E  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 

5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 

6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 

7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 

10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 

11.  EUCLID 
ARCHIMEDES 
APOLLONIUS 
NICOMACHUS 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 

13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 

16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 

17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 

23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 

24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


K 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  g 


>.A  <.  ^ 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 


29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 


31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 


32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 


34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 


35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 


36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 


37.  FIELDING 


38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 


39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 


43.  AMERICAN  STATE 
PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 


44.  BOSWELL 


45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 


46.  HEGEL 


47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 


50.  MARX 
ENGELS 


51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011 


http://www.archive.org/details/greatbooksofwest26ency 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


26. 

SHAKESPEARE:  I 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


««>V«'5.K  .aaJOA,  Jf  : 

4  jr^3*17^\.viAV4AMa^Tpj?.;j)»l^|jifiiwowwra& 

.Max^^  WAV'  juaM  .aAXt4i9S  .\.»w  v;c|JjyhO(«Jxi3>/  -iao>i>j;juA.j1|SlK 
A  .nSocuit^  ajTiAW  ^;>uJ  .^',Jmaj'J  ^  .9  .A  -aafcjJ 

^  *  “■  .a  ' 


^  The  Plays  and 
Sonnets  of 
William  Shakespeare 

Volume  One 

Edited  by  William  George  Clarke  and  William  Aldis  Wright 


William  Benton,  Publisher 
ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 


CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  •  SYDNEY  ■  TOKYO  ■  MANILA 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 

© 

1952 

BY  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Twenty-eighth  Printing,  1986 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55-10334 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229-163-9 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

William  Shakespeare,  1564-1616 


Shakespeare  was  baptized  in  the  parish  church 
of  Stratford-on-Avon  in  Warwickshire  on  April 
26,  1564,  His  father,  John  Shakespeare,  was  a 
burgess  of  the  recently  constituted  corporation  of 
Stratford,  and  filled  certain  municipal  offices,  in¬ 
cluding  that  of  high  bailiff.  By  occupation  he  was 
a  glover,  although  he  appears  to  have  dealt  from 
time  to  time  in  various  kinds  of  agricultural  pro¬ 
duce  and  may  have  combined  a  certain  amount  of 
farming  with  the  practice  of  his  trade.  His  wife, 
and  the  mother  of  the  dramatist,  Mary  Arden, 
came  of  a  distinguished  Catholic  family,  and  had 
brought  her  husband  a  farm  of  about  fifty  or 
sixty  acres,  known  as  the  Asbies.  There  were  at 
least  eight  children,  William  being  the  third  child 
and  eldest  son. 

Stratford  possessed  a  free  grammar-school,  and 
Shakespeare  presumably  obtained  his  education 
there.  When  he  was  about  thirteen,  his  father’s 
fortunes  took  a  turn  for  the  worse,  and  it  seems 
likely  that  Shakespeare  was  apprenticed  to  some 
local  trade.  According  to  one  story,  he  killed 
calves  for  his  father,  and  “would  do  it  in  a  high 
style,  and  make  a  speech.”  In  November,  1582, 
he  married  Anne  Hathaway,  a  woman  eight  years 
his  senior,  and  their  first  child  Susanna,  was  bap¬ 
tized  on  May  26,  1583,  followed  by  twins, 
Hamnet  and  Judith,  in  1585.  Before  the  birth  of 
the  twins  Shakespeare’s  career  in  Stratford  seems 
to  have  come  to  a  tempestuous  close.  One  tradi¬ 
tion,  coming  from  two  different  sources,  asserts 
that  he  got  into  trouble  through  poaching  on  the 
estates  of  a  considerable  Warwickshire  magnate. 
Sir  Thomas  Lucy,  and  found  it  necessary  to  leave 
town.  But  from  this  event  until  he  emerges  as  an 
actor  and  rising  playwright  in  1592,  his  history 
is  unknown.  His  entry  into  the  theatrical  world, 
according  to  the  stage  tradition,  was  in  a  menial 
capacity,  perhaps  even  as  a  holder  of  horses  at 
the  doors. 

By  1592,  when  he  was  twenty-eight,  Shake¬ 
speare  had  begun  to  emerge  as  a  playwright  and 
had  evoked  the  jealousy  of  at  least  one  of  the 
group  of  scholar  poets  who  claimed  a  monopoly 
of  the  stage.  Robert  Greene,  in  an  invective 
against  the  play-actors  in  his  Groats-worth  of  Wit, 
parodies  a  line  from  Henry  VI  and  speaks  of  an 
“upstart  crow”  who  is  “in  his  own  conceit  the 
only  Shake-scene  in  the  country.”  While  the 
theatres  were  closed  from  1592  to  1594  because 
of  riot  and  the  plague,  Shakespeare  fiirther  en¬ 


hanced  his  literary  reputation  by  the  publication 
of  Venus  and  Adonis  and  Lucrece.  It  is  also  prob¬ 
able  that  the  first  of  his  sonnets  then  began  to 
circulate  privately,  although  they  were  not  pub¬ 
lished  as  a  whole  until  1 609. 

After  the  reopening  of  the  theatres  in  1594, 
Shakespeare  is  listed  among  the  “servauntes  of 
the  Lord  Chamberlayne,”  the  company  for  which 
he  wrote  and  acted  throughout  his  life.  His  act¬ 
ing  seems  to  have  been  limited  to  such  roles  as 
the  Ghost  in  Hamlet  and  Adam  in  As  You  Like  It, 
but  as  a  dramatist  he  was  the  mainstay  of  the 
company  for  some  fifteen  years.  As  early  as  1598 
the  Palladis  Tamia,  a  kind  of  literary  handbook 
published  by  Francis  Meres,  extols  Shakespeare 
as  “the  most  excellent  in  both  kinds  (i.e.  comedy 
and  tragedy)  for  the  state,”  and  one  of  “the  most 
passionate  among  us  to  bewaile  and  bemoane  the 
perplexities  of  love”;  it  also  provides  a  list  of 
twelve  plays  already  written,  which  serves  as  a 
starting  point  for  modern  attempts  at  a  chrono¬ 
logical  arrangement  of  his  work.  Shakespeare 
seems  to  have  written  more  rapidly  during  these 
early  years  than  later,  but  on  an  average  he  wrote 
for  his  company  about  two  plays  a  year.  His 
fellow-dramatists  writing  for  the  Chamberlain’s 
men  included  Ben  Jonson,  Dekker,  Beaumont 
and  Fletcher,  and  Tourneur.  He  seems  to  have 
been  particularly  intimate  with  Jonson;  there  are 
stories  of  their  jests  and  drinking  bouts,  and 
Jonson  later  declared,  “I  lov’d  the  man  and  do 
honour  his  memory  (on  this  side  idolatry)  as 
much  as  any.” 

In  addition  to  being  both  actor  and  playwright, 
Shakespeare  was  also  a  shareholder  in  the  com¬ 
pany,  and  his  prosperity  was  joined  with  that  of 
his  theatre.  They  were  frequently  asked  to  play 
at  court,  and  The  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor  is 
said  to  owe  its  origin  to  Elizabeth’s  desire  to  see 
Falstaff  in  love.  James  I  on  his  accession  took 
the  company  under  his  patronage,  and  during  the 
remainder  of  Shakespeare’s  connection  with  the 
stage  they  were  “the  King’s  men.”  The  records 
of  performances  at  court  show  that  they  were  by 
far  the  most  favored  of  the  companies.  Shake¬ 
speare  was  particularly  popular;  Jonson  refers  to 
his  flights  “that  so  did  take  Eliza  and  our  James,” 
and  he  is  said  to  have  received  an  autograph  letter 
from  King  James.  He  appears  also  to  have  been 
on  cordial  terms  with  his  fellows  of  the  stage; 
one  of  them  left  him  a  small  legacy,  and  in  his 


V 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


vi 

own  will  he  paid  a  similar  compliment  to  three  of 
his  theatrical  associates. 

Shakespeare’s  increasing  prosperity  is  reflect¬ 
ed  in  the  restored  fortunes  of  his  family  at  Strat¬ 
ford.  The  prosecutions  of  John  Shakespeare  for 
debt  ceased,  and  in  1596  his  application  for  a 
coat-of-arms,  made  at  the  time  he  was  bailiff,  was 
at  length  granted.  In  1597  the  playwright  pur¬ 
chased  New  Place,  one  of  the  largest  houses  in 
Stratford.  Here  he  established  his  wife  and  two 
daughters,  his  son  having  died  the  year  before. 
Until  1610  he  apparently  lived  and  worked  in 
London,  making  only  occasional  visits  to  Strat¬ 
ford,  but  in  that  year  he  seems  to  have  returned 
to  his  birthplace.  He  lived  as  a  retired  gentleman 
on  friendly  terms  with  the  richest  of  his  neigh¬ 
bors  and  showed  interest  in  local  affairs  which 
might  affect  his  income  or  his  comfort,  such  as  a 
bill  for  the  improvement  of  the  highways  in  1 61 1 , 
or  a  proposed  enclosure  of  the  open  fields  in 


1614.  His  retirement  did  not  imply  a  complete 
break  with  London  life;  his  plays  were  still  being 
produced,  and  he  was  providing  new  ones,  al¬ 
though  the  last  few  may  have  been  written  at 
Stratford.  As  late  as  1613  he  is  known  to  have 
bought  a  house  in  London  at  the  Blackfriars, 
perhaps  for  purposes  of  investment  rather  than 
residence.  It  is  likely  that  his  connection  with 
the  king’s  company  ended  when  the  Globe  thea¬ 
tre  was  burnt  down  during  a  performance  of 
Henry  Vlll  in  1613. 

In  March  of  1616  Shakespeare  made  his  will, 
leaving  to  his  daughter  Susanna  the  bulk  of 
his  estate  and  to  his  wife  “the  second  best  bed 
with  the  furniture,”  although  she  also  legally  en¬ 
joyed  until  her  death  a  third  of  his  lands  and 
houses.  A  month  after  his  will  was  signed,  on 
April  23,  1616,  Shakespeare  died  and  as  a  tithe- 
owner  was  buried  in  the  chancel  of  the  parish 
church. 


Contents,  Volume  One  , 

phical  Note,  v 

The  First  Part  of  King  Henry  THE  Sixth,  i  i 

The  Second  Part  of  King  Henry  the  Sixth,  33 
The  Third  Part  of  King  Henry  the  Sixth,  69 
The  Tragedy  of  King  Richard  the  Third,  105 
The  Comedy  of  Errors,  149 
Titus  Andronicus,  i  70 
The  Taming  of  the  Shrew,  199 
The  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  229 
Love’s  Labour’s  Lost,  254 
Romeo  and  Juliet,  285 

The  Tragedy  of  King  Richard  the  Second,  320 
A  Midsummer-Night’s  Dream,  352 
The  Life  and  Death  of  King  John,  376 
The  Merchant  of  Venice,  406 
The  First  Part  of  King  Henry  the  Fourth,  434 
The  Second  Part  of  King  Henry  the  Fourth,  467 
Much  Ado  About  Nothing,  503 
The  Life  of  King  Henry  the  Fifth,  532 
Julius  G^sar,  568 
As  You  Like  It,  597 


; 


vt 


,  V,  • . ;  ^ 

■  4 

illbORA.?*HiCAfc  wS 


,f:  ■ 

.  ' .  J.'"'  ■  ]  ■< 


-  llOORA.?*HiCAfc  %  W  . 

:;luf,hotn«U»^^  J#,  ;  £ 

^  W  fhr  rmoteJ  lf«ttly  «  W  .SK^  fc*  Jr 

.«  lar|ti  g»^,J  |«  *ii|^  r’*)'^»#«‘.p«^  ^  '^^•V  O^P!#  rHs-  t^lplii^  wiri,; 

eh«K4  Now  (*!«>:<».  <kaff^  «•  tetuei  Jr  -  -is. —  .-  -  .^  ,  4 

S^Hatd-  !Wi  N<>^i|jpy&  }^i  \Kif^  44vd;T«vi?*^T< 

i]^;bnr«.  huA  «icm  diVSUM  •*•11  • '‘iBpi*!-  .  '  -T 

prof^eo.*  .-.^e 


Pt  i  »«i/awo«o«A  esmT 
^  <?pi  30owimT.TOT  . 

Qtt  ,AKo»mV  30  o#T  JiyT 

Vr?c»J  e'itqoaA  J  /4J 

^St  /raUtft'owA  03jmv>J3 


•  ■<•  %.  “j 


otj  tOnoDsEatti  o«A«S}Ji  a’-^i^>o  ^k>^4rT9dTr  i  -  - 

,JWA3«C!  A  A,  -‘  •“ 


•  A.  -i^jt''  d'^l  ,MHo]  owriilo  ri}£!»0  9<n' 

I’  -  ■  ■■  " 

6of  pSPiwaV  lOTMAHPsaMauT^i 
4k£|k  .HTWooli  arHT  ViJKtH  aMiXlo  fU[^^^gyvT»' 

,«T«uo'^  saT  yavfsH  oiii>!  lo  ji«9  hocabB  arfT 
£o  i  ^pnaroH  TooaA' ooA  1  oO 
.wwi*?  imT  y«waH  mu? )o  slfll 
,A*«a08uiuut 
rl  t  a«»J  w?y  a/k 


?*>  The  First  Part  of 
KING  HENRY  THE  SIXTH 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


King  Henry  the  Sixth 

Duke  of  Gloucester,  uncle  to  the  King  and  Lord 
Protector 

Duke  of  Bedford,  uncle  to  the  King  and  Regent  of 
France 

Henry  Beaufort,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  great- 
uncle  to  the  King^  afterwards  Cardinal 
Thomas  Beaufort,  Duke  of  Exeter,  great-uncle 
to  the  King 

John  Beaufort,  Earl  of  Somerset,  afterwards 
Duke 

Richard  Plantagenet,  son  of  Richard  late  Earl  of 
Ca?nbridge^  afterwards  Duke  of  York 
Earl  ofW^rwick 
Earl  of  Salisbury 

William  de  la  Pole,  Earl  of  Suffolk 

Lord  Talbot,  afterwards  Earl  of  Shrewsbury 

John  Talbot,  his  son 

Edmund  Mortimer,  Earl  of  March 

Sir  John  Fastolfe 

Sir  William  Lucy 

Sir  William  Glansdale 

Sir  Thomas  Gargrave 

Mayor  of  London 

Officer  of  the  Mayor  of  London 

Wood  VILE,  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower 

Vernon,  of  the  White  Rose  or  York  faction 

Basset,  of  the  Red  Rose  or  Lancaster  faction 

Lawyer 

Gaoler 

Six  Messengers 
TwoWarders 

Three  Servants  to  Gloucester 
Servant  to  Talbot 


English  Captain 
Captain  of  Talbofs  Army 
English  Soldier 

Charles,  Dauphin^  and  afterwards  King^  of 
France 

Reignier,  Duke  of  Anjou  and  Maine^  and  titular 
King  of  Naples  and  Jerusalem 
Duke  of  Burgundy 
Duke  of  Alen9on 
Bastard  of  Orleans 
Governor  of  Paris 
Master-Gunner  of  Orleans 
Boy  of  Master-Gunner 
General  of  the  French  Forces  in  Bourdeaux 
French  Sergeant 
French  Sentinel 
Porter 

Shepherd,  to  Joan  La  Pucelle 
French  SoLdier 
Watchman  of  Rouen 
French  Scout 
Papal  Legate 

Margaret,  daughter  to  Reignier^  afterwards  married 
to  King  Henry 
Countess  of  Auvergne 
Joan  La  Pucelle,  commonly  called  Joan  of  Arc 

Non-Speaking:  French  Herald^  Ambassadors^  Sol¬ 
diers^  Gaolers^  Servingmen^  Attendants ^  and  Fitmdi 
appearing  to  Joan  La  Pucelle 

Scene:  Partly  in  England^  and  partly  in  France 


ACT  I 

Scene  i.  Westminster  Abbey 

Dead  March.  Enter  the  Funeral  of  King  Henry  the 
Fifth,  attended  on  by  the  duke  of  Bedford, 
Regent  of  France;  the  duke  of  Gloucester, 
Protector;  the  duke  of  exeter,  the  earl  of 

WARWICK,  the  BISHOP  OF  WINCHESTER,  the 
DUKE  OF  SOMERSET,  Hcralds,  &r. 

Bed.  Hung  be  the  heavens  with  black,  yield  day 
to  night! 

Comets,  importing  change  of  times  and  states, 
Brandish  your  crystal  tresses  in  the  sky. 

And  with  them  scourge  the  bad  revoltingr  stars 
That  have  consented  unto  Henry’s  death! 

King  Henry  the  Fifth,  too  famous  to  live  long! 
England  ne’er  lost  a  king  of  so  much  worth. 


Glou.  England  ne’er  had  a  king  until  his  time. 
Virtue  he  had,  deserving  to  command: 

His  brandish’d  sword  did  blind  men  with  his 
beams:  to 

His  arms  spread  wider  than  a  dragon’s  wings; 
His  sparkling  eyes,  replete  with  wrathful  fire. 
More  dazzled  and  drove  back  his  enemies 
Than  mid-day  sun  fierce  bent  against  their  faces. 
What  should  I  say?  his  deeds  exceed  all  speech: 
He  ne’er  lift  up  his  hand  but  conquered. 

Exe.  We  mourn  in  black:  why  mourn  we  not  in 
blood? 

Henry  is  dead  and  never  shall  revive: 

Upon  a  wooden  coffin  we  attend. 

And  death’s  dishonourable  victory  20 

\Vc  with  our  stately  presence  glorify. 

Like  captives  bound  to  a  triumphant  car. 


1 


2  FIRST  PART  OF 

What!  shall  we  curse  the  planets  of  mishap 
That  plotted  thus  our  glory’s  overthrow? 

Or  shall  we  think  the  subtle-witted  French 
Conjurers  and  sorcerers,  that,  afraid  of  him, 

By  magic  verses  have  contrived  his  end? 

Win.  He  was  a  king  bless’d  of  the  King  of 
Kings. 

Unto  the  French  the  dreadful  judgement-day 
So  dreadful  will  not  be  as  was  his  sight.  jo 

The  battles  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  he  fought: 

The  church’s  prayers  made  him  so  prosperous. 
Gto.The  church!  where  is  it?  Had  not  church¬ 
men  pray’d. 

His  thread  of  life  had  not  so  soon  decay’d: 

None  do  you  like  but  an  effeminate  prince. 
Whom,  like  a  school-boy,  you  may  over-awe. 
Win.  Gloucester,  whate’er  we  like,  thou  art 
protector 

And  lookest  to  command  the  prince  and  realm. 
Thy  wife  is  proud;  she  holdeth  thee  in  awe. 

More  than  God  or  religious  churchmen  may.  40 
Glou.  Name  not  religion,  for  thou  lovest  the 
flesh. 

And  ne’er  throughout  the  year  to  church  thou 
go’ St 

Except  it  be  to  pray  against  thy  foes. 

Bed.  Cease,  cease  these  jars  and  rest  your  minds 
in  peace: 

Let’s  to  the  altar:  heralds,  wait  on  us: 

Instead  of  gold,  we’ll  offer  up  our  arms; 

Since  arms  avail  not  now  that  Henry’s  dead. 
Posterity,  await  for  wretched  years. 

When  at  their  mothers’  moist  eyes  babes  shall 
suck. 

Our  isle  be  made  a  nourish  of  salt  tears,  jo 

And  none  but  women  left  to  wail  the  dead. 

Henry  the  Fifth,  thy  ghost  I  invocate: 

Prosper  this  realm,  keep  it  from  civil  broils. 
Combat  with  adverse  planets  in  the  heavens! 

A  far  more  glorious  star  thy  soul  will  make 
Than  Julius  Caesar  or  bright - 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  My  honourable  lords,  health  to  you  all! 
Sad  tidings  bring  I  to  you  out  of  France, 

Of  loss,  of  slaughter  and  discomfiture: 

Guienne,  Champagne,  Rheims,  Orleans,  60 
Paris,  Guysors,  Poictiers,  are  all  quite  lost. 

Bed.  What  say’st  thou,  man,  before  dead 
Henry’s  corse? 

Speak  softly,  or  the  loss  of  those  great  towns 
Will  make  him  burst  his  lead  and  rise  from  death. 

Glou.  Is  Paris  lost?  is  Rouen  yielded  up? 

If  Henry  were  recall’d  to  life  again. 

These  news  would  cause  him  once  more  yield 
the  ghost. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  i 

Exe.  How  were  they  lost?  what  treachery  was 
used? 

Mess.  No  treachery;  but  want  of  men  and 
money. 

Amongst  the  soldiers  this  is  muttered,  70 

That  here  you  maintain  several  factions. 

And  whilst  a  field  should  be  dispatch’d  and 
fought. 

You  are  disputing  of  your  generals: 

One  would  have  lingering  wars  with  little  cost; 
Another  would  fly  swift,  but  wanteth  wings; 

A  third  thinks,  without  expense  at  all, 

By  guileful  fair  words  peace  may  be  obtain’d. 
Awake,  awake,  English  nobility! 

Let  not  sloth  dim  your  honours  new-begot: 
Cropp’d  are  the  flower-de-luces  in  your  arms;  80 
Of  England’s  coat  one  half  is  cut  away. 

ExeW^rc  our  tears  wanting  to  this  funeral, 
These  tidings  would  call  forth  their  flowing  tides. 
Bed.  Me  they  concern;  Regent  I  am  of  France. 
Give  me  my  steeled  coat.  I’ll  fight  for  France. 
Away  with  these  disgraceful  wailing  robes! 
Wounds  will  I  lend  the  French  instead  of  eyes, 
To  weep  their  intermissive  miseries. 

Enter  to  them  a  second  messenger. 

2nd  Mess.  Lords,  view  these  letters  full  of  bad 
mischance. 

France  is  revolted  from  the  English  quite,  po 
Except  some  petty  towns  of  no  import: 

The  Dauphin  Charles  is  crowned  king  in  Rheims; 
The  Bastard  of  Orleans  with  him  is  join’d; 
Reignier,  Duke  of  Anjou,  doth  take  his  part. 

The  Duke  of  Alengon  flieth  to  his  side. 

Exe.  The  Dauphin  crowned  king!  all  fly  to  him! 
O,  whither  shall  we  fly  from  this  reproach? 

Glou.  We  will  not  fly,  but  to  our  enemies’ 
throats. 

Bedford,  if  thou  be  slack.  I’ll  fight  it  out. 

Bed.  Gloucester,  why  doubt’ st  thou  of  my  for¬ 
wardness?  100 

An  army  have  I  muster’d  in  my  thoughts. 
Wherewith  already  France  is  overrun. 

Enter  a  third  messenger. 

^rd  Mess.  My  gracious  lords,  to  add  to  your 
laments. 

Wherewith  you  now  bedew  King  Henry’s 
hearse, 

I  must  inform  you  of  a  dismal  fight 
Betwixt  the  stout  Lord  Talbot  and  the  French. 
Win.  What!  wherein  Talbot  overcame?  is’t  so? 
^rd  Mess.  O,  no;  wherein  Lord  Talbot  was  o’er- 
thrown: 

The  circumstance  I’ll  tell  you  more  at  large. 

The  tenth  of  August  last  this  dreadful  lord,  no 


SCENE  I 


3 


FIRST  PART  OF 

Retiring  from  the  siege  of  Orleans, 

Having  full  scarce  six  thousand  in  his  troop, 

By  three-and-twenty  thousand  of  the  French 
Was  round  encompassed  and  set  upon. 

No  leisure  had  he  to  enrank  his  men; 

He  wanted  pikes  to  set  before  his  archers; 

Instead  whereof  sharp  stakes  pluck’d  out  of 
hedges 

They  pitched  in  the  ground  confusedly, 

To  keep  the  horsemen  off  from  breaking  in. 

More  than  three  hours  the  fight  continued;  120 
Where  valiant  Talbot  above  human  thought 
Enacted  wonders  with  his  sword  and  lance: 
Hundreds  he  sent  to  hell,  and  none  durst  stand 
him; 

Here,  there,  and  everywhere,  enraged  he  flew: 
The  French  exclaim’d,  the  devil  was  in  arms; 

All  the  whole  army  stood  agazed  on  him: 

His  soldiers  spying  his  undaunted  spirit, 

“A  Talbot!  a  Talbot!”cried  out  amain 
And  rush’d  into  the  bowels  of  the  battle. 

Here  had  the  conquest  fully  been  seal’d  up,  75 o 
If  Sir  John  Fastolfe  had  not  play’d  the  coward: 

He,  being  in  the  vaward,  placed  behind 
With  purpose  to  relieve  and  follow  them. 
Cowardly  fled,  not  having  struck  one  stroke. 
Hence  grew  the  general  wreck  and  massacre; 
Enclosed  were  they  with  their  enemies: 

A  base  Walloon,  to  win  the  Dauphin’s  grace. 
Thrust  Talbot  with  a  spear  into  the  back. 

Whom  all  France  with  their  chief  assembled 
strength 

Durst  not  presume  to  look  once  in  the  face.  740 
Bed.  Is  Talbot  slain?  then  I  will  slay  myself. 

For  living  idly  here  in  pomp  and  ease. 

Whilst  such  a  worthy  leader,  wanting  aid. 

Unto  his  dastard  foemen  is  betray’d. 

^rd Mess.  O  no,  he  lives;  but  is  took  prisoner. 
And  Lord  Scales  with  him  and  Lord  Hungerford: 
Most  of  the  rest  slaughter’d  or  took  likewise. 

Bed.  His  ransom  there  is  none  but  I  shall  pay: 

I’ll  hale  the  Dauphin  headlong  from  his  throne: 

His  crown  shall  be  the  ransom  of  my  friend;  750 
Four  of  their  lords  I’ll  change  for  one  of  ours. 
Farewell,  my  masters;  to  my  task  will  I; 

Bonfires  in  France  forthwith  I  am  to  make. 

To  keep  our  great  Saint  George’s  feast  withal: 
Ten  thousand  soldiers  with  me  I  will  take. 

Whose  bloody  deeds  shall  make  all  Europe 
quake. 

srd  Aiess.  So  you  had  need;  for  Orleans  is 
besieged; 

The  English  army  is  grown  weak  and  faint: 

The  Earl  of  Salisbury  craveth  supply. 

And  hardly  keeps  his  men  from  mutiny,  160 
Since  they,  so  few,  watch  such  a  multitude. 


KING  HENRY  VI 

Exe.  Remember,  lords,  your  oaths  to  Henry 
sworn. 

Either  to  quell  the  Dauphin  utterly, 

Or  bring  him  in  obedience  to  your  yoke. 

Bed.  I  do  remember  it;  and  here  take  my  leave. 
To  go  about  my  preparation .  [ Exit. 

Glou.  I’ll  to  the  Tower  with  all  the  haste  I  can. 
To  view  the  artillery  and  munition; 

And  then  I  will  proclaim  young  Henry  king. 

[Exit. 

Exe.  To  Eltham  will  I,  where  the  young  king  is. 
Being  ordain’d  his  special  governor,  iji 

And  for  his  safety  there  I’ll  best  devise.  [Exit. 
Win.  Each  hath  his  place  and  function  to 
attend: 

I  am  left  out;  for  me  nothing  remains. 

But  long  I  will  not  be  Jack  out  of  office: 

The  king  from  Eltham  I  intend  to  steal 

And  sit  at  chiefest  stern  of  public  weal.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  France:  Before  Orleans 
Sound  a  flourish.  Enter  Charles,  alen^on,  and 
reignier,  marching  with  drum  and  Soldiers. 
Char.  Mars  his  true  moving,  even  as  in  the 
heavens 

So  in  the  earth,  to  this  day  is  not  known: 

Late  did  he  shine  upon  the  English  side; 

Now  we  are  victors;  upon  us  he  smiles. 

What  towns  of  any  moment  but  we  have? 

At  pleasure  here  we  lie  near  Orleans; 
Otherwhiles  the  famish’d  English,  like  pale 
ghosts. 

Faintly  besiege  us  one  hour  in  a  month. 

Alen.  They  want  their  porridge  and  their  fat 
bull-beeves: 

Either  they  must  be  dieted  like  mules  10 

And  have  their  provender  tied  to  their  mouths. 

Or  piteous  they  will  look,  like  drowned  mice. 
Reig.  Let’s  raise  the  siege:  why  live  we  idly  here? 
Talbot  is  taken,  whom  we  wont  to  fear: 
Remaineth  none  but  mad-brain’d  Salisbury; 

And  he  may  well  in  fretting  spend  his  gall. 

Nor  men  nor  money  hath  he  to  make  war. 

Char.  Sound,  sound  alarum!  we  will  rush  on 
them. 

Now  for  the  honour  of  the  forlorn  French! 

Him  I  forgive  my  death  that  killeth  me  20 

When  he  sees  me  go  back  one  foot  or  fly.[£':r«7727. 
Here  alarum;  they  are  beaten  back  by  the  English 
with  great  loss.  Re-enter  Charles,  ALEN90N, 
and  REIGNIER. 

Char.  Who  ever  saw  the  like?  what  men  have  I ! 
Dogs!  cowards!  dastards!  I  would  ne’er  have  fled. 
But  that  they  left  me  ’midst  my  enemies. 

Reig.  Salisbury  is  a  desperate  homicide; 

He  fighteth  as  one  weary  of  his  life. 


4  FIRST  PART  OF 

The  other  lords,  like  lions  wanting  food, 

Do  rush  upon  us  as  their  hungry  prey. 

Aim.  Froissart,  a  countryman  of  ours,  records, 
England  all  Olivers  and  Rowlands  bred 
During  the  time  Edward  the  Third  did  reign. 
More  truly  now  may  this  be  verified; 

For  none  but  Samsons  and  Goliases 
It  sendeth  forth  to  skirmish.  One  to  ten! 

Lean  raw-boned  rascals!  who  would  e’er  suppose 
They  had  such  courage  and  audacity? 

Char.  Let’s  leave  this  town;  for  they  are  hare- 
brain’d  slaves. 

And  hunger  will  enforce  them  to  be  more  eager: 
Of  old  I  know  them;  rather  with  their  teeth  55^ 
The  walls  they’ll  tear  down  than  forsake  the 
siege. 

Reig.  I  think,  by  some  odd  gimmors  or  device 
Their  arms  are  set  like  clocks,  still  to  strike  on; 
Else  ne’er  could  they  hold  out  so  as  they  do. 

By  my  consent,  we’ll  even  let  them  alone. 

Aim.  Be  it  so. 

Enter  the  bastard  of  Orleans. 

Bast.  Where’s  the  Prince  Dauphin?  I  have  news 
for  him. 

Char.  Bastard  of  Orleans,  thrice  welcome  to  us. 
Bast.  Methinks  your  looks  are  sad,  your  cheer 
appall’d: 

Hath  the  late  overthrow  wrought  this  offence? 

Be  not  dismay’d,  for  succour  is  at  hand:  50 

A  holy  maid  hither  with  me  I  bring. 

Which  by  a  vision  sent  to  her  from  heaven 
Ordained  is  to  raise  this  tedious  siege 
And  drive  the  English  forth  the  bounds  of  France. 
The  spirit  of  deep  prophecy  she  hath. 

Exceeding  the  nine  Sibyls  of  old  Rome: 

What’s  past  and  what’s  to  come  she  can  descry. 
Speak,  shall  I  call  her  in?  Believe  my  words. 

For  they  are  certain  and  unfallible. 

Char.  Go,  call  her  in.  [Exit  Bastard.]  But  first, 
to  try  her  skill,  60 

Reignier,  stand  thou  as  Dauphin  in  my  place: 
Question  her  proudly;  let  thy  looks  be  stern: 

By  this  means  shall  we  sound  what  skill  she 
hath. 

Re~mter  the  bastard  of  Orleans,  'with  joan 

LA  PUCELLE. 

Reig.  Fair  maid,  is’t  thou  wilt  do  these 
wondrous  feats? 

Puc.  Reignier,  is’t  thou  that  thinkest  to  beguile 
me? 

Where  is  the  Dauphin?  Come,  come  from 
behind; 

I  know  thee  well,  though  never  seen  before. 

Be  not  amazed,  there’s  nothing  hid  from  me: 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  i 

In  private  will  I  talk  with  thee  apart.  6^ 

Stand  back,  you  lords,  and  give  us  leave  awhile. 
Reig.  She  takes  upon  her  bravely  at  first  dash. 
Puc.  Dauphin,  I  am  by  birth  a  shepherd’s 
daughter. 

My  wit  untrain’d  in  any  kind  of  art. 

Heaven  and  our  Lady  gracious  hath  it  pleased 
To  shine  on  my  contemptible  estate: 

Lo,  whilst  I  waited  on  my  tender  lambs, 

And  to  sun’s  parching  heat  display’d  my  cheeks, 

God’s  mother  deigned  to  appear  to  me 

And  in  a  vision  full  of  majesty 

Will’d  me  to  leave  my  base  vocation  80 

And  free  my  country  from  calamity: 

Her  aid  she  promised  and  assured  success: 

In  complete  glory  she  reveal’d  herself; 

And,  A^hereas  I  was  black  and  swart  before. 

With  those  clear  rays  which  she  infused  on  me 
That  beauty  am  I  bless’d  with  which  you  see. 
Ask  me  what  question  thou  canst  possible. 

And  I  will  answer  unpremeditated: 

My  courage  try  by  combat,  if  thou  darest. 

And  thou  shalt  find  that  I  exceed  my  sex.  5)0 
Resolve  on  this,  thou  shalt  be  fortunate. 

If  thou  receive  me  for  thy  warlike  mate. 

Char.  Thou  hast  astonish’d  me  with  thy  high 
terms : 

Only  this  proof  I’ll  of  thy  valour  make. 

In  single  combat  thou  shalt  buckle  with  me. 

And  if  thou  vanquishest,  thy  words  are  true; 
Otherwise  I  renounce  all  confidence. 

Puc.  I  am  prepared:  here  is  my  keen-edged 
sword. 

Deck’d  with  five  flower-de-luces  on  each  side; 
The  which  at  Touraine,  in  Saint  Katharine’s 
churchyard,  too 

Out  of  a  great  deal  of  old  iron  I  chose  forth. 

Char.  Then  come,  o’  God’s  name;  I  fear  no 
woman. 

Puc.  And  while  I  live.  I’ll  ne’er  fly  from  a  man. 
Here  they  fight,  and  joan  la  pucelle  overcomes. 
Char.  Stay,  stay  thy  hands!  thou  art  an  Amazon 
And  fightest  with  the  sword  of  Deborah. 

Puc.  Christ’s  mother  helps  me,  else  I  were  too 
weak. 

Char.  Whoe’er  helps  thee,  ’tis  thou  that  must 
help  me: 

Impatiently  I  burn  with  thy  desire: 

My  heart  and  hands  thou  hast  at  once  subdued. 
Excellent  Pucelle,  if  thy  name  be  so,  no 

Let  me  thy  servant  and  not  sovereign  be: 

’Tis  the  French  Dauphin  sueth  to  thee  thus. 

Puc.  I  must  not  yield  to  any  rites  of  love. 

For  my  profession’s  sacred  from  above: 

When  1  have  chased  all  thy  foes  from  hence. 
Then  will  I  think  upon  a  recompense. 


SCENE  U 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


5 


Char,  Meantime  look  gracious  on  thy  prostrate 
thrall. 

Reig,  My  lord,  methinks,  is  very  long  in  talk. 
Alen,  Doubtless  he  shrives  this  woman  to  her 
smock; 

Else  ne’er  could  he  so  long  protract  his  speech. 
Reig,  Shall  we  disturb  him,  since  he  keeps  no 
mean?  121 

Alen,  He  may  mean  more  than  we  poor  men  do 
know: 

These  women  are  shrewd  tempters  with  their 
tongues. 

Reig,  My  lord,  where  are  you?  what  devise  you 
on? 

Shall  we  give  over  Orleans,  or  no? 

Fuc.  Why,  no,  I  say,  distrustful  recreants! 

Fight  till  the  last  gasp;  I  will  be  your  guard. 

Char,  What  she  says.  I’ll  confirm:  we’ll  fight  it 
out. 

Fuc,  Assign’d  am  I  to  be  the  English  scourge. 
This  night  the  siege  assuredly  I’ll  raise:  /50 

Expect  Saint  Martin’s  summer,  halcyon  days. 
Since  I  have  entered  into  these  wars. 

Glory  is  like  a  circle  in  the  water. 

Which  never  ceaseth  to  enlarge  itself 
Till  by  broad  spreading  it  disperse  to  nought. 
With  Henry’s  death  the  English  circle  ends; 
Dispersed  are  the  glories  it  included. 

Now  am  I  like  that  proud  insulting  ship 
Which  Caesar  and  his  fortune  bare  at  once. 

Char,  Was  Mahomet  inspired  with  a  dove? 
Thou  with  an  eagle  art  inspired  then.  74/ 

Helen,  the  mother  of  great  Constantine, 

Nor  yet  Saint  Philip’s  daughters,  were  like  thee. 
Bright  star  of  Venus,  fall’n  down  on  the  earth. 
How  may  I  reverently  worship  thee  enough? 
Alen,  Leave  off  delays,  and  let  us  raise  the  siege. 
Reig,  Woman,  do  what  thou  canst  to  save  our 
honours; 

Drive  them  from  Orleans  and  be  immortalized. 
Char.  Presently  we’ll  try:  come,  let’s  away 
about  it: 

No  prophet  will  I  trust,  if  she  proves  false.  /50 

[Exeunt, 

Scene  hi.  London:  Before  the  Toiver 
Enter  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  with  his  Serving- 
men  in  blue  coats, 

Glou.  I  am  come  to  survey  the  Tower  this  day: 
Since  Henry’s  death,  I  fear,  there  is  conveyance. 
Where  be  these  warders,  that  they  wait  not 
here? 

Open  the  gates;  ’tis  Gloucester  that  calls. 

[Servingmen  knock. 

ist  Warder.  [Within]  Who’s  there  that  knocks 
so  imperiously? 


ist  Serv.  It  is  the  noble  Duke  of  Gloucester. 

2nd  Warder.  [Within^  Whoe’er  he  be,  you  may 
not  be  let  in. 

ist  Serv.  Villains,  answer  you  so  the  lord 
protector? 

ist  Warder.  [Within]  The  Lord  protect  him!  so 
we  answer  him: 

We  do  no  otherwise  than  we  are  will’d.  10 

Glou.  Who  willed  you?  or  whose  will  stands 
but  mine? 

There’s  none  protector  of  the  realm  but  1. 

Break  up  the  gates.  I’ll  be  your  warrantize: 

Shall  I  be  flouted  thus  by  dunghill  grooms? 

Gloucester's  men  rush  at  the  Tower  Gates,  and 

wooDviLE,  the  Lieutenant,  speaks  within,  i* 

Wood.  What  noise  is  this?  what  traitors  have 
we  here? 

Glou.  Lieutenant,  is  it  you  whose  voice  I  hear? 

Open  the  gates:  here’s  Gloucester  that  would 
j  enter. 

Wood.  Have  patience,  noble  duke;  I  may  not 
open: 

The  Cardinal  of  Winchester  forbids; 

From  him  I  have  express  commandment  20 

That  thou  nor  none  of  thine  shall  be  let  in. 

Glou.  Faint-hearted  Woodvile,  prizest  him 
’fore  me? 

Arrogant  Winchester,  that  haughty  prelate. 

Whom  Henry,  our  late  sovereign,  ne’er  could 
brook? 

Thou  art  no  friend  to  God  or  to  the  king: 

Open  the  gates,  or  I’ll  shut  thee  out  shortly. 

Servingmen.  Open  the  gates  unto  the  lord 
protector. 

Or  we’ll  burst  them  open,  if  that  you  come  not 
quickly. 

Enter  to  the  Lord  Frotector  at  the  Tower  Gates 
WINCHESTER,  and  his  men  in  tawny  coats. 

Win.  How  now,  ambitious  Humphrey!  what 
means  this? 

Glou.  Peel’d  priest,  dost  thou  command  me  to 
be  shut  out?  50 

Win.  I  do,  thou  most  usurping  proditor. 

And  not  protector,  of  the  king  or  realm. 

Glou.  Stand  back,  thou  manifest  conspirator. 

Thou  that  contrivedst  to  murder  our  dead  lord; 

Thou  that  givest  whores  indulgences  to  sin: 

I’ll  canvass  thee  in  thy  broad  cardinal’s  hat. 

If  thou  proceed  in  this  thy  insolence. 

Win.  Nay,  stand  thou  back;  I  will  not  budge  a 
foot: 

This  be  Damascus,  be  thou  cursed  Cain, 

To  slay  thy  brother  Abel,  if  thou  wilt.  40 

Glou.  I  will  not  slay  thee,  but  I’ll  drive  thee 
back: 


6 

Thy  scarlet  robes  as  a  child’s  bearing-cloth 
I’ll  use  to  carry  thee  out  of  this  place. 

Win.  Do  what  thou  darest;  1  beard  thee  to  thy 
face. 

Glou.  What!  am  I  dared  and  bearded  to  my 
face? 

Draw,  men,  for  all  this  privileged  place; 

Blue  coats  to  tawny  coats.  Priest,  beware  your 
beard; 

I  mean  to  tug  it  and  to  cuff  you  soundly: 

Under  my  feet  I  stamp  thy  cardinal’s  hat: 

In  spite  of  Pope  or  dignities  of  church,  50 

Here  by  the  cheeks  I’ll  drag  thee  up  and  down. 
Win.  Gloucester,  thou  wilt  answer  this  before 
the  Pope. 

Glou.  Winchester  goose,  I  cry,  a  rope!  a  rope! 
Now  beat  them  hence;  why  do  you  let  them 
stay? 

Thee  I’ll  chase  hence,  thou  wolf  in  sheep’s  array. 
Out,  tawny  coats!  out,  scarlet  hypocrite! 

Here  Gloucester's  men  beat  out  the  Car  dinars  men., 
and  enter  in  the  hurly-burly  the  mayor  of  Lon¬ 
don  and  his  officers. 

May.  Fie,  lords!  that  you,  being  supreme 
magistrates. 

Thus  contumeliously  should  break  the  peace! 
Glou.  Peace,  mayor!  thou  know’st  little  of  my 
wrongs: 

Here’s  Beaufort,  that  regards  nor  God  nor 
king. 

Hath  here  distrain’d  the  Tower  to  his  use.  61 
Win.  Here’s  Gloucester,  a  foe  to  citizens, 

One  that  still  motions  war  and  never  peace, 
O’ercharging  your  free  purses  with  large  fines, 
That  seeks  to  overthrow  religion. 

Because  he  is  protector  of  the  realm. 

And  would  have  armour  here  out  of  the  Tower, 
To  crown  himself  king  and  suppress  the  prince. 
Glou.  I  will  not  answer  thee  with  words,  but 
blows.  [Here  they  skirmish  again. 

May.  Nought  rests  for  me  in  this  tumultuous 
strife  70 

But  to  make  open  proclamation: 

Come,  officer;  as  loud  as  e’er  thou  canst 

Off.  All  manner  of  men  assembled  here  in  arms 
this  day  against  God’s  peace  and  the  King’s,  we 
charge  and  command  you,  in  his  Highness’  name, 
to  repair  to  your  several  dwelling-places;  and  not 
to  wear,  handle,  or  use  any  sword,  weapon  or 
dagger,  henceforward,  upon  pain  of  death. 

Glou.  Cardinal,  I’ll  be  no  breaker  of  the  law: 

But  we  shall  meet,  and  break  our  minds  at  large. 
Win.  Gloucester,  we  will  meet;  to  thy  cost,  be 
sure: 


ACT  I 

Thy  heart-blood  I  will  have  for  this  day’s  work. 

May.  ril  call  for  clubs,  if  you  will  not  away. 
This  cardinal’s  more  haughty  than  the  devil. 

Glou.  Mayor,  farewell:  thou  dost  but  what  thou 
may  St. 

Win.  Abominable  Gloucester,  guard  thy  head; 
For  I  intend  to  have  it  ere  long. 

[Exeunt,  severally,  Gloucester  and  win¬ 
chester  voith  their  Servingmen. 
May.  See  the  coast  clear’d,  and  then  we  will 
depart. 

Good  God,  these  nobles  should  such  stomachs 
bear!  po 

I  myself  fight  not  once  in  forty  year.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Before  Orleans 

Enter,  on  the  'walls,  a  master  gunner  and  his  boy. 
Gun.  Sirrah,  thou  know’st  how  Orleans  is 
besieged, 

And  how  the  English  have  the  suburbs  won. 

Boy.  Father,  I  know;  and  oft  have  shot  at  them. 
Howe’er  unfortunate  I  miss’d  my  aim. 

Gun.  But  now  thou  shalt  not.  Be  thou  ruled  by 
me: 

Chief  master-gunner  am  I  of  this  town; 
Something  I  must  do  to  procure  me  grace. 

The  prince’s  espials  have  informed  me 

How  the  English,  in  the  suburbs  close  intrench’d. 

Wont  through  a  secret  grate  of  iron  bars  w 

In  yonder  tower  to  overpeer  the  city 

And  thence  discover  how  with  most  advantage 

They  may  vex  us  with  shot  or  with  assault. 

To  intercept  this  inconvenience, 

A  piece  of  ordnance  ’gainst  it  I  have  placed; 

And  even  these  three  days  have  I  watch’d. 

If  I  could  see  them. 

Now  do  thou  watch,  for  I  can  stay  no  longer. 

If  thou  spy’ St  any,  run  and  bring  me  word; 

And  thou  shalt  find  me  at  the  governor’s.  [Exit. 

Boy.  Father,  I  warrant  you;  take  you  no  care; 
I’ll  never  trouble  you,  if  I  may  spy  them.  [Exit. 

Enter,  on  the  turrets,  the  lords  Salisbury  and  tal- 

BOT,  SIR  WILLIAM  GLANSDALE,  SIR  THOMAS  GAR- 
GRAVE,  and  others. 

Sal.  Talbot,  my  life,  my  joy,  again  return’d! 
How  wert  thou  handled  being  prisoner? 

Or  by  what  means  got’st  thou  to  be  released? 
Discourse,  I  prithee,  on  this  turret’s  top. 

Tal.  The  Duke  of  Bedford  had  a  prisoner 
Call’d  the  brave  Lord  Ponton  de  Santrailles; 

For  him  was  I  exchanged  and  ransomed. 

But  with  a  baser  man  of  arms  by  far  50 

Once  in  contempt  they  would  have  barter’d  me; 
Which  I  disdaining  scorn’d  and  craved  death 
Rather  than  I  would  be  so  vile-esteem’d. 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


SCENE  IV  FIRST  PART  OF 

In  fine,  redeem’d  I  was  as  I  desired. 

But,  O !  the  treacherous  Fastol  fe  wounds  my  heart, 
Whom  with  my  bare  fists  I  would  execute 
If  I  now  had  him  brought  into  my  power. 

Sal.  Yet  tell’st  thou  not  how  thou  wert  en¬ 
tertain’d. 

Tal.  With  scoffs  and  scorns  and  contumelious 
taunts. 

In  open  market-place  produced  they  me,  40 
^  To  be  a  public  spectacle  to  all : 

Here,  said  they,  is  the  terror  of  the  French, 

The  scarecrow  that  affrights  our  children  so. 
Then  broke  I  from  the  officers  that  led  me. 

And  with  my  nails  digg’d  stones  out  of  the  ground. 
To  hurl  at  the  beholders  of  my  shame: 

My  grisly  countenance  made  others  fly; 

None  durst  come  near  for  fear  of  sudden  death. 

In  iron  walls  they  deem’d  me  not  secure; 

So  great  fear  of  my  name  ’mongst  them  was 
spread 

That  they  supposed  I  could  rend  bars  of  steel  5/ 
And  spurn  in  pieces  posts  of  adamant: 

Wherefore  a  guard  of  chosen  shot  I  had 
That  walk’d  about  me  every  minute  while; 

And  if  I  did  but  stir  out  of  my  bed. 

Ready  they  were  to  shoot  me  to  the  heart. 

Enter  the  boy  v)ith  a  linstock. 

Sal.  I  grieve  to  hear  what  torments  you  en¬ 
dured, 

But  we  will  be  revenged  sufficiently. 

Now  it  is  supper-time  in  Orleans: 

Here,  through  this  grate,  I  count  each  one  60 
And  view  the  Frenchmen  how  they  fortify: 

Let  us  look  in;  the  sight  will  much  delight  thee. 
Sir  Thomas  Gargrave,  and  Sir  William  Glans- 
dale. 

Let  me  have  your  express  opinions 
Where  is  best  place  to  make  our  battery  next. 

Gar.  I  think,  at  the  north  gate;  for  there  stand 
lords. 

Gian.  And  I,  here,  at  the  bulwark  of  the  bridge. 
Tal.  For  aught  I  see,  this  city  must  be  famish’d. 
Or  with  light  skirmishes  enfeebled. 

Here  they  shoot.  Salisbury  and  gargrave  fall. 
Sal.  O  Lord,  have  mercy  on  us,  wretched 
sinners!  70 

Gar.  O  Lord,  have  mercy  on  me,  woful  man! 

Tal.  What  chance  is  this  that  suddenly  hath 
cross’d  us? 

Speak,  Salisbury;  at  least,  if  thou  canst  speak: 
How  farest  thou,  mirror  of  all  martial  men? 

One  of  thy  eyes  and  thy  cheek’s  side  struck  off! 
Accursed  tower!  accursed  fatal  hand 
That  hath  contrived  this  woful  tragedy! 

In  thirteen  battles  Salisbury  o’ercame; 


KING  HENRY  VI  7 

Henry  the  Fifth  he  first  train’d  to  the  wars; 
Whilst  any  trump  did  sound,  or  drum  struck  up. 
His  sword  did  ne’er  leave  striking  in  the  field.  81 
Yet  livest  thou,  Salisbury?  though  thy  speech 
doth  fail. 

One  eye  thou  hast,  to  look  to  heaven  for  grace: 
The  sun  with  one  eye  vieweth  all  the  world. 
Heaven,  be  thou  gracious  to  none  alive. 

If  Salisbury  wants  mercy  at  thy  hands! 

Bear  hence  his  body;  I  will  help  to  burn  it. 

Sir  Thomas  Gargrave,  hast  thou  any  life? 

Speak  unto  Talbot;  nay,  look  up  to  him. 
Salisbury,  cheer  thy  spirit  with  this  comfort;  po 
Thou  shalt  not  die  whiles — 

He  beckons  with  his  hand  and  smiles  on  me. 

As  who  should  say  “When  I  am  dead  and  gone. 
Remember  to  avenge  me  on  the  French.” 
Plantagenet,  I  will;  and  like  thee,  Nero, 

Play  on  the  lute,  beholding  the  towns  burn: 
Wretched  shall  France  be  only  in  my  name. 

Here  an  alarum.,  and  it  thunders  and  lightens. 

What  stir  is  this?  what  tumult’s  in  the  heavens? 
Whence  cometh  this  alarum  and  the  noise? 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  My  lord,  my  lord,  the  French  have 
gather’d  head:  loo 

The  Dauphin,  with  one  Joan  la  Pucelle  join’d, 

A  holy  prophetess  new  risen  up. 

Is  come  with  a  great  power  to  raise  the  siege. 
Here  Salisbury  lifteth  himself  up  and  groans. 

Tal.  Hear,  hear  how  dying  Salisbury  doth 
groan! 

It  irks  his  heart  he  cannot  be  revenged. 
Frenchmen,  I’ll  be  a  Salisbury  to  you: 

Pucelle  or  puzzel,  dolphin  or  dogfish. 

Your  hearts  I’ll  stamp  out  with  my  horse’s  heels. 
And  make  a  quagmire  of  your  mingled  brains. 
Convey  me  Salisbury  into  his  tent,  no 

And  then  we’ll  try  what  these  dastard  French¬ 
men  dare.  [Alarum.  Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  The  same 

Here  an  alarum  again:  and  talbot  pursueth  the 
DAUPHIN,  and  driveth  him:  then  enter  joan  la 
PUCELLE,  driving  Englishmen  before  her.,  and 
exit  after  them:  then  re-enter  talbot. 

Tal.  Where  is  my  strength,  my  valour,  and  my 
force? 

Our  English  troops  retire,  I  cannot  stay  them; 

A  woman  clad  in  armour  chaseth  them. 

Re-enter  la  pucelle. 

Here,  here  she  comes.  I’ll  have  a  bout  with  thee; 
Devil  or  devil’s  dam.  I’ll  conjure  thee: 

Blood  will  I  draw  on  thee,  thou  art  a  witch. 


8  FIRST  PART  OF 

And  straightway  give  thy  soul  to  him  thou 
servest. 

Puc.  Come,  come,  ’tis  only  1  that  must  disgrace 
thee.  [Here  they  fight, 

TaL  Heavens,  can  you  suffer  hell  so  to  pre¬ 
vail?  9 

My  breast  I’ll  burst  with  straining  of  my  courage 
And  from  my  shoulders  crack  my  arms  asunder, 
But  I  will  chastise  this  high-minded  strumpet. 
They  fight  again. 

Puc,  Talbot,  farewell;  thy  hour  is  not  yet  come: 
I  must  go  victual  Orleans  forthwith. 

A  short  alarum:  then  enter  the  town  with  soldiers. 
O’ertake  m.e,  if  thou  canst;  I  scorn  thy  strength. 
Go,  go,  cheer  up  thy  hungry-starved  men; 

Help  Salisbury  to  make  his  testament: 

This  day  is  ours,  as  many  more  shall  be.  [Exit. 
Tal.  My  thoughts  are  whirled  like  a  potter’s 
wheel; 

I  know  not  where  I  am,  nor  what  I  do:  20 

A  witch,  by  fear,  not  force,  like  Hannibal, 

Drives  back  our  troops  and  conquers  as  she  lists: 
So  bees  with  smoke  and  doves  with  noisome  stench 
Are  from  rheir  hives  and  houses  driven  away. 
They  call’d  us  for  our  fierceness  English  dogs; 
Now,  like  to  whelps,  we  crying  run  away. 

A  short  alarum. 

Hark,  countrymen!  either  renew  the  fight, 

Or  tear  the  lions  out  of  England’s  coat; 

Renounce  your  soil,  give  sheep  in  lions’  stead: 
Sheep  run  not  half  so  treacherous  from  the  wolf, 
Or  horse  or  oxen  from  the  leopard,  5/ 

As  you  fly  from  your  oft-subdued  slaves. 

Alarum.  Here  another  skirmish. 

It  will  not  be:  retire  into  your  trenches: 

You  all  consented  unto  Salisbury’s  death. 

For  none  would  strike  a  stroke  in  his  revenge. 
Pucelle  is  enter’d  into  Orleans, 

In  spite  of  us  or  aught  that  we  could  do. 

O,  would  I  were  to  die  with  Salisbury! 

The  shame  hereof  will  make  me  hide  my  head. 

[Exit  TALBOT.  Alarum;  retreat;  fiourish. 

Scene  vi.  The  same 

Enter.,  on  the  walls.,  la  pucelle,  Charles,  reig- 
NiER,  ALEN90N,  and  Soldiers. 

Puc.  Advance  our  waving  colours  on  the  walls; 
Rescued  is  Orleans  from  the  English: 

Thus  Joan  la  Pucelle  hath  perform’d  her  word. 

Char.  Divinest  creature,  Astraea’s  daughter. 
How  shall  I  honour  thee  for  this  success? 

Thy  promises  are  like  Adonis’  gardens 
That  one  day  bloom’d  and  fruitful  were  the  next. 
France,  triumph  in  thy  glorious  prophetess! 
Recover’d  is  the  town  of  Orleans: 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  11 

More  blessed  hap  did  ne’er  befall  our  state.  10 
Reig.  Why  ring  not  out  the  bells  aloud  through¬ 
out  the  town? 

Dauphin,  command  the  citizens  make  bonfires 
And  feast  and  banquet  in  the  open  streets. 

To  celebrate  the  joy  that  God  hath  given  us. 

Alen.  All  France  will  be  replete  with  mirth  and 

joy, 

When  they  shall  hear  how  we  have  play’d  the 
men. 

Char.  ’Tis  Joan,  not  wc,  by  whom  the  day  is 
won; 

For  which  I  will  divide  my  crown  with  her. 

And  all  the  priests  and  friars  in  my  realm 
Shall  in  procession  sing  her  endless  praise.  20 
A  statelier  pyramis  to  her  I’ll  rear 
Than  Rhodope’s  or  Memphis’  ever  was: 

In  memory  of  her  when  she  is  dead, 

Her  ashes,  in  an  urn  more  precious 
Than  the  rich-jewel’d  coffer  of  Darius, 
Transported  shall  be  at  high  festivals 
Before  the  kings  and  queens  of  France. 

No  longer  on  Saint  Denis  will  we  cry. 

But  Joan  la  Pucelle  shall  be  France’s  saint. 

Come  in,  and  let  us  banquet  royally,  50 

After  this  golden  day  of  victory. 

[Flourish.  Exeunt. 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  Before  Orleans 

Enter  a  sergeant  of  a  band,  with  two  sentinels. 
Serg.  Sirs,  take  your  places  and  be  vigilant: 

If  any  noise  or  soldier  you  perceive 
Near  to  the  walls,  by  some  apparent  sign 
L  et  us  have  knowledge  at  the  court  of  guard. 
tst  Sent.  Sergeant,  you  shall.  [Exit  Sergeant. 
Thus  are  poor  servitors, 

When  others  sleep  upon  their  quiet  beds. 
Constrain’d  to  watch  in  darkness,  rain  and  cold 

Enter  talbot,  Bedford,  burgundy,  and  forces, 
with  scaling-ladders,  their  drums  beating  a  dead 
march. 

Tal.  Lord  Regent,  and  redoubted  Burgundy, 

By  whose  approach  the  regions  of  Artois, 

Wallon  and  Picardy  are  friends  to  us,  10 

This  happy  night  the  Frenchmen  are  secure. 
Having  all  day  caroused  and  banqueted: 

Embrace  we  then  this  opportunity 
As  fitting  best  to  quittance  their  deceit, 

Contrived  by  art  and  baleful  sorcery. 

Bed.  Coward  of  France!  how  much  he  wrongs 
his  fame, 

Despairing  of  his  own  arm’s  fortitude. 

To  join  with  witches  and  the  help  of  hell! 


SCENE  I 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


9 


Bur.  Traitors  have  never  other  company. 

But  what’s  that  Pucelle  whom  they  term  so 

pure?  20 

Tal.  A  maid,  they  say. 

Bed.  A  maid!  and  be  so  martial! 

Bur.  Pray  God  she  prove  not  masculine  ere 
’long, 

If  underneath  the  standard  of  the  French 
She  carry  armour  as  she  hath  begun. 

Tal.  Well,  let  them  practise  and  converse  with 
spirits: 

God  is  our  fortress,  in  whose  conquering  name 
Let  us  resolve  to  scale  their  flinty  bulwarks. 

Bed.  Ascend,  brave  Talbot;  we  will  follow 
thee. 

Tal.  Not  all  together:  better  far,  I  guess, 

That  we  do  make  our  entrance  several  ways;  50 
That,  if  it  chance  the  one  of  us  do  fail. 

The  other  yet  may  rise  against  their  force. 

Bed.  Agreed:  I’ll  to  yond  corner. 

Bur.  And  I  to  this. 

Tal.  And  here  will  Talbot  mount,  or  make  his 
grave. 

Now,  Salisbury,  for  thee,  and  for  the  right 
Of  English  Henry,  shall  this  night  appear 
How  much  in  duty  I  am  bound  to  both. 
ist  Sent.  Arm!  arm!  the  enemy  doth  make 
assault  ^ 

Cry:  ^'St.  George ''A  Talbot.”  The  English 
scale  the  walls. 

The  French  leap  over  the  walls  in  their  shirts.  Enter ^ 
several  ways.^  the  bastard  of  Orleans,  alen- 
90N,  and  REiGNiER,  half  ready.,  and  half  unready. 

Alen.  How  now,  my  lords!  what,  all  unready 
so? 

Bast.  Unready!  ay,  and  glad  we  ’scaped  so 
well.  40 

Reig.  ’Twas  time,  I  trow,  to  wake  and  leave 
our  beds. 

Hearing  alarums  at  our  chamber-doors. 

Alen.  Of  all  exploits  since  first  I  follow’d  arms. 
Ne’er  heard  I  of  a  warlike  enterprise 
More  venturous  or  desperate  than  this. 

Bast.  I  think  this  Talbot  be  a  fiend  of  hell. 

Reig.  If  not  of  hell,  the  heavens,  sure,  favour 
him. 

Alen.  Here  cometh  Charles:  I  marvel  how  he 
sped. 

Bast  Tut,  holy  Joan  was  his  defensive  guard. 

Enter  Charles  and  la  pucelle. 

Char.  Is  this  thy  cunning,  thou  deceitful  dame? 

Didst  thou  at  first,  to  flatter  us  withal. 

Make  us  partakers  of  a  little  gain. 


That  now  our  loss  might  be  ten  times  so  much? 
Puc.  Wherefore  is  Charles  impatient  with  his 
friend? 

At  all  times  will  you  have  my  power  alike? 
Sleeping  or  waking  must  I  still  prevail. 

Or  will  you  blame  and  lay  the  fault  on  me? 
Improvident  soldiers!  had  your  watch  been  good, 
This  sudden  mischief  never  could  have  fall’n. 
Char.  Duke  of  Alengon,  this  was  your 

default,  60 

That,  being  captain  of  the  watch  to-night. 

Did  look  no  better  to  that  weighty  charge. 

Alen.  Had  all  your  quarters  been  as  safely  kept 
As  that  whereof  I  had  the  government. 

We  had  not  been  thus  shamefully  surprised. 

Bast.  Mine  was  secure. 

Reig.  And  so  was  mine,  my  lord. 

Char.  And,  for  myself,  most  part  of  all  this 
night. 

Within  her  quarter  and  mine  own  precinct 
I  was  employ’d  in  passing  to  and  fro. 

About  relieving  of  the  sentinels :  70 

Then  how  or  which  way  should  they  first 
break  in? 

Puc.  Question,  my  lords,  no  further  of  the  case. 
How  or  which  way:  ’tis  sure  they  found  some 
place 

But  weakly  guarded,  where  the  breach  was  made. 
And  now  there  rests  no  other  shift  but  this; 

To  gather  our  soldiers,  scatter’d  and  dispersed. 
And  lay  new  platforms  to  endamage  them. 

Alarum.  Enter  an  English  soldier,  crying  “A 
Talbot!  a  Talbot!”  They  fly.,  leaving  their 
clothes  behind. 

Sold.  I’ll  be  so  bold  to  take  what  they  have  left. 
The  cry  of  Talbot  serves  me  for  a  sword; 

For  I  have  loaden  me  with  many  spoils.  So 

Using  no  other  weapon  but  his  name.  [Exit. 

Scene  ii.  Orleans:  Within  the  town 
Enter  talbot,  Bedford,  burgundy,  a  captain, 
and  others. 

Bed.  The  day  begins  to  break,  and  night  is  fled. 
Whose  pitchy  mantle  over-veil’d  the  earth. 

Here  sound  retreat,  and  cease  our  hot  pursuit. 

[Retreat  sounded. 

Tal.  Bring  forth  the  body  of  old  Salisbury, 

And  here  advance  it  in  the  market-place. 

The  middle  centre  of  this  cursed  town. 

Now  have  I  paid  my  vow  unto  his  soul; 

For  every  drop  of  blood  was  drawn  from  him 
There  hath  at  least  five  Frenchmen  died  to-night. 
And  that  hereafter  ages  may  behold  w 

What  ruin  happen’d  in  revenge  of  him. 

Within  their  chiefest  temple  I’ll  erect 


lo  FIRST  PART  OF 

A  tomb,  wherein  his  corpse  shall  be  interr’d: 
Upon  the  which,  that  every  one  may  read. 

Shall  be  engraved  the  sack  of  Orleans, 

The  treacherous  manner  of  his  mournful  death, 
And  what  a  terror  he  had  been  to  France. 

But,  lords,  in  all  our  bloody  massacre, 

I  muse  we  met  not  with  the  Dauphin’s  grace. 

His  new-come  champion,  virtuous  Joan  of  Arc, 
Nor  any  of  his  false  confederates.  21 

Bed,  ’Tis  thought,  Lord  Talbot,  when  the  fight 
began. 

Roused  on  the  sudden  from  their  drowsy  beds. 
They  did  amongst  the  troops  of  armed  men 
Leap  o’er  the  walls  for  refuge  in  the  field. 

Bur.  Myself,  as  far  as  I  could  well  discern 
For  smoke  and  dusky  vapours  of  the  night. 

Am  sure  I  scared  the  Dauphin  and  his  trull. 

When  arm  in  arm  they  both  came  swiftly 
running. 

Like  to  a  pair  of  loving  turtle-doves  50 

That  could  not  live  asunder  day  or  night. 

After  that  things  are  set  in  order  here. 

We’ll  follow  them  with  all  the  power  we  have. 

Enter  a  messenger 

Mess.  All  hail,  my  lords!  Which  of  this 
princely  train 

Call  ye  the  warlike  Talbot,  for  his  acts 
So  much  applauded  through  the  realm  of  France? 
Tal.  Here  is  the  Talbot:  who  would  soeak  with 
him? 

Mess.  The  virtuous  lady.  Countess  of  Auvergne, 
With  modesty  admiring  thy  renown. 

By  me  entreats,  great  lord,  thou  wouldst  vouch¬ 
safe  40 

To  visit  her  poor  castle  where  she  lies. 

That  she  may  boast  she  hath  beheld  the  man 
Whose  glory  fills  the  world  with  loud  report. 

Bur.  Is  it  even  so?  Nay,  then,  I  see  our  wars 
Will  turn  unto  a  peaceful  comic  sport. 

When  ladies  crave  to  be  encounter’d  with. 

You  may  not,  my  lord,  despise  her  gentle  suit. 

Tal  Ne’er  trust  me  then;  for  when  a  world  of 
men 

Could  not  prevail  with  all  their  oratory. 

Yet  hath  a  woman’s  kindness  over-ruled:  yo 

And  therefore  tell  her  I  return  great  thanks. 

And  in  submission  will  attend  on  her. 

Will  not  your  honours  bear  me  company? 

Bed.  No  truly;  it  is  more  than  manners  will: 

And  I  have  heard  it  said,  unbidden  guests 
Are  often  welcomes t  when  they  are  gone. 

Tal.  Well  then,  alone,  since  there’s  no  remedy, 

I  mean  to  prove  this  lady’s  courtesy. 

Come  hither,  captain.  [Whispers.]  You  perceive 
my  mind? 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  ii 

Capt.  I  do,  my  lord,  and  mean  accordingly. 

[Exeunt.  60 

Scene  hi.  Auvergne:  The  Countess's  castle 
Enter  the  countess  and  her  porter. 

Count.  Porter,  remember  what  I  gave  in  charge; 
And  when  you  have  done  so,  bring  the  keys  to  me. 
Port.  Madam,  I  will.  [Exit. 

Count.  The  plot  is  laid:  if  all  things  fall  out 
right, 

I  shall  as  famous  be  by  this  exploit 
As  Scythian  Tomyris  by  Cyrus’  death. 

Great  is  the  rumour  of  this  dreadful  knight. 

And  his  achievements  of  no  less  account: 

Fain  would  mine  eyes  be  witness  with  mine  ears. 
To  give  their  censure  of  these  rare  reports.  10 

Enter  messenger  and  talbot. 

Mess.  Madam, 

According  as  your  ladyship  desired. 

By  message  craved,  so  is  Lord  Talbot  come. 
Count.  And  he  is  welcome.  What!  is  this  the 
man? 

Mess.  Madam,  it  is. 

Count.  Is  this  the  scourge  of  France? 

Is  this  the  Talbot,  so  much  fear’d  abroad 
That  with  his  name  the  mothers  still  their  babes? 
I  see  report  is  fabulous  and  false: 

I  thought  I  should  have  seen  some  Hercules, 

A  second  Hector,  for  his  grim  aspect,  20 

And  large  proportion  of  his  strong-knit  limbs. 
Alas,  this  is  a  child,  a  silly  dwarf! 

It  cannot  be  this  weak  and  writhled  shrimp 
Should  strike  such  terror  to  his  enemies. 

Tal.  Madam,  I  have  been  bold  to  trouble  you; 
But  since  your  ladyship  is  not  at  leisure. 

I’ll  sort  some  other  time  to  visit  you. 

Count.  What  means  he  now?  Go  ask  him 
whither  he  goes. 

Mess.  Stay,  my  Lord  Talbot;  for  mv  lady 
craves 

To  know  the  cause  of  your  abrupt  departure.  50 
Tal.  Marry,  for  that  she’s  in  a  wrong  belief, 

I  go  to  certify  her  Talbot’s  here. 

Re-enter  porter  voith  keys. 

Count.  If  thou  be  he,  then  art  thou  prisoner. 

Tal.  Prisoner!  to  whom? 

Count.  To  me,  blood-thirsty  lord; 

And  for  that  cause  I  train’d  thee  to  my  house. 
Long  time  thy  shadow  hath  been  thrall  to  me, 

For  in  my  gallery  thy  picture  hangs: 

But  now  the  substance  shall  endure  the  like. 

And  I  will  chain  these  legs  and  arms  of  thine. 
That  hast  by  tyranny  these  many  years  40 

Wasted  our  country,  slain  our  citizens 


SCENE  III  FIRST  PART  OF 

And  sent  our  sons  and  husbands  captivate. 

Tal.  Ha,  ha,  ha! 

Count.  Laughest  thou,  wretch?  thy  mirth  shall 
turn  to  moan. 

Tal.  I  laugh  to  see  your  ladyship  so  fond 
To  think  that  you  have  aught  but  Talbot’s 
shadow 

Whereon  to  practise  your  severity. 

Count.  Why,  art  not  thou  the  man? 

Tal.  I  am  indeed. 

Count.  Then  have  I  substance  too. 

Tal.  No,  no,  I  am  but  shadow  of  myself:  50 

You  are  deceived,  my  substance  is  not  here; 

For  what  you  see  is  but  the  smallest  part 
And  least  proportion  of  humanity: 

I  tell  you,  madam,  were  the  whole  frame  here, 

It  is  of  such  a  spacious  lofty  pitch, 

Your  roof  were  not  sufficient  to  contain ’t. 

Count.  This  is  a  riddling  merchant  for  the 
nonce; 

He  will  be  here,  and  yet  he  is  not  here: 

How  can  these  contrarieties  agree? 

Tal.  That  will  I  show  you  presently.  60 

Winds  his  hom.  Drums  strike  up:  a  peal  of  ord¬ 
nance.  Enter  Soldiers. 

How  say  you,  madam?  are  you  now  persuaded 
That  TalW  is  but  shadow  of  himself? 

These  are  his  substance,  sinews,  arms  and 
strength. 

With  which  he  yoketh  your  rebellious  necks, 
Razeth  your  cities,  and  subverts  your  towns 
And  in  a  moment  makes  them  desolate. 

Count.  Victorious  Talbot!  pardon  my  abuse: 

I  find  thou  art  no  less  than  fame  hath  bruited 
And  more  than  may  be  gather’d  by  thy  shape. 

Let  my  presumption  not  provoke  thy  wrath ;  70 
For  I  am  sorry  that  with  reverence 
I  did  not  entertain  thee  as  thou  art. 

Tal.  Be  not  dismay’d,  fair  lady;  nor  misconstrue 
The  mind  of  Talbot,  as  you  did  mistake 
The  outward  composition  of  his  body. 

What  you  have  done  hath  not  offended  me; 

Nor  other  satisfaction  do  I  crave. 

But  only,  with  your  patience,  that  we  may 
Taste  of  your  wine  and  see  what  cates  you  have; 
For  soldiers’  stomachs  always  serve  them  well.  80 
Count.  With  all  my  heart,  and  think  me 
honoured 

To  feast  so  great  a  warrior  in  my  house.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  London:  The  Temple-garden 
Enter  the  earls  of  somerset,  Suffolk,  and  war- 
wick;  RICHARD  PLANTAGENET,  VERNON,  and 
another  lawyer. 

Plan.  Great  lords  and  gentlemen,  what  means 
this  silence? 


KING  HENRY  VI  n 

Dare  no  man  answer  in  a  case  of  truth? 

Suf.  Within  the  Temple-hall  we  were  too  loud; 
The  garden  here  is  more  convenient. 

Plan.  Then  say  at  once  if  I  maintain’d  the  truth; 
Or  else  was  wrangling  Somerset  in  the  error? 

Suf.  Faith,  I  have  been  a  truant  in  the  law. 

And  never  yet  could  frame  my  will  to  it; 

And  therefore  frame  the  law  unto  my  will. 

Som.  Judge  you,  my  Lord  of  Warwick,  then, 
between  us.  10 

War.  Between  two  hawks,  which  flies  the 
higher  pitch; 

Between  two  dogs,  which  hath  the  deeper  mouth; 
Between  two  blades,  which  bears  the  better 
temper; 

Between  two  horses,  which  doth  bear  him  best; 
Between  two  girls,  which  hath  the  merriest  eye; 

I  have  perhaps  some  shallow  spirit  of  judgement; 
But  in  these  nice  sharp  quillets  of  the  law. 

Good  faith,  I  am  no  wiser  than  a  daw. 

Plan.  Tut,  tut,  here  is  a  mannerly  forbearance: 
The  truth  appears  so  naked  on  my  side  20 

That  any  purblind  eye  may  find  it  out. 

Som.  And  on  my  side  it  is  so  well  apparell’d, 

So  clear,  so  shining  and  so  evident 
That  it  will  glimmer  through  a  blind  man’s  eye. 
Plan.  Since  you  are  tongue-tied  and  so  loath  to 
speak. 

In  dumb  significants  proclaim  your  thoughts: 

Let  him  that  is  a  true-born  gentleman 
And  stands  upon  the  honour  of  his  birth. 

If  he  suppose  that  I  have  pleaded  truth. 

From  off  this  brier  pliick  a  white  rose  with 

me.  50 

Som.  Let  him  that  is  no  coward  nor  no  flatterer. 
But  dare  maintain  the  party  of  the  truth. 

Pluck  a  red  rose  from  off  this  thorn  with  me. 

War.  I  love  no  colours,  and  without  all  colour 
Of  base  insinuating  flattery 
I  pluck  this  white  rose  with  Plantagenet. 

Suf.  I  pluck  this  red  rose  with  young  Somerset 
And  say  withal  I  think  he  held  the  right. 

Ver.  Stay,  lords  and  gentlemen,  and  pluck  no 
more. 

Till  you  conclude  that  he  upon  whose  side  40 
The  fewest  roses  are  cropp’d  from  the  tree 
Shall  yield  the  other  in  the  right  opinion. 

Som.  Good  Master  Vernon,  it  is  well  objected: 
If  I  have  fewest,  I  subscribe  in  silence. 

Plan.  And  I. 

Ver.  Then  for  the  truth  and  plainness  of  the 
case, 

I  pluck  this  pale  and  maiden  blossom  here. 

Giving  my  verdict  on  the  white  rose  side. 

Som.  Prick  not  your  finger  as  you  pluck  it  off. 
Lest  bleeding  you  do  paint  the  white  rose  red  yo 


12  FIRST  PART  OF 

And  fall  on  my  side  so,  against  your  will. 

Ver.  If  I,  my  lord,  for  my  opinion  bleed. 

Opinion  shall  be  surgeon  to  my  hurt 
And  keep  me  on  the  side  where  still  I  am. 

Som,  Well,  well,  come  on:  who  else? 

Law,  Unless  my  study  and  my  books  be  false, 
The  argument  you  held  was  wrong  in  you; 

To  SOMERSET. 

In  sign  whereof  I  pluck  a  white  rose  too. 

Flan.  Now,  Somerset,  where  is  your  argument? 
Som.  Here  in  my  scabbard,  meditating  that 
Shall  dye  your  white  rose  in  a  bloody  red.  6i 
Plan,  Meantime  your  cheeks  do  counterfeit  our 
roses; 

For  pale  they  look  with  fear,  as  witnessing 
The  truth  on  our  side. 

So7n,  No,  Plantagenet, 

’Tis  not  for  fear  but  anger  that  thy  cheeks 
Blush  for  pure  shame  to  counterfeit  our  roses. 
And  yet  thy  tongue  will  not  confess  thy  error. 
Plan.  Hath  not  thy  rose  a  canker,  Somerset? 

Som.  Hath  not  thy  rose  a  thorn,  Plantagenet? 
Plan.  Ay,  sharp  and  piercing,  to  maintain  his 
truth;  70 

Whiles  thy  consuming  canker  eats  his  falsehood. 
Srnn.  Well,  I’ll  find  friends  to  wear  my  bleeding 
roses. 

That  shall  maintain  what  I  have  said  is  true 
Where  false  Plantagenet  dare  not  be  seen. 

Plan.  Now,  by  this  maiden  blossom  in  my  hand, 
I  scorn  thee  and  thy  fashion,  peevish  boy. 

Suf.  Turn  not  thy  scorns  this  way,  Plantagenet. 
Plan.  Proud  Pole,  I  will,  and  scorn  both  him 
and  thee. 

Suf.  I’ll  turn  my  part  thereof  into  thy  throat. 
S^.  Away,  away,  good  William  de  la  Pole! 

We  grace  the  yeoman  by  conversing  with  him.^/ 
War.  Now,  by  God’s  will,  thou  wrong’ st  him, 
Somerset; 

His  grandfather  was  Lionel  Duke  of  Clarence, 
Third  son  to  the  third  Edward  King  of  England: 
Spring  crestless  yeomen  from  so  deep  a  root? 
Plan.  He  bears  him  on  the  place’s  privilege. 

Or  durst  not,  for  his  craven  heart,  say  thus. 

Som.  By  him  that  made  me.  I’ll  maintain  my 
words 

On  any  plot  of  ground  in  Christendom. 

Was  not  thy  father,  Richard  Earl  of  Cambridge, 
For  treason  executed  in  our  late  king’s  days? 

And,  by  his  treason,  stand’ st  not  thou  attainted. 
Corrupted,  and  exempt  from  ancient  gentry? 

His  trespass  yet  lives  guilty  in  thy  blood; 

And,  till  thou  be  restored,  thou  art  a  yeoman. 

Plan.  My  father  was  attached,  not  attainted. 
Condemn’d  to  die  for  treason,  but  no  traitor; 

And  that  I’ll  prove  on  better  men  than  Somerset, 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  ii 

Were  growing  time  once  ripen’d  to  my  will. 

For  your  partaker  Pole,  and  you  yourself,  wo 
I’ll  note  you  in  my  bopk  of  memory. 

To  scourge  you  for  this  apprehension: 

Look  to  it  well  and  say  you  are  well  warn’d. 

Som.  Ah,  thou  shalt  find  us  ready  for  thee  still; 
And  know  us  by  these  colours  for  thy  foes. 

For  these  my  friends  in  spite  of  thee  shall  wear. 
Plan.  And,  by  my  soul,  this  pale  and  angry  rose, 
As  cognizance  of  my  blood-drinking  hate. 

Will  I  for  ever  and  my  faction  wear, . 

Until  it  wither  with  me  to  my  grave  iw 

Or  flourish  to  the  height  of  my  degree. 

Suf.  Go  forward  and  be  choked  with  thy 
ambition! 

And  so  farewell  until  I  meet  thee  next.  [Exit. 

Som.  Have  with  thee,  Pole.  Farewell,  ambitious 
Richard.  [Exit. 

Plan.  How  I  am  braved  and  must  perforce 
endure  it! 

War.  This  blot  that  they  object  against  your 
house 

Shall  be  wiped  out  in  the  next  parliament 
Call’d  for  the  truce  of  Winchester  and 
Gloucester; 

And  if  thou  be  not  then  created  York, 

I  will  not  live  to  be  accounted  Warwick.  120 
Meantime,  in  signal  of  my  love  to  thee. 

Against  proud  Somerset  and  William  Pole, 

Will  I  upon  thy  party  wear  this  rose: 

And  here  I  prophesy:  this  brawl  to-day. 

Grown  to  this  faction  in  the  Temple-garden, 
Shall  send  between  the  red  rose  and  the  white 
A  thousand  souls  to  death  and  deadly  night. 

Plan.  Good  Master  Vernon,  I  am  bound  to  you. 
That  you  on  my  behalf  would  pluck  a  flower. 
Ver.  In  your  behalf  still  will  I  wear  the  same. 
Law.  And  so  will  1 .  75 / 

Plan.  Thanks,  gentle  sir. 

Come,  let  us  four  to  dinner:  I  dare  say 
This  quarrel  will  drink  blood.another  day. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  The  Tower  of  London. 

Enter  mortimer,  brought  in  a  chair.,  and 

GAOLERS. 

Mor.  Kind  keepers  of  my  weak  decaying  age. 
Let  dying  Mortimer  here  rest  himself. 

Even  like  a  man  new  haled  from  the  rack. 

So  fare  my  limbs  with  long  imprisonment; 

And  these  grey  locks,  the  pursuivants  of  death, 
Nestor-like  aged  in  an  age  of  care. 

Argue  the  end  of  Edmund  Mortimer. 

These  eyes,  like  lamps  whose  wasting  oil  is 
spent. 

Wax  dim,  as  drawing  to  their  exigent; 


SCENE  V  FIRST  PART  OF 

Weak  shoulders,  overborne  with  burthening 

And  pithless  arms,  like  to  a  wither’d  vine  // 
That  droops  his  sapless  branches  to  the  ground: 
Yet  are  these  feet,  whose  strengthless  stay  is 
numb, 

Unable  to  support  this  lump  of  clay, 

Swift- winged  with  desire  to  get  a  grave, 

As  witting  I  no  other  comfort  have. 

But  tell  me,  keeper,  will  my  nephew  come? 
ist  Gaol.  Richard  Plantagenet,  my  lord,  will 
come: 

We  sent  unto  the  Temple,  unto  his  chamber; 

And  answer  was  return’d  that  he  will  come.  20 
Mor.  Enough:  my  soul  shall  then  be  satisfied. 
Poor  gentleman!  his  wrong  doth  equal  mine. 

Since  Henry  Monmouth  first  began  to  reign. 
Before  whose  glory  I  was  great  in  arms. 

This  loathsome  sequestration  have  I  had; 

And  even  since  then  hath  Richard  been  obscured, 
Deprived  of  honour  and  inheritance. 

But  now  the  arbitrator  of  despairs. 

Just  death,  kind  umpire  of  men’s  miseries. 

With  sweet  enlargement  doth  dismiss  me  hence: 

I  would  his  troubles  likewise  were  expired,  5/ 
That  so  he  might  recover  what  was  lost. 

Enter  richard  plantagenet. 

ist  Gaol.  My  lord,  your  loving  nephew  now  is 
come. 

Mor.  Richard  Plantagenet,  my  friend,  is  he 
come? 

Plan.  Ay,  noble  uncle,  thus  ignobly  used. 

Your  nephew,  late  despised  Richard,  comes. 

Mor.  Direct  mine  arms  I  may  embrace  his  neck, 
And  in  his  bosom  spend  my  latter  gasp: 

O,  tell  me  when  my  lips  do  touch  his  cheeks. 

That  I  may  kindly  give  one  fainting  kiss.  40 
And  now  declare,  sweet  stem  from  York’s 
great  stock. 

Why  didst  thou  say,  of  late  thou  wert  despised? 
Plan.  First,  lean  thine  aged  back  against  mine 
arm; 

And,  in  that  ease,  Fll  tell  thee  my  disease. 

This  day,  in  argument  upon  a  case. 

Some  words  there  grew  ’twixt  Somerset  and  me; 
Among  which  terms  he  used  his  lavish  tongue 
And  did  upbraid  me  with  my  father’s  death: 
Which  obloquy  set  bars  before  my  tongue. 

Else  with  the  like  I  had  requited  him.  50 

Therefore,  good  uncle,  for  my  father’s  sake. 

In  honour  of  a  true  Plantagenet 

And  for  alliance  sake,  declare  the  cause 

My  father,  Earl  of  Cambridge,  lost  his  head. 

Mor.  That  cause,  fair  nephew,  that  imprison’d 
me 


KING  HENRY  VI  13 

And  hath  detain’d  me  all  my  flowering  youth 
Within  a  loathsome  dungeon,  there  to  pine. 

Was  cursed  instrument  of  his  decease. 

Plan.  Discover  more  at  large  what  cause  that 
was. 

For  I  am  ignorant  and  cannot  guess.  60 

Mor.  1  will,  if  that  my  fading  breath  permit 
And  death  approach  not  ere  my  tale  be  done. 
Henry  the  Fourth,  grandfather  to  this  king. 
Deposed  his  nephew  Richard,  Edward’s  son. 

The  first-begotten  and  the  lawful  heir 
Of  Edward  king,  the  third  of  that  descent: 

During  whose  reign  the  Percies  of  the  north. 
Finding  his  usurpation  most  unjust, 

Endeavour’d  my  advancement  to  the  throne: 

The  reason  moved  these  warlike  lords  to  this  70 
Was  for  that — young  King  Richard  thus 
removed. 

Leaving  no  heir  begotten  of  his  body — 

I  was  the  next  by  birth  and  parentage; 

For  by  my  mother  I  derived  am 
From  Lionel  Duke  of  Clarence,  the  third  son 
To  King  Edward  the  Third;  whereas  he 
From  John  of  Gaunt  doth  bring  his  pedigree. 
Being  but  fourth  of  that  heroic  line. 

But  mark:  as  in  this  haughty  great  attempt 
They  laboured  to  plant  the  rightful  heir,  80 
I  lost  my  liberty  and  they  their  lives. 

Long  after  this,  when  Henry  the  Fifth, 
Succeeding  his  father  Bolingbroke,  did  reign. 
Thy  father,  Earl  of  Cambridge,  then  derived 
From  famous  Edmund  Langley,  Duke  of  York, 
Marrying  my  sister  that  thy  mother  was. 

Again  in  pity  of  my  hard  distress 
Levied  an  army,  weening  to  redeem 
And  have  install’d  me  in  the  diadem: 

But,  as  the  rest,  so  fell  that  noble  earl  po 

And  was  beheaded.  Thus  the  Mortimers, 

In  whom  the  title  rested,  were  suppress’d. 

Plan.  Of  which,  my  lord,  your  honour  is  the  last. 
Mor.  True;  and  thou  seest  that  I  no  issue  have 
And  that  my  fainting  words  do  warrant  death: 
Thou  art  my  heir;  the  rest  I  wish  thee  gather: 

But  yet  be  wary  in  thy  studious  care. 

Plan.  Thy  grave  admonishments  prevail  with 
me: 

But  yet,  methinks,  my  father’s  execution 
Was  nothing  less  than  bloody  tyranny.  100 
Mor.  With  silence,  nephew,  be  thou  politic: 
String-fixed  is  the  house  of  Lancaster 
And  like  a  mountain,  not  to  be  removed. 

But  now  thy  uncle  is  removing  hence; 

As  princes  do  their  courts,  when  they  are  cloy’d 
With  long  continuance  in  a  settled  place. 

Plan.  O,  uncle,  would  some  part  of  my  young 
years 


14  FIRST  PART  OF 

Might  but  redeem  the  passage  of  your  age! 

Alor.  Thou  dost  then  wrong  me,  as  that 

slaughterer  doth  /op 

Which  giveth  many  wounds  when  one  will  kill. 
Mourn  not,  except  thou  sorrow  for  my  good; 
Only  give  order  for  my  funeral: 

And  so  farewell,  and  fair  be  all  thy  hopes 
And  prosperous  be  thy  life  in  peace  and  war !  [Dies. 
Plan.  And  peace,  no  war,  befall  thy  parting  soul! 
In  prison  hast  thou  spent  a  pilgrimage 
And  like  a  hermit  overpass’d  thy  days. 

Well,  I  will  lock  his  counsel  in  my  breast; 

And  what  I  do  imagine,  let  that  rest. 

Keepers,  convey  him  hence,  and  I  myself  120 
Will  see  his  burial  better  than  his  life. 

[Exeunt  gaolers,  bearing  out  the  body 
of  MORTIMER. 

Here  dies  the  dusky  torch  of  Mortimer, 

Choked  with  ambition  of  the  meaner  sort: 

And  for  those  wrongs,  those  bitter  injuries. 
Which  Somerset  hath  offer’d  to  my  house, 

I  doubt  not  but  with  honour  to  redress; 

And  therefore  haste  I  to  the  parliament. 

Either  to  be  restored  to  my  blood. 

Or  make  my  ill  the  advantage  of  my  good.  [Exit. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  London:  The  Parliament-house 
Flourish.  Enter  king,  exeter,  Gloucester,  War¬ 
wick,  SOMERSET,  and  SUFFOLK;  the  BISHOP  OF 
WINCHESTER,  RICHARD  PLANTAGENET,  and 

others.  Gloucester  offers  to  put  up  a  bill;  win¬ 
chester  snatches  it,  and  tears  it. 

Win.  Comest  thou  with  deep  premeditated 
lines. 

With  written  pamphlets  studiously  devised, 
Humphrey  of  Gloucester?  If  thou  canst  accuse. 

Or  aught  intend’ st  to  lay  unto  my  charge. 

Do  it  without  invention,  suddenly; 

As  I  with  sudden  and  extemporal  speech 
Purpose  to  answer  what  thou  canst  object. 

Glou.  Presumptuous  priest!  this  place  commands 
my  patience. 

Or  thou  shouldst  find  thou  hast  dishonour’d  me. 
Think  not,  although  in  writing  I  preferr’d  10 
The  manner  of  thy  vile  outrageous  crimes. 

That  therefore  I  have  forged,  or  am  not  able 
Verbatim  to  rehearse  the  method  of  my  pen: 

No,  prelate:  such  is  thy  audacious  wickedness. 
Thy  lewd,  pestiferous  and  dissentious  pranks. 

As  very  infants  prattle  of  thy  pride. 

Thou  art  a  most  pernicious  usurer, 

Froward  by  nature,  enemy  to  peace: 

Lascivious,  wanton,  more  than  well  beseems 
A  man  of  thy  profession  and  degree;  20 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  m 

And  for  thy  treachery,  what’s  more  manifest? 

In  that  thou  laid’st  a  trap  to  take  my  life, 

As  well  at  London  bridge  as  at  the  Tower. 
Beside,  I  fear  me,  if  thy  thoughts  were  sifted. 

The  king,  thy  sovereign,  is  not  quite  exempt 
From  envious  malice  of  thy  swelling  heart. 

Win.  Gloucester,  I  do  defy  thee.  Lords, 
vouchsafe 

To  give  me  hearing  what  I  shall  reply. 

If  I  were  covetous,  ambitious  or  perverse. 

As  he  will  have  me,  how  am  I  so  poor?  50 

Or  how  haps  it  I  seek  not  to  advance 
Or  raise  myself,  but  keep  my  wonted  calling" 
And  for  dissension,  who  preferreth  peace 
More  than  I  do? — ekcept  I  be  provoked. 

No,  my  good  lords,  it  is  not  that  offends; 

It  is  not  that  that  hath  incensed  the  duke: 

It  is,  because  no  one  should  sway  but  he; 

No  one  but  he  should  be  about  the  king: 

And  that  engenders  thunder  in  his  breast 
And  makes  him  roar  these  accusations  forth.  40 
But  he  shall  know  I  am  as  good — 

Glou.  As  good! 

Thou  bastard  of  my  grandfather! 

Win.  Ay,  lordly  sir;  for  what  are  you,  I  pray. 
But  one  imperious  in  another’s  throne? 

Glou.  Am  I  not  protector,  saucy  priest? 

Win.  And  am  not  I  a  prelate  of  the  church? 

Glou.  Yes,  as  an  outlaw  in  a  castle  keeps 
And  useth  it  to  patronage  his  theft. 

Win.  Unreverent  Gloucester! 

Glou.  Thou  art  reverent 

Touching  thy  spiritual  function,  not  thy  life.  50 
Win.  Rome  shall  remedy  this. 

War.  Roam  thither,  then. 

Som.  My  lord,  it  were  your  duty  to  forbear. 
War.  Ay,  see  the  bishop  be  not  overborne. 

Som.  Methinks  my  lord  should  be  religious 
And  know  the  office  that  belongs  to  such. 

War.  Methinks  his  lordship  should  be  humbler; 
It  fitteth  not  a  prelate  so  to  plead. 

Som.  Yes,  when  his  holy  state  is  touch’d  so 
near. 

War.  State  holy  or  unhallow’d,  what  of  that? 

Is  not  his  grace  protector  to  the  king?  60 

Plan.  [Aside}  Plantagenet,  I  see,  must  hold  his 
tongue. 

Lest  it  be  said  “Speak,  sirrah,  when  you  should; 
Must  your  bold  verdict  enter  talk  with  lords?” 
Else  would  I  have  a  fling  at  Winchester. 

King.  Uncles  of  Gloucester  and  of  Winchester, 
The  special  watchmen  of  our  English  weal, 

I  would  prevail,  if  prayers  might  prevail. 

To  join  your  hearts  in  love  and  amity. 

O,  what  a  scandal  is  it  to  our  crown 

That  two  such  noble  peers  as  ye  should  jar!  70 


SCENE!  FIRST  PART  OF 

Believe  me,  lords,  my  tender  years  can  tell 

Civil  dissension  is  a  viperous  worm 

That  gnaws  the  bowels  of  the  commonwealth. 

noise  within,  “Down  with  the  tawny- 
coats!”] 

What  tumult’s  this? 

War,  An  uproar,  I  dare  warrant, 

Begun  through  malice  of  the  bishop’s  men. 

[A  noise  again,  “Stones!  stones!”] 

Enter  mayor. 

May.  O,  my  good  lords,  and  virtuous  Henry, 
Pity  the  city  of  London,  pity  as! 

The  bishop  and  the  Duke  of  Gloucester’s  men, 
Forbidden  late  to  carry  any  weapon. 

Have  fill’d  their  pockets  full  of  pebble  stones  8o 
And  banding  themselves  in  contrary  parts 
Do  pelt  so  fast  at  one  another’s  pate 
That  many  have  their  giddy  brains  knock’d  out: 
Our  windows  are  broke  down  in  every  street 
And  we  for  fear  compell’d  to  shut  our  shops. 

Enter  serving-men,  in  skirmish,  with  bloody 
pates. 

King.  We  charge  you,  on  allegiance  to  ourself, 
Fo  hold  your  slaughtering  hands  and  keep  the 
peace. 

Pray,  uncle  Gloucester,  mitigate  this  strife. 
istServ.  Nay,  if  we  be  forbidden  stones,  we’ll 
fall  to  it  with  our  teeth.  90 

2nd  Serv.  Do  what  ye  dare,  we  are  as  resolute. 

[Skirmish  again. 

Glou.  You  of  my  household,  leave  this  peevish 
broil 

And  set  this  unaccustom’d  fight  aside. 

^rd  Serv.  My  lord,  we  know  your  grace  to  be  a 
man 

Just  and  upright;  and,  for  your  royal  birth. 
Inferior  to  none  but  to  his  majesty: 

And  ere  that  we  will  suffer  such  a  prince. 

So  kind  a  father  of  the  commonweal. 

To  be  disgraced  by  an  inkhorn  mate. 

We  and  our  wives  and  children  all  will  fight  too 
And  have  our  bodies  slaughter’d  by  thy  foes. 

ist  Serv.  Ay,  and  the  very  parings  of  our  nails 
Shall  pitch  a  field  when  we  are  dead. 

Begin  again. 

Glou.  Stay,  stay,  I  say! 

And  if  you  love  me,  as  you  say  you  do. 

Let  me  persuade  you  to  forbear  awhile. 

King.  O,  how  this  discord  doth  afflict  my  soul! 
Can  you,  my  Lord  of  Winchester,  behold 
My  sighs  and  tears  and  will  not  once  relent? 

Who  should  be  pitiful,  if  you  be  not? 

Or  who  should  study  to  prefer  a  peace,  no 

If  holy  churchmen  take  delight  in  broils? 


KING  HENRY  VI  15 

War.  Yield,  my  lord  protector;  yield,  Win¬ 
chester; 

Except  you  mean  with  obstinate  repulse 
To  slay  your  sovereign  and  destroy  the  realm. 
You  see  what  mischief  and  what  murder  too 
Hath  been  enacted  through  your  enmity; 

Then  be  at  peace,  except  ye  thirst  for  blood. 

Win.  He  shall  submit,  or  I  will  never  yield. 

Glou.  Compassion  on  the  king  eommands  me 
stoop; 

Or  I  would  see  his  heart  out,  ere  the  priest  120 
Should  ever  get  that  privilege  of  me. 

War.  Behold,  my  Lord  of  Winchester,  the  duke 
Hath  banish’d  moody  discontented  fury. 

As  by  his  smoothed  brows  it  doth  appear: 

Why  look  you  still  so  stern  and  tragical? 

Glou.  Here,  Winchester,  I  offer  thee  my  hand. 
King.  Fie,  uncle  Beaufort!  I  have  heard  you 
preach 

That  malice  was  a  great  and  grievous  sin; 

And  will  not  you  maintain  the  thing  you  teach. 
But  prove  a  chief  offender  in  the  same?  1^0 

War.  Sweet  king!  the  bishop  hath  a  kindly  gird. 
For  shame,  my  lord  of  Winchester,  relent! 

What,  shall  a  child  instruct  you  what  to  do? 

Win.  Well,  Duke  of  Gloucester,  I  will  yield  to 
thee; 

Love  for  thy  love  and  hand  for  hand  I  give. 

Glou.  [Aside]  Ay,  but,  I  fear  me,  with  a  hollow 
heart. — 

See  here,  my  friends  and  loving  countrymen. 
This  token  serveth  for  a  flag  of  truce 
Betwixt  ourselves  and  all  our  followers : 

So  help  me  God,  as  I  dissemble  not!  140 

Win.  [Aside]  So  help  me  God,  as  I  intend  it  not! 
King.  O  loving  uncle,  kind  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
How  joyful  am  I  made  by  this  contract! 

Away,  my  masters!  trouble  us  no  more; 

But  join  in  friendship,  as  your  lords  have  done. 
ist  Serv.  Content:  I’ll  to  the  surgeon’s. 

2nd  Serv.  And  so  will  L 

^rd  Serv.  And  I  will  see  what  physic  the  tavern 
affords. 

[Exeunt  serving-men,  mayor,  &r. 
War.  Accept  this  scroll,  most  gracious 
sovereign. 

Which  in  the  right  of  Richard  Plantagenet  1^0 
We  do  exhibit  to  your  majesty. 

Glou.  Well  urged,  my  Lord  of  Warwick:  for 
sweet  prince, 

An  if  your  grace  mark  every  circumstance. 

You  have  great  reason  to  do  Richard  right; 
Especially  for  those  occasions 
At  Eltham  Place  I  told  your  majesty. 

King.  And  those  occasions,  uncle,  were  of  force: 
Therefore,  my  loving  lords,  our  pleasure  i5^ 


i6  FIRST  PART  OF 

That  Richard  be  restored  to  his  blood. 

War.  Let  Richard  be  restored  to  his  blood; 

So  shall  his  father’s  wrongs  be  recompensed.  i6i 
Win.  As  will  the  rest,  so  willeth  Winchester. 
King.  If  Richard  will  be  true,  not  that  alone 
But  all  the  whole  inheritance  I  give 
That  doth  belong  unto  the  house  of  York, 

From  whence  you  spring  by  lineal  descent. 

Plan.  Thy  humble  servant  vows  obedience 
And  humble  service  till  the  point  of  death. 

King.  Stoop  then  and  set  your  knee  against 
my  foot; 

And,  in  reguerdon  of  that  duty  done,  /70 

I  gird  thee  with  the  valiant  sword  of  York: 

Rise,  Richard,  like  a  true  Plantagenet, 

And  rise  created  princely  Duke  of  York. 

Plan.  And  so  thrive  Richard  as  thy  foes  may 
fall!  ■ 

And  as  my  duty  springs,  so  perish  they 
That  grudge  one  thought  against  your  majesty! 
All.  Welcome,  high  prince,  the  mighty  Duke 
of  York! 

Som.  [Aside]  Perish,  base  prince,  ignoble 
Duke  of  York! 

Glou.  Now  will  it  best  avail  your  majesty 
To  cross  the  seas  and  to  be  crown’d  in  France: 
The  presence  of  a  king  engenders  love  181 

Amongst  his  subjects  and  his  loyal  friends. 

As  it  disanimates  his  enemies. 

King.  When  Gloucester  says  the  word.  King 
Henry  goes; 

For  friendly  counsel  cuts  off  many  foes. 

Glou.  Your  ships  already  are  in  readiness. 

[Sennet.  Flourish.  Exeunt  all  but  exeter. 
Fxe.  Ay,  we  may  march  in  England  or  in  France, 
Not  seeing  what  is  likely  to  ensue. 

This  late  dissension  grown  betwixt  the  peers 
Burns  under  feigned  ashes  of  forged  love  190 
And  will  at  last  break  out  into  a  flame: 

As  fester’d  members  rot  but  by  degree, 

Till  bones  and  flesh  and  sinews  fall  away, 

So  will  this  base  and  envious  discord  breed. 

And  now  I  fear  that  fatal  prophecy 
Which  in  the  time  of  Henry  named  the  Fifth 
Was  in  the  mouth  of  every  sucking  babe; 

That  Henry  born  at  Monmouth  should  win  all 
And  Henry  born  at  Windsor  lose  all: 

Which  is  so  plain  that  Exeter  doth  wish  200 
His  days  may  finish  ere  that  hapless  time.  [Exit. 

Scene  ii.  France:  Before  Rouen 
Enter  la  pucelle  disguised.,  with  four  soldiers 
with  sacks  upon  their  backs. 

Puc.  These  are  the  city  gates,  the  gates  of 
Rouen, 

Through  which  our  policy  must  make  a  breach: 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  m 

Take  heed,  be  wary  how  you  place  your  words; 
Talk  like  the  vulgar  sort  of  market  men 
That  come  to  gather  money  for  their  corn 
If  we  have  entrance,  as  I  hope  we  shall. 

And  that  we  find  the  slothful  watch  but  weak. 

I’ll  by  a  sign  give  notice  to  our  friends. 

That  Charles  the  Dauphin  may  encounter  them. 
ist  Sol.  Our  sacks  shall  be  a  mean  to  sack  the 
city,  10 

And  we  be  lords  and  rulers  over  Rouen; 
Therefore  we’ll  knock.  [Knocks. 

Watch.  [Within]  Qui  est  la? 

Puc.  Paysans,  pauvres  gens  de  France; 

Poor  market  folks  that  come  to  sell  their  corn. 
Watch.  Enter,  go  in;  the  market  bell  is  rung. 

Puc.  Now,  Rouen,  I’ll  shake  thy  bulwarks  to 
the  ground.  [Exeunt. 

Enter  Charles,  the  bastard  of  Orleans, 
ALEN90N,  REiGNiER,  and  forces. 

Char.  Saint  Denis  bless  this  happy  stratagem! 
And  once  again  we’ll  sleep  secure  in  Rouen. 

Bast.  Here  enter’d  Pucelle  and  her  practisants; 
Now  she  is  there,  how  will  she  specify  21 

Where  is  the  best  and  safest  passage  in? 

Reign.  By  thrusting  out  a  torch  from  yonder 
tower; 

Which,  once  discern’d,  shows  that  her  meaning 
is. 

No  way  to  that,  for  weakness,  which  she 
enter’d. 

Enter  la  pucelle  on  the  top.,  thrusting  out  a 
torch  burning. 

Puc.  Behold,  this  is  the  happy  wedding  torch 
That  joineth  Rouen  unto  her  countrymen. 

But  burning  fatal  to  the  Talbotites!  [Exit. 

Bast.  See,  noble  Charles,  the  beacon  of  our 
friend; 

The  burning  torch  in  yonder  turret  stands.  50 
Char.  Now  shine  it  like  a  comet  of  revenge, 

A  prophet  to  the  fall  of  all  our  foes! 

Reign.  Defer  no  time,  delays  have  dangerous 
ends: 

Enter,  and  cry  “The  Dauphin!”  presently. 

And  then  do  execution  on  the  watch. 

[Alarum.  Exeunt. 

An  alarum.  Enter  talbot  in  an  excursion. 

Tal.  France,  thou  shalt  rue  this  treason  with 
thy  tears. 

If  Talbot  but  survive  thy  treachery. 

Pucelle,  that  witch,  that  damned  sorceress. 

Hath  wrought  this  hellish  mischief  unawares. 
That  hardly  we  escaped  the  pride  of  France.  40 

[Exit. 


SCENE  II  FIRST  PART  OF 

An  alarum:  excursions,  Bedford,  brought  in  sick  in 
a  chair.  Enter  talbot  and  burgundy  u'ithmt: 

within  LA  PUCELLE,  CHARLES,  BASTARD,  ALEN- 
goN,  and  REiGNiER,  on  the  walls. 

Puc.  Good  morrow,  gallants!  want  ye  corn  for 
bread? 

I  think  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  will  fast 
Before  he’ll  buy  again  at  such  a  rate: 

’Twas  full  of  darnel;  do  you  like  the  taste? 

Bur.  Scoff  on,  vile  fiend  and  shameless 
courtezan! 

I  trust  ere  long  to  choke  thee  with  thine  own 
And  make  thee  curse  the  harvest  of  that  corn. 
Char.  Your  grace  may  starve  perhaps  before 
that  time. 

Bed.  O,  let  no  words,  but  deeds,  revenge  this 
treason! 

Puc.  What  will  you  do,  good  grey -beard? 
break  a  lance,  50 

And  run  a  tilt  at  death  within  a  chair? 

Tal.  Foul  fiend  of  France,  and  hag  of  all  despite, 
Encompass’d  with  thy  lustful  paramours! 

Becomes  it  thee  to  taunt  his  valiant  age 
And  twit  with  cowardice  a  man  half  dead? 
Damsel,  I’ll  have  a  bout  with  you  again. 

Or  else  let  Talbot  perish  with  this  shame. 

Puc.  Are  ye  so  hot,  sir?  yet,  Pucelle,  hold  thy 
peace; 

If  Talbot  do  but  thunder,  rain  will  follow. 

The  English  whisper  together  in  council 
God  speed  the  parliament!  who  shall  be  the 

speaker?  60 

r al.  Dare  ye  come  forth  and  meet  us  in  the 
field? 

Puc.  Belike  your  lordship  takes  us  then  for  fools, 
To  try  if  that  our  own  be  ours  or  no. 

Tal.  I  speak  not  to  that  railing  Hecate, 

But  unto  thee,  Alengon,  and  the  rest; 

Will  ye,  like  soldiers,  come  and  fight  it  out? 

Alen.  Signior,  no. 

Tal.  Signior,  hang!  base  muleters  of  France! 

Like  peasant  foot-boys  do  they  keep  the  walls 
And  dare  not  take  up  arms  like  gentlemen.  70 
Puc.  Away,  captains!  let’s  get  us  from  the  walls; 
For  Talbot  means  no  goodness  by  his  looks. 

God  be  wi’  you,  my  lord!  we  came  but  to  tell 
you 

That  we  are  here.  [Exeunt from  the  walls. 

Tal.  And  there  will  we  be  too,  ere  it  be  long. 

Or  else  reproach  be  Talbot’s  greatest  fame! 

Vow,  Burgundy,  by  honour  of  thy  house. 

Prick’d  on  by  public  wrongs  sustain’d  in  France, 
Either  to  get  the  town  again  or  die: 

And  I,  as  sure  as  English  Henry  lives  So 

And  as  his  father  here  was  conqueror. 


KING  HENRY  VI  17 

As  sure  as  in  this  late-betrayed  town 
Great  Coeur-de-lion’s  heart  was  buried. 

So  sure  I  swear  to  get  the  town  or  die. 

Bur.  My  vows  are  equal  partners  with  thy 
vows. 

Tal.  But,  ere  we  go,  regard  this  dying  prince. 
The  valiant  Duke  of  Bedford.  Come,  my  lord. 
We  will  bestow  you  in  some  better  place. 

Fitter  for  sickness  and  for  crazy  age. 

Bed.  Lord  Talbot,  do  not  so  dishonour  me: 

Here  will  I  sit  before  the  walls  of  Rouen 
And  will  be  partner  of  your  weal  or  woe. 

But.  Courageous  Bedford,  let  us  now  persuade 
you. 

Bed.  Not  to  be  gone  from  hence;  for  once  I  read 
That  stout  Pendragon  in  his  litter  sick 
Came  to  the  field  and  vanquished  his  foes: 
Methinks  I  should  revive  the  soldiers’  hearts. 
Because  I  ever  found  them  as  myself. 

Tal.  Undaunted  spirit  in  a  dying  breast! 

Then  be  it  so:  heavens  keep  old  Bedford  safe! 
And  now  no  more  ado,  brave  Burgundy,  loi 
But  gather  we  our  forces  out  of  hand 
And  set  upon  our  boasting  enemy. 

[Exeunt  all  but  Bedford  and  Attendants. 

An  alarum:  excursions.  Enter  sir  john 
FASTOLFE  and  a  captain. 

Cap.  Whither  away.  Sir  John  Fastolfe,  in  such 
haste? 

Fast.  Whither  away!  to  save  myself  by  flight: 
We  are  like  to  have  the  overthrow  again. 

Cap.  What!  will  you  fly,  and  leave  Lord 
Talbot? 

Fast.  Ay, 

All  the  Talbots  in  the  world,  to  save  my  life. 

[Exit. 

Cap.  Cowardly  knight!  ill  fortune  follow  thee! 

[Exit. 

Retreat:  excursions,  la  pucelle,  ALEN90N,  and 
CHARLES,  enter  from  the  town  and  fly. 

Bed.  Now,  quiet  soul,  depart  when  heaven 
please,  no 

For  I  have  seen  our  enemies’  overthrow. 

What  is  the  trust  or  strength  of  foolish  man? 
They  that  of  late  were  daring  with  their  scoffs 
Are  glad  and  fain  by  flight  to  save  themselves. 

[Bedford  dies,  and  is  carried  in  by  two  in  his 

chair. 

An  alarum.  Re-enter  talbot,  burgundy, 
and  the  rest. 

Tal.  Lost,  and  recover’d  in  a  day  again! 

This  is  a  double  honour.  Burgundy: 

Yet  heavens  have  glorv  for  this  victory! 


i8  FIRST  PART  OF 

Bur.  Warlike  and  martial  Talbot,  Burgundy 
Enshrines  thee  in  his  heart  and  there  erects 
Thy  noble  deeds  as  valour’s  monuments.  120 
Tal.  Thanks,  gentle  Duke.  But  where  is  Pucelle 
now? 

I  think  her  old  familiar  is  asleep: 

Now  where’s  the  Bastard’s  braves,  and  Charles 
his  gleeks? 

What,  all  amort?  Rouen  hangs  her  head  for  grief 
That  such  a  valiant  company  are  fled. 

Now  will  we  take  some  order  in  the  town. 

Placing  therein  some  expert  officers. 

And  then  depart  to  Paris  to  the  king. 

For  there  young  Flenry  with  his  nobles  lie. 

Bur.  What  wills  Lord  Talbot  pleaseth 

Burgundy.  75  0 

Tal.  But  yet,  before  we  go,  let’s  not  forget 
The  noble  Duke  of  Bedford,  late  deceased. 

But  see  his  exequies  fulfill’d  in  Rouen: 

A  braver  soldier  never  couched  lance, 

A  gentler  heart  did  never  sway  in  court; 

But  kings  and  mightiest  potentates  must  die, 

For  that’s  the  end  of  human  misery.  [Exeunt, 

Scene  hi.  The  plains  near  Rouen 
Enter  Charles,  the  bastard  of  Orleans, 
ALEN90N,  LA  PUCELLE,  and  forces. 

Puc.  Dismay  not,  princes,  at  this  accident. 

Nor  grieve  that  Rouen  is  so  recovered: 

Care  is  no  cure,  but  rather  corrosive, 

For  things  that  are  not  to  be  remedied. 

Let  frantic  Talbot  triumph  for  a  while 
And  like  a  peacock  sweep  along  his  tail: 

We’ll  pull  his  plumes  and  take  away  his  train. 

If  Dauphin  and  the  rest  will  be  but  ruled. 

Char.  We  have  been  guided  by  thee  hitherto 
And  of  thy  cunning  had  no  diffidence:  10 

One  sudden  foil  shall  never  breed  distrust. 

Bast.  Search  out  thy  wit  for  secret  policies. 

And  we  will  make  thee  famous  through  the  world. 
Alen.  We’ll  set  thy  statue  in  some  holy  place. 
And  have  thee  reverenced  like  a  blessed  saint: 
Employ  thee  then,  sweet  virgin,  for  our  good. 

Puc.  Then  thus  it  must  be;  this  doth  Joan  devise: 
By  fair  persuasions  mix’d  with  sugar’d  words 
We  will  entice  the  Duke  of  Burgundy 
ToleavetheTalbot  and  to  follow  us.  20 

Char.  Ay,  marry,  sweeting,  if  we  could  do  that, 
France  were  no  place  for  Henry’s  warriors; 

Nor  should  that  nation  boast  it  so  with  us. 

But  be  extirped  from  our  provinces. 

Alen.  For  ever  should  they  be  expulsed  from 
France 

And  not  have  title  of  an  earldom  here. 

Puc.  Your  honours  shall  perceive  how  I  will 
work 


KING  HENRY  VI  ACT  III 

To  bring  this  matter  to  the  wished  end. 

Drum  sounds  afar  off. 

Hark!  by  the  sound  of  drum  you  may  perceive 
Their  powers  are  marching  unto  Paris-ward.  50 
Here  sound  an  English  march.  Enter.,  and  pass  over 
at  a  distance.,  talbot  and  his  forces. 

There  goes  the  Talbot,  with  his  colours  spread, 
And  all  the  troops  of  English  after  him. 

French  march.  Enter  the  duke  of  burgundy 
and  forces. 

Now  in  the  rearward  comes  the  duke  and  his: 
Fortune  in  favour  makes  him  lag  behind. 

Summon  a  parley;  we  will  talk  with  him. 
Trumpets  sound  a  parley. 

Char.  A  parley  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundy! 

Bur.  Who  craves  a  parley  with  the  Burgundy? 
Puc.  The  princely  Charles  of  France  thy 
countryman. 

Bur.  What  say’st  thou,  Charles?  for  I  am 
marching  hence. 

Char.  Speak,  Pucelle,  and  enchant  him  with  thy 
words.  40 

Puc.  Brave  Burgundy,  undoubted  hope  of 
France! 

Stay,  let  thy  humble  handmaid  speak  to  thee. 

Bur.  Speak  on;  but  be  not  over-tedious. 

Puc.  Look  on  thy  country,  look  on  fertile 
France, 

And  see  the  cities  and  the  towns  defaced 
By  wasting  ruin  of  the  cruel  foe. 

As  looks  the  mother  on  her  lowly  babe 
When  death  doth  close  his  tender  dying  eyes. 
See,  see  the  pining  malady  of  France: 

Behold  the  wounds,  the  most  unnatural  wounds. 
Which  thou  thyself  hast  given  her  wo  fill  breast. 
O,  turn  thy  edged  sword  another  way; 

Strike  those  that  hurt,  and  hurt  not  those  that 
help. 

One  drop  of  blood  drawn  from  thy  country’s 
bosom 

Should  grieve  thee  more  than  streams  of  foreign 
gore: 

Return  thee  therefore  with  a  flood  of  tears. 

And  wash  away  thy  country’s  stained  spots. 

Bur.  Either  she  hath  bewitch’d  me  with  her 
words. 

Or  nature  makes  me  suddenly  relent. 

Puc.  Besides,  all  French  and  France  exclaims 
on  thee,  60 

Doubting  thy  birth  and  lawful  progeny. 

Who  join’st  thou  with  but  with  a  lordly  nation 
That  will  not  trust  thee  but  for  profit’s  sake? 
When  Talbot  hath  set  footing  once  in  France 
And  fashion’d  thee  that  instrument  of  ill. 

Who  then  but  English  Henry  will  be  lord 


SCENE  III  FIRST  PART  OF 

And  thou  be  thrust  out  like  a  fugitive? 

Call  we  to  mind,  and  mark  but  this  for  proof, 
Was  not  the  Duke  of  Orleans  thy  foe? 

And  was  he  not  in  England  prisoner?  70 

But  when  they  heard  he  was  thine  enemy, 

They  set  him  free  without  his  ransom  paid. 

In  spite  of  Burgundy  and  all  his  friends. 

See,  then,  thou  fight’ st  against  thy  countrymen 
And  join’ St  with  them  will  be  thy  slaughter-men. 
Come,  come,  return;  return,  thou  wandering  lord 
Charles  and  the  rest  will  take  thee  in  their  arms. 
Bur.  I  am  vanquished;  these  haughty  words 
of  hers 

Have  batter’d  me  like  roaring  cannon-shot. 

And  made  me  almost  yield  upon  my  knees.  80 
Forgive  me,  country,  and  sweet  countrymen. 
And,  lords,  accept  this  hearty  kind  embrace: 

My  forces  and  my  power  of  men  are  yours: 

So  farewell,  Talbot;  I’ll  no  longer  trust  thee. 

Puc.  [Aside]  Done  like  a  Frenchman:  turn,  and 
turn  again! 

Char.  Welcome,  brave  duke!  thy  friendship 
makes  us^/resh. 

Bast.  And  doth  beget  new  courage  in  our  breasts. 
Alen.  Pucelie  hath  bravely  play’d  her  part  in  this, 
And  doth  deserve  a  coronet  of  gold. 

Char.  Now  let  us  on,  my  lords,  and  join  our 
powers,  po 

And  seek  how  we  may  prejudice  the  foe. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Paris:  The  palace 
Enter  the  king,  Gloucester,  bishop  of  win¬ 
chester,  YORK  [RICHARD  PLANTAGENEt]  ,  SUF¬ 
FOLK,  SOMERSET,  WARWICK,  EXETER:  VERNON, 

BASSET,  and  others.  To  them  with  his  Soldiers, 

TALBOT. 

Tal.  My  gracious  prince,  and  honourable  peers, 
Hearing  of  your  arrival  in  this  realm, 

I  have  awhile  given  truce  unto  my  wars. 

To  do  my  duty  to  my  sovereign: 

In  sign  whereof,  this  arm,  that  hath  reclaim’d 
To  your  obedience  fifty  fortresses. 

Twelve  cities  and  seven  walled  towns  of  strength. 
Beside  five  hundred  prisoners  of  esteem. 

Lets  fall  his  sword  before  your  highness’  feet. 
And  with  submissive  loyalty  of  heart  10 

Ascribes  the  glory  of  his  conquest  got 
First  to  my  God  and  next  unto  your  Grace. 

[Kneels. 

King.  Is  this  the  Lord  Talbot,  uncle  Gloucester, 
That  hath  so  long  been  resident  in  France? 

Glou.  Yes,  if  it  please  your  majesty,  my  liege. 
King.  Welcome,  brave  captain  and  victorious 
lord! 

When  I  was  young,  as  yet  I  am  not  old. 


KING  HENRY  VI  19 

I  do  remember  how  my  father  said 
A  stouter  champion  never  handled  sword. 

Long  since  we  were  resolved  of  your  truth,  20 
Your  faithful  service,  and  your  toil  in  war; 

Yet  never  have  you  tasted  our  reward. 

Or  been  reguerdon’d  with  so  much  as  thanks. 
Because  till  now  we  never  saw  your  face: 
Therefore,  stand  up;  and,  for  these  good  deserts, 
We  here  create  you  Earl  of  Shrewsbury; 

And  in  our  coronation  take  your  place. 

[Sennet.  Flourish.  Exeunt  all  but  vernon  and 

BASSET. 

Ver.  Now,  sir,  to  you,  that  were  so  hot  at  sea. 
Disgracing  of  these  colours  that  I  wear 
In  honour  of  my  noble  Lord  of  York :  5  o 

Darest  thou  maintain  the  former  words  thou 
spakest? 

Bas.  Yes,  sir;  as  well  as  you  dare  patronage 
The  envious  barking  of  your  saucy  tongue 
Against  my  lord  the  Duke  of  Somerset. 

Ver.  Sirrah,  thy  lord  I  honour  as  he  is. 

Bas.  Why,  what  is  he?  as  good  a  man  as  York. 
Ver.  Hark  ye;  not  so:  in  witness,  take  ye 
that.  [Strikes  him.] 

Bas.  Villain,  thou  know’st  the  law  of  arms  is 
such 

That  whoso  draws  a  sword,  ’tis  present  death. 

Or  else  this  blow  should  broach  thy  dearest 
blood.  ^0 

But  I’ll  unto  his  majesty,  and  crave 
I  may  have  liberty  to  venge  this  wrong; 

When  thou  shalt  see  I’ll  meet  thee  to  thy  cost. 
Ver.  Well,  miscreant.  I’ll  be  there  as  soon  as 
you; 

And,  after,  meet  you  sooner  than  you  would. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  Paris:  A  hall  of  state 
Enter  the  king,  Gloucester,  bishop  of  win¬ 
chester,  YORK,  SUFFOLK,  SOMERSET,  WAR¬ 
WICK,  TALBOT,  EXETER,  the  GOVERNOR  OF  PARIS, 

and  others. 

Glou.  Lord  Bishop,  set  the  crown  upon  his 
head. 

Win.  God  save  King  Henry,  of  that  name  the 
Sixth! 

Glou.  Now,  Governor  of  Paris,  take  your  oath, 
[governor  kneels.] 

That  you  elect  no  other  king  but  him; 

Esteem  none  friends  but  such  as  are  his  friends, 
And  none  your  foes  but  such  as  shall  pretend 
Malicious  practices  against  his  state: 

This  shall  ye  do,  so  help  you  righteous  God! 
[Exeunt  governor  and  train^ 


20  FIRST  PART  OF 

Enter  sir  john  fastolfe. 

Fast.  My  gracious  sovereign,  as  I  rode  from 
Calais, 

To  haste  unto  your  coronation,  lo 

A  letter  was  deliver’d  to  my  hands, 

Writ  to  your  grace  from  the  Duke  of  Burgundy. 

Tal.  Shame  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  and  thee! 

I  vow’d,  base  knight,  when  I  did  meet  thee  next. 
To  tear  the  Garter  from  thy  craven’s  leg. 

Plucking  it  off. 

Which  I  have  done,  because  unworthily 
Thou  wast  installed  in  that  high  degree. 

Pardon  me,  princely  Henry,  and  the  rest: 

This  dastard,  at  the  battle  of  Patay, 

When  but  in  all  I  was  six  thousand  strong  20 
And  that  the  French  were  almost  ten  to  one. 
Before  we  met  or  that  a  stroke  was  given. 

Like  to  a  trusty  squire  did  run  away: 

In  which  assault  we  lost  twelve  hundred  men; 
Myself  and  divers  gentlemen  beside 
Were  there  surprised  and  taken  prisoners. 

Then  judge,  great  lords,  if  I  have  done  amiss; 

Or  whether  that  such  cowards  ought  to  wear 
This  ornament  of  knighthood,  yea  or  no. 

Glou.  To  say  the  truth,  this  fact  was  infamous 
And  ill  beseeming  any  common  man,  5/ 

Much  more  a  knight,  a  captain  and  a  leader. 

Tal.  When  first  this  order  was  ordain’d,  my 
lords, 

Knights  of  the  Garter  were  of  noble  birth. 
Valiant  and  virtuous,  full  of  haughty  courage, 
Such  as  were  grown  to  credit  by  the  wars; 

Not  fearing  death,  nor  shrinking  for  distress, 

But  always  resolute  in  most  extremes. 

He  then  that  is  not  furnish’d  in  this  sort 

Doth  but  usurp  the  sacred  name  of  knight,  40 

Profaning  this  most  honourable  order. 

And  should,  if  I  were  worthy  to  be  judge, 

Be  quite  degraded,  like  a  hedge-born  swain 
That  doth  presume  to  boast  of  gentle  blood. 

King.  Stain  to  thy  countrymen,  thou  hear’st 
thy  doom! 

Be  packing,  therefore,  thou  that  wast  a  knight: 
Henceforth  we  banish  thee,  on  pain  of  death. 

[Exit  FASTOLFE. 

And  now,  my  lord  protector,  view  the  letter 
Sent  from  our  uncle  Duke  of  Burgundy. 

Glou.  What  means  his  grace,  that  he  hath 
changed  his  style?  50 

No  more  but,  plain  and  bluntly,  “To  the  king!” 
Hath  he  forgot  he  is  his  sovereign? 

Or  doth  this  churlish  superscription 
Pretend  some  alteration  in  good  will? 

What’s  here?  [Reads]  “I  have,  upon  especial 
cause. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  iv 

Moved  with  compassion  of  my  country’s  wreck. 
Together  with  the  pitiful  complaints 
Of  such  as  your  oppression  feeds  upon, 

Forsaken  your  pernicious  faction 
And  join’d  with  Charles,  the  rightful  King  of 
France.”  60 

O  monstrous  treachery!  can  this  be  so. 

That  in  alliance,  amity  and  oaths. 

There  should  be  found  such  false  dissembling 
guile? 

King.  What!  doth  my  uncle  Burgundy  revolt? 
Glou.  He  doth,  my  lord,  and  is  become  your  foe. 
King.  Is  that  the  worst  this  letter  doth  contain? 
Glou.  It  is  the  worst,  and  all,  my  lord,  he 
writes. 

King.  Why,  then.  Lord  Talbot  there  shall  talk 
with  him 

And  give  him  chastisement  for  this  abuse. 

How  say  you,  my  lord?  are  you  not  content?  70 
Tal.  Content,  my  liege!  yes,  but  that  I  am 
prevented, 

I  should  have  begg’d  I  might  have  been  employ’d. 
King.  Then  gather  strength  and  march  unto  him 
straight: 

Let  him  perceive  how  ill  we  brook  his  treason 
And  what  offence  it  is  to  flout  his  friends. 

Tal.  I  go,  my  lord,  in  heart  desiring  still 
You  may  behold  confusion  of  your  foes.  [Exit. 

Enter  vernon  and  basset. 

Ver.  Grant  me  the  combat,  gracious  sovereign. 
Bas.  And  me,  my  lord,  grant  me  the  combat  too. 
York.  This  is  my  servant:  hear  him,  noble 
prince.  80 

Som.  And  this  is  mine:  sweet  Henry,  favour 
him. 

King.  Be  patient,  lords;  and  give  them 
leave  to  speak. 

Say,  gentlemen,  what  makes  you  thus  exclaim? 
And  wherefore  crave  you  combat?  or  with 
whom? 

Ver.  With  him,  my  lord;  for  he  hath  done  me 
wrong. 

Bas.  And  I  with  him;  for  he  hath  done  me 
wrong. 

King.  What  is  that  wrong  whereof  you 

both  complain? 

First  let  me  know,  and  then  I’ll  answer  you. 

Bas.  Crossing  the  sea  from  England  into  France, 
This  fellow  here,  with  envious  carping  tongue. 
Upbraided  me  about  the  rose  I  wear;  y/ 

Saying,  the  sanguine  colour  of  the  leaves 
Did  represent  my  master’s  blushing  cheeks. 
When  stubbornly  he  did  repugn  the  truth 
About  a  certain  question  in  the  law 
Argued  betwixt  the  Duke  of  York  and  him; 


SCENE  I  FIRST  PART  OF 

With  other  vile  and  ignominious  terms: 

In  confutation  of  which  rude  reproach 
And  in  defence  of  my  lord’s  worthiness, 

I  crave  the  benefit  of  law  of  arms .  wo 

Ver.  And  that  is  my  petition,  noble  lord: 

For  though  he  seem  with  forged  quaint  conceit 
To  set  a  gloss  upon  his  bold  intent. 

Yet  know,  my  lord,  I  was  provoked  by  him; 

And  he  first  took  exceptions  at  this  badge. 
Pronouncing  that  the  paleness  of  this  flower 
Bewray’d  the  faintness  of  my  master’s  heart. 
York.  Will  not  this  malice,  Somerset,  be  left? 
Som.  Your  private  grudge,  my  Lord  of  York, 
will  out. 

Though  ne’er  so  cunningly  you  smother  it.  no 
King.  Good  Lord,  what  madness  rules  in 
brainsick  men. 

When  for  so  slight  and  frivolous  a  cause 
Such  factious  emulations  shall  arise! 

Good  cousins  both,  of  York  and  Somerset, 

Quiet  yourselves,  I  pray,  and  be  at  peace. 

York.  Let  this  dissension  first  be  tried  by  fight. 
And  then  your  highness  shall  command  a  peace. 
Som.  The  quarrel  toucheth  none  but  us  alone; 
Betwixt  ourselves  let  us  decide  it  then.  n^ 

York.  There  is  my  pledge:  accept  it,  Somerset. 
Ver.  Nay,  let  it  rest  where  it  began  at  first. 

Bas.  Confirm  it  so,  mine  honourable  lord. 

Glou.  Confirm  it  so!  Confounded  be  your  strife! 
And  perish  ye,  with  your  audacious  prate! 
Presumptuous  vassals,  are  you  not  ashamed 
With  this  immodest  clamorous  outrage 
To  trouble  and  disturb  the  king  and  us? 

And  you,  my  lords,  methinks  you  do  not  well 
To  bear  with  their  perverse  objections; 

Much  less  to  take  occasion  from  their  mouths  /50 
To  raise  a  mutiny  betwixt  yourselves: 

Let  me  persuade  you  take  a  better  course. 

Exe.  It  grieves  his  Highness:  good  my  lords, 
be  friends. 

King.  Come  hither,  you  that  would  be 
combatants: 

Henceforth  I  charge  you,  as  you  love  our  favour, 
Quite  to  forget  this  quarrel  and  the  cause. 

And  you,  my  lords,  remember  where  we  are; 

In  France,  amongst  a  fickle  wavering  nation: 

If  they  perceive  dissension  in  our  looks 
And  that  within  ourselves  we  disagree,  140 
How  will  their  grudging  stomachs  be  provoked 
To  wilful  disobedience,  and  rebel! 

Beside,  what  infamy  will  there  arise. 

When  foreign  princes  shall  be  certified 
That  for  a  toy,  a  thing  of  no  regard. 

King  Henry’s  peers  and  chief  nobility 
Destroy’d  themselves,  and  lost  the  realm  of 
France! 


KING  HENRY  VI  21 

O,  think  upon  the  conquest  of  my  father. 

My  tender  years,  and  let  us  not  forego 

That  for  a  trifle  that  was  bought  with  blood!  /yo 

Let  me  be  umpire  in  this  doubtful  strife. 

I  see  no  reason,  if  I  wear  this  rose. 

Butting  on  a  red  rose. 

That  any  one  should  therefore  be  suspicious 
I  more  incline  to  Somerset  than  York: 

Both  are  my  kinsmen,  and  I  love  them  both: 

As  well  they  may  upbraid  me  with  my  crown. 
Because,  forsooth,  the  King  of  Scots  is  crown’d. 
But  your  discretions  better  can  persuade 
Than  I  am  able  to  instruct  or  teach: 

And  therefore,  as  we  hither  came  in  peace,  160 
So  let  us  still  continue  peace  and  love. 

Cousin  of  York,  we  institute  your  Grace 
To  be  our  Regent  in  these  parts  of  France: 

And,  good  my  Lord  of  Somerset,  unite 
Your  troops  of  horsemen  with  his  bands  of  foot; 
And,  like  true  subjects,  sons  of  your  progenitors. 
Go  cheerfully  together  and  digest 
Your  angry  choler  on  your  enemies. 

Ourself,  my  Lord  Protector  and  the  rest 
After  some  respite  will  return  to  Calais ;  /70 

From  thence  to  England;  where  I  hope  ere  long 
To  be  presented,  by  your  victories. 

With  Charles,  Alengon  and  that  traitorous  rout. 
[Flourish.  Exeunt  all  but  york,  Warwick,  exe- 

TER  and  VERNON. 

War.  My  Lord  of  York,  I  promise  you,  the  king 
Prettily,  methought,  did  play  the  orator. 

York.  And  so  he  did:  but  vet  I  like  it  not, 

In  that  he  wears  the  badge  of  Somerset. 

War.  Tush,  that  was  but  his  fancy,  blame 
him  not; 

I  dare  presume,  sweet  prince,  he  thought  no 
harm. 

York.  An  if  I  wist  he  did — but  let  it  rest;  iSo 
Other  affairs  must  now  be  managed. 

[Exeunt  all  but  Exeter. 

Exe.  Well  didst  thou,  Richard,  to  suppress  thy 
voice; 

For,  had  the  passions  of  thy  heart  burst  out, 

I  fear  we  should  have  seen  decipher’d  there 
More  rancorous  spite,  more  furious  raging 
broils. 

Than  yet  can  be  imagined  or  supposed. 

But  howsoe’er,  no  simple  man  that  sees 
This  jarring  discord  of  nobility. 

This  shouldering  of  each  other  in  the  court, 

This  factious  bandying  of  their  favourites,  190 
But  that  it  doth  presage  some  ill  event. 

’Tis  much  when  sceptres  are  in  children’s  hands; 
But  more  when  envy  breeds  unkind  division; 
There  comes  the  ruin,  there  begins  confusion. 

[Exit. 


22  FIRST  PART  OF 

Scene  u.  Before  Boi/rdeaux 
Enter  talbot,  'with  trump  and  drum. 

Tal.  Go  to  the  gates  of  Bourdeaux,  trumpeter; 
Summon  their  general  unto  the  wall. 

Trumpet  sounds.  Enter  general  and  others.,  aloft. 

English  John  Talbot,  Captains,  calls  you  forth, 
Servant  in  arms  to  Harry  King  of  England; 

And  thus  he  would:  Open  your  city  gates; 

Be  humble  to  us;  call  my  sovereign  yours, 

And  do  him  homage  as  obedient  subjects; 

And  I’ll  withdraw  me  and  my  bloody  power: 

But,  if  you  frown  upon  this  proffer’d  peace. 

You  tempt  the  fury  of  my  three  attendants,  lo 
Lean  famine,  quartering  steel,  and  climbing  fire; 
Who  in  a  moment  even  with  the  earth 
Shall  lay  your  stately  and  air-braving  towers, 

I  f  you  forsake  the  offer  of  their  love. 

Gen.  Thou  ominous  and  fearful  owl  of  death. 
Our  nation’s  terror  and  their  bloody  scourge! 

The  period  of  thy  tyranny  approacheth. 

On  us  thou  canst  not  enter  but  by  death; 

For,  I  protest,  we  are  well  fortified 

And  strong  enough  to  issue  out  and  fight:  20 

If  thou  retire,  the  Dauphin,  well  appointed. 

Stands  with  the  snares  of  war  to  tangle  thee: 

On  either  hand  thee  there  are  squadrons  pitch’d, 
To  wall  thee  from  the  liberty  of  flight  ; 

And  no  way  canst  thou  turn  thee  for  redress. 

But  death  doth  front  thee  with  apparent  spoil 
And  pale  destruction  meets  thee  in  the  face. 

Ten  thousand  French  have  ta’en  the  sacrament 
To  rive  their  dangerous  artillery 
Upon  no  Christian  soul  but  English  Talbot.  50 
Lo,  there  thou  stand’st,  a  breathing  valiant  man, 
Of  an  invincible  unconquer’d  spirit! 

This  is  the  latest  glory  of  thy  praise 
That  I,  thy  enemy,  due  thee  withal; 

For  ere  the  glass,  that  now  begins  to  run. 

Finish  the  process  of  his  sandy  hour. 

These  eyes,  that  see  thee  now  well  coloured. 

Shall  see  thee  wither’d,  bloody,  pale  and  dead. 
Drum  afar  off. 

Hark!  hark!  the  Dauphin’s  drum,  a  warning  bell. 
Sings  heavy  music  to  thy  timorous  soul;  40 
And  mine  shall  ring  thy  dire  departure  out. 

[Exeunt  GENERAL,  &c. 
Tal.  He  fables  not;  I  hear  the  enemy: 

Out,  some  light  horsemen,and  peruse  their  wings. 
O,  negligent  and  heedless  discipline! 

How  are  we  park’d  and  bounded  in  a  pale, 

A  little  herd  of  England’s  timorous  deer. 

Mazed  with  a  yelping  kennel  of  French  curs! 

If  we  be  English  deer,  be  then  in  blood; 

Not  rascal-like,  to  fall  down  with  a  pinch. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  iv 

But  rather,  moody-mad  and  desperate  stags,  yo 
Turn  on  the  bloody  hounds  with  heads  of  steel 
And  make  the  cowards  stand  aloof  at  bay: 

Sell  every  man  his  life  as  dear  as  mine. 

And  they  shall  find  dear  deer  of  us,  my  friends. 
God  and  Saint  George,  Talbot  and  England’s 
right, 

Prosper  our  colours  in  this  dangerous  fight! 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Plains  in  Gascony 
Enter  a  messenger  that  meets  york.  Enter  york 
'with  trumpet  and  many  Soldiers. 

York.  Are  not  the  speedy  scouts  return’d  again. 
That  dogg’d  the  mighty  army  of  the  Dauphin? 
Mess.  They  are  return’d,  my  lord,  and  give  it 
out 

That  he  is  march’d  to  Bourdeaux  with  his  power. 
To  fight  with  Talbot:  as  he  march’d  along. 

By  your  espials  were  discovered 
Two  mightier  troops  than  that  the  Dauphin  led. 
Which  join’d  with  him  and  made  their  march  for 
Bourdeaux. 

York.  A  plague  upon  that  villain  Somerset, 

That  thus  delays  my  promised  supply  10 

Of  horsemen,  that  were  levied  for  this  siege! 
Renowned  Talbot  doth  expect  my  aid. 

And  I  am  lowted  by  a  traitor  villain 
And  cannot  help  the  noble  chevalier: 

God  comfort  him  in  this  necessity! 

If  he  miscarry,  farewell  wars  in  France. 

Enter  sir  william  lucy. 

Lucy.  Thou  princely  leader  of  our  English 
strength. 

Never  so  needful  on  the  earth  of  France, 

Spur  to  the  rescue  of  the  noble  Talbot, 

Who  now  is  girdled  with  a  waist  of  iron  20 
And  hemm’d  about  with  grim  destruction: 

To  Bourdeaux,  warlike  duke!  to  Bourdeaux, 
York! 

Else,  farewell  Talbot,  France,  and  England’s 
honour. 

York.  O  God,  that  Somerset,  who  in  proud 
heart 

Doth  stop  my  cornets,  were  in  Talbot’s  place! 

So  should  we  save  a  valiant  gentleman 
By  forfeiting  a  traitor  and  a  coward. 

Mad  ire  and  wrathful  fury  makes  me  weep. 

That  thus  we  die,  while  remiss  traitors  sleep. 
Lucy.  O,  send  some  succour  to  the  distress’d 
lord!  50 

York.  He  dies,  we  lose;  I  break  my  warlike 
word; 

We  mourn,  France  smiles;  we  lose,  they  daily 
get; 


SCENE  III  FIRST  PART  OF 

All  ’long  of  this  vUe  traitor  Somerset. 

Lucy.  Then  God  take  mercy  on  brave  Talbot’s 
soul; 

And  on  his  son  young  John,  who  two  hours  since 
I  met  in  travel  toward  his  warlike  father! 

This  seven  years  did  not  Talbot  see  his  son; 

And  now  they  meet  where  both  their  lives  are 
done. 

York.  Alas,  what  joy  shall  noble  Talbot  have 
To  bid  his  young  son  welcome  to  his  grave?  40 
Away!  vexation  almost  stops  my  breath, 

That  sunder’d  friends  greet  in  the  hour  of  death. 
Lucy,  farewell :  no  more  my  fortune  can, 

But  curse  the  cause  I  cannot  aid  the  man. 

Maine,  Blois,  Poictiers,  and  Tours,  are  won  away, 
’Long  all  of  Somerset  and  his  delay. 

[Exit,  with  his  soldiers. 
Lucy.  Thus,  while  the  vulture  of  sedition 
Feeds  in  the  bosom  of  such  great  commanders. 
Sleeping  neglection  doth  betray  to  loss 
The  conquest  of  our  scarce  cold  conqueror,  50 
That  ever  living  man  of  memory, 

Henry  the  Fifth:  whiles  they  each  other  cross. 
Lives,  honours,  lands  and  all  hurry  to  loss.[£jr/?. 

Scene  iv.  Other  plains  in  Gascony 
Enter  somerset,  with  his  army;  a  captain  of 
Talbot’s  with  him. 

Som.  It  is  too  late;  I  cannot  send  them  now: 

This  expedition  was  by  York  and  Talbot 
Too  rashly  plotted:  all  our  general  force 
Might  with  a  sally  of  the  very  town 
Be  buckled  with:  the  over-daring  Talbot 
Hath  sullied  all  his  gloss  of  former  honour 
By  this  unheedful,  desperate,  wild  adventure: 
York  set  him  on  to  fight  and  die  in  shame, 

That,  Talbot  dead,  great  York  might  bear  the 
name. 

Cap.  Here  is  Sir  William  Lucy,  who  with  me 
Set  from  our  o’ermatch’d  forces  forth  for  aid.  ii 

Enter  sir  william  lucy. 

Som.  How  now,  Sir  William!  whither  were 
you  sent? 

Lucy.  Whither,  my  lord?  from  bought  and 
sold  Lord  Talbot  ; 

Who,  ring’d  about  with  bold  adversity, 

Cries  out  for  noble  York  and  Somerset, 

To  beat  assailing  death  from  his  weak  legions: 
And  whiles  the  honourable  captain  there 
Drops  bloody  sweat  from  his  war- wearied  limbs. 
And,  in  advantage  lingering,  looks  for  rescue. 
You,  his  false  hopes,  the  trust  of  England’s 

honour,  20 

Keep  off  aloof  with  worthless  emulation. 

Let  not  your  private  discord  keep  away 


KING  HENRY  VI  23 

The  levied  succours  that  should  lend  him  aid. 
While  he,  renowned  noble  gentleman. 

Yields  up  his  life  unto  a  world  of  odds: 

Orleans  the  Bastard,  Charles,  Burgundy, 
Alen^on,  Reignier,  compass  him  about. 

And  Talbot  perisheth  by  your  default. 

Som.  York  set  him  on;  York  should  have  sent 
him  aid. 

Lucy.  And  York  as  fast  upon  your  grace 

exclaims;  50 

Swearing  that  you  withhold  his  levied  host. 
Collected  for  this  expedition. 

Som.  York  lies;  he  might  have  sent  and  had 
the  horse; 

I  owe  him  little  duty,  and  less  love; 

And  take  foul  scorn  to  fawn  on  him  by  sending. 
Lucy.  The  fraud  of  England,  not  the  force  of 
France, 

Hath  now  entrapp’d  the  noble-minded  Talbot: 
Never  to  England  shall  he  bear  his  life; 

But  dies,  betray’d  to  fortune  by  your  strife. 

Som.  Come,  go;  I  will  dispatch  the  horsemen 
straight:  40 

Within  six  hours  they  will  be  at  his  aid. 

Lucy.  Too  late  comes  rescue:  he  is  ta’en  or 
slain; 

For  fly  he  could  not,  if  he  would  have  fled; 

And  fly  would  Talbot  never,  though  he  might. 
Som.  If  he  be  dead,  brave  Talbot,  then  adieu! 
Lucy.  His  fame  lives  in  the  world,  his  shame  in 
you.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  The  English  camp  near  Bourdeazix 
Enter  talbot  and  john  his  son. 

Tal.  O  young  John  Talbot!  I  did  send  for  thee 
To  tutor  thee  in  stratagems  of  war. 

That  Talbot’s  name  might  be  in  thee  revived 
When  sapless  age  and  weak  unable  limbs 
Should  bring  thy  father  to  his  drooping  chair. 

But,  O  malignant  and  ill-boding  stars! 

Now  thou  art  come  unto  a  feast  of  death, 

A  terrible  and  unavoided  danger: 

Therefore,  dear  boy,  mount  on  my  swiftest  horse; 
And  I’ll  direct  thee  how  thou  shalt  escape  10 
By  sudden  flight:  come,  dally  not,  be  gone. 

John.  Is  my  name  Talbot?  and  am  I  your  son? 
And  shall  I  fly?  O,  if  you  love  my  mother. 
Dishonour  not  her  honourable  name. 

To  make  a  bastard  and  a  slave  of  me! 

The  world  will  say  he  is  not  Talbot’s  blood 
That  basely  fled  when  noble  Talbot  stood. 

Tal.  Fly,  to  revenge  my  death,  if  I  be  slain. 

John.  He  that  flies  so  will  ne’er  return  again. 

Tal.  If  we  both  stay,  we  both  are  sure  to  die.  20 
John.  Then  let  me  stay;  and,  father,  do  you  fly: 
Your  loss  is  great,  so  your  regard  should  be; 


24  FIRST  PART  OF 

My  worth  unknown,  no  loss  is  known  in  me. 
Upon  my  death  the  French  can  little  boast; 

In  yours  they  will,  in  you  all  hopes  are  lost. 

Flight  cannot  stain  the  honour  you  have  won; 

But  mine  it  will,  that  no  exploit  have  done: 

You  fled  for  vantage,  every  one  will  swear; 

But,  if  I  bow,  they’ll  say  it  was  for  fear. 

There  is  no  hope  that  ever  I  will  stay,  50 

If  the  first  hour  I  shrink  and  run  away. 

Here  on  my  knee  I  beg  mortality, 

Rather  than  life  preserved  with  infamy. 

Tal,  Shall  all  thy  mother’s  hopes  lie  in  one 
tomb? 

John.  Ay,  rather  than  I’ll  shame  my  mother’s 
womb. 

Tal.  Upon  my  blessing,  I  command  thee  go. 
John.  To  fight  I  will,  but  not  to  fly  the  foe. 

Tal.  Part  of  thy  father  may  be  saved  in  thee. 
John.  No  part  of  him  but  will  be  shame  in  me. 
Tal.  Thou  never  hadst  renown,  nor  canst  not 
lose  it.  40 

John.  Yes,  your  renowned  name:  shall  flight 
abuse  it? 

Tal.  Thy  father’s  charge  shall  clear  thee  from 
that  stain. 

John.  You  cannot  witness  for  me,  being  slain. 

If  death  be  so  apparent,  then  both  fly. 

Tal.  And  leave  my  followers  here  to  fight  and 
die? 

My  age  was  never  tainted  with  such  shame. 

John.  And  shall  my  youth  be  guilty  of  such 
blame? 

No  more  can  I  be  sever’d  from  your  side. 

Than  can  yourself  yourself  in  twain  divide: 

Stay,  go,  do  what  you  will,  the  like  do  I;  50 
For  live  I  will  not,  if  my  father  die. 

Tal.  Then  here  I  take  my  leave  of  thee,  fair 
son, 

Born  to  eclipse  thy  life  this  afternoon. 

Come,  side  by  side  together  live  and  die; 

And  soul  with  soul  from  France  to  heaven  fly. 

{Exeunt. 

Scene  vi.  Afield  of  battle 
Alarum:  excursions.,  'wherein  john  talbot  is 
hemmed  about.,  and  talbot  rescues  him. 

Tal.  Saint  George  and  victory!  fight,  soldiers, 
fight: 

The  Regent  hath  with  Talbot  broke  his  word 
And  left  us  to  the  rage  of  France  his  sword. 
Where  is  John  Talbot?  Pause,  and  take  thy 
breath; 

I  gave  thee  life  and  rescued  thee  from  death. 

John.  O,  twice  my  father,  twice  am  I  thy  son! 
The  life  thou  gavest  me  first  was  lost  and  done. 
Till  with  thy  warlike  sword,  despite  of  fate, 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  iv 

To  my  determined  time  thou  gavest  new  date. 
Tal.  When  from  the  Dauphin’s  crest  thy  sword 
struck  fire,  ,  10 

It  warm’d  thy  father’s  heart  with  proud  desire 
Of  bold-faced  victory.  Then  leaden  age. 
Quicken’d  with  youthful  spleen  and  warlike 
rage. 

Beat  down  Alen^on,  Orleans,  Burgundy, 

And  from  the  pride  of  Gallia  rescued  thee. 

The  ireful  Bastard  Orleans,  that  drew  blood 
From  thee,  my  boy,  and  had  the  maidenhood 
Of  thy  first  fight,  I  soon  encountered, 

And  interchanging  blows,  I  quickly  shed 
Some  of  his  bastard  blood;  and  in  disgrace  20 
Bespoke  him  thus:  “Contaminated,  base. 

And  misbegotten  blood  I  spill  of  thine, 

Mean  and  right  poor,  for  that  pure  blood  of 
mine 

Which  thou  didst  force  from  Talbot,  my  brave 
boy”: 

Here,  purposing  the  Bastard  to  destroy. 

Came  in  strong  rescue.  Speak,  thy  father’s  care. 
Art  thou  not  weary,  John?  how  dost  thou  fare? 
Wilt  thou  yet  leave  the  battle,  boy,  and  fly. 

Now  thou  art  seal’d  the  son  of  chivalry? 

Fly,  to  revenge  my  death  when  I  am  dead:  50 

The  help  of  one  stands  me  in  little  stead. 

O,  too  much  folly  is  it,  well  I  wot. 

To  hazard  all  our  lives  in  one  small  boat! 

If  I  to-day  die  not  with  Frenchmen’s  rage. 
To-morrow  I  shall  die  with  mickle  age: 

By  me  they  nothing  gain  an  if  I  stay; 

’Tis  but  the  shortening  of  my  life  one  day: 

In  thee  thy  mother  dies,  our  household’s  name. 
My  death’s  revenge,  thy  youth,  and  England’s 
fame: 

All  these  and  more  we  hazard  by  thy  stay  ;  40 

All  these  are  saved  if  thou  wilt  fly  away. 

John.  The  sword  of  Orleans  hath  not  made  me 
smart; 

These  words  of  yours  draw  life-blood  from  my 
heart: 

On  that  advantage,  bought  with  such  a  shame, 

To  save  a  paltry  life  and  slay  bright  fame. 

Before  young  Talbot  from  old  Talbot  fly. 

The  coward  horse  that  bears  me  fall  and  die! 

And  like  me  to  the  peasant  boys  of  France, 

To  be  shame’s  scorn  and  subject  of  mischance! 
Surely,  by  all  the  glory  you  have  won,  50 

An  if  I  fly,  I  am  not  Talbot’s  son: 

Then  talk  no  more  of  flight,  it  is  no  boot; 

If  son  to  Talbot,  die  at  Talbot’s  foot. 

Tal.  Then  follow  thou  thy  desperate  sire  of 
Crete, 

Thou  Icarus;  thy  life  to  me  is  sweet: 

If  thou  wilt  fight,  fight  by  thy  father’s  side; 


SCENE  VI  FIRST  PART  OF 

And,  commendable  proved,  let’s  die  in  pride. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  vii.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Alarum:  excursions.  Enter  old  talbot 
led  by  a  servant. 

Tal.  Where  is  my  other  life?  mine  own  is  gone; 
O,  where’s  young  Talbot?  where  is  valiant  John? 
Triumphant  death,  smear’d  with  captivity. 

Young  Talbot’s  valour  makes  me  smile  at  thee: 
When  he  perceived  me  shrink  and  on  my  knee, 
His  bloody  sword  he  brandish’d  over  me, 

And,  like  a  hungry  lion,  did  commence 
Rough  deeds  of  rage  and  stern  impatience; 

But  when  my  angry  guardant  stood  alone. 
Tendering  my  ruin  and  assail’d  of  none,  lo 

Dizzy-eyed  fury  and  great  rage  of  heart 
Suddenly  made  him  from  mv  side  to  start 
Into  the  clustering  battle  of  the  French; 

And  in  that  sea  of  blood  my  boy  did  drench 
His  over-mounting  spirit,  and  there  died. 

My  Icarus,  my  blossom,  in  his  pride. 

Serv.  O  my  dear  lord,  lo,  where  your  son  is 
borne! 

Enter  Soldiers.,  with  the  body  of  john  talbot. 

Tal.  Thou  antic  death,  which  laugh’ st  us  here 
to  scorn. 

Anon,  from  thy  insulting  tyranny, 

Coupled  in  bonds  of  perpetuity,  20 

Two  Talbots,  winged  through  the  lither  sky. 

In  thy  despite  shall  ’scape  mortality. 

O  thou,  whose  wounds  become  hard-favour’d 
death. 

Speak  to  thy  father  ere  thou  yield  thy  breath! 
Brave  death  by  speaking,  whether  he  will  or  no; 
Imagine  him  a  Frenchman  and  thy  foe. 

Poor  boy !  he  smiles,  methinks,  as  who  should  say. 
Had  death  been  French,  then  death  had  died 
to-day. 

Come,  come  and  lay  him  in  his  father’s  arms: 

My  spirit  can  no  longer  bear  these  harms.  50 
Soldiers,  adieu!  I  have  what  I  would  have. 

Now  my  old  arms  are  young  John  Talbot’s  grave. 

[Dies. 

Enter  Charles,  ALEN90N,  burgundy,  bastard, 
LA  PUCELLE,  and  forces. 

Char.  Had  York  and  Somerset  brought  rescuein. 
We  should  have  found  a  bloody  day  of  this. 

Bast.  How  the  young  whelp  of  Talbot’s,  raging- 
wood. 

Did  flesh  his  puny  sword  in  Frenchmen’s  blood! 
Puc.  Once  I  encounter’d  him,  and  thus  I  said: 
“Thou  maiden  youth,  be  vanquish’d  by  a  maid”: 
But,  with  proud  majestical  high  scorn. 


KING  HENRY  VI  25 

He  answer’d  thus:  “Young  Talbot  was  not  born 
To  be  the  pillage  of  a  giglot  wench” :  41 

So,  rushing  in  the  bowels  of  the  French, 

He  left  me  proudly,  as  unworthy  fight. 

Bur.  Doubtless  he  would  have  made  a  noble 
knight: 

See,  where  he  lies  inhearsed  in  the  arms 
Of  the  most  bloody  nurser  of  his  harms! 

Bast.  Hew  them  to  pieces,  hack  their  bones 
asunder. 

Whose  life  was  England’s  glory,Gallia’swonder. 
Char.  O,  no,  forbear!  for  that  which  we  have 
fled 

During  the  life,  let  us  not  wrong  it  dead.  50 

Enter  sir  william  lucy,  attended;  Herald  of  the 
French  preceding. 

Lucy.  Herald,  conduct  me  to  the  Dauphin’s  tent. 
To  know  who  hath  obtained  the  glory  of  the  day. 
Char.  On  what  submissive  message  art  thou 
sent? 

Lucy.  Submission,  Dauphin!  ’tis  a  mere  French 
word; 

We  English  warriors  wot  not  what  it  means. 

I  come  to  know  what  prisoners  thou  hast  ta’en 
And  to  survey  the  bodies  of  the  dead. 

Char.  For  prisoners  ask’st  thou?  hell  our 
prison  is. 

But  tell  me  whom  thou  seek’st. 

Lucy.  But  where’s  the  great  Alcides  of  the 
field,  60 

Valiant  Lord  Talbot,  Earl  of  Shrewsbury, 
Created,  for  his  rare  success  in  arms, 

Great  Earl  of  Washford,  Water  ford  and  Valence; 
Lord  Talbot  of  Goodrig  and  Urchinfield, 

Lord  Strange  of  Blackmere,  Lord  Verdun  of 
Alton, 

Lord  Cromwell  of  Wingfield,  Lord  Furnival  of 
Sheffield, 

The  thrice-victorious  Lord  of  Falconbridge; 
Knight  of  the  noble  order  of  Saint  George, 
Worthy  Saint  Michael  and  the  Golden  Fleece; 
Great  marshal  to  Henry  the  Sixth  70 

Of  all  his  wars  within  the  realm  of  France? 

Puc.  Here  is  a  silly  stately  style  indeed! 

The  Turk,  that  two  and  fifty  kingdoms  hath. 
Writes  not  so  tedious  a  style  as  this. 

Him  that  thou  magnifiest  with  all  these  titles 
Stinking  and  fly-blown  lies  here  at  our  feet. 

Lucy.  Is  Talbot  slain,  the  Frenchmen’s  only 
scourge. 

Your  kingdom’s  terror  and  black  Nemesis? 

O,  were  mine  eye-balls  into  bullets  turn’d. 

That  I  in  rage  might  shoot  them  at  your  faces!  So 
O,  that  I  could  but  call  these  dead  to  life! 

It  were  enough  to  fright  the  realm  of  France: 


26  FIRST  PART  OF 

Were  but  his  picture  left  amongst  you  here, 

It  would  amaze  the  proudest  of  you  all. 

Give  me  their  bodies,  that  I  may  bear  them  hence 
And  give  them  burial  as  beseems  their  worth. 

Puc.  I  think  this  upstart  is  old  Talbot’s  ghost, 

He  speaks  with  such  a  proud  commanding  spirit. 
For  God’s  sake,  let  him  have  ’em;  to  keep  them 
here. 

They  would  but  stink,  and  putrefy  the  air.  90 
Char.  Go,  take  their  bodies  hence. 

Lucy.  I’ll  bear  them  hence;  but  from  their  ashes 
shall  be  rear’d 

A  phoenix  that  shall  make  all  France  afeard. 

Char.  So  we  be  rid  of  them,  do  with  ’em  what 
thou  wilt. 

And  now  to  Paris,  in  this  conquering  vein: 

All  will  be  ours,  now  bloody  Talbot’s  slain. 

\Exeunt. 

ACT  V 

Scene  1.  London:  The  palace 
Sennet.  Enter  king,  Gloucester,  and  exeter. 
King.  Have  you  perused  the  letters  from  the 
Pope, 

The  Emperor  and  the  Earl  of  Armagnac? 

Glou.  I  have,  my  lord:  and  their  intent  is  this: 
They  humbly  sue  unto  your  Excellence 
To  have  a  godly  peace  concluded  of 
Between  the  realms  of  England  and  of  France. 
King.  How  doth  yout  Grace  affect  their  motion? 
Glou.  Well,  my  good  lord;  and  as  the  only  means 
To  stop  effusion  of  our  Christian  blood 
And  stablish  quietness  on  every  side.  10 

King.  Ay,  marry,  uncle;  for  I  always  thought 
It  was  both  impious  and  unnatural 
That  such  immanity  and  bloody  strife 
Should  reign  among  professors  of  one  faith. 

Glou.  Beside,  my  lord,  the  sooner  to  effect 
And  surer  bind  this  knot  of  amity. 

The  Earl  of  Armagnac,  near  knit  to  Charles, 

A  man  of  great  authority  in  France, 

Proffers  his  only  daughter  to  your  grace  79 
In  marriage,  with  a  large  and  sumptuous  dowry. 
King.  Marriage,  uncle!  alas,  my  years  are 
young! 

And  fitter  is  my  study  and  my  books 
Than  wanton  dalliance  with  a  paramour. 

Yet  call  the  ambassadors;  and,  as  you  please. 

So  let  them  have  their  answers  every  one: 

I  shall  be  well  content  with  any  choice 
Tends  to  God’s  glory  and  my  country’s  weal. 

Enter  winchester  in  Cardinal's  habit,  a  papal 
LEGATE  and  two  Ambassadors. 

Exe.  What!  is  my  Lord  of  Winchester  install’d, 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  v 

And  call’d  unto  a  cardinal’s  degree? 

Then  I  perceive  that  will  be  verified  50 

Henry  the  Fifth  did  sometime  prophesy, 

“If  once  he  come  to  be  a  cardinal. 

He’ll  make  his  cap  co-equal  with  the  crown.” 
King.  My  Lords  Ambassadors,  your  several 
suits 

Have  been  consider’d  and  debated  on. 

Your  purpose  is  both  good  and  reasonable; 

And  therefore  are  we  certainly  resolved 
To  draw  conditions  of  a  friendly  peace; 

Which  by  my  Lord  of  Winchester  we  mean 
Shall  be  transported  presently  to  France.  40 
Glou.  And  for  the  proffer  of  my  lord  your 
master, 

I  have  inform’d  his  highness  so  at  large 
\s  liking  of  the  lady’s  virtuous  gifts. 

Her  beauty,  and  the  value  of  her  dower. 

He  doth  intend  she  shall  be  England’s  Queen. 
King.  In  argument  and^roof  of  which  contract. 
Bear  her  this  jewel,  pledge  of  my  affection. 

And  so,  my  Lord  Protector,  see  them  guarded 
And  safely  brought  to  Dover;  where  inshipp’d 
Commit  them  to  the  fortune  of  the  sea.  yo 

[Exeunt  all  but  winchester  and  legate. 
Win.  Stay,  my  Lord  Legate:  you  shall  first  re¬ 
ceive 

The  sum  of  money  which  I  promised 
Should  be  deliver’d  to  his  Holiness 
For  clothing  me  in  these  grave  ornaments. 

Leg.  I  will  attend  upon  your  lordship’s  leisure. 
Win.  [Aside^  Now  Winchester  will  not  submit, 
I  trow. 

Or  be  inferior  to  the  proudest  peer. 

Humphrey  of  Gloucester,  thou  shalt  well  perceive 
That,  neither  in  birth  or  for  authority, 

The  bishop  will  be  overborne  by  thee:  60 

ril  either  make  thee  stoop  and  bend  thy  knee. 

Or  sack  this  country  with  a  mutiny.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  France:  Plains  in  Anjou 
Enter  Charles,  burgundy,  alen^on,  bastard, 
reignier,  la  pucelle,  and  forces. 

Char.  These  news,  my  lords,  may  cheer  our 
drooping  spirits: 

’Tis  said  the  stout  Parisians  do  revolt 
And  turn  again  unto  the  warlike  French. 

Alen.  Then  march  to  Paris,  royal  Charles  of 
France, 

And  keep  not  back  your  powers  in  dalliance. 

Puc.  Peace  be  amongst  them,  if  they  turn  to  us; 
Else,  ruin  combat  with  their  palaces! 

Enter  scout 

Scout.  Success  unto  our  valiant  general, 

And  happiness  to  his  accomplices! 


SCENE  II 


27 


FIRST  PART  OF 

Char.  What  tidings  send  our  scouts?  I  prithee, 
speak.  10 

Scout.  The  English  army,  that  divided  was 
Into  two  parties,  is  now  conjoin’d  in  one. 

And  means  to  give  you  battle  presently. 

Char.  Somewhat  too  sudden,  sirs,  the  warning 
is: 

But  we  will  presently  provide  for  them. 

Bur.  I  trust  the  ghost  of  Talbot  is  not  there: 

Now  he  is  gone,  my  lord,  you  need  not  fear. 

Puc.  Of  all  base  passions,  fear  is  most  accursed. 
Command  the  conquest,  Charles,  it  shall  be 
thine. 

Let  Henry  fret  and  all  the  world  repine.  20 
Char.  Then  on,  my  lords;  and  France  be  fortu¬ 
nate!  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Before  Angiers 
Alarum.  Excursions.  Enter  la  pucelle. 

Puc.  The  Regent  conquers,  and  the  Frenchmen 

Now  help,  ye  charming  spells  and  periapts; 

And  ye  choice  spirits  that  admonish  me 
And  give  me  signs  of  future  accidents.  [Thunder. 
You  speedy  helpers,  that  are  substitutes 
Under  the  lordly  monarch  of  the  north. 

Appear  and  aid  me  in  this  enterprise. 

Enter  Fiends. 

This  speedy  and  quick  appearance  argues  proof 
Of  your  accustom’d  diligence  to  me. 

Now,  ye  familiar  spirits,  that  are  cull’d  10 

Out  of  the  powerful  regions  under  earth. 

Help  me  this  once,  that  France  may  get  the  field. 

They  'walk.,  and  speak  not. 

O,  hold  me  not  with  silence  over-long! 

Where  I  was  wont  to  feed  you  with  my  blood. 

I’ll  lop  a  member  off  and  give  it  you 
In  earnest  of  a  further  benefit. 

So  you  do  condescend  to  help  me  now. 

They  hang  their  heads. 

No  hope  to  have  redress?  My  body  shall 
Pay  recompense,  if  you  will  grant  my  suit. 

They  shake  their  heads. 

Cannot  my  body  nor  blood-sacrifice  20 

Entreat  you  to  your  wonted  furtherance? 

Then  take  my  soul,  my  body,  soul  and  all. 

Before  that  England  give  the  French  the  foil. 

They  depart. 

See,  they  forsake  me!  Now  the  time  is  come 
That  France  must  vail  her  lofty-plumed  crest 
And  let  her  head  fall  into  England’s  lap. 

My  ancient  incantations  are  too  weak. 

And  hell  too  strong  for  me  to  buckle  with: 

Now,  France,  thy  glory  droopeth  to  the  dust. 

[Exit. 


KING  HENRY  VI 

Excursions.  Enter  burgundy  and  york  fighting 
hand  to  hand.  The  French  fly.  la  pucelle  is 
brought  in  captive. 

York.  Damsel  of  France,  I  think  I  have  you 
fast:  50 

Unchain  your  spirits  now  with  spelling  charms 
And  try  if  they  can  gain  your  liberty. 

goodly  prize,  fit  for  the  devil’s  grace! 

See,  how  the  ugly  witch  doth  bend  her  brows. 

As  if  with  Circe  she  would  change  my  shape! 

Puc.  Changed  to  a  worser  shape  thou  canst  not 
be. 

York.  O,  Charles  the  Dauphin  is  a  proper  man; 
No  shape  but  his  can  please  your  dainty  eye. 

Puc.  A  plaguing  mischief  light  on  Charles  and 
thee! 

And  may  ye  both  be  suddenly  surprised  40 

By  bloody  hands,  in  sleeping  on  your  beds! 

York.  Fell  banning  hag,  enchantress,  hold  thy 
tongue! 

Puc.  I  prithee,  give  me  leave  to  curse  awhile. 
York.  Curse,  miscreant,  when  thou  comest  to 
the  stake.  [Exeunt. 

Alarum.  Enter  Suffolk,  'with  Margaret  in  his 
hand. 

Suf.  Be  what  thou  wilt,  thou  art  my  prisoner. 

[Gazes  on  her. 

O  fairest  beauty,  do  not  fear  nor  fly! 

For  I  will  touch  thee  but  with  reverent  hands; 

I  kiss  these  fingers  for  eternal  peace. 

And  lay  them  gently  on  thy  tender  side. 

Who  art  thou?  say,  that  I  may  honour  thee.  50 
Mar.  Margaret  my  name,  and  daughter  to  a 
king, 

The  King  of  Naples,  whosoe’er  thou  art. 

Suf.  An  earl  I  am,  and  Suffolk  am  I  call’d. 

Be  not  offended,  nature’s  miracle. 

Thou  art  allotted  to  be  ta’en  by  me: 

So  doth  the  swan  her  downy  cygnets  save. 
Keeping  them  prisoner  underneath  her  wings. 
Yet,  if  this  servile  usage  once  offend. 

Go  and  be  free  again  as  Suffolk’s  friend. 

[She  is  going. 

O,  stay!  [Aside]  I  have  no  power  to  let  her  pass;  60 
My  hand  would  free  her,  but  my  heart  says  no. 

As  plays  the  sun  upon  the  glassy  streams. 
Twinkling  another  counterfeited  beam. 

So  seems  this  gorgeous  beauty  to  mine  eyes. 

Fain  would  I  woo  her,  yet  I  dare  not  speak: 

I’ll  call  for  pen  and  ink,  and  write  my  mind. 

Fie,  de  la  Pole!  disable  not  thyself; 

Hast  not  a  tongue?  is  she  not  here? 

Wilt  thou  be  daunted  at  a  woman’s  sight? 

Ay,  beauty’s  princely  majesty  is  such, 


70 


28 


FIRST  PART  OF 

Confounds  the  tongue  and  makes  the  senses  rough. 

Mar.  Say,  Earl  of  Suffolk — if  thy  name  be  so — 

What  ransom  must  I  pay  before  I  pass? 

For  I  perceive  1  am  thy  prisoner. 

Suf.  [Aside]  How  canst  thou  tell  she  will  deny 
thy  suit, 

Before  thou  make  a  trial  of  her  love? 

Mar.  Why  speak’ st  thou  not?  what  ransom 
must  I  pay? 

Suf.  [Aside]  She’s  beautiful  and  therefore  to  be 
woo’d; 

She  is  a  woman,  therefore  to  be  won. 

Alar.Wih  thou  accept  of  ransom?  yea,  or  no.  8o 

Suf.  [Aside]  Fond  man,  remember  that  thou  hast 
a  wife; 

Then  how  can  Margaret  be  thy  paramour? 

Mar.  I  were  best  to  leave  him,  for  he  will  not 
hear. 

Suf.  [Aside]  There  all  is  marr’d;  there  lies  a 
cooling  card. 

Mar.  He  talks  at  random;  sure,  the  man  is  mad. 

Suf.  [Aside]  And  yet  a  dispensation  may  be 
had. 

Mar.  And  yet  I  would  that  you  would  answer 
me. 

Suf.  [Aside]  I’ll  win  this  Lady  Margaret.  For 
whom? 

Why,  for  my  king:  tush,  that’s  a  wooden  thing! 

Mar.  He  talks  of  wood:  it  is  some  carpenter. 

Suf.  [Aside]  Yet  so  my  fancy  may  be  satisfied,^/ 

And  peace  established  between  these  realms. 

But  there  remains  a  scruple  in  that  too; 

For  though  her  father  be  the  King  of  Naples, 

Duke  of  Anjou  and  Maine,  yet  is  he  poor, 

And  our  nobility  will  scorn  the  match. 

Mar.  Hear  ye,  captain,  are  you  not  at  leisure? 

Suf.  [Aside]  It  shall  be  so,  disdain  they  ne’er  so 
much: 

Henry  is  youthful  and  will  quickly  yield. 

Madam,  I  have  a  secret  to  reveal.  loo 

Mar.  [Aside]  What  though  I  be  enthrall’d?  he 
seems  a  knight. 

And  will  not  any  wav  dishonour  me. 

Suf.  Lady,  vouchsafe  to  listen  what  I  say. 

Mar.  [Aside]  Perhaps  I  shall  be  rescued  by  the 
French; 

And  then  I  need  not  crave  his  courtesy. 

Suf.  Sweet  madam,  give  me  hearing  in  a  cause — 

Mar.  [Aside]  Tush,  women  have  been  captivate 
ere  now. 

Suf.  Lady,  wherefore  talk  you  so? 

Mar.  I  cry  you  mercy,  ’tis  but  Quid  for  Quo. 

Suf.  Say,  gentle  princess,  would  you  not  sup¬ 
pose  no 

Your  bondage  happy,  to  be  made  a  queen? 

Mar.  To  be  a  queen  in  bondage  is  more  vile 


KING  HENRY  VI  actv; 

Than  is  a  slave  in  base  servility;  I 

For  princes  should  be  free.  | 

Suf,  '  And  so  shall  you,  i 

If  happy  England’s  royal  king  be  free.  ' 

Mar,  Why,  what  concerns  his  freedom  unto  me? 
Suf.  I’ll  undertake  to  make  thee  Henry’s  queen. 
To  put  a  golden  sceptre  in  thy  hand 
And  set  a  precious  crown  upon  thy  head. 

If  thou  wilt  condescend  to  be  my — 

Mar.  What?  120 

Suf.  His  love. 

Mar.  I  am  unworthy  to  be  Henry’s  wife. 

Suf.  No,  gentle  madam;  I  unworthy  am 
To  woo  so  fair  a  dame  to  be  his  wife 
And  have  no  portion  in  the  choice  myself. 

How  say  you,  madam,  are  ye  so  content? 

Mar.  An  if  my  father  please,  I  am  content. 

Suf.  Then  call  our  captains  and  our  colours 
forth. 

And,  madam,  at  your  father’s  castle  walls 
We’ll  crave  a  parley,  to  confer  with  him.  1^0 

A  parley  sounded.  Enter  reignier  on  the  walls. 

See,  Reignier,  see,  thy  daughter  prisoner! 

Reig.  To  whom? 

Suf  .  To  me. 

Reig.  Suffolk,  what  remedy? 

I  am  a  soldier  and  unapt  to  weep 
Or  to  exclaim  on  fortune’s  fickleness.  I 

Suf.  Yes,  there  is  remedy  enough,  my  lord: 
Consent,  and  for  thy  honour  give  consent. 

Thy  daughter  shall  be  wedded  to  my  king; 

Whom  I  with  pain  have  woo’d  and  won  thereto; 
And  this  her  easy-held  imprisonment 
Hath  gain’d  thy  daughter  princely  liberty.  140 
Reig.  Speaks  Suffolk  as  he  thinks? 

Suf.  Fair  Margaret  knows 

That  Suffolk  doth  not  flatter,  face,  or  feign. 

Reig.  Upon  thy  princely  warrant,  I  descend 
To  give  thee  answer  of  thy  just  demand.  1 

[Exit from  the  walls.  \ 

Suf.  And  here  I  will  expect  thy  coming. 

Trumpets  sound.  Enter  reignier,  below. 

Reig.  Welcome,  brave  Earl,  into  our  territories: 
Command  in  Anjou  what  your  Honour  pleases. 
Suf.  Thanks,  Reignier,  happy  for  so  sweet  a 
child. 

Fit  to  be  made  companion  with  a  king:  149 

What  answer  makes  your  Grace  unto  my  suit? 
Reig.  Since  thou  dost  deign  to  woo  her  little 
worth 

To  be  the  princely  bride  of  such  a  lord; 

Upon  condition  I  may  quietly 

Enjoy  mine  own,  the  country  Maine  and  Anjou, 

Free  from  oppression  or  the  stroke  of  war, 


SCENE  III  FIRST  PART  OF 

My  daughter  shall  be  Henry’s,  if  he  please. 

Suf.  That  is  her  ransom;  I  deliver  her; 

And  those  two  counties  I  will  undertake 
Your  grace  shall  well  and  quietly  enjoy. 

Reig.  And  I  again,  in  Henry’s  royal  name. 

As  deputy  unto  that  gracious  king,  1 6i 

Give  thee  her  hand,  for  sign  of  plighted  faith. 

Suf.  Reignier  of  France,  I  give  thee  kingly 
thanks. 

Because  this  is  in  traffic  of  a  king. 

[Aside]  And  yet,  methinks,  I  could  be  well  con¬ 
tent 

To  be  mine  own  attorney  in  this  case. 

I’ll  over  then  to  England  with  this  news. 

And  make  this  marriage  to  be  solemnized. 

So  farewell,  Reignier;  set  this  diamond  safe 
In  golden  palaces,  as  it  becomes.  ijo 

Reig.  I  do  embrace  thee,  as  I  would  embrace 
The  Christian  prince.  King  Henry,  were  he  here. 
Mar.  Farewell,  my  lord:  good  wishes,  praise 
and  prayers 

Shall  Suffolk  ever  have  of  Margaret.  [Going. 

Suf.  Farewell,  sweet  madam:  but  hark  you, 
Margaret; 

No  princely  commendations  to  my  king? 

Mar.  Such  commendations  as  becomes  a  maid, 

A  virgin,  and  his  servant,  say  to  him. 

Suf.  Words  sweetly  placed  and  modestly  di¬ 
rected. 

But,  madam,  I  must  trouble  you  again;  i8o 

No  loving  token  to  his  majesty? 

Mar.  Yes,  my  good  lord,  a  pure  unspotted 
heart. 

Never  yet  taint  with  love,  I  send  the  King. 

Suf.  And  this  withal.  [Kisses  her. 

Mar.  That  for  thyself:  I  will  not  so  presume 
To  send  such  peevish  tokens  to  a  king. 

[Exeunt  reignier  arid  Margaret. 
Suf.  O,  wert  thou  for  myself!  But,  Suffolk, 
stay; 

Thou  mayst  not  wander  in  that  labyrinth; 

There  Minotaurs  and  ugly  treasons  lurk. 

Solicit  Henry  with  her  wondrous  praise :  /y o 

Bethink  thee  on  her  virtues  that  surmount. 

And  natural  graces  that  extinguish  art; 

Repeat  their  semblance  often  on  the  seas. 

That,  when  thou  comest  to  kneel  at  Henry’s 
feet. 

Thou  mayst  bereave  him  of  his  wits  with  wonder. 

[Exit. 

Scene  iv.  Camp  of  the  duke  of  york 
in  Anjou 

Enter  york,  Warwick,  and  others. 

York.  Bring  forth  that  sorceress  condemn’d 
to  bum. 


KING  HENRY  VI  29 

Enter  la  pucelle,  guarded,  and  a  shepherd. 

Shep.  Ah,  Joan,  this  kills  thy  father’s  heart 
outright! 

Have  I  sought  every  country  far  and  near. 

And,  now  it  is  my  chance  to  find  thee  out. 

Must  I  behold  thy  timeless  cruel  death? 

Ah,  Joan,  sweet  daughter  Joan,  I’ll  die  with 
thee! 

Fuc.  Decrepit  miser!  base  ignoble  wretch! 

I  am  descended  of  a  gentler  blood: 

Thou  art  no  father  nor  no  friend  of  mine. 

Shep.  Out,  out!  My  lords,  an  please  you, 

’tis  not  so;  10 

I  did  beget  her,  all  the  parish  knows: 

Her  mother  liveth  yet,  can  testify 
She  was  the  first  fruit  of  my  bachelorship. 

War.  Graceless!  wilt  thou  deny  thy  parentage? 
York.  This  argues  what  her  kind  of  life  hath 
been. 

Wicked  and  vile;  and  so  her  death  concludes. 
Shep.  Fie,  Joan,  that  thou  wilt  be  so  obstacle! 
God  knows  thou  art  a  collop  of  my  flesh; 

And  for  thy  sake  have  I  shed  many  a  tear: 

Deny  me  not,  I  prithee,  gentle  Joan.  20 

Fuc.  Peasant,  avaunt!  You  have  suborn’d 
this  man. 

Of  purpose  to  obscure  my  noble  birth. 

Shep.  ’Tis  true,  I  gave  a  noble  to  the  priest 
The  morn  that  I  was  wedded  to  her  mother. 

Kneel  down  and  take  my  blessing,  good  my  girl. 
Wilt  thou  not  stoop?  Now  cursed  be  the  time 
Of  thy  nativity!  I  would  the  milk 
Thy  mother  gave  thee  when  thou  suck’dst  her 
breast. 

Had  been  a  little  ratsbane  for  thy  sake! 

Or  else,  when  thou  didst  keep  my  lambs  a-field, 

I  wish  some  ravenous  wolf  had  eaten  thee! 

Dost  thou  deny  thy  father,  cursed  drab? 

O,  burn  her,  burn  her!  hanging  is  too  good. 

[Exit. 

York.  Take  her  away;  for  she  hath  lived  too 
long, 

To  fill  the  world  with  vicious  qualities. 

Fuc.  First,  let  me  tell  you  whom  you  have 
condemn’d: 

Not  me  begotten  of  a  shepherd  swain, 

But  issued  from  the  progeny  of  kings; 

Virtuous  and  holy;  chosen  from  above. 

By  inspiration  of  celestial  grace,  40 

To  work  exceeding  miracles  on  earth. 

I  never  had  to  do  with  wicked  spirits: 

But  you,  that  are  polluted  with  your  lusts. 

Stain’d  with  the  guiltless  blood  of  innocents. 
Corrupt  and  tainted  with  a  thousand  vices. 
Because  you  want  the  grace  that  others  have, 


30  FIRST  PART  OF 

You  judge  it  straight  a  thing  impossible 
To  compass  wonders  but  by  help  of  devils. 

No,  misconceived!  Joan  of  Arc  hath  been 
A  virgin  from  her  tender  infancy,  yo 

Chaste  and  immaculate  in  very  thought; 

Whose  maiden  blood,  thus  rigorously  effused, 
Will  cry  for  vengeance  at  the  gates  of  heaven. 
Vork.  Ay,  ay:  away  with  her  to  execution! 

War.  And  hark  ye,  sirs;  because  she  is  a 
maid. 

Spare  for  no  faggots,  let  there  be  enow: 

Place  barrels  of  pitch  upon  the  fatal  stake. 

That  so  her  torture  may  be  shortened. 

Fwr.  Will  nothing  turn  your  unrelenting 
hearts? 

Then,  Joan,  discover  thine  infirmity, 

That  warranteth  by  law  to  be  thy  privilege. 

I  am  with  child,  ye  bloody  homicides: 

Murder  not  then  the  fruit  within  my  womb. 
Although  ye  hale  me  to  a  violent  death. 

Vork.  Now  heaven  forfend!  the  holy  maid 
with  child! 

War.  The  greatest  miracle  that  e’er  ye 
wrought: 

Is  all  your  strict  preciseness  come  to  this? 

Fork.  She  and  the  Dauphin  have  been  jug- 
gling: 

I  did  imagine  what  would  be  her  refuge. 

War.  Well,  go  to;  we’ll  have  no  bastards 
live;  70 

Expecially  since  Charles  must  father  it. 

Fi/c.  You  are  deceived;  my  child  is  none  of 
his: 

It  was  Alengon  that  enjoy’d  my  love. 

Fork.  Alengon!  that  notorious  Machiavel! 

It  dies,  an  if  it  had  a  thousand  lives. 

Puc.  O,  give  me  leave,  I  have  deluded  you: 
’Twas  neither  Charles  nor  yet  the  duke  I  named. 
But  Reignier,  King  of  Naples,  that  prevail’d. 

War.  A  married  man!  that’s  most  intolerable. 
Fork.  Why,  here’s  a  girl!  I  think  she  knows 
not  well,  So 

There  were  so  many,  whom  she  may  accuse. 

War.  It’s  sign  she  hath  been  liberal  and  free. 
Fork.  And  yet,  forsooth,  she  is  a  virgin  pure. 
Strumpet,  thy  words  condemn  thy  brat  and 
thee: 

Use  no  entreaty,  for  it  is  in  vain. 

Pi/c.  Then  lead  me  hence;  with  whom  I  leave 
my  curse: 

May  never  glorious  sun  reflex  his  beams 
Upon  the  country  where  you  make  abode; 

But  darkness  and  the  gloomy  shade  of  death 
Environ  you,  till  mischief  and  despair  po 

Drive  you  to  break  your  necks  or  hang  your¬ 
selves!  [ExiU  guarded. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  v 

Fork.  Break  thou  in  pieces  and  consume  to 
ashes. 

Thou  foul  accursed  minister  of  hell! 

CARDINAL  BEAUFORT  [WINCHESTER], 

attended. 

Car.  Lord  Regent,  I  do  greet  your  Excellence 
With  letters  of  commission  from  the  King. 

For  know,  my  lords,  the  states  of  Christendom, 
Moved  with  remorse  of  these  outrageous  broils. 
Have  earnestly  implored  a  general  peace 
Betwixt  our  nation  and  the  aspiring  French; 

And  here  at  hand  the  Dauphin  and  his  train  100 
Approacheth,  to  confer  about  some  matter. 

Fork.  Is  all  our  travail  turn’d  to  this  effect? 

After  the  slaughter  of  so  many  peers. 

So  mai)y  captains,  gentlemen  and  soldiers. 

That  in  this  quarrel  have  been  overthrown 
And  sold  their  bodies  for  their  country’s  benefit. 
Shall  we  at  last  conclude  effeminate  peace? 

Have  we  not  lost  most  part  of  all  the  towns. 

By  treason,  falsehood  and  by  treachery. 

Our  great  progenitors  had  conquered?  no 

O,  Warwick,  Warwick!  I  foresee  with  grief 
The  utter  loss  of  all  the  realm  of  France. 

War.  Be  patient,  York:  if  we  conclude  a 
peace. 

It  shall  be  with  such  strict  and  severe  covenants 
As  little  shall  the  Frenchmen  gain  thereby. 

CHARLES,  ALEN90N,  BASTARD,  REIGNIER, 

and  others. 

Char.  Since,  lords  of  England,  it  is  thus 
agreed 

That  peaceful  truce  shall  be  proclaim’d  in  France, 
We  come  to  be  informed  by  yourselves 
What  the  conditions  of  that  league  must  be. 

Fork.  Speak,  Winchester;  for  boiling  choler 
chokes  uo 

The  hollow  passage  of  my  poison’d  voice. 

By  sight  of  these  our  baleful  enemies. 

Car.  Charles,  and  the  rest,  it  is  enacted  thus: 
That,  in  regard  King  Henry  gives  consent. 

Of  mere  compassion  and  of  lenity. 

To  ease  your  country  of  distressful  war. 

And  suffer  you  to  breathe  in  fruitful  peace. 

You  shall  become  true  liegemen  to  his  crown: 
And,  Charles,  upon  condition  thou  wilt  swear 
To  pay  him  tribute,  and  submit  thyself,  1^0 

Thou  shalt  be  placed  as  viceroy  under  him. 

And  still  enjoy  thy  regal  dignity. 

Alen.  Must  he  be  then  as  shadow  of  himself? 
Adorn  his  temples  with  a  coronet. 

And  yet,  in  substance  and  authority. 

Retain  but  privilege  of  a  private  man? 

This  proffer  is  absurd  and  reasonless. 


SCENE  IV  FIRST  PART  OF 

Char.  ’Tis  known  already  that  I  am  possess’d 
With  more  than  half  the  Gallian  territories, 

And  therein  reverenced  for  their  lawful  king:  /40 
Shall  I,  for  lucre  of  the  rest  unvanquish’d, 

Detract  so  much  from  that  prerogative. 

As  to  be  call’d  but  viceroy  of  the  whole? 

No,  Lord  Ambassador,  I’ll  rather  keep 
That  which  I  have  than,  coveting  for  more. 

Be  cast  from  possibility  of  all. 

York.  Insulting  Charles!  hast  thou  by  secret 
means 

Used  intercession  to  obtain  a  league. 

And,  now  the  matter  grows  to  compromise, 
Stand’st  thou  aloof  upon  comparison?  /50 

Either  accept  the  title  thou  usurp’ st. 

Of  benefit  proceeding  from  our  king 
And  not  of  any  challenge  of  desert. 

Or  we  will  plague  thee  with  incessant  wars. 

Reig.  My  lord,  you  do  not  well  in  obstinacy 
To  cavil  in  the  course  of  this  contract: 

If  once  it  be  neglected,  ten  to  one 
We  shall  not  find  like  opportunity. 

Aim.  To  say  the  truth,  it  is  your  policy 
To  save  your  subjects  from  such  massacre  160 
And  ruthless  slaughters  as  are  daily  seen 
*  By  our  proceeding  in  hostility; 

And  therefore  take  this  compact  of  a  truce. 
Although  you  break  it  when  your  pleasure  serves . 
War.  How  say’st  thou,  Charles?  shall  our 
condition  stand? 

Char.  It  shall; 

Only  reserved,  you  claim  no  interest 
In  any  of  our  towns  of  garrison. 

York.  Then  swear  allegiance  to  his  majesty. 

As  thou  art  knight,  never  to  disobey  ijo 

Nor  be  rebellious  to  the  crown  of  England, 

Thou,  nor  thy  nobles,  to  the  crown  of  England. 

I  So,  now  dismiss  your  army  when  ye  please; 

Hang  up  your  ensigns,  let  your  drums  be  still. 

For  here  we  entertain  a  solemn  peace.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  London:  The  palace 
I  Enter  Suffolk  in  conference  with  the  king, 
GLOUCESTER  and  EXETER. 

King.  Your  wondrous  rare  description,  noble 
earl. 

Of  beauteous  Margaret  hath  astonish’d  me: 

Her  virtues  graced  with  external  gifts 
,  Do  breed  love’s  settled  passions  in  my  heart: 

And  like  as  rigour  of  tempestuous  gusts 
Provokes  the  mightiest  hulk  against  the  tide. 

So  am  I  driven  by  breath  of  her  renown 
Either  to  suffer  shipwreck  or  arrive 
Where  I  may  have  fruition  of  her  love. 

Suf.  Tush,  my  good  lord,  this  superficial  tale 
Is  but  a  preface  of  her  worthy  praise;  // 


KING  HENRY  VI  31 

The  chief  perfections  of  that  lovely  dame, 

Had  I  sufficient  skill  to  utter  them, 

Would  make  a  volume  of  enticing  lines, 

Able  to  ravish  any  dull  conceit: 

And,  which  is  more,  she  is  not  so  divine. 

So  full-replete  with  choice  of  all  delights. 

But  with  as  humble  lowliness  of  mind 
She  is  content  to  be  at  your  command; 

Command,  I  mean,  of  virtuous  chaste  intents,  20 
To  love  and  honour  Henry  as  her  lord. 

King.  And  otherwise  will  Henry  ne’er  pre¬ 
sume. 

Therefore,  my  Lord  Protector,  give  consent 
That  Margaret  may  be  England’s  royal  Queen. 
Glou.  So  should  I  give  consent  to  flatter  sin. 

You  know,  my  lord,  your  highness  is  betroth’d 
Unto  another  lady  of  esteem: 

How  shall  we  then  dispense  ^ith  that  contract. 
And  not  deface  your  honour  with  reproach? 

Suf.  As  doth  a  ruler  with  unlawful  oaths;  50 
Or  one  that,  at  a  triumph  having  vow’d 
To  try  his  strength,  forsaketh  yet  the  lists 
By  reason  of  his  adversary’s  odds: 

A  poor  earl’s  daughter  is  unequal  odds. 

And  therefore  may  be  broke  without  offence. 
Glou.  Why,  what,  I  pray,  is  Margaret  more 
than  that? 

Her  father  is  no  better  than  an  earl. 

Although  in  glorious  titles  he  excel. 

Suf.  Yes,  my  lord,  her  father  is  a  king. 

The  King  of  Naples  and  Jerusalem;  ^0 

And  of  such  great  authority  in  France 
As  his  alliance  will  confirm  our  peace 
And  keep  the  Frenchmen  in  allegiance. 

Glou.  And  so  the  Earl  of  Armagnac  may  do, 
Because  he  is  near  kinsman  unto  Charles. 

Exe.  Beside,  his  wealth  doth  warrant  a  liberal 
dower. 

Where  Reignier  sooner  will  receive  than  give. 
Suf.  A  dower,  my  lords!  disgrace  not  so  your 
king, 

That  he  should  be  so  abject,  base  and  poor. 

To  choose  for  wealth  and  not  for  perfect  love,  jo 

Henry  is  able  to  enrich  his  queen 

And  not  to  seek  a  queen  to  make  him  rich: 

So  worthless  peasants  bargain  for  their  wives. 

As  market-men  for  oxen,  sheep,  or  horse. 
Marriage  is  a  matter  of  more  worth 
Than  to  be  dealt  in  by  attorneyship; 

Not  whom  we  will,  but  whom  his  Grace  affects, 
Must  be  companion  of  his  nuptial  bed: 

And  therefore,  lords,  since  he  affects  her  most. 

It  most  of  all  these  reasons  bindeth  us,  60 

In  our  opinions  she  should  be  preferr’d. 

For  what  is  wedlock  forced  but  a  hell. 

An  age  of  discord  and  continual  strife? 


32  FIRST  PART  OF 

Whereas  the  contrary  bringeth  bliss, 

And  is  a  pattern  of  celestial  peace. 

Whom  should  we  match  with  Henry,  being  a 
king. 

But  Margaret,  that  is  daughter  to  a  king? 

Her  peerless  feature,  joined  with  her  birth. 
Approves  her  fit  for  none  but  for  a  king: 

Her  valiant  courage  and  undaunted  spirit,  70 
More  than  in  women  commonly  is  seen. 

Will  answer  our  hope  in  issue  of  a  king; 

For  Henry,  son  unto  a  conqueror, 

Is  likely  to  beget  more  conquerors, 

If  with  a  lady  of  so  high  resolve 

As  is  fair  Margaret  he  be  link’d  in  love. 

Then  yield,  my  lords;  and  here  conclude  with  me 
That  Margaret  shall  be  queen,  and  none  but  she. 
King.  Whether  it  be  through  force  of  your 
report. 

My  noble  Lord  of  Suffolk,  or  for  that  80 

My  tender  youth  was  never  yet  attaint 
With  any  passion  of  inflaming  love, 

I  cannot  tell;  but  this  I  am  assured, 

I  feel  such  sharp  dissension  in  my  breast. 

Such  fierce  alarums  both  of  hope  and  fear. 

As  I  am  sick  with  working  of  my  thoughts. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  v 

Take,  therefore,  shipping;  post,  my  lord,  to 
France; 

Agree  to  any  covenants,  and  procure 
That  Lady  Margaret  do  vouchsafe  to  come 
To  cross  the  seas  to  England  and  be  crown’d  po 
King  Henry’s  faithful  and  anointed  queen; 

For  your  expenses  and  sufficient  charge. 

Among  the  people  gather  up  a  tenth. 

Be  gone,  I  say;  for,  till  you  do  return, 

1  rest  perplexed  with  a  thousand  cares. 

And  you,  good  uncle,  banish  all  offence: 

If  you  do  censure  me  by  what  you  were, 

Not  what  you  are,  I  know  it  will  excuse 
This  sudden  execution  of  my  will. 

And  so,  conduct  me  where,  from  company,  100 
I  may> revolve  and  ruminate  my  grief.  [Exit. 
Glou.  Ay,  grief,  I  fear  me,  both  at  first  and  last. 

GLOUCESTER  and  exeter. 
Suf.  Thus  Suffolk  hath  prevail’d;  and  thus  he 
goes, 

x\s  did  the  youthful  Paris  once  to  Greece, 

With  hope  to  find  the  like  event  in  love. 

But  prosper  better  than  the  Trojan  did. 

Margaret  shall  now  be  queen,  and  rule  the  king; 
But  I  will  rule  both  her,  the  king,  and  realm. 

[Exit. 


?•>  The  Second  Part  of 
KING  HENRY  THE  SIXTH 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


King's 

Party 


King  Henry  the  Sixth 
Humphrey,  Duke  of  Gloucester,  his  uncle 
Cardinal  Beaufort,  Bishop  of  Winchester, 
great-uncle  to  the  King 
Richard  Plantagenet,  Duke  of  York 

Duke  OF  Somerset 

William  de  la  Pole,  Duke  of  Suffolk 
Duke  of  Buckingham 
Lord  Clifford 
Young  Clifford,  his  son 
Earl  of  Salisbury  I 
Larl  of  Warwick  | 

Lord  Scales 
Lord  Say 

Sir  Humphrey  Stafford 
William  Stafford,  his  brother 
Sir  John  Stanley 
Vaux 

Sea-Captain 
Master 

Master’s  Mate 
Walter  Whitmore 
Two  Gentlemen,  prisoners  'with  Suffolk 
John  Hume  I  . 

John  Southwell  |  ^ 

Bolingbroke,  a  conjurer 
Thomas  Horner,  an  armourer 
Peter  Thump,  his  man 
Clerk  of  Chatham 
Mayor  of  Saint  Alban  s 


SiMPCOx,  an  imposter 
Alexander  I  den,  a  Kentish  gentleman 
Jack  Cade,  a  rebel 
George  Bevis 


followers  of  Cade 


John  Holland 
Dick,  the  butcher 
Smith,  the  'weaver 
Michael 
Two  Murderers 
Five  Messengers 
Two  Petitioners 
Spirit 
Beadle 

Two  ’Prentices 

Three  Neighbors  to  Horner 

Servant  to  Gloucester 

Sheriff 

Herald 

A  Post 

Commons 

A  Citizen 

A  Soldier 


Margaret,  Queen  to  King  Henry 
Eleanor,  lyuchess  of  Gloucester 
Margaret  Jourdain,  a  witch 
Wife  Simpcox 

Non-Speaking:  Mathew  Goffe,  Petitioners,  Guards, 
Servants,  Attendants,  Citizens,  'Prentices,  Officers  of 
the  Sheriff,  Lords,  Ladies,  and  Soldiers 

Scene:  England 


ACT  I 

Scene  i.  London:  The  palace 
Flourish  of  trumpets:  then  hautboys.  Enter  tlte  king, 

DUKE  OF  GLOUCESTER,  SALISBURY,  WARWICK, 

and  cardinal  beaufort,  an  the  one  side;  the 

QUEEN,  SUFFOLK,  YORK,  SOxMERSET,  and  BUCK¬ 
INGHAM,  on  the  other. 

Suf.  As  by  your  high  imperial  majesty 
I  had  in  charge  at  my  depart  for  France, 

As  procurator  to  your  Excellence, 

To  marry  Princess  Margaret  for  your  Grace, 

So,  in  the  famous  ancient  city  Tours, 

In  presence  of  the  Kings  of  France  and  Sicil, 

The  Dukes  of  Orleans,  Calaber,  Bretagne  and 
Alengon, 

Seven  earls,  twelve  barons  and  twenty  reverend 
Bishops, 


I  have  perform’d  my  task  and  was  espoused: 

And  humbly  now  upon  my  bended  knee,  lo 
In  sight  of  England  and  her  lordly  peers. 

Deliver  up  my  title  in  the  Queen 
To  your  most  gracious  hands,  that  are  the  sub¬ 
stance 

Of  that  great  shadow  I  did  represent; 

The  happiest  gift  that  ever  marquess  gave. 

The  fairest  queen  that  ever  king  received. 

King.  Suffolk,  arise.  Welcome,  Queen  Mar¬ 
garet: 

I  can  express  no  kinder  sign  of  love 
Than  this  kind  kiss.  O  Lord,  that  lends  me 
life. 

Lend  me  a  heart  replete  with  thankfulness !  20 

For  thou  hast  given  me  in  this  beauteous  face 
A  world  of  earthly  blessings  to  my  soul. 

If  sympathy  of  love  unite  our  thoughts. 


33 


34  SECOND  PART  OF 

Queen,  Great  King  of  England  and  my  gracious 
lord, 

The  mutual  conference  that  my  mind  hath  had, 

By  day,  by  night,  waking  and  in  my  dreams. 

In  courtly  company  or  at  my  beads. 

With  you,  mine  alder-1  iefest  sovereign. 

Makes  me  the  bolder  to  salute  my  king 

With  ruder  terms,  such  as  my  wit  affords  50 

And  over-joy  of  heart  doth  minister. 

King.  Her  sight  did  ravish;  but  her  grace  in 
speech. 

Her  words  y-clad  with  wisdom’s  majesty, 

Makes  me  from  wondering  fall  to  weeping  joys; 
Such  is  the  fulness  of  my  heart’s  content. 

Lords,  with  one  cheerful  voice  welcome  my  love. 
All  [kneeling] .  Long  live  Queen  Margaret,  Eng¬ 
land’s  happiness! 

Queen,  We  thank  you  all.  [Flourish, 

Suf,  My  Lord  Protector,  so  it  please  your 
Grace, 

Here  are  the  articles  of  contracted  peace  40 
Between  our  soveriegn  and  the  French  King 
Charles, 

For  eighteen  months  concluded  by  consent. 

Glou.  [Reads]  ''Imprimis,,  It  is  agreed  between 
the  French  king  Charles,  and  William  de  la  Pole, 
Marquess  of  Suffolk,  ambassador  for  Henry  King 
of  England,  that  the  said  Henry  shall  espouse  the 
Lady  Margaret,  daughter  unto  Reignier  King  of 
Naples,  Sicilia  and  Jerusalem,  and  crown  her 
Queen  of  England  ere  the  thirtieth  of  May  next 
ensuing.  Item,,  that  the  duchy  of  Anjou  and  the 
county  of  Maine  shall  be  released  and  delivered 
to  the  king  her  father” — [Lets  the  paper  fall. 

King,  Uncle,  how  now! 

Glou,  Pardon  me,  gracious  lord; 

Some  sudden  qualm  hath  struck  me  at  the  heart 
And  dimm’d  mine  eyes,  that  I  can  read  no  fur¬ 
ther. 

King.  Uncle  of  Winchester,  I  pray,  read  on. 

Car.  [Reads]  "Item,  It  is  further  agreed  between 
them,  that  the  duchies  of  Anjou  and  Maine  shall 
be  released  and  delivered  over  to  the  king  her 
father,  and  she  sent  over  of  the  King  of  England’s 
own  proper  cost  and  charges,  without  having  any 
dowry.” 

King.  They  please  us  well.  Lord  Marquess, 
kneel  down: 

We  here  create  thee  the  first  Duke  of  Suffolk, 

And  gird  thee  with  the  sword.  Cousin  of  York, 

We  here  discharge  your  Grace  from  being  regent 
r  the  parts  of  France,  till  term  of  eighteen 
months 

Be  full  expired.  Thanks,  unde  Winchester, 
Gloucester,  York,  Buckingham,  Somerset, 
Salisbury,  and  Warwick;  70 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  i 

We  thank  you  all  for  this  great  favour  done, 

In  entertainment  to  my  princely  queen. 

Come,  let  us  in,  and  with  all  speed  provide 
To  see  her  coronation  be  perform’d. 

[Exeunt  king,  queen,  and  Suffolk. 
Glou.  Brave  peers  of  England,  pillars  of  the 
state. 

To  you  Duke  Humphrey  must  unload  his  grief. 
Your  grief,  the  common  grief  of  all  the  land. 
What!  did  my  brother  Henry  spend  his  youth. 
His  valour,  coin  and  people,  in  the  wars? 

Did  he  so  often  lodge  in  open  field,  80 

In  winter’s  cold  and  summer’s  parching  heat. 

To  conquer  France,  his  true  inheritance? 

And  did  my  brother  Bedford  toil  his  wits. 

To  keep  by  policy  what  Henry  got? 

Have  you  yourselves,  Somerset,  Buckingham, 
Brave  York,  Salisbury,  and  victorious  Warwick, 
Received  deep  scars  in  France  and  Normandy? 

Or  hath  mine  uncle  Beaufort  and  myself. 

With  all  the  learned  council  of  the  realm. 

Studied  so  long,  sat  in  the  council-house 
Early  and  late,  debating  to  and  fro 
How  France  and  Frenchmen  might  be  kept  in 
awe. 

And  had  his  highness  in  his  infancy 
Crowned  in  Paris  in  despite  of  foes? 

And  shall  these  labours  and  these  honours  die? 
Shall  Henry’s  conquest,  Bedford’s  vigilance. 

Your  deeds  of  war  and  all  our  counsel  die? 

O  peers  of  England,  shameful  is  this  league! 

Fatal  this  marriage,  cancelling  your  fame. 
Blotting  your  names  from  books  of  memory,  too 
Razing  the  characters  of  your  renown, 

Defacing  monuments  of  conquer’d  France, 
Undoing  all,  as  all  had  never  been! 

Car.  Nephew,  what  means  this  passionate  dis¬ 
course. 

This  peroration  with  such  circumstance? 

For  France,  ’tis  ours;  and  we  will  keep  it  still. 
Glou.  Ay,  uncle,  we  will  keep  it,  if  we  can; 

But  now  it  is  impossible  we  should: 

Suffolk,  the  new-made  duke  that  rules  the  roast. 
Hath  given  the  duchy  of  Anjou  and  Maine  no 
Unto  the  poor  King  Reignier,  whose  large  style 
Agrees  not  with  the  leanness  of  his  purse. 

Sal.  Now,  by  the  death  of  Him  that  died  for  all. 
These  counties  were  the  keys  of  Normandy. 

But  wherefore  weeps  Warwick,  my  valiant  son? 

War.  For  grief  that  they  are  past  recovery: 

For,  were  there  hope  to  conquer  them  again. 

My  sword  should  shed  hot  blood,  mine  eyes  no 
tears. 

Anjou  and  Maine!  myself  did  win  them  both; 
Those  provinces  these  arms  of  mine  did  conquer: 
And  are  the  cities,  that  I  got  with  wounds,  121 


SCENE  I 


SECOND  PART  OF 


Deliver’d  up  again  with  peaceful  words? 

Alort  Dieu! 

York,  For  Suffolk’s  duke,  may  he  be  suffocate, 
That  dims  the  honour  of  this  warlike  isle! 

France  should  have  torn  and  rent  my  very  heart. 
Before  I  would  have  yielded  to  this  league. 

I  never  read  but  England’s  kings  have  had 
Large  sums  of  gold  and  dowries  with  their  wives; 
And  our  King  Henry  gives  away  his  own,  /50 
To  match  with  her  that  brings  no  vatitages. 

Glou.  A  proper  jest,  and  never  heard  before. 
That  Suffolk  should  demand  a  whole  fifteenth 
For  costs  and  charges  in  transporting  her! 

She  should  have  stay’d  in  France  and  starved  in 
France, 

Before — 

Car.  My  Lord  of  Gloucester,  now  ye  grow  too 
hot: 

It  was  the  pleasure  of  my  lord  the  King. 

Glou.  My  Lord  of  Winchester,  I  know  your 
mind; 

’Tis  not  my  speeches  that  you  do  mislike,  /40 
But  ’tis  my  presence  that  doth  trouble  ye. 
Rancour  will  out:  proud  prelate,  in  thy  face 
I  see  thy  fury:  if  I  longer  stay. 

We  shall  begin  our  ancient  bickerings. 

Lordings,  farewell;  and  say,  when  I  am  gone, 

I  prophesied  France  will  be  lost  ere  long.  [Exit. 
Car.  So,  there  goes  our  Protector  in  a  rage. 

’Tis  known  to  you  he  is  mine  enemy. 

Nay,  more,  an  enemy  unto  you  all. 

And  no  great  friend,  I  fear  me,  to  the  King.  /50 
Consider,  lords,  he  is  the  next  of  blood. 

And  heir  apparent  to  the  English  crown: 

Had  Henry  got  an  empire  by  his  marriage. 

And  all  the  wealthy  kingdoms  of  the  west. 
There’s  reason  he  should  be  displeased  at  it. 

Look  to  it,  lords;  let  not  his  smoothing  words 
Bewitch  your  hearts;  be  wise  and  circumspect. 
What  though  the  common  people  favour  him. 
Calling  him  “Humphrey,  the  good  Duke  of 
Gloucester,”  /yp 

Clapping  their  hands,  and  crying  with  loud  voice, 
“Jesu  maintain  your  royal  Excellence!” 

With  “God  preserve  the  good  Duke  Humphrey!” 
I  fear  me,  lords,  for  all  this  flattering  gloss, 

He  will  be  found  a  dangerous  protector. 

Buck.  Why  should  he,  then,  protect  our  sover- 
eign. 

He  being  of  age  to  govern  of  himself? 

Cousin  of  Somerset,  join  you  with  me. 

And  all  together,  with  the  Duke  of  Suffolk, 

We’ll  quickly  hoise  Duke  Humphrey  from  his 
seat. 

Car.  This  weighty  business  will  not  brook  de¬ 
lay;  /70 


KING  HENRY  VI  35 

I’ll  to  the  Duke  of  Suffolk  presently.  [Exit. 

Som.  Cousin  of  Buckingham,  though  Hum¬ 
phrey’s  pride 

And  greatness  of  his  place  be  grief  to  us. 

Yet  let  us  watch  the  haughty  cardinal: 

His  insolence  is  more  intolerable 
Than  all  the  princes  in  the  land  beside: 

If  Gloucester  be  displaced,  he’ll  be  Protector. 
Buck.  Or  thou  or  I,  Somerset,  will  be  Protector, 
Despite  Duke  Humphrey  or  the  Cardinal .  77 y 

[Exeunt  Buckingham  and  somerset. 
Sal.  Pride  went  before,  ambition  follows  him. 
While  these  do  labour  for  their  own  preferment. 
Behoves  it  us  to  labour  for  the  realm. 

I  never  saw  but  Humphrey  Duke  of  Gloucester 
Did  bear  him  like  a  noble  gentleman. 

Oft  have  I  seen  the  haughty  Cardinal, 

More  like  a  soldier  than  a  man  o’  the  church. 

As  stout  and  proud  as  he  were  lord  of  all. 

Swear  like  a  ruffian  and  demean  himself 
Unlike  the  ruler  of  a  commonweal. 

Warwick,  my  son,  the  comfort  of  my  age,  /yo 
Thy  deeds,  thy  plainness,  and  thy  housekeeping. 
Hath  won  the  greatest  favour  of  the  commons. 
Excepting  none  but  good  Duke  Humphrey: 

And,  brother  York,  thy  acts  in  Ireland, 

In  bringing  them  to  civil  discipline. 

Thy  late  exploits  done  in  the  heart  of  France, 
When  thou  wert  regent  for  out  sovereign. 

Have  made  thee  fear’d  and  honour’d  of  the 
people: 

Join  we  together,  for  the  public  good. 

In  what  we  can,  to  bridle  and  suppress  200 
The  pride  of  Suffolk  and  the  Cardinal, 

With  Somerset’s  and  Buckingham’s  ambition; 
And,  as  we  may,  cherish  Duke  Humphrey’s 
deeds. 

While  they  do  tend  the  profit  of  the  land. 

War.  So  God  help  Warwick,  as  he  loves  the 
land. 

And  common  profit  of  his  country! 

York.  [Aside^  And  so  says  York,  for  he  hath 
greatest  cause. 

Sal.  Then  let’s  make  haste  away,  and  look  unto 
the  main. 

War.  Unto  the  main!  O  father,  Maine  is  lost; 
That  Maine  which  by  main  force  Warwick  did 
win,  210 

And  would  have  kept  so  long  as  breath  did  last! 
Main  chance,  father,  you  meant;  but  I  meant 
Maine, 

Which  I  will  win  from  France,  or  else  be  slain. 

[Exeunt  Warwick  and  Salisbury. 
York.  Anjou  and  Maine  are  given  to  the  French; 
Paris  is  lost;  the  state  of  Normandy 
Stands  on  a  tickle  point,  now  they  are  gone: 


36  SECOND  PART  OF 

Suffolk  concluded  on  the  articles, 

The  peers  agreed,  and  Henry  was  well  pleased 
To  change  two  dukedoms  for  a  duke’s  fair  daugh¬ 
ter. 

I  cannot  blame  them  all:  what  is’t  to  them?  220 
’Tis  thine  they  give  away,  and  not  their  own. 
Pirates  may  make  cheap  pennyworths  of  their 
pillage 

And  purchase  friends  and  give  to  courtezans. 

Still  revelling  like  lords  till  all  be  gone; 

While  as  the  silly  owner  of  the  goods 
Weeps  over  them  and  wrings  his  hapless  hands 
And  shakes  his  head  and  trembling  stands  aloof. 
While  all  is  shared  and  all  is  borne  away, 

Ready  to  starve  and  dare  not  touch  his  own: 

So  York  must  sit  and  fret  and  bite  his  tongue,  250 
While  his  own  lands  are  bargain’d  for  and  sold. 
Methinks  the  realms  of  England,  France  and  Ire¬ 
land 

Bear  that  proportion  to  my  flesh  and  blood 
As  did  the  fatal  brand  Althaea  burn’d 
Unto  the  Prince’s  heart  of  Calydon. 

Anjou  and  Maine  both  given  unto  the  French! 

Cold  news  for  me,  for  I  had  hope  of  France, 

Even  as  I  have  of  fertile  England’s  soil. 

A  day  will  come  when  York  shall  claim  his  own; 
And  therefore  I  will  take  the  Nevils’  parts  240 
And  make  a  show  of  love  to  proud  Duke  Hum¬ 
phrey, 

And,  when  I  spy  advantage,  claim  the  crown, 

For  that’s  the  golden  mark  I  seek  to  hit: 

Nor  shall  proud  Lancaster  usurp  my  right. 

Nor  hold  the  sceptre  in  his  childish  fist. 

Nor  wear  the  diadem  upon  his  head. 

Whose  church-like  humours  fits  not  for  a  crown. 
Then,  York,  be  still  awhile,  till  time  do  serve: 
Watch  thou  and  wake  when  others  be  asleep. 

To  pry  into  the  secrets  of  the  state;  250 

Till  Henry,  surfeiting  in  joys  of  love. 

With  his  new  bride  and  England’s  dear-bought 
queen. 

And  Humphrey  with  the  peers  be  fall’n  at  jars: 
Then  will  I  raise  aloft  the  milk-white  rose. 

With  whose  sweet  smell  the  air  shall  be  per¬ 
fumed; 

And  in  my  standard  bear  the  arms  of  York, 

To  grapple  with  the  house  of  Lancaster; 

And,  force  perforce.  I’ll  make  him  yield  the 
crown. 

Whose  bookish  rule  hath  pull’d  fair  England 
down.  [Exit, 

Scene  ii.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester' s  house 
Enter  duke  Humphrey  and  his  'wife  eleanor. 
Duch.  Why  droops  my  lord,  like  over-ripen’d 
corn, 


KING  HENRY  VI  ACT  I 

Hanging  the  head  at  Ceres’  plenteous  load? 

Why  doth  the  great  Duke  Humphrey  knit  his 
brows. 

As  frowning  at  the  favours  of  the  world? 

Why  are  thine  eyes  fix’d  to  the  sullen  earth. 
Gazing  on  that  which  seems  to  dim  thy  sight? 
What  seest  thou  there?  King  Henry’s  diadem. 
Enchased  with  all  the  honours  of  the  world? 

If  so,  gaze  on,  and  grovel  on  thy  face. 

Until  thy  head  be  circled  with  the  same.  10 

Put  forth  thy  hand,  reach  at  the  glorious  gold. 
What,  is’t  too  short?  I’ll  lengthen  it  with  mine; 
And,  having  both  together  heaved  it  up. 

We’ll  both  together  lift  our  heads  to  heaven. 

And  never  more  abase  our  sight  so  low 
As  to  vouchsafe  one  glance  unto  the  ground. 

Glou.  O  Nell,  sweet  Nell,  if  thou  dost  love  thy 
lord. 

Banish  the  canker  of  ambitious  thoughts. 

And  may  that  thought,  when  I  imagine  ill 
Against  my  king  and  nephew,  virtuous  Henry,  20 
Be  my  last  breathing  in  this  mortal  world! 

My  troublous  dream  this  night  doth  make  me 
sad. 

Duch.  What  dream’d  my  lord?  tell  me,  and  I’ll 
requite  it 

With  sweet  rehearsal  of  my  morning’s  dream. 
Glou.  Methought  this  staff,  mine  office-badge  in 
court. 

Was  broke  in  twain;  by  whom  I  have  forgot. 

But,  as  I  think,  it  was  by  the  Cardinal; 

And  on  the  pieces  of  the  broken  wand 
Were  placed  the  heads  of  Edmund  Duke  of 
Somerset, 

And  William  de  la  Pole,  first  Duke  of  Suffolk.  50 
This  was  my  dream:  what  it  doth  bode,  God 
knows. 

Duch.  Tut,  this  was  nothing  but  an  argument 
That  he  that  breaks  a  stick  of  Gloucester’s  grove 
Shall  lose  his  head  for  his  presumption. 

But  list  to  me,  my  Humphrey,  my  sweet  duke: 
Methought  I  sat  in  seat  of  majesty 
In  the  cathedral  church  of  Westminster, 

And  in  that  chair  where  kings  and  queens  are 
crown’d; 

Where  Henry  and  dame  Margaret  kneel’d  to  me 
And  on  my  head  did  set  the  diadem .  40 

Glou.  Nay,  Eleanor,  then  must  I  chide  outright: 
Presumptuous  dame,  ill-nurtured  Eleanor, 

Art  thou  not  second  woman  in  the  realm. 

And  the  Protector’s  wife,  beloved  of  him? 

Hast  thou  not  worldly  pleasure  at  command. 
Above  the  reach  or  compass  of  thy  thought? 

And  wilt  thou  still  be  hammering  treachery, 

To  tumble  down  thy  husband  and  thyself 
From  top  of  honour  to  disgrace’s  feet? 


SCENE  II 


37 


SECOND  PART  OF 

iVway  from  me,  and  let  me  hear  no  more!  50 
Duch.  What,  what,  my  lord!  are  you  so  choleric 
With  Eleanor,  for  telling  but  her  dream? 

Next  time  I’ll  keep  my  dreams  unto  myself. 

And  not  be  check’d. 

Glou.  Nay,  be  not  angry;  I  am  pleased  again. 
Enter  messenger. 

Mess.  My  Lord  Protector,  ’tis  his  Highness’ 
pleasure 

You  do  prepare  to  ride  unto  Saint  Alban’s, 

Where  as  the  King  and  Queen  do  mean  to  hawk. 
Glou.  I  go.  Come,  Nell,  thou  wilt  ride  with  us? 
Duch.  Yes,  my  good  lord.  I’ll  follow  presently. 

[Exeunt  Gloucester  and  messenger. 
Follow  I  must;  I  cannot  go  before,  61 

While  Gloucester  bears  this  base  and  humble 
mind. 

Were  I  a  man,  a  duke,  and  next  of  blood, 

I  would  remove  these  tedious  stumbling-blocks 
And  smooth  my  way  upon  their  headless  necks; 
And,  being  a  woman,  I  will  not  be  slack 
To  play  my  part  in  Fortune’s  pageant. 

Where  are  you  there?  Sir  John!  nay,  fear  not, 
man. 

We  are  alone;  here’s  none  but  thee  and  I. 

Enter 

Hume.  Jesus  preserve  your  royal  majesty!  70 
Duch.  What  say’st  thou?  majesty!  I  am  but 
Grace. 

Hume.  But,  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  Hume’s 
advice. 

Your  Grace’s  title  shall  be  multiplied. 

Duch.  What  say’st  thou,  man?  hast  thou  as  yet 
conferr’d 

With  Margery  Jourdain,  the  cunning  witch, 

With  Roger  Bolingbroke,  the  conjurer? 

And  will  they  undertake  to  do  me  good? 

Hume.  This  they  have  promised,  to  show  your 
highness 

A  spirit  raised  from  depth  of  under-ground. 

That  shall  make  answer  to  such  questions  So 
As  by  your  Grace  shall  be  propounded  him. 

Duch.  It  is  enough;  I’ll  think  upon  the  Questions: 
When  from  Saint  Alban’s  we  do  make  return. 
We’ll  see  these  things  effected  to  the  full. 

Here,  Hume,  take  this  reward;  make  merry, 
man. 

With  thy  confederates  in  this  weighty  cause. 

[Exit. 

Hume.  Hume  must  make  merry  with  the  Duch¬ 
ess’  gold; 

Marry,  and  shall.  But,  how  now.  Sir  John  Hume! 
Seal  up  your  lips,  and  give  no  words  but  mum: 

The  business  asketh  silent  secrecy.  5)0 


KING  HENRY  VI 

Dame  Eleanor  gives  gold  to  bring  the  witch: 

Gold  cannot  come  amiss,  were  she  a  devil. 

Yet  have  I  gold  flies  from  another  coast; 

I  dare  not  say  from  the  rich  Cardinal 
And  from  the  great  and  new-made  Duke  of  Suf¬ 
folk, 

Yet  I  do  find  it  so;  for,  to  be  plain. 

They,  knowing  Dame  Eleanor’s  aspiring  humour. 
Have  hired  me  to  undermine  the  Duchess 
And  buz  these  conjurations  in  her  brain. 

They  say,  “A  crafty  knave  does  need  no  broker”; 
Yet  am  I  Suffolk  and  the  Cardinal’s  broker,  loi 
Hume,  if  you  take  not  heed,  you  shall  go  near 
To  call  them  both  a  pair  of  crafty  knaves. 

Well,  so  it  stands;  and  thus,  I  fear,  at  last 
Hume’s  knavery  will  be  the  Duchess’  wreck. 

And  her  attainture  will  be  Humphrey’s  fall: 

Sort  how  it  will,  I  shall  have  gold  for  all.  [Exit. 

Scene  hi.  The  palace 

Enter  three  or  four  petitioners,  peter,  the 
Armourer's  man,  being  one. 
ist  Petit.  My  masters,  let’s  stand  close:  my  Lord 
Protector  will  come  this  way  by  and  by,  and  then 
we  may  deliver  our  supplications  in  the  quill. 

2nd  Petit.  Marry,  the  Lord  protect  him,  for  he’s 
a  good  man!  Jesu  bless  him! 

Enter  Suffolk  and  queen. 

Peter.  Here  a’comes,  methinks,  and  the  Queen 
with  him.  I’ll  be  the  first,  sure. 

2nd  Petit.  Come  back,  fool;  this  is  the  Duke  of 
Suffolk,  and  not  my  Lord  Protector.  10 

Suf.  How  now,  fellow!  wouldst  any  thing  with 
me? 

ist  Petit.  I  pray,  my  lord,  pardon  me;  I  took  ye 
for  my  Lord  Protector. 

Queen.  [Reading]  ‘‘To  my  Lord  Protector!”  Are 
your  supplications  to  his  lordship?  Let  me  see 
them:  what  is  thine? 

ist  Petit.  Mine  is,  an’t  please  your  Grace,  against 
John  Goodman,  my  Lord  Cardinal’s  man,  for 
keeping  my  house,  and  lands,  and  wife,  and  all, 
from  me.  21 

Suf.  Thy  wife  too!  that’s  some  wrong,  indeed. 
What’s  yours?  What’s  here!  [Reads]  “Against 
the  Duke  of  Suffolk,  for  enclosing  the  commons 
of  Melford.”  How  now,  sir  knave! 

2nd  Petit.  Alas,  sir,  I  am  but  a  poor  petitioner  of 
our  whole  township. 

Peter.  [Giving  his  petition]  Against  my  master , 
Thomas  Horner,  for  saying  that  the  Duke  of 
York  was  rightful  heir  to  the  crown.  50 

Queen.  W^hat  say’st  thou?  did  the  Duke  of  York 
say  he  was  rightful  heir  to  the  crown? 

Peter.  That  my  master  was?  no,  forsooth:  my 


38  SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


master  said  that  he  was,  and  that  the  King  was  an 
usurper. 

Suf.  Who  is  there?  [Enter  Servant.]  Take  this 
fellow  in,  and  send  for  his  master  with  a  pursui¬ 
vant  presently:  we’ll  hear  more  of  your  matter 
before  the  King.  [Exit  Servant  veith  peter. 

Queen.  And  as  for  you,  that  love  to  be  protected 
Under  the  wings  of  our  Protector’s  grace,  4/ 
Begin  your  suits  anew,  and  sue  to  him.  [Tears  the 
supplications.] 

Away,  base  cullions!  Suffolk,  let  them  go. 

All.  Come,  let’s  be  gone.  [Exeunt. 

Queen.  My  Lord  of  Suffolk,  say,  is  this  the  guise. 
Is  this  the  fashion  in  the  court  of  England? 

Is  this  the  government  of  Britain’s  isle. 

And  this  the  royalty  of  Albion’s  king? 

What,  shall  King  Henry  be  a  pupil  still 
Under  the  surly  Gloucester’s  governance?  50 
Am  I  a  queen  in  title  and  in  style. 

And  must  be  made  a  subject  to  a  duke? 

I  tell  thee,  Pole,  when  in  the  city  Tours 
Thou  ran’ St  a  tilt  in  honour  of  my  love 
And  stolest  away  the  ladies’  hearts  of  France, 

I  thought  King  Henry  had  resembled  thee 
In  courage,  courtship  and  proportion; 

But  all  his  mind  is  bent  to  holiness. 

To  number  Ave-Maries  on  his  beads; 

His  champions  are  the  prophets  and  apostles,  60 
His  weapons  holy  saws  of  sacred  writ, 

His  study  is  his  tilt-yard,  and  his  loves 
Are  brazen  images  of  canonized  saints. 

I  would  the  college  of  the  cardinals 

Would  choose  him  Pope  and  carry  him  to  Rome, 

And  set  the  triple  crown  upon  his  head: 

That  were  a  state  fit  for  his  holiness. 

Suf.  Madam,  be  patient:  as  I  was  cause 
Your  Highness  came  to  England,  so  will  I 
In  England  work  your  Grace’s  full  content.  70 
Queen.  Beside  the  haughty  Protector,  have  we 
Beaufort 

The  imperious  churchman,  Somerset,  Bucking¬ 
ham, 

And  grumbling  York;  and  not  the  least  of  these 
But  can  do  more  in  England  than  the  king. 

Suf.  And  he  of  these  that  can  do  most  of  all 
Cannot  do  more  in  England  than  the  Nevils: 
Salisbury  and  Warwick  are  no  simple  peers. 
Queen.  Not  all  these  lords  do  vex  me  half  so 
much 

As  that  proud  dame,  the  Lord  Protector’s  wife. 
She  sweeps  it  through  the  court  with  troops  of 
ladies,  80 

More  like  an  empress  than  Duke  Humphrey’s 
wife: 

Strangers  in  court  do  take  her  for  the  Queen: 

She  bears  a  duke’s  revenues  on  her  back. 


And  in  her  heart  she  scorns  our  poverty: 

Shall  I  not  live  to  be  avenged  on  her? 
Contemptuous  base-born  callet  as  she  is. 

She  vaunted  ’mongst  her  minions  t’other  day. 

The  very  train  of  her  worst  wearing  gown 
Was  better  worth  than  all  my  father’s  lands,  8p 
Till  Suffolk  gave  two  dukedoms  for  his  daughter. 

Suf.  Madam,  myself  have  limed  a  bush  for  her. 
And  placed  a  quire  of  such  enticing  birds 
That  she  will  light  to  listen  to  the  lays. 

And  never  mount  to  trouble  you  again. 

So,  let  her  rest:  and,  madam,  list  to  me; 

For  I  am  bold  to  counsel  you  in  this. 

Although  we  fancy  not  the  Cardinal, 

Yet  must  we  join  with  him  and  with  the  lords. 
Till  we  have  brought  Duke  Humphrey  in  dis¬ 
grace. 

As  for  the  Duke  of  York,  this  late  complaint  too 
Will  make  but  little  for  his  benefit. 

So,  one  by  one,  we’ll  weed  them  all  at  last. 

And  you  yourself  shall  steer  the  happy  helm. 

Sound  a  sennet.  Enter  the  king,  duke  Humphrey 

OF  GLOUCESTER,  CARDINAL  BEAUFORT,  BUCKING- 
INGHAM,  YORK,  SOMERSET,  SALISBURY,  WAR¬ 
WICK,  and  the  duchess  of  Gloucester. 

King.  For  my  part,  noble  lords,  I  care  not  which; 
Or  Somerset  or  York,  all’s  one  to  me. 

York.  If  York  have  ill  demean’d  himself  in 
France, 

Then  let  him  be  denay’d  the  regentship. 

Som.  If  Somerset  be  unworthy  of  the  place. 

Let  York  be  regent;  I  will  yield  to  him.  top 
War.  Whether  your  Grace  be  worthy,  yea  or 
no. 

Dispute  not  that;  York  is  the  worthier. 

Car.  Ambitious  Warwick,  let  thy  betters  speak. 
War.  The  Cardinal’s  not  my  better  in  the  field. 
Buck.  All  in  this  presence  are  thy  betters,  War¬ 
wick. 

War.  Warwick  may  live  to  be  the  best  of  all. 

Sal.  Peace,  son!  and  show  some  reason,  Buck¬ 
ingham, 

Why  Somerset  should  be  preferr’d  in  this. 

Queen.  Because  the  King,  forsooth,  will  have  it 
so. 

Glou.  Madam,  the  King  is  old  enough  himself 
To  give  his  censure:  these  are  no  women’s  matters. 
Queen.  If  he  be  old  enough,  what  needs  your 
Grace  121 

To  be  Protector  of  his  Excellence? 

Glou.  Madam,  I  am  Protector  of  the  realm; 

And,  at  his  pleasure,  will  resign  my  place. 

Suf.  Resign  it  then  and  leave  thine  insolence. 
Since  thou  wert  king — as  who  is  king  but  thou? — 
The  commonwealth  hath  daily  run  to  wreck; 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


The  Dauphin  hath  prevaird  beyond  the  seas; 

And  all  the  peers  and  nobles  of  the  realm 
Have  been  as  bondmen  to  thy  sovereignty.  i^o 
Car.  The  commons  hast  thou  rack’d;  the  cler¬ 
gy’s  bags 

Are  lank  and  lean  with  thy  extortions. 

Som.  Thy  sumptuous  buildings  and  thy  wife’s 
attire 

Have  cost  a  mass  of  public  treasury. 

Buck.  Thy  cruelty  in  execution 
Upon  offenders  hath  exceeded  law 
And  left  thee  to  the  mercy  of  the  law. 

Queen.  Thy  sale  of  offices  and  towns  in  France, 
If  they  were  known,  as  the  suspect  is  great. 
Would  make  thee  quickly  hop  without  thy  head. 

[Ejir/f  GLOUCESTER.  The  QUEEN  drops  her  fan. 
Give  me  my  fan:  what,  minion!  can  ye  not?  14.1 
She  gives  the  duchess  a  box  on  the  ear. 

I  cry  you  mercy,  madam;  was  it  you? 

Duch.  Was’t  I!  yea,  I  it  was,  proud  French¬ 
woman: 

Could  I  come  near  your  beauty  with  my  nails, 
rid  set  my  ten  commandments  in  your  face. 

King.  Sweet  aunt,  be  quiet;  ’twas  against  her 
will. 

Duch.  Against  her  will!  good  King,  look  to’t  in 
time; 

She’ll  hamper  thee,  and  dandle  thee  like  a  baby: 
Though  in  this  place  most  master  wear  no 
breeches. 

She  shall  not  strike  Dame  Eleanor  unrevenged. 

[Exit. 

Buck.  Lord  Cardinal,  I  will  follow  Eleanor, 

And  listen  after  Humphrey,  how  he  proceeds: 
She’s  tickled  now;  her  fume  needs  no  spurs. 

She’ll  gallop  far  enough  to  her  destruction.  [Exit. 

Re-enter  Gloucester. 

Glou.  Now,  lords,  my  choler  being  over-blown 
With  walking  once  about  the  quadrangle, 

I  come  to  talk  of  commonwealth  affairs. 

As  for  your  spiteful  false  objections, 

Prove  them,  and  I  lie  open  to  the  law; 

But  God  in  mercy  so  deal  with  my  soul  160 
As  I  in  duty  love  my  king  and  country! 

But,  to  the  matter  that  we  have  in  hand: 

I  say,  my  sovereign,  York  is  meetest  man 
To  be  your  regent  in  the  realm  of  France. 

Suf.  Before  we  make  election,  give  me  leave 
To  show  some  reason,  of  no  little  force, 

That  York  is  most  unmeet  of  any  man. 

York.  I’ll  tell  thee,  Suffolk,  why  I  am  unmeet: 
First,  for  I  cannot  flatter  thee  in  pride; 

Next,  if  I  be  appointed  for  the  place,  /70 

My  Lord  of  Somerset  will  keep  me  here. 

Without  discharge,  money,  or  furniture, 


Till  France  be  won  into  the  Dauphin’s  hands: 
Last  time,  I  danced  attendance  on  his  will 
Till  Paris  was  besieged,  famish’d,  and  lost. 

War.  That  can  I  witness;  and  a  fouler  fact 
Did  never  traitor  in  the  land  commit. 

Suf.  Peace,  headstrong  Warwick! 

War.  Image  of  pride,  why  should  I  hold  my 
peace? 

Enter  horner,  the  Armourer.,  and  his 
Tnan  peter,  guarded. 

Suf.  Because  here  is  a  man  accused  of  treason: 
Pray  God  the  Duke  of  York  excuse  himself!  181 
York.  Doth  any  one  accuse  York  for  a  traitor? 
King.  What  mean’st  thou,  Suffolk;  tell  me, 
what  are  these? 

Suf.  Please  it  your  Majesty,  this  is  the  man 
That  doth  accuse  his  master  of  high  treason: 

His  words  were  these:  that  Richard  Duke  of 
York 

Was  rightful  heir  unto  the  English  crown 
And  that  your  majesty  was  an  usurper. 

King.  Say,  man,  were  these  thy  words? 

Hor.  An’t  shall  please  your  Majesty,  I  never 
said  nor  thought  any  such  matter:  God  is  my  wit¬ 
ness,  I  am  falsely  accused  by  the  villain. 

Pet.  By  these  ten  bones,  my  lords,  he  did  speak 
them  to  me  in  the  garret  one  night,  as  we  were 
scouring  my  Lord  of  York’s  armour. 

York.  Base  dunghill  villain  and  mechanical. 

I’ll  have  thy  head  for  this  thy  traitor’s  speech. 

I  do  beseech  your  royal  Majesty, 

Let  him  have  all  the  rigour  of  the  law. 

Hor.  Alas,  my  lord,  hang  me,  if  ever  I  spake  the 
words.  My  accuser  is  my  ’prentice;  and  when  I 
did  correct  him  for  his  fault  the  other  day,  he  did 
vow  upon  his  knees  he  would  be  even  with  ine:  I 
have  good  witness  of  this:  therefore  I  beseech 
your  Majesty,  do  not  cast  away  an  honest  man 
for  a  villain’s  accusation. 

King.  Uncle,  what  shall  we  say  to  this  in  law? 
Glou.  This  doom,  my  lord,  if  I  may  judge: 

Let  Somerset  be  regent  o’er  the  French, 

Because  in  York  this  breeds  suspicion:  210 

And  let  these  have  a  day  appointed  them 
For  single  combat  in  convenient  place, 

For  he  hath  witness  of  his  servant’s  malice: 

This  is  the  law,  and  this  Duke  Humphrey’s  doom. 
Som.  I  humbly  thank  your  royal  Majesty. 

Hor.  And  I  accept  the  combat  willingly. 

Pet.  Alas,  my  lord,  I  cannot  fight;  for  God’s 
sake,  pity  my  case.  The  spite  of  man  prevaileth 
against  me.  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me!  I  shall 
never  be  able  to  fight  a  blow.  O  Lord,  my  heart ! 
Glou.  Sirrah,  or  you  must  fight,  or  else  be 
bang’d. 


40 

King.  Away  with  them  to  prison;  and  the  day 
of  combat  shall  be  the  last  of  the  next  month. 
Come,  Somerset,  we’ll  see  thee  sent  away. 

[Flourish.  Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Gloucester' s  garden 
Enter  margery  jourdain,  hume,  south- 
well,  and  BOLINGBROKE. 

Hume.  Come,  my  masters;  the  Duchess,  I  tell 
you,  expects  performance  of  your  promises. 

Boling.  Master  Hume,  we  are  therefore  provid¬ 
ed:  will  her  ladyship  behold  and  hear  our  exor¬ 
cisms? 

Hume.  Ay,  what  else?  fear  you  not  her  courage. 
Boling.  I  have  heard  her  reported  to  be  a  xVoman 
of  an  invincible  spirit:  but  it  shall  be  convenient. 
Master  Hume,  that  you  be  by  her  aloft,  while  we 
be  busy  below;  and  so,  I  pray  you,  go,  in  God’s 
name,  and  leave  us.  [Exit  hume.]  Mother  Jour¬ 
dain,  be  you  prostrate  and  grovel  on  the  earth; 
John  Southwell,  read  you;  and  let  us  to  our  work. 

Enter  duchess  aloft.,  follonjoing. 

Duch.  Well  said,  my  masters;  and  welcome  all. 
To  this  gear,  the  sooner  the  better. 

Boling.  Patience,  good  lady;  wizards  know  their 
times: 

Deep  night,  dark  night,  the  silent  of  the  night. 
The  time  of  night  when  Troy  was  set  on  fire;  20 
The  time  when  screech-owls  cry  and  ban-dogs 
howl 

And  spirits  walk  and  ghosts  break  up  their  graves, 
That  time  best  fits  the  work  we  have  in  hand. 
Madam,  sit  you  and  fear  not:  whom  we  raise. 

We  will  make  fast  within  a  hallow’d  verge. 

Here  they  do  the  ceremonies  belonging,  and  make 
the  circle;  bolingbroke  or  southwell  reads, 
“Conjuro  te,”  &c.  It  thunders  and  lightens 
terribly;  then  the  Spirit  riseth. 

Spir.  Adsum. 

M.  Jourd.  Asmath, 

By  the  eternal  God,  whose  name  and  power 
Thou  trem blest  at,  answer  that  I  shall  ask; 

For,  till  thou  speak,  thou  shalt  not  pass  from 
hence.  50 

Spir.  Ask  what  thou  wilt.  That  I  had  said  and 
done! 

Boling.  [Reading  out  of  a  paper} .  “First  of  the 
king:  what  shall  of  him  become?” 

Spir.  The  duke  yet  lives  that  Henry  shall  de¬ 
pose; 

But  him  outlive,  and  die  a  violent  death. 

As  the  Spirit  speaks,  southwell  uorites  the  an¬ 
swer. 

Boling.  “What  fates  await  the  Duke  of  Suf¬ 
folk?” 


ACT  1 

Spir.  By  water  shall  he  die,  and  take  his  end. 
Boling.  “What  shall  befall  the  Duke  of  Somer¬ 
set?” 

Spir.  Let  him  shun  castles; 

Safer  shall  he  be  upon  the  sandy  plains 

Than  where  castles  mounted  stand.  40 

Have  done,  for  more  I  hardly  can  endure. 

Boling.  Descend  to  darkness  and  the  burning 
lake! 

False  fiend,  avoid! 

[Thunder  and  lightning.  Exit  spirit. 

Enter  the  duke  of  york  and  the  duke  of 
BUCKINGHAM  with  their  guard  and  break  in. 

York.  Lay  hands  upon  these  traitors  and  their 
trash. 

Beldam,  I  think  we  watch’d  you  at  an  inch. 

What,  madam,  are  you  there?  the  King  and  com¬ 
monweal 

Are  deeply  indebted  for  this  piece  of  pains: 

My  Lord  Protector  will,  I  doubt  it  not. 

See  you  well  guerdon’d  for  these  good  deserts. 
Duch.  Not  half  so  bad  as  thine  to  England’s 
king,  JO 

Injurious  duke,  that  threatest  where’s  no  cause. 
Buck.  True,  madam,  none  at  all:  what  call  you 
this? 

Away  with  them!  let  them  be  clapp’d  up  close. 
And  kept  asunder.  You,  madam,  shall  with  us. 
Stafford,  take  her  to  thee. 

[Exeunt  above  duchess  and  hume,  guarded. 
We’ll  see  your  trinkets  here  all  forthcoming. 

All,  away! 

[Exeunt  guard  with  jourdain,  southwell,  &c. 
York.  Lord  Buckingham,  methinks,  you  watch’d 
her  well : 

A  pretty  plot,  well  chosen  to  build  upon! 

Now,  pray,  my  lord,  let’s  see  the  devil’s  writ.  6g 
What  have  we  here?  [Reads ^ 

“The  duke  yet  lives,  that  Henry  shall  depose; 

But  him  outlive,  and  die  a  violent  death.” 

Why,  this  is  just 

te,  ALacida,  Ro?nanos  vincere  posse." 

Well,  to  the  rest: 

“Tell  me  what  fate  awaits  the  Duke  of  Suffolk? 
By  water  shall  he  die,  and  take  his  end. 

What  shall  betide  the  Duke  of  Somerset? 

Let  him  shun  castles;  70 

Safer  shall  he  be  upon  the  sandy  plains 
Than  where  castles  mounted  stand.” 

Come,  come,  my  lords; 

These  oracles  are  hardly  attain’d. 

And  hardly  understood. 

The  King  is  now  in  progress  towards  Saint 
Alban’s, 

With  him  the  husband  of  this  lovely  lady; 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


SCENE  IV 

'rhither  go  these  news,  as  fast  as  horse  can  carry 
them: 

A  sorry  breakfast  for  my  Lord  Protector. 

Buck,  Your  grace  shall  give  me  leave,  my  Lord 
ofYork,  8o 

To  be  the  post,  in  hope  of  his  reward. 

York.  At  your  pleasure,  my  good  lord.  Who’s 
within  there,  ho! 

Enter  a  Servingman. 

Invite  my  Lords  of  Salisbury  and  Warwick 
To  sup  with  me  to-morrow  night.  Away! 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  Saint  Alban's 

Enter  the  king,  queen,  Gloucester,  cardinal, 
and  SUFFOLK,  v^ith  falconers  halloing. 
Queen.  Believe  me,  lords,  for  flying  at  the 
brook, 

I  saw  not  better  sport  these  seven  years’  day: 

Yet,  ’oy  your  leave,  the  wind  was  very  high; 

And,  ten  to  one,  old  Joan  had  not  gone  out. 

King.  But  what  a  point,  my  lord,  your  falcon 
made. 

And  what  a  pitch  she  flew  above  the  rest! 

To  see  how  God  in  all  his  creatures  works! 

Yea,  man  and  birds  are  fain  of  climbing  high. 

Suf.  No  marvel,  an  it  like  your  Majesty, 

My  Lord  Protector’s  hawks  do  tower  so  well;  to 
They  know  their  master  loves  to  be  aloft 
And  bears  his  thoughts  above  his  falcon’s  pitch. 

Glou.  My  lord,  ’tis  but  a  base  ignoble  mind 
That  mounts  no  higher  than  a  bird  can  soar. 

Car.  I  thought  as  much;  he  would  be  above  the 
clouds. 

Glou.  Ay,  my  Lord  Cardinal?  how  think  you  by 
that? 

Were  it  not  good  your  Grace  could  fly  to  heaven? 
King.  The  treasury  of  everlasting  joy. 

Car.  Thy  heaven  is  on  earth;  thine  eyes  and 
thoughts 

Beat  on  a  crown,  the  treasure  of  thy  heart:  20 

Pernicious  Protector,  dangerous  peer. 

That  smooth’st  it  so  with  king  and  commonweal! 
Glou.  What,  Cardinal,  is  your  priesthood  grown 
peremptory? 

Tantcene  aniinis  ccelestibus  ira? 

Churchmen  so  hot?  good  uncle,  hide  such  malice; 
With  such  holiness  can  you  do  it? 

Suf.  No  malice,  sir;  no  more  than  well  becomes 
So  good  a  quarrel  and  so  bad  a  peer. 

Glou.  As  who,  my  lord? 

Suf.  Why,  as  you,  my  lord, 

An’t  like  your  lordly  Lord-protectorship.  50 


KING  HENRY  VI  41 

Glou.  Why,  Suffolk,  England  knows  thine  inso¬ 
lence. 

Queen.  And  thy  ambition,  Gloucester. 

King.  I  prithee,  peace,  good  queen. 

And  whet  not  on  these  furious  peers; 

For  blessed  are  the  peacemakers  on  earth. 

Car.  Let  me  be  blessed  for  the  peace  I  make. 
Against  this  proud  Protector,  with  my  sword! 

Glou.  [Aside  to  cardinal]  Faith,  holy  uncle, 
would  ’twere  come  to  that! 

Car.  [Aside  to  Gloucester]  Marry,  when  thou 
darest. 

Glou.  [Aside  to  cardinal]  Make  up  no  factious 
numbers  for  the  matter;  40 

In  thine  own  person  answer  thy  abuse. 

Car.  [Aside  to  Gloucester]  Ay,  where  thou  dar¬ 
est  not  peep:  an  if  thou  darest, 

This  evening,  on  the  east  side  of  the  grove. 

King.  How  now,  my  lords! 

Car.  Believe  me,  cousin  Gloucester, 

Had  not  your  man  put  up  the  fowl  so  suddenly. 
We  had  had  more  sport.  [Aside  to  Gloucester] 
Come  with  thy  two-hand  sword. 

Glou.  True,  uncle. 

Car.  [Aside  to  Gloucester]  Are  ye  advised?  the 
east  side  of  the  grove? 

Glou.  [Aside  to  cardinal]  Cardinal,  I  am  with 
you. 

King.  Why,  how  now,  uncle  Gloucester! 

Glou.  Talking  of  hawking;  nothing  else,  my 
lord.  JO 

[Aside  to  cardinal]  Now,  by  God’s  mother, 
priest.  I’ll  shave  your  crown  for  this, 

Or  all  my  fence  shall  fail. 

Car.  [Aside  to  Gloucester]  Medice,  teipsum — 
Protector,  see  to’t  well,  protect  yourself. 

King.  The  winds  grow  high;  so  do  your  stom¬ 
achs,  lords. 

How  irksome  is  this  music  to  my  heart! 

When  such  strings  jar,  what  hope  of  harmony? 

I  pray,  my  lords,  let  me  compound  this  strife. 

Enter  a  townsman  of  Saint  Alban's.,  crying 
“A  miracle!” 

Glou.  What  means  this  noise? 

Fellow,  what  miracle  dost  thou  proclaim?  60 

Towns.  A  miracle!  a  miracle! 

Suf.  Come  to  the  King  and  tell  him  what 
miracle. 

Towns.  Forsooth,  a  blind  man  at  Saint  Alban's 
shrine. 

Within  this  half-hour,  hath  received  his  sight, 

A  man  that  ne’er  saw  in  his  life  before. 

King.  Now,  God  be  praised,  that  to  believing 
souls 

Gives  light  in  darkness,  comfort  in  despair! 


SECOND  PART  OF 


42 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


Enter  the  mayor  of  Saint  Alban's  and  his  brethren^ 
bearing  simpcox,  betnjoeen  tioo  in  a  chair,  simp- 
cox’s  WIFE  following. 

Car.  Here  comes  the  townsmen  on  procession, 

To  present  your  highness  with  the  man. 

King.  Great  is  his  comfort  in  this  earthly 
vale, 

Although  by  his  sight  his  sin  be  multiplied.  7/ 

Glau.  Stand  by,  my  masters:  bring  him  near  the 

His  highness’  pleasure  is  to  talk  with  him. 

King.  Good  fellow,  tell  us  here  the  circum¬ 
stance. 

That  we  for  thee  may  glorify  the  Lord. 

What,  hast  thou  been  long  blind  and  now  re¬ 
stored? 

Sbnp.  Born  blind,  an’t  please  your  Grace. 

Wife.  Ay,  indeed,  was  he. 

Suf.  What  woman  is  this? 

Wife.  His  wife,  an’t  like  your  worship.  80 

Glou.  Hadst  thou  been  his  mother,  thou  couldst 
have  better  told. 

King.  Where  wert  thou  born? 

Simp.  At  Berwick  in  the  north,  an’t  like  your 
Grace. 

King.  Poor  soul,  God’s  goodness  hath  been 
great  to  thee: 

Let  never  day  nor  night  unhallow’d  pass. 

But  still  remember  what  the  Lord  hath  done. 

Queen.  Tell  me,  good  fellow,  earnest  thou  here 
by  chance. 

Or  of  devotion,  to  this  holy  shrine? 

Simp.  God  knows,  of  pure  devotion;  being 
call’d 

A  hundred  times  and  oftener,  in  my  sleep,  po 

By  good  Saint  Alban;  who  said,  “Simpcox, 
come. 

Come,  offer  at  my  shrine,  and  I  will  help  thee.” 

Wife.  Most  true,  forsooth;  and  many  time  and 
oft 

Myself  have  heard  a  voice  to  call  him  so. 

Car.  What,  art  thou  lame? 

Simp.  Ay,  God  Almighty  help  me! 

Suf.  How  earnest  thou  so? 

Simp.  A  fall  off  of  a  tree. 

Wife.  A  plum-tree,  master. 

Glou.  How  long  hast  thou  been  blind? 

Simp.  O,  born  so,  master. 

Glou.  What,  and  wouldst  climb  a  tree? 

Simp.  But  that  in  all  my  life,  when  I  was  a 
youth. 

Wife.  Too  true;  and  bought  his  climbing  very 
dear.  100 

Glou.  Mass,  thou  lovedst  plums  well,  that 
wouldst  venture  so. 


ACT  u 

Simp.  Alas,  good  master,  my  wife  desired  some 
damsons, 

And  made  me  climb,  with  danger  of  m)^  life. 

Glou.  A  subtle  knave!  but  yet  it  shall  not  serve. 
Let  me  see  thine  eyes:  wink  now:  now  open 
them: 

In  my  opinion  yet  thou  see’st  not  well. 

Simp.  Yes,  master,  clear  as  day,  I  thank  God 
and  Saint  Alban. 

Glou.  Say’st  thou  me  so?  What  colour  is  this 
cloak  of? 

Simp.  Red,  master;  red  as  blood.  no 

Glou  Why,  that’s  well  said. What  colour  is  my 
gown  of? 

Simp.  Black,  forsooth:  coal-black  as  jet. 
King.Why,  then,  thou  know’st  what  colour 
jet  is  of? 

Suf.  And  yet,  I  think,  jet  did  he  never  see. 

Glou.  But  cloaks  and  gowns,  before  this  day, 
a  many. 

Wife.  Never,  before  this  day,  in  all  his  life. 

Glou.  Tell  me,  sirrah,  what’s  my  name? 

Simp.  Alas,  master,  I  know  not. 

Gte.What’s  his  name? 

Simp.  I  know  not.  120 

Glou.  Nor  his? 

Simp.  No,  indeed,  master. 

G/<?z/.What’s  thine  own  name? 

Simp.  Saunder  Simpcox,  and  if  it  please  you, 
master. 

Glou.  Then  Saunder,  sit  there,  the  lyingest 
knave  in  Christendom.  If  thou  hadst  been  born 
blind,  thou  mightst  as  well  have  known  all  our 
names  as  thus  to  name  the  several  colours  we  do 
wear.  Sight  may  distinguish  of  colours,  but  sud¬ 
denly  to  nominate  them  all,  it  is  impossible.  My 
lords.  Saint  Alban  here  hath  done  a  miracle;  and 
would  ye  not  think  his  cunning  to  be  great,  that 
could  restore  this  cripple  to  his  legs  again? 

Simp.  O  master,  that  you  could! 

Glou.  My  masters  of  Saint  Alban’s,  have  you 
not  beadles  in  your  own,  and  things  called 
whips? 

May.  Yes,  my  lord,  if  it  please  your  Grace. 

Glou.  Then  send  for  one  presently. 

May.  Sirrah,  to  fetch  the  beadle  hither  straight. 

[Exit  an  Attendant.  14.1 
Glou.  Now  fetch  me  a  stool  hither  by  and  by. 
Now,  sirrah,  if  you  mean  to  save  yourself  from 
whipping,  leap  me  over  this  stool  and  run  away. 
Simp.  Alas,  master,  I  am  not  able  to  stand 
alone: 

You  go  about  to  torture  me  in  vain. 

Enter  a  beadle  with  whips. 

G/(?M.Well,  sir,  we  must  have  you  find  your 


SCENE  I 

legs.  Sirrah,  beadle  whip  him  till  he  leap  over 
that  same  stool. 

Bead.  I  will,  my  lord.  Come  on,  sirrah;  off  with 
your  doublet  quickly. 

Simp.  Alas,  master,  what  shall  I  do?  I  am  not 
able  to  stand. 

After  the  beadle  hath  hit  him  once.,  he  leaps  over 
the  stool  and  runs  away;  and  they  follow  and 
cry,  ''A  miracle!" 

King.  O  God,  seest  Thou  this,  and  bearest  so 
long? 

Queen.  It  made  me  laugh  to  see  the  villain  run. 
Glou.  Follow  the  knave;  and  take  this  drab 
away. 

Wife.  Alas,  sir,  we  did  it  for  pure  need. 

Glau.  Let  them  be  whipped  through  every 
market-town,  till  they  come  to  Berwick,  from 
whence  they  came.  i6o 

[Exeunt  WIFE,  beadle,  mayor,  &c. 
Car.  Duke  Humphrey  has  done  a  miracle  to-day. 
Suf.  True;  made  the  lame  to  leap  and  fly  away. 
Glou.  But  you  have  done  more  miracles  than  I; 
You  made  in  a  day,  my  lord,  whole  towns  to  fly. 

Enter  Buckingham. 

King.  What  tidings  with  our  cousin  Bucking¬ 
ham? 

Buck.  Such  as  my  heart  doth  tremble  to  unfold. 

A  sort  of  naughty  persons,  lewdly  bent. 

Under  the  countenance  and  confederacy 
Of  Lady  Eleanor,  the  Protector’s  wife. 

The  ringleader  and  head  of  all  this  rout,  170 
Have  practised  dangerously  against  your  state. 
Dealing  with  witches  and  with  conjurers: 

Whom  we  have  apprehended  in  the  fact; 

Raising  up  wicked  spirits  from  under  ground. 
Demanding  of  King  Henry’s  life  and  death. 

And  other  of  your  Highness’  privy-council; 

As  more  at  large  your  Grace  shall  understand. 
Car.  [Aside  to  Gloucester]  And  so,  my  Lord 
Protector,  by  this  means 
Your  lady  is  forthcoming  yet  at  London. 

This  news,  I  think,  hath  turn’d  your  weapon’s 
edge;  180 

’Tis  like,  my  lord,  you  will  not  keep  your  hour. 
Glou.  Ambitious  churchman,  leave  to  afflict  my 
heart: 

Sorrow  and  grief  have  vanquish’d  all  my  powers  ; 
And,  vanquish’d  as  I  am,  I  yield  to  thee. 

Or  to  the  meanest  groom. 

King.  O  God,  what  mischiefs  work  the  wicked 
ones. 

Heaping  confusion  on  their  own  heads  thereby! 
Queen.  Gloucester,  see  here  the  tainture  of  thy 
nest. 

And  look  thyself  be  faultless,  thou  wert  best. 


43 

Glou.  Madam,  for  myself,  to  heaven  I  do 

appeal,  /yo 

How  I  have  loved  my  king  and  commonweal: 
And,  for  my  wife,  I  know  not  how  it  stands; 
Sorry  I  am  to  hear  what  I  have  heard: 

Noble  she  is,  but  if  she  have  forgot 
Honour  and  virtue  and  conversed  with  such 
As,  like  to  pitch,  defile  nobility, 

I  banish  her  my  bed  and  company 
And  give  her  as  a  prey  to  law  and  shame. 

That  hath  dishonour’d  Gloucester’s  honest  name. 
King.WoW,  for  this  night  we  will  repose  us 
here:  200 

To-morrow  toward  London  back  again, 

To  look  into  this  business  thoroughly 
And  call  these  foul  offenders  to  their  answers 
And  poise  the  cause  in  justice’  equal  scales, 
Whose  beam  stands  sure,  whose  rightful  cause 
prevails.  [Flourish.  Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  London:  The  Duke  of  York's 
garden 

Enter  york,  Salisbury,  and  Warwick. 

York.  Now,  my  good  Lords  of  Salisbury  and 
Warwick, 

Our  simple  supper  ended,  give  me  leave 
In  this  close  walk  to  satisfy  myself. 

In  craving  y  our  opinion  of  my  title. 

Which  is  infallible,  to  England’s  crown. 

Sal.  My  Lord,  I  long  to  hear  it  at  full. 

War.  Sweet  York,  begin:  and  if  thy  claim  be 
good. 

The  Nevils  are  thy  subjects  to  command. 

York.  Then  thus : 

Edward  the  Third,  my  lords,  had  seven  sons:  10 
The  first,  Edward  the  Black  Prince,  Prince  of 
Wales; 

The  second,  William  of  Hatfield,  and  the  third, 
Lionel  Duke  of  Clarence;  next  to  whom 
Was  John  of  Gaunt,  the  Duke  of  Lancaster; 

The  fifth  was  Edmund  Langley,  Duke  of  York; 
The  sixth  was  Thomas  of  Woodstock,  Duke  of 
Gloucester; 

William  of  Windsor  was  the  seventh  and  last. 
Edward  the  Black  Prince  died  before  his  father 
And  left  behind  him  Richard,  his  only  son. 

Who  after  Edward  the  Third’s  death  reign’d  as 
king;  20 

Till  Henry  Bolingbroke,  Duke  of  Lancaster, 

The  eldest  son  and  heir  of  John  of  Gaunt, 
Crown’d  by  the  name  of  Henry  the  Fourth, 

Seized  on  the  realm,  deposed  the  rightful  king. 
Sent  his  poor  queen  to  France,  from  whence  she 
came. 

And  him  to  Pomfret;  where,  as  all  you  know, 
Harmless  Richard  was  murder’d  traitorously. 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


44  SECOND  PART  OF 

War.  Father,  the  Duke  hath  told  the  truth; 

Thus  got  the  house  of  Lancaster  the  crown. 

York.  Which  now  they  hold  by  force  and  not  by 
right;  50 

For  Richard,  the  first  son’s  heir,  being  dead. 

The  issue  of  the  next  son  should  have  reign’d. 

Sal.  But  William  of  Hatfield  died  without  an 
heir. 

York.  The  third  son,  Duke  of  Clarence,  from 
whose  line 

I  claim  the  crown,  had  issue,  Philippe,  a  daughter. 
Who  married  Edmund  Mortimer,  Earl  of  March: 
Edmund  had  issue,  Roger  Earl  of  March; 

Roger  had  issue,  Edmund,  Anne  and  Eleanor. 

Sal.  This  Edmund,  in  the  reign  of  Bolingbroke, 

As  I  have  read,  laid  claim  unto  the  crown;  40 
And,  but  for  Owen  Glendower,  had  been  king. 
Who  kept  him  in  captivity  till  he  died. 

But  to  the  rest. 

York.  His  eldest  sister,  Anne, 

My  mother,  being  heir  unto  the  crown, 

Married  Richard  Earl  of  Cambridge,  who  was 
son 

To  Edmund  Langley,  Edward  the  Third’s  fifth 
son. 

By  her  I  claim  the  kingdom:  she  was  heir 
To  Roger  Earl  of  March,  who  was  the  son 
Of  Edmund  Mortimer,  who  married  Philippe, 

Sole  daughter  unto  Lionel  Duke  of  Clarence :  yo 
So,  if  the  issue  of  the  elder  son 
Succeed  before  the  younger,  I  am  king. 

War.  What  plain  proceeding  is  more  plain  than 
this? 

Henry  doth  claim  the  crown  from  John  of  Gaunt, 
The  fourth  son;  York  claims  it  from  the  third. 

Till  Lionel’s  issue  fails,  his  should  not  reign: 

It  fails  not  yet,  but  flourishes  in  thee 
And  in  thy  sons,  fair  slips  of  such  a  stock. 

Then,  father  Salisbury,  kneel  we  together; 

And  in  this  private  plot  be  we  the  first  60 

That  shall  salute  our  rightful  sovereign 
With  honour  of  his  birthright  to  the  crown. 

Both.  Long  life  our  sovereign  Richard,  Eng¬ 
land’s  king! 

York.  We  thank  you,  lords.  But  I  am  not  your 
king 

Till  I  be  crown’d  and  that  my  sword  be  stain’d 
With  heart-blood  of  the  house  of  Lancaster; 

And  that’s  not  suddenly  to  be  perform’d. 

But  with  advice  and  silent  secrecy. 

Do  you  as  I  do  in  these  dangerous  days : 

Wink  at  the  Duke  of  Suffolk’s  insolence,  70 
At  Beaufort’s  pride,  at  Somerset’s  ambition. 

At  Buckingham  and  all  the  crew  of  them. 

Till  they  have  snared  the  shepherd  of  the  flock. 
That  virtuous  prince,  the  good  Duke  Humphrey; 


KING  HENRY  VI  ACT  II 

’Tis  that  they  seek,  and  they  in  seeking  that 
Shall  find  their  deaths,  if  York  can  prophesy. 

Sal.  My  lord,  break  we  off;  we  know  your 
mind  at  full. 

War.  My  heart  assures  me  that  the  Earl  of 
Warwick 

Shall  one  day  make  the  Duke  of  York  a  king. 

York.  And,  Nevil,  this  I  do  assure  myself: 
Richard  shall  live  to  make  the  Earl  of  Warwick 
The  greatest  man  in  England  but  the  king. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  A  hall  of  justice 
Sound  trumpets.  Enter  the  king,  the  queen,  Glou¬ 
cester,  YORK,  SUFFOLK,  and  SALISBURY;  the 
DUCHESS  OF  GLOUCESTER,  MARGERY  JOURDAIN, 
SOUTHWELL,  and  BOLINGBROKE,  Under 

guard. 

King.  Stand  forth.  Dame  Eleanor  Cobham, 
Gloucester’s  wife: 

In  sight  of  God  and  us,  your  guilt  is  great: 
Receive  the  sentence  of  the  law  for  sins 
Such  as  by  God’s  book  are  adjudged  to  death. 

You  four,  from  hence  to  prison  back  again; 

From  thence  unto  the  place  of  execution: 

The  witch  in  Smithfield  shall  be  burn’d  to  ashes. 
And  you  three  shall  be  strangled  on  the  gallows. 
You,  madam,  for  you  are  more  nobly  born. 
Despoiled  of  your  honour  in  your  life,  10 

Shall,  after  three  days’  open  penance  done. 

Live  in  your  country  here  in  banishment. 

With  Sir  John  Stanley,  in  the  Isle  of  Man. 

Duch.  Welcome  is  banishment;  welcome  were 
my  death. 

Glou.  Eleanor,  the  law,  thou  see’st,  hath 
judged  thee: 

I  cannot  justify  whom  the  law  condemns. 

[Exeunt  duchess  and  other  prisoners.,  guarded. 
Mine  eyes  are  full  of  tears,  my  heart  of  grief. 

Ah,  Humphrey,  this  dishonour  in  thine  age 
Will  bring  thy  head  with  sorrow  to  the  ground! 

I  beseech  your  Majesty,  give  me  leave  to  go;  20 
Sorrow  would  solace  and  mine  age  would  ease. 
King.  Stay,  Humphrey  Duke  of  Gloucester: 
ere  thou  go. 

Give  up  thy  staff;  Henry  will  to  himself 
Protector  be;  and  God  shall  be  my  hope. 

My  stay,  my  guide  and  lantern  to  my  feet: 

And  go  in  peace,  Humphrey,  no  less  beloved 
Than  when  thou  wert  Protector  to  thy  king. 

Queen.  I  see  no  reason  why  a  king  of  years 
Should  be  to  be  protected  like  a  child. 

God  and  King  Henry  govern  England’s  realm.  50 
Give  up  your  staff,  sir,  and  the  King  his  realm. 

Glou.  My  staff?  here,  noble  Henry,  is  my  staff: 
As  willingly  do  I  the  same  resign 


SCENE  III 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


As  e’er  thy  father  Henry  made  it  mine; 

And  even  as  willingly  at  thy  feet  I  leave  it 
As  others  would  ambitiously  receive  it. 

Farewell,  good  king:  when  I  am  dead  and  gone, 
May  honourable  peace  attend  thy  throne!  [Exit. 
Queen.  Why,  now  is  Henry  king,  and  Margaret 
queen; 

And  Humphrey  Duke  of  Gloucester  scarce  him¬ 
self,  40 

That  bears  so  shrewd  a  maim;  two  pulls  at  once; 
His  lady  banish’d,  and  a  limb  lopp’d  off. 

This  staff  of  honour  raught,  there  let  it  stand 
Where  it  best  fits  to  be,  in  Henry’s  hand. 

Suf.  Thus  droops  this  lofty  pine  and  hangs  his 
sprays; 

Thus  Eleanor’s  pride  dies  in  her  youngest  days. 

York.  Lords,  let  him  go.  Please  it  your  majesty. 
This  is  the  day  appointed  for  the  combat; 

And  ready  are  the  appellant  and  defendant. 

The  armourer  and  his  man,  to  enter  the  lists,  50 
So  please  your  Highness  to  behold  the  fight. 
Queen.  Ay,  good  my  lord;  for  purposely  there¬ 
fore 

Left  I  the  court,  to  see  this  quarrel  tried. 

King.  O’  God’s  name,  see  the  lists  and  all  things 
fit: 

Here  let  them  end  it;  and  God  defend  the  right! 

York.  I  never  saw  a  fellow  worse  bested. 

Or  more  afraid  to  fight,  than  is  the  appellant, 

The  servant  of  this  armourer,  my  lords. 

Enter  at  one  door.,  horner,  the  Armourer.,  and  his 
NEIGHBOURS,  drinking  to  him  so  much  that  he  is 
drunk;  and  he  enters  with  a  drum  before  him  and 
his  staff  with  a  sand-bag  fastened  to  it;  and  at  the 
other  door  peter,  his  man.,  with  a  drum  and  sand¬ 
bag.,  and  ’prentices  drinking  to  him. 

ist  Neigh.  Here,  neighbour  Horner,  I  drink  to 
you  in  a  cup  of  sack:  and  fear  not,  neighbour,  you 
shall  do  well  enough.  61 

2nd  Neigh.  And  here,  neighbour,  here’s  a  cup 
of  charneco. 

^rd  Neigh.  And  here’s  a  pot  of  good  double 
beer,  neighbour:  drink,  and  fear  not  your  man. 
Hor.  Let  it  come,  i’  faith,  and  I’ll  pledge  you  all; 
and  a  fig  for  Peter! 

1st  'Pren.  Here,  Peter,  I  drink  to  thee:  and  be 
not  afraid. 

2nd  'Pren.  Be  merry,  Peter,  and  fear  not  thy 
master:  fight  for  credit  of  the  ’prentices.  7/ 
Peter.  I  thank  you  all:  drink,  and  pray  for  me, 
I  pray  you;  for  I  think  I  have  taken  my  last 
draught  in  this  world.  Here,  Robin,  an  if  I  die,  I 
give  thee  my  apron:  and, Will,  thou  shall  have 
my  hammer:  and  here,  Tom,  take  all  the  money 
that  I  have.  O  Lord  bless  me!  I  pray  God!  for 


45 

I  am  never  able  to  deal  with  my  master,  he  hath 
learnt  so  much  fence  already. 

Sal.  Come,  leave  your  drinking,  and  fall  to 
blows.  Sirrah,  what’s  thy  name?  81 

Peter.  Peter,  forsooth. 

Sal.  Peter!  what  more? 

Peter.  Thump. 

Sal.  Thump!  then  see  thou  thump  thy  master 
well. 

Hor.  Masters,  I  am  come  hither,  as  it  were,  up¬ 
on  my  man’s  instigation,  to  prove  him  a  knave 
and  myself  an  honest  man:  and  touching  the 
Duke  of  York,  I  will  take  my  death,  I  never 
meant  him  any  ill,  nor  the  King,  nor  the  Queen: 
and  therefore,  Peter,  have  at  thee  with  a  down¬ 
right  blow! 

York.  Dispatch:  this  knave’s  tongue  begins  to 
double. 

Sound,  trumpets,  alarum  to  the  combatants! 
Alarum.  They  fight,  and  peter  strikes  him  down. 
Hor.  Hold,  Peter,  hold!  I  confess,  I  confess 
treason.  [Dies. 

York.  Take  away  his  weapon.  Fellow,  thank 
God,  and  the  good  wine  in  thy  master’s  way. 
Peter.  O  God,  have  I  overcome  mine  enemy  in 
this  presence?  O  Peter,  thou  hast  prevailed  in 
right! 

King.  Go,  take  hence  that  traitor  from  our 
sight; 

For  by  his  death  we  do  perceive  his  guilt: 

And  God  in  justice  hath  reveal’d  to  us 
The  truth  and  innocence  of  this  poor  fellow. 
Which  he  had  thought  to  have  murder’d  wrong¬ 
fully. 

Come,  fellow,  follow  us  for  thy  reward. 

[Sound  a  flourish.  Exeunt, 

Scene  iv.  A  street 

GLOUCESTER  and  his  servingmen,  in 
mourning  cloaks. 

Glou.  Thus  sometimes  hath  the  brightest  day 
a  cloud; 

And  after  summer  evermore  succeeds 
Barren  winter,  with  his  wrathful  nipping  cold: 

So  cares  and  joys  abound,  as  seasons  fleet. 

Sirs,  what’s  o’clock? 

Serv.  Ten,  my  lord. 

Glou.  Ten  is  the  hour  that  was  appointed  me 
To  watch  the  coming  of  my  punish’d  duchess: 
Uneath  may  she  endure  the  flinty  streets. 

To  tread  them  with  her  tender-feeling  feet. 

Sweet  Nell,  ill  can  thy  noble  mind  abrook  10 
The  abject  people  gazing  on  thy  face. 

With  envious  looks,  laughing  at  thy  shame. 

That  erst  did  follow  thy  proud  chariot- wheels 


46 

When  thou  didst  ride  in  triumph  through  the 
streets. 

But,  soft!  I  think  she  comes;  and  I’ll  prepare 
My  tear-stain’d  eyes  to  see  her  miseries. 

Enter  the  duchess  of  Gloucester  in  a  uohite  sheets 
and  a  taper  burning  in  her  hand;  'with  sir  john 
STANLEY,  the  SHERIFF,  and  Officers. 

Serv.  So  please  your  Grace,  we’ll  take  her  from 
the  sheriff. 

Glou.  No,  stir  not,  for  your  lives;  let  her  pass  by. 
Duch.  Come  you,  my  lord,  to  see  my  open  shame? 
Now  thou  dost  penance  too.  Look  how  they  gaze! 
See  how  the  giddy  multitude  do  point,  2i 

And  nod  their  heads,  and  throw  their  eyes  on 
thee! 

Ah,  Gloucester,  hide  thee  from  their  hateful 
looks. 

And,  in  thy  closet  pent  up,  rue  my  shame. 

And  ban  thine  enemies,  both  mine  and  thine! 

Glou.  Be  patient,  gentle  Nell;  forget  this  grief. 
Duch.  Ah,  Gloucester,  teach  me  to  forget  my¬ 
self! 

For  whilst  I  think  I  am  thy  married  wife 
And  thou  a  prince.  Protector  of  this  land, 
Methinks  I  should  not  thus  be  led  along,  50 
Mail’d  up  in  shame,  with  papers  on  my  back, 

And  follow’d  with  a  rabble  that  rejoice 
To  see  my  tears  and  hear  my  deep-fet  groans. 

The  ruthless  flint  doth  cut  my  tender  feet. 

And  when  I  start,  the  envious  people  laugh 
And  bid  me  be  advised  how  I  tread. 

Ah,  Humphrey,  can  I  bear  this  shameful  yoke? 
Trow’st  thou  that  e’er  I’ll  look  upon  the  world. 
Or  count  them  happy  that  enjoy  the  sun? 

No;  dark  shall  be  my  light  and  night  my  day;  40 
To  think  upon  my  pomp  shall  be  my  hell. 
Sometime  I’ll  say  I  am  Duke  Humphrey’s  wife. 
And  he  a  prince  and  ruler  of  the  land: 

Yet  so  he  ruled  and  such  a  prince  he  was 
As  he  stood  by  whilst  I,  his  forlorn  duchess. 

Was  made  a  wonder  and  a  pointing-stock 
To  every  idle  rascal  follower. 

But  be  thou  mild  and  blush  not  at  my  shame. 

Nor  stir  at  nothing  till  the  axe  of  death 
Hang  over  thee,  as,  sure,  it  shortly  will ;  50 

For  Suffolk,  he  that  can  do  all  in  all 
With  her  that  hateth  thee  and  hates  us  all. 

And  York  and  impious  Beaufort,  that  false  priest. 
Have  all  limed  bushes  to  betray  thy  wings. 

And,  fly  thou  how  thou  canst,  they’ll  tangle  thee: 
But  fear  not  thou,  until  thy  foot  be  snared. 

Nor  never  seek  prevention  of  thy  foes. 

Glou.  Ah,  Nell,  forbear!  thou  aimest  all  awry; 

I  must  offend  before  I  be  attainted; 


ACT  11 

And  had  I  twenty  times  so  many  foes,  60 

And  each  of  them  had  twenty  times  their  power, 
All  these  could  not  procure  me  any  scathe. 

So  long  as  I  am  loyal,  true  and  crimeless. 

Wouldst  have  me  rescue  thee  from  this  reproach? 
Why,  yet  thy  scandal  were  not  wiped  away. 

But  I  in  danger  for  the  breach  of  law. 

Thy  greatest  help  is  quiet,  gentle  Nell: 

I  pray  thee,  sort  thy  heart  to  patience; 

These  few  days’  wonder  will  be  quickly  worn. 

Enter  a  herald. 

Her.  I  summon  your  Grace  to  his  Majesty’s 
parliament,  70 

Holden  at  Bury  the  first  of  this  next  month. 

Glou.  And  my  consent  ne’er  ask’d  herein  be¬ 
fore! 

This  is  close  dealing.  Well,  I  will  be  there. 

[Exit  HERALD 

My  Nell,  I  take  my  leave:  and,  master  sheriff. 
Let  not  her  penance  exceed  the  King’s  commis¬ 
sion. 

Sher.  An’t  please  your  Grace,  here  my  commis¬ 
sion  stays. 

And  Sir  John  Stanley  is  appointed  now 
To  take  her  with  him  to  the  Isle  of  Man. 

Glou.  Must  you.  Sir  John,  protect  my  lady  here? 
Stan.  So  am  I  given  in  charge,  may’t  please  your 
Grace.  80 

Glou.  Entreat  her  not  the  worse  in  that  I  pray 
You  use  her  well:  the  world  may  laugh  again; 
And  I  may  live  to  do  you  kindness  if 
You  do  it  her:  and  so.  Sir  John,  farewell! 

Duch.  What,  gone,  my  lord,  and  bid  me  not 
farewell! 

Glou.  Witness  my  tears,  I  cannot  stay  to  speak. 

GLOUCESTER  and  servingmen. 
Duch.  Art  thou  gone  too?  all  comfort  go  with 
thee! 

For  none  abides  with  me:  my  joy  is  death; 

Death,  at  whose  name  I  oft  have  been  afear’d. 
Because  I  wish’d  this  world’s  eternity.  90 

Stanley,  I  prithee,  go,  and  take  me  hence; 

I  care  not  whither,  for  I  beg  no  favour. 

Only  convey  me  where  thou  art  commanded. 
Stan.  Why,  madam,  that  is  to  the  Isle  of  Man; 
There  to  be  used  according  to  your  state. 

Duch.  That’s  bad  enough,  for  I  am  but  re¬ 
proach: 

And  shall  I  then  be  used  reproachfully? 

Stan.  Like  to  a  duchess,  and  Duke  Hum¬ 
phrey’s  lady. 

According  to  that  state  you  shall  be  used.  99 
Duch.  Sheriff,  farewell,  and  better  than  I  fare. 
Although  thou  hast  been  conduct  of  my  shame. 
Sher.  It  is  my  office;  and,  madam,  pardon  me. 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


SCENE  IV 


47 


SECOND  PART  OF 


Duch.  Ay,  ay,  farewell;  thy  office  is  discharged. 
Come,  Stanley,  shall  we  go? 

Stan,  Madam,  your  penance  done,  throw  off 
this  sheet. 

And  go  we  to  attire  you  for  our  journey. 

Duch.  My  shame  will  not  be  shifted  with  my 
sheet: 

No,  it  will  hang  upon  my  richest  robes 
And  show  itself,  attire  me  how  I  can. 

Go,  lead  the  way;  I  long  to  see  my  prison.  no 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  The  Abbey  at  Bury  St.  Edmund's 
Sound  a  sennet.  Enter  the  king,  the  queen,  car¬ 
dinal  BEAUFORT,  SUFFOLK,  YORK,  BUCKING¬ 
HAM,  SALISBURY  and  WARWICK  to  the  Parlia¬ 
ment. 

King.  I  muse  my  Lord  of  Gloucester  is  not 
come: 

’Tis  not  his  wont  to  be  the  hindmost  man, 
VVhate’er  occasion  keeps  him  from  us  now. 

Queen.  Can  you  not  see?  or  will  ye  not  observe 
The  strangeness  of  his  alter’d  countenance? 

With  what  a  majesty  he  bears  himself. 

How  insolent  of  late  he  is  become. 

How  proud,  how  peremptory,  and  unlike  him¬ 
self? 

We  know  the  time  since  he  was  mild  and  affable. 
And  if  we  did  but  glance  a  far-off  look,  lo 

Immediately  he  was  upon  his  knee. 

That  all  the  court  admired  him  for  submission: 
But  meet  him  now,  and,  be  it  in  the  morn. 

When  every  one  will  give  the  time  of  day, 

He  knits  his  brow  and  shows  an  angry  eye 
And  passeth  by  with  stiff  unbowed  knee. 
Disdaining  duty  that  to  us  belongs. 

Small  curs  are  not  regarded  when  they  grin; 

But  great  men  tremble  when  the  lion  roars; 

And  Humphrey  is  no  little  man  in  England.  20 
First  note  that  he  is  near  you  in  descent. 

And  should  you  fall,  he  is  the  next  will  mount. 

Me  seemeth  then  it  is  no  policy. 

Respecting  what  a  rancorous  mind  he  bears 
And  his  advantage  following  your  decease. 

That  he  should  come  about  your  royal  person 
Or  be  admitted  to  your  Highness’  council. 

By  flattery  hath  he  won  the  commons’  hearts. 

And  when  he  please  to  make  commotion, 

’Tis  to  be  fear’d  they  all  will  follow  him.  50 
Now  ’tis  the  spring,  and  weeds  are  shallow- 
rooted; 

Suffer  them  now,  and  they’ll  o’ergrow  the  garden 
And  choke  the  herbs  for  want  of  husbandry. 

The  reverent  care  I  bear  unto  my  lord 


KING  HENRY  VI 

Made  me  collect  these  dangers  in  the  Duke. 

If  it  be  fond,  caJl  it  a  woman’s  fear; 

Which  fear  if  better  reasons  can  supplant, 

I  will  subscribe  and  say  I  wrong’d  the  Duke. 

My  Lord  of  Suffolk,  Buckingham,  and  York, 
Reprove  my  allegation,  if  you  can; 

Or  else  conclude  my  words  effectual. 

Suf.  Well  hath  your  Highness  seen  into  this 
duke; 

And,  had  I  first  been  put  to  speak  my  mind, 

I  think  I  should  have  told  your  Grace’s  tale. 
The  Duchess  by  his  subornation. 

Upon  my  life,  began  her  devilish  practices: 

Or,  if  he  were  not  privy  to  those  faults, 

Yet,  by  reputing  of  his  high  descent. 

As  next  the  King  he  was  successive  heir. 

And  such  high  vaunts  of  his  nobility,  jo 

Did  instigate  the  bedlam  brain-sick  Duchess 
By  wicked  means  to  frame  our  sovereign’s  fall. 
Smooth  runs  the  water  where  the  brook  is  deep; 
And  in  his  simple  show  he  harbours  treason. 

The  fox  barks  not  when  he  would  steal  the  lamb. 
No,  no,  my  sovereign;  Gloucester  is  a  man 
Unsounded  yet  and  full  of  deep  deceit. 

Car.  Did  he  not,  contrary  to  form  of  law. 

Devise  strange  deaths  for  small  offences  done? 

York.  And  did  he  not,  in  his  protectorship,  60 
Levy  great  sums  of  money  through  the  realm 
For  soldiers’  pay  in  France,  and  never  sent  it? 

By  means  whereof  the  towns  each  day  revolted. 
Buck.  Tut,  these  are  petty  faults  to  faults 
unknown. 

Which  time  will  bring  to  light  in  smooth  Duke 
Humphrey. 

King.  My  lords,  at  once:  the  care  you  have  of 
us. 

To  mow  down  thorns  that  would  annoy  our  foot. 
Is  worthy  praise:  but,  shall  I  speak  my  con¬ 
science. 

Our  kinsman  Gloucester  is  as  innocent 

From  meaning  treason  to  our  royal  person  70 

As  is  the  sucking  lamb  or  harmless  dove: 

The  Duke  is  virtuous,  mild  and  too  well  given 
To  dream  on  evil  or  to  work  my  downfall. 

Queen.  Ah,  what’s  more  dangerous  than  this 
fond  affiance! 

Seems  he  a  dove?  his  feathers  are  but  borrow’d. 
For  he’s  disposed  as  the  hateful  raven: 

Is  he  a  lamb?  his  skin  is  surely  lent  him. 

For  he’s  inclined  as  is  the  ravenous  wolf. 

Who  cannot  steal  a  shape  that  means  deceit? 
Take  heed,  my  lord;  the  welfare  of  us  all  80 
Hangs  on  the  cutting  short  that  fraudful  man. 

Enter  somerset. 

Som.  All  health  unto  my  gracious  sovereign! 


48 

King.  Welcome,  Lord  Somerset.  What  news 
from  France? 

Som.  That  all  your  interest  in  those  territories 
Is  utterly  bereft  you;  all  is  lost. 

Kifjg.  Cold  news,  Lord  Somerset:  but  God’s 
will  be  done! 

York.  [Aside]  Cold  news  for  me;  for  I  had  hope 
of  France 

As  firmly  as  I  hope  for  fertile  England. 

Thus  are  my  blossoms  blasted  in  the  bud 
And  caterpillars  eat  my  leaves  away;  po 

But  I  will  remedy  this  gear  ere  long. 

Or  sell  my  title  for  a  glorious  grave. 

Enter  Gloucester. 

Glou.  All  happiness  unto  my  lord  the  king! 
Pardon,  my  liege,  that  I  have  stay’d  so  long. 

Suf.  Nay,  Gloucester,  know  that  thou  art 
come  too  soon. 

Unless  thou  wert  more  loyal  than  thou  art. 

I  do  arrest  thee  of  high  treason  here. 

Gto.Well,  Suffolk,  thou  shalt  not  see  me 
blush 

Nor  change  my  countenance  for  this  arrest: 

A  heart  unspotted  is  not  easily  daunted.  too 
The  purest  spring  is  not  so  free  from  mud 
As  I  am  clear  from  treason  to  my  sovereign: 

Who  can  accuse  me?  wherein  am  I  guilty? 

York.  ’Tis  thought,  my  lord,  that  you  took 
bribes  of  France, 

And,  being  Protector,  stay’d  the  soldiers’  pay; 

By  means  whereof  his  Highness  hath  lost  France. 
Glou.  Is  it  but  thought  so?  what  are  they  that 
think  it? 

I  never  robb’d  the  soldiers  of  their  pay. 

Nor  ever  had  one  penny  bribe  from  France. 

So  help  me  God,  as  I  have  watch’d  the  night,  no 
Ay,  night  by  night,  in  studying  good  for  Eng¬ 
land, 

That  doit  that  e’er  I  wrested  from  the  king. 

Or  any  groat  I  hoarded  to  my  use. 

Be  brought  against  me  at  my  trial-day! 

No;  many  a  pound  of  mine  own  proper  store. 
Because  I  would  not  tax  the  needy  commons. 
Have  I  dispursed  to  the  garrisons. 

And  never  ask’d  for  restitution. 

Car.  It  serves  you  well,  my  lord,  to  say  so 
much. 

Glou.  I  say  no  more  than  truth,  so  help  me 
God!  120 

York.  In  your  protectorship  you  did  devise 
Strange  tortures  for  offenders  never  heard  of. 

That  England  was  defamed  by  tyranny. 

Glou.  Why,  ’tis  well  known  that,  whiles  I  was 
Protector, 

Pity  was  all  the  fault  that  was  in  me; 

For  I  should  melt  at  an  offender’s  tears, 


ACT  III 

And  lowly  words  were  ransom  for  their  fault. 
Unless  it  were  a  bloody  murderer. 

Or  foul  felonious  thief  that  fleeced  poor  passen¬ 
gers, 

I  never  gave  them  condign  punishment :  1^0 

Murder  indeed,  that  bloody  sin,  I  tortured 
Above  the  felon  or  what  trespass  else. 

Suf.  My  lord,  these  faults  are  easy,  quickly 
answer’d: 

But  mightier  crimes  are  laid  unto  your  charge. 
Whereof  you  cannot  easily  purge  yourself. 

I  do  arrest  you  in  his  Highness’  name; 

And  here  commit  you  to  my  Lord  Cardinal 
To  keep,  until  your  further  time  of  trial. 

King.  My  Lord  of  Gloucester,  ’tis  my  special 
hope 

That  you  will  clear  yourself  from  all  suspect:  /40 
My  conscience  tells  me  you  are  innocent. 

Glou.  Ah,  gracious  lord,  these  days  are  dan¬ 
gerous: 

Virtue  is  choked  with  foul  ambition 
And  charity  chased  hence  by  rancour’s  hand; 

Foul  subornation  is  predominant 
And  equity  exiled  your  Highness’  land. 

I  know  their  complot  is  to  have  my  life. 

And  if  my  death  might  make  this  island  happy 
And  prove  the  period  of  their  tyranny, 

I  would  expend  it  with  all  willingness :  ijo 

But  mine  is  made  the  prologue  to  their  play; 

For  thousands  more,  that  yet  suspect  no  peril. 
Will  not  conclude  their  plotted  tragedy. 
Beaufort’s  red  sparkling  eyes  blab  his  heart’s 
malice. 

And  Suffolk’s  cloudy  brow  his  stormy  hate; 
Sharp  Buckingham  unburthens  with  his  tongue 
The  envious  load  that  lies  upon  his  heart; 

And  dogged  York,  that  reaches  at  the  moon. 
Whose  overweening  arm  I  have  pluck’d  back. 

By  false  accuse  doth  level  at  my  life:  160 

And  you,  my  sovereign  lady,  with  the  rest. 
Causeless  have  laid  disgraces  on  my  head 
And  with  your  best  endeavour  have  stirr’d  up 
My  liefest  liege  to  be  mine  enemy: 

Ay,  all  of  you  have  laid  your  heads  together — 
Myself  had  notice  of  your  conventicles — 

And  all  to  make  away  my  guiltless  life. 

I  shall  not  want  false  witness  to  condemn  me. 

Nor  store  of  treasons  to  augment  my  guilt; 

The  ancient  proverb  will  be  well  effected:  /70 
“A  staff  is  quickly  found  to  beat  a  dog.” 

Car.  My  liege,  his  railing  is  intolerable: 

If  those  that  care  to  keep  your  royal  person 
From  treason’s  secret  knife  and  traitors’  rage 
Be  thus  upbraided,  chid,  and  rated  at. 

And  the  offender  granted  scope  of  speech, 

’Twill  make  them  cool  in  zeal  unto  your  Grace. 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


SCENE  I 


49 


SECOND  PART  OF 

Suf.  Hath  he  not  twit  our  sovereign  lady  here 
With  ignominious  words,  though  clerkly 
couch’d, 

As  if  she  had  suborned  some  to  swear  iSo 

False  allegations  to  o’erthrow  his  state? 

Queen.  But  I  can  give  the  loser  leave  to  chide. 

Glou.  Far  truer  spoke  than  meant:  I  lose, 
indeed; 

Beshrew  the  winners,  for  they  play’d  me  false! 

And  well  such  losers  may  have  leave  to  speak. 

Buck.  He’ll  wrest  the  sense  and  hold  us  here  all 
day: 

Lord  Cardinal,  he  is  your  prisoner. 

Car.  Sirs,  take  away  the  Duke,  and  guard  him 
sure. 

Glou.  Ah!  thus  King  Henry  throws  away  his 
crutch 

Before  his  legs  be  firm  to  bear  his  body.  ipo 
Thus  is  the  shepherd  beaten  from  thy  side 
And  wolves  are  gnarling  who  shall  gnaw  thee  first. 
Ah,  that  my  fear  were  false!  ah,  that  it  were! 

For,  good  King  Henry,  thy  decay  I  fear. 

[Exit  guarded. 

King.  My  lords,  what  to  your  wisdoms  seem- 
eth  best. 

Do  or  undo,  as  if  ourself  were  here. 

Queen.  What,  will  your  Highness  leave  the  par¬ 
liament? 

King.  Ay,  Margaret;  my  heart  is  drown’d  with 

Whose  flood  begins  to  flow  within  mine  eyes. 

My  body  round  engirt  with  misery,  200 

For  what’s  more  miserable  than  discontent? 

Ah,  uncle  Humphrey!  in  thy  face  I  see 
The  map  of  honour,  truth  and  loyalty: 

And  yet,  good  Humphrey,  is  the  hour  to  come 
That  e’er  I  proved  thee  false  or  fear’d  thy  faith. 
What  louring  star  now  envies  thy  estate. 

That  these  great  lords  and  Margaret  our  queen 
Do  seek  subversion  of  thy  harmless  life? 

Thou  never  didst  them  wrong  nor  no  man  wrong; 
And  as  the  butcher  takes  away  the  calf  210 
And  binds  the  wretch  and  beats  it  when  it  strays. 
Bearing  it  to  the  bloody  slaughter-house. 

Even  so  remorseless  have  they  borne  him  hence; 
And  as  the  dam  runs  lowing  up  and  down. 

Looking  the  way  her  harmless  young  one  went. 
And  can  do  nought  but  wail  her  darling’s  loss. 

Even  so  myself  bewails  good  Gloucester’s  case 
With  sad  unhelpful  tears,  and  with  dimm’d  eyes 
Look  after  him  and  cannot  do  him  good, 

Somighty  are  his  vowed  enemies.  220 

His  fortunes  I  will  weep  and  ’twixt  each  groan 
Say,  “Who’s  a  traitor?  Gloucester  he  is  none.” 
[Exeunt  all  but  queen,  cardinal  beaufort, 
SUFFOLK,  and  york;  somerset  remains  apart. 


KING  HENRY  VI 

Queen.  Free  lords,  cold  snow  melts  with  the 
sun’s  hot  beams. 

Henry  my  lord  is  cold  in  great  affairs, 

Too  full  of  foolish  pity,  and  Gloucester’s  show 
Beguiles  him  as  the  mournful  crocodile 
With  sorrow  snares  relenting  passengers, 

Or  as  the  snake  roll’d  in  a  flowering  bank. 

With  shining  checker’d  slough,  doth  sting  a 
child 

That  for  the  beauty  thinks  it  excellent.  250 
Believe  me,  lords,  were  none  more  wise  than  I— 
And  yet  herein  I  judge  mine  own  wit  good — 

This  Gloucester  should  be  quickly  rid  the  world. 
To  rid  us  from  the  fear  we  have  of  him. 

Car.  That  he  should  die  is  worthy  policy; 

But  yet  we  want  a  colour  for  his  death: 

’Tis  meet  he  be  condemn’d  by  course  of  law. 

Suf.  But,  in  my  mind,  that  were  no  policy: 

The  King  will  labour  still  to  save  his  life, 

The  commons  haply  rise,  to  save  his  life;  2^0 
And  yet  we  have  but  trivial  argument. 

More  than  mistrust,  that  shows  him  worthy 
death. 

York.  So  that,  by  this,  you  would  not  have  him 
die. 

Suf.  Ah,  York,  no  man  alive  so  fain  as  I! 

York.  ’Tis  York  that  hath  more  reason  for  his 
death. 

But,  my  Lord  Cardinal,  and  you,  my  Lord  of 
Suffolk, 

Say  as  you  think,  and  speak  it  from  your  souls, 
Were’t  not  all  one,  an  empty  eagle  were  set 
To  guard  the  chicken  from  a  hungry  kite. 

As  place  Duke  Humphrey  for  the  King’s  Pro¬ 
tector?  250 

Queen.  So  the  poor  chicken  should  be  sure  of 
death. 

Suf.  Madam,  ’tis  true;  and  were’t  not  madness, 
then, 

To  make  the  fox  surveyor  of  the  fold? 

Who  being  accused  a  crafty  murderer, 

His  guilt  should  be  but  idly  posted  over, 

Because  his  purpose  is  not  executed. 

No;  let  him  die,  in  that  he  is  a  fox. 

By  nature  proved  an  enemy  to  the  flock, 

Before  his  chaps  be  stain’d  with  crimson  blood, 

As  Humphrey,  proved  by  reasons,  to  my  liege. 
And  do  not  stand  on  quillets  how  to  slay  him:  261 
Be  it  by  gins,  by  snares,  by  subtlety. 

Sleeping  or  waking,  ’tis  no  matter  how. 

So  he  be  dead;  for  that  is  good  deceit 
Which  mates  him  first  that  first  intends  deceit. 
Queen.  Thrice-noble  Suffolk,  ’tis  resolutely 
spoke. 

Suf.  Not  resolute,  except  so  much  were  done; 
For  things  are  often  spoke  and  seldom  meant: 


50  SECOND  PART  OF 

But  that  my  heart  accordeth  with  my  tongue, 

Seeing  the  deed  is  meritorious,  270 

And  to  preserve  my  sovereign  from  his  foe. 

Say  but  the  word,  and  I  will  be  his  priest. 

Car,  But  I  would  have  him  dead,  my  Lord  of 
Suffolk, 

Ere  you  can  take  due  orders  for  a  priest: 

Say  you  consent  and  censure  well  the  deed. 

And  ril  provide  his  executioner, 

I  tender  so  the  safety  of  my  liege. 

Suf.  Here  is  my  hand,  the  deed  is  worthy 
doing. 

Qiicen.  And  so  say  1. 

York.  And  I :  and  now  we  three  have  spoke 
it,  2U 

It  skills  not  greatly  who  impugns  our  doom. 

Enter  a  post. 

Post.  Great  lords,  from  Ireland  am  I  come 
amain. 

To  signify  that  rebels  there  are  up 
And  put  the  Englishmen  unto  the  sword: 

Send  succours,  lords,  and  stop  the  rage  betime. 
Before  the  wound  do  grow  uncurable; 

For,  being  green,  there  is  great  hope  of  help. 

Car.  A  breach  that  craves  a  quick  expedient 
stop! 

What  counsel  give  you  in  this  weighty  cause? 

York.  That  Somerset  be  sent  as  regent  thither: 

’Tis  meet  that  lucky  ruler  be  employ’d;  2^1 
Witness  the  fortune  he  hath  had  in  France. 

Som.  If  York,  with  all  his  far-fet  policy. 

Had  been  the  regent  there  instead  of  me. 

He  never  would  have  stay’d  in  France  so  long. 

York.  No,  not  to  lose  it  all,  as  thou  hast  done: 

I  rather  would  have  lost  my  life  betimes 
Than  bring  a  burthen  of  dishonour  home 
By  staying  there  so  long  till  all  were  lost. 

Show  me  one  scar  character’d  on  thy  skin :  500 

Men’s  flesh  preserved  so  whole  do  seldom  win. 
Queen.  Nay,  then,  this  spark  will  prove  a  raging 
fire. 

If  wind  and  fuel  be  brought  to  feed  it  with: 

No  more,  good  York;  sweet  Somerset,  be  still : 

Thy  fortune,  York,  hadst  thou  been  regent  there. 
Might  happily  have  proved  far  worse  than  his. 

York.  What,  worse  than  nought?  nay,  then,  a 
shame  take  all! 

Som.  And,  in  the  number,  thee  that  wishest 
shame! 

Car.  My  Lord  of  York,  try  what  your  fortune  is. 
The  uncivil  kerns  of  Ireland  are  in  arms  5/0 
And  temper  clay  with  blood  of  Englishmen: 

To  Ireland  will  you  lead  a  band  of  men. 

Collected  choicely,  from  each  county  some, 

And  try  your  hap  against  the  Irishmen? 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  111 

York.  I  will,  my  lord,  so  please  his  Majesty. 

Suf.  Why,  our  authority  is  his  consent. 

And  what  we  do  establish  he  confirms: 

Then,  noble  York,  take  thou  this  task  in  hand. 

York.  I  am  content:  provide  me  soldiers,  lords. 
Whiles  I  take  order  for  mine  own  affairs.  ^20 
Suf.  A  charge.  Lord  York,  that  I  will  see  per¬ 
form’d. 

But  now  return  we  to  the  false  Duke  Humphrey. 

Car.  No  more  of  him,  for  I  will  deal  with  him 
That  henceforth  he  shall  trouble  us  no  more. 

And  so  break  off;  the  day  is  almost  spent: 

Lord  Suffolk,  you  and  I  must  talk  of  that  event. 

York.  My  Lord  of  Suffolk,  within  fourteen  days 
At  Bristol  I  expect  my  soldiers; 

For  there  I’ll  ship  them  all  for  Ireland. 

Suf.  I’ll  see  it  truly  done,  my  Lord  of  York. 

'  [Exeunt  all  but  york. 

York.  Now,  York,  or  never,  steel  thy  fearful 
thoughts,  55/ 

And  change  misdoubt  to  resolution: 

Be  that  thou  hopest  to  be,  or  what  thou  art 
Resign  to  death;  it  is  not  worth  the  enjoying: 

Let  pale-faced  fear  keep  with  the  mean-born  man. 
And  find  no  harbour  in  a  royal  heart. 

Faster  than  spring-time  showers  comes  thought 
on  thought. 

And  not  a  thought  but  thinks  on  dignity. 

My  brain  more  busy  than  the  labouring  spider 
Weaves  tedious  snares  to  trap  mine  enemies.  540 
Well,  nobles,  well,  ’tis  politicly  done. 

To  send  me  packing  with  an  host  of  men: 

I  fear  me  you  but  warm  the  starved  snake. 

Who,  cherish’d  in  your  breasts,  will  sting  your 
hearts. 

’Twas  men  I  lack’d  and  you  will  give  them  me 
I  take  it  kindly;  yet  be  well  assured 
You  put  sharp  weapons  in  a  madman’s  hands. 
Whiles  I  in  Ireland  nourish  a  mighty  band, 

I  will  stir  up  in  England  some  black  storm 
Shall  blow  ten  thousand  souls  to  heaven  or  hell; 
And  this  fell  tempest  shall  not  cease  to  rage  55/ 
Until  the  golden  circuit  on  my  head. 

Like  to  the  glorious  sun’s  transparent  beams. 

Do  calm  the  fury  of  this  mad-bred  flaw. 

And,  for  a  minister  of  my  intent, 

I  have  seduced  a  headstrong  Kentishman, 

John  Cade  of  Ashford, 

To  make  commotion,  as  full  well  he  can. 

Under  the  title  of  John  Mortimer. 

In  Ireland  have  I  seen  this  stubborn  Cade  5  60 
Oppose  himself  against  a  troop  of  kerns, 

And  fought  so  long,  till  that  his  thighs  with  darts 
Were  almost  like  a  sharp-quill’d  porpentine; 

And,  in  the  end  being  rescued,!  have  seen 
Him  caper  upright  like  a  wild  Morisco, 


SCENE  I 

Shaking  the  bloody  darts  as  he  his  bells. 

Full  often,  like  a  shag-hair’d  crafty  kern, 

Hath  he  conversed  with  the  enemy. 

And  undiscover’d  come  to  me  again 

And  given  me  notice  of  their  villainies.  570 

This  devil  here  shall  be  my  substitute; 

For  that  John  Mortimer,  which  now  is  dead. 

In  face,  in  gait,  in  speech,  he  doth  resemble: 

By  this  I  shall  perceive  the  commons’  mind. 

How  they  affect  the  house  and  claim  of  York. 

Say  he  be  taken,  rack’d  and  tortured, 

I  know  no  pain  they  can  inflict  upon  him 
Will  make  him  say  I  moved  him  to  those  arms. 
Say  that  he  thrive,  as  ’tis  great  like  he  will, 

Why,  then  from  Ireland  come  I  with  my  strength 
And  reap  the  harvest  which  that  rascal  sow’d;^^/ 
For  Humphrey  being  dead,  as  he  shall  be. 

And  Henry  put  apart,  the  next  for  me.  [Exit, 

Scene  ii.  Bury  St  Edmund's:  A  room  of  state 
Enter  certain  murderers,  hastily, 
ist  Mur.  Run  to  my  Lord  of  Suffolk;  let  him 
know 

We  have  dispatch’d  the  Duke,  as  he  commanded. 
2nd  Mur.  O  that  it  were  to  do!  What  have  we 
done? 

Didst  ever  hear  a  man  so  penitent? 

Enter  Suffolk. 

ist  Mur.  Here  comes  my  lord. 

Suf.  Now,  sirs,  have  you  dispatch’d  this  thing? 
ist  Mur.  Ay,  my  good  lord,  he’s  dead. 

Suf.  Why,  that’s  well  said.  Go,  get  you  to  my 
house; 

I  will  reward  you  for  this  venturous  deed. 

The  King  and  all  the  peers  are  here  at  hand.  10 
Have  you  laid  fair  the  bed?  Is  all  things  well. 
According  as  I  gave  directions? 
ist  Mur.  ’Tis,  my  good  lord. 

Suf.  Away!  be  gone.  [Exeunt  murderers. 

Sound  trumpets.  Enter  the  king,  the  queen,  cardi¬ 
nal  BEAUFORT,  SOMERSET,  with  Attendants. 

King.  Go,  call  our  uncle  to  our  presence 
straight; 

Say  we  intend  to  try  his  Grace  to-day. 

If  he  be  guilty,  as  ’tis  published. 

Suf.  I’ll  call  him  presently,  my  noble  lord. 

[Exit. 

King.  Lords,  take  your  places;  and,  I  pray  you 
all. 

Proceed  no  straiter  ’gainst  our  uncle  Gloucester 
Than  from  true  evidence  of  good  esteem  21 
He  be  approved  in  practice  culpable. 

Queen.  God  forbid  any  malice  should  prevail, 
That  faultless  may  condemn  a  nobleman! 


KING  HENRY  VI  51 

Pray  God  he  may  acquit  him  of  suspicion! 

King.  I  thank  thee,  Aleg;  these  words  content 
me  much. 

Re-enter  Suffolk. 

How  now!  why  look’st  thou  pale?  why  tremblest 
thou? 

Where  is  our  uncle?  what’s  the  matter,  Suffolk? 
Suf.  Dead  in  his  bed,  my  lord;  Gloucester  is 
dead. 

Queen.  Marry,  God  for  fend! 

Car.  God’s  secret  judgement:  I  did  dream  to¬ 
night 

The  Duke  was  dumb  and  could  not  speak  a  word. 
The  KING  snjooons. 

Queen.  How  fares  my  lord?  Help,  lords!  the 
King  is  dead. 

Som.  Rear  up  his  body;  wring  him  by  the  nose. 
Queen.  Run,  go,  help,  help!  O  Henry,  ope  thine 
eyes! 

Suf.  He  doth  revive  again:  madam,  be  patient. 
King.  O  heavenly  God! 

Queen.  How  fares  my  gracious  lord? 

Suf.  Comfort,  my  sovereign!  gracious  Henry, 
comfort! 

King.  What,  doth  my  Lord  of  Suffolk  comfort 
me? 

Came  he  right  now  to  sing  a  raven’s  note,  ^0 
Whose  dismal  tune  bereft  my  vital  powers; 

And  thinks  he  that  the  chirping  of  a  wren. 

By  crying  comfort  from  a  hollow  breast. 

Can  chase  away  the  first-conceived  sound? 

Hide  not  thy  poison  with  such  sugar’d  words: 
Lay  not  thy  hands  on  me;  forbear,  I  say; 

Their  touch  affrights  me  as  a  serpent’s  sting. 
Thou  baleful  messenger,  out  of  my  sight! 

Upon  thy  eye- balls  murderous  tyranny 
Sits  in  grim  majesty,  to  fright  the  world.  50 
Look  not  upon  me,  for  thine  eyes  are  wounding: 
Yet  do  not  go  away:  come,  basilisk. 

And  kill  the  innocent  gazer  with  thy  sight; 

For  in  the  shade  of  death  I  shall  find  joy: 

In  life  but  double  death,  now  Gloucester’s  dead. 
Queen.  Why  do  you  rate  my  Lord  of  Suffolk 
thus? 

Although  the  Duke  was  enemy  to  him. 

Yet  he  most  Christian-like  laments  his  death: 

And  for  myself,  foe  as  he  was  to  me. 

Might  liquid  tears  or  heart-offending  groans  60 
Or  blood-consuming  sighs  recall  his  life, 

I  would  be  blind  with  weeping,  sick  with  groans. 
Look  pale  as  primrose  with  blood-drinking  sighs. 
And  all  to  have  the  noble  Duke  alive. 

What  know  I  how  the  world  may  deem  of  me? 
For  it  is  known  we  were  but  hollow  friends: 

It  may  be  judged  I  made  the  Duke  away; 


SECOND  PART  OF 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


So  shall  my  name  with  slander’s  tongue  be 
wounded, 

And  princes’  courts  be  fill’d  with  my  reproach. 
This  get  I  by  his  death:  ay  me,  unhappy!  70 
To  be  a  queen,  and  crown’d  with  infamy! 

Kmg.  Ah,  woe  is  me  for  Gloucester,  wretched 
man! 

Queen.  Be  woe  for  me,  more  wretched  than  he 

is. 

What,  dost  thou  turn  away  and  hide  thy  face? 

I  am  no  loathsome  leper;  look  on  me. 

What!  art  thou,  like  the  adder,  waxen  deaf? 

Be  poisonous  too  and  kill  thy  forlorn  queen. 

Is  all  thy  comfort  shut  in  Gloucester’s  tomb? 
Why,  then,  Dame  Margaret  was  ne’er  thy  joy. 
Erect  his  statua  and  worship  it,  80 

And  make  my  image  but  an  alehouse  sign. 

Was  I  for  this  nigh  wreck’d  upon  the  sea 
And  twice  by  awkward  wind  from  England’s 
bank 

Drove  back  again  unto  my  native  clime? 

What  boded  this,  but  well  forewarning  wind 
Did  seem  to  say,  ‘'Seek  not  a  scorpion’s  nest. 

Nor  set  no  footing  on  this  unkind  shore”? 

What  did  I  then,  hut  cursed  the  gentle  gusts 
And  he  that  loosed  them  forth  their  brazen  caves: 
And  bid  them  blow  towards  England’s  blessed 
shore,  po 

Or  turn  our  stern  upon  a  dreadful  rock? 

Yet  iTolus  would  not  be  a  murderer. 

But  left  that  hateful  office  unto  thee: 

The  pretty-vaulting  sea  refused  to  drown  me. 
Knowing  that  thou  wouldst  have  me  drown’d  on 
shore 

With  tears  as  salt  as  sea,  through  thy  unkindness : 
The  splitting  rocks  cower’d  in  the  sinking  sands 
And  would  not  dask  me  with  their  ragged  sides. 
Because  thy  flinty  heart,  more  hard  than  they. 
Might  in  thy  palace  perish  Margaret.  100 

As  far  as  I  could  ken  thy  chalky  cliffs. 

When  from  thy  shore  the  tempest  beat  us  back, 

I  stood  upon  the  hatches  in  the  storm. 

And  when  the  dusky  sky  began  to  rob 
My  earnest-gaping  sight  of  thy  land’s  view, 

I  took  a  costly  jewel  from  my  neck, 

A  heart  it  was,  bound  in  with  diamonds. 

And  threw  it  towards  thy  land:  the  sea  received 

it. 

And  so  I  wish’d  thy  body  might  my  heart: 

And  even  with  this  I  lost  fair  England’s  view  no 
And  bid  mine  eyes  be  packing  with  my  heart 
And  call’d  them  blind  and  dusky  spectacles. 

For  losing  ken  of  Albion’s  wished  coast. 

How  often  have  I  tempted  Suffolk’s  tongue, 

The  agent  of  thy  foul  inconstancy. 

To  sit  and  witch  me,  as  Ascanius  did 


When  he  to  madding  Dido  would  unfold 
His  father’s  acts  commenced  in  burning  Troy! 
Am  I  not  witch’d  like  her?  or  thou  not  false  like 
him? 

Ay  me,  I  can  no  more!  die,  Margaret!  120 

For  Henry  weeps  that  thou  dost  live  so  long. 

Noise  'within.  Enter  Warwick,  Salisbury, 
and  many  commons. 

War.  It  is  reported,  mighty  sovereign. 

That  good  Duke  Humphrey  traitorously  is  mur¬ 
der’d 

By  Suffolk  and  the  Cardinal  Beaufort’s  means. 
The  commons,  like  an  angry  hive  of  bees 
That  want  their  leader,  scatter  up  and  down 
And  care  not  who  they  sting  in  his  revenge. 
Myself  have  calm’d  their  spleenful  mutiny. 

Until  they  hear  the  order  of  his  death. 

King.  That;  he  is  dead,  good  Warwick,  ’tis  too 
true;  1^0 

But  how  he  died  God  knows,  not  Henry: 

Enter  his  chamber,  view  his  breathless  corpse. 
And  comment  then  upon  his  sudden  death. 

War.  That  shall  I  do,  my  liege.  Stay,  Salis- 
bury. 

With  the  rude  multitude  till  I  return.  [Exit. 

King.  O  Thou  that  judgest  all  things,  stay  my 
thoughts. 

My  thoughts,  that  labour  to  persuade  my  soul 
Some  violent  hands  were  laid  on  Humphrey’s 
life! 

If  my  suspect  be  false,  forgive  me,  God, 

For  judgement  only  doth  belong  to  thee.  /40 
Fain  would  I  go  to  chafe  his  paly  lips 
With  twenty  thousand  kisses  and  to  drain 
Upon  his  face  an  ocean  of  salt  tears. 

To  tell  my  love  unto  his  dumb  deaf  trunk 
And  with  my  fingers  feel  his  hand  unfeeling: 

But  all  in  vain  are  these  mean  obsequies; 

And  to  survey  his  dead  and  earthly  image. 

What  were  it  but  to  make  my  sorrow  greater? 

Re-enter  Warwick  and  others^  bearing  Gloucester's 
body  on  a  bed. 

War.  Come  hither,  gracious  sovereign,  view 
this  body. 

King.  That  is  to  see  how  deep  my  grave  is 
made;  /50 

For  with  his  soul  fled  all  my  worldly  solace. 

For  seeing  him  I  see  my  life  in  death. 

War.  As  surely  as  my  soul  intends  to  live 
With  that  dread  King  that  took  our  state  upon 
him 

To  free  us  from  his  father’s  wrathful  curse, 

I  do  believe  that  violent  hands  were  laid 
Upon  the  life  of  this  thrice-famed  duke. 


SCENE  II 


SECOND  PART  OF 

Suf,  A  dreadful  oath,  sworn  with  a  solemn 
tongue! 

What  instance  gives  Lord  Warwick  for  his  vow? 

War.  See  how  the  blood  is  settled  in  his  face. 

Oft  have  I  seen  a  timely-parted  ghost,  i6i 

Of  ashy  semblance,  meagre,  pale  and  bloodless. 
Being  all  descended  to  the  lalx)uring  heart; 

Who,  in  the  conflict  that  it  holds  with  death. 
Attracts  the  same  for  aidance  ’gainst  the  enemy; 
Which  with  the  heart  there  cools  and  ne’er  re- 
turneth 

To  blush  and  beautify  the  cheek  again. 

But  see,  his  face  is  black  and  full  of  blood. 

His  eye-balls  further  out  than  when  he  lived. 
Staring  full  ghastly  like  a  strangled  man;  /70 
His  hair  uprear’d,  his  nostrils  stretched  with 
struggling; 

His  hands  abroad  display’d,  as  one  that  grasp’d 
And  tugg’d  for  life  and  was  by  strength  subdued: 
Look,  on  the  sheets  his  hair,  you  see,  is  sticking; 
His  well-proportion’d  beard  made  rough  and 
rugged. 

Like  to  the  summer’s  corn  by  tempest  lodged. 

It  cannot  be  but  he  was  murder’d  here; 

The  least  of  all  these  signs  were  probable. 

Suf.  Why,  Warwick,  who  should  do  the  Duke 
to  death? 

Myself  and  Beaufort  had  him  in  protection;  180 
And  we,  I  hope,  sir,  are  no  murderers. 

War.  But  both  of  you  were  vow’d  Duke  Hum¬ 
phrey’s  foes. 

And  you,  forsooth,  had  the  good  Duke  to  keep: 

’Tis  like  you  would  not  feast  him  like  a  friend; 

And  ’tis  well  seen  he  found  an  enemy. 

Queen.  Then  you,  belike,  suspect  these  noble¬ 
men 

As  guilty  of  Duke  Humphrey’s  timeless  death. 

War.  Who  finds  the  heifer  dead  and  bleeding 
fresh 

And  sees  fast  by  a  butcher  with  an  axe. 

But  will  suspect  ’twas  he  that  made  the  slaughter? 
Who  finds  the  partridge  in  the  puttock’s  nest, 

But  may  imagine  how  the  bird  was  dead. 

Although  the  kite  soar  with  unbloodied  beak? 

Even  so  suspicious  is  this  tragedy. 

Queen.  Are  you  the  butcher,  Suffolk?  Where’s 
your  knife? 

Is  Beaufort  term’d  a  kite?  Where  are  his  talons? 
Suj.  I  wear  no  knife  to  slaughter  sleeping  men; 

But  here’s  a  vengeful  sword,  rusted  with  ease. 

That  shall  be  scoured  in  his  rancorous  heart 
That  slanders  me  with  murder’s  crimson  badge. 
Say,  if  thou  darest,  proud  Lord  of  Warwick¬ 
shire, 

That  I  am  faulty  in  Duke  Humphrey’s  death. 

CARDINAL,  SOMERSET,  and  Others. 


KING  HENRY  VI  53 

War.  What  dares  not  Warwick,  if  false  Suffolk 
dare  him? 

Queen.  He  dares  not  calm  his  contumelious  spirit 
Nor  cease  to  be  an  arrogant  controller. 

Though  Suffolk  dare  him  twenty  thousand  times. 
War.  Madam,  be  still;  with  reverence  may  I 
say; 

For  every  word  you  speak  in  his  behalf 
Is  slander  to  your  royal  dignity. 

Suf.  Blunt- witted  lord,  ignoble  in  demeanour! 

If  ever  lady  wrong’d  her  lord  so  much,  211 

Thy  mother  took  into  her  blameful  bed 
Some  stern  untutor’d  churl,  and  noble  stock 
Was  graft  with  crab-tree  slip;  whose  fruit  thou 
art 

And  never  of  the  Nevils’  noble  race. 

War.  But  that  the  guilt  of  murder  bucklers  thee 
And  I  should  rob  the  deathsman  of  his  fee. 
Quitting  thee  thereby  of  ten  thousand  shames, 
And  that  my  sovereign’s  presence  makes  me 
mild,  21^ 

I  would,  false  murderous  coward,  on  thy  knee 
Make  thee  beg  pardon  for  thy  passed  speech 
And  say  it  was  thy  mother  that  thou  meant’ st, 
That  thou  thyself  wast  born  in  bastardy; 

And  after  all  this  fearful  homage  done. 

Give  thee  thy  hire  and  send  thy  soul  to  hell, 
Pernicious  blood-sucker  of  sleeping  men! 

Suf.  Thou  shalt  be  waking  while  I  shed  thy 
blood. 

If  from  this  presence  thou  darest  go  with  me. 

War.  Away  even  now,  or  I  will  drag  thee  hence: 
Unworthy  though  thou  art.  I’ll  cope  with  thee  2^0 
And  do  some  service  to  Duke  Humphrey’s  ghost. 

[Exeunt  Suffolk  and  Warwick. 
King.  What  stronger  breastplate  than  a  heart 
untainted! 

Thrice  is  he  arm’d  that  hath  his  quarrel  just. 

And  he  but  naked,  though  lock’d  up  in  steel. 
Whose  conscience  with  injustice  is  corrupted. 

A  noise  within. 

Queen.  What  noise  is  this? 

Re-enter  Suffolk  and  Warwick,  with  their 
weapons  drawn. 

King.  Why,  how  now,  lords!  your  wrathful 
weapons  drawn 

Here  in  our  presence!  dare  you  be  so  bold? 

Why,  what  tumultous  clamour  have  we  here? 

Suf.  The  traitorous  Warwick  with  the  men  of 
Bury  240 

Set  all  upon  me,  mighty  sovereign. 

Sal.  [To  r/z^' COMMONS,  entering]  Sirs,  stand  apart; 

the  King  shall  know  your  mind. 

Dread  lord,  the  commons  send  you  word  by  me. 
Unless  Lord  Suffolk  straight  be  done  to  death. 


54  SECOND  PART  OF 

Or  banished  fair  England’s  territories, 

They  will  by  violence  tear  him  from  your  palace 
And  torture  him  with  grievous  lingering  death. 
They  say,  by  him  the  good  Duke  Humphrey 
died; 

They  say,  in  him  they  fear  your  Highness’  death; 
And  mere  instinct  of  love  and  loyalty,  250 

Free  from  a  stubborn  opposite  intent. 

As  being  thought  to  contradict  your  liking. 

Makes  them  thus  forward  in  his  banishment. 

They  say,  in  care  of  your  most  royal  person. 

That  if  your  Highness  should  intend  to  sleep 
And  charge  that  no  man  should  disturb  your  rest 
In  pain  of  your  dislike  or  pain  of  death. 

Yet,  notwithstanding  such  a  strait  edict. 

Were  there  a  serpent  seen,  with  forked  tongue, 
That  slily  glided  towards  your  Majesty,  2  60 
It  were  but  necessary  you  were  waked. 

Lest,  being  suffer’d  in  that  harmful  slumber. 

The  mortal  worm  might  make  the  sleep  eternal; 
And  therefore  do  they  cry,  though  you  forbid, 

That  they  will  guard  you,  whether  you  will  or 
no. 

From  such  fell  serpents  as  false  Suffolk  is. 

With  whose  envenomed  and  fatal  sting. 

Your  loving  uncle,  twenty  times  his  worth, 

They  say,  is  shamefully  bereft  of  life. 

Commons.  [Within]  An  answer  from  the  King, 
my  Lord  of  Salisbury!  270 

Suf.  ’Tis  like  the  commons,  rude  unpolish’d 
hinds, 

Could  send  such  message  to  their  sovereign: 

But  you,  my  lord,  were  glad  to  be  employ’d. 

To  show  how  quaint  an  orator  you  are: 

But  all  the  honour  Salisbury  hath  won 
Is,  that  he  was  the  lord  ambassador 
Sent  from  a  sort  of  tinkers  to  the  King. 

Commons.  [Within]  An  answer  from  the  King, 
or  we  will  all  break  in! 

King.  Go,  Salisbury,  and  tell  them  all  from  me, 

I  thank  them  for  their  tender  loving  care;  280 
And  had  I  not  been  cited  so  by  them. 

Yet  did  I  purpose  as  they  do  entreat; 

For,  sure,  my  thoughts  do  hourly  prophesy 
Mischance  unto  my  state  by  Suffolk’s  means: 

And  therefore,  by  His  majesty  I  swear. 

Whose  far  unworthy  deputy  I  am. 

He  shall  not  breathe  infection  in  this  air 
But  three  days  longer,  on  the  pain  of  death. 

[Exit  SALISBURY. 
Queen.  O  Henry,  let  me  plead  for  gentle  Suffolk! 
King.  Ungentle  queen,  to  call  him  gentle  Suf¬ 
folk!  2po 

No  more,  I  say:  if  thou  dost  plead  for  him, 

Thou  wilt  but  add  increase  unto  my  wrath. 

Had  I  but  said,  I  would  have  kept  my  word. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  m 

But  when  I  swear,  it  is  irrevocable. 

If,  after  three  days’  space,  thou  here  be’st  found 
On  any  ground  that  'I  am  ruler  of. 

The  world  shall  not  be  ransom  for  thy  life. 

Come,  Warwick,  come,  good  Warwick,  go  with 
me; 

I  have  great  matters  to  impart  to  thee. 

[Exeunt  all  but  queen  and  Suffolk. 
Queen.  Mischance  and  sorrow  go  along  with 
you!  500 

Heart’s  discontent  and  sour  affliction 
Be  playfellows  to  keep  you  company! 

There’s  two  of  you;  the  devil  make  a  third! 

And  threefold  vengeance  tend  upon  your  steps ! 

Suf.  Cease,  gentle  queen,  these  execrations 
And  let  thy  Suffolk  take  his  heavy  leave. 

Queen.  Fie,  coward  woman  and  soft-hearted 
wretch! 

Hast  thou  not  spirit  to  curse  thine  enemy? 

Suf.  A  plague  upon  them!  wherefore  should  I 
curse  them? 

Would^curses  kill,  as  doth  the  mandrake’s  groan, 
I  would  invent  as  bitter-searching  terms,  5  // 
As  curst,  as  harsh  and  horrible  to  hear. 

Deliver’d  strongly  through  my  fixed  teeth. 

With  full  as  many  signs  of  deadly  hate. 

As  lean-faced  Envy  in  her  loathsome  cave: 

My  tongue  should  stumble  in  mine  earnest  words; 
Mine  eyes  should  sparkle  like  the  beaten  fiint; 
Mine  hair  be  fix’d  on  end,  as  one  distract; 

Ay,  every  joint  should  seem  to  curse  and  ban: 
And  even  now  my  burthen’ d  heart  would  break. 
Should  I  not  curse  them.  Poison  be  their 

drink!  52/ 

Gall,  worse  than  gall,  the  daintiest  that  they 
taste! 

Their  sweetest  shade  a  grove  of  cypress  trees! 
Their  chiefest  prospect  murdering  basilisks! 
Their  softest  touch  as  smart  as  lizards’  stings! 
Their  music  frightful  as  the  serpent’s  hiss. 

And  boding  screech-owls  make  the  concert  full! 
All  the  foul  terrors  in  dark-seated  hell — 

Queen.  Enough,  sweet  Suffolk;  thou  torment’st 
thyself; 

And  these  dread  curses,  like  the  sun  ’gainst  glass. 
Or  like  an  overcharged  gun,  recoil,  5 5 1 

And  turn  the  force  of  them  upon  thyself. 

Suf.  You  bade  me  ban,  and  will  you  bid  me 
leave? 

Now,  by  the  ground  that  I  am  banish’d  from, 
Well  could  I  curse  away  a  winter’s  night, 
Though  standing  naked  on  a  mountain  top. 
Where  biting  cold  would  never  let  grass  grow. 
And  think  it  but  a  minute  spent  in  sport. 

Queen.  O,  let  me  entreat  thee  cease.  Give  me 
thy  hand. 


SCENE  U 

That  1  may  dew  it  with  my  mournful  tears; 

Nor  let  the  rain  of  heaven  wet  this  place, 

To  wash  away  my  woful  monuments. 

O,  could  this  kiss  be  printed  in  thy  hand, 

That  thou  mightst  think  upon  these  by  the  seal. 
Through  whom  a  thousand  sighs  are  breathed 
for  thee! 

So,  get  thee  gone,  that  I  may  know  my  grief; 

’Tis  but  surmised  whiles  thou  art  standing  by. 

As  one  that  surfeits  thinking  on  a  want. 

I  will  repeal  thee,  or,  be  well  assured. 

Adventure  to  be  banished  myself:  ^50 

And  banished  I  am,  if  but  from  thee. 

Go;  speak  not  to  me;  even  now  be  gone. 

O,  go  not  yet!  Even  thus  two  friends  condemn’d 
Embrace  and  kiss  and  take  ten  thousand  leaves, 
Loather  a  hundred  times  to  part  than  die. 

Yet  now  farewell;  and  farewell  life  with  thee! 
Suf.  Thus  is  poor  Suffolk  ten  times  banished; 
Once  by  the  king,  and  three  times  thrice  by  thee. 
’Tis  not  the  land  I  care  for,  wert  thou  thence; 

A  wilderness  is  populous  enough,  ^60 

So  Suffolk  had  thy  heavenly  company: 

For  where  thou  art,  there  is  the  world  itself, 

With  every  several  pleasure  in  the  world. 

And  where  thou  art  not,  desolation. 

I  can  no  more:  live  thou  to  joy  thy  life; 

Myself  no  joy  in  nought  but  that  thou  livest. 

Enter  vaux. 

Queen.  Whither  goes  Vaux  so  fast?  what  news, 

I  prithee? 

Vaux.  To  signify  unto  his  Majesty 
That  Cardinal  Beaufort  is  at  point  of  death; 

For  suddenly  a  grievous  sickness  took  him,  570 
That  makes  him  gasp  and  stare  and  catch  the  air. 
Blaspheming  God  and  cursing  men  on  earth. 
Sometime  he  talks  as  if  Duke  Humphrey’s  ghost 
Were  by  his  side;  sometime  he  calls  the  King 
And  whispers  to  his  pillow  as  to  him 
The  secrets  of  his  overcharged  soul: 

And  I  am  sent  to  tell  his  Majesty 
That  even  now  he  cries  aloud  for  him. 

Queen.  Go  tell  this  heavy  message  to  the  King. 

[Exit  VAUX. 

Ay  me!  what  is  this  world!  what  news  are  these! 
But  wherefore  grieve  I  at  an  hour’s  poor  loss,  ^81 
Omitting  Suffolk’s  exile,  my  soul’s  treasure? 
Why  only,  Suffolk,  mourn  I  not  for  thee. 

And  with  the  southern  clouds  contend  in  tears. 
Theirs  for  the  earth’s  increase,  mine  for  my 
sorrows? 

Now  get  thee  hence:  the  King,  thou  know’st,  is 
coming; 

If  thou  be  found  by  me,  thou  art  but  dead. 

Suf.  If  I  depart  from  thee,  I  cannot  live; 


55 

And  in  thy  sight  to  die,  what  were  it  else 

But  like  a  pleasant  slumber  in  thy  lap?  5^0 

Here  could  I  breathe  my  soul  into  the  air. 

As  mild  and  gentle  as  the  cradle-babe 
Dying  with  mother’s  dug  between  its  lips: 
Where,  from  thy  sight,  I  should  be  raging  mad 
And  cry  out  for  thee  to  close  up  mine  eyes. 

To  have  thee  with  thy  lips  to  stop  my  mouth; 

So  shouldst  thou  either  turn  my  flying  soul, 

Or  I  should  breathe  it  so  into  thy  body. 

And  then  it  lived  in  sweet  Elysium. 

To  die  by  thee  were  but  to  die  in  jest;  ^00 

From  thee  to  die  were  torture  more  than  death: 

O,  let  me  stay,  befall  what  may  befall! 

Queen.  Away!  though  parting  be  a  fretful  corro¬ 
sive. 

It  is  applied  to  a  deathful  wound. 

To  France,  sweet  Suffolk:  let  me  hear  from  thee; 
For  wheresoe’er  thou  art  in  this  world’s  globe. 

I’ll  have  an  Iris  that  shall  find  thee  out. 

Suf.  I  go. 

Queen.  And  take  my  heart  with  thee. 

Suf.  A  jewel,  lock’d  into  the  wofull’st  cask 
That  ever  did  contain  a  thing  of  worth.  ^10 

Even  as  a  splitted  bark,  so  sunder  we: 

This  way  fall  I  to  death. 

Queen.  This  way  for  me. 

[Exeunt  severally. 

Scene  hi.  A  bedchamber 
Enter  the  king,  Salisbury,  Warwick,  to  the 
CARDINAL  in  bed. 

King.  How  fares  my  lord?  speak,  Beaufort,  to 
thy  sovereign. 

Car.  If  thou  be’st  death.  I’ll  give  thee  England’s 
treasure. 

Enough  to  purchase  such  another  island. 

So  thou  wilt  let  me  live,  and  feel  no  pain. 

King.  Ah,  what  a  sign  it  is  of  evil  life. 

Where  death’s  approach  is  seen  so  terrible! 

War.  Beaufort,  it  is  thy  sovereign  speaks  to  thee. 
Car.  Bring  me  unto  my  trial  when  you  will. 

Died  he  not  in  his  bed?  where  should  he  die? 

Can  I  make  men  live,  whether  they  will  or  no?  10 
O,  torture  me  no  more!  I  will  confess. 

Alive  again?  then  show  me  where  he  is: 

I’ll  give  a  thousand  pound  to  look  upon  him. 

He  hath  no  eyes,  the  dust  hath  blinded  them. 
Comb  down  his  hair;  look,  look!  it  stands  up- 

. 

Like  lime-twigs  set  to  catch  my  winged  soul. 
Give  me  some  drink;  and  bid  the  apothecary 
Bring  the  strong  poison  that  I  bought  of  him. 

King.  O  thou  eternal  Mover  of  the  heavens. 
Look  with  a  gentle  eye  upon  this  wretch !  20 

O,  beat  away  the  busy  meddling  fiend 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 
340 


ACT  IV 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


56 

That  lays  strong  siege  unto  this  wretch’s  soul 
And  from  his  bosom  purge  this  black  despair! 
War.  See,  how  the  pangs  of  death  do  make  him 
grin! 

Sal.  Disturb  him  not;  let  him  pass  peaceably. 
King.  Peace  to  his  soul,  if  God’s  good  pleasure 
be! 

Lord  Cardinal,  if  thou  think’st  on  heaven’s  bliss. 
Hold  up  thy  hand,  make  signal  of  thy  hope. 

He  dies,  and  makes  no  sign.  O  God,  forgive 
him!  2p 

War.  So  bad  a  death  argues  a  monstrous  life. 
King.  Forbear  to  judge,  for  we  are  sinners  all. 
Close  up  his  eyes  and  draw  the  curtain  close; 

And  let  us  all  to  meditation.  [Exeunt. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  The  coast  of  Kent  ^ 

Alarum.  Fight  at  sea.  Ordnance  goes  off.  Enter  a 

CAPTAIN,  a  MASTER,  a  MASTEr’s-MATE,  WALTER 
WHITMORE,  and  others;  with  them  Suffolk,  dis¬ 
guised.,  and  other  gentlernen,  prisoners. 

Cap.  The  gaudy,  blabbing  and  remorseful  day 
Is  crept  into  the  bosom  of  the  sea; 

And  now  loud-howling  wolves  arouse  the  jades 
That  drag  the  tragic  melancholy  night; 

Who,  with  their  drowsy,  slow,  and  flagging 
wings. 

Clip  dead  men’s  graves  and  from  their  misty 
jaws 

Breathe  foul  contagious  darkness  in  the  air. 
Therefore  bring  forth  the  soldiers  of  our  prize; 
For,  whilst  out  pinnace  anchors  in  the  Downs, 
Here  shall  they  make  their  ransom  on  the  sand,  10 
Or  with  their  blood  stain  this  discolour’d  shore. 
Master,  this  prisoner  freely  give  I  thee; 

And  thou  that  art  his  mate,  make  boot  of  this; 

The  other,  Walter  Whitmore,  is  thy  share. 
ist  Gent.  What  is  my  ransom,  master?  let  me 
know. 

Mast.  A  thousand  crowns,  or  else  lay  down  your 
head. 

Mate.  And  so  much  shall  you  give,  or  off  goes 
yours. 

Cap.  What,  think  you  much  to  pay  two  thou¬ 
sand  crowns. 

And  bear  the  name  and  port  of  gentlemen? 

Cut  both  the  villains’  throats;  for  die  you  shall: 
The  lives  of  those  which  we  have  lost  in  fight  21 
Be  counterpoised  with  such  a  petty  sum! 

1st  Gent.  I’ll  give  it,  sir;  and  therefore  spare  my 
life. 

2nd  Gent.  And  so  will  I  and  write  home  for  it 
straight. 

Whit.  I  lost  mine  eye  in  laying  the  prize  aboard, 


And  therefore  to  revenge  it,  shalt  thou  die; 

[To  SUFFOLK. 

And  so  should  these,  if  I  might  have  my  will. 

Cap.  Be  not  so  rash;  take  ransom,  let  him  live. 
Suf.  Look  on  my  George;  I  am  a  gentleman; 
Rate  me  at  what  thou  wilt,  thou  shalt  be  paid, 
Whit.  And  so  am  I;  my  name  is  Walter  Whit¬ 
more. 

How  now!  why  start’st  thou?  what,  doth  death 
affright? 

Suf.  Thy  name  affrights  me,  in  whose  sound  is 
death. 

A  cunning  man  did  calculate  my  birth 
And  told  me  that  by  water  I  should  die: 

Yet  let  not  this  make  thee  be  bloody-minded; 
Thy  name  is  Gaultier,  being  rightly  sounded. 
Whit.  Gaultier  or  Walter,  which  it  is,  I  care 
not: 

Never  yet  did  base  dishonour  blur  our  name. 

But  with  our  sword  we  wiped  away  the  blot;  40 
Therefore,  when  merchant-like  I  sell  revenge. 
Broke  be  my  sword,  my  arms  torn  and  defaced. 
And  I  proclaim’d  a  coward  through  the  world! 
Suf.  Stay,  Whitmore;  for  thy  prisoner  is  a 
prince. 

The  Duke  of  Suffolk,  William  de  la  Pole. 

Whit.  The  Duke  of  Suffolk  muffled  up  in 
rags! 

Suf.  Ay,  but  these  rags  are  no  part  of  the 
duke: 

Jove  sometime  went  disguised,  and  why  not  I? 
Cap.  But  Jove  was  never  slain,  as  thou  shalt  be. 
Suf.  Obscure  and  lowly  swain.  King  Henry’s 
blood,  50 

The  honourable  blood  of  Lancaster, 

Must  not  be  shed  by  such  a  jaded  groom. 

Hast  thou  not  kiss’d  thy  hand  and  held  my  stir¬ 
rup? 

Bare-headed  plodded  by  my  foot-cloth  mule 
And  thought  thee  happy  when  I  shook  my  head? 
How  often  hast  thou  waited  at  my  cup. 

Fed  from  my  trencher,  kneel’d  down  at  the 
board. 

When  I  have  feasted  with  Queen  Margaret? 
Remember  it  and  let  it  make  thee  crest-fall’n. 

Ay,  and  allay  this  thy  abortive  pride;  60 

How  in  our  voiding  lobby  hast  thou  stood 
And  duly  waited  for  my  coming  forth? 

This  hand  of  mine  hath  writ  in  thy  behalf 
And  therefore  shall  it  charm  thy  riotous  tongue. 
Whit.  Speak,  captain,  shall  I  stab  the  forlorn 
swain? 

Cap.  First  let  my  words  stab  him,  as  he  hath 
me. 

Suf.  Base  slave,  thy  words  are  blunt  and  so  art 
thou. 


SCENE  I 


SECOND  PART  OF 


Cap.  Convey  him  hence  and  on  our  long-boat’s 
side 

Strike  off  his  head. 

Suf.  Thou  darest  not,  for  thy  own. 

Cap.  Yes,  Pole. 

Suf.  Pole! 

Cap.  Pool!  Sir  Pool!  lord!  70 

Ay,  kennel,  puddle,  sink;  whose  filth  and  dirt 
Troubles  the  silver  spring  where  England  drinks. 
Now  will  I  dam  up  this  thy  yawning  mouth 
For  swallowing  the  treasure  of  the  realm: 

Thy  lips  that  kiss’d  the  queen  shall  sweep  the 
ground; 

And  thou  that  smiled  at  good  Duke  Humphrey’s 
death 

Against  the  senseless  winds  shalt  grin  in  vain. 
Who  in  contempt  shall  hiss  at  thee  again: 

And  wedded  be  thou  to  the  hags  of  hell. 

For  daring  to  afFy  a  mighty  lord  80 

Unto  the  daughter  of  a  worthless  king. 

Having  neither  subject,  wealth,  nor  diadem. 

By  devilish  policy  art  thou  grown  great 
And,  like  ambitious  Sylla,  overgorged 
With  gobbets  of  thy  mother’s  bleeding  heart. 

By  thee  Anjou  and  Maine  were  sold  to  France, 
The  false  revolting  Normans  thorough  thee 
Disdain  to  call  us  lord,  and  Picardy 
Hath  slain  their  governors,  surprised  our  forts 
And  sent  the  ragged  soldiers  wounded  home,  po 
The  princely  Warwick,  and  the  Nevils  all. 
Whose  dreadful  swords  were  never  drawn  in 
vain. 

As  hating  thee,  are  rising  up  in  arms: 

And  now  the  house  of  York,  thrust  from  the 
crown 

By  shameful  murder  of  a  guiltless  king 
And  lofty  proud  encroaching  tyranny. 

Burns  with  revenging  fire;  whose  hopeful  colours 
Advance  our  half-faced  sun,  striving  to  shine. 
Under  the  which  is  writ  ^^Invitis  nubibusT 
The  commons  here  in  Kent  are  up  in  arms :  100 

And,  to  conclude,  reproach  and  beggary 
Is  crept  into  the  palace  of  our  king. 

And  all  by  thee.  Away!  convey  him  hence. 

Suf.  O  that  I  were  a  god,  to  shoot  forth 
thunder 

Upon  these  paltry,  servile,  abject  drudges! 

Small  things  make  base  men  proud:  this  villain 
here. 

Being  captain  of  a  pinnace,  threatens  more 
Than  Bargulus  the  strong  Illyrian  pirate. 

Drones  suck  not  eagles’  blood  but  rob  bee-hives: 
It  is  impossible  that  I  should  die  no 

By  such  a  lowly  vassal  as  thyself. 

Thy  words  move  rage  and  not  remorse  in  me: 

I  go  of  message  from  the  Queen  to  France; 


KING  HENRY  VI  57 

I  charge  thee  waft  me  safely  cross  the  Channel. 
Capt.  Walter, — 

Whit.  Come,  Suffolk,  I  must  waft  thee  to  thy 
death. 

Suf.  Gelidus  timor  occupat  anus,  it  is  thee  I  fear. 
Whit.  Thou  shalt  have  cause  to  fear  before  I 
leave  thee. 

What,  are  ye  daunted  now?  now  will  ye  stoop? 
ist  Gent.  My  gracious  lord,  entreat  him,  speak 
him  fair.  120 

Suf.  Suffolk’s  imperial  tongue  is  stern  and  rough. 
Used  to  command,  untaught  to  plead  for  favour. 
Far  be  it  we  should  honour  such  as  these 
With  humble  suit:  no,  rather  let  my  head 
Stoop  to  the  block  than  these  knees  bow  to  any 
Save  to  the  God  of  heaven  and  to  my  king; 

And  sooner  dance  upon  a  bloody  pole 
Than  stand  uncover’d  to  the  vulgar  groom. 

True  nobility  is  exempt  from  fear: 

More  can  I  bear  than  you  dare  execute.  /50 

Cap.  Hale  him  away,  and  let  him  talk  no  more. 
Suf.  Come,  soldiers,  show  what  cruelty  ye  can, 
That  this  my  death  may  never  be  forgot! 

Great  men  oft  die  by  vile  bezonians: 

A  Roman  sworder  and  banditto  slave 
Murder’d  sweet  Tully;  Brutus’  bastard  hand 
Stabb’d  Julius  Caesar;  savage  islanders 
Pompey  the  Great;  and  Suffolk  dies  by  pirates. 
[Exeunt  whitmore  and  others  with  Suffolk. 
Cap.  And  as  for  these  whose  ransom  we  have 
set. 

It  is  our  pleasure  one  of  them  depart:  1^0 

Therefore  come  you  with  us  and  let  him  go. 

[Exeunt  all  but  the  first  gentleman. 

Re-enter  whitmore  with  Suffolk’s  body. 

Whit.  There  let  his  head  and  lifeless  body  lie. 
Until  the  queen  his  mistress  bury  it.  [Exit. 

istGent.  O  barbarous  and  bloody  spectacle! 

His  body  will  I  bear  unto  the  King: 

If  he  revenge  it  not,  yet  will  his  friends; 

So  will  the  Queen,  that  living  held  him  dear. 

[Exit  with  the  body. 

Scene  ii.  Blackheath 
Enter  bevis  and  john  Holland. 

Bevis.  Come,  and  get  thee  a  sword,  though  made 
of  a  lath:  they  have  been  up  these  two  days. 

Holl.  They  have  the  more  need  to  sleep  now, 
then. 

Bevis.  I  tell  thee.  Jack  Cade  the  clothier  means 
to  dress  the  commonwealth,  and  turn  it,  and  set  a 
new  nap  upon  it. 

Holl.  So  he  had  need,  for  ’tis  threadbare.  Well,  I 
say  it  was  never  merry  world  in  England  since 
gentlemen  came  up.  to 


58  SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


Bevis.  O  miserable  age!  virtue  is  not  regarded  in 
handicrafts-men. 

Holl.  The  nobility  think  scorn  to  go  in  leather 
aprons. 

Bevis,  Nay,  more,  the  King’s  council  are  no  good 
workmen. 

Holl.  True;  and  yet  it  is  said,  “Labour  in  thy 
vocation”;  which  is  as  much  to  say  as,  “Let  the 
magistrates  be  labouring  men;  and  therefore 
should  we  be  magistrates.”  20 

Bevis.  Thou  hast  hit  it;  for  there’s  no  better  sign 
of  a  brave  mind  than  a  hard  hand. 

Holl.  I  see  them!  I  see  them!  There’s  Best’s  son, 
the  tanner  of  Wingham — 

Bevis.  He  shall  have  the  skins  of  our  enemies,  to 
make  dog’s-leather  of. 

Holl.  And  Dick  the  Butcher — 

Bevis.  Then  is  sin  struck  down  like  an  ox,  and 
iniquity’s  throat  cut  like  a  calf. 

Holl.  And  Smith  the  weaver —  50 

Bevis.  Argo,  their  thread  of  life  is  spun. 

Holl.  Come,  come,  let’s  fall  in  with  them. 

Drum.  Enter  cade,  dick  the  Butcher,  smith  the 
Weaver,  a?id  a  Sawyer,  with  infinite  numbers. 

Cade.  We  John  Cade,  so  termed  of  our  supposed 
father — 

Dick.  [Aside]  Or  rather,  of  stealing  a  cade  of 
herrings. 

Cade.  For  our  enemies  shall  fall  before  us,  in¬ 
spired  with  the  spirit  of  putting  down  kings  and 
princes — Command  silence. 

Dick.  Silence!  4.0 

Cade.  My  father  was  a  Mortimer — 

Dick.  [Aside]  He  was  an  honest  man,  and  a  good 
bricklayer. 

Cade.  My  mother  a  Plantagenet — 

Dick.  [Aside]  I  knew  her  well;  she  was  a  mid¬ 
wife. 

Cade.  My  wife  descended  of  the  Lacies — 

Dick.  [Aside]  She  was,  indeed,  a  pedler’s  daugh¬ 
ter,  and  sold  many  laces.  4P 

Smith.  [Aside]  But  now  of  late,  not  able  to  travel 
with  her  furred  pack,  she  washes  bucks  here  at 
home. 

Cade.  Therefore  am  I  of  an  honourable  house. 
Dick.  [Aside]  Ay,  by  my  faith,  the  field  is  hon¬ 
ourable;  and  there  was  he  born,  under  a  hedge, 
for  his  father  had  never  a  house  but  the  cage. 

Cade.  Valiant  I  am. 

Smith.  [Aside]  A’  must  needs;  for  beggary  is 
valiant. 

Cade.  I  am  able  to  endure  much.  60 

Dick.  [Aside]  No  question  of  that:  for  I  have 
seen  him  whipped  three  market-days  together. 
Cade.  I  fear  neither  sword  nor  fire. 


Smith.  [Aside]  He  need  not  fear  the  sword;  for 
his  coat  is  of  proof. 

Dick.  [Aside]  But  methinks  he  should  stand  in 
fear  of  fire,  being  burnt  i’  the  hand  for  stealing  of 
sheep. 

Cade.  Be  brave,  then;  for  your  captain  is  brave, 
and  vows  reformation.  There  shall  be  in  England 
seven  halfpenny  loaves  sold  for  a  penny:  the 
three-hooped  pot  shall  have  ten  hoops;  and  I  will 
make  it  felony  to  drink  small  beer:  all  the  realm 
shall  be  in  common;  and  in  Cheapside  shall  my 
palfry  go  to  grass:  and  when  I  am  king,  as  king  I 
will  be — 

All.  God  save  your  majesty! 

Cade.  I  thank  you,  good  people:  there  shall  be 
no  money;  all  shall  eat  and  drink  on  my  score; 
and  I  will  apparel  them  all  in  one  livery,  that  they 
may  agree  like  brothers  and  worship  me  their 
lord. 

Dick.  The  lirst  thing  we  do,  let’s  kill  all  the 
lawyers. 

Cade.  Nay,  that  I  mean  to  do.  Is  not  this  a  la¬ 
mentable  thing,  that  of  the  skin  of  an  innocent 
Iamb  should  be  made  parchment?  that  parchment, 
being  scribbled  o’er,  should  undo  a  man?  Some 
say  the  bee  stings:  but  I  say,  ’tis  the  bee’s  wax; 
for  I  did  but  seal  once  to  a  thing,  and  I  was  never 
mine  own  man  since.  How  now!  who’s  there?  ^1 

Enter  some,  bringing  forward  the  clerk  of 

CHATHAM. 

Smith.  The  clerk  of  Chatham :  he  can  write  and 
read  and  cast  accompt. 

Cade.  O  monstrous! 

Smith.  We  took  him  setting  of  boys’  copies. 

Cade.  Here’s  a  villain! 

Smith.  Has  a  book  in  his  pocket  with  red  letters 
in’t. 

Cade.  Nay,  then,  he  is  a  conjurer. 

Dick.  Nay,  he  can  make  obligations,  and  write 
court-hand.  101 

Cade.  I  am  sorry  for’t:  the  man  is  a  proper  man, 
of  mine  honour;  unless  I  find  him  guilty,  he  shall 
not  die.  Come  hither,  sirrah,  I  must  examine  thee: 
what  is  thy  name? 

Clerk.  Emmanuel. 

Dick.  They  use  to  write  it  on  the  top  of  letters: 
’twill  go  hard  with  you. 

Cade.  Let  me  alone.  Dost  thou  use  to  write  thy 
name?  or  hast  thou  a  mark  to  thyself,  like  an 
honest  plain-dealing  man?  iii 

Clerk.  Sir,  I  thank  God,  I  have  been  so  well 
brought  up  that  I  can  write  my  name. 

All.  He  hath  confessed:  away  with  him!  he’s  a 
villain  and  a  traitor. 

Cade.  Away  with  him,  I  say!  hang  him  with  his 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


pen  and  ink-horn  about  his  neck. 

[Exit  one  'ivith  the  clerk. 

Enter  mighael. 

Mich.  Where’s  our  general? 

Cade.  Here  I  am,  thou  particular  fellow.  119 
Mich.  Fly,  fly,  fly!  Sir  Humphrey  Stafford  and 
his  brother  are  hard  by,  with  the  King’s  forces. 

Cade.  Stand,  villain,  stand,  or  I’ll  fell  thee  down. 
He  shall  be  encountered  with  a  man  as  good  as 
himself:  he  is  but  a  knight,  is  a’? 

Mich.  No. 

Cade.  To  equal  him,  I  will  make  myself  a  knight 
presently.  [Kneels]  Rise  up  Sir  John  Mortimer. 
Now  have  at  him! 

Enter  sir  Humphrey  Stafford  and  william 
STAFFORD,  Ms  Brother,  with  drum  and  soldiers. 

H.  Staf.  Rebellious  hinds,  the  filth  and  scum  of 
Kent,  ISO 

Mark’d  for  the  gallows,  lay  your  weapons  down; 
Home  to  your  cottages,  forsake  this  groom: 

The  King  is  merciful,  if  you  revolt. 

W.  Staf.  But  angry,  wrathful,  and  inclined  to 
blood. 

If  you  go  forward;  therefore  yield,  or  die. 

Cade.  As  for  these  silken-coated  slaves,  I  pass 
not: 

It  is  to  you,  good  people,  that  I  speak. 

Over  whom,  in  time  to  come,  I  hope  to  reign; 

For  I  am  rightful  heir  unto  the  crown. 

H.  Staf.  Villain,  thy  father  was  a  plasterer; 

And  thou  thyself  a  shearman,  art  thou  not? 

Cade.  And  Adam  was  a  gardener. 

W.  Staf.  And  what  of  that? 

Cade.  Marry  this:  Edmund  Mortimer,  Earl  of 
March, 

Married  the  Duke  of  Clarence’  daughter,  did  he 
not? 

H.  Staf.  Ay,  sir. 

Cade.  By  her  he  had  two  children  at  one  birth. 

W.  Staf.  That’s  false. 

Cade.  Ay,  there’s  the  question;  but  I  say,  ’tis 
true: 

The  elder  of  them,  being  put  to  nurse,  /yo 

Was  by  a  beggar-woman  stolen  away; 

And,  ignorant  of  his  birth  and  parentage. 

Became  a  bricklayer  when  he  came  to  age: 

His  son  am  I;  deny  it,  if  you  can. 

Dick.  Nay,  ’tis  too  true;  therefore  he  shall  be 

king. 

Smith.  Sir,  he  made  a  chimney  in  my  father’s 
house,  and  the  bricks  are  alive  at  this  day  to  testi¬ 
fy  it;  therefore  deny  it  not. 

H.  Staf.  And  will  you  credit  this  base  drudge’s 
words. 


That  speaks  he  knows  not  what?  160 

All.  Ay,  marry,  will  we;  therefore  get  ye  gone. 
W.  Staf.  Jack  Cade,  the  Duke  of  York  hath 
taught  you  this. 

Cade.  [A-side]  He  lies,  for  I  invented  it  myself. 
Go  to,  sirrah,  tell  the  King  from  me,  that,  for  his 
father’s  sake,  Henry  the  Fifth,  in  whose  time 
boys  went  to  span-counter  for  French  crowns,  I 
am  content  he  shall  reign;  but  I’ll  be  Protector 
over  him. 

Dick.  And  furthermore,  we’ll  have  the  Lord 
Say’s  head  for  selling  the  dukedom  of  Maine.  /70 
Cade.  And  good  reason;  for  thereby  is  England 
mained,  and  fain  to  go  with  a  staff,  but  that  my 
puissance  holds  it  up.  Fellow  kings,  I  tell  you  that 
that  Lord  Say  hath  gelded  the  commonwealth, 
and  made  it  an  eunuch:  and  more  than  that,  he 
can  speak  French;  and  therefore  he  is  a  traitor. 

H.  Staf.  O  gross  and  miserable  ignorance! 

Cade.  Nay,  answer,  if  you  can:  the  Frenchmen 
are  our  enemies;  go  to,  then,  I  ask  but  this:  can 
he  that  speaks  with  the  tongue  of  an  enemy  be  a 
good  counsellor,  or  no? 

All.  No,  no;  and  therefore  we’ll  have  his  head. 
W.  Staf.  Well,  seeing  gentle  words  will  not  pre¬ 
vail. 

Assail  them  with  the  army  of  the  King. 

H.  Staf.  Herald,  away;  and  throughout  every 
town 

Proclaim  them  traitors  that  are  up  with  Cade; 
That  those  which  fly  before  the  battle  ends 
May,  even  in  their  wives’  and  children’s  sight. 

Be  hang’ d  up  for  example  at  thei r  doors :  /y  o 

And  you  that  be  the  King’s  friends,  follow  me. 

[Exeunt  the  two  staffords,  and  soldiers. 
Cade.  And  you  that  love  the  commons,  follow 
me. 

Now  show  yourselves  men;  ’tis  for  liberty. 

We  will  not  leave  one  lord,  one  gentleman: 

Spare  none  but  such  as  go  in  clouted  shoon; 

For  they  are  thrifty  honest  men  and  such 
As  would,  but  that  they  dare  not,  take  our  pafts. 
Dick.  They  are  all  in  order  and  march  toward 
us. 

Cade.  But  then  are  we  in  order  when  we  are 
most  out  of  order.  Come,  march  forward.  200 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Another  part  of  Blackheath 
Alarums  to  the  fight,  wherein  both  the  staffords 
are  slain.  Enter  cade  and  the  rest. 

Cade.  Where’s  Dick,  the  butcher  of  Ashford? 
Dick.  Here,  sir. 

Cade.  They  fell  before  thee  like  sheep  and  oxen, 
and  thou  behavedst  thyself  as  if  thou  hadst  been 
in  thine  own  slaughter-house:  therefore  thus  will 


6o 


ACT  IV 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


I  reward  thee,  the  Lent  shall  be  as  long  again  as 
it  is;  and  thou  shalt  have  a  license  to  kill  for  a 
hundred  lacking  one. 

Dick.  I  desire  no  more.  lo 

Cade.  And,  to  speak  truth,  thou  deservest  no 
less.  This  monument  of  the  victory  will  I  bear 
[putting  on  Sir  Humphrey  $  brigandine] ;  and  the 
bodies  shall  be  dragged  at  my  horse  heels  till  I  do 
come  to  London,  where  we  will  have  the  mayor’s 
sword  borne  before  us. 

Dtck.  If  we  mean  to  thrive  and  do  good,  break 
open  the  gaols  and  let  out  the  prisoners. 

Cade.  Fear  not  that,  I  warrant  thee.  Come,  let’s 
march  towards  London.  [Exeunt.  20 

Scene  iv.  London:  The  palace 
Enter  the  king  'with  a  supplication.,  and  the  queen 
'with  Suffolk's  heady  the  duke  of  Buckingham 
and  the  lord  say. 

Queen.  Oft  have  I  heard  that  grief  softens  the 
mind 

And  makes  it  fearful  and  degenerate; 

Think  therefore  on  revenge  and  cease  to  weep. 
But  who  can  cease  to  weep  and  look  on  this? 

Here  may  his  head  lie  on  my  throbbing  breast: 
But  where’s  the  body  that  I  should  embrace? 

Buck.  What  answer  makes  your  grace  to  the 
rebel’s  supplication? 

King.  I’ll  send  some  holy  bishop  to  entreat; 

For  God  forbid  so  many  simple  souls  10 

Should  perish  by  the  sword!  And  I  myself. 

Rather  than  bloody  war  shall  cut  them  short, 

Will  parley  with  Jack  Cade  their  general: 

But  stay.  I’ll  read  it  over  once  again. 

Queen.  Ah,  barbarous  villains!  hath  this  lovely 
face 

Ruled,  like  a  wandering  planet,  over  me. 

And  could  it  not  enforce  them  to  relent. 

That  were  unworthy  to  behold  the  same? 

King.  Lord  Say,  Jack  Cade  hath  sworn  to  have 
thy  head. 

S^ry.  Ay,  but  I  hope  your  Highness  shall  have 
his.  20 

King.  How  now,  madam! 

Still  lamenting  and  mourning  for  Suffolk’s  death? 
1  fear  me,  love,  if  that  I  had  been  dead. 

Thou  wouldest  not  have  mourn’d  so  much  for  me. 
Queen.  No,  my  love,  I  should  not  mourn,  but 
die  for  thee. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

King.  How  now!  what  news?  why  comest  thou 
in  such  haste? 

Mess.  The  rebels  are  in  Southwark;  fly,  my  lord! 
Jack  Cade  proclaims  himself  Lord  Mortimer, 
Descended  from  the  Duke  of  Clarence’  house. 


And  calls  your  Grace  usurper  openly  50 

And  vows  to  crown  himself  in  Westminster. 

His  army  is  a  ragged  multitude 

Of  hinds  and  peasants,  rude  and  merciless: 

Sir  Humphrey  Stafford  and  his  brother’s  death 
Hath  given  them  heart  and  courage  to  proceed: 
All  scholars,  lawyers,  courtiers,  gentlemen, 

They  call  false  caterpillars  and  intend  their  death. 
King.  O  graceless  men!  they  know  not  what 
they  do. 

Buck.  My  gracious  lord,  retire  to  Killingworth, 
Until  a  power  be  raised  to  put  them  down.  40 
Queen.  Ah,  were  the  Duke  of  Suffolk  now  alive. 
These  Kentish  rebels  would  be  soon  appeased! 

King.  Lord  Say,  the  traitors  hate  thee; 
Therefore  away  with  us  to  Killingworth. 

Say.  So  might  your  Grace’s  person  be  in  danger. 
The  sight  of  me  is  odious  in  their  eyes; 

And  therefore  in  this  city  will  I  stay 
And  live  alone  as  secret  as  I  may. 

Enter  another  messenger. 

Mess.  Jack  Cade  hath  gotten  London  bridge: 
The  citizens  fly  and  forsake  their  houses :  50 

The  rascal  people,  thirsting  after  prey. 

Join  with  the  traitor,  and  they  jointly  swear 
To  spoil  the  city  and  your  royal  court. 

Buck.  Then  linger  not,  my  lord;  away,  take 
horse. 

King.  Come,  Margaret;  God,  our  hope,  will 
succour  us. 

Queen.  My  hope  is  gone,  now  Suffolk  is  de¬ 
ceased. 

King.  Farewell,  my  lord:  trust  not  the  Kentish 
rebels. 

Buck.  Trust  nobody,  for  fear  you  be  betray’d. 
Say.  The  trust  I  have  is  in  mine  innocence. 

And  therefore  am  1  bold  and  resolute.  60 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  London:  The  Tower 
Enter  lord  scales  upon  the  To'wer^  'walking. 
Then  enter  t'wo  or  three  citizens  belo'W. 

Scales.  How  now!  is  Jack  Cade  slain? 
ist  Cit.  No,  my  lord,  nor  likely  to  be  slain;  for 
they  have  won  the  bridge,  killing  all  those  that 
withstand  them:  the  Lord  Mayor  craves  aid  of 
your  honour  from  the  Tower  to  defend  the  city 
from  the  rebels. 

Scales.  Such  aid  as  I  can  spare  you  shall  com¬ 
mand; 

But  I  am  troubled  here  with  them  myself; 

The  rebels  have  assay’d  to  win  the  Tower. 

But  get  you  to  Smithfield  and  gather  head,  10 
And  thither  I  will  send  you  Matthew  Goffe; 

Fight  for  your  King,  your  country  and  your  lives ; 


SCENE  V 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


And  so,  farewell,  for  I  must  hence  again. 

[Exeunt, 

Scene  vi.  London:  Cannon  Street 
Enter  jack  cade  and  the  rest,,  and  strikes 
his  staff  on  London-stone. 

Cade.  Now  is  Mortimer  lord  of  this  city.  And 
here,  sitting  upon  London-stone,  I  charge  and 
command  that,  of  the  city’s  cost,  the  pissing- 
conduit  run  nothing  but  claret  wine  this  first  year 
of  our  reign.  And  now  henceforward  it  shall  be 
treason  for  any  that  calls  me  other  than  Lord 
Mortimer. 

Enter  a  soldier,  running. 

Sold.  Jack  Cade!  Jack  Cade! 

Cade.  Knock  him  down  there.  [They  kill  him.] 
Smith.  If  this  fellow  be  wise,  he’ll  never  call 
ye  Jack  Cade  more:  I  think  he  hath  a  very  fair 
warning. 

Dick.  My  lord,  there’s  an  army  gathered  to¬ 
gether  in  Smithfield. 

Cade.  Come,  then,  let’s  go  fight  with  them: 
but  first,  go  and  set  London  bridge  on  fire:  and, 
if  you  can,  burn  down  the  Tower  too.  Come, 
let’s  away.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  vii.  London:  Smithfield 
Alarums,  matthew  goffe  is  slain.,  and  all  the 
rest.  Then  enter  jack  cade,  ivith  his  company. 
Cade.  So,  sirs:  now  go  some  and  pull  down  the 
Savoy;  others  to  the  inns  of  court;  down  with 
them  all. 

Dick.  I  have  a  suit  unto  your  lordship. 

Cade.  Be  it  a  lordship,  thou  shalt  have  it  for  that 
word. 

Dick.  Only  that  the  laws  of  England  may  come 
out  of  your  mouth. 

Holl.  [Aside]  Mass,  ’twill  be  sore  law,  then; 
for  he  was  thrust  in  the  mouth  with  a  spear,  and 
’tis  not  whole  yet.  u 

Smith.  [Aside]  Nay,  John,  it  will  be  stinking 
law;  for  his  breath  stinks  with  eating  toasted 
cheese. 

Cade.  I  have  thought  upon  it,  it  shall  be  so. 
Away,  burn  all  the  records  of  the  realm:  my 
mouth  shall  be  the  parliament  of  England. 

Holl.  [Aside]  Then  we  are  like  to  have  biting 
statutes,  unless  his  teeth  be  pulled  out. 

Cade.  And  henceforward  all  things  shall  be  in 
common.  21 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  My  lord,  a  prize,  a  prize!  here’s  the  Lord 
Say,  which  sold  the  towns  in  France;  he  that 
made  us  pay  one  and  twenty  fifteens,  and  one 


61 

shilling  to  the  pound,  the  last  subsidy. 

Enter  GiioxKGK  bevis,  'vcith  the  lord  say. 
CadeMJcW.,  he  shall  be  beheaded  for  it  ten  times. 
Ah,  thou  say,  thou  serge,  nay  thou  buckram 
lord!  now  art  thou  within  point-blank  of  our 
jurisdiction  regal.  What  canst  thou  answer  to 
my  Majesty  for  giving  up  of  Normandy  unto 
Mounsieur  Basimecu,  the  dauphin  of  France? 
Be  it  known  unto  thee  by  these  presence,  even 
the  presence  of  Lord  Mortimer,  that  I  am  the 
besom  that  must  sweep  the  court  clean  of  such 
filth  as  thou  art.  Thou  hast  most  traitorously 
corrupted  the  youth  of  the  realm  in  erecting  a 
grammar  school:  and  whereas,  before,  our  fore¬ 
fathers  had  no  other  books  but  the  score  and  the 
tally,  thou  hast  caused  printing  to  be  used,  and, 
contrary  to  the  King,  his  crown  and  dignity,  thou 
hast  built  a  paper-mill.  It  will  be  proved  to  thy 
face  that  thou  hast  men  about  thee  that  usually 
talk  of  a  noun  and  a  verb,  and  such  abominable 
words  as  no  Christian  ear  can  endure  to  hear. 
Thou  hast  appointed  justices  of  peace,  to  call 
poor  men  before  them  about  matters  they  were 
not  able  to  answer.  Moreover,  thou  hast  put 
them  in  prison;  and,  because  they  could  not  read, 
thou  hast  hanged  them;  when,  indeed,  only  for 
that  cause  they  have  been  most  worthy  to  live. 
Thou  dost  ride  in  a  foot-cloth,  dost  thou  not? 
S^y.What  of  that? 

Cade.  Marry,  thou  oughtest  not  to  let  thy  horse 
wear  a  cloak,  when  honester  men  than  thou  go  in 
their  hose  and  doublets. 

Dick.  And  work  in  their  shirt  too;  as  myself, 
for  example,  that  am  a  butcher. 

Say.  You  men  of  Kent — 

D/V^.What  say  you  of  Kent?  60 

Say.  Nothing  but  this;  ’tis  ''bona  terra.,  mala 
gensT 

Cade.  Away  with  him,  away  with  him!  he 
speaks  Latin. 

Say.  Hear  me  but  speak,  and  bear  me  where  you 
will. 

Kent,  in  the  Commentaries  Caesar  writ. 

Is  term’d  the  civil’st  place  of  all  this  isle: 

Sweet  is  the  country,  because  full  riches; 

The  people  liberal,  valiant,  active,  wealthy; 
Which  makes  me  hope  you  are  not  void  of  pity. 

I  sold  not  Maine,  I  lost  not  Normandy,  70 

Yet,  to  recover  them,  would  lose  my  life. 

Justice  with  favour  have  I  always  done; 

Prayers  and  tears  have  moved  me,  gifts  could 
never. 

When  have  I  aught  exacted  at  your  hands. 

But  to  maintain  the  King,  the  realm  and  you? 
Large  gifts  have  I  bestow’d  on  learned  clerks. 
Because  my  book  preferr’d  me  to  the  King, 


62 

And  seeing  ignorance  is  the  curse  of  God, 
Knowledge  the  wing  wherewith  we  fly  to  heaven, 
Unless  you  be  possess’d  with  devilish  spirits,  8o 
You  cannot  but  forbear  to  murder  me: 

This  tongue  hath  parley’d  unto  foreign  kings 
For  your  behoof — 

Cade.  Tut,  when  struck’st  thou  one  blow  in  the 
field? 

Say.  Great  men  have  reaching  hands:  oft  have  I 
struck 

Those  that  I  never  saw  and  struck  them  dead. 

Geo.  O  monstrous  coward!  what,  to  come  be¬ 
hind  folks? 

Say.  These  cheeks  are  pale  for  watching  for 
your  good.  po 

Cade.  Give  him  a  box  o’  the  ear  and  that  will 
make  ’em  red  again. 

Say.  Long  sitting  to  determine  poor  men’s 
causes 

Hath  made  me  full  of  sickness  and  diseases. 

Cade.  Ye  shall  have  a  hempen  caudle  then  and 
the  help  of  hatchet. 

Dick.  Why  dost  thou  quiver,  man? 

Say.  The  palsy,  and  not  fear,  provokes  me. 

Cade.  Nay,  he  nods  at  us,  as  who  should  say, 
“I’ll  be  even  with  you”:  I’ll  see  if  his  head  will 
stand  steadier  on  a  pole,  or  no.  Take  him  away, 
and  behead  him. 

Say.  Tell  me  wherein  have  I  offended  most? 
Have  I  affected  wealth  or  honour?  speak. 

Are  my  chests  fill’d  up  with  extorted  gold? 

Is  my  apparel  sumptuous  to  behold? 

Whom  have  I  injured,  that  ye  seek  my  death? 
These  hands  are  free  from  guiltless  blood-shed- 
ding. 

This  breast  from  harbouring  foul  deceitful 
thoughts. 

O,  let  me  live!  no 

Cade.  [Aside]  1  feel  remorse  in  myself  with  his 
words;  but  I’ll  bridle  it:  he  shall  die,  an  it  be  but 
for  pleading  so  well  for  his  life.  Away  with  him! 
he  has  a  familiar  under  his  tongue;  he  speaks  not 
o’  God’s  name.  Go,  take  him  away,  I  say,  and 
strike  off  his  head  presently;  and  then  break  into 
his  son-in-law’s  house.  Sir  James  Cromer,  and 
strike  off  his  head,  and  bring  them  both  upon  two 
poles  hither. 

All.  It  shall  be  done.  120 

Say.  Ah,  countrymen!  if  when  you  make  your 
prayers, 

God  should  be  so  obdurate  as  yourselves. 

How  would  it  fare  with  your  departed  souls? 

And  therefore  yet  relent,  and  save  my  life. 

Cade.  Away  with  him!  and  do  as  I  command  ye. 

[Exeunt  some  with  lord  say. 
The  proudest  peer  in  the  realm  shall  not  wear  a 


ACT  IV 

head  on  his  shoulders,  unless  he  pay  me  tribute; 
there  shall  not  a  maid  be  married,  but  she  shall 
pay  to  me  her  maidenhead  ere  they  have  it:  men 
shall  hold  of  me  in  capite;  and  we  charge  and  com¬ 
mand  that  their  wives  be  as  free  as  heart  can  wish 
or  tongue  can  tell. 

Dick.  My  lord,  when  shall  we  go  to  Cheapside 
and  take  up  commodities  upon  our  bills? 

Cade.  Marry,  presently. 

All.  O,  brave! 

Re-enter  one  with  the  heads. 

Cade.  But  is  not  this  braver?  Let  them  kiss  one 
another,  for  they  loved  well  when  they  were 
alive.  Now  part  them  again,  lest  they  consult 
about  the  giving  up  of  some  more  towns  in 
France.  Soldiers,  defer  the  spoil  of  the  city  until 
night:  for  with  these  borne  before  us,  instead  of 
of  maces,  will  we  ride  through  the  streets;  and 
at  every  corner  have  them  kiss.  Away!  [Exeunt, 

Scene  viii.  Southwark 
Alarum  and  retreat.  Enter  cade  and  all 
his  rabblement. 

Cade.  Up  Fish  Street!  down  Saint  Magnus’ 
Corner!  kill  and  knock  down!  throw  them  into 
Thames!  [Sound  a  parley.]  What  noise  is  this  I 
hear?  Dare  any  be  so  bold  to  sound  retreat  or 
parley,  when  I  command  them  kill? 

Enter  Buckingham  and  old  Clifford,  attended. 

Buck.  Ay,  here  they  be  that  dare  and  will  disturb 
thee: 

Know,  Cade,  we  come  ambassadors  from  the 
King 

Unto  the  commons  whom  thou  hast  misled; 

And  here  pronounce  free  pardon  to  them  all 
That  will  forsake  thee  and  go  home  in  peace.  10 
Clif.  What  say  ye,  countrymen?  will  ye  relent. 
And  yield  to  mercy  whilst  ’tis  offer’d  you; 

Or  let  a  rebel  lead  you  to  your  deaths? 

Who  loves  the  King  and  will  embrace  his  pardon. 
Fling  up  his  cap,  and  say  “God  save  his  Ma¬ 
jesty!” 

Who  hateth  him  and  honours  not  his  father, 

Henry  the  Fifth,  that  made  all  France  to  quake. 
Shake  he  his  weapon  at  us  and  pass  by. 

All.  God  save  the  King!  God  save  the  King! 

Cade.  What,  Buckingham  and  Clifford,  are  ye 
so  brave?  And  you,  base  peasants,  do  ye  believe 
him?  will  you  needs  be  hanged  with  your  pardons 
about  your  necks?  Hath  my  sword  therefore 
broke  through  London  gates,  that  you  should 
leave  me  at  the  White  Hart  in  Southwark?  I 
thought  ye  would  never  have  given  out  these 
arms  till  you  had  recovered  your  ancient  free- 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


SCENE  VIII 


63 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


dom:  but  you  are  all  recreants  and  dastards,  and 
delight  to  live  in  slavery  to  the  nobility.  Let  them 
break  your  backs  with  burthens,  take  your  houses 
over  your  heads,  ravish  your  wives  and  daugh¬ 
ters  before  your  faces:  for  me,  I  will  make  shift 
for  one;  and  so,  God’s  curse  light  upon  you  all! 
AIL  We’ll  follow  Cade,  we’ll  follow  Cade! 

Cltf.  Is  Cade  the  son  of  Henry  the  Fifth, 

That  thus  you  do  exclaim  you’ll  go  with  him? 
Will  he  conduct  you  through  the  heart  of  France, 
And  make  the  meanest  of  you  earls  and  dukes? 
Alas,  he  hath  no  home,  no  place  to  fly  to;  40 
Nor  knows  he  how  to  live  but  by  the  spoil. 

Unless  by  robbing  of  your  friends  and  us. 

Were’t  not  a  sbame,  that  whilst  you  live  at  jar. 
The  fearful  French,  whom  you  late  vanquished. 
Should  make  a  start  o’er  seas  and  vanquish  you? 
Methinks  already  in  this  civil  broil 
I  see  them  lording  it  in  London  streets. 

Crying  “  VilliagoV'  unto  all  they  meet. 

Better  ten  thousand  base-born  Cades  miscarry  45^ 
Than  you  should  stoop  unto  a  Frenchman’s 
mercy. 

To  France,  to  France,  and  get  what  you  have 
lost; 

Spare  England,  for  it  is  your  native  coast: 

Henry  hath  money,  you  are  strong  and  manly; 
God  on  our  side,  doubt  not  of  victory. 

All.  A  Clifford!  a  Clifford!  we’ll  follow  the 
King  and  Clifford. 

Cade.  Was  ever  feather  so  lightly  blown  to  and 
fro  as  this  multitude?  The  name  of  Henry  the 
Fifth  hales  them  to  an  hundred  mischiefs  and 
makes  them  leave  me  desolate.  I  see  them  lay 
their  heads  together  to  surprise  me.  My  sword 
make  way  for  me,  for  here  is  no  staying.  In  de¬ 
spite  of  the  devils  and  hell,  through  the  very 
middest  of  you!  and  heavens  and  honour  be  wit¬ 
ness  that  no  want  of  resolution  in  me,  but  only 
my  followers’  base  and  ignominious  treasons, 
makes  me  betake  me  to  my  heels.  [Exit. 

Buck.  What,  is  he  fled?  Go  some,  and  follow 
him; 

And  he  that  brings  his  head  unto  the  King 
Shall  have  a  thousand  crowns  for  his  reward.  70 
[Exeunt  some  of  them. 
Follow  me,  soldiers:  we’ll  devise  a  mean 
To  reconcile  you  all  unto  the  King.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ix.  Kenilworth  Castle 
Sound  trumpets.  Enter  king,  queen,  and 
SOMERSET,  on  the  terrace. 

King.  Was  ever  king  that  joy’d  an  earthly 
throne. 

And  could  command  no  more  content  than  I? 

No  sooner  was  I  crept  out  of  my  cradle 


But  I  was  made  a  king,  at  nine  months  old. 

Was  never  subject  long’d  to  be  a  king 
As  I  do  long  and  wish  to  be  a  subject. 

Enter  Buckingham  and  old  Clif  ford. 

Buck.  Health  and  glad  tidings  to  your  Majesty! 
King.  Why,  Buckingham,  is  the  traitor  Cade 
surprised? 

Or  is  he  but  retired  to  make  him  strong? 

Enter y  below.,  multitudes.,  with  halters  about 
their  necks. 

Clif.  He  is  fled,  my  lord,  and  all  his  powers  do 
yield;  10 

And  humbly  thus,  with  halters  on  their  necks. 
Expect  your  Highness’  doom,  of  life  or  death. 
King.  Then,  heaven,  set  ope  thy  everlasting 
gates. 

To  entertain  my  vows  of  thanks  and  praise! 
Soldiers,  this  day  have  you  redeem’d  your  lives 
And  show’d  how  well  you  love  your  prince  and 
country: 

Continue  still  in  this  so  good  a  mind. 

And  Henry,  though  he  be  infortunate. 

Assure  yourselves,  will  never  be  unkind: 

And  so,  with  thanks  and  pardon  to  you  all,  20 
I  do  dismiss  you  to  your  several  countries. 

All.  God  save  the  King!  God  save  the  King! 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  Please  it  your  grace  to  be  advertised 
The  Duke  of  York  is  newly  come  from  Ireland, 
And  with  a  puissant  and  a  mighty  power 
Of  gallowglasses  and  stout  kerns 
Is  marching  hitherward  in  proud  array. 

And  still  proclaimeth,  as  he  comes  along. 

His  arms  are  only  to  remove  from  thee 
The  Duke  of  Somerset,  whom  he  terms  a  traitor. 
King.  Thus  stands  my  state,  ’twixt  Cade  and 
York  distress’d;  5/ 

Like  to  a  ship  that,  having  ’scaped  a  tempest. 

Is  straightway  calm’d  and  boarded  with  a  pirate: 
But  now  is  Cade  driven  back,  his  men  dispersed; 
And  now  is  York  in  arms  to  second  him. 

I  pray  thee,  Buckingham,  go  and  meet  him. 

And  ask  him  what’s  the  reason  of  these  arms. 

Tell  him  I’ll  send  Duke  Edmund  to  the  Tower; 
And,  Somerset,  we  will  commit  thee  thither. 
Until  his  army  be  dismiss’d  from  him.  40 

Som.  My  lord. 

I’ll  yield  myself  to  prison  willingly. 

Or  unto  death,  to  do  my  country  good. 

King.  In  any  case,  be  not  too  rough  in  terms; 

For  he  is  fierce  and  cannot  brook  hard  language. 

Buck.  I  will,  my  lord;  and  doubt  not  so  to  deal 
As  all  things  shall  redound  unto  your  good. 


64  SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


King.  Come,  wife,  let’s  in,  and  learn  to  govern 
better; 

For  yet  may  England  curse  my  wretched  reign. 

{Flourish.  Exeunt. 

Scene  x.  Kent:  I  den's  garden 
Enter  cade. 

Cade.  Fie  on  ambition!  fie  on  myself,  that  have  a 
sword,  and  yet  am  ready  to  famish!  These  five 
days  have  I  hid  me  in  these  woods  and  durst  not 
peep  out,  for  all  the  country  is  laid  for  me;  but 
now  am  I  so  hungry  that  if  I  might  have  a  lease 
of  my  life  for  a  thousand  years  I  could  stay 
no  longer.  Wherefore,  on  a  brick  wall  have  I 
climbed  into  this  garden,  to  see  if  I  can  eat  grass, 
or  pick  a  sallet  another  while,  which  is  not  amiss 
to  cool  a  man’s  stomach  this  hot  weather.  And  I 
think  this  word  “sallet”  was  born  to  do  me  good: 
for  many  a  time,  but  for  a  sallet,  my  brain-pan 
had  been  cleft  with  a  brown  bill;  and  many  a 
time,  when  I  have  been  dry  and  bravely  march¬ 
ing,  it  hath  served  me  instead  of  a  quart  pot  to 
drink  in;  and  now  the  word  “sallet”  must  serve 
me  to  feed  on. 

Enter  iden. 

Iden.  Lord,  who  would  live  turmoiled  in  the 
court. 

And  may  enjoy  such  quiet  walks  as  these? 

This  small  inheritance  my  father  left  me  20 
Content eth  me,  and  worth  a  monarchy. 

I  seek  not  to  wax  great  by  others’  waning. 

Or  gather  wealth,  I  care  not,  with  what  envy: 
Sufficeth  that  I  have  maintains  my  state 
And  sends  the  poor  well  pleased  from  my  gate. 

Cade.  Here’s  the  lord  of  the  soil  come  to  seize 
me  for  a  stray,  for  entering  his  fee-simple  with¬ 
out  leave.  Ah,  villain,  thou  wilt  betray  me,  and 
get  a  thousand  crowns  of  the  King  by  carrying 
my  head  to  him:  but  I’ll  make  thee  eat  iron  like 
an  ostrich,  and  swallow  my  sword  like  a  great 
pin,  ere  thou  and  I  part. 

Iden.  Why,  rude  companion,  whatsoe’er  thou  be, 
I  know  thee  not;  why,  then  should  I  betray  thee? 
Is’t  not  enough  to  break  into  my  garden, 

And,  like  a  thief,  to  come  to  rob  my  grounds. 
Climbing  my  walls  in  spite  of  me  the  owner, 

But  thou  wilt  brave  me  with  these  saucy  terms? 

Cade.  Brave  thee!  ay,  by  the  best  blood  that  ever 
was  broached,  and  beard  thee  too.  Look  on  me 
well:  I  have  eat  no  meat  these  five  days;  yet, 
come  thou  and  thy  five  men,  and  if  I  do  not  leave 
you  all  as  dead  as  a  door-nail,  I  pray  God  I  may 
never  eat  grass  more. 

Iden.  Nay,  it  shall  ne’er  be  said,  while  England 
stands. 


That  Alexander  Iden,  an  esquire  of  Kent, 

Took  odds  to  combat  a  poor  famish’d  man. 
Oppose  thy  steadfasf-gazing  eyes  to  mine. 

See  if  thou  canst  outface  me  with  thy  looks: 

Set  limb  to  limb,  and  thou  art  far  the  lesser;  50 
Thy  hand  is  but  a  finger  to  my  fist. 

Thy  leg  a  stick  compared  with  this  truncheon; 
My  foot  shall  fight  with  all  the  strength  thou  hast; 
And  if  mine  arm  be  heaved  in  the  air. 

Thy  grave  is  digg’d  already  in  the  earth. 

As  for  words,  whose  greatness  answers  words. 
Let  this  my  sword  report  what  speech  forbears. 
Cade.  By  my  valour,  the  most  complete  cham¬ 
pion  that  ever  I  heard!  Steel,  if  thou  turn  the 
edge,  or  cut  not  out  the  burly-boned  clown  in 
chines  of  beef  ere  thou  sleep  in  thy  sheath,  I  be¬ 
seech  God  on  my  knees  thou  mayst  be  turned  to 
hobnails.  [Here  they  fight,  cade  falls.] 

O,  I  am  slain!  famine  and  no  other  hath  slain 
me:  letiten  thousand  devils  come  against  me,  and 
give  me  but  the  ten  meals  I  have  lost,  and  I’ld 
defy  them  all.  Wither,  garden;  and  be  henceforth 
a  burying-place  to  all  that  do  dwell  in  this  house, 
because  the  unconquered  soul  of  Cade  is  fled.  70 
Iden.  Is’t  Cade  that  I  have  slain,  that  monstrous 
traitor? 

Sword,  I  will  hallow  thee  for  this  thy  deed. 

And  hang  thee  o’er  my  tomb  when  I  am  dead: 
Ne’er  shall  this  blood  be  wiped  from  thy  point; 
But  thou  shalt  wear  it  as  a  herald’s  coat. 

To  emblaze  the  honour  that  thy  master  got. 

Cade.  Iden,  farewell,  and  be  proud  of  thy  vic¬ 
tory.  Tell  Kent  from  me  she  hath  lost  her  best 
man,  and  exhort  all  the  world  to  be  cowards;  for 
I,  that  never  feared  any,  am  vanquished  by  fam¬ 
ine,  not  by  valour.  [Dies.  81 

Iden.  How  much  thou  wrong’ st  me,  heaven  be 
my  judge. 

Die,  damned  wretch,  the  curse  of  her  that  bare 
thee; 

And  as  I  thrust  thy  body  in  with  my  sword. 

So  wish  I,  I  might  thrust  thy  soul  to  hell. 

Hence  will  I  drag  thee  headlong  by  the  heels 
Unto  a  dunghill  which  shall  be  thy  grave. 

And  there  cut  off  thy  most  ungracious  head; 
Which  I  will  bear  in  triumph  to  the  King,  8^ 
Leaving  thy  trunk  for  crows  to  feed  upon.  [Exit. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  Fields  between  Hartford  and 
Blackheath 

Enter  york,  and  his  army  of  Irish,  with  drum 
and  colours. 

York.  From  Ireland  thus  comes  York  to  claim 
his  right. 


SCENE  I 


65 


SECOND  PART  OF 

And  pluck  the  crown  from  feeble  Henry’s  head: 
Ring,  bells,  aloud;  burn,  bonfires,  clear  and 
bright, 

To  entertain  great  England’s  lawful  king. 

Ah!  sancta  rnajestas,  who  would  not  buy  thee 
dear? 

Let  them  obey  that  know  not  how  to  rule; 

This  hand  was  made  to  handle  nought  but  gold. 

I  cannot  give  due  action  to  my  words. 

Except  a  sword  or  sceptre  balance  it: 

A  sceptre  shall  it  have,  have  I  a  soul,  10 

On  which  I’ll  toss  the  flower-de-luce  of  France. 

Enter  Buckingham. 

Whom  have  we  here?  Buckingham,  to  disturb 
me? 

The  King  hath  sent  him,  sure:  I  must  dissemble. 
Buck.  York,  if  thou  meanest  well,  I  greet  thee 
well. 

York.  Humphrey  of  Buckingham,  I  accept  thy 
greeting. 

Art  thou  a  messenger,  or  come  of  pleasure? 

Buck.  A  messenger  from  Henry,  our  dread  liege. 
To  know  the  reason  of  these  arms  in  peace; 

Or  why  thou,  being  a  subject  as  I  am. 

Against  thy  oath  and  true  allegiance  sworn,  20 
Should  raise  so  great  a  power  without  his  leave. 

Or  dare  to  bring  thy  force  so  near  the  court. 

York.  [Aside]  Scarce  can  I  speak,  my  choler  is 
so  great: 

O,  I  could  hew  up  rocks  and  fight  with  flint, 

I  am  so  angry  at  these  abject  terms; 

And  now,  like  Ajax  Telamonius, 

On  sheep  or  oxen  could  I  spend  my  fury. 

I  am.  far  better  born  than  is  the  King, 

More  like  a  king,  more  kingly  in  my  thoughts: 

But  I  must  make  fair  weather  yet  a  while,  50 
Till  Henry  be  more  weak  and  I  more  strong. — 
Buckingham,  I  prithee,  pardon  me. 

That  I  have  given  no  answer  all  this  while; 

My  mind  was  troubled  with  deep  melancholy. 

The  cause  why  I  have  brought  this  army  hither 
Is  to  remove  proud  Somerset  from  the  King, 
Seditious  to  his  Grace  and  to  the  state. 

Buck.  That  is  too  much  presumption  on  thy 
part: 

But  if  thy  arms  be  to  no  other  end. 

The  King  hath  yielded  unto  thy  demand:  40 

The  Duke  of  Somerset  is  in  the  Tower. 

York.  Upon  thine  honour,  is  he  prisoner? 

Buck.  Upon  mine  honour,  he  is  prisoner. 

York.  Then,  Buckingham,  I  do  dismiss  my 
powers. 

Soldiers,  I  thank  you  all;  disperse  yourselves; 

Meet  me  to-morrow  in  Saint  George’s  field. 

You  shall  have  pay  and  everything  you  wish 


KING  HENRY  VI 

And  let  my  sovereign,  virtuous  Henry, 

Command  my  eldest  son,  nay,  all  my  sons. 

As  pledges  of  my  fealty  and  love;  50 

I’ll  send  them  all  as  willing  as  I  live: 

Lands,  goods,  horse,  armour,  any  thing  I  have, 

Is  his  to  use,  so  Somerset  may  die. 

Buck.  York,  I  commend  this  kind  submission: 
We  twain  will  go  into  his  Highness’  tent. 

Enter  king  and  Attendants. 

King.  Buckingham,  doth  York  intend  no  harm 
to  us. 

That  thus  he  marcheth  with  thee  arm  in  arm? 

York.  In  all  submission  and  humility 
York  doth  present  himself  unto  your  Highness. 
King.  Then  what  intends  these  forces  thou  dost 
bring?  60 

York.  To  heave  the  traitor  Somerset  from  hence. 
And  fight  against  that  monstrous  rebel  Cade, 
Who  since  I  heard  to  be  discomfited. 

Enter  iden,  'with  Cade's  head. 

Iden.  If  one  so  rude  and  of  so  mean  condition 
May  pass  into  the  presence  of  a  king, 

Lo,  I  present  your  Grace  a  traitor’s  head. 

The  head  of  Cade,  whom  I  in  combat  slew. 

King.  The  head  of  Cade!  Great  God,  how  just 
art  Thou! 

O,  let  me  view  his  visage,  being  dead. 

That  living  wrought  me  such  exceeding  trouble. 
Tell  me,  my  friend,  art  thou  the  man  that  slew 
him?  7/ 

Iden.  I  was,  an’t  like  your  Majesty. 

King.  How  art  thou  call’d?  and  what  is  thy  de¬ 
gree? 

Iden.  Alexander  Iden,  that’s  my  name; 

A  poor  esquire  of  Kent,  that  loves  his  king. 

Buck.  So  please  it  you,  my  lord,  ’twere  not  amiss 
He  were  created  knight  for  his  good  service. 
King.  Iden,  kneel  down.  [He  kneels.]  Rise  up  a 
knight. 

We  give  thee  for  reward  a  thousand  marks. 

And  will  that  thou  henceforth  attend  on  us.  So 
Iden.  May  Iden  live  to  merit  such  a  bounty. 

And  never  live  but  true  unto  his  liege! 

Enter  queen  and  somerset. 

King.  See,  Buckingham,  Somerset  comes  with 
the  queen: 

Go,  bid  her  hide  him  quickly  from  the  Duke. 
Queen.  For  thousand  Yorks  he  shall  not  hide  his 
head. 

But  boldly  stand  and  front  him  to  his  face. 

York.  How  now!  is  Somerset  at  liberty? 

Then,  York,  unloose  thy  long-imprison’d 
thoughts, 


66 


ACT  V 


SECOND  PART  OF 

And  let  thy  tongue  be  equal  with  thy  heart. 

Shall  I  endure  the  sight  of  Somerset?  5)0 

False  King!  why  hast  thou  broken  faith  with 
me, 

Knowing  how  hardly  I  can  brook  abuse? 

King  did  I  call  thee?  no,  thou  art  not  King, 

Not  fit  to  govern  and  rule  multitudes. 

Which  darest  not,  no,  nor  canst  not  rule  a  traitor. 
That  head  of  thine  doth  not  become  a  crown; 

Thy  hand  is  made  to  grasp  a  palmer’s  staff, 

And  not  to  grace  an  awful  princely  sceptre. 

That  gold  must  round  engirt  these  brows  of  mine, 
Whose  smile  and  frown,  like  to  Achilles’  spear, 

Is  able  with  the  change  to  kill  and  cure.  loi 

Here  is  a  hand  to  hold  a  sceptre  up 

And  with  the  same  to  act  controlling  laws. 

Give  place:  by  heaven,  thou  shalt  rule  no  more 
O’er  him  whom  heaven  created  for  thy  ruler. 

Som.  O  monstrous  traitor!  I  arrest  thee,  York, 

Of  capital  treason  ’gainst  the  King  and  crown: 
Obey,  audacious  traitor;  kneel  for  grace. 

York.  Wouldst  have  me  kneel?  first  let  me  ask 
of  these. 

If  they  can  brook  I  bow  a  knee  to  man.  iio 

Sirrah,  call  in  my  sons  to  be  my  bail: 

[Exit  Attendant. 

I  know,  ere  they  will  have  me  go  to  ward, 

They’ll  pawn  their  swords  for  my  enfranchise¬ 
ment. 

Queen.  Call  hither  Clifford;  bid  him  come  amain. 
To  say  if  that  the  bastard  boys  of  York 
Shall  be  the  surety  for  their  traitor  father. 

[Exit  BUCKINGHAM. 

York.  O  blood-bespotted  Neapolitan, 

Outcast  of  Naples,  England’s  bloody  scourge! 

The  sons  of  York,  thy  betters  in  their  birth. 

Shall  be  their  father’s  bail;  and  bane  to  those  120 
That  for  my  surety  will  refuse  the  boys! 

Enter  edward  and  richard. 

See  where  they  come:  I’ll  warrant  they’ll  make 
it  good. 

Enter  old  Clifford  and  his  son. 

Queen.  And  here  comes  Clifford  to  deny  their 
bail. 

Clif.  Health  and  all  happiness  to  my  lord  the 
King!  [Kneels. \ 

York.  I  thank  thee,  Clifford:  say,  what  news 
with  thee? 

Nay,  do  not  fright  us  with  an  angry  look: 

We  are  thy  sovereign,  Clifford,  kneel  again; 

For  thy  mistaking  so,  we  pardon  thee. 

Clif.  This  is  my  king,  York,  I  do  not  mistake; 

But  thou  mistakest  me  much  to  think  I  do:  75 0 

To  Bedlam  with  him!  is  the  man  grown  mad? 


KING  HENRY  VI 

King.  Ay,  Clifford;  a  bedlam  and  ambitious 
humour 

Makes  him  oppose  himself  against  his  king. 

Clif.  He  is  a  traitor;  let  him  to  the  Tower, 

And  chop  away  that  factious  pate  of  his. 

Queen.  He  is  arrested,  but  will  not  obey; 

His  sons,  he  says,  shall  give  their  words  for  him. 
York.  Will  you  not,  sons? 

Edw.  Ay,  noble  father,  if  our  words  will  serve. 
Rich.  And  if  words  will  not,  then  our  weapons 
shall.  7^0 

Clif.  Why,  what  a  brood  of  traitors  have  we 
here! 

York.  Look  in  a  glass,  and  call  thy  image  so: 

I  am  thy  king,  and  thou  a  false-heart  traitor. 

Call  hither  to  the  stake  my  two  brave  bears. 

That  with  the  very  shaking  of  their  chains 
They  may  astonish  these  fell-lurking  curs: 

Bid  Salisbury  and  Warwick  come  to  me. 

Enter  the  earls  of  Warwick  and  Salisbury. 

Clif.  Are  these  thy  bears?  we’ll  bait  thy  bears 
to  death. 

And  manacle  the  bear- ward  in  their  chains. 

If  thou  darest  bring  them  to  the  baiting  place.  1^0 
Rich.  Oft  have  I  seen  a  hot  o’erweening  cur 
Run  back  and  bite,  because  he  was  withheld; 
Who,  being  suffer’d  with  the  bear’s  fell  paw. 
Hath  clapp’d  his  tail  between  his  legs  and  cried: 
And  such  a  piece  of  service  will  you  do. 

If  you  oppose  yourselves  to  match  Lord  War¬ 
wick. 

Clif.  Hence,  heap  of  wrath,  foul  indigested 
lump. 

As  crooked  in  thy  manners  as  thy  shape! 

York.  Nay,  we  shall  heat  you  thoroughly  anon. 
Clif.  Take  heed,  lest  by  your  heat  you  burn 
yourselves.  160 

King.  Why,  Warwick,  hath  thy  knee  forgot  to 
bow? 

Old  Salisbury,  shame  to  thy  silver  hair. 

Thou  mad  misleader  of  thy  brain-sick  son! 

What,  wilt  thou  on  thy  death-bed  play  the  rufiian. 
And  seek  for  sorrow  with  thy  spectacles? 

O,  where  is  faith?  O,  where  is  loyalty? 

If  it  be  banish’d  from  the  frosty  head. 

Where  shall  it  find  a  harbour  in  the  earth? 

Wilt  thou  go  dig  a  grave  to  find  out  war. 

And  shame  thine  honourable  age  with  blood?  770 
Why  art  thou  old,  and  want’st  experience? 

Or  wherefore  dost  abuse  it,  if  thou  hast  it? 

For  shame!  in  duty  bend  thy  knee  to  me 
That  bows  unto  the  grave  with  mickle  age. 

Sal.  My  lord,  I  have  consider’d  with  myself 
The  title  of  this  most  renowned  duke; 

And  in  my  conscience  do  repute  his  Grace 


SCENE  I 

The  rightful  heir  to  England’s  royal  seat. 

King.  Hast  thou  not  sworn  allegiance  unto  me? 
SaL  I  have.  i8o 

King.  Canst  thou  dispense  with  heaven  for  such 
an  oath? 

SaL  It  is  great  sin  to  swear  unto  a  sin, 

But  greater  sin  to  keep  a  sinful  oath. 

Who  can  be  bound  by  any  solemn  vow 
To  do  a  murderous  deed,  to  rob  a  man, 

To  force  a  spotless  virgin’s  chastity, 

To  reave  the  orphan  of  his  patrimony, 

To  wring  the  widow  from  her  custom’d  right, 
And  have  no  other  reason  for  this  wrong 
But  that  he  was  bound  by  a  solemn  oath?  ipo 
Queen.  A  subtle  traitor  needs  no  sophister. 

King.  Call  Buckingham,  and  bid  him  arm  him¬ 
self. 

York.  Call  Buckingham,  and  all  the  friends  thou 
hast, 

I  am  resolved  for  death  or  dignity. 

Clif.  The  first  I  warrant  thee,  if  dreams  prove 
true. 

War.  You  were  best  to  go  to  bed  and  dream 
again. 

To  keep  thee  from  the  tempest  of  the  field. 

Clif.  I  am  resolved  to  bear  a  greater  storm 
Than  any  thou  canst  conjure  up  "o-day; 

And  that  I’ll  write  upon  thy  burgonet,  200 

Might  I  but  know  thee  by  thy  household  badge. 
War.  Now,  by  my  father’s  badge,  old  Nevil’s 
crest. 

The  rampant  bear  chain’d  to  the  ragged  staff. 
This  day  I’ll  wear  aloft  my  burgonet. 

As  on  a  mountain  top  the  cedar  shows 
That  keeps  his  leaves  in  spite  of  any  storm. 

Even  to  affright  thee  with  the  view  thereof. 

Clif.  And  from  thy  burgonet  I’ll  rend  thy  bear 
And  tread  it  under  foot  with  all  contempt. 

Despite  the  bear- ward  that  protects  the  bear.  210 
Y.  Clif.  And  so  to  arms,  victorious  father. 

To  quell  the  rebels  and  their  complices. 

Rich.  Fie!  charity,  for  shame!  speak  not  in  spite. 
For  you  shall  sup  with  Jesu  Christ  to-night. 

Y.  Clif.  Foul  stigmatic,  that’s  more  than  thou 
canst  tell. 

Rich.  If  not  in  heaven,  you’ll  surely  sup  in  hell. 

[Exeunt  severally. 

Scene  ii.  Saint  Alban' s 
Alarums  to  the  battle.  Enter  Warwick. 

War.  Clifford  of  Cumberland,  ’tis  Warwick 
calls: 

And  if  thou  dost  not  hide  thee  from  the  bear. 
Now,  when  the  angry  trumpet  sounds  alarum 
And  dead  men’s  cries  do  fill  the  empty  air, 
Clifford,  I  say,  come  forth  and  fight  with  me: 


KING  HENRY  VI  67 

Proud  northern  lord,  Clifford  of  Cumberland, 
Warwick  is  hoarse  with  calling  thee  to  arms. 

Enter  york. 

How  now,  my  noble  lord!  what,  all  afoot? 

York.  The  deadly-handed  Clifford  slew  my 
steed. 

But  match  to  match  I  have  encounter’d  him  10 
And  made  a  prey  for  carrion  kites  and  crows 
Even  of  the  bonny  beast  he  loved  so  well. 

Enter  old  Clifford. 

War.  Of  one  or  both  of  us  the  time  is  come. 

York.  Hold,  Warwick,  seek  thee  out  some  other 
chase. 

For  I  myself  must  hunt  this  deer  to  death. 

War.  Then,  nobly,  York;  ’tis  for  a  crown  thou 
fight’ St. 

As  I  intend,  Clifford,  to  thrive  to-day. 

It  grieves  my  soul  to  leave  thee  unassail’d.  [Exit. 
Clif.  What  seest  thou  in  me,  York?  why  dost 
thou  pause? 

York.  With  thy  brave  bearing  should  I  be  in 
love,  20 

But  that  thou  art  so  fast  mine  enemy. 

Clif.  Nor  should  thy  prowess  want  praise  and 
esteem. 

But  that  ’tis  shown  ignobly  and  in  treason. 

York.  So  let  it  help  me  now  against  thy  sword 
As  I  in  justice  and  true  right  express  it. 

Clif.  My  soul  and  body  on  the  action  both! 

York.  A  dreadful  lay!  Address  thee  instantly. 

They  fight,  cind  Clifford  falls. 

Clif.  La  fin  couronne  les  oeuvres.  [Dies. 

York.  Thus  war  hath  given  thee  peace,  for  thou 
art  still. 

Peace  with  his  soul.  Heaven,  if  it  be  thy  will!  50 

[Exit. 

Enter  young  Clifford. 

Y.  Clif.  Shame  and  confusion!  all  is  on  the  rout; 
Fear  frames  disorder,  and  disorder  wounds 
Where  it  should  guard.  O  war,  thou  son  of  hell. 
Whom  angry  heavens  do  make  their  minister, 
Throw  in  the  frozen  bosoms  of  our  part 
Hot  coals  of  vengeance!  Let  no  soldier  fly. 

He  that  is  truly  dedicate  to  war 
Hath  no  self-love,  nor  he  that  loves  himself 
Hath  not  essentially  but  by  circumstance 
The  name  of  valour.  [Seeing  his  dead  father] 

O,  let  the  vile  world  end,  40 

And  the  premised  flames  of  the  last  day 
Knit  earth  and  heaven  together! 

Now  let  the  general  trumpet  blow  his  blast. 
Particularities  and  petty  sounds 
To  cease!  Wast  thou  ordain’d,  dear  father, 


SECOND  PART  OF 


68 


ACT  V 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


To  lose  thy  youth  in  peace,  and  to  achieve 
The  silver  livery  of  advised  age, 

And,  in  thy  reverence  thy  chair-days,  thus 
To  die  in  ruffian  battle?  Even  at  this  sight  4^ 
My  heart  is  turn’d  to  stone:  and  while  ’tis 
mine, 

It  shall  be  stony.  York  not  our  old  men  spares; 

No  more  will  1  their  babes:  tears  virginal 
Shall  be  to  me  even  as  the  dew  to  fire. 

And  beauty  that  the  tyrant  oft  reclaims 
Shall  to  my  flaming  wrath  be  oil  and  flax. 
Henceforth  I  will  not  have  to  do  with  pity: 

Meet  1  an  infant  of  the  house  of  York, 

Into  as  many  gobbets  will  I  cut  it 
As  wild  Medea  young  Absyrtus  did: 

In  cruelty  will  I  seek  out  my  fame.  60 

Come,  thou  new  ruin  of  old  Clifford’s  house: 

As  did  Tineas  old  Anchises  bear. 

So  bear  I  thee  upon  my  manly  shoulders; 

But  then  Tineas  bare  a  living  load. 

Nothing  so  heavy  as  these  woes  of  mine. 

[Exit^  bearing  off  his  father. 

Enter  richard  and  somerset  to  fight. 
SOMERSET  is  killed. 

Rich.  So,  lie  thou  there; 

For  underneath  an  alehouse’  paltry  sign, 

The  Castle  in  Saint  Alban’s,  Somerset 
Hath  made  the  wizard  famous  in  his  death.  6^ 
Sword,  hold  thy  temper;  heart,  be  wrathful 
still: 

Priests  pray  for  enemies,  but  princes  kill.  [Exit. 

Fight:  excursions.  Enter  king,  queen,  and 
others. 

Queen.  Away,  my  lord!  you  are  slow;  for  shame, 
away! 

King.  Can  we  outrun  the  heavens?  good  Mar¬ 
garet,  stay. 

Queen.  What  are  you  made  of?  you’ll  nor  fight 
nor  fly: 

Now  is  it  manhood,  wisdom,  and  defence, 

To  give  the  enemy  way,  and  to  secure  us 
By  what  we  can,  which  can  no  more  but  fly. 
Alarum  afar  off. 

If  you  be  ta’en,  we  then  should  see  the  bottom 
Of  all  our  fortunes:  but  if  we  haply  scape. 

As  well  we  may,  if  not  through  your  neglect,  80 
We  shall  to  London  get,  where  you  are  loved 
And  where  this  breach  now  in  our  fortunes 
made 

May  readily  be  stopp’d. 


Re-enter  young  Clifford. 

V.  Clif.  But  that  my  heart’s  on  future  mischief 
set, 

I  would  speak  blasphemy  ere  bid  you  fly: 

But  fly  you  must;  uncurable  discomfit 
Reigns  in  the  hearts  of  all  our  present  parts. 
Away,  for  your  relief!  and  we  will  live 
To  see  their  day  and  them  our  fortune  give: 
Away,  my  lord,  away!  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Fields  near  St  Alban' s 
Alarum.  Retreat.  Enter  york,  richard,  Warwick, 
and  Soldiers^  'with  drum  and  colours. 

York.  Of  Salisbury,  who  can  report  of  him, 

That  winter  lion,  who  in  rage  forgets 
Aged  contusions  and  all  brush  of  time. 

And,  like  a  gallant  in  the  brow  of  youth. 

Repairs  him  with  occasion?  This  happy  day 
Is  not  itself,  nor  have  we  won  one  foot. 

If  Salisbury  be  lost. 

Rich.  My  noble  father. 

Three  times  to-day  I  holp  him  to  his  horse. 

Three  times  bestrid  him;  thrice  I  led  him  off. 
Persuaded  him  from  any  further  act:  10 

But  still,  where  danger  was,  still  there  I  met  him; 
And  like  rich  hangings  in  a  homely  house. 

So  was  his  will  in  his  old  feeble  body. 

But,  noble  as  he  is,  look  where  he  comes. 

Enter  Salisbury. 

Sal.  Now,  by  my  sword,  well  hast  thou  fought 
to-day; 

By  the  mass,  so  did  we  all.  I  thank  you,  Richard: 
God  knows  how  long  it  is  I  have  to  live; 

And  it  hath  pleased  him  that  three  times  to-day 
You  have  defended  me  from  imminent  death. 
Well,  lords,  we  have  not  got  that  which  we  have: 
’Tis  not  enough  our  foes  are  this  time  fled,  21 
Being  opposites  of  such  repairing  nature. 

York.  I  know  our  safety  is  to  follow  them; 

For,  as  I  hear,  the  King  is  fled  to  London, 

To  call  a  present  court  of  parliament. 

Let  us  pursue  him  ere  the  writs  go  forth. 

What  says  Lord  Warwick?  shall  we  after  them? 

War.  After  them!  nay,  before  them,  if  we  can. 
Now,  by  my  faith,  lords,  ’twas  a  glorious  day: 
Saint  Alban’s  battle  won  by  famous  York  50 
Shall  be  eternized  in  all  age  to  come. 

Sound  drums  and  trumpets,  and  to  London  all: 
And  more  such  days  as  these  to  us  befall! 

\Exeunt, 


sv  The  Third  Part  of 
KING  HENRY  THE  SIXTH 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


King  Henry  the  Sixth 

Edward,  Prince  of  Wales,  his  son 

Lewis  XI,  Kin^  of  France 

Duke  OF  Somerset 

Duke  of  Exeter 

Earl  of  Oxford 

Earl  of  Northumberland 

Earl  of  Westmoreland 

Lord  Clifford 

Richard  Plantagenet,  Duke  of  York 
Edward,  Earl  of  March,  afterwards  King 

Edward  IV  r  • 

Edmund,  Earl  of  Rutland 
George,  afterwards  Duke  of  Clarence 
Richard,  afterwards  Duke  of  Gloucester 
Duke  of  Norfolk 
Marquess  of  Montague 
Earl  of  Warwick 
Earl  of  Pembroke 
Lord  Hastings 
Lord  Stafford 

Q ^5"''  Mortimer  I  ^  .  y^k 

Sir  Hugh  Mortimer  | 

Lord  Rivers,  brother  to  Lady  Grey 
Sir  William  Stanley 


Sir  John  Montgomery 
Sir  John  Somerville 
Tutor  to  Rutland 
Mayor  of  York 
Lieutenant  of  the  Tower 
Nobleman 
Two  Keepers 
Huntsman 

Son  that  has  killed  his  father 
Father  that  has  killed  his  son 
Seven  Messengers 
Post 
Soldier 

Queen  Margaret 

Elizabeth  Woodville,  Lady  Grey,  afterwards 
Queen  to  Edward  IV 
Bona,  sister  to  the  French  Queen 

Non-Speaking  :  Henry,  Earl  of  Richmond;  Mayor  of 
Coventry;  Admiral  called  Bourbon;  Nurse;  Alder- 
men;  Soldiers;  Attendants 

Scene:  England  and  France 


ACT  I 

Scene  i.  London:  The  Parliament-house 

Alarum.  Enter  the  duke  of  york,  edward,  Rich¬ 
ard,  NORFOLK,  MONTAGUE,  WARWICK,  and  Sol¬ 
diers. 

War.  I  wonder  how  the  King  escaped  our  hands. 
York.  While  we  pursued  the  horsemen  of  the 
north. 

He  slily  stole  away  and  left  his  men: 

Whereat  the  great  Lord  of  Northumberland, 
Whose  warlike  ears  could  never  brook  retreat, 
Cheer’d  up  the  drooping  army;  and  himself. 

Lord  Clifford,  and  Lord  Stafford,  all  abreast. 
Charged  our  main  battle’s  front,  and  breaking  in 
Were  by  the  swords  of  common  soldiers  slain. 
Edw.  Lord  Stafford’s  father,  Duke  of  Bucking¬ 
ham,  10 

Is  either  slain  or  wounded  dangerously; 

I  cleft  his  beaver  with  a  downright  blow: 

That  this  is  true,  father,  behold  his  blood. 

Mont.  And,  brother,  here’s  the  Earl  of  Wilt¬ 
shire’s  blood. 


Whom  I  encounter’d  as  the  battles  join’d. 

Rich.  Speak  thou  for  me  and  tell  them  what  I 
did.  [Throwing  down  the  Duke  of  Somerset' s 
head.] 

York.  Richard  hath  best  deserved  of  all  my  sons. 
But  is  your  Grace  dead,  my  Lord  of  Somerset? 

Norf.  Such  hope  have  all  the  line  of  John  of 
Gaunt! 

Rich.  Thus  do  I  hope  to  shake  King  Henry’s 
head.  20 

War.  And  so  do  1.  Victorious  Prince  of  York, 
Before  I  see  thee  seated  in  that  throne 
Which  now  the  house  of  Lancaster  usurps, 

I  vow  by  heaven  these  eyes  shall  never  close. 
This  is  the  palace  of  the  fearful  king. 

And  this  the  regal  seat:  possess  it,  York; 

For  this  is  thine  and  not  King  Henry’s  heirs’. 

York.  Assist  me,  then,  sweet  Warwick,  and  I 
will; 

For  hither  we  have  broken  in  by  force  2p 

Norf.  We’ll  all  assist  you;  he  that  flies  shall  die. 

York.  Thanks,  gentle  Norfolk:  stay  by  me,  my 
lords; 


69 


ACT  I 


70  THIRD  PART  OF 

And,  soldiers,  stay  and  lodge  by  me  this  night. 

[They  go  up. 

War.  And  when  the  King  comes,  offer  him  no 
violence. 

Unless  he  seek  to  thrust  you  out  perforce. 

Fork.  The  Queen  this  day  here  holds  her  parlia¬ 
ment. 

But  little  thinks  we  shall  be  of  her  council : 

By  words  or  blows  here  let  us  win  our  right. 

Rich.  Arm’d  as  we  are,  let’s  stay  within  this 
house. 

War.  The  bloody  parliament  shall  this  be  call’d, 
Unless  Plantagenet,  Duke  of  York,  be  king,  40 
And  bashful  Henry  deposed,  whose  cowardice 
Hath  made  us  by- words  to  our  enemies. 

York.  Then  leave  me  not,  my  lords;  be  reso¬ 
lute; 

I  mean  to  take  possession  of  my  right. 

War.  Neither  the  King,  nor  he  that  loves  him 
best. 

The  proudest  he  that  holds  up  Lancaster, 

Dares  stir  a  wing,  if  Warwick  shake  his  bells. 

I’ll  plant  Plantagenet,  root  him  up  who  dares; 
Resolve  thee,  Richard;  claim  the  English  crown. 

Flourish.  Enter  king  henry,  Clifford,  North¬ 
umberland,  WESTMORELAND,  EXETER,  and  the 
rest,  'wearing  red  roses. 

K.  Hen.  My  lords,  look  where  the  sturdy  rebel 
sits,  50 

Even  in  the  chair  of  state:  belike  he  means, 

Back’d  by  the  power  of  Warwick,  that  false 
peer. 

To  aspire  unto  the  crown  and  reign  as  king. 

Earl  of  Northumberland,  he  slew  thy  father, 

And  thine.  Lord  Clifford;  and  you  both  have 
vow’d  revenge 

On  him,  his  sons,  his  favourites  and  his  friends. 
North.  If  I  be  not,  heavens  be  revenged  on  me! 
Clif.  The  hope  thereof  makes  Clifford  mourn  in 
steel. 

West.  What,  shall  we  suffer  this?  let’s  pluck 
him  down. 

My  heart  for  anger  burns;  I  cannot  brook  it.  60 
K.  Hen.  Be  patient,  gentle  Earl  of  Westmore¬ 
land. 

Clif.  Patience  is  for  poltroons,  such  as  he: 

He  durst  not  sit  there,  had  your  father  lived. 

My  gracious  lord,  here  in  the  parliament 
Let  us  assail  the  family  of  York. 

North.  Well  hast  thou  spoken,  cousin:  be  it  so. 

K.  Hen.  Ah,  know  you  not  the  city  favours 
them. 

And  they  have  troops  of  soldiers  at  their  beck? 

Exe.  But  when  the  Duke  is  slain,  they’ll  quickly 
fly. 


KING  HENRY  VI 

K.  Hen.  Far  be  the  thought  of  this  from  Henry’s 
heart,  70 

To  make  a  shambles 'of  the  parliament-house! 
Cousin  of  Exeter,  frowns,  words,  and  threats 
Shall  be  the  war  that  Henry  means  to  use. 

Thou  factious  Duke  of  York,  descend  my  throne. 
And  kneel  for  grace  and  mercy  at  my  feet; 

I  am  thy  sovereign. 

York.  I  am  thine. 

Exe.  For  shame,  come  down:  he  made  thee 
Duke  of  York. 

York.  ’Twas  my  inheritance,  as  the  earldom 
was. 

Exe.  Thy  father  was  a  traitor  to  the  crown. 

War.  Exeter,  thou  art  a  traitor  to  the  crown 
In  following  this  usurping  Henry.  8i 

Clif.  Whom  should  he  follow  but  his  natural 
king? 

War.  True,  Clifford;  and  that’s  Richard  Duke 
of  York. 

K.  Hen.  And  shall  I  stand,  and  thou  sit  in  my 
throne? 

York.  It  must  and  shall  be  so:  content  thyself. 

War.  Be  Duke  of  Lancaster;  let  him  be  King. 

West.  He  is  both  Kinor  and  Duke  of  Lancaster; 
And  that  the  Lord  of  Westmoreland  shall  main¬ 
tain. 

War.  And  Warwick  shall  disprove  it.  You  for¬ 
get  89 

That  we  are  those  which  chased  you  from  the 
field 

And  slew  your  fathers,  and  with  colours  spread 
March’d  through  the  city  to  the  palace  gates. 

North.  Yes,  Warwick,  I  remember  it  to  my 
grief; 

And,  by  his  soul,  thou  and  thy  house  shall  rue  it. 

West.  Plantagenet,  of  thee  and  these  thy  sons. 
Thy  kinsmen  and  thy  friends.  I’ll  have  more 
lives 

Than  drops  of  blood  were  in  my  father’s  veins. 

Clif.  Urge  it  no  more;  lest  that,  instead  of 
words, 

I  send  thee,  Warwick,  such  a  messenger 
As  shall  revenge  his  death  before  I  stir.  too 

War.  Poor  Clifford!  how  I  scorn  his  worthless 
threats! 

York.  Will  you  we  show  our  title  to  the  crown? 
If  not,  our  swords  shall  plead  it  in  the  field. 

K.  Hen.  What  title  hast  thou,  traitor,  to  the 
crown? 

Thy  father  was,  as  thou  art,  Duke  of  York; 

Thy  grandfather,  Roger  Mortimer,  Earl  of 
March: 

I  am  the  son  of  Henry  the  Fifth, 

Who  made  the  Dauphin  and  the  French  to  stoop 
And  seized  upon  their  towns  and  provinces. 


SCENE 


THIRD  PART  OF 

War.  Talk  not  of  France,  sith  thou  hast  lost  it 
all.  I/O 

K.  Hen.  The  Lord  Protector  lost  it,  and  not  I : 
When  1  was  crown’d  I  was  but  nine  months  old. 
Rich.  You  are  old  enough  now,  and  yet,  me- 
thinks,  you  lose. 

Father,  tear  the  crown  from  the  usurper’s  head. 
Ed^.  Sweet  father,  do  so;  set  it  on  your  head. 
Mont.  Good  brother,  as  thou  lovest  and  honour- 
est  arms, 

Let’s  fight  it  out  and  not  stand  cavilling  thus. 

Rich.  Sound  drums  and  trumpets,  and  the  King 
will  fly. 

York.  Sons,  peace! 

K.  Hen.  Peace,  thou!  and  give  King  Henry  leave 
to  speak.  120 

War.  Plantagenet  shall  speak  first:  hear  him, 
lords; 

And  be  you  silent  and  attentive  tuo. 

For  he  that  interrupts  him  shall  not  live. 

K.  Hen.  Think’st  thou  that  I  will  leave  my 
kingly  throne, 

Wherein  my  grandsire  and  my  father  sat? 

No:  first  shall  war  unpeople  this  my  realm; 

Ay,  and  their  colours,  often  borne  in  France, 

And  now  in  England  to  our  heart’s  great  sorrow. 
Shall  be  my  winding-sheet.  Why  faint  you,  lords? 
My  title’s  good,  and  better  far  than  his.  /50 
War.  Prove  it,  Henry,  and  thou  shalt  be  King. 

K.  Hen.  Henry  the  Fourth  by  conquest  got  the 
crown. 

York.  ’Twas  by  rebellion  against  his  king. 

K.  Hen.  [Aside]  I  know  not  what  to  say;  my 
title’s  weak. — 

Tell  me,  may  not  a  king  adopt  an  heir? 

York.  What  then? 

K.  Hen.  An  if  he  may,  then  am  I  lawful  king; 

For  Richard,  in  the  view  of  many  lords. 

Resign’d  the  crown  to  Henry  the  Fourth, 

Whose  heir  my  father  was,  and  I  am  his.  140 
York.  He  rose  against  him,  being  his  sovereign. 
And  made  him  to  resign  his  crown  perforce. 

War.  Suppose,  my  lords,  he  did  it  unconstrain’d. 
Think  you  ’twere  prejudicial  to  his  crown? 

Exe.  No;  for  he  could  not  so  resign  his  crown 
But  that  the  next  heir  should  succeed  and  reign. 

K.  Hen.  Art  thou  against  us,  Duke  of  Exeter? 

Exe.  His  is  the  right,  and  therefore  pardon  me. 
York.  Why  whisper  you,  my  lords,  and  answer 
not? 

Exe.  My  conscience  tells  me  he  is  lawful  king. 

K.  Hen.  [Aside]  All  will  revolt  from  me,  and 
turn  to  him.  /j/ 

North.  Plantagenet,  for  all  the  claim  thou  lay’st. 
Think  not  that  Henry  shall  be  so  deposed. 

War.  Deposed  he  shall  be,  in  despite  of  all 


KING  HENRY  VI  71 

North.  Thou  art  deceived:  ’tis  not  thy  southern 
power. 

Of  Essex,  Norfolk,  Suffolk,  nor  of  Kent, 

Which  makes  thee  thus  presumptuous  and  proud. 
Can  set  the  Duke  up  in  despite  of  me. 

Clif.  King  Henry,  be  thy  title  right  or  wrong. 
Lord  Clifford  vows  to  fight  in  thy  defence:  160 
May  that  ground  gape  and  swallow  me  alive. 
Where  I  shall  kneel  to  him  that  slew  my  father! 
K.  Hen.  O  Clifford,  how  thy  words  revive  my 
heart! 

York.  Henry  of  Lancaster,  resign  thy  crown. 
What  mutter  you,  or  what  conspire  you,  lords? 

War.  Do  right  unto  this  princely  Duke  of  York, 
Or  I  will  fill  the  house  with  armed  men. 

And  over  the  chair  of  state,  where  now  he  sits. 
Write  up  his  title  with  usurping  blood. 

[He  stamps  with  his  foot.,  and  the  Soldiers  show 
themselves. 

K.  Hen.  My  Lord  of  Warwick,  hear  me  but  one 
word:  /70 

Let  me  for  this  my  life-time  reign  as  king. 

York.  Confirm  the  crown  to  me  and  to  mine 
heirs. 

And  thou  shalt  reign  in  quiet  while  thou  livest. 
King.  I  am  content:  Richard  Plantagenet, 

Enjoy  the  kingdom  after  my  decease. 

Clif.  What  wrong  is  this  unto  the  Prince  your 
son! 

War.  What  good  is  this  to  England  and  himself! 
West.  Base,  fearful  and  despairing  Henry! 

Clif.  How  hast  thou  injured  both  thyself  and  us! 
West.  I  cannot  stay  to  hear  these  articles. 
North.Novl.  181 

Clif.  Come,  cousin,  let  us  tell  the  Queen  these 
news. 

West.  Farewell,  faint-hearted  and  degenerate 
king, 

In  whose  cold  blood  no  spark  of  honour  bides. 
North.  Be  thou  a  prey  unto  the  house  of  York, 
And  die  in  bands  for  this  unmanly  deed! 

Clif.  In  dreadful  war  mayst  thou  be  overcome, 
Or  live  in  peace  abandon’d  and  despised! 

[Exeunt  Northumberland,  Clifford, 

and  WESTMORELAND. 

War.  Turn  this  way,  Henry,  and  regard  them 
not. 

Exe.  They  seek  revenge  and  therefore  will  not 
yield.  190 

K.  Hen.  Ah,  Exeter! 

War.  Why  should  you  sigh,  my  lord? 

K.  Hen.  Not  for  myself.  Lord  Warwick,  but 
my  son. 

Whom  I  unnaturally  shall  disinherit. 

But  be  it  as  it  may:  I  here  entail 

The  crown  to  thee  and  to  thine  heirs  for  ever; 


72  THIRD  PART  OF 

Conditionally,  that  here  thou  take  an  oath 
To  cease  this  civil  war,  and,  whilst  I  live 
To  honour  me  as  thy  king  and  sovereign. 

And  neither  by  treason  nor  hostility 
To  seek  to  put  me  down  and  reign  thyself.  200 
York,  This  oath  I  willingly  take  and  will  per- 
form. 

War.  Long  live  King  Henry!  Plantagenet,  em¬ 
brace  him. 

K.  Hen.  And  long  live  thou  and  these  thy  for¬ 
ward  sons  I 

York.  Now  York  and  Lancaster  are  reconciled. 
Exe.  Accursed  be  he  that  seeks  to  make  them 
foes! 

Sennet.  Here  they  come  down. 

York.  Farewell,  my  gracious  lord;  I’ll  to  my 
castle. 

War.  And  I’ll  keep  London  with  my  soldiers. 
Norf.  And  I  to  Norfolk  with  my  followers. 
Mont.  And  I  unto  the  sea  from  whence  I  came. 

[Exeunt  york  and  his  Sons^  Warwick, 

NORFOLK,  MONTAGUE,  their  Sol- 

diers,  and  Attendants. 

K.  Hen.  And  I,  with  grief  and  sorrow,  to  the 
court.  210 

Enter  queen  Margaret  and  the  prince  of 

WALES. 

Exe.  Here  comes  the  Queen,  whose  looks  be¬ 
wray  her  anger: 

I’ll  steal  away. 

K.  Hen.  Exeter,  so  will  I. 

Q.  Mar.  Nay,  go  not  from  me;  I  will  follow 
thee. 

K.  Hen.  Be  patient,  gentle  queen,  and  I  will  stay. 
Q.  Mar.  Who  can  be  patient  in  such  extremes? 
Ah,  wretched  man!  would  I  had  died  a  maid. 

And  never  seen  thee,  never  borne  thee  son. 

Seeing  thou  hast  proved  so  unnatural  a  father! 
Hath  he  deserved  to  lose  his  birthright  thus? 

Hadst  thou  but  loved  him  half  so  well  as  I,  220 
Or  felt  that  pain  which  I  did  for  him  once. 

Or  nourish’d  him  as  I  did  with  my  blood. 

Thou  wouldst  have  left  thy  dearest  heart-blood 
there. 

Rather  than  have  made  that  savage  duke  thine 
heir 

And  disinherited  thine  only  son. 

Prince.  Father,  you  cannot  disinherit  me: 

If  you  be  King,  why  should  not  I  succeed? 

K.  Hen.  Pardon  me,  Margaret;  pardon  me, 
sweet  son: 

The  Earl  of  Warwick  and  the  Duke  enforced  me. 
Q.  Mar.  Enforced  thee!  art  thou  King,  and  wilt 
be  forced?  2^0 

I  shame  to  hear  thee  speak.  Ah,  timorous  wretch! 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  i 

Thou  hast  undone  thyself,  thy  son,  and  me; 

And  given  unto  the  house  of  York  such  head 
As  thou  shalt  reign  but  by  their  sufferance. 

To  entail  him  and  his  heirs  unto  the  crown. 

What  is  it,  but  to  make  thy  sepulchre 
And  creep  into  it  far  before  thy  time? 

Warwick  is  chancellor  and  the  lord  of  Calais; 
Stern  Falconbridge  commands  the  narrow  seas; 
The  Duke  is  made  Protector  of  the  realm;  240 

And  yet  shalt  thou  be  safe?  such  safety  finds 
The  trembling  lamb  environed  with  wolves. 

Had  I  been  there,  which  am  a  silly  woman. 

The  soldiers  should  have  toss’d  me  on  their  pikes 
Before  I  would  have  granted  to  that  act. 

But  thou  prefer r’ St  thy  life  before  thine  honour: 
And  seeing  thou  dost,  I  here  divorce  myself 
Both  from  thy  table,  Henry,  and  thy  bed. 

Until  that  act  of  parliament  be  repeal’d 
Whereby  my  son  is  disinherited.  250 

The  northern  lords  that  have  forsworn  thy  col¬ 
ours 

Will  follow  mine,  if  once  they  see  them  spread; 
And  spread  they  shall  be,  to  thy  foul  disgrace 
And  utter  ruin  of  the  house  of  York. 

Thus  do  I  leave  thee.  Come,  son,  let’s  away; 

Our  army  is  ready;  come,  we’ll  after  them. 

K.  Hen.  Stay,  gentle  Margaret,  and  hear  me 
speak. 

(2.  Mar.  Thou  hast  spoke  too  much  already: 
get  thee  gone. 

K.  Hen.  Gentle  son,  Edward,  thou  wilt  stay 
with  me? 

Q.  Mar.  Ay,  to  be  murder’d  by  his  enemies. 
Prince.  When  I  return  with  victory  from  the 
field  261 

I’ll  see  your  Grace:  till  then  I’ll  follow  her. 

Q.  Mar.  Come,  son,  away;  we  may  not  linger 
thus. 

[Exeunt  queen  Margaret  and  the  prince. 
K.  Hen.  Poor  queen!  how  love  to  me  and  to  her 
son 

Hath  made  her  break  out  into  terms  of  rage! 
Revenged  may  she  be  on  that  hateful  duke. 
Whose  haughty  spirit,  winged  with  desire. 

Will  cost  my  crown,  and  like  an  empty  eagle 
Tire  on  the  flesh  of  me  and  of  my  son! 

The  loss  of  those  three  lords  torments  my  heart: 
I’ll  write  unto  them  and  entreat  them  fair.  27/ 
Come,  cousin,  you  shall  be  the  messenger. 

Exe.  And  I,  I  hope,  shall  reconcile  them  all. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Sandal  Castle 
Enter  richard,  edward,  and  Montague. 
Rich.  Brother,  though  I  be  youngest,  give  me 
leave. 


SCENE  II 


73 


THIRD  PART  OF 

Edu\  No,  I  can  better  play  the  orator. 

Mont,  But  I  have  reasons  strong  and  forcible. 

Enter  the  duke  of  york. 

York,  Why,  how  now,  sons  and  brother!  at  a 
strife.^ 

What  is  your  quarrel?  how  began  it  first? 

Edw.  No  quarrel,  but  a  slight  contention. 

York,  About  what? 

Rich,  About  that  which  concerns  your  Grace 
and  us; 

The  crown  of  England,  father,  which  is  yours.  ^ 
York,  Mine,  boy?  not  till  King  Henry  be  dead. 
Rich.  Your  right  depends  not  on  his  life  or 
death. 

Edw.  Now  you  are  heir,  therefore  enjoy  it 
now; 

By  giving  the  house  of  Lancaster  leave  to  breathe, 

It  will  outrun  you,  father,  in  the  end. 

York.  I  took  an  oath  that  he  should  quietly  reign. 
Edw.  But  for  a  kingdom  any  oath  may  be 
broken: 

I  would  break  a  thousand  oaths  to  reign  one  year. 
Rich.  No;  God  forbid  your  Grace  should  be 
forsworn. 

York.  I  shall  be,  if  I  claim  by  open  war. 

Rich.  I’ll  prove  the  contrary,  if  you’ll  hear  me 
speak.  20 

York.  Thou  canst  not,  son;  it  is  impossible. 

Rich.  An  oath  is  of  no  moment,  being  not  took 
Before  a  true  and  lawful  magistrate. 

That  hath  authority  over  him  that  swears: 

Henry  had  none,  but  did  usurp  the  place; 

Then,  seeing  ’twas  he  that  made  you  to  depose, 
Your  oath,  my  lord,  is  vain  and  frivolous. 
Therefore,  to  arms!  And,  father,  do  but  think 
How  sweet  a  thing  it  is  to  wear  a  crown; 

Within  whose  circuit  is  Elysium  50 

And  all  that  poets  feign  of  bliss  and  joy. 

Why  do  we  linger  thus?  I  cannot  rest 
Until  the  white  rose  that  I  wear  be  dyed 
Even  in  the  lukewarm  blood  of  Henry’s  heart. 

York.  Richard,  enough;  I  will  be  King,  or  die. 
Brother,  thou  shalt  to  London  presently. 

And  whet  on  Warwick  to  this  enterprise. 

Thou,  Richard,  shalt  to  the  Duke  of  Norfolk, 

And  tell  him  privily  of  our  intent. 

You,  Edward,  shall  unto  my  Lord  Cobham,  40 
With  whom  the  Kentishmen  will  willingly  rise: 

In  them  I  trust;  for  they  are  soldiers. 

Witty,  courteous,  liberal,  full  of  spirit. 

While  you  are  thus  employ’d,  what  resteth 
more. 

But  that  I  seek  occasion  how  to  rise. 

And  yet  the  King  not  privy  to  my  drift. 

Nor  any  of  the  house  of  Lancaster? 


KING  HENRY  VI 

MESSENGER. 

But,  stay:  what  news?  Why  comest  thou  in  such 
post? 

Mess.  The  Queen  with  all  the  northern  earls 
and  lords 

Intend  here  to  besiege  you  in  your  castle: 

She  is  hard  by  with  twenty  thousand  men; 

And  therefore  fortify  your  hold,  my  lord. 

York.  Ay,  with  my  sword.  What!  think’st  thou 
that  we  fear  them? 

Edward  and  Richard,  you  shall  stay  with  me; 

My  brother  Montague  shall  post  to  London: 

Let  noble  Warwick,  Cobham,  and  the  rest. 
Whom  we  have  left  protectors  of  the  King, 

With  powerful  policy  strengthen  themselves, 
And  trust  not  simple  Henry  nor  his  oaths.  yp 
Mont.  Brother,  I  go;  I’ll  win  them,  fear  it  not: 
And  thus  most  humbly  I  do  take  my  leave.  [Exit. 

Enter  sir  john  mortimer  and  sir  hugh 

MORTIMER. 

York.  Sir  John  and  Sir  Hugh  Mortimer,  mine 
uncles. 

You  are  come  to  Sandal  in  a  happy  hour; 

The  army  of  the  Queen  mean  to  besiege  us. 

Sir  John.  She  shall  not  need;  we’ll  meet  her  in 
the  field. 

York.  What,  with  five  thousand  men? 

Rich.  Ay,  with  five  hundred,  father,  for  a  need: 
A  woman’s  general;  what  should  we  fear? 

A  march  ajar  off. 

Edw.  I  hear  their  drums:  let’s  set  our  men  in 
order. 

And  issue  forth  and  bid  them  battle  straight.  70 
York.  Five  men  to  twenty!  though  the  odds  be 
great, 

I  doubt  not,  uncle,  of  our  victory. 

Many  a  battle  have  I  won  in  France, 

When  as  the  enemy  hath  been  ten  to  one: 

Why  should  I  not  now  have  the  like  success? 

[Alarum.  Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Field  of  battle  betwixt  Sandal 
Castle  and  Wakefield 

Alarums.  Enter  Rutland  and  his  tutor. 

Rut.  Ah,  whither  shall  I  fly  to  ’scape  their 
hands? 

Ah,  tutor,  look  where  bloody  Clifford  comes! 

Enter  Clifford  and  Soldiers. 

Clif.  Chaplain,  away!  thy  priesthood  saves  thy 
life. 

As  for  the  brat  of  this  accursed  duke. 

Whose  father  slew  my  father,  he  shall  die. 

Tut.  And  I,  my  lord,  will  bear  him  company. 


74  THIRD  PART  OF 

Clif.  Soldiers,  away  with  him! 

Tut.  Ah,  Clifford,  murder  not  this  innocent 
child. 

Lest  thou  be  hated  both  of  God  and  man! 

[Exit,  dragged  off  by  Soldiers. 
Clif.  How  now!  is  he  dead  already?  or  is  it 
fear  lo 

That  makes  him  close  his  eyes?  I’ll  open  them. 

Rut.  So  looks  the  pent-up  lion  o’er  the  wretch 
That  trembles  under  his  4evouring  paws; 

And  so  he  walks,  insulting  o’er  his  prey, 

And  so  he  comes,  to  rend  his  limbs  asunder. 

Ah,  gentle  Clifford,  kill  me  with  thy  sword. 

And  not  with  such  a  cruel  threatening  look. 

Sweet  Clifford,  hear  me  speak  before  I  die. 

I  am  too  mean  a  subject  for  thy  wrath: 

Be  thou  revenged  on  men,  and  let  me  live.  20 
Clif.  In  vain  thou  speak’ st,  poor  boy;  my 
father’s  blood 

Hath  stopp’d  the  passage  where  thy  words 
should  enter. 

Rut.  Then  let  my  father’s  blood  open  it  again: 

He  is  a  man,  and,  Clifford,  cope  with  him. 

Clif.  Had  I  thy  brethren  here,  their  lives  and 
thine 

Were  not  revenge  sufficient  for  me; 

No,  if  I  digg’d  up  thy  forefathers’  graves 
And  hung  their  rotten  coffins  up  in  chains, 

It  could  not  slake  mine  ire,  nor  ease  my  heart. 

The  sight  of  any  of  the  house  of  York  50 

Is  as  a  fury  to  torment  my  soul; 

And  till  I  root  out  their  accursed  line 
And  leave  not  one  alive,  I  live  in  hell. 

Therefore —  [Lifting  his  hand.] 

Rut.  O,  let  me  pray  before  I  take  my  death! 

To  thee  I  pray;  sweet  Clifford,  pity  me! 

Clif.  Such  pity  as  my  rapier’s  point  affords. 

Rut.  I  never  did  thee  harm:  why  wilt  thou  slay 
me? 

Clif.  Thy  father  hath. 

Rut.  But  ’twas  ere  I  was  born. 

Thou  hast  one  son;  for  his  sake  pity  me,  40 
Lest  in  revenge  thereof,  sith  God  is  just, 

He  be  as  miserably  slain  as  I. 

Ah,  let  me  live  in  prison  all  my  days; 

And  when  I  give  occasion  of  offence. 

Then  let  me  die,  for  now  thou  hast  no  cause. 

Clif.  No  cause! 

Thy  father  slew  my  father;  therefore,  die.  [Stabs 
hi?n.] 

Rut.  Difaciant  laudis  summa  sit  ista  tua!  [Dies. 
Clif.  Plantagenet!  I  come,  Plantagenet! 

And  this  thy  son’s  blood  cleaving  to  my  blade  50 
Shall  rust  upon  my  weapon,  till  thy  blood, 
Congeal’d  with  this,  do  make  me  wipe  off  both. 

[Exit. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  i 

Scene  iv.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Alarum.  Enter,  richard,  duke  of  york. 

York.  The  army  of  the  Queen  hath  got  the  field: 
My  uncles  both  are  slain  in  rescuing  me; 

And  all  my  followers  to  the  eager  foe 
Turn  back  and  fly,  like  ships  before  the  wind 
Or  lambs  pursued  by  hunger-starved  wolves. 

My  sons,  God  knows  what  hath  bechanced  them: 
But  this  I  know,  they  have  demean’d  themselves 
Like  men  born  to  renown  by  life  or  death. 

Three  times  did  Richard  make  a  lane  to  me. 

And  thrice  cried,  “Courage,  father!  fight  it  out!” 
And  full  as  oft  came  Edward  to  my  side,  // 

With  purple  falchion,  painted  to  the  hilt 
In  blood  of  those  that  had  encounter’d  him: 

And  when  the  hardiest  warriors  did  retire, 
Richard  cried,  “Charge!  and  give  no  foot  of 
ground!” 

And  cried,  “A  crown,  or  else  a  glorious  tomb! 

A  sceptre,  or  an  earthly  sepulchre!” 

With  this,  we  charged  again:  but,  out,  alas! 

We  bodged  again;  as  I  have  seen  a  swan 
With  bootless  labour  swim  against  the  tide  20 
And  spend  her  strength  with  over-matching 
waves.  [A  short  alarum  within^ 

Ah,  hark!  the  fatal  followers  do  pursue; 

And  I  am  faint  and  cannot  fly  their  fury: 

And  were  I  strong,  I  would  not  shun  their  fury: 
The  sands  are  number’d  that  make  up  my  life; 
Here  must  I  stay,  and  here  my  life  must  end. 

Enter  queen  Margaret,  Clifford,  Northum¬ 
berland,  the  PRINCE  OF  WALES,  and  Soldiers. 

Come,  bloody  Clifford,  rough  Northumberland, 

1  dare  your  quenchless  fury  to  more  rage: 

I  am  your  butt,  and  I  abide  your  shot.  2^ 

North.  Yield  to  our  mercy,  proud  Plantagenet. 
Clif.  Ay,  to  such  mercy  as  his  ruthless  arm. 
With  downright  payment,  show’d  unto  my  fa¬ 
ther. 

Now  Phaethon  hath  tumbled  from  his  car. 

And  made  an  evening  at  the  noontide  prick. 

York.  My  ashes,  as  the  phoenix,  may  bring  forth 
A  bird  that  will  revenge  upon  you  all : 

And  in  that  hope  I  throw  mine  eyes  to  heaven. 
Scorning  whate’er  you  can  afflict  me  with. 

Why  come  you  not?  what!  multitudes,  and  fear? 
Cltf.  So  cowards  fight  when  they  can  fly  no  fur¬ 
ther;  40 

So  doves  do  peck  the  falcon’s  piercing  talons; 

So  desperate  thieves,  all  hopeless  of  their  lives. 
Breathe  out  invectives  ’gainst  the  officers. 

York.  O  Clifford,  but  bethink  thee  once  again. 
And  in  thy  thought  o’er-run  my  former  time; 
And,  if  thou  canst  for  blushing,  view  this  face. 


SCENE  IV  THIRDPARTOF 

And  bite  thy  tongue,  that  slanders  him  with 
cowardice 

Whose  frown  hath  made  thee  faint  and  fly  ere 
this! 

Clif.  I  will  not  bandy  with  thee  word  for  word, 
But  buckle  with  thee  blows,  twice  two  for  one.  50 
Q.  Mar.  Hold,  valiant  Clifford!  for  a  thousand 
causes 

I  would  prolong  awhile  the  traitor’s  life. 

Wrath  makes  him  deaf:  speak  thou,  Northum¬ 
berland. 

North.  Hold,  Clifford!  do  not  honour  him  so 
much 

To  prick  thy  finger,  though  to  wound  his  heart: 
What  valour  were  it,  when  a  cur  doth  grin. 

For  one  to  thrust  his  hand  between  his  teeth. 

When  he  might  spurn  him  with  his  foot  away? 

It  is  war’s  prize  to  take  all  vantages; 

And  ten  to  one  is  no  impeach  of  valour.  60 

They  lay  hands  on  york,  uoho  struggles. 

Clif.  Ay,  ay,  so  strives  the  woodcock  with  the 
gin. 

North.  So  doth  the  cony  struggle  in  the  net. 

York.  So  triumph  thieves  upon  their  conquer’d 
booty; 

So  true  men  yield,  with  robbers  so  o’ermatch’d. 
North.  What  would  your  grace  have  done  unto 
him  now? 

Q.  Mar.  Brave  warriors,  Clifford  and  Northum¬ 
berland, 

Come,  make  him  stand  upon  this  molehill  here, 
That  raught  at  mountains  with  outstretched  arms. 
Yet  parted  but  the  shadow  with  his  hand. 

What!  was  it  you  that  would  be  England’s  king? 
W as’t  you  that  revell’d  in  our  parliament,  7/ 

And  made  a  preachment  of  your  high  descent? 
Where  are  your  mess  of  sons  to  back  you  now? 
The  wanton  Edward,  and  the  lusty  George? 

And  where’s  that  valiant  crook-back  prodigy, 
Dicky  your  boy,  that  with  his  grumbling  voice 
W’as  wont  to  cheer  his  dad  in  mutinies? 

Or,  with  the  rest,  where  is  your  darling  Rutland? 
Look,  York:  I  stain’d  this  napkin  with  the  blood 
That  valiant  Clifford,  with  his  rapier’s  point,  80 
Made  issue  from  the  bosom  of  the  boy; 

And  if  thine  eyes  can  water  for  his  death, 

I  give  thee  this  to  dry  thy  cheeks  withal. 

Alas,  poor  York!  but  that  I  hate  thee  deadly, 

I  should  lament  thy  miserable  state. 

I  prithee,  grieve,  to  make  me  merry,  York. 

What,  hath  thy  fiery  heart  so  parch’d  thine  en¬ 
trails 

That  not  a  tear  can  fall  for  Rutland’s  death? 

Why  art  thou  patient,  man?  thou  shouldst  be 
mad; 

And  I,  to  make  thee  mad,  do  mock  thee  thus,  po 


KING  HENRY  VI  75 

Stamp,  rave,  and  fret,  that  I  may  sing  and  dance. 
Thou  wouldst  be  fee’d,  I  see,  to  make  me  sport: 
York  cannot  speak,  unless  he  wear  a  crown. 

A  crown  for  York!  and,  lords,  bow  low  to  him: 
Hold  you  his  hands,  whilst  I  do  set  it  on. 

Putting  a  paper  crown  on  his  head. 

Ay,  marry,  sir,  now  looks  he  like  a  king! 

Ay,  this  is  he  that  took  King  Henry’s  chair. 

And  this  is  he  was  his  adopted  heir. 

But  how  is  it  that  great  Plantagenet 
Is  crown’d  so  soon,  and  broke  his  solemn  oath? 

As  I  bethink  me,  you  should  not  be  King  wi 
Till  our  King  Henry  had  shook  hands  with  death. 
And  will  you  pale  your  head  in  Henry’s  glory. 
And  rob  his  temples  of  the  diadem. 

Now  in  his  life,  against  your  holy  oath? 

O,  ’tis  a  fault  too  too  unpardonable! 

Off  with  the  crown;  and,  with  the  crown,  his 
head; 

And,  whilst  we  breathe,  take  time  to  do  him  dead. 
Clif.  That  is  my  office,  for  my  father’s  sake. 

Q.  Mar.  Nay,  stay;  let’s  hear  the  orisons  he 
makes.  no 

York.  She- wolf  of  France,  but  worse  than  wolves 
of  France, 

Whose  tongue  more  poisons  than  the  adder’s 
tooth! 

How  ill-beseeming  is  it  in  thy  sex 
To  triumph,  like  an  Amazonian  trull. 

Upon  their  woes  whom  fortune  captivates! 

But  that  thy  face  is,  visard-like,  unchanging, 
Made  impudent  with  use  of  evil  deeds, 

I  would  assay,  proud  queen,  to  make  thee  blush. 
To  tell  thee  whence  thou  earnest,  of  whom  de¬ 
rived. 

Were  shame  enough  to  shame  thee,  wert  thou 
not  shameless.  120 

Thy  father  bears  the  type  of  King  of  Naples, 

Of  both  the  Sicils  and  Jerusalem, 

Yet  not  so  wealthy  as  an  English  yeoman. 

Hath  that  poor  monarch  taught  thee  to  insult? 

It  needs  not,  nor  it  boots  thee  not,  proud  queen, 
Unless  the  adage  must  be  verified. 

That  beggars  mounted  run  their  horse  to  death. 
’Tis  beauty  that  doth  oft  make  women  proud; 
But,  God  he  knows,  thy  share  thereof  is  small: 
’Tis  virtue  that  doth  make  them  most  admired; 
The  contrary  doth  make  thee  wonder’d  at: 

’Tis  government  that  makes  them  seem  divine; 
The  want  thereof  makes  thee  abominable: 

Thou  art  as  opposite  to  every  good 
As  the  Antipodes  are  unto  us. 

Or  as  the  south  to  the  septentrion. 

O  tiger’s  heart  wrapt  in  a  woman’s  hide! 

How  couldst  thou  drain  the  life-blood  of  the 
child. 


76  THIRD  PART  OF 

To  bid  the  father  wipe  his  eyes  withal, 

And  yet  be  seen  to  bear  a  woman’s  face?  14.0 
Women  are  soft,  mild,  pitiful,  and  flexible; 

Thou  stern,  obdurate,  flinty,  rough,  remorseless. 
Bid’st  thou  me  rage?  why,  now  thou  hast  thy 
wish: 

Wouldst  have  me  weep?  why,  now  thou  hast  thy 
will: 

For  raging  wind  blows  up  incessant  showers, 

And  when  the  rage  allays,  the  rain  begins. 

These  tears  are  my  sweet  Rutland’s  obsequies: 
And  every  drop  cries  vengeance  for  his  death, 
’Gainst  thee,  fell  Clifford,  and  thee,  false  French¬ 
woman. 

North.  Beshrew  me,  but  his  passion  moves  me 
so  150 

That  hardly  can  I  check  my  eyes  from  tears. 

York.  That  face  of  his  the  hungry  cannibals 
Would  not  have  touch’d,  would  not  have  stain’d 
with  blood: 

But  you  are  more  inhuman,  more  inexorable, 

O,  ten  times  more,  than  tigers  of  Hyrcania. 

See,  ruthless  queen,  a  hapless  father’s  tears: 

This  cloth  thou  dip’dst  in  blood  of  my  sweet  boy, 
And  I  with  tears  do  wash  the  blood  away. 

Keep  thou  the  napkin,  and  go  boast  of  this: 

And  if  thou  tell’st  the  heavy  story  right,  160 
Upon  my  soul,  the  hearers  will  shed  tears; 

Yea  even  my  foes  will  shed  fast-falling  tears. 

And  say,  “Alas,  it  was  a  piteous  deed!” 

There,  take  the  crown,  and,  with  the  crown,  my 
curse; 

And  in  thy  need  such  comfort  come  to  thee 
As  now  I  reap  at  thy  too  cruel  hand! 

Hard-hearted  Clifford,  take  me  from  the  world: 
My  soul  to  heaven,  my  blood  upon  your  heads! 
North.  Had  he  been  slaughter-man  to  all  my 
kin, 

I  should  not  for  my  life  but  weep  with  him,  /70 
To  see  how  inly  sorrow  gripes  his  soul. 

O.  Mar.  What,  weeping-ripe,  my  Lord  North¬ 
umberland? 

Think  but  upon  the  wrong  he  did  us  all. 

And  that  will  quickly  dry  thy  melting  tears. 

Clif.  Here’s  for  my  oath,  here’s  for  my  father’s 
death.  [Stabbing  him.] 

Q.  Mar.  And  here’s  to  right  our  gentle-hearted 
king.  [Stabbing  him.] 

York.  Open  Thy  gate  of  mercy,  gracious 
God! 

My  soul  flies  through  these  wounds  to  seek  out 
Thee.  [Dies. 

Q.  Mar.  Off  with  his  head,  and  set  it  on  York 
gates; 

So  York  may  overlook  the  town  of  York. 

[Flourish.  Exeunt. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  11 

ACT  Tl 

Scene  i.  A  plain  near  Mortimer  s  Cross  in 
Herefordshire 

A  march.  Enter  edward,  richard,  and  their 
power. 

Edw.  I  wonder  how  our  princely  father  ’scaped. 
Or  whether  he  be  ’scaped  away  or  no 
From  Clifford’s  and  Northumberland’s  pursuit: 
Had  he  been  ta’en,  we  should  have  heard  the 
news; 

Had  he  been  slain,  we  should  have  heard  the 
news; 

Or  had  he  ’scaped,  methinks  we  should  have 
heard 

The  happy  tidings  of  his  good  escape. 

How  fares  my  brother?  why  is  he  so  sad? 

Rich.  I  cannot  joy,  until  I  be  resolved 
Where  our  right  valiant  father  is  become.  10 
I  saw  him  in  the  battle  range  about; 

And  watch’d  him  how  he  singled  Clifford 
forth. 

Methought  he  bore  him  in  the  thickest  troop 
As  doth  a  lion  in  a  herd  of  neat; 

Or  as  a  bear,  encompass’d  round  with  dogs. 

Who  having  pinch’d  a  few  and  made  them  cry. 
The  rest  stand  all  aloof,  and  bark  at  him. 

So  fared  our  father  with  his  enemies; 

So  fled  his  enemies  my  warlike  father: 

Methinks,  ’tis  prize  enough  to  be  his  son.  20 
See  how  the  morning  opes  her  golden  gates. 

And  takes  her  farewell  of  the  glorious  sun! 

How  well  resembles  it  the  prime  of  youth, 
Trimm’d  like  a  younker  prancing  to  his  love! 
Edw.  Dazzle  mine  eyes,  or  do  I  see  three 
suns? 

Rich.  Three  glorious  suns,  each  one  a  perfect 
sun; 

Not  separated  with  the  racking  clouds. 

But  sever’d  in  a  pale  clear-shining  sky. 

See,  see!  they  join,  embrace,  and  seem  to  kiss. 

As  if  they  vow’d  some  league  inviolable:  jo 

Now  are  they  but  one  lamp,  one  light,  one  sun. 

In  this  the  heaven  figures  some  event. 

Edw.  ’Tis  wondrous  strange,  the  like  yet  never 
heard  of. 

I  think  it  cites  us,  brother,  to  the  field. 

That  we,  the  sons  of  brave  Plantagenet, 

Each  one  already  blazing  by  our  meeds. 

Should  notwithstanding  join  our  lights  together 
And  over-shine  the  earth  as  this  the  world. 
Whate’er  it  bodes,  henceforward  will  I  bear 
Upon  my  target  three  fair-shining  suns.  40 

Rich.  Nay,  bear  three  daughters:  by  your  leave 
I  speak  it. 

You  love  the  breeder  better  than  the  male. 


SCENE  1  THIRD  PART  OF 

Enter  a  messenger. 

But  what  art  thou,  whose  heavy  looks  foretell 
Some  dreadful  story  hanging  on  thy  tongue? 

Mess.  Ah,  one  that  was  a  woeful  looker-on 
When  as  the  noble  Duke  of  York  was  slain. 

Your  princely  father  and  my  loving  lord! 

Eduo.  O,  speak  no  more,  for  I  have  heard  too 
much. 

Rich.  Say  how  he  died,  for  I  will  hear  it  all. 

Mess.  Environed  he  was  with  many  foes,  50 
And  stood  against  them,  as  the  hope  of  Troy 
Against  the  Greeks  that  would  have  enter’d 
Troy. 

But  Hercules  himself  must  yield  to  odds; 

And  many  strokes,  though  with  a  little  axe. 

Hew  down  and  fell  the  hardest-timber’d  oak. 

By  many  hands  your  father  was  subdued; 

But  only  slaughter’d  by  the  ireful  arm 
Of  unrelenting  Clifford  and  the  Queen, 

Who  crown’d  the  gracious  Duke  in  high  despite, 
Laugh’d  in  his  face;  and  when  with  grief  he 
wxpt. 

The  ruthless  Queen  gave  him  to  dry  his  cheeks  61 
A  napkin  steeped  in  the  harmless  blood 
Of  sweet  young  Rutland,  by  rough  Clifford  slain: 
And  after  many  scorns,  many  foul  taunts, 

They  took  his  head,  and  on  the  gates  of  York 
They  set  the  same;  and  there  it  doth  remain. 

The  saddest  spectacle  that  e’er  I  view’d. 

Edv).  Sweet  Duke  of  York,  our  prop  to  lean 
upon. 

Now  thou  art  gone,  we  have  no  staff,  no  stay. 

O  Clifford,  boisterous  Clifford!  thou  hast  slain 
The  flower  of  Europe  for  his  chivalry;  7/ 

And  treacherously  hast  thou  vanquish’d  him. 

For  hand  to  hand  he  would  have  vanquish’d  thee. 
Now  my  soul’s  palace  is  become  a  prison: 

Ah,  would  she  break  from  hence,  that  this  my 
body 

Might  in  the  ground  be  closed  up  in  rest! 

For  never  henceforth  shall  I  joy  again. 

Never,  O  never,  shall  I  see  more  joy! 

Rich.  I  cannot  weep;  for  all  my  body’s  moisture 
Scarce  serves  to  quench  my  furnace-burning 
heart: 

Nor  can  my  tongue  unload  my  heart’s  great 

burthen;  81 

For  selfsame  wind  that  I  should  speak  withal 
Is  kindling  coals  that  fires  all  my  breast, 

And  burns  me  up  with  flames  that  tears  would 
quench. 

To  weep  is  to  make  less  the  depth  of  grief: 

Tears  then  for  babes;  blows  and  revenge  for  me. 
Richard,  I  bear  thy  name;  I’ll  venge  thy  death. 

Or  die  renowned  by  attempting  it. 


KING  HENRY  VI  77 

Edw.  His  name  that  valiant  duke  hath  left  with 
thee; 

His  dukedom  and  his  chair  with  me  is  left. 

Rich.  Nay,  if  thou  be  that  princely  eagle’s  bird. 
Show  thy  descent  by  gazing  ’gainst  the  sun: 

For  chair  and  dukedom,  throne  and  kingdom  say; 
Either  that  is  thine,  or  else  thou  wert  not  his. 


March.  Enter  Warwick,  marquess  of 
MONTAGUE,  and  their  army. 


War.  How  now,  fair  lords !  What  fare?  what 
news  abroad? 

Rich.  Great  Lord  of  Warwick,  if  we  should  re¬ 
count 

Our  baleful  news,  and  at  each  word’s  deliverance 
Stab  poniards  in  our  flesh  till  all  were  told. 

The  words  would  add  more  anguish  than  the 
wounds. 

O  valiant  lord,  the  Duke  of  York  is  slain!  100 

Edw.  O  Warwick,  Warwick!  that  Plantagenet, 
Which  held  thee  dearly  as  his  soul’s  redemption, 
Is  by  the  stern  Lord  Clifford  done  to  death. 

War.  Ten  days  ago  I  drown’d  these  news  in 
tears; 

And  now,  to  add  more  measure  to  your  woes, 

I  come  to  tell  you  things  sith  then  befall’n. 

After  the  bloody  fray  at  Wakefield  fought. 
Where  your  brave  father  breathed  his  latest  gasp, 
Tidings,  as  swiftly  as  the  posts  could  run. 

Were  brought  me  of  your  loss  and  his  depart,  no 
I,  then  in  London,  keeper  of  the  King, 

Muster’d  my  soldiers,  gather’d  flocks  of  friends, 
And  very  well  appointed,  as  I  thought. 

March’d  toward  Saint  Alban’s  to  intercept  the 
Queen, 

Bearing  the  King  in  my  behalf  along; 

For  by  my  scouts  I  was  advertised 
That  she  was  coming  with  a  full  intent 


To  dash  our  late  decree  in  parliament 
Touching  King  Henry’s  oath  and  your  succes¬ 
sion. 

Short  tale  to  make,  we  at  Saint  Alban’s  met,  120 
Our  battles  join’d,  and  both  sides  fiercely  fought: 
But  whether  ’twas  the  coldness  of  the  King, 

Who  look’d  full  gently  on  his  warlike  Queen, 
That  robb’d  my  soldiers  of  their  heated  spleen; 
Or  whether  ’twas  report  of  her  success; 

Or  more  than  common  fear  of  Clifford’s  rigour. 
Who  thunders  to  his  captives  blood  and  death, 

I  cannot  judge:  but,  to  conclude  with  truth, 

Their  weapons  like  to  lightning  came  and  went; 
Our  soldiers’,  like  the  night-owl’s  lazy  flight,  /50 
Or  like  an  idle  thresher  with  a  flail. 

Fell  gently  down,  as  if  they  struck  their  friends. 

I  cheer’d  them  up  with  justice  of  our  cause. 

With  promise  of  high  pay  and  great  rewards; 


78  THIRD  PART  OF 

But  all  in  vain;  they  had  no  heart  to  fight, 

And  we  in  them  no  hope  to  win  the  day; 

So  that  we  fled;  the  King  unto  the  Queen; 

Lord  George  your  brother,  Norfolk,  and  myself. 
In  haste,  post-haste,  are  come  to  join  with  you; 

For  in  the  marches  here  we  heard  you  were,  /40 
Making  another  head  to  fight  again. 

Eduo.  Where  is  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  gentle 
Warwick? 

And  when  came  George  from  Burgundy  to  Eng¬ 
land? 

War.  Some  six  miles  oflF  the  Duke  is  with  the 
soldiers; 

And  for  your  brother,  he  was  lately  sent 
From  your  kind  aunt.  Duchess  of  Burgundy, 

With  aid  of  soldiers  to  this  needful  war. 

Rich.  ’Twas  odds,  belike,  when  valiant  War¬ 
wick  fled: 

Oft  have  I  heard  his  praises  in  pursuit. 

But  ne’er  till  now  his  scandal  of  retire.  /yo 

War.  Nor  now  my  scandal,  Richard,  dost  thou 
hear; 

For  thou  shalt  know  this  strong  right  hand  of 
mine 

Can  pluck  the  diadem  from  faint  Henry’s  head. 
And  wring  the  awful  sceptre  from  his  fist. 

Were  he  as  famous  and  as  bold  in  war 
As  he  is  famed  for  mildness,  peace,  and  prayer. 
Rich.  I  know  it  well.  Lord  Warwick;  blame  me 
not: 

*Tis  love  I  bear  thy  glories  makes  me  speak. 

But  in  this  troublous  time  what’s  to  be  done? 

Shall  we  go  throw  away  our  coats  of  steel,  i6o 
And  wrap  our  bodies  in  black  mourning  gowns. 
Numbering  our  Ave-Maries  with  our  beads? 

Or  shall  we  on  the  helmets  of  our  foes 
Tell  our  devotion  with  revengeful  arms? 

If  for  the  last,  say  ay,  and  to  it,  lords. 

War.  Why,  therefore  Warwick  came  to  seek 
you  out; 

And  therefore  comes  my  brother  Montague. 
Attend  me,  lords.  The  proud  insulting  Queen, 
With  Clifford  and  the  haught  Northumberland, 
And  of  their  feather  many  moe  proud  birds,  ijo 
Have  wrought  the  easy-melting  King  like  wax. 

He  swore  consent  to  your  succession. 

His  oath  enrolled  in  the  parliament; 

And  now  to  London  all  the  crew  are  gone. 

To  frustrate  both  his  oath  and  what  beside 
May  make  against  the  house  of  Lancaster. 

Their  power,  I  think,  is  thirty  thousand  strong: 
Now,  if  the  help  of  Norfolk  and  myself. 

With  all  the  friends  that  thou,  brave  Earl  of 
March, 

Amongst  the  loving  Welshmen  canst  procure,/^o 
Will  but  amount  to  five  and  twenty  thousand. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  ii 

Why,  Via!  to  London  will  we  march  amain. 

And  once  again  bestride  our  foaming  steeds. 

And  once  again  cry,  “Charge  upon  our  foes!” 

But  never  once  again  turn  back  and  fly. 

Rich.  Ay,  now  methinks  I  hear  great  Warwick 
speak: 

Ne’er  may  he  live  to  see  a  sunshine  day. 

That  cries  “Retire,”  if  Warwick  bid  him  stay. 
Edw.  Lord  Warwick,  on  thy  shoulder  will  I 
lean;  189 

And  when  thou  fail’st — as  God  forbid  the 
hour — 

Must  Edward  fall,  which  peril  heaven  forfend! 
War.  No  longer  Earl  of  March,  but  Duke  of 
York: 

The  next  degree  is  England’s  royal  throne; 

For  King  of  England  shalt  thou  be  proclaim’d 
In  every  borough  as  we  pass  along; 

And  he  that  throws  not  up  his  cap  for  joy 
Shall  for  the  fault  make  forfeit  of  his  head. 

King  Edward,  valiant  Richard,  Montague, 

Stay  we  no  longer,  dreaming  of  renown. 

But  sound  the  trumpets,  and  about  our  task.  200 
Rich.  Then,  Clifford,  were  thy  heart  as  hard  as 
steel. 

As  thou  hast  shown  it  flinty  by  thy  deeds, 

I  come  to  pierce  it,  or  to  give  thee  mine. 

Edv).  Then  strike  up  drums:  God  and  Saint 
George  for  us! 

Enter  a  SECOND  messenger. 

War.  How  now!  what  news? 

2nd  Mess.  The  Duke  of  Norfolk  sends  you  word 
by  me. 

The  Queen  is  coming  with  a  puissant  host; 

And  craves  your  company  for  speedy  counsel. 
War.  Why  then  it  sorts,  brave  warriors,  let’s 
away.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Before  York 

Flourish.  Enter  king  henry,  queen  Margaret, 

the  PRINCE  OF  WALES,  CLIFFORD,  and  NORTH¬ 
UMBERLAND,  with  drum  and  trumpets. 

Q.  Mar.  Welcome,  my  lord,  to  this  brave  town 
of  York. 

Yonder’s  the  head  of  that  arch-enemy 

That  sought  to  be  encompass’d  with  your  crown; 

Doth  not  the  object  cheer  your  heart,  my  lord? 

K.  Hen.  Ay,  as  the  rocks  cheer  them  that  fear 
their  wreck: 

To  see  this  sight,  it  irks  my  very  soul. 

Withhold  revenge,  dear  God!  ’tis  not  my  fault. 
Nor  wittingly  have  I  infringed  my  vow. 

Clif.  My  gracious  liege,  this  too  much  lenity 
And  harmful  pity  must  be  laid  aside.  10 

To  whom  do  lions  cast  their  gentle  looks? 


SCENE  II  THIRD  PART  OF 

Not  to  the  beast  that  would  usurp  their  den. 
Whose  hand  is  that  the  forest  bear  doth  lick? 

Not  his  that  spoils  her  young  before  her  face. 

Who  ’scapes  the  lurking  serpent’s  mortal  sting? 
Not  he  that  sets  his  foot  upon  her  back. 

The  smallest  worm  will  turn  being  trodden  on, 
And  doves  will  peck  in  safeguard  of  their  brood. 
Ambitious  York  did  level  at  thy  crown, 

Thou  smiling  while  he  knit  his  angry  brows :  20 

He,  but  a  duke,  would  have  his  son  a  king, 

And  raise  his  issue,  like  a  loving  sire; 

Thou,  being  a  king,  blest  with  a  goodly  son, 

Didst  yield  consent  to  disinherit  him. 

Which  argued  thee  a  most  unloving  father. 
Unreasonable  creatures  feed  their  young; 

And  though  man’s  face  be  fearful  to  their  eyes, 

Yet,  in  protection  of  their  tender  ones. 

Who  hath  not  seen  them,  even  with  those  wings 
Which  sometime  they  have  used  with  fearful 
flight,  . 

Make  war  with  him  that  climb’d  unto  their  nest. 
Offering  their  own  lives  in  their  young’s  de¬ 
fence? 

For  shame,  my  liege,  make  them  your  precedent! 
Were  it  not  pity  that  this  goodly  boy 
Should  lose  his  birthright  by  his  father’s  fault, 

And  long  hereafter  say  unto  his  child, 

“What  my  great-grandfather  and  grandsire  got 
My  careless  father  fondly  gave  away”? 

Ah,  what  a  shame  were  this!  Look  on  the  boy; 

And  let  his  manly  face,  which  promiseth  40 
Successful  fortune,  steel  thy  melting  heart 
To  hold  thine  own  and  leave  thine  own  with  him. 
K.  Hen.  Full  well  hath  Clifford  play’d  the  ora¬ 
tor. 

Inferring  arguments  of  mighty  force. 

But,  Clifford,  tell  me,  didst  thou  never  hear 
That  things  ill-got  had  ever  bad  success? 

And  happy  always  was  it  for  that  son 
Whose  father  for  his  hoarding  went  to  hell? 

I’ll  leave  my  son  my  virtuous  deeds  behind; 

And  v/ould  my  father  had  left  me  no  more!  jo 
For  all  the  rest  is  held  at  such  a  rate 
As  brings  a  thousand- fold  more  care  to  keep 
Than  in  possession  any  jot  of  pleasure. 

Ah,  cousin  York!  would  thy  best  friends  did 
know 

How  it  doth  grieve  me  that  thy  head  is  here! 

Q.  Mar.  My  lord,  cheer  up  your  spirits:  our 
foes  are  nigh. 

And  this  soft  courage  makes  your  followers  faint. 
You  promised  knighthood  to  our  forward  son: 
Unsheathe  your  sword,  and  dub  him  presently. 
Edward,  kneel  down.  60 

K.  Hen.  Edward  Plantagenet,  arise  a  knight; 

And  learn  this  lesson,  draw  thy  sword  in  right. 


KING  HENRY  VI  79 

Prince.  My  gracious  father,  by  your  kingly 
leave. 

I’ll  draw  it  as  apparent  to  the  crown. 

And  in  that  quarrel  use  it  to  the  death. 

Clif.  Why,  that  is  spoken  like  a  toward  prince. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  Royal  commanders,  be  in  readiness; 

For  with  a  band  of  thirty  thousand  men 
Comes  Warwick,  backing  of  the  Duke  of 
York; 

And  in  the  towns,  as  they  do  march  along,  70 
Proclaims  him  king,  and  many  fly  to  him: 
Darraign  your  battle,  for  they  are  at  hand. 

Clif.  I  would  your  Highness  would  depart  the 
field: 

The  Queen  hath  best  success  when  you  are  ab¬ 
sent. 

Q.  Mar.  Ay,  good  my  lord,  and  leave  us  to  our 
fortune. 

K.  Hen.  Why,  that’s  my  fortune  too;  therefore 
I’ll  stay. 

North.  Be  it  with  resolution  then  to  fight. 

Prince.  My  royal  father,  cheer  these  noble  lords 
And  hearten  those  that  fight  in  your  defence: 
Unsheathe  your  sword,  good  father;  cry  “Saint 
George!”  80 

March.  Enter  edward,  george,  richard,  war- 
wick,  NORFOLK,  MONTAGUE,  and Soldters. 

Edw.  Now,  perjured  Henry!  wilt  thou  kneel  for 
grace. 

And  set  thy  diadem  upon  my  head; 

Or  bide  the  mortal  fortune  of  the  field? 

Q.  Mar.  Go,  rate  thy  minions,  proud  insulting 
boy! 

Becomes  it  thee  to  be  thus  bold  in  terms 
Before  thy  sovereign  and  thy  lawful  king? 

Edw.  I  am  his  king,  and  he  should  bow  his  knee; 

I  was  adopted  heir  by  his  consent: 

Since  when,  his  oath  is  broke;  for,  as  I  hear. 

You,  that  are  king,  though  he  do  wear  the  crown, 
Have  caused  him,  by  new  act  of  parliament,  pi 
To  blot  out  me,  and  put  his  own  son  in. 

Cltf.  And  reason  too: 

Who  should  l  ucceed  the  father  but  the  son? 

Rich.  Are  you  there,  butcher?  O,  I  cannot 
speak! 

Clif.  Ay,  crook-back,  here  I  stand  to  answer 
thee, 

Or  any  he  the  proudest  of  thy  sort. 

Rich.  ’Twas  you  that  kill’d  young  Rutland, 
was  it  not? 

Clif.  Ay,  and  old  York,  and  yet  not  satisfied. 
Rich.  For  God’s  sake,  lords,  give  signal  to  the 
fight.  100 


8o 


THIRD  PART  OF 

War.  What  say’st  thou,  Henry,  wilt  thou  yield 
the  crown? 

Q.  Alar.  Why,  how  now,  long-tongued  War¬ 
wick!  dare  you  speak? 

When  you  and  I  met  at  Saint  Alban’s  last. 

Your  legs  did  better  service  than  your  hands. 

War.  Then  ’twas  my  turn  to  fly,  and  now  ’tis 
thine. 

CUf.  You  said  so  much  before,  and  yet  you  fled. 
War.  ’Twas  not  your  valour,  Clifford,  drove  me 
thence. 

North.  No,  nor  your  manhood  that  durst  make 
you  stay. 

Rich.  Northumberland,  I  hold  thee  reverently. 
Break  off  the  parley;  for  scarce  I  can  refrain  no 
The  execution  of  my  big-swoln  heart 
Upon  that  Clifford,  that  cruel  child-killer. 

Clif.  I  slew  thy  father,  call’st  thou  him  a  child? 
Rich.  Ay,  like  a  dastard  and  a  treacherous 
coward. 

As  thou  didst  kill  our  tender  brother  Rutland; 

But  ere  sunset  I’ll  make  thee  curse  the  deed. 

K.  Hen.  Have  done  with  words,  my  lords,  and 
hear  me  speak. 

Q.  Mar.  Defy  them  then,  or  else  hold  close  thy 
lips. 

K.  Hen.  I  prithee,  give  no  limits  to  my  tongue: 

I  am  a  king,  and  privileged  to  speak.  120 

Clif.  My  liege,  the  wound  that  bred  this  meet¬ 
ing  here 

Cannot  be  cured  by  words;  therefore  be  still. 

Rich.  Then,  executioner,  unsheathe  thy  sword: 
By  him  that  made  us  all,  I  am  resolved 
That  Clifford’s  manhood  lies  upon  his  tongue. 
Edw.  Say,  Henry,  shall  I  have  my  right,  or  no? 

A  thousand  men  have  broke  their  fasts  to-day. 
That  ne’er  shall  dine  unless  thou  yield  the  crown. 

War.  If  thou  deny,  their  blood  upon  thy  head; 

For  York  in  justice  puts  his  armour  on.  75 0 
Prince.  If  that  be  right  which  Warwick  says  is 

There  is  no  wrong,  but  every  thing  is  right. 

Rich.  Whoever  got  thee,  there  thy  mother 
stands; 

For,  well  I  wot,  thou  hast  thy  mother’s  tongue. 

Q.  Mar.  But  thou  art  neither  like  thy  sire  nor 
dam; 

But  like  a  foul  mis-shapen  stigmatic, 

Mark’d  by  the  destinies  to  be  avoided, 

As  venom  toads,  or  lizards’  dreadful  stings. 

Rich.  Iron  of  Naples  hid  with  English  gilt. 

Whose  father  bears  the  title  of  a  king —  1^0 

As  if  a  channel  should  be  call’d  the  sea — 

Shamest  thou  not,  knowing  whence  thou  art  ex- 
traught. 

To  let  thy  tongue  detect  thy  base-born  heart? 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  11 

Ediv.  A  wisp  of  straw  were  worth  a  thousand 
crowns. 

To  make  this  shameless  callet  know  herself. 
Helen  of  Greece  was  fairer  far  than  thou. 
Although  thy  husband  may  be  Menelaus; 

And  ne’er  was  Agamemnon’s  brother  wrong’d 
By  that  false  woman,  as  this  King  by  thee. 

His  father  revell’d  in  the  heart  of  France,  750 
And  tamed  the  King,  and  made  the  Dauphin 
stoop; 

And  had  he  match’d  according  to  his  state. 

He  might  have  kept  that  glory  to  this  day; 

But  when  he  took  a  beggar  to  his  bed, 

And  graced  thy  poor  sire  with  his  bridal-day. 
Even  then  that  sunshine  brew’d  a  shower  for  him. 
That  wash’d  his  father’s  fortunes  forth  of  France 
And  heap’d  sedition  on  his  crown  at  home. 

For  what  hath  broach’d  this  tumult  but  thy  pride? 
Hadst  thou  been  meek,  our  title  still  had  slept; 
And  we,  in  pity  of  the  gentle  king,  161 

Had  slipp’d  our  claim  until  another  age. 

Geo.  But  when  we  saw  our  sunshine  made  thy 
spring. 

And  that  thy  summer  bred  us  no  increase. 

We  set  the  axe  to  thy  usurping  root ; 

And  though  the  edge  hath  something  hit  our¬ 
selves. 

Yet,  know  thou,  since  we  have  begun  to  strike. 
We’ll  never  leave  till  we  have  hewn  thee  down. 
Or  bathed  thy  growing  with  our  heated  bloods. 
Edw.  And,  in  this  resolution,  I  defy  thee;  770 
Not  willing  any  longer  conference. 

Since  thou  deniest  the  gentle  king  to  speak. 

Sound  trTjmpets!  let  our  bloody  colours  wave! 
And  either  victory,  or  else  a  grave.  I 

Q.  Mar.  Stay,  Edward.  ■ 

Edw.  No,  wrangling  woman,  we’ll  no  longer  | 
stay: 

These  words  will  cost  ten  thousand  lives  this  day. 

[Exeunt, 

Scene  hi.  A  field  of  battle  between  Towton 
and  Saxton.,  in  Yorkshire 
Alarum.  Excursions.  Enter  Warwick. 

War.  Forspent  with  toil,  as  runners  with  a  race, 
I  lay  me  down  a  little  while  to  breathe; 

For  strokes  received,  and  many  blows  repaid. 
Have  robb’d  my  strong-knit  sinews  of  their 
strength. 

And  spite  of  spite  needs  must  I  rest  awhile. 

Enter  edward,  running. 

Edw.  Smile,  gentle  heaven!  or  strike,  ungentle 
death! 

For  this  world  frowns,  and  Edward’s  sun  is 
clouded. 


SCENE  III  THIRD  PART  OF 

War.  How  now,  my  lord!  what  hap?  what  hope 
of good? 

Enter  george. 

Geo.  Our  hap  is  loss,  our  hope  but  sad  despair; 
Our  ranks  are  broke,  and  ruin  follows  us :  lo 

What  counsel  give  you?  whither  we  fly? 

Edv).  Bootless  is  flight,  they  follow  us  with 
wings; 

And  weak  we  are  and  cannot  shun  pursuit. 

Enter  richard. 

Rich.  Ah,  Warwick,  why  hast  thou  withdrawn 
thyself? 

Thy  brother’s  blood  the  thirsty  earth  hath  drunk. 
Broach’d  with  the  steely  point  of  Clifford’s  lance; 
And  in  the  very  pangs  of  death  he  cried. 

Like  to  a  dismal  clangor  heard  from  far, 
“Warwick,  revenge!  brother,  revenge  my 
death!” 

So,  underneath  the  belly  of  their  steeds,  20 

That  stain’d  their  fetlocks  in  his  smoking 
blood. 

The  noble  gentleman  gave  up  the  ghost. 

,  War.  Then  let  the  earth  be  drunken  with  our 
blood: 

I’ll  kill  my  horse,  because  I  will  not  fly. 

Why  stand  we  like  soft-hearted  women  here, 
Wailing  our  losses,  whiles  the  foe  doth  rage; 

And  look  upon,  as  if  the  tragedy 

Were  play’d  in  jest  by  counterfeiting  actors? 

Here  on  my  knee  I  vow  to  God  above. 

I’ll  never  pause  again,  never  stand  still,  50 

Till  either  death  hath  closed  these  eyes  of  mine 
Or  fortune  given  me  measure  of  revenge. 

Edw.  O  Warwick,  I  do  bend  my  knee  with 
thine; 

And  in  this  vow  do  chain  my  soul  to  thine! 

And,  ere  my  knee  rise  from  the  earth’s  cold  face, 

I  throw  my  hands,  mine  eyes,  my  heart  to  thee, 
Thou  setter  up  and  plucker  down  of  kings, 
Beseeching  thee,  if  with  thy  will  it  stands 
That  to  my  foes  this  body  must  be  prey. 

Yet  that  thy  brazen  gates  of  heaven  may  ope,  40 
And  give  sweet  passage  to  my  sinful  soul! 

Now,  lords,  take  leave  until  we  meet  again. 
Where’er  it  be,  in  heaven  or  in  earth. 

Rich.  Brother,  give  me  thy  hand;  and,  gentle 
Warwick 

Let  me  embrace  thee  in  my  weary  arms : 

I,  that  did  never  weep,  now  melt  with  woe 
That  winter  should  cut  off  our  spring-time  so. 

War.  Away,  away!  Once  more,  sweet  lords, 
farewell. 

Geo.  Yet  let  us  all  together  to  our  troops. 

And  give  them  leave  to  fly  that  will  not  stay;  50 


KING  HENRY  VI  81 

And  call  them  pillars  that  will  stand  to  us; 

And,  if  we  thrive,  promise  them  such  rewards 
As  victors  at  the  Olympian  games: 

This  may  plant  courage  in  their  quailing  breasts; 
For  yet  is  hope  of  life  and  victory. 

Forslow  no  longer,  make  we  hence  amain. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Excursions.  Enter  richard  and  Clifford. 
Rich.  Now,  Clifford,  I  have  singled  thee  alone: 
Suppose  this  arm  is  for  the  Duke  of  York, 

And  this  for  Rutland;  both  bound  to  revenge, 
Wert  thou  environ’d  with  a  brazen  wall. 

Clif.  Now,  Richard,  I  am  with  thee  here  alone; 
This  is  the  hand  that  stabb’d  thy  father  York; 

And  this  the  hand  that  slew  thy  brother  Rutland; 
And  here’s  the  heart  that  triumphs  in  their  death 
And  cheers  these  hands  that  slew  thy  sire  and 
brother 

To  execute  the  like  upon  thyself;  to 

And  so,  have  at  thee! 

They  fight.  Warwick  comes;  Clifford  flies. 
Rich.  Nay,  Warwick,  single  out  some  other 
chase; 

For  I  myself  will  hunt  this  wolf  to  death. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Alarum.  Enter  king  henry  alone. 

King.  This  battle  fares  like  to  the  morning’s 
war. 

When  dying  clouds  contend  with  growing  light, 
What  time  the  shepherd,  blowing  of  his  nails, 
Can  neither  call  it  perfect  day  nor  night. 

Now  sways  it  this  way,  like  a  mighty  sea 
Forced  by  the  tide  to  combat  with  the  wind; 

Now  sways  it  that  way,  like  the  selfsame  sea 
Forced  to  retire  by  fury  of  the  wind: 

Sometime  the  flood  prevails,  and  then  the  wind; 
Now  one  the  better,  then  another  best;  10 

Both  tugging  to  be  victors,  breast  to  breast, 

Yet  neither  conqueror  nor  conquered: 

So  is  the  equal  poise  of  this  fell  war. 

Here  on  this  molehill  will  I  sit  me  down. 

To  whom  God  will,  there  be  the  victory! 

For  Margaret  my  queen,  and  Clifford  too. 

Have  chid  me  from  the  battle;  swearing  both 
They  prosper  best  of  all  when  I  am  thence. 
Would  I  were  dead!  if  God’s  good  will  were  so; 
For  what  is  in  this  world  but  grief  and  woe?  20 
O  God!  methinks  it  were  a  happy  life, 

To  be  no  better  than  a  homely  swain; 

To  sit  upon  a  hill,  as  I  do  now. 

To  carve  out  dials  quaintly,  point  by  point, 
Thereby  to  see  the  minutes  how  they  run, 


82  THIRD  PART  OF 

How  many  make  the  hour  full  complete; 

How  many  hours  bring  about  the  day; 

How  many  days  will  finish  up  the  year; 

How  many  years  a  mortal  man  may  live. 

When  this  is  known,  then  to  divide  the  times:  50 
So  many  hours  must  I  tend  my  flock; 

So  many  hours  must  I  take  my  rest; 

So  many  hours  must  1  contemplate; 

So  many  hours  must  I  sport  myself; 

So  many  days  my  ewes  have  been  with  young; 

So  many  weeks  ere  the  poor  fools  will  ean; 

So  many  years  ere  I  shall  shear  the  fleece: 

So  minutes,  hours,  days,  months,  and  years. 

Pass’d  over  to  the  end  they  were  created. 

Would  bring  white  hairs  unto  a  quiet  grave.  40 
Ah,  what  a  life  were  this !  how  sweet!  how  lovely! 
Gives  not  the  hawthorn-bush  a  sweeter  shade 
To  shepherds  looking  on  their  silly  sheep 
Than  doth  a  rich  embroider’d  canopy 
To  kings  that  fear  their  subjects’  treachery? 

O,  yes  it  doth;  a  thousand-fold  it  doth. 

And  to  conclude,  the  shepherd’s  homely  curds, 

His  cold  thin  drink  out  of  his  leather  bottle, 

His  wonted  sleep  under  a  fresh  tree’s  shade. 

All  which  secure  and  sweetly  he  enjoys,  50 
Is  far  beyond  a  prince’s  delicates. 

His  viands  sparkling  in  a  golden  cup. 

His  body  couched  in  a  curious  bed. 

When  care,  mistrust,  and  treason  waits  on  him. 

Alarum.  Enter  a  son  that  has  killed  his  father^ 
dragging  in  the  dead  body. 

Son.  Ill  blows  the  wind  that  profits  nobody. 

This  man,  whom  hand  to  hand  I  slew  in  fight, 

May  be  possessed  with  some  store  of  crowns; 

And  I,  that  haply  take  them  from  him  now. 

May  yet  ere  night  yield  both  my  life  and  them 
To  some  man  else,  as  this  dead  man  doth  me.  60 
Who’s  this?  O  God,  it  is  my  father’s  face. 

Whom  in  this  conflict  I  unawares  have  kill’d. 

O  heavy  times,  begetting  such  events! 

From  London  by  the  King  was  I  press’d  forth; 

My  father,  being  the  Earl  of  Warwick’s  man, 
Came  on  the  part  of  York,  press’d  by  his  master; 
And  I,  who  at  his  hands  received  my  life. 

Have  by  my  hands  of  life  bereaved  him. 

Pardon  me,  God,  I  knew  not  what  I  did! 

And  pardon,  father,  for  I  knew  not  thee!  70 
My  tears  shall  wipe  away  these  bloody  marks; 

And  no  more  words  till  they  have  flow’d  their 
fill. 

K.  Hen.  O  piteous  spectacle!  O  bloody  times! 
Whiles  lions  war  and  battle  for  their  dens. 

Poor  harmless  lambs  abide  their  enmity. 

Weep,  wretched  man.  I’ll  aid  thee  tear  for  tear; 
And  let  out  hearts  and  eyes,  like  civil  war. 


KING  HENRY  VI  ACT  II 

Be  blind  with  tears,  and  break  o’ercharged  with 
grief. 

Enter  a  FXTHEK  that  has  killed  his  son.,  bringing 
in  the  body. 

Fath.  Thou  that  so  stoutly  hast  resisted  me. 

Give  me  thy  gold,  if  thou  hast  any  gold;  80 

For  I  have  bought  it  with  an  hundred  blows. 

But  let  me  see:  is  this  our  foeman’s  face? 

Ah,  no,  no,  no,  it  is  mine  only  son! 

Ah,  boy,  if  any  life  be  left  in  thee. 

Throw  up  thine  eye!  see,  see  what  showers  arise. 
Blown  with  the  windy  tempest  of  my  heart. 

Upon  thy  wounds,  that  kill  mine  eye  and  heart! 
O,  pity,  God,  this  miserable  age! 

What  stratagems,  how  fell,  how  butcherly, 
Erroneous,  mutinous  and  unnatural,  po 

This  deadly  quarrel  daily  doth  beget! 

O  boy,  thy  father  gave  thee  life  too  soon. 

And  hath  bereft  thee  of  thy  life  too  late! 

K.  Hen.  Woe  above  woe!  grief  more  than 
common  grief! 

O  that  my  death  would  stay  these  ruthful  deeds! 
O,  pity,  pity,  gentle  heaven,  pity! 

The  red  rose  and  the  white  are  on  his  face. 

The  fatal  colours  of  our  striving  houses: 

The  one  his  purple  blood  right  well  resembles; 
The  other  his  pale  cheeks,  methinks,  presenteth: 
Wither  one  rose,  and  let  the  other  flourish;  loi 
If  you  contend,  a  thousand  lives  must  wither. 

Son.  How  will  my  mother  for  a  father’s  death 
Take  on  with  me  and  ne’er  be  satisfied! 

Fath.  How  will  my  wife  for  slaughter  of  my 
son 

Shed  seas  of  tears  and  ne’er  be  satisfied! 

K.  Hen.  How  will  the  country  for  these  woful 
chances 

Misthink  the  King  and  not  be  satisfied! 

Son.  Was  ever  son  so  rued  a  father’s  death? 

Fath.  Was  ever  father  so  bemoan’d  his  son? 

K.  Hen.  Was  ever  king  so  grieved  for  subjects’ 
woe?  Ill 

Much  is  your  sorrow;  mine  ten  times  so  much. 
Son.  I’ll  bear  thee  hence,  where  I  may  weep  my 
fill .  [Exit  'with  the  body. 

Fath.  These  arms  of  mine  shall  be  thy  winding- 
sheet; 

My  heart,  sweet  boy,  shall  be  thy  sepulchre, 

For  from  my  heart  thine  image  ne’er  shall  go; 

My  sighing  breast  shall  be  thy  funeral  bell; 

And  so  obsequious  will  thy  father  be. 

Even  for  the  loss  of  thee,  having  no  more, 

As  Priam  was  for  all  his  valiant  sons.  120 

I’ll  bear  thee  hence;  and  let  them  fight  that  will. 
For  I  have  murdered  where  I  should  not  kill. 

[Exit  'with  the  body. 


SCENE  V 


83 


THIRD  PART  OF 

K.  Hen.  Sad-hearted  men,  much  overgone  with 
care, 

Here  sits  a  king  more  woeful  than  you  are. 

Alarums:  excursions.  Enter  queen  Margaret, 
the  PRINCE  OF  WALES,  and  exeter. 

Prince.  Fly,  father,  fly!  for  all  your  friends  are 
fled. 

And  Warwick  rages  like  a  chafed  bull: 

Away!  for  death  doth  hold  us  in  pursuit. 

Q.  Mar.  Mount  you,  my  lord:  towards  Berwick 
post  amain: 

Edward  and  Richard,  like  a  brace  of  greyhounds 
Having  the  fearful  flying  hare  in  sight,  /50 

With  fiery  eyes  sparkling  for  very  wrath. 

And  bloody  steel  grasp’d  in  their  ireful  hands. 

Are  at  our  backs;  and  therefore  hence  amain. 

Exe.  Away!  for  vengeance  comes  along  with 
them: 

Nay,  stay  not  to  expostulate,  make  speed; 

Or  else  come  after:  I’ll  away  before. 

K.  Hen.  Nay,  take  me  with  thee,  good  sweet 
Exeter: 

Not  that  I  fear  to  stay,  but  love  to  go 
Whither  the  Queen  intends.  Forward;  away! 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  vi.  Another  part  of  the  field 
A  loud  alarum.  Enter  Clifford,  ucoimded. 

Clif.  Here  burns  my  candle  out;  ay,  here  it  dies. 
Which,  whiles  it  lasted,  gave  King  Henry  light. 

O  Lancaster,  I  fear  thy  overthrow 
More  than  my  body’s  parting  with  my  soul! 

My  love  and  fear  glued  many  friends  to  thee; 

And,  now  I  fall,  thy  tough  commixture  melts. 
Impairing  Henry,  strengthening  misproud  York, 
The  common  people  swarm  like  summer  flies; 

And  whither  fly  the  gnats  but  to  the  sun? 

And  who  shines  now  but  Henry’s  enemies?  to 
O  Phoebus,  hadst  thou  never  given  consent 
That  Phaethon  should  check  thy  fiery  steeds. 

Thy  burning  car  never  had  scorch’d  the  earth! 

And,  Henry,  hadst  thou  sway’d  as  kings  should 
do. 

Or  as  thy  father  and  his  father  did. 

Giving  no  ground  unto  the  house  of  York, 

They  never  then  had  sprung  like  summer  flies; 

I  and  ten  thousand  in  this  luckless  realm 
Had  left  no  mourning  widows  for  our  death; 

And  thou  this  day  hadst  kept  thy  chair  in  peace. 
For  what  doth  cherish  weeds  but  gentle  air?  21 
And  what  makes  robbers  bold  but  too  much  len¬ 
ity? 

Bootless  are  plaints,  and  cureless  are  my  wounds; 
No  way  to  fly,  nor  strength  to  hold  out  flight: 

The  foe  is  merciless,  and  will  not  pity; 


KING  HENRY  VI 

For  at  their  hands  I  have  deserved  no  pity. 

The  air  hath  got  into  my  deadly  wounds. 

And  much  effuse  of  blood  doth  make  me  faint. 
Come,  York  and  Richard,  Warwick  and  the  rest; 
I  stabb’d  your  fathers’  bosoms,  split  my  breast. 
[He  faints.] 

Alarum  and  retreat.  Enter  edward,  george, 
RICHARD,  MONTAGUE,  WARWICK,  and  Soldier s. 

Edw.  Now  breathe  we,  lords:  good  fortune  bids 
us  pause,  5/ 

And  smooth  the  frowns  of  war  with  peaceful 
looks. 

Some  troops  pursue  the  bloody-minded  Queen, 
That  led  calm  Henry,  though  he  were  a  king. 

As  doth  a  sail,  fill’d  with  a  fretting  gust, 
Command  an  argosy  to  stem  the  waves. 

But  think  you,  lords,  that  Clifford  fled  with 
them? 

War.  No,  ’tis  impossible  he  should  escape; 

For,  though  before  his  face  I  speak  the  words. 
Your  brother  Richard  mark’d  him  for  the  grave: 
And  wheresoe’er  he  is,  he’s  surely  dead.  4/ 
[CLIFFORD  and  dies. 

Edw.  Whose  soul  is  that  which  takes  her  heavy 
leave? 

Rich.  A  deadly  groan,  like  life  and  death’s  de¬ 
parting. 

Edw.  See  who  it  is:  and,  now  the  battle’s  ended, 
If  friend  or  foe,  let  him  be  gently  used. 

Rich.  Revoke  that  doom  of  mercy,  for  ’tis 
Clifford; 

Who  not  contented  that  he  lopp’d  the  branch 
In  hewing  Rutland  when  his  leaves  put  forth. 

But  set  his  murdering  knife  unto  the  root 
From  whence  that  tender  spray  did  sweetly 
spring, 

I  mean  our  princely  father,  Duke  of  York.  5/ 
War.  From  off  the  gates  of  York  fetch  down 
the  head. 

Your  father’s  head,  which  Clifford  placed  there; 
Instead  whereof  let  this  supply  the  room: 
Measure  for  measure  must  be  answered. 

Edw.  Bring  forth  that  fatal  screech-owl  to  our 
house. 

That  nothing  sung  but  death  to  us  and  ours: 

Now  death  shall  stop  his  dismal  threatening 
sound. 

And  his  ill-boding  tongue  no  more  shall  speak. 

War.  I  think  his  understanding  is  bereft.  60 
Speak,  Clifford,  dost  thou  know  who  speaks  to 
thee? 

Dark  cloudy  death  o’ershades  his  beams  of  life. 
And  he  nor  sees  nor  hears  us  what  we  say. 

Rich.  O,  would  he  did!  and  so  perhaps  he  doth: 
’Tis  but  his  policy  to  counterfeit. 


Acr  HI 


84  THIRD  PART  OF 

Because  he  would  avoid  such  bitter  taunts 
Which  in  the  time  of  death  he  gave  our  father. 

Geo.  If  so  thou  think’ st,  vex  him  with  eager 
words. 

Kkh.  Clifford,  ask  mercy  and  obtain  no  grace. 
Ed^.  Clifford,  repent  in  bootless  penitence. 70 
War.  Clifford,  devise  excuses  for  thy  faults. 

Geo.  While  we  devise  fell  tortures  for  thy  faults. 
Rich.  Thou  didst  love  York,  and  I  am  son  to 
York. 

Ednjo.  Thou  pitied’st  Rutland;  I  will  pity  thee. 
Geo.  Where’s  Captain  Margaret,  to  fence  you 
now? 

War.  They  mock  thee,  Clifford:  swear  as  thou 
wast  wont. 

Rich.  What,  not  an  oath?  nay,  then  the  world 
goes  hard 

When  Clifford  cannot  spare  his  friends  an  oath. 

I  know  by  that  he’s  dead;  and,  by  my  soul. 

If  this  right  hand  would  buy  two  hours’  life,  80 
That  I  in  all  despite  might  rail  at  him, 

This  hand  should  chop  it  off,  and  with  the  issuing 
blood 

Stifle  the  villain  whose  unstanched  thirst 
York  and  young  Rutland  could  not  satisfy. 

War.  Ay,  but  he’s  dead:  off  with  the  traitor’s 
head. 

And  rear  it  in  the  place  your  father’s  stands. 

And  now  to  London  with  triumphant  march. 

There  to  be  crowned  England’s  royal  king: 

From  whence  shall  Warwick  cut  the  sea  to 
France, 

And  ask  the  Lady  Bona  for  thy  queen:  po 

So  shalt  thou  sinew  both  these  lands  together; 

And,  having  France  thy  friend,  thou  shalt  not 
dread 

The  scatter’d  foe  that  hopes  to  rise  again; 

For  though  they  cannot  greatly  sting  to  hurt. 

Yet  look  to  have  them  buzz  to  offend  thine  ears. 
First  will  I  see  the  coronation; 

And  then  to  Brittany  Eli  cross  the  sea. 

To  effect  this  marriage,  so  it  please  my  lord. 

Edw.  Even  as  thou  wilt,  sweet  Warwick,  let  it 
be; 

For  in  thy  shoulder  do  I  build  my  seat,  100 

And  never  will  I  undertake  the  thing 
Wherein  thy  counsel  and  consent  is  wanting. 
Richard,  I  will  create  thee  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
And  George,  of  Clarence:  Warwick,  as  ourself. 
Shall  do  and  undo  as  him  pleaseth  best. 

Rich.  Let  me  be  Duke  of  Clarence,  George  of 
Gloucester; 

For  Gloucester’s  dukedom  is  too  ominous. 

War.  Tut,  that’s  a  foolish  observation: 

Richard,  be  Duke  of  Gloucester.  Now  to  Lon¬ 
don, 


KING  HENRY  VI 

To  see  these  honours  in  possession.  no 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  A  forest  in  the  north  of  England 
Enter  two  keepers,  with  cross-bows  in  their 
hands. 

ist  Keep.  Under  this  thick-grown  brake  we’ll 
shroud  ourselves; 

For  through  this  laund  anon  the  deer  will  come; 
And  in  this  covert  will  we  make  our  stand. 

Culling  the  principal  of  all  the  deer. 

2nd  Keep.  I’ll  stay  above  the  hill,  so  both  may 
shoot. 

ist  Keep.  That  cannot  be;  the  noise  of  thy  cross¬ 
bow 

Will  scare  the  herd,  and  so  my  shoot  is  lost. 

Here  stand  we  both,  and  aim  we  at  the  best: 

And,  for  the  time  shall  not  seem  tedious. 

I’ll  tell  thee  what  befel  me  on  a  day  10 

In  this  self-place  where  now  we  mean  to  stand. 
2nd  Keep.  Here  comes  a  man;  let’s  stay  till  he 
be  past. 

Enter  king  henry,  disguised,  with  a 
prayerbook. 

K.  Hen.  From  Scotland  am  I  stol’n,  even  of  pure 
love. 

To  greet  mine  own  land  with  my  wishful  sight. 
No,  Harry,  Harry,  ’tis  no  land  of  thine; 

Thy  place  is  fill’d,  thy  sceptre  wrung  from  thee. 
Thy  balm  wash’d  off  wherewith  thou  wast 
anointed: 

No  bending  knee  will  call  thee  Caesar  now. 

No  humble  suitors  press  to  speak  for  right. 

No,  not  a  man  comes  for  redress  of  thee;  20 

For  how  can  I  help  them,  and  not  myself? 
ist  Keep.  Ay,  here’s  a  deer  whose  skin’s  a 
keeper’s  fee: 

This  is  the  quondam  king;  let’s  seize  upon  him. 

K.  Hen.  Let  me  embrace  thee,  sour  adversity. 

For  wise  men  say  it  is  the  wisest  course. 

2nd  Keep.  Why  linger  we?  let  us  lay  hands  upon  | 
him. 

ist  Keep.  Forbear  awhile;  we’ll  hear  a  little  j 

more.  [• 

K.  Hen.  My  queen  and  son  are  gone  to  France  !' 
for  aid;  |! 

And,  as  I  hear,  the  great  commanding  Warwick  | 
Is  thither  gone,  to  crave  the  French  King’s  sister 
To  wife  for  Edward:  if  this  news  be  true,  ^i 
Poor  queen  and  son,  your  labour  is  but  lost; 

For  Warwick  is  a  subtle  orator. 

And  Lewis  a  prince  soon  won  with  moving 
words. 


SCENE  I  THIRD  PART  OF 

By  this  account  then  Margaret  may  win  him; 

For  she’s  a  woman  to  be  pitied  much: 

Her  sighs  will  make  a  battery  in  his  breast; 

Her  tears  will  pierce  into  a  marble  heart; 

The  tiger  will  be  mild  whiles  she  doth  mourn; 

And  Nero  will  be  tainted  with  remorse,  40 

To  hear  and  see  her  plaints,  her  brinish  tears. 

Ay,  but  she’s  come  to  beg,  Warwick,  to  give; 

She,  on  his  left  side,  craving  aid  for  Henry, 

He,  on  his  right,  asking  a  wife  for  Edward. 

She  weeps,  and  says  her  Henry  is  deposed; 

He  smiles,  and  says  his  Edward  is  install’d; 

That  she,  poor  wretch,  for  grief  can  speak  no 
more; 

Whiles  W^arwick  tells  his  title,  smooths  the 
wrong, 

Inferreth  arguments  of  mighty  strength. 

And  in  conclusion  wins  the  King  from  her,  jo 
With  promise  of  his  sister,  and  what  else. 

To  strengthen  and  support  King  Edward’s  place. 

O  Margaret,  thus  ’twill  be;  and  thou,  poor  soul. 
Art  then  forsaken,  as  thou  went’st  forlorn! 

2nd  Keep,  Say,  what  art  thou  that  talk’st  of 
kings  and  queens? 

K.  Hen,  More  than  I  seem,  and  less  than  I  was 
born  to: 

A  man  at  least,  for  less  I  should  not  be; 

And  men  may  talk  of  kings,  and  why  not  I? 

2nd  Keep.  Ay,  but  thou  talk’st  as  if  thou  wert  a 
king. 

K.  Hen.  Why,  so  I  am,  in  mind;  and  that’s 
enough.  60 

2nd  Keep.  But,  if  thou  be  a  king,  where  is  thy 
crown? 

K.  Hen.  My  crown  is  in  my  heart,  not  on  my 
head; 

Not  deck’d  with  diamonds  and  Indian  stones. 

Nor  to  be  seen:  my  crown  is  called  content: 

A  crown  it  is  that  seldom  kings  enjoy. 

2nd  Keep.  Well,  if  you  be  a  king  crown’d  with 
content. 

Your  crown  content  and  you  must  be  contented 
To  go  along  with  us;  for,  as  we  think. 

You  are  the  king  King  Edward  hath  deposed; 

And  we  his  subjects  sworn  in  all  allegiance  70 
Will  apprehend  you  as  his  enemy. 

K.  Hen.  But  did  you  never  swear,  and  break  an 
oath? 

2nd  Keep.  No,  never  such  an  oath;  nor  will  not 
now. 

K.  Hen.  WTere  did  you  dwell  when  I  was  King 
of  England? 

2nd  Keep.  Here  in  this  country,  where  we  now 
remain. 

K.  Hen.  I  was  anointed  king  at  nine  months  old; 
My  father  and  my  grandfather  were  kings. 


KING  HENRY  VI  85 

And  you  were  sworn  true  subjects  unto  me; 

And  tell  me,  then,  have  you  not  broke  your  oaths? 

I  St  Keep. 'No-,  So 

For  we  were  subjects  but  while  you  were  king. 

K.  Hen.  Why,  am  I  dead?  do  I  not  breathe  a 
man? 

Ah,  simple  men,  you  know  not  what  you  swear! 
Look,  as  I  blow  this  feather  from  my  face. 

And  as  the  air  blows  it  to  me  again. 

Obeying  with  my  wind  when  I  do  blow. 

And  yielding  to  another  when  it  blows. 
Commanded  always  by  the  greater  gust; 

Such  is  the  lightness  of  you  common  men. 

But  do  not  break  your  oaths;  for  of  that  sin  po 
My  mild  entreaty  shall  not  make  you  guilty. 

Go  where  you  will,  the  king  shall  be  command¬ 
ed; 

And  be  you  kings,  command,  and  I’ll  obey. 
ist  Keep.  We  are  true  subjects  to  the  King,  King 
Edward. 

K.  Hen.  So  would  you  be  again  to  Henry, 

If  he  were  seated  as  King  Edward  is. 

I  St  Keep.  We  charge  you,  in  God’s  name,  and 
the  King’s, 

To  go  with  us  unto  the  officers. 

K.  Hen.  In  God’s  name,  lead;  your  king’s  name 
be  obey’d: 

And  what  God  will,  that  let  your  king  perform; 
And  what  he  will,  I  humbly  yield  unto.  loi 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  London:  The  palace 
Enter  king  edward,  Gloucester,  clarence, 

and  LADY  GREY. 

K.  Edw.  Brother  of  Gloucester,  at  Saint  Alban’s 
field 

This  lady’s  husband.  Sir  Richard  Grey,  was 
slain. 

His  lands  then  seized  on  by  the  conqueror: 

Her  suit  is  now  to  repossess  those  lands; 

Which  we  in  justice  cannot  well  deny. 

Because  in  quarrel  of  the  house  of  York 
Thy  worthy  gentleman  did  lose  his  life. 

Glou.  Your  highness  shall  do  well  to  grant  her 
suit; 

It  were  dishonour  to  deny  it  her. 

K.  Edvj.  It  were  no  less;  but  yet  I’ll  make  a 
pause.  10 

Glou.  [Aside  clarence]  Yea,  is  it  so? 

I  see  the  lady  hath  a  thing  to  grant. 

Before  the  King  will  grant  her  humble  suit. 

Clar.  [Aside  to  Gloucester]  He  knows  the 
game:  how  true  he  keeps  the  wind! 

Glou.  [Aside  to  Silence! 

K.  Eduo.  Widow,  we  will  consider  of  your  suit; 
And  come  some  other  time  to  know  our  mind. 


86  THIRD  PART  OF 

L.  Grey.  Right  gracious  lord,  I  cannot  brook 
delay: 

May  it  please  your  Highness  to  resolve  me  now; 
And  what  your  pleasure  is,  shall  satisfy  me.  20 

Glou.  [Aside  clarence]  Ay,  widow?  then  I’ll 
warrant  you  all  your  lands. 

An  if  what  pleases  him  shall  pleasure  you. 

Fight  closer,  or,  good  faith,  you’ll  catch  a  blow. 

Clar.  [Aside  to  Gloucester]  I  fear  her  not,  un¬ 
less  she  chance  to  fall. 

Glou.  [Aside  to  clarence]  God  forbid  that!  for 
he’ll  take  vantages. 

K.  Edw.  How  many  children  hast  thou,  widow? 
tell  me. 

Clar.  [Aside  Gloucester]  I  think  he  means  to 
beg  a  child  of  her. 

Glm.  [Aside  to  clarence]  Nay,  whip  me  then: 
he’ll  rather  give  her  two. 

L.  Grey.  Three,  my  most  gracious  lord. 

Glou.  [Aside  to  clarence]  You  shall  have  four, 
if  you’ll  be  ruled  by  him.  jo 

K.  Edw.  ’Twere  pity  they  should  lose  their 
father’s  lands. 

L.  Grey.  Be  pitiful,  dread  lord,  and  grant  it  then. 

K.  Edw.  Lords,  give  us  leave:  I’ll  try  this 

widow’s  wit. 

Glou.  [Aside  to  clarence]  Ay,  good  leave  have 
you;  for  you  will  have  leave. 

Till  youth  take  leave  and  leave  you  to  the  crutch. 

[GLOUCESTER  ofid  CLARENCE  retire. 

K.  Edw.  Now  tell  me,  madam,  do  you  love 
your  children? 

L.  Grey.  Ay,  full  as  dearly  as  I  love  myself. 

K.  Edw.  And  would  you  not  do  much  to  do 
them  good? 

L.  Grey.  To  do  them  good,  I  would  sustain 
some  harm. 

K.  Edw.  Then  get  your  husband’s  lands,  to  do 

them  good.  40 

L.  Grey.  Therefore  I  came  unto  your  Majesty. 

K.  Edw.  I’ll  tell  you  how  these  lands  are  to  be 
got. 

L.  Grey.  So  shall  you  bind  me  to  your  Highness’ 
service. 

K.  Edw.  What  service  wilt  thou  do  me,  if  I  give 
them? 

L.  Grey.  What  you  command,  that  rests  in  me 
to  do. 

K.  Edw.  But  you  will  take  exceptions  to  my 
boon. 

L.  Grey.  No,  gracious  lord,  except  I  cannot  do 
it. 

K.  Edw.  Ay,  but  thou  canst  do  what  I  mean  to 
ask. 

L.  Grey.  Why,  then  I  will  do  what  your  grace 
commands. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  in 

Glou.  [Aside  to  clarence]  He  plies  her  hard;  and 
much  rain  wears  the  marble.  $0 

Clar.  [Aside  to  Gloucester]  As  red  as  fire!  nay, 
then  her  wax  must  melt. 

L.  Grey.  Why  stops  my  lord?  shall  I  not  hear 
my  task? 

K.  Edw.  An  easy  task;  ’tis  but  to  love  a  king. 

L.  Grey.  That’s  soon  perform’d,  because  I  am  a 
subject. 

K.  Edw.  Why,  then,  thy  husband’s  lands  I 
freely  give  thee. 

L.  Grey.  I  take  my  leave  with  many  thousand 
thanks. 

Glou.  [Aside  to  clarence]  The  match  is  made; 
she  seals  it  with  a  curtsy. 

K.  Edw.  But  stay  thee,  ’tis  the  fruits  of  love  I 
mean. 

L.  Grey.  The  fruits  of  love  I  mean,  my  loving 
liege. 

K.  Edw.  Ay,  but,  I  fear  me,  in  another  sense.  60 

What  love,  think’st  thou,  I  sue  so  much  to  get? 

L.  Grey.  My  love  till  death,  my  humble  thanks, 
my  prayers; 

That  love  which  virtue  begs  and  virtue  grants. 

K.  Edw.  No,  by  my  troth,  I  did  not  mean  such 
love. 

L.  Grey.  Why,  then  you  mean  not  as  I  thought 
you  did. 

K.  Edw.  But  now  you  partly  may  perceive  my 
mind. 

L.  Grey.  My  mind  will  never  grant  what  I  per¬ 
ceive 

Your  Highness  aims  at,  if  I  aim  aright. 

K.  Edw.  To  tell  thee  plain,  I  aim  to  lie  with 
thee. 

L.  Grey.  To  tell  you  plain,  I  had  rather  lie  in 

prison.  70 

K.  Edw.  Why,  then  thou  shalt  not  have  thy 
husband’s  lands. 

L.  Grey.  Why,  then  mine  honesty  shall  be  my 
dower; 

For  by  that  loss  I  will  not  purchase  them. 

K.  Edw.  Therein  thou  wrong’st  thy  children 
mightily. 

L.  Grey.  Herein  your  Highness  wrongs  both 
them  and  me. 

But,  mighty  lord,  this  merry  inclination 

Accords  not  with  the  sadness  of  my  suit: 

Please  you  dismiss  me,  either  with  “ay”  or  “no.” 

K.  Edw.  Ay,  if  thou  wilt  say  “ay”  to  my  re¬ 
quest; 

No,  if  thou  dost  say  “no”  to  my  demand.  80 

L.  Grey.  Then,  no,  my  lord.  My  suit  is  at  an 
end. 

Glou.  [Aside  to  clarence]  The  widow  likes  him 
not,  she  knits  her  brows. 


SCENE  II 


THIRD  PART  OF 

Clar.  [Aside  to  Gloucester]  He  is  the  bluntest 
wooer  in  Christendom. 

K,  Edw.  [Aside]  Her  looks  do  argue  her  replete 
with  modesty; 

Her  words  do  show  her  wit  incomparable; 

All  her  perfections  challenge  sovereignty: 

One  way  or  other,  she  is  for  a  king; 

And  she  shall  be  my  love,  or  else  my  queen. — 

Say  that  King  Edward  take  thee  for  his  queen? 

L.  Grey.  ’Tis  better  said  than  done,  my  gra¬ 
cious  lord:  90 

I  am  a  subject  fit  to  jest  withal. 

But  far  unfit  to  be  a  sovereign. 

K.  Edw.  Sweet  widow,  by  my  state  I  swear  to 
thee 

I  speak  no  more  than  what  my  soul  intends; 

And  that  is,  to  enjoy  thee  for  my  love. 

L.  Grey.  And  that  is  more  than  I  will  yield  unto: 

I  know  I  am  too  mean  to  be  your  queen. 

And  yet  too  good  to  be  your  concubine. 

K.  Edw.  You  cavil,  widow:  I  did  mean,  my 
queen. 

L.  Grey.  ’Twill  grieve  your  Grace  my  sons 

should  call  you  father.  100 

K.  Edw.  No  more  than  when  my  daughters  call 
thee  mother. 

Thou  art  a  widow,  and  thou  hast  some  children; 

And,  by  God’s  mother,  I,  being  but  a  bachelor. 

Have  other  some:  why,  ’tis  a  happy  thing 

To  be  the  father  unto  many  sons. 

Answer  no  more,  for  thou  shalt  be  my  queen. 

Glou.  [Aside  to  clarence]  The  ghostly  father 
now  hath  done  his  shrift. 

Clar.  [Aside  to  Gloucester]  When  he  was  made 
a  shriver,  ’twas  for  shift. 

K.  Edw.  Brothers,  you  muse  what  chat  we  two 
have  had. 

Glou.  The  widow  likes  it  not,  for  she  looks  very 
sad.  no 

K.  Edw.  You’ld  think  it  strange  if  I  should 
marry  her. 

Clar.  To  whom,  my  lord? 

K.  Edw.  Why,  Clarence,  to  myself. 

Glou.  That  would  be  ten  days’  wonder  at  the 
least. 

Clar.  That’s  a  day  longer  than  a  wonder  lasts. 

Glou.  By  so  much  is  the  wonder  in  extremes. 

K.  Edw.  Well,  jest  on,  brothers:  I  can  tell  you 
both 

Her  suit  is  granted  for  her  husband’s  lands. 

a  NOBLEMAN. 

Nob.  My  gracious  lord,  Henry  your  foe  is  taken. 

And  brought  your  prisoner  to  your  palace  gate. 

K.  Edw.  See  that  he  be  convey’d  unto  the 
Tower:  120 


KING  HENRY  VI  87 

And  go  we,  brothers,  to  the  man  that  took  him. 
To  question  of  his  apprehension. 

Widow,  go  you  along.  Lords,  use  her  honour¬ 
ably.  [Exeunt  all  but  GLOUCESTER. 

Glou.  Ay,  Edward  will  use  women  honourably. 
Would  he  were  wasted,  marrow,  bones  and  all. 
That  from  his  loins  no  hopeful  branch  may  spring. 
To  cross  me  from  the  golden  time  I  look  for! 

And  yet,  between  my  soul’s  desire  and  me — 

The  lustful  Edward’s  title  buried — 

Is  Clarence,  Henry,  and  his  son  young  Edward, 
And  all  the  unlook’d  for  issue  of  their  bodies 
To  take  their  rooms,  ere  I  can  place  myself: 

A  cold  premeditation  for  my  purpose! 

Why,  then,  I  do  but  dream  on  sovereignty; 

Like  one  that  stands  upon  a  promontory 
And  spies  a  far-off  shore  where  he  would  tread. 
Wishing  his  foot  were  equal  with  his  eye. 

And  chides  the  sea  that  sunders  him  from  thence. 
Saying,  he’ll  lade  it  dry  to  have  his  way: 

So  do  I  wish  the  crown,  being  so  far  off;  1^0 
And  so  I  chide  the  means  that  keeps  me  from  it; 
And  so  I  say.  I’ll  cut  the  causes  off. 

Flattering  me  with  impossibilities. 

My  eye’s  too  quick,  my  heart  o’er  weens  too 
much. 

Unless  my  hand  and  strength  could  equal  them. 
Well,  say  there  is  no  kingdom  then  for  Richard; 
What  other  pleasure  can  the  world  afford? 

I’ll  make  my  heaven  in  a  lady’s  lap. 

And  deck  my  body  in  gay  ornaments. 

And  witch  sweet  ladies  with  my  words  and  looks. 
O  miserable  thoughts!  and  more  unlikely  /j/ 
Than  to  accomplish  twenty  golden  crowns! 

Why,  love  forswore  me  in  my  mother’s  womb: 
And,  for  I  should  not  deal  in  her  soft  laws. 

She  did  corrupt  frail  nature  with  some  bribe. 

To  shrink  mine  arm  up  like  a  wither’d  shrub; 

To  make  an  envious  mountain  on  my  back. 
Where  sits  deformity  to  mock  my  body; 

To  shape  my  legs  of  an  unequal  size; 

To  disproportion  me  in  every  part,  160 

Like  to  a  chaos,  or  an  unlick’d  bear-whelp 
That  carries  no  impression  like  the  dam. 

And  am  I  then  a  man  to  be  beloved? 

O  monstrous  fault,  to  harbour  such  a  thought! 
Then,  since  this  earth  affords  no  joy  to  me, 

But  to  command,  to  check,  to  o’erbear  such 
As  are  of  better  person  than  myself. 

I’ll  make  my  heaven  to  dream  upon  the  crown, 
And,  whiles  I  live,  to  account  this  world  but  hell. 
Until  my  mis-shaped  trunk  that  bears  this  head 
Be  round  impaled  with  a  glorious  crown.  171 
And  yet  I  know  not  how  to  get  the  crown. 

For  many  lives  stand  between  me  and  home: 

And  I — like  one  lost  in  a  thorny  wood. 


88  THIRD  PART  OF 

That  rends  the  thorns  and  is  rent  with  the  thorns, 
Seeking  a  way  and  straying  from  the  way; 

Not  knowing  how  to  find  the  open  air, 

But  toiling  desperately  to  find  it  out — 

Torment  myself  to  catch  the  English  crown: 

And  from  that  torment  I  will  free  myself,  i8o 
Or  hew  my  way  out  with  a  bloody  axe. 

Why,  I  can  smile,  and  murder  whiles  I  smile. 

And  cry  “Content”  to  that  which  grieves  my 
heart. 

And  wet  my  cheeks  with  artificial  tears. 

And  frame  my  face  to  all  occasions, 
ril  drown  more  sailors  than  the  mermaid  shall; 
ril  slay  more  gazers  than  the  basilisk; 
ril  play  the  orator  as  well  as  Nestor, 

Deceive  more  slily  than  Ulysses  could, 

And,  like  a  Sinon,  take  another  Troy.  /po 

I  can  add  colours  to  the  chameleon. 

Change  shapes  with  Proteus  for  advantages, 

And  set  the  murderous  Machiavel  to  school. 

Can  I  do  this,  and  cannot  get  a  crown? 

Tut,  were  it  farther  off.  I’ll  pluck  it  down.  [Exit. 

Scene  hi.  France:  The  King  s palace 
Flourish.  Enter  lewis  the  French  King,  his  sister 
BONA,  his  Admiral,  called  Bourbon:  prince  Ed¬ 
ward,  QUEEN  MARGARET,  and  the  EARL  OF  OX¬ 
FORD.  LEWIS  sits,  and  riseth  up  again. 

K.  Lew.  Fair  Queen  of  England,  worthy  Mar¬ 
garet, 

Sit  down  with  us:  it  ill  befits  thy  state 
And  birth,  that  thou  shouldst  stand  while  Lewis 
doth  sit. 

Q.  Mar.  No,  mighty  King  of  France:  now  Mar¬ 
garet 

Must  strike  her  sail  and  learn  awhile  to  serve 
Where  kings  command.  I  was,  I  must  confess. 
Great  Albion’s  queen  in  former  golden  days: 

But  now  mischance  hath  trod  my  title  down. 

And  with  dishonour  laid  me  on  the  ground; 

Where  I  must  take  like  seat  unto  my  fortune,  lo 
And  to  my  humble  seat  conform  myself. 

K.  Lew.  Why,  say,  fair  queen,  whence  springs 
this  deep  despair? 

Q.  Mar.  From  such  a  cause  as  fills  mine  eyes 
with  tears 

And  stops  my  tongue,  while  heart  is  drown’d  in 
cares. 

K.  Lew.  Whate’er  it  be,  be  thou  still  like  thy¬ 
self. 

And  sit  thee  by  our  side:  [Seats  her  by  him]  yield 
not  thy  neck 

To  fortune’s  yoke,  but  let  thy  dauntless  mind 
Still  ride  in  triumph  over  all  mischance. 

Be  plain.  Queen  Margaret,  and  tell  thy  grief; 

I I  shall  be  eased,  if  France  can  yield  relief.  20 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  iii 

Q.  Mar.  Those  gracious  words  revive  my 
drooping  thoughts 

And  give  my  tongue-tied  sorrows  leave  to  speak. 
Now,  therefore,  be  it  known  to  noble  Lewis, 
That  Henry,  sole  possessor  of  my  love. 

Is  of  a  king  become  a  banish’d  man. 

And  forced  to  live  in  Scotland  a  forlorn; 

While  proud  ambitious  Edward,  Duke  of  York, 
Usurps  the  regal  title  and  the  seat 
Of  England’s  true-anointed  lawful  king. 

This  is  the  cause  that  I,  poor  Margaret,  50 
With  this  my  son.  Prince  Edward,  Henry’s  heir. 
Am  come  to  crave  thy  just  and  lawful  aid; 

And  if  thou  fail  us,  all  our  hope  is  done: 

Scotland  hath  will  to  help,  but  cannot  help; 

Our  people  and  our  peers  are  both  misled. 

Our  treasure  seized,  our  soldiers  put  to  flight. 
And,  as  thou  seest,  ourselves  in  heavy  plight. 

K.  Lew.  Renowned  queen,  with  patience  calm 
the  storm. 

While  we  bethink  a  means  to  break  it  off. 

Q.  Mar.  The  more  we  stay,  the  stronger  grows 
our  foe. 

K.  Lew.  The  more  I  stay,  the  more  I’ll  succour 
thee. 

Q.  Mar.  O,  but  impatience  waiteth  on  true 
sorrow. 

And  see  where  comes  the  breeder  of  my  sorrow! 
Enter  Warwick. 

K.  Lew.  What’s  he  approacheth  boldly  to  our 
presence? 

Q.  Mar.  Our  Earl  of  Warwick,  Edward’s  great¬ 
est  friend. 

K.  Lew.  Welcome,  brave  Warwick!  What 
brings  thee  to  France? 

He  descends.  She  ariseth. 

Q.  Mar.  Ay,  now  begins  a  second  storm  to  rise; 
For  this  is  he  that  moves  both  wind  and  tide. 

War.  From  worthy  Edward,  King  of  Albion, 
My  lord  and  sovereign,  and  thy  vowed  friend,  50 
I  come,  in  kindness  and  unfeigned  love. 

First,  to  do  greetings  to  thy  royal  person; 

And  then  to  crave  a  league  of  amity; 

And  lastly,  to  confirm  that  amity 

With  nuptial  knot,  if  thou  vouchsafe  to  grant 

That  virtuous  Lady  Bona,  thy  fair  sister. 

To  England’s  king  in  lawful  marriage. 

Q.  Mar.  [Aside]  If  that  go  forward,  Henry’s 
hope  is  done. 

War.  [To  bona]  And,  gracious  madam,  in  our 
king’s  behalf, 

I  am  commanded,  with  your  leave  and  favour,  6g 
Humbly  to  kiss  your  hand  and  with  my  tongue 
To  tell  the  passion  of  my  sovereign’s  heart; 
Where  fame,  late  entering  at  his  heedful  ears. 


'  SCENE  III 

Hath  placed  thy  beauty’s  image  and  thy  virtue. 

Q.  Alar,  King  Lewis  and  Lady  Bona,  hear  me 
speak 

Before  you  answer  Warwick.  His  demand 
i  Springs  not  from  Edward’s  well-meant  honest 
love, 

But  from  deceit  bred  by  necessity; 

For  how  can  tyrants  safely  govern  home, 

Unless  abroad  they  purchase  great  alliance?  70 
To  prove  him  tyrant  this  reason  may  suffice, 

That  Henry  liveth  still;  but  were  he  dead, 

Yet  here  Prince  Edward  stands,  King  Henry’s 
I  son. 

'  Look,  therefore,  Lewis,  that  by  this  league  and 
marriage 

Thou  draw  not  on  thy  danger  and  dishonour; 

For  though  usurpers  sway  the  rule  awhile. 

Yet  heavens  are  just,  and  time  suppresseth 
wrongs. 

War.  Injurious  Margaret! 

Prince.  And  why  not  Queen? 

War.  Because  thy  father  Henry  did  usurp; 

And  thou  no  more  art  prince  than  she  is  queen.  80 
Oxf.  Then  Warwick  disannuls  great  John  of 
'  Gaunt, 

Which  did  subdue  the  greatest  part  of  Spain; 

And,  after  John  of  Gaunt,  Henry  the  Fourth, 
Whose  wisdom  was  a  mirror  to  the  wisest; 

:  And,  after  that  wise  prince,  Henry  the  Fifth, 

I  Who  by  his  prowess  conquered  all  France: 

From  these  our  Henry  lineally  descends. 

War.  Oxford,  how  haps  it,  in  this  smooth  dis¬ 
course. 

You  told  not  how  Henry  the  Sixth  hath  lost 
;  All  that  which  Henry  the  Fifth  had  gotten?  90 
Methinks  these  peers  of  France  should  smile  at 
I  that. 

But  for  the  rest,  you  tell  a  pedigree 
Of  threescore  and  two  years;  a  silly  time 
To  make  prescription  for  a  kingdom’s  worth. 

Oxf.  Why,  Warwick,  canst  thou  speak  against 
thy  liege. 

Whom  thou  obeyed’ st  thirty  and  six  years. 

And  not  bewray  thy  treason  with  a  blush? 

War.  Can  Oxford,  that  did  ever  fence  the  right, 

.  Now  buckler  falsehood  with  a  pedigree? 

I  For  shame!  leave  Henry,  and  call  Edward  king. 
Oxf.  Call  him  my  king  by  whose  injurious 
doom 

My  elder  brother,  the  Lord  Aubrey  Vere, 

Was  done  to  death?  and  more  than  so,  my  father. 
Even  in  the  downfall  of  his  mellow’d  years. 

When  nature  brought  him  to  the  door  of  death? 
No,  Warwick,  no;  while  life  upholds  this  arm. 
This  arm  upholds  the  house  of  Lancaster. 

War.  And  I  the  house  of  York. 


KING  HENRY  VI  89 

K.  Lew.  Queen  Margaret,  Prince  Edward,  and 
Oxford, 

Vouchsafe,  at  our  request,  to  stand  aside,  uo 
While  I  use  further  conference  with  Warwick. 
They  stand  aloof. 

Q.  Mar.  Heavens  grant  that  Warwick’s  words 
bewitch  him  not! 

K.  Lew.  Now,  Warwick,  tell  me,  even  upon 
thy  conscience. 

Is  Edward  your  true  king?  for  I  were  loath 
To  link  with  him  that  were  not  lawful  chosen. 
War.  Thereon  I  pawn  my  credit  and  mine  hon¬ 
our. 

K.  Lew.  But  is  he  gracious  in  the  people’s  eye? 
War.  The  more  that  Henry  was  unfortunate. 

K.  Lew.  Then  further,  all  dissembling  set  aside. 
Tell  me  for  truth  the  measure  of  his  love  120 
Unto  our  sister  Bona. 

War.  Such  it  seems 

As  may  beseem  a  monarch  like  himself. 

Myself  have  often  heard  him  say  and  swear 
That  this  his  love  was  an  eternal  plant. 

Whereof  the  root  was  fix’d  in  virtue’s  ground. 
The  leaves  and  fruit  maintain’d  with  beauty’s  sun. 
Exempt  from  envy,  but  not  from  disdain. 

Unless  the  Lady  Bona  quit  his  pain. 

K.  Lew.  Now,  sister,  let  us  hear  your  firm  re¬ 
solve.  i2g 

Bom.  Your  grant,  or  your  denial,  shall  be  mine: 
[To  WARWICK]  Yet  I  confess  that  often  ere  this 
day. 

When  I  have  heard  your  king’s  desert  recounted. 
Mine  ear  hath  tempted  judgment  to  desire. 

K.  Lew.  Then,  Warwick,  thus:  our  sister  shall 
be  Edward’s; 

And  now  forthwith  shall  articles  be  drawn 
Touching  the  jointure  that  your  king  must  make. 
Which  with  her  dowry  shall  be  counterpoised. 
Draw  near,  Queen  Margaret,  and  be  a  witness 
That  Bona  shall  be  wife  to  the  English  king.  1^9 
Prince.  To  Edward,  but  not  to  the  English  king. 
Q.  Mar.  Deceitful  Warwick!  it  was  thy  device 
By  this  alliance  to  make  void  my  suit: 

Before  thy  coming  Lewis  was  Henry’s  friend. 

K.  Lew.  And  still  is  friend  to  him  and  Margaret: 
But  if  your  title  to  the  crown  be  weak. 

As  may  appear  by  Edward’s  good  success. 

Then  ’tis  but  reason  that  I  be  released 
From  giving  aid  which  late  I  promised. 

Yet  shall  you  have  all  kindness  at  my  hand 
That  your  estate  requires  and  mine  can  yield,  /yo 
War.  Henry  now  lives  in  Scotland  at  his  ease. 
Where  having  nothing,  nothing  can  he  lose. 

And  as  for  you  yourself,  our  quondam  queen. 

You  have  a  father  able  to  maintain  you; 

And  better  ’twere  you  troubled  him  than  France. 


THIRD  PART  OF 


90  THIRD  PART  OF 

Q.  Mar,  Peace,  impudent  and  shameless  War¬ 
wick,  peace. 

Proud  setter  up  and  puller  down  of  kings! 

I  will  not  hence,  till,  with  my  talk  and  tears. 

Both  full  of  truth,  I  make  King  Lewis  behold 
Thy  sly  conveyance  and  thy  lord’s  false  love;  i6o 
For  both  of  you  are  birds  of  selfsame  feather. 

Post  blows  a  horn  within. 

K,  Lew.  Warwick,  this  is  some  post  to  us  or 
thee. 

Enter  a  post. 

Post.  [To  Warwick]  My  lord  ambassador,  these 
letters  are  for  you. 

Sent  from  your  brother.  Marquess  Montague: 

[To  Lewis]  These  from  our  king  unto  your  ma¬ 
jesty: 

[To  Margaret]  And,  madam,  these  for  you; 
from  whom  I  know  not. 

They  all  read  their  letters. 

Oxf.  I  like  it  well  that  our  fair  queen  and  mis¬ 
tress 

Smiles  at  her  news,  while  Warwick  frowns  at 
his. 

Prince.  Nay,  mark  how  Lewis  stamps,  as  he 
were  nettled: 

I  hope  all’s  for  the  best.  /70 

K.  Lew,  Warwick,  what  are  thy  news?  and 
yours,  fair  queen? 

Q.  Mar.  Mine,  such  as  fill  my  heart  with  un¬ 
hoped  joys. 

War.  Mine,  full  of  sorrow  and  heart’s  discon¬ 
tent. 

K.  Lew.  What!  has  your  king  married  the  Lady 
Grey? 

And  now,  to  soothe  your  forgery  and  his. 

Sends  me  a  paper  to  persuade  me  patience? 

Is  this  the  alliance  that  he  seeks  with  France? 

Dare  he  presume  to  scorn  us  in  this  manner? 

Q.  Mar.  I  told  your  Majesty  as  much  before: 

This  proveth  Edward’s  love  and  Warwick’s  hon¬ 
esty.  180 

War.  King  Lewis,  I  here  protest,  in  sight  of 
heaven. 

And  by  the  hope  1  have  of  heavenly  bliss. 

That  I  am  clear  from  this  misdeed  of  Edward’s, 

No  more  my  king,  for  he  dishonours  me. 

But  most  himself,  if  he  could  see  his  shame. 

Did  I  forget  that  by  the  house  of  York 
My  father  came  untimely  to  his  death? 

Did  I  let  pass  the  abuse  done  to  my  niece? 

Did  1  impale  him  with  the  regal  crown? 

Did  I  put  Henry  from  his  native  right?  /po 

And  am  I  guerdon’d  at  the  last  with  shame? 

Shame  on  himself!  for  my  desert  is  honour: 

And  to  repair  my  honour  lost  for  him. 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  m 

I  here  renounce  him  and  return  to  Henry. 

My  noble  queen,  let  former  grudges  pass. 

And  henceforth  I  am  thy  true  servitor: 

I  will  revenge  his  wrong  to  Lady  Bona 
And  replant  Henry  in  his  former  state. 

Q.  Mar.  Warwick,  these  words  have  turn’d  my 
hate  to  love; 

And  I  forgive  and  quite  forget  old  faults,  200 
And  joy  that  thou  becomest  King  Henry’s  friend. 
War.  So  much  his  friend,  ay,  his  unfeigned 
friend. 

That,  if  King  Lewis  vouchsafe  to  furnish  us 
With  some  few  bands  of  chosen  soldiers. 

I’ll  undertake  to  land  them  on  our  coast 
And  force  the  tyrant  from  his  seat  by  war. 

’Tis  not  his  new-made  bride  shall  succour  him: 
And  as  for  Clarence,  as  my  letters  tell  me. 

He’s  very  likely  now  to  fall  from  him,  2op 

For  matching  more  for  wanton  lust  than  honour. 
Or  than  for  strength  and  safety  of  our  country. 
Bom.  Dear  brother,  how  shall  Bona  be  revenged 
But  by  thy  help  to  this  distressed  queen? 

Q.  Mar.  Renowned  prince,  how  shall  poor 
Henry  live. 

Unless  thou  rescue  him  from  foul  despair? 

Bona.  My  quarrel  and  this  English  queen’s  are 
one. 

War.  And  mine,  fair  lady  Bona,  joins  with  yours. 
K.  Lew.  And  mine  with  hers,  and  thine,  and 
Margaret’s. 

Therefore  at  last  I  firmly  am  resolved 
You  shall  have  aid.  220 

Q.  Mar.  Let  me  give  humble  thanks  for  all  at 
once. 

K.  Lew.  Then,  England’s  messenger,  return  in 
post. 

And  tell  false  Edward,  thy  supposed  king. 

That  Lewis  of  France  is  sending  over  masquers 
To  revel  it  with  him  and  his  new  bride: 

Thou  seest  what’s  past,  go  fear  thy  king  withal. 
Bom.  Tell  him,  in  hope  he’ll  prove  a  widower 
shortly, 

I’ll  wear  the  willow  garland  for  his  sake. 

Q.  Mar.  Tell  him,  my  mourning  weeds  are  laid 
aside, 

And  I  am  ready  to  put  armour  on.  2^0 

War.  Tell  him  from  me  that  he  hath  done  me 
wrong. 

And  therefore  I’ll  uncrown  him  ere’t  be  long. 
There’s  thy  reward :  be  gone.  [Exit  post. 

K.  Lew.  But,  Warwick, 

Thou  and  Oxford,  with  five  thousand  men. 

Shall  cross  the  seas,  and  bid  false  Edward  battle; 
And,  as  occasion  serves,  this  noble  queen 
And  prince  shall  follow  with  a  fresh  supply. 

Yet,  ere  thou  go,  but  answer  me  one  doubt, 


SCENE  III  THIRDPARTOF 

What  pledge  have  we  of  thy  firm  loyalty? 

War.  This  shall  assure  my  constant  loyalty. 

That  if  our  queen  and  this  young  prince  agree, 

I’ll  join  mine  eldest  daughter  and  my  joy 
To  him  forthwith  in  holy  wedlock  bands. 

Q.  Mar.  Yes,  I  agree,  and  thank  you  for  your 
motion. 

Son  Edward,  she  is  fair  and  virtuous, 

Therefore  delay  not,  give  thy  hand  to  Warwick; 
And,  with  thy  hand,  thy  faith  irrevocable. 

That  only  Warwick’s  daughter  shall  be  thine. 
Prince.  Yes,  I  accept  her,  for  she  well  deserves 
it; 

And  here,  to  pledge  my  vow,  I  give  my  hand.  2^0 
He  gives  his  hand  to  Warwick. 

K.  Lew.  Why  stay  we  now?  These  soldiers 
shall  be  levied. 

And  thou,  Lord  Bourbon,  our  high  admiral, 

Shalt  waft  them  over  with  our  royal  fleet. 

I  long  till  Edward  fall  by  war’s  mischance. 

For  mocking  marriage  with  a  dame  of  France. 

[Exeunt  all  but  Warwick. 
War.  I  came  from  Edward  as  ambassador. 

But  I  return  his  sworn  and  mortal  foe: 

Matter  of  marriage  was  the  charge  he  gave  me. 

But  dreadful  war  shall  answer  his  demand. 

Had  he  none  else  to  make  a  stale  but  me?  260 
Then  none  but  I  shall  turn  his  jest  to  sorrow. 

1  was  the  chief  that  raised  him  to  the  crown. 

And  I’ll  be  chief  to  bring  him  down  again: 

Not  that  I  pity  Henry’s  misery. 

But  seek  revenge  on  Edward’s  mockery.  [Exit. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  London:  The  palace 
Enter  Gloucester,  clarence,  somerset, 

and  MONTAGUE. 

Glau.  Now  tell  me,  brother  Clarence,  what 
think  you 

Of  this  new  marriage  with  the  Lady  Grey? 

Hath  not  our  brother  made  a  worthy  choice? 

Clar.  Alas,  you  know,  ’tis  far  from  hence  to 
France; 

How  could  he  stay  till  Warwick  made  return? 
Som.  My  lords,  forbear  this  talk;  here  comes 
the  king. 

Glou.  And  his  well-chosen  bride. 

Clar.  I  mind  to  tell  him  plainly  what  I  think. 

Flourish.  Enter  king  edward,  attended;  lady 
GREY,  as  Queen;  Pembroke,  Stafford,  Hast¬ 
ings,  and  others.  Four  stand  on  one  side.,  and  four 
on  the  other. 

K.  Edw.  Now,  brother  of  Clarence,  how  like 
you  our  choice. 


KING  HENRY  VI  91 

That  you  stand  pensive,  as  half  malcontent?  10 

Clar.  As  well  as  Lewis  of  France,  or  the  Earl  of 
Warwick, 

Which  are  so  weak  of  courage  and  in  judgement 
That  they’ll  take  no  offence  at  our  abuse. 

K.  Edw.  Suppose  they  take  offence  without  a 
cause. 

They  are  but  Lewis  and  Warwick:  I  am  Edward, 
Your  king  and  Warwick’s,  and  must  have  my 
will. 

Glou.  And  shall  have  your  will,  because  our 
king: 

Yet  hasty  marriage  seldom  proveth  well. 

K.  Edw.  Yea,  brother  Richard,  are  you  offend¬ 
ed  too? 

Glou.  Not  1 :  20 

No,  God  forbid  that  I  should  wish  them  sever’d 
Whom  God  hath  join’d  together;  ay,  and  ’twere 

1  o  sunder  them  that  yoke  so  well  together. 

K.  Edw.  Setting  your  scorns  and  your  mislike 
aside. 

Tell  me  some  reason  why  the  Lady  Grey 
Should  not  become  my  wife  and  England’s 
queen. 

And  you  too,  Somerset  and  Montague, 

Speak  freely  what  you  think. 

Clar.  Then  this  is  mine  opinion:  that  King 
Lewis 

Becomes  your  enemy,  for  mocking  him  50 

About  the  marriage  of  the  Lady  Bona. 

Glou.  And  Warwick,  doing  what  you  gave  in 
charge. 

Is  now  dishonoured  by  this  new  marriage. 

K.  Edw.  What  if  both  Lewis  and  Warwick  be 
appeased 

By  such  invention  as  I  can  devise? 

Mont.  Yet,  to  have  join’d  with  France  in  such 
alliance 

Would  more  have  strengthen’d  this  our  common¬ 
wealth 

’Gainst  foreign  storms  than  any  home-bred  mar¬ 
riage. 

Hast.  Why,  knows  not  Montague  that  of  itself 
England  is  safe,  if  true  within  itself?  ^0 

Mont.  But  the  safer  when  ’tis  back’d  with 
France. 

Hast.  ’Tis  better  using  France  than  trusting 
France: 

Let  us  be  back’d  with  God  and  with  the  seas 
Which  He  hath  given  for  fence  impregnable. 

And  with  their  helps  only  defend  ourselves; 

In  them  and  in  ourselves  our  safety  lies. 

Clar.  For  this  one  speech  Lord  Hastings  well 
deserves 

To  have  the  heir  of  the  Lord  Hungerford. 


92  THIRD  PART  OF 

K.  Ediv.  Ay,  what  of  that?  it  was  my  will  and 
grant; 

And  for  this  once  my  will  shall  stand  for  law.  50 
Glou.  And  yet  methinks  your  Grace  hath  not 
done  well, 

To  give  the  heir  and  daughter  of  Lord  Scales 
Unto  the  brother  of  your  loving  bride; 

She  better  would  have  fitted  me  or  Clarence: 

But  in  your  bride  you  bury  brotherhood. 

Clar.  Or  else  you  would  not  have  bestow’d  the 
heir 

Of  the  Lord  Bonville  on  your  new  wife’s  son, 

And  leave  your  brothers  to  go  speed  elsewhere. 

K.  Edw.  Alas,  poor  Clarence!  is  it  for  a  wife 
That  thou  art  malcontent?  I  will  provide  thee.  60 
Clar.  In  choosing  for  yourself,  you  show’d  your 
judgement. 

Which  being  shallow,  you  shall  give  me  leave 
To  play  the  broker  in  mine  own  behalf; 

And  to  that  end  I  shortly  mind  to  leave  you. 

K.  Edw.  Leave  me,  or  tarry,  Edward  will  be 
king, 

And  not  be  tied  unto  his  brother’s  will. 

Q.  Eliz.  My  lords,  before  it  pleased  his  Majesty 
To  raise  my  state  to  title  of  a  queen. 

Do  me  but  right,  and  you  must  all  confess 
That  I  was  not  ignoble  of  descent;  70 

And  meaner  than  myself  have  had  like  fortune. 

But  as  this  title  honours  me  and  mine. 

So  your  dislike,  to  whom  I  would  be  pleasing. 

Doth  cloud  my  joys  with  danger  and  with  sor¬ 
row. 

K.  Edw.  My  love,  forbear  to  fawn  upon  their 
frowns : 

What  danger  or  what  sorrow  can  befall  thee. 

So  long  as  Edward  is  thy  constant  friend 
And  their  true  sovereign,  whom  they  must  obey? 
Nay,  whom  they  shall  obey,  and  love  thee  too, 
Unless  they  seek  for  hatred  at  my  hands;  80 
Which  if  they  do,  yet  will  I  keep  thee  safe. 

And  they  shall  feel  the  vengeance  of  my  wrath. 
Glou.  [Aside]  I  hear,  yet  say  not  much,  but  think 
the  more. 

Enter  a  post. 

K.  Edw,  Now,  messenger,  what  letters  or  what 
news 

From  France? 

Post.  My  sovereign  liege,  no  letters;  and  few 
words. 

But  such  as  I,  without  your  special  pardon. 

Dare  not  relate. 

K.  Edw.  Go  to,  we  pardon  thee:  therefore,  in 
brief. 

Tell  me  their  words  as  near  as  thou  canst  guess 
them.  po 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  iv 

What  answer  makes  King  Lewis  unto  our  letters? 
Post.  At  my  depart^  these  were  his  very  words: 
“Go  tell  false  Edward,  thy  supposed  king, 

That  Lewis  of  France  is  sending  over  masquers 
To  revel  it  with  him  and  his  new  bride.” 

K.  Edw.  Is  Lewis  so  brave?  belike  he  thinks  me 
Henry. 

But  what  said  Lady  Bona  to  my  marriage? 

Post.  These  were  her  words,  utter’d  with  mild 
disdain: 

“Tell  him,  in  hope  he’ll  prove  a  widower  shortly. 
I’ll  wear  the  willow  garland  for  his  sake.”  100 
K.  Edw.  I  blame  not  her,  she  could  say  little 
less; 

She  had  the  wrong.  But  what  said  Henry’s 
queen? 

For  I  have  heard  that  she  was  there  in  place. 

Post.  “Tell  him,”  quoth  she,  “m.y  mourning 
weeds  are  done. 

And  I  am  ready  to  put  armour  on.” 

K.  Edw.  Belike  she  minds  to  play  the  Amazon. 
But  what  said  Warwick  to  these  injuries? 

Post.  He,  more  incensed  against  your  Majesty 
Than  all  the  rest,  discharged  me  with  these 
words: 

“Tell  him  from  me  that  he  hath  done  me 

wrong,  no 

And  therefore  I’ll  uncrown  him  ere’t  be  long.” 

K.  Edw.  Ha!  durst  the  traitor  breathe  out  so 
proud  words? 

Well,  I  will  arm  me,  being  thus  forewarn’d: 

They  shall  have  wars  and  pay  for  their  presump¬ 
tion. 

But  say,  is  Warwick  friends  with  Margaret? 

Post.  Ay,  gracious  sovereign;  they  are  so  link’d 
in  friendship. 

That  young  Prince  Edward  marries  Warwick’s 
daughter. 

Clar.  Belike  the  elder;  Clarence  will  have  the 
younger. 

Now,  brother  king,  farewell,  and  sit  you  fast,  up 
For  I  will  hence  to  Warwick’s  other  daughter; 
That,  though  I  want  a  kingdom,  yet  in  marriage 
I  may  not  prove  inferior  to  yourself. 

You  that  love  me  and  Warwick,  follow  me. 

[Exit  CLARENCE,  and  somerset  follows. 
Glou.  [Aside]  Not  I: 

My  thoughts  aim  at  a  further  matter:  I 
Stay  not  for  the  love  of  Edward,  but  the  crown. 
K.  Edw.  Clarence  and  Somerset  both  gone  to 
Warwick! 

Yet  am  I  arm’d  against  the  worst  can  happen; 

And  haste  is  needful  in  this  desperate  case. 
Pembroke  and  Stafford,  you  in  our  behalf  /50 
Go  levy  men,  and  make  prepare  for  war; 

They  are  already,  or  quickly  will  be  landed: 


SCENE  I 


93 


THIRD  PART  OF 

Myself  in  person  will  straight  follow  you. 

[Exeunt  Pembroke  and  Stafford. 
But,  ere  I  go,  Hastings  and  Montague, 

Resolve  my  doubt.  You  twain,  of  all  the  rest. 

Are  near  to  Warwick  by  blood  and  by  alliance: 
Tell  me  if  you  love  Warwick  more  than  me? 

If  it  be  so,  then  both  depart  to  him; 

I  rather  wish  you  foes  than  hollow  friends: 

But  if  you  mind  to  hold  your  true  obedience,  140 
Give  me  assurance  with  some  friendly  vow. 

That  I  may  never  have  you  in  suspect. 

Mont.  So  God  help  Montague  as  he  proves 
true! 

Hast.  And  Hastings  as  he  favours  Edward’s 
cause! 

K.  Edw.  Now,  brother  Richard,  will  you  stand 
by  us? 

Glou.  Ay,  in  despite  of  all  that  shall  withstand 
you. 

K.  Edv).  Why,  so!  then  am  I  sure  of  victory. 
Now  therefore  let  us  hence;  and  lose  no  hour. 

Till  we  meet  Warwick  with  his  foreign  power. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  A  plain  in  Warwickshire 
Enter  Warwick  and  oxford,  with  French 
soldiers. 

War.  Trust  me,  my  lord,  all  hitherto  goes  well; 
The  common  people  by  numbers  swarm  to  us. 

Enter  clarence  and  somerset. 

But  see  where  Somerset  and  Clarence  comes ! 
Speak  suddenly,  my  lords,  are  we  all  friends? 

Clar.  Fear  not  that,  my  lord. 

War.  Then,  gentle  Clarence,  welcome  unto 
Warwick; 

And  welcome,  Somerset:  I  hold  it  cowardice 
To  rest  mistrustful  where  a  noble  heart 
Hath  pawn’d  an  open  hand  in  sign  of  love; 

Else  might  I  think  that  Clarence,  Edward’s 

brother,  /o 

Were  but  a  feigned  friend  to  our  proceedings: 

But  welcome,  sweet  Clarence;  my  daughter  shall 
be  thine. 

And  now  what  rests  but,  in  night’s  coverture. 

Thy  brother  being  carelessly  encamp’d. 

His  soldiers  lurking  in  the  towns  about. 

And  but  attended  by  a  simple  guard. 

We  may  surprise  and  take  him  at  our  pleasure? 
Our  scouts  have  found  the  adventure  very  easy: 
That  as  Ulysses  and  stout  Diomede  /p 

With  sleight  and  manhood  stole  to  Rhesus’  tents. 
And  brought  from  thence  the  Thracian  fatal 
steeds. 

So  we,  well  cover’d  with  the  night’s  black 
mantle. 


KING  HENRY  VT 

At  unawares  may  beat  down  Edward’s  guard 

And  seize  himself;  I  say  not,  slaughter  him. 

For  I  intend  but  only  to  surprise  him. 

You  that  will  follow  me  to  this  attempt. 

Applaud  the  name  of  Henry  with  your  leader. 
ney  all  cry.,  “Henry!” 

Why,  then,  let’s  on  our  way  in  silent  sort: 

For  Warwick  and  his  friends,  God  and  Saint 
George!  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Edward' s  camp,  near  Warwick 
Enter  three  watchmen,  to  guard  the  King's 
tent. 

1st  Watch.  Come  on,  my  masters,  each  man  take 
his  stand: 

The  King  by  this  is  set  him  down  to  sleep. 

2nd  Watch.  What,  will  he  not  to  bed? 
ist  Watch.  Why,  no;  for  he  hath  made  a  solemn 
vow 

Never  to  lie  and  take  his  natural  rest 

Till  Warwick  or  himself  be  quite  suppress’d. 

2nd  Watch.  To-morrow  then  belike  shall  be  the 
day. 

If  Warwick  be  so  near  as  men  report. 

^rd  Watch.  But  say,  I  pray,  what  nobleman  is 
that 

That  with  the  King  here  resteth  in  his  tent?  10 
ist  Watch.  ’Tis  the  Lord  Hastings,  the  King’s 
chiefest  friend. 

^rd  Watch.  O,  is  it  so?  But  why  commands  the 
King 

That  his  chief  followers  lodge  in  towns  about 
him. 

While  he  himself  keeps  in  the  cold  field? 

2nd  Watch.  ’Tis  the  more  honour,  because  more 
dangerous. 

^rd  Watch.  Ay,  but  give  me  worship  and  quiet¬ 
ness; 

I  like  it  better  than  a  dangerous  honour. 

If  Warwick  knew  in  what  estate  he  stands, 

’Tis  to  be  doubted  he  would  waken  him. 
ist  Watch.  Unless  our  halberds  did  shut  up  his 
passage.  20 

2nd  Watch.  Ay,  wherefore  else  guard  we  his 
royal  tent. 

But  to  defend  his  person  from  night-foes? 

Enter  Warwick,  clarence,  oxford,  somer¬ 
set,  and  French  soldiers,  silent  all. 

War.  This  is  his  tent;  and  see  where  stand  his 
guard. 

Courage,  my  masters!  honour  now  or  never! 

But  follow  me,  and  Edward  shall  be  ours. 

1st  Watch.  Who  goes  there? 

2nd  Watch.  Stay,  or  thou  diest! 

Warwick  and  the  rest  cry  all,  “Warwick! 


94 


ACT  IV 


THIRD  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


Warwick!”  and  set  upon  the  Guard,  who  fly, 
crying,  “Arm!  arm!”  Warwick  and  the  rest  fol¬ 
lowing  them. 

The  drum  playing  and  trumpet  sounding,  re-enter 
WARWICK,  SOMERSET,  and  the  rest,  bringing  the 
KING  out  in  his  gown,  sitting  in  a  chair,  richard 
and  HASTINGS  fly  over  the  stage. 

Som.  What  are  they  that  fly  there? 

War.  Richard  and  Hastings:  let  them  go;  here  is 
The  Duke. 

K.  Edw.  The  Duke!  Why,  Warwick,  when  we 
parted,  50 

Thou  call’dst  me  king. 

War.  Ay,  but  the  case  is  alter’d : 

When  you  disgraced  me  in  my  embassade. 

Then  I  degraded  you  from  being  king. 

And  come  now  to  create  you  Duke  of  York. 

Alas!  how  should  you  govern  any  kingdom. 

That  know  not  how  to  use  ambassadors. 

Nor  how  to  be  contented  with  one  wife. 

Nor  how  to  use  your  brothers  brotherly. 

Nor  how  to  study  for  the  people’s  welfare. 

Nor  how  to  shroud  yourself  from  enemies?  40 

K.  Edw.  Yea,  brother  of  Clarence,  art  thou  here 
too? 

Nay,  then  I  see  that  Edward  needs  must  down. 
Yet,  Warwick,  in  despite  of  all  mischance. 

Of  thee  thyself  and  all  thy  complices, 

Edward  will  always  bear  himself  as  king: 

Though  fortune’s  malice  overthrow  my  state. 

My  mind  exceeds  the  compass  of  her  wheel. 

War.  Then,  for  his  mind,  be  Edward  England’s 
king:  [Takes  off  his  crown. 

But  Henry  now  shall  wear  the  English  crown. 
And  be  true  king  indeed,  thou  but  the  shadow.  50 
My  Lord  of  Somerset,  at  my  request. 

See  that  forthwith  Duke  Edward  be  convey’d 
Unto  my  brother.  Archbishop  of  York. 

When  I  have  fought  with  Pembroke  and  his 
fellows. 

I’ll  follow  you,  and  tell  what  answer 
Lewis  and  the  Lady  Bona  send  to  him. 

Now,  for  a  while  farewell,  good  Duke  of  York. 

[They  lead  him  out  forcibly. 
K.  Edw.  What  fates  impose,  that  men  must 
needs  abide; 

It  boots  not  to  resist  both  wind  and  tide. 

[Exit,  guarded. 

Oxf.  What  now  remains,  my  lords,  for  us  to 
flo  60 

But  march  to  London  with  our  soldiers? 

War.  Ay,  that’s  the  first  thing  that  we  have  to 
do; 

To  free  King  Henry  from  imprisonment 
And  see  him  seated  in  the  regal  throne.  [Exeunt. 


Scene  iv.  London:  The  palace 
Enter  queen  Elizabeth  and  rivers. 

Riv.  Madam,  what  makes  you  in  this  sudden 
change? 

Q.  Eliz.  Why,  brother  Rivers,  are  you  yet  to 
learn 

What  late  misfortune  is  befall’n  King  Edward? 
Riv.  What!  loss  of  some  pitch’d  battle  against 
Warwick? 

Q.  Eliz.  No,  but  the  loss  of  his  own  royal  person. 
Riv.  Then  is  my  sovereign  slain? 

Q.  Ehz.  Ay,  almost  slain,  for  he  is  taken  prison- 
er. 

Either  betray’d  by  falsehood  of  his  guard 
Or  by  his  foe  surprised  at  unawares: 

And,  as  I  further  have  to  understand,  10 

Is  new  committed  to  the  Bishop  of  York, 

Fell  Warwick’s  brother  and  by  that  our  foe. 

Riv.  These  news  I  must  confess  are  full  of  grief; 
Yet,  gracious  madam,  bear  it  as  you  may: 
Warwick  may  lose,  that  now  hath  won  the  day. 
Q.  Eliz.  Till  then  fair  hope  must  hinder  life’s 
decay. 

And  I  the  rather  wean  me  from  despair 
For  love  of  Edward’s  offspring  in  my  womb: 

This  is  it  that  makes  me  bridle  passion 
And  bear  with  mildness  my  misfortune’s  cross; 
Ay,  ay,  for  this  I  draw  in  many  a  tear  21 

And  stop  the  rising  of  blood-sucking  sighs. 

Lest  with  my  sighs  or  tears  I  blast  or  drown 
King  Edward’s  fruit,  true  heir  to  the  English 
crown. 

Riv.  But,  madam,  where  is  Warwick  then  be¬ 
come? 

Q.  Eliz.  I  am  inform’d  that  he  comes  towards 
London, 

To  set  the  crown  once  more  on  Henry’s  head: 
Guess  thou  the  rest;  King  Edward’s  friends  must 
down. 

But,  to  prevent  the  tyrant’s  violence — 

For  trust  not  him  that  hath  once  broken  faith — 
I’ll  hence  forthwith  unto  the  sanctuary,  5/ 

To  save  at  least  the  heir  of  Edward’s  right: 

There  shall  I  rest  secure  from  force  and  fraud. 
Come,  therefore,  let  us  fly  while  we  may  fly: 

If  Warwick  take  us  we  are  sure  to  die.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  A  park  near  Middleham  Castle  in 
Yorkshire 

GLOUCESTER,  LORD  HASTINGS,  and  SIR 
WILLIAM  STANLEY. 

Glou.  Now,  my  Lord  Hastings  and  Sir  William 
Stanley, 

Leave  off  to  wonder  why  I  drew  you  hither, 

Into  the  chiefest  thicket  of  the  park. 


SCENE  V 

Thus  stands  the  case:  you  know  our  king,  my 
brother, 

Is  prisoner  to  the  Bishop  here,  at  whose  hands 
He  hath  good  usage  and  great  liberty. 

And,  often  but  attended  with  weak  guard. 

Comes  hunting  this  way  to  disport  himself. 

I  have  advertised  him  by  secret  means 

That  if  about  this  hour  he  make  this  way  lo 

Under  the  colour  of  his  usual  game. 

He  shall  here  find  his  friends  with  horse  and  men 
To  set  him  free  from  his  captivity. 

Enter  king  edward  and  a  huntsman  with  him. 

Hunt.  This  way,  my  lord;  for  this  way  lies  the 
game. 

K.  Edw.  Nay,  this  way,  man:  see  where  the 
huntsmen  stand. 

Now,  brother  of  Gloucester,  Lord  Hastings,  and 
the  rest, 

Stand  you  thus  close,  to  steal  the  Bishop’s  deer? 

Glou.  Brother,  the  time  and  case  requireth  haste: 
Your  horse  stands  ready  at  the  park-corner. 

K.  Edw.  But  whither  shall  we  then? 

Hast.  To  Lynn,  my  lord,  20 

And  ship  from  thence  to  Flanders. 

Glou.  Well  guess’d,  believe  me;  for  that  was 
my  meaning. 

K.  Edw.  Stanley,  I  will  requite  thy  forward¬ 
ness. 

Glou.  But  wherefore  stay  we?  ’tis  no  time  to 
talk. 

K.  Edw.  Huntsman,  what  say’st  thou?  wilt  thou 
go  along? 

Hunt.  Better  do  so  than  tarry  and  be  bang’d. 
Glou.  Come  then,  away;  let’s  ha’  no  more  ado. 
K.  Edw.  Bishop,  farewell:  shield  thee  from 
Warwick’s  frown; 

And  pray  that  I  may  repossess  the  crown. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  vi.  London:  The  Tower 
Flourish.  Enter  KmG  henry,  clarence,  Warwick, 
somerset,  young  Richmond,  oxford,  Mon¬ 
tague,  and  lieutenant  of  the  tower. 

K.  Hen.  Master  lieutenant,  now  that  God  and 
friends 

Have  shaken  Edward  from  the  regal  seat. 

And  turn’d  my  captive  state  to  liberty. 

My  fear  to  hope,  my  sorrows  unto  joys. 

At  our  enlargement  what  are  thy  due  fees? 

Lieu.  Subjects  may  challenge  nothing  of  their 
sovereigns; 

But  if  an  humble  prayer  may  prevail, 

I  then  crave  pardon  of  your  Majesty. 

K.  Hen.  For  what,  lieutenant?  for  well  using 
me?  o 


95 

Nay,  be  thou  sure  I’ll  well  requite  thy  kindness. 
For  that  it  made  my  imprisonment  a  pleasure; 

Ay,  such  a  pleasure  as  incaged  birds. 

Conceive  when  after  many  moody  thoughts 
At  last  by  notes  of  household  harmony 
They  quite  forget  their  loss  of  liberty. 

But,  Warwick,  after  God,  thou  set’st  me  free, 
And  chiefly  therefore  I  thank  God  and  thee; 

He  was  the  author,  thou  the  instrument. 
Therefore,  that  I  may  conquer  Fortune’s  spite 
By  living  low,  where  Fortune  cannot  hurt  me,  20 
And  that  the  people  of  this  blessed  land 
May  not  be  punish’d  with  my  thwarting  stars, 
Warwick,  although  my  head  still  wear  the 
crown, 

I  here  resign  my  government  to  thee, 

For  thou  art  fortunate  in  all  thy  deeds. 

War.  Your  Grace  hath  still  been  famed  for  vir¬ 
tuous; 

And  now  may  seem  as  wise  as  virtuous. 

By  spying  and  avoiding  Fortune’s  malice, 

For  few  men  rightly  temper  with  the  stars : 

Yet  in  this  one  thing  let  me  blame  your  Grace,  50 
For  choosing  me  when  Clarence  is  in  place. 

Clar.  No,  Warwick,  thou  art  worthy  of  the 
sway. 

To  whom  the  heavens  in  thy  nativity 
Adjudged  an  olive  branch  and  laurel  crown, 

As  likely  to  be  blest  in  peace  and  war; 

And  therefore  I  yield  thee  my  free  consent. 

War.  And  I  choose  Clarence  only  for  Protector. 
K.  Hen.  Warwick  and  Clarence,  give  me  both 
your  hands: 

Now  join  your  hands,  and  with  your  hands  your 
hearts. 

That  no  dissension  hinder  government :  ^0 

I  make  you  both  Protectors  of  this  land. 

While  I  myself  will  lead  a  private  life 
And  in  devotion  spend  my  latter  days. 

To  sin’s  rebuke  and  my  Creator’s  praise. 

War.  What  answers  Clarence  to  his  sovereign’s 
will? 

Clar.  That  he  consents,  if  Warwick  yield  con¬ 
sent; 

For  on  thy  fortune  I  repose  myself. 

War.  Why,  then,  though  loath,  yet  must  I  be 
content: 

We’ll  yoke  together,  like  a  double  shadow 
To  Henry’s  body,  and  supply  his  place;  50 
I  mean,  in  bearing  weight  of  government. 

While  he  enjoys  the  honour  and  his  ease. 

And,  Clarence,  now  then  it  is  more  than  needful 
Forthwith  that  Edward  be  pronounced  a  traitor. 
And  all  his  lands  and  goods  be  confiscate. 

Clar.  What  else?  and  that  succession  be  deter¬ 
mined. 


THIRD  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  VI 


96  THIRD  PART  OF 

War.  Ay,  therein  Clarence  shall  not  want  his 
part. 

K.  Hen.  But,  with  the  first  of  all  your  chief 
affairs, 

Let  me  entreat,  for  I  command  no  more,  yp 
That  Margaret  your  queen  and  my  son  Edward 
Be  sent  for,  to  return  from  France  with  speed; 

For,  till  I  see  them  here,  by  doubtful  fear 
My  joy  of  liberty  is  half  eclipsed. 

Clar.  It  shall  be  done,  my  sovereign,  with  all 
speed. 

K.  Hen.  My  Lord  of  Somerset,  what  youth  is 
that, 

Of  whom  you  seem  to  have  so  tender  care? 

Som.  My  liege,  it  is  young  Henry,  Earl  of  Rich¬ 
mond. 

K.  Hen.  Come  hither,  England’s  hope.  [Lays  his 
hand  on  his  head.]  If  secret  powers 
Suggest  but  truth  to  my  divining  thoughts. 

This  pretty  lad  will  prove  our  country’s  bliss.  70 
His  looks  are  full  of  peaceful  majesty. 

His  head  by  nature  framed  to  wear  a  crown, 

His  hand  to  wield  a  sceptre,  and  himself 
Likely  in  time  to  bless  a  regal  throne. 

Make  much  of  him,  my  lords,  for  this  is  he 
Must  help  you  more  than  you  are  hurt  by  me. 

Enter  a  POST. 

War.  What  news,  my  friend? 

Post.  That  Edward  is  escaped  from  your  brother, 
And  fled,  as  he  hears  since,  to  Burgundy. 

War.  Unsavoury  news!  but  how  made  he  es¬ 
cape?  80 

Post.  He  was  convey’d  by  Richard  Duke  of 
Gloucester 

And  the  Lord  Hastings,  who  attended  him 

In  secret  ambush  on  the  forest  side 

And  from  the  Bishop’s  huntsmen  rescued  him; 

For  hunting  was  his  daily  exercise. 

War.  My  brother  was  too  careless  of  his  charge. 
But  let  us  hence,  my  sovereign,  to  provide 
A  salve  for  any  sore  that  may  betide. 

[Exeunt  all  but  somerset,  Richmond, 

^72^/ OXFORD. 

Som.  My  lord,  I  like  not  of  this  flight  of  Ed¬ 
ward’s; 

For  doubtless  Burgundy  will  yield  him  help,  po 
And  we  shall  have  more  wars  before ’t  be  long. 

As  Henry’s  late  presaging  prophecy 
Did  glad  my  heart  with  hope  of  this  young  Rich¬ 
mond, 

So  doth  my  heart  misgive  me,  in  these  conflicts 
What  may  befall  him,  to  his  harm  and  ours : 
Therefore,  Lord  Oxford,  to  prevent  the  worst. 
Forthwith  we’ll  send  him  hence  to  Brittany, 

Till  storms  be  past  of  civil  enmity. 

Oxf.  Ay,  for  if  Edward  repossess  the  crown. 


KING  HENRY  VI  ACT  IV 

’Tis  like  that  Richmond  with  the  rest  shall  down. 
Som.  It  shall  be  so;  he  shall  to  Brittany.  loi 
Come,  therefore,  let’s  about  it  speedily.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  vii.  Before  Fork 
Flourish.  Enter  king  edward,  Gloucester, 
HASTINGS,  and  soldiers. 

K.  Edw.  Now,  brother  Richard,  Lord  Hastings, 
and  the  rest. 

Yet  thus  far  Fortune  maketh  us  amends. 

And  says  that  once  more  I  shall  interchange 
My  waned  state  for  Henry’s  regal  crown. 

Well  have  we  pass’d  and  now  repass’d  the  seas 
And  brought  desired  help  from  Burgundy: 

What  then  remains,  we  being  thus  arrived 
From  Ravenspurgh  haven  before  the  gates  of 
York, 

But  that  we  enter  as  into  our  dukedom? 

Glou.  The  gates  made  fast!  Brother,  I  like  not 
this;  10 

For  many  men  that  stumble  at  the  threshold 
Are  well  foretold  that  danger  lurks  within. 

K.  Edw.  Tush,  man,  abodements  must  not  now 
aflFright  us: 

By  fair  or  foul  means  we  must  enter  in. 

For  hither  will  our  friends  repair  to  us. 

Hast.  My  liege.  I’ll  knock  once  more  to  sum¬ 
mon  them. 

Enter y  on  the  'walls,  the  mayor  of  york,  and 
his  Brethren. 

May.  My  lords,  we  were  forewarned  of  your 
coming. 

And  shut  the  gates  for  safety  of  ourselves; 

For  now  we  owe  allegiance  unto  Henry. 

K.  Ed'w.  But,  master  mayor,  if  Henry  be  your 
king,  20 

Yet  Edward  at  the  least  is  Duke  of  York. 

May.  True,  my  good  lord;  I  know  you  for  no 
less. 

K.  Ed'w.  Why,  and  I  challenge  nothing  but  my 
dukedom. 

As  being  well  content  with  that  alone. 

Glou.  [Aside]  But  when  the  fox  hath  once  got  in 
his  nose. 

He’ll  soon  find  means  to  make  the  body  follow. 
Hast.  Why,  master  mayor,  why  stand  you  in  a 
doubt? 

Open  the  gates;  we  are  King  Henry’s  friends. 
May.  Ay,  say  you  so?  the  gates  shall  then  be 
open’d.  [They  descend. 

Glou.  A  wise  stout  captain,  and  soon  persuaded! 
Hast.  The  good  old  man  would  fain  that  all  were 
well,  5/ 

So  ’twere  not  ’long  of  him;  but  being  enter’d, 

I  doubt  not,  I,  but  we  shall  soon  persuade 


SCENE  VII  THIRD  PART  OF 

Both  him  and  all  his  brothers  unto  reason. 

Enter  the  mayor  and  two  Aldermen,  below. 

K.  Edw.  So,  master  mayor:  these  gates  must 
not  be  shut 

But  in  the  night  or  in  the  time  of  war. 

What!  fear  not,  man,  but  yield  me  up  the  keys; 
[Takes  his  keys.] 

For  Edward  will  defend  the  town  and  thee. 

And  all  those  friends  that  deign  to  follow  me. 

March.  Enter  Montgomery,  with  drum  and 
soldiers. 

Glou.  Brother,  this  is  Sir  John  Montgomery, 

Our  trusty  friend,  unless  I  be  deceived.  4/ 

K.  Edw.  Welcome,  Sir  John!  But  why  come 
you  in  arms? 

Mont.  To  help  King  Edward  in  his  time  of 
storm. 

As  every  loyal  subject  ought  to  do. 

K.  Edw.  Thanks,  good  Montgomery;  but  we 
new  forget 

Our  title  to  the  crown  and  only  claim 
Our  dukedom  till  God  please  to  send  the  rest. 
Mont.  Then  fare  you  well,  for  I  will  hence 
again: 

I  came  to  serve  a  king  and  not  a  duke. 

Drummer,  strike  up,  and  let  us  march  away.  50 
The  drum  begins  to  march. 

K.  Edw.  Nay,  stay.  Sir  John,  awhile,  and  we’ll 
debate 

By  what  safe  means  the  crown  may  be  recover’d. 
Mont.  What  talk  you  of  debating?  in  few  words. 
If  you’ll  not  here  proclaim  yourself  our  king. 

I’ll  leave  you  to  your  fortune  and  be  gone 
To  keep  them  back  that  come  to  succour  you: 
Why  shall  we  fight,  if  you  pretend  no  title? 

Glou.  Why,  brother,  wherefore  stand  you  on 
nice  points? 

K.  Edw.  When  we  grow  stronger,  then  we’ll 
make  our  claim: 

Till  then,  ’tis  wisdom  to  conceal  our  meaning.  60 
Hast.  Away  with  scrupulous  wit!  now  arms 
must  rule. 

Glou.  And  fearless  minds  climb  soonest  unto 
crowns. 

Brother,  we  will  proclaim  you  out  of  hand: 

The  bruit  thereof  will  bring  you  many  friends. 

K.  Edw.  Then  be  it  as  you  will;  for  ’tis  my 
right, 

And  Henry  but  usurps  the  diadem. 

Mont.  Ay,  now  my  sovereign  speaketh  like 
himself; 

And  now  will  I  be  Edward’s  champion. 

Hast.  Sound  trumpet;  Edward  shall  be  here  pro¬ 
claim’d: 


KING  HENRY  VI  97 

Come,  fellow-soldier,  make  thou  proclamation. 

G iving  him  a  paper.  Flourish.  7 o 

Sold.  [Reads.]  “Edward  the  Fourth,  by  the  grace 
of  God,  king  of  England  and  France,  and  lord  of 
Ireland,”  &c. 

Mont.  And  whosoe’er  gainsays  King  Edward’s 
right, 

By  this  1  challenge  him  to  single  fight. 

Throws  down  his  gauntlet. 

All.  Long  live  Edward  the  Fourth! 

K.  Edw.  Thanks,  brave  Montgomery;  and 
thanks  unto  you  all: 

If  fortune  serve  me.  I’ll  requite  this  kindness. 
Now,  for  this  night,  let’s  harbour  here  in  York; 
And  when  the  morning  sun  shall  raise  his  car  80 
Above  the  border  of  this  horizon. 

We’ll  forward  towards  Warwick  and  his  mates; 
For  well  I  wot  that  Henry  is  no  soldier. 

Ah,  froward  Clarence!  how  evil  it  beseems  thee. 
To  flatter  Henry  and  forsake  thy  brother! 

Yet,  as  we  may,  we’ll  meet  both  thee  and  War¬ 
wick. 

Come  on,  brave  soldiers:  doubt  not  of  the  day, 
And,  that  once  gotten,  doubt  not  of  large  pay. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  viii.  London:  The  palace 
Flourish.  Enter  king  henry,  Warwick,  Mon¬ 
tague,  clarence,  EXETER,  and  OXFORD. 

War.  What  counsel,  lords?  Edward  from  Belgia, 
With  hasty  Germans  and  blunt  Hollanders, 

Hath  pass’d  in  safety  through  the  narrow  seas. 
And  with  his  troops  doth  march  amain  to  Lon¬ 
don; 

And  many  giddy  people  flock  to  him. 

K.  Hen.  Let’s  levy  men,  and  beat  him  back 
again. 

Clar.  A  little  fire  is  quickly  trodden  out; 

Which,  being  suffer’d,  rivers  cannot  quench. 

War.  In  Warwickshire  I  have  true-hearted 
friends. 

Not  mutinous  in  peace,  yet  bold  in  war;  10 

Those  will  I  muster  up:  and  thou,  son  Clarence, 
Shalt  stir  up  in  Suffolk,  Norfolk,  and  in  Kent. 

The  knights  and  gentlemen  to  come  with  thee: 
Thou,  brother  Montague,  in  Buckingham, 
Northampton,  and  in  Leicestershire,  shalt  find 
Men  well  inclined  to  hear  what  thou  command’st: 
And  thou,  brave  Oxford,  wondrous  well  beloved. 
In  Oxfordshire  shalt  muster  up  thy  friends. 

My  sovereign,  with  the  loving  citizens. 

Like  to  his  island  girt  in  with  the  ocean,  20 
Or  modest  Dian  circled  with  her  nymphs. 

Shall  rest  in  London  till  we  come  to  him. 

Fair  lords,  take  leave  and  stand  not  to  reply. 
Farewell,  my  sovereign. 


98  THIRD  PART  OF 

K.  Hen.  Farewell,  my  Hector,  and  my  Troy’s 
true  hope. 

Clar.  In  sign  of  truth,  I  kiss  your  Highness’ 
hand. 

K.  Hen.  Well-minded  Clarence,  be  thou  fortu¬ 
nate! 

Mont.  Comfort,  my  lord;  and  so  I  take  my 
leave. 

Oxf.  And  thus  I  seal  my  truth,  and  bid  adieu. 

K.  Hen.  Sweet  Oxford,  and  my  loving  Mon¬ 
tague,  50 

And  all  at  once,  once  more  a  happy  farewell. 

War.  Farewell,  sweet  lords:  let’s  meet  at  Cov¬ 
entry. 

[Exeunt  all  but  king  henry  and  exeter. 
K.  Hen.  Here  at  the  palace  will  I  rest  awhile. 
Cousin  of  Exeter,  what  thinks  your  lordship? 
Methinks  the  power  that  Edward  hath  in  field 
Should  not  be  able  to  encounter  mine. 

Exe.  The  doubt  is  that  he  will  seduce  the  rest. 

K.  Hen.  That’s  not  my  fear;  my  meed  hath  got 
me  fame: 

I  have  not  stopp’d  mine  ears  to  their  demands, 

Nor  posted  off  their  suits  with  slow  delays;  40 
My  pity  hath  been  balm  to  heal  their  wounds, 

My  mildness  hath  allay’d  their  swelling  griefs, 

My  mercy  dried  their  water-flowing  tears; 

I  have  not  been  desirous  of  their  wealth. 

Nor  much  oppress’d  them  with  great  subsidies, 
Nor  forward  of  revenge,  though  they  much  err’d : 
Then  why  should  they  love  Edward  more  than 
me? 

No,  Exeter,  these  graces  challenge  grace: 

And  when  the  lion  fawns  upon  the  lamb, 

The  lamb  will  never  cease  to  follow  him.  50 
Shout 'within,  “A  Lancaster!  A  Lancaster!” 

Exe.  Hark,  hark,  my  lord!  what  shouts  are 
these? 

Enter  king  edward,  Gloucester,  and 
soldiers. 

K.  Ed'w.  Seize  on  the  shame-faced  Henry,  bear 
him  hence; 

And  once  again  proclaim  us  King  of  England. 

You  are  the  fount  that  makes  small  brooks  to 
flow: 

Now  stops  thy  spring;  my  sea  shall  suck  them 
dry. 

And  swell  so  much  the  higher  by  their  ebb. 

Hence  with  him  to  the  Tower;  let  him  not  speak. 

[Exeunt  some  'with  king  henry. 
And,  lords,  towards  Coventry  bend  we  our 
course. 

Where  peremptory  Warwick  now  remains: 

The  sun  shines  hot;  and,  if  we  use  delay,  60 
Cold  biting  winter  mars  our  hoped-for  hay. 


KING  HENRY  VI  ACT  V 

Glou.  Away  betimes,  before  his  forces  join. 

And  take  the  great-grown  traitor  unawares : 

Brave  warriors,  march  amain  towards  Coventry . 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  Coventry 

Enter  Warwick,  the  Mayor  of  Coventry,  two 
MESSENGERS,  and  others  upon  the  walls. 

War.  Where  is  the  post  that  came  from  valiant 
Oxford? 

How  far  hence  is  thy  lord,  mine  honest  fellow? 

istMess.  By  this  at  Dunsinore,  marching  hither¬ 
ward. 

War.  How  far  off  is  our  brother  Montague? 

Where  is  the  post  that  came  from  Montague? 

2nd  Mess.  By  this  at  Daintry,  with  a  puissant 
troop. 

Enter  sir  john  somerville. 

War.  Say,  Somerville,  what  says  my  loving  son? 

And,  by  thy  guess,  how  nigh  is  Clarence  now? 

Som.  At  Southam  I  did  leave  him  with  his  forces. 

And  do  expect  him  here  some  two  hours  hence. 
Drum  heard. 

War.  Then  Clarence  is  at  hand;  I  hear  his  drum. 

Som.  It  is  not  his,  my  lord;  here  Southam  lies: 

The  drum  your  honour  hears  marcheth  from 
Warwick. 

War.  Who  should  that  be?  belike,  unlook’d-for 
friends. 

Som.  They  are  at  hand,  and  you  shall  quickly 
know. 

March:  flourish.  Enter  king  edward, 
GLOUCESTER,  and  soldiers. 

K.  Edw.  Go,  trumpet,  to  the  walls,  and  sound  a 
parle. 

Glou.  See  how  the  surly  Warwick  mans  the 
wall! 

War.  O  unbid  spite!  is  sportful  Edward  come? 

Where  slept  our  scouts,  or  how  are  they  seduced. 

That  we  could  hear  no  news  of  his  repair?  20 

K.  Edw.  Now,  Warwick,  wilt  thou  ope  the  city 
gates. 

Speak  gentle  words  and  humbly  bend  thy  knee. 

Call  Edward  king  and  at  his  hands  beg  mercy? 

And  he  shall  pardon  thee  these  outrages. 

War.  Nay,  rather,  wilt  thou  draw  thy  forces 
hence. 

Confess  who  set  thee  up  and  pluck’d  thee  down. 

Call  Warwick  patron  and  be  penitent? 

And  thou  shalt  still  remain  the  Duke  of  York. 

Glou.  I  thought,  at  least,  he  would  have  said  the 
King; 


SCENE  I 


99 


THIRD  PART  OF 

Or  did  he  make  the  jest  against  his  will?  50 
War.  Is  not  a  dukedom,  sir,  a  goodly  gift? 

Glm.  Ay,  by  my  faith,  for  a  poor  earl  to  give: 
ril  do  thee  service  for  so  good  a  gift. 

War.  ’Twas  I  that  gave  the  kingdom  to  thy 
brother. 

K.  Edw.  Why  then  ’tis  mine,  if  but  by  War¬ 
wick’s  gift. 

War.  Thou  art  no  Atlas  for  so  great  a  weight: 
And,  weakling,  Warwick  takes  his  gift  again; 

And  Henry  is  my  king,  Warwick  his  subject. 

K.  Edw.  But  Warwick’s  king  is  Edward’s  pris¬ 
oner: 

And,  gallant  Warwick,  do  but  answer  this:  40 
What  is  the  body  when  the  head  is  off? 

Glm.  Alas,  that  Warwick  had  no  more  fore¬ 
cast. 

But,  whiles  he  thought  to  steal  the  single  ten. 

The  king  was  slily  finger’d  from  the  deck! 

You  left  poor  Henry  at  the  Bishop’s  palace. 

And,  ten  to  one,  you’ll  meet  him  in  the  Tower. 

K.  Edw.  ’Tis  even  so;  yet  you  are  Warwick 
still. 

Glm.  Come,  Warwick,  take  the  time;  kneel 
down,  kneel  down: 

Nay,  when?  strike  now,  or  else  the  iron  cools. 

War.  I  had  rather  chop  this  hand  off  at  a  blow  50 
And  with  the  other  fling  it  at  thy  face 
Than  bear  so  low  a  sail  to  strike  to  thee. 

K.  Edw.  Sail  how  thou  canst,  have  wind  and 
tide  thy  friend. 

This  hand,  fast  wound  about  thy  coal-black  hair, 
Shall,  whiles  thy  head  is  warm  and  new  cut  off, 
Write  in  the  dust  this  sentence  with  thy  blood, 
“Wind-changing  Warwick  now  can  change  no 
more.” 

Enter  oxford,  with  drum  and  colmrs. 

War.  O  cheerful  colours!  see  where  Oxford 
comes ! 

Oxf.  Oxford,  Oxford,  for  Lancaster! 

He  and  his  forces  enter  the  city. 

Glm.  The  gates  are  open,  let  us  enter  too.  60 
K.  Edw.  So  other  foes  may  set  upon  our  backs. 
Stand  we  in  good  array;  for  they  no  doubt 
Will  issue  out  again  and  bid  us  battle: 

If  not,  the  city  being  but  of  small  defence. 

We’ll  quickly  rouse  the  traitors  in  the  same. 

War.  O,  welcome,  Oxford!  for  we  want  thy 
help. 

Enter  Montague,  with  drum  and  colmrs. 

Mont.  Montague,  Montague,  for  Lancaster! 

He  and  his  forces  enter  the  city. 

Glm.  Thou  and  thy  brother  both  shall  buy  this 
treason 


KING  HENRY  VI 

Even  with  the  dearest  b^ood  your  bodies  bear. 

K.  Edw.  The  harder  match’d,  the  greater  vic¬ 
tory:  70 

My  mind  presageth  happy  gain  and  conquest. 

Enter  somerset,  with  drum  and  colours. 

Som.  Somerset,  Somerset,  for  Lancaster! 

He  and  his  forces  enter  the  city. 

Glm.  Two  of  thy  name,  both  Dukes  of  Somer¬ 
set, 

Have  sold  their  lives  unto  the  house  of  York; 

And  thou  shalt  be  the  third,  if  this  sword  hold. 

Enter  clarence,  with  drum  and  colmrs. 

War.  And  lo,  where  George  of  Clarence  sweeps 
along. 

Of  force  enough  to  bid  his  brother  battle; 

With  whom*  an  upright  zeal  to  right  prevails 
More  than  the  nature  of  a  brother’s  love! 

Come,  Clarence,  come;  thou  wilt,  if  Warwick 
call.  80 

Clar.  Father  of  Warwick,  know  you  what  this 
means? 

Taking  his  red  rose  mt  of  his  hat. 

Look  here,  I  throw  my  infancy  at  thee: 

I  will  not  ruinate  my  father’s  house. 

Who  gave  his  blood  to  line  the  stones  together, 
And  set  up  Lancaster.  Why,  trow’st  thou,  War¬ 
wick, 

That  Clarence  is  so  harsh,  so  blunt,  unnatural, 

To  bend  the  fatal  instruments  of  war 
Against  his  brother  and  his  lawful  king? 

Perhaps  thou  wilt  object  my  holy  oath: 

To  keep  that  oath  were  more  impiety  ^0 

Than  Jephthah’s,  when  he  sacrificed  his  daughter. 
I  am  so  sorry  for  my  trespass  made 
That,  to  deserve  well  at  my  brother’s  hands, 

I  here  proclaim  myself  thy  mortal  foe. 

With  resolution,  wheresoe’er  I  meet  thee — 

As  I  will  meet  thee,  if  thou  stir  abroad — 

To  plague  thee  for  thy  foul  misleading  me. 

And  so,  proud-hearted  Warwick,  I  defy  thee. 
And  to  my  brother  turn  my  blushing  cheeks. 
Pardon  me,  Edward,  I  will  make  amends:  too 

And,  Richard,  do  not  frown  upon  my  faults. 

For  I  will  henceforth  be  no  more  unconstant. 

K.  Edw.  Now  welcome  more,  and  ten  times 
more  beloved. 

Than  if  thou  never  hadst  deserved  our  hate. 

Glm.  Welcome,  good  Clarence;  this  is  brother¬ 
like. 

War.  O  passing  traitor,  perjured  and  unjust! 

K.  Edw.  What,  Warwick,  wilt  thou  leave  the 
town  and  fight? 

Or  shall  we  beat  the  stones  about  thine  ears? 

War.  Alas,  I  am  not  coop’d  here  for  defence! 


lOO 


ACT  V 


THIRD  PART  OF 

I  will  away  towards  Barnet  presently,  no 

And  bid  thee  battle,  Edward,  if  thou  darest. 

K.  Ed'iv.  Yes,  Warwick,  Edward  dares,  and 
leads  the  way. 

Lords,  to  the  field;  Saint  George  and  victory! 

[Exeunt  king  edward  and  his  company. 
March.  Warwick  and  his  company 
follow. 

Scene  ii.  Afield  of  battle  near  Barnet 
Alarum  and  excursions.  Enter  king  edward, 
bringing  forth  Warwick  wounded. 

K.  Edw.  So,  lie  thou  there:  die  thou,  and  die  our 
fear; 

For  Warwick  was  a  bug  that  fear’d  us  all. 

Now,  Montague,  sit  fast  ;  I  seek  for  thee. 

That  Warwick’s  bones  may  keep  thine  company. 

[Exit. 

War.  Ah,  who  is  nigh?  come  to  me,  friend  or 
foe. 

And  tell  me  who  is  victor,  York  or  Warwick? 
Why  ask  I  that?  my  mangled  body  shows. 

My  blood,  my  want  of  strength,  my  sick  heart 
shows 

That  I  must  yield  my  body  to  the  earth 

And,  by  my  fall,  the  conquest  to  my  foe.  lo 

Thus  yields  the  cedar  to  the  axe’s  edge. 

Whose  arms  gave  shelter  to  the  princely  eagle. 
Under  whose  shade  the  ramping  lion  slept. 

Whose  top-branch  overpeer’d  Jove’s  spreading 
tree 

And  kept  low  shrubs  from  winter’s  powerful 
wind. 

These  eyes,  that  now  are  dimm’d  with  death’s 
black  veil. 

Have  been  as  piercing  as  the  mid-day  sun. 

To  search  the  secret  treasons  of  the  world: 

The  wrinkles  in  my  brows,  now  fill’d  with  blood, 
Were  liken’d  oft  to  kingly  sepulchres;  20 

For  who  lived  king,  but  I  could  dig  his  grave? 

And  who  durst  smile  when  Warwick  bent  his 
brow? 

Lo,  now  my  glory  smear’d  in  dust  and  blood! 

My  parks,  my  walks,  my  manors  that  I  had. 

Even  now  forsake  me,  and  of  all  my  lands 
Is  nothing  left  me  but  my  body’s  length. 

Why,  what  is  pomp,  rule,  reign,  but  earth  and 
dust? 

And,  live  we  how  we  can,  yet  die  we  must. 

Enter  oxford  and  somerset. 

Som.  Ah,  Warwick,  Warwick!  wert  thou  as  we 
are. 

We  might  recover  all  our  loss  again:  50 

The  Queen  from  France  hath  brought  a  puissant 
power: 


KING  HENRY  VI 

Even  now  we  heard  the  news :  ah,  couldst  thou 

rty ! 

War.  Why,  then  I  would  not  fly.  Ah,  Montague, 
If  thou  be  there,  sweet  brother,  take  my  hand. 
And  with  thy  lips  keep  in  my  soul  awhile! 

Thou  lovest  me  not;  for,  brother,  if  thou  didst. 
Thy  tears  would  wash  this  cold  congealed  blood 
That  glues  my  lips  and  will  not  let  me  speak. 
Come  quickly,  Montague,  or  I  am  dead. 

Som.  Ah,  VVarwick!  Montague  hath  breathed 
his  last;  40 

And  to  the  latest  gasp  cried  out  for  Warwick 
And  said,  “Commend  me  to  my  valiant  brother.” 
And  more  he  would  have  said,  and  more  he  spoke, 
Which  sounded  like  a  clamour  in  a  vaul:. 

That  mought  not  be  distinguish’d;  but  at  last 
I  well  might  hear,  deliver’d  with  a  groan, 

“O,  farewell,  Warwick!” 

War.  Sweet  rest  his  soul!  Fly,  lords,  and  save 
yourselves; 

For  Warwick  bids  you  all  farewell,  to  meet  in 
heaven.  [Dies. 

Oxf.  Away,  away,  to  meet  the  Queen’s  great 
power !  [Here  they  bear  away  his  body . 

Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Flourish.  Enter  king  edward  in  triumph;  with 
GLOUCESTER,  CLARENCE,  and  the  rest. 

K.  Edw.  Thus  far  our  fortune  keeps  an  upward 
course. 

And  we  are  graced  with  wreaths  of  victory. 

But,  in  the  midst  of  this  bright-shining  day, 

I  spy  a  black,  suspicious,  threatening  cloud. 

That  will  encounter  with  our  glorious  sun. 

Ere  he  attain  his  easeful  western  bed: 

I  mean,  my  lords,  those  powers  that  the  Queen 
Hath  raised  in  Gallia  have  arrived  our  coast 
And,  as  we  hear,  march  on  to  fight  with  us.  ^ 
Clar.  A  little  gale  will  soon  disperse  that  cloud 
And  blow  it  to  the  source  from  whence  it  came: 
The  very  beams  will  dry  those  vapours  up. 

For  every  cloud  engenders  not  a  storm. 

Glou.  The  Queen  is  valued  thirty  thousand 
strong, 

And  Somerset,  with  Oxford,  fled  to  her: 

If  she  have  time  to  breathe,  be  well  assured 
Her  faction  will  be  full  as  strong  as  ours. 

K.  Edw.  We  are  advertised  by  our  loving 
friends 

That  they  do  hold  their  course  toward  Tewks¬ 
bury: 

We,  having  now  the  best  at  Barnet  field,  20 
Will  thither  straight,  for  willingness  rids  way; 
And,  as  we  march,  our  strength  will  be  aug¬ 
mented 


SCENE  III  THIRD  PART  OF 

In  every  county  as  we  go  along. 

Strike  up  the  drum;  cry  “Q)urage!”  and  away. 

[Exeunt, 

Scene  iv.  Plains  near  Tewksbury 
March,  Enter  queen  Margaret,  prince 
EDWARD,  soxMerset,  OXFORD,  and  soldiers, 

Q,  Mar,  Great  lords,  wise  men  ne’er  sit  and 
wail  their  loss. 

But  cheerly  seek  how  to  redress  their  harms. 

What  though  the  mast  be  now  blown  overboard. 
The  cable  broke,  the  holding-anchor  lost. 

And  half  our  sailors  swallow’d  in  the  flood? 

Yet  lives  our  pilot  still.  Is’t  meet  that  he 
Should  leave  the  helm  and  like  a  fearful  lad 
With  tearful  eyes  add  water  to  the  sea 
And  give  more  strength  to  that  which  hath  too 
much,  p 

Whiles,  in  his  moan,  the  ship  splits  on  the  rock. 
Which  industry  and  courage  might  have  saved? 
Ah,  what  a  shame!  ah,  what  a  fault  were  this! 

Say  Warwick  was  our  anchor;  what  of  that? 

And  Montague  our  topmast;  what  of  him? 

Our  slaughter’d  friends  the  tackles;  what  of 
these? 

Why,  is  not  Oxford  here  another  anchor? 

And  Somerset  another  goodly  mast? 

The  friends  of  France  our  shrouds  and  tacklings? 
And,  though  unskilful,  why  not  Ned  and  I 
For  once  allow’d  the  skilful  pilot’s  charge?  20 
We  will  not  from  the  helm  to  sit  and  weep. 

But  keep  our  course,  though  the  rough  wind  say 
no. 

From  shelves  and  rocks  that  threaten  us  with 
wreck. 

As  good  to  chide  the  waves  as  speak  them  fair. 

And  what  is  Edward  but  a  ruthless  sea? 

What  Clarence  but  a  quicksand  of  deceit? 

And  Richard  but  a  ragged  fatal  rock? 

All  these  the  enemies  to  our  poor  bark. 

Say  you  can  swim;  alas,  ’tis  but  a  while! 

Tread  on  the  sand;  why,  there  you  quickly  sink; 
Bestride  the  rock ;  the  tide  will  wash  you  off,  5  / 
Or  else  you  famish;  that’s  a  threefold  death. 

This  speak  I,  lords,  to  let  you  understand. 

If  case  some  one  of  you  would  fly  from  us. 

That  there’s  no  hoped-for  mercy  with  the  broth¬ 
ers 

More  than  with  ruthless  waves,  with  sands,  and 
rocks. 

Why,  courage  then!  what  cannot  be  avoided 
’Twere  childish  weakness  to  lament  or  fear. 

Prince,  Methinks  a  woman  of  this  valiant  spirit 
Should,  if  a  coward  heard  her  speak  these  words. 
Infuse  his  breast  with  magnanimity  4/ 

And  make  him,  naked,  foil  a  man  at  arms. 


KING  HENRY  VI  loi 

I  speak  not  this  as  doubting  any  here; 

For  did  I  but  suspect  a  fearful  man. 

He  should  have  leave  to  go  away  betimes, 

Lest  in  our  need  he  might  infect  another 
And  make  him  of  like  spirit  to  himself. 

If  any  such  be  here — as  God  forbid! — 

Let  him  depart  before  we  need  his  help. 

Oxf.  Women  and  children  of  so  high  a  courage. 
And  warriors  faint!  why,  ’twere  perpetual  shame. 
O  brave  young  prince!  thy  famous  grandfather 
Doth  live  again  in  thee:  long  mayst  thou  live 
To  bear  his  image  and  renew  his  glories! 

Som,  And  he  that  will  not  fight  for  such  a 
hope. 

Go  home  to  bed,  and  like  the  owl  by  day, 

If  he  arise,  be  mock’d  and  wonder’d  at. 

Q.  Mar,  Thanks,  gentle  Somerset;  sweet  Ox¬ 
ford,  thanks. 

Prince.  And  take  his  thanks  that  yet  hath  nothing 
else. 

MESSENGER. 

Mess.  Prepare  you,  lords,  for  Edward  is  at 
hand,  60 

Ready  to  fight;  therefore  be  resolute. 

Oxf.  I  thought  no  less:  it  is  his  policy 
To  haste  thus  fast,  to  find  us  unprovided. 

Som.  But  he’s  deceived;  we  are  in  readiness. 

Q.  Mar.  This  cheers  my  heart,  to  see  your  for¬ 
wardness. 

Oxf,  Here  pitch  our  battle;  hence  we  will  not 
budge. 

Flourish  and  march.  Enter  king  edward, 
GLOUCESTER,  CLARENCE,  and  soldkrs. 

K.  Edw.  Brave  followers,  yonder  stands  the 
thorny  wood. 

Which,  by  the  heavens’  assistance  and  your 
strength. 

Must  by  the  roots  be  hewn  up  yet  ere  night. 

I  need  not  add  more  fuel  to  your  fire,  70 

For  well  I  wot  ye  blaze  to  burn  them  out: 

Give  signal  to  the  fight,  and  to  it,  lords! 

Q.  Mar.  Lords,  knights,  and  gentlemen,  what 
I  should  say 

My  tears  gainsay;  for  every  word  I  speak. 

Ye  see,  I  drink  the  water  of  mine  eyes. 
Therefore,  no  more  but  this:  Henry,  your  sover- 
eign. 

Is  prisoner  to  the  foe;  his  state  usurp’d. 

His  realm  a  slaughter-house,  his  subjects  slain. 
His  statutes  cancell’d,  and  his  treasure  spent; 

And  yonder  is  the  wolf  that  makes  this  spoil.  80 
You  fight  in  justice:  then,  in  God’s  name,  lords. 
Be  valiant  and  give  signal  to  the  fight. 

[Alarum:  Retreat:  Excursions.  Exeunt. 


102  THIRD  PART  OF 

Scene  v.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Flourish.  Enter  king  edward,  Gloucester,  clar¬ 
ence,  and  soldiers;  with  queen  Margaret,  ox¬ 
ford,  and  SOMERSET,  prisoners. 

K.  Edw.  Now  here  a  period  of  tumultuous 
broils. 

Away  with  Oxford  to  Hames  Castle  straight: 

For  Somerset,  off  with  his  guilty  head. 

Go,  bear  them  hence;  I  will  not  hear  them  speak. 
Oxf.  For  my  part.  I’ll  not  trouble  thee  with 
words. 

Sont.  Nor  I,  but  stoop  with  patience  to  my  for¬ 
tune. 

OXFORD  and  somerset,  guarded, 
Q.  Mar.  So  part  we  sadly  in  this  troublous 
world. 

To  meet  with  joy  in  sweet  Jerusalem. 

K.  Edw.  Is  proclamation  made,  that  who  finds 
Edward 

Shall  have  a  high  reward,  and  he  his  life?  lo 
Glou.  It  is:  and  lo,  where  youthful  Edward 
comes! 

Enter  soldiers.,  with  prince  edward. 

K.  Edw.  Bring  forth  the  gallant,  let  us  hear  him 
speak. 

What!  can  so  young  a  thorn  begin  to  prick? 
Edward,  what  satisfaction  canst  thou  make 
For  bearing  arms,  for  stirring  up  my  subjects. 

And  all  the  trouble  thou  hast  turn’d  me  to? 

Prince,  Speak  like  a  subject,  proud  ambitious 
York! 

Suppose  that  I  am  now  my  father’s  mouth; 

Resign  thy  chair,  and  where  I  stand  kneel  thou. 
Whilst  I  propose  the  selfsame  words  to  thee,  20 
Which,  traitor,  thou  wouldst  have  me  answer  to. 
Q.  Mar.  Ah,  that  thy  father  had  been  so  re¬ 
solved! 

Glou.  That  you  might  still  have  worn  the  petti¬ 
coat 

And  ne’er  have  stol’n  the  breech  from  Lancaster. 
Prince.  Let  ^Tsop  fable  in  a  winter’s  night; 

His  currish  riddles  sort  not  with  this  place. 

Glou.  By  heaven,  brat.  I’ll  plague  ye  for  that 
word. 

Q.  Mar.  Ay,  thou  wast  born  to  be  a  plague  to 
men. 

Glou.  For  God’s  sake,  take  away  this  captive 
scold. 

Prince.  Nay,  take  away  this  scolding  crook¬ 
back  rather.  50 

K.  Edw.  Peace,  wilful  boy,  or  I  will  charm  your 
tongue. 

Clar.  Untutor’d  lad,  thou  art  too  malapert. 

Prince.  I  know  my  duty;  you  are  all  undutiful: 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  v 

Lascivious  Edward,  and  thou  perjured  George, 
And  thou  mis-shapen  Dick,  1  tell  ye  all 
I  am  your  better,  traitors  as  ye  are: 

And  thou  usurp’st  my  father’s  right  and  mine. 

K.  Edw.  Take  that,  thou  likeness  of  this  railer 
here.  [Stabs  him.] 

Glou.  Sprawl’st  thou?  take  that,  to  end  thy 
agony.  [Stabs  him.] 

Clar.  And  there’s  for  twitting  me  with  perjury. 

him.]  40 

Q.  Mar.  O,  kill  me  too! 

Glou.  Marry,  and  shall.  [Offers  to  kill  her.] 

K,  Edw.  Hold,  Richard,  hold;  for  we  have  done 
too  much. 

Glou.  Why  should  she  live,  to  fill  the  world  with 
words? 

K,  Edw.  What,  doth  she  swoon?  use  means  for 
her  recovery. 

Glou.  Clarence,  excuse  me  to  the  King  my 
brother; 

I’ll  hence  to  London  on  a  serious  matter: 

Ere  ye  come  there,  be  sure  to  hear  some  news. 
Clar.  What?  what? 

Glou.  The  Tower,  the  Tower.  [Exit.  50 

Q.  Mar.  O  Ned,  sweet  Ned!  speak  to  thy 
mother,  boy! 

Canst  thou  not  speak?  O  traitors!  murderers! 
They  that  stabb’d  Caesar  shed  no  blood  at  all. 

Did  not  offend,  nor  were  not  worthy  blame. 

If  this  foul  deed  were  by  to  equal  it: 

He  was  a  man;  this,  in  respect,  a  child: 

And  men  ne’er  spend  their  fury  on  a  child. 

What’s  worse  than  murderer,  that  I  may  name 
it? 

No,  no,  my  heart  will  burst,  an  if  I  speak: 

And  I  will  speak,  that  so  my  heart  may  burst.  60 
Butchers  and  villains!  bloody  cannibals! 

How  sweet  a  plant  have  you  untimely  cropp’d! 
You  have  no  children,  butchers!  if  you  had. 

The  thought  of  them  would  have  stirr’d  up  re¬ 
morse: 

But  if  you  ever  chance  to  have  a  child. 

Look  in  his  youth  to  have  him  cut  off 
As,  deathsmen,  you  have  rid  this  sweet  young 
prince! 

K.  Edw.  Away  with  her;  go,  bear  her  hence 
perforce. 

Q.  Mar.  Nay,  never  bear  me  hence,  dispatch  me 
here; 

Here  sheathe  thy  sword,  I’ll  pardon  thee  my 
death : 

What,  wilt  thou  not?  then,  Clarence,  do  it  thou. 
Clar.  By  heaven,  I  will  not  do  thee  so  much 
ease. 

Q.  Mar.  Good  Clarence,  do;  sweet  Clarence, 
do  thou  do  it. 


SCENE  V 


THIRD  PART  OF 

Clar.  Didst  thou  not  hear  me  swear  I  would  not 
do  it? 

Q.  Mar,  Ay,  but  thou  usest  to  forswear  thyself: 
’Twas  sin  before,  but  now  ’tis  charity. 

What,  wilt  thou  not?  Where  is  that  devil’s 
butcher, 

Hard-favour’d  Richard?  Richard,  where  art 
thou? 

Thou  art  not  here:  murder  is  thy  alms-deed; 
Petitioners  for  blood  thou  ne’er  put’st  back.  8o 

K,  Ediv.  Away,  I  say;  I  charge  ye,  bear  her 
hence. 

Q.  Mar.  So  come  to  you  and  yours,  as  to  this 
prince!  [Exit,  led  out  forcibly. 

K.  Edw.  Where’s  Richard  gone? 

Clar.  To  London,  all  in  post;  and,  as  I  guess, 

To  make  a  bloody  supper  in  the  Tower. 

K.  Edw.  He’s  sudden,  if  a  thing  comes  in  his 
head. 

Now  march  we  hence:  discharge  the  common 
sort 

With  pay  and  thanks,  and  let’s  away  to  London 
And  see  our  gentle  queen  how  well  she  fares : 

By  this,  I  hope,  she  hath  a  son  for  me.  pv 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  vi.  London:  The  Tower 
Enter  king  henry  and  Gloucester,  with  the 
LIEUTENANT,  on  the  walls. 

Glou.  Good  day,  my  lord.  What,  at  your  book 
so  hard? 

K.  Hen.  Ay,  my  good  lord: — my  lord,  I  should 
say  rather; 

’Tis  sin  to  flatter;  “good”  was  little  better: 

“Good  Gloucester”  and  “good  devil”  were  alike, 
And  both  preposterous;  therefore,  not  “good 
lord.” 

Glou.  Sirrah,  leave  us  to  ourselves:  we  must 
confer.  [Exit  lieutenant. 

K.  Hen.  So  flies  the  reckless  shepherd  from  the 
wolf; 

So  first  the  harmless  sheep  doth  yield  his  fleece 
And  next  his  throat  unto  the  butcher’s  knife. 

What  scene  of  death  hath  Roscius  now  to  act?  lo 

Glou.  Suspicion  always  haunts  the  guilty  mind; 
The  thief  doth  fear  each  bush  an  officer. 

K.  Hen.  The  bird  that  hath  been  limed  in  a  bush, 
With  trembling  wings  misdoubteth  every  bush; 
And  I,  the  hapless  male  to  one  sweet  bird. 

Have  now  the  fatal  object  in  my  eye 
Where  my  poor  young  was  limed,  was  caught, 
and  kill’d. 

Glou.  Why,  what  a  peevish  fool  was  that  of 
Crete, 

That  taught  his  son  the  office  of  a  fowl  I  ip 

And  yet,  for  all  his  wings,  the  fool  was  drown’d. 


KING  HENRY  VI  103 

K.  Hen.  I,  Daedalus;  my  poor  boy,  Icarus; 

Thy  father,  Minos,  that  denied  our  course; 

The  sun  that  sear’d  the  wings  of  my  sweet  boy 
Thy  brother  Edward,  and  thyself  the  sea 
Whose  envious  gulf  did  swallow  up  his  life. 

Ah,  kill  me  with  thy  weapon,  not  with  words! 
My  breast  can  better  brook  thy  dagger’s  point 
Than  can  my  ears  that  tragic  history. 

But  wherefore  dost  thou  come?  is’t  for  my  life? 
Glou.  Think’st  thou  I  am  an  executioner?  50 
K.  Hen.  A  persecutor,  I  am  sure,  thou  art: 

If  murdering  innocents  be  executing. 

Why,  then  thou  art  an  execut’oner. 

Glou.  Thy  son  I  kill’d  for  his  presumption. 

K.  Hen.  Hadst  thou  been  kill’d  when  first  thou 
didst  presume. 

Thou  hadst  not  lived  to  kill  a  son  of  mine. 

And  thus  I  prophesy,  that  many  a  thousand. 
Which  now  mistrust  no  parcel  of  my  fear, 

And  many  an  old  man’s  sigh  and  many  a  widow’s. 
And  many  an  orphan’s  water-standing  eye —  40 
Men  for  their  sons,  wives  for  their  husbands. 

And  orphans  for  their  parents’  timeless  death — 
Shall  rue  the  hour  that  ever  thou  wast  born. 

The  owl  shriek’d  at  thy  birth,  an  evil  sign; 

The  night-crow  cried,  aboding  luckless  time; 
Dogs  howl’d,  and  hideous  tempest  shook  down 
trees; 

The  raven  rook’d  her  on  the  chimney’s  top. 

And  chattering  pies  in  dismal  discords  sung. 

Thy  mother  felt  more  than  a  mother’s  pain, 

And  yet  brought  forth  less  than  a  mother’s  hope. 
To  wit,  an  indigested  and  deformed  lump,  5/ 
Not  like  the  fruit  of  such  a  goodly  tree. 

Teeth  hadst  thou  in  thy  head  when  thou  wast 
born. 

To  signify  thou  earnest  to  bite  the  world: 

And,  if  the  rest  be  true  which  I  have  heard, 

Thou  earnest — 

Glou.  I’ll  hear  no  more:  die,  prophet,  in  thy 
speech:  [Stabs  him.\ 

For  this,  amongst  the  rest,  was  I  ordain’d. 

K.  Hen.  Ay,  and  for  much  more  slaughter  after 
this. 

O,  God  forgive  my  sins,  and  pardon  thee!  [Dies. 
Glou.  What,  will  the  aspiring  blood  of  Lan¬ 
caster  61 

Sink  in  the  ground?  I  thought  it  would  have 
mounted. 

See  how  my  sword  weeps  for  the  poor  king’s 
death! 

O,  may  such  purple  tears  be  alway  shed 
From  those  that  wish  the  downfal  l  of  our  house! 
If  any  spark  of  life  be  yet  remaining, 

Down,  down  to  hell;  and  say  I  sent  thee  thither: 
[Stabs  him  again.] 


104  THIRD  PART  OF 

I,  that  have  neither  pity,  love,  nor  fear. 

Indeed,  ’tis  true  that  Henry  told  me  of; 

For  I  have  often  heard  my  mother  say  70 

I  came  into  the  world  with  my  legs  forward: 

Had  I  not  reason,  think  ye,  to  make  haste. 

And  seek  their  ruin  that  usurp’d  our  right? 

The  midwife  wonder’d  and  the  women  cried, 

“O  Jesus  bless  us,  he  is  born  with  teeth!” 

And  so  I  was;  which  plainly  signified 
That  I  should  snarl  and  bite  and  play  the  dog. 
Then,  since  the  heavens  have  shaped  my  body  so, 
Let  hell  make  crook’d  my  mind  to  answer  it. 

I  have  no  brother,  I  am  like  no  brother;  80 

And  this  word  “love,”  which  greybeards  call 
divine, 

Be  resident  in  men  like  one  another 
And  not  in  me:  I  am  myself  alone. 

Clarence,  beware;  thou  keep’st  me  from  the 
light: 

But  I  will  sort  a  pitchy  day  for  thee; 

For  I  will  buz  abroad  such  prophecies 
That  Edward  shall  be  fearful  of  his  life. 

And  then,  to  purge  his  fear.  I’ll  be  thy  death. 

King  Henry  and  the  Prince  his  son  are  gone: 
Clarence,  thy  turn  is  next,  and  then  the  rest,  po 
Counting  myself  but  bad  till  I  be  best. 

I’ll  throw  thy  body  in  another  room 
And  triumph,  Henry,  in  thy  day  of  doom. 

[Exit,  with  the  body. 

Scene  vii.  London:  The  palace 
Flourish.  Enter  king  edward,  queen  Elizabeth, 

CLARENCE,  GLOUCESTER,  HASTINGS,  a  Nurse 

with  the  young  Prince  Edward,  and  Attendants. 
K.  Edw.  Once  more  we  sit  in  England’s  royal 
throne. 

Re-purchased  with  the  blood  of  enemies. 

What  valiant  foemen,  like  to  autumn’s  corn. 

Have  we  mow’d  down  in  tops  of  all  their  pride! 
Three  Dukes  of  Somerset,  threefold  renown’d 
For  hardy  and  undoubted  champions; 

Two  Cliffords,  as  the  father  and  the  son, 

And  two  Northumberlands;  two  braver  men 
Ne’er  spurr’d  their  coursers  at  the  trumpet’s 
sound; 

With  them,  the  two  brave  bears,  Warwick  and 
Montague, 


KING  HENRY  VI  act  v 

That  in  their  chains  fetter’d  the  kingly  lion 
And  made  the  forest  tremble  when  they  roar’d. 
Thus  have  we  swept  suspicion  from  our  seat 
And  made  our  footstool  of  security. 

Come  hither,  Bess,  and  let  me  kiss  my  boy. 

Young  Ned,  for  thee,  thine  uncles  and  myself 
Have  in  our  armours  watch’d  the  winter’s  night. 
Went  all  afoot  in  summer’s  scalding  heat. 

That  thou  mightst  repossess  the  crown  in 
peace; 

And  of  our  labours  thou  shalt  reap  the  gain.  20 
Glou.  [Aside]  I’ll  blast  his  harvest,  if  your  head 
were  laid; 

For  yet  I  am  not  look’d  on  in  the  world. 

This  shoulder  was  ordain’d  so  thick  to  heave; 

And  heave  it  shall  some  weight,  or  break  my 
back: 

Work  thou  the  way, — and  thou  shalt  execute. 

K.  Edw.  Clarence  and  Gloucester,  love  my 
lovely  queen; 

And  kiss  your  princely  nephew,  brothers  both. 
Clar.  The  duty  that  I  owe  unto  your  Majesty 
I  seal  upon  the  lips  of  this  sweet  babe. 

Q.  Eliz.  Thanks,  noble  Clarence;  worthy  broth¬ 
er,  thanks.  50 

Glou.  And,  that  I  love  the  tree  from  whence 
thou  sprang’ St, 

Witness  the  loving  kiss  I  give  the  fruit. 

[Aside]  To  say  the  truth,  so  Judas  kiss’d  his 
master. 

And  cried  “All  hail!”  when  as  he  meant  all 
harm. 

K.  Edw.  Now  am  1  seated  as  my  soul  delights, 
Having  my  country’s  peace  and  brothers’  loves. 
Clar.  What  will  your  Grace  have  done  with 
Margaret? 

Reignier,  her  father,  to  the  King  of  France 
Hath  pawn’d  the  Sicils  and  Jerusalem, 

And  hither  have  they  sent  it  for  her  ransom. 

K.  Edw.  Away  with  her,  and  waft  her  hence  to 
France. 

And  now  what  rests  but  that  we  spend  the  time 
With  stately  triumphs,  mirthful  comic  shows. 
Such  as  befits  the  pleasure  of  the  court? 

Sound  drums  and  trumpets!  farewell  sour  annoy! 
For  here,  I  hope,  begins  our  lasting  joy. 


10 


[Exeunt. 


The  Tragedy  of 

KING  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


King  Edward  the  Fourth 
Edward,  Prince  of  ^terwards 

King  Edward  V,  later  as  a  Ghost  sons  to 
Richard,  Duke  of  York,  later  as  a  the  King 

Ghost 

George,  Duke  of  Clarence,  later  as  a 

Ghost  brothers  to 

Richard,  Duke  of  Gloucester,  after-  the  King 
wards  King  Richard  III 
Edward,  Earl  of  Warwick,  son  of  Clarence 
Henry,  Earl  of  Richmond,  afterwards  King 
Henry  VII 

Cardinal  Bourchier,  Archbishop  of  Canter- 


Thomas  Rotherham,  Archbishop  of  York 

John  Morton,  Bishop  of  Ely 

Duke  of  Buckingham,  later  as  a  Ghost 

Duke  of  Norfolk 

Earl  of  Surrey,  his  son 

Earl  Rivers,  brother  to  Elizabeth^  later  as  a  Ghost 

Marquis  of  Dorset  I  ^  171  l 

Lord  Grey,  later  as  a  Ghost  |  ^  ^ 

Earl  of  Oxford 

Lord  Hastings,  later  as  a  Ghost 

Lord  Stanley,  later  Earl  of  Derby 

Lord  Lovel 

Sir  Thomas  Vaughan,  later  as  a  Ghost 
Sir  Richard  Ratcliff 
Sir  William  Catesby 
Sir  James  Tyrrel 


Sir  James  Blunt 
Sir  Walter  Herbert 

Sir  Robert  Brakenbury,  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower 
Christopher  Urswick, 

Lord  Mayor  of  London 

Sheriff  of  Wiltshire 

Gentleman  Mourner 

Two  Murderers 

Three  Citizens 

Six  Messengers 

Pursuivant 

Priest 

Scrivener 

Page  to  Richard  III 

Ghosts  of  King  Henry  VI 

Lords 

Elizabeth,  queen  to  King  Edward  IV 
Margaret,  widow  of  King  Henry  VI 
Duchess  of  York,  mother  to  King  Edward  IV 
Lady  Anne,  widow  of  Edward  Prince  of  Wales^  son 
to  King  Henry  Vf  afterwards  married  to  Richard, 
later  as  a  Ghost 

Margaret  Plantagenet,  daughter  of  Clarence 

Non-Speaking:  Lords  and  other  attendants.  Two 
Bishops,  Sir  William  Brandon,  Citizens,  Soldiers 

Scene:  England 


ACT  I 

Scene  i.  London:  a  street 
Enter  richard,  duke  of  Gloucester,  solus. 

Glou.  Now  is  the  winter  of  our  discontent 
Made  glorious  summer  by  this  sun  of  York; 

And  all  the  clouds  that  lour’d  upon  our  house 
In  the  deep  bosom  of  the  ocean  buried. 

Now  are  our  brows  bound  with  victorious 
wreaths; 

Our  bruised  arms  hung  up  for  monuments; 

Our  stern  alarums  changed  to  merry  meetings, 
Our  dreadful  marches  to  delightful  measures. 
Grim-visaged  War  hath  smooth’d  his  wrinkled 
front; 

And  now,  instead  of  mounting  barbed  steeds  10 
To  fright  the  souls  of  fearful  adversaries, 

He  capers  nimbly  in  a  lady’s  chamber 
To  the  lascivious  pleasing  of  a  lute. 


But  I,  that  am  not  shaped  for  sportive  tricks, 

Nor  made  to  court  an  amorous  looking-glass; 

I,  that  am  rudely  stamp’d,  and  want  love’s  majesty 
To  strut  before  a  wanton  ambling  nymph; 

I,  that  am  curtail’d  of  this  fair  proportion, 
Cheated  of  feature  by  dissembling  nature. 
Deform’d,  unfinish’d,  sent  before  my  time  20 
Into  this  breathing  world,  scarce  half  made  up, 
And  that  so  lamely  and  unfashionable 
That  dogs  bark  at  me  as  I  halt  by  them; 

Why,  I,  in  this  weak  piping  time  of  peace, 

Have  no  delight  to  pass  away  the  time. 

Unless  to  spy  my  shadow  in  the  sun 
And  descant  on  mine  own  deformity: 

And  therefore,  since  I  cannot  prove  a  lover. 

To  entertain  these  fair  well-spoken  days, 

I  am  determined  to  prove  a  villian  50 

And  hate  the  idle  pleasures  of  these  days. 

Plots  have  I  laid,  inductions  dangerous. 


105 


ACT  I 


KING  RICHARD  III 


io6 

By  drunken  prophecies,  libels,  and  dreams. 

To  set  my  brother  Clarence  and  the  King 
In  deadly  hate  the  one  against  the  other: 

And  if  King  Edward  be  as  true  and  just 
As  I  am  subtle,  false,  and  treacherous. 

This  day  should  Clarence  closely  be  mew’d  up. 
About  a  prophecy,  which  says  that  G 
Of  Edward’s  heirs  the  murderer  shall  be.  40 
Dive,  thoughts,  down  to  my  soul:  here  Clarence 
comes. 

CLARENCE,  guarded^  and  brakenbury. 

Brother,  good  day:  what  means  this  armed  guard 
That  waits  upon  your  Grace? 

Clar,  His  majesty. 

Tendering  my  person’s  safety,  hath  appointed 
This  conduct  to  convey  me  to  the  Tower. 

Glou.  Upon  what  cause? 

Clar.  Because  my  name  is  George. 

Glou.  Alack,  my  lord,  that  fault  is  none  of 
yours; 

He  should,  for  that,  commit  your  godfathers: 

O,  belike  his  Majesty  hath  some  intent  45^ 

That  you  shall  be  new-christen’d  in  the  Tower. 
But  what’s  the  matter,  Clarence?  may  I  know? 

Clar.  Yea,  Richard,  when  I  know;  for  I  protest 
As  yet  I  do  not:  but,  as  I  can  learn, 

He  hearkens  after  prophecies  and  dreams; 

And  from  the  cross-row  plucks  the  letter  G, 

And  says  a  wizard  told  him  that  by  G 
His  issue  disinherited  should  be; 

And,  for  my  name  of  George  begins  with  G, 

It  follows  in  his  thought  that  I  am  he. 

These,  as  1  learn,  and  such  like  toys  as  these  60 
Have  moved  his  Highness  to  commit  me  now. 
Glou.  Why,  this  it  is,  when  men  are  ruled  by 
women: 

’Tis  not  the  King  that  sends  you  to  the  Tower; 
My  Lady  Grey  his  wife,  Clarence,  ’tis  she 
That  tempers  him  to  this  extremity. 

Was  it  not  she  and  that  good  man  of  worship, 
AnthonyWoodville,  her  brother  there. 

That  made  him  send  Lord  Hastings  to  the  Tower, 
From  whence  this  present  day  he  is  deliver’d? 

We  are  not  safe,  Clarence;  we  are  not  safe.  70 
Clar.  By  heaven,  I  think  there’s  no  man  is  secure 
But  the  Queen’s  kindred  and  night-walking 
heralds 

That  trudge  betwixt  the  King  and  Mistress  Shore. 
Heard  ye  not  what  an  humble  suppliant 
Lord  Hastings  was  to  her  for  his  delivery? 

Glou.  Humbly  complaining  to  her  deity 
Got  my  Lord  Chamberlain  his  liberty. 

I’ll  tell  you  what;  I  think  it  is  our  way. 

If  we  will  keep  in  favour  with  the  King, 

To  be  her  men  and  wear  her  livery :  80 


The  jealous  o’erworn  widow  and  herself. 

Since  that  our  brother  dubb’d  them  gentlewomen. 
Are  mighty  gossips  in  this  monarchy. 

Brak.  I  beseech  your  Graces  both  to  pardon 
me; 

His  Majesty  hath  straitly  given  in  charge 
That  no  man  shall  have  private  conference. 

Of  what  degree  soever,  with  his  brother. 

Glou.  Even  so;  an’t  please  your  worship, 
Brakenbury, 

You  may  partake  of  any  thing  we  say: 

We  speak  no  treason,  man:  we  say  the  King  po 
Is  wise  and  virtuous,  and  his  noble  queen 
Well  struck  in  years,  fair,  and  not  jealous; 

We  say  that  Shore’s  wife  hath  a  pretty  foot, 

A  cherry  lip,  a  bonny  eye,  a  passing  pleasing 
tongue; 

And  that  the  Queen’s  kindred  are  made  gentle¬ 
folks: 

How  say  you,  sir?  can  you  deny  all  this? 
Brak.Wkh  this,  my  lord,  myself  have  nought 
to  do. 

Glou.  Naught  to  do  with  Mistress  Shore!  I 
tell  thee,  fellow. 

He  that  doth  naught  with  her,  excepting  one. 
Were  best  he  do  it  secretly,  alone.  100 

Brak.  What  one,  my  lord? 

Glou.  Her  husband,  knave:  wouldst  thou 
betray  me? 

Brak.  I  beseech  your  Grace  to  pardon  me, 
and  withal 

Forbear  your  conference  with  the  noble  Duke. 
Clar.  We  know  thy  charge,  Brakenbury,  and 
will  obey. 

Glou.  We  are  the  Queen’s  abjects,  and  must 
obey. 

Brother,  farewell:  I  will  unto  the  King; 

And  whatsoever  you  will  employ  me  in. 

Were  it  to  call  King  Edward’s  widow  sister, 

I  will  perform  it  to  enfranchise  you.  no 

Meantime,  this  deep  disgrace  in  brotherhood 
Touches  me  deeper  than  you  can  imagine. 

Clar.  I  know  it  pleaseth  neither  of  us  well. 

Glou.  Well,  your  imprisonment  shall  not  be 
long; 

I  will  deliver  you,  or  else  lie  for  you: 

Meantime,  have  patience. 

Clar.  I  must  perforce.  Farewell. 

[Exeunt  chARE^CE^  brakenbury,  and  Guard. 
Glou.  Go,  tread  the  path  that  thou  shalt  ne’er 
return. 

Simple,  plain  Clarence!  I  do  love  thee  so. 

That  I  will  shortly  send  thy  soul  to  heaven. 

If  heaven  will  take  the  present  at  our  hands.  120 
But  who  comes  here?  the  new-deliver’d  Hast¬ 
ings? 


SCENE  I 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Enter  lord  Hastings. 

Hast,  Good  time  of  day  unto  my  gracious  lord! 
Glou.  As  much  unto  my  good  Lord  Chamberlain! 
Well  are  you  welcome  to  the  open  air. 

How  hath  your  lordship  brook’d  imprisonment? 
Hast.  With  patience,  noble  lord,  as  prisoners 
must: 

But  I  shall  live,  my  lord,  to  give  them  thanks 
That  were  the  cause  of  my  imprisonment. 

Glou.  No  doubt,  no  doubt;  and  so  shall 
Clarence  too; 

For  they  that  were  your  enemies  are  his,  75 o 

And  have  prevail’d  as  much  on  him  as  you. 

Hast.  More  pity  that  the  eagle  should  be 
mew’d. 

While  kites  and  buzzards  prey  at  liberty. 

Glou.  What  news  abroad? 

Hast.  No  news  so  bad  abroad  as  this  at 
home; 

The  King  is  sickly,  weak,  and  melancholy, 

And  his  physicians  fear  him  mightily. 

Glou.  Now,  by  Saint  Paul,  this  news  is  bad 
indeed. 

O,  he  hath  kept  an  evil  diet  long. 

And  overmuch  consumed  his  royal  person:  1^0 
’Tis  very  grievous  to  be  thought  upon. 

What,  is  he  in  his  bed? 

HasU  He  is. 

Glou.  Go  you  before,  and  I  will  follow  you. 

[Exit  HASTINGS. 

He  cannot  live,  I  hope;  and  must  not  die 
Till  George  be  pack’d  with  post-horse  up  to 
heaven. 

I’ll  in,  to  urge  his  hatred  more  to  Clarence, 

With  lies  well  steel’d  with  weighty  argu¬ 
ments; 

And,  if  I  fail  not  in  my  deep  intent, 

Clarence  hath  not  another  day  to  live:  /50 

Which  done,  God  take  King  Edward  to  his 
mercy, 

And  leave  the  world  for  me  to  bustle  in! 

For  then  I’ll  marry  Warwick’s  youngest  daugh¬ 
ter. 

What  though  I  kill’d  her  husband  and  her 
father? 

The  readiest  way  to  make  the  wench  amends 
Is  to  become  her  husband  and  her  father: 

The  which  will  I ;  not  all  so  much  for  love 
As  for  another  secret  close  intent. 

By  marrying  her  which  I  must  reach  unto. 

But  yet  I  run  before  my  horse  to  market :  160 

Clarence  still  breathes;  Edward  still  lives  and 
reigns : 

When  they  are  gone,  then  must  I  count  my  gains. 

[Exit, 


107 

Scene  ii.  The  same:  another  street 

Enter  the  corpse  of  King  Henry  the  Sixth, 
gentlemen  with  halberds  to  guard  it,  atnong 
them  TRESSEL  and  Berkeley;  lady  anne  being 
the  mourner. 

Arme.  Set  down,  set  down  your  honourable 
load. 

If  honour  may  be  shrouded  in  a  hearse. 

Whilst  I  awhile  obsequiously  lament 
The  untimely  fall  of  virtuous  Lancaster. 

The  coffin  is  set  down. 

Poor  key-cold  figure  of  a  holy  king! 

Pale  ashes  of  the  house  of  Lancaster! 

Thou  bloodless  remnant  of  that  royal  blood! 

Be  it  lawful  that  I  invocate  thy  ghost. 

To  hear  the  lamentations  of  poor  Anne, 

Wife  to  thy  Edward,  to  thy  slaughter’d  son,  10 
Stabb’d  by  the  selfsame  hand  that  made  these 
wounds ! 

Lo,  in  these  windows  that  let  forth  thy  life, 

I  pour  the  helpless  balm  of  my  poor  eyes. 

Cursed  be  the  hand  that  made  these  fatal  holes! 
Cursed  be  the  heart  that  had  the  heart  to  do  it! 
Cursed  the  blood  that  let  this  blood  from  hence! 
More  direful  hap  betide  that  hated  wretch 
That  makes  us  wretched  by  the  death  of  thee 
Than  I  can  wish  to  adders,  spiders,  toads. 

Or  any  creeping  venom’d  thing  that  lives  I  20 
If  ever  he  have  child,  abortive  be  it. 

Prodigious,  and  untimely  brought  to  light, 

Whose  ugly  and  unnatural  aspect 

May  fright  the  hopeful  mother  at  the  view; 

And  that  be  heir  to  his  unhappiness! 

If  ever  he  have  wife,  let  her  be  made 
As  miserable  by  the  death  of  him 
As  I  am  made  by  my  poor  lord  and  thee! 

Come,  now  towards  Chertsey  with  your  holy 
load. 

Taken  from  Paul’s  to  be  interred  there;  50 

And  still,  as  you  are  weary  of  the  weight, 

Rest  you,  whiles  I  lament  King  Henry’s  corse. 

Enter  Gloucester. 

Glou.  Stay,  you  that  bear  the  corse,  and  set 
it  down. 

Anne.  What  black  magician  conjures  up  this 
fiend, 

To  stop  devoted  charitable  deeds? 

Glou.  Villains,  set  down  the  corse;  or,  by 
Saint  Paul, 

I’ll  make  a  corse  of  him  that  disobeys. 

Gent.  My  lord,  stand  back,  and  let  the  coffin 
pass. 

Glou.  Unmanner’d  dog!  stand  thou,  when  I 
command : 


ACT  I 


KING  RICHARD  III 


io8 

Advance  thy  halberd  higher  than  my  breast,  40 
Or,  by  Saint  Paul,  I’ll  strike  thee  to  my  foot. 

And  spurn  upon  thee,  beggar,  for  thy  boldness. 
Anne.  What,  do  you  tremble?  are  you  all 
afraid? 

Alas,  I  blame  you  not;  for  you  are  mortal. 

And  mortal  eyes  cannot  endure  the  devil. 

Avaunt,  thou  dreadful  minister  of  hell! 

Thou  hadst  but  power  over  his  mortal  body, 

His  soul  thou  canst  not  have;  therefore,  be  gone. 
Glou.  Sweet  saint,  for  charity,  be  not  so  curst. 
Anne.  Foul  devil,  for  God’s  sake,  hence,  and 
trouble  us  not;  50 

For  thou  hast  made  the  happy  earth  thy  hell. 
Fill’d  it  with  cursing  cries  and  deep  exclaims. 

If  thou  delight  to  view  thy  heinous  deeds. 

Behold  this  pattern  of  thy  butcheries. 

O,  gentlemen,  see,  see!  dead  Henry’s  wounds 
Open  their  congeal’d  mouths  and  bleed  afresh! 
Blush,  blush,  thou  lump  of  foul  deformity; 

For  ’tis  thy  presence  that  exhales  this  blood 
From  cold  and  empty  veins,  where  no  blood 
dwells; 

Thy  deed,  inhuman  and  unnatural,  60 

Provokes  this  deluge  most  unnatural. 

O  God,  which  this  blood  madest,  revenge  his 
death! 

O  earth,  which  this  blood  drink’st,  revenge  his 
death! 

Either  heaven  with  lightning  strike  the  murderer 
dead. 

Or  earth,  gape  open  wide  and  eat  him  quick. 

As  thou  dost  swallow  up  this  good  king’s  blood. 
Which  his  hell-govern’d  arm  hath  butchered! 

Glou.  Lady,  you  know  no  rules  of  charity. 
Which  renders  good  for  bad,  blessings  for  curses. 
Anne.  Villain,  thou  know’st  no  law  of  God 
nor  man:  70 

?Jo  beast  so  fierce  but  knows  some  touch  of  pity. 
Glou.  But  I  know  none,  and  therefore  am  no 
beast. 

Anm.  O  wondeiful,  when  devils  tell  the  truth! 
Glou.  More  wonderful,  when  angels  are  so 
angry. 

Vouchsafe,  divine  perfection  of  a  woman. 

Of  these  supposed  evils  to  give  me  leave 
By  circumstance  but  to  acquit  myself. 

Anne.  Vouchsafe,  defused  infection  of  a  man, 

For  these  known  evils  but  to  give  me  leave 
By  circumstance  to  curse  thy  cursed  self.  80 
Glou.  Fairer  than  tongue  can  name  thee,  let 
me  have 

Some  patient  leisure  to  excuse  myself. 

Anne.  Fouler  than  heart  can  think  thee,  thou 
canst  make 

No  excuse  current,  but  to  hang  thyself. 


Glou.  By  such  despair,  I  should  accuse  myself. 
Anne.  And,  by  despairing,  shouldst  thou  stand 
excused; 

For  doing  worthy  vengeance  on  thyself. 

Which  didst  unworthy  slaughter  upon  others. 
Glou.  Say  that  I  slew  them  not? 

Anne.  Why,  then  they  are  not  dead : 

But  dead  they  are,  and,  devilish  slave,  by  thee. 
Glou.  I  did  not  kill  your  husband.  p/ 

Anne.  Why,  then  he  is  alive. 

Glou.  Nay,  he  is  dead;  and  slain  by  Edward’s 
hand. 

Anne.  In  thy  foul  throat  thou  liest:  Queen 
Margaret  saw 

Thy  murderous  falchion  smoking  in  his  blood; 
The  which  thou  once  didst  bend  against  her 
breast. 

But  that  thy  brothers  beat  aside  the  point. 

Glou.  I  was  provoked  by  her  slanderous  tongue. 
Which  laid  their  guilt  upon  my  guiltless 
shoulders. 

Anne.  Thou  wast  provoked  by  thy  bloody  mind 
Which  never  dreamt  on  aught  but  butcheries  :ioo 
Didst  thou  not  kill  this  king? 

Glou.  I  grant  ye. 

Anne.  Dost  grant  me,  hedgehog?  then,  God 
grant  me  too 

Thou  may  St  be  damned  for  that  wicked  deed! 

O,  he  was  gentle,  mild,  and  virtuous! 

Glou.  The  fitter  for  the  King  of  heaven,  that 
hath  him. 

Anne.  He  is  in  heaven,  where  thou  shalt 
never  come. 

Glou.  Let  him  thank  me,  that  holp  to  send 
him  thither; 

For  he  was  fitter  for  that  place  than  earth. 

Anne.  And  thou  unfit  for  any  place  but  hell. 

Glou.  Yes,  one  place  else,  if  you  will  hear  me 
name  it.  no 

Anne.  Some  dungeon. 

Glou.  Your  bed-chamber. 

Anne.  Ill  rest  betide  the  chamber  where  thou 
liest! 

Glou.  So  will  it,  madam,  till  I  lie  with  you. 

Anne.  I  hope  so. 

Glou.  I  know  so.  But,  gentle  Lady  Anne, 

To  leave  this  keen  encounter  of  our  wits. 

And  fall  somewhat  into  a  slower  method. 

Is  not  the  causer  of  the  timeless  deaths 
Of  these  Plantagenets,  Henry  and  Edward, 

As  blameful  as  the  executioner? 

Anne.  Thou  art  the  cause,  and  most  accursed 
effect.  120 

Glou.  Your  beauty  was  the  cause  of  that  effect; 
Your  beauty,  which  did  haunt  me  in  my  sleep 
To  undertake  the  death  of  all  the  world. 


SCENE  II 


KING  RICHARD  III 


So  I  might  live  one  hour  in  your  sweet  bosom. 
Anne,  If  I  thought  that,  I  tell  thee,  homicide. 
These  nails  should  rend  that  beauty  from  my 
cheeks. 

Glou.  These  eyes  could  never  endure  sweet 
beauty’s  wreck; 

You  should  not  blemish  it,  if  I  stood  by: 

As  all  the  world  is  cheered  by  the  sun. 

So  I  by  that;  it  is  my  day,  my  life.  75 o 

Anne.  Black  night  o’ershade  thy  day,  and 
death  thy  life! 

Glou.  Curse  not  thyself,  fair  creature;  thou 
art  both. 

Anne.  I  would  I  were,  to  be  revenged  on  thee. 
Glou.  It  is  a  quarrel  most  unnatural. 

To  be  revenged  on  him  that  loveth  you. 

Anne.  It  is  a  quarrel  just  and  reasonable. 

To  be  revenged  on  him  that  slew  my  husband. 

Glou.  He  that  bereft  thee,  lady,  of  thy  husband. 
Did  it  to  help  thee  to  a  better  husband. 

Anne.  His  better  doth  not  breathe  upon  the 
earth.  140 

Glou.  He  lives  that  loves  thee  better  than  he 
could. 

Anne.  Name  him. 

Glou.  Plantagenet. 

Anne.  Why,  that  was  he. 

Glou.  The  salfsame  name,  but  one  of  better 
nature. 

Anne.  Where  is  he? 

Glm.  Here.  [She  spitteth  at  him.] 

Why  dost  thou  spit  at  me? 

Anne.  Would  it  were  mortal  poison,  for  thy 
sake! 

Glou.  Never  came  poison  from  so  sweet  a  place. 
Anne.  Never  hung  poison  on  a  fouler  toad. 

Out  of  my  sight!  thou  dost  infect  my  eyes. 

Glou.  Thine  eyes,  sweet  lady,  have  infected 
mine.  750 

Anne.  Would  they  were  basilisks,  to  strike 
thee  dead! 

Glou.  I  would  they  were,  that  I  might  die  at 
once; 

For  now  they  kill  me  with  a  living  death. 

Those  eyes  of  thine  from  mine  have  drawn  salt 
tears. 

Shamed  their  aspect  with  store  of  childish  drops: 
These  eyes,  which  never  shed  remorseful  tear. 
No,  when  my  father  York  and  Edward  wept. 

To  hear  the  piteous  moan  that  Rutland  made 
When  black-faced  Clifford  shook  his  sword  at 
him; 

Nor  when  thy  warlike  father,  like  a  child,  160 
Told  the  sad  story  of  my  father’s  death. 

And  twenty  times  made  pause  to  sob  and  weep. 
That  all  the  standers-by  had  wet  their  cheeks. 


Like  trees  bedash’d  with  rain:  in  that  sad  time 
My  manly  eyes  did  scorn  an  humble  tear; 

And  what  these  sorrows  could  not  thence  exhale. 
Thy  beauty  hath,  and  made  them  blind  with 
weeping. 

I  never  sued  to  friend  nor  enemy; 

My  tongue  could  never  learn  sweet  smoothing 
words; 

But,  now  thy  beauty  is  proposed  my  fee,  770 
My  proud  heart  sues  and  prompts  my  tongue  to 
speak.  [She  looks  scornfully  at  him.] 

Teach  not  thy  lips  such  scorn,  for  they  were  made 
For  kissing,  lady,  not  for  such  contempt. 

If  thy  revengeful  heart  cannot  forgive, 

Lo,  here  I  lend  thee  this  sharp-pointed  sword; 
Which  if  thou  please  to  hide  in  this  true  bosom. 
And  let  the  soul  forth  that  adoreth  thee, 

I  lay  it  naked  to  the  deadly  stroke. 

And  humbly  beg  the  death  upon  my  knee. 

He  lays  his  breast  open:  she  offers  at  it  with  his 
sword. 

Nay,  do  not  pause;  for  I  did  kill  King  Henry, 

But  ’twas  thy  beauty  that  provoked  me.  iSi 
Nay,  now  dispatch;  ’twas  I  that  stabb’d  young 
Edward, 

But  ’twas  thy  heavenly  face  that  set  me  on. 

Here  she  lets  fall  the  sword. 

Take  up  the  sword  again,  or  take  up  me. 

Anjie.  Arise,  dissembler:  though  I  wish  thy 
death, 

I  will  not  be  the  executioner. 

Glou.  Then  bid  me  kill  myself,  and  I  will  do  it. 
Anne.  I  have  already. 

Glou.  Tush,  that  was  in  thy  rage: 

Speak  it  again,  and  even  with  the  word. 

That  hand,  which,  for  thy  love,  did  kill  thy  love. 
Shall,  for  thy  love,  kill  a  far  truer  love;  i^i 

To  both  their  deaths  thou  shalt  be  accessary. 
Anne.  I  would  I  knew  thy  heart. 

Glou.  ’Tis  figured  in  my  tongue. 

Anne.  I  fear  me  both  are  false. 

Glou.  Then  never  man  was  true. 

Anne.  Well,  well,  put  up  your  sword. 

Glou.  Say,  then,  my  peace  is  made. 

Anne.  That  shall  you  know  hereafter. 

Glou.  But  shall  I  live  in  hope?  200 

Anne.  All  men,  I  hope,  live  so. 

Glou.  Vouchsafe  to  wear  this  ring. 

Anne.  To  take  is  not  to  give. 

Glou.  Look,  how  this  ring  encompasseth  thy 
finger. 

Even  so  thy  breast  encloseth  my  poor  heart; 
Wear  both  of  them,  for  both  of  them  are  thine. 
And  if  thy  poor  devoted  suppliant  may 
But  beg  one  favour  at  thy  gracious  hand. 

Thou  dost  confirm  his  happiness  for  ever. 


KING  RICHARD  III 


ACT  I 


Anne.  What  is  it?  210 

Glou.  That  it  would  please  thee  leave  these 
sad  designs 

To  him  that  hath  more  cause  to  be  a  mourner, 
And  presently  repair  to  Crosby  Place; 

Where,  after  1  have  solemnly  interr’d 
At  Chcrtsey  monastery  this  noble  king, 

And  wet  his  grave  with  my  repentant  tears, 

I  will  with  all  expedient  duty  see  you: 

For  divers  unknown  reasons,  I  beseech  you. 
Grant  me  this  boon. 

Anne.  With  all  my  heart;  and  much  it  joys 
me  too,  220 

To  see  you  are  become  so  penitent. 

Tressel  and  Berkeley,  go  along  with  me. 

Glou.  Bid  me  farewell. 

Anne.  ’Tis  more  than  you  deserve; 

But  since  you  teach  me  how  to  flatter  you. 
Imagine  I  have  said  farewell  already. 

[Exeunt  lady  anne,  tressel,  and  Berkeley. 
Glou.  Sirs,  take  up  the  corse. 

Gent.  Towards  Chertsey,  noble  lord? 

Gloti.  No,  to  White-Friars;  there  attend  my 
coming.  [Exeunt  all  but  gi^ovcestek. 

Was  ever  woman  in  this  humour  woo’d? 

Was  ever  woman  in  this  humour  won? 

I’ll  have  her;  but  I  will  not  keep  her  long.  250 
What!  I,  that  kill’d  her  husband  and  his  father. 

To  take  her  in  her  heart’s  extremest  hate, 

With  curses  in  her  mouth,  tears  in  her  eyes. 

The  bleeding  witness  of  her  hatred  by; 

Having  God,  her  conscience,  and  these  bars 
against  me. 

And  I  nothing  to  back  my  suit  at  all 
But  the  plain  devil  and  dissembling  looks. 

And  yet  to  win  her,  all  the  world  to  nothing! 

Ha! 

Hath  she  forgot  already  that  brave  prince,  240 
Edward,  her  lord,  whom  I,  some  three  months 
since, 

Stabb’d  in  my  angry  mood  at  Tewksbury? 

A  sweeter  and  a  lovelier  gentleman. 

Framed  in  the  prodigality  of  nature. 

Young,  valiant,  wise,  and,  no  doubt,  right  royal. 
The  spacious  world  cannot  again  afford: 

And  will  she  yet  debase  her  eyes  on  me. 

That  cropp’d  the  golden  prime  of  this  sweet 
prince 

And  made  her  widow  to  a  woeful  bed? 

On  me,  whose  all  not  equals  Edward’s  moiety? 

On  me,  that  halt  and  am  unshapen  thus?  25/ 
My  dukedom  to  a  beggarly  denier, 

I  do  mistake  my  person  all  this  while: 

Upon  my  life,  she  finds,  although  I  cannot, 

Myself  to  be  a  marvellous  proper  man. 

[’ll  be  at  charges  for  a  looking-glass. 


And  entertain  some  score  or  two  of  tailors 
To  study  fashions  to  adorn  my  body. 

Since  I  am  crept  in  favour  with  myself, 

I  will  maintain  it  with  some  little  cost.  260 

But  first  I’ll  turn  yon  fellow  in  his  grave; 

And  then  return  lamenting  to  my  love. 

Shine  out,  fair  sun,  till  I  have  bought  a  glass. 

That  I  may  see  my  shadow  as  I  pass.  [Exit. 

Scene  hi.  The  palace 

Enter  Elizabeth,  lord  rivers,  and 

LORD  GREY. 

Riv.  Have  patience,  madam;  there’s  no 
doubt  his  Majesty 

Will  soon  recover  his  accustom’d  health. 

Grey.  In  that  you  brook  it  ill,  it  makes  him 
worse: 

Therefore,  for  God’s  sake,  entertain  good 
comfort. 

And  cheer  his  Grace  with  quick  and  merry  words. 
Q.  Eliz.  If  he  were  dead,  what  would  betide 
of  me? 

Riv.  No  other  harm  but  loss  of  such  a  lord. 

Q.  Eliz.  The  loss  of  such  a  lord  includes  all 
harm. 

Grey.  The  heavens  have  bless’d  you  with  a 
goodly  son, 

To  be  your  comforter  when  he  is  gone.  ic 

Q.  Eliz.  Oh,  he  is  young,  and  his  minority 
Is  put  unto  the  trust  of  Richard  Gloucester, 

A  man  that  loves  not  me,  nor  none  of  you. 

Riv.  Is  it  concluded  he  shall  be  Protector? 

Q.  Eliz.  It  is  determined,  not  concluded  yet: 

But  so  it  must  be,  if  the  King  miscarry. 

Enter  Buckingham  and  lord  Stanley, 

EARL  OF  DERBY. 

Grey.  Here  come  the  lords  of  Buckingham 
and  Derby. 

Buck.  Good  time  of  day  unto  your  royal  Grace! 
Stan.  God  make  your  Majesty  joyful  as  you 
have  been! 

Q.  Eliz.  The  Countess  Richmond,  good  my 
Lord  of  Derby,  20 

To  your  good  prayers  will  scarcely  say  amen. 
Yet,  Derby,  notwithstanding  she’s  your  wife. 

And  loves  not  me,  be  you,  good  lord,  assured 
I  hate  not  you  for  her  proud  arrogance. 

Stan.  I  do  beseech  you,  either  not  believe 
The  envious  slanders  of  her  false  accusers; 

Or,  if  she  be  accused  in  true  report. 

Bear  with  her  weakness,  which,  I  think,  proceeds 
From  wayward  sickness  and  no  grounded  malice. 
Riv.  Saw  you  the  King  to-day,  my  Lord  of 
Derby?  50 

Stan.  But  now  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  and  I 


SCENE  III 


III 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Are  come  from  visiting  his  majesty. 

Q.  Eliz.  What  likelihood  of  his  amendment, 
lords? 

Buck.  Madam,  good  hope;  his  Grace  speaks 
cheerfully. 

Q.  Eliz.  God  grant  him  health!  Did  you 
confer  with  him? 

Buck.  Madam,  we  did:  he  desires  to  make 
atonement 

Betwixt  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  and  your 
brothers, 

And  betwixt  them  and  my  Lord  Chamberlain; 
And  sent  to  warn  them  to  his  royal  presence. 

Q.  Ehz.  Would  all  were  well!  but  that  will 
never  be:  40 

I  fear  our  happiness  is  at  the  highest. 

Enter  Gloucester,  Hastings,  and  Dorset. 

Glou.  They  do  me  wrong,  and  I  will  not  en¬ 
dure  it: 

Who  are  they  that  complain  unto  the  King 
That  I,  forsooth,  am  stern  and  love  them  not? 

By  holy  Paul,  they  love  his  Grace  but  lightly 
That  fill  his  ears  with  such  dissentious  rumours. 
Because  I  cannot  flatter  and  speak  fair. 

Smile  in  men’s  faces,  smooth,  deceive  and  cog. 
Duck  with  French  nods  and  apish  courtesy, 

I  must  be  held  a  rancorous  enemy.  jo 

Cannot  a  plain  man  live  and  think  no  harm. 

But  thus  his  simple  truth  must  be  abused 
By  silken,  sly,  insinuating  Jacks? 

Riv.  To  whom  in  all  this  presence  speaks 
your  Grace? 

Glou.  To  thee,  that  hast  nor  honesty  nor  grace. 
When  have  I  injured  thee?  when  done  thee 
wrong? 

Or  thee?  or  thee?  or  any  of  your  faction? 

A  plague  upon  you  all !  His  royal  person — 

Whom  God  preserve  better  than  you  would 
wish! — 

Cannot  be  quiet  scarce  a  breathing- while  60 

But  you  must  trouble  him  with  lewd  complaints. 

Q.  Eliz.  Brother  of  Gloucester,  you  mistake 
the  matter. 

The  King,  of  his  own  royal  disposition. 

And  not  provoked  by  any  suitor  else. 

Aiming,  belike,  at  your  interior  hatred. 

Which  in  your  outward  actions  shows  itself 
Against  my  kindred,  brothers,  and  myself. 

Makes  him  to  send  that  thereby  he  may  gather 
The  ground  of  your  ill-will  and  so  remove  it. 

Glou.  I  cannot  tell:  the  world  is  grown  so 
bad  70 

That  wrens  make  prey  where  eagles  dare  not 
perch: 

Since  every  Jack  became  a  gentleman, 


There’s  many  a  gentle  person  made  a  Jack. 

Q.  Eliz.  Come,  come,  we  know  your  meaning, 
brother  Gloucester; 

You  envy  my  advancement  and  my  friends’: 

God  grant  wc  never  have  need  of  you! 

Glou.  Meantime,  God  grants  that  we  have 
need  of  you: 

Our  brother  is  imprison’d  by  your  means. 

Myself  disgraced,  and  the  nobility 
Held  in  contempt;  whilst  many  fair  promotions 
Are  daily  given  to  ennoble  those  Si 

That  scarce,  some  two  days  since,  were  worth  a 
noble. 

Q.  Eliz.  By  Him  that  raised  me  to  this  care¬ 
ful  height 

From  that  contented  hap  which  I  enjoy’d, 

I  never  did  incense  his  Majesty 

Against  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  but  have  been 

An  earnest  advocate  to  plead  for  him. 

My  lord,  you  do  me  shameful  injury. 

Falsely  to  draw  me  in  these  vile  suspects. 

Glou.  You  may  deny  that  you  were  not  the 
cause  5^0 

Of  my  Lord  Hastings’  late  imprisonment. 

Riv.  She  may,  my  lord,  for — 

Glou.  She  may.  Lord  Rivers!  why,  who 
knows  not  so? 

She  may  do  more,  sir,  than  denying  that: 

She  may  help  you  to  many  fair  preferments 
And  then  deny  her  aiding  hand  therein. 

And  lay  those  honours  on  your  high  deserts. 
What  may  she  not?  She  may,  yea,  marry,  may 
she — 

Riv.  What,  marry,  may  she? 

Glou.  What,  marry,  may  she!  marry  with  a 
king,  100 

A  bachelor,  a  handsome  stripling  too: 

I  wis  your  grandam  had  a  worser  match. 

0.  Eliz.  My  Lord  of  Gloucester,  I  have  too 
long  borne 

Your  blunt  upbraidings  and  your  bitter  scoffs: 

By  heaven,  I  will  acquaint  his  Majesty 
With  those  gross  taunts  I  often  have  endured. 

I  had  rather  be  a  country  servant-maid 
Than  a  great  queen,  with  this  condition. 

To  be  thus  taunted,  scorn’d,  and  baited  at: 

Enter  queen  Margaret,  behind. 

Small  joy  have  I  in  being  England’s  queen.  no 
Q.  Mar.  And  lessen’d  be  that  small,  God,  I 
beseech  thee! 

Thy  honour,  state,  and  seat  is  due  to  me. 

Glou.  What!  threat  you  me  with  telling  of 
the  King? 

Tell  him,  and  spare  not:  look,  what  I  have  said 
I  will  avouch  in  presence  of  the  King: 


I  1  2 


KING  RICHARD  III 


I  dare  adventure  to  be  sent  to  the  Tower. 

’Tis  time  to  speak;  my  pains  are  quite  forgot. 

Q.  Alar.  Out,  devil!  I  remember  them  too 
well: 

Thou  slowest  my  husband  Henry  in  the  Tower, 
And  Edward,  my  poor  son,  at  Tewksbury.  /20 
Glou.  Ere  you  were  queen,  yea,  or  your 
husband  king, 

I  was  a  pack-horse  in  his  great  affairs; 

A  weeder-out  of  his  proud  adversaries, 

A  liberal  rewarder  of  his  friends: 

To  royalise  his  blood  I  spilt  mine  own. 

Q.  Aiar.  Yea,  and  much  better  blood  than  his 
or  thine. 

Glm.  In  all  which  time  you  and  your  husband 
Grey 

Were  factious  for  the  house  of  Lancaster; 

And,  Rivers,  so  were  you.  Was  not  your  husband 
In  Margaret’s  battle  at  Saint  Alban’s  slain?  1^0 
Let  me  put  in  your  minds,  if  you  forget. 

What  you  have  been  ere  now  and  what  you  are; 
Withal,  what  I  have  been  and  what  I  am. 

Q.  Alar.  A  murderous  villain,  and  so  still 
thou  art. 

Glou.  Poor  Clarence  did  forsake  his  father, 
Warwick; 

Yea,  and  forswore  himself — 'vhich  Jesu 
pardon! — 

Q.  Mar.  Which  God  revenge! 

Glou.  To  fight  on  Edward’s  party  for  the 
crown; 

And  for  his  meed,  poor  lord,  he  is  mew’d  up. 

I  would  to  God  my  heart  were  flint,  like 

Edward’s;  140 

Or  Edward’s  soft  and  pitiful,  like  mine: 

I  am  too  childish-foolish  for  this  world. 

Q.  Mar.  Hie  thee  to  hell  for  shame,  and  leave 
the  world. 

Thou  cacodemon!  there  thy  kingdom  is. 

Riv.  My  Lord  of  Gloucester,  in  those  busy 
days 

Which  here  you  urge  to  prove  us  enemies, 

We  follow’d  then  our  lord,  our  lawful  king: 

So  should  we  you,  if  you  should  be  our  king. 

Glou.  If  I  should  be!  I  had  rather  be  a  pedlar: 

Far  be  it  from  my  heart,  the  thought  of  it!  /50 

Q.  Eliz.  As  little  joy,  my  lord,  as  you  suppose 
You  should  enjoy,  were  you  this  country’s  king. 
As  little  joy  may  you  suppose  in  me. 

That  I  enjoy,  being  the  queen  thereof. 

Q.  Mar.  A  little  joy  enjoys  the  queen  thereof; 
For  I  am  she,  and  altogether  joyless. 

I  can  no  longer  hold  me  patient.  [Advancing.] 
Hear  me,  you  wrangling  pirates,  that  fall  out 
In  sharing  that  which  you  have  pill’d  from  me! 
Which  of  you  trembles  not  that  looks  on  me?  160 


ACT  I 

If  not  that,  I  being  queen,  you  bow  like  subjects. 
Yet  that,  by  you  deposed,  you  quake  like  rebels? 
O  gentle  villain,  do'  not  turn  away! 

Glou.  Foul  wrinkled  witch,  what  makest  thou 
in  my  sight? 

Q.  Mar.  But  repetition  of  what  thou  hast 
marr’d; 

That  will  I  make  before  I  let  thee  go. 

Glou.Wen  thou  not  banished  on  pain  of  death? 
Q.  Mar.  I  was;  but  I  do  find  more  pain  in 
banishment 

Than  death  can  yield  me  here  by  my  abode. 

A  husband  and  a  son  thou  owest  to  me;  /70 
And  thou  a  kingdom;  all  of  you  allegiance: 

The  sorrow  that  I  have  by  right  is  yours, 

And  all  the  pleasures  you  usurp  are  mine. 

Glou.  The  curse  my  noble  father  laid  on  thee. 
When  thou  didst  crown  his  warlike  brows  with 
paper 

And  with  thy  scorns  drew’st  rivers  from  his  eyes. 
And  then,  to  dry  them,  gavest  the  Duke  a  clout 
Steep’d  in  the  faultless  blood  of  pretty  Rutland — 
His  curses,  then  from  bitterness  of  soul  775) 

Denounced  against  thee,  are  all  fall’n  upon  thee; 
And  God,  not  we,  hath  plagued  thy  bloody  deed. 
Q.  Eliz.  So  just  is  God,  to  right  the  innocent. 
Hast.  O,  ’twas  the  foulest  deed  to  slay  that 
babe. 

And  the  most  merciless  that  e’er  was  heard  of! 
Riv.  Tyrants  themselves  wept  when  it  was 
reported. 

Dor.  No  man  but  prophesied  revenge  for  it. 

Buck.  Northumberland,  then  present,  wept 
to  see  it. 

Q.  Mar.  What!  were  you  snarling  all  before  I 
came. 

Ready  to  catch  each  other  by  the  throat. 

And  turn  you  all  your  hatred  now  on  me?  /po 
Did  York’s  dread  curse  prevail  so  much  with 
heaven 

That  Henry’s  death,  my  lovely  Edward’s  death, 
Their  kingdom’s  loss,  my  woeful  banishment. 
Could  all  but  answer  for  that  peevish  brat? 

Can  curses  pierce  the  clouds  and  enter  heaven? 
Why,  then,  give  way,  dull  clouds,  to  my  quick 
curses! 

If  not  by  war,  by  surfeit  die  your  king. 

As  ours  by  murder,  to  make  him  a  king! 

Edward  thy  son,  which  now  is  Prince  of  Wales, 
For  Edward  my  son,  which  was  Prince  of  Wales, 
Die  in  his  youth  by  like  untimely  violence!  201 
Thyself  a  queen,  for  me  that  was  a  queen, 

Outlive  thy  glory,  like  my  wretched  self! 

Long  mayst  thou  live  to  wail  thy  children’s  loss; 
And  see  another,  as  I  see  thee  now. 

Deck’d  in  thy  rights,  as  thou  art  stall’d  in  mine! 


SCENE  III 

Long  die  thy  happy  days  before  thy  death; 

And,  after  many  lengthen’d  hours  of  grief, 

Die  neither  mother,  wife,  nor  England’s  Queen! 
Rivers  and  Dorset,  you  were  standers  by,  210 
And  so  wast  thou.  Lord  Hastings,  when  my  son 
Was  stabb’d  with  bloody  daggers:  God,  I  pray 
him, 

That  none  of  you  may  live  your  natural  age. 

But  by  some  unlook’d  accident  cut  off! 

Glou.  Have  done  thy  charm,  thou  hateful 
wither’d  hag! 

Q.  Mar.  And  leave  out  thee?  stay,  dog,  for 
thou  shalt  hear  me. 

If  heaven  have  any  grievous  plague  in  store 
Exceeding  those  that  I  can  wish  upon  thee, 

O,  let  them  keep  it  till  thy  sins  be  ripe. 

And  then  hurl  down  their  indignation  220 

On  thee,  the  troubler  of  the  poor  world’s  peace! 
The  worm  of  conscience  still  begnaw  thy  soul! 
Thy  friends  suspect  for  traitors  while  thou  livest, 
And  take  deep  traitors  for  thy  dearest  friends ! 

No  sleep  close  up  that  deadly  eye  of  thine. 

Unless  it  be  whilst  some  tormenting  dream 
Affrights  thee  with  a  hell  of  ugly  devils! 

Thou  elvish-mark’d,  abortive,  rooting  hog! 

Thou  that  wast  seal’d  in  thy  nativity 

The  slave  of  nature  and  the  son  of  hell !  250 

Thou  slander  of  thy  mother’s  heavy  womb! 

Thou  loathed  issue  of  thy  father’s  loins! 

Thou  rag  of  honour!  thou  detested — 

Glou.  Margaret. 

Q.  Mar.  Richard! 

Glou.  Ha! 

Q.  Mar.  I  call  thee  not. 

Glou.  I  cry  thee  mercy  then,  for  I  had 
thought 

That  thou  hadst  call’d  me  all  these  bitter  names. 
Q.  Mar ^Vhyy  so  I  did;  but  look’d  for  no 
reply. 

O,  let  me  make  the  period  to  my  curse! 

Glou.  ’Tis  done  by  me,  and  ends  in  “Margaret.” 
Q.  Eliz.  Thus  have  you  breathed  your  curse 
against  yourself.  240 

Q.  Mar.  Poor  painted  queen,  vain  flourish  of 
my  fortune! 

Why  strew’st  thou  sugar  on  that  bottled  spider, 
Whose  deadly  web  ensnareth  thee  about? 

Fool,  fool!  thou  whet’ St  a  knife  to  kill  thyself. 
The  time  will  come  when  thou  shalt  wish  for  me 
To  help  thee  curse  that  poisonous  bunch-back’d 
toad. 

Hast.  False- boding  woman,  end  thy  frantic 
curse. 

Lest  to  thy  harm  thou  move  our  patience. 

Q.  Mar.  Foul  shame  upon  you!  you  have 
all  moved  mine. 


Riv Were  you  well  served,  you  would  be 
taught  your  duty.  250 

Q.  Alar.  To  serve  me  well,  you  all  should  do 
me  duty. 

Teach  me  to  be  your  queen,  and  you  my  subjects: 
O,  serve  me  well,  and  teach  yourselves  that 
duty! 

Dor.  Dispute  not  with  her;  she  is  lunatic. 

Q.  Mar.  Peace,  master  marquess,  you  are 
malapert: 

Your  fire-new  stamp  of  honour  is  scarce  current. 
O,  that  your  young  nobility  could  judge 
What  ’twere  to  lose  it,  and  be  miserable! 

They  that  stand  high  have  many  blasts  to  shake 
them;  25P 

And  if  they  fall,  they  dash  themselves  to  pieces. 
Glou.  Good  counsel,  marry:  learn  it,  learn  it, 
marquess. 

Dor.  It  toucheth  you,  my  lord,  as  much  as  me. 
Glou.  Yea,  and  much  more:  but  I  was  born 
so  high. 

Our  aery  buildeth  in  the  cedar’s  top. 

And  dallies  with  the  wind  and  scorns  the  sun. 

Q.  Mar.  And  turns  the  sun  to  shade;  alas! 
alas! 

Witness  my  son,  now  in  the  shade  of  death; 
Whose  bright  out-shining  beams  thy  cloudy 
wrath 

Hath  in  eternal  darkness  folded  up. 

Your  aery  buildeth  in  our  aery’s  nest.  270 

O  God,  that  seest  it,  do  not  suffer  it; 

As  it  was  won  with  blood,  lost  be  it  so! 

Buck.  Have  done!  for  shame,  if  not  for  charity. 
Q.  Mar.  Urge  neither  charity  nor  shame  to  me: 
Uncharitably  with  me  have  you  dealt, 

And  shamefully  by  you  my  hopes  are  butcher’d. 
My  charity  is  outrage,  life  my  shame; 

And  in  that  shame  still  live  my  sorrow’s  rage! 
Buck.  Have  done,  have  done. 

Q.  Mar.  O  princely  Buckingham,  I’ll  kiss 
thy  hand,  280 

In  sign  of  league  and  amity  with  thee: 

Now  fair  befal  thee  and  thy  noble  house! 

Thy  garments  are  not  spotted  with  our  blood. 
Nor  thou  within  the  compass  of  my  curse. 

Buck.  Nor  no  one  here;  for  curses  never  pass 
The  lips  of  those  that  breathe  them  in  the  air. 

Q.  Alar.  I’ll  not  believe  but  they  ascend  the  sky. 
And  there  awake  God’s  gentle-sleeping  peace. 
[Aside  to  Buckingham.] 

O  Buckingham,  take  heed  of  yonder  dog! 

Look,  when  he  fawns,  he  bites;  and  when  he 
bites,  2^0 

His  venom  tooth  will  rankle  to  the  death: 

Have  not  to  do  with  him,  beware  of  him; 

Sin,  death,  and  hell  have  set  their  marks  on  him, 


KING  RICHARD  III 


ACl  I 


KING  RICHARD  III 


And  all  their  ministers  attend  on  him. 

Glou.  What  doth  she  say,  my  Lord  of 
Buckingham? 

Buck.  Nothing  that  I  respect,  my  gracious  lord. 
Q.  d/iJfr.What,  dost  thou  scorn  me  for  my 
gentle  counsel? 

And  soothe  the  devil  that  I  warn  thee  from? 

O,  but  remember  this  another  day. 

When  he  shall  split  thy  very  heart  with  sorrow. 
And  say  poor  Margaret  was  a  prophetess !  5 0/ 

Live  each  of  you  the  subjects  to  his  hate, 

And  he  to  yours,  and  all  of  you  to  God’s!  [Exit. 
Hast.  My  hair  doth  stand  on  end  to  hear  her 
curses. 

Rtv.  And  so  doth  mine:  I  muse  why  she’s  at 
liberty. 

Glou.  I  cannot  blame  her:  by  God’s  holy 
mother. 

She  hath  had  too  much  wrong;  and  I  repent 
My  part  thereof  that  I  have  done  to  her. 

Q.  Eliz.  I  never  did  her  any,  to  my  knowledge. 
Glou.  But  you  have  all  the  vantage  of  her 

wrong.  5/0 

I  was  too  hot  to  do  somebody  good 
That  is  too  cold  in  thinking  of  it  now. 

Marry,  as  for  Clarence,  he  is  well  repaid; 

He  is  frank’d  up  to  fatting  for  his  pains: 

God  pardon  them  that  are  the  cause  of  it! 

Riv.  A  virtuous  and  a  Christian-like  conclusion, 
To  pray  for  them  that  have  done  scathe  to  us. 

Glou.  So  do  I  ever:  [Aside]  being  well  advised. 
For  had  I  cursed  now,  I  had  cursed  myself. 

Enter  catesby. 

Cates.  Madam,  his  Majesty  doth  call  for  you;  520 
And  for  your  Grace;  and  you,  my  noble  lords. 

Q.  Eliz.  Catesby,  we  come.  Lords,  will 
you  go  with  us? 

Riv.  Madam,  we  will  attend  your  Grace. 

[Exeunt  all  but  Gloucester 
Glou.  1  do  the  wrong,  and  first  begin  to  brawl. 
The  secret  mischiefs  that  I  set  abroach 
I  lay  unto  the  grievous  charge  of  others. 
Clarence,  whom  I,  indeed,  have  laid  in  dark¬ 
ness, 

I  do  beweep  to  many  simple  gulls; 

Namely,  to  Hastings,  Derby,  Buckingham; 

And  say  it  is  the  Queen  and  her  allies  550 

That  stir  the  King  against  the  Duke  my  brother. 
Now,  they  believe  it;  and  withal  whet  me 
To  be  revenged  on  Rivers,  Vaughan,  Grey: 

But  then  I  sigh,  and,  with  a  piece  of  scripture. 

Tell  them  that  God  bids  us  do  good  for  evil: 

And  thus  I  clothe  my  naked  villainy 
With  old  odd  ends  stolen  out  of  holy  writ, 

And  seem  a  saint,  when  most  I  play  the  devil. 


Enter  two  murderers. 

But,  soft!  here  come  my  executioners. 

How  now,  my  hardy,  stout,  resolved  mates!  540 
Are  you  now  going  to  dispatch  this  deed? 
ist  Murd.Wc  are,  my  lord;  and  come  to 
have  the  warrant, 

That  we  may  be  admitted  where  he  is. 

Glou.Wdl  thought  upon;  I  have  it  here  about 
me.  [Gives  the  warrant. 

When  you  have  done,  repair  to  Crosby  Place. 

But,  sirs,  be  sudden  in  the  execution. 

Withal  obdurate,  do  not  hear  him  plead; 

For  Clarence  is  well-spoken,  and  perhaps 
May  move  your  hearts  to  pity,  if  you  mark  him. 

ist  Murd.  Tush !  j  yo 

Fear  not,  my  lord,  we  will  not  stand  to  prate; 
Talkers  are  no  good  doers:  be  assured 
We  come  to  use  our  hands  and  not  our  tongues. 
Glou.  Your  eyes  drop  millstones,  when  fools’ 
eyes  drop  tears: 

I  like  you,  lads;  about  your  business  straight; 

Go,  go,  dispatch. 

istMurd?iVe  will,  my  noble  lord.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  London:  the  Tower. 

Enter  clarence  and  brakenbury. 
Brak}N\vf  looks  your  Grace  so  heavily  to-day? 
Clar.  O,  I  have  pass’d  a  miserable  night. 

So  full  of  ugly  sights,  of  ghastly  dreams. 

That,  as  I  am  a  Christian  faithful  man, 

I  would  not  spend  another  such  a  night, 

Though  ’twere  to  buy  a  world  of  happy  days. 

So  full  of  dismal  terror  was  the  time! 

Brak.  What  was  your  dream?  I  long  to  hear 
you  tell  it. 

Clar.  Methoughts  that  I  had  broken  from  the 
Tower, 

And  was  embark’d  to  cross  to  Burgundy;  10 
And,  in  my  company,  my  brother  Gloucester, 
Who  from  my  cabin  tempted  me  to  walk 
Upon  the  hatches:  thence  we  look’d  toward 
England, 

And  cited  up  a  thousand  fearful  times, 

During  the  wars  of  York  and  Lancaster 
That  had  befall’n  us.  As  we  paced  along 
Upon  the  giddy  footing  of  the  hatches, 
Methought  that  Gloucester  stumbled;  and,  in 
falling, 

Struck  me,  that  thought  to  stay  him,  overboard, 
Into  the  tumbling  billows  of  the  main.  20 

Lord,  Lord!  methought  what  pain  it  was  to 
drown! 

What  dreadful  noise  of  waters  in  mine  ears! 
What  ugly  sights  of  death  within  mine  eyes! 
Methought  I  saw  a  thousand  fearful  wrecks; 


SCENE  IV 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Ten  thousand  men  that  fishes  gnaw’d  upon; 
Wedges  of  gold,  great  anchors,  heaps  of  pearl. 
Inestimable  stones,  unvalued  jewels. 

All  scatter’d  in  the  bottom  of  the  sea; 

Some  lay  in  dead  men’s  skulls;  and,  in  those  holes 
Where  eyes  did  once  inhabit,  there  were  crept. 
As  ’twere  in  scorn  of  eyes,  reflecting  gems,  5/ 

Which  woo’d  the  slimy  bottom  of  the  deep 
And  mock’d  the  dead  bones  that  lay  scatter’d  by. 
Brak.  Had  you  such  leisure  in  the  time  of 
death 

To  gaze  upon  the  secrets  of  the  deep? 

Clar.  Methought  I  had;  and  often  did  I  strive 
To  yield  the  ghost:  but  still  the  envious  flood 
Kept  in  my  soul  and  would  not  let  it  forth 
To  seek  the  empty,  vast,  and  wandering  air; 

But  smother’d  it  within  my  panting  bulk,  40 
Which  almost  burst  to  belch  it  in  the  sea. 

Brak.  Awaked  you  not  with  this  sore  agony? 
Clar.  O,  no,  my  dream  was  lengthen’d  after  life; 
O,  then  began  the  tempest  to  my  soul. 

Who  pass’d,  methought,  the  melancholy  flood. 
With  that  grim  ferryman  which  poets  write  of, 
Unto  the  kingdom  of  perpetual  night. 

The  first  that  there  did  greet  my  stranger  soul 
Was  my  great  father-in-law,  renowned 
Warwick, 

Who  cried  aloud,  “What  scourge  for  perjury  jo 
Can  this  dark  monarchy  afford  false  Clarence?” 
And  so  he  vanish’d:  then  came  wandering  by 
A  shadow  like  an  angel,  with  bright  hair 
Dabbled  in  blood;  and  he  squeak’d  out  aloud, 
“Clarence  is  come;  false,  fleeting,  perjured 
Clarence, 

That  stabb’d  me  in  the  field  by  Tewksbury; 

Seize  on  him.  Furies,  take  him  to  your  torments!” 
With  that,  methoughts,  a  legion  of  foul  fiends 
Environ’d  me  about,  and  howled  in  mine  ears 
Such  hideous  cries  that  with  the  very  noise  60 
I  trembling  waked,  and  for  a  season  after 
Could  not  believe  but  that  I  was  in  hell. 

Such  terrible  impression  made  the  dream. 

Brak.  No  marvel,  my  lord,  though  it  affrighted 
you; 

I  promise  you,  I  am  afraid  to  hear  you  tell  it. 

Clar.  O  Brakenbury,  I  have  done  those  things. 
Which  now  bear  evidence  against  my  soul. 

For  Edward’s  sake;  and  see  how  he  requites  me! 
O  God!  if  my  deep  prayers  cannot  appease  thee. 
But  thou  wilt  be  avenged  on  my  misdeeds,  70 
Yet  execute  thy  wrath  in  me  alone, 

O,  spare  my  guiltless  wife  and  my  poor  children! 
I  pray  thee,  gentle  keeper,  stay  by  me; 

My  soul  is  heavy,  and  I  fain  would  sleep. 

Brak.  I  will,  my  lord:  God  give  your  Grace 
good  rest!  [Clarence  sleeps.] 


15 

Sorrow  breaks  seasons  and  reposing  hours. 

Makes  the  night  morning,  and  the  noon-tide 
night. 

Princes  have  but  their  titles  for  their  glories, 

An  outward  honour  for  an  inward  toil; 

And,  for  unfelt  imagination.  So 

They  often  feel  a  world  of  restless  cares: 

So  that,  betwixt  their  titles  and  low  names, 
There’s  nothing  differs  but  the  outward  fame. 

Enter  the  two  murderers. 

istMurd.  Ho!  who’s  here? 

Brak.  In  God’s  name  what  are  you,  and  how 
came  you  hither? 

istMurd.  I  would  speak  with  Clarence, 
and  I  came  hither  on  my  legs. 

Brak.  Yea,  are  you  so  brief? 

2nd  Murd.  O  sir,  it  is  better  to  be  brief  than 
tedious.  Shew  him  our  commission;  talk  no 
more. 

[Brakenbury  reads  it. 

Brak.  I  am,  in  this,  commanded  to  deliver 
The  noble  Duke  of  Clarence  to  your  hands: 

I  will  not  reason  what  is  meant  hereby. 

Because  I  will  be  guiltless  of  the  meaning. 

Here  are  the  keys,  there  sits  the  Duke  asleep: 

I’ll  to  the  King;  and  signify  to  him 
That  thus  I  have  resign’d  my  charge  to  you 
ist  Murd.  Do  so,  it  is  a  point  of  wisdom: 
fare  you  well.  [Exit  brakenbury  ioo 

2nd  Murd.  What,  shall  we  stab  him  as  he 
sleeps? 

istMurd.  No;  then  he  will  say  ’twas  done 
cowardly,  when  he  wakes. 

2nd  Murd.  When  he  wakes!  why,  fool,  he 
shall  never  wake  till  the  judgement-day. 

ist  Murd.  Why,  then  he  will  say  we  stabbed 
him  sleeping. 

2nd  Murd.  The  urging  of  that  word  “judge¬ 
ment”  hath  bred  a  kind  of  remorse  in  me.  no 
ist  Murd.  What,  art  thou  afraid? 

2nd  Murd.  Not  to  kill  him,  having  a  warrant 
for  it;  but  to  be  damned  for  killing  him,  from 
which  no  warrant  can  defend  us. 
ist  Murd.  I  thought  thou  hadst  been  resolute. 

2nd  Murd.  So  I  am  to  let  him  live. 
ist  Murd.  Back  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
tell  him  so.  ^^9 

2nd  Murd.  I  pray  thee,  stay  a  while:  I  hope  my 
holy  humour  will  change;  ’twas  wont  to  hold  me 
but  while  one  would  tell  twenty. 
istMurd.  How  dost  thou  feel  thyself  now? 

2nd  Murd.  ’Faith,  some  certain  dregs  of 
conscience  are  yet  within  me. 

ist  Murd.  Remember  our  reward,  when  the 
deed  is  done. 


ACT  I 


KING  RICHARD  III 


1 16 

2nd  Murd,  ’Zounds,  he  dies:  I  had  forgot  the 
reward.  129 

istMurd.  Where  is  thy  conscience  now.^ 

2nd  Murd.  In  the  Duke  of  Gloucester’s  purse. 
ist  Murd.  So  when  he  opens  his  purse  to  give  us 
our  reward,  thy  conscience  flies  out. 

2nd  Murd.  Let  it  go;  there’s  few  or  none  will 
entertain  it. 

ist  Murd.  How  if  it  come  to  thee  again? 

2nd  Murd.  I’ll  not  meddle  with  it:  it  is  a  danger¬ 
ous  thing:  it  makes  a  man  a  coward:  a  man  cannot 
steal,  but  it  accuseth  him;  he  cannot  swear,  but  it 
checks  him;  he  cannot  lie  with  his  neighbour’s 
wife,  but  it  detects  him:  ’tis  a  blushing  shamefast 
spirit  that  mutinies  in  a  man’s  bosom;  it  fills  one 
full  of  obstacles :  it  made  me  once  restore  a  purse 
of  gold  that  I  found;  it  beggars  any  man  that 
keeps  it:  it  is  turned  out  of  all  towns  and  cities  for 
a  dangerous  thing;  and  every  man  that  means  to 
live  well  endeavours  to  trust  himself  and  to  live 
without  it. 

ist  Murd.  ’Zounds,  it  is  even  now  at  my  elbow, 
persuading  me  not  to  kill  the  Duke.  /50 

2nd  Murd.  Take  the  devil  in  thy  mind,  and 
believe  him  not:  he  would  insinuate  with  thee 
but  to  make  thee  sigh. 

ist  Murd.  Tut,  I  am  strong-framed,  he  cannot 
prevail  with  me,  I  warrant  thee. 

2nd  Murd.  Spoke  like  a  tall  fellow  that  respects 
his  reputation.  Come,  shall  we  to  this  gear? 

ist  Murd.  Take  him  over  the  costard  with  the 
hilts  of  thy  sword,  and  then  we  will  chop  him  in 
the  malmsey-butt  in  the  next  room.  161 

2nd  Murd.  O  excellent  device!  make  a  sop  of 
him. 

ist  Murd.  Hark!  he  stirs:  shall  I  strike? 

2nd  Murd.  No,  first  let’s  reason  with  him. 

Clar.  Where  art  thou,  keeper?  give  me  a  cup 
of  wine. 

2nd  Murd.  You  shall  have  wine  enough,  my 
lord,  anon. 

Clar.  In  God’s  name,  what  art  thou? 

2nd  Murd.  A  man,  as  you  are.  ijo 

Clar.  But  not,  as  I  am,  royal. 

2nd  Murd.  Nor  you,  as  we  are,  loyal. 

Clar.  Thy  voice  is  thunder,  but  thy  looks  are 
humble. 

2nd  Murd.  My  voice  is  now  the  King’s,  my 
looks  mine  own. 

Clar.  How  darkly  and  how  deadly  dost  thou 
speak! 

Your  eyes  do  menace  me:  why  look  you  pale? 
Who  sent  you  hither?  Wherefore  do  you  come? 
Both.  To,  to,  to — 

Clar.  To  murder  me? 

Both.  Ay,  ay. 


Clar.  You  scarcely  have  the  hearts  to  tell 
me  so,  180 

And  therefore  cannot  have  the  hearts  to  do  it. 
Wherein,  my  friends,  have  I  offended  you? 
ist  Murd.  Offended  us  you  have  not,  but  the 
King. 

Clar.  I  shall  be  reconciled  to  him  again. 

2nd  Murd.  Never,  my  lord;  therefore  prepare 
to  die. 

Clar.  Are  you  call’d  forth  from  out  a  world 
of  men 

To  slay  the  innocent?  What  is  my  offence? 
Where  are  the  evidence  that  do  accuse  me? 

What  lawful  quest  have  given  their  verdict  up 
Unto  the  frowning  judge?  or  who  pronounced  1^0 
The  bitter  sentence  of  poor  Clarence’  death? 
Before  I  be  convict  by  course  of  law, 

To  threaten  me  with  death  is  most  unlawful. 

I  charge  you,  as  you  hope  to  have  redemption 
By  Christ’s  dear  blood  shed  for  our  grievous  sins, 
That  you  depart  and  lay  no  hands  on  me: 

The  deed  you  undertake  is  damnable. 
ist  Murd.  What  we  will  do,  we  do  upon  com¬ 
mand. 

2nd  Murd.  And  he  that  hath  commanded  is  the 
King. 

Clar.  Erroneous  vassal!  the  great  King  of 

kings  200 

Hath  in  the  tables  of  his  law  commanded 
That  thou  shalt  do  no  murder:  and  wilt  thou, 
then. 

Spurn  at  his  edict  and  fulfil  a  man’s? 

Take  heed;  for  he  holds  vengeance  in  his  hands. 
To  hurl  upon  their  heads  that  break  his  law. 

2nd  Murd.  And  that  same  vengeance  doth  he 
hurl  on  thee. 

For  false  forswearing  and  for  murder  too: 

Thou  didst  receive  the  holy  sacrament. 

To  fight  in  quarrel  of  the  house  of  Lancaster. 
ist  Murd.  And,  like  a  traitor  to  the  name  of 
God,  210 

Didst  break  that  vow;  and  with  thy  treacherous 
blade 

Unrip’dst  the  bowels  of  thy  sovereign’s  son. 

2nd  Murd.  Whom  thou  wert  sworn  to  cherish 
and  defend. 

ist  Murd.  How  canst  thou  urge  God’s 
dreadful  law  to  us. 

When  thou  hast  broke  it  in  so  dear  degree? 

Clar.  Alas!  for  whose  sake  did  I  that  ill  deed? 

For  Edward,  for  my  brother,  for  his  sake: 

Why,  sirs. 

He  sends  ye  not  to  murder  me  for  this; 

For  in  this  sin  he  is  as  deep  as  L  220 

If  God  will  be  revenged  for  this  deed, 

O,  know  you  yet  he  doth  it  publicly: 


SCENE  IV 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Take  not  the  quarrel  from  his  powerful  arm; 

He  needs  no  indirect  nor  lawless  course 
To  cut  off  those  that  have  offended  him. 
ist  Murd.  Who  made  thee,  then,  a  bloody 
minister, 

When  gallant-springing  brave  Plantagenet, 

That  princely  novice,  was  struck  dead  by  thee? 
Clar.  My  brother’s  love,  the  devil,  and  my  rage. 
ist  Mtird.  Thy  brother’s  love,  our  duty, 

and  thy  fault,  250 

Provoke  us  hither  now  to  slaughter  thee. 

Clar.  Oh,  if  you  love  my  brother,  hate  not  me; 

I  am  his  brother,  and  I  love  him  well. 

If  you  be  hired  for  meed,  go  back  again. 

And  I  will  send  you  to  my  brother  Gloucester, 
Who  shall  reward  you  better  for  my  life 
Than  Edward  will  for  tidings  of  my  death. 

2nd  Murd.  You  are  deceived,  your  brother 
Gloucester  hates  you. 

Clat.  O,  no,  he  loves  me,  and  he  holds  me  dear: 
Go  you  to  him  from  me. 

Both.  Ay,  so  we  will.  240 

Clar.  Tell  him,  when  that  our  princely  father 
York 

Bless’d  his  three  sons  with  his  victorious  arm. 
And  charged  us  from  his  soul  to  love  each  other. 
He  little  thought  of  this  divided  friendship: 

Bid  Gloucester  think  of  this,  and  he  will  weep. 
ist  Murd.  Ay,  millstones;  as  he  lesson’d  us  to 
weep. 

Clar.  O,  do  not  slander  him,  for  he  is  kind. 
ist  Murd.  Right, 

As  snow  in  harvest.  Thou  deceivest  thyself: 

’Tis  he  that  sent  us  hither  now  to  slaughter  thee. 

Clar.  It  cannot  be;  for  when  I  parted  with  him. 
He  hugg’d  me  in  his  arms,  and  swore,  with  sobs. 
That  he  would  labour  my  delivery. 

2nd  Murd. Why,  so  he  doth,  now  he  delivers 
thee 

From  this  world’s  thraldom  to  the  joys  of  heaven. 
ist  Murd.  Make  peace  with  God,  for  you  must 
die,  my  lord. 

Clar.  Hast  thou  that  holy  feeling  in  thy  soul. 

To  counsel  me  to  make  my  peace  with  God, 

And  art  thou  yet  to  thy  own  soul  so  blind. 

That  thou  wilt  war  with  God  by  murdering  me? 
Ah,  sirs,  consider,  he  that  set  you  on  2  61 

To  do  this  deed  will  hate  you  for  the  deed. 

2nd  Alurd.  What  shall  we  do? 

Clar.  Relent,  and  save  your  souls. 

ist  Murd.  Relent!  ’tis  cowardly  and  womanish. 
Clar.  Not  to  relent  is  beastly,  savage,  devilish. 
Which  of  you,  if  you  were  a  prince’s  son. 

Being  pent  from  liberty,  as  I  am  now. 

If  two  such  murderers  as  yourselves  came  to  you. 
Would  not  entreat  for  life? 


My  friend,  I  spy  some  pity  in  thy  looks;  270 
O,  if  thine  eye  be  not  a  flatterer. 

Come  thou  on  my  side,  and  entreat  for  me, 

As  you  would  beg,  were  you  in  my  distress: 

A  begging  prince  what  beggar  pities  not? 

2nd  Murd.  Look  behind  you,  my  lord. 
ist  Murd.  Take  that,  and  that:  if  all  this  will  not 
do,  [Stabs  him.] 

I’ll  drown  you  in  the  malmsey-butt  within. 

[Exit,  with  the  body. 
2nd  Murd.  A  bloody  deed,  and  desperately 
dispatch’d! 

How  fain,  like  Pilate,  would  I  wash  my  hands 
Of  this  most  grievous  guilty  murder  done!  280 

Re-enter  first  murderer. 

ist  Murd.  How  now!  what  mean’st  thou,  that 
thou  help’ St  me  not? 

By  heavens,  the  Duke  shall  know  how  slack  thou 
art! 

2nd  Murd.  I  would  he  knew  that  I  had  saved  his 
brother! 

Take  thou  the  fee,  and  tell  him  what  I  say; 

For  I  repent  me  that  the  Duke  is  slain.  [Exit, 
ist  Murd.  So  do  not  I :  go,  coward  as  thou  art. 
Now  must  I  hide  his  body  in  some  hole. 

Until  the  Duke  take  order  for  his  burial: 

And  when  I  have  my  meed,  I  must  away; 

For  this  will  out,  and  here  I  must  not  stay.  2^0 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  London:  the  palace 
Flourish.  Enter  king  edward  sick,  queen  Eliza¬ 
beth,  DORSET,  rivers,  HASTINGS,  BUCKINGHAM, 
GREY,  and  others. 

K.  Edw.  Why,  so:  now  have  I  done  a  good 
day’s  work: 

You  peers,  continue  this  united  league: 

I  every  day  expect  an  embassage 
From  my  Redeemer  to  redeem  me  hence; 

And  now  in  peace  my  soul  shall  part  to  heaven, 
Since  I  have  set  my  friends  at  peace  on  earth. 
Rivers  and  Hastings,  take  each  other’s  hand; 
Dissemble  not  your  hatred,  swear  your  love. 

Riv.  By  heaven,  my  heart  is  purged  from  grudg¬ 
ing  hate; 

And  with  my  hand  I  seal  my  true  heart’s  love.  10 
Hast.  So  thrive  I,  as  I  truly  swear  the  like! 

K.  Edw.  Take  heed  you  dally  not  before  your 

Lest  he  that  is  the  supreme  King  of  kings 
Confound  your  hidden  falsehood  and  award 
Either  of  you  to  be  the  other’s  end. 

Hast.  So  prosper  I,  as  I  swear  perfect  love! 

Riv.  And  I,  as  I  love  Hastings  with  my  heart! 


ACT  II 


KING  RICHARD  III 


ii8 

K.  Ed  w.  Madam,  yourself  are  not  exempt  in 
this, 

Nor  your  son  Dorset,  Buckingham,  nor  you; 

You  have  been  factious  one  against  the  other.  20 
Wife,  love  Lord  Hastings,  let  him  kiss  your 
hand; 

And  what  you  do,  do  it  unfeignedly. 

Q.  Eliz.  Here,  Hastings;  I  will  never  more 
remember 

Our  former  hatred,  so  thrive  I  and  mine! 

K.  Edw,  Dorset,  embrace  him;  Hastings, 
love  lord  marquess. 

Dor,  This  interchange  of  love,  I  here  protest, 
Upon  my  part  shall  be  unviolable. 

Hast.  And  so  swear  I,  my  lord. 

They  embrace. 

K.  Edw.  Now,  princely  Buckingham,  seal  thou 
this  league 

With  thy  embracements  to  my  wife’s  allies,  50 
And  make  me  happy  in  your  unity. 

Bwfi^.Whenever  Buckingham  doth  turn  his  hate 
On  you  or  yours  [to  the  queen],  but  with  all 
duteous  love 

Doth  cherish  you  and  yours,  God  punish  me 
With  hate  in  those  where  I  expect  most  love! 
When  I  have  most  need  to  employ  a  friend, 

And  most  assured  that  he  is  a  friend. 

Deep,  hollow,  treacherous,  and  full  of  guile. 

Be  he  unto  me!  this  do  I  beg  of  God, 

When  I  am  cold  in  zeal  to  you  or  yours.  40 
They  embrace. 

K.  Edw.  A  pleasing  cordial,  princely  Buck¬ 
ingham, 

Is  this  thy  vow  unto  my  sickly  heart. 

There  wanteth  now  our  brother  Gloucester  here, 
To  make  the  perfect  period  of  this  peace. 

Buck.  And,  in  good  time,  here  comes  the  noble 
Duke. 

Enter  Gloucester. 

Glou.  Good  morrow  to  my  sovereign  king  and 
queen; 

And,  princely  peers,  a  happy  time  of  day! 

K.  Edw.  Happy,  indeed,  as  we  have  spent  the 
day. 

Brother,  we  have  done  deeds  of  charity; 

Made  peace  of  enmity,  fair  love  of  hate,  50 

Between  these  swelling  wrong-incensed  peers. 
Glou.  A  blessed  labour,  my  most  sovereign 
liege: 

Amongst  this  princely  heap,  if  any  here. 

By  false  intelligence,  or  wrong  surmise. 

Hold  me  a  foe; 

If  I  unwittingly,  or  in  my  rage. 

Have  aught  committed  that  is  hardly  borne 
By  any  in  this  presence,  I  desire 


To  reconcile  me  to  his  friendly  peace: 

’Tis  death  to  me  to  be  at  enmity;  60 

I  hate  it  and  desire  all  good  men’s  love. 

First,  madam,  I  entreat  true  peace  of  you. 

Which  I  will  purchase  with  my  duteous  service; 
Of  you,  my  noble  cousin  Buckingham, 

If  ever  any  grudge  were  lodged  between  us; 

Of  you,  Lord  Rivers,  and,  Lord  Grey,  of  you; 
That  all  without  desert  have  frown’d  on  me; 
Dukes,  earls,  lords,  gentlemen;  indeed,  of  all. 

I  do  not  know  that  Englishman  alive 

With  whom  my  soul  is  any  jot  at  odds  70 

More  than  the  infant  that  is  born  to-night: 

I  thank  my  God  for  my  humility. 

Q.  Eliz.  A  holy  day  shall  this  be  kept  hereafter: 

I  would  to  God  all  strifes  were  well  compounded. 
My  sovereign  liege,  I  do  beseech  your  Majesty 
To  take  our  brother  Clarence  to  your  grace. 

Glou.  Why,  madam,  have  I  offer’d  love  for  this, 
To  be  so  flouted  in  this  royal  presence? 

Who  knows  not  that  the  noble  Duke  is  dead? 
They  all  start. 

You  do  him  injury  to  scorn  his  corse.  80 

Riv.  Who  knows  not  he  is  dead!  who  knows 
he  is? 

Q.  Eliz.  All-seeing  heaven,  what  a  world  is  this! 
Buck.  Look  I  so  pale,  Lord  Dorset,  as  the  rest? 
Dor.  Ay,  my  good  lord;  and  no  one  in  this 
presence 

But  his  red  colour  hath  forsook  his  cheeks. 

K.  Edw.  Is  Clarence  dead?  the  order  was 
reversed. 

Glou.  But  he,  poor  soul,  by  your  first  order  died. 
And  that  a  winged  Mercury  did  bear; 

Some  tardy  cripple  bore  the  countermand. 

That  came  too  lag  to  see  him  buried.  po 

God  grant  that  some,  less  noble  and  less  loyal. 
Nearer  in  bloody  thoughts,  but  not  in  blood. 
Deserve  not  worse  than  wretched  Clarence  did. 
And  yet  go  current  from  suspicion! 

Enter  Stanley. 

Stan.  A  boon,  my  sovereign,  for  my  service 
done! 

K.  Edw.  I  pray  thee,  peace:  my  soul  is  full  of 
sorrow. 

Stan.  I  will  not  rise,  unless  your  Highness  grant. 
K.  Edw.  Then  speak  at  once  what  is  it  thou 
demand’st. 

Stan.  The  forfeit,  sovereign,  of  my  servant’s 
life; 

Who  slew  to-day  a  riotous  gentleman  too 

Lately  attendant  on  the  Duke  of  Norfolk. 

K.  Edw.  Have  I  a  tongue  to  doom  my  brother’s 
death. 

And  shall  the  same  give  pardon  to  a  slave? 


KING  RICHARD  III 


My  brother  slew  no  man;  his  fault  was  thought, 
And  yet  his  punishment  was  cruel  death. 

Who  sued  to  me  for  him?  who,  in  my  rage, 
Kneel’d  at  my  feet,  and  bade  me  be  advised? 

Who  spake  of  brotherhood?  who  spake  of  love? 
Who  told  me  how  the  poor  soul  did  forsake 
The  mightv  Warwick  and  did  fight  for  me?  no 
Who  told  me,  in  the  field  by  Tewksbury, 

When  Oxford  had  me  down,  he  rescued  me. 

And  said,  “Dear  brother,  live,  and  be  a  king”? 
Who  told  me,  when  we  both  lay  in  the  field 
Frozen  almost  to  death,  how  he  did  lap  me 
Even  in  his  own  garments,  and  gave  himself. 

All  thin  and  naked,  to  the  numb  cold  night? 

All  this  from  my  remembrance  brutish  wrath 
Sinfully  pluck’d,  and  not  a  man  of  you 
Had  so  much  grace  to  put  it  in  my  mind.  120 
But  when  your  carters  or  your  waiting-vassals 
Have  done  a  drunken  slaughter  and  defaced 
The  precious  image  of  our  dear  Redeemer, 

You  straight  are  on  your  knees  for  pardon, 
pardon; 

And  I,  unjustly  too,  must  grant  it  you: 

But  for  my  brother  not  a  man  would  speak. 

Nor  I,  ungracious,  speak  unto  myself 
For  him,  poor  soul.  The  proudest  of  you  all 
Have  been  beholding  to  him  in  his  life; 

Yet  none  of  you  would  once  plead  for  his  life.  /50 
O  God,  I  fear  thy  justice  will  take  hold 
On  me,  and  you,  and  mine,  and  yours  for  this ! 
Come,  Hastings,  help  me  to  my  closet.  Oh,  poor 
Clarence! 

{Exeunt  some  with  king  and  queen. 
Glou.  This  is  the  fruit  of  rashness!  Mark’d 
you  not 

How  that  the  guilty  kindred  of  the  Queen 
Lxx)k’d  pale  when  they  did  hear  of  Clarence’ 
death? 

O,  they  did  urge  it  still  unto  the  King! 

God  will  revenge  it.  But  come,  let  us  in. 

To  comfort  Edward  with  our  company. 

Buck.  We  wait  upon  your  grace.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  palace 

Enter  the  duchess  of  york,  with  the  two  children 

of  CLARENCE,  EDWARD  EARL  OF  WARWICK  and 
MARGARET  PLANTAGENET. 

War.  Tell  me,  good  grandam,  is  our  father 
dead? 

Ehich.  No,  boy. 

War.  Why  do  you  wring  your  hands,  and  beat 
your  breast. 

And  cry,  “O  Clarence,  my  unhappy  son!” 

Mar.  Why  do  you  look  on  us,  and  shake  your 
head. 

And  call  us  wretches,  orphans,  castaways. 


If  that  our  noble  father  be  alive? 

Duch.  My  pretty  cousins,  you  mistake  me 
much; 

I  do  lament  the  sickness  of  the  King, 

As  loath  to  lose  him,  not  your  father’s  death;  10 
It  were  lost  sorrow  to  wail  one  that’s  lost. 

War.  Then,  grandam,  you  conclude  that  he  is 
dead. 

The  King  my  uncle  is  to  blame  for  this: 

God  will  revenge  it;  whom  I  will  importune 
With  daily  prayers  all  to  that  effect. 

Mar.  And  so  will  I. 

Duch.  Peace,  children,  peace!  the  King  doth 
love  you  well: 

Incapable  and  shallow  innocents. 

You  cannot  guess  who  caused  your  father’s  death. 
War.  Grandam,  we  can;  for  my  good  uncle 
Gloucester  20 

Told  me,  the  King,  provoked  by  the  Queen, 
Devised  impeachments  to  imprison  him: 

And  when  my  uncle  told  me  so,  he  wept. 

And  hugg’d  me  in  his  arm,  and  kindly  kiss’d  my 
cheek; 

Bade  me  rely  on  him  as  on  my  father. 

And  he  would  love  me  dearly  as  his  child. 

Duch.  Oh,  that  deceit  should  steal  such  gentle 
shapes. 

And  with  a  virtuous  vizard  hide  foul  guile! 

He  is  my  son;  yea,  and  therein  my  shame; 

Yet  from  my  dugs  he  drew  not  this  deceit.  50 
War.  Think  you  my  uncle  did  dissemble, 
grandam? 

Duch.  Ay,  boy. 

War.  I  cannot  think  it.  Hark!  what  noise  is  this? 

Enter  queen  Elizabeth,  with  her  hair  about  her 
ears;  rivers  and  Dorset  after  her. 

Q.  Eliz.  Oh,  who  shall  hinder  me  to  wail  and 
weep. 

To  chide  my  fortune,  and  torment  myself? 

I’ll  join  with  black  despair  against  my  soul, 

And  to  myself  become  an  enemy. 

DuchWhzt  means  this  scene  of  rude 
impatience? 

Q.  Eliz.  To  make  an  act  of  tragic  violence: 
Edward,  my  lord,  your  son,  our  king,  is  dead.  40 
Why  grow  the  branches  now  the  root  is 
wither’d? 

Why  wither  not  the  leaves  the  sap  being  gone? 

If  you  will  live,  lament;  if  die,  be  brief. 

That  our  swift-winged  souls  may  catch  the 
King’s; 

Or,  like  obedient  subjects,  follow  him 
To  his  new  kingdom  of  perpetual  rest. 

Duch.  Ah,  so  much  interest  have  I  in  thy 
sorrow 


120 


ACT  II 


KING  RICHARD  HI 


As  I  had  title  in  thy  noble  husband! 

1  have  bevvept  a  worthy  husband’s  death, 

And  lived  by  looking  on  his  images :  50 

But  now  two  mirrors  of  his  princely  semblance 
Are  crack’d  in  pieces  by  malignant  death, 

And  I  for  comfort  have  but  one  false  glass, 

VVhich  grieves  me  when  I  see  my  shame  in  him. 
Thou  art  a  widow;  yet  thou  art  a  mother, 

And  hast  the  comfort  of  thy  children  left  thee: 

But  death  hath  snatch’d  my  husband  from  mine 
arms, 

And  pluck’d  two  crutches  from  my  feeble  limbs, 
Edward  and  Clarence.  O,  what  cause  have  I, 
Thine  being  but  a  moiety  of  my  grief,  60 

To  overgo  thy  plaints  and  drown  thy  cries ! 

War.  Good  aunt,  you  wept  not  for  our  father’s 
death; 

How  can  we  aid  you  with  our  kindred  tears? 

Alar.  Our  fatherless  distress  was  left  unmoan’d; 
Your  widow-dolour  likewise  be  unwept! 

Q.  Eliz.  Give  me  no  help  in  lamentation; 

[  am  not  barren  to  bring  forth  complaints: 

All  springs  reduce  their  currents  to  mine  eyes. 
That  I,  being  govern’d  by  the  watery  moon, 

May  send  forth  plenteous  tear?  to  drown  the 
world!  70 

Oh  for  my  husband,  for  my  dear  lord  Edward! 
War.  and  Alar.  Oh  for  our  father,  for  our  dear 
lord  Clarence! 

Dvch.  Alas  for  both,  both  mine,  Edward  and 
Clarence! 

Q.  E/iz.What  stay  had  I  but  Edward?  and  he’s 
gone. 

War.  and  Mar  .What  stay  had  we  but  Clarence? 
and  he’s  gone. 

Dwr/z.What  stays  had  I  but  they?  and  they  are 
gone. 

Q.  ElizAVas  never  widow  had  so  dear  a  loss! 
War.  and  Alar  Wert  never  orphans  had  so  dear 
a  loss! 

Dnch.Was  never  mother  had  so  dear  a  loss! 

Alas,  I  am  the  mother  of  these  moans!  80 

Their  woes  are  parcell’d,  mine  are  general. 

She  for  an  Edward  weeps,  and  so  do  I ; 

I  for  a  Clarence  weep,  so  doth  not  she: 

These  babes  for  Clarence  weep  and  so  do  I; 

I  for  an  Edward  weep,  so  do  not  they: 

Alas,  you  three,  on  me,  threefold  distress’d. 

Pour  all  your  tears!  I  am  your  sorrow’s  nurse. 
And  I  will  pamper  it  with  lamentations. 

Dor.  Comfort,  dear  mother:  God  is  much 
displeased 

That  you  take  with  unthankfulness  his  doing:  po 
In  common  w'orldly  things,  ’tis  call’d  ungrateful 
With  dull  unwillingness  to  repay  a  debt 
Which  with  a  bounteous  hand  was  kindly  lent; 


Much  more  to  be  thus  opposite  with  heaven. 

For  it  requires  the  myal  debt  it  lent  you. 

Riv.  Madam,  bethink  you,  like  a  careful 
mother. 

Of  the  young  prince  your  son:  send  straight  for 
him; 

Let  him  be  crown’d;  in  him  your  comfort  lives: 
Drown  desperate  sorrow  in  dead  Edward’s  grave. 
And  plant  your  joys  in  living  Edward’s 

throne.  100 

Enter  GLOUCESTER,  Buckingham,  derby, 
HASTINGS,  and  ratcliff. 

Glou.  Madam,  have  comfort:  all  of  us  have 
cause 

To  wail  the  dimming  of  our  shining  star; 

But  none  can  cure  their  harms  by  wailing  them. 
Madam,  my  mother,  I  do  cry  you  mercy; 

I  did  not  see  your  Grace:  humbly  on  my  knee 
I  crave  your  blessing. 

Duch.  God  bless  thee;  and  put  meekness  in  thy 
mind. 

Love,  charity,  obedience,  and  true  duty! 

Glou.  [Aside]  Amen;  and  make  me  die  a  good 
old  man! 

That  is  the  butt-end  of  a  mother’s  blessing:  no 
I  marvel  why  her  Grace  did  leave  it  out. 

Buck.  You  cloudy  princes  and  heart-sorrowing 
peers 

That  bear  this  mutual  heavy  load  of  moan. 

Now  cheer  each  other  in  each  other’s  love: 
Though  we  have  spent  our  harvest  of  this  king. 
We  are  to  reap  the  harvest  of  his  son. 

The  broken  rancour  of  your  high-swoln  hearts. 
But  lately  splinter’d,  knit,  and  join’d  together. 
Must  gently  be  preserved,  cherish’d,  and  kept: 
Me  seemeth  good,  that,  with  some  little  train. 
Forthwith  from  Ludlow  the  young  prince 

be  fetch’d  t2i 

Hither  to  London,  to  be  crown’d  our  king. 

Riv.  Why  with  some  little  train,  my  Lord  of 
Buckingham? 

Buck.  Marry,  my  lord,  lest,  by  a  multitude. 

The  new-heal’d  wound  of  malice  should  break 
out; 

Which  would  be  so  much  the  more  dangerous, 

By  how  much  the  estate  is  green  and  yet 
ungovern’d: 

Where  every  horse  bears  his  commanding  rein. 
And  may  direct  his  course  as  please  himself. 

As  well  the  fear  of  harm,  as  harm  apparent,  1^0 
In  my  opinion,  ought  to  be  prevented. 

Glou.  I  hope  the  King  made  peace  with  all  of  us; 
And  the  compact  is  firm  and  true  in  me. 

Riv.  And  so  in  me;  and  so,  I  think,  in  all: 

Yet,  since  it  is  but  green,  it  should  be  put 


SCENE  II 

To  no  apparent  likelihood  of  breach, 

Which  haply  by  much  company  might  be  urged: 
Therefore  I  say  with  noble  Buckingham 
That  it  is  meet  so  few  should  fetch  the  Prince. 

And  so  say  I.  /40 

Glou.  Then  be  it  so;  and  go  we  to  determine 
Who  they  shall  be  that  straight  shall  post  to 
Ludlow. 

Madam,  and  you,  my  mother,  will  you  go 
To  give  your  censures  in  this  weighty  business? 
Q.  Eliz.  I  With  all  our  hearts. 

Duch.  ) 

[Exeunt  all  but  Buckingham  and  Gloucester. 
Buck.  My  Lord,  whoever  journeys  to  the 
Prince, 

For  God’s  sake,  let  not  us  two  be  behind; 

For,  by  the  way,  I’ll  sort  occasion. 

As  index  to  the  story  we  late  talk’d  of. 

To  part  the  Queen’s  proud  kindred  from  the 
King.  150 

Glou.  My  other  self,  my  counsel’s  consistory, 
My  oracle,  my  prophet!  My  dear  cousin, 

I,  like  a  child,  will  go  by  thy  direction. 

Towards  Ludlow  then,  for  we’ll  not  stay 

behind.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  London:  a  street 
Enter  two  citizens,  meeting, 
ist  Cit.  Neighbour,  well  met:  whither  away  so 
fast? 

2nd  Cit.  I  promise  you,  I  scarcely  know  myself: 
Hear  you  the  news  abroad? 

I  St  Cit.  Ay,  that  the  King  is  dead . 

2nd  Cit.  Bad  news,  by’r  lady;  seldom  comes 
the  better: 

I  fear,  I  fear  ’twill  prove  a  troublous  world. 

Enter  third  citizen. 

^rd  Cit.  Neighbours,  God  speed! 
ist  Cit.  Give  you  good  morrow,  sir. 

^rd  Cit.  Doth  this  news  hold  of  good  King 
Edward’s  death? 

2nd  Cit.  Ay,  sir,  it  is  too  true;  God  help  the 
while! 

^rd  Cit.  Then,  masters,  look  to  see  a  troublous 
world. 

ist  Cit.  No,  no;  by  God’s  good  grace  his  son 
shall  reign.  10 

3rd  CilWoc  to  that  land  that’s  govern’d  by  a 
child! 

2nd  Cit.  In  him  there  is  a  hope  of  government. 
That  in  his  nonage  council  under  him. 

And  in  his  full  and  ripen’d  years  himself. 

No  doubt,  shall  then  and  till  then  govern  well. 

ist  Cit.  So  stood  the  state  when  Henry  the  Sixth 
Was  crown’d  in  Paris  but  at  nine  months  old. 


121 

3rd  Cit.  Stood  the  state  so?  No,  no,  good 
friends,  God  wot; 

For  then  this  land  was  famously  enrich’d 
With  politic  grave  counsel;  then  the  King  20 
Had  virtuous  uncles  to  protect  his  grace. 
ist  Cit.  Why,  so  hath  this,  both  by  the  father  and 
mother. 

3rd  Cit.  Better  it  were  they  all  came  by  the 
father. 

Or  by  the  father  there  were  none  at  all; 

For  emulation  now,  who  shall  be  nearest. 

Will  touch  us  all  too  near,  if  God  prevent  not. 

O,  full  of  danger  is  the  Duke  of  Gloucester! 

And  the  Queen’s  sons  and  brothers  haught  and 
proud : 

And  were  they  to  be  ruled,  and  not  to  rule. 

This  sickly  land  might  solace  as  before.  30 
ist  Cit.  Come,  come,  we  fear  the  worst;  all  shall 
be  well. 

3rd  Cit.  When  clouds  appear,  wise  men  put  on 
their  cloaks; 

When  great  leaves  fall,  the  winter  is  at  hand; 
When  the  sun  sets,  who  doth  not  look  for  night? 
Untimely  storms  make  men  expect  a  dearth. 

All  may  be  well;  but,  if  God  sort  it  so, 

’Tis  more  than  we  deserve,  or  I  expect. 

2nd  Cit.  Truly,  the  souls  of  men  are  full  of 
dread: 

Ye  cannot  reason  almost  with  a  man 
That  looks  not  heavily  and  full  of  fear.  40 

3rd  Cit.  Before  the  times  of  change,  still  is  it  so: 
By  a  divine  instinct  men’s  minds  mistrust 
Ensuing  dangers;  as,  by  proof,  we  see 
The  waters  swell  before  a  boisterous  storm. 

But  leave  it  all  to  God.  Whither  away? 

2nd  Cit.  Marry,  we  were  sent  for  to  the  justices. 
3rd  Cit.  And  so  was  I :  I’ll  bear  you  company. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  London:  the  palace 
Enter  the  archbishop  of  york,  the  young  duke  of 

YORK,  QUEEN  ELIZABETH,  and  the  DUCHESS  OF 
YORK. 

Arch.  Last  night,  I  hear,  they  lay  at  North¬ 
ampton; 

At  Stony-Stratford  will  they  be  to-night: 
To-morrow,  or  next  day,  they  will  be  here. 

Duch.  I  long  with  all  my  heart  to  see  the  Prince: 
I  hope  he  is  much  grown  since  last  I  saw  him. 

Q.  Eliz.  But  I  hear,  no;  they  say  my  son  of  York 
Hath  almost  overta’en  him  in  his  growth. 

York.  Ay,  mother;  but  I  would  not  have  it  so. 
Dwr/z.  Why,  my  young  cousin,  it  is  good  to 
grow. 

York.  Grandam,  one  night,  as  we  did  sit  at 
supper,  to 


KING  RICHARD  Ill 


122 


ACT  III 


KING  RICHARD  III 


My  uncle  Rivers  talk’d  how  I  did  grow 
More  than  my  brother:  “Ay,”  quoth  my  uncle 
Gloucester, 

“Small  herbs  have  grace,  great  weeds  do  grow 
apace”: 

And  since,  methinks,  I  would  not  grow  so  fast. 
Because  sweet  flowers  are  slow  and  weeds 
make  haste. 

Duch,  Good  faith,  good  faith,  the  saying  did 
not  hold 

In  him  that  did  object  the  same  to  thee: 

He  was  the  wretched’ st  thing  when  he  was  young. 
So  long  a-growing  and  so  leisurely 
That,  if  this  rule  were  true,  he  should  be  gracious. 
ArchWhy^  madam,  so,  no  doubt,  he  is.  21 

Duch.  I  hope  he  is;  but  yet  let  mothers  doubt. 
York.  Now,  by  my  troth,  if  I  had  been 
remember’d, 

I  could  have  given  my  uncle’s  Grace  a  flout, 

To  touch  his  growth  nearer  than  he  touch’d 
mine. 

Duch.  How,  my  pretty  York.^  I  pray  thee,  let 
me  hear  it. 

York.  Marry,  they  say  my  uncle  grew  so  fast 
That  he  could  gnaw  a  crust  at  two  hours  old : 
’Twas  full  two  years  ere  I  could  get  a  tooth. 
Grandam,  this  would  havp  been  a  biting  jest.  50 
Duch.  I  pray  thee,  pretty  York,  who  told  thee 
this? 

York.  Grandam,  his  nurse. 

Duch.  His  nurse!  why,  she  was  dead  ere  thou 
wert  born. 

York.  If ’twere  not  she,  I  cannot  tell  who  told 
me. 

Q.  Eliz.  A  parlous  boy:  go  to,  you  are  too 
shrewd. 

Arch.  Good  madam,  be  not  angry  with  the  child. 
Q.  Eliz.  Pitchers  have  ears. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Arch.  Here  comes  a  messenger.  What  news? 
Mess.  Such  news,  my  lord,  as  grieves  me  to 
unfold. 

Q.  Eliz.  How  fares  the  Prince? 

Mess.  Well,  madam,  and  in  health.  40 

Duch Whzt  is  thy  news  then? 

Mess.  Lord  Rivers  and  Lord  Grey  are  sent  to 
Pomfret, 

With  them  Sir  Thomas  Vaughan,  prisoners. 
Duch.Who  hath  committed  them? 

Mess.  The  mighty  dukes 

Gloucester  and  Buckingham. 

Q.  Eliz.  For  what  offence? 

Mess.  The  sum  of  all  I  can,  I  have  disclosed; 
Why  or  for  what  these  nobles  were  committed 
Is  all  unknown  to  me,  my  gracious  lady. 


Q.  Eliz.  Ay  me,  I  see  the  downfall  of  our 
house! 

The  tiger  now  hath  seized  the  gentle  hind;  50 

Insulting  tyranny  begins  to  jet 

Upon  the  innocent  and  aweless  throne: 

Welcome,  destruction,  death,  and  massacre! 

I  see,  as  in  a  map,  the  end  of  all. 

Duch.  Accursed  and  unquiet  wrangling  days. 
How  many  of  you  have  mine  eyes  beheld ! 

My  husband  lost  his  life  to  get  the  crown; 

And  often  up  and  down  my  sons  were  toss’d. 

For  me  to  joy  and  weep  their  gain  and  loss: 

And  being  seated,  and  domestic  broils  60 

Clean  over-blown,  themselves,  the  conquerors 
Make  war  upon  themselves;  blood  against  blood. 
Self  against  self:  O,  preposterous 
And  frantic  outrage,  end  thy  damned  spleen; 

Or  let  me  die,  to  look  on  death  no  more! 

Q.  Eliz.  Come,  come,  my  boy;  we  will  to 
sanctuary. 

Madam,  farewell. 

Duch.  I’ll  go  along  with  you. 

Q.  Eliz.  You  have  no  cause. 

Arch.  My  gracious  lady,  go; 

And  thither  bear  your  treasure  and  your  goods. 
For  my  part.  I’ll  resign  unto  your  Grace  70 
The  seal  I  keep:  and  so  betide  to  me 
As  well  I  tender  you  and  all  of  yours! 

Come,  I’ll  conduct  you  to  the  sanctuary. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  London:  a  street 

The  trumpets  sound.  Enter  the  young  prince,  the 
Dukes  of  GLOUCESTER  and  Buckingham,  car¬ 
dinal  BOURCHiER,  catesby,  and  others. 

Buck.  Welcome,  sweet  prince,  to  London  to 
your  chamber. 

Glou.  Welcome,  dear  cousin,  my  thoughts’ 
sovereign: 

The  weary  way  hath  made  you  melancholy. 

Prince.  No,  uncle;  but  our  crosses  on  the  way 
Have  made  it  tedious,  wearisome,  and  heavy: 

I  want  more  uncles  here  to  welcome  me. 

Glou.  Sweet  prince,  the  untainted  virtue  of 
your  years 

Hath  not  yet  dived  into  the  world’s  deceit: 

Nor  more  can  you  distinguish  of  a  man 
Than  of  his  outward  show;  which,  God  he  knows. 
Seldom  or  never  jumpeth  with  the  heart.  it 

Those  uncles  which  you  want  were  dangerous; 
Your  Grace  attended  to  their  sugar’d  words. 

But  look’d  not  on  the  poison  of  their  hearts: 

God  keep  you  from  them,  and  from  such  false 
friends! 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Prince.  God  keep  me  from  false  friends!  but 
they  were  none. 

Glou.  My  lord,  the  Mayor  of  London  comes  to 
greet  you. 

Enter  the  lord  mayor,  and  his  train. 

May.  God  bless  your  Grace  with  health  and 
happy  days! 

Prince.  I  thank  you,  good  my  lord;  and  thank 
you  all. 

I  thought  my  mother,  and  my  brother  York,  20 
Would  long  ere  this  have  met  us  on  the  way: 

Fie,  what  a  slug  is  Hastings,  that  he  comes  not 
To  tell  us  whether  they  will  come  or  no! 

Enter  lord  Hastings. 

Buck.  And,  in  good  time,  here  comes  the 
sv/eating  lord. 

.Welcome,  my  lord:  what,  will  our 
mother  come? 

Hast.  On  what  occasion,  God  he  knows,  not  I, 
The  Queen  your  mother,  and  your  brother  York, 
Have  taken  sanctuary:  the  tender  prince 
Would  fain  have  come  with  me  to  meet  your 
Grace, 

But  by  his  mother  was  perforce  withheld.  50 
Buck.  Fie,  what  an  indirect  and  peevish  course 
Is  this  of  hers!  Lord  Cardinal,  will  your  Grace 
Persuade  the  Queen  to  send  the  Duke  of  York 
Unto  his  princely  brother  presently? 

If  she  deny.  Lord  Hastings,  go  with  him. 

And  from  her  jealous  arms  pluck  him  perforce. 
Card.  My  Lord  of  Buckingham,  if  my  weak 
oratory 

Can  from  his  mother  win  the  Duke  of  York, 

Anon  expect  him  here;  but  if  she  be  obdurate 
To  mild  entreaties,  God  in  heaven  forbid  40 
We  should  infringe  the  holy  privilege 
Of  blessed  sanctuary!  not  for  all  this  land 
Would  I  be  guilty  of  so  deep  a  sin. 

Buck.  You  are  too  senseless-obstinate,  my 
lord. 

Too  ceremonious  and  traditional: 

Weigh  it  but  with  the  grossness  of  his  age. 

You  break  not  sanctuary  in  seizing  him. 

The  benefit  thereof  is  always  granted 
To  those  whose  dealings  have  deserved  the  place, 
And  those  who  have  the  wit  to  claim  the  place: 
This  prince  hath  neither  claim’d  it  nor  deserved  it; 
And  therefore,  in  mine  opinion,  cannot  have  it: 
Then,  taking  him  from  thence  that  is  not  there. 
You  break  no  privilege  nor  charter  there. 

Oft  have  I  heard  of  sanctuary  men; 

But  sanctuary  children  ne’er  till  now. 

Card.  My  lord,  you  shall  o’er-rule  my  mind 
for  once. 


Come  on.  Lord  Hastings,  will  you  go  with  me? 
Hast.  I  go,  my  lord. 

Prince.  Good  lords,  make  all  the  speedy  haste 
ybu  may. 

[Exeunt  cardinal  Hastings. 
Say,  uncle  Gloucester,  if  our  brotiier  come. 
Where  shall  we  sojourn  till  our  coronation? 

G/ox/.Where  it  seems  best  unto  your  royal  self. 

If  I  may  counsel  you,  some  day  or  two 
Your  highness  shall  repose  you  at  the  Tower: 
Then  where  you  please,  and  shall  be  thought 
most  fit 

For  your  best  health  and  recreation. 

Prince.  I  do  not  like  the  Tower,  of  any  place. 

Did  Julius  Cassar  build  that  place,,  my  lord? 

Buck.  He  did,  my  gracious  lord,  begin  that 
place;  70 

Which,  since,  succeeding  ages  have  re-edified. 
Prince.  Is  it  upon  record,  or  else  reported 
Successively  from  age  to  age,  he  built  it? 

Buck.  Upon  record,  my  gracious  lord. 

Prince.  But  say,  my  lord,  it  were  not  register’d, 
Methinks  the  truth  should  live  from  age  to  age, 
As  ’twere  retail’d  to  all  posterity. 

Even  to  the  general  all-ending  day. 

Glou.  [Aside^  So  wise  so  young,  they  say,  do 
never  live  long. 

PnW.What  say  you,  uncle?  80 

Glou.  I  say,  without  characters,  fame  lives  long. 
[Aside^  Thus,  like  the  formal  vice.  Iniquity, 

I  moralize  two  meanings  in  one  word. 

Prince.  That  Julius  Caesar  was  a  famous  man; 
With  what  his  valour  did  enrich  his  wit. 

His  wit  set  down  to  make  his  valour  live: 

Death  makes  no  conquest  of  this  conqueror; 

For  now  he  lives  in  fame,  though  not  in  life. 

I’ll  tell  you  what,  my  cousin  Buckingham — 
Bwr^.What,  my  g  acious  lord?  ^0 

Prince.  An  if  I  live  until  I  be  a  man. 

I’ll  win  our  ancient  right  in  France  again. 

Or  die  a  soldier,  as  I  lived  a  king. 

Glou.  [Aside]  Short  summers  lightly  have  a 
forward  spring. 

Enter  young  york,  Hastings,  and  cardinal. 

Buck.  Now,  in  good  time,  here  comes  the 
Duke  of  York. 

Prince.  Richard  of  York!  how  fares  our  loving 
brother? 

York.  Well,  my  dread  lord;  so  must  I  call  you 
now. 

Prince.  Ay,  brother,  to  our  grief,  as  it  is  yours: 
Too  late  he  died  that  might  have  kept  that  title 
Which  by  his  death  hath  lost  much  majesty,  too 
Glou.  How  fares  our  cousin,  noble  Lord  of 
York? 


ACT  III 


KING  RICHARD  III 


York.  I  thank  you,  gentle  uncle.  O,  my  lord, 

You  said  that  idle  weeds  are  fast  in  growth: 

The  prince  my  brother  hath  outgrown  me  far. 
Glou.  He  hath,  my  lord. 

York.  And  therefore  is  he  idle? 

Glou.  O,  my  fair  cousin,  I  must  not  say  so. 

York.  Then  he  is  more  beholding  to  you  than  I. 
Glou.  He  may  command  me  as  my  sovereign; 
But  you  have  power  in  me  as  in  a  kinsman. 

York.  I  pray  you,  uncle,  give  me  this  dagger. 
Glou.  My  dagger,  little  cousin?  with  all  my 
heart.  in 

Prince.  A  beggar,  brother? 

York.  Of  my  kind  uncle,  that  I  know  will  give; 
And  being  but  a  toy,  which  is  no  grief  to  give. 
Glou.  A  greater  gift  than  that  I’ll  give  my 
cousin. 

York.  A  greater  gift!  O,  that’s  the  sword  to  it. 
Glou.  Ay,  gentle  cousin,  were  it  light  enough. 
York.  O,  then,  I  see,  you  will  part  but  with 
light  gifts; 

In  weightier  things  you’ll  say  a  beggar  nay. 

Glou.  It  is  too  heavy  for  your  Grace  to  wear. 
York.  I  weigh  it  lightly,  were  it  heavier.  121 
Glou.  What,  would  you  have  my  weapon, 
little  lord? 

York.  I  would,  that  I  might  thank  you  as  you 
call  me. 

Glou.  How? 

York.  Little. 

Prince.  My  Lord  of  York  will  still  be  cross  in 
talk: 

Uncle,  your  Grace  knows  how  to  bear  with  him. 
York.  You  mean,  to  bear  me,  not  to  bear  with 
me: 

Uncle,  my  brother  mocks  both  you  and  me; 
Because  that  I  am  little,  like  an  ape,  /50 

He  thinks  that  you  should  bear  me  on  your 
shoulders. 

Buck.  [Aside  to  Hastings]  With  what  a  sharp- 
provided  wit  he  reasons! 

To  mitigate  the  scorn  he  gives  his  uncle, 

He  prettily  and  aptly  taunts  himself: 

So  cunning  and  so  young  is  wonderful. 

Glou.  My  lord,  will’t  please  you  pass  along? 
Myself  and  my  good  cousin  Buckingham 
Will  to  your  mother,  to  entreat  of  her 
To  meet  you  at  the  Tower  and  welcome  you. 
York AVhzt,  will  you  go  unto  the  Tower,  my 
lord?  /40 

Prince.  My  Lord  Protector  needs  will  have  it  so. 
York.  I  shall  not  sleep  in  quiet  at  the  Tower. 
Glou.  Why,  what  should  you  fear? 

York.  Marry,  my  uncle  Clarence’  angry  ghost: 
My  grandam  told  me  he  was  murder’d  there. 
Prince.  I  fear  no  uncles  dead. 


Glou.  Nor  none  that  live,  I  hope. 

Prince.  An  if  they  live,  I  hope  I  need  not  fear. 

But  come,  my  lord;  and  with  a  heavy  heart. 
Thinking  on  them,  go  I  unto  the  Tower.  /50 
[A  Sennet.  Exeunt  all  but  Gloucester, 

BUCKINGHAM  and  CATESBY. 

Buck.  Think  you,  my  lord,  this  little  prating 
York 

Was  not  incensed  by  his  subtle  mother 
To  taunt  and  scorn  you  thus  opprobriously? 

Glou.  No  doubt,  no  doubt:  O,  ’tis  a  parlous  boy; 
Bold,  quick,  ingenious,  forward,  capable: 

He  is  all  the  mother’s,  from  the  top  to  toe. 

Buck.  Well,  let  them  rest.  Come  hither,  Cates  by. 
Thou  art  sworn  as  deeply  to  effect  what  we 
intend 

As  closely  to  conceal  what  we  impart: 

Thou  know’st  our  reasons  urged  upon  the  way; 
What  think’st  thou?  is  it  not  an  easy  matter  161 
To  make  William  Lord  Hastings  of  our  mind 
For  the  instalment  of  this  noble  duke 
In  the  seat  royal  of  this  famous  isle? 

Cate.  He  for  his  father’s  sake  so  loves  the 
Prince 

That  he  will  not  be  won  to  aught  against  him. 
Buck.  What  think’st  thou,  then,  of  Stanley? 
what  will  he? 

Cate.  He  will  do  all  in  all  as  Hastings  doth. 
BuckWdl,  then,  no  more  but  this:  go,  gentle 
Cates  by, 

And,  as  it  were  far  off,  sound  thou  Lord  Hastings, 
How  he  doth  stand  affected  to  our  purpose;  lyi 
And  summon  him  to-morrow  to  the  Tower, 

To  sit  about  the  coronation. 

If  thou  dost  find  him  tractable  to  us. 

Encourage  him  and  show  him  all  our  reasons: 

If  he  be  leaden,  icy-cold,  unwilling, 

Be  thou  so  too;  and  so  break  off  your  talk. 

And  give  us  notice  of  his  inclination: 

For  we  to-morrow  hold  divided  councils, 
Wherein  thyself  shalt  highly  be  employ’d.  180 
Glou.  Commend  me  to  Lord  William:  tell  him, 
Catesby, 

His  ancient  knot  of  dangerous  adversaries 
To-morrow  are  let  blood  at  Pomfret-castle; 

And  bid  my  friend,  for  joy  of  this  good  news, 
Give  Mistress  Shore  one  gentle  kiss  the  more. 
Buck.  Good  Catesby,  go,  effect  this  business 
soundly. 

Cate.  My  good  lords  both,  with  all  the  heed  I 
may. 

Glou.  Shall  we  hear  from  you,  Catesby,  ere 
we  sleep? 

Cate.  You  shall,  my  lord. 

Glou.  At  Crosby  Place,  there  shall  you  find  us 

both.  CATESBY.  i^n 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Buck.  Now,  my  lord,  what  shall  we  do,  if  we 
perceive 

Lord  Hastings  will  not  yield  to  our  complots? 
Glou.  Chop  off  his  head,  man;  somewhat  we 
will  do: 

And,  look,  when  I  am  king,  claim  thou  of  me 
The  earldom  of  Hereford,  and  the  moveables 
Whereof  the  King  my  brother  stood  possess’d. 
Buck.  I’ll  claim  that  promise  at  your  Grace’s 
hands. 

Glou.  And  look  to  have  it  yielded  with  all 
willingness. 

Come,  let  us  sup  betimes,  that  afterwards 
We  may  digest  our  complots  in  some  form.  200 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Before  Lord  Hastings'  house 
Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  What,  ho!  my  lord! 

Hast.  [Within^  Who  knocks  at  the  door? 

Mess.  A  messenger  from  the  Lord  Stanley. 

Enter  lord  Hastings. 

Hast.  What  is’t  o’clock? 

Aiess.  Upon  the  stroke  of  four. 

Hast.  Cannot  thy  master  sleep  these  tedious 
nights? 

Mess.  So  it  should  seem  by  that  I  have  to  say. 
First,  he  commends  him  to  your  noble  lordship. 
Hast.  And  then? 

Mess.  And  then  he  sends  you  word  10 

He  dreamt  to-night  the  boar  had  razed  his  helm: 
Besides,  he  says  there  are  two  councils  held; 

And  that  may  be  determined  at  the  one 
Which  may  make  you  and  him  to  rue  at  the 
other. 

Therefore  he  sends  to  know  your  lordship’s 
pleasure. 

If  presently  you  will  take  horse  with  him, 

And  with  all  speed  post  with  him  toward  the 
north 

To  shun  the  danger  that  his  soul  divines. 

Hast.  Go,  fellow,  go,  return  unto  thy  lord; 

Bid  him  not  fear  the  separated  councils :  20 

His  honour  and  myself  are  at  the  one. 

And  at  the  other  is  my  servant  Catesby; 

Where  nothing  can  proceed  that  toucheth  us 
Whereof  I  shall  not  have  intelligence. 

Tell  him  his  fears  are  shallow,  wanting  instance: 
And  for  his  dreams,  I  wonder  he  is  so  fond 
To  trust  the  mockery  of  unquiet  slumbers: 

To  fly  the  boar  before  the  boar  pursues 
Were  to  incense  the  boar  to  follow  us 
And  make  pursuit  where  he  did  mean  no  chase. 
Go,  bid  thy  master  rise  and  come  to  me;  5/ 
And  we  will  both  together  to  the  Tower, 


Where,  he  shall  see,  the  boar  will  use  us  kindly. 
Mess.  My  gracious  lord.  I’ll  tell  him  what 
you  say.  [Exit, 

Enter  CATESBY. 

Cate.  Many  good  morrows  to  my  noble  lord! 
Hast.  Good  morrow,  Catesby;  you  are  early 
stirring: 

What  news,  what  news,  in  this  our  tottering 
state? 

Cate.  It  is  a  reeling  world,  indeed,  my  lord; 

And  I  believe  ’twill  never  stand  upright 
Till  Richard  wear  the  garland  of  the  realm.  ^0 

Hast.  How!  wear  the  garland!  dost  thou  mean 
the  crown? 

Cate.  Ay,  my  good  lord. 

Hast.  I’ll  have  this  crown  of  mine  cut  from  my 
shoulders 

Ere  I  will  see  the  crown  so  foul  misplaced. 

But  canst  thou  guess  that  he  doth  aim  at  it? 

Cate.  Ay,  on  my  life;  and  hopes  to  find  you 
forward 

Upon  his  party  for  the  gain  thereof: 

And  thereupon  he  sends  you  this  good  news. 

That  this  same  very  day  your  enemies, 

The  kindred  of  the  Queen,  must  die  at  Pomfret. 
Hast.  Indeed,  I  am  no  mourner  for  that  news, 
Because  they  have  been  still  mine  enemies: 

But,  that  I’ll  give  my  voice  on  Richard’s  side. 

To  bar  my  master’s  heirs  in  true  descent, 

God  knows  I  will  not  do  it,  to  the  death. 

Cate.  God  keep  your  lordship  in  that  gracious 
mind! 

Hast.  But  I  shall  laugh  at  this  a  twelve-month 
hence. 

That  they  who  brought  me  in  my  master’s  hate, 

I  live  to  look  upon  their  tragedy. 

I  tell  thee,  Catesby —  60 

Cate.  What,  my  lord? 

Hast.  Ere  a  fortnight  make  me  elder. 

I’ll  send  some  packing  that  yet  think  not  on  it. 

Cate.  ’Tis  a  vile  thing  to  die,  my  gracious  lord, 
When  men  are  unprepared  and  look  not  for  it. 
Hast.  O  monstrous,  monstrous!  and  so  falls 
it  out 

With  Rivers,  Vaughan,  Grey:  and  so  ’twill  do 
With  some  men  else,  who  think  themselves  as 
safe 

As  thou  and  I  ;  who,  as  thou  know’st,  are  dear 
To  princely  Richard  and  to  Buckingham.  70 
Cate.  The  Princes  both  make  high  account  of 
you; 

[Aside]  For  they  account  his  head  upon  the 
bridge. 

Hast.  I  know  they  do;  and  1  have  well  deserved 
It. 


126 


ACT  III 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Enter  lord  Stanley. 

Come  on,  come  on;  where  is  your  boar-spear, 
man? 

Fear  you  the  boar,  and  go  so  unprovided? 

Stan.  My  lord,  good  morrow;  good  morrow, 
Catesby: 

You  may  jest  on,  but,  by  the  holy  rood, 

I  do  not  like  these  several  councils,  I. 

Hast.  My  lord, 

I  hold  my  life  as  dear  as  you  do  yours;  8o 

And  never  in  my  life,  I  do  protest, 

W as  it  more  precious  to  me  than  ’tis  now: 

Think  you,  but  that  I  know  our  state  secure, 

I  would  be  so  triumphant  as  I  am? 

Stan.  The  lords  at  Pomfret,  when  they  rode 
from  London, 

Were  jocund,  and  supposed  their  state  was 
sure. 

And  they  indeed  had  no  cause  to  mistrust; 

But  yet,  you  see,  how  soon  the  day  o’ercast. 

This  sudden  stab  of  rancour  I  misdoubt: 

Pray  God,  I  say,  I  prove  a  needless  coward!  po 
What,  shall  we  toward  the  Tower?  the  day  is 
spent. 

Hast.  Come,  come,  have  with  you.  Wot  you 
what,  my  lord? 

To-day  the  lords  you  talk  of  are  beheaded. 

Stan.  They,  for  their  truth,  might  better  wear 
their  heads 

Than  some  that  have  accused  them  wear  their 
hats. 

But,  come,  my  lord,  let  us  away. 

Enter  a  pursuivant. 

Hast.  Go  on  before;  I’ll  talk  with  this  good 
fellow.  [Exeunt  Stanley  and  catesby. 

How  now,  sirrah!  how  goes  the  world  with  thee? 
Furs.  The  better  that  your  lordship  please 
to  ask. 

Hast.  I  tell  thee,  man,  ‘tis  better  with  me  now 
Than  when  I  met  thee  last  where  now  we  meet: 
Then  was  I  going  prisoner  to  the  Tower, 

By  the  suggestion  of  the  Queen’s  allies; 

But  now,  I  tell  thee — keep  it  to  thyself — 

This  day  those  enemies  are  put  to  death. 

And  I  in  better  state  than  e’er  I  was. 

Purs.  God  hold  it,  to  your  honour’s  good 
content! 

Hast.  Gramercy,  fellow:  there,  drink  that  for 
me.  [Throivs  him  his  purse. ^ 

Purs.  God  save  your  lordship!  [Exit. 

Enter  a  VKiRST . 

Priest.  Well  met,  my  lord;  I  am  glad  to  see 
your  honour.  no 


Hast.  I  thank  thee,  good  Sir  John,  with  all  my 
heart. 

I  am  in  your  debt  for  your  last  exercise; 

Come  the  next  Sabbath,  and  1  will  content  you. 
He  'whispers  in  his  ear. 

Enter  Buckingham. 

Buck.  What,  talking  with  a  priest,  Lord 
Chamberlain? 

Your  friends  at  Pomfret,  they  do  need  the 
priest; 

Your  honour  hath  no  shriving  work  in  hand. 

Hast.  Good  faith,  and  when  I  met  this  holy  man. 
Those  men  you  talk  of  came  into  my  mind. 

What,  go  you  toward  the  Tower? 

Buck.  I  do,  my  lord;  but  long  I  shall  not  stay: 

I  shall  return  before  your  lordship  thence.  121 
Hast.  ’Tis  like  enough,  for  I  stay  dinner  there. 
Buck.  [Aside]  And  supper  too,  although  thou 
know’st  it  not. 

Come,  will  you  go? 

Hast.  I’ll  wait  upon  your  lordship.  [Exeunt. 
Scene  hi.  Pomfret  Castle 

Enter  sir  richard  ratcliff,  'with  halberds.,  carry¬ 
ing  RIVERS,  GREY,  and  VAUGHAN  to  death. 

Rat.  Come,  bring  forth  the  prisoners. 

Riv.  Sir  Richard  Ratcliff,  let  me  tell  thee  this: 
To-day  shalt  thou  behold  a  subject  die 
For  truth,  for  duty,  and  for  loyalty. 

Grey.  God  keep  the  Prince  from  all  the  pack 
of  you! 

A  knot  you  are  of  damned  blood-suckers. 

Vaug.  You  live  that  shall  cry  woe  for  this 
hereafter. 

Rat.  Dispatch;  the  limit  of  your  lives  is  out. 

Riv.  O  Pomfret,  Pomfret !0  thou  bloody 
prison, 

Fatal  and  ominous  to  noble  peers!  10 

Within  the  guilty  closure  of  thy  walls 
Richard  the  Second  here  was  hack’d  to  death; 
And,  for  more  slander  to  thy  dismal  seat. 

We  give  thee  up  our  guiltless  blood  to  drink. 
Grey.  Now  Margaret’s  curse  is  fall’n  upon  our 
heads. 

For  standing  by  when  Richard  stabb’d  her  son. 
Riv.  Then  cursed  she  Hastings,  then  cursed 
she  Buckingham, 

Then  cursed  she  Richard.  O,  remember,  God, 

To  hear  her  prayers  for  them,  as  now  for  us! 

And  for  my  sister  and  her  princely  sons,  20 
Be  satisfied,  dear  God,  with  our  true  blood, 
Which,  as  thou  know’st,  unjustly  must  be  spilt. 
Rat.  Make  haste;  the  hour  of  death  is  expiate. 
Riv.  Come,  Grey,  come,  Vaughan,  let  us  all 
embrace; 


SCENE  in 


127 


KING  RICHARD  III 


And  take  our  leave,  until  we  meet  in  heaven. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  The  Tower  of  London 
Enter  Buckingham,  Stanley,  Hastings,  the  bish¬ 
op  OF  ELY,  RATCLIFF,  LOVEL,  with  Others,  and 
take  their  seats  at  a  table. 

Hast.  My  lords,  at  once:  the  cause  why  we  are 
met 

Is  to  determine  of  the  coronation. 

In  God’s  name,  speak:  when  is  the  royal  day? 
Buck.  Are  all  things  fitting  for  that  royal  time? 
Stan.  It  is,  and  wants  but  nomination. 

Ely.  To-morrow,  then,  I  judge  a  happy  day. 
Buck.  Who  knows  the  Lord  Protector’s  mind 
herein? 

Who  is  most  inward  with  the  noble  Duke? 

Ely.  Your  Grace,  we  think,  should  soonest 
know  his  mind. 

Buck.  Who,  I,  my  lord!  we  know  each  other’s 
faces,  10 

But  for  our  hearts,  he  knows  no  more  of  mine, 
Than  I  of  yours; 

Nor  I  no  more  of  his,  than  you  of  mine. 

Lord  Hastings,  you  and  he  are  near  in  love. 

Hast.  I  thank  his  Grace,  I  know  he  loves  me 
well; 

But,  for  his  purpose  in  the  coronation, 

I  have  not  sounded  him,  nor  he  deliver’d 
His  gracious  pleasure  any  way  therein: 

But  you,  my  noble  lords,  may  name  the  time; 

And  in  the  Duke’s  behalf  I’ll  give  my  voice,  20 

Which,  I  presume,  he’ll  take  in  gentle  part. 

Enter  Gloucester. 

Ely.  Now  in  good  time,  here  comes  the  Duke 
himself. 

Glou.  My  noble  lords  and  cousins  all,  good 
morrow. 

I  have  been  long  a  sleeper;  but,  I  hope. 

My  absence  doth  neglect  no  great  designs 
Which  by  my  presence  might  have  been 
concluded. 

Buck.  Had  not  you  come  upon  your  cue,  my 
lord, 

William  Lord  Hastings  had  pronounced  your 
part — 

I  mean,  your  voice — for  crowning  of  the  King. 
Glou.  Than  my  Lord  Hastings  no  man  might 
beholder;  50 

His  lordship  knows  me  well,  and  loves  me  well. 
Hast.  I  thank  your  Grace. 

Glou.  My  lord  of  Ely! 

Ely.  My  lord? 

Glou.  When  I  was  last  in  Holborn, 

I  saw  good  strawberries  in  your  garden  there: 


I  do  beseech  you  send  for  some  of  them. 

Ely.  Marry,  and  will,  my  lord,  with  all  my 
heart.  [Exit. 

Glou.  Cousin  of  Buckingham,  a  word  with  you. 
Drawing  him  aside. 

Catesby  hath  sounded  Hastings  in  our  business. 
And  finds  the  testy  gentleman  so  hot. 

As  he  will  lose  his  head  ere  give  consent  40 
His  master’s  son,  as  worshipful  he  terms  it. 

Shall  lose  the  royalty  of  England’s  throne. 

Buck.  Withdraw  you  hence,  my  lord.  I’ll 
follow  you. 

[Exit  GLOUCESTER,  BUCKINGHAM  following. 
Stan.  We  have  not  yet  set  down  this  day  of 
triumph. 

To-morrow,  in  mine  opinion,  is  too  sudden; 

For  I  myself  am  not  so  well  provided 
As  else  I  would  be,  were  the  day  prolong’d. 

Re-enter  bishop  of  ely. 

Ely.  Where  is  my  Lord  Protector?  I  have  sent 
for  these  strawberries. 

Hast.  His  Grace  looks  cheerfully  and  smooth 
to-day;  50 

There’s  some  conceit  or  other  likes  him  well, 
When  he  doth  bid  good  morrow  with  such  a 
spirit. 

I  think  there’s  never  a  man  in  Christendom 
That  can  less  hide  his  love  or  hate  than  he; 

For  by  his  face  straight  shall  you  know  his  heart. 
Stan.  What  of  his  heart  perceive  you  in  his  face 
By  any  likelihood  he  show’d  to-day? 

Hast.  Marry,  that  with  no  man  here  he  is 
offended; 

For,  were  he,  he  had  shown  it  in  his  looks. 

Stan.  I  pray  God  he  be  not,  I  say.  60 

Re-enter  Gi^oucESTEK  and  Buckingham. 

Glou.  I  pray  you  all,  tell  me  what  they  deserve 
That  do  conspire  my  death  with  devilish  plots 
Of  damned  witchcraft,  and  that  have  prevail’d 
Upon  my  body  with  their  hellish  charms? 

Hast.  The  tender  love  I  bear  your  Grace,  my 
lord. 

Makes  me  most  forward  in  this  noble  presence 
To  doom  the  offenders,  whatsoever  they  be: 

I  say,  my  lord,  they  have  deserved  death. 

Glou.  Then  be  your  eyes  the  witness  of  this  ill: 
See  how  I  am  bewitch’d;  behold  mine  arm  70 
Is,  like  a  blasted  sapling,  wither’d  up: 

And  this  is  Edward’s  wife,  that  monstrous 
witch. 

Consorted  with  that  harlot  strumpet  Shore, 

That  by  their  witchcraft  thus  have  marked  me. 
Hast.  If  they  have  done  this  thing,  my  gracious 
lord — 


128 


ACT  III 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Glou.  If!  thou  protector  of  this  damned 
strumpet, 

Tellest  thou  me  of  “ifs”?  Thou  art  a  traitor: 

Off  with  his  head!  Now,  by  Saint  Paul  I  swear, 

I  will  not  dine  until  I  see  the  same. 

Lovel  and  Ratcliff,  look  that  it  be  done:  So 

The  rest,  that  love  me,  rise  and  follow  me. 

[Exewitall  but  Hastings,  ratcliff,  attd  lovel. 
Hast.  Woe,  woe  for  England!  not  a  whit  for  me; 
For  I,  too  fond,  might  have  prevented  this. 
Stanley  did  dream  the  boar  did  raze  his  helm; 

But  I  disdain’d  it,  and  did  scorn  to  fly: 

Three  times  to-day  my  foot-cloth  horse  did 
stumble. 

And  startled  when  he  look’d  upon  the  Tower, 

As  loath  to  bear  me  to  the  slaughter-house. 

O,  now  I  want  the  priest  that  spake  to  me: 

I  now  repent  I  told  the  pursuivant,  po 

As  ’twere  triumphing  at  mine  enemies. 

How  they  at  Pomfret  bloodily  were  butcher’d. 
And  I  myself  secure  in  grace  and  favour. 

O  Margaret,  Margaret,  now  thy  heavy  curse 
Is  lighted  on  poor  Hastings’  wretched  head! 

Rat.  Dispatch,  my  lord;  the  Duke  would  be  at 
dinner: 

Make  a  short  shrift;  he  longs  to  see  your  head. 
Hast.  O  momentary  grace  of  mortal  men. 

Which  we  more  hunt  for  than  the  grace  of  God! 
Who  builds  his  hopes  in  air  of  your  good  looks. 
Lives  like  a  drunken  sailor  on  a  mast,  loi 

Ready,  with  every  nod,  to  tumble  down 
Into  the  fatal  bowels  of  the  deep. 

Lov.  Come,  come,  dispatch;  ’tis  bootless  to 
exclaim. 

Hast.  O  bloody  Richard!  miserable  England! 

I  prophesy  the  fearfull’st  time  to  thee 
That  ever  wretched  age  hath  look’d  upon. 

Come,  lead  me  to  the  block;  bear  him  my  head: 
They  smile  at  me  that  shortly  shall  be  dead. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  The  Tower-walls 
Enter  GLOUCESTER  and  Buckingham,  in  rotten 
armour.,  marvellous  ill-favoured. 

Glou.  Come,  cousin,  canst  thou  quake,  and 
change  thy  colour. 

Murder  thy  breath  in  middle  of  a  word. 

And  then  begin  again,  and  stop  again. 

As  if  thou  wert  distraught  and  mad  with  terror? 

Buck.  Tut,  I  can  counterfeit  the  deep  tragedian; 
Speak  and  look  back,  and  pry  on  every  side. 
Tremble  and  start  at  wagging  of  a  straw. 
Intending  deep  suspicion:  ehastlv  looks 
Are  at  my  service,  like  enforced  smiles; 

And  both  are  ready  in  their  offices,  lo 

At  any  time,  to  grace  my  stratagems. 


But  what,  is  Catesby  gone? 

Glou.  He  is;  and;  see,  he  brings  the  Mayor 
along. 

Enter  the  mayor  and  catesby. 

Buck.  Lord  mayor — 

Glou.  Look  to  the  drawbridge  there! 

Buck.  Hark!  a  drum. 

Glou.  Catesby,  o’erlook  the  walls. 

Buck.  Lord  Mayor,  the  reason  we  have  sent — 
Glou.  Look  back,  defend  thee,  here  are  enemies. 
Buck.  God  and  our  innocency  defend  and 

guard  us!  20 

Glou.  Be  patient,  they  are  friends,  Ratcliff  and 
Lovel. 

Enter  lovel  and  ratcliff,  with  Hastings’  head. 

Lov.  Here  is  the  head  of  that  ignoble  traitor. 
The  dangerous  and  unsuspected  Hastings. 

Glou.  So  dear  I  loved  the  man,  that  I  must 
weep. 

I  took  him  for  the  plainest  harmless  creature 
That  breathed  upon  this  earth  a  Christian; 

Made  him  my  book,  wherein  my  soul  recorded 
The  history  of  all  her  secret  thoughts: 

So  smooth  he  daub’d  his  vice  with  show  of  virtue 
That,  his  apparent  open  guilt  omitted,  50 

I  mean,  his  conversation  with  Shore’s  wife. 

He  lived  from  all  attainder  of  suspect. 

Buck.  Well,  well,  he  was  the  covert’st  shelter’d 
traitor 

That  ever  lived. 

Would  you  imagine,  or  almost  believe, 

Were’t  not  that,  by  great  preservation. 

We  live  to  tell  it  you,  the  subtle  traitor 
This  day  had  plotted,  in  the  council-house 
To  murder  me  and  my  good  Lord  of  Gloucester? 
May.  What,  had  he  so?  40 

Glou.  What,  think  you  we  are  Turks  or  infidels? 
Or  that  we  would,  against  the  form  of  law. 
Proceed  thus  rashly  to  the  villain’s  death. 

But  that  the  extreme  peril  of  the  case. 

The  peace  of  England  and  our  persons ’safety. 
Enforced  us  to  this  execution? 

May.  Now,  fair  befall  you!  he  deserved  his 
death; 

And  you  my  good  lords,  both  have  well  proceeded 
To  warn  false  traitors  from  the  like  attempts. 

I  never  look’d  for  better  at  his  hands  jro 

After  he  once  fell  in  with  Mistress  Shore. 

Glou.  Yet  had  not  we  determined  he  should  die. 
Until  your  lordship  came  to  see  his  death; 

Which  now  the  loving  haste  of  these  our  friends. 
Somewhat  against  our  meaning,  have  prevented: 
Because,  my  lord,  we  would  have  had  you  heard 
The  traitor  speak,  and  timorously  confess 


SCENE  V 


29 


KING  RICHARD  III 


The  manner  and  the  purpose  of  his  treason; 

That  you  might  well  have  signified  the  same 
Unto  the  citizens,  who  haply  may  60 

Misconstrue  us  in  him  and  wail  his  death. 

May.  But,  my  good  lord,  your  Grace’s  word 
shall  serve 

As  well  as  I  had  seen  and  heard  him  speak: 

And  doubt  you  not,  right  noble  princes  both. 

But  I’ll  acquaint  our  duteous  citizens 
With  all  your  just  proceedings  in  this  cause. 

Glou.  And  to  that  end  we  wish’d  your  lordship 
here. 

To  avoid  the  carping  censures  of  the  world. 

Buck.  But  since  you  come  too  late  of  our  intents. 
Yet  witness  what  you  hear  we  did  intend:  70 

And  so,  my  good  Lord  Mayor,  we  bid  farewell. 

[Exit  MAYOR. 

Glou.  Go,  after,  after,  cousin  Buckingham. 

The  Mayor  towards  Guildhall  hies  him  in  all 
post: 

There,  at  your  meet’st  advantage  of  the  time. 
Infer  the  bastardy  of  Edward’s  children: 

Tell  them  how  Edward  put  to  death  a  citizen 
Only  for  saying  he  would  make  his  son 
Heir  to  the  crown;  meaning  indeed  his  house. 
Which,  by  the  sign  thereof,  was  termed  so. 
Moreover,  urge  his  hateful  luxury.  So 

And  bestial  appetite  in  change  of  lust; 

Which  stretched  to  their  servants,  daughters, 
wives. 

Even  where  his  lustful  eye  or  savage  heart. 
Without  control,  listed  to  make  his  prey. 

Nay,  for  a  need,  thus  far  come  near  my  person: 
Tell  them,  when  that  my  mother  went  with  child 
Of  that  unsatiate  Edward,  noble  York 
My  princely  father  then  had  wars  in  France; 

And,  by  just  computation  of  the  time. 

Found  that  the  issue  was  not  his  begot;  510 

Which  well  appeared  in  his  lineaments. 

Being  nothing  like  the  noble  Duke  my  father: 

But  touch  this  sparingly,  as  ’twere  far  off; 
Because  you  know,  my  lord,  my  mother  lives. 

Buck.  Fear  not,  my  lord.  I’ll  play  the  orator 
As  if  the  golden  fee  for  which  I  plead 
Were  for  myself:  and  so,  my  lord,  adieu. 

Glou.  If  you  thrive  well,  bring  them  to 
Baynard’s  Castle; 

Where  you  shall  find  me  well  accompanied 
With  reverend  fathers  and  well-learned  bishops. 
Buck.  I  go;  and  towards  three  or  four  o’clock 
Look  for  the  news  that  the  Guildhall  affords. 

[Exit. 

Glou.  Go,  Lovel,  with  all  speed  to  Doctor 
Shaw; 

[To  CATESBY.]  Go  thou  to  Friar  Penker;  bid 
them  both 


Meet  me  within  this  hour  at  Baynard’s  Castle. 

[Exeunt  all  but  Gloucester. 
Now  will  I  in,  to  take  some  privy  order. 

To  draw  the  brats  of  Clarence  out  of  sight; 

And  to  give  notice  that  no  manner  of  person 
At  any  time  have  recourse  unto  the  princes.  [Exit. 

Scene  vi.  The  same:  a  street 
Enter  a  scrivener,  'with  a  paper  in  his  hand. 
Scriv.  This  is  the  indictment  of  the  good  Lord 
Hastings; 

Which  in  a  set  hand  fairly  is  engross’d 
That  it  may  be  this  day  read  o’er  in  Paul’s. 

And  mark  how  well  the  sequel  hangs  together: 
Eleven  hours  I  spent  to  write  it  over, 

For  yesternight  by  Catesby  was  it  brought  me; 
The  precedent  was  full  as  long  a-doing: 

And  yet  within  these  five  hours  lived  Lord 
Hastings, 

Untainted,  unexamined,  free,  at  liberty. 

Here’s  a  good  world  the  while!  Why  who’s  so 
gross  10 

That  seeth  not  this  palpable  device? 

Yet  who’s  so  blind,  but  says  he  sees  it  not? 

Bad  is  the  world;  and  all  will  come  to  nought 
When  such  bad  dealing  must  be  seen  in  thought. 

[Exit. 

Scene  vii.  Baynard's  Castle 

£72/^r  GLOUCESTER  and  BUCKINGHAM,  at 

several  doors. 

Glou.  How  now,  my  lord,  what  say  the  citizens? 
Buck.  Now,  by  the  holy  mother  of  our  Lord, 
The  citizens  are  mum  and  speak  not  a  word. 

Glou.  Touch’d  you  the  bastardy  of  Edward’s 
children? 

Buck.  I  did;  with  his  contract  with  Lady 
Lucy, 

And  his  contract  by  deputy  in  France; 

The  insatiate  greediness  of  his  desires. 

And  his  enforcement  of  the  city  wives; 

His  tyranny  for  trifles;  his  own  bastardy, 

As  being  got,  your  father  then  in  France,  lo 
And  his  resemblance,  being  not  like  the  duke: 
Withal  I  did  infer  your  lineaments. 

Being  the  right  idea  of  your  father. 

Both  in  your  form  and  nobleness  of  mind; 

Laid  open  all  your  victories  in  Scotland, 

Your  discipline  in  war,  wisdom  in  peace. 

Your  bounty,  virtue,  fair  humility; 

Indeed,  left  nothing  fitting  for  the  purpose 
Untouch’d  or  slightly  handled  in  discourse: 

And  when  mine  oratory  grew  to  an  end,  20 
I  bid  them  that  did  love  their  country’s  good 
Cry  “God  save  Richard,  England’s  royal  king!” 
Glou.  Ah!  and  did  they  so? 


ACT  III 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Buck.  No,  so  God  help  me,  they  spake  not  a 
word; 

But,  like  dumb  statuas  or  breathing  stones. 

Gazed  each  on  other  and  look’d  deadly  pale. 
Which  when  I  saw,  I  reprehended  them; 

And  ask’d  the  Mayor  what  meant  this  wilful 
silence: 

His  answer  was,  the  people  were  not  wont 
To  be  spoke  to  but  by  the  Recorder.  50 

Then  he  was  urged  to  tell  my  tale  again, 

“Thus  saith  the  Duke,  thus  hath  the  Duke 
inferr’d”; 

But  nothing  spake  in  warrant  from  himself. 

When  he  had  done,  some  followers  of  mine  own, 
At  the  lower  end  of  the  hall,  hurl’d  up  their  caps. 
And  some  ten  voices  cried  “God  save  King 
Richard!” 

And  thus  I  took  the  vantage  of  those  few, 
“Thanks,  gentle  citizens  and  friends,”  quoth  I; 
“This  general  applause  and  loving  shout 
Argues  your  wisdoms  and  your  love  to  Richard” : 
And  even  here  brake  off,  and  came  away. 

Glou.  What  tongueless  blocks  were  they! 

would  they  not  speak? 

Buck.  No,  by  my  troth,  my  lord. 

Glou.  Will  not  the  Mayor  then  and  his 
brethren  come? 

Buck.  The  Mayor  is  here  at  hand;  intend 
some  fear; 

Be  not  you  spoke  with  but  by  mighty  suit: 

And  look  you  get  a  prayer-book  in  your  hand 
And  stand  betwixt  two  churchmen,  good  my  lord; 
For  on  that  ground  I’ll  build  a  holy  descant: 

And  be  not  easily  won  to  our  request :  y 0 

Play  the  maid’s  part,  still  answer  nay  and  take  it. 

Glou.  I  go;  and  if  you  plead  as  well  for  them 
As  I  can  say  nay  to  thee  for  myself. 

No  doubt  we’ll  bring  it  to  a  happy  issue. 

Buck.  Go,  go,  up  to  the  leads;  the  lord  Mayor 

knocks.  GLOUCESTER. 

Enter  the  mayor  and  Citizens. 

Welcome,  my  lord:  I  dance  attendance  here; 

I  think  the  Duke  will  not  be  spoke  withal. 

Enter  catesby. 

Here  comes  his  servant:  how  now,  Catesby, 
What  says  he? 

Cate.  My  lord,  he  doth  entreat  your  Grace 
To  visit  him  to-morrow  or  next  day:  60 

He  is  within,  with  two  right  reverend  fathers, 
Divinely  bent  to  meditation; 

And  in  no  worldly  suit  would  he  be  moved 
To  draw  him  from  his  holy  exercise. 

Buck.  Return,  good  Catesby,  to  thy  lord  again; 
Tell  him,  myself,  the  Mayor  and  citizens. 

In  deep  designs  and  matters  of  great  moment. 


No  less  importing  than  our  general  good. 

Are  come  to  have  some  conference  with  his 
Grace. 

Cate.  I’ll  tell  him  what  you  say,  my  lord.  70 

[Exit. 

Buck.  Ah,  ha,  my  lord,  this  prince  is  not  an 
Edward  I 

He  is  not  lolling  on  a  lewd  day-bed. 

But  on  his  knees  at  meditation; 

Not  dallying  with  a  brace  of  courtezans. 

But  meditating  with  two  deep  divines; 

Not  sleeping,  to  engross  his  idle  body. 

But  praying,  to  enrich  his  watchful  soul: 

Happy  were  England,  would  this  gracious  prince 
Take  on  himself  the  sovereignty  thereof: 

But,  sure,  I  fear,  we  shall  ne’er  win  him  to  it.  So 
May.  Marry,  God  forbid  his  Grace  should  say 
us  nay! 

Buck.  I  fear  he  will. 

Re-enter  catesby. 

How  now,  Catesby,  what  says  your  lord? 

Cate.  My  lord, 

He  wonders  to  what  end  you  have  assembled 
Such  troops  of  citizens  to  speak  with  him. 

His  Grace  not  being  warn’d  thereof  before: 

My  lord,  he  fears  you  mean  no  good  to  him. 

Buck.  Sorry  I  am  my  noble  cousin  should 
Suspect  me,  that  I  mean  no  good  to  him: 

By  heaven,  I  come  in  perfect  love  to  him;  po 
And  so  once  more  return  and  tell  his  Grace. 

[Exit  CATESBY. 

When  holy  and  devout  religious  men 

Are  at  their  beads,  ’tis  hard  to  draw  them  thence. 

So  sweet  is  zealous  contemplation. 

GLOUCESTER  aloft,  between  t'wo  bishops. 
CATESBY  returns. 

May.  See,  where  he  stands  between  two 
clergymen! 

Buck.  Two  props  of  virtue  for  a  Christian 
prince. 

To  stay  him  from  the  fall  of  vanity: 

And,  see,  a  book  of  prayer  in  his  hand. 

True  ornaments  to  know  a  holy  man. 

Famous  Plantagenet,  most  gracious  prince,  100 
Lend  favourable  ears  to  our  request; 

And  pardon  us  the  interruption 

Of  thy  devotion  and  right  Christian  zeal. 

Glou.  My  lord,  there  needs  no  such  apology: 

I  rather  do  beseech  you  pardon  me. 

Who,  earnest  in  the  service  of  my  God, 

Neglect  the  visitation  of  my  friends. 

But,  leaving  this,  what  is  your  Grace’s  pleasure? 
Buck  Even  that,  I  hope,  which  pleaseth  God 
above. 


SCENE  VII 


KING  RICHARD  III 


And  all  good  men  of  this  ungovern’d  isle.  no 
Glou.  I  do  suspect  I  have  done  some  offence 
That  seems  disgracious  in  the  city’s  eyes, 

And  that  you  come  to  reprehend  my  ignorance. 
Buck.  You  have,  my  lord:  would  it  might 
please  your  Grace, 

At  our  entreaties,  to  amend  that  fault! 

Glou.  Else  wherefore  breathe  I  in  a  Christian 
land? 

Buck.  Then  know,  it  is  your  fault  that  you 
resign 

The  supreme  seat,  the  throne  majestical, 

The  scepter ’d  office  of  your  ancestors, 

Your  state  of  fortune  and  your  due  of  birth,  120 

The  lineal  glory  of  your  royal  house, 

To  the  corruption  of  a  blemish’d  stock: 

Whilst,  in  the  mildness  of  your  sleepy  thoughts. 
Which  here  we  waken  to  our  country’s  good, 
This  noble  isle  doth  want  her  proper  limbs; 

Her  face  defaced  with  scars  of  infamy. 

Her  royal  stock  graft  with  ignoble  plants. 

And  almost  shoulder’d  in  the  swallowing  gulf 
Of  blind  forgetfulness  and  dark  oblivion. 

Which  to  recure,  we  heartily  solicit  /50 

Your  gracious  self  to  take  on  you  the  charge 
And  kingly  government  of  this  your  land. 

Not  as  protector,  steward,  substitute. 

Or  lowly  factor  for  another’s  gain; 

But  as  successively  from  blood  to  blood, 

Your  right  of  birth,  your  empery,  your  own. 

For  this,  consorted  with  the  citizens. 

Your  very  worshipful  and  loving  friends. 

And  by  their  vehement  instigation. 

In  this  just  suit  come  I  to  move  your  Grace.  /40 
Glou.  I  know  not  whether  to  depart  in  silence, 
Or  bitterly  to  speak  in  your  reproof. 

Best  fitteth  my  degree  or  your  condition: 

If  not  to  answer,  you  might  haply  think 
Tongue-tied  ambition,  not  replying,  yielded 
To  bear  the  golden  yoke  of  sovereignty, 

Which  fondly  you  would  here  impose  on  me; 

If  to  reprove  you  for  this  suit  of  yours. 

So  season’d  with  your  faithful  love  to  me. 

Then,  on  the  other  side,  I  check’d  my  friends. 
Therefore,  to  speak,  and  to  avoid  the  first,  75/ 
And  then,  in  speaking,  not  to  incur  the  last. 
Definitively  thus  I  answer  you. 

Your  love  deserves  my  thanks;  but  my  desert 
Unmeritable  shuns  your  high  request. 

First,  if  all  obstacles  were  cut  away, 

And  that  my  path  were  even  to  the  crown. 

As  my  ripe  revenue  and  due  by  birth; 

Yet  so  much  is  my  poverty  of  spirit. 

So  mighty  and  so  many  my  defects,  160 

As  I  had  rather  hide  me  from  my  greatness. 

Being  a  bark  to  brook  no  mighty  sea. 


Than  in  my  greatness  covet  to  be  hid. 

And  in  the  vapour  of  my  glory  smother’d. 

But,  God  be  thanked,  there’s  no  need  of  me, 

And  much  I  need  to  help  you,  if  need  were; 

The  royal  tree  hath  left  us  royal  fruit. 

Which,  mellow’d  by  the  stealing  hours  of  time, 
Will  well  become  the  seat  of  majesty. 

And  make,  no  doubt,  us  happy  by  his  reign.  /70 
On  him  I  lay  what  you  would  on  me. 

The  right  and  fortune  of  his  happy  stars. 

Which  God  defend  that  I  should  wring  from  him! 
Buck.  My  lord,  this  argues  conscience  in  your 
Grace; 

But  the  respects  thereof  are  nice  and  trivial. 

All  circumstances  well  considered. 

You  say  that  Edward  is  your  brother’s  son: 

So  say  we  too,  but  not  by  Edward’s  wife; 

For  first  he  was  contract  to  Lady  Lucy — 

Your  mother  lives  a  witness  to  that  vow —  180 

And  afterward  by  substitute  betroth’d 
To  Bona,  sister  to  the  King  of  France. 

These  both  put  by,  a  poor  petitioner, 

A  care-crazed  mother  of  a  many  children, 

A  beauty-waning  and  distressed  widow. 

Even  in  the  afternoon  of  her  best  days. 

Made  prize  and  purchase  of  his  lustful  eye. 
Seduced  the  pitch  and  height  of  all  his  thoughts 
To  base  declension  and  loathed  bigamy: 

By  her,  in  his  unlawful  bed,  he  got  ipo 

This  Edward,  whom  our  manners  term  the 
Prince. 

More  bitterly  could  I  expostulate 
Save  that,  for  reverence  to  some  alive, 

I  give  a  sparing  limit  to  my  tongue. 

Then,  good  my  lord,  take  to  your  royal  self 
This  proffer’d  benefit  of  dignity; 

If  not  to  bless  us  and  the  land  withal. 

Yet  to  draw  forth  your  noble  ancestry 
From  the  corruption  of  abusing  times 
Unto  a  lineal  true-derived  course.  200 

May.  Do,  good  my  lord,  your  citizens  entreat 
you. 

Buck.  Refuse  not,  mighty  lord,  this  proffer’d 
love. 

Cate.  O,  make  them  joyful,  grant  their  lawful 
suit! 

Glou.  Alas,  why  would  you  heap  these  cares 
on  me? 

I  am  unfit  for  state  and  majesty: 

I  do  beseech  you,  take  it  not  amiss; 

I  cannot  nor  I  will  not  yield  to  you. 

Buck.  If  you  refuse  it — as,  in  love  and  zeal. 

Loath  to  depose  the  child,  your  brother’s  son; 

As  well  we  know  your  tenderness  of  heart  210 
An  J  gentle,  kind,  effeminate  remorse. 

Which  we  have  noted  in  you  to  your  kin. 


ACT  IV 


KING  RICHARD  III 


And  egally  indeed  to  all  estates — 

Yet  whether  you  accept  our  suit  or  no, 

Your  brother’s  son  shall  never  reign  our  king; 

But  we  will  plant  some  other  in  the  throne, 

To  the  disgrace  and  downfall  of  your  house: 

And  in  this  resolution  here  we  leave  you. 

Come,  citizens;  ’zounds!  I’ll  entreat  no  more. 
Glou.  O,  do  not  swear,  my  lord  of  Buckingham. 

[Exit  BUCKINGHAM  njoith  the  Citizens. 
Cate.  Call  them  again,  my  lord,  and  accept 
their  suit.  221 

Another.  Do,  good  my  lord,  lest  all  the  land 
do  rue  it. 

Glou.  Would  you  enforce  me  to  a  world  of 
care? 

Well,  call  them  again.  I  am  not  made  of  stones. 
But  penetrable  to  your  kind  entreats. 

Albeit  against  my  conscience  and  my  soul. 

Re-enter  Buckingham  and  the  rest. 

Cousin  of  Buckingham,  and  you  sage,  grave 
men. 

Since  you  will  buckle  fortune  on  my  back 
To  bear  her  burthen  whether  I  will  or  no, 

I  must  have  patience  to  endure  the  load :  2^0 

But  if  black  scandal  or  foul-faced  reproach 
Attend  the  sequel  of  your  imposition. 

Your  mere  enforcement  shall  acquittance  me 
From  all  the  impure  blots  and  stains  thereof; 

For  God  he  knows,  and  you  may  partly  see. 

How  far  I  am  from  the  desire  thereof. 

May.  God  bless  your  Grace!  we  see  it  and  will 
say  it. 

Glou.  In  saying  so  you  shall  but  say  the  truth. 
Buck.  Then  I  salute  you  with  this  kingly  title: 
Long  live  Richard,  England’s  royal  king!  240 
May.  and  Cit.  Amen 

Buck.  To-morrow  will  it  please  you  to  be 
crown’d? 

Glou.  Even  when  you  please,  since  you  will 
have  it  so. 

Buck.  To-morrow,  then,  we  will  attend  your 
Grace: 

And  so  most  joyfully  we  take  our  leave. 

Glou.  Come,  let  us  to  our  holy  task  again. 
Farewell,  good  cousin;  farewell,  gentle  friends. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  Before  the  Tower 
Enter.,  on  one  side.,  queen  Elizabeth,  duchess  of 
YORK,  and  MARQUESS  OF  DORSET;  on  the  other, 
ANNE,  DUCHESS  OF  GLOUCESTER,  leading  LADY 
MARGARET  PLANTAGENET,  Clarence's  young 
Daughter. 


Duch.  Who  meets  us  here?  my  niece  Plantagenet 
Led  in  the  hand  of  her  kind  aunt  of  Gloucester? 
Now,  for  my  life,  she’s  wandering  to  the  Tower 
On  pure  heart’s  love  to  greet  the  tender  princes. 
Daughter,  well  met. 

Anne.  God  give  your  Graces  both 

A  happy  and  a  joyful  time  of  day! 

Q.  Eliz.  As  much  to  you,  good  sister!  Whither 
away? 

Anne.  No  farther  than  the  Tower;  and,  as  I 
guess. 

Upon  the  like  devotion  as  yourselves. 

To  gratulate  the  gentle  princes  there.  10 

Q.  Eliz.  Kind  sister,  thanks:  we’ll  enter  all 
together. 

Enter  brakenbury. 

And,  in  good  time,  here  the  lieutenant  comes. 
Master  lieutenant,  pray  you,  by  your  leave. 

How  doth  the  Prince,  and  my  young  son  of  York? 
Brak.  Right  well,  dear  madam.  By  your 
patience, 

I  may  not  suffer  you  to  visit  them; 

The  King  hath  straitly  charged  the  contrary. 

2-  Eliz.  The  King!  why,  who’s  that? 

Brak.  I  cry  you  mercy:  I  mean  the  Lord 
Protector. 

Q.  Eliz.  The  Lord  protect  him  from  that  kingly 
title!  20 

Hath  he  set  bounds  betwixt  their  love  and  me? 

I  am  their  mother;  who  should  keep  me  from 
them? 

Duch.  I  am  their  father’s  mother;  I  will  see 
them. 

Anne.  Their  aunt  I  am  in  law,  in  love  their 
mother: 

Then  bring  me  to  their  sights;  I’ll  bear  thy 
blame 

And  take  thy  office  from  thee,  on  my  peril. 

Brak.  No,  madam,  no;  I  may  not  leave  it  so: 

I  am  bound  by  oath,  and  therefore  pardon  me. 

[Exit. 

Enter  lord  Stanley. 

Stan.  Let  me  but  meet  you,  ladies,  one  hour 
hence. 

And  I’ll  salute  your  Grace  of  York  as  mother,  ^0 
And  reverend  looker  on,  of  two  fair  queens. 

[To  Anne]  Come,  madam,  you  must  straight  to 
Westminster, 

There  to  be  crowned  Richard’s  royal  queen. 

Q.  Eliz.  O,  cut  my  lace  in  sunder,  that  my  pent 
heart 

May  have  some  scope  to  beat,  or  else  I  swoon 
With  this  dead-killing  news! 

Anne.  Despiteful  tidings!  O  unpleasing  news! 


! 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Dor.  Be  of  good  cheer:  mother,  how  fares  your 
Grace? 

Q.  Eliz.  O  Dorset,  speak  not  to  me,  get  thee 
hence! 

Death  and  destruction  dog  thee  at  the  heels ;  40 

Thy  mother’s  name  is  ominous  to  children. 

If  thou  wilt  outstrip  death,  go  cross  the  seas. 

And  live  with  Richmond,  from  the  reach  of  hell: 
Go,  hie  thee,  hie  thee  from  this  slaughter-house, 
Lest  thou  increase  the  number  of  the  dead; 

And  make  me  die  the  thrall  of  Margaret’s  curse. 
Nor  mother,  wife,  nor  England’s  counted  queen. 
Stan.  Full  of  wise  care  is  this  your  counsel, 
madam. 

Take  all  the  swift  advantage  of  the  hours; 

You  shall  have  letters  from  me  to  my  son  50 
To  meet  you  on  the  way  and  welcome  you. 

Be  not  ta’en  tardy  by  unwise  delay. 

Diich.  O  ill-dispersing  wind  of  misery! 

O  my  accursed  womb,  the  bed  of  death! 

A  cockatrice  hast  thou  hatch’d  to  the  world, 

(  Whose  unavoided  eye  is  murderous, 
j  Stan.  Come,  madam,  come;  I  in  all  haste  was 
i  sent. 

Anne.  And  I  in  all  unwillingness  will  go. 
i  I  would  to  God  that  the  inclusive  verge 
I  Of  golden  metal  that  must  round  my  brow  60 

Were  red-hot  steel,  to  sear  me  to  the  brain! 

I  Anointed  let  me  be  with  deadly  venom, 

I  And  die  ere  men  can  say,  “God  save  the  Queen!” 

I  Q.  Eliz.  Go,  go,  poor  soul,  I  envy  not  thy  glory; 

I  To  feed  my  humour,  wish  thyself  no  harm. 

Anne.  No!  why?  When  he  that  is  my  husband 
now 

Came  to  me,  as  I  follow’d  Henry’s  corse. 

When  scarce  the  blood  was  well  wash’d  from  his 
hands 

Which  issued  from  my  other  angel  husband 
And  that  dead  saint  which  then  I  weeping 
follow’d; 

O,  when,  I  say,  I  look’d  on  Richaid’s  face,  7/ 
This  was  my  wish:  “Be  thou,”  quoth  I 
“accursed. 

For  making  me,  so  young,  so  old  a  widow! 

And,  when  thou  wed’st,  let  sorrow  haunt  thy  bed; 
And  be  thy  wife — if  any  be  so  mad — 

As  miserable  by  the  life  of  thee 

As  thou  hast  made  me  by  my  dear  lord’s  death!” 

Lo,  ere  I  can  repeat  this  curse  again. 

Even  in  so  short  a  space,  my  woman’s  heart 
Grossly  grew  captive  to  his  honey  words  80 
And  proved  the  subject  of  my  own  soul’s  curse. 
Which  ever  since  hath  kept  my  eyes  from  rest; 
For  never  yet  one  hour  in  his  bed 
Have  I  enjoy’d  the  golden  dew  of  sleep. 

But  have  been  waked  by  his  timorous  dreams. 


Besides,  he  hates  me  for  my  father  Warwick, 
And  will,  no  doubt,  shortly  be  rid  of  me. 

Q.  Eliz.  Poor  heart,  adieu!  1  pity  thy  com¬ 
plaining. 

Anne.  No  more  than  from  my  soul  I  mourn  for 
yours. 

Q.  Eliz.  Farewell,  thou  woeful  welcomer  of 
glory! 

Anne.  Adieu,  poor  soul,  that  takest  thy  leave 
of  it! 

Duch.  [To  Dorset]  Go  thou  to  Richmond,  and 
good  fortune  guide  thee! 

[To  anne]  Go  thou  to  Richard,  and  good  angels 
guard  thee! 

[To  QUEEN  ELIZABETH]  Go  thou  to  Sanctuary, 
and  good  thoughts  possess  thee! 

I  to  my  grave,  where  peace  and  rest  lie  with  me! 
Eighty  odd  years  of  sorrow  have  I  seen. 

And  each  hour’s  joy  wreck’d  with  a  week  of  teen. 
Q.  Eliz.  Stay,  yet  look  back  with  me  unto  the 
Tower. 

Pity,  you  ancient  stones,  those  tender  babes 
Whom  envy  hath  immured  within  your  walls! 
Rough  cradle  for  such  little  pretty  ones!  loi 
Rude  ragged  nurse,  old  sullen  playfellow 
For  tender  princes,  use  my  babies  well! 

So  foolish  sorrow  bids  your  stones  farewell. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  II.  London:  the  palace 
Sennet.  Enter  richard,  in  pomp,  crowned; 
BUCKINGHAM,  CATES  BY,  a  PAGE,  and  Others. 

K.  Rich.  Stand  all  apart.  Cousin  of  Buckingham! 
Buck.  My  gracious  sovereign? 

K.  Rich.  Give  me  thy  hand.  [Here  he  ascendeth 
his  throne.]  Thus  high,  by  thy  advice 
And  thy  assistance,  is  King  Richard  seated: 

But  shall  we  wear  these  honours  for  a  day? 

Or  shall  they  last,  and  we  rejoice  in  them? 

Buck.  Still  live  they  and  for  ever  may  they  last! 
K.  Rich.  O  Buckingham,  now  do  I  play  the 
touch 

To  try  if  thou  be  current  gold  indeed: 

Young  Edward  lives:  think  now  what  I  would 
say.  /o 

Buck.  Say  on,  my  loving  lord. 

K.  Rich.  Why,  Buckingham..  I  say,  1  would  be 
king. 

Buck.  Why,  so  you  are,  my  thrice  renowned 
liege. 

K.  Rich.  Ha!  am  I  king?  ’tis  so:  but  Edward 
lives. 

Buck.  True,  noble  prince. 

K.  Rich.  O  bitter  consequence. 

That  Edward  still  should  live!  “True,  noble 
prince!” 


134 

Cousin,  thou  wert  not  wont  to  be  so  dull; 

Shall  I  be  plain?  I  wish  the  bastards  dead; 

And  I  would  have  it  suddenly  perform’d. 

What  sayest  thou?  speak  suddenly;  be  brief. 
Buck.  Your  Grace  may  do  your  pleasure. 

K.  Rich.  Tut,  tut,  thou  art  all  ice,  thy  kindness 
freezeth: 

Say,  have  I  thy  consent  that  they  shall  die? 

Buck.  Give  me  some  breath,  some  little  pause, 
my  lord. 

Before  I  positively  speak  herein: 

I  will  resolve  your  Grace  immediately.  [Exit. 
Cate.  [Aside  to  a  stander  by]  The  King  is  angry: 
see,  he  bites  the  lip. 

K.  Rich.  I  will  converse  with  iron-witted  fools 
And  unrespective  boys:  none  are  for  me 
That  look  into  me  with  considerate  eyes :  50 

High-reaching  Buckingham  grows  circumspect. 
Boy! 

Page.  My  lord? 

K.  Rich.  Know’ St  thou  not  any  whom 
corrupting  gold 

Would  tempt  unto  a  close  exploit  of  death? 

Page.  My  lord,  1  know  a  discontented  gentleman, 
Whose  humble  means  match  not  his  haughty 
mind: 

Gold  were  as  good  as  twenty  orators. 

And  will,  no  doubt,  tempt  him  to  anything. 

K.  Rich.  What  is  his  name?  40 

Page.  His  name,  my  lord,  is  Tyrrel. 

K.  Rich.  I  partly  know  the  man:  go,  call  him 
hither.  [Exit  page. 

The  deep-revolving  witty  Buckingham 
No  more  shall  be  the  neighbour  to  my  counsel: 
Hath  he  so  long  held  out  with  me  untired. 

And  stops  he  now  for  breath? 

Enter  Stanley. 

How  now!  what  news  with  you? 
Stan.  My  lord,  I  hear  the  Marquis  Dorset’s  fled 
To  Richmond,  in  those  parts  beyond  the  sea 
Where  he  abides.  [Stands  apart. 

K.  Rich.  Catesby! 

Cate.  My  lord?  50 

K.  Rich.  Rumour  it  abroad 
That  Anne,  my  wife,  is  sick  and  like  to  die: 

I  will  take  order  for  her  keeping  close. 

Inquire  me  out  some  mean-born  gentleman. 
Whom  I  will  marry  straight  to  Clarence’ 
daughter: 

The  boy  is  foolish,  and  I  fear  not  him. 

Look,  how  thou  dream’st!  I  say  again,  give  out 
That  x\nne  my  wife  is  sick  and  like  to  die: 

About  it;  for  it  stands  me  much  upon 

To  stop  all  hopes  whose  growth  may  damage  me. 

[Exit  CATESBY. 


ACT  IV 

I  must  be  married  to  my  brother’s  daughter. 

Or  else  my  kingdom  stands  on  brittle  glass. 
Murder  her  brothers  and  then  marry  her! 
Uncertain  way  of  gain!  But  I  am  in 
So  far  in  blood  that  sin  will  pluck  on  sin: 
Tear-falling  pity  dwells  not  in  this  eye. 

Re-enter  page  with  tyrrel. 

Is  thy  name  Tyrrel? 

Tyr.  James  Tyrrel,  and  your  most  obedient 
subject. 

K.  Rich.  Art  thou,  indeed? 

Tyr.  Prove  me,  my  gracious  sovereign. 

K.  Rich.  Darest  thou  resolve  to  kill  a  friend 
of  mine?  70 

Tyr.  Ay,  my  lord; 

But  I  had  rather  kill  two  enemies. 

K.  Rich.  Why,  there  thou  hast  it:  two  deep 
enemies. 

Foes  to  my  rest  and  my  sweet  sleep’s  disturbers 
Are  they  that  I  would  have  thee  deal  upon 
Tyrrel,  I  mean  those  bastards  in  the  Tower. 

Tyr.  Let  me  have  open  means  to  come  to  them. 
And  soon  I’ll  rid  you  from  the  fear  of  them. 

K.  Rich.  Thou  sing’st  sweet  music.  Hark,  come 
hither,  Tyrrel: 

Go,  by  this  token:  rise,  and  lend  thine  ear:  80 

[Whispers. 

There  is  no  more  but  so:  say  it  is  done. 

And  I  will  love  thee  and  prefer  thee  too. 

Tyr.  ’Tis  done,  my  gracious  lord. 

K.  Rich.  Shall  we  hear  from  thee,  Tyrrel,  ere 
we  sleep? 

Tyr.  Ye  shall,  my  lord.  [Exit. 

Re-enter  Buckingham. 

Buck.  My  lord,  I  have  consider’d  in  my  mind 
The  late  demand  that  you  did  sound  me  in. 

K.  Rich.  Well,  let  that  pass.  Dorset  is  fled  to 
Richmond. 

Buck.  I  hear  that  news,  my  lord. 

K.  Rich.  Stanley,  he  is  your  wife’s  son:  well, 
look  to  it.  po 

Buck.  My  lord,  I  claim  your  gift,  my  due  by 
promise. 

For  which  your  honour  and  your  faith  is  pawn’d; 
The  earldom  of  Hereford  and  the  moveables 
The  which  you  promised  I  should  possess. 

K.  Rich.  Stanley,  look  to  your  wife:  if  she 
convey 

Letters  to  Richmond,  you  shall  answer  it. 

Buck.  What  says  your  Highness  to  my  just 
demand? 

K.  Rich.  As  I  remember,  Henry  the  Sixth 
Did  prophesy  that  Richmond  should  be  king. 
When  Richmond  was  a  little  peevish  boy.  100 


KING  RICHARD  HI 


20 


SCENE  II 


KING  RICHARD  III 


A  king,  perhaps,  perhaps — 

Buck,  My  lord! 

K,  Rich,  How  chance  the  prophet  could  not  at 
that  time 

Have  told  me,  I  being  by,  that  I  should  kill  him? 
Buck.  My  lord,  your  promise  for  the  earldom — 
K,  Rich.  Richmond!  When  last  I  was  at  Exeter, 
The  mayor  in  courtesy  show’d  me  the  castle 
And  call’d  it  Rougemont:  at  which  name  I 
started. 

Because  a  bard  of  Ireland  told  me  once, 

I  should  not  live  long  after  I  saw  Richmond,  no 
Buck.  My  lord! 

K.  Rich.  Ay,  what’s  o’clock? 

Buck.  I  am  thus  bold  to  put  your  Grace  in  mind 
Of  what  you  promised  me. 

K.  Rich.  Well,  but  what’s  o’clock? 

Buck.  Upon  the  stroke  of  ten. 

K.  Rich.  Well,  let  it  strike. 

Buck.  Why  let  it  strike? 

K.  Rich.  Because  that,  like  a  Jack,  thou  keep’st 
the  stroke 

Betwixt  thy  begging  and  my  mediation. 

I  am  not  in  the  giving  vein  to-day. 

Buck.  Why,  then  resolve  me  whether  you  will 
or  no.  120 

K.  Rich.  Tut,  tut, 

Thou  troublest  me;  I  am  not  in  the  vein. 

[Exeunt  all  but  Buckingham. 
Buck.  Is  it  even  so?  rewards  he  my  true  service 
With  such  deep  contempt?  made  I  him  king  for 
this? 

O,  let  me  think  on  Hastings,  and  be  gone 
To  Brecknock  while  my  fearful  head  is  on! 

[Exit. 

Scene  hi.  The  same 
Enter  tyrrel. 

Tyr.  The  tyrannous  and  bloody  deed  is  done. 
The  most  arch  act  of  piteous  massacre 
That  ever  yet  this  land  was  guilty  of. 

Dighton  and  Forrest,  whom  I  did  suborn 
To  do  this  ruthless  piece  of  butchery. 

Although  they  were  flesh’d  villains,  bloody  dogs, 
Melting  with  tenderness  and  kind  compassion 
Wept  like  two  children  in  their  deaths’  sad 
stories. 

“Lo,  thus,”  quoth  Dighton,  “lay  those  tender 
babes”: 

“Thus,  thus,”  quoth  Forrest,  “girdling  one 
another 

Within  their  innocent  alabaster  arms:  u 

Their  lips  were  four  red  roses  on  a  stalk. 

Which  in  their  summer  beauty  kiss’d  each 
other. 

A  book  of  prayers  on  their  pillow  lay; 


Which  once,”  quoth  Forrest,  “almost  changed 
my  mind  " 

But  O!  the  devil” — there  the  villain  stopp’d; 
Whilst  Dighton  thus  told  on:  “We  smothered 
The  most  replenished  sweet  work  of  nature 
That  from  the  prime  creation  e’er  she  framed.” 
Thus  both  are  gone  with  conscience  and  remorse; 
They  could  not  speak;  and  so  I  left  them  both. 

To  bring  this  tidings  to  the  bloody  King. 

And  here  he  comes. 

Enter  king  richard. 

All  hail,  my  sovereign  liege! 
K.  Rich.  Kind  Tyrrel,  am  I  happy  in  thy  news? 
Tyr.  If  to  have  done  the  thing  you  gave  in 
charge 

Beget  your  happiness,  be  happy  then. 

For  it  is  dene,  my  lord. 

K.  Rich.  But  didst  thou  see  them  dead? 

Tyr.  I  did,  my  lord. 

K.  Rich.  And  buried,  gentle  Tyrrel? 

Tyr.  The  chaplain  of  the  Tower  hath  buried 
them; 

But  how  or  in  what  place  I  do  not  know.  50 
K.  Rich.  Come  to  me,  Tyrrel,  soon  at  after 
supper. 

And  thou  shalt  tell  the  process  of  their  death. 
Meantime,  but  think  how  I  may  do  thee  good. 
And  be  inheritor  of  thy  desire. 

Farewell  till  soon.  [&/Y tyrrel. 

The  son  of  Clarence  have  I  pent  up  close; 

His  dau2[hter  meanly  have  I  match’d  in  marriage; 
The  sons  of  Edward  sleep  in  Abraham’s  bosom. 
And  Anne  my  wife  hath  bid  the  world  good 
night. 

Now,  for  I  know  the  Breton  Richmond  aims  40 
At  young  Elizabeth,  my  brother’s  daughter. 

And,  by  that  knot,  looks  proudly  o’er  the  crown, 
To  her  I  go,  a  jolly  thriving  wooer. 

Enter  ratcliff. 

Rat.  My  lord! 

K.  Rich.  Good  news  or  bad,  that  thou  comest 
in  so  bluntly? 

Rat.  Bad  news,  mv  lord:  Ely  is  fled  to  Richmond; 
And  Buckingham,  back’d  with  the  hardy  Welsh¬ 
men, 

Is  in  the  field,  and  still  his  power  increaseth. 

K.  Rich.  Ely  with  Richmond  troubles  me 
more  near 

Than  Buckingham  and  his  rash-levied  army.  50 
Come,  I  have  heard  that  fearful  commenting 
Is  leaden  servitor  to  dull  delay; 

Delay  leads  impotent  and  snail-paced  beggary: 
Then  fiery  expedition  be  my  wing, 

Jove’s  Mercury,  and  herald  for  a  king! 


ACT  IV 


KING  RICHARD  III 


136 

Come,  muster  men:  my  counsel  is  my  shield; 

We  must  be  brief  when  traitors  brave  the  field. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Before  the  palace 
Enter  queen  Margaret. 

Q-  Mar.  So,  now  prosperity  begins  to  mellow 
And  drop  into  the  rotten  mouth  of  death. 

Here  in  these  confines  slily  have  I  lurk’d, 

To  watch  the  waning  of  mine  adversaries. 

A  dire  induction  am  I  witness  to, 

And  will  to  France,  hoping  the  consequence 
Will  prove  as  bitter,  black,  and  tragical. 
Withdraw  thee,  wretched  Margaret:  who  comes 
here? 

Enter  queen  Elizabeth  and  the  duchess 

OF  YORK. 

Q.  Eliz.  Ah,  my  young  princes!  ah,  miy  tender 
babes  I 

My  unblown  flowers,  new-appearing  sweets!  10 
If  yet  your  gentle  souls  fly  in  the  air 
And  be  not  fix’d  in  doom  perpetual. 

Hover  about  me  with  your  airy  wings 
And  hear  your  mother’s  lamentation! 

Q.  Mar.  Hover  about  her;  say  that  right  for 
right 

Hath  dimm’d  your  infant  morn  to  aged  night. 

Duch.  So  many  miseries  have  crazed  my  voice. 
That  my  woe- wearied  tongue  is  mute  and  dumb, 
Edward  Plantagenet,  why  art  thou  dead? 

Q.  Mar.  Plantagenet  doth  quit  Plantagenet. 
Edward  for  Edward  pays  a  dying  debt.  21 

Q.  Eliz.  Wilt  thou,  O  God,  fly  from  such 
gentle  lambs, 

And  throw  them  in  the  entrails  of  the  wolf? 

When  didst  thou  sleep  when  such  a  deed  was 
done? 

Q.  Mar.  When  holy  Harry  died,  and  my  sweet 
son. 

Duch.  Blind  sight,  dead  life,  poor  mortal 
living  ghost. 

Woe’s  scene,  world’s  shame,  grave’s  due  by 
life  usurp’d. 

Brief  abstract  and  record  of  tedious  days. 

Rest  thy  unrest  on  England’s  lawful  earth. 

Sitting  dovm. 

Unlawfully  made  drunk  with  innocents’  blood! 

Q.  Eliz.  O,  that  thou  wouldst  as  well  aflFord  a 
grave  5/ 

As  thou  canst  yield  a  melancholy  seat! 

Then  would  I  hide  my  bones,  not  rest  them  here. 
O,  who  hath  any  cause  to  mourn  but  I? 

Sitting  down  by  her. 

Q.  Mar.  If  ancient  sorrow  be  most  reverend. 
Give  mine  the  benefit  of  seniory. 


And  let  my  woes  frown  on  the  upper  hand. 

If  sorrow  can  admit  society. 

Sitting  down  with  thetn. 

Tell  o’er  your  woes  again  by  viewing  mine: 

I  had  an  Edward,  till  a  Richard  kill’d  him;  ^0 
I  had  a  Harry,  till  a  Richard  kill’d  him: 

Thou  hadst  an  Edward,  till  a  Richard  kill’d  him; 
Thou  hadst  a  Richard,  till  a  Richard  kill’d  him. 
Duch.  I  had  a  Richard  too,  and  thou  didst 
kill  him; 

I  had  a  Rutland  too,  thou  holp’st  to  kill  him. 

Q.  Mar.  Thou  hadst  a  Clarence  too,  and 
Richard  kill’d  him. 

From  forth  the  kennel  of  thy  womb  hath  crept 
A  hell-hound  that  doth  hunt  us  all  to  death: 

That  dog,  that  had  his  teeth  before  his  eyes. 

To  worry  lambs  and  lap  their  gentle  blood,  jo 
That  foul  defacer  of  God’s  handiwork. 

That  excellent  grand  tyrant  of  the  earth 
That  reigns  in  galled  eyes  of  weeping  souls. 

Thy  womb  let  loose,  to  chase  us  to  our  graves. 

O  upright,  just,  and  true-disposing  God, 

How  do  I  thank  thee  that  this  carnal  cur 
Preys  on  the  issue  of  his  mother’s  body 
And  makes  her  pew-fellow  with  others’  moan! 

Duch.  O  Harry’s  wife,  triumph  not  in  my  woes! 
God  witness  with  me,  I  have  wept  for  thine.  60 
Q.  Mar.  Bear  with  me;  I  am  hungry  for  revenge. 
And  now  I  cloy  me  with  beholding  it. 

Thy  Edward  he  is  dead,  that  stabb’d  my  Edward; 
Thy  other  Edward  dead,  to  quit  my  Edward; 
Young  York  he  is  but  boot,  because  both 
they 

Match  not  the  high  perfection  of  my  loss: 

Thy  Clarence  he  is  dead  that  kill’d  my  Edward; 
And  the  beholders  of  this  tragic  play. 

The  adulterate  Hastings,  Rivers,  Vaughan, 

Grey, 

Untimely  smother’d  in  their  dusky  graves.  70 
Richard  yet  lives,  hell’s  black  intelligencer. 

Only  reserved  their  factor,  to  buy  souls 
And  send  them  thither:  but  at  hand,  at  hand. 
Ensues  his  piteous  and  unpitied  end: 

Earth  gapes,  hell  burns,  fiends  roar,  saints  pray, 
To  have  him  suddenly  convey’d  away. 

Cancel  his  bond  of  life,  dear  God,  I  pray. 

That  I  may  live  to  say,  “The  dog  is  dead!” 

Q.  Eliz.  O,  thou  didst  prophesy  the  time 
would  come 

That  I  should  wish  for  thee  to  help  me  curse  80 
That  bottled  spider,  that  foul  bunch-back’d  toad! 
Q.  Mar.  I  call’d  thee  then  vain  flourish  of  my 
fortune; 

I  call’d  thee  then  poor  shadow,  painted  queen; 

The  presentation  of  but  what  I  was ; 

The  flattering  index  of  a  direful  pageant; 


SCENE  IV 


KING  RICHARD  III 


One  heaved  a-high,  to  be  hurl’d  down  below; 

A  mother  only  mock’d  with  two  sweet  babes; 

A  dream  of  what  thou  wert,  a  breath,  a  bubble, 

A  sign  of  dignity,  a  garish  flag. 

To  be  the  aim  of  every  dangerous  shot;  po 

A  queen  in  jest,  only  to  All  the  scene. 

Where  is  thy  husband  now?  where  be  thy 
brothers? 

Where  are  thy  children?  wherein  dost  thou  joy? 
Who  sues  to  thee  and  cries  “God  save  the 
Queen”? 

Where  be  the  bending  peers  that  flatter’d  thee? 
Where  be  the  thronging  troops  that  follow’d  thee? 
Decline  all  this,  and  see  what  now  thou  art: 

For  happy  wife,  a  most  distressed  widow; 

For  joyful  mother,  one  that  wails  the  name; 

For  queen,  a  very  caitiff  crown’d  with  care;  loo 
For  one  being  sued  to,  one  that  humbly  sues; 

For  one  that  scorn’d  at  me,  now  scorn’d  of  me; 
For  one  being  fear’d  of  all,  now  fearing  one; 

For  one  commanding  all,  obey’d  of  none. 

Thus  hath  the  course  of  justice  wheel’d  about. 
And  left  thee  but  a  very  prey  to  time; 

Having  no  more  but  thought  of  what  thou  wert. 
To  torture  thee  the  more,  being  what  thou  art. 
Thou  didst  usurp  my  place,  and  dost  thou  not 
Usurp  the  just  proportion  of  my  sorrow?  no 
Now  thy  proud  neck  bears  half  my  burthen’d 
yoke; 

From  which  even  here  I  slip  my  weary  neck. 

And  leave  the  burthen  of  it  all  on  thee. 

Farewell,  York’s  wife,  and  queen  of  sad 
mischance: 

These  English  woes  will  make  me  smile  in 
France. 

Q.  Eliz.  O  thou  well  skill’d  in  curses,  stay 
awhile. 

And  teach  me  how  to  curse  mine  enemies! 

Q.  Mar.  Forbear  to  sleep  the  nights,  and  fast 
the  days; 

Compare  dead  happiness  with  living  woe; 

Think  that  thy  babes  were  fairer  than  they  were. 
And  he  that  slew  them  fouler  than  he  is:  121 

Bettering  thy  loss  makes  the  bad  causer  worse: 
Revolving  this  will  teach  thee  how  to  curse. 

Q.  Eliz.  My  words  are  dull;  O,  quicken  them 
with  thine! 

Q.  Mar.  Thy  woes  will  make  them  sharp  and 
pierce  like  mine.  [Exit. 

Duch.  Why  should  calamity  be  full  of  words? 

Q.  Eliz.  VVindy  attorneys  to  their  client  woes. 
Airy  succeeders  of  intestate  joys. 

Poor  breathing  orators  of  miseries! 

Let  them  have  scope:  though  what  they  do 

impart  /50 

Help  not  at  all,  yet  do  they  ease  the  heart. 


Duch.  If  so,  then  be  not  tongue-tied:  go  with  me. 
And  in  the  breath  of  bitter  words  let’s  smother 
My  damned  son,  which  thy  two  sweet  sons 
smother’d. 

I  hear  his  drum:  be  copious  in  exclaims. 

Enter  king  richard,  marching,  with  drums 
and  trumpets. 

K.  Rich.  Who  intercepts  my  expedition? 

Duch.  O,  she  that  might  have  intercepted  thee, 
By  strangling  thee  in  her  accursed  womb. 

From  all  the  slaughters,  wretch,  that  thou  hast 
done! 

Q.  Eliz.  Hidest  thou  that  forehead  with  a 
golden  crown,  1^0 

Where  should  be  graven,  if  that  right  were  right. 
The  slaughter  of  the  prince  that  owed  that 
crown, 

x\nd  the  dire  death  of  my  two  sons  and  brothers? 
Tell  me,  thou  villain  slave,  where  are  my 
children? 

Lhich.  Thou  toad,  thou  toad,  where  is  thy 
brother  Clarence? 

And  little  Ned  Plantagenet,  his  son? 

Q.  Eliz.  Where  is  kind  Hastings,  Rivers, 
Vaughan,  Grey? 

K.  Rich.  A  flourish,  trumpets!  strike  alarum, 
drums! 

Let  not  the  heavens  hear  these  tell-tale  women 
Rail  on  the  Lord’s  anointed:  strike,  I  say!  ijo 
Flourish.  Alarums. 

Either  be  patient,  and  entreat  me  fair. 

Or  with  the  clamorous  report  of  war 
Thus  will  I  drown  your  exclamations. 

Duch.  Art  thou  my  son? 

K.  Rich.  Ay,  I  thank  God,  my  father,  and 
yourself. 

Duch.  Then  patiently  hear  my  impatience. 

K.  Rich.  Madam,  I  have  a  touch  of  your 
condition. 

Which  cannot  brook  the  accent  of  reproof. 

Duch.  O,  let  me  speak! 

K.  Rich.  Do  then;  but  I’ll  not  hear,  /jp 

Duch.  I  will  be  mild  and  gentle  in  my  speech. 

K.  Rich.  And  brief,  good  mother;  for  I  am  in 
haste. 

Duch.  Art  thou  so  hasty?  I  have  stay’d  for  thee, 
God  knows,  in  anguish,  pain,  and  agony. 

K.  Rich.  And  came  I  not  at  last  to  comfort  you? 
Duch.  No,  by  the  holy  rood,  thou  know’st  it 
well. 

Thou  earnest  on  earth  to  make  the  earth  my  hell. 
A  grievous  burthen  was  thy  birth  to  me; 

Tetchy  and  wayward  was  thy  infancy; 

Thy  school-days  frightful,  desperate,  wild,  and 
furious. 


ACT  IV 


138  KING  RICHARD  III 


Thy  prime  of  manhood  daring,  bold,  and 

venturous,  77  0 

Thy  age  confirm'd,  proud,  subtle,  bloody, 
treacherous. 

More  mild,  but  yet  more  harmful,  kind  in  hatred: 
VThat  comfortable  hour  canst  thou  name, 

That  ever  graced  me  in  thy  company? 

K,  Rich,  Faith,  none,  but  Humphrey  Hour, 
that  call’d  your  Grace 
To  breakfast  once  forth  of  my  company. 

If  I  be  so  disgracious  in  your  sight, 

Let  me  march  on,  and  not  offend  your  Grace. 
Strike  up  the  drum. 

Duch,  I  prithee,  hear  me  speak. 

K.  Rich,  You  speak  too  bitterly. 

Duch,  Hear  me  a  word;  iSo 

For  I  shall  never  speak  to  thee  again. 

K,  Rich.  So, 

Diich,  Either  thou  wilt  die,  by  God’s  just 
ordinance. 

Ere  from  this  war  thou  turn  a  conqueror. 

Or  I  with  grief  and  extreme  age  shall  perish 
And  never  look  upon  thy  face  again. 

Therefore  take  with  thee  my  most  heavy  curse; 
Which  in  the  day  of  battle  tire  thee  more 
Than  all  the  complete  armour  that  thou  wear’st! 
My  prayers  on  the  adverse  party  fight;  /yo 
And  there  the  little  souls  of  Edward’s  children 
Whisper  the  spirits  of  thine  enemies 
And  promise  them  success  and  victory. 

Bloody  thou  art,  bloody  will  be  thy  end; 

Shame  serves  thy  life  and  doth  thy  death  attend. 

[Exit. 

Q.  Eliz.  Though  far  more  cause,  yet  much  less 
spirit  to  curse 

Abides  in  me;  I  say  amen  to  all. 

K.  Rich.  Stay,  madam;  I  must  speak  a  word 
with  you. 

0.  Eliz.  I  have  no  more  sons  of  the  royal 
blood  ipp 

For  thee  to  murder:  for  my  daughters,  Richard, 
They  shall  be  praying  nuns,  not  weeping  queens; 
And  therefore  level  not  to  hit  their  lives. 

K.  Rich.  You  have  a  daughter  call’d  Elizabeth, 
Virtuous  and  fair,  royal  and  gracious. 

Q.  Eliz.  And  she  must  die  for  this?  O,  let  her 
live. 

And  I’ll  corrupt  her  manners,  stain  her  beauty; 
Slander  myself  as  false  to  Edward’s  bed; 

Throw  over  her  the  veil  of  infamy: 

So  she  may  live  unscarr’d  of  bleeding  slaughter, 

I  will  confess  she  was  not  Edward’s  daughter. 

K.  Rich.  Wrong  not  her  birth,  she  is  of  royal 
blood.  211 

Q.  Eliz.  To  save  her  life.  I’ll  say  she  is  not  so. 

K.  Rich.  Her  life  is  only  safest  in  her  birth. 


Q.  Eliz.  And  only  in  that  safety  died  her 
brothers. 

K.  Rich.  Lo,  at  their  births  good  stars  were 
opposite. 

Q.  Eliz.  No,  to  their  lives  bad  friends  were 
contrary. 

K.  Rich.  All  unavoided  is  the  doom  of  destiny. 

Q  Eliz.  True,  when  avoided  grace  makes 
destiny: 

My  babes  were  destined  to  a  fairer  death. 

If  grace  had  bless’d  thee  with  a  fairer  life.  220 

K.  Rich.  You  speak  as  if  that  I  had  slain  my 
cousins. 

Q.  Eliz.  Cousins,  indeed;  and  by  their  uncle 
cozen’d 

Of  comfort,  kingdom,  kindred,  freedom,  life. 
Whose  hand  soever  lanced  their  tender  hearts, 
Thy  head,  all  indirectly,  gave  direction: 

No  doubt  the  murderous  knife  was  dull  and  blunt 
Till  it  was  whetted  on  thy  stone-hard  heart, 

To  revel  in  the  entrails  of  my  lambs. 

But  that  still  use  of  grief  makes  wild  grief  tame, 
My  tongue  should  to  thy  ears  not  name  my  boys 
Till  that  my  nails  were  anchor’d  in  thine  eyes; 
And  I,  in  such  a  desperate  bay  of  death, 

Like  a  poor  bark,  of  sails  and  tackling  reft. 

Rush  all  to  pieces  on  thy  rock  bosom. 

K.  Rich.  Madam,  so  thrive  I  in  my  enterprise 
And  dangerous  success  of  bloody  wars. 

As  I  intend  more  good  to  you  and  yours 
Than  ever  you  or  yours  were  by  me  wrong’d! 

Q.  Eliz.  What  good  is  cover’d  with  the  face  of 
heaven. 

To  be  discover’d,  that  can  do  me  good?  240 

K.  Rich.  The  advancement  of  your  children, 
gentle  lady. 

Q.  Eliz.  Up  to  some  scaffold,  there  to  lose 
their  heads? 

K.  Rich.  No,  to  the  dignity  and  height  of 
honour, 

The  high  imperial  type  of  this  earth’s  glory. 

Q.  Eliz.  Flatter  my  sorrows  with  report  of  it; 
Tell  me  what  state,  what  dignity,  what  honour, 
Canst  thou  demise  to  any  child  of  mine? 

K.  Rich.  Even  all  I  have;  yea,  and  myself  and 
all. 

Will  I  withal  endow  a  child  of  thine; 

So  in  the  Lethe  of  thy  angry  soul  250 

Thou  drown  the  sad  remembrance  of  those 
wrongs 

Which  thou  supposest  I  have  done  to  thee. 

Q.  Eliz.  Be  brief,  lest  that  the  process  of  thy 
kindness 

Last  longer  telling  than  thy  kindness’  date. 

K.  Rich.  Then  know,  that  from  my  soul  I  love 
thy  daughter. 


SCENE  IV 

Q.  Eliz.  My  daughter’s  mother  thinks  it  with 
her  soul. 

K.  Rich.  What  do  you  think? 

Q.  Eliz.  That  thou  dost  love  my  daughter  from 
thy  soul: 

So  from  thy  soul’s  love  didst  thou  love  her 
brothers; 

And  from  my  heart’s  love  I  do  thank  thee  for  it. 
K.  Rich.  Be  not  so  hasty  to  confound  my 
meaning: 

I  mean,  that  with  my  soul  I  love  thy  daughter, 
And  mean  to  make  her  queen  of  England. 

Q.  Eliz.  Say  then,  who  dost  thou  mean  shall 
be  her  king? 

K.  Rich.  Even  he  that  makes  her  queen:  who 
should  be  else? 

Q.  Eliz.  What,  thou? 

K.  Rich.  I,  even  I :  what  think  you  of  it, 
madam? 

Q.  Eliz.  How  canst  thou  woo  her? 

K.  Rich.  That  would  I  learn  of  you. 

As  one  that  are  best  acquainted  with  her  humour. 
Q.  Eliz.  And  wilt  thou  learn  of  me? 

K.  Rich.  Madam,  with  all  my  heart.  270 
Q.  Eliz.  Send  to  her,  by  the  man  that  slew  her 
brothers, 

A  pair  of  bleeding  hearts;  thereon  engrave 
Edward  and  York;  then  haplv  she  will  weep: 
Therefore  present  to  her — as  sometime  Margaret 
Did  to  thy  father,  steep’d  in  Rutland’s  blood— 

A  handkerchief;  which,  say  to  her,  did  drain 
The  purple  sap  from  her  sweet  brother’s  body. 
And  bid  her  dry  her  weeping  eyes  therewith. 

If  this  inducement  force  her  not  to  love. 

Send  her  a  story  of  thy  noble  acts ;  2  80 

Tell  her  thou  madest  away  her  uncle  Clarence, 
Her  uncle  Rivers;  yea,  and,  for  her  sake, 

Madest  quick  conveyance  with  her  good  aunt 
Anne. 

K.  Rich.  Come,  come,  you  mock  me;  this  is 
not  the  way 
To  win  your  daughter. 

Q.  Eliz.  There  is  no  other  way; 

Unless  thou  couldst  put  on  some  other  shape 
And  not  be  Richard  that  hath  done  all  this. 

K.  Rich.  Say  that  I  did  all  this  for  love  of  her. 

Q.  Eliz.  Nay,  then  indeed  she  cannot  choose 
but  hate  thee. 

Having  bought  love  with  such  a  bloody  spoil. 

K.  Rich.  Look,  what  is  done  cannot  be  now 
amended:  2  pi 

Men  shall  deal  unadvisedly  sometimes. 

Which  after  hours  give  leisure  to  repent. 

If  1  did  take  the  kingdom  from  your  sons, 

To  make  amends.  I’ll  give  it  to  your  daughter. 

If  I  have  kill’d  the  issue  of  your  womb. 


»39 

To  quicken  your  increase,  I  will  beget 
Mine  issue  of  your  blood  upon  your  daughter: 

A  grandam’s  name  is  little  less  in  love 

Than  is  the  doting  title  of  a  mother;  500 

They  are  as  children  but  one  step  below. 

Even  of  your  mettle,  of  your  very  blood; 

Of  all  one  pain,  save  for  a  night  of  groans 
Endured  of  her,  for  whom  you  bid  like  sor¬ 
row, 

Your  children  were  vexation  to  your  youth. 

But  mine  shall  be  a  comfort  to  your  age. 

The  loss  you  have  is  but  a  son  being  king, 

And  by  that  loss  your  daughter  is  made  queen. 

I  cannot  make  you  what  amends  I  would, 
Therefore  accept  such  kindness  as  I  can.  5/0 
Dorset  your  son,  that  with  a  fearful  soul 
Leads  discontented  steps  in  foreign  soil, 

This  fair  alliance  quickly  shall  call  home 
To  high  promotions  and  great  dignity: 

The  king,  that  calls  your  beauteous  daughter 
wife, 

Familiarly  shall  call  thy  Dorset  brother; 

Again  shall  you  be  mother  to  a  king. 

And  all  the  ruins  of  distressful  times 
Repair’d  with  double  riches  of  content. 

What!  we  have  many  goodly  days  to  see:  520 

The  liquid  drops  of  tears  that  you  have  shed 
Shall  come  again,  transform’d  to  orient  pearl. 
Advantaging  their  loan  with  interest 
Of  ten  times  double  gain  of  happiness. 

Go,  then,  my  mother,  to  thy  daughter  go; 

Make  bold  her  bashful  years  with  your 
experience; 

Prepare  her  ears  to  hear  a  wooer’s  tale; 

Put  in  her  tender  heart  the  aspiring  flame 
Of  golden  sovereignty;  acquaint  the  princess 
With  the  sweet  silent  hours  of  marriage  joys: 
And  when  this  arm  of  mine  hath  chastised  5^/ 

The  petty  rebel,  dull-brain’d  Buckingham, 

Bound  with  triumphant  garlands  will  I  come 
And  lead  thy  daughter  to  a  conqueror’s  bed; 

To  whom  I  will  retail  my  conquest  won. 

And  she  shall  be  sole  victress,  Caesar’s  Caesar. 

Q.  Eliz.  What  were  I  best  to  say?  her  father’s 
brother 

Would  be  her  lord?  or  shall  I  say,  her  uncle? 

Or,  he  that  slew  her  brothers  and  her  uncles? 
Under  what  title  shall  I  woo  for  thee,  540 

That  God,  the  law,  my  honour,  and  her  love. 

Can  make  seem  pleasing  to  her  tender  years? 

K.  Rich.  Infer  fair  England’s  peace  by  this 
alliance. 

Q.  Eliz.  Which  she  shall  purchase  with  still 
lasting  war. 

K.  Rich.  Say  that  the  king,  which  may  command, 
entreats. 


KING  RICHARD  HI 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Q.  Eliz.  That  at  her  hands  which  the  king’s 
King  forbids. 

K.  Rich.  Say,  she  shall  be  a  high  and  mighty 
queen. 

Q.  Eliz.  To  wail  the  title,  as  her  mother  doth. 

K.  Rich.  Say,  I  will  love  her  everlastingly. 

Q.  Eliz.  But  how  long  shall  that  title  “ever” 
last?  550 

K.  Rich.  Sweetly  in  force  unto  her  fair  life’s  end. 

Q.  Eliz.  But  how  long  fairly  shall  her  sweet 
life  last? 

K.  Rich.  So  long  as  heaven  and  nature  lengthens 
it. 

Q.  Eliz.  So  long  as  hell  and  Richard  likes  of  it. 

K.  Rich.  Say,  I,  her  sovereign,  am  her  subject 
love. 

Q.  Eliz.  But  she,  your  subject,  loathes  such 
sovereignty. 

K.  Rich.  Be  eloquent  in  my  behalf  to  her. 

Q.  Eliz.  An  honest  tale  speeds  best  being 
plainly  told. 

K.  Rich.  Then  in  plain  terms  tell  her  my 
loving  tale. 

Q.  Eliz.  Plain  and  not  honest  is  too  harsh  a 
style.  ^60 

K.  Rich.  Your  reasons  are  too  shallow  and  too 
quick. 

Q.  Eliz.  O  no,  my  reasons  are  too  deep  and 
dead; 

Too  deep  and  dead,  poor  infants,  in  their  grave. 

K.  Rich.  Harp  not  on  that  string,  madam;  that 
is  past. 

Q.  Eliz.  Harp  on  it  still  shall  I  till  heartstrings 
break. 

K.  Rich.  Now,  by  my  George,  my  Garter,  and 
my  crown — 

Q.  Eliz.  Profaned,  dishonour’d,  and  the  third 
usurp’d. 

K.  Rich.  I  swear — 

Q.  Eliz.  By  nothing;  for  this  is  no  oath : 

The  George,  profaned,  hath  lost  his  holy  honour; 

The  Garter,  blemish’d,  pawn’d  his  knightly 
virtue;  570 

The  crown,  usurp’d,  disgraced  his  kingly  glory. 

If  something  thou  wilt  swear  to  be  believed. 

Swear  then  by  something  that  thou  hast  not 
wrong’d. 

K.  Rich.  Now,  by  the  world — 

Q.  Eliz.  ’Tis  full  of  thy  foul  wrongs. 

K.  Rich.  My  father’s  death — 

Q.  Eliz.  Thy  life  hath  that  dishonour’d. 

K.  Rich.  Then,  by  myself — 

Q.  Eliz.  Thyself  thyself  misusest. 

K.  Rich.  Why  then,  by  God — 

Q.  Eliz.  God’s  wrong  is  most  of  all. 

If  thou  hadst  fear’d  to  break  an  oath  by  Him, 


T  he  unity  the  king  thy  brother  made 

Had  not  been  broken,  nor  my  brother  slain:  ^80 

If  thou  hadst  fear’d  to  break  an  oath  by  Him, 

The  imperial  metal,  circling  now  thy  brow. 

Had  graced  the  tender  temples  of  my  child, 

And  both  the  princes  had  been  breathing  here. 
Which  now,  two  tender  playfellows  for  dust. 
Thy  broken  faith  hath  made  a  prey  for  worms. 
What  canst  thou  swear  by  now? 

K.  Rich.  The  time  to  come. 

Q.  Eliz.  That  thou  hast  wronged  in  the  time 
o’erpast; 

For  I  myself  have  many  tears  to  wash 
Hereafter  time,  for  time  past  wrong’d  by  thee. 
The  children  live,  whose  parents  thou  hast 
slaughter’d. 

Ungovern’d  youths,  to  wail  it  in  their  age; 

The  parents  live,  whose  children  thou  hast 
butcher’d. 

Old  wither’d  plants,  to  wail  it  with  their  age. 
Swear  not  by  time  to  come;  for  that  thou  hast 
Misused  ere  used,  by  time  misused  o’erpast. 

K.  Rich.  As  I  intend  to  prosper  and  repent, 

So  thrive  I  in  my  dangerous  attempt 
Of  hostile  arms!  myself  myself  confound! 

Heaven  and  fortune  bar  me  happy  hours !  400 

Day,  yield  me  not  thy  light;  nor,  night,  thy  rest! 
Be  opposite  all  planets  of  good  luck 
To  my  proceedings,  if,  with  pure  heart’s  love. 
Immaculate  devotion,  holy  thoughts, 

I  tender  not  thy  beauteous  princely  daughter! 

In  her  consists  my  happiness  and  thine; 

Without  her,  follows  to  this  land  and  me. 

To  thee,  herself,  and  many  a  Christian  soul. 
Death,  desolation,  ruin  and  decay: 

It  cannot  be  avoided  but  by  this;  410 

It  will  not  be  avoided  but  by  this. 

Therefore,  good  mother — I  must  call  you  so — 

Be  the  attorney  of  my  love  to  her: 

Plead  what  I  will  be,  not  what  I  have  been; 

Not  my  deserts,  but  what  I  will  deserve: 

Urge  the  necessity  and  state  of  times, 

And  be  not  peevish-fond  in  great  designs. 

Q.  Eliz.  Shall  I  be  tempted  of  the  devil  thus? 

K.  Rich.  Ay,  if  the  devil  tempt  thee  to  do  good. 
Q.  Eliz.  Shall  I  forget  myself  to  be  myself?  420 
K.  Rich.  Ay,  if  yourself’s  remembrance  wrong 
yourself. 

Q.  Eliz.  But  thou  didst  kill  my  children. 

K.  Rich.  But  in  your  daughter’s  womb  I  bury 
them: 

Where  in  that  nest  of  spicery  they  shall  breed 
Selves  of  themselves,  to  your  recomforture. 

Q.  Eliz.  Shall  I  go  win  my  daughter  to  thy  will  ? 
K.  Rich.  And  be  a  happy  mother  by  the  deed. 

Q.  Eliz.  I  go.  Write  to  me  very  shortly, 


SCENE  IV 

And  you  shall  understand  from  me  her  mind. 

K.  Rich.  Bear  her  my  true  love’s  kiss;  and  so, 
farewell.  queen  Elizabeth.  450 

Relenting  fool,  and  shallow,  changing  woman! 

Enter  ratcliff;  cates  by  following. 

How  now!  what  news? 

Rat.  My  gracious  sovereign,  on  the  western 
coast 

Rideth  a  puissant  navy;  to  the  shore 
Throng  many  doubtful  hollow-hearted  friends, 
Unarm’d,  and  unresolved  to  beat  them  back: 

’Tis  thought  that  Richmond  is  their  admiral; 

And  there  they  hull,  expecting  but  the  aid 
Of  Buckingham  to  welcome  them  ashore. 

K.  Rich.  Some  light-foot  friend  post  to  the 
Duke  of  Norfolk :  440 

Ratcliff,  thyself,  or  Catesby;  where  is  he? 

Cate.  Here,  my  lord. 

K.  Rich.  Fly  to  the  Duke:  [To  ratcliff]  Post 
thou  to  Salisbury: 

When  thou  comest  thither — [To  catesby]  Dull, 
unmindful  villain. 

Why  stand’st  thou  still,  and  go’st  not  to  the 
Duke? 

Cate.  First,  mighty  sovereign,  let  me  know 
your  mind. 

What  from  your  Grace  I  shall  deliver  to  him. 

K.  Rich.  O,  true,  good  Catesby:  bid  him  levy 
straight 

The  greatest  strength  and  power  he  can  make. 
And  meet  me  presently  at  Salisbury.  450 

Cate.  I  go.  [Exit. 

Rat.  What  is’t  your  Highness’  pleasure  I  shall  do 
At  Salisbury? 

K.  Rich.  Why,  what  wouldst  thou  do  there 
before  I  go? 

Rat.  Your  Highness  told  me  I  should  post 
before. 

K.  Rich.  My  mind  is  changed,  sir,  my  mind  is 
changed. 

Enter  lord  Stanley. 

How  now,  what  news  with  you? 

Stan.  None  good,  my  lord,  to  please  you  with 
the  hearing; 

Nor  none  so  bad,  but  it  may  well  be  told. 

K.  Rich.  Hoyday,  a  riddle!  neither  good  nor 
bad!  460 

Why  dost  thou  run  so  many  mile  about. 

When  thou  mayst  tell  thy  tale  a  nearer  way? 
Once  more,  what  news? 

Stan.  Richmond  is  on  the  seas. 

K.  Rich.  There  let  him  sink,  and  be  the  seas  on 
him! 

White-liver’d  runagate,  what  doth  he  there? 


141 

Stan.  I  know  not,  mighty  sovereign,  but  by 
guess. 

K.  Rich.  Well,  sir,  as  you  guess,  as  you  guess? 

Stan.  Stirr’d  up  by  Dorset,  Buckingham,  and 
Ely, 

He  makes  for  England,  there  to  claim  the  crown. 

K.  Rich.  Is  the  chair  empty?  is  the  sword 

unsway’d?  470 

Is  the  King  dead?  the  empire  unpossess’d? 

What  heir  of  York  is  there  alive  but  we? 

And  who  is  England’s  king  but  great  York’s 
heir? 

Then,  tell  me,  what  doth  he  upon  the  sea? 

Stan.  Unless  for  that,  my  liege,  1  cannot  guess. 

K.  Rich.  Unless  for  that  he  comes  to  be  your 
liege. 

You  cannot  guess  wherefore  the  Welshman 
comes. 

Thou  wilt  revolt,  and  fly  to  him,  I  fear. 

Stan.  No,  mighty  liege,  therefore  mistrust  me 
not. 

K.  Rich.  Where  is  thy  power,  then,  to  beat 
him  back?  480 

Where  are  thy  tenants  and  thy  followers? 

Are  they  not  now  upon  the  western  shore. 
Safe-conducting  the  rebels  from  their  ships? 

Stan.  No,  my  good  lord,  my  friends  are  in  the 
north. 

K.  Rich.  Cold  friends  to  Riehard:  what  do  they 
in  the  north. 

When  they  should  serve  their  sovereign  in  the 
west? 

Stan.  They  have  not  been  commanded,  mighty 
sovereign: 

Please  it  your  majesty  to  give  me  leave. 

I’ll  muster  up  my  friends,  and  meet  your  Grace 
Where  and  what  time  your  Majesty  shall  please. 

K.  Rich.  Ay,  ay,  thou  wouldst  be  gone  to  join 
with  Richmond: 

I  will  not  trust  you,  sir. 

Stan.  Most  mighty  sovereign. 

You  have  no  cause  to  hold  my  friendship  doubtful: 
I  never  was  nor  never  will  be  false. 

K.  Rich.  Well, 

Go  muster  men;  but,  hear  you,  leave  behind 
Your  son,  George  Stanley:  look  your  faith  be 
firm. 

Or  else  his  head’s  assurance  is  but  frail. 

Stan.  So  deal  with  him  as  I  prove  true  to  you. 

[Exit. 

Enter  a  MESSENGER. 

Mess.  My  gracious  sovereign,  now  in  Devon¬ 
shire,  500 

As  I  by  friends  am  well  advertised. 

Sir  Edward  Courtney,  and  the  haughty  prelate 


KING  RICHARD  III 


KING  RICHARD  III 


ACT  V 


142 

Bishop  of  Exeter,  his  brother  there, 

With  many  moe  confederates,  are  in  arms. 

Enter  second  messenger. 

2nd  Mess.  My  liege,  in  Kent  the  Guildfords  are 
in  arms; 

And  every  hour  more  competitors 

Flock  to  their  aid,  and  still  their  power  increaseth. 

Enter  third  messenger. 

^rd  Mess.  My  lord,  the  army  of  the  Duke  of 
Buckingham — 

K.  Rich.  Out  on  you,  owls!  nothing  but  songs 
of  death?  [He  striketh  him.] 

Take  that,  until  thou  bring  me  better  news.  $10 
^rd  Mess.  The  news  I  have  to  tell  your  Majesty 
Is  that  by  sudden  floods  and  fall  of  waters 
Buckingham’s  army  is  dispersed  and  scatter’d; 
And  he  himself  wander’d  away  alone. 

No  man  knows  whither. 

K.  Rich.  I  cry  thee  mercy: 

There  is  my  purse  to  cure  that  blow  of  thine. 
Hath  any  well-advised  friend  proclaim’d 
Reward  to  him  that  brings  the  traitor  in? 

^rd Mess.  Such  proclamation  hath  been  made, 
my  liege. 

Enter  fourth  messenger. 

^th  Mess.  Sir  Thomas  Lovel  and  Lord 

Marquis  Dorset,  520 

’Tis  said,  my  liege,  in  Yorkshire  are  in  arms. 

Yet  this  good  comfort  bring  1  to  your  Grace, 

The  Breton  navy  is  dispersed  by  tempest: 
Richmond,  in  Dorsetshire,  sent  out  a  boat 
Unto  the  shore,  to  ask  those  on  the  banks 
If  they  were  his  assistants,  yea  or  no; 

Who  answer’d  him,  they  came  from  Buckingham 
Upon  his  party:  he,  mistrusting  them, 

Hoised  sail  and  made  away  for  Brittany. 

K.  Rich.  March  on,  march  on,  since  we  are 
up  in  arms;  550 

If  not  to  fight  with  foreign  enemies. 

Yet  to  beat  down  these  rebels  here  at  home. 

Re-enter  catesby. 

Cate.  My  liege,  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  is 
taken; 

That  is  the  best  news:  that  the  Earl  of  Richmond 
Is  with  a  mighty  power  landed  at  Milford, 

Is  colder  tidings,  yet  they  must  be  told. 

K.  Rich.  Away  towards  Salisbury!  while  we 
reason  here, 

A  royal  battle  might  be  won  and  lost: 

Some  one  take  order  Buckingham  be  brought 
To  Salisbury;  the  rest  march  on  with  me.  540 

[Flourish.  Exeunt. 


Scene  v.  Lord  Stanley  s  house 

Enter  Stanley  and  sir  Christopher  urswick. 
Stan.  Sir  Christopher,  tell  Richmond  this  from 
me: 

That  in  the  sty  of  this  most  bloody  boar 
My  son  George  Stanley  is  frank’d  up  in  hold: 

If  I  revolt,  off  goes  young  George’s  head; 

The  fear  of  that  withholds  my  present  aid. 

But,  tell  me,  where  is  princely  Richmond  now? 
Chris.  At  Pembroke,  or  at  Ha’rford-west,  in 
Wales. 

Stan.  What  men  of  name  resort  to  him? 

Chris.  Sir  Walter  Herbert,  a  renowned  soldier; 
Sir  Gilbert  Talbot,  Sir  William  Stanley;  10 
Oxford,  redoubted  Pembroke,  Sir  James  Blunt, 
And  Rice  ap  Thomas,  with  a  valiant  crew; 

And  many  moe  of  noble  fame  and  worth: 

And  towards  London  they  do  bend  their  course. 
If  by  the  way  they  be  not  fought  withal. 

Stan.  Return  unto  thy  lord;  commend  me  to  him: 
Tell  him  the  Queen  hath  heartily  consented 
He  shall  espouse  Elizabeth  her  daughter. 

These  letters  will  resolve  him  of  my  mind. 
Farewell.  [Exeunt.  20 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  Salisbury:  an  open  place 
Enter  the  sheriff,  and  Buckingham,  with 
halberds,  led  to  execution. 

Buck.  Will  not  King  Richard  let  me  speak 
with  him? 

Sher.  No,  my  good  lord;  therefore  be  patient. 
Buck.  Hastings,  and  Edward’s  children.  Rivers, 
Grey, 

Holy  King  Henry  and  thy  fair  son  Edward, 
Vaughan,  and  all  that  have  miscarried 
By  underhand  corrupted  foul  injustice. 

If  that  your  moody  discontented  souls 
Do  through  the  clouds  behold  this  present  hour, 
Even  for  revenge  mock  my  destruction! 

This  is  All-Souls’  day,  fellows,  is  it  not?  10 
Sher.  It  is,  my  lord. 

Buck.  Why,  then  All-Souls’  day  is  my  body’s 
doomsday. 

This  is  the  day  that,  in  King  Edward’s  time, 

I  wish’d  might  fall  on  me,  when  I  was  found 
False  to  his  children  or  his  wife’s  allies; 

This  is  the  day  wherein  I  wish’d  to  fall 
By  the  false  faith  of  him  I  trusted  most; 

This,  this  All-Souls’  day  to  my  fearful  soul 
Is  the  determined  respite  of  my  wrongs: 

That  high  All-Seer  that  I  dallied  with  20 

Hath  turn’d  my  feigned  prayer  on  my  head 
And  given  in  earnest  what  I  begg’d  in  jest. 


SCENE  I 

Thus  doth  he  force  the  swords  of  wicked  men 
To  turn  their  own  points  on  their  masters’ 
bosoms: 

Now  Margaret’s  curse  is  fallen  upon  my  head; 
“When  he,”  quoth  she,  “shall  split  thy  heart 
with  sorrow. 

Remember  Margaret  was  a  prophetess.” 

Come,  sirs,  convey  me  to  the  block  of  shame; 
Wrong  hath  but  wrong,  and  blame  the  due  of 
blame.  [Exeunt, 

Scene  ii.  The  camp  near  Tamworth 

Enter  Richmond,  oxford,  blunt,  Herbert, 
and  others,  with  drum  and  colours, 

Richm.  Fellows  in  arms,  and  my  most  loving 
friends. 

Bruised  underneath  the  yoke  of  tyranny. 

Thus  far  into  the  bowels  of  the  land 
Have  we  march’d  on  without  impediment; 

And  here  receive  we  from  our  father  Stanley 
Lines  of  fair  comfort  and  encouragement. 

The  wretched,  bloody,  and  usurping  boar. 

That  spoil’d  your  summer  fields  and  fruitful 
vines. 

Swills  your  warm  blood  like  wash,  and  makes  his 
trough 

In  your  embowell’d  bosoms,  this  foul  swine  lo 
Lies  now  even  in  the  centre  of  this  isle. 

Near  to  the  town  of  Leicester,  as  we  learn: 

From  Tamworth  thither  is  but  one  day’s  march. 
In  God’s  name,  cheerly  on,  courageous  friends, 
To  reap  the  harvest  of  perpetual  peace 
By  this  one  bloody  trial  of  sharp  war. 

Oxf.  Every  man’s  conscience  is  a  thousand 
swords 

To  fight  against  that  bloody  homicide. 

Herb,  I  doubt  not  but  his  friends  will  fly  to  us. 
Blunt.  He  hath  no  friends  but  who  are  friends 
for  fear,  20 

Which  in  his  greatest  need  will  shrink  from  him. 
Richm.  All  for  our  vantage.  Then,  in  God’s 
name,  march: 

True  hope  is  swift  and  flies  with  swallow’s 
wings; 

Kings  it  makes  gods  and  meaner  creatures  kings. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Bosworth  Field 
Enter  king  richard  in  arms,  with  Norfolk, 
the  EARL  OF  SURREY,  and  others. 

K.  Rich.  Here  pitch  our  tents,  even  here  in 
Bosworth  field. 

My  Lord  of  Surrey,  why  look  you  so  sad? 

Sur.  My  heart  is  ten  times  lighter  than  my  looks. 
K.  Rich.  My  Lord  of  Norfolk — 

Nor.  Here,  most  gracious  liege. 


H3 

K.  Rich.  Norfolk,  we  must  have  knocks;  ha! 
must  we  nqt? 

Nor.  We  must  both  give  and  take,  my  gracious 
lord. 

K.  Rich.  Up  with  my  tent  there!  here  will  I 
lie  to-night; 

But  where  to-morrow?  Well,  all’s  one  for  that. 
Who  hath  descried  the  number  of  the  foe? 

Nor.  Six  or  seven  thousand  is  their  utmost 
power.  10 

K.  Rich.  Why,  our  battalion  trebles  that 
account: 

Besides,  the  King’s  name  is  a  tower  of  strength. 
Which  they  upon  the  adverse  party  want. 

Up  with  my  tent  there!  Valiant  gentlemen. 

Let  us  survey  the  vantage  of  the  field; 

Call  for  some  men  of  sound  direction: 

Let’s  want  no  discipline,  make  no  delay; 

For,  lords,  to-morrow  is  a  busy  day.  [Exeunt. 

Enter,  on  the  other  side  of  the  field,  Richmond,  Sir 
William  Brandon,  oxford,  Dorset,  blunt,  and 
others.  Some  of  the  Soldiers  pitch  Richmond's 
tent. 

Richm.  The  weary  sun  hath  made  a  golden  set. 
And,  by  the  bright  track  of  his  fiery  car,  20 
Gives  signal  of  a  goodly  day  to-morrow. 

Sir  William  Brandon,  you  shall  bear  my  standard. 
Give  me  some  ink  and  paper  in  my  tent: 

I’ll  draw  the  form  and  model  of  our  battle. 

Limit  each  leader  to  his  several  charge. 

And  part  in  just  proportion  our  small  strength. 
My  Lord  of  Oxford,  you.  Sir  William  Brandon, 
And  you.  Sir  Walter  Herbert,  stay  with  me. 

The  Earl  of  Pembroke  keeps  his  regiment: 

Good  Captain  Blunt,  bear  my  good-night  to  him. 
And  by  the  second  hour  in  the  morning  5/ 

Desire  the  Earl  to  see  me  in  my  tent: 

Yet  one  thing  more,  good  Blunt,  before  thou  go’st, 
Where  is  Lord  Stanley  quarter’d,  dost  thou 
know? 

Blunt.  Unless  I  have  mista’en  his  colours 
much. 

Which  well  I  am  assured  I  have  not  done. 

His  regiment  lies  half  a  mile  at  least 
South  from  the  mighty  power  of  the  King. 

Richm.  If  without  peril  it  be  possible,  ^9 

Good  captain  Blunt,  bear  my  good-night  to  him. 
And  give  him  from  me  this  most  needful  scroll. 

Blunt.  Upon  my  life,  my  lord,  I’ll  undertake  it; 
And  so,  God  give  you  quiet  rest  to-night! 

Richm.  Good  night,  good  Captain  Blunt. 

Come,  gentlemen. 

Let  us  consult  upon  to-morrow’s  business: 

In  to  our  tent;  the  air  is  raw  and  cold. 

[They  withdraw  into  the  tent. 


KING  RICHARD  HI 


ACT  V 


KING  RICHARD  III 


144 

Enter y  to  his  tenU  king  richard,  Norfolk, 
RATCLIFF,  CATESBY,  and  Others. 

K.  Rich.  What  is’t  o’clock? 

Cate.  It’s  supper-time,  my  lord; 

It’s  nine  o’clock. 

K.  Rich.  I  will  not  sup  to-night. 

Give  me  some  ink  and  paper. 

What,  is  my  beaver  easier  than  it  was?  50 

And  all  my  armour  laid  into  my  tent? 

Cate.  It  is,  my  liege;  and  all  things  are  in 
readiness. 

K.  Rich.  Good  Norfolk,  hie  thee  to  thy  charge; 
Use  careful  watch,  choose  trusty  sentinels. 

Nor.  I  go,  my  lord. 

K.  Rich.  Stir  with  the  lark  to-morrow,  gentle 
Norfolk. 

Nor.  I  warrant  you,  my  lord.  [Exit. 

K.  Rich.  Catesby! 

Cate.  My  lord? 

K.  Rich.  Send  out  a  pursuivant  at  arms 

To  Stanley’s  regiment;  bid  him  bring  his  power 
Before  sunrising,  lest  his  son  George  fall  61 
Into  the  blind  cave  of  eternal  night. 

[Exit  CATESBY. 

Fill  me  a  bowl  of  wine.  Give  me  a  watch. 

Saddle  white  Surrey  for  the  field  to-morrow. 
Look  that  my  staves  be  sound,  and  not  too  heavy. 
Ratcliff! 

Rat.  My  lord? 

K.  Rich.  Saw’st  thou  the  melancholy  Lord 
Northumberland? 

Rat.  Thomas  the  Earl  of  Surrey,  and  himself. 
Much  about  cock-shut  time,  from  troop  to  troop 
Went  through  the  army,  cheering  up  the 

soldiers.  7/ 

K.  Rich.  So,  I  am  satisfied.  Give  me  a  bowl  of 
wine: 

I  have  not  that  alacrity  of  spirit 

Nor  cheer  of  mind  that  I  was  wont  to  have. 

Set  it  down.  Is  ink  and  paper  ready? 

Rat.  It  is,  my  lord. 

K.  Rich.  Bid  my  guard  watch;  leave  me. 

Ratcliff,  about  the  mid  of  night  come  to  my  tent 
And  help  to  arm  me.  Leave  me,  I  say. 

[Exeunt  ratcliff  and  other  Attendants. 

Enter  Stanley  to  Richmond  in  his  tent.  Lords 
and  others  attending. 

Stan.  Fortune  and  victory  sit  on  thy  helm! 
Richm.  All  comfort  that  the  dark  night  can 
afford  So 

Be  to  thy  person,  noble  father-in-law! 

Tell  me,  how  fares  our  loving  mother? 

Stan.  I,  by  attorney,  bless  thee  from  thy  mother. 
Who  prays  continually  for  Richmond’s  good: 


So  much  for  that.  The  silent  hours  steal  on, 

And  flaky  darkness  breaks  within  the  east. 

In  brief — for  so  the  season  bids  us  be — 

Prepare  thy  battle  early  in  the  morning, 

And  put  thy  fortune  to  the  arbitrement 
Of  bloody  strokes  and  mortal-staring  war.  5)0 
I,  as  I  may — that  which  I  would  I  cannot — 

With  best  advantage  will  deceive  the  time. 

And  aid  thee  in  this  doubtful  shock  of  arms: 

But  on  thy  side  I  may  not  be  too  forward, 

Lest,  being  seen,  thy  brother,  tender  George, 

Be  executed  in  his  father’s  sight. 

Farewell:  the  leisure  and  the  fearful  time 
Cuts  off  the  ceremonious  vows  of  love 
And  ample  interchange  of  sweet  discourse. 

Which  so  long  sunder’d  friends  should  dwell 
upon: 

God  give  us  leisure  for  these  rites  of  love!  loi 

Once  more,  adieu:  be  valiant,  and  speed  well! 
Richm.  Good  lords,  conduct  him  to  his  regi¬ 
ment: 

I’ll  strive  with  troubled  thoughts  to  take  a  nap, 
Lest  leaden  slumber  peise  me  down  to-morrow, 
When  I  should  mount  with  wings  of  victory: 
Once  more,  good  night,  kind  lords  and  gentlemen. 

[Exeunt  all  but  Richmond. 
O  Thou,  whose  captain  I  account  myself, 

Look  on  my  forces  with  a  gracious  eye; 

Put  in  their  hands  thy  bruising  irons  of  wrath,  uo 
That  they  may  crush  down  with  a  heavy  fall 
The  usurping  helmets  of  our  adversaries! 

Make  us  thy  ministers  of  chastisement. 

That  we  may  praise  thee  in  the  victory! 

To  thee  I  do  commend  my  watchful  soul. 

Ere  I  let  fall  the  windows  of  mine  eyes: 

Sleeping  and  waking,  O,  defend  me  still! 

[Sleeps. 

Enter  the  ghost  of  prince  edward,  son  to 

HENRY  THE  SIXTH. 

Ghost.  [To  richard]  Let  me  sit  heavy  on  thy 
soul  to-morrow! 

Think,  how  thou  stab’dst  me  in  my  prime  of 
youth 

At  Tewksbury:  despair,  therefore,  and  die!  120 
[To  Richmond]  Be  cheerful,  Richmond;  for  the 
wronged  souls 

Of  butcher’d  princes  fight  in  thy  behalf: 

King  Henry’s  issue,  Richmond,  comforts  thee. 

Enter  the  ghost  of  henry  the  sixth. 

Ghost.  [To  richard]  When  I  was  mortal,  my 
anointed  body 

By  thee  was  punched  full  of  deadly  holes : 

Think  on  the  Tower  and  me:  despair,  and  die! 
Harry  the  Sixth  bids  thee  despair  and  die! 


SCENE  III 


KING  RICHARD  III 


[To  Richmond]  Virtuous  and  holy,  be  thou 
conqueror! 

Harry,  that  prophesied  thou  shouldst  be  king. 
Doth  comfort  thee  in  sleep:  live,  and  flourish! 

Enter  the  ghost  of  clarence. 

Ghost.  [To  RICHARD]  Let  me  sit  heavy  on  thy 
soul  to-morrow!  /j/ 

I,  that  was  wash’d  to  death  with  fulsome  wine. 
Poor  Clarence,  by  thy  guile  betrayed  to  death! 
To-m.orrow  in  the  battle  think  on  me 
And  fall  thy  edgeless  sword:  despair,  and  die! 

[To  Richmond]  Thou  offspring  of  the  house  of 
Lancaster, 

The  wronged  heirs  of  York  do  pray  for  thee: 
Good  angels  guard  thy  battle!  live,  and  flourish! 

Enter  the  ghosts  of  rivers,  grey,  and 

VAUGHAN. 

Ghost  of  R.  [To  RICHARD]  Let  me  sit  heavy  on 
thy  soul  to-morrow. 

Rivers,  that  died  at  Pomfret!  despair,  and  die! 
Ghost  of  G.  [To  Richard]  Think  upon  Grey, 
and  let  thy  soul  despair!  i^i 

Ghost  of  V.  [To  Richard]  Think  upon 
Vaughan  and  with  guilty  fear 
Let  fall  thy  lance:  despair,  and  die! 

All.  [To  Richmond]  Awake,  and  think  our 
wrongs  in  Richard’s  bosom 
Will  conquer  him!  awake,  and  win  the  day! 

Enter  the  ghost  of  Hastings. 

Glmst.  [To  RICHARD]  Bloody  and  guilty, 
guiltily  awake. 

And  in  a  bloody  battle  end  thy  days! 

Think  on  Lord  Hastings:  despair,  and  die! 

[To  Richmond]  Quiet  untroubled  soul,  awake, 
awake! 

Arm,  fight,  and  conquer,  for  fair  England’s  sake! 

Enter  the  ghosts  of  the  two  young  princes. 

Ghosts.  [To  Richard]  Dream  on  thy  cousins 
smother’d  in  the  Tower:  /j/ 

Let  us  be  lead  within  thy  bosom,  Richard, 

And  weigh  thee  down  to  ruin,  shame,  and  death! 
Thy  nephews’  souls  bid  thee  despair  and  die! 

[To  Richmond]  Sleep,  Richmond,  sleep  in 
peace,  and  wake  in  joy. 

Good  angels  guard  thee  from  the  boar’s  annoy! 
Live,  and  beget  a  happy  race  of  kings! 

Edward’s  unhappy  sons  do  bid  thee  flourish. 

Enter  the  ghost  of  lady  anne. 

Ghost,  [To  RICHARD]  Richard,  thy  wife,  that 
wretched  Anne  thy  wife. 

That  never  slept  a  quiet  hour  with  thee,  i6o 


Now  fills  thy  sleep  with  perturbations: 
To-morrow  in,  the  battle  think  on  me. 

And  fall  thy  edgeless  sword:  despair,  and  die! 

[To  RICHMOND]  Thou  quiet  soul,  sleep  thou  a 
quiet  sleep; 

Dream  of  success  and  happy  victory! 

Thy  adversary’s  wife  doth  pray  for  thee. 

Enter  the  ghost  of  Buckingham. 

Ghost.  [To  RICHARD]  The  first  was  I  that 
help’d  thee  to  the  crown; 

The  last  was  I  that  felt  thy  tyranny: 

O,  in  the  battle  think  on  Buckingham, 

And  die  in  terror  of  thy  guiltiness !  ijo 

Dream  on,  dream  on,  of  bloody  deeds  and  death: 
Fainting,  despair;  despairing,  yield  thy  breath! 
[7^  Richmond]  I  died  for  hope  ere  I  could  lend 
thee  aid: 

But  cheer  thy  heart,  and  be  thou  not  dismay’d: 
God  and  good  angels  fight  on  Richmond’s  side; 
And  Richard  falls  in  height  of  all  his  pride. 

[T/?^  ghosts  vanish,  king  richard  starts 
out  of  his  dream, 

K.  Rich.  Give  me  another  horse:  bind  up  my 
wounds. 

Have  mercy,  Jesu! — Soft!  I  did  but  dream. 

O  coward  conscience,  how  dost  thou  afflict 
me! 

The  lights  burn  blue.  It  is  now  dead  midnight. 
Cold  fearful  drops  stand  on  my  trembling  flesh. 
What  do  I  fear?  myself?  there’s  none  else  by: 
Richard  loves  Richard;  that  is,  I  am  1. 

Is  there  a  murderer  here?  No.  Yes,  I  am. 

Then  fly.  What,  from  myself?  Great  reason 
why: 

Lest  I  rev'enge.  What,  myself  upon  myself? 
Alack,  I  love  myself.  Wherefore?  for  any  good 
That  I  myself  have  done  unto  myself? 

O,  no!  alas,  I  rather  hate  myself 

For  hateful  deeds  committed  by  myself!  igo 

I  am  a  villain:  yet  I  lie,  I  am  not. 

Fool,  of  thyself  speak  well:  fool,  do  not  flatter. 
My  conscience  hath  a  thousand  several  tongues, 
And  every  tongue  brings  in  a  several  tale. 

And  every  tale  condemns  me  for  a  villain. 
Perjury,  perjury,  in  the  high’st  degree; 

Murder,  stern  murder,  in  the  direst  degree; 

All  several  sins,  all  used  in  each  degree. 

Throng  to  the  bar,  crying  all,  “Guilty!  guilty!” 

I  shall  despair.  There  is  no  creature  loves  me; 
And  if  I  die,  no  soul  shall  pity  me:  201 

Nay,  wherefore  should  they,  since  that  I  myself 
Find  in  myself  no  pity  to  myself? 

Methought  the  souls  of  all  that  I  had  murder’d 
Came  to  my  tent;  and  every  one  did  threat 
To-morrow’s  vengeance  on  the  head  of  Richard. 


146 


ACT  V 


KING  RICHARD  III 


Enter  ratcliff. 

Rat.  My  lord! 

K.  Rich.  ’Zounds!  who  is  there? 

Rat.  Ratcliff,  my  lord;  ’tis  I.  The  early 
village-cock 

Hath  twice  done  salutation  to  the  morn;  210 
Your  friends  are  up,  and  buckle  on  their  armour. 
K.  Rich.  O  Ratcliff,  I  have  drcam’d  a  fearful 
dream! 

What  thinkest  thou,  will  our  friends  prove  all 
true? 

Rat.  No  doubt,  my  lord. 

K.  Rich.  O  Ratcliff,  I  fear,  I  fear — 

Rat.  Nay,  good  my  lord,  be  not  afraid  of 
shadows. 

K.  Rich.  By  the  apostle  Paul,  shadows  to-night 
Have  struck  more  terror  to  the  soul  of  Richard 
Than  can  the  substance  of  ten  thousand  soldiers 
Armed  in  proof  and  led  by  shallow  Richmond. 

It  is  not  yet  near  day.  Come,  go  with  me;  220 
Under  our  tents  I’ll  play  the  eaves-dropper. 

To  see  if  any  mean  to  shrink  from  me.  [Exeunt. 

Enter  the  lords  to  Richmond,  sitting  in  his  tent. 

V  Lords.  Good  morrow,  Richmond! 

Richm.  Cry  mercy,  lords  and  watchful 
*  gentlemen. 

That  you  have  ta’en  a  tardy  sluggard  here. 

Lords.  How  have  you  slept,  my  lord? 

Richm.  The  sweetest  sleep  and  fairest-boding 
dreams 

That  ever  enter’d  in  a  drowsy  head 
Have  I  since  your  departure  had,  my  lords. 
Methought  their  souls,  whose  bodies  Richard 
murder’d,  2^0 

Came  to  my  tent,  and  cried  on  victory: 

I  promise  you,  my  soul  is  very  jocund 
In  the  remembrance  of  so  fair  a  dream. 

How  far  into  the  morning  is  it,  lords? 

Lords.  Upon  the  stroke  of  four. 

Richm.  Why,  then  ’tis  time  to  arm  and  give 
direction. 

His  ORATION  TO  HIS  SOLDIERS 

More  than  I  have  said,  loving  countrymen. 

The  leisure  and  enforcement  of  the  time 
Forbids  to  dwell  upon:  yet  remember  this, 

God  and  our  good  cause  fight  upon  our  side;  240 
The  prayers  of  holy  saints  and  wronged  souls. 
Like  high-rear’d  bulwarks,  stand  before  our  faces ; 
Richard  except,  those  whom  we  fight  against 
Had  rather  have  us  win  than  him  they  follow: 
For  what  is  he  they  follow?  truly,  gentlemen, 

A  bloody  tyrant  and  a  homicide; 

One  raised  in  blood,  and  one  in  blood  establish’d; 


One  that  made  means  to  come  by  what  he  hath, 
And  slaughter’d  those  that  were  the  means  to 
help  him; 

A  base  foul  stone,  made  precious  by  the  foil  250 
Of  England’s  chair,  where  he  is  falsely  set; 

One  that  hath  ever  been  God’s  enemy: 

Then,  if  you  fight  against  God’s  enemy, 

God  will  in  justice  ward  you  as  his  soldiers; 

If  you  do  sweat  to  put  a  tyrant  down. 

You  sleep  in  peace,  the  tyrant  being  slain; 

If  you  do  fight  against  your  country’s  foes. 

Your  country’s  fat  shall  pay  your  pains  the 
hire; 

If  you  do  fight  in  safeguard  of  your  wives. 

Your  wives  shall  welcome  home  the  conquerors; 
If  you  do  free  your  children  from  the  sword,  261 
Your  children’s  children  quit  it  in  your  age. 

Then,  in  the  name  of  God  and  all  these  rights. 
Advance  your  standards,  draw  your  willing 
swords. 

For  me,  the  ransom  of  my  bold  attempt 
Shall  be  this  cold  corpse  on  the  earth’s  cold 
face; 

But  if  I  thrive,  the  gain  of  my  attempt 
The  least  of  you  shall  share  his  part  thereofT 
Sound  drums  and  trumpets  boldly  and  cheer- 
fully; 

God  and  Saint  George!  Richmond  and  victory! 

[Exeunt.  2^0 

Re-enter  richard,  ratcliff.  Attendants 
and  Forces. 

K.  Rich.  What  said  Northumberland  as  touching 
Richmond? 

Rat.  That  he  was  never  trained  up  in  arms. 

K.  Rich.  He  said  the  truth:  and  what  said 
Surrey  then? 

Rat.  He  smiled  and  said,  “The  better  for  our 
purpose.” 

K.  Rich.  He  was  in  the  right;  and  so  indeed 
it  is.  [Clock  striketh.\ 

Tell  the  clock  there.  Give  me  a  calendar. 

Who  saw  the  sun  to-day? 

Rat.  Not  I,  my  lord. 

K.  Rich.  Then  he  disdains  to  shine;  for  by  the 
book 

He  should  have  braved  the  east  an  hour  ago: 

A  black  day  will  it  be  to  somebody.  280 

Ratcliff! 

Rat.  My  lord? 

K.  Rich.  The  sun  will  not  be  seen  to-day; 

The  sky  doth  frown  and  lour  upon  our  army. 

I  would  these  dewy  tears  were  from  the  ground. 
Not  shine  to-day!  Why,  what  is  that  to  me 
More  than  to  Richmond?  for  the  selfsame  heaven 
That  frowns  on  me  looks  sadly  upon  him. 


SCENE  in 

Enter  Norfolk. 

Nor.  Arm,  arm,  my  lord;  the  foe  vaunts  in  the 
field. 

K.  Rich.  Come,  bustle,  bustle,  caparison  my 
horse. 

Call  up  Lord  Stanley,  bid  him  bring  his  power: 

I  will  lead  forth  my  soldiers  to  the  plain,  2pi 
And  thus  my  battle  shall  be  ordered: 

My  foreward  shall  be  drawn  out  all  in  length. 
Consisting  equally  of  horse  and  foot; 

Our  archers  shall  be  placed  in  the  midst: 

John  Duke  of  Norfolk,  Thomas  Earl  of  Surrey, 
Shall  have  the  leading  of  this  foot  and  horse. 

They  thus  directed,  we  will  follow 
In  the  main  battle,  whose  puissance  on  either 
side 

Shall  be  well  winged  with  our  chiefest  horse.  500 
This,  and  Saint  George  to  boot!  What  think’st 
thou,  Norfolk? 

Nor.  A  good  direction,  warlike  sovereign. 

This  found  I  on  my  tent  this  morning. 

He  sheu^eth  him  a  paper. 

K.  Rich.  [Reads]  “Jockey  of  Norfolk,  be  not 
too  bold. 

For  Dickon  thy  master  is  bought  and  sold.” 

A  thing  devised  by  the  enemy. 

Go,  gentlemen,  every  man  unto  his  charge: 

Let  not  our  babbling  dreams  affright  our 
souls: 

Conscience  is  but  a  word  that  cowards  use. 
Devised  at  first  to  keep  the  strong  in  awe:  5/0 

Our  strong  arms  be  our  conscience,  swords  our 
law. 

March  on,  join  bravely,  let  us  to’t  pell-mell; 

If  not  to  heaven,  then  hand  in  hand  to  hell. 

His  oration  to  his  Army 

What  shall  I  say  more  than  I  have  inferr’d? 
Remember  whom  you  are  to  cope  withal; 

A  sort  of  vagabonds,  rascals,  and  runaways, 

A  scum  of  Bretons,  and  base  lackey  peasants, 
Whom  their  o’er-cloyed  country  vomits 
forth 

To  desperate  ventures  and  assured  destruc¬ 
tion. 

You  sleeping  safe,  they  bring  to  you  unrest;  520 
You  having  lands,  and  blest  with  beauteous 
wives. 

They  would  restrain  the  one,  distain  the  other. 
x\nd  who  doth  lead  them  but  a  paltry  fellow. 

Long  kept  in  Bretagne  at  our  mother’s  cost? 

A  milk-sop,  one  that  never  in  his  life 
Felt  so  much  cold  as  over  shoes  in  snow? 

Let’s  whip  these  stragglers  o’er  the  seas 
again; 


147 

Lash  hence  these  overv/eening  rags  of  France, 
These  famish’d  beggars  weary  of  their  lives; 
Who,  but  for  dreaming  on  this  fond  exploit,  550 
For  want  of  means,  poor  rats,  had  hang’d  them¬ 
selves: 

If  we  be  conquer’d,  let  men  conquer  us. 

And  not  these  bastard  Bretons;  whom  our 
fathers 

Have  in  their  own  land  beaten,  bobb’d,  and 
thump’d. 

And  in  record,  left  them  the  heirs  of  shame. 

Shall  these  enjoy  our  lands?  lie  with  our  wives? 
Ravish  our  daughters?  [Drum  afar  0^ .]  Hark! 

I  hear  their  drum. 

Fight!  gentlemen  of  England!  fight,  bold  yeomen! 
Draw,  archers,  draw  your  arrows  to  the  head! 
Spur  your  proud  horses  hard,  and  ride  in  blood; 
Amaze  the  welkin  with  your  broken  staves!  54/ 

Enter  a  messenger. 

What  says  Lord  Stanley?  will  he  bring  his 
power? 

Adess.  My  lord,  he  doth  deny  to  come. 

K.  Rich.  Off  with  his  son  George’s  head! 

Nor.  My  lord,  the  enemy  is  past  the  marsh; 
After  the  battle  let  George  Stanley  die. 

K.  Rich.  A  thousand  hearts  are  great  within 
my  bosom: 

Advance  our  standards,  set  upon  our  foes; 

Our  ancient  word  of  courage,  fair  Saint  George, 
Inspire  us  with  the  spleen  of  fiery  dragons!  550 
Upon  them!  Victory  sits  on  our  helms. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Alarum:  excursions.  Enter  Norfolk  and 
forces  fighting;  to  hbn  catesby. 

Cate.  Rescue,  my  Lord  of  Norfolk,  rescue, 
rescue! 

The  King  enacts  more  wonders  than  a  man, 
Daring  an  opposite  to  every  danger: 

His  horse  is  slain,  and  all  on  foot  he  fights. 
Seeking  for  Richmond  in  the  throat  of  death. 
Rescue,  fair  lord,  or  else  the  day  is  lost! 

Alarums.  Enter  king  richard. 

K.  Rich.  A  horse!  a  horse!  my  kingdom  for  a 
horse! 

Cate.  Withdraw,  my  lord;  I’ll  help  you  to  a 
horse. 

K.  Rich.  Slave,  I  have  set  my  life  upon  a  cast 
And  I  will  stand  the  hazard  of  the  die:  10 

I  think  there  be  six  Richmonds  in  the  field; 

Five  have  I  slain  to-day  instead  of  him. 

A  horse!  a  horse!  my  kingdom  for  a  horse! 

[Exeunt. 


KING  RICHARD  HI 


ACT  V 


148  KING  RICHARD  III 


Scene  v.  Another  part  of  the  field 

Alarum.  Enter  richard  and  Richmond;  they  fight. 
RICHARD  is  slain.  Retreat  and  flourish.  Re-enter 
RICHMOND,  STANLEY  bearing  the  crown.,  with 
divers  other  Lords. 

Richm.  God  and  your  arms  be  praised,  victorious 
friends; 

The  day  is  ours,  the  bloody  dog  is  dead. 

Stan.  Courageous  Richmond,  well  hast  thou 
acquit  thee. 

Lo,  here,  this  long-usurped  royalty 

From  the  dead  temples  of  this  bloody  wretch 

Have  I  pluck’d  off,  to  grace  thy  brows  withal: 

Wear  it,  enjoy  it,  and  make  much  of  it. 

Richm.  Great  God  of  heaven,  say  Amen  to  all! 

But,  tell  me,  is  young  George  Stanley  living? 

Stan.  He  is,  my  lord,  and  safe  in  Leicester 
town;  10 

Whither,  if  it  please  you,  we  may  now  with¬ 
draw  us. 

Richm.  What  men  of  name  are  slain  on  either 
side? 

Stan.  John  Duke  of  Norfolk,  Walter  Lord 
Ferrers, 

Sir  Robert  Brakenbury,  and  Sir  William  Brandon. 

Richm.  Inter  their  bodies  as  becomes  their 
births: 

Proclaim  a  pardon  to  the  soldiers  fled 


That  in  submission  will  return  to  us: 

And  then,  as  we  have  ta’en  the  sacrament. 

We  will  unite  the  white  rose  and  the  red: 

Smile  heaven  upon  this  fair  conjunction,  20 
That  long  have  frown’d  upon  their  enmity! 

What  traitor  hears  me,  and  says  not  amen? 
England  hath  long  been  mad,  and  scarr’d  herself; 
The  brother  blindly  shed  the  brother’s  blood. 

The  father  rashly  slaughter’d  his  own  son, 

The  son,  compell’d,  been  butcher  to  the  sire: 

All  this  divided  York  and  Lancaster, 

Divided  in  their  dire  division, 

O,  now,  let  Richmond  and  Elizabeth, 

The  true  succeeders  of  each  royal  house,  50 
By  God’s  fair  ordinance  conjoin  together! 

And  let  their  heirs,  God,  if  thy  will  be  so. 

Enrich  the  time  to  come  with  smooth-faced 
peace. 

With  smiling  plenty  and  fair  prosperous  days! 
Abate  the  edge  of  traitors,  gracious  Lord, 

That  would  reduce  these  bloody  days  again 
And  make  poor  England  weep  in  streams  of 
blood! 

Let  them  not  live  to  taste  land’s  increase 
That  would  with  treason  wound  this  fair  land’s 
peace! 

Now  civil  wounds  are  stopp’d,  peace  lives  again: 
That  she  may  long  live  here,  God  say  amen!  40 

[Exeunt. 


^THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAE 


SoLiNus,  Duke  of  Ephesus  . 

^GEON,  a  merchant  of  Syracuse 

Antipholus  OF  Ephesus  I  tucin  brothers,  and  sons 

Antiphoeus  of  Syracuse  1  of  AEgeon  and  Ah?iilia 

Dromio  of  Ephesus  I  twin  brothers,  and  attend- 

Dromio  of  Syracuse  |  ants  on  the  two  Antipholuses 

Balthazar,  a  merchant 

Angelo,  a  goldsmith 

First  Merchant,  friend  to  Antipholus  of 
Syracuse 

Second  Merchant,  to  whom  Angelo  is  a  debtor 
Pinch,  a  schoohnaster 


A  Servant 
A  Gaoler 
An  Officer 

^Emilia,  wife  to  AEgeon,  an  abbess  at  Ephesus 
Adriana,  wife  to  Antipholus  of  Ephesus 
Luciana,  her  sister 
Luce,  servant  to  Adriana 
A  Courtezan 

Non-Speaking  and  other  Attendants 

Scene:  Ephesus 


act  I 

Scene  i.  A  hall  in  the  Duke's  palace 
Enter  duke,  ^^Igeon,  gaoler,  Officers,  and 
other  Attendants. 

Proceed,  Solinus,  to  procure  my  fall 
And  by  the  doom  of  death  end  woes  and  all. 

Duke.  Merchant  ofSyracusa,  plead  no  more; 

I  am  not  partial  to  infringe  our  laws: 

The  enmity  and  discord  which  of  late 
Sprung  from  the  rancorous  outrage  of  your  duke 
To  merchants,  our  well-dealing  countrymen. 
Who,  wanting  guilders  to  redeem  their  lives 
Have  seal’d  his  rigorous  statutes  with  their 
bloods. 

Excludes  all  pity  from  our  threatening  looks,  lo 
For,  since  the  mortal  and  intestine  jars 
’Twixt  thy  seditious  countrymen  and  us, 

Tt  hath  in  solemn  synods  been  decreed. 

Both  by  the  Syracusians  and  ourselves. 

To  admit  no  traffic  to  our  adverse  towns: 

Nay,  more. 

If  any  born  at  Ephesus  be  seen 
At  any  Syracusian  marts  and  fairs; 

Again:  if  any  Syracusian  born 
Come  to  the  bay  of  Ephesus,  he  dies,  20 

His  goods  confiscate  to  the  Duke’s  dispose, 
L^nless  a  thousand  marks  be  levied. 

To  quit  the  penalty  and  to  ransom  him. 

Thy  substance,  valued  at  the  highest  rate. 

Cannot  amount  unto  a  hundred  marks; 

Therefore  by  law  thou  art  condemn’d  to  die. 
AEge.  Yet  this  my  comfort:  when  your  words 
are  done. 

My  woes  end  likewise  with  the  evening  sun. 

Well,  Syracusian,  sav  in  brief  the  cause 


Why  thou  departed’ St  from  thy  native  home  50 
And  for  what  cause  thou  earnest  to  Ephesus. 

EEge.  A  heavier  task  could  not  have  been  im¬ 
posed 

Than  I  to  speak  my  griefs  unspeakable: 

Yet,  that  the  world  may  witness  that  my  end 
Was  wrought  by  nature,  not  by  vile  offence. 

I’ll  utter  what  my  sorrow  gives  me  leave. 

In  Syracusa  was  I  born,  and  wed 
Unto  a  woman,  happy  but  for  me. 

And  by  me,  had  not  our  hap  been  bad. 

With  her  I  lived  in  joy;  our  wealth  increased  ^0 
By  prosperous  voyages  I  often  made 
To  Epidamnum;  till  my  factor’s  death 
And  the  great  care  of  goods  at  random  left 
Drew  me  from  kind  embracements  of  my  spouse: 
From  whom  my  absence  was  not  six  months  old 
Before  herself,  almost  at  fainting  under 
The  pleasing  punishment  that  women  bear. 

Had  made  provision  for  her  following  me 
And  soon  and  safe  arrived  where  I  was. 

There  had  she  not  been  long  but  she  became  50 
A  joyful  mother  of  two  goodly  sons; 

And,  which  was  strange,  the  one  so  like  the 
other 

As  could  not  be  distinguish’d  but  by  names. 

That  very  hour  and  in  the  self-same  inn 
A  meaner  woman  was  delivered 
Of  such  a  burden,  male  twins,  both  alike: 

Those,  for  their  parents  were  exceeding  poor, 

I  bought  and  brought  up  to  attend  my  sons. 

My  wife,  not  meanly  proud  of  two  such  boys. 
Made  daily  motions  for  our  home  return:  60 

Unwilling  I  agreed;  alas!  too  soon 
We  came  aboard. 

A  league  from  Epidamnum  had  we  sail’d. 


ACT  I 


150  THE  COMEDY 

Before  the  always  wind-obeying  deep 
Gave  any  tragic  instance  of  our  harm: 

But  longer  did  we  not  retain  much  hope; 

For  what  obscured  light  the  heavens  did  grant 
Did  but  convey  unto  our  fearful  minds 
A  doubtful  warrant  of  immediate  death; 

Which  though  myself  would  gladly  have  em¬ 
braced, 

Yet  the  incessant  weepings  of  my  wife,  7/ 

Weeping  before  for  what  she  saw  must  come. 

And  piteous  plainings  of  the  pretty  babes. 

That  mourn’d  for  fashion,  ignorant  what  to  fear. 
Forced  me  to  seek  delays  for  them  and  me. 

And  this  it  was,  for  other  means  was  none: 

The  sailors  sought  for  safety  by  our  boat. 

And  left  the  ship,  then  sinking-ripe,  to  us: 

My  wife,  more  careful  for  the  latter- born. 

Had  fasten’d  him  unto  a  small  spare  mast,  80 
Such  as  seafaring  men  provide  for  storms; 

To  him  one  of  the  other  twins  was  bound. 

Whilst  I  had  been  like  heedful  of  the  other: 

The  children  thus  disposed,  my  wife  and  I, 

Fixing  our  eyes  on  whom  our  care  was  fix’d. 
Fasten’d  ourselves  at  either  end  the  mast; 

And  floating  straight,  obedient  to  the  stream. 

Was  carried  towards  Corinth,  as  we  thought. 

At  length  the  sun,  gazing  upon  the  earth. 

Dispersed  those  vapours  that  offended  us ;  po 

And,  by  the  benefit  of  his  wished  light. 

The  seas  wax’d  calm,  and  we  discovered 
Two  ships  from  far  making  amain  to  us, 

Of  Corinth  that,  of  Epidaurus  this: 

But  ere  they  came — O,  let  me  say  no  more! 

Gather  the  sequel  by  that  went  before. 

Duke.  Nay,  forward,  old  man;  do  not  break  off 
so; 

For  we  may  pity,  though  not  pardon  thee. 

Mge.  O,  had  the  gods  done  so,  I  had  not  now 
Worthily  term’d  them  merciless  to  us!  100 

For,  ere  the  ships  could  meet  by  twice  five  leagues. 
We  were  encounter’d  by  a  mighty  rock; 

Which  being  violently  borne  upon. 

Our  helpful  ship  was  splitted  in  the  midst; 

So  that,  in  this  unjust  divorce  of  us. 

Fortune  had  left  to  both  of  us  alike 
What  to  delight  in,  what  to  sorrow  for. 

Her  part,  poor  soul!  seeming  as  burdened 
With  lesser  weight  but  not  with  lesser  woe. 

Was  carried  with  more  speed  before  the  wind; 

And  in  our  sight  they  three  were  taken  up  /// 
By  fishermen  of  Corinth,  as  we  thought. 

At  length,  another  ship  had  seized  on  us; 

And,  knowing  whom  it  was  their  hap  to  save. 

Gave  healthful  welcome  to  their  shipwreck’d 
guests; 

And  would  have  reft  the  fishers  of  their  prey, 


OF  ERRORS 

Had  not  their  bark  been  very  slow  of  sail; 

And  therefore  homeward  did  they  bend  their 
course. 

Thus  have  you  heard  me  sever’d  from  my  bliss. 
That  by  misfortunes  was  my  life  prolong’d  120 
To  tell  sad  stories  of  my  own  mishaps. 

Duke.  And,  for  the  sake  of  them  thou  sorrowest 
for. 

Do  me  the  favour  to  dilate  at  full 
What  hath  befall’n  of  them  and  thee  till  now. 
^ge.  My  youngest  boy,  and  yet  my  eldest  care. 
At  eighteen  years  became  inquisitive 
After  his  brother:  and  importuned  me 
That  his  attendant — so  his  case  was  like. 

Reft  of  his  brother,  but  retain’d  his  name — 

Might  bear  him  company  in  the  quest  of  him: 
Whom  whilst  I  labour’d  of  a  love  to  see,  75/ 

I  hazarded  the  loss  of  whom  I  loved. 

Five  summers  have  I  spent  in  furthest  Greece, 
Roaming  clean  through  the  bounds  of  Asia, 

And,  coasting  homeward,  came  to  Ephesus; 
Hopeless  to  find,  yet  loath  to  leave  unsought 
Or  that  or  any  place  that  harbours  men. 

But  here  must  end  the  story  of  my  life; 

And  happy  were  I  in  my  timely  death. 

Could  all  my  travels  warrant  me  they  live.  140 
Duke.  Hapless  ^geon,  whom  the  fates  have 
mark’d 

To  bear  the  extremity  of  dire  mishap! 

Now,  trust  me,  were  it  not  against  our  laws. 
Against  my  crown,  ray  oath,  my  dignity. 

Which  princes,  would  they,  may  not  disannul. 
My  soul  should  sue  as  advocate  for  thee. 

But,  though  thou  art  adjudged  to  the  death 
And  passed  sentence  may  not  be  recall’d 
But  to  our  honour’s  great  disparagement. 

Yet  I  will  favour  thee  in  what  I  can.  /jo 

Therefore,  merchant,  Fll  limit  thee  this  day 
To  seek  thy  life  by  beneficial  help: 

Try  all  the  friends  thou  hast  in  Ephesus; 

Beg  thou,  or  borrow,  to  make  up  the  sum. 

And  live;  if  no,  then  thou  art  doom’d  to  die. 
Gaoler,  take  him  to  thy  custody. 

Gaol.  I  will,  my  lord. 

JEge.  Hopeless  and  helpless  doth  ^geon  wend. 
But  to  procrastinate  his  lifeless  end.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  Mart 

Enter  antipholus  of  Syracuse,  dromio  of 
SYRACUSE,  and  first  merchant. 
ist  Mer.  Therefore  give  out  you  are  of  Epi- 
damnum. 

Lest  that  your  goods  too  soon  be  confiscate. 

This  very  day  a  Syracusian  merchant 
Is  apprehended  for  arrival  here; 

And  not  being  able  to  buy  out  his  life 


SCENE  II 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


According  to  the  statute  of  the  town 
Dies  ere  the  weary  sun  set  in  the  west. 

There  is  your  money  that  I  had  to  keep. 

Ant.  S.  Go  bear  it  to  the  Centaur,  where  we 
host, 

And  stay  there,  Dromio,  till  I  come  to  thee.  lo 
Within  this  hour  it  will  be  dinner-time: 

Till  that,  ril  view  the  manners  of  the  town. 
Peruse  the  traders,  gaze  upon  the  buildings. 

And  then  return  and  sleep  within  mine  inn. 

For  with  long  travel  I  am  stiff  and  weary. 

Get  thee  away. 

Dro.  S.  Many  a  man  would  take  you  at  your 
word. 

And  go  indeed,  having  so  good  a  mean.  [Exit. 
Ant.  S.  A  trusty  villain,  sir,  that  very  oft. 

When  I  am  dull  with  care  and  melancholy,  20 
Lightens  my  humour  with  his  merry  jests. 

What,  will  you  walk  with  me  about  the  town. 
And  then  go  to  my  inn  and  dine  with  me? 

istMer.  I  am  invited,  sir,  to  certain  merchants, 
Of  whom  I  hope  to  make  much  benefit; 

I  crave  your  pardon.  Soon  at  five  o’clock. 

Please  you.  I’ll  meet  with  you  upon  the  mart 
And  afterward  consort  you  till  bed-time: 

My  present  business  calls  me  from  you  now. 

Ant.  S.  Farewell  till  then:  I  will  go  lose  myself 
And  wander  up  and  down  to  view  the  city.  5  / 
ist  Mer.  Sir,  I  commend  you  to  your  own  con¬ 
tent.  [Exit. 

Ant.  S.  He  that  commends  me  to  mine  own  con¬ 
tent 

Commends  me  to  the  thing  I  cannot  get. 

I  to  the  world  am  like  a  drop  of  water 
That  in  the  ocean  seeks  another  drop. 

Who,  falling  there  to  find  his  fellow  forth. 
Unseen,  inquisitive,  confounds  himself: 

So  I,  to  find  a  mother  and  a  brother. 

In  quest  of  them,  unhappy,  lose  myself.  40 

Enter  dromio  of  ephesus. 

Here  comes  the  almanac  of  my  true  date. 

What  now?  how  chance  thou  art  return’d  so 
soon? 

Dro.  E.  Return’d  so  soon!  rather  approach’d  too 
late: 

The  capon  burns,  the  pig  falls  from  the  spit. 

The  clock  hath  strucken  twelve  upon  the  bell; 
My  mistress  made  it  one  upon  my  cheek: 

She  is  so  hot  because  the  meat  is  cold; 

The  meat  is  cold  because  you  come  not  home; 
You  come  not  home  because  you  have  no  stom¬ 
ach; 

You  have  no  stomach  having  broke  your  fast; 

But  we  that  know  what  ’tis  to  fast  and  pray  y/ 
Are  penitent  for  your  default  to-day. 


Ant.  S.  Stop  in  your  wind,  sir:  tell  me  this,  I 
pray: 

Where  have  you  left  the  money  that  I  gave  you? 
Dro.  E.  O — sixpence,  that  I  had  o’  Wednesday 
last 

To  pay  the  saddler  for  my  mistress’  crupper? 

The  saddler  had  it,  sir;  I  kept  it  not. 

Ant.  S.  I  am  not  in  a  sportive  humour  now: 

Tell  me,  and  dally  not,  where  is  the  money? 

We  being  strangers  here,  how  darest  thou  trust 
So  great  a  charge  from  thine  own  custody?  61 
Dro.  E.  I  pray  you,  jest,  sir,  as  you  sit  at  dinner: 
I  from  my  mistress  come  to  you  in  post; 

If  I  return,  I  shall  be  post  indeed. 

For  she  will  score  your  fault  upon  my  pate. 
Methinks  your  maw,  like  mine,  should  be  your 
clock 

And  strike  you  home  without  a  messenger. 

Ant.  S.  Come,  Dromio,  come,  these  jests  are 
out  of  season; 

Reserve  them  till  a  merrier  hour  than  this. 

Where  is  the  gold  I  gave  in  charge  to  thee?  70 
Dro.  E.  To  me,  sir?  why,  you  gave  no  gold  to 
me. 

Ant.  S.  Come  on,  sir  knave,  have  done  your 
foolishness 

And  tell  me  how  thou  hast  disposed  thy  charge. 
Dro.  E.  My  charge  was  but  to  fetch  you  from 
the  mart 

Home  to  your  house,  the  Phoenix,  sir,  to  dinner: 
My  mistress  and  her  sister  stays  for  you. 

Ant.  S.  Now,  as  I  am  a  Christian,  answer  me 
In  what  safe  place  you  have  bestow’d  my  money. 
Or  I  shall  break  that  merry  sconce  of  yours 
That  stands  on  tricks  when  I  am  undisposed:  80 
Where  is  the  thousand  marks  thou  hadst  of  me? 
Dro.  E.  I  have  some  marks  of  yours  upon  my 
pate. 

Some  of  my  mistress’  marks  upon  my  shoulders. 
But  not  a  thousand  marks  between  you  both. 

If  I  should  pay  your  worship  those  again. 
Perchance  you  will  not  bear  them  patiently. 

Ant.  S.  Thy  mistress’  marks?  what  mistress, 
slave,  hast  thou? 

Dro.  E.  Your  worship’s  wife,  my  mistress  at  the 
Phoenix; 

She  that  doth  fast  till  you  come  home  to  dinner 
And  prays  that  you  will  hie  you  home  to  dinner. 
Ant.  S.  What,  wilt  thou  flout  me  thus  unto  my 
face,  9^ 

Being  forbid?  There,  take  you  that,  sir  knave. 
Dro.  E.  What  mean  you,  sir?  for  God’s  sake, 
hold  your  hands! 

Nay,  an  you  will  not,  sir,  I’ll  take  my  heels. 

[Exit. 

Ant.  S.  Upon  my  life,  by  some  device  or  other 


ACT  II 


152  THE  COMEDY 

The  villain  is  o’er-raught  of  all  my  money. 

They  say  this  town  is  full  of  cozenage, 

As,  nimble  jugglers  that  deceive  the  eye. 

Dark- working  sorcerers  that  change  the  mind. 
Soul-killing  witches  that  deform  the  body,  100 
Disguised  cheaters,  prating  mountebanks. 

And  many  such-like  liberties  of  sin: 

If  it  prove  so,  I  will  be  gone  the  sooner, 
ril  to  the  Centaur,  to  go  seek  this  slave: 

1  greatly  fear  my  money  is  not  safe.  [Exit, 

ACT  II 

Scene  i  .  The  house  of  Antipholus  of  Ephesus 
Enter  adriana  and  luciana. 

Adr,  Neither  my  husband  nor  the  slave  re¬ 
turn’d. 

That  in  such  haste  I  sent  to  seek  his  master! 

Sure,  Luciana,  it  is  two  o’clock. 

Luc.  Perhaps  some  merchant  hath  invited  him 
And  from  the  mart  he’s  somewhere  gone  to 
dinner. 

Good  sister,  let  us  dine  and  never  fret: 

A  man  is  master  of  his  liberty: 

Time  is  their  master,  and  when  they  see  time 
They’ll  go  or  come:  if  so,  be  patient,  sister. 

Adr.  Why  should  their  liberty  than  ours  be 
more?  10 

Luc.  Because  their  business  still  lies  out  o’  door. 
Adr.  Look,  when  I  serve  him  so,  he  takes  it  ill. 
Luc.  O,  know  he  is  the  bridle  of  your  will. 

Adr.  There’s  none  but  asses  will  be  bridled  so. 

Luc.  Why,  headstrong  liberty  is  lash’d  with 
woe. 

There’s  nothing  situate  under  heaven’s  eye 
But  hath  his  bound,  in  earth,  in  sea,  in  sky: 

The  beasts,  the  fishes  and  the  winged  fowls 
Are  their  males’  subjects  and  at  their  controls: 

Men,  more  divine,  the  masters  of  all  these,  20 
Lords  of  the  wide  world  and  wild  watery  seas. 
Indued  with  intellectual  sense  and  souls. 

Of  more  pre-eminence  than  fish  and  fowls. 

Are  masters  to  their  females,  and  their  lords: 

Then  let  your  will  attend  on  their  accords. 

Adr.  This  servitude  makes  you  to  keep  unwed. 
Luc.  Not  this,  but  troubles  of  the  marriage-bed. 
Adr.  But,  were  you  wedded,  you  would  hear 
some  sway. 

Luc.  Ere  I  learn  love.  I’ll  practise  to  obey. 

Adr.  How  if  your  husband  start  some  other 
where?  50 

Luc.  Till  he  come  home  again,  I  would  forbear. 
Adr.  Patience  unmoved!  no  marvel  though  she 
pause; 

They  can  be  meek  that  have  no  other  cause. 

A  wretched  soul,  bruised  with  adversity, 


OF  ERRORS 

We  bid  be  quiet  when  we  hear  it  cry; 

But  were  we  burden’d  with  like  weight  of  pain. 
As  much  or  more  we  should  ourselves  complain: 
So  thou,  that  hast  no  unkind  mate  to  grieve  thee. 
With  urging  helpless  patience  wouldst  relieve 
me; 

But,  if  thou  live  to  see  like  right  bereft,  ^0 

This  fool-begg’d  patience  in  thee  will  be  left. 

Luc.  Well,  I  will  marry  one  day,  but  to  try. 
Here  comes  your  man;  now  is  your  husband  nigh. 

Enter  dromio  of  ephesus. 

Adr.  Say,  is  your  tardy  master  now  at  hand? 
Dro.  E.  Nay,  he’s  at  two  hands  with  me,  and 
that  my  two  ears  can  witness. 

Adr.  Say,  didst  thou  speak  with  him?  know’st 
thou  his  mind? 

Dro.  E.  Ay,  ay,  he  told  his  mind  upon  mine 
ear: 

Beshrew  his  hand,  I  scarce  could  understand  it. 
Luc.  Spake  he  so  doubtfully,  thou  couldst  not 
feel  his  meaning? 

Dro.  E.  Nay,  he  struck  so  plainly,  I  could  too 
well  feel  his  blows;  and  withal  so  doubtfully  that 
I  could  scarce  understand  them. 

Adr.  But  say,  I  prithee,  is  he  coming  home? 

It  seems  he  hath  great  care  to  please  his  wife. 

Dro.  E.  Why,  mistress,  sure  my  master  is  horn- 
mad. 

Adr.  Horn-mad,  thou  villain! 

Dro.  E.  I  mean  not  cuckold-mad; 

But,  sure,  he  is  stark  mad. 

When  I  desired  him  to  come  home  to  dinner,  60 
He  ask’d  me  for  a  thousand  marks  in  gold: 

“’Tis  dinner-time,”  quoth  I;  “My  gold!”  quoth 
he: 

“Your  meat  doth  burn,”  quoth  I;  “My  gold!” 
quoth  he: 

“Will  you  come  home?”  quoth  I;  “My  gold!” 
quoth  he, 

“Where  is  the  thousand  marks  I  gave  thee,  vil¬ 
lain?” 

“The  pig,”  quoth  I,  “is  burn’d”;  “My  gold!” 
quoth  he: 

“My  mistress,  sir,”  quoth  I;  “Hang  up  thy  mis¬ 
tress! 

I  know  not  thy  mistress;  out  on  thy  mistress!” 
Luc.  Quoth  who? 

Dro.  E.  Quoth  my  master:  70 

“I  know,”  quoth  he,  “no  house,  no  wife,  no  mis¬ 
tress.” 

So  that  my  errand,  due  unto  my  tongue, 

I  thank  him,  I  bare  home  upon  my  shoulders; 

For,  in  conclusion,  he  did  beat  me  there. 

Adr.  Go  back  again,  thou  slave,  and  fetch  him 
home. 


SCENE  I 

Dro.  E.  Go  back  again,  and  be  new  beaten 
home? 

For  God’s  sake,  send  some  other  messenger. 

Adr.  Back,  slave,  or  I  will  break  thy  pate 
across. 

Dro.  E.  And  he  will  bless  that  cross  with  other 
beating: 

Between  you  I  shall  have  a  holy  head.  8o 

Adr.  Hence,  prating  peasant!  fetch  thy  master 
home. 

Dro.  E.  Am  I  so  round  with  you  as  you  with  me, 
That  like  a  football  you  do  spurn  me  thus? 

You  spurn  me  hence,  and  he  will  spurn  me  hither: 
If  I  last  in  this  service,  you  must  case  me  in 

leather.  [Exit. 

Luc.  Fie,  how  impatience  loureth  in  your  face! 
Adr.  His  company  must  do  his  minions  grace, 
Whilst  I  at  home  starve  for  a  merry  look. 

Hath  homely  age  the  alluring  beauty  took 
From  my  poor  cheek?  then  he  hath  wasted  it:  po 
Are  my  discourses  dull?  barren  my  wit? 

If  voluble  and  sharp  discourse  be  marr’d. 
Unkindness  blunts  it  more  than  marble  hard: 

Do  their  gay  vestments  his  affections  bait? 

That’s  not  my  fault:  he’s  master  of  my  state: 
What  ruins  are  in  me  that  can  be  found. 

By  him  not  ruin’d?  then  is  he  the  ground 
Of  my  defeatures.  My  decayed  fair 
A  sunny  look  of  his  would  soon  repair: 

But,  too  unruly  deer,  he  breaks  the  pale  loo 
And  feeds  from  home;  poor  I  am  but  his  stale. 
Luc.  Self-harming  jealousy!  fie,  beat  it  hence! 
Adr.  Unfeeling  fools  can  with  such  wrongs  dis¬ 
pense. 

I  know  his  eye  doth  homage  otherwhere; 

Or  else  what  lets  it  but  he  would  be  here? 

Sister,  you  know  he  promised  me  a  chain; 

Would  that  alone,  alone  he  would  detain. 

So  he  would  keep  fair  quarter  with  his  bed! 

I  see  the  jewel  best  enamelled 

Will  lose  his  beauty;  yet  the  gold  bides  still  no 

That  others  touch,  and  often  touching  will 

Wear  gold:  and  no  man  that  hath  a  name 

By  falsehood  and  corruption  doth  it  shame. 

Since  that  my  beauty  cannot  please  his  eye. 

I’ll  weep  what’s  left  away,  and  weeping  die. 

Luc.  How  many  fond  fools  serve  mad  jealousy! 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  A  public  place 
Enter  antipholus  of  Syracuse. 

Ant.  S.  The  gold  I  gave  to  Dromio  is  laid  up 
Safe  at  the  Centaur;  and  the  heedful  slave 
Is  wander’d  forth,  in  care  to  seek  me  out 
By  computation  and  mine  host’s  report. 

I  could  not  speak  with  Dromio  since  at  first 


153 

I  sent  him  from  the  mart.  See,  here  he  comes. 

Enter  dromio  of  Syracuse. 

How  now,  sir!  is  your  merry  humour  alter’d? 

As  you  love  strokes,  so  jest  with  me  again. 

You  know  no  Centaur?  you  received  no  gold? 
Your  mistress  sent  to  have  me  home  to  dinner?  10 
My  house  was  at  the  Phoenix?  Wast  thou  mad 
That  thus  so  madly  thou  didst  answer  me? 

Dro.  S.  What  answer,  sir?  when  spake  I  such  a 
word? 

Ant.  S.  Even  now,  even  here,  not  half  an  hour 
since. 

Dro.  S.  I  did  not  see  you  since  you  sent  me 
hence. 

Home  to  the  Centaur,  with  the  gold  you  gave 
me. 

Ant.  S.  Villain,  thou  didst  deny  the  gold’s  re¬ 
ceipt 

And  told’st  me  of  a  mistress  and  a  dinner; 

For  which,  I  hope,  thou  felt’st  I  was  displeased. 
Dro.  S.  I  am  glad  to  see  you  in  this  merry  vein: 
What  means  this  jest?  I  pray  you,  master,  tell 
me.  21 

Ant.  S.  Yea,  dost  thou  jeer  and  flout  me  in  the 
teeth? 

Think’st  thou  I  jest?  Hold,  take  thou  that,  and 
that.  [Beating  him.] 

Dro.  S.  Hold,  sir,  for  God’s  sake!  now  your  jest 
is  earnest: 

Upon  what  bargain  do  you  give  it  me? 

Ant.  S.  Because  that  I  familiarly  sometimes 
Do  use  you  for  my  fool  and  chat  with  you, 

Your  sauciness  will  jest  upon  my  love 
And  make  a  common  of  my  serious  hours.  2p 
When  the  sun  shines  let  foolish  gnats  make  sport, 
But  creep  in  crannies  when  he  hides  his  beams. 

If  you  will  jest  with  me,  know  my  aspect 
And  fashion  your  demeanour  to  my  looks. 

Or  I  will  beat  this  method  in  your  sconce. 

Dro.  S.  Sconce  call  you  it?  so  you  would  leave 
battering,  I  had  rather  have  it  a  head:  an  you  use 
these  blows  long,  I  must  get  a  sconce  for  my 
head  and  insconce  it  too;  or  else  I  shall  seek  my 
wit  in  my  shoulders.  But,  I  pray,  sir,  why  am  I 
beaten?  40 

Ant.  S.  Dost  thou  not  know? 

Dro.  S.  Nothing,  sir,  but  that  I  am  beaten. 

Ant.  S.  Shall  I  tell  you  why? 

Dro.  S.  Ay,  sir,  and  wherefore;  for  they  say 
every  why  hath  a  wherefore. 

Ant.  S.  Why,  first,  for  flouting  me;  and  then, 
wherefore. 

For  urging  it  the  second  time  to  me. 

Dro.  S.  Was  there  ever  any  man  thus  beaten  out 
of  season. 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


When  in  the  why  and  the  wherefore  is  neither 
rhyme  nor  reason? 

Well,  sir,  I  thank  you.  jo 

Ant.  S.  Thank  me,  sir!  for  what? 

Dro.  S.  Marry,  sir,  for  this  something  that  you 
gave  me  for  nothing. 

Ant.  S.  ril  make  you  amends  next,  to  give  you 
nothing  for  something.  But  say,  sir,  is  it  dinner¬ 
time? 

Dro.  S.  No,  sir:  I  think  the  meat  wants  that  I 
have. 

Ant.  S.  In  good  time,  sir;  what’s  that? 

Dro.  S.  Basting. 

Ant.  S.  Well,  sir,  then  ’twill  be  dry.  6o 

Dro.  S.  If  it  be,  sir,  I  pray  you,  eat  none  of  it. 
Ant.  S.  Your  reason? 

Dro.  S.  Lest  it  make  you  choleric  and  purchase 
me  another  dry  basting. 

Ant.  S.  Well,  sir,  learn  to  jest  in  good  time: 
there’s  a  time  for  all  things. 

Dro.  S.  I  durst  have  denied  that,  before  you 
were  so  choleric. 

Ant.  S.  By  what  rule,  sir? 

Dro.  S.  Marry,  sir,  by  a  rule  as  plain  as  the  plain 
bald  pate  of  father  Time  himself.  7/ 

Ant.  S.  Let’s  hear  it. 

Dro.  S.  There’s  no  time  for  a  man  to  recover  his 
hair  that  grows  bald  by  nature. 

Ant.  S.  May  he  not  do  it  by  fine  and  recovery? 
Dro.  S.  Yes,  to  pay  a  fine  for  a  periwig  and  re¬ 
cover  the  lost  hair  of  another  man. 

Ant.  S.  Why  is  Time  such  a  niggard  of  hair, 
being,  as  it  is,  so  plentiful  an  excrement?  yp 
Dro.  S.  Because  it  is  a  blessing  that  he  bestows 
on  beasts;  and  what  he  hath  scanted  men  in  hair 
he  hath  given  them  in  wit. 

Ant.  S.  Why,  but  there’s  many  a  man  hath  more 
hair  than  wit. 

Dro.  S.  Not  a  man  of  those  but  he  hath  the  wit 
to  lose  his  hair. 

Ant.  S.  Why,  thou  didst  conclude  hairy  men 
plain  dealers  without  wit. 

Dro.  S.  The  plainer  dealer,  the  sooner  lost:  yet 
he  loseth  it  in  a  kind  of  jollity. 

Ant.  S.  For  what  reason? 

Dro.  S.  For  two;  and  sound  ones  too. 

Ant.  S.  Nay,  not  sound,  I  pray  you. 

Dro.  S.  Sure  ones  then. 

Ant.  S.  Nay,  not  sure,  in  a  thing  falsing. 

Dro.  S.  Certain  ones  then. 

Ant.  S.  Name  them. 

Dro.  S.  The  one,  to  save  the  money  that  he 
spends  in  tiring;  the  other  that  at  dinner  they 
should  not  drop  in  his  porridge.  100 

Ant.  S.  You  would  all  this  time  have  proved 
there  is  no  time  for  all  things. 


Dro.  S.  Marry,  and  did,  sir;  namely,  no  time  to 
recover  hair  lost  by  nature. 

Ant.  S.  But  your  reason  was  not  substantial, 
why  there  is  no  time  to  recover. 

Dro.  S.  Thus  I  mend  it:  Time  himself  is  bald 
and  therefore  to  the  world’s  end  will  have  bald 
followers. 

Ant.  S.  I  knew  ’t would  be  a  bald  conclusion: 

But,  soft!  who  wafts  us  yonder?  /// 

Enter  adriana  and  luciana. 

Adr.  Ay,  ay,  Antipholus,  look  strange  and 
frown: 

Some  other  mistress  hath  thy  sweet  aspects; 

I  am  not  Adriana  nor  thy  wife. 

The  time  was  once  when  thou  unurged  wouldst 
vow 

That  never  words  were  music  to  thine  ear. 

That  never  object  pleasing  in  thine  eye. 

That  never  touch  well  welcome  to  thy  hand. 

That  never  meat  sweet-savour’d  in  thy  taste, 
Unless  I  spake,  or  look’d,  or  touch’d,  or  carved 
to  thee.  120 

How  comes  it  now,  my  husband,  O,  how  comes 
it 

That  thou  art  thus  estranged  from  thyself? 
Thyself  I  call  it,  being  strange  to  me. 

That,  undividable,  incorporate. 

Am  better  than  thy  dear  self’s  better  part. 

Ah,  do  not  tear  away  thyself  from  me! 

Foi  know,  my  love,  as  easy  mayst  thou  fall 
A  drop  of  water  in  the  breaking  gulf 
And  take  unmingled  thence  that  drop  again. 
Without  addition  or  diminishing,  /50 

As  take  from  me  thyself  and  not  me  too. 

How  dearly  would  it  touch  thee  to  the  quick 
Shouldst  thou  but  hear  1  were  licentious 
And  that  this  body,  consecrate  to  thee. 

By  ruffian  lust  should  be  contaminate! 

Wouldst  thou  not  spit  at  me  and  spurn  at  me 
And  hurl  the  name  of  husband  in  my  face 
And  tear  the  stain’d  skin  off  my  harlot-brow 
And  from  my  false  hand  cut  the  wedding-ring 
And  break  it  with  a  deep-divorcing  vow?  /40 
I  know  thou  canst;  and  therefore  see  thou  do  it. 

I  am  possess’d  with  an  adulterate  blot; 

My  blood  is  mingled  with  the  crime  of  lust: 

For  if  we  two  be  one  and  thou  play  false, 

I  do  digest  the  poison  of  thy  flesh. 

Being  strumpet ed  by  thy  contagion. 

Keep  then  fair  league  and  truce  with  thy  true 
bed; 

I  live  unstain’d,  thou  undishonoured. 

Ant.  S.  Plead  you  to  me,  fair  dame?  I  know  you 
not: 

In  Ephesus  I  am  but  two  hours  old,  /50 


SCENE  II 


155 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


As  strange  unto  your  town  as  to  your  talk; 

Who,  every  word  by  all  my  wit  being  scann’d, 
Want  wit  in  all  one  word  to  understand. 

Luc.  Fie,  brother!  how  the  world  is  changed 
with  you! 

When  were  you  wont  to  use  my  sister  thus? 

She  sent  for  you  by  Dromio  home  to  dinner. 

Ant.  S.  By  Dromio? 

Dro.  S.  By  me? 

A  dr.  By  thee;  and  this  thou  didst  return  from 
him. 

That  he  did  buffet  thee  and  in  his  blows  160 
Denied  my  house  for  his,  me  for  his  wife. 

Ant.  S.  Did  you  converse,  sir,  with  this  gentle¬ 
woman? 

What  is  the  course  and  drift  of  your  compact? 
Dro.  S.  I,  sir?  I  never  saw  her  till  this  time. 

Ant.  S.  Villain,  thou  best;  for  even  her  very 
words 

Didst  thou  deliver  to  me  on  the  mart. 

Dro.  S.  I  never  spake  with  her  in  all  my  life. 

Ant.  S.  How  can  she  thus  then  call  us  by  our 
names? 

Unless  it  be  by  inspiration. 

Adr.  How  ill  agrees  it  with  your  gravity  ijo 
To  counterfeit  thus  grossly  with  your  slave. 
Abetting  him  to  thwart  me  in  my  mood! 

Be  it  my  wrong  you  are  from  me  exempt. 

But  wrong  not  that  wrong  with  a  more  contempt. 
Come,  I  will  fasten  on  this  sleeve  of  thine: 

Thou  art  an  elm,  my  husband,  I  a  vine. 

Whose  weakness  married  to  thy  stronger  state 
Makes  me  with  thy  strength  to  communicate: 

If  aught  possess  thee  from  me,  it  is  dross. 
Usurping  ivy,  brier,  or  idle  moss;  180 

Who,  all  for  want  of  pruning,  with  intrusion 
Infect  thy  sap  and  live  on  thy  confusion. 

Ant.  S.  To  me  she  speaks;  she  moves  me  for  her 
theme: 

What,  was  I  married  to  her  in  my  dream? 

Or  sleep  I  now  and  think  I  hear  all  this? 

What  error  drives  our  eyes  and  ears  amiss? 

Until  I  know  this  sure  uncertainty. 

I’ll  entertain  the  offer’d  fallacy. 

Luc.  Dromio,  go  bid  the  servants  spread  for 
dinner. 

Dro.  S.  O,  for  my  beads!  I  cross  me  for  a  sinner. 
This  is  the  fairy  land:  O  spite  of  spites!  /p/ 
We  talk  with  goblins,  owls  and  sprites: 

If  we  obey  them  not,  this  will  ensue. 

They’ll  suck  our  breath  or  pinch  us  black  and 
blue. 

Luc.  Why  pratest  thou  to  thyself  and  answer’ st 
not? 

Dromio,  thou  drone,  thou  snail,  thou  slug,  thou 
sot! 


Dro.  S.  I  am  transformed,  master,  am  I  not? 

Ant.  S.  I  think  thou  art  in  mind,  and  so  am  I. 

Dro.  S.  Nay,  master,  both  in  mind  and  in  my 
shape. 

Ant.  S.  Thou  hast  thine  own  form. 

Dro.  S.  No,  I  am  an  ape.  200 

Luc.  If  thou  art  changed  to  aught,  ’tis  to  an  ass. 
Dro.  S.  ’Tis  true;  she  rides  me  and  I  long  for 
grass. 

’Tis  so,  I  am  an  ass;  else  it  could  never  be 
But  I  should  know  her  as  well  as  she  knows 
me. 

Adr.  Come,  come,  no  longer  will  I  be  a  fool. 

To  put  the  finger  in  the  eye  and  weep. 

Whilst  man  and  master  laugh  my  woes  to  scorn. 
Come,  sir,  to  dinner.  Dromio,  keep  the  gate. 
Husband,  I’ll  dine  above  with  you  to-day 
And  shrive  you  of  a  thousand  idle  pranks.  210 

Sirrah,  if  any  ask  you  for  your  master. 

Say  he  dines  forth  and  let  no  creature  enter. 
Come,  sister.  Dromio,  play  the  porter  well. 

Ant.  S.  Am  I  in  earth,  in  heaven,  or  in  hell? 
Sleeping  or  waking?  mad  or  well-advised? 
Known  unto  these,  and  to  myself  disguised! 

I’ll  say  as  they  say  and  persever  so 
And  in  this  mist  at  all  adventures  go. 

Dro.  S.  Master,  shall  I  be  porter  at  the  gate? 
Adr.  Ay;  and  let  none  enter,  lest  I  break  your 
pate.  220 

Luc.  Come,  come,  Antipholus,  we  dine  too  late. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  Before  the  house  of  Antipholus  of 
Ephesus. 

Enter  antipholus  of  ephesus,  dromio  of 

EPHESUS,  ANGELO,  and  BALTHAZAR. 

Ant.  E.  Good  Signior  Angelo,  you  must  excuse 
us  all; 

My  wife  is  shrewish  when  I  keep  not  hours: 

Say  that  I  linger’d  with  you  at  your  shop 

To  see  the  making  of  her  carcanet 

And  that  to-morrow  you  will  bring  it  home. 

But  here’s  a  villain  that  would  face  me  down 
He  met  me  on  the  mart  and  that  I  beat  him 
And  charged  him  with  a  thousand  marks  in  gold 
And  that  I  did  deny  my  wife  and  house. 

Thou  drunkard,  thou,  what  didst  thou  mean  by 
this? 

Dro.  E.  Say  what  you  will,  sir,  but  I  know  what 
I  know; 

That  you  beat  me  at  the  mart,  I  have  your  hand 
to  show: 

If  the  skin  were  parchment  and  the  blows  you 
gave  were  ink, 


ACT  III 


156  THE  COMEDY 

Your  own  handwriting  would  tell  you  what  I 
think. 

Avt.  E.  I  think  thou  art  an  ass. 

Dro.  E.  Marry,  so  it  doth  appear 

By  the  wrongs  I  suffer  and  the  blows  I 
bear. 

I  should  kick,  being  kick’d;  and,  being  at  that 
pass. 

You  would  keep  from  my  heels  and  beware  of  an 
ass. 

Ant.  E.  You’re  sad,  Signior  Balthazar:  pray 
God  our  cheer 

May  answer  my  good  will  and  your  good  wel¬ 
come  here.  20 

Bal.  I  hold  your  dainties  cheap,  sir,  and  your 
welcome  dear. 

Ant.  E.  O,  Signior  Balthazar,  either  at  flesh  or 
fish, 

A  table  full  of  welcome  makes  scarce  one  dainty 
dish. 

Bal.  Good  meat,  sir,  is  common;  that  every 
churl  affords. 

Ant.  E.  And  welcome  more  common;  for  that’s 
nothing  but  words. 

Bal.  Small  cheer  and  great  welcome  makes  a 
merry  feast. 

Ant.  E.  Ay  to  a  niggardly  host  and  more  spar¬ 
ing  guest: 

But  though  my  cates  be  mean,  take  them  in  good 
part; 

Better  cheer  may  you  have,  but  not  with  better 
heart. 

But,  soft!  my  door  is  lock’d.  Go  bid  them  let  us 
in.  50 

Dro.  E.  Maud,  Bridget,  Marian,  Cicely,  Gil¬ 
lian,  Ginn! 

Dro.  S.  [Within]  Mome,  malt-horse,  capon, 
coxcomb,  idiot,  patch! 

Either  get  thee  from  the  door  or  sit  down  at  the 
hatch. 

Dost  thou  conjure  for  wenches,  that  thou  call’st 
for  such  store. 

When  one  is  one  too  many.?  Go  get  thee  from 
the  door. 

Dro.  E.  What  patch  is  made  our  porter?  My 
master  stays  in  the  street. 

Dro.  S.  [  Within]  Let  him  walk  from  whence  he 
came,  lest  he  catch  cold  on’s  feet. 

Ant.  E.  Who  talks  within  there?  ho,  open  the 
door! 

Dro.  S.  [Within]  Right,  sir;  I’ll  tell  you  when, 
an  you’ll  tell  me  wherefore. 

Ant.  E.  Wherefore?  for  my  dinner:  I  have  not 
dined  to-day.  40 

Dro.  S.  [Within]  Nor  to-day  here  you  must  not; 
come  again  when  you  may. 


OE  ERRORS 

Ant.  E.  What  art  thou  that  keepest  me  out  from 
the  house  I  owe? 

Dro.  S.  [Within]  The  porter  for  this  time,  sir, 
and  my  name  is  Dromio. 

Dro.  E.  O  villain!  thou  hast  stolen  both  mine 
office  and  my  name. 

The  one  ne’er  got  me  credit,  the  other  mickle 
blame. 

If  thou  hadst  been  Dromio  to-day  in  my 
place. 

Thou  wouldst  have  changed  thy  face  for  a  name 
or  thy  name  for  an  ass. 

Luce.  [Within]  What  a  coil  is  there,  Dromio? 
who  are  those  at  the  gate? 

Dro.  E.  Let  my  master  in.  Luce. 

Luce.  [Within]  Faith,  no;  he  comes  too  late; 

And  so  tell  your  master. 

Dro.  E.  O  Lord,  I  must  laugh! 

Have  at  you  with  a  proverb:  Shall  I  set  in  my 
staff? 

Luce.  [Within]  Have  at  you  with  another; 
that’s:  When?  can  you  tell? 

Dro.  S.  [Within]  If  thy  name  be  call’d  Luce — 
Luce,  thou  hast  answer’d  him  well. 

Ant.  E.  Do  you  hear,  you  minion?  you’ll  let  us 
in,  I  hope? 

Luce.  [Within]  I  thought  to  have  ask’d  you. 

Dro.  S.  [Within]  And  you  said  no. 

Dro.  E.  So,  come,  help:  well  struck!  there  was 
blow  for  blow. 

Ant.  E.  Thou  baggage,  let  me  in. 

Luce.  [Within]  Can  you  tell  for  whose  sake? 

Dro.  E.  Master,  knock  the  door  hard. 

Luce.  [Within]  Let  him  knock  till  it  ache. 

Ant.  E.  You’ll  cry  for  this,  minion,  if  I  beat  the 
door  down. 

Luce.  [Within]  What  needs  all  that,  and  a  pair 
of  stocks  in  the  town?  60 

Adr.  [Within]  Who  is  that  at  the  door  that 
keeps  all  this  noise? 

Dro.  S.  [Within]  By  my  troth,  your  town  is 
troubled  with  unruly  boys. 

Ant.  E.  Are  you  there,  wife?  you  might  have 
come  before. 

Adr.  [Within]  Your  wife,  sir  knave!  go  get  you 
from  the  door. 

Dro.  E.  If  you  went  in  pain,  master,  this  “knave” 
would  go  sore. 

Ang.  Here  is  neither  cheer,  sir,  nor  welcome: 
we  would  fain  have  either. 

Bal.  In  debating  which  was  best,  we  shall  part 
with  neither. 

Dro.  E.  They  stand  at  the  door,  master;  bid 
them  welcome  hither. 

Ant.  E.  There  is  something  in  the  wind,  that  we 
cannot  get  in. 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


Dro,  E.  You  would  say  so,  master,  if  your  gar¬ 
ments  were  thin.  70 

Your  cake  there  is  warm  within;  you  stand  here 
in  the  cold: 

It  would  make  a  man  mad  as  a  buck,  to  be  so 
bought  and  sold. 

Ant.  E.  Go  fetch  me  something:  I’ll  break  ope 
the  gate. 

Dro.  S.  [Within]  Break  any  breaking  here,  and 
I’ll  break  your  knave’s  pate. 

Dro.  E.  A  man  may  break  a  word  with  you,  sir, 
and  words  are  but  wind. 

Ay,  and  break  it  in  your  face,  so  he  break  it  not 
behind. 

Dro.  S.  [Within]  It  seems  thou  want’st  break¬ 
ing:  out  upon  thee,  hind! 

Dro.  E.  Here’s  too  much  “out  upon  thee!”  I 
pray  thee,  let  me  in. 

Dro.  S.  [Within]  Ay,  when  fowls  have  no 
feathers  and  fish  have  no  fin. 

Ant.  E.  Well,  I’ll  break  in:  go  borrow  me  a 
crow.  80 

Dro.  E.  A  crow  without  feather?  Master,  mean 
you  so? 

For  a  fish  without  a  fin,  there’s  a  fowl  without  a 
feather: 

If  a  crow  help  us  in,  sirrah,  we’ll  pluck  a  crow 
together. 

Ant.  E.  Go  get  thee  gone;  fetch  me  an  iron 
crow. 

Bal.  Have  patience,  sir;  O,  let  it  not  be  so! 
Herein  you  war  against  your  reputation 
And  draw  within  the  compass  of  suspect 
The  unviolated  honour  of  your  wife. 

Once  this — your  long  experience  of  her  wisdom. 
Her  sober  virtue,  years  and  modesty,  po 

Plead  on  her  part  some  cause  to  you  unknown; 
And  doubt  not,  sir,  but  she  will  well  excuse 
Why  at  this  time  the  doors  are  made  against 
you. 

Be  ruled  by  me:  depart  in  patience. 

And  let  us  to  the  Tiger  all  to  dinner. 

And  about  evening  come  yourself  alone 
To  know  the  reason  of  this  strange  restraint. 

If  by  strong  hand  you  offer  to  break  in 
Now  in  the  stirring  passage  of  the  day, 

A  vulgar  comment  will  be  made  of  it,  too 

And  that  supposed  by  the  common  rout 
Against  your  yet  ungalled  estimation 
That  may  with  foul  intrusion  enter  in 
And  dwell  upon  your  grave  when  you  are  dead; 
For  slander  lives  upon  succession. 

For  ever  housed  where  it  gets  possession. 

Ant.  E.  You  have  prevail’d:  I  will  depart  in 
quiet. 

And,  in  despite  of  mirth,  mean  to  be  merry. 


I  know  a  wench  of  excellent  discourse, 

Pretty  and  witty,  wild  and  yet,  too,  gentle:  no 
There  will  we  dine.  This  woman  that  I  mean, 

My  wife — but,  I  protest,  without  desert — 

Hath  oftentimes  upbraided  me  withal; 

To  her  will  we  to  dinner.  [To  angelo]  Get  you 
home 

And  fetch  the  chain;  by  this  I  know  ’tis  made: 
Bring  it,  I  pray  you,  to  the  Porpentine; 

For  there’s  the  house:  that  chain  will  I  bestow — 
Be  it  for  nothing  but  to  spite  my  wife — 

Upon  mine  hostess  there:  good  sir,  make  haste. 
Since  mine  own  doors  refuse  to  entertain  me,  120 
I’ll  knock  elsewhere,  to  see  if  they’ll  disdain  me. 
Ang.  I’ll  meet  you  at  that  place  some  hour 
hence. 

Ant.  E.  Do  so.  This  jest  shall  cost  me  some 
expense.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  same 

Enter  luciana  and  antipholus  of  Syracuse. 
Luc.  And  may  it  be  that  you  have  quite  forgot 
A  husband’s  office?  shall,  Antipholus, 

Even  in  the  spring  of  love,  thy  love-springs  rot? 

Shall  love,  in  building,  grow  so  ruinous? 

If  you  did  wed  my  sister  for  her  wealth. 

Then  for  her  wealth’s  sake  use  her  with  more 
kindness: 

Or  if  you  like  elsewhere,  do  it  by  stealth; 

Muffle  your  false  love  with  some  show  of 
blindness: 

Let  not  my  sister  read  it  in  your  eye; 

Be  not  thy  tongue  thy  own  shame’s  orator;  10 
Look  sweet,  speak  fair,  become  disloyalty; 

Apparel  vice  like  virtue’s  harbinger; 

Bear  a  fair  presence,  though  your  heart  be 
tainted; 

Teach  sin  the  carriage  of  a  holy  saint; 

Be  secret-false:  what  need  she  be  acquainted? 

What  simple  thief  brags  of  his  own  attaint? 
’Tis  double  wrong,  to  truant  with  your  bed 
And  let  her  read  it  in  thy  looks  at  board: 

Shame  hath  a  bastard  fame,  well  managed; 

Ill  deeds  are  doubled  with  an  evil  word.  20 
Alas,  poor  women!  make  us  but  believe. 

Being  compact  of  credit,  that  you  love  us; 
Though  others  have  the  arm,  show  us  the  sleeve; 

We  in  your  motion  turn  and  you  may  move  us. 
Then,  gentle  brother,  get  you  in  again; 

Comfort  my  sister,  cheer  her,  call  her  wife: 
’Tis  holy  sport  to  be  a  little  vain. 

When  the  sweet  breath  of  flattery  conquers 
strife. 

Ant.  S.  Sweet  mistress — what  your  name  is 
else,  I  know  not. 

Nor  by  what  wonder  you  do  hit  of  mine —  50 


ACT  III 


158  THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


Less  in  your  knowledge  and  your  grace  you 
show  not 

Than  our  earth’s  wonder,  more  than  earth  di¬ 
vine. 

Teach  me,  dear  creature,  how  to  think  and  speak; 

Lay  open  to  my  earthly-gross  conceit. 
Smother’d  in  errors,  feeble,  shallow,  weak. 

The  folded  meaning  of  your  words’  deceit. 
Against  my  soul’s  pure  truth  why  labour  you 
To  make  it  wander  in  an  unknown  field? 

Are  you  a  god?  would  you  create  me  new? 
Transform  me  then,  and  to  your  power  I’ll 
yield.  40 

But  if  that  I  am  I,  then  well  I  know 
Your  weeping  sister  is  no  wife  of  mine. 

Nor  to  her  bed  no  homage  do  I  owe: 

Far  more,  far  more  to  you  do  I  decline. 

O,  train  me  not,  sweet  mermaid,  with  thy  note. 
To  drown  me  in  thy  sister’s  flood  of  tears: 
Sing,  siren,  for  thyself  and  I  will  dote: 

Spread  o’er  the  silver  waves  thy  golden  hairs. 
And  as  a  bed  I’ll  take  them  and  there  lie. 

And  in  that  glorious  supposition  think  50 

He  gains  by  death  that  hath  such  means  to  die: 
Let  Love,  being  light,  be  drowned  if  she  sink! 
Luc.  What,  are  you  mad,  that  you  do  reason  so? 
Ant.  S.  Not  mad,  but  mated;  how,  I  do  not 
know. 

Luc.  It  is  a  fault  that  springeth  from  your  eye. 
Ant.  S.  For  gazing  on  your  beams,  fair  sun, 
being  by. 

Luc.  Gaze  where  you  should,  and  that  will  clear 
your  sight. 

Ant.  S.  As  good  to  wink,  sweet  love,  as  look  on 
night. 

Luc.  Why  call  you  me  love?  call  my  sister  so. 
Ant.  S.  Thy  sister’s  sister. 

Luc.  That’s  my  sister. 

Ant.  S.  No;  60 

It  is  thyself,  mine  own  self’s  better  part. 

Mine  eye’s  clear  eye,  my  dear  heart’s  dearer  heart. 
My  food,  my  fortune  and  my  sweet  hope’s  aim. 
My  sole  earth’s  heaven  and  my  heaven’s  claim. 
Luc.  All  this  my  sister  is,  or  else  should  be. 

Ant.  S.  Call  thyself  sister,  sweet,  for  I  am  thee. 
Thee  will  I  love  and  with  thee  lead  my  life: 

Thou  hast  no  husband  yet  nor  I  no  wife. 

Give  me  thy  hand. 

Luc.  O,  soft,  sir!  hold  you  still: 

I’ll  fetch  my  sister,  to  get  her  good  will.  [Exit,  jo 

Enter  dromio  of  Syracuse. 

Ant.  S.  Why,  how  now,  Dromio!  where  runn’st 
thou  so  fast? 

Dro.  S.  Do  you  know  me,  sir?  am  I  Dromio? 
am  I  your  man?  am  I  myself? 


Ant.  S  Thou  art  Dromio,  thou  art  my  man, 
thou  art  thyself. 

Dro.  S.  I  am  an  ass,  I  am  a  woman’s  man  and 
besides  myself. 

Ant.  S.  What  woman’s  man?  and  how  besides 
thyself?  80 

Dro.  S.  Marry,  sir,  besides  myself,  I  am  due  to 
a  woman;  one  that  claims  me,  one  that  haunts 
me,  one  that  will  have  me. 

Ant.  S.  What  claim  lays  she  to  thee? 

Dro.  S.  Marry,  sir,  such  claim  as  you  would 
lay  to  your  horse;  and  she  would  have  me  as  a 
beast:  not  that,  I  being  a  beast,  she  would  have 
me;  but  that  she,  being  a  very  beastly  creature, 
lays  claim  to  me. 

Ant.  S.  What  is  she?  yo 

Dro.  S.  A  very  reverent  body;  ay,  such  a  one 
as  a  man  may  not  speak  of  without  he  say  “Sir- 
reverence.”  I  have  but  lean  luck  in  the  match, 
and  yet  is  she  a  wondrous  fat  marriage. 

Ant.  S.  How  dost  thou  mean  a  fat  marriage? 

Dro.  S.  Marry,  sir,  she’s  the  kitchen  wench  and 
all  grease;  and  I  know  not  what  use  to  put  her  to 
but  to  make  a  lamp  of  her  and  run  from  her  by 
her  own  light.  I  warrant,  her  rags  and  the  tallow 
in  them  will  burn  a  Poland  winter:  if  she  lives 
till  doomsday,  she’ll  burn  a  week  longer  than 
the  whole  world. 

Ant.  S.  What  complexion  is  she  of? 

Dro.  S.  Swart,  like  my  shoe,  but  her  face  noth¬ 
ing  like  so  clean  kept:  for  why,  she  sweats;  a 
man  may  go  over  shoes  in  the  grime  of  it. 

Ant.  S.  That’s  a  fault  that  water  will  mend. 

Dro.  S.  No,  sir,  ’tis  in  grain;  Noah’s  flood  could 
not  do  it. 

Ant.  S.  What’s  her  name?  no 

Dro.  S.  Nell,  sir;  but  her  name  and  three  quar¬ 
ters,  that’s  an  ell  and  three  quarters,  will  not 
measure  her  from  hip  to  hip. 

Ant.  S.  Then  she  bears  some  breadth? 

Dro.  S.  No  longer  from  head  to  foot  than  from 
hip  to  hip:  she  is  spherical,  like  a  globe;  I  could 
find  out  countries  in  her. 

Ant.  S.  In  what  part  of  her  body  stands  Ire¬ 
land? 

Dro.  S.  Marry,  sir,  in  her  buttocks:  I  found  it 
out  by  the  bogs.  121 

Ant.  S.  Where  Scotland? 

Dro.  S.  I  found  it  by  the  barrenness;  hard  in  the 
palm  of  the  hand. 

Ant.  S.  Where  France? 

Dro.  S.  In  her  forehead;  armed  and  reverted, 
making  war  against  her  heir. 

Ant.  S.  Where  England? 

Dro.  S.  I  looked  for  the  chalky  cliffs,  but  I 
could  find  no  whiteness  in  them;  but  I  guess  it 


SCENE  II 


THE  COMEDY 


stood  in  her  chin,  by  the  salt  rheum  that  ran  be¬ 
tween  France  and  it. 

Ant.  S.  Where  Spain? 

Dro.  S.  Faith,  I  saw  it  not;  but  I  felt  it  hot  in 
her  breath. 

Ant.  S.  Where  America,  the  Indies? 

Dro.  S.  Oh,  sir,  upon  her  nose,  all  o’er  embell¬ 
ished  with  rubies,  carbuncles,  sapphires,  declin¬ 
ing  their  rich  aspect  to  the  hot  breath  of  Spain; 
who  sent  whole  armadoes  of  caracks  to  be  bal¬ 
last  at  her  nose. 

Ant.  S.  Where  stood  Belgia,  the  Netherlands? 

Dro.  S.  Oh,  sir,  I  did  not  look  so  low.  To  con¬ 
clude,  this  drudge,  or  diviner,  laid  claim  to  me; 
called  me  Dromio;  swore  I  was  assured  to  her; 
told  me  what  privy  marks  I  had  about  me,  as, 
the  mark  of  my  shoulder,  the  mole  in  my  neck, 
the  great  wart  on  my  left  arm,  that  I  amazed  ran 
from  her  as  a  witch: 

And,  I  think,  if  my  breast  had  not  been  made  of 
faith  and  my  heart  of  steel,  /jo 

She  had  transform’d  me  to  a  curtal  dog  and  made 
me  turn  i’  the  wheel. 

Ant.  S.  Go  hie  thee  presently,  post  to  the  road: 
An  if  the  wind  blow  any  way  from  shore, 

I  will  not  harbour  in  this  town  to-night: 

If  any  bark  put  forth,  come  to  the  mart. 

Where  I  will  walk  till  thou  return  to  me. 

If  every  one  knows  us  and  we  know  none, 

’Tis  time,  I  think,  to  trudge,  pack,  and  be  gone. 

Dro.  S.  As  from  a  bear  a  man  would  run  for  life. 
So  fly  I  from  her  that  would  be  my  wife.  [Exit. 

Ant.  S.  There’s  none  but  witches  do  inhabit 
here;  i6i 

And  therefore  ’tis  high  time  that  I  were  hence. 
She  that  doth  call  me  husband,  even  my  soul 
Doth  for  a  wife  abhor.  But  her  fair  sister. 
Possess’d  with  such  a  gentle  sovereign  grace, 

Of  such  enchanting  presence  and  discourse. 

Hath  almost  made  me  traitor  to  myself: 

But,  lest  myself  be  guilty  to  self-wrong. 

I’ll  stop  mine  ears  against  the  mermaid’s  song. 

Enter  angelo  'with  the  chain. 

Ang.  Master  Antipholus — 

Ant.  S.  Ay,  that’s  my  name,  ijo 

Ang.  I  know  it  well,  sir:  lo,  here  is  the  chain. 

I  thought  to  have  ta’en  you  at  the  Porpentine: 

The  chain  unfinish’d  made  me  stay  thus  long. 

Ant.  S.  What  is  your  will  that  I  shall  do  with 
this? 

Ang.  What  please  yourself,  sir:  I  have  made  it 
for  you. 

Ant.  S.  Made  it  for  me,  sir!  I  bespoke  it  not. 

Ang.  Not  once,  nor  twice,  but  twenty  times 
you  have. 


OF  ERRORS  159 

Go  home  with  it  and  please  your  wife  withal; 

And  soon  at  supper-time  I’ll  visit  you 
And  then  receive  my  money  for  the  chain.  180 
Ant.  S.  I  pray  you,  sir,  receive  the  money  now. 
For  fear  you  ne’er  see  chain  nor  money  more. 
Ang.  You  are  a  merry  man,  sir:  fare  you  well. 

[Exit. 

Ant.  S.  What  I  should  think  of  this,  I  cannot 
tell: 

But  this  I  think,  there’s  no  man  is  so  vain 
That  would  refuse  so  fair  an  olFer’d  chain. 

I  see  a  man  here  needs  not  live  by  shifts 
When  in  the  streets  he  meets  such  golden  gifts. 
I’ll  to  the  mart  and  there  for  Dromio  stay: 

If  any  ship  put  out,  then  straight  away.  [Exit. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  A  public  place 
Enter  second  merchant,  angelo,  and  an 

OFFICER. 

2nd  Mer.  You  know  since  Pentecost  the  sum  is 
due, 

And  since  I  have  not  much  importuned  you; 

Nor  now  I  had  not,  but  that  I  am  bound 
To  Persia  and  want  guilders  for  my  voyage: 
Therefore  make  present  satisfaction. 

Or  I’ll  attach  you  by  this  officer. 

Ang.  Even  just  the  sum  that  I  do  owe  to  you 
Is  growing  to  me  by  Antipholus, 

And  in  the  instant  that  I  met  with  you 

He  had  of  me  a  chain :  at  five  o’clock  10 

I  shall  receive  the  money  for  the  same. 

Pleaseth  you  walk  with  me  down  to  his  house, 

I  will  discharge  my  bond  and  thank  you  too. 

Enter  antipholus  of  ei*hesus  and  dromio 
OF  EPHESus/r<97//  the  courtezan's. 

Off.  That  labour  may  you  save;  see  where  he 
comes. 

Ant.  E.  While  I  go  to  the  goldsmith’s  house,  go 
thou 

And  buy  a  rope’s  end:  that  will  I  bestow 
Among  my  wife  and  her  confederates. 

For  locking  me  out  of  my  doors  by  day. 

But,  soft!  I  see  the  goldsmith.  Get  thee  gone; 

Buy  thou  a  rope  and  bring  it  home  to  me.  20 
Dro.  E.  I  buy  a  thousand  pound  a  year:  I  buy  a 
rope.  [Exit. 

Ant.  E.  A  man  is  well  holp  up  that  trusts  to 
you: 

I  promised  your  presence  and  the  chain; 

But  neither  chain  nor  goldsmith  came  to  me. 
Belike  you  thought  our  love  would  last  too  long. 
If  it  were  chain’d  together,  and  therefore  came 
not. 


ACT  IV 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


i6o 

A/2g.  Saving  your  merry  humour,  here’s  the 
note 

How  much  your  chain  weighs  to  the  utmost 
carat, 

The  fineness  of  the  gold  and  chargeful  fashion. 
Which  doth  amount  to  three  odd  ducats  more  50 
Than  1  stand  debted  to  this  gentleman: 

I  pray  you,  see  him  presently  discharged. 

For  he  is  bound  to  sea  and  stays  but  for  it. 

Ant.  E.  I  am  not  furnish’d  with  the  present 
money; 

Besides,  I  have  some  business  in  the  town. 

Good  signior,  take  the  stranger  to  my  house 
And  with  you  take  the  chain  and  bid  my  wife 
Disburse  the  sum  on  the  receipt  thereof: 
Perchance  I  will  be  there  as  soon  as  you. 

Ang.  Then  you  will  bring  the  chain  to  her  your- 
sdf} 

Ant.  E.  No;  bear  it  with  you,  lest  I  come  not 
time  enough. 

Ang.  Well,  sir,  I  will.  Have  you  the  chain  about 
you? 

Ant.  E.  An  if  I  have  not,  sir,  I  hope  you  have; 

Or  else  you  may  return  without  your  money. 

Ang.  Nay,  come,  I  pray  you,  sir,  give  me  the 
chain: 

Both  wind  and  tide  stays  for  this  gentleman. 

And  1,  to  blame,  have  held  him  here  too  long. 

Ant.  E.  Good  Lord!  you  use  this  dalliance  to 
excuse 

Your  breach  of  promise  to  the  Porpentine. 

I  should  have  chid  you  for  not  bringing  it,  50 
But,  like  a  shrew,  you  first  begin  to  brawl. 

2nd  Mer.  The  hour  steals  on;  1  pray  you,  sir, 
dispatch. 

Ang.  You  hear  how  he  importunes  me;  the 
chain! 

Ant.  E.  Why,  give  it  to  my  wife  and  fetch  your 
money. 

Ang.  Come,  come,  you  know  I  gave  it  you  even 
now. 

Either  send  the  chain  or  send  me  by  some  token. 

Ant.  E.  Fie,  now  you  run  this  humour  out  of 
breath. 

Come,  where’s  the  chain?  I  pray  you,  let  me  see 
it. 

2nd  Mer.  My  business  cannot  brook  this  dalli¬ 
ance. 

Good  sir,  say  whether  you’ll  answer  me  or  no:  60 
If  not.  I’ll  leave  him  to  the  officer. 

Ant.  E.  I  answer  you!  what  should  I  answer 
you? 

Ang.  The  money  that  you  owe  me  for  the 
chain. 

Ant.  E.  I  owe  you  none  till  I  receive  the  chain. 

Ang.  You  know  I  gave  it  you  half  an  hour  since. 


Ant.  E.  You  gave  me  none:  you  wrong  me 
much  to  say  so, 

Ang.  You  wrong  me  more,  sir,  in  denying  it: 
Consider  how  it  stands  upon  my  credit. 

2nd  Mer.  Well,  officer,  arrest  him  at  my  suit. 
Off.  I  do;  and  charge  you  in  the  Duke’s  name 
to  obey  me.  70 

Ang.  This  touches  me  in  reputation. 

Either  consent  to  pay  this  sum  for  me 
Or  I  attach  you  by  this  officer. 

Ant.  E.  Consent  to  pay  thee  that  I  never  had! 
Arrest  me,  foolish  fellow,  if  thou  darest. 

Ang.  Here  is  thy  fee;  arrest  him,  officer. 

I  would  not  spare  my  brother  in  this  case. 

If  he  should  scorn  me  so  apparently. 

Off.  I  do  arrest  you,  sir:  you  hear  the  suit. 

Ant.  E.  1  do  obey  thee  till  I  give  thee  bail. 

But,  sirrah,  you  shall  buy  this  sport  as  dear  81 
As  all  the  metal  in  your  shop  will  answer. 

Ang.  Sir,  sir,  I  shall  have  law  in  Ephesus, 

To  your  notorious  shame;  I  doubt  it  not. 

Enter  dromio  of  Syracuse, /r^  the  bay. 

Dro.  S.  Master,  there  is  a  bark  of  Epidamnum 
That  stays  but  till  her  owner  comes  aboard 
And  then,  sir,  she  bears  away.  Our  fraught- 
age,  sir, 

I  have  convey’d  aboard  and  1  have  bought 
The  oil,  the  balsamum  and  aqua-vitae. 

The  ship  is  in  her  trim;  the  merry  wind  po 

Blows  fair  from  land:  they  stay  for  nought  at  all 
But  foi  their  owner,  master,  and  yourself. 

Ant.  E.  How  now!  a  madman!  Why,  thou 
peevish  sheep, 

What  ship  of  Epidamnum  stays  for  me? 

Dro.  S.  A  ship  you  sent  me  to,  to  hire  waftage. 
Ant.  E.  Thou  drunken  slave,  I  sent  thee  for  a 
rope 

And  told  thee  to  what  purpose  and  what  end. 

Dro.  S.  You  sent  me  for  a  rope’s  end  as  soon: 
You  sent  me  to  the  bay,  sir,  for  a  bark. 

Ant.  E.  I  will  debate  this  matter  at  more  lei¬ 
sure  too 

And  teach  your  ears  to  list  me  with  more  heed. 
To  Adriana,  villain,  hie  thee  straight: 

Give  her  this  key,  and  tell  her,  in  the  desk 
That’s  cover’d  o’er  with  Turkish  tapestry 
There  is  a  purse  of  ducats;  let  her  send  it: 

Tell  her  I  am  arrested  in  the  street 

And  that  shall  bail  me:  hie  thee,  slave,  be  gone! 

On,  officer,  to  prison  till  it  come. 

\Exeunt  second  merchant,  angelo, 
OFFICER  and  antipholus  of 
EPHESUS. 

Dro.  S.  To  Adriana!  that  is  where  we  dined. 
Where  Dowsabel  did  claim  me  for  her  husband: 


SCENE  I 

She  is  too  big,  I  hope,  for  me  to  compass. 

Thither  I  must,  although  against  my  will, 

For  servants  must  their  masters’  minds  fulfil. 

[Exit. 

Scene  ii.  The  house  of  An  tip  holus  of 
Ephesus 

Enter  adriana  and  luciana. 

Adr.  Ah,  Luciana,  did  he  tempt  thee  so? 

Mightst  thou  perceive  austerely  in  his  eye 
That  he  did  plead  in  earnest?  yea  or  no? 

Look’d  he  or  red  or  pale,  or  sad  or  merrily? 
What  observation  madest  thou  in  this  case 
Of  his  heart’s  meteors  tilting  in  his  face? 

Luc.  First  he  denied  you  had  in  him  no  right. 
Adr.  He  meant  he  did  me  none;  the  more  my 
spite. 

Luc.  Then  swore  he  that  he  was  a  stranger  here. 
Adr.  And  true  he  swore,  though  yet  forsworn 
he  were.  lo 

Luc.  Then  pleaded  I  for  you. 

Adr.  And  what  said  he? 

Luc.  That  love  I  begg’d  for  you  he  begg’d  of  me. 
Adr.  With  what  persuasion  did  he  tempt  thy 
love? 

Luc.  With  words  that  in  an  honest  suit  might 
move. 

First  he  did  praise  my  beauty,  then  my  speech. 
Adr.  Didst  speak  him  fair? 

Luc.  Have  patience,  I  beseech. 

Adr.  I  cannot,  nor  I  will  not,  hold  me  still; 

My  tongue,  though  not  my  heart,  shall  have  his 
will. 

He  is  deformed,  crooked,  old  and  sere, 

Ill-faced,  worse  bodied,  shapeless  everywhere; 
Vicious,  ungentle,  foolish,  blunt,  unkind,  21 
Stigmatical  in  making,  worse  in  mind. 

Luc.  Who  would  be  jealous  then  of  such  a  one? 
No  evil  lost  is  wail’d  when  it  is  gone. 

Adr.  Ah,  but  I  think  him  better  than  I  say. 

And  yet  would  herein  others’  eyes  were  worse. 
Far  from  her  nest  the  lapwing  cries  away: 

My  heart  prays  for  him,  though  my  tongue  do 
curse. 

Enter  dromio  of  Syracuse.  ' 

Dro.  S.  Here!  go;  the  desk,  the  purse!  sweet, 
now,  make  haste. 

Lite.  How  hast  thou  lost  thy  breath? 

Dro.  S.  By  running  fast.  50 

Adr.  Where  is  thy  master,  Dromio?  is  he  well? 
Dro.  S.  No,  he’s  in  Tartar  limbo,  worse  than  hell. 
A  devil  in  an  everlasting  garment  hath  him; 

One  whose  hard  heart  is  button’d  up  with  steel; 

A  fiend,  a  fury,  pitiless  and  rough; 

A  wolf,  nay,  worse,  a  fellow  all  in  buff; 


161 

A  back-friend,  a  shoulder-clapper,  one  that  coun¬ 
termands^ 

The  passages  of  alleys,  creeks,  and  narrow  lands; 

A  hound  that  runs  counter  and  yet  draws  dry- 
foot  well; 

One  that  before  the  judgement  carries  poor  souls 
to  hell.  40 

Adr.  Why,  man,  what  is  the  matter? 

Dro.  S.  I  do  not  know  the  matter:  he  is  ’rested 
on  the  case. 

Adr.  What,  is  he  arrested?  Tell  me  at  whose 
suit. 

Dro.  S.  I  know  not  at  whose  suit  he  is  arrested 
well; 

But  he’s  in  a  suit  of  buff  which  ’rested  him,  that 
can  I  tell. 

Will  you  send  him,  mistress,  redemption,  the 
money  in  his  desk? 

Adr.  Go  fetch  it,  sister.  [Exit  luciana.]  This  I 
wonder  at, 

That  he,  unknown  to  me,  should  be  in  debt. 

Tell  me,  was  he  arrested  on  a  band? 

Dro.  S.  Not  on  a  band,  but  on  a  stronger  thing; 

A  chain,  a  chain!  Do  you  not  hear  it  ring?  5-/ 

Adr.  What,  the  chain? 

Dro.  S.  No,  no,  the  bell:  ’tis  time  that  I  were 
gone: 

It  was  two  ere  I  left  him,  and  now  the  clock 
strikes  one. 

Adr.  The  hours  come  back!  that  did  I  never 
hear. 

Dro.  S.  O,  yes;  if  any  hour  meet  a  sergeant,  a’ 
turns  back  for  very  fear. 

Adr.  As  if  Time  were  in  debt!  how  fondly  dost 
thou  reason! 

Dro.  S.  Time  is  a  very  bankrupt  and  owes  more 
than  he’s  worth  to  season. 

Nay,  he’s  a  thief  too:  have  you  not  heard  men 
say. 

That  Time  comes  stealing  on  by  night  and  day? 

If  Time  be  in  debt  and  theft,  and  a  sergeant  in 
the  way,  61 

Hath  he  not  reason  to  turn  back  an  hour  in  a  day? 

Re-enter  luciana  with  a  purse. 

Adr.  Go,  Dromio;  there’s  the  money,  bear  it 
straight, 

And  bring  thy  master  home  immediately. 

Come,  sister:  I  am  press’d  down  with  conceit — 
Conceit,  my  comfort  and  my  injury.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  in.  A  public  place 
Enter  antipholus  of  Syracuse. 

Ant.  S.  There’s  not  a  man  I  meet  but  doth  salute 
me 

As  if  I  were  their  well-acquainted  friend; 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 

III 


62 


ACT  IV 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


And  every  one  doth  call  me  by  my  name. 

Some  tender  money  to  me;  some  invite  me; 

Some  other  give  me  thanks  for  kindnesses; 

Some  offer  me  commodities  to  buy: 

Even  now  a  tailor  call’d  me  in  his  shop 
And  show’d  me  silks  that  he  had  bought  for  me 
And  therewithal  took  measure  of  my  body. 

Sure,  these  are  but  imaginary  wiles  lo 

And  Lapland  sorcerers  inhabit  here. 

Enter  dromio  of  Syracuse. 

Dro.  S.  Master,  here’s  the  gold  you  sent  me  for. 
What,  have  you  got  the  picture  of  old  Adam 
new-apparelled? 

Ant.  S.  What  gold  is  this?  what  Adam  dost  thou 
mean? 

Dro.  S.  Not  that  Adam  that  kept  the  Paradise, 
but  that  Adam  that  keeps  the  prison:  he  that  goes 
in  the  calfs  skin  that  was  killed  for  the  Prodigal; 
he  that  came  behind  you,  sir,  like  an  evil  angel, 
and  bid  you  forsake  your  liberty.  20 

Ant.  S.  I  understand  thee  not. 

Dro.  S.  No?  why,  ’tis  a  plain  case:  he  that  went, 
like  a  bass-viol,  in  a  case  of  leather;  the  man,  sir, 
that,  when  gentlemen  are  tired,  gives  them  a  sob 
and  ’rests  them;  he,  sir,  that  takes  pity  on  de¬ 
cayed  men  and  gives  them  suits  of  durance;  he 
that  sets  up  his  rest  to  do  more  exploits  with  his 
mace  than  a  morris-pike. 

Ant.  S.  What,  thou  meanest  an  officer? 

Dro.  S.  Ay,  sir,  the  sergeant  of  the  band;  he  that 
brings  any  man  to  answer  it  that  breaks  his  band; 
one  that  thinks  a  man  always  going  to  bed  and 
says,  “God  give  you  good  rest!” 

Ant.  S.  Well,  sir,  there  rest  in  your  foolery.  Is 
there  any  ship  puts  forth  to-night?  may  we  be 
gone? 

Dro.  S.  Why,  sir,  I  brought  you  word  an  hour 
since  that  the  bark  Expedition  put  forth  to-night; 
and  then  were  you  hindered  by  the  sergeant,  to 
tarry  for  the  hoy  Delay.  Here  are  the  angels  that 
you  sent  for  to  deliver  you. 

Ant.  S.  The  fellow  is  distract,  and  so  am  I; 

And  here  we  wander  in  illusions: 

Some  blessed  power  deliver  us  from  hence! 

Enter  a  courtezan. 

Cour.  Well  met,  well  met.  Master  Antipholus. 

I  see,  sir,  you  have  found  the  goldsmith  now: 

Is  that  the  chain  you  promised  me  to-day? 

Ant.  S.  Satan,  avoid!  I  charge  thee,  tempt  me 
not. 

Dro.  S.  Master,  is  this  Mistress  Satan? 

Ant.  S.  It  is  the  devil.  50 

Dro.  S.  Nay,  she  is  worse,  she  is  the  devil’s 
dam;  and  here  she  comes  in  the  habit  of  a  light 


wench:  and  thereof  comes  that  the  wenches  say 
“God  damn  me”;, that’s  as  much  to  say  “God 
make  me  a  light  wench.”  It  is  written,  they  ap¬ 
pear  to  men  like  angels  of  light:  light  is  an  effect 
of  fire,  and  fire  will  burn;  ergo,  light  wenches 
will  burn.  Come  not  near  her. 

Conr.  Your  man  and  you  are  marvellous  merry, 
sir. 

Will  you  go  with  me?  We’ll  mend  our  dinner 
here?  60 

Dro.  S.  Master,  if  you  do,  expect  spoon-meat; 
or  bespeak  a  long  spoon. 

Ant.  S.  Why,  Dromio? 

Dro.  S.  Marry,  he  must  have  a  long  spoon  that 
must  eat  with  the  devil. 

Ant.  S.  Avoid  then,  fiend!  what  tell’st  thou  me 
of  supping? 

Thou  art,  as  you  are  all,  a  sorceress: 

I  conjure  thee  to  leave  me  and  be  gone. 

Cour.  Give  me  the  ring  of  mine  you  had  at 
dinner. 

Or,  for  my  diamond,  the  chain  you  promised,  70 
And  I’ll  be  gone,  sir,  and  not  trouble  you. 

Dro.  S.  Some  devils  ask  but  the  parings  of  one’s 
nail, 

A  rush,  a  hair,  a  drop  of  blood,  a  pin, 

A  nut,  a  cherry-stone; 

But  she,  more  covetous,  would  have  a  chain. 
Master,  be  wise:  an  if  you  give  it  her. 

The  devil  will  shake  her  chain  and  fright  us  with 
it. 

Cour.  I  pray  you,  sir,  my  ring,  or  else  the  chain: 
I  hope  you  do  not  mean  to  cheat  me  so. 

Ant.  S.  Avaunt,  thou  witch!  Come,  Dromio,  let 
us  go.  80 

Dro.  S.  “Fly  pride,”  says  the  peacock:  mistress, 
that  you  know. 

[Exeunt  antipholus  of  Syracuse  and 

DROMIO  OF  SYRACUSE. 

Cour.  Now,  out  of  doubt  Antipholus  is  mad. 

Else  would  he  never  so  demean  himself. 

A  ring  he  hath  of  mine  worth  forty  ducats. 

And  for  the  same  he  promised  me  a  chain: 

Both  one  and  other  he  denies  me  now. 

The  reason  that  I  gather  he  is  mad. 

Besides  this  present  instance  of  his  rage. 

Is  a  mad  tale  he  told  to-day  at  dinner. 

Of  his  own  doors  being  shut  against  his  en¬ 
trance. 

Belike  his  wife,  acquainted  with  his  fits,  p/ 

On  purpose  shut  the  doors  against  his  way. 

My  way  is  now  to  hie  home  to  his  house. 

And  tell  his  wife  that,  being  lunatic. 

He  rush’d  into  my  house  and  took  perforce 
My  ring  away.  This  course  I  fittest  choose; 

For  fortv  ducats  is  too  much  to  lose.  [Exit. 


SCENE  IV 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


163 


Scene  iv.  A  street 

Enter  antipholus  of  ephesus  and  the  officer. 
Ant.  E.  Fear  me  not,  man;  I  will  not  break 
away: 

I’ll  give  thee,  ere  I  leave  thee,  so  much  money. 

To  warrant  thee,  as  I  am  ’rested  for. 

My  wife  is  in  a  wayward  mood  to-day, 

And  will  not  lightly  trust  the  messenger. 

That  I  should  be  attach’d  in  Ephesus, 

I  tell  you,  ’twill  sound  harshly  in  her  ears. 

Enter  dromio  of  ephesus  with  a  rope^s-end. 

Here  comes  my  man;  I  think  he  brings  the 
money. 

How  now,  sir!  have  you  that  I  sent  you  for? 

Dro.  E.  Here’s  that,  I  warrant  you,  will  pay 
them  all.  10 

Ant.  E.  But  where’s  the  money? 

Dro.  E.  Why,  sir,  I  gave  the  money  for  the 
rope. 

Ant.  E.  Five  hundred  ducats,  villain,  for  a 
rope? 

Dro.  £.  I’ll  serve  you,  sir,  five  hundred  at  the 
rate. 

Ant.  E.  To  what  end  did  I  bid  thee  hie  thee 
home? 

Dro.  E.  To  a  rope’s-end,  sir;  and  to  that  end  am 
I  returned. 

Ant.  E.  And  to  that  end,  sir,  I  will  welcome 
you.  [Beating  him.] 

Off.  Good  sir,  be  patient. 

Dro.  E.  Nay,  ’tis  for  me  to  be  patient;  I  am  in 
adversity.  21 

Off.  Good  now,  hold  thy  tongue. 

Dro.  E.  Nay,  rather  persuade  him  to  hold  his 
hands. 

Ant.  E.  Thou  whoreson,  senseless  villain! 

Dro.  E.  I  would  I  were  senseless,  sir,  that  I 
might  not  feel  your  blows. 

Ant.  E.  Thou  art  sensible  in  nothing  but  blows, 
and  so  is  an  ass. 

Dro.  E.  I  am  an  ass,  indeed;  you  may  prove  it 
by  my  long  ears.  I  have  served  him  from  the^hour 
of  my  nativity  to  this  instant,  and  have  nothing 
at  his  hands  for  my  service  but  blows.  When  I 
am  cold,  he  heats  me  with  beating;  when  I  am 
warm,  he  cools  me  with  beating:  I  am  waked 
with  it  when  I  sleep;  raised  with  it  when  I  sit; 
driven  out  of  doors  with  it  when  I  go  from  home; 
welcomed  home  with  it  when  I  return:  nay,  I 
bear  it  on  my  shoulders,  as  a  beggar  wont  her 
brat;  and,  I  think,  when  he  hath  lamed  me,  I 
shall  beg  with  it  from  door  to  door. 

Ant.  E.  Come,  go  along;  my  wife  is  coming 
yonder. 


Enter  adriana,  luciana,  tJie  courtezan, 
and  PiscH. 

Dro.  E.  Mistress,  ''respice  finem,'"  respect  your 
end;  or  rather,  the  prophecy  like  the  parrot,  “be¬ 
ware  the  rope’s-end.” 

Ant.  E.  Wilt  thou  still  talk?  [Beating  him.] 

Cour.  How  say  you  now?  is  not  your  husband 
mad? 

Adr.  His  incivility  confirms  no  less. 

Good  Doctor  Pinch,  you  are  a  conjurer;  50 
Establish  him  in  his  true  sense  again. 

And  I  will  please  you  what  you  will  demand. 

Luc.  Alas,  how  fiery  and  how  sharp  he  looks! 

Cour.  Mark  how  he  trembles  in  his  ecstasy! 

Pinch.  Give  me  your  hand  and  let  me  feel  your 
pulse. 

Ant.  E.  There  is  my  hand,  and  let  it  feel  your 
ear.  [Striking  him.] 

Pinch.  I  charge  thee,  Satan,  housed  within  this 
man. 

To  yield  possession  to  my  holy  prayers 
And  to  thy  state  of  darkness  hie  thee  straight: 

I  conjure  thee  by  all  the  saints  in  heaven!  60 

Ant.  E.  Peace,  doting  wizard,  peace!  I  am  not 
mad. 

Adr.  O,  that  thou  were  not,  poor  distressed 
soul! 

Ant.  E.  You  minion,  you,  are  these  your  cus¬ 
tomers? 

Did  this  companion  with  the  saffron  face 
Revel  and  feast  it  at  my  house  to-day. 

Whilst  upon  me  the  guilty  doors  were  shut 
And  I  denied  to  enter  in  my  house? 

Adr.  O  husband,  God  doth  know  you  dined  at 
home; 

Where  would  you  had  remain’d  until  this  time. 
Free  from  these  slanders  and  this  open  shame! 

Ant.  E.  Dined  at  home!  Thou  villain,  what  say- 
est  thou?  7/ 

Dro.  E.  Sir,  sooth  to  say,  you  did  not  dine  at 
home. 

Ant.  E.  Were  not  my  doors  lock’d  up  and  I  shut 
out? 

Dro.  E.  Perdicy  your  doors  were  lock’d  and  you 
shut  out. 

Ant.  E.  And  did  not  she  herself  revile  me  there? 

Dro.  E.  Sans  fable,  she  herself  reviled  you  there. 

Ant.  E.  Did  not  her  kitchen-maid  rail,  taunt, 
and  scorn  me? 

Dro.  E.  Certes,  she  did;  the  kitchen-vestal 
scorn’d  you. 

Ant.  E.  And  did  not  I  in  rage  depart  from 
thence? 

Dro.  E.  In  verity  you  did;  my  bones  bear  wit¬ 
ness,  80 


ACT  lY 


164 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


That  since  have  felt  the  vigour  of  his  rage. 

Adr.  Is’t  good  to  soothe  him  in  these  contraries? 
Pinch.  It  is  no  shame:  the  fellow  finds  his  vein 
And  yielding  to  him  humours  well  his  frenzy. 
Ant.  E.  Thou  hast  suborn’d  the  goldsmith  to 
arrest  me. 

Adr.  Alas,  I  sent  you  money  to  redeem  you, 

By  Dromio  here,  who  came  in  haste  for  it. 

Dro.  E.  Money  by  me!  heart  and  good-will  you 
might; 

But,  surely,  master,  not  a  rag  of  money. 

Ant.  E.  Went’ St  not  thou  to  her  for  a  purse  of 
ducats?  90 

Adr.  He  came  to  me  and  I  deliver’d  it. 

Luc.  And  I  am  witness  with  her  that  she  did. 
Dro.  E.  God  and  the  rope-maker  bear  me  wit¬ 
ness 

That  I  was  sent  for  nothing  but  a  rope! 

Pinch.  Mistress,  both  man  and  master  is  pos¬ 
sess’d; 

I  know  it  by  their  pale  and  deadly  looks : 

They  must  be  bound  and  laid  in  some  dark  room. 
Ant.  E.  Say,  wherefore  didst  thou  lock  me  forth 
to-day? 

And  why  dost  thou  deny  the  bag  of  gold? 

Adr.  I  did  not,  gentle  husband,  lock  thee  forth.  100 
Dro.  E.  And,  gentle  master,  I  received  no  gold; 
But  I  confess,  sir,  that  we  were  lock’d  out. 

Adr.  Dissembling  villain,  thou  speak’st  false  in 
both. 

Ant.  E.  Dissembling  harlot,  thou  art  false  in  all 
And  art  confederate  with  a  damned  pack 
To  make  a  loathsome  abject  scorn  of  me: 

But  with  these  nails  I’ll  pluck  out  these  false  eyes 
That  would  behold  in  me  this  shameful  sport. 

Enter  three  or  four.,  and  offer  to  bind  him.  He 
strives. 

Adr.  O,  bind  him,  bind  him!  let  him  not  come 
near  me. 

Pinch.  More  company!  The  fiend  is  strong 
within  him.  no 

Luc.  Ay  me,  poor  man,  how  pale  and  wan  he 
looks! 

Ant.  E.  What,  will  you  murder  me?  Thou 
gaoler,  thou, 

I  am  thy  prisoner:  wilt  thou  suffer  them 
To  make  a  rescue? 

Off.  Masters,  let  him  go: 

He  is  my  prisoner,  and  you  shall  not  have  him. 
Pinch.  Go  bind  this  man,  for  he  is  frantic  too. 

They  offer  to  bind  dromio  of  ephesus. 

Adr.  What  wilt  thou  do,  thou  peevish  officer? 
Hast  thou  delight  to  see  a  wretched  man 
Do  outrage  and  displeasure  to  himself? 

Off.  He  is  my  prisoner :  if  I  let  him  go,  120 


The  debt  he  owes  will  be  required  of  me. 

Adr.  I  will  discharge  thee  ere  I  go  from  thee: 
Bear  me  forthwith  unto  his  creditor 
And,  knowing  how  the  debt  grows,  I  will  pay  it. 
Good  master  doctor,  see  him  safe  convey’d 
Home  to  my  house.  O  most  unhappy  day! 

Ant.  E.  O  most  unhappy  strumpet! 

Dro.  E.  Master,  I  am  here  enter’d  in  bond  for 
you. 

Ant.  E.  Out  on  thee,  villain!  wherefore  dost 
thou  mad  me? 

Dro.  E.  Will  you  be  bound  for  nothing?  be  mad, 
good  master:  cry  “The  devil!”  75/ 

Luc.  God  help,  poor  souls,  how  idly  do  they 
talk! 

Adr.  Go  bear  him  hence.  Sister,  go  you  with 
me.  [Exeunt  all  but  adriana,  luciana, 

OFFICER  and  courtezan. 
Say  now,  whose  suit  is  he  arrested  at? 

Off.  One  Angelo,  a  goldsmith:  do  you  know 
him? 

Adr.  I  know  the  man.  What  is  the  sum  he  owes? 
Off.  Two  hundred  ducats. 

Adr.  Say,  how  grows  it  due? 

Off.  Due  for  a  chain  your  husband  had  of  him. 
Adr.  He  did  bespeak  a  chain  for  me,  but  had  it 
not. 

Com.  When  as  your  husband  all  in  rage  to-day 
Came  to  my  house  and  took  away  my  ring —  74/ 
The  ring  I  saw  upon  his  finger  now — 

Straight  after  did  I  meet  him  with  a  chain. 

Adr.  It  may  be  so,  but  I  did  never  see  it. 

Come,  gaoler,  bring  me  where  the  goldsmith  is: 

I  long  to  know  the  truth  hereof  at  large. 

Enter  antipholus  of  Syracuse  voith  his  rapier 
dravm,  and  dromio  of  Syracuse. 

Luc.  God,  for  thy  mercy!  they  are  loose  again. 
Adr.  And  come  with  naked  swords. 

Let’s  call  more  help  to  have  them  bound  again. 
Off.  Away!  they’ll  kill  us.  750 

[Exeunt  all  to  antipholus  of  Syracuse 
and  DROMIO  of  Syracuse. 

Ant.  S.  I  see  these  witches  are  afraid  of  swords. 
Dro.  S.  She  that  would  be  your  wife  now  ran 
from  you. 

Ant.  S.  Come  to  the  Centaur;  fetch  our  stuff 
from  thence: 

I  long  that  we  were  safe  and  sound  aboard. 

Dro.  S.  Faith,  stay  here  this  night;  they  will 
surely  do  us  no  harm:  you  saw  they  speak  us  fair, 
give  us  gold:  methinks  they  are  such  a  gentle 
nation  that,  but  for  the  mountain  of  mad  flesh 
that  claims  marriage  of  me,  I  could  find  in  my 
heart  to  stay  here  still  and  turn  witch.  160 

Ant.  S.  I  will  not  stay  to-night  for  all  the  town; 


SCENE  IV 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS  i6c 


Therefore  away,  to  get  our  stuff  aboard. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i,  A  street  before  a  Priory 
Enter  second  merchant  and  angelo. 

Ang.  I  am  sorry,  sir,  that  I  have  hinder’d  you; 
But,  I  protest,  he  had  the  chain  of  me. 

Though  most  dishonestly  he  doth  deny  it. 

2nd  Mer.  How  is  the  man  esteem’d  here  in  the 
city? 

Ang.  Of  very  reverend  reputation,  sir. 

Of  credit  infinite,  highly  beloved. 

Second  to  none  that  lives  here  in  the  city: 

His  word  might  bear  my  wealth  at  any  time. 

2nd  Mer.  Speak  softly:  yonder,  as  I  think,  he 
walks.  y 

Enter  antipholus  of  Syracuse  and  dromio 

OF  SYRACUSE. 

Ang.  ’Tis  so;  and  that  self  chain  about  his  neck 
Which  he  forswore  most  monstrously  to  have. 
Good  sir,  draw  near  to  me.  I’ll  speak  to  him. 
Signior  Antipholus,  I  wonder  much 
That  you  would  put  me  to  this  shame  and  trouble; 
And,  not  without  some  scandal  to  yourself. 

With  circumstance  and  oaths  so  to  deny 
This  chain  which  now  you  wear  so  openly: 

Beside  the  charge,  the  shame,  imprisonment. 

You  have  done  wrong  to  this  my  honest  friend. 
Who,  but  for  staying  on  our  controversy,  20 
Had  hoisted  sail  and  put  to  sea  to-day: 

This  chain  you  had  of  me;  can  you  deny  it? 

Ant.  S.  I  think  I  had;  I  never  did  deny  it. 

2nd  Mer.  Yes,  that  you  did,  sir,  and  forswore 
it  too. 

Ant.  S.  Who  heard  me  to  deny  it  or  forswear 
it? 

2nd  Mer.  These  ears  of  mine,  thou  know’st,  did 
hear  thee. 

Fie  on  thee,  wretch!  ’tis  pity  that  thou  livest 
To  walk  where  any  honest  men  resort. 

Ant.  S.  Thou  art  a  villain  to  impeach  me  thus: 

I’ll  prove  mine  honour  and  mine  honesty  50 
Against  thee  presently,  if  thou  darest  stan^. 

2nd  Mer.  I  dare,  and  do  defy  thee  for  a  villain. 
They  draw. 

Enter  adriana,  luciana,  the  courtezan,  and 
others. 

Adr.  Hold,  hurt  him  not,  for  God’s  sake!  he  is 
mad. 

Some  get  within  him,  take  his  sword  away: 

Bind  Dromio  too,  and  bear  them  to  my  house. 


Dro.  S.  Run,  master,  run;  for  God’s  sake,  take 
a  house! 

This  is  some  priory.  In,  or  we  are  spoil’d! 

[Exeunt  antipholus  of  Syracuse  and 
DROMIO  OF  SYRACUSE  to  the  Priory. 

Enter  the  lady  abbess. 

Abb.  Be  quiet,  people.  Wherefore  throng  you 
hither? 

Adr.  To  fetch  my  poor  distracted  husband 
hence. 

Let  us  come  in,  that  we  may  bind  him  fast 
And  bear  him  home  for  his  recovery. 

Ang.  I  knew  he  was  not  in  his  perfect  wits. 

2nd  Mer.  I  am  sorry  now  that  I  did  draw  on 
him. 

Abb.  How  long  hath  this  possession  held  the 
man? 

Adr.  This  week  he  hath  been  heavy,  sour,  sad. 
And  much  different  from  the  man  he  was; 

But  till  this  afternoon  his  passion 
Ne’er  brake  into  extremity  of  rage. 

Abb.  Hath  he  not  lost  much  wealth  by  wreck 
of  sea? 

Buried  some  dear  friend?  Hath  not  else  his  eye 
Stray’d  his  affection  in  unlawful  love?  5/ 

A  sin  prevailing  much  in  youthful  men. 

Who  give  their  eyes  the  liberty  of  gazing. 

Which  of  these  sorrows  is  he  subject  to? 

Adr.  To  none  of  these,  except  it  be  the  last; 
Namely,  some  love  that  drew  him  oft  from  home. 
Abb.  You  should  for  that  have  reprehended  him. 
Adr.  Why,  so  I  did. 

Abb.  Ay,  but  not  rough  enough. 

Adr.  As  roughly  as  my  modesty  would  let  me. 
Abb.  Haply,  in  private. 

Adr.  And  in  assemblies  too. 

Abb.  Ay,  but  not  enough.  61 

Adr.  It  was  the  copy  of  our  conference: 

In  bed  he  slept  not  for  my  urging  it; 

At  board  he  fed  not  for  my  urging  it; 

Alone,  it  was  the  subject  of  my  theme; 

In  company  I  often  glanced  it; 

Still  did  I  tell  him  it  was  vile  and  bad. 

Abb.  And  thereof  came  it  that  the  man  was 
mad: 

The  venom  clamours  of  a  jealous  woman 
Poisons  more  deadly  than  a  mad  dog’s  tooth.  70 
It  seems  his  sleeps  were  hinder’d  by  thy  railing. 
And  thereof  comes  it  that  his  head  is  light. 

Thou  say’st  his  meat  was  sauced  with  thy  up- 
braidings: 

Unquiet  meals  make  ill  digestions; 

Thereof  the  raging  fire  of  fever  bred; 

And  what’s  a  fever  but  a  fit  of  madness? 


ACT  V 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


1 66 

Thou  say’st  his  sports  were  hinder’d  by  thy 
brawls: 

Sweet  recreation  barr’d,  what  doth  ensue 
But  moody  and  dull  melancholy, 

Kinsman  to  grim  and  comfortless  despair,  8o 
And  at  her  heels  a  huge  infectious  troop 
Of  pale  distemperatures  and  foes  to  life? 

In  food,  in  sport,  and  life-preserving  rest 
To  be  disturb’d,  would  mad  or  man  or  beast: 

The  consequence  is  then  thy  jealous  fits 
Have  scared  thy  husband  from  the  use  of  wits. 
Luc,  She  never  reprehended  him  but  mildly. 
When  he  demean’d  himself  rough,  rude,  and 
wildly. 

Why  bear  you  these  rebukes  and  answer  not? 
Adr.  She  did  betray  me  to  my  own  reproof,  po 
Good  people,  enter  and  lay  hold  on  him. 

Abb.  No,  not  a  creature  enters  in  my  house. 
Adr.  Then  let  your  servants  bring  my  husband 
forth. 

Abb.  Neither:  he  took  this  place  for  sanctuary. 
And  it  shall  privilege  him  from  your  hands 
Till  I  have  brought  him  to  his  wits  again. 

Or  lose  my  labour  in  assaying  it. 

Adr.  I  will  attend  my  husband,  be  his  nurse, 

Diet  his  sickness,  for  it  is  my  office. 

And  will  have  no  attorney  but  myself;  loo 

And  therefore  let  me  have  him  home  with  me. 
Abb.  Be  patient;  for  1  will  not  let  him  stir 
Till  I  have  used  the  approved  means  I  have. 

With  wholesome  syrups,  drugs  and  holy  prayers, 
To  make  of  him  a  formal  man  again: 

It  is  a  branch  and  parcel  of  mine  oath, 

A  charitable  duty  ot  my  order. 

Therefore  depart  and  leave  him  here  with  me. 
Adr.  I  will  not  hence  and  leave  my  husband 
here: 

And  ill  it  doth  beseem  your  holiness  no 

To  separate  the  husband  and  the  wife. 

Abb.  Be  quiet  and  depart:  thou  shalt  not  have 
him.  [Exit. 

Luc.  Complain  unto  the  Duke  of  this  indignity. 
Adr.  Come,  go:  I  will  fall  prostrate  at  his  feet 
And  never  rise  until  my  tears  and  prayers 
Have  won  his  Grace  to  come  in  person  hither 
And  take  perforce  my  husband  from  the  abbess. 
2nd  Mer.  By  this,  I  think,  the  dial  points  at  five: 
Anon,  I’m  sure,  the  Duke  himself  in  person 
Comes  this  way  to  the  melancholy  vale,  120 
The  place  of  death  and  sorry  execution. 

Behind  the  ditches  of  the  abbey  here. 

Ang.  Upon  what  cause? 

2nd  Mer.  To  see  a  reverend  Syracusian  mer¬ 
chant. 

Who  put  unluckily  into  this  bay 
Against  the  laws  and  statutes  of  this  town, 


Beheaded  publicly  for  his  offence. 

Ang.  See  where  they  come:  we  will  behold  his 
death. 

Luc.  Kneel  to  the  Duke  before  he  pass  the 
abbey. 

Enter  duke,  attended;  ^Tgeon  bareheaded; 
with  the  Headsman  and  other  Officers. 

Duke.  Yet  once  again  proclaim  it  publicly,  /50 
If  any  friend  will  pay  the  sum  for  him. 

He  shall  not  die;  so  much  we  tender  him. 

Adr.  Justice,  most  sacred  Duke,  against  the 
abbess! 

Duke.  She  is  a  virtuous  and  a  reverend  lady: 

It  cannot  be  that  she  hath  done  thee  wrong. 

Adr.  May  it  please  your  grace,  Antipholus  my 
husband. 

Whom  I  made  lord  of  me  and  all  I  had, 

At  your  important  letters — this  ill  day 
A  most  outrageous  fit  of  madness  took  him; 

That  desperately  he  hurried  through  the  street — 
With  him  his  bondman,  all  as  mad  as  he — 

Doing  displeasure  to  the  citizens 
By  rushing  in  their  houses,  bearing  thence 
Rings,  jewels,  any  thing  his  rage  did  like. 

Once  did  I  get  him  bound  and  sent  him  home. 
Whilst  to  take  order  for  the  wrongs  I  went 
That  here  and  there  his  fury  had  committed. 
Anon,  I  wot  not  by  what  strong  escape. 

He  broke  from  those  that  had  the  guard  of  him; 
And  with  his  mad  attendant  and  himself,  ipo 
Each  one  with  ireful  passion,  with  drawn  swords. 
Met  us  again  and  madly  bent  on  us 
Chased  us  away,  till  raising  of  more  aid 
We  came  again  to  bind  them.  Then  they  fled 
Into  this  abbey,  whither  we  pursued  them: 

And  here  the  abbess  shuts  the  gates  on  us 
And  will  not  suffer  us  to  fetch  him  out. 

Nor  send  him  forth  that  we  may  bear  him  hence. 
Therefore,  most  gracious  Duke,  with  thy  com¬ 
mand 

Let  him  be  brought  forth  and  borne  hence  for 
help. 

Duke.  Long  since  thy  husband  served  me  in  my 
wars,  161 

And  I  to  thee  engaged  a  prince’s  word. 

When  thou  didst  make  him  master  of  thy  bed. 

To  do  him  all  the  grace  and  good  I  could. 

Go,  some  of  you,  knock  at  the  abbey-gate 
And  bid  the  lady  abbess  come  to  me. 

I  will  determine  this  before  I  stir. 

Enter  a  servant. 

Serv.  O  mistress,  mistress,  shift  and  save  your¬ 
self! 

My  master  and  his  man  are  both  broke  loose, 


SCENE  I 


167 


THE  COMEDY 

Beaten  the  maids  a-row  and  bound  the  doctor,  /70 
Whose  beard  they  have  singed  off  with  brands 
of  fire; 

And  ever,  as  it  blazed,  they  threw  on  him 
Great  pails  of  puddled  mire  to  quench  the  hair: 

My  master  preaches  patience  to  him  and  the 
while 

His  man  with  scissors  nicks  him  like  a  fool. 

And  sure,  unless  you  send  some  present  help. 
Between  them  they  will  kill  the  conjurer. 

Adr.  Peace,  fool!  thy  master  and  his  man  are 
here. 

And  that  is  false  thou  dost  report  to  us. 

Serv,  Mistress,  upon  my  life,  I  tell  you  true; 

I  have  not  breathed  almost  since  I  did  see  it.  iSi 
He  cries  for  you  and  vows,  if  he  can  take  you, 

To  scorch  your  face  and  to  disfigure  you. 

Cry  'within. 

Hark!  hark!  I  hear  him,  mistress:  fly,  be  gone! 

Duke.  Come,  stand  by  me;  fear  nothing.  Guard 
with  halberds! 

Adr.  Ay  me,  it  is  my  husband!  Witness  you. 

That  he  is  borne  about  invisible: 

Even  now  we  housed  him  in  the  abbey  here; 

And  now  he’s  there,  past  thought  of  human 
reason. 

Enter  antipholus  of  ephesus  and  dromio 

OF  EPHESUS. 

Ant.  E.  Justice,  most  gracious  Duke,  O,  grant 
me  justice!  190 

Even  for  the  service  that  long  since  I  did  thee. 

When  I  bestrid  thee  in  the  wars  and  took 
Deep  scars  to  save  thy  life;  even  for  the  blood 
That  then  I  lost  for  thee,  now  grant  me  justice. 

JEge.  Unless  the  fear  of  death  doth  make  me 
dote, 

I  see  my  son  Antipholus  and  Dromio. 

Ant.  E.  justice,  sweet  prince,  against  that 
woman  there! 

She  whom  thou  gavest  to  me  to  be  my  wife. 

That  hath  abused  and  dishonour’d  me 
Even  in  the  strength  and  height  of  injury!  200 

Beyond  imagination  is  the  wrong 
That  she  this  day  hath  shameless  thrown  on  me. 
Duke.  Discover  how,  and  thou  shalt  find  me 
just. 

Ant.  E.  This  day,  great  Duke,  she  shut  the 
doors  upon  me. 

While  she  with  harlots  feasted  in  my  house. 

Duke.  A  grievous  fault!  Say,  woman,  didst  thou 
so? 

Adr.  No,  my  good  lord:  myself,  he  and  my 
sister 

To-day  did  dine  together.  So  befall  my  soul 
As  this  is  false  he  burdens  me  withal! 


OF  ERRORS 

Luc.  Ne’er  may  I  look  on  day,  nor  sleep  on 
night,  210 

But  she  tells  tdyour  Highness  simple  truth! 

Ang.  O  perjured  woman!  They  are  both  for¬ 
sworn: 

In  this  the  madman  justly  chargeth  them. 

Ant.  E.  My  liege,  I  am  advised  what  I  say. 
Neither  disturbed  with  the  effect  of  wine. 

Nor  heady-rash,  provoked  with  raging  ire. 

Albeit  my  wrongs  might  make  one  wiser  mad. 
This  woman  lock’d  me  out  this  day  from  dinner: 
That  goldsmith  there,  were  he  not  pack’d  with 
her. 

Could  witness  it,  for  he  was  with  me  then;  220 
Who  parted  with  me  to  go  fetch  a  chain. 
Promising  to  bring  it  to  the  Porpentine, 

Where  Balthazar  and  I  did  dine  together. 

Our  dinner  done,  and  he  not  coming  thither, 

I  went  to  seek  him:  in  the  street  I  met  him 
And  in  his  company  that  gentleman. 

There  did  this  perjured  goldsmith  swear  me 
down 

That  I  this  day  of  him  received  the  chain. 

Which,  God  he  knows,  1  saw  not:  for  the  which 
He  did  arrest  me  with  an  officer.  250 

I  did  obey,  and  sent  my  peasant  home 
For  certain  ducats:  he  with  none  return’d. 

Then  fairly  I  bespoke  the  officer 
To  go  in  person  with  me  to  my  house. 

By  the  way  we  met 
My  wife,  her  sister,  and  a  rabble  more 
Of  vile  confederates.  Along  with  them 
They  brought  one  Pinch,  a  hungry  lean- faced 
villain, 

A  mere  anatomy,  a  mountebank, 

A  threadbare  juggler  and  a  fortune-teller, 

A  needy,  hollow-eyed,  sharp-looking  wretch, 240 
A  living-dead  man:  this  pernicious  slave. 
Forsooth,  took  on  him  as  a  conjurer. 

And,  gazing  in  mine  eyes,  feeling  my  pulse. 

And  with  no  face,  as  ’twere,  outfacing  me. 

Cries  out,  I  was  possess’d.  Then  all  together 
They  fell  upon  me,  bound  me,  bore  me  thence 
And  in  a  dark  and  dankish  vault  at  home 
There  left  me  and  my  man,  both  bound  together; 
Till,  gnawing  with  my  teeth  my  bonds  in  sunder, 
I  gain’d  my  freedom  and  immediately  2  jo 

Ran  hither  to  your  Grace;  whom  I  beseech 
To  give  me  ample  satisfaction 
For  these  deep  shames  and  great  indignities. 

Ang.  My  lord,  in  truth,  thus  far  I  witness  with 
him. 

That  he  dined  not  at  home,  but  was  lock’d  out. 
Duke.  But  had  he  such  a  chain  of  thee  or  no? 
Ang.  He  had,  my  lord:  and  when  he  ran  in  here, 
These  people  saw  the  chain  about  his  neck. 


ACT  \' 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


1 68 

2ndMer.  Besides,  I  will  be  sworn  these  ears  of 
mine 

Heard  you  confess  you  had  the  chain  of  him  2  60 
After  you  first  forswore  it  on  the  mart: 

And  thereupon  I  drew  my  sword  on  you; 

And  then  you  fled  into  this  abbey  here, 

From  whence,  I  think,  you  are  come  by  miracle. 
Ant.  E.  I  never  came  within  these  abbey-walls. 
Nor  ever  didst  thou  draw  thy  sword  on  me: 

I  never  saw  the  chain,  so  help  me  Heaven! 

And  this  is  false  you  burden  me  withal. 

Duke.  Why,  what  an  intricate  impeach  is  this! 

I  think  you  all  have  drunk  of  Circe’s  cup.  270 
If  here  you  housed  him,  here  he  would  have  been; 
If  he  were  mad,  he  would  not  plead  so  coldly: 

You  say  he  dined  at  home;  the  goldsmith  here 
Denies  that  saying.  Sirrah,  what  say  you? 

Dro.  E.  Sir,  he  dined  with  her  there,  at  the  Por- 
pentine. 

Cmr.  He  did,  and  from  my  finger  snatch’d  that 

Ant,  E.  ’Tis  true,  my  liege;  this  ring  I  had  of 
her. 

Duke.  Saw’st  thou  him  enter  at  the  abbey  here? 
Cour.  As  sure,  my  liege,  as  I  do  see  your  Grace. 
Duke.  Why,  this  is  strange.  Go  call  the  abbess 
hither.  2  So 

I  think  you  are  all  mated  or  stark  mad. 

[Exit  one  to  the  Abbess, 
JEge.  Most  mighty  duke,  vouchsafe  me  speak  a 
word: 

Haply  I  see  a  friend  will  save  my  life 
And  pay  the  sum  that  may  deliver  me. 

Duke.  Speak  freely,  Syracusian,  what  thou  wilt. 
JEge.  Is  not  your  name,  sir,  call’d  Antipholus? 
And  is  not  that  your  bondman,  Dromio? 

Dro.  E.  Within  this  hour  I  was  his  bondman, 
sir. 

But  he,  I  thank  him,  gnaw’d  in  two  my  cords : 
Now  am  I  Dromio  and  his  man  unbound.  2po 
JEge.  I  am  sure  you  both  of  you  remember  me. 
Dro.  E.  Ourselves  we  do  remember,  sir,  by  you; 
For  lately  we  were  bound,  as  you  are  now. 

You  are  not  Pinch’s  patient,  are  you,  sir? 

JEge.  Why  look  you  strange  on  me?  you  know 
me  well. 

Ant.  E.  I  never  saw  you  in  my  life  till  now. 

JEge.  O,  grief  hath  changed  me  since  you  saw 
me  last. 

And  careful  hours  with  time’s  deformed  hand 
Have  written  strange  defeatures  in  my  face: 

But  tell  me  yet,  dost  thou  not  know  my  voice? 

E.  Neither.  50/ 

JEge.  Dromio,  nor  thou? 

Dro.  E.  No,  trust  me,  sir,  nor  I. 

JEge.  I  am  sure  thou  dost. 


Dro.  E.  Ay,  sir,  but  I  am  sure  I  do  not;  and 
whatsoever  a  man  denies,  you  are  now  bound  to 
believe  him. 

JEge.  Not  know  my  voice!  O  time’s  extremity. 
Hast  thou  so  crack’d  and  splitted  my  poor  tongue 
In  seven  short  years,  that  here  my  only  son 
Knows  not  my  feeble  key  of  untuned  cares?  5/0 
Though  now  this  grained  face  of  mine  be  hid 
In  sap-consuming  winter’s  drizzled  snow 
And  all  the  conduits  of  my  blood  froze  up. 

Yet  hath  my  night  of  life  some  memory. 

My  wasting  lamps  some  fading  glimmer  left. 

My  dull  deaf  ears  a  little  use  to  hear: 

All  these  old  witnesses — I  cannot  err — 

Tell  me  thou  art  my  son  Antipholus. 

Ant.  E.  I  never  saw  my  father  in  my  life. 

JEge.  But  seven  years  since,  in  Syracusa,  boy. 
Thou  know’st  we  parted:  but  perhaps,  my  son. 
Thou  shamest  to  acknowledge  me  in  misery. 

Ant.  E.  The  Duke  and  all  that  know  me  in  the 
city 

Can  witness  with  me  that  it  is  not  so: 

I  ne’er  saw  Syracusa  in  my  life. 

Duke.  I  tell  thee,  Syracusian,  twenty  years 
Have  I  been  patron  to  Antipholus, 

During  which  time  he  ne’er  saw  Syracusa: 

I  see  thy  age  and  dangers  make  thee  dote. 

Re-enter  with  antipholus  of  Syracuse 

and  DROMIO  of  Syracuse. 

Abb.  Most  mighty  Duke,  behold  a  man  much 
wrong’ d .  [A  1 1  gather  to  see  them.^  5^0 

Adr.  I  see  two  husbands,  or  mine  eyes  deceive 
me. 

Duke.  One  of  these  men  is  Genius  to  the  other; 
And  so  of  these.  Which  is  the  natural  man. 

And  which  the  spirit?  who  deciphers  them? 

Dro.  S.  I,  sir,  am  Dromio:  command  him  away. 
Dro.  E.  I,  sir,  am  Dromio:  pray,  let  me  stay. 
Ant.  S.  iTgeon  art  thou  not?  or  else  his  ghost? 
Dro.  S.  O,  my  old  master!  who  hath  bound  him 
here? 

Abb.  Whoever  bound  him,  I  will  loose  his 
bonds 

And  gain  a  husband  by  his  liberty.  540 

Speak,  old  ^Tgeon,  if  thou  be’st  the  man 
That  hadst  a  wife  once  call’d  Tlmilia 
That  bore  thee  at  a  burden  two  fair  sons: 

O,  if  thou  be’st  the  same  Tlgeon,  speak. 

And  speak  unto  the  same  Tlmilia! 

JEge.  If  I  dream  not,  thou  art  Tlmilia: 

If  thou  art  she,  tell  me  where  is  that  son 
That  floated  with  thee  on  the  fatal  raft? 

Abb.  By  men  of  Epidamnum  he  and  I 
And  the  twin  Dromio  all  were  taken  up;  550 
But  by  and  by  rude  fishermen  of  Corinth 


SCENE  I 

By  force  took  Dromio  and  my  son  from  them 
And  me  they  left  with  those  of  Epidamnum. 
What  then  became  of  them  I  cannot  tell; 

I  to  this  fortune  that  you  see  me  in. 

Duke.  Why,  here  begins  his  morning  story 
right: 

These  two  Antipholuses,  these  two  so  like, 

And  these  two  Dromios,  one  in  semblance — 
Besides  her  urging  of  her  wreck  at  sea — 

These  are  the  parents  to  these  children,  5  60 
Which  accidentally  are  met  together. 

Antipholus,  thou  earnest  from  Corinth  first? 

Ant.  S.  No,  sir,  not  I ;  I  came  from  Syracuse. 
Duke.  Stay,  stand  apart;  I  know  not  which  is 
which. 

Ant.  E.  I  came  from  Corinth,  my  most  gracious 
lord — 

Dro.  E.  And  I  with  him. 

Ant.  E.  Brought  to  this  town  by  that  most  fa¬ 
mous  warrior, 

Duke  Menaphon,  your  most  renowned  uncle. 
Adr.  Which  of  you  two  did  dine  with  me  to-day? 
Ant.  S.  I,  gentle  mistress. 

Adr.  And  are  not  you  my  husband? 

Ant.  E.  No;  I  say  nay  to  that.  57/ 

Ant.  S.  And  so  do  I;  yet  did  she  call  me  so: 

And  this  fair  gentlewoman,  her  sister  here. 

Did  call  me  brother.  [To  luciana]  What  I  told 
you  then, 

I  hope  I  shall  have  leisure  to  make  good; 

If  this  be  not  a  dream  I  see  and  hear. 

Ang.  That  is  the  chain,  sir,  which  you  had  of 
me. 

Ant.  S.  I  think  it  be,  sir;  I  deny  it  not. 

Ant.  E.  And  you,  sir,  for  this  chain  arrested  me. 
Ang.  I  think  I  did,  sir;  I  deny  it  not. 

Adr.  I  sent  you  money,  sir,  to  be  your  bail. 

By  Dromio;  but  I  think  he  brought  it  not. 

Dro.  E.  No,  none  by  me. 

Ant.  S.  This  purse  of  ducats  I  received  from 
you 

And  Dromio  my  man  did  bring  them  me. 

I  see  we  still  did  meet  each  other’s  man. 

And  I  was  ta’en  for  him,  and  he  for  me. 

And  thereupon  these  errors  are  arose. 

Ant.  E.  These  ducats  pawn  I  for  my  father  here. 
Duke.  It  shall  not  need;  thy  father  hath  his 
life.  5^0 

Cour.  Sir,  I  must  have  that  diamond  from  you. 


169 

Ant.  E.  There,  take  it;  and  much  thanks  for  my 
good  cheer. 

Abb.  Renowned  Duke,  vouchsafe  to  take  the 
pains 

To  go  with  us  into  the  abbey  here 

And  hear  at  large  discoursed  all  our  fortunes: 

And  all  that  are  assembled  in  this  place, 

That  by  this  sympathized  one  day’s  error 
Have  suffer’d  wrong,  go  keep  us  company. 

And  we  shall  make  full  satisfaction. 

Thirty-three  years  have  I  but  gone  in  travail  400 
Of  you,  my  sons;  and  till  this  present  hour 
My  heavy  burthen  ne’er  delivered. 

The  Duke,  my  husband  and  my  children  both. 
And  you  the  calendars  of  their  nativity. 

Go  to  a  gossips’  feast,  and  go  with  me; 

After  so  long  grief,  such  festivity! 

Duke.  With  all  my  heart.  I’ll  gossip  at  this  feast. 
[Exeunt  all  but  antipholus  of  Syracuse, 

ANTIPHOLUS  OF  EPHESUS,  DROMIO  OF 
SYRACUSE,  and  dromio  of  ephesus. 
Dro.  S.  Master,  shall  I  fetch  your  stuff  from 
shipboard? 

Ant.  E.  Dromio,  what  stuff  of  mine  hast  thou 
embark’d? 

Dro.  S.  Your  goods  that  lay  at  host,  sir,  in  the 
Centaur.  410 

Ant.  S.  He  speaks  to  me.  I  am  your  master, 
Dromio: 

Come,  go  with  us;  we’ll  look  to  that  anon: 
Embrace  thy  brother  there;  rejoice  with  him. 

[Exeunt  antipholus  of  Syracuse  and 

ANTIPHOLUS  OF  EPHESUS. 

Dro.  S.  There  is  a  fat  friend  at  your  master’s 
house. 

That  kitchen’d  me  for  you  to-day  at  dinner: 

She  now  shall  be  my  sister,  not  my  wife. 

Dro.  E.  Methinks  you  are  my  glass,  and  not  my 
brother: 

I  see  by  you  I  am  a  sweet-faced  youth. 

Will  you  walk  in  to  see  their  gossiping? 

Dro.  S.  Not  I,  sir;  you  are  my  elder.  420 

Dro.  E.  That’s  a  question:  how  shall  we  try  it? 
Dro.  S.  We’ll  draw  cuts  for  the  senior:  till  then 
lead  thou  first. 

Dro.  E.  Nay,  then,  thus: 

We  came  into  the  world  like  brother  and  brother; 
And  now  let’s  go  hand  in  hand,  not  one  before 
another.  [Exeunt. 


THE  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 


?*>  TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAS 


Saturninus,  oldest  son  to  the  late  Emperor  of  Rome^ 
and  after'wards  declared  Emperor 
Bassianus,  brother  to  Saturninus;  in  love  with  Lavinia 
Titus  Andronicus,  a  noble  Roman^  general  against 
the  Goths 

Marcus  Andronicus,  tribune  of  the  people  and 
brother  to  Titus 
Lucius 
Quintus 
Marti  us 
Mutius 

Young  Lucius,  a  boy^  son  to  Lucius 
Publius,  son  to  Marcus  the  tribune 
/Emilius,  a  noble  Roman 
Demetrius  I 
Chiron  I 


:  to  Titus  Andronicus 


Aaron,  a  Moor^  beloved  by  Tamora 
A  Captain 
A  Tribune 
A  Messenger 
A  Clown 
Three  Goths 

Tamora,  Queen  of  the  Goths 
Lavinia,  daughter  to  Titus  Andronicus 
A  Nurse 

Non-Speaking:  Sempronius^  Caiiis^  and  Valentine, 
kinsmen  to  Titus;  Alar  bus,  oldest  son  to  Tamora; 
Senators^  Tribunes^  Soldiers,  Attendants,  Romans, 
and  Goths 

Scene  :  Rome,  and  the  country  near  it 


act  i 

Scene  i.  Rome:  before  the  Capitol 
The  Tomb  of  the  Andronici  appearing;  the  trib¬ 
unes  and  Senators  aloft.  Enter,  below,  from 
one  side,  Saturninus  and  his  followers;  and, 
from  the  other  side,  Bassianus  and  his  followers; 
with  drum  and  colours. 

Sat.  Noble  patricians,  patrons  of  my  right, 
Defend  the  justice  of  my  cause  with  arms, 

And,  countrymen,  my  loving  followers. 

Plead  my  successive  title  with  your  swords: 

I  am  his  first-born  son,  that  was  the  last 
That  wore  the  imperial  diadem  of  Rome; 

Then  let  my  father’s  honours  live  in  me. 

Nor  wrong  mine  age  with  this  indignity. 

Bas.  Romans,  friends,  followers,  favourers  of 
my  right. 

If  ever  Bassianus,  Caesar’s  son,  to 

Were  gracious  in  the  eyes  of  royal  Rome, 

Keep  then  this  passage  to  the  Capitol 
And  suffer  not  dishonour  to  approach 
The  imperial  seat,  to  virtue  consecrate. 

To  justice,  continence  and  nobility; 

But  let  desert  in  pure  election  shine. 

And,  Romans,  fight  for  freedom  in  your 
choice. 

Enter  marcus  andronicus,  aloft,  with  the  crown. 

Marc.  Princes,  that  strive  by  factions  and  by 
friends 

Ambitiously  for  rule  and  empery, 


Know  that  the  people  of  Rome,  for  whom  we 
stand  20 

A  special  party,  have,  by  common  voice. 

In  election  for  the  Roman  empery. 

Chosen  Andronicus,  surnamed  Pius 
For  many  good  and  great  deserts  to  Rome: 

A  nobler  man,  a  braver  warrior. 

Lives  not  this  day  within  the  city  walls: 

He  by  the  senate  is  accited  home 

From  weary  wars  against  the  barbarous  Goths; 

That,  with  his  sons,  a  terror  to  our  foes. 

Hath  yoked  a  nation  strong,  train’d  up  in  arms. 
Ten  years  are  spent  since  first  he  undertook  5/ 
This  cause  of  Rome  and  chastised  with  arms 
Our  enemies  pride:  five  times  he  hath  return’d 
Bleeding  to  Rome,  bearing  his  valiant  sons 
In  coffins  from  the  field; 

And  now  at  last,  laden  with  honour’s  spoils. 
Returns  the  good  Andronicus  to  Rome, 
Renowned  Titus,  flourishing  in  arms. 

Let  us  entreat,  by  honour  of  his  name. 

Whom  worthily  you  would  have  now  succeed. 
And  in  the  Capitol  and  senate’s  right,  41 

Whom  you  pretend  to  honour  and  adore, 

That  you  withdraw  you  and  abate  your  strength; 
Dismiss  your  followers  and,  as  suitors  should. 
Plead  your  deserts  in  peace  and  humbleness. 

Sat.  How  fair  the  tribune  speaks  to  calm  my 
thoughts! 

Bas.  Marcus  Andronicus,  so  I  do  affy 
In  thy  uprightness  and  integrity. 

And  so  I  love  and  honour  thee  and  thine. 

Thy  noble  brother  Titus  and  his  sons,  50 


SCENE  I 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


And  her  to  whom  my  thoughts  are  humbled  all, 
Gracious  Lavinia,  Rome’s  rich  ornament, 

That  I  will  here  dismiss  my  loving  friends. 

And  to  my  fortunes  and  the  people’s  favour 
Commit  my  cause  in  balance  to  be  weigh’d. 

[Exeunt  the  followers  of  Bassianus, 
Sat.  Friends,  that  have  been  thus  forward  in 
my  right, 

I  thank  you  all  and  here  dismiss  you  all. 

And  to  the  love  and  favour  of  my  country 
Commdt  myself,  my  person,  and  the  cause. 

[Exeunt  the  followers  of  Satuminus. 
Rome,  be  as  just  and  gracious  unto  me  6o 

As  I  am  confident  and  kind  to  thee. 

Open  the  gates,  and  let  me  in. 

Bas.  Tribunes,  and  me,  a  poor  competitor. 
[Flourish,  saturninus  and  bassianus  go  up 
into  the  Capitol. 

Enter  a  cx^TMisi. 

Cap.  Romans,  make  way:  the  good  Andronicus, 
Patron  of  virtue,  Rome’s  best  champion. 
Successful  in  the  battles  that  he  fights. 

With  honour  and  with  fortune  is  return’d 
From  where  he  circumscribed  with  his  sword 
And  brought  to  yoke  the  enemies  of  Rome. 

Drums  and  trumpets  sounded.  Enter  martius  and 
MUTius;  after  them.,  two  men  bearing  a  coffin 
covered  with  black;  then  lucius  and  quintus. 
After  them.,  titus  andronicus;  and  then  ta- 
MORA,  with  Alarbus^  demetrius,  chiron, 
AARON,  and  other  Goths,  prisoners;  Soldiers  and 
People  following.  The  bearers  set  down  the  coffin, 
and  TITUS  speaks. 

Tit.  Hail,  Rome,  victorious  in  thy  mourning 
weeds!  70 

Lo,  as  the  bark  that  hath  discharged  her  fraught 
Returns  with  precious  lading  to  the  bay 
From  whence  at  first  she  weigh’d  her  anchorage, 
Cometh  Andronicus,  bound  with  laurel  boughs, 
To  re-salute  his  country  with  his  tears. 

Tears  of  true  joy  for  his  return  to  Rome. 

Thou  great  defender  of  this  Capitol, 

Stand  gracious  to  the  rites  that  we  intend! 

Romans,  of  five  and  twenty  valiant  sons. 

Half  of  the  number  that  King  Priam  had,  80 

Behold  the  poor  remains,  alive  and  dead! 

These  that  survive  let  Rome  reward  with  love; 
These  that  I  bring  unto  their  latest  home. 

With  burial  amongst  their  ancestors: 

Here  Goths  have  given  me  leave  to  sheathe  my 
sword. 

Titus,  unkind  and  careless  of  thine  own. 

Why  suffer’st  thou  thy  sons,  unburied  yet. 

To  hover  on  the  dreadful  shore  of  Styx? 


Make  way  to  lay  them  by  their  brethren. 

The  tomb  is  opened. 

There  greet  in  silence,  as  the  dead  are  wont,  90 
And  sleep  in  peace,  slain  in  your  country’s  wars! 
O  sacred  receptacle  of  my  joys. 

Sweet  cell  of  virtue  and  nobility. 

How  rpany  sons  of  mine  hast  thou  in  store. 

That  thou  wilt  never  render  to  me  more! 

Luc.  Give  us  the  proudest  prisoner  of  the  Goths, 
That  we  may  hew  his  limbs  and  on  a  pile 
Ad  manes  fratrum  sacrifice  his  flesh 
Before  this  earthy  prison  of  their  bones; 

That  so  the  shadows  be  not  unappeased,  100 
Nor  we  disturb’d  with  prodigies  on  earth. 

Tit.  I  give  him  you,  the  noblest  that  survives. 
The  eldest  son  of  this  distressed  queen. 

Tam.  Stay,  Roman  brethren!  Gracious 
conqueror. 

Victorious  Titus,  rue  the  tears  I  shed, 

A  mother’s  tears  in  passion  for  her  son: 

And  if  thy  sons  were  ever  dear  to  thee, 

O,  think  my  son  to  be  as  dear  to  me! 

Sufficeth  not  that  we  are  brought  to  Rome, 

To  beautify  thy  triumphs  and  return,  no 

Captive  to  thee  and  to  thy  Roman  yoke. 

But  must  my  sons  be  slaughter’d  in  the  streets 
For  valiant  doings  in  their  country’s  cause? 

O,  if  to  fight  for  king  and  commonweal 
Were  piety  in  thine,  it  is  in  these. 

Andronicus,  stain  not  thy  tomb  with  blood: 

Wilt  thou  draw  near  the  nature  of  the  gods? 

Draw  near  them  then  in  being  merciful : 

Sweet  mercy  is  nobility’s  true  badge: 

Thrice  noble  Titus,  spare  my  first-born  son,  120 
Tit.  Patient  yourself,  madam,  and  pardon  me. 
These  are  their  brethren,  whom  you  Goths 
beheld 

Alive  and  dead,  and  for  their  brethren  slain 
Religiously  they  ask  a  sacrifice: 

To  this  your  son  is  mark’d,  and  die  he  must. 

To  appease  their  groaning  shadows  that  are  gone. 
Luc.  Away  with  him!  and  make  a  fire  straight; 
And  with  our  swords,  upon  a  pile  of  wood. 

Let’s  hew  his  limbs  till  they  be  clean  consumed. 
[Exeunt 'LUCIUS,  quintus,  martius,  and 
MUTIUS,  with  Alarbus. 

Tam.  O  cruel,  irreligious  piety!  130 

Chi.  Was  ever  Scythia  half  so  barbarous? 

Dem.  Oppose  not  Scythia  to  ambitious  Rome. 
Alarbus  goes  to  rest;  and  we  survive 
To  tremble  under  Titus’  threatening  looks. 

Then,  madam,  stand  resolved,  but  hope  withal 
The  self-same  gods  that  arm’d  the  Queen  of 
Troy 

With  opportunity  of  sharp  revenge 
Upon  the  Thracian  tyrant  in  his  tent. 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


May  favour  Tamora.  the  Queen  of  Goths — 
When  Goths  were  Goths  and  Tamora  was 
queen — 

To  quit  the  bloody  wrongs  upon  her  foes.  74/ 

Re-enter  lucius,  quintus,  martius,  and 
MUTius,  ZDith  their  swords  bloody, 

Luc.  See,  lord  and  father,  how  we  have 
perform’d 

Our  Roman  rites:  Alarbus’  limbs  are  lopp’d. 

And  entrails  feed  the  sacrificing  fire. 

Whose  smoke,  like  incense,  doth  perfume  the 
sky. 

Remaineth  nought  but  to  inter  our  brethren 
And  with  loud  ’larums  welcome  them  to  Rome. 

Tit.  Let  it  be  so;  and  let  Andronicus 
Make  this  his  latest  farewell  to  their  souls. 

Trumpets  sounded,  and  the  coffin  laid  in  the  tomb. 
In  peace  and  honour  rest  you  here,  my  sons;  750 
Rome’s  readiest  champions,  repose  you  here  in 
rest. 

Secure  from  worldly  chances  and  mishaps! 

Here  lurks  no  treason,  here  no  envy  swells. 

Here  grow  no  damned  grudges;  here  are  no 
storms. 

No  noise,  but  silence  and  eternal  sleep: 

In  peace  and  honour  rest  you  here,  my  sons! 

Enter  lavinia. 

Lav.  In  peace  and  honour  live  Lord  Titus  long; 
My  noble  lord  and  father,  live  in  fame! 

Lo,  at  this  tomb  my  tributary  tears 
I  render,  for  my  brethren’s  obsequies;  160 

And  at  thy  feet  I  kneel,  with  tears  of  joy 
Shed  on  the  earth  for  thy  return  to  Rome: 

O,  bless  me  here  with  thy  victorious  hand. 
Whose  fortunes  Rome’s  best  citizens  applaud! 
Tit.  Kind  Rome,  that  hast  thus  lovingly 
reserved 

The  cordial  of  mine  age  to  glad  my  heart! 

Lavinia,  live;  outlive  thy  father’s  days. 

And  fame’s  eternal  date,  for  virtue’s  praise! 

Enter,  below,  marcus  andronicus  and  tribunes; 
re-enter  saturninus  and  bassianus,  attended. 

Marc.  Long  live  Lord  Titus,  my  beloved 
brother. 

Gracious  triumpher  in  the  eyes  of  Rome!  770 

Tit.  T  hanks,  gentle  tribune,  noble  brother 
Marcus. 

Marc.  And  welcome,  nephews,  from  successful 
wars. 

You  that  survive,  and  you  that  sleep  in  fame! 

Fair  lords,  your  fortunes  are  alike  in  all. 

That  in  your  country’s  service  drew  your  swords : 
But  safer  triumph  is  this  funeral  pomp. 


That  hath  aspired  to  Solon’s  happiness 
And  triumphs  over  chance  in  honour’s  bed. 

Titus  Andronicus,  the  people  of  Rome, 

Whose  friend  in  justice  thou  hast  ever  been,  180 
Send  thee  by  me,  their  tribune  and  their  trust. 
This  palliament  of  white  and  spotless  hue; 

And  name  thee  in  election  for  the  empire. 

With  these  our  late-deceased  emperor’s  sons: 

Be  candidatus  then,  and  put  it  on. 

And  help  to  set  a  head  on  headless  Rome. 

Tit.  A  better  head  her  glorious  body  fits 
Than  his  that  shakes  for  age  and  feebleness: 

What  should  I  don  this  robe  and  trouble  you? 

Be  chosen  with  proclamations  to-day,  1^0 

To-morrow  yield  up  rule,  resign  my  life. 

And  set  abroad  new  business  for  you  all? 

Rome,  I  have  been  thy  soldier  forty  years, 

And  led  my  country’s  strength  successfully. 

And  buried  one  and  twenty  valiant  sons. 

Knighted  in  field,  slain  manfully  in  arms 
In  right  and  service  of  their  noble  country: 

Give  me  a  staff  of  honour  for  mine  age. 

But  not  a  sceptre  to  control  the  world : 

Upright  he  held  it,  lords,  that  held  it  last.  200 
Marc.  Titus,  thou  shalt  obtain  and  ask  the 
empery. 

Sat.  Proud  and  ambitious  tribune,  canst  thou 
tell? 

Tit.  Patience,  Prince  Saturninus. 

Sat.  Romans,  do  me  right: 

Patricians,  draw  your  swords,  and  sheathe  them 
not 

Till  Saturninus  be  Rome’s  emperor. 

Andronicus,  would  thou  wert  shipp’d  to  hell 
Rather  than  rob  me  of  the  people’s  hearts! 

Luc.  Proud  Saturnine,  interrupter  of  the  good 
That  noble-minded  Titus  means  to  thee! 

Tit.  Content  thee.  Prince;  I  will  restore  to 
thee  270 

The  people’s  hearts,  and  wean  them  from  them¬ 
selves. 

Bas.  Andronicus,  I  do  not  flatter  thee. 

But  honour  thee,  and  will  do  till  I  die: 

My  faction  if  thou  strengthen  with  thy  friends, 

I  will  most  thankful  be;  and  thanks  to  men 
Of  noble  minds  is  honourable  meed. 

Tit.  People  of  Rome,  and  people’s  tribunes  here, 
I  ask  your  voices  and  your  suffrages : 

Will  you  bestow  them  friendly  on  Andronicus? 

Tribunes.  To  gratify  the  good  Andronicus,  220 
And  gratulate  his  safe  return  to  Rome, 

The  people  will  accept  whom  he  admits. 

Tit.  Tribunes,  I  thank  you:  and  this  suit  I 
make. 

That  you  create  your  Emperor’s  eldest  son, 

Lord  Saturnine;  whose  virtues  will,  I  hope. 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


Reflect  on  Rome  as  Titan's  rays  on  earth, 

And  ripen  justice  in  this  commonweal: 

Then,  if  you  will  elect  by  my  advice. 

Crown  him,  and  say  “Long  live  our  Emperor!” 
Marc.  With  voices  and  applause  of  every  sort, 
Patricians  and  plebeians,  we  create  231 

Lord  Saturninus  Rome’s  great  Emperor, 

And  say  “Long  live  our  Emperor  Saturnine!” 

A  long  flourish  till  they  come  dovm. 

Sat.  Titus  Andronicus,  for  thy  favours  done 
To  us  in  our  election  this  day, 

I  give  thee  thanks  in  part  of  thy  deserts. 

And  will  with  deeds  requite  thy  gentleness: 

And,  for  an  onset,  Titus,  to  advance 
Thy  name  and  honourable  family, 

Lavinia  will  I  make  my  empress,  240 

Rome’s  royal  mistress  of  my  heart. 

And  in  the  sacred  Pantheon  her  espouse: 

Tell  me,  Andronicus,  doth  this  motion  please 
thee? 

Tit.  It  doth,  my  worthy  lord;  and  in  this  match 
I  hold  me  highly  honour’d  of  your  Grace: 

And  here  in  sight  of  Rome  to  Saturnine, 

King  and  commander  of  our  commonweal. 

The  wide  world’s  Emperor,  do  I  consecrate 
My  sword,  my  chariot,  and  my  prisoners; 
Presents  well  worthy  Rome’s  imperial  lord:  2^0 
Receive  them  then,  the  tribute  that  I  owe. 

Mine  honour’s  ensigns  humbled  at  thy  feet. 

Sat.  Thanks,  noble  Titus,  father  of  my  life! 

How  proud  I  am  of  thee  and  of  thy  gifts 
Rome  shall  record,  and  when  I  do  forget 
The  least  of  these  unspeakable  deserts, 

Romans,  forget  your  fealty  to  me. 

Tit.  [To  tamora]  Now,  madam,  are  you 
prisoner  to  an  emperor; 

To  him  that,  for  your  honour  and  your  state, 

Will  use  you  nobly  and  your  followers.  260 
Sat.  A  goodly  lady,  trust  me;  of  the  hue 
That  I  would  choose,  were  I  to  choose  anew. 
Clear  up,  fair  queen,  that  cloudy  countenance: 
Though  chance  of  war  hath  wrought  this  change 
of  cheer. 

Thou  comest  not  to  be  made  a  scorn  in  Rome: 
Princely  shall  be  thy  usage  every  way. 

Rest  on  my  word,  and  let  not  discontent 
Daunt  all  your  hopes:  madam,  he  comforts  you 
Can  make  you  greater  than  the  Queen  of 
Goths. 

Lavinia,  you  are  not  displeased  with  this?  270 
Lav.  Not  I,  my  lord;  sith  true  nobility 
Warrants  these  words  in  princely  courtesy. 

Sat.  Thanks,  sweet  Lavinia.  Romans,  let  us  go: 
Ransomless  here  we  set  our  prisoners  free: 
Proclaim  our  honours,  lords,  with  trump  and 
drum. 


Flourish,  saturninus  courts  tamora 
in  dumb  slpvo. 

Bas.  Lord  Titus,  by  your  leave,  this  maid  is 
mine.  [Seizing  Lavinia.] 

Tit.  How,  sir!  are  you  earnest  then,  my 
lord? 

Bas.  Ay,  noble  Titus;  and  resolved  withal 
To  do  myself  this  reason  and  this  right.  27^ 

Marc.  ''Suum  cuiqiie"  is  our  Roman  justice: 

This  prince  in  justice  seizeth  but  his  own. 

Luc.  And  that  he  will,  and  shall,  if  Lucius  live. 
Tit.  Traitors,  avaunt!  Where  is  the  Emperor’s 
guard? 

Treason,  my  lord!  Lavinia  is  surprised! 

Sat.  Surprised!  by  whom? 

Bas.  By  him  that  justly  may 

Bear  his  betroth’d  from  all  the  world  away. 
[Exeunt  bassianus  and  marcus  %vith  lavinia. 
Mut.  Brothers,  help  to  convey  her  hence  away, 
And  with  my  sword  I’ll  keep  this  door  safe. 

[Exeunt  lucius,  quintus,  and  martius. 
Tit.  Follow,  my  lord,  and  Ell  soon  bring  her 
back. 

Mut.  My  lord,  you  pass  not  here. 

Tit.  What,  villain  boy!  2^0 

Barr’ St  me  my  way  in  Rome?  [Stabbing  mutius. 
Mut.  Help,  Lucius,  help!  [Dies. 

[During  the  fray,  saturninus,  tamora,  Deme¬ 
trius,  CHIRON  and  aaron  go  out  and  re-enter, 
above. 

Re-enter  lucius. 

Luc.  My  lord,  you  are  unjust,  and,  more  than  so, 
In  wrongful  quarrel  you  have  slain  your  son. 

Tit.  Nor  thou,  nor  he,  are  any  sons  of  mine; 

My  sons  would  never  so  dishonour  me: 

Traitor,  restore  Lavinia  to  the  Emperor. 

Luc.  Dead,  if  you  will;  but  not  to  be  his  wife. 
That  is  another’s  lawful  promised  love.  [Exit. 

Sat.  No,  Titus,  no;  the  Emperor  needs  her  not. 
Nor  her,  nor  thee,  nor  any  of  thy  stock:  300 

I’ll  trust,  by  leisure,  him  that  mocks  me  once; 
Thee  never,  nor  thy  traitorous  haughty  sons, 
Confederates  all  thus  to  dishonour  me. 

Was  there  none  else  in  Rome  to  make  a  stale. 

But  Saturnine?  Full  well,  Andronicus, 

Agree  these  deeds  with  that  proud  brag  of  thine. 
That  said’st  I  begg’d  the  empire  at  thy  hands. 

Tit.  O  monstrous!  what  reproachful  words  are 
these? 

Sat.  But  go  thy  ways;  go,  give  that  changing 
piece  309 

To  him  that  flourish’d  for  her  with  his  sword: 

A  valiant  son-in-law  thou  shall  enjoy; 

One  fit  to  bandy  with  thy  lawless  sons. 

To  ruffle  in  the  commonwealth  of  Rome. 


174 

Tit.  These  words  are  razors  to  my  wounded 
heart. 

Sat.  And  therefore,  lovely  Tamora,  queen  of 
Goths, 

That  like  the  stately  Phoebe  ’mongst  her  nymphs 
Dost  overshine  the  gallant’st  dames  of  Rome, 

If  thou  be  pleased  with  this  my  sudden  choice. 
Behold,  I  choose  thee,  Tamora,  for  my  bride, 

And  will  create  thee  Empress  of  Rome.  520 

Speak,  Queen  of  Goths,  dost  thou  applaud  my 
choice? 

And  here  I  swear  by  all  the  Roman  gods, 

Sith  priest  and  holy  water  are  so  near 
And  tapers  burn  so  bright  and  everything 
In  readiness  for  Hymenasus  stand, 

I  will  not  re-salute  the  streets  of  Rome, 

Or  climb  my  palace,  till  from  forth  this  place 
I  lead  espoused  my  bride  along  with  me. 

Tam.  And  here,  in  sight  of  heaven,  to  Rome  I 
swear. 

If  Saturnine  advance  the  Queen  of  Goths,  550 

She  will  a  handmaid  be  to  his  desires, 

A  loving  nurse,  a  mother  to  his  youth. 

Sat.  Ascend,  fair  queen.  Pantheon.  Lords, 
accompany 

Your  noble  emperor  and  his  lovely  bride. 

Sent  by  the  heavens  for  Prince  Saturnine, 

Whose  wisdom  hath  her  fortune  conquered: 
There  shall  we  consummate  our  spousal  rites. 

[Exeunt  all  but  titus. 
Tit.  I  am  not  bid  to  wait  upon  this  bride. 

Titus,  when  wert  thou  wont  to  walk  alone. 
Dishonour’d  thus,  and  challenged  of  wrongs?  540 

Re-enter  marcus,  lucius,  quintus,  and  martius. 

Marc.  O  Titus,  see,  O,  see  what  thou  hast  done! 
In  a  bad  quarrel  slain  a  virtuous  son. 

Tit.  No,  foolish  tribune,  no;  no  son  of  mine. 

Nor  thou,  nor  these,  confederates  in  the  deed 
That  hath  dishonour’d  all  our  family; 

Unworthy  brother,  and  unworthy  sons! 

Luc.  But  let  us  give  him  burial,  as  becomes; 

Give  Mutius  burial  with  our  brethren. 

Tit.  Traitors,  away!  he  rests  not  in  this  tomb: 
This  monument  five  hundred  years  hath  stood. 
Which  I  have  sumptuously  re-edified: 

Here  none  but  soldiers  and  Rome’s  servitors 
Repose  in  fame;  none  basely  slain  in  brawls: 

Bury  him  where  you  can;  he  comes  not  here. 
Marc.  My  lord,  this  is  impiety  in  you: 

My  nephew  Mutius’  deeds  do  plead  for  him; 

He  must  be  buried  with  his  brethren. 

Quin.  \  And  shall,  or  him  we  will  accom- 
Mart.  /  pany. 

Tit.  “And  shall!”  What  villain  was  it  spake 
that  word? 


ACT  I 

Quin.  He  that  would  vouch  it  in  any  place  but 
here  »  5  60 

Tit.  What,  would  you  bury  him  in  my 
despite? 

Marc.  No,  noble  Titus,  but  entreat  of  thee 
To  pardon  Mutius  and  to  bury  him. 

Tit.  Marcus,  even  thou  hast  struck  upon  my 
crest. 

And,  with  these  boys,  mine  honour  thou  hast 
wounded: 

My  foes  I  do  repute  you  every  one: 

So,  trouble  me  no  more,  but  get  you  gone. 

Mart.  He  is  not  with  himself;  let  us  withdraw. 

Quin.  Not  I,  till  Mutius’  bones  be  buried. 

MARCUS  and  the  sons  of  Titus  kneel. 

Marc.  Brother,  for  in  that  name  doth  nature 
plead —  '  570 

Quin.  Father,  and  in  that  name  doth  nature 
speak — 

Tit.  Speak  thou  no  more,  if  all  the  rest  will 
speed. 

Marc.  Renowned  Titus,  more  than  half  my 
soul — 

Luc.  Dear  father,  soul  and  substance  of  us 
all— 

Marc.  Suffer  thy  brother  Marcus  to  inter 
His  noble  nephew  here  in  virtue’s  nest. 

That  died  in  honour  and  Lavinia’s  cause. 

Thou  art  a  Roman;  be  not  barbarous: 

The  Greeks  upon  advice  did  bury  Ajax 

That  slew  himself;  and  wise  Laertes’  son  ^80 

Did  graciously  plead  for  his  funerals: 

Let  not  young  Mutius,  then,  that  was  thy  joy. 

Be  barr’d  his  entrance  here. 

Tit.  Rise,  Marcus,  rise. 

The  dismall’st  day  is  this  that  e’er  I  saw. 

To  be  dishonour’d  by  my  sons  in  Rome! 

Well,  bury  him,  and  bury  me  the  next. 

[Mutius  is  put  into  the  tomb. 

Luc.  There  lie  thy  bones,  sweet  Mutius,  with 
thy  friends. 

Till  we  with  trophies  do  adorn  thy  tomb. 

All.  [Kneeling]  No  man  shed  tears  for  noble 
Mutius; 

He  lives  in  fame  that  died  in  virtue’s  cause.  5^0 

Marc.  My  lord,  to  step  out  of  these  dreary 
dumps. 

How  comes  it  that  the  subtle  Queen  of  Goths 
Is  of  a  sudden  thus  advanced  in  Rome? 

Tit.  I  know  not,  Marcus;  but  I  know  it  is: 
Whether  by  device  or  no,  the  heavens  can 
tell: 

Is  she  not  then  beholding  to  the  man 
That  brought  her  for  this  high  good  turn  so 
far? 

Yes,  and  will  nobly  him  remunerate. 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


Flourish.  Re-enter.,  from  one  side,  saturninus 
attended,  tamora,  demetrius,  chiron,  and 
AARON;  from  the  other,  bassianus,  lavinia,  and 
others. 

Sat.  So,  Bassianus,  you  have  play’d  your  prize: 
God  give  you  joy,  sir,  of  your  gallant  bride!  400 
Bas.  And  you  of  yours,  my  lord!  I  say  no  more. 
Nor  wish  no  less;  and  so,  I  take  my  leave. 

Sat.  Traitor,  if  Rome  have  law  or  we  have 
power. 

Thou  and  thy  faction  shall  repent  this  rape. 

Bas.  Rape,  call  you  it,  my  lord,  to  seize  my  own. 
My  true-betrothed  love  and  now  my  wife.? 

But  let  the  laws  of  Rome  determine  all; 
Meanwhile  I  am  possess’d  of  that  is  mine. 

Sat.  ’Tis  good,  sir:  you  are  very  short  with  us; 
But,  if  we  live,  we’ll  be  as  sharp  with  you.  410 
Bas.  My  lord,  what  I  have  done,  as  best  I  may, 
Answer  I  must  and  shall  do  with  my  life. 

Only  thus  much  I  give  your  Grace  to  know: 

By  all  the  duties  that  I  owe  to  Rome, 

This  noble  gentleman.  Lord  Titus  here, 

Is  in  opinion  and  in  honour  wrong’d; 

That  in  the  rescue  of  Lavinia 

With  his  own  hand  did  slay  his  youngest  son. 

In  zeal  to  you  and  highly  moved  to  wrath 

To  be  controll’d  in  that  he  frankly  gave:  420 

Receive  him,  then,  to  favour.  Saturnine, 

That  hath  express’d  himself  in  all  his  deeds 
A  father  and  a  friend  to  thee  and  Rome. 

Tit.  Prince  Bassianus,  leave  to  plead  my  deeds: 
’Tis  thou  and  those  that  have  dishonour’d  me. 
Rome  and  the  righteous  heavens  be  my  judge. 
How  I  have  loved  and  honour’d  Saturnine! 

Tam.  My  worthy  lord,  if  ever  Tamora 
Were  gracious  in  those  princely  eyes  of  thine, 
Then  hear  me  speak  indifferently  for  all;  4^0 
And  at  my  suit,  sweet,  pardon  what  is  past. 

Sat.  What,  madam!  be  dishonour’d  openly 
And  basely  put  it  up  without  revenge? 

Tam.  Not  so,  my  lord;  the  gods  of  Rome 
forfend 

I  should  be  author  to  dishonour  you! 

But  on  mine  honour  dare  I  undertake 
For  good  Lord  Titus’  innocence  in  all; 

Whose  fury  not  dissembled  speaks  his  griefs: 
Then,  at  my  suit,  look  graciously  on  him; 

Lose  not  so  noble  a  friend  on  vain  suppose,  440 
Nor  with  sour  looks  afflict  his  gentle  heart. 

[Aside  to  saturninus]  My  lord,  be  ruled  by  me, 
be  won  at  last; 

Dissemble  all  your  griefs  and  discontents: 

You  are  but  newly  planted  in  your  throne; 

Lest,  then,  the  people,  and  patricians  too. 

Upon  a  just  survey,  take  Titus’  part. 


And  so  supplant  you  for  ingratitude. 

Which  Rome  reputes  to  be  a  heinous  sin, 

Yield  at  entreats;  and  then  let  me  alone: 

I’ll  find  a  day  to  massacre  them  all  450 

And  raze  their  faction  and  their  family. 

The  cruel  father  and  his  traitorous  sons. 

To  whom  I  sued  for  my  dear  son’s  life. 

And  make  them  know  what  ’tis  to  let  a  queen 
Kneel  in  the  streets  and  beg  for  grace  in  vain. 
Again  speaking  openly  to  saturninus. 

Come,  come,  sweet  emperor;  come,  Andronicus; 
Take  up  this  good  old  man,  and  cheer  the  heart 
That  dies  in  tempest  of  thy  angry  frown. 

Sat.  Rise,  Titus,  rise;  my  empress  hath  pre¬ 
vail’d. 

Tit.  I  thank  your  Majesty,  and  her,  my  lord: 
These  words,  these  looks,  infuse  new  life  in  me. 

Tam.  Titus,  I  am  incorporate  in  Rome, 

A  Roman  now  adopted  happily. 

And  must  advise  the  Emperor  for  his  good. 

This  day  all  quarrels  die,  Andronicus; 

And  let  it  be  mine  honour,  good  my  lord. 

That  I  have  reconciled  your  friends  and  you. 

For  you.  Prince  Bassianus,  I  have  pass’d 
My  word  and  promise  to  the  Emperor, 

That  you  will  be  more  mild  and  tractable.  470 
And  fear  not,  lords,  and  you,  Lavinia; 

By  my  advice,  all  humbled  on  your  knees. 

You  shall  ask  pardon  of  his  Majesty. 

Luc.  We  do,  and  vow  to  heaven  and  to  his 
Highness, 

That  what  we  did  was  mildly  as  we  might. 
Tendering  our  sister’s  honour  and  our  own. 

Marc.  That,  on  mine  honour,  here  I  do  protest. 
Sat.  Away,  and  talk  not;  trouble  us  no  more. 
Tam.  Nay,  nay,  sweet  emperor,  we  must  all 
be  friends :  475^ 

The  tribune  and  his  nephews  kneel  for  grace; 

I  will  not  be  denied:  sweet  heart,  look  back. 

Sat.  Marcus,  for  thy  sake  and  thy  brother’s  here, 
And  at  my  lovely  Tamora’ s  entreats, 

I  do  remit  these  young  men’s  heinous  faults: 
Stand  up. 

Lavinia,  though  you  left  me  like  a  churl, 

I  found  a  friend,  and  sure  as  death  I  swore 
I  would  not  part  a  bachelor  from  the  priest. 

Come,  if  the  Emperor’s  court  can  feast  two 
brides. 

You  are  my  guest,  Lavinia,  and  your  friends.  4^0 
This  day  shall  be  a  love-day,  Tamora. 

Tit.  To-morrow,  an  it  please  your  Majesty 
To  hunt  the  panther  and  the  hart  with  me. 

With  horn  and  hound  we’ll  give  your  Grace 
bonjour. 

Sat.  Be  it  so,  Titus,  and  gramercy  too. 

[Flourish.  Exeunt. 


176 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


ACT  II 

Scene  i.  Rome:  before  the  palace 
Enter  aaron. 

Aar,  Now  climbeth  Tamora  Olympus’  top, 

Safe  out  of  fortune’s  shot;  and  sits  aloft, 

Secure  of  thunder’s  crack  or  lightning  flash; 
Advanced  above  pale  envy’s  threatening  reach. 
As  when  the  golden  sun  salutes  the  morn. 

And,  having  gilt  the  ocean  with  his  beams. 
Gallops  the  zodiac  in  his  glistering  coach. 

And  overlooks  the  highest-peering  hills; 

So  Tamora: 

Upon  her  wit  doth  earthly  honour  wait,  lo 

And  virtue  stoops  and  trembles  at  her  frown. 
Then,  Aaron,  arm  thy  heart  and  fit  thy  thoughts. 
To  mount  aloft  with  thy  imperial  mistress. 

And  mount  her  pitch,  whom  thou  in  triumph 
long 

Hast  prisoner  held,  fetter’d  in  amorous  chains 
And  faster  bound  to  Aaron’s  charming  eyes 
Than  is  Prometheus  tied  to  Caucasus. 

Away  with  slavish  weeds  and  servile  thoughts! 

I  will  be  bright,  and  shine  in  pearl  and  gold. 

To  wait  upon  this  new-made  empress.  20 

To  wait,  said  I?  to  wanton  with  this  queen, 

This  goddess,  this  Semiramis,  this  nymph. 

This  siren,  that  will  charm  Rome’s  Saturnine, 
And  see  his  shipwreck  and  his  commonweal’s. 
Holloa!  what  storm  is  this? 

Enter  demetrius  and  chiron,  braving, 

Dem,  Chiron,  thy  years  want  wit,  thy  wit 
wants  edge. 

And  manners,  to  intrude  where  I  am  graced; 

And  may,  for  aught  thou  know’st,  affected  be. 

Chi.  Demetrius,  thou  dost  over-ween  in  all; 

And  so  in  this,  to  bear  me  down  with  braves.  50 
’Tis  not  the  difference  of  a  year  or  two 
Makes  me  less  gracious  or  thee  more  fortunate: 

I  am  as  able  and  as  fit  as  thou 

To  serve,  and  to  deserve  my  mistress’  grace; 

And  that  my  sword  upon  thee  shall  approve. 

And  plead  my  passions  for  Lavinia’s  love. 

Aar,  [Aside]  Clubs,  clubs!  these  lovers  will 
not  keep  the  peace. 

Dem.  Why,  boy,  although  our  mother, 
unadvised. 

Gave  you  a  dancing-rapier  by  your  side. 

Are  you  so  desperate  grown,  to  threat  your 

friends?  40 

Go  to;  have  your  lath  glued  within  your  sheath 
Till  you  know  better  how  to  handle  it. 

Chi.  Meanwhile,  sir,  with  the  little  skill  I  have. 
Full  well  shalt  thou  perceive  how  much  I  dare. 
Dem,  Ay,  boy,  grow  ye  so  brave?  [They  draw.] 


Aar.  [Coming forward]  Why,  how  now,  lords! 
So  near  the  Emperor’s  palace  dare  you  draw. 

And  maintain  such  a  quarrel  openly? 

Full  well  I  wot  the  ground  of  all  this  grudge: 

I  would  not  for  a  million  of  gold 
The  cause  were  known  to  them  it  most  con¬ 
cerns; 

Nor  would  your  noble  mother  for  much  more  5/ 
Be  so  dishonour’d  in  the  court  of  Rome. 

For  shame,  put  up. 

Dem,  Not  I,  till  I  have  sheathed 

My  rapier  in  his  bosom  and  withal 
Thrust  these  reproachful  speeches  down  his 
throat 

That  he  hath  breathed  in  my  dishonour  here. 

Chi.  For  that  I  am  prepared  and  full  resolved. 
Foul-spoken  coward,  that  thunder’ st  with  thy 
tongue. 

And  with  thy  weapon  nothing  darest  perform! 
Aar,  Away,  I  say!  60 

Now,  by  the  gods  that  warlike  Goths  adore. 

This  petty  brabble  will  undo  us  all. 

Why,  lords,  and  think  you  not  how  dangerous 
It  is  to  jet  upon  a  prince’s  right? 

What,  is  Lavinia  then  become  so  loose. 

Or  Bassianus  so  degenerate. 

That  for  her  love  such  quarrels  may  be  broach’d 
Without  controlment,  justice,  or  revenge? 

Young  lords,  beware!  an  should  the  Empress 
know 

This  discord’s  ground,  the  music  would  not 

please.  70 

Chi.  I  care  not,  I,  knew  she  and  all  the  world: 

I  love  Lavinia  more  than  all  the  world. 

Dem.  Youngling,  learn  thou  to  make  some 
meaner  choice: 

Lavinia  is  thine  elder  brother’s  hope. 

Aar.  Why,  are  ye  mad?  or  know  ye  not,  in 
Rome 

How  furious  and  impatient  they  be. 

And  cannot  brook  competitors  in  love? 

I  tell  you,  lords,  you  do  but  plot  your  deaths 
By  this  device. 

Chi.  Aaron,  a  thousand  deaths 

Would  I  propose  to  achieve  her  whom  I  love.  80 
Aar.  To  achieve  her!  how? 

Dem.  Why  makest  thou  it  so  strange? 

She  is  a  woman,  therefore  may  be  woo’d; 

She  is  a  woman,  therefore  may  be  won; 

She  is  Lavinia,  therefore  must  be  loved. 

What,  m.an!  more  water  glideth  by  the  mill 
Than  wots  the  miller  of;  and  easy  it  is 
Of  a  cut  loaf  to  steal  a  shive,  we  know: 

Though  Bassianus  be  the  Emperor’s  brother. 
Better  than  he  have  worn  Vulcan’s  badge. 

Aar,  [Aside]  Ay,  and  as  good  as  Saturninus  may. 


SCENE  I 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


177 


Dem.  Then  why  should  he  despair  that  knows 
to  court  it  91 

With  words,  fair  looks,  and  liberality? 

What,  hast  not  thou  full  often  struck  a  doe. 

And  borne  her  cleanly  by  the  keeper’s  nose? 

Aar.  Why,  then,  it  seems,  some  certain  snatch 
or  so 

Would  serve  your  turns. 

Chi.  Ay,  so  the  turn  were  served. 

De?n.  Aaron,  thou  hast  hit  it. 

Aar.  Would  you  had  hit  it  too! 

Then  should  not  we  be  tired  with  this  ado. 

Why,  hark  ye,  hark  ye!  and  are  you  such  fools 
To  square  for  this?  would  if  offend  you,  then. 
That  both  should  speed?  10/ 

Chi.  Faith,  not  me. 

Dem.  Nor  me,  so  I  were  one. 

Aar.  For  shame,  be  friends,  and  join  for  that 
you  jar: 

’Tis  policy  and  stratagem  must  do 
That  you  affect;  and  so  must  you  resolve 
That  what  you  cannot  as  you  would  achieve 
You  must  perforce  accomplish  as  you  may. 

Take  this  of  me:  Lucrece  was  not  more  chaste 
Than  this  Lavinia,  Bassianus’  love. 

A  speedier  course  than  lingering  languishment 
Must  we  pursue,  and  1  have  found  the  path.  /// 
My  lords,  a  solemn  hunting  is  in  hand; 

There  will  the  lovely  Roman  ladies  troop: 

The  forest  walks  are  wide  and  spacious; 

And  many  unfrequented  plots  there  are 
Fitted  by  kind  for  rape  and  villany: 

Single  you  thither  then  this  dainty  doe. 

And  strike  her  home  by  force,  if  not  by 
words: 

This  way,  or  not  at  all,  stand  you  in  hope. 

Come,  come,  our  empress,  with  her  sacred 
wit 

To  villainy  and  vengeance  consecrate,  121 

Will  we  acquaint  with  all  that  we  intend; 

And  she  shall  file  our  engines  with  advice. 

That  will  not  suffer  you  to  square  yourselves, 

But  to  your  wishes’  height  advance  you  both. 

The  Emperor’s  court  is  like  the  house  of  Fame, 
The  palace  full  of  tongues,  of  eyes,  and  ears: 

The  woods  are  ruthless,  dreadful,  deaf,  and 
dull; 

There  speak,  and  strike,  brave  boys,  and  take 
your  Darns; 

There  serve  your  lusts,  shadow’d  from  heaven’s 
eye,  75  o 

And  revel  in  Lavinia’s  treasury. 

Chi.  Thy  counsel,  lad,  smells  of  no  cowardice, 
Dem.  Sit  fas  autnefas.,  till  I  find  the  stream 
To  cool  this  heat,  a  charm  to  calm  these  fits, 

Fer  Styga,  per  manes  vehor.  [Exeunt. 


Scene  ii.  A  forest  near  Rome:  Iwms  and 
cry  of  hounds  heard 

Enter  titus  andronicus,  with  Hunters., 

MARCUS,  LUCIUS,  QUINTUS,  and  MARTI  us. 

Tit.  The  hunt  is  up,  the  morn  is  bright  and  grey, 
The  fields  are  fragrant  and  the  woods  are  green* 
Uncouple  here  and  let  us  make  a  bay 
And  wake  the  Emperor  and  his  lovely  bride 
And  rouse  the  Prince  and  ring  a  hunter’s  peal. 
That  all  the  court  may  echo  with  the  noise. 

Sons,  let  it  be  your  charge,  as  it  is  ours. 

To  attend  the  Emperor’s  person  carefully: 

1  have  been  troubled  in  my  sleep  this  night. 

But  dawning  day  new  comfort  hath  inspired,  lo 

A  cry  of  hounds.,  and  horns  winded  in  a  peal.  Enter 

SATURNINUS,  TAMORA,  BASSIANUS,  LAVINIA,  DE¬ 
METRIUS,  CHIRON,  and  Attendants. 

Many  good  morrows  to  your  Majesty; 

Madam,  to  you  as  many  and  as  good: 

1  promised  your  Grace  a  hunter’s  peal. 

Sat.  And  you  have  rung  it  lustily,  my  lord; 
Somewhat  too  early  for  new-married  ladies. 

Bas.  Lavinia,  how  say  you? 

Lav.  I  say,  no; 

1  have  been  broad  awake  two  hours  and  more. 

Sat.  Come  on,  then;  horse  and  chariots  let  us 
have. 

And  to  our  sport.  [To  tamora]  Madam,  now 
shall  ye  see 
Our  Roman  hunting. 

Marc.  I  have  dogs,  my  lord,  20 

Will  rouse  the  proudest  panther  in  the  chase. 

And  climb  the  highest  promontory  top. 

Tit.  And  I  have  horse  will  follow  where  the 
game 

Makes  way,  and  run  like  swallows  o’er  the  plain. 
Dem.  Chiron,  we  hunt  not,  we,  with  horse 
nor  hound. 

But  hope  to  pluck  a  dainty  doe  to  ground. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  A  lonely  part  of  the  forest 
Enter  aaron,  with  a  bag  of  gold. 

Aar.  He  that  had  wit  would  think  that  I  had 
none. 

To  bury  so  much  gold  under  a  tree 
And  never  after  to  inherit  it. 

Let  him  that  thinks  of  me  so  abjectly 
Know  that  this  gold  must  coin  a  stratagem. 
Which,  cunningly  effected,  will  beget 
A  very  excellent  piece  of  villainy: 

And  so  repose,  sweet  gold,  for  their  unrest 

[Hides  the  gold, 

\  That  have  their  alms  out  of  the  Empress’  chest. 


178 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


Enter  TXMOKk, 

Tam,  My  lovely  Aaron,  wherefore  look’st 
thou  sad,  .  10 

When  everything  doth  make  a  gleeful  boast? 

The  birds  chant  melody  on  every  bush. 

The  snake  lies  rolled  in  the  cheerful  sun. 

The  green  leaves  quiver  with  the  cooling  wind 
And  make  a  chequer’d  shadow  on  the  ground: 
Under  their  sweet  shade,  Aaron,  let  us  sit. 

And,  whilst  the  babbling  echo  mocks  the  hounds. 
Replying  shrilly  to  the  well-tuned  horns. 

As  if  a  double  hunt  were  heard  at  once. 

Let  us  sit  down  and  mark  their  yelping  noise;  20 
And,  after  conflict  such  as  was  supposed 
The  wandering  prince  and  Dido  once  enjoy’d. 
When  with  a  happy  storm  they  were  surprised 
And  curtain’d  with  a  counsel-keeping  cave. 

We  may,  each  wreathed  in  the  other’s  arms, 

Our  pastimes  done,  possess  a  golden  slumber; 
Whiles  hounds  and  horns  and  sweet  melodious 
birds 

Be  unto  us  as  is  a  nurse’s  song 
Of  lullaby  to  bring  her  babe  asleep. 

Aar,  Madam,  though  Venus  govern  your 

desires,  50 

Saturn  is  dominator  over  mine: 

What  signifies  my  deadly-standing  eye, 

My  silence  and  my  cloudy  melancholy, 

My  fleece  of  wooly  hair  that  now  uncurls 
Even  as  an  adder  when  she  doth  unroll 
To  do  some  fatal  execution? 

No,  madam,  these  are  no  venereal  signs: 
Vengeance  is  in  my  heart,  death  in  my  hand. 
Blood  and  revenge  are  hammering  in  my  head. 
Hark,  Tamora,  the  empress  of  my  soul,  40 

Which  never  hopes  more  heaven  than  rests  in 
thee. 

This  is  the  day  of  doom  for  Bassianus: 

His  Philomel  must  lose  her  tongue  to-day. 

Thy  sons  make  pillage  of  her  chastity 
And  wash  their  hands  in  Bassianus’  blood. 

Seest  thou  this  letter?  take  it  up,  I  pray  thee. 

And  give  the  King  this  fatal-plotted  scroll. 

Now  question  me  no  more;  we  are  espied; 

Here  comes  a  parcel  of  our  hopeful  booty. 

Which  dreads  not  yet  their  lives’  destruction.  50 
Tam,  Ah,  my  sweet  Moor,  sweeter  to  me  than 
life! 

Aar,  No  more,  great  Empress;  Bassianus  comes: 
Be  cross  with  him;  and  I’ll  go  fetch  thy  sons 
To  back  thy  quarrels,  whatsoe’er  they  be.  [Exit, 

Enter  bassianus  and  lavinia. 

Bas,  Who  have  we  here?  Rome’s  royal  Empress, 
Unfurnish’d  of  her  well-beseeming  troop? 


Or  is  it  Dian,  habited  like  her. 

Who  hath  abandoned  her  holy  groves 
To  see  the  general  hunting  in  this  forest? 

Tam,  Saucy  controller  of  our  private  steps! 

Had  I  the  power  that  some  say  Dian  had,  61 
Thy  temples  should  be  planted  presently 
With  horns,  as  was  Actaeon’s;  and  the  hounds 
Should  drive  upon  thy  new-transformed  limbs. 
Unmannerly  intruder  as  thou  art! 

Lav,  Under  your  patience,  gentle  Empress, 

’Tis  thought  you  have  a  goodly  gift  in  horning; 
And  to  be  doubted  that  your  Moor  and  you 
Are  singled  forth  to  try  experiments: 

Jove  shield  your  husband  from  his  hounds  to-day! 
’Tis  pity  they  should  take  him  for  a  stag.  7/ 
Bas.  Believe  me.  Queen,  your  swarth  Cimmerian 
Doth  make  your  honour  of  his  body’s  hue. 
Spotted,  detested,  and  abominable. 

Why  are  you  sequester’d  from  all  your  train. 
Dismounted  from  your  snow-white  goodly 
steed. 

And  wander’d  hither  to  an  obscure  plot. 
Accompanied  but  with  a  barbarous  Moor, 

If  foul  desire  had  not  conducted  you? 

Lav.  And,  being  intercepted  in  your  sport.  So 
Great  reason  that  my  noble  lord  be  rated 
For  sauciness.  I  pray  you,  let  us  hence. 

And  let  her  joy  her  raven-co lour’d  love: 

This  valley  fits  the  purpose  passing  well. 

Bas.  The  King  my  brother  shall  have  note  of 
this. 

Lav.  Ay,  for  these  slips  have  made  him  noted 
long: 

Good  king,  to  be  so  mightily  abused! 

Tam.  Why  have  I  patience  to  endure  all  this? 

Enter  demetrius  and  chiron. 

Dem.  How  now,  dear  sovereign,  and  our 
gracious  mother! 

Why  doth  your  Highness  look  so  pale  and  wan? 
Tam,  Have  I  not  reason,  think  you,  to  look 
pale?  yi 

These  two  have  ’ticed  me  hither  to  this  place: 

A  barren  detested  vale,  you  see  it  is; 

The  trees,  though  summer,  yet  forlorn  and  lean, 
O’ercome  with  moss  and  baleful  mistletoe: 

Here  never  shines  the  sun;  here  nothing  breeds. 
Unless  the  nightly  owl  or  fatal  raven: 

And  when  they  show’d  me  this  abhorred  pit. 
They  told  me,  here,  at  dead  time  of  the  night, 

A  thousand  fiends,  a  thousand  hissing  snakes,  100 
Ten  thousand  swelling  toads,  as  many  urchins. 
Would  make  such  fearful  and  confused  cries 
As  any  mortal  body  hearing  it 
Should  straight  fall  mad,  or  else  die  suddenly. 

No  sooner  had  they  told  this  hellish  tale. 


SCENE  III 

But  Straight  they  told  me  they  would  bind  me 
here 

Unto  the  body  of  a  dismal  yew, 

And  leave  me  to  this  miserable  death: 

And  then  they  call’d  me  foul  adulteress, 
Lascivious  Goth,  and  all  the  bitterest  terms  no 
That  ever  ear  did  hear  to  such  effect: 

And,  had  you  not  by  wondrous  fortune  come. 
This  vengeance  on  me  had  they  executed. 
Revenge  it,  as  you  love  your  mother’s  life. 

Or  be  ye  not  henceforth  call’d  my  children. 

Dem.  This  is  a  witness  that  I  am  thy  son. 

Stabs  BASSIANUS. 

Chi.  And  this  for  me,  struck  home  to  show  my 
strength.  [Also  stabs  bassianus,  ivho  dies.] 
Lav.  Ay,  come,  Semiramis,  nay,  barbarous 
Tamora, 

For  no  name  fits  thy  nature  but  thy  own! 

Tam.  Give  me  thy  poniard;  you  shall  know, 
my  boys,  120 

Your  mother’s  hand  shall  right  your  mother’s 
wrong. 

Dem.  Stay,  madam;  here  is  more  belongs  to  her; 
First  thrash  the  corn,  then  after  burn  the  straw: 
This  minion  stood  upon  her  chastity. 

Upon  her  nuptial  vow,  her  loyalty. 

And  with  that  painted  hope  braves  your  mighti¬ 
ness: 

And  shall  she  carry  this  unto  her  grave? 

Chi.  An  if  she  do,  I  would  I  were  an  eunuch. 
Drag  hence  her  husband  to  some  secret  hole. 

And  make  his  dead  trunk  pillow  to  our  lust.  1^0 
Tam.  But  when  ye  have  the  honey  ye  desire. 

Let  not  this  wasp  outlive,  us  both  to  sting. 

Chi.  I  warrant  you,  madam,  we  will  make  that 
sure. 

Come,  mistress,  now  perforce  we  will  enjoy 
That  nice-preserved  honesty  of  yours. 

Lav.  O  Tamora!  thou  bear’st  a  woman’s  face — 
Tam.  I  will  not  hear  her  speak;  away  with  her! 
Lav.  Sweet  lords,  entreat  her  hear  me  but  a 
word. 

Dem.  Listen,  fair  madam:  let  it  be  your  glory 
To  see  her  tears;  but  be  your  heart  to  them  /40 
As  unrelenting  flint  to  drops  of  rain. 

Lav.  When  did  the  tiger’s  young  ones  teach 
the  dam? 

O,  do  not  learn  her  wrath;  she  taught  it  thee; 

The  milk  thou  suck’dst  from  her  did  turn  to 
marble; 

Even  at  thy  teat  thou  hadst  thy  tyranny. 

Yet  every  mother  breeds  not  sons  alike: 

[To  chiron]  Do  thou  entreat  her  show  a  woman 
pity. 

Chi.  What,  wouldst  thou  have  me  prove  myself 
a  bastard? 


179 

Lav.  ’Tis  true;  the  raven  doth  not  hatch  a  lark: 
Yet  have  I  heafd — O,  could  I  find  it  now! —  /50 
The  lion  moved  with  pity  did  endure 
To  have  his  princely  paws  pared  all  away  : 

Some  say  that  ravens  foster  forlorn  children, 

The  whilst  their  own  birds  famish  in  their  nests: 
O,  be  to  me,  though  thy  hard  heart  say  no. 
Nothing  so  kind,  but  something  pitiful! 

Tatn.  I  know  not  what  it  means;  away  with  her! 
Lav.  O,  let  me  teach  thee!  for  my  father’s  sake. 
That  gave  thee  life,  when  well  he  might  have 
slain  thee. 

Be  not  obdurate,  open  thy  deaf  ears .  /  60 

Tam.  Hadst  thou  in  person  ne’er  offended  me, 
Even  for  his  sake  am  I  pitiless. 

Remember,  boys,  I  pour’d  forth  tears  in  vain, 

To  save  your  brother  from  the  sacrifice; 

But  fierce  Andronicus  would  not  relent: 
Therefore,  away  with  her,  and  use  her  as  you 
will, 

The  worse  to  her,  the  better  loved  of  me. 

Lav.  O  Tamora,  be  call’d  a  gentle  queen. 

And  with  thine  own  hands  kill  me  in  this  place! 
For  ’tis  not  life  that  I  have  begg’d  so  long;  lyo 
Poor  I  was  slain  when  Bassianus  died. 

Tam.  What  begg’st  thou,  then?  fond  woman, 
let  me  go. 

Lav.  ’Tis  present  death  I  beg;  and  one  thing 
more 

That  womanhood  denies  my  tongue  to  tell: 

O,  keep  me  from  their  worse  than  killing  lust. 
And  tumble  me  into  some  loathsome  pit. 

Where  never  man’s  eye  may  behold  my  body: 

Do  this,  and  be  a  charitable  murderer. 

Tam.  So  should  I  rob  my  sweet  sons  of  their 
fee: 

No,  let  them  satisfy  their  lust  on  thee.  180 

Dem.  Away!  for  thou  hast  stay’d  us  here  too 
long. 

Lav.  No  grace?  no  womanhood?  Ah,  beastly 
creature! 

The  blot  and  enemy  to  our  general  name! 
Confusion  fall — 

Chi.  Nay,  then  I’ll  stop  your  mouth.  Bring  thou 
her  husband: 

This  is  the  hole  where  Aaron  bid  us  hide  him. 
[Demetrius  throws  the  body  of  Bassianus  into  the 
pit;  then  exeunt  hemkikivs  and  CHIRON, 
offhAVlNlA. 

Tam.  Farewell,  my  sons:  see  that  you  make 
her  sure. 

Ne’er  let  my  heart  know  merry  cheer  indeed. 

Till  all  the  Andronici  be  made  away. 

Now  will  I  hence  to  seek  my  lovely  Moor,  190 
And  let  my  spleenful  sons  this  trull  deflow’r. 

[Exit. 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


i8o 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


Re-enter  aaron,  njoith  quintus  and  martius. 

Aar.  Come  on,  my  lords,  the  better  foot  before: 
Straight  will  I  bring  you  to  the  loathsome  pit 
Where  I  espied  the  panther  fast  asleep. 

Quin.  My  sight  is  very  dull,  whate’er  it  bodes. 
Mart.  And  mine,  I  promise  you;  were’t  not  for 
shame. 

Well  could  I  leave  our  sport  to  sleep  awhile. 

Falls  into  the  pit. 

Quin.  What,  art  thou  fall’n?  What  subtle  hole 
is  this. 

Whose  mouth  is  cover’d  with  rude-growing 
briers. 

Upon  whose  leaves  are  drops  of  new-shed  blood 
As  fresh  as  morning  dew  distill’d  on  flowers? 

A  very  fatal  place  it  seems  to  me. 

Speak,  brother,  hast  thou  hurt  thee  with  the  fall? 
Mart.  O  brother,  with  the  dismall’ st  object 
hurt 

That  ever  eye  with  sight  made  heart  lament! 

Aar.  [Aside]  Now  will  1  fetch  the  King  to  find 
them  here. 

That  he  thereby  may  give  a  likely  guess 
How  these  were  they  that  made  away  his 

brother.  [Exit. 

Mart.  Why  dost  not  comfort  me  and  help 
me  out  20^ 

From  this  unhallowed  and  blood-stained  hole? 

Quin.  I  am  surprised  with  an  uncouth  fear: 

A  chilling  sweat  o’er-runs  my  trembling  joints: 
My  heart  suspects  more  than  mine  eye  can  see. 
Mart.  To  prove  thou  hast  a  true-divining  heart, 
Aaron  and  thou  look  down  into  this  den. 

And  see  a  fearful  sight  of  blood  and  death. 

Quin.  Aaron  is  gone;  and  my  compassionate 
heart 

Will  not  permit  mine  eyes  once  to  behold 
The  thing  whereat  it  trembles  by  surmise: 

O,  tell  me  how  it  is;  for  ne’er  till  now  220 

Was  I  a  child  to  fear  I  know  not  what. 

Mart.  Lord  Bassianus  lies  embrewed  here. 

All  on  a  heap,  like  to  a  slaughter’d  lamb. 

In  this  detested,  dark,  blood-drinking  pit. 

Quin.  If  it  be  dark,  how  dost  thou  know  ’tis  he? 
Mart.  Upon  his  bloody  finger  he  doth  wear 
A  precious  ring,  that  lightens  all  the  hole. 

Which,  like  a  taper  in  some  monument. 

Doth  shine  upon  the  dead  man’s  earthy  cheeks 
And  shows  the  ragged  entrails  of  the  pit:  250 

So  pale  did  shine  the  moon  on  Pyramus 
when  he  by  night  lay  bathed  in  maiden  blood. 

O  brother,  help  me  with  thy  fainting  hand — 

If  fear  hath  made  thee  faint,  as  me  it  hath — 

Out  of  this  fell  devouring  receptacle. 

As  hateful  as  Cocytus’  misty  mouth. 


ACT  II 

Quin.  Reach  me  thy  hand,  that  I  may  help  thee 
out; 

Or,  wanting  strength  to  do  thee  so  much  good, 

I  may  be  pluck’d  into  the  swallowing  womb 
Of  this  deep  pit,  poor  Bassianus’  grave.  240 
I  have  no  strength  to  pluck  thee  to  the  brink. 
Mart.  Nor  1  no  strength  to  climb  without  thy 
help. 

Quin.  Thy  hand  once  more;  I  will  not  loose 
again. 

Till  thou  art  here  aloft  or  I  below; 

Thou  canst  not  come  to  me:  I  come  to  thee. 

Falls  in. 

Enter  saturninus  'with  aaron. 

Sat.  Along  with  me:  I’ll  see  what  hole  is  here, 
And  what  he  is  that  now  is  leap’d  into  it. 

Say,  who  art  thou  that  lately  didst  descend 
Into  this  gaping  hollow  of  the  earth? 

Mart.  The  unhappy  son  of  old  Andronicus; 
Brought  hither  in  a  most  unlucky  hour,  25/ 
To  find  thy  brother  Bassianus  dead. 

Sat.  My  brother  dead!  I  know  thou  dost  but  jest: 
He  and  his  lady  both  are  at  the  lodge 
Upon  the  north  side  of  this  pleasant  chase; 

’Tis  not  an  hour  since  I  left  him  there. 

Mart.  We  know  not  where  you  left  him  all  alive; 
But,  out,  alas!  here  have  we  found  him  dead. 

Re-enter  tamora,  'with  Attendants;  titus 

ANDRONICUS,  and  LUCIUS. 

Tam.  Where  is  my  lord  the  King? 

Sat.  Here,  Tamora,  though  grieved  with  killing 
grief.  260 

Tam.  Where  is  thy  brother  Bassianus? 

Sat.  Now  to  the  bottom  dost  thou  search  my 
wound: 

Poor  Bassianus  here  lies  murdered. 

Tam.  Then  all  too  late  I  bring  this  fatal  writ. 
The  complot  of  this  timeless  tragedy; 

And  wonder  greatly  that  man’s  face  can  fold 
In  pleasing  smiles  such  murderous  tyranny. 

She  giveth  saturninus  a  letter. 

Sat.  [Reads]  “An  if  we  miss  to  meet  him 
handsomely — 

Sweet  huntsman,  Bassianus  ’tis  we  mean — 

Do  thou  so  much  as  dig  the  grave  for  him:  270 
Thou  know’st  our  meaning.  Look  for  thy  reward 
Among  the  nettles  at  the  elder-tree 
Which  overshades  the  mouth  of  that  same  pit 
Where  we  decreed  to  bury  Bassianus. 

Do  this,  and  purchase  us  thy  lasting  friends.” 

O  Tamora!  was  ever  heard  the  like? 

This  is  the  pit,  and  this  the  elder-tree. 

Look,  sirs,  if  you  can  find  the  huntsman  out 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


i8i 


SCENE  III 

That  should  have  murder’d  Bassianus  here. 

Aar.  My  gracious  lord,  here  is  the  bag  of 

gold.  280 

Sat.  [To  TiTus]  Two  of  thy  whelps,  fell  curs  of 
bloody  kind, 

Have  here  bereft  my  brother  of  his  life. 

Sirs,  drag  them  from  the  pit  unto  the  prison: 
There  let  them  bide  until  we  have  devised 
Some  never-heard-of  torturing  pain  for  them. 
Tam.  What,  are  they  in  this  pit?  O  wondrous 
thing! 

How  easily  murder  is  discovered! 

Tit.  High  Emperor,  upon  my  feeble  knee 
I  beg  this  boon,  with  tears  not  lightly  shed. 

That  this  fell  fault  of  my  accursed  sons,  2po 
Accursed,  if  the  fault  be  proved  in  them — 

Sat.  If  it  be  proved!  you  see  it  is  apparent. 

Who  found  this  letter?  Tamora,  was  it  you? 

Tam.  Andronicus  himself  did  take  it  up. 

Tit.  I  did,  my  lord:  yet  let  me  be  their  bail; 

For,  by  my  father’s  reverend  tomb,  I  vow 
They  shall  be  ready  at  your  Highness’  will 
To  answer  their  suspicion  with  their  lives. 

Sat.  Thou  shalt  not  bail  them:  see  thou  follow 
me. 

Some  bring  the  murder’d  body,  some  the 

murderers:  500 

Let  them  not  speak  a  word;  the  guilt  is  plain; 

For,  by  my  soul,  were  there  worse  end  than 
death. 

That  end  upon  them  should  be  executed. 

Tam.  Andronicus,  I  will  entreat  the  King: 

Fear  not  thy  sons;  they  shall  do  well  enough. 

Tit.  Come,  Lucius,  come;  stay  not  to  talk  with 
them.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Another  part  of  the  forest 

Enter  demetrius  and  chiron,  'with  lavinia, 
ravished;  her  hands  cut  off,  and  her  tongue  cut 
out. 

Dem.  So,  now  go  tell,  an  if  thy  tongue  can  speak, 
Who  ’twas  that  cut  thy  tongue  and  ravish’d  thee. 
Chi.  Write  down  thy  mind,  bewray  thy 
meaning  so. 

An  if  thy  stumps  will  let  thee  play  the  scribe. 
Dem.  See,  how  with  signs  and  tokens  she  can 
scrowl. 

Chi.  Go  home,  call  for  sweet  water,  wash  thy 
hands. 

Dem.  She  hath  no  tongue  to  call,  nor  hands  to 
wash; 

And  so  let’s  leave  her  to  her  silent  walks. 

Chi.  An  ’twere  my  case,  I  should  go  hang 
myself. 

Dem.  If  thou  hadst  hands  to  help  thee  knit  the 
cord.[Exeunt  demetrius  and  chiron. 


^  Enter  MARCUS. 

Alar.  Who  is  this?  my  niece,  that  flies  away  so 
fast!  II 

Cousin,  a  word;  where  is  your  husband? 

If  I  do  dream,  would  all  my  wealth  would  wake 
me! 

If  I  do  wake,  some  planet  strike  me  down, 

That  I  may  slumber  in  eternal  sleep! 

Speak,  gentle  niece,  what  stern  ungentle  hands 
Have  lopp’d  and  hew’d  and  made  thy  body  bare 
Of  her  two  branches,  those  sweet  ornaments 
Whose  circling  shadows  kings  have  sought  to 
sleep  in, 

And  might  not  gain  so  great  a  happiness  20 
As  have  thy  love?  Why  dost  not  speak  to  me? 
Alas,  a  crimson  river  of  warm  blood. 

Like  to  a  bubbling  fountain  stirr’d  with  wind, 
Doth  rise  and  fall  between  thy  rosed  lips. 

Coming  and  going  with  thy  honey  breath. 

But,  sure,  some  Tereus  hath  deflowered  thee, 
And,  lest  thou  shouldst  detect  him,  cut  thy 
tongue. 

Ah,  now  thou  turn’st  away  thy  face  for  shame! 
And,  notwithstanding  all  this  loss  of  blood. 

As  from  a  conduit  with  three  issuing  spouts,  50 
Yet  do  thy  cheeks  look  red  as  Titan’s  face 
Blushing  to  be  encounter’d  with  a  cloud. 

Shall  I  speak  for  thee?  shall  I  say  ’tis  so? 

O,  that  I  knew  thy  heart;  and  knew  the  beast, 
That  I  might  rail  at  him,  to  ease  my  mind! 

Sorrow  concealed,  like  an  oven  stopp’d. 

Doth  burn  the  heart  to  cinders  where  it  is. 

Fair  Philomela,  she  but  lost  her  tongue. 

And  in  a  tedious  sampler  sew’d  her  mind: 

But,  lovely  niece,  that  mean  is  cut  from  thee; 

A  craftier  Tereus,  cousin,  hast  thou  met, 

And  he  hath  cut  those  pretty  fingers  off 
That  could  have  better  sew’d  than  Philomel. 

O,  had  the  monster  seen  those  lily  hands 
Tremble,  like  aspen-leaves,  upon  a  lute 
And  make  the  silken  strings  delight  to  kiss  them. 
He  would  not  then  have  touch’d  them  for  his 
life! 

Or,  had  he  heard  the  heavenly  harmony 
Which  that  sweet  tongue  hath  made. 

He  would  have  dropp’d  his  knife,  and  fell  asleep 
As  Cerberus  at  the  Thracian  poet’s  feet.  5/ 
Come,  let  us  go,  and  make  thy  father  blind; 

For  such  a  sight  will  blind  a  father’s  eye: 

One  hour’s  storm  will  drown  the  fragrant  meads; 
What  will  whole  months  of  tears  thy  father’s 
eyes? 

Do  not  draw  back,  for  we  will  mourn  with  thee: 
O,  could  our  mourning  ease  thy  misery! 

[Exeunt, 


i82 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  Rome:  a  street 

Enter  Judges,  Senators  and  Tribunes,  with  martius 
and  QUINTUS,  bound,  passing  on  to  the  place  of 
execution;  titus  going  before,  pleading. 

Tit.  Hear  me,  grave  fathers!  noble  tribunes, 
stay! 

For  pity  of  mine  age,  whose  youth  was  spent 
In  dangerous  wars,  whilst  you  securely  slept; 

For  all  my  blood  in  Rome’s  great  quarrel  shed; 
For  all  the  frosty  nights  that  I  have  watch’d; 

And  for  these  bitter  tears,  which  now  you  see 
Filling  the  aged  wrinkles  in  my  cheeks; 

Be  pitiful  to  my  condemned  sons. 

Whose  souls  are  not  corrupted  as  ’tis  thought. 

For  two  and  twenty  sons  I  never  wept,  lo 

Because  they  died  in  honour’s  lofty  bed. 

[Lieth  down;  the  Judges,  &c.  pass  by 
him,  and  Exeunt, 

For  these,  these,  tribunes,  in  the  dust  I  write 
My  heart’s  deep  languor  and  my  soul’s  sad 
tears: 

Let  my  tears  stanch  the  earth’s  dry  appetite; 

My  sons’  sweet  blood  will  make  it  shame  and 
blush. 

O  earth,  I  will  befriend  thee  more  with  rain. 

That  shall  distil  from  these  two  ancient  urns. 
Than  youthful  April  shall  with  all  his  showers: 

In  summer’s  drought  I’ll  drop  upon  thee  still; 

In  winter  with  warm  tears  I’ll  melt  the  snow,  20 
And  keep  eternal  spring-time  on  thy  face. 

So  thou  refuse  to  drink  my  dear  sons’  blood. 

Enter  lucius,  with  his  sword  drawn. 

O  reverend  tribunes!  O  gentle,  aged  men! 

Unbind  my  sons,  reverse  the  doom  of  death; 

And  let  me  say,  that  never  wept  before. 

My  tears  are  now  prevailing  orators. 

Luc.  O  noble  father,  you  lament  in  vain: 

The  tribunes  hear  you  not;  no  man  is  by; 

And  you  recount  your  sorrows  to  a  stone. 

Tit.  Ah,  Lucius,  for  thy  brothers  let  me  plead. 
Grave  tribunes,  once  more  I  entreat  of  you —  5/ 
Luc.  My  gracious  lord,  no  tribune  hears  you 
speak. 

Tit.  Why,  ’tis  no  matter,  man:  if  they  did  hear. 
They  would  not  mark  me,  or  if  they  did  mark. 
They  would  not  pity  me;  yet  plead  I  must. 

And  bootless  unto  them. 

Therefore  I  tell  my  sorrows  to  the  stones; 

Who,  though  they  cannot  answer  my  distress. 

Yet  in  some  sort  they  are  better  than  the 
tribunes. 

For  that  they  will  not  intercept  my  tale:  40 

When  I  do  weep,  they  humbly  at  my  feet 


ACT  III 

Receive  my  tears  and  seem  to  weep  with  me; 
And,  were  they  but  attired  in  grave  weeds, 

Rome  could  afford  no  tribune  like  to  these. 

A  stone  is  soft  as  wax,  tribunes  more  hard  than 
stones; 

A  stone  is  silent,  and  offendeth  not. 

And  tribunes  with  their  tongues  doom  men  to 
death, 

But  wherefore  stand’st  thou  with  thy  weapon 
drawn? 

Luc.  To  rescue  my  two  brothers  from  their 
death: 

For  which  attempt  the  judges  have  pronounced 
My  everlasting  doom  of  banishment.  5/ 

Tit.  O  happy  man!  they  have  befriended  thee. 
Why,  foolish  Lucius,  dost  thou  not  perceive 
That  Rome  is  but  a  wilderness  of  tigers? 

Tigers  must  prey,  and  Rome  affords  no  prey 
But  me  and  mine:  how  happy  art  thou,  then. 

From  these  devourers  to  be  banished! 

But  who  comes  with  our  brother  Marcus  here? 

Enter  marcus  and  lavinia. 

Marc.  Titus,  prepare  thy  aged  eyes  to  weep; 

Or,  if  not  so,  thy  noble  heart  to  break :  60 

I  bring  consuming  sorrow  to  thine  age. 

Tit.  Will  it  consume  me?  let  me  see  it,  then. 
Marc.  This  was  thy  daughter. 

Tit.  Why,  Marcus,  so  she  is. 

Luc.  Ay  me,  this  object  kills  me! 

Tit.  Faint-hearted  boy,  arise,  and  look  upon  her. 
Speak,  Lavinia,  what  accursed  hand 
Hath  made  thee  handless  in  thy  father’s  sight? 
What  fool  hath  added  water  to  the  sea. 

Or  brought  a  faggot  to  bright-burning  Troy? 

My  grief  was  at  the  height  before  thou  earnest. 
And  now,  like  Nilus,  it  disdaineth  bounds.  7/ 
Give  me  a  sword.  I’ll  chop  off  my  hands  too; 

For  they  have  fought  for  Rome,  and  all  in  vain; 
And  they  have  nursed  this  woe,  in  feeding  life; 

In  bootless  prayer  have  they  been  held  up. 

And  they  have  served  me  to  effectless  use: 

Now  all  the  service  I  require  of  them 
Is  that  the  one  will  help  to  cut  the  other. 

’Tis  well,  Lavinia,  that  thou  hast  no  hands; 

For  hands,  to  do  Rome  service,  are  but  vain.  So 
Luc.  Speak,  gentle  sister,  who  hath  martyr’d 
thee? 

Marc.  O,  that  delightful  engine  of  her  thoughts. 
That  blabb’d  them  with  such  pleasing  eloquence. 
Is  torn  from  forth  that  pretty  hollow  cage. 
Where,  like  a  sweet  melodious  bird,  it  sung 
Sweet  varied  notes,  enchanting  every  ear! 

Luc.  O,  say  thou  for  her,  who  hath  done  this 
deed? 

Marc.  O,  thus  I  found  her,  straying  in  the  park, 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


SCENE  I 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


183 


Seeking  to  hide  herself,  as  doth  the  deer 
I'hat  hath  received  some  unrecuring  wound,  po 
Tit.  It  was  my  deer;  and  he  that  wounded  her 
Hath  hurt  me  more  than  had  he  kill’d  me  dead: 

For  now  I  stand  as  one  upon  a  rock 
Environ’d  with  a  wilderness  of  sea, 

Who  marks  the  waxing  tide  grow  wave  by 
wave, 

Expecting  ever  when  some  envious  surge 
Will  in  his  brinish  bowels  swallow  him. 

This  way  to  death  my  wretched  sons  are  gone; 
Here  stands  my  other  son,  a  banish’d  man. 

And  here  my  brother,  weeping  at  my  woes :  100 

But  that  which  gives  my  soul  the  greatest  spurn 
Is  dear  Lavinia,  dearer  than  my  soul. 

Had  I  but  seen  thy  picture  in  this  plight. 

It  would  have  madded  me:  what  shall  I  do 
Now  I  behold  thy  lively  body  so? 

Thou  hast  no  hands,  to  wipe  away  thy  tears; 

Nor  tongue,  to  tell  me  who  hath  martyr’d  thee: 
Thy  husband  he  is  dead;  and  for  his  death 
Thy  brothers  are  condemn’d,  and  dead  by  this. 
Look,  Marcus!  ah,  son  Lucius,  look  on  her!  no 
When  I  did  name  her  brothers,  then  fresh  tears 
Stood  on  her  cheeks,  as  doth  the  honey-dew 
Upon  a  gather’d  lily  almost  wither’d. 

Marc.  Perchance  she  weeps  because  they  kill’d 
her  husband; 

Perchance  because  she  knows  them  innocent. 

Tit.  If  they  did  kill  thy  husband,  then  be  joyful, 
Because  the  law  hath  ta’en  revenge  on  them. 

No,  no,  they  would  not  do  so  foul  a  deed; 

Witness  the  sorrow  that  their  sister  makes. 

Gentle  Lavinia,  let  me  kiss  thy  lips;  120 

Or  make  some  sign  how  I  may  do  thee  ease: 

Shall  thy  good  uncle,  and  thy  brother  Lucius, 

And  thou,  and  I,  sit  round  about  some  fountain. 
Looking  all  downwards,  to  behold  our  cheeks 
How  they  are  stain’d,  as  meadows  yet  not  dry 
With  miry  slime  left  on  them  by  a  flood? 

And  in  the  fountain  shall  we  gaze  so  long 
Till  the  fresh  taste  be  taken  from  that  clearness. 
And  made  a  brine-pit  with  our  bitter  tears? 

Or  shall  we  cut  away  our  hands,  like  thine?  i^o 
Or  shall  we  bite  our  tongues,  and  in  dumb  shows 
Pass  the  remainder  of  our  hateful  days? 

What  shall  we  do?  let  us,  that  have  our  tongues, 
Plot  some  device  of  further  misery. 

To  make  us  wonder’d  at  in  time  to  come. 

Luc.  Sweet  father,  cease  your  tears ;  for,  at 
your  grief. 

See  how  my  wretched  sister  sobs  and  weeps. 

Marc.  Patience,  dear  niece.  Good  Titus,  dry 
thine  eyes. 

Tit.  Ah,  Marcus,  Marcus!  brother,  well  I  wot 
Thy  napkin  cannot  drink  a  tear  of  mine,  140  v 


For  thou,  poor  man,  hast  drown’d  it  with  thine 
own. 

Luc.  Ah,  my  Lavinia,  I  will  wipe  thy  cheeks. 
Tit.  Mark,  Marcus,  mark!  I  understand  her 
signs: 

Had  she  a  tongue  to  speak,  now  would  she  say 
That  to  her  brother  which  I  said  to  thee: 

His  napkin,  with  his  true  tears  all  bewet. 

Can  do  no  service  on  her  sorrowful  cheeks. 

O,  what  a  sympathy  of  woe  is  this. 

As  far  from  help  as  Limbo  is  from  bliss!  14^ 

Enter  aaron. 

Aar.  Titus  Andronicus,  my  lord  the  Emperor 
Sends  thee  this  word — that,  if  thou  love  thy 
sons. 

Let  Marcus,  Lucius,  or  thyself,  old  Titus, 

Or  any  one  of  you,  chop  off  your  hand. 

And  send  it  to  the  King:  he  for  the  same 
Will  send  thee  hither  both  thy  sons  alive; 

And  that  shall  be  the  ransom  for  their  fault. 

Tit.  O  gracious  Emperor!  O  gentle  Aaron! 

Did  ever  raven  sing  so  like  a  lark 
That  gives  sweet  tidings  of  the  sun’s  uprise? 
With  all  my  heart.  I’ll  send  the  Emperor  160 
My  hand: 

Good  Aaron,  wilt  thou  help  to  chop  it  off? 

Luc.  Stay,  father!  for  that  noble  hand  of  thine 
That  hath  thrown  down  so  many  enemies 
Shall  not  be  sent:  my  hand  will  serve  the  turn: 
My  youth  can  better  spare  my  blood  than  you; 
And  therefore  mine  shall  save  my  brothers’  lives. 
Marc.  Which  of  your  hands  hath  not  defended 
Rome, 

And  rear’d  aloft  the  bloody  battle-axe. 

Writing  destruction  on  the  enemy’s  castle?  /70 
O,  none  of  both  but  are  of  high  desert: 

My  hand  hath  been  but  idle;  let  it  serve 
To  ransom  my  two  nephews  from  their  death; 
Then  have  I  kept  it  to  a  worthy  end. 

Aar.  Nay,  come,  agree  whose  hand  shall  go 
along. 

For  fear  they  die  before  their  pardon  come. 

Marc.  My  hand  shall  go. 

Luc.  By  heaven,  it  shall  not  go! 

Tit.  Sirs,  strive  no  more:  such  wither’d  herbs 
as  these 

Are  meet  for  plucking  up,  and  therefore  mine. 
Luc.  Sweet  father,  if  I  shall  be  thought  thy 
son,  iSo 

Let  me  redeem  my  brothers  both  from  death. 
Marc.  And,  for  our  father’s  sake  and  mother’s 
care. 

Now  let  me  show  a  brother’s  love  to  thee. 

Tit.  Agree  between  you;  I  will  spare  my  hand. 
Luc.  Then  I’ll  go  fetch  an  axe. 


184 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


ACT  III 


Marc.  But  I  will  use  the  axe. 

[Exeunt  lucius  and  marcus. 
Tit.  Come  hither,  Aaron;  I’ll  deceive  them  both: 
Lend  me  thy  hand,  and  I  will  give  thee  mine. 

Aar.  [Aside]  If  that  be  call’d  deceit,  I  will  be 
honest. 

And  never,  whilst  I  live,  deceive  men  so:  1^0 

But  I’ll  deceive  you  in  another  sort. 

And  that  you’ll  say,  ere  half  an  hour  pass. 

Cuts  off  TiTus’s  hand. 

Re-enter  lucius  and  marcus. 

Tit.  Now  stay  your  strife:  what  shall  be  is 
dispatch’d. 

Good  Aaron,  give  his  Majesty  my  hand: 

Tell  him  it  was  a  hand  that  warded  him 
From  thousand  dangers;  bid  him  bury  it; 

More  hath  it  merited;  that  let  it  have. 

As  for  my  sons,  say  I  account  of  them 
As  jewels  purchased  at  an  easy  price;  1^9 

And  yet  dear  too,  because  I  bought  mine  own. 
Aar.  I  go,  Andronicus:  and  for  thy  hand 
Look  by  and  by  to  have  thy  sons  with  thee. 
[Aside]  Their  heads,  I  mean.  O,  how  this 
villainy 

Doth  fat  me  with  the  very  thoughts  of  it! 

Let  fools  do  good,  and  fair  men  call  for  grace, 
Aaron  will  have  his  soul  black  like  his  face.  [Exit. 

Tit.  O,  here  I  lift  this  one  hand  up  to  heaven. 
And  bow  this  feeble  ruin  to  the  earth: 

If  any  power  pities  wretched  tears. 

To  that  I  call!  [To  lavinia]  What,  wilt  thou 
kneel  with  me?  210 

Do,  then,  dear  heart;  for  heaven  shall  hear  our 
prayers; 

Or  with  our  sighs  we’ll  breathe  the  welkin  dim. 
And  stain  the  sun  with  fog,  as  sometime  clouds 
When  they  do  hug  him  in  their  melting  bosoms. 
Marc.  O  brother,  speak  with  possibilities, 

And  do  not  break  into  these  deep  extremes. 

Tit.  Is  not  my  sorrow  deep,  having  no  bottom? 
Then  be  my  passions  bottomless  with  them. 
Marc.  But  yet  let  reason  govern  thy  lament. 

Tit.  If  there  were  reason  for  these  miseries, 
Then  into  limits  could  I  bind  my  woes :  221 

When  heaven  doth  weep,  doth  not  the  earth 
o’erflow? 

If  the  winds  rage,  doth  not  the  sea  wax  mad. 
Threatening  the  welkin  with  his  big-swoln  face? 
And  wilt  thou  have  a  reason  for  this  coil? 

I  am  the  sea;  hark,  how  her  sighs  do  blow! 

She  is  the  weeping  welkin,  I  the  earth: 

Then  must  my  sea  be  moved  with  her  sighs; 

Then  must  my  earth  with  her  continual  tears 
Become  a  deluge,  overflow’d  and  drown’d;  250 
For  why  my  bowels  cannot  hide  her  woes. 


But  like  a  drunkard  must  I  vomit  them. 

Then  give  me  leave,  for  losers  will  have  leave 
To  ease  their  stomachs  with  their  bitter  tongues. 

Enter  a  messenger,  ^ith  two  heads  and  a  hand. 

Mess.  Worthy  Andronicus,  ill  art  thou  repaid 
For  that  good  hand  thou  sent’st  the  Emperor. 
Here  are  the  heads  of  thy  two  noble  sons; 

And  here’s  thy  hand,  in  scorn  to  thee  sent  back; 
Thy  griefs  their  sports,  thy  resolution  mock’d; 
That  woe  is  me  to  think  upon  thy  woes  240 
More  than  remembrance  of  my  father’s  death. 

[Exit. 

Marc.  Now  let  hot  ^tna  cool  in  Sicily, 

And  be  my  heart  an  ever-burning  hell! 

These  miseries  are  more  than  may  be  borne. 

To  weep  with  them  that  weep  doth  ease  some 
deal; 

But  sorrow  flouted  at  is  double  death. 

Luc.  Ah,  that  this  sight  should  make  so  deep  a 
wound. 

And  yet  detested  life  not  shrink  thereat! 

That  ever  death  should  let  life  bear  his  name,  24.^ 
Where  life  hath  no  more  interest  but  to  breathe! 
lavinia  kisses  titus. 

Marc.  Alas,  poor  heart,  that  kiss  is  comfortless 
As  frozen  water  to  a  starved  snake. 

Tit.  When  will  this  fearful  slumber  have  an 
end? 

Marc.  Now,  farewell,  flattery:  die,  Andronicus; 
Thou  dost  not  slumber:  see,  thy  two  sons’  heads. 
Thy  warlike  hand,  thy  mangled  daughter  here; 
Thy  other  banish’d  son,  with  this  dear  sight 
Struck  pale  and  bloodless;  and  thy  brother,  I, 
Even  like  a  stony  image,  cold  and  numb. 

Ah,  now  no  more  will  I  control  thy  griefs :  2  60 

Rend  off  thy  silver  hair,  thy  other  hand 
Gnawing  with  thy  teeth;  and  be  this  dismal  sight 
The  closing  up  of  our  most  wretched  eyes: 

Now  is  a  time  to  storm;  why  art  thou  still? 

Tit.  Ha,  ha,  ha! 

Marc.  Why  dost  thou  laugh?  it  fits  not  with 
this  hour. 

Tit.  Why,  I  have  not  another  tear  to  shed: 
Besides,  this  sorrow  is  an  enemy. 

And  would  usurp  upon  my  watery  eyes. 

And  make  them  blind  with  tributary  tears :  270 

Then  which  way  shall  I  find  Revenge’s  cave? 

For  these  two  heads  do  seem  to  speak  to  me 
And  threat  me  I  shall  never  come  to  bliss 
Till  all  these  mischiefs  be  return’d  again. 

Even  in  their  throats  that  have  committed  them. 
Come,  let  me  see  what  task  I  have  to  do. 

You  heavy  people,  circle  me  about, 

That  I  may  turn  me  to  each  one  of  you. 

And  swear  unto  my  soul  to  right  your  wrongs. 


SCENEI  TITUS  ANDRONICUS  185 


The  vow  is  made.  Come,  brother,  take  a  head; 
And  in  this  hand  the  other  will  I  bear.  281 

Lavinia,  thou  shalt  be  employ’d:  these  arms! 

Bear  thou  my  hand,  sweet  wench,  between  thy 
teeth. 

As  for  thee,  boy,  go  get  thee  from  my  sight; 

Thou  art  an  exile,  and  thou  must  not  stay: 

Hie  to  the  Goths,  and  raise  an  army  there: 

And,  if  you  love  me,  as  1  think  you  do. 

Let’s  kiss  and  part,  for  we  have  much  to  do. 

[Exeunt  m arcus,  and  lavinia. 

Luc.  Farewell,  Andronicus,  my  noble  father, 
The  woefull’st  man  that  ever  lived  in  Rome:  290 
Farewell,  proud  Rome;  till  Lucius  come  again, 
He  leaves  his  pledges  dearer  than  his  life: 
Farewell,  Lavinia,  my  noble  sister; 

O,  would  thou  wert  as  thou  tofore  hast  been! 

But  now  nor  Lucius  nor  Lavinia  lives 
But  in  oblivion  and  hateful  griefs. 

If  Lucius  live,  he  will  requite  your  wrongs; 

And  make  proud  Saturnine  and  his  empress 
Beg  at  the  gates,  like  Tarquin  and  his  queen. 

Now  will  I  to  the  Goths,  and  raise  a  power.  500 
To  be  revenged  on  Rome  and  Saturnine.  [Exit. 

Scene  ii.  A  room  in  Titus's  house: 
a  banquet  set  out. 

Enter  titus,  marc  us,  lavinia,  and  young 
LUCIUS,  a  Boy. 

Tit.  So,  so;  now  sit:  and  look  you  eat  no  more 
Than  will  preserve  just  so  much  strength  in  us 
As  will  revenge  these  bitter  woes  of  ours. 
Marcus,  unknit  that  sorrow-wreathen  knot: 

Thy  niece  and  I,  poor  creatures,  want  our  hands. 
And  cannot  passionate  our  tenfold  grief 
With  folded  arms.  This  poor  right  hand  of  mine 
Is  left  to  tyrannize  upon  my  breast; 

Who,  when  my  heart,  all  mad  with  misery. 

Beats  in  this  hollow  prison  of  my  flesh,  10 

Then  thus  I  thump  it  down. 

[To  LAVINIA.]  Thou  map  of  woe,  that  thus  dost 
talk  in  signs! 

When  thy  poor  heart  beats  with  outrageous 
beating. 

Thou  canst  not  strike  it  thus  to  make  it  still. 
Wound  it  with  sighing,  girl,  kill  it  with  groans; 
Or  get  some  little  knife  between  thy  teeth, 

And  just  against  thy  heart  make  thou  a  hole; 

That  all  the  tears  that  thy  poor  eyes  let  fall 
May  run  into  that  sink,  and  soaking  in 
Drown  the  lamenting  fool  in  sea-salt  tears.  20 
Marc,  Fie,  brother,  fie!  teach  her  not  thus  to  lay 
Such  violent  hands  upon  her  tender  life. 

Tit.  How  now!  has  sorrow  made  thee  dote 
already? 

Why,  Marcus,  no  man  should  be  mad  but  1. 


What  violent  hands  can  she  lay  on  her  life? 

Ah,  wherefore  dost  thou  urge  the  name  of  hands; 
To  bid  Tineas  tell  the  tale  twice  o’er. 

How  Troy  was  burnt  and  he  made  miserable? 

O,  handle  not  the  theme,  to  talk  of  hands. 

Lest  we  remember  still  that  we  have  none.  50 
Fie,  fie,  how  frantically  I  square  my  talk. 

As  if  we  should  forget  we  had  no  hands. 

If  Marcus  did  not  name  the  word  of  hands! 

Come,  let’s  fall  to;  and,  gentle  girl,  eat  this: 

Here  is  no  drink!  Hark,  Marcus,  what  she  says; 

I  can  interpret  all  her  martyr’d  signs; 

She  says  she  drinks  no  other  drink  but  tears. 
Brew’d  with  her  sorrow,  mesh’d  upon  her  cheeks: 
Speechless  complainer,  I  will  learn  thy  thought; 
In  thy  dumb  action  will  I  be  as  perfect  40 

As  begging  hermits  in  their  holy  prayers: 

Thou  shalt  not  sigh,  nor  hold  thy  stumps  to 
heaven. 

Nor  wink,  nor  nod,  nor  kneel,  nor  make  a  sign. 
But  I  of  tliese  will  wrest  an  alphabet 
And  by  still  practice  learn  to  know  thy  meaning. 
Young  Luc.  Good  grandsire,  leave  these  bitter 
deep  laments: 

Make  my  aunt  merry  with  some  pleasing  tale. 
Marc.  Alas,  the  tender  boy,  in  passion  moved. 
Doth  weep  to  see  his  grandsire’s  heaviness. 

Tit.  Peace,  tender  sapling;  thou  art  made  of 
tears,  jo 

And  tears  will  quickly  melt  thy  life  away. 

MARCUS  strikes  the  dish  with  a  knife. 

What  dost  thou  strike  at,  Marcus,  with  thy 
knife? 

Marc.  At  that  that  I  have  kill’d,  my  lord;  a  fly. 
Tit.  Out  on  thee,  murderer!  thou  kill’st  my 
heart; 

Mine  eyes  are  cloy’d  with  view  of  tyranny: 

A  deed  of  death  done  on  the  innocent 
Becomes  not  Titus’  brother:  get  thee  gone; 

I  see  thou  art  not  for  my  company. 

Marc.  Alas,  my  lord,  I  have  but  kill’d  a  fly. 

Tit.  But  how,  if  that  fly  had  a  father  and 

mother?  60 

How  would  he  hang  his  slender  gilded  wings. 
And  buzz  lamenting  doings  in  the  air! 

Poor  harmless  fly, 

That,  with  his  pretty  buzzing  melody. 

Came  here  to  make  us  merry!  and  thou  hast  kill’d 
him. 

Marc.  Pardon  me,  sir;  it  was  a  black  ill-favour’d 

Like  to  the  Empress’  Moor;  therefore  I  kill’d  him. 
Tit.  O,  O,  O, 

Then  pardon  me  for  reprehending  thee. 

For  thou  hast  done  a  charitable  deed.  70 

Give  me  thy  knife,  I  will  insult  on  him; 


1 86 

Flattering  myself,  as  if  it  were  the  Moor 
Come  hither  purposely  to  poison  me. 

There’s  for  thyself,  and  that’s  for  Tamora. 

Ah,  sirrah! 

Yet,  I  think,  we  are  not  brought  so  low, 

But  that  between  us  we  can  kill  a  fly 
That  comes  in  likeness  of  a  coal-black  Moor. 
Marc.  Alas,  poor  man!  grief  has  so  wrought  on 
him. 

He  takes  false  shadows  for  true  substances.  8o 
Tit.  Come,  take  away.  Lavinia,  go  with  me: 

I’ll  to  thy  closet;  and  go  read  with  thee 
Sad  stories  chanced  in  the  times  of  old. 

Come,  boy,  and  go  with  me:  thy  sight  is  young, 
And  thou  shalt  read  when  mine  began  to  dazzle. 

[Exeunt, 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  Rome:  Titus' s  garden 
Enter  young  lucius,  and  lavinia  running  after 
him.,  and  the  boy  flies  from  her.,  with  books  under 
his  arm.  Then  enter  titus  and  marcus. 

Ymng  Luc.  Help,  grandsire,  help!  my  aunt 
Lavinia 

Follows  me  everywhere,  I  know  not  why: 

Good  uncle  Marcus,  see  how  swift  she  comes. 
Alas,  sweet  aunt,  I  know  not  what  you  mean. 
Marc.  Stand  by  me,  Lucius;  do  not  fear  thine 
aunt. 

Tit.  She  loves  thee,  boy,  too  well  to  do  thee 
harm. 

Young  Luc.  Ay,  when  my  father  was  in  Rome 
she  did. 

Marc.  What  means  my  niece  Lavinia  by  these 
signs? 

Tit.  Fear  her  not,  Lucius:  somewhat  doth  she 
mean: 

See,  Lucius,  see  how  much  she  makes  of  thee:  lo 
Somewhither  would  she  have  thee  go  with 
her. 

Ah,  boy,  Cornelia  never  with  more  care 
Read  to  her  sons  than  she  hath  read  to  thee 
Sweet  poetry  and  Tully’s  Orator. 

Marc.  Canst  thou  not  guess  wherefore  she  plies 
thee  thus? 

Young  Luc.  My  lord,  I  know  nor,  I,  nor  can  I 
guess. 

Unless  some  fit  or  frenzy  do  possess  her: 

For  I  have  heard  my  grandsire  say  full  oft. 
Extremity  of  griefs  would  make  men  mad; 

And  I  have  read  that  Hecuba  of  Troy  20 

Ran  mad  for  sorrow:  that  made  me  to  fear; 
Although,  my  lord,  I  know  my  noble  aunt 
Loves  me  as  dear  as  e’er  my  mother  did. 

And  would  nor,  but  in  fury,  fright  my  youth: 


ACT  IV 

Which  made  me  down  to  throw  my  books, 
and  fly — 

Causeless,  perhaps.  But  pardon  me,  sweet  aunt: 
And,  madam,  if  my  uncle  Marcus  go, 

I  will  most  willingly  attend  your  ladyship. 

Marc.  Lucius,  I  will. 

LAVINIA  turns  over  with  her  stumps  the  books 
which  LUCIUS  has  let  fall. 

Tit.  How  now,  Lavinia!  Marcus,  what  means 
this?  ^0 

Some  book  there  is  that  she  desires  to  see. 

Which  is  it,  girl,  of  these?  Open  them,  boy. 

But  thou  art  deeper  read,  and  better  skill’d: 

Come,  and  take  choice  of  all  my  library. 

And  so  beguile  thy  sorrow,  till  the  heavens 
Reveal  the  damn’d  contriver  of  this  deed. 

Why  lifts  she  up  her  arms  in  sequence  thus? 

Marc.  I  think  she  means  that  there  was  more 
than  one 

Confederate  in  the  fact:  ay,  more  there  was; 

Or  else  to  heaven  she  heaves  them  for  revenge. 
Tit.  Lucius,  what  book  is  that  she  tosseth  so?  4/ 
Young  Luc.  Grandsire,  ’tis  Ovid’s  Metamor- 
phoses; 

My  mother  gave  it  me. 

Marc.  For  love  of  her  that’s  gone. 

Perhaps  she  cull’d  it  from  among  the  rest. 

Tit.  Soft!  see  how  busily  she  turns  the  leaves! 
[Helping  her.] 

What  would  she  find?  Lavinia,  shall  I  read? 

This  is  the  tragic  tale  of  Philomel, 

And  treats  of  Tereus’  treason  and  his  rape; 

And  rape,  I  fear,  was  root  of  thine  annoy. 

Marc.  See,  brother,  see;  note  how  she  quotes 
the  leaves.  jo 

Tit.  Lavinia,  wert  thou  thus  surprised,  sweet 
girl, 

Ravish’d  and  wrong’d,  as  Philomela  was. 

Forced  in  the  ruthless,  vast,  and  gloomy  woods? 
See,  see! 

Ay,  such  a  place  there  is,  where  we  did  hunt — 

O,  had  we  never,  never  hunted  there! — 

Pattern’d  by  that  the  poet  here  describes. 

By  nature  made  for  murders  and  for  rapes. 

Marc.  O,  why  should  nature  build  so  foul  a  den. 
Unless  the  gods  delight  in  tragedies?  60 

Tit.  Give  signs,  sweet  girl,  for  here  are  none  but 
friends. 

What  Roman  lord  it  was  durst  do  the  deed: 

Or  slunk  not  Saturnine,  as  Tarquin  erst. 

That  left  the  camp  to  sin  in  Lucrece’  bed? 

Marc.  Sit  down,  sweet  niece:  brother,  sit 
down  by  me. 

Apollo,  Pallas,  Jove,  or  Mercury, 

Inspire  me,  that  I  may  this  treason  find! 

My  lord,  look  here:  look  here,  Lavinia: 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


SCENE  I 

This  sandy  plot  is  plain;  guide  if  thou  canst, 

This  after  me,  when  I  have  writ  my  name  70 
Without  the  help  of  any  hand  at  all. 

He  writes  his  name  with  his  staff,  and  guides  it 
with  feet  and  mouth. 

Cursed  be  that  heart  that  forced  us  to  this  shift! 
Write  thou,  good  niece;  and  her  display,  at  last. 
What  God  will  have  discover’d  for  revenge: 
Heaven  guide  thy  pen  to  print  thy  sorrows  plain. 
That  we  may  know  the  traitors  and  the  truth! 

She  takes  the  staff  in  her  mmth,  and  guides  it  with 
her  stumps,  and  writes. 

Tit.  O,  do  ye  read,  my  lord,  what  she  hath  writ? 
''''Stuprum.  Chiron.  Demetrius.” 

Marc.  What,  what!  the  lustful  sons  of  Tamora 
Performers  of  this  heinous,  bloody  deed?  ^0 
Tit.  Magni  Dominator  poli, 

Tam  lentus  audis  scelera?  tarn  lentus  vides? 

Marc.  O,  calm  thee,  gentle  lord;  although  I 
know 

There  is  enough  written  upon  this  earth 
To  stir  a  mutiny  in  the  mildest  thoughts 
And  arm  the  minds  of  infants  to  exclaims. 

My  lord,  kneel  down  with  me;  Lavinia,  kneel; 
And  kneel,  sweet  boy,  the  Roman  Hector’s 
hope; 

And  swear  with  me,  as,  with  the  woeful  fere 
And  father  of  that  chaste  dishonour’d  dame,  po 
Lord  Junius  Brutus  sware  for  Lucrece’  rape. 

That  we  will  prosecute  by  good  advice 
Mortal  revenge  upon  these  traitorous  Goths, 

And  see  their  blood,  or  die  with  this  reproach. 

Tit.  ’Tis  sure  enough,  an  you  knew  how. 

But  if  you  hunt  these  bear-whelps,  then  beware: 
The  dam  will  wake;  and,  if  she  wind  you  once. 
She’s  with  the  lion  deeplv  still  in  league. 

And  lulls  him  whilst  she  playeth  on  her  back. 

And  when  he  sleeps  will  she  do  what  she  list,  too 
You  are  a  young  huntsman,  Marcus;  let  it  alone; 
And,  come,  I  will  go  get  a  leaf  of  brass. 

And  with  a  gad  of  steel  will  write  these  words. 
And  lay  it  by:  the  angry  northern  wind 
Will  blow  these  sands,  like  Sibyl’s  leaves,  abroad 
And  where’s  your  lesson,  then?  Boy,  what  say 
you? 

Young  Luc.  I  say,  my  lord,  that  if  I  were  a  man. 
Their  mother’s  bed-chamber  should  not  be  safe 
For  these  bad  bondmen  to  the  yoke  of  Rome. 
Marc.  Ay,  that’s  my  boy!  thy  father  hath 
full  oft  no 

For  his  ungrateful  country  done  the  like. 

Young  Luc.  And,  uncle,  so  will  I,  an  if  I  live. 

Tit.  Come,  go  with  me  into  mine  armoury; 
Lucius,  ril  fit  thee;  and  withal,  my  boy, 

Shalt  carry  from  me  to  the  Empress’  sons 
Presents  that  I  intend  to  send  them  both: 


187 

Come,  come;  thou’lt  do  thy  message,  wilt  thou 
not? 

Young  Luc.  Ay,  with  my  dagger  in  their 
bosoms,  grandsire. 

Tit.  No,  boy,  not  so;  Fll  teach  thee  another 
course. 

Lavinia,  come.  Marcus,  look  to  my  house:  120 
Lucius  and  Fll  go  brave  it  at  the  court: 

Ay,  marry,  will  we,  sir;  and  we’ll  be  waited  on. 

[Exeunt  titus,  lavinia,  and  young  lug. 
Marc.  O  heavens,  can  you  hear  a  good  man 
groan 

And  not  relent  or  not  compassion  him? 

Marcus,  attend  him  in  his  ecstasy. 

That  hath  more  scars  of  sorrow  in  his  heart 
Than  foemen’s  marks  upon  his  batter’d  shield; 
But  yet  so  just  that  he  will  not  revenge. 

Revenge,  ye  heavens,  for  old  Andronicus !  [Exit. 

Scene  ii.  The  same:  a  room  in  the  palace 
Enter,  from  one  side,  aaron,  demetrius,  and 
cmKO's;  from  the  other  side,  young  lucius,  and 
an  Attendant,  with  a  bundle  of  weapons,  and 
verses  writ  upon  them. 

Chi.  Demetrius,  here’s  the  son  of  Lucius; 

He  hath  some  message  to  deliver  us. 

Aar.  Ay,  some  mad  message  from  his  mad 
grandfather. 

Young  Luc.  My  lords,  with  all  the  humbleness 
I  may, 

I  greet  your  honours  from  Andronicus. 

[Aside]  And  pray  the  Roman  gods  confound  you 
both! 

Dem.  Gramercy,  lovely  Lucius:  what’s  the 
news? 

Young  Luc.  [Aside]  That  you  are  both 
decipher’d,  that’s  the  news. 

For  villains  mark’d  with  rape. — May  it  please 
you. 

My  grandsire,  well  advised,  hath  sent  by  me  10 
The  goodliest  weapons  of  his  armoury 
To  gratify  your  honourable  youth. 

The  hope  of  Rome;  for  so  he  bade  me  say; 

And  so  I  do,  and  with  his  gifts  present 
Your  lordships,  that,  whenever  you  have  need, 
You  may  be  armed  and  appointed  well: 

And  so  I  leave  you  both:  [Aside]  like  bloody 
villains. 

[Exeunt  young  lucius  and  Attendant. 
Dem.  What’s  here?  A  scroll;  and  written  round 
about? 

Let’s  see: 

[Reads]  Integer  vita,  scelerisque  purus,  20 

Non  eget  Mauri jaculis,  nec  arcu. 

Chi.  O,  ’tis  a  verse  in  Horace;  I  know  it  well: 

I  read  it  in  the  grammar  long  ago. 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


i88 

Aar,  Ay,  just;  a  verse  in  Horace;  right,  you 
have  it. 

[Aside]  Now,  what  a  thing  it  is  to  be  an  ass! 
Here’s  no  sound  jest!  the  old  man  hath  found 
their  guilt; 

And  sends  them  weapons  wrapp’d  about  with 
lines. 

That  wound,  beyond  their  feeling,  to  the  quick. 
But  were  our  witty  empress  well  afoot. 

She  would  applaud  Andronicus’  conceit:  50 

But  let  her  rest  in  her  unrest  awhile. — 

And  now,  young  lords,  was’t  not  a  happy  star 
Led  us  to  Rome,  strangers,  and  more  than  so. 
Captives,  to  be  advanced  to  this  height? 

It  did  me  good,  before  the  palace  gate 
To  brave  the  tribune  in  his  brother’s  hearing. 

Dem,  But  me  more  good,  to  see  so  great  a  lord 
Basely  insinuate  and  send  us  gifts. 

Aar.  Had  he  not  reason.  Lord  Demetrius? 

Did  you  not  use  his  daughter  very  friendly?  40 
Dem.  I  would  we  had  a  thousand  Roman  dames 
At  such  a  bay,  by  turn  to  serve  our  lust. 

Chi.  A  charitable  wish  and  full  of  love. 

Aar.  Here  lacks  but  your  mother  for  to  say 
amen. 

Chi.  And  that  would  she  for  twenty  thousand 
more. 

Dem.  Come,  let  us  go;  and  pray  to  all  the  gods 
For  our  beloved  mother  in  her  pains. 

Aar.  [Aside]  Pray  to  the  devils;  the  gods  have 
given  us  over. 

Trumpets  sound  within. 

Dem.  Why  do  the  Emperor’s  trumpets  flourish 
thus? 

Chi.  Belike,  for  joy  the  Emperor  hath  a  son.  50 
Dem.  Soft!  who  comes  here? 

Enter  a  nurse,  with  a  blackamoor  child  in  her  arms. 

Nur.  Good  morrow,  lords : 

O,  tell  me,  did  you  see  Aaron  the  Moor? 

Aar.  Well,  more  or  less,  or  ne’er  a  whit  at  all. 
Here  Aaron  is;  and  what  with  Aaron  now? 

Nur.  O  gentle  Aaron,  we  are  all  undone! 

Now  help,  or  woe  betide  thee  evermore! 

Aar.  Why,  what  a  caterwauling  dost  thou  keep! 
What  dost  thou  wrap  and  fumble  in  thine  arms? 
Nur.  O,  that  which  I  would  hide  from  heaven’s 
eye,  ^  ^  S9 

Our  Empress’  shame,  and  stately  Rome’s 
disgrace! 

She  is  deliver’d,  lords;  she  is  deliver’d. 

Aar.  To  whom? 

Nur.  I  mean,  she  is  brought  a-bed. 

Aar.  Well,  God  give  her  good  rest!  What 
hath  he  sent  her? 

Nur.  A  devil. 


ACT  IV 

Aar.  Why,  then  she  is  the  devil’s  dam;  a 
joyful  issue. 

Nur.  A  joyless,  dismal,  black,  and  sorrowful 
issue: 

Here  is  the  babe,  as  loathsome  as  a  toad 
Amongst  the  fairest  breeders  of  our  clime: 

The  Empress  sends  it  thee,  thy  stamp,  thy  seal, 
And  bids  thee  christen  it  with  thy  dagger’s  point. 

Aar.  ’Zounds,  ye  whore!  is  black  so  base  a  hue? 
Sweet  blowse,  you  are  a  beauteous  blossom,  sure. 
Dem.  Villain,  what  hast  thou  done? 

Aar.  That  which  thou  canst  not  undo. 

Chi.  Thou  hast  undone  our  mother. 

Aar.  Villain,  I  have  done  thy  mother. 

Dem.  And  therein,  hellish  dog,  thou  hast  undone. 
Woe  to  her  chance,  and  damn’d  her  loathed 
choice! 

Accursed  the  offspring  of  so  foul  a  fiend! 

Chi.  It  shall  not  live.  80 

Aar.  It  shall  not  die. 

Nur.  Aaron,  it  must;  the  mother  wills  it  so. 

Aar.  What,  must  it,  nurse?  then  let  no  man  but  I 
Do  execution  on  my  flesh  and  blood. 

Dem.  I’ll  broach  the  tadpole  on  my  rapier’s 
point: 

Nurse,  give  it  me;  my  sword  shall  soon  dispatch 
it. 

Aar.  Sooner  this  sword  shall  plough  thy  bowels 
up. 

Takes  the  child  from  the  nurse  and  draws. 

Stay,  murderous  villains!  will  you  kill  your 
brother? 

Now,  by  the  burning  tapers  of  the  sky. 

That  shone  so  brightly  when  this  boy  was  got, 

He  dies  upon  my  scimitar’s  sharp  point 
That  touches  this  my  first-born  son  and  heir! 

I  tell  you,  younglings,  not  Enceladus, 

With  all  his  threatening  band  of  Typhon’s  brood, 
Nor  great  Alcides,  nor  the  god  of  war. 

Shall  seize  this  prey  out  of  his  father’s  hands. 
What,  what,  ye  sanguine,  shallow-hearted  boys! 
Ye  white-limed  walls!  ye  alehouse  painted  signs! 
Coal-black  is  better  than  another  hue, 

In  that  it  scorns  to  bear  another  hue;  100 

For  all  the  water  in  the  ocean 
Can  never  turn  the  swan’s  black  legs  to  white. 
Although  she  lave  them  hourly  in  the  flood. 

Tell  the  Empress  from  me,  I  am  of  age 
To  keep  mine  own,  excuse  it  how  she  can. 

Dem.  Wilt  thou  betray  thy  noble  mistress  thus? 
Aar.  My  mistress  is  my  mistress;  this  myself. 
The  vigour  and  the  picture  of  my  youth : 

This  before  all  the  world  do  I  prefer; 

This  maugre  all  the  world  will  I  keep  safe,  no 
Or  some  of  you  shall  smoke  for  it  in  Rome. 

Dem.  By  this  our  mother  is  for  ever  shamed. 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


SCENE  II 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


189 


Chi.  Rome  will  despise  her  for  this  foul  escape. 
Nur.  The  Emperor,  in  his  rage,  will  doom  her 
death. 

Chi.  I  blush  to  think  upon  this  ignomy. 

Aar.  Why,  there’s  the  privilege  your  beauty 
bears: 

Fie,  treacherous  hue,  that  will  betray  with 
blushing 

The  close  enacts  and  counsels  of  the  heart! 

Here’s  a  young  lad  framed  of  another  leer: 

Look,  how  the  black  slave  smiles  upon  the  father. 
As  who  should  say,  “Old  lad,  I  am  thine  own.”  121 
He  is  your  brother,  lords,  sensibly  fed 
Of  that  self-blood  that  first  gave  life  to  you. 

And  from  that  womb  where  you  imprison’d  were 
He  is  enfranchised  and  come  to  light: 

Nay,  he  is  your  brother  by  the  surer  side. 
Although  my  seal  be  stamped  in  his  face. 

Nur.  Aaron,  what  shall  I  say  unto  the  Empress? 
Dem.  Advise  thee,  Aaron,  what  is  to  be  done. 
And  we  will  all  subscribe  to  thy  advice:  /50 

Save  thou  the  child,  so  we  may  all  be  safe. 

Aar.  Then  sit  we  down,  and  let  us  all  consult. 
My  son  and  I  will  have  the  wind  of  you: 

Keep  there:  now  talk  at  pleasure  of  your  safety. 
They  sit. 

Dem.  How  many  women  saw  this  child  of  his? 
Aar.  Why,  so,  brave  lords!  when  we  join  in 
league, 

I  am  a  lamb:  but  if  you  brave  the  Moor, 

The  chafed  boar,  the  mountain  lioness. 

The  ocean  swells  not  so  as  Aaron  storms. 

But  say,  again,  how  many  saw  the  child?  /40 
Nur.  Cornelia  the  midwife  and  myself; 

And  no  one  else  but  the  deliver’d  Empress. 

Aar.  The  Empress  the  midwife,  and  yourself: 
Two  may  keep  counsel  when  the  third’s  away: 
Go  to  the  Empress,  tell  her  this  I  said. 

He  kills  the  nurse. 

Weke,  weke!  so  cries  a  pig  prepared  to  the  spit. 
Dem.  What  mean’st  thou,  Aaron?  wherefore 
didst  thou  this? 

Aar.  O  Lord,  sir,  ’tis  a  deed  of  policy: 

Shall  she  live  to  betray  this  guilt  of  ours, 

A  long-tongued  babbling  gossip?  no,  lords,  no: 
And  now  be  it  known  to  you  my  full  intent,  75/ 
Not  far,  one  Muli  lives,  my  countryman; 

His  wife  but  yesternight  was  brought  to  bed; 

His  child  is  like  to  her,  fair  as  you  are: 

Go  pack  with  him,  and  give  the  mother  gold, 
x\nd  tell  them  both  the  circumstance  of  all; 

And  how  by  this  their  child  shall  be  advanced. 
And  be  received  for  the  Emperor’s  heir. 

And  substituted  in  the  place  of  mine, 

To  calm  this  tempest  whirling  in  the  court;  160 
And  let  the  Emperor  dandle  him  for  his  own. 


Hark  ye,  lords;  ye  see  I  have  given  her  physic, 
Pointing  to  tht  nurse. 

And  you  must  needs  bestow  her  funeral; 

The  fields  are  near,  and  you  are  gallant  grooms: 
This  done,  see  that  you  take  no  longer  days. 

But  send  the  midwife  presently  to  me. 

The  midwife  and  the  nurse  well  made  away, 
Then  let  the  ladies  tattle  what  they  please. 

Chi.  Aaron,  I  see  thou  wilt  not  trust  the  air 
With  secrets. 

Dem.  For  this  care  of  Tamora,  ijo 

Herself  and  hers  are  highly  bound  to  thee. 

[Exeunt  demetrius  and  chiron  bearing  off  the 

Nurse's  body. 

Aar.  Now  to  the  Goths,  as  swift  as  swallow 
flies; 

There  to  dispose  this  treasure  in  mine  arms. 

And  secretly  to  greet  the  Empress’  friends. 

Come  on,  you  thick-lipp’d  slave.  I’ll  bear  you 
hence; 

For  it  is  you  that  puts  us  to  our  shifts: 

I’ll  make  you  feecl  on  berries  and  on  roots. 

And  feed  on  curds  and  whey,  and  suck  the  goat. 
And  cabin  in  a  cave,  and  bring  you  up  ijg 

To  be  a  warrior,  and  command  a  camp.  [Exit. 

Scene  hi.  The  same:  a  public  place 
Enter  titus,  bearing  arrows  with  letters  at  the  ends 
of  them;  with  him,  marcus,  young  lucius, 
PUBLIUS,  Sempronius,  Caius,  and  other  Gentle¬ 
men  with  bows. 

Tit.  Come,  Marcus;  come,  kinsmen;  this  is 
the  way. 

Sir  boy,  now  let  me  see  your  archery; 

Look  ye  draw  home  enough,  and  ’tis  there 
straight. 

Terras  Astrrn  reliquit: 

Be  you  remember’d,  Marcus,  she’s  gone,  she’s 
fled. 

Sirs,  take  you  to  your  tools.  You,  cousins,  shall 
Go  sound  the  ocean,  and  cast  your  nets; 

Happily  you  may  catch  her  in  the  sea; 

Yet  there’s  as  little  justice  as  at  land: 

No;  Publius  and  Sempronius,  you  must  do  it;  10 
’Tis  you  must  dig  with  mattock  and  with  spade. 
And  pierce  the  inmost  centre  of  the  earth: 

Then  when  you  come  to  Pluto’s  region, 

I  pray  you,  deliver  him  this  petition; 

Tell  him,  it  is  for  Justice  and  for  aid. 

And  that  it  comes  from  old  Andronicus, 

Shaken  with  sorrows  in  ungrateful  Rome. 

Ah,  Rome!  Well,  well;  I  made  thee  miserable 
What  time  I  threw  the  people’s  suffrages 
On  him  that  thus  doth  tyrannize  o’er  me.  20 
Go,  get  you  gone;  and  pray  be  careful  all, 

And  leave  you  not  a  man-of-war  unsearch’d: 


190 

This  wicked  Emperor  may  have  shipp’d  her 
hence; 

And,  kinsmen,  then  we  may  go  pipe  for  Justice. 
Marc.  O  Publius,  is  not  this  a  heavy  case. 

To  see  thy  noble  uncle  thus  distract? 

Pub.  Therefore,  my  lord,  it  highly  us  concerns 
By  day  and  night  to  attend  him  carefully. 

And  feed  his  humour  kindly  as  we  may. 

Till  time  beget  some  careful  remedy.  50 

Marc.  Kinsmen,  his  sorrows  are  past  remedy. 
Join  with  the  Goths;  and  with  revengeful  war 
Take  wreak  on  Rome  for  this  ingratitude. 

And  vengeance  on  the  traitor  Saturnine. 

Tit.  Publius,  how  now!  how  now,  my  masters! 
What,  have  you  met  with  her? 

Pub.  No,  my  good  lord;  but  Pluto  sends  you 
word. 

If  you  will  have  Revenge  from  hell,  you  shall: 
Marry,  for  Justice,  she  is  so  employ’d. 

He  thinks,  with  Jove  in  heaven,  or  somewhere 
else,  40 

So  that  perforce  you  must  needs  stay  a  time. 

Tit.  He  doth  me  wrong  to  feed  me  with  delays. 
I’ll  dive  into  the  burning  lake  below. 

And  pull  her  out  of  Acheron  by  the  heels. 
Marcus,  we  are  but  shrubs,  no  cedars  we. 

No  big-boned  men  framed  of  the  Cyclops’  size; 
But  metal,  Marcus,  steel  to  the  very  back. 

Yet  wrung  with  wrongs  more  than  our  backs  can 
bear: 

And,  sith  there’s  no  justice  in  earth  nor  hell. 

We  will  solicit  heaven  and  move  the  gods  50 
To  send  down  Justice  for  to  wreak  our  wrongs. 
Come,  to  this  gear.  You  are  a  good  archer, 
Marcus ;  [He  gives  them  the  arrovos^ 

Jovem”  that’s  for  you:  here,  Apolli- 
nem'" : 

*‘*‘Ad  Martem^^'  that’s  for  myself: 

Here,  boy,  to  Pallas:  here,  to  Mercury: 

To  Saturn,  Caius,  not  to  Saturnine; 

You  were  as  good  to  shoot  against  the  wind. 

To  it,  boy!  Marcus,  loose  when  I  bid. 

Of  my  word,  I  have  written  to  effect; 

There’s  not  a  god  left  unsolicited. 

Marc.  Kinsmen,  shoot  all  your  shafts  into  the 
court: 

We  will  afflict  the  Emperor  in  his  pride. 

Tit.  Now,  masters,  draw.  [They  shoot.]  O, 
well  said,  Lucius! 

Good  boy,  in  Virgo’s  lap;  give  it  Pallas. 

Marc.  My  lord,  I  aim  a  mile  beyond  the 
moon; 

Youz  letter  is  with  Jupiter  by  this. 

Tit.  Ha,  ha! 

Publius,  Publius,  what  hast  thou  done? 

See,  see,  thou  hast  shot  off  one  of  Taurus’  horns. 


ACT  IV 

Marc.  This  was  the  sport,  my  lord:  when 
Publius  shot,  »  70 

The  Bull,  being  gall’d,  gave  Aries  such  a  knock 
That  down  fell  both  the  Ram’s  horns  in  the  court; 
And  who  should  find  them  but  the  Empress’ 
villain? 

She  laugh’d,  and  told  the  Moor  he  should  not 
choose 

But  give  them  to  his  master  for  a  present. 

Tit.  Why,  there  it  goes:  God  give  his  lordship 
joy! 

Enter  a  clown,  with  a  basket,  and  two  pigeons  in  it. 

News,  news  from  heaven!  Marcus,  the  post  is 
come. 

Sirrah,  what  tidings?  have  you  any  letters? 

Shall  I  have  justice?  what  says  Jupiter?  jp 

Clo.  O,  the  gibbet-maker!  he  says  that  he  hath 
taken  them  down  again,  for  the  man  must  not  be 
hanged  till  the  next  week. 

Tit.  But  what  says  Jupiter,  I  ask  thee? 

Clo.  Alas,  sir,  I  know  not  Jupiter;  I  never  drank 
with  him  in  all  my  life. 

Tit.  Why,  villain,  art  not  thou  the  carrier? 

Clo.  Ay,  of  my  pigeons,  sir;  nothing  else. 

Tit.  Why,  didst  thou  not  come  from  heaven? 

Clo.  From  heaven!  alas,  sir,  I  never  came  there: 
God  forbid  I  should  be  so  bold  to  press  to  heaven 
in  my  young  days.  Why,  I  am  going  with  my 
pigeons  to  the  tribunal  plebs,  to  take  up  a  matter 
of  brawl  betwixt  my  uncle  and  one  of  the  empe- 
rial’s  men. 

Marc.  Why,  sir,  that  is  as  fit  as  can  be  to  serve 
for  your  oration;  and  let  him  deliver  the  pigeons 
to  the  Emperor  from  you. 

Tit.  Tell  me,  can  you  deliver  an  oration  to  the 
Emperor  with  a  grace? 

Clo.  Nay,  truly,  sir,  I  could  never  say  grace  in 
all  my  life.  loi 

Tit.  Sirrah,  come  hither:  make  no  more  ado, 

But  give  your  pigeons  to  the  Emperor: 

By  me  thou  shalt  have  justice  at  his  hands. 

Hold,  hold;  meanwhile  here’s  money  for  thy 
charges. 

Give  me  pen  and  ink.  Sirrah,  can  you  with  a 
grace  deliver  a  supplication? 

Clo.  Ay,  sir. 

Tit.  Then  here  is  a  supplication  for  you.  And 
when  you  come  to  him,  at  the  first  approach  you 
must  kneel,  then  kiss  his  foot,  then  deliver  up 
your  pigeons,  and  then  look  for  your  reward.  I’ll 
be  at  hand,  sir;  see  you  do  it  bravely. 

Clo.  I  warrant  you,  sir,  let  me  alone. 

Tit.  Sirrah,  hast  thou  a  knife?  come,  let  me 
see  it. 

Here,  Marcus,  fold  it  in  the  oration; 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


SCENE  III 

For  thou  hast  made  it  like  an  humble  suppliant. 
And  when  thou  hast  given  it  the  Emperor, 

Knock  at  my  door  and  tell  me  what  he  says. 

Clo.  God  be  with  you,  sir;  I  will.  120 

Tit.  Come,  Marcus,  let  us  go.  Publius,  follow 
me.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  The  same:  before  the  palace 
Enter  saturninus,  tamora,  demetrius,  chiron. 
Lords ^  and  others;  saturninus  with  the  arrows 
in  his  hand  that  titus  shot. 

Sat.  Why,  lords,  what  wrongs  are  these!  was 
ever  seen 

An  Emperor  in  Rome  thus  overborne. 

Troubled,  confronted  thus;  and,  for  the  extent 
Of  egal  justice,  used  in  such  contempt? 

My  lords,  you  know,  as  know  the  mightful  gods. 

However  these  disturbers  of  our  peace 

Buz  in  the  people’s  ears,  there  nought  hath  pass’d. 

But  even  with  law,  against  the  wilful  sons 

Of  old  Andronicus.  And  what  an  if 

His  sorrows  have  so  overwhelm’d  his  wits,  10 

Shall  we  be  thus  afflicted  in  his  wreaks. 

His  fits,  his  frenzy,  and  his  bitterness? 

And  now  he  writes  to  heaven  for  his  redress: 

See,  here’s  to  Jove,  and  this  to  Mercury: 

This  to  Apollo;  this  to  the  god  of  war; 

Sweet  scrolls  to  fly  about  the  streets  of  Rome! 
What’s  this  but  libelling  against  the  senate. 

And  blazoning  our  injustice  every  where? 

A  goodly  humour,  is  it  not,  my  lords? 

As  who  would  say,  in  Rome  no  justice  were  20 
But  if  I  live,  his  feigned  ecstasies 
Shall  be  no  shelter  to  these  outrages: 

But  he  and  his  shall  know  that  justice  lives 
In  Saturninus’  health,  whom,  if  she  sleep. 

He’ll  so  awake  as  she  in  fury  shall 
Cut  off  the  proud’ st  conspirator  that  lives. 

Tam.  My  gracious  lord,  my  lovely  Saturnine, 
Lord  of  my  life,  commander  of  my  thoughts. 
Calm  thee,  and  bear  the  faults  of  Titus’  age. 

The  effects  of  sorrow  for  his  valiant  sons,  50 
Whose  loss  hath  pierced  him  deep  and  scarr’d  his 
heart; 

And  rather  comfort  his  distressed  plight 
Than  prosecute  the  meanest  or  the  best 
For  these  contempts.  [Aside']  Why,  thus  it  shall 
become 

High-witted  Tamora  to  gloze  with  all: 

But,  Titus,  I  have  touch’d  thee  to  the  quick. 

Thy  life-blood  out:  if  Aaron  now  be  wise, 

Then  is  all  safe,  the  anchor’s  in  the  port. 

Enter  clown. 

How  now,  good  fellow!  wouldst  thou  speak 
with  us? 


191 

Clo.  Yea,  forsooth,  an  your  mistership  be 
emperial.  ^ 

Tam.  Empress  I  am,  but  yonder  sits  the 
Emperor. 

Clo.  ’Tis  he.  God  and  Saint  Stephen  give  you 
good  den:  I  have  brought  you  a  letter  and  a 
couple  of  pigeons  here. 

Saturninus  reads  the  letter. 

Sat.  Go,  take  him  away,  and  hang  him  presently. 
Clo.  How  much  money  must  I  have? 

Tam.  Come,  sirrah,  you  must  be  hanged. 

Clo.  Hanged!  by’r  lady,  then  I  have  brought  up 
a  neck  to  a  fair  end.  [Exit,  guarded. 

Sat.  Despiteful  and  intolerable  wrongs !  jo 
Shall  I  endure  this  monstrous  villainy? 

I  know  from  whence  this  same  device  proceeds: 
May  this  be  borne?  As  if  his  traitorous  sons, 

That  died  by  law  for  murder  of  our  brother, 

Have  by  my  means  been  butcher’d  wrongfully! 
Go,  drag  the  villain  hither  by  the  hair; 

Nor  age  nor  honour  shall  shape  privilege: 

For  this  proud  mock  I’ll  be  thy  slaughter-man; 
Sly  frantic  wretch,  that  holp’st  to  make  me  great, 
In  hope  thyself  should  govern  Rome  and  me.  60 

Enter  JEMiiAJjs. 

What  news  with  thee,  ^Tmilius? 

/Emil.  Arm,  arm,  my  lord;  Rome  never  had 
more  cause. 

The  Goths  have  gather’d  head;  and  with  a  power 
Of  high-resolved  men,  bent  to  the  spoil. 

They  hither  march  amain,  under  conduct 
Of  Lucius,  son  to  old  Andronicus; 

Who  threats,  in  course  of  this  revenge,  to  do 
As  much  as  ever  Coriolanus  did. 

Sat.  Is  warlike  Lucius  general  of  the  Goths? 
These  tidings  nip  me,  and  I  hang  the  head  70 
As  flowers  with  frost  or  grass  beat  down  with 
storms: 

Ay,  now  begin  our  sorrows  to  approach: 

’Tis  he  the  common  people  love  so  much; 

Myself  hath  often  over-heard  them  say. 

When  I  have  walked  like  a  private  man. 

That  Lucius’  banishment  was  wrongfully. 

And  they  have  wish’d  that  Lucius  were  their 
emperor. 

Tam.  Why  should  you  fear?  is  not  your  city 
strong? 

Sat.  Ay,  but  the  citizens  favour  Lucius, 

And  will  revolt  from  me  to  succour  him.  80 
Tam.  King,  be  thy  thoughts  imperious,  like  thy 
name. 

Is  the  sun  dimm’d,  that  gnats  do  fly  in  it? 

The  eagle  suffers  little  birds  to  sing. 

And  is  not  careful  what  they  mean  thereby. 
Knowing  that  with  the  shadow  of  his  wings 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


ACT  V 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


192 

He  can  at  pleasure  stint  their  melody: 

Even  so  mayst  thou  the  giddy  men  of  Rome. 

Then  cheer  thy  spirit:  for  know,  thou  emperor, 

I  will  enchant  the  old  Andronicus 
W  ith  words  more  sweet,  and  yet  more  danger¬ 
ous,  po 

Than  baits  to  fish,  or  honey-stalks  to  sheep. 
When  as  the  one  is  wounded  with  the  bait. 

The  other  rotted  with  delicious  feed. 

Sat.  But  he  will  not  entreat  his  son  for  us. 

Tam.  If  Tamora  entreat  him,  then  he  will: 

For  I  can  smooth  and  fill  his  aged  ear 
With  golden  promises;  that,  were  his  heart 
Almost  impregnable,  his  old  ears  deaf. 

Yet  should  both  ear  and  heart  obey  my  tongue. 
[To^emilius]  Go  thou  before,  be  our  ambassa¬ 
dor:  too 

Say  that  the  Emperor  requests  a  parley 
Of  warlike  Lucius,  and  appoint  the  meeting 
Even  at  his  father's  house,  the  old  Andronicus. 

Sat.  ^Tmilius,  do  this  message  honourably; 

And  if  he  stand  on  hostage  for  his  safety, 

Bid  him  demand  what  pledge  will  please  him  best. 
/Emil.  Your  bidding  shall  I  do  effectually. 

[Exit. 

Tam.  Now  will  I  to  that  old  Andronicus, 

And  temper  him  with  all  the  art  I  have 
To  pluck  proud  Lucius  from  the  warlike  Goths. 
And  now,  sweet  emperor,  be  blithe  again,  /// 
And  bury  thy  fear  in  my  devices. 

Sat.  Then  go  successantly,  and  plead  to  him. 

[Exeunt, 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  Plains  bear  Rome 
Enter  lucius  'with  an  army  d?/GOTHS,  njoith 
drum  and  colours. 

Luc.  Approved  warriors,  and  my  faithful  friends, 
I  have  received  letters  from  great  Rome, 

Which  signify  what  hate  they  bear  their  Emperor 
And  how  desirous  of  our  sight  they  are. 
Therefore,  great  lords,  be,  as  your  titles  witness. 
Imperious  and  impatient  of  your  wrongs. 

And  wherein  Rome  hath  done  you  any  scath. 

Let  him  make  treble  satisfaction. 
ist  Goth.  Brave  slip,  sprung  from  the  great 
Andronicus, 

Whose  name  was  once  our  terror,  now  our 

comfort;  lo 

Whose  high  exploits  and  honourable  deeds 
Ingrateful  Rome  requites  with  foul  contempt. 

Be  bold  in  us:  we’ll  follow  where  thou  lead’st. 
Like  stinging  bees  in  hottest  summer’s  day 
Led  by  their  master  to  the  flowered  fields. 

And  be  avenged  on  cursed  Tamora. 


All  the  Goths.  And  as  he  saith,  so  say  we  all 
with  him. 

Luc.  I  humbly  thank  him,  and  I  thank  you  all. 
But  who  comes  here,  led  by  a  lusty  Goth? 

Enter  second  goth,  leading  aaron  'with  his  child 
in  his  arms. 

2nd  Goth.  Renowned  Lucius,  from  our  troops  I 
stray’d  20 

To  gaze  upon  a  ruinous  monastery; 

And,  as  I  earnestly  did  fix  mine  eye 
Upon  the  wasted  building,  suddenly 
I  heard  a  child  cry  underneath  a  wall. 

I  made  unto  the  noise;  when  soon  I  heard 
The  crying  babe  controll’d  with  this  discourse: 
“Peace,  tawny  slave,  half  me  and  half  thy  dam! 
Did  not  thy  hue  bewray  whose  brat  thou  art. 

Had  nature  lent  thee  but  thy  mother’s  look. 
Villain,  thou  mightst  have  been  an  emperor:  50 
But  where  the  bull  and  cow  are  both  milk-white. 
They  never  do  beget  a  coal-black  calf. 

Peace,  villain,  peace!” — even  thus  he  rates  the 
babe — 

“For  1  must  bear  thee  to  a  trusty  Goth; 

Who,  when  he  knows  thou  art  the  Empress’  babe. 
Will  hold  thee  dearly  for  thy  mother’s  sake.” 
With  this,  my  weapon  drawn,  I  rush’d  upon  him. 
Surprised  him  suddenly,  and  brought  him  hither 
To  use  as  you  think  needful  of  the  man. 

Luc.  O  worthy  Goth,  this  is  the  incarnate  devil 
That  robb’d  Andronicus  of  his  good  hand;  41 
This  is  the  pearl  that  pleased  your  Empress’  eye. 
And  here’s  the  base  fruit  of  his  burning  lust. 

Say,  wall-eyed  slave,  whither  wouldst  thou 
convey 

This  growing  image  of  thy  fiend-like  face? 

Why  dost  not  speak?  what,  deaf?  not  a  word? 

A  halter,  soldiers!  hang  him  on  this  tree. 

And  by  his  side  his  fruit  of  bastardy. 

Aar.  Touch  not  the  boy;  he  is  of  royal  blood. 
Luc.  Too  like  the  sire  for  ever  being  good.  50 
First  hang  the  child,  that  he  may  see  it  sprawl; 

A  sight  to  vex  the  father’s  soul  withal. 

Get  me  a  ladder. 

A  ladder  brought,  'which  aaron  is  made  to  ascend, 
Aar.  Lucius,  save  the  child 

And  bear  it  from  me  to  the  Empress. 

If  thou  do  this.  I’ll  show  thee  wondrous  things. 
That  highly  may  advantage  thee  to  hear: 

If  thou  wilt  not,  befall  what  may  befall. 

I’ll  speak  no  more  but  “Vengeance  rot  you  all!” 
Luc.  Say  on:  an  if  it  please  me  which  thou 
speak’st. 

Thy  child  shall  live,  and  I  will  see  it  nourish’d. 
Aar.  An  if  it  please  thee!  why,  assure  thee, 
Lucius,  61 


SCENE  I 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


193 


’Twill  vex  thy  soul  to  hear  what  I  shall  speak; 

For  I  must  talk  of  murders,  rapes  and  massacres, 
Acts  of  black  night,  abominable  deeds, 

Complots  of  mischief,  treason,  villainies 
Ruthful  to  hear,  yet  piteously  perform’d: 

And  this  shall  all  be  buried  by  my  death 
Unless  thou  swear  to  me  my  child  shall  live. 

Luc.  Tell  on  thy  mind;  I  say  thy  child  shall 
live. 

Aar.  Swear  that  he  shall,  and  then  I  will  begin. 
Luc.  Who  should  I  swear  by?  thou  believest 
no  god:  77 

That  granted,  how  canst  thou  believe  an  oath? 
Aar.  What  if  1  do  not?  as,  indeed,  I  do  not; 

Yet,  for  I  know  thou  art  religious 
And  hast  a  thing  within  thee  called  conscience, 
With  twenty  popish  tricks  and  ceremonies 
Which  1  have  seen  thee  careful  to  observe, 
Therefore  I  urge  thy  oath;  for  that  I  know 
An  idiot  holds  his  bauble  for  a  god  7y 

And  keeps  the  oath  which  by  that  god  he  swears. 
To  that  I’ll  urge  him:  therefore  thou  shalt  vow 
By  that  same  god,  what  god  soe’er  it  be. 

That  thou  adorest  and  hast  in  reverence, 

To  save  my  boy,  to  nourish  and  bring  him  up; 

Or  else  I  will  discover  nought  to  thee. 

Luc.  Even  by  my  god  I  swear  to  thee  I  will. 

Aar.  First  know  thou,  I  begot  him  on  the 
Empress. 

Luc.  O  most  insatiate  and  luxurious  woman! 

Aar.  Tut,  Lucius,  this  was  but  a  deed  of  charity 
To  that  which  thou  shalt  hear  of  me  anon.  yo 
’Twas  her  two  sons  that  murder’d  Bassianus; 
They  cut  thy  sister’s  tongue  and  ravish’d  her 
And  cut  her  hands  and  trimm’d  her  as  thou  saw’st. 
Luc.  O  detestable  villain!  call’st  thou  that 
trimming? 

Aar.  Why,  she  was  wash’d  and  cut  and 
trimm’d,  and  ’twas 

Trim  sport  for  them  that  had  the  doing  of  it. 

Luc.  O  barbarous,  beastly  villains,  like  thyself! 
Aar.  Indeed,  I  was  their  tutor  to  instruct  them: 
That  codding  spirit  had  they  from  their  mother. 
As  sure  a  card  as  ever  won  the  set;  100 

That  bloody  mind,  I  think,  they  learn’d  of  me. 

As  true  a  dog  as  ever  fought  at  head. 

Well,  let  my  deeds  be  witness  of  my  worth. 

I  train’d  thy  brethren  to  that  guileful  hole 
Where  the  dead  corpse  of  Bassianus  lay: 

I  wrote  the  letter  that  thy  father  found 
And  hid  the  gold  within  the  letter  mention’d. 
Confederate  with  the  Queen  and  her  two  sons: 
And  what  not  done,  chat  thou  hast  cause  to  rue. 
Wherein  I  had  no  stroke  of  mischief  in  it?  no 

I  play’d  the  cheater  for  thy  father’s  hand. 

And,  when  I  had  it,  drew  myself  apart  ^ 


And  almost  broke  my  heart  with  extreme  laughter : 

I  pry’d  me  through  the  crevice  of  a  wall 
When,  for  his  hand,  he  had  his  two  sons’  heads; 
Beheld  his  tears,  and  laugh’d  so  heartily, 

That  both  mine  eyes  were  rainy  like  to  his: 

And  when  I  told  the  Empress  of  this  sport. 

She  swooned  almost  at  my  pleasing  tale 
And  for  my  tidings  gave  me  twenty  kisses.  120 
ist  Goth.  What,  canst  thou  say  all  this,  and 
never  blush? 

Aar.  Ay,  like  a  black  dog,  as  the  saying  is. 

Luc.  Art  thou  not  sorry  for  these  heinous  deeds? 
Aar.  Ay,  that  I  had  not  done  a  thousand  more. 
Even  now  I  curse  the  day —  and  yet,  I  think. 

Few  come  within  the  compass  of  my  curse — 
Wherin  I  did  not  some  notorious  ill. 

As  kill  a  man,  or  else  devise  his  death. 

Ravish  a  maid,  or  plot  the  way  to  do  it, 

Accuse  some  innocent  and  forswear  myself,  75 0 
Set  deadly  enmity  between  two  friends. 

Make  poor  men’s  cattle  break  their  necks; 

Set  fires  on  barns  and  hay-stacks  in  the  night. 

And  bid  the  owners  quench  them  with  their  tears. 
Oft  have  I  digg’d  up  dead  men  from  their  graves. 
And  set  them  upright  at  their  dear  friends’  doors. 
Even  when  their  sorrows  almost  were  forgot; 
And  on  their  skins,  as  on  the  bark  of  trees. 

Have  with  my  knife  carved  in  Roman  letters, 
“Let  not  your  sorrow  die,  though  I  am  dead.” 
Tut,  I  have  done  a  thousand  dreadful  things  747 
As  willingly  as  one  would  kill  a  fly. 

And  nothing  grieves  me  heartily  indeed 
But  that  I  cannot  do  ten  thousand  more. 

Luc.  Bring  down  the  devil;  for  he  must  not  die 
So  sweet  a  death  as  hanging  presently. 

Aar.  If  there  be  devils,  would  I  were  a  devil. 

To  live  and  burn  in  everlasting  fire. 

So  I  might  have  your  company  in  hell. 

But  to  torment  you  with  my  bitter  tongue!  750 
Luc.  Sirs,  stop  his  mouth,  and  let  him  speak 
no  more. 

Enter  third  goth. 

^rd  Goth.  My  lord,  there  is  a  messenger  from 
Rome 

Desires  to  be  admitted  to  your  presence. 

Luc.  Let  him  come  near. 

Enter  >emilius. 

Welcome,  iTmilius :  what’s  the  news  from  Rome? 
/Emil.  Lord  Lucius,  and  you  princes  of  the 
Goths, 

The  Roman  Emperor  greets  you  all  by  me; 

And,  for  he  understands  you  are  in  arms. 

He  craves  a  parley  at  your  father’s  house. 

Willing  you  to  demand  your  hostages,  160 


194 

And  they  shall  be  immediately  deliver’d. 
ist  Goth.  What  says  our  general? 

Luc.  yEmilius,  let  the  Emperor  give  his  pledges 
Unto  my  father  and  my  uncle  Marcus, 

And  we  will  come.  March  away.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Rome:  before  Titus's  house 
TAMORA,  DEMETRIUS,  and  CHIRON,  disgutsed- 
Tam.  Thus,  in  this  strange  and  sad  habiliment, 

I  will  encounter  with  Andronicus, 

And  say  I  am  Revenge,  sent  from  below 
To  join  with  him  and  right  his  heinous  wrongs. 
Knock  at  his  study,  where,  they  say,  he  keeps, 

To  ruminate  strange  plots  of  dire  revenge; 

Tell  him  Revenge  is  come  to  join  with  him. 

And  work  confusion  on  his  enemies. 

They  knock. 

Enter  titus,  above. 

Tit.  Who  doth  molest  my  contemplation? 

Is  it  your  trick  to  make  me  ope  the  door  lo 

That  so  my  sad  decrees  may  fly  away 
And  all  my  study  be  to  no  effect? 

You  are  deceived:  for  what  I  mean  to  do 
See  here  in  bloody  lines  I  have  set  down; 

And  what  is  written  shall  be  executed. 

Tam.  Titus,  I  am  come  to  talk  with  thee. 

Tit.  No,  not  a  word;  how  can  I  grace  my  talk. 
Wanting  a  hand  to  give  it  action? 

Thou  hast  the  odds  of  me;  therefore  no  more. 
Tam.  If  thou  didst  know  me,  thou  wouldest 
talk  with  me.  20 

Tit.  I  am  not  mad;  I  know  thee  well  enough: 
Witness  this  wretched  stump,  witness  these 
crimson  lines; 

Witness  these  trenches  made  by  grief  and  care; 
Witness  the  tiring  day  and  heavy  night; 

Witness  all  sorrow,  that  I  know  thee  well 
For  our  proud  empress,  mighty  Tamora: 

Is  not  thy  coming  for  my  other  hand? 

Tam.  Know,  thou  sad  man,  I  am  not  Tamora; 
She  is  thy  enemy,  and  I  thy  friend: 

I  am  Revenge:  sent  from  the  infernal  kingdom  50 
To  ease  the  gnawing  vulture  of  thy  mind 
By  working  wreakful  vengeance  on  thy  foes. 
Come  down  and  welcome  me  to  this  world’s  light; 
Confer  with  me  of  murder  and  of  death: 

There’s  not  a  hollow  cave  or  lurking-place. 

No  vast  obscurity  or  misty  vale. 

Where  bloody  murder  or  detested  rape 
Can  couch  for  fear,  but  I  will  find  them  out; 

And  in  their  ears  tell  them  my  dreadful  name. 
Revenge,  which  makes  the  foul  offender  quake. 
Tit.  Art  thou  Revenge?  and  art  thou  sent  to 
me,  41 

To  be  a  torment  to  mine  enemies? 


ACT  V 

Tam.  I  am;  therefore  come  down  and  welcome 
me. 

Tit.  Do  me  some  service,  ere  I  come  to  thee. 

Lo,  by  thy  side  where  Rape  and  Murder  stands; 
Now  give  some  surance  that  thou  art  Revenge, 
Stab  them,  or  tear  them  on  thy  chariot-wheels; 
And  then  I’ll  come  and  be  thy  waggoner. 

And  whirl  along  with  thee  about  the  globe. 
Provide  thee  two  proper  palfreys,  black  as  jet,  50 
To  hale  thy  vengeful  waggon  swift  away 
And  find  our  murderers  in  their  guilty  caves: 

And  when  thy  car  is  loaden  with  their  heads, 

I  will  dismount,  and  by  the  waggon-wheel 
Trot,  like  a  servile  footman,  all  day  long, 

Even  from  Hyperion’s  rising  in  the  east 
Until  his  very  downfall  in  the  sea: 

And  day  by  day  I’ll  do  this  heavy  task. 

So  thou  destroy  Rapine  and  Murder  there. 

Tam.  These  are  my  ministers,  and  come  with 
me.  60 

Tit.  Are  these  thy  ministers?  what  are  they 
call’d? 

Tam.  Rapine  and  Murder;  therefore  called  so. 
Cause  they  take  vengeance  of  such  kind  of  men. 
Tit.  Good  Lord,  how  like  the  Empress’  sons 
they  are! 

And  you,  the  Empress!  but  we  worldly  men 
Have  miserable,  mad,  mistaking  eyes. 

O  sweet  Revenge,  now  do  I  come  to  thee; 

And,  if  one  arm’s  embracement  will  content  thee, 
I  will  embrace  thee  in  it  by  and  by.  [Exit  above. 

Tam.  This  closing  with  him  fits  his  lunacy: 
Whate’er  I  forge  to  feed  his  brain-sick  fits,  7/ 
Do  you  uphold  and  maintain  in  your  speeches. 

For  now  he  firmly  takes  me  for  Revenge; 

And,  being  credulous  in  this  mad  thought, 

I’ll  make  him  send  for  Lucius  his  son; 

And,  whilst  I  at  a  banquet  hold  him  sure, 

I’ll  find  some  cunning  practice  out  of  hand 
To  scatter  and  disperse  the  giddy  Goths, 

Or,  at  the  least,  make  them  his  enemies. 

See,  here  he  comes,  and  I  must  ply  my  theme. 

Enter  titus  below. 

Tit.  Long  have  I  been  forlorn,  and  all  for 
thee:  81 

Welcome,  dread  Fury,  to  my  woful  house: 

Rapine  and  Murder,  you  are  welcome  too. 

How  like  the  Empress  and  her  sons  you  are! 

Well  are  you  fitted,  had  you  but  a  Moor: 

Could  not  all  hell  afford  you  such  a  devil? 

For  well  I  wot  the  Empress  never  wags 
But  in  her  company  there  is  a  Moor; 

And,  would  you  represent  our  Queen  aright. 

It  were  convenient  you  had  such  a  devil:  po 

But  welcome,  as  you  are.  What  shall  we  do? 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


SCENE  II 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


195 


Tam,  What  wouldst  thou  have  us  do, 
Andronicus? 

Dem,  Show  me  a  murderer,  I’ll  deal  with  him. 
Chi.  Show  me  a  villain  that  hath  done  a  rape, 
And  I  am  sent  to  be  revenged  on  him. 

Tam.  Show  me  a  thousand  that  have  done  thee 
wrong. 

And  I  will  be  revenged  on  them  all. 

Tit.  Look  round  about  the  wicked  streets  of 
Rome; 

And  when  thou  find’st  a  man  that’s  like  thy¬ 
self. 

Good  Murder,  stab  him;  he’s  a  murderer.  wo 
Go  thou  with  him;  and  when  it  is  thy  hap 
To  find  another  that  is  like  to  thee. 

Good  Rapine,  stab  him;  he’s  a  ravisher. 

Go  thou  with  them;  and  in  the  Emperor’s  court 
There  is  a  Queen,  attended  by  a  Moor: 

Well  mayst  thou  know  her  by  thy  own 
proportion. 

For  up  and  down  she  doth  resemble  thee: 

I  pray  thee,  do  on  them  some  violent  death; 

They  have  been  violent  to  me  and  mine. 

Tam.  Well  hast  thou  lesson’d  us;  this  shall 
we  do.  no 

But  would  it  please  thee,  good  Andronicus, 

To  send  for  Lucius,  thy  thrice-valiant  son, 

Who  leads  towards  Rome  a  band  of  warlike 
Goths, 

And  bid  him  come  and  banquet  at  thy  house; 
When  he  is  here,  even  at  thy  solemn  feast, 

I  will  bring  in  the  Empress  and  her  sons, 

The  Emperor  himself  and  all  thy  foes; 

And  at  thy  mercy  shall  they  stoop  and  kneel. 

And  on  them  shalt  thou  ease  thy  angry  heart. 
What  says  Andronicus  to  this  device?  120 

Tit.  Marcus,  my  brother!  ’tis  sad  Titus  calls. 

Enter  marcus. 

Go,  gentle  Marcus,  to  thy  nephew  Lucius; 

Thou  shalt  inquire  him  out  among  the  Goths: 

Bid  him  repair  to  me,  and  bring  with  him 
Some  of  the  chiefest  princes  of  the  Goths; 

Bid  him  encamp  his  soldiers  where  they  are: 

Tell  him  the  Emperor  and  the  Empress  too 
Feast  at  my  house,  and  he  shall  feast  with  them. 
This  do  thou  for  my  love;  and  so  let  him. 

As  he  regards  his  aged  father’s  life.  75 0 

Marc.  This  will  I  do,  and  soon  return  again. 

[Exit. 

Tain.  Now  will  I  hence  about  thy  business. 

And  take  my  ministers  along  with  me. 

Tit.  Nay,  nay,  let  Rape  and  Murder  stay 
with  me; 

Or  else  I’ll  call  my  brother  back  again. 

And  cleave  to  no  revenge  but  Lucius. 


Tam.  [Aside  to  her  sons^  What  say  you,  boys? 
will  you  bide  with  him. 

Whiles  I  go  tell  my  lord  the  Emperor 
How  I  have  govern’d  our  determined  jest? 

Yield  to  his  humour,  smooth  and  speak  him  fair. 
And  tarry  with  him  till  I  turn  again.  141 

Tit.  [Aside]  I  know  them  all,  though  they 
suppose  me  mad. 

And  will  o’erreach  them  in  their  own  devices: 

A  pair  of  cursed  hell-hounds  and  their  dam! 

Dem.  Madam,  depart  at  pleasure;  leave  us  here. 

Tam.  Farewell,  Andronicus:  Revenge  now  goes 
To  lay  a  complot  to  betray  thy  foes. 

Tit.  I  know  thou  dost;  and,  sweet  Revenge, 
farewell.  [FA:i?TAMORA. 

Chi.  Tell  us,  old  man,  how  shall  we  be 
employ’d? 

Tit.  Tut,  I  have  work  enough  for  you  to  do. 
Publius,  come  hither,  Caius,  and  Valentine!  75/ 

Enter  publics  and  others. 

Pub.  What  is  your  will? 

Tit.  Know  you  these  two? 

Pub.  The  Empress’  sons,  I  take  them,  Chiron 
and  Demetrius. 

Tit.  Fie,  Publius,  fie!  thou  art  too  much 
deceived; 

The  one  is  Murder,  Rape  is  the  other’s  name; 
And  therefore  bind  them,  gentle  Publius. 

Caius  and  Valentine,  lay  hands  on  them. 

Oft  have  you  heard  me  wish  for  such  an  hour,  160 
And  now  I  find  it;  therefore  bind  them  sure. 

And  stop  their  mouths,  if  they  begin  to  cry.  [Exit. 

Publius^  &c.  lay  hold  on  chiron  and 

DEMETRIUS. 

Chi.  Villains,  forbear!  we  are  the  Empress’  sons. 

Pub.  And  therefore  do  we  what  we  are 
commanded. 

Stop  close  their  mouths,  let  them  not  speak  a 
word. 

Is  he  sure  bound?  look  that  you  bind  them  fast. 

Re-enter  titus,  with  lavinia;  he  bearing  a 
knife,  and  she  a  basin. 

Tit.  Come,  come,  Lavinia;  look,  thy  foes  are 
bound. 

Sirs,  stop  their  mouths,  let  them  not  speak  to 
me; 

But  let  them  hear  what  fearful  words  I  utter. 

O  villains,  Chiron  and  Demetrius!  /70 

Here  stands  the  spring  whom  you  have  stain’d 
with  mud. 

This  goodly  summer  with  your  winter  mix’d. 
You  kill’d  her  husband,  and  for  that  vile  fault 
Two  of  her  brothers  were  condemn’d  to  death. 
My  hand  cut  off  and  made  a  merry  jest; 


196 

Both  her  sweet  hands,  her  tongue,  and  that  more 
dear 

Than  hands  or  tongue,  her  spotless  chastity. 
Inhuman  traitors,  you  constrain’d  and  forced. 
What  would  you  say,  if  I  should  let  you  speak? 
Villains,  for  shame  you  could  not  beg  for  grace. 
Hark,  wretches!  how  I  mean  to  martyr  you.  i8i 
This  one  hand  yet  is  left  to  cut  your  throats. 
Whilst  that  Lavinia  ’tween  her  stumps  doth  hold 
The  basin  that  receives  your  guilty  blood. 

You  know  your  mother  means  to  feast  with  me, 
And  calls  herself  Revenge,  and  thinks  me  mad: 
Hark,  villains!  I  will  grind  your  bones  to  dust 
And  with  your  blood  and  it  I’ll  make  a  paste, 

And  of  the  paste  a  coffin  I  will  rear 
And  make  two  pastries  of  your  shameful  heads. 
And  bid  that  strumpet,  your  unhallow’d  dam,  /p/ 
Like  to  the  earth  swallow  her  own  increase. 

This  is  the  feast  that  I  have  bid  her  to. 

And  this  the  banquet  she  shall  surfeit  on; 

For  worse  than  Philomel  you  used  my  daughter, 
And  worse  than  Progne  I  will  be  revenged: 

And  now  prepare  your  throats.  Lavinia,  come, 

He  cuts  their  throats. 

Receive  the  blood:  and  when  that  they  are  dead. 
Let  me  go  grind  their  bones  to  powder  small 
And  with  this  hateful  liquor  temper  it;  200 
And  in  that  paste  let  their  vile  heads  be  baked. 
Come,  come,  be  every  one  officious 
To  make  this  banquet,  which  I  wish  may  prove 
More  stern  and  bloody  then  the  Centaurs’  feast. 
So,  now  bring  them  in,  for  I’ll  play  the  cook. 

And  see  them  ready  ’gainst  their  mother  comes. 

[Exeunt,  bearing  the  dead  bodies. 

Scene  iii.  Court  of  Titus's  house:  a  banquet 
set  out 

Enter  lucius,  marcus,  and  goths,  with 
AARON  prisoner. 

Luc.  Uncle  Marcus,  since  it  is  my  father’s  mind 
That  I  repair  to  Rome,  I  am  content. 
ist  Goth.  And  ours  with  thine,  befall  what 
fortune  will. 

Luc.  Good  uncle,  take  you  in  this  barbarous 
Moor, 

This  ravenous  tiger,  this  accursed  devil; 

Let  him  receive  no  sustenance,  fetter  him. 

Till  he  be  brought  unto  the  Empress’  face. 

For  testimony  of  her  foul  proceedings: 

And  see  the  ambush  of  our  friends  be  strong; 

I  fear  the  Emperor  means  no  good  to  us.  10 

Aar.  Some  devil  whisper  curses  in  mine  ear. 

And  prompt  me,  that  my  tongue  may  utter  forth 
The  venomous  malice  of  my  swelling  heart! 

Luc.  Away,  inhuman  dog!  unhallow’d  slave! 
Sirs,  help  our  uncle  to  convey  him  in. 


ACT  V 

[Exeunt  GOTHS,  with  aaron.  Flaurish  within. 

The  trumpets  show  the  Emperor  is  at  hand. 

Enter  saturninus  and  tamora,  with  ^milius. 
Tribunes,  Senators,  and  others. 

Sat.  What,  hath  the  firmament  more  suns  than 
one? 

Luc.  What  boots  it  thee  to  call  thyself  a  sun? 

Marc.  Rome’s  Emperor,  and  nephew,  break 
the  parle; 

These  quarrels  must  be  quietly  debated.  20 
The  feast  is  ready,  which  the  careful  Titus 
Hath  ordain’d  to  an  honourable  end. 

For  peace,  for  love,  for  league,  and  good  to  Rome: 
Please  you,  therefore,  draw  nigh,  and  take  your 
places. 

Sat.  Marcus,  we  will. 

Hautboys  sound.  The  Company  sit  down  at 
table. 

Enter  titus  dressed  like  a  Cook,  lavinia  veiled, 
YOUNG  LUCIUS,  ond  others,  titus  places  the 
dishes  on  the  table. 

Tit.  Welcome,  my  gracious  lord;  welcome, 
dread  Queen; 

Welcome,  ye  warlike  Goths;  welcome,  Lucius; 
And  welcome,  all  :  although  the  cheer  be  poor, 
’Twill  fill  your  stomachs;  please  you  eat  of  it.  29 

Sat.  Why  art  thou  thus  attired,  Andronicus? 

Tit.  Because  I  would  be  sure  to  have  all  well. 

To  entertain  your  Highness  and  your  Empress. 

Tam.  We  are  beholding  to  you,  good 
Andronicus . 

Tit.  An  if  your  Highness  knew  my  heart,  you 
were. 

My  lord  the  Emperor,  resolve  me  this: 

Was  it  well  done  of  rash  Virginius 
To  slay  his  daughter  with  his  own  right  hand. 
Because  she  was  enforced,  stain’d,  and 
deflower’d? 

Sat.  It  was,  Andronicus. 

Tit.  Your  reason,  mighty  lord?  40 

Sat.  Because  the  girl  should  not  survive  her 
shame, 

And  by  her  presence  still  renew  sorrows. 

Tit.  A  reason  mighty,  strong,  and  effectual; 

A  pattern,  precedent,  and  lively  warrant. 

For  me,  most  wretched,  to  perform  the  like. 

Die,  die,  Lavinia,  and  thy  shame  with  thee; 

[Kills  LAVINIA. 

And,  with  thy  shame,  thy  father’s  sorrow  die! 

Sat.  What  hast  thou  done,  unnatural  and  unkind? 

Tit.  Kill’d  her,  for  whom  my  tears  have  made 
me  blind. 

I  am  as  woful  as  Virginius  was,  yo 

And  have  a  thousand  times  more  cause  than  he 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


SCENE  III 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


197 


To  do  this  outrage:  and  it  now  is  done. 

Sat.  What,  was  she  ravish’d?  tell  who  did  the 
deed. 

Tit.  Will’t  please  you  eat?  will’t  please  your 
Highness  feed? 

Tam.  Why  hast  thou  slain  thine  only  daughter 
thus? 

Tit.  Not  I;  ’twas  Chiron  and  Demetrius: 

They  ravish’d  her,  and  cut  away  her  tongue; 

And  they,  ’twas  they,  that  did  her  all  this  wrong. 
Sat.  Go  fetch  them  hither  to  us  presently. 

Tit.  Why,  there  they  are  both,  baked  in  that  pie; 
Whereof  their  mother  daintily  hath  fed,  61 

Eating  the  flesh  that  she  herself  hath  bred. 

’Tis  true,  ’tis  true;  witness  my  knife’s  sharp 
point. 

[Kills  TAMORA. 

Sat.  Die,  frantic  wretch,  for  this  accursed  deed! 
[Kills  TITVS. 

Luc.  Can  the  son’s  eye  behold  his  father  bleed? 
There’s  meed  for  meed,  death  for  a  deadly  deed! 
[Kills  SATURNiNus.  A  great  tumult. 

LUCIUS,  MARCUS,  and  others  go  up  into  the 

balcony. 

Marc.  You  sad-faced  men,  people  and  sons  of 
Rome, 

By  uproar  sever’d,  like  a  flight  of  fowl 
Scatter’d  by  winds  and  high  tempestuous 
gusts, 

O,  let  me  teach  you  how  to  knit  again  70 

This  scatter’d  corn  into  one  mutual  sheaf, 

These  broken  limbs  again  into  one  body; 

Lest  Rome  herself  be  bane  unto  herself. 

And  she  whom  mighty  kingdoms  court’ sy  to, 

Like  a  forlorn  and  desperate  castaway. 

Do  shameful  execution  on  herself. 

But  if  my  frosty  signs  and  chaps  of  age. 

Grave  witnesses  of  true  experience. 

Cannot  induce  you  to  attend  my  words, 

[To  Lucius]  Speak,  Rome’s  dear  friend,  as  erst 
our  ancestor,  So 

When  with  his  solemn  tongue  he  did  discourse 
To  love-sick  Dido’s  sad  attending  ear 
The  story  of  that  baleful  burning  night 
When  subtle  Greeks  surprised  King  Priam’s 
Troy, 

Tell  us  what  Sinon  hath  bewitch’d  our  ears. 

Or  who  hath  brought  the  fatal  engine  in 
That  gives  our  Troy,  our  Rome,  the  civil  wound. 
My  heart  is  not  compact  of  flint  nor  steel; 

Nor  can  I  utter  all  our  bitter  grief. 

But  floods  of  tears  will  drown  my  oratory,  510 
And  break  my  utterance,  even  in  the  time 
When  it  should  move  you  to  attend  me  most. 
Lending  your  kind  commiseration. 

Here  is  a  captain,  let  him  tell  the  tale;  ^ 


Your  hearts  will  throb  and  weep  to  hear  him 
speak. 

Luc.  Then,  noble  auditory,  be  it  known  to  you. 
That  cursed  Chiron  and  Demetrius 
Were  they  that  murdered  our  Emperor’s  brother; 
And  they  it  were  that  ravished  our  sister :  p p 

For  their  fell  faults  our  brothers  were  beheaded; 
Our  father’s  tears  despised,  and  basely  cozen’d 
Of  that  true  hand  that  fought  Rome’s  quarrel  out. 
And  sent  her  enemies  unto  the  grave. 

Lastly,  myself  unkindly  banished, 

The  gates  shut  on  me,  and  turn’d  weeping  out 
To  beg  relief  among  Rome’s  enemies; 

Who  drown’d  their  enmity  in  my  true  tears. 

And  oped  their  arms  to  embrace  me  as  a  friend. 

I  am  the  turned  forth,  be  it  known  to  you. 

That  have  preserved  her  welfare  in  my  blood; 
And  from  her  bosom  took  the  enemy’s  point,  in 
Sheathing  the  steel  in  my  adventurous  body. 

Alas,  you  know  I  am  no  vaunter,  I; 

My  scars  can  witness,  dumb  although  they  are. 
That  my  report  is  just  and  full  of  truth. 

But,  soft!  methinks  I  do  disgress  to  much. 

Citing  my  worthless  praise:  O,  pardon  me; 

For  when  no  friends  are  by,  men  praise  them¬ 
selves. 

Marc.  Now  is  my  turn  to  speak.  Behold  this 
child: 

[Pointing  to  the  child  in  the  arms  of  an  Attendant. 
Of  this  was  Tamora  delivered;  120 

The  issue  of  an  irreligious  Moor, 

Chief  architect  and  plotter  of  these  woes: 

The  villain  is  alive  in  Titus’  house. 

And  as  he  is,  to  witness  this  is  true. 

Now  judge  what  cause  had  Titus  to  revenge 
These  wrongs,  unspeakable,  past  patience. 

Or  more  than  any  living  man  could  bear. 

Now  you  have  heard  the  truth,  what  say  you, 
Romans? 

Have  we  done  aught  amiss?  Show  us  wherein. 
And,  from  the  place  where  you  behold  us  now. 
The  poor  remainder  of  Andronici  i  s  i 

Will,  hand  in  hand,  all  headlong  cast  us  down. 
And  on  the  ragged  stones  beat  forth  our  brains. 
And  make  a  mutual  closure  of  our  house. 

Speak,  Romans,  speak;  and  if  you  say  we  shall, 
Lo,  hand  in  hand,  Lucius  and  I  will  fall. 

/KmiL  Come,  come,  thou  reverend  man  of 
Rome, 

And  bring  our  Emperor  gently  in  thy  hand, 

Lucius  our  Emperor;  for  well  I  know 
The  common  voice  do  cry  it  shall  be  so.  /40 
All.  Lucius,  all  hail,  Rome’s  royal  Emperor! 
Marc.  Go,  go  into  old  Titus’  sorrowful  house. 

To  Attendants. 

And  hither  hale  that  misbelieving  Moor, 


198 

To  be  adjudged  some  direful  slaughtering  death, 
As  punishment  for  his  most  wicked  life. 

[Exeunt  Attendants. 

LUCIUS,  MARCUS,  and  the  others  descend. 

All.  Lucius,  all  hail,  Rome’s  gracious  governor! 
Luc.  Thanks,  gentle  Romans:  may  I  govern  so. 
To  heal  Rome’s  harms,  and  wipe  away  her  woe! 
But,  gentle  people,  give  me  aim  awhile. 

For  nature  puts  me  to  a  heavy  task:  /50 

Stand  all  aloof:  but,  uncle,  draw  you  near. 

To  shed  obsequious  tears  upon  this  trunk. 

O,  take  this  warm  kiss  on  thy  pale  cold  lips. 
Kissing  Titus. 

These  sorrowful  drops  upon  thy  blood-stain’d 
face. 

The  last  true  duties  of  thy  noble  son! 

Marc.  Tear  for  tear,  and  loving  kiss  for  kiss. 
Thy  brother  Marcus  tenders  on  thy  lips: 

O,  were  the  sum  of  these  that  I  should  pay 
Countless  and  infinite,  yet  would  I  pay  them! 

Luc.  Come  hither,  boy;  come,  come,  and  learn 
of  us  160 

To  melt  in  showers:  thy  grandsire  loved  thee 
well: 

Many  a  time  he  danced  thee  on  his  knee. 

Sung  thee  asleep,  his  loving  breast  thy  pillow; 
Many  a  matter  hath  he  told  to  thee. 

Meet  and  agreeing  with  thine  infancy; 

In  that  respect,  then,  like  a  loving  child. 

Shed  yet  some  small  drops  from  thy  tender  spring. 
Because  kind  nature  doth  require  it  so: 

Friends  should  associate  friends  in  grief  and  woe: 
Bid  him  farewell;  commit  him  to  the  grave;  ijo 
Do  him  that  kindness,  and  take  leave  of  him. 
Young  Luc.  O  grandsire,  grandsire!  even  with 
all  my  heart 


ACT  V 

Would  I  were  dead,  so  you  did  live  again! 

O  Lord,  I  cannot  speak  to  him  for  weeping; 

My  tears  will  choke  me,  if  I  ope  my  mouth. 

Re-enter  Attendants  'with  aaron. 

^m.  You  sad  Andronici,  have  done  with  woes: 
Give  sentence  on  this  execrable  wretch, 

That  hath  been  breeder  of  these  dire  events. 

Luc.  Set  him  breast-deep  in  earth,  and  famish 
him;  775^ 

There  let  him  stand,  and  rave,  and  cry  for  food: 

If  any  one  relieves  or  pities  him. 

For  the  offence  he  dies.  This  is  our  doom: 

Some  stay  to  see  him  fasten’d  in  the  earth. 

Aar.  O,  why  should  wrath  be  mute  and  fury 
dumb? 

I  am  no  baby,  I,  that  with  base  prayers 
I  should  repent  the  evils  I  have  done: 

Ten  thousand  worse  than  ever  yet  I  did 
Would  I  perform,  if  I  might  have  my  will: 

If  one  good  deed  in  all  my  life  I  did, 

I  do  repent  it  from  my  very  soul.  1^0 

Luc.  Some  loving  friends  convey  the  Emperor 
hence. 

And  give  him  burial  in  his  father’s  grave: 

My  father  and  Lavinia  shall  forthwith 
Be  closed  in  our  household’s  monument. 

As  for  that  heinous  tiger,  Tamora, 

No  funeral  rite,  nor  man  in  mourning  weeds. 

No  mournful  bell  shall  ring  her  burial; 

But  throw  her  forth  to  beasts  and  birds  of  prey: 
Her  life  was  beast-like  and  devoid  of  pity; 

And,  being  so,  shall  have  like  want  of  pity.  200 
See  justice  done  on  Aaron,  that  damn’d  Moor, 

By  whom  our  heavy  haps  had  their  beginning: 
Then,  afterwards,  to  order  well  the  state. 

That  like  events  may  ne’er  it  ruinate.  [Exeunt. 


TITUS  ANDRONICUS 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE 
SHREW 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAE 


Persons  in  the  Induction 


A  Lord 

Christopher  Sly,  a  tinker 
Two  Huntsmen 
Servingman 
Page 

Messenger 
Three  Servants 
Players 
Hostess 

Baptista  Minola,  a  rich  gentleman  of  Padua 
ViNCENTio,  an  old  gentleman  of  Pisa 
Lucentio,  son  to  Vincentio,  in  love  with  Bianca 
Petruchio,  a  gentleman  of  Verona^  a  suitor  to  Katharina 
Gremio 
Hortensio 
Tranio 


suitors  to  Bianca 


servants  to  Petruchio 


Biondello 


servants  to  Lucentio 


Grumio 
Curtis 
Peter 
Nathaniel 
Philip 
Joseph 
Nicholas 
A  Pedant 
A  Tailor 
A  Haberdasher 

Katharina,  the  shrew  \  ,  , ,  ^  „ 

Bianca  1  dmghters  to  Baptista 

Widow 

Non-Speaking:  Attendants  and  servants 
Scene:  Padua^  and  Petruchio  s  country  house 


INDUCTION 

Scene  i.  Before  an  alehouse  on  a  heath 
Enter  hostess  and  sly. 

Sly.  I’ll  pheeze  you,  in  faith. 

Host.  A  pair  of  stocks,  you  rogue! 

Sly.  Ye  are  a  baggage:  the  Slys  are  no  rogues; 
look  in  the  chronicles;  we  came  in  with  Richard 
Conqueror.  Therefore  paucas  pallabris;  let  the 
world  slide:  sessa! 

Host.  You  will  not  pay  for  the  glasses  you  have 
burst? 

Sly.  No,  not  a  denier.  Go  by,  Jeronimy:  go  to 
thy  cold  bed,  and  warm  thee.  lo 

Host.  I  know  my  remedy;  I  must  go  fetch  the 
third-borough.  [Exit. 

Sly.  Third,  or  fourth,  or  fifth  borough.  I’ll  an¬ 
swer  him  by  law:  I’ll  not  budge  an  inch,  boy: 
let  him  come,  and  kindly.  [Falls  asleep.] 

Homs  winded.  Enter  a  lord  from  huntings 
with  his  train. 

Lord.  Huntsman,  I  charge  thee,  tender  well  my 
hounds : 

Brach  Merriman,  the  poor  cur,  is  emboss’d; 

And  couple  Clowder  with  the  deep-mouth’d 
brach. 

Saw’st  thou  not,  boy,  how  Silver  made  it  good 
At  the  hedge-corner,  in  the  coldest  fault?  20 


I  would  not  lose  the  dog  for  twenty  pound. 

I  St.  Hun.  Why,  Belman  is  as  good  as  he,  my  lord; 

He  cried  upon  it  at  the  merest  loss 

And  twice  to-day  pick’d  out  the  dullest  scent: 

Trust  me,  I  take  him  for  the  better  dog. 

Lord.  Thou  art  a  fool:  if  Echo  were  as 
fleet, 

I  would  esteem  him  worth  a  dozen  such. 

But  sup  them  well  and  look  unto  them  all: 

To-morrow  I  intend  to  hunt  again. 
ist  Hun.  I  will,  my  lord.  50 

Lord.  What’s  here?  one  dead,  or  drunk?  See, 
doth  he  breathe? 

2nd  Hun.  He  breathes,  my  lord.  Were  he  not 
warm’d  with  ale, 

This  were  a  bed  but  cold  to  sleep  so  soundly. 
Lord.  O  monstrous  beast!  how  like  a  swine  he 
lies! 

Grim  death,  how  foul  and  loathsome  is  thine 
image! 

Sirs,  I  will  practice  on  this  drunken  man. 

What  think  you,  if  he  were  convey’d  to  bed, 

Wrapp’d  in  sweet  clothes,  rings  put  upon  his 
fingers, 

A  most  delicious  banquet  by  his  bed. 

And  brave  attendants  near  him  when  he  wakes. 

Would  not  the  beggar  then  forget  himself?  4/ 
ist  Hun.  Believe  me,  lord,  I  think  he  cannot 
choose. 


199 


200 


INDUCTION 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


2nd  Hun.  It  would  seem  strange  unto  him  when 
he  waked. 

Lord.  Even  as  a  flattering  dream  or  worthless 
fancy. 

Then  take  him  up  and  manage  well  the  jest: 

Carry  him  gently  to  my  fairest  chamber 
And  hang  it  round  with  all  my  wanton  pictures : 
Balm  his  foul  head  in  warm  distilled  waters 
And  burn  sweet  wood  to  make  the  lodging  sweet: 
Procure  me  music  ready  when  he  wakes,  yo 
To  make  a  dulcet  and  a  heavenly  sound; 

And  if  he  chance  to  speak,  be  ready  straight 

And  with  a  low  submissive  reverence 

Say,  “What  is  it  your  honour  will  command?” 

Let  one  attend  him  with  a  silver  basin 

Full  of  rose-water  and  bestrew’d  with  flowers; 

Another  bear  the  ewer,  the  third  a  diaper, 

And  say,  “Will’t  please  your  lordship  cool  your 
hands?” 

Some  one  be  ready  with  a  costly  suit 

And  ask  him  what  apparel  he  will  wear;  6o 

Another  tell  him  of  his  hounds  and  horse, 

And  that  his  lady  mourns  at  his  disease: 

Persuade  him  that  he  hath  been  lunatic; 

And  when  he  says  he  is,  say  that  he  dreams. 

For  he  is  nothing  but  a  mighty  lord. 

This  do  and  do  it  kindly,  gentle  sirs: 

It  will  be  pastime  passing  excellent. 

If  it  be  husbanded  with  modesty. 
ist  Hun,  My  lord,  I  warrant  you  we  will  play 
our  part. 

As  he  shall  think  by  our  true  diligence  70 

He  is  no  less  than  what  we  say  he  is. 

Lord.  Take  him  up  gently  and  to  bed  with  him; 
And  each  one  to  his  office  when  he  wakes. 

Some  bear  out  sly.  A  trumpet  sounds. 

Sirrah,  go  see  what  trumpet  ’tis  that  sounds: 

[Exit  SERVINGMAN. 

Belike,  some  noble  gentleman  that  means. 
Travelling  some  journey,  to  repose  him  here. 

Re-enter  servingman. 

How  now!  who  is  it? 

Serv.  An’t  please  your  honour,  players 

That  offer  service  to  your  lordship. 

Lord.  Bid  them  come  near. 

Enter  players. 

Now,  fellows,  you  are  welcome. 
Players.  We  thank  your  honour.  80 

Lord.  Do  you  intend  to  stay  with  me  to-night? 

A  Player.  So  please  your  lordship  to  accept  our 
duty. 

Lord.  With  all  my  heart.  This  fellow  I  remem¬ 
ber. 

Since  once  he  play’d  a  farmer’s  eldest  son: 


’Twas  where  you  woo’d  the  gentlewoman  so 
well: 

I  have  forgot  your  name;  but,  sure,  that  part 
Was  aptly  fitted  and  naturally  perform’d. 

A  Player.  I  think  ’twas  Soto  that  your  honour 
means. 

Lord.  ’Tis  very  true:  thou  didst  it  excellent. 
Well,  you  are  come  to  me  in  happy  time;  510 
The  rather  for  I  have  some  sport  in  hand 
Wherein  your  cunning  can  assist  me  much. 

There  is  a  lord  will  hear  you  play  to-night: 

But  I  am  doubtful  of  your  modesties; 

Lest  over-eyeing  of  his  odd  behaviour, — 

For  yet  his  honour  never  heard  a  play — 

You  break  into  some  merry  passion 
And  so  offend  him;  for  I  tell  you,  sirs, 

If  you  should  smile  he  grows  impatient. 

A  Player.  Fear  not,  my  lord:  we  can  contain 
ourselves 

Were  he  the  veriest  antic  in  the  world. 

Lord.  Go,  sirrah,  take  them  to  the  buttery. 

And  give  them  friendly  welcome  every  one: 

Let  them  want  nothing  that  my  house  affords. 

[Exit  one  'with  the  players. 
Sirrah,  go  you  to  Barthol’mew  my  page. 

And  see  him  dress’d  in  all  suits  like  a  lady: 

That  done,  conduct  him  to  the  drunkard’s  cham¬ 
ber; 

And  call  him  “madam,”  do  him  obeisance. 

Tell  him  from  me,  as  he  will  win  my  love. 

He  bear  himself  with  honourable  action,  no 
Such  as  he  hath  observed  in  noble  ladies 
Unto  their  lords,  by  them  accomplished: 

Such  duty  to  the  drunkard  let  him  do 
With  soft  low  tongue  and  lowly  courtesy. 

And  say  “What  is’t  your  honour  will  command, 
Wherein  your  lady  and  your  humble  wife 
May  show  her  duty  and  make  known  her  love?” 
And  then  with  kind  embracements,  tempting 
kisses. 

And  with  declining  head  into  his  bosom, 

Bid  him  shed  tears,  as  being  overjoy’d  120 

To  see  her  noble  lord  restored  to  health. 

Who  for  this  seven  years  hath  esteemed  him 
No  better  than  a  poor  and  loathsome  beggar: 

And  if  the  boy  have  not  a  woman’s  gift 
To  rain  a  shower  of  commanded  tears. 

An  onion  will  do  well  for  such  a  shift. 

Which  in  a  napkin  being  close  convey’d 
Shall  in  despite  enforce  a  watery  eye. 

See  this  dispatch’d  with  all  the  haste  thou  canst: 
Anon  I’ll  give  thee  more  instructions.  1^0 

[Exit  a  SERVINGMAN. 
I  know  the  boy  will  well  usurp  the  grace. 

Voice,  gait,  and  action  of  a  gentlewoman  : 

I  long  to  hear  him  call  the  drunkard  husband, 


SCENE  II 


201 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


And  how  my  men  will  stay  themselves  from 
laughter 

When  they  do  homage  to  this  simple  peasant, 
ril  in  to  counsel  them;  haply  my  presence 
May  well  abate  the  over-merry  spleen 
Which  otherwise  would  grow  into  extremes. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  A  bedchamber  in  the  Lord's  house 
Enter  aloft  sly,  with  Attendants;  some  with  ap¬ 
parel,  others  with  basin  and  ewer  and  other 
appurtenances;  and  lord. 

Sly.  For  God’s  sake,  a  pot  of  small  ale. 

ist  Serv.  Will’t  please  your  lordship  drink  a  cup 
of  sack? 

2nd  Serv.  Will’t  please  your  honour  taste  of 
these  conserves? 

^rd  Serv.  What  raiment  will  your  honour  wear 
to-day? 

Sly.  I  am  Christophero  Sly;  call  not  me  “hon¬ 
our”  nor  “lordship”:  I  ne’er  drank  sack  in  my 
life;  and  if  you  give  me  any  conserves,  give  me 
conserves  of  beef:  ne’er  ask  me  what  raiment  I’ll 
wear;  for  I  have  no  more  doublets  than  backs, 
no  more  stockings  than  legs,  nor  no  more  shoes 
than  feet;  nay,  sometime  more  feet  than  shoes,  or 
such  shoes  as  my  toes  look  through  the  over¬ 
leather. 

Lord.  Heaven  cease  this  idle  humour  in  your 
honour! 

O,  that  a  mighty  man  of  such  descent. 

Of  such  possessions,  and  so  high  esteem, 

Should  be  infused  with  so  foul  a  spirit! 

Sly.  What,  would  you  make  me  mad?  Am  not  I 
Christopher  Sly,  old  Sly’s  son  of  Burtonheath,  by 
birth  a  pedlar,  by  education  a  cardmaker,  by 
transmutation  a  bear-herd,  and  now  by  present 
profession  a  tinker?  Ask  Marian  Hacket,  the  fat 
ale-wife  of  Wincot,  if  she  know  me  not:  if  she 
say  I  am  not  fourteen  pence  on  the  score  for  sheer 
ale,  score  me  up  for  the  lyingest  knave  in  Chris¬ 
tendom.  What!  I  am  not  bestr aught:  here’s — 

^rd  Serv.  O,  this  it  is  that  makes  your  lady 
mourn! 

2nd  Serv.  O,  this  is  it  that  makes  your  servants 
droop! 

Lord.  Hence  comes  it  that  your  kindred  shuns 
your  house,  50 

As  beaten  hence  by  your  strange  lunacy. 

O  noble  lord,  bethink  thee  of  thy  birth. 

Call  home  thy  ancient  thoughts  from  banishment 
x\nd  banish  hence  these  abject  lowly  dreams. 
Look  how  thy  servants  do  attend  on  thee, 

Each  in  his  office  ready  at  thy  beck. 

Wilt  thou  have  music?  hark!  Apollo  plays. 
Music. 


And  twenty  caged  nightingales  do  sing: 

Or  wilt  thou  ^leep?  we’ll  have  thee  to  a  couch 
Softer  and  sweeter  than  the  lustful  bed  40 

On  purpose  trimm’d  up  for  Semiramis. 

Say  thou  wilt  walk;  we  will  bestrew  the  ground: 
Or  wilt  thou  ride?  thy  horses  shall  be  trapp’d. 
Their  harness  studded  all  with  gold  and  pearl. 
Dost  thou  love  hawking?  thou  hast  hawks  will  soar 
Above  the  morning  lark:  or  wilt  thou  hunt? 

Thy  hounds  shall  make  the  welkin  answer  them 
And  fetch  shrill  echoes  from  the  hollow  earth. 

I  St  Serv.  Say  thou  wilt  course;  thy  greyhounds 
are  as  swift 

As  breathed  stags,  ay,  fleeter  than  the  roe.  50 
2nd  Serv.  Dost  thou  love  pictures?  we  will  fetch 
thee  straight 

Adonis  painted  by  a  running  brook. 

And  Cytherea  all  in  sedges  hid. 

Which  seem  to  move  and  wanton  with  her  breath, 
Even  as  the  waving  sedges  play  with  wind. 

Lord.  We’ll  show  thee  lo  as  she  was  a  maid. 

And  how  she  was  beguiled  and  surprised. 

As  lively  painted  as  the  deed  was  done. 

^rd  Serv.  Or  Daphne  roaming  through  a  thorny 
wood. 

Scratching  her  legs  that  one  shall  swear  she 

bleeds,  60 

And  at  that  sight  shall  sad  Apollo  weep. 

So  workmanly  the  blood  and  tears  are  drawn. 

Lord.  Thou  art  a  lord  and  nothing  but  a  lord: 
Thou  hast  a  lady  far  more  beautiful 
Than  any  woman  in  this  waning  age. 
ist  Serv.  And  till  the  tears  that  she  hath  shed  for 
thee 

Like  envious  floods  o’er-run  her  lovely  face, 

She  was  the  fairest  creature  in  the  world; 

And  yet  she  is  inferior  to  none. 

Sly.  Am  I  a  lord?  and  have  I  such  a  lady?  70 
Or  do  I  dream?  or  have  I  dream’d  till  now? 

I  do  not  sleep:  I  see,  I  hear,  I  speak; 

I  smell  sweet  savours  and  I  feel  soft  things: 

Upon  my  life,  I  am  a  lord  indeed 
And  not  a  tinker  nor  Christophero  Sly. 

Well,  bring  our  lady  hither  to  our  sight; 

And  once  again,  a  pot  o’  the  smallest  ale. 

2nd  Serv.  Will’t  please  your  mightiness  to  wash 
your  hands? 

O,  how  we  joy  to  see  your  wit  restored!  jp 
O,  that  once  more  you  knew  but  what  you  are! 
These  fifteen  years  you  have  been  in  a  dream; 

Or  when  you  waked,  so  waked  as  if  you  slept. 
Sly.  These  fifteen  years!  by  my  fay,  a  goodly 
nap. 

But  did  I  never  speak  of  all  that  time? 

ist  Serv.  O,  yes,  my  lord,  but  very  idle  words: 
For  though  you  lay  here  in  this  goodly  chamber. 


202 


ACT  I 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


Yet  would  you  say  ye  were  beaten  out  of  door; 
And  rail  upon  the  hostess  of  the  house; 

And  say  you  would  present  her  at  the  leet, 
Because  she  brought  stone  jugs  and  no  seal’d 
quarts;  po 

Sometimes  you  would  call  out  for  Cicely  Hacket. 
Sly.  Ay,  the  woman’s  maid  of  the  house. 

^rd  Serv.  Why,  sir,  you  know  no  house  nor  no 
such  maid. 

Nor  no  such  men  as  you  have  reckon’d  up, 

As  Stephen  Sly,  and  old  John  Naps  of  Greece, 
And  Peter  Turph,  and  Henry  Pimpernell, 

And  twenty  more  such  names  and  men  as  these 
Which  never  were,  nor  no  man  ever  saw. 

Sly.  Now  Lord  be  thanked  for  my  good  amends! 
All.  Amen.  loo 

Sly.  1  thank  thee:  thou  shalt  not  lose  by  it. 

Enter  the  page  as  a  lady,  with  attendants. 

Page.  How  fares  my  noble  lord? 

Sly.  Marry,  1  fare  well;  for  here  is  cheer  enough. 
Where  is  my  wife? 

Page.  Here,  noble  lord:  what  is  thy  will  with  her? 
Sly.  Are  you  my  wife  and  will  not  call  me  hus¬ 
band? 

My  men  should  call  me  “lord” :  I  am  your  good- 
man. 

Page.  My  husband  and  my  lord,  my  lord  and 
husband; 

I  am  your  wife  in  all  obedience. 

Sly.  I  know  it  well.  What  must  I  call  her? 

Lord.  Madam.  iii 

Sly.  Al’ce  madam,  or  Joan  madam? 

Lord.  “Madam,”  and  nothing  else:  so  lords  call 
ladies. 

Sly.  Madam  wife,  they  say  that  I  have  dream’d 
And  slept  above  some  fifteen  year  or  more. 

Page.  Ay,  and  the  time  seems  thirty  unto  me, 
Being  all  this  time  abandon’d  from  your  bed. 

Sly.  ’Tis  much.  Servants,  leave  me  and  her  alone. 
Madam,  undress  you  and  come  now  to  bed. 

Page.  Thrice-noble  lord,  let  me  entreat  of  you 
To  pardon  me  yet  for  a  night  or  two,  121 

Or,  if  not  so,  until  the  sun  be  set: 

For  your  physicians  have  expressly  charged, 

In  peril  to  incur  your  former  malady. 

That  I  should  yet  absent  me  from  your  bed: 

I  hope  this  reason  stands  for  my  excuse. 

Sly.  Ay,  It  stands  so  that  I  may  hardly  tarry  so 
long.  But  I  would  be  loath  to  fall  into  my  dreams 
again:  I  will  therefore  tarry  in  despite  of  the 
flesh  and  the  blood.  75 o 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  Your  honour’s  players,  hearing  your 
amendment. 


Are  come  to  play  a  pleasant  comedy; 

For  so  your  doctors  hold  it  very  meet. 

Seeing  too  much  sadness  hath  congeal’d  your 
blood. 

And  melancholy  is  the  nurse  of  frenzy: 

Therefore  they  thought  it  good  you  hear  a  play 
And  frame  your  mind  to  mirth  and  merriment. 
Which  bars  a  thousand  harms  and  lengthens  life. 
Sly.  Marry,  I  will,  let  them  play  it.  Is  not  a 
comonty  a  Christmas  gambold  or  a  tumbling- 
trick?  7^7 

Page.  No,  my  good  lord;  it  is  more  pleasing  stuff. 
Sly.  What,  household  stuff? 

Page.  It  IS  a  kind  of  history. 

Sly.  Well,  we’ll  see’t.  Come,  madam  wife,  sit 
by  my  side  and  let  the  world  slip:  we  shall  ne’er 
be  younger. 

Flourish. 

ACT  I 

Scene  i.  Padua:  a  public  place 
Enter  lucentio  and  his  man  tranio. 

Luc.  Tranio,  since  for  the  great  desire  I  had 
To  see  fair  Padua,  nursery  of  arts, 

I  am  arrived  for  fruitful  Lombardy, 

The  pleasant  garden  of  great  Italy; 

And  by  my  father’s  love  and  leave  am  arm’d 
With  his  good  will  and  thy  good  company. 

My  trusty  servant,  well  approved  in  all, 

Here  let  us  breathe  and  haply  institute 
A  course  of  learning  and  ingenious  studies. 

Pisa  renown’d  for  grave  citizens  10 

Gave  me  my  being  and  my  father  first, 

A  merchant  of  great  traffic  through  the  world, 
Vincentio,  come  of  the  Bentivolii. 

Vincentio’s  son  brought  up  in  Florence 
It  shall  become  to  serve  all  hopes  conceived, 

To  deck  his  fortune  with  his  virtuous  deeds; 

And  therefore,  Tranio,  for  the  time  I  study. 
Virtue  and  that  part  of  philosophy 
Will  I  apply  that  treats  of  happiness 
By  virtue  specially  to  be  achieved.  20 

Tell  me  thy  mind;  for  I  have  Pisa  left 
And  am.  to  Padua  come,  as  he  that  leaves 
A  shallow  plash  to  plunge  him  in  the  deep 
And  with  satiety  seeks  to  quench  his  thirst. 

Tra.  Mi perdonato,  gentle  master  mine, 

I  am  in  all  affected  as  yourself; 

Glad  that  you  thus  continue  your  resolve 
To  suck  the  sweets  of  sweet  philosophy. 

Only,  good  master,  while  we  do  admire 

This  virtue  and  this  moral  discipline,  50 

Let’s  be  no  stoics  nor  no  stocks,  I  pray; 

Or  so  devote  to  Aristotle’s  checks 
As  Ovid  be  an  outcast  quite  abjured: 


SCENE  I 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


Balk  logic  with  acquaintance  that  you  have 
And  practise  rhetoric  in  your  common  talk; 
Music  and  poesy  use  to  quicken  you; 

The  mathematics  and  the  metaphysics, 

Fall  to  them  as  you  find  your  stomach  serves  you; 
No  profit  grows  where  is  no  pleasure  ta’en: 

In  brief,  sir,  study  what  you  most  affect.  40 
Luc.  Gramercies,  Tranio,  well  dost  thou  advise. 
If,  Biondello,  thou  wert  come  ashore. 

We  could  at  once  put  us  in  readiness. 

And  take  a  lodging  fit  to  entertain 
Such  friends  as  time  in  Padua  shall  beget. 

But  stay  a  while:  what  company  is  this? 

Tra.  Master,  some  show  to  welcome  us  to  town. 

Enter  baptista,  katharina,  bianca,  gremio,  a 
pantaloon.,  and  hortensio.  lucentio  and  tra¬ 
nio  stand  by. 

Bap.  Gentlemen,  importune  me  no  farther. 

For  how  I  firmly  am  resolved  you  know; 

That  is,  not  to  bestow  my  youngest  daughter  50 
Before  I  have  a  husband  for  the  elder: 

If  either  of  you  both  love  Katharina, 

Because  I  know  you  well  and  love  you  well. 
Leave  shall  you  have  to  court  her  at  your  pleas¬ 
ure. 

Gre.  [Aside]  To  cart  her  rather:  she’s  too  rough 
for  me. 

There,  there,  Hortensio,  will  you  any  wife? 

Kath.  I  pray  you,  sir,  is  it  your  will 
To  make  a  stale  of  me  amongst  these  mates? 

Hor.  Mates,  maid!  how  mean  you  that?  no 
mates  for  you. 

Unless  you  were  of  gentler,  milder  mould.  60 
Kath.  I’faith,  sir,  you  shall  never  need  to  fear: 

I  wis  it  is  not  half  way  to  her  heart; 

But  if  it  were,  doubt  not  her  care  should  be 
To  comb  your  noddle  with  a  three-1  egg’d  stool 
And  paint  your  face  and  use  you  like  a  fool. 

Hor.  From  all  such  devils,  good  Lord  deliver 
us! 

Gre.  And  me  too,  good  Lord! 

Tra.  Hush,  master!  here’s  some  good  pastime 
toward: 

That  wench  is  stark  mad  or  wonderful  froward. 
Luc.  But  in  the  other’s  silence  do  I  see  70 

Maid’s  mild  behaviour  and  sobriety. 

Peace,  Tranio! 

Tra.  Well  said,  master;  mum!  and  gaze  your 
fill. 

Bap.  Gentlemen,  that  I  may  soon  make  good 
What  I  have  said,  Bianca,  get  you  in: 

And  let  it  not  displease  thee,  good  Bianca, 

For  1  will  love  thee  ne’er  the  less,  my  girl. 

Kath.  A  pretty  peat!  it  is  best  ' 

Put  finger  in  the  eye,  an  she  knew  why. 


203 

Bian.  Sister,  content  you  in  my  discontent.  80 
Sir,  to  your  pleasure  humbly  I  subscribe: 

My  books  and  instruments  shall  be  my  company. 
On  them  to  look  and  practise  by  myself. 

Luc.  Hark,  Tranio!  thou  may’st  hear  Minerva 
speak. 

Hor.  Signior  Baptista,  will  you  be  so  strange? 
Sorry  am  I  that  our  good  will  effects 
Bianca’s  grief. 

Gre.  Why  will  you  mew  her  up, 

Signior  Baptista,  for  this  fiend  of  hell. 

And  make  her  bear  the  penance  of  her  tongue? 

Bap.  Gentlemen,  content  ye;  I  am  resolved:  ^0 
Go  in,  Bianca:  [Exit  bianca. 

And  for  I  know  she  taketh  most  delight 
In  music,  instruments,  and  poetry. 

Schoolmasters  will  I  keep  within  my  house. 

Fit  to  instruct  her  youth.  If  you,  Hortensio, 

Or  Signior  Gremio,  you,  know  any  such. 

Prefer  them  hither;  for  to  cunning  men 

I  will  be  very  kind,  and  liberal 

To  mine  own  children  in  good  bringing  up: 

And  so  farewell.  Katharina,  you  may  stay;  100 
For  I  have  more  to  commune  with  Bianca.  [Exit. 
Kath.  Why,  and  I  trust  I  may  go  too,  may  I  not? 
What,  shall  I  be  appointed  hours;  as  though,  be¬ 
like,  I  knew  not  what  to  take,  and  what  to  leave, 
ha?  [Exit. 

Gre.  You  may  go  to  the  devil’s  dam:  your  gifts 
are  so  good,  here’s  none  will  hold  you.  Their  love 
is  not  so  great,  Hortensio,  but  we  may  blow  our 
nails  together,  and  fast  it  fairly  out:  our  cake’s 
dough  on  both  sides.  Farewell:  yet,  for  the  love  I 
bear  my  sweet  Bianca,  if  I  can  by  any  means  light 
on  a  fit  man  to  teach  her  that  wherein  she  de¬ 
lights,  I  will  wish  him  to  her  father. 

Hor.  So  will  I,  Signior  Gremio:  but  a  word,  I 
pray.  Though  the  nature  of  our  quarrel  yet  never 
brooked  parle,  know  now,  upon  advice,  it  touch- 
eth  us  both,  that  we  may  yet  again  have  access 
to  our  fair  mistress  and  be  happy  rivals  in 
Bianca’s  love,  to  labour  and  effect  one  thing 
specially.  121 

Gre.  What’s  that,  I  pray? 

Hor.  Marry,  sir,  to  get  a  husband  for  her  sister. 
Gre.  A  husband!  a  devil. 

Hor.  I  say,  a  husband. 

Gre.  I  say,  a  devil.  Thinkest  thou,  Hortensio, 
though  her  father  be  very  rich,  any  man  is  so 
very  a  fool  to  be  married  to  hell? 

Hor.  Tush,  Gremio,  though  it  pass  your  pa¬ 
tience  and  mine  to  endure  her  loud  alarums,  why, 
man,  there  be  good  fellows  in  the  world,  an  a 
man  could  light  on  them,  would  take  her  with  all 
faults,  and  money  enough. 

Gre.  I  cannot  tell;  but  I  had  as  lief  take  her 


ACT  I 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


dowry  with  this  condition,  to  be  whipped  at  the 
high  cross  every  morning. 

Hor.  Faith,  as  you  say,  there’s  small  choice  in 
rotten  apples.  But  come;  since  this  bar  in  law 
makes  us  friends,  it  shall  be  so  far  forth  friendly 
maintained,  till  by  helping  Baptista’s  eldest 
daughter  to  a  husband  we  set  his  youngest  free 
for  a  husband,  and  then  have  to’t  afresh.  Sweet 
Bianca!  Happy  man  be  his  dole!  He  that  runs 
fastest  gets  the  ring.  How  say  you,  Signior 
Gremio? 

Gre.  I  am  agreed;  and  would  1  had  given  him 
the  best  horse  in  Padua  to  begin  his  wooing  that 
would  thoroughly  woo  her,  wed  her  and  bed  her, 
and  rid  the  house  of  her!  Come  on.  i$o 

[Exeunt  gremio  and  hortensio. 
Tra.  I  pray,  sir,  tell  me,  is  it  possible 
That  love  should  of  a  sudden  take  such  hold? 

Luc.  O  Tranio,  till  I  found  it  to  be  true, 

I  never  thought  it  possible  or  likely; 

But  see,  while  idly  I  stood  looking  on, 

I  found  the  effect  of  love  in  idleness: 

And  now  in  plainness  do  confess  to  thee. 

That  art  to  me  as  secret  and  as  dear 
As  Anna  to  the  queen  of  Carthage  was, 

Tranio,  I  burn,  I  pine,  I  perish,  Tranio,  i6o 
If  I  achieve  not  this  young  modest  girl. 

Counsel  me,  Tranio,  for  I  know  thou  canst; 

Assist  me,  Tranio,  for  I  know  thou  wilt. 

Tra.  Master,  it  is  no  time  to  chide  you  now; 
Affection  is  not  rated  from  the  heart: 

If  love  have  touch’d  you,  nought  remains  but  so. 
Redime  te  captum  quam  queas  minimo. 

Luc.  Gramercies,  lad,  go  forward;  this  contents: 
The  rest  will  comfort,  for  thy  counsel’s  sound. 

Tra.  Master,  you  look’d  so  longly  on  the  maid. 
Perhaps  you  mark’d  not  what’s  the  pith  of  all. 
Luc.  O  yes,  I  saw  sweet  beauty  in  her  face. 

Such  as  the  daughter  of  Agenor  had. 

That  made  great  Jove  to  humble  him  to  her  hand. 
When  with  his  knees  he  kiss’d  the  Cretan  strand. 
Tra.  Saw  you  no  more?  mark’d  you  not  how  her 
sister 

Began  to  scold  and  raise  up  such  a  storm 
That  mortal  ears  might  hardly  endure  the  din? 
Luc.  Tranio,  I  saw  her  coral  lips  to  move 
And  with  her  breath  she  did  perfume  the  air:  i^o 
Sacred  and  sweet  was  all  I  saw  in  her. 

Tra.  Nay,  then,  ’tis  time  to  stir  him  from  his 
trance. 

I  pray,  awake,  sir:  if  you  love  the  maid. 

Bend  thoughts  and  wits  to  achieve  her.  Thus  it 
stands: 

Her  elder  sister  is  so  curst  and  shrewd 
That  till  the  father  rid  his  hands  of  her. 

Master,  your  love  must  live  a  maid  at  home; 


And  therefore  has  he  closely  mew’d  her  up, 
Because  she  will  not  Jbe  annoy’d  with  suitors. 

Luc.  Ah,  Tranio,  what  a  cruel  father’s  he! 

But  art  thou  not  advised,  he  took  some  care  1 
To  get  her  cunning  schoolmasters  to  instruct  her? 
Tra.  Ay,  marry,  am  I,  sir;  and  now  ’tis  plotted. 
Luc.  I  have  it,  Tranio. 

Tra.  Master,  for  my  hand. 

Both  our  inventions  meet  and  jump  in  one. 

Luc.  Tell  me  thine  first. 

Tra.  You  will  be  schoolmaster 

And  undertake  the  teaching  of  the  maid: 

That’s  your  device. 

Luc.  It  is:  may  it  be  done? 

Tra.  Not  possible;  for  who  shall  bear  your  part. 
And  be  in  Padua  here  Vincentio’s  son,  200 

Keep  house  and  ply  his  book,  welcome  his 
friends. 

Visit  his  countrymen  and  banquet  them? 

Luc.  Basta;  content  thee,  for  I  have  it  full. 

We  have  not  yet  been  seen  in  any  house. 

Nor  can  we  be  distinguish’d  by  our  faces 
For  man  or  master;  then  it  follows  thus; 

Thou  shalt  be  master,  Tranio,  in  my  stead. 

Keep  house  and  port  and  servants,  as  I  should: 

I  will  some  other  be,  some  Florentine, 

Some  Neapolitan,  or  meaner  man  of  Pisa.  210 
’Tis  hatch’d  and  shall  be  so:  Tranio,  at  once 
Uncase  thee;  take  my  colour’d  hat  and  cloak: 
When  Biondello  comes,  he  waits  on  thee; 

But  I  will  charm  him  first  to  keep  his  tongue. 

Tra.  So  had  you  need. 

In  brief,  sir,  sith  it  your  pleasure  is. 

And  I  am  tied  to  be  obedient; 

For  so  your  father  charged  me  at  our  parting, 

“Be  serviceable  to  my  son,”  quoth  he. 

Although  I  think  ’twas  in  another  sense;  220 
I  am  content  to  be  Lucentio, 

Because  so  well  I  love  Lucentio. 

Luc.  Tranio,  be  so,  because  Lucentio  loves: 

And  let  me  be  a  slave,  to  achieve  that  maid 
Whose  sudden  sight  hath  thrall’d  my  wounded 
eye. 

Here  comes  the  rogue. 

Enter  biondello. 

Sirrah,  where  have  you  been? 
Bion.  Where  have  I  been!  Nay,  how  now! 
where  are  you?  Master,  has  my  fellow  Tranio 
stolen  your  clothes?  Or  you  stolen  his?  or  both? 
pray,  what’s  the  news?  2^0 

Luc.  Sirrah,  come  hither:  ’tis  no  time  to  jest. 
And  therefore  frame  your  manners  to  the  time. 
Your  fellow  Tranio  here,  to  save  my  life. 

Puts  my  apparel  and  my  countenance  on, 

And  I  for  my  escape  have  put  on  his; 


SCENE  I 


THE  TAMING 

For  in  a  quarrel  since  1  came  ashore 
I  kill’d  a  man  and  fear  I  was  descried: 

Wait  you  on  him,  I  charge  you,  as  becomes. 
While  I  make  way  from  hence  to  save  my  life: 
You  understand  me? 

Bion,  I,  sir!  ne’er  a  whit.  240 

Luc.  And  not  a  jot  of  Tranio  in  your  mouth: 
Tranio  is  changed  into  Lucentio. 

Biou.  The  better  for  him:  would  I  were  so  too! 
Tra.  So  could  I,  faith,  boy,  to  have  the  next  wish 
after. 

That  Lucentio  indeed  had  Baptista’s  youngest 
daughter. 

But,  sirrah,  not  for  my  sake,  but  your  master’s,  I 
advise 

You  use  your  manners  discreetly  in  all  kind  of 
companies: 

When  I  am  alone,  why,  then  I  am  Tranio; 

But  in  all  places  else  your  master  Lucentio.  2451 
Luc.  Tranio,  let’s  go:  one  thing  more  rests,  that 
thyself  execute,  to  make  one  among  these  woo¬ 
ers:  if  thou  ask  me  why,  sufficeth,  my  reasons 
are  both  good  and  weighty.  [Exeunt. 

The  presenters  above  speak. 

ist  Serv.  My  lord,  you  nod;  you  do  not  mind 
the  play. 

Sly.  Yes,  by  Saint  Anne,  do  I.  A  good  matter, 
surely:  comes  there  any  more  of  it? 

Page.  My  lord,  ’tis  but  begun. 

Sly.  *Tis  a  very  excellent  piece  of  work,  madam 
lady:  would  ’twere  done!  255) 

They  sit  and  mark. 

Scene  ii.  Padua:  before  Hortensio^s  house 
Enter  petruchio  and  his  man  grumio. 

Pet.  Verona,  for  a  while  I  take  my  leave, 

To  see  my  friends  in  Padua,  but  of  all 
My  best  beloved  and  approved  friend, 

Hortensio;  and  I  trow  this  is  his  house. 

Here,  sirrah  Grumio;  knock,  I  say. 

Gru.  Knock,  sir!  whom  should  I  knock?  is  there 
any  man  has  rebused  your  worship? 

Pet.  Villain,  I  say,  knock  me  here  soundly. 

Gru.  Knock  you  here,  sir!  why,  sir,  what  am  I, 
sir,  that  1  should  knock  you  here,  sir?  10 

Pet.  Villain,  I  say,  knock  me  at  this  gate 
And  rap  me  well,  or  I’ll  knock  your  knave’s  pate. 
Gru.  My  master  is  grown  quarrelsome.  I  should 
knock  you  first. 

And  then  I  know  after  who  comes  by  the  worst. 
Pet.  Will  it  not  be? 

Faith,  sirrah,  an  you’ll  not  knock.  I’ll  ring  it; 

I’ll  try  how  you  can  sol,  fa,  and  sing  it. 

He  vorings  him  by  the  ears.  \ 

Gru.  Help,  masters,  help!  my  master  is  mad. 


OF  THE  SHREW  205 

Pet.  Now,  knock  when  I  bid  you,  sirrah  villain! 

'  Enter  hortensio. 

Hor.  How  now!  what’s  the  matter?  My  old 
friend  Grumio!  and  my  good  friend  Petruchio! 
How  do  you  all  at  Verona? 

Pet.  Signior  Hortensio,  come  you  to  part  the 
fray? 

Con  turn  il  cuore.,  ben  trovato.,  may  I  say. 

Hor.  Alla  nostra  casa  ben  venuto,  molto  hanorato 
signor  mio  Petruchio. 

Rise,  Grumio,  rise:  we  will  compound  this 
quarrel. 

Gru.  Nay,  ’tis  no  matter,  sir,  what  he  ’leges  in 
Latin.  If  this  be  not  a  lawful  cause  for  me  to  leave 
his  service,  look  you,  sir,  he  bid  me  knock  him 
and  rap  him  soundly,  sir:  well,  was  it  fit  for  a 
servant  to  use  his  master  so,  being  perhaps,  for 
aught  I  see,  two  and  thirty,  a  pip  out? 

W'hom  would  to  God  I  had  well  knock’d  at  first, 
Then  had  not  Grumio  come  by  the  worst. 

Pet.  A  senseless  villain!  Good  Hortensio, 

I  bade  the  rascal  knock  upon  your  gate 
And  could  not  get  him  for  my  heart  to  do  it. 

Gru.  Knock  at  the  gate!  O  heavens!  Spake  you 
not  these  words  plain,  “Sirrah,  knock  me  here, 
rap  me  here,  knock  me  well,  and  knock  me 
soundly”?  And  come  you  now  with,  “knocking 
at  the  gate”? 

Pet.  Sirrah,  be  gone,  or  talk  not,  I  advise  you. 
Hor.  Petruchio,  patience;  I  am  Grumio’ s  pledge: 
Why,  this’s  a  heavy  chance  ’twixt  him  and  you, 
Your  ancient,  trusty,  pleasant  servant  Grumio. 
And  tell  me  now,  sweet  friend,  what  happy  gale 
Blows  you  to  Padua  here  from  old  Verona? 

Pet.  Such  wind  as  scatters  young  men  through 
the  world  yo 

To  seek  their  fortunes  farther  than  at  home 
Where  small  experience  grows.  But  in  a  few, 
Signior  Hortensio,  thus  it  stands  with  me: 
Antonio,  my  father,  is  deceased; 

And  I  have  thrust  myself  into  this  maze. 

Haply  to  wive  and  thrive  as  best  I  may: 

Crowns  in  my  purse  I  have  and  goods  at  home. 
And  so  am  come  abroad  to  see  the  world. 

Hor.  Petruchio,  shall  I  then  come  roundly  to 
thee 

And  wish  thee  to  a  shrewd  ill-favour’d  wife?  60 
Thou’ldst  thank  me  but  a  little  for  my  counsel: 
And  yet  I’ll  promise  thee  she  shall  be  rich 
And  very  rich:  but  thou’rt  too  much  my  friend. 
And  I’ll  not  wish  thee  to  her. 

Pet.  Signior  Hortensio,  ’twixt  such  friends  as  we 
Few  words  suffice:  and  therefore,  if  thou  know 
One  rich  enough  to  be  Petruchio’ s  wife. 

As  wealth  is  burden  of  my  wooing  dance, 


2o6 


ACT  I 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


Be  she  as  foul  as  was  Florentius’  love, 

As  old  as  Sibyl,  and  as  curst  and  shrewd  70 
As  Socrates’  Xanthippe,  or  a  worse. 

She  moves  me  not,  or  not  removes,  at  least. 
Affection’s  edge  in  me,  were  she  as  rough 
As  are  the  swelling  Adriatic  seas: 

I  come  to  wive  it  wealthily  in  Padua; 

If  wealthily,  then  happily  in  Padua. 

Gni.  Nay,  look  you,  sir,  he  tells  you  flatly  what 
his  mind  is:  why,  give  him  gold  enough  and 
marry  him  to  a  puppet  or  an  aglet-baby;  or  an 
old  trot  with  ne’er  a  tooth  in  her  head,  though  she 
have  as  many  diseases  as  two  and  fifty  horses: 
why,  nothing  comes  amiss,  so  money  comes 
withal. 

Hot.  Petruchio,  since  we  are  stepp’d  thus  far  in, 
I  will  continue  that  I  broach’d  in  jest. 

I  can,  Petruchio,  help  thee  to  a  wife 

With  wealth  enough  and  young  and  beauteous, 

Brought  up  as  best  becomes  a  gentlewoman: 

Her  only  fault,  and  that  is  faults  enough. 

Is  that  she  is  intolerable  curst 

And  shrewd  and  froward,  so  beyond  all  measure 

That,  were  my  state  far  worser  than  it  is, 

I  would  not  wed  her  for  a  mine  of  gold. 

?et.  Hortensio,  peace!  thou  know’st  not  gold’s 
effect: 

Tell  me  her  father’s  name  and  ’tis  enough: 

For  I  will  board  her,  though  she  chide  as  loud 
As  thunder  when  the  clouds  in  autumn  crack. 

Hor.  Her  father  is  Baptista  Minola, 

An  affable  and  courteous  gentleman: 

Her  name  is  Katharina  Minola, 

Renown’d  in  Padua  for  her  scolding  tongue.  100 
Pet.  I  know  her  father,  though  I  know  not  her; 
And  he  knew  my  deceased  father  well, 

I  will  not  sleep,  Hortensio,  till  I  see  her; 

And  therefore  let  me  be  thus  bold  with  you 
To  give  you  over  at  this  first  encounter. 

Unless  you  will  accompany  me  thither. 

Gru.  I  pray  you,  sir,  let  him  go  while  the  hu¬ 
mour  lasts.  O’  my  word,  an  she  knew  him  as 
well  as  I  do,  she  would  think  scolding  would  do 
little  good  upon  him:  she  may  perhaps  call  him 
half  a  score  knaves  or  so:  why,  that’s  nothing; 
an  he  begin  once,  he’ll  rail  in  his  rope-tricks.  I’ll 
tell  you  what,  sir,  an  she  stand  him  but  a  little, 
he  will  throw  a  figure  in  her  face  and  so  disfigure 
her  with  it  that  she  shall  have  no  more  eyes  to 
see  withal  than  a  cat.  You  know  him  not,  sir. 

Hor.  Tarry,  Petruchio,  I  must  go  with  thee, 

For  in  Baptista’s  keep  my  treasure  is: 

He  hath  the  jewel  of  my  life  in  hold. 

His  youngest  daughter,  beautiful  Bianca,  120 
And  her  withholds  from  me  and  other  more. 
Suitors  to  her  and  rivals  in  my  love. 


Supposing  it  a  thing  impossible. 

For  those  defects  I  have  before  rehearsed. 

That  ever  Katharina  will  be  woo’d; 

Therefore  this  order  hath  Baptista  ta’en. 

That  none  shall  have  access  unto  Bianca 
Till  Katharine  the  curst  have  got  a  husband. 

Gru.  Katharine  the  curst! 

A  title  for  a  maid  of  all  titles  the  worst.  1^0 

Hor.  Now  shall  my  friend  Petruchio  do  me 
grace. 

And  offer  me  disguised  in  sober  robes 
To  old  Baptista  as  a  schoolmaster 
Well  seen  in  music,  to  instruct  Bianca; 

That  so  I  may,  by  this  device,  at  least 
Have  leave  and  leisure  to  make  love  to  her 
And  unsuspected  court  her  by  herself. 

Gru.  Here’s  no  knavery!  See,  to  beguile  the  old 
folks,  how  the  young  folks  lay  their  heads  to¬ 
gether!  1^0 

Enter  gremio,  and  lucentio  disguised. 

Master,  master,  look  about  you:  who  goes  there, 
ha? 

Hor.  Peace,  Grumio!  it  is  the  rival  of  my  love. 
Petruchio,  stand  by  a  while. 

Gru.  A  proper  stripling  and  an  amorous! 

Gre.  O,  very  well;  I  have  perused  the  note. 

Hark  you,  sir;  I’ll  have  them  very  fairly  bound: 
All  books  of  love,  see  that  at  any  hand; 

And  see  you  read  no  other  lectures  to  her: 

You  understand  me:  over  and  beside 
Signior  Baptista’s  liberality,  /50 

I’ll  mend  it  with  a  largess.  Take  your  paper  too. 
And  let  me  have  them  very  well  perfumed: 

For  she  is  sweeter  than  perfume  itself 
To  whom  they  go  to.  What  will  you  read  to  her? 

Luc.  Whate’er  I  read  to  her.  I’ll  plead  for  you 
As  for  my  patron,  stand  you  so  assured. 

As  firmly  as  yourself  were  still  in  place: 

Yea,  and  perhaps  with  more  successful  words 
Than  you,  unless  you  were  a  scholar,  sir. 

Gre.  O  this  learning,  what  a  thing  it  is!  160 
Gru.  O  this  woodcock,  what  an  ass  it  is! 

Pet.  Peace,  sirrah! 

Hor.  Grumio,  mum!  God  save  you,  Signior 
Gremio. 

Gre.  And  you  are  well  met,  Signior  Hortensio. 
Trow  you  whither  I  am  going?  To  Baptista 
Minola. 

I  promised  to  inquire  carefully 

About  a  schoolmaster  for  the  fair  Bianca: 

And  by  good  fortune  I  have  lighted  well 
On  this  young  man,  for  learning  and  behaviour 
Fit  for  her  turn,  well  read  in  poetry  ijo 

And  other  books,  good  ones,  I  warrant  ye. 

Hor.  ’Tis  well;  and  I  have  met  a  gentleman 


SCENE  11  THE  TAMING 

Hath  promised  me  to  help  me  to  another, 

A  fine  musician  to  instruct  our  mistress; 

So  shall  I  no  whit  be  behind  in  duty 
To  fair  Bianca,  so  beloved  of  me. 

Gre.  Beloved  of  me;  and  that  my  deeds  shall 
prove. 

Gni.  And  that  his  bags  shall  prove. 

Hor.  Gremio,  ’tis  now  no  time  to  vent  our  love: 
Listen  to  me,  and  if  you  speak  me  fair,  iSo 

ril  tell  you  news  indifferent  good  for  either. 

Here  is  a  gentleman  whom  by  chance  I  met. 

Upon  agreement  from  us  to  his  liking. 

Will  undertake  to  woo  curst  Katharine, 

Yea,  and  to  marry  her,  if  her  dowry  please. 

Gre.  So  said,  so  done,  is  well. 

Hortensio,  have  you  told  him  all  her  faults? 

Pet.  I  know  she  is  an  irksome  brawling  scold: 
If  that  be  all,  masters,  I  hear  no  harm. 

Gre.  No.  say’st  me  so,  friend?  What  country¬ 
man?  1^0 

Pet.  Born  in  Verona,  old  Antonio’s  son: 

My  father  dead,  my  fortune  lives  for  me; 

And  I  do  hope  good  days  and  long  to  see. 

Gre.  O  sir,  such  a  life,  with  such  a  wife,  were 
strange! 

But  if  you  have  a  stomach,  to’t  i’  God’s  name: 

You  shall  have  me  assisting  you  in  all. 

But  will  you  woo  this  wild-cat? 

Pet.  Will  I  live? 

Gru.  Will  he  woo  her?  ay,  or  I’ll  hang  her. 

Pet.  Why  came  I  hither  but  to  that  intent? 

Think  you  a  little  din  can  daunt  mine  ears?  200 
Have  I  not  in  my  time  heard  lions  roar? 

Have  I  not  heard  the  sea  puff’d  up  with  winds 
Rage  like  an  angry  boar  chafed  with  sweat? 

Have  I  not  heard  great  ordnance  in  the  field. 

And  heaven’s  artillery  thunder  in  the  skies? 

Have  I  not  in  a  pitched  battle  heard 
Loud  ’larums,  neighing  steeds,  and  trumpets’ 
clang? 

And  do  you  tell  me  of  a  woman’s  tongue. 

That  gives  not  half  so  great  a  blow  to  hear 
As  will  a  chestnut  in  a  farmer’s  fire?  210 

Tush,  tush!  fear  boys  with  bugs. 

Gru.  For  he  fears  none. 

Gre.  Hortensio,  hark: 

This  gentleman  is  happily  arrived. 

My  mind  presumes,  for  his  own  good  and  ours. 
Hor.  I  promised  we  would  be  contributors 
x\nd  bear  his  charge  of  wooing,  whatsoe’er. 

Gre.  And  so  we  will,  provided  that  he  win  her. 
Gru.  I  would  I  were  as  sure  of  a  good  dinner. 

Enter  tranio  brave ^  and  biondello. 

Tra.  Gentlemen,  God  save  you.  If  I  may"  be 
bold. 


OF  THE  SHREW  207 

Tell  me,  I  beseech  you,  which  is  the  readiest  way 
To  the  house  of  Signior  Baptista  Minola?  221 
Bion.  He  that  has  the  two  fair  daughters:  is’t  he 
you  mean? 

Tra.  Even  he,  Biondello. 

Gre.  Hark  you,  sir;  you  mean  not  her  to — 

Tra.  Perhaps,  him  and  her,  sir:  what  have  you 
to  do? 

Pet.  Nor  her  that  chides,  sir,  at  any  hand,  I  pray. 
Tra.  I  love  no  chiders,  sir.  Biondello,  let’s  away. 
Luc.  Well  begun,  Tranio. 

Hor.  Sir,  a  word  ere  you  go; 

Are  you  a  suitor  to  the  maid  you  talk  of,  yea  or 
no? 

Tra.  And  if  I  be,  sir,  is  it  any  offence?  25/ 
Gre.  No;  if  without  more  words  you  will  get 
you  hence. 

Tra.  Why,  sir,  I  pray,  are  not  the  streets  as  free 
For  me  as  for  you? 

Gre.  But  so  is  not  she. 

Tra.  For  what  reason,  I  beseech  you? 

Gre.  For  this  reason,  if  you’ll  know. 

That  she’s  the  choice  love  of  Signior  Gremio. 
Hor.  That  she’s  the  chosen  of  Signior  Horten¬ 
sio. 

Tra.  Softly,  my  masters!  if  you  be  gentlemen. 

Do  me  this  right;  hear  me  with  patience, 

Baptista  is  a  noble  gentleman,  2^0 

To  whom  my  father  is  not  all  unknown; 

And  were  his  daughter  fairer  than  she  is. 

She  may  more  suitors  have  and  me  for  one. 

Fair  Leda’s  daughter  had  a  thousand  wooers; 
Then  well  one  more  may  fair  Bianca  have: 

And  so  she  shall;  Lucentio  shall  make  one. 
Though  Paris  came  in  hope  to  speed  alone. 

Gre.  What!  this  gentleman  will  out-talk  us  all. 
Luc.  Sir,  give  him  head;  I  know  he’ll  prove  a 
jade.  245? 

Pet.  Hortensio,  to  what  end  are  all  these  words? 
Hor.  Sir,  let  me  be  so  bold  as  ask  you. 

Did  you  yet  ever  see  Baptista’ s  daughter? 

Tra.  No,  sir;  but  hear  I  do  that  he  hath  two. 

The  one  as  famous  for  a  scolding  tongue 
As  is  the  other  for  beauteous  modesty. 

Pet.  Sir,  sir,  the  first’s  for  me;  let  her  go  by. 

Gre.  Yea,  leave  that  labour  to  great  Hercules; 
And  let  it  be  more  than  Alcides’  twelve. 

Pet.  Sir,  understand  you  this  of  me  in  sooth: 

The  youngest  daughter  whom  you  hearken  for 
Her  father  keeps  from  all  access  of  suitors,  261 
And  will  not  promise  her  to  any  man 
Until  the  elder  sister  first  be  wed: 

The  younger  then  is  free  and  not  before. 

Tra.  If  it  be  so,  sir.  that  you  are  the  rnan 
Must  stead  us  all  and  me  amongst  the  rest. 

And  if  you  break  the  ice  and  do  this  feat. 


2o8 


ACT  11 


THE  TAMING  OF  FHE  SHREW 


Achieve  the  elder,  set  the  younger  free 
For  our  access,  whose  hap  shall  be  to  have  her 
Will  not  so  graceless  be  to  be  ingrate.  270 

Hor.  Sir,  you  say  well  and  well  you  do  con¬ 
ceive; 

And  since  you  do  profess  to  be  a  suitor. 

You  must,  as  we  do,  gratify  this  gentleman. 

To  whom  we  all  rest  generally  beholding. 

Tra.  Sir,  I  shall  not  be  slack:  in  sign  whereof. 
Please  ye  we  may  contrive  this  afternoon. 

And  quaff  carouses  to  our  mistress’  health. 

And  do  as  adversaries  do  in  law. 

Strive  mightily,  but  eat  and  drink  as  friends. 

Gni.  Bion.  O  excellent  motion!  Fellows,  let’s 
begone.  280 

Hor.  The  motion’s  good  indeed  and  be  it  so, 
Petruchio,  I  shall  be  your  ben  venuto.  [Exeunt, 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  Padua:  a  room  in  Baptista's  house 
Enter  katharina  and  bianca. 

Bian.  Good  sister,  wrong  me  not,  nor  wrong 
yourself. 

To  make  a  bondmaid  and  a  slave  of  me; 

That  I  disdain:  but  for  these  other  gawds. 

Unbind  my  hands.  I’ll  pull  them  off  myself, 

Yea,  all  my  raiment,  to  my  petticoat; 

Or  what  you  will  command  me  will  I  do. 

So  well  I  know  my  duty  to  my  elders. 

Kath.  Of  all  thy  suitors,  here  I  charge  thee,  tell 
Whom  thou  lovest  best:  see  thou  dissemble  not. 

Bian.  Believe  me,  sister,  of  all  the  men  alive 
I  never  yet  beheld  that  special  face  ii 

Which  I  could  fancy  more  than  any  other. 

Kath.  Minion,  thou  best.  Is’t  not  Hortensio? 
Bian.  If  you  affect  him,  sister,  here  I  swear 
I’ll  plead  for  you  myself,  but  you  shall  have  him. 
Kath.  O  then,  belike,  you  fancy  riches  more: 
You  will  have  Gremio  to  keep  you  fair. 

Bian.  Is  it  for  him  you  do  envy  me  so? 

Nay  then  you  jest,  and  now  I  well  perceive 
You  have  but  jested  with  me  all  this  while:  20 

I  prithee,  sister  Kate,  untie  my  hands. 

Kath.  If  that  be  jest,  then  all  the  rest  was  so. 
Strikes  her. 

Enter  baptista. 

B^rp.Why,  how  now,  dame!  whence  grows  this 
insolence? 

Bianca,  stand  aside.  Poor  girl!  she  weeps. 

Go  ply  thy  needle;  meddle  not  with  her. 

For  shame,  thou  hilding  of  a  devilish  spirit. 

Why  dost  thou  wrong  her  that  did  ne’er  wrong 
thee? 

When  did  she  cross  thee  with  a  bitter  word? 


Kath.  Her  silence  flouts  me,  and  I’ll  be  revenged. 

,  [Flies  after  bianca. 

R^ip.What,  in  my  sight?  Bianca,  get  thee  in. 

[Exit  bianca.  50 
Kath.  What,  will  you  not  suffer  me?  Nay,  now 
I  see 

She  is  your  treasure,  she  must  have  a  husband; 

I  must  dance  barefoot  on  her  wedding  day 
And  for  your  love  to  her  lead  apes  in  hell. 

Talk  not  to  me:  I  will  go  sit  and  weep 

Till  I  can  find  occasion  of  revenge.  [Exit. 

Bap.  Was  ever  gentleman  thus  grieved  as  I? 

But  who  comes  here? 

Enter  gremio,  lucentio  in  the  habit  of  a  mean 
man;  petruchio,  with  hortensio  as  a  musician; 
and  TRANio,  with  biondello  bearing  a  lute  and 
books. 

Gre.  Good  morrow,  neighbour  Baptista. 

Bap.  Good  morrow,  neighbour  Gremio.  God 
save  you,  gentlemen!  4/ 

Pet.  And  you,  good  sir!  Pray,  have  you  not  a 
daughter 

Call’d  Katharina,  fair  and  virtuous? 

Bap.  I  have  a  daughter,  sir,  called  Katharina. 
Gre.  You  are  too  blunt:  go  to  it  orderly. 

Pet.  You  wrong  me,  Signior  Gremio:  give  me 
leave. 

I  am  a  gentleman  of  Verona,  sir. 

That,  hearing  of  her  beauty  and  her  wit. 

Her  affability  and  bashful  modesty. 

Her  wondrous  qualities  and  mild  behaviour,  jo 
Am  bold  to  show  myself  a  forward  guest 
Within  your  house,  to  make  mine  eye  the  witness 
Of  that  report  which  I  so  oft  have  heard. 

And,  for  an  entrance  to  my  entertainment, 

I  do  present  you  with  a  man  of  mine. 

Presenting  hortensio. 

Cunning  in  music  and  the  mathematics. 

To  instruct  her  fully  in  those  sciences. 

Whereof  I  know  she  is  not  ignorant: 

Accept  of  him,  or  else  you  do  me  wrong: 

His  name  is  Licio,  born  in  Mantua.  60 

Bap.  You’re  welcome,  sir;  and  he,  for  your 
good  sake. 

But  for  my  daughter  Katharine,  this  I  know. 

She  is  not  for  your  turn,  the  more  my  grief. 

Pet.  I  see  you  do  not  mean  to  part  with  her, 

Or  else  you  like  not  of  my  company. 

Bap.  Mistake  me  not;  I  speak  but  as  I  find. 
Whence  are  you,  sir?  what  may  I  call  your  name? 
Pet.  Petruchio  is  my  name;  Antonio’s  son, 

A  man  well  known  throughout  all  Italy. 

Bap.  I  know  him  well:  you  are  welcome  for  his 
sake.  70 

Gre.  Saving  your  tale,  Petruchio,  I  pray. 


SCENE 


209 


THE  TAMING 

Let  us,  that  are  poor  petitioners,  speak  too: 
Baccare!  you  are  marvellous  forward. 

Pet.  O,  pardon  me,  Signior  Gremio;  I  would 
fain  be  doing. 

Gre.  I  doubt  it  not,  sir;  but  you  will  curse  your 
wooing. 

Neighbour,  this  is  a  gift  very  grateful,  I  am  sure 
of  it.  To  express  the  like  kindness,  myself,  that 
have  been  more  kindly  beholding  to  you  than 
any,  freely  give  unto  you  this  young  scholar  [pre¬ 
senting  LucENTio],  that  hath  been  long  studying 
at  Rheims;  as  cunning  in  Greek,  Latin,  and 
other  languages,  as  the  other  in  music  and  ma¬ 
thematics:  his  name  is  Cambio;  pray,  accept  his 
service. 

Bap.  A  thousand  thanks,  Signior  Gremio. Wel¬ 
come,  Cambio.  [To  tranio]  But,  gentle  sir,  me- 
thinks  you  walk  like  a  stranger:  may  I  be  so 
bold  to  know  the  cause  of  your  coming? 

Tra.  Pardon  me,  sir,  the  boldness  is  mine  own, 
That,  being  a  stranger  in  this  city  here,  yo 

Do  make  myself  a  suitor  to  your  daughter, 

Unto  Bianca,  fair  and  virtuous. 

Nor  is  your  firm  resolve  unknown  to  me. 

In  the  preferment  of  the  eldest  sister. 

This  liberty  is  all  that  I  request. 

That,  upon  knowledge  of  my  parentage, 

I  may  have  welcome  ’mongst  the  rest  that  woo 
And  free  access  and  favour  as  the  rest: 

And,  toward  the  education  of  your  daughters, 

I  here  bestow  a  simple  instrument,  100 

And  this  small  packet  of  Greek  and  Latin  books: 
If  you  accept  them,  then  their  worth  is  great. 

Bap.  Lucentio  is  your  name;  of  whence,  I  pray? 
Tra.  Of  Pisa,  sir;  son  to  Vincentio. 

Bap.  A  mighty  man  of  Pisa;  by  report 
I  know  him  well:  you  are  very  welcome,  sir. 
Take  you  the  lute,  and  you  the  set  of  books; 

You  shall  go  see  your  pupils  presently. 

Holla,  within! 

Enter  a  Servant. 

Sirrah,  lead  these  gentlemen 
To  my  daughters;  and  tell  them  both,  no 

These  are  their  tutors:  bid  them  use  them  well. 
[Exit  Servant,  'with  lucentio  and  hortensio, 

BIONDELLO  following. 
We  will  go  walk  a  little  in  the  orchard. 

And  then  to  dinner.  You  are  passing  welcome. 
And  so  I  pray  you  all  to  think  yourselves. 

Pet.  Signior  Baptista,  my  business  asketh  haste. 
And  every  day  I  cannot  come  to  woo. 

You  knew  my  father  well,  and  in  him  me. 

Left  solely  heir  to  all  his  lands  and  goods. 

Which  I  have  better’d  rather  than  decreased:  ‘ 
Then  tell  me,  if  I  get  your  daughter’s  love,  120 


OF  THE  SHREW 

What  dowry  shall  I  have  with  her  to  wife? 

Bap.  After  my  death  the  one  half  of  my  lands, 
And  in  possession  twenty  thousand  crowns. 

Pet.  And,  for  that  dowry.  I’ll  assure  her  of 
Her  widowhood,  be  it  that  she  survive  me. 

In  all  my  lands  and  leases  whatsoever: 

Let  specialties  be  therefore  drawn  between  us, 
That  covenants  may  be  kept  on  either  hand. 

Bap.  Ay,  when  the  special  thing  is  well  ob¬ 
tain’d. 

That  is,  her  love;  for  that  is  all  in  all.  1^0 

Pet.  Why,  that  is  nothing;  for  I  tell  you,  father, 

I  am  as  peremptory  as  she  proud-minded; 

And  where  two  raging  fires  meet  together 
They  do  consume  the  thing  that  feeds  their  fury: 
Though  little  fire  grows  great  with  little  wind. 
Yet  extreme  gusts  will  blow  out  fire  and  all: 

So  I  to  her,  and  so  she  yields  to  me; 

For  I  am  rough  and  woo  not  like  a  babe. 

Bap.  Well  mayst  thou  woo,  and  happy  be  thy 
speed ! 

But  be  thou  arm’d  for  some  unhappy  words.  /40 
Pet.  Ay,  to  the  proof;  as  mountains  are  for 
winds. 

That  shake  not,  though  they  blow  perpetually. 
Re-enter  hortensio,  with  his  head  broke. 

Bap.  How  now,  my  friend!  why  dost  thou  look 
so  pale? 

Hor.  For  fear,  I  promise  you,  if  I  look  pale. 

Bap.  What,  will  my  daughter  prove  a  good  mu¬ 
sician? 

Hor.  I  think  she’ll  sooner  prove  a  soldier: 

Iron  may  hold  with  her,  but  never  lutes. 

Bap. Why,  then  thou  canst  not  break  her  to  the 
lute? 

Hor.  Why,  no;  for  she  hath  broke  the  lute  to 
me. 

I  did  but  tell  her  she  mistook  her  frets,  /50 
And  bow’d  her  hand  to  teach  her  fingering; 
When,  with  a  most  impatient  devilish  spirit, 
“Frets,  call  you  these?”  quoth  she;  “I’ll  fume 
with  them”: 

And,  with  that  word,  she  struck  me  on  the  head. 
And  through  the  instrument  my  pate  made  way; 
And  there  I  stood  amazed  for  a  while. 

As  on  a  pillory,  looking  through  the  lute: 

While  she  did  call  me  rascal  fiddler 
And  twangling  Jack;  with  twenty  such  vile 
terms. 

As  had  she  studied  to  misuse  me  so.  i6o 

Pet.  Now,  by  the  world,  it  is  a  lusty  wench; 

I  love  her  ten  times  more  than  e’er  I  did: 

O,  how  I  long  to  have  some  chat  with  her! 

Bap.  Well,  go  with  me  and  be  not  so  discom¬ 
fited: 

Proceed  in  practice  with  my  younger  daughter; 


2  10 


ACT  n 


THE  TAMING 

She’s  apt  to  learn  and  thankful  for  good  turns. 
Signior  Petruchio,  will  you  go  with  us, 

Or  shall  I  send  my  daughter  Kate  to  you? 

Pet.  I  pray  you  do.  [Exeunt  all  but  petruchio.] 
I  will  attend  her  here, 

And  woo  her  with  some  spirit  when  she 
comes. 

Say  that  she  rail;  why  then  I’ll  tell  plain  iji 
She  sings  as  sweetly  as  a  nightingale: 

Say  that  she  frown;  I’ll  say  she  looks  as  clear 
As  morning  roses  newly  wash’d  with  dew: 

Say  she  be  mute  and  will  not  speak  a  word: 

Then  I’ll  commend  her  volubility. 

And  say  she  uttereth  piercing  eloquence: 

If  she  do  bid  me  pack.  I’ll  give  her  thanks. 

As  though  she  bid  me  stay  by  her  a  week: 

If  she  deny  to  wed.  I’ll  crave  the  day  iSo 

When  I  shall  ask  the  banns  and  when  be  married. 
But  here  she  comes;  and  now,  Petruchio,  speak. 

Enter  katharina. 

Good  morrow,  Kate;  for  that’s  your  name,  I  hear. 
Kath}^^\\  have  you  heard,  but  something  hard 
of  hearing: 

They  call  me  Katharine  that  do  talk  of  me. 

Pet.  You  lie,  in  faith;  for  you  are  call’d  plain 
Kate, 

And  bonny  Kate  and  sometimes  Kate  the  curst; 
But  Kate,  the  prettiest  Kate  in  Christendom, 

Kate  of  Kate  Hall,  my  super-dainty  Kate, 

For  dainties  are  all  Kates,  and  therefore,  Kate, 
Take  this  of  me,  Kate  of  my  consolation; 

Hearing  thy  mildness  praised  in  every  town. 

Thy  virtues  spoke  of,  and  thy  beauty  sounded. 
Yet  not  so  deeply  as  to  thee  belongs. 

Myself  am  moved  to  woo  thee  for  my  wife. 

Kath.  Moved!  in  good  time:  let  him  that  moved 
you  hither 

Remove  you  hence:  I  knew  you  at  the  first 
You  were  a  moveable. 

Pet.  Why,  what’s  a  moveable? 

Kath.  A  join’d-stool. 

Pet.  Thou  hast  hit  it :  come,  sit  on  me. 
Kath.  Asses  are  made  to  bear,  and  so  are  you. 
Pet.  Women  are  made  to  bear,  and  so  are  you. 
Kath.  No  such  jade  as  you,  if  me  you  mean. 

Pet.  Alas!  good  Kate,  I  will  not  burden  thee; 

For,  knowing  thee  to  be  but  young  and  light — 
Kath.  Too  light  for  such  a  swain  as  you  to 
catch; 

And  yet  as  heavy  as  my  weight  should  be. 

Pet.  Should  be!  should  — buzz! 

Kath.  Well  ta’en,  and  like  a  buzzard. 

Pet.  O  slow-wing’d  turtle!  shall  a  buzzard  take 
thee? 

Kath.  Ay,  for  a  turtle,  as  he  takes  a  buzzard. 


OF  THE  SHREW 

Pet.  Come,  come,  you  wasp;  i’  faith,  you  are 
too  angry.  ^  210 

Kath.  If  I  be  waspish,  best  beware  my  sting. 

Pet.  My  remedy  is  then,  to  pluck  it  out. 

Kath.  Ay,  if  the  fool  could  find  it  where  it  lies. 
Pet.  Who  knows  not  where  a  wasp  does  wear 
his  sting?  In  his  tail. 

Kath.  In  his  tongue. 

Pet.  Whose  tongue? 

Kath.  Yours,  if  you  talk  of  tails:  and  so  fare¬ 
well. 

Pet.  What,  with  my  tongue  in  your  tail?  nay, 
come  again. 

Good  Kate;  I  am  a  gentleman. 

Kath.  That  I’ll  try.  [She  strikes  him.]  220 

Pet.  I  swear  I’ll  cuff  you,  if  you  strike  again. 
Kath.  So  may  you  lose  your  arms; 

If  you  strike  me,  you  are  no  gentleman; 

And  if  no  gentleman,  why  then  no  arms. 

Pet.  A  herald,  Kate?  O,  put  me  in  thy  books! 
Kath.  What  is  your  crest?  a  coxcomb? 

Pet.  A  combless  cock,  so  Kate  will  be  my  hen. 
Kath.  No  cock  of  mine;  you  crow  too  like  a 
craven. 

Pet.  Nay,  come,  Kate,  come;  you  must  not 
look  so  sour. 

Kath.  It  is  my  fashion,  when  I  see  a  crab.  2^0 
Pet.  Why,  here’s  no  crab;  and  therefore  look 
not  sour. 

Kath.  There  is,  there  is. 

Pet.  Then  show  it  me. 

Kath.  Had  I  a  glass,  I  would. 

Pet.  What,  you  mean  my  face? 

Kath.  Well  aim’d  of  such  a  young  one. 

Pet.  Now,  by  Saint  George,  I  am  too  young  for 
you. 

Kath.  Yet  you  are  wither’d. 

Pet.  ’Tis  with  cares.  240 

Kath.  I  care  not. 

Pet.  Nay,  hear  you,  Kate:  in  sooth  you  scape 
not  so. 

Kath.  I  chafe  you,  if  I  tarry:  let  me  go. 

Pet.  No,  not  a  whit:  I  find  you  passing  gentle. 
’Twas  told  me  you  were  rough  and  coy  and  sul¬ 
len. 

And  not  I  find  report  a  very  liar; 

For  thou  are  pleasant,  gamesome,  passing  cour¬ 
teous. 

But  slow  in  speech,  yet  sweet  as  spring-time 
flowers; 

Thou  canst  not  frown,  thou  canst  not  look  askance, 
Nor  bite  the  lip,  as  angry  wenches  will,  2jo 
Nor  hast  thou  pleasure  to  be  cross  in  talk. 

But  thou  with  mildness  entertain’st  thy  wooers. 
With  gentle  conference,  soft  and  affable. 

Why  does  the  world  report  that  Kate  doth  limp? 


SCENE  I 


2  I  I 


THE  TAMING 

O  slanderous  world!  Kate  like  the  hazel-twig 
Is  straight  and  slender  and  as  brown  in  hue 
As  hazel  nuts  and  sweeter  than  the  kernels. 

O,  let  me  see  thee  walk:  thou  dost  not  halt. 

Kath,  Go,  fool,  and  whom  thou  keep’st  com¬ 
mand. 

Fet.  Did  ever  Dian  so  become  a  grove  260 
As  Kate  this  chamber  with  her  princely  gait? 

O,  be  thou  Dian,  and  let  her  be  Kate; 

And  then  let  Kate  be  chaste  and  Dian  sportful! 
Kath.  Where  did  you  study  all  this  goodly 
speech? 

Fet.  It  is  extempore,  from  my  mother-wit. 

Kath.  A  witty  mother!  witless  else  her  son. 

Fet.  Am  I  not  wise? 

Kath.  Yes;  keep  you  warm. 

Fet.  Marry,  so  I  mean,  sweet  Katharine,  in  thy 
bed: 

And  therefore,  setting  all  this  chat  aside,  270 
Thus  in  plain  terms:  your  father  hath  consented 
That  you  shall  be  my  wife;  your  dowry  ’greed 
on; 

And,  will  you,  nill  you,  I  will  marry  you. 

Now,  Kate,  I  am  a  husband  for  your  turn; 

For,  by  this  light,  whereby  I  see  thy  beauty. 

Thy  beauty,  that  doth  make  me  like  thee  well, 
Thou  must  be  married  to  no  man  but  me; 

For  I  am  he  am  born  to  tame  you  Kate, 

And  bring  you  from  a  wild  Kate  to  a  Kate 
Conformable  as  other  household  Kates.  2S0 
Here  comes  your  father:  never  make  denial; 

I  must  and  will  have  Katharine  to  my  wife. 

Re-enter  baptista,  gremio,  and  tranio. 

Bap.  Now,  Signior  Petruchio,  how  speed  you 
with  my  daughter? 

Fet.  How  but  well,  sir?  how  but  well? 

It  were  impossible  I  should  speed  amiss. 

Bap.  Why,  how  now,  daughter  Katharine!  in 
your  dumps? 

Kath.  Call  you  me  daughter?  now,  I  promise 
you 

You  have  show’d  a  tender  fatherly  regard. 

To  wish  me  wed  to  one  half  lunatic; 

A  mad-cap  ruffian  and  a  swearing  Jack,  2  po 

That  thinks  with  oaths  to  face  the  matter  out. 

Fet.  Father,  ’tis  thus:  yourself  and  all  the  world. 
That  talk’d  of  her,  have  talk’d  amiss  of  her: 

If  she  be  curst,  it  is  for  policy. 

For  she’s  not  froward,  but  modest  as  the  dove; 
She  is  not  hot,  but  temperate  as  the  morn; 

For  patience  she  will  prove  a  second  Grissel, 

And  Roman  Lucrece  for  her  chastity:  h 

And  to  conclude,  we  have  ’greed  so  well  together. 
That  upon  Sunday  is  the  wedding-day.  500 
Kath.  i’ll  see  thee  hang’d  on  Sunday  first. 


OF  THE  SHREW 

Gre.  Hark,  Petruchio;  she  says  she’ll  see  thee 
hang’d  first; 

Tra.  Is  this  your  speeding?  nay,  then,  good 
night  our  part! 

Fet.  Be  patient,  gentlemen;  I  choose  her  for 
myself: 

If  she  and  I  be  pleased,  what’s  that  to  you? 

’Tis  bargain’d  twixt  us  twain,  being  alone. 

That  she  shall  still  be  curst  in  company. 

I  tell  you,  ’tis  incredible  to  believe 

How  much  she  loves  me:  O,  the  kindest  Kate! 

She  hung  about  my  neck;  and  kiss  on  kiss  5/0 
She  vied  so  fast,  protesting  oath  on  oath. 

That  in  a  twink  she  won  me  to  her  love. 

O,  you  are  novices!  ’tis  a  world  to  see. 

How  tame,  when  men  and  women  are  alone, 

A  meacock  wretch  can  make  the  curstest  shrew. 
Give  me  thy  hand,  Kate:  I  will  unto  Venice, 

To  buy  apparel  ’gainst  the  wedding-day. 

Provide  the  feast,  father,  and  bid  the  guests; 

I  will  be  sure  my  Katharine  shall  be  fine. 

Bap.  I  know  not  what  to  say:  but  give  me  your 
hands;  ^20 

God  send  you  joy,  Petruchio!  ’tis  a  match. 

Gre.  Tra.  Amen,  say  we:  we  will  be  witnesses. 
Fet.  Father,  and  wife,  and  gentlemen,  adieu: 

I  will  to  Venice;  Sunday  comes  apace: 

We  will  have  rings  and  things  and  fiste  array; 

And  kiss  me,  Kate,  we  will  be  married  o’  Sunday. 

[Exeunt  petruchio  and  katharina  severally. 
Gre.  Was  ever  match  clapp’d  up  so  suddenly? 
Bap.  Faith,  gentlemen,  now  I  play  a  merchant’s 
part. 

And  venture  madly  on  a  desperate  mart. 

Tra.  ’Twas  a  commodity  lay  fretting  by 
you: 

’Twill  bring  you  gain,  or  perish  on  the  seas.  55/ 
Bap.  The  gain  I  seek  is,  quiet  in  the  match. 

Gre.  No  doubt  but  he  hath  got  a  quiet  catch. 

But  now,  Baptista,  to  your  younger  daughter: 
Now  is  the  day  we  long  have  looked  for: 

I  am  your  neighbour,  and  was  suitor  first. 

Tra.  And  I  am  one  that  love  Bianca  more 
Than  words  can  witness,  or  your  thoughts  can 
guess. 

Gre.  Youngling,  thou  canst  not  love  so  dear  as  I. 
Tra.  Greybeard,  thy  love  doth  freeze. 

Gre.  But  thine  doth  fry.  ^40 

Skipper,  stand  back:  ’tis  age  that  nourishcth. 

Tra.  But  youth  in  ladies’  eyes  that  flourisheth. 
Bap.  Content  you,  gentlemen:  I  will  compound 
this  strife: 

’Tis  deeds  must  win  the  prize;  and  he  of  both 
That  can  assure  my  daughter  greatest  dower 
Shall  have  my  Bianca’s  love. 

Say,  Signior  Gremio,  what  can  you  assure  her? 


2  I  2 


ACT  III 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


Gre.  First,  as  you  know,  my  house  within  the 
city 

Is  richly  furnished  with  plate  and  gold; 

Basins  and  ewers  to  lave  her  dainty  hands;  550 
My  hangings  all  of  Tyrian  tapestry; 

In  ivory  coffers  I  have  stuff’d  my  crowns; 

In  cypress  chests  my  arras  counterpoints, 

Costly  apparel,  tents,  and  canopies. 

Fine  linen,  Turkey  cushions  boss’d  with  pearl. 
Valance  of  Venice  gold  in  needlework. 

Pewter  and  brass  and  all  things  that  belong 
To  house  or  housekeeping:  then,  at  my  farm 
I  have  a  hundred  milch-kine  to  the  pail, 

Sixscore  fat  oxen  standing  in  my  stalls,  360 

And  all  things  answerable  to  this  portion. 

Myself  am  struck  in  years,  I  must  confess; 

And  if  I  die  to-morrow,  this  is  hers. 

If  whilst  I  live  she  will  be  only  mine. 

Tra.  That  “only”  came  well  in.  Sir,  list  to  me: 

I  am  my  father’s  heir  and  only  son: 

If  I  may  have  your  daughter  to  my  wife. 

I’ll  leave  her  houses  three  or  four  as  good. 

Within  rich  Pisa  walls,  as  any  one 

Old  Signior  Gremio  has  in  Padua;  570 

Besides  two  thousand  ducats  by  the  year 

Of  fruitful  land,  all  which  shall  be  her  jointure. 

What,  have  1  pinch’d  you,  Signior  Gremio? 

Gre,  Two  thousand  ducats  by  the  year  of  land! 
My  land  amounts  not  to  so  much  in  all: 

That  she  shall  have;  besides  an  argosy 
That  now  is  lying  in  Marseilles’  road. 

What,  have  I  choked  you  with  an  argosy? 

Tra,  Gremio,  ’tis  known  my  father  hath  no  less 
Than  three  great  argosies;  besides  two  galliases. 
And  twelve  tight  galleys:  these  I  will  assure  her. 
And  twice  as  much,  whate’er  thou  offer’st  next. 

Gre,  Nay,  I  have  offer’d  all,  I  have  no  more; 

And  she  can  have  no  more  than  all  I  have: 

If  you  like  me,  she  shall  have  me  and  mine. 

Tra  Why,  then  the  maid  is  mine  from  all  the 
world. 

By  your  firm  promise:  Gremio  is  out-vied. 

Bap,  I  must  confess  your  offer  is  the  best; 

And,  let  your  father  make  her  the  assurance. 

She  is  your  own;  else,  you  must  pardon  me, 

If  you  should  die  before  him,  where’s  her  dower? 
Tra,  That’s  but  a  cavil:  he  is  old,  I  young. 

Gre.  And  may  not  young  men  die,  as  well  as 
old? 

Bap.  Well,  gentlemen, 

I  am  thus  resolved :  on  Sunday  next  you  know 
My  daughter  Katharine  is  to  be  married: 

Now,  on  the  Sunday  following,  shall  Bianca 
Be  bride  to  you,  if  you  make  this  assurance; 

If  not,  to  Signior  Gremio: 

And  so,  I  take  my  leave,  and  thank  you  both. 


Gre.  Adieu,  good  neighbour.  [Exit  baptista. 

Now  I  fear  thee  not:  401 

Sirrah  young  gamester,  your  father  were  a  fool 
To  give  thee  all,  and  in  his  waning  age 
Set  foot  under  thy  table:  tut,  a  toy! 

An  old  Italian  fox  is  not  so  kind,  my  boy.  [Exit. 
Tra.  A  vengeance  on  your  crafty  wither’d  hide! 
Yet  I  have  faced  it  with  a  card  of  ten. 

’Tis  in  my  head  to  do  my  master  good: 

I  see  no  reason  but  supposed  Lucentio 
Must  get  a  father,  call’d  “supposed  Vincentio”; 
And  that’s  a  wonder:  fathers  commonly  4// 
Do  get  their  children;  but  in  this  case  of  wooing, 
A  child  shall  get  a  sire,  if  I  fail  not  of  my  cun¬ 
ning.  [Exit. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  Padua:  Baptista' s  house 
Enter  lucentio,  hortensio,  and  bianca. 

Luc.  Fiddler,  forbear;  you  grow  too  forward, 
sir: 

Have  you  so  soon  forgot  the  entertainment 
Her  sister  Katharine  welcomed  you  withal? 

Hor.  But,  wrangling  pedant,  this  is 
The  patroness  of  heavenly  harmony: 

Then  give  me  leave  to  have  prerogative; 

And  when  in  music  we  have  spent  an  hour. 

Your  lecture  shall  have  leisure  for  as  much. 

Luc.  Preposterous  ass,  that  never  read  so  far 
To  know  the  cause  why  music  was  ordain’d!  10 
Was  it  not  to  refresh  the  mind  of  man 
After  his  studies  or  his  usual  pain? 

Then  give  me  leave  to  read  philosophy, 

And  while  I  pause,  serve  in  your  harmony. 

Hor.  Sirrah,  I  will  not  bear  these  braves  of 
thine. 

Bian. Why,  gentlemen,  you  do  me  double 
wrong. 

To  strive  for  that  which  resteth  in  my  choice: 

I  am  no  breeching  scholar  in  the  schools; 

I’ll  not  be  tied  to  hours  nor  ’pointed  times. 

But  learn  my  lessons  as  I  please  myself.  20 

And,  to  cut  off  all  strife,  here  sit  we  down: 

Take  you  your  instrument,  play  you  the  whiles; 
His  lecture  will  be  done  ere  you  have  tuned. 

Hor.  You’ll  leave  his  lecture  when  I  am  in 
tune? 

Luc.  That  will  be  never:  tune  your  instrument. 
Bian,  Where  left  we  last? 

Luc.  Here,  madam: 

Hie  ibat  Simois;  hie  est  Sigeia  tellus; 

Hie  steterat  Priami  regia  celsa  senis. 

Bian.  Construe  them.  50 

Luc.  Hie  ibat,  as  I  told  you  before,  Simois,  I  am 
Lucentio,  hie  est,  son  unto  Vincentio  of  Pisa, 


SCENE  I 


213 


THE  TAMING 

Sigeia  tellus,  disguised  thus  to  get  your  love;  Hie 
steterat^  and  that  Lucentio  that  comes  a-wooing, 
Priamiy  is  my  man  Tranio,  regky  bearing  my  port, 
celsa  senisy  that  we  might  beguile  the  old  panta¬ 
loon. 

Hor.  Madam,  my  instrument’s  in  tune. 

Bian.  Let’s  hear.  O  fie!  the  treble  jars. 

Luc.  Spit  in  the  hold,  man,  and  tune  again.  /fo 
Bian.  Now  let  me  see  if  I  can  construe  it: 

Hie  ibat  SimoiSy  I  know  you  not,  hie  est  Sigeia 
telluSy  I  trust  you  not;  His  steterat  Priamiy  take 
heed  he  hear  us  not,  regiay  presume  not,  celsa  seniSy 
despair  not. 

Hor.  Madam,  ’tis  now  in  tune. 

Luc.  All  but  the  base. 

Hor.  The  base  is  right;  ’tis  the  base  knave  that 
jars. 

[Aside]  How  fiery  and  forward  our  pendant  is! 
Now,  for  my  life,  the  knave  doth  court  my 
love: 

Pedascule,  I’ll  watch  you  better  yet.  50 

Bian.  In  time  I  may  believe,  yet  I  mistrust. 

Luc.  Mistrust  it  not;  for,  sure,  Tlacides 
Was  Ajax,  call’d  so  from  his  grandfather. 

Bian.  I  must  believe  my  master;  else,  I  promise 
you, 

I  should  be  arguing  still  upon  that  doubt: 

But  let  it  rest.  Now,  Licio,  to  you: 

Good  masters,  take  it  not  unkindly,  pray. 

That  I  have  been  thus  pleasant  with  you  both. 
Hor.  You  may  go  walk,  and  give  me  leave  a 
while: 

My  lessons  make  no  music  in  three  parts.  60 
Luc.  Are  you  so  formal,  sir?  well,  I  must  wait, 
[Aside]  And  watch  withal;  for,  but  I  be 
deceived. 

Our  fine  musician  groweth  amorous. 

Hor.  Madam,  before  you  touch  the  instrument. 
To  learn  the  order  of  my  fingering, 

I  must  begin  with  rudiments  of  art; 

To  teach  you  gamut  in  a  briefer  sort. 

More  pleasant,  pithy,  and  effectual. 

Than  hath  been  taught  by  any  of  my  trade: 

And  there  it  is  in  writing,  fairly  drawn.  70 

Bian.  Why,  I  am  past  my  gamut  long  ago. 

Hor.  Yet  read  the  gamut  of  Hortensio. 

Bian.  [Reads]  ^Gamut’  I  am,  the  ground  of  all 
accord, 

‘A  re,’  to  plead  Hortensio’s  passion; 

‘B  mi,’  Bianca,  take  him  for  thy  lord, 

‘C  fa  ut,’  that  loves  with  all  affection: 

‘D  sol  re,’  one  clef,  two  notes  have  I: 

‘E  la  mi,’ show  pity,  or  I  die.”  ^ 

Call  you  this  gamut?  tut,  I  like  it  not: 

Old  fashions  please  me  best;  I  am  not  so  nice,  80 
To  chansfe  true  rules  for  old  inventions. 


OF  THE  SHREW 

Enter  a  servant. 

Serv.  Mistress,  your  father  prays  you  leave 
your  books 

And  help  to  dress  your  sister’s  chamber  up: 

You  know  to-morrow  is  the  wedding-day. 

Bian.  Farewell,  sweet  masters  both;  I  must  be 
gone.  [Exeunt  Bianca  and  Servant. 

Luc.  Faith,  mistress,  then  I  have  no  cause  to 
stay.  [Exit. 

Hor.  But  I  have  cause  to  pry  into  this  pedant: 
Methinks  he  looks  as  though  he  were  in  love: 

Yet  if  thy  thoughts,  Bianca,  be  so  humble 
To  cast  thy  wandering  eyes  on  every  stale,  ^0 
Seize  thee  that  list:  if  once  I  find  thee  ranging, 
Hortensio  will  be  quit  with  thee  by  changing. 

[Exit. 

Scene  ii.  Padua:  before  Baptista's  house 
Enter  baptista,  gremio,  tranio,  katharina, 
BIANCA,  lucentio,  and  otherSy  attendants. 

Bap.  [To  tranio]  Signior  Lucentio,  this  is  the 
’pointed  day. 

That  Katharine  and  Petruchio  should  be  married. 
And  yet  we  hear  not  of  our  son-in-law. 

What  will  be  said?  what  mockery  will  it  be. 

To  want  the  bridegroom  when  the  priest  attends 
To  speak  the  ceremonial  rites  of  marriage! 

What  says  Lucentio  to  this  shame  of  ours? 

Kath.  No  shame  but  mine:  I  must,  forsooth,  be 
forced 

To  give  my  hand  opposed  against  my  heart 
Unto  a  mad-brain  rudesby  full  of  spleen;  10 
Who  woo’d  in  haste  and  means  to  wed  at  leisure. 
I  told  you,  I,  he  was  a  frantic  fool. 

Hiding  his  bitter  jests  in  blunt  behaviour: 

And,  to  be  noted  for  a  merry  man. 

He’ll  woo  a  thousand,  ’point  the  day  of  marriage. 
Make  feasts,  invite  friends,  and  proclaim  the 
banns; 

Yet  never  means  to  wed  where  he  hath  woo’d. 
Now  must  the  world  point  at  poor  Katharine, 
And  say,  “Lo,  there  is  mad  Petruchio’s  wife. 

If  it  would  please  him  come  and  marry  her!”  20 
Tra.  Patience,  good  Katharine,  and  Baptista  too. 
Upon  my  life,  Petruchio  means  but  well. 
Whatever  fortune  stays  him  from  his  word: 
Though  he  be  blunt,  I  know  him  passing  vdse; 
Though  he  be  merry,  yet  withal  he’s  honest. 

Kath.  Would  Katharine  had  never  seen  him 
though! 

[Exit  weepingy  followed  by  bianca  and  others. 

Bap.  Go,  girl;  I  cannot  blame  thee  now  to 
weep; 

For  such  an  injury  would  vex  a  very  saint. 

Much  more  a  shrew  of  thy  impatient  humour. 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


Enter  biondello. 

Bion,  Master,  master!  news,  old  news,  and  such 
news  as  you  never  heard  of!  5/ 

Bap.  Is  it  new  and  old  too?  how  may  that  be? 

Bion.  Why,  is  it  not  news,  to  hear  of  Petruchio’s 
coming? 

Bap.  Is  he  come? 

Bian.  Why,  no,  sir. 

Bap.  What  then? 

Bion.  He  is  coming. 

Bap.  When  will  he  be  here? 

Bion.  When  he  stands  where  I  am  and  sees  you 
there.  41 

Tra.  But  say,  what  to  thine  old  news? 

Bion.  Why,  Petruchio  is  coming  in  a  new  hat 
and  an  old  jerkin,  a  pair  of  old  breeches  thrice 
turned,  a  pair  of  boots  that  have  been  candle- 
cases,  one  buckled,  another  laced,  an  old  rusty 
sword  ta’en  out  of  the  town-armoury,  with  a 
broken  hilt,.,  and  chapeless;  with  two  broken 
points:  his  horse  hipped  with  an  old  mothy  saddle 
and  stirrups  of  no  kindred;  besides,  possessed 
with  the  glanders  and  like  to  mose  in  the  chine; 
troubled  with  the  lampass,  infected  with  the 
fashions,  full  of  windgalls,  sped  with  spavins, 
rayed  with  the  yellows,  past  cure  of  the  fives, 
stark  spoiled  with  the  staggers,  begnawn  with  the 
bots,  swayed  in  the  back  and  shoulder-shotten; 
near-legged  before  and  with  a  half-checked  bit 
and  a  head-stall  of  sheep’s  leather  which,  being 
restrained  to  keep  him  from  stumbling,  hath  been 
often  burst  and  now  repaired  with  knots;  one 
girth  six  times  pieced  and  a  woman’s  crupper  of 
velure,  which  hath  two  letters  for  her  name  fairly 
set  down  in  studs,  and  here  and  there  pierced 
with  packthread. 

Bap.  Who  comes  with  him? 

Bion.  O,  sir,  his  lackey,  for  all  the  world  ca¬ 
parisoned  like  the  horse;  with  a  linen  stock  on 
one  leg  and  a  kersey  boot-hose  on  the  other, 
gartered  with  a  red  and  blue  list;  an  old  hat  and 
“the  humour  of  forty  fancies”  pricked  in’t  for  a 
feather:  a  monster,  a  very  monster  in  apparel, 
and  not  like  a  Christian  footboy  or  a  gentle¬ 
man’s  lackey. 

Tra.  ’Tis  some  odd  humour  pricks  him  to  this 
fashion; 

Yet  oftentimes  he  goes  but  mean-apparell’d. 

Bap.  I  am  glad  he’s  come,  howsoe’er  he  comes. 

Bion.  Why,  sir,  he  comes  not. 

Bap.  Didst  thou  not  say  he  comes? 

Bion.  Who?  that  Petruchio  came? 

Bap.  Ay,  that  Petruchio  came.  80 

Bion.  No,  sir;  I  say  his  horse  comes,  with  him 
on  his  back. 


Bap.  Why,  that’s  all  one. 

Bion.  Nay,  by  Saintjamy, 

I  hold  you  a  penny, 

A  horse  and  a  man 
Is  more  than  one. 

And  yet  not  many. 

Enter  petruchio  and  grumio. 

Pet.  Come,  where  be  these  gallants?  who’s  at 
home? 

Bap.  You  are  welcome,  sir. 

Pet.  And  yet  I  come  not  well.  po 

Bap.  And  yet  you  halt  not. 

Tra.  Not  so  well  apparell’d 

As  I  wish  you  were. 

Pet.  Were  it  better,  I  should  rush  in  thus. 

But  where  is  Kate?  where  is  my  lovely  bride? 
How  does  my  father?  Gentles,  methinks  you 
frown: 

And  wherefore  gaze  this  goodly  company. 

As  if  they  saw  some  wondrous  monument. 

Some  comet  or  unusual  prodigy? 

Bap.  Why,  sir,  you  know  this  is  your  wedding- 
day: 

First  were  we  sad,  fearing  you  would  not  come; 
Now  sadder,  that  you  come  so  unprovided.  loi 
Fie,  doff  this  habit,  shame  to  your  estate. 

An  eye-sore  to  our  solemn  festival! 

Tra.  And  tell  us,  what  occasion  of  import 
Hath  all  so  long  detain’d  you  from  your  wife. 
And  sent  you  hither  so  unlike  yourself? 

Pet.  Tedious  it  were  to  tell,  and  harsh  to  hear: 
Sufficeth,  I  am  come  to  keep  my  word. 

Though  in  some  part  enforced  to  digress; 

Which,  at  more  leisure,  I  will  so  excuse  no 
As  you  shall  well  be  satisfied  withal. 

But  where  is  Kate?  I  stay  too  long  from  her: 

The  morning  wears,  ’tis  time  we  were  at  church. 
Tra.  See  not  your  bride  in  these  unreverent 
robes: 

Go  to  my  chamber;  put  on  clothes  of  mine. 

Pet.  Not  I,  believe  me:  thus  I’ll  visit  her. 

Bap.  But  thus,  I  trust,  you  will  not  marry  her. 
Pet.  Good  sooth,  even  thus;  therefore  ha’  done 
with  words : 

To  me  she’s  married,  not  unto  my  clothes: 

Could  I  repair  what  she  will  wear  in  me,  120 
As  I  can  change  these  poor  accoutrements, 
’Twere  well  for  Kate  and  better  for  myself. 

But  what  a  fool  am  I  to  chat  with  you. 

When  I  should  bid  good  morrow  to  my  bride, 
And  seal  the  title  with  a  lovely  kiss! 

[Exeunt  petruchio  and  grumio. 
Tra.  He  hath  some  meaning  in  his  mad  attire: 
We  will  persuade  him,  be  it  possible. 

To  put  on  better  ere  he  go  to  church. 


SCENE  II 


215 


THE  TAMING 

Bap.  I’ll  after  him,  and  see  the  event  of  this. 

[Exeunt  baptista,  gremio,  and  attendants. 
Tra.  But  to  her  love  concerneth  us  to  add 
Her  father’s  liking:  which  to  bring  to  pass,  75/ 
As  I  before  imparted  to  your  worship, 

I  am  to  get  a  man — whate’er  he  be. 

It  skills  not  much,  we’ll  fit  him  to  our  turn — 

And  he  shall  be  Vincentio  of  Pisa; 

And  make  assurance  here  in  Padua 
Of  greater  sums  than  I  have  promised. 

So  shall  you  quietly  enjoy  your  hope. 

And  marry  sweet  Bianca  with  consent. 

Luc.  Were  it  not  that  my  fellow-schoolmaster 
Doth  watch  Bianca’s  steps  so  narrowly,  74/ 
’Twere  good,  methinks,  to  steal  our  marriage; 
Which  once  perform’d,  let  all  the  world  say  no, 
I’ll  keep  mine  own,  despite  of  all  the  world. 

Tra.  That  by  degrees  we  mean  to  look  into, 

And  watch  our  vantage  in  this  business: 

We’ll  over-reach  the  greybeard,  Gremio, 

The  narrow-prying  father,  Minola, 

The  quaint  musician,  amorous  Licio; 

All  for  my  master’s  sake,  Lucentio.  /50 

Re-enter  gremio. 

Signior  Gremio,  came  you  from  the  church? 

Gre.  As  willingly  as  e’er  I  came  from  school. 
Tra.  And  is  the  bride  and  bridegroom  coming 
home? 

Gre.  A  bridegroom  say  you?  ’tis  a  groom  indeed, 
A  grumbling  groom,  and  that  the  girl  shall  find. 
Tra.  Curster  than  she?  why,  ’tis  impossible. 

Gre.  Why,  he’s  a  devil,  a  devil,  a  very  fiend. 

Tra.  Why,  she’s  a  devil,  a  devil,  the  devil’s  dam. 
Gre.  Tut,  she’s  a  lamb,  a  dove,  a  fool  to  him! 

I’ll  tell  you.  Sir  Lucentio:  when  the  priest  160 
Should  ask,  if  Katharine  should  be  his  wife, 

“Ay,  by  gogs-wouns,”  quoth  he;  and  swore  so 
loud. 

That,  all-amazed,  the  priest  let  fall  the  book; 

And,  as  he  stoop’d  again  to  take  it  up, 

This  mad-brain’d  bridegroom  took  him  such  a 
cuff 

That  down  fell  priest  and  book  and  book  and 
priest: 

“Now  take  them  up,”  quoth  he,  “if  any  list.” 

Tra.  What  said  the  wench  when  he  rose  again? 
Gre.  Trembled  and  shook;  for  why,  he  stamp’d 
and  swore. 

As  if  the  vicar  meant  to  cozen  him.  770 

But  after  many  ceremonies  done. 

He  calls  for  wine:  “A  health!”  quoth  he,  as  if 
He  had  been  aboard,  carousing  to  his  mates 
After  a  storm;  quaff’d  off  the  muscadel 
And  threw  the  sops  all  in  the  sexton’s  face; 
Having  no  other  reason 


OF  THE  SHREW 

But  that  his  beard  grew  thin  and  hungerly 
And  seem’d  tq  ask  him  sops  as  he  was  drinking. 
This  done,  he  took  the  bride  about  the  neck 
And  kiss’d  her  lips  with  such  a  clamorous  smack 
That  at  the  parting  all  the  church  did  echo:  181 

And  I  seeing  this  came  thence  for  very  shame; 
And  after  me,  I  know,  the  rout  is  coming. 

Such  a  mad  marriage  never  was  before: 

Hark,  hark!  I  hear  the  minstrels  play.  [Music. 

Re-enter  petruchio,  katharina,  bianca, 
BAPTISTA,  HORTENsio,  GRUMio,  and  train. 

Pet.  Gentlemen  and  friends,  I  thank  you  for 
your  pains: 

I  know  you  think  to  dine  with  me  to-day. 

And  have  prepared  great  store  of  wedding  cheer; 
But  so  it  is,  my  haste  doth  call  me  hence. 

And  therefore  here  I  mean  to  take  my  leave.  1^0 
Bap.  Is’t  possible  you  will  away  to-night? 

Pet.  I  must  away  to-day,  before  night  come: 
Make  it  no  wonder;  if  you  knew  my  business. 
You  would  entreat  me  rather  go  than  stay. 

And,  honest  company,  I  thank  you  all, 

That  have  beheld  me  give  away  myself 
To  this  most  patient,  sweet,  and  virtuous  wife: 
Dine  with  my  father,  drink  a  health  to  me; 

For  I  must  hence;  and  farewell  to  you  all. 

Tra.  Let  us  entreat  you  stay  till  after  dinner. 

Pet.  It  may  not  be. 

Gre.  Let  me  entreat  you.  201 

Pet.  It  cannot  be. 

Kath .  Let  me  entreat  you . 

Pet.  I  am  content. 

Kath.  Are  you  content  to  stay? 

Pet.  I  am  content  you  shall  entreat  me  stay; 

But  yet  not  stay,  entreat  me  how  you  can. 

Kath.  Now,  if  you  love  me,  stay. 

Pet.  Grumio,  my  horse. 

Gru.  Ay,  sir,  they  be  ready:  the  oats  have  eaten 
the  horses. 

Kath.  Nay,  then. 

Do  what  thou  canst,  I  will  not  go  to-day  ;  210 

No,  nor  to-morrow,  not  till  I  please  myself. 

The  door  is  open,  sir;  there  lies  your  way; 

You  may  be  jogging  whiles  your  boots  are  green; 
For  me.  I’ll  not  be  gone  till  I  please  myself: 

’Tis  like  you’ll  prove  a  jolly  surly  groom. 

That  take  it  on  you  at  the  first  so  roundly. 

Pet.  O  Kate,  content  thee;  prithee,  be  not 
angry. 

Kath.  I  will  be  angry:  what  hast  thou  to  do? 
Father,  be  quiet:  he  shall  stay  my  leisure.  2 ip 
Gre.  Ay,  marry,  sir,  now  it  begins  to  work. 
Kath.  Gentlemen,  forward  to  the  bridal  dinner: 

I  see  a  woman  may  be  made  a  fool. 

If  she  had  not  a  spirit  to  resist. 


2i6 

Pet.  They  shall  go  forward,  Kate,  at  thy  com¬ 
mand. 

Obey  the  bride,  you  that  attend  on  her; 

Go  to  the  feast,  revel  and  domineer. 

Carouse  full  measure  to  her  maidenhead. 

Be  mad  and  merry,  or  go  hang  yourselves: 

But  for  my  bonny  Kate,  she  must  with  me. 

Nay,  look  not  big,  nor  stamp,  nor  stare,  nor  fret; 
I  will  be  master  of  what  is  mine  own :  2^1 

She  is  my  goods,  my  chattels;  she  is  my  house. 
My  household  stuff,  my  field,  my  barn, 

My  horse,  my  ox,  my  ass,  my  any  thing; 

And  here  she  stands,  touch  her  whoever  dare; 

I’ll  bring  mine  action  on  the  proudest  he 
That  stops  my  way  in  Padua.  Grumio, 

Draw  forth  thy  weapon,  we  are  beset  with 
thieves; 

Rescue  thy  mistress,  if  thou  be  a  man. 

Fear  not,  sweet  wench,  they  shall  not  touch  thee, 
Kate:  240 

ril  buckler  thee  against  a  million. 

[Exeunt  petruchio,  katharina,  and  grumio. 
Bap.  Nay,  let  them  go,  a  couple  of  quiet  ones. 
Gre.  Went  they  not  quickly,  I  should  die  with 
laughing. 

Tra.  Of  all  mad  matches  never  was  the  like. 

Luc.  Mistress,  what’s  your  opinion  of  your 
sister? 

Bian.  That,  being  mad  herself,  she’s  madly 
mated. 

Gre.  I  warrant  him,  Petruchio  is  Kated. 

Bap.  Neighbours  and  friends,  though  bride  and 
bridegroom  wants 

For  to  supply  the  places  at  the  table,  245? 

You  know  there  wants  no  junkets  at  the 
feast. 

Lucentio,  you  shall  supply  the  bridegroom’s 
place; 

And  let  Bianca  take  her  sister’s  room. 

Tra.  Shall  sweet  Bianca  practise  how  to  bride 
it? 

Bap.  She  shall,  Lucentio.  Come,  gentlemen, 
let’s  go.  [Exeunt. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  Petruchio' s  country  house 
Enter  grumio. 

Gru.  Fie,  fie  on  all  tired  jades,  on  all  mad  mas¬ 
ters,  and  all  foul  ways!  Was  ever  man  so  beaten? 
was  ever  man  so  rayed?  was  ever  man  so  weary? 
I  am  sent  before  to  make  a  fire,  and  they  are 
coming  after  to  warm  them.  Now,  were  not  I  a 
little  pot  and  soon  hot,  my  very  lips  might  freeze 
to  my  teeth,  my  tongue  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth, 
my  heart  in  my  belly,  ere  I  should  come  by  a  fire 


ACT  IV 

to  thaw  me:  but  I,  with  blowing  the  fire,  shall 
warm  myself;  for, ,  considering  the  weather,  a 
taller  man  than  I  will  take  cold.  Holla,  ho! 
Curtis. 

Enter  cvKTis. 

Curt.  Who  is  that  calls  so  coldly? 

Gru.  A  piece  of  ice:  if  thou  doubt  it,  thou  mayst 
slide  from  my  shoulder  to  my  heel  with  no  great¬ 
er  a  run  but  my  head  and  my  neck.  A  fire,  good 
Curtis. 

Curt.  Is  my  master  and  his  wife  coming,  Gru¬ 
mio? 

Gru.  O,  ay,  Curtis,  ay:  and  therefore  fire,  fire; 
cast  on  no  water.  21 

Curt.  Is  she  so  hot  a  shrew  as  she’s  reported? 

Gru.  She  was,  good  Curtis,  before  this  frost: 
but,  thou  knowest,  winter  tames  man,  woman, 
and  beast;  for  it  hath  tamed  my  old  master  and 
my  new  mistress  and  myself,  fellow  Curtis. 

Curt.  Away,  you  three-inch  fool!  I  am  no  beast. 

Gru.  Am  I  but  three  inches?  why,  thy  horn  is  a 
foot;  and  so  long  am  I  at  the  least.  But  wilt  thou 
make  a  fire,  or  shall  I  complain  on  thee  to  our 
mistress,  whose  hand,  she  being  now  at  hand, 
thou  shalt  soon  feel,  to  thy  cold  comfort,  for 
being  slow  in  thy  hot  office? 

Curt.  I  prithee,  good  Grumio,  tell  me,  how  goes 
the  world? 

Gru.  A  cold  world,  Curtis,  in  every  office  but 
thine;  and  therefore  fire:  do  thy  duty,  and  have 
thy  duty;  for  my  master  and  mistress  are  almost 
frozen  to  death.  40 

Curt.  There’s  fire  ready;  and  therefore,  good 
Grumio,  the  news. 

Gru.  Why,  “Jack,  boy!  ho!  boy!”  and  as  much 
news  as  will  thaw. 

Curt.  Come,  you  are  so  full  of  cony-catching! 

Gru.  Why,  therefore  fire;  for  I  have  caught 
extreme  cold.  Where’s  the  cook?  is  supper  ready, 
the  house  trimmed,  rushes  strewed,  cobwebs 
swept;  the  serving-men  in  their  new  fustian,  their 
white  stockings,  and  every  officer  his  wedding- 
garment  on?  Be  the  jacks  fair  within,  the  jills  fair 
without,  the  carpets  laid,  and  every  thing  in 
order? 

Curt.  All  ready;  and  therefore,  I  pray  thee, 
news. 

Gru.  First,  know,  my  horse  is  tired;  my  master 
and  mistress  fallen  out. 

Curt.  How? 

Gru.  Out  of  their  saddles  into  the  dirt;  and 
thereby  hangs  a  tale.  60 

Curt.  Let’s  ha’t,  good  Grumio. 

Gru.  Lend  thine  ear. 

Curt.  Here. 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


SCENE  I 

Gru.  There.  [Strikes  him.] 

Curt.  This  is  to  feel  a  tale,  not  to  hear  a  tale. 

Gru.  And  therefore  ’tis  called  a  sensible  tale: 
and  this  cuff  was  but  to  knock  at  your  ear,  and 
beseech  listening.  Now  I  begin:  Imprimis,  we 
came  down  a  foul  hill,  my  master  riding  behind 
my  mistress —  7^ 

Curt.  Both  of  one  horse? 

Gru.  What’s  that  to  thee? 

Curt.  Why,  a  horse. 

Gru.  Tell  thou  the  tale:  but  hadst  thou  not 
crossed  me,  thou  shouldst  have  heard  how  her 
horse  fell  and  she  under  her  horse;  thou  shouldst 
have  heard  in  how  miry  a  place,  how  she  was 
bemoiled,  how  he  left  her  with  the  horse  upon 
her,  how  he  beat  me  because  her  horse  stumbled, 
how  she  waded  through  the  dirt  to  pluck  him  off 
me,  how  he  swore,  how  she  prayed,  that  never 
prayed  before,  how  1  cried,  how  the  horses  ran 
away,  how  her  bridle  was  burst,  how  I  lost  my 
crupper,  with  many  things  of  worthy  memory, 
which  now  shall  die  in  oblivion  and  thou  return 
unexperienced  to  thy  grave. 

Curt.  By  this  reckoning  he  is  more  shrew  than 
she. 

Gru.  Ay:  and  that  thou  and  the  proudest  of  you 
all  shall  find  when  he  comes  home.  But  what  talk 
I  of  this?  Call  forth  Nathaniel,  Joseph,  Nicholas, 
Philip,  Walter,  Sugarsop  and  the  rest:  let  their 
heads  be  sleekly  combed,  their  blue  coats  brushed 
and  their  garters  of  an  indifferent  knit:  let  them 
curtsy  with  their  left  legs  and  not  presume  to 
touch  a  hair  of  my  master’s  horsetail  till  they 
kiss  their  hands.  Are  they  all  ready? 

Curt.  They  are. 

Gru.  Call  them  forth. 

Curt.  Do  you  hear,  ho?  you  must  meet  my 
master  to  countenance  my  mistress.  loi 

Gru.  Why,  she  hath  a  face  of  her  own. 

Curt.  Who  knows  not  that? 

Gru.  Thou,  it  seems,  that  calls  for  company  to 
countenance  her. 

Curt.  I  call  them  forth  to  credit  her. 

Gru.  Why,  she  comes  to  borrow  nothing  of 
them. 

Enter  four  or  jive  serving-men. 

Nath.  Welcome  home,  Grumio! 

Phil.  How  now,  Grumio!  no 

Jos.  What,  Grumio! 

Nich.  Fellow  Grumio! 

Nath.  How  now,  old  lad? 

Gru.  Welcome,  you; — how  now,  you; — what, 
you; — fellow,  you; — and  thus  much  for  greeting. 
Now,  my  spruce  companions,  is  all  ready,  and  all 
things  neat? 


217 

Nath.  All  things  is  ready.  How  near  is  our 
master?  ^ 

Gru.  E’en  at  hand,  alighted  by  this;  and  there¬ 
fore  be  not — Cock’s  passion,  silence!  I  hear  my 
master. 

Enter  petruchio  and  katharina. 

Pet.  Where  be  these  knaves?  What,  no  man  at 
door 

To  hold  my  stirrup  nor  to  take  my  horse! 

Where  is  Nathaniel,  Gregory,  Philip? 

All  Serv.  Here,  here,  sir;  here,  sir. 

Pet.  Here,  sir!  here,  sir!  here,  sir!  here,  sir! 

You  logger-headed  and  unpolish’d  grooms! 

What,  no  attendance?  no  regard?  no  duty? 
Where  is  the  foolish  knave  I  sent  before?  /50 
Gru.  Here,  sir;  as  foolish  as  I  was  before. 

Pet.  You  peasant  swain!  you  whoreson  malt- 
horse  drudge! 

Did  I  not  bid  thee  meet  me  in  the  park. 

And  bring  along  these  rascal  knaves  with  thee? 

Gru.  Nathaniel’s  coat,  sir,  was  not  fully  made. 
And  Gabriel’s  pumps  were  all  unpink’d  i’  the 
heel; 

There  was  no  link  to  colour  Peter’s  hat. 

And  Walter’s  dagger  was  not  come  from  sheath¬ 
ing: 

There  were  none  fine  but  Adam,  Ralph,  and 
Gregory; 

The  rest  were  ragged,  old,  and  beggarly;  1^0 
Yet,  as  they  are,  here  are  they  come  to  meet 
you. 

Pet.  Go,  rascals,  go,  and  fetch  my  supper  in. 

[Exeunt  servants. 

[Singing]  “Where  is  the  life  that  late  I  led” — 
Where  are  those — Sit  down,  Kate,  and  wel¬ 
come. — 

Soud, soud, soud, soud! 

Re-enter  servants  vuith  supper. 

Why,  when,  I  say?  Nay,  good  sweet  Kate,  be 
merry. 

Off  with  my  boots,  you  rogues!  you  villains, 
when? 

“It  was  the  friar  of  orders  grey. 

As  he  forth  walked  on  his  way:” — 

Out,  you  rogue!  you  pluck  my  foot  awry:  /50 

Take  that,  and  mend  the  plucking  off  the  other. 
Strikes  him. 

Be  merry,  Kate.  Some  water,  here;  what,  ho! 
Where’s  my  spaniel  Troilus?  Sirrah,  get  you 
hence. 

And  bid  my  cousin  Ferdinand  come  hither; 

One,  Kate,  that  you  must  kiss,  and  be  acquainted 
with. 

Where  are  my  slippers?  Shall  I  have  some  water? 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


2i8 

Enter  one  njcith  water. 

Come,  Kate,  and  wash,  and  welcome  heartily. 
You  whoreson  villain!  will  you  let  it  fall? 

Strikes  him. 

Kath.  Patience,  I  pray  you;  ’twas  a  fault  un¬ 
willing. 

Pet.  A  whoreson  beetle-headed,  flap-ear’d 
knave!  i6o 

Come,  Kate,  sit  down;  I  know  you  have  a 
stomach. 

Will  you  give  thanks,  sweet  Kate;  or  else  shall  I? 
What’s  this?  mutton? 
istServ.  Ay. 

Pet.  Who  brought  it? 

Peter.  I. 

Pet.  ’Tis  burnt;  and  so  is  all  the  meat. 

What  dos^s  are  these!  Where  is  the  rascal  cook? 
How  durst  you,  villains,  bring  it  from  the  dresser. 
And  serve  it  thus  to  me  that  love  it  not? 

There,  take  it  to  you,  trenchers,  cups,  and  all: 

Throws  the  meat.,  &c.  about  the  stage. 

You  heedless  joltheads  and  unmanner’d  slaves! 
What,  do  you  grumble?  I’ll  be  with  you  straight. 

Kath.  I  pray  you,  husband,  be  not  so  disquiet: 
The  meat  was  well,  if  you  were  so  contented,  iji 
Pet.  I  tell  thee,  Kate,  ’twas  burnt  and  dried 
away; 

And  I  expressly  am  forbid  to  touch  it. 

For  it  engenders  choler,  planteth  anger; 

And  better  ’twere  that  both  of  us  did  fast. 

Since,  of  ourselves,  ourselves  are  choleric. 

Than  feed  it  with  such  over-roasted  flesh. 

Be  patient;  to-morrow  ’t  shall  be  mended. 

And,  for  this  night,  we’ll  fast  for  company:  i8o 
Come,  I  will  bring  thee  to  thy  bridal  chamber. 

[Exeunt. 

Re-enter  servants  severally. 

Nath.  Peter,  didst  ever  see  the  like? 

Peter.  He  kills  her  in  her  own  humour. 

Re-enter  curtis. 

Gru.  Where  is  he? 

Curt.  In  her  chamber,  making  a  sermon  of  conti- 
nency  to  her; 

And  rails,  and  swears,  and  rates,  that  she,  poor 
soul. 

Knows  not  which  way  to  stand,  to  look,  to 
speak. 

And  sits  as  one  new-risen  from  a  dream.  1S9 
Away,  away!  for  he  is  coming  hither.  [Exeunt. 

Re-enter  petruchio. 

Pet.  Thus  have  I  politicly  begun  my  reign. 

And  ’tis  my  hope  to  end  successfully. 


ACT  IV 

My  falcon  now  is  sharp  and  passing  empty; 

And  till  she  stoop  slje  must  not  be  full-gorged. 

For  then  she  never  looks  upon  her  lure. 

Another  way  I  have  to  man  my  haggard. 

To  make  her  come  and  know  her  keeper’s  call. 
That  is,  to  watch  her,  as  we  watch  these  kites 
That  bate  and  beat  and  will  not  be  obedient. 

She  eat  no  meat  to-day,  nor  none  shall  eat;  200 
Last  night  she  slept  not,  nor  to-night  she  shall 
not; 

As  with  the  meat,  some  undeserved  fault 
I’ll  find  about  the  making  of  the  bed; 

And  here  I’ll  fling  the  pillow,  there  the  bolster, 
This  way  the  coverlet,  another  way  the  sheets: 
Ay,  and  amid  this  hurly  I  intend 
That  all  is  done  in  reverend  care  of  her; 

And  in  conclusion  she  shall  watch  all  night: 

And  if  she  chance  to  nod  I’ll  rail  and  brawl 
And  with  the  clamour  keep  her  still  awake.  210 
This  is  a  way  to  kill  a  wife  with  kindness; 

And  thus  I’ll  curb  her  mad  and  headstrong  hum¬ 
our. 

He  that  knows  better  how  to  tame  a  shrew. 

Now  let  him  speak:  ’tis  charity  to  show.  [Exit, 

Scene  ii.  Padua:  before  Baptista's  house 
Enter  tranio  and  hortensio. 

Tra.  Is’t  possible,  friend  Licio,  that  Mistress 
Bianca 

Doth  fancy  any  other  but  Lucentio? 

I  tell  you,  sir,  she  bears  me  fair  in  hand. 

Hor.  Sir,  to  satisfy  you  in  what  I  have  said. 
Stand  by  and  mark  the  manner  of  his  teaching. 

Enter  bianca  and  lucentio. 

Luc.  Now,  mistress,  profit  you  in  what  you 
read? 

Bian.  What,  master,  read  you?  first  resolve  me 
that. 

Luc,  I  read  that  I  profess.  The  Art  to  Love. 

Bian.  And  may  you  prove,  sir,  master  of  your 
art! 

Luc.  While  you,  sweet  dear,  prove  mistress  of 
my  heart!  10 

Hor.  Quick  proceeders,  marry!  Now,  tell  me,  I 
pray. 

You  that  durst  swear  that  your  mistress  Bianca 
Loved  none  in  the  world  so  well  as  Lucentio. 

Tra.  O  despiteful  love!  unconstant  womankind! 
I  tell  thee,  Licio,  this  is  wonderful. 

Hor.  Mistake  no  more:  I  am  not  Licio, 

Nor  a  musician,  as  I  seem  to  be; 

But  one  that  scorn  to  live  in  this  disguise. 

For  such  a  one  as  leaves  a  gentleman. 

And  makes  a  god  of  such  a  cullion:  20 

Know,  sir,  thatJ  am  call’d  Hortensio. 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


SCENE  II 


219 


THE  TAMING 

Tra.  Signior  Horrensio,  I  have  often  heard 
Of  your  entire  affection  to  Bianca  ; 

And  since  mine  eyes  are  witness  of  her  lightness, 
I  will  with  you,  if  you  be  so  contented, 

Forswear  Bianca  and  her  love  for  ever. 

Hor.  See,  how  they  kiss  and  court!  Signior 
Lucentio, 

Here  is  my  hand,  and  here  I  firmly  vow 
Never  to  woo  her  more,  but  do  forswear  her. 

As  one  unworthy  all  the  former  favours  5  o 

That  I  have  fondly  flatter’d  her  withal. 

Tra.  And  here  I  take  the  like  unfeigned  oath. 
Never  to  marry  with  her  though  she  would  en¬ 
treat: 

Fie  on  her!  see,  how  beastly  she  doth  court  him! 
Hor.  Would  all  the  world  but  he  had  quite  for¬ 
sworn! 

For  me,  that  I  may  surely  keep  mine  oath, 

I  will  be  married  to  a  wealthy  widow. 

Ere  three  days  pass,  which  hath  as  long  loved  me 
As  I  have  loved  this  proud  disdainful  haggard. 
And  so  farewell,  Signior  Lucentio.  40 

Kindness  in  women,  not  their  beauteous  looks. 
Shall  win  my  love:  and  so  I  take  my  leave. 

In  resolution  as  I  swore  before.  [Exit. 

Tra.  Mistress  Bianca,  bless  you  with  such  grace 
As  ’longeth  to  a  lover’s  blessed  case! 

Nay,  I  have  ta’en  you  napping,  gentle  love. 

And  have  forsworn  you  with  Hortensio. 

Bian.  Tranio,  you  jest:  but  have  you  both  for¬ 
sworn  me? 

Tra.  Mistress,  we  have. 

Luc.  Then  we  are  rid  of  Licio. 

Tra.V  faith,  he’ll  have  a  lusty  widow  now. 

That  shall  be  woo’d  and  wedded  in  a  day.  5/ 
Bian.  God  give  him  joy! 

Tra.  Ay,  and  he’ll  tame  her. 

Bian.  He  says  so,  Tranio. 

Tra.  Faith,  he  is  gone  unto  the  taming-school. 
Bian.  The  taming-school!  what,  is  there  such  a 
place? 

Tra.  Ay,  mistress,  and  Petruchio  is  the  master; 
That  teacheth  tricks  eleven  and  twenty  long. 

To  tame  a  shrew  and  charm  her  chattering 
tongue. 

Enter  biondello. 

Bion.  O  master,  master,  I  have  watch’d  so  long 
That  I  am  dog-weary:  but  at  last  I  spied  60 
An  ancient  angel  coming  down  the  hill, 

Will  serve  the  turn. 

Tra.  What  is  he,  Biondello? 

Bion.  Master,  a  mercatante,  or  a  pedant, 

I  know  not  what;  but  formal  in  apparel. 

In  gait  and  countenance  surely  like  a  father. 

Luc.  And  what  of  him,  Tranio? 


OF  THE  SHREW 

Tra.  If  he  be  credulous  and  trust  my  tale. 

I’ll  make  him  glad  to  seem  Vincentio, 

And  give  assurahce  to  Baptista  Minola, 

As  if  he  were  the  right  Vincentio.  70 

Take  in  your  love,  and  then  let  me  alone. 

[Exeunt  lucentio  and  bianca. 

Enter  a  pedant. 

Fed.  God  save  you,  sir! 

Tra.  And  you,  sir!  you  are  welcome. 

Travel  you  far  on,  or  are  you  at  the  farthest? 

Fed.  Sir,  at  the  farthest  for  a  week  or  two: 

But  then  up  farther,  and  as  far  as  Rome; 

And  so  to  Tripoli,  if  God  lend  me  life. 

Tra.  What  countryman,  I  pray? 

Fed.  Of  Mantua. 

Tra.  Of  Mantua,  sir?  marry,  God  forbid! 

And  come  to  Padua,  careless  of  your  life? 

Fed.  My  life,  sir!  how,  I  pray?  for  that  goes 
hard.  80 

Tra.  ’Tis  death  for  any  one  in  Mantua 
To  come  to  Padua.  Know  you  not  the  cause? 
Your  ships  are  stay’d  at  Venice,  and  the  Duke, 
For  private  quarrel  ’twixt  your  Duke  and  him. 
Hath  publish’d  and  proclaim’d  it  openly: 

’Tis  marvel,  but  that  you  are  but  newly  come. 
You  might  have  heard  it  else  proclaim’d  about. 
Fed.  Alas!  sir,  it  is  worse  for  me  than  so; 

For  I  have  bills  for  money  by  exchange 
From  Florence  and  must  here  deliver  them.  90 
Tra.  Well,  sir,  to  do  you  courtesy. 

This  will  I  do,  and  this  I  will  advise  you: 

First,  tell  me,  have  you  ever  been  at  Pisa? 

Fed.  Ay,  sir,  in  Pisa  have  I  often  been, 

Pisa  renowned  for  grave  citizens. 

Tra.  Among  them  know  you  one  Vincentio? 
Fed.  I  know  him  not,  but  I  have  heard  of  him; 

A  merchant  of  incomparable  wealth. 

Tra.  He  is  my  father,  sir;  and,  sooth  to  say. 

In  countenance  somewhat  doth  resemble  you.  wo 
Bion.  [Aside]  As  much  as  an  apple  doth  an 
oyster,  and  all  one. 

Tra.  To  save  your  life  in  this  extremity. 

This  favour  will  I  do  you  for  his  sake; 

And  think  it  not  the  worst  of  all  your  fortunes 
That  you  are  like  to  Sir  Vincentio. 

His  name  and  credit  shall  you  undertake. 

And  in  my  house  you  shall  be  friendly  lodged: 
Look  that  you  take  upon  you  as  you  should; 

You  understand  me,  sir:  so  shall  you  stay 
Till  you  have  done  your  business  in  the  city:  no 
If  this  be  courtesy,  sir,  accept  of  it. 

Fed.  O  sir,  I  do;  and  will  repute  you  ever 
The  patron  of  my  life  and  liberty. 

Tra.  Then  go  with  me  to  make  the  matter  good. 
This,  by  the  way,  I  let  you  understand; 


220 


ACT  IV 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


My  father  is  here  look’d  for  every  day, 

To  pass  assurance  of  a  dower  in  marriage 
’Twixt  me  and  one  Baptista’s  daughter  here: 

In  all  these  circumstances  I’ll  instruct  you: 

Go  with  me  to  clothe  you  as  becomes  you.  120 

[Exetwt. 

Scene  hi.  A  room  in  Petruchws  house 
Enter  katharina  and  grumio. 

Gru.  No,  no,  forsooth;  I  dare  not  for  my  life. 
Kath,  The  more  my  wrong,  the  more  his  spite 
appears: 

What,  did  he  marry  me  to  famish  me? 

Beggars,  that  come  unto  my  father’s  door. 

Upon  entreaty  have  a  present  alms; 

If  not,  elsewhere  they  meet  with  charity: 

But  1,  who  never  knew  how  to  entreat, 

Nor  never  needed  that  I  should  entreat. 

Am  starved  for  meat,  giddy  for  lack  of  sleep,  9 

With  oaths  kept  waking  and  with  brawling  fed: 
And  that  which  spites  me  more  than  all  these 
wants. 

He  does  it  under  name  of  perfect  love; 

As  who  should  say,  if  I  should  sleep  or  eat, 
’Twere  deadly  sickness  or  else  present  death. 

I  prithee  go  and  get  me  some  repast; 

I  care  not  what,  so  it  be  wholesome  food. 

Gru.  What  say  you  to  a  neat’s  foot? 

Kath.  ’Tis  passing  good:  I  prithee  let  me  have  it. 
Gru.  I  fear  it  is  too  choleric  a  meat. 

How  say  you  to  a  fat  tripe  finely  broil’d?  20 
Kath.  I  like  it  well:  good  Grumio,  fetch  it  me. 
Gru.  I  cannot  tell;  I  fear  ’tis  choleric. 

What  say  you  to  a  piece  of  beef  and  mustard? 
Kath.  A  dish  that  I  do  love  to  feed  upon. 

Gru.  Ay,  but  the  mustard  is  too  hot  a  little. 

Kath.  Why  then,  the  beef,  and  let  the  mustard 
rest. 

Gru.  Nay  then,  I  will  not:  you  shall  have  the 
mustard. 

Or  else  you  get  no  beef  of  Grumio. 

Kath.  Then  both,  or  one,  or  anything  thou  wilt. 
Gru.  Why  then,  the  mustard  without  the  beef. 
Kath.  Go,  get  thee  gone,  thou  false  deluding 
slave,  [Beats  him. 

That  feed’ St  me  with  the  very  name  of  meat: 
Sorrow  on  thee  and  all  the  pack  of  you. 

That  triumph  thus  upon  my  misery! 

Go,  get  thee  gone,  I  say. 

Enter  petruchio  and  hortensio  with  meat. 

Pet.  How  fares  my  Kate?  What,  sweeting,  all 
amort? 

Hor.  Mistress,  what  cheer? 

Kath.  Faith,  as  cold  as  can  be. 


Pet.  Pluck  up  thy  spirits;  look  cheerfully  upon 
me. 

Here,  love;  thou  see’st  how  diligent  I  am 
To  dress  thy  meat  myself  and  bring  it  thee:  40 
I  am  sure,  sweet  Kate,  this  kindness  merits 
thanks. 

What,  not  a  word?  Nay,  then  thou  lovest  it  not; 
And  all  my  pains  is  sorted  to  no  proof. 

Here,  take  away  this  dish. 

Kath.  I  pray  you,  let  it  stand. 

Pet.  The  poorest  service  is  repaid  with  thanks; 
And  so  shall  mine,  before  you  touch  the  meat. 
Kath.  I  thank  you,  sir. 

Hor.  Signior  Petruchio,  fie!  you  are  to  blame. 
Come,  Mistress  Kate,  I’ll  bear  you  company. 

Pet.  [Aside]  Eat  it  up  all,  Hortensio,  if  thou 
lovest  me.  50 

Much  good  do  it  unto  thy  gentle  heart! 

Kate,  eat  apace:  and  now,  my  honey  love. 

Will  we  return  unto  thy  father’s  house 
And  revel  it  as  bravely  as  the  best. 

With  silken  coats  and  caps  and  golden  rings, 
With  ruffs  and  cuffs  and  fardingales  and  things; 
With  scarfs  and  fans  and  double  change  of 
bravery, 

With  amber  bracelets,  beads,  and  all  this  knav¬ 
ery. 

What,  hast  thou  dined?  The  tailor  stays  thy  lei¬ 
sure. 

To  deck  thy  body  with  his  ruffling  treasure.  60 
Enter  tailor. 

Come,  tailor,  let  us  see  these  ornaments; 

Lay  forth  the  gown. 

Enter  haberdasher. 

What  news  with  you,  sir? 

Hab.  Here  is  the  cap  your  worship  did  bespeak. 
Pet.  Why,  this  was  moulded  on  a  porringer; 

A  velvet  dish:  fie,  fie!  ’tis  lewd  and  filthy: 

Why,  ’tis  a  cockle  or  a  walnut-shell, 

A  knack,  a  toy,  a  trick,  a  baby’s  cap: 

Away  with  it!  come,  let  me  have  a  bigger. 

Kath.  I’ll  have  no  bigger:  this  doth  fit  the  time. 
And  gentlewomen  wear  such  caps  as  these.  70 
Pet.  When  you  are  gentle,  you  shall  have  one 
too. 

And  not  till  then. 

Hor.  [Aside]  That  will  not  be  in  haste. 

Kath.  Why,  sir,  I  trust  I  may  have  leave  to 
speak; 

And  speak  I  will;  I  am  no  child,  no  babe: 

Your  betters  have  endured  me  say  my  mind. 

And  if  you  cannot,  best  you  stop  your  ears. 

My  tongue  will  tell  the  anger  of  my  heart,  ^ 

Or  else  my  heart  concealing  it  will  break. 


SCENE  Ill 

And  rather  than  it  shall,  I  will  be  free 
Even  to  the  uttermost,  as  I  please,  in  words.  8o 
Pet.  Why,  thou  say’st  true;  it  is  a  paltry  cap, 

A  custard-coffin,  a  bauble,  a  silken  pie: 

I  love  thee  well,  in  that  thou  likest  it  not. 

Kath.  Love  me  or  love  me  not,  I  like  the  cap; 
And  it  I  will  have,  or  I  will  have  none. 

[Exit  HABERDASHER. 

Pet.  Thy  gown?  why,  ay:  come,  tailor,  let  us 
see’t. 

O  mercy,  God!  what  masquing  stuff  is  here? 
What’s  this?  a  sleeve?  ’tis  like  a  demi-cannon: 
What,  up  and  down,  carved  like  an  apple-tart? 
Here’s  snip  and  nip  and  cut  and  slish  and  slash. 
Like  to  a  censer  in  a  barber’s  shop:  51/ 

Why,  what,  i’  devil’s  name,  tailor,  call’st  thou 
this? 

Hor.  [Aside]  I  see  she’s  like  to  have  neither  cap 
nor  gown. 

Tai.  You  bid  me  make  it  orderly  and  well. 
According  to  the  fashion  and  the  time. 

Pet.  Marry,  and  did;  but  if  you  be  remember’d, 

I  did  not  bid  you  mar  it  to  the  time. 

Go,  hop  me  over  every  kennel  home. 

For  you  shall  hop  without  my  custom,  sir: 

Fll  none  of  it:  hence!  make  your  best  of  it.  too 
Kath.  I  never  saw  a  better-fashion’d  gown. 

More  quaint,  more  pleasing,  nor  more  commend¬ 
able: 

Belike  you  mean  to  make  a  puppet  of  me. 

Pet.  Why,  true;  he  means  to  make  a  puppet  of 
thee. 

Tai.  She  says  your  worship  means  to  make  a 
puppet  of  her. 

Pet.  O  monstrous  arrogance!  Thou  best,  thou 
thread,  thou  thimble, 

Thou  yard,  three-quarters,  half-yard,  quarter, 
nail! 

Thou  flea,  thou  nit,  thou  winter-cricket  thou! 
Braved  in  mine  own  house  with  a  skein  of  thread? 
Away,  thou  rag,  thou  quantity,  thou  remnant; 

Or  I  shall  so  be-mete  thee  with  thy  yard 
As  thou  shalt  think  on  prating  whilst  thou  livest! 

I  tell  thee,  I,  that  thou  hast  marr’d  her  gown. 

Tai.  Your  worship  is  deceived;  the  gown  is 
made 

Just  as  my  master  had  direction: 

Grumio  gave  order  how  it  should  be  done. 

Gru.  I  gave  him  no  order;  I  gave  him  the  stuff. 
Tai.  But  how  did  you  desire  it  should  be  made? 
Gru.  Marry,  sir,  with  needle  and  thread.  121 
Tai.  But  did  you  not  request  to  have  it  cut? 

Gru.  Thou  hast  faced  many  things. 

Tai.  I  have. 

Gru.  Face  not  me:  thou  hast  braved  many  men; 
brave  not  me;  I  will  neither  be  faced  nor  braved. 


221 

I  say  unto  thee,  I  bid  thy  master  cut  out  the 
gown;  but  I  di^  not  bid  him  cut  it  to  pieces:  ergo, 
thou  best. 

Tai.  Why,  here  is  the  note  of  the  fashion  to 
testify.  '  75/ 

Pet.  Read  it. 

Gru.  The  note  lies  in’s  throat,  if  he  say  I  said  so. 
Tai.  [Reads]  ^AmprimiSy  a  loose-bodied  gown”: 
Gru.  Master,  if  ever  I  said  loose-bodied  gown, 
sew  me  in  the  skirts  of  it,  and  beat  me  to  death 
with  a  bottom  of  brown  thread:  I  said  a  gown. 

Pet.  Proceed. 

Tai.  [Reads]  ‘With  a  small  compassed  cape”: 
Gru.  I  confess  the  cape. 

Tai.  [Reads]  “With  a  trunk  sleeve”: 

Gru.  I  confess  two  sleeves. 

Tai.  [Reads]  “The  sleeves  curiously  cut.” 

Pet.  Ay,  there’s  the  villainy. 

Gru.  Error  i’  the  bill,  sir;  error  i’  the  bill.  I 
commanded  the  sleeves  should  be  cut  out  and 
sewed  up  again;  and  that  I’ll  prove  upon  thee, 
though  thy  little  finger  be  armed  in  a  thimble. 

Tai.  This  is  true  that  I  say:  an  I  had  thee  in 
place  where,  thou  shouldst  know  it.  /j/ 

Gru.  I  am  for  thee  straight:  take  thou  the  bill, 
give  me  thy  mete-yard,  and  spare  not  me. 

Hor.  God-a-mercy,  Grumio!  then  he  shall  have 
no  odds. 

Pet.  Well,  sir,  in  brief,  the  gown  is  not  for  me. 
Gru.  You  are  i’  the  right,  sir:  ’tis  for  my  mis¬ 
tress. 

Pet.  Go,  take  it  up  unto  thy  master’s  use. 

Gru.  Villain,  not  for  thy  life:  take  up  my  mis¬ 
tress’  gown  for  thy  master’s  use!  161 

Pet.  Why,  sir,  what’s  your  conceit  in  that? 

Gru.  O,  sir,  the  conceit  is  deeper  than  you  think 
for: 

Take  up  my  mistress’  gown  to  his  master’s  use! 
O,  fie,  fie,  fie! 

Pet.  [Aside]  Hortensio,  say  thou  wilt  see  the 
tailor  paid. 

Go  take  it  hence;  be  gone,  and  say  no  more. 

Hor.  Tailor,  I’ll  pay  thee  for  thy  gown  to¬ 
morrow: 

Take  no  unkindness  of  his  hasty  words: 

Away!  I  say;  commend  me  to  thy  master.  ijo 

[Exit  TAILOR. 

Pet.  Well,  come,  my  Kate;  we  will  unto  your 
father’s 

Even  in  these  honest  mean  habiliments: 

Our  purses  shall  be  proud,  our  garments  poor; 

For  ’tis  the  mind  that  makes  the  body  rich; 

And  as  the  sun  breaks  through  the  darkest  clouds, 
So  honour  peereth  in  the  meanest  habit. 

What  is  the  jay  more  precious  than  the  lark. 
Because  his  feathers  are  more  beautiful? 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


222 

Or  is  the  adder  better  than  the  eel, 

Because  his  painted  skin  contents  the  eye? 

O,  no,  good  Kate;  neither  art  thou  the  worse 
For  this  poor  furniture  and  mean  array. 

If  thou  account’ St  it  shame,  lay  it  on  me; 

And  therefore  frolic:  we  will  hence  forthwith. 

To  feast  and  sport  us  at  thy  father’s  house. 

Go,  call  my  men,  and  let  us  straight  to  him; 

And  bring  our  horses  unto  Long-lane  end; 

There  will  we  mount,  and  thither  walk  on  foot. 
Let’s  see;  I  think  ’tis  now  some  seven  o’clock, 
And  well  we  may  come  there  by  dinner-time.  190 
Kath,  I  dare  assure  you,  sir,  ’tis  almost  two; 

And  ’twill  be  supper-time  ere  you  come  there. 
Pet,  It  shall  be  seven  ere  I  go  to  horse: 

Look,  what  I  speak,  or  do,  or  think  to  do, 

You  are  still  crossing  it.  Sirs,  let ’t  alone: 

I  will  not  go  to-day;  and  ere  I  do, 

It  shall  be  what  o’clock  I  say  it  is. 

Hor,  [Aside]  Why,  so  this  gallant  will  com¬ 
mand  the  sun.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Padua:  before  Baptista's  hause 
Enter  tranio,  and  the  pedant  dressed  like 

VINCENTIO. 

Tra.  Sir,  this  is  the  house:  please  it  you  that  I 
call? 

Ped.  Ay,  what  else?  and  but  I  be  deceived 
Signior  Baptista  may  remember  me, 

Near  twenty  years  ago,  in  Genoa, 

Where  we  were  lodgers  at  the  Pegasus. 

Tra.  ’Tis  well;  and  hold  your  own,  in  any  case. 
With  such  austerity  as  ’longeth  to  a  father. 

Ped.  I  warrant  you. 

Enter  biondello. 

But,  sir,  here  comes  your  boy; 
’Twere  good  he  were  school’d. 

Tra.  Fear  you  not  him.  Sirrah  Biondello, 

Now  do  your  duty  throughly,  I  advise  you:  u 

Imagine  ’twere  the  right  Vincentio. 

Bion.  Tut,  fear  not  me. 

Tra.  But  hast  thou  done  thy  errand  to  Baptista? 
Bion.  I  told  him  that  your  father  was  at  Venice, 
And  that  you  look’d  for  him  this  day  in  Padua. 
Tra.  Thou’rt  a  tall  fellow:  hold  thee  that  to 
drink. 

Here  comes  Baptista:  set  your  countenance,  sir. 

Enter  baptista  and  lucentio. 

Signior  Baptista,  you  are  happily  met. 

[To  the  pedant]  Sir,  this  is  the  gentleman  I  told 
you  of:  20 

I  pray  you,  stand  good  father  to  me  now. 

Give  me  Bianca  for  my  patrimony. 

Ped.  Soft,  son! 


ACT  IV 

Sir,  by  your  leave:  having  come  to  Padua 
To  gather  in  some  debts,  my  son  Lucentio 
Made  me  acquainted  with  a  weighty  cause 
Of  love  between  your  daughter  and  himself: 

And,  for  the  good  report  I  hear  of  you 
And  for  the  love  he  beareth  to  your  daughter 
And  she  to  him,  to  stay  him  not  too  long,  50 
I  am  content,  in  a  good  father’s  care. 

To  have  him  match’d;  and  if  you  please  to  like 
No  worse  than  I,  upon  some  agreement 
Me  shall  you  find  ready  and  willing 
With  one  consent  to  have  her  so  bestow’d; 

For  curious  I  cannot  be  with  you, 

Signior  Baptista,  of  whom  I  hear  so  well. 

Bap.  Sir,  pardon  me  in  what  I  have  to  say: 

Your  plainness  and  your  shortness  please  me  well. 
Right  true  it  is,  your  son  Lucentio  here  40 

Doth  love  my  daughter  and  she  loveth  him, 

Or  both  dissemble  deeply  their  affections: 

And  therefore,  if  you  say  no  more  than  this. 

That  like  a  father  you  will  deal  with  him 
And  pass  my  daughter  a  sufficient  dower, 

The  match  is  made,  and  all  is  done: 

Your  son  shall  have  my  daughter  with  consent. 
Tra.  I  thank  you,  sir.  Where  then  do  you  know 
best 

We  be  affied  and  such  assurance  ta’en 
As  shall  with  either  part’s  agreement  stand?  yo 
Bap.  Not  in  my  house,  Lucentio;  for,  you 
know. 

Pitchers  have  ears,  and  I  have  many  servants: 
Besides,  old  Gremio  is  hearkening  still; 

And  happily  we  might  be  interrupted. 

Tra.  Then  at  my  lodging,  an  it  like  you: 

There  doth  my  father  lie;  and  there,  this  night, 
We’ll  pass  the  business  privately  and  well. 

Send  for  your  daughter  by  your  servant  here; 

My  boy  shall  fetch  the  scrivener  presently. 

The  worst  is  this,  that,  at  so  slender  warning,  60 
You  are  like  to  have  a  thin  and  slender  pittance. 

Bap.  It  likes  me  well.  Biondello,  hie  you  home. 
And  bid  Bianca  make  her  ready  straight; 

And,  if  you  will,  tell  what  hath  happened, 
Lucentio’s  father  is  arrived  in  Padua, 

And  how  she’s  like  to  be  Lucentio’s  wife. 

Bion.  I  pray  the  gods  she  may  with  all  my  heart! 
Tra.  Dally  not  with  the  gods,  but  get  chee  gone. 

[Exit  BIONDELLO. 

Signior  Baptista,  shall  I  lead  the  way? 

Welcome!  one  mess  is  like  to  be  your  cheer:  70 
Come,  sir;  we  will  better  it  in  Pisa. 

Bap.  I  follow  you. 

[Exeunt  TRAmo,  pedant,  and  baptista. 
Re-enter  biondello. 

Biml.  Cambio! 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 
180 


SCENE  IV 


THE  TAMING 

Luc.  What  sayest  thou,  Biondello? 

Bion.  You  saw  my  master  wink  and  laugh  upon 
you? 

Luc.  Biondello,  what  of  that? 

Bion.  Faith,  nothing;  but  has  left  me  here  be¬ 
hind,  to  expound  the  meaning  or  moral  of  his 
signs  and  tokens.  8o 

Luc.  I  pray  thee,  moralize  them. 

Bion.  Then  thus.  Baptista  is  safe,  talking  with 
the  deceiving  father  of  a  deceitful  son. 

Luc.  And  what  of  him? 

Bion.  His  daughter  is  to  be  brought  by  you  to 
the  supper. 

Luc.  And  then? 

Bion.  The  old  priest  of  Saint  Luke’s  church  is  at 
your  command  at  all  hours. 

Luc.  And  what  of  all  this? 

Bion.  I  cannot  tell;  expect  they  are  busied  about 
a  counterfeit  assurance:  take  you  assurance  of 
her,  ''cum  privilegio  ad  imprimendum  solum":  to 
the  church;  take  the  priest,  clerk,  and  some  suffi¬ 
cient  honest  witnesses: 

If  this  be  not  that  you  look  for,  I  have  no  more 
to  say. 

But  bid  Bianca  farewell  for  ever  and  a  day. 

Luc.  Hearest  thou,  Biondello? 

Bion.  I  cannot  tarry:  I  knew  a  wench  married 
in  an  afternoon  as  she  went  to  the  garden  for 
parsley  to  stuff  a  rabbit;  and  so  may  you,  sir:  and 
so,  adieu,  sir.  My  master  hath  appointed  me  to 
go  to  Saint  Luke’s,  to  bid  the  priest  be  ready  to 
come  against  you  come  with  your  appendix. 

[Exit. 

Luc.  I  may,  and  will,  if  she  be  so  contented: 

She  will  be  pleased;  then  wherefore  should  I 
doubt? 

Hap  what  hap  may,  I’ll  roundly  go  about  her: 

It  shall  go  hard  if  Cambio  go  without  her.  [Exit. 

Scene  v.  A  public  road 
Enter  petruchio,  katharina,  hortensio, 
and  Servants. 

Pet.  Come  on,  i’  God’s  name;  once  more  toward 
our  father’s. 

Good  Lord,  how  bright  and  goodly  shines  the 
moon! 

Kath.  The  moon!  the  sun:  it  is  not  moonlight 
now. 

Pet.  I  say  it  is  the  moon  that  shines  so  bright. 
Kath.  I  know  it  is  the  sun  that  shines  so 
bright. 

Pet.  Now,  by  my  mother’s  son,  and  that’s  my¬ 
self. 

It  sh^ll  be  moon,  or  star,  or  what  I  list. 

Or  ere  I  journey  to  your  father’s  house. 

Go  on,  and  fetch  our  horses  back  again. 


OF  THE  SHREW  223 

Evermore  cross’d  and  cross’d;  nothing  but 
cross’d!  ^ 

Hor.  Say  as  he  says,  or  we  shall  never  go.  ii 
Kath.  Forward,  I  pray,  since  we  have  come  so 
far, 

And  be  it  moon,  or  sun,  or  what  you  please: 

An  if  you  please  to  call  it  a  rush-candle. 
Henceforth  I  vow  it  shall  be  so  for  me. 

Pet.  I  say  it  is  the  moon. 

Kath.  I  know  it  is  the  moon. 

Pet.  Nay,  then  you  lie;  it  is  the  blessed  sun. 

Kath.  Then,  God  be  bless’d,  it  is  the  blessed 
sun: 

But  sun  it  is  not,  when  you  say  it  is  not; 

And  the  moon  changes  even  as  your  mind.  20 
What  you  will  have  it  named,  even  that  it  is; 

And  so  it  shall  be  so  for  Katharine. 

Hor.  Petruchio,  go  thy  ways;  the  field  is 
won. 

Pet.  Well,  forward,  forward!  thus  the  bowl 
should  run. 

And  not  unluckily  against  the  bias. 

But,  soft!  company  is  coming  here. 

Enter  vincentio. 

[To  vincentio]  Good  morrow,  gentle  mistress; 
where  away? 

Tell  me,  sweet  Kate,  and  tell  me  truly  too. 

Hast  thou  beheld  a  fresher  gentlewoman? 

Such  war  of  white  and  red  within  her  cheeks !  5  o 
What  stars  do  spangle  heaven  with  such  beauty. 
As  those  two  eyes  become  that  heavenly  face? 
Fair  lovely  maid,  once  more  good  day  to  thee. 
Sweet  Kate,  embrace  her  for  her  beauty’s  sake. 
Hor.  A’  will  make  the  man  mad,  to  make  a 
woman  of  him. 

Kath.  Young  budding  virgin,  fair  and  fresh  and 
sweet. 

Whither  away,  or  where  is  thy  abode? 

Happy  the  parents  of  so  fair  a  child; 

Happier  the  man,  whom  favourable  stars  40 
Allot  thee  for  his  lovely  bed-fellow! 

Pet.  Why,  how  now,  Kate!  I  hope  thou  art  not 
mad: 

This  is  a  man,  old,  wrinkled,  faded,  wither’d. 

And  not  a  maiden,  as  thou  say’st  he  is. 

Kath.  Pardon,  old  father,  my  mistaking  eyes. 
That  have  been  so  bedazzled  with  the  sun 
That  everything  I  look  on  seemeth  green: 

Now  I  perceive  thou  art  a  reverend  father; 
Pardon,  I  pray  thee,  for  my  mad  mistaking. 

Pet.  Do,  good  old  grandsire;  and  withal  make 
known  50 

Which  way  thou  travellest:  if  along  with  us. 

We  shall  be  joyful  of  thy  company. 

Vin.  Fair  sir,  and  you  my  merry  mistress, 


ACT  V 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


That  with  your  strange  encounter  much  amazed 
me, 

My  name  is  call’d  Vincentio;  my  dwelling 
Pisa; 

And  bound  I  am  to  Padua;  there  to  visit 
A  son  of  mine,  which  long  I  have  not  seen. 

Pet.  What  is  his  name? 

Vin.  Lucentio,  gentle  sir. 

Pet.  Happily  met;  the  happier  for  thy  son. 

And  now  by  law,  as  well  as  reverend  age,  6o 
I  may  entitle  thee  my  loving  father: 

The  sister  to  my  wife,  this  gentlewoman. 

Thy  son  by  this  hath  married.  Wonder  not. 

Nor  be  not  grieved:  she  is  of  good  esteem. 

Her  dowry  wealthy,  and  of  worthy  birth; 

Beside,  so  qualified  as  may  beseem 
The  spouse  of  any  noble  gentleman. 

Let  me  embrace  with  old  Vincentio, 

And  wander  we  to  see  thy  honest  son. 

Who  will  of  thy  arrival  be  full  joyous.  70 

Vin.  But  is  this  true?  or  is  it  else  your  pleas¬ 
ure. 

Like  pleasant  travellers,  to  break  a  jest 
Upon  the  company  you  overtake? 

Hor.  I  do  assure  thee,  father,  so  it  is. 

Pet.  Come,  go  along,  and  see  the  truth  hereof; 
For  our  first  merriment  hath  made  thee  jealous. 

[Exeunt  all  but  hortensio. 
//or.  Well,  Petruchio,  this  has  put  me  in 
heart. 

Have  to  my  widow!  and  if  she  be  froward. 

Then  hast  thou  taught  Hortensio  to  be  untoward. 

[Exit. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  Padua:  before  Lucentw  s  house 
GREMio  discovered.  Enter  behind  biondello, 
LUCENTIO,  and  bianca. 

Bion.  Softly  and  swiftly,  sir;  for  the  priest  is 
ready. 

Luc.  I  fly,  Biondello:  but  they  may  chance  to 
need  thee  at  home;  therefore  leave  us. 

Bion.  Nay,  faith.  I’ll  see  the  church  o’  your 
back;  and  then  come  back  to  my  master’s  as  soon 
as  I  can. 

[Exeunt  lucentio,  bianca,  and  biondello. 
Gre.  I  marvel  Cambio  comes  not  all  this  while. 

Enter  petruchio,  katharina,  vincentio, 
GRUMio,  with  Attendants. 

Pet.  Sir,  here’s  the  door,  this  is  Lucentio’s 
house: 

My  father’s  bears  more  toward  the  market¬ 
place; 

Thither  must  I,  and  here  I  leave  you,  sir.  ii 


Vin.  You  shall  not  choose  but  drink  before  you 
go: 

I  think  I  shall  command  your  welcome  here, 

And,  by  all  likelihood,  some  cheer  is  toward. 
Knocks. 

Gre.  They’re  busy  within;  you  were  best  knock 
louder. 

PEDANT  looks  out  of  the  window. 

Ped.  What’s  he  that  knocks  as  he  would  beat 
down  the  gate? 

Vin.  Is  Signior  Lucentio  within,  sir? 

Ped.  He’s  within,  sir,  but  not  to  be  spoken 
withal.  21 

Vin.  What  if  a  man  bring  him  a  hundred  pound 
or  two,  to  make  merry  withal? 

Ped.  Keep  your  hundred  pounds  to  yourself:  he 
shall  need  none,  so  long  as  I  live. 

Pet.  Nay,  I  told  you  your  son  was  well  beloved 
in  Padua.  Do  you  hear,  sir?  To  leave  frivolous 
circumstances,  I  pray  you,  tell  Signior  Lucentio 
that  his  father  is  come  from  Pisa  and  is  here  at 
the  door  to  speak  with  him.  ^0 

Ped.  Thou  liest:  his  father  is  come  from  Padua 
and  here  looking  out  at  the  window. 

Vin.  Art  thou  his  father? 

Ped.  Ay,  sir;  so  his  mother  says,  if  I  may  be¬ 
lieve  her. 

Pet.  [To  vincentio]  Why,  how  now,  gentle¬ 
man!  why,  this  is  flat  knavery,  to  take  upon  you 
another  man’s  name. 

Ped.  Lay  hands  on  the  villain:  I  believe  a’  means 
to  cozen  somebody  in  this  city  under  my  coun¬ 
tenance.  41 

Re-enter  biondello. 

Bion.  I  have  seen  them  in  the  church  together: 
God  send  ’em  good  shipping!  But  who  is  here? 
mine  old  master  Vincentio!  now  we  are  undone 
and  brought  to  nothing. 

Vin.  [Seeing  biondello]  Come  hither,  crack- 
hemp. 

Bion.  I  hope  I  may  choose,  sir. 

Vin.  Come  hither,  you  rogue.  What,  have  you 
forgot  me?  50 

Bion.  Forgot  you!  no,  sir:  I  could  not  forget 
you,  for  I  never  saw  you  before  in  all  my  life. 

Vin.  What,  you  notorious  villain,  didst  thou 
never  see  thy  master’s  father,  Vincentio? 

Bion.  What,  my  old  worshipful  old  master?  yes, 
marry,  sir:  see  where  he  looks  out  of  the  win¬ 
dow. 

Fw.  Is’t  so,  indeed?  [Beats  biondello.] 

Bion.  Help,  help,  help!  here’s  a  madman  will 
murder  me.  [Exit.  61 

Ped.  Help,  son!  help,  Signior  Baptista! 

'  [Exit from  above. 


SCENE  I 

Pet.  Prithee,  Kate,  let’s  stand  aside  and  see  the 
end  of  this  controversy. 

Re-enter  pedant  belouo;  tranio,  baptista, 
and  Servants. 

Tra.  Sir,  what  are  you  that  offer  to  beat  my 
servant? 

Vin.  What  am  I,  sir!  nay,  what  are  you,  sir?  O 
immortal  gods!  O  fine  villain!  A  silken  doublet! 
a  velvet  hose!  a  scarlet  cloak!  and  a  copatain  hat! 
O,  I  am  undone!  I  am  undone!  while  I  play  the 
good  husband  at  home,  my  son  and  my  servant 
spend  all  at  the  university. 

Tra.  How  now!  what’s  the  matter? 

Bap.  What,  is  the  man  lunatic? 

Tra.  Sir,  you  seem  a  sober  ancient  gentleman  by 
your  habit,  but  your  words  show  you  a  madman. 
Why,  sir,  what  ’cerns  it  you  if  I  wear  pearl  and 
gold?  I  thank  my  good  father,  I  am  able  to  main¬ 
tain  it.  79 

Vin.  Thy  father!  O  villain!  he  is  a  sail-maker  in 
Bergamo. 

Bap.  You  mistake,  sir,  you  mistake,  sir. 

Pray,  what  do  you  think  is  his  name? 

Vin.  His  name!  as  if  I  knew  not  his  name:  I 
have  brought  him  up  ever  since  he  was  three 
years  old,  and  his  name  is  Tranio. 

Fed.  Away,  away,  mad  ass!  his  name  is  Lucen- 
tio;  and  he  is  mine  only  son,  and  heir  to  the  lands 
of  me,  Signior  Vincentio.  89 

Vin.  Lucentio!  O,  he  hath  murdered  his  mas¬ 
ter!  Lay  hold  on  him,  I  charge  you,  in  the  Duke’s 
name.  O,  my  son,  my  son!  Tell  me,  thou  villain, 
where  is  my  son  Lucentio? 

Tra.  Call  forth  an  officer. 

Enter  one  with  an  Officer. 

Carry  this  mad  knave  to  the  gaol.  Father  Bap¬ 
tista,  I  charge  you  see  that  he  be  forthcoming. 

Vin.  Carry  me  to  the  gaol! 

Gre.  Stay,  officer:  he  shall  not  go  to  prison. 

Bap.  Talk  not,  Signior  Gremio:  I  say  he  shall 
go  to  prison.  100 

Gre.  Take  heed,  Signior  Baptista,  lest  you  be 
cony-catched  in  this  business:  I  dare  swear  this 
is  the  right  Vincentio. 

Fed.  Swear,  if  thou  darest. 

Gre.  Nay,  I  dare  not  swear  it. 

Tra.  Then  thou  wert  best  say  that  I  am  not 
Lucentio. 

Gre.  Yes,  I  know  thee  to  be  Signior  Lucentio. 

Bap.  Away  with  the  dotard!  to  the  gaol  with 
him!  (  no 

Vin.  Thus  strangers  may  be  haled  and  abused: 
O  monstrous  villain! 


225 

Re-enter  bio;vdello,  with  Lucentio  and 

BIANCA. 

Bion.  O!  we  are  spoiled  and — yonder  he  is: 
deny  him,  forswear  him,  or  else  we  are  all  undone. 
Luc.  [Kneeling]  Pardon,  sweet  father. 

Vin.  Lives  my  sweet  son? 

[Exeunt  biondello,  tranio,  and  pedant, 
as  fast  as  may  be. 

Bian.  Pardon,  dear  father. 

Bap.  How  hast  thou  offended? 

Where  is  Lucentio? 

Luc.  Here’s  Lucentio, 

Right  son  to  the  right  Vincentio; 

That  have  by  marriage  made  thy  daughter  mine. 
While  counterfeit  supposes  blear’d  thine  eyne. 
Gre.  Here’s  packing,  with  a  witness,  to  deceive 
us  all! 

Vin.  Where  is  that  damned  villain  Tranio, 

That  faced  and  braved  me  in  this  matter  so? 

Bap.  Why,  tell  me,  is  not  this  my  Cambio? 

Bian.  Cambio  is  changed  into  Lucentio. 

Luc.  Love  wrought  these  miracles.  Bianca’s 
love 

Made  me  exchange  my  state  with  Tranio, 

While  he  did  bear  my  countenance  in  the  town; 
And  happily  I  have  arrived  at  the  last  /50 

Unto  the  wished  haven  of  my  bliss. 

What  Tranio  did,  myself  enforced  him  to; 

Then  pardon  him,  sweet  father,  for  my  sake. 

Vin.  I’ll  slit  the  villain’s  nose,  that  would  have 
sent  me  to  the  gaol. 

Bap.  But  do  you  hear,  sir?  have  you  married 
my  daughter  without  asking  my  good  will? 

Vin.  Fear  not,  Baptista:  we  will  content  you, 
go  to:  but  I  will  in,  to  be  revenged  for  this  vil¬ 
lainy.  [Exit.  140 

Bap.  And  I,  to  sound  the  depth  of  this  knavery. 

[Exit. 

Luc.  Look  not  pale,  Bianca;  thy  father  will  not 
frown.  [Exeunt  lucentio  and  bianca. 

Gre.  My  cake  is  dough;  but  I’ll  in  among  the 
rest. 

Out  of  hope  of  all,  but  my  share  of  the  feast. 

[Exit. 

Kath.  Husband,  let’s  follow,  to  see  the  end  of 
this  ado. 

Pet.  First  kiss  me,  Kate,  and  we  will. 

Kath.  What,  in  the  midst  of  the  street? 

Pet.  What,  are  thou  ashamed  of  me?  /50 

Kath.  No,  sir,  God  forbid;  but  ashamed  to  kiss. 
Pet.  Why,  then  let’s  home  again.  Come,  sirrah, 
let’s  away. 

Kath.  Nay,  I  will  give  thee  a  kiss:  now  pray 
thee,  love,  stay. 

Pet.  Is  not  this  well?  Come,  my  sweet  Kate: 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


ACT  V 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


226 

Better  once  than  never,  for  never  too  late. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Padua:  Lucentw  s  house 
Enter  baptista,  vincentio,  gremio,  the  pedant, 

LUCENTIO,  BIANCA,  PETRUCHIO,  KATHARINA, 
HORTENSIO,  and  WIDOW,  TRANIO,  BIONDELLO, 

and  GRUMio:  the  servingmen  with  tranio 
bringing  in  a  banquet. 

Luc.  At  last,  though  long,  our  jarring  notes 
agree: 

And  time  it  is,  when  raging  war  is  done. 

To  smile  at  scapes  and  perils  overblown. 

My  fair  Bianca,  bid  my  father  welcome, 

While  I  with  self-same  kindness  welcome  thine. 
Brother  Petruchio,  sister  Katharina, 

And  thou,  Hortensio,  with  thy  loving  widow. 
Feast  with  the  best,  and  welcome  to  my  house: 
My  banquet  is  to  close  our  stomachs  up. 

After  our  great  good  cheer.  Pray  you,  sit 
down; 

For  now  we  sit  to  chat  as  well  as  eat.  // 

Pet.  Nothing  but  sit  and  sit,  and  eat  and  eat! 

Bap.  Padua  affords  this  kindness,  son  Petruchio. 
Pet.  Padua  affords  nothing  but  what  is  kind. 

Hor.  For  both  our  sakes,  I  would  that  word 
were  true. 

Pet.  Now,  for  my  life,  Hortensio  fears  his 
widow. 

Wid.  Then  never  trust  me,  if  1  be  afeard. 

Pet.  You  are  very  sensible,  and  yet  you  miss  my 
sense: 

I  mean,  Hortensio  is  afeard  of  you. 

Wid.  He  that  is  giddy  thinks  the  world  turns 
round.  20 

Pet.  Roundly  replied. 

Kath.  Mistress,  how  mean  you  that? 

Wid.  Thus  I  conceive  by  him. 

Pet.  Conceives  by  me!  How  likes  Hortensio 
that? 

Hor.  My  widow  says,  thus  she  conceives  her 
tale. 

Pet.  Very  well  mended.  Kiss  him  for  that,  good 
widow. 

Kath.  “He  that  is  giddy  thinks  the  world  turns 
round”: 

I  pray  you,  tell  me  what  you  meant  by  that. 

Wid.  Your  husband,  being  troubled  with  a 
shrew. 

Measures  my  husband’s  sorrow  by  his  woe: 

And  now  you  know  my  meaning.  50 

Kath.  A  very  mean  meaning. 

Wid.  Right,  I  mean  you. 

Kath.  And  I  am  mean  indeed,  respecting  you. 

Pet.  To  her,  Kate! 

Hor.  To  her,  widow! 


Pet.  A  hundred  marks,  my  Kate  does  put  her 
down. 

Hor.  That’s  my  office. 

Pet.  Spoke  like  an  officer:  ha’  to  thee,  lad! 

Drinks  to  Hortensio. 

Bap.  How  likes  Gremio  these  quick-witted 
folks? 

Gre.  Believe  me,  sir,  they  butt  together  well. 
Bian.  Head,  and  butt!  an  hasty- witted  body 
Would  say  your  head  and  butt  were  head  and 
horn. 

Vin.  Ay,  mistress  bride,  hath  that  awaken’d 
you? 

Bian.  Ay,  but  not  frighted  me;  therefore  I’ll 
sleep  again. 

Pet.  Nay,  that  you  shall  not:  since  you  have  be- 
gun. 

Have  at  you  for  a  bitter  jest  or  two! 

Bian.  Am  I  your  bird?  I  mean  to  shift  my 
bush; 

And  then  pursue  me  as  you  draw  your  bow. 

You  are  welcome  all. 

[Exeunt  bianca,  katharina,  and  widow. 
Pet.  She  hath  prevented  me.  Here,  Signior 
Tranio, 

This  bird  you  aim’d  at,  though  you  hit  her  not; 
Therefore  a  health  to  all  that  shot  and  miss’d.  5/ 
Tra.  O,  sir,  Lucentio  slipp’d  me  like  his  grey¬ 
hound. 

Which  runs  himself  and  catches  for  his  master. 
Pet.  A  good  swift  simile,  but  something  currish. 
Tra.  ’Tis  well,  sir,  that  you  hunted  for  yourself: 
‘Tis  thought  your  deer  does  hold  you  at  a  bay. 
Bap.  O  ho,  Petruchio!  Tranio  hits  you  now. 

Luc.  I  thank  thee  for  that  gird,  good  Tranio. 
Hor.  Confess,  confess,  hath  he  not  hit  you  here? 
Pet.  A’  has  a  little  gall’d  me,  I  confess;  60 

And,  as  the  jest  did  glance  away  from  me, 

’Tis  ten  to  one  it  maim’d  you  two  outright. 

Bap.  Now,  in  good  sadness,  son  Petruchio, 

I  think  thou  hast  the  veriest  shrew  of  all. 

Pet.  Well,  I  say  no:  and  therefore  for  assurance 
Let’s  each  one  send  unto  his  wife; 

And  he  whose  wife  is  most  obedient 
To  come  at  first  when  he  doth  send  for  her. 

Shall  win  the  wager  which  we  will  propose. 

Hor.  Content.  What  is  the  wager? 

Luc.  Twenty  crowns.  70 

Pet.  Twenty  crowns! 

I’ll  venture  so  much  of  my  hawk  or  hound. 

But  twenty  times  so  much  upon  my  wife. 

Luc.  A  hundred  then. 

Hor.  Content. 

Pep.  A  match!  ’tis  done. 

Hor.  Who  shall  begin? 

Luc.  That  will  I. 


SCENE  II 


227 


THE  TAMING 

Go,  Biondello,  bid  your  mistress  come  to  me. 
Bion,  I  go.  [Exit, 

Bap.  Son,  I’ll  be  your  half,  Bianca  comes. 

Luc.  I’ll  have  no  halves;  I’ll  bear  it  all  myself. 

Re-enter  biondello. 

How  now!  what  news? 

Bion.  Sir,  my  mistress  sends  you  word  So 

That  she  is  busy  and  she  cannot  come. 

Pet.  How!  she  is  busy  and  she  cannot  come! 

Is  that  an  answer? 

Gre.  Ay,  and  a  kind  one  too: 

Pray  God,  sir,  your  wife  send  you  not  a  worse. 
Pet.  I  hope,  better. 

Hor.  Sirrah  Biondello,  go  and  entreat  my  wife 
To  come  to  me  forthwith.  [Exit  biondello. 

Pet.  O,  ho!  entreat  her! 

Nay,  then  she  must  needs  come. 

Hor.  I  am  afraid,  sir. 

Do  what  you  can,  yours  will  not  be  entreated. 

Re-enter  biondello. 

Now,  where’s  my  wife?  po 

Bion.  She  says  you  have  some  goodly  jest  in 
hand: 

She  will  not  come;  she  bids  you  come  to  her. 

Pet.  Worse  and  worse;  she  will  not  come! 

O  vile. 

Intolerable,  not  to  be  endured! 

Sirrah  Grumio,  go  to  your  mistress; 

Say,  I  command  her  come  to  me.  [Exit  grumio. 
Hor.  I  know  her  answer. 

Pet.  What? 

Hor.  She  will  not. 

Pet.  The  fouler  fortune  mine,  and  there  an  end. 
Bap.  Now,  by  my  holidame,  here  comes 
Katharina! 

Re-enter  katharina. 

Kath.  What  is  your  will,  sir,  that  you  send  for 
me?  100 

Pet.  Where  is  your  sister,  and  Hortensio’s  wife? 
Kath.  They  sit  conferring  by  the  parlour  fire. 

Pet.  Go,  fetch  them  hither:  if  they  deny  to  come. 
Swinge  me  them  soundly  forth  unto  their  hus¬ 
bands  : 

Away,  I  say,  and  bring  them  hither  straight. 

[Exit  KATHARINA. 

Luc.  Here  is  a  wonder,  if  you  talk  of  a  wonder. 
Hor.  And  so  it  is:  I  wonder  what  it  bodes. 

Pet.  Marry,  peace  it  bodes,  and  love,  and  quiet 
life. 

And  awful  rule,  and  right  supremacy; 

And,  to  be  short,  what  not,  that’s  sweet  and 
happy?  no 

Bap.  Now,  fair  befal  thee,  good  Petruchio! 


OF  THE  SHREW 

The  wager  thou  hast  won;  and  I  will  add 
Unto  their  lossjss  twenty  thousand  crowns; 
Another  dowry  to  another  daughter. 

For  she  is  changed,  as  she  had  never  been. 

Pet.  Nay,  I  will  win  my  wager  better  yet 
And  show  more  sign  of  her  obedience. 

Her  new-built  virtue  and  obedience. 

See  where  she  comes  and  brings  your  froward 
wives 

As  prisoners  to  her  womanly  persuasion.  120 

Re-enter  katharina,  'with  bianga  and  widow. 

Katharine,  that  cap  of  yours  becomes  you  not: 
Off  with  that  bauble,  throw  it  under-foot. 

Wid.  Lord,  let  me  never  have  a  cause  to  sigh. 
Till  I  be  brought  to  such  a  silly  pass! 

Bian.  Fie!  what  a  foolish  duty  call  you  this? 

Luc.  I  would  your  duty  were  as  foolish  too: 

The  wisdom  of  your  duty,  fair  Bianca, 

Hath  cost  me  an  hundred  crowns  since  supper¬ 
time. 

Bian.  The  more  fool  you,  for  laying  on  my  duty. 
Pet.  Katharine,  I  charge  thee,  tell  these  head¬ 
strong  women  /jo 

What  duty  they  do  owe  their  lords  and  husbands. 
Wid.  Come,  come,  you’re  mocking:  we  will 
have  no  telling. 

Pet.  Come  on,  I  say;  and  first  begin  with  her. 
Wid.  She  shall  not. 

Pet.  I  say  she  shall:  and  first  begin  with  her. 
Kath.  Fie,  fie!  unknit  that  threatening  unkind 
brow. 

And  dart  not  scornful  glances  from  those  eyes. 
To  wound  thy  lord,  thy  king,  thy  governor: 

It  blots  thy  beauty  as  frosts  do  bite  the  meads. 
Confounds  thy  fame  as  whirlwinds  shake  fair 
buds,  /40 

And  in  no  sense  is  meet  or  amiable. 

A  woman  moved  is  like  a  fountain  troubled. 
Muddy,  ill-seeming,  thick,  bereft  of  beauty; 

And  while  it  is  so,  none  so  dry  or  thirsty 
Will  deign  to  sip  or  touch  one  drop  of  it. 

Thy  husband  is  thy  lord,  thy  life,  thy  keeper. 
Thy  head,  thy  sovereign;  one  that  cares  for  thee, 
And  for  thy  maintenance  commits  his  body 
To  painful  labour  both  by  sea  and  land. 

To  watch  the  night  in  storms,  the  day  in  cold,  /50 
Whilst  thou  best  warm  at  home,  secure  and  safe; 
And  craves  no  other  tribute  at  thy  hands 
But  love,  fair  looks,  and  true  obedience; 

Too  little  payment  for  so  great  a  debt. 

Such  duty  as  the  subject  owes  the  prince 
Even  such  a  woman  oweth  to  her  husband; 

And  when  she  is  froward,  peevish,  sullen,  sour. 
And  not  obedient  to  his  honest  will, 

What  is  she  but  a  foul  contending  rebel 


228 


ACT  V 


THE  TAMING  OF  THE  SHREW 


And  graceless  traitor  to  her  loving  lord?  i6o 
I  am  ashamed  that  women  are  so  simple 
To  offer  war  where  they  should  kneel  for  peace, 
Or  seek  for  rule,  supremacy  and  sway. 

When  they  are  bound  to  serve,  love,  and  obey. 
Why  are  our  bodies  soft  and  weak  and  smooth. 
Unapt  to  toil  and  trouble  in  the  world. 

But  that  our  soft  conditions  and  our  hearts 
Should  well  agree  with  our  external  parts? 

Come,  come,  you  froward  and  unable  worms! 

My  mind  hath  been  as  big  as  one  of  yours,  /70 
My  heart  as  great,  my  reason  haply  more. 

To  bandy  word  for  word  and  frown  for  frown; 
But  now  I  see  our  lances  are  but  straws. 

Our  strength  as  weak,  our  weakness  past  com¬ 
pare. 

That  seeming  to  be  most  which  we  indeed  least 
are. 

Then  vail  your  stomachs,  for  it  is  no  boot. 

And  place  your  hands  below  your  husband’s  foot: 


In  token  of  which  duty,  if  he  please. 

My  hand  is  ready;  »may  it  do  him  ease. 

?et.  Why,  there’s  a  wench!  Come  on,  and  kiss 
me,  Kate.  1^0 

Luc.  Well,  go  thy  ways,  old  lad;  for  thou  shalt 
ha’t. 

Vin.  ’Tis  a  good  hearing  when  children  are  to¬ 
ward. 

Luc.  But  a  harsh  hearing  when  women  are  fro¬ 
ward. 

Pet.  Come,  Kate,  we’ll  to  bed. 

We  three  are  married,  but  you  two  are  sped. 

[To  LucENTio]  ’Twas  I  won  the  wager,  though 
you  hit  the  white; 

And,  being  a  winner,  God  give  you  good  night! 

[Exeunt  petruchio  and  katharina. 

Hor.  Now,  go  thy  ways;  thou  hast  tamed  a  curst 
shrew. 

Luc.  ’Tis  a  wonder,  by  your  leave,  she  will  be 
tamed  so.  [Exeunt. 


^  THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN 
OF  VERONA 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAE 


Duke  of  Milan,  Father  to  Silvia 

pr."™  I'*' 

Antonio,  Father  to  Proteus 
Thurio,  a  foolish  rival  to  Valentine 
Eglamour,  Agent  for  Silvia  in  her  escape 
Host,  where  Julia  lodges 
Three  Outlaws,  with  Valentine 
Speed,  a  clownish  servant  to  Valentine 


Launce,  the  like  to  Proteus 
Panthino,  Servant  to  Antonio 

Julia,  beloved  of  Proteus 
Silvia,  beloved  of  Valentine 
Lucetta,  waiting-woman  to  Julia 

Non-Speaking  :  Servants  and  musicians 

Scene:  Verona^  Milan,  and  the  frontiers  of  Mantua 


ACT  I 

Scene  I.  Verona:  an  open  place 
Enter  valentine  and  proteus. 

Val.  Cease  to  persuade,  my  loving  Proteus: 
Home-keeping  youth  have  ever  homely  wits. 
Were’t  not  affection  chains  thy  tender  days 
To  the  sweet  glances  of  thy  honour’d  love, 

I  rather  would  entreat  thy  company 
To  see  the  wonders  of  the  world  abroad 
Than,  living  dully  sluggardized  at  home, 

Wear  out  thy  youth  with  shapeless  idleness. 

But  since  thou  lovest,  love  still  and  thrive  therein, 
Even  as  I  would  when  I  to  love  begin.  lo 

Pro.  Wilt  thou  begone?  Sweet  Valentine,  adieu! 
Think  on  thy  Proteus,  when  thou  haply  seest 
Some  rare  note- worthy  object  in  thy  travel: 

Wish  me  partaker  in  thy  happiness 
When  thou  dost  meet  good  hap;  and  in  thy  dan¬ 
ger, 

If  ever  danger  do  environ  thee, 

Commend  thy  grievance  to  my  holy  prayers, 

For  I  will  be  thy  beadsman,  Valentine. 

Val.  And  on  a  love-book  pray  for  my  success? 
Pro.  Upon  some  book  I  love  I’ll  pray  for  thee. 
Val.  That’s  on  some  shallow  story  of  deep 
love:  21 

How  young  Leander  cross’d  the  Hellespont. 

Pro.  That’s  a  deep  story  of  a  deeper  love; 

For  he  was  more  than  over  shoes  in  love. 

Val.  ’Tis  true;  for  you  are  over  boots  in  love. 
And  yet  you  never  swum  the  Hellespont. 

Pro.  Over  the  boots?  nay,  give  me  not  the 
boQts. 

Val.  No,  I  will  not,  for  it  boots  thee  not. 

Pro.  What? 


Val.  To  be  in  love,  where  scorn  is  bought  with 
groans; 

Coy  looks  with  heart-sore  sighs;  one  fading 
moment’s  mirth  50 

With  twenty  watchful,  weary,  tedious  nights: 

If  haply  won,  perhaps  a  hapless  gain; 

If  lost,  why  then  a  grievous  labour  won; 
However,  but  a  folly  bought  with  wit. 

Or  else  a  wit  by  folly  vanquished. 

Pro.  So,  by  your  circumstance,  you  call  me  fooL 
Val.  So,  by  your  circumstance,  I  fear  you’ll 
prove. 

Pro.  ’Tis  love  you  cavil  at  :  I  am  not  Love. 

Val.  Love  is  your  master,  for  he  masters  you: 
And  he  that  is  so  yoked  by  a  fool,  40 

Methinks,  should  not  be  chronicled  for  wise. 

Pro.  Yet  writers  say,  as  in  the  sweetest  bud 
The  eating  canker  dwells,  so  eating  love 
Inhabits  in  the  finest  wits  of  all. 

Val.  And  writers  say,  as  the  most  forward  bud 
Is  eaten  by  the  canker  ere  it  blow. 

Even  so  by  love  the  young  and  tender  wit 
Is  turn’d  to  folly,  blasting  in  the  bud, 

Losing  his  verdure  even  in  the  prime 
And  all  the  fair  effects  of  future  hopes.  50 

But  wherefore  waste  I  time  to  counsel  thee 
That  art  a  votary  to  fond  desire? 

Once  more  adieu!  my  father  at  the  road 
Expects  my  coming,  there  to  see  me  shipp’d. 

Pro.  And  thither  will  I  bring  thee,  Valentine. 
Val.  Sweet  Proteus,  no;  now  let  us  take  our 
leave. 

To  Milan  let  me  hear  from  thee  by  letters 
Of  thy  success  in  love  and  what  news  else 
Betideth  here  in  absence  of  thy  friend; 

And  I  likewise  will  visit  thee  with  mine.  60 


229 


ACT  I 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


230 

Pro.  All  happiness  bechance  to  thee  in  Milan! 

Val.  As  much  to  you  at  home!  and  so,  farewell. 

[Exit. 

Pro.  He  after  honour  hunts,  I  after  love: 

He  leaves  his  friends  to  dignify  them  more; 

I  leave  myself,  my  friends,  and  all,  for  love. 

Thou,  Julia,  thou  hast  metamorphosed  me. 

Made  me  neglect  my  studies,  lose  my  time, 

War  with  good  counsel,  set  the  world  at  nought; 
Made  wit  with  musing  weak,  heart  sick  with 
thought. 

Enter  SPEED. 

Speed.  Sir  Proteus,  save  you!  Saw  you  my 
master?  70 

Pro.  But  now  he  parted  hence,  to  embark  for 
Milan. 

Speed.  Twenty  to  one  then  he  is  shipp’d  already. 
And  I  have  play’d  the  sheep  in  losing  him. 

Pro.  Indeed,  a  sheep  doth  very  often  stray, 

An  if  the  shepherd  be  a  while  away. 

Speed.  You  conclude  that  my  master  is  a  shep¬ 
herd  then  and  I  a  sheep? 

Pro.  I  do. 

Speed.  Why  then,  my  horns  are  his  horns, 

whether  I  wake  or  sleep.  80 

Pro.  A  silly  answer  and  fitting  well  a  sheep. 

Speed.  This  proves  me  still  a  sheep. 

Pro.  True;  and  thy  master  a  shepherd. 

Speed.  Nay,  that  I  can  deny  by  a  circumstance. 

Pro.  It  shall  go  hard  but  I’ll  prove  it  by  another. 

Speed.  The  shepherd  seeks  the  sheep,  and  not 
the  sheep  the  shepherd;  but  I  seek  my  master, 
and  my  master  seeks  not  me:  therefore  I  am  no 
sheep.  91 

Pro.  The  sheep  for  fodder  follow  the  shepherd; 
the  shepherd  for  food  follows  not  the  sheep:  thou 
for  wages  folio  west  thy  master;  thy  master  for 
wages  follows  not  thee:  therefore  thou  art  a 
sheep. 

Speed.  Such  another  proof  will  make  me  cry 
“baa.” 

Pro.  But,  dost  thou  hear?  gavest  thou  my  letter 
to  Julia?  100 

Speed.  Ay,  sir:  I,  a  lost  mutton,  gave  your  letter 
to  her,  a  laced  mutton,  and  she,  a  laced  mutton, 
gave  me,  a  lost  mutton,  nothing  for  my  labour. 

Pro.  Here’s  too  small  a  pasture  for  such  store  of 
muttons. 

Speed.  If  the  ground  be  overcharged,  you  were 
best  stick  her. 

Pro.  Nay:  in  that  you  are  astray,  ’twere  best 
pound  you.  no 

Speed.  Nay,  sir,  less  than  a  pound  shall  serve  me 
for  carrying  your  letter. 

Pro.  You  mistake;  I  mean  the  pound — a  pinfold. 


Speed.  From  a  pound  to  a  pin?  fold  it  over  and 
over, 

’Tis  threefold  too  little  for  carrying  a  letter  to 
your  lover. 

Pro.  But  what  said  she? 

Speed.  [First  nodding]  Ay. 

Pro.  Nod — Ay — why,  that’s  noddy. 

Speed.  You  mistook,  sir;  I  say,  she  did  nod:  and 
you  ask  me  if  she  did  nod;  and  I  say,  “Ay.” 

Pro.  And  that  set  together  is  noddy.  122 

Speed.  Now  you  have  taken  the  pains  to  set  it 
together,  take  it  for  your  pains. 

Pro.  No,  no;  you  shall  have  it  for  bearing  the 
letter. 

Speed.  Well,  I  perceive  I  must  be  fain  to  bear 
with  you. 

Pro.  Why,  sir,  how  do  you  bear  with  me? 

Speed.  Marry,  sir,  the  letter,  very  orderly; 
having  nothing  but  the  word  “noddy”  for  my 
pains. 

Pro.  Beshrew  me,  but  you  have  a  quick  wit. 
Speed.  And  yet  it  cannot  overtake  your  slow 
purse. 

Pro.  Come,  come,  open  the  matter  in  brief:  what 
said  she? 

Speed.  Open  your  purse,  that  the  money  and  the 
matter  may  be  both  at  once  delivered. 

Pro.  Well,  sir,  here  is  for  your  pains.  What  said 
she?  1^0 

Speed.  Truly,  sir,  I  think  you’ll  hardly  win  her. 
Pro.  Why,  couldst  thou  perceive  so  much  from 
her? 

Speed.  Sir,  I  could  perceive  nothing  at  all  from 
her;  no,  not  so  much  as  a  ducat  for  delivering 
your  letter:  and  being  so  hard  to  me  that  brought 
your  mind,  I  fear  she’ll  prove  as  hard  to  you  in 
telling  your  mind.  Give  her  no  token  but  stones; 
for  she’s  as  hard  as  steel. 

Pro.  What  said  she?  nothing?  /50 

Speed.  No,  not  so  much  as  “Take  this  for  thy 
pains.”  To  testify  your  bounty,  I  thank  you,  you 
have  testerned  me;  in  requital  whereof,  hence¬ 
forth  carry  your  letters  yourself:  and  so,  sir.  I’ll 
commend  you  to  my  master. 

Pro.  Go,  go,  be  gone,  to  save  your  ship  from 
wreck. 

Which  cannot  perish  having  thee  aboard. 

Being  destined  to  a  drier  death  on  shore. 

[Exit  SPEED. 

I  must  go  send  some  better  messenger: 

I  fear  my  Julia  would  not  deign  my  lines,  160 
Receiving  them  from  such  a  worthless  post.  [Exit. 

'  Scene  ii.  The  same:  garden  of  Julia  s  house 
Enter  and  lucetta. 

Jul.  But  say,  Lucetta,  now  we  are  alone. 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


W^uldst  thou  then  counsel  me  to  fiill  in  love? 
Luc.  Ay,  madam,  so  you  stumble  not  unheed- 
fully. 

Jul.  Of  all  the  fair  resort  of  gentlemen 
That  every  day  with  park  encounter  me. 

In  thy  opinion  which  is  worthiest  love? 

Luc.  Please  you  repeat  their  names.  I’ll  show 
my  mind 

According  to  my  shallow  simple  skill. 

Jul.  What  think’st  thou  of  the  fair  Sir  Egla- 
mour? 

Luc.  As  of  a  knight  well-  spoken,  neat  and  fine; 
But,  were  I  you,  he  never  should  be  mine.  // 
Jul.  What  think’st  thou  of  the  rich  Mercatio? 
Luc.  Well  of  his  wealth;  but  of  himself,  so  so. 
Jul.  What  think’st  thou  of  the  gentle  Proteus? 
Luc.  Lord,  Lord!  to  see  what  folly  reigns  in  us! 
Jul.  How  now!  what  means  this  passion  at  his 
name? 

Luc.  Pardon,  dear  madam:  tis  a  passing  shame 
That  I,  unworthy  body  as  I  am. 

Should  censure  thus  on  lovely  gentlemen. 

Jul.  Why  not  on  Proteus,  as  of  all  the  rest?  20 
Luc.  Then  thus:  of  many  good  I  think  him  best. 
Jul.  Your  reason? 

Luc.  I  have  no  other  but  a  woman’s  reason; 

I  think  him  so  because  1  think  him  so. 

Jul.  And  wouldst  thou  have  me  cast  my  love  on 
him? 

Luc.  Ay,  if  you  thought  your  love  not  cast 
away. 

Jul.  Why  he,  of  all  the  rest,  hath  never  moved 
me. 

Luc.  Yet  he,  of  all  the  rest,  I  think,  best  loves  ye. 
Jul.  His  little  speaking  shows  his  love  but 
small. 

Luc.  Fire  that’s  closest  kept  burns  most  of  all. 
Jul.  They  do  not  love  that  do  not  show  their 
love. 

Luc.  O,  they  love  least  that  let  men  know  their 
love. 

Jul.  I  would  I  knew  his  mind. 

Luc.  Peruse  this  paper,  madam. 

Jul.  “To  Julia.”  Say,  from  whom? 

Luc.  That  the  contents  will  show. 

Jul.  Say,  say,  who  gave  it  thee? 

Luc.  Sir  Valentine’s  page;  and  sent,  I  think, 
from  Proteus. 

He  would  have  given  it  you;  but  I,  being  in  the 
way. 

Did  in  your  name  receive  it:  pardon  the  fault,  I 
pray.  40 

Jul.  Now,  by  my  modesty,  a  goodly  broker! 
Dare  vou  presume  to  harbour  wanton  lines? 

To  wfiisper  and  conspire  against  my  youth? 

Now,  trust  me,  ’tis  an  office  of  great  worth 


And  you  an  officer  fit  for  the  place. 

There,  take  the  paper:  see  it  be  return’d; 

Or  else  return  no  more  into  my  sight. 

Luc.  To  plead  for  love  deserves  more  fee  than 
hate. 

Jul.  Will  ye  be  gone? 

Luc.  That  you  may  ruminate. 

[Exit. 

Jul.  And  yet  I  would  I  had  o’erlooked  the 

letter:  yo 

It  were  a  shame  to  call  her  back  again 
And  pray  her  to  a  fault  for  which  I  chid  her. 
What  a  fool  is  she,  that  knows  I  am  a  maid. 

And  would  not  force  the  letter  to  my  view! 

Since  maids,  in  modesty,  say  “no”  to  that 
Which  they  would  have  the  profferer  construe 

Fie,  fie,  how  wayward  is  this  foolish  love 
That,  like  a  testy  babe,  will  scratch  the  nurse 
And  presently  all  humbled  kiss  the  rod! 

How  churlishly  I  chid  Lucetta  hence,  60 

When  willingly  I  would  have  had  her  here! 

How  angerly  I  taught  my  brow  to  frown. 

When  inward  joy  enforced  my  heart  to  smile! 
My  penance  is  to  call  Lucetta  back 
And  ask  remission  for  my  folly  past. 

What  ho!  Lucetta! 

Re-enter  lucetta. 

Luc.  What  would  your  ladyship? 

Jul.  Is’t  near  dinner-time? 

Luc.  I  would  it  were. 

That  you  might  kill  your  stomach  on  your  meat 
And  not  upon  your  maid. 

Jul.  What  is’t  that  you  took  up  so  gingerly? 

Luc.  Nothing.  7/ 

Jul.  Why  didst  thou  stoop,  then? 

Luc.  To  take  a  paper  up  that  I  let  fall. 

Jul.  And  is  that  paper  nothing? 

Luc.  Nothing  concerning  me. 

Jul.  Then  let  it  lie  for  those  that  it  concerns. 

Luc.  Madam,  it  will  not  lie  where  it  concerns, 
Unless  it  have  a  false  interpreter. 

Jul.  Some  love  of  yours  hath  writ  to  you  in 
rhyme. 

Luc.  That  I  might  sing  it,  madam,  to  a  tune. 
Give  me  a  note:  your  ladyship  can  set.  81 

Jul.  As  little  by  such  toys  as  may  be  possible. 
Best  sing  it  to  the  tune  of  “Light  o’  Love.” 

Luc.  It  is  too  heavy  for  so  light  a  tune. 

Jul.  Heavy!  belike  it  hath  some  burden  then? 
Luc.  Ay,  and  melodious  were  it,  would  you  sing 
it. 

Jul.  And  why  not  you? 

Luc.  1  cannot  reach  so  high. 

Jul.  Let’s  see  your  song.  How  now,  minion! 


ACT  I 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


^32 

Luc.  Keep  tune  there  still,  so  you  will  sing  it 
out: 

And  yet  methinks  I  do  not  like  this  tune.  po 
]ul.  You  do  not? 

Luc.  No,  madam;  it  is  too  sharp. 

]ul.  You,  minion,  are  too  saucy. 

Luc.  Nay,  now  you  are  too  flat 
And  mar  the  concord  with  too  harsh  a  descant: 
There  wanteth  but  a  mean  to  fill  your  song. 

Jul.  The  mean  is  drown’d  with  your  unruly  bass. 
Luc.  Indeed,  I  bid  the  base  for  Proteus. 

Jul.  This  babble  shall  not  henceforth  trouble  me. 
Here  is  a  coil  with  protestation!  [Tears  the  letter.'] 
Go  get  you  gone,  and  let  the  papers  lie:  too 

You  would  be  fingering  them,  to  anger  me. 

Luc.  She  makes  it  strange;  but  she  would  be 
best  pleased 

To  be  so  anger’d  with  another  letter.  [Exit. 
Jul.  Nay,  would  I  were  so  anger’d  with  the 
same! 

O  hateful  hands,  to  tear  such  loving  words! 
Injurious  wasps,  to  feed  on  such  sweet  honey 
And  kill  the  bees  that  yield  it  with  your  stings! 
I’ll  kiss  each  several  paper  for  amends. 

Look,  here  is  writ  “kind  Julia.”  Unkind  Julia! 

As  in  revenge  of  thy  ingratitude.  no 

I  throw  thy  name  against  the  bruising  stones. 
Trampling  contemptuously  on  thy  disdain. 

And  here  is  writ  “love-wounded  Proteus.” 

Poor  wounded  name!  my  bosom  as  a  bed 
Shall  lodge  thee  till  thy  wound  be  throughly 
heal’d; 

And  thus  I  search  it  with  a  sovereign  kiss. 

But  twice  or  thrice  was  “Proteus”  written  down. 
Be  calm,  good  wind,  blow  not  a  word  away 
Till  I  have  found  each  letter  in  the  letter. 

Except  mine  own  name:  that  some  whirlwind 
bear 

Unto  a  ragged  fearful-hanging  rock  121 

And  throw  it  thence  into  the  raging  sea! 

Lo,  here  in  one  line  is  his  name  twice  writ, 

“Poor  forlorn  Proteus,  passionate  Proteus, 

To  the  sweet  Julia” :  that  I’ll  tear  away. 

And  yet  I  will  not,  sith  so  prettily 
He  couples  it  to  his  complaining  names. 

Thus  will  I  fold  them  one  upon  another: 

Now  kiss,  embrace,  contend,  do  what  you  will. 

Re-enter  lucetta. 

Luc.  Madam,  1^0 

Dinner  is  ready,  and  your  father  stays. 

Jul.  Well,  let  us  go. 

Luc.  What,  shall  these  papers  lie  like  telltales 
here? 

Jul.  If  you  respect  them,  best  to  take  them  up. 
Luc.  Nay,  I  was  taken  up  for  laying  them  down: 


Yet  here  they  shall  not  lie,  for  catching  cold. 

Jul.  I  see  you  have  a  month’s  mind  to  them. 

Luc.  Ay,  madam,  you  may  say  what  sights  you 
see; 

I  see  things  too,  although  you  judge  I  wink. 

Jul.  Come,  come;  will’t  please  you  go?  1^0 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  same:  Antonio's  house. 

Enter  antonio  and  panthino. 

Ant.  Tell  me,  Panthino,  what  sad  talk  was  that 
Wherewith  my  brother  held  you  in  the  cloister? 
Pan.  ’Twas  of  his  nephew  Proteus,  your  son. 
Ant.  Why,  what  of  him? 

Pan.  He  wonder’d  that  your  lordship 

Would  suffer  him  to  spend  his  youth  at  home, 
While  other  men,  of  slender  reputation. 

Put  forth  their  sons  to  seek  preferment  out: 

Some  to  the  wars,  to  try  their  fortune  there; 

Some  to  discover  islands  far  away; 

Some  to  the  studious  universities.  lo 

For  any  or  for  all  these  exercises 
He  said  that  Proteus  your  son  was  meet. 

And  did  request  me  to  importune  you 
To  let  him  spend  his  time  no  more  at  home. 
Which  would  be  great  impeachment  to  his  age. 

In  having  known  no  travel  in  his  youth. 

Ant.  Nor  need’st  thou  much  importune  me  to 
that 

Wheron  this  month  I  have  been  hammering. 

I  have  consider’d  well  his  loss  of  time 

And  how  he  cannot  be  a  perfect  man,  20 

Not  being  tried  and  tutor’d  in  the  world: 

Experience  is  by  industry  achieved 

And  perfected  by  the  swift  course  of  time. 

Then  tell  me,  whither  were  I  best  to  send  him? 
Pan.  I  think  your  lordship  is  not  ignorant 
How  his  companion,  youthful  Valentine, 

Attends  the  Emperor  in  his  royal  court. 

Ant.  I  know  it  well. 

Pan.  ’Twere  good,  I  think,  your  lordship  sent 
him  thither: 

There  shall  he  practise  tilts  and  tournaments,  50 
Hear  sweet  discourse,  converse  with  noblemen. 
And  be  in  eye  of  every  exercise 
Worthy  his  youth  and  nobleness  of  birth. 

Ant.  I  like  thy  counsel;  well  hast  thou  advised: 
And  that  thou  mayst  perceive  how  well  I  like  it 
The  execution  of  it  shall  make  known. 

Even  with  the  speediest  expedition 
I  will  dispatch  him  to  the  Emperor’s  court. 

Pan.  To-morrow,  may  it  please  you,  Don 
^  Alphonso 

With  other  gentlemen  of  good  esteem  40 

Are  journeying  to  salute  the  Emperor 
And  to  commend  their  service  to  his  will. 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


Ant.  Good  company;  with  them  shall  Proteus 

And,  in  good  time!  now  will  we  break  with 
him. 

Enter  proteus. 

Pro.  Sweet  love!  sweet  lines!  sweet  life! 

Here  is  her  hand,  the  agent  of  her  heart; 

Here  is  her  oath  for  love,  her  honour's  pawn. 

O,  that  our  fathers  would  applaud  our  loves, 

To  seal  our  happiness  with  their  consents! 

O  heavenly  Julia!  50 

Ant.  How  now!  what  letter  are  you  reading 
there? 

Pro.  May’t  please  your  lordship,  'tis  a  word 
or  two 

Of  commendations  sent  from  Valentine, 
Deliver’d  by  a  friend  that  came  from  him. 

Ant.  Lend  me  the  letter;  let  me  see  what  news. 
Pro.  There  is  no  news,  my  lord,  but  that  he 
writes 

How  happily  he  lives,  how  well  beloved 
And  daily  graced  by  the  Emperor; 

Wishing  me  with  him,  partner  of  his  fortune. 

Ant.  And  how  stand  you  affected  to  his  wish? 
Pro.  As  one  relying  on  your  lordship’s  will  6i 
And  not  depending  on  his  friendly  wish. 

Ant.  My  will  is  something  sorted  with  his 
wish. 

Muse  not  that  I  thus  suddenly  proceed; 

For  what  I  will,  I  will,  and  there  an  end. 

I  am  resolved  that  thou  shalt  spend  some  time 
With  Valentinus  in  the  Emperor’s  court: 

What  maintenance  he  from  his  friends  receives. 
Like  exhibition  thou  shalt  have  from  me. 
To-morrow  be  in  readiness  to  go:  70 

Excuse  it  not,  for  I  am  peremptory. 

Pro.  My  lord,  I  cannot  be  so  soon  provided: 
Please  you,  deliberate  a  day  or  two. 

Ant.  Look,  what  thou  want’st  shall  be  sent 
after  thee: 

No  more  of  stay!  to-morrow  thou  must  go. 

Come  on,  Panthino:  you  shall  be  employ’d 
To  hasten  on  his  expedition. 

[Exeunt  antonio  and  panthino. 
Pro.  Thus  have  I  shunn’d  the  fire  for  fear  of 
burning. 

And  drench’d  me  in  the  sea,  where  I  am  drown’d. 
I  fear’d  to  show  my  father  Julia’s  letter,  80 

Lest  he  should  take  exceptions  to  my  love; 

And  with  the  vantage  of  mine  own  excuse 
Hath  he  excepted  most  against  my  love. 

O,  how  this  spring  of  love  resembleth 
The  uncertain  glory  of  an  April  day. 

Which  now  shows  all  the  beauty  of  the  sun, 

And  by  and  by  a  cloud  takes  all  away! 


Re-enter  panthino. 

Pan.  Sir  Proteus,  your  father  calls  for  you: 

He  is  in  haste;  therefore,  I  pray  you,  go.  89 

Pro.  Why,  this  it  is:  my  heart  accords  thereto. 
And  yet  a  thousand  times  it  answers  “no.” 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  Milan:  the  Duke' s  palace 
Enter  valentine  and  speed. 

Speed.  Sir,  your  glove. 

Val.  Not  mine;  my  gloves  are  on. 

Speed.  Why,  then,  this  may  be  yours,  for  this 
is  but  one. 

Val.  Ha!  let  me  see:  ay,  give  it  me,  it’s 
mine: 

Sweet  ornament  that  decks  a  thing  divine! 

Ah,  Silvia,  Silvia! 

Speed.  Madam  Silvia!  Madam  Silvia! 

Val.  How  now,  sirrah? 

Speed.  She  is  not  within  hearing,  sir. 

Val.  Why  sir,  who  bade  you  call  her? 

Speed.  Your  worship,  sir;  or  else  I  mistook,  to 

Val.  Well,  you’ll  still  be  too  forward. 

Speed.  And  yet  I  was  last  chidden  for  being  too 
slow. 

Val.  Go  to,  sir:  tell  me,  do  you  know  Madam 
Silvia? 

Speed.  She  that  your  worship  loves? 

Val.  Why,  how  know  you  that  I  am  in  love? 

Speed.  Marry,  by  these  special  marks:  first, 
you  have  learned,  like  Sir  Proteus,  to  wreathe 
your  arms,  like  a  malcontent;  to  relish  a  love- 
song,  like  a  robin-redbreast;  to  walk  alone,  like 
one  that  had  the  pestilence;  to  sigh,  like  a  school¬ 
boy  that  had  lost  his  A  B  C;  to  weep,  like  a 
young  wench  that  had  buried  her  grandam;  to 
fast,  like  one  that  takes  diet;  to  watch,  like  one 
that  fears  robbing;  to  speak  puling,  like  a  beg¬ 
gar  at  Hallowmas.  You  were  wont,  when  you 
laughed  to  crow  like  a  cock;  when  you  walked, 
to  walk  like  one  of  the  lions;  when  you  fasted, 
it  was  presently  after  dinner;  when  you  looked 
sadly,  it  was  for  want  of  money:  and  now  you 
are  metamorphosed  with  a  mistress,  that,  when 
I  look  on  you,  I  can  hardly  think  you  my  master. 

Val.  Are  all  these  things  perceived  in  me? 

Speed.  They  are  all  perceived  without  ye. 

Val.  Without  me?  they  cannot. 

Speed.  Without  you?  nay,  that’s  certain,  for, 
without  you  were  so  simple,  none  else  would: 
but  you  are  so  without  these  follies,  that  these 
follies  are  within  you  and  shine  through  you  like 
the  water  in  an  urinal,  that  not  an  eye  that  sees 


ACT  II 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


234 

you  but  is  a  physician  to  comment  on  your  mal¬ 
ady. 

Val.  But  tell  me,  dost  thou  know  my  lady 
Silvia? 

Speed,  She  that  you  gaze  on  so  as  she  sits  at 
supper? 

Val.  Hast  thou  observed  that?  even  she,  I 
mean. 

Speed,  Why,  sir,  I  know  her  not.  50 

Val.  Dost  thou  know  her  by  my  gazing  on  her, 
and  yet  knowest  her  not? 

Speed.  Is  she  not  hard-favoured,  sir? 

Val.  Not  so  fair,  boy,  as  well-favoured. 

Speed.  Sir,  I  know  that  well  enough. 

Val.  What  dost  thou  know? 

Speed.  That  she  is  not  so  fair  as,  of  you,  well 
favoured. 

Val.  I  mean  that  her  beauty  is  exquisite,  but  her 
favour  infinite.  60 

Speed.  That’s  because  the  one  is  painted  and  the 
other  out  of  all  count. 

Val.  How  painted?  and  how  out  of  count? 

Speed.  Marry,  sir,  so  painted,  to  make  her  fair, 
that  no  man  counts  of  her  beauty. 

Val.  How  esteemest  thou  me?  I  account  of  her 
beauty. 

Speed.  You  never  saw  her  since  she  was  de¬ 
formed. 

Val.  How  long  hath  she  been  deformed?  70 

Speed.  Ever  since  you  loved  her. 

Val.  I  have  loved  her  ever  since  I  saw  her;  and 
still  I  see  her  beautiful. 

Speed.  If  you  love  her,  you  cannot  see  her. 

Val.  Why? 

Speed.  Because  Love  is  blind.  O,  that  you  had 
mine  eyes;  or  your  own  eyes  had  the  lights  they 
were  wont  to  have  when  you  chid  at  Sir  Proteus 
for  going  ungartered ! 

Val.  What  should  I  see  then?  80 

Speed.  Your  own  present  folly  and  her  passing 
deformity:  for  he,  being  in  love,  could  not  see  to 
garter  his  hose,  and  you,  being  in  love,  cannot  see 
to  put  on  your  hose. 

Val.  Belike,  boy,  then,  you  are  in  love;  for  last 
morning  you  could  not  see  to  wipe  my  shoes. 

Speed.  True,  sir;  1  was  in  love  with  my  bed:  I 
thank  you,  you  swinged  me  for  my  love,  which 
makes  me  the  bolder  to  chide  you  for  yours. 

Val.  In  conclusion,  I  stand  affected  to  her.  90 

Speed.  I  would  you  were  set,  so  your  affection 
would  cease. 

Val.  Last  night  she  enjoined  lue  to  write  some 
lines  to  one  she  loves. 

Speed.  And  have  you? 

Val.  I  have. 

Speed.  Are  they  not  lamely  writ? 


Val.  No,  boy,  but  as  well  as  I  can  do  them. 
Peace!  here  she  comes. 

Speed.  [Aside^  O  excellent  motion!  O  exceeding 
puppet!  Now  will  he  interpret  to  her. 

Enter  si l via. 

Val.  Madam  and  mistress,  a  thousand  good- 
morrows. 

Speed  [Aside^  O,  give  ye  good  even!  here’s  a 
million  of  manners. 

Sil.  Sir  Valentine  and  servant,  to  you  two 
thousand. 

Speed.  [Aside']  He  should  give  her  interest,  and 
she  gives  it  him. 

Val.  As  you  enjoin’d  me,  I  have  writ  your  letter 
Unto  the  secret  nameless  friend  of  yours;  iii 

Which  I  was  much  unwilling  to  proceed  in 
But  for  my  duty  to  your  ladyship. 

Sil.  I  thank  you,  gentle  servant:  ’tis  very 
clerkly  done. 

Val.  Now  trust  me,  madam,  it  came  hardly  off; 
For  being  ignorant  to  whom  it  goes 
I  writ  at  random,  very  doubtfully. 

Sil.  Perchance  you  think  too  much  of  so  much 
pains? 

Val.  No,  madam;  so  it  stead  you,  I  will  write, 
Please  you  command,  a  thousand  times  as  much; 
And  yet —  121 

Sil.  A  pretty  period!  Well,  I  guess  the  sequel; 
And  yet  I  will  not  name  it;  and  yet  I  care  not; 
And  yet  take  this  again;  and  yet  I  thank  you, 
Meaning  henceforth  to  trouble  you  no  more. 
Speed.  [Aside]  And  yet  you  will;  and  yet 
another  “yet.” 

Val.  What  means  your  ladyship?  do  you  not 
like  it? 

Sil.  Yes,  yes:  the  lines  are  very  quaintly  writ; 
But  since  unwillingly,  take  them  again. 

Nay,  take  them.  75 o 

Val.  Madam,  they  are  for  you. 

Sil.  Ay,  ay:  you  writ  them,  sir,  at  my  request; 
But  I  will  none  of  them;  they  are  for  you; 

I  would  have  had  them  writ  more  movingly. 

Val.  Please  you.  I’ll  write  your  ladyship  an¬ 
other. 

Sil.  And  when  it’s  writ,  for  my  sake  read  it  over. 
And  if  it  please  you,  so;  if  not,  why,  so. 

Val.  If  it  please  me,  madam,  what  then? 

Sil.  Why,  if  it  please  you,  take  it  for  your 
labour: 

And  so,  good  morrow,  servant.  [Exit.  14.0 
Speed.  O  jest  unseen,  inscrutable,  invisible. 

As  a  nose  on  a  man’s  face,  or  a  weathercock  on  a 
steeple! 

My  master  sues  to  her,  and  she  hath  taught  her 
suitor. 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


He  being  her  pupil,  to  become  her  tutor. 

O  excellent  device!  was  there  ever  heard  a  better, 
That  my  master,  being  scribe,  to  himself  should 
write  the  letter? 

Val.  How  now,  sir?  what  are  you  reasoning 
with  yourself? 

Speed.  Nay,  I  was  rhyming:  ’tis  you  that  have 
the  reason.  /50 

Val.  To  do  what? 

Speed.  To  be  a  spokesman  from  Madam  Silvia. 
Val.  To  whom? 

Speed.  To  yourself:  why,  she  wooes  you  by  a 
figure. 

Val.  What  figure? 

Speed.  By  a  letter,  I  should  say. 

Val.  Why,  she  hath  not  writ  to  me? 

Speed.  What  need  she,  when  she  hath  made  you 
write  to  yourself?  Why,  do  you  not  perceive  the 
jest?  160 

Val.  No,  believe  me. 

Speed.  No  believing  you,  indeed,  sir.  But  did  you 
perceive  her  earnest? 

Val.  She  gave  me  none,  except  an  angry  word. 
Speed.  Why,  she  hath  given  you  a  letter. 

Val.  That’s  the  letter  I  writ  to  her  friend. 

Speed.  And  that  letter  hath  she  delivered,  and 
there  an  end. 

Val.  I  would  it  were  no  worse. 

Speed.  I’ll  warrant  you,  ’tis  as  well:  ijo 

For  often  have  you  writ  to  her,  and  she,  in 
modesty. 

Or  else  for  want  of  idle  time,  could  not  again 
reply; 

Or  fearing  else  some  messenger  that  might  her 
mind  discover. 

Herself  hath  taught  her  love  himself  to  write 
unto  her  lover. 

All  this  I  speak  in  print,  for  in  print  I  found  it. 
Why  muse  you,  sir?  ’tis  dinner-time. 

Val.  I  have  dined. 

Speed.  Ay,  but  hearken,  sir;  though  the  cha¬ 
meleon  Love  can  feed  on  the  air,  I  am  one  that 
am  nourished  by  my  victuals  and  would  fain  have 
meat.  O,  be  not  like  your  mistress;  be  moved, 
be  moved.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Verona:  Julia's  house 
Enter  proteus  and  julia. 

Pro.  Have  patience,  gentle  Julia. 

Jul.  \  must,  where  is  no  remedy. 

Pro.  When  possibly  I  can,  I  will  return. 

Jul.  If  you  turn  not,  you  will  return  the  sooner. 
Keep  this  remembrance  for  thy  Julia’s  sake. 
Giving  a  ring. 

Pro.  Why,  then,  we’ll  make  exchange;  here, 
take  you  this. 


Jul.  And  seal  the  bargain  with  a  holy  kiss. 

Pro.  Here  is  my  hand  for  my  true  constancy; 
And  when  that  hour  o’erslips  me  in  the  day 
Wherein  I  sigh  not,  Julia,  for  thy  sake,  10 

The  next  ensuing  hour  some  foul  mischance 
Torment  me  for  my  love’s  forgetfulness! 

My  father  stays  my  coming;  answer  not; 

The  tide  is  now:  nay,  not  thy  tide  of  tears; 

That  tide  will  stay  me  longer  than  I  should. 

Julia,  farewell!  [&// julia. 

What,  gone  without  a  word? 

Ay,  so  true  love  should  do:  it  cannot  speak; 

For  truth  hath  better  deeds  than  words  to 
grace  it. 

Enter  panthino. 

Pan.  Sir  Proteus,  you  are  stay’d  for. 

Pro.  Go;  I  come,  I  come.  20 

Alas!  this  parting  strikes  poor  lovers  dumb. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  same:  a  street 
Enter  launce,  leading  a  dog. 

Launce.  Nay,  ’twill  be  this  hour  ere  I  have  done 
weeping;  all  the  kind  of  the  Launces  have  this 
very  fault.  1  have  received  my  proportion,  like 
the  prodigious  son,  and  am  going  with  Sir  Proteus 
to  the  Imperial’s  court.  I  think  Crab  my  dog  be 
the  sourest-natured  dog  that  lives:  my  mother 
weeping,  my  father  wailing,  my  sister  crying,  our 
maid  howling,  our  cat  wringing  her  hands,  and  all 
our  house  in  a  great  perplexity,  yet  did  not  this 
cruel-hearted  cur  shed  one  tear:  he  is  a  stone,  a 
very  pebble  stone,  and  has  no  more  pity  in  him 
than  a  dog:  a  Jew  would  have  wept  to  have  seen 
our  parting;  why,  my  grandam,  having  no  eyes, 
look  you,  wept  herself  blind  at  my  parting.  Nay, 
I’ll  show  you  the  manner  of  it.  This  shoe  is  my 
father:  no,  this  left  shoe  is  my  father:  no,  no,  this 
left  shoe  is  my  mother:  nay,  that  cannot  be  so 
neither:  yes,  it  is  so,  it  is  so,  it  hath  the  worser 
sole.  This  shoe,  with  the  hole  in  it,  is  my  mother, 
and  this  my  father;  a  vengeance  on’t  there  ’tis: 
now,  sir,  this  staff  is  my  sister,  for,  look  you, 
she  is  as  white  as  a  lily  and  as  small  as  a  wand: 
this  hat  is  Nan,  our  maid:  I  am  the  dog:  no,  the 
dog  is  himself,  and  I  am  the  dog — Oh!  the  dog  is 
me,  and  I  am  myself;  ay,  so,  so.  Now  come  I 
to  my  father;  Father,  your  blessing:  now  should 
not  the  shoe  speak  a  word  for  weeping:  now 
should  I  kiss  my  father;  well,  he  weeps  on.  Now 
come  I  to  my  mother:  O,  that  she  could  speak 
now  like  a  wood  woman!  Well,  I  kiss  her;  why, 
there  ’tis;  here’s  my  mother’s  breath  up  and 
down.  Now  come  I  to  my  sister;  mark  the  moan 
she  makes.  Now  the  dog  all  this  while  sheds  not 


236  THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


a  tear  nor  speaks  a  word;  but  see  how  I  lay  the 
dust  with  my  tears. 

Enter  panthino. 

Pan.  Launce,  away,  away,  aboard!  thy  master 
is  shipped  and  thou  art  to  post  after  with  oars. 
What’s  the  matter?  why  weepest  thou,  man? 
Away,  ass!  you’ll  lose  the  tide,  if  you  tarry  any 
longer. 

Launce.  It  is  no  matter  if  the  tied  were  lost;  for 
it  is  the  unkindest  tied  that  ever  any  man  tied. 

Pan.  What’s  the  unkindest  tide? 

Launce.  Why,  he  that’s  tied  here,  Crab,  my  dog. 

Pan.  Tut,  man,  I  mean  thou’lt  lose  the  flood, 
and,  in  losing  the  flood,  lose  thy  voyage,  and,  in 
losing  thy  voyage,  lose  thy  master,  and,  in  losing 
thy  master,  lose  thy  service,  and,  in  losing  thy 
service — Why  dost  thou  stop  my  mouth?  j/ 

Launce.  For  fear  thou  shouldst  lose  thy  tongue. 

Pan.  Where  should  I  lose  my  tongue? 

Launce.  In  thy  tale. 

Pan.  In  thy  tail! 

Launce.  Lose  the  tide,  and  the  voyage,  and  the 
master,  and  the  service,  and  the  tied!  Why,  man, 
if  the  river  were  dry,  I  am  able  to  fill  it  with  my 
tears;  if  the  wind  were  down,  I  could  drive  the 
boat  with  my  sighs.  6o 

Pan.  Come,  come  away,  man;  I  was  sent  to  call 
thee. 

Launce.  Sir,  call  me  what  thou  dares t. 

Pan.  Wilt  thou  go? 

Launce.  Well,  I  will  go.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Milan:  the  Duke' s palace 
Enter  silvia,  valentine,  thurio,  and  speed. 

Stl.  Servant! 

Val.  Mistress? 

Speed.  Master,  Sir  Thurio  frowns  on  you. 

Val.  Ay,  boy,  it’s  for  love. 

Speed.  Not  of  you. 

Val.  Of  my  mistress,  then. 

Speed.  ’Twere  good  you  knocked  him.  [Exit. 

Sil.  Servant,  you  are  sad. 

Val.  Indeed,  madam,  I  seem  so. 

Thu.  Seem  you  that  you  are  not?  lo 

Val.  Haply  I  do. 

Thu.  So  do  counterfeits. 

Val.  So  do  you. 

Thu.  What  seem  I  that  I  am  not? 

Val.  Wise. 

Thu.  What  instance  of  the  contrary? 

Val.  Your  folly. 

Thu.  And  how  quote  you  my  folly? 

Val.  I  quote  it  in  your  jerkin. 

Thu.  My  jerkin  is  a  doublet.  20 


Val.  Well,  then,  I’ll  double  your  folly. 

Thu.  How? 

Sil.  What,  angry,  Sir  Thurio!  do  you  change 
colour? 

Val.  Give  him  leave,  madam;  he  is  a  kind  of 
chameleon. 

Thu.  That  hath  more  mind  to  feed  on  your  blood 
than  live  in  your  air. 

Val.  You  have  said,  sir. 

Thu.  Ay,  sir,  and  done  too,  for  this  time.  50 

Val.  I  know  it  well,  sir;  you  always  end  ere  you 
begin. 

Sil.  A  fine  volley  of  words,  gentlemen,  and 
quickly  shot  off. 

Val.  ’Tis  indeed,  madam;  we  thank  the  giver. 

Sil.  Who  is  that,  servant? 

Val.  Yourself,  sweet  lady;  for  you  gave  the  fire. 
Sir  Thurio  borrows  his  wit  from  your  ladyship’s 
looks,  and  spends  what  he  borrows  kindly  in 
your  company.  40 

Thu.  Sir,  if  you  spend  word  for  word  with  me, 
I  shall  make  your  wit  bankrupt. 

Val.  I  know  it  well,  sir;  you  have  an  exchequer 
of  words,  and,  I  think,  no  other  treasure  to  give 
your  followers,  for  it  appears,  by  their  bare 
liveries,  that  they  live  by  your  bare  words. 

Sil.  No  more,  gentlemen,  no  more:  here  comes 
my  father. 

Enter  duke. 

Duke.  Now,  daughter  Silvia,  you  are  hard  beset. 
Sir  V alentine,  your  father’s  in  good  health :  50 

What  say  you  to  a  letter  from  your  friends 
Of  much  good  news? 

Val.  My  lord,  I  will  be  thankful 

To  any  happy  messenger  from  thence. 

Duke.  Know  ye  Don  Antonio,  your  country¬ 
man? 

Val.  Ay,  my  good  lord,  I  know  the  gentleman 
To  be  of  worth  and  worthy  estimation 
And  not  without  desert  so  well  reputed. 

Duke.  Hath  he  not  a  son? 

Val.  Ay,  my  good  lord;  a  son  that  well  deserves 
The  honour  and  regard  of  such  a  father.  60 

Duke.  You  know  him  well? 

Val.  I  know  him  as  myself;  for  from  our  infancy 
We  have  conversed  and  spent  our  hours  together: 
And  though  myself  have  been  an  idle  truant. 
Omitting  the  sweet  benefit  of  time 
To  clothe  mine  age  with  angel-like  perfection. 
Yet  hath  Sir  Proteus,  for  that’s  his  name, 

Made  use  and  fair  advantage  of  his  days; 
His^years  but  young,  but  his  experience  old; 

His  head  unmellow’d,  but  his  judgement  ripe;  70 
And,  in  a  word,  for  far  behind  his  worth 
Comes  all  the  praises  that  I  now  bestow, 


SCENE  IV 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


He  is  complete  in  feature  and  in  mind 
With  all  good  grace  to  grace  a  gentleman. 

Duke,  Beshrew  me,  sir,  but  if  he  make  this  good. 
He  is  as  worthy  for  an  empress’  love 
As  meet  to  be  an  emperor’s  counsellor. 

Well,  sir,  this  gentleman  is  come  to  me. 

With  commendation  from  great  potentates; 

And  here  he  means  to  spend  his  time  awhile:  So 
I  think  ’tis  no  unwelcome  news  to  you. 

Val,  Should  I  have  wish’d  a  thing,  it  had  been  he. 
Duke.  Welcome  him  then  according  to  his 
worth. 

Silvia,  I  speak  to  you,  and  you.  Sir  Thurio; 

For  Valentine,  I  need  not  cite  him  to  it: 

I  will  send  him  hither  to  you  presently.  [Exit. 

Val.  This  is  the  gentleman  I  told  your  ladyship 
Had  come  along  with  me,  but  that  his  mistress 
Did  hold  his  eyes  lock’d  in  her  crystal  looks. 

Sil.  Belike  that  now  she  hath  enfranchised 
them  5?o 

Upon  some  other  pawn  for  fealty. 

Val.  Nay,  sure,  I  think  she  holds  them  prisoners 
still. 

Sil.  Nay,  then  he  should  be  blind;  and,  being 
blind. 

How  could  he  see  his  way  to  seek  out  you? 

Val.  Why,  lady.  Love  hath  twenty  pair  of  eyes. 
Thu.  They  say  that  Love  hath  not  an  eye  at  all. 
Val.  To  see  such  lovers,  Thurio,  as  yourself: 
Upon  a  homely  object  Love  can  wink. 

Sil.  Have  done,  have  done;  here  comes  the 
gentleman.  [Exi/ thurio. 

Enter  proteus. 

Val.  Welcome,  dear  Proteus!  Mistress,  I 
beseech  you,  loo 

Confirm  his  welcome  with  some  special  favour. 
Sil.  His  worth  is  warrant  for  his  welcome  hither, 
If  this  be  he  you  oft  have  wish’d  to  hear  from. 

Val.  Mistress,  it  is:  sweet  lady,  entertain  him 
To  be  my  fellow-servant  to  your  ladyship. 

Sil.  Too  low  a  mistress  for  so  high  a  servant. 

Pro.  Not  so,  sweet  lady:  but  too  mean  a  servant 
To  have  a  look  of  such  a  worthy  mistress. 

Val.  Leave  off  discourse  of  disability: 

Sweet  lady,  entertain  him  for  your  servant.  no 
Pro,  My  duty  will  I  boast  of;  nothing  else. 

Sil.  And  duty  never  yet  did  want  his  meed: 
Servant,  you  are  welcome  to  a  worthless  mistress. 
Pro.  I’ll  die  on  him  that  says  so  but  yourself. 

Sil.  That  you  are  welcome? 

Pro.  That  you  are  worthless. 

Re-enter  thurio. 

77zw. 'Madam,  my  lord  your  father  would  speak 
with  you. 


237 

Sil.  I  wait  upon  his  pleasure.  Come,  Sir  Thurio, 
Go  with  me.  Once  more,  new  servant,  welcome: 
I’ll  leave  you  to  fconfer  of  home  affairs; 

When  you  have  done,  we  look  to  hear  from  you. 
Pro.  We’ll  both  attend  upon  your  ladyship. 

[Exeunt  silvia  and  thurio. 
Val.  Now,  tell  me,  how  do  all  from  whence 
you  came? 

Pro.  Your  friends  are  well  and  have  them  much 
commended. 

Val.  And  how  do  yours? 

Pro.  I  left  them  all  in  health. 

Val.  How  does  your  lady?  and  how  thrives 
your  love? 

Pro.  My  tales  of  love  were  wont  to  weary  you; 

I  know  you  joy  not  in  a  love-discourse. 

Val.  Ay,  Proteus,  but  that  life  is  alter’d  now: 

I  have  done  penance  for  contemning  Love, 
Whose  high  imperious  thoughts  have  punish’d 
me  1^0 

With  bitter  fasts,  with  penitential  groans. 

With  nightly  tears,  and  daily  heart-sore  sighs; 
For  in  revenge  of  my  contempt  of  love. 

Love  hath  chased  sleep  from  my  enthralled  eyes 
And  made  them  watchers  of  mine  own  heart’s 
sorrow. 

O  gentle  Proteus,  Love’s  a  mighty  lord 
And  hath  so  humbled  me  as  I  confess 
There  is  no  woe  to  his  correction 
Nor  to  his  service  no  such  joy  on  earth. 

Now  no  discourse,  except  it  be  of  love;  1^0 
Now  can  I  break  my  fast,  dine,  sup,  and  sleep. 
Upon  the  very  naked  name  of  love. 

Pro.  Enough;  I  read  your  fortune  in  your  eye. 
Was  this  the  idol  that  you  worship  so? 

Val.  Even  she;  and  is  she  not  a  heavenly  saint? 
Pro.  No;  but  she  is  an  earthly  paragon. 

Val.  Call  her  divine. 

Pro.  I  will  not  flatter  her. 

Val.  O,  flatter  me;  for  love  delights  in  praises. 
Pro.  When  I  was  sick,  you  gave  me  bitter  pills. 
And  I  must  minister  the  like  to  you.  /50 

Val.  Then  speak  the  truth  by  her;  if  not  divine. 
Yet  let  her  be  a  principality. 

Sovereign  to  all  the  creatures  on  the  earth. 

Pro.  Except  my  mistress. 

Val.  Sweet,  except  not  any; 

Except  thou  wilt  except  against  my  love. 

Pro.  Have  I  not  reason  to  prefer  mine  own? 

Val.  And  I  will  help  thee  to  prefer  her  too: 

She  shall  be  dignified  with  this  high  honour — 

To  bear  my  lady’s  train,  lest  the  base  earth 
Should  from  her  vesture  chance  to  steal  a  kiss  160 
And,  of  so  great  a  favour  growing  proud. 

Disdain  to  root  the  summer-swelling  flower 
And  make  rough  winter  everlasting. 


238 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


Pro.  Why,  Valentine,  what  braggardism  is 
this? 

Val,  Pardon  me,  Proteus:  all  I  can  is  nothing 
To  her  whose  worth  makes  other  worthies 
nothing; 

She  is  alone. 

Pro.  Then  let  her  alone. 

Val.  Not  for  the  world:  why,  man,  she  is  mine 
own. 

And  I  as  rich  in  having  such  a  jewel 
As  twenty  seas,  if  all  their  sand  were  pearl,  lyo 
The  water  nectar,  and  the  rocks  pure  gold. 
Forgive  me  that  I  do  not  dream  on  thee. 

Because  thou  see’st  me  dote  upon  my  love. 

My  foolish  rival,  that  her  father  likes 
Only  for  his  possessions  are  so  huge. 

Is  gone  with  her  along,  and  I  must  after. 

For  love,  thou  know’st,  is  full  of  jealousy. 

Pro.  But  she  loves  you? 

Val.  Ay,  and  we  are  bethroth’d:  nay,  more,  our 
marriage-hour. 

With  all  the  cunning  manner  of  our  flight,  i8o 

Determined  of;  how  I  must  climb  her  window, 
The  ladder  made  of  cords,  and  all  the  means 
Plotted  and  ’greed  on  for  my  happiness. 

Good  Proteus,  go  with  me  to  my  chamber. 

In  these  affairs  to  aid  me  with  thy  counsel. 

Pro.  Go  on  before;  I  shall  inquire  you  forth: 

I  must  unto  the  road,  to  disembark 
Some  necessaries  that  I  needs  must  use, 

And  then  I’ll  presently  attend  you. 

Val.  Will  you  make  haste?  i^o 

Pro.  IwiW.  [&/?  VALENTINE. 

Even  as  one  heat  another  heat  expels. 

Or  as  one  nail  by  strength  drives  out  another. 

So  the  remembrance  of  my  former  love 
Is  by  a  newer  object  quite  forgotten. 

[Is  it  mine,  or  Valentine’s  praise,] 

Her  true  perfection,  or  my  false  transgression. 
That  makes  me  reasonless  to  reason  thus? 

She  is  fair;  and  so  is  Julia  that  I  love — 

That  I  did  love,  for  now  my  love  is  thaw’d;  200 
Which,  like  a  waxen  image  ’gainst  a  fire, 

Bears  no  impression  of  the  thing  it  was. 

Methinks  my  zeal  to  Valentine  is  cold. 

And  that  I  love  him  not  as  I  was  wont. 

O,  but  I  love  his  lady  too  too  much. 

And  that’s  the  reason  I  love  him  so  little. 

How  shall  I  dote  on  her  with  more  advice, 

That  thus  without  advice  begin  to  love  her! 

’Tis  but  her  picture  I  have  yet  beheld. 

And  that  hath  dazzled  my  reason’s  light;  210 
But  when  I  look  on  her  perfections. 

There  is  no  reason  but  I  shall  be  blind. 

If  I  can  check  my  erring  love,  I  will; 

If  not,  to  compass  her  I’ll  use  my  skill.  [Exit. 


Scene  v.  The  same:  a  street 
Enter  svEEi>and  launce  severally. 

Speed.  Launce!  by  mine  honesty,  welcome  to 
Milan! 

Launce.  Forswear  not  thyself,  sweet  youth,  for 
I  am  not  welcome.  I  reckon  this  always,  that  a 
man  is  never  undone  till  he  be  hanged,  nor  never 
welcome  to  a  place  till  some  certain  shot  be  paid 
and  the  hostess  say  “Welcome!” 

Speed.  Come  on,  you  madcap.  I’ll  to  the  alehouse 
with  you  presently;  where,  for  one  shot  of  five 
pence,  thou  shalt  have  five  thousand  welcomes. 
But,  sirrah,  how  did  thy  master  part  with  Madam 
Julia? 

Launce.  Marry,  after  they  closed  in  earnest, 
they  parted  very  fairly  in  jest. 

Speed.  But  shall  she  marry  him? 

Launce.  No. 

Speed.  How  then?  shall  he  marry  her? 

Launce.  No,  neither. 

Speed.  What,  are  they  broken? 

Launce.  No,  they  are  both  as  whole  as  a  fish.  20 
Speed.  Why,  then,  how  stands  the  matter  with 
them? 

Launce.  Marry,  thus;  when  it  stands  well  with 
him,  it  stands  well  with  her. 

Speed. Whzt  an  ass  art  thou !  I  understand  thee  not. 
Ijiunce.Wh2t  a  block  art  thou,  that  thou  canst 
not!  My  staff  understands  me. 

Speed.  What  thou  sayest? 

Launce.  Ay,  and  what  I  do  too:  look  thee.  I’ll 
but  lean,  and  my  staff  understands  me.  5/ 

Speed.  It  stands  under  thee,  indeed. 

Launce.  Why,  stand-under  and  under-stand  is 
all  one. 

Speed.  But  tell  me  true,  will’t  be  a  match? 

Launce.  Ask  my  dog:  if  he  say  ay,  it  will;  if  he 
say  no,  it  will;  if  he  shake  his  tail  and  say 
nothing,  it  will. 

Speed.  The  conclusion  is  then  that  it  will. 

Launce.  Thou  shalt  never  get  such  a  secret  from 
me  but  by  a  parable.  4/ 

Speed.  ’Tis  well  that  I  get  it  so.  But,  Launce, 
how  sayest  thou,  that  my  master  is  become  a 
notable  lover? 

Launce.  I  never  knew  him  otherwise. 

Speed.  Than  how? 

Launce.  A  notable  lubber,  as  thou  reportest  him 
to  be. 

Speed.  Why,  thou  whoreson  ass,  thou  mistakest 
me.  50 

Launce.  Why,  fool,  I  meant  not  thee;  I  meant 
thy  master. 

Speed.  I  tell  thee,  my  master  is  become  a  hot 
lover. 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


Launce.  Why,  1  tell  thee,  I  care  not  though  he 
burn  himself  in  love.  If  thou  wilt,  go  with  me  to 
the  alehouse;  if  not,  thou  art  an  Hebrew,  a  Jew, 
and  not  worth  the  name  of  a  Christian. 

Speed.  Why?  59 

Launce.  Because  thou  hast  not  so  much  charity 
in  thee  as  to  go  to  the  ale  with  a  Christian.  Wilt 
thou  go? 

Speed.  At  thy  service.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  vi.  The  same:  the  Duke' s  palace 
Enter  proteus. 

Pro.  To  leave  my  Julia,  shall  I  be  forsworn; 

To  love  fair  Silvia,  shall  I  be  forsworn; 

To  wrong  my  friend,  I  shall  be  much  forsworn; 
And  even  that  power  which  gave  me  first  my 
oath 

Provokes  me  to  this  threefold  perjury; 

Love  bade  me  swear  and  Love  bids  me  forswear. 
O  sweet-suggesting  Love,  if  thou  hast  sinn’d, 
Teach  me,  thy  tempted  subject,  to  excuse  it! 

At  first  I  did  adore  a  twinkling  star, 

But  now  I  worship  a  celestial  sun.  lo 

Unheedful  vows  may  heedfully  be  broken, 

And  he  wants  wit  that  wants  resolved  will 
To  learn  his  wit  to  exchange  the  bad  for  better. 
Fie,  fie,  unreverend  tongue!  to  call  her  bad, 
Whose  sovereignty  so  oft  thou  hast  preferr’d 
With  twenty  thousand  soul-confirming  oaths. 

I  cannot  leave  to  love,  and  yet  I  do; 

But  there  1  leave  to  love  where  I  should  love. 

Julia  I  lose  and  Valentine  I  lose: 

If  I  keep  them,  I  needs  must  lose  myself;  20 
If  I  lose  them,  thus  find  I  by  their  loss 
For  Valentine  myself,  for  Julia  Silvia. 

I  to  myself  am  dearer  than  a  friend. 

For  love  is  still  most  precious  in  itself; 

And  Silvia — witness  Heaven,  that  made  her 
fair! — 

Shows  Julia  but  a  swarthy  Ethiope. 

I  will  forget  that  Julia  is  alive. 

Remembering  that  my  love  to  her  is  dead; 

And  Valentine  Fll  hold  an  enemy. 

Aiming  at  Silvia  as  a  sweeter  friend.  50 

I  cannot  now  prove  constant  to  myself. 

Without  some  treachery  used  to  Valentine. 

This  night  he  meaneth  with  a  corded  ladder 
To  climb  celestial  Silvia’s  chamber- window. 
Myself  in  counsel,  his  competitor. 

Now  presently  I’ll  give  her  father  notice 
Of  their  disguising  and  pretended  flight; 

Who,  all  enraged,  will  banish  Valentine; 

For  Thurio,  he  intends,  shall  wed  his  daughter; 
But,  Valentine  being  gone.  I’ll  quickly  cross  40 
By  some  sly  trick  blunt  Thurio’ s  dull  proceed¬ 
ing. 


Love,  lend  me  wings  to  make  my  purpose  swift. 
As  thou  hast  lent  me  wit  to  plot  this  drift!  [Exit. 

Scene  vii.  Verona:  Julia's  house 
Enter  julia  and  lucetta. 

Jul.  Counsel,  Lucetta;  gentle  girl,  assist  me; 

And  even  in  kind  love  I  do  conjure  thee. 

Who  art  the  table  wherein  all  my  thoughts 
Are  visibly  character’d  and  engraved, 

To  lesson  me  and  tell  me  some  good  mean 
How,  with  my  honour,  I  may  undertake 
A  journey  to  my  loving  Proteus. 

Luc.  Alas,  the  way  is  wearisome  and  long! 

Jul.  A  true-devoted  pilgrim  is  not  weary 
To  measure  kingdoms  with  his  feeble  steps;  10 
Much  less  shall  she  that  hath  Love’s  wings  to  fly. 
And  when  the  flight  is  made  to  one  so  dear. 

Of  such  divine  perfection,  as  Sir  Proteus. 

Luc.  Better  forbear  till  Proteus  make  return. 

Jul.  O,  know’st  thou  not  his  looks  are  my  soul’s 
food? 

Pity  the  dearth  that  I  have  pined  in. 

By  longing  for  that  food  so  long  a  time. 

Didst  thou  but  know  the  inly  touch  of  love. 

Thou  wouldst  as  soon  go  kindle  fire  with  snow 
As  seek  to  quench  the  fire  of  love  with  words.  20 
Luc.  I  do  not  seek  to  quench  your  love’s  hot  fire, 
But  qualify  the  fire’s  extreme  rage. 

Lest  it  should  burn  above  the  bounds  of  reason. 
Jul.  The  more  thou  damn’st  it  up,  the  more  it 
burns. 

The  current  that  with  gentle  murmur  glides. 
Thou  know’st,  being  stopp’d,  impatiently  doth 
rage; 

But  when  his  fair  course  is  not  hindered. 

He  makes  sweet  music  with  the  enamell’d  stones, 
Giving  a  gentle  kiss  to  every  sedge 
He  overtaketh  in  his  pilgrimage,  50 

And  so  by  many  winding  nooks  he  strays 
With  willing  sport  to  the  wild  ocean. 

Then  let  me  go  and  hinder  not  my  course: 

I’ll  be  as  patient  as  a  gentle  stream 
And  make  a  pastime  of  each  weary  step. 

Till  the  last  step  have  brought  me  to  my  love; 
And  there  I’ll  rest,  as  after  much  turmoil 
A  blessed  soul  doth  in  Elysium. 

Luc.  But  in  what  habit  will  you  go  along? 

Jul.  Not  like  a  woman;  for  I  would  prevent  40 
The  loose  encounters  of  lascivious  men: 

Gentle  Lucetta,  fit  me  with  such  weeds 
As  may  beseem  some  well-reputed  page. 

Luc.  Why,  then,  your  ladyship  must  cut  your 
hair. 

Jul.  No,  girl;  I’ll  knit  it  up  in  silken  strings 
With  twenty  odd-conceited  true-love  knots. 

To  be  fantastic  may  become  a  youth 


ACT  in 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


240 

Of  greater  time  than  I  shall  show  to  be. 

Liic.  What  fashion,  madam,  shall  I  make  your 
breeches? 

JuL  That  fits  as  well  as  “Tell  me,  good  my  lord. 
What  compass  will  you  wear  your  farthingale?” 
Why  even  what  fashion  thou  best  likest,  Lucetta. 
Luc.  You  must  needs  have  them  with  a  codpiece, 
madam. 

Jul.  Out,  out,  Lucetta!  that  will  be  ill-favour’d. 
Luc.  A  round  hose,  madam,  now’s  not  worth  a 
pin, 

Unless  you  have  a  codpiece  to  stick  pins  on. 

Jul.  Lucetta,  as  thou  lovest  me,  let  me  have 
What  thou  thinkest  meet  and  is  most  mannerly. 
But  tell  me,  wench,  how  will  the  world  repute 
me 

For  undertaking  so  unstaid  a  journey?  60 

I  fear  me,  it  will  make  me  scandalized. 

Luc.  If  you  think  so,  then  stay  at  home  and  go 
not. 

Jul.  Nay,  that  I  will  not. 

Luc.  Then  never  dream  on  infamy,  but  go. 

If  Proteus  like  your  journey  when  you  come. 

No  matter  who’s  displeased  when  you  are  gone: 

I  fear  me,  he  will  scarce  be  pleased  withal. 

Jul.  That  is  the  least,  Lucetta,  of  my  fear: 

A  thousand  oaths,  an  ocean  of  his  tears 

And  instances  of  infinite  of  love  70 

Warrant  me  welcome  to  my  Proteus. 

Luc.  All  these  are  servants  to  deceitful  men. 

Jul.  Base  men,  that  use  them  to  so  base  effect! 
But  truer  stars  did  govern  Proteus’  birth; 

His  words  are  bonds,  his  oaths  are  oracles. 

His  love  sincere,  his  thoughts  immaculate. 

His  tears  pure  messengers  sent  from  his  heart. 

His  heart  as  far  from  fraud  as  heaven  from  earth. 
Luc.  Pray  heaven  he  prove  so,  when  you  come 
to  him! 

Jul.  Now,  as  thou  lovest  me,  do  him  not  that 
wrong  So 

To  bear  a  hard  opinion  of  his  truth: 

Only  deserve  my  love  by  loving  him; 

And  presently  go  with  me  to  my  chamber, 

To  take  a  note  of  what  I  stand  in  need  of. 

To  furnish  me  upon  my  longing  journey. 

All  that  is  mine  I  leave  at  thy  dispose. 

My  goods,  my  lands,  my  reputation; 

Only,  in  lieu  thereof,  dispatch  me  hence. 

Come,  answer  not,  but  to  it  presently! 

I  am  impatient  of  my  tarriance.  [Exeunt.  90 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  Milan:  the  Duke' s palace 
Enter  duke,  thurio,  and  proteus. 

Duke.  Sir  Thurio,  give  us  leave,  I  pray,  awhile; 


We  have  some  secrets  to  confer  about. 

,  THURIO. 

Now  tell  me,  Proteus,  what’s  your  will  with 
me? 

Pro.  My  gracious  lord,  that  which  I  would 
discover 

The  law  of  friendship  bids  me  to  conceal; 

But  when  I  call  to  mind  your  gracious  favours 
Done  to  me,  undeserving  as  I  am. 

My  duty  pricks  me  on  to  utter  that 
Which  else  no  worldly  good  should  draw  from 
me.  ^ 

Know,  worthy  prince.  Sir  Valentine,  my  friend. 
This  night  intends  to  steal  away  your  daughter: 
Myself  am  one  made  privy  to  the  plot. 

I  know  you  have  determined  to  bestow  her 
On  Thurio,  whom  your  gentle  daughter  hates ; 
And  should  she  thus  be  stol’n  away  from  you. 

It  would  be  much  vexation  to  your  age. 

Thus,  for  my  duty’s  sake,  I  rather  chose 
To  cross  my  friend  in  his  intended  drift 
Than,  by  concealing  it,  heap  on  your  head 
A  pack  of  sorrows  which  would  press  you  down. 
Being  unprevented,  to  your  timeless  grave.  21 
Duke.  Proteus,  I  thank  thee  for  thine  honest 
care; 

Which  to  requite,  command  me  while  I  live. 

This  love  of  theirs  myself  have  often  seen. 

Haply  when  they  have  judged  me  fast  asleep. 

And  oftentimes  have  purposed  to  forbid 
Sir  Valentine  her  company  and  my  court: 

But  fearing  lest  my  jealous  aim  might  err 
And  so  unworthily  disgrace  the  man, 

A  rashness  that  I  ever  yet  have  shunn’d,  50 
I  gave  him  gentle  looks,  thereby  to  find 
That  which  thyself  hast  now  disclosed  to  me. 
And,  that  thou  mayst  perceive  my  fear  of  this. 
Knowing  that  tender  youth  is  soon  suggested, 

I  nightly  lodge  her  in  an  upper  tower. 

The  key  whereof  myself  have  ever  kept; 

And  thence  she  cannot  be  convey’d  away. 

Pro.  Know,  noble  lord,  they  have  devised  a 
mean 

How  he  her  chamber-window  will  ascend 
And  with  a  corded  ladder  fetch  her  down;  40 
For  which  the  youthful  lover  now  is  gone 
And  this  way  comes  he  with  it  presently; 

Where,  if  it  please  you,  you  may  intercept  him. 
But,  good  my  Lord,  do  it  so  cunningly 
That  my  discovery  be  not  aimed  at; 

For  love  of  you,  not  hate  unto  my  friend. 

Hath  made  me  publisher  of  this  pretence. 

Duke.  Upon  mine  honour,  he  shall  never  know 
That  I  had  any  light  from  thee  of  this. 

Pro.  Adieu,  my  lord;  Sir  Valentine  is  coming. 

[Exit.  50 


SCENE  I 


241 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


Enter  valentine. 

Duke.  Sir  Valentine,  whither  away  so  fast? 

Val.  Please  it  your  Grace,  there  is  a  messenger 
That  stays  to  bear  my  letters  to  my  friends. 

And  I  am  going  to  deliver  them. 

Duke.  Be  they  of  much  import? 

Val.  The  tenour  of  them  doth  but  signify 
My  health  and  happy  being  at  your  court. 

Duke.  Nay  then,  no  matter;  stay  with  me 
awhile; 

I  am  to  break  with  thee  of  some  affairs 
That  touch  me  near,  wherein  thou  must  be  secret. 
’Tis  not  unknown  to  thee  that  I  have  sought  61 
To  match  my  friend  Sir  Thurio  to  my  daughter. 
Val.  I  know  it  well,  my  Lord;  and,  sure,  the 
match 

Were  rich  and  honourable;  besides,  the  gentle¬ 
man 

Is  full  of  virtue,  bounty,  worth,  and  qualities 
Beseeming  such  a  wife  as  your  fair  daughter: 
Cannot  your  Grace  win  her  to  fancy  him? 

Duke.  No,  trust  me;  she  is  peevish,  sullen, 
froward, 

Proud,  disobedient,  stubborn,  lacking  duty, 
Neither  regarding  that  she  is  my  child  70 

Nor  fearing  me  as  if  I  were  her  father; 

And,  may  1  say  to  thee,  this  pride  of  hers. 

Upon  advice,  hath  drawn  my  love  from  her; 

And,  where  I  thought  the  remnant  of  mine  age 
Should  have  been  cherish’d  by  her  child-like  duty, 
I  now  am  full  resolved  to  take  a  wife 
x\nd  turn  her  out  to  who  will  take  her  in: 

Then  let  her  beauty  be  her  wedding-dower; 

For  me  and  my  possessions  she  esteems  not. 

Val.  What  would  your  Grace  have  me  to  do  in 
this?  80 

Duke.  There  is  a  lady  in  Verona  here 
Whom  I  affect;  but  she  is  nice  and  coy 
And  nought  esteems  my  aged  eloquence: 

Now  therefore  would  I  have  thee  to  my  tutor — 
For  long  agone  I  have  forgot  to  court; 

Besides,  the  fashion  of  the  time  is  changed — 

How  and  which  way  I  may  bestow  myself 
To  be  regarded  in  her  sun-bright  eye. 

Val.  Win  her  with  gifts,  if  she  respect  not 
words: 

Dumb  jewels  often  in  their  silent  kind 
More  than  quick  words  do  move  a  woman’s  mind. 
Duke.  But  she  did  scorn  a  present  that  I  sent  her. 
Val.  A  woman  sometimes  scorns  what  best 
contents  her. 

Send  her  another;  never  give  her  o’er; 

For  scorn  at  first  makes  after-love  the  more. 

If  shfe  do  frown,  ’tis  not  in  hate  of  you. 

But  rather  to  beget  more  love  in  you: 


If  she  do  chide,  ’tis  not  to  have  you  gone; 

For  why,  the  fools  are  mad,  if  left  alone. 

T ake  no  repulse,  whatever  she  doth  say;  100 

For  “get  you  gone,”  she  doth  not  mean  “away!” 
Flatter  and  praise,  commend,  extol  their  graces; 
Though  ne’er  so  black,  say  they  have  angels’ 
faces. 

That  man  that  hath  a  tongue,  I  say,  is  no  man. 

If  with  his  tongue  he  cannot  win  a  woman. 

Duke.  But  she  I  mean  is  promised  by  her  friends 
Unto  a  youthful  gentleman  of  worth. 

And  kept  severely  from  resort  of  men. 

That  no  man  hath  access  by  day  to  her. 

Val.  Why,  then,  I  would  resort  to  her  by  night. 
Duke.  Ay,  but  the  doors  be  lock’d  and  keys 
kept  safe,  m 

That  no  man  hath  recourse  to  her  by  night. 

Val.  What  lets  but  one  may  enter  at  her 
window? 

Duke.  Her  chamber  is  aloft,  far  from  the  ground. 
And  built  so  shelving  that  one  cannot  climb  it 
Without  apparent  hazard  of  his  life. 

Val.  Why  then,  a  ladder  quaintly  made  of 
cords, 

To  cast  up,  with  a  pair  of  anchoring  hooks. 
Would  serve  to  scale  another  Hero’s  tower. 

So  bold  Leander  would  adventure  it.  120 

Duke.  Now,  as  thou  art  a  gentleman  of  blood, 
Advise  me  where  I  may  have  such  a  ladder. 

Val.  When  would  you  use  it?  pray,  sir,  tell  me 
that. 

Duke.  This  very  night;  for  Love  is  like  a  child. 
That  longs  for  every  thing  that  he  can  come  by. 
Val.  By  seven  o’clock  I’ll  get  you  such  a  ladder. 
Duke.  But,  hark  thee;  I  will  go  to  her  alone: 
How  shall  I  best  convey  the  ladder  thither? 

Val.  It  will  be  light,  my  lord,  that  you  may  bear 
it 

Under  a  cloak  that  is  of  any  length.  75 o 

Duke.  A  cloak  as  long  as  thine  will  serve  the 
turn? 

Val.  Ay,  my  good  lord. 

Duke.  Then  let  me  see  thy  cloak: 

I’ll  get  me  one  of  such  another  length. 

Val.  Why,  any  cloak  will  serve  the  turn,  my 
lord. 

Duke.  How  shall  I  fashion  me  to  wear  a  cloak? 

I  pray  thee,  let  me  feel  thy  cloak  upon  me. 

VVhat  letter  is  this  same?  What’s  here?  “To 
Silvia”! 

And  here  an  engine  fit  for  my  proceeding. 

I’ll  be  so  bold  to  break  the  seal  for  once.  [Reads. 
“My  thoughts  do  harbour  with  my  Silvia  nightly. 
And  slaves  they  are  to  me  that  send  them 
flying:  141 

O,  could  their  master  come  and  go  as  lightly, 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


Himself  would  lodge  where  senseless  they 
are  lying! 

My  herald  thoughts  in  thy  pure  bosom  rest  them; 
While  L  their  king,  that  hither  them  impor¬ 
tune, 

Do  curse  the  grace  that  with  such  grace  hath 
bless’d  them. 

Because  myself  do  want  my  servants’  fortune: 

I  curse  myself,  for  they  are  sent  by  me. 

That  they  should  harbour  where  their  lord  would 
be.” 

What’s  here?  /50 

“Silvia,  this  night  I  will  enfranchise  thee.” 
’Tis  so;  and  here’s  the  ladder  for  the  purpose. 
Why,  Phaethon — for  thou  art  Merops’  son — 
Wilt  thou  aspire  to  guide  the  heavenly  car 
And  with  thy  daring  folly  burn  the  world? 

Wilt  thou  reach  stars,  because  they  shine  on  thee? 
Go,  base  intruder!  overweening  slave! 

Bestow  thy  fawning  smiles  on  equal  mates. 

And  think  my  patience,  more  than  thy  desert, 

I s  privilege  for  thy  departure  hence :  / 60 

Thank  me  for  this  more  than  for  all  the  favours 
Which  all  too  much  I  have  bestow’d  on  thee. 

But  if  thou  linger  in  my  territories 

Longer  than  swiftest  expedition 

Will  give  thee  time  to  leave  our  royal  court. 

By  heaven!  my  wrath  shall  far  exceed  the  love 
I  ever  bore  my  daughter  or  thyself. 

Be  gone!  I  will  not  hear  thy  vain  excuse; 

But,  as  thou  lovest  thy  life,  make  speed  from 
hence.  [Exit. 

Val.  And  why  not  death  rather  than  living 
torment?  /70 

To  die  is  to  be  banish’d  from  myself; 

And  Silvia  is  myself:  banish’d  from  her 
Is  self  from  self:  a  deadly  banishment! 

What  light  is  light,  if  Silvia  be  not  seen? 

What  joy  is  joy,  if  Silvia  be  not  by? 

Unless  it  be  to  think  that  she  is  by 
And  feed  upon  the  shadow  of  perfection. 

Except  I  be  by  Silvia  in  the  night. 

There  is  no  music  in  the  nightingale; 

Unless  I  look  on  Silvia  in  the  day,  iSo 

There  is  no  day  for  me  to  look  upon; 

She  is  my  essence,  and  I  leave  to  be. 

If  I  be  not  by  her  fair  influence 
Foster’d,  illumined,  cherish’d,  kept  alive. 

I  fly  not  death,  to  fly  his  deadly  doom: 

Tarry  I  here,  I  but  attend  on  death: 

But,  fly  I  hence,  I  fly  away  from  life. 

Enter  proteus  and  launce. 

Pro.  Run,  boy,  run,  run,  and  seek  him  out. 
Launce.  Soho,  soho! 

Pro.  What  seest  thou?  190 


Launce.  Him  we  go  to  find:  there’s  not  a  hair 
on’s  head  but  ’tis  a  Valentine. 

Pro.  Valentine? 

Val.  No. 

Pro.  Who  then?  his  spirit? 

Val.  Neither. 

Pro.  What  then? 

Val.  Nothing. 

Launce.  Can  nothing  speak?  Master,  shall  I 
strike? 

Pro.  Who  wouldst  thou  strike?  200 

Launce.  Nothing. 

Pro.  Villain,  forbear. 

Launce.  Why,  sir.  I’ll  strike  nothing:  I  pray 
you — 

Pro.  Sirrah,  I  say,  forbear.  Friend  Valentine,  a 
word. 

Val.  My  ears  are  stopt  and  cannot  hear  good 
news. 

So  much  of  bad  already  hath  possess’d  them. 

Pro.  Then  in  dumb  silence  will  I  bury  mine, 

For  they  are  harsh,  untuneable  and  bad. 

Val.  Is  Silvia  dead? 

Pro.  No,  Valentine.  210 

Val.  No  Valentine,  indeed,  for  sacred  Silvia. 
Hath  she  forsworn  me? 

Pro.  No,  Valentine. 

Val.  No  Valentine,  if  Silvia  have  forsworn  me. 
What  is  your  news? 

Launce.  Sir,  there  is  a  proclamation  that  you  are 
vanished. 

Pro.  That  thou  art  banished — O,  that’s  the 
news! — 

From  hence,  from  Silvia,  and  from  me  thy  friend. 

Val.  O,  I  have  fed  upon  this  woe  already. 

And  now  excess  of  it  will  make  me  surfeit.  220 
Doth  Silvia  know  that  I  am  banished? 

Pro.  Ay,  ay;  and  she  hath  offer’d  to  the  doom — 
Which,  unreversed,  stands  in  effectual  force— 

A  sea  of  melting  pearl,  which  some  call  tears: 
Those  at  her  father’s  churlish  feet  she  tender’d; 
With  them,  upon  her  knees,  her  humble  self; 
Wringing  her  hands,  whose  whiteness  so  became 
them 

As  if  but  now  they  waxed  pale  for  woe: 

But  neither  bended  knees,  pure  hands  held  up. 

Sad  sighs,  deep  groans,  nor  silver-shedding  tears, 
Could  penetrate  her  uncompassionate  sire;  25/ 
But  Valentine,  if  he  be  ta’en,  must  die. 

Besides,  her  intercession  chafed  him  so, 

When  she  for  thy  repeal  was  suppliant. 

That  to  close  prison  he  commanded  her. 

With  many  bitter  threats  of  biding  there. 

Val.  No  more;  unless  the  next  word  that  thou 
speak’st 

Have  some  malignant  power  upon  my  life: 


SCENE  1 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


If  so,  1  pray  thee,  breathe  it  in  mine  ear, 

As  ending  anthem  of  my  endless  dolour.  240 

Pro.  Cease  to  lament  for  that  thou  canst  not 
help, 

And  study  help  for  that  which  thou  lament’st. 
Time  is  the  nurse  and  breeder  of  all  good. 

Here  if  thou  stay,  thou  canst  not  see  thy  love; 
Besides,  thy  staying  will  abridge  thy  life. 

Hope  is  a  lover’s  staff;  walk  hence  with  that 
And  manage  it  against  despairing  thoughts. 

Thy  letters  may  be  here,  though  thou  art  hence; 
Which,  being  writ  to  me,  shall  be  deliver’d 
Even  in  the  milk-white  bosom  of  thy  love.  250 

The  time  now  serves  not  to  expostulate: 

Come,  I’ll  convey  thee  through  the  city-gate; 
And,  ere  I  part  with  thee,  confer  at  large 
Of  all  that  may  concern  thy  love-affairs. 

As  thou  lovest  Silvia,  though  not  for  thyself, 
Regard  thy  danger,  and  along  with  me! 

Val.  I  pray  thee,  Launce,  an  if  thou  seest  my 
boy. 

Bid  him  make  haste  and  meet  me  at  the  North- 
gate. 

Pro.  Go,  sirrah,  find  him  out.  Come,  Valentine. 
Val.  O  my  dear  Silvia!  Hapless  Valentine!  260 
[Exeunt  valentine  and  proteus. 
Launce.  I  am  but  a  fool,  look  you;  and  yet  I  have 
the  wit  to  think  my  master  is  a  kind  of  a  knave: 
but  that’s  all  one,  if  he  be  but  one  knave.  He  lives 
not  now  that  knows  me  to  be  in  love;  yet  I  am 
in  love;  but  a  team  of  horse  shall  not  pluck  that 
from  me;  nor  who  ’tis  I  love;  and  yet  ’tis  a 
woman;  but  what  woman,  I  will  not  tell  myself; 
and  yet  ’tis  a  milkmaid;  yet  ’tis  not  a  maid,  for 
she  hath  had  gossips;  yet  ’tis  a  maid,  for  she  is 
her  master’s  maid,  and  serves  for  wages.  She  hath 
more  qualities  than  a  water-spaniel;  which  is 
much  in  a  bare  Christian.  [Pulling  out  a  paper. ^ 
Here  is  the  cate-log  of  her  condition.  ''Imprimis: 
She  can  fetch  and  carry.”  Why,  a  horse  can  do 
no  more:  nay,  a  horse  cannot  fetch  but  only 
carry;  therefore  is  she  better  than  a  jade.  "Item: 
She  can  milk”;  look  you,  a  sweet  virtue  in  a 
maid  with  clean  hands. 

Enter  speed. 

Speed.  How  now,  Signior  Launce!  what  news 
with  your  mastership?  280 

Launce.  With  my  master’s  ship?  why,  it  is  at  sea. 
Speed.  Well,  your  old  vice  still;  mistake  the 
word.  What  news,  then,  in  your  paper? 

Launce.  The  blackest  news  that  ever  thou 
heardest. 

Speed.  Why,  man,  how  black? 

Launce.  Why,  as  black  as  ink. 

Speed.  Let  me  read  them. 


Launce.  Fie  on  thee,  jolt-head!  thou  canst  not 
read.  2^1 

Speed.  Thou  fiest;  I  can. 

Launce.  I  will  try  thee.  Tell  me  this:  who  begot 
thee? 

Speed.  Marry,  the  son  of  my  grandfather. 

Launce.  O  illiterate  loiterer!  it  was  the  son  of 
thy  grandmother:  this  proves  that  thou  canst  not 
read. 

Speed.  Come,  fool,  come;  try  me  in  thy  paper. 

Launce.  There;  and  Saint  Nicholas  be  thy 
speed!  ^0/ 

Speed.  [Reads.]  She  can  milk.” 

Launce.  Ay,  that  she  can. 

Speed,  "hem:  She  brews  good  ale.” 

Launce.  And  thereof  comes  the  proverb: 
“Blessing  of  your  heart,  you  brew  good  ale.” 

Speed.  "Item:  She  can  sew.” 

Launce.  That’s  as  much  as  to  say,  “Can  she 
so?” 

Speed.  "Item:  She  can  knit.”  5/0 

Launce.  What  need  a  man  care  for  a  stock  with 
a  wench,  when  she  can  knit  him  a  stock? 

Speed.  "Item:  She  can  wash  and  scour.” 

Launce.  A  special  virtue;  for  then  she  need  not 
be  washed  and  scoured. 

Speed.  "Item:  She  can  spin.” 

Launce.  Then  may  I  set  the  world  on  wheels, 
when  she  can  spin  for  her  living.  5/5? 

Speed.  "Item:  she  hath  many  nameless  virtues.” 

Launce.  That’s  as  much  as  to  say,  bastard  vir¬ 
tues;  that,  indeed,  know  not  their  fathers  and 
therefore  have  no  names. 

Speed.  “Here  follow  her  vices.” 

Launce.  Close  at  the  heels  of  her  virtues. 

Speed.  "Item:  She  is  not  to  be  kissed  fasting,  in 
respect  of  her  breath.” 

Launce.  Well,  that  fault  may  be  mended  with  a 
breakfast.  Read  on. 

Speed.  "Item:  She  hath  a  sweet  mouth.”  550 

Launce.  That  makes  amends  for  her  sour  breath. 

Speed.  "Item:  She  doth  talk  in  her  sleep.” 

Launce.  It’s  no  matter  for  that,  so  she  sleep  not 
in  her  talk. 

Speed.  "Item:  She  is  slow  in  words.” 

Launce.  O  villain,  that  set  this  down  among  her 
vices!  To  be  slow  in  words  is  a  woman’s  only 
virtue:  I  pray  thee,  out  with’t,  and  place  it  for 
her  chief  virtue.  34^ 

Speed.  "Item:  she  is  proud.” 

Launce.  Out  with  that  too;  it  was  Eve’s  legacy, 
and  cannot  be  ta’en  from  her. 

Speed.  "Item:  She  hath  no  teeth.” 

Launce.  I  care  not  for  that  neither,  because  I 
love  crusts. 

Speed.  "Item:  She  is  curst.” 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


Lmnce  Well,  the  best  is,  she  hath  no  teeth  to 
bite.  35^ 

Speed.  '^Item:  She  will  often  praise  her  liquor.” 

Launce.  If  her  liquor  be  good,  she  shall:  if  she 
will  not,  I  will;  for  good  things  should  be  praised. 

Speed.  ''Item:  She  is  too  liberal.” 

Launce.  Of  her  tongue  she  cannot,  for  that’s 
writ  down  she  is  slow  of;  of  her  purse  she  shall 
not,  for  that  I’ll  keep  shut:  now,  of  another  thing 
she  may,  and  that  cannot  I  help.  Well,  proceed. 

Speed.  "Item:  She  hath  more  hair  than  wit,  and 
more  faults  than  hairs,  and  more  wealth  than 
faults.” 

Launce.  Stop  there;  I’ll  have  her:  she  was  mine, 
and  not  mine,  twice  or  thrice  in  that  last  article. 
Rehearse  that  once  more. 

Speed,  "hem:  She  hath  more  hair  than  wit” — 

Launce.  More  hair  than  wit?  It  may  be:  I’ll 
prove  it.  The  cover  of  the  salt  hides  the  salt,  and 
therefore  it  is  more  than  the  salt;  the  hair  that 
covers  the  wit  is  more  than  the  wit,  for  the 
greater  hides  the  less.  What’s  next? 

Speed.  “And  more  faults  than  hairs” — 

Launce.  That’s  monstrous:  O,  that  that  were 
out! 

Speed.  “And  more  wealth  than  faults.” 

Launce.  Why,  that  word  makes  the  faults 
gracious.  Well,  I’ll  have  her:  and  if  it  be  a  match, 
as  nothing  is  impossible — 

What  then?  ^8o 

Launce.  Why,  then  will  I  tell  thee — that  thy 
master  stays  for  thee  at  the  North-gate. 

Speed.  For  me? 

Launce.  For  thee!  ay,  who  art  thou?  he  hath 
stayed  for  a  better  man  than  thee. 

Speed.  And  must  I  go  to  him? 

Launce.  Thou  must  run  to  him,  for  thou  hast 
stayed  so  long  that  going  will  scarce  serve  the 
turn. 

Speed.  Why  didst  not  tell  me  sooner?  pox  of 
your  love-letters!  [Exit.  5p/ 

Launce.  Now  will  he  be  swinged  for  reading  my 
letter;  an  unmannerly  slave,  that  will  thrust 
himself  into  secrets!  I’ll  after,  to  rejoice  in  the 
boy’s  correction.  [Exit. 

Scene  ii.  The  same:  the  Duke' s  palace 
Enter  duke  and  thurio. 

Duke.  Sir  Thurio,  fear  not  but  that  she  will 
love  you. 

Now  Valentine  is  banish’d  from  her  sight. 

Thu.  Since  his  exile  she  hath  despised  me  most. 
Forsworn  my  company,  and  rail’d  at  me. 

That  I  am  desperate  of  obtaining  her. 

Duke.  This  weak  impress  of  love  is  as  a  figure 
Trenched  in  ice,  which  with  an  hour’s  heat 


Dissolves  to  water  and  doth  lose  his  form. 

A  little  time  will  mejt  her  frozen  thoughts 
And  worthless  Valentine  shall  be  forgot.  lo 

Enter  p  rote  us. 

How  now.  Sir  Proteus!  Is  your  countryman 
According  to  our  proclamation  gone? 

Pro.  Gone,  my  good  lord. 

Duke.  My  daughter  takes  his  going  grievously. 
Pro.  A  little  time,  my  lord,  will  kill  that  grief. 
Duke.  So  I  believe;  but  Thurio  thinks  not  so. 
Proteus,  the  good  conceit  I  hold  of  thee — 

For  thou  hast  shown  some  sign  of  good  desert — 
Makes  me  the  better  to  confer  with  thee. 

Pro.  Longer  than  I  prove  loyal  to  your  grace 
Let  me  not  live  to  look  upon  your  Grace.  21 
Duke.  Thou  know’st  how  willingly  I  would 
effect 

The  match  between  Sir  Thurio  and  my  daughter. 
Pro.  I  do,  my  lord. 

Duke.  And  also,  I  think,  thou  art  not  ignorant 
How  she  opposes  her  against  my  will. 

Pro.  She  did,  my  lord,  when  Valentine  was  here. 
Duke.  Ay,  and  perversely  she  persevers  so. 
What  might  we  do  to  make  the  girl  forget 
The  love  of  Valentine  and  love  Sir  Thurio?  50 
Pro.  The  best  way  is  to  slander  Valentine 
With  falsehood,  cowardice,  and  poor  descent. 
Three  things  that  women  highly  hold  in  hate. 
Duke.  Ay,  but  she’ll  think  that  it  is  spoke  in 
hate. 

Pro.  Ay,  if  his  enemy  deliver  it: 

Therefore  it  must  with  circumstance  be  spoken 
By  one  whom  she  esteemeth  as  his  friend. 

Duke.  Then  you  must  undertake  to  slander  him. 
Pro.  And  that,  my  lord  I  shall  be  loath  to  do: 

’Tis  an  ill  office  for  a  gentleman,  40 

Especially  against  his  very  friend. 

Duke.  Where  your  good  word  cannot  advantage 
him. 

Your  slander  never  can  endamage  him; 

Therefore  the  office  is  indifferent. 

Being  entreated  to  it  by  your  friend. 

Pro.  You  have  prevail’d,  my  lord:  if  I  can  do  it 
By  aught  that  I  can  speak  in  his  dispraise. 

She  shall  not  long  continue  love  to  him. 

But  say  this  weed  her  love  from  Valentine, 

It  follows  not  that  she  will  love  Sir  Thurio.  50 
Thu.  Therefore,  as  you  unwind  her  love  from 
him. 

Lest  it  should  ravel  and  be  good  to  none. 

You  must  provide  to  bottom  it  on  me; 

Which  must  be  done  by  praising  me  as  much 
As  you  in  worth  dispraise  Sir  Valentine. 

Duke.  And,  Proteus,  we  dare  trust  you  in  this 
kind. 


SCENE  II 


245 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


Because  we  know,  on  Valentine’s  report, 

You  are  already  Love’s  firm  votary 
And  cannot  soon  revolt  and  change  your  mind. 
Upon  this  warrant  shall  you  have  access  60 
Where  you  with  Silvia  may  confer  at  large; 

For  she  is  lumpish,  heavy,  melancholy. 

And,  for  your  friend’s  sake,  will  be  glad  of 
you; 

Where  you  may  temper  her  by  your  persuasion 
To  hate  young  Valentine  and  love  my  friend. 

Pro.  As  much  as  I  can  do,  I  will  effect: 

But  you.  Sir  Thurio,  are  not  sharp  enough; 

You  must  lay  lime  to  tangle  her  desires 
By  wailful  sonnets,  whose  composed  rhymes 
Should  be  full-fraught  with  serviceable  vows.  70 
Duke.  Ay, 

Much  is  the  force  of  heaven- bred  poesy. 

Pro.  Say  that  upon  the  altar  of  her  beauty 
You  sacrifice  your  tears,  your  sighs,  your  heart: 
Write  till  your  ink  be  dry,  and  with  your  tears 
Moist  it  again,  and  frame  some  feeling  line 
That  may  discover  such  integrity: 

For  Orpheus’  lute  was  strung  with  poets’  sinews. 
Whose  golden  touch  could  soften  steel  and  stones. 
Make  tigers  tame  and  huge  leviathans  80 

Forsake  unsounded  deeps  to  dance  on  sands. 

After  your  di re-lamenting  elegies. 

Visit  by  night  your  lady’s  chamber-window 
With  some  sweet  concert;  to  their  instruments 
Tune  a  deploring  dump:  the  night’s  dead  silence 
Will  well  become  such  sweet-complaining 
grievance. 

This,  or  else  nothing,  will  inherit  her. 

Duke.  This  discipline  shows  thou  hast  been  in 
love. 

Thu.  And  thy  advice  this  night  I’ll  put  in 
practice. 

Therefore,  sweet  Proteus,  my  direction-giver. 
Let  us  into  the  city  presently  pi 

To  sort  some  gentlemen  well  skill’d  in  music. 

I  have  a  sonnet  that  will  serve  the  turn 
To  give  the  onset  to  thy  good  advice. 

Duke.  About  it,  gentlemen! 

Pro.  We’ll  wait  upon  your  Grace  till  after 
supper, 

And  afterward  determine  our  proceedings. 

Duke.  Even  now  about  it!  I  will  pardon  you. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  The  frontiers  of  Mantua:  a  forest 
Enter  certain  outlaws. 

ist  Out.  Fellows,  stand  fast;  I  see  a  passenger. 
2nd  Out.  If  there  be  ten,  shrink  not,  but  down 
with  ’em. 


Enter  valentine  and  speed. 

^rd  Out.  Stand,  sir,  and  throw  us  that  you  have 
about  ye: 

If  not,  we’ll  make  you  sit  and  rifle  you. 

Speed.  Sir,  we  are  undone;  these  are  the  villains 
That  all  the  travellers  do  fear  so  much. 

Val.  My  friends — 

ist  Out.  That’s  not  so,  sir:  we  are  your  enemies. 
2nd  Out.  Peace!  we’ll  hear  him. 

Srd  Out.  Ay,  by  my  beard,  will  we,  for  he’s  a 
proper  man. 

Val.  Then  know  that  I  have  little  wealth  to 
lose; 

A  man  I  am  cross’d  with  adversity; 

My  riches  are  these  poor  habiliments. 

Of  which  if  you  should  here  disfurnish  me. 

You  take  the  sum  and  substance  that  I  have. 

2nd  Out.  Whither  travel  you? 

Val.  To  Verona. 

ist  Out.  Whence  came  you? 

Val.  From  Milan. 

^rd  Out.  Have  you  long  sojourned  there? 

Val.  Some  sixteen  months,  and  longer  might 
have  stay’d,  21 

If  crooked  fortune  had  not  thwarted  me. 
ist  Out.  What,  were  you  banish’d  thence? 

Val.  I  was. 

2nd  Out.  For  what  offence? 

Val.  For  that  which  now  torments  me  to  re¬ 
hearse: 

I  kill’d  a  man,  whose  death  I  much  repent; 

But  yet  I  slew  him  manfully  in  fight. 

Without  false  vantage  or  base  treachery. 
ist  Ow?.  Why,  ne’er  repent  it,  if  it  were  done  so. 
But  were  you  banish’d  for  so  small  a  fault?  5/ 
Val.  I  was,  and  held  me  glad  of  such  a  doom. 

2nd  Out.  Have  you  the  tongues? 

Val.  My  youthful  travel  therein  made  me 
happy. 

Or  else  I  often  had  been  miserable. 

^rd  Out.  By  the  bare  scalp  of  Robin  Hood’s  fat 
friar. 

This  fellow  were  a  king  for  our  wild  faction! 
ist  Out.  We’ll  have  him.  Sirs,  a  word. 

Speed.  Master,  be  one  of  them;  it’s  an  honour¬ 
able  kind  of  thievery.  40 

Val.  Peace,  villain! 

2nd  Out.  Tell  us  this:  have  you  any  thing  to 
take  to? 

Val.  Nothing  but  my  fortune. 

^rd  Out.  Know,  then,  that  some  of  us  are 
gentlemen. 

Such  as  the  fury  of  ungovern’d  youth 
Thrust  from  the  company  of  awful  men: 

Myself  was  from  Verona  banished 


246  THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


For  practising  to  steal  away  a  lady, 

An  heir,  and  near  allied  unto  the  Duke. 

2nd  Out.  And  I  from  Mantua,  for  a  gentle¬ 
man,  50 

Who,  in  my  mood,  I  stabb’d  unto  the  heart. 
ist  Out.  And  I  for  such  like  petty  crimes  as 
these. 

But  the  purpose — for  we  cite  our  faults. 

That  they  may  hold  excused  our  lawless  lives; 
And  partly,  seeing  you  are  beautified 
With  goodly  shape  and  by  your  own  report 
A  linguist  and  a  man  of  such  perfection 
AS  we  do  in  our  quality  much  want — 

2nd  Out.  Indeed,  because  you  are  a  banish’d 
man. 

Therefore,  above  the  rest,  we  parley  to  you:  60 
Are  you  content  to  be  our  general? 

To  make  a  virtue  of  necessity 
And  live,  as  we  do,  in  this  wilderness? 

^rd  Out.  What  say’st  thou?  wilt  thou  be  of  our 
consort? 

Say  ay,  and  be  the  captain  of  us  all: 

We’ll  do  thee  homage  and  be  ruled  by  thee. 

Love  thee  as  our  commander  and  our  king. 
ist  Out.  But  if  thou  scorn  our  courtesy,  thou 
diest. 

2nd  Out.  Thou  shalt  not  live  to  brag  what  we 
have  offer’d. 

Val.  I  take  your  offer  and  will  live  with  you. 
Provided  that  you  do  no  outrages  7/ 

On  silly  women  or  poor  passengers. 

^rd  Out.  No,  we  detest  such  vile  base  prac¬ 
tices. 

Come,  go  with  us,  we’ll  bring  thee  to  our  crews. 
And  show  thee  all  the  treasure  we  have  got; 
Which,  with  ourselves,  all  rest  at  thy  dispose. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Milan:  Outside  the  duke’s  palace.,  under 
Silvia’s  chamber 
Enter  p  rote  us. 

Pro.  Already  have  I  been  false  to  Valentine 
And  now  I  must  be  as  unjust  to  Thurio. 

Under  the  colour  of  commending  him, 

I  have  access  my  own  love  to  prefer: 

But  Silvia  is  too  fair,  too  true,  too  holy. 

To  be  corrupted  with  my  worthless  gifts. 

When  I  protest  true  loyalty  to  her. 

She  twits  me  with  my  falsehood  to  my  friend; 
When  to  her  beauty  I  commend  my  vows. 

She  bids  me  think  how  I  have  been  forsworn  10 
In  breaking  faith  with  Julia  whom  I  loved: 

And  notwithstanding  all  her  sudden  quips. 

The  least  whereof  would  quell  a  lover’s  hope. 

Yet,  spaniel-like,  the  more  she  spurns  my  love, 
The  more  it  grows  and  fawneth  on  her  still. 


But  here  comes  Thurio:  now  must  we  to  her 
window. 

And  give  some  evening  music  to  her  ear. 

Enter  thurio  and  Musicians. 

Thu.  How  now.  Sir  Proteus,  are  you  crept 
before  us? 

Pro.  Ay,  gentle  Thurio:  for  you  know  that 
love 

Will  creep  in  service  where  it  cannot  go.  20 
Thu.  Ay,  but  I  hope,  sir,  that  you  love  not  here. 
Pro.  Sir,  but  I  do;  or  else  I  would  be  hence. 

Thu.  Who?  Silvia? 

Pro.  Ay,  Silvia;  for  your  sake. 

Thu.  I  thank  you  for  your  own.  Now,  gentle¬ 
men. 

Let’s  tune,  and  to  it  lustily  awhile. 

Enter.,  at  a  distance.,  host,  and  julia  in  boys 
clothes. 

Host.  Now,  my  young  guest,  methinks  you’re 
allycholly :  I  pray  you,  why  is  it? 

Jul.  Marry,  mine  host,  because  I  cannot  be 
merry.  29 

Host.  Come,  we’ll  have  you  merry:  I’ll  bring 
you  where  you  shall  hear  music  and  see  the  gen¬ 
tleman  that  you  asked  for. 

Jul.  But  shall  I  hear  him  speak? 

Host.  Ay,  that  you  shall. 

Jul.  That  will  be  music. 

Music  plays. 

Host.  Hark,  hark! 

Jul.  Is  he  among  these? 

Host.  Ay:  but,  peace!  let’s  hear  ’em. 

SONG 

Who  is  Silvia?  what  is  she. 

That  all  our  swains  commend  her?  40 

Holy,  fair  and  wise  is  she; 

The  heaven  such  grace  did  lend  her. 

That  she  might  admired  be. 

Is  she  kind  as  she  is  fair? 

For  beauty  lives  with  kindness. 

Love  doth  to  her  eyes  repair. 

To  help  him  of  his  blindness. 

And,  being  help’d,  inhabits  there. 

Then  to  Silvia  let  us  sing. 

That  Silvia  is  excelling;  yo 

She  excels  each  mortal  thing 
Upon  the  dull  earth  dwelling: 

To  her  let  us  garlands  bring. 

Host.  How  now!  are  you  sadder  than  you  were 
before?  How  do  you,  man?  the  music  likes  you 
not. 

Jul.  You  mistake;  the  musician  likes  me  not. 
Host.  Why,  my  pretty  youth? 


SCENE  II 


247 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


]uL  He  plays  false,  father. 

Host.  How?  out  of  tune  on  the  strings?  60 

Jul.  Not  SO;  but  yet  so  false  that  he  grieves  my 
very  heart-strings. 

Host.  You  have  a  quick  ear. 

Jul.  Av,  1  would  I  were  deaf;  it  makes  me 
have  a  slow  heart. 

Host.  I  perceive  you  delight  not  in  music. 

Jul.  Not  a  whit,  when  it  jars  so. 

Host.  Hark,  what  fine  change  is  in  the  music! 

Jul.  Ay,  that  change  is  the  spite. 

Host.  You  would  have  them  always  play  but 
one  thing?  7/ 

Jul.  I  would  always  have  one  play  but  one 
thing. 

But,  host,  doth  this  Sir  Proteus  that  we  talk  on 
Often  resort  unto  this  gentlewoman? 

Host.  I  tell  you  what  Launce,  his  man,  told  me: 

he  loved  her  out  of  all  nick. 

Jul.  Where  is  Launce? 

Host.  Gone  to  seek  his  dog;  which  to-morrow, 
by  his  master’s  command,  he  must  carry  for  a 
present  to  his  lady.  So 

Jul.  Peace!  stand  aside:  the  company  parts. 

Pro.  Sir  Thurio,  fear  not  you:  I  will  so  plead 
That  you  shall  say  my  cunning  drift  excels. 

Thu.  Where  meet  we? 

Pro.  At  Saint  Gregory’s  well. 

Thu.  Farewell. 

[Exeunt  thurio  and  Musicians. 

Enter  silvia  above. 

Pro.  Madam,  good  even  to  your  ladyship. 

Sil.  I  thank  you  for  your  music,  gentlemen. 
Who  is  that  that  spake? 

Pro.  One,  lady,  if  you  knew  his  pure  heart’s 
truth. 

You  would  quickly  learn  to  know  him  by  his 
voice. 

Sil.  Sir  Proteus,  as  I  take  it.  po 

Pro.  Sir  Proteus,  gentle  lady,  and  your  servant. 
Sil.  What’s  your  will? 

Pro.  That  I  may  compass  yours. 

Sil.  You  have  your  wish;  my  will  is  even  this: 
That  presently  you  hie  you  home  to  bed. 

Thou  subtle,  perjured,  false,  disloyal  man! 
Think’st  thou  I  am  so  shallow,  so  conceitless. 

To  be  seduced  by  thy  flattery. 

That  hast  deceived  so  many  with  thy  vows? 
Return,  return,  and  make  thy  love  amends. 

For  me,  by  this  pale  queen  of  night  I  swear,  100 
I  am  so  far  from  granting  thy  request 
That  I  despise  thee  for  thy  wrongful  suit. 

And  by  and  by  intend  to  chide  myself 
Even  Tor  this  time  I  spend  in  talking  to  thee. 

Pro.  I  grant,  sweet  love,  that  I  did  love  a  lady; 


But  she  is  dead. 

Jul.  [Aside]  ’Twere  false,  if  I  should  speak  it; 

For  I  am  sure  she  is  not  buried. 

Sil.  Say  that  she  be;  yet  Valentine  thy  friend 
Survives;  to  whom,  thyself  art  witness,  no 
I  am  betroth’d  :  and  art  thou  not  ashamed 
To  wrong  him  with  thy  importunacy? 

Pro.  I  likewise  hear  that  Valentine  is  dead. 

Sil.  And  so  suppose  am  I;  for  in  his  grave 
Assure  thyself  my  love  is  buried. 

Pro.  Sweet  lady,  let  me  rake  it  from  the  earth. 
Sil.  Go  to  thy  lady’s  grave  and  call  hers  thence. 
Or,  at  the  least,  in  hers  sepulchre  thine. 

Jul.  [Aside]  He  heard  not  that. 

Pro.  Madam,  if  your  heart  be  so  obdurate. 
Vouchsafe  me  yet  your  picture  for  my  love,  121 
The  picture  that  is  hanging  in  your  chamber; 

To  that  I’ll  speak,  to  that  I’ll  sigh  and  weep: 

For  since  the  substance  of  your  perfect  self 
Is  else  devoted,  I  am  but  a  shadow; 

And  to  your  shadow  will  I  make  true  love. 

Jul.  [Aside]  If ’twere  a  substance,  you  would, 
sure,  deceive  it. 

And  make  it  but  a  shadow,  as  I  am. 

Sil.  I  am  very  loath  to  be  your  idol,  sir; 

But  since  your  falsehood  shall  become  you  well 
To  worship  shadows  and  adore  false  shapes,  75/ 
Send  to  me  in  the  morning  and  I’ll  send  it: 

And  so,  good  rest. 

Pro.  As  wretches  have  o’ernight 

That  wait  for  execution  in  the  morn. 

[Exeunt  proteus  and  silvia,  severally. 
Jul.  Host,  will  you  go? 

Host.  By  my  halidom,  I  was  fast  asleep. 

Jul.  Pray  you,  where  lies  Sir  Proteus? 

Host.  Marry,  at  my  house.  Trust  me,  I  think 
’tis  almost  day. 

Jul.  Not  so;  but  it  hath  been  the  longest  night 
That  e’er  I  watch’d  and  the  most  heaviest.  141 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  same 
Enter  eglamour. 

Egl.  This  is  the  hour  that  Madam  Silvia 
Entreated  me  to  call  and  know  her  mind: 

There’s  some  great  matter  she’ Id  employ  me  in. 
Madam,  madam! 


Enter  silvia  above. 

Sil.  Who  calls? 

Egl.  Your  servant  and  your  friend; 

One  that  attends  your  ladyship’s  command. 

Sil.  Sir  Eglamour,  a  thousand  times  good  mor¬ 
row. 

Egl.  As  many,  worthy  lady,  to  yourself: 
According  to  your  ladyship’s  impose, 


ACT  IV 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


248 

I  am  thus  early  come  to  know  what  service 
It  is  your  pleasure  to  command  me  in.  10 

Sil.  O  Eglamour,  thou  art  a  gentleman — 

Think  not  I  flatter,  for  I  swear  I  do  not — 

Valiant,  wise,  remorseful,  well  accomplishM: 
Thou  art  not  ignorant  what  dear  good  will 
I  bear  unto  the  banish’d  Valentine, 

Nor  how  my  father  would  enforce  me  marry 
Vain  Thurio,  whom  my  very  soul  abhors. 
Thyself  hast  loved;  and  I  have  heard  thee  say 
No  grief  did  ever  come  so  near  thy  heart 
As  when  thy  lady  and  thy  true  love  died,  20 
Upon  whose  grave  thou  vow’dst  pure  chastity. 

Sir  Eglamour,  1  would  to  Valentine, 

To  Mantua,  where  I  hear  he  makes  abode; 

And,  for  the  ways  are  dangerous  to  pass, 

I  do  desire  thy  worthy  company, 

Upon  whose  faith  and  honour  I  repose. 

Urge  not  my  father’s  anger,  Eglamour, 

But  think  upon  my  grief,  a  lady’s  grief, 

And  on  the  justice  of  my  flying  hence. 

To  keep  me  from  a  most  unholy  match,  50 

Which  heaven  and  fortune  still  rewards  with 
plagues. 

( do  desire  thee,  even  from  a  heart 
.\s  full  of  sorrows  as  the  sea  of  sands. 

To  bear  me  company  and  go  with  me: 

If  not,  to  hide  what  1  have  said  to  thee. 

That  I  may  venture  to  depart  alone. 

Egl.  Madam,  I  pity  much  your  grievances; 
Which  since  I  know  they  virtuously  are  placed, 
I  give  consent  to  go  along  with  you. 

Recking  as  little  what  betideth  me  40 

As  much  I  wish  all  good  befortune  you. 

When  will  you  go? 

Sil.  This  evening  coming. 

Egl.  Where  shall  1  meet  you? 

Sil.  At  Friar  Patrick’s  cell. 

Where  1  intend  holy  confession. 

Egl.  1  will  not  fail  your  ladyship.  Good  mor¬ 
row,  gentle  lady. 

Sil.  Good  morrow,  kind  Sir  Eglamour. 

[Exeunt  severally. 

Scene  iv.  The  same 
Enter  launce,  voith  his  Dog. 

Launce.  When  a  man’s  servant  shall  play  the 
cur  with  him,  look  you,  it  goes  hard:  one  that  I 
brought  up  of  a  puppy;  one  that  I  saved  from 
drowning,  when  three  or  four  of  his  blind  brothers 
and  sisters  went  to  it.  I  have  taught  him,  even 
as  one  would  say  precisely,  “thus  I  would  teach  a 
dog.”  I  was  sent  to  deliver  him  as  a  present  to 
Mistress  Silvia  from  my  master;  and  I  came  no 
sooner  into  the  dining-chamber  but  he  steps  me 
to  her  trencher  and  steals  her  capon’s  leg:  O, 


’tis  a  foul  thing  when  a  cur  cannot  keep  himself 
in  all  companies!  I ^ would  have,  as  one  should 
say,  one  that  takes  upon  him  to  be  a  dog  indeed, 
to  be,  as  is  were,  a  dog  at  all  things.  If  I  had 
not  had  more  wit  than  he,  to  take  a  fault  upon 
me  that  he  did,  I  think  verily  he  had  been  hanged 
for’t;  sure  as  1  live,  he  had  suffered  for’t:  you 
shall  judge.  He  thrusts  me  himself  into  the  com¬ 
pany  of  three  or  four  gentlemanlike  dogs,  under 
the  Duke’s  table:  he  had  not  been  there — bless 
the  mark! — a  pissing  while,  but  all  the  chamber 
smelt  him.  “Out  with  the  dog!”  says  one:  “What 
cur  is  that?”  says  another:  “Whip  him  out”  says 
the  third:  “Hang  him  up”  says  the  Duke.  I, 
having  been  acquainted  with  the  smell  before, 
knew  it  was  Crab,  and  goes  me  to  the  fellow  that 
whips  the  dogs:  “Friend,”  quoth  I,  “you  mean  to 
whip  the  dog?”  “Ay,  marry,  do  I,”  quoth  he. 
“You  do  him  the  more  wrong,”  quoth  I;  “  ’twas  I 
did  the  thing  you  wot  of.”  He  makes  me  no 
more  ado,  but  whips  me  out  of  the  chamber. 
How  many  masters  would  do  this  for  his  servant? 
Nay,  I’ll  be  sworn,  I  have  sat  in  the  stocks  for 
puddings  he  hath  stolen,  otherwise  he  had  been 
executed;  I  have  stood  on  the  pillory  for  geese 
he  hath  killed,  otherwise  he  had  suffered  for’t. 
Thou  thinkest  not  of  this  now.  Nay,  I  remember 
the  trick  you  served  me  when  I  took  my  leave  of 
Madam  Silvia:  did  not  I  bid  thee  still  mark  me 
and  do  as  I  do?  when  didst  thou  see  me  heave  up 
my  leg  and  make  water  against  a  gentlewoman’s 
farthingale?  didst  thou  ever  see  me  do  such  a 
trick? 

Enter  proteus  and  julia. 

Pro.  Sebastian  is  thy  name?  I  like  thee  well. 
And  will  employ  thee  in  some  service  presently. 

Jul.  In  what  you  please:  I’ll  do  what  I  can. 

Pro.  I  hope  thou  wilt.  [To  launce]  How  now, 
you  whoreson  peasant! 

Where  have  you  been  these  two  days  loitering? 

Launce.  Marry,  sir,  I  carried  Mistress  Silvia 
the  dog  you  bade  me.  $0 

Pro.  And  what  says  she  to  my  little  jewel? 

Launce.  Marry,  she  says  your  dog  was  a  cur, 
and  tells  you  currish  thanks  is  good  enough  for 
such  a  present. 

Pro.  But  she  received  my  dog? 

Launce.  No,  indeed,  did  she  not:  here  have  I 
brought  him  back  again. 

Pro.  What,  didst  thou  offer  her  this  from  me? 

Launce.  Ay,  sir;  the  other  squirrel  was  stolen 
from  me  by  the  hangman  boys  in  the  market¬ 
place:  and  then  I  offered  her  mine  own,  who  is  a 
dog  as  big  as  ten  of  yours,  and  therefore  the  gift 
the  greater. 


SCENE  IV 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


Pro.  Go  get  thee  hence,  and  find  my  dog  again. 
Or  ne’er  return  again  into  my  sight. 

Away,  I  say!  stay’st  thou  to  vex  me  here? 

[Exit  LAUNCE. 

A  slave,  that  still  an  end  turns  me  to  shame! 
Sebastian,  I  have  entertained  thee. 

Partly  that  I  have  need  of  such  a  youth 

That  can  with  some  discretion  do  my  business,  70 

For  ’tis  no  trusting  to  yond  foolish  lout. 

But  chiefly  for  thy  face  and  thy  behaviour. 
Which,  if  my  augury  deceive  me  not. 

Witness  good  bringing  up,  fortune,  and  truth: 
Therefore  know  thou,  for  this  I  entertain  thee. 
Go  presently  and  take  this  ring  with  thee. 

Deliver  it  to  Madam  Silvia: 

She  loved  me  well  deliver’d  it  to  me. 

Jul.  It  seems  you  loved  not  her,  to  leave  her 
token. 

She  is  dead,  belike? 

Pro.  Not  so;  I  think  she  lives.  So 

Jul.  Alas! 

Pro.  Why  dost  thou  cry  “alas”? 

Jul.  I  cannot  choose 

But  pity  her. 

Pro.  Wherefore  shouldst  thou  pity  her? 

Jul.  Because  methinks  that  she  loved  you  as 
well 

As  you  do  love  your  lady  Silvia: 

She  dreams  on  him  that  has  forgot  her  love; 

You  dote  on  her  that  cares  not  for  your  love. 

’Tis  pity  love  should  be  so  contrary; 

And  thinking  on  it  makes  me  cry  “alas!” 

Pro.  Well,  give  her  that  ring  and  therewithal  510 
This  letter.  That’s  her  chamber.  Tell  my  lady 
I  claim  the  promise  for  her  heavenly  picture. 

Your  message  done,  hie  home  unto  my  chamber. 
Where  thou  shalt  find  me,  sad  and  solitary.  [Exit. 
Jul.  How  many  women  would  do  such  a  mes¬ 
sage? 

Alas,  poor  Proteus!  thou  hast  entertain’d 
A  fox  to  be  the  shepherd  of  thy  lambs. 

Alas,  poor  fool!  why  do  I  pity  him 
That  with  his  very  heart  despiseth  me? 

Because  he  loves  her,  he  despiseth  me;  100 

Because  I  love  him,  I  must  pity  him. 

This  ring  I  gave  him  when  he  parted  from  me, 

To  bind  him  to  remember  my  good  will; 

And  now  am  I,  unhappy  messenger. 

To  plead  for  that  which  I  would  not  obtain, 

To  carry  that  which  I  would  have  refused. 

To  praise  his  faith  which  I  would  have  dispraised. 
I  am  my  master’s  true-confirmed  love; 

But  cannot  be  true  servant  to  my  master. 

Unless  I  prove  false  traitor  to  myself.  no 

Yet  <vill  I  woo  for  him,  but  yet  so  coldly 

As,  heaven  it  knows,  I  would  not  have  him  speed. 


249 

Enter  silvia,  attended. 

Gentlewoman,  good  day!  I  pray  you,  be  my  mean 
To  being  me  where  to  speak  with  Madam  Silvia. 
5/7.  What  would  you  with  her,  if  that  I  be  she? 
Jul.  If  you  be  she,  I  do  entreat  your  patience 
To  hear  me  speak  the  message  I  am  sent  on. 

5/7.  From  whom? 

Jul.  From  my  master.  Sir  Proteus,  madam. 

5/7.  O,  he  sends  you  for  a  picture.  120 

Jul.  Ay,  madam. 

5/7.  Ursula,  bring  my  picture  there. 

Go  give  your  master  this:  tell  him  from  me. 

One  Julia,  that  his  changing  thoughts  forget. 
Would  better  fit  his  chamber  than  this  shadow. 
Jul.  Madam,  please  you  peruse  this  letter. — 
Pardon  me,  madam;  I  have  unadvised 
Deliver’d  you  a  paper  that  I  should  not: 

This  is  the  letter  to  your  ladyship. 

5/7. 1  pray  thee,  let  me  look  on  that  again.  /50 
Jul.  It  may  not  be;  good  madam,  pardon  me. 

5/7.  There,  hold! 

I  will  not  look  upon  your  master’s  lines: 

I  know  they  are  stuff’d  with  protestations 
And  full  of  new-found  oaths;  which  he  will  break 
As  easily  as  I  do  tear  his  paper. 

Jul.  Madam,  he  sends  your  ladyship  this  ring. 

5/7.  The  more  shame  for  him  that  he  sends  it 
me; 

For  I  have  heard  him  say  a  thousand  times 
His  Julia  gave  it  him  at  his  departure.  /40 

Though  his  false  finger  have  profaned  the  ring. 
Mine  shall  not  do  his  Julia  so  much  wrong. 

Jul.  She  thanks  you. 

5/7.  What  say’st  thou? 

Jul.  I  thank  you,  madam,  that  you  tender  her. 
Poor  gentlewoman!  my  master  wrongs  her  much. 
5/7.  Dost  thou  know  her? 

Jul.  Almost  as  well  as  I  do  know  myself: 

To  think  upon  her  woes  I  do  protest 
That  I  have  wept  a  hundred  several  times.  /50 
5/7.  Belike  she  thinks  that  Proteus  hath  for¬ 
sook  her. 

Jul.  I  think  she  doth;  and  that’s  her  cause  of 
sorrow. 

5/7.  Is  she  not  passing  fair? 

Jul.  She  hath  been  fairer,  madam,  than  she  is: 
When  she  did  think  my  master  loved  her  well, 
She,  in  my  judgment,  was  as  fair  as  you; 

But  since  she  did  neglect  her  looking-glass 
And  threw  her  sun-expelling  mask  away. 

The  air  hath  starved  the  roses  in  her  cheeks 
And  pinch’d  the  lily-tincture  of  her  face,  160 

That  now  she  is  become  as  black  as  I. 

5/7.  How  tall  was  she? 

Jul.  About  my  stature;  for  at  Pentecost, 


250  THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


When  all  our  pageants  of  delight  were  play’d» 
Our  youth  got  me  to  play  the  woman’s  part, 

And  I  was  trimm’d  in  Madam  Julia’s  gown, 
Which  served  me  as  fit,  by  all  men’s  judgements, 
As  if  the  garment  had  been  made  for  me: 
Therefore  I  know  she  is  about  my  height. 

And  at  that  time  I  made  her  weep  agood,  /70 
For  I  did  play  a  lamentable  part: 

Madam,  ’twas  Ariadne  passioning 
For  Theseus’  perjury  and  unjust  flight; 

Which  I  so  lively  acted  with  my  tears 
That  my  poor  mistress,  moved  therewithal, 

Wept  bitterly;  and  would  I  might  be  dead 
If  I  in  thought  felt  not  her  very  sorrow! 

Sil.  She  is  beholding  to  thee,  gentle  youth. 

Alas,  poor  lady,  desolate  and  left! 

I  weep  myself  to  think  upon  thy  words  180 

Flere,  youth,  there  is  my  purse;  I  give  thee  this 
For  thy  sweet  mistress’  sake,  because  thou  lovest 
her. 

Farewell.  [Exit  silvia,  with  attendants. 

Jul.  And  she  shall  thank  you  for’t,  if  e’er  you 
know  her. 

A  virtuous  gentlewoman,  mild  and  beautiful! 

I  hope  my  master’s  suit  will  be  but  cold. 

Since  she  respects  my  mistress’  love  so  much. 
Alas,  how  love  can  trifle  with  itself! 

Here  is  her  picture:  let  me  see;  I  think, 

If  I  had  such  a  tire,  this  face  of  mine  ipo 

Were  full  as  lovely  as  is  this  of  hers: 

And  yet  the  painter  flatter’d  her  a  little. 

Unless  I  flatter  with  myself  too  much. 

Her  hair  is  auburn,  mine  is  perfect  yellow: 

If  that  be  all  the  difference  in  his  love. 

I’ll  get  me  such  a  colour’d  periwig. 

Her  eyes  are  grey  as  glass,  and  so  are  mine: 

Ay,  but  her  forehead’s  low,  and  mine’s  as  high. 
What  should  it  be  that  he  respects  in  her 
But  I  can  make  respective  in  myself,  200 

If  this  fond  Love  were  not  a  blinded  god? 

Come,  shadow,  come,  and  take  this  shadow  up. 
For  ’tis  thy  rival.  O  thou  senseless  form. 

Thou  shalt  be  worshipp’d,  kiss’d,  loved,  and 
adored! 

And,  were  there  sense  in  his  idolatry. 

My  substance  should  be  statue  in  thy  stead. 

I’ll  use  thee  kindly  for  thy  mistress’  sake. 

That  used  me  so;  or  else,  by  Jove  I  vow, 

I  should  have  scratch’d  out  your  unseeing  eyes. 
To  make  my  master  out  of  love  with  thee!  [Exit. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  Milan:  an  abbey 
Enter  egl amour. 

Egl.  The  sun  begins  to  gild  the  western  sky; 


And  now  it  is  about  the  very  hour 
That  Silvia,  at  Friar  Patrick’s  cell,  should  meet 
me. 

She  will  not  fail,  for  lovers  break  not  hours, 
Unless  it  be  to  come  before  their  time; 

So  much  they  spur  their  expedition. 

See  where  she  comes. 

Enter  silvia. 

Lady,  a  happy  evening! 
Sil.  Amen,  amen!  Go  on,  good  Eglamour, 

Out  at  the  postern  by  the  abbey-wall: 

I  fear  I  am  attended  by  some  spies.  10 

Egl.  Fear  not:  the  forest  is  not  three  leagues 
off; 

If  we  recover  that,  we  are  sure  enough.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  same:  the  Duke  s  palace 
Enter  thurio,  proteus,  and  julia. 

Thu.  Sir  Proteus,  what  says  Silvia  to  my  suit? 
Pro.  O,  sir,  I  find  her  milder  than  she  was; 

And  yet  she  takes  exceptions  at  your  person. 

Thu.  What,  that  my  leg  is  too  long? 

Pro.  No;  that  it  is  too  little. 

Thu.  I’ll  wear  a  boot,  to  make  it  somewhat 
rounder. 

Jul.  [Aside\  But  love  will  not  be  spurr’d  to 
what  it  loathes. 

Thu.  What  says  she  to  my  face? 

Pro.  She  says  it  is  a  fair  one. 

Thu.  Nay  then,  the  wanton  lies;  my  face  is 
black.  10 

Pro.  But  pearls  are  fair;  and  the  old  saying  is, 
“Black  men  are  pearls  in  beauteous  ladies’  eyes.” 
Jul.  [Aside]  ’Tis  true;  such  pearls  as  put  out 
ladies’  eyes; 

For  I  had  rather  wink  than  look  on  them. 

Thu.  How  likes  she  my  discourse? 

Pro.  Ill,  when  you  talk  of  war. 

Thu.  But  well,  when  I  discourse  of  love  and 
peace? 

Jul.  [Aside]  But  better,  indeed,  when  you  hold 
your  peace. 

Thu.  What  says  she  to  my  valour? 

Pro.  O,  sir,  she  makes  no  doubt  of  that.  20 

Jul.  [Aside]  She  needs  not,  when  she  knows  it 
cowardice. 

Thu.  What  says  she  to  my  birth? 

Pro.  That  you  are  well  derived. 

Jul.  [Aside]  True;  from  a  gentleman  to  a  fool. 
Thu.  Considers  she  my  possessions? 

Pro.  O,  ay;  and  pities  them. 

Thu.  Wherefore? 

Jul.  [Aside]  That  such  an  ass  should  owe  them. 
Pro.  That  they  are  out  by  lease. 

Jul.  Here  comes  the  Duke.  50 


SCENE  II 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


251 


Enter  dcke. 

Duke.  How  now,  Sir  Proteus!  how  now,  Thurio! 
Which  of  you  saw'  Sir  Eglamour  of  late? 

Thu.  Not  I. 

Pro.  Nor  I. 

Duke.  Saw  you  my  daughter? 

Pro.  Neither. 

Duke.  WTy  then. 

She’s  fled  unto  that  peasant  Valentine; 

And  Eglarnour  is  in  her  company. 

’Tis  true;  for  Friar  Laurence  met  them  both. 

As  he  in  penance  wander’d  through  the  forest; 
Him  he  knew  wxll,  and  guess’d  that  it  was  she. 
But,  being  mask’d,  he  was  not  sure  of  it;  40 
Besides,  she  did  intend  confession 
At  Patrick’s  cell  this  even;  and  there  she  was 
not; 

These  likelihoods  confirm  her  flight  from  hence. 
Therefore,  I  pray  you,  stand  not  to  discourse. 
But  mount  you  presently  and  meet  wfith  me 
Upon  the  rising  of  the  mountain-foot 
That  leads  toward  Mantua,  whither  they  are  fled; 
Dispatch,  sweet  gentlemen,  and  follow  me.  [Exit. 

Thu.  Why,  this  it  is  to  be  a  peevish  girl. 

That  flies  her  fortune  when  it  follows  her.  50 
I’ll  after,  more  to  be  revenged  on  Eglamour 
Than  for  the  love  of  reckless  Silvia.  [Exit. 

Pro.  And  I  will  follow,  more  for  Silvia’s  love 
Than  hate  of  Eglamour  that  goes  with  her.  [Exit. 
Jul.  And  I  will  follow,  more  to  cross  that  love 
Than  hate  for  Silvia  that  is  gone  for  love.  [Exit. 

Scene  hi.  The  frontiers  of  Alantua: 
the  forest 

Enter  outlaws  ninth  silvia. 
ist  Out.  Come,  come. 

Be  patient;  we  must  bring  you  to  our  captain. 
Sil.  A  thousand  more  mischances  than  this  one 
Have  learn’d  me  how  to  brook  this  patiently. 
2nd  Out.  Come,  bring  her  away. 
ist  Out.  Where  is  the  gentleman  that  was  with 
her? 

^rd  Out.  Being  nimble- footed,  he  hath  outrun 
us. 

But  Moyses  and  V^alerius  follow  him. 

Go  thou  with  her  to  the  west  end  of  the  wood; 
There  is  our  captain:  we’ll  follow  him  that’s 
fled;  10 

The  thicket  is  beset;  he  cannot  ’scape. 
ist  Out.  Come,  I  must  bring  you  to  our  cap¬ 
tain’s  cave: 

Fear  not;  he  bears  an  honourable  mind. 

And  will  not  use  a  woman  lawlessly. 

Sil.  O  Valentine,  this  I  endure  for  thee! 

[Exeunt. 


Scene  iv.  Another  part  of  the  forest 
Enter  valentine. 

Val.  How  use  doth  breed  a  habit  in  a  man! 

This  shadowy  desert,  unfrequented  woods, 

I  better  brook  than  flourishing  peopled  towns: 
Here  can  I  sit  alone,  unseen  of  any, 

And  to  the  nightingale’s  complaining  notes 
Tune  my  distresses  and  record  my  woes. 

O  thou  that  dost  inhabit  in  my  breast. 

Leave  not  the  mansion  so  long  tenantless, 

Lest,  growing  ruinous,  the  building  fall 

And  leave  no  memory  of  what  it  was !  10 

Repair  me  with  thy  presence,  Silvia; 

Thou  gentle  nymph,  cherish  thy  forlorn  swain! 
What  halloing  and  what  stir  is  this  to-day? 

These  are  my  mates,  that  make  their  wills  their 
law. 

Have  some  unhappy  passenger  in  chase. 

They  love  me  well;  yet  I  have  much  to  do 
To  keep  them  from  uncivil  outrages. 

Withdraw  thee,  Valentine:  who’s  this  comes 
here? 

Enter  proteus,  silvia,  and  julia. 

Pro.  Madam,  this  service  I  have  done  for  you, 
Though  you  respect  not  aught  your  servant  doth, 
To  hazard  life  and  rescue  you  from  him  21 

That  would  have  forced  your  honour  and  your 
love; 

Vouchsafe  me,  for  my  meed,  but  one  fair  look; 

A  smaller  boon  than  this  I  cannot  beg 
And  less  than  this,  I  am  sure,  you  cannot  give. 
Val.  [Aside]  How  like  a  dream  is  this  I  see  and 
hear! 

Love,  lend  me  patience  to  forbear  awhile. 

Sil.  O  miserable,  unhappy  that  I  am! 

Pro.  Unhappy  were  you,  madam,  ere  I  came; 
But  by  my  coming  I  have  made  you  happy.  50 
Sil.  By  thy  approach  thou  makest  me  most  un¬ 
happy. 

Jul.  [Aside]  And  me,  when  he  approacheth  to 
your  presence. 

Sil.  Had  I  been  seized  by  a  hungry  lion, 

1  would  have  been  a  breakfast  to  the  beast. 

Rather  than  have  false  Proteus  rescue  me. 

O,  Heaven  be  judge  how  I  love  Valentine, 
Whose  life’s  as  tender  to  me  as  my  soul! 

And  full  as  much,  for  more  there  cannot  be, 

I  do  detest  false  perjured  Proteus. 

Therefore  be  gone;  solicit  me  no  more.  40 

Pro.  What  dangerous  action,  stood  it  next  to 
death. 

Would  I  not  undergo  for  one  calm  look! 

O,  ’tis  the  curse  in  love,  and  still  approved. 

When  women  cannot  love  where  they’re  beloved! 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


Si/.  When  Proteus  cannot  love  where  he’s  be¬ 
loved. 

Read  over  Julia’s  heart,  thy  first  best  love, 

For  whose  dear  sake  thou  didst  then  rend  thy 
faith 

Into  a  thousand  oaths;  and  all  those  oaths 
Descended  into  perjury,  to  love  me. 

Thou  hast  no  faith  left  now,  unless  thou’dst  two; 
And  that’s  far  worse  than  none;  better  have  none 
Than  plural  faith  which  is  too  much  by  one: 

Thou  counterfeit  to  thy  true  friend! 

Pro.  In  love 

Who  respects  friend? 

Sil.  All  men  but  Proteus. 

Pro.  Nay,  if  the  gentle  spirit  of  moving  words 
Can  no  way  change  you  to  a  milder  form, 

I’ll  woo  you  like  a  soldier,  at  arms’  end. 

And  love  you  ’gainst  the  nature  of  love — force 
ye. 

Sil.  O  heaven! 

Pro.  I’ll  force  thee  yield  to  my  desire. 

Val.  Ruffian,  let  go  that  rude  uncivil  touch. 

Thou  friend  of  an  ill  fashion! 

Pro.  Valentine!  6i 

Val.  Thou  common  friend,  that’s  without  faith 
or  love, 

For  such  is  a  friend  now;  treacherous  man! 

Thou  hast  beguiled  my  hopes;  nought  but  mine 
eye 

Could  have  persuaded  me;  now  I  dare  not  say 
I  have  one  friend  alive;  thou  wouldst  disprove 
me. 

Who  should  be  trusted,  when  one’s  own  right 
hand 

Is  perjured  to  the  bosom?  Proteus, 

I  am  sorry  I  must  never  trust  thee  more, 

But  count  the  world  a  stranger  for  thy  sake.  70 
The  private  wound  is  deepest:  O  time  most  ac¬ 
curst, 

’Mongst  all  foes  that  a  friend  should  be  the  worst! 
Pro.  My  shame  and  guilt  confounds  me. 

Forgive  me,  Valentine:  if  hearty  sorrow 
Be  a  sufficient  ransom  for  offence, 

I  tender  ’t  here;  I  do  as  truly  suffer 
As  e’er  I  did  commit. 

Val.  Then  I  am  paid; 

And  once  again  I  do  receive  thee  honest. 

Who  by  repentance  is  not  satisfied 
Is  nor  of  heaven  nor  earth,  for  these  are  pleased. 
By  penitence  the  Eternal’s  wrath’s  appeased:  81 
And,  that  my  love  may  appear  plain  and  free. 

All  that  was  mine  in  Silvia  I  give  thee. 

}ul.  O  me  unhappy!  [Swoons.'] 

Pro.  Look  to  the  boy. 

Val.  Why,  boy!  why,  wag!  how  now!  what’s 
the  matter?  Look  up;  speak. 


Jul.  O  good  sir,  my  master  charged  me  to  de¬ 
liver  a  ring  to  Madam  Silvia,  which,  out  of  my 
neglect,  was  never  done.  po 

Pro.  Where  is  that  ring,  boy? 

Jul.  Here  ’tis;  this  is  it. 

Pro.  How!  let  me  see: 

Why,  this  is  the  ring  I  gave  to  Julia. 

Jul.  O,  cry  you  mercy,  sir,  I  have  mistook: 

This  is  the  ring  you  sent  to  Silvia. 

Pro.  But  how  earnest  thou  by  this  ring?  At  my 
depart 

I  gave  this  unto  Julia. 

Jul.  And  Julia  herself  did  give  it  me; 

And  Julia  herself  hath  brought  it  hither. 

How!  Julia!  100 

Jul.  Behold  her  that  gave  aim  to  all  thy  oaths. 
And  entertain’d  ’em  deeply  in  her  heart. 

How  oft  hast  thou  with  perjury  cleft  the  root! 

O  Proteus,  let  this  habit  make  thee  blush! 

Be  thou  ashamed  that  I  have  took  upon  me 
Such  an  immodest  raiment,  if  shame  live 
In  a  disguise  of  love: 

It  is  the  lesser  blot,  modesty  finds. 

Women  to  change  their  shapes  than  men  their 
minds. 

Pro.  Than  men  their  minds!  ’tis  true.  O  heaven! 
were  man  no 

But  constant,  he  were  perfect.  That  one  error 
Fills  him  with  faults;  makes  him  run  through  all 
the  sins: 

Inconstancy  falls  off  ere  it  begins. 

What  is  in  Silvia’s  face,  but  I  may  spy 
More  fresh  in  Julia’s  with  a  constant  eye? 

Val.  Come,  come,  a  hand  from  either: 

Let  me  be  blest  to  make  this  happy  close; 

’Twere  pity  two  such  friends  should  be  long  foes. 
Pro.  Bear  witness.  Heaven,  I  have  my  wish  for 
ever. 

Jul.  And  I  mine.  120 

Enter  outlaws,  with  duke  and  thurio. 

Outlaws.  A  prize,  a  prize,  a  prize! 

Val.  Forbear,  forbear,  I  say!  it  is  my  lord  the 
Duke. 

Your  Grace  is  welcome  to  a  man  disgraced. 
Banished  Valentine. 

Duke.  Sir  Valentine! 

Thu.  Yonder  is  Silvia;  and  Silvia’s  mine. 

Val.  Thurio,  give  back,  or  else  embrace  thy 
death; 

Come  not  within  the  measure  of  my  wrath; 

Do  not  name  Silvia  thine;  if  once  again, 

Verona  shall  not  hold  thee.  Here  she  stands: 
Take  but  possession  of  her  with  a  touch:  /50 

I  dare  thee  but  to  breathe  upon  my  love. 

Thu.  Sir  Valentine,  I  care  not  for  her,  I: 


THE  TWO  GENTLEMEN  OF  VERONA 


I  hold  him  but  a  fool  that  will  endanger 
His  body  for  a  girl  that  loves  him  not: 

I  claim  her  not,  and  therefore  she  is  thine. 

Duke.  The  more  degenerate  and  base  art  thou, 
To  make  such  means  for  her  as  thou  hast  done 
And  leave  her  on  such  slight  conditions. 

Now,  by  the  honour  of  my  ancestry, 

I  do  applaud  thy  spirit,  Valentine,  /40 

And  think  thee  worthy  of  an  empress’  love: 
Know  then,  I  here  forget  all  former  griefs. 

Cancel  all  grudge,  repeal  thee  home  again, 

Plead  a  new  state  in  thy  unrival’d  merit. 

To  which  I  thus  subscribe:  Sir  Valentine, 

Thou  art  a  gentleman  and  well  derived; 

Take  thou  thy  Silvia,  for  thou  hast  deserved  her. 
Val.  I  thank  your  Grace;  the  gift  hath  made  me 
happy. 

I  now  beseech  you,  for  your  daughter’s  sake. 

To  grant  one  boon  that  I  shall  ask  of  you.  /50 
Duke.  I  grant  it,  for  thine  own,  whate’er  it  be. 
Val.  These  banish’d  men  that  I  have  kept  withal 
Are  men  endued  with  worthy  qualities: 

Forgive  them  what  they  have  committed  here 


And  let  them  be  recall’d  from  their  exile: 

They  are  reformed,  civil,  full  of  good. 

And  fit  for  great  employment,  worthy  lord. 

Duke.  Thou  hast  prevail’d;  I  pardon  them  and 
thee: 

Dispose  of  them  as  thou  know’st  their  deserts. 
Come,  let  us  go:  we  will  include  all  jars  160 
With  triumphs,  mirth,  and  rare  solemnity. 

Val.  And,  as  we  walk  along,  I  dare  be  bold 
With  our  discourse  to  make  your  Grace  to  smile. 
What  think  you  of  this  page,  my  lord? 

Duke.  I  think  the  boy  hath  grace  in  him;  he 
blushes. 

Val.  I  warrant  you,  my  lord,  more  grace  than 
boy. 

Duke.  What  mean  you  by  that  saying? 

Val.  Please  you.  I’ll  tell  you  as  we  pass  along, 
That  you  will  wonder  what  hath  fortuned. 

Come,  Proteus;  ’tis  your  penance  but  to  hear  ijo 
The  story  of  your  loves  discovered: 

That  done,  our  day  of  marriage  shall  be  yours; 
One  feast,  one  house,  one  mutual  happiness. 

[Exeunt, 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


Ferdinand,  King  of  Navarre 
Biron 

Longaville  lords  attending  on  the  King 

Domain 

Boyet  I 

Mercade  attending  on  the  Princess  of  France 

Don  Adriano  de  Armado,  a  fantastical  Spaniard 

Sir  Nathaniel,  a  curate 

Holof ERNES,  a  schoolmaster 

Dull,  a  constable 

Costard,  a  cloven 

Moth,  a  page  to  Armado 


A  Forester 
A  Lord  of  F'rance 

The  Princess  of  France 
Rosaline 
Maria 
Katharine 
Jaquenetta,  a  country  uoench 

Non-Speaking:  Lords,  Attendants,  Blackamoors,  &c. 

Scene:  Navarre 


ladies  attending  on  the  Princess 


ACT  I 

Scene  i.  The  king  of  Navarre* s  par 
Enter  Ferdinand,  king  of  navarre,  biron, 
longaville,  and  domain. 

King,  Let  fame,  that  all  hunt  after  in  their  lives. 
Live  register’d  upon  our  brazen  tombs 
And  then  grace  us  in  the  disgrace  of  death; 

When,  spite  of  cormorant  devouring  Time, 

The  endeavour  of  this  present  breath  may  buy 
That  honour  which  shall  bate  his  scythe’s  keen 
edge 

And  make  us  heirs  of  all  eternity. 

Therefore,  brave  conquerors— for  so  you  are, 
That  war  against  your  own  affections 
And  the  huge  army  of  the  world’s  desires —  lo 
Our  late  edict  shall  strongly  stand  in  force: 
Navarre  shall  be  the  wonder  of  the  world; 

Our  court  shall  be  a  little  Academe, 

Still  and  contemplative  in  living  art. 

You  three,  Biron,  Dumain,  and  Longaville, 

Have  sworn  for  three  years’  term  to  live  with  me 
My  fellow-scholars  and  to  keep  those  statutes 
That  are  recorded  in  this  schedule  here; 

Your  oaths  are  pass’d;  and  now  subscribe  your 
names. 

That  his  own  hand  may  strike  his  honour  down 
That  violates  the  smallest  branch  herein:  21 

If  you  are  arm’d  to  do  as  sworn  to  do, 

Subscribe  to  your  deep  oaths,  and  keep  it  too. 

Long.  I  am  resolved;  ’tis  but  a  three  years’  fast: 
The  mind  shall  banquet,  though  the  body  pine: 

Fat  paunches  have  lean  pates,  and  dainty  bits 
Make  rich  the  ribs,  but  bankrupt  quite  the  wits. 
Dum.  My  loving  lord,  Dumain  is  mortified: 

The  grosser  manner  of  these  world’s  delights 
He  throws  upon  the  gross  world’s  baser  slaves: 

2 


To  love,  to  wealth,  to  pomp,  I  pine  and  die;  5/ 
With  all  these  living  in  philosophy. 

Biron.  I  can  but  say  their  protestation  over; 

So  much,  dear  liege,  I  have  already  sworn. 

That  is,  to  live  and  study  here  three  years. 

But  there  are  other  strict  observances; 

As,  not  to  see  a  woman  in  that  term. 

Which  I  hope  well  is  not  enrolled  there; 

And  one  day  in  a  week  to  touch  no  food 

And  but  one  meal  on  every  day  beside,  40 

The  which  I  hope  is  not  enrolled  there; 

And  then,  to  sleep  but  three  hours  in  the  night. 
And  not  be  seen  to  wink  of  all  the  day — 

When  I  was  wont  to  think  no  harm  all  night 
And  make  a  dark  night  too  of  half  the  day — 
Which  I  hope  well  is  not  enrolled  there: 

O,  these  are  barren  tasks,  too  hard  to  keep. 

Not  to  see  ladies,  study,  fast,  not  sleep! 

King.  Your  oath  is  pass’d  to  pass  away  from 
these. 

Biron.  Let  me  say  no,  my  liege,  an  if  you 
please:  50 

I  only  swore  to  study  with  your  Grace 
And  stay  here  in  your  court  for  three  years’  space. 
Long.  You  swore  to  that,  Biron,  and  to  the  rest. 
Biron.  By  yea  and  nay,  sir,  then  I  swore  in  jest. 
What  is  the  end  of  study?  let  me  know. 

King.  Why,  that  to  know,  which  else  we  should 
not  know. 

Biron.  Things  hid  and  barr’d,  you  mean,  from 
common  sense? 

King.  Ay,  that  is  study’s  godlike  recompense. 
Biron.  Come  on,  then;  I  will  swear  to  study  so. 
To  know  the  thing  I  am  forbid  to  know:  60 

As  thus — to  study  where  I  well  may  dine. 

When  I  to  feast  expressly  am  forbid; 

Or  study  where  to  meet  some  mistress  fine, 


SCENE  I 


2SS 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


When  mistresses  from  common  sense  are  hid; 
Or,  having  sworn  too  hard  a  keeping  oath, 

Study  to  break  it  and  not  break  my  troth. 

If  study’s  gain  be  thus  and  this  be  so. 

Study  knows  that  which  yet  it  doth  not  know: 
Swear  me  to  this,  and  I  will  ne’er  say  no. 

King.  These  be  the  stops  that  hinder  study 
quite  70 

And  train  our  intellects  to  vain  delight. 

Biron.  Why,  all  delights  are  vain;  but  that  most 
vain. 

Which,  with  pain  purchased,  doth  inherit  pain: 
As,  painfully  to  pore  upon  a  book 
To  seek  the  light  of  truth;  while  truth  the 
while 

Doth  falsely  blind  the  eyesight  of  his  look: 

Light  seeking  light  doth  light  of  light  beguile: 

So,  ere  you  find  where  light  in  darkness  lies, 

Your  light  grows  dark  by  losing  of  your  eyes. 
Study  me  how  to  please  the  eye  indeed  80 

By  fixing  it  upon  a  fairer  eye. 

Who  dazzling  so,  that  eye  shall  be  his  heed 
And  give  him  light  that  it  was  blinded  by. 

Study  is  like  the  heaven’s  glorious  sun 
That  will  not  be  deep-search’d  with  saucy  looks : 
Small  have  continual  plodders  ever  won 
Save  base  authority  from  others’  books. 

These  earthly  godfathers  of  heaven’s  lights 
That  give  a  name  to  every  fixed  star 
Have  no  more  profit  of  their  shining  nights  po 
Than  those  that  walk  and  wot  not  what  they 
are. 

Too  much  to  know  is  to  know  nought  but  fame; 
And  every  godfather  can  give  a  name. 

King.  How  well  he’s  read,  to  reason  against 
reading! 

Dum.  Proceeded  well,  to  stop  all  good  proceed- 
ing! 

Long.  He  weeds  the  corn  and  still  lets  grow  the 
weeding. 

Biron.  The  spring  is  near  when  green  geese  are 
a-breeding. 

Dum.  How  follows  that? 

Biron.  Fit  in  his  place  and  time. 

Dum.  In  reason  nothing. 

Biron.  Something  then  in  rhyme. 

King.  Biron  is  like  an  envious  sneaping  frost 

That  bites  the  first-born  infants  of  the 
spring.  loi 

Biron.  Well,  say  I  am;  why  should  proud  sum¬ 
mer  boast 

Before  the  birds  have  any  cause  to 
sing? 

Why  should  I  joy  in  any  abortive  birth? 

At  Christmas  I  no  more  desire  a  rose 

Than  wish  a  snow  in  May’s  new-fangled  mirth; 


But  like  of  each  thing  that  in  season  grows. 

So  you,  to  study  now  it  is  too  late. 

Climb  o’er  the  house  to  unlock  the  little  gate. 
King.  Well,  sit  you  out:  go  home,  Biron: 

adieu.  no 

Biron.  No,  my  good  lord;  I  have  sworn  to  stay 
with  you: 

And  though  I  have  for  barbarism  spoke  more 
Than  for  that  angel  knowledge  you  can  say. 
Yet  confident  I’ll  keep  what  I  have  swore 
And  bide  the  penance  of  each  three  years’  day. 
Give  me  the  paper;  let  me  read  the  same; 

And  to  the  strict’st  decrees  I’ll  write  my  name. 
King.  How  well  this  yielding  rescues  thee  from 
shame! 

Biron  [reads] .  ''Item,  That  no  woman  shall  come 
within  a  mile  of  my  court”:  Hath  this  been  pro¬ 
claimed?  121 

Long.  Four  days  ago. 

Biron.  Let’s  see  the  penalty.  [Reads]  “On  pain 
of  losing  her  tongue.”  Who  devised  this  penalty? 
Long.  Marry,  that  did  1. 

Biron.  Sweet  lord,  and  why? 

Long.  To  fright  them  hence  with  that  dread 
penalty. 

Biron.  A  dangerous  law  against  gentility! 

[Reads]  "Item,  If  any  man  be  seen  to  talk  with  a 
woman  within  the  term  of  three  years,  he  shall 
endure  such  public  shame  as  the  rest  of  the  court 
can  possibly  devise.” 

This  article,  my  liege,  yourself  must  break; 

For  well  you  know  here  comes  in  embassy 
The  French  king’s  daughter  with  yourself  to 
speak — 

A  maid  of  grace  and  complete  majesty — 

About  surrender  up  of  Aquitaine 
To  her  decrepit,  sick  and  bedrid  father: 
Therefore  this  article  is  made  in  vain,  /40 

Or  vainly  comes  the  admired  princess  hither. 
King.  What  say  you,  lords?  why,  this  was 
quite  forgot. 

Biron.  So  study  evermore  is  overshot: 

While  it  doth  study  to  have  what  it  would 
It  doth  forget  to  do  the  thing  it  should. 

And  when  it  hath  the  thing  it  hunteth  most, 

’Tis  won  as  towns  with  fire,  so  won,  so  lost. 

King.  We  must  of  force  dispense  with  this 
decree; 

She  must  lie  here  on  mere  necessity. 

Biron.  Necessity  will  make  us  all  forsworn 
Three  thousand  times  within  this  three  years’ 
space.  '5^ 

For  every  man  with  his  affects  is  born, 

Not  by  might  master’d  but  by  special  grace: 

If  I  break  faith,  this  word  shall  speak  for  me; 

I  am  forsworn  on  “mere  necessity.” 


ACT  I 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


256 

So  to  the  laws  at  large  I  write  my  name: 

Subscribes, 

And  he  that  breaks  them  in  the  least  degree 
Stands  in  attainder  of  eternal  shame: 

Suggestions  are  to  other  as  to  me; 

But  I  believe,  although  I  seem  so  loath,  160 

I  am  the  last  that  will  last  keep  his  oath. 

But  is  there  no  quick  recreation  granted? 

King,  Ay,  that  there  is.  Our  court,  you  know, 
is  haunted 

With  a  refined  traveller  of  Spain; 

A  man  in  all  the  world’s  new  fashion  planted. 
That  hath  a  mint  of  phrases  in  his  brain; 

One  whom  the  music  of  his  own  vain  tongue 
Doth  ravish  like  enchanting  harmony; 

A  man  of  complements,  whom  right  and 
wrong 

Have  chose  as  umpire  of  their  mutiny:  /70 

This  child  of  fancy  that  Armado  hight 
For  interim  to  our  studies  shall  relate 
In  high-born  words  the  worth  of  many  a  knight 
From  tawny  Spain  lost  in  the  world’s  debate. 
How  you  delight,  my  lords,  I  know  not,  I; 

But,  I  protest,  I  love  to  hear  him  lie 
And  I  will  use  him  for  my  minstrelsy. 

Biron,  Armado  is  a  most  illustrious  wight, 

A  man  of  fire-new  words,  fashion’s  own  knight. 
Long.  Costard  the  swain  and  he  shall  be  our 
sport;  180 

And  so  to  study,  three  years  is  but  short. 

Enter  dull  'with  a  letter,  and  costard. 

Dz///.Which  is  the  Duke’s  own  person? 

Biron.  This,  fellow:  what  wouldst? 

Dull.  I  myself  reprehend  his  own  person,  for  I 
am  his  grace’s  tharborough:  but  I  would  see  his 
own  person  in  flesh  and  blood. 

Biron.  This  is  he. 

Dull,  Signior  Arme — Arme — commends  you. 
There’s  villainy  abroad:  this  letter  will  tell  you 
more.  ipo 

Cost.  Sir,  the  contempts  thereof  are  as  touching 
me. 

King.  A  letter  from  the  magnificent  Armado. 
Biron.  How  low  soever  the  matter,  I  hope  in 
God  for  high  words. 

Ij)ng.  A  high  hope  for  a  low  heaven:  God 
grant  us  patience! 

Biron.  To  hear?  or  forbear  laughing? 

Long.  To  hear  meekly,  sir,  and  to  laugh  mod¬ 
erately;  or  to  forbear  both.  200 

Biron.  Well,  sir,  be  it  as  the  style  shall  give  us 
cause  to  climb  in  the  merriness. 

Cost.  The  matter  is  to  me,  sir,  as  concerning 
Jaquenetta.  The  manner  of  it  is,  I  was  taken 
with  the  manner. 


Biron.  In  what  manner? 

Cost.  In  manner  aqd  form  following,  sir;  all 
those  three:  I  was  seen  with  her  in  the  manor- 
house,  sitting  with  her  upon  the  form,  and  taken 
following  her  into  the  park;  which,  put  together, 
is  in  manner  and  form  following.  Now,  sir,  for 
the  manner — it  is  the  manner  of  a  man  to  speak 
to  a  woman:  for  the  form — in  some  form. 

Biron.  For  the  following,  sir? 

Cost.  As  it  shall  follow  in  my  correction:  and 
God  defend  the  right! 

King.  Will  you  hear  this  letter  with  attention? 
Biron.  As  we  would  hear  an  oracle. 

Cost.  Such  is  the  simplicity  of  man  to  hearken 
after  the  flesh.  220 

King,  [reads].  “Great  deputy,  the  welkin’s 
vicegerent  and  sole  dominator  of  Navarre,  my 
soul’s  earth’s  god,  and  body’s  fostering  patron.” 
Cost.  Not  a  word  of  Costard  yet. 

King  [reads] .  “So  it  is — ” 

Cost.  It  may  be  so:  but  if  he  say  it  is  so,  he  is, 
in  telling  true,  but  so. 

King.  Peace! 

Cost.  Be  to  me  and  every  man  that  dares  not 
fight!  2^0 

King.  No  words! 

Cost.  Of  other  men’s  secrets,  I  beseech  you. 

King  [reads].  “So  it  is,  besieged  with  sable- 
coloured  melancholy,  I  did  commend  the  black¬ 
oppressing  humour  to  the  most  wholesome  physic 
of  thy  health-giving  air;  and,  as  1  am  a  gentle¬ 
man,  betook  myself  to  walk.  The  time  when. 
About  the  sixth  hour;  when  beasts  most  graze, 
birds  best  peck,  and  men  sit  down  to  that  nourish¬ 
ment  which  is  called  supper:  so  much  for  the 
time  when.  Now  for  the  ground  which;  which,  I 
mean,  I  walked  upon:  it  is  ycleped  thy  park. 
Then  for  the  place  where;  where,  I  mean,  I  did 
encounter  that  obscene  and  most  preposterous 
event,  that  draweth  from  my  snow-white  pen 
the  ebon-coloured  ink,  which  here  thou  viewest, 
beholdest,  surveyest,  or  seest:  but  to  the  place 
where;  it  standeth  north-north-east  and  by  east 
from  the  west  corner  of  thy  curious-knotted 
garden:  there  did  I  see  that  low-spirited  swain, 
that  base  minnow  of  thy  mirth” —  25/ 

Cost,  Me? 

King,  [reads],  “that  unlettered  small-knowing 
soul” — 

Cost.  Me? 

King  [reads],  “that  shallow  vassal” — 

Cost.  Still  me? 

King  [reads],  “which,  as  I  remember,  hight 
Costard” — 

O,  me!  -260 

King  [reads],  “sorted  and  consorted,  contrary 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


to  thy  established  proclaimed  edict  and  continent 
canon,  which  with — O,  with — but  with  this  I 
passion  to  say  wherewith” — 

Cost.  With  a  wench. 

King  [reads],  “with  a  child  of  our  grandmother 
Eve,  a  female;  or,  for  thy  more  sweet  under¬ 
standing,  a  woman.  Him  I,  as  my  ever-esteemed 
duty  pricks  me  on,  have  sent  to  thee,  to  receive 
the  meed  of  punishment,  by  thy  sweet  grace’s 
officer,  Anthony  Dull;  a  man  of  good  repute, 
carriage,  bearing,  and  estimation.” 

Dull.  Ale,  an’t  shall  please  you;  I  am  Anthony 
Dull. 

Kmg.  [reads].  “For  Jaquenetta — so  is  the 
weaker  vessel  called  which  I  apprehended  with 
the  aforesaid  swain — I  keep  her  as  a  vessel  of 
thy  law’s  fury;  and  shall,  at  the  least  of  thy  sweet 
notice,  bring  her  to  trial.  Thine,  in  all  compli¬ 
ments  of  devoted  and  heart-burning  heat  of  duty. 

Don  Adriano  de  Armado” 

Biron.  This  is  not  so  well  as  I  looked  for,  but 
the  best  that  ever  I  heard. 

King.  Ay,  the  best  for  the  worst.  But,  sirrah, 
what  say  you  to  this? 

Cost.  Sir,  I  confess  the  wench. 

King.  Did  you  hear  the  proclamation? 

Cost.  I  do  confess  much  of  the  hearing  it,  but 
little  of  the  marking  of  it. 

King.  It  was  proclaimed  a  year’s  imprison¬ 
ment,  to  be  taken  with  a  wench.  2po 

Cost.  I  was  taken  with  none,  sir;  I  was  taken 
with  a  damsel. 

King.  Well,  it  was  proclaimed  “damsel.” 

Cost.  This  was  no  damsel  neither,  sir;  she  was 
a  virgin. 

King.  It  is  so  varied  too;  for  it  was  proclaimed 
“virgin.” 

Cost.  If  it  were,  I  deny  her  virginity:  I  was 
taken  with  a  maid. 

King.  This  maid  will  not  serve  your  turn,  sir. 

Cost.  This  maid  will  serve  my  turn,  sir.  50/ 

King.  Sir,  I  will  pronounce  your  sentence;  you 
shall  fast  a  week  with  bran  and  water. 

Cost.  I  had  rather  pray  a  month  with  mutton 
and  porridge. 

King.  And  Don  Armado  shall  be  your  keeper. 
My  Lord  Biron,  see  him  deliver’d  o’er: 

And  go  we,  lords,  to  put  in  practice  that 

Which  each  to  other  hath  so  strongly  sworn. 

[Exeunt  king,  Longa ville,  and  domain. 
Biron.VW  lay  my  head  to  any  good  man’s  hat,  5/0 

These  oaths  and  laws  will  prove  an  idle  scorn. 
Sirrah,  come  on. 

Cost.  I  suffer  for  the  truth,  sir;  for  true  it  is, 
I  was  taken  with  Jaquenetta,  and  jaquenetta  is  a 
true  girl;  and  therefore  welcome  the  sour  cup  of 


prosperity!  Affliction  may  one  day  smile  again; 
and  till  then,  sit  thee  down,  sorrow!  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  same 
Enter  armado  and  moth 

Arm.  Boy,  what  sign  is  it  when  a  man  of  great 
spirit  grows  melancholy? 

Moth.  A  great  sign,  sir,  that  he  will  look  sad. 

Arm.  Why,  sadness  is  one  and  the  self-same 
thing,  dear  imp. 

Moth.  No,  no;  O  Lord,  sir,  no. 

Arm.  How  canst  thou  part  sadness  and  melan¬ 
choly,  my  tender  juvenal? 

Moth.  By  a  familiar  demonstration  of  the  work¬ 
ing,  my  tough  senior.  10 

Arm.  Why  tough  senior?  why  tough  senior? 

Moth.  Why  tender  juvenal?  why  tender  ju¬ 
venal? 

Arm.  I  spoke  it,  tender  juvenal,  as  a  congruent 
epitheton  appertaining  to  thy  young  days,  which 
we  may  nominate  tender. 

Moth.  And  I,  tough  senior,  as  an  appertinent 
title  to  your  old  time,  which  we  may  name  tough. 

Arm.  Pretty  and  apt. 

Moth.  How  mean  you,  sir?  I  pretty,  and  my 
saying  apt?  or  I  apt,  and  my  saying  pretty? 

Arm.  Thou  pretty,  because  little. 

Moth.  Little  pretty,  because  little.  Wherefore 
apt? 

Arm.  And  therefore  apt,  because  quick. 

Moth.  Speak  you  this  in  my  praise,  master? 

Arm.  In  thy  condign  praise. 

Moth.  I  will  praise  an  eel  with  the  same  praise. 

Arm.  What,  that  an  eel  is  ingenious? 

That  an  eel  is  quick.  •  50 

Arm.  I  do  say  thou  art  quick  in  answers:  thou 
heatest  my  blood. 

Moth.  I  am  answered,  sir. 

Arm.l  love  not  to  be  crossed. 

Moth.  [Aside]  He  speaks  the  mere  contrary; 
crosses  love  not  him. 

Arm.  I  have  promised  to  study  three  years 
with  the  duke. 

Moth.  You  may  do  it  in  an  hour,  sir. 

Arm.  Impossible.  40 

Moth.  How  many  is  one  thrice  told? 

Arm.  I  am  ill  at  reckoning;  it  fitteth  the  spirit 
of  a  tapster. 

Moth.  You  are  a  gentleman  and  a  gamester,  sir. 

Arm.  I  confess  both;  they  are  both  the  varnish 
of  a  complete  man. 

Moth.  Then,  I  am  sure,  you  know  how  much 
the  gross  sum  of  deuce-ace  amounts  to. 

Arm.  It  doth  amount  to  one  more  than  two. 

Moth.  Which  the  base  vulgar  do  call  three. 

Arm.  True. 


258 

Moth.  W^hy,  sir,  is  this  such  a  piece  of  study? 
Now  here  is  three  studied,  ere  ye’ll  thrice  wink: 
and  how  easy  it  is  to  put  “years”  to  the  word 
“three,”  and  study  three  years  in  two  words,  the 
dancing  horse  will  tell  you. 

Arm.  most  fine  figure! 

Moth.  To  prove  you  a  cipher.  55) 

Ar?n.  I  will  hereupon  confess  I  am  in  love:  and 
as  it  is  base  for  a  soldier  to  love,  so  am  I  in  love 
with  a  base  wench.  If  drawing  my  sword  against 
the  humour  of  affection  would  deliver  me  from 
the  reprobate  thought  of  it,  I  would  take  Desire 
prisoner,  and  ransom  him  to  any  French  courtier 
for  a  new-devised  courtesy.  I  think  scorn  to  sigh: 
methinks  I  should  outs  wear  Cupid.  Comfort  me, 
boy:  what  great  men  have  been  in  love? 

Moth.  Hercules,  master.  6p 

Arm.  Most  sweet  Hercules!  More  authority, 
dear  boy,  name  more;  and,  sweet  my  child,  let 
them  be  men  of  good  repute  and  carriage. 

Moth.  Samson,  master:  he  was  a  man  of  good 
carriage,  great  carriage,  for  he  carried  the  town- 
gates  on  his  back  like  a  porter:  and  he  was  in 
love. 

Arm.  O  well-knit  Samson!  strong-jointed 
Samson!  I  do  excel  thee  in  my  rapier  as  much  as 
thou  didst  me  in  carrying  gates.  I  am  in  love  too. 
Who  was  Samson’s  love,  my  dear  Moth? 
Moth.  A  woman,  master.  81 

Arm.  Of  what  complexion? 

Moth.  Of  all  the  four,  or  the  three,  or  the  two, 
or  one  of  the  four. 

Arm.  Tell  me  precisely  of  what  complexion. 
Moth.  Of  the  sea-water  green,  sir. 

Arm.  Is  that  one  of  the  four  complexions? 
Moth.  As  I  have  read,  sir;  and  the  best  of  them 
too.  89 

Arm.  Green  indeed  is  the  colour  of  lovers;  but 
to  have  a  love  of  that  colour,  methinks  Samson 
had  small  reason  for  it.  He  surely  affected  her 
for  her  wit. 

Moth.  It  was  so,  sir;  for  she  had  a  green  wit. 
Arm.  My  love  is  most  immaculate  white  and 
red. 

Moth.  Most  maculate  thoughts,  master,  are 
masked  under  such  colours. 

Arm.  Define,  define,  well-educated  infant. 

Moth.  My  father’s  wit  and  my  mother’s  tongue, 
assist  me!  loi 

Arm.  Sweet  invocation  of  a  child;  most  pretty 
and  pathetical! 

Moth.  If  she  be  made  of  white  and  red. 

Her  faults  will  ne’er  be  known. 

For  blushing  cheeks  by  faults  are  bred 
And  fears  by  pale  white  shown: 

Then  if  she  fear,  or  be  to  blame, 


ACT  I 

By  this  you  shall  not  know. 

For  still  her  cheeks  possess  the  same 
Which  native  she  doth  owe.  lu 

A  dangerous  rhyme,  master,  against  the  reason 
of  white  and  red. 

Arm.  Is  there  not  a  ballad,  boy,  of  the  King 
and  the  Beggar? 

Moth.  The  world  was  very  guilty  of  such  a 
ballad  some  three  ages  since:  but  I  think  now 
’tis  not  to  be  found;  or,  if  it  were,  it  would 
neither  serve  for  the  writing  nor  the  tune,  up 
Arm.  I  will  have  that  subject  newly  writ  o’er, 
that  I  may  example  my  digression  by  some 
mighty  precedent.  Boy,  I  do  love  that  country 
girl  that  I  took  in  the  park  with  the  rational  hind 
Costard:  she  deserves  well. 

Moth.  [Aside]  To  be  whipped;  and  yet  a  better 
love  than  my  master. 

Arm.  Sing,  boy;  my  spirit  grows  heavy  in  love. 
Moth.  And  that’s  great  marvel,  loving  a  light 
wench. 

Arm.  I  say,  sing.  1^0 

Moth.  Forbear  till  this  company  be  past. 

Enter  dull,  costard,  and  jaquenetta. 

Dull.  Sir,  the  Duke’s  pleasure  is,  that  you  keep 
Costard  safe:  and  you  must  suffer  him  to  take 
no  delight  nor  no  penance;  but  a’  must  fast  three 
days  a  week.  For  this  damsel,  I  must  keep  her 
at  the  park:  she  is  allowed  for  the  day-woman. 
Fare  you  well. 

Arm.  I  do  betray  myself  with  blushing.  Maid! 
Jaq.  Man? 

Arm.  I  will  visit  thee  at  the  lodge.  /40 

Jaq.  That’s  hereby. 

Arm.  I  know  where  it  is  situate. 

Jaq.  Lord,  how  wise  you  are! 

Arm.  I  will  tell  thee  wonders. 

Jaq.  With  that  face? 

Arm.  I  love  thee. 

Jaq.  So  I  heard  you  say. 

Arm.  And  so,  farewell. 

Jaq.  Fair  weather  after  you! 

Dull.  Come,  Jaquenetta,  away!  75 o 

[Exeunt  dull  and  jaquenetta. 
Arm.  Villain,  thou  shalt  fast  for  thy  offences 
ere  thou  be  pardoned. 

Cost.  Well,  sir,  I  hope,  when  I  do  it,  I  shall 
do  it  on  a  full  stomach. 

Arm.  Thou  shalt  be  heavily  punished. 

Cost.  I  am  more  bound  to  you  than  your  fel¬ 
lows,  for  they  are  but  lightly  rewarded. 

Arm.  Take  away  this  villain;  shut  him  up. 

Moth.  Come,  you  transgressing  slave;  away! 
Cost.  Let  me  not  be  pent  up,  sir:  I  will  fast, 
being  loose.  161 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


SCENE  II 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


Moth,  No,  sir;  that  were  fast  and  loose;  thou 
shalt  to  prison. 

Cost.  Well,  if  ever  I  do  see  the  merry  days  of 
desolation  that  I  have  seen,  some  shall  see. 

Moth.  What  shall  some  see? 

Cost.  Nay,  nothing.  Master  Moth,  but  what 
they  look  upon.  It  is  not  for  prisoners  to  be  too 
silent  in  their  words;  and  therefore  I  will  say 
nothing:  I  thank  God  I  have  as  little  patience  as 
another  man;  and  therefore  I  can  be  quiet.  iji 
[Exeunt  moth  and  costard. 

Arm.  I  do  affect  the  very  ground,  which  is 
base,  where  her  shoe,  which  is  baser,  guided  by 
her  foot,  which  is  basest,  doth  tread.  I  shall  be 
forsworn,  which  is  a  great  argument  of  falsehood, 
if  I  love.  And  how  can  that  be  true  love  which 
is  falsely  attempted?  Love  is  a  familiar;  Love  is 
a  devil:  there  is  no  evil  angel  but  Love.  Yet  was 
Samson  so  tempted,  and  he  had  an  excellent 
strength;  yet  was  Solomon  so  seduced,  and  he 
had  a  very  good  wit.  Cupid’s  butt-shaft  is  too 
hard  for  Hercules’  club;  and  therefore  too  much 
odds  for  a  Spaniard’s  rapier.  The  first  and  se¬ 
cond  cause  will  not  serve  my  uirn;  the  passado 
he  respects  not,  the  duello  he  regards  not:  his 
disgrace  is  to  be  called  boy;  but  his  glory  is  to 
subdue  men.  Adieu,  valour!  rust,  rapier!  be 
still,  drum!  for  your  manager  is  in  love;  yea,  he 
loveth.  Assist  me,  some  extemporal  god  of 
rhyme,  for  I  am  sure  I  shall  turn  sonnet.  De¬ 
vise,  wit;  write,  pen;  for  I  am  for  whole  volumes 
in  folio.  [Exit. 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  The  same 

Enter  the  princess  of  France,  Rosaline,  maria, 

KATHARINE,  BOYET,  LORDS,  and  Other  Attendants. 

Boyet.  Now,  madam,  summon  up  your  dearest 
spirits: 

Consider  who  the  King  your  father  sends. 

To  whom  he  sends,  and  what’s  his  embassy: 
Yourself,  held  precious  in  the  world’s  esteem, 

To  parley  with  the  sole  inheritor 
Of  all  perfections  that  a  man  may  owe. 

Matchless  Navarre;  the  plea  of  no  less  weight 
Than  Aquitaine,  a  dowry  for  a  queen. 

Be  now  as  prodigal  of  all  dear  grace 
As  Nature  was  in  making  graces  dear  lo 

When  she  did  starve  the  general  world  beside 
And  prodigally  gave  them  all  to  you. 

Prin.  Good  Lord  Boyet,  my  beauty,  though  but 
mean, 

Nee4s  not  the  painted  flourish  of  your  praise: 
Beauty  is  bought  by  judgement  of  the  eye. 

Not  utter’d  by  base  sale  of  chapmen’s  tongues: 


259 

I  am  less  proud  to  hear  you  tell  my  worth 
Than  you  much  willing  to  be  counted  wise 
In  spending  your  wit  in  the  praise  of  mine. 

But  now  to  task  the  tasker:  good  Boyet,  20 
You  are  not  ignorant,  all-telling  fame 
Doth  noise  abroad,  Navarre  hath  made  a  vow, 
Till  painful  study  shall  outwear  three  years, 

No  woman  may  approach  his  silent  court: 
Therefore  to’s  seemeth  it  a  needful  course. 

Before  we  enter  his  forbidden  gates. 

To  know  his  pleasure;  and  in  that  behalf. 

Bold  of  your  worthiness,  we  single  you 
As  our  best-moving  fair  solicitor. 

Tell  him,  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  France,  ^0 
On  serious  business,  craving  quick  dispatch, 
Importunes  personal  conference  with  his  Grace: 
Haste,  signify  so  much;  while  we  attend. 

Like  humble-visaged  suitors,  his  high  will. 

Boyet.  Proud  of  employment,  willingly  I  go. 
Prin.  xAll  pride  is  willing  pride,  and  yours  is  so. 

[Exit  BOYET. 

Who  are  the  votaries,  my  loving  lords. 

That  are  vow-fellows  with  this  virtuous  Duke? 
ist  Lord.  Lord  Longaville  is  one. 

Prin.  Know  you  the  man? 

Mar.  I  know  him,  madam:  at  a  marriage- 
feast,  40 

Between  Lord  Perigort  and  the  beauteous  heir 
Of  Jaques  Falconbridge,  solemnized 
In  Normandy,  saw  I  this  Longaville: 

A  man  of  sovereign  parts  he  is  esteem’d; 

Well  fitted  in  arts,  glorious  in  arms: 

Nothing  becomes  him  ill  that  he  would  well. 

The  only  soil  of  his  fair  virtue’s  gloss. 

If  virtue’s  gloss  will  stain  with'any  soil, 

Is  a  sharp  wit  match’d  with  too  blunt  a  will; 
Whose  edge  hath  power  to  cut,  whose  will  still 
wills  JO 

It  should  none  spare  that  come  within  his  power. 
Prin.  Some  merry  mocking  lord,  belike;  is’t  so? 
Mar.  They  say  so  most  that  most  his  humours 
know. 

Prin.  Such  short-lived  wits  do  wither  as  they 
grow. 

Who  are  the  rest? 

Kath.  The  young  Dumain,  a  well-accomplished 
youth, 

Of  ail  that  virtue  love  for  virtue  loved: 

Most  power  to  do  most  harm,  least  knowing  ill; 
For  he  hath  wit  to  make  an  ill  shape  good. 

And  shape  to  win  grace  though  he  had  no  wit.  60 
I  saw  him  at  the  Duke  Alen^on’s  once; 

And  much  too  little  of  that  good  I  saw 
Is  my  report  to  his  great  worthiness. 

Ros.  Another  of  these  students  at  that  time 
Was  there  with  him,  if  I  have  heard  a  truth. 


26o 


ACT  II 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


Biron  they  call  him;  but  a  merrier  man. 

Within  the  limit  of  becoming  mirth, 

I  never  spent  an  hour’s  talk  withal: 

His  eye  begets  occasion  for  his  wit; 

For  every  object  that  the  one  doth  catch  70 
The  other  turns  to  a  mirth-moving  jest, 

Which  his  fair  tongue,  conceit’s  expositor. 
Delivers  in  such  apt  and  gracious  words 
That  aged  ears  play  truant  at  his  tales 
And  younger  hearings  are  quite  ravished; 

So  sweet  and  voluble  is  his  discourse. 

Prin.  God  bless  my  ladies!  are  they  all  in  love, 
That  every  one  her  own  hath  garnished 
With  such  bedecking  ornaments  of  praise? 
isr  Lord.  Here  comes  Boyet. 

Re-enter  boyet. 

Prm.  Now,  what  admittance,  lord?  2o 
Boyet.  Navarre  had  notice  of  your  fair  approach; 
And  he  and  his  competitors  in  oath 
Were  all  address’d  to  meet  you,  gentle  lady. 
Before  I  came.  Marry,  thus  much  I  have  learnt: 
He  rather  means  to  lodge  you  in  the  field. 

Like  one  that  comes  here  to  besiege  his  court, 
Than  seek  a  dispensation  for  his  oath. 

To  let  you  enter  his  unpeopled  house. 

Here  comes  Navarre. 

Enter  king,  longaville,  domain,  biron,  and 
Attendants. 

King.  Fair  princess,  welcome  to  the  court  of 
Navarre.  po 

Prin.  “Fair”  I  give  you  back  again;  and  “wel¬ 
come”  I  have  not  yet:  the  roof  of  this  court  is 
too  high  to  be  yours;  and  welcome  to  the  wide 
fields  too  base  to  be  mine. 

King.  You  shall  be  welcome,  madam,  to  my 
court. 

Prin.  I  will  be  welcome,  then:  conduct  me 
thither. 

King.  Hear  me,  dear  lady;  I  have  sworn  an  oath. 
Prin.  Our  Lady  help  my  lord!  he’ll  be  forsworn. 
King.  Not  for  the  world,  fair  madam,  by  my 
will. 

Prin.  Why,  will  shall  break  it;  will  and  no¬ 
thing  else.  100 

King.  Your  ladyship  is  ignorant  what  it  is. 

Prin.  Were  my  lord  so,  his  ignorance  were 
wise, 

Where  now  his  knowledge  must  prove  ignorance. 
I  hear  your  Grace  hath  sworn  out  house-keeping: 
’Tis  deadly  sin  to  keep  that  oath,  my  lord. 

And  sin  to  break  it. 

But  pardon  me,  I  am  too  sudden- bold: 

To  teach  a  teacher  ill  beseemeth  me. 

Vouchsafe  to  read  the  purpose  of  my  coming. 


And  suddenly  resolve  me  in  my  suit.  no 

King.  Madam,  I  will,  if  suddenly  I  may. 

Prin.  You  will  the  Sooner,  that  I  were  away; 

For  you’ll  prove  perjured  if  you  make  me  stay. 
Biron.  Did  not  I  dance  with  you  in  Brabant 
once? 

Ros.  Did  not  I  dance  with  you  in  Brabant  once? 
Biron.  I  know  you  did. 

Ros.  How  needless  was  it  then  to  ask  the  ques¬ 
tion! 

Biron.  You  must  not  be  so  quick. 

Ros.  ’Tis  ’long  of  you  that  spur  me  with  such 
questions. 

Biron.  Your  wit’s  too  hot,  it  speeds  too  fast, 
’twill  tire.  120 

Ros.  Not  till  it  leave  the  rider  in  the  mire. 

Biron.  What  time  o’day? 

Ros.  The  hour  that  fools  should  ask. 

Biron.  Now  fair  befall  your  mask! 

Ros.  Fair  fall  the  face  it  covers! 

Biron.  And  send  you  many  lovers! 

Ros.  Amen,  so  you  be  none. 

Biron.  Nay,  then  will  I  be  gone. 

King.  Madam,  your  father  here  doth  intimate 
The  payment  of  a  hundred  thousand  crowns;  /50 
Being  but  the  one  half  of  an  entire  sum 
Disbursed  by  my  father  in  his  wars. 

But  say  that  he  or  we,  as  neither  have. 

Received  that  sum,  yet  there  remains  unpaid 
A  hundred  thousand  more;  in  surety  of  the 
which, 

One  part  of  Aquitaine  is  bound  to  us. 

Although  not  valued  to  the  money’s  worth. 

If  then  the  King  your  father  will  restore 
But  that  one  half  which  is  unsatisfied. 

We  will  give  up  our  right  in  Aquitaine,  /40 
And  hold  fair  friendship  wih  his  Majesty. 

But  that,  it  seems,  he  little  purposeth. 

For  here  he  doth  demand  to  have  repaid 
A  hundred  thousand  crowns;  and  not  demands. 
On  payment  of  a  hundred  thousand  crowns. 

To  have  his  title  live  in  Aquitaine; 

Which  we  much  rather  had  depart  withal 
And  have  the  money  by  our  father  lent 
Than  Aquitaine  so  gelded  as  it  is. 

Dear  Princess,  were  not  his  requests  so  far  ipo 
From  reason’s  yielding,  your  fair  self  should 
make 

A  yielding  ’gainst  some  reason  in  my  breast 
And  go  well  satisfied  to  France  again. 

Prin.  You  do  the  King  my  father  too  much 
wrong 

And  wrong  the  reputation  of  your  name. 

In  so  unseeming  to  confess  receipt 
Of  that  which  hath  so  faithfully  been  paid. 

King.  I  do  protest  I  never  heard  of  it; 


SCENE  I 


261 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


And  if  you  prove  it,  I’ll  repay  it  back 
Or  yield  up  Aquitaine. 

Prin.  We  arrest  your  word.  160 

Boyet,  you  can  produce  acquittances 
For  such  a  sum  from  special  officers 
Of  Charles  his  father. 

King,  Satisfy  me  so. 

Boyet,  So  please  your  Grace,  the  packet  is  not 
come 

Where  that  and  other  specialties  are  bound: 
To-morrow  you  shall  have  a  sight  of  them. 

King.  It  shall  suffice  me:  at  which  interview 
All  liberal  reason  I  will  yield  unto. 

Meantime  receive  such  welcome  at  my  hand 
As  honour  without  breach  of  honour  may  170 
Make  tender  of  to  thy  true  worthiness: 

You  may  not  come,  fair  Princess,  in  my  gates; 

But  here  without  you  shall  be  so  received 
As  you  shall  deem  yourself  lodged  in  my  heart. 
Though  so  denied  fair  harbour  in  my  house. 

Your  own  good  thoughts  excuse  me,  and  farewell : 
To-morrow  shall  we  visit  you  again. 

Prin.  Sweet  health  and  fair  desires  consort  your 
Grace! 

King.  Thy  own  wish  wish  I  thee  in  every  place! 

[Exit. 

Biron.  Lady,  I  will  commend  you  to  mine  own 
heart.  180 

Ros.  Pray  you,  do  my  commendations;  I  would 
be  glad  to  see  it. 

Biron.  I  would  you  heard  it  groan. 

Ros.  Is  the  fool  sick? 

Biron.  Sick  at  the  heart. 

Ros.  Alack,  let  it  blood. 

Biron.  Would  that  do  it  good? 

Ros.  My  physic  says  “ay.” 

Biron.  Will  you  prick’t  with  your  eye? 

Ros.  No  point,  with  my  knife.  ipo 

Biron.  Now,  God  save  thy  life! 

Ros.  And  yours  from  long  living! 

Biron.  I  cannot  stay  thanksgiving.  [Retiring. 
Dum.  Sir,  I  pray  you,  a  word;  what  lady  is  that 
same? 

Boyet.  The  heir  of  Alengon,  Katharine  her 
name. 

Dum.  A  gallant  lady.  Monsieur,  fare  you  well. 

[Exit. 

Long.  I  beseech  you  a  word:  what  is  she  in  the 
white? 

Boyet.  A  woman  sometimes,  an  you  saw  her  in 
the  light. 

Long.  Perchance  light  in  the  light.  I  desire  her 
name. 

Boyet.  She  hath  but  one  for  herself;  to  desire 
t^at  were  a  shame.  200 

Long.  Pray  you,  sir,  whose  daughter? 


Boyet.  Her  mother’s,  I  have  heard. 

Ijrng.  God’s  blessing  on  your  beard! 

Boyet.  Good'sir,  be  not  offended. 

She  is  an  heir  of  Falconbridge. 

Long.  Nay,  my  choler  is  ended. 

She  is  a  most  sweet  lady. 

Boyet.  Not  unlike,  sir,  that  may  be. 

[Exit  LONGAVILLE. 
Biron.  What’s  her  name  in  the  cap? 

Boyet.  Rosaline,  by  good  hap.  210 

Biron.  Is  she  wedded  or  no? 

Boyet.  To  her  will,  sir,  or  so. 

Biron.  You  are  welcome,  sir:  adieu. 

Boyet.  Farewell  to  me,  sir,  and  welcome  to  you. 

[Exit  BIRON. 

Mar.  That  last  is  Biron,  the  merry  mad-cap 
lord: 

Nor  a  word  with  him  but  a  jest. 

Boyet.  And  every  jest  but  a  word. 

Prin.  It  was  well  done  of  you  to  take  him  at  his 
word. 

Boyet.  I  was  as  willing  to  grapple  as  he  was  to 
board. 

A4ar.  Two  hot  sheeps,  marry. 

Boyet.  And  wherefore  not  ships? 

No  sheep,  sweet  lamb,  unless  we  feed  on  your 
lips.  220 

Mar.  You  sheep,  and  I  pasture:  shall  that  finish 
the  jest? 

Boyet.  So  you  grant  pasture  for  me. 

Offering  to  kiss  her. 

Mar.  Not  so,  gentle  beast: 

My  lips  are  no  common,  though  several  they  be. 
Boyet.  Belonging  to  whom? 

Mar.  To  my  fortunes  and  me. 

Prin.  Good  wits  will  be  jangling;  but,  gentles, 
agree: 

This  civil  war  of  wits  were  much  better  used 
On  Navarre  and  his  book-men;  for  here  ’tis 
abused. 

Boyet.  If  my  observation,  which  very  seldom 
lies. 

By  the  heart’s  still  rhetoric  disclosed  with  eyes, 
Deceive  me  not  now,  Navarre  is  infected.  2^0 
Prin.  With  what? 

Boyet.  With  that  which  we  lovers  entitle  af¬ 
fected. 

Prin.  Your  reason? 

Boyet.  Why,  all  his  behaviours  did  make  their 
retire 

To  the  court  of  his  eye,  peeping  thorough  desire: 
His  heart,  like  an  agate,  with  your  print  im¬ 
press’d. 

Proud  with  his  form,  in  his  eye  pride  express’d: 
His  tongue,  all  impatient  to  speak  and  not  see, 
Did  stumble  with  haste  in  his  eyesight  to  be; 


262 

All  senses  to  that  sense  did  make  their  repair,  2^0 
To  feel  only  looking  on  fairest  of  fair: 

Methought  all  his  senses  were  lock’d  in  his  eye, 
As  jewels  in  crystal  for  some  prince  to  buy; 

Who,  tendering  their  own  worth  from  where 
they  were  glass’d. 

Did  point  you  to  buy  them,  along  as  you  pass’d: 
His  face’s  own  margent  did  quote  such  amazes 
That  all  eyes  saw  his  eyes  enchanted  with  gazes. 
I’ll  give  you  Aquitaine  and  all  that  is  his. 

An  you  give  him  for  my  sake  but  one  loving  kiss. 
Prin.  Come  to  our  pavilion:  Boyet  is  disposed. 
Boyet,  But  to  speak  that  in  words  which  his  eye 
hath  disclosed,  25/ 

I  only  have  made  a  mouth  of  his  eye, 

By  adding  a  tongue  which  I  know  will  not  lie. 
Ros.  Thou  art  an  old  love-monger  and  speakest 
skilfully. 

Alar.  He  is  Cupid’s  grandfather  and  learns  news 
ofhim. 

Ros.  Then  was  Venus  like  her  mother,  for  her 
father  is  but  grim. 

Boyet.  Do  you  hear,  my  mad  wenches? 

Alar.  No. 

Boyet.  What  then,  do  you  see? 

Ros.  Ay,  our  way  to  be  gone. 

Boyet.  You  are  too  hard  for  me. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  III 
Scene  i.  The  same 
Enter  arm  a  do  and  moth. 

Arm.  Warble,  child;  make  passionate  my  sense 
of  hearing. 

Aioth.  Concolinel.  [Singing. 

Arm.  Sweet  air!  Go,  tenderness  of  years;  take 
this  key,  give  enlargement  to  the  swain,  bring 
him  festinately  hither:  I  must  employ  him  in  a 
letter  to  my  love. 

Adoth.  Master,  will  you  win  your  love  with  a 
French  brawl?  9 

Arm.  How  meanest  thou?  brawling  in  French? 
Aioth.  No,  my  complete  master:  but  to  jig  off  a 
tune  at  the  tongue’s  end,  canary  to  it  with  your 
feet,  humour  it  with  turning  up  your  eyelids,  sigh 
a  note  and  sing  a  note,  sometime  through  the 
throat,  as  if  you  swallowed  love  with  singing 
love,  sometime  through  the  nose,  as  if  you 
snuffed  up  love  by  smelling  love;  with  your  hat 
penthouse-like  o’er  the  shop  of  your  eyes;  with 
your  arms  crossed  on  your  thin-belly  doublet  like 
a  rabbit  on  a  spit;  or  your  hands  in  your  pocket 
like  a  man  after  the  old  painting;  and  keep  not 
too  long  in  one  tune,  but  a  snip  and  away.  These 
are  complements,  these  are  humours;  these  be- 


ACT  III 

tray  nice  wenches,  that  would  be  betrayed  with¬ 
out  these;  and  make  them  men  of  note — do  you 
note  me? — that  most  are  affected  to  these. 

Arm.  How  hast  thou  purchased  this  experience? 
Aioth.  By  my  penny  of  observation. 

Arm.  But  O — but  O — 

Aioth.  “The  hobby-horse  is  forgot.”  50 

Arm.  Cal  lest  thou  mv  love  “hobby-horse”? 
Aioth.  No,  master;  the  hobby-horse  is  but  a  colt, 
and  your  love  perhaps  a  hackney.  But  have  you 
forgot  your  love? 

Arm.  Almost  I  had. 

Aioth.  Negligent  student!  learn  her  by  heart. 
Arm.  By  heart  and  in  heart,  boy. 

Aioth.  And  out  of  heart,  master:  all  those  three 
I  will  prove. 

Arm.  What  wilt  thou  prove?  40 

Aioth.  A  man,  if  I  live;  and  this,  by,  in,  and 
without,  upon  the  instant:  by  heart  you  love  her, 
because  your  heart  cannot  come  by  her;  in  heart 
you  love  her,  because  your  heart  is  in  love  with 
her;  and  out  of  heart  you  love  her,  being  out  of 
heart  that  you  cannot  enjoy  her. 

Arm.  I  am  all  these  three. 

Aioth.  And  three  times  as  much  more,  and  yet 
nothing  at  all. 

Arm.  Fetch  hither  the  swain:  he  must  carry  me 
a  letter.  5/ 

Moth.  A  message  well  sympathized;  a  horse  to 
be  ambassador  for  an  ass. 

Arm.  Ha,  ha!  what  sayest  thou? 

Moth.  Marry,  sir,  you  must  send  the  ass  upon 
the  horse,  for  he  is  very  slow-gaited.  But  I  go. 
Arm.  The  way  is  but  short:  away! 

Aioth.  As  swift  as  lead,  sir? 

Arm.  The  meaning,  pretty  ingenious? 

Is  not  lead  a  metal  heavy,  dull,  and  slow?  60 
Moth.  Aiinime,  honest  master;  or  rather,  mas¬ 
ter,  no. 

Arm.  I  say  lead  is  slow. 

Aioth.  You  are  too  swift,  sir,  to  say  so: 

Is  that  lead  slow  which  is  fired  from  a  gun? 

Arm.  Sweet  smoke  of  rhetoric! 

He  reputes  me  a  cannon;  and  the  bullet,  that’s  he: 

I  shoot  thee  at  the  swain. 

Aioth.  Thump  then  and  I  flee.  [Exit. 

Arm.  A  most  acute  juvenal;  volable  and  free  of 
grace! 

By  thy  favour,  sweet  welkin,  I  must  sigh  in  thy 
face: 

Most  rude  melancholy,  valour  gives  thee  place. 
My  herald  is  return’d.  70 

Re-enter  moth  with  costard. 

Aioth.  A  wonder,  master!  here’s  a  costard  bro¬ 
ken  in  a  shin. 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


SCENE 

Arm.  Some  enigma,  some  riddle:  come,  thy 
r envoy;  begin. 

Cost.  No  egma,  no  riddle,  no  Fenvoy;  no  salve 
in  the  mail,  sir:  O,  sir,  plantain,  a  plain  plantain! 
no  Fenvoy,  no  Fenvoy;  no  salve,  sir,  but  a  plan¬ 
tain! 

Arm.  By  virtue,  thou  enforcest  laughter;  thy 
silly  thought  my  spleen;  the  heaving  of  my 
lungs  provokes  me  to  ridiculous  smiling.  O,  par¬ 
don  me,  my  stars!  Doth  the  inconsiderate  take 
salve  for  Fenvoy,  and  the  word  Fenvoy  for  a 
salve?  ^0 

Moth.  Do  the  wise  think  them  other?  is  not 
Fenvoy  a  salve? 

Arm.  No,  page:  it  is  an  epilogue  or  discourse, 
to  make  plain 

Some  obscure  precedence  that  hath  tofore  been 
sain. 

I  will  example  it: 

The  fox,  the  ape  and  the  humble-bee. 
Were  still  at  odds,  being  but  three. 
There’s  the  moral.  Now  the  Fenvoy. 

Moth.  I  will  add  the  Fenvoy.  Say  the  moral 
again. 

Arm.  The  fox,  the  ape,  the  humble-bee,  po 
Were  still  at  odds,  being  but  three. 

Moth.  Until  the  goose  came  out  of  door. 

And  stay’d  the  odds  by  adding  four. 

Now  will  I  begin  your  moral,  and  do  you  follow 
with  my  Fenvoy. 

The  fox,  the  ape  and  the  humble-bee. 
Were  still  at  odds,  being  but  three. 

Arm.  Until  the  goose  came  out  of  door. 

Staying  the  odds  by  adding  four. 

Moth.  A  good  Fenvoy,  ending  in  the  goose: 
would  you  desire  more?  loi 

Cost.  The  boy  hath  sold  him  a  bargain,  a  goose, 
that’s  flat. 

Sir,  your  pennyworth  is  good,  an  your  goose  be 
fat. 

To  sell  a  bargain  well  is  as  cunning  as  fast  and 
loose: 

Let  me  see;  a  fat  Fenvoy;  ay,  that’s  a  fat 
goose. 

Arm.  Come  hither,  come  hither.  How  did  this 
argument  begin? 

Moth.  By  saying  that  a  costard  was  broken  in  a 
shin. 

Then  call’d  you  for  the  Fenvoy. 

Cost.  True,  and  I  for  a  plantain:  thus  came  your 
argument  in; 

Then  the  boy’s  fat  Fenvoy,  the  goose  that  you 
bought;  no 

And  he  ended  the  market. 

AnH.  But  tell  me;  how  was  there  a  costard  bro¬ 
ken  in  a  shin? 


263 

Moth.  I  will  tell  you  sensibly. 

Cost.  Thou  hast  no  feeling  of  it.  Moth:  I  will 
speak  that  Fenvoy: 

I  Costard,  running  out,  that  was  safely  within. 
Fell  over  the  threshold,  and  broke  my  shin. 
Arm.  We  will  talk  no  more  of  this  matter. 

Cost.  Till  there  be  more  matter  in  the  shin. 

Arm.  Sirrah  Costard,  I  will  enfranchise  thee. 
Cost.  O,  marry  me  to  one  Frances:  I  smell  some 
Fenvoy,  some  goose,  in  this. 

Arm.  By  my  sweet  soul,  I  mean  setting  thee  at 
liberty,  enfreedoming  thy  person:  thou  wert  im¬ 
mured,  restrained,  captivated,  bound. 

Cost.  True,  true;  and  now  you  will  be  my  pur¬ 
gation  and  let  me  loose. 

Arm.  I  give  thee  thy  liberty,  set  thee  from  dur¬ 
ance;  and,  in  lieu  thereof,  impose  on  thee  nothing 
but  this:  bear  this  significant  [giving  a  letter]  to 
the  country  maid  Jaquenetta:  there  is  remunera¬ 
tion;  for  the  best  ward  of  mine  honour  is  reward¬ 
ing  my  dependents.  Moth,  follow.  [Exit. 

Moth.  Like  the  sequel,  1.  Signior  Costard,  adieu. 
Cost.  My  sweet  ounce  of  man’s  flesh!  my  incony 
Jew!  [£;timoTH. 

Now  will  I  look  to  his  remuneration.  Remunera¬ 
tion!  O,  that’s  the  Latin  word  for  three  farthings: 
three  farthings — remuneration.  “What’s  the 
price  of  this  inkle?”  “One  penny.”  “No,  Fll  give 
you  a  remuneration”  why,  it  carries  it.  Remuner¬ 
ation!  why,  it  is  a  fairer  name  than  French  crown. 
I  will  never  buy  and  sell  out  of  this  word. 

Enter  biron. 

Biron.  O,  my  good  knave  Costard!  exceedingly 
well  met. 

Cost.  Pray  you,  sir,  how  much  carnation  ribbon 
may  a  man  buy  for  a  remuneration? 

Biron.  What  is  a  remuneration? 

Cost.  Marry,  sir,  halfpenny  farthing.  /^p 

Biron.  Why,  then,  three- farthing  worth  of  silk. 
Cost.  I  thank  your  worship:  God  be  wi’  you! 
Biron.  Stay,  slave;  I  must  employ  thee: 

As  thou  wilt  win  my  favour,  good  my  knave, 

Do  one  thing  for  me  that  I  shall  entreat. 

Cost.  When  would  you  have  it  done,  sir? 

Biron.  This  afternoon. 

Cost.  Well,  I  will  do  it,  sir:  fare  you  well. 

Biron.  Thou  knowest  not  what  it  is. 

Cost.  I  shall  know,  sir,  when  I  have  done  it. 
Biron.  Why,  villain,  thou  must  know  first.  160 
Cost.  I  will  come  to  your  worship  to-morrow 
morning. 

Biron.  It  must  be  done  this  afternoon.  Hark, 
slave,  it  is  but  this: 

The  Princess  comes  to  hunt  here  in  the  park. 

And  in  her  train  there  is  a  gentle  lady; 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


x\CT  IV 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


264 

When  tongues  speak  sweetl)^  then  they  name 
her  name, 

And  Rosaline  they  call  her:  ask  for  her; 

And  to  her  white  hand  see  thou  do  commend  /dy 
This  seal’d-up  counsel.  There’s  thy  guerdon;  go. 
Giving  him  a  shilling. 

Cost.  Gardon,  O  sweet  gardon!  better  than  re¬ 
muneration,  a  ’leven-pence  farthing  better:  most 
sweet  gardon!  I  will  do  it,  sir,  in  print.  Gardon! 
Remuneration!  [Exit. 

Biron.  And  I,  forsooth,  in  love!  I,  that  have  been 
love’s  whip; 

A  very  beadle  to  a  humorous  sigh; 

A  critic,  nay,  a  night-watch  constable; 

A  domineering  pedant  o’er  the  boy; 

Than  whom  no  mortal  so  magnificent!  180 

This  wimpled,  whining,  purblind,  wayward  boy; 
This  senior-junior,  giant-dwarf,  Dan  Cupid; 
Regent  of  love-rhymes,  lord  of  folded  arms, 

The  anointed  sovereign  of  sighs  and  groans, 

Liege  of  all  loiterers  and  malcontents. 

Dread  prince  of  plackets,  king  of  codpieces, 

Sole  imperator  and  great  general 
Of  trotting  ’paritors:  O  my  little  heart! — 

And  I  to  be  a  corporal  of  his  field. 

And  wear  his  colours  like  a  tumbler’s  hoop!  /po 
What,  I!  I  love!  I  sue!  I  seek  a  wife! 

A  woman,  that  is  like  a  German  clock. 

Still  a-repairing,  ever  out  of  frame. 

And  never  going  aright,  being  a  watch. 

But  being  watch’d  that  it  may  still  go  right! 

Nay,  to  be  perjured,  which  is  worst  of  all; 

And,  among  three,  to  love  the  worst  of  all; 

A  wightly  wanton  with  a  velvet  brow. 

With  two  pitch-balls  stuck  in  her  face  for  eyes; 
Ay,  and,  by  heaven,  one  that  will  do  the  deed  200 
Though  Argus  were  her  eunuch  and  her  guard : 
And  I  to  sigh  for  her!  to  watch  for  her! 

To  pray  for  her!  Go  to;  it  is  a  plague 
That  Cupid  will  impose  for  my  neglect 
Of  his  almighty  dreadful  little  might. 

Well,  I  will  love,  write,  sigh,  pray,  sue  and 
groan: 

Some  men  must  love  my  lady  and  some 
Joan. 

[Exit. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  The  same 

Enter  the  princess,  and  her  train,  a  forks  i  er, 

BOYET,  ROSALINE,  MARIA,  and  KA  rHARINK. 

Prin.  Was  that  the  King,  that  spurt’d  his  horse 
so  hard 

Against  the  steep  uprising  of  the  hill? 

Boyet.  I  know  not;  but  I  think  it  was  not  he. 


Prin.  Whoe’er  a’  was,  a’  show’d  a  mounting 
mind. 

Well,  lords,  to-day  we  shall  have  our  dispatch: 
On  Saturday  we  will  return  to  France, 

Then,  forester,  my  friend,  where  is  the  bush 
That  we  must  stand  and  play  the  murderer  in? 

For.  Hereby,  upon  the  edge  of  yonder  coppice; 
A  stand  where  you  make  the  fairest  shoot. 

Prin.  I  thank  my  beauty,  I  am  fair  that  shoot. 
And  thereupon  thou  speak’st  the  fairest  shoot. 
For.  Pardon  me,  madam,  for  I  meant  not  so. 

Prin.  What,  what?  first  praise  me  and  again  say 
no? 

O  short-lived  pride!  Not  fair?  alack  for  woe! 

For.  Yes,  madam,  fair. 

Prin.  Nay,  never  paint  me  now: 

Where  fair  is  not,  praise  cannot  mend  the  brow. 
Here,  good  my  glass,  take  this  for  telling  true: 
Fair  payment  for  foul  words  is  more  than  due. 
For.  Nothing  but  fair  is  that  which  you  inherit. 
Prin.  See,  see,  my  beauty  will  be  saved  by 
merit!  21 

O  heresy  in  fair,  fit  for  these  days! 

A  giving  hand,  though  foul,  shall  have  fair  praise. 
But  come,  the  bow:  now  mercy  goes  to  kill. 

And  shooting  well  is  then  accounted  ill. 

Thus  will  I  save  my  credit  in  the  shoot: 

Not  wounding,  pity  would  not  let  me  do’t; 

If  wounding,  then  it  was  to  show  my  skill. 

That  more  for  praise  than  purpose  meant  to  kill. 
And  out  of  question  so  it  is  sometimes,  50 

Glory  grows  guilty  of  detested  crimes. 

When,  for  fame’s  sake,  for  praise,  an  outward 
part. 

We  bend  to  that  the  working  of  the  heart; 

As  I  for  praise  alone  now  seek  to  spill 
The  poor  deer’s  blood,  that  my  heart  means  no 
ill. 

Boyet.  Do  not  curst  wives  hold  that  self-sover¬ 
eignty 

Only  for  praise  sake,  when  they  strive  to  be 
Lords  o’er  their  lords? 

Prin.  Only  for  praise:  and  praise  we  may  afford 
To  any  lady  that  subdues  a  lord.  40 

Boyet.  Here  comes  a  member  of  the  common¬ 
wealth. 

Enter  costard. 

Cost.  God  dig-you-den  all!  Pray  you,  which  is 
the  head  lady? 

Prin.  Thou  shalt  know  her,  fellow,  by  the  rest 
that  have  no  heads. 

Cost.  Which  is  the  greatest  lady,  the  highest? 
Prin.  The  thickest  and  the  tallest. 

Cost.  The  thickest  and  the  tallest!  it  is  so;  truth 
is  truth. 


SCENE  I 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


An  your  waist,  mistress,  were  as  slender  as  my 
wit. 

One  o’  these  maids’  girdles  for  your  waist  should 
be  fit.  JO 

Are  not  you  the  chief  woman?  you  are  the  thick¬ 
est  here. 

Prin.  What’s  your  will,  sir?  what’s  your  will? 
Cost.  I  have  a  letter  from  Monsieur  Biron  to  one 
Lady  Rosaline. 

Prin.  O,  thy  letter,  thy  letter!  he’s  a  good  friend 
of  mine: 

Stand  aside,  good  bearer.  Boyet,  you  can  carve; 
Break  up  this  capon. 

Boyet.  I  am  bound  to  serve. 

This  letter  is  mistook,  it  importeth  none  here; 

It  is  writ  to  Jaquenetta. 

Prin.  We  will  read  it,  I  swear. 

Break  the  neck  of  the  wax,  and  every  one  give 
ear.  ^9 

Boyet  [reads].  “By  heaven,  that  thou  art  fair,  is 
most  infallible;  true,  that  thou  art  beauteous; 
truth  itself,  that  thou  art  lovely.  More  fairer  than 
fair,  beautiful  than  beauteous,  truer  than  truth 
itself,  have  commiseration  on  thy  heroical  vassal! 
The  magnanimous  and  most  illustrate  king  Cop- 
hetua  set  eye  upon  the  pernicious  and  indubiate 
beggar  Zenelophon;  and  he  it  was  that  might 
rightly  say,  Veni,  vidi,  vici;  which  to  annothan- 
ize  in  the  vulgar, — O  base  and  obscure  vulgar! — 
videlicet.,  He  came,  saw,  and  overcame:  he  came, 
one;  saw,  two;  overcame,  three.  Who  came?  the 
king:  why  did  he  come?  to  see:  why  did  he  see? 
to  overcome:  to  whom  came  he?  to  the  beggar: 
what  saw  he?  the  beggar:  who  overcame  he?  the 
beggar.  The  conclusion  is  victory:  on  whose 
side?  the  king’s.  The  captive  is  enriched:  on 
whose  side?  the  beggar’s.  The  catastrophe  is  a 
nuptial:  on  whose  side?  the  king’s:  no,  on  both 
in  one,  or  one  in  both.  I  am  the  king;  for  so 
stands  the  comparison:  thou  the  beggar;  for  so 
witnesseth  thy  lowliness.  Shall  I  command  thy 
love?  I  may:  shall  I  enforce  thy  love?  I  could: 
shall  I  entreat  thy  love?  I  will.  What  shalt  thou 
exchange  for  rags?  robes;  for  tittles?  titles;  for 
thyself?  me.  Thus,  expecting  thy  reply,  I  pro¬ 
fane  my  lips  on  thy  foot,  my  eyes  on  thy  picture, 
and  my  heart  on  thy  every  part.  Thine,  in  the 
dearest  design  of  industry, 

Don  Adriano  de  Armado” 
Thus  dost  thou  hear  the  Nemean  lion  roar  90 
’Gainst  thee,  thou  lamb,  that  standest  as  his 

Submissive  fall  his  princely  feet  before. 

And  he  from  forage  will  incline  to  play: 

But  if  thou  strive,  poor  soul,  what  art  thou  then? 
Food  for  his  rage,  repasture  for  his  den. 


265 

Prin.  What  plume  of  feathers  is  he  that  indited 
this  letter? 

What  vane?  wliat  weathercock?  did  you  ever 
hear  better? 

Boyet.  I  am  much  deceived  but  I  remember  the 
style. 

Prin.  Else  your  memory  is  bad,  going  o’er  it 
erewhile. 

Boyet.  This  Armado  is  a  Spaniard,  that  keeps 
here  in  court;  100 

A  phantasime,  a  Monarcho,  and  one  that  makes 
sport 

To  the  prince  and  his  bookmates. 

Prin.  Thou  fellow,  a  word: 

Who  gave  thee  this  letter? 

Cost.  I  told  you;  my  lord. 

Prin.  To  whom  shouldst  thou  give  it? 

Cost.  From  my  lord  to  my  lady. 

Prin.  From  which  lord  to  which  lady? 

Cost.  From  my  lord  Biron,  a  good  master  of 
mine. 

To  a  lady  of  France  that  he  call’d  Rosaline. 

Prin.  Thou  hast  mistaken  his  letter.  Come, 
lords,  away. 

[To  Rosaline]  Here,  sweet,  put  up  this:  ’twill  be 
thine  another  day. 

[Exeunt  princess  and  train. 
Boyet.  Who  is  the  suitor?  who  is  the  suitor? 

Ros.  Shall  I  teach  you  to  know?  110 

Boyet.  Ay,  my  continent  of  beauty. 

Ros.  Why,  she  that  bears  the  bow. 

Finely  put  off! 

Boyet.  My  lady  goes  to  kill  horns;  but,  if  thou 
marry. 

Hang  me  by  the  neck,  if  horns  that  year  miscarry. 
Finely  put  on! 

Ros.  Well,  then,  I  am  the  shooter. 

Boyet.  And  who  is  your  deer? 

Ros.  If  we  choose  by  the  horns,  yourself  come 
not  near. 

Finely  put  on,  indeed! 

Mar.  You  still  wrangle  with  her,  Boyet,  and  she 
strikes  at  the  brow. 

Boyet.  But  she  herself  is  hit  lower:  have  I  hit  her 
now?  120 

Ros.  Shall  I  come  upon  thee  with  an  old  saying, 
that  was  a  man  when  King  Pepin  of  France  was  a 
little  boy,  as  touching  the  hit  it? 

Boyet.  So  I  may  answer  thee  with  one  as  old, 
that  was  a  woman  when  Queen  Gui  never  of 
Britain  was  a  little  wench,  as  touching  the  hit  it. 
Ros.  Thou  canst  not  hit  it,  hit  it,  hit  it. 

Thou  canst  not  hit  it,  my  good  man. 

Boyet.  An  I  cannot,  cannot,  cannot. 

An  I  cannot,  another  can.  750 

[Exeunt  rosaline  and  Katharine. 


266 

Cost.  By  my  troth,  most  pleasant:  how  both  did 
fit  it! 

Mar.  A  mark  marvellous  well  shot,  for  they 
both  did  hit  it. 

Boyet.  A  mark!  O,  mark  but  that  mark!  A 
mark,  says  my  lady! 

]  .et  the  mark  have  a  prick  in’t,  to  mete  at,  if  it 
may  be. 

Mar.  Wide  o’  the  bow  hand!  i’  faith,  your  hand 
is  out. 

Cost.  Indeed,  a’  must  shoot  nearer,  or  he’ll  ne’er 
hit  the  clout. 

Boyet.  An  if  my  hand  be  out,  then  belike  your 
hand  is  in. 

Cost.  Then  will  she  get  the  upshoot  by  cleaving 
the  pin. 

Mar.  Come,  come,  you  talk  greasily;  your  lips 
grow  foul. 

Cost. 'ShCs  too  hard  for  you  at  pricks,  sir:  chal¬ 
lenge  her  to  bowl .  140 

Boyet.  I  fear  too  much  rubbing.  Good  night,  my 
good  owl.  [Exeunt  boyet  and  maria. 

Cost.  By  my  soul,  a  swain!  a  most  simple  clown! 
Lx)rd,  Lord,  how  the  ladies  and  I  have  put  him 
down! 

O’  my  troth,  most  sweet  jests!  most  incony  vul¬ 
gar  wit! 

When  it  comes  so  smoothly  off,  so  obscenely,  as 
it  were,  so  fit. 

Armado  o’  th’  one  side — O,  a  most  daipty  man! 
To  see  him  walk  before  a  lady  and  to  bear  her 
fan! 

To  see  him  kiss  his  hand!  and  how  most  sweetly 
a’  will  swear! 

And  his  page  o’  t’  other  side,  that  handful  of  wit! 
Ah,  heavens,  it  is  a  most  pathetical  nit!  /50 

Sola,  sola!  [Shout  within.  £^1/ costard,  running. 

Scene  11.  The  same 

Enter  holofernes,  sir  Nathaniel,  and  dull. 

Nath.  Very  reverend  sport,  truly;  and  done  in 
the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience. 

Hoi.  The  deer  was,  as  you  know,  sanguis.,  in 
blood;  ripe  as  the  pomewater,  who  now  hangeth 
like  a  jewel  in  the  ear  of  caelo,  the  sky,  the  wel¬ 
kin,  the  heaven;  and  anon  falleth  like  a  crab  on 
the  face  of  terra.,  the  soil,  the  land,  the  earth. 

Nath.  Truly,  Master  Holofernes,  the  epithets 
are  sweetly  varied,  like  a  scholar  at  the  least: 
but,  sir,  I  assure  ye,  it  was  a  buck  of  the  first 
head.  10 

Hoi.  Sir  Nathaniel,  hand  credo. 

Hull.  ’Twas  not  a  baud  credo;  ’twas  a  pricket. 

Hoi.  Most  barbarous  intimation!  yet  a  kind  of 
insinuation,  as  it  were,  in  via.,  in  way,  of  explica¬ 
tion;  facere.,  as  it  were,  replication,  or  rather. 


ACT  IV 

ostentare,  to  show,  as  it  were,  his  inclination,  after 
his  undressed,  unpohshed,  uneducated,  unpruned, 
untrained,  or  rather,  unlettered,  or  ratherest,  un¬ 
confirmed  fashion,  to  insert  again  my  baud  credo 
for  a  deer.  20 

Dull.  I  said  the  deer  was  not  a  hand  credo; 
’twas  a  pricket. 

Hoi.  Twice-sod  simplicity,  bis  coctus! 

O  thou  monster  Ignorance,  how  deformed  dost 
thou  look! 

Nath.  Sir,  he  hath  never  fed  of  the  dainties  that 
are  bred  in  a  book; 

he  hath  not  eat  paper,  as  it  were;  he  hath  not 
drunk  ink:  his  intellect  is  not  replenished;  he  is 
only  an  animal,  only  sensible  in  the  duller  parts: 
And  such  barren  plants  are  set  before  us,  that  we 
thankful  should  be. 

Which  we  of  taste  and  feeling  are,  for  those  parts 
that  do  fructify  in  us  more  than  he.  50 

For  as  it  would  ill  become  me  to  be  vain,  indis¬ 
creet,  or  a  fool. 

So  were  there  a  patch  set  on  learning,  to  see  him 
in  a  school: 

But  omne  bene.,  say  I;  being  of  an  old  father’s 
mind. 

Many  can  brook  the  weather  that  love  not  the 
wind. 

Dull.  You  two  are  book-men:  can  you  tell  me 
by  your  wit 

What  was  a  month  old  at  Cain’s  birth,  that’s  not 
five  weeks  old  as  yet? 

Hoi.  Dictynna,  goodman  Dull;  Dictynna,  good- 
man  Dull. 

Dull.  What  is  Dictynna? 

Nath.  A  title  to  Pheebe,  to  Luna,  to  the  moon. 

Hoi.  The  moon  was  a  month  old  when  Adam 
was  no  more,  40 

And  raught  not  to  five  weeks  when  he  came  to 
five-score. 

The  allusion  holds  in  the  exchange. 

Dull.  ’Tis  true  indeed;  the  collusion  holds  in 
the  exchange. 

Hoi.  God  comfort  thy  capacity!  I  say,  the  allu¬ 
sion  holds  in  the  exchange. 

Dull.  x\nd  I  say,  the  pollusion  holds  in  the  ex¬ 
change;  for  the  moon  is  never  but  a  month  old: 
and  I  say  beside  that,  ’pwas  a  pricket  that  the 
Princess  killed. 

Hoi.  Sir  Nathaniel,  will  you  hear  an  extemporal 
epitaph  on  the  death  of  the  deer?  And,  to  humour 
the  ignorant,  call  I  the  deer  the  Princess  killed  a 
pricket. 

Nath.  Perge,  good  Master  Holofernes,  perge;  so 
it  shall  please  you  to  abrogate  scurrility. 

Hoi.  I  will  something  affect  the  letter,  for  it 
argues  facility. 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


SCENE  II 


267 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


The  preyful  Princess  pierced  and  prick’d  a  pretty 
pleasing  pricket; 

Some  say  a  sore;  but  not  a  sore,  till  now  made 
sore  with  shooting. 

The  dogs  did  yell:  put  l  to  sore,  then  sorel  jumps 
from  thicket;  60 

Or  pricket  sore,  or  else  sorel;  the  people  fall 
a-hooting. 

If  sore  be  sore,  then  l  to  sore  makes  fifty  sores 
one  sorel. 

Of  one  sore  1  an  hundred  make  by  adding  but 
one  more  l. 

Nath.  A  rare  talent! 

Dull.  [Aside]  If  a  talent  be  a  claw,  look  how  he 
claws  him  with  a  talent. 

Hoi.  This  is  a  gift  that  I  have,  simple,  simple;  a 
foolish  extravagant  spirit,  full  of  forms,  figures, 
shapes,  objects,  ideas,  apprehensions,  motions, 
revolutions:  these  are  begot  in  the  ventricle  of 
memory,  nourished  in  the  womb  ofpia  mater,  and 
delivered  upon  the  mellowing  of  occasion.  But 
the  gift  is  good  in  those  in  whom  it  is  acute,  and  I 
am  thankful  for  it. 

Nath.  Sir,  I  praise  the  Lord  for  you:  and  so  may 
my  parishioners;  for  their  sons  are  well  tutored 
by  you,  and  their  daughters  profit  very  greatly 
under  you:  you  are  a  good  member  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth.  75) 

Hoi.  Mehercle,  if  their  sons  be  ingenuous,  they 
shall  want  no  instruction;  if  their  daughters  be 
capable,  I  will  put  it  to  them:  but  vir  sapit  qui 
pauca  loquitur;  a  soul  feminine  saluteth  us. 

Enter  jaquenetta  and  costard. 

]aq.  God  give  you  good  morrow,  master  Parson. 

Hoi.  Master  Parson,  quasi  pers-on.  An  if  one 
should  be  pierced,  which  is  the  one? 

Cost.  Marry,  master  schoolmaster,  he  that  is 
likest  to  a  hogshead. 

Hoi.  Piercing  a  hogshead!  a  good  lustre  of  con¬ 
ceit  in  a  turf  of  earth;  fire  enough  for  a  flint,  pearl 
enough  for  a  swine:  ’tis  pretty;  it  is  well.  ^0 

Jaq.  Good  master  Parson,  be  so  good  as  read  me 
this  letter:  it  was  given  me  by  Costard,  and  sent 
me  from  Don  Armado:  I  beseech  you,  read  it. 

Hoi.  Fauste,  precor  gelida  quando  peats  omne  sub 
umbra  Ruminat — and  so  forth.  Ah,  good  old 
Mantuan!  I  may  speak  of  thee  as  the  traveller 
doth  of  Venice; 

Venetia,  Venetia, 

Chi  non  ti  vede  non  ti  pretia.  too 

Old  Mantuan,  old  Mantuan!  who  understandeth 
thee  not,  loves  thee  not.  Ut,  re,  sol,  la,  jni,  fa. 
Under  pardon,  sir,  what  are  the  contents?  or 
rather,  as  Horace  says  in  his:  What,  my  soul, 
verses? 


Nath.  Ay,  sir,  and  very  learned. 

Hoi.  Let  me  hear  a  staff,  a  stanze,  a  verse;  lege, 
domine. 

Nath,  [reads] 

“If  love  make  me  forsworn,  how  shall  I  swear  to 

love? 

Ah,  never  faith  could  hold,  if  not  to  beauty 
vow’d!  uo 

Though  to  myself  forsworn,  to  thee  I’ll  faithful 
prove; 

Those  thoughts  to  me  were  oaks,  to  thee  like 
osiers  bow’d. 

Study  his  bias  leaves  and  m  kes  his  book  thine 
eyes. 

Where  all  those  pleasures  live  that  art  would 
comprehend : 

If  knowledge  be  the  mark,  to  know  thee  shall 
suffice; 

Well  learned  is  that  tongue  that  well  can  thee 
commend. 

All  ignorant  that  soul  that  sees  thee  without 
wonder; 

Which  is  to  me  some  praise  that  I  thy  parts 
admire: 

Thy  eye  Jove’s  lightning  bears,  thy  voice  his 
dreadful  thunder. 

Which,  not  to  anger  bent,  is  music  and  sweet 
fire.  120 

Celestial  as  thou  art,  O,  pardon  love  this  wrong. 

That  sings  heaven’s  praise  with  such  an  earthly 
tongue.” 

Hoi.  You  find  not  the  apostraphas,  and  so  miss 
the  accent:  let  me  supervise  the  canzonet.  Here 
are  only  numbers  ratified;  but,  for  the  elegancy, 
facility,  and  golden  cadence  of  poesy,  caret.  Ovid- 
ius  Naso  was  the  man:  and  why,  indeed,  Naso, 
but  for  smelling  out  the  odoriferous  flowers  of 
fancy,  the  jerks  of  invention?  Imitari  is  nothing: 
so  doth  the  hound  his  master,  the  ape  his  keeper, 
the  tired  horse  his  rider.  But,  damosella  virgin, 
was  this  directed  to  you? 

Jaq.  Ay,  sir,  from  one  Monsieur  Biron,  one  of 
the  strange  queen’s  lords. 

Hoi.  I  will  overglance  the  superscript:  “To  the 
snow-white  hand  of  the  most  beauteous  Lady 
Rosaline.”  I  will  look  again  on  the  intellect  of  the 
letter,  for  the  nomination  of  the  party  writing  to 
the  person  written  unto:  “Your  ladyship’s  in  all 
desired  employment,  Biron.''  Sir  Nathaniel,  this 
Biron  is  one  of  the  votaries  with  the  king;  and 
here  he  hath  framed  a  letter  to  a  sequent  of  the 
stranger  queen’s,  which  accidentally,  or  by  the 
way  of  progression,  hath  miscarried.  Trip  and 
go,  my  sweet;  deliver  this  paper  into  the  royal 
hand  of  the  King:  it  may  concern  much.  Stay 
not  thy  compliment;  I  forgive  thy  duty:  adieu. 


ACT  IV 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


268 

Jaq,  Good  Costard,  go  with  me.  Sir,  God  save 
your  life!  /jo 

Cost.  Have  with  thee,  my  girl. 

[Exeunt  costard  and  jaquenetta. 

Nath.  Sir,  you  have  done  this  in  the  fear  of  God, 
very  religiously;  and,  as  a  certain  father  saith — 

Hoi.  Sir,  tell  not  me  of  the  father;  I  do  fear 
colourable  colours.  But  to  return  to  the  verses: 
did  they  please  you.  Sir  Nathaniel? 

Nath.  Marvellous  well  for  the  pen. 

Hoi.  I  do  dine  to-day  at  the  father’s  of  a  certain 
pupil  of  mine;  where,  if,  before  repast,  it  shall 
please  you  to  gratify  the  table  with  a  grace,  I 
will,  on  my  privilege  I  have  with  the  parents  of 
the  foresaid  child  or  pupil,  undertake  your  ben 
venuto;  where  I  will  prove  those  verses  to  be  very 
unlearned,  neither  savouring  of  poetry,  wit,  nor 
invention  I  beseech  your  society. 

Nath.  And  thank  you  too;  for  society,  saith 
the  text,  is  the  happiness  of  life. 

Hoi.  And,  certes,  th2  text  most  infallibly  con¬ 
cludes  it.  [To  dull]  Sir,  I  do  invite  you  too; 
you  shall  not  say  me  nay:  pauca  verba.  Away! 
the  gentles  are  at  their  game,  and  we  will  to  our 
recreation.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  same 
Enter  biron,  voith  a  paper. 

Biron.  The  King  he  is  hunting  the  deer;  I  am 
coursing  myself:  they  have  pitched  a  toil;  I  am 
toiling  in  a  pitch — pitch  that  defiles:  defile!  a 
foul  word.  Well,  set  thee  down,  sorrow!  for  so 
they  say  the  fool  said,  and  so  say  I,  and  I  the 
fool:  well  proved,  wit!  By  the  Lord,  this  love 
is  as  mad  as  Ajax:  it  kills  sheep;  it  kills  me,  I  a 
sheep;  well  proved  again  o’  my  side!  I  will  not 
love:  if  I  do,  hang  me;  i’  faith,  I  will  not.  O, 
but  her  eye — by  this  light,  but  for  her  c/e,  I 
would  not  love  her;  yes,  for  her  two  eyes.  Well, 
I  do  nothing  in  the  world  but  lie,  and  lie  in  my 
throat.  By  heaven,  I  do  love:  and  it  hath  taught 
me  to  rhyme  and  to  be  melancholy;  and  here  is 
part  of  my  rhyme,  and  here  my  melancholy. 
Well,  she  hath  one  o’  my  sonnets  already:  the 
clown  bore  it,  the  fool  sent  it,  and  the  lady  hath 
it:  sweet  clown,  sweeter  fool,  sweetest  lady! 
By  the  world,  I  would  not  care  a  pin,  if  the  other 
three  were  in.  Here  comes  one  with  a  paper: 
God  give  him  grace  to  groan !  [Stands  aside.  2 1 

Enter  the  king,  voith  a  paper. 

King.  Ay  me! 

Biron.  [Aside]  Shot,  by  heaven!  Proceed, 
sweet  Cupid:  thou  hast  thumped  him  with  thy 
bird-bolt  under  the  left  pap.  In  faith,  secrets! 

King  [reads] . 


“So  sweet  a  kiss  the  golden  sun  gives  not 
To  those  fresh  morning  drops  upon  the  rose. 
As  thy  eye-beams,  when  their  fresh  rays  have 
smote 

The  night  of  dew  that  on  my  cheeks  down  flows : 
Nor  shines  the  silver  moon  one  half  so  bright  50 
Through  the  transparent  bosom  of  the  deep. 
As  doth  thy  face  through  tears  of  mine  give  light; 
Thou  shinest  in  every  tear  that  I  do  weep: 

No  drop  but  as  a  coach  doth  carry  thee; 

So  ridest  thou  triumphing  in  my  woe. 

Do  but  behold  the  tears  that  swell  in  me. 

And  they  thy  glory  through  my  grief  will  show; 
But  do  not  love  thyself;  then  thou  wilt  keep 
My  tears  for  glasses,  and  still  make  me  weep. 

O  queen  of  queens!  how  far  dost  thou  excel,  40 
No  thought  can  think,  nor  tongue  of  mortal  tell.” 
How  shall  she  know  my  griefs?  I’ll  drop  the 
paper: 

Sweet  leaves,  shade  folly.Who  is  he  comes  here? 
Steps  aside. 

What,  Longaville!  and  reading!  listen,  ear. 
Biron.  Now,  in  thy  likeness,  one  more  fool 
appear! 

Enter  longaville,  voith  a  paper. 

Long.  Ay  me,  I  am  forsworn! 

Biron.  Why,  he  comes  in  like  a  perjure,  wear¬ 
ing  papers. 

King.  In  love,  I  hope:  sweet  fellowship  in 
shame! 

Biron.  One  drunkard  loves  another  of  the 

name.  jo 

Long.  Am  I  the  first  that  have  been  perjured  so? 
Biron.  I  could  put  thee  in  comfort.  Not  by  two 
that  I  know: 

Thou  makest  the  triumviry,  the  corner-cap  of 
society. 

The  shape  of  Love’s  Tyburn  that  hangs  up  sim¬ 
plicity. 

Long.  I  fear  these  stubborn  lines  lack  power 
to  move. 

O  sweet  Maria,  empress  of  my  love! 

These  numbers  will  I  tear,  and  write  in  prose. 
Biron.  O,  rhymes  are  guards  on  wanton  Cupid’s 
hose: 

Disfigure  not  his  slop. 

Long.  This  same  shall  go.  [Reads] . 

“Did  not  the  heavenly  rhetoric  of  thine  eye,  60 
’Gainst  whom  the  world  cannot  hold  argument. 
Persuade  my  heart  to  this  false  perjury? 

Vows  for  thee  broke  deserve  not  punishment. 

A  woman  I  forswore;  but  I  will  prove. 

Thou  being  a  goddess,  I  forswore  not  thee: 

My  vow  was  earthly,  thou  a  heavenly  love; 
Thy  grace  being  gain’d  cures  all  disgrace  in  me. 


SCENE  III 

Vows  are  but  breath,  and  breath  a  vapour  is: 
Then  thou,  fair  sun,  which  on  my  earth  dost 
shine, 

Exhalest  this  vapour-vow;  in  thee  it  is :  70 

If  broken  then,  it  is  no  fault  of  mine: 

If  by  me  broke,  what  fool  is  not  so  wise 
To  lose  an  oath  to  win  a  paradise?” 

Biron.  This  is  the  liver-vein,  which  makes 
flesh  a  deity, 

A  green  goose  a  goddess:  pure,  pure  idolatry. 
God  amend  us,  God  amend!  we  are  much  out  o’ 
the  way. 

Long.  By  whom  shall  I  send  this? — Company! 

stay.  [Steps  aside. 

Biron.  All  hid,  all  hid;  an  old  infant  play. 

Like  a  demigod  here  sit  I  in  the  sky. 

And  wretched  fools’  secrets  heedfully  o’er-eye.  80 
More  sacks  to  the  mill!  O  heavens,  I  have  my 
wish! 

Enter  domain,  ’with  a  paper. 

Dumain  transform’d!  four  woodcocks  in  a  dish! 
Diim.  O  most  divine  Kate! 

Biron.  O  most  profane  coxcomb! 

Dum.  By  heaven,  the  wonder  in  a  mortal  eye! 
Biron.  By  earth,  she  is  not,  corporal,  there  you 
lie. 

Dmn.  Her  amber  hair  for  foul  hath  amber 
quoted. 

Biron.  An  amber-colour’d  raven  was  well  noted. 
Dum.  As  upright  as  the  cedar. 

Biron.  Stoop,  I  say; 

Her  shoulder  is  with  child. 

Dum.  As  fair  as  day.  ^0 

Biron.  Ay,  as  some  days;  but  then  no  sun 
must  shine. 

Dum.  O  that  I  had  my  wish! 

Long.  And  I  had  mine! 

King.  And  I  mine  too,  good  Lord! 

Biron.  Amen,  so  I  had  mine:  is  not  that  a  good 
word? 

Dum.  I  would  forget  her;  but  a  fever  she 
Reigns  in  my  blood  and  will  remember’d  be. 
Biron.  A  fever  in  your  blood!  why,  then  incis¬ 
ion 

Would  let  her  out  in  saucers:  sweet  misprision! 
Dum.  Once  more  I’ll  read  the  ode  that  I  have 
writ. 

Biron.  Once  more  I’ll  mark  how  love  can  vary 
wit.  100 

Dum.  [reads] 

“On  a  day — alack  the  day! — 

Love,  whose  month  is  ever  May, 

^ied  a  blossom  passing  fair 
Playing  in  the  wanton  air: 

Through  the  velvet  leaves  the  wind. 


269 

All  unseen,  can  passage  find; 

That  the  lover,  sick  to  death. 

Wish  himself  the  heaven’s  breath. 

Air,  quoth  he,  thy  cheeks  may  blow; 

Air,  would  I  might  triumph  so!  no 

But,  alack,  my  hand  is  sworn 
Ne’er  to  pluck  thee  from  thy  thorn; 

Vow,  alack,  for  youth  unmeet. 

Youth  so  apt  to  pluck  a  sweet! 

Do  not  call  it  sin  in  me. 

That  I  am  forsworn  for  thee; 

Thou  for  whom  Jove  would  swear 
Juno  but  an  Ethiope  were; 

And  deny  himself  for  Jove, 

Turning  mortal  for  thy  love.”  120 

This  will  I  send  and  something  else  more  plain, 
That  shall  express  my  true  love’s  fasting  pain. 

O,  would  the  King,  Biron,  and  Longaville, 

Were  lovers  too!  Ill,  to  example  ill. 

Would  from  my  forehead  wipe  a  perjured  note; 
For  none  offend  where  all  alike  do  dote. 

Long,  [advancing] .  Dumain,  thy  love  is  far  from 
charity, 

That  in  love’s  grief  desirest  society: 

You  may  look  pale,  but  I  should  blush,  I  know. 
To  be  o’erheard  and  taken  napping  so.  1^0 

King  [advancing].  Come,  sir,  you  blush;  as  his 
your  case  is  such; 

You  chide  at  him,  offending  twice  as  much; 

You  do  not  love  Maria;  Longaville 
Did  never  sonnet  for  her  sake  compile, 

Nor  never  lay  his  wreathed  arms  athwart 
His  loving  bosom  to  keep  down  his  heart. 

I  have  been  closely  shrouded  in  this  bush 
And  mark’d  you  both  and  for  you  both  did  blush: 
I  heard  your  guilty  rhymes,  observed  your  fashion. 
Saw  sighs  reek  from  you,  noted  well  your  passion: 
“Ay  me!”  says  one;  “O  Jove!”  the  other 

cries;  141 

One,  her  hairs  were  gold,  crystal  the  other’s  eyes: 
[To  LONCAviia.i  I  You  would  for  paradise  break 
faith  and  troth; 

[To  dumain]  And  Jove,  for  \  our  love,  would  in¬ 
fringe  an  oath. 

What  will  Biron  sa)'  when  that  he  shall  hear 
Faith  so  infringed,  which  such  zeal  did  swear? 
How  will  he  scorn!  how  will  he  spend  his  wit! 
How  will  he  triumph,  leap,  and  laugh  at  it! 

For  all  the  wealth  that  ever  I  did  see, 

I  would  not  have  him  know  so  much  by  me.  /jo 
Biron.  Now  step  I  forth  to  whip  hypocrisy. 
Advancing. 

Ah,  good  mv^  liege,  I  pray  thee,  pardon  me! 

Good  heart*  what  grace  hast  thou,  thus  to  reprove 
These  worms  for  loving,  that  art  most  in  love? 
Your  eyes  do  make  no  coaches;  in  your  tears 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


There  is  no  certain  princess  that  appears; 

You’ll  not  be  perjured,  ’tis  a  hateful  thing; 

Tush,  none  but  minstrels  like  of  sonneting! 

But  are  you  not  ashamed?  nay,  are  you  not. 

All  three  of  you,  to  be  thus  much  o’ershot?  i6o 
You  found  his  mote;  the  King  your  mote  did  see; 
But  I  a  beam  do  find  in  each  of  three. 

O,  what  a  scene  of  foolery  have  I  seen. 

Of  sighs,  of  groans,  of  sorrow,  and  of  teen! 

O  me,  with  what  strict  patience  have  I  sat, 

To  see  a  king  transformed  to  a  gnat! 

To  see  great  Hercules  whipping  a  gig. 

And  profound  Solomon  to  tune  a  jig, 

And  Nestor  play  at  push-pin  with  the  boys. 

And  critic  Timon  laugh  at  idle  toys !  /70 

Where  lies  thy  grief,  O,  tell  me,  good  Dumain? 
And,  gentle  Longaville,  where  lies  thy  pain? 

And  where  my  liege’s?  all  about  the  breast: 

A  caudle,  ho! 

King  Too  bitter  is  thy  jest. 

Are  we  betray’d  thus  to  thy  over-view? 

Biron.  Not  you  to  me,  but  I  betray’d  by  you: 

I,  that  am  honest;  I,  that  hold  it  sin 
To  break  the  vow  1  am  engaged  in; 

I  am  betray’d,  by  keeping  company 
With  men  like  men  of  inconstancy.  180 

When  shall  you  see  me  write  a  thing  in  rhyme? 
Or  groan  for  love?  or  spend  a  minute’s  time 
In  pruning  me?  When  shall  you  hear  that  I 
Will  praise  a  hand,  a  foot,  a  face,  an  eye, 

A  gait,  a  state,  a  brow,  a  breast,  a  waist, 

A  leg,  a  limb? 

King.  Soft!  whither  away  so  fast? 

A  true  man  or  a  thief  that  gallops  so? 

Biron.  I  post  from  love:  good  lover,  let  me  go. 

Enter  jaquenetta  and  costard. 

Jaq.  God  bless  the  King! 

King.  What  present  hast  thou  there? 

Cost.  Some  certain  treason. 

King.  What  makes  treason  here?  ipo 
Cost.  Nay,  it  makes  nothing,  sir. 

King.  If  it  mar  nothing  neither. 

The  treason  and  you  go  in  peace  away  together. 
Jaq.  I  beseech  your  Grace,  let  this  letter  be 
read: 

Our  parson  misdoubts  it;  ’twas  treason,  he  said. 
King.  Biron,  read  it  over. 

Giving  him  the  p.iper. 

Where  hadst  thou  it?  ( 

Jaq.  Of  Costard. 

King.  Where  hadst  thou  it? 

Cost.  Of  Dun  Adramadio,  Dun  iVdramadio. 

Biron  tears  the  letter. 

King.  How  now!  what  is  in  you?  why  dost 
thou  tear  it?  200 


Biron.  A  toy,  my  liege,  a  toy:  your  Grace 
needs  not  fear  it. 

Long.  It  did  move  him  to  passion,  and  therefore 
let’s  hear  it. 

Dum.  It  is  Biron’s  writing,  and  here  is  his  name. 
[Gathering  up  the  pieces.] 

Biron.  [To  costard]  Ah,  you  whoreson  logger- 
head!  you  were  born  to  do  me  shame. 

Guilty,  my  lord,  guilty!  I  confess,  I  confess. 
King.  What? 

Biron.  That  you  three  fools  lack’d  me  fool  to 
make  up  the  mess: 

He,  he,  and  you,  and  you,  my  liege,  and  I, 

Are  pick-purses  in  love,  and  we  deserve  to  die. 

O,  dismiss  this  audience,  and  I  shall  tell  you  more. 
Dum.  Now  the  number  is  even.  211 

Biron.  True,  true;  we  are  four. 

Will  these  turtles  be  gone? 

King.  Hence,  sirs;  away! 

Cost.  Walk  aside  the  true  folk,  and  let  the 
traitors  stay. 

[Exteunt  costard  and  jaquenetta. 
Biron.  Sweet  lords,  sweet  lovers,  O,  let  us  em¬ 
brace! 

As  true  we  are  as  flesh  and  blood  can  be: 

The  sea  will  ebb  and  flow,  heaven  show  his  face; 

Young  blood  doth  not  obey  an  old  decree: 

We  cannot  cross  the  cause  why  we  were  born; 
Therefore  of  all  hands  must  we  be  forsworn. 
King.  What,  did  these  rent  lines  show  some 
love  of  thine?  220 

Biron.  Did  they,  quoth  you?  Who  sees  the 
heavenly  Rosaline, 

That,  like  a  rude  and  savage  man  of  Ind, 

At  the  first  opening  of  the  gorgeous  east. 

Bows  not  his  vassal  head  and  strucken  blind 
Kisses  the  base  ground  with  obedient  breast? 
What  peremptory  eagle-sighted  eye 
Dares  look  upon  the  heaven  of  her  brow. 

That  is  not  blinded  by  her  majesty? 

King.  What  zeal,  what  fury  hath  inspired  thee 
now? 

My  love,  her  mistress,  is  a  gracious  moon;  250 
She  an  attending  star,  scarce  seen  a  light. 

Biron.  My  eyes  are  then  no  eyes,  nor  I  Biron: 

O,  but  for  my  love,  day  would  turn  to  nig^ht! 
Of  all  complexions  the  cull’d  sovereignty 
Do  meet,  as  at  a  fair,  in  her  fair  cheek. 

Where  several  worthies  make  one  dignity. 

Where  nothing  wants  that  want  itself  doth  seek. 
Lend  me  the  flourish  of  all  gentle  tongues — 

Fie,  painted  rhetoric!  O,  she  needs  it  not: 

To  things  of  sale  a  seller’s  praise  belongs,  240 
She  passes  praise;  then  praise  too  short  doth 
blot. 

A  wither’d  hermit,  five-score  winters  worn. 


SCENE  III 

Might  shake  off  fifty,  looking  in  her  eye: 

Beauty  doth  varnish  age,  as  if  new-born, 

And  gives  the  crutch  the  cradle’s  infancy: 

O,  ’tis  the  sun  that  maketh  all  things  shine. 

King.  By  heaven,  thy  love  is  black  as  ebony. 
Biron.  Is  ebony  like  her?  O  wood  divine! 

A  wife  of  such  wood  were  felicity. 

O,  who  can  give  an  oath?  where  is  a  book?  250 
That  I  may  swear  beauty  doth  beauty  lack. 

If  that  she  learn  not  of  her  eye  to  look: 

No  face  is  fair  that  is  not  full  so  black. 

King.  O  paradox!  Black  is  the  badge  of  hell. 

The  hue  of  dungeons,  and  the  suit  of  night; 

And  beauty’s  crest  becomes  the  heavens  well. 
Biron.  Devils  soonest  tempt,  resembling  spirits 
of  light. 

O,  if  in  black  my  lady’s  brows  be  deck’d, 

It  mourns  that  painting  and  usurping  hair 
Should  ravish  doters  with  a  false  aspect;  260 
And  therefore  is  she  born  to  make  black  fair. 
Her  favour  turns  the  fashion  of  the  days. 

For  native  blood  is  counted  painting  now; 

And  therefore  red,  that  would  avoid  dispraise. 
Paints  itself  black,  to  imitate  her  brow. 

Dum.  To  look  like  her  are  chimney-sweepers 
black. 

Long.  And  since  her  time  are  colliers  counted 
bright. 

King.  i\nd  Ethiopes  of  their  sweet  complexion 
crack. 

Dum.  Dark  needs  no  candles  now,  for  dark  is 
light. 

Biron.  Your  mistresses  dare  never  come  in  rain, 
For  fear  their  colours  should  be  wash’d  away. 
King.  ’Twere  good,  yours  did;  for,  sir,  to  tell 
you  plain, 

I’ll  find  a  fairer  face  not  wash’d  to-day. 

Biron.  I’ll  prove  her  fair,  or  talk  till  doomsday 
here. 

King.  No  devil  will  fright  thee  then  so  much  as 
she. 

Dum.  I  never  knew  man  hold  vile  stuff  so  dear. 
Long.  Look,  here’s  thy  love:  my  foot  and  her 
face  see. 

Biron.  O,  if  the  streets  were  paved  with  thine 
eyes. 

Her  feet  were  much  too  dainty  for  such  tread! 
Dum.  O  vile!  then,  as  she  goes,  what  upward 
lies  280 

The  street  should  see  as  she  walk’d  overhead. 
King.  But  what  of  this?  are  we  not  all  in  love? 
Biron.  Nothing  so  sure;  and  thereby  all  for¬ 
sworn. 

King.  Then  leave  this  chat;  and,  good  Biron, 
prove 

Our  loving  lawful,  and  our  faith  not  torn. 


271 

Dum.  Ay,  marry,  there;  some  flattery  for  this 
evil. 

Long.  O,  some  authority  how  to  proceed; 

Some  tricks,  some  quillets,  how  to  cheat  the  devil. 
Dum.  Some  salve  for  perjury. 

Biron.  ’Tis  more  than  need. 

Have  at  you,  then,  affection’s  men  at  arms.  2^0 
Consider  what  you  first  did  swear  unto, 

To  fast,  to  study,  and  to  see  no  woman; 

Flat  treason  ’gainst  the  kingly  state  of  youth. 

Say,  can  you  fast?  your  stomachs  are  too  young; 
And  abstinence  engenders  maladies. 

And  where  that  you  have  vow’d  to  study,  lords, 
In  that  each  of  you  have  forsworn  his  book. 

Can  you  still  dream  and  pore  and  thereon  look? 
For  when  would  you,  my  lord,  or  you,  or  you. 
Have  found  the  ground  of  study’s  excellence  500 
Without  the  beauty  of  a  woman’s  face? 

[From  women’s  eyes  this  doctrine  I  derive; 

They  are  the  ground,  the  books,  the  academes 
From  whence  doth  spring  the  true  Promethean 
fire.] 

Why,  universal  plodding  poisons  up 
The  nimble  spirits  in  the  arteries, 

As  motion  and  long-during  action  tires 
The  sinewy  vigour  of  the  traveller. 

Now,  for  not  looking  on  a  woman’s  face. 

You  have  in  that  forsworn  the  use  of  eyes  ^20 

And  study  too,  the  causer  of  your  vow; 

For  where  is  any  author  in  the  world 
Teaches  such  beauty  as  a  woman’s  eye? 

Learning  is  but  an  adjunct  to  ourself 
And  where  we  are  our  learning  likewise  is: 

Then  when  ourselves  we  see  in  ladies’  eyes. 

Do  we  not  likewise  see  our  learning  there? 

O,  we  have  made  a  vow  to  study,  lords. 

And  in  that  vow  we  have  forsworn  our  books. 
For  when  would  you,  my  liege,  or  you,  or  you. 

In  leaden  contemplation  have  found  out  52/ 
Such  fiery  numbers  as  the  prompting  eyes 
Of  beauty’s  tutors  have  enrich’d  you  with? 

Other  slow  arts  entirely  keep  the  brain; 

And  therefore,  finding  barren  practisers. 

Scarce  show  a  harvest  of  their  heavy  toil: 

But  love,  first  learned  in  a  lady’s  eyes. 

Lives  not  alone  immured  in  the  brain; 

But,  with  the  motion  of  all  elements, 

Courses  as  swift  as  thought  in  every  power,  550 
And  gives  to  every  power  a  double  power. 

Above  their  functions  and  their  offices. 

It  adds  a  precious  seeing  to  the  eye; 

A  lover’s  eyes  will  gaze  an  eagle  blind; 

A  lover’s  ear  will  hear  the  lovv^est  sound. 

When  the  suspicious  head  of  theft  is  stopp’d: 
Love’s  feeling  is  more  soft  and  sensible 
Than  are  the  tender  horns  of  cockled  snails; 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


ACT  V 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


Love’s  tongue  proves  dainty  Bacchus  gross  in 
taste: 

For  valour,  is  not  Love  a  Hercules,  540 

Still  climbing  trees  in  the  Hesperides? 

Subtle  as  Sphinx;  as  sweet  and  musical 
As  bright  Apollo’s  lute,  strung  with  his  hair; 

And  when  Love  speaks,  the  voice  of  all  the 
gods 

Make  heaven  drowsy  with  the  harmony. 

Never  durst  poet  touch  a  pen  to  write 
Until  his  ink  were  temper’d  with  Love’s  sighs; 

O,  then  his  lines  would  ravish  savage  ears 
And  plant  in  tyrants  mild  humility. 

From  women’s  eyes  this  doctrine  I  derive:  550 
They  sparkle  still  the  right  Promethean  fire; 
They  are  the  books,  the  arts,  the  academes. 

That  show,  contain  and  nourish  all  the  world: 
Else  none  at  all  in  aught  proves  excellent. 

Then  fools  you  were  these  women  to  forswear. 
Or  keeping  what  is  sworn,  you  will  prove  fools. 
For  wisdom’s  sake,  a  word  that  all  men  love. 

Or  for  love’s  sake,  a  word  that  loves  all  men. 

Or  for  men’s  sake,  the  authors  of  these  women. 
Or  women’s  sake,  by  whom  we  men  are  men,  5  60 
Let  us  once  lose  our  oaths  to  find  ourselves, 

Or  else  we  lose  ourselves  to  keep  our  oaths. 

It  is  religion  to  be  thus  forsworn. 

For  charity  itself  fulfils  the  law. 

And  who  can  sever  love  from  charity? 

King.  Saint  Cupid,  then!  and,  soldiers,  to  the 
field! 

Biroji.  Advance  your  standards,  and  upon  them, 
lords; 

Pell-mell,  down  with  them!  but  be  first  advised. 
In  conflict  that  you  get  the  sun  of  them.  ^6^ 
Long.  Now  to  plain-dealing;  lay  these  glozes  by: 
Shall  we  resolve  to  woo  these  girls  of  France? 
King.  And  win  them  too:  therefore  let  us  de¬ 
vise 

Some  entertainment  for  them  in  their  tents. 
Biron.  First,  from  the  park  let  us  conduct  them 
thither; 

Then  homeward  every  man  attach  the  hand 
Of  his  fair  mistress:  in  the  afternoon 
We  will  with  some  strange  pastime  solace  them. 
Such  as  the  shortness  of  the  time  can  shape; 

For  revels,  dances,  masks,  and  merry  hours 
Forerun  fair  Love,  strewing  her  way  with 
flowers.  ^80 

King.  Away,  away!  no  time  shall  be  omitted 
That  will  betime,  and  may  by  us  be  fitted. 

Biron.  Allonsf  allonsf  Sow’d  cockle  reap’d  no 
corn; 

And  justice  always  whirls  in  equal  measure: 
Light  wenches  may  prove  plagues  to  men  for¬ 
sworn; 


If  so,  our  copper  buys  no  better  treasure. 

[Exeunt, 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  The  same 

Enter  holofernes,  sir  Nathaniel,  and 

DULL. 

Hoi.  Satis  quod  sufficit. 

Nath.  I  praise  God  for  you,  sir:  your  reasons 
at  dinner  have  been  sharp  and  sententious; 
pleasant  without  scurrility,  witty  without  affec¬ 
tion,  audacious  without  impudency,  learned 
without  opinion,  and  strange  without  heresy.  I 
did  converse  this  quondam  day  with  a  companion 
of  the  king’s,  who  is  intituled,  nominated,  or 
called,  Don  Adriano  de  Armado. 

Hoi.  Novi  hominem  tanquam  te:  his  humour  is 
lofty,  his  discourse  peremptory,  his  tongue 
filed,  his  eye  ambitious,  his  gait  majestical,  and 
his  general  behaviour  vain,  ridiculous,  and 
thrasonical.  He  is  too  picked,  too  spruce,  too 
affected,  too  odd,  as  it  were,  too  peregrinate,  as 
I  may  call  it. 

Nath.  A  most  singular  and  choice  epithet. 

Draws  out  his  tMe-book. 

Hoi.  He  draweth  out  the  thread  of  his  ver¬ 
bosity  finer  than  the  staple  of  his  argument.  I 
abhor  such  fanatical  phantasimes,  such  insociable 
and  point-devise  companions;  such  rackets  of 
orthography,  as  to  speak  dout.,  fine,  when  he 
should  say  doubt;  det.,  when  he  should  pronounce 
debt, — d,  e,  b,  t,  not  d,  e,  t:  he  clepeth  a  calf,  cauf; 
half,  hauf;  neighbour  vocatur  nebour;  neigh  abbre¬ 
viated  ne.  This  is  abhominable, — which  he  would 
call  abbominable:  it  insinuateth  me  of  insanie: 
anne  intelligis,  domine?  to  make  frantic,  lunatic. 

Nath.  Laus  Deo,  bene  intelligo.  50 

Hoi.  Bon,  bon,  fort  bon!  Priscian  a  little 
scratched,  ’twill  serve. 

Nath.  Videsne  quisvenit? 

Hoi.  Video,  etgaudeo. 

Enter  armado,  moth,  and  costard. 

Arm.  [To  moth].  Chirrah! 

Hoi.  Quare  chirrah,  not  sirrah? 

Arm.  Men  of  peace,  well  encountered. 

Hoi.  Most  military  sir,  salutation. 

Moth.  [Aside  to  costard]  They  have  been  at  a 
great  feast  of  languages,  and  stolen  the  scraps. 

Cost.  O,  they  have  lived  long  on  the  almsbasket 
of  words.  I  marvel  thy  master  hath  not  eaten 
thee  for  a  word;  for  thou  art  not  so  long  by  the 
head  as  honor ificabilitudinitatibus:  thou  art  easier 
swallowed  than  a  flap-dragon. 

Moth.  Peace!  the  peal  begins. 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


Arm.  [To  holofernes]  Monsieur,  are  you  not 
lettered? 

Moth.  Yes,  yes;  he  teaches  boys  the  hornbook. 
What  is  a,  b,  spelt  backward,  with  the  horn  on 
his  head? 

Hoi.  Ba,  piieritky  with  a  horn  added. 

Aloth.  Ba,  most  silly  sheep  with  a  horn.  You 
hear  his  learning. 

Hoi.  Quis,  quis,  thou  consonant? 

Moth.  The  third  of  the  five  vowels,  if  you  re¬ 
peat  them;  or  the  fifth,  if  1. 

Hoi.  I  will  repeat  them — /, — 

Aioth.  The  sheep:  the  other  two  concludes  it, — 
0^  u.  6o 

Arm.  Now,  by  the  salt  wave  of  the  Mediter- 
raneum,  a  sweet  touch,  a  quick  venue  of  wit! 
snip,  snap,  quick,  and  home!  it  rejoiceth  my 
intellect:  true  wit! 

Moth.  Offered  by  a  child  to  an  old  man;  which 
is  wit-old. 

Hoi.  What  is  the  figure?  what  is  the  figure? 

Moth.  Horns. 

Hoi.  Thou  disputest  like  an  infant:  go,  whip 
thy  gig.  70 

Moth.  Lend  me  your  horn  to  make  one,  and 
I  will  whip  about  your  infamy  circum  circa — a  gig 
cf  a  cuckold’s  horn. 

Cost.  An  I  had  but  one  penny  in  the  world, 
thou  shouldst  have  it  to  buy  gingerbread:  hold, 
there  is  the  very  remuneration  I  had  of  thy 
master,  thou  halfpenny  purse  of  wit,  thou  pigeon- 
egg  of  discretion.  O,  an  the  heavens  were  so 
pleased  that  thou  wert  but  my  bastard,  what  a 
joyful  father  wouldst  thou  make  me!  Go  to; 
thou  hast  it  ad  dunghill,  at  the  fingers’  ends,  as 
they  say. 

Hoi.  O,  I  smell  false  Latin;  dunghill  for  unguem. 

Arm.  Arts-man,  preambulate,  we  will  be  sin- 
guled  from  the  barbarous.  Do  you  not  educate 
youth  at  the  charge-house  on  the  top  of  the 
mountain? 

Hoi.  Or  mons,  the  hill. 

Arm.  At  your  sweet  pleasure,  for  the  mountain. 

Hoi.  I  do,  sans  question. 

Arm.  Sir,  it  is  the  King’s  most  sweet  pleasure 
and  affection  to  congratulate  the  Princess  at  her 
pavilion  in  the  posteriors  of  this  day,  which  the 
rude  multitude  call  the  afternoon. 

Hoi.  The  posterior  of  the  day,  most  generous 
sir,  is  liable,  congruent  and  measurable  for  the 
afternoon:  the  word  is  well  culled,  chose,  sweet 
and  apt,  I  do  assure  you,  sir,  1  do  assure.  py 

Arm.  Sir,  the  King  is  a  noble  gentleman,  and 
my  familiar,  I  do  assure  ye,  very  good  friendT 
for  wnat  is  inward  between  us,  let  it  pass.  I  do 
beseech  thee,  remember  thy  courtesy;  I  beseech 


thee,  apparel  thy  head:  and  among  other  im¬ 
portant  and  rnost  serious  designs,  and  of  great 
import  indeed,  too,  but  let  that  pass:  for  I  must 
tell  thee,  it  will  please  his  Grace,  by  the  world, 
sometime  to  lean  upon  my  poor  shoulder,  and 
with  his  royal  finger,  thus,  dally  with  my  excre¬ 
ment,  with  my  mustachio;  but,  sweet  heart,  let 
that  pass.  By  the  world,  I  recount  no  fable: 
some  certain  special  honours  it  pleaseth  his 
greatness  to  impart  to  Armado,  a  soldier,  a  man 
of  travel,  that  hath  seen  the  world;  but  let  that 
pass.  The  very  all  of  all  is — but,  sweet  heart,  I 
do  implore  secrecy — that  the  King  would  have 
me  present  the  Princess,  sweet  chuck,  with  some 
delightful  ostentation,  or  show,  or  pageant,  or 
antique,  or  firework.  Now,  understanding  that 
the  curate  and  your  sweet  self  are  good  at  such 
eruptions  and  sudden  breaking  out  of  mirth,  as 
it  were,  I  have  acquainted  you  withal,  to  the  end 
to  crave  your  assistance. 

Hoi.  Sir,  you  shall  present  before  her  the  Nine 
Worthies.  Sir,  as  concerning  some  entertainment 
of  time,  some  show  in  the  posterior  of  this  day, 
to  be  rendered  by  our  assistants,  at  the  King’s 
command,  and  this  most  gallant,  illustrate,  and 
learned  gentleman,  before  the  Princess;  I  say 
none  so  fit  as  to  present  the  Nine  Worthies.  /50 

Hath.  Where  will  you  find  men  worthy  enough 
to  present  them? 

Hoi.  Joshua,  yourself;  myself  and  this  gallant 
gentleman,  Judas  Maccabaeus;  this  swain,  be¬ 
cause  of  his  great  limb  or  joint,  shall  pass  Pom- 
pey  the  Great;  the  page,  Hercules — 

Arm.  Pardon,  sir;  error:  he  is  not  quantity 
enough  for  that  Worthy’s  thumb:  he  is  not  so 
big  as  the  end  of  his  club.  755) 

Hoi.  Shall  I  have  audience?  he  shall  present 
Hercules  in  minority:  his  enter  and  exit  shall  be 
strangling  a  snake;  and  I  will  have  an  apology 
for  that  purpose. 

Moth.  An  excellent  device!  so,  if  any  of  the 
audience  hiss,  you  may  cry  “Well  done,  Hercu¬ 
les!  now  thou  crushest  the  snake!”  That  is  the 
way  to  make  an  offence  gracious,  though  few 
have  the  grace  to  do  it. 

Arm.  For  the  rest  of  the  Worthies? — 

Hoi.  I  will  play  three  myself.  /yo 

Moth.  Thrice- worthy  gentleman! 

Arm.  Shall  I  tell  you  a  thing? 

Hoi.  We  attend. 

Arm.  We  will  have,  if  this  fadge  not,  an  an¬ 
tique.  I  beseech  you,  follow. 

Hoi.  Via,  goodman  Dull!  thou  hast  spoken  no 
word  all  this  while. 

Didl.  Nor  understood  none  neither,  sir. 

Hoi.  Allons!  we  will  employ  thee. 


ACT  V 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


274 

Dull.  I’ll  make  one  in  a  dance,  or  so;  or  I  will 
play  160 

On  the  tabor  to  the  Worthies,  and  let  them  dance 
the  hay. 

Hoi.  Most  dull,  honest  Dull!  To  our  sport, 
away!  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  same 

Enter  the  princess,  Katharine,  Rosaline,  and 

MARIA. 

Prin.  Sweet  hearts,  we  shall  be  rich  ere  we  de¬ 
part. 

If  fairings  come  thus  plentifully  in: 

A  lady  wall’d  about  with  diamonds! 

Look  you  what  I  have  from  the  loving  King. 

Ros.  Madame,  came  nothing  else  along  with 
that? 

Prin.  Nothing  but  this!  yes,  as  much  love  in 
rhyme 

As  would  be  cramm’d  up  in  a  sheet  of  paper. 

Writ  o’  both  sides  the  leaf,  margent  and  all. 

That  he  was  fain  to  seal  on  Cupid’s  name. 

Ros.  That  was  the  way  to  make  his  godhead 
wax,  10 

For  he  hath  been  five  thousand  years  a  boy. 
Rath.  Ay,  and  a  shrewd  unhappy  gallows  too. 
Ros.  You’ll  ne’er  be  friends  with  him;  a’kill’d 
your  sister. 

Rath.  He  made  her  melancholy,  sad,  and  heavy; 
And  so  she  died:  had  she  been  light,  like  you. 
Of  such  a  m.erry,  nimble,  stirring  spirit. 

She  might  ha’  been  a  grandam  ere  she  died: 
And  so  may  you;  for  a  light  heart  lives  long. 
Ros.  What’s  your  dark  meaning,  mouse,  of  this 
light  word? 

Rath.  A  light  condition  in  a  beauty  dark.  20 
Ros.  We  need  more  light  to  find  your  meaning 
out. 

Rath.  You’ll  mar  the  light  by  taking  it  in  snuff; 
Therefore  I’ll  darkly  end  the  argument. 

Ros.  Look,  what  you  do,  you  do  it  still  i’  the 
dark. 

Rath.  So  do  not  you,  for  you  are  a  light  wench. 
Ros.  Indeed  I  weigh  not  you,  and  therefore  light. 
Rath.  You  weigh  me  not?  O,  that’s  you  care  not 
for  me. 

Ros.  Great  reason;  for  “past  cure  is  still  past 
care.” 

Prin.  Well  bandied  both;  a  set  of  wit  well 
play’d. 

But,  Rosaline,  you  have  a  favour  too:  50 

Who  sent  it?  and  what  is  it? 

Ros.  I  would  you  knew: 

An  if  my  face  were  but  as  fair  as  yours. 

My  favour  were  as  great;  be  witness  this. 

Nay,  I  have  verses  too,  I  thank  Biron: 


The  numbers  true;  and,  were  the  numbering  too, 
I  were  the  fairest  goddess  on  the  ground: 

I  am  compared  to  twenty  thousand  fairs. 

O,  he  hath  drawn  my  picture  in  his  letter! 

Prin.  Any  thing  like? 

Ros.  Much  in  the  letters;  nothing  in  the  praise. 
Prin.  Beauteous  as  ink;  a  good  conclusion.  4/ 
Rath.  Fair  as  a  text  R  in  a  copy-book. 

Ros.  ’Ware  pencils,  ho!  let  me  not  die  your 
debtor. 

My  red  dominical,  my  golden  letter: 

O  that  your  face  were  not  so  full  of  O’s! 

Rath.  A  pox  of  that  jest!  and  I  beshrew  all 
shrows. 

Prin.  But,  Katherine,  what  was  sent  to  you  from 
fair  Dumain? 

Rath.  Madam,  this  glove. 

Prin.  Did  he  not  send  you  twain? 

Rath.  Yes,  madam,  and  moreover 
Some  thousand  verses  of  a  faithful  lover,  50 
A  huge  translation  of  hypocrisy. 

Vilely  compiled,  profound  simplicity. 

Mar.  This  and  these  pearls  to  me  sent  Lon- 
gaville: 

The  letter  is  too  long  by  half  a  mile. 

Prin.  I  think  no  less.  Dost  thou  not  wish  in 
heart 

The  chain  were  longer  and  the  letter  short? 

Mar.  Ay,  or  I  would  these  hands  might  never 
part. 

Prin.  We  are  wise  girls  to  mock  our  lovers  so. 
Ros.  They  are  worse  fools  to  purchase  mocking 
so. 

That  same  Biron  I’ll  torture  ere  I  go:  60 

O  that  I  knew  he  were  but  in  by  the  week! 

How  I  would  make  him  fawn  and  beg  and  seek 
And  wait  the  season  and  observe  the  times 
And  spend  his  prodigal  wits  in  bootless  rhymes 
And  shape  his  service  wholly  to  my  bests 
And  make  him  proud  to  make  me  proud  that 
jests! 

So  perttaunt-like  would  I  o’ersway  his  state 
That  he  should  be  my  fool  and  I  his  fate. 

Prin.  None  are  so  surely  caught,  when  they  are 
catch’d, 

As  wit  turn’d  fool:  folly,  in  wisdom  hatch’d,  70 
Hath  wisdom’s  warrant  and  the  help  of  school 
And  wit’s  own  grace  to  grace  a  learned  fool. 

Ros.  The  blood  of  youth  burns  not  with  such 
excess 

As  gravity’s  revolt  to  wantonness. 

Mar.  Folly  in  fools  bears  not  so  strong  a  note 
As  foolery  in  the  wise,  when  wit  doth  dote; 

Since  all  the  power  thereof  it  doth  apply 
To  prove,  by  wit,  worth  in  simplicity. 

Prin.  Here  comes  Boyet,  and  mirth  is  in  his  face. 


SCENE  ir 


275 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


Enter  boyet 

Boyet.  O,  I  am  stabb’d  with  laughter!  Where’s 
her  Grace?  80 

Prin.  Thy  news,  Boyet? 

Boyet.  Prepare,  madam,  prepare! 

Arm,  wenches,  arm!  encounters  mounted  are 
Against  your  peace:  Love  doth  approach  dis¬ 
guised, 

Armed  in  arguments;  you’ll  be  surprised: 

Muster  your  wits;  stand  in  your  own  defence; 

Or  hide  your  heads  like  cowards,  and  fly  hence. 
Prin.  Saint  Denis  to  Saint  Cupid!  What  are  they 
That  charge  their  breath  against  us?  say,  scout, 
say. 

Boyet.  Under  the  cool  shade  of  a  sycamore 
I  thought  to  close  mine  eyes  some  half  an  hour; 
When,  lo!  to  interrupt  my  purposed  rest,  p/ 
Toward  that  shade  I  might  behold  addrest 
The  King  and  his  companions:  warily 
I  stole  into  a  neighbour  thicket  by. 

And  overheard  what  you  shall  overhear; 

That,  by  and  by,  disguised  they  will  be  here. 
Their  herald  is  a  pretty  knavish  page, 

That  well  by  heart  hath  conn’d  his  embassage: 
Action  and  accent  did  they  teach  him  there; 
‘‘Thus  must  thou  speak,”  and  “thus  thy  body 
bear”: 

And  ever  and  anon  they  made  a  doubt  loi 

Presence  majestical  would  put  him  out; 

“For,”  quoth  the  King,  “an  angel  shalt  thou  see; 
Yet  fear  not  thou,  but  speak  audaciously.” 

The  boy  replied,  “An  angel  is  not  evil; 

I  should  have  fear’d  her  had  she  been  a  devil.” 
With  that,  all  laugh’d  and  clapp’d  him  on  the 
shoulder. 

Making  the  bold  wag  by  their  praises  bolder: 

One  rubb’d  his  elbows  thus,  and  fleer’d,  and 
swore 

A  better  speech  was  never  spoke  before;  no 
Another,  with  his  finger  and  his  thumb. 

Cried,  “Fw.'we  willdo’t,  come  what  will  come”; 
The  third  he  caper’d,  and  cried,  “All  goes  well”; 
The  fourth  turn’d  on  the  toe,  and  down  he  fell. 
With  that,  they  all  did  tumble  on  the  ground. 
With  such  a  zealous  laughter,  so  profound. 

That  in  this  spleen  ridiculous  appears, 

To  check  their  folly,  passion’s  solemn  tears. 

Prin.  But  what,  but  what,  come  they  to  visit  us? 
Boyet.  They  do,  they  do;  and  are  apparell’d 
thus,^  120 

Like  Muscovites  or  Russians  as  1  guess. 

Their  purpose  is  to  parle,  to  court  and  dance; 

And  every  one  his  love-feat  will  advance 
Unto  his  several  mistress,  which  they’ll  know 
By  favours  several  which  they  did  bestow. 


Prin.  And  will  they  so?  the  gallants  shall  be 
task’d; 

For,  ladies,  we  will  every  one  be  mask’d; 

And  not  a  man  of  them  shall  have  the  grace, 
Despite  of  suit,  to  see  a  lady’s  face. 

Hold,  Rosaline,  this  favour  thou  shalt  wear,  1^0 
And  then  the  King  will  court  thee  for  his  dear; 
Hold,  take  thou  this,  my  sweet,  and  give  me 
thine. 

So  shall  Biron  take  me  for  Rosaline. 

And  change  you  favours  too;  so  shall  your  loves 
Woo  contrary,  deceived  by  these  removes. 

Ros.  Come  on,  then;  wear  the  favours  most  in 
sight. 

Kath.  But  in  this  changing  what  is  your  intent? 
Prin.  The  effect  of  my  intent  is  to  cross  theirs: 
They  do  it  but  in  mocking  merriment; 

And  mock  for  mock  is  only  my  intent.  1^0 

Their  several  counsels  they  unbosom  shall 
To  loves  mistook,  and  so  be  mock’d  withal 
Upon  the  next  occasion  that  we  meet. 

With  visages  display’d,  to  talk  and  greet. 

Ros.  But  shall  we  dance,  if  they  desire  us  to’t? 
Prin.  No,  to  the  death,  we  will  not  move  a 
foot; 

Nor  to  their  penn’d  speech  render  we  no  grace. 
But  while  ’tis  spoke  each  turn  away  her  face. 
Boyet.  Why,  that  contempt  will  kill  the  speak¬ 
er’s  heart, 

And  quite  divorce  his  memory  from  his  part.  /50 
Prin.  Therefore  I  do  it;  and  I  make  no  doubt 
The  rest  will  ne’er  come  in,  if  he  be  out. 

There’s  no  such  sport  as  sport  by  sport  o’er- 
thrown. 

To  make  theirs  ours  and  ours  none  but  our  own: 
So  shall  we  stay,  mocking  intended  game. 

And  they,  well  mock’d,  depart  away  with  shame. 
Trumpets  sound  njoithin. 

Boyet.  The  trumpet  sounds:  be  mask’d;  the 
maskers  come.  [The  ladies  mask.] 

Enter  Blackamoors  'with  music;  moth;  the  king 
BIRON,  LONGAviLLE,  and  DOMAIN,  in  Russiau 
habits,  and  masked. 

Moth.  All  hail,  the  richest  beauties  on  the 
earth! — 

Boyet.  Beauties  no  richer  than  rich  taffeta. 

Moth.  A  holy  parcel  of  the  fairest  dames  160 

[The  LADIES  turn  their  backs  to  hbn. 
That  ever  turn’d  their — backs — to  mortal  views! 
Biron.  [Aside  to  moth]  Their  eyes,  villain,  their 
eyes. 

Moth.  That  ever  turn’d  their  eyes  to  mortal 
views! — 

Out — 

Boyet.  True;  out  indeed. 


ACT  V 


276  LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


Moth.  Out  of  your  favours,  heavenly  spirits, 
vouchsafe 
Not  to  behold — 

Bimn.  [Aside  to  moth]  Once  to  behold,  rogue. 
Moth.  Once  to  behold  with  your  sun-beamed 
eyes, 

— with  your  sun-beamed  eyes —  16^ 

Boyet.  They  will  not  answer  to  that  epithet; 

You  were  best  call  it  “daughter-beamed  eyes.” 
Moth.  They  do  not  mark  me,  and  that  brings 
me  out. 

Biron.  Is  this  your  perfectness.^  be  gone,  you 
rogue !  [Exit  moth  . 

Ros.  What  would  these  strangers?  know  their 
minds,  Boyet: 

If  they  do  speak  our  language,  ’tis  our  will 
That  some  plain  man  recount  their  purposes: 
Know  what  they  would. 

Boyet.  What  would  you  with  the  Princess? 
Biron.  Nothing  but  peace  and  gentle  visitation. 
Ros.  What  would  they,  say  they?  180 

Boyet.  Nothing  but  peace  and  gentle  visitation. 
Ros.  Why,  that  they  have;  and  bid  them  so  be 
gone. 

Boyet.  She  says,  you  have  it,  and  you  may  be 
gone. 

King.  Say  to  her,  we  have  measured  many  miles 
To  tread  a  measure  with  her  on  this  grass. 

Boyet.  They  say  that  they  have  measured  many 
a  mile 

To  tread  a  measure  with  you  on  this  grass. 

Ros.  It  is  not  so.  Ask  them  how  many  inches 
Is  in  one  mile:  if  they  have  measured  many, 

The  measure  then  of  one  is  easily  told.  ipo 

Boyet.  If  to  come  hither  you  have  measured 
miles. 

And  many  miles,  the  Princess  bids  you  tell 
How  many  inches  doth  fill  up  one  mile. 

Biron.  Tell  her,  we  measure  them  by  weary 
steps. 

Boyet.  She  hears  herself. 

Ros.  How  many  weary  steps. 

Of  many  weary  miles  you  have  o’ergone. 

Are  number’d  in  the  travel  of  one  mile? 

Biron.  We  number  nothing  that  we  spend  for 
you: 

Our  duty  is  so  rich,  so  infinite. 

That  we  may  do  it  still  without  accompt.  200 
Vouchsafe  to  show  the  sunshine  of  your  face. 
That  we,  like  savages,  may  worship  it. 

Ros.  My  face  is  but  a  moon,  and  clouded  too. 
King.  Blessed  are  clouds,  to  do  as  such  clouds 
do! 

Vouchsafe,  bright  moon,  and  these  thy  stars,  to 
shine. 

Those  clouds  removed,  upon  our  watery  eyne. 


Ros.  O  vain  petitioner!  beg  a  greater  matte; , 
Thou  now  request’st  but  moonshine  in  the  water. 
King.  Then,  in  our  measure  do  but  vouchsafe 
one  change. 

Thou  bid’st  me  beg:  this  begging  is  not  strange. 
Ros.  Play,  music,  then!  Nay,  you  must  do  it 
soon.  [Music plays.]  211 

Not  yet!  no  dance!  Thus  change  I  like  the  moon. 
King.  Will  you  not  dance?  How  come  you  thus 
estranged? 

Ros.  You  took  the  moon  at  full,  but  now  she’s 
changed. 

King.  Yet  still  she  is  the  moon,  and  I  the  man. 
The  music  plays;  vouchsafe  some  motion  to  it. 
Ros.  Our  ears  vouchsafe  it. 

King.  But  your  legs  should  do  it. 

Ros.  Since  you  are  strangers  and  come  here  by 
chance. 

We’ll  not  be  nice:  take  hands.  We  will  not 
dance. 

King.  Why  take  we  hands,  then? 

Ros.  Only  to  part  friends:  220 

Curtsy,  sweet  hearts;  and  so  the  measure  ends. 
King.  More  measure  of  this  measure;  be  not 
nice. 

Ros.  We  can  afford  no  more  at  such  a  price. 
King.  Prize  you  yourselves:  what  buys  your 
company? 

Ros.  Your  absence  only. 

King.  That  can  never  be. 

Ros.  Then  cannot  we  be  bought:  and  so,  adieu; 
Twice  to  your  visor,  and  half  once  to  you. 

King.  If  you  deny  to  dance,  let’s  hold  more  chat. 
Ros.  In  private,  then. 

King.  I  am  best  pleased  with  that. 

They  converse  apart. 

Biron.  White-handed  mistress,  one  sweet  word 
with  three.  2^0 

Prin.  Honey,  and  milk,  and  sugar;  there  is  three. 
Biron.  Nay  then,  two  treys,  and  if  you  grow  so 
nice, 

Metheglin,  wort,  and  malmsey:  well  run,  dice! 
There’s  half-a-dozen  sweets. 

Prin.  Seventh  sweet,  adieu: 

Since  you  can  cog.  I’ll  play  no  more  with  you. 
Biron.  One  word  in  secret. 

Prin.  Let  it  not  be  sweet. 

Biron.  Thou  grievest  my  gall. 

Prin.  Gall!  bitter. 

Biron  Therefore  meet. 

They  converse  apart. 

Dum.  Will  you  vouchsafe  with  me  to  change  a 
word? 

Mar.  Name  it. 

Dum.  Fair  lady — 

Mar.  Say  you  so?  Fair  lord — 


SCENE  II 

Take  that  for  your  fair  lady. 

Dum.  Please  it  you, 

As  much  in  private,  and  I’ll  bid  adieu. 

They  converse  apart. 

Kath.  What,  was  your  vizard  made  without  a 
tongue? 

Long.  I  know  the  reason,  lady,  why  you  ask. 
Kath.  O  for  your  reason!  quickly,  sir;  I  long. 
Long.  You  have  a  double  tongue  within  your 
mask, 

And  would  afford  my  speechless  vizard  half. 
Kath.  “Veal,”  quoth  the  Dutchman.  Is  not 
“veal”  a  calf? 

Long.  A  calf,  fair  lady! 

Kath.  No,  a  fair  lord  calf. 

Long.  Let’s  part  the  word. 

Kath.  No,  I’ll  not  be  your  half: 

Take  all,  and  wean  it;  it  may  prove  an  ox.  2jo 
Long.  Look,  how  you  butt  yourself  in  these 
sharp  mocks! 

Will  you  give  horns,  chaste  lady?  do  not  so. 

Kath.  Then  die  a  calf,  before  your  horns  do 
grow. 

Long.  One  word  in  private  with  you,  ere  I  die. 
Kath.  Bleat  softly  then;  the  butcher  hears  you 
cry. 

They  converse  apart. 

Boyet.  The  tongues  of  mocking  wenches  are  as 
keen 

As  is  the  razor’s  edge  invisible, 

Cutting  a  smaller  hair  than  may  be  seen. 

Above  the  sense  of  sense;  so  sensible 
Seemeth  their  conference;  their  conceits  have 
wings  260 

Fleeter  than  arrows,  bullets,  wind,  thought, 
swifter  things. 

Ros.  Not  one  word  more,  my  maids;  break  off, 
break  off. 

Biron.  By  heaven,  all  dry-beaten  with  pure 
scoff! 

King.  Farewell,  mad  wenches;  you  have  simple 
wits. 

Prin.  Twenty  adieus,  my  frozen  Muscovits. 

[Exeunt  king,  lords,  and  Blackatnoors. 
Are  these  the  breed  of  wits  so  wonder’d  at? 

Boyet.  Tapers  they  are,  with  your  sweet 
breaths  puff’d  out. 

Well-liking  wits  they  have;  gross,  gross; 
fat,  fat. 

Prin.  O  poverty  in  wit,  kingly-poor  flout! 

Will  they  not,  think  you,  hang  themselves  to¬ 
night?  2’JO 

Or  ever,  but  in  vizards,  show  their  faces? 

This  pert  Biron  was  out  of  countenance  quite. 

Ros.  O,  they  were  all  in  lamentable  cases! 

The  King  was  weeping-ripe  for  a  good  word. 


277 

Prin.  Biron  did  swear  himself  out  of  all  suit. 
Mar.  Dumain  was  at  my  service,  and  his  sword; 
“No  point,”  quoth  I;  my  servant  straight  was 
mute. 

Kath.  Lord  Longaville  said  I  came  o’er  his 
heart; 

And  trow  you  what  he  call’d  me? 

Prin  Qualm,  perhaps. 

Kath.  Yes,  in  good  faith. 

Prin.  Go,  sickness  as  thou  art!  280 

Ros.  Well,  better  wits  have  worn  plain  statute- 
caps. 

But  will  you  hear?  the  King  is  my  love  sworn. 
Prin.  And  quick  Biron  hath  plighted  faith  to 
me. 

Kath.  And  Longaville  was  for  my  service  born. 
Mar.  Dumain  is  mine,  as  sure  as  bark  on  tree 
Boyet.  Madam,  and  pretty  mistresses,  give  ear: 
Immediately  they  will  again  be  here 
In  their  own  shapes;  for  it  can  never  be 
They  will  digest  this  harsh  indignity. 

Prin.  Will  they  return? 

Boyet.  They  will,  they  will,  God  knows,  2^0 
And  leap  for  joy,  though  they  are  lame  with 
blows: 

Therefore  change  favours;  and,  when  they  re- 
pair. 

Blow  like  sweet  roses  in  this  summer  air. 

Prin.  How  blow?  how  blow?  speak  to  be  under 
stood. 

Boyet.  Fair  ladies  mask’d  are  roses  in  their  bud; 
Dismask’d,  their  damask  sweet  commixture 
shown. 

Are  angels  vailing  clouds,  or  roses  blown, 

Prin.  Avaunt,  perplexity!  What  shall  we  do. 

If  they  return  in  their  own  shapes  to  woo? 

Ros.  Good  madam,  if  by  me  you’ll  be  advised. 
Let’s  mock  them  still,  as  well  known  as  disguised: 
Let  us  complain  to  them  what  fools  were  here. 
Disguised  like  Muscovites,  in  shapeless  gear; 

And  wonder  what  they  were  and  to  what  end 
Their  shallow  shows  and  prologue  vilely  penn’d 
And  their  rough  carriage  so  ridiculous. 

Should  be  presented  at  our  tent  to  us. 

Boyet.  Ladies,  withdraw:  the  gallants  are  at 
hand. 

Prin.  Whip  to  our  tents,  as  roes  run  o’er  land. 

PRINCESS,  ROSALINE,  KATHARINE,  and 

MARIA. 

Re-enter  the  king,  biron,  longaville,  and 
DUMAIN,  in  their  proper  habits. 

King.  Fair  sir,  God  save  you!  Where’s  the 
Princess?  3^^ 

Boyet.  Gone  to  her  tent.  Please  it  your  Majesty 
Command  me  any  service  to  her  thither? 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 
2^0 


ACT  V 


278  LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


King.  That  she  vouchsafe  me  audience  for  one 
word. 

Boyet.  I  will;  and  so  will  she,  I  know,  my  lord. 

[Exit. 

Biron.  This  fellow  pecks  up  wit  as  pigeons 
pease. 

And  utters  it  again  when  God  doth  please: 

He  is  wit’s  pedler,  and  retails  his  wares 
At  wakes  and  wassails,  meetings,  markets,  fairs; 
And  we  that  sell  by  gross,  the  Lord  doth  know, 
Have  not  the  grace  to  grace  it  with  such  show. 
This  gallant  pins  the  wenches  on  his  sleeve;  52/ 
Had  he  been  Adam,  he  had  tempted  Eve; 

A’  can  carve  too,  and  lisp:  why,  this  is  he 
That  kiss’d  his  hand  away  in  courtesy; 

This  is  the  ape  of  form,  monsieur  the  nice. 

That,  when  he  plays  at  tables,  chides  the  dice 
In  honourable  terms:  nay,  he  can  sing 
A  mean  most  meanly;  and  in  ushering 
Mend  him  who  can:  the  ladies  call  him  sweet; 
The  stairs,  as  he  treads  on  them,  kiss  his  feet; 
This  is  the  flower  that  smiles  on  every  one,  55/ 
To  show  his  teeth  as  white  as  whale’s  bone; 

And  consciences,  that  will  not  die  in  debt. 

Pay  him  the  due  of  honey-tongued  Boyet. 

King.  A  blister  on  his  sweet  tongue,  with  my 
heart. 

That  put  Armado’s  page  out  of  his  part! 

Biron.  See  where  it  comes!  Behaviour,  what 
wert  thou 

Till  this  madman  show’d  thee?  and  what  art  thou 
now? 

Re-enter  the  princess,  ushered  by  boyet;  Rosa¬ 
line,  MARIA,  and  KATHARINE. 

King.  All  hail,  sweet  madam,  and  fair  time  of 
(iay!  ^  S39 

Prin.  “Fair”  in  “all  hail”  is  foul,  as  I  conceive. 
King.  Construe  my  speeches  better,  if  you  may. 
Prin.  Then  wish  me  better;  I  will  give  you  leave. 
King.  We  came  to  visit  you,  and  purpose  now 
To  lead  you  to  our  court;  vouchsafe  it  then. 

Prin.  This  field  shall  hold  me;  and  so  hold  your 
vow: 

Nor  God,  nor  I,  delights  in  perjured  men. 

King.  Rebuke  me  not  for  that  which  you  pro¬ 
voke: 

The  virtue  of  your  eye  must  break  my  oath. 

Prin.  You  nickname  virtue;  vice  you  should 
have  spoke; 

For  virtue’s  office  never  breaks  men’s  troth. 

Now  by  maiden  honour,  yet  as  pure  j  j/ 

As  the  unsullied  lily,  I  protest, 

A  world  of  torments  though  I  should  endure, 

I  would  not  yield  to  be  your  house’s  guest; 

So  much  I  hate  a  breaking  cause  to  be 


Of  heavenly  oaths,  vow’d  with  integrity. 

King.  O,  you  have  lived  in  desolation  here. 
Unseen,  unvisited,  much  to  our  shame. 

Prin.  Not  so,  my  lord;  it  is  not  so,  I  swear; 

We  have  had  pastimes  here  and  pleasant 
game: 

A  mess  of  Russians  left  us  but  of  late.  ^  61 

King.  How,  madam!  Russians! 

Prin.  Ay,  in  truth,  my  lord; 

Trim  gallants,  full  of  courtship  and  of  state. 

Ros.  Madam,  speak  true.  It  is  not  so,  my  lord: 
My  lady,  to  the  manner  of  the  days. 

In  courtesy  gives  undeserving  praise. 

We  four  indeed  confronted  were  with  four 
In  Russian  habit:  here  they  stay’d  an  hour. 

And  talk’d  apace;  and  in  that  hour,  my  lord. 

They  did  not  bless  us  with  one  happy  word.  570 
I  dare  not  call  them  fools;  but  this  I  think, 

WTen  they  are  thirsty,  fools  would  fain  have 
drink. 

Biron.  This  jest  is  dry  to  me.  Fair  gentle  sweet. 
Your  wit  makes  wise  things  foolish:  when  we 
greet. 

With  eyes  best  seeing,  heaven’s  fiery  eye. 

By  light  we  lose  light:  your  capacity 
Is  of  that  nature  that  to  your  huge  store 
Wise  things  seem  foolish  and  rich  things  but 
poor. 

Ros.  This  proves  you  wise  and  rich,  for  in  my 
eye — 

Biron.  I  am  a  fool,  and  full  of  poverty.  5  80 
Ros.  But  that  you  take  what  doth  to  you  belong. 
It  were  a  fault  to  snatch  words  from  my  tongue. 
Biron.  O,  I  am  yours,  and  all  that  I  possess! 

Ros.  All  the  fool  mine? 

Biron.  I  cannot  give  you  less. 

Ros.  Which  of  the  vizards  was  it  that  you  wore? 
Biron.  Where?  when?  what  vizard?  why  de¬ 
mand  you  this? 

Ros.  There,  then,  that  vizard;  that  superffuous 
case 

That  hid  the  worse  and  show’d  the  better  face. 
King.  We  are  descried;  they’ll  mock  us  now 
downright. 

Dum.  Let  us  confess  and  turn  it  to  a  jest. 

Prin.  Amazed,  my  lord?  why  looks  your  High¬ 
ness  sad?  55?/ 

Ros.  Help,  hold  his  brows!  he’ll  swoon!  Why 
look  you  pale? 

Sea-sick,  I  think,  coming  from  Muscovy. 

Biron.  Thus  pour  the  stars  down  plagues  for 
perjury. 

Can  any  face  of  brass  hold  longer  out? 

Here  stand  I :  lady,  dart  thy  skill  at  me; 

Bruise  me  with  scorn,  confound  me  with  a 
flout; 


SCENE  II 

Thrust  thy  sharp  wit  quite  through  my  igno¬ 
rance; 

Cut  me  to  pieces  with  thy  keen  conceit; 

And  I  will  wish  thee  never  more  to  dance. 

Nor  never  more  in  Russian  habit  wait. 

O,  never  will  I  trust  to  speeches  penn’d, 

Nor  to  the  motion  of  a  schoolboy’s  tongue, 

Nor  never  come  in  vizard  to  my  friend. 

Nor  woo  in  rhyme,  like  a  blind  harper’s  song! 
Taffeta  phrases,  silken  terms  precise. 

Three-piled  hyperboles,  spruce  affectation. 
Figures  pedantical;  these  summer-flies 
Have  blown  me  full  of  maggot  ostentation: 

I  do  forswear  them;  and  I  here  protest,  4/0 
By  this  white  glove — how  white  the  hand, 

God  knows!— 

Henceforth  my  wooing  mind  shall  be  express’d 
In  russet  yeas  and  honest  kersey  noes: 

And,  to  begin,  wench — so  God  help  me,  la! — 

My  love  to  thee  is  sound,  sans  crack  or  flaw. 

Ros.  Sans  sans,  I  pray  you. 

Biron.  Yet  I  have  a  trick 

Of  the  old  rage:  bear  with  me,  I  am  sick; 

I’ll  leave  it  by  degrees.  Soft,  let  us  see: 

Write,  “Lord  have  mercy  on  us”  on  those  three; 
They  are  infected;  in  their  hearts  it  lies;  420 
They  have  the  plague,  and  caught  it  of  your  eyes; 
These  lords  are  visited;  you  are  not  free, 

For  the  Lord’s  tokens  on  you  do  I  see. 

Prin.  No,  they  are  free  that  gave  these  tokens  to 
us. 

Biron.  Our  states  are  forfeit:  seek  not  to  undo 
us. 

Ros.  It  is  not  so;  for  how  can  this  be  true. 

That  you  stand  forfeit,  being  those  that  sue? 
Biron.  Peace!  for  I  will  not  have  to  do  with  you. 
Ros.  Nor  shall  not,  if  I  do  as  I  intend. 

Biron.  Speak  for  yourselves;  my  wit  is  at  an 
end.  450 

King.  Teach  us,  sweet  madam,  for  our  rude 
transgression 
Some  fair  excuse. 

Prin.  The  fairest  is  confession. 

Were  not  you  here  but  even  now  disguised? 

King.  Madam,  I  was. 

Prin.  And  were  you  well  advised? 

King.  I  was,  fair  madam. 

Prin.  When  you  then  were  here. 

What  did  you  whisper  in  your  lady’s  ear? 

King.  That  more  than  all  the  world  I  did  re¬ 
spect  her. 

Prin.  When  she  shall  challenge  this,  vou  will 
reject  her. 

King.  Upon  mine  honour,  no. 

Prin.  Peace,  peace!  forbear: 

Your  oath  once  broke,  you  force  not  to  forswear. 


279 

King.  Despise  me,  when  I  break  this  oath  of 
mine.  44/ 

Prin.  I  will:  and  therefore  keep  it.  Rosaline, 
400  What  did  the  Russian  whisper  in  your  ear? 

Ros.  Madam,  he  swore  that  he  did  hold  me  dear 
As  precious  eyesight,  and  did  value  me 
Above  this  world;  adding  thereto  moreover 
That  he  would  wed  me,  or  else  die  my  lover. 

Prin.  God  give  thee  joy  of  him!  the  noble  lord 
Most  honourably  doth  uphold  his  word. 

King.  What  mean  you,  madam?  by  my  life,  my 
troth,  4^0 

I  never  swore  this  lady  such  an  oath. 

Ros.  By  heaven,  you  did;  and  to  confirm  it  plain. 
You  gave  me  this:  but  take  it,  sir,  again. 

King.  My  faith  and  this  the  Princess  I  did  give: 

I  knew  her  by  this  jewel  on  her  sleeve. 

Prin.  Pardon  me,  sir,  this  jewel  did  she  wear; 
And  Lord  Biron,  I  thank  him,  is  my  dear. 

What,  will  you  have  me,  or  your  pearl  again? 

Biron.  Neither  of  either;  I  remit  both  twain. 

I  see  the  trick  on’t:  here  was  a  consent,  460 

Knowing  aforehand  of  our  merriment. 

To  dash  it  like  a  Christmas  comedy: 

Some  carry-tale  some  please-man,  some  slight 
zany. 

Some  mumble-news,  some  trencher-knight,  some 
Dick, 

That  smiles  his  cheek  in  years  and  knows  the 
trick 

To  make  my  lady  laugh  when  she’s  disposed. 
Told  our  intents  before;  which  once  disclosed. 
The  ladies  did  change  favours;  and  then  we. 
Following  the  signs,  woo’d  but  the  sign  of  she. 
Now,  to  our  perjury  to  add  more  terror,  470 
We  are  again  forsworn,  in  will  and  error. 

Much  upon  this  it  is:  and  might  not  you 
To  BO  YET. 

Forestall  our  sport,  to  make  us  thus  untrue? 

Do  not  you  know  my  lady’s  foot  by  the  squire. 
And  laugh  upon  the  apple  of  her  eye? 

And  stand  between  her  back,  sir,  and  the  fire. 
Holding  a  trencher,  jesting  merrily? 

You  put  our  page  out:  go,  you  are  allow’d; 

Die  when  you  will,  a  smock  shall  be  your  shroud. 
You  leer  upon  me,  do  you?  there’s  an  eye  4S0 
\V(  urds  like  a  leaden  sword. 

Boyet.  Full  merrily 

Hath  this  brave  manage,  this  career,  been  run. 
P)jrofi.  Lo,  he  is  tilting  straight!  Peaee!  1  have 
done. 

Enter  costard. 

Welcome,  pure  wit!  thou  partest  a  fair  fray. 

Cost.  O  Lord,  sir,  they  would  know 
Whether  the  three  Worthies  shall  come  in  or  no. 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


28o 

Birm.  What,  are  there  but  three? 

Cost.  No,  sir;  but  it  is  vara  fine. 

For  every  one  pursents  three. 

Biron.  And  three  times  thrice  is  nine. 

Cost.  Not  so,  sir;  under  correction,  sir;  I  hope  it 
is  not  so. 

You  cannot  beg  us,  sir,  I  can  assure  you,  sir;  we 
know  what  we  know:  490 

I  hope,  sir,  three  times  thrice,  sir — 

Biron.  Is  not  nine. 

Cost.  Under  correction,  sir,  we  know  where- 
until  it  doth  amount. 

Biro?].  By  Jove,  1  always  took  three  threes  for 
nine. 

Cost.  O  Lord,  sir,  it  were  pity  you  should  get 
your  living  by  reckoning,  sir. 

Biron.  How  much  is  it?  4pp 

Cost.  O  Lord,  sir,  the  parties  themselves,  the 
actors,  sir,  will  show  whereuntil  it  doth  amount: 
for  mine  own  part,  I  am,  as  they  say,  but  to 
parfect  one  man  in  one  poor  man,  Pompion  the 
Great,  sir. 

Biron.  Art  thou  one  of  the  Worthies? 

Cost.  It  pleased  them  to  think  me  worthy  of 
Pompion  the  Great:  for  mine  own  part,  I  know 
not  the  degree  of  the  Worthy,  but  I  am  to  stand 
for  him. 

Biron.  Go,  bid  them  prepare.  5/0 

Cost.  We  will  turn  it  finely  off,  sir;  we  will  take 
some  care.  [Exit. 

King.  Biron,  they  will  shame  us:  let  them  not 
approach. 

Biron.  We  are  shame-proof,  my  lord:  and  ’tis 
some  policy 

To  have  one  show  worse  than  the  King’s  and  his 
company. 

King.  I  say  they  shall  not  come. 

Prin.  Nay,  my  good  lord,  let  me  o’errule  you 
now: 

That  sport  best  pleases  that  doth  least  know  how: 
Where  zeal  strives  to  content,  and  the  contents 
Dies  in  the  zeal  of  that  which  it  presents: 

Their  form  confounded  makes  most  form  in 

mirth,  520 

When  great  things  labouring  perish  in  their  birth. 
Biron.  A  right  description  of  our  sport,  my 
lord. 

Enter  ARMADo. 

Arm.  Anointed,  I  implore  so  much  expense  of 
thy  royal  sweet  breath  as  will  utter  a  brace  of 
words. 

Converses  apart  ivith  the  king,  and  delivers  him 
a  paper. 

Prin.  Doth  this  man  serve  God? 

Biron.  Why  ask  you? 


ACT  V 

Prin.  He  speaks  not  like  a  man  of  God’s  making. 
Arm.  That  is  all  one,  my  fair,  sweet,  honey 
monarch;  for,  I  protest,  the  schoolmaster  is  ex¬ 
ceeding  fantastical;  too  too  vain,  too  too  vain: 
but  we  will  put  it,  as  they  say,  to  fortuna  dela 
guerra.  I  wish  you  the  peace  of  mind,  most  royal 
couplement!  [Exit. 

King.  Here  is  like  to  be  a  good  presence  of 
Worthies.  He  presents  Hector  of  Troy;  the 
swain,  Pompey  the  Gre.it;  the  parish  curate, 
Alexander;  Armado’s  page,  Hercules;  the  ped^ 
ant,  Judas  Maccabaeus:  540 

And  if  these  four  Worthies  in  their  first  show 
thrive 

These  four  will  change  habits,  and  present  the 
other  five. 

Biron.  There  is  five  in  the  first  show. 

King.  You  are  deceived;  ’tis  not  so. 

Biron.  The  pedant,  the  braggart,  the  hedge- 
priest,  the  fool  and  the  boy : 

Abate  throw  at  novum,  and  the  whole  world 
again 

Cannot  pick  out  five  such,  take  each  one  in  his 
vein. 

King.  The  ship  is  under  sail,  and  here  she  comes 
amain. 

Enter  costard, /or  Pompey. 

Cost.  “I  Pompey  am” — 

Boyet.  You  lie,  you  are  not  he.  550 

Cost.  “1  Pompey  am” — 

Boyet.  With  libbard’s  head  on  knee. 

Biron.  Well  said,  old  mocker:  I  must  needs  be 
friends  with  thee. 

Cost.  *‘I  Pompey  am,  Pompey  surnamed  the 

Big”- 

Dum.  The  Great. 

Cost.  It  is,  ‘‘Great,”  sir: — 

“Pompey  surnamed  the  Great; 
That  oft  in  field,  with  targe  and  shield,  did  make 
my  foe  to  sweat: 

And  travelling  along  this  coast,  1  here  am  come 
by  chance. 

And  lay  my  arms  before  the  legs  of  this  sweet 
lass  of  France.” 

If  your  ladyship  would  say,  “Thanks,  Pompey,” 
I  had  done. 

Prin.  Great  thanks,  great  Pompey.  p6o 

Cost.  ’Tis  not  so  much  worth;  but  I  hope  I  was 
perfect:  I  made  a  little  fault  in  “Great.” 

Biron.  My  hat  to  a  halfpenny,  Pompey  proves 
the  best  Worthy. 

Enter  sir  ^ATHAmEi..,  for  Alexander. 

Nath.  “When  in  the  world  I  lived.  I  was  the 
world’s  commander; 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


SCENE  II 


281 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


By  east,  west,  north,  and  south,  I  spread  my 
conquering  might; 

My  scutcheon  plain  declares  that  I  am  Ali San¬ 
der” — 

Boyet.  Your  nose  says,  no,  you  are  not;  for  it 
stands  too  right. 

Biron.  Your  nose  smells  “no”  in  this,  most 
tender-smelling  knight. 

Prin.  The  conqueror  is  dismay’d.  Proceed,  good 
Alexander.  570 

Nath.  “When  in  the  world  I  lived,  1  was  the 
world’s  commander” — 

Boyet.  Most  true,  ’tis  right;  you  were  so,  Ali- 
sander. 

Biron.  Pompey  the  Great — 

Cost.  Your  servant,  and  Costard. 

Biron.  Take  away  the  conqueror,  take  away 
Alisander. 

Cost.  [To  SIR  NATHANIEL]  O,  sit,  you  havc  over¬ 
thrown  Alisander  the  conqueror!  You  will  be 
scraped  out  of  the  painted  cloth  for  this:  your 
lion,  that  holds  his  poll-axe  sitting  on  a  close- 
stool,  will  be  given  to  Ajax:  he  will  be  the  ninth 
Worthy.  A  conqueror,  and  afeard  to  speak!  run 
away  for  shame,  Alisander.  [sir  Nathaniel  re¬ 
tires.]  There,  an’t  shall  please  you;  a  foolish  mild 
man;  an  honest  man,  look  you,  and  soon  dashed. 
He  is  a  marvellous  good  neighbour,  faith,  and  a 
very  good  bowler:  but,  for  Alisander — alas,  you 
see  how  ’tis — a  little  o’erparted.  But  there  are 
Worthies  a-coming  will  speak  their  mind  in  some 
other  sort.  55? o 

Prin.  Stand  aside,  good  Pompey. 

Enter  holofernes,/^^  Judas;  and  moth, 
for  Hercules. 

Hoi.  “Great  Hercules  is  presented  by  this  imp. 
Whose  club  kill’d  Cerberus,  that  three¬ 
headed  canus; 

And  when  he  was  a  babe,  a  child,  a  shrimp. 
Thus  did  he  strangle  serpents  in  his  manus. 
Quoniam  he  seemeth  in  minority. 

Ergo  I  come  with  this  apology.” 

Keep  some  state  in  thy  exit,  and  vanish. 

[moth  retires. 

“Judas  I  am” — 

Z)ww.  AJudas!  600 

Hoi.  Not  Iscariot,  sir. 

“Judas  I  am,  ycliped  Maccabasus.” 

Dum.  Judas  Maccabaeus  dipt  is  plain  Judas. 
Biron.  A  kissing  traitor.  How  art  thou  proved 
Judas? 

Hoi.  “Judas  I  am”— 

Dum.  The  more  shame  for  you,  Judas. 

Hoi.  What  mean  you,  sir? 

Boyet.  To  make  Judas  hang  himself. 


Hoi.  Begin,  sir;  you  are  my  elder. 

Biron.  Well  followed:  Judas  was  hanged  on  an 
elder.  610 

Hoi.  I  will  not  be  put  out  of  countenance. 

Biron.  Because  thou  hast  no  face. 

Hoi.  What  is  this? 

Boyet.  A  cittern-head. 

Dum.  The  head  of  a  bodkin. 

Biron.  A  Death’s  face  in  a  ring. 

Long.  The  face  of  an  old  Roman  coin,  scarce 
seen. 

Boyet.  The  pommel  of  Caesar’s  falchion. 

Dum.  The  carved-bone  face  on  a  flask. 

Biron.  Saint  George’s  half-cheek  in  a  brooch. 
Dum.  Ay,  and  in  a  brooch  of  lead.  621 

Biron.  Ay,  and  worn  in  the  cap  of  a  tooth- 
drawer. 

And  now  forward;  for  we  have  put  thee  in  coun¬ 
tenance. 

Hoi.  You  have  put  me  out  of  countenance. 

Biron.  False;  we  have  given  thee  faces. 

Hoi.  But  you  have  out- faced  them  all. 

Biron.  An  thou  wert  a  lion,  we  would  do  so. 
Boyet.  Therefore,  as  he  is  an  ass,  let  him  go. 

And  so  adieu,  sweet  Jude!  nay,  why  dost  thou 
stay? 

Dum.  For  the  latter  end  of  his  name.  6^0 

Biron.  For  the  ass  to  the  Jude;  give  it  him: 
Jud-as,  away! 

Hoi.  This  is  not  generous,  not  gentle,  not 
humble. 

Boyet.  A  light  for  Monsieur  Judas!  it  grows 
dark,  he  may  stumble,  [holofernes  retires. 
Prin.  Alas,  poor  Maccabxus,  how  hath  he  been 
baited! 

Enter  armado,  for  Hector. 

Biron.  Hide  thy  head,  Achilles:  here  comes 
Hector  in  arms. 

Dum.  Though  my  mocks  come  home  by  me,  I 
will  now  be  merry. 

King.  Hector  was  but  a  Troyan  in  respect  of 
this.  640 

Boyet.  But  is  this  Hector? 

King.  I  think  Hector  was  not  so  clean-timbered. 
Long.  His  leg  is  too  big  for  Hector’s. 

Dum.  More  calf,  certain. 

Boyet.  No;  he  is  best  indued  in  the  small. 

Biron.  This  cannot  be  Hector. 

Dum.  He’s  a  god  or  a  painter;  for  he  makes 
faces. 

Arm.  “The  armipotent  Mars,  of  lances  the 
almighty,  6^0 

Gave  Hector  a  gift” — 

Dum.  A  gilt  nutmeg. 

Biron.  A  lemon. 


282 


ACT  V 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


Lang.  Stuck  with  cloves. 

Dum.  No,  cloven. 

Arm.  Peace! — 

“The  armipotent  Mars,  of  lances  the  almighty, 
Gave  Hector  a  gift,  the  heir  of  Ilion; 

A  man  so  breathed,  that  certain  he  would  fight, 
yea 

From  morn  till  night,  out  of  his  pavilion.  660 
I  am  that  flower” — 

Dum.  That  mint. 

Lang.  That  columbine. 

Arm.  Sweet  Lord  Longaville,  rein  thy  tongue. 

Lang.  I  must  rather  give  it  the  rein,  for  it  runs 
against  Hector. 

Dum.  Ay,  and  Hector’s  a  greyhound. 

Arm.  The  sweet  war-man  is  dead  and  rotten; 
sweet  chucks,  beat  not  the  bones  of  the  buried; 
when  he  breathed,  he  was  a  man.  But  I  will 
forward  with  my  device.  [To  the  princess]  Sweet 
royalty,  bestow  on  me  the  sense  of  hearing.  6jo 

Prin.  Speak,  brave  Hector:  we  are  much  de¬ 
lighted. 

Arm.  I  do  adore  thy  sweet  grace’s  slipper. 

Boyet.  [Aside  to  domain]  Loves  her  by  the  foot. 

Dum.  [Aside  to  boyet]  He  may  not  by  the  yard. 

Arm.  “This  Hector  far  surmounted  Hanni- 
bal”— 

Cost.  The  party  is  gone,  fellow  Hector,  she  is 
gone;  she  is  two  months  on  her  way. 

Arm.  What  meanest  thou?  680 

Cost.  Faith,  unless  you  play  the  honest  Troyan, 
the  poor  wench  is  cast  away:  she’s  quick;  the 
child  brags  in  her  belly  already:  ’tis  yours. 

Arm.  Dost  thou  infamonize  me  among  poten¬ 
tates?  thou  shalt  die. 

Cost.  Then  shall  Hector  be  whipped  for  Jaquen- 
etta  that  is  quick  by  him  and  hanged  for  Pompey 
that  is  dead  by  him. 

Dum.  Most  rare  Pompey! 

Boyet.  Renowned  Pompey!  6^0 

Biron.  Greater  than  great,  great,  great,  great 
Pompey!  Pompey  the  Huge! 

Dum.  Hector  trembles. 

Biron.  Pompey  is  moved.  More  Ates,  more 
Ates!  stir  them  on!  stir  them  on! 

Dum.  Hector  will  challenge  him. 

Biron.  Ay,  if  a’  have  no  more  man’s  blood  in’s 
belly  than  will  sup  a  flea. 

Arm.  By  the  north  pole,  I  do  challenge  thee. 

Cost.  I  will  not  fight  with  a  pole,  like  a  northern 
man:  I’ll  slash;  I’ll  do  it  by  the  sword.  I  bepra^' 
you,  let  me  borrow  my  arms  again. 

Dum.  Room  for  the  incensed  Worthies! 

Cost.  I’ll  do  it  in  my  shirt. 

Dum.  Most  resolute  Pompey! 

Moth.  Master,  let  me  take  you  a  button-hole 


lower.  Do  you  not  see  Pompey  is  uncasing  for 
the  combat?  What  mean  you?  You  will  lose  your 
reputation. 

Arm.  Gentlemen  and  soldiers,  pardon  me;  I 
will  not  combat  in  my  shirt.  7// 

Dum.  You  may  not  deny  it:  Pompey  hath  made 
the  challenge. 

Arm.  Sweet  bloods,  I  both  may  and  will. 

Biron.  What  reason  have  you  for’t? 

Arm.  The  naked  truth  of  it  is,  I  have  no  shirt; 
I  go  wool  ward  for  penance. 

Boyet.  True,  and  it  was  enjoined  him  in  Rome 
for  want  of  linen:  since  when.  I’ll  be  sworn,  he 
wore  none  but  a  dishclout  of  Jaquenetta’s,  and 
that  a’  wears  next  his  heart  for  a  favour. 

Enter  mercade. 

Mer.  God  save  you,  madam! 

Prin.  Welcome,  Mercade; 

But  that  thou  interrupt’ st  our  merriment. 

Mer.  I  am  sorry,  madam;  for  the  news  I  bring 
Is  heavy  in  my  tongue.  The  King  your  father— 

Prin.  Dead,  for  my  life! 

Mer.  Even  so;  my  tale  is  told. 

Biron.  Worthies,  away!  the  scene  begins  to 
cloud.  75/ 

Arm.  For  mine  own  part,  I  breathe  free  breath. 
I  have  seen  the  day  of  wrong  through  the  little 
hole  of  discretion,  and  I  will  right  myself  like  a 
soldier.  [Exeunt  Worthies. 

King.  How  fares  your  Majesty? 

Prin.  Boyet,  prepare;  I  will  away  to-night. 

King.  Madam,  not  so;  I  do  beseech  you,  stay. 

Prin.  Prepare,  I  say.  I  thank  you,  gracious 
lords. 

For  all  your  fair  endeavours;  and  entreat,  740 

Out  of  a  new-sad  soul,  that  you  vouchsafe 
In  your  rich  wisdom  to  excuse  or  hide 
The  liberal  opposition  of  our  spirits. 

If  over-boldly  we  have  borne  ourselves 
In  the  converse  of  breath:  your  gentleness 
Was  guilty  of  it.  Farewell,  worthy  lord! 

A  heavy  heart  bears  not  a  nimble  tongue: 

Excuse  me  so,  coming  too  short  of  thanks 
For  my  great  suit  so  easily  obtain’d. 

King.  The  extreme  parts  of  time  extremely 
forms  750 

All  causes  to  the  purpose  of  his  speed. 

And  often  at  his  very  loose  decides 

That  which  long  process  could  not  arbitrate: 

And  though  the  mourning  brow  of  progeny 
Forbid  the  smiling  courtesy  of  love 
The  holy  suit  which  fain  it  would  convince. 

Yet,  since  love’s  argument  was  first  on  foot. 

Let  not  the  cloud  of  sorrow  justle  it 

From  what  it  purposed;  since,  to  wail  friends  lost 


SCENE  II 

Is  not  by  much  so  wholesome-profitable 
As  to  rejoice  at  friends  but  newly  found. 

Prin.  I  understand  you  not:  my  griefs  are 
double. 

Biron.  Honest  plain  words  best  pierce  the  ear 
of  grief; 

And  by  these  badges  understand  the  King. 

For  your  fair  sakes  have  we  neglected  time, 
Play’d  foul  play  with  our  oaths:  your  beauty, 
ladies, 

Hath  much  deform’d  us,  fashioning  our  humours 
Even  to  the  opposed  end  of  our  intents : 

And  what  in  us  hath  seem’d  ridiculous — 

As  love  is  full  of  unbefitting  strains,  770 

All  wanton  as  a  child,  skipping  and  vain. 

Form’d  by  the  eye  and  therefore,  like  the  eye. 
Full  of  strange  shapes,  of  habits  and  of  forms. 
Varying  in  subjects  as  the  eye  doth  roll 
To  every  varied  object  in  his  glance: 

Which  parti-coated  presence  of  loose  love 
Put  on  by  us,  if,  in  your  heavenly  eyes. 

Have  misbecomed  our  oaths  and  gravities. 

Those  heavenly  eyes,  that  look  into  these  faults. 
Suggested  us  to  make.  Therefore,  ladies,  j8o 
Our  love  being  yours,  the  error  that  love  makes 
Is  likewise  yours:  we  to  ourselves  prove  false. 

By  being  once  false  for  ever  to  be  true 
To  those  that  make  us  both — fair  ladies,  you: 
And  even  that  falsehood,  in  itself  a  sin. 

Thus  purifies  itself  and  turns  to  grace. 

Prin.  We  have  received  your  letters  full  of  love; 
Your  favours,  the  ambassadors  of  love; 

And,  in  our  maiden  council,  rated  them 
At  courtship,  pleasant  jest,  and  courtesy,  jpo 
As  bombast  and  as  lining  to  the  time: 

But  more  devout  than  this  in  our  respects 
Have  we  not  been;  and  therefore  met  your  loves 
In  their  own  fashion,  like  a  merriment. 

Dum.  Our  letters,  madam,  show’d  much  more 
than  jest. 

Long.  So  did  our  looks. 

Ros.  We  did  not  quote  them  so. 

King.  Now,  at  the  latest  minute  of  the  hour, 
Grant  us  your  loves. 

Prin.  A  time,  methinks,  too  short 

To  make  a  world-without-end  bargain  in. 

No,  no,  my  lord,  your  Grace  is  perjured  much. 
Full  of  dear  guiltiness ;  and  therefore  this :  801 

If  for  my  love,  as  there  is  no  such  cause, 

You  will  do  aught,  this  shall  you  do  for  me: 

Your  oath  I  will  not  trust;  but  go  with  speed 
To  some  forlorn  and  naked  hermitage, 

Remote  from  all  the  pleasures  of  the  world; 
There  stay  until  the  twelve  celestial  signs 
Have  brought  about  the  annual  reckoning. 

If  this  austere  insociable  life 


283 

Change  not  your  offer  made  in  heat  of  blood; 

If  frosts  and  fasts,  hard  lodging  and  thin  weeds 
Nip  not  the  gaudy  blossoms  of  your  love, 

But  that  it  bear  this  trial  and  last  love; 

Then,  at  the  expiration  of  the  year. 

Come  challenge  me,  challenge  me  by  these  do 
serts. 

And,  by  this  virgin  palm  now  kissing  thine, 

I  will  be  thine;  and  till  that  instant  shut 
My  woeful  self  up  in  a  mourning  house. 

Raining  the  tears  of  lamentation 

For  the  remembrance  of  my  father’s  death.  820 

If  this  thou  do  deny,  let  our  hands  part. 

Neither  intitled  in  the  other’s  heart. 

King.  If  this,  or  more  than  this,  I  would  deny. 
To  flatter  up  these  powers  of  mine  with  rest, 
The  sudden  hand  of  death  close  up  mine  eye! 
Hence  ever  then  my  heart  is  in  thy  breast. 
Biron.  And  what  to  me,  my  love?  and  what  to 
me? 

Ros.  You  must  be  purged  too,  your  sins  are 
rack’d. 

You  are  attaint  with  faults  and  perjury: 

Therefore  if  you  my  favour  mean  to  get,  8^0 
A  twelvemonth  shall  you  spend,  and  never  rest. 
But  seek  the  weary  beds  of  people  sick. 

Dum.  But  what  to  me,  my  love?  but  what  to  me? 
A  wife? 

Kath.  A  beard,  fair  health,  and  honesty; 
With  three-fold  love  I  wish  you  all  these  three. 
Dum.  O,  shall  I  say,  “I  thank  you,  gentle 
wife”? 

Kath.  Not  so,  my  lord;  a  twelvemonth  and  a 
day 

I’ll  mark  no  words  that  smooth-faced  wooers 
say: 

Come  when  the  King  doth  to  my  lady  come; 
Then,  if  I  have  much  love.  I’ll  give  you  some.  8^0 
Dum.  I’ll  serve  thee  true  and  faithfully  till 
then. 

Kath.  Yet  swear  not,  lest  ye  be  forsworn  again. 
Long.  What  says  Maria? 

Mar.  At  the  twelvemonth’s  end 

I’ll  change  my  black  gown  for  a  faithful  friend. 
Long.  I’ll  stay  with  patience;  but  the  time  is 
long. 

Mar.  The  liker  you;  few  taller  are  so  young. 
Biron.  Studies  my  lady?  mistress,  look  on  me; 
Behold  the  window  of  my  heart,  mine  eye. 

What  humble  suit  attends  thy  answer  there: 
Impose  some  service  on  me  for  thy  love.  8^0 
Ros.  Oft  have  I  heard  of  you,  my  Lord  Biron, 
Before  I  saw  you;  and  the  world’s  large  tongue 
Proclaims  you  for  a  man  replete  with  mocks. 

Full  of  comparisons  and  wounding  flouts. 

Which  you  on  all  estates  will  execute 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 
j6o 


ACT  \' 


LOVE’S  LABOUR’S  LOST 


284 

That  lie  within  the  mercy  of  your  wit. 

To  weed  this  wormwood  from  your  fruitful 
brain, 

And  therewithal  to  win  me,  if  you  please. 
Without  the  which  I  am  not  to  be  won. 

You  shall  this  twclv^emonth  term  from  day  to  day 
Visit  the  speechless  sick  and  still  converse  Hi 
With  groaning  wretches;  and  your  task  shall  be. 
With  all  the  fierce  endeavour  of  your  wit 
To  enforce  the  pained  impotent  to  smile. 

Biron.  To  move  wild  laughter  in  the  throat  of 
death? 

It  cannot  be;  it  is  impossible: 

Mirth  cannot  move  a  soul  in  agony. 

Ros.  Why,  that’s  the  way  to  choke  a  gibing 
spirit, 

Whose  influence  is  begot  of  that  loose  grace 
Which  shallow  laughing  hearers  give  to  fools: 

A  jest’s  prosperity  lies  in  the  ear  5*7/ 

of  him  that  hears  it,  never  in  the  tongue 
Of  him  that  makes  it:  then,  if  sickly  ears, 

Deaf’d  with  the  clamours  of  their  own  dear 
groans. 

Will  hear  your  idle  scorns,  continue  then. 

And  I  will  have  you  and  that  fault  withal; 

Buf  if  they  will  not,  throw  away  that  spirit. 

And  I  shall  find  you  empty  of  that  fault. 

Right  joyful  of  your  reformation. 

Biron.  A  twelvemonth!  well;  befall  what  will 
befall,  880 

I’ll  jest  a  twelvemonth  in  an  hospital. 

Prin.  [To  the  king]  Ay,  sweet  my  lord;  and  so 
I  take  my  leave. 

King.  No,  madam;  we  will  bring  you  on  your 
way. 

Biron.  Our  wooing  doth  not  end  like  an  old 
play; 

Jack  hath  not  Jill:  these  ladies’  courtesy 
Might  well  have  made  our  sport  a  comedy. 

King.  Come,  sir,  it  wants  a  twelv^emonth  and  a 
day, 

And  then  ’twill  end. 

Biron.  That’s  too  long  for  a  play. 

Re-enter  arm  a  no. 

Arm.  Sweet  majesty,  vouchsafe  me — 

Prin.  Was  not  that  Hector? 

Dum.  The  worthy  knight  of  Troy.  890 

Arm.  I  will  kiss  thy  royal  finger,  and  take 
leave.  I  am  a  votary;  I  have  vowed  to  Jaque- 
netta  to  hold  the  plough  for  her  sweet  love  three 
years.  But,  most  esteemed  greatness,  will  you 
hear  the  dialogue  that  the  two  learned  men  have 


compiled  in  praise  of  the  owl  and  the  cuckoo?  It 
should  have  followed  in  the  end  of  our  show. 
King.  Call  them  forth  quickly;  we  will  do  so. 
Arin.  Holla!  approach.  ^00 

Re-enter  holofernes,  Nathaniel,  .moth,  cos- 
1 ARD,  and  others. 

This  side  is  Hiems,  Winter,  this  Ver,  the  Spring; 
the  one  maintained  by  the  owl,  the  other  by  the 
cuckoo.  Ver,  begin. 

Song 

Spring. 

When  daisies  pied  and  violets  blue 
And  lady-smocks  all  silver-white 
And  cuckoo-buds  of  yellow  hue 
Do  paint  the  meadows  with  delight. 

The  cuckoo  then,  on  every  tree. 

Mocks  married  men;  for  thus  sings  he, 

“Cuckoo;  p/o 

Cuckoo,  cuckoo”;  O  word  of  fear. 

Unpleasing  to  a  married  ear! 

When  shepherds  pipe  on  oaten  straws 
And  merry  larks  are  ploughmen’s  clocks. 
When  turtles  tread,  and  rooks,  and  daws. 

And  maidens  bleach  their  summer  smocks. 
The  cuckoo  then,  on  every  tree. 

Mocks  married  men;  for  thus  sings  he, 
“Cuckoo; 

Cuckoo,  cuckoo”;  O  word  of  fear,  ^20 

Unpleasing  to  a  married  ear! 

Winter. 

When  icicles  hang  by  the  wall 
And  Dick  the  shepherd  blows  his  nail 
And  Tom  bears  logs  into  the  hall 
x\nd  milk  comes  frozen  home  in  pail. 

When  blood  is  nipp’d  and  ways  be  foul. 

Then  nightly  sings  the  staring  owl, 

“Tu-whit; 

Tu-who,”  a  merry  note, 

While  greasy  Joan  doth  keel  the  pot. 

When  all  aloud  the  wind  doth  blow 
And  coughing  drowns  the  parson’s  saw 
And  birds  sit  brooding  in  the  snow 
And  Marian’s  nose  looks  red  and  raw. 

When  roasted  crabs  hiss  in  the  bowl. 

Then  nightly  sings  the  staring  owl, 

“Tu-whit; 

To-who,”  a  merry  note, 

While  greasy  Joan  doth  keel  the  pot. 

Arm.  The  words  of  Mercury  are  harsh  after 
the  songs  of  Apollo.  You  that  way:  we  this 
way.  [Exeunt. 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


Escalus,  Prince  of  Verona 

Paris,  a  young  nobleman,  kinsman  to  the  Prince 

Montague  \  heads  of  two  houses  at  variance  with 

Capulet  I  each  other 

Cousin  to  Capulet,  an  old  man 

Romeo,  son  to  Montague 

Mercutio,  kinsman  to  the  Prince,  and  friend  to 
Romeo 

Benvolio,  nephew  to  Montague,  and  friend  to  Romeo 
Tybalt,  nephew  to  Lady  Capulet 


Franciscans 


Friar  Laurence 
Friar  John 
Balthasar,  servant  to  Romeo 

I 

Peter,  servant  to  Juliefs  nurse 
Abraham,  servant  to  Montague 


An  Apothecary 
Three  Musicians 
Page  to  Paris 
ThreeWatchmen 
A  Citizen  of  Verona 
Three  Servants  to  Capulet 

Lady  Montague,  wife  to  Montague 
Lady  Capulet,  wife  to  Capulet 
Juliet,  daughter  to  Capulet 
Nurse  to  Juliet 
Chorus 

Non-Speaking:  Citizens  of  Verona,  Maskers,  Musi¬ 
cians,  Page  to  Mercutio,  Guards,  Watchmen,  and 
Attendants 

Scene:  Verona  and  Mantua 


PROLOGUE 

Two  households,  both  alike  in  dignity, 

In  fair  Verona,  where  we  lay  our  scene. 

From  ancient  grudge  break  to  new  mutiny, 
Where  civil  blood  makes  civil  hands  unclean. 
From  forth  the  fatal  loins  of  these  two  foes 
A  pair  of  star-cross’d  lovers  take  their  life; 
Whose  mis  adventured  piteous  overthrows 
Do  with  their  death  bury  their  parents’  strife. 
The  fearful  passage  of  their  death-mark’d  love. 
And  the  continuance  of  their  parents’  rage,  to 
Which,  but  their  children’s  end,  nought  could 
remove. 

Is  now  the  two  hours’  traffic  of  our  stage; 

The  which  if  you  with  patient  ears  attend. 

What  here  shall  miss,  our  toil  shall  strive  to 
mend. 

ACT  I 

Scene  i  .  Verona :  a  publ ic  place 
Enter  sampson  and  Gregory,  of  the  house  of 
Capulet,  armed  with  swords  and  bucklers, 

Sam.  Gregory,  o’  my  word,  we’ll  not  carry 
coals. 

Gre.  No^  for  then  we  should  be  colliers. 

Sam.  I  mean,  an  we  be  in  choler,  we’ll  draw. 

Gre.  Ay,  while  you  live,  draw  your  neck  out  o’ 
the  collar. 

Sam.  I  strike  quickly,  being  moved. 

Gre.  But  thou  art  not  quickly  moved  to  strike. 


Sam.  A  dog  of  the  house  of  Montague  moves 
me.  10 

Gre.  To  move  is  to  stir;  and  to  be  valiant  is  to 
stand:  therefore,  if  thou  art  moved,  thou  runn’st 
away. 

Sam.  A  dog  of  that  house  shall  move  me  to 
stand:  I  will  take  the  wall  of  any  man  or  maid  of 
Montague’s. 

Gre.  That  shows  thee  a  weak  slave;  for  the 
weakest  goes  to  the  wall. 

Sam.  True;  and  therefore  women,  being  the 
weaker  vessels,  are  ever  thrust  to  the  wall:  there¬ 
fore  I  will  push  Montague’s  men  from  the  wall, 
and  thrust  his  maids  to  the  wall. 

Gre.  The  quarrel  is  between  our  masters  and  us 
their  men. 

Sam.  ’Tis  all  one,  I  will  show  myself  a  tyrant: 
when  I  have  fought  with  the  men,  I  will  be  cruel 
with  the  maids  and  cut  off  their  heads. 

Gre.  The  heads  of  the  maids?  29 

Sam.  Ay,  the  heads  of  the  maids,  or  their 
maidenheads;  take  it  in  what  sense  thou  wilt. 

Gre.  They  must  take  it  in  sense  that  feel  it. 

Sam.  Me  they  shall  feel  while  I  am  able  to 
stand:  and  ’tis  known  I  am  a  pretty  piece  of  flesh. 

Gre.  ’Tis  well  thou  art  not  fish;  if  thou  hadsr, 
thou  hadst  been  poor  John.  Draw  thy  tool;  here 
comes  two  of  the  house  of  the  Montagues. 

Sam.  My  naked  weapon  is  out:  quarrel,  I  will 
back  thee.  4^ 

Gre.  How!  turn  thy  back  and  run? 

Sam.  Fear  me  not. 

285 


2  86 

Gre,  No,  marry:  I  fear  thee! 

Sam.  Let  us  take  the  law  of  our  sides;  let  them 
begin. 

Gre.  I  will  frown  as  I  pass  by,  and  let  them  take 
it  as  they  list. 

Sam.  Nay,  as  they  dare.  I  will  bite  my  thumb  at 
them;  which  is  a  disgrace  to  them,  if  they  bear  it. 

Enter  abraham  and  balthasar. 

Abr.  Do  you  bite  your  thumb  at  us,  sir?  52 
Sam.  I  do  bite  my  thumb,  sir. 

Abr.  Do  you  bite  your  thumb  at  us,  sir? 

Sam.  [Aside  to  Gregory]  Is  the  law  of  our  side, 
if  I  say  ay? 

Gre.  No. 

Sa?7t.  No,  sir,  I  do  not  bite  my  thumb  at  you, 
sir,  but  I  bite  my  thumb,  sir. 

Gre.  Do  you  quarrel,  sir? 

Abr.  Quarrel,  sir!  no,  sir.  60 

Sam.  If  you  do,  sir,  I  am  for  you:  I  serve  as 
good  a  man  as  you. 

Abr.  No  better. 

Sam.  Well,  sir. 

Gre.  Say  “better”:  here  comes  one  of  my 
master's  kinsmen. 

Sam.  Yes,  better,  sir. 

Abr.  You  lie. 

Sam.  Draw,  if  you  be  men.  Gregory,  remember 
thy  swashing  blow.  [They  fight^  70 

Enter  benvolio. 

Ben.  Part,  fools! 

Put  up  your  swords;  you  know  not  what  you  do. 
Beats  down  their  swords. 

Enter  tybalt. 

Tyb.  What,  art  thou  drawn  among  these  heart¬ 
less  hinds? 

Turn  thee,  Benvolio,  look  upon  thy  death. 

Ben.  I  do  but  keep  the  peace:  put  up  thy  sword. 
Or  manage  it  to  part  these  men  with  me. 

Tyb.  What,  drawn,  and  talk  of  peace!  I  hate  the 
word, 

As  I  hate  hell,  all  Montagues,  and  thee: 

Have  at  thee,  coward!  [They  fight. \ 

Enter  several  of  both  houses,  who  join  the  fray; 
then  enter  citizens,  with  clubs. 

istCit.  Clubs,  bills,  and  partisans!  strike!  beat 
them  down! 

Down  with  the  Capulets!  down  with  the  Mon¬ 
tagues  ! 

Enter  capulet  in  his  gown,  and  lady  capulet. 

Cap.  What  noise  is  this?  Give  me  my  long 
sword,  ho! 


ACT  I 

La.  Cap.  A  crutch,  a  crutch!  why  call  you  for  a 
sword? 

Cap.  My  sword,  I  say!  Old  Montague  is  come, 
And  flourishes  his  blade  in  spi  te  of  me. 

Enter  Montague  and  lady  Montague. 

Mon.  Thou  villain  Capulet.  Hold  me  not,  let 
me  go. 

La.  Mon.  Thou  shalt  not  stir  a  foot  to  seek  a  foe. 

Enter  prince  escalus,  with  Attendants. 

Prin.  Rebellious  subjects,  enemies  to  peace, 
Profaners  of  this  neighbour-stained  steel — 

Will  they  not  hear?  What,  ho!  you  men,  you 
beasts, 

That  quench  the  fire  of  your  pernicious  rage 
With  purple  fountains  issuing  from  your  veins. 
On  pain  of  torture,  from  those  bloody  hands 
Throw  your  mistemper’d  weapons  to  the  ground. 
And  hear  the  sentence  of  your  moved  prince. 
Three  civil  brawls,  bred  of  an  airy  word. 

By  thee,  old  Capulet,  and  Montague, 

Have  thrice  disturb’d  the  quiet  of  our  streets, 

And  made  Verona’s  ancient  citizens 
Cast  by  their  grave  beseeming  ornaments  too 
To  wield  old  partisans,  in  hands  as  old. 

Canker’d  with  peace,  to  part  your  canker’d  hate: 
If  ever  you  disturb  our  streets  again. 

Your  lives  shall  pay  the  forfeit  of  the  peace. 

For  this  time,  all  the  rest  depart  away: 

You,  Capulet,  shall  go  along  with  me: 

And,  Montague,  come  you  this  afternoon. 

To  know  our  further  pleasure  in  this  case. 

To  old  Free-town,  our  common  judgement-place. 
Once  more,  on  pain  of  death,  all  men  depart,  no 
[Exeunt  all  but  Montague,  lady  Montague, 

and  BENVOLIO. 

Mon.  Who  set  this  ancient  quarrel  new  abroach? 
Speak,  nephew,  were  you  by  when  it  began? 

Ben.  Here  were  the  servants  of  your  adversary. 
And  yours,  close  fighting  ere  I  did  approach: 

I  drew  to  part  them:  in  the  instant  came 
The  fiery  Tybalt,  with  his  sword  prepared, 
Which,  as  he  breathed  defiance  to  my  ears, 

He  swung  about  his  head  and  cut  the  winds. 

Who  nothing  hurt  withal  hiss’d  him  in  scorn :  //p 
While  we  were  interchanging  thrusts  and  blows. 
Came  more  and  more  and  fought  on  part  and 
part, 

80  Till  the  prince  came,  who  parted  either  part. 

La.  Mon.  O,  where  is  Romeo?  saw  you  him 
to-day? 

Right  glad  I  am  he  was  not  at  this  fray. 

Ben.  Madam,  an  hour  before  the  wor shipp’d  sun 
Peer’d  forth  the  golden  window  of  the  east, 

A  troubled  mind  drave  me  to  walk  abroad; 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


SCENE  I 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


287 


Where,  underneath  the  grove  of  sycamore 
That  westward  rooteth  from  the  city’s  side. 

So  early  walking  did  I  see  your  son:  /50 

Towards  him  I  made,  but  he  was  ware  of  me 
And  stole  into  the  covert  of  the  wood: 

I,  measuring  his  affections  by  my  own. 

That  most  are  busied  when  they’re  most  alone, 
Pursued  my  humour  not  pursuing  his, 

And  gladly  shunn’d  who  gladly  fled  from  me. 
Mon.  Many  a  morning  hath  he  there  been  seen. 
With  tears  augmenting  the  fresh  morning’s  dew, 
Adding  to  clouds  more  clouds  with  his  deep  sighs; 
But  all  so  soon  as  the  all-cheering  sun  /40 

Should  in  the  furthest  east  begin  to  draw 
The  shady  curtains  from  Aurora’s  bed. 

Away  from  light  steals  home  my  heavy  son. 

And  private  in  his  chamber  pens  himself. 

Shuts  up  his  windows,  locks  fair  daylight  out. 
And  makes  himself  an  artificial  night: 

Black  and  portentous  must  this  humour  prove. 
Unless  good  counsel  may  the  cause  remove. 

Ben.  My  noble  uncle,  do  you  know  the  cause? 
Mon.  I  neither  know  it  nor  can  learn  of  him.  /jo 
Ben.  Have  you  importuned  him  by  any  means? 
Mon.  Both  by  myself  and  many  other  friends: 
But  he,  his  own  affections’  counsellor, 

Is  to  himself — I  will  not  say  how  true — 

But  to  himself  so  secret  and  so  close. 

So  far  from  sounding  and  discovery. 

As  is  the  bud  bit  with  an  envious  worm, 

Ere  he  can  spread  his  sweet  leaves  to  the  air. 

Or  dedicate  his  beauty  to  the  sun. 

Could  we  but  learn  from  whence  his  sorrows 
grow,  160 

We  would  as  willingly  give  cure  as  know. 

Enter  romeo. 

Ben.  See,  where  he  comes:  so  please  you,  step 
aside; 

I’ll  know  his  grievance,  or  be  much  denied. 

Mon.  I  would  thou  wert  so  happy  by  thy  stay, 
To  hear  true  shrift.  Come,  madam,  let’s  away. 

[Exeunt  Montague  and  lady. 
Ben.  Good  morrow,  cousin. 

Rom.  Is  the  day  so  young? 

Ben.  But  new  struck  nine. 

Rom.  Ay  me!  sad  hours  seem  long. 

Was  that  my  father  that  went  hence  so  fast? 

Ben.  It  was.  What  sadness  lengthens  Romeo’s 
hours? 

Rom.  Not  having  that,  which,  having,  makes 
them'short.  ijo 

Ben.  In  love? 

Rom.  Out — 

Ben.  Of  love? 

Rom.  Out  of  her  favour,  where  I  am  in  love. 


Ben.  Alas,  that  love,  so  gentle  in  his  view. 

Should  be  so  tyrannous  and  rough  in  proof! 

Rom.  Alas,  that  love,  whose  view  is  muffled 
still. 

Should,  without  eyes,  see  pathways  to  his  will! 
Where  shall  we  dine?  O  me!  What  fray  was 
here? 

Yet  tell  me  not,  for  I  have  heard  it  all.  180 

Here’s  much  to  do  with  hate,  but  more  with  love. 
Why,  then,  O  brawling  love!  O  loving  hate! 

O  any  thing,  of  nothing  first  create! 

O  heavy  lightness!  serious  vanity! 

Mis-shapen  chaos  of  well-seeming  forms! 

Feather  of  lead,  bright  smoke,  cold  fire,  sick 
health! 

Still-waking  sleep,  that  is  not  what  it  is! 

This  love  feel  I,  that  feel  no  love  in  this. 

Dost  thou  not  laugh? 

Ben.  No,  coz,  I  rather  weep.  i8p 

Rom.  Good  heart,  at  what? 

Ben.  At  thy  good  heart’s  oppression. 

Rom.  Why,  such  is  love’s  transgression. 

Griefs  of  mine  own  lie  heavy  in  my  breast. 

Which  thou  wilt  propagate,  to  have  it  prest 
With  more  of  thine:  this  love  that  thou  hast 
shown 

Doth  add  more  grief  to  too  much  of  mine  own. 
Love  is  a  smoke  raised  with  the  fume  of  sighs; 
Being  purged,  a  fire  sparkling  in  lovers’  eyes; 
Being  vex’d,  a  sea  nourish’d  with  lovers’  tears: 
What  is  it  else?  a  madness  most  discreet, 

A  choking  gall  and  a  preserving  sweet.  200 
Farewell,  my  coz. 

Ben.  Soft!  I  will  go  along; 

An  if  you  leave  me  so,  you  do  me  wrong. 

Rom.  Tut,  I  have  lost  myself;  I  am  not  here; 
This  is  not  Romeo,  he’s  some  other  where. 

Ben.  Tell  me  in  sadness,  who  is  that  you  love. 
Rom.  What,  shall  I  groan  and  tell  thee? 

Ben.  Groan!  why,  no; 

But  sadly  tell  me  who. 

Rom.  Bid  a  sick  man  in  sadness  make  his  will: 
Ah,  word  ill  urged  to  one  that  is  so  ill! 

In  sadness,  cousin,  I  do  love  a  woman.  210 

Ben.  I  aim’d  so  near,  when  I  supposed  you  loved. 
Rom.  A  right  good  mark-man!  And  she’s  fair 
I  love. 

Ben.  A  right  fair  mark,  fair  coz,  is  soonest  hit. 
Rom.  Well,  in  that  hit  you  miss:  she’ll  not  be  hit 
With  Cupid’s  arrow;  she  hath  Dian’s  wit; 

And,  in  strong  proof  of  chastity  well  arm’d. 

From  love’s  weak  childish  bow  she  lives 
unharm’d. 

She  will  not  stay  the  siege  of  loving  terms. 

Nor  bide  the  encounter  of  assailing  eyes. 

Nor  ope  her  lap  to  saint-seducing  gold :  220 


288 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


O.  she  is  rich  in  beauty,  only  poor 
That,  when  she  dies,  with  beauty  dies  her  store. 
Ben.  Then  she  hath  sworn  that  she  will  still  live 
chaste? 

Rom.  She  hath,  and  in  that  sparing  makes  huge 
waste. 

For  beauty  starved  with  her  severity 
Cuts  beauty  off  from  all  posterity. 

She  is  too  fair,  too  wise,  wisely  too  fair. 

To  merit  bliss  by  making  me  despair: 

She  hath  forsworn  to  love,  and  in  that  vow 
Do  I  live  dead  that  live  to  tell  it  now.  2^0 

Ben.  Be  ruled  by  me,  forget  to  think  of  her. 

Rom.  O,  teach  me  how  I  should  forget  to  think. 
Ben.  By  giving  liberty  unto  thine  eyes; 

Examine  other  beauties. 

Rom.  *Tis  the  way 

To  call  hers  exquisite,  in  question  more: 

These  happy  masks  that  kiss  fair  ladies’  brows 
Being  black  put  us  in  mind  they  hide  the  fair; 

He  that  is  strucken  blind  cannot  forget 
The  precious  treasure  of  his  eyesight  lost: 

Show  me  a  mistress  that  is  passing  fair,  240 
What  doth  her  beauty  serve,  but  as  a  note 
Where  I  may  read  who  pass’d  that  passing  fair? 
Farewell:  thou  canst  not  teach  me  to  forget. 
Ben.  I’ll  pay  that  doctrine,  or  else  die  in  debt. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  A  street 

Enter  capulet,  paris,  and  servant. 

Cap.  But  Montague  is  bound  as  well  as  I, 

In  penalty  alike;  and  ’tis  not  hard,  I  think. 

For  men  so  old  as  we  to  keep  the  peace. 

Par.  Of  honourable  reckoning  are  you  both; 

And  pity  ’tis  you  lived  at  odds  so  long. 

But  now,  my  lord,  what  say  you  to  my  suit? 

Cap.  But  saying  o’er  what  I  have  said  before: 
My  child  is  yet  a  stranger  in  the  world; 

She  hath  not  seen  the  change  of  fourteen  years; 
Let  two  more  summers  wither  in  their  pride,  10 
Ere  we  may  think  her  ripe  to  be  a  bride. 

Par.  Younger  than  she  are  happy  mothers  made. 
Cap.  And  too  soon  marr’d  are  those  so  early 
made. 

The  earth  hath  swallow’d  all  my  hopes  but  she, 
She  is  the  hopeful  lady  of  my  earth: 

But  woo  her,  gentle  Paris,  get  her  heart. 

My  will  to  her  consent  is  but  a  part; 

An  she  agree,  within  her  scope  of  choice 
Lies  my  consent  and  fair  according  voice. 

This  night  I  hold  an  old  accustom’d  feast,  20 
Whereto  I  have  invited  many  a  guest. 

Such  as  I  love;  and  you,  among  the  store. 

One  more,  most  welcome,  makes  my  number 
more. 


At  my  poor  house  look  to  behold  this  night 
Earth-treading  stars  that  make  dark  heaven  light: 
Such  comfort  as  do  lusty  young  men  feel 
When  well-apparell’d  April  on  the  heel 
Of  limping  winter  treads,  even  such  delight 
Among  fresh  female  buds  shall  you  this  night 
Inherit  at  my  house;  hear  all,  all  see,  ^0 

And  like  her  most  whose  merit  most  shall  be: 
Which  on  more  view,  of  many  mine  being  one 
May  stand  in  number,  though  in  reckoning  none. 
Come,  go  with  me.  [To  servant,  giving  a  paper.] 
Go,  sirrah,  trudge  about 
Through  fair  Verona;  find  those  persons  out 
Whose  names  are  written  there,  and  to  them  say. 
My  house  and  welcome  on  their  pleasure  stay. 

[Exeunt  capulet  and  paris. 
Serv.  Find  them  out  whose  names  are  written 
here!  It  is  written,  that  the  shoemaker  should 
meddle  with  his  yard,  and  the  tailor  with  his  last, 
the  fisher  with  his  pencil,  and  the  painter  with  his 
nets;  but  I  am  sent  to  find  those  persons  whose 
names  are  here  writ,  and  can  never  find  what 
names  the  writing  person  hath  here  writ.  I  must 
to  the  learned. — In  good  time. 

Enter  benvolio  and  romeo. 

Ben.  Tut,  man,  one  fire  burns  out  another’s 
burning, 

One  pain  is  lessen’d  by  another’s  anguish; 

Turn  giddy,  and  be  holp  by  backward  turning; 
One  desperate  grief  cures  with  another’s  lan¬ 
guish: 

Take  thou  some  new  infection  to  thy  eye,  jo 
And  the  rank  poison  of  the  old  will  die. 

Rom.  Your  plaintain-leaf  is  excellent  for  that. 
Ben.  For  what,  I  pray  thee? 

Rom.  For  your  broken  shin. 

Ben.  Why,  Romeo,  art  thou  mad? 

Rom.  Not  mad,  but  bound  more  than  a  madman 
is; 

Shut  up  in  prison,  kept  without  my  food. 

Whipp’d  and  tormented  and — God-den,  good 
fellow. 

Serv.  God  gi’  god-den.  I  pray,  sir,  can  you  read? 
Rom.  Ay,  mine  own  fortune  in  my  misery.  60 
Serv.  Perhaps  you  have  learned  it  without  book: 
but,  I  pray,  can  you  read  anything  you  see? 

Rom.  Ay,  if  I  know  the  letters  and  the  language. 
Serv.  Ye  say  honestly:  rest  you  merry! 

Rom.  Stay,  fellow;  I  can  read.  [Reads.] 

“Signior  Martino  and  his  wife  and  daughters; 
County  Anselme  and  his  beauteous  sisters;  the 
lady  widow  of  Vitruvio;  Signior  Placentio  and 
his  lovely  nieces;  Mercutio  and  his  brother 
Valentine;  mine  uncle  Capulet,  his  wife,  and 
daughters;  my  fair  niece  Rosaline;  Livia;  Signior 


SCENE  11 

Valentio  and  his  cousin  Tybalt;  Lucio  and  the 
lively  Helena.” 

A  fair  assembly:  whither  should  they  come? 

Serv.  Up. 

Rom.  Whither? 

Serv.  To  supper;  to  our  house. 

Rom.  Whose  house? 

My  master’s.  8o 

Ram.  Indeed,  I  should  have  ask’d  you  that 
before. 

Serv.  Now  I’ll  tell  you  without  asking:  my 
master  is  the  great  rich  Capulet;  and  if  you  be 
not  of  the  house  of  Montagues,  I  pray,  come  and 
crush  a  cup  of  wine.  Rest  you  merry!  [Exit. 

Ben.  At  this  same  ancient  feast  of  Capulet’s 
Sups  the  fair  Rosaline  whom  thou  so  lovest. 

With  all  the  admired  beauties  of  Verona: 

Go  thither;  and,  with  unattained  eye,  5)0 

Compare  her  face  with  some  that  I  shall  show, 
And  I  will  make  thee  think  thy  swan  a  crow. 
Rom.  When  the  devout  religion  of  mine  eye 
Maintains  such  falsehood,  then  turn  tears  to 
fires; 

And  these,  who  often  drown’d  could  never  die. 
Transparent  heretics,  be  burnt  for  liars! 

One  fairer  than  my  love!  the  all-seeing  sun 
Ne’er  saw  her  match  since  first  the  world  begun. 

Ben.  Tut,  you  saw  her  fair,  none  else  being  by. 
Herself  poised  with  herself  in  either  eye:  wo 

But  in  that  crystal  scales  let  there  be  weigh’d 
Your  lady’s  love  against  some  other  maid 
That  I  will  show  you  shining  at  this  feast, 

And  she  shall  scant  show  well  that  now  shows 
best. 

Rom.  I’ll  go  along,  no  such  sight  to  be  shown, 

But  to  rejoice  in  splendour  of  mine  own. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  A  room  in  Capulet' s  house 
Enter  lady  capulet  and  nurse. 

La.  Cap.  Nurse,  where’s  my  daughter?  call  her 
forth  to  me. 

Nurse.  Now,  by  my  maidenhead  at  twelve  year 
old, 

I  bade  her  come.  What,  lamb!  what,  lady-bird! 
God  forbid!  Where’s  this  girl?  What,  Juliet! 

Enter  juliet. 

Jul.  How  now!  who  calls? 

Nurse.  Your  mother. 

Jul.  ^  Madam,  I  am  here. 

What  is  your  will? 

La.  Cap.  This  is  the  matter: — Nurse,  give 
leave  awhile. 

We  must  talk  in  secret: — nurse,  come  back 
again; 


289 

I  have  remember’d  me,  thou’s  hear  our  counsel. 
Thou  know’st  my  daughter’s  of  a  pretty  age.  10 
Nurse.  Faith,  I  can  tell  her  age  unto  an  hour. 

La.  Cap.  She’s  not  fourteen. 

Nurse.  I’ll  lay  fourteen  of  my  teeth — 

And  yet,  to  my  teen  be  it  spoken,  I  have  but 
four — 

She  is  not  fourteen.  How  long  is  it  now 
To  Lammas-tide? 

La.  Cap.  A  fortnight  and  odd  days. 

Nurse.  Even  or  odd,  of  all  days  in  the  year. 

Come  Lammas-eve  at  night  shall  she  be  fourteen. 
Susan  and  she — God  rest  all  Christian  souls! — 
Were  of  an  age:  well,  Susan  is  with  God; 

She  was  too  good  for  me:  but,  as  I  said,  20 

On  Lammas-eve  at  night  shall  she  be  fourteen; 
That  shall  she,  marry;  I  remember  it  well. 

’Tis  since  the  earthquake  now  eleven  years: 

And  she  was  wean’d — I  never  shall  forget  it — 

Of  all  the  days  of  the  year,  upon  that  day: 

For  I  had  then  laid  wormwood  to  my  dug. 

Sitting  in  the  sun  under  the  dove-house  wall; 

My  lord  and  you  were  then  at  Mantua — 

Nay,  I  do  bear  a  brain —  but,  as  I  said. 

When  it  did  taste  the  wormwood  on  the  nipple 
Of  my  dug  and  felt  it  bitter,  pretty  fool,  5/ 

To  see  it  tetchy  and  fall  out  with  the  dug! 
“Shake”  quoth  the  dove-house:  ’twas  no  need,  I 
trow, 

To  bid  me  trudge: 

And  since  that  time  it  is  eleven  years; 

For  then  she  could  stand  alone;  nay,  by  the  rood, 
She  could  have  run  and  waddled  all  about; 

For  even  the  day  before,  she  broke  her  brow: 

And  then  my  husband — God  be' with  his  soul! 

A’  was  a  merry  man — took  up  the  child:  40 

“Yea,”  quoth  he,  “dost  thou  fall  upon  thy  face? 
Thou  wilt  fall  backward  when  thou  hast  more 
wit; 

Wilt  thou  not,  Jule?”  and,  by  my  holidame. 

The  pretty  wretch  left  crying  and  said  “Ay.” 

To  see,  now,  how  a  jest  shall  come  about! 

I  warrant,  an  I  should  live  a  thousand  years, 

I  never  should  forget  it:  “Wilt  thou  not,  Jule?” 
quoth  he; 

And,  pretty  fool,  it  stinted  and  said,  “Ay.” 

La.  Cap.  Enough  of  this;  I  pray  thee,  hold  thy 
peace. 

Nurse.  Yes,  madam:  yet  I  cannot  choose  but 
laugh,  50 

To  think  it  should  leave  crying  and  say,  “Ay.” 
And  yet,  I  warrant,  it  had  upon  its  brow 
A  bump  as  big  as  a  young  cockerel’s  stone; 

A  parlous  knock;  and  it  cried  bitterly: 

“Yea,”  quoth  my  husband,  “fall’st  upon  thy  face? 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


290 

Thou  wilt  fall  backward  when  thou  comest  to 

Wilt  thou  not,  Jule?”  it  stinted  and  said,  “Ay.” 
]iiL  And  stint  thou  too,  I  pray  thee,  nurse,  say  I. 
Nurse.  Peace,  I  have  done.  God  mark  thee  to 
his  grace! 

Thou  wast  the  prettiest  babe  that  e’er  I  nursed: 
An  I  might  live  to  see  thee  married  once,  6i 
I  have  my  wish. 

La.  Cap.  Marry,  that  “marry”  is  the  very  theme 
I  came  to  talk  of.  Tell  me,  daughter  Juliet, 

How  stands  your  disposition  to  be  married? 

Jul.  It  is  an  honour  that  I  dream  not  of. 

Nurse.  An  honour!  were  not  I  thine  only  nurse, 

I  would  say  thou  hadst  suck’d  wisdom  from  thy 
teat. 

La.  Cap.  Well,  think  of  marriage  now;  younger 
than  you, 

Here  in  Verona,  ladies  of  esteem,  70 

Are  made  already  mothers:  by  my  count, 

1  was  your  mother  much  upon  these  years 
That  you  are  now  a  maid.  Thus  then  in  brief: 

The  valiant  Paris  seeks  you  for  his  love. 

Nurse.  A  man,  young  lady!  lady,  such  a  man 
As  all  the  world — why,  he’s  a  man  of  wax. 

La.  Cap.  Verona’s  summer  hath  not  such  a 
flower. 

Nurse.  Nay,  he’s  a  flower;  in  faith,  a  very 
flower. 

La.  Cap.  What  say  you?  can  you  love  the 
gentleman? 

This  night  you  shall  behold  him  at  our  feast;  80 
Read  o’er  the  volume  of  young  Paris’  face 
And  find  delight  writ  there  with  beauty’s  pen; 
Examine  every  married  lineament 
And  see  how  one  another  lends  content. 

And  what  obscured  in  this  fair  volume  lies 
Find  written  in  the  margent  of  his  eyes. 

This  precious  book  of  love,  this  unbound  lover. 
To  beautify  him,  only  lacks  a  cover: 

The  fish  lives  in  the  sea,  and  ’tis  much  pride 
For  fair  without  the  fair  within  to  hide : 

That  book  in  many’s  eyes  doth  share  the  glory, 
That  in  gold  clasps  locks  in  the  golden  story; 

So  shall  you  share  all  that  he  doth  possess. 

By  having  him,  making  yourself  no  less. 

Nurse.  No  less!  nay,  bigger;  women  grow  by 
men. 

Jul.  Cap.  Speak  briefly,  can  you  like  of  Paris’ 
love? 

Jul.  I’ll  look  to  like,  if  looking  liking  move: 

But  no  more  deep  will  I  endart  mine  eye 
Than  your  consent  gives  strength  to  make  it  fly. 

Enter  a  servant. 

Serv.  Madam,  the  guests  are  come,  supper 


ACT  I 

served  up,  you  called,  my  young  lady  asked  for, 
the  nurse  cursed  in,the  pantry,  and  everything  in 
extremity.  I  must  hence  to  wait;  I  beseech  you, 
follow  straight. 

La.  Cap.  We  follow  thee.  [Exit  servant. 

Juliet,  the  County  stays. 

Nurse.  Go,  girl,  seek  happy  nights  to  happy 
days.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  A  street 

Enter  romeo,  mercutio,  benvolio,  with  Jive 
or  six  Maskers,  Torch-bearers,  and  others. 

Rom.  What,  shall  this  speech  be  spoke  for  our 
excuse? 

Or  shall  we  on  without  apology? 

Ben.  The  date  is  out  of  such  prolixity: 

We’ll  have  not  Cupid  hoodwink’d  with  a  scarf. 
Bearing  a  Tartar’s  painted  bow  of  lath. 

Scaring  the  ladies  like  a  crow-keeper; 

Nor  no  without-book  prologue,  faintly  spoke 
After  the  prompter,  for  our  entrance: 

But  let  them  measure  us  by  what  they  will; 

We’ll  measure  them  a  measure  and  be  gone.  10 
Rom.  Give  me  a  torch:  I  am  not  for  this 
ambling; 

Being  but  heavy,  I  will  bear  the  light. 

Mer.  Nay,  gentle  Romeo,  we  must  have  you 
dance. 

Rom.  Not  I,  believe  me:  you  have  dancing  shoes 
With  nimble  soles:  I  have  a  soul  of  lead 
So  stakes  me  to  the  ground  I  cannot  move. 

Mer.  You  are  a  lover;  borrow  Cupid’s  wings. 
And  soar  with  them  above  a  common  bound. 

Rom.  I  am  too  sore  enpierced  with  his  shaft 
To  soar  with  his  light  feathers,  and  so  bound  20 
I  cannot  bound  a  pitch  above  dull  woe: 

Under  love’s  heavy  burden  do  I  sink. 

Mer.  And,  to  sink  in  it,  should  you  burden  love; 
Too  great  oppression  for  a  tender  thing. 

Rom.  Is  love  a  tender  thing?  it  is  too  rough. 

Too  rude,  too  boisterous,  and  it  pricks  like 
thorn. 

Mer.  If  love  be  rough  with  you,  be  rough  with 
love; 

Prick  love  for  pricking,  and  you  beat  love  down. 
Give  me  a  case  to  put  my  visage  in! 

A  visor  for  a  visor!  what  care  I  50 

What  curious  eye  doth  quote  deformities? 

Here  are  the  beetle  brows  shall  blush  for  me. 

Ben.  Come,  knock  and  enter;  and  no  sooner  in, 
But  every  man  betake  him  to  his  legs. 

Rom.  A  torch  for  me:  let  wantons  light  of 
heart 

Tickle  the  senseless  rushes  with  their  heels, 

For  I  am  proverb’d  with  a  grandsire  phrase; 

I’ll  be  a  candle-holder,  and  look  on. 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


SCENE  IV 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


291 


The  game  was  ne’er  so  fair,  and  I  am  done. 

Met.  Tut,  dun’s  the  mouse,  the  constable’s  own 
word:  40 

If  thou  art  Dun,  we’ll  draw  thee  from  the  mire 
Of  this  sir-reverence  love,  wherein  thou  stick’st 
Up  to  the  ears.  Come,  we  burn  daylight,  ho! 

Rom,  Nay,  that’s  not  so. 

Mer.  I  mean,  sir,  in  delay 

We  waste  our  lights  in  vain,  like  lamps  by  day. 
Take  our  good  meaning,  for  our  judgment  sits 
Five  times  in  that  ere  once  in  our  five  wits. 

Rom.  And  we  mean  well  in  going  to  this  mask; 
But  ’tis  no  wit  to  go. 

Mer.  Why,  may  one  ask? 

Rom.  I  dream’d  a  dream  to-night. 

Mer.  And  so  did  I.  50 

Ram.  Well,  what  was  yours? 

Mer.  That  dreamers  often  lie. 

Rom.  In  bed  asleep,  while  they  do  dream 
things  true. 

Mer.  O,  then,  I  see  Queen  Mab  hath  been  with 
you. 

She  is  the  fairies’  midwife,  and  she  comes 
In  shape  no  bigger  than  an  agate-stone 
On  the  fore-finger  of  an  alderman. 

Drawn  with  a  team  of  little  atomies 
Athwart  men’s  noses  as  they  lie  asleep; 

Her  waggon-spokes  made  of  long  spinners’  legs. 
The  cover  of  the  wings  of  grasshoppers,  60 
The  traces  of  the  smallest  spider’s  web. 

The  collars  of  the  moonshine’s  watery  beams. 
Her  whip  of  cricket’s  bone,  the  lash  of  film. 

Her  waggoner  a  small  grey-coated  gnat, 

Not  half  so  big  as  a  round  little  worm 
Prick’d  from  the  lazy  finger  of  a  maid; 

Her  chariot  is  an  empty  hazel-nut 
Made  by  the  joiner  squirrel  or  old  grub, 

Time  out  o’  mind  the  fairies’  coachmakers. 

And  in  this  state  she  gallops  night  by  night  70 
Through  lovers’  brains,  and  then  they  dream  of 
love; 

O’er  courtiers’  knees,  that  dream  on  court’sies 
straight. 

O’er  lawyers’  fingers,  who  straight  dream  on 
fees. 

O’er  ladies’  lips,  who  straight  on  kisses  dream. 
Which  oft  the  angry  Mab  with  blisters  plagues. 
Because  their  breaths  with  sweetmeats  tainted 
are: 

Sometime  she  gallops  o’er  a  courtier’s  nose. 

And  then  dreams  he  of  smelling  out  a  suit; 

And  sometime  comes  she  with  a  tithe-pig’s  tail 
Tickling  a  parson’s  nose  as  a’  lies  asleep,  80 
Then  dreams  he  of  another  benefice: 

Sometime  she  driveth  o’er  a  soldier’s  neck. 

And  then  dreams  he  of  cutting  foreign  throats. 


Of  breaches,  ambuscadoes,  Spanish  blades. 

Of  healths  five- fathom  deep;  and  then  anon 
Drums  in  his  ear,  at  which  he  starts  and  wakes, 
And  being  thus  frighted  swears  a  prayer  or  two 
And  sleeps  again.  This  is  that  very  Mab 
That  plats  the  manes  of  horses  in  the  night. 

And  bakes  the  elf-locks  in  foul  sluttish  hairs,  po 
Which  once  untangled  much  misfortune  bodes: 
This  is  the  hag,  when  maids  lie  on  their  backs. 
That  presses  them  and  learns  them  first  to  bear. 
Making  them  women  of  good  carriage: 

This  is  she — 

Rom.  Peace,  peace,  Mercutio,  peace! 

Thou  talk’st  of  nothing. 

Mer.  True,  I  talk  of  dreams, 

Which  are  the  children  of  an  idle  brain. 

Begot  of  nothing  but  vain  fantasy. 

Which  is  as  thin  of  substance  as  the  air 
And  more  inconstant  than  the  wind,  who 
wooes 

Even  now  the  frozen  bosom  of  the  north,  loi 

And,  being  anger’d,  puffs  away  from  thence, 
Turning  his  face  to  the  dew-dropping  south. 

Ben.  This  wind,  you  talk  of,  blows  us  from 
ourselves; 

Supper  is  done,  and  we  shall  come  too  late. 

Rom.  I  fear,  too  early:  for  my  mind  misgives 
Some  consequence  yet  hanging  in  the  stars 
Shall  bitterly  begin  his  fearful  date 
With  this  night’s  revels  and  expire  the  term 
Of  a  despised  life  closed  in  my  breast  no 

By  some  vile  forfeit  of  untimely  death. 

But  He,  that  hath  the  steerage  of  my  course. 
Direct  my  sail!  On,  lusty  gentlemen. 

Ben.  Strike,  drum.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  A  hall  in  Capulefs  house 
Musicians  ^waiting.  Enter  servingmen,  with 
napkins. 

ist  Serv.  Where’s  Potpan,  that  he  helps  not  to 
take  away?  He  shift  a  trencher?  he  scrape  a 
trencher! 

2nd  Serv.  When  good  manners  shall  lie  all  in 
one  or  two  men’s  hands  and  they  unwashed  too, 
’tis  a  foul  thing. 

ist.  Serv.  Away  with  the  joint-stools,  remove 
the  court-cupboard,  look  to  the  plate.  Good  thou, 
save  me  a  piece  of  marchpane;  and,  as  thou  lovest 
me,  let  the  porter  let  in  Susan  Grindstone  and 
Nell.  Antony,  and  Potpan!  // 

2nd  Serv.  Ay,  boy,  ready. 

ist  Serv.  You  are  looked  for  and  called  for, 
asked  for  and  sought  for,  in  the  greater  chamber. 

2nd  Serv.  We  cannot  be  here  and  there  too. 
Cheerly,  boys;  be  brisk  awhile,  and  the  longer 
liver  take  all. 


292 

Enter  capulet,  'with  juliet,  and  others  of  his 
house,  meeting  the  Guests  and  Maskers. 

Cap.  Welcome,  gentlemen!  ladies  that  have 
their  toes 

Unplagued  with  corns  will  have  a  bout  with  you. 
Ah  ha,  my  mistresses!  which  of  you  ail  20 

Will  now  deny  to  dance?  she  that  makes  dainty. 
She,  I’ll  swear,  hath  corns;  am  I  come  near  ye 
now? 

Welcome,  gentlemen!  1  have  seen  the  day 
That  I  have  worn  a  visor  and  could  tell 
A  whispering  tale  in  a  fair  lady’s  ear. 

Such  as  would  please:  ’tis  gone,  ’tis  gone,  ’tis 
gone: 

You  are  welcome,  gentlemen!  Come,  musicians, 

P'^y-  .  r  •  • 

A  hall,  a  hall!  give  room!  and  foot  it,  girls. 

Music  plays,  and  they  dance. 

More  light,  you  knaves  ;  and  turn  the  tables  up. 
And  quench  the  fire,  the  room  is  grown  too  hot. 
Ah,  sirrah,  this  unlook’d- for  sport  comes  well.  5/ 
Nay,  sit,  nay,  sit,  good  cousin  Capulet; 

For  you  and  I  are  past  our  dancing  days: 

How  long  is’t  now  since  last  yourself  and  I 
Were  in  a  mask? 

Cousin  Cap.  By’r  lady,  thirty  years. 

Cap.  What,  man!  ’tis  not  so  much,  ’tis  not  so 
much: 

’Tis  since  the  nuptial  of  Lucentio, 

Come  pentecost  as  quickly  as  it  will, 

Some  five  and  twenty  years;  and  then  we  mask’d. 
Cousin  Cap.  ’Tis  more,  ’tis  more:  his  son  is 
elder,  sir;  40 

His  son  is  thirty. 

Cap.  Will  you  tell  me  that? 

His  son  was  but  a  ward  two  years  ago. 

Rom.  [T(9  ^  servingman]  What  lady  is  that, 
which  doth  enrich  the  hand 
Of  yonder  knight? 

Serv.  I  know  not,  sir. 

Rom.  O,  she  doth  teach  the  torches  to  burn 
bright! 

It  seems  she  hangs  upon  the  cheek  of  night 
Like  a  rich  jewel  in  an  Ethiope’s  ear; 

Beauty  too  rich  for  use,  for  earth  too  dear! 

So  shows  a  snowy  dove  trooping  with  crows,  50 
As  yonder  lady  o’er  her  fellows  shows. 

The  measure  done.  I’ll  watch  her  place  of  stand. 
And,  touching  hers,  make  blessed  my  rude  hand. 
Did  my  heart  love  till  now?  forswear  it,  sight! 

For  I  ne’er  saw  true  beauty  till  this  night. 

Tyb.  This,  by  his  voice,  should  be  a  Montague. 
Fetch  me  my  rapier,  boy.  What  dares  the  slave 
Come  hither,  cover’d  with  an  antic  face. 

To  fleet  and  scorn  at  our  solemnity? 


ACT  I 

Now,  by  the  stock  and  honour  of  my  kin,  60 

To  strike  him  dead  I  hold  it  not  a  sin. 

Cap.  Why,  how  now,  kinsman!  wherefore 
storm  you  so? 

Tyb.  Uncle,  this  is  a  Montague,  our  foe, 

A  villain  that  is  hither  come  in  spite, 

To  scorn  at  our  solemnity  this  night. 

Cap.  Young  Romeo  is  it? 

Ty').  ’Tis  he,  that  villain  Romeo. 

Cap.  Content  thee,  gentle  coz,  let  him  alone; 

He  bears  him  like  a  portly  gentleman; 

And,  to  say  truth,  Verona  brags  of  him 
To  be  a  virtuous  and  well  govern’d  youth:  70 

I  would  not  for  the  wealth  of  all  the  town 
Here  in  my  house  do  him  disparagement: 
Therefore  be  patient,  take  no  note  of  him: 

It  is  my  will,  the  which  if  thou  respect. 

Show  a  fair  presence  and  put  off  these  frowns. 

An  ill-beseeming  semblance  for  a  feast. 

Tyb.  It  fits,  when  such  a  villain  is  a  guest: 

I’ll  not  endure  him. 

Cap.  He  shall  be  endured: 

What,  goodman  boy!  I  say,  he  shall:  go  to; 

Am  I  the  master  here,  or  you?  go  to.  80 

You’ll  not  endure  him!  God  shall  mend  my  soul! 
You’ll  make  a  mutiny  among  my  guests! 

You  will  set  cock-a-hoop!  you’ll  be  the  man! 

Tyb.  Why,  uncle,  ’tis  a  shame. 

Cap.  Goto,  goto; 

You  are  a  saucy  boy:  is’t  so,  indeed? 

This  trick  may  chance  to  scathe  you,  I  know 
what: 

You  must  contrary  me!  marry,  ’tis  time. 

Well  said,  my  hearts!  You  are  a  princox;  go: 

Be  quiet,  or — More  light,  more  light!  For  shame! 
I’ll  make  you  quiet.  What,  cheerly,  my  hearts! 
Tyb.  Patience  perforce  with  wilful  choler 
meeting 

Makes  my  flesh  tremble  in  their  different 
greeting. 

I  will  withdraw:  but  this  intrusion  shall 
Now  seeming  sweet  convert  to  bitter  gall.  [Exit. 
Rom.  [To  juliet]  If  I  profane  with  my  un- 
worthiest  hand 

This  holy  shrine,  the  gentle  fine  is  this: 

My  lips,  two  blushing  pilgrims,  ready  stand 
To  smooth  that  rough  touch  with  a  tender  kiss. 
Jul.  Good  pilgrim,  you  do  wrong  your  hand  too 
much. 

Which  mannerly  devotion  shows  in  this;  too 
For  saints  have  hands  that  pilgrims’  hands  do 
touch. 

And  palm  to  palm  is  holy  palmers’  kiss. 

Rom.  Have  not  saints  lips,  and  holy  palmers  too? 
Jul.  Ay,  pilgrim,  lips  that  they  must  use  in 
prayer. 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


SCENE  V 

Rom.  O,  then,  dear  saint,  let  lips  do  what  hands 
do; 

They  pray,  grant  thou,  lest  faith  turn  to 
despair. 

Jul.  Saints  do  not  move,  though  grant  for 
prayers’  sake. 

Rom.  Then  move  not,  while  my  prayer’s  effect 
I  take. 

Thus  from  my  lips,  by  yours,  my  sin  is  purged. 
Jul.  Then  have  my  lips  the  sin  that  they  have 
took.  no 

Rom.  Sin  from  my  lips?  O  trespass  sweetly 
urged! 

Give  me  my  sin  again. 

Jul.  You  kiss  by  the  book. 

Nurse.  Madam,  your  mother  craves  a  word 
with  you. 

Rom.  What  is  her  mother? 

Nurse.  Marry,  bachelor, 

Her  mother  is  the  lady  of  the  house. 

And  a  good  lady,  and  a  wise  and  virtuous: 

I  nursed  her  daughter,  that  you  talk’d  withal; 

I  tell  you,  he  that  can  lay  hold  of  her 
Shall  have  the  chinks. 

Rom.  Is  she  a  Capulet? 

O  dear  account!  my  life  is  my  foe’s  debt.  120 
Ben.  Away,  be  gone;  the  sport  is  at  the  best. 
Rom.  Ay,  so  I  fear;  the  more  is  my  unrest. 

Cap.  Nay,  gentlemen,  prepare  not  to  be  gone; 
We  have  a  trifling  foolish  banquet  towards. 

Is  it  e’en  so?  why,  then,  I  thank  you  all; 

I  thank  you,  honest  gentlemen;  good  night. 

More  torches  here!  Come  on  then,  let’s  to  bed. 
Ah,  sirrah,  by  my  fay,  it  waxes  late: 

I’ll  to  my  rest. 

[Exeunt  all  but  juliet  and  nurse. 
Jul.  Come  hither,  nurse.  What  is  yond  gentle¬ 
man?  1^0 

Nurse.  The  son  and  heir  of  old  Tiberio. 

Jul.  What’s  he  that  now  is  going  out  of  door? 
Nurse.  Marry,  that,  I  think,  be  young  Petruchio. 
Jul.  What’s  he  that  follows  there,  that  would 
not  dance? 

Nurse.  I  know  not. 

Jul.  Go,  ask  his  name:  if  he  be  married. 

My  grave  is  like  to  be  my  wedding  bed. 

Nurse.  His  name  is  Romeo,  and  a  Montague; 
The  only  son  of  your  great  enemy. 

Jul.  My  only  love  sprung  from  my  only  hate! 
Too  early  seen  unknown,  and  known  too  late! 
Prodigious  birth  of  love  it  is  to  me 
That  I  must  love  a  loathed  enemy. 

Nurse.  What’s  this?  what’s  this? 

Jul.  A  rhyme  I  learn’d  even  now 

Of  one  I  danced  withal. 

One  calls  'within,  “Juliet.” 


193 

Nurse.  Anon,  anon! 

Come,  let’s  away;  the  strangers  all  are  gone. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  II 

PROLOGUE 
Enter  CHORUS. 

Chor.  Now  old  desire  doth  in  his  death-bed  lie. 
And  young  affection  gapes  to  be  his  heir; 

That  fair  for  which  love  groan’d  for  and  would 
die. 

With  render  Juliet  match’d,  is  now  not  fair. 
Now  Romeo  is  beloved  and  loves  again. 

Alike  bewitched  by  the  charm  of  looks. 

But  to  his  foe  supposed  he  must  complain. 

And  she  steal  love’s  sweet  bait  from  fearful 
hooks. 

Being  held  a  foe,  he  may  not  have  access 

To  breathe  such  vows  as  lovers  use  to  swear; 
And  she  as  much  in  love,  her  means  much  less  // 
To  meet  her  new-beloved  anywhere: 

But  passion  lends  them  power,  time  means,  to 
meet. 

Tempering  extremities  with  extreme  sweet. 

[Exit. 

Scene  i.  A  lane  by  the  'wall  of  Capulet' s  orchard 
Enter  romeo. 

Rom.  Can  I  go  forward  when  my  heart  is  here? 
Turn  back,  dull  earth,  and  find  thy  centre  out. 

He  climbs  the  'wall,  and  leaps  do'wn  'within  it. 

Enter  benvolio  and  mercutio. 

Ben.  Romeo!  my  cousin  Romeo! 

Mer.  He  is  wise; 

And,  on  my  life,  hath  stol’n  him  home  to  bed. 

Ben.  He  ran  this  way,  and  leap’d  this  orchard 
wall: 

Call,  good  Mercutio. 

Mer.  Nay,  I’ll  conjure  too. 

Romeo!  humours!  madman!  passion!  lover! 
Appear  thou  in  the  likeness  of  a  sigh: 

Speak  but  one  rhyme,  and  I  am  satisfied; 

Cry  but  “Ay  me!”  pronounce  but  “love”  and 
“dove”;  10 

Speak  to  my  gossip  Venus  one  fair  word. 

One  nick-name  for  her  purblind  son  and  heir. 
Young  Adam  Cupid,  he  that  shot  so  trim, 

When  King  Cophetua  loved  the  beggar-maid! 

He  heareth  not,  he  stirreth  not,  he  moveth  not; 
The  ape  is  dead,  and  I  must  conjure  him. 

I  conjure  thee  by  Rosaline’s  bright  eyes. 

By  her  high  forehead  and  her  scarlet  lip. 

By  her  fine  foot,  straight  leg,  and  quivering 
thigh 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


ACT  n 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


And  the  demesnes  that  there  adjacent  lie,  20 
That  in  thy  likeness  thou  appear  to  us! 

Ber?.  An  if  he  hear  thee,  thou  wilt  anger  him. 
Ater,  This  cannot  anger  him:  ’twould  anger  him 
To  raise  a  spirit  in  his  mistress’  circle 
Of  some  strange  nature,  letting  it  there  stand 
Till  she  had  laid  it  and  conjured  it  down; 

That  were  some  spite:  my  invocation 
Is  fair  and  honest,  and  in  his  mistress’  name 
I  conjure  only  but  to  raise  up  him. 

Ben,  Come,  he  hath  hid  himself  among  these 
trees,  50 

To  be  consorted  with  the  humorous  night: 

Blind  is  his  love  and  best  befits  the  dark. 

Aler.  If  love  be  blind,  love  cannot  hit  the  mark. 
Now  will  he  sit  under  a  medlar  tree. 

And  wish  his  mistress  were  that  kind  of  fruit 
As  maids  call  medlars,  when  they  laugh  alone. 

O,  Romeo,  that  she  were,  O,  that  she  were 
An  open  et  c cetera,  thou  a  poperin  pear! 

Romeo,  good  night:  I’ll  to  my  truckle-bed; 

This  field-bed  is  too  cold  for  me  to  sleep:  40 

Come,  shall  we  go? 

Ben,  Go,  then;  for  ’tis  in  vain 

To  seek  him  here  that  means  not  to  be  found. 

[Exeunt, 

Scene  11.  Capulef  s  orchard 
Enter  romeo. 

Rom,  He  jests  at  scars  that  never  felt  a  wound. 
JULIET  appears  above  at  a  voindovc. 

But,  soft!  what  light  through  yonder  window 
breaks? 

It  is  the  east,  and  Juliet  is  the  sun. 

Arise,  fair  sun,  and  kill  the  envious  moon. 

Who  is  already  sick  and  pale  with  grief. 

That  thou  her  maid  art  far  more  fair  than  she: 

Be  not  her  naid,  since  she  is  envious; 

Her  vestal  livery  is  but  sick  and  green 
And  none  but  fools  do  wear  it;  cast  it  off. 

It  is  my  lady,  O,  it  is  my  love!  10 

O,  that  she  knew  she  were! 

She  speaks,  yet  she  says  nothing:  what  of  that? 
Her  eye  discourses;  I  will  answer  it. 

I  am  too  bold,  ’tis  not  to  me  she  speaks: 

Two  of  the  fairest  stars  in  all  the  heaven. 

Having  some  business,  do  entreat  her  eyes 
To  twinkle  in  their  spheres  till  they  return. 

What  if  her  eyes  were  there,  they  in  her  head? 
The  brightness  of  her  cheek  would  shame  those 
stars. 

As  daylight  doth  a  lamp;  her  eyes  in  heaven  20 
Would  through  the  airy  region  stream  so  bright 
That  birds  would  sing  and  think  it  were  not 
night. 

See,  how  she  leans  her  cheek  upon  her  hand! 


O,  that  I  were  a  glove  upon  that  hand. 

That  I  might  touch  that  cheek! 

]ul.  Ay  me! 

Roin,  She  speaks: 

O,  speak  again,  bright  angel!  for  thou  art 
As  glorious  to  this  night,  being  o’er  my  head. 

As  is  a  winged  messenger  of  heaven 
Unto  the  white-upturned  wondering  eyes 
Of  mortals  that  fall  back  to  gaze  on  him  50 

When  he  bestrides  the  lazy-pacing  clouds 
And  sails  upon  the  bosom  of  the  air. 

Jul.  O  Romeo,  Romeo!  wherefore  art  thou 
Romeo? 

Deny  thy  father  and  refuse  thy  name; 

Or,  if  thou  wilt  not,  be  but  sworn  my  love. 

And  I’ll  no  longer  be  a  Capulet. 

Rom.  [Aside^  Shall  I  hear  more,  or  shall  I  speak 
at  this? 

Jul,  ’Tis  but  thy  name  that  is  my  enemy; 

Thou  art  thyself,  though  not  a  Montague. 

What’s  Montague?  it  is  nor  hand,  nor  foot,  40 
Nor  arm,  nor  face,  nor  any  other  part 
Belonging  to  a  man.  O,  be  some  other  name! 
What’s  in  a  name?  that  which  we  call  a  rose 
By  any  other  name  would  smell  as  sweet; 

So  Romeo  would,  were  he  not  Romeo  call’d. 
Retain  that  dear  perfection  which  he  owes 
Without  that  title.  Romeo,  doff  thy  name. 

And  for  that  name  which  is  no  part  of  thee 
Take  all  myself. 

Rom,  I  take  thee  at  thy  word: 

Call  me  but  love,  and  I’ll  be  new  baptized;  50 
Henceforth  I  never  will  be  Romeo. 

Jul.  What  man  art  thou  that  thus  bescreen’d 
in  night 

So  stumblest  on  my  counsel? 

Rom,  By  a  name 

I  know  not  how  to  tell  thee  who  I  am: 

My  name,  dear  saint,  is  hateful  to  myself. 
Because  it  is  an  enemy  to  thee; 

Had  I  it  written,  I  would  tear  the  word. 

Jul,  My  ears  have  not  yet  drunk  a  hundred 
words 

Of  that  tongue’s  utterance,  yet  I  know  the  sound: 
Art  thou  not  Romeo  and  a  Montague?  60 

Rom,  Neither,  fair  saint,  if  either  thee  dislike. 
Jul,  How  earnest  thou  hither,  tell  me,  and 
wherefore? 

The  orchard  walls  are  high  and  hard  to  climb. 
And  the  place  death,  considering  who  thou  art. 

If  any  of  my  kinsmen  find  thee  here. 

Rom,  With  love’s  light  wings  did  I  o’er-perch 
these  walls; 

For  stony  limits  cannot  hold  love  out, 

And  what  love  can  do  that  dares  love  attempt; 
Therefore  thy  kinsmen  are  no  let  to  me. 


SCENE  II 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


295 


JuL  If  they  do  see  thee,  they  will  murder 

thee.  70 

Rom.  Alack,  there  lies  more  peril  in  thine  eye 
Than  twenty  of  their  swords:  look  thou  but 
sweet. 

And  I  am  proof  against  their  enmity. 

Jul.  I  would  not  for  the  world  they  saw  thee 
here. 

Rom.  I  have  night’s  cloak  to  hide  me  from 
their  sight; 

And  but  thou  love  me,  let  them  find  me  here: 

My  life  were  better  ended  by  their  hate. 

Than  death  prorogued,  wanting  of  thy  love. 

Jul.  Bv  whose  direction  found’st  thou  out  this 
place? 

Rom.  By  love,  who  first  did  prompt  me  to 
inquire;  80 

He  lent  me  counsel  and  I  lent  him  eyes. 

I  am  no  pilot;  yet,  wert  thou  as  far 

As  that  vast  shore  wash’d  with  the  farthest  sea, 

I  would  adventure  for  such  merchandise. 

/w/.  Thou  know’st  the  mask  of  night  is  on  my 
face, 

Else  would  a  maiden  blush  bepaint  my  cheek 
For  that  which  thou  hast  heard  me  speak  to-night. 
Fain  would  I  dwell  on  form,  fain,  fain  deny 
What  I  have  spoke:  but  farewell  compliment!  89 
Dost  thou  love  me?  I  know  thou  wilt  say  “Ay,” 
And  I  will  take  thy  word:  yet,  if  thou  swear’st. 
Thou  mayst  prove  false;  at  lovers’  perjuries. 
They  say,  Jove  laughs.  O  gentle  Romeo, 

If  thou  dost  love,  pronounce  it  faithfully: 

Or  if  thou  think’st  I  am  too  quickly  won. 

I’ll  frown  and  be  perverse  and  say  thee  nay. 

So  thou  wilt  woo;  but  else,  not  for  the  world. 

In  truth,  fair  Montague,  I  am  too  fond. 

And  therefore  thou  mayst  think  my  ’haviour 
light: 

But  trust  me,  gentleman.  I’ll  prove  more  true  wo 
Than  those  that  have  more  cunning  to  be  strange. 
I  should  have  been  more  strange,  I  must  confess. 
But  that  thou  overheard’ st,  ere  I  was  ware. 

My  true  love’s  passion:  therefore  pardon  me. 

And  not  impute  this  yielding  to  light  love. 

Which  the  dark  night  hath  so  discovered. 

Rom.  Lady,  by  yonder  blessed  moon  I  swear 
That  tips  with  silver  all  these  fruit-tree  tops — 
Jul.  O,  swear  not  by  the  moon,  the  inconstant 
moon. 

That  monthly  changes  in  her  circled  orb,  no 
Lest  that  thy  love  prove  likewise  variable. 

Rom.  What  shall  I  swear  by? 

Jul.  Do  not  swear  at  all; 

Or,  if  thou  wilt,  swear  by  thy  gracious  self, 
Which  is  the  god  of  my  idolatry. 

And  I’ll  believe  thee. 


Rom.  If  my  heart’s  dear  love — 

Jul.  Well,  do  not  swear:  although  I  joy  in  thee, 

I  have  no  joy  of  this  contract  to-night: 

It  is  too  rash,  too  unadvised,  too  sudden; 

Too  like  the  lightning,  which  doth  cease  to  be 
Ere  one  can  say  “It  lightens.”  Sweet,  good  night! 
This  bud  of  love,  by  summer’s  ripening  breath, 
iMay  prove  a  beauteous  flower  when  next  we 
meet.  122 

Good  night,  good  night!  as  sweet  repose  and  rest 
Come  to  thy  heart  as  that  within  my  breast! 

Rom.  O,  wilt  thou  leave  me  so  unsatisfied? 

Jul.  What  satisfaction  canst  thou  have  to¬ 
night? 

Rom.  The  exchange  of  thy  love’s  faithful  vow 
for  mine. 

Jul.  I  gave  thee  mine  before  thou  didst  request 
it: 

And  yet  I  would  it  were  to  give  again. 

Rom.  Wouldst  thou  withdraw  it?  for  what 
purpose,  love?  /50 

Jul.  But  to  be  frank,  and  give  it  thee  again. 

And  yet  I  wish  but  for  the  thing  I  have: 

My  bounty  is  as  boundless  as  the  sea. 

My  love  as  deep;  the  more  1  give  to  thee. 

The  more  I  have,  for  both  are  infinite. 

Nurse  calls  'within. 

I  hear  some  noise  within;  dear  love,  adieu! 
x\non,  good  nurse!  Sweet  Montague,  be  true. 
Stay  but  a  little,  I  will  come  again.  [Exit.,  above. 

Rom.  O  blessed,  blessed  night!  I  am  afeard. 
Being  in  night,  all  this  is  but  a  dream,  14.0 

Too  flattering-sweet  to  be  substantial. 

Re-enter  juliet,  above. 

Jul.  Three  words,  dear  Romeo,  and  good  night 
indeed. 

If  that  thy  bent  of  love  be  honourable. 

Thy  purpose  marriage,  send  me  word  to-morrow, 
By  one  that  I’ll  procure  to  come  to  thee. 

Where  and  what  time  thou  wilt  perform  the  rite; 
And  all  my  fortunes  at  thy  foot  I’ll  lay 
And  follow  thee  my  lord  throughout  the  world. 
Nurse  [Within]  Madam! 

Jul.  I  come,  anon. — But  if  thou  mean’st  not 
well,  150 

I  do  beseech  thee — • 

Nurse.  [Within]  Madam! 

Jul.  By  and  by,  I  come:  — 

To  cease  thy  suit,  and  leave  me  to  my  grief: 
To-morrow  will  I  send. 

Rom.  So  thrive  my  soul — 

Jul.  A  thousand  times  good  night! 

[Exit,  above. 

Rom.  A  thousand  times  the  worse,  to  want  thy 

light. 


ACT  II 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


296 

Love  goes  toward  love,  as  schoolboys  from  their 
books, 

But  love  from  love,  toward  school  with  heavy 
looks.  [Retiring. 

Re-enter  jvLiET,  above. 

Jul.  Hist!  Romeo,  hist!  O,  for  a  falconer’s 
voice. 

To  lure  this  tassel-gentle  back  again!  160 

Bondage  is  hoarse,  and  may  not  speak  aloud; 
Else  would  1  tear  the  cave  where  Echo  lies. 

And  make  her  airy  tongue  more  hoarse  than  mine. 
With  repetition  of  my  Romeo’s  name. 

Rom.  It  is  my  soul  that  calls  upon  my  n  me: 
How  silver-sweet  sound  lovers’  tongues  by  night, 
Like  softest  music  to  attending  ears! 

Jul.  Romeo! 

Rom.  My  dear? 

Jul.  At  what  o’clock  to-morrow 

Shall  I  send  to  thee? 

Rom.  At  the  hour  of  nine.  169 

Jul.  I  will  not  fail:  ’tis  twenty  years  till  then. 

I  have  forgot  why  I  did  call  thee  back. 

Rom.  Let  me  stand  here  till  thou  remember  it. 
Jul.  I  shall  forget,  to  have  thee  still  stand  there, 
Remembering  how  I  love  thy  company. 

Rom.  And  I’ll  still  stay,  to  have  thee  still  forget. 
Forgetting  any  other  home  but  this. 

Jul.  ’Tis  almost  morning;  I  would  have  thee 
gone: 

And  yet  no  further  than  a  wanton’s  bird; 

Who  lets  it  hop  a  little  from  her  hand. 

Like  a  poor  prisoner  in  his  twisted  gyves,  180 
And  with  a  silk  thread  plucks  it  back  again. 

So  loving-jealous  of  his  liberty. 

Rom.  I  would  I  were  thy  bird. 

Jul.  Sweet,  so  would  I : 

Yet  I  should  kill  thee  with  much  cherishing. 

Good  night,  good  night!  parting  is  such  sweet 
sorrow. 

That  I  shall  say  good  night  till  it  be  morrow. 

[Exit  above. 

Rom.  Sleep  dwell  upon  thine  eyes,  peace  in  thy 
breast! 

Would  I  were  sleep  and  peace,  so  sweet  to  rest! 
Hence  will  I  to  my  ghostly  father’s  cell,  189 
His  help  to  crave,  and  my  dear  hap  to  tell.  [Exit. 

Scene  hi.  Friar  Laurence' s  cell 
Enter  friar  Laurence,  voith  a  basket. 

Fri.  L.  The  grey-eyed  morn  smiles  on  the 
frowning  night. 

Chequering  the  eastern  clouds  with  streaks  of 
light, 

And  flecked  darkness  like  a  drunkard  reels 
From  forth  day’s  path  and  Titan’s  fiery  wheels: 


Now,  ere  the  sun  advance  his  burning  eye. 

The  day  to  cheer  and  night’s  dank  dew  to  dry, 

I  must  up-fill  this  osier  cage  of  ours 
With  baleful  weeds  and  precious-juiced  flowers. 
The  earth  that’s  nature’s  mother  is  her  tomb; 
What  is  her  burying  grave  that  is  her  womb,  to 
And  from  her  womb  children  of  divers  kind 
We  sucking  on  her  natural  bosom  find. 

Many  for  many  virtues  excellent. 

None  but  for  some,  and  yet  all  different. 

O,  mickle  is  the  powerful  grace  that  lies 
In  herbs,  plants,  stones,  and  their  true  qualities: 
For  nought  so  vile  that  on  the  earth  doth  live 
But  to  the  earth  some  special  good  doth  give. 

Nor  aught  so  good  but  strain’d  from  that  fair  use 
Revolts  from  true  birth,  stumbling  on  abuse:  20 
Virtue  itself  turns  vice,  being  misapplied; 

And  vice  sometimes  by  action  dignified. 

Within  the  infant  rind  of  this  small  flower 
Poison  hath  residence  and  medicine  power: 

For  this,  being  smelt,  with  that  part  cheers  each 
part; 

Being  tasted,  slays  all  senses  with  the  heart. 

Two  such  opposed  kings  encamp  them  still 
In  man  as  well  as  herbs,  grace  and  rude  will; 

And  where  the  worser  is  predominant. 

Full  soon  the  canker  death  eats  up  that  plant, 

Enter  romeo. 

Rom.  Good  morrow,  father. 

Fri.  L.  Benedicitef 

What  early  tongue  so  sweet  saluteth  me? 

Young  son,  it  argues  a  distemper’d  head 
So  soon  to  bid  good  morrow  to  thy  bed: 

Care  keeps  his  watch  in  every  old  man’s  eye. 

And  where  care  lodges,  sleep  will  never  lie; 

But  where  unbruised  youth  with  unstuff’d  brain 
Doth  couch  his  limbs,  there  golden  sleep  doth 
reign: 

Therefore  thy  earliness  doth  me  assure 

Thou  art  up-roused  by  some  distemperature;  40 

Or  if  not  so,  then  here  I  hit  it  right. 

Our  Romeo  hath  not  been  in  bed  to-night. 

Rom.  That  last  is  true;  the  sweeter  rest  was 
mine. 

Fri.  L.  God  pardon  sin!  wast  thou  with  Rosa¬ 
line? 

Rom.  With  Rosaline,  my  ghostly  father?  no; 

I  have  forgot  that  name,  and  that  name’s  woe. 

Fri.  L.  That’s  my  good  son:  but  where  hast 
thou  been,  then? 

Rom.  I’ll  tell  thee,  ere  thou  ask  it  me  again. 

I  have  been  feasting  with  mine  enemy. 

Where  on  a  sudden  one  hath  wounded  me,  50 
That’s  by  me  wounded:  both  our  remedies 
Within  thy  help  and  holy  physic  lies: 


SCENE  III 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


297 


I  bear  no  hatred,  blessed  man,  for,  lo. 

My  intercession  likewise  steads  my  foe. 

Fri.  L.  Be  plain,  good  son,  and  homely  in  thy 
drift; 

Riddling  confession  finds  but  riddling  shrift. 

Rmi.  Then  plainly  know  my  heart’s  dear  love 
is  set 

On  the  fair  daughter  of  rich  Capulet: 

As  mine  on  hers  so  hers  is  set  on  mine;  59 

And  all  combined,  save  what  thou  must  combine 
By  holy  marriage:  when  and  where  and  how 
We  met,  we  woo’d,  and  made  exchange  of  vow, 
I’ll  tell  thee  as  we  pass;  but  this  I  pray. 

That  thou  consent  to  marry  us  to-day. 

Fri.  L.  Holy  Saint  Francis,  what  a  change  is 
here! 

Is  Rosaline,  whom  thou  didst  love  so  dear. 

So  soon  forsaken?  young  men’s  love  then  lies 
Not  truly  in  their  hearts,  but  in  their  eyes. 

Jesu  Maria,  what  a  deal  of  brine 

Hath  wash’d  thy  sallow  cheeks  for  Rosaline!  70 

How  much  salt  water  thrown  away  in  waste, 

To  season  love,  that  of  it  doth  not  taste! 

The  sun  net  yet  thy  sighs  from  heaven  clears. 

Thy  old  groans  ring  yet  in  my  ancient  ears; 

Lo,  here  upon  thy  cheek  the  stain  doth  sit 
Of  an  old  tear  that  is  not  wash’d  off  yet: 

If  e’er  thou  wast  thyself  and  these  woes  thine, 
Thou  and  these  woes  were  all  for  Rosaline: 

And  art  thou  changed?  pronounce  this  sentence 
then:  79 

Women  may  fall,  when  there’s  no  strength  in 
men. 

Rom.  Thou  chid’st  me  oft  for  loving  Rosaline. 
Fri.  L.  For  doting,  not  for  loving,  pupil  mine. 
Rom.  And  bad’st  me  bury  love. 

Fri.  L.  Not  in  a  grave, 

To  lay  one  in,  another  out  to  have. 

Rom.  I  pray  thee,  chide  not:  she  whom  I  love 
now 

Doth  grace  for  grace  and  love  for  love  allow; 

The  other  did  not  so. 

Fri.  L.  O,  she  knew  well 

Thy  love  did  read  by  rote  and  could  not  spell. 

But  come,  young  waverer,  come,  go  with  me. 

In  one  respect  I’ll  thy  assistant  be;  ^0 

For  this  alliance  may  so  happy  prove. 

To  turn  your  households’  rancour  to  pure  love. 
Rom.  O,  let  us  hence;  I  stand  on  sudden  haste. 
Fri.  L.  Wisely  and  slow;  they  stumble  that  run 
fast.  ^  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  A  street 
Enter  benvolio  and  mercutio. 

Mer.  Where  the  devil  should  this  Romeo  be? 
Came  he  not  home  to-night? 


Ben.  Not  to  his  father’s;  I  spoke  with  his 
man. 

Mer.  Ah,  that  same  pale  hard-hearted  wench, 
that  Rosaline, 

Torments  him  so,  that  he  will  sure  run  mad. 

Ben.  Tybalt,  the  kinsman  of  old  Capulet, 

Hath  sent  a  letter  to  his  father’s  house. 

Mer.  A  challenge,  on  my  life. 

Ben.  Romeo  will  answer  it. 

Mer.  Any  man  that  can  write  may  answer  a 
letter.  10 

Ben.  Nay,  he  will  answer  the  letter’s  master, 
how  he  dares,  being  dared. 

Mer.  x\las,  poor  Romeo!  he  is  already  dead; 
stabbed  with  a  white  wench’s  black  eye;  shot 
thorough  the  ear  with  a  love-song;  the  very  pin 
of  his  heart  cleft  with  the  blind  bow-boy’s  butt- 
shaft:  and  is  he  a  man  to  encounter  Tybalt? 

Ben.  Why,  what  is  Tybalt? 

Mer.  More  than  prince  of  cats,  I  can  tell  you. 
O,  he  is  the  courageous  captain  of  complements. 
He  fights  as  you  sing  prick-song,  keeps  rime, 
distance,  an  proportion;  rests  me  his  minim 
rest,  one,  two,  and  the  third  in  your  bosom:  the 
very  butcher  of  a  silk  button,  a  duellist,  a  duel- 
list;  a  gentleman  of  the  very  first  house,  of  the 
first  and  second  cause:  ah,  the  immortal  passado! 
the  punto  reversal  the  hail 
Ben.  The  what? 

Mer.  The  pox  of  such  antic,  lisping,  affecting 
fantasticoes;  these  new  tuners  of  accents!  “By 
Jesu,  a  very  good  blade!  a  very  tall  man!  a  very 
good  whore!”  Why,  is  not  this  a  lamentable 
thing,  grandsire,  that  we  should  be  thus  afflicted 
with  these  strange  flies,  these  fashion-mongers, 
these  per  dona-mi' s.,  who  stand  so  much  on  the 
new  form,  that  they  cannot  sit  at  ease  on  the  old 
bench?  O,  their  bones,  their  bones! 

Enter  romeo. 

Ben.  Here  comes  Romeo,  here  comes  Romeo. 
Mer.  Without  his  roe,  like  a  dried  herring:  O 
flesh,  flesh,  how  art  thou  fishified!  Now  is  he 
for  the  numbers  that  Petrarch  flowed  in:  Laura 
to  his  lady  was  but  a  kitchen-wench;  marry, 
she  had  a  better  love  to  be-rhyme  her;  Dido  a 
dowdy;  Cleopatra  a  gipsy;  Helen  and  Hero 
hildings  and  harlots;  Thisbe  a  grey  eye  or  so, 
but  not  to  the  purpose.  Signior  Romeo,  bon 
jour!  there’s  a  French  salutation  to  your  French 
slop.  You  gave  us  the  counterfeit  fairly  last 
night. 

Rom.  Good  morrow  to  you  both.  What  coun¬ 
terfeit  did  I  give  you?  5 0 

Mer.  The  slip,  sir,  the  slip;  can  you  not  con¬ 
ceive? 


298 

Ro?fi.  Pardon,  good  Mercutio,  my  business  was 
great;  and  in  such  a  case  as  mine  a  man  may 
strain  courtesy. 

Mer.  That’s  as  much  as  to  say,  such  a  case  as 
yours  constrains  a  man  to  bow  in  the  hams. 

Rom.  Meaning,  to  court’sy. 

Aler.  Thou  hast  most  kindly  hit  it. 

Rom.  A  most  courteous  exposition.  60 

Aler.  Nay,  I  am  the  very  pink  of  courtesy. 

Rom.  Pink  for  flower. 

Aler.  Right. 

Rom.  Why,  then  is  my  pump  well  flowered. 

Aler.  Well  said:  follow  me  this  jest  now  till 
thou  hast  worn  out  thy  pump,  that  when  the 
single  sole  of  it  is  worn,  the  jest  may  remain  after 
the  wearing  sole  singular. 

Rom.  O  single-soled  jest,  solely  singular  for  the 
singleness!  70 

Aler.  Come  between  us,  good  Benvolio;  my 
wits  faint. 

Rom.  Switch  and  spurs,  switch  and  spurs;  or 
ril  cry  a  match. 

Aler.  Nay,  if  thy  wits  run  the  wild-goose  chase, 
I  have  done,  for  thou  hast  more  of  the  wild- 
goose  in  one  of  thy  wits  than,  I  am  sure,  I  have 
in  my  whole  five:  was  I  with  you  there  for  the 
goose? 

Rom.  Thou  wast  never  with  me  for  any  thing 
when  thou  wast  not  there  for  the  goose.  80 

Aler.  I  will  bite  thee  by  the  ear  for  that  jest. 

Rom.  Nay,  good  goose,  bite  not. 

Aler.  Thy  wit  is  a  very  bitter  sweeting;  it  is  a 
most  sharp  sauce. 

Rom.  And  is  it  not  well  served  in  to  a  sweet 
goose? 

Aler.  O,  here’s  a  wit  of  cheveril,  that  stretches 
from  an  inch  narrow  to  an  ell  broad! 

Rom.  I  stretch  it  out  for  that  word  “broad”; 
which  added  to  the  goose,  proves  thee  far  and 
wide  a  broad  goose.  91 

Aler.  Why,  is  not  this  better  now  than  groaning 
for  love?  now  art  thou  sociable,  now  art  thou 
Romeo;  now  art  thou  what  thou  art,  by  art  as 
well  as  by  nature:  for  this  drivelling  love  is  like  a 
great  natural,  that  runs  lolling  up  and  down  to 
hide  his  bauble  in  a  hole. 

Ben.  Stop  there,  stop  there. 

Aler.  Thou  desirest  me  to  stop  in  my  tale 
against  the  hair.  100 

Ben.  Thou  wouldst  else  have  made  thy  tale 
large. 

Aler.  O,  thou  art  deceived;  I  would  have  made 
it  short:  for  I  was  come  to  the  whole  depth  of  my 
tale;  and  meant,  indeed,  to  occupy  the  argument 
no  longer. 

Rom.  Here’s  goodly  gear! 


ACT  II 

Enter  nurse  and  peter. 

Aler.  A  sail,  a  sail! 

Ben.  Two,  two;  a  shirt  and  a  smock. 

Nurse.  Peter!  no 

Peter.  Anon! 

Nurse.  My  fan,  Peter. 

Aler.  Good  Peter,  to  hide  her  face;  for  her  fan’s 
the  fairer  face. 

Nurse.  God  ye  good  morrow,  gentlemen. 

Aler.  God  ye  good  den,  fair  gentlewoman. 

Nurse.  Is  it  good  den? 

Aler.  ’Tis  no  less,  I  tell  you,  for  the  bawdy 
hand  of  the  dial  is  now  upon  the  prick  of  noon. 

Nurse.  Out  upon  you!  what  a  man  are  you !  120 

Rom.  One,  gentlewoman,  that  God  hath  made 
for  himself  to  mar. 

Nurse.  By  my  troth,  it  is  well  said;  “for  him¬ 
self  to  mar,”  quoth  a’?  Gentlemen,  can  any  of 
you  tell  me  where  I  may  find  the  young  Romeo? 

Rom.  I  can  tell  you;  but  young  Romeo  will  be 
older  when  you  have  found  him  than  he  was 
when  you  sought  him:  I  am  the  youngest  of  that 
name,  for  fault  of  a  worse. 

Nurse.  You  say  well .  75  o 

Aler.  Yea,  is  the  worst  well?  very  well  took,  i’ 
faith;  wisely,  wisely. 

Nurse.  If  you  be  he,  sir,  I  desire  some  confid¬ 
ence  with  you. 

Ben.  She  will  indite  him.  to  some  supper. 

Aier.  A  bawd,  a  bawd,  a  bawd!  So  ho! 

Rom.  What  hast  thou  found? 

Aler.  No  hare,  sir;  unless  a  hare,  sir,  in  a  lenten 
pie,  that  is  something  stale  and  hoar  ere  it  be 
spent.  [‘Smgj.]  /40 

An  old  hare  hoar. 

And  an  old  hare  hoar. 

Is  very  good  meat  in  lent: 

But  a  hare  that  is  hoar 
Is  too  much  for  a  score, 

When  it  hoars  ere  it  be  spent. 

Romeo,  will  you  come  to  your  father’s?  we’ll  to 
dinner,  thither. 

Rom.  I  will  follow  you. 

Aler.  Farewell,  ancient  lady;  farewell,  [singing 
“lady,  lady,  lady.”  /y/ 

[Exeunt  mercutio  and  benvolio. 

Nurse.  Marry,  farewell  I  pray  you,  sir,  what 
saucy  merchant  was  this,  that  was  so  full  of  his 
ropery? 

Rom.  A  gentleman,  nurse,  that  loves  to  hear 
himself  talk,  and  will  speak  more  in  a  minute 
than  he  will  stand  to  in  a  month. 

Nurse.  An  a’  speak  any  thing  against  me.  I’ll 
take  him  down,  an  a’  were  lustier  than  he  is,  and 
twenty  such  Jacks;  and  if  I  cannot.  I’ll  find  those 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


SCENE  IV  ROMEO  AND  JULIET  299 


that  shall.  Scurvy  knave!  I  am  none  of  his  flirt- 
gills;  I  am  none  of  his  skains-mates.  x4nd  thou 
must  stand  by  too,  and  suffer  every  knave  to  use 
me  at  his  pleasure? 

Peter.  I  saw  no  man  use  you  at  his  pleasure:  if  I 
had,  my  weapon  should  quickly  have  been  out,  I 
warrant  you :  I  dare  draw  as  soon  as  another  man, 
if  I  see  occasion  in  a  good  quarrel,  and  the  law  on 
my  side. 

Nurse.  Now,  afore  God,  I  am  so  vexed,  that 
every  part  about  me  quivers.  Scurvy  knave! 
Pray  you,  sir,  a  word:  and  as  I  told  you,  my 
young  lady  bade  me  inquire  you  out;  what  she 
bade  me  say,  I  will  keep  to  myself:  but  first 
let  me  tell  ye,  if  ye  should  lead  her  into  a  fool’s 
paradise,  as  they  say,  it  were  a  very  gross  kind 
of  behaviour,  as  they  say:  for  the  gentlewoman 
is  young;  and,  therefore,  if  you  should  deal 
double  with  her,  truly  it  were  an  ill  thing  to  be 
offered  to  any  gentlewoman,  and  very  weak 
dealing.  iSi 

Rom.  Nurse,  commend  me  to  thy  lady  and  mis¬ 
tress.  I  protest  unto  thee — 

Nurse.  Good  heart,  and,  i’  faith,  I  will  tell  her 
as  much:  Lord,  Lord,  she  will  be  a  joyful  woman. 

Rom.  What  wilt  thou  tell  her,  nurse?  thou  dost 
not  mark  me. 

Nurse.  I  will  tell  her,  sir,  that  you  do  protest; 
which,  as  I  take  it,  is  a  gentlemanlike  offer. 

Rom.  Bid  her  devise  191 

Some  means  to  come  to  shrift  this  afternoon; 

And  there  she  shall  at  Friar  Laurence’  cell 
Be  shrived  and  married.  Here  is  for  thy  pains. 

Nurse.  No,  truly,  sir;  not  a  penny. 

Rom.  Go  to;  I  say  you  shall. 

Nurse.  This  afternoon,  sir?  well,  she  shall  be 
there. 

Rom.  And  stay,  good  nurse,  behind  the  abbey 
wall: 

Within  this  hour  my  man  shall  be  with  thee,  200 
And  bring  thee  cords  made  like  a  tackled  stair; 
Which  to  the  high  top-gallant  of  my  joy 
Must  be  my  convoy  in  the  secret  night. 

Farewell;  be  trusty,  and  I’ll  quit  thy  pains: 
Farewell;  commend  me  to  thy  mistress. 

Nurse.  Now  God  in  heaven  bless  thee!  Hark 
you,  sir. 

Rom.  What  say’st  thou,  my  dear  nurse? 

Nurse.  Is  your  man  secret?  Did  you  ne’er  hear 
say, 

*‘Two  may  keep  counsel,  putting  one  away”? 

Rom.  I  warrant  thee,  my  man’s  as  true  as 

steel.  210 

Nurse.  Well,  sir;  my  mistress  is  the  sweetest 
lady — Lord,  Lord!  when  ’twas  a  little  prating 
thing: —  O,  there  is  a  nobleman  in  town,  one 


Paris,  that  would  fain  lay  knife  aboard,  but  she, 
good  soul,  had  as  lief  see  a  toad,  a  very  toad,  as 
see  him.  I  anger  her  sometimes  and  tell  her  that 
Paris  is  the  properer  man;  but.  I’ll  warrant  you, 
when  I  say  so,  she  looks  as  pale  as  any  clout  in 
the  versal  world.  Doth  not  rosemary  and  Romeo 
begin  both  with  a  letter?  220 

Rom.  Ay,  nurse;  what  of  that?  both  with  an  R. 
Nurse.  Ah,  mocker!  that’s  the  dog’s  name;  R  is 
for  the — No;  I  know  it  begins  with  some  other 
letter: —  and  she  hath  the  prettiest  sententious  of 
it,  of  you  and  rosemary,  that  it  would  do  you 
good  to  hear  it. 

Rom.  Commend  me  to  thy  lady. 

Nurse.  Ay,  a  thousand  times.  [Exit  romeo.] 
Peter!  250 

Pet.  Anon! 

Nurse.  Peter,  take  my  fan,  and  go  before,  and 
apace.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  Capulet' s  orchard 
Enter  JULIET. 

Jul.  The  clock  struck  nine  when  I  did  send  the 
nurse; 

In  half  an  hour  she  promised  to  return. 

Perchance  she  cannot  meet  him:  that’s  not  so. 

O,  she  is  lame!  love’s  heralds  should  be  thoughts. 
Which  ten  times  faster  glide  than  the  sun’s  beams. 
Driving  back  shadows  over  louring  hills : 
Therefore  do  nimble-pinion’d  doves  draw  love. 
And  therefore  hath  the  wind-swift  Cupid  wings. 
Now  is  the  sun  upon  the  highmost  hill 
Of  this  day’s  journey,  and  from  nine  till  twelve 
Is  three  long  hours,  yet  she  is  not  come.  // 

Had  she  affections  and  warm  youthful  blood. 

She  would  be  as  swift  in  motion  as  a  ball; 

My  words  would  bandy  her  to  my  sweet  love. 
And  his  to  me: 

But  old  folks,  many  feign  as  they  were  dead; 
Unwieldy,  slow,  heavy,  and  pale  as  lead. 

O  God,  she  comes! 

Enter  nurse  and  peter. 

O  honey  nurse,  what  news? 
Hast  thou  met  with  him?  Send  thy  man  away. 
Nurse.  Peter,  stay  at  the  gate.  [Exit  peter. 

Jul.  Now,  good  sweet  nurse — O  Lord,  why 
look’st  thou  sad?  21 

Though  news  be  sad,  yet  tell  them  merrily; 

If  good,  thou  shamest  the  music  of  sweet  news 
By  playing  it  to  me  with  so  sour  a  face. 

Nurse.  I  am  a- weary,  give  me  leave  awhile: 

Fie,  how  my  bones  ache!  what  a  jaunt  have  I 
had! 

Jul.  I  would  thou  hadst  my  bones,  and  I  thy 
news. 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


Nay,  come,  I  pray  thee,  speak;  good,  good 
nurse,  speak. 

Nurse.  Jesu,  what  haste?  can  you  not  stay 
awhile? 

Do  you  not  see  that  I  am  out  of  breath?  50 

]uL  How  art  thou  out  of  breath,  when  thou  hast 
breath 

To  say  to  me  that  thou  art  out  of  breath? 

The  excuse  that  thou  dost  make  in  this  delay 
Is  longer  than  the  tale  thou  dost  excuse. 

Is  thy  news  good,  or  bad?  answer  to  that; 

Say  either,  and  I’ll  stay  the  circumstance: 

Let  me  be  satisfied,  is’t  good  or  bad? 

Nurse.  Well,  you  have  made  a  simple  choice; 
you  know  not  how  to  choose  a  man:  Romeo!  no, 
not  he;  though  his  face  be  better  than  any  man’s, 
yet  his  leg  excels  all  men’s;  and  for  a  hand,  and  a 
foot,  and  a  body,  though  they  be  not  to  be  talked 
on,  yet  they  are  past  compare:  he  is  not  the 
flower  of  courtesy,  but.  I’ll  warrant  him,  as 
gentle  as  a  lamb.  Go  thy  ways,  wench;  serve 
God.  What,  have  you  dined  at  home? 

Jul.  No,  no:  but  all  this  did  I  know  before. 

What  says  he  of  our  marriage?  what  of  that? 
Nurse.  Lord,  how  my  head  aches!  what  a  head 
have  I ! 

It  beats  as  it  would  fall  in  twenty  pieces.  jo 
My  back  o’  t’  other  side — O,  my  back,  my  back! 
Beshrew  your  heart  for  sending  me  about 
To  catch  my  death  with  jaunting  up  and  down! 
Jul.  r  faith,  I  am  sorry  that  thou  art  not  well. 
Sweet,  sweet,  sweet  nurse,  tell  me,  what  says  my 
love? 

Nurse.  Your  love  says,  like  an  honest  gentle¬ 
man,  and  a  courteous,  and  a  kind,  and  a  hand¬ 
some,  and,  I  warrant,  a  virtuous — Where  is  your 
mother? 

Jul.  Where  is  my  mother!  why,  she  is 

within;  60 

Where  should  she  be?  How  oddly  thou  repliest! 
“Your  love  says,  like  an  honest  gentleman, 
‘Where  is  your  mother?’  ” 

Nurse.  O  God’s  lady  dear! 

Are  you  so  hot?  marry,  come  up,  I  trow; 

Is  this  the  poultice  for  my  aching  bones? 
Henceforward  do  your  messages  yourself. 

Jul.  Here’s  such  a  coil!  come,  what  says 
Romeo? 

Nurse.  Have  you  got  leave  to  go  to  shrift 
to-day? 

Jul.  I  have. 

Nurse.  Then  hie  you  hence  to  Friar  Laurence’ 
cell;  70 

There  stays  a  husband  to  make  you  a  wife: 

Now  comes  the  wanton  blood  up  in  your  cheeks. 
They’ll  be  in  scarlet  straight  at  any  news. 


Hie  you  to  church;  I  must  another  way. 

To  fetch  a  ladder,  by  the  which  your  love 
Must  climb  a  bird’s  nest  soon  when  it  is  dark: 

I  am  the  drudge  and  toil  in  your  delight. 

But  you  shall  bear  the  burden  soon  at  night. 

Go;  I’ll  to  dinner;  hie  you  to  the  cell. 

Jul.  Hie  to  high  fortune!  Honest  nurse, 

farewell.  [Exeunt.  80 

Scene  vi.  Friar  Laurence' s  cell 
Enter  friar  Laurence  and  romeo. 

Fri.  L.  So  smile  the  heavens  upon  this  holy  act. 
That  after  hours  with  sorrow  chide  us  not! 

Rom.  Amen,  amen!  but  come  what  sorrow  can. 
It  cannot  countervail  the  exchange  of  joy 
That  one  short  minute  gives  me  in  her  sight: 

Do  thou  but  close  our  hands  with  holy  words. 
Then  love-devouring  death  do  what  he  dare; 

It  is  enough  I  may  call  her  mine. 

Fri.  L.  These  violent  delights  have  violent 
ends 

And  in  their  triumph  die,  like  fire  and  powder,  10 
Which  as  they  kiss  consume:  the  sweetest  honey 
Is  loathesome  in  his  own  deliciousness 
And  in  the  taste  confounds  the  appetite: 
Therefore  love  moderately;  long  love  doth  so; 
Too  swift  arrives  as  tardy  as  too  slow. 

Enter  juliet. 

Here  comes  the  lady:  O,  so  light  a  foot 
Will  ne’er  wear  out  the  everlasting  flint: 

A  lover  may  bestride  the  gossamer 
That  idles  in  the  wanton  summer  air. 

And  yet  not  fall;  so  light  is  vanity.  20 

Jul.  Good  even  to  my  ghostly  confessor. 

Fri.  L.  Romeo  shall  thank  thee,  daughter,  for  us 
both. 

Jul.  As  much  to  him,  else  is  his  thanks  too 
much. 

Rom.  Ah,  Juliet,  if  the  measure  of  thy  joy 
Be  heap’d  like  mine  and  that  thy  skill  be  more 
To  blazon  it,  then  sweeten  with  thy  breath 
This  neighbour  air,  and  let  rich  music’s  tongue 
Unfold  the  imagined  happiness  that  both 
Receive  in  either  by  this  dear  encounter. 

Jul.  Conceit,  more  rich  in  matter  than  in 
words. 

Brags  of  his  substance,  not  of  ornament: 

They  are  but  beggars  that  can  count  their  worth; 
But  my  true  love  is  grown  to  such  excess 
I  cannot  sum  up  sum  of  half  my  wealth. 

Fri.  L.  Come,  come  with  me,  and  we  will 
make  short  work; 

For,  by  your  leaves,  you  shall  not  stay  alone 
Till  holy  church  incorporate  two  in  one. 

[Exeunt. 


SCENE  I 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


ACT  III 


Scene  i.  A  public  place 

Ewf^MERCUTio,  BENVoLio,  Page,  and  Servants. 

Ben.  I  pray  thee,  good  Mercutio,  let’s  retire: 

The  day  is  hot,  the  Capulets  abroad. 

And,  if  we  meet,  we  shall  not  scape  a  brawl; 

For  now,  these  hot  days,  is  the  mad  blood 
stirring. 

Mer.  Thou  art  like  one  of  those  fellows  that 
when  he  enters  the  confines  of  a  tavern  claps  me 
his  sword  upon  the  table  and  says,  “God  send 
me  no  need  of  thee!”  and  by  the  operation  of  the 
second  cup  draws  it  on  the  drawer,  when  indeed 
there  is  no  need.  lo 

Ben.  Am  I  like  such  a  fellow? 

Mer.  Come,  come,  thou  art  as  hot  a  Jack  in  thy 
mood  as  any  in  Italy,  and  as  soon  moved  to  be 
moody,  and  as  soon  moody  to  be  moved. 

Ben.  And  what  to? 

Mer.  Nay,  an  there  were  two  such,  we  should 
have  none  shortly,  for  one  would  kill  the  other. 
Thou!  why,  thou  wilt  quarrel  with  a  man  that 
hath  a  hair  more,  or  a  hair  less,  in  his  beard  than 
thou  hast:  thou  wilt  quarrel  with  a  man  for 
cracking  nuts,  having  no  other  reason  but  be¬ 
cause  thou  hast  hazel  eyes:  what  eye  but  such 
an  eye  would  spy  out  such  a  quarrel?  Thy  head 
is  as  full  of  quarrels  as  an  egg  is  full  of  meat,  and 
yet  thy  head  hath  been  beaten  as  addle  as  an  egg 
for  quarrelling:  thou  hast  quarrelled  with  a  man 
for  coughing  in  the  street,  because  he  hath 
wakened  thy  dog  that  hath  lain  asleep  in  the  sun: 
didst  thou  not  fall  out  with  a  tailor  for  wearing 
his  new  doublet  before  Easter?  with  another,  for 
tying  his  new  shoes  with  old  riband?  and  yet 
thou  wilt  tutor  me  from  quarrelling! 

Ben.  x\n  I  were  so  apt  to  quarrel  as  thou  art,  any 
man  should  buy  the  fee-simple  of  my  life  for  an 
hour  and  a  quarter. 

Mer.  The  fee-simple — O  simple! 

Ben.  By  my  head,  here  come  the  Capulets. 

Mer.  By  my  heel,  I  care  not.  55) 

Enter  tybalt  and  others. 

Tyb.  Follow  me  close,  for  I  will  speak  to  them. 
Gentlemen,  good  den:  a  word  with  one  of  you. 

Mer.  And  but  one  word  with  one  of  us?  couple 
it  with  something;  make  it  a  word  and  a  blow. 

Tyb.  You  shall  find  me  apt  enough  to  that,  sir, 
an  you  wijl  give  me  occasion. 

Mer.  Could  you  not  take  some  occasion  with¬ 
out  giving? 

Tyb.  Mercutio,  thou  consort’ st  with  Romeo — 

Mer.  Consort!  what,  dost  thou  make  us  min¬ 
strels?  an  thou  make  minstrels  of  us,  look  to  hear 


301 

nothing  but  discords:  here’s  my  fiddlestick; 
here’s  that  shall  make  you  dance.  ’Zounds, 
consort! 

Ben.  We  talk  here  in  the  public  haunt  of  men: 
Either  withdraw  unto  some  private  place. 

And  reason  coldly  of  your  grievances. 

Or  else  depart;  here  all  eyes  gaze  on  us. 

Mer.  Men’s  eyes  were  made  to  look,  and  let 
them  gaze; 

I  will  not  budge  for  no  man’s  pleasure,  I. 

Enter  romeo. 

Tyb.  Well,  peace  be  with  you,  sir:  here  comes 
my  man. 

Mer.  But  I’ll  be  hang’d,  sir,  if  he  wear  your 
livery:  60 

Marry,  go  before  to  field,  he’ll  be  your  follower; 
Your  worship  in  that  sense  may  call  him  “man.” 

Tyb.  Romeo,  the  hate  I  bear  thee  can  afford 
No  better  term  than  this:  thou  art  a  villain. 

Rom.  Tybalt,  the  reason  that  I  have  to  love 
thee 

Doth  much  excuse  the  appertaining  rage 
To  such  a  greeting:  villain  am  I  none; 

Therefore  farewell;  I  see  thou  know’st  me  not. 

Tyb.  Boy,  this  shall  not  excuse  the  injuries 
That  thou  hast  done  me;  therefore  turn  and  draw. 
Rom.  I  do  protest  I  never  injured  thee,  7/ 

But  love  thee  better  than  thou  canst  devise. 

Till  thou  shalt  know  the  reason  of  my  love: 

And  so,  good  Capulet — which  name  I  tender 
As  dearly  as  my  own — be  satisfied. 

Mer.  O  calm,  dishonourable,  vile  submission! 
Alla  stoccata  carries  it  away.  [Draws.] 

Tybalt,  you  rat-catcher,  will  you  walk? 

Tyb.  What  wouldst  thou  have  with  me?  75? 
Mer.  Good  king  of  cats,  nothing  but  one  of  your 
nine  lives;  that  I  mean  to  make  bold  withal,  and, 
as  you  shall  use  me  hereafter,  dry-beat  the  rest  of 
the  eight.  Will  you  pluck  your  sword  out  of  his 
pilcher  by  the  ears?  make  haste,  lest  mine  be 
about  your  ears  ere  it  be  out. 

Tyb.  I  am  for  you.  [Drawing.] 

Rom.  Gentle  Mercutio,  put  thy  rapier  up. 

Mer.  Come,  sir,  your  passado.  [They  fight.] 

Rom.  Draw,  Benvolio;  beat  down  their  weapons. 
Gentlemen,  for  shame,  forbear  this  outrage!  po 
Tybalt,  Mercutio,  the  prince  expressly  hath 
Forbidden  bandying  in  Verona  streets: 

Hold,  Tybalt!  good  Mercutio! 

[tybalt  under  romeo’ s  arm  stabs  mercutio, 
and fiies  with  his  followers. 
Mer.  I  am  hurt. 

A  plague  o’  both  your  houses!  I  am  sped. 

Is  he  gone,  and  hath  nothing? 

Ben.  What,  art  thou  hurt? 


ACT  III 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


Aier.  Ay,  ay,  a  scratch,  a  scratch;  marry,  ’tis 
enough. 

Where  is  my  page?  Go,  villain,  fetch  a  surgeon. 

[Exit  PAGE. 

Rom.  Courage,  man;  the  hurt  cannot  be  much. 
Aler.  No,  ’tis  not  so  deep  as  a  well,  nor  so  wide 
as  a  church-door;  but  ’tis  enough,  ’twill  serve: 
ask  for  me  to-morrow,  and  you  shall  find  me  a 
grave  man.  I  am  peppered,  I  warrant,  for  this 
world.  A  plague  o’  both  your  houses!  ’Zounds, 
a  dog,  a  rat,  a  mouse,  a  cat,  to  scratch  a  man  to 
death!  a  braggart,  a  rogue,  a  villain,  that  fights  by 
the  book  of  arithmetic!  Why  the  devil  came  you 
between  us?  I  was  hurt  under  your  arm. 

Rom.  I  thought  all  for  the  best.  109 

Aier.  Help  me  into  some  house,  Benvolio, 

Or  I  shall  faint.  A  plague  o’  both  your  houses! 
They  have  made  worms’  meat  of  me:  I  have  it, 
And  soundly  too:  your  houses! 

[Exeunt  mercutio  and  benvolio. 
Rom.  This  gentleman,  the  Prince’s  near  ally. 

My  very  friend,  hath  got  his  mortal  hurt 
In  my  behalf;  my  reputation  stain’d 
With  Tybalt’s  slander —  Tybalt,  that  an  hour 
Hath  been  my  kinsman!  O  sweet  Juliet, 

Thy  beauty  hath  made  me  effeminate 

And  in  my  temper  soften’d  valour’s  steel !  120 

Re-enter  benvolio. 

Ben.  O  Romeo,  Romeo,  brave  Mercutio’s  dead! 
That  gallant  spirit  hath  aspired  the  clouds. 

Which  too  untimely  here  did  scorn  the  earth. 
Rom.  This  day’s  black  fate  on  more  days  doth 
depend; 

This  but  begins  the  woe  others  must  end. 

Ben.  Here  comes  the  furious  Tybalt  back  again. 
Rom.  Alive,  in  triumph!  and  Mercutio  slain! 
Away  to  heaven,  respective  lenity. 

And  fire-eyed  fury  be  my  conduct  now! 

Re-enter  tybalt. 

Now, Tybalt,  take  the  “villain”  back  again  /50 
That  late  thou  gavest  me;  for  Mercutio’s  soul 
Is  but  a  little  way  above  our  heads. 

Staying  for  thine  to  keep  him  company: 

Either  thou,  or  I,  or  both,  must  go  with  him. 

Tyb.  Thou,  wretched  boy,  that  didst  consort 
him  here, 

Shalt  with  him  hence. 

Rom.  This  shall  determine  that. 

They  fight;  tybmjt  falls. 

Ben.  Romeo  away,  be  gone! 

The  citizens  are  up,  and  Tybalt  slain. 

Stand  not  amazed:  the  Prince  will  doom  thee 
death. 

If  thou  art  taken:  hence,  be  gone,  away!  /40 


Rom.  O,  I  am  fortune’s  fool! 

Ben.  Why  dost  thou  stay? 

[Exit  ROMEO. 

citizens,  &c. 

ist  Cit.  Which  way  ran  he  that  kill’d  Mercutio? 
Tybalt,  that  murderer,  which  way  ran  he? 

Ben.  There  lies  that  Tybalt. 

I  St  Cit.  Up,  sir,  go  with  me; 

I  charge  thee  in  the  Prince’s  name,  obey. 

Enter  prince,  attended;  Montague,  capulet, 
their  wives,  and  others. 

Prin.  Where  are  the  vile  beginners  of  this  fray? 
Ben.  O  noble  Prince,  I  can  discover  all 
The  unlucky  manage  of  this  fatal  brawl: 

There  lies  the  man,  slain  by  young  Romeo, 

That  slew  thy  kinsman,  brave  Mercutio.  /50 
La.  Cap.  Tybalt,  my  cousin!  O  my  brother’s 
child! 

O  Prince!  O  cousin!  husband!  O,  the  blood  is 
spilt 

Of  my  dear  kinsman!  Prince,  as  thou  art  true. 

For  blood  of  ours,  shed  blood  of  Montague. 

O  cousin,  cousin! 

Prin.  Benvolio,  who  began  this  bloody  fray? 

Ben.  Tybalt,  here  slain,  whom  Romeo’s  hand 
did  slay; 

Romeo  that  spoke  him  fair,  bade  him  bethink 
How  nice  the  quarrel  was,  and  urged  withal 
Your  high  displeasure:  all  this  uttered  160 

With  gentle  breath,  calm  look,  knees  humbly 
bow’d. 

Could  not  take  truce  with  the  unruly  spleen 
Of  Tybalt  deaf  to  peace,  but  that  he  tilts 
With  piercing  steel  at  bold  Mercutio’s  breast, 
Who,  all  as  hot,  turns  deadly  point  to  point. 

And,  with  a  martial  scorn,  with  one  hand  beats 
Cold  death  aside,  and  with  the  other  sends 
It  back  to  Tybalt,  whose  dexterity 
Retorts  it:  Romeo  he  cried  aloud, 

“Hold,  friends!  friends,  part!”  and,  swifter  than 
his  tongue,  ryo 

His  agile  arm  beats  down  their  fatal  points. 

And  ’twixt  them  rushes;  underneath  whose  arm 
An  envious  thrust  from  Tybalt  hit  the  life 
Of  stout  Mercutio,  and  then  Tybalt  fled; 

But  by  and  by  comes  back  to  Romeo, 

Who  had  but  newly  entertain’d  revenge. 

And  to’t  they  go  like  lightning,  for,  ere  I 
Could  draw  to  part  them,  was  stout  Tybalt  slain. 
And,  as  he  fell,  did  Romeo  turn  and  fly. 

This  is  the  truth,  or  let  Benvolio  die.  180 

La.  Cap.  He  is  a  kinsman  to  the  Montague; 
Affection  makes  him  false;  he  speaks  not  true: 
Some  twenty  of  them  fought  in  this  black  strife. 


SCENE  I 

And  all  those  twenty  could  but  kill  one  life. 

I  beg  for  justice,  which  thou,  Prince,  must  give; 
Romeo  slew  Tybalt,  Romeo  must  not  live. 

Prin.  Romeo  slew  him,  he  slew  Mercutio; 

Who  now  the  price  of  his  dear  blood  doth  owe? 
Mon.  Not  Romeo,  Prince,  he  was  Mercutio’s 
friend;  i8p 

His  fault  concludes  but  what  the  law  should  end, 
The  life  of  Tybalt. 

Prin.  And  for  that  offence 

Immediately  we  do  exile  him  hence: 

I  have  an  interest  in  your  hate’s  proceeding. 

My  blood  for  your  rude  brawls  doth  lie  a-bleed- 

ing; 

But  I’ll  amerce  you  with  so  strong  a  fine 
That  you  shall  all  repent  the  loss  of  mine: 

I  will  be  deaf  to  pleading  and  excuses; 

Nor  tears  nor  prayers  shall  purchase  out  abuses: 
Therefore  use  none:  let  Romeo  hence  in  haste. 
Else,  when  he’s  found,  that  hour  is  his  last.  200 
Bear  hence  this  body  and  attend  our  will: 

Mercy  but  murders,  pardoning  those  that  kill. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  11.  Capulef  s  orchard 
Enter 

Jul.  Gallop  apace,  you  fiery-footed  steeds. 
Towards  Phoebus’  lodging:  such  a  waggoner 
As  Phaethon  would  whip  you  to  the  west. 

And  bring  in  cloudy  night  immediately. 

Spread  thy  close  curtain,  love-performing  night, 
That  runaways’  eyes  may  wink,  and  Romeo 
Leap  to  these  arms,  untalk’d  of  and  unseen. 
Lovers  can  see  to  do  their  amorous  rites 
By  their  own  beauties;  or,  if  love  be  blind, 

It  best  agrees  with  night.  Come,  civil  night,  10 
Thou  sober-suited  matron,  all  in  black. 

And  learn  me  how  to  lose  a  winning  match. 

Play’d  for  a  pair  of  stainless  maidenhoods: 

Hood  my  unmann’d  blood,  bating  in  my  cheeks. 
With  thy  black  mantle;  till  strange  love,  grown 
bold. 

Think  true  love  acted  simple  modesty. 

Come,  night;  come,  Romeo;  come,  thou  day  in 
night; 

For  thou  wilt  lie  upon  the  wings  of  night 
Whiter  than  new  snow  on  a  raven’s  back. 

Come,  gentle  night,  come,  loving,  black-brow’d 
night,  20 

Give  me  my  Romeo;  and,  when  he  shall  die, 

Take  him -and  cut  him  out  in  little  stars. 

And  he  will  make  the  face  of  heaven  so  fine 
That  all  the  world  will  be  in  love  with  night 
And  pay  no  worship  to  the  garish  sun. 

O,  I  have  bought  the  mansion  of  a  love. 

But  not  possess’d  it,  and,  though  I  am  sold. 


303 

Not  yet  enjoy’d:  so  tedious  is  this  day 
As  is  the  night  before  some  festival 
To  an  impatient  child  that  hath  new  robes  50 
And  may  not  wear  them.  O,  here  comes  my 
nurse. 

And  she  brings  news;  and  every  tongue  that 
speaks 

But  Romeo’s  name  speaks  heavenly  eloquence. 

Enter  nurse,  with  cords. 

Now,  nurse,  what  news?  What  hast  thou  there? 
the  cords 

That  Romeo  bid  thee  fetch? 

Nurse.  iVy,  ay,  the  cords. 

Throws  them  down. 

Jul.  Ay  me!  what  news?  why  dost  thou  wring 
thy  hands? 

Nurse.  Ah,  well-a-day!  he’s  dead,  he’s  dead! 

We  are  undone,  lady,  we  are  undone! 

Alack  the  day!  he’s  gone,  he’s  kill’d,  he’s  dead! 
Jul.  Can  heaven  be  so  envious? 

Nurse.  Romeo  can,  40 

Though  heaven  cannot:  O  Romeo,  Romeo! 

Who  ever  would  have  thought  it?  Romeo! 

Jul.  What  devil  art  thou,  that  dost  torment  me 
thus? 

This  torture  should  be  roar’d  in  dismal  hell. 

Hath  Romeo  slain  himself?  say  thou  but  ay. 

And  that  bare  vowel  I  shall  poison  more 
Than  the  death-darting  eye  of  cockatrice: 

I  am  not  I,  if  there  be  such  an  ay. 

Or  those  eyes  shut,  that  make  thee  answer  ay. 

If  he  be  slain,  say  ay;  or  if  not,  no:  50 

Brief  sounds  determine  of  my  weal  or  woe. 

Nurse.  I  saw  the  wound,  I  saw  it  with  mine 
eyes— 

God  save  the  mark! — here  on  his  manly  breast: 

A  piteous  corse,  a  bloody  piteous  corse; 

Pale,  pale  as  ashes,  all  bedaub’d  in  blood. 

All  in  gore-blood;  I  swounded  at  the  sight. 

Jul.  O,  break,  my  heart!  poor  bankrupt,  break 
at  once! 

To  prison,  eyes,  ne’er  look  on  liberty! 

Vile  earth,  to  earth  resign;  end  motion  here; 

And  thou  and  Romeo  press  one  heavy  bier !  60 

Nurse.  O  Tybalt,  Tybalt,  the  best  friend  I 
had! 

O  courteous  Tybalt!  honest  gentleman! 

That  ever  I  should  live  to  see  thee  dead! 

Jul.  What  storm  is  this  that  blows  so  contrary? 
Is  Romeo  slaughter’d,  and  is  Tybalt  dead? 

My  dear-loved  cousin,  and  my  dearer  lord? 

Then,  dreadful  trumpet,  sound  the  general  doom! 
For  who  is  living,  if  those  two  are  gone? 

Nurse.  Tybalt  is  gone,  and  Romeo  banished; 
Romeo  that  kill’d  him,  he  is  banished.  70 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


ACT  HI 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


304 

Jul.  O  God!  did  Romeo’s  hand  shed  Tybalt’s 
blood? 

Nurse.  It  did,  it  did;  alas  the  dav,  it  did! 

Jul.  O  serpent  heart,  hid  with  a  flowering  face! 
Did  ever  dragon  keep  so  fair  a  cave? 

Beautiful  tyrant!  fiend  angelical! 

Dove-feather’d  raven!  wolvish-ravening  lamb! 
Despised  substance  of  divinest  show! 

Just  opposite  to  what  thou  justly  seem’st, 

A  damned  saint,  an  honourable  villain! 

O  nature,  what  hadst  thou  to  do  in  hell,  So 

When  thou  didst  bower  the  spirit  of  a  fiend 
In  mortal  paradise  of  such  sweet  flesh? 

Was  ever  book  containing  such  vile  matter 
So  fairly  bound?  O,  that  deceit  should  dwell 
In  such  a  gorgeous  palace! 

Nurse.  There’s  no  trust, 

No  faith,  no  honesty  in  men;  all  perjured. 

All  forsworn,  all  naught,  all  dissemblers. 

Ah,  where’s  my  man?  give  me  some  aqua  vita: 
These  griefs,  these  woes,  these  sorrows  make  me 
old. 

Shame  come  to  Romeo! 

Jul.  Blister’d  be  thy  tongue  ^0 

For  such  a  wish!  he  was  not  born  to  shame: 

Upon  his  brow  shame  is  ashamed  to  sit; 

For  ’tis  a  throne  where  honour  may  be  crown’d 
Sole  monarch  of  the  universal  earth. 

O,  what  a  beast  was  I  to  chide  at  him! 

Nurse.  Will  you  speak  well  of  him  that  kill’d 
your  cousin? 

Jul.  Shall  I  speak  ill  of  him  that  is  my  husband? 
Ah,  poor  my  lord,  what  tongue  shall  smooth  thy 
name. 

When  I,  thy  three-hours  wife,  have  mangled  it? 
But,  wherefore,  villain,  didst  thou  kill  my 

cousin?  too 

That  villain  cousin  would  have  kill’d  my  husband: 
Back,  foolish  tears,  back  to  your  native  spring; 
Your  tributary  drops  belong  to  woe. 

Which  you,  mistaking,  offer  up  to  joy. 

My  husband  lives,  that  Tybalt  would  have  slain; 
And  Tybalt’s  dead,  that  would  have  slain  my 
husband: 

All  this  is  comfort;  wherefore  weep  I  then? 

Some  word  there  was,  worser  than  Tybalt’s  death. 
That  murder’d  me:  I  would  forget  it  fain; 

But,  O,  it  presses  to  my  memory,  no 

Like  damned  guilty  deeds  to  sinners’  minds: 
“Tybalt  is  dead,  and  Romeo — banished”; 

That  “banished,”  that  one  word  “banished,” 
Hath  slain  ten  thousand  Tybalts.  Tybalt’s  death 
Was  woe  enough,  if  it  had  ended  there: 

Or,  if  sour  woe  delights  in  fellowship 
And  needly  will  be  rank’d  with  other  griefs. 


Why  follow’d  not,  when  she  said  “Tybalt’s 
dead,” 

Thy  father,  or  thy  mother,  nay,  or  both,  //p 
which  modern  lamentation  might  have  moved? 
But  with  a  rearward  following  Tybalt’s  death, 
“Romeo  is  banished,”  to  speak  that  word. 

Is  father,  mother,  Tybalt,  Romeo,  Juliet, 

All  slain,  all  dead.  “Romeo  is  banished!” 

There  is  no  end,  no  limit,  measure,  bound. 

In  that  word’s  death;  no  words  can  that  woe 
sound. 

Where  is  my  father  and  my  mother,  nurse? 
Nurse.  Weeping  and  wailing  over  Tybalt’s 
corse: 

Will  you  go  to  them?  I  will  bring  you  thither. 

Jul.  Wash  they  his  wounds  with  tears:  mine 
shall  be  spent,  /50 

When  theirs  are  dry,  for  Romeo’s  banishment. 
Take  up  those  cords:  poor  ropes,  you  are 
beguiled. 

Both  you  and  I;  for  Romeo  is  exiled: 

He  made  you  for  a  highway  to  my  bed; 

But  I,  a  maid,  die  maiden-widowed. 

Come,  cords,  come,  nurse;  I’ll  to  my  wedding- 
bed; 

And  death,  not  Romeo,  take  my  maidenhead! 
Nurse.  Hie  to  your  chamber:  I’ll  find  Romeo 
To  comfort  you:  I  wot  well  where  he  is. 

Hark  ye,  your  Romeo  will  be  here  at  night:  iq.o 
I’ll  to  him;  he  is  hid  at  Laurence’  cell. 

Jul.  O,  find  him!  give  this  ring  to  my  true 
knight. 

And  bid  him  come  to  take  his  last  farewell. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Friar  Laurence' s  cell 
Enter  friar  Laurence. 

Fri.  L.  Romeo,  come  forth;  come  forth,  thou 
fearful  man: 

Affliction  is  enamour’d  of  thy  parts, 

And  thou  art  wedded  to  calamity. 

Enter  romeo. 

Rom.  Father,  what  news?  what  is  the  Prince’s 
doom? 

What  sorrow  craves  acquaintance  at  my  hand, 
That  I  yet  know  not? 

Fri.  L.  Too  familiar 

Is  my  dear  son  with  such  sour  company: 

I  bring  thee  tidings  of  the  Prince’s  doom. 

Rom.  What  less  than  dooms-day  is  the  Prince’s 
doom? 

Fri.  L.  A  gentler  judgement  vanish’d  from  his 
lips,  10 

Not  body’s  death,  but  body’s  banishment. 


SCENE  III 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


305 


Roni.  Ha,  banishment!  be  merciful,  say 
“death”; 

For  exile  hath  more  terror  in  his  look, 

Much  more  than  death:  do  not  say  “banishment.” 

Fri.  L,  Hence  from  Verona  art  thou  banished: 

Be  patient,  for  the  world  is  broad  and  wide. 

Rom,  There  is  no  world  without  Verona  walls. 
But  purgatory,  torture,  hell  itself. 

Hence-banished  is  banish’d  from  the  world. 

And  world’s  exile  is  death:  then  “banished”  20 
Is  death  mis-term’d:  calling  death  “banishment,” 
Thou  cutt’st  my  head  off  with  a  golden  axe. 

And  smilest  upon  the  stroke  that  murders  me. 

Fri.  L.  O  deadly  sin!  O  rude  unthankfulness! 
Thy  fault  our  law  calls  death;  but  the  kind  prince, 
Taking  thy  part,  hath  rush’d  aside  the  law. 

And  turn’d  that  black  word  “death”  to  “banish¬ 
ment”: 

This  is  dear  mercy,  and  thou  seest  it  not. 

Rom.  ’Tis  torture,  and  not  mercy:  heaven  is 
here. 

Where  Juliet  lives;  and  every  cat  and  dog  50 
And  little  mouse,  every  unworthy  thing. 

Live  here  in  heaven  and  may  look  on  her; 

But  Romeo  may  not:  more  validity. 

More  honourable  state,  more  courtship  lives 
In  carrion-flies  than  Romeo:  they  may  seize 
On  the  white  wonder  of  dear  Juliet’s  hand 
And  steal  immortal  blessing  from  her  lips, 

Who,  even  in  pure  and  vestal  modesty. 

Still  blush,  as  thinking  their  own  kisses  sin; 

But  Romeo  may  not;  he  is  banished :  40 

Flies  may  do  this,  but  I  from  this  must  fly: 

They  are  free  men,  but  I  am  banished: 

And  say’st  thou  yet  that  exile  is  nor  death? 

Hadst  thou  no  poison  mix’d,  no  sharp-ground 
knife. 

No  sudden  mean  of  death,  though  ne’er  so  mean, 
But  “banished”  to  kill  me? — “banished”? 

O  friar,  the  damned  use  that  word  in  hell; 
Howlings  attend  it:  how  hast  thou  the  heart, 
Being  a  divine,  a  ghostly  confessor, 

A  sin-absolver,  and  my  friend  profess’d,  50 
To  mangle  me  with  that  word  “banished”? 

Fri.  L.  Thou  fond  mad  man,  hear  me  but  speak 
a  word. 

Rom.  O,  thou  wilt  speak  again  of  banishment. 
Fri.  L.  I’ll  give  thee  armour  to  keep  off  that 
word; 

Adversity’s  sweet  milk,  philosophy. 

To  comfort  thee,  though  thou  art  banished. 

Rom.  Yet  “banished”?  Hang  up  philosophy! 
Unless  philosophy  can  make  a  Juliet, 

Displant  a  town,  reverse  a  prince’s  doom. 

It  helps  not,  it  prevails  not:  talk  no  more.  60 
Fri.  L.  O,  then  I  see  that  madmen  have  no  ears. 


Rom.  How  should  they,  v.^hen  that  wise  men 
have  no  eyes? 

Fri.  L.  Let  me  dispute  with  thee  of  thy  estate. 
Rom.  Thou  canst  not  speak  of  that  thou  dost 
not  feel: 

Wert  thou  as  young  as  I,  Juliet  thy  love, 

An  hour  but  married,  Tybalt  murdered. 

Doting  like  me  and  like  me  banished. 

Then  mightst  thou  speak,  then  mightst  thou  tear 
thy  hair. 

And  fall  upon  the  ground,  as  I  do  now. 

Taking  the  measure  of  an  unmade  grave.  70 
Knocking  within. 

Fri.  L.  Arise;  one  knocks;  good  Romeo,  hide 
thyself. 

Rom.  Not  I;  unless  the  breath  of  heart-sick 
groans. 

Mist-like,  infold  me  from  the  search  of  eyes. 
Knocking. 

Fri.  L.  Hark,  how  they  knock!  Who’s  there? 
Romeo,  arise; 

Thou  wilt  be  taken.  Stay  awhile!  Stand  up; 
Knocking. 

Run  to  my  study.  By  and  by!  God’s  will. 

What  simpleness  is  this!  I  come,  I  come! 
Knocking. 

Who  knocks  so  hard?  whence  come  you?  what’s 
your  will? 

Nurse.  [Within]  Let  me  come  in,  and  you  shall 
know  my  errand; 

I  come  from  Lady  Juliet. 

Fri.  L.  Welcome,  then.  80 

Enter  nurse. 

Nurse.  O  holy  friar,  O,  tell  me,  holy  friar. 
Where  is  my  lady’s  lord,  where’s  Romeo? 

Fri.  L.  There  on  the  ground,  with  his  own  tears 
made  drunk. 

Nurse.  O,  he  is  even  in  my  mistress’  case. 

Just  in  her  case!  O  woeful  sympathy! 

Piteous  predicament!  Even  so  lies  she. 

Blubbering  and  weeping,  weeping  and  blubbering. 
Stand  up,  stand  up,  stand,  an  you  be  a  man: 

For  Juliet’s  sake,  for  her  sake,  rise  and  stand; 
Why  should  you  fall  into  so  deep  an  O?  90 
Rom.  Nurse! 

Nurse.  Ah  sir!  ah  sir!  Well,  death’s  the  end  of 
all. 

Rom.  Spakest  thou  of  Juliet?  how  is  it  with  her? 
Doth  she  not  think  me  an  old  murderer. 

Now  I  have  stain’d  the  childhood  of  our  joy 
With  blood  removed  but  little  from  her  own? 
Where  is  she?  and  how  doth  she?  and  what  says 
My  conceal’d  lady  to  our  cancell’d  love? 

Nurse.  O,  she  says  nothing,  sir,  but  weeps  and 
weeps; 


ACT  III 


306 

And  now  falls  on  her  bed,  and  then  starts  up, 

And  Tybalt  calls;  and  then  on  Romeo  cries. 

And  then  down  falls  again. 

R(mi.  As  if  that  name, 

Shot  from  the  deadly  level  of  a  gun. 

Did  murder  her;  as  that  name’s  cursed  hand 
Murder’d  her  kinsman.  O,  tell  me,  friar,  tell  me, 
In  what  vile  part  of  this  anatomy 
Doth  my  name  lodge?  tell  me,  that  I  may  sack 
The  hateful  mansion.  [Drauing  his  suvrd.] 

Fri.  L.  Hold  thy  desperate  hand: 

Art  thou  a  man?  thy  form  cries  out  thou  art: 
Thy  tears  are  womanish;  thy  wild  acts  denote 
The  unreasonable  fury  of  a  beast:  /// 

Unseemly  woman  in  a  seeming  man! 

Or  ill-beseeming  beast  in  seeming  both! 

Thou  hast  amazed  me;  by  my  holy  order, 

I  thought  thy  disposition  better  temper’d. 

Hast  thou  slain  Tybalt?  wilt  thou  slay  thyself? 
And  slay  thy  lady  too  that  lives  in  thee, 

By  doing  damned  hate  upon  thyself? 

Why  rail’st  thou  on  thy  birth,  the  heaven,  and 
earth? 

Since  birth,  and  heaven,  and  earth,  all  three  do 
meet  120 

In  thee  at  once;  which  thou  at  once  wouldst  lose. 
Fie,  fie,  thou  shamest  thy  shape,  thy  love,  thy 
wit; 

Which,  like  a  usurer,  abound’st  in  all. 

And  usest  none  in  that  true  use  indeed 
Which  should  bedeck  thy  shape,  thy  love,  thy 
wit: 

Thy  noble  shape  is  but  a  form  of  wax, 

Digressing  from  the  valour  of  a  man; 

Thy  dear  love  sworn  but  hollow  perjury. 

Killing  that  love  which  thou  hast  vow’d  to 
cherish; 

Thy  wit,  that  ornament  to  shape  and  love,  /50 
Mis-shapen  in  the  conduct  of  them  both. 

Like  powder  in  a  skilless  soldier’s  flask. 

Is  set  a-fire  by  thine  own  ignorance. 

And  thou  dismember’d  with  thine  own  defence. 
What,  rouse  thee,  man!  thy  Juliet  is  alive. 

For  whose  dear  sake  thou  wast  but  lately  dead; 
There  art  thou  happy:  Tybalt  would  kill  thee. 
But  thou  slew’st  Tybalt;  there  art  thou  happy 
too; 

The  law  that  threaten’d  death  becomes  thy  friend 
And  turns  it  to  exile;  there  art  thou  happy:  /40 
A  pack  of  blessings  lights  upon  thy  back; 
Happiness  courts  thee  in  her  best  array; 

But,  like  a  misbehaved  and  sullen  wench. 

Thou  pout’st  upon  thy  fortune  and  thy  love: 

Take  heed,  take  heed,  for  such  die  miserable. 

Go,  get  thee  to  thy  love,  as  was  decreed. 

Ascend  her  chamber,  hence  and  comfort  her; 


But  look  thou  stay  not  till  the  watch  be  set. 

For  then  thou  canst  not  pass  to  Mantua; 

Where  thou  shalt  live,  till  we  can  find  a  time  /50 
To  blaze  your  marriage,  reconcile  your  friends. 
Beg  pardon  of  the  Prince,  and  call  thee  back 
With  twenty  hundred  thousand  times  more  joy 
Than  thou  went’st  forth  in  lamentation. 

Go  before,  nurse:  commend  me  to  thy  lady; 

And  bid  her  hasten  all  the  house  to  bed. 

Which  heavy  sorrow  makes  them  apt  unto: 
Romeo  is  coming. 

Nurse.  O  Lord,  I  could  have  stay’d  here  all  the 
night 

To  hear  good  counsel:  O,  what  learning  is!  160 
My  lord.  I’ll  tell  my  lady  you  will  come. 

Rom.  Do  so,  and  bid  my  sweet  prepare  to  chide. 
Nurse.  Here,  sir,  a  ring  she  bid  me  give  you,  sir: 
Hie  you,  make  haste,  for  it  grows  very  late. 

[Exit. 

Rom.  How  well  my  comfort  is  revived  by  this! 
Fri.  L.  Go  hence;  good  night;  and  here  stands 
all  youi  state: 

Either  be  gone  before  the  watch  be  set. 

Or  by  the  break  of  day  disguised  from  hence: 
Sojourn  in  Mantua;  I’ll  find  out  your  man. 

And  he  shall  signify  from  time  to  time  ijo 

Every  good  hap  to  you  that  chances  here; 

Give  me  thy  hand;  ’tis  late:  farewell;  good 
night. 

Rom.  But  that  a  joy  past  joy  calls  out  on  me. 

It  were  a  grief,  so  brief  to  part  with  thee  : 
Farewell.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  A  room  in  Capulet^s  house 

CAPULET,  LADY  CAPULET,  and  PARIS. 

Cap.  Things  have  fall’n  out,  sir,  so  unluckily. 
That  we  have  had  no  time  to  move  our  daughter: 
Look  you,  she  loved  her  kinsman  Tybalt  dearly. 
And  so  did  1.  Well,  we  were  born  to  die. 

’Tis  very  late,  she’ll  not  come  down  to-night: 

I  promise  you,  but  for  your  company, 

I  would  have  been  a-bed  an  hour  ago. 

Par.  These  times  of  woe  afford  no  time  to  woo. 
Madam,  good  night:  commend  me  to  your 
daughter. 

La.  Cap.  I  will,  and  know  her  mind  early  to¬ 
morrow;  10 

To-night  she  is  mew’d  up  to  her  heaviness. 

Gjf/7.  Sir  Paris,  I  will  make  a  desperate  tender 
Of  my  child’s  love:  I  think  she  will  be  ruled 
In  all  respects  by  me;  nay,  more,  I  doubt  it  not. 
Wife,  go  you  to  her  ere  you  go  to  bed; 

Acquaint  her  here  of  my  son  Paris’  love; 

And  bid  her,  mark  you  me,  on  Wednesday  next — 
But,  soft!  what  day  is  this? 

Par.  Monday,  my  lord. 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 
100 


SCENE  IV 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


^07 


Cap.  Monday!  ha,  ha!  Well,  Wednesday  is  too 
soon, 

O’  Thursday  let  it  be:  o’  Thursday,  tell  her,  20 
She  shall  be  married  to  this  noble  earl. 

Will  you  be  ready?  do  you  like  this  haste? 

We’ll  keep  no  great  ado — a  friend  or  two; 

For,  hark  you,  Tybalt  being  slain  so  late. 

It  may  be  thought  we  held  him  carelessly, 

Being  our  kinsman,  if  we  revel  much: 

Therefore  we’ll  have  some  half  a  dozen  friends. 
And  there  an  end.  But  what  say  you  to  Thursday? 
Par.  My  lord,  I  would  that  Thursday  were  to¬ 
morrow. 

Cap.  Well,  get  you  gone:  o’  Thursday  be  it, 
then. 

Go  you  to  Juliet  ere  you  go  to  bed. 

Prepare  her,  wife,  against  this  wedding-day. 
Farewell,  my  lord.  Light  to  my  chamber,  ho! 
Afore  me!  it  is  so  very  very  late. 

That  we  may  call  it  early  by  and  by. 

Good  night.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  Capulet's  orchard 
Enter  romeo  and  juliet  above,  at  the  voindovo. 
Jul.  Wilt  thou  be  gone?  it  is  not  yet  near  day: 

It  was  the  nightingale,  and  not  the  lark, 

That  pierced  the  fearful  hollow  of  thine  ear; 
Nightly  she  sings  on  yon  pomegranate-tree: 
Believe  me,  love,  it  was  the  nightingale. 

Rom.  It  was  the  lark,  the  herald  of  the  morn. 

No  nightingale:  look,  love,  what  envious  streaks 
Do  lace  the  severing  clouds  in  yonder  east: 
Night’s  candles  are  burnt  out,  and  jocund  day 
Stands  tiptoe  on  the  misty  mountain  tops.  10 
I  must  be  gone  and  live,  or  stay  and  die. 

Jul.  Yon  light  is  not  day-light,  I  know  it,  I: 

It  is  some  meteor  that  the  sun  exhales. 

To  be  to  thee  this  night  a  torch-bearer, 

And  light  thee  on  thy  way  to  Mantua: 

Therefore  stay  yet;  thou  need’st  not  to  be  gone. 

Rom.  Let  me  be  ta’en,  let  me  be  put  to  death; 

I  am  content,  so  thou  wilt  have  it  so. 

I’ll  say  yon  grey  is  not  the  morning’s  eye, 

’Tis  but  the  pale  reflex  of  Cynthia’s  brow;  20 
Nor  that  is  not  the  lark,  whose  notes  do  beat 
The  vaulty  heaven  so  high  above  our  heads: 

I  have  more  care  to  stay  than  will  to  go: 

Come,  death,  and  welcome!  Juliet  wills  it  so. 
How  is’t,  my  soul?  let’s  talk;  it  is  not  day. 

Jul.  It  is,  it  is:  hie  hence,  be  gone,  away! 

It  is  the  lark  that  sings  so  out  of  tune. 

Straining  harsh  discords  and  unpleasing  sharps. 
Some  say  the  lark  makes  sweet  division; 

This  doth  not  so,  for  she  divideth  us: 

Some  say  the  lark  and  loathed  toad  change  eyes; 
O,  now  I  would  they  had  changed  voices  too! 


Since  arm  from  arm  that  voice  doth  us  affray. 
Hunting  thee  hence  with  hunt’s-up  to  the  day. 

O,  now  be  gone;  more  light  and  light  it  grows. 
Rom.  More  light  and  light;  more  dark  and  dark 
our  woes! 

Enter  nurse,  to  the  chamber. 

Nurse.  Madam! 

Jul.  Nurse? 

Nurse.  Your  lady  mother  is  coming  to  your 
chamber: 

The  day  is  broke;  be  wary,  look  about.  [Exit.  40 
Jul.  Then,  window,  let  day  in,  and  let  life  out. 
Rom.  Farewell,  farewell!  one  kiss,  and  I’ll 
descend .  [He  goeth  dozen . 

Jul.  Art  thou  gone  so?  love,  lord,  ay,  husband, 
friend! 

I  must  hear  from  thee  every  day  in  the  hour. 

For  in  a  minute  there  are  many  days: 

O,  by  this  count  I  shall  be  much  in  years 
Ere  I  again  behold  my  Romeo! 

Rom.  Farewell! 

I  will  omit  no  opportunity 

That  may  convey  my  greetings,  love,  to  thee.  50 
Jul.  O,  think’st  thou  we  shall  ever  meet  again? 
Rom.  I  doubt  it  not;  and  all  these  woes  shall 
serve 

For  sweet  discourses  in  our  time  to  come. 

Jul.  O  God,  I  have  an  ill-divining  soul! 

Methinks  I  see  thee,  now  thou  art  below. 

As  one  dead  in  the  bottom  of  a  tomb: 

Either  my  eyesight  fails,  or  thou  look’st  pale. 
Rom.  And  trust  me,  love,  in  my  eye  so  do 
you: 

Dry  sorrow  drinks  our  blood.  Adieu,  adieu! 

[Exit. 

Jul.  O  Fortune,  Fortune!  all  men  call  thee 
fickle:  60 

If  thou  art  fickle,  what  dost  thou  with  him 
That  is  renown’d  for  faith?  Be  fickle.  Fortune; 
For  then,  I  hope,  thou  wilt  not  keep  him  long. 

But  send  him  back. 

La.  Cap.  [Within^  Ho,  daughter!  are  you  up? 

Jul.  Who  is’t  that  calls?  is  it  my  lady  mother? 

Is  she  not  down  so  late,  or  up  so  early? 

What  unaccustom’d  cause  procures  her  hither? 

Enter  lady  capulet. 

La.  Cap.  Why,  how  now,  Juliet! 

Jul.  Madam,  I  am  not  well. 

La.  Cap.  Evermore  weeping  for  your  cousin’s 
death?  70 

What,  wilt  thou  wash  him  from  his  grave  with 
tears? 

An  if  thou  couldst,  thou  couldst  not  make  him 
live; 


ACT  III 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


308 

Therefore,  have  done:  some  grief  shows  much  of 
love; 

But  much  of  grief  shows  still  some  want  of  wit. 
Jul.  Yet  let  me  weep  for  such  a  feeling  loss. 

La,  Cap.  So  shall  you  feel  the  loss,  but  not  the 
friend 

Which  you  weep  for. 

Jul.  Feeling  so  the  loss, 

I  cannot  choose  but  ever  weep  the  friend. 

La.  Cap.  Well,  girl,  thou  weep’st  not  so  much 
for  his  death. 

As  that  the  villain  lives  which  slaughter’d  him. 
Jul.  What  villain,  madam?  Si 

La.  Cap.  That  same  villain,  Romeo. 

Jul.  [Aside]  Villain  and  he  be  many  miles 
asunder. — 

God  pardon  him!  I  do,  with  all  my  heart; 

And  yet  no  man  like  he  doth  grieve  my  heart. 

La.  Cap.  That  is,  because  the  traitor  murderer 
lives. 

Jul.  Ay,  madam,  from  the  reach  of  these  my 
hands : 

Would  none  but  I  might  venge  my  cousin’s  death! 
La.  Cap.  We  will  have  vengeance  for  it,  fear 
thou  not: 

Then  weep  no  more.  I’ll  send  to  one  in  Mantua, 
Where  that  same  banish’d  runagate  doth  live. 
Shall  give  him  such  an  unaccustom’d  dram, 

That  he  shall  soon  keep  Tybalt  company: 

And  then,  I  hope,  thou  wilt  be  satisfied. 

Jul.  Indeed,  I  never  shall  be  satisfied 
With  Romeo,  till  I  behold  him — dead — 

Is  my  poor  heart  so  for  a  kinsman  vex’d: 

Madam,  if  you  could  find  out  but  a  man 
To  bear  a  poison,  I  would  temper  it; 

That  Romeo  should,  upon  receipt  thereof. 

Soon  sleep  in  quiet.  O,  how  my  heart  abhors  wo 
To  hear  him  named,  and  cannot  come  to  him. 

To  wreak  the  love  I  bore  my  cousin 
Upon  his  body  that  hath  slaughter’d  him! 

La.  Cap.  Find  thou  the  means,  and  I’ll  find  such 
a  man. 

But  now  I’ll  tell  thee  joyful  tidings,  girl. 

Jul.  And  joy  comes  well  in  such  a  needy  time: 
What  are  they,  I  beseech  your  ladyship? 

La.  Cap.  Well,  well,  thou  hast  a  careful  father, 
child; 

One  who,  to  put  thee  from  thy  heaviness. 

Hath  sorted  out  a  sudden  day  of  joy,  no 

That  thou  expect’ st  not  nor  I  look’d  not  for. 

Jul.  Madam,  in  happy  time,  what  day  is  that? 

La.  Cap.  Marry,  my  child,  early  next  Thursday 
morn. 

The  gallant,  young  and  noble  gentleman. 

The  County  Paris,  at  Saint  Peter’s  Church, 

Shall  happily  make  thee  there  a  joyful  bride. 


Jul.  Now,  by  Saint  Peter’s  Church  and  Peter 
too. 

He  shall  not  make  me  there  a  joyful  bride. 

I  wonder  at  this  haste;  that  I  must  wed 
Ere  he,  that  should  be  husband,  comes  to  woo. 

I  pray  you,  tell  my  lord  and  father,  madam,  121 
I  will  not  marry  yet;  and,  when  I  do,  I  swear. 

It  shall  be  Romeo,  whom  you  know  I  hate. 

Rather  than  Paris.  These  are  news  indeed! 

La.  Cap.  Here  comes  your  father;  tell  him  so 
yourself. 

And  see  how  he  will  take  it  at  your  hands. 

Enter  capulet  and  nurse. 

Cap.  When  the  sun  sets,  the  air  doth  drizzle 
dew; 

But  for  the  sunset  of  my  brother’s  son 
It  rains  downright. 

How  now!  a  conduit,  girl?  what,  still  in  tears? 
Evermore  showering?  In  one  little  body  75/ 

Thou  counterfeit’st  a  bark,  a  sea,  a  wind; 

For  still  thy  eyes,  which  I  may  call  the  sea. 

Do  ebb  and  flow  with  tears;  the  bark  thy  body  is. 
Sailing  in  this  salt  flood;  the  winds,  thy  sighs; 
Who,  raging  with  thy  tears,  and  they  with  them. 
Without  a  sudden  calm,  will  overset 
Thy  tempest-tossed  body.  How  now,  wife! 

Have  you  deliver’d  to  her  our  decree? 

La.  Cap.  Ay,  sir;  but  she  will  none,  she  gives 
you  thanks.  140 

I  would  the  fool  were  married  to  her  grave! 

Cap.  Soft!  take  me  with  you,  take  me  with  you, 
wife. 

How!  will  she  none?  doth  she  not  give  us  thanks? 
Is  she  not  proud?  doth  she  not  count  her  blest. 
Unworthy  as  she  is,  that  we  have  wrought 
So  worthy  a  gentleman  to  be  her  bridegroom? 

Jul.  Not  proud  you  have;  but  thankful  that  you 
have: 

Proud  can  I  never  be  of  what  I  hate; 

But  thankful  even  for  hate  that  is  meant  love. 

Cap.  How  now,  how  now,  chop-logic!  What  is 
this?  /JO 

“Proud,”  and  “I  thank  you,”  and  “I  thank  you 
not”; 

And  yet  “not  proud”:  mistress  minion,  you. 
Thank  me  no  thankings,  nor  proud  me  no  prouds. 
But  fettle  your  fine  joints  ’gainst  Thursday  next. 
To  go  with  Paris  to  Saint  Peter’s  Church, 

Or  I  will  drag  thee  on  a  hurdle  thither. 

Out,  you  green-sickness  carrion!  out,  you  bag¬ 
gage! 

You  tallow-face! 

La.  Cap.  Fie,  fie!  what,  are  you  mad? 

Jul.  Good  father,  I  beseech  you  on  my  knees. 
Hear  me  with  patience  but  to  speak  a  word.  160 


SCENE  V 

Cap.  Hang  thee,  young  baggage!  disobedient 
wretch ! 

I  tell  thee  what:  get  thee  to  church  o’  Thursday, 
Or  never  after  look  me  in  the  face: 

Speak  not,  reply  not,  do  not  answer  me; 

My  fingers  itch.  Wife,  we  scarce  thought  us 
blest 

That  God  had  lent  us  but  this  only  child; 

But  now  I  see  this  one  is  one  too  much. 

And  that  we  have  a  curse  in  having  her: 

Out  on  her,  hilding! 

Nurse.  God  in  heaven  bless  her! 

You  are  to  blame,  my  lord,  to  rate  her  so.  /70 
Cap.  And  why,  my  lady  Wisdom?  hold  your 
tongue, 

Good  prudence;  smarter  with  your  gossips,  go. 
Nurse.  I  speak  no  treason. 

Cap.  O,  God  ye  god-den. 

Nurse.  May  not  one  speak? 

Cap.  Peace,  you  mumbling  fool! 

Utter  your  gravity  o’er  a  gossip’s  bowl; 

For  here  we  need  it  not. 

L^.  Cap.  You  are  too  hot. 

Cap.  God’s  bread!  it  makes  me  mad: 

Day,  night,  hour,  tide,  time,  work,  play. 

Alone,  in  company,  still  my  care  hath  been  ijp 
To  have  her  match’d:  and  having  now  provided 
A  gentleman  of  noble  parentage. 

Of  fair  demesnes,  youthful,  and  nobly  train’d. 
Stuff’d,  as  they  say,  with  honourable  parts. 
Proportion’d  as  one’s  thought  would  wish  a  man; 
And  then  to  have  a  wretched  puling  fool, 

A  whining  mammet,  in  her  fortune’s  tender. 

To  answer  “I’ll  nor  wed;  I  cannot  love, 

1  am  too  young;  I  pray  you,  pardon  me.” 

But,  an  you  will  not  wed.  I’ll  pardon  you: 

Graze  where  you  will,  you  shall  not  house  with 
me:  ipo 

Look  to’t,  think  on’t,  I  do  not  use  to  jest. 
Thursday  is  near;  lay  hand  on  heart,  advise: 

An  you  be  mine.  I’ll  give  you  to  my  friend; 

An  you  be  not,  hang,  beg,  starve,  die  in  the 
streets. 

For,  by  my  soul.  I’ll  ne’er  acknowledge  thee. 

Nor  what  is  mine  shall  never  do  thee  good: 

Trust  to’t,  bethink  you;  I’ll  not  be  forsworn. 

[Exit. 

]ul.  Is  there  no  pity  sitting  in  the  clouds. 

That  sees  into  the  bottom  of  my  grief? 

O,  sweet  my  mother,  cast  me  not  away!  200 
Delay  this  marriage  for  a  month,  a  week; 

Or,  if  you  do  not,  make  the  bridal  bed 
In  that  dim  monument  where  Tybalt  lies. 

La.  Cap  Talk  not  to  me,  for  I’ll  not  speak  a 
word: 

Do  as  thou  wilt,  for  I  have  done  with  thee.  [Exit. 


309 

Jul.  O  God! — O  nurse,  how  shall  this  be  pre¬ 
vented? 

My  husband  is  on  earth,  my  faith  in  heaven; 

How  shall  that  faith  return  again  to  earth. 

Unless  that  husband  send  it  me  from  heaven 
By  leaving  earth?  comfort  me,  counsel  me.  210 
Alack,  alack,  that  heaven  should  practise  strata¬ 
gems 

Upon  so  soft  a  subject  as  myself! 

What  say’st  thou?  hast  thou  not  a  word  of  joy? 
Some  comfort,  nurse. 

Nurse.  Faith,  here  it  is. 

Romeo  is  banish’d;  and  all  the  world  to  nothing 
That  he  dares  ne’er  come  back  to  challenge  you; 
Or,  if  he  do,  it  needs  must  be  by  stealth. 

Then,  since  the  case  so  stands  as  now  it  doth, 

I  think  it  best  you  married  with  the  County. 

O,  he’s  a  lovely  gentleman!  220 

Romeo’s  a  dishclout  to  him:  an  eagle,  madam. 
Hath  not  so  green,  so  quick,  so  fair  an  eye 
As  Paris  hath.  Beshrew  my  very  heart, 

I  think  you  are  happy  in  this  second  match. 

For  it  excels  your  first:  or  if  it  did  not. 

Your  first  is  dead;  or  ’twere  as  good  he  were 
As  living  here  and  you  no  use  of  him. 

Jul.  Speakest  thou  from  thy  heart? 

Nurse.  And  from  my  soul  too; 

Or  else  beshrew  them  both. 

Jul.  Amen! 

Nurse.  What? 

Jul.  Well,  thou  hast  comforted  me  marvellous 
much.  250 

Go  in;  and  tell  my  lady  I  am  gone. 

Having  displeased  my  father,  to  Laurence’  cell, 
To  make  confession  and  to  be  absolved. 

Nurse.  Marry,  I  will;  and  this  is  wisely  done. 

[Exit. 

Jul.  Ancient  damnation!  O  most  wicked  fiend! 

Is  it  more  sin  to  wish  me  thus  forsworn. 

Or  to  dispraise  my  lord  with  that  same  tongue 
Which  she  hath  praised  him  with  above  compare 
So  many  thousand  times?  Go,  counsellor;  2^^ 
Thou  and  my  bosom  henceforth  shall  be  twain. 
I’ll  to  the  friar,  to  know  his  remedy: 

If  all  else  fail,  myself  have  power  to  die.  [Exit. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  Friar  Laurence's  cell 
Enter  frur  Laurence  and  paris. 

Fri.  L.  On  Thursday,  sir?  the  time  is  very 
short. 

Par.  My  father  Capulet  will  have  it  so; 

And  I  am  nothing  slow  to  slack  his  haste. 

Fri.  L.  You  say  you  do  not  know  the  lady’s 
mind: 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


ACT  IV 


ROMEO  AND  lULIET 


Uneven  is  the  course,  I  like  it  not. 

Par.  Immoderately  she  weeps  for  Tybalt’s 
death. 

And  therefore  have  I  little  talk’d  of  love; 

For  Venus  smiles  not  in  a  house  of  tears. 

Now,  sir,  her  father  counts  it  dangerous 
That  she  doth  give  her  sorrow  so  much  sway,  lo 
And  in  his  wisdom  hastes  our  marriage. 

To  stop  the  inundation  of  her  rears; 

Which,  too  much  minded  by  herself  alone, 

May  be  put  from  her  by  society: 

Now  do  you  know  the  reason  of  this  haste. 

Fri.  L.  [Aside]  I  would  I  knew  not  why  it 
should  be  slow’d. 

Look,  sir,  here  comes  the  lady  towards  my  cell. 
Enter  }\JIAKT. 

Par.  Happily  met,  my  lady  and  my  wife! 

]ul.  That  may  be,  sir,  when  I  may  be  a  wife. 

Par.  That  may  be  must  be,  love,  on  Thursday 
next.  20 

Jul.  What  must  be  shall  be. 

Fri.  L.  That’s  a  certain  text. 

Par.  Come  you  to  make  confession  to  this 
father? 

]ul.  To  answer  that,  I  should  confess  to  you. 

Par.  Do  not  deny  to  him  that  you  love  me. 

Jul.  I  will  confess  to  you  that  I  love  him. 

Par.  So  will  ye,  I  am  sure,  that  you  love  me. 

Jul.  If  I  do  so,  it  will  be  of  more  price. 

Being  spoke  behind  your  back,  than  to  your  face. 
Par.  Poor  soul,  thy  face  is  much  abused  with 
tears. 

Jul.  The  tears  have  got  small  victory  by  that; 
For  it  was  bad  enough  before  their  spite.  5/ 
Par.  Thou  wrong’ st  it,  more  than  tears,  with 
that  report. 

Jul.  That  is  no  slander,  sir,  which  is  a  truth; 

And  what  I  spake,  I  spake  it  to  my  face. 

Par.  Thy  face  is  mine,  and  thou  hast  slander’d  it. 
Jul.  It  may  be  so,  for  it  is  not  mine  own. 

Are  you  at  leisure,  holy  father,  now; 

Or  shall  I  come  to  you  at  evening  mass? 

Fri.  L.  My  leisure  serves  me,  pensive  daughter, 
now. 

My  lord,  we  must  entreat  the  time  alone.  40 
Par.  God  shield  I  should  disturb  devotion! 

Juliet,  on  Thursday  early  will  I  rouse  ye: 

Till  then,  adieu;  and  keep  this  holy  kiss.  [Exit. 
Jul.  O,  shut  the  door!  and  when  thou  hast  done 
so. 

Come  weep  with  me;  past  hope,  past  cure,  past 
help! 

Fri.  L.  Ah,  Juliet.  I  already  know  thy  grief; 

It  strains  me  past  the  compass  of  my  wits: 

1  hear  thou  must,  and  nothing  may  prorogue  it, 


On  Thursday  next  be  married  to  this  County. 

Jul.  Tell  me  not»  friar,  that  thou  hear’st  of  this. 
Unless  thou  tell  me  how  I  may  prevent  it:  y/ 

If,  in  thy  wisdom,  thou  canst  give  no  help. 

Do  thou  but  call  my  resolution  wise. 

And  with  this  knife  I’ll  help  it  presently. 

God  join’d  my  heart  and  Romeo’s,  thou  our 
hands; 

And  ere  this  hand,  by  thee  to  Romeo  seal’d. 

Shall  be  the  label  to  another  deed. 

Or  my  true  heart  with  treacherous  revolt 
Turn  to  another,  this  shall  slay  them  both: 
Therefore,  out  of  thy  long-experienced  time,  60 
Give  me  some  present  counsel,  or,  behold, 

’Twixt  my  extremes  and  me  this  bloody  knife 
Shall  play  the  umpire,  arbitrating  that 
Which  the  commission  of  thy  years  and  art 
Could  to  no  issue  of  true  honour  bring. 

Be  not  so  long  to  speak;  I  long  to  die. 

If  what  thou  speak’ St  speak  not  of  remedy. 

Fri.  L.  Hold,  daughter:  I  do  spy  a  kind  of  hope. 
Which  craves  as  desperate  an  execution 
As  that  is  desperate  which  we  would  prevent,  jo 
If,  rather  than  to  marry  County  Paris, 

Thou  hast  the  strength  of  will  to  slay  thyself. 
Then  is  it  likely  thou  wilt  undertake 
A  thing  like  death  to  chide  away  this  shame. 

That  copest  with  death  himself  to  scape  from  it  , 
And,  if  thou  darest.  I’ll  give  thee  remedy. 

Jul.  O,  bid  me  leap,  rather  than  marry  Paris, 
From  off  the  battlements  of  yonder  tower; 

Or  walk  in  thievish  ways;  or  bid  me  lurk 
Where  serpents  are;  chain  me  with  roaring  bears; 
Or  shut  me  nightly  in  a  charnel-house,  81 

O’er-cover’d  quite  with  dead  men’s  rattling 
bones. 

With  reeky  shanks  and  yellow  chapless  skulls; 
Or  bid  me  go  into  a  new-made  grave 
And  hide  me  with  a  dead  man  in  his  shroud; 
Things  that,  to  hear  them  told,  have  made  me 
tremble; 

And  I  will  do  it  without  fear  or  doubt. 

To  live  an  unstain’d  wife  to  my  sweet  love. 

Fri.  L.  Hold,  then;  go  home,  be  merry,  give 
consent 

To  marry  Paris:  Wednesday  is  to-morrow:  ^0 
To-morrow  night  look  that  thou  lie  alone; 

Let  not  thy  nurse  lie  with  thee  in  thy  chamber: 
Take  thou  this  vial,  being  then  in  bed. 

And  this  distilled  liquor  drink  thou  off; 

When  presently  through  all  thy  veins  shall  run 
A  cold  and  drowsy  humour,  for  no  pulse 
Shall  keep  his  native  progress,  but  surcease: 

No  warmth,  no  breath,  shall  testify  thou  livest; 
The  roses  in  thy  lips  and  cheeks  shall  fade 
To  paly  ashes,  thy  eyes’  windows  fall,  too 


SCENE  I 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


Like  death,  when  he  shuts  up  the  day  of  life; 

Each  part,  deprived  of  supple  government. 

Shall,  stiff  and  stark  and  cold,  appear  like  death: 
And  in  this  borrow’d  likeness  of  shrunk  death 
Thou  shalt  continue  two  and  forty  hours. 

And  then  awake  as  from  a  pleasant  sleep. 

Now,  when  the  bridegroom  in  the  morning  comes 
To  rouse  thee  from  thy  bed,  there  art  thou  dead: 
Then,  as  the  manner  of  our  country  is. 

In  thy  best  robes  uncover’d  on  the  bier  uo 

Thou  shalt  be  borne  to  that  same  ancient  vault 
Where  all  the  kindred  of  the  Capulets  lie. 

In  the  mean  time,  against  thou  shalt  awake, 

Shall  Romeo  by  my  letters  know  our  drift. 

And  hither  shall  he  come:  and  he  and  I 
Will  watch  thy  waking,  and  that  very  night 
Shall  Romeo  bear  thee  hence  to  Mantua. 

And  this  shall  free  thee  from  this  present  shame; 
If  no  inconstant  toy,  nor  womanish  fear. 

Abate  thy  valour  in  the  acting  it.  120 

Jul.  Give  me,  give  me!  O,  tell  not  me  of  fear! 

Fri,  L.  Hold;  get  you  gone,  be  strong  and 
prosperous 

In  this  resolve:  I’ll  send  a  friar  with  speed 
To  Mantua,  with  my  letters  to  thy  lord. 

Jul.  Love  give  me  strength!  and  strength  shall 
help  afford. 

Farewell,  dear  father!  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Hall  in  Capulefs  house 
Enter  capulet,  lady  capulet,  nurse,  and 

TWO  SERVINGMEN. 

Cap.  So  many  guests  invite  as  here  are  writ. 

[Exit  I  ST  SERVANT. 

Sirrah,  go  hire  me  twenty  cunning  cooks. 

2nd  Serv.  You  shall  have  none  ill,  sir;  for  I’ll  try 
if  they  can  lick  their  fingers. 

Cap.  How  canst  thou  try  them  so? 

2nd  Serv.  Marry,  sir,  ’tis  an  ill  cook  that  can¬ 
not  lick  his  own  fingers:  therefore  he  that  can¬ 
not  lick  his  fingers  goes  not  with  me 
Cap.  Go,  be  gone.  [Exit  znd  servant. 

We  shall  be  much  unfiirnish’d  for  this  time.  10 
What,  is  my  daughter  gone  to  Friar  Laurence? 
Nurse.  Ay,  forsooth. 

Cap.  Well,  he  may  chance  to  do  some  good  on 
her: 

A  peevish  self-will’d  harlotry  it  is. 

Nurse.  See  where  she  comes  from  shrift  with 
merry  look. 

Enter  jvi^iET. 

Cap.  How  now,  my  headstrong!  where  have 
you  been  gadding? 

Jul.  Where  I  have  learn’d  me  to  repent  the  sin 
Of  disobedient  opposition 


To  you  and  your  behests,  and  am  enjoin’d 
By  holy  Laurence  to  fall  prostrate  here,  20 
And  beg  your  pardon:  pardon,  I  beseech  you! 
Henceforward  I  am  ever  ruled  by  you. 

Cap.  Send  for  the  County;  go  tell  him  of  this: 

I’ll  have  this  knot  knit  up  to-morrow  morning. 
Jul.  I  met  the  youthful  lord  at  Laurence’  cell; 
And  gave  him  what  becomed  love  I  might. 

Not  stepping  o’er  the  bounds  of  modesty. 

Cap.  Why,  I  am  glad  on’t;  this  is  well :  stand 
up: 

This  is  as’t  should  be.  Let  me  see  the  County; 

Ay,  marry,  go,  I  say,  and  fetch  him  hither.  50 
Now,  afore  God!  this  reverend  holy  friar. 

All  our  whole  city  is  much  bound  to  him. 

Jul.  Nurse,  will  go  with  me  into  my  closet, 

To  help  me  sort  such  needful  ornaments 
As  you  think  fit  to  furnish  me  to-morrow? 

Im.  Cap.  No,  not  till  Thursday;  there  is  time 
enough. 

Cap.  Go  nurse,  go  with  her:  we’ll  to  church 
to-morrow.  [Exeunt  juliet  and  nurse. 
La.  Cap.  We  shall  be  short  in  our  provision: 

’Tis  now  near  night. 

Cap.  Tush,  I  will  stir  about. 

And  all  things  shall  be  well,  I  warrant  thee,  wife: 
Go  thou  to  J uliet,  help  to  deck  up  her ;  4/ 

I’ll  not  to  bed  to-night;  let  me  alone; 

I’ll  play  the  housewife  for  this  once.  What,  ho! 
They  are  all  forth.  Well,  I  will  walk  myself 
To  County  Paris,  to  prepare  him  up 
Against  to-morrow:  my  heart  is  wondrous  light. 
Since  this  same  wayward  girl  is  so  reclaim’d. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Juliet' s  chamber 
Enter  ]\jiAET  and  nurse. 

Jul.  Ay,  those  attires  are  best:  but,  gentle 
nurse, 

I  pray  thee,  leave  me  to  myself  to-night; 

For  I  have  need  of  many  orisons 
To  move  the  heavens  to  smile  upon  my  state. 
Which,  well  thou  know’st,  is  cross  and  full  of 
sin. 

Enter  lady  capulet. 

La.  Cap.  What,  are  you  busy,  ho?  need  you 
my  help? 

Jul.  No,  madam;  we  have  cull’d  such  neces¬ 
saries 

As  are  behoveful  for  our  state  to-morrow: 

So  please  you,  let  me  now  be  left  alone. 

And  let  the  nurse  this  night  sit  up  with  you;  10 
For,  I  am  sure,  you  have  your  hands  full  all. 

In  this  so  sudden  business. 

La.  Cap.  Good  night: 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


Get  thee  to  bed,  and  rest;  for  thou  hast  need. 

[Exeunt  lady  capulet  and  nurse. 
Jul.  Farewell!  God  knows  when  we  shall  meet 
again. 

I  have  a  faint  cold  fear  thrills  though  my 
veins, 

That  almost  freezes  up  the  heat  of  life: 
ril  call  them  back  again  to  comfort  me: 

Nurse!  What  should  she  do  here? 

My  dismal  scene  I  needs  must  act  alone. 

Come,  vial.  20 

What  if  this  mixture  do  not  work  at  all? 

Shall  I  be  married  then  to-morrow  morning? 

No,  no:  this  shall  forbid  it:  lie  thou  there. 

Laying  down  her  dagger. 

What  if  it  be  a  poison,  which  the  friar 
Subtly  hath  minister’d  to  have  me  dead. 

Lest  in  this  marriage  he  should  be  dishonour’d. 
Because  he  married  me  before  to  Romeo? 

I  fear  it  is:  and  yet,  methinks,  it  should  not. 

For  he  hath  still  been  tried  a  holy  man. 

How  if,  when  I  am  laid  into  the  tomb,  50 

I  wake  before  the  time  that  Romeo 

Come  to  redeem  me?  there’s  a  fearful  point! 

Shall  I  not,  then,  be  stifled  in  the  vault. 

To  whose  foul  mouth  no  healthsome  air  breathes 
in. 

And  there  die  strangled  ere  my  Romeo  comes? 
Or,  if  I  live,  is  it  not  very  like. 

The  horrible  conceit  of  death  and  night, 

Together  with  the  terror  of  the  place — 

As  in  a  vault,  an  ancient  receptacle, 

Where,  for  these  many  hundred  years,  the 
bones 

Of  all  my  buried  ancestors  are  pack’d:  4/ 

Where  bloody  Tybalt,  yet  but  green  in  earth. 
Lies  festering  in  his  shroud;  where,  as  they 
say. 

At  some  hours  in  the  night  spirits  resort — 

Alack,  alack,  is  it  not  like  that  I, 

So  early  waking,  what  with  loathsome  smells, 
And  shrieks  like  mandrakes’  torn  out  of  the 
earth. 

That  living  mortals,  hearing  them,  run  mad: 

O,  if  I  wake,  shall  I  not  be  distraught. 

Environed  with  all  these  hideous  fears?  50 

And  madly  play  with  my  forefathers’  joints? 

And  pluck  the  mangled  Tybalt  from  his  shroud? 
And,  in  this  rage,  with  some  great  kinsman’s 
bone. 

As  with  a  club,  dash  out  my  desperate  brains? 

O,  look!  methinks  I  see  my  cousin’s  ghost 
Seeking  out  Romeo,  that  did  spit  his  body 
Upon  a  rapier’s  point:  stay,  Tybalt,  stay! 

Romeo,  I  come!  this  do  I  drink  to  thee. 

[She falls  upon  her  bed,  within  the  curtains. 


Scene  iv.  Hall  in  Capulet' s  house 
Enter  lady  capulet  and  nurse. 

La.  Cap.  Hold,  take  these  keys,  and  fetch  more 
spices  nurse. 

Nurse.  They  call  for  dates  and  quinces  in  the 
pastry. 

Enter  capulet. 

Cap.  Come,  stir,  stir,  stir!  the  second  cock  hath 
crow’d. 

The  curfew-bell  hath  rung,  ’tis  three  o’clock: 
Look  to  the  baked  meats,  good  Angelica: 

Spare  not  for  cost. 

Nurse.  Go,  you  cot-quean,  go. 

Get  you  to  bed;  faith,  you’ll  be  sick  to-morrow 
For  this  night’s  watching. 

Cap.  No,  not  a  whit:  what!  I  have  watch’d  ere 
now 

All  night  for  lesser  cause,  and  ne’er  been  sick.  10 
La.  Cap.  Ay,  you  have  been  a  mouse-hunt  in 
your  time; 

But  I  will  watch  you  from  such  watching  now. 

[Exeunt  lady  capulet  and  nurse. 
Cap.  A  jealous-hood,  a  jealous-hood! 

Enter  three  or  four  servingmen,  with  spits,  logs, 
and  baskets. 

Now,  fellow. 

What’s  there? 

ist  Serv.  Things  for  the  cook,  sir;  but  I  know 
not  what. 

Cap.  Make  haste,  make  haste.  [Exit  first 
servant]  Sirrah,  fetch  drier  logs: 

Call  Peter,  he  will  show  thee  where  they  are. 

2nd  Serv.  I  have  a  head,  sir,  that  will  find  out  logs. 
And  never  trouble  Peter  for  the  matter.  [Exit. 

Cap.  Mass,  and  well  said;  a  merry  whoreson,  ha! 
Thou  shalt  be  logger-head.  Good  faith,  ’tis  day: 
The  County  will  be  here  with  music  straight,  21 
For  so  he  said  he  would:  I  hear  him  near. 

Music  within. 

Nurse!  Wife,  What,  ho!  What,  nurse,  I  say! 
Re-enter  nurse. 

Go  waken  Juliet,  go  and  trim  her  up; 

I’ll  go  and  chat  with  Paris:  hie,  make  haste. 

Make  haste;  the  bridegroom  he  is  come  already: 
Make  haste,  I  say.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  Juliets  chamber 
Enter  nurse. 

Nurse.  Mistress!  what,  mistress!  Juliet!  fast, 

I  warrant  her,  she: 

Why,  lamb!  why,  lady!  fie,  you  slug-a-bed! 

Why,  love,  I  say!  madam!  sweet-heart!  why, 
bride! 


SCENE  V 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


313 


What,  not  a  word?  you  take  your  pennyworths 
now; 

Sleep  for  a  week;  for  the  next  night,  I  warrant. 
The  County  Paris  hath  set  up  his  rest. 

That  you  shall  rest  but  little.  God  forgive  me, 
Marry,  and  amen,  how  sound  is  she  asleep! 

I  must  needs  wake  her.  Madam,  madam,  madam! 
Ay,  let  the  County  take  you  in  your  bed;  10 
He’ll  fright  you  up,  i’  faith.  Will  it  not  be? 
Undraws  the  curtains. 

What,  dress’d!  and  in  your  clothes!  and  down 
again! 

I  must  needs  wake  you:  Lady!  lady!  lady! 

Alas,  alas!  Help,  help!  my  lady’s  dead! 

O,  well-a-day,  that  ever  I  was  born! 

Some  aqua  vitce,  ho!  My  lord!  my  lady! 

Enter  lady  capulet. 

La.  Cap.  What  noise  is  here? 

Nurse.  O  lamentable  day! 

La.  Cap.  What  is  the  matter? 

Nurse.  Look,  look!  O  heavy  day! 

La  Cap.  O  me,  O  me!  My  child,  my  only  life, 
Revive,  look  up,  or  I  will  die  with  thee!  20 

Help,  help!  Call  help. 

Enter  capulet. 

Cap.  For  shame,  bring  Juliet  forth;  her  lord  is 
come. 

Nurse.  She’s  dead,  deceased,  she’s  dead;  alack 
the  day! 

La.  Cap.  Alack  the  day,  she’s  dead,  she’s  dead, 
she’s  dead! 

Cap.  Ha!  let  me  see  her:  out,  alas!  she’s  cold; 
Her  blood  is  settled,  and  her  joints  are  stiff; 

Life  and  these  lips  have  long  been  separated: 
Death  lies  on  her  like  an  untimely  frost 
Upon  the  sweetest  flower  of  all  the  field. 

Nurse.  O  lamentable  day! 

La.  Cap.  O  woeful  time!  50 

Cap.  Death,  that  hath  ta’en  her  hence  to  make 
me  wail. 

Ties  up  my  tongue  and  will  not  let  me  speak. 

Enter  friar  Laurence  Paris, 
with  musicians. 

Fri.  L.  Come,  is  the  bride  ready  to  go  to  church? 
Cap.  Ready  to  go,  but  never  to  return. 

O  son!  the  night  before  thy  wedding-day 
Hath  Death  lain  with  thy  wife.  There  she  lies. 
Flower  as  she  was,  deflowered  by  him. 

Death  is  my  son-in-law.  Death  is  my  heir; 

My  daughter  he  hath  wedded:  I  will  die. 

And  leave  him  all;  life,  living,  all  is  Death’s.  40 
Par.  Have  I  thought  long  to  see  this  morning’s 
face, 


And  doth  it  give  me  such  a  sight  as  this? 

La.  Cap.  Accursed,  unhappy,  wretched  hateful 
day! 

Most  miserable  hour  that  e’er  time  saw 
In  lasting  labour  of  his  pilgrimage! 

But  one,  poor  one,  one  poor  and  loving  child. 

But  one  thing  to  rejoice  and  solace  in. 

And  cruel  death  hath  catch’d  it  from  my  sight! 
Nurse.  O  woe!  O  woeful,  woeful,  woeful  day! 
Most  lamentable  day,  most  woeful  day,  50 

That  ever,  ever,  I  did  yet  behold! 

O  day!  O  day!  O  day!  O  hateful  day! 

Never  was  seen  so  black  a  day  as  this: 

O  woeful  day,  O  woeful  day! 

Par.  Beguiled,  divorced,  wronged,  spited,  slain 
Most  detestable  death,  by  thee  beguiled. 

By  cruel  cruel  thee  quite  overthrown! 

O  love!  O  life!  not  life,  but  love  in  death! 

Cap.  Despised,  distressed,  hated,  martyr’d, 
kill’d! 

Uncomfortable  time,  why  earnest  thou  now  60 
To  murder,  murder  our  solemnity? 

O  child!  O  child!  my  soul,  and  not  my  child! 

Dead  art  thou!  Alack!  my  child  is  dead: 

And  with  my  child  my  joys  are  buried. 

Fri.  L.  Peace,  ho,  for  shame!  confusion’s  cure 
lives  not 

In  these  confusions.  Heaven  and  yourself 
Had  part  in  this  fair  maid;  now  heaven  hath  all. 
And  all  the  better  is  it  for  the  maid: 

Your  part  in  her  you  could  not  keep  from  death. 
But  heaven  keeps  his  part  in  eternal  life.  70 
The  most  you  sought  was  her  promotion; 

For  ’twas  your  heaven  she  should  be  advanced: 
And  weep  ye  now,  seeing  she  is  advanced 
Above  the  clouds,  as  high  as  heaven  itself? 

O,  in  this  love,  you  love  your  child  so  ill 
That  you  run  mad,  seeing  that  she  is  well: 

She’s  not  well  married  that  lives  married  long; 
But  she’s  best  married  that  dies  married  young. 
Dry  up  your  tears,  and  stick  your  rosemary 
On  this  fair  corse;  and,  as  the  custom  is.  So 
In  all  her  best  array  bear  her  to  church: 

For  though  fond  nature  bids  us  all  lament. 

Yet  nature’s  tears  are  reason’s  merriment. 

Cap.  All  things  that  we  ordained  festival. 

Turn  from  their  office  to  black  funeral; 

Our  instruments  to  melancholy  bells. 

Our  wedding  cheer  to  a  sad  burial  feast. 

Our  solemn  hymns  to  sullen  dirges  change. 

Our  bridal  flowers  serve  for  a  buried  corse. 

And  all  things  change  them  to  the  contrary. 

Fri.  L.  Sir,  go  you  in;  and,  madam,  go  with  him; 
And  go.  Sir  Paris;  every  one  prepare 
To  follow  this  fair  corse  unto  her  grave: 

The  heavens  do  lour  upon  you  for  some  ill; 


ROMEO  AND  lULIET 


[Exeunt  lady  capulet, 

PARIS,  and  FRIAR. 


ist  Aius.  Faith,  we  may  put  up  our  pipes  and  be 
gone. 

Nurse.  Honest  good  feilows,  ah,  put  up,  put  up; 
For,  well  you  know,  this  is  a  pitiful  case.  [Exit. 

ist  Mus.  Ay,  by  my  troth,  the  case  may  be 
amended.  loi 

Enter  peter. 

Pet.  Musicians,  O,  musicians,  “Heart’s  ease. 
Heart’s  ease”:  O,  an  you  will  have  me  live,  play 
“Heart’s  ease.” 
ist  Mus.  Why  “Heart’s  ease”? 

Pet.  O,  musicians,  because  my  heart  itself  plays 
“My  heart  is  full  of  woe”:  O,  play  me  some 
merry  dump,  to  comfort  me. 

ist  Mus.  Not  a  dump  we;  ’tis  no  time  to  play 
now.  no 

Pet.  You  will  not,  then? 
ist  Mus.  No. 

Pet.  I  will  then  give  it  you  soundly. 
ist  Mus.  What  will  you  give  us? 

Pet.  No  money,  on  my  faith,  but  the  gleek;  I 
will  give  you  the  minstrel. 

ist  Mus.  Then  will  I  give  you  the  serving- 
creature. 

Pet.  Then  will  I  lay  the  serving-creature’s 
dagger  on  your  pate.  I  will  carry  no  crotchets: 
I’ll  re  you,  Vllfa  you;  do  you  note  me?  121 

ist  Mus.  An  you  re  us  and/<?  us,  you  note  us. 

2nd  Mus.  Pray  you,  put  up  your  dagger,  and 
put  out  your  wit. 

Pet.  Then  have  at  you  with  my  wit!  I  will  dry- 
beat  you  with  an  iron  wit,  and  put  up  my  iron 
dagger.  Answer  me  like  men: 

“When  griping  grief  the  heart  doth  wound. 
And  doleful  dumps  the  mind  oppress. 

Then  music  with  her  silver  sound” —  75 o 

why  “silver  sound”?  why  “music  with  her  sil¬ 
ver  sound”?  What  say  you,  Simon  Catling? 

ist  Mus.  Marry,  sir,  because  silver  hath  a  sweet 
sound. 

Pet.  Pretty!  What  say  you,  Hugh  Rebeck? 

2nd  Mus.  I  say  “silver  sound,”  because  musi¬ 
cians  sound  for  silver. 

Pet.  Pretty  too!  What  say  you,  James  Sound- 
post?  i^p 

^rd  Mus.  Faith,  I  know  not  what  to  say. 

Pet.  O,  I  cry  you  mercy;  you  are  the  singer: 

I  will  say  for  you.  It  is  “music  with  her  silver 
sound,”  because  musicians  have  no  gold  for 
sounding: 

“Then  music  with  her  silver  sound 
With  speedy  help  doth  lend  redress.”  [Exit. 


ist  Mus.  What  a  pestilent  knave  is  this  same! 
2nd  Mus.  Hang  him.  Jack!  Come,  we’ll  in  here; 
tarry  for  the  mourners,  and  stay  dinner. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  V 

Scene  1.  Mantua:  a  street 
Enter  romeo. 

Rom.  If  I  may  trust  the  flattering  truth  of  sleep. 
My  dreams  presage  some  joyful  news  at  hand: 
My  bosom’s  lord  sits  lightly  in  his  throne; 

And  all  this  day  an  unaccustom’d  spirit 
Lifts  me  above  the  ground  with  cheerful  thoughts. 
I  dreamt  my  lady  came  and  found  me  dead — 
Strange  dream,  that  gives  a  dead  man  leave  to 
think! — 

And  breathed  such  life  with  kisses  in  my  lips. 
That  I  revived,  and  was  an  emperor. 

Ah  me!  how  sweet  is  love  itself  possess’d,  10 

When  but  love’s  shadows  are  so  rich  in  joy! 

Enter  balthasar,  booted. 

News  from  Verona! — How  now,  Balthasar! 

Dost  thou  not  bring  me  letters  from  the  friar? 
How  doth  my  lady?  Is  my  father  well? 

How  fares  my  Juliet?  that  I  ask  again; 

For  nothing  can  be  ill,  if  she  be  well. 

Bal.  Then  she  is  well,  and  nothing  can  be  ill: 

Her  body  sleeps  in  Capel’s  monument. 

And  her  immortal  part  with  angels  lives. 

I  saw  her  laid  low  in  her  kindred’s  vault,  20 
And  presently  took  post  to  tell  it  you: 

O,  pardon  me  for  bringing  these  ill  news. 

Since  you  did  leave  it  for  my  office,  sir. 

Rom.  Is  it  even  so?  then  I  defy  you,  stars! 

Thou  know’ St  my  lodging:  get  me  ink  and  paper. 
And  hire  post-horses;  I  will  hence  to-night. 

Bal.  I  do  beseech  you,  sir,  have  patience: 

Your  looks  are  pale  and  wild,  and  do  import 
Some  misadventure. 

Rom.  Tush,  thou  art  deceived: 

Leave  me,  and  do  the  thing  I  bid  thee  do.  50 
Hast  thou  no  letters  to  me  from  the  friar? 

Bal.  No,  my  good  lord. 

Rom.  No  matter:  get  thee  gone. 

And  hire  those  horses;  I’ll  be  with  thee  straight. 

[Exit  BALTHASAR. 

Well,  Juliet,  I  will  lie  with  thee  to-night. 

Let’s  see  for  means:  O  mischief,  thou  art  swift 
To  enter  in  the  thoughts  of  desperate  men! 

I  do  remember  an  apothecary — 

And  hereabouts  he  dwells — which  late  I  noted 
In  tatter’d  weeds,  with  overwhelming  brows. 
Culling  of  simples ;  meagre  were  his  looks,  40 

Sharp  misery  had  worn  him  to  the  bones: 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


And  in  his  needy  shop  a  tortoise  hung, 

An  alligator  stuff’d,  and  other  skins 
Of  ill-shaped  fishes;  and  about  his  shelves 
A  beggarly  account  of  empty  boxes. 

Green  earthen  pots,  bladders  and  musty  seeds, 
Remnants  of  packthread  and  old  cakes  of  roses, 
Were  thinly  scatter’d,  to  make  up  a  show. 

Noting  this  penury,  to  myself  I  said 

“An  if  a  man  did  need  a  poison  now,  50 

Whose  sale  is  present  death  in  Mantua, 

Here  lives  a  caitiff  wretch  would  sell  it  him.” 

O,  this  same  thought  did  but  forerun  my  need; 
And  this  same  needy  man  must  sell  it  me. 

As  I  remember,  this  should  be  the  house. 

Being  holiday,  the  beggar’s  shop  is  shut. 

What,  ho!  apothecary! 

Enter  apothecary. 

Ap.  Who  calls  so  loud? 

Rom.  Come  hither,  man.  I  see  that  thou  art 
poor: 

Hold,  there  is  forty  ducats:  let  me  have 

A  dram  of  poison,  such  soon-speeding  gear  60 

As  will  disperse  itself  through  all  the  veins 

That  the  life-weary  taker  may  fall  dead 

And  that  the  trunk  may  be  discharged  of  breath 

As  violently  as  hasty  powder  fired 

Doth  hurry  from  the  fatal  cannon’s  womb. 

Ap.  Such  mortal  drugs  I  have;  but  Mantua’s  law 
Is  death  to  any  he  that  utters  them. 

Rom.  Art  thou  so  bare  and  full  of  wretchedness. 
And  fear’st  to  die?  famine  is  in  thy  cheeks. 

Need  and  oppression  starveth  in  thine  eyes,  70 
G)ntempt  and  beggary  hangs  upon  thy  back; 

The  world  is  not  thy  friend  nor  the  world’s  law; 
The  world  affords  no  law  to  make  thee  rich; 

Then  be  not  poor,  but  break  it,  and  take  this. 

Ap.  My  poverty,  but  not  my  will,  consents. 
Rom.  I  pay  thy  poverty,  and  not  thy  will. 

Ap.  Put  this  in  any  liquid  thing  you  will, 

And  drink  it  off;  and,  if  you  had  the  strength 
Of  twenty  men,  it  would  dispatch  you  straight. 
Rom.  There  is  thy  gold,  worse  poison  to  men’s 
souls,  80 

Doing  more  murders  in  this  loathsome  world 
Than  these  poor  compounds  that  thou  mayst  not 
sell. 

I  sell  thee  poison;  thou  hast  sold  me  none. 
Farewell:  buy  food,  and  get  thyself  in  flesh. 
Come,  cordial  and  not  poison,  go  with  me 
To  Juliet’s-grave;  for  there  must  I  use  thee. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  11.  Friar  Laurence' s  cell 
Enter  friar  john. 

Fri.J.  Holy  Franciscan  friar!  brother,  ho! 


Enter  friar  Laurence. 

Fri.  L.  This  same  should  be  the  voice  of  Friar 
John. 

Welcome  from  Mantua:  what  says  Romeo? 

Or,  if  his  mind  be  writ,  give  me  his  letter. 

Fri.  /.  Going  to  find  a  bare-foot  brother  out, 

One  of  our  order,  to  associate  me. 

Here  in  this  city  visiting  the  sick. 

And  finding  him,  the  searchers  of  the  town. 
Suspecting  that  we  both  were  in  a  house 
Where  the  infectious  pestilence  did  reign,  /o 
Seal’d  up  the  doors,  and  would  not  let  us  forth; 

So  that  my  speed  to  Mantua  there  was  stay’d. 

Fri.  L.  Who  bare  my  letter,  then,  to  Romeo? 
Fri.  ].  I  could  not  send  it — here  it  is  again — 

Nor  get  a  messenger  to  bring  it  thee, 

So  fearful  were  they  of  infection. 

Fri.  L.  Unhappy  fortune!  by  my  brother¬ 
hood. 

The  letter  was  not  nice  but  full  of  charge 

Of  dear  import,  and  the  neglecting  it 

May  do  much  danger.  Friar  John,  go  hence;  20 

Get  me  an  iron  crow,  and  bring  it  straight 

Unto  my  cell. 

Fri.  ].  Brother,  I’ll  go  and  bring  it  thee.  [Exit, 
Fri.  L.  Now  must  I  to  the  monument  alone; 
Within  this  three  hours  will  fair  Juliet  wake; 

She  will  beshrew  me  much  that  Romeo 
Hath  had  no  notice  of  these  accidents; 

But  I  will  write  again  to  Mantua, 

And  keep  her  at  my  cell  till  Romeo  come; 

Poor  living  corse,  closed  in  a  dead  man’s  tomb! 

[Exit, 

Scene  hi.  A  churchyard;  in  it  a  tomb 
belonging  to  the  Capulets 
Enter  Paris,  and  his  page  bearing  flowers 
and  a  torch. 

Par.  Give  me  thy  torch,  boy:  hence,  and  stand 
aloof: 

Yet  put  it  out,  for  I  would  not  be  seen. 

Under  yond  yew-trees  lay  thee  all  along. 

Holding  thine  ear  close  to  the  hollow  ground; 

So  shall  no  foot  upon  the  churchyard  tread, 

Being  loose,  unfirm,  with  digging  up  of  graves. 
But  thou  shalt  hear  it:  whistle  then  to  me. 

As  signal  that  thou  hear’st  something  approach. 
Give  me  those  flowers.  Do  as  1  bid  thee,  go. 

Page.  [Aside]  I  am  almost  afraid  to  stand  alone 
Here  in  the  churchyard;  yet  I  will  adventure.  // 

[Retires. 

Par.  Sweet  flower,  with  flowers  thy  bridal  bed 
I  strew — 

O  woe!  thy  canopy  is  dust  and  stones — 
Which  with  sweet  water  nightly  1  will  dew. 


3i6 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


Or,  wanting  that,  with  tears  distill’d  by 
moans : 

The  obsequies  that  I  for  thee  will  keep 
Nightly  shall  be  to  strew  thy  grave  and  weep. 
The  PAGE  whistles. 

The  boy  gives  warning  something  doth  approach. 
What  cursed  foot  wanders  this  way  to-night. 

To  cross  my  obsequies  and  true  love’s  rite?  20 
What,  with  a  torch!  muffle  me,  night,  awhile. 

[Retires. 

Enter  romeo  and  balthasar,  with  a  torch^ 
mattock,  &c. 

Rom.  Give  me  that  mattock  and  the  wrenching 
iron. 

Hold,  take  this  letter;  early  in  the  morning 
See  thou  deliver  it  to  my  lord  and  father. 

Give  me  the  light:  upon  thy  life,  I  charge  thee, 
Whate’er  thou  hear’st  or  seest,  stand  all  aloof. 
And  do  not  interrupt  me  in  my  course. 

Why  I  descend  into  this  bed  of  death. 

Is  partly  to  behold  my  lady’s  face;  29 

But  chiefly  to  take  thence  from  her  dead  finger 
A  precious  ring,  a  ring  that  I  must  use 
In  dear  employment:  therefore  hence,  be  gone: 
But  if  thou,  jealous,  dost  return  to  pry 
In  what  I  further  shall  intend  to  do. 

By  heaven,  I  will  tear  thee  joint  by  joint 
And  strew  this  hungry  churchyard  with  thy 
limbs: 

The  time  and  my  intents  are  savage-wild. 

More  fierce  and  more  inexorable  far 
Than  empty  tigers  or  the  roaring  sea. 

Bal.  I  will  be  gone,  sir,  and  not  trouble  you. 
Rom.  So  shalt  thou  show  me  friendship.  Take 
thou  that: 

Live,  and  be  prosperous:  and  farewell,  good 
fellow. 

Bal.  [Aside]  For  all  this  same.  I’ll  hide  me 
hereabout: 

His  looks  I  fear,  and  his  intents  I  doubt. 

[Retires. 

Rom.  Thou  detestable  maw,  thou  womb  of 
death. 

Gorged  with  the  dearest  morsel  of  the  earth. 
Thus  I  enforce  thy  rotten  jaws  to  open. 

And,  in  despite.  I’ll  cram  thee  with  more  food! 
Opens  the  tomb. 

Par.  This  is  that  banish’d  haughty  Montague,  4p 
That  murder’d  my  love’s  cousin,  with  which 
grief,  50 

It  is  supposed,  the  fair  creature  died; 

And  here  is  come  to  do  some  villainous  shame 
To  the  dead  bodies:  I  will  apprehend  him. 

Comes  forward. 

Stop  thy  unhallow’d  toil,  vile  Montague! 


Can  vengeance  be  pursued  further  than  death? 
Condemned  villain,  I  do  apprehend  thee: 

Obey,  and  go  with  me;  for  thou  must  die. 

Roin.  I  must  indeed;  and  therefore  came  I  hither. 
Good  gentle  youth,  tempt  not  a  desperate  man; 
Fly  hence,  and  leave  me:  think  upon  these  gone; 
Let  them  affright  thee.  I  beseech  thee,  youth. 

Put  not  another  sin  upon  my  head. 

By  urging  me  to  fury:  O,  be  gone! 

By  heaven,  I  love  thee  better  than  myself; 

For  I  come  hither  arm’d  against  myself: 

Stay  not,  be  gone;  live,  and  hereafter  say, 

A  madman’s  mercy  bade  thee  run  away. 

Par.  I  do  defy  thy  conjurations, 

And  apprehend  thee  for  a  felon  here. 

Rom.  Wilt  thou  provoke  me?  then  have  at  thee, 
boy!  [They  fight.]  70 

Page.  O  Lord,  they  fight!  I  will  go  call  the 
watch.  [Exit. 

Par.  O,  I  am  slain!  [Falls.]  If  thou  be  merciful. 
Open  the  tomb,  lay  me  with  Juliet.  [Dies. 

Rom.  In  faith,  I  will.  Let  me  peruse  this  face. 
Mercutio’s  kinsman,  noble  County  Paris! 

What  said  my  man,  when  my  betossed  soul 
Did  not  attend  him  as  we  rode?  I  think 
He  told  me  Paris  should  have  married  Juliet: 

Said  he  not  so?  or  did  I  dream  it  so? 

Or  am  I  mad,  hearing  him  talk  of  Juliet,  80 
To  think  it  was  so?  O,  give  me  thy  hand. 

One  writ  with  me  in  sour  misfortune’s  book! 

I’ll  bury  thee  in  a  triumphant  grave; 

A  grave?  O,  no!  a  lantern,  slaughter’d  youth. 

For  here  lies  Juliet,  and  her  beauty  makes 
This  vault  a  feasting  presence  full  of  light. 

Death,  lie  thou  there,  by  a  dead  man  interr’d. 

Laying  Paris  in  the  tomb. 

How  oft  when  men  are  at  the  point  of  death 
Have  they  been  merry !  which  their  keepers  call 
A  lightning  before  death :  O,  how  may  I  po 
Call  this  a  lightning?  O  my  love!  my  wife! 

Death,  that  hath  suck’d  the  honey  of  thy  breath. 
Hath  had  no  power  yet  upon  thy  beauty: 

Thou  art  not  conquer’d;  beauty’s  ensign  yet 
Is  crimson  in  thy  lips  and  in  thy  cheeks. 

And  death’s  pale  flag  is  not  advanced  there. 
Tybalt,  liest  thou  there  in  thy  bloody  sheet? 

O,  what  more  favour  can  I  do  to  thee. 

Than  with  that  hand  that  cut  thy  youth  in  twain 
To  sunder  his  that  was  thine  enemy?  too 

Forgive  me,  cousin!  Ah,  dear  Juliet, 

Why  art  thou  yet  so  fair?  shall  I  believe 
That  unsubstantial  death  is  amorous. 

And  that  the  lean  abhorred  monster  keeps 
Thee  here  in  dark  to  be  his  paramour? 

For  fear  of  that,  I  still  will  stay  with  thee; 

And  never  from  this  palace  of  dim  night 


SCENE  III 

Depart  again:  here,  here  will  I  remain 
With  worms  that  are  thy  chamber-maids;  O, 
here 

Will  I  set  up  my  everlasting  rest,  no 

And  shake  the  yoke  of  inauspicious  stars 
From  this  world-wearied  flesh.  Eyes,  look  your 
last! 

Arms,  take  your  last  embrace!  and,  lips,  O  you 
The  doors  of  breath,  seal  with  a  righteous  kiss 
A  dateless  bargain  to  engrossing  death! 

Come,  bitter  conduct,  come,  unsavoury  guide! 
Thou  desperate  pilot,  now  at  once  run  on 
The  dashing  rocks  thy  sea-sick  weary  bark! 
Here’s  to  my  love!  [Drinks^  O  true  apothecary! 
Thy  drugs  are  quick.  Thus  with  a  kiss  I  die.  120 

[Dies, 

Enter,  at  the  other  end  of  the  churchyard,  friar 
LAURENCE,  with  a  lantern,  crauo,  and  spade. 

Fri.  L.  Saint  Francis  be  my  speed!  how  oft 
to-night 

Have  my  old  feet  stumbled  at  graves!  Who’s 
there? 

Bal.  Here’s  one,  a  friend,  and  one  that  knows 
you  well. 

Fri.  L.  Bliss  be  upon  you!  Tell  me,  good  my 
friend. 

What  torch  is  yond,  that  vainly  lends  his  light 
To  grubs  and  eyeless  skulls?  as  I  discern, 

It  burneth  in  the  Capels’  monument. 

Bal.  It  doth  so,  holy  sir;  and  there’s  my  master, 
One  that  you  love. 

Fri.  L.  Who  is  it? 

Bal.  Romeo. 

Fri.  L.  How  long  hath  he  been  there? 

Bal.  Full  half  an  hour.  75  0 

Fri.  L.  Go  with  me  to  the  vault. 

Bal.  I  dare  not,  sir: 

My  master  knows  not  but  I  am  gone  hence; 

And  fearfully  did  menace  me  with  death. 

If  I  did  stay  to  look  on  his  intents. 

Fri.  L.  Stay,  then;  I’ll  go  alone.  Fear  comes 
upon  me: 

O,  much  I  fear  some  ill  unlucky  thing. 

Bal.  As  I  did  sleep  under  this  yew-tree  here, 

I  dreamt  my  master  and  another  fought. 

And  that  my  master  slew  him. 

Fri.  L.  Romeo! 

Advances. 

Alack,  alack,  what  blood  is  this,  which  stains 
The  stonyjentrance  of  this  sepulchre? 

What  mean  these  masterless  and  gory  swords 
To  lie  discolour’d  by  this  place  of  peace? 

Enters  the  tomb. 

Romeo!  O,  pale!  Who  else?  what,  Paris  t(x)? 

And  steep’d  in  blood?  Ah,  what  an  unkind  hour 


317 

Is  guilty  of  this  lamentable  chance! 

The  lady  stirs. 

JULIET  wakes. 

Jul.  O  comfortable  friar!  where  is  my  lord? 

I  do  remember  well  where  I  should  be. 

And  there  I  am.  Where  is  my  Romeo?  /jo 

Noise  within. 

Fri.  L.  I  hear  some  noise.  Lady,  come  from  that 
nest 

Of  death,  contagion,  and  unnatural  sleep: 

A  greater  power  than  we  can  contradict 
Hath  thwarted  our  intents.  Come,  come  away. 
Thy  husband  in  thy  bosom  there  lies  dead; 

And  Paris  too.  Come,  I’ll  dispose  of  thee 
Among  a  sisterhood  of  holy  nuns: 

Stay  not  to  question,  for  the  watch  is  coming; 
Come,  go,  good  Juliet  [Noise  again],  I  dare  no 
longer  stay.  /jp 

Jul.  Go,  get  thee  hence,  for  I  will  not  away. 

[Exit  FRIAR  LAURENCE. 
What’s  here?  a  cup,  closed  in  my  true  love’s 
hand? 

Poison,  I  see,  hath  been  his  timeless  end: 

O  churl!  drunk  all,  and  left  no  friendly  drop 
To  help  me  after?  I  will  kiss  thy  lips; 

Haply  some  poison  yet  doth  hang  on  them, 

To  make  me  die  with  a  restorative.  [Kisses  him. 
Thy  lips  are  warm. 

ist  Watch.  [Within]  Lead,  boy:  which  way? 

Jul.  Yea,  noise?  then  I’ll  be  brief.  O  happy 
dagger!  [Snatching  Ro7?teo's  dagger.] 

This  is  thy  sheath  [Stabs  herself] ;  there  rust,  and 
let  me  die.  ijo 

[Falls  on  Romeo's  body,  and  dies. 

Enter  first  watch,  with  the  page  6?/ Paris. 

Page.  This  is  the  place;  there,  where  the  torch 
doth  burn. 

ist  Watch.  The  ground  is  bloody;  search  about 
the  churchyard: 

Go,  some  of  you,  whoe’er  you  find  attach. 

Pitiful  sight!  here  lies  the  County  slain; 

And  Juliet  bleeding,  warm,  and  newly  dead, 

Who  here  hath  lain  these  two  days  buried. 

Go,  tell  the  Prince:  run  to  the  Capulets: 

Raise  up  the  Montagues:  some  others  search: 

We  see  the  ground  whereon  these  woes  do 
lie; 

But  the  true  ground  of  all  these  piteous  woes  180 
We  cannot  without  circumstance  descry. 

Re-enter  some  of  the  watch,  with  balthasar. 

2nd  Watch.  Here’s  Romeo’s  man;  we  found 
him  in  the  churchyard. 
ist  Watch.  Hold  him  in  safety,  till  the  Prince 
come  hither. 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


3i8 


ACT  V 


ROMEO  AND  JULIET 


Re-enter  others  of  the  watch,  with  friar 

LAURENCE. 

^rd  Watch.  Here  is  a  friar,  that  trembles,  sighs, 
and  weeps: 

We  took  this  mattock  and  this  spade  from  him, 
As  he  was  coming  from  this  churchyard  side. 
ist  Watch.  A  great  suspicion:  stay  the  friar  too. 

Enter  prince  and  Attendants. 

Prince.  What  misadventure  is  so  early  up, 

That  calls  our  person  from  our  morning’s  rest? 

Enter  capulet,  lady  capulet,  and  others. 

Cap.  What  should  it  be,  that  they  so  shriek 
abroad?  190 

L.  Cap.  The  people  in  the  street  cry  “Romeo,” 
Some  “Juliet,”  and  some  “Paris”;  and  all  run. 
With  open  outcry,  toward  our  monument. 
Prince.  What  fear  is  this  which  startles  in  our 
ears? 

I  St  Watch.  Sovereign,  here  lies  the  County 
Paris  slain; 

And  Romeo  dead;  and  Juliet,  dead  before. 

Warm  and  new  kill’d. 

Prince.  Search,  seek,  and  know  how  this  foul 
murder  comes. 

First  Watch.  Here  is  a  friar,  and  slaughter’d 
Romeo’s  man; 

With  instruments  upon  them,  fit  to  open  200 
These  dead  men’s  tombs. 

Cap.  O  heavens!  O  wife,  look  how  our  daugh¬ 
ter  bleeds! 

This  dagger  hath  mista’en — for,  lo,  his  house 
Is  empty  on  the  back  of  Montague — 

And  it  mis-sheathed  in  my  daughter’s  bosom! 

La.  Cap.  O  me!  this  sight  of  death  is  as  a  bell. 
That  warns  my  old  age  to  a  sepulchre. 

Enter  Montague  and  others. 

Prince.  Come,  Montague;  for  thou  art  early  up. 
To  see  thy  son  and  heir  more  early  down.  2 op 
Mon.  Alas,  my  liege,  my  wife  is  dead  to-night; 
Grief  of  my  son’s  exile  hath  stopp’d  her  breath: 
What  further  woe  conspires  against  mine  age? 
Prince.  Look,  and  thou  shalt  see. 

Mon.  O  thou  untaught!  what  manners  is  in  this. 
To  press  before  thy  father  to  a  grave? 

Prince.  Seal  up  the  mouth  of  outrage  for  a  while, 
Till  we  can  clear  these  ambiguities. 

And  know  their  spring,  their  head,  their  true 
descent; 

And  then  will  I  be  general  of  your  woes  2ip 
And  lead  you  even  to  death:  meantime  forbear. 
And  let  mischance  be  slave  to  patience. 

Bring  forth  the  parties  of  suspicion. 


Fri.  L.  I  am  the  greatest,  able  to  do  least. 

Yet  most  suspected,  as  the  time  and  place 
Doth  make  againk  me,  of  this  direful  murder; 
And  here  I  stand,  both  to  impeach  and  purge 
Myself  condemned  and  mvself  excused. 

Prince.  Then  say  at  once  what  thou  dost  know 
in  this. 

Fri.  L.  I  will  be  brief,  for  my  short  date  of 
breath 

Is  not  so  long  as  is  a  tedious  tale.  2^0 

Romeo,  there  dead,  was  husband  to  that  Juliet; 
And  she,  there  dead,  that  Romeo’s  faithful  wife: 

I  married  them;  and  their  stol’n  marriage-day 
Was  Tybalt’s  dooms-day,  whose  untimely  death 
Banish’d  the  new-made  bridegroom  from  this 
city. 

For  whom,  and  not  for  Tybalt,  Juliet  pined. 

You,  to  remove  that  siege  of  grief  from  her. 
Betroth’d  and  would  have  married  her  perforce 
T o  County  Pari s :  then  comes  she  to  me,  2 

And,  with  wild  looks,  bid  me  devise  some  mean 
To  rid  her  from  this  second  marriage. 

Or  in  my  cell  there  would  she  kill  herself. 

Then  gave  I  her,  so  tutor’d  by  my  art, 

A  sleeping  potion;  which  so  took  effect 
As  I  intended,  for  it  wrought  on  her 
The  form  of  death:  meantime  I  writ  to  Romeo, 
That  he  should  hither  come  as  this  dire  night. 

To  help  to  take  her  from  her  borrow’d  grave. 
Being  the  time  the  potion’s  force  should  cease. 
But  he  which  bore  my  letter.  Friar  John,  250 
Was  stay’d  by  accident,  and  yesternight 
Return’d  my  letter  back.  Then  all  alone 
At  the  prefixed  hour  of  her  waking. 

Came  I  to  take  her  from  her  kindred’s  vault; 
Meaning  to  keep  her  closely  at  my  cell. 

Till  I  conveniently  could  send  to  Romeo: 

But  when  I  came,  some  minute  ere  the  time 
Of  her  awaking,  here  untimely  lay 
The  noble  Paris  and  true  Romeo  dead. 

She  wakes;  and  I  entreated  her  come  forth,  260 
And  bear  this  work  of  heaven  with  patience: 

But  then  a  noise  did  scare  me  from  the  tomb; 

And  she,  too  desperate,  would  not  go  with  me. 
But,  as  it  seems,  did  violence  on  herself. 

All  this  I  know;  and  to  the  marriage 
Her  nurse  is  privy;  and,  if  aught  in  this 
Miscarried  by  my  fault,  let  my  old  life 
Be  sacrificed,  some  hour  before  his  time. 

Unto  the  rigour  of  severest  law. 

Prince.  We  still  have  known  thee  for  a  holy 
man.  270 

Where’s  Romeo’s  man?  what  can  he  say  in  this? 

Bal.  I  brought  my  master  news  of  Juliet’s  death; 
And  then  in  post  he  came  from  Mantua 
To  this  same  place,  to  this  same  monument. 


SCENE  III 


ROMEO  A 


This  letter  he  early  bid  me  give  his  father, 

And  threaten’d  me  with  death,  going  in  the  vault. 
If  I  departed  not  and  left  him  there. 

Prince.  Give  me  the  letter;  I  will  look  on  it. 
Where  is  the  County’s  page,  that  raised  the 
watch? 

Sirrah,  what  made  your  master  in  this  place?  2  80 
Page.  He  came  with  flowers  to  strew  his  lady’s 
grave; 

And  bid  me  stand  aloof,  and  so  I  did: 

Anon  comes  one  with  light  to  ope  the  tomb; 

And  by  and  by  my  master  drew  on  him; 

And  then  I  ran  away  to  call  the  watch. 

Prince.  This  letter  doth  make  good  the  friar’s 
words, 

Their  course  of  love,  the  tidings  of  her  death: 

And  here  he  writes  that  he  did  buy  a  poison 
Of  a  poor  ’pothecary,  and  therewithal 
Came  to  this  vault  to  die,  and  lie  with  Juliet.  2po 
Where  be  these  enemies?  Capulet!  Montague! 
See,  what  a  scourge  is  laid  upon  your  hate, 


ND  JULIET  319 

That  heaven  finds  means  to  kill  your  joys  with 
love. 

And  I  for  winking  at  your  discords  too 
Have  lost  a  brace  of  kinsmen:  all  are  punish’d. 
Cap.  O  brother  Montague,  give  me  thy  hand: 
This  is  my  daughter’s  jointure,  for  no  more 
Can  I  demand. 

Mon.  But  I  can  give  thee  more: 

For  I  will  raise  her  statue  in  pure  gold; 

That  while  Verona  by  that  name  is  known,  500 
There  shall  no  figure  at  such  rate  be  set 
As  that  of  true  and  faithful  Juliet. 

Cap.  As  rich  shall  Romeo’s  by  his  lady’s  lie; 
Poor  sacrifices  of  our  enmity! 

Prince.  A  glooming  peace  this  morning  with  it 
brings; 

The  sun,  for  sorrow,  will  not  show  his  head: 

Go  hence,  to  have  more  talk  of  these  sad  things; 
Some  shall  be  pardon’d,  and  some  punished: 

For  never  was  a  story  of  more  woe 

Than  this  of  Juliet  and  her  Romeo.  \Exeunt.  ^10 


The  Tragedy  of 
KING  RICHARD  II 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


King  Richard  the  Second 
John  of  Gaunt,  Duke  of  Lancaster  I  uncles  to 
Edmund  of  Langley,  Duke  of  York  |  the  King 
Henry,  surnamed  Bolingbroke,  Duke  of  Here¬ 
ford,  son  to  John  of  Gaunt;  afterwards  King 
Henry  IV 

Duke  of  Aumerle,  son  to  the  Duke  of  York 

Thomas  Mowbray,  Duke  of  Norfolk 

Duke  of  Surrey 

Earl  of  Salisbury 

Lord  Berkeley 

Bushy 

Bagot  servants  to  King  Richard 
Green 

Earl  of  Northumberland 

Henry  Percy,  surnamed  Hotspur^  his  son 

Lord  Ross 

LordWilloughby 

Lord  Fitz water 

Bishop  of  Carlisle 

Abbot  of  Westminster 


Lord  Marshal 

Sir  Stephen  Scroop 

Sir  Pierce  of  Exton 

Captain  to  a  band  of  Welshmen 

Two  Heralds 

Another  Lord 

Gardener 

Groom  of  the  Stable 
Keeper 

Two  Servants  to  York 
Servant  to  Exton 

Queen  to  King  Richard 
Duchess  of  York 
Duchess  of  Gloucester 
Lady  attending  on  the  Queen 

Non-Speaking:  Lords,  Ladies,  Officers,  Soldiers, 
Gardeners,  Guards,  and  other  Attendants 

Scene:  England  and  Wales 


ACT  1 

Scene  i.  Ijmdon:  King  Richard" s  palace 
Enter  king  richard,  john  of  gaunt,  with 
other  Nobles  and  Attendants, 

K.  Rich,  Old  John  of  Gaunt,  time-honour’d 
Lancaster, 

Hast  thou,  according  to  thy  oath  and  band. 
Brought  hither  Henry  Hereford  thy  bold  son. 
Here  to  make  good  the  boisterous  late  appeal. 
Which  then  our  leisure  would  not  let  us  hear, 
Against  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  Thomas  Mow¬ 
bray? 

Gaunt.  I  have,  my  liege. 

K,  Rich.  Tell  me,  moreover,  hast  thou  sounded 
him. 

If  he  appeal  the  Duke  on  ancient  malice; 

Or  worthily,  as  a  good  subject  should,  lo 

On  some  known  ground  of  treachery  in  him? 

Gaunt.  As  near  as  I  could  sift  him  on  that  argu¬ 
ment. 

On  some  apparent  danger  seen  in  him 
Aim’d  at  your  Highness,  no  inveterate  malice. 

K.  Rich.  Then  call  them  to  our  presence;  face  to 
face. 

And  frowning  brow  to  brow,  ourselves  will  hear 
T  he  accuser  and  the  accused  freely  speak: 


High-stomach’d  are  they  both,  and  full  of  ire, 

In  rage  deaf  as  the  sea,  hasty  as  fire. 

Enter  bolingbroke  and  mowbray. 

Boling.  Many  years  of  happy  days  befall  20 

My  gracious  sovereign,  my  most  loving  liege! 
Mow.  Each  day  still  better  other’s  happiness; 
Until  the  heavens,  envying  earth’s  good  hap. 

Add  an  immortal  title  to  your  crown! 

K.  Rich.  We  thank  you  both:  yet  one  but  flat¬ 
ters  us. 

As  well  appear eth  by  the  cause  you  come; 
Namely,  to  appeal  each  other  of  high  treason. 
Cousin  of  Hereford,  what  dost  thou  object 
Against  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  Thomas  Mow¬ 
bray? 

Boling.  First,  heaven  be  the  record  to  my 

speech!  50 

In  the  devotion  of  a  subject’s  love. 

Tendering  the  precious  safety  of  my  prince. 

And  free  from  other  misbegotten  hate. 

Come  I  appellant  to  this  princely  presence. 

Now,  Thomas  Mowbray,  do  I  turn  to  thee, 

And  mark  my  greeting  well;  for  what  I  speak 
My  body  shall  make  good  upon  this  earth. 

Or  my  divine  soul  answer  it  in  heaven. 

Thou  art  a  traitor  and  a  miscreant, 


KING  RICHARD  II 


T<x)  good  to  be  so  and  too  bad  to  live,  40 

Since  the  more  fair  and  crystal  is  the  sky, 

The  uglier  seem  the  clouds  that  in  it  fly. 

Once  more,  the  more  to  aggravate  the  note. 

With  a  foul  traitor’s  name  stuff  I  thy  throat; 

And  wish,  so  please  my  sovereign,  ere  I  move. 
What  my  tongue  speaks  my  right  drawn  sword 
may  prove. 

Alow.  Let  not  my  cold  words  here  accuse  my 
zeal: 

’Tis  not  the  trial  of  a  woman’s  war. 

The  bitter  clamour  of  two  eager  tongues. 

Can  arbitrate  this  cause  betwixt  us  twain;  50 
The  blood  is  hot  that  must  be  cool’d  for  this: 

Yet  can  I  not  of  such  tame  patience  boast 
As  to  be  hush’d  and  nought  at  all  to  say: 

First,  the  fair  reverence  of  your  Highness  curbs 
me 

From  giving  reins  and  spurs  to  my  free  speech; 
Which  else  would  post  until  it  had  return’d 
These  terms  of  treason  doubled  down  his  throat. 
Setting  aside  his  high  blood’s  royalty. 

And  let  him  be  no  kinsman  to  my  liege, 

I  do  defy  him,  and  I  spit  at  him;  60 

Call  him  a  slanderous  coward  and  a  villain: 
Which  to  maintain  I  would  allow  him  odds, 

And  meet  him,  were  I  tied  to  run  afoot 
Even  to  the  frozen  ridges  of  the  Alps, 

Or  any  other  ground  inhabitable 
Where  ever  Englishman  durst  set  his  foot. 
Meantime  let  this  defend  my  loyalty. 

By  all  my  hopes,  most  falsely  doth  he  lie. 

Bolins:-  Pale  trembling  coward,  there  I  throw 
my  gage. 

Disclaiming  here  the  kindred  of  the  King,  70 

And  lay  aside  my  high  blood’s  royalty. 

Which  fear,  not  reverence,  makes  thee  to  ex¬ 
cept. 

If  guilty  dread  have  left  thee  so  much  strength 
As  to  take  up  mine  honour’s  pawn,  then  stoop: 

By  that  and  all  the  rites  of  knighthood  else. 

Will  I  make  good  against  thee,  arm  to  arm. 

What  I  have  spoke  or  thou  canst  worse  devise. 
Mow.  I  take  it  up;  and  by  that  sword  I  swear 
Which  gently  laid  my  knighthood  on  my  shoul¬ 
der, 

I’ll  answer  thee  in  any  fair  degree.  So 

Or  chivalrous  design  of  knightly  trial: 

And  when  I  mount,  alive  may  I  not  light. 

If  I  be  traitor  or  unjustly  fight! 

K.  Rtch^  What  doth  our  cousin  lay  to  Mow¬ 
bray’s  charge? 

It  must  be  great  that  can  inherit  us 
So  much  as  of  a  thought  of  ill  in  him. 

Boling.  Look,  what  I  speak,  my  life  shall  prove 
it  true; 


That  Mowbray  hath  received  eight  thousand 
nobles 

In  name  of  lendings  for  your  Highness’  soldiers, 
The  which  he  hath  detain’d  for  lewd  employ¬ 
ments, 

Like  a  false  traitor  and  injurious  villain. 

Besides  I  say  and  will  in  battle  prove, 

Or  here  or  elsewhere  to  the  furthest  verge 
That  ever  was  survey’d  by  English  eye. 

That  all  the  treasons  for  these  eighteen  years 
Complotted  and  contrived  in  this  land 
Fetch  from  false  Mowbray  their  first  head  and 
spring. 

Further  I  say  and  further  will  maintain 
Upon  his  bad  life  to  make  all  this  good. 

That  he  did  plot  the  Duke  of  Gloucester’s  death, 
Suggest  his  soon-believing  adversaries,  wi 

And  consequently,  like  a  traitor  coward. 

Sluiced  out  his  innocent  soul  through  streams  of 
blood: 

Which  blood,  like  sacrificing  Abel’s,  cries. 

Even  from  the  tongueless  caverns  of  the  earth. 

To  me  for  justice  and  rough  chastisement; 

And,  by  the  glorious  worth  of  my  descent. 

This  arm  shall  do  it,  or  this  life  be  spent. 

K.  Rich.  How  high  a  pitch  his  resolution  soars! 
Thomas  of  Norfolk,  what  say’st  thou  to  this?  uo 
Mow.  O,  let  my  sovereign  turn  away  his  face 
And  bid  his  ears  a  little  while  be  deaf. 

Till  I  have  told  this  slander  of  his  blood, 

How  God  and  good  men  hate  so  foul  a  liar. 

K.  Rich.  Mowbray,  impartial  are  our  eyes  and 
ears: 

Were  he  my  brother,  nay,  my  kingdom’s  heir. 

As  he  is  but  my  father’s  brother’s  son. 

Now,  by  my  sceptre’s  awe,  I  make  a  vow. 

Such  neighbour  nearness  to  our  sacred  blood 
Should  nothing  privilege  him,  nor  partialize  120 
The  unstooping  firmness  of  my  upright  soul: 

He  is  our  subject,  Mowbray;  so  art  thou: 

Free  speech  and  fearless  I  to  thee  allow. 

Alow.  Then,  Bolingbroke,  as  low  as  to  thy 
heart. 

Through  the  false  passage  of  thy  throat,  thou 
best. 

Three  parts  of  that  receipt  I  had  for  Calais 
Disbursed  I  duly  to  his  Highness’  soldiers; 

The  other  part  reserved  I  by  consent, 

For  that  my  sovereign  liege  was  in  my  debt 
Upon  remainder  of  a  dear  account,  /50 

Since  last  I  went  to  France  to  fetch  his  queen: 
Now  swallow  down  that  lie.  For  Gloucester’s 
death, 

I  slew  him  not;  but  to  my  own  disgrace 
Neglected  my  sworn  duty  in  that  case. 

For  you,  my  noble  Lord  of  Lancaster, 


KING  RICHARD  II 


The  honourable  father  to  my  foe, 

Once  did  I  lay  an  ambush  for  your  life, 

A  trespass  that  doth  vex  my  grieved  soul; 

But  ere  I  last  received  the  sacrament 
I  did  confess  it,  and  exactly  begg’d  i^o 

Your  Grace’s  pardon,  and  I  hope  I  had  it. 

This  is  my  fault:  as  for  the  rest  appeal’d. 

It  issues  from  the  rancour  of  a  villain, 

A  recreant  and  most  degenerate  traitor: 

Which  in  myself  I  boldly  will  defend; 

And  interchangeably  hurl  down  my  gage 
Upon  this  overweening  traitor’s  foot. 

To  prove  myself  a  loyal  gentleman 

Even  in  the  best  blood  chamber’d  in  his  bosom. 

In  haste  whereof,  most  heartily  I  pray  /50 

Your  Highness  to  assign  our  trial  day. 

K.  Rich.  Wrath-kindled  gentlemen,  be  ruled  by 
me; 

Let’s  purge  this  choler  without  letting  blood: 
This  we  prescribe,  though  no  physician; 

Deep  malice  makes  too  deep  incision; 

Forget,  forgive;  conclude  and  be  agreed; 

Our  doctors  say  this  is  no  month  to  bleed. 

Good  uncle,  let  this  end  where  it  begun; 

We’ll  calm  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  you  your  son. 
Gaunt.  To  be  a  make-peace  shall  become  my 
age:  1^0 

Throw  down,  my  son,  the  Duke  of  Norfolk’s 
gage. 

K.  Rich.  And,  Norfolk,  throw  down  his. 

Gaunt.  When,  Harry,  when? 

Obedience  bids  I  should  not  bid  again. 

K.  Rich.  Norfolk,  throw  down,  we  bid;  there  is 
no  boot. 

Mow.  Myself  I  throw,  dread  sovereign,  at  thy 
foot. 

My  life  thou  shalt  command,  but  not  my  shame: 
The  one  my  duty  owes;  but  my  fair  name. 
Despite  of  death  that  lives  upon  my  grave. 

To  dark  dishonour’s  use  thou  shalt  not  have. 

I  am  disgraced,  impeach’d  and  baffled  here,  ijo 
Pierced  to  the  soul  with  slander’s  venom’d  spear. 
The  which  no  balm  can  cure  but  his  heart-blood 
Which  breathed  this  poison. 

K.  Rich.  Rage  must  be  withstood : 

Give  me  his  gage:  lions  make  leopards  tame. 
Mow.  Yea,  but  not  change  his  spots:  take  but 
my  shame. 

And  I  resign  my  gage.  My  dear  dear  lord. 

The  purest  treasure  mortal  times  afford 
Is  spotless  reputation:  that  away, 

Men  are  but  gilded  loam  or  painted  clay. 

A  jewel  in  a  ten-times-barr’d-up  chest  180 

Is  a  bold  spirit  in  a  loyal  breast. 

Mine  honour  is  my  life;  both  grow  in  one; 

Take  honour  from  me,  and  my  life  is  done: 


Then,  dear  my  liege,  mine  honour  let  me  try; 

In  that  I  live  and  for  that  will  I  die. 

K.  Rich.  Cousin,  throw  up  your  gage;  do  you 
begin. 

Boling.  O,  God  defend  my  soul  from  such  deep 
sin! 

Shall  I  seem  crest-fall’n  in  my  father’s  sight? 

Or  with  pale  beggar-fear  impeach  my  height  189 
Before  this  out-dared  dastard?  Ere  my  tongue 
Shall  wound  my  honour  with  such  feeble  wrong. 
Or  sound  so  base  a  parle,  my  teeth  shall  tear 
The  slavish  motive  of  recanting  fear, 

And  spit  it  bleeding  in  his  high  disgrace. 

Where  shame  doth  harbour,  even  in  Mowbray’s 
face.  [Exit  gaunt. 

K.  Rich.  We  were  not  born  to  sue,  but  to  com¬ 
mand; 

Which  since  we  cannot  do  to  make  you  friends, 
Be  ready,  as  your  lives  shall  answer  it. 

At  Coventry,  upon  Saint  Lambert’s  day: 

There  shall  your  swords  and  lances  arbitrate  200 
The  swelling  difference  of  your  settled  hate: 
Since  we  can  not  atone  you,  we  shall  see 
Justice  design  the  victor’s  chivalry. 

Lord  marshal,  command  our  officers  at  arms 
Be  ready  to  direct  these  home  alarms.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  Duke  of  Lancaster  s  palace 
Enter  john  of  gaunt  with  the  duchess 

OF  GLOUCESTER. 

Gaunt.  Alas,  the  part  I  had  in  Woodstock’s  blood 
Doth  more  solicit  me  than  your  exclaims 
To  stir  against  the  butchers  of  his  life! 

But  since  correction  lieth  in  those  hands 
Which  made  the  fault  that  we  cannot  correct, 

Put  we  our  quarrel  to  the  will  of  heaven; 

Who,  when  they  see  the  hours  ripe  on  earth, 

Will  rain  hot  vengeance  on  offenders’  heads. 
Duch.  Finds  brotherhood  in  thee  no  sharper 
spur? 

Hath  love  in  thy  old  blood  no  living  fire?  10 
Edward’s  seven  sons,  whereof  thyself  art  one, 
Were  as  seven  vials  of  his  sacred  blood. 

Or  seven  fair  branches  springing  from  one  root: 
Some  of  those  seven  are  dried  by  nature’s  course. 
Some  of  those  branches  by  the  Destinies  cut; 

But  Thomas,  my  dear  lord,  my  life,  my  Glou¬ 
cester, 

One  vial  full  of  Edward’s  sacred  blood. 

One  flourishing  branch  of  his  most  royal  root. 

Is  crack’d,  and  all  the  precious  liquor  spilt, 

Is  hack’d  down,  and  his  summer  leaves  all  faded. 
By  Envy’s  hand  and  Murder’s  bloody  axe.  21 
Ah,  Gaunt,  his  blood  was  thine!  that  bed,  that 
womb. 

That  metal,  that  self  mould,  that  fashion’d  thee 


SCENE  II 

Made  him  a  man;  and  though  thou  livest  and 
breathest, 

Yet  art  thou  slain  in  him:  thou  dost  consent 
In  some  large  measure  to  thy  father’s  death, 

In  that  thou  seest  thy  wretched  brother  die, 

Who  was  the  model  of  thy  father’s  life. 

Call  it  not  patience.  Gaunt;  it  is  despair: 

In  suffering  thus  thy  brother  to  be  slaughter’d,  50 
Thou  showest  the  naked  pathway  to  thy  life. 
Teaching  stern  murder  how  to  butcher  thee: 

That  which  in  mean  men  we  entitle  patience 
Is  pale  cowardice  in  noble  breasts. 

What  shall  I  say?  to  safeguard  thine  own  life. 
The  best  way  is  to  venge  my  Gloucester’s  death. 
Gaunt.  God’s  is  the  quarrel;  for  God’s  substi¬ 
tute. 

His  deputy  anointed  in  His  sight. 

Hath  caused  his  death:  the  which  if  wrongfully. 
Let  heaven  revenge;  for  I  may  never  lift  4.0 
An  angry  arm  against  His  minister. 

Duch.  Where  then,  alas,  may  I  complain  my¬ 
self? 

Gaunt.  To  God,  the  widow’s  champion  and  de¬ 
fence. 

Duch.  Why,  then,  I  will.  Farewell,  old  Gaunt. 
Thou  goest  to  Coventry,  there  to  behold 
Our  cousin  Hereford  and  fell  Mowbray  fight: 

O,  sit  my  husband’s  wrongs  on  Hereford’s  spear, 
That  it  may  enter  butcher  Mowbray’s  breast! 

Or,  if  misfortune  miss  the  first  career. 

Be  Mowbray’s  sins  so  heavy  in  his  bosom  50 
That  they  may  break  his  foaming  courser’s  back, 
And  throw  the  rider  headlong  in  the  lists, 

A  caitiff  recreant  to  my  cousin  Hereford! 
Farewell,  old  Gaunt:  thy  sometimes  brother’s 
wife 

With  her  companion  grief  must  end  her  life. 
Gaunt.  Sister,  farewell;  I  must  to  Coventry: 

As  much  good  stay  with  thee  as  go  with  me! 
Duch.  Yet  one  word  more:  grief  boundeth 
where  it  falls. 

Not  with  the  empty  hollowness,  but  weight: 

I  take  my  leave  before  I  have  begun,  60 

For  sorrow  ends  not  when  it  seemeth  done. 
Commend  me  to  thy  brother,  Edmund  York. 

Lo,  this  is  all: — nay,  yet  depart  not  so; 

Though  this  be  all,  do  not  so  quickly  go; 

I  shall  remember  more.  Bid  him — ah,  what? — 
With  all  good  speed  at  Flashy  visit  me. 

Alack,  and  what  shall  good  old  York  there  see 
But  empty  lodgings  and  unfurnish’d  walls. 
Unpeopled  offices,  untrodden  stones? 

And  what  hear  there  for  welcome  but  my 

groans?  70 

Therefore  commend  me;  let  him  not  come  there. 
To  seek  out  sorrow  that  dwells  everywhere. 


KING  RICHARD  II 


323 


Desolate,  desolate,  will  I  hence  and  die: 

The  last  leave  of  thee  takes  my  weeping  eye. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  lists  at  Coventry 
Enter  the  lord  marshal  and  the  duke  of 

AUMERLE. 

Mar.  My  Lord  Aumerle,  is  Harry  Hereford 
arm’d? 

Amn.  Yea,  at  all  points;  and  longs  to  enter  in. 
Mar.  The  Duke  of  Norfolk,  sprightfully  and 
bold, 

Stays  but  the  summons  of  the  appellant’s  trumpet. 
Atmi.  Why,  then,  the  champions  are  prepared, 
and  stay 

For  nothing  but  his  Majesty’s  approach. 

The  tnnnpets  sound,  and  the  king  enters  'with  his 
nobles,  gaunt,  bushy,  bagot,  green,  and 
others.  When  they  are  set,  enter  mowbray  in 
arms,  defendant,  'with  a  herald. 

K.  Rich.  Marshal,  demand  of  yonder  champion 
The  cause  of  his  arrival  here  in  arms: 

Ask  him  his  name  and  orderly  proceed 
To  swear  him  in  the  justice  of  his  cause.  10 

Mar.  In  God’s  name  and  the  King’s,  say  who 
thou  art 

And  why  thou  comest  thus  knightly  clad  in  arms. 
Against  what  man  thou  comest,  and  what  thy 
quarrel: 

Speak  truly,  on  thy  knighthood  and  thy  oath; 

As  so  defend  thee  heaven  and  thy  valour! 

Mo'w.  My  name  is  Thomas  Mowbray,  Duke  of 
Norfolk; 

Who  hither  come  engaged  by  my  oath — 

Which  God  defend  a  knight  should  violate! — 
Both  to  defend  my  loyalty  and  truth 
To  God,  my  King,  and  my  succeeding  issue,  20 
Against  the  Duke  of  Hereford  that  appeals  me; 
And,  by  the  grace  of  God  and  this  mine  arm. 

To  prove  him,  in  defending  of  myself, 

A  traitor  to  my  God,  my  King,  and  me: 

And  as  I  truly  fight,  defend  me  heaven! 

The  trumpets  sound.  Enter  bolingbroke, 
appellant,  in  armour,  'with  a  herald. 

K.  Rich.  Marshal,  ask  yonder  knight  in  arms. 
Both  who  he  is  and  why  he  cometh  hither 
Thus  plated  in  habiliments  of  war. 

And  formally,  according  to  our  law. 

Depose  him  in  the  justice  of  his  cause. 

Alar.  What  is  thy  name?  and  wherefore  comest 
thou  hither. 

Before  King  Richard  in  his  royal  lists? 

Against  whom  comest  thou?  and  what’s  thy 
quarrel? 


ACT  1 


324  KING  RICHARD  II 


Speak  like  a  true  knight,  so  defend  thee  heaven! 
Boling,  Harry  of  Hereford,  Lancaster,  and 
Derby 

Am  I;  who  ready  here  do  stand  in  arms. 

To  prove,  by  God’s  grace  and  my  body’s  valour. 
In  lists,  on  Thomas  Mowbray,  Duke  of  Norfolk, 
That  he  is  a  traitor,  foul  and  dangerous. 

To  God  of  heaven.  King  Richard,  and  to  me;  40 
And  as  I  truly  fight,  defend  me  heaven! 

Mar.  On  pain  of  death,  no  person  be  so  bold 
Or  daring-hardy  as  to  touch  the  lists. 

Except  the  Marshal  and  such  officers 
Appointed  to  direct  these  fair  designs. 

Boling.  Lord  Marshal,  let  me  kiss  my 
sovereign’s  hand. 

And  bow  my  knee  before  his  Majesty: 

For  Mowbray  and  myself  are  like  two  men 
That  vow  a  long  and  weary  pilgrimage; 

Then  let  us  take  a  ceremonious  leave  50 

And  loving  farewell  of  our  several  friends. 

Mar.  The  appellant  in  all  duty  greets  your 
Highness, 

And  craves  to  kiss  your  hand  and  take  his  leave. 
K.  Rich.  We  will  descend  and  fold  him  in  our 
arms. 

Cousin  of  Hereford,  as  thy  cause  is  right. 

So  be  thy  fortune  in  this  royal  fight! 

Farewell,  my  blood;  which  if  to-day  thou  shed. 
Lament  we  may,  but  not  revenge  thee  dead. 
Boling.  O,  let  no  noble  eye  profane  a  tear 
For  me,  if  I  be  gored  with  Mowbray’s  spear;  60 
As  confident  as  is  the  falcon’s  flight 
Against  a  bird,  do  I  with  Mowbray  fight. 

My  loving  lord,  I  take  my  leave  of  you; 

Of  you,  my  noble  cousin.  Lord  Aumerle; 

Not  sick,  although  I  have  to  do  with  death. 

But  lusty,  young,  and  cheer ly  drawing  breath. 

Lo,  as  at  English  feasts,  so  I  regreet 

The  daintiest  last,  to  make  the  end  most  sweet: 

O  thou,  the  earthly  author  of  my  blood. 

Whose  youthful  spirit,  in  me  regenerate,  70 
Doth  with  a  twofold  vigour  lift  me  up 
To  reach  at  victory  above  my  head. 

Add  proof  unto  mine  armour  with  thy  prayers; 
And  with  thy  blessings  steel  my  lance’s  point. 
That  it  may  enter  Mowbray’s  waxen  coat. 

And  furbish  new  the  name  of  John  o’  Gaunt, 

Even  in  the  lusty  haviour  of  his  son. 

Gaunt.  God  in  thy  good  cause  make  thee  pros¬ 
perous! 

Be  swift  like  lightning  in  the  execution; 

And  let  thy  blows,  doubly  redoubled,  80 

Fall  like  amazing  thunder  on  the  casque 
Of  thy  adverse  pernicious  enemy: 

Rouse  up  thy  youthful  blood,  be  valiant,  and 
live. 


Boling.  Mine  innocency  and  Saint  George  to 
thrive! 

Mow.  However  God  or  fortune  cast  my  lot. 
There  lives  or  dies,  true  to  King  Richard’s 
throne, 

A  loyal,  just,  and  upright  gentleman: 

Never  did  captive  with  a  freer  heart 
Cast  off  his  chains  of  bondage  and  embrace 
His  golden  uncontroll’d  enfranchisement,  po 
More  than  my  dancing  soul  doth  celebrate 
This  feast  of  battle  with  mine  adversary. 

Most  mighty  liege,  and  my  companion  peers. 
Take  from  my  mouth  the  wish  of  happy  years: 
As  gentle  and  as  jocund  as  to  jest 
Go  I  to  fight:  truth  hath  a  quiet  breast. 

K.  Rich.  Farewell,  my  lord:  securely  I  espy 
Virtue  with  valour  couched  in  thine  eye. 

Order  the  trial.  Marshal,  and  begin. 

Mar.  Harry  of  Hereford,  Lancaster,  and 

Derby,  100 

Receive  thy  lance;  and  God  defend  the  right! 
Boling.  Strong  as  a  tower  in  hope,  I  cry  amen. 
Mar.  Go  bear  this  lance  to  Thomas,  Duke  of 
Norfolk. 

i St  Her.  Harry  of  Hereford,  Lancaster,  and 
Derby, 

Stands  here  for  God,  his  sovereign,  and  himself. 
On  pain  to  be  found  false  and  recreant. 

To  prove  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  Thomas  Mow¬ 
bray, 

A  traitor  to  his  God,  his  King,  and  him; 

And  dares  him  to  set  forward  to  the  fight. 

2nd  Her.  Here  standeth  Thomas  Mowbray, 
Duke  of  Norfolk,  no 

On  pain  to  be  found  false  and  recreant, 

Both  to  defend  himself  and  to  approve 
Henry  of  Hereford,  Lancaster,  and  Derby, 

To  God,  his  sovereign,  and  to  him  disloyal; 
Courageously  and  with  a  free  desire 
Attending  but  the  signal  to  begin. 

Mar.  Sound,  trumpets;  and  set  forward,  com¬ 
batants. 

A  charge  sounded. 

Stay,  the  King  hath  thrown  his  warder  down. 

K.  Rich.  Let  them  lay  by  their  helmets  and  their 
spears. 

And  both  return  back  to  their  chairs  again :  120 

Withdraw  with  us :  and  let  the  trumpets  sound 
While  we  return  these  Dukes  what  we  decree. 

A  long  flourish. 

Draw  near. 

And  list  what  with  our  council  we  have  done. 

For  that  our  kingdom’s  earth  should  not  be 
soil’d 

With  that  dear  blood  which  it  hath  fostered; 

And  for  our  eyes  do  hate  the  dire  aspect 


SCENE  III 


KING  RICHARD  II 


Of  civil  wounds  plough’d  up  with  neighbours’ 
sword; 

And  for  we  think  the  eagle- winged  pride 
Of  sky-aspiring  and  ambitious  thoughts,  i^o 
With  rival-hating  envy,  set  on  you 
To  wake  our  peace,  which  in  our  country’s 
cradle 

Draws  the  sweet  infant  breath  of  gentle  sleep; 
Which  so  roused  up  with  boisterous  untuned 
drums. 

With  harsh-resounding  trumpets’  dreadful  bray. 
And  grating  shock  of  wrathful  iron  arms. 

Might  from  our  quiet  confines  fright  fair  peace 
And  make  us  wade  even  in  our  kindred’s  blood; 
Therefore,  we  banish  you  our  territories: 

You,  cousin  Hereford,  upon  pain  of  life,  /40 

Till  twice  five  summers  have  enrich’d  our  fields 
Shall  not  regreet  our  fair  dominions, 

But  tread  the  stranger  paths  of  banishment. 
Boling.  Your  will  be  done:  this  must  my  com¬ 
fort  be. 

That  sun  that  warms  you  here  shall  shine  on 
me; 

And  those  his  golden  beams  to  you  here  lent 
Shall  point  on  me  and  gild  my  banishment. 

K.  Rich.  Norfolk,  for  thee  remains  a  heavier 
doom. 

Which  I  with  some  unwillingness  pronounce: 
The  sly  slow  hours  shall  not  determinate  /jo 
The  dateless  limit  of  thy  dear  exile; 

The  hopeless  word  of  “never  to  return” 

Breathe  I  against  thee,  upon  pain  of  life. 

Mow.  A  heavy  sentence,  my  most  sovereign 
liege. 

And  all  unlook’d  for  from  your  Highness’  mouth: 
A  dearer  merit,  not  so  deep  a  maim 
As  to  be  cast  forth  in  the  common  air. 

Have  I  deserved  at  your  Highness’  hands. 

The  language  I  have  learn’d  these  forty  years. 

My  native  English,  now  I  must  forego:  160 

And  now  my  tongue’s  use  is  to  me  no  more 
Than  an  unstringed  viol  or  a  harp. 

Or  like  a  cunning  instrument  cased  up. 

Or,  being  open,  put  into  his  hands 
That  knows  no  touch  to  tune  the  harmony: 
Within  my  mouth  you  have  engaol’d  my  tongue, 
Doubly  portcullis’d  with  my  teeth  and  lips; 

And  dull  unfeeling  barren  ignorance 
Is  made  my  gaoler  to  attend  on  me. 

I  am  too  old  to  fawn  upon  a  nurse,  ijo 

Too  far  fn  years  to  be  a  pupil  now: 

What  is  thy  sentence  then  but  speechless  death. 
Which  robs  my  tongue  from  breathing  native 
breath? 

K.  Rich.  It  boots  thee  not  to  be  compassionate: 
After  our  sentence  plaining  comes  too  late. 


Mow.  Then  thus  I  turn  me  from  my  country’s 
light, 

To  dwell  in  solemn  shades  of  endless  night. 

K.  Rich.  Return  again,  and  take  an  oath  with 
thee. 

Lay  on  our  royal  sword  your  banish’d  hands; 
Swear  by  the  duty  that  you  owe  to  God —  180 

Our  part  therein  we  banish  with  yourselves — 

To  keep  the  oath  that  we  administer: 

You  never  shall,  so  help  you  truth  and  God! 
Embrace  each  other’s  love  in  banishment; 

Nor  never  look  upon  each  other’s  face; 

Nor  never  write,  regreet,  nor  reconcile 
This  louring  tempest  of  your  home-bred  hate; 
Nor  never  by  advised  purpose  meet 
To  plot,  contrive,  or  complot  any  ill 
’Gainst  us,  our  state,  our  subjects,  or  our  land./^a 
Boling.  I  swear. 

Mow.  And  I,  to  keep  all  this. 

Boling.  Norfolk,  so  far  as  to  mine  enemy: — 

By  this  time,  had  the  King  permitted  us, 

One  of  our  souls  had  wander’d  in  the  air. 

Banish’d  this  frail  sepulchre  of  our  flesh. 

As  now  our  flesh  is  banish’d  from  this  land: 
Confess  thy  treasons  ere  thou  fly  the  realm; 

Since  thou  hast  far  to  go,  bear  not  along 
The  clogging  burthen  of  a  guilty  soul.  200 

Mow.  No,  Bolingbroke:  if  ever  I  were  traitor, 
My  name  be  blotted  from  the  book  of  life. 

And  I  from  heaven  banish’d  as  from  hence! 

But  what  thou  art,  God,  thou,  and  I  do  know; 
And  all  too  soon,  I  fear,  the  King  shall  rue. 
Farewell,  my  liege.  Now  no  way  can  I  stray; 
Save  back  to  England,  all  the  world’s  my  way. 

[Exit. 

K.  Rich.  Uncle,  even  in  the  glasses  of  thine  eyes 
I  see  thy  grieved  heart:  thy  sad  aspect 
Hath  from  the  number  of  his  banish’d  years  210 
Pluck’d  four  away.  [To  bolingbroke]  Six  frozen 
winters  spent. 

Return  with  welcome  home  from  banishment. 
Boling.  How  long  a  time  lies  in  one  little  word! 
Four  lagging  winters  and  four  wanton  springs 
End  in  a  word:  such  is  the  breath  of  Kings. 

Gaunt.  I  thank  my  liege,  that  in  regard  of  me 
He  shortens  four  years  of  my  son’s  exile: 

But  little  vantage  shall  I  reap  thereby; 

For,  ere  the  six  years  that  he  hath  to  spend 
Can  change  their  moons  and  bring  their  times 
about,  220 

My  oil-dried  lamp  and  time-bewasted  light 
Shall  be  extinct  with  age  and  endless  night; 

My  inch  of  taper  will  be  burnt  and  done, 

And  blindfold  death  not  let  me  see  my  son. 

K.  Rich.  Why,  uncle,  thou  hast  many  years  to 
live. 


ACT  I 


326  KING  RICHARD  II 


Gaunt.  But  not  a  minute,  King,  that  thou  canst 
give: 

Shorten  my  days  thou  canst  with  sullen  sorrow. 
And  pluck  nights  from  me,  but  not  lend  a  mor¬ 
row; 

Thou  canst  help  time  to  furrow  me  with  age, 

But  stop  no  wrinkle  in  his  pilgrimage;  2^0 

Thy  word  is  current  with  him  for  my  death. 

But  dead,  thy  kingdom  cannot  buy  my  breath. 

K.  Rich.  Thy  son  is  banish’d  upon  good  advice, 
Whereto  thy  tongue  a  party-verdict  gave: 

Why  at  our  justice  seem’st  thou  then  to  lour? 
Gaunt.  Things  sweet  to  taste  prove  in  digestion 
sour. 

You  urged  me  as  a  judge;  but  I  had  rather 
You  would  have  bid  me  argue  like  a  father. 

O,  had  it  been  a  stranger,  not  my  child. 

To  smooth  his  fault  I  should  have  been  more 
mild: 

A  partial  slander  sought  I  to  avoid,  24/ 

And  in  the  sentence  my  own  life  destroy’d. 

Alas,  I  look’d  when  some  of  you  should  say, 

I  was  too  strict  to  make  mine  own  away; 

But  you  gave  leave  to  my  unwilling  tongue 
Against  my  will  to  do  myself  this  wrong. 

K.  Rich.  Cousin,  farewell;  and,  uncle,  bid  him 
so: 

Six  years  we  banish  him,  and  he  shall  go. 

[Flourish.  Exeunt  king  richard  and  train. 
Aum.  Cousin,  farewell :  what  presence  must  not 
know. 

From  where  you  do  remain  let  paper  show.  2  yo 
Mar.  My  lord,  no  leave  take  I;  for  I  will  ride. 

As  far  as  land  will  let  me,  by  your  side. 

Gaunt.  O,  to  what  purpose  dost  thou  hoard  thy 
words. 

That  thou  return’st  no  greeting  to  thy  friends? 

Boling.  I  have  too  few  to  take  my  leave  of  you. 
When  the  tongue’s  office  should  be  prodigal 
To  breathe  the  abundant  dolour  of  the  heart. 
Gaunt.  Thy  grief  is  but  thy  absence  for  a  time. 
Boling.  Joy  absent,  grief  is  present  for  that  time. 
Gaunt.  What  is  six  winters?  they  are  quickly 
gone.  260 

Boling.  To  men  in  joy;  but  grief  makes  one  hour 
ten. 

Gaunt.  Call  it  a  travel  that  thou  takest  for  pleas¬ 
ure. 

Boling.  My  heart  will  sigh  when  I  miscall  it  so, 
Which  finds  it  an  enforced  pilgrimage. 

Gaunt.  The  sullen  passage  of  thy  weary  steps 
Esteem  as  foil  wherein  thou  art  to  set 
The  precious  jewel  of  thy  home  return. 

Boling.  Nay,  rather,  every  tedious  stride  I  make 
Will  but  remember  me  what  a  deal  of  world 
I  wander  from  the  jewels  that  I  love.  270 


Must  I  not  serve  a  long  apprenticehood 
To  foreign  passages,  and  in  the  end. 

Having  my  freedom,  boast  of  nothing  else 
Bur  that  I  was  a  journeyman  to  grief? 

Gaunt.  All  places  that  the  eye  of  heaven  visits 
Are  to  a  wise  man  ports  and  happy  havens. 

Teach  thy  necessity  to  reason  thus; 

There  is  no  virtue  like  necessity. 

Think  not  the  King  did  banish  thee. 

But  thou  the  King.  Woe  doth  the  heavier  sit,  280 
Where  it  perceives  it  is  but  faintly  borne. 

Go,  say  I  sent  thee  forth  to  purchase  honour 
And  not  the  King  exiled  thee;  or  suppose 
Devouring  pestilence  hangs  in  our  air 
And  thou  art  flying  to  a  fresher  clime: 

Look,  what  thy  soul  holds  dear,  imagine  it 
To  lie  that  way  thou  go’st,  not  whence  thou 
comest: 

Suppose  the  singing  birds  musicians. 

The  grass  whereon  thou  tread’st  the  presence 
strew’d. 

The  flowers  fair  ladies,  and  thy  steps  no  more 
Than  a  delightful  measure  or  a  dance;  2^1 

For  gnarling  sorrow  hath  less  power  to  bite 
The  man  that  mocks  at  it  and  sets  it  light. 

Boling.  O,  who  can  hold  a  fire  in  his  hand 
By  thinking  on  the  frosty  Caucasus? 

Or  cloy  the  hungry  edge  of  appetite 
By  bare  imagination  of  a  feast? 

Or  wallow  naked  in  December  snow 
By  thinking  on  fantastic  summer’s  heat? 

O,  no!  the  apprehension  of  the  good  ^00 

Gives  but  the  greater  feeling  to  the  worse: 

Fell  sorrow’s  tooth  doth  never  rankle  more 
Than  when  he  bites,  but  lanceth  not  the  sore. 
Gaunt.  Come,  come,  my  son.  I’ll  bring  thee  on 
thy  way: 

Had  I  thy  youth  and  cause,  I  would  not  stay. 
Boling.  Then,  England’s  ground,  farewell; 
sweet  soil,  adieu; 

My  mother,  and  my  nurse,  that  bears  me  yet! 
Where’er  I  wander,  boast  of  this  I  can. 

Though  banish’d,  yet  a  trueborn  Englishman. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  The  court 

Enter  the  king,  with  bagot  and  green  at  one 
door;  and  the  duke  of  aumerle  at  another. 

K.  Rich.  We  did  observe.  Cousin  Aumerle, 

How  far  brought  you  high  Hereford  on  his 
way? 

Aum.  I  brought  high  Hereford,  if  you  call  him 
so. 

But  to  the  next  highway,  and  there  I  left  him. 

K.  Rich.  And  say,  what  store  of  parting  tears 
were  shed? 


SCENE  IV 


KING  RICHARD  II 


Aum.  Faith,  none  for  me;  except  the  northeast 
wind, 

Which  then  blew  bitterly  against  our  faces, 
Awaked  the  sleeping  rheum,  and  so  by  chance 
Did  grace  our  hollow  parting  with  a  tear. 

K.  Rich.  What  said  our  cousin  when  you  parted 
with  him?  /o 

Aum.  “Farewell”; 

And,  for  my  heart  disdained  that  my  tongue 
Should  so  profane  the  word,  that  taught  me  craft 
To  counterfeit  oppression  of  such  grief 
That  words  seem’d  buried  in  my  sorrow’s 
grave. 

Marry,  would  the  word  “farewell”  have  length¬ 
en’d  hours 

And  added  years  to  his  short  banishment, 

He  should  have  had  a  volume  of  farewells; 

But  since  it  would  not,  he  had  none  of  me. 

K.  Rich.  He  is  our  cousin,  cousin;  but  ’tis 
doubt,  20 

When  time  shall  call  him  from  banishment. 
Whether  our  kinsman  come  to  see  his  friends. 
Ourself  and  Bushy,  Bagot  here  and  Green 
Observed  his  courtship  to  the  common  people; 
How  he  did  seem  to  dive  into  their  hearts 
With  humble  and  familiar  courtesy. 

What  reverence  he  did  throw  away  on  slaves. 
Wooing  poor  craftsmen  with  the  craft  of  smiles 
And  patient  under  bearing  of  his  fortune. 

As  ’twere  to  banish  their  affects  with  him.  50 
Off  goes  his  bonnet  to  an  oyster- wench; 

A  brace  of  draymen  bid  God  speed  him  well 
And  had  the  tribute  of  his  supple  knee. 

With  “Thanks,  my  countrymen,  my  loving 
friends”; 

As  were  our  England  in  reversion  his. 

And  he  our  subjects’  next  degree  in  hope. 

Green.  Well,  he  is  gone;  and  with  him  go  these 
thoughts. 

Now  for  the  rebels  which  stand  out  in  Ireland, 
Expedient  manage  must  be  made,  my  liege. 

Ere  further  leisure  yield  them  further  means  40 
For  their  advantage  and  your  Highness’  loss. 

K.  Rich.  We  will  ourself  in  person  to  this  war: 
And,  for  our  coffers,  with  too  great  a  court 
And  liberal  largess,  are  grown  somewhat  light. 
We  are  inforced  to  farm  our  royal  realm; 

The  revenue  whereof  shall  furnish  us 
For  our  affairs  in  hand:  if  that  come  short. 

Our  substitutes  at  home  shall  have  blank  char¬ 
ters;  ^ 

Whereto,  when  they  shall  know  what  men  are 
rich. 

They  shall  subscribe  them  for  large  sums  of  gold 
And  send  them  after  to  supply  our  wants;  j/ 
For  we  will  make  for  Ireland  presently. 


327 

Enter  bushy. 

Bushy,  what  news? 

Bushy.  Old  John  of  Gaunt  is  grievous  sick,  my 
lord. 

Suddenly  taken;  and  hath  sent  post  haste 
To  entreat  your  Majesty  to  visit  him. 

K.  Rich.  Where  lies  he? 

Bushy.  At  Ely  House. 

K.  Rich.  Now  put  it,  God,  in  the  physician’s 
mind 

To  help  him  to  his  grave  immediately !  60 

The  lining  of  his  coffers  shall  make  coats 
To  deck  our  soldiers  for  these  Irish  wars. 

Come,  gentlemen,  let’s  all  go  visit  him: 

Pray  God  we  may  make  haste,  and  come  too  late! 

All.  Amen.  [Exeunt. 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  Ely  House 

Enter  john  of  gaunt  sick.,  zvith  the  duke  of 

YORK,  &C. 

Gaunt.  Will  the  King  come,  that  I  may  breathe 
my  last 

In  wholesome  counsel  to  his  unstaid  youth? 

York.  Vex  not  yourself,  nor  strive  not  with  your 
breath. 

For  all  in  vain  comes  counsel  to  his  ear. 

Gaunt.  O,  but  they  say  the  tongues  of  dying 
men 

Enforce  attention  like  deep  harmony: 

Where  words  are  scarce,  they  are  seldom  spent 
in  vain. 

For  they  breathe  truth  that  breathe  their  words 
in  pain. 

He  that  no  more  must  say  is  listen’d  more 
Than  they  whom  youth  and  ease  have  taught 
to  glose;  10 

More  are  men’s  ends  mark’d  than  their  lives  be¬ 
fore: 

The  setting  sun,  and  music  at  the  close. 

As  the  last  taste  of  sweets,  is  sweetest  last, 

W rit  in  remembrance  more  than  things  long 
past: 

Though  Richard  my  life’s  counsel  would  not 
hear. 

My  death’s  sad  tale  may  yet  undeaf  his  ear. 

York.  No;  it  is  stopp’d  with  other  flattering 
sounds. 

As  praises,  of  whose  taste  the  wise  are  fond. 
Lascivious  metres,  to  whose  venom  sound 
The  open  ear  of  youth  doth  always  listen;  20 
Report  of  fashions  in  proud  Italy, 

Whose  manners  still  our  tardy  apish  nation 
Limps  after  in  base  imitation. 


ACT  II 


KING  RICHARD  II 


328 

Where  doth  the  world  thrust  forth  a  vanity — 

So  it  be  new,  there’s  no  respect  how  vile — 

That  is  not  quickly  buzz’d  into  his  ears? 

Then  all  too  late  comes  counsel  to  be  heard, 
Where  will  doth  mutiny  with  wit’s  regard. 

Direct  not  him  whose  way  himself  will  choose: 
’Tis  breath  thou  lack’st,  and  that  breath  wilt  thou 
lose.  50 

Gaunt,  Methinks  I  am  a  prophet  new  inspired 
And  thus  expiring  do  foretell  of  him: 

His  rash  fierce  blaze  of  riot  cannot  last. 

For  violent  fires  soon  burn  out  themselves; 

Small  showers  last  long,  but  sudden  storms  are 
short; 

He  tires  betimes  that  spurs  too  fast  betimes; 

With  eager  feeding  food  doth  choke  the  feeder: 
Light  vanity,  insatiate  cormorant. 

Consuming  means,  soon  preys  upon  itself. 

This  royal  throne  of  kings,  this  scepter’d  isle,  40 
This  earth  of  majesty,  this  seat  of  Mars, 

This  other  Eden,  demi-paradise. 

This  fortress  built  by  Nature  for  herself 
Against  infection  and  the  hand  of  war. 

This  happy  breed  of  men,  this  little  world, 

This  precious  stone  set  in  the  silver  sea, 

Which  serves  it  in  the  office  of  a  wall 
Or  as  a  moat  defensive  to  a  house. 

Against  the  envy  of  less  happier  lands. 

This  blessed  plot,  this  earth,  this  realm,  this  Eng¬ 
land,  JO 

This  nurse,  this  teeming  womb  of  royal  kings. 
Fear’d  by  their  breed  and  famous  by  their  birth. 
Renowned  for  their  deeds  as  far  from  home. 

For  Christian  service  and  true  chivalry. 

As  is  the  sepulchre  in  stubborn  Jewry 
Of  the  world’s  ransom,  blessed  Mary’s  Son, 

This  land  of  such  dear  souls,  this  dear  dear  land. 
Dear  for  her  reputation  through  the  world. 

Is  now  leased  out,  I  die  pronouncing  it. 

Like  to  a  tenement  or  pelting  farm:  60 

England,  bound  in  with  the  triumphant  sea. 
Whose  rocky  shore  beats  back  the  envious  siege 
Of  watery  Neptune,  is  now  bound  in  with  shame. 
With  inky  blots  and  rotten  parchment  bonds : 
That  England,  that  was  wont  to  conquer  others. 
Hath  made  a  shameful  conquest  of  itself. 

Ah,  would  the  scandal  vanish  with  my  life. 

How  happy  then  were  my  ensuing  death! 

Enter  king  richard  and  queen,  aumerle,  bushy, 

GREEN,  BAGOT,  ROSS,  and  WILLOUGHBY. 

York.  The  King  is  come:  deal  mildly  with  his 
youth; 

For  young  hot  colts  being  raged  do  rage  the 
more. 

Queen.  How  fares  our  noble  uncle,  Lancaster? 


K.  Rich.  What  comfort,  man?  how  is’t  with 
aged  Gaunt? 

Gaunt.  O,  how  that  name  befits  my  composi¬ 
tion! 

Old  Gaunt  indeed,  and  gaunt  in  being  old: 

Within  me  grief  hath  kept  a  tedious  fast; 

And  who  abstains  from  meat  that  is  not  gaunt? 
For  sleeping  England  long  time  have  I  watch’d; 
Watching  breeds  leanness,  leanness  is  all  gaunt: 
The  pleasure  that  some  fathers  feed  upon. 

Is  my  strict  fast;  I  mean,  my  children’s  looks;  So 
And  therein  fasting,  hast  thou  made  me  gaunt: 
Gaunt  am  I  for  the  grave,  gaunt  as  a  grave. 
Whose  hollow  womb  inherits  nought  but  bones. 
K.  Rich.  Can  sick  men  play  so  nicely  with  their 
names? 

Gaunt.  No,  misery  makes  sport  to  mock  itself: 
Since  thou  dost  seek  to  kill  my  name  in  me, 

I  mock  my  name,  great  King,  to  flatter  thee. 

K.  Rich.  Should  dying  men  flatter  with  those 
that  live? 

Gaunt.  No,  no,  men  living  flatter  those  that  die. 
K.  Rich.  Thou,  now  a-dying,  say’st  thou  flatter- 
est  me.  jo 

Gaunt.  O,  no!  thou  diest,  though  I  the  sicker  be. 
K.  Rich.  I  am  in  health,  I  breathe,  and  see  thee 
ill. 

Gaunt.  Now  He  that  made  me  knows  I  see  thee 
ill; 

Ill  in  myself  to  see,  and  in  thee  seeing  ill. 

Thy  death-bed  is  no  lesser  than  thy  land 
Wherein  thou  liest  in  reputation  sick; 

And  thou,  too  careless  patient  as  thou  art, 
Commit’st  thy  anointed  body  to  the  cure 
Of  those  physicians  that  first  wounded  thee: 

A  thousand  flatterers  sit  within  thy  crown,  100 
Whose  compass  is  no  bigger  than  thy  head; 

And  yet,  incaged  in  so  small  a  verge. 

The  waste  is  no  whit  lesser  than  thy  land. 

O,  had  thy  grandsire  with  a  prophet’s  eye 
Seen  how  his  son’s  son  should  destroy  his  sons. 
From  forth  thy  reach  he  would  have  laid  thy 
shame. 

Deposing  thee  before  thou  wert  possess’d. 

Which  art  possess’d  now  to  depose  thyself. 

Why,  cousin,  wert  thou  regent  of  the  world. 

It  were  a  shame  to  let  this  land  by  lease;  no 
But  for  thy  world  enjoying  but  this  land. 

Is  it  not  more  than  shame  to  shame  it  so? 

Landlord  of  England  art  thou  now,  not  king: 

Thy  state  of  law  is  bondslave  to  the  law; 

And  thou — 

69  K.  Rich.  A  lunatic  lean-witted  fool. 

Presuming  on  an  ague’s  privilege. 

Dares t  with  thy  frozen  admonition 
Make  pale  our  cheek,  chasing  the  royal  blood 


SCENE  I 


KING  RICHARD  II 


With  fiiry  from  his  native  residence. 

Now,  by  my  seat’s  right  royal  majesty,  120 
Wert  thou  not  brother  to  great  Edward’s  son. 
This  tongue  that  runs  so  roundly  in  thy  head 
Should  run  thy  head  from  thy  unreverent  shoul¬ 
ders. 

Gaunt.  O,  spare  me  not,  my  brother  Edward’s 
son. 

For  that  I  was  his  father  Edward’s  son; 

That  blood  already,  like  the  pelican. 

Hast  thou  tapp’d  out  and  drunkenly  caroused: 

My  brother  Gloucester,  plain  well-meaning  soul, 
Whom  fair  befall  in  heaven  ’mongst  happy  souls! 
May  be  a  precedent  and  witness  good  1^0 

That  thou  respect’st  not  spilling  Edward’s  blood: 
Join  with  the  present  sickness  that  I  have; 

And  thy  unkindness  be  like  crooked  age, 

To  crop  at  once  a  too  long  wither’d  flower. 

Live  in  thy  shame,  bur  die  not  shame  with  thee! 
These  words  hereafter  thy  tormentors  be! 
Convey  me  to  my  bed,  then  to  my  grave: 

Love  they  to  live  that  love  and  honour  have, 

[Exit,  borne  off  by  his  Attendants. 
K.  Rich.  And  let  them  die  that  age  and  sullens 
have; 

For  both  hast  thou,  and  both  become  the  grave. 
York.  I  do  beseech  your  majesty,  impute  his 
words  141 

To  wayward  sickliness  and  age  in  him: 

He  loves  you,  on  my  life,  and  holds  you  dear 
As  Harry  Duke  of  Hereford,  were  he  here. 

K.  Rich.  Right,  you  say  true:  as  Hereford’s 
love,  so  his; 

As  theirs,  so  mine;  and  all  be  as  it  is. 

Enter  Northumberland. 

North.  My  liege,  old  Gaunt  commends  him  to 
your  Majesty. 

K.  Rich.  What  says  he? 

North.  Nay,  nothing;  all  is  said: 

His  tongue  is  now  a  stringless  instrument; 
Words,  life  and  all,  old  Lancaster  hath  spent,  /jo 
York.  Be  York  the  next  that  must  be  bankrupt 
so! 

Though  death  be  poor,  it  ends  a  mortal  woe. 

K.  Rich.  The  ripest  fruit  first  falls,  and  so  doth 
he; 

His  time  is  spent,  our  pilgrimage  must  be. 

So  much  for  that.  Now  for  our  Irish  wars: 

We  must  supplant  those  rough  rug-headed  kerns. 
Which  liye  like  venom  where  no  venom  else 
But  only  they  have  privilege  to  live. 

And  for  these  great  affairs  do  ask  some  charge. 
Towards  our  assistance  we  do  seize  to  us  160 
The  plate,  coin,  revenues  and  moveables. 
Whereof  our  uncle  Gaunt  did  stand  possess’d. 


York.  How  long  shall  I  be  patient?  ah,  how  long 
Shall  tender  duty  make  me  suffer  wrong? 

Not  Gloucester’s  death,  nor  Hereford’s  banish¬ 
ment, 

Not  Gaunt’s  rebukes,  nor  England’s  private 
wrongs, 

Nor  the  prevention  of  poor  Bolingbroke 
About  his  marriage,  nor  my  own  disgrace. 

Have  ever  made  me  sour  my  patient  cheek. 

Or  bend  one  wrinkle  on  my  sovereign’s  face.  /70 
I  am  the  last  of  noble  Edward’s  sons. 

Of  whom  thy  father.  Prince  ofWales,  was  first: 

In  war  was  never  lion  raged  more  fierce. 

In  peace  was  never  gentle  lamb  more  mild, 

Than  was  that  young  and  princely  gentleman. 

His  face  thou  hast,  for  even  so  look’d  he. 
Accomplish’d  with  the  number  of  thy  hours; 

But  when  he  frown’d,  it  was  against  the  French 
And  not  against  his  friends;  his  noble  hand 
Did  win  what  he  did  spend  and  spent  not  that  iSo 
Which  his  triumphant  father’s  hand  had  won; 

His  hands  were  guilty  of  no  kindred  blood. 

But  bloody  with  the  enemies  of  his  kin. 

O  Richard!  York  is  too  far  gone  with  grief. 

Or  else  he  never  would  compare  between. 

K.  Rich.  Why,  uncle,  what’s  the  matter? 

York.  O  my  liege. 

Pardon  me,  if  you  please;  if  not,  I,  pleased 
Nor  to  be  pardon’d,  am  content  withal. 

Seek  you  to  seize  and  gripe  into  your  hands  i8p 
The  royalties  and  rights  of  banish’d  Hereford? 

Is  not  Gaunt  dead,  and  doth  not  Hereford  live? 
Was  not  Gaunt  just,  and  is  not  Harry  true? 

Did  not  the  one  deserve  to  have  an  heir? 

Is  not  his  heir  a  well-deserving  son? 

Take  Hereford’s  rights  away,  and  take  from 
Time 

His  charters  and  his  customary  rights; 

Let  not  to-morrow  then  ensue  to-day; 

Be  not  thyself;  for  how  art  thou  a  king 
But  by  fair  sequence  and  succession? 

Now,  afore  God — God  forbid  I  say  true! —  200 
If  you  do  wrongfully  seize  Hereford’s  rights. 

Call  in  the  letters  patents  that  he  hath 

By  his  attorney s-general  to  sue 

His  livery,  and  deny  his  offer’d  homage. 

You  pluck  a  thousand  dangers  on  your  head. 

You  lose  a  thousand  well-disposed  hearts 
And  prick  my  tender  patience  to  those  thoughts 
Which  honour  and  allegiance  cannot  think. 

K.  Rich.  Think  what  you  will,  we  seize  into  our 
hands 

His  plate,  his  goods,  his  money,  and  his  lands. 
York,  ril  not  be  by  the  while:  my  liege,  fare¬ 
well:  211 

What  will  ensue  hereof,  there’s  none  can  tell; 


ACT  II 


KING  RICHARD  II 


330 

But  by  bad  courses  may  be  understood 
That  their  events  can  never  fall  out  good.  [Exit, 
K.  Rich.  Go,  Bushy,  to  the  Earl  ofWiltshire 
straight: 

Bid  him  repair  to  us  to  Ely  House 
To  see  this  business.  To-morrow  next 
VVe  will  for  Ireland;  and  ’tis  time,  I  trow: 

And  we  create,  in  absence  of  ourself, 

Our  uncle  York  lord  governor  of  England;  220 
For  he  is  just  and  always  loved  us  well. 

Come  on,  our  queen:  to-morrow  must  we  part; 
Be  merry,  for  our  time  of  stay  is  short. 

[Flourish.  Exeunt  king,  queen,  aumerle, 

BUSHY,  GREEN,  and  BAGOT. 

North.  Well,  lords,  the  Duke  of  Lancaster  is 
dead. 

Ross.  And  living  too;  for  now  his  son  is  duke. 
Willo.  Barely  in  title,  not  in  revenues. 

North.  Richly  in  both,  if  justice  had  her 
right. 

Ross.  My  heart  is  great;  but  it  must  break  with 
silence, 

Ere’t  be  disburden’d  with  a  liberal  tongue. 

North.  Nay,  speak  thy  mind;  and  let  him  ne’er 
speak  more  250 

That  speaks  thy  words  again  to  do  thee  harm! 
Willo.  Tends  that  thou  wouldst  speak  to  the 
Duke  of  Hereford? 

If  it  be  so,  out  with  it  boldly,  man; 

Quick  is  mine  ear  to  hear  of  good  towards  him. 
Ross.  No  good  at  all  that  I  can  do  for  him; 

Unless  you  call  it  good  to  pity  him, 

Bereft  and  gelded  of  his  patrimony. 

North.  Now,  afore  God,  ’tis  shame  such  wrongs 
are  borne 

In  him,  a  royal  prince,  and  many  moe 
Of  noble  blood  in  this  declining  land.  240 

The  King  is  not  himself,  but  basely  led 
By  flatterers;  and  what  they  will  inform. 

Merely  in  hate,  ’gainst  any  of  us  all. 

That  will  the  King  severely  prosecute 
’Gainst  us,  our  lives,  our  children,  and  our  heirs. 
Ross.  The  commons  hath  he  pill’d  with  grievous 
taxes. 

And  quite  lost  their  hearts:  the  nobles  hath  he 
fined 

For  ancient  quarrels,  and  quite  lost  their  hearts. 

Willo.  And  daily  new  exactions  are  devised. 

As  blanks,  benevolences,  and  I  wot  not  what:  250 
But  what,  o’  God’s  name,  doth  become  of  this? 
N(9rr/?.Wars  have  not  wasted  it,  for  warr’d  he 
hath  not. 

But  basely  yielded  upon  compromise 
That  which  his  noble  ancestors  achieved  with 
blows : 

More  hath  he  spent  in  peace  than  they  in  wars. 


Ross.  The  Earl  ofWiltshire  hath  the  realm  in 
farm. 

Willo.  The  King’s  grown  bankrupt,  like  a  bro¬ 
ken  man. 

North.  Reproach  and  dissolution  hangeth  over 
him. 

Ross.  He  hath  not  money  for  these  Irish  wars. 
His  burthenous  taxations  notwithstanding,  260 
But  by  the  robbing  of  the  banish’d  Duke. 

North.  His  noble  kinsman:  most  degenerate 
king! 

But,  lords,  we  hear  this  fearful  tempest  sing. 

Yet  seek  no  shelter  to  avoid  the  storm; 

We  see  the  wind  sit  sore  upon  our  sails. 

And  yet  we  strike  not,  but  securely  perish. 

Ross.  We  see  the  very  wreck  that  we  must 
suffer; 

And  unavoided  is  the  danger  now. 

For  suffering  so  the  causes  of  our  wreck. 

North.  Not  so;  even  through  the  hollow  eyes  of 
death  270 

I  spy  life  peering;  but  I  dare  not  say 
How  near  the  tidings  of  our  comfort  is. 

Willo.  Nay,  let  us  share  thy  thoughts,  as  thou 
dost  ours. 

Ross.  Be  confident  to  speak,  Northumberland: 
We  three  are  but  thyself;  and,  speaking  so. 

Thy  words  are  but  as  thoughts;  therefore,  be 
bold. 

North.  Then  thus:  I  have  from  Port  le  Blanc,  a 
bay 

In  Brittany,  received  intelligence 
That  Harry  Duke  of  Hereford,  Rainold  Lord 
Cobham, 

. 280 

That  late  broke  from  the  Duke  of  Exeter, 

His  brother.  Archbishop  late  of  Canterbury, 

Sir  Thomas  Erpingham,  Sir  John  Ramston, 

Sir  John  Norbery,  Sir  Robert  Waterton  and 
Francis  Quoint, 

All  these  well  furnish’d  by  the  Duke  of  Bretagne 
With  eight  tall  ships,  three  thousand  men  of  war. 
Are  making  hither  with  all  due  expedience 
And  shortly  mean  to  touch  our  northern  shore: 
Perhaps  they  had  ere  this,  but  that  they  stay 
The  first  departing  of  the  King  for  Ireland.  2^0 
If  then  we  shall  shake  off  our  slavish  yoke. 

Imp  out  our  drooping  country’s  broken  wing. 
Redeem  from  broking  pawn  the  blemish’d  crown. 
Wipe  off  the  dust  that  hides  our  sceptre’s  gilt 
And  make  high  majesty  look  like  itself. 

Away  with  me  in  post  to  Ravenspurgh; 

But  if  you  faint,  as  fearing  to  do  so. 

Stay  and  be  secret,  and  myself  will  go. 

Ross.  To  horse,  to  horse!  urge  doubts  to  them 
that  fear. 


f  SCENE  1 

K 

I  Willo.  Hold  out  my  horse,  and  I  will  first  be 
there.  [Exeunt.  500 

Scene  11.  Windsor  Castle 
Enter  queen,  bushy,  and  bagot. 

Bushy.  Madam,  your  majesty  is  too  much  sad: 

I  You  promised,  when  you  parted  with  the  King, 
To  lay  aside  life-harming  heaviness 
i  And  entertain  a  cheerful  disposition. 

Queen.  To  please  the  King  I  did;  to  please  my¬ 
self 

I  cannot  do  it;  yet  I  know  no  cause 

Why  I  should  welcome  such  a  guest  as  grief. 

Save  bidding  farewell  to  so  sweet  a  guest 
As  my  sweet  Richard:  yet  again,  methinks, 

Some  unborn  sorrow,  ripe  in  fortune’s  womb. 

Is  coming  towards  me,  and  my  inward  soul  // 
With  nothing  trembles:  at  some  thing  it  grieves. 
More  than  with  parting  from  my  lord  the  king. 
Bushy.  Each  substance  of  a  grief  hath  twenty 
shadows, 

Which  shows  like  grief  itself,  but  is  not  so; 

For  sorrow’s  eye,  glazed  with  blinding  tears. 
Divides  one  thing  entire  to  many  objects; 

Like  perspectives,  which  rightly  gazed  upon 
Show  nothing  but  confusion,  eyed  awry 
Distinguish  form:  so  your  sweet  Majesty,  20 
Looking  awry  upon  your  lord’s  departure. 

Find  shapes  of  grief,  more  than  himself,  to  wail; 
Which,  look’d  on  as  it  is,  is  nought  but  shadows 
Of  what  it  is  not.  Then,  thrice-gracious  Queen, 
More  than  your  lord’s  departure  weep  not: 
more’s  not  seen; 

Or  if  it  be,  ’tis  with  false  sorrow’s  eye. 

Which  for  things  true  weeps  things  imaginary. 

Queen.  It  may  be  so;  but  yet  my  inward  soul 
Persuades  me  it  is  otherwise:  howe’er  it  be, 

I  cannot  but  be  sad;  so  heavy  sad  50 

As,  though  on  thinking  on  no  thought  I  think. 
Makes  me  with  heavy  nothing  faint  and  shrink. 
Bushy.  ’Tis  nothing  but  conceit,  my  gracious 
lady. 

Queen.  ’Tis  nothing  less:  conceit  is  still  derived 
From  some  forefather  grief;  mine  is  not  so. 

For  nothing  hath  begot  my  something  grief; 

Or  something  hath  the  nothing  that  I  grieve: 

’Tis  in  reversion  that  I  do  possess; 

But  what  it  is,  that  is  not  yet  known;  what 
I  cannot  name;  ’tis  nameless  woe,  I  wot.  40 

Enter  green 

Green.  God  save  your  Majesty!  and  well  met, 
gentlemen: 

I  hope  the  King  is  not  yet  shipp’d  for  Ireland. 
Queen.  Why  hopest  thou  so?  ’tis  better  hope 
he  is; 


331 

For  his  designs  crave  haste,  his  haste  good  hope: 
Then  wherefore  dost  thou  hope  he  is  not  shipp’d? 
Green.  That  he,  our  hope,  might  have  retired 
his  power. 

And  driven  into  despair  an  enemy’s  hope. 

Who  strongly  hath  set  footing  in  this  land: 

The  banish’d  Bolingbroke  repeals  himself. 

And  with  uplifted  arms  is  safe  arrived  50 

At  Ravenspurgh. 

Queen.  Now  God  in  heaven  forbid! 

Green.  Ah,  madam,  ’tis  too  true:  and  that  is 
worse. 

The  Lord  Northumberland,  his  son  young  Henry 
Percy, 

The  Lords  of  Ross,  Beaumond,  and  Willoughby, 
With  all  their  powerful  friends,  are  fled  to  him. 
Bushy.  Why  have  you  not  proclaim’d  North¬ 
umberland 

And  all  the  rest  revolted  faction  traitors? 

Green.  We  have:  whereupon  the  Earl  of  Wor¬ 
cester 

Hath  broke  his  staff,  resign’d  his  stewardship. 
And  all  the  household  servants  fled  with  him  60 
To  Bolingbroke. 

Queen.  So,  Green,  thou  art  the  midwife  to  my 
woe. 

And  Bolingbroke  my  sorrow’s  dismal  heir: 

Now  hath  my  soul  brought  forth  her  prodigy, 
And  I,  a  gasping  new-deliver’d  mother. 

Have  woe  to  woe,  sorrow  to  sorrow  join’d. 
Bushy.  Despair  not,  madam. 

Queen.  Who  shall  hinder  me? 

I  will  despair,  and  be  at  enmity 
With  cozening  hope:  he  is  a  flatterer, 

A  parasite,  a  keeper  back  of  death,  70 

Who  gently  would  dissolve  the  bands  of  life. 
Which  false  hope  lingers  in  extremity. 

Enter  York, 

Green.  Here  comes  the  Duke  of  York. 

Queen.  With  signs  of  war  about  his  aged  neck: 
O,  full  of  careful  business  are  his  looks! 

Uncle,  for  God’s  sake,  speak  comfortable  words. 

York.  Should  I  do  so,  I  should  belie  my  thoughts: 
Comfort’s  in  heaven;  and  we  are  on  the  earth. 
Where  nothing  lives  but  crosses,  cares  and 
grief. 

Your  husband,  he  is  gone  to  save  far  off,  80 
Whilst  others  come  to  make  him  lose  at  home: 
Here  am  I  left  to  underprop  his  land, 

Who,  weak  with  age,  cannot  support  myself: 
Now  comes  the  sick  hour  that  his  surfeit  made; 
Now  shall  he  try  his  friends  that  flatter’d  him. 

Enter  a  servant. 

Serv.  My  lord,  you  son  was  gone  before  I  came. 


KING  RICHARD  II 


KING  RICHARD  II 


York.  He  was?  Why,  so!  go  all  which  way  it 
will! 

The  nobles  they  are  fled,  the  commons  they  are 
cold. 

And  will,  I  fear,  revolt  on  Hereford’s  side. 

Sirrah,  get  thee  to  Flashy,  to  my  sister  Glou¬ 
cester;  yo 

Bid  her  send  me  presently  a  thousand  pound: 
Hold,  take  my  ring. 

Serv.  My  lord,  I  had  forgot  to  tell  your  lord- 
ship. 

To-day,  as  I  came  by,  I  called  there; 

But  I  shall  grieve  you  to  report  the  rest. 

York.  What  is’t,  knave? 

Serv.  An  hour  before  I  came,  the  Duchess  died. 
York.  God  for  his  mercy!  what  a  tide  of  woes 
Comes  rushing  on  this  woeful  land  at  once! 

I  know  not  what  to  do:  I  would  to  God,  wo 
So  my  untruth  had  not  provoked  him  to  it. 

The  King  had  cut  off  my  head  with  my  brother’s. 
What,  are  there  no  posts  dispatch’d  for  Ireland? 
How  shall  we  do  for  money  for  these  wars? 
Come,  sister — cousin,  I  would  say — pray,  par¬ 
don  me. 

Go,  fellow,  get  thee  home,  provide  some  carts 
And  bring  away  the  armour  that  is  there. 

[Exit  Servant. 

Gentlemen,  will  you  go  muster  men? 

If  I  know  how  or  which  way  to  order  these  affairs 
Thus  thrust  disorderly  into  my  hands,  no 

Never  believe  me.  Both  are  my  kinsmen: 

The  one  is  my  sovereign,  whom  both  my  oath 
And  duty  bids  defend;  the  other  again 
Is  my  kinsman,  whom  the  King  hath  wrong’d. 
Whom  conscience  and  my  kindred  bids  to  right. 
Well,  somewhat  we  must  do.  Come,  cousin.  I’ll 
Dispose  of  you. 

Gentlemen,  go,  muster  up  your  men. 

And  meet  me  presently  at  Berkeley. 

I  should  to  Flashy  too;  120 

But  time  will  not  permit:  all  is  uneven. 

And  every  thing  is  left  at  six  and  seven. 

[Exeunt  york  and  queen. 
Bushy.  The  wind  sits  fair  for  news  to  go  to 
Ireland, 

But  none  returns.  For  us  to  levy  power 
Froportionable  to  the  enemy 
Is  all  unpossible. 

Green.  Besides,  our  nearness  to  the  King  in  love 
Is  near  the  hate  of  those  love  not  the  King. 

Bagot.  And  that’s  the  wavering  commons:  for 
their  love 

Lies  in  their  purses,  and  whoso  empties  them  1^0 
By  so  much  fills  their  hearts  with  deadly  hate. 
Bushy.  Wherein  the  King  stands  generally  con¬ 
demn’d. 


Bagot.  If  judgement  lie  in  them,  then  so  do  we. 
Because  we  ever  have  been  near  the  King. 

Green.  Well,  I  will  for  refuge  straight  to  Bristol 
castle: 

The  Earl  ofWiltshire  is  already  there. 

Bushy.  Thither  will  1  with  you;  for  little  office 
The  hateful  commons  will  perform  for  us. 

Except  like  curs  to  tear  us  all  to  pieces. 

Will  you  go  along  with  us?  /40 

Bagot.  No;  I  will  to  Ireland  to  his  Majesty. 
Farewell:  if  heart’s  presages  be  not  vain. 

We  three  here  part  that  ne’er  shall  meet  again. 
Bushy.  That’s  as  York  thrives  to  beat  back  Bol- 
ingbroke. 

Green.  Alas,  poor  duke!  the  task  he  undertakes 
Is  numbering  sands  and  drinking  oceans  dry: 
Where  one  on  his  side  fights,  thousands  will  fly. 
Farewell  at  once,  for  once,  for  all,  and  ever. 
Bushy.  Well,  we  may  meet  again. 

Bagot.  I  fear  me,  never. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Wilds  in  Gloucestershire 
Enter  bolingbroke  and  Northumberland,  voith 
Forces. 

Boling.  How  far  is  it,  my  lord,  to  Berkeley 
now? 

North.  Believe  me,  noble  lord, 

I  am  a  stranger  here  in  Gloucestershire: 

These  high  wild  hills  and  rough  uneven  ways 
Draws  out  our  miles,  and  makes  them  weari¬ 
some; 

And  yet  your  fair  discourse  hath  been  as  sugar, 
Making  the  hard  way  sweet  and  delectable. 

But  I  bethink  me  what  a  weary  way 
From  Ravenspurgh  to  Cots  wold  will  be  found 
In  Ross  and  Willoughby,  wanting  your  company. 
Which,  I  protest,  hath  very  much  beguiled  // 
The  tediousness  and  process  of  my  travel: 

But  theirs  is  sweetened  with  the  hope  to  have 
The  present  benefit  which  I  possess; 

And  hope  to  joy  is  little  less  in  joy 
Than  hope  enjoy’d:  by  this  the  weary  lords 
Shall  make  their  way  seem  short,  as  mine  hath 
done 

By  sight  of  what  I  have,  your  noble  company. 

Boling.  Of  much  less  value  is  my  company 
Than  your  good  words.  But  who  comes  here? 

Enter  henry  Percy. 

North.  It  is  my  son,  young  Harry  Fercy,  21 
Sent  from  my  brother  Worcester,  whencesoever. 
Harry,  how  fares  your  uncle? 

Percy.  I  had  thought,  my  lord,  to  have  learn’d 
his  health  of  you. 

North.  Why,  is  he  not  with  the  Queen? 


SCENE  III 

Percy.  No,  my  good  Lord;  he  hath  forsook  the 
'  court, 

Broken  his  staff  of  office  and  dispersed 
The  household  of  the  King. 

North.  What  was  his  reason? 

He  was  not  so  resolved  when  last  we  spake  to¬ 
gether. 

Percy.  Because  your  lordship  was  proclaimed 
traitor.  50 

But  he,  my  lord,  is  gone  to  Ravenspurgh, 

To  offer  service  to  the  Duke  of  Hereford, 

And  sent  me  over  by  Berkeley,  to  discover 
What  power  the  Duke  of  York  had  levied  there; 
Then  with  directions  to  repair  to  Ravenspurgh. 
North.  Have  you  forgot  the  Duke  of  Hereford, 
boy? 

Percy.  No,  my  good  lord,  for  that  is  not  forgot 
Which  ne’er  I  did  remember:  to  my  knowledge, 

I  never  in  my  life  did  look  on  him. 

North.  Then  learn  to  know  him  now;  this  is 
the  Duke.  40 

Percy.  My  gracious  lord,  I  tender  you  my  serv¬ 
ice. 

Such  as  it  is,  being  tender,  raw  and  young; 

Which  elder  days  shall  ripen  and  confirm 
To  more  approved  service  and  desert. 

Boling.  I  thank  thee,  gentle  Percy;  and  be  sure 
I  count  myself  in  nothing  else  so  happy 
As  in  a  soul  remembering  my  good  friends; 
x\nd,  as  my  fortune  ripens  with  thy  love. 

It  shall  be  still  thy  true  love’s  recompense: 

My  heart  this  covenant  makes,  my  hand  thus 
seals  it.  50 

North.  How  far  is  it  to  Berkeley?  and  what  stir 
Keeps  good  old  York  there  with  his  men  of  war? 
Percy.  There  stands  the  castle,  by  yon  tuft  of 
trees, 

Mann’d  with  three  hundred  men,  as  I  have  heard: 
And  in  it  are  the  Lords  of  York,  Berkeley,  and 
Seymour; 

None  else  of  name  and  noble  estimate. 

Enter  ross  and  willoughby. 

North.  Here  come  the  Lords  of  Ross  and 
Willoughby, 

Bloody  with  spurring,  fiery-red  with  haste. 

Boling.  Welcome,  my  lords.  I  wot  your  love 
pursues 

A  banish’d  traitor:  all  my  treasury  60 

Is  yet  but  unfelt  thanks,  which  more  enrich’d 
Shall  be  your  love  and  labour’s  recompense. 

Ross.  Your  presence  makes  us  rich,  most  noble 
lord. 

Willo.  And  far  surmounts  our  labour  to  attain  it. 
Boling.  Evermore  thanks,  the  exchequer  of  the 
poor; 


333 

Which,  till  my  infant  fortune  comes  to  years. 
Stands  for  my  bounty.  But  who  comes  here? 

Enter  Berkeley. 

North.  It  is  my  Lord  of  Berkeley,  as  I  guess. 
Berk.  My  Lord  of  Hereford,  my  message  is  to 
you.  69 

Boling.  My  lord,  my  answer  is — to  Lancaster; 
And  I  am  come  to  seek  that  name  in  England; 

And  I  must  find  that  title  in  your  tongue. 

Before  I  make  reply  to  aught  you  say. 

Berk.  Mistake  me  not,  my  lord;  ’tis  not  my 
meaning 

To  raze  one  title  of  your  honour  out: 

To  you,  my  lord,  I  come,  what  lord  you  will. 
From  the  most  gracious  regent  of  this  land. 

The  Duke  of  York,  to  know  what  pricks  you  on 

To  take  advantage  of  the  absent  time 

And  fright  our  native  peace  with  self-born  arms. 

Enter  york  attended. 

Boling.  I  shall  not  need  transport  my  words  bv 
you;  81 

Here  comes  his  Grace  in  person. 

My  noble  uncle!  [Kneels. 
York.  Show  me  thy  humble  heart,  and  not  thy 
knee. 

Whose  duty  is  deceiveable  and  false. 

Boling.  My  gracious  uncle — 

York.  Tut,  tut! 

Grace  me  no  grace,  nor  uncle  me  no  uncle: 

I  am  no  traitor’s  uncle;  and  that  word  “grace” 

In  an  ungracious  mouth  is  but  profane. 

Why  have  those  banish’d  and  forbidden  legs  yo 
Dared  once  to  touch  a  dust  of  England’s  ground? 
But  then  more  “why?”  Why  have  they  dared  to 
march 

So  many  miles  upon  her  peaceful  bosom, 
Frighting  her  pale-faced  villages  with  war 
And  ostentation  of  despised  arms? 

Comest  thou  because  the  anointed  King  is  hence? 
Why,  foolish  boy,  the  King  is  left  behind. 

And  in  my  loyal  bosom  lies  his  power. 

Were  I  but  now  the  lord  of  such  hot  youth 
As  when  brave  Gaunt,  thy  father,  and  myself  100 
Rescued  the  Black  Prince,  that  young  Mars  of 
men. 

From  forth  the  ranks  of  many  thousand  French, 
O,  then  how  quickly  should  this  arm  of  mine. 
Now  prisoner  to  the  palsy,  chastise  thee 
And  minister  correction  to  thy  fault! 

Boling.  My  gracious  uncle,  let  me  know  my 
fault: 

On  what  condition  stands  it  and  wherein? 

York.  Even  in  condition  of  the  worst  degree. 

In  gross  rebellion  and  detested  treason: 


KING  RICHARD  II 


334 

Thou  art  a  banish’d  man,  and  here  art  come 
Before  the  expiration  of  thy  time, 

In  braving  arms  against  thy  sovereign. 

Boling.  As  I  was  banish’d,  I  was  banish’d  Here¬ 
ford; 

But  as  I  come,  I  come  for  Lancaster. 

And,  noble  uncle,  I  beseech  your  Grace 
Look  on  my  wrongs  with  an  indifferent  eye: 

You  are  my  father,  for  methinks  in  you 
I  see  old  Gaunt  alive;  O,  then,  my  father. 

Will  you  permit  that  I  shall  stand  condemn’d 
A  wandering  vagabond;  my  rights  and  royalties 
Pluck’d  from  my  arms  perforce  and  given  away 
To  upstart  unthrifts?  Wherefore  was  I  born? 

If  that  my  cousin  king  be  King  of  England, 

It  must  be  granted  I  am  Duke  of  Lancaster. 

You  have  a  son,  Aumerle,  my  noble  cousin; 

Had  you  first  died,  and  he  been  thus  trod  down. 
He  should  have  found  his  uncle  Gaunt  a  father. 
To  rouse  his  wrongs  and  chase  them  to  the  bay. 

I  am  denied  to  sue  my  livery  here. 

And  yet  my  letter s-patents  give  me  leave :  o 

My  father’s  goods  are  all  distrain’d  and  sold. 

And  these  and  all  are  all  amiss  employ’d. 

What  would  you  have  me  do?  I  am  a  subject. 

And  I  challenge  law:  attorneys  are  denied  me; 
And  therefore  personally  I  lay  my  claim 
To  my  inheritance  of  free  descent. 

North.  The  noble  Duke  hath  been  too  much 
abused. 

Ross.  It  stands  your  Grace  upon  to  do  him 
right. 

Willo.  Base  men  by  his  endowments  are  made 
great. 

York.  My  lords  of  England,  let  me  tell  you  this: 
I  have  had  feeling  of  my  cousin’s  wrongs 
And  labour’d  all  1  could  to  do  him  right; 

But  in  this  kind  to  come,  in  braving  arms. 

Be  his  own  carver  and  cut  out  his  way. 

To  find  out  right  with  wrong,  it  may  not  be; 

And  you  that  do  abet  him  in  this  kind 
Cherish  rebellion  and  are  rebels  all. 

North.  The  noble  Duke  hath  sworn  his  coming 
is 

But  for  his  own;  and  for  the  right  of  that 
We  all  have  strongly  sworn  to  give  him  aid;  /50 
And  let  him  ne’er  see  joy  that  breaks  that  oath! 

York.  Well,  well,  I  see  the  issue  of  these  arms: 

I  cannot  mend  it,  I  must  needs  confess. 

Because  my  power  is  weak  and  all  ill  left: 

But  if  I  could,  by  Him  that  gave  me  life, 

I  would  attach  you  all  and  make  you  stoop 
Unto  the  sovereign  mercy  of  the  King; 

But  since  I  cannot,  be  it  known  to  you 
I  do  remain  as  neuter.  So,  fare  you  well; 

Unless  you  please  to  enter  in  the  castle 


ACT  III 

And  there  repose  you  for  this  night. 

Boling.  An  offer,  uncle,  that  we  will  accept: 

But  we  must  win  your  Grace  to  go  with  us 
To  Bristol  castle,  which  they  say  is  held 
By  Bushy,  Bagot,  and  their  complices. 

The  caterpillars  of  the  commonwealth. 

Which  I  have  sworn  to  weed  and  pluck  away. 
York.  It  may  be  I  will  go  with  you:  but  yet  I’ll 
pause; 

For  I  am  loath  to  break  our  country’s  laws. 

Nor  friends  nor  foes,  to  me  welcome  you  are:  /70 
Things  past  redress  are  now  with  me  past  care. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  A  camp  in  Wales 
Enter  Salisbury  and  a  welsh  captain. 

Cap.  My  Lord  of  Salisbury,  we  have  stay’d  ten 
days. 

And  hardly  kept  our  countrymen  together. 

And  yet  we  hear  no  tidings  from  the  King; 
Therefore  we  will  disperse  ourselves:  farewell. 
Sal.  Stay  yet  another  day,  thou  trusty  Welsh¬ 
man: 

The  King  reposeth  all  his  confidence  in  thee. 

Cap.  ’Tis  thought  the  King  is  dead;  we  will  not 
stay. 

The  bay-trees  in  our  country  are  all  wither’d 
And  meteors  fright  the  fixed  stars  of  heaven; 

The  pale-faced  moon  looks  bloody  on  the  earth  10 
And  lean-look’d  prophets  whisper  fearful  change; 
Rich  men  look  sad  and  ruffians  dance  and  leap. 
The  one  in  fear  to  lose  what  they  enjoy, 

The  other  to  enjoy  by  rage  and  war: 

These  signs  forerun  the  death  or  fall  of  kings. 
Farewell:  our  countrymen  are  gone  and  fled. 

As  well  assured  Richard  their  king  is  dead. 

[Exit. 

Sal.  Ah,  Richard,  with  the  eyes  of  heavy  mind 
I  see  thy  glory  like  a  shooting  star 
Fall  to  the  base  earth  from  the  firmament.  20 
Thy  sun  sets  weeping  in  the  lowly  west. 
Witnessing  storms  to  come,  woe,  and  unrest: 
Thy  friends  are  fled  to  wait  upon  thy  foes. 

And  crossly  to  thy  good  all  fortune  goes.  [Exit. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  Bristol:  before  the  castle 
Enter  bolingbroke,  york,  Northumberland, 

ROSS,  PERCY,  WILLOUGHBY,  Vjith  BUSHY  and 
GREEN,  prisoners. 

Boling.  Bring  forth  these  men. 

Bushy  and  Green,  I  will  not  vex  your  souls — 
Since  presently  your  souls  must  part  your 
bodies — 

160  With  too  much  urging  your  pernicious  lives. 


KING  RICHARD  H 
no 


SCENE  I 


KING  RICHARD  II 


‘  For  ’twere  no  charity;  yet,  to  wash  your  blood 
From  off  my  hands,  here  in  the  view  of  men 
I  will  unfold  some  causes  of  your  deaths. 

I  You  have  misled  a  prince,  a  royal  king, 

A  happy  gentleman  in  blood  and  lineaments. 

By  you  unhappied  and  disfigured  clean:  lo 

You  have  in  manner  with  your  sinful  hours 
Made  a  divorce  betwixt  his  queen  and  him, 

Broke  the  possession  of  a  royal  bed 
And  stain’d  the  beauty  of  a  fair  queen’s  cheeks 
With  tears  drawn  from  her  eyes  by  your  foul 
wrongs. 

Myself,  a  prince  by  fortune  of  my  birth. 

Near  to  the  King  in  blood,  and  near  in  love 
Till  you  did  make  him  misinterpret  me, 

Have  stoop’d  my  neck  under  your  injuries, 

And  sigh’d  my  English  breath  in  foreign  clouds. 
Eating  the  bitter  bread  of  banishment;  21 

Whilst  you  have  fed  upon  my  signories, 
Dispark’d  my  parks  and  fell’d  my  forest  woods, 
From  my  own  windows  torn  my  household 
coat, 

Razed  out  my  imprese,  leaving  me  no  sign, 

Save  men’s  opinions  and  my  living  blood, 

To  show  the  world  I  am  a  gentleman. 

This  and  much  more,  much  more  than  twice  all 
this, 

Condemns  you  to  the  death.  See  them  deliver’d 
over 

To  execution  and  the  hand  of  death .  5  0 

Bushy.  More  welcome  is  the  stroke  of  death  to 
me 

Than  Bolingbroke  to  England.  Lords,  farewell. 
Green.  My  comfort  is  that  heaven  will  take  our 
souls 

And  plague  injustice  with  the  pains  of  hell. 

Boling.  My  Lord  Northumberland,  see  them 
dispatch’d. 

[Exeunt  Northumberland  and  others j 
'with  the  prisoners. 

Uncle,  you  say  the  Queen  is  at  your  house; 

For  God’s  sake,  fairly  let  her  be  entreated: 

Tell  her  I  send  to  her  my  kind  commends; 

Take  special  care  my  greetings  be  deliver’d. 

York.  A  gentleman  of  mine  I  have  dispatch’d 
With  letters  of  your  love  to  her  at  large.  4/ 
Boling.  Thanks,  gentle  uncle.  Come,  lords, 
away. 

To  fight  with  Glendower  and  his  complices: 
Awhile  to  work,  and  after  holiday.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ti.  The  coast  of  Wales:  a  castle  in  view 
Drums:  flourish  and  colours.  Enter  king  richard, 
the  BISHOP  OF  CARLISLE,  AUMERLE,  and  Soldiers. 

K.  Rich.  Barkloughly  castle  call  they  this  at 
hand.^ 


Au?n.  Yea,  my  lord.  How  brooks  your  Grace 
the  air. 

After  your  late  tossing  on  the  breaking  seas  ’ 

K.  Rich.  Needs  must  I  like  it  well:  1  weep  for 
joy 

To  stand  upon  my  kingdom  once  again. 

Dear  earth,  I  do  salute  thee  with  my  hand. 
Though  rebels  wound  thee  with  their  horses’ 
hoofs: 

As  a  long-parted  mother  with  her  child 
Plays  fondly  with  her  tears  and  smiles  in  meeting. 
So,  weeping,  smiling,  greet  I  thee,  my  earth,  10 
And  do  thee  favours  with  my  royal  hands. 

Feed  not  thy  sovereign’s  foe,  my  gentle  earth, 
Nor  with  thy  sweets  comfort  his  ravenous  sense; 
But  let  thy  spiders,  that  suck  up  thy  venom. 

And  heavy-gaited  toads  lie  in  their  way. 

Doing  annoyance  to  the  treacherous  feet 
Which  with  usurping  steps  do  trample  thee: 

Yield  stinging  nettles  to  mine  enemies; 

And  when  they  from  thy  bosom  pluck  a  flower. 
Guard  it,  I  pray  thee,  with  a  lurking  adder  20 
Whose  double  tongue  may  with  a  mortal  touch 
Throw  death  upon  thy  sovereign’s  enemies. 
Mock  not  my  senseless  conjuration,  lords: 

This  earth  shall  have  a  feeling  and  these  stones 
Prove  armed  soldiers,  ere  her  native  king 
Shall  falter  under  foul  rebellion’s  arms. 

Car.  Fear  not,  my  lord:  that  Power  that  made 
you  king 

Hath  power  to  keep  you  king  in  spite  of  all. 

The  means  that  heaven  yields  must  be  embraced. 
And  not  neglected;  else,  if  heaven  would,  50 
And  we  will  not,  heaven’s  offer  we  refuse. 

The  proffer’d  means  of  succour  and  redress. 
Aum.  He  means,  my  lord,  that  we  are  too 
remiss; 

Whilst  Bolingbroke,  through  our  security, 

Grows  strong  and  great  in  substance  and  in 
power. 

K.  Rich.  Discomfortable  cousin!  know’st  thou 
not 

That  when  the  searching  eye  of  heaven  is  hid. 
Behind  the  globe,  that  lights  the  lower  world. 
Then  thieves  and  robbers  range  abroad  unseen 
In  murders  and  in  outrage,  boldly  here;  40 

But  when  from  under  this  terrestrial  ball 
He  fires  the  proud  tops  of  the  eastern  pines 
And  darts  his  light  through  every  guilty  hole. 
Then  murders,  treasons,  and  detested  sins. 

The  cloak  of  night  being  pluck’d  from  off  their 
backs. 

Stand  bare  and  naked,  trembling  at  themselves? 

So  when  this  thief,  this  traitor,  Bolingbroke, 

Who  all  this  while  hath  revell’d  in  the  night 
Whilst  we  were  wandering  with  the  antipodes, 


ACT  III 


936 

Shall  see  us  rising  in  our  throne,  the  east, 

His  treasons  will  sit  blushing  in  his  face. 

Not  able  to  endure  the  sight  of  day. 

But  self-afFrighted  tremble  at  his  sin. 

Not  all  the  water  in  the  rough  rude  sea 
Can  wash  the  balm  off  from  an  anointed  king; 
The  breath  of  worldly  men  cannot  depose 
The  deputy  elected  by  the  Lord: 

For  every  man  that  Bolingbroke  hath  press’d 
To  lift  shrewd  steel  against  our  golden  crown, 
God  for  his  Richard  hath  in  heavenly  pay  60 
A  glorious  angel:  then,  if  angels  fight. 

Weak  men  must  fall,  for  heaven  still  guards  the 
right. 

Enter  Salisbury. 

Welcome,  my  lord:  how  far  off  lies  your  power? 
Sal.  Nor  near  nor  farther  off,  my  gracious  lord. 
Than  this  weak  arm:  discomfort  guides  my 
tongue 

And  bids  me  speak  of  nothing  but  despair. 

One  day  too  late,  I  fear  me,  noble  lord, 

Hath  clouded  all  thy  happy  days  on  earth: 

O,  call  back  yesterday,  bid  time  return, 

And  thou  shalt  have  twelve  thousand  fighting 
men!  70 

To-day,  to-day,  unhappy  day,  too  late, 
O’erthrows  thy  joys,  friends,  fortune,  and  thy 
state: 

For  all  the  Welshmen,  hearing  thou  wert  dead, 
Are  gone  to  Bolingbroke,  dispersed  and  fled; 
Alim.  Comfort,  my  liege:  why  looks  your 
grace  so  pale? 

K.  Rich.  But  now  the  blood  of  twenty  thousand 
men 

Did  triumph  in  my  face,  and  they  are  fled; 

And,  till  so  much  blood  thither  come  again, 

Have  I  not  reason  to  look  pale  and  dead? 

All  souls  that  will  be  safe  fly  from  my  side,  80 
For  time  hath  set  a  blot  upon  my  pride. 

Aum.  Comfort,  my  liege;  remember  who  you 
are. 

K.  Rich.  I  had  forgot  myself:  am  I  not  king? 
Awake,  thou  coward  majesty!  thou  sleepest. 

Is  not  the  King’s  name  twenty  thousand  names? 
Arm,  arm,  my  name!  a  puny  subject  strikes 
At  thy  great  glory.  Look  not  to  the  ground. 

Ye  favourites  of  a  king:  are  we  not  high? 

High  be  our  thoughts:  I  know  my  uncle  York 
Hath  power  enough  to  serve  our  turn.  But  who 
comes  here? 

Enter  scroop. 

Scroop.  More  health  and  happiness  betide  my 
liege 

Than  can  my  care-tuned  tongue  deliver  him! 


K.  Rich.  Mine  ear  is  open  and  my  heart  pre¬ 
pared  : 

The  worst  is  worldly  loss  thou  canst  unfold. 

Say,  is  my  kingdom  lost?  why,  ’twas  my  care; 
And  what  loss  is  it  to  be  rid  of  care? 

Strives  Bolingbroke  to  be  as  great  as  we? 

Greater  he  shall  not  be;  if  he  serve  God, 

We’ll  serve  Him  too  and  be  his  fellow  so: 

Revolt  our  subjects?  that  we  cannot  mend;  too 
They  break  their  faith  to  God  as  well  as  us: 

Cry  woe,  destruction,  ruin,  and  decay; 

The  worst  is  death,  and  death  will  have  his  day. 
Scroop.  Glad  am  I  that  your  Highness  is  so 
arm’d 

To  bear  the  tidings  of  calamity. 

Like  an  unseasonable  stormy  day. 

Which  makes  the  silver  rivers  drown  their  shores. 
As  if  the  world  were  all  dissolved  to  tears. 

So  high  above  his  limits  swells  the  rage 
Of  Bolingbroke,  covering  your  fearful  land  iw 
With  hard  bright  steel  and  hearts  harder  than 
steel. 

White-beards  have  arm’d  their  thin  and  hairless 
scalps 

Against  thy  Majesty;  boys,  with  women’s  voices. 
Strive  to  speak  big  and  clap  their  female  joints 
In  stiff  unwieldy  arms  against  thy  crown: 

Thy  very  beadsmen  learn  to  bend  their  bows 
Of  double-fatal  yew  against  thy  state; 

Yea,  distaff-women  manage  rusty  bills 
Against  thy  seat:  both  young  and  old  rebel, 

And  all  goes  worse  than  I  have  power  to  tell.  120 
K.  Rich.  Too  well,  too  well  thou  tell’st  a  tale 
so  ill. 

Where  is  the  Earl  of  Wiltshire?  where  is  Bagot? 
What  is  become  of  Bushy?  where  is  Green? 

That  they  have  let  the  dangerous  enemy 
Measure  our  confines  with  such  peaceful  steps? 

If  we  prevail,  their  heads  shall  pay  for  it: 

I  warrant  they  have  made  peace  with  Boling¬ 
broke. 

Scroop.  Peace  have  they  made  with  him  indeed, 
my  lord. 

K.  Rich.  O  villains,  vipers,  damn’d  without 
redemption! 

Dogs,  easily  won  to  fawn  on  any  man!  /50 

Snakes,  in  my  heart-blood  warm’d,  that  sting  my 
heart! 

Three  Judases,  each  one  thrice  worse  than 
Judas! 

Would  they  make  peace?  terrible  hell  make  war 
Upon  their  spotted  souls  for  this  offence! 

Scroop.  Sweet  love,  I  see,  changing  his  prop¬ 
erty. 

Turns  to  the  sourest  and  most  deadly  hate: 

Again  uncurse  their  souls;  their  peace  is  made 


KING  RICHARD  II 
50 


SCENE  II 


KING  RICHARD  II 


With  heads,  and  not  with  hands:  those  whom 
you  curse 

Have  felt  the  worst  of  death’s  destroying  wound 
And  lie  full  low,  graved  in  the  hollow  ground. 
Aum.  Is  Bushy,  Green,  and  the  Earl  of  Wilt¬ 
shire  dead?  141 

Scroop,  Ay,  all  of  them  at  Bristol  lost  their 
heads. 

Aum.  Where  is  the  Duke  my  father  with  his 
power? 

K.  Rich.  No  matter  where;  of  comfort  no  man 
speak: 

Let’s  talk  of  graves,  of  worms  and  epitaphs; 

Make  dust  our  paper  and  with  rainy  eyes 
Write  sorrow  on  the  bosom  of  the  earth. 

Let’s  choose  executors  and  talk  of  wills: 

And  yet  no  so,  for  what  can  we  bequeath 
Save  our  deposed  bodies  to  the  ground?  /50 
Our  lands,  our  lives,  and  all  are  Bolingbroke’s, 
And  nothing  can  we  call  our  own  but  death 
x\nd  that  small  model  of  the  barren  earth 
Which  serves  as  paste  and  cover  to  our  bones. 

For  God’s  sake,  let  us  sit  upon  the  ground 
And  tell  sad  stories  of  the  death  of  kings: 

How  some  have  been  deposed;  some  slain  in 
war; 

Some  haunted  by  the  ghosts  they  have  deposed; 
Some  poison’d  by  their  wives;  some  sleeping 
kill’d; 

All  murder’d:  for  within  the  hollow  crown  160 
That  rounds  the  mortal  temples  of  a  king 
Keeps  Death  his  court  and  there  the  antic  sits. 
Scoffing  his  state  and  grinning  at  his  pomp. 
Allowing  him  a  breath,  a  little  scene. 

To  monarchize,  be  fear’d,  and  kill  with  looks, 
Infusing  him  with  self  and  vain  conceit. 

As  if  this  flesh  which  walls  about  our  life 
Were  brass  impregnable,  and  humour’d  thus 
Comes  at  the  last  and  with  a  little  pin  i6p 

Bores  through  his  castle  wall,  and  farewell  king! 
Cover  your  heads  and  mock  not  flesh  and  blood 
With  solemn  reverence:  throw  away  respect. 
Tradition,  form,  and  ceremonious  duty. 

For  you  have  but  mistook  me  all  this  while: 

I  live  with  bread  like  you,  feel  want. 

Taste  grief,  need  friends:  subjected  thus, 

How  can  you  say  to  me  I  am  a  king? 

Car.  My  lord,  wise  men  ne’er  sit  and  wail  their 
woes. 

But  presently  prevent  the  ways  to  wail.  17 p 

To  fear  the/oe,  since  fear  oppresseth  strength. 
Gives  in  your  weakness  strength  unto  your  foe. 
And  so  your  follies  fight  against  yourself. 

Fear,  and  be  slain;  no  worse  can  come  to  fight: 
And  fight  and  die  is  death  destroying  death; 
Where  fearing  dying  pays  death  servile  breath. 


Aum.  My  father  hath  a  power;  inquire  of  him. 
And  learn  to  make  a  body  of  a  limb. 

K.  Rich.  Thou  chidest  me  well:  proud  Boling- 
broke,  I  come 

To  change  blows  with  thee  for  our  day  of  doom. 
This  ague  fit  of  fear  is  over-blown;  ipo 

An  easy  task  it  is  to  win  our  own. 

Say,  Scroop,  where  lies  our  uncle  with  his  power? 
Speak  sweetly,  man,  although  thy  looks  be  sour. 
Scroop.  Men  judge  by  the  complexion  of  the 
sky 

The  state  and  inclination  of  the  day: 

So  may  you  by  my  dull  and  heavy  eye. 

My  tongue  hath  but  a  heavier  tale  to  say. 

I  play  the  torturer,  by  small  and  small 
To  lengthen  out  the  worst  that  must  be  spoken: 
Your  uncle  York  is  join’d  with  Bolingbroke,  200 
And  all  your  northern  castles  yielded  up. 

And  all  your  southern  gentlemen  in  arms 
Upon  his  party. 

K.  Rich.  Thou  hast  said  enough. 

Beshrew  thee,  cousin,  which  didst  lead  me  forth 
To  AUMERLE. 

Of  that  sweet  way  I  was  in  to  despair! 

What  say  you  now?  what  comfort  have  we  now? 
By  heaven.  I’ll  hate  him  everlastingly 
That  bids  me  be  of  comfort  any  more. 

Go  to  Flint  castle:  there  I’ll  pine  away; 

A  king,  woe’s  slave,  shall  kingly  woe  obey.  210 
That  power  I  have,  discharge;  and  let  them  go 
To  ear  the  land  that  hath  some  hope  to  grow. 

For  I  have  none:  let  no  man  speak  again 
To  alter  this,  for  counsel  is  but  vain. 

Aum.  My  liege,  one  word. 

K.  Rich.  He  does  me  double  wrong 

That  wounds  me  with  the  flatteries  of  his  tongue. 
Discharge  my  followers:  let  them  hence  away, 
From  Richard’s  night  to  Bolingbroke’s  fair  day. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Wales:  before  Flint  castle 
Enter.,  'with  drum  and  colours,  bolingbroke, 
YORK,  NORTHUMBERLAND,  Attendants,  and  forces. 
Boling.  So  that  by  this  intelligence  we  learn 
The  Welshmen  are  dispersed,  and  Salisbury 
Is  gone  to  meet  the  King,  who  lately  landed 
With  some  few  private  friends  upon  this  coast. 
North.  The  news  is  very  fair  and  good,  my 
lord: 

Richard  not  far  from  hence  hath  hid  his  head. 
York.  It  would  beseem  the  Lord  Northumber¬ 
land 

To  say  “King  Richard”:  alack  the  heavy  day 
When  such  a  sacred  king  should  hide  his  head. 
North.  Your  Grace  mistakes;  only  to  be  brief, 
Left  I  his  title  out. 


ACT  III 


KING  RICHARD  II 


338 

York.  The  time  hath  been,  u 

Would  you  have  been  so  brief  with  him,  he  would 
Have  been  so  brief  with  you,  to  shorten  you. 

For  taking  so  the  head,  your  whole  head’s  length. 
Boling.  Mistake  not,  uncle,  further  than  you 
should. 

York.  Take  not,  good  cousin,  further  than  you 
should. 

Lest  you  mistake  the  heavens  are  o’er  our  heads. 
Boling.  I  know  it,  uncle,  and  oppose  not  myself 
Against  their  will.  But  who  comes  here?  /p 

Enter  percy. 

Welcome,  Harry:  what,  will  not  this  castle  yield? 
Percy.  The  castle  royally  is  mann’d,  my  lord. 
Against  thy  entrance. 

Boling.  Royally! 

Why,  it  contains  no  king? 

Percy.  Yes,  my  good  lord. 

It  doth  contain  a  king;  King  Richard  lies 
Within  the  limits  of  yon  lime  and  stone: 

And  with  him  are  the  Lord  Aumerle,  Lord  Salis¬ 
bury, 

Sir  Stephen  Scroop,  besides  a  clergyman 
Of  holy  reverence;  who,  I  cannot  learn. 

North.  O,  belike  it  is  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle. 
Boling.  Noble  lords,  5/ 

Go  to  the  rude  ribs  of  that  ancient  castle; 
Through  brazen  trumpet  send  the  breath  of  parley 
Into  his  ruin’d  ears,  and  thus  deliver: 

Henry  Bolingbroke 

On  both  his  knees  doth  kiss  King  Richard’s  hand 
And  sends  allegiance  and  true  faith  of  heart 
To  his  most  royal  person,  hither  come 
Even  at  his  feet  to  lay  my  arms  and  power, 
Provided  that  my  banishment  repeal’d  40 

And  lands  restored  again  be  freely  granted: 

If  not.  I’ll  use  the  advantage  of  my  power 
And  lay  the  summer’s  dust  with  showers  of  blood 
Rain’d  from  the  wounds  of  slaughter’d  English¬ 
men: 

The  which,  how  far  off  from  the  mind  of  Boling¬ 
broke 

It  is,  such  crimson  tempest  should  bedrench 
The  fresh  green  lap  of  fair  King  Richard’s  land. 
My  stooping  duty  tenderly  shall  show. 

Go,  signify  as  much,  while  here  we  march 
Upon  the  grassy  carpet  of  this  plain.  50 

Let’s  march  without  the  noise  of  threatening 
drum. 

That  from  this  castle’s  tatter’d  battlements 
Out  fair  appointments  may  be  well  perused. 
Methinks  King  Richard  and  myself  should  meet 
With  no  less  terror  than  the  elements 
Of  fire  and  water,  when  their  thundering  shock 
At  meeting  tears  the  cloudy  cheeks  of  heaven. 


Be  he  the  fire.  I’ll  be  the  yielding  water: 

The  rage  be  his,  whilst  on  the  earth  I  rain 
My  waters;  on  the  earth,  and  not  on  him.  60 
March  on,  and  mark  King  Richard  how  he  looks. 

Parle  'without  and  answer  within.  Then  a  flourish. 
Enter  on  the  walls.,  king  richard,  the  bishop  of 

CARLISLE,  AUMERLE,  SCROOP,  and  SALISBURY. 

See,  see.  King  Richard  doth  himself  appear. 

As  doth  the  blushing  discontented  sun 
From  out  the  fiery  portal  of  the  east. 

When  he  perceives  the  envious  clouds  are  bent 
To  dim  his  glory  and  to  stain  the  track 
Of  his  bright  passage  to  the  Occident. 

York.  Yet  looks  he  like  a  king:  behold,  his  eye, 
As  bright  as  is  the  eagle’s,  lightens  forth 
Controlling  majesty:  alack,  alack,  for  woe,  70 
That  any  harm  should  stain  so  fair  a  show! 

X.  Rich.  We  are  amazed;  and  thus  long  have  we 
stood 

To  watch  the  fearful  bending  of  thy  knee, 

To  NORTHUMBERLAND. 

Because  we  thought  ourself  thy  lawful  king: 

And  if  we  be,  how  dare  thy  joints  forget 
To  pay  their  awful  duty  to  our  presence? 

If  we  be  not,  show  us  the  hand  of  God 
That  hath  dismiss’d  us  from  our  stewardship; 

For  well  we  know,  no  hand  of  blood  and  bone 
Can  gripe  the  sacred  handle  of  our  sceptre,  80 
Unless  he  do  profane,  steal,  or  usurp. 

And  though  you  think  that  all,  as  you  have  done. 
Have  torn  their  souls  by  turning  them  from  us. 
And  we  are  barren  and  bereft  of  friends; 

Yet  know,  my  master,  God  omnipotent. 

Is  mustering  in  his  clouds  on  our  behalf 
Armies  of  pestilence;  and  they  shall  strike 
Your  children  yet  unborn  and  unbegot. 

That  lift  your  vassal  hands  against  my  head 
And  threat  the  glory  of  my  precious  crown.  5^0 
Tell  Bolingbroke — for  yond  methinks  he 
stands — 

That  every  stride  he  makes  upon  my  land 
Is  dangerous  treason:  he  is  come  to  open 
The  purple  testament  of  bleeding  war; 

But  ere  the  crown  he  looks  for  live  in  peace, 

Ten  thousand  bloody  crowns  of  mothers’  sons 
Shall  ill  become  the  flower  of  England’s  face. 
Change  the  complexion  of  her  maid-pale  peace 
To  scarlet  indignation  and  bedew 
Her  pastures’  grass  with  faithful  English  blood. 
North.  The  King  of  heaven  forbid  our  lord 
the  King  lot 

Should  so  with  civil  and  uncivil  arms 
Be  rush’d  upon!  Thy  thrice  noble  cousin 
Harry  Bolingbroke  doth  humbly  kiss  thy  hand; 
And  by  the  honourable  tomb  he  swears, 


SCENE  III 


339 


KING  RICHARD  II 


That  stands  upon  your  royal  grandsire’s  bones, 
And  by  the  royalties  of  both  your  bloods, 
Currents  that  spring  from  one  most  gracious 
head, 

And  by  the  buried  hand  of  warlike  Gaunt, 

And  by  the  worth  and  honour  of  himself,  no 
Comprising  all  that  may  be  sworn  or  said. 

His  coming  hither  hath  no  further  scope 
Than  for  his  lineal  royalties,  and  to  beg 
Enfranchisement  immediate  on  his  knees: 

Which  on  thy  royal  party  granted  once. 

His  glittering  arms  he  will  commend  to  rust. 

His  barbed  steeds  to  stables,  and  his  heart 
To  faithful  service  of  your  Majesty. 

This  swears  he,  as  he  is  a  prince,  is  just; 

And,  as  I  am  a  gentleman,  I  credit  him.  120 
K.  Rich.  Northumberland,  say  thus  the  King 
returns : 

His  noble  cousin  is  right  welcome  hither; 

And  all  the  number  of  his  fair  demands 
Shall  be  accomplish’d  without  contradiction: 
With  all  the  gracious  utterance  thou  hast 
Speak  to  his  gentle  hearing  kind  commends. 

We  do  debase  ourselves,  cousin,  do  we  not. 

To  AUMERLE. 

To  look  so  poorly  and  to  speak  so  fair? 

Shall  we  call  back  Northumberland,  and  send 
Defiance  to  the  traitor,  and  so  die?  75 o 

Aum.  No,  good  my  lord;  let’s  fight  with  gentle 
words 

Till  time  lend  friends  and  friends  their  helpful 
swords. 

K.  Rich.  O  God,  O  God!  that  e’er  this  tongue 
of  mine. 

That  laid  the  sentence  of  dread  banishment 
On  yon  proud  man,  should  take  it  off  again 
With  words  of  sooth!  O  that  I  were  as  great 
As  is  my  grief,  or  lesser  than  my  name! 

Or  that  I  could  forget  what  I  have  been. 

Or  not  remember  what  I  must  be  now! 

Swell’st  thou,  proud  heart?  I’ll  give  thee  scope 
to  beat,  140 

Since  foes  have  scope  to  beat  both  thee  and  me. 
Aum.  Northumberland  comes  back  from  Bo¬ 
b' ngbroke. 

K.  Rich.  What  must  the  King  do  now?  must  he 
submit? 

The  King  shall  do  it:  must  he  be  deposed? 

The  King  shall  be  contented:  must  he  lose 
The  name  of  king?  o’ God’s  name,  let  it  go: 

I’ll  give  my  jewels  for  a  set  of  beads. 

My  gorgeous  palace  for  a  hermitage. 

My  gay  apparel  for  an  almsman’s  gown. 

My  figured  goblets  for  a  dish  of  wood,  /50 

My  sceptre  for  a  palmer’s  walking-staff. 

My  subjects  for  a  pair  of  carved  saints 


And  my  large  kingdom  for  a  little  grave. 

A  little  little  grave,  an  obscure  grave; 

Or  I’ll  be  buried  in  the  King’s  highway. 

Some  way  of  common  trade,  where  subjects’  feet 
May  hourly  trample  on  their  sovereign’s  head; 
For  on  my  heart  they  tread  now  whilst  I  live; 

And  buried  once,  why  not  upon  my  head-^ 
Aumerle,  thou  weep’st,  my  tender-hearted  cousin! 
We’ll  make  foul  weather  with  despised  tears;  161 
Our  sighs  and  they  shall  lodge  the  summer  corn. 
And  make  a  dearth  in  this  revolting  land. 

Or  shall  we  play  the  wantons  with  our  woes. 

And  make  some  pretty  match  with  shedding 
tears? 

As  thus,  to  drop  them  still  upon  one  place, 

Till  they  have  fretted  us  a  pair  of  graves 
Within  the  earth;  and,  therein  laid — there  lies 
Two  kinsmen  digg’d  their  graves  with  weeping 
eyes. 

Would  not  this  ill  do  well?  Well,  well,  I  see  /70 
I  talk  but  idly,  and  you  laugh  at  me. 

Most  mighty  prince,  my  Lord  Northumberland, 
What  says  King  Bolingbroke?  will  his  majesty 
Give  Richard  leave  to  live  till  Richard  die? 

You  make  a  leg,  and  Bolingbroke  says  ay. 

North.  My  lord,  in  the  base  court  he  doth 
attend 

To  speak  with  you;  may  it  please  you  to  come 
down. 

K.  Rich.  Down,  down  I  come;  like  glist’ring 
Phaethon, 

Wanting  the  manage  of  unruly  jades. 

In  the  base  court?  Base  court,  where  kings  grow 
base,  180 

To  come  at  traitors’  calls  and  do  them  grace. 

In  the  base  court?  Come  down?  Down,  court! 
down,  king! 

For  night-owls  shriek  where  mounting  larks 
should  sing.  [Exeunt from  above. 

Boling.  What  says  his  majesty? 

North.  Sorrow  and  grief  of  heart 

Makes  him  speak  fondly,  like  a  frantic  man: 

Yet  he  is  come. 

Enter  king  richard  and  his  attendants  below, 

Boling.  Stand  all  apart. 

And  show  fair  duty  to  his  majesty. 

He  kneels  down. 

My  gracious  lord — 

K.  Rich.  Fair  cousin,  you  debase  your  princely 
knee  7^o 

To  make  the  base  earth  proud  with  kissing  it: 

Me  rather  had  my  heart  might  feel  your  love 
Than  my  unpleased  eye  see  your  courtesy. 

Up,  cousin,  up;  your  heart  is  up,  I  know. 

Thus  high  at  least,  although  your  knee  be  low. 


ACT  ni 


KING  RICHARD  II 


Boling.  My  gracious  lord,  I  come  but  for  mine 
own. 

K.  Rich.  Your  own  is  yours,  and  I  am  yours, 
and  all. 

Boling.  So  far  be  mine,  my  most  redoubted 
lord. 

As  my  true  service  shall  deserve  your  love. 

K.  Rich.  Well  you  deserve:  they  well  deserve 
to  have  200 

That  know  the  strong’ st  and  surest  way  to  get. 
Uncle,  give  me  your  hands:  nay,  dry  your  eyes; 
Tears  show  their  love,  but  want  their  remedies. 
Cousin,  I  am  too  young  to  be  your  father. 

Though  you  are  old  enough  to  be  my  heir. 

What  you  will  have.  I’ll  give,  and  willing  too; 
For  do  we  must  what  force  will  have  us  do. 

Set  on  towards  London,  cousin,  is  it  so? 

Boling.  Yea,  my  good  lord. 

K.  Rich.  Then  I  must  not  say  no. 

[Flourish.  Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Langley:  the  duke  of  York’s 
garden. 

Enter  the  queen  and  two  ladies. 

Queen.  What  sport  shall  we  devise  here  in  this 
garden 

To  drive  away  the  heavy  thought  of  care? 

Lady.  Madam,  we’ll  play  at  lx)wls. 

Queen.  ’Twill  make  me  think  the  world  is  foil 
of  rubs. 

And  that  my  fortune  runs  against  the  bias. 

Lady.  Madam,  we’ll  dance. 

Queen.  My  legs  can  keep  no  measure  in  de- 
light, 

When  my  poor  heart  no  measure  keeps  in 
grief: 

Therefore,  no  dancing,  girl;  some  other  sport. 
Lady.  Madam,  we’ll  tell  tales.  10 

Queen.  Of  sorrow  or  of  joy? 

Lady.  Of  either,  madam. 

Queen.  Of  neither,  girl: 

For  if  of  joy,  being  altogether  wanting. 

It  doth  remember  me  the  more  of  sorrow; 

Or  if  of  grief,  being  altogether  had. 

It  adds  more  sorrow  to  my  want  of  joy: 

For  what  I  have  I  need  not  to  repeat; 

And  what  I  want  it  boots  not  to  complain. 

Lady.  Madam,  I’ll  sing. 

Queen.  ’Tis  well  that  thou  has  cause; 

But  thou  shouldst  please  me  better,  wouldst  thou 
weep.  20 

Lady.  I  could  weep,  madam,  would  it  do  you 
good. 

Queen.  And  I  could  sing,  would  weeping  do  me 
good. 

And  never  borrow  any  tear  of  thee. 


Enter  a  gardener,  and  two  servants. 

But  stay,  here  come  the  gardeners : 

Let’s  step  into  the  shadow  of  these  trees. 

My  wretchedness  unto  a  row  of  pins. 

They’ll  talk  of  state;  for  every  one  doth  so 
Against  a  change;  woe  is  forerun  with  woe. 

[queen  and  ladies  retire. 
Card.  Go,  bind  thou  up  yon  dangling  apricocks, 
Which,  like  unruly  children,  make  their  sire  50 
Stoop  with  oppression  of  their  prodigal  weight: 
Give  some  supportance  to  the  bending  twigs. 

Go  thou,  and  like  an  executioner. 

Cut  off  the  heads  of  too  fast  growing  sprays. 

That  look  too  lofty  in  our  commonwealth: 

All  must  be  even  in  our  government. 

You  thus  employ’d,  I  will  go  root  away 
The  noisome  weeds,  which  without  profit  suck 
The  soil’s  fertility  from  wholesome  flowers. 

Serv.  Why  should  we  in  the  compass  of  a  pale 
Keep  law  and  form  and  due  proportion,  4/ 

Showing,  as  in  a  model,  our  firm  estate. 

When  our  sea-walled  garden,  the  whole  land. 

Is  full  of  weeds,  her  fairest  flowers  choked  up. 
Her  fruit-trees  all  unpruned,  her  hedges  ruin’d. 
Her  knots  disorder’d  and  her  wholesome  herbs 
Swarming  with  caterpillars? 

Card.  Hold  thy  peace: 

He  that  hath  suflFer’d  this  disorder’d  spring 
Hath  now  himself  met  with  the  fall  of  leaf: 

The  weeds  which  his  broad-spreading  leaves  did 
shelter,  50 

That  seem’d  in  eating  him  to  hold  him  up. 

Are  pluck’d  up  root  and  all  by  Bolingbroke, 

I  mean  the  Earl  of  Wiltshire,  Bushy,  Green. 

Serv.  What,  are  they  dead? 

Card.  They  are;  and  Bolingbroke 

Hath  seized  the  wasteful  king.  O,  what  pity  is  it 
That  he  had  not  so  trimm’d  and  dress’d  his  land 
As  we  this  garden!  We  at  time  of  year 
Do  wound  the  bark,  the  skin  of  our  fruit-trees. 
Lest,  being  over-proud  in  sap  and  blood. 

With  too  much  riches  it  confound  itself:  60 

Had  he  done  so  to  great  and  growing  men. 

They  might  have  lived  to  bear  and  he  to  taste 
Their  fruits  of  duty:  superfluous  branches 
We  lop  away,  that  bearing  boughs  may  live: 

Had  he  done  so,  himself  had  borne  the  crown. 
Which  waste  of  idle  hours  hath  quite  thrown 
down. 

Serv.  What,  think  you  then  the  King  shall  be 
deposed? 

Card.  Depress’d  he  is  already,  and  deposed 
’Tis  doubt  he  will  be:  letters  came  last  night 
To  a  dear  friend  of  the  good  Duke  of  York’s,  70 
That  tell  black  tidings. 


SCENE  IV 

Queen.  O,  I  am  press’d  to  death  through  want 
of  speaking!  [Coming  for'ward.] 

Thou,  old  Adam’s  likeness,  set  to  dress  this 
garden. 

How  dares  thy  harsh  rude  tongue  sound  this  un¬ 
pleasing  news? 

What  Eve,  what  serpent,  hath  suggested  thee 
To  make  a  second  fall  of  cursed  man? 

Why  dost  thou  say  King  Richard  is  deposed? 
Darest  thou,  thou  little  better  thing  than  earth. 
Divine  his  downfall?  Say,  where,  when,  and  how, 
Camest  thou  by  this  ill  tidings?  speak,  thou 
wretch.  8o 

Card.  Pardon  me,  madam:  little  joy  have  I 
To  breathe  this  news;  yet  what  I  say  is  true. 

King  Richard,  he  is  in  the  mighty  hold 
Of  Bolingbroke:  their  fortunes  both  are  weigh’d: 
In  your  lord’s  scale  is  nothing  but  himself. 

And  some  few  vanities  that  make  him  light; 

But  in  the  balance  of  great  Bolingbroke, 

Besides  himself,  are  all  the  English  peers. 

And  with  that  odds  he  weighs  King  Richard 
down. 

Post  you  to  London,  and  you  will  find  it  so; 

I  speak  no  more  than  every  one  doth  know. 

(^een.  Nimble  mischance,  that  art  so  light  of 
foot. 

Doth  not  thy  embassage  belong  to  me. 

And  am  I  last  that  knows  it?  O,  thou  think’st 
To  serve  me  last,  that  I  may  longest  keep 
Thy  sorrow  in  my  breast.  Come,  ladies,  go. 

To  meet  at  London  London’s  king  in  woe. 

What,  was  I  born  to  this,  that  my  sad  look 
Should  grace  the  triumph  of  great  Bolingbroke? 
Gardener,  for  telling  me  these  news  of  woe,  loo 
Pray  God  the  plants  thou  graft’st  may  never 
grow. 

[Exeunt  queen  and  ladies. 
Card.  Poor  queen!  so  that  thy  state  might  be  no 
worse, 

I  would  my  skill  were  subject  to  thy  curse. 

Here  did  she  fall  a  tear;  here  in  this  place 
I’ll  set  a  bank  of  rue,  sour  herb  of  grace: 

Rue,  even  for  ruth,  here  shortly  shall  be  seen. 

In  the  remembrance  of  a  weeping  queen.  [Exeimt. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  Westminster  Hall 
Enter,  as  to  the  Parliament,  bolingbroke,  au- 

MERLE,  NORTHUMBERLAND,  PERCY,  FITZWATER, 
SURREY,  the  BISHOP  OF  CARLISLE,  the  ABBOT  OF 
WESTMINSTER,  oud  another  lord,  Herald,  Offi¬ 
cers,  and  BAGOT. 

Boling.  Call  forth  Bagot. 

Now.  Bagot,  freely  speak  thy  mind; 


341 

What  thou  dost  know  of  noble  Gloucester’s 
death. 

Who  wrought  it  with  the  King,  and  who  per¬ 
form’d 

The  bloody  office  of  his  timeless  end. 

Bagot.  Then  set  before  my  face  the  Lord 
Aumerle. 

Boling.  Cousin,  stand  forth,  and  look  upon  that 
man. 

Bagot.  My  Lord  Aumerle,  I  know  your  daring 
tongue 

Scorns  to  unsay  what  once  it  hath  deliver’d. 

In  that  dead  time  when  Gloucester’s  death  was 
plotted,  10 

I  heard  you  say,  “Is  not  my  arm  of  length, 

That  reacheth  from  the  restful  English  court 
As  far  as  Calais,  to  mine  uncle’s  head?” 

Amongst  much  other  talk,  that  very  time, 

I  heard  you  say  that  you  had  rather  refuse 
The  offer  of  an  hundred  thousand  crowns 
Than  Bolingbroke’s  return  to  England; 

Adding  withal,  how  blest  this  land  would  be 
In  this  your  cousin’s  death. 

Aum.  Princes  and  noble  lords. 

What  answer  shall  I  make  to  this  base  man?  20 
Shall  I  so  much  dishonour  my  fair  stars. 

On  equal  terms  to  give  him  chastisement? 

Either  I  must,  or  have  mine  honour  soil’d 
With  the  attainder  of  his  slanderous  lips. 

There  is  my  gage,  the  manual  seal  of  death. 

That  marks  thee  out  for  hell:  I  say,  thou  best. 
And  will  maintain  what  thou  hast  said  is  false 
In  thy  heart-blood,  though  being  all  too  base 
To  stain  the  temper  of  my  knightly  sword. 
Boling.  Bagot,  forbear;  thou  shalt  not  take  it 
up.  50 

Aum.  Excepting  one,  I  would  he  were  the  best 
In  all  this  presence  that  hath  moved  me  so. 

Fitz.  If  that  thy  valour  stand  on  sympathy. 
There  is  my  gage,  Aumerle,  in  gage  to  thine: 

By  that  fair  sun  which  shows  me  where  thou 
stand’st, 

I  heard  thee  say,  and  vauntingly  thou  spakest  it. 
That  thou  wert  cause  of  noble  Gloucester’s  death. 
If  thou  deny’st  it  twenty  times,  thou  best; 

And  I  will  turn  thy  falsehood  to  thy  heart, 

Where  it  was  forged,  with  my  rapier’s  point.  40 
Aum.  Thou  darest  not,  coward,  live  to  see  that 
day. 

Fitz.  Now,  by  my  soul,  I  would  it  were  this 
hour. 

Aum.  Fitzwater,  thou  art  damn’d  to  hell  for 
this. 

Percy.  Aumerle,  thou  best;  his  honour  is  as  true 
In  this  appeal  as  thou  art  all  unjust; 

And  that  thou  art  so,  there  I  throw  my  gage. 


KING  RICHARD  II 


ACT  IV 


KING  RICHARD  II 


To  prove  it  on  thee  to  the  extremest  point 
Of  mortal  breathing:  seize  it,  if  thou  darest. 

Au7n.  An  if  1  do  not,  may  my  hands  rot  off 
And  never  brandish  more  revengeful  steel  yo 
Over  the  glittering  helmet  of  my  foe! 

Another  Lord.  I  task  the  earth  to  the  like,  for¬ 
sworn  Aumerle; 

And  spur  thee  on  with  full  as  many  lies 
As  may  be  holloa’d  in  thy  treacherous  ear 
From  sun  to  sun:  there  is  my  honour’s  pawn; 
Engage  it  to  the  trial,  if  thou  darest. 

Aum.  Who  sets  me  else?  by  heaven,  I’ll  throw 
at  all: 

I  have  a  thousand  spirits  in  one  breast, 

To  answer  twenty  thousand  such  as  you. 

Surrey.  My  Lord  Fitzwater,  I  do  remember 
well  6o 

The  very  time  Aumerle  and  you  did  talk. 

Fitz.  ’Tis  very  true:  you  were  in  presence  then; 
And  you  can  witness  with  me  this  is  true. 

Surrey.  As  false,  by  heaven,  as  heaven  itself  is 
true. 

Fitz.  Surrey,  thou  liest. 

Surrey.  Dishonourable  boy! 

That  lie  shall  lie  so  heavy  on  my  sword. 

That  it  shall  render  vengeance  and  revenge 
Till  thou  the  lie-giver  and  that  lie  do  lie 
In  earth  as  quiet  as  thy  father’s  skull: 

In  proof  whereof,  there  is  my  honour’s  pawn;  70 
Engage  it  to  the  trial,  if  thou  darest. 

Fitz.  How  fondly  dost  thou  spur  a  forward 
horse! 

If  I  dare  eat,  or  drink,  or  breathe,  or  live, 

1  dare  meet  Surrey  in  a  wilderness. 

And  spit  upon  him,  whilst  I  say  he  lies. 

And  lies,  and  lies:  there  is  my  bond  of  faith. 

To  tie  thee  to  my  strong  correction. 

As  I  intend  to  thrive  in  this  new  world, 

Aumerle  is  guilty  of  my  true  appeal: 

Besides,  I  heard  the  banish’d  Norfolk  say  80 
That  thou,  Aumerle,  didst  send  two  of  thy  men 
To  execute  the  noble  duke  at  Calais. 

Aum.  Some  honest  Christian  trust  me  with  a 

gage, 

That  Norfolk  lies:  here  do  I  throw  down  this. 

If  he  may  be  repeal’d,  to  try  his  honour. 

Boling.  These  differences  shall  all  rest  under 
.  gage 

Till  Norfolk  be  repeal’d;  repeal’d  he  shall  be. 
And,  though  mine  enemy,  restored  again 
To  all  his  lands  and  signories:  when  he’s  re¬ 
turn’d. 

Against  Aumerle  we  will  enforce  his  trial.  po 
Car.  That  honourable  day  shall  ne’er  be  seen. 
Many  a  time  hath  banish’d  Norfolk  fought 
For  Jesu  Christ  in  glorious  Christian  field. 


Streaming  the  ensign  of  the  Christian  cross 
Against  black  pagans,  Turks,  and  Saracens; 

And  toil’d  with  works  of  war,  retired  himself 

To  Italy;  and  there  at  Venice  gave 

His  body  to  that  pleasant  country’s  earth. 

And  his  pure  soul  unto  his  captain  Christ, 

Under  whose  colours  he  had  fought  so  long.  100 
Boling.  Why,  bishop,  is  Norfolk  dead? 

Car.  As  surely  as  I  live,  my  lord. 

Boling.  Sweet  peace  conduct  his  sweet  soul  to 
the  bosom 

Of  good  old  Abraham!  Lords  appellants, 

Your  differences  shall  all  rest  under  gage 
Till  we  assign  you  to  your  days  of  trial. 

Enter  york,  attended. 

York.  Great  Duke  of  Lancaster,  I  come  to  thee 
From  plume-pluck’d  Richard;  who  with  willing 
soul 

Adopts  thee  heir,  and  his  high  sceptre  yields 
To  the  possession  of  thy  royal  hand :  no 

Ascend  his  throne,  descending  now  from  him; 
And  long  live  Henry,  fourth  of  that  name! 

Boling.  In  God’s  name.  I’ll  ascend  the  regal 
throne. 

Car.  Marry,  God  forbid! 

Worst  in  this  royal  presence  may  I  speak. 

Yet  best  beseeming  me  to  speak  the  truth. 

Would  God  that  any  in  this  noble  presence 
Were  enough  noble  to  be  upright  judge 
Of  noble  Richard!  then  true  noblesse  would 
Learn  him  forbearance  from  so  foul  a  wrong.  120 
What  subject  can  give  sentence  on  his  king? 

And  who  sits  here  that  is  not  Richard’s  subject? 
Thieves  are  not  judged  but  they  are  by  to  hear. 
Although  apparent  guilt  be  seen  in  them; 

And  shall  the  figure  of  God’s  majesty. 

His  captain,  steward,  deputy-elect, 

Anointed,  crowned,  planted  many  years. 

Be  judged  by  subject  and  inferior  breath. 

And  he  himself  not  present?  O,  forfend  it,  God, 
That  in  a  Christian  climate  souls  refined  /50 
Should  show  so  heinous,  black,  obscene  a  deed! 

I  speak  to  subjects,  and  a  subject  speaks, 

Stirr’d  up  by  God,  thus  boldly  for  his  king. 

My  Lord  of  Hereford  here,  whom  you  call  king. 
Is  a  foul  traitor  to  proud  Hereford’s  king: 

And  if  you  crown  him,  let  me  prophesy: 

The  blood  of  English  shall  manure  the  ground. 
And  future  ages  groan  for  this  foul  act; 

Peace  shall  go  sleep  with  Turks  and  infidels. 

And  in  this  seat  of  peace  tumultuous  wars  14.0 
Shall  kin  with  kin  and  kind  with  kind  confound; 
Disorder,  horror,  fear,  and  mutiny 
Shall  here  inhabit,  and  this  land  be  call’d 
The  field  of  Golgotha  and  dead  men’s  skulls. 


SCENE  I 


343 


KING  RICHARD  II 


O,  if  you  raise  this  house  against  this  house, 

It  will  the  woefullest  division  prove 
That  ever  fell  upon  this  cursed  earth. 

Prevent  it,  resist  it,  let  it  not  be  so. 

Lest  child,  child’s  children,  cry  against  you 
“woe!” 

North.  Well  have  you  argued,  sir;  and,  for  your 
pains,  ISO 

Of  capital  treason  we  arrest  you  here. 

My  Lord  of  Westminster,  be  it  your  charge 
To  keep  him  safely  till  his  day  of  trial. 

May  it  please  you,  lords,  to  grant  the  commons’ 
suit. 

Boling.  Fetch  hither  Richard,  that  in  common 
view 

He  may  surrender;  so  we  shall  proceed 
Without  suspicion. 

York.  I  will  be  his  conduct.  [Exit. 

Boling.  Lords,  you  that  here  are  under  our 
arrest. 

Procure  your  sureties  for  your  days  of  answer. 
Little  are  we  beholding  to  your  love,  i6o 

And  little  look’d  for  at  your  helping  hands. 

Re-enter  york,  'with  richard,  and  Officers 
bearing  the  regalia. 

K.  Rich.  Alack,  why  am  I  sent  for  to  a  king. 
Before  I  have  shook  off  the  regal  thoughts 
Wherewith  I  reign’d?  I  hardly  yet  have  learn’d 
To  insinuate,  flatter,  bow,  and  bend  my  limbs: 
Give  sorrow  leave  awhile  to  tutor  me 
To  this  submission.  Yet  I  well  remember 
The  favours  of  these  men:  were  they  not  mine? 
Did  they  not  sometime  cry,  “all  hail!”  to  me? 

So  Judas  did  to  Christ:  but  he,  in  twelve,  /70 
Found  truth  in  all  but  one;  I,  in  twelve  thousand, 
none. 

God  save  the  King!  Will  no  man  say  amen? 

Am  I  both  priest  and  clerk?  well  then,  amen. 

God  save  the  King!  although  I  be  not  he; 

And  yet,  amen,  if  heaven  do  think  him  me. 

To  do  what  service  am  I  sent  for  hither? 

York.  To  do  that  office  of  thine  own  good 
will 

Which  tired  majesty  did  make  thee  offer. 

The  resignation  of  thy  state  and  crown 
To  Henry  Bolingbroke.  180 

K.  Rich.  Give  me  the  crown.  Here,  cousin, 
seize  the  crown; 

Here  cousin; 

On  this  side  my  hand,  and  on  that  side  yours 
Now  is  this  golden  crown  like  a  deep  well 
That  owes  two  buckets,  filling  one  another. 

The  emptier  ever  dancing  in  the  air. 

The  other  down,  unseen,  and  full  of  water: 

That  bucket  down  and  full  of  tears  am  I, 


Drinking  my  griefs,  whilst  you  mount  up  on 

high. 

Boling.  I  thought  you  had  been  willing  to  resign. 
K.  Rich.  My  crown  I  am;  but  still  my  griefs  are 
mine: 

You  may  my  glories  and  my  state  depose. 

But  not  my  griefs;  still  am  I  king  of  those. 

Boling.  Part  of  your  cares  you  give  me  with 
your  crown. 

K.  Rich.  Your  cares  set  up  do  not  pluck  my 
cares  down. 

My  care  is  loss  of  care,  by  old  care  done; 

Your  care  is  gain  of  care,  by  new  care  won: 

The  cares  I  give  I  have,  though  given  away ; 

They  tend  the  crown,  yet  still  with  me  they  stay. 
Boling.  Are  you  contented  to  resign  the 

crown?  200 

K.  Rich.  Ay,  no;  no,  ay;  for  I  must  nothing  be; 
Therefore  no  no,  for  I  resign  to  thee. 

Now  mark  me,  how  I  will  undo  myself: 

I  give  this  heavy  weight  from  off  my  head 
And  this  unwieldly  sceptre  from  my  hand. 

The  pride  of  kingly  sway  from  out  m)  heart; 
With  mine  own  tears  I  wash  away  my  balm. 
With  mine  own  hands  I  give  away  my  crown. 
With  mine  own  tongue  deny  my  sacred  state. 
With  mine  own  breath  release  all  duty’s  rites: 

All  pomp  and  majesty  I  do  forswear;  211 

My  manors,  rents,  revenues  I  forego; 

My  acts,  decrees,  and  statutes  I  deny: 

God  pardon  all  oaths  that  are  broke  to  me! 

God  keep  all  vows  unbroke  that  swear  to  thee! 
Make  me,  that  nothing  have,  with  nothing 
grieved. 

And  thou  with  all  pleased,  that  hast  all  achieved! 
Long  mayst  thou  live  in  Richard’s  seat  to  sit. 

And  soon  lie  Richard  in  an  earthy  pit! 

God  save  King  Harry,  unking’d  Richard  says. 
And  send  him  many  years  of  sunshine  days !  221 

What  more  remains? 

North.  No  more,  but  that  you  read 

These  accusations  and  these  grievous  crimes 
Committed  by  your  person  and  your  followers 
Against  the  state  and  profit  of  this  land; 

That,  by  confessing  them,  the  souls  of  men 
May  deem  that  you  are  worthily  deposed. 

K.  Rich.  Must  I  do  so?  and  must  I  ravel  out 
My  weaved-up  folly?  Gentle  Northumberland, 

If  thy  offences  were  upon  record,  250 

Would  it  not  shame  thee  in  so  fair  a  troop 
To  read  a  lecture  of  them?  If  thou  wouldst. 

There  shouldst  thou  find  one  heinous  article. 
Containing  the  deposing  of  a  king 
And  cracking  the  strong  warrant  of  an  oath. 
Mark’d  with  a  blot,  damn’d  in  the  book  of 
heaven: 


ACT  IV 


KING  RICHARD  II 


344 

Nay,  all  of  you  that  stand  and  look  upon, 

Whilst  that  my  wretchedness  doth  bait  myself, 
Though  some  of  you  with  Pilate  wash  your 
hands 

Showing  an  outward  pity;  yet  you  Pilates  240 
Have  here  deliver’d  me  to  my  sour  cross, 

And  water  cannot  wash  away  your  sin. 

North.  My  lord,  dispatch;  read  o’er  these 
articles. 

K.  Rich.  Mine  eyes  are  full  of  tears,  I  cannot 
see: 

And  yet  salt  water  blinds  them  not  so  much 
But  they  can  see  a  sort  of  traitors  here. 

Nay,  if  I  turn  mine  eyes  upon  myself, 

I  find  myself  a  traitor  with  the  rest; 

For  I  have  given  here  my  soul’s  consent 
To  undeck  the  pompous  body  of  a  king;  250 
Made  glory  base  and  sovereignty  a  slave, 

Proud  majesty  a  subject,  state  a  peasant. 

North.  My  lord — 

K.  Rich.  No  lord  of  thine,  thou  haught  insulting 
man. 

Nor  no  man’s  lord;  I  have  no  name,  no  title, 

No,  not  that  name  was  given  me  at  the  font, 

But  ’tis  usurp’d:  alack  the  heavy  day. 

That  1  have  worn  so  many  winters  out, 

And  know  not  now  what  name  to  call  myself! 

O  that  I  were  a  mockery  king  of  snow,  2  60 

Standing  before  the  sun  of  Bolingbroke, 

To  melt  myself  away  in  water-drops! 

Good  king,  great  king,  and  yet  not  greatly  good. 
An  if  my  word  be  sterling  yet  in  England, 

Let  it  command  a  mirror  hither  straight. 

That  it  may  show  me  what  a  face  I  have 
Since  it  is  bankrupt  of  his  majesty. 

Boling.  Go  some  of  you  and  fetch  a  looking- 
glass.  [Exit  an  attendant. 

North.  Read  o’er  this  paper  while  the  glass  doth 
come. 

K.  Rich.  Fiend,  thou  torment’st  me  ere  I  come 
to  hell!  2J0 

Boling.  Urge  it  no  more,  my  Lord  Northumber¬ 
land. 

North.  The  commons  will  not  then  be  satisfied. 
K.  Rich.  They  shall  be  satisfied:  I’ll  read 
enough. 

When  I  do  see  the  very  book  indeed 
Where  all  my  sins  are  writ,  and  that’s  myself. 

Re-enter  Attendant 'with  a  glass. 

Give  me  the  glass,  and  therein  will  I  read. 

No  deeper  wrinkles  yet?  hath  sorrow  struck 
So  many  blows  upon  this  face  of  mine. 

And  made  no  deeper  wounds?  O  flattering  glass. 
Like  to  my  followers  in  prosperity,  2  80 

Thou  dost  beguile  me!  Was  this  face  the  face 


That  every  day  under  his  household  roof 
Did  keep  ten  thousand  men?  was  this  the  face 
That,  like  the  sun,'  did  make  beholders  wink? 
Was  this  the  face  that  faced  so  many  follies. 

And  was  at  last  out-faced  by  Bolingbroke? 

A  brittle  glory  shineth  in  this  face: 

As  brittle  as  the  glory  is  the  face; 

Dashes  the  glass  against  the  ground. 

For  there  it  is,  crack’d  in  a  hundred  shivers. 
Mark,  silent  king,  the  moral  of  this  sport,  2^0 
How  soon  my  sorrow  hath  destroy’d  my  face. 
Boling.  The  shadow  of  your  sorrow  hath  de¬ 
stroy’d 

The  shadow  of  your  face. 

K.  Rich.  Say  that  again. 

The  shadow  of  my  sorrow!  ha!  let’s  see: 

’Tis  very  true,  my  grief  lies  all  within; 

And  these  external  manners  of  laments 
Are  merely  shadows  to  the  unseen  grief 
That  swells  with  silence  in  the  tortured  soul; 
There  lies  the  substance:  and  I  thank  thee. 

King, 

For  thy  great  bounty,  that  not  only  givest  500 
Me  cause  to  wail  but  teachest  me  the  way 
How  to  lament  the  cause.  I’ll  beg  one  boon. 

And  then  be  gone  and  trouble  you  no  more. 

Shall  I  obtain  it? 

Boling.  Name  it,  fair  cousin. 

K.  Rich.  ‘‘Fair  cousin”?  I  am  greater  than  a 
king: 

For  when  I  was  a  king,  my  flatterers 
Were  then  but  subjects;  being  now  a  subject, 

I  have  a  king  here  to  my  flatterer. 

Being  so  great,  I  have  no  need  to  beg. 

Boling.  Yet  ask.  5/0 

K.  Rich.  And  shall  I  have? 

Boling.  You  shall. 

K.  Rich.  Then  give  me  leave  to  go. 

Boling.  Whither? 

K.  Rich.  Whither  you  will,  so  I  were  from 
your  sights. 

Boling.  Go,  some  of  you  convey  him  to  the 
Tower. 

K.  Rich.  O,  good!  convey?  conveyers  are  you 
all. 

That  rise  thus  nimbly  by  a  true  king’s  fall. 

[Exeunt  king  richard,  some  Lords, 
and  a  Guard. 

Boling.  On  Wednesday  next  we  solemnly  set 
down 

Our  coronation:  lords,  prepare  yourselves.  520 
[Exeunt  all  except  the  bishop  of  Carlisle,  the 

ABBOT  OF  WESTMINSTER,  and  AUMERLE. 

Abbot.  A  woeful  pageant  have  we  here  beheld. 
Car.  The  woe’s  to  come;  the  children  yet  un¬ 
born 


SCENE  I 


345 


KING  RICHARD  II 


Shall  feel  this  day  as  sharp  to  them  as  thorn. 

Aum.  You  holy  clergymen,  is  there  no  plot 
To  rid  the  realm  of  this  pernicious  blot? 

Abbot.  My  lord, 

Before  I  freely  speak  my  mind  herein. 

You  shall  not  only  take  the  sacrament 
To  bury  mine  intents,  but  also  to  effect 
Whatever  I  shall  happen  to  devise.  jjo 

I  see  your  brows  are  full  of  discontent, 

Your  hearts  of  sorrow,  and  your  eyes  of  tears: 
Come  home  with  me  to  supper;  and  I’ll  lay 
A  plot  shall  show  us  all  a  merry  day.  [Exeunt. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  London:  a  street  leading  to  the  Tower 
Enter  queen  and  ladies. 

Queen.  This  way  the  King  will  come;  this  is 
the  way 

To  Julius  Caesar’s  ill-erected  tower. 

To  whose  flint  bosom  my  condemned  lord 
is  doom’d  a  prisoner  by  proud  Bolingbroke: 

Here  let  us  rest,  if  this  rebellious  earth 
Have  any  resting  for  her  true  king’s  queen. 

Enter  richard  and  Guard. 

But  soft,  but  see,  or  rather  do  not  see. 

My  fair  rose  wither:  yet  look  up,  behold, 

That  you  in  pity  may  dissolve  to  dew  ^ 

And  wash  him  fresh  again  with  true-love  tears. 
Ah,  thou,  the  model  where  old  Troy  did  stand. 
Thou  map  of  honour,  thou  King  Richard’s  tomb. 
And  not  King  Richard;  thou  most  beauteous  inn. 
Why  should  hard-favour’d  grief  be  lodged  in 
thee, 

When  triumph  is  become  an  alehouse  guest? 

K.  Rich.  Join  not  with  grief,  fair  woman,  do 
not  so. 

To  make  my  end  too  sudden:  learn,  good  soul. 

To  think  our  former  state  a  happy  dream; 

From  which  awaked,  the  truth  of  what  we  are 
Shows  us  but  this:  I  am  sworn  brother,  sweet,  20 
To  grim  Necessity,  and  he  and  I 
Will  keep  a  league  till  death.  Hie  thee  to  France 
And  cloister  thee  in  some  religious  house: 

Our  holy  lives  must  win  a  new  world’s  crown. 
Which  our  profane  hours  here  have  stricken 
down. 

Qiieen.  What,  is  my  Richard  both  in  shape  and 
mind 

Transformed  and  weaken’d?  hath  Bolingbroke 
deposed 

Thine  intellect?  hath  he  been  in  thy  heart? 

The  lion  dying  thrusteth  forth  his  paw, 

i\nd  wounds  the  earth,  if  nothing  else,  with  rage 

To  be  o’erpower’d;  and  wilt  thou,  pupil-like,  5/ 


Take  thy  correction  mildly,  kiss  the  rod. 

And  fawn  on  rage  with  base  humility. 

Which  art  a  lion  and  a  king  of  beasts? 

K.  Rich.  A  king  of  beasts,  indeed;  if  aught  but 
beasts, 

I  had  been  still  a  happy  king  of  men. 

Good  sometime  queen,  prepare  thee  hence  for 
France: 

Think  I  am  dead  and  that  even  here  thou  takest. 
As  from  my  death-bed,  thy  last  living  leave. 

In  winter’s  tedious  nights  sit  by  the  fire  40 

With  good  old  folks  and  let  them  tell  thee  tales 
Of  woeful  ages  long  ago  betid; 

And  ere  thou  bid  good  night,  to  quit  their 
griefs. 

Tell  thou  the  lamentable  tale  of  me 
And  send  the  hearers  weeping  to  their  beds: 

For  why  the  senseless  brands  will  sympathize 
The  heavy  accent  of  thy  moving  tongue 
And  in  compassion  weep  the  fire  out; 

And  some  will  mourn  in  ashes,  some  coal-black, 
For  the  deposing  of  a  rightful  king.  jo 

Enter  Northumberland  and  others. 

North.  My  lord,  the  mind  of  Bolingbroke  is 
changed; 

You  must  to  Pomfret,  not  unto  the  Tower. 

And,  madam,  there  is  order  ta’en  for  you; 

With  all  swift  speed  you  must  away  to  France. 

K.  Rich.  Northumberland,  thou  ladder  where¬ 
withal 

The  mounting  Bolingbroke  ascends  my  throne. 
The  time  shall  not  be  many  hours  of  age 
More  than  it  is  ere  foul  sin  gathering  head 
Shall  break  into  corruption:  thou  shalt  think 
Though  he  divide  the  realm  and  give  thee  half. 

It  is  too  little,  helping  him  to  all;  61 

And  he  shall  think  that  thou,  which  know’st  the 
way 

To  plant  unrightful  kings,  wilt  know  again. 

Being  ne’er  so  little  urged,  another  way 
To  pluck  him  headlong  from  the  usurped  throne. 
The  love  of  wicked  men  converts  to  fear; 

That  fear  to  hate,  and  hate  turns  one  or  both 
To  worthy  danger  and  deserved  death. 

North.  My  guilt  be  on  my  head,  and  there  an 
end. 

Take  leave  and  part;  for  you  must  part  forth¬ 
with.  70 

K.  Rich.  Doubly  divorced!  Bad  men,  you  vio¬ 
late 

A  twofold  marriage,  ’twixt  my  crown  and  me. 
And  then  betwixt  me  and  my  married  wife. 

Let  me  unkiss  the  oath  ’twixt  thee  and  me; 

And  yet  not  so,  for  with  a  kiss  ’twas  made. 
Partus,  Northumberland;  I  towards  the  north, 


ACT  V 


KING  RICHARD  II 


346 

Where  shivering  cold  and  sickness  pines  the 
clime; 

My  wife  to  France:  from  whence,  set  forth  in 
pomp, 

She  came  adorned  hither  like  svveet  May, 

Sent  back  like  Hallowmas  or  short’st  of  day.  80 

Queen.  And  must  we  be  divided?  must  we  part? 

K.  Rich.  Ay,  hand  from  hand,  my  love,  and 
heart  from  heart. 

Queen.  Banish  us  both  and  send  the  King  with 
me. 

North.  That  were  some  love  but  little  policy. 

Queen.  Then  whither  he  goes,  thither  let  me  go. 

K.  Rich.  So  two,  together  weeping,  make  one 
woe. 

Weep  thou  for  me  in  France,  I  for  thee  here; 
Better  far  off  than  near,  be  ne’er  the  near. 

Go,  count  thy  way  with  sighs;  I  mine  with 
groans. 

Queen.  So  longest  way  shall  have  the  longest 
moans.  5>o 

K.  Rich.  Twice  for  one  step  I’ll  groan,  the  way 
being  short, 

And  piece  the  way  out  with  a  heavy  heart. 

Come,  come,  in  wooing  sorrow  let’s  be  brief, 
Since,  wedding  it,  there  is  such  length  in  grief: 
One  kiss  shall  stop  our  mouths,  and  dumbly  part; 
Thus  give  I  mine,  and  thus  take  I  thy  heart. 

Queen.  Give  me  mine  own  again;  ’twere  no 
good  part 

To  take  on  me  to  keep  and  kill  thy  heart. 

So,  now  I  have  mine  own  again,  be  gone, 

That  I  may  strive  to  kill  it  with  a  groan.  100 

K.  Rich.  We  make  woe  wanton  with  this  fond 
delay: 

Once  more,  adieu;  the  rest  let  sorrow  say. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  11.  The  Duke  of  York' s  palace 
Enter  york  and  his  duchess. 

Duch.  My  lord,  you  told  me  you  would  tell  the 
rest. 

When  weeping  made  you  break  the  story  off. 

Of  our  two  cousins  coming  into  London. 

York.  Where  did  I  leave? 

Duch.  At  that  sad  stop,  my  lord. 

Where  rude  misgovern’d  hands  from  windows’ 
tops 

Threw  dust  and  rubbish  on  King  Richard’s  head. 

York.  Then,  as  I  said,  the  Duke,  great  Boling- 
broke, 

Mounted  upon  a  hot  and  fiery  steed 
Which  his  aspiring  rider  seem’d  to  know. 

With  slow  but  stately  pace  kept  on  his  course,  to 
Whilst  all  tongues  cried  “God  save  thee,  Boling- 
broke!” 


You  would  have  thought  the  very  windows  spake. 
So  many  greedy  looks  of  young  and  old 
Through  casements  darted  their  desiring  eyes 
Upon  his  visage,  and  that  all  the  walls 
With  painted  imagery  had  said  at  once 
“Jesu  preserve  thee!  Welcome,  Bolingbroke!” 
Whilst  he,  from  the  one  side  to  the  other  turning. 
Bareheaded,  lower  than  his  proud  steed’s  neck, 
Bespake  them  thus:  “I  thank  you,  countrymen:” 
And  thus  still  doing,  thus  he  pass’d  along.  21 
Duch.  Alack,  poor  Richard!  where  rode  he  the 
whilst? 

York.  As  in  a  theatre,  the  eyes  of  men. 

After  a  well-graced  actor  leaves  the  stage. 

Are  idly  bent  on  him  that  enters  next, 

Thinking  his  prattle  to  be  tedious; 

Even  so,  or  with  much  more  contempt,  men’s 
eyes 

Did  scowl  on  gentle  Richard;  no  man  cried  “God 
save  him!” 

No  joyful  tongue  gave  him  his  welcome  home: 
But  dust  was  thrown  upon  his  sacred  head ;  5  0 

Which  with  such  gentle  sorrow  he  shook  off, 

His  face  still  combating  with  tears  and  smiles. 
The  badges  of  his  grief  and  patience. 

That  had  not  God,  for  some  strong  purpose,  steel ’d 
The  hearts  of  men,  they  must  perforce  have 
melted 

And  barbarism  itself  have  pitied  him. 

But  heaven  hath  a  hand  in  these  events. 

To  whose  high  will  we  bound  our  calm  con¬ 
tents. 

To  Bolingbroke  are  we  sworn  subjects  now. 
Whose  state  and  honour  I  for  aye  allow.  40 
Duch.  Here  comes  my  son  Aumerle. 

York.  Aumerle  that  was ; 

But  that  is  lost  for  being  Richard’s  friend, 

And  madam,  you  must  call  him  Rutland  now: 

I  am  in  parliament  pledge  for  his  truth 
And  lasting  fealty  to  the  new-made  king. 

Enter  aumerle. 

Duch.  Welcome,  my  son:  who  are  the  violets 
now 

That  strew  the  green  lap  of  the  new  come  spring? 
Aum.  Madam,  I  know  not,  nor  I  greatly  care 
not: 

God  knows  I  had  as  lief  be  none  as  one. 

York.  Well,  bear  you  well  in  this  new  spring  of 
time,  JO 

Lest  you  be  cropp’d  before  you  come  to  prime. 
What  news  from  Oxford?  hold  those  jousts  and 
triumphs? 

Aum.  For  aught  I  know,  my  lord,  they  do. 

York.  You  will  be  there,  I  know. 

Aum.  If  God  prevent  not,  I  purpose  so. 


SCENE  II 


347 


KING  RICHARD  II 


York,  What  seal  is  that,  that  hangs  without 
thy  bosom? 

Yea,  look’st  thou  pale?  let  me  see  the  writing. 
Aum.  My  lord,  ’tis  nothing. 

York,  No  matter,  then,  who  see  it: 

I  will  be  satisfied;  let  me  see  the  writing. 

Aum.  I  do  beseech  your  Grace  to  pardon  me: 

It  is  a  matter  of  small  consequence,  6i 

Which  for  some  reasons  I  would  not  have  seen. 
York.  Which  for  some  reasons,  sir,  I  mean 
to  see. 

I  fear,  I  fear —  . 

Duch.  What  should  you  fear? 

’Tis  nothing  but  some  bond  that  he  is  enter’d 
into 

For  gay  apparel  ’gainst  the  triumph  day. 

York.  Bound  to  himself!  what  doth  he  with  a 
bond 

That  he  is  bound  to?  Wife,  thou  art  a  fool. 

Boy,  let  me  see  the  writing. 

Aum.  I  do  beseech  you,  pardon  me;  I  may 
not  show  it.  70 

York.  I  will  be  satisfied;  let  me  see  it,  I  say. 

He  plucks  it  out  o  f  his  bosom  and  reads  it. 
Treason!  foul  treason!  Villain!  traitor!  slave! 
Duch.  What  is  the  matter,  my  lord? 

York.  Ho!  who  is  within  there? 

Enter  a  servant. 

Saddle  my  horse. 

God  for  his  mercy,  what  treachery  is  here! 

Duch.  Why,  what  is  it,  my  lord? 

York.  Give  me  my  boots,  I  say;  saddle  my 
horse.  [Exit  servant. 

Now,  by  mine  honour,  by  my  life, by  my  troth, 

I  will  appeach  the  villain. 

Duch.  What  is  the  matter? 

York.  Peace,  foolish  woman.  80 

Duch.  I  will  not  peace.  What  is  the  matter, 
Aumerle? 

Aum.  Good  mother,  be  content;  it  is  no  more 
Than  my  poor  life  must  answer. 

Duch.  Thy  life  answer! 

York.  Bring  me  my  boots:  I  will  unto  the  King. 

Re-enter  servant  with  boots. 

Duch.  Strike  him,  Aumerle.  Poor  boy,  thou 
art  amazed. 

Hence,  villain!  never  more  come  in  my  sight. 
York.  Give  me  my  boots,  I  say. 

Duch.  Why,  York,  what  wilt  thou  do? 

Wilt  thou  hot  hide  the  trespass  of  thine  own? 
Have  we  more  sons?  or  are  we  like  to  have?  90 
Is  not  my  teeming  date  drunk  up  with  time? 

And  wilt  thou  pluck  my  fair  son  from  mine  age. 
And  rob  me  of  a  happy  mother’s  name? 


Is  he  not  like  thee?  is  he  not  thine  own? 

York.  Thou  fond  mad  woman. 

Wilt  thou  conceal  this  dark  conspiracy? 

A  dozen  of  them  here  have  ta’en  the  sacrament, 
And  interchangeably  set  down  their  hands. 

To  kill  the  King  at  Oxford. 

Duch.  He  shall  be  none; 

We’ll  keep  him  here:  then  what  is  that  to  him? 
York.  Away,  fond  woman!  were  he  twenty 
times  my  son, 

I  would  appeach  him. 

Duch.  Hadst  thou  groan’d  for  him 

As  I  have  done,  thou  wouldst  be  more  pitiful. 

But  now  I  know  thy  mind;  thou  dost  suspect 
That  I  have  been  disloyal  to  thy  bed. 

And  that  he  is  a  bastard,  not  thy  son: 

Sweet  York,  sweet  husband,  be  not  of  that  mind: 
He  is  as  like  thee  as  a  man  may  be. 

Not  like  to  me,  or  any  of  my  kin. 

And  yet  I  love  him. 

York.  Make  way,  unruly  woman!  no 

[Exit. 

Duch.  After,  Aumerle!  mount  thee  upon  his 
horse; 

Spur  post,  and  get  before  him  to  the  King, 

And  beg  thy  pardon  ere  he  do  accuse  thee. 

I’ll  not  be  long  behind;  though  I  be  old, 

I  doubt  not  but  to  ride  as  fast  as  York. 

And  never  will  I  rise  up  from  the  ground 
Till  Bolingbroke  have  pardon’d  thee.  Away,  be 
gone!  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  A  royal  palace 

Enter  bolingbroke,  Percy,  and  other  Lords. 
Boling.  Can  no  man  tell  me  of  my  unthrifty 
son? 

’Tis  full  three  months  since  I  did  see  him  last: 

If  any  plague  hang  over  us,  ’tis  he. 

I  would  to  God,  my  lords,  he  might  be  found: 
Inquire  at  London,  ’mongst  the  taverns  there, 

For  there,  they  say,  he  daily  doth  frequent. 

With  unrestrained  loose  companions. 

Even  such,  they  say,  as  stand  in  narrow  lanes. 
And  beat  our  watch,  and  rob  our  passengers; 
Which  he,  young  wanton  and  effeminate  boy,  10 
Takes  on  the  point  of  honour  to  support 
So  dissolute  a  crew. 

Percy.  My  lord,  some  two  days  since  I  saw  the 
prince. 

And  told  him  of  those  triumphs  held  at  Oxford. 
Boling.  And  what  said  the  gallant? 

Percy.  His  answer  was,  he  would  unto  the 
stews. 

And  from  the  common’st  creature  pluck  a  glove. 
And  wear  it  as  a  favour;  and  with  that 
He  would  unhorse  the  lustiest  challenger. 


ACT  V 


KING  RICHARD  II 


348 

Boling.  As  dissolute  as  desperate;  yet  through 
both  20 

I  see  some  sparks  of  better  hope,  which  elder 
years 

May  happily  bring  forth.  But  who  comes  here? 

Enter  Aumerle. 

Aum.  Where  is  the  King? 

Boling.  What  means  our  cousin,  that  he  stares 
and  looks 

So  wildly? 

Aum.  God  save  your  Grace!  I  do  beseech  your 
Majesty, 

To  have  some  conference  with  your  Grace  alone. 

Boling.  Withdraw  yourselves,  and  leave  us 
here  alone.  [Exeunt  percy  and  Lords. 

What  is  the  matter  with  our  cousin  now? 

Aum.  For  ever  may  my  knees  grow  to  the 
earth,  50 

My  tongue  cleave  to  my  roof  within  my  mouth. 

Unless  a  pardon  ere  I  rise  or  speak. 

Boling.  Intended  or  committed  was  this  fault? 

If  on  the  first,  how  heinous  e’er  it  be. 

To  win  thy  after-love  I  pardon  thee. 

Aum.  Then  give  me  leave  that  I  may  turn  the 
key, 

That  no  man  enter  till  my  tale  be  done. 

Boling.  Have  thy  desire. 

AUMERLE  locks  the  door.  YORK  knocks  at  the  door 
and  crieth. 

York.  [Within]  My  liege,  beware:  look  to  thy¬ 
self; 

Thou  hast  a  traitor  in  thy  presence  there.  40 

Boling.  Villain,  I’ll  make  thee  safe. 

Drawing. 

Aum.  Stay  thy  revengeful  hand;  thou  hast  no 
cause  to  fear. 

York.  [Within]  Open  the  door,  secure,  fool¬ 
hardy  King: 

Shall  I  for  love  speak  treason  to  thy  face? 

Open  the  door,  or  I  will  break  it  open. 

Enter  york. 

Boling.  What  is  the  matter,  uncle?  speak; 

Recover  breath;  tell  us  how  near  is  danger. 

That  we  may  arm  us  to  encounter  it. 

York.  Peruse  this  writing  here,  and  thou  shalt 
know 

The  treason  that  my  haste  forbids  me  show.  50 

Aum.  Remember,  as  thou  read’st,  thy  promise 
pass’d: 

I  do  repent  me;  read  not  my  name  there; 

My  heart  is  not  confederate  with  my  hand. 

York.  It  was,  villain,  ere  thy  hand  did  set  it 
down. 

I  tore  it  from  the  traitor’s  bosom.  King; 


Fear,  and  not  love,  begets  his  penitence: 

Forget  to  pity  him,  lest  thy  pity  prove 
A  serpent  that  will  sting  thee  to  the  heart. 

Boling.  O  heinous,  strong  and  bold  conspiracy! 

O  loyal  father  of  a  treacherous  son!  60 

Thou  sheer,  immaculate,  and  silver  fountain. 
From  whence  this  stream  through  muddy  pas¬ 
sages 

Hath  held  his  current  and  defiled  himself! 

Thy  overflow  of  good  converts  to  bad. 

And  thy  abundant  goodness  shall  excuse 
This  deadly  blot  in  thy  digressing  son. 

York.  So  shall  my  virtue  be  his  vice’s  bawd; 

And  he  shall  spend  mine  honour  with  his  shame. 
As  thriftless  sons  their  scraping  fathers’  gold. 
Mine  honour  lives  when  his  dishonour  dies,  70 
Or  my  shamed  life  in  his  dishonour  lies: 

Thou  kill’s  me  in  this  life;  giving  him  breath. 

The  traitor  lives,  the  true  man’s  put  to  death. 
Duch.  [Within]Whzt  ho,  my  liege!  for  God’s 
sake,  let  me  in. 

Boling.  What  shrill-voiced  suppliant  makes  this 
eager  cry? 

Duch.  A  woman,  and  thy  aunt,  great  King; 
’tis  I. 

Speak  with  me,  pity  me,  open  the  door: 

A  begger  begs  that  never  begg’d  before. 

Boling.  Our  scene  is  alter’d  from  a  serious  thing. 
And  now  changed  to  “The  Beggar  and  the  King.” 
My  dangerous  cousin,  let  your  mother  in:  Si 

I  know  she  is  come  to  pray  for  your  foul  sin. 

York.  If  thou  do  pardon,  whosoever  pray. 

More  sins  for  this  forgiveness  prosper  may. 

This  fester’d  joint  cut  off,  the  rest  rest  sound; 
This  let  alone  will  all  the  rest  confound; 

Enter  duchess. 

Duch.  O  King,  believe  not  this  hard-hearted 
man! 

Love  loving  not  itself  none  other  can. 

York.  Thou  frantic  woman,  what  dost  thou 
make  here? 

Shall  thy  old  dugs  once  more  a  traitor  rear?  po 
Duch.  Sweet  York,  be  patient.  Hear  me,  gentle 
liege.  [Kneels.] 

Boling.  Rise  up,  good  aunt. 

Duch.  Not  yet,  I  thee  beseech: 

For  ever  will  I  walk  upon  my  knees. 

And  never  see  day  that  the  happy  sees. 

Till  thou  give  joy;  until  thou  bid  me  joy. 

By  pardoning  Rutland,  my  transgressing  boy. 
Aum.  Unto  my  mother’s  prayers  I  bend  my 
knee. 

York.  Against  them  both  my  true  joints  bended 
be. 

Ill  mayst  thou  thrive,  if  thou  grant  any  grace! 


SCENE  III 


349 


KING  RICHARD  II 


Duch.  Pleads  he  in  earnest?  look  upon  his 
face;  100 

His  eyes  do  drop  no  tears,  his  prayers  are  in  jest: 
His  words  come  from  his  mouth,  ours  from  our 
breast: 

He  prays  but  faintly  and  would  be  denied; 

We  pray  with  heart  and  soul  and  all  beside: 

,  His  weary  joints  would  gladly  rise,  I  know; 

I  Our  knees  shall  kneel  till  to  the  ground  they 
j  grow: 

His  prayers  are  full  of  false  hypocrisy; 

Ours  of  true  zeal  and  deep  integrity. 

Our  prayers  do  out-pray  his;  then  let  them  have 
That  mercy  which  true  prayer  ought  to  have,  ito 
Boling.  Good  aunt,  stand  up. 

'  Duch.  Nay,  do  not  say,  ‘‘Stand  up”; 

j  Say  “Pardon”  first,  and  afterwards  “Stand  up.” 

I  An  if  I  were  thy  nurse,  thy  tongue  to  teach, 

“Pardon”  should  be  the  first  word  of  thy  speech. 
I  never  long’d  to  hear  a  word  till  now; 

Say  “pardon,”  King;  let  pity  teach  thee  how: 

The  word  is  short,  but  not  so  short  as  sweet; 

No  word  like  “pardon”  for  kings’  mouths  so 
meet. 

York.  Speak  it  in  French,  King;  say  Pardonne 
moi. 

Duch.  Dost  thou  teach  pardon  pardon  to  de¬ 
stroy?  120 

Ah,  my  sour  husband,  my  hard-hearted  lord. 

That  set’st  the  word  itself  against  the  word! 
Speak  “pardon”  as  ’tis  current  in  our  land; 

The  chopping  French  we  do  not  understand. 
Thine  eye  begins  to  speak;  set  thy  tongue  there; 
Or  in  thy  piteous  heart  plant  thou  thine  ear; 

That  hearing  how  our  plaints  and  prayers  do 
pierce. 

Pity  may  move  thee  “pardon”  to  rehearse. 

Boling.  Good  aunt,  stand  up. 

Duch.  I  do  not  sue  to  stand; 

Pardon  is  all  the  suit  I  have  in  hand.  /50 

Boling.  I  pardon  him,  as  God  shall  pardon  me. 
Duch.  O  happy  vantage  of  a  kneeling  knee! 

Yet  am  I  sick  for  fear:  speak  it  again; 

Twice  saying  “pardon”  doth  not  pardon  twain. 
But  makes  one  pardon  strong. 

Boling.  With  all  my  heart 

I  pardon  him. 

Duch.  A  god  on  earth  thou  art. 

Boling.  But  for  our  trusty  brother-in-law  and 
the  abbot. 

With  all  the  rest  of  that  consorted  crew. 
Destruction  straight  shall  dog  them  at  the  heels. 
Good  uncle,  help  to  order  several  powers  140 
To  Oxford,  or  where’er  these  traitors  are: 

They  shall  not  live  within  this  world,  I  swear, 
But  I  will  have  them,  if  I  once  know  where. 


Uncle,  farewell:  and,  cousin  too,  adieu: 

Your  mother  well  hath  pray’d,  and  prove  you 
true. 

Duch.  Come,  my  old  son:  I  pray  God  make  thee 
new.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  The  same 
Enter  exton  and  servant. 

Exton.  Didst  thou  not  mark  the  King,  what 
words  he  spake, 

“Have  I  no  friend  will  rid  me  of  this  living  fear?” 
Was  it  not  so? 

Ser.  These  were  his  very  words. 

Exton.  “Have  I  no  friend?”  quoth  he:  he  spake 
it  twice. 

And  urged  it  twice  together,  did  he  not? 

Serv.  He  did. 

Exton.  And  speaking,  it,  he  wistly  look’d  on 
me; 

As  who  should  say,  “I  would  thou  wert  the  man 
That  would  divorce  this  terror  from  my  heart”; 
Meaning  the  king  at  Pomfret.  Come,  let’s  go:  10 
I  am  the  king’s  friend,  and  will  rid  his  foe. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  Pomfret  castle 
Enter  king  richard. 

K.  Rich.  I  have  been  studying  how  I  may  com¬ 
pare 

This  prison  where  I  live  unto  the  world: 

And  for  because  the  world  is  populous 
And  here  is  not  a  creature  but  myself, 

I  cannot  do  it;  yet  I’ll  hammer  it  out. 

My  brain  I’ll  prove  the  female  to  my  soul, 

My  soul  the  father;  and  these  two  beget 
A  generation  of  still-breeding  thoughts. 

And  these  same  thoughts  people  this  little  world, 
In  humours  like  the  people  of  this  world,  10 
For  no  thought  is  contented.  The  better  sort, 

As  thoughts  of  things  divine,  are  intermix’d 
With  scruples  and  do  set  the  word  itself 
Against  the  word: 

As  thus,  “Come,  little  ones,”  and  then  again, 

“It  is  as  hard  to  come  as  for  a  camel 
To  thread  the  postern  of  a  small  needle’s  eye.” 
Thoughts  tending  to  ambition,  they  do  plot 
Unlikely  wonders;  how  these  vain  weak  nails 
May  tear  a  passage  through  the  flinty  ribs  20 
Of  this  hard  world,  my  ragged  prison  walls. 

And,  for  they  cannot,  die  in  their  own  pride. 
Thoughts  tending  to  content  flatter  themselves 
That  they  are  not  the  first  of  fortune’s  slaves. 

Nor  shall  not  be  the  last;  like  silly  beggars 
Who  sitting  in  the  stocks  refuge  their  shame. 
That  many  have  and  others  must  sit  there; 

And  in  this  thought  they  find  a  kind  of  ease, 


350 


KING  RICHARD  II 


ACT  V 


Bearing  their  own  misfortunes  on  the  back 
Of  such  as  have  before  endured  the  like.  50 

Thus  play  I  in  one  person  many  people, 

And  none  contented:  sometimes  am  I  king; 

Then  treasons  make  me  wish  myself  a  beggar, 
And  so  I  am:  then  crushing  penury 
Persuades  me  I  was  better  when  a  king; 

Then  am  I  king’d  again:  and  by  and  by 
Think  that  I  am  unking’d  by  Bolingbroke, 

And  straight  am  nothing:  but  whate’er  I  be, 

Nor  I  nor  any  man  that  but  man  is 
With  nothing  shall  be  pleased,  till  he  be  eased  40 
With  being  nothing.  Music  do  I  hear?  [Music, 
Ha,  ha!  keep  time:  how  sour  sweet  music  is, 
When  time  is  broke  and  no  proportion  kept! 

So  is  it  in  the  music  of  men’s  lives. 

And  here  have  I  the  daintiness  of  ear 
To  check  time  broke  in  a  disorder’d  strong; 

But  for  the  concord  of  my  state  and  time 
Had  not  an  ear  to  hear  my  true  time  broke. 

I  wasted  time,  and  now  doth  time  waste  me; 

For  now  hath  time  made  me  his  numbering 
clock:  50 

My  thoughts  are  minutes;  and  with  sighs  they 
jar 

Their  watches  on  unto  mine  eyes,  the  outward 
watch. 

Whereto  my  finger,  like  a  dial’s  point. 

Is  pointing  still,  in  cleansing  them  from  tears. 
Now  sir,  the  sound  that  tells  what  hour  it  is 
Are  clamorous  groans,  which  strike  upon  my 
heart. 

Which  is  the  bell:  so  sighs  and  tears  and  groans 
Show  minutes,  times,  and  hours:  but  my  time 
Runs  posting  on  in  Bolingbroke’s  proud  joy, 
While  I  stand  fooling  here,  his  Jack  o’  the  clock. 
This  music  mads  me;  let  it  sound  no  more;  61 
For  though  it  have  holp  madmen  to  their  wits. 

In  me  it  seems  it  will  make  wise  men  mad. 

Yet  blessing  on  his  heart  that  gives  it  me! 

For  ’tis  a  sign  of  love;  and  love  to  Richard 
Is  a  strange  brooch  in  this  all-hating  world. 

Enter  a  groom  of  the  stable 

Groom.  Hail,  royal  prince! 

K.  Rich.  Thanks,  noble  peer; 

The  cheapest  of  us  is  ten  groats  too  deer. 

What  art  thou?  and  how  comest  thou  hither. 
Where  no  man  never  comes  but  that  sad  dog  70 
That  brings  me  food  to  make  misfortune  live? 

Groom.  I  was  a  poor  groom  of  thy  stable.  King, 
When  thou  wert  king;  who,  travelling  towards 
York, 

With  much  ado  at  length  have  gotten  leave 
To  look  upon  my  sometimes  royal  master’s  face. 
O,  how  it  yearn’d  my  heart  when  I  beheld 


In  London  streets,  that  coronation-day. 

When  Bolingbroke  rode  on  roan  Barbary, 

That  horse  that  thou  so  often  hast  bestrid. 

That  horse  that  I  so  carefully  have  dress’d !  80 

K.  Rich.  Rode  he  on  Barbary?  Tell  me,  gentle 
friend. 

How  went  he  under  him? 

Groom.  So  proudly  as  if  he  disdain’d  the  ground. 

K.  Rich.  So  proud  that  Bolingbroke  was  on  his 
back! 

That  jade  hath  eat  bread  from  my  royal  hand; 
This  hand  hath  made  him  proud  with  clapping 
him. 

Would  he  not  stumble?  would  he  not  fall  down, 
Since  pride  must  have  a  fall,  and  break  the  neck 
Of  that  proud  man  that  did  usurp  his  back? 
Forgiveness,  horse!  why  do  I  rail  on  thee,  5)0 
Since  thou,  created  to  be  awed  by  man, 

Wast  born  to  bear?  I  was  not  made  a  horse; 

And  yet  I  bear  a  burthen  like  an  ass, 

Spurr’d,  gall’d,  and  tired  by  jauncing  Boling¬ 
broke. 

Enter  keeper,  with  a  dish. 

Keep.  Fellow,  give  place;  here  is  no  longer 
stay. 

K.  Rich.  If  thou  love  me,  ’tis  time  thou  wert 
away. 

Groom.  What  my  tongue  dares  not,  that  my 
heart  shall  say.  [Exit. 

Keep.  My  lord,  will’t  please  you  to  fall  to? 

K.  Rich.  Taste  of  it  first,  as  thou  art  wont  to 
do.  pp 

Keep.  My  lord,  I  dare  not:  Sir  Pierce  of  Ex¬ 
ton,  who  lately  came  from  the  King,  commands 
the  contrary. 

K.  Rich.  The  devil  take  Henry  of  Lancaster 
and  thee! 

Patience  is  stale,  and  I  am  weary  of  it. 

Beats  the  keeper. 

Keep.  Help,  help,  help! 

Enter  exton  and  servants.,  armed. 

K.  Rich.  How  now!  what  means  death  in  this 
rude  assault? 

Villain,  thy  own  hand  yields  thy  death’s  instru¬ 
ment. 

Snatching  an  axe  from  a  Servant  and  killing  him. 
Go  thou,  and  fill  another  room  in  hell. 

He  kills  another.,  Then  exton  strikes  him  down. 
That  hand  shall  burn  in  never-quenching  fire 
That  staggers  thus  my  person.  Exton,  thy  fierce 
hand  no 

Hath  with  the  King’s  blood  stain’d  the  King’s 
own  land. 

Mount,  mount,  my  soul!  thy  seat  is  up  on  high; 


SCENE  V 


351 


KING  RICHARD  II 


Whilst  my  gross  flesh  sinks  downward,  here  to 
die.  [Dies. 

Exton.  As  full  of  valour  as  of  royal  blood: 

Both  have  I  spill’d;  O  would  the  deed  were 
good! 

For  now  the  devil,  that  told  me  I  did  well. 

Says  that  this  deed  is  chronicled  in  hell. 

This  dead  king  to  the  living  king  I’ll  bear: 

Take  hence  the  rest,  and  give  them  burial  here. 

[Exeunt, 

Scene  vi.  Windsor  castle 

Flourish.  Enter  bolingbroke,  york,  'with  other 
Lords.,  and  Attendants. 

Boling.  Kind  uncle  York,  the  latest  news  we 
hear 

Is  that  the  rebels  have  consumed  with  fire 
Out  town  of  Cicester  in  Gloucestershire; 

But  whether  they  be  ta’en  or  slain  we  hear  not. 

Enter  Northumberland. 

Welcome,  my  lord:  what  is  the  news? 

North.  First,  to  thy  sacred  state  wish  I  all 
happiness. 

The  next  news  is,  I  have  to  London  sent 
The  heads  of  Oxford,  Salisbury,  Blunt,  and  Kent: 
The  manner  of  their  taking  may  appear 
At  large  discoursed  in  this  paper  here.  10 

Boling.  We  thank  thee,  gentle  Percy,  for  thy 
pains; 

And  to  thy  worth  will  add  right  worthy  gains. 
Enter  fitzwater. 

Fitz.  My  lord,  I  have  from  Oxford  sent  to 
London 

The  heads  of  Brocas  and  Sir  Bennet  Seely, 

Two  of  the  dangerous  consorted  traitors 
That  sought  at  Oxford  thy  dire  overthrow. 

Boling.  Thy  pains,  Fitzwater,  shall  not  be 
forgot; 

Right  noble  is  thy  merit,  well  I  wot. 


Enter  Percy,  and  the  bishop  of  Carlisle 

Percy  .  The  grand  conspirator.  Abbot  of  West¬ 
minster, 

With  clog  of  conscience  and  sour  melancholy  20 
Hath  yielded  up  his  body  to  the  grave; 

But  here  is  Carlisle  living,  to  abide 
Thy  kingly  doom  and  sentence  of  his  pride. 

Boling.  Carlisle,  this  is  your  doom: 

Choose  out  some  secret  place,  some  reverend 
room. 

More  than  thou  hast,  and  with  it  joy  thy  life; 

So  as  thou  livest  in  peace,  die  free  from  strife; 

For  though  mine  enemy  thou  hast  ever  been. 

High  sparks  of  honour  in  thee  have  I  seen. 

Enter  exton,  'with  persons  bearing  a  coffin. 

Exton.  Great  King,  within  this  coffin  I  pre¬ 
sent  50 

Thy  buried  fear:  herein  all  breathless  lies 
The  mightiest  of  thy  greatest  enemies, 

Richard  of  Bordeaux,  by  me  hither  brought. 
Boling.  Exton,  I  thank  thee  not;  for  thou  hast 
wrought 

A  deed  of  slander  with  thy  fatal  hand 
Upon  my  head  and  all  this  famous  land. 

Exton.  From  your  own  mouth,  my  lord,  did  I 
this  deed. 

Boling.  They  love  not  poison  that  do  poison 
need, 

Nor  do  I  thee:  though  I  did  wish  him  dead, 

I  hate  the  murderer,  love  him  murdered.  ^0 
The  guilt  of  conscience  take  thou  for  thy  labour. 
But  neither  my  good  word  nor  princely  favour: 
With  Cain  go  wander  through  shades  of  night. 
And  never  show  thy  head  by  day  nor  light. 

Lords,  I  protest,  my  soul  is  full  of  woe. 

That  blood  should  sprinkle  me  to  make  me  grow: 
Come,  mourn  with  me  for  that  I  do  lament. 

And  put  on  sullen  black  incontinent: 

I’ll  make  a  voyage  to  the  Holy  Land, 

To  wash  this  blood  off  from  my  guilty  hand:  50 
March  sadly  after;  grace  my  mournings  here; 

In  weeping  after  this  untimely  bier.  [Exeunt. 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S 
DREAM 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


Theseus,  Duke  of  Athens 
Egeus,  father  to  Hermia 
Lysander  I  Hermia 

Demetrius  J 

Philostrate,  master  of  the  revels  to  Theseus 

Quince,  a  carpenter 

Snug,  a  joiner 

Bottom,  a  weaver 

Flute,  a  bellows-mender 

Snout,  a  tinker 

Starveling,  a  tailor 

Hippolyta  ,  Queen  of  the  Amazons^  betrothed  to 
Theseus 

Hermia,  daughter  to  Egeus^  in  love  with  Lysander 


Helena,  in  love  with  Demetrius 


Oberon,  King  of  the  fairies 
Titania,  Queen  of  the  fairies 
Puck,  or  Robin  Goodfellow 
Peaseblossom 
Cobweb 

Moth  fairies 

Mustardseed 
Two  Fairies 


Non-Speaking:  Attendants  on  Theseus  and  Hippo- 
lyta;  fairies  attending  their  King  and  Queen . 

Scene:  Athens^  and  a  wood  near  it 


ACT  I 

Scene  i.  Athens:  the  palace  of  Theseus 
Enter  theseus,  hippolyta,  philostrate,  and 
Attendants. 

The.  Now,  fair  Hippolyta,  our  nuptial  hour 
Draws  on  apace;  four  happy  days  bring  in 
Another  moon:  but,  O,  methinks,  how  slow 
This  old  moon  wanes!  she  lingers  my  desires. 
Like  to  a  step-dame  or  a  dowager 
Long  withering  out  a  young  man’s  revenue. 

Hip.  Four  days  will  quickly  steep  themselves 
in  night; 

Four  nights  will  quickly  dream  away  the  time; 
And  then  the  moon,  like  to  a  silver  lx)w 
New-bent  in  heaven,  shall  behold  the  night  to 
Of  our  solemnities. 

The.  Go,  Philostrate, 

Stir  up  the  Athenian  youth  to  merriments; 

Awake  the  pert  and  nimble  spirit  of  mirth: 

Turn  melancholy  forth  to  funerals; 

The  pale  companion  is  not  for  our  pomp. 

[Exit  PHILOSTRATE. 

Hippolyta,  I  woo’d  thee  with  my  sword. 

And  won  thy  love,  doing  thee  injuries; 

But  I  will  wed  thee  in  another  key. 

With  pomp,  with  triumph,  and  with  revelling. 

Enter  egeus,  hermia,  lysander,  and 

DEMETRIUS. 

Ege.  Happy  be  Theseus,  our  renowned  Duke! 


The.  Thanks,  good  Egeus:  what’s  the  news 
with  thee?  21 

Ege.  Full  of  vexation  come  I,  with  complaint 
Against  my  child,  my  daughter  Hermia. 

Stand  forth,  Demetrius.  My  noble  lord. 

This  man  hath  my  consent  to  marry  her. 

Stand  forth,  Lysander:  and,  my  gracious  Duke, 
This  man  hath  bewitch’d  the  bosom  of  my  child: 
Thou,  thou,  Lysander,  thou  hast  given  her 
rhymes 

And  interchanged  love-tokens  with  my  child: 
Thou  hast  by  moonlight  at  her  window  sung 
With  feigning  voice  verses  of  feigning  love. 

And  stolen  the  impression  of  her  fantasy 
With  bracelets  of  thy  hair,  rings,  gawds,  conceits. 
Knacks,  trifles,  nosegays,  sweetmeats,  messen¬ 
gers 

Of  strong  prevailment  in  unharden’d  youth: 

With  cunning  hast  thou  filch’d  my  daughter’s 
heart. 

Turn’d  her  obedience,  which  is  due  to  me, 

To  stubborn  harshness:  and,  my  gracious  Duke, 
Be  it  so  she  will  not  here  before  your  Grace 
Consent  to  marry  with  Demetrius,  40 

I  beg  the  ancient  privilege  of  Athens, 

As  she  is  mine,  I  may  dispose  of  her: 

Which  shall  be  either  to  this  gentleman 
Or  to  her  death,  according  to  our  law 
Immediately  provided  in  that  case. 

The.  What  say  you,  Hermia?  be  advised,  fair 
maid: 


35^ 


353 


SCENE  I 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


To  you  your  father  should  be  as  a  god; 

One  that  composed  your  beauties,  yea,  and  one 
To  whom  you  are  but  as  a  form  in  wax 
By  him  imprinted  and  within  his  power  50 

To  leave  the  figure  or  disfigure  it. 

Demetrius  is  a  worthy  gentleman. 

Her.  So  is  Lysander. 

The.  In  himself  he  is; 

But  in  this  kind,  wanting  your  father’s  voice. 

The  other  must  be  held  the  worthier. 

Her.  I  would  my  father  look’d  but  with  my  eyes. 
The.  Rather  your  eyes  must  with  his  judge¬ 
ment  look. 

Her.  I  do  entreat  your  Grace  to  pardon  me. 

I  know  not  by  what  power  I  am  made  bold, 

Nor  how  it  may  concern  my  modesty,  60 

In  such  a  presence  here  to  plead  my  thoughts; 

But  I  beseech  your  Grace  that  I  may  know 
The  worst  that  may  befall  me  in  this  case. 

If  I  refuse  to  wed  Demetrius. 

The.  Either  to  die  the  death  or  to  abjure 
For  ever  the  society  of  men. 

Therefore,  fair  Hermia,  question  your  desires; 
Know  of  your  youth,  examine  well  your  blood, 
Whether,  if  you  yield  not  to  your  father’s  choice, 
You  can  endure  the  livery  of  a  nun,  70 

For  aye  to  be  in  shady  cloister  mew’d, 

To  live  a  barren  sister  all  your  life. 

Chanting  faint  hymns  to  the  cold  fruitless  moon. 
Thrice-blessed  they  that  master  so  their  blood 
To  undergo  such  maiden  pilgrimage; 

But  earthlier  happy  is  the  rose  distill’d 
Than  that  which  withering  on  the  virgin  thorn 
Grows,  lives,  and  dies  in  single  blessedness. 

Her.  So  will  I  grow,  so  live,  so  die,  my  lord. 

Ere  I  will  yield  my  virgin  patent  up  So 

Unto  his  lordship,  whose  unwished  yoke 
My  soul  consents  not  to  give  sovereignty. 

The.  Take  time  to  pause;  and,  by  the  next  new 
moon — 

The  sealing-day  betwixt  my  love  and  me, 

For  everlasting  bond  of  fellowship — 

Upon  that  day  either  prepare  to  die 
For  disobedience  to  your  father’s  will. 

Or  else  to  wed  Demetrius,  as  he  would; 

Or  on  Diana’s  altar  to  protest 
For  aye  austerity  and  single  life.  go 

Dem.  Relent,  sweet  Hermia:  and,  Lysander, 
yield 

Thy  crazed  title  to  my  certain  right. 

Lys.  You  have  her  father’s  love,  Demetrius; 

Let  me  have  Hermia’s:  do  you  marry  him. 

Ege.  Scornful  Lysander!  true,  he  hath  my  love. 
And  what  is  mine  my  love  shall  render  him. 

And  she  is  mine,  and  all  my  right  of  her 
I  do  estate  unto  Demetrius, 


Lys.  I  am,  my  lord,  as  well  derived  as  he. 

As  well  possess’d;  my  love  is  more  than  his;  100 
My  fortunes  every  way  as  fairly  rank’d. 

If  not  with  vantage,  as  Demetrius’; 

And,  which  is  more  than  all  these  boasts  can  be, 

I  am  beloved  of  beauteous  Hermia: 

Why  should  not  I  then  prosecute  my  right? 
Demetrius,  I’ll  avouch  it  to  his  head. 

Made  love  to  Nedar’s  daughter,  Helena, 

And  won  her  soul;  and  she,  sweet  lady,  dotes. 
Devoutly  dotes,  dotes  in  idolatry. 

Upon  this  spotted  and  inconstant  man.  no 

The.  I  must  confess  that  I  have  heard  so  much. 
And  with  Demetrius  thought  to  have  spoke 
thereof; 

But,  being  over-full  of  self-affairs. 

My  mind  did  lose  it.  But,  Demetrius,  come; 

And  come,  Egeus;  you  shall  go  with  me, 

I  have  some  private  schooling  for  you  both. 

For  you,  fair  Hermia,  look  you  arm  yourself 
To  fit  your  fancies  to  your  father’s  will; 

Or  else  the  law  of  Athens  yields  you  up — 

Which  by  no  means  we  may  extenuate — 

To  death,  or  to  a  vow  of  single  life. 

Come,  my  Hippolyta:  what  cheer,  my  love? 
Demetrius  and  Egeus,  go  along: 

I  must  employ  you  in  some  business 
Against  our  nuptial  and  confer  with  you 
Of  something  nearly  that  concerns  yourselves. 
Ege.  With  duty  and  desire  we  follow  you. 

[Exeunt  all  but  lysander  and  hermia. 
Lys.  How  now,  my  love!  why  is  your  cheek  so 
pale? 

How  chance  the  roses  there  do  fade  so  fast? 

Her.  Belike  for  want  of  rain,  which  I  could 
well  1^0 

Beteem  them  from  the  tempest  of  my  eyes. 

Lys.  Ay  me!  for  aught  that  I  could  ever  read. 
Could  ever  hear  by  tale  or  history. 

The  course  of  true  love  never  did  run  smooth; 
But,  either  it  was  different  in  blood — 

Her.  O  cross!  too  high  to  be  enthrall’d  to  low. 
Lys.  Or  else  misgraffed  in  respect  of  years — 
Her.  O  spite!  too  old  to  be  engaged  to  young. 
Lys.  Or  else  it  stood  upon  the  choice  of  friends — 
Her.  O  hell!  to  choose  love  by  another’s  eyes. 
Lys.  Or,  if  there  were  a  sympathy  in  choice. 
War,  death,  or  sickness  did  lay  siege  to  it. 
Making  it  momentany  as  a  sound. 

Swift  as  a  shadow,  short  as  any  dream; 

Brief  as  the  lightning  in  the  collied  night. 

That,  in  a  spleen,  unfolds  both  heaven  and  earth, 
And  ere  a  man  hath  power  to  say  “Behold!” 

The  jaws  of  darkness  do  devour  it  up: 

So  quick  bright  things  come  to  confusion. 

Her.  If  then  true  lovers  have  been  ever  cross’d, 


354 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


It  stands  as  an  edict  in  destiny:  75/ 

Then  let  us  teach  our  trial  patience, 

Because  it  is  a  customary  cross, 

As  due  to  love  as  thoughts  and  dreams  and  sighs, 
Wishes  and  tears,  poor  Fancy’s  followers. 

Lys.  A  good  persuasion:  therefore,  hear  me, 
Hermia. 

I  have  a  widow  aunt,  a  dowager 
Of  great  revenue,  and  she  hath  no  child: 

From  Athens  is  her  house  remote  seven  leagues; 
And  she  respects  me  as  her  only  son.  160 

There,  gentle  Hermia,  may  I  marry  thee; 

And  to  that  place  the  sharp  Athenian  law 
Cannot  pursue  us.  If  thou  lovest  me  then. 

Steal  forth  thy  father’s  house  to-morrow  night; 
And  in  the  wood,  a  league  without  the  town. 
Where  I  did  meet  thee  once  with  Helena 
To  do  observance  to  a  morn  of  May, 

There  will  I  stay  for  thee. 

Her,  My  good  Ly  s  ander ! 

I  swear  to  thee,  by  Cupid’s  strongest  bow. 

By  his  best  arrow  with  the  golden  head,  70 
By  the  simplicity  of  Venus’  doves. 

By  that  which  knitteth  souls  and  prospers  loves. 
And  by  that  fire  which  burn’d  the  Carthage 
queen, 

When  the  false  Troyan  under  sail  was  seen. 

By  all  the  vows  that  ever  men  have  broke. 

In  number  more  than  ever  women  spoke. 

In  that  same  place  thou  hast  appointed  me. 
To-morrow  truly  will  I  meet  with  thee. 

Lys.  Keep  promise,  love.  Look,  here  comes 
Helena. 

Enter  Helena. 

Her.  God  speed  fair  Helena!  whither  away.^ 

Hel.  Call  you  me  fair?  that  fair  again  unsay. 
Demetrius  loves  your  fair:  O  happy  fair! 

Your  eyes  are  lode-stars;  and  your  tongue’s 
sweet  air 

More  tuneable  than  lark  to  shepherd’s  ear. 

When  wheat  is  green,  when  hawthorn  buds  ap¬ 
pear. 

Sickness  is  catching:  O,  were  favour  so. 

Yours  would  I  catch,  fair  Hermia,  ere  I  go; 

My  ear  should  catch  your  voice,  my  eye  your 
eye. 

My  tongue  should  catch  your  tongue’s  sweet  me¬ 
lody. 

Were  the  world  mine,  Demetrius  being  bated. 
The  rest  I ’Id  give  to  be  to  you  translated. 

O,  teach  me  how  you  look,  and  with  what  art 
You  sway  the  motion  of  Demetrius’  heart. 

Her.  I  frown  upon  him,  yet  he  loves  me  still. 

Hel.  O  that  your  frowns  would  teach  my 
smiles  such  skill! 


Her.  I  give  him  curses,  yet  he  gives  me  love. 

Hel.  O  that  my  prayers  could  such  affection 
move! 

Her.  The  more  I  hate,  the  more  he  follows  me. 
Hel.  The  more  I  love,  the  more  he  hateth  me. 
Her.  His  folly,  Helena,  is  no  fault  of  mine. 

Hel.  None,  but  your  beauty:  would  that  fault 
were  mine!  201 

Her.  Take  comfort:  he  no  more  shall  see  my 
face; 

Lysander  and  myself  will  fly  this  place. 

Before  the  time  I  did  Lysander  see. 

Seem’d  Athens  as  a  paradise  to  me: 

O,  then,  what  graces  in  my  love  do  dwell. 

That  he  hath  turn’d  a  heaven  unto  a  hell! 

Lys.  Helen,  to  you  our  minds  we  will  unfold: 
To-morrow  night,  when  Phoebe  doth  behold 
Her  silver  visage  in  the  watery  glass,  210 

Decking  with  liquid  pearl  the  bladed  grass, 

A  time  that  lovers’  flights  doth  still  conceal. 
Through  Athens’  gates  have  we  devised  to  steal. 
Her.  And  in  the  wood,  where  often  you  and  I 
Upon  faint  primrose-beds  were  wont  to  lie. 
Emptying  our  bosoms  of  their  counsel  sweet. 
There  my  Lysander  and  myself  shall  meet; 

And  thence  from  Athens  turn  away  our  eyes. 

To  seek  new  friends  and  stranger  companies. 
Farewell,  sweet  playfellow:  pray  thou  for  us; 
And  good  luck  grant  thee  thy  Demetrius !  221 

Keep  word,  Lysander:  we  must  starve  our  sight 
From  lovers’  food  till  morrow  deep  midnight. 
Lys.  I  will,  my  Hermia.  [Exit  Hermia. 

Helena,  adieu: 

As  you  on  him,  Demetrius  dote  on  you!  [Exit. 
Hel.  How  happy  some  o’er  other  some  can  be! 
Through  Athens  I  am  thought  as  fair  as  she. 

But  what  of  that?  Demetrius  thinks  not  so; 

He  will  not  know  what  all  but  he  do  know: 

And  as  he  errs,  doting  on  Hermia’s  eyes,  2^0 
So  I,  admiring  of  his  qualities: 

Things  base  and  vile,  holding  no  quantity. 

Love  can  transpose  to  form  and  dignity: 

Love  looks  not  with  the  eyes,  but  with  the  mind; 
And  therefore  is  wing’d  Cupid  painted  blind: 

Nor  hath  Love’s  mind  of  any  judgement  taste; 
Wings  and  no  eyes  figure  unheedy  haste: 

And  therefore  is  Love  said  to  be  a  child. 

Because  in  choice  he  is  so  oft  beguiled. 

As  waggish  boys  in  game  themselves  for¬ 
swear,  24,0 

So  the  boy  Love  is  perjured  every  where: 

For  ere  Demetrius  look’d  on  Hermia’s  eyne. 

He  hail’d  down  oaths  that  he  was  only  mine; 

And  when  this  hail  some  heat  from  Hermia  felt. 
So  he  dissolved,  and  showers  of  oaths  did  melt. 

I  will  go  tell  him  of  fair  Hermia’s  flight: 


SCENE  I 


355 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


Then  to  the  wood  will  he  to-morrow  night 
I  Pursue  her;  and  for  this  intelligence 
I  If  I  have  thanks,  it  is  a  dear  expense: 

But  herein  mean  I  to  enrich  my  pain,  250 

To  have  his  sight  thither  and  back  agaih.  [Exit. 

^  Scene  ii.  Athens:  Quince  s  huose. 

Enter  quince,  snug,  bottom,  flute,  snout,  and 

I  STARVELING. 

Quin.  Is  all  our  company  here? 

Bot.  You  were  best  to  call  them  generally, 
man  by  man,  according  to  the  scrip. 

I  Quin.  Here  is  the  scroll  of  every  man  s  name, 

I  which  is  thought  fit,  through  all  Athens,  to  play 
I  in  our  interlude  before  the  Duke  and  the  Duchess, 
on  his  wedding-day  at  night. 

!  Bot.  First,  good  Peter  Quince,  say  what  the 
play  treats  on,  then  read  the  names  of  the  actors, 
and  so  grow  to  a  point. 

Quin.  Marry,  our  play  is  The  most  lamentable 
comedy^  and  most  cruel  death  of  Pyramus  and 
Thisby. 

Bot.  A  very  good  piece  of  work,  I  assure  you, 
and  a  merry.  Now,  good  Peter  Quince,  call 
forth  your  actors  by  the  scroll.  Masters,  spread 
yourselv^es. 

Quin.  Answer  as  I  call  you.  Nick  Bottom,  the 
weaver. 

Bot.  Ready.  Name  what  part  I  am  for,  and  pro¬ 
ceed.  21 

Quin.  You,  Nick  Bottom,  are  set  down  for 
Pyramus. 

Bot.  What  is  Pyramus?  a  lover,  or  a  tyrant? 

Quin.  A  lover,  that  kills  himself  most  gallant 
for  love. 

Bot.  That  will  ask  some  tears  in  the  true  per¬ 
forming  of  it:  if  I  do  it,  let  the  audience  look  to 
their  eyes;  I  will  move  storms,  I  will  condole  in 
some  measure.  To  the  rest:  yet  my  chief  humour 
is  for  a  tyrant:  I  could  play  Ercles  rarely,  or  a 
part  to  tear  a  cat  in,  to  make  all  split. 

“The  raging  rocks 
And  shivering  shocks 
Shall  break  the  locks 
Of  prison  gates; 

And  Phibbus’  car 
Shall  shine  from  far 
And  make  and  mar 

The  foolish  F'ates.”  40 

This  was  lofty!  Now  name  the  rest  of  the 
players.  This  is  Ercles’  vein,  a  tyrant’s  vein;  a 
lover  is  more  condoling. 

Quin.  Francis  Flute,  the  bellows-mender. 

Flu.  Here,  -'eter  Quince. 

Qiiin.  Flute,  you  must  take  Thisby  on  you. 

Flu.  What  is  Thisby?  a  wandering  knight? 


Quin.  It  is  the  lady  that  Pyramus  must  love. 

Flu.  Nay,  faith,  let  not  me  play  a  woman;  I 
have  a  beard  coming.  yo 

Quin.  That’s  all  one:  you  shall  play  it  in  a 
mask,  and  you  may  speak  as  small  as  you  will. 

Bot.  An  I  may  hide  my  face,  let  me  play 
Thisby  too.  I’ll  speak  in  a  monstrous  little  voice, 
“Thisne,  Thisne”;  “Ah  Pyramus,  my  lover 
dear!  thy  Thisby  dear,  and  lady  dear!” 

Quin.  No,  no;  you  must  play  Pyramus:  and, 
Flute,  you  Thisby. 

Bot.  Well,  proceed. 

Quin.  Robin  Starveling,  the  tailor.  60 

Star.  Here,  Peter  Quince. 

Quin.  Robin  Starveling,  you  must  play  Thisby’s 
mother.  Tom  Snout,  the  tinker. 

Snout.  Here,  Peter  Quince. 

Quin.  You,  Pyramus’  father:  myself,  Thisby’s 
father.  Snug,  the  joiner;  you,  the  lion’s  part: 
and,  I  hope,  here  is  a  play  fitted. 

Snug.  Have  you  the  lion’s  part  written?  pray 
you,  if  it  be,  give  it  me,  for  I  am  slow  of  study. 

Quin.  You  may  do  it  extempore,  for  it  is  noth¬ 
ing  but  roaring.  7/ 

Bot.  Let  me  play  the  lion  too:  I  will  roar,  that 
I  will  do  any  man’s  heart  good  to  hear  me; 
I  will  roar,  that  I  will  make  the  Duke  say,  “Let 
him  roar  again,  let  him  roar  again.” 

Quin.  An  you  should  do  it  too  terribly,  you 
would  fright  the  Duchess  and  the  ladies,  that 
they  would  shriek;  and  that  were  enough  to  hang 
us  all. 

All.  That  would  hang  us,  every  mother’s  son. 

Bot.  I  grant  you,  friends,  if  that  you  should 
fright  the  ladies  out  of  their  wits,  they  would 
have  no  more  discretion  but  to  hang  us:  but  I 
will  aggravate  my  voice  so  that  I  will  roar  you 
as  gently  as  any  sucking  dove;  I  will  roar  you 
an  ’twere  any  nightingale. 

Quin.  You  can  play  no  part  but  Pyramus;  for 
Pyramus  is  a  sweet-faced  man;  a  proper  man,  as 
one  shall  see  in  a  summer’s  day;  a  most  lovely 
gentleman-like  man:  therefore  you  must  needs 
play  Pyramus.  pi 

Bot.  Well,  I  will  undertake  it.  What  beard  were 
I  best  to  play  it  in? 

Quin.  Why,  what  you  will. 

Bot.  I  will  discharge  it  in  either  your  straw- 
colour  beard,  your  orange-tawny  beard,  your 
purple-in-grain  beard,  or  your  French-crown- 
colour  beard,  your  perfect  yellow. 

Quin.  Some  of  your  French  crowns  have  no  hair 
at  all,  and  then  you  will  play  barefaced.  But, 
masters,  here  are  your  parts:  and  I  am  to  en¬ 
treat  you,  request  you  and  desire  you,  to  con 
them  by  to-morrow  night;  and  meet  me  in  the 


ACT  11 


356  A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


palace  wood,  a  mile  without  the  town,  by  moon¬ 
light;  there  will  we  rehearse,  for  if  we  meet  in 
the  city,  we  shall  be  dogged  with  company,  and 
our  devices  known.  In  the  meantime  I  will  draw 
a  bill  of  properties,  such  as  our  play  wants.  I 
pray  you,  fail  me  not.  10^ 

Bot.  We  will  meet;  and  there  we  may  rehearse 
most  obscenely  and  courageously.  Take  pains; 
be  perfect:  adieu. 

Quin.  At  the  Duke’s  oak  we  meet. 

Bot.  Enough;  hold  or  cut  bow-strings. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  II 


Scene  i.  A  wood  near  Athens 


Enter,  from  opposite  sides,  a  fairy,  and  puck. 
Puck.  How  now,  spirit!  whither  wander  you.^ 
Fai.  Ov^er  hill,  over  dale. 

Thorough  bush,  thorough  brier, 

Over  park,  over  pale, 

Thorough  flood,  thorough  fire, 

I  do  wander  every  where. 

Swifter  then  the  moon’s  sphere; 

And  I  serve  the  fairy  Queen, 

To  dew  her  orbs  upon  the  green. 

The  cowslips  tali  her  pensioners  be:  10 

In  their  gold  coats  spots  you  see; 

Those  be  rubies,  fairy  favours. 

In  those  freckles  live  their  savours: 

I  must  go  seek  some  dewdrops  here 
And  hang  a  pearl  in  every  cowslip’s  ear. 
Farewell,  thou  lob  of  spirits;  I’ll  be  gone: 
Our  Queen  and  all  her  elves  come  here 
anon. 

Puck.  The  King  doth  keep  his  revels  here  to¬ 
night: 

Take  heed  the  Queen  come  not  within  his  sight; 
For  Oberon  is  passing  fell  and  wrath,  20 

Because  that  she  as  her  attendant  hath 
A  lovely  boy,  stolen  from  an  Indian  king; 

She  never  had  so  sweet  a  changeling; 

And  jealous  Oberon  would  have  the  child 
Knight  of  his  train,  to  trace  the  forests  wild; 

But  she  perforce  withholds  the  loved  boy. 

Crowns  him  with  flowers  and  makes  him  all  her 
joy: 

And  now  they  never  meet  in  grove  or  green, 

By  fountain  clear,  or  spangled  starlight  sheen. 

But  they  do  square,  that  all  their  elves  for  fear  50 
Creep  into  acorn-cups  and  hide  them  there. 

Fai.  Either  I  mistake  your  shape  and  making 
quite. 

Or  else  you  are  that  shrewd  and  knavish  sprite 
Call’d  Robin  Goodfellow:  are  not  you  he 
That  frights  the  maidens  of  the  villagery ; 

Skim  milk,  and  sometimes  labour  in  the  quern 


And  bootless  make  the  breathless  housewife 
churn; 

And  sometime  make  the  drink  to  bear  no  barm; 
Mislead  night- wanderers,  laughing  at  their 
harm? 

Those  that  Hobgoblin  call  you  and  sweet  Puck, 
You  do  their  work,  and  they  shall  have  good 
luck : 

Are  not  you  he? 

Puck.  Thou  speak’ St  aright; 

I  am  that  merry  wanderer  of  the  night. 

I  jest  to  Oberon  and  make  him  smile 
When  I  a  fat  and  bean-fed  horse  beguile, 
Neighing  in  likeness  of  a  filly  foal: 

And  sometime  lurk  I  in  a  gossip’s  bowl. 

In  very  likeness  of  a  roasted  crab. 

And  when  she  drinks,  against  her  lips  I  bob 
And  on  her  wither’d  dewlap  pour  the  ale.  50 
The  wisest  aunt,  telling  the  saddest  tale, 
Sometime  for  three-foot  stool  mistaketh  me; 
Then  slip  I  from  her  bum,  down  topples  she, 

And  “tailor”  cries,  and  falls  into  a  cough; 

And  then  the  whole  quire  hold  their  hips  and 
laugh. 

And  waxen  in  their  mirth  and  neeze  and  swear 
A  merrier  hour  was  never  wasted  there. 

But,  room,  fairy!  here  comes  Oberon. 

Fai.  And  here  my  mistress.  Would  that  he  were 
gone! 

Enter,  from  one  side,  oberon,  with  his  train; 
from  the  other,  titania,  with  hers. 

Obe.  Ill  met  by  moonlight,  proud  Titania.  60 
Tita.  What,  jealous  Oberon!  Fairies,  skip 
hence: 

I  have  forsworn  his  bed  and  company. 

Obe.  Tarry,  rash  wanton:  am  not  I  thy  lord? 
Tita.  Then  I  must  be  thy  lady:  but  I  know 
When  thou  hast  stolen  away  from  fairy  land, 

And  in  the  shape  of  Cor  in  sat  all  day. 

Playing  on  pipes  of  corn  and  versing  love 
To  amorous  Phillida.  Why  art  thou  here, 

Come  from  the  farthest  steppe  of  India? 

But  that,  forsooth,  the  bouncing  Amazon,  70 
Your  buskin’d  mistress  and  your  warrior  love, 

To  Theseus  must  be  wedded,  and  you  come 
To  give  their  bed  joy  and  prosperity. 

Obe.  How  canst  thou  thus  for  shame,  Titania, 
Glance  at  my  credit  with  Hippolyta, 

Knowing  I  know  thy  love  to  Theseus? 

Didst  thou  not  lead  him  through  the  glimmering 
night 

From  Perigenia,  whom  he  ravished? 

And  make  him  with  fair  ^gle  break  his  faith. 
With  Ariadne  and  Antiopa?  So 

Tita.  These  are  the  forgeries  of  jealousy: 


SCENE  I 


357 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


And  never,  since  the  middle  summer’s  spring, 
Met  we  on  hill,  in  dale,  forest  or  mead. 

By  paved  fountain  or  by  rushy  brook. 

Or  in  the  beached  margent  of  the  sea. 

To  dance  our  ringlets  to  the  whistling  wind. 

But  with  thy  brawls  thou  hast  disturb’d  our 
sport. 

Therefore  the  winds,  piping  to  us  in  vain. 

As  in  revenge,  have  suck’d  up  from  the  sea 
Contagious  fogs;  which  falling  in  the  land 
Have  every  pelting  river  made  so  proud 
That  they  have  overborne  their  continents: 

The  ox  hath  therefore  stretch’d  his  yoke  in  vain. 
The  ploughman  lost  his  sweat,  and  the  green  corn 
Hath  rotted  ere  his  youth  attain’d  a  beard; 

The  fold  stands  empty  in  the  drowned  field. 

And  crows  are  fatted  with  the  murrion  flock; 

The  nine  men’s  morris  is  fill’d  up  with  mud. 

And  the  quaint  mazes  in  the  wanton  green 
For  lack  of  tread  are  undistinguishable:  loo 

The  human  mortals  want  their  winter  here; 

No  night  is  now  with  hymn  or  carol  blest: 
Therefore  the  moon,  the  governess  of  floods, 

Pale  in  her  anger,  washes  all  the  air. 

That  rheumatic  diseases  do  abound: 

And  thorough  this  distemperature  we  see 
The  seasons  alter:  hoary-headed  frosts 
Fall  in  the  fresh  lap  of  the  crimson  rose, 

And  on  old  Hiems’  thin  and  icy  crown 
An  odorous  chaplet  of  sweet  summer  buds  no 
Is,  as  in  mockery,  set:  the  spring,  the  summer. 
The  childing  autumn,  angry  winter,  change 
Their  wonted  liveries,  and  the  mazed  world, 

By  their  increase,  now  knows  not  which  is 
which: 

And  this  same  progeny  of  evils  comes 
From  our  debate,  from  our  dissension; 

We  are  their  parents  and  original. 

Obe.  Do  you  amend  it  then;  it  lies  in  you: 

Why  should  Titania  cross  her  Oberon.^ 

I  do  but  beg  a  little  changeling  boy  120 

To  be  my  henchman. 

Tita.  Set  your  heart  at  rest : 

The  fairy  land  buys  not  the  child  of  me. 

His  mother  was  a  votaress  of  my  order: 

And,  in  the  spiced  Indian  air,  by  night. 

Full  often  hath  she  gossip’d  by  my  side. 

And  sat  with  me  on  Neptune’s  yellow  sands. 
Marking  the  embarked  traders  on  the  flood. 
When  we  have  laugh’d  to  see  the  sails  conceive 
And  gro\^ big-bellied  with  the  wanton  wind; 
Which  she,  with  pretty  and  with  swimming  gait 
Following — her  womb  then  rich  with  my  young 
squire —  75/ 

Would  imitate,  and  sail  upon  the  land. 

To  fetch  me  trifles,  and  return  again, 


As  from  a  voyage,  rich  with  merchandise. 

But  she,  being  mortal,  of  that  boy  did  die; 

And  for  her  sake  do  I  rear  up  her  boy. 

And  for  her  sake  I  will  not  part  with  him. 

Obe.  How  long  within  this  wood  intend  you 
stay? 

Tita.  Perchance  till  after  Theseus’  wedding- 
day. 

If  you  will  patiently  dance  in  our  round  1^0 

And  see  our  moonlight  revels,  go  with  us; 

If  not,  shun  me,  and  I  will  spare  your  haunts. 

Obe.  Give  me  that  boy,  and  I  will  go  with  thee. 
Tita.  Not  for  thy  fairy  kingdom.  Fairies,  away! 
We  shall  chide  downright,  if  I  longer  stay. 

[Exit  TITANIA  'with  her  train. 
Obe.  Well,  go  thy  way:  thou  shalt  not  from 
this  grove 

Till  I  torment  thee  for  this  injury. 

My  gentle  Puck,  come  hither.  Thou  remem- 
b’rest 

Since  once  I  sat  upon  a  promontory. 

And  heard  a  mermaid  on  a  dolphin’s  back  750 
Uttering  such  dulcet  and  harmonious  breath 
That  the  rude  sea  grew  civil  at  her  song 
And  certain  stars  shot  madly  from  their  spheres, 
To  hear  the  sea-maid’s  music. 

Puck.  I  remember. 

Obe.  That  very  time  I  saw,  but  thou  couldst  not, 
Flying  between  the  cold  moon  and  the  earth, 
Cupid  all  arm’d:  a  certain  aim  he  took 
At  a  fair  vestal  throned  by  the  west. 

And  loosed  his  love-shaft  smartly  from  his  bow. 
As  it  should  pierce  a  hundred  thousand  hearts; 7 (5o 
But  I  might  see  young  Cupid’s  fiery  shaft 
Quench’d  in  the  chaste  beams  of  the  watery 
moon. 

And  the  imperial  votaress  passed  on. 

In  maiden  meditation,  fancy-free. 

Yet  mark’d  I  where  the  bolt  of  Cupid  fell: 

It  fell  upon  a  little  western  flower. 

Before  milk-white,  now  purple  with  love’s 
wound. 

And  maidens  call  it  love-in-idleness. 

Fetch  me  that  flower;  the  herb  I  shew’d  thee 
once: 

The  juice  of  it  on  sleeping  eye-lids  laid  770 

Will  make  or  man  or  woman  madly  dote 
Upon  the  next  live  creature  that  it  sees. 

Fetch  me  this  herb;  and  be  thou  here  again 
Ere  the  leviathan  can  swim  a  league. 

Puck.  I’ll  put  a  girdle  round  about  the  earth 
In  forty  minutes.  [Exit. 

Obe.  Having  once  this  juice. 

I’ll  watch  Titania  when  she  is  asleep. 

And  drop  the  liquor  of  it  in  her  eyes. 

The  next  thing  then  she  waking  looks  upon. 


ACT  II 


NIGHT’S  DREAM 


358  A  MIDSUMMER- 

Be  it  on  lion,  bear,  or  wolf,  or  bull,  iSo 

On  meddling  monkey,  or  on  busy  ape. 

She  shall  pursue  it  with  the  soul  of  love: 

And  ere  I  take  this  charm  from  off  her  sight, 

As  I  can  take  it  with  another  herb. 

I’ll  make  her  render  up  her  page  to  me. 

But  who  comes  here?  I  am  invisible; 

And  I  will  overhear  their  conference. 

Enter  demetrius,  Helena  following  him. 

Dem.  I  love  thee  not,  therefore  pursue  me  not. 
Where  is  Lysander  and  fair  Hermia? 

The  one  I’ll  slay,  the  other  slayeth  me.  190 

Thou  told’ St  me  they  were  stolen  unto  this  wood; 
And  here  am  I,  and  wood  within  this  wood. 
Because  I  cannot  meet  my  Hermia. 

Hence,  get  thee  gone,  and  follow  me  no  more. 

Hel.  You  draw  me,  you  hard-hearted  adamant; 
But  yet  you  draw  not  iron,  for  my  heart 
Is  true  as  steel:  leave  you  your  power  to  draw. 
And  I  shall  have  no  power  to  follow  you. 

Dem.  Do  I  entice  you?  do  I  speak  you  fair? 

Or,  rather,  do  I  not  in  plainest  truth  200 

Tell  you,  I  do  not,  nor  I  cannot  love  you? 

Hel.  And  even  for  that  do  I  love  you  the  more. 

I  am  your  spaniel;  and,  Demetrius, 

The  more  you  beat  me,  I  will  fawn  on  you: 

Use  me  but  as  your  spaniel,  spurn  me,  strike  me, 
Neglect  me,  lose  me;  only  give  me  leave, 
Unworthy  as  I  am,  to  follow  you. 

What  worser  place  can  I  beg  in  your  love — 

And  yet  a  place  of  high  respect  with  me — 

Than  to  be  used  as  you  use  your  dog?  210 

Dem.  Tempt  not  too  much  the  hatred  of  my 
spirit. 

For  I  am  sick  when  I  do  look  on  thee. 

Hel.  And  I  am  sick  when  I  look  not  on  you. 

Dem.  You  do  impeach  your  modesty  too  much. 
To  leave  the  city  and  commit  yourself 
Into  the  hands  of  one  that  loves  you  not; 

To  trust  the  opportunity  of  night 
And  the  ill  counsel  of  a  desert  place 
With  the  rich  worth  of  your  virginity. 

Hel.  Your  virtue  is  my  privilege:  for  that  220 
It  is  not  night  when  I  do  see  your  face. 

Therefore  I  think  I  am  not  in  the  night; 

Nor  doth  this  wood  lack  worlds  of  company. 

For  you  in  my  respect  are  all  the  world: 

Then  how  can  it  be  said  I  am  alone. 

When  all  the  world  is  here  to  look  on  me? 

Dem.  I’ll  run  from  thee  and  hide  me  in  the 
brakes. 

And  leave  thee  to  the  mercy  of  wild  beasts. 

Hel.  The  wildest  hath  not  such  a  heart  as  you. 
Run  when  you  will,  the  story  shall  be  changed: 
Apollo  flies,  and  Daphne  holds  the  chase;  25/ 


The  dove  pursues  the  griffin;  the  mild  hind 
Makes  speed  to  catch  the  tiger;  bootless  speed. 
When  cowardice  pursues  and  valour  flies. 

Dem.  I  will  not  stay  thy  questions;  let  me  go: 
Or,  if  thou  follow  me,  do  not  believe 
But  I  shall  do  thee  mischief  in  the  wood. 

Hel.  Ay,  in  the  temple,  in  the  town,  the  field, 
You  do  me  mischief.  Fie,  Demetrius! 

Your  wrongs  do  set  a  scandal  on  my  sex :  240 

We  cannot  fight  for  love,  as  men  may  do; 

We  should  be  woo’d  and  were  not  made  to  woo. 

[Exit  DEMETRIUS. 

I’ll  follow  thee  and  make  a  heaven  of  hell. 

To  die  upon  the  hand  I  love  so  well.  [Exit. 

Obe.  Fare  thee  well,  nymph:  ere  he  do  leave 
this  grove. 

Thou  shalt  fly  him  and  he  shall  seek  thy  love. 
Re-enter  puck. 

Hast  thou  the  flower  there?  Welcome,  wanderer. 
Puck.  Ay,  there  it  is. 

Obe.  I  pray  thee,  give  it  me. 

I  know  a  bank  where  the  wild  thyme  blows. 
Where  oxlips  and  the  nodding  violet  grows,  2  50 
Quite  over-canopied  with  luscious  woodbine. 
With  sweet  musk-roses  and  with  eglantine: 
There  sleeps  Titania  sometime  of  the  night. 
Lull’d  in  these  flowers  with  dances  and  delight; 
And  there  the  snake  throws  her  enamell’d  skin, 
Weed  wide  enough  to  wrap  a  fairy  in: 

And  with  the  juice  of  this  I’ll  streak  her  eyes. 

And  make  her  full  of  hateful  fantasies. 

Take  thou  some  of  it,  and  seek  through  this 
grove: 

A  sweet  Athenian  lady  is  in  love  2  60 

With  a  disdainful  youth:  anoint  his  eyes; 

But  do  it  when  the  next  thing  he  espies 
May  be  the  lady;  thou  shalt  know  the  man 
By  the  Athenian  garments  he  hath  on. 

Effect  it  with  some  care  that  he  may  prove 
More  fond  on  her  than  she  upon  her  love: 

And  look  thou  meet  me  ere  the  first  cock  crow. 
Puck.  Fear  not,  my  lord,  your  servant  shall  do 
so.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Another  part  of  the  wood 
Enter  titania,  with  her  train. 

Tita.  Come,  now  a  roundel  and  a  fairy  song; 
Then,  for  the  third  part  of  a  minute,  hence; 

Some  to  kill  cankers  in  the  musk-rose  buds. 

Some  war  with  rere-mice  for  their  leathern 
wings. 

To  make  my  small  elves  coats,  and  some  keep 
back 

The  clamorous  owl  that  nightly  hoots  and  won¬ 
ders 


SCENE  II 


A  MIDSUMMER. NIGHT’S  DREAM 


At  our  quaint  spirits.  Sing  me  now  asleep; 

Then  to  your  offices  and  let  me  rest. 

The  FAIRIES  sing. 

ist  Fai.  You  spotted  snakes  with  double  tongue, 
Thorny  hedgehogs,  be  not  seen;  lo 
Newts  and  blind-worms,  do  no  wrong, 
Q)me  not  near  our  fairy  queen. 

Chorus.  Philomel,  with  melody 

Sing  in  our  sweet  lullaby; 

Lulla,  lulla,  lullaby,  lulla,  lulla,  lullaby: 
Never  harm. 

Nor  spell  nor  charm. 

Come  our  lovely  lady  nigh; 

So,  good  night,  with  lullaby. 

ist  Fai.  Weaving  spiders,  come  not  here;  20 
Hence,  you  long-legg’d  spinners, 
hence! 

Beetles  black,  approach  not  near; 

Worm  nor  snail,  do  no  offence. 

Chorus,  Philomel,  with  melody,  &c. 

2nd  Fai,  Hence,  away!  now  all  is  well: 

One  aloof  stand  sentinel. 

[Exeunt  fairies,  titania  sleeps* 

Enter  oberon,  and  squeezes  the  flower  on 
titania’ s  eyelids. 

Obe.  What  thou  seest  when  thou  dost  wake, 

Do  it  for  thy  true-love  take, 

Lx)ve  and  languish  for  his  sake: 

Be  it  ounce,  or  cat,  or  bear,  50 

Pard,  or  boar  with  bristled  hair. 

In  thy  eye  that  shall  appear 
When  thou  wakest,  it  is  thy  dear: 

Wake  when  some  vile  thing  is  near.  [Exit. 

Enter  lysander  and  hermia. 

Lys.  Fair  love,  you  faint  with  wandering  in  the 
wood; 

And  to  speak  troth,  I  have  forgot  our  way: 
We’ll  rest  us,  Hermia,  if  you  think  it  good. 

And  tarry  for  the  comfort  of  the  day. 

Her.  Be  it  so,  Lysander:  find  you  out  a  bed; 

For  I  upon  this  bank  will  rest  my  head.  40 

Lys.  One  turf  shall  serve  as  pillow  for  us  both; 
One  heart,  one  bed,  two  bosoms,  and  one  troth. 
Her.  Nay,  good  Lysander;  for  my  sake,  my 
dear. 

Lie  further  off  yet,  do  not  lie  so  near. 

Lys.  O,  take  the  sense,  sweet,  of  my  innocence! 
Love  takes  the  meaning  in  love’s  conference. 

I  mean,  that  my  heart  unto  yours  is  knit 
So  that  but  one  heart  we  can  make  of  it; 

Two  bosoms  interchained  with  an  oath; 


359 

So  then  two  bosoms  and  a  single  troth.  50 

Then  by  your  side  no  bed-room  me  deny; 

For  lying  so,  Hermia,  I  do  not  lie. 

Her.  Lysander  riddles  very  prettily: 

Now  much  beshrew  my  manners  and  my  pride. 

If  Hermia  meant  to  say  Lysander  lied. 

But,  gentle  friend,  for  love  and  courtesy 
Lie  further  off;  in  human  modesty. 

Such  separation  as  may  well  be  said 
Becomes  a  virtuous  bachelor  and  a  maid, 

So  far  be  distant;  and,  good  night,  sweet  friend: 
Thy  love  ne’er  alter  till  thy  sweet  life  end!  61 
Lys,  Amen,  amen,  to  that  fair  prayer,  say  I ; 

And  then  end  life  when  I  end  loyalty! 

Here  is  my  bed:  sleep  give  thee  all  his  rest! 

Her.  With  half  that  wish  the  wisher’s  eyes  be 
press’d!  [They  sleep. 

Enter  puck. 

Puck.  Through  the  forest  have  I  gone. 

But  Athenian  found  I  none. 

On  vfiose  eyes  I  might  approve 
This  flower’s  force  in  stirring  love. 

Night  and  silence. — Who  is  here.^  70 

Weeds  of  Athens  he  doth  wear: 

This  is  he,  my  master  said. 

Despised  the  Athenian  maid; 

And  here  the  maiden,  sleeping  sound. 

On  the  dank  and  dirty  ground. 

Pretty  soul!  she  durst  not  lie 
Near  this  lack-love,  this  kill-courtesy. 
Churl,  upon  thy  eyes  I  throw 
All  the  power  this  charm  doth  owe. 

When  thou  wakest,  let  love  forbid  80 
Sleep  his  seat  on  thy  eyelid: 

So  awake  when  I  am  gone; 

For  I  must  now  to  Oberon.  [Exit. 

Enter  demetrius  and  Helena,  running. 

Hel.  Stay,  though  thou  kill  me,  sweet  Deme¬ 
trius. 

Dem.  I  charge  thee,  hence,  and  do  not  haunt  me 
thus. 

Hel.  O,  wilt  thou  darkling  leave  me?  do  not  so. 
Dem.  Stay,  on  thy  peril:  I  alone  will  go. 

[Exit. 

Hel.  O,  I  am  out  of  breath  in  this  fond  chase! 
The  more  my  prayer,  the  lesser  is  my  grace. 
Happy  is  Hermia,  wheresoe’er  she  lies;  5»o 

For  she  hath  blessed  and  attractive  eyes. 

How  came  her  eyes  so  bright?  Not  with  salt 
tears: 

If  so,  my  eyes  are  oftener  wash’d  than  hers. 

No,  no,  I  am  as  ugly  as  a  bear; 

For  beasts  that  meet  me  run  away  for  fear: 
Therefore  no  marvel  though  Demetrius 


ACT  111 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


360 

Do,  as  a  monster,  fly  my  presence  thus. 

What  wicked  and  dissembling  glass  of  mine 
Made  me  compare  with  Hermia’s  sphery  eyne? 
But  who  is  here?  Lysander!  on  the  ground!  100 
Dead?  or  asleep?  I  see  no  blood,  no  wound. 
Lysander,  if  you  live,  good  sir,  awake. 

Lys,  [Awaking]  And  run  through  fire  I  will 
for  thy  sweet  sake. 

Transparent  Helena!  Nature  shows  art. 

That  through  thy  bosom  makes  me  see  thy  heart. 
Where  is  Demetrius?  O,  how  fit  a  word 
Is  that  vile  name  to  perish  on  my  sword! 

Hel,  Do  not  say  so,  Lysander;  say  not  so. 

What  though  he  love  your  Hermia?  Lord,  what 
though? 

Yet  Hermia  still  loves  you:  then  be  content,  no 
Lys.  Content  with  Hermia!  No;  I  do  repent 
The  tedious  minutes  I  with  her  have  spent. 

Not  Hermia  but  Helena  I  love: 

Who  will  not  change  a  raven  for  a  dove? 

The  will  of  man  is  by  his  reason  sway’d; 

And  reason  says  you  are  the  worthier  maid. 
Things  growing  are  not  ripe  until  their  season: 

So  I,  being  young,  till  now  ripe  not  to  reason; 

And  touching  now  the  point  of  human  skill. 
Reason  becomes  the  marshal  to  my  will  120 
And  leads  me  to  your  eyes,  where  I  o’erlook 
Love’s  stories  written  in  love’s  richest  book. 

Hel.  Wherefore  was  I  to  this  keen  mockery 
born? 

When  at  your  hands  did  I  deserve  this  scorn? 

Is’t  not  enough,  is’t  not  enough,  young  man, 

That  I  did  never,  no,  nor  never  can. 

Deserve  a  sweet  look  from  Demetrius’  eye. 

But  you  must  flout  my  insufficiency? 

Good  troth,  you  do  me  wrong,  good  sooth,  you 
do. 

In  such  disdainful  manner  me  to  woo.  75 o 

But  fare  you  well :  perforce  I  must  confess 
I  thought  you  lord  of  more  true  gentleness. 

O,  that  a  lady,  of  one  man  refused. 

Should  of  another  therefore  be  abused !  [Exit. 
Lys.  She  sees  not  Hermia.  Hermia,  sleep  thou 
there: 

And  never  mayst  thou  come  Lysander  near! 

For  as  a  surfeit  of  the  sweetest  things 
The  deepest  loathing  to  the  stomach  brings. 

Or  as  the  heresies  that  men  do  leave 

Are  hated  most  of  those  they  did  deceive,  /40 

So  thou,  my  surfeit  and  my  heresy. 

Of  all  be  hated,  but  the  most  of  me! 

And,  all  my  powers,  address  your  love  and  might 
To  honour  Helen  and  to  be  her  knight!  [Exit. 
Her.  [Awaking]  Help  me,  Lysander,  help  me! 
do  thy  best 

To  pluck  this  crawling  serpent  from  my  breast! 


Ay  me,  for  pity!  what  a  dream  was  here! 
Lysander,  look  how  I  do  quake  with  fear: 
Methought  a  serpent  eat  my  heart  away. 

And  you  sat  smiling  at  his  cruel  prey.  /50 

Lysander!  what,  removed?  Lysander!  lord! 
What,  out  of  hearing?  gone?  no  sound,  no  word? 
Alack,  where  are  you?  speak,  an  if  you  hear; 
Speak,  of  all  loves!  I  swoon  almost  with  fear. 

No?  then  I  well  perceive  you  are  not  nigh: 

Either  death  or  you  I’ll  find  immediately.  [Exit. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  The  wood:  titania  lying  asleep 
Enter  snug,  bottom,  flute,  snout, 

and  STARVELING. 

Bot.  Are  we  all  met? 

Quin.  Pat,  pat;  and  here’s  a  marvellous  conveni¬ 
ent  place  for  our  rehearsal.  This  green  plot  shall 
be  our  stage,  this  hawthorn-brake  our  tiring- 
house;  and  we  will  do  it  in  action  as  we  will  do  it 
before  the  Duke. 

Bot.  Peter  Quince, — 

Quin.  What  sayest  thou,  bully  Bottom? 

Bot.  There  are  things  in  this  comedy  of  Pyra- 
mus  and  Thisby  that  will  never  please.  First, 
Pyramus  must  draw  a  sword  to  kill  himself, 
which  the  ladies  cannot  abide.  How  answer  you 
that? 

Snout.  By’r  lakin,  a  parlous  fear. 

Star.  I  believe  we  must  leave  the  killing  out, 
when  all  is  done. 

Bot.  Not  a  whit:  I  have  a  device  to  make  all 
well.  Write  me  a  prologue;  and  let  the  prologue 
seem  to  say,  we  will  do  no  harm  with  our  swords 
and  that  Pyramus  is  not  killed  indeed;  and,  for 
the  more  better  assurance,  tell  them  that  I  Pyra¬ 
mus  am  not  Pyramus,  but  Bottom  the  weaver: 
this  will  put  them  out  of  fear. 

Quin.  Well,  we  will  have  such  a  prologue;  and 
it  shall  be  written  in  eight  and  six. 

Bot.  No,  make  it  two  more;  let  it  be  written  in 
eight  and  eight. 

Snout.  Will  not  the  ladies  be  afeard  of  the  lion? 

Star.  I  fear  it,  I  promise  you.  29 

Bot.  Masters,  you  ought  to  consider  with  your¬ 
selves:  to  bring  in — God  shield  us! — a  lion  among 
ladies,  is  a  most  dreadful  thing;  for  there  is  not  a 
more  fearful  wild-fowl  than  your  lion  living;  and 
we  ought  to  look  to ’t. 

Snout.  Therefore  another  prologue  must  tell  he 
is  not  a  lion. 

Bot.  Nay,  you  must  name  his  name,  and  half  his 
face  must  be  seen  through  the  lion’s  neck;  and  he 
himself  must  speak  through,  saying  thus,  or  to 
the  same  defect,  “Ladies,”  or  “Fair  ladies,  I 


SCENE  I 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


would  wish  you,”  or  “I  would  request  you,”  or 
“I  would  entreat  you,  not  to  fear,  not  to  trem¬ 
ble:  my  life  for  yours.  If  you  think  I  come  hither 
as  a  lion,  it  were  a  pity  of  my  life:  no,  I  am  no 
such  thing;  I  am  a  man  as  other  men  are”;  and 
there  indeed  let  him  name  his  name,  and  tell 
them  plainly  he  is  Snug  the  joiner. 

Quin.  Well,  it  shall  be  so.  But  there  is  two  hard 
things;  that  is,  to  bring  the  moonlight  into  a 
chamber;  for,  you  know,  Pyramus  and  Thisby 
meet  by  moonlight.  5/ 

Snout.  Doth  the  moon  shine  that  night  we  play 
our  play? 

Bot.  A  calendar,  a  calendar!  look  in  the  almanac; 
find  out  moonshine,  find  out  moonshine. 

Quin.  Yes,  it  doth  shine  that  night. 

Bot.  Why,  then  may  you  leave  a  casement  of  the 
great  chamber  window,  where  we  play,  open, 
and  the  moon  may  shine  in  at  the  casement. 

Quin.  Ay;  or  else  one  must  come  in  with  a  bush 
I  of  thorns  and  a  lanthorn,  and  say  he  comes  to 
disfigure,  or  to  present,  the  person  of  Moonshine. 
Then,  there  is  another  thing:  we  must  have  a 
wall  in  the  great  chamber;  for  Pyramus  and 
Thisby,  says  the  story,  did  talk  through  the 
chink  of  a  wall. 

Snout.  You  can  never  bring  in  a  wall.  What  say 
you.  Bottom? 

Bot.  Some  man  or  other  must  present  Wall:  and 
let  him  have  some  plaster,  or  some  loam,  or  some 
rough-cast  about  him,  to  signify  wall;  and  let 
him  hold  his  fingers  thus,  and  through  that  cranny 
shall  Pyramus  and  Thisby  whisper. 

Quin.  If  that  may  be,  then  all  is  well.  Come,  sit 
down,  every  mother’s  son,  and  rehearse  your 
parts.  Pyramus,  you  begin:  when  you  have  spo¬ 
ken  your  speech,  enter  into  that  brake:  and  so 
every  one  according  to  his  cue. 

Enter  puck  behind. 

Puck.  What  hempen  home-spuns  have  we  swag¬ 
gering  here. 

So  near  the  cradle  of  the  fairy  queen?  80 

What,  a  play  toward!  I’ll  be  an  auditor; 

An  actor  too  perhaps,  if  I  see  cause. 

Quin.  Speak,  Pyramus.  Thisby,  stand  forth. 

Bot.  “Thisby,  the  flowers  of  odious  savours 
sweet” — 

Quin.  Odours,  odours. 

Bot.  — “odours  savours  sweet: 

So  hatirthy  breath,  my  dearest  Thisby 
dear. 

But  hark,  a  voice!  stay  thou  but  here  awhile. 

And  by  and  by  I  will  to  thee  appear.”  [Exit. 

Puck.  A  stranger  Pyramus  than  e’er  played 
here.  [Exit, 


361 

Flu.  Must  I  speak  now? 

Quin.  Ay,  marry,  must  you;  for  you  must  under¬ 
stand  he  goes  but  to  see  a  noise  that  he  heard, 
and  is  to  come  again. 

Flu.  “Most  radiant  Pyramus,  most  lily-white  of 
hue. 

Of  colour  like  the  red  rose  on  triumphant 
brier. 

Most  brisky  juvenal  and  eke  most  lovely  Jew, 

As  true  as  truest  horse  that  yet  would  never 
tire. 

I’ll  meet  thee,  Pyramus,  at  Ninny’s  tomb.”  ^9 
Quin.  “Ninus’  tomb,”  man:  why,  you  must  not 
speak  that  yet;  that  you  answer  to  Pyramus:  you 
speak  all  your  part  at  once,  cues  and  all.  Pyramus 
enter:  your  cue  is  past;  it  is,  “never  tire.” 

Flu.  O, — “As  true  as  truest  horse,  that  yet 
would  never  tire.” 

Re-enter  puck,  and  bottom  with  an  ass's  head. 

Bot.  “If  I  were  fair,  Thisby,  I  were  only  thine.” 
Quin.  O  monstrous!  O  strange!  we  are  haunted. 
Pray,  masters!  fly,  masters!  Help! 

[Exeunt  qjjiNCEy  snug,  flute,  snout,  and 

STARVELING. 

Puck.  I’ll  follow  you.  I’ll  lead  you  about  a 
round. 

Through  bog,  through  bush,  through  brake, 
through  brier:  iio 

Sometime  a  horse  I’ll  be,  sometime  a  hound, 

A  hog,  a  headless  bear,  sometime  a  fire; 

And  neigh,  and  bark,  and  grunt,  and  roar,  and 
burn, 

Like  horse,  hound,  hog,  bear,  fire,  at  every  turn. 

[Exit. 

Bot.  Why  do  they  run  away?  this  is  a  knavery 
of  them  to  make  me  afeard. 

Re-enter  snout. 

Snout.  O  Bottom,  thou  art  changed!  what  do  I 
see  on  thee? 

Bot.  What  do  you  see?  you  see  an  ass-head  of 
your  own,  do  you?  [Exit  snout.  120 

Re-enter  quince. 

Quin.  Bless  thee.  Bottom!  bless  thee!  thou  art 
translated.  [Exit. 

Bot.  I  see  their  knavery:  this  is  to  make  an  ass 
of  me;  to  fright  me,  if  they  could.  But  I  will  not 
stir  from  this  place,  do  what  they  can:  I  will  walk 
up  and  down  here,  and  I  will  sing,  that  they  shall 
hear  I  am  not  afraid. 

“The  ousel  cock  so  black  of  hue. 

With  orange-tawny  bill, 

The  throstle  with  his  note  so  true,  75 0 
The  wren  with  little  quill” — 


ACT  III 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


362 

Tita.  [Awaking^  What  angel  wakes  me  from 
my  flowery  bed? 

Bot. 

“The  finch,  the  sparrow  and  the  lark, 

The  plain-song  cuckoo  gray. 

Whose  note  full  many  a  man  doth  mark. 
And  dares  not  answer  nay” — 
for,  indeed,  who  would  set  his  wit  to  so  foolish  a 
bird?  who  would  give  a  bird  the  lie,  though  he 
cry  “cuckoo”  never  so? 

Tita.  I  pray  thee,  gentle  mortal,  sing  again: 

Mine  ear  is  much  enamour’d  of  thy  note;  14.1 
So  is  mine  eye  enthralled  to  thy  shape; 

And  thy  fair  virtue’s  force  perforce  doth  move 
me 

On  the  first  view  to  say,  to  swear,  I  love  thee. 

Bot.  Methinks,  mistress,  you  should  have  little 
reason  for  that:  and  yet,  to  say  the  truth,  reason 
and  love  keep  little  company  together  now-a- 
days;  the  more  the  pity  that  some  honest  neigh¬ 
bours  will  not  make  them  friends.  Nay,  I  can 
gleek  upon  occasion.  /50 

Tita.  Thou  art  as  wise  as  thou  art  beautiful. 

Bot.  Not  so,  neither:  but  if  I  had  wit  enough  to 
get  out  of  this  wood,  I  have  enough  to  serve  mine 
own  turn. 

Tita.  Out  of  this  wood  do  not  desire  to  go: 

Thou  shalt  remain  here,  whether  thou  wilt  or  no. 
I  am  a  spirit  of  no  common  rate: 

The  summer  still  doth  tend  upon  my  state; 

And  I  do  love  thee:  therefore,  go  with  me; 

I’ll  give  thee  fairies  to  attend  on  thee,  160 

And  they  shall  fetch  thee  jewels  from  the  deep. 
And  sing  while  thou  on  pressed  flowers  dost 
sleep: 

And  I  will  purge  thy  mortal  grossness  so 
That  thou  shalt  like  an  airy  spirit  go. 
Peaseblossom!  Cobweb!  Moth!  and  Mustard- 
seed! 

Enter  peaseblossom,  cobweb,  moth,  and 

MUSTARDSEED. 

Peas.  Ready. 

Cob.  And  I. 

Moth.  And  I. 

Mus.  And  I. 

All.  Where  shall  we  go? 

Tita.  Be  kind  and  courteous  to  this  gentleman; 
Hop  in  his  walks  and  gambol  in  his  eyes; 

Feed  him  with  apricocks  and  dewberries. 

With  purple  grapes,  green  figs,  and  mulberries; 
The  honey-bags  steal  from  the  humble-bees,  iji 
And  for  night-tapers  crop  their  waxen  thighs 
And  light  them  at  the  fiery  glow-worm’s  eyes, 

To  have  my  love  to  bed  and  to  arise; 

And  pluck  the  wings  from  painted  butterfliei 


To  fan  the  moonbeams  from  his  sleeping  eyes: 
Nod  to  him,  elves,  and  do  him  courtesies. 

Peas.  Hail,  mortal! 

Cob.  Hail! 

AIoth.HsLiW  180 

Mus.  Hail! 

Bot.  I  cry  your  worships  mercy,  heartily:  I  be¬ 
seech  your  worship’s  name. 

Cob.  Cobweb. 

Bot.  I  shall  desire  you  of  more  acquaintance, 
good  Master  Cobweb:  if  I  cut  my  finger,  I  shall 
make  bold  with  you.  Your  name,  honest  gentle¬ 
man? 

Peas.  Peaseblossom. 

Bot.  I  pray  you,  commend  me  to  Mistress 
Squash,  your  mother,  and  to  Master  Peascod, 
your  father.  Good  Master  Peaseblossom,  I  shall 
desire  you  of  more  acquaintance  too.  Your  name, 
I  beseech  you,  sir? 

Mus.  Mustardseed. 

Bot.  Good  Master  Mustardseed,  I  know  your 
patience  well:  that  same  cowardly,  giant-like  ox- 
beef  hath  devoured  many  a  gentleman  of  your 
house:  I  promise  you  your  kindred  hath  made 
my  eyes  water  ere  now.  I  desire  your  more  ac¬ 
quaintance,  good  Master  Mustardseed.  201 
Tita.  Come,  wait  upon  him;  lead  him  to  my 
bower. 

The  moon  methinks  looks  with  a  watery 
eye; 

And  when  she  weeps,  weeps  every  little  flower, 
Lamenting  some  enforced  chastity. 

Tie  up  my  love’s  tongue,  bring  him  silently. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Another  part  of  the  wood 
Enter  oberon. 

Obe.  I  wonder  if  Titania  be  awaked; 

Then,  what  it  was  that  next  came  in  her  eye, 
Which  she  must  dote  on  in  extremity. 

Enter  puck. 

Here  comes  my  messenger. 

How  now,  mad  spirit! 

What  night-rule  now  about  this  haunted  grove? 

Puck.  My  mistress  with  a  monster  is  in  love. 
Near  to  her  close  and  consecrated  bower. 

While  she  was  in  her  dull  and  sleeping  hour, 

A  crew  of  patches,  rude  mechanicals. 

That  work  for  bread  upon  Athenian  stalls,  10 
Were  met  together  to  rehearse  a  play 
Intended  for  great  Theseus’  nuptial-day. 

The  shallowest  thick-skin  of  that  barren  sort, 
Who  Pyramus  presented,  in  their  sport 
Forsook  his  scene  and  enter’d  in  a  brake: 

When  I  did  him  at  this  advantage  take. 


SCENE  II 


A  MIDSUMMER- 

An  ass’s  nole  I  fixed  on  his  head: 

Anon  his  Thisbe  must  be  answered, 

And  forth  my  mimic  comes.  When  they  him  spy, 
As  wild  geese  that  the  creeping  fowler  eye,  20 
Or  russet-pated  choughs,  many  in  sort. 

Rising  and  cawing  at  the  gun’s  report, 

Sever  themselves  and  madly  sweep  the  sky, 

So,  at  his  sight,  away  his  fellows  fly; 

And,  at  our  stamp,  here  o’er  and  o’er  one  falls; 

He  murder  cries  and  help  from  Athens  calls . 

Their  sense  thus  weak,  lost  with  their  fears  thus 
strong. 

Made  senseless  things  begin  to  do  them  wrong; 

For  briers  and  thorns  at  their  apparel  snatch; 

Some  sleeves,  some  hats,  from  yielders  all  things 
catch.  50 

I  led  them  on  in  this  distracted  fear. 

And”  left  sweet  Pyramus  translated  there: 

When  in  that  moment,  so  it  came  to  pass, 

Titania  waked  and  straightway  loved  an  ass. 

Obe.  This  falls  out  better  than  I  could  devise. 

But  hast  thou  yet  latch’d  the  Athenian’s  eyes 
With  the  love-juice,  as  I  did  bid  thee  do? 

Puck.  I  took  him  sleeping — that  is  finish’d  too — 
And  the  Athenian  woman  by  his  side; 

That,  when  he  waked,  of  force  she  must  be  40 

eyed. 

Ejiter  HERMiA  and  demetrius. 

Obe.  Stand  close:  this  is  the  same  Athenian. 

Puck.  This  is  the  woman,  but  nor  this  the  man. 
Dem.  O,  why  rebuke  you  him  that  loves  you  so? 
Lay  breath  so  bitter  on  your  bitter  foe. 

Her.  Now  I  but  chide;  but  I  should  use  thee 
worse. 

For  thou,  I  fear,  hast  given  me  cause  to  curse. 

If  thou  hast  slain  Lysander  in  his  sleep. 

Being  o’er  shoes  in  blood,  plunge  in  the  deep, 

And  kill  me  too. 

The  sun  was  not  so  true  unto  the  day  50 

As  he  to  me:  would  he  have  stolen  away 
From  sleeping  Hermia?  I’ll  believe  as  soon 
This  whole  earth  may  be  bored  and  that  the 
moon 

May  through  the  centre  creep  and  so  displease 
Her  brother’s  noontide  with  the  Antipodes. 

It  cannot  be  but  thou  hast  murder’d  him; 

So  should  a  murderer  look,  so  dead,  so  grim. 

Dem.  So  should  the  murder’d  look,  and  so 
should  I, 

Pierced  thjough  the  heart  with  your  stern  cruelty: 
Yet  you,  the  murderer,  look  as  bright,  as  clear. 

As  yonder  Venus  in  her  glimmering  sphere.  61 
Her.  What’s  this  to  my  Lysander?  where  is  he? 
Ah,  good  Demetrius,  wilt  thou  give  him  me? 

Dem.  I  had  rather  give  his  carcass  to  my  hounds. 


NIGHT’S  DREAM  363 

Her.  Out,  dog!  out,  cur!  thou  drivest  me  past 
the  bounds 

Of  maiden’s  patience.  Hast  thou  slain  him,  then? 
Henceforth  be  never  number’d  among  men! 

O,  once  tell  true,  tell  true,  even  for  my  sake! 
Durst  thou  have  look’d  upon  him  being  awake. 
And  hast  thou  kill’d  him  sleeping?  O  brave 

touch!  70 

Could  not  a  worm,  an  adder,  do  so  much? 

An  adder  did  it;  for  with  doubler  tongue 
Than  thine,  thou  serpent,  never  adder  stung. 

Dem.  You  spend  your  passion  on  a  misprised 
mood: 

I  am  not  guilty  of  Lysander’s  blood; 

Nor  is  he  dead,  for  aught  that  I  can  tell. 

Her.  I  pray  thee,  tell  me  than  that  he  is  well. 
De7n.  An  if  I  could,  what  should  I  get  therefore? 
Her.  A  privilege  never  to  see  me  more. 

And  from  thy  hated  presence  part  I  so:  So 

See  me  no  more,  whether  he  be  dead  or  no.  [Exit. 
Dem.  There  is  no  following  her  in  this  fierce 
vein: 

Here  therefore  for  a  while  I  will  remain. 

So  sorrow’s  heaviness  doth  heavier  grow 
For  debt  that  bankrupt  sleep  doth  sorrow  owe; 
Which  now  in  some  slight  measure  it  will  pay, 

If  for  his  tender  here  I  make  some  stay. 

Lies  donjon  and  sleeps. 

Obe.  What  hast  thou  done?  thou  hast  mistaken 
quite 

And  laid  the  love-juice  on  some  true-love’s  sight: 
Of  thy  misprision  must  perforce  ensue  5)0 

Some  true  love  turn’d  and  not  a  false  turn’d  true. 
Puck.  Then  fate  o’er-rules,  that,  one  man  hold¬ 
ing  troth, 

A  million  fail,  confounding  oath  on  oath. 

Obe.  About  the  wood  go  swifter  than  the  wind, 
And  Helena  of  Athens  look  thou  find: 

All  fancy-sick  she  is  and  pale  of  cheer. 

With  sighs  of  love,  that  costs  the  fresh  blood 
dear: 

By  some  illusion  see  thou  bring  her  here: 

I’ll  charm  his  eyes  against  she  do  appear. 

Puck.  I  go,  I  go;  look  how  I  go,  100 

Swifter  than  arrow  from  the  Tartar’s  bow.  [Exit. 
Obe.  Flower  of  this  purple  dye. 

Hit  with  Cupid’s  archery, 

Sink  in  apple  of  his  eye. 

When  his  love  he  doth  espy. 

Let  her  shine  as  gloriously 
As  the  Venus  of  the  sky. 

When  thou  wakest,  if  she  be  by, 

Beg  of  her  for  remedy. 

Re-enter  puck. 

Puck.  Captain  of  our  fairy  band, 


uo 


364 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


Helena  is  here  at  hand; 

And  the  youth,  mistook  by  me, 

Pleading  for  a  lover’s  fee. 

Shall  we  their  fond  pageant  see.^ 

Lord,  what  fools  these  mortals  be! 

Obe.  Stand  aside:  the  noise  they  make 
Will  cause  Demetrius  to  awake. 

Fuck.  Then  will  two  at  once  woo  one; 

That  must  needs  be  sport  alone; 

And  those  things  do  best  please  me  120 
That  befall  preposterously. 

Enter  lysander  and  Helena. 

Lys.  Why  should  you  think  that  I  should  woo  in 
scorn? 

Scorn  and  derision  never  come  in  tears; 

Look,  when  I  vow,  I  weep;  and  vows  so  born. 

In  their  nativity  all  truth  appears. 

How  can  these  things  in  me  seem  scorn  to  you, 
Bearing  the  badge  of  faith,  to  prove  them  true? 
Hel.  You  do  advance  your  cunning  more  and 
more. 

When  truth  kills  truth,  O  devilish-holy  fray! 
These  vows  are  Hermia’s:  will  you  give  her 
o’er? 

Weigh  oath  with  oath,  and  you  will  nothing 
weigh: 

Your  vows  to  her  and  me,  put  in  two  scales. 

Will  even  weigh,  and  both  as  light  as  tales. 

Lys.  I  had  no  judgement  when  to  her  I  swore. 
Hel.  Nor  none,  in  my  mind,  now  you  give  her 
o’er. 

Lys.  Demetrius  loves  her,  and  he  loves  not  you. 
Dein.  [Aijoakin^  O  Helen,  goddess,  nymph, 
perfect,  divine! 

To  what,  my  love,  shall  I  compare  thine  eyne? 
Crystal  is  muddy.  O,  how  ripe  in  show 
Thy  lips,  those  kissing  cherries,  tempting  grow! 
That  pure  congealed  white,  high  Taurus’  snow, 
Fann’d  with  the  eastern  wind,  turns  to  a  crow 
When  thou  hold’st  up  thy  hand:  O,  let  me  kiss 
This  princess  of  pure  white,  this  seal  of  bliss! 

Hel.  O  spite!  O  hell!  I  see  you  all  are  bent 
To  set  against  me  for  your  merriment: 

If  you  were  civil  and  knew  courtesy. 

You  would  not  do  me  thus  much  injury. 

Can  you  not  hate  me,  as  I  know  you  do. 

But  you  must  join  in  souls  to  mock  me  too?  /50 
If  you  were  men,  as  men  you  are  in  show. 

You  would  not  use  a  gentle  lady  so; 

To  vow,  and  swear,  and  superpraise  my  parts. 
When  I  am  sure  you  hate  me  with  your  hearts. 
You  both  are  rivals,  and  love  Hermia; 

And  now  both  rivals,  to  mock  Helena: 

A  trim  exploit,  a  manly  enterprise. 

To  conjure  tears  up  in  a  poor  maid’s  eyes 


With  your  derision!  none  of  noble  sort 
Would  so  offend  a  virgin  and  extort  160 

A  poor  soul’s  patience,  all  to  make  you  sport. 

Lys.  You  are  unkind,  Demetrius;  be  not  so; 

For  you  love  Hermia;  this  you  know  I  know: 
And  here,  with  all  good  will,  with  all  my  heart. 

In  Hermia’s  love  I  yield  you  up  my  part; 

And  yours  of  Helena  to  me  bequeath. 

Whom  I  do  love  and  will  do  till  my  death. 

Hel.  Never  did  mockers  waste  more  idle  breath. 
Deitt.  Lysander,  keep  thy  Hermia;  I  will  none: 
If  e’er  I  loved  her,  all  that  love  is  gone.  ijo 

My  heart  to  her  but  as  guest-wise  sojourn’d. 

And  now  to  Helen  is  it  home  return’d. 

There  to  remain. 

Lys.  Helen,  it  is  not  so. 

De?n.  Disparage  not  the  faith  thou  dost  not 
know. 

Lest,  to  thy  peril,  thou  aby  it  dear. 

Look,  where  thy  love  comes;  yonder  is  thy  dear. 

Re-enter  hermia. 

Her.  Dark  night,  that  from  the  eye  his  function 
takes. 

The  ear  more  quick  of  apprehension  makes; 
Wherein  it  doth  impair  the  seeing  sense. 

It  pays  the  hearing  double  recompense.  180 
Thou  art  not  by  mine  eye,  Lysander,  found; 

Mine  ear,  I  thank  it,  brought  me  to  thy  sound. 

But  why  unkindly  didst  thou  leave  me  so? 

Lys.  Why  should  he  stay,  whom  love  doth  press 
to  go? 

Her.  What  love  could  press  Lysander  from  my 
side? 

Lys.  Lysander’s  love,  that  would  not  let  him 
bide. 

Fair  Helena,  who  more  engilds  the  night 
Than  all  yon  fiery  oes  and  eyes  of  light. 

Why  seek’st  thou  me?  could  not  this  make  thee 
know. 

The  hate  I  bear  thee  made  me  leave  thee  so?  ipo 
Her.  You  speak  not  as  you  think:  it  cannot  be. 
Hel.  Lo,  she  is  one  of  this  confederacy! 

Now  I  perceive  they  have  conjoin’d  all  three 
To  fashion  this  false  sport,  in  spite  of  me. 
Injurious  Hermia!  most  ungrateful  maid! 

Have  you  conspired,  have  you  with  these  con¬ 
trived 

To  bait  me  with  this  foul  derision? 

Is  all  the  counsel  that  we  two  have  shared. 

The  sisters’  vows,  the  hours  that  we  have  spent. 
When  we  have  chid  the  hasty-footed  time  200 
For  parting  us — O,  is  it  all  forgot? 

All  school-days’  friendship,  childhood  innocence? 
We,  Hermia,  like  two  artificial  gods. 

Have  with  our  needles  created  both  one  flower, 


SCENE  ir 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM  365 


Both  on  one  sampler,  sitting  on  one  cushion, 

Both  warbling  of  one  song,  both  in  one  key. 

As  if  our  hands,  our  sides,  voices  and  minds. 

Had  been  incorporate.  So  we  grew  together, 

Like  to  a  double  cherry,  seeming  parted. 

But  yet  an  union  in  partition ;  210 

Two  lovely  berries  moulded  on  one  stem; 

So,  with  two  seeming  bodies,  but  one  heart; 

Two  of  the  first,  like  coats  in  heraldry. 

Due  but  to  one  and  crowned  with  one  crest. 

And  will  you  rend  our  ancient  love  asunder. 

To  join  with  men  in  scorning  your  poor  friend? 

It  is  not  friendly,  ’tis  not  maidenly: 

Our  sex,  as  well  as  I,  may  chide  you  for  it, 
Though  I  alone  do  feel  the  injury. 

Her.  I  am  amazed  at  your  passionate  words. 

I  scorn  you  not:  it  seems  that  you  scorn  me.  221 
Hel.  Have  you  not  set  Lysander,  as  in  scorn. 

To  follow  me  and  praise  my  eyes  and  face? 

And  made  your  other  love,  Demetrius, 

Who  even  but  now  did  spurn  me  with  his  foot. 
To  call  me  goddess,  nymph,  divine  and  rare. 
Precious,  celestial?  Wherefore  speaks  he  this 
To  her  he  hates?  and  wherefore  doth  Lysander 
Deny  your  love,  so  rich  within  his  soul. 

And  tender  me,  forsooth,  affection,  250 

But  by  your  setting  on,  by  your  consent? 

What  though  I  be  not  so  in  grace  as  you. 

So  hung  upon  with  love,  so  fortunate. 

But  miserable  most,  to  love  unloved? 

This  you  should  pity  rather  than  despise. 

Her.  I  understand  not  what  you  mean  by  this. 
Hel.  Ay,  do,  persever,  counterfeit  sad  looks. 
Make  mouths  upon  me  when  I  turn  my  back; 
Wink  each  at  other;  hold  the  sweet  jest  up: 

This  sport,  well  carried,  shall  be  chronicled.  240 
If  you  have  any  pity,  grace,  or  manners. 

You  would  not  make  me  such  an  argument. 

But  fare  ye  well :  ’tis  partly  my  own  fault; 

Which  death  or  absence  soon  shall  remedy. 

Lys.  Stay,  gentle  Helena;  hear  my  excuse: 

My  love,  my  life,  my  soul,  fair  Helena! 

Hel.  O  excellent! 

Her.  Sweet,  do  not  scorn  her  so. 

Dem.  If  she  cannot  entreat,  I  can  compel. 

Lys.  Thou  canst  compel  no  more  than  she  en¬ 
treat: 

Thy  threats  have  no  more  strength  than  her  weak 
prayers.  250 

Helen,  I  love  thee,  by  my  life,  I  do: 

I  swear  by  that  which  I  will  lose  for  thee. 

To  prove  him  false  that  says  I  love  thee  not. 

Dem.  I  say  I  love  thee  more  than  he  can  do. 

Lys.  If  thou  say  so,  withdraw,  and  prove  it  too. 
Dem.  Quick,  come! 

Her,  Lysander,  whereto  tends  all  this? 


Lys.  Away,  you  Ethiope! 

Dem.  No,  no;  he’ll  bit 

Seem  to  break  loose;  take  on  as  you  would 
follow. 

But  yet  come  not:  you  are  a  tame  man,  go! 

Lys.  Hang  off,  thou  cat,  thou  burr!  vile  thing, 
let  loose,  260 

Or  I  will  shake  thee  from  me  like  a  serpent! 

Her.  Why  are  you  grown  so  rude?  what  change 
is  this? 

Sweet  love — 

Lys.  Thy  love!  out,  tawny  Tartar,  out! 

Out,  loathed  medicine!  hated  potion,  hence! 

Her.  Do  you  not  jest? 

Hel.  Yes,  sooth;  and  so  do  you. 

Lys.  Demetrius,  I  will  keep  my  word  with  thee. 
Dem.  I  would  I  had  your  bond,  for  I  perceive 
A  weak  bond  holds  you:  I’ll  not  trust  your  word. 
Lys.  What,  should  I  hurt  her,  strike  her,  kill 
her  dead? 

Although  I  hate  her.  I’ll  not  harm  her  so.  270 
Her.  What,  can  you  do  me  greater  harm  than 
hate? 

Hate  me!  wherefore?  O  me!  what  news,  my 
love! 

Am  not  I  Hermia?  are  not  you  Lysander? 

I  am  as  fair  now  as  I  was  ere  while. 

Since  night  you  loved  me;  yet  since  night  you 
left  me: 

Why,  then  you  left  me — O,  the  gods  forbid! — 

In  earnest,  shall  I  say? 

Lys.  Ay,  by  my  life; 

And  never  did  desire  to  see  thee  more. 

Therefore  be  out  of  hope,  of  question,  of  doubt; 
Be  certain,  nothing  truer;  ’tis  no  jest  280 

That  I  do  hate  thee  and  love  Helena. 

Her.  O  me!  you  juggler!  you  canker-blossom! 
You  thief  of  love!  what,  have  you  come  by  night 
And  stolen  my  love’s  heart  from  him? 

Hel.  Fine,  i’ faith! 

Have  you  no  modesty,  no  maiden  shame. 

No  touch  of  bashfulness?  What,  will  you  tear 
Impatient  answers  from  my  gentle  tongue? 

Fie,  fie!  you  counterfeit,  you  puppet,  you! 

Her.  “Puppet”?  why  so?  ay,  that  way  goes  the 
game. 

Now  I  perceive  that  she  hath  made  compare  2^0 
Between  our  statures;  she  hath  urged  her  height; 
And  with  her  personage,  her  tall  personage. 

Her  height,  forsooth,  she  hath  prevail’d  with 
him. 

And  are  you  grown  so  high  in  his  esteem. 

Because  I  am  so  dwarfish  and  so  low? 

How  low  am  I,  thou  painted  maypole?  speak; 

How  low  am  I?  I  am  not  yet  so  low 

But  that  my  nails  can  reach  unto  thine  eyes. 


ACT  III 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


366 

Hel.  I  pray  you,  though  you  mock  me,  gentle¬ 
men. 

Let  her  not  hurt  me:  I  was  never  curst;  500 
i  have  no  gift  at  all  in  shrewishness; 

I  am  a  right  maid  for  my  cowardice: 

Let  her  not  strike  me.  You  perhaps  may  think, 
Because  she  is  something  lower  than  myself. 

That  I  can  match  her. 

Her,  “Lower”!  hark,  again. 

Hel.  Good  Hermia,  do  not  be  so  bitter  with  me. 
I  evermore  did  love  you,  Hermia, 

Did  ever  keep  your  counsels,  never  wrong’d  you; 
Save  that,  in  love  unto  Demetrius, 

I  told  him  of  your  stealth  unto  this  wood.  5/0 
He  follow’d  you;  for  love  I  follow’d  him; 

But  he  hath  chid  me  hence  and  threaten’d  me 
To  strike  me,  spurn  me,  nay,  to  kill  me  too: 

And  now,  so  you  will  let  me  quiet  go. 

To  Athens  will  I  bear  my  folly  back 
And  follow  you  no  further:  let  me  go: 

You  see  how  simple  and  how  fond  I  am. 

Her.  Why,  get  you  gone:  who  is’t  that  hinders 
you? 

Hel.  A  foolish  heart,  that  I  leave  here  behind. 
Her.  What,  with  Lysander? 

Hel.  With  Demetrius.  520 

Lys.  Be  not  afraid;  she  shall  not  harm  thee, 
Helena. 

Dem.  No,  sir,  she  shall  not,  though  you  take  her 
part. 

Hel.  O,  when  she’s  angry,  she  is  keen  and 
shrewd! 

She  was  a  vixen  when  she  went  to  school; 

And  though  she  be  but  little,  she  is  fierce. 

Her,  “Little”  again!  nothing  but  “low”  and 
“little”! 

Why  will  you  suffer  her  to  flout  me  thus? 

Let  me  come  to  her. 

Lys.  Get  you  gone,  you  dwarf; 

You  minimus,  of  hindering  knot-grass  made; 

You  bead,  you  acorn. 

Dem.  You  are  too  officious  550 

In  her  behalf  that  scorns  your  services. 

Let  her  alone:  speak  not  of  Helena; 

Take  not  her  part;  for,  if  thou  dost  intend 
Never  so  little  show  of  love  to  her. 

Thou  shalt  aby  it. 

Lys.  Now  she  holds  me  not; 

Now  follow,  if  thou  darest,  to  try  whose  right. 

Of  thine  or  mine,  is  most  in  Helena. 

Dem.  Follow!  nay.  I’ll  go  with  thee,  cheek 
by  jole.  [Exeunt  lysander  and  demetrius. 
Her.  You,  mistress,  all  this  coil  is  ’long  of  you: 
Nay,  go  not  back. 

Hel.  I  will  not  trust  you,  I,  540 

Nor  longer  stay  in  your  curst  company. 


Your  hands  than  mine  are  quicker  for  a  fray. 

My  legs  are  longer  though,  to  run  away.  [Exit. 
Her.  I  am  amazed,  and  know  not  what  to  say. 

[Exit. 

Obe.  This  is  thy  negligence:  still  thou  mistak- 
est. 

Or  else  committ’st  thy  knaveries  wilfully. 

Puck.  Believe  me,  king  of  shadows,  I  mistook. 
Did  not  you  tell  me  I  should  know  the  man 
By  the  Athenian  garments  he  had  on? 

And  so  far  blameless  proves  my  enterprise,  550 
That  I  have  ’nointed  an  Athenian’s  eyes; 

And  so  far  am  I  glad  it  so  did  sort 
As  this  their  jangling  I  esteem  a  sport. 

Obe.  Thou  see’st  these  lovers  seek  a  place  to 
fight; 

Hie  therefore,  Robin,  overcast  the  night; 

The  starry  welkin  cover  thou  anon 
With  drooping  fog  as  black  as  Acheron, 

And  lead  these  testy  rivals  so  astray 
As  one  come  not  within  another’s  way. 

Like  to  Lysander  sometime  frame  thy  tongue, 
Then  stir  Demetrius  up  with  bitter  wrong;  ^  61 
And  sometime  rail  thou  like  Demetrius; 

And  from  each  other  look  thou  lead  them  thus. 
Till  o’er  their  brows  death-counterfeiting  sleep 
With  leaden  legs  and  batty  wings  doth  creep: 
Then  crush  this  herb  into  Lysander’s  eye; 

Whose  liquor  hath  this  virtuous  property. 

To  take  from  thence  all  error  with  his  might. 

And  make  his  eyeballs  roll  with  wonted  sight. 
When  they  next  wake,  all  this  derision  570 
Shall  seem  a  dream  and  fruitless  vision, 

And  back  to  Athens  shall  the  lovers  wend. 

With  league  whose  date  till  death  shall  never 
end. 

Whiles  I  in  this  affair  do  thee  employ. 

I’ll  to  my  queen  and  beg  her  Indian  boy; 

And  then  I  will  her  charmed  eye  release 
From  monster’s  view,  and  all  things  shall  be 
peace. 

Puck.  My  fairy  lord,  this  must  be  done  with 
haste, 

For  night’s  swift  dragons  cut  the  clouds  full  fast, 
And  yonder  shines  Aurora’s  harbinger;  5  80 
At  whose  approach,  ghosts,  wandering  here  and 
there, 

Troop  home  to  churchyards:  damned  spirits  all, 
That  in  crossways  and  floods  have  burial, 

Already  to  their  wormy  beds  are  gone; 

For  fear  lest  day  should  look  their  shames  upon, 
They  wilfully  themselves  exile  from  light 
And  must  for  aye  consort  with  black-brow’d 
night. 

Obe.  But  we  are  spirits  of  another  sort: 

I  with  the  morning’s  love  have  oft  made  sport. 


SCENE  II 

And,  like  a  forester,  the  groves  may  tread, 

Even  till  the  eastern  gate,  all  fiery-red. 

Opening  on  Neptune  with  fair  blessed  beams. 
Turns  into  yellow  gold  his  salt  green  streams. 
But,  notwithstanding,  haste;  make  no  delay: 

We  may  effect  this  business  yet  ere  day.  [Exit. 
Puck.  Up  and  down,  up  and  down, 

I  will  lead  them  up  and  down: 

I  am  fear’d  in  field  and  town: 

Goblin,  lead  them  up  and  down. 

Here  comes  one.  400 

Re-enter  lysander. 

Lys.  Where  art  thou,  proud  Demetrius?  speak 
thou  now. 

Puck.  Here,  villain;  drawn  and  ready.  Where 
art  thou? 

Lys.  I  will  be  with  thee  straight. 

Puck.  Follow  me,  then, 

To  plainer  ground. 

[Exit  LYSANDER,  US  folltTwing  the  voice. 
Re-enter  demetrius. 

Dem.  Lysander!  speak  again: 

Thou  runaway,  thou  coward,  art  thou  fled? 

Speak!  In  some  bush?  Where  dost  thou  hide  thy 
head? 

Puck.  Thou  coward,  art  thou  bragging  to  the 
stars. 

Telling  the  bushes  that  thou  look’st  for  wars. 

And  wilt  not  come?  Come,  recreant;  come,  thou 
child; 

I’ll  whip  thee  with  a  rod:  he  is  defiled  410 

That  draws  a  sword  on  thee. 

Dent.  Yea,  art  thou  there? 

Puck.  Follow  my  voice:  we’ll  try  no  manhood 
here.  [Exeunt. 

Re-enter  lysander. 

Lys.  He  goes  before  me  and  still  dares  me  on; 
When  I  come  where  he  calls,  then  he  is  gone. 

The  villain  is  much  lighter-heel’d  than  I : 

I  follow’d  fast,  but  faster  he  did  fly; 

That  fallen  am  I  in  dark  uneven  way. 

And  here  will  rest  me.  [Lies  dovon.\  Come,  thou 
gentle  day ! 

For  if  but  once  thou  show  me  thy  grey  light. 

I’ll  find  Demetrius  and  revenge  this  spite.  [Sleeps. 

Re-enter  puck  and  demetrius. 

Puck.  Ho,  ho,  ho!  Coward,  why  comest  thou 
not?  421 

Dem.  Abide,  me,  if  thou  darest;  for  well  I  wot 
Thou  runn’st  before  me,  shifting  every  place. 

And  darest  not  stand,  nor  look  me  in  the  face. 
Where  art  thou  now? 


367 

Puck.  Come  hither:  I  am  here. 

Dem.  Nay,  then,  thou  mock’st  me.  Thou  shalt 
buy  this  dear. 

If  ever  I  thy  face  by  daylight  see: 

Now,  go  thy  way.  Faintness  constraineth  me 
To  measure  out  my  length  on  this  cold  bed. 

By  day’s  approach  look  to  be  visited.  4^0 

Lies  dovon  and  sleeps. 

Re-enter  Helena. 

Hel.  O  weary  night,  O  long  and  tedious  night. 
Abate  thy  hours!  Shine  comforts  from  the  east, 
That  I  may  back  to  Athens  by  daylight. 

From  these  that  my  poor  company  detest: 

And  sleep,  that  sometimes  shuts  up  sorrow’s  eye. 
Steal  me  awhile  from  mine  own  company. 

Lies  donxn  and  sleeps. 

Puck.  Yet  but  three?  Come  one  more; 

Two  of  both  kinds  makes  up  four. 

Here  she  comes,  curst  and  sad: 

Cupid  is  a  knavish  lad,  440 

Thus  to  make  poor  females  mad. 

Re-enter  hermia. 

Her.  Never  so  weary,  never  so  in  woe. 
Bedabbled  with  the  dew  and  torn  with  briers, 
I  can  no  further  crawl,  no  further  go; 

My  legs  can  keep  no  pace  with  rny  desires. 
Here  will  I  rest  me  till  the  break  of  day. 

Heavens  shield  Lysander,  if  they  mean  a  fray! 
Lies  dovm  and  sleeps. 

Puck.  On  the  ground 
Sleep  sound: 

I’ll  apply  450 

To  vour  eye. 

Gentle  lover,  remedy. 

Squeezing  the  juice  on  Lysander  s  eyes. 

When  thou  wakest. 

Thou  takest 
True  delight 
In  the  sight 

Of  thv  former  lady’s  eye: 

And  the  country  proverb  known. 

That  every  man  should  take  his  own, 

In  your  waking  shall  be  shown:  460 

Jack  shall  have  Jill; 

Nought  shall  go  ill; 

The  man  shall  have  his  mare  again,  and  all  shall 
be  well.  [Exit. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  The  same:  lysander,  demetrius,  Hel¬ 
ena,  and  HERMIA  lying  asleep 
Enter  titania  and  bottom;  peaseblossom,  cob¬ 
web,  MOTH,  MUSTARDSEED,  and  Other  Fairies 
attending;  oberon  behind  unseen. 


A  MIDSUMMER. NIGHT’S  DREAM 

^90 


ACT  IV 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


368 

Tita,  Come,  sit  thee  down  upon  this  flowery 
bed, 

While  I  thy  amiable  cheeks  do  coy. 

And  stick  musk-roses  in  thy  sleek  smooth 
head. 

And  kiss  thy  fair  large  ears,  my  gentle 
joy. 

Bot.  Where’s  Peaseblossom? 

Peas.  Ready. 

Bot.  Scratch  my  head,  Peaseblossom.  Where’s 
Mounsieur  Cobweb? 

Cob.  Ready. 

Bot.  Mounsieur  Cobweb,  good  mounsieur,  get 
you  your  weapons  in  your  hand,  and  kill  me  a 
red-hipped  humble-bee  on  the  top  of  a  thistle; 
and,  good  mounsieur,  bring  me  the  honey-bag. 
Do  not  fret  yourself  too  much  in  the  action, 
mounsieur;  and,  good  mounsieur,  have  a  care  the 
honey-bag  break  not;  I  would  be  loath  to  have 
you  overflown  with  a  honey-bag,  signior.  Where’s 
Mounsieur  Mustardseed? 

Allis.  Ready.  19 

Bot.  Give  me  your  neaf,  Mounsieur  Mustard- 
seed.  Pray  you,  leave  your  courtesy,  good  moun¬ 
sieur. 

Aim.  What’s  your  will? 

Bot.  Nothing,  good  mounsieur,  but  to  help 
Cavalerv  Cobweb  to  scratch.  I  must  to  the  bar¬ 
ber’s,  mounsieur;  for  methinks  I  am  marvellous 
hairy  about  the  face;  and  I  am  such  a  tender  ass, 
if  my  hair  do  but  tickle  me,  I  must  scratch. 

Tita.  What,  wilt  thou  hear  some  music,  my 
sweet  love? 

Bot.  I  have  a  reasonable  good  ear  in  music. 

Let’s  have  the  tongs  and  the  bones.  3/ 

Tita.  Or  say,  sweet  love,  what  thou  desirest 
to  eat. 

Bot.  Truly,  a  peck  of  provender:  I  could 
munch  your  good  dry  oats.  Methinks  I  have  a 
great  desire  to  a  bottle  of  hay:  good  hay,  sweet 
hay,  hath  no  fellow. 

Tita.  I  have  a  venturous  fairy  that  shall  seek 
The  squirrel’s  hoard,  and  fetch  thee  new  nuts. 

Bot.  I  had  rather  have  a  handful  or  two  of  dried 
peas.  But,  I  pray  you,  let  none  of  your  people 
stir  me:  I  have  an  exposition  of  sleep  come  upon 
me.  42 

Tita.  Sleep  thou,  and  I  will  wind  thee  in  my 
arms. 

Fairies,  be  gone,  and  be  all  ways  away. 

[Exeunt  fairies. 

So  doth  the  woodbine  the  sweet  honeysuckle 
Gently  entwist;  the  female  ivy  so 
Enrings  the  barky  fingers  of  the  elm. 

O,  how  I  love  thee!  how  I  dote  on  thee! 

They  sleep. 


Enter  Puck 

Obe.  [Advancing  Welcome,  good  Robin. 

See’st  thou  this  sweet  sight? 

Her  dotage  now  I  do  begin  to  pity: 

For,  meeting  her  of  late  behind  the  wood. 

Seeking  sweet  favours  for  this  hateful  fool, 

I  did  upbraid  her  and  fall  out  with  her; 

For  she  his  hairy  temples  then  had  rounded 
With  coronet  of  fresh  and  fragrant  flowers; 

And  that  same  dew,  which  sometime  on  the  buds 
Was  wont  to  swell  like  round  and  orient  pearls. 
Stood  now  within  the  pretty  flowerets’  eyes 
Like  tears  hat  did  their  own  disgrace  bewail. 
When  I  had  at  my  pleasure  taunted  her  60 

And  she  in  mild  terms  begg’d  my  patience, 

I  then  did  ask  her  of  her  changeling  child; 

Which  straight  she  gave  me,  and  her  fairy  sent 
To  bear  him  to  my  bower  in  fairy  land. 

And  now  I  have  the  boy,  I  will  undo 
This  hateful  imperfection  of  her  eyes: 

And,  gentle  Puck,  take  this  transformed  scalp 
From  off  the  head  of  this  Athenian  swain; 

That,  he  awaking  when  the  other  do. 

May  all  to  Athens  back  again  repair  70 

And  think  no  more  of  this  night’s  accidents 
But  as  the  fierce  vexation  of  a  dream. 

But  first  I  will  release  the  fairy  queen.  [Touching 
her  eyes.] 

Be  as  thou  wast  wont  to  be; 

See  as  thou  wast  wont  to  see: 

Dian’s  bud  o’er  Cupid’s  flower 
Hath  such  force  and  blessed  power. 
Now,  my  Titania;  wake  you,  my  sweet  queen. 

Tita.  My  Oberon!  what  visions  have  I  seen! 
Methought  I  was  enamour’d  of  an  ass.  80 

Obe.  There  lies  your  love. 

Tita.  How  came  these  things  to  pass? 

O,  how  mine  eyes  do  loathe  his  visage  now! 

Obe.  Silence  awhile.  Robin,  take  off  this  head. 
Titania,  music  call;  and  strike  more  dead 
Than  common  sleep  of  all  these  five  the  sense. 
Tita.  Music,  ho!  music,  such  as  charmeth  sleep! 
Adusic,  still. 

Puck.  Now,  when  thou  wakest,  with  thine  own 
fool’s  eyes  peep. 

Obe.  Sound,  music!  Come,  my  queen,  take 
hands  with  me,  8^ 

And  rock  the  ground  whereon  these  sleepers  be. 
Now  thou  and  I  are  new  in  amity 
And  will  to-morrow  midnight  solemnly 
Dance  in  Duke  Theseus’  house  triumphantly 
And  bless  it  to  all  fair  prosperity: 

There  shall  the  pairs  of  faithful  lovers  be 
Wedded,  with  Theseus,  all  in  jollity. 

Puck.  Fairy  king,  attend,  and  mark: 


SCENE  I 


A  MIDSUMMER- 

I  do  hear  the  morning  lark. 

Obe.  Then,  my  queen,  in  silence  sad 

Trip  we  after  night’s  shade:  wo 

We  the  globe  can  compass  soon. 

Swifter  than  the  wandering  moon. 

Tita.  Come,  my  lord,  and  in  our  flight 
Tell  me  how  it  came  this  night 
That  1  sleeping  here  was  found 
With  these  mortals  on  the  ground. 

[Exeunt. 

Homs  winded  within. 

Enter  theseus,  hippolyta,  egeus,  and  train. 

The.  Go,  one  of  you,  find  out  the  forester; 

For  now  our  observation  is  perform’d; 

And  since  we  have  the  vaward  of  the  day. 

My  love  shall  hear  the  music  of  my  hounds .  no 

Uncouple  in  the  western  valley;  let  them  go: 
Dispatch,  I  say,  and  find  the  forester. 

[Exit  an  Attendant. 

We  will,  fair  queen,  up  to  the  mountain’s  top 
And  mark  the  musical  confusion 
Of  hounds  and  echo  in  conjunction. 

Hip.  I  was  with  Hercules  and  Cadmus  once. 
When  in  a  wood  of  Crete  they  bay’d  the  bear 
With  hounds  of  Sparta:  never  did  I  hear 
Such  gallant  chiding;  for,  besides  the  groves. 

The  skies,  the  fountains,  every  region  near  120 
Seem’d  all  one  mutual  cry:  I  never  heard 
So  musical  a  discord,  such  sweet  thunder. 

The.  My  hounds  are  bred  out  of  the  Spartan 
kind. 

So  flew’d,  so  sanded,  and  their  heads  are  hung 
With  ears  that  sweep  away  the  morning  dew; 
Crook'knee’d,  and  dew-lapp’d  like  Thessalian 
bulls; 

Slow  in  pursuit,  but  match’d  in  mouth  like  bells. 
Each  under  each.  A  cry  more  tuneable 
Was  never  holla’d  to,  nor  cheer’d  with  horn. 

In  Crete,  in  Sparta,  nor  in  Thessaly:  /_jo 

Judge  when  you  hear.  But,  soft!  what  nymphs 
are  these? 

Ege.  My  lord,  this  is  my  daughter  here  asleep; 
And  this,  Lysander;  this  Demetrius  is; 

This  Helena,  old  Nedar’s  Helena: 

I  wonder  of  their  being  here  together. 

The.  No  doubt  they  rose  up  early  to  observe 
The  rite  of  May,  and,  hearing  our  intent. 

Came  here  in  grace  of  our  solemnity. 

But  speak,  Egeus;  is  not  this  the  day 
That  Hermia  should  give  answer  of  her  choice? 
Ege.  It  is,  my  lord.  74/ 

The.  Go,  bid  the  huntsmen  wake  them  with 
their  horns.  Homs  and  shout  within. 

LYSANDER,  DEMETRIUS,  HELENA,  and  HERMIA, 

wake  and  start  up. 


NIGHT’S  DREAM  369 

Good  morrow,  friends.  Saint  Valentine  is  past: 
Begin  these  wood-birds  but  to  couple  now? 

Lys.  Pardon,  my  lord. 

The.  1  pray  you  all,  stand  up. 

I  know  you  two  are  rival  enemies: 

How  comes  this  gentle  concord  in  the  world. 
That  hatred  is  so  far  from  jealousy 
To  sleep  by  hate  and  fear  no  enmity? 

Lys.  My  lord,  I  shall  reply  amazedly,  /50 

Half  sleep,  half  waking:  but  as  yet,  I  swear, 

I  cannot  truly  say  how  I  came  here; 

But,  as  I  think — for  truly  would  I  speak, 

And  now  I  do  bethink  me,  so  it  is — 

I  came  with  Hermia  hither:  our  intent 
Was  to  be  gone  from  Athens,  where  we  might, 
Without  the  peril  of  the  Athenian  law — 

Ege.  Enough,  enough,  my  lord;  you  have 
enough: 

I  beg  the  law,  the  law,  upon  his  head. 

They  would  have  stolen  away;  they  would, 

Demetrius,  160 

Thereby  to  have  defeated  you  and  me. 

You  of  your  wife  and  me  of  my  consent. 

Of  my  consent  that  she  should  be  your  wife. 

Dem.  My  lord,  fair  Helen  told  me  of  their 
stealth. 

Of  this  their  purpose  hither  to  this  wood; 

And  I  in  fury  hither  follow’d  them. 

Fair  Helena  in  fancy  following  me. 

But,  my  good  lord,  I  wot  not  by  what  power — 
But  by  some  power  it  is — my  love  to  Hermia, 
Melted  as  the  snow,  seems  to  me  now  770 

As  the  remembrance  of  an  idle  gawd 
Which  in  my  childhood  I  did  dote  upon; 

And  all  the  faith,  the  virtue  of  my  heart, 

The  object  and  the  pleasure  of  mine  eye, 

Is  only  Helena.  To  her,  my  lord. 

Was  I  betroth’d  ere  I  saw  Hermia: 

But  like  in  sickness  did  I  loathe  this  food; 

But,  as  in  health,  come  to  my  natural  taste. 

Now  I  do  wish  it,  love  it,  long  for  it. 

And  will  for  evermore  be  true  to  it.  iSo 

The.  Fair  lovers,  you  are  fortunately  met: 

Of  this  discourse  we  more  will  hear  anon. 

Egeus,  I  will  overbear  your  will; 

For  in  the  temple,  by  and  by,  with  us 
These  couples  shall  eternally  be  knit: 

And,  for  the  morning  now  is  something  worn. 
Our  purposed  hunting  shall  be  set  aside. 

Away  with  us  to  Athens;  three  and  three. 

We’ll  hold  a  feast  in  great  solemnity. 

Come,  Hippolyta.  19^ 

[Exeunt  theseus,  hippolyta,  egeus,  and  train. 
Dem.  These  things  seem  small  and  undistin- 
guishable. 

Like  far-oflf  mountains  turned  into  clouds. 


ACT  V 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


370 

Her.  Methinks  I  see  these  things  with  parted 
eye, 

When  every  thing  seems  double. 

Hel.  So  methinks : 

And  I  have  found  Demetrius  like  a  jewel, 

Mine  own,  and  not  mine  own. 

Dem.  Are  you  sure 

That  we  are  awake?  It  seems  to  me 
That  yet  we  sleep,  we  dream.  Do  not  you  think 
The  Duke  was  here,  and  bid  us  follow  him? 

Her.  Yea;  and  my  father. 

Hel.  And  Hippolyta. 

Lys.  And  he  did  bid  us  follow  to  the  temple. 

De?n.  Why,  then,  we  are  awake:  let’s  follow 
him; 

And  by  the  way  let  us  recount  our  dreams. 

[Exeunt. 

Bot.  [Awakhig]  When  my  cue  comes,  call  me, 
and  I  will  answer:  my  next  is,  “Most  fair  Pyra- 
mus.”  Heigh-ho!  Peter  Quince!  Flute,  the  hel¬ 
lo  ws-mender!  Snout,  the  tinker!  Starveling!  God’s 
my  life,  stolen  hence,  and  left  me  asleep!  I  have 
had  a  most  rare  vision.  I  have  had  a  dream,  past 
the  wit  of  man  to  say  what  dream  it  was  :  man  is 
but  an  ass,  if  he  go  about  to  expound  this  dream. 
Methought  1  was — there  is  no  man  can  tell 
what.  Methought  I  was — and  methought  I  had— 
but  man  is  but  a  patched  fool,  if  he  will  offer  to 
say  what  methought  I  had.  The  eye  of  man  hath 
not  heard,  the  ear  of  man  hath  not  seen,  man’s 
hand  is  not  able  to  taste,  his  tongue  to  conceive, 
nor  his  heart  to  report,  what  my  dream  was.  I 
will  get  Peter  Quince  to  write  a  ballad  of  this 
dream:  it  shall  be  called  “Bottom’s  Dream,” 
because  it  hath  no  bottom;  and  I  will  sing  it  in 
the  latter  end  of  a  play,  before  the  Duke:  per- 
adventure,  to  make  it  the  more  gracious,  I  shall 
sing  it  at  her  death.  [Exit. 

Scene  11.  Athens:  Quince's  house 
Enter  quince,  flute,  snout,  and 

STARVELING. 

Quin.  Have  you  sent  to  Bottom’s  house?  is  he 
come  home  yet? 

Star.  He  cannot  be  heard  of.  Out  of  doubt 
he  is  transported. 

Flu.  If  he  come  not,  then  the  play  is  marred: 
it  goes  not  forward,  doth  it? 

Quin.  It  is  not  possible:  you  have  not  a  man 
in  all  Athens  able  to  discharge  Pyramus  but  he. 

Flu.  No,  he  hath  simply  the  best  wit  of  any 
handicraft  man  in  Athens.  lo 

Qiiin.  Yea,  and  the  best  person  too;  and  he  is  a 
very  paramour  for  a  sweet  voice. 

Flu.  You  must  say  “paragon”:  a  paramour  is, 
God  bless  us,  a  thing  of  naught. 


Enter  snug. 

Snug.  Masters,  the  Duke  is  coming  from  the 
temple,  and  there  is  two  or  three  lords  and  ladies 
more  married:  if  our  sport  had  gone  forward,  we 
had  all  been  made  men. 

Flu.  O  sweet  bully  Bottom!  Thus  hath  he  lost 
sixpence  a  day  during  his  life;  he  could  not  have 
’scaped  sixpence  a  day:  an  the  Duke  had  not 
given  him  sixpence  a  day  for  playing  Pyramus, 
I’ll  be  hanged;  he  would  have  deserved  it:  six¬ 
pence  a  day  in  Pyramus,  or  nothing. 

Enter  bottom. 

Bot.  Where  are  these  lads?  where  are  these 
hearts? 

Quin.  Bottom!  O  most  courageous  day!  O  most 
happy  hour! 

Bot.  Masters,  I  am  to  discourse  wonders:  but 
ask  me  not  what:  for  if  I  tell  you,  I  am  no  true 
Athenian.  I  will  tell  you  everything,  right  as  it 
fell  out. 

Quin.  Let  us  hear,  sweet  Bottom. 

Bot.  Not  a  word  of  me.  All  that  I  will  tell  you 
is,  that  the  Duke  hath  dined.  Get  your  apparel 
together,  good  strings  to  your  beards,  new  rib¬ 
bons  to  your  pumps;  meet  presently  at  the  pal¬ 
ace;  every  man  look  o’er  his  part;  for  the  short 
and  the  long  is,  our  play  is  preferred.  In  any 
case,  let  Thisby  have  clean  linen;  and  let  not 
him  that  plays  the  lion  pare  his  nails,  for  they 
shall  hang  out  for  the  lion’s  claws.  And,  most 
dear  actors,  eat  no  onions  nor  garlic,  for  we  are 
to  utter  sweet  breath;  and  I  do  not  doubt  but  to 
hear  them  say,  it  is  a  sweet  comedy.  No  more 
words:  away!  go,  away!  [Exeunt. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  Athens:  the  palace  of  Theseus 
Enter  theseus,  hippolyta,  philostrate,  Lords, 
and  Attendants. 

Hip.  ’Tis  strange,  my  Theseus,  that  these 
lovers  speak  of. 

The.  More  strange  than  true:  I  never  may  be¬ 
lieve 

These  antique  fables,  nor  these  fairy  toys. 

Lovers  and  madmen  have  such  seething  brains, 
Such  shaping  fantasies,  that  apprehend 
More  than  cool  reason  ever  comprehends. 

The  lunatic,  the  lover,  and  the  poet 
Are  of  imagination  all  compact: 

One  sees  more  devils  than  vast  hell  can  hold. 
That  is,  the  madman:  the  lover,  all  as  frantic,  10 
Sees  Helen’s  beauty  in  a  brow  of  Egypt: 

The  poet’s  eye,  in  a  fine  frenzy  rolling. 


SCENE  I 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


Doth  glance  from  heaven  to  earth,  from  earth  to 
heaven; 

And  as  imagination  bodies  forth 
The  forms  of  things  unknown,  the  poet’s  pen 
Turns  them  to  shapes  and  gives  to  airy  nothing 
A  local  habitation  and  a  name. 

Such  tricks  hath  strong  imagination. 

That,  if  it  would  but  apprehend  some  joy. 

It  comprehends  some  bringer  of  that  joy;  20 
Or  in  the  night,  imagining  some  fear. 

How  easy  is  a  bush  supposed  a  bear! 

Hip.  But  all  the  story  of  the  night  told  over. 

And  all  their  minds  transfigured  so  together. 
More  witnesseth  than  fancy’s  images 
And  grows  to  something  of  great  constancy; 

But,  howsoever,  strange  and  admirable. 

The,  Here  come  the  lovers,  full  of  joy  and 
mirth. 

Enter  lysander,  demetrius,  hermia,  and 

HELENA. 

Joy,  gentle  friends!  joy  and  fresh  days  of  love 
Accompany  your  hearts ! 

Lys.  More  than  to  us  50 

Wait  in  your  royal  walks,  your  board,  your  bed! 
The,  Come  now;  what  masques,  what  dances 
shall  we  have. 

To  wear  away  this  long  age  of  three  hours 
Between  our  after-supper  and  bed-time? 

Where  is  our  usual  manager  of  mirth? 

What  revels  are  in  hand?  Is  there  no  play. 

To  ease  the  anguish  of  a  torturing  hour? 

Call  Philostrate. 

Phil.  Here,  mighty  Theseus. 

The.  Say,  what  abridgement  have  you  for  this 
evening? 

What  masque?  what  music?  How  shall  we  be¬ 
guile 

The  lazy  time,  if  not  with  some  delight? 

Phil.  There  is  a  brief  how  many  sports  are  ripe: 
Make  choice  of  which  your  highness  will  see 
first. 

Giving  a  paper. 

The.  [Reads]  “The  battle  with  the  Centaurs,  to 
be  sung 

By  an  Athenian  eunuch  to  the  harp.” 

We’ll  none  of  that:  that  have  I  told  my  love, 

In  glory  of  my  kinsman  Hercules. 

“The  riot  of  the  tipsy  Bacchanals, 

Tearing  the  Thracian  singer  in  their  rage.” 

That  is  an  old  device;  and  it  was  play’d  yo 

When  I  from  Thebes  came  last  a  conqueror. 
“The  thrice  three  Muses  mourning  for  the  death 
Of  learning,  late  deceased  in  beggary.” 

That  is  some  satire,  keen  and  critical. 

Not  sorting  with  a  nuptial  ceremony. 


“A  tedious  brief  scene  of  young  Pyramus 
And  his  loveThisby;  very  tragical  mirth.” 

Merry  and  tragical!  tedious  and  brief! 

That  is,  hot  ice  and  wondrous  strange  snow. 
How  shall  we  find  the  concord  of  this  discord?  60 
Phil.  A  play  there  is,  my  lord,  some  ten  words 
long, 

Which  is  as  brief  as  I  have  known  a  play; 

But  by  ten  words,  my  lord,  it  is  too  long. 

Which  makes  it  tedious;  for  in  all  the  play 
There  is  not  one  word  apt,  one  player  fitted: 

And  tragical,  my  noble  lord,  it  is; 

For  Pyramus  therein  doth  kill  himself. 

Which,  when  I  saw  rehearsed,  I  must  confess, 
Made  mine  eyes  water;  but  more  merry  tears 
The  passion  of  loud  laughter  never  shed .  70 

The.  What  are  they  that  do  play  it? 

Phil.  Hard-handed  men  that  work  in  Athens 
here. 

Which  never  labour’d  in  their  minds  till  now. 
And  now  have  toil’d  their  unbreathed  memories 
With  this  same  play,  against  your  nuptial. 

The.  And  we  will  hear  it. 

Phil.  No,  my  noble  lord; 

It  is  not  for  you:  I  have  heard  it  over. 

And  it  is  nothing,  nothing  in  the  world; 

Unless  you  can  find  sport  in  their  intents. 
Extremely  stretch’d  and  conn’d  with  cruel  pain,  80 
To  do  you  service. 

The.  I  will  hear  that  play; 

For  never  anything  can  be  amiss. 

When  simpleness  and  duty  tender  it. 

Go,  bring  them  in:  and  take  your  places  ladies. 

[Exit  PHILOSTRATE. 

Hip.  I  love  not  to  see  wretchedness  o’ercharged 
And  duty  in  his  service  perishing. 

The.  Why,  gentle  sweet,  you  shall  see  no  such 
thing. 

Hip.  He  says  they  can  do  nothing  in  this  kind. 
The.  The  kinder  we,  to  give  them  thanks  for 
nothing. 

Our  sport  shall  be  to  take  what  they  mistake:  po 
And  what  poor  duty  cannot  do,  noble  respect 
Takes  it  in  might,  not  merit. 

Where  I  have  come,  great  clerks  have  purposed 
To  greet  me  with  premeditated  welcomes; 
Where  1  have  seen  them  shiver  and  look  pale. 
Make  periods  in  the  midst  of  sentences, 

Throttle  their  practised  accent  in  their  fears 
And  in  conclusion  dumbly  have  broke  off. 

Not  paying  me  a  welcome.  Trust  me,  sweet. 

Out  of  this  silence  yet  1  pick’d  a  welcome;  too 

And  in  the  modesty  of  fearful  duty 
I  read  as  much  as  from  the  rattling  tongue 
Of  saucy  and  audacious  eloquence. 

Lx>ve,  therefore,  and  tongue-tied  simplicity 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


In  least  speak  most,  to  my  capacity. 

Re-enter  philostrate. 

Phil.  So  please  your  grace,  the  Prologue  is 
address’d. 

The.  Let  him  approach.  [Flourish  of  trumpets. 

Enter  quince  for  the  prologue. 

Pro.  If  we  offend,  it  is  with  our  good  will. 

That  you  should  think,  we  come  not  to  offend. 
But  with  good  will.  To  show  our  simple  skill,  no 
That  is  the  true  beginning  of  our  end. 

Consider  then  we  come  but  in  despite. 

We  do  not  come  as  minding  to  content  you. 

Our  true  intent  is.  All  for  your  delight 
We  are  not  here.  That  you  should  here  repent 
you. 

The  actors  are  at  hand  and  by  their  show 
You  shall  know  all  that  you  are  like  to  know. 

The.  This  fellow  doth  not  stand  upon  points. 
Lys.  He  hath  rid  his  prologue  like  a  rough  colt; 
he  knows  not  the  stop.  A  good  moral,  my  lord: 
it  is  not  enough  to  speak,  but  to  speak  true. 

Hip.  Indeed  he  hath  played  on  his  prologue  like 
a  child  on  a  recorder;  a  sound,  but  not  in  gov¬ 
ernment. 

The.  His  speech  was  like  a  tangled  chain;  noth¬ 
ing  impaired,  but  all  disordered.  Who  is  next? 

Enter  pyramus  and  thisbe,  wall,  moonshine, 
and  LION. 

Pro.  Gentles,  perchance  you  wonder  at  this 
show; 

But  wonder  on,  till  truth  make  all  things  plain. 
This  man  is  Pyramus,  if  you  would  know;  /jo 

This  beauteous  lady  Thisby  is  certain. 

This  man,  with  lime  and  rough-cast,  doth  present 
Wall,  that  vile  Wall  which  did  these  lovers 
sunder; 

And  through  Wall’s  chink,  poor  souls,  they  are 
content 

To  whisper.  At  the  which  let  no  man  wonder. 
This  man,  with  lanthorn,  dog,  and  bush  of  thorn, 
Presenteth  Moonshine;  for,  if  you  will  know. 
By  moonshine  did  these  lovers  think  no  scorn 
To  meet  at  Ninus’  tomb,  there,  there  to  woo. 
This  grisly  beast,  which  Lion  hight  by  name,  /40 
The  trusty  Thisby,  coming  first  by  night. 

Did  scare  away,  or  rather  did  affright; 

And,  as  she  fled,  her  mantle  she  did  fall. 

Which  Lion  vile  with  bloody  mouth  did  stain. 
Anon  comes  Pyramus,  sweet  youth  and  tall. 

And  finds  his  trusty  Thisby’s  mantle  slain: 
Whereat,  with  blade,  with  bloody  blameful 
blade. 

He  bravely  broach’d  his  boiling  bloody  breast; 


And  Thisby,  tarrying  in  mulberry  shade. 

His  dagger  drew,  ^nd  died.  For  all  the  rest. 

Let  Lion,  Moonshine,  Wall,  and  lovers  twain  75/ 
At  large  discourse,  while  here  they  do  remain. 
[Exeunt  prologue,  pyramus,  thisbe,  lion,  and 

MOONSHINE. 

The.  I  wonder  if  the  lion  be  to  speak. 

Dem.  No  wonder,  my  lord:  one  lion  may,  when 
many  asses  do. 

Wall.  In  this  same  interlude  it  doth  befall 
That  I,  one  Snout  by  name,  present  a  wall; 

And  such  a  wall,  as  I  would  have  you  think. 

That  had  in  it  a  crannied  hole  or  chink. 

Through  which  the  lovers,  Pyramus  and  Thisby, 
Did  whisper  often  very  secretly.  161 

This  loam,  this  rough-cast,  and  this  stone  doth 
show 

That  I  am  that  same  wall;  the  truth  is  so: 
x\nd  this  the  cranny  is,  right  and  sinister. 

Through  which  the  fearful  lovers  are  to  whisper. 

The.  Would  you  desire  lime  and  hair  to  speak 
better? 

Dem.  It  is  the  wittiest  partition  that  ever  I 
heard  discourse,  my  lord. 

Re-enter  pyramus. 

The.  Pyramus  draws  near  the  wall:  silence! 

Pyr.  O  grim-look’d  night!  O  night  with  hue 
so  black!  77/ 

O  night,  which  ever  art  when  day  is  not! 

O  night,  O  night!  alack,  alack,  alack, 

I  fear  my  Thisby’s  promise  is  forgot! 

And  thou,  O  wall,  O  sweet,  O  lovely  w^all. 

That  stand’st  between  her  father’s  ground  and 
mine! 

Thou  wall,  O  wall,  O  sweet  and  lovely  wall. 
Show  me  thy  chink,  to  blink  through  with  mine 
eyne!  [wall  holds  up  his  fingers. 

Thanks,  courteous  wall:  Jove  shield  thee  well  for 
this! 

But  what  see  I?  No  Thisby  do  I  see,  180 

O  wicked  wall,  through  whom  I  see  no  bliss! 
Curs’d  be  thy  stones  for  thus  deceiving  me! 

The.  The  wall,  methinks,  being  sensible,  should 
curse  again. 

Pyr.  No,  in  truth,  sir,  he  should  not.  “Deceiv¬ 
ing  me”  is  Thisby’s  cue:  she  is  to  enter  now, 
and  I  am  to  spy  her  through  the  wall.  You  shall 
see,  it  will  fall  pat  as  I  told  you.  Yonder  she 
comes. 

Re-enter  thisbe. 

This.  O  wall,  full  often  hast  thou  heard  my 
moans,  190 

For  parting  my  fair  Pyramus  and  me! 

My  cherry  lips  have  often  kiss’d  thy  stones, 


SCENE  I 

Thy  stones  with  lime  and  hair  knit  up  in  thee. 
Pyr.  I  see  a  voice:  now  will  I  to  the  chink, 

To  spy  an  I  can  hear  my  Thisby’s  face. 

Thisby! 

This.  My  love  thou  art,  my  love  I  think. 

Pyr.  Think  what  thou  wilt,  I  am  thy  lover’s 
grace; 

And,  like  Limander,  am  I  trusty  still. 

This.  And  I  like  Helen,  till  the  Fates  me  kill. 
Pyr.  Not  Shafalus  to  Procrus  was  so  true.  200 
This.  As  Shafalus  to  Procrus,  I  to  you. 

Pyr.  O,  kiss  me  through  the  hole  of  this  vile 
wall! 

This.  I  kiss  the  wall’s  hole,  not  your  lips  at  all. 
Pyr.  W  ih  thou  at  Ninnv’s  tomb  meet  me 
straightway? 

This.  ’Tide  life,  ’tide  death,  I  come  without 
delay.  [Exeunt  pyramus  and  1  hisbe. 

Wall.  Thus  have  I,  Wall,  my  part  discharged 
so; 

And,  being  done,  thus  Wall  away  doth  go.  [Exit. 

The.  Now  is  the  mural  down  between  the  two 
neighbours. 

Deni.  No  remedy,  my  lord,  when  walls  are  so 
wilful  to  hear  without  warning.  211 

Hip.  This  is  the  silliest  stuff  that  ever  I  heard. 
The.  The  best  in  this  kind  are  but  shadows;  and 
the  worst  are  no  worse,  if  imagination  amend 
them. 

Hip.  It  must  be  your  imagination  then,  and  not 
theirs. 

The.  If  we  imagine  no  worse  of  them  than  they 
of  themselves,  they  may  pass  for  excellent  men. 
Here  come  two  noble  beasts  in,  a  man  and  a 
lion.  221 

Re-enter  lion  and  moonshine. 

Lion.  You,  ladies,  you,  whose  gentle  hearts  do 
fear 

The  smallest  monstrous  mouse  that  creeps  on 
floor. 

May  now  perchance  both  quake  and  tremble  here, 
When  lion  rough  in  wildest  rage  doth  roar. 

Then  know  that  I,  one  Snug  the  joiner,  am 
A  lion  fell,  nor  else  no  lion’s  dam; 

For,  if  I  should  as  lion  come  in  strife 
Into  this  place,  ’twere  pity  on  my  life. 

The.  A  very  gentle  beast,  and  of  a  good  con¬ 
science.  257 

Dem.  The  very  best  at  a  beast,  my  lord,  that 
e’er  I  saw.^ 

Lys.  This  lion  is  a  very  fox  for  his  valour. 

The.  True;  and  a  goose  for  his  discretion. 

De^n.  Not  so,  my  lord;  for  his  valour  cannot 
carry  his  discretion;  and  the  fox  carries  the 
goose. 


373 

The.  His  discretion,  I  am  sure,  cannot  carry 
his  valour;  for  the  goose  carries  not  the  fox.  It  is 
well:  leave  it  to  his  discretion,  and  let  us  listen  to 
the  moon. 

Moon.  This  lanthorn  doth  the  horned  moon 
present — 

Dem.  He  should  have  worn  the  horns  on  his 
head. 

The.  He  is  no  crescent,  and  his  horns  are  in¬ 
visible  within  the  circumference. 

Moon.  This  lanthorn  doth  the  horned  moon 
present; 

Myself  the  man  i’  the  moon  do  seem  to  be. 

The.  This  is  the  greatest  error  of  all  the  rest: 
the  man  should  be  put  into  the  lanthorn.  How  is 
it  else  the  man  i’  the  moon? 

Dem.  He  dares  not  come  there  for  the  candle; 
for,  you  see,  it  is  already  in  snuff. 

Hip.  I  am  aweary  of  this  moon:  would  he 
would  change! 

The.  It  appears,  by  his  small  light  of  discre¬ 
tion,  that  he  is  in  the  wane;  but  yet,  in  courtesy, 
in  all  reason,  we  must  stay  the  time. 

Lys.  Proceed,  Moon.  260 

Moon.  All  that  I  have  to  say,  is,  to  tell  you  that 
the  lanthorn  is  the  moon;  I,  the  man  in  the  moon; 
this  thorn-bush,  my  thorn-bush;  and  this  dog,  my 
dog. 

Dem.  Why,  all  these  should  be  in  the  lanthorn; 
for  all  these  are  in  the  moon.  But,  silence!  here 
comes  Thisbe. 

Re-enter  thisbe. 

This.  This  is  old  Ninny’s  tomb.W’here  is  my 
love? 

Idon.  [Roaring]  Oh —  [thisbe  runs  off. 

Dem.  Well  roared.  Lion.  2jo 

The.  Well  run,  Thisbe. 

Hip.  Well  shone.  Moon.  Truly,  the  moon 
shines  with  a  good  grace. 

[The  LION  shakes  thisbe’s  mantle,  and  exit. 

The.  Well  moused.  Lion. 

Lys.  And  so  the  lion  vanished. 

Dem.  And  then  came  Pyramus. 

Re-enter  pyramus. 

Pyr.  Sweet  Moon,  I  thank  thee  for  thy  sunny 
beams; 

I  thank  thee.  Moon,  for  shining  now  so  bright; 
For,  by  thy  gracious,  golden,  glittering  gleams, 

I  trust  to  take  of  truest  Thisby  sight.  280 

But  stay,  O  spite! 

But  mark,  poor  knight. 

What  dreadful  dole  is  here! 

Eyes,  do  you  see? 

How  can  it  be? 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


A  MIDSUMMER-NIGHT’S  DREAM 


O  dainty  duck!  O  dear! 

Thy  mantle  good, 

What,  stain’d  with  blood! 
Approach,  ye  Furies  fell! 

O  Fates,  come,  come,  2po 

Cut  thread  and  thrum; 

Quail,  crush,  conclude,  and  quell! 

The.  This  passion,  and  the  death  of  a  dear 
friend,  would  go  near  to  make  a  man  look  sad. 
Hip.  Beshrew  my  heart,  but  I  pity  the  man. 

Pyr.  O  wherefore.  Nature,  didst  thou  lions 
frame? 

Since  lion  vile  hath  here  deflower’d  my  dear: 
Which  is — no,  no — which  was  the  fairest  dame 
That  lived,  that  loved,  that  liked,  that  look’d 
with  cheer. 

Come,  tears,  confound;  500 

Out,  sword,  and  wound 
The  pap  of  Pyr  am  us; 

Ay,  that  left  pap. 

Where  heart  doth  hop:  [Stabs  him¬ 
self.] 

Thus  die  I,  thus,  thus,  thus. 

Now  am  I  dead. 

Now  am  I  fled; 

My  soul  is  in  the  sky: 

Tongue,  lose  thy  light; 

Moon  take  thy  flight:  [Exit  moon¬ 
shine. 

Now  die,  die,  die,  die,  die.  [Dies. 
Dem.  No  die,  but  an  ace,  for  him;  for  he  is  but 
one. 

Lys.  Less  than  an  ace,  man;  for  he  is  dead;  he 
is  nothing. 

The.  With  the  help  of  a  surgeon  he  might  yet 
recover,  and  prove  an  ass. 

Hip.  How  chance  Moonshine  is  gone  before 
Thisbe  comes  back  and  finds  her  lover? 

The.  She  will  find  him  by  starlight.  Here  she 
comes;  and  her  passion  ends  the  play.  52/ 

Re-enter  thisbe. 

Hip.  Methinks  she  should  not  use  a  long  one 
for  such  a  Pyramus:  1  hope  she  will  be  brief. 

Dem.  A  mote  will  turn  the  balance,  which 
Pyramus,  which  'Thisbe,  is  the  better;  he  for  a 
man,  God  warrant  us;  she  for  a  woman,  God 
bless  us. 

Lys.  She  hath  spied  him  already  with  those 
sweet  eyes. 

Dem.  And  thus  she  moans,  videlicet —  550 

This.  Asleep,  my  love? 

What,  dead,  my  dove? 

O  Pyramus,  arise! 

Speak,  speak.  Quite  dumb? 

Dead,  dead?  A  tomb 


Must  cover  thy  sweet  eyes. 

These;  lily  lips. 

This  cherry  nose. 

These  yellow  cowslip  cheeks, 

Are  gone,  are  gone: 

Lovers,  make  moan: 

His  eyes  were  green  as  leeks. 

O  Sisters  Three, 

Come,  come  to  me. 

With  hands  as  pale  as  milk; 

Lay  them  in  gore. 

Since  you  have  shore 
With  shears  his  thread  of  silk. 
Tongue,  not  a  word: 

Come,  trusty  sword;  550 

Come,  blade,  my  breast  imbrue: 

Stabs  herself. 

And,  farewell,  friends; 

Thus  Thisby  ends: 

Adieu,  adieu,  adieu.  [Dies. 

The.  Moonshine  and  Lion  are  left  to  bury  the 
dead. 

Dem.  Ay,  and  Wall  too. 

Bot.  [Starting  up]  No,  I  assure  you;  the  wall 
is  down  that  parted  their  fathers.  Will  it  please 
you  to  see  the  epilogue,  or  to  hear  a  Bergomask 
dance  between  two  of  our  company?  5  61 

The.  No  epilogue,  I  pray  you;  for  your  play 
needs  no  excuse.  Never  excuse;  for  when  the 
players  are  all  dead,  there  need  none  to  be  blamed. 
Marry,  if  he  that  writ  it  had  played  Pyramus  and 
hanged  himself  in  Thisbe’s  garter,  it  would  have 
been  a  fine  tragedy:  and  so  it  is,  truly;  and  very 
notably  discharged.  But,  come,  your  Bergo¬ 
mask:  let  your  epilogue  alone. 

A  dance. 

The  iron  tongue  of  midnight  hath  told  twelve: 
Lovers,  to  bed;  ’tis  almost  fairy  time.  57/ 

1  fear  we  shall  out-sleep  the  coming  morn 
As  much  as  we  this  night  have  overwatch’d. 

This  palpable-gross  play  hath  well  beguiled 
The  heavy  gait  of  night.  Sweet  friends,  to  bed. 

A  fortnight  hold  we  this  solemnity, 

In  nightly  revels  and  new  jollity.  [Exeunt. 

Enter  puck. 

Puck.  Now  the  hungry  lion  roars. 

And  the  wolf  behowls  the  moon; 

Whilst  the  heavy  ploughman  snores,  5  80 

All  with  weary  task  fordone. 

Now  the  wasted  brands  do  glow. 

Whilst  the  screech-owl,  screeching  loud. 

Puts  the  wretch  that  lies  in  woe 
In  remembrance  of  a  shroud. 

Now  it  is  the  time  of  night 

Thar,  the  graves  all  gaping  wide, 


SCENE  I 


375 


A  MIDSUMMER- 

Every  one  lets  forth  his  sprite, 

In  the  church-way  paths  to  glide: 

And  we  fairies,  that  do  run  55>o 

By  the  triple  Hecate’s  team, 

From  the  presence  of  the  sun. 

Following  darkness  like  a  dream, 

Now  are  frolic:  not  a  mouse 
Shall  disturb  this  hallow’d  house: 

I  am  sent  with  broom  before, 

To  sweep  the  dust  behind  the  door. 

Enter  oberon  and  titania  'with  their  train. 

Obe.  Through  the  house  give  glimmering  light. 
By  the  dead  and  drowsy  fire: 

Every  elf  and  fairy  sprite 

Hop  as  light  as  bird  from  brier; 

And  this  ditty,  after  me. 

Sing,  and  dance  it  trippingly. 

Tita.  First,  rehearse  your  song  by  rote. 

To  each  word  a  warbling  note: 

Hand  in  hand,  with  fairy  grace. 

Will  we  sing,  and  bless  this  place. 

Song  and  dance. 

Obe.  Now,  until  the  break  of  day. 

Through  this  house  each  fairy  stray. 

To  the  best  bride-bed  will  we,  4/0 

Which  by  us  shall  blessed  be; 

And  the  issue  there  create 
Ever  shall  be  fortunate. 

So  shall  all  the  couples  three 
Ever  true  in  loving  be; 


NIGHT’S  DREAM 

And  the  blots  of  Nature’s  hand 
Shall  not  in  their  issue  stand; 

Never  mole,  hare  lip,  nor  scar. 

Nor  mark  prodigious,  such  as  are 
Despised  in  nativity. 

Shall  upon  their  children  be. 

With  this  field-dew  consecrate. 

Every  fairy  take  his  gait; 

And  each  several  chamber  bless. 

Through  this  palace,  with  sweet  peace; 

And  the  owner  of  it  blest 
Ever  shall  in  safety  rest. 

Trip  away;  make  no  stay; 

Meet  me  all  by  break  of  day. 

[Exeunt  oberon,  titania,  and  train. 
Puck.  If  we  shadows  have  offended,  430 

Think  but  this,  and  all  is  mended. 

That  you  have  but  slumber’d  here 
While  these  visions  did  appear. 

And  this  weak  and  idle  theme. 

No  more  yielding  but  a  dream. 

Gentles,  do  not  reprehend: 

If  you  pardon,  we  will  mend: 

And,  as  I  am  an  honest  Puck, 

If  we  have  unearned  luck 

Now  to  ’scape  the  serpent’s  tongue,  440 

We  will  make  amends  ere  long; 

Else  the  Puck  a  liar  call : 

So,  good  night  unto  you  all. 

Give  me  your  hands,  if  we  be  friends. 

And  Robin  shall  restore  amends.  [Exit. 


sv  The  Life  and  Death  of 
KING  JOHN 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAE 


King  John 

Prince  Henry,  son  to  the  King 

Arthur,  Duke  of  Bretagne^  nephew  to  the  King 

Earl  of  Pembroke 

Earl  of  Essex 

Earl  of  Salisbury 

Lord  Bigot 

Hubert  de  Burgh 

Robert  Faulconbridge,  son  to  Sir  Robert  Faulcon- 
bridge 

Philip  the  Bastard,  his  half-brother,  later  dubbed 
Richard  Plantagenet 

James  Gurney,  servant  to  Lady  Faulconbridge 

Peter  of  Pom  fret,  a  prophet 

Executioner 

Two  Messengers 

English  Herald 


Philip,  King  of  France 
Lewis,  the  Dauphin 
Lymoges,  Duke  of  Austria 
Cardinal  Pandulph,  the  Pope's  legate 
Melun,  a  French  Lord 

Chatillon,  ambassador  from  France  to  King  John 
Citizen  of  Angiers 
French  Herald 

Queen  Elinor,  fnother  to  King  John 
Constance,  mother  to  Arthur 
Blanch  of  Spain,  niece  to  King  John 
Lady  Faulconbridge 

Non-Speaking  ;  Lords,  Citizens  of  Angiers,  Sheriff, 
Officers,  Soldiers  and  other  Attendants 

Scene:  Partly  in  England,  and  partly  in  France 


ACT  1 

Scene  i.  King  John' s  palace 
Enter  king  john,  queen  elinor,  Pembroke, 
ESSEX,  SALISBURY,  and  others,  'with  chatillon. 

K.  John.  Now,  say,  Chatillon,  what  would 
France  with  us? 

Chat.  Thus,  after  greeting,  speaks  the  King 
of  France 

In  my  behaviour  to  the  majesty. 

The  borrow’d  majesty,  of  England  here. 

Eli.  A  strange  beginning:  “borrow’d  majesty!” 
K.  John.  Silence,  good  mother;  hear  the  em¬ 
bassy. 

Chat.  Philip  of  France,  in  right  and  true  behalf 
Of  thy  deceased  brother  Geoffrey’s  son, 

Arthur  Plantagenet,  lays  most  lawful  claim 
To  this  fair  island  and  the  territories,  lo 

To  Ireland,  Poictiers,  Anjou,  Touraine,  Maine, 
Desiring  thee  to  lay  aside  the  sword 
Which  sways  usurpingly  these  several  titles. 

And  put  the  same  into  young  Arthur’s  hand, 

Thy  nephew  and  right  royal  sovereign. 

K.  John.  What  follows  if  we  disallow  of  this? 
Chat.  The  proud  control  of  fierce  and  bloody 
war. 

To  enforce  these  rights  so  forcibly  withheld. 

K.  John.  Here  have  we  war  for  war  and  blood 
for  blood, 


Controlment  for  controlment:  so  answer  France. 
Chat.  Then  take  my  king’s  defiance  from  my 
mouth,  21 

The  farthest  limit  of  my  embassy. 

K.  John.  Bear  mine  to  him,  and  so  depart  in 
peace: 

Be  thou  as  lightning  in  the  eyes  of  France; 

For  ere  thou  canst  report  I  will  be  there, 

The  thunder  of  my  cannon  shall  be  heard: 

So  hence!  Be  thou  the  trumpet  of  our  wrath 
And  sullen  presage  of  your  own  decay. 

An  honourable  conduct  let  him  have: 

Pembroke,  look  to’t.  Farewell,  Chatillon.  50 

[Exeunt  chatillon  and  Pembroke. 
Eli.  What  now,  my  son!  have  I  not  ever  said 
How  that  ambitious  Constance  would  not  cease 
Till  she  had  kindled  France  and  all  the  world 
Upon  the  right  and  party  of  her  son? 

This  might  have  been  prevented  and  made  whole 
With  very  easy  arguments  of  love. 

Which  now  the  manage  of  two  kingdoms  must 
With  fearful  bloody  issue  arbitrate. 

K.  John.  Our  strong  possession  and  our  right 
for  us. 

Eli.  Your  strong  possession  much  more  than 
your  right. 

Or  else  it  must  go  wrong  with  you  and  me: 

So  much  my  conscience  whispers  in  your  ear. 
Which  none  but  heaven  and  you  and  I  shall  hear. 


376 


SCENE  I  KING 

Enter  a  Sheriff. 

Essex.  My  liege,  here  is  the  strangest  contro¬ 
versy 

Come  from  the  country  to  be  judged  by  you 
That  e’er  I  heard:  shall  I  produce  the  men? 

K.  John.  Let  them  approach. 

Our  abbeys  and  our  priories  shall  pay 
This  expedition’s  charge. 

Enter  Robert  faulconbridge,  and  philip  the 

BASTARD. 

What  men  are  you? 

Bast.  Your  faithful  subject  I,  a  gentleman  50 
Born  jn  Northamptonshire  and  eldest  son, 

As  I  suppose,  to  Robert  Faulconbridge, 

A  soldier,  by  the  honour-giving  hand 
Of  Coeur-de-lion  knighted  in  the  field. 

K.  John.  What  art  thou? 

Rob.  The  son  and  heir  to  that  same  Faulcon¬ 
bridge. 

K.  John.  Is  that  the  elder,  and  art  thou  the  heir? 
You  came  not  of  one  mother  then,  it  seems. 

Bast.  Most  certain  of  one  mother,  mighty  king; 
That  is  well  known;  and,  as  I  think,  one  father: 
But  for  the  certain  knowledge  of  that  truth  61 
I  put  you  o’er  to  heaven  and  to  my  mother: 

Of  that  I  doubt,  as  all  men’s  children  may. 

Eli.  Out  on  thee,  rude  man!  thou  dost  shame 
thy  mother 

And  wound  her  honour  with  this  diffidence. 

Bast.  I,  madam?  no,  I  have  no  reason  for  it; 

That  is  my  brother’s  plea  and  none  of  mine; 

The  which  if  he  can  prove,  a’  pops  me  out 
At  least  from  fair  five  hundred  pound  a  year: 
Heaven  guard  my  mother’s  honour  and  my  land! 
K.  John.  A  good  blunt  fellow.  Why,  being 
younger  born,  7/ 

Doth  he  lay  claim  to  thine  inheritance? 

Bast.  I  know  not  why,  except  to  get  the  land. 

But  once  he  slander’d  me  with  bastardy: 

But  whether  I  be  as  true  begot  or  no. 

That  still  I  lay  upon  my  mother’s  head. 

But  that  I  am  as  well  begot,  my  liege — 

Fair  fall  the  bones  that  took  the  pains  for  me! — 
Compare  our  faces  and  be  judge  yourself. 

If  old  sir  Robert  did  beget  us  both  So 

And  were  our  father  and  this  son  like  him, 

O  old  sir  Robert,  father,  on  my  knee 
I  give  heaven  thanks  I  was  not  like  to  thee! 

K.  /(9/2W."  Why,  what  a  madcap  hath  heaven  lent 
us  here! 

Eli.  He  hath  a  trick  of  Cocur-de-lion’s  face; 

The  accent  of  his  tongue  affecteth  him. 

Do  you  not  read  some  tokens  of  my  son 
In  the  large  composition  of  this  man? 


JOHN  377 

K.  John.  Mine  eye  hath  well  examined  his  parts 
And  finds  them  perfect  Richard.  Sirrah,  speak,  go 
What  doth  move  you  to  claim  your  brother’s 
land? 

Bast.  Because  he  hath  a  half-face,  like  my 
father. 

With  half  that  face  would  he  have  all  my  land: 

A  half- faced  groat  five  hundred  pound  a  year! 

Rob.  My  gracious  liege,  when  that  my  father 
lived. 

Your  brother  did  employ  my  father  much — 

Bast.  Well,  sir,  by  this  you  cannot  get  my  land: 
Your  tale  must  be  how  he  employ’d  my  mother. 
Rob.  And  once  dispatch’d  him  in  an  embassy 
To  Germany,  there  with  the  Emperor  100 

To  treat  of  high  affairs  touching  that  time. 

The  advantage  of  his  absence  took  the  king 
And  in  the  mean  time  sojourn’d  at  my  father’s; 
Where  how  he  did  prevail  I  shame  to  speak. 

But  truth  is  truth:  large  lengths  of  seas  and 
shores 

Between  my  father  and  my  mother  lay. 

As  I  have  heard  my  father  speak  himself, 

When  this  same  lusty  gentleman  was  got. 

Upon  his  death-bed  he  by  will  bequeath’d 
His  lands  to  me,  and  took  it  on  his  death  no 
That  this  my  mother’s  son  was  none  of  his; 

And  if  he  were,  he  came  into  the  world 
Full  fourteen  weeks  before  the  course  of  time. 
Then,  good  my  liege,  let  me  have  what  is  mine. 
My  father’s  land,  as  was  my  father’s  will. 

K.  John.  Sirrah,  your  brother  is  legitimate; 

Your  father’s  wife  did  after  wedlock  bear  him, 
And  if  she  did  play  false,  the  fault  was  hers; 
Which  fault  lies  on  the  hazards  of  all  husbands 
That  marry  wives.  Tell  me,  how  if  my  brother. 
Who,  as  you  say,  took  pains  to  get  this  son,  121 
Had  of  your  father  claim’d  this  son  for  his? 

In  sooth,  good  friend,  your  father  might  have 
kept 

This  calf  bred  from  his  cow  from  all  the  world; 

In  sooth  he  might;  then,  if  he  were  my  brother’s. 
My  brother  might  not  claim  him;  nor  your  father. 
Being  none  of  his,  refuse  him:  this  concludes; 

My  mother’s  son  did  get  your  father’s  heir; 

Your  father’s  heir  must  have  your  father’s  land. 
Rob.  Shall  then  my  father’s  will  be  of  no 
force  t^o 

To  dispossess  that  child  which  is  not  his? 

Bast.  Of  no  more  force  to  dispossess  me,  sir. 
Than  was  his  will  to  get  me,  as  I  think. 

Eli.  Whether  hadst  thou  rather  be  a  Faulcon¬ 
bridge 

And  like  thy  brother,  to  enjoy  thy  land, 

Or  the  reputed  son  of  Coeur-de-lion, 

Lord  of  thy  presence  and  no  land  beside? 


378  KING 

Bast.  Madam,  an  if  my  brother  had  my  shape, 
And  I  had  his.  Sir  Robert’s  his,  like  him; 

And  if  my  legs  were  two  such  riding-rods,  /40 

My  arms  such  eel-skins  stuff’d,  my  face  so  thin 
That  in  mine  ear  I  durst  not  stick  a  rose 
Lest  men  should  say  “Look,  where  three-farth¬ 
ings  goes!’’ 

And,  to  his  shape,  were  heir  to  all  this  land. 
Would  1  might  never  stir  from  off  this  place, 

I  would  give  it  every  foot  to  have  this  face; 

I  would  not  be  Sir  Nob  in  any  case. 

Eli.  I  like  thee  well:  wilt  thou  forsake  thy 
fortune, 

Bequeath  thy  land  to  him  and  follow  me? 

I  am  a  soldier  and  now  bound  to  France.  /50 
Bast.  Brother,  take  you  my  land.  I’ll  take  my 
chance. 

Your  face  hath  got  five  hundred  pound  a  year. 

Yet  sell  your  face  for  five  pence  and  ’tis  dear. 
Madam,  I’ll  follow  you  unto  the  death. 

Eli.  Nay,  I  would  have  you  go  before  me 
thither. 

Bast.  Our  country  manners  give  our  betters 
way. 

K.  John.  What  is  thy  name? 

Bast.  Philip,  my  liege,  so  is  my  name  begun; 
Philip,  good  old  Sir  Robert’s  wife’s  eldest  son. 

K.  John.  From  henceforth  bear  his  name  whose 
form  thou  bear’st:  160 

Kneel  thou  down  Philip,  but  rise  more  great. 
Arise  Sir  Richard  and  Plantagenet. 

Bast.  Brother  by  the  mother’s  side,  give  me 
your  hand: 

My  father  gave  me  honour,  yours  gave  land. 

Now  blessed  be  the  hour,  by  night  or  day. 

When  I  was  got.  Sir  Robert  was  away ! 

Eli.  The  very  spirit  of  Plantagenet! 

I  am  thy  grandam,  Richard;  call  me  so. 

Bast.  Madam,  by  chance  but  not  by  truth; 
what  though? 

Something  about,  a  little  from  the  right,  /70 
In  at  the  window,  or  else  o’er  the  hatch: 

Who  dares  not  stir  by  day  must  walk  by  night, 
And  have  is  have,  however  men  do  catch: 
Near  or  far  off,  well  won  is  still  well  shot. 

And  I  am  I,  howe’er  I  was  begot. 

K.  John.  Go,  Faulconbridge:  now  hast  thou  thy 
desire; 

A  landless  knight  makes  thee  a  landed  squire. 
Come,  madam,  and  come,  Richard,  we  must 
speed 

For  France,  for  France,  for  it  is  more  than  need. 
Bast.  Brother,  adieu:  good  fortune  come  to 
thee!  180 

For  thou  wast  got  i’  the  wav  of  honesty. 

[Exeunt  all  but  bastard. 


JOHN  ACT  I 

A  foot  of  honour  better  than  I  was; 

But  many  a  many  foot  of  land  the  worse. 

Well,  now  can  I  make  any  Joan  a  lady. 

“Good  den,  sir  Richard!”  “God-a-mercy,  fel¬ 
low!” 

And  if  his  name  be  George,  I’ll  call  him  Peter; 

For  new-made  honour  doth  forget  men’s  names; 

’Tis  too  respective  and  too  sociable 

For  your  conversion.  Now  your  traveller. 

He  and  his  toothpick  at  my  worship’s  mess,  1^0 
And  when  my  knightly  stomach  is  sufficed. 

Why  then  I  suck  my  teeth  and  catechize 
My  picked  man  of  countries:  “My  dear  sir,” 
Thus,  leaning  on  mine  elbow,  I  begin, 

“I  shall  beseech  vou” — that  is  question  now; 

And  then  comes  answer  like  an  Absey  book: 

“O  sir,”  says  answer,  “at  your  best  command; 

At  your  employment;  at  your  service,  sir”: 

“No,  sir,”  says  question,  “I,  sweet  sir,  at 
yours”: 

And  so,  ere  answer  knows  what  question  would. 
Saving  in  dialogue  of  compliment,  201 

And  talking  of  the  Alps  and  Apennines, 

The  Pyrenean  and  the  river  Po, 

It  draws  toward  supper  in  conclusion  so. 

But  this  is  worshipful  society 

And  fits  the  mounting  spirit  like  myself. 

For  he  is  but  a  bastard  to  the  time 
That  doth  not  smack  of  observation; 

And  so  am  I,  whether  I  smack  or  no; 

And  not  alone  in  habit  and  device,  210 

Exterior  form,  outward  accoutrement. 

But  from  the  inward  motion  to  deliver 
Sweet,  sweet,  sweet  poison  for  the  age’s  tooth: 
Which,  though  I  will  not  practise  to  deceive. 

Yet,  to  avoid  deceit,  I  mean  to  learn; 

For  it  shall  strew  the  footsteps  of  my  rising. 

But  who  comes  in  such  haste  in  riding-robes? 
What  woman-post  is  this?  hath  she  no  husband 
That  will  rake  pains  to  blow  a  horn  before  her? 

Enter  lady  faulconbridge  and  james  gurney. 

O  me!  it  is  my  mother.  How  now,  good  lady! 
What  brings  you  here  to  court  so  hastily?  221 
Lady.  F.  Where  is  that  slave,  thy  brother? 
where  is  he. 

That  holds  in  chase  mine  honour  up  and  down? 
Bast.  My  brother  Robert?  old  Sir  Robert’s 
son? 

Colbrand  the  giant,  that  same  mighty  man? 

Is  it  Sir  Robert’s  son  that  you  seek  so? 

Lady  F.  Sir  Robert’s  son!  Ay,  thou  unreverend 
boy. 

Sir  Robert’s  son:  why  scorn’st  thou  at  Sir 
Robert? 

He  is  Sir  Robert’s  son,  and  so  art  thou. 


SCENE  I 


379 


KING 

Bast.  James  Gurney,  wilt  thou  give  us  leave 
awhile?  2^0 

Gur.  Good  leave,  good  Philip. 

Bast.  Philip!  sparrow:  James, 

There’s  toys  abroad:  anon  I’ll  tell  thee  more. 

[Exit  GURNEY. 

Madam,  I  was  not  old  Sir  Robert’s  son: 

Sir  Robert  might  have  eat  his  part  in  me 
Upon  Good-Friday  and  ne’er  broke  his  fast: 

Sir  Robert  could  do  well:  marry,  to  confess, 

Could  he  get  me?  Sir  Robert  could  not  do  it: 

We  know  his  handiwork:  therefore,  good 
mother. 

To  whom  am  I  beholding  for  these  limbs? 

Sir  Robert  never  holp  to  make  this  leg.  240 
Lady  F.  Hast  thou  conspired  with  thy  bro¬ 
ther  too. 

That  for  thine  own  gain  shouldst  defend  mine 
honour? 

What  means  this  scorn,  thou  most  untoward 
knave? 

Bast.  “Knight,  knight,”  good  mother,  Basilisco- 
like. 

What!  I  am  dubb’d!  I  have  it  on  my  shoulder. 

But,  mother,  I  am  not  Sir  Robert’s  son; 

I  have  disclaim’d  Sir  Robert  and  my  land; 
Legitimation,  name,  and  all  is  gone: 

Then,  good  my  mother,  let  me  know  my  father; 
Some  proper  man,  I  hope:  who  was  it,  mother? 
Lady  F.  Hast  thou  denied  thyself  a  Faulcon- 
bridge? 

Bast.  As  faithfully  as  I  deny  the  devil. 

Lady  F.  King  Richard  Coeur-de-lion  was  thy 
father: 

By  long  and  vehement  suit  I  was  seduced 
To  make  room  for  him  in  my  husband’s  bed: 
Heaven  lay  not  my  transgression  to  my  charge! 
Thou  are  the  issue  of  my  dear  offence. 

Which  was  so  strongly  urged  past  my  defence. 
Bast.  Now,  by  this  light,  were  I  to  get  again, 
Madam,  I  would  not  wish  a  better  father.  260 
Some  sins  do  bear  their  privilege  on  earth. 

And  so  doth  yours;  your  fault  was  not  your  folly: 
Needs  must  you  lay  your  heart  at  his  dispose. 
Subjected  tribute  to  commanding  love. 

Against  whose  fury  and  unmatched  force 
The  aweless  lion  could  not  wage  the  fight. 

Nor  keep  his  princely  heart  from  Richard’s  hand. 
He  that  perforce  robs  lions  of  their  hearts 
May  easily  win  a  woman’s.  Ay,  my  mother. 

With  all  my  heart  I  thank  thee  for  my  father!  270 
A\To  lives  and  dares  but  say  thou  didst  not  well 
When  I  was  got.  I’ll  send  his  soul  to  hell. 

Come,  lady,  I  will  show  thee  to  my  kin; 

And  they  shall  say,  when  Richard  me  begot. 

If  thou  hadst  said  him  nay,  it  had  been  sin: 


JOHN 

Who  says  it  was,  he  lies;  I  say  ’twas  not. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  France:  before  Anglers 
Enter  Austria  and  forces,  drums,  etc.  on  one  side: 
on  the  other  king  Philip  of  France  and  his  poi^er; 
LEWIS,  ARTHUR,  CONSTANCE  and  attendants. 

Lew.  Before  Angiers  well  met,  brave  Austria. 
Arthur,  that  great  forerunner  of  thy  blood, 
Richard,  that  robb’d  the  lion  of  his  heart 
And  fought  the  holy  wars  in  Palestine, 

By  this  brave  duke  came  early  to  his  grave: 

And  for  amends  to  his  posterity. 

At  our  importance  hither  is  he  come. 

To  spread  his  colours,  boy,  in  thy  behalf, 

And  to  rebuke  the  usurpation 
Of  thy  unnatural  uncle,  English  John:  10 

Embrace  him,  love  him,  give  him  welcome  hither. 
Arth.  God  shall  forgive  you  Coeur-de-1  ion’s 
death 

The  rather  that  you  give  his  offspring  life, 
Shadowing  their  right  under  your  wings  of  war: 

I  give  you  welcome  with  a  powerless  hand. 

But  with  a  heart  full  of  unstained  love; 

Welcome  before  the  gates  of  Angiers,  Duke. 
Lew.  A  noble  boy!  Who  would  not  do  thee 
right? 

Aust.  Upon  thy  cheek  lay  I  this  zealous  kiss 
As  seal  to  this  indenture  of  my  love  20 

That  to  my  home  I  will  no  more  return 
Till  Angiers  and  the  right  thou  hast  in  France, 
Together  with  that  pale,  that  white-faced  shore. 
Whose  foot  spurns  back  the  ocean’s  roaring  tides 
And  coops  from  other  lands  her  islanders, 

Even  till  that  England,  hedged  in  with  the  main, 
That  water-walled  bulwark,  still  secure 
And  confident  from  foreign  purposes. 

Even  till  that  utmost  corner  of  the  west 
Salute  thee  for  her  king:  till  then,  fair  boy,  50 
Will  I  not  think  of  home,  but  follow  arms. 

Const.  O,  take  his  mother’s  thanks,  a  widow’s 
thanks. 

Till  your  strong  hand  shall  help  to  give  him 
strength 

To  make  a  more  requital  to  your  love! 

Aust.  The  peace  of  heaven  is  theirs  that  lift 
their  swords 

In  such  a  just  and  charitable  war. 

K.  Phi.  Well  then,  to  work:  our  cannon  shall  be 
bent 

Against  the  brows  of  this  resisting  town. 

Call  for  our  chiefest  men  of  discipline. 

To  cull  the  plots  of  best  advantages :  40 

We’ll  lay  before  this  town  our  royal  bones. 


ACT  U 


380  KING 

Wade  to  the  market-place  in  Frenchmen’s  blood, 
But  we  will  make  it  subject  to  this  boy. 

Const.  Stay  for  an  answer  to  your  embassy, 

Lest  unadvised  you  stain  your  swords  with 
blood: 

My  Lord  Chatillon  may  from  England  bring 
That  right  in  peace  which  here  we  urge  in  war, 
And  then  we  shall  repent  each  drop  of  blood 
That  hot  rash  haste  so  indirectly  shed. 

Enter  chatillon. 

K.  Phi.  A  wonder,  lady !  lo,  upon  thy  wish. 

Our  messenger  Chatillon  is  arrived!  5/ 

What  England  says,  say  briefly,  gentle  lord; 

We  coldly  pause  for  thee;  Chatillon,  speak. 

Chat.  Then  turn  your  forces  from  this  paltry 
siege 

And  stir  them  up  against  a  mightier  task. 

England,  impatient  of  your  just  demands. 

Hath  put  himself  in  arms:  the  adverse  winds, 
Whose  leisure  I  have  stay’d,  have  given  him 
time 

To  land  his  legions  all  as  soon  as  I; 

His  marches  are  expedient  to  this  town,  60 

His  forces  strong,  his  soldiers  confident. 

With  him  along  is  come  the  mother-queen. 

An  Ate,  stirring  him  to  blood  and  strife; 

With  her  her  niece,  the  Lady  Blanch  of  Spain; 
With  them  a  bastard  of  the  king’s  deceased; 

And  all  the  unsettled  humours  of  the  land. 

Rash,  inconsiderate,  fiery  voluntaries. 

With  ladies’  faces  and  fierce  dragons’  spleens. 
Have  sold  their  fortunes  at  their  native  homes. 
Bearing  their  birthrights  proudly  on  their  backs, 
To  make  a  hazard  of  new  fortunes  here:  7/ 

In  brief,  a  braver  choice  of  dauntless  spirits 
Than  now  the  English  bottoms  have  waft  o’er 
Did  never  float  upon  the  swelling  tide. 

To  do  offence  and  scath  in  Christendom. 

Drum  beats. 

The  interruption  of  their  churlish  drums 
Cuts  off  more  circumstance:  they  are  at  hand 
To  parley  or  to  fight;  therefore  prepare. 

K.  Phi.  How  much  unlook’d  for  is  this  expedi¬ 
tion! 

Aust.  By  how  much  unexpected,  by  so  much 
We  must  awake  endeavour  for  defence;  81 

For  courage  mounteth  with  occasion: 

Let  them  be  welcome  then;  we  are  prepared. 

Enter  king  john,  elinor,  blanch,  the 
BASTARD,  Lords.,  and  forces. 

K.  John.  Peace  be  to  France,  if  France  in  peace 
permit 

Our  just  and  lineal  entrance  to  our  own; 

If  not,  bleed  France,  and  peace  ascend  to  heaven, 


JOHN 

Whiles  we,  God’s  wrathful  agent,  do  correct 
Their  proud  contempt  that  beats  His  peace  to 
heaven. 

K.  Phi.  Peace  be  to  England,  if  that  war  return 
From  France  to  England,  there  to  live  in  peace. 
England  we  love;  and  for  that  England’s  sake  p/ 
With  burden  of  our  armour  here  we  sweat. 

This  toil  of  ours  should  be  a  work  of  thine; 

But  thou  from  loving  England  art  so  far. 

That  thou  hast  under-wrought  his  lawful  king. 
Cut  off  the  sequence  of  posterity. 

Out-faced  infant  state,  and  done  a  rape 
Upon  the  maiden  virtue  of  the  crown. 

Look  here  upon  thy  brother  Geoffrey’s  face; 
These  eyes,  these  iDrows,  were  moulded  out  of 
his:  100 

This  little  abstract  doth  contain  that  large 
Which  died  in  Geoffrey,  and  the  hand  of  time 
Shall  draw  this  brief  into  as  huge  a  volume. 

That  Geoffrey  was  thy  elder  brother  born. 

And  this  his  son;  England  was  Geoffrey’s  right 
And  this  is  Geoffrey’s:  in  the  name  of  God 
How  comes  it  then  that  thou  art  call’d  a  king. 
When  living  blood  doth  in  these  temples  beat. 
Which  owe  the  crown  that  thou  o’ermasterest? 
K.  John.  From  whom  hast  thou  this  great  com¬ 
mission,  France,  no 

To  draw  my  answer  from  thy  articles? 

K.  Phi.  From  that  supernal  judge,  that  stirs  good 
thoughts 

In  any  breast  of  strong  authority. 

To  look  into  the  blots  and  stains  of  right: 

That  judge  hath  made  me  guardian  to  this  boy: 
Under  whose  warrant  1  impeach  thy  wrong 
And  by  whose  help  I  mean  to  chastise  it. 

K.  John.  Alack,  thou  dost  usurp  authority. 

K.  Phi.  Excuse,  it  is  to  beat  usurping  down. 

Eli.  Who  is  it  thou  dost  call  usurper,  Erance? 
Const.  Let  me  make  answer;  thy  usurping  son. 
Eli.  Out,  insolent!  thy  bastard  shall  be  king 
That  thou  mayst  be  a  queen,  and  check  the 
world! 

Const.  My  bed  was  ever  to  thy  son  as  true 
As  thine  was  to  thy  husband;  and  this  boy 
Liker  in  feature  to  his  father  Geoffrey 
Than  thou  and  John  in  manners;  being  as  like 
As  rain  to  water,  or  devil  to  his  dam. 

My  boy  a  bastard!  By  my  soul,  I  think 

His  father  never  was  so  true  begot:  75 0 

It  cannot  be,  an  if  thou  wert  his  mother. 

Eli.  There’s  a  good  mother,  boy,  that  blots  thy 
father. 

Const.  There’s  a  good  grandam,  boy,  that  would 
blot  thee. 

Aust.  Peace! 

Bast.  Hear  the  crier. 


SCENE  I  KING 

Aust.  What  the  devil  art  thou? 

Bast.  One  that  will  play  the  devil,  sir,  with  you, 
An  a’  may  catch  your  hide  and  you  alone: 

You  are  the  hare  of  whom  the  proverb  goes, 

Whose  valour  plucks  dead  lions  by  the  beard: 

[’ll  smoke  your  skin-coat,  an  I  catch  you  right; 
Sirrah,  look  to’t;  i’faith,  I  will,  i’faith.  /40 

Blanch.  O,  well  did  he  become  that  lion’s  robe 
That  did  disrobe  the  lion  of  that  robe! 

Bast.  It  lies  as  sightly  on  the  back  of  him 
As  great  Alcides’  shows  upon  an  ass: 

But,  ass,  I’ll  take  that  burthen  from  your  back, 

Or  lay  on  that  shall  make  your  shoulders  crack. 
Aust.  What  cracker  is  this  same  that  deafs  our 
ears 

With  this  abundance  of  superfluous  breath? 

K.  Phi.  Lewis,  determine  what  we  shall  do 
straight. 

Lew.  Women  and  fools,  break  off  your  con¬ 
ference.  /JO 

King  John,  this  is  the  very  sum  of  all; 

England  and  Ireland,  Anjou,  Touraine,  Maine, 

In  right  of  Arthur  do  I  claim  of  thee: 

Wilt  thou  resign  them  and  lay  down  thy  arms? 

K.  John.  My  life  as  soon:  I  do  defy  thee, 

France. 

Arthur  of  Bretagne,  yield  thee  to  my  hand; 

And  out  of  my  dear  love  I’ll  give  thee  more 
Than  e’er  the  coward  hand  of  France  can  win: 
Submit  thee,  boy. 

Eli.  Come  to  thy  grandam,  child. 

Const.  Do,  child,  go  to  it  grandam,  child;  i6o 
Give  grandam  kingdom,  and  it  grandam  will 
Give  it  a  plum,  a  cherry,  and  a  fig: 

There’s  a  good  grandam. 

Arth.  Good  my  mother,  peace! 

I  would  that  I  were  low  laid  in  my  grave: 

I  am  not  worth  this  coil  that’s  made  for  me. 

Eli.  His  mother  shames  him  so,  poor  boy,  he 
weeps. 

Const.  Now  shame  upon  you,  whether  she  does 
or  no! 

His  grandam’s  wrongs,  and  not  his  mother’s 
shames. 

Draws  those  heaven-moving  pearls  from  his  poor 
eyes. 

Which  heaven  shall  take  in  nature  of  a  fee;  /70 
Ay,  with  these  crystal  beads  heaven  shall  be 
bribed 

To  do  him  justice  and  revenge  on  you. 

Eli.  Thou  monstrous  slanderer  of  heaven  and 
earth! 

Const.  Thou  monstrous  injurer  of  heaven  and 
earth! 

Call  not  me  slanderer;  thou  and  thine  usurp 
The  dominations,  royalties,  and  rights 


JOHN  381 

Of  this  oppressed  boy:  this  is  thy  eld’st  son’s  son, 
Infortunate  in  nothing  but  in  thee: 

Thy  sins  are  visited  in  this  poor  child; 

The  canon  of  the  law  is  laid  on  him,  180 

Being  but  the  second  generation 
Removed  from  thy  sin-conceiving  womb. 

K.  John.  Bedlam,  have  done. 

Const.  I  have  but  this  to  say. 

That  he  is  not  only  plagued  for  her  sin. 

But  God  hath  made  her  sin  and  her  the  plague 
On  this  removed  issue,  plagued  for  her 
And  with  her  plague;  her  sin  his  injury. 

Her  injury  the  beadle  to  her  sin. 

All  punish’d  in  the  person  of  this  child. 

And  all  for  her;  a  plague  upon  her!  /jo 

Eli.  Thou  unadvised  scold,  I  can  produce 
A  will  that  bars  the  title  of  thy  son. 

Const.  Ay,  who  doubts  that?  a  will!  a  wicked 
will; 

A  woman’s  will;  a  canker’d  grandam’s  will! 

K.  Phi.  Peace,  lady!  pause,  or  be  more  tem¬ 
perate: 

It  ill  beseems  this  presence  to  cry  aim 
To  these  ill-tuned  repetitions. 

Some  trumpet  summon  hither  to  the  walls 
These  men  of  Angiers:  let  us  hear  them  speak 
Whose  title  they  admit,  Arthur’s  or  John’s.  200 

Trumpet  sounds.  Enter  a  citizen  upon 
the  walls.,  attended. 

Cit.  Who  IS  it  that  hath  warn’d  us  to  the  walls? 
K.  Phi.  ’Tis  France,  for  England. 

K.  John.  England,  for  itself. 

You  men  of  Angiers,  and  my  loving  subjects — 

K.  Phi.  You  loving  men  of  Angiers,  Arthur’s 
subjects. 

Our  trumpet  call’d  you  to  this  gentle  parle — 

K.  John.  For  our  advantage;  therefore  hear  us 
first. 

These  flags  of  France,  that  are  advanced  here 
Before  the  eye  and  prospect  of  your  town. 

Have  hither  march’d  to  your  endamagement: 

The  cannons  have  their  bowels  full  of  wrath,  210 
And  ready  mounted  are  they  to  spit  forth 
Their  iron  indignation  ’gainst  your  walls: 

All  preparation  for  a  bloody  siege 
And  merciless  proceeding  by  these  French 
Confronts  your  city’s  eyes,  your  winking  gates; 
And  but  for  our  approach  those  sleeping  stones. 
That  as  a  waist  doth  girdle  you  about, 

By  the  compulsion  of  their  ordinance 
By  this  time  from  their  fixed  beds  of  lime 
Had  been  dishabited,  and  wide  havoc  made  220 
For  bloody  power  to  rush  upon  your  peace. 

But  on  the  sight  of  us  your  lawful  king. 

Who  painfully  with  much  expedient  march 


382  KING 

Have  brought  a  countercheck  before  your  gates, 
To  save  unscratch’d  your  city’s  threatened 
cheeks. 

Behold,  the  French  amazed  vouchsafe  a  parle; 

And  now,  instead  of  bullets  wrapp’d  in  fire. 

To  make  a  shaking  fever  in  your  walls, 

They  shoot  but  calm  words  folded  up  in  smoke. 
To  make  a  faithless  error  in  your  ears:  250 

Which  trust  accordingly  kind  citizens. 

And  let  us  in,  your  king,  whose  labour’d  spirits, 
Forwearied  in  this  action  of  swift  speed. 

Crave  harbourage  within  your  city  walls. 

K.  Phi.  When  I  have  said,  make  answer  to  us 
both. 

Lo,  in  this  right  hand,  whose  protection 
Is  most  divinely  vow’d  upon  the  right 
Of  him  it  holds,  stands  young  Plantagenet, 

Son  to  the  elder  brother  of  this  man. 

And  king  o’er  him  and  all  that  he  enjoys :  240 

For  this  down-trodden  equity,  we  tread 
In  warlike  march  these  greens  before  your  town. 
Being  no  further  enemy  to  you 
Than  the  constraint  of  hospitable  zeal 
In  the  relief  of  this  oppressed  child 
Religiously  provokes.  Be  pleased  then 
To  pay  that  duty  which  you  truly  owe 
To  him  that  owes  it,  namely  this  young  prince: 
And  then  our  arms,  like  to  a  muzzled  bear. 

Save  in  aspect,  hath  all  offence  seal’d  up;  250 
Our  cannons’  malice  vainly  shall  be  spent 
Against  the  invulnerable  clouds  of  heaven; 

And  with  a  blessed  and  unvex’d  retire, 

With  unhack’d  swords  and  helmets  all  unbruised. 
We  will  bear  home  that  lusty  blood  again 
Which  here  we  came  to  spout  against  your  town. 
And  leave  your  children,  wives,  and  you  in  peace. 
But  if  you  fondly  pass  our  proffer’d  offer, 

’Tis  not  the  roundure  of  your  old-faced  walls 
Can  hide  you  from  our  messengers  of  war,  2  60 

Though  all  these  English  and  their  discipline 
Were  harbour’d  in  their  rude  circumference. 
Then  tell  us,  shall  your  city  call  us  lord. 

In  that  behalf  which  we  have  challenged  it? 

Or  shall  we  give  the  signal  to  our  rage 
And  stalk  in  blood  to  our  possession? 

Cit.  In  brief,  we  are  the  King  of  England’s  sub¬ 
jects: 

For  him,  and  in  his  right,  we  hold  this  town. 

K.  John.  Acknowledge  then  the  King,  and  let 
me  in. 

Cit.  That  can  we  not;  but  he  that  proves  the 
King,  270 

To  him  will  we  prove  loyal:  till  that  time 
Have  we  ramm’d  up  our  gates  against  the  world. 
K.  John.  Doth  not  the  crown  of  England  prove 
the  King? 


JOHN  ACT  II 

And  if  not  that,  I  bring  you  witnesses. 

Twice  fifteen  thousand  hearts  of  England’s 
breed — 

Bast.  Bastards,  and  else. 

K.  John.  To  verify  our  title  with  their  lives. 

K.  Phi.  As  many  and  as  well-born  bloods  as 
those — 

Bast.  Some  bastards  too. 

K.  Phi.  Stand  in  his  face  to  contradict  his  claim. 
Cit.  Till  you  compound  whose  right  is  worthi¬ 
est,  281 

We  for  the  worthiest  hold  the  right  from  both. 

K.  John.  Then  God  forgive  the  sin  of  all  those 
souls 

That  to  their  everlasting  residence. 

Before  the  dew  of  evening  fall,  shall  fleet. 

In  dreadful  trial  of  our  kingdom’s  king! 

K.  Phi.  Amen,  amen!  Mount,  chevaliers!  to 
arms! 

Bast.  Saint  George,  that  swinged  the  dragon, 
and  e’er  since 

Sits  on  his  horse  back  at  mine  hostess’  door. 
Teach  us  some  fence!  [To  Austria]  Sirrah,  were 
I  at  home,  2^0 

At  your  den,  sirrah,  with  your  lioness, 

I  would  set  an  ox-head  to  your  lion’s  hide. 

And  make  a  monster  of  you. 

Aust.  Peace !  no  more . 

Bast.  O,  tremble,  for  you  hear  the  lion  roar. 

K.  John.  Up  higher  to  the  plain;  where  we’ll 
set  forth 

In  best  appointment  all  our  regiments. 

Bast.  Speed  then,  to  take  advantage  of  the  field. 
K.  Phi.  It  shall  be  so;  and  at  the  other  hill 
Command  the  rest  to  stand.  God  and  our  right! 

[Exeunt. 

Here  after  excursions.,  enter  the  herald  of 
FRANCE,  with  trumpets.,  to  the  gates. 

F.  Her.  You  men  of  Angiers,  open  wide  your 
gates,  500 

And  let  young  Arthur,  Duke  of  Bretagne,  in. 
Who  by  the  hand  of  France  this  day  hath  made 
Much  work  for  tears  in  many  an  English  mother, 
Whose  sons  lie  scattered  on  the  bleeding  ground; 
Many  a  widow’s  husband  grovelling  lies. 

Coldly  embracing  the  discolour’d  earth; 

And  victory,  with  little  loss,  doth  play 
Upon  the  dancing  banners  of  the  French, 

Who  are  at  hand,  triumphantly  display’d. 

To  enter  conquerors  and  to  proclaim  5/0 

Arthur  of  Bretagne  England’s  king  and  yours. 

Enter  English  herald,  with  trumpet. 

E.  Her.  Rejoice,  you  men  of  Angiers,  ring  your 
bells; 


SCENIC  1  KING 

King  John,  your  king  and  England’s,  doth  ap¬ 
proach. 

Commander  of  this  hot  malicious  day: 

Their  armours,  that  march’d  hence  so  silver- 
bright. 

Hither  return  all  gilt  with  Frenchmen’s  blood; 
There  stuck  no  plume  in  any  English  crest 
That  is  removed  by  a  staff  of  France; 

Our  colours  do  return  in  those  same  hands 
That  did  display  them  when  we  first  march’d 
forth; 

And,  like  a  jolly  troop  of  huntsmen,  come  52/ 
Our  lusty  English,  all  with  purpled  hands. 

Dyed  in  the  dying  slaughter  of  their  foes: 

Open  your  gates  and  give  the  victors  way. 

Cit,  Heralds,  from  off  our  towers  we  might 
behold. 

From  first  to  last,  the  onset  and  retire 
Of  both  your  armies;  whose  equality 
By  our  best  eyes  cannot  be  censured: 

Blood  hath  bought  blood  and  blows  have  an¬ 
swer’d  blows; 

Strength  match’d  with  strength,  and  power  con¬ 
fronted  power :  550 

Both  are  alike;  and  both  alike  we  like. 

One  must  prove  greatest:  while  they  weigh  so 
even. 

We  hold  our  town  for  neither,  yet  for  both. 

Re-enter  the  two  kings,  with  their  powers, 
severally. 

K.  John.  France,  hast  thou  yet  more  blood  to 
cast  away? 

Say,  shall  the  current  of  our  right  run  on? 

Whose  passage,  vex’d  with  thy  impediment. 

Shall  leave  his  native  channel  and  o’erswell 
With  course  disturb’d  even  thy  confining  shores. 
Unless  thou  let  his  silver  water  keep 
A  peaceful  progress  to  the  ocean.  540 

K.  Phi.  England,  thou  hast  not  saved  one  drop 
of  blood. 

In  this  hot  trial,  more  than  we  of  France; 

Rather,  lost  more.  And  by  this  hand  I  swear. 

That  sways  the  earth  this  climate  overlooks. 
Before  we  will  lay  down  our  just-borne  arms. 
We’ll  put  thee  down,  ’gainst  whom  these  arms 
we  bear. 

Or  add  a  royal  number  to  the  dead. 

Gracing  the  scroll  that  tells  of  this  war’s  loss 
With  slaughter  coupled  to  the  name  of  kings. 

Bast.  Ha,  majesty!  how  high  thy  glory  towers. 
When  the  rich  blood  of  kings  is  set  on  fire !  55/ 

O,  now  doth  Death  line  his  dead  chaps  with  steel; 
The  swords  of  soldiers  are  his  teeth,  his  fangs; 
And  now  he  feasts,  mousing  the  flesh  of  men, 

In  undetermined  differences  of  kings. 


JOHN  383 

Why  stand  these  royal  fronts  amazed  thus? 

Cry,  “havoc!”  kings;  back  to  the  stained  field. 
You  equal  potents,  fiery  kindled  spirits! 

Then  let  confusion  of  one  part  confirm 
The  other’s  peace;  till  then,  blows,  blood,  and 
death!  ^60 

K.  John.  Whose  party  do  the  townsmen  yet 
admit? 

K.  Phi.  Speak,  citizens,  for  England;  who’s  your 
king? 

Cit.  The  King  of  England,  when  we  know  the 
King. 

K.  Phi.  Know  him  in  us,  that  here  hold  up  his 
right. 

K.  John.  In  us,  that  are  our  own  great  deputy. 
And  bear  possession  of  our  person  here. 

Lord  of  our  presence,  Angiers,  and  of  you. 

Cit.  A  greater  power  than  we  denies  all  this; 

And  till  it  be  undoubted,  we  do  lock 
Our  former  scruple  in  our  strong-barr’d  gates; 
King’d  of  our  fears,  until  our  fears,  resolved,  57/ 
Be  by  some  certain  king  purged  and  deposed. 

Bast.  By  heaven,  these  scroyles  of  Angiers  flout 
you,  kings. 

And  stand  securely  on  their  battlements 
As  in  a  theatre,  whence  they  gape  and  point 
At  your  industrious  scenes  and  acts  of  death. 
Your  royal  presences  be  ruled  by  me: 

Do  like  the  mutines  of  Jerusalem, 

Be  friends  awhile  and  both  conjointly  bend 
Your  sharpest  deeds  of  malice  on  this  town :  5  80 
By  east  and  west  let  France  and  England  mount 
Their  battering  cannon  charged  to  the  mouths. 
Till  their  soul-fearing  clamours  have  brawl’d 
down 

The  flinty  ribs  of  this  contemptuous  city: 
rid  play  incessantly  upon  these  jades. 

Even  till  unfenced  desolation 
Leave  them  as  naked  as  the  vulgar  air. 

That  done,  dissever  your  united  strengths, 

And  part  your  mingled  colours  once  again; 

Turn  face  to  face  and  bloody  point  to  point;  jpo 
Then,  in  a  moment.  Fortune  shall  cull  forth 
Out  of  one  side  her  happy  minion. 

To  whom  in  favour  she  shall  give  the  day. 

And  kiss  him  with  a  glorious  victory. 

How  like  you  this  wild  counsel,  mighty  states? 
Smacks  it  not  something  of  the  policy? 

K.  John.  Now,  by  the  sky  that  hangs  above  our 
heads, 

I  like  it  well.  France,  shall  we  knit  our  powers 
And  lay  this  Angiers  even  with  the  ground; 

Then  after  fight  who  shall  be  king  of  it?  400 
Bast.  An  if  thou  hast  the  mettle  of  a  king. 

Being  wrong’d  as  we  are  by  this  peevish  town. 
Turn  thou  the  mouth  of  thy  artillery. 


384  KING 

As  we  will  ours,  against  these  saucy  walls; 

And  when  that  we  have  dash’d  them  to  the 
ground, 

Why  then  defy  each  other,  and  pell-mell 
Make  work  upon  ourselves,  for  heaven  or  hell. 

K.  Phi.  Let  it  be  so.  Say,  where  will  you  as¬ 
sault? 

K.  John.  We  from  the  west  will  send  destruc¬ 
tion 

Into  this  city’s  bosom.  410 

Aiist.  I  from  the  north. 

K.  Phi.  Our  thunder  from  the  south 

Shall  rain  their  drift  of  bullets  on  this  town. 

Bast.  O  prudent  discipline!  From  north  to  south: 
Austria  and  France  shoot  in  each  other’s  mouth: 
I’ll  stir  them  to  it.  Come,  away,  away! 

Cit.  Hear  us,  great  kings:  vouchsafe  awhile  to 
stay, 

And  I  shall  show  you  peace  and  fair-faced  league 
Win  you  this  city  without  stroke  or  wound; 
Rescue  those  breathing  lives  to  die  in  beds. 

That  here  come  sacrifices  for  the  field:  420 

Persever  not,  but  hear  me,  mighty  kings. 

K.  John.  Speak  on  with  favour;  we  are  bent  to 
hear. 

Cit.  That  daughter  there  of  Spain,  the  Lady 
Blanch, 

Is  niece  to  England:  look  upon  the  years 
Of  Lewis  the  Dauphin  and  that  lovely  maid: 

If  lusty  love  should  go  in  quest  of  beauty. 

Where  should  he  find  it  fairer  than  in  Blanch? 

If  zealous  love  should  go  in  search  of  virtue. 
Where  should  he  find  it  purer  than  in  Blanch? 

If  love  ambitious  sought  a  match  of  birth,  4^0 
Whose  veins  bound  richer  blood  than  Lady 
Blanch? 

Such  as  she  is,  in  beauty,  virtue,  birth. 

Is  the  young  Dauphin  every  way  complete: 

If  not  complete  of,  say  he  is  not  she; 

And  she  again  wants  nothing,  to  name  want, 

If  want  it  be  not  that  she  is  not  he: 

He  is  the  half  part  of  a  blessed  man, 

Left  to  be  finished  by  such  as  she; 

And  she  a  fair  divided  excellence. 

Whose  fulness  of  perfection  lies  in  him.  440 
O,  two  such  silver  currents,  when  they  join. 

Do  glorify  the  banks  that  bound  them  in; 

And  two  such  shores  to  two  such  streams  made 
one. 

Two  such  controlling  bounds  shall  you  be,  kings. 
To  these  two  princes,  if  you  marry  them. 

This  union  shall  do  more  than  battery  can 
To  our  fast-closed  gates;  for  at  this  match. 

With  swifter  spleen  than  powder  can  enforce. 
The  mouth  of  passage  shall  we  fling  wide  ope. 
And  give  you  entrance:  but  without  this  match, 


JOHN  ACT  ir 

The  sea  enraged  is  not  half  so  deaf,  45/ 

Lions  more  confident,  mountains  and  rocks 
More  free  from  motion,  no,  not  Death  himself 
In  mortal  fury  half  so  peremptory. 

As  we  to  keep  this  city. 

Bast.  Here’s  a  stay 

That  shakes  the  rotten  carcass  of  old  Death 
Out  of  his  rags!  Here’s  a  large  mouth,  indeed. 
That  spits  forth  death  and  mountains,  rocks  and 
seas. 

Talks  as  familiarly  of  roaring  lions 

As  maids  of  thirteen  do  of  puppy-dogs!  460 

What  cannoneer  begot  this  lusty  blood? 

He  speaks  plain  cannon  fire,  and  smoke  and 
bounce; 

He  gives  the  bastinado  with  his  tongue: 

Our  ears  are  cudgell’d;  not  a  word  of  his 
But  buffets  better  than  a  fist  of  France: 

Zounds!  I  was  never  so  bethump’d  with  words 
Since  I  first  called  my  brother’s  father  dad. 

Eli.  Son,  list  to  this  conjunction,  make  this 
match; 

Give  with  our  niece  a  dowry  large  enough: 

For  by  this  knot  thou  shalt  so  surely  tie  470 
Thy  now  unsured  assurance  to  the  crown, 

That  yon  green  boy  shall  have  no  sun  to  ripe 
The  bloom  that  promiseth  a  mighty  fruit. 

I  see  a  yielding  in  the  looks  of  France; 

Mark,  how  they  whisper:  urge  them  while  their 
souls 

Are  capable  of  this  ambition. 

Lest  zeal,  now  melted  by  the  windy  breath 
Of  soft  petitions,  pity,  and  remorse. 

Cool  and  congeal  again  to  what  it  was. 

Cit.  Why  answer  not  the  double  majesties  480 
This  friendly  treaty  of  our  threaten’d  town? 

K.  Phi.  Speak  England  first,  that  hath  been  for¬ 
ward  first 

To  speak  unto  this  city:  what  say  you? 

K.  John.  If  that  the  Dauphin  there,  thy  princely 
son. 

Can  in  this  book  of  beauty  read  “I  love,” 

Her  dowry  shall  weigh  equal  with  a  queen: 

For  Anjou  and  fair  Touraine,  Maine,  Poictiers, 
And  all  that  we  upon  this  side  the  sea. 

Except  this  city  now  by  us  besieged. 

Find  liable  to  our  crown  and  dignity,  4^0 

Shall  gild  her  bridal  bed  and  make  her  rich 
In  titles,  honours,  and  promotions. 

As  she  in  beauty,  education,  blood. 

Holds  hand  with  any  princess  of  the  world. 

K.  Phi.  What  say’st  thou,  boy?  look  in  the 
lady’s  face. 

Lew.  I  do,  my  lord;  and  in  her  eye  I  find 
A  wonder,  or  a  wondrous  miracle. 

The  shadow  of  myself  form’d  in  her  eye; 


SCENE  I 


KING 

Which,  being  but  the  shadow  of  your  son, 
Becomes  a  sun  and  makes  your  son  a  shadow:  yoo 
I  do  protest  I  never  loved  myself 
Till  now  infixed  I  beheld  myself 
Drawn  in  the  flattering  table  of  her  eye. 

Whispers  'with  blanch. 

Bast.  E)rawn  in  the  flattering  table  of  her  eye! 
Rang’d  in  the  frowning  wrinkle  of  her  brow! 
And  quarter’d  in  her  heart!  he  doth  espy 
Himself  love’s  traitor:  this  is  pity  now. 

That,  hang’d  and  drawn  and  quarter’d,  there 
should  be 

In  such  a  love  so  vile  a  lout  as  he. 

Blanch.  My  uncle’s  will  in  this  respect  is 
mine: 

If  he  see  aught  in  you  that  makes  him  like,  y// 
That  anything  he  sees,  which  moves  his  liking, 

I  can  with  ease  translate  it  to  my  will; 

Or  if  you  will,  to  speak  more  properly, 

I  will  enforce  it  easily  to  my  love. 

Further  I  will  not  flatter  you,  my  lord, 

That  all  I  see  in  you  is  worthy  love, 

Than  this;  that  nothing  do  I  see  in  you. 

Though  churlish  thoughts  themselves  should  be 
your  judge. 

That  I  can  find  should  merit  any  hate.  y2o 

K.  John.  What  say  these  young  ones?  What  say 
you,  my  niece? 

Blanch.  That  she  is  bound  in  honour  still  to  do 
What  you  in  wisdom  still  vouchsafe  to  say. 

K.  John.  Speak  then,  Prince  Dauphin;  can  you 
love  this  lady? 

Lev:.  Nay,  ask  me  if  I  can  refrain  from  love; 

For  I  do  love  her  most  unfeignedly. 

K.  John.  Then  do  I  give  Volquessen,  Touraine, 
Maine, 

Poictiers  and  x\njou,  these  five  provinces. 

With  her  to  thee-,  and  this  addition  more. 

Full  thirty  thousand  marks  of  English  coin,  yyo 
Philip  of  France,  if  thou  be  pleased  withal. 
Command  thy  son  and  daughter  to  join  hands. 

K.  Phi.  It  likes  us  well;  young  princes,  close 
your  hands. 

Aust.  And  your  lips  too;  for  I  am  well  assured 
That  I  did  so  when  I  was  first  assured. 

K.  Phi.  Now,  citizens  of  Angiers,  ope  your 
gates. 

Let  in  that  amity  which  you  have  made; 

For  at  Saint  Mary’s  chapel  presently 
The  rites  of  marriage  shall  be  solemnized. 

Is  not  the  Lady  Constance  in  this  troop?  540 
I  know  she  is  not,  for  this  match  made  up 
Her  presence  would  have  interrupted  much: 
Where  is  she  and  her  son?  tell  me,  who  knows. 
Lev:.  She  is  sad  and  passionate  at  your  High¬ 
ness’  tent. 


JOHN  335 

K.  Phil.  And,  by  my  faith,  this  league  that  we 
have  made 

Will  give  her  sadness  very  little  cure. 

Brother  of  England,  how  may  we  content 
This  widow  lady?  In  her  right  we  came; 

Which  we,  God  knows,  have  turn’d  another  way. 
To  our  own  vantage. 

K.John.  We  will  heal  up  all;  yyo 

For  we’ll  create  young  Arthur  Duke  of  Bretagne 
And  Earl  of  Richmond;  and  this  rich  fair  town 
We  make  him  lord  of.  Call  the  Lady  Constance; 
Some  speedy  messenger  bid  her  repair 
To  our  solemnity:  I  trust  we  shall. 

If  not  fill  up  the  measure  of  her  will. 

Yet  in  some  measure  satisfy  her  so 
That  we  shall  stop  her  exclamation. 

Go  we,  as  well  as  haste  will  suffer  us. 

To  this  unlook’d  for,  unprepared  pomp.  ^60 
[Exeunt  all  but  the  bastard. 

Bast.  Mad  world!  mad  kings!  mad  composition! 
John,  to  stop  Arthur’s  title  in  the  whole. 

Hath  willingly  departed  with  a  part. 

And  France,  whose  armour  conscience  buckled 
on. 

Whom  zeal  and  charity  brought  to  the  field 
As  God’s  own  soldier,  rounded  in  the  ear 
With  that  same  purpose-changer,  that  sly  devil. 
That  broker,  that  still  breaks  the  pate  of  faith. 
That  daily  break-vow,  he  that  wins  of  all. 

Of  kings,  of  beggars,  old  men,  young  men,  maids. 
Who,  having  no  external  thing  to  lose  57/ 

But  the  word  “maid,”  cheats  the  poor  maid  of 
that. 

That  smooth-faced  gentleman,  tickling  Com¬ 
modity, 

Commodity,  the  bias  of  the  world. 

The  world,  who  of  itself  is  peised  well, 

Made  to  run  even  upon  even  ground. 

Till  this  advantage,  this  vile-dr awing  bias. 

This  sway  of  motion,  this  Commodity, 

Makes  it  take  head  from  all  indifferency. 

From  all  direction,  purpose,  course,  intent:  ^80 
And  this  same  bias,  this  Commodity, 

This  bawd,  this  broker,  this  all-changing  word. 
Clapp’d  on  the  outward  eye  of  fickle  France, 

Hath  drawn  him  from  his  own  determined  aid, 
From  a  resolved  and  honourable  war. 

To  a  most  base  and  vile  -concluded  peace, 
x^nd  why  rail  I  on  this  Commodity? 

But  for  because  he  hath  not  woo’d  me  yet: 

Not  that  I  have  the  power  to  clutch  my  hand. 
When  his  fair  angels  would  salute  my  palm;  ypo 
But  for  my  hand,  as  unattempted  yet. 

Like  a  poor  beggar,  raileth  on  the  rich. 

Well,  whiles  I  am  a  beggar,  I  will  rail 
And  say  there  is  no  sin  but  to  be  rich; 


ACT  III 


386  KING 

And  being  rich,  my  virtue  then  shall  be 
To  say  there  is  no  vice  but  beggary. 

Since  kings  break  faith  upon  Commodity, 

Gain,  be  my  lord,  for  I  will  worship  thee.  [Exit. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  The  French  King  s pavilion 

£72/^^  CONSTANCE,  ARTHUR,  and  SALISBURY. 

Const.  Gone  to  be  married!  gone  to  swear  a 
peace! 

False  blood  to  false  blood  join’d!  gone  to  be 
friends! 

Shall  Lewis  have  Blanch,  and  Blanch  those  prov¬ 
inces? 

It  is  not  so;  thou  hast  misspoke,  misheard; 

Be  well  advised,  tell  o’er  thy  tale  again: 

It  cannot  be;  thou  dost  but  say  ’tis  so: 

I  trust  I  may  not  trust  thee;  for  thy  word 
Is  but  the  vain  breath  of  a  common  man: 

Believe  me,  I  do  not  believe  thee,  man; 

I  have  a  king’s  oath  to  the  contrary.  10 

Thou  shalt  be  punish’d  for  thus  frighting  me, 

For  I  am  sick  and  capable  of  fears. 

Oppress’d  with  wrongs  and  therefore  full  of 
fears, 

A  widow,  husbandless,  subject  to  fears, 

A  woman,  naturally  born  to  fears; 

And  though  thou  now  confess  thou  didst  but  jest. 
With  my  vex’d  spirits  I  cannot  take  a  truce. 

But  they  will  quake  and  tremble  all  this  day. 

What  dost  thou  mean  by  shaking  of  thy  head? 
Why  dost  thou  look  so  sadly  on  my  son?  20 
What  means  that  hand  upon  that  breast  of  thine? 
Why  holds  thine  eye  that  lamentable  rheum. 

Like  a  proud  river  peering  o’er  his  bounds? 

Be  these  sad  signs  confirmers  of  thy  words? 

Then  speak  again;  not  all  thy  former  tale. 

But  this  one  word,  whether  thy  tale  be  true. 

Sal.  As  true  as  I  believe  you  think  them  false 
That  give  you  cause  to  prove  my  saying  true. 

Const.  O,  if  thou  teach  me  to  believe  this  sorrow. 
Teach  thou  this  sorrow  how  to  make  me  die,  ^0 
And  let  belief  and  life  encounter  so 
As  doth  the  fury  of  two  desperate  men 
Which  in  the  very  meeting  fall  and  die. 

Lewis  marry  Blanch !  O  boy,  then  where  art  thou? 
France  friend  with  England,  what  becomes  of 
me? 

Fellow,  be  gone:  I  cannot  brook  thy  sight: 

This  news  hath  made  thee  a  most  ugly  man. 

Sal.  What  other  harm  have  I,  good  lady,  done. 
But  spoke  the  harm  that  is  by  others  done? 

Const.  Which  harm  within  itself  so  heinous  is 
As  it  makes  harmful  all  that  speak  of  it.  4/ 

Arth.  I  do  beseech  you,  madam,  be  content. 


JOHN 

Const.  If  thou,  that  bid’st  me  be  content,  wert 
grim. 

Ugly,  and  slanderous  to  thy  mother’s  womb. 

Full  of  unpleasing  blots  and  sightless  stains. 

Lame,  foolish,  crooked,  swart,  prodigious. 
Patch’d  with  foul  moles  and  eye-offending  marks, 
I  would  not  care,  I  then  would  be  content. 

For  then  I  should  not  love  thee,  no,  nor  thou 
Become  thy  great  birth  nor  deserve  a  crown.  50 
But  thou  art  fair,  and  at  thy  birth,  dear  boy. 
Nature  and  Fortune  join’d  to  make  thee  great: 

Of  Nature’s  gifts  thou  mayst  with  lilies  boast 
And  with  the  half-blown  rose.  But  Fortune,  O, 
She  is  corrupted,  changed,  and  won  from  thee; 
She  adulterates  hourly  with  thine  uncle  John, 

And  with  her  golden  hand  hath  pluck’d  on  France 
To  tread  down  fair  respect  of  sovereignty. 

And  made  his  majesty  the  bawd  to  theirs. 

France  is  a  bawd  to  Fortune  and  King  John,  60 
That  strumpet  Fortune,  that  usurping  John! 

Tell  me,  thou  fellow,  is  not  France  forsworn? 
Envenom  him  with  words,  or  get  thee  gone 
And  leave  those  woes  alone  which  I  alone 
Am  bound  to  under-bear. 

Sal.  Pardon  me,  madam, 

I  may  not  go  without  you  to  the  kings. 

Const.  Thou  mayst,  thou  shalt;  I  will  not  go 
with  thee: 

I  will  instruct  my  sorrows  to  be  proud; 

For  grief  is  proud  and  makes  his  owner  stoop. 

To  me  and  to  the  state  of  my  great  grief  70 
Let  kings  assemble;  for  my  gTief’s  so  great 
That  no  supporter  but  the  huge  firm  earth 
Can  hold  it  up:  here  I  and  sorrows  sit; 

Here  is  my  throne,  bid  kings  come  bow  to  it. 

Seats  herself  on  the  ground. 

Enter  king  john,  king  philip,  lewis,  blanch, 

ELINOR,  the  BASTARD,  AUSTRIA,  and  Attendants. 

K.  Phi.  ’Tis  true,  fair  daughter;  and  this  blessed 
day 

Ever  in  France  shall  be  kept  festival: 

To  solemnize  this  day  the  glorious  sun 
Stays  in  his  course  and  plays  the  alchemist. 
Turning  with  splendour  of  his  precious  eye 
The  meagre  cloddy  earth  to  glittering  gold:  80 
The  yearly  course  that  brings  this  day  about 
Shall  never  see  it  but  a  holiday. 

Const.  A  wicked  day,  and  not  a  holy  day! 

Rising. 

What  hath  this  day  deserved?  what  hath  it  done. 
That  it  in  golden  letters  should  be  set 
Among  the  high  tides  in  the  calendar? 

Nay,  rather  turn  this  day  out  of  the  week. 

This  day  of  shame,  oppression,  perjury. 

Or,  if  it  must  stand  still,  let  wives  with  child 


SCENE  I  KING 

Pray  that  their  burthens  may  not  fall  this  day, 
Lest  that  their  hopes  prodigiously  be  cross’d: 

But  on  this  day  let  seamen  fear  no  wreck; 

No  bargains  break  that  are  not  this  day  made: 

This  day,  all  things  begun  come  to  ill  end. 

Yea,  faith  itself  to  hollow  falsehood  change! 

K.  Phi.  By  heaven,  lady,  you  shall  have  no 
cause 

To  curse  the  fair  proceedings  of  this  day: 

Have  I  not  pawn’d  to  you  my  majesty? 

Const.  You  have  beguiled  me  with  a  counterfeit 
Resembling  majesty,  which,  being  touch’d  and 
tried,  loo 

Proves  valueless:  you  are  forsworn,  forsworn; 
You  came  in  arms  to  spill  mine  enemies’  blood. 

But  now  in  arms  you  strengthen  it  with  yours: 
The  grappling  vigour  and  rough  frown  of  war 
Is  cold  in  amity  and  painted  peace. 

And  our  oppression  hath  made  up  this  league. 
Arm,  arm,  you  heavens,  against  these  perjured 
kings! 

A  widow  cries;  be  husband  to  me,  heavens! 

Let  not  the  hours  of  this  ungodly  day 
Wear  out  the  day  in  peace;  but,  ere  sunset,  no 
Set  armed  discord  ’twixt  these  perjured  kings! 
Hear  me,  O,  hear  me! 

Aust.  Lady  Constance,  peace! 

Const.  War!  war!  no  peace!  peace  is  to  me  a 
war. 

O  Lymoges!  O  Austria!  thou  dost  shame 
That  bloody  spoil:  thou  slave,  thou  wretch,  thou 
coward! 

Thou  little  valiant,  great  in  villainy! 

Thou  ever  strong  upon  the  stronger  side! 

Thou  Fortune’s  champion  that  dost  never  fight 
But  when  her  humorous  ladyship  is  by 
To  teach  thee  safety!  thou  art  perjured  too,  120 
And  soothest  up  greatness.  What  a  fool  art  thou, 
A  ramping  fool,  to  brag  and  stamp  and  swear 
Upon  my  party!  Thou  cold-blooded  slave. 

Hast  thou  not  spoke  like  thunder  on  my  side. 

Been  sworn  my  soldier,  bidding  me  depend 
Upon  thy  stars,  thy  fortune,  and  thy  strength. 

And  dost  thou  now  fall  over  to  my  foes? 

Thou  wear  a  lion’s  hide!  doff  it  for  shame. 

And  hang  a  calf’s-skin  on  those  recreant  limbs, 
Aiist.  O,  that  a  man  should  speak  those  words 
tome!  75  0 

Bast.  And  hjing  a  calf’s-skin  on  those  recreant 
limbs. 

Aust.  Thou  darest  not  say  so,  villain,  for  thy 
life. 

Bast.  And  hang  a  calf’s-skin  on  those  recreant 
limbs. 

K.  John.  We  like  not  this;  thou  dost  forget 
thyself. 


JOHN  387 

Enter  pandulph. 

K.  Phi.  Here  comes  the  holy  legate  of  the 
Pope. 

Pand.  Hail,  you  anointed  deputies  of  heaven! 

To  thee.  King  John,  my  holy  errand  is. 

I  Pandulph,  of  fair  Milan  cardinal. 

And  from  Pope  Innocent  the  legate  here. 

Do  in  his  name  religiously  demand  1^0 

Why  thou  against  the  church,  our  holy  mother. 

So  wilfully  dost  spurn;  and  force  perforce 
Keep  Stephen  Langton,  chosen  Archbishop 
Of  Canterbury,  from  that  holy  see? 

This,  in  our  foresaid  Holy  Father’s  name. 

Pope  Innocent,  I  do  demand  of  thee. 

K.  John.  What  earthly  name  to  interrogatories 
Can  task  the  free  breath  of  a  sacred  king? 

Thou  canst  not.  Cardinal,  devise  a  name 
So  slight,  unworthy,  and  ridiculous,  /yo 

To  charge  me  to  an  answer,  as  the  Pope. 

Tell  him  this  tale;  and  from  the  mouth  of  England 
Add  thus  much  more,  that  no  Italian  priest 
Shall  tithe  or  toll  in  our  dominions; 

But  as  we,  under  heaven,  are  supreme  head. 

So  under  Him  that  great  supremacy. 

Where  we  do  reign,  we  will  alone  uphold. 
Without  the  assistance  of  a  mortal  hand: 

So  tell  the  Pope,  all  reverence  set  apart 
To  him  and  his  usurp’d  authority.  160 

K.  Phi.  Brother  of  England,  you  blaspheme 
in  this. 

K.  John.  Though  you  and  all  the  kings  of 
Christendom 

Are  led  so  grossly  by  this  meddling  priest. 
Dreading  the  curse  that  money  may  buy  out; 

And  by  the  merit  of  vile  gold,  dross,  dust. 
Purchase  corrupted  pardon  of  a  man. 

Who  in  that  sale  sells  pardon  from  himself. 
Though  you  and  all  the  rest  so  grossly  led 
This  juggling  witchcraft  with  revenue  cherish, 
Yet  I  alone,  alone  do  me  oppose  /70 

Against  the  Pope  and  count  his  friends  my  foes. 

Pand.  Then,  by  the  lawful  power  that  I  have, 
Thou  shalt  stand  cursed  and  excommunicate: 

And  blessed  shall  he  be  that  doth  revolt 
From  his  allegiance  to  an  heretic; 

And  meritorious  shall  that  hand  be  call’d. 
Canonized  and  worshipp’d  as  a  saint. 

That  takes  away  by  any  secret  course 
Thy  hateful  life. 

Const.  O,  lawful  let  it  be 

That  I  have  room  with  Rome  to  curse  awhile!  /  So 
Good  father  Cardinal,  cry  thou  amen 
To  my  keen  curses:  for  without  my  wrong 
There  is  no  tongue  hath  power  to  curse  him 
right. 


388  KING 

Pand.  There’s  law  and  warrant,  lady,  for  my 
curse. 

Const.  And  for  mine  too:  when  law  can  do 
no  right. 

Let  it  be  lawful  that  law  bar  no  wrong: 

Law  cannot  give  my  child  his  kingdom  here. 

For  he  that  holds  his  kingdom  holds  the  law; 
Therefore,  since  law  itself  is  perfect  wrong. 

How  can  the  law  forbid  my  tongue  to  curse? 

Pand.  Philip  of  France,  on  peril  of  a  curse. 

Let  go  the  hand  of  that  arch-heretic; 

And  raise  the  power  of  France  upon  his  head. 
Unless  he  do  submit  himself  to  Rome. 

Eli.  Look’st  thou  pale,  France?  do  not  let  go 
thy  hand. 

Const.  Look  to  that,  devil;  lest  that  France  re¬ 
pent. 

And,  by  disjoining  hands,  hell  lose  a  soul. 

Aust.  King  Philip,  listen  to  the  Cardinal. 

Bast.  And  hang  a  calfs-skin  on  his  recreant 
limbs. 

Aust.  Well,  ruffian,  I  must  pocket  up  these 
wrongs,  200 

Because — 

Bast.  Your  breeches  best  may  carry  them. 

K.  John.  Philip,  what  say’st  thou  to  the  Car¬ 
dinal? 

Const.  What  should  he  say,  but  as  the  Car¬ 
dinal? 

Lev:.  Bethink  you,  father;  for  the  difference 
Is  purchase  of  a  heavy  curse  from  Rome, 

Or  the  light  loss  of  England  for  a  friend: 

Forego  the  easier. 

Blanch.  That’s  the  curse  of  Rome. 

Const.  O  Lewis,  stand  fast!  the  devil  tempts  thee 
here 

In  likeness  of  a  new  untrimmed  bride. 

Blanch.  The  Lady  Constance  speaks  not  from 
her  faith,  210 

But  from  her  need. 

Const.  O,  if  thou  grant  my  need. 

Which  only  lives  but  by  the  death  of  faith. 

That  need  must  needs  infer  this  principle. 

That  faith  would  live  again  by  death  of 
need. 

O  then,  tread  down  my  need,  and  faith  mounts 
up; 

Keep  my  need  up,  and  faith  is  trodden  down! 

K.  John.  The  King  is  moved,  and  answers  not 
to  this. 

Const.  O,  be  removed  from  him,  and  answer 
well! 

Aust.  Do  so.  King  Philip;  hang  no  more  in 
doubt. 

Bast.  Hang  nothing  but  a  calf’s-skin,  most 
sweet  lout.  220 


JOHN  ACT  III 

K.  Phi.  I  am  perplex’d,  and  know  not  what  to 
say. 

Pand.  What  canSt  thou  say  but  will  perplex  thee 
more. 

If  thou  stand  excommunicate  and  cursed? 

K.  Phi.  Good  reverend  father,  make  my  person 
yours. 

And  tell  me  how  you  would  bestow  yourself. 

This  royal  hand  and  mine  are  newly  knit. 

And  the  conjunction  of  our  inward  souls 
Married  in  league,  coupled,  and  link’d  together 
With  all  religious  strength  of  sacred  vows; 

The  latest  breath  that  gave  the  sound  of  words  250 
Was  deep-sworn  faith,  peace,  amity,  true  love 
Between  our  kingdoms  and  our  royal  selves. 

And  even  before  this  truce,  but  new  before. 

No  longer  than  we  well  could  wash  our  hands 
To  clap  this  royal  bargain  up  of  peace, 

Fleaven  knows,  they  were  besmear’d  and  over¬ 
stain’d 

With  slaughter’s  pencil,  where  revenge  did  paint 
The  fearful  difference  of  incensed  kings: 

And  shall  these  hands,  so  lately  purged  of  blood. 
So  newly  join’d  in  love,  so  strong  in  both,  240 
Unyoke  this  seizure  and  this  kind  regreet? 

Play  fast  and  loose  with  faith?  so  jest  with 
heaven, 

Adake  such  unconstant  children  of  ourselves. 

As  now  again  to  snatch  our  palm  from  palm. 
Unswear  faith  sworn,  and  on  the  marriage-bed 
Of  smiling  peace  to  march  a  bloody  host. 

And  make  a  riot  on  the  gentle  brow 
Of  true  sincerity?  O,  holy  sir. 

My  reverend  father,  let  it  not  be  so! 

Out  of  your  grace,  devise,  ordain,  impose  2  jo 
Some  gentle  order;  and  then  we  shall  be  blest 
To  do  your  pleasure  and  continue  friends. 

Pand.  All  form  is  formless,  order  orderless. 

Save  what  is  opposite  to  England’s  love. 
Therefore  to  arms !  be  champion  of  our  church. 
Or  let  the  church,  our  mother,  breathe  her  curse, 
A  mother’s  curse,  on  her  revolting  son. 

France,  thou  mayst  hold  a  serpent  by  the  tongue, 
A  chafed  lion  by  the  mortal  paw, 

A  fasting  tiger  safer  by  the  tooth,  2  60 

Than  keep  in  peace  that  hand  which  thou  dost 
hold. 

K.  Phi.  I  may  disjoin  my  hand,  but  not  my 
faith. 

Pand.  So  makest  thou  faith  an  enemy  to  faith; 
And  like  a  civil  war  set’st  oath  to  oath. 

Thy  tongue  against  thy  tongue.  O,  let  thy  vow 
First  made  to  heaven,  first  be  to  heaven  per¬ 
form’d. 

That  is,  to  be  the  champion  of  our  church! 

What  since  thou  sworest  is  sworn  against  thyself 


SCENE  I  KING 

And  may  not  be  performed  by  thyself, 

For  that  which  thou  hast  sworn  to  do  amiss  270 
Is  not  amiss  when  ic  is  truly  done, 

And  being  not  done,  where  doing  tends  to  ill. 

The  truth  is  then  most  done  not  doing  it: 

The  better  act  of  purposes  mistook 
Is  to  mistake  again;  though  indirect. 

Yet  indirection  thereby  grows  direct. 

And  falsehood  falsehood  cures,  as  fire  cools  fire 
Within  the  scorched  veins  of  one  new-burrf  d. 

It  is  religion  that  doth  make  vows  kept; 

But  thou  hast  sworn  against  religion,  280 

By  what  thou  swear’ st  against  the  thing  thou 
swear’ St, 

And  makest  an  oath  the  surety  for  thy  truth 
Against  an  oath:  the  truth  thou  art  unsure 
To  swear,  swears  only  not  to  be  forsworn; 

Else  what  a  mockery  should  it  be  to  swear! 

But  thou  dost  swear  only  to  be  forsworn; 

And  most  forsworn,  to  keep  what  thou  dost 
swear. 

Therefore  thy  later  vows  against  thy  first 
Is  in  thyself  rebellion  to  thyself; 

And  better  conquest  never  canst  thou  make  290 
Than  arm  thy  constant  and  thy  nobler  parts 
Against  these  giddy  loose  suggestions: 

Upon  which  better  part  our  prayers  come  in. 

If  thou  vouchsafe  them.  But  if  not,  then  know 
The  peril  of  our  curses  light  on  thee 
So  heavy  as  thou  shalt  not  shake  them  off. 

But  in  despair  die  under  their  black  weight. 

Aust.  Rebellion,  flat  rebellion! 

Bast,  Will’t  not  be? 

Will  not  a  calf’s-skin  stop  that  mouth  of  thine? 
Leiv.  Father,  to  arms! 

Blanch.  Upon  thy  wedding  day?  500 

Against  the  blood  that  thou  hast  married? 

What,  shall  our  feast  be  kept  with  slaughter’d 
men? 

Shall  braying  trumpets  and  loud  churlish  drums, 
Clamours  of  hell,  be  measures  to  our  pomp? 

O  husband,  hear  me!  ay,  alack,  how  new 
Is  husband  in  my  mouth!  even  for  that  name. 
Which  till  this  time  my  tongue  did  ne’er  pro¬ 
nounce. 

Upon  my  knee  I  beg,  go  not  to  arms 
Against  mine  uncle. 

Const.  O,  upon  my  knee, 

Made  hard  with  kneeling,  I  do  pray  to  thee,  5/0 
Thou  virtuous  Dauphin,  alter  not  the  doom 
Forethought  by  heaven! 

Blanch.  Now  shall  I  see  thy  love:  what  mo¬ 
tive  may 

Be  stronger  with  thee  than  the  name  of  wife? 
Const.  That  which  upholdeth  him  that  thee 
upholds. 


JOHN  389 

His  honour:  O,  thine  honour,  Lewis,  thine 
honour! 

Leu\  1  muse  your  Majesty  doth  seem  so  cold. 
When  such  profound  respects  do  pull  you  on. 

Band.  I  will  denounce  a  curse  upon  his  head. 

K.  Phi.  Thou  shalt  not  need.  England,  I  will  fall 
from  thee.  520 

Const.  O  fair  return  of  banish’d  majesty! 

Eli.  O  foul  revolt  of  French  inconstancy! 

K.  John.  France,  thou  shalt  rue  this  hour  within 
this  hour. 

Bast.  Old  Time  the  clock-setter,  that  bald  sex¬ 
ton  Time, 

Is  it  as  he  will?  well  then,  France  shall  rue. 

Blanch.  The  sun’s  o’ercast  with  blood:  fair  day, 
adieu! 

Which  is  the  side  that  I  must  go  withal? 

I  am  with  both:  each  army  hath  a  hand; 

And  in  their  rage,  I  having  hold  of  both. 

They  whirl  asunder  and  dismember  me.  550 
Husband,  I  cannot  pray  that  thou  mayst  win; 
Uncle,  I  needs  must  pray  that  thou  mayst 
lose; 

Father,  I  may  not  wish  the  fortune  thine; 
Grandam,  I  will  not  wish  thy  wishes  thrive: 
Whoever  wins,  on  that  side  shall  1  lose; 

Assured  loss  before  the  match  be  play’d. 

Lew.  Lady,  with  me,  with  me  thy  fortune  lies. 

Blanch.  There  where  my  fortune  lives,  there  my 
life  dies. 

K.  John.  Cousin,  go  draw  our  puissance  to¬ 
gether.  [Exit  BASTARD. 

France,  I  am  burn’d  up  with  inflaming  wrath;  540 
A  rage  whose  heat  hath  this  condition. 

That  nothing  can  allay,  nothing  but  blood. 

The  blood,  and  dearest-valued  blood,  of  France. 

K.  Phi.  Thy  rage  shall  burn  thee  up,  and  thou 
shalt  turn 

To  ashes,  ere  our  blood  shall  quench  that  fire: 
Look  to  thyself,  thou  art  in  jeopardy. 

K.  John.  No  more  than  he  that  threats.  To  arms 
let’s  hie!  [Exeunt. 

Scene  11.  The  same:  plains  near  Angiers 
Alarums^  excursions.  Enter  the  bastard,  with 
Austria’s  head. 

Bast.  Now,  by  my  life,  this  day  grows  won¬ 
drous  hot; 

Some  airy  devil  hovers  in  the  sky 
And  pours  down  mischief.  Austria’s  head  lie 
there, 

While  Philip  breathes. 

Enter  king  john,  Arthur,  and  Hubert. 

K.  John.  Hubert,  keep  this  boy.  Philip,  make 
up: 


390  KING 

My  mother  is  assailed  in  our  tent, 

And  ta’en,  I  fear. 

Bast.  My  lord,  I  rescued  her; 

Her  Highness  is  in  safety,  fear  you  not: 

But  on,  my  liege;  for  very  little  pains 

Will  bring  this  labour  to  an  happy  end.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  same 

Alarums.,  excursions,  retreat.  Enter  king  john, 

ELINOR,  ARTHUR,  the  BASTARD,  HUBERT,  and 

Lords. 

K.  John.  [To  Elinor]  So  shall  it  be;  your  Grace 
shall  stay  behind 

So  strongly  guarded.  [To  Arthur]  Cousin,  look 
not  sad: 

Thy  grandam  loves  thee;  and  thy  uncle  will 
As  dear  be  to  thee  as  thy  father  was. 

Arth.  O,  this  will  make  my  mother  die  with 
grief! 

K.  John.  [To  the  bastard]  Cousin,  away  for 
England!  haste  before: 

And,  ere  our  coming,  see  thou  shake  the  bags 

Of  hoarding  abbots;  imprisoned  angels 

Set  at  liberty:  the  fat  ribs  of  peace 

Must  by  the  hungry  now  be  fed  upon :  lo 

Use  our  commission  in  his  utmost  force. 

Bast.  Bell,  book,  and  candle  shall  not  drive  me 
back, 

When  gold  and  silver  becks  me  to  come  on. 

I  leave  your  highness.  Grandam,  I  will  pray. 

If  ever  I  remember  to  be  holy. 

For  your  fair  safety;  so,  I  kiss  your  hand. 

Eli.  Farewell,  gentle  cousin. 

K.John.  Coz,  farewell.  [Exit  bast akt>. 

Eli.  Come  hither,  little  kinsman;  hark,  a  word. 

K.  John.  Come  hither,  Hubert.  O  my  gentle 
Hubert, 

We  owe  thee  much !  within  this  wall  of  flesh  20 
There  is  a  soul  counts  thee  her  creditor 
And  with  advantage  means  to  pay  thy  love: 

And,  my  good  friend,  thy  voluntary  oath 
Lives  in  this  bosom,  dearly  cherished. 

Give  me  thy  hand.  I  had  a  thing  to  say, 

But  I  will  fit  it  with  some  better  time. 

By  heaven,  Hubert,  I  am  almost  ashamed 
To  say  what  good  respect  I  have  of  thee. 

Hub.  I  am  much  bounden  to  your  Majesty. 

K.  John.  Good  friend,  thou  hast  no  cause  to  say 
so  yet,  50 

But  thou  shalt  have;  and  creep  time  ne’er  so  slow, 
Yet  it  shall  come  for  me  to  do  thee  good. 

I  had  a  thing  to  say,  but  let  it  go: 

The  sun  is  in  the  heaven,  and  the  proud  day. 
Attended  with  the  pleasures  of  the  world, 

Is  all  too  wanton  and  too  full  of  gawds 
To  give  me  audience:  if  the  midnight  bell 


JOHN  ACT  III 

Did,  with  his  iron  tongue  and  brazen  mouth, 
Sound  on  into  the  drowsy  race  of  night; 

If  this  same  were  a  churchyard  where  we  stand. 
And  thou  possessed  with  a  thousand  wrongs,  4/ 
Or  if  that  surly  spirit,  melancholy. 

Had  baked  thy  blood  and  made  it  heavy-thick. 
Which  else  runs  tickling  up  and  down  the  veins. 
Making  that  idiot,  laughter,  keep  men’s  eyes 
And  strain  their  cheeks  to  idle  merriment, 

A  passion  hateful  to  my  purposes. 

Or  if  that  thou  couldst  see  me  without  eyes. 

Hear  me  without  thine  ears,  and  make  reply 
Without  a  tongue,  using  conceit  alone,  50 

Without  eyes,  ears,  and  harmful  sound  of  words; 
Then,  in  despite  of  brooded  watchful  day, 

I  would  into  thy  bosom  pour  my  thoughts  : 

But,  ah,  I  will  not!  yet  I  love  thee  well; 

And,  by  my  troth,  I  think  thou  lovest  me  well. 
Hub.  So  well,  that  what  you  bid  me  undertake. 
Though  that  my  death  were  adjunct  to  my  act. 

By  heaven,  I  would  do  it. 

K.  John.  Do  not  I  know  thou  wouldst.^ 
Good  Hubert,  Hubert,  Hubert,  throw  thine  eye 
On  yon  young  boy:  I’ll  tell  thee  what,  my 
friend,  60 

He  is  a  very  serpent  in  my  way; 

And  wheresoe’er  this  foot  of  mine  doth  tread. 

He  lies  before  me:  dost  thou  understand  me? 
Thou  art  his  keeper. 

Hub.  And  I’ll  keep  him  so. 

That  he  shall  not  offend  your  Majesty. 

K.  John.  Death. 

Hub.  My  lord? 

K.  John.  A  grave. 

Hub.  He  shall  not  live. 

K.  John.  Enough. 

I  could  be  merry  now.  Hubert,  I  love  thee; 

Well,  I’ll  not  say  what  I  intend  for  thee: 
Remember.  Madam,  fare  you  well: 

I’ll  send  those  powers  o’er  to  your  Majesty.  70 
Eli.  My  blessing  go  with  thee! 

K.  John.  For  England,  cousin,  go: 

Hubert  shall  be  your  man,  attend  on  you 
With  all  true  duty.  On  toward  Calais,  ho! 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  The  same:  the  French  King's  tent. 
Enter  king  philip,  lewis,  pandulph,  and  At¬ 
tendants. 

K.  Phi.  So,  by  a  roaring  tempest  on  the  flood, 

A  whole  armado  of  convicted  sail 
Is  scatter’d  and  disjoin’d  from  fellowship. 

Pand.  Courage  and  comfort!  all  shall  yet  go 
well. 

K.  Phil.  What  can  go  well,  when  we  have  run 
so  ill? 


SCENE  IV 

Are  we  not  beaten?  Is  not  Angiers  lost? 

Arthur  ta’en  prisoner?  divers  dear  friends  slain? 
And  bloody  England  into  England  gone, 
O’erbearing  interruption,  spite  of  France? 

Lew.  What  he  hath  won,  that  hath  he  forti¬ 
fied:  10 

So  hot  a  speed  with  such  advice  disposed. 

Such  temperate  order  in  so  fierce  a  cause. 

Doth  want  example:  who  hath  read  or  heard 
Of  any  kindred  action  like  to  this? 

K.  Phi.  Well  could  I  bear  that  England  had  this 
praise. 

So  we  could  find  some  pattern  of  our  shame. 

Enter  Constance. 

Look,  who  comes  here!  a  grave  unto  a  soul; 
Holding  the  eternal  spirit,  against  her  will, 

In  the  vile  prison  of  afflicted  breath. 

I  prithee,  lady,  go  away  with  me.  20 

Const.  Lo,  now!  now  see  the  issue  of  your  peace. 
K.  Phi.  Patience,  good  lady!  comfort,  gentle 
Constance! 

Const.  No,  I  defy  all  counsel,  all  redress. 

But  that  which  ends  all  counsel,  true  redress, 
Death,  death;  O  amiable  lovely  death! 

Thou  odoriferous  stench!  sound  rottenness! 

Arise  forth  from  the  couch  of  lasting  night. 

Thou  hate  and  terror  to  prosperity, 

And  I  will  kiss  thy  detestable  bones 
And  put  my  eyeballs  in  thy  vaulty  brows  50 
And  ring  these  fingers  with  thy  household  worms 
And  stop  this  gap  of  breath  with  fulsome  dust 
And  be  a  carrion  monster  like  thyself: 

Come,  grin  on  me,  and  I  will  think  thou  smilest 
And  buss  thee  as  thy  wife.  Misery’s  love, 

O,  come  tome! 

K.  Phi.  O  fair  affliction,  peace! 

Const.  No,  no,  I  will  not,  having  breath  to  cry: 

O,  that  my  tongue  were  in  the  thunder’s  mouth! 
Then  with  a  passion  would  I  shake  the  world; 
And  rouse  from  sleep  that  fell  anatomy  40 

Which  cannot  hear  a  lady’s  feeble  voice. 

Which  scorns  a  modern  invocation. 

Pand.  Lady,  you  utter  madness,  and  not  sorrow. 
Const.  Thou  art  not  holy  to  belie  me  so; 

I  am  not  mad:  fhis  hair  I  tear  is  mine; 

My  name  is  Constance;  I  was  Geoffrey’s  wife; 
Young  Arthur  is  my  son,  and  he  is  lost : 

I  am  not  mad:  I  would  to  heaven  I  were! 

For  then,  ’tis  like  I  should  forget  myself: 

O,  if  I  could,  what  grief  should  I  forget!  50 
Preach  some  philosophy  to  make  me  mad. 

And  thou  shalt  be  canonized.  Cardinal; 

For  being  not  mad  but  sensible  of  grief. 

My  reasonable  part  produces  reason 
How  I  may  be  deliver’d  of  these  woes. 


JOHN  391 

And  teaches  me  to  kill  or  hang  myself: 

If  I  were  mad,  I  should  forget  my  son. 

Or  madly  think  a  babe  of  clouts  were  he: 

I  am  not  mad;  too  well,  too  well  1  feel 
The  different  plague  of  each  calamity.  60 

K.  Phi.  Bind  up  those  tresses.  O,  what  love 
I  note 

In  the  fair  multitude  of  those  her  hairs ! 

Where  but  by  chance  a  silver  drop  hath  fallen. 
Even  to  that  drop  ten  thousand  wiry  friends 
Do  glue  themselves  in  sociable  grief. 

Like  true,  inseparable,  faithful  loves. 

Sticking  together  in  calamity. 

Const.  To  England,  if  you  will, 

K.  Phi.  Bind  up  your  hairs. 

Cmst.  Yes,  that  I  will;  and  wherefore  will  I 
do  it? 

I  tore  them  from  their  bonds  and  cried  aloud  70 
“O  that  these  hands  could  so  redeem  my  son 
As  they  have  given  these  hairs  their  liberty!” 

But  now  1  envy  at  their  liberty. 

And  will  again  commit  them  to  their  bonds. 
Because  my  poor  child  is  a  prisoner. 

And,  father  Cardinal,  I  have  heard  you  say 
That  we  shall  see  and  know  our  friends  in 
heaven: 

If  that  be  true,  I  shall  see  my  boy  again; 

For  since  the  birth  of  Cain,  the  first  male  child. 
To  him  that  did  but  yesterday  suspire,  80 

There  was  not  such  a  gracious  creature  born. 

But  now  will  canker  sorrow  eat  my  bud 
And  chase  the  native  beauty  from  his  cheek 
And  he  will  look  as  hollow  as  a  ghost. 

As  dim  and  meagre  as  an  ague’s  fit. 

And  so  he’ll  die;  and,  rising  so  again. 

When  I  shall  meet  him  in  the  court  of  heaven 
I  shall  not  know  him:  therefore  never,  never 
Must  I  behold  my  pretty  Arthur  more. 

Pand.  You  hold  too  heinous  a  respect  of  grief,  po 
Const.  He  talks  to  me  that  never  had  a  son. 

K.  Phi.  You  are  as  fond  of  grief  as  of  your 
child. 

Const.  Grief  fills  the  room  up  of  my  absent 
child. 

Lies  in  his  bed,  walks  up  and  down  with  me, 

Puts  on  his  pretty  looks,  repeats  his  words, 
Remembers  me  of  all  his  gracious  parts. 

Stuffs  out  his  vacant  garments  with  his  form; 
Then,  have  I  reason  to  be  fond  of  grief? 

Fare  you  well:  had  you  such  a  loss  as  I, 

I  could  give  better  comfort  than  you  do.  100 
I  will  not  keep  this  form  upon  my  head  [tearing 

her  hair] 

When  there  is  such  disorder  in  my  wit. 

O  Lord!  my  boy,  my  Arthur,  my  fair  son! 

My  life,  my  joy,  my  food,  my  all  the  world! 


KING 


392  KING 

My  widow-comfort,  and  my  sorrows’  cure! 

[Exit. 

K.  Phi.  I  fear  some  outrage,  and  I’ll  follow  her. 

[Exit. 

Lew.  There’s  nothing  in  this  world  can  make 
me  joy: 

Life  is  as  tedious  as  a  twice-told  tale 
Vexing  the  dull  ear  of  a  drowsy  man; 

And  bitter  shame  hath  spoil’d  the  sweet  world’s 
taste,  no 

That  it  yields  nought  but  shame  and  bitterness. 
Pand.  Before  the  curing  of  a  strong  disease. 

Even  in  the  instant  of  repair  and  health. 

The  fit  is  strongest;  evils  that  take  leave. 

On  their  departure  most  of  all  show  evil: 

What  have  you  lost  by  losing  of  this  day? 

Lew.  All  days  of  glory,  joy,  and  happiness. 

Pand.  If  you  had  won  it,  certainly  you  had. 

No,  no;  when  Fortune  means  to  men  most 
good. 

She  looks  upon  them  with  a  threatening  eye.  120 
’Tis  strange  to  think  how  much  King  John  hath 
lost 

In  this  which  he  accounts  so  clearly  won: 

Are  not  you  grieved  that  Arthur  is  his  prisoner? 
Lew.  As  heartily  as  he  is  glad  he  hath  him. 

Pand.  Your  mind  is  all  as  youthful  as  your 
blood. 

Now  hear  me  speak  with  a  prophetic  spirit; 

For  even  the  breath  of  what  I  mean  to  speak 
Shall  blow  each  dust,  each  straw,  each  little  rub. 
Out  of  the  path  which  shall  directly  lead 
Thy  foot  to  England’s  throne;  and  therefore 
mark. 

John  hath  seized  Arthur;  and  it  cannot  be  i^i 
That,  whiles  warm  life  plays  in  that  infant’s 
veins. 

The  misplaced  John  should  entertain  an  hour. 
One  minute,  nay,  one  quiet  breath  of  rest. 

A  sceptre  snatch’d  with  an  unruly  hand 
Must  be  as  boisterously  maintain’d  as  gain’d; 
And  he  that  stands  upon  a  slippery  place 
Makes  nice  of  no  vile  hold  to  stay  him  up: 

That  John  may  stand,  then  Arthur  needs  must 
fall; 

So  be  it,  for  it  cannot  be  but  so.  /40 

Lew.  But  what  shall  I  gain  by  young  Arthur’s 
fall? 

Pand.  You,  in  the  right  of  Lady  Blanch  your 
wife. 

May  then  make  all  the  claim  that  Arthur  did. 
Lew.  And  lose  it,  life  and  all,  as  Arthur  did. 
Pand.  How  green  you  are  and  fresh  in  this  old 
world! 

John  lays  you  plots;  the  times  conspire  with 
you; 


JOHN  ACT  IV 

For  he  that  steeps  his  safety  in  true  blood 
Shall  find  but  bloody  safety  and  untrue. 

This  act  so  evilly  born  shall  cool  the  hearts 
Of  all  his  people  and  freeze  up  their  zeal,  /50 
That  none  so  small  advantage  shall  step  forth 
To  check  his  reign,  but  they  will  cherish  it; 

No  natural  exhalation  in  the  sky. 

No  scope  of  nature,  no  distemper’d  day. 

No  common  wind,  no  customed  event. 

But  they  will  pluck  away  his  natural  cause 
And  call  them  meteors,  prodigies,  and  signs. 
Abortives,  presages,  and  tongues  of  heaven. 
Plainly  denouncing  vengeance  upon  John. 

Lew.  May  be  he  will  not  touch  young  Arthur’s 
life,  160 

But  hold  himself  safe  in  his  prisonment. 

Pand.  O,  sir,  when  he  shall  hear  of  your  ap¬ 
proach. 

If  that  young  Arthur  be  not  gone  already. 

Even  at  that  news  he  dies;  and  then  the  hearts 
Of  all  his  people  shall  revolt  from  him 
And  kiss  the  lips  of  unacquainted  change 
And  pick  strong  matter  of  revolt  and  wrath 
Out  of  the  bloody  fingers’  ends  of  John. 

Methinks  1  see  this  hurly  all  on  foot: 

And,  O,  what  better  matter  breeds  for  you  /70 
Than  I  have  named!  The  bastard  Faulconbridge 
Is  now  in  England,  ransacking  the  church. 
Offending  charity:  if  but  a  dozen  French 
Were  there  in  arms,  they  would  be  as  a  call 
To  train  ten  thousand  English  to  their  side. 

Or  as  a  little  snow,  tumbled  about. 

Anon  becomes  a  mountain.  O  noble  Dauphin, 

Go  with  me  to  the  King:  ’tis  wonderful 
What  may  be  wrought  out  of  their  discontent. 
Now  that  their  souls  are  topfull  of  offence.  180 
For  England  go:  I  will  whet  on  the  King. 

Lew.  Strong  reasons  make  strong  actions: 
let  us  go: 

If  you  say  ay,  the  King  will  not  say  no.  [Exeunt. 
ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  A  room  in  a  castle 
Enter  Hubert  and  executioners. 

Hub.  Heat  me  these  irons  hot;  and  look  thou 
stand 

Within  the  arras:  when  I  strike  my  foot 
Upon  the  bosom  of  the  ground,  rush  forth 
And  bind  the  boy  which  you  shall  find  with  me 
Fast  to  the  chair:  be  heedful:  hence,  and  watch. 
ist  Exec.  I  hope  your  warrant  will  bear  out  the 
deed. 

Hub.  Uncleanly  scruples!  fear  not  you:  look 
to’t.  [Exeunt  executioners. 

Young  lad,  come  forth;  I  have  to  say  with  you. 


SCENE  I  KING 

Enter  Arthur. 

Arth,  Good  morrow,  Hubert. 

Hub.  Good  morrow,  little  prince. 

Arth.  As  little  prince,  having  so  great  a  title 
To  be  more  prince,  as  may  be.  You  are  sad.  // 
Hub.  Indeed,  I  have  been  merrier. 

A rth.  Mercy  on  me ! 

Methinks  no  body  should  be  sad  but  I: 

Yet,  I  remember,  when  I  was  in  France, 

Young  gentlemen  would  be  as  sad  as  night. 

Only  for  wantonness.  By  my  Christendom, 

So  I  were  out  of  prison  and  kept  sheep, 

I  should  be  as  merry  as  the  day  is  long; 

And  so  I  would  be  here,  but  that  I  doubt 
My  uncle  practises  more  harm  to  me:  20 

He  is  afraid  of  me  and  I  of  him: 

Is  it  my  fault  that  I  was  Geoffrey’s  son? 

No,  indeed,  is’t  not;  and  I  would  to  heaven 
I  were  your  son,  so  you  would  love  me,  Hubert. 
Hub.  [Aside]  If  I  talk  to  him,  with  his  innocent 
prate 

He  will  awake  my  mercy  which  lies  dead: 
Therefore  I  will  be  sudden  and  dispatch. 

Arth.  Are  you  sick,  Hubert?  you  look  pale 
to-day: 

In  sooth,  I  would  you  were  a  little  sick. 

That  I  might  sit  all  night  and  watch  with  you:  50 
I  warrant  I  love  you  more  than  you  do  me. 

Hub.  [Aside]  His  words  do  take  possession  of 
my  bosom. 

Read  here,  young  Arthur.  [Showing  a  paper.] 

[Aside]  How  now,  foolish  rheum! 
Turning  dispiteous  torture  out  of  door! 

I  must  be  brief,  lest  resolution  drop 
Out  at  mine  eyes  in  tender  womanish  tears. 

Can  you  not  read  it?  is  it  not  fair  writ? 

Arth.  Too  fairly,  Hubert,  for  so  foul  effect: 

Must  you  with  hot  irons  burn  out  both  mine  eyes? 
Hub.  Young  boy,  I  must. 

Arth.  And  will  you? 

Hub.  And  I  will.  40 

Arth.  Have  you  the  heart?  When  your  head  did 
but  ache, 

I  knit  my  handkercher  about  your  brows. 

The  best  I  had,  a  princess  wrought  it  me, 

And  I  did  never  ask  it  you  again; 

And  with  my  hand  at  midnight  held  your  head. 
And  like  the  watchful  minutes  to  the  hour. 

Still  and  anon  cheer’d  up  the  heavy  time. 

Saying,  “What  lack  you?”  and  “Where  lies  your 
grief?” 

Or  “What  good  love  may  I  perform  for  you?” 
Many  a  poor  man’s  son  would  have  lien  still  50 
And  ne’er  have  spoke  a  loving  word  to  you; 

But  you  at  your  sick  service  had  a  prince. 


JOHN  393 

Nay,  you  may  think  my  love  was  crafty  love 
And  call  it  cunning:  do,  an  if  you  will: 

If  heaven  be  pleased  that  you  must  use  me  ill. 
Why  then  you  must.  Will  you  put  out  mine  eyes? 
These  eyes  that  never  did  nor  never  shall 
So  much  as  frown  on  you. 

Hub.  I  have  sworn  to  do  it; 

And  with  hot  irons  must  I  burn  them  out. 

Arth.  Ah,  none  but  in  this  iron  age  would  do 
it!  60 

The  iron  of  itself,  though  heat  red-hot. 
Approaching  near  these  eyes,  would  drink  my 
tears 

And  quench  his  fiery  indignation 
Even  in  the  matter  of  mine  innocence; 

Nay,  after  that,  consume  away  in  rust. 

But  for  containing  fire  to  harm  mine  eye. 

Are  you  more  stubborn-hard  than  hammer’d 
iron? 

An  if  an  angel  should  have  come  to  me 
And  told  me  Hubert  should  put  out  mine  eyes, 

I  would  not  have  believed  him — no  tongue  but 
Hubert’s.  70 

Hub.  Come  forth.  [Stamps.] 

Re-enter  executioners,  with  a  cord.,  irons.,  &c. 
Do  as  I  bid  you  do. 

Arth.  O,  save  me,  Hubert,  save  me!  my  eyes 
are  out 

Even  with  the  fierce  looks  of  these  bloody  men. 
Hub.  Give  me  the  iron,  I  say,  and  bind  him 
here. 

Arth.  Alas,  what  need  you  be  so  boisterous- 
rough? 

I  will  not  struggle,  I  will  stand  stone-still. 

For  heaven  sake,  Hubert,  let  me  not  be  bound! 
Nay,  hear  me,  Hubert,  drive  these  men  away. 
And  I  will  sit  as  quiet  as  a  lamb;  80 

I  will  not  stir,  nor  wince,  nor  speak  a  word. 

Nor  look  upon  the  iron  anger ly: 

Thrust  but  these  men  away,  and  I’ll  forgive  you. 
Whatever  torment  you  do  put  me  to. 

Hub.  Go,  stand  within;  let  me  alone  with  him. 

I  St  Exec.  I  am  best  pleased  to  be  from  such  a 
deed.  [Exeunt  executioners. 

Arth.  Alas,  I  then  have  chid  away  my  friend! 

He  hath  a  stern  look,  but  a  gentle  heart: 

Let  him  come  back,  that  his  compassion  may 
Give  life  to  yours. 

Hub.  Come,  boy,  prepare  yourself.  90 

Arth.  \s  there  no  remedy? 

Hub.  None,  but  to  lose  your  eyes. 

Arth.  O  heaven,  that  there  were  but  a  mote  in 
yours, 

A  grain,  a  dust,  a  gnat,  a  wandering  hair. 

Any  annoyance  in  that  precious  sense! 


394  KING 

Then  feeling  what  small  things  are  boisterous 
there, 

Your  vile  intent  must  needs  seem  horrible. 

Hub.  Is  this  your  promise?  go  to,  hold  your 
tongue. 

Arth.  Hubert,  the  utterance  of  a  brace  of 
tongues 

Must  needs  want  pleading  for  a  pair  of  eyes: 

Let  me  not  hold  my  tongue,  let  me  not,  Hubert; 
Or,  Hubert,  if  you  will,  cut  out  my  tongue,  wi 

So  I  may  keep  mine  eyes:  O,  spare  mine  eyes. 
Though  to  no  use  but  still  to  look  on  you! 

Lo,  by  my  troth,  the  instrument  is  cold 
And  would  not  harm  me. 

Hub.  I  can  heat  it,  boy. 

Arth.  No,  in  good  sooth;  the  fire  is  dead  with 
grief. 

Being  create  for  comfort,  to  be  used 
In  undeserved  extremes:  see  else  yourself; 

There  is  no  malice  in  this  burning  coal; 

The  breath  of  heaven  hath  blown  his  spirit 
out  tio 

And  strew’d  repentant  ashes  on  his  head. 

Hub.  But  with  my  breath  I  can  revive  it,  boy. 
Arth.  An  if  you  do,  you  will  but  make  it  blush 
And  glow  with  shame  of  your  proceedings,  Hu¬ 
bert: 

Nay,  it  perchance  will  sparkle  in  your  eyes; 

And  like  a  dog  that  is  compell’d  to  fight. 

Snatch  at  his  master  that  doth  tarre  him  on. 

All  things  that  you  should  use  to  do  me  wrong 
Deny  their  office:  only  you  do  lack 
That  mercy  which  fierce  fire  and  iron  extends,  120 
Creatures  of  note  for  mercy-lacking  uses. 

Hub.  Well,  see  to  live;  I  will  not  touch  thine  eye 
For  all  the  treasure  that  thine  uncle  owes: 

Yet  am  I  sworn  and  I  did  purpose,  boy. 

With  this  same  very  iron  to  burn  them  out. 

Arth.  O,  now  you  look  like  Hubert!  all  this 
while 

You  were  disguised. 

Hub.  Peace;  no  more.  Adieu. 

Your  uncle  must  not  know  but  you  are  dead; 

I’ll  fill  these  dogged  spies  with  false  reports: 

And,  pretty  child,  sleep  doubtless  and  secure  /50 
That  Hubert,  for  the  wealth  of  all  the  world. 

Will  not  offend  thee. 

Arth.  O  heaven!  I  thank  you,  Hubert. 

Hub.  Silence;  no  more:  go  closely  in  with  me: 
Much  danger  do  I  undergo  for  thee.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  11.  king  John’s  palace. 

Enter  king  john,  Pembroke,  Salisbury,  and 
other  Lords. . 

K.  John.  Here  once  again  we  sit,  once  again 
crown’d. 


JOHN  act  IV 

And  looked  upon,  I  hope,  with  cheerful  eyes. 

Pent.  This  “once  again,’’  but  that  your  High¬ 
ness  pleased,  . 

Was  once  superfluous:  you  were  crown’d  before. 
And  that  high  royalty  was  ne’er  pluck’d  off. 

The  faiths  of  men  ne’er  stained  with  revolt; 

Fresh  expectation  troubled  not  the  land 
With  any  long’d-for  change  or  better  state. 

Sal.  Therefore,  to  be  possess’d  with  double 
pomp. 

To  guard  a  title  that  was  rich  before,  lo 

To  gild  refined  gold,  to  paint  the  lily. 

To  throw  a  perfume  on  the  violet. 

To  smooth  the  ice,  or  add  another  hue 
Unto  the  rainbow,  or  with  taper-light 
To  seek  the  beauteous  eye  of  heaven  to  garnish. 

Is  wasteful  and  ridiculous  excess. 

Pern.  But  that  your  royal  pleasure  must  be 
done. 

This  act  is  as  an  ancient  tale  new  told. 

And  in  the  last  repeating  troublesome. 

Being  urged  at  a  time  unseasonable.  20 

Sal.  In  this  the  antique  and  well  noted  face 
Of  plain  old  form  is  much  disfigured; 

And,  like  a  shifted  wind  unto  a  sail, 

It  makes  the  course  of  thoughts  to  fetch  about. 
Startles  and  frights  consideration. 

Makes  sound  opinion  sick  and  truth  suspected. 
For  putting  on  so  new  a  fashion’d  robe. 

Pern.  When  workmen  strive  to  do  better  than 
well. 

They  do  confound  their  skill  in  covetousness; 
And  oftentimes  excusing  of  a  fault  5  0 

Doth  make  the  fault  the  worse  by  the  excuse, 

As  patches  set  upon  a  little  breach 
Discredit  more  in  hiding  of  the  fault 
Than  did  the  fault  before  it  was  so  patch’d. 

Sal.  To  this  effect,  before  you  were  new 
crown’d. 

We  breathed  our  counsel:  but  it  pleased  your 
highness 

To  overbear  it,  and  we  are  all  well  pleased. 

Since  all  and  every  part  of  what  we  would 
Doth  make  a  stand  at  what  your  Highness  will. 
K.  John.  Some  reasons  of  this  double  corona¬ 
tion  40 

I  have  possess’d  you  with  and  think  them  strong; 
And  more,  more  strong,  then  lesser  is  my  fear, 

I  shall  indue  you  with:  meantime  but  ask 
What  you  would  have  reform’d  that  is  not  well. 
And  well  shall  you  perceive  how  willingly 
I  will  both  hear  and  grant  you  your  requests. 

Pern.  Then  I,  as  one  that  am  the  tongue  of 
these 

To  sound  the  purposes  of  all  their  hearts, 

Both  for  myself  and  them,  but,  chief  of  all, 


SCENE  11  KING 

Your  safety,  for  the  which  myself  and  them  50 
Bend  their  best  studies,  heartily  request 
The  enfranchisement  of  Arthur;  whose  restraint 
Doth  move  the  murmuring  lips  of  discontent 
To  break  into  this  dangerous  argument — 

If  what  in  rest  you  have  in  right  you  hold, 

Why  then  your  fears,  which,  as  they  say,  attend 
The  steps  of  wrong,  should  move  you  to  mew  up 
Your  tender  kinsman  and  to  choke  his  days 
With  barbarous  ignorance  and  deny  his  youth 
The  rich  advantage  of  good  exercise?  60 

That  the  time’s  enemies  may  not  have  this 
To  grace  occasions,  let  it  be  our  suit 
That  you  have  bid  us  ask  his  liberty; 

Which  for  our  goods  we  do  no  further  ask 
Than  whereupon  our  weal,  on  you  depending. 
Counts  it  your  weal  he  have  his  liberty. 

Enter  Hubert. 

K.  John.  Let  it  be  so:  I  do  commit  his  youth 
To  your  direction.  Hubert,  what  news  with  you? 
[Taking  him  apart.] 

Pern.  This  is  the  man  should  do  the  bloody 
deed; 

He  show’d  his  warrant  to  a  friend  of  mine:  70 

The  image  of  a  wicked  heinous  fault 
Lives  in  his  eye;  that  close  aspect  of  his 
Does  show  the  mood  of  a  much  troubled  breast; 
And  I  do  fearfully  believe  ’tis  done. 

What  we  so  fear’d  he  had  a  charge  to  do. 

Sal.  The  colour  of  the  King  doth  come  and  go 
Between  his  purpose  and  his  conscience. 

Like  heralds  ’twixt  two  dreadful  battles  set: 

His  passion  is  so  ripe,  it  needs  must  break. 

Pern.  And  when  it  breaks,  I  fear  will  issue 
thence  80 

The  foul  corruption  of  a  sweet  child’s  death. 

K.  John.  We  cannot  hold  mortality’s  strong 
hand: 

Good  lords,  although  my  will  to  give  is  living, 
The  suit  which  you  demand  is  gone  and  dead: 

He  tells  us  Arthur  is  deceased  to-night. 

Sal.  Indeed  we  fear’d  his  sickness  was  past  cure. 
Pern.  Indeed  we  heard  how  near  his  death  he 
was 

Before  the  child  himself  felt  he  was  sick: 

Thus  must  be  answer’d  either  here  or  hence. 

K.  John.  Why  do  you  bend  such  solemn  brows 
on  me?  go 

Think  you  I  bear  the  shears  of  destiny? 

Have  I  commandment  on  the  pulse  of  life? 

Sal.  It  is  apparent  foul  play;  and  ’tis  shame 
That  greatness  should  so  grossly  offer  it: 

So  thrive  it  in  your  game!  and  so,  farewell. 

Pern.  Stay  yet,  I^rd  Salisbury;  I’ll  go  with 
thee. 


JOHN  395 

And  find  the  inheritance  of  this  poor  child. 

His  little  kingdom  of  a  forced  grave. 

That  blood  which  owed  the  breadth  of  all 
this  isle,  gg 

Three  foot  of  it  doth  hold:  bad  world  the  while! 
This  must  not  be  thus  borne:  this  will  break  out 
To  all  our  sorrows,  and  ere  long  I  doubt. 

[Exeunt  Lords, 

K.  John.  They  burn  in  indignation.  I  repent: 
There  is  no  sure  foundation  set  on  blood. 

No  certain  life  achieved  by  others’  death. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

A  fearful  eye  thou  hast:  where  is  that  blood 
That  I  have  seen  inhabit  in  those  cheeks? 

So  foul  a  sky  clears  not  without  a  storm: 

Pour  down  thy  weather:  how  goes  all  in  France? 
Mess.  From  France  to  England.  Never  such  a 
power  no 

For  any  foreign  preparation 
Was  levied  in  the  body  of  a  land. 

The  copy  of  your  speed  is  learn’d  by  them; 

For  when  you  should  be  told  they  do  prepare. 

The  tidings  come  that  they  are  all  arrived. 

K.  John.  O,  where  hath  our  intelligence  been 
drunk? 

Where  hath  it  slept?  Where  is  my  mother’s  care, 
That  such  an  army  could  be  drawn  in  France, 

And  she  not  hear  of  it? 

Mess.  My  liege,  her  ear 

Is  stopp’d  with  dust;  the  first  of  April  died  120 

Your  noble  mother:  and,  as  I  hear,  my  lord. 

The  Lady  Constance  in  a  frenzy  died 
Three  days  before:  but  this  from  rumour’s 
tongue 

I  idly  heard;  if  true  or  false  I  know  not. 

K.  John.  Withhold  thy  speed,  dreadful  occa¬ 
sion! 

O,  make  a  league  with  me,  till  I  have  pleased 
My  discontented  peers!  What!  mother  dead! 
How  wildly  then  walks  my  estate  in  France! 
Under  whose  conduct  came  those  powers  of 
France 

That  thou  for  truth  givest  out  are  landed  here? 
Mess.  Under  the  Dauphin. 

K.John.  Thou  hast  made  me  giddy  75/ 
With  these  ill  tidings. 

Enter  the  bastard  and  peter  of  pom  fret. 

Now,  what  says  the  world 
To  your  proceedings?  do  not  seek  to  stuff 
My  head  with  more  ill  news,  for  it  is  full. 

Bast.  But  if  you  be  afeard  to  hear  the  worst. 
Then  let  the  worst  unheard  fall  on  your  head. 

K.  John.  Bear  with  me,  cousin;  for  I  was 
amazed 


KING  JOHN 


ACT  IV 


396 

Under  the  tide:  but  now  I  breathe  again 
Aloft  the  flood,  and  can  give  audience 
To  any  tongue,  speak  it  of  what  it  will .  /40 

Bast.  How  I  have  sped  among  the  clergymen. 
The  sums  I  have  collected  shall  express. 

But  as  I  travell’d  hither  through  the  land, 

I  find  the  people  strangely  fantasied; 

Possess’d  with  rumours,  full  of  idle  dreams. 

Not  knowing  what  they  fear,  but  full  of  fear: 

And  here’s  a  prophet,  that  I  brought  with  me 
From  forth  the  streets  of  Pomfret,  whom  I  found 
With  many  hundreds  treading  on  his  heels: 

To  whom  he  sung,  in  rude  harsh-sounding 
rhymes. 

That,  ere  the  next  Ascension-day  at  noon, 

Your  highness  should  deliver  up  your  crown. 

K.  John.  Thou  idle  dreamer,  wherefore  didst 
thou  so? 

Feter.  Foreknowing  that  the  truth  will  fall  out 
so. 

K.  John.  Hubert,  away  with  him,  imprison  him; 
And  on  that  day  at  noon,  whereon  he  says 
I  shall  yield  up  my  crown,  let  him  be  hang’d. 
Deliver  him  to  safety;  and  return. 

For  I  must  use  thee.  [Exit  Hubert  with  peter. 

O  my  gentle  cousin. 

Hear’ St  thou  the  news  abroad,  who  are  arrived? 
Bast.  The  French,  my  lord;  men’s  mouths  are 
full  of  it:  161 

Besides,  I  met  Lord  Bigot  and  Lord  Salisbury, 
With  eyes  as  red  as  new-enkindled  fire. 

And  others  more,  going  to  seek  the  grave 
Of  Arthur,  whom  they  say  is  kill’d  to-night 
On  your  suggestion. 

K.  John.  Gentle  kinsman,  go, 

And  thrust  thyself  into  their  companies: 

I  have  a  way  to  win  their  loves  again; 

Bring  them  before  me. 

Bast.  I  will  seek  them  out. 

K.  John.  Nay,  but  make  haste;  the  better  foot 
before.  170 

O,  let  me  have  no  subject  enemies. 

When  adverse  foreigners  aflFright  my  towns 
With  dreadful  pomp  of  stout  invasion! 

Be  Mercury,  set  feathers  to  thy  heels. 

And  fly  like  thought  from  them  to  me  again. 

Bast.  The  spirit  of  the  time  shall  teach  me 
speed.  [Exit. 

K.  John.  Spoke  like  a  sprightful  noble  gentle¬ 
man. 

Go  after  him;  for  he  perhaps  shall  need 
Some  messenger  betwixt  me  and  the  peers; 

And  be  thou  he. 

Mess.  With  all  my  heart,  my  liege.  180 

[Exit. 

K.  John.  My  mother  dead! 


Re-enter  Hubert. 

Hub.  My  lord,  they  say  five  moons  were  seen 
to-night; 

Four  fixed;  and  the  fifth  did  whirl  about 
The  other  four  in  wondrous  motion. 

K.  John.  Five  moons! 

Hub.  Old  men  and  beldams  in  the  streets 
Do  prophesy  upon  it  dangerously: 

Young  Arthur’s  death  is  common  in  their  mouths : 
And  when  they  talk  of  him,  they  shake  their  heads 
And  whisper  one  another  in  the  ear; 

And  he  that  speaks  doth  gripe  the  hearer’s  wrist, 
Whilst  he  that  hears  makes  fearful  action, 

With  wrinkled  brows,  with  nods,  \vith  rolling 
eyes. 

I  saw  a  smith  stand  with  his  hammer,  thus, 

The  whilst  his  iron  did  on  the  anvil  cool. 

With  open  mouth  swallowing  a  tailor’s  news; 
Who,  with  his  shears  and  measure  in  his  hand, 
Standing  on  slippers,  which  his  nimble  haste 
Had  falsely  thrust  upon  contrary  feet. 

Told  of  a  many  thousand  warlike  French 
That  were  em battailed  and  rank’d  in  Kent:  200 
Another  lean  unwash’d  artificer 
Cuts  oflFhis  tale  and  talks  of  Arthur’s  death. 

K.  John.  Why  seek’st  thou  to  possess  me  with 
these  fears? 

Why  urgest  thou  so  oft  young  Arthur’s  death? 
Thy  hand  hath  murder’d  him:  I  had  a  might>' 
cause 

To  wish  him  dead,  but  thou  hadst  none  to  kill 
him. 

Hub.  No  had,  my  lord!  why,  did  you  not  pro¬ 
voke  me? 

K.  John.  It  is  the  curse  of  kings  to  be  attended 
By  slaves  that  take  their  humours  for  a  warrant 
To  break  within  the  bloody  house  of  life,  210 
And  on  the  winking  of  authority 
To  understand  a  law,  to  know  the  meaning 
Of  dangerous  majesty,  when  perchance  it  frowns 
More  upon  humour  than  advised  respect. 

Hub.  Here  is  your  hand  and  seal  for  what  I 
did. 

K.  John.  O,  when  the  last  account  ’twixt 
heaven  and  earth 

Is  to  be  made,  then  shall  this  hand  and  seal 
Witness  against  us  to  damnation! 

How  oft  the  sight  of  means  to  do  ill  deeds 
Make  deeds  ill  done!  Hadst  not  thou  been  by, 

A  fellow  by  the  hand  of  nature  mark’d,  221 

Quoted  and  sign’d  to  do  a  deed  of  shame. 

This  murder  had  not  come  into  my  mind: 

But  taking  note  of  thy  abhorr’d  aspect, 

Finding  thee  fit  for  bloody  villainy, 

Apt,  liable  to  be  employ’d  in  danger. 


SCENE  II  KING 

I  faintly  broke  with  thee  of  Arthur’s  death; 

And  thou,  to  be  endeared  to  a  king, 

Made  it  no  conscience  to  destroy  a  prince. 

Hub.  My  lord —  250 

K.  John.  Hadst  thou  but  shook  thy  head  or 
made  a  pause 

When  I  spake  darkly  what  I  purposed. 

Or  turn’d  an  eye  of  doubt  upon  my  face. 

As  bid  me  tell  my  tale  in  express  words. 

Deep  shame  had  struck  me  dumb,  made  me 
break  off. 

And  those  thy  fears  might  have  wrought  fears  in 
me: 

But  thou  didst  understand  me  by  my  signs 
And  didst  in  signs  again  parley  with  sin; 

Yea,  without  stop,  didst  let  thy  heart  consent, 

And  consequently  thy  rude  hand  to  act  240 
The  deed,  which  both  our  tongues  held  vile  to 
name. 

Out  of  my  sight,  and  never  see  me  more! 

My  nobles  leave  me;  and  my  state  is  braved. 

Even  at  my  gates,  with  ranks  of  foreign  powers: 
Nay,  in  the  body  of  this  fleshly  land, 

This  kingdom,  this  confine  of  blood  and  breath, 
Hostility  and  civil  tumult  reigns 
Between  my  conscience  and  my  cousin’s  death. 
Hub.  Arm  you  against  your  other  enemies. 

I’ll  make  a  peace  between  your  soul  and  you.  250 
Young  Arthur  is  alive:  this  hand  of  mine 
Is  yet  a  maiden  and  an  innocent  hand. 

Not  painted  with  the  crimson  spots  of  blood. 

Within  this  bosom  never  enter’d  yet 

The  dreadful  motion  of  a  murderous  thought; 

And  you  have  slander’d  nature  in  my  form. 

Which,  howsoever  rude  exteriorly. 

Is  yet  the  cover  of  a  fairer  mind 
Than  to  be  butcher  of  an  innocent  child. 

K.  John.  Doth  Arthur  live?  O,  haste  thee  to  the 
peers,  260 

Throw  this  report  on  their  incensed  rage. 

And  make  them  tame  to  their  obedience! 

Forgive  the  comment  that  my  passion  made 
Upon  thy  feature;  for  my  rage  was  blind. 

And  foul  imaginary  eyes  of  blood 
Presented  thee  more  hideous  than  thou  art. 

O,  answer  not,  but  to  my  closet  bring 
The  angry  lords  with  all  expedient  haste. 

I  conjure  thee  but  slowly;  run  more  fast. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Before  the  castle 
Enter  Arthur,  on  the  'walls. 

Arth.  The  wall  is  high,  and  yet  will  I  leap 
down: 

Good  ground,  be  pitiful  and  hurt  me  not! 

There’s  few  or  none  do  know  me:  if  they  did, 


JOHN  397 

This  ship-boy’s  semblance  hath  disguised  me 
quite. 

I  am  afraid;  and  yet  I’ll  venture  it. 

If  I  get  down,  and  do  not  break  my  limbs, 

I’ll  find  a  thousand  shifts  to  get  away: 

As  good  to  die  and  go,  as  die  and  stay. 

Leaps  down. 

O  me!  my  uncle’s  spirit  is  in  these  stones: 

Heaven  take  my  soul,  and  England  keep  my 
bones!  [Dies.  10 

Enter  Pembroke,  Salisbury,  and  bigot. 

Sal.  Lords,  I  will  meet  him  at  Saint  Edmunds- 
bury: 

It  is  our  safety,  and  we  must  embrace 
This  gentle  offer  of  the  perilous  time. 

Pern.  Who  brought  that  letter  from  the  Card¬ 
inal? 

Sal.  The  Count  Melun,  a  noble  lord  of  France; 
Whose  private  with  me  of  the  Dauphin’s  love 
Is  much  more  general  than  these  lines  import. 

Big.  To-morrow  morning  let  us  meet  him  then. 
Sal.  Or  rather  then  set  forward;  for  ’twill  be 
Two  long  days’  journey,  lords,  or  ere  we  meet.  20 

Enter  the  bastard. 

Bast.  Once  more  to-day  well  met,  distemper’d 
lords! 

The  King  by  me  requests  your  presence  straight. 
Sal.  The  King  hath  dispossess’d  himself  of  us : 
We  will  not  line  his  thin  bestained  cloak 
With  our  pure  honours,  nor  attend  the  foot 
That  leaves  the  print  of  blood  where’er  it  walks. 
Return  and  tell  him  so:  we  know  the  worst. 

Bast.  Whate’er  you  think,  good  words,  I 
think,  were  best. 

Sal.  Our  griefs,  and  not  our  manners,  reason 
now.  2p 

Bast.  But  there  is  little  reason  in  your  grief; 
Therefore  ’twere  reason  you  had  manners  now. 
Pern.  Sir,  sir,  impatience  hath  his  privilege. 

Bast.  ’Tis  true,  to  hurt  his  master,  no  man  else. 
Sal.  This  is  the  prison.  What  is  he  lies  here? 
Seeing  Arthur. 

Pern.  O  death,  made  proud  with  pure  and  prince¬ 
ly  beauty! 

The  earth  had  not  a  hole  to  hide  this  deed. 

Sal.  Murder,  as  hating  what  himself  hath  done. 
Doth  lay  it  open  to  urge  on  revenge. 

Big.  Or,  when  he  doom’d  this  beauty  to  a 
grave. 

Found  it  too  precious-princely  for  a  grave.  40 
Sal.  Sir  Richard,  what  think  you?  have  you  be¬ 
held. 

Or  have  you  read  or  heard?  or  could  you  think? 
Or  do  you  almost  think,  although  you  see. 


398  KING 

That  you  do  see?  could  thought,  without  this 
object, 

Form  such  another?  This  is  the  very  top. 

The  height,  the  crest,  or  crest  unto  the  crest, 

Of  murder’s  arms:  this  is  the  bloodiest  shame. 

The  wildest  savagery,  the  vilest  stroke. 

That  ever  wall-eyed  wrath  or  staring  rage 
Presented  to  the  tears  of  soft  remorse.  jo 

Pern.  All  murders  past  do  stand  excused  in  this: 
And  this,  so  sole  and  so  unmatchable. 

Shall  give  a  holiness,  a  purity, 

To  the  yet  unbegotten  sin  of  times; 

And  prove  a  deadly  bloodshed  but  a  jest, 

Exampled  by  this  heinous  spectacle. 

Bast.  It  is  a  damned  and  a  bloody  work; 

The  graceless  action  of  a  heavy  hand. 

If  that  it  be  the  work  of  any  hand. 

Sal.  If  that  it  be  the  work  of  any  hand !  6o 

We  had  a  kind  of  light  what  would  ensue: 

It  is  the  shameful  work  of  Hubert’s  hand; 

The  practice  and  the  purpose  of  the  King: 

From  whose  obedience  I  forbid  my  soul. 

Kneeling  before  this  ruin  of  sweet  life. 

And  breathing  to  his  breathless  excellence 
The  incense  of  a  vow,  a  holy  vow, 

Never  to  taste  the  pleasures  of  the  world. 

Never  to  be  infected  with  delight. 

Nor  conversant  with  ease  and  idleness,  70 

Till  I  have  set  a  glory  to  this  hand. 

By  giving  it  the  worship  of  revenge. 

Pem.\  Our  souls  religiously  confirm  thy 
Big.  I  words. 

Enter  Hubert. 

Hub.  Lords,  I  am  hot  with  haste  in  seeking  you: 
Arthur  doth  live;  the  King  hath  sent  for  you. 

Sal.  O,  he  is  bold  and  blushes  not  at  death. 
Avaunt,  thou  hateful  villain,  get  thee  gone! 

Hub.  I  am  no  villain. 

Sal.  Must  I  rob  the  law? 

Drawing  his  sword. 

Bast.  Your  sword  is  bright,  sir;  put  it  up  again. 
Sal.  Not  till  I  sheathe  it  in  a  murderer’s  skin.  80 
Hub.  Stand  back.  Lord  Salisbury,  stand  back,  I 
say; 

By  heaven,  I  think  my  sword’s  as  sharp  as  yours: 

I  would  not  have  you,  lord,  forget  yourself. 

Nor  tempt  the  danger  of  my  true  defence; 

Lest  I,  by  marking  of  your  rage,  forget 
Your  worth,  your  grea^tness  and  nobility. 

Big.  Out,  dunghill!  darest  thou  brave  a  noble¬ 
man? 

Hub.  Not  for  my  life:  but  yet  I  dare  defend 
My  innocent  life  against  an  emperor. 

Sal.  Thou  art  a  murderer. 

Hub.  Do  not  prove  me  so;  po 


JOHN  ACT  IV 

Yet  I  am  none:  whose  tongue  soe’er  speaks  false, 
Not  truly  speaks;  who  speaks  not  truly,  lies. 

Pern.  Cut  him  to^pieces. 

Bast.  Keep  the  peace,  I  say. 

Sal.  Stand  by,  or  I  shall  gall  you,  Faulcon- 
bi  idge. 

Bast.  Thou  wert  better  gall  the  devil,  Salisbury: 
If  thou  but  frown  on  me,  or  stir  thy  foot. 

Or  teach  thy  hasty  spleen  to  do  me  shame. 

I’ll  strike  thee  dead.  Put  up  thy  sword  betime; 

Or  I’ll  so  maul  you  and  your  toasting-iron. 

That  you  shall  think  the  devil  is  come  from  hell. 
Big.  What  wilt  thou  do,  renowned  Faulcon- 
bridge?  lOt 

Second  a  villain  and  a  murderer? 

Hub.  Lord  Bigot,  I  am  none. 

Big.  Who  kill’d  this  prince? 

Hub.  ’Tis  not  an  hour  since  I  left  him  well: 

I  honour’d  him,  I  loved  him,  and  will  weep 
My  date  of  life  out  for  his  sweet  life’s  loss. 

&/.  Trust  not  those  cunning  waters  of  his  eyes. 
For  villainy  is  not  without  such  rheum; 

And  he,  long  traded  in  it,  makes  it  seem 
Like  rivers  of  remorse  and  innocency.  no 

Away  with  me,  all  you  whose  souls  abhor 
The  uncleanly  savours  of  a  slaughter-house; 

For  I  am  stifled  with  this  smell  of  sin. 

Big.  Away  toward  Bury,  to  the  Dauphin  there! 
Pern.  There  tell  the  King  he  may  inquire  us  out. 

[Exeunt  Lords. 

Bast.  Here’s  a  good  world!  Knew  you  of  this 
fair  work? 

Beyond  the  infinite  and  boundless  reach 
Of  mercy,  if  thou  didst  this  deed  of  death. 

Art  thou  damn’d,  Hubert. 

Hub.  Do  but  hear  me,  sir. 

Bast.  Ha!  I’ll  tell  thee  what;  120 

Thou’rt  damn’d  as  black — nay,  nothing  is  so 
black; 

Thou  art  more  deep  damn’d  than  Prince  Lucifer: 
There  is  not  yet  so  ugly  a  fiend  of  hell 
As  thou  shalt  be,  if  thou  didst  kill  this  child. 

Hub.  Upon  my  soul — 

Bast.  If  thou  didst  but  consent 

To  this  most  cruel  act,  do  but  despair; 

And  if  thou  want’st  a  cord,  the  smallest  thread 
That  ever  spider  twisted  from  her  womb 
Will  serve  to  strangle  thee;  a  rush  will  be  a 
beam 

To  hang  thee  on;  or  wouldst  thou  drown  thyself. 
Put  but  a  little  water  in  a  spoon,  i^i 

And  it  shall  be  as  all  the  ocean. 

Enough  to  stifle  such  a  villain  up. 

I  do  suspect  thee  very  grievously. 

Hub.  If  I  in  act,  consent,  or  sin  of  thought. 

Be  guilty  of  the  stealing  that  sweet  breath 


SCENE  III 

\Miich  was  embounded  in  this  beauteous  clay, 
Let  hell  want  pains  enough  to  torture  me. 

I  left  him  well. 

Bast.  Go,  bear  him  in  thine  arms. 

I  am  amazed,  methinks,  and  lose  my  way  i^o 
Among  the  thorns  and  dangers  of  this  world. 
How  easy  dost  thou  take  all  England  up! 

From  forth  this  morsel  of  dead  royalty. 

The  life,  the  right,  and  truth  of  all  this  realm 
Is  fled  to  heaven;  and  England  now  is  left 
To  tug  and  scamble  and  to  part  by  the  teeth 
The  unowed  interest  of  proud -swelling  state. 
Now  for  the  bare-pick’d  bone  of  majesty 
Doth  dogged  war  bristle  his  angry  crest 
And  snarleth  in  the  gentle  eyes  of  peace:  /jo 

Now  powers  from  home  and  discontents  at  home 
Meet  in  one  line;  and  vast  confusion  waits. 

As  doth  a  raven  on  a  sick-fall’n  beast. 

The  imminent  decay  of  wrested  pomp. 

Now  happy  he  whose  cloak  and  cincture  can 
Hold  out  this  tempest.  Bear  away  that  child 
And  follow  me  with  speed:  I’ll  to  the  King: 

A  thousand  businesses  are  brief  in  hand. 

And  heaven  itself  doth  frown  upon  the  land. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  King  John’s  palace 
Enter  king  john,  pandulph,  and  Attendants. 

K.  John.  Thus  have  I  yielded  up  into  your  hand 
The  circle  of  my  glory.  [Giving  the  crovm. 

Band.  Take  again 

From  this  my  hand,  as  holding  of  the  Pope 
Your  sovereign  greatness  and  authority. 

K.  John.  Now  keep  your  holy  word:  go  meet 
the  French, 

And  from  his  Holiness  use  all  your  power 
To  stop  their  marches  ’fore  we  are  inflamed. 

Our  discontented  counties  do  revolt; 

Our  people  quarrel  with  obedience. 

Swearing  allegiance  and  the  love  of  soul  lo 

To  stranger  blood,  to  foreign  royalty. 

This  inundation  of  mistemper’d  humour 
Rests  by  you  only  to  be  qualified: 

Then  pause  not;  for  the  present  time’s  so  sick. 
That  present  medicine  must  be  minister’d. 

Or  overthrow  incurable  ensues. 

Band.  It  was  my  breath  that  blew  this  tempest 
up. 

Upon  your  stubborn  usage  of  the  Pope; 

But  since  you  are  a  gentle  convert! te. 

My  tongue  shall  hush  again  this  storm  of  war  20 
And  make  fair  weather  in  your  blustering  land. 
On  this  Ascension-day,  remember  well. 

Upon  your  oath  of  service  to  the  Pope, 


JOHN  399 

Go  I  to  make  the  French  lay  down  their  arms. 

[Exit. 

K.  John.  Is  this  Ascension-day?  Did  not  the 
prophet 

Say  that  before  Ascension-day  at  noon 
My  crown  I  should  give  off?  Even  so  I  have: 

I  did  suppose  it  should  be  on  constraint; 

But,  heaven  be  thank’d,  it  is  but  voluntary. 

Enter  the  bastard. 

Bast.  All  Kent  hath  yielded;  nothing  there  holds 
out  JO 

But  Dover  castle:  London  hath  received. 

Like  a  kind  host,  the  Dauphin  and  his  powers: 
Your  nobles  will  not  hear  you,  but  are  gone 
To  offer  service  to  your  enemy. 

And  wild  amazement  hurries  up  and  down 
The  little  number  of  your  doubtful  friends. 

K.  John.  Would  not  my  lords  return  to  me 
again. 

After  they  heard  young  Arthur  was  alive? 

Bast.  They  found  him  dead  and  cast  into  the 
streets. 

An  empty  casket,  where  the  jewel  of  life  40 
By  some  damn’d  hand  was  robb’d  and  ta’en 
away. 

K.  John.  That  villain  Hubert  told  me  he  did  live. 
Bast.  So,  on  my  soul,  he  did,  for  aught  he  knew. 
But  wherefore  do  you  droop?  why  look  you  sad? 
Be  great  in  act,  as  you  have  been  in  thought; 

Let  not  the  world  see  fear  and  sad  distrust 
Govern  the  motioh  of  a  kingly  eye: 

Be  stirring  as  the  time;  be  fire  with  fire; 

Threaten  the  threatener  and  outface  the  brow 
Of  bragging  horror:  so  shall  inferior  eyes,  yo 
That  borrow  their  behaviours  from  the  great, 
Grow  great  by  your  example  and  put  on 
The  dauntless  spirit  of  resolution. 

Away,  and  glister  like  the  god  of  war. 

When  he  intendeth  to  become  the  field: 

Show  boldness  and  aspiring  confidence. 

What,  shall  they  seek  the  lion  in  his  den. 

And  fright  him  there?  and  make  him  tremble 
there? 

O,  let  it  not  be  said:  forage,  and  run 

To  meet  displeasure  father  from  the  doors,  60 

And  grapple  with  him  ere  he  come  so  nigh. 

K.  John.  The  legate  of  the  Pope  hath  been  with 
me. 

And  I  have  made  a  happy  peace  with  him; 

And  he  hath  promised  to  dismiss  the  powers 
Led  by  the  Dauphin. 

Bast.  O  inglorious  league! 

Shall  we,  upon  the  footing  of  our  land. 

Send  fair-play  orders  and  make  compromise. 
Insinuation,  parley  and  base  truce 


KING 


400  KING 

To  arms  invasive?  shall  a  beardless  boy, 

A  cocker’d  silken  wanton,  brave  our  fields,  70 
And  flesh  his  spirit  in  a  warlike  soil. 

Mocking  the  air  with  colours  idly  spread. 

And  find  no  check?  Let  us,  my  liege,  to  arms: 
Perchance  the  Cardinal  cannot  make  your  peace; 
Or  if  he  do,  let  it  at  least  be  said 
They  saw  we  had  a  purpose  of  defence. 

K.  ]ohn.  Have  thou  the  ordering  of  this  present 
time. 

Bast.  Away,  then,  with  good  courage!  yet,  I 
know. 

Our  party  may  well  meet  a  prouder  foe.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  11 .  The  Dauphin  s  camp  at  Saint 
Edmundsbury 

Enter,  inarms,  lewis,  Salisbury,  melun, 
PEMBROKE,  BIGOT,  and  Soldurs. 

Lew.  My  Lord  Melun,  let  this  be  copied  out, 

And  keep  it  safe  for  our  remembrance: 

Return  the  precedent  to  these  lords  again; 

That,  having  our  fair  order  written  down. 

Both  they  and  we,  perusing  o’er  these  notes. 

May  know  wherefore  we  took  the  sacrament 
And  keep  our  faiths  firm  and  inviolable. 

Sal.  Upon  our  sides  it  never  shall  be  broken. 

And,  noble  Dauphin,  albeit  we  swear 
A  voluntary  zeal  and  an  unurged  faith  10 

To  your  proceedings;  yet  believe  me.  Prince, 

I  am  not  glad  that  such  a  sore  of  time 
Should  seek  a  plaster  by  contemn’d  revolt, 

And  heal  the  inveterate  canker  of  one  wound 
By  making  many.  O,  it  grieves  my  soul. 

That  I  must  draw  this  metal  from  my  side 
To  be  a  widow-maker!  O,  and  there 
Where  honourable  rescue  and  defence 
Cries  out  upon  the  name  of  Salisbury! 

But  such  is  the  infection  of  the  time,  20 

That,  for  the  health  and  physic  of  our  right. 

We  cannot  deal  but  with  the  very  hand 
Of  stern  injustice  and  confused  wrong. 

And  is’t  not  pity,  O  my  grieved  friends. 

That  we,  the  sons  and  children  of  this  isle. 

Were  born  to  see  so  sad  an  hour  as  this; 

Wherein  we  step  after  a  stranger  march 
Upon  her  gentle  bosom,  and  fill  up 
Her  enemies’  ranks — I  must  withdraw  and 
weep 

Upon  the  spot  of  this  enforced  cause —  50 

To  grace  the  gentry  of  a  land  remote. 

And  follow  unacquainted  colours  here? 

What,  here?  O  nation,  that  thou  couldst  remove! 
That  Neptune’s  arms,  who  clippeth  thee  about. 
Would  bear  thee  from  the  knowledge  of  thyself. 
And  grapple  thee  unto  a  pagan  shore; 


JOHN  act  v 

Where  these  two  Christian  armies  might  com¬ 
bine 

The  blood  of  malice  in  a  vein  of  league. 

And  not  to  spend  it  so  unneighbour ly! 

Lew.  A  noble  temper  dost  thou  show  in  this; 
And  great  affections  wrestling  in  thy  bosom  4/ 
Doth  make  an  earthquake  of  nobility. 

O,  what  a  noble  combat  hast  thou  fought 
Between  compulsion  and  a  brave  respect! 

Let  me  wipe  off  this  honourable  dew. 

That  silverly  doth  progress  on  thy  cheeks: 

My  heart  hath  melted  at  a  lady’s  tears. 

Being  an  ordinary  inundation; 

But  this  effusion  of  such  manly  drops, 

This  shower,  blown  up  by  tempest  of  the  soul,  50 
Startles  mine  eyes,  and  makes  me  more  amazed 
Than  had  I  seen  the  vaulty  top  of  heaven 
Figured  quite  o’er  with  burning  meteors. 

Lift  up  thy  brow,  renowned  Salisbury, 

And  with  a  great  heart  heave  away  this  storm: 
Commend  these  waters  to  those  baby  eyes 
That  never  saw  the  giant  world  enraged; 

Nor  met  with  fortune  other  than  at  feasts. 

Full  of  warm  blood,  of  mirth,  of  gossiping. 

Come,  come;  for  thou  shalt  thrust  thy  hand  as 
deep  60 

Into  the  purse  of  rich  prosperity 
As  Lewis  himself:  so,  nobles,  shall  you  all. 

That  knit  your  sinews  to  the  strength  of  mine. 
And  even  there,  methinks,  an  angel  spake: 

Enter  pandulph. 

Look,  where  the  holy  legate  comes  apace, 

To  give  us  warrant  from  the  hand  of  heaven. 

And  on  our  actions  set  the  name  of  right 
With  holy  breath. 

Pand.  Hail,  noble  prince  of  France! 

The  next  is  this.  King  John  hath  reconciled 
Himself  to  Rome;  his  spirit  is  come  in,  70 

That  so  stood  out  against  the  Holy  Church, 

The  great  metropolis  and  see  of  Rome: 

Therefore  thy  threatening  colours  now  wind  up; 
And  tame  the  savage  spirit  of  wild  war. 

That,  like  a  lion  foster’d  up  at  hand. 

It  may  lie  gently  at  the  foot  of  peace. 

And  be  no  further  harmful  than  in  show. 

Lew.  Your  Grace  shall  pardon  me,  I  will  not 
back: 

I  am  too  high-born  to  be  propertied. 

To  be  a  secondary  at  control,  80 

Or  useful  serving-man  and  instrument. 

To  any  sovereign  state  throughout  the  world. 
Your  breath  first  kindled  the  dead  coal  of  wars 
Between  this  chastised  kingdom  and  myself. 

And  brought  in  matter  that  should  feed  this  fire; 
And  now  ’tis  far  too  huge  to  be  blown  out 


SCENE  II  KING 

With  that  same  weak  wind  which  enkindled  it. 
You  taught  me  how  to  know  the  face  of  right, 
Acquainted  me  with  interest  to  this  land, 

Yea,  thrust  this  enterprise  into  my  heart; 

And  come  ye  now  to  tell  me  John  hath  made 
His  peace  with  Rome?  What  is  that  peace  to  me? 
I,  by  the  honour  of  my  marriage-bed. 

After  young  Arthur,  claim  this  land  for  mine; 

And,  now  it  is  half-conquer’d,  must  I  back 
Because  that  John  hath  made  his  peace  with 
Rome? 

Am  I  Rome’s  slave?  What  penny  hath  Rome 
borne. 

What  men  provided,  what  munition  sent. 

To  underprop  this  action?  Is’t  not  I 

That  undergo  this  charge?  who  else  but  I,  lOO 

And  such  as  to  my  claim  are  liable, 

Sweat  in  this  business  and  maintain  this  war? 

Have  I  not  heard  these  islanders  shout  out 
Vive  le  rot!  as  I  have  bank’d  their  towns? 

Have  I  not  here  the  best  cards  for  the  game. 

To  win  this  easy  match  play’d  for  a  crown? 

And  shall  I  now  give  o’er  the  yielded  set? 

No,  no,  on  my  soul,  it  never  shall  be  said. 

Fand,  You  look  but  on  the  outside  of  this  work. 
Levo.  Outside  or  inside,  I  will  not  return  no 
Till  my  attempt  so  much  be  glorified 
As  to  my  ample  hope  was  promised 
Before  I  drew  this  gallant  head  of  war, 

And  cull’d  these  fiery  spirits  from  the  world, 

To  outlook  conquest  and  to  win  renown 
Even  in  the  jaws  of  danger  and  of  death. 

Trumpet  sounds. 

What  lusty  trumpet  thus  doth  summon  us? 

Enter  the  bastard,  attended. 

Bast.  According  to  the  fair  play  of  the  world, 

Let  me  have  audience;  I  am  sent  to  speak: 

My  holy  lord  of  Milan,  from  the  King  120 

I  come,  to  learn  how  you  have  dealt  for  him; 

And,  as  you  answer,  I  do  know  the  scope 
And  warrant  limited  unto  my  tongue. 

Fand.  The  Dauphin  is  too  wilful-opposite. 

And  will  not  temporize  with  my  entreaties; 

He  flatly  says  he’ll  not  lay  down  his  arms. 

Bast.  By  all  the  blood  that  ever  fury  breathed. 
The  youth  says  well.  Now  hear  our  English 
King; 

For  thus  his  royalty  doth  speak  in  me. 

He  is  prepared,  and  reason  too  he  should:  /50 

This  apish  and  unmannerly  approach. 

This  harness’d  masque  and  unadvised  revel. 

This  unhair’d  sauciness  and  boyish  troops. 

The  King  doth  smile  at;  and  is  well  prepared 
To  whip  this  dwarfish  war,  these  pigmy  arms, 

F  rom  out  the  circle  of  his  territories. 


JOHN  401 

That  hand  which  had  the  strength,  even  at  your 
door. 

To  cudgel  you  and  make  you  take  the  hatch. 

To  dive  like  buckets  in  concealed  wells. 

To  crouch  in  litter  of  your  stable  planks,  1^0 

To  lie  like  pawns  lock’d  up  in  chests  and  trunks. 
To  hug  with  swine,  to  seek  sweet  safety  out 
In  vaults  and  prisons,  and  to  thrill  and  shake 
Even  at  the  crying  of  your  nation’s  crow. 
Thinking  his  voice  an  armed  Englishman; 

Shall  that  victorious  hand  be  feebled  here. 

That  in  your  chambers  gave  you  chastisement? 
No:  know  the  gallant  monarch  is  in  arms 
And  like  an  eagle  o’er  his  aery  towers. 

To  souse  annoyance  that  comes  near  his  nest.  /50 
And  you  degenerate,  you  ingrate  revolts. 

You  bloody  Neroes,  ripping  up  the  womb 
Of  your  dear  mother  England,  blush  for  shame; 
For  your  own  ladies  and  pale-visaged  maids 
Like  Amazons  come  tripping  after  drums. 

Their  thimbles  into  armed  gauntlets  change. 
Their  needles  to  lances,  and  their  gentle  hearts 
To  fierce  and  bloody  inclination. 

Levo.  There  end  thy  brave,  and  turn  thy  face  in 
peace; 

We  grant  thou  canst  outscold  us:  fare  thee  well; 
We  hold  our  time  too  precious  to  be  spent  161 
With  such  a  brabbler. 

Fand.  Give  me  leave  to  speak. 

Bast.  No,  I  will  speak. 

Lew.  We  will  attend  to  neither. 

Strike  up  the  drums;  and  let  the  tongue  of  war 
Plead  for  our  interest  and  our  being  here. 

Bast.  Indeed,  your  drums,  being  beaten,  will  cry 
out; 

And  so  shall  you,  being  beaten:  do  but  start 
An  echo  with  the  clamour  of  thy  drum. 

And  even  at  hand  a  drum  is  ready  braced 

That  shall  reverberate  all  as  loud  as  thine;  ijo 

Sound  but  another,  and  another  shall 

As  loud  as  thine  rattle  the  welkin’s  ear 

And  mock  the  deep-mouth’d  thunder:  for  at  hand. 

Not  trusting  to  this  halting  legate  here. 

Whom  he  hath  used  rather  for  sport  than  need, 

Is  warlike  John;  and  in  his  forehead  sits 
A  bare-ribb’d  death,  whose  office  is  this  day 
To  feast  upon  whole  thousands  of  the  French. 
Lew.  Stiike  up  our  dnims,  to  find  this  danger 
out. 

Bast.  And  thou  shalt  find  it,  Dauphin,  do  not 
doubt.  [Exeunt.  180 

Scene  hi.  The  field  of  battle 
Alarums.  Enter  king  john  and  Hubert. 

K.  John.  How  goes  the  day  with  us?  O,  tell  me, 
Hubert. 


402  KING 

Hub.  Badly,  I  fear.  How  fares  your  Majesty? 

K.  John.  This  fever,  that  hath  troubled  me  so 
long, 

Lies  heavy  on  me;  O,  my  heart  is  sick! 

Enter  a  messenger. 

A/m.  My  lord,  your  valiant  kinsman,  Faulcon- 
bridge. 

Desires  your  Majesty  to  leave  the  field 
And  send  him  word  by  me  which  way  you  go. 

K.  John.  Tell  him,  toward  Swinstead,  to  the 
abbey  there. 

Mess.  Be  of  good  comfort;  for  the  great  supply 
That  was  expected  by  the  Dauphin  here,  lo 
Are  wreck’d  three  nights  ago  on  Goodwin  Sands. 
This  news  was  brought  to  Richard  but  even  now: 
The  French  fight  coldly,  and  retire  themselves. 

K.  John.  Ay  me!  this  tyrant  fever  burns  me 
up, 

And  will  not  let  me  welcome  this  good  news. 

Set  on  toward  Swinstead:  to  my  litter  straight; 
Weakness  possesseth  me,  and  I  am  faint. 

[Exeunt, 

Scene  iv.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Enter  Salisbury,  Pembroke,  and  bigot. 

Sal.  I  did  not  think  the  King  so  stored  with 
friends. 

Pern.  Up  once  again;  put  spirit  in  the  French: 

If  they  miscarry,  we  miscarry  too. 

Sal.  That  misbegotten  devil,  Faulconbridge, 

In  spite  of  spite,  alone  upholds  the  day. 

Pern.  They  say  King  John  sore  sick  hath  left  the 
field. 

Enter  melun,  mounded. 

Mel.  Lead  me  to  the  revolts  of  England  here. 

Sal.  When  we  were  happy  we  had  other  names. 
Pern.  It  is  the  Count  Melun. 

Sal.  Wounded  to  death. 

Mel.  Fly,  noble  English,  you  are  bought  and 
sold;  10 

Unthread  the  rude  eye  of  rebellion 
And  welcome  home  again  discarded  faith. 

Seek  out  King  John  and  fall  before  his  feet; 

For  if  the  French  be  lords  of  this  loud  day. 

He  means  to  recompense  the  pains  you  take 
By  cutting  off  your  heads:  thus  hath  he  sworn 
And  I  with  him,  and  many  moe  with  me. 

Upon  the  altar  at  Saint  Edmundsbury ; 

Even  on  that  altar  where  we  swore  to  you 
Dear  amity  and  everlasting  love.  20 

Sal.  May  this  be  possible?  may  this  be  true? 

Mel.  Have  I  not  hideous  death  within  my 
view. 

Retaining  but  a  quantity  of  life, 


JOHN  ACT  V 

Which  bleeds  away,  even  as  a  form  of  wax 
Resolveth  from  his  figure  ’gainst  the  fire? 

What  in  the  world' should  make  me  now  de¬ 
ceive, 

Since  I  must  lose  the  use  of  all  deceit? 

Why  should  I  then  be  false,  since  it  is  true 
That  I  must  die  here  and  live  hence  by  truth? 

I  say  again,  i f  Lewis  do  win  the  day,  5 o 

He  is  forsworn,  if  e’er  those  eyes  of  yours 
Behold  another  day  break  in  the  east: 

But  even  this  night,  whose  black  contagious 
breath 

Already  smokes  about  the  burning  crest 
Of  the  old,  feeble,  and  day-wearied  sun. 

Even  this  ill  night,  your  breathing  shall  expire. 

Paying  the  fine  of  rated  treachery 

Even  with  a  treacherous  fine  of  all  your  lives. 

If  Lewis  by  your  assistance  win  the  day. 
Commend  me  to  one  Hubert  with  your  king:  40 
The  love  of  him,  and  this  respect  besides. 

For  that  my  grandsire  was  an  Englishman, 
Awakes  my  conscience  to  confess  all  this. 

In  lieu  whereof,  I  pray  you,  bear  me  hence 
From  forth  the  noise  and  rumour  of  the  field, 
Where  I  may  think  the  remnant  of  my  thoughts 
In  peace,  and  part  this  body  and  my  soul 
With  contemplation  and  devout  desires. 

Sal.  We  do  believe  thee:  and  beshrew  my  soul 
But  I  do  love  the  favour  and  the  form  jo 

Of  this  mosf:  fair  occasion,  by  the  which 
We  will  untread  the  steps  of  damned  flight. 

And  like  a  bated  and  retired  flood. 

Leaving  our  rankness  and  irregular  course. 

Stoop  low  within  those  bounds  we  have  o’er- 
look’d 

And  calmly  run  on  in  obedience 

Even  to  our  ocean,  to  our  great  King  John. 

My  arm  shall  give  thee  help  to  bear  thee  hence; 
For  I  do  see  the  cruel  pangs  of  death 
Right  in  thine  eye.  Away,  my  friends!  New 
flight;  60 

And  happy  newness,  that  intends  old  right. 

[Exeunt,  leading  off  melun. 

Scene  v.  The  French  camp 
Enter  lewis  and  his  train. 

Lew.  The  sun  of  heaven  methought  was  loath 
to  set. 

But  stay’d  and  made  the  western  welkin  blush, 
When  English  measure  backward  their  own 
ground 

In  faint  retire.  O,  bravely  came  we  off. 

When  with  a  volley  of  our  needless  shot. 

After  such  bloody  toil,  we  bid  good  night; 

And  wound  out  tattering  colours  clearly  up. 

Last  in  the  field,  and  almost  lords  of  it! 


SCENE  V  KING 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  Where  is  my  prince,  the  Dauphin? 

Lew.  Here:  what  news? 

Mess.  The  Count  Melun  is  slain;  the  English 
lords  io 

By  his  persuasion  are  again  fall’n  off, 

And  your  supply,  which  you  have  wish’d  so  long. 
Are  cast  away  and  sunk  on  Goodwin  Sands. 

Lew.  Ah,  foul  shrewd  news !  beshrew  thy  very 
heart! 

I  did  not  think  to  be  so  sad  to-night 
As  this  hath  made  me.  Who  was  he  that  said 
King  John  did  fly  an  hour  or  two  before 
The  stumbling  night  did  part  our  weary  powers? 
Mess.  Whoever  spoke  it,  it  is  true,  my  lord. 

Lew.  Well ;  keep  good  quarter  and  good  care 
to-night:  20 

The  day  shall  not  be  up  so  soon  as  I, 

To  try  the  fair  adventure  of  to-morrow.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  vi.  An  open  place  m  the  neighbourhood 
ofSwinstead  Abbey 

Enter  the  bastard  and  Hubert,  severally. 

Hub.  Who’s  there?  speak,  ho!  speak  quickly, 
or  I  shoot. 

Bast.  A  friend.  What  art  thou? 

Hub.  Of  the  part  of  England. 

Bast.  Whither  dost  thou  go? 

Hub.  What’s  that  to  thee?  why  may  not  I  de¬ 
mand 

Of  thine  affairs,  as  well  as  thou  of  mine? 

Bast.  Hubert,  I  think? 

Hub.  Thou  hast  a  perfect  thought: 

I  will  upon  all  hazards  well  believe 
I'hou  art  my  friend,  that  know’st  my  tongue  so 
well. 

Who  art  thou? 

Bast.  -  Who  thou  wilt:  and  if  thou  please. 
Thou  mayst  befriend  me  so  much  as  to  think  10 
I  come  one  way  of  the  Plantagenets. 

Hub.  Unkind  remembrance!  thou  and  eyeless 
night 

Have  done  me  shame:  brave  soldier,  pardon  me. 
That  any  accent  breaking  from  thy  tongue 
Should  ’scape  the  true  acquaintance  of  mine  ear. 
Bast.  Come,  come;  sans  compliment,  what  news 
abroad? 

Hub.  Why,  here  walk  I  in  the  black  brow  of 
night. 

To  find  you  out. 

Bast.  Brief,  then;  and  what’s  the  news? 

Hub.  O,  my  sweet  sir,  news  fitting  to  the  night. 
Black,  fearful,  comfortless,  and  horrible.  20 
Bast.  Show  me  the  very  wound  of  this  ill  news; 

I  am  no  woman.  I’ll  not  swoon  at  it. 


JOHN  403 

Hub.  The  King,  I  fear,  is  poison’d  by  a  monk: 

I  left  him  almost  speechless;  and  broke  out 
To  acquaint  you  with  this  evil,  that  you  might 
The  better  arm  you  to  the  sudden  time. 

Than  if  you  had  at  leisure  known  of  this. 

Bast.  How  did  he  take  it?  who  did  taste  to  him? 
Hub.  A  monk,  I  tell  you;  a  resolved  villain. 
Whose  bowels  suddenly  burst  out:  the  King  50 
Yet  speaks  and  peradventure  may  recover. 

Bast.  Who  didst  thou  leave  to  tend  his  Majesty? 
Hub.  Why,  know  you  not?  the  lords  are  all 
come  back, 

And  brought  Prince  Henry  in  their  company; 

At  whose  request  the  King  hath  pardon’d  them. 
And  they  are  all  about  his  Majesty. 

Bast.  Withhold  thine  indignation,  mighty  heav¬ 
en. 

And  tempt  us  not  to  bear  above  our  power! 

I’ll  tell  thee,  Hubert,  half  hiy  power  this  night, 
Passing  these  flats,  are  taken  by  the  tide;  40 
These  Lincoln  Washes  have  devoured  them; 
Myself,  well  mounted,  hardly  have  escaped. 
Away  before:  conduct  me  to  the  King; 

I  doubt  he  will  be  dead  or  ere  I  come.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  vii.  The  orchard  in  Swinstead  Abbey 
Enter  prince  henry,  Salisbury,  and  bigot. 

P.  Hen.  It  is  too  late:  the  life  of  all  his  blood 
Is  touch’d  corruptibly,  and  his  pure  brain. 

Which  some  suppose  the  soul’s  frail  dwelling- 
house. 

Doth  by  the  idle  comments  that  it  makes 
Foretell  the  ending  of  mortality. 

Enter  Pembroke. 

Pern.  His  Highness  yet  doth  speak,  and  holds 
belief 

That,  being  brought  into  the  open  air. 

It  would  allay  the  burning  quality 
Of  that  fell  poison  which  assaileth  him. 

P.  Hen.  Let  him  be  brought  into  the  orchard 
here.  10 

Doth  he  still  rage?  [Exit  bigot. 

Pern.  He  is  more  patient 

Than  when  you  left  him;  even  now  he  sung. 

P.  Hen.  O  vanity  of  sickness!  fierce  extremes 
In  their  continuance  will  not  feel  themselves. 
Death,  having  prey’d  upon  the  outward  parts. 
Leaves  them  invisible,  and  his  siege  is  now 
Against  the  mind,  the  which  he  pricks  and 
wounds 

With  many  legions  of  strange  fantasies. 

Which,  in  their  throng  and  press  to  that  last  hold. 
Confound  themselves.  ’Tis  strange  that  death 
should  sing.  20 

I  am  the  cygnet  to  this  pale  faint  swan. 


404  KING 

Who  chants  a  doleful  hymn  to  his  own  death, 

And  from  the  organ-pipe  of  frailty  sings 
His  soul  and  body  to  their  lasting  rest. 

Sal.  Be  of  good  comfort,  Prince;  for  you  are 
born 

To  set  a  form  upon  that  indigest 

Which  he  hath  left  so  shapeless  and  so  rude. 

Enter  Attendants.,  and  bigot,  carrying  king  john 
in  a  chair. 

K.  John.  Ay,  marry,  now  my  soul  hath  elbow- 
room; 

I  would  not  out  at  windows  nor  at  doors. 

There  is  so  hot  a  summer  in  my  bosom,  50 

That  all  my  bowels  crumble  up  to  dust: 

I  am  a  scribbled  form,  drawn  with  a  pen 
Upon  a  parchment,  and  against  this  fire 
Do  I  shrink  up. 

P.  Hen.  How  fares  your  Majesty? 

K.  John.  Poison’d — ill  fare — dead,  forsook, 
castoff: 

And  none  of  you  will  bid  the  winter  come 
To  thrust  his  icy  fingers  in  my  maw. 

Nor  let  my  kingdom’s  rivers  take  their  course 
Through  my  burn’d  bosom,  nor  entreat  the 
north 

To  make  his  bleak  winds  kiss  my  parched  lips  40 
And  comfort  me  with  cold.  I  do  not  ask  you 
much, 

I  beg  cold  comfort;  and  you  are  so  strait 
And  so  ingrateful,  you  deny  me  that. 

P.  Hen.  O  that  there  were  some  virtue  in  my 
tears, 

That  might  relieve  you! 

K.  John.  The  salt  in  them  is  hot. 

Within  me  is  a  hell;  and  there  the  poison 
Is  as  a  fiend  confined  to  tyrannize 
On  unreprievable  condemned  blood. 

Enter  the  bastard. 

Bast.  O,  I  am  scalded  with  my  violent  motion, 
And  spleen  of  speed  to  see  your  Majesty!  50 

K.  John.  O  cousin,  thou  art  come  to  set  mine 
eye: 

The  tackle  of  my  heart  is  crack’d  and  bum’d. 

And  all  the  shrouds  wherewith  my  life  should 
sail 

Are  turned  to  one  thread,  one  little  hair: 

My  heart  hath  one  poor  string  to  stay  it  by, 
Which  holds  but  till  thy  news  be  uttered; 

And  then  all  this  thou  seest  is  but  a  clod 
And  module  of  confounded  royalty. 

Bast.  The  Dauphin  is  preparing  hitherward. 
Where  heaven  He  knows  how  we  shall  answer 
him;  60 

For  in  a  night  the  best  part  of  my  power, 


JOHN  ACT  V 

As  I  upon  advantage  did  remove. 

Were  in  the  Washe;s  all  unwarily 
Devoured  by  the  unexpected  flood. 

[The  king  dies. 

Sal.  You  breathe  these  dead  news  in  as  dead  an 
ear. 

My  liege!  my  lord!  but  now  a  king,  now  thus. 

P.  Hen.  Even  so  must  I  run  on,  and  even  so 
stop. 

What  surety  of  the  world,  what  hope,  what 
stay. 

When  this  was  now  a  king,  and  now  is  clay? 

Bast.  Art  thou  gone  so?  I  do  but  stay  behind  70 
To  do  the  office  for  thee  of  revenge. 

And  then  my  soul  shall  wait  on  thee  to  heaven. 

As  it  on  earth  hath  been  thy  servant  still. 

Now,  now,  you  stars  that  move  in  your  right 
spheres. 

Where  be  your  powers?  show  now  your  mended 
faiths. 

And  instantly  return  with  me  again. 

To  push  destruction  and  perpetual  shame 
Out  of  the  weak  door  of  our  fainting  land. 
Straight  let  us  seek,  or  straight  we  shall  be 
sought; 

The  Dauphin  rages  at  our  very  heels.  80 

Sal.  It  seems  you  know  not,  then,  so  much  as 
we: 

The  Cardinal  Pandulph  is  within  at  rest. 

Who  half  an  hour  since  came  from  the  Dauphin, 
And  brings  from  him  such  offers  of  our  peace 
As  we  with  honour  and  respect  may  take. 

With  purpose  presently  to  leave  this  war. 

Bast.  He  will  the  rather  do  it  when  he  sees 
Ourselves  well  sinewed  to  our  defence. 

Sal.  Nay,  it  is  in  a  manner  done  already; 

For  many  carriages  he  hath  dispatch’d  po 

To  the  sea-side,  and  put  his  cause  and  quarrel 
To  the  disposing  of  the  Cardinal : 

With  whom  yourself,  myself,  and  other 
lords. 

If  you  think  meet,  this  afternoon  will  post 
To  consummate  this  business  happily. 

Bast.  Let  it  be  so:  and  you,  my  noble  prince. 
With  other  princes  that  may  best  be  spared, 

Shall  wait  upon  your  father’s  funeral. 

P.  Hen.  At  Worcester  must  his  body  be  in- 
terr’d; 

For  so  he  .v^ill’d  it. 

Bast.  Thither  shall  it  then:  too 

And  happily  may  your  sweet  self  put  on 
The  lineal  state  and  glory  of  the  land! 

To  whom,  with  all  submission,  on  my  knee 
I  do  bequeath  my  faithful  services 
And  true  subjection  everlastingly. 

Sal.  And  the  like  tender  of  our  love  we  make, 


SCENE  VII  KING 

To  rest  without  a  spot  for  evermore. 

P.  Hen.  I  have  a  kind  soul  that  would  give  you 
thanks 

And  knows  not  how  to  do  it  but  with  tears. 

Bast.  O,  let  us  pay  the  time  but  needful  woe, 

Since  it  hath  been  beforehand  with  our  griefs,  in 
This  England  never  did,  nor  never  shall. 


JOHN  405 

Lie  at  the  proud  foot  of  a  conqueror. 

But  when  it  first  did  help  to  wound  itself. 

Now  these  her  princes  are  come  home  again. 
Come  the  three  corners  of  the  world  in  arms. 

And  we  shall  shock  them.  Nought  shall  make  us 
rue, 

I  f  England  to  itself  do  rest  but  true.  [Exeunt. 


sv  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAE 


The  Duke  of  Venice 

Prince  of  Morocco  I 
n  A  suitors  to  rortia 

Prince  of  Arragon  | 

Antonio,  a  ?uerchant  of  Venice 
Bassanio,  his  friend^  suitor  likewise  to  Portia 
Salanio 
Salarino 
Gratiano 
Salerio 

Lorenzo,  in  love  with  Jessica 
Shylock,  a  rich  Jew 
Tubal,  a  Jew,  his  friend 

Launcelot  Gobbo,  the  clown,  servant  to  Shylock 
Old  Gobbo,  father  to  Launcelot 
Leonardo,  servant  to  Bassanio 


friends  to  Antonio  and  Bassanio 


Balthasar  I  ,  ^  r» 

Stephano  I 
Servant  to  Antonio 
Servant  to  Portia 

Portia,  a  rich  heiress 
Nerissa,  her  waiting-maid 
Jessica,  daughter  to  Shylock 

Non-Speaking:  Magnificoes  of  Venice,  Officers  of  the 
Court  of  Justice,  Gaoler,  Musicians,  Servants  to 
Portia,  and  other  Attendants 

Scene:  Partly  in  Venice,  and  partly  at  Belmont,  the 
seat  of  Portia,  on  the  continent 


ACT  1 

Scene  i.  Venice:  a  street 
Enter  antonio,  salarino,  and  salanio. 

Ant.  In  sooth,  I  know  not  why  I  am  so  sad: 

It  wearies  me;  you  say  it  wearies  you; 

But  how  I  caught  it,  found  it,  or  came  by  it, 

What  stuff ’tis  made  of,  whereof  it  is  born, 

I  am  to  learn; 

And  such  a  want-wit  sadness  makes  of  me, 

That  I  have  much  ado  to  know  myself. 

Salar.  Your  mind  is  tossing  on  the  ocean; 

There,  where  your  argosies  with  portly  sail. 

Like  signiors  and  rich  burghers  on  the  flood,  lo 
Or,  as  it  were,  the  pageants  of  the  sea. 

Do  overpeer  the  petty  traffickers 
That  curtsy  to  them,  do  them  reverence. 

As  they  fly  by  them  with  their  woven  wings. 
Salan.  Believe  me,  sir,  had  I  such  venture  forth. 
The  better  part  of  my  affections  would 
Be  with  my  hopes  abroad.  I  should  be  still 
Plucking  the  grass,  to  know  where  sits  the  wind. 
Peering  in  maps  for  ports  and  piers  and  roads; 
And  every  object  that  might  make  me  fear  20 
Misfortune  to  my  ventures,  out  of  doubt 
Would  make  me  sad. 

Salar.  My  wind  cooling  my  broth 

Would  blow  me  to  an  ague,  when  I  thought 
What  harm  a  wind  too  great  at  sea  might  do. 

I  should  not  see  the  sandy  hour-glass  run. 

But  I  should  think  of  shallows  and  of  flats. 

And  see  my  wealthy  Andrew  dock’d  in  sand. 
Vailing  her  high-top  lower  than  her  ribs 
To  kiss  her  burial.  Should  I  go  to  church 


And  see  the  holy  edifice  of  stone,  50 

And  not  bethink  me  straight  of  dangerous  rocks. 
Which  touching  but  my  gentle  vessel’s  side; 
Would  scatter  all  her  spices  on  the  stream. 
Enrobe  the  roaring  waters  with  my  silks. 

And,  in  a  word,  but  even  now  worth  this. 

And  now  worth  nothing?  Shall  I  have  the  thought 
To  think  on  this,  and  shall  I  lack  the  thought 
That  such  a  thing  bechanced  would  make  me  sad? 
But  tell  not  me;  I  know,  Antonio 
Is  sad  to  think  upon  his  merchandise.  40 

Ant.  Believe  me,  no:  I  thank  my  fortune  for  it. 
My  ventures  are  not  in  one  bottom  trusted. 

Nor  to  one  place;  nor  is  my  whole  estate 
Upon  the  fortune  of  this  present  year: 

Therefore  my  merchandise  makes  me  not  sad. 
Salar.  Why,  then  you  are  in  love. 

Ant.  Fie,  fie! 

Salar.  Not  in  love  neither?  Then  let  us  say  you 
are  sad. 

Because  you  are  not  merry:  and  ’twere  as  easy 
For  you  to  laugh  and  leap  and  say  you  are  merry, 
Because  you  are  not  sad.  Now,  by  two-headed 
Janus,  yo 

Nature  hath  framed  strange  fellows  in  her  time: 
Some  that  will  evermore  peep  through  their  eyes 
And  laugh  like  parrots  at  a  bag-piper. 

And  other  of  such  vinegar  aspect 

That  they’ll  not  show  their  teeth  in  way  of  smile. 

Though  Nestor  swear  the  jest  be  laughable. 

Enter  bassanio,  lorenzo,  and  gratiano. 

Salan.  Here  comes  Bassanio,  your  most  noble 
kinsman. 


406 


SCENE  I 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


Grariano,  and  Lorenzo.  Fare  ye  well: 

We  leave  you  now  with  better  company. 

Salar.  I  would  have  stay’d  till  I  had  made  you 
merry  6o 

If  worthier  friends  had  not  prevented  me. 

Ant.  Your  worth  is  very  dear  in  my  regard. 

I  take  it,  your  own  business  calls  on  you 
And  you  enbrace  the  occasion  to  depart. 

Salar.  Good  morrow,  my  good  lords. 

Bass.  Good  signiors  both,  when  shall  we  laugh? 
say,  when? 

You  grow  exceeding  strange;  must  it  be  so? 

Salar.  We’ll  make  our  leisures  to  attend  on 
yours. 

[Exeunt  salarino  and  salanio. 
Lor.  My  lord  Bassanio,  since  you  have  found 
Antonio, 

We  two  will  leave  you:  but  at  dinner-time,  70 
I  pray  you,  have  in  mind  where  we  must  meet. 
Bass.  I  will  not  fail  you. 

Gra.  You  look  not  well,  Signior  Antonio; 

You  have  too  much  respect  upon  the  world: 

They  lose  it  that  do  buy  it  with  much  care: 
Believe  me,  you  are  marvellously  changed. 

Ant.  I  hold  the  world  but  as  the  world,  Gratiano; 
A  stage  where  every  man  must  play  a  part. 

And  mine  a  sad  one. 

Gra.  Let  me  play  the  fool : 

With  mirth  and  laughter  let  old  wrinkles  come. 
And  let  my  liver  rather  heat  with  wine  81 

Than  my  heart  cool  with  mortifying  groans. 

Why  should  a  man,  whose  blood  is  warm  within, 
Sit  like  his  grandsire  cut  in  alabaster? 

Sleep  when  he  wakes  and  creep  into  the  jaundice 
By  being  peevish?  I  tell  thee  what,  Antonio — 

I  love  thee,  and  it  is  my  love  that  speaks — 

There  are^a  sort  of  men  whose  visages 
Do  cream  and  mantle  like  a  standing  pond. 

And  do  a  wilful  stillness  entertain,  po 

With  purpose  to  be  dress’d  in  an  opinion 
Of  wisdom,  gravity,  profound  conceit. 

As  who  should  say,  “I  am  Sir  Oracle, 

And  when  I  ope  my  lips  let  no  dog  bark!” 

O  my  Antonio,  I  do  know  of  these 
That  therefore  only  are  reputed  wise 
For  saying  nothing,  when,  I  am  very  sure. 

If  they  should  speak,  would  almost  damn  those 
ears 

Which,  hearing  them,  would  call  their  brothers 
fools. 

I’ll  tell  thee  more  of  this  another  time:  100 

But  fish  not,  with  this  melancholy  bait. 

For  this  fool  gudgeon,  this  opinion. 

Come,  good  Lorenzo.  Fare  ye  well  awhile: 

I’ll  end  my  exhortation  after  dinner. 

Ij)r.  Well,  we  will  leave  you  then  till  dinnertime: 


I  must  be  one  of  these  same  dumb  wise  men, 

For  Gratiano  never  lets  me  speak. 

Gra.  Well,  keep  me  company  but  two  years 
moe, 

Thou  shalt  not  know  the  sound  of  thine  own 
tongue.  /op 

Ant.  Farewell:  I’ll  grow  a  talker  for  this  gear. 
Gra.  Thanks,  i’  faith,  for  silence  is  only  com¬ 
mendable 

In  a  neat’s  tongue  dried  and  a  maid  not  vendible. 

[Exeunt  gratiano  and  lorenzo. 
Ant.  Is  that  any  thing  now? 

Bass.  Gratiano  speaks  an  infinite  deal  of  nothing, 
more  than  any  man  in  all  Venice.  His  reasons  are 
as  two  grains  of  wheat  hid  in  two  bushels  of  chaff : 
you  shall  seek  all  day  ere  you  find  them,  and 
when  you  have  them,  they  are  not  worth  the 
search. 

Ant.  Well,  tell  me  now  what  lady  is  the  same 
To  whom  you  swore  a  secret  pilgrimage,  120 
That  you  to-day  promised  to  tell  me  of? 

Bass.  ’Tis  not  unknown  to  you,  Antonio, 

How  much  I  have  disabled  mine  estate. 

By  something  showing  a  more  swelling  port 
Than  my  faint  means  would  grant  continuance: 
Nor  do  I  now  make  moan  to  be  abridged 
From  such  a  noble  rate;  but  my  chief  care 
Is  to  come  fairly  off  from  the  great  debts 
Wherein  my  time  something  too  prodigal 
Hath  left  me  gaged.  To  you,  Antonio,  1^0 

I  owe  the  most,  in  money  and  in  love. 

And  from  your  love  I  have  a  warranty 
To  unburden  all  my  plots  and  purposes 
How  to  get  clear  of  all  the  debts  I  owe. 

Ant.  I  pray  you,  good  Bassanio,  let  me  know  it; 
And  if  it  stand,  as  you  yourself  still  do. 

Within  the  eye  of  honour,  be  assured. 

My  purse,  my  person,  my  extremest  means. 

Lie  all  unlock’d  to  your  occasions. 

Bass.  In  my  school-days,  when  I  had  lost  one 
shaft,  140 

I  shot  his  fellow  of  the  self-same  flight 
The  self-same  way  with  more  advised  watch, 

To  find  the  other  forth,  and  by  adventuring  both 
I  oft  found  both:  I  urge  this  childhood  proof. 
Because  what  follows  is  pure  innocence. 

I  owe  you  much,  and,  like  a  wilful  youth. 

That  which  I  owe  is  lost;  but  if  you  please 
To  shoot  another  arrow  that  self  way 
Which  you  did  shoot  the  first,  I  do  not  doubt. 

As  I  will  watch  the  aim,  or  to  find  both  /50 
Or  bring  your  latter  hazard  back  again 
And  thankfully  rest  debtor  for  the  first. 

Ant.  You  know  me  well,  and  herein  spend  but 
time 

To  wind  about  my  love  with  circumstance; 


ACT 


408  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


And  out  of  doubt  you  do  me  now  more  wrong 
In  making  question  of  my  uttermost 
Than  if  you  had  made  waste  of  all  I  have: 

Then  do  but  say  to  me  what  I  should  do 
That  in  your  knowledge  may  by  me  be  done, 

And  I  am  prest  unto  it:  therefore,  speak.  160 
Bass.  In  Belmont  is  a  lady  richly  left; 

And  she  is  fair  and,  fairer  than  that  word. 

Of  wondrous  virtues:  sometimes  from  her  eyes 
I  did  receive  fair  speechless  messages: 

Her  name  is  Portia,  nothing  undervalued 
To  Cato’s  daughter,  Brutus’  Portia: 

Nor  is  the  wide  world  ignorant  of  her  worth. 

For  the  four  winds  blow  in  from  every  coast 
Renowned  suitors,  and  her  sunny  locks 
Hang  on  her  temples  like  a  golden  fleece;  ijo 
Which  makes  her  seat  of  Belmont  Colchos’ 
strand. 

And  many  Jasons  come  in  quest  of  her. 

O  my  Antonio,  had  I  but  the  means 
To  hold  a  rival  place  with  one  of  them, 

I  have  a  mind  presages  me  such  thrift. 

That  I  should  questionless  be  fortunate! 

Ant.  Thou  know’ St  that  all  my  fortunes  are  at 
sea; 

Neither  have  I  money  nor  commodity 
To  raise  a  present  sum:  therefore  go  forth; 

Try  what  my  credit  can  in  Venice  do:  180 

That  shall  be  rack’d,  even  to  the  uttermost. 

To  funish  thee  to  Belmont,  to  fair  Portia. 

Go,  presently  inquire,  and  so  will  I, 

Where  money  is,  and  I  no  question  make 
To  have  it  of  my  trust  or  for  my  sake.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Belrnont:  a  room  in  Portia's  house 
Enter  portia  and  nerissa. 

For.  By  my  troth,  Nerissa,  my  little  body  is 
aweary  of  this  great  world. 

Ner.  You  would  be,  sweet  madam,  if  your 
miseries  were  in  the  same  abundance  as  your 
good  fortunes  are:  and  yet,  for  aught  I  see,  they 
are  as  sick  that  surfeit  with  too  much  as  they  that 
starve  with  nothing.  It  is  no  mean  happiness 
therefore,  to  be  seated  in  the  mean:  superfluity 
comes  sooner  by  white  hairs,  but  competency 
lives  longer.  10 

For.  Good  sentences  and  well  pronounced. 

Ner.  They  would  be  better,  if  well  followed. 
For.  If  to  do  were  as  easy  as  to  know  what  were 
good  to  do,  chapels  had  been  churches  and  poor 
men’s  cottages  princes’  palaces.  It  is  a  good 
divine  that  follows  his  own  instructions:  I  can 
easier  teach  twenty  what  were  good  to  be  done, 
than  be  one  of  the  twenty  to  follow  mine  own 
teaching.  The  brain  may  devise  laws  for  the 
blood,  but  a  hot  temper  leaps  o’er  a  cold  decree: 


such  a  hare  is  madness  the  youth,  to  skip  o’er  the 
meshes  of  good  counsel  the  cripple.  But  this 
reasoning  is  not  the  fashion  to  choose  me  a 
husband.  O  me,  the  word  “choose!”  I  may  nei¬ 
ther  choose  whom  I  would  nor  refuse  whom  I 
dislike;  so  is  the  will  of  a  living  daughter  curbed 
by  the  will  of  a  dead  father.  Is  it  not  hard, 
Nerissa,  that  I  cannot  choose  one  nor  refuse 
none?  2p 

Ner.  Your  father  was  ever  virtuous;  and  holy 
men  at  their  death  have  good  inspirations:  there¬ 
fore  the  lottery,  that  he  hath  devised  in  these 
three  chests  of  gold,  silver,  and  lead,  whereof 
who  chooses  his  meaning  chooses  you,  will,  no 
doubt,  never  be  chosen  by  any  rightly  but  one 
who  shall  rightly  love.  But  what  warmth  is  there 
in  your  affection  towards  any  of  these  princely 
suitors  that  are  already  come? 

For.  I  pray  thee,  over-name  them;  and  as  thou 
namest  them,  I  will  describe  them;  and,  accord¬ 
ing  to  my  description,  level  at  my  affection. 

Ner.  First,  there  is  the  Neapolitan  prince. 

For.  Ay,  that’s  a  colt  indeed,  for  he  doth  nothing 
but  talk  of  his  horse;  and  he  makes  it  a  great 
appropriation  to  his  own  good  parts,  that  he  can 
shoe  him  himself.  I  am  much  afeard  my  lady  his 
mother  played  false  with  a  smith. 

Ner.  Then  there  is  the  County  Palatine. 

For.  He  doth  nothing  but  frown,  as  who  should 
say  “If  you  will  not  have  me,  choose”:  he  hears 
merry  tales  and  smiles  not:  I  fear  he  will  prove 
the  weeping  philosopher  when  he  grows  old, 
being  so  full  of  unmannerly  sadness  in  his  youth. 
I  had  rather  be  married  to  a  death’s-head  with 
a  bone  in  his  mouth  than  to  either  of  these.  God 
defend  me  from  these  two! 

Ner.  How  say  you  by  the  French  lord.  Mon¬ 
sieur  Le  Bon?  jp 

For.  God  made  him,  and  therefore  let  him  pass 
for  a  man.  In  truth,  I  know  it  is  a  sin  to  be  a 
mocker:  but,  he!  why,  he  hath  a  horse  better  than 
the  Neapolitan’s,  a  better  bad  habit  of  frowning 
than  the  Count  Palatine;  he  is  every  man  in  no 
man;  if  a  throstle  sing,  he  falls  straight  a  caper¬ 
ing:  he  will  fence  with  his  own  shadow:  if  1 
should  marry  him,  I  should  marry  twenty  hus¬ 
bands.  If  he  would  despise  me,  I  would  forgive 
him,  for  if  he  love  me  to  madness,  I  shall  never 
requite  him.  70 

Ner.  What  say  you,  then,  to  Falconbridge,  the 
young  baron  of  England? 

For.  You  know  I  say  nothing  to  him,  for  he 
understands  not  me,  nor  I  him:  he  hath  neither 
Latin,  French,  nor  Italian,  and  you  will  come 
into  the  court  and  swear  that  I  have  a  poor 
pennyworth  in  the  English.  He  is  a  proper  man’s 


SCENE  II 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


picture,  but,  alas,  who  can  converse  with  a  dumb- 
show?  How  oddly  he  is  suited!  I  think  he  bought 
his  doublet  in  Italy,  his  round  hose  in  France, 
his  bonnet  in  Germany  and  his  behaviour  every¬ 
where. 

Ner.  What  think  you  of  the  Scottish  lord,  his 
neighbour? 

For.  That  he  hath  a  neighbourly  charity  in  him, 
for  he  borrowed  a  box  of  the  ear  of  the  English¬ 
man  and  swore  he  would  pay  him  again  when  he 
was  able:  I  think  the  Frenchman  became  his 
surety  and  sealed  under  for  another. 

Ner,  How  like  you  the  young  German,  the 
Duke  of  Saxony’s  nephew?  5?/ 

For.  Very  vilely  in  the  morning,  when  he  is 
sober,  and  most  vilely  in  the  afternoon,  when  he 
is  drunk:  when  he  is  best,  he  is  a  little  worse 
than  a  man,  and  when  he  is  worst,  he  is  little 
better  than  a  beast:  an  the  worst  fall  that  ever 
fell,  I  hope  I  shall  make  shift  to  go  without  him. 

Ner.  If  he  should  offer  to  choose,  and  choose  the 
right  casket,  you  should  refuse  to  perform  your 
father’s  will,  if  you  should  refuse  to  accept  him. 

For.  Therefore,  for  fear  of  the  worst,  I  pray 
thee,  set  a  deep  glass  of  rhenish  wine  on  the 
contrary  casket,  for  if  the  devil  be  within  and 
that  temptation  without,  I  know  he  will  choose 
it.  I  will  do  anything,  Nerissa,  ere  I’ll  be  married 
to  a  sponge. 

Ner.  You  need  not  fear,  lady,  the  having  any 
of  these  lords:  they  have  acquainted  me  with 
their  determinations;  which  is,  indeed,  to  return 
suit,  unless  you  may  be  won  by  some  other  sort 
than  your  father’s  imposition  depending  on  the 
caskets. 

For.  If  I  live  to  be  as  old  as  Sibylla,  I  will  die  as 
chaste  as  Diana,  unless  I  be  obtained  by  the 
manner  of  my  father’s  will.  I  am  glad  this  parcel 
of  wooers  are  so  reasonable,  for  there  is  not  one 
among  them  but  I  dote  on  his  very  absence,  and 
I  pray  God  grant  them  a  fair  departure. 

Ner.  Do  you  not  remember,  lady,  in  your 
father’s  time,  a  Venetian,  a  scholar  and  a  soldier, 
that  came  hither  in  company  of  the  Marquis  of 
Montferrat? 

For.  Yes,  yes,  it  was  Bassanio;  as  I  think,  he 
was  so  called. 

Ner.  True,  madam:  he,  of  all  the  men  that  ever 
my  foolish  eyes  looked  upon,  was  the  best 
deserving  a  fair  lady.  75/ 

For.  I  remember  him  well,  and  I  remember  him 
worthy  of  thy  praise. 

Enter  a  serving-man. 

How  now!  what  news? 

Serv.  The  four  strangers  seek  for  you,  madam. 


409 

to  take  their  leave:  and  there  is  a  forerunner 
come  from  a  fifth,  the  Prince  of  Morocco,  who 
brings  word  the  Prince  his  master  will  be  here 
to-night. 

For.  If  I  could  bid  the  fifth  welcome  with  so 
good  a  heart  as  I  can  bid  the  other  four  farewell, 
I  should  be  glad  of  his  approach;  if  he  have  the 
condition  of  a  saint  and  the  complexion  of  a 
devil,  I  had  rather  he  should  shrive  me  than  wive 
me. 

Come,  Nerissa.  Sirrah,  go  before. 

Whiles  we  shut  the  gates  upon  one  wooer, 
another  knocks  at  the  door.  [Exeunt, 

Scene  111.  Venice:  a  public  place 
Enter  bassanio  and  shylock. 

Shy.  Three  thousand  ducats;  well. 

Bass.  Ay,  sir,  for  three  months. 

Shy.  For  three  months;  well. 

Bass.  For  the  which,  as  I  told  you,  Antonio  shall 
be  bound. 

Shy.  Antonio  shall  become  bound;  well. 

Bass.  May  you  stead  me?  will  you  pleasure  me? 
shall  I  know  your  answer? 

Shy.  Three  thousand  ducats  for  three  months 
and  Antonio  bound.  10 

Bass.  Your  answei  to  that. 

Shy.  Antonio  is  a  good  man. 

Bass.  Have  you  heard  any  imputation  to  the 
contrary? 

Shy.  Oh,  no,  no,  no,  no:  my  meaning  in  saying 
he  is  a  good  man  is  to  have  you  understand  me 
that  he  is  sufficient.  Yet  his  means  are  in  supposi¬ 
tion:  he  hath  an  argosy  bound  to  Tripolis,  an¬ 
other  to  the  Indies;  I  understand,  moreover,  upon 
the  Rialto,  he  hath  a  third  at  Mexico,  a  fourth 
for  England,  and  other  ventures  he  hath,  squan¬ 
dered  abroad.  But  ships  are  but  boards,  sailors 
but  men:  there  be  land-rats  and  water-rats,  water- 
thieves  and  land-thieves,  I  mean  pirates,  and 
then  there  is  the  peril  of  waters,  winds,  and 
rocks.  The  man  is,  notwithstanding,  sufficient. 
Three  thousand  ducats;  I  think  I  may  take  his 
bond. 

Bass.  Be  assured  you  may. 

Shy.  I  will  be  assured  I  may;  and,  that  I  may 
be  assured,  I  will  bethink  me.  May  I  speak  with 
Antonio? 

Bass.  If  it  please  you  to  dine  with  us. 

Shy.  Yes,  to  smell  pork;  to  eat  of  the  habitation 
which  your  prophet  the  Nazarite  conjured  the 
devil  into.  I  will  buy  with  you,  sell  with  you,  talk 
with  you,  walk  with  you,  and  so  following,  but 
I  will  not  eat  with  you,  drink  with  you,  nor  pray 
with  you.  What  news  on  the  Rialto?  Who  is  he 
comes  here?  40 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


ANTONIO. 

Bass.  This  is  Signior  Antonio. 

Shy.  [Aside]  How  like  a  fawning  publican  he 
looks! 

I  hate  him  for  he  is  a  Christian, 

But  more  for  that  in  low  simplicity 
He  lends  out  money  gratis  and  brings  down 
The  rate  of  usance  here  with  us  in  Venice. 

If  I  can  catch  him  once  upon  the  hip, 

I  will  feed  fat  the  ancient  grudge  I  bear  him. 

He  hates  our  sacred  nation,  and  he  rails. 

Even  there  where  merchants  most  do  congregate. 
On  me,  my  bargains,  and  my  well-won  thrift,  5/ 
Which  he  calls  interest.  Cursed  be  my  tribe. 

If  I  forgive  him! 

Bass.  Shylock,  do  you  hear.^ 

Shy.  I  am  debating  of  my  present  store, 

And,  by  the  near  guess  of  my  memory, 

I  cannot  instantly  raise  up  the  gross 

Of  full  three  thousand  ducats.  What  of  that? 

Tubal,  a  wealthy  Hebrew  of  my  tribe. 

Will  furnish  me.  But  soft!  how  many  months 
Do  you  desire?  [To  antonio]  Rest  you  fair,  good 
signior;  60 

Your  worship  was  the  last  man  in  our  mouths. 
Ant.  Shylock,  although  I  neither  lend  nor 
borrow 

By  taking  nor  by  giving  of  excess. 

Yet,  to  supply  the  ripe  wants  of  my  friend, 

I’ll  break  a  custom.  Is  he  yet  possess’d 
How  much  ye  would? 

Shy.  Ay,  ay,  three  thousand  ducats. 

Ant.  And  for  three  months. 

Shy.  I  had  forgot;  three  months;  you  told  me  so. 
Well  then,  your  bond;  and  let  me  see;  but  hear 
you; 

Methought  you  said  you  neither  lend  nor  borrow 
Upon  advantage. 

Ant.  I  do  never  use  it.  7/ 

Shy.  When  Jacob  grazed  his  uncle  Laban’s 
sheep — 

This  Jacob  from  our  holy  Abram  was, 

As  his  wise  mother  wrought  in  his  behalf. 

The  third  possessor;  ay,  he  was  the  third — 

Ant.  And  what  of  him?  did  he  take  interest? 

Shy.  No,  not  take  interest,  not,  as  you  would 
say. 

Directly  interest:  mark  what  Jacob  did. 

When  Laban  and  himself  were  compromised 
That  all  the  eanlings  which  were  streak’d  and 
pied  80 

Should  fall  as  Jacob’s  hire,  the  ewes,  being  rank. 
In  the  end  of  autumn  turned  to  the  rams. 

And,  when  the  work  of  generation  was 
Between  these  wooly  breeders  in  the  act, 


The  skilful  shepherd  peel’d  me  certain  wands 
And,  in  the  doing  of  the  deed  of  kind, 

He  stuck  them  up  before  the  fulsome  ewes. 

Who  then  conceiving  did  in  eaning  time 

Fall  parti-colour’d  lambs,  and  those  were  Jacob’s. 

This  was  a  way  to  thrive,  and  he  was  blest: 

And  thrift  is  blessing,  if  men  steal  it  not. 

Ant.  This  was  a  venture,  sir,  that  Jacob  served 
for; 

A  thing  not  m  his  power  to  bring  to  pass. 

But  sway’d  and  fashion’d  by  the  hand  of  heaven. 
Was  this  inserted  to  make  interest  good? 

Or  is  your  gold  and  silver  ewes  and  rams? 

Shy.  I  cannot  tell;  I  make  it  breed  as  fast: 

But  note  me,  signior. 

Ant.  Mark  you  this  Bassanio, 

The  devil  can  cite  Scripture  for  his  purpose. 

An  evil  soul  producing  holy  witness  100 

Is  like  a  villain  with  a  smiling  cheek, 

A  goodly  apple  rotten  at  the  heart: 

O,  what  a  goodly  outside  falsehood  hath! 

Shy.  Three  thousand  ducats;  ’tis  a  good  round 
sum. 

Three  months  from  twelve;  then,  let  me  see;  the 
rate — 

Ant.  Well,  Shylock,  shall  we  be  beholding  to 
you? 

Shy.  Signior  Antonio,  many  a  time  and  oft 
In  the  Rialto  you  have  rated  me 
About  my  moneys  and  my  usances : 

Still  have  I  borne  it  with  a  patient  shrug,  no 
For  sufferance  is  the  badge  of  all  our  tribe. 

You  call  me  misbeliever,  cut-throat  dog. 

And  spit  upon  my  Jewish  gaberdine. 

And  all  for  use  of  that  which  is  mine  own. 

Well  then,  it  now  appears  you  need  my  help: 

Go  to,  then;  you  come  to  me,  and  you  say 
“Shylock,  we  would  have  moneys”:  you  say  so; 
You,  that  did  void  your  rheum  upon  my  beard 
And  foot  me  as  you  spurn  a  stranger  cur 
Over  your  threshold:  moneys  is  your  suit.  120 
What  should  I  say  to  you?  Should  I  not  say 
“Hath  a  dog  money?  is  it  possible 
A  cur  can  lend  three  thousand  ducats?”  Or 
Shall  I  bend  low  and  in  a  bondman’s  key, 

With  bated  breath  and  whispering  humbleness, 
Say  this; 

“Fair  sir,  you  spit  on  me  on  Wednesday  last; 

You  spurn’d  me  such  a  day;  another  time 
You  call’d  me  dog;  and  for  these  courtesies 
I’ll  lend  you  thus  much  moneys” ?  75 o 

Ant.  I  am  as  like  to  call  thee  so  again. 

To  spit  on  thee  again,  to  spurn  thee  too. 

If  thou  wilt  lend  this  money,  lend  it  not 
As  to  thy  friends;  for  when  did  friendship  take 
A  breed  for  barren  metal  of  his  friend? 


SCENE  III 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


But  lend  it  rather  to  thine  enemy, 

Who,  if  he  break,  thou  mayst  with  better  face 
Exact  the  penalty. 

Shy.  Why,  look  you,  how  you  storm! 

I  would  be  friends  with  you  and  have  your  love. 
Forget  the  shames  that  you  have  stain’d  me 
with. 

Supply  your  present  wants  and  take  no  doit 
Of  usance  for  my  moneys,  and  you’ll  not  hear 
me; 

This  is  kind  I  offer. 

Bass.  This  were  kindness. 

Shy.  This  kindness  will  I  show. 

Go  with  me  to  a  notary,  seal  me  there 
Your  single  bond;  and,  in  a  merry  sport. 

If  you  repay  me  not  on  such  a  day. 

In  such  a  place,  such  sum  or  sums  as  are 
Express’d  in  the  condition,  let  the  forfeit 
Be  nominated  for  an  equal  pound  /j'o 

Of  your  fair  flesh,  to  be  cut  off  and  taken 
In  what  part  of  your  body  pleaseth  me. 

Ant.  Content,  i’  faith:  I’ll  seal  to  such  a  bond 
And  say  there  is  much  kindness  in  the  Jew. 

Bass.  You  shall  not  seal  to  such  a  bond  for  me: 

I’ll  rather  dwell  in  my  necessity. 

Ant.  Why,  fear  not,  man;  I  will  not  forfeit  it: 
Within  these  two  months,  that’s  a  month  be¬ 
fore 

This  bond  expires,  I  do  expect  return 
Of  thrice  three  times  the  value  of  this  bond.  i6o 
Shy.  O  father  Abram,  what  these  Christians 
are. 

Whose  own  hard  dealings  teaches  them  suspect 
The  thoughts  of  others!  Pray  you,  tell  me  this; 

If  he  should  break  his  day,  what  should  I  gain 
By  the^exaction  of  the  forfeiture? 

A  pound  of  man’s  flesh  taken  from  a  man 
Is  not  so  estimable,  profitable  neither, 

As  flesh  of  muttons,  beefs,  or  goats.  I  say. 

To  buy  his  favour,  I  extend  this  friendship: 

If  he  will  take  it,  so;  if  not,  adieu;  ijo 

And,  for  my  love,  I  pray  you  wrong  me  not. 

Ant.  Yes,  Shylock,  I  will  seal  unto  this  bond. 
Shy.  Then  meet  me  forthwith  at  the  notary’s; 
Give  him  direction  for  this  merry  bond, 

And  I  will  go  and  purse  the  ducats  straight. 

See  to  my  house,  left  in  the  fearful  guard 
Of  an  unthrifty  knave,  and  presently 
I  will  be  with  you. 

Ant.  Hie  thee,  gentle  Jew.  [Exit  shylock. 
The  Hebrew  will  turn  Christian:  he  grows 
kind. 

Bass.  I  like  not  fair  terms  and  a  villain’s  mind. 
Ant.  Come  on:  in  this  there  can  be  no  dismay; 
My  ships  come  home  a  month  before  the  day. 

[Exeunt. 


ACT  II 

Scene  i.  Belmont:  a  room  in  Portia  s  house 
Flourish  of  cornets.  Enter  the  prince  of  morocco 
and  his  train;  portia,  nerissa,  and  others 
attending. 

Mor.  Mislike  me  not  for  my  complexion. 

The  shadow’d  livery  of  the  burnish’d  sun. 

To  whom  I  am  a  neighbour  and  near  bred. 

Bring  me  the  fairest  creature  northward  born. 
Where  Phoebus’  fire  scarce  thaws  the  icicles. 

And  let  us  make  incision  for  your  love. 

To  prove  whose  blood  is  reddest,  his  or  mine. 

I  tell  thee,  lady,  this  aspect  of  mine 
Hath  fear’d  the  valiant:  by  my  love,  I  swear 
The  best-regarded  virgins  of  our  clime  lo 

Have  loved  it  too;  I  would  not  change  this  hue. 
Except  to  steal  your  thoughts,  my  gentle  queen. 
For.  In  terms  of  choice  I  am  not  solely  led 
By  nice  direction  of  a  maiden’s  eyes; 

Besides,  the  lottery  of  my  destiny 
Bars  me  the  right  of  voluntary  choosing: 

But  if  my  father  had  not  scanted  me 
And  hedged  me  by  his  wit,  to  yield  myself 
His  wife  who  wins  me  by  that  means  I  told  you. 
Yourself,  renowned  Prince,  then  stood  as  fair  20 
As  any  comer  I  have  look’d  on  yet 
For  my  affection. 

Mor.  Even  for  that  I  thank  you: 

Therefore,  I  pray  you,  lead  me  to  the  caskets 
To  try  my  fortune.  By  this  scimitar 
That  slew  the  Sophy  and  a  Persian  prince 
That  won  three  fields  of  Sultan  Solyman, 

I  would  outstare  the  sternest  eyes  that  look. 
Outbrave  the  heart  most  daring  on  the  earth. 
Pluck  the  young  sucking  cubs  from  the  she-bear. 
Yea,  mock  the  lion  when  he  roars  for  prey,  50 
To  win  thee,  lady.  But,  alas  the  while! 

If  Hercules  and  Lichas  play  at  dice 
Which  is  the  better  man,  the  greater  throw 
May  turn  by  fortune  from  the  weaker  hand: 

So  is  Alcides  beaten  by  his  page; 

And  so  may  I,  blind  fortune  leading  me. 

Miss  that  which  one  un worthier  may  attain. 

And  die  with  grieving. 

For.  You  must  take  your  chance. 

And  either  not  attempt  to  choose  at  all 
Or  swear  before  you  choose,  if  you  choose 
wrong 

Never  to  speak  to  lady  afterward  41 

In  way  of  marriage:  therefore  be  advised. 

Mor.  Nor  will  not.  Come,  bring  me  unto  my 
chance. 

For.  First,  forward  to  the  temple:  after  dinner 
Your  hazard  shall  be  made. 

Mor.  Good  fortune  then! 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


To  make  me  blest  or  cursed’st  among  men. 

[Cornets,  and  exeunt. 

Scene  II.  Venice:  a  street 
Enter  launcelot. 

Laun.  Certainly  my  conscience  will  serve  me  to 
run  from  this  Jew  my  master.  The  fiend  is  at 
mine  elbow  and  tempts  me  saying  to  me  “Gobbo, 
Launcelot  Gobbo,  good  Launcelot,”  or  “good 
Gobbo,”  or  “good  Launcelot  Gobbo,  use  your 
legs,  take  the  start,  run  away.”  My  conscience 
says  “No;  take  heed,  honest  Launcelot;  take 
heed,  honest  Gobbo,”  or,  as  aforesaid,  “honest 
Launcelot  Gobbo;  do  not  run;  scorn  running  with 
thy  heels.”  Well,  the  most  courageous  fiend  bids 
me  pack:  “Via!”  says  the  fiend;  “away!”  says 
the  fiend;  “for  the  heavens,  rouse  up  a  brave 
mind,”  says  the  fiend,  “and  run.”  Well,  my  con¬ 
science,  hanging  about  the  neck  of  my  heart, 
says  very  wisely  to  me,  “My  honest  friend  Laun¬ 
celot,  being  an  honest  man’s  son,”  or  rather  an 
honest  woman’s  son;  for,  indeed,  my  father  did 
something  smack,  something  grow  to,  he  had  a 
kind  of  taste;  well,  my  conscience  says,  “Laun¬ 
celot,  budge  not.”  “Budge,”  says  the  fiend. 
“Budge  not,”  says  my  conscience.  “Conscience,” 
say  I,  “you  counsel  well”;  “Fiend,”  say  I,  “you 
counsel  well”:  to  be  ruled  by  my  conscience,  I 
should  stay  with  the  Jew  my  master,  who,  God 
bless  the  mark,  is  a  kind  of  devil;  and,  to  run 
away  from  the  Jew,  I  should  be  ruled  by  the 
fiend,  who,  saving  your  reverence,  is  the  devil 
himself.  Certainly  the  Jew  is  the  very  devil 
incarnal;  and,  in  my  conscience,  my  conscience 
is  but  a  kind  of  hard  conscience,  to  offer  to  coun¬ 
sel  me  to  stay  with  the  Jew.  The  fiend  gives  the 
more  friendly  counsel:  I  will  run,  fiend;  my  heels 
are  at  your  command;  I  will  run. 

Enter  old  gobbo,  nxith  a  basket. 

Gob.  Master  young  man,  you,  I  pray  you, 
which  is  the  way  to  master  Jew’s? 

Laun.  [Aside^  O  heavens,  this  is  my  true- 
begotten  father!  who,  being  more  than  sand- 
blind,  high-gravel  blind,  knows  me  not:  I  will 
try  confusions  with  him. 

Gob.  Master  young  gentleman,  I  pray  you, 
which  is  the  way  to  master  Jew’s?  4/ 

Laun.  Turn  up  on  your  right  hand  at  the  next 
turning,  but,  at  the  next  turning  of  all,  on  your 
left;  marry,  at  the  very  next  turning,  turn  of  no 
hand,  but  turn  down  indirectly  to  the  Jew’s  house. 

Gob.  By  God’s  sonties,  ’twill  be  a  hard  way  to 
hit.  Can  you  tell  me  whether  one  Launcelot,  that 
dwells  with  him,  dwell  with  him  or  no?  49 

Laun.  Talk  you  of  young  Master  Launcelot? 


[Aside]  Mark  me  now;  now  will  I  raise  the 
waters.  Talk  you  of  young  Master  Launcelot? 

Gob.  No  master,  sir,  but  a  poor  man’s  son:  his 
father,  though  I  say  it,  is  an  honest  exceeding 
poor  man  and,  God  be  thanked,  well  to  live. 

Laun.  Well,  let  his  father  be  what  a’  will,  we 
talk  of  young  Master  Launcelot. 

Gob.  Your  worship’s  friend  and  Launcelot,  sir. 

Laun.  But  I  pray  you,  ergo,  old  man,  ergo,  I 
beseech  you,  talk  you  of  young  Master  Launce¬ 
lot?  60 

Gob.  Of  Launcelot,  an’t  please  your  mastership. 

Laun.  Ergo,  Master  Launcelot.  Talk  not  of 
Master  Launcelot,  father;  for  the  young  gentle¬ 
man,  according,  to  Fates  and  Destinies  and  such 
odd  sayings,  the  Sisters  Three  and  such  branches 
of  learning,  is  indeed  deceased,  or,  as  you  would 
say  in  plain  terms,  gone  to  heaven. 

Gob.  Marry,  God  forbid!  the  boy  was  the  very 
staff  of  my  age,  my  very  prop.  70 

Laun.  Do  I  look  like  a  cudgel  or  a  hovel  post,  a 
staff  or  a  prop?  Do  you  know  me,  father? 

Gob.  Alack  the  day,  I  know  you  not,  young 
gentleman:  but,  I  pray  you,  tell  me,  is  my  boy, 
God  rest  his  soul,  alive  or  dead? 

Laun.  Do  you  not  know  me,  father? 

Gob.  Alack,  Sir,  I  am  sand-blind;  I  know  you 
not. 

Laun.  Nay,  indeed,  if  you  had  your  eyes,  you 
might  fail  of  the  knowing  me:  it  is  a  wise  father 
that  knows  his  own  child.  Well,  old  man,  I  will 
tell  you  news  of  your  son:  give  me  your  blessing: 
truth  will  come  to  light;  murder  cannot  be  hid 
long;  a  man’s  son  may,  but  at  the  length  truth 
will  out. 

Gob.  Pray  you,  sir,  stand  up:  lam  sure  you  are 
not  Launcelot,  my  boy. 

Laun.  Pray  you,  let’s  have  no  more  fooling 
about  it,  but  give  me  your  blessing:  I  am  Launce¬ 
lot,  your  boy  that  was,  your  son  that  is,  your 
child  that  shall  be.  5?/ 

Gob.  I  cannot  think  you  are  my  son. 

Laun.  I  know  not  what  I  shall  think  of  that: 
but  I  am  Launcelot,  the  Jew’s  man,  and  I  am 
sure  Margery  your  wife  is  my  mother. 

Gob.  Her  name  is  Margery,  indeed:  Fll  be 
sworn,  if  thou  be  Launcelot,  thou  art  mine  own 
flesh  and  blood.  Lord  worshipped  might  he  be! 
what  a  beard  hast  thou  got!  thou  hast  got  more 
hair  on  thy  chin  than  Dobbin  my  fill-horse  has  on 
his  tail.  loi 

Laun.  It  should  seem,  then,  that  Dobbin’s  tail 
grows  backward:  I  am  sure  he  had  more  hair  of 
his  tail  than  I  have  of  my  face  when  I  last  saw 
him. 

Gob.  Lord,  how  art  thou  changed!  How  dost 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


thou  and  thy  master  agree?  I  have  brought  him 
a  present.  How  ’gree  you  now? 

Laun.  Well,  well:  but,  for  mine  own  part,  as  I 
have  set  up  my  rest  to  run  away,  so  I  will  not 
rest  till  I  have  run  some  ground.  My  master’s  a 
very  Jew:  give  him  a  present!  give  him  a  halter: 
I  am  famished  in  his  service;  you  may  tell  every 
finger  I  have  with  my  ribs.  Father,  I  am  glad  you 
are  come:  give  me  your  present  to  one  Master 
Bassanio,  who,  indeed,  gives  rare  new  liveries: 
if  I  serve  not  him,  I  will  run  as  far  as  God  has 
any  ground.  O  rare  fortune!  here  comes  the  man: 
to  him,  father;  for  I  am  a  Jew,  if  I  serve  the  Jew 
any  longer.  120 

Enter  bassanio,  v)ith  Leonardo  and  other 
followers. 

Bass.  You  may  do  so;  but  let  it  be  so  hasted  that 
supper  be  ready  at  the  farthest  by  five  of  the 
clock.  See  these  letters  delivered;  put  the  liveries 
to  making,  and  desire  Gratiano  to  come  anon  to 
my  lodging.  [Exit  a  Servant. 

Laun.  To  him,  father. 

Gob.  God  bless  your  worship! 

Bass.  Gramercy!  wouldst  thou  aught  with  me? 
Gob.  Here’s  my  son,  sir,  a  poor  boy —  129 

Ijtiin.  Not  a  poor  boy,  sir,  but  the  rich  Jew’s 
man;  that  would,  sir,  as  my  father  shall  specify — 
Gob.  He  hath  a  great  infection,  sir,  as  one 
would  say,  to  serve — 

Laim.  Indeed,  the  short  and  the  long  is,  I  serve 
the  Jew,  and  have  a  desire,  as  my  father  shall 
specify — 

Gob.  His  master  and  he,  saving  your  worship’s 
reverence,  are  scarce  cater-cousins — 

Laun.  To  be  brief,  the  very  truth  is  that  the  Jew, 
having  doneme  wrong,  doth  cause  me,  as  my  father, 
being,  I  hope,  an  old  man,  shall  frutify  unto  you — 
Gob.  I  have  here  a  dish  of  doves  that  I  would 
bestow  upon  your  worship,  and  my  suit  is — 
Laun.  In  very  brief,  the  suit  is  impertinent  to 
myself,  as  your  worship  shall  know  by  this 
honest  old  man;  and,  though  I  say  it,  though  old 
man,  yet  poor  man,  my  father. 

Bass.  One  speak  for  both.  What  would  you? 
Laun.  Serve  you,  sir.  75/ 

Gob.  That  is  the  very  defect  of  the  matter,  sir. 
Bass.  I  know  thee  well;  thou  hast  obtain’d  thy 
suit: 

Shylock  thy  master  spoke  with  me  this  day. 

And  hath  preferr’d  thee,  if  it  be  preferment 
To  leave  a  rich  Jew’s  service,  to  become 
The  follower  of  so  poor  a  gentleman. 

Laun.  The  old  proverb  is  very  well  parted 
between  my  master  Shylock  and  you,  sir:  you 
have  the  grace  of  God,  sir,  and  he  hath  enough. 


Bass.  Thou  speak’st  it  well.  Go,  father,  with 
thy  son. 

Take  leave  of  thy  old  master  and  inquire 
My  lodging  out.  Give  him  a  livery 
More  guarded  than  his  fellows’ :  see  it  done. 

Laun.  Father,  in.  I  cannot  get  a  service,  no;  I 
have  ne’er  a  tongue  in  my  head.  Well,  if  any  man 
in  Italy  have  a  fairer  table  which  doth  offer  to 
swear  upon  a  book,  I  shall  have  good  fortune.  Go 
to,  here’s  a  simple  line  of  life:  here’s  a  small  trifle 
of  wives:  alas,  fifteen  wives  is  nothing!  eleven 
widows  and  nine  maids  is  a  simple  coming-in  for 
one  man:  and  then  to  ’scape  drowning  thrice,  and 
to  be  in  peril  of  my  life  with  the  edge  of  a  feather¬ 
bed;  here  are  simple  scapes.  Well,  if  Fortune  be 
a  woman,  she’s  a  good  wench  for  this  gear. 
Father,  come;  I’ll  take  my  leave  of  the  Jew  in 
the  twinkling  of  an  eye. 

[Exeunt  launcelot  and  old  gobbo. 
Bass.  I  pray  thee,  good  Leonardo,  think  on  this: 
These  things  being  bought  and  orderly  bestow’d. 
Return  in  haste,  for  I  do  feast  to-night  i8o 

My  best-esteem’d  acquaintance:  hie  thee,  go. 
Leon.  My  best  endeavours  shall  be  done  herein. 

Enter  gratiano. 

Gra.  Where  is  your  master? 

Leon.  Yonder,  sir,  he  walks.  [Exit. 

Gra.  Signior  Bassanio! 

Bass.  Gratiano! 

Gra.  I  have  a  suit  to  you. 

Bass.  You  have  obtain’d  it. 

Gra.  You  must  not  deny  me:  I  must  go  with  vou 
to  Belmont. 

Bass.  Why,  then  you  must.  But  hear  thee,  Gra¬ 
tiano; 

Thou  art  too  wild,  too  rude,  and  bold  of  voice; 
Parts  that  become  thee  happily  enough 
And  in  such  eyes  as  ours  appear  not  faults; 

But  where  thou  art  not  known,  why,  there  they 
show 

Something  too  liberal.  Pray  thee,  take  pain 
To  allay  with  some  cold  drops  of  modesty 
Thy  skipping  spirit,  lest  through  thy  wild  be¬ 
haviour 

I  be  misconstrued  in  the  place  I  go  to 
And  lose  my  hopes. 

Gra.  Signior  Bassanio,  hear  me: 

If  I  do  not  put  on  a  sober  habit,  199 

Talk  with  respect  and  swear  but  now  and  then. 
Wear  prayer-books  in  my  pocket,  look  demurely, 
Nay  more,  while  grace  is  saying,  hood  mine  eyes 
Thus  with  my  hat,  and  sigh  and  say  “amen,” 

Use  all  the  observance  of  civility. 

Like  one  well  studied  in  a  sad  ostent 
To  please  his  grandam,  never  trust  me  more- 
Bass.  Well,  we  shall  see  your  bearing. 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


Gra.  Nay,  but  I  bar  to-night:  you  shall  not 
gauge  me 

By  what  we  do  to-night. 

Bass.  No,  that  were  pity: 

I  would  entreat  you  rather  to  put  on  210 

Your  boldest  suit  of  mirth,  for  we  have  friends 
That  purpose  merriment.  But  fare  you  well: 

I  have  some  business. 

Gra.  And  I  must  to  Lorenzo  and  the  rest: 

But  we  will  visit  you  at  supper-time.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  same:  a  room  in  Shy  lock's  house 
JESSICA  and  launcelot. 

Jes.  I  am  sorry  thou  wilt  leave  my  father  so: 

Our  house  is  hell,  and  thou,  a  merry  devil. 

Didst  rob  it  of  some  taste  of  tediousness. 

But  fare  thee  well,  there  is  a  ducat  for  thee: 

And,  Launcelot,  soon  at  supper  shalt  thou  see 
Lorenzo,  who  is  thy  new  master’s  guest: 

Give  him  this  letter;  do  it  secretly; 

And  so  farewell :  I  would  not  have  my  father 
See  me  in  talk  with  thee.  9 

Laun.  Adieu!  tears  exhibit  my  tongue.  Most 
beautiful  pagan,  most  sweet  Jew!  if  a  Christian 
did  not  play  the  knave  and  get  thee,  I  am  much 
deceived.  But,  adieu:  these  foolish  drops  do 
something  drown  my  manly  spirit:  adieu. 

Jes.  Farewell,  good  Launcelot. 

[Exit  LAUNCELOT* 
Alack,  what  heinous  sin  is  it  in  me 
To  be  ashamed  to  be  my  father’s  child! 

But  though  I  am  a  daughter  to  his  blood, 

I  am  not  to  his  manners.  O  Lorenzo, 

If  thou  keep  promise,  I  shall  end  this  strife,  20 
Become  a  Christian  and  thy  loving  wife.  [Exit. 

Scene  iv.  The  same:  a  street 

GRATIANO,  LORENZO,  SALARINO,  and 
SALANIO. 

Lor.  Nay,  we  will  slink  away  in  supper-time, 
Disguise  us  at  my  lodging  and  return. 

All  in  an  hour. 

Gra.  We  have  not  made  good  preparation. 

Salar.  We  have  not  spoke  us  yet  of  torch- 
bearers. 

Salan.  ’Tis  vile,  unless  it  may  be  quaintly 
order’d. 

And  better  in  my  mind  not  undertook. 

Lor.  ’Tis  now  but  four  o’clock*  we  have  two 
hours 

To  furnish  us. 

Enter  launcelot,  uoith  a  letter. 

Friend  Launcelot,  what’s  the  news? 
Laun.  An  it  shall  please  you  to  break  up  this, 
it  shall  seem  to  signify.  it 


Lor.  I  know  the  hand:  in  faith,  ’tis  a  fair  hand; 
And  whiter  than  the  paper  it  writ  on 
Is  the  fair  hand  that  writ. 

Gra.  Love-news,  in  faith. 

Laun.  By  your  leave,  sir. 

Lor.  Whither  goest  thou? 

Laun.  Marry,  sir,  to  bid  my  old  master  the  Jew 
to  sup  to-night  with  my  new  master  the  Christian. 
Lor.  Hold  here,  take  this:  tell  gentle  Jessica  I 
will  not  fail  her;  speak  it  privately.  21 

Go,  gentlemen,  [Exit  launcelot. 

Will  you  prepare  you  for  this  masque  to-night? 

I  am  provided  of  a  torch-bearer. 

Salar.  Ay,  marry.  I’ll  be  gone  about  it  straight. 
Salan.  And  so  will  I. 

Lor.  Meet  me  and  Gratiano 

At  Gratiano’s  lodging  some  hour  hence. 

Salar.  ’Tis  good  we  do  so. 

[Exeunt  salarino  and  salanio. 
Gra.  Was  not  that  letter  from  fair  Jessica? 

Lor.  I  must  needs  tell  thee  all.  She  hath  directed 
How  I  shall  take  her  from  her  father’s  house,  5/ 
What  gold  and  jewels  she  is  furnish’d  with. 

What  page’s  suit  she  hath  in  readiness. 

If  e’er  the  Jew  her  father  come  to  heaven. 

It  will  be  for  his  gentle  daughter’s  sake: 

And  never  dare  misfortune  cross  her  foot. 

Unless  she  do  it  under  this  excuse, 

That  she  is  issue  to  a  faithless  Jew. 

Come,  go  with  me;  peruse  this  as  thou  goest: 

Fair  Jessica  shall  be  my  torch-bearer.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  The  same:  before  Shylock's  house 
Enter  shylock  and  launcelot. 

Shy.  Well,  thou  shalt  see,  thy  eyes  shall  be  thy 
judge, 

The  difference  of  old  Shylock  and  Bassanio: — 
What,  Jessica! — thou  shalt  not  gormandise. 

As  thou  hast  done  with  me: — What  Jessica! — 
And  sleep  and  snore,  and  rend  apparel  out; — 
Why,  Jessica,  I  say! 

Laun.  Why,  Jessica! 

Shy.  Who  bids  thee  call?  I  do  not  bid  thee  call. 
Laun.  Your  worship  was  wont  to  tell  me  that 
I  could  do  nothing  without  bidding. 

JESSICA. 

Jes.  Call  you?  what  is  your  will?  10 

Shy.  I  am  bid  forth  to  supper,  Jessica: 

There  are  my  keys.  But  wherefore  should  I  go? 

I  am  not  bid  for  love;  they  flatter  me: 

But  yet  I’ll  go  in  hate,  to  feed  upon 
The  prodigal  Christian.  Jessica,  my  girl. 

Look  to  my  house.  I  am  right  loath  to  go: 

There  is  some  ill  a-brewing  towards  my  rest, 

For  I  did  dream  of  money-bags  to-night. 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


Laun.  I  beseech  you,  sir,  go:  my  young  master 
doth  expect  your  reproach.  20 

Shy.  So  do  I  his. 

Laun.  And  they  have  conspired  together,  I  will 
not  say  you  shall  see  a  masque;  but  if  you  do, 
then  it  was  not  for  nothing  that  my  nose  fell 
a-bleeding  on  Black-Monday  last  at  six  o’clock  i’ 
the  morning,  falling  out  that  year  on  Ash-Wed- 
nesday  was  four  year,  in  the  afternoon. 

Shy.  What,  are  there  masques?  Hear  you  me, 
Jessica: 

Lock  up  my  doors;  and  when  you  hear  the  drum 
And  the  vile  squealing  of  the  wry-neck’d  fife,  50 
Clamber  not  you  up  to  the  casements  then. 

Nor  thrust  your  head  into  the  public  street 
To  gaze  on  Christian  fools  with  varnish’d  faces. 
But  stop  my  house’s  ears,  I  mean  my  casements: 
Let  not  the  sound  of  shallow  foppery  enter 
My  sober  house.  By  Jacob’s  staff,  I  swear, 

I  have  no  mind  of  feasting  forth  to-night: 

But  I  will  go.  Go  you  before  me,  sirrah; 

Say  I  will  come. 

Laun.  I  will  go  before,  sir.  Mistress,  look  out  at 
window,  for  all  this;  41 

There  will  come  a  Christian  by, 

Will  be  worth  a  Jewess’  eye.  [Exit. 

Shy.  What  says  that  fool  of  Hagar’s  offspring, 
ha? 

Jes.  His  words  were  “Farewell  mistress”; 
nothing  else. 

Shy.  The  patch  is  kind  enough,  but  a  huge 
feeder; 

Snail-slow  in  profit,  and  he  sleeps  by  day 
More  than  the  wild-cat:  drones  hive  not  with  me; 
Therefore  I  part  with  him,  and  part  with  him 
To  one  that  I  would  have  him  help  to  waste  50 
His  borrow’d  purse.  Well,  Jessica,  go  in: 

Perhaps  I  will  return  immediately: 

Do  as  I  bid  you;  shut  doors  after  you: 

Fast  bind,  fast  find; 

A  proverb  never  stale  in  thrifty  mind.  [Exit. 
Jes.  Farewell;  and  if  my  fortune  be  not  crost, 

I  have  a  father,  you  a  daughter,  lost.  [Exit. 

Scene  vi.  The  same 

Enter  gratiano  and  salarino,  masqued. 

Gra.  This  is  the  pent-house  under  which 
Lorenzo 

Desired  us  to  make  stand. 

Salar.  His  hour  is  almost  past. 

Gra.  And  it  is  marvel  he  out-dwells  his  hour, 

For  lovers  ever  run  before  the  clock. 

Salar.  O,  ten  times  faster  Venus’  pigeons  fly 
To  seal  love’s  bonds  new-made,  than  they  are 
wont 

To  keep  obliged  faith  unforfeited! 


Gra.  That  ever  holds:  who  riseth  from  a  feast 
With  that  keen  appetite  that  he  sits  down? 

Where  is  the  horse  that  doth  untread  again  10 
His  tedious  measures  with  the  unbated  fire 
That  he  did  pace  them  first?  All  things  that  are. 
Are  with  more  spirit  chased  than  enjoy’d. 

How  like  a  younker  or  a  prodigal 
The  scarfed  bark  puts  from  her  native  bay, 
Hugg’d  and  embraced  by  the  strumpet  wind! 
How  like  the  prodigal  doth  she  return. 

With  over-weather’d  ribs  and  ragged  sails. 

Lean,  rent  and  beggar’d  by  the  strumpet  wind! 
Salar.  Here  comes  Lorenzo:  more  of  this 

hereafter.  20 

Enter  lorenzo. 

Lor.  Sweet  friends,  your  patience  for  my  long 
abode; 

Not  I,  but  my  affairs,  have  made  you  wait: 

When  you  shall  please  to  play  the  thieves  for 
wives. 

I’ll  watch  as  long  for  you  then.  Approach; 

Here  dwells  my  father  Jew.  Ho!  who’s  within? 

Enter  ]EssiCAy  above y  in  boy  s  clothes. 

Jes.  Who  are  you?  Tell  me,  for  more  certainty. 
Albeit  I’ll  swear  that  I  do  know  your  tongue. 

Lor.  Lorenzo,  and  thy  love. 

Jes.  Lorenzo,  certain,  and  my  love  indeed. 

For  who  love  I  so  much?  And  now  who  knows 
But  you,  Lorenzo,  whether  I  am  yours?  5/ 

Lor.  Heaven  and  thy  thoughts  are  witness  that 
thou  art. 

Jes.  Here,  catch  this  casket;  it  is  worth  the 
pains. 

I  am  glad  ’tis  night,  you  do  not  look  on  me. 

For  I  am  much  ashamed  of  my  exchange: 

But  love  is  blind  and  lovers  cannot  see 
The  pretty  follies  that  themselves  commit; 

For  if  they  could,  Cupid  himself  would  blush 
To  see  me  thus  transformed  to  a  boy. 

Lor.  Descend,  for  you  must  be  my  torch- 

bearer.  40 

Jes.  What,  must  I  hold  a  candle  to  my  shames? 
They  in  themselves,  good  sooth,  are  too  too  light. 
Why,  ’tis  an  office  of  discovery,  love; 

And  I  should  be  obscured. 

Lor.  So  are  you,  sweet. 

Even  in  the  lovely  garnish  of  a  boy. 

But  come  at  once; 

For  the  close  night  doth  play  the  runaway. 

And  we  are  stay’d  for  at  Bassanio’s  feast. 

Jes.  I  will  make  fast  the  doors,  and  gild  myself 
With  some  more  ducats,  and  be  with  you 

straight.  [Exit  above.  50 

Gra.  Now,  by  my  hood,  a  Gentile  and  no  Jew. 


ACT  II 


i6  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


Lor.  Beshrew  me  but  I  love  her  heartily; 

For  she  is  wise,  if  1  can  judge  of  her, 

And  fair  she  is,  if  that  mine  eyes  be  true. 

And  true  she  is,  as  she  hath  proved  herself. 

And  therefore,  like  herself,  wise,  fair,  and  true. 
Shall  she  be  placed  in  my  constant  soul. 

Enter  JESSICA,  below. 

What,  art  thou  come?  On,  gentlemen;  away! 

Our  masquing  mates  by  this  time  for  us  stay. 

[Exit  with  JESSICA  and  salarino. 

Enter  antonio. 

Ant.  Who’s  there?  6o 

Gra.  Signior  Antonio! 

Ant.  Fie,  fie,  Gratiano!  where  are  all  the  rest? 
’Tis  nine  o’clock:  our  friends  all  stay  for  you. 

No  masque  to-night:  the  wind  is  come  about; 
Bassanio  presently  will  go  aboard: 

1  have  sent  twenty  out  to  seek  for  you. 

Gra.  I  am  glad  on’t:  I  desire  no  more  delight 
Than  to  be  under  sail  and  gone  to-night.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  vii.  Belmont:  a  room  in  Portia's  house. 
Flourish  of  comets.  Enter  portia,  with  the  prince 
OF  MOROCCO,  and  their  trains. 

For.  Go  draw  aside  the  curtains  and  discover 
The  several  caskets  to  this  noble  prince. 

Now  make  your  choice. 

Mor.  The  first,  of  gold,  who  this  inscription 
bears, 

“Who  chooseth  me  shall  gain  what  many  men 
desire”; 

The  second,  silver,  which  this  promise  carries, 
“Who  chooseth  me  shall  get^s  much  as  he  de¬ 
serves”; 

This  third,  dull  lead,  with  warning  all  as  blunt, 
“Who  chooseth  me  must  give  and  hazard  all  he 
hath.” 

How  shall  I  know  if  I  do  choose  the  right?  lo 
For.  The  one  of  them  contains  my  picture. 
Prince: 

If  you  choose  that,  then  I  am  yours  withal. 

Mor.  Some  god  direct  my  judgement!  Let  me 
see; 

I  will  survey  the  inscriptions  back  again. 

What  says  this  leaden  casket? 

“Who  chooseth  me  must  give  and  hazard  all  he 
hath.” 

Must  give:  for  what?  for  lead?  hazard  for 
lead? 

This  casket  threatens.  Men  that  hazard  all 
Do  it  in  hope  of  fair  advantages : 

A  golden  mind  stoops  not  to  shows  of  dross;  20 
I’ll  then  nor  give  hazard  aught  for  lead. 

What  says  the  silver  with  her  virgin  hue? 


“Who  chooseth  me  shall  get  as  much  as  he  de¬ 
serves.” 

As  much  as  he  deserves !  Pause  there,  Morocco, 
And  weigh  thy  value  with  an  even  hand: 

If  thou  be’ St  rated  by  thy  estimation. 

Thou  dost  deserve  enough;  and  yet  enough 
May  not  extend  so  far  as  to  the  lady: 

And  yet  to  be  afeard  of  my  deserving 

Were  but  a  weak  disabling  of  myself.  50 

As  much  as  I  deserve!  Why,  that’s  the  lady: 

I  do  in  birth  deserve  her,  and  in  fortunes. 

In  graces,  and  in  qualities  of  breeding; 

But  more  than  these,  in  love  I  do  deserve. 

What  if  I  stray’d  no  further,  but  chose  here? 

Let’s  see  once  more  this  saying  graved  in  gold; 
“Who  chooseth  me  shall  gain  what  many  men 
desire.” 

Why,  that’s  the  lady;  all  the  world  desires  her; 
From  the  four  corners  of  the  earth  they  come. 

To  kiss  this  shrine,  this  mortal-breathing  saint: 
The  Hyrcanian  deserts  and  the  vasty  wilds  4/ 
Of  wide  Arabia  are  as  throughfares  now 
For  princes  to  come  view  fair  Portia: 

The  watery  kingdom,  whose  ambitious  head 
Spits  in  the  face  of  heaven,  is  no  bar 
To  stop  the  foreign  spirits,  but  they  come. 

As  o’er  a  brook,  to  see  fair  Portia. 

One  of  these  three  contains  her  heavenly  picture. 
Is’t  like  that  lead  contains  her?  ’Twere  damnation 
To  think  so  base  a  thought:  it  were  too  gross  50 
To  rib  her  cerecloth  in  the  obscure  grave. 

Or  shall  I  think  in  silver  she’s  immured. 

Being  ten  times  undervalued  to  tried  gold? 

O  sinful  thought!  Never  so  rich  a  gem 
Was  set  in  worse  than  gold.  They  have  in  Eng¬ 
land 

A  coin  that  bears  the  figure  of  an  angel 
Stamped  in  gold,  but  that’s  insculp’d  upon; 

But  here  an  angel  in  a  golden  bed 
Lies  all  within.  Deliver  me  the  key: 

Here  do  I  choose,  and  thrive  I  as  I  may!  60 
For.  There,  take  it.  Prince;  and  if  my  form  lie 
there, 

Then  I  am  yours.  [He  unlocks  the  golden  casket^ 
Mor.  O  hell !  what  have  we  here? 

A  carrion  Death,  within  whose  empty  eye 
There  is  a  written  scroll!  I’ll  read  the  writing. 
[Reads]  “All  that  glisters  is  not  gold; 

Often  have  you  heard  that  told: 

Many  a  man  his  life  hath  sold 
But  my  outside  to  behold: 

Gilded  tombs  do  worms  infold. 

Had  you  been  as  wise  as  bold,  70 

Young  in  limbs,  in  judgement  old. 

Your  answer  had  not  been  inscroll’d: 

Fare  you  well;  your  suit  is  cold.” 


SCENE  VII 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


Cold,  indeed;  and  labour  lost: 

Then,  farewell,  heat,  and  welcome,  frost! 
Portia,  adieu.  I  have  too  grieved  a  heart 
To  take  a  tedious  leave:  thus  losers  part. 

[Exit  'with  his  train.  Flourish  of  comets. 
For.  A  gentle  riddance.  Draw  the  curtains,  go. 
Let  all  of  his  complexion  choose  me  so.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  viii.  Venice:  a  street 
Enter  salarino  and  salanio. 

Salar.  Why,  man,  I  saw  Bassanio  under  sail: 
With  him  is  Gratiano  gone  along; 

And  in  their  ship  I  am  sure  Lorenzo  is  not. 

Salan.  The  villain  Jew  with  outcries  raised  the 
Duke, 

Who  went  with  him  to  search  Bassanio’s  ship. 
Salar.  He  came  too  late,  the  ship  was  under  sail: 
But  there  the  Duke  was  given  to  understand 
That  in  a  gondola  were  seen  together 
Lorenzo  and  his  amorous  Jessica: 

Besides,  Antonio  certified  the  Duke  lo 

They  were  not  with  Bassanio  in  his  ship. 

Salan.  I  never  heard  a  passion  so  confused, 

So  strange,  outrageous,  and  so  variable. 

As  the  dog  Jew  did  utter  in  the  streets: 

“My  daughter!  O  my  ducats!  O  my  daughter! 
Fled  with  a  Christian!  O  my  Christian  ducats! 
Justice!  the  law!  my  ducats,  and  my  daughter! 

A  sealed  bag,  two  sealed  bags  of  ducats. 

Of  double  ducats,  stolen  from  me  by  my  daugh¬ 
ter! 

And  jewels,  two  stones,  two  rich  and  precious 
stones,  20 

Stolen  by  my  daughter!  Justice!  find  the  girl; 

She  hath  the  stones  upon  her,  and  the  ducats.” 
Salar.  Why,  all  the  boys  in  Venice  follow  him. 
Crying,  “His  stones,  his  daughter,  and  his 
ducats.” 

Salan.  Let  good  Antonio  look  he  keep  his  day. 

Or  he  shall  pay  for  this. 

Salar.  Marry,  well  remember’d. 

I  reason’d  with  a  Frenchman  yesterday, 

Whc  told  me,  in  the  narrow  seas  that  part 
The  French  and  English,  there  miscarried 
A  vessel  of  our  country  richly  fraught:  50 

I  thought  upon  Antonio  when  he  told  me; 

And  wish’d  in  silence  that  it  were  not  his. 

Salan.  You  were  best  to  tell  Antonio  what  you 
hear; 

Yet  do  not  suddenly,  for  it  may  grieve  him. 

Salar.  A  kinder  gentleman  treads  not  the  earth. 

I  saw  Bassanio  and  Antonio  part: 

Bassanio  told  him  he  would  make  some  speed 
Of  his  return:  he  answer’d,  “Do  not  so; 

Slubber  not  business  for  my  sake,  Bassanio, 

But  stay  the  very  riping  of  the  time;  40 


And  for  the  Jew’s  bond  which  he  hath  of  me. 

Let  it  not  enter  in  your  mind  of  love: 

Be  merry,  and  employ  your  chiefest  thoughts 
To  courtship  and  such  fair  ostents  of  love 
As  shall  conveniently  become  you  there”: 

And  even  there,  his  eye  being  big  with  tears. 
Turning  his  face,  he  put  his  hand  behind  him. 

And  with  affection  wondrous  sensible 
He  wrung  Bassanio’s  hand;  and  so  they  parted. 
Salan.  I  think  he  only  loves  the  world  for  him. 

I  pray  thee,  let  us  go  and  find  him  out  j/ 

And  quicken  his  embraced  heaviness 
With  some  delight  or  other. 

Salar.  Do  we  so.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ix.  Belmont:  a  room  in  Portia's  house 
Enter  nerissa  'with  a  Servitor. 

Ner.  Quick,  quick,  I  pray  thee;  draw  the  cur¬ 
tain  straight: 

The  Prince  of  Arragon  hath  ta’en  his  oath. 

And  comes  to  his  election  presently. 

Flourish  of  comets  Enter  the  prince  of  arragon, 
PORTIA,  and  their  trains. 

For.  Behold,  there  stand  the  caskets,  noble 
Prince: 

If  you  choose  that  wherein  I  am  contain’d. 
Straight  shall  our  nuptial  rites  be  solemnized: 

But  if  you  fail,  without  more  speech,  my  lord, 
You  must  be  gone  from  hence  immediately. 
Ar.lmi  enjoin’d  by  oath  to  observe  three 
things: 

First,  never  to  unfold  to  any  one  10 

Which  casket  ’twas  I  chose;  next,  if  I  fail 
Of  the  right  casket,  never  in  my  life 
To  woo  a  maid  in  way  of  marriage: 

Lastly, 

If  I  do  fail  in  fortune  of  my  choice. 

Immediately  to  leave  you  and  be  gone. 

For.  To  these  injunctions  every  one  doth  swear 
That  comes  to  hazard  for  my  worthless  self. 

Ar.  And  so  have  I  address’d  me.  Fortune  now 
To  my  heart’s  hope!  Gold;  silver;  and  base  lead. 
“Who  chooseth  me  must  give  and  hazard  all  he 
hath.”  21 

You  shall  look  fairer,  ere  I  give  or  hazard. 

What  says  the  golden  chest?  ha,  let  me  see: 
“Who  chooseth  me  shall  gain  what  many  men 
desire.” 

What  many  men  desire!  that  “many”  may  be 
meant 

By  the  fool  multitude,  that  choose  by  show. 

Not  learning  more  than  the  fond  eye  doth  teach; 
Which  pries  not  to  the  interior,  but,  like  the 
martlet. 

Builds  in  the  weather  on  the  outward  wall. 


4i8 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


Even  in  the  force  and  road  of  casualty.  50 

I  will  not  choose  what  many  men  desire, 

Because  1  will  not  jump  with  common  spirits 
And  rank  me  with  the  barbarous  multitudes. 

Why,  then  to  thee,  thou  silver  treasure-house; 

Tell  me  once  more  what  title  thou  dost  bear: 
“Who  chooseth  me  shall  get  as  much  as  he  de¬ 
serves”: 

And  well  said  too;  for  who  shall  go  about 
To  cozen  fortune  and  be  honourable 
Without  the  stamp  of  merit?  Let  none  presume 
To  wear  an  undeserved  dignity.  40 

O,  that  estates,  degrees,  and  offices 
Were  not  derived  corruptly,  and  that  clear 
honour 

Were  purchased  by  the  merit  of  the  wearer! 

How  many  then  should  cover  that  stand  bare! 

How  many  be  commanded  that  command! 

How  much  low  peasantry  would  then  be  glean’d 
From  the  true  seed  of  honour !  and  how  much 
honour 

Pick’d  from  the  chaff  and  ruin  of  the  times 
To  be  new-varnish’d!  Well,  but  to  my  choice: 
“Who  chooseth  me  shall  get  as  much  as  he  de¬ 
serves.”  JO 

I  will  assume  desert.  Give  me  a  key  for  this, 

And  instantly  unlock  my  fortunes  here. 

He  opens  the  silver  casket. 

For.  Too  long  a  pause  for  that  which  you  find 
there. 

Ar.  What’s  here?  the  portrait  of  a  blinking 
idiot. 

Presenting  me  a  schedule!  I  will  read  it. 

How  much  unlike  art  thou  to  Portia! 

How  much  unlike  my  hopes  and  my  deservings! 
“Who  chooseth  me  shall  have  as  much  as  he  de¬ 
serves.” 

Did  I  deserve  no  more  than  a  fool’s  head? 

Is  that  my  prize?  are  my  deserts  no  better?  60 
For.  To  offend,  and  judge,  are  distinct  offices 
And  of  opposed  natures. 

Ar.  What  is  here? 

[Reads]  “The  fire  seven  times  tried  this: 

Seven  times  tried  that  judgement  is, 

That  did  never  choose  amiss. 

Some  there  be  that  shadows  kiss; 

Such  have  but  a  shadow’s  bliss: 

There  be  fools  alive,  I  wis. 

Silver’d  o’er;  and  so  was  this. 

Take  what  wife  you  will  to  bed,  70  • 
I  will  ever  be  your  head: 

So  be  gone:  you  are  sped.” 

Still  more  fool  I  shall  appear 
By  the  time  I  linger  here: 

With  one  fool’s  head  I  came  to  woo. 

But  1  go  away  with  two. 


Sweet,  adieu.  I’ll  keep  my  oath, 

Patiently  to  bear  my  wroth. 

[Exeunt  arragon  and  train. 
For.  Thus  hath  the  candle  singed  the  moth. 

O,  these  deliberate  fools!  when  they  do  choose. 
They  have  the  wisdom  by  their  wit  to  lose.  Si 
Ner.  The  ancient  saying  is  no  heresy, 

Hanging  and  wiving  goes  by  destiny. 

For.  Come,  draw  the  curtain,  Ncrissa. 

Enter  a  servant. 

Serv.  What  is  my  lady? 

For.  Here:  what  would  my  lord? 

Serv.  Madam,  there  is  alighted  at  your  gate 
A  young  Venetian,  one  that  comes  before 
To  signify  the  approaching  of  his  lord; 

From  whom  he  bringeth  sensible  regreets. 

To  wit,  besides  commends  and  courteous  breath. 
Gifts  of  rich  value.  Yet  I  have  not  seen  pi 

So  likely  an  ambassador  of  love: 

A  day  in  April  never  came  so  sweet. 

To  show  how  costly  summer  was  at  hand. 

As  this  fore-spurrer  comes  before  his  lord. 

For.  No  more,  I  pray  thee:  I  am  half  afeard 
Thou  wilt  say  anon  he  is  some  kin  to  thee. 

Thou  spend’st  such  high-day  wit  in  praising  him. 
Come,  come,  Nerissa;  for  I  Jong  to  see 
Quick  Cupid’s  post  that  comes  so  mannerly.  100 
Ner,  Bassanio,  lord  Love,  if  thy  will  it  be! 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  Venice:  a  street 
Enter  salanio  and  salarino. 

Salan.  Now,  what  news  on  the  Rialto? 

Salar.  Why,  yet  it  lives  there  unchecked  that 
Antonio  hath  a  ship  of  rich  lading  wrecked  on  the 
narrow  seas;  the  Goodwins,  I  think  they  call  the 
place;  a  very  dangerous  fiat  and  fatal,  where  the 
carcases  of  many  a  tall  ship  lie  buried,  as  they  say, 
if  my  gossip  Report  be  an  honest  woman  of  her 
word. 

Salan.  I  would  she  were  as  lying  a  gossip  in  that 
as  ever  knapped  ginger  or  made  her  neighbours 
believe  she  wept  for  the  death  of  a  third  husband. 
But  it  is  true,  without  any  slips  of  prolixity  or 
crossing  the  plain  highway  of  talk,  that  the  good 
Antonio,  the  honest  Antonio — O  that  I  had  a 
title  good  enough  to  keep  his  name  company! — 
Salar.  Come,  the  full  stop. 

Salan.  Ha!  what  sayest  thou?  Why,  the  end  is, 
he  hath  lost  a  ship. 

Salar.  I  would  it  might  prove  the  end  of  his 
losses.  21 

Salan.  Let  me  say  “amen”  betimes,  lest  the 


SCENE  I 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


devil  cross  my  prayer,  for  here  he  comes  in  the 
likeness  of  a  Jew. 

Enter  shylock. 

How  now,  Shylock!  what  news  among  the 
merchants? 

Shy,  You  knew,  none  so  well,  none  so  well  as 
you,  of  my  daughter’s  flight. 

Salar.  That’s  certain:  I,  for  my  part,  knew  the 
tailor  that  made  the  wings  she  flew  withal.  50 

Salan.  And  Shylock,  for  his  own  part,  knew  the 
bird  was  fledged;  and  then  it  is  the  complexion  of 
them  all  to  leave  the  dam. 

Shy.  She  is  damned  for  it. 

Salar.  That’s  certain,  if  the  devil  may  be  her 
judge. 

Shy.  My  own  flesh  and  blood  to  rebel! 

Salan.  Out  upon  it,  old  carrion!  rebels  it  at  these 
years?  S9 

Shy.  I  say,  my  daughter  is  my  flesh  and  blood. 

Scdar.  There  is  more  difference  between  thy 
flesh  and  hers  than  between  jet  and  ivory;  more 
between  your  bloods  than  there  is  between  red 
wine  and  rhenish.  But  tell  us,  do  you  hear 
whether  Antonio  have  had  any  loss  at  sea  or  no? 

Shy.  There  I  have  another  bad  match:  a  bank¬ 
rupt,  a  prodigal,  who  dare  scarce  show  his  head 
on  the  Rialto:  a  beggar,  that  was  used  to  come 
so  smug  upon  the  mart;  let  him  look  to  his  bond: 
he  was  wont  to  call  me  usurer;  let  him  look  to 
his  bond:  he  was  wont  to  lend  money  for  a 
Christian  courtesy;  let  him  look  to  his  bond. 

Salar.  Why,  I  am  sure,  if  he  forfeit,  thou  wilt 
not  take  his  flesh:  what’s  that  good  for? 

Shy.  T(5  bait  fish  withal:  if  it  will  feed  nothing 
else,  it  will  feed  my  revenge.  He  hath  disgraced 
me,  and  hindered  me  half  a  million;  laughed  at 
my  losses,  mocked  at  my  gains,  scorned  my 
nation,  thwarted  my  bargains,  cooled  my  friends, 
heated  mine  enemies;  and  what’s  his  reason?  I 
am  a  Jew.  Hath  not  a  Jew  eyes?  hath  not  a  Jew 
hands,  organs,  dimensions,  senses,  affections, 
passions?  fed  with  the  same  food,  hurt  with 
the  same  weapons,  subject  to  the  same  diseases, 
healed  by  the  same  means,  warmed  and  cooled 
by  the  same  winter  and  summer,  as  a  Christian 
is?  If  you  prick  us,  do  we  not  bleed?  if  you 
tickle  us,  do  we  not  laugh?  if  you  poison  us,  do 
we  not  die?  and  if  you  wrong  us,  shall  we  not 
revenge?  If  we  are  like  you  in  the  rest,  we  will 
resemble  you  in  that.  If  a  Jew  wrong  a  Christian, 
what  is  his  humility?  Revenge.  If  a  Christian 
wrong  a  Jew,  what  should  his  sufferance  be  by 
Christian  example?  Why,  revenge.  The  villainy 
you  teach  me,  I  will  execute,  and  it  shall  go  hard 
but  I  will  better  the  instruction. 


Enter  a  servant. 

Serv.  Gentlemen,  my  master  Antonio  is  at  his 
house  and  desires  to  speak  with  you  both. 

Salar.  We  have  been  up  and  down  to  seek  him. 

Enter  tubal. 

Salan.  Here  comes  another  of  the  tribe:  a  third 
cannot  be  matched,  unless  the  devil  himself  turn 
Jew.  [Exeunt  salarino,  and  servant. 

Shy.  How  now.  Tubal!  what  news  from  Genoa? 
hast  thou  found  my  daughter? 

Tub.  I  often  came  where  I  did  hear  of  her,  but 
cannot  find  her. 

Shy.  Why,  there,  there,  there,  there!  a  diamond 
gone,  cost  me  two  thousand  ducats  in  Frankfort! 
The  curse  never  fell  upon  our  nation  till  now;  I 
never  felt  it  till  now:  two  thousand  ducats  in 
that;  and  other  precious,  precious  jewels.  I 
would  my  daughter  were  dead  at  my  foot,  and 
the  jewels  in  her  ear!  would  she  were  hearsed  at 
my  foot,  and  the  ducats  in  her  coffin!  No  news  of 
them?  Why,  so;  and  I  know  not  what’s  spent  in 
the  search:  why,  thou  loss  upon  loss!  the  thief 
gone  with  so  much,  and  so  much  to  find  the  thief; 
and  no  satisfaction,  no  revenge:  nor  no  ill  luck 
stirring  but  what  lights  on  my  shoulders;  no  sighs 
but  of  my  breathing;  no  tears  but  of  my  shed¬ 
ding.  lOI 

Tub.  Yes,  other  men  have  ill  luck  too:  Antonio, 
as  I  heard  in  Genoa — 

Shy.  What,  what,  what?  ill  luck,  ill  luck? 

Tub.  Hath  an  argosy  cast  away,  coming  from 
Tripolis. 

Shy.  I  thank  God,  I  thank  God.  Is’t  true,  is’t 
true? 

Tub.  I  spoke  with  some  of  the  sailors  that 
escaped  the  wreck.  no 

Shy.  I  thank  thee,  good  Tubal:  good  news, 
good  news!  ha,  ha!  where?  in  Genoa? 

Tub.  Your  daughter  spent  in  Genoa,  as  I  heard, 
in  one  night  fourscore  ducats. 

Shy.  Thou  stickest  a  dagger  in  me:  I  shall  never 
see  my  gold  again:  fourscore  ducats  at  a  sitting! 
fourscore  ducats ! 

Tub.  There  came  divers  of  x\ntonio’s  creditors 
in  my  company  to  Venice,  that  swear  he  cannot 
choose  but  break.  120 

Shy.  I  am  very  glad  of  it:  I’ll  plague  him;  I’ll 
torture  him :  I  am  glad  of  it. 

Tub.  One  of  them  showed  me  a  ring  that  he  had 
of  your  daughter  for  a  monkey. 

Shy.  Out  upon  her!  Thou  torturest  me.  Tubal: 
it  was  my  turquoise;  I  had  it  of  Leah  when  I  was 
a  bachelor:  I  would  not  have  given  it  for  a 
wilderness  of  monkeys. 


ACT  III 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


Tub.  But  Antonio  is  certainly  undone.  12^ 

Shy.  Nay,  that’s  true,  that’s  very  true.  Go, 
Tubal,  fee  me  an  officer;  bespeak  him  a  fortnight 
before.  I  will  have  the  heart  of  him,  if  he  forfeit; 
for,  were  he  out  of  Venice,  I  can  make  what 
merchandise  I  will.  Go,  go.  Tubal,  and  meet  me 
at  our  synagogue;  go,  good  Tubal;  at  our  syna¬ 
gogue,  Tubal.  [Exeunt* 

Scene  ii.  Belmont:  a  room  in  Portia  s  house 
Enter  bassanio,  portia,  gratiano,  nerissa, 
and  Attendants. 

For.  I  pray  you,  tarry:  pause  a  day  or  two 
Before  you  hazard;  for,  in  choosing  wrong, 

I  lose  your  company:  therefore  forbear  awhile. 
There’s  something  tells  me,  but  it  is  not  love, 

I  would  not  lose  you;  and  you  know  yourself. 
Hate  counsels  not  in  such  a  quality. 

But  lest  you  should  not  understand  me  well — 
And  yet  a  maiden  hath  no  tongue  but  thought — 

I  would  detain  you  here  some  month  or  two 
Before  you  venture  for  me.  I  could  teach  you 
How  to  choose  right,  but  I  am  then  forsworn;  u 
So  will  I  never  be:  so  may  you  miss  me; 

But  if  you  do,  you’ll  make  me  wish  a  sin. 

That  I  had  been  forsworn.  Beshrew  your  eyes. 
They  have  o’erlook’d  me  and  divided  me; 

One  half  of  me  is  yours,  the  other  half  yours. 
Mine  own,  I  would  say;  but  if  mine,  then  yours, 
And  so  all  yours.  O,  these  naughty  times 
Put  bars  between  the  owners  and  their  rights ! 

And  so,  though  yours,  not  yours.  Prove  it  so, 

Let  fortune  go  to  hell  for  it,  not  1 .  21 

I  speak  too  long;  but  ’tis  to  peize  the  time, 

To  eke  it,  and  to  draw  it  out  in  length. 

To  stay  you  from  election. 

Bass .  Let  me  choose ; 

For  as  I  am,  I  live  upon  the  rack. 

For.  Upon  the  rack,  Bassanio!  then  confess 
What  treason  there  is  mingled  with  your  love. 

Bass.  None  but  that  ugly  treason  of  mistrust. 
Which  makes  me  fear  the  enjoying  of  my  love: 
There  may  as  well  be  amity  and  life  50 

’Tween  snow  and  fire,  as  treason  and  my  love. 

For.  Ay,  but  I  fear  you  speak  upon  the  rack. 
Where  men  enforced  do  speak  anything. 

Bass.  Promise  me  life,  and  I’ll  confess  the  truth. 

For.  Well  then,  confess  and  live. 

Bass.  “Confess”  and  “love” 

Had  been  the  very  sum  of  my  confession: 

O  happy  torment,  when  my  torturer 
Doth  teach  me  answers  for  deliverance! 

But  let  me  to  my  fortune  and  the  caskets. 

For.  Away,  then!  I  am  lock’d  in  one  of  them:  40 
If  you  do  love  me,  you  will  find  me  out. 

Nerissa  and  the  rest,  stand  all  aloof. 


Let  music  sound  while  he  doth  make  his  choice; 
Then,  if  he  lose,  he  makes  a  swan-like  end. 
Fading  in  music:  that  the  comparison 
May  stand  more  proper,  my  eye  shall  be  the 
stream 

And  watery  death-bed  for  him.  He  may  win; 

And  what  is  music  then?  'Fhen  music  is 
Even  as  the  flourish  when  true  subjects  bow 
To  a  new-crowned  monarch :  such  it  is  50 

As  are  those  dulcet  sounds  in  break  of  day 
That  creep  into  the  dreaming  bridegroom’s  ear 
And  summon  him  to  marriage.  Now  he  goes. 
With  no  less  presence,  but  with  much  more  love. 
Than  young  Alcides,  when  he  did  redeem 
The  virgin  tribute  paid  by  howling  Troy 
To  the  sea-monster:  I  stand  for  sacrifice; 

The  rest  aloof  are  the  Dardanian  wives, 

With  bleared  visages,  come  forth  to  view 
The  issue  of  the  exploit.  Go,  Hercules !  60 

Live  thou,  I  live:  with  much  much  more  dismay 
I  view  the  fight  than  thou  that  makest  the  fray. 

Musky  ^whilst  BASSANIO  comments  on  the  caskets 
to  himself. 

SONG 

Tell  me  where  is  fancy  bred. 

Or  in  the  heart  or  in  the  head? 

How  begot,  how  nourished? 

Reply,  reply. 

It  is  engender’d  in  the  eyes. 

With  gazing  fed;  and  fancy  dies 
In  the  cradle  where  it  lies. 

Let  us  all  ring  fancy’s  knell:  70 

I’ll  begin  it — Ding,  dong,  bell. 

All.  Ding,  dong,  bell. 

Bass.  So  may  the  outward  shows  be  least  them¬ 
selves: 

The  world  is  still  deceived  with  ornament. 

In  law,  what  plea  so  tainted  and  corrupt 
But,  being  season’d  with  a  gracious  voice. 
Obscures  the  show  of  evil?  In  religion. 

What  damned  error,  but  some  sober  brow 
Will  bless  it  and  approve  it  with  a  text. 

Hiding  the  grossness  with  fair  ornament?  So 
There  is  no  vice  so  simple  but  assumes 
Some  mark  of  virtue  on  his  outward  parts : 

How  many  cowards,  whose  hearts  are  all  as  false 
As  stairs  of  sand,  wear  yet  upon  their  chins 
The  beards  of  Hercules  and  frowning  Mars, 
Who,  inward  search’d,  have  livers  white  as  milk; 
And  these  assume  but  valour’s  excrement 
To  render  them  redoubted!  Look  on  beauty, 

And  you  shall  see  ’tis  purchased  by  the  weight; 
Which  therein  works  a  miracle  in  nature,  ^0 
Making  them  lightest  that  wear  most  of  it: 

So  are  those  crisped  snaky  golden  locks 


SCENE  n 


421 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


Which  make  such  wanton  gambols  with  the  wind, 
Upon  supposed  fairness,  often  known 
To  be  the  dowry  of  a  second  head. 

The  skull  that  bred  them  in  the  sepulchre. 

Thus  ornament  is  but  the  guiled  shore 
To  a  most  dangerous  sea;  the  beauteous  scarf 
Veiling  an  Indian  beauty;  in  a  word,  pp 

The  seeming  truth  which  cunning  times  put  on 
To  entrap  the  wisest.  Therefore,  thou  gaudy 
gold, 

Hard  food  for  Midas,  I  will  none  of  thee; 

Nor  none  of  thee,  thou  pale  and  common  drudge 
’Tween  man  and  man:  but  thou,  thou  meagre 
lead. 

Which  rather  threatenest  than  dost  promise  aught. 
Thy  paleness  moves  me  more  than  eloquence; 
And  here  choose  I:  joy  be  the  consequence! 

For.  [Aside]  How  all  the  other  passions  fleet  to 
air. 

As  doubtful  thoughts,  and  rash-embraced  despair, 
And  shuddering  fear,  and  green-eyed  jealousy! 

O  love.  III 

Be  moderate;  allay  thy  ecstasy; 

In  measure  rein  thy  joy;  scant  this  excess. 

I  feel  too  much  thy  blessing;  make  it  less, 

For  fear  I  surfeit. 

Bass.  What  fina  I  here? 

Opening  the  leaden  casket. 

Fair  Portia’s  counterfeit!  What  demi-god 
Hath  come  so  near  creation?  Move  these  eyes? 
Or  whether,  riding  on  the  balls  of  mine. 

Seem  they  in  motion?  Here  are  sever’d  lips. 
Parted  with  sugar  breath:  so  sweet  a  bar  120 
Should  sunder  such  sweet  friends.  Here  m  her 
hairs 

The  painter  plays  the  spider  and  hath  woven 
A  golden  mesh  to  entrap  the  hearts  of  men 
Faster  than  gnats  in  cobwebs:  but  her  eyes — 
How  could  he  see  to  do  them?  having  made  one, 
Methinks  it  should  have  power  to  steal  both  his 
And  leave  itself  unfurnish’d.  Yet  look,  how  far 
The  substance  of  my  praise  doth  wrong  this 
shadow 

In  underprizing  it,  so  far  this  shadow 
Doth  limp  behind  the  substance.  Here’s  the 

scroll,  75  o 

The  continent  and  summary  of  my  fortune. 
[Reads]  “You  that  choose  not  by  the  view. 
Chance  as  fair  and  choose  as  true! 

Since  this  fortune  falls  to  you. 

Be  content  and  seek  no  new. 

If  you  be  well  pleased  with  this 
And  hold  your  fortune  for  your  bliss. 
Turn  you  where  your  lady  is 
And  claim  her  with  a  loving  kiss.” 

A  gentle  scroll.  Fair  lady,  by  your  leave;  /40 


I  come  by  note,  to  give  and  to  receive. 

Like  one  of  two  contending  in  a  prize. 

That  thinks  he  hath  done  well  in  people’s  eyes, 
Hearing  applause  and  universal  shout. 

Giddy  in  spirit,  still  gazing  in  a  doubt 
Whether  those  peals  of  praise  be  his  or  no; 

So,  thrice-fair  lady,  stand  I,  even  so; 

As  doubtful  whether  what  I  see  be  true. 

Until  confirm’d,  sign’d,  ratified  by  you. 

For.  You  see  me.  Lord  Bassanio,  where  I  stand. 
Such  as  I  am:  though  for  myself  alone  ipi 

I  would  not  be  ambitious  in  my  wish. 

To  wish  myself  much  better;  yet,  for  you 
I  would  be  trebled  twenty  times  myself; 

A  thousand  times  more  fair,  ten  thousand  times 
More  rich; 

That  only  to  stand  high  in  your  account, 

I  might  in  virtues,  beauties,  livings,  friends, 
Exceed  account;  but  the  full  sum  of  me 
Is  sum  of  something,  which,  to  term  in  gross. 

Is  an  unlesson’d  girl,  unschool’d,  unpractised;  161 
Happy  in  this,  she  is  not  yet  so  old 
But  she  may  learn;  happier  than  this. 

She  is  not  bred  so  dull  but  she  can  learn; 

Happiest  of  all  is  that  her  gentle  spirit 
Commits  itself  to  yours  to  be  directed. 

As  from  her  lord,  her  governor,  her  king. 

Myself  and  what  is  mine  to  you  and  yours 
Is  now  converted:  but  now  I  was  the  lord 
Of  this  fair  mansion,  master  of  my  servants,  /70 
Queen  o’er  myself;  and  even  now,  but  now. 

This  house,  these  servants,  and  this  same  myself 
Are  yours,  my  lord:  I  give  them  with  this  ring; 
Which  when  you  part  from,  lose,  or  give  away. 
Let  It  presage  the  ruin  of  your  love 
And  be  my  vantage  to  exclaim  on  you. 

Bass.  Madam,  you  have  bereft  me  of  all  words. 
Only  my  blood  speaks  to  you  in  my  veins; 

And  there  is  such  confusion  in  my  powers. 

As,  after  some  oration  fairly  spoke  iSo 

By  a  beloved  prince,  there  doth  appear 
Among  the  buzzing  pleased  multitude; 

Where  every  something,  being  blent  together, 
Turns  to  a  wild  of  nothing,  save  of  joy. 

Express’d  and  not  express’d.  But  when  this  ring 
Parts  from  this  finger,  then  parts  life  from  hence: 
O,  then  be  bold  to  say  Bassanio’s  dead! 

Ner.  My  lord  and  lady,  it  is  now  our  time. 

That  have  stood  by  and  seen  our  wishes  prosper, 
To  cry,  good  joy:  good  joy,  my  lord  and  lady! 
Gra.  My  lord  Bassanio  and  my  gentle  lady, 

I  wish  you  all  the  joy  that  you  can  wish; 

For  I  am  sure  you  can  wish  none  from  me: 

And  when  your  honours  mean  to  solemnize 
The  bargain  of  your  faith,  I  do  beseech  you. 

Even  at  that  time  I  may  be  married  too. 


ACT  III 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


422 

Bass.  With  all  my  heart,  so  thou  canst  get  a  wife. 
Gra.  I  thank  your  lordship,  you  have  got  me  one. 
My  eyes,  my  lord,  can  look  as  swift  as  yours: 
You  saw  the  mistress,  I  beheld  the  maid;  200 
You  loved,  I  loved  for  intermission. 

No  more  pertains  to  me,  my  lord,  than  you. 

Your  fortune  stood  upon  the  casket  there. 

And  so  did  mine  too,  as  the  matter  falls; 

For  wooing  here  until  I  sweat  again. 

And  swearing  till  my  very  roof  was  dry 
With  oaths  of  love,  at  last,  if  promise  last, 

I  got  a  promise  of  this  fair  one  here 
To  have  her  love,  provided  that  your  fortune 
Achieved  her  mistress. 

For.  Is  this  true,  Nerissa?  210 

Ner.  Madam,  it  is  ,  so  you  stand  pleased  withal. 
Bass.  And  do  you,  Gratiano,  mean  good  faith? 
Gra.  Yes,  faith,  my  lord. 

Bass.  Our  feast  shall  be  much  honour’d  in  your 
marriage. 

Gra.  We’ll  play  with  them  the  first  boy  for  a 
thousand  ducats. 

Ner.  What,  and  stake  down? 

Gra.  No;  we  shall  ne’er  win  at  that  sport,  and 
stake  down.  220 

But  who  comes  here?  Lorenzo  and  his  infidel? 
What,  and  my  old  Venetian  friend  Salerio? 

Enter  lorenzo,  jessica,  and  salerio, 
a  Messenger  from  Venice. 

Bass.  Lorenzo  and  Salerio,  welcome  hither; 

If  that  the  youth  of  my  new  interest  here 
Have  power  to  bid  you  welcome.  By  your  leave, 

I  bid  my  friends  and  countrymen. 

Sweet  Portia,  welcome. 

Par.  So  do  I,  my  lord: 

They  are  entirely  welcome. 

Lor.  I  thank  your  honour.  For  my  part,  my  lord. 
My  purpose  was  not  to  have  seen  you  here;  250 
But  meeting  with  Salerio  by  the  way. 

He  did  intreat  me,  past  all  saying  nay. 

To  come  with  him  along. 

Saler.  I  did,  my  lord; 

And  I  have  reason  for  it.  Signor  Antonio 
Commends  him  to  you.  [Gives  bassanio  a  letter.] 
Bass.  Ere  I  ope  his  letter, 

I  pray  you,  tell  me  how  my  good  friend  doth. 
Saler.  Not  sick,  my  lord,  unless  it  be  in  mind; 
Nor  well,  unless  in  mind:  his  letter  there 
Will  show  you  his  estate. 

Gra.  Nerissa,  cheer  yon  stranger;  bid  her 
welcome.  240 

Your  hand,  Salerio:  what’s  the  news  from 
Venice? 

How  doth  that  royal  merchant,  good  Antonio? 

I  know  he  will  be  glad  of  our  success; 


We  are  the  Jasons,  we  have  won  the  fleece. 

Saler.  I  would  you  had  won  the  fleece  that  he 
hath  lost. 

For.  There  are  some  shrewd  contents  in  yon 
same  paper. 

That  steals  the  colour  from  Bassanio’s  cheek: 
Some  dear  friend  dead;  else  nothing  in  the  world 
Could  turn  so  much  the  constitution 
Of  any  constant  man.  What,  worse  and  worse! 
With  leave,  Bassanio;  I  am  half  yourself,  25/ 

And  I  must  freely  have  the  half  of  anything 
That  this  same  paper  brings  you. 

Bass.  O  sweet  Portia, 

Here  are  a  few  of  the  unpleasant’st  words 
That  ever  blotted  paper!  Gentle  lady. 

When  I  did  first  impart  my  love  to  you, 

I  freely  told  you,  all  the  wealth  I  had 
Ran  in  my  veins,  I  was  a  gentleman; 

And  then  I  told  you  true:  and  yet,  dear  lady. 
Rating  myself  at  nothing,  you  shall  see 
How  much  I  was  a  braggart.  When  I  told  you 
My  state  was  nothing,  I  should  then  have  told 
you 

That  I  was  worse  than  nothing;  for,  indeed, 

I  have  engaged  myself  to  a  dear  friend. 

Engaged  my  friend  to  his  mere  enemy. 

To  feed  my  means.  Here  is  a  letter,  lady; 

The  paper  as  the  body  of  my  friend. 

And  every  word  in  it  a  gaping  wound. 

Issuing  life-blood.  But  is  it  true,  Salerio? 

Have  all  his  ventures  fail’d?  What,  not  one  hit? 
From  Tripolis,  from  Mexico,  and  England,  27/ 
From  Lisbon,  Barbary,  and  India? 

And  not  one  vessel  ’scape  the  dreadful  touch 
Of  merchant-marring  rocks? 

Saler.  Not  one,  my  lord. 

Besides,  it  should  appear,  that  if  he  had 
The  present  money  to  discharge  the  Jew, 

He  would  not  take  it.  Never  did  I  know 
A  creature  that  did  bear  the  shape  of  man 
So  keen  and  greedy  to  confound  a  man: 

He  plies  the  Duke  at  morning  and  at  night,  2  80 
And  doth  impeach  the  freedom  of  the  state. 

If  they  deny  him  justice:  twenty  merchants. 

The  Duke  himself,  and  the  magnificoes 
Of  greatest  port,  have  all  persuaded  with  him; 

But  none  can  drive  him  from  the  envious  plea 
Of  forfeiture,  of  justice,  and  his  bond. 

Jes.  When  I  was  with  him  I  have  heard  him 
swear 

To  Tubal  and  to  Chus,  his  countrymen. 

That  he  would  rather  have  iVntonio’s  flesh 
Than  twenty  times  the  value  of  the  sum  25?  o 

That  he  did  owe  him:  and  I  know,  my  lord. 

If  law,  authority  and  power  deny  not. 

It  will  go  hard  with  poor  Antonio. 


SCENE  II 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


For,  Is  it  your  dear  friend  that  is  thus  in  trouble? 
Bass.  The  dearest  friend  to  me,  the  kindest  man, 
The  best-condition’d  and  unwearied  spirit 
In  doing  courtesies,  and  one  in  whom 
The  ancient  Roman  honour  more  appears 
Than  any  that  draws  breath  in  Italy. 

For.  What  sum  owes  he  the  Jew?  5  00 

Bass.  For  me  three  thousand  ducats. 

For.  What,  no  more? 

Pay  him  six  thousand,  and  deface  the  bond; 
Double  six  thousand,  and  then  treble  that. 

Before  a  friend  of  this  description 
Shall  lose  a  hair  through  Bassanio’s  fault. 

First  go  with  me  to  church  and  call  me  wife. 

And  then  away  to  Venice  to  your  friend; 

For  never  shall  you  lie  by  Portia’s  side 
With  an  unquiet  soul.  You  shall  have  gold 
To  pay  the  petty  debt  twenty  times  over :  5 10 

When  it  is  paid,  bring  your  true  friend  along. 

My  maid  Nerissa  and  myself  meantime 
Will  live  as  maids  and  widows.  Come,  away! 

For  you  shall  hence  upon  your  wedding-day: 

Bid  your  friends  welcome,  show  a  merry  cheer: 
Since  you  are  dear  bought,  I  will  love  you  dear. 
But  let  me  hear  the  letter  of  your  friend. 

Bass.  [Reads]  “Sweet  Bassanio,  my  ships  have  all 
miscarried,  my  creditors  grow  cruel,  my  estate 
is  very  low,  my  bond  to  the  Jew  is  forfeit;  and 
since  in  paying  it,  it  is  impossible  I  should  live, 
all  debts  are  cleared  between  you  and  I,  if  I  might 
but  see  you  at  my  death.  Notwithstanding,  use 
your  pleasure:  if  your  love  do  not  persuade  you 
to  come,  let  not  my  letter.” 

For.  O  love,  dispatch  all  business,  and  be  gone! 
Bass.  Since  I  have  your  good  leave  to  go  away, 

I  will  make  haste:  but,  till  I  come  again. 

No  bed  shall  e’er  be  guilty  of  my  stay. 

No  rest  be  interposer  ’twixt  us  twain.  550 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Venice:  a  street 
Enter  shylock,  salarino,  antonio,  and  Gaoler. 
Shy.  Gaoler,  look  to  him:  tell  not  me  of 
mercy; 

This  is  the  fool  that  lent  out  money  gratis: 
Gaoler,  look  to  him. 

Ant.  Hear  me  yet,  good  Shylock. 

Shy.  I’ll  have  my  bond;  speak  not  against  my 
bond: 

I  have  sworn  an  oath  that  I  will  have  my  bond. 
Thou  call’dst  me  dog  before  thou  hadst  a  cause; 
But,  since  lama  dog,  beware  my  fangs : 

The  Duke  shall  grant  me  justice.  I  do  wonder. 
Thou  naughty  gaoler,  that  thou  art  so  fond 
To  come  abroad  with  him  at  his  request.  10 
Ant.  I  pray  thee,  hear  me  speak. 


Shy.  I’ll  have  my  bond;  I  will  not  hear  thee 
speak: 

I’ll  have  my  bond;  and  therefore  speak  no  more. 
I’ll  not  be  made  a  soft  and  dull-eyed  fool. 

To  shake  the  head,  relent,  and  sigh,  and  yield 
To  Christian  intercessors.  Follow  not; 

I’ll  have  no  speaking:  I  will  have  my  bond. 

[Exit, 

Salar.  It  is  most  impenetrable  cur 
That  ever  kept  with  men. 

Ant.  Let  him  alone: 

I’ll  follow  him  no  more  with  bootless  prayers.  20 
He  seeks  my  life;  his  reason  well  I  know: 

I  oft  deliver’d  from  his  forfeitures 
Many  that  have  at  times  made  moan  to  me; 
Therefore  he  hates  me. 

Salar.  I  am  sure  the  Duke 

Will  never  grant  this  forfeiture  to  hold. 

Ant.  The  Duke  cannot  deny  the  course  of  law: 
For  the  commodity  that  strangers  have 
With  us  in  Venice,  if  it  be  denied. 

Will  much  impeach  the  justice  of  his  state; 

Since  that  the  trade  and  profit  of  the  city  50 

Consisteth  of  all  nations.  Therefore,  go: 

These  griefs  and  losses  have  so  bated  me. 

That  I  shall  hardly  spare  a  pound  of  flesh 
To-morrow  to  my  bloody  creditor. 

Well,  gaoler,  on.  Pray  God,  Bassanio  come 
To  see  me  pay  his  debt,  and  then  I  care  not! 

[Exeunt, 

Scene  iv.  Belmont:  a  room  in  Fortia's  house 
Enter  portia,  nerissa,  lorenzo,  jessica, 

and  BALTHASAR. 

Lor.  Madam,  although  I  speak  it  in  your 
presence, 

You  have  a  noble  and  a  true  conceit 
Of  god-like  amity;  which  appears  most  strongly 
In  bearing  thus  the  absence  of  your  lord. 

But  if  you  knew  to  whom  you  show  this  honour. 
How  true  a  gentleman  you  send  relief. 

How  dear  a  lover  of  my  lord  your  husband, 

I  know  you  would  be  prouder  of  the  work 
Than  customary  bounty  can  enforce  you. 

For.  I  never  did  repent  for  doing  good,  lo 

Nor  shall  not  now:  for  in  companions 
That  do  converse  and  waste  the  time  together, 
Whose  souls  do  bear  an  equal  yoke  of  love. 

There  must  be  needs  a  like  proportion 
Of  lineaments,  of  manners,  and  of  spirit; 

Which  makes  me  think  that  this  Antonio, 

Being  the  bosom  lover  of  my  lord, 

Must  needs  be  like  my  lord.  If  it  be  so. 

How  little  is  the  cost  I  have  bestow’d 
In  purchasing  the  semblance  of  my  soul  20 

From  out  the  state  of  hellish  misery! 


ACT  III 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


This  comes  too  near  the  praising  of  myself; 
Therefore  no  more  of  it:  hear  other  things. 
Lorenzo,  I  commit  into  your  hands 
The  husbandry  and  manage  of  my  house 
Until  my  lord’s  return:  for  mine  own  part, 

I  have  toward  heaven  breathed  a  secret  vow 
To  live  in  prayer  and  contemplation. 

Only  attended  by  Nerissa  here. 

Until  her  husband  and  my  lord’s  return:  50 

There  is  a  monastery  two  miles  off; 

And  there  will  we  abide.  I  do  desire  you 
Not  to  deny  this  imposition; 

The  which  my  love  and  some  necessity 
Now  lays  upon  you. 

Lor.  Madam,  with  all  my  heart; 

I  shall  obey  you  in  all  fair  commands. 

For.  My  people  do  already  know  my  mind. 

And  will  acknowledge  you  and  Jessica 
In  place  of  Lord  Bassanio  and  myself. 

And  so  farewell,  till  we  shall  meet  again.  40 
Lor.  Fair  thoughts  and  happy  hours  attend  on 
you! 

Jes.  I  wish  your  ladyship  all  heart’s  content. 

For.  I  thank  you  for  your  wish,  and  am  well 
pleased 

To  wish  it  back  on  you:  fare  you  well,  Jessica. 

[Exeunt  JESSICA  and  lorenzo. 

Now,  Balthasar, 

As  I  have  ever  found  thee  honest-true. 

So  let  me  find  thee  still.  Take  this  same  letter, 
And  use  thou  all  the  endeavour  of  a  man 
In  speed  to  Padua:  see  thou  render  this 
Into  my  cousin’s  hand.  Doctor  Bellario;  50 
And,  look,  what  notes  and  garments  he  doth 
give  thee, 

Bring  them,  I  pray  thee,  with  imagined  speed 
Unto  the  tranect,  to  the  common  ferry 
Which  trades  to  Venice.  Waste  no  time  in  words. 
But  get  thee  gone:  I  shall  be  there  before  thee. 
Balth.  Madam,  I  go  with  all  convenient  speed. 

[Exit. 

For.  Come  on,  Nerissa;  I  have  work  in  hand 
That  you  yet  know  not  of:  we’ll  see  our 
husbands 

Before  they  think  of  us. 

Ner.  Shall  they  see  us? 

For.  They  shall,  Nerissa;  but  in  such  a  habit,  60 
That  they  shall  think  we  are  accomplished 
With  that  we  lack.  I’ll  hold  thee  any  wager. 
When  we  are  both  accoutred  like  young  men. 

I’ll  prove  the  prettier  fellow  of  the  two. 

And  wear  my  dagger  with  the  braver  grace. 

And  speak  between  the  change  of  man  and  boy 
With  a  reed  voice,  and  turn  two  mincing  steps 
Into  a  manly  stride,  and  speak  of  frays 
Like  a  fine  bragging  youth,  and  tell  quaint  lies. 


How  honourable  ladies  sought  my  love,  70 

Which  I  denying,  tfiey  fell  sick  and  died; 

I  could  not  do  withal;  then  I’ll  repent. 

And  wish,  for  all  that,  that  I  had  not  kill’d  them; 
And  twenty  of  these  puny  lies  I’ll  tell. 

That  men  shall  swear  I  have  discontinued  school 
Above  a  twelvemonth.  I  have  within  my  mind 
A  thousand  raw  tricks  of  these  bragging  Jacks, 
Which  I  will  practise. 

Ner.  Why,  shall  we  turn  to  men? 

For.  Fie,  what  a  question’s  that. 

If  thou  wert  near  a  lewd  interpreter!  80 

But  come.  I’ll  tell  thee  all  my  whole  device 
When  I  am  in  my  coach,  which  stays  for  us 
At  the  park  gate;  and  therefore  haste  away, 

For  we  must  measure  twenty  miles  to-day. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  The  same:  a  garden 
Enter  launcelot  and  jessica. 

Laun.  Yes,  truly;  for,  look  you,  the  sins  of  the 
father  are  to  be  laid  upon  the  children:  therefore, 
I  promise  ye,  I  fear  you.  I  was  always  plain  with 
you,  and  so  now  I  speak  my  agitation  of  the 
matter:  therefore  be  of  good  cheer,  for  truly  I 
think  you  are  damned.  There  is  but  one  hope  in 
It  can  do  you  any  good;  and  that  is  but  a  kind  of 
bastard  hope  neither. 

Jes.  And  what  hope  is  that.  I  pray  thee?  10 

Laun.  Marry,  you  may  partly  hope  that  your 
father  got  you  not,  that  you  are  not  the  Jew’s 
daughter. 

Jes.  That  were  a  kind  of  bastard  hope,  indeed: 
so  the  sins  of  my  mother  should  be  visited  upon 
me. 

Laun.  Truly  then  I  fear  you  are  damned  both 
by  father  and  mother:  thus  when  I  shun  Scylla, 
your  father,  I  fall  into  Charybdis,  your  mother: 
well,  you  are  gone  both  ways.  20 

Jes.  I  shall  be  saved  by  my  husband;  he  hath 
made  me  a  Christian. 

Laun.  Truly,  the  more  to  blame  he:  we  were 
Christians  enow  before;  e’en  as  many  as  could 
well  live,  one  by  another.  This  making  of  Chris¬ 
tians  will  raise  the  price  of  hogs:  if  we  grow  all 
to  be  pork-eaters,  we  shall  not  shortly  have  a 
rasher  on  the  coals  for  money. 

Enter  lorenzo. 

Jes.  I’ll  tell  my  husband,  Launcelot,  what  you 
say:  here  he  comes.  50 

Lor.  I  shall  grow  jealous  of  you  shortly,  Laun¬ 
celot,  if  you  thus  get  my  wife  into  corners. 

Jes.  Nay,  you  need  not  fear  us,  Lorenzo:  Laun¬ 
celot  and  I  are  out.  He  tells  me  flatlv,  there  is  no 
mercy  for  me  in  heaven,  because  1  am  a  Jew’s 


SCENE  V 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


425 


daughter:  and  he  says,  you  are  no  good  member 
of  the  commonwealth,  for  in  converting  Jews  to 
Christians,  you  raise  the  price  of  pork. 

Lor.  I  shall  answer  that  better  to  the  common¬ 
wealth  than  you  can  the  getting  up  of  the  negro’s 
belly:  the  Moor  is  with  child  by  you,  Launcelot. 
Laun.  It  is  much  that  the  Moor  should  be  more 
than  reason:  but  if  she  be  less  than  an  honest 
woman,  she  is  indeed  more  than  I  took  her  for. 

Lor.  How  every  fool  can  play  upon  the  word! 
I  think  the  best  grace  of  wit  will  shortly  turn  into 
silence,  and  discourse  grow  commendable  in  none 
only  but  parrots.  Go  in,  sirrah;  bid  them  prepare 
for  dinner. 

Lcmn.  That  is  done,  sir;  they  have  all  stomachs. 
Lor.  Goodly  Lord,  what  a  wit-snapper  are  you! 
then  bid  them  prepare  dinner. 

Lmn.  That  is  done  too,  sir;  only  “cover”  is  the 
word. 

Lor.  Will  you  cover  then,  sir? 

Laun.  Not  so,  sir,  neither;  I  know  my  duty.  ^9 
Lor.  Yet  more  quarrelling  with  occasion!  Wilt 
thou  show  the  whole  wealth  of  thy  wit  in  an  in¬ 
stant?  I  pray  thee,  understand  a  plain  man  in  his 
plain  meaning:  go  to  thy  fellows;  bid  them  cover 
the  table,  serve  in  the  meat,  and  we  will  come  in 
to  dinner. 

Laun.  For  the  table,  sir,  it  shall  be  served  in;  for 
the  meat,  sir,  it  shall  be  covered;  for  your  com¬ 
ing  in  to  dinner,  sir,  why,  let  it  be  as  humours 
and  conceits  shall  govern.  [Exit. 

Lor.  O  dear  discretion,  how  his  words  are 
suited!  70 

The  fool  hath  planted  in  his  memory 
An  army  of  good  words;  and  I  do  know 
A  many  fools,  that  stand  in  better  place, 

Garnish’d  like  him,  that  for  a  tricksy  word 
Defy  the  matter.  How  cheer’st  thou,  Jessica? 

And  now,  good  sweet,  say  thy  opinion, 

How  dost  thou  like  the  Lord  Bassanio’s  wife? 

Jes.  Past  all  expressing.  It  is  very  meet 
The  Lord  Bassanio  live  an  upright  life; 

For,  having  such  a  blessing  in  his  lady.  So 

He  finds  the  joys  of  heaven  here  on  earth; 

And  if  on  earth  he  do  not  mean  it,  then 
In  reason  he  should  never  come  to  heaven. 

Why,  if  two  gods  should  play  some  heavenly 
match 

And  on  the  wager  lay  two  earthly  women, 

And  Portia  one,  there  must  be  something  else 
Pawn’d  with  the  other,  for  the  poor  rude  world 
Hath  not  her  fellow. 

Lor.  Even  such  a  husband 

Hast  thou  of  me  as  she  is  for  a  wife. 

Jes.  Nay,  but  ask  my  opinion  too  of  that.  90 

Lor.  I  will  anon:  first,  let  us  go  to  dinner. 


Jes.  Nay,  let  me  praise  you  while  I  have  a 
stomach. 

Lor.  No,  pray  thee,  let  it  serve  for  table-talk; 
Then,  howsoe’er  thou  speak’st,  ’mong  other 
things 

I  shall  digest  it. 

Jes.  Well,  I’ll  set  you  forth.  [Exeunt. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  Venice:  a  court  of  justice 
Enter  the  duke,  the  Magnijicoes,  antonio, 

BASSANIO,  GRATiANo,  SALERio,  and  Others. 

Duke.  What,  is  Antonio  here? 

Ant.  Ready,  so  please  your  Grace. 

Duke.  I  am  sorry  for  thee:  thou  art  come  to 
answer 

A  stony  adversary,  an  inhuman  wretch 
Uncapable  of  pity,  void  and  empty 
From  any  dram  of  mercy. 

Ant.  I  have  heard 

Your  Grace  hath  ta’en  great  pains  to  qualify 
His  rigorous  course;  but  since  he  stands  obdurate 
And  that  no  lawful  means  can  carry  me 
Out  of  his  envy’s  reach,  I  do  oppose  lo 

My  patience  to  his  fury,  and  am  arm’d 
To  suffer,  with  a  quietness  of  spirit. 

The  very  tyranny  and  rage  of  his. 

Duke.  Go  one,  and  call  the  Jew  into  the  court. 
Saler.  He  is  ready  at  the  door:  he  comes,  my 
lord. 

Enter  shylock. 

Duke.  Make  room,  and  let  him  stand  before  our 
face. 

Shylock,  the  world  thinks,  and  I  think  so  too. 
That  thou  but  lead’st  this  fashion  of  thy  malice 
To  the  last  hour  of  act;  and  then  ’tis  thought 
Thou’ It  show  thy  mercy  and  remorse  more 
strange 

Than  is  thy  strange  apparent  cruelty;  2l 

And  where  thou  now  exact’st  the  penalty. 

Which  is  a  pound  of  this  poor  merchant’s  flesh, 
Thou  wilt  not  only  loose  the  forfeiture, 

But,  touch’d  with  human  gentleness  and  love, 
Forgive  a  moiety  of  the  principal; 

Glancing  an  eye  of  pity  on  his  losses. 

That  have  of  late  so  huddled  on  his  back. 

Enow  to  press  a  royal  merchant  down 
And  pluck  commiseration  of  his  state  50 

From  brassy  bosoms  and  rough  hearts  of  flint. 
From  stubborn  Turks  and  Tartars,  never  train’d 
To  offices  of  tender  courtesy. 

We  all  expect  a  gentle  answer,  Jew. 

Shy.  I  have  possess’d  your  Grace  of  what  I 
purpose; 


426  THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


And  by  our  holy  Sabbath  have  I  sworn 
To  have  the  due  and  forfeit  of  my  bond: 

If  you  deny  it,  let  the  danger  light 
Upon  your  charter  and  your  city’s  freedom. 
You’ll  ask  me,  why  I  rather  choose  to  have  40 
A  weight  of  carrion  flesh  than  to  receive 
Three  thousand  ducats:  I’ll  not  answer  that: 

But  say  it  is  my  humour:  is  it  answer’d? 

What  if  my  house  be  troubled  with  a  rat 
And  I  be  pleased  to  give  ten  thousand  ducats 
To  have  it  baned?  What,  are  you  answer’d  yet? 
Some  men  there  are  love  not  a  gaping  pig; 

Some,  that  are  mad  if  they  behold  a  cat; 

And  others,  when  the  bagpipe  sings  i’  the  nose. 
Cannot  contain  their  urine:  for  affection,  50 
Mistress  of  passion,  sways  it  to  the  mood 
Of  what  it  likes  or  loathes.  Now,  for  your 
answer: 

As  there  is  no  firm  reason  to  be  render’d, 

Why  he  cannot  abide  a  gaping  pig; 

Why  he,  a  harmless  necessary  cat; 

Why  he,  a  woollen  bag-pipe;  but  of  force 
Must  yield  to  such  inevitable  shame 
As  to  offend,  himself  being  offended; 

So  can  I  give  no  reason,  nor  I  will  not. 

More  than  a  lodged  hate  and  a  certain  loathing 
I  bear  iVntonio,  that  I  follow  thus  61 

A  losing  suit  against  him.  Are  you  answer’d? 

Bass.  This  is  no  answer,  thou  unfeeling  man. 

To  excuse  the  current  of  thy  cruelty. 

Shy.  I  am  not  bound  to  please  thee  with  my 
answers. 

Bass.  Do  all  men  kill  the  things  they  do  not  love? 
Shy.  Hates  any  man  the  thing  he  would  not  kill? 
Bass.  Every  offence  is  not  a  hate  at  first. 

Shy.  What,  wouldst  thou  have  a  serpent  sting 
thee  twice? 

Ant.  I  pray  you,  think  you  question  with  the 
Jew:  70 

You  may  as  well  go  stand  upon  the  beach 
And  bid  the  main  flood  bate  his  usual  height; 

You  may  as  well  use  question  with  the  wolf 
Why  he  hath  made  the  ewe  bleat  for  the  lamb; 
You  may  as  well  forbid  the  mountain  pines 
To  wag  their  high  tops  and  to  make  no  noise, 
When  they  are  fretten  with  the  gusts  of  heaven; 
You  may  as  well  do  any  thing  most  hard. 

As  seek  to  soften  that — than  which  what’s  hard¬ 
er? — 

His  Jewish  heart:  therefore,  I  do  beseech  you,  80 
Make  no  more  offers,  use  no  farther  means. 

But  with  all  brief  and  plain  conveniency 
Let  me  have  judgement  and  the  Jew  his  will. 

Bass.  For  thy  three  thousand  ducats  here  is  six. 
Shy.  If  every  ducat  in  six  thousand  ducats 
Were  in  six  parts  and  every  part  a  ducat, 


I  would  not  draw  them;  I  would  have  niy  bond. 
Duke.  How  shalt  thou  hope  for  mercy,  render¬ 
ing  none? 

Shy.  What  judgement  shall  I  dread,  doing  no 
wrong? 

You  have  among  you  many  a  purchased  slave, 
Which,  like  your  asses  and  your  dogs  and  mules. 
You  use  in  abject  and  in  slavish  parts. 

Because  you  bought  them:  shall  I  say  to  you. 

Let  them  be  free,  marry  them  to  your  heirs? 

Why  sweat  they  under  burthens?  let  their  beds 
Be  made  as  soft  as  yours  and  let  their  palates 
Be  season’d  with  such  viands?  You  will  answer 
“The  slaves  are  ours”:  so  do  I  answer  you: 

The  pound  of  flesh,  which  I  demand  of  him. 

Is  dearly  bought;  ’tis  mine  and  I  will  have  it.  too 
If  you  deny  me,  fie  upon  your  law! 

There  is  no  force  in  the  decrees  of  Venice. 

I  stand  for  judgement:  answer;  shall  I  have  it? 
Duke.  Upon  my  power  I  may  dismiss  this  court, 
Unless  Bellario,  a  learned  doctor. 

Whom  I  have  sent  for  to  determine  this. 

Come  here  to-day. 

Saler.  My  lord,  here  stays  without 

A  messenger  with  letters  from  the  doctor. 

New  come  from  Padua. 

Duke.  Bring  us  the  letters;  call  the  messenger. 
Bass.  Good  cheer,  Antonio!  What,  man, 

courage  yet!  /// 

The  Jew  shall  have  my  flesh,  blood,  bones,  and 
all. 

Ere  thou  shalt  lose  for  me  one  drop  of  blood. 

Ant.  I  am  a  tainted  wether  of  the  flock, 

Meetest  for  death:  the  weakest  kind  of  fruit 
Drops  earliest  to  the  ground;  and  so  let  me: 

You  cannot  better  be  employ’d,  Bassanio, 

Than  to  live  still  and  write  mine  epitaph. 

Enter  nerissa,  dressed  like  a  lawyer's  clerk. 

Duke.  Came  you  from  Padua,  from  Bellario? 
Ner.  From  both,  my  lord.  Bellario  greets  your 
Grace.  [Presenting  a  letter.]  120 

Bass.  Why  dost  thou  whet  thy  knife  so 
earnestly? 

Shy.  To  cut  the  forfeiture  from  that  bankrupt 
there. 

Gra.  Not  on  thy  sole,  but  on  thy  soul,  harsh 
Jew, 

Thou  makest  thy  knife  keen;  but  no  metal  can. 
No,  not  the  hangman’s  axe,  bear  half  the  keenness 
Of  thy  sharp  envy.  Can  no  prayers  pierce  thee? 
Shy.  No,  none  that  thou  hast  wit  enough  to 
make. 

Gra.  O,  be  thou  damn’d,  inexecrable  dog! 

And  for  thy  life  let  justice  be  accused. 

Thou  almost  makest  me  waver  in  my  faith  1^0 


SCENE  I 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


To  hold  opinion  with  Pythagoras, 

That  souls  of  animals  infuse  themselves 
Into  the  trunks  of  men:  thy  currish  spirit 
Govern’d  a  wolf,  who,  hang’d  for  human 
slaughter, 

Even  from  the  gallows  did  his  fell  soul  fleet. 

And,  whilst  thou  lay’st  in  thy  unhallow’d  dam, 

Infused  itself  in  thee;  for  thy  desires 

Are  wolvish,  bloody,  starved,  and  ravenous. 

Shy.  Till  thou  canst  rail  the  seal  from  off  my 
bond. 

Thou  but  offend’st  thy  lungs  to  speak  so  loud: 
Repair  thy  wit,  good  youth,  or  it  will  fall  141 
To  cureless  ruin.  I  stand  here  for  law. 

Duke.  This  letter  from  Bellario  doth  commend 
A  young  and  learned  doctor  to  our  court. 

Where  is  he? 

Ner.  He  attendeth  here  hard  by. 

To  know  your  answer,  whether  you’ll  admit  him. 
Duke.  With  all  my  heart.  Some  three  or  four 
of  you 

Go  give  him  courteous  conduct  to  this  place. 
Meantime  the  court  shall  hear  Bellario’s  letter. 
Clerk  [Reads]  “Your  Grace  shall  understand 
that  at  the  receipt  of  your  letter  I  am  very  sick: 
but  in  the  instant  that  your  messenger  came,  in 
loving  visitation  was  with  me  a  young  doctor  of 
Rome;  his  name  is  Balthasar.  I  acquainted  him 
with  the  cause  in  controversy  between  the  Jew 
and  Antonio  the  merchant:  we  turned  o’er  many 
books  together:  he  is  furnished  with  my  opinion; 
which,  bettered  with  his  own  learning,  the  great¬ 
ness  whereof  I  cannot  enough  commend,  comes 
with  him^  at  my  importunity,  to  fill  up  your 
Grace’s  request  in  my  stead.  I  beseech  you,  let 
his  lack  of  years  be  no  impediment  to  let  him  lack 
a  reverend  estimation;  for  I  never  knew  so  young 
a  body  with  so  old  a  head.  I  leave  him  to  your 
gracious  acceptance,  whose  trial  shall  better  pub¬ 
lish  his  commendation.” 

Duke.  You  hear  the  learn’d  Bellario,  what  he 
writes : 

And  here,  I  take  it,  is  the  doctor  come. 

Enter  portia,  dressed  like  a  doctor  of  laws. 

Give  me  your  hand.  Come  you  from  old  Bellario? 
For.  I  did,  my  lord. 

Duke.  You  are  welcome:  take  your  place. 
Are  you  acquainted  with  the  difference  iji 

That  holds  this  present  question  in  the  court? 

For.  I  am  informed  throughly  of  the  cause. 
Which  is  the  merchant  here,  and  which  the  Jew? 
Duke.  Antonio  and  old  Shy  lock,  both  stand 
forth. 

For.  Is  your  name  Shy  lock? 

Shy.  Shy  lock  is  my  name. 


For.  Of  a  strange  nature  is  the  suit  you  follow; 
Yet  in  such  rule  that  the  Venetian  law 
Cannot  impugn  you  as  you  do  proceed. 

You  stand  within  his  danger,  do  you  not?  180 
Ant.  Ay,  so  he  says. 

For.  Do  you  confess  the  bond? 

Ant.  I  do. 

For.  Then  must  the  Jew  be  merciful. 

Shy.  On  what  compulsion  must  I?  tell  me  that. 
For.  The  quality  of  mercy  is  not  strain’d, 

It  droppeth  as  the  gentle  rain  from  heaven 
Upon  the  place  beneath:  it  is  twice  blest; 

It  blesseth  him  that  gives  and  him  that  takes: 

’Tis  mightiest  in  the  mightiest:  it  becomes 
The  throned  monarch  better  than  his  crown; 

His  sceptre  shows  the  force  of  temporal  power. 
The  attribute  to  a  we  and  majesty,  i^i 

Wherein  doth  sit  the  dread  and  fear  of  kings; 

But  mercy  is  above  this  sceptred  sway; 

It  is  enthroned  in  the  hearts  of  kings. 

It  is  an  attribute  to  God  himself; 

And  earthly  power  doth  then  show  likest  God’s 
When  mercy  seasons  justice.  Therefore,  Jew, 
Though  justice  be  thy  plea,  consider  this. 

That,  in  the  course  of  justice,  none  of  us 
Should  see  salvation:  we  do  pray  for  mercy;  200 
x\nd  that  same  prayer  doth  teach  us  all  to  render 
The  deeds  of  mercy.  I  have  spoke  thus  much 
To  mitigate  the  justice  of  thy  plea; 

Which  if  thou  follow,  this  strict  court  of  Venice 
Must  needs  give  sentence  ’gainst  the  merchant 
there. 

Shy.  My  deeds  upon  my  head!  I  crave  the  law. 
The  penalty  and  forfeit  of  my  bond. 

For.  Is  he  not  able  to  discharge  the  money? 

Bass.  Yes,  here  I  tender  it  for  him  in  the  court; 
Yea,  twice  the  sum:  if  that  will  not  suffice,  210 

I  will  be  bound  to  pay  it  ten  times  o’er. 

On  forfeit  of  my  hands,  my  head,  my  heart: 

If  this  will  not  suffice,  it  must  appear 

That  malice  bears  down  truth.  And  I  beseech  you, 

Wrest  once  the  law  to  your  authority: 

To  do  a  great  right,  do  a  little  wrong. 

And  curb  this  cruel  devil  of  his  will. 

For.  It  must  not  be;  there  is  no  power  in  Venice 
Can  alter  a  decree  established: 

’Twill  be  recorded  for  a  precedent,  220 

And  many  an  error  by  the  same  example 
Will  rush  into  the  state:  it  cannot  be. 

Shy.  A  Daniel  come  to  judgement!  yea,  a 
Daniel! 

O  wise  young  judge,  how  I  do  honour  thee! 

For.  I  pray  you,  let  me  look  upon  the  bond. 

Shy.  Here  ’tis,  most  reverend  doctor,  here  it  is. 
For.  Shylock,  there’s  thrice  thy  money  offer’d 
thee. 


+  28 

Shy.  An  oath,  an  oath,  I  have  an  oath  in  heaven: 
Shall  I  lay  perjury  upon  my  soul? 

No,  not  for  Venice. 

For.  Why,  this  bond  is  forfeit;  2^0 

And  lawfully  by  this  the  Jew  may  claim 
A  pound  of  flesh,  to  be  by  him  cut  off 
Nearest  the  merchant’s  heart.  Be  merciful: 

Take  thrice  thy  money;  bid  me  tear  the  bond. 
Shy.  When  it  is  paid  according  to  the  tenour. 

It  doth  appear  you  are  a  worthy  judge; 

You  know  the  law,  your  exposition 

Hath  been  most  sound :  I  charge  you  by  the  law, 

Whereof  you  are  a  well-deserving  pillar. 

Proceed  to  judgement:  by  my  soul  I  swear  2^0 
There  is  no  power  in  the  tongue  of  man 
To  alter  me:  I  stay  here  on  my  bond. 

Ant.  Most  heartily  I  do  beseech  the  court 
To  give  the  judgement. 

For.  Why  then,  thus  i t  is : 

You  must  prepare  your  bosom  for  his  knife. 

Shy.  O  noble  judge!  O  excellent  young  man! 

For.  For  the  intent  and  purpose  of  the  law 
Hath  full  relation  to  the  penalty. 

Which  here  appeareth  due  upon  the  bond. 

Shy.  ’Tis  very  true:  O  wise  and  upright 

judge!  250 

How  much  more  elder  art  thou  than  thy  looks! 
For.  Therefore  lay  bare  your  bosom. 

Shy.  Ay,  his  breast: 

So  says  the  bond:  doth  it  not,  noble  judge? 
“Nearest  his  heart” :  those  are  the  very  words. 
For.  It  is  so.  Are  there  balance  here  to  weigh 
The  flesh? 

Shy.  I  have  them  ready. 

For.  Have  by  some  surgeon,  Shylock,  on  your 
charge. 

To  stop  his  wounds,  lest  he  do  bleed  to  death. 
Shy.  Is  it  so  nominated  in  the  bond? 

For.  It  is  not  so  express’d:  but  what  of  that? 
’Twere  good  you  do  so  much  for  charity.  261 
Shy.  I  cannot  find  it;  ’tis  not  in  the  bond. 

For.  You,  merchant,  have  you  any  thing  to  say? 
Ant.  But  little:  I  am  arm’d  and  well  prepared. 
Give  me  your  hand,  Bassanio:  fare  you  well! 
Grieve  not  that  I  am  fallen  to  this  for  you; 

For  herein  Fortune  shows  herself  more  kind 
Than  is  her  custom:  it  is  still  her  use 
To  let  the  wretched  man  outlive  his  wealth. 

To  view  with  hollow  eye  and  wrinkled  brow  270 
An  age  of  poverty;  from  which  lingering  penance 
Of  such  misery  doth  she  cut  me  off. 

Commend  me  to  your  honourable  wife: 

Tell  her  the  process  of  Antonio’s  end; 

Say  how  I  loved  you,  speak  me  fair  in  death; 

And,  when  the  tale  is  told,  bid  her  be  judge 
Whether  Bassanio  had  not  once  a  love. 


ACT  IV 

Repent  but  you  that  you  shall  lose  your  friend. 
And  he  repents  not  that  he  pays  your  debt; 

For  if  the  Jew  do  cut  but  deep  enough,  2  So 

I’ll  pay  it  presently  with  all  my  heart. 

Bass.  Antonio,  I  am  married  to  a  wife 
Which  is  as  dear  to  me  as  life  itself; 

But  life  itself,  my  wife,  and  all  the  world. 

Are  not  with  me  esteem’d  above  thy  life: 

I  would  lose  all,  sacrifice  them  all 
Here  to  this  devil,  to  deliver  you. 

For.  Your  wife  would  give  you  little  thanks  for 
that. 

If  she  were  by,  to  hear  you  make  the  offer. 

Gra.  I  have  a  wife,  whom,  I  protest,  I  love: 

I  would  she  were  in  heaven,  so  she  could  2^1 
Entreat  some  power  to  change  this  currish  Jew. 
Ner.  ’Tis  well  you  offer  it  behind  her  back; 

The  wish  would  make  else  an  unquiet  house. 

Shy.  These  be  the  Christian  husbands.  I  have 
a  daughter; 

Would  any  of  the  stock  of  Barrabas 

Had  been  her  husband  rather  than  a  Christian! 

[Aside.] 

We  trifle  time:  I  pray  thee,  pursue  sentence. 

For.  A  pound  of  that  same  merchant’s  flesh  is 
thine: 

The  court  awards  it,  and  the  law  doth  give  it. 

Shy.  Most  rightful  judge!  50/ 

For.  And  you  must  cut  this  flesh  from  off  his 
breast: 

The  law  allows  it,  and  the  court  awards  it. 

Shy.  Most  learned  judge!  A  sentence!  Come, 
prepare! 

For.  Tarry  a  little;  there  is  something  else. 

This  bond  doth  give  thee  here  no  jot  of  blood; 
The  words  expressly  are  “a  pound  of  flesh”: 
Take  then  thy  bond,  take  thou  thy  pound  of  flesh ; 
But,  in  the  cutting  it,  if  thou  dost  shed 
One  drop  of  Christian  blood,  thy  lands  and  goods 
Are,  by  the  laws  of  Venice,  confiscate  5// 

Unto  the  state  of  Venice. 

Gra.  O  upright  judge!  Mark,  Jew:  O  learned 
judge! 

Shy.  Is  that  the  law? 

For.  Thyself  shalt  see  the  act : 

For,  as  thou  urgest  justice,  be  assured 
Thou  shalt  have  justice,  more  than  thou  desirest. 
Gra.  O  learned  judge!  Mark,  Jew:  a  learned 
judge! 

Shy.  I  take  this  offer,  then;  pay  the  bond  thrice 
And  let  the  Christian  go. 

Bass.  Here  is  the  money. 

For.  Soft!  520 

The  Jew  shall  have  all  justice;  soft!  no  haste: 

He  shall  have  nothing  but  the  penalty. 

Gra.  O  Jew!  an  upright  judge,  a  learned  judge! 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


SCENE  I 

For.  Therefore  prepare  thee  to  cut  off  the  flesh. 
Shed  thou  no  blood,  nor  cut  thou  less  nor  more 
But  just  a  pound  of  flesh:  if  thou  cut’st  more 
Or  less  than  a  just  pound,  be  it  but  so  much 
As  makes  it  light  or  heavy  in  the  substance. 

Or  the  division  of  the  twentieth  part 

Of  one  poor  scruple,  nay,  if  the  scale  do  turn  550 

But  in  the  estimation  of  a  hair, 

Thou  diest  and  all  thy  goods  are  confiscate. 

Gra.  A  second  Daniel,  a  Daniel,  Jew! 

Now,  infidel,  I  have  you  on  the  hip. 

For.  Why  doth  the  Jew  pause?  take  thy  for¬ 
feiture. 

Shy.  Give  me  my  principal,  and  let  me  go. 

Bass.  I  have  it  ready  for  thee;  here  it  is. 

For.  He  hath  refused  it  in  the  open  court: 

He  shall  have  merely  justice  and  his  bond.  55P 
Gra.  A  Daniel,  still  say  I,  a  second  Daniel! 

I  thank  thee,  Jew,  for  teaching  me  that  word. 

Shy.  Shall  I  not  have  barely  my  principal? 

For.  Thou  shalt  have  nothing  but  the  forfeiture, 
To  be  so  taken  at  thy  peril,  Jew. 

Shy.  Why,  then  the  devil  give  him  good  of  it! 

I’ll  stay  no  longer  question. 

For.  Tarry,  Jew: 

The  law  hath  yet  another  hold  on  you. 

It  is  enacted  in  the  laws  of  Venice, 

If  it  be  proved  against  an  alien 

That  by  direct  or  indirect  attempts  550 

He  seek  the  life  of  any  citizen. 

The  party  ’gainst  the  which  he  doth  contrive 
Shall  seize  one  half  his  goods;  the  other  half 
Comes  to  the  privy  coffer  of  the  state; 

And  the  offender’s  life  lies  in  the  mercy 
Of  the  Duke  only,  ’gainst  all  other  voice. 

In  which  predicament,  I  say,  thou  stand’ st: 

For  it  appears,  by  manifest  proceeding. 

That  indirectly  and  directly  too 
Thou  hast  contrived  against  the  very  life 
Of  the  defendant;  and  thou  hast  incurr’d 
The  danger  formerly  by  me  rehearsed. 

Down  therefore  and  beg  mercy  of  the  Duke. 

Gra.  Beg  that  thou  mayst  have  leave  to  hang 
thyself: 

And  yet,  thy  wealth  being  forfeit  to  the  state. 
Thou  hast  not  left  the  value  of  a  cord; 

Therefore  thou  must  be  bang’d  at  the  state’s 
charge. 

Duke.  That  thou  shalt  see  the  difference  of  our 
spirits, 

I  pardon  thee  thy  life  before  thou  ask  it: 

For  half  thy  wealth,  it  is  Antonio’s;  570 

The  other  half  comes  to  the  general  state. 

Which  humbleness  may  drive  unto  a  fine. 

For.  Ay,  for  the  state,  not  for  Antonio. 

Shy.  Nay,  take  my  life  and  all;  pardon  not  that: 


429 

You  take  my  house  when  you  do  take  the  prop 
That  doth  sustain  my  house;  you  take  my  life 
When  you  do  take  the  means  whereby  I  live. 

For.  What  mercy  can  you  render  him,  Antonio? 
Gra.  A  halter  gratis;  nothing  else,  for  God’s 
sake. 

Ant.  So  please  my  lord  the  Duke  and  all  the 
court  ^80 

To  quit  the  fine  for  one  half  of  his  goods, 

I  am  content;  so  he  will  let  me  have 
The  other  half  in  use,  to  render  it. 

Upon  his  death,  unto  the  gentleman 
That  lately  stole  his  daughter: 

Two  things  provided  more,  that,  for  this  favour, 
He  presently  become  a  Christian; 

The  other,  that  he  do  record  a  gift. 

Here  in  the  court,  of  all  he  dies  possess’d, 

Unto  his  son  Lorenzo  and  his  daughter.  5^0 

Duke.  He  shall  do  this,  or  else  I  do  recant 
The  pardon  that  I  late  pronounced  here. 

For.  Art  thou  contented,  Jew?  what  dost  thou 
say? 

Shy.  I  am  content. 

For.  Clerk,  draw  a  deed  of  gift. 

Shy.  I  pray  you,  give  me  leave  to  go  from  hence; 
I  am  not  well:  send  the  deed  after  me. 

And  I  will  sign  it. 

Duke.  Get  thee  gone,  but  do  it. 

Gra.  In  christening  shalt  thou  have  two  god¬ 
fathers: 

Had  I  been  judge,  thou  shouldst  have  had  ten 
more. 

To  bring  thee  to  the  gallows,  not  the  font.  400 

[Exit  SHYLOCK. 

Duke.  Sir,  I  entreat  you  home  with  me  to  dinner. 
For.  I  humbly  do  desire  your  Grace  of  pardon: 

I  must  away  this  night  toward  Padua, 

And  it  is  meet  I  presently  set  forth. 

Duke.  I  am  sorry  that  your  leisure  serves  you 
not. 

Antonio,  gratify  this  gentleman. 

For,  in  my  mind,  you  are  much  bound  to  him. 

[Exeunt  duke  and  his  train. 
Bass.  Most  worthy  gentleman,  I  and  my  friend 
Have  by  your  wisdom  been  this  day  acquitted 
Of  grievous  penalties;  in  lieu  whereof,  4/0 

Three  thousand  ducats,  due  unto  the  Jew, 

We  freely  cope  your  courteous  pains  withal. 

Ant.  And  stand  indebted,  over  and  above. 

In  love  and  service  to  you  evermore. 

For.  He  is  well  paid  that  is  well  satisfied; 

And  I,  delivering  you,  am  satisfied 
And  therein  do  account  myself  well  paid: 

My  mind  was  never  yet  more  mercenary. 

I  pray  you,  know  me  when  we  meet  again: 

I  wish  you  well,  and  so  I  take  my  leave. 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


420 


ACT  V 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


430 

Bass.  Dear  sir,  of  force  I  must  attempt  you 
further: 

Take  some  remembrance  of  us,  as  a  tribute. 

Not  as  a  fee,  grant  me  two  things,  I  pray 
you. 

Not  to  deny  me,  and  to  pardon  me. 

For.  You  press  me  far,  and  therefore  I  will 
yield. 

[To  ANTONio]  Give  me  your  gloves.  I’ll  wear 
them  for  your  sake; 

[To  BASSANio]  And,  for  your  love.  I’ll  take  this 
ring  from  you: 

Do  not  draw  back  your  hand;  I’ll  take  no 
more; 

And  you  in  love  shall  not  deny  me  this. 

Bass.  This  ring,  good  sir,  alas,  it  is  a  trifle! 

I  will  not  shame  myself  to  give  you  this.  45/ 

For.  I  will  have  nothing  else  but  only  this; 

And  now  methinks  I  have  a  mind  to  it. 

Bass.  There’s  more  depends  on  this  than  on  the 
value. 

The  dearest  ring  in  Venice  will  I  give  you, 

And  find  it  out  by  proclamation: 

Only  for  this,  I  pray  you,  pardon  me. 

For.  I  see,  sir,  you  are  liberal  in  offers: 

You  taught  me  first  to  beg;  and  now  methinks 
You  teach  me  how  a  beggar  should  be  answer’d. 
Bass.  Good  sir,  this  ring  was  given  me  by  my 
wife;  441 

And  when  she  put  it  on,  she  made  me  vow 
That  I  should  neither  sell  nor  give  nor  lose  it. 

For.  That  ’sense  serves  many  men  to  save  their 
gifts. 

An  if  your  wife  be  not  a  mad-woman. 

And  know  how  well  I  have  deserved  the  ring. 

She  would  not  hold  out  enemy  for  ever. 

For  giving  it  to  me.  Well,  peace  be  with  you! 

[Exeunt  portia  and  nerissa. 
Ant.  My  Lord  Bassanio,  let  him  have  the  ring: 
Let  his  deservings  and  my  love  withal  4^0 

Be  valued  ’gainst  your  wife’s  commandment. 

Bass.  Go,  Gratiano,  run  and  overtake  him; 

Give  him  the  ring,  and  bring  him,  if  thou  canst. 
Unto  Antonio’s  house:  away!  make  haste. 

[Exit  GRATIANO. 

Come,  you  and  I  will  thither  presently; 

And  in  the  morning  early  will  we  both 

Fly  toward  Belmont:  come,  Antonio.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  same:  a  street 
Enter  portia  and  nerissa. 

For.  Inquire  the  Jew’s  house  out,  give  him  this 
deed 

And  let  him  sign  it:  we’ll  away  to-night 
And  be  a  day  before  our  husbands  home: 

This  deed  will  be  well  welcome  to  Lorenzo, 


Enter  gratiano. 

Gra.  Fair  sir,  you  are  well  o’erta’en: 

My  Lord  Bassanio  upon  more  advice 
Hath  sent  you  here  this  ring,  and  doth  entreat 
Your  company  at  dinner. 

For.  That  cannot  be: 

His  ring  I  do  accept  most  thankfully: 

And  so,  1  pray  you,  tell  him:  furthermore,  10 
I  pray  you,  show  my  youth  old  Shylock’s  house. 
Gra.  That  will  I  do. 

Ner.  Sir,  I  would  speak  with  you. 

[Aside  to  portia]  I’ll  see  if  I  can  get  my  husband’s 

Which  I  did  make  him  swear  to  keep  for  ever. 
For.  [Aside  to  nerissa]  Thou  mayst,  I  warrant. 
We  shall  have  old  swearing 
That  they  did  give  the  rings  away  to  men; 

But  we’ll  outface  them,  and  outswear  them  too. 
[Aloud]  Away!  make  haste:  thou  know’st  where 
I  will  tarry. 

Ner.  Come,  good  sir,  will  you  show  me  to  this 
house?  [Exeunt, 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  Belmont:  avenue  to  Form's  house 
Enter  lorenzo  and  jessica. 

Lor.  The  moon  shines  bright:  in  such  a  night 
as  this, 

When  the  sweet  wind  did  gently  kiss  the  trees 
And  they  did  make  no  noise,  in  such  a  night 
Troilus  methinks  mounted  the  Troyan  walls 
And  sigh’d  his  soul  toward  the  Grecian  tents. 
Where  Cressid  lay  that  night. 

Jes.  In  such  a  night 

Did  Thisbe  fearfully  o’ertrip  the  dew 
And  saw  the  lion’s  shadow  ere  himself 
And  ran  dismay’d  away. 

Lor.  In  such  a  night 

Stood  Dido  with  a  willow  in  her  hand  to 

Upon  the  wild  sea  banks,  and  waft  her  love 
To  come  again  to  Carthage. 

Jes.  In  such  a  night 

Medea  gather’d  the  enchanted  herbs 
That  did  renew  old  ^son. 

Lor.  In  such  a  night 

Did  Jessica  steal  from  the  wealthy  Jew, 

And  with  an  unthrift  love  did  run  from  Venice 
As  far  as  Belmont. 

Jes.  In  such  a  night 

Did  young  Lorenzo  swear  he  loved  her  well. 
Stealing  her  soul  with  many  vows  of  faith 
And  ne’er  a  true  one. 

Lor.  In  such  a  night  20 

Did  pretty  Jessica,  like  a  little  shrew. 


SCENE  I 

Slander  her  love,  and  he  forgave  it  her. 

Jes,  I  would  out-night  you,  did  no  body  come; 
But,  hark,  I  hear  the  footing  of  a  man. 

Enter  stephano. 

Lor.  Who  comes  so  fast  in  silence  of  the  night? 
Steph.  A  friend. 

Lor.  A  friend!  what  friend?  your  name,  I  pray 
you,  friend? 

Steph.  Stephano  is  my  name;  and  I  bring  word 
My  mistress  will  before  the  break  of  day 
Be  here  at  Belmont:  she  doth  stray  about  50 
By  holy  crosses,  where  she  kneels  and  prays 
For  happy  wedlock  hours. 

Lor.  Who  comes  with  her? 

Steph,  None  but  a  holy  hermit  and  her  maid. 

I  pray  you,  is  my  master  yet  return’d? 

Lor.  He  is  not,  nor  we  have  not  heard  from  him. 
But  go  we  in,  I  pray  thee,  Jessica, 

And  ceremoniously  let  us  prepare 

Some  welcome  for  the  mistress  of  the  house. 

Enter  launcelot. 

Laun.  Sola,  sola!  wo  ha,  ho!  sola,  sola! 

Lor.  Who  calls?  40 

Laun.  Sola!  did  you  see  Master  Lx)renzo?  Mas¬ 
ter  Lorenzo,  sola, sola! 

Lor,  Leave  hollaing,  man:  here. 

Laun.  Sola!  where?  where? 

Lor.  Here. 

Laun.  Tell  him  there’s  a  post  come  from  my 
master,  with  his  horn  full  of  good  news :  my  mas¬ 
ter  will  be  here  ere  morning.  [Exit. 

Lor.  Sweet  soul,  let’s  in,  and  there  expect 
their  coming. 

And  yet  no  matter:  why  should  we  go  in?  50 
My  friend  Stephano,  signify,  I  pray  you. 

Within  the  house,  your  mistress  is  at  hand; 

And  bring  your  music  forth  into  the  air. 

[Exit  STEPHANO. 

How  sweet  the  moonlight  sleeps  upon  this  bank! 
Here  will  we  sit  and  let  the  sounds  of  music 
Creep  in  our  ears:  soft  stillness  and  the  night 
Become  the  touches  of  sweet  harmony. 

Sit,  Jessica.  Look  how  the  floor  of  heaven 
Is  thick  inlaid  with  patines  of  bright  gold: 
There’s  not  the  smallest  orb  which  thou  behold’st 
But  in  his  motion  like  an  angel  sings,  61 

Still  quiring  to  the  young-eyed  cherubins; 

Such  harmony  is  in  immortal  souls; 

But  whilst  this  muddy  vesture  of  decay 
Doth  grossly  close  it  in,  we  cannot  hear  it. 

Enter  Musicians. 

Come,  ho!  and  wake  Diana  with  a  hymn: 

With  sweetest  touches  pierce  your  mistress’  ear 


431 

And  draw  her  home  with  music. 

Music. 

Jes.  I  am  never  merry  when  I  hear  sweet  music. 
Lor.  The  reason  is,  your  spirits  are  attentive: 

For  do  but  note  a  wild  and  wanton  herd,  7/ 
Or  race  of  youthful  and  unhandled  colts. 

Fetching  mad  bounds,  bellowing,  and  neighing 
loud. 

Which  is  the  hot  condition  of  their  blood; 

If  they  but  hear  perchance  a  trumpet  sound. 

Or  any  air  of  music  touch  their  ears, 

You  shall  perceive  them  make  a  mutual  stand, 
Their  savage  eyes  turn’d  to  a  modest  gaze 
By  the  sweet  power  of  music:  therefore  the  poet 
Did  feign  that  Orpheus  drew  trees,  stones  and 
floods;  80 

Since  nought  so  stockish,  hard,  and  full  of  rage. 
But  music  for  the  time  doth  change  his  nature. 

The  man  that  hath  no  music  in  himself. 

Nor  is  not  moved  with  concord  of  sweet  sounds. 
Is  fit  for  treasons,  stratagems  and  spoils; 

The  motions  of  his  spirit  are  dull  as  night 
And  his  affections  dark  as  Erebus : 

Let  no  such  man  be  trusted.  Mark  the  music. 

Enter  portia  and  nerissa. 

For.  That  light  we  see  is  burning  in  my  hall. 
How  far  that  little  candle  throws  his  beams ! 

So  shines  a  good  deed  in  a  naughty  world. 

Ner.  When  the  moon  shone,  we  did  not  see  the 
candle. 

For.  So  doth  the  greater  glory  dim  the  less: 

A  substitute  shines  brightly  as  a  king 
Until  a  king  be  by,  and  then  his  state 
Empties  itself,  as  doth  an  inland  brook 
Into  the  main  of  waters.  Music!  hark! 

Ner.  It  is  your  music,  madam,  of  the  house. 

For.  Nothing  is  good,  I  see,  without  respect: 
Methinks  it  sounds  much  sweeter  than  by  day. 
Ner.  Silence  bestows  that  virtue  on  it,  madam. 
For.  The  crow  doth  sing  as  sweetly  as  the  lark 
When  neither  is  attended,  and  I  think 
The  nightingale,  if  she  should  sing  by  day. 

When  every  goose  is  cackling,  would  be  thought 
No  better  a  musician  than  the  wren. 

How  many  things  by  season  season’d  are 
To  their  right  praise  and  true  perfection! 

Peace,  ho!  the  moon  sleeps  with  Endymion 
And  would  not  be  awaked. 

Music  ceases. 

Lor.  That  is  the  voice,  no 

Or  I  am  much  deceived,  of  Portia. 

For.  He  knows  me  as  the  blind  man  knows  the 
cuckoo. 

By  the  bad  voice. 

Lor.  Dear  lady,  welcome  home. 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


For.  We  have  been  praying  for  our  husbands’ 
healths, 

Which  speed,  we  hope,  the  better  for  our  words. 
Are  they  return’d? 

Lor.  Madam,  they  are  not  yet; 

But  there  is  come  a  messenger  before. 

To  signify  their  coming. 

For.  Go  in,  Nerissa; 

Give  order  to  my  servants  that  they  take 
No  note  at  all  of  our  being  absent  hence;  i20 
Nor  you,  Lorenzo;  Jessica,  nor  you. 

A  tucket  sounds. 

Lor.  Your  husband  is  at  hand;  I  hear  his 
trumpet: 

We  are  no  tell-tales,  madam;  fear  you  not. 

For.  This  night  methinks  is  but  the  daylight 
sick; 

It  looks  a  little  paler:  ’tis  a  day. 

Such  as  the  day  is  when  the  sun  is  hid. 

Enter  bassanio,  antonio,  gratiano,  and 
their  followers. 

Bass.  We  should  hold  day  with  the  Antipodes, 

If  you  would  walk  in  absence  of  the  sun. 

For.  Let  me  give  light,  but  let  me  not  be  light; 
For  a  light  wife  doth  make  a  heavy  husband,  /50 
And  never  be  Bassanio  so  for  me: 

But  God  sort  all !  You  are  welcome  home,  my 
lord. 

Bass.  I  thank  you,  madam.  Give  welcome  to  my 
friend. 

This  is  the  man,  this  is  Antonio, 

To  whom  I  am  so  infinitely  bound. 

For.  You  should  in  all  sense  be  much  bound  to 
him. 

For,  as  I  hear,  he  was  much  bound  for  you. 

Ant.  No  more  than  I  am  well  acquitted  of. 

For.  Sir,  you  are  very  welcome  to  our  house: 

It  must  appear  in  other  ways  than  words,  14.0 
Therefore  I  scant  this  breathing  courtesy. 

Gra.  [To  nerissa]  By  yonder  moon  I  swear  you 
dome  wrong; 

In  faith,  I  gave  it  to  the  judge’s  clerk: 

Would  he  were  gelt  that  had  it,  for  my  part. 

Since  you  do  take  it,  love,  so  much  at  heart. 

For.  A  quarrel,  ho,  already!  what’s  the  matter? 
Gra.  About  a  hoop  of  gold,  a  paltry  ring 
That  she  did  give  me,  whose  posy  was 
For  all  the  world  like  cutler’s  poetry 
Upon  a  knife,  “Love  me,  and  leave  me  not.”  /50 
Ner.  What  talk  you  of  the  posy  or  the  value? 
You  swore  to  me,  when  I  did  give  it  you. 

That  you  would  wear  it  till  your  hour  of  death 
And  that  it  should  lie  with  you  in  your  grave: 
Though  not  for  me,  yet  for  your  vehement  oaths. 
You  should  have  been  respective  and  have  kept  it. 


Gave  it  a  judge’s  clerk!  no,  God’s  my  judge. 

The  clerk  will  ne’er  wear  hair  on’s  face  that  had 
it. 

Gra.  He  will,  an  if  he  live  to  be  a  man. 

AVr.  Ay,  if  a  woman  live  to  be  a  man.  160 

Gra.  Now,  by  this  hand,  1  gave  it  to  a  youth, 

A  kind  of  boy,  a  little  scrubbed  boy. 

No  higher  than  thyself,  the  judge’s  clerk, 

A  prating  boy,  that  begg’d  it  as  a  fee: 

I  could  not  for  my  heart  deny  it  him. 

For.  You  were  to  blame,  I  must  be  plain  with 
you. 

To  part  so  slightly  with  your  wife’s  first  gift; 

A  thing  stuck  on  with  oaths  upon  your  finger 
And  so  riveted  with  faith  unto  your  flesh. 

I  gave  my  love  a  ring  and  made  him  swear  /70 
Never  to  part  with  it;  and  here  he  stands; 

I  dare  be  sworn  for  him  he  would  not  leave  it 
Nor  pluck  it  from  his  finger,  for  the  wealth 
That  the  world  masters.  Now,  in  faith,  Gratiano, 
You  give  your  wife  too  unkind  a  cause  of  grief: 
An  ’twere  to  me.  I  should  be  mad  at  it. 

Bass.  [Aside]  Why,  I  were  best  to  cut  my  left 
hand  oflF 

And  swear  I  lost  the  ring  defending  it. 

Gra.  My  Lord  Bassanio  gave  his  ring  away 
Unto  the  judge  that  begg’d  it  and  indeed  180 
Deserved  it  too;  and  then  the  boy,  his  clerk. 

That  took  some  pains  in  writing,  he  begg’d  mine; 
And  neither  man  nor  master  would  take  aught 
But  the  two  rings. 

For.  What  ring  gave  you,  my  lord? 

Not  that,  I  hope,  which  you  received  of  me. 

Bass.  If  I  could  add  a  lie  unto  a  fault, 

I  would  deny  it;  but  you  see  my  finger 
Hath  not  the  ring  upon  it;  it  is  gone. 

For.  Even  so  void  is  your  false  heart  of  truth. 

By  heaven,  I  will  ne’er  come  in  your  bed  ipo 
Until  I  see  the  ring. 

Ner.  Nor  I  in  yours 

Till  I  again  see  mine. 

Bass.  Sweet  Portia, 

If  you  did  know  to  whom  I  gave  the  ring. 

If  you  did  know  for  whom  I  gave  the  ring. 

And  would  conceive  for  what  I  gave  the  ring. 
And  how  unwillingly  I  left  the  ring. 

When  nought  would  be  accepted  but  the  ring. 
You  would  abate  the  strength  of  your  displeasure. 
For.  If  you  had  known  the  virtue  of  the  ring. 

Or  half  her  worthiness  that  gave  the  ring,  200 
Or  your  own  honour  to  contain  the  ring. 

You  would  not  then  have  parted  with  the  ring. 
What  man  is  there  so  much  unreasonable, 

If  you  had  pleased  to  have  defended  it 
With  any  terms  of  zeal,  wanted  the  modesty 
To  urge  the  thing  held  as  a  ceremony? 


SCENE  I 


THE  MERCHANT  OF  VENICE 


Nerissa  readies  irie  what  to  believe: 
ril  die  for’t  but  some  woman  had  the  ring. 

Bass.  No,  by  my  honour,  madam,  by  my  soul. 
No  woman  had  it,  but  a  civil  doctor,  210 

Which  did  refuse  three  thousand  ducats  of  me 
And  begg’d  the  ring;  the  which  I  did  deny  him 
And  suffer’d  him  to  go  displeased  away; 

Even  he  that  did  uphold  the  very  life 

Of  my  dear  friend.  What  should  I  say,  sweet  lady.^ 

I  was  enforced  to  send  it  after  him; 

I  was  beset  with  shame  and  courtesy; 

My  honour  would  not  let  ingratitude 
So  much  besmear  it.  Pardon  me,  good  lady; 

For,  by  these  blessed  candles  of  the  night,  220 
Had  you  been  there,  I  think  you  would  have 
begg’d 

The  ring  of  me  to  give  the  worthy  doctor. 

For.  Let  not  that  doctor  e’er  come  near  my 
house: 

Since  he  hath  got  the  jewel  that  I  loved. 

And  that  which  you  did  swear  to  keep  for  me, 

I  will  become  as  liberal  as  you; 

I’ll  not  deny  him  any  thing  I  have. 

No,  not  my  body,  nor  my  husband’s  bed: 

Know  him  I  shall,  I  am  well  sure  of  it: 

Lie  not  a  night  from  home;  watch  me  like  Argus: 
I  f  you  do  not,  if  I  be  left  alone,  25  / 

Now,  by  mine  honour,  which  is  yet  mine  own. 

I’ll  have  that  doctor  for  my  bedfellow. 

Ner.  And  I  his  clerk;  therefore  be  well  advised 
How  you  do  leave  me  to  mine  own  protection. 
Gra.  Well,  do  you  so:  let  not  me  take  him,  then; 
For  if  I  do.  I’ll  mar  the  young  clerk’s  pen. 

Ant.  I  am  the  unhappy  subject  of  these  quarrels. 
For.  Sir,  grieve  not  you;  you  are  welcome  not¬ 
withstanding. 

Bass.  Portia,  forgive  me  this  enforced  wrong; 
And,  in  the  hearing  of  these  many  friends,  241 

I  swear  to  thee,  even  by  thine  own  fair  eyes. 
Wherein  I  see  myself — 

For.  Mark  you  but  that! 

In  both  my  eyes  he  doubly  sees  himself; 

In  each  eye,  one:  swear  by  your  double  self, 

And  there’s  an  oath  of  credit. 

Bass.  Nay,  but  hear  me: 

Pardon  this  fault,  and  by  my  soul  I  swear 
I  never  more  will  break  an  oath  with  thee. 

Ant.  I  once  did  lend  my  body  for  his  wealth; 
Which,  but  for  him  that  had  your  husband’s  ring. 
Had  quite  miscarried:  I  dare  be  bound  again. 

My  soul  upon  the  forfeit,  that  your  lord 
Will  never  more  break  faith  advisedly. 

For.  Then  you  shall  be  his  surety.  Give  him  this 
And  bid  him  keep  it  better  than  the  other. 

Ant.  Here,  Lord  Bassanio;  swear  to  keep  this 
ring. 


433 

Bass.  By  heaven,  it  is  the  same  I  gave  the  doctor! 
For.  I  had  it  of  him:  pardon  me,  Bassanio; 

For,  by  this  ring,  the  doctor  lay  with  me.  2jp 
Ner.  And  pardon  me,  my  gentle  Gratiano; 

For  that  same  scrubbed  boy,  the  doctor’s  clerk, 

In  lieu  of  this  last  night  did  lie  with  me. 

Gra.  Why,  this  is  like  the  mending  of  highways 
In  summer,  where  the  ways  are  fair  enough: 
What,  are  we  cuckolds  ere  we  have  deserved  it? 
For.  Speak  not  so  grossly.  You  are  all  amazed: 
Here  is  a  letter;  read  it  at  your  leisure; 

It  comes  from  Padua,  from  Bellario: 

There  you  shall  find  that  Portia  was  the  doctor, 
Nerissa  there  her  clerk:  Lorenzo  here  270 
Shall  witness  I  set  forth  as  soon  as  you 
And  even  but  now  return’d;  I  have  not  yet 
Enter’d  my  house.  Antonio,  you  are  welcome; 
And  I  have  better  news  in  store  for  you 
Than  you  expect:  unseal  this  letter  soon; 

There  you  shall  find  three  of  your  argosies 
Are  richly  come  to  harbour  suddenly: 

You  shall  not  know  by  what  strange  accident 
I  chanced  on  this  letter. 

Ant.  I  am  dumb. 

Bass.  Were  you  the  doctor  and  I  knew  you  not? 
Gra.  Were  you  the  clerk  that  is  to  make  me 
cuckold?  281 

Ner.  Ay,  but  the  clerk  that  never  means  to  do  it. 
Unless  he  live  until  he  be  a  man. 

Bass.  Sweet  doctor,  you  shall  be  my  bedfellow: 
When  I  am  absent,  then  lie  with  my  wife. 

Ant.  Sweet  lady,  you  have  given  me  life  and 
living; 

For  here  I  read  for  certain  that  my  ships 
Are  safely  come  to  road. 

For.  How  now,  Lorenzo! 

My  clerk  hath  some  good  comforts  too  for  you. 
Ner.  Ay,  and  I’ll  give  them  him  without  a  fee. 
There  do  I  give  to  you  and  Jessica,  2pi 

From  the  rich  Jew,  a  special  deed  of  gift. 

After  his  death,  of  all  he  dies  possess’d  of. 

Lor.  Fair  ladies,  you  drop  manna  in  the  way 
Of  starved  people. 

For.  It  is  almost  morning. 

And  yet  I  am  sure  you  are  not  satisfied 
Of  these  events  at  full.  Let  us  go  in; 

And  charge  us  there  upon  inter’gatories. 

And  we  will  answer  all  things  faithfully. 

Gra.  Let  it  be  so:  the  first  inter’gatory  500 
That  my  Nerissa  shall  be  sworn  on  is. 

Whether  till  the  next  night  she  had  rather  stay. 
Or  go  to  bed  now,  being  two  hours  to  day: 

But  were  the  day  come,  I  should  wish  it  dark. 
That  I  were  couching  with  the  doctor’s  clerk. 
Well,  while  I  live  I’ll  fear  no  other  thing 
So  sore  as  keeping  safe  Nerissa’s  ring.  [Exeunt. 


The  First  Part  of 

KING  HENRY  THE  FOURTH 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


sons  to  the  King 


King  Henry  the  Fourth 
Henry,  Prince  ofWales 
John  of  Lancaster 
Earl  ofWestmoreland 
Sir  Walter  Blunt 
Thomas  Percy,  Earl  of  Worcester 
Henry  Percy,  Earl  of  Northumberland 
Henry  Percy,  surnamed  hotspur,  his  son 
Edmund  Mortimer,  Earl  of  March 
Richard  Scroop,  Archbishop  of  York 
Archibald,  Earl  of  Douglas 
Owen  Glendower 
Sir  Richard  Vernon 
Sir  John  Falstaff 

Sir  Michael,  a  friend  to  the  Archbishop  of  York 

PoiNS 

Gadshill 

Peto 

Bardolph 


Two  Carriers 
Ostler 

A  Chamberlain 
Several  Travellers 
A  Vintner 
Francis,  the  drawer 
Sheriff 

Two  Messengers 
Servant  to  Hotspur 

Lady  Percy,  wife  to  Hotspur,  and  sister  toMortimer 
Lady  Mortimer,  daughter  to  Glendower,  and  wife  to 
Mortimer 

Mistress  Quickly,  hostess  of  a  tavern  in  Eastcheap 

Non-Speaking:  Lords,  Officers,  Drawers,  Travellers 
and  Attendants 

Scene:  England 


ACT  I 

Scene  i.  London:  the  palace 
Enter  king  henry,  lord  john  of  Lancaster, 
the  earl  of  WESTMORELAND,  SIR  WALTER 
BLUNT,  and  others. 

King.  So  shaken  as  we  are,  so  wan  with  care, 
Find  we  a  time  for  frighted  peace  to  pant, 

And  breathe  short-winded  accents  of  new  broils 
To  be  commenced  in  strands  afar  remote. 

No  more  the  thirsty  entrance  of  this  soil 
Shall  daub  her  lips  with  her  own  children’s  blood; 
No  more  shall  trenching  war  channel  her  fields, 
Nor  bruise  her  flowers  with  the  armed  hoofs 
Of  hostile  paces:  those  opposed  eyes, 

Which,  like  the  meteors  of  a  troubled  heaven,  to 
All  of  one  nature,  of  one  substance  bred, 

Did  lately  meet  in  the  intestine  shock 
And  furious  close  of  civil  butchery 
Shall  now,  in  mutual  well-beseeming  ranks, 
March  all  one  way  and  be  no  more  opposed 
Against  acquaintance,  kindred  and  allies: 

The  edge  of  war,  like  an  ill-sheathed  knife, 

No  more  shall  cut  his  master.  Therefore,  friends, 
As  far  as  to  the  sepulchre  of  Christ, 

Whose  soldier  now,  under  whose  blessed  cross  20 
We  are  impressed  and  engaged  to  fight, 


Forthwith  a  power  of  English  shall  we  levy; 
Whose  arms  were  moulded  in  their  mothers’ 
womb 

To  chase  these  pagans  in  those  holy  fields 
Over  whose  acres  walk’d  those  blessed  feet 
Which  fourteen  hundred  years  ago  were  nail’d 
For  our  advantage  on  the  bitter  cross. 

But  this  our  purpose  now  is  twelve  month  old, 
And  bootless  ’tis  to  tell  you  we  will  go: 
Therefore  we  meet  not  now.  Then  let  me  hear  50 
Of  you,  my  gentle  cousin  Westmoreland, 

What  yesternight  our  council  did  decree 
In  forwarding  this  dear  expedience. 

West.  My  liege,  this  haste  was  hot  in  question, 
And  many  limits  of  the  charge  set  down 
But  yesternight:  when  all  athwart  there  came 
A  post  from  Wales  loaden  with  heavy  news; 
Whose  worst  was  that  the  noble  Mortimer, 
Leading  the  men  of  Herefordshire  to  fight 
Against  the  irregular  and  wild  Glendower,  40 
Was  by  the  rude  hands  of  that  Welshman  taken, 
A  thousand  of  his  people  butchered; 

Upon  whose  dead  corpse  there  was  such  misuse. 
Such  beastly  shameless  transformation. 

By  those  Welshwomen  done  as  may  not  be 
Without  much  shame  retold  or  spoken  of. 

King.  It  seems  then  that  the  tidings  of  this  broil 


434 


SCENE  I 


435 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


Brake  off  our  business  for  the  Holy  Land. 

West.  This  match’d  with  other  did,  my  gracious 
lord; 

For  more  uneven  and  unwelcome  news  50 

Came  from  the  north  and  thus  it  did  import: 

On  Holy-rood  day,  the  gallant  Hotspur  there, 
Young  Harry  Percy  and  brave  Archibald, 

That  ever-valiant  and  approved  Scot, 

At  Holmedon  met. 

Where  they  did  spend  a  sad  and  bloody  hour; 

As  by  discharge  of  their  artillery, 

And  shape  of  likelihood,  the  news  was  told; 

For  he  that  brought  them,  in  the  very  heat 
And  pride  of  their  contention  did  take  horse,  60 
Uncertain  of  the  issue  any  way. 

King.  Here  is  a  dear,  a  true  industrious  friend, 

Sir  \Va!ter  Blunt,  new  lighted  from  his  horse. 
Stain’d  with  the  variation  of  each  soil 
Betwixt  that  Holmedon  and  this  seat  of  ours; 

And  he  hath  brought  us  smooth  and  welcome 
news. 

The  Earl  of  Douglas  is  discomfited: 

Ten  thousand  bold  Scots,  two  and  twenty 
knights. 

Balk’d  in  their  own  blood  did  Sir  Walter  see 
On  Holmedon’s  plains.  Of  prisoners.  Hotspur 
took  70 

Mordake  the  Earl  of  Fife,  and  eldest  son 
To  beaten  Douglas;  and  the  Earl  of  Athol, 

Of  Murray,  Angus,  and  Menteith: 

And  is  not  this  an  honourable  spoil? 

A  gallant  prize?  ha,  cousin,  is  it  not? 

West.  In  faith. 

It  is  a  conquest  for  a  prince  to  boast  of. 

King.  Yea,  there  thou  makest  me  sad  and  mak- 
est  me  sin 

In  envy  that  my  Lord  Northumberland 
Should  be  the  father  to  so  blest  a  son,  80 

A  son  who  is  the  theme  of  Honour’s  tongue; 
Amongst  a  grove,  the  very  straightest  plant; 
Who  is  sweet  Fortune’s  minion  and  her  pride: 
Whilst  I,  by  looking  on  the  praise  of  him. 

See  riot  and  dishonour  stain  the  brow 
Of  my  young  Harry.  O  that  it  could  be  proved 
That  some  night-tripping  fairy  had  exchanged 
In  cradle-clothes  our  children  where  they  lay. 
And  call’d  mine  Percy,  his  Plantagenet! 

Then  would  I  have  his  Harry,  and  he  mine.  90 
But  let  him  from  my  thoughts.  What  think  you, 
coz. 

Of  this  young  Percy’s  pride?  the  prisoners. 
Which  he  in  this  adventure  hath  surprised. 

To  his  own  use  he  keeps;  and  sends  me  word, 

I  shall  have  none  but  Mordake  Earl  of  Fife. 

West.  This  is  his  uncle’s  teaching:  this  is  Wor- 
ce«^er, 


Malevolent  to  vou  in  all  aspects; 

Which  makes  him  prune  himself,  and  bristle  up 
The  crest  of  youth  against  your  dignity. 

King.  But  I  have  sent  for  him  to  answer  this; 

And  for  this  cause  awhile  we  must  neglect  loi 
Our  holy  purpose  to  Jerusalem. 

Cousin,  on  Wednesday  next  our  council  we 
Will  hold  at  Windsor;  so  inform  the  lords: 

But  come  yourself  with  speed  to  us  again; 

For  more  is  to  be  said  and  to  be  done 
Than  out  of  anger  can  be  uttered. 

West.  I  will,  my  liege.  [Exeunt, 

Scene  ii.  London:  an  apartment  of  the  Prince's 
Enter  the  prince  of  wales  and  falstaff. 

Fal.  Now,  Hal,  what  time  of  day  is  it,  lad? 

Prince.  Thou  art  so  fat-witted,  with  drinking 
of  old  sack  and  unbuttoning  thee  after  supper 
and  sleeping  upon  benches  after  noon,  that  thou 
hast  forgotten  to  demand  that  truly  which  thou 
wouldst  truly  know.  What  a  devil  hast  thou  to 
do  with  the  time  of  the  day?  Unless  hours  were 
cups  of  sack  and  minutes  capons  and  clocks  the 
tongues  of  bawds  and  dials  the  signs  of  leaping- 
houses  and  the  blessed  sun  himself  a  fair  hot 
wench  in  flame-coloured  taffeta,  I  see  no  reason 
why  thou  shouldst  be  so  superfluous  to  demand 
the  time  of  the  day. 

Fal.  Indeed,  you  come  near  me  now,  Hal; 
for  we  that  take  purses  go  by  the  moon  and  the 
seven  stars,  and  not  by  Phoebus,  he  “that  wan¬ 
dering  knight  so  fair.”  And,  I  prithee,  sweet 
wag,  when  thou  art  king,  as,  God  save  thy 
Grace — Majesty  I  should  say,  for  grace  thou 
wilt  have  none —  20 

Prince.  What,  none? 

Fal.  No,  by  my  troth,  not  so  much  as  will  serve 
to  be  prologue  to  an  egg  and  butter. 

Prince.  Well,  how  then?  come,  roundly, 
roundly. 

Fal.  iMarry,  then,  sweet  wag,  when  thou  art 
king,  let  not  us  that  are  squires  of  the  night's 
body  be  called  thieves  of  the  day’s  beauty:  let 
us  be  Diana’s  foresters,  gentlemen  of  the  shade, 
minions  of  the  moon;  and  let  men  say  we  be  men 
of  good  government,  being  governed,  as  the  sea 
is,  by  our  noble  and  chaste  mistress  the  moon, 
under  whose  countenance  we  steal. 

Prince.  Thou  sayest  well,  and  it  holds  well  too; 
for  the  fortune  of  us  that  are  the  moon’s  men 
doth  ebb  and  flow  like  the  sea,  being  governed, 
as  the  sea  is,  by  the  moon.  As,  for  proof,  now: 
a  purse  of  gold  most  resolutely  snatched  on 
Monday  night  and  most  dissolutely  spent  on 
Tuesday  morning;  got  with  swearing  “Lay  by” 
and  spent  with  crying  “Bring  in”;  now  in  as  low 


ACT  I 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


436 

an  ebb  as  the  foot  of  the  ladder  and  by  and  by 
in  as  high  a  flow  as  the  ridge  of  the  gallows. 

Fal.  By  the  Lord  thou  sayest  true,  lad.  And  is 
not  my  hostess  of  the  tavern  a  most  sweet 
wench? 

Prhice.  As  the  honey  of  Hybla,  my  old  lad  of 
the  castle.  And  is  not  a  buff  jerkin  a  most  sweet 
robe  of  durance?  49 

Fal.  How  now,  how  now,  mad  wag!  what,  in 
thy  quips  and  thy  quiddities?  what  a  plague 
have  I  to  do  with  a  buff  jerkin? 

Prince.  Why,  what  a  pox  have  I  to  do  with  my 
hostess  of  the  tavern? 

Fal.  Well,  thou  hast  called  her  to  a  reckoning 
many  a  time  and  oft. 

Prince.  Did  I  ever  call  for  thee  to  pay  thy  part? 

Fal.  No;  I’ll  give  thee  thy  due,  thou  hast  paid 
all  there.  60 

Prince.  Yea,  and  elsewhere,  so  far  as  my  coin 
would  stretch;  and  where  it  would  not,  I  have 
used  my  credit. 

Fal.  Yea,  and  so  used  it  that,  were  it  not  here 
apparent  that  thou  art  heir  apparent — But,  I 
prithee,  sweet  wag,  shall  there  be  gallows  stand¬ 
ing  in  England  when  thou  art  king?  and  resolu¬ 
tion  thus  fobbed  as  it  is  with  the  rusty  curb  of 
old  father  antic  the  law?  Do  not  thou,  when 
thou  art  king,  hang  a  thief.  70 

Prince.  No;  thou  shalt. 

Fal.  Shall  I?  O  rare!  By  the  Lord,  I’ll  be  a  brave 
judge. 

Prince.  Thou  judgest  false  already:  I  mean, 
thou  shalt  have  the  hanging  of  the  thieves  and  so 
become  a  rare  hangman. 

Fal.  Well,  Hal,  well;  and  in  some  sort  it 
jumps  with  my  humour  as  well  as  waiting  in  the 
court,  I  can  tell  you. 

Prince.  For  obtaining  of  suits?  80 

Fal.  Yea,  for  obtaining  of  suits,  whereof  the 
hangman  hath  no  lean  wardrobe.  ’Sblood,  I  am 
as  melancholy  as  a  gib  cat  or  a  lugged  bear. 

Prin.  Or  an  old  lion,  or  a  lover’s  lute. 

Fal.  Yea,  or  the  drone  of  a  Lincolnshire  bagpipe. 

Prince.  What  sayest  thou  to  a  hare,  or  the 
melancholy  of  Moor-ditch? 

Fal.  Thou  hast  the  most  unsavoury  similes 
and  art  indeed  the  most  comparative,  rascalliest, 
sweet  young  prince.  But,  Hal,  I  prithee,  trou¬ 
ble  me  no  more  with  vanity.  I  would  to  God 
thou  and  I  knew  where  a  commodity  of  good 
names  were  to  be  bought.  An  old  lord  of  the 
council  rated  me  the  other  day  in  the  street 
about  you,  sir,  but  I  marked  him  not;  and  yet 
he  talked  very  wisely,  but  I  regarded  him  not; 
and  yet  he  talked  wisely,  and  in  the  street  too. 

Prince.  Thou  didst  well;  for  wisdom  cries  out 


in  the  streets,  and  no  man  regards  it.  loo 

Fal.  O,  thou  hast  damnable  iteration  and  art 
indeed  able  to  corrupt  a  saint.  Thou  hast  done 
much  harm  upon  me,  Hal;  God  forgive  thee 
for  it!  Before  I  knew  thee,  Hal,  I  knew  nothing; 
and  now  am  I,  if  a  man  should  speak  truly,  little 
better  than  one  of  the  wicked.  I  must  give  over 
this  life,  and  I  will  give  it  over:  by  the  Lord, 
an  I  do  not,  I  am  a  villain:  I’ll  be  damned  for 
never  a  king’s  son  in  Christendom. 

Prince.  Where  shall  we  take  a  purse  to-morrow. 
Jack?  Ill 

Fal.  ’Zounds,  where  thou  wilt,  lad;  I’ll  make 
one;  an  I  do  not,  call  me  villain  and  baffle  me. 

Prince.  I  see  a  good  amendment  of  life  in  thee; 
from  praying  to  purse-taking. 

Fal.  Why,  Hal,  ’tis  my  vocation,  Hal;  ’tis  no 
sin  for  a  man  to  labour  in  his  vocation. 

Enter  poins. 

Poins!  Now  shall  we  know  if  Gadshill  have 
set  a  match.  O,  if  men  were  to  be  saved  by 
merit,  what  hole  in  hell  were  hot  enough  for 
him?  This  is  the  most  omnipotent  villain  that 
ever  cried  “Stand”  to  a  true  man. 

Prince.  Good  morrow,  Ned. 

Poins.  Good  morrow,  sweet  Hal.  What  says 
Monsieur  Remorse?  what  says  Sir  John  Sack 
and  Sugar?  Jack!  how  agrees  the  devil  and 
thee  about  thy  soul,  that  thou  soldest  him  on 
Good-Friday  last  for  a  cup  of  Madeira  and  a  cold 
capon’s  leg?  129 

Prince.  Sir  John  stands  to  his  word,  the  devil 
shall  have  his  bargain;  for  he  was  never  yet  a 
breaker  of  proverbs :  he  will  give  the  devil  his  due. 

Poins.  Then  art  thou  damned  for  keeping  thy 
word  with  the  devil. 

Prince.  Else  he  had  been  damned  for  cozening 
the  devil. 

Poins.  But,  my  lads,  my  lads,  to-morrow  morn¬ 
ing,  by  four  o’clock,  early  at  Gadshill!  there  are 
pilgrims  going  to  Canterbury  with  rich  offerings, 
and  traders  riding  to  London  with  fat  purses:  I 
have  vizards  for  you  all;  you  have  horses  for 
yourselves:  Gadshill  lies  to-night  in  Rochester: 
I  have  bespoke  supper  to-morrow  night  in 
Eastcheap:  we  may  do  it  as  secure  as  sleep.  If 
you  will  go,  I  will  stuff  your  purses  full  of 
crowns;  if  you  will  not,  tarry  at  home  and  be 
hanged. 

Fal.  Hear  ye,  Yedward;  if  I  tarry  at  home  and 
go  not,  ril  hang  you  for  going.  /jo 

Poins.  You  will,  chops? 

Fal.  Hal,  wilt  thou  make  one? 

Prince.  Who,  I  rob?  I  a  thief?  not  I,  by  my 
faith. 


SCENE  II 

Fal.  There’s  neither  honesty,  manhood,  nor 
good  fellowship  in  thee,  nor  thou  earnest  not  of 
the  blood  royal,  if  thou  darest  not  stand  for  ten 
shillings. 

Prince.  Well  then,  once  in  my  days  I’ll  be  a 
madcap.  i6o 

Fal.  Why,  that’s  well  said. 

Prince.  Well,  come  what  will,  I’ll  tarry  at 
home. 

Fal.  By  the  Lord,  I’ll  be  a  traitor  then,  when 
thou  art  king. 

Prince.  I  care  not. 

Poins.  Sir  John,  I  prithee,  leave  the  Prince 
and  me  alone:  I  will  lay  him  down  such  reasons 
for  this  adventure  that  he  shall  go.  i6^ 

Fal.  Well,  God  give  thee  the  spirit  of  per¬ 
suasion  and  him  the  ears  of  profiting,  that  what 
thou  speakest  may  move  and  what  he  hears  may 
be  believed,  that  the  true  prince  may,  for  recrea¬ 
tion  sake,  prove  a  false  thief;  for  the  poor  abuses 
of  the  time  want  countenance.  Farewell:  you 
shall  find  me  in  Eastcheap. 

Prince.  Farewell,  thou  latter  spring!  farewell, 
All-hallown  summer!  [Exit  falstaff. 

Poins.  Now,  my  good  sweet  honey  lord,  ride 
with  us  to-morrow:  I  have  a  jest  to  execute  that 
I  cannot  manage  alone.  FalstaflF,  Bardolph, 
Peto  and  Gadshill  shall  rob  those  men  that  we 
have  already  waylaid;  yourself  and  I  will  not 
be  there;  and  when  they  have  the  booty,  if  you 
and  I  do  not  rob  them,  cut  this  head  off  from  my 
shoulders. 

Prince.  How  shall  we  part  with  them  in  setting 
forth? 

Poins.  V\^y,  we  will  set  forth  before  or  after 
them,  and  appoint  them  a  place  of  meeting, 
wherein  it  is  at  our  pleasure  to  fail,  and  then  will 
they  adventure  upon  the  exploit  themselves; 
which  they  shall  have  no  sooner  achieved,  but 
we’ll  set  upon  them. 

Prince.  Yea,  but  ’tis  like  that  they  will  know 
us  by  our  horses,  by  our  habits  and  by  every 
other  appointment,  to  be  ourselves. 

Poins.  Tut!  our  horses  they  shall  not  see; 
I’ll  tie  them  in  the  wood;  our  vizards  we  will 
change  after  we  leave  them:  and,  sirrah,  I  have 
cases  of  buckram  for  the  nonce,  to  immask  our 
noted  outward  garments. 

Prince.  Yea,  but  I  doubt  they  will  be  too  hard 
for  us. 

Poins.  Well,  for  two  of  them,  I  know  them  to 
be  as  true-bred  cowards  as  ever  turned  back;  and 
for  the  third,  if  he  fight  longer  than  he  sees  rea¬ 
son,  I’ll  forswear  arms.  The  virtue  of  this  jest 
will  be  the  incomprehensible  lies  that  this  same 
fat  rogue  will  tell  us  when  we  meet  at  supper: 


437 

how  thirty,  at  least,  he  fought  with;  what  wards, 
what  blows,  what  extremities  he  endured;  and 
in  the  reproof  of  this  lies  the  jest. 

Prince.  Well,  I’ll  go  with  thee:  provide  us  all 
things  necessary  and  meet  me  to-morrow  night 
in  Eastcheap;  there  I’ll  sup.  Farewell. 

Poins.  Farewell,  my  lord.  [Exit. 

Prince.  1  know  you  all,  and  will  awhile  uphold 
The  unyoked  humour  of  your  idleness : 

Yet  herein  will  1  imitate  the  sun,  220 

Who  doth  permit  the  base  contagious  clouds 
To  smother  up  his  beauty  from  the  world. 

That,  when  he  please  again  to  be  himself. 

Being  wanted,  he  may  be  more  wonder’d  at, 

By  breaking  through  the  foul  and  ugly  mists 
Of  vapours  that  did  seem  to  strangle  him. 

If  all  the  year  were  playing  holidays. 

To  sport  would  be  as  tedious  as  to  work; 

But  when  they  seldom  come,  they  wish’d  for 
come. 

And  nothing  pleaseth  but  rare  accidents.  230 
So,  when  this  loose  behaviour  I  throw  off 
And  pay  the  debt  I  never  promised. 

By  how  much  better  than  my  word  I  am. 

By  so  much  shall  I  falsify  men’s  hopes; 

And  like  bright  metal  on  a  sullen  ground. 

My  reformation,  glittering  o’er  my  fault. 

Shall  show  more  goodly  and  attract  more  eyes 
Than  that  which  hath  no  foil  to  set  it  ofiF. 

I’ll  so  offend,  to  make  offence  a  skill; 

Redeeming  time  when  men  think  least  I  will.  2^0 

[Exit. 

Scene  hi.  London:  the  palace 

Enter  the  king,  Northumberland,  Worcester, 
HOTSPUR,  sir  WALTER  BLUNT,  'with  Others. 
King.  My  blood  hath  been  too  cold  and  tem¬ 
perate. 

Unapt  to  stir  at  these  indignities. 

And  you  have  found  me;  for  accordingly 
You  tread  upon  my  patience:  but  be  sure 
I  will  from  henceforth  rather  be  myself. 

Mighty  and  to  be  fear’d,  than  my  condition; 
Which  hath  been  smooth  as  oil,  soft  as  young 
down. 

And  therefore  lost  that  title  of  respect 
Which  the  proud  soul  ne’er  pays  but  to  the 
proud. 

Wor.  Our  house,  my  sovereign  liege,  little  de¬ 
serves  to 

The  scourge  of  greatness  to  be  used  on  it; 

And  that  same  greatness  too  which  our  own 
hands 

Have  holp  to  make  so  portly. 

North.  My  lord — 

K/wg .Worcester,  get  thee  gone;  for  I  do  see 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


ACT  I 


438  FIRST  PART  OF 

Danger  and  disobedience  in  thine  eye: 

O,  sir,  your  presence  is  too  bold  and  peremptory, 
And  majesty  might  never  yet  endure 
The  moody  frontier  of  a  servant  brow. 

You  have  good  leave  to  leave  us:  when  we  need 
Your  use  and  counsel,  we  shall  send  for  you.  21 

[Exit  WORCESTER. 
You  were  about  to  speak.  [To  Northumberland. 
North.  Yea,  my  good  lord. 

Those  prisoners  in  your  Highness’  name  de¬ 
manded. 

Which  Harry  Percy  here  at  Holmedon  took. 
Were,  as  he  says,  not  with  such  strength  denied 
As  is  deliver’d  to  your  Majesty: 

Either  envy,  therefore,  or  misprision 
Is  guilty  of  this  fault  and  not  my  son. 

Hot.  My  liege,  I  did  deny  no  prisoners. 

But  I  remember,  when  the  fight  was  done,  50 
When  I  was  dry  with  rage  and  extreme  toil. 
Breathless  and  faint,  leaning  upon  my  sword. 
Came  there  a  certain  lord,  neat,  and  trimly 
dress’d. 

Fresh  as  a  bridegroom;  and  his  chin  new  reap’d 
Show’d  like  a  stubble-land  at  harvest-home; 

He  was  perfumed  like  a  milliner; 

And  ’twixt  his  finger  and  his  thumb  he  held 
A  pouncet-box,  which  ever  and  anon 
He  gave  his  nose  and  took’t  away  again :  39 

Who  therewith  angry,  when  it  next  came  there, 
Took  it  in  snuff;  and  still  he  smiled  and  talk’d. 
And  as  the  soldiers  bore  dead  bodies  by. 

He  call’d  them  untaught  knaves,  unmannerly, 

To  bring  a  slovenly  unhandsome  corse 
Betwixt  the  wind  and  his  nobility. 

With  many  holiday  and  lady  terms 
He  question’d  me;  amongst  the  rest,  demanded 
My  prisoners  in  your  Majesty’s  behalf. 

I  then,  all  smarting  with  my  wounds  being  cold. 
To  be  so  pester’d  with  a  popinjay,  50 

Out  of  my  grief  and  my  impatience. 

Answer’d  neglectingly  I  know  not  what. 

He  should,  or  he  should  not;  for  he  made  me 
mad 

To  see  him  shine  so  brisk  and  smell  so  sweet 
And  talk  so  like  a  waiting-gentlewoman 
Of  guns  and  drums  and  wounds — God  save  the 
mark! — 

And  telling  me  the  sovereign’st  thing  on  earth 
Was  parmaceti  for  an  inward  bruise; 

And  that  it  was  great  pity,  so  it  was. 

This  villainous  salt-petre  should  be  digg’d  60 
Out  of  the  bowels  of  the  harmless  earth. 

Which  many  a  good  tall  fellow  had  destroy’d 
So  cowardly;  and  but  for  these  vile  guns. 

He  would  himself  have  been  a  soldier. 

This  bald  un  jointed  chat  of  his,  my  lord. 


KING  HENRY  IV 

I  answer’d  indirectly,  as  I  said; 

And  I  beseech  you^  let  not  his  report 
Come  current  for  an  accusation 
Betwixt  my  love  and  your  high  Majesty. 

Blunt.  The  circumstance  consider’d,  good  my 
lord,  70 

Whate’er  Lord  Harry  Percy  then  had  said 
To  such  a  person  and  in  such  a  place. 

At  such  a  time,  with  all  the  rest  retold. 

May  reasonably  die  and  never  rise 
To  do  him  wrong  or  any  way  impeach 
What  then  he  said,  so  he  unsay  it  now. 

Kmg.  Why,  yet  he  doth  deny  his  prisoners. 

But  with  proviso  and  exception. 

That  we  at  our  own  charge  shall  ransom  straight 
His  brother-in-law,  the  foolish  Mortimer;  80 

Who,  on  my  soul,  hath  wilfully  betray’d 
The  lives  of  those  that  he  did  lead  to  fight 
Against  that  great  magician,  damn’d  Glendower, 
Whose  daughter,  as  we  hear,  the  Earl  of  March 
Hath  lately  married.  Shall  our  coffers,  then. 

Be  emptied  to  redeem  a  traitor  home? 

Shall  we  buy  treason?  and  indent  with  fears. 
When  they  have  lost  and  forfeited  themselves? 
No,  on  the  barren  mountains  let  him  starve; 

For  I  shall  never  hold  that  man  my  friend  po 
Whose  tongue  shall  ask  me  for  one  penny  cost 
To  ransom  home  revolted  Mortimer. 

Hot.  Revolted  Mortimer! 

He  never  did  fall  off,  my  sovereign  liege. 

But  by  the  chance  of  war:  to  prove  that  true 
Needs  no  more  but  one  tongue  for  all  those 
wounds. 

Those  mouthed  wounds,  which  valiantly  he  took. 
When  on  the  gentle  Severn’s  sedgy  bank. 

In  single  opposition,  hand  to  hand. 

He  did  confound  the  best  part  of  an  hour  100 
In  changing  hardiment  with  great  Glendower: 
Three  times  they  breathed  and  three  times  did 
they  drink. 

Upon  agreement,  of  swift  Severn’s  flood; 

Who  then,  affrighted  with  their  bloody  looks. 
Ran  fearfully  among  the  trembling  reeds. 

And  hid  his  crisp  head  in  the  hollow  bank 
Bloodstained  with  these  valiant  combatants. 
Never  did  base  and  rotten  policy 
Colour  her  working  with  such  deadly  wounds: 
Nor  never  could  the  noble  Mortimer  no 

Receive  so  many,  and  all  willingly: 

Then  let  not  him  be  slander’d  with  revolt. 

King.  Thou  dost  belie  him,  Percy,  thou  dost 
belie  him; 

He  never  did  encounter  with  Glendower: 

I  tell  thee. 

He  durst  as  well  have  met  the  devil  alone 
As  Owen  Glendower  for  an  enemy. 


SCENE  III  FIRST  PART  OF 

Art  thou  not  ashamed?  But,  sirrah,  henceforth 
Let  me  not  hear  you  speak  of  Mortimer: 

Send  me  your  prisoners  with  the  speediest  means. 
Or  you  shall  hear  in  such  a  kind  from  me  121 
As  will  displease  you.  My  Lord  Northumber¬ 
land, 

We  license  your  departure  with  your  son. 

Send  us  your  prisoners,  or  you’ll  hear  of  it. 

{Exeunt  king  henry,  blunt,  and  train. 
Hot.  An  if  the  devil  come  and  roar  for  them, 

I  will  not  send  them:  1  will  after  straight 
And  tell  him  so;  for  I  will  ease  my  heart. 

Albeit  I  make  a  hazard  of  my  head. 

North.  W^hat,  drunk  with  choler?  stay  and 
pause  awhile: 

Here  comes  your  uncle. 

Re-enter  Worcester. 

Hot.  Speak  of  Mortimer!  1^0 

’Zounds,  1  will  speak  of  him;  and  let  my  soul 
W ant  mercy,  if  1  do  not  join  with  him: 

Yea,  on  his  part  I’ll  empty  all  these  veins. 

And  shed  my  dear  blood  drop  by  drop  in  the  dust. 
But  I  will  lift  the  down-trod  Mortimer 
As  high  in  the  air  as  this  unthankful  king. 

As  this  ingrate  and  canker’d  Bolingbroke. 

North.  Brother,  the  King  hath  made  your 
nephew  mad. 

Wor.  Who  struck  this  heat  up  after  I  was 
gone? 

Hot.  He  will,  forsooth,  have  all  my  prisoners; 
And  when  1  urged  the  ransom  once  again 
Of  my  wife’s  brother,  then  his  cheek  look’d  pale. 
And  on  my  face  he  turn’d  an  eye  of  death. 
Trembling  even  at  the  name  of  Mortimer. 

Wor.  I  cannot  blame  him:  was  not  he  pro¬ 
claim’d 

By  Richard,  that  dead  is,  the  next  of  blood? 

North.  He  was;  I  heard  the  proclamation: 

And  then  it  was  when  the  unhappy  king — 

Whose  wrongs  in  us  God  pardon! — did  set  forth 
Upon  his  Irish  expedition;  /50 

From  whence  he  intercepted  did  return 
To  be  deposed  and  shortly  murdered. 

Wor.  And  for  whose  death  we  in  the  world’s 
wide  mouth 

Live  scandalized  and  foully  spoken  of. 

Hot.  But,  soft,  I  pray  you;  did  King  Richard  then 
Proclaim  my  brother  Edmund  Mortimer 
Heir  to  the  crown? 

North.  He  did;  myself  did  hear  it. 

Hot.  Nay,  then  I  cannot  blame  his  cousin  king. 
That  wish’d  him  on  the  barren  mountains  starve. 
But  shall  it  be  that  you,  that  set  the  crown  160 
Upon  the  head  of  this  forgetful  man 
And  for  his  sake  wear  the  detested  blot 


KING  HENRY  IV  439 

Of  murderous  subornation,  shall  it  be 
That  you  a  world  of  curses  undergo. 

Being  the  agents,  or  base  second  means. 

The  cords,  the  ladder,  or  the  hangman  rather? 

O,  pardon  me  that  I  descend  so  low 
To  show  the  line  and  the  predicament 
Wherein  you  range  under  this  subtle  king; 

Shall  it  for  shame  be  spoken  in  these  days,  /70 
Or  fill  up  chronicles  in  time  to  come, 

That  men  of  your  nobility  and  power 
Did  gage  them  both  in  an  unjust  behalf. 

As  both  of  you — God  pardon  it! — have  done. 

To  put  down  Richard,  that  sweet  lovely  rose. 
And  plant  this  thorn,  this  canker,  Bolingbroke? 
And  shall  it  in  more  shame  be  further  spoken 
That  you  are  fool’d,  discarded  and  shook  off 
By  him  for  whom  these  shames  ye  underwent? 
No;  yet  time  serves  wherein  you  may  redeem  180 
Your  banish’d  honours  and  restore  yourselves 
Into  the  good  thoughts  of  the  world  again. 
Revenge  the  jeering  and  disdain’d  contempt 
Of  this  proud  king,  who  studies  day  and  night 
To  answer  all  the  debt  he  owes  to  you 
Even  with  the  bloody  payment  of  your  deaths: 
Therefore,  I  say — 

Wor.  Peace,  cousin,  say  no  more: 

And  now  I  will  unclasp  a  secret  book. 

And  to  your  quick-conceiving  discontents 
I’ll  read  you  matter  deep  and  dangerous,  ipo 
As  full  of  peril  and  adventurous  spirit 
As  to  o’er-walk  a  current  roaring  loud 
On  the  unsteadfast  footing  of  a  spear. 

Hot.  If  he  fall  in,  good  night!  or  sink  or  swim: 
Send  Danger  from  the  east  unto  the  west. 

So  Honour  cross  it  from  the  north  to  south, 

And  let  them  grapple:  O,  the  blood  more  stirs 
To  rouse  a  lion  than  to  start  a  hare! 

North.  Imagination  of  some  great  exploit 
Drives  him  beyond  the  bounds  of  patience.  200 
Hot.  By  heaven,  methinks  it  were  an  easy  leap, 
To  pluck  bright  Honour  from  the  pale-faced 
moon. 

Or  dive  into  the  bottom  of  the  deep. 

Where  fathom-line  could  never  touch  the 
ground. 

And  pluck  up  drowned  Honour  by  the  locks; 

So  he  that  doth  redeem  her  thence  might  wear 
Without  corrival  all  her  dignities: 

But  out  upon  this  half-faced  fellowship! 

Wor.  He  apprehends  a  world  of  figures  here. 

But  not  the  form  of  what  he  should  attend.  210 
Good  cousin,  give  me  audience  for  a  while. 

Hot.  I  cry  you  mercy. 

Wor.  Those  same  noble  Scots 

That  are  your  prisoners — 

Hot.  I’ll  keep  them  all; 


ACT  II 


440  FIRST  PART  OF 

By  God,  he  shall  noc  have  a  Scot  of  them; 

No,  if  a  Scot  would  save  his  soul,  he  shall  not: 

I’ll  keep  them,  by  this  hand. 

Wor.  You  start  away 

And  lend  no  ear  unto  my  purposes. 

Those  prisoners  you  shall  keep. 

Hot.  Nay,  I  will;  that’s  flat: 

He  said  he  would  not  ransom  Mortimer; 

Forbade  my  tongue  to  speak  of  Mortimer;  220 

But  I  will  find  him  when  he  lies  asleep. 

And  in  his  ear  I’ll  holla  “Mortimer!” 

Nay, 

I’ll  have  a  starling  shall  be  taught  to  speak 
Nothing  but  “Mortimer,”  and  give  it  him. 

To  keep  his  anger  still  in  motion. 

Wor.  Hear  you,  cousin;  a  word. 

Hot.  All  studies  here  I  solemnly  defy. 

Save  how  to  gall  and  pinch  this  Bolingbroke: 

And  that  same  sword-and-buckler  Prince  of 
Wales,  2^0 

But  that  I  think  his  father  loves  him  not 
And  would  be  glad  he  met  with  some  mischance, 

I  would  have  him  poison’d  with  a  pot  of  ale. 

Wor.  Farewell,  kinsman:  I’ll  talk  to  you 
When  you  are  better  temper’d  to  attend. 

North.  Why,  what  a  wasp-stung  and  impatient 
fool 

Art  thou  to  break  into  this  woman’s  mood. 

Tying  thine  ear  to  no  tongue  but  thine  own! 

Hot.  Why,  look  you,  I  am  whipp’d  and 
scourged  with  rods. 

Nettled  and  stung  with  pismires,  when  I  hear 
Of  this  vile  politician,  Bolingbroke.  241 

In  Richard’s  time — what  do  you  call  the  place? — 
A  plague  upon  it,  it  is  in  Gloucestershire; 

’Twas  where  the  madcap  duke  his  uncle  kept. 

His  uncle  York;  where  I  first  bow’d  my  knee 
Unto  this  king  of  smiles,  this  Bolingbroke — 
’Sblood!— 

When  you  and  he  came  back  from  Ravenspurgh. 
North.  At  Berkley  castle. 

Hot.  You  say  true:  2  jo 

Why,  what  a  candy  deal  of  courtesy 
This  fawning  greyhound  then  did  proffer  me! 
Look,  “when  his  infant  fortune  came  to  age,” 

And  “gentle  Harry  Percy,”  and  “kind  cousin”; 
O,  the  devil  take  such  cozeners!  God  forgive  me! 
Good  uncle,  tell  your  tale;  I  have  done. 

Wor.  Nay,  if  you  have  not,  to  it  again; 

We  will  stay  your  leisure. 

Hot.  I  have  done,  i’  faith. 

Wor.  Then  once  more  to  your  Scottish  prison¬ 
ers. 

Deliver  them  up  without  their  ransom  straight. 
And  make  the  Douglas’  son  your  only  mean  261 
For  powers  in  Scotland;  which,  for  divers  reasons 


KING  HENRY  IV 

Which  I  shall  send  you  written,  be  assured. 

Will  easily  be  granted.  You,  my  lord. 

To  NORTHUMBERLAND. 

Your  son  in  Scotland  being  thus  employ’d, 

Shall  secretly  into  the  bosom  creep 
Of  that  same  noble  prelate,  well  beloved, 

The  Archbishop. 

Hot.  Of  York,  is  it  not? 

Wor.  True;  who  bears  hard  270 

His  brother’s  death  at  Bristol,  the  Lord  Scroop. 

I  speak  not  this  in  estimation. 

As  what  I  think  might  be,  but  what  I  know 
Is  ruminated,  plotted,  and  set  down. 

And  only  stays  but  to  behold  the  face 
Of  that  occasion  that  shall  bring  it  on. 

Hot.  I  smell  it:  upon  my  life,  it  will  do  well. 
North.  Before  the  game  is  afoot,  thou  still  let’st 
slip. 

Hot.  Why,  it  cannot  choose  but  be  a  noble  plot: 
And  then  the  power  of  Scotland  and  of  York,  280 
To  join  with  Mortimer,  ha? 

Wor,  And  so  they  shall. 

Hot.  In  faith,  it  is  exceedingly  well  aim’d. 

Wor.  And  ’tis  no  little  reason  bids  us  speed. 

To  save  our  heads  by  raising  of  a  head; 

For,  bear  ourselves  as  even  as  we  can. 

The  King  will  always  think  him  in  our  debt. 

And  think  we  think  ourselves  unsatisfied. 

Till  he  hath  found  a  time  to  pay  us  home: 

And  see  already  how  he  doth  begin 
To  make  us  strangers  to  his  looks  of  love.  290 
Hot.  He  does,  he  does:  we’ll  be  revenged  on 
him. 

Wor.  Cousin,  farewell:  no  further  go  in  this 
Than  I  by  letters  shall  direct  your  course. 

When  time  is  ripe,  which  will  be  suddenly. 

I’ll  steal  to  Glendowerand  Lord  Mortimer; 
Where  you  and  Douglas  and  our  powers  at  once. 
As  I  will  fashion  it,  shall  happily  meet. 

To  bear  our  fortunes  in  our  own  strong  arms. 
Which  now  we  hold  at  much  uncertainty. 

North.  Farewell,  good  brother:  we  shall  thrive, 

I  trust.  300 

Hot.  Uncle,  adieu:  O,  let  the  hours  be  short 
Till  fields  and  blows  and  groans  applaud  our 
sport!  {Exeunt, 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  Rochester:  an  inn  yard 
Enter  a  carrier  v)ith  a  lantern  in  his  hand. 

I  St  Car.  Heigh-ho!  an  it  be  not  four  by  the  day. 
I’ll  be  hanged:  Charles’  wain  is  over  the  new 
chimney,  and  yet  our  horse  not  packed.  What, 
ostler! 

Ost.  [Within]  Anon,  anon. 


SCENE 

ist  Car.  I  prithee,  Tom,  beat  Cut’s  saddle,  put  a 
few  flocks  in  the  point;  poor  jade,  is  wrung  in 
the  withers  out  of  all  cess. 

Enter  a  second  carrier. 

2nd  Car.  Peas  and  beans  are  as  dank  here  as  a 
dog,  and  that  is  the  next  way  to  give  poor  jades 
the  bots;  this  house  is  turned  upside  down  since 
Robin  Ostler  died. 

I  St  Car.  Poor  fellow,  never  joyed  since  the  price 
of  oats  rose;  it  was  the  death  of  him. 

2nd  Car.  I  think  this  be  the  most  villainous  house 
in  all  London  road  for  fleas:  I  am  stung  like  a 
tench. 

ist  Car.  Like  a  tench!  by  the  mass,  there  is  ne’er 
a  king  christen  could  be  better  bit  than  I  have 
been  since  the  first  cock.  20 

2nd  Car.  Why,  they  will  allow  us  ne’er  a  jordan, 
and  then  we  leak  in  your  chimney;  and  your 
chamber-lie  breeds  fleas  like  a  loach. 

ist  Car.  What,  ostler!  come  away  and  be  hanged! 
come  away. 

2nd  Car.  1  have  a  gammon  of  bacon  and  two 
razes  of  ginger,  to  be  delivered  as  far  as  Charing- 
cross. 

ist  Car.  God’s  body!  the  turkeys  in  my  pannier 
are  quite  starved.  What,  ostler!  A  plague  on 
thee!  hast  thou  never  an  eye  in  thy  head? 
canst  not  hear?  An  ’twere  not  as  good  deed  as 
drink,  to  break  the  pate  on  thee,  I  am  a  very 
villain.  Come,  and  be  hanged!  hast  no  faith  in 
thee? 

Enter  gadshill. 

Gads.  Good  morrow,  carriers.  What’s  o’clock? 
ist  Car.  I  think  it  be  two  o’clock. 

Gads.  I  prithee,  lend  me  thy  lantern,  to  see  my 
gelding  in  the  stable. 

ist  Car.  Nay,  by  God,  soft;  I  know  a  trick 
worth  two  of  that,  i’  faith.  4/ 

Gads.  I  pray  thee,  lend  me  thine. 

2nd  Car.  Ay,  when?  canst  tell?  Lend  me  thy 
lantern,  quoth  he?  marry.  I’ll  see  thee  hanged 
first. 

Gads.  Sirrah  carrier,  what  time  do  you  mean  to 
come  to  London? 

2nd  Car.  Time  enough  to  go  to  bed  with  a 
candle,  I  warrant  thee.  Come,  neighbour  Mugs, 
we’ll  call  up  the  gentlemen:  they  will  along  with 
company,  for  they  have  great  charge.  j/ 

[Exeunt  carriers. 

Gads.  What,  ho!  chamberlain! 

Cham.  [Within\  At  hand,  quoth  pick-purse. 
Gads.  That’s  even  as  fair  as — at  hand,  quoth  the 
chamberlain;  for  thou  variest  no  more  from  pick¬ 
ing  of  purses  than  giving  direction  doth  from 


441 

labouring;  thou  layest  the  plot  how. 

Enter  chamberlain. 

Cham.  Good  morrow.  Master  Gadshill.  It  holds 
current  that  I  told  you  yesternight:  there’s  a 
franklin  in  theWild  of  Kent  hath  brought  three 
hundred  marks  with  him  in  gold:  I  heard  him  tell 
it  to  one  of  his  company  last  night  at  supper;  a 
kind  of  auditor;  one  that  hath  abundance  of 
charge  too,  God  knows  what.  They  are  up  al¬ 
ready,  and  call  for  eggs  and  butter:  they  will 
away  presently. 

Gads.  Sirrah,  if  they  meet  not  with  Saint  Nicho¬ 
las’  clerks.  I’ll  give  thee  this  neck.  69 

Cham.  No,  I’ll  none  of  it:  I  pray  thee,  keep  that 
for  the  hangman;  for  I  know  thou  worshippest 
Saint  Nicholas  as  truly  as  a  man  of  falsehood 
may. 

Gads.  What  talkest  thou  to  me  of  the  hangman? 
if  I  hang.  I’ll  make  a  fat  pair  of  gallows;  for  if  I 
hang,  old  Sir  John  hangs  with  me,  and  thou  know- 
est  he  is  no  starveling.  Tut!  there  are  other  Tro¬ 
jans  that  thou  dreamest  not  of,  the  which  for 
sport  sake  are  content  to  do  the  profession  some 
grace;  that  would,  if  matters  should  be  looked 
into,  for  their  own  credit  sake,  make  all  whole.  I 
am  joined  with  no  foot  land-rakers,  no  long-staff 
sixpenny  strikers,  none  of  these  mad  mustachio 
purple-hued  malt-worms;  but  with  nobility  and 
tranquility,  burgomasters  and  great  oneyers,  such 
as  can  hold  in,  such  as  will  strike  sooner  than 
speak,  and  speak  sooner  than  drink,  and  drink 
sooner  than  pray:  and  yet,  ’zounds,  I  lie;  for  they 
pray  continually  to  their  saint,  the  common¬ 
wealth;  or  rather,  not  pray  to  her,  but  prey  on 
her,  for  they  ride  up  and  down  on  her  and  make 
her  their  boots. 

Cham.  What,  the  commonwealth  their  boots? 
will  she  hold  out  water  in  foul  way? 

Gads.  She  will,  she  will;  justice  hath  liquored 
her.  We  steal  as  in  a  castle,  cock-sure;  we  have 
the  receipt  of  fern-seed,  we  walk  invisible. 

Cham.  Nay,  by  my  faith,  I  think  you  are  more 
beholding  to  the  night  than  to  fern-seed  for  your 
walking  invisible. 

Gads.  Give  me  thy  hand:  thou  shalt  have  a 
share  in  our  purchase,  as  I  am  a  true  man.  loi 

Cham.  Nay,  rather  let  me  have  it,  as  you  are  a 
false  thief. 

Gads.  Go  to;  homo  is  a  common  name  to  all  men. 
Bid  the  ostler  bring  my  gelding  out  of  the  stable. 
Farewell,  you  muddy  knave.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  highway,  near  Gadshill 
Enter  prince  henry  and  poins. 

Poins.  Come,  shelter,  shelter:  I  have  removed 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


ACT  II 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


442 

FalstafT s  horse,  and  he  frets  like  a  gummed 
velvet. 

Prince.  Stand  close. 

Enter  falstaff. 

Fal.  Poins!  Poins,  and  be  hanged!  Poins! 

Prince.  Peace,  ye  fat-kidneyed  rascal!  what  a 
brawling  dost  thou  keep! 

Fal.  Where’s  Poins,  Hal? 

Prince.  He  is  walked  up  to  the  top  of  the  hill: 
I’ll  go  seek  him.  9 

Fal.  I  am  accursed  to  rob  in  that  thief’s  com¬ 
pany:  the  rascal  hath  removed  my  horse,  and 
tied  him  I  know  not  where.  If  I  travel  but  four 
foot  by  the  squire  further  afoot,  I  shall  break  my 
wind.  Well,  I  doubt  not  but  to  die  a  fair  death  for 
all  this,  if  I  ’scape  hanging  for  killing  that  rogue. 
I  have  forsworn  his  company  hourly  any  time 
this  two  and  twenty  years,  and  yet  I  am  be¬ 
witched  with  the  rogue’s  company.  If  the  rascal 
have  not  given  me  medicines  to  make  me  love 
him.  I’ll  be  hanged;  it  could  not  be  else;  I  have 
drunk  medicines.  Poins!  Hal!  a  plague  upon  you 
both!  Bardolph!  Peto!  I’ll  starve  ere  I’ll  rob  a 
foot  further.  An  ’twere  not  as  good  a  deed  as 
drink,  to  turn  true  man  and  to  leave  these  rogues, 
I  am  the  veriest  varlet  that  ever  chewed  with  a 
tooth.  Eight  yards  of  uneven  ground  is  three¬ 
score  and  ten  miles  afoot  with  me;  and  the  stony¬ 
hearted  villains  know  it  well  enough:  a  plague 
upon  it  when  thieves  cannot  be  true  one  to  an¬ 
other!  [They  whistle.]  Whew!  A  plague  upon 
you  all!  Give  me  my" horse,  you  rogues;  give 
me  my  horse,  and  be  hanged! 

Prince.  Peace,  ye  fat-guts!  lie  down;  lay  thine 
ear  close  to  the  ground  and  list  if  thou  canst  hear 
the  tread  of  travellers. 

Fal.  Have  you  any  levers  to  lift  me  up  again, 
being  down?  ’Sblood,  I’ll  not  bear  mine  own  flesh 
so  far  afoot  again  for  all  the  coin  in  thy  father’s 
exchequer.  What  a  plague  mean  ye  to  colt  me 
thus? 

Prince.  Thou  liest;  thou  art  not  coked,  thou  art 
uncolted. 

Fal.  I  prithee,  good  Prince  Hal,  help  me  to  my 
horse,  good  king’s  son. 

Prince.  Out,  ye  rogue!  shall  I  be  your  ostler? 

Fal.  Go  hang  thyself  in  thine  own  heir- appar¬ 
ent  garters!  If  I  be  ta’en.  I’ll  peach  for  this.  An  I 
have  not  ballads  made  on  you  all  and  sung  to 
filthy  tunes,  let  a  cup  of  sack  be  my  poison: 
when  a  jest  is  so  forward,  and  afoot  too!  I  hate  it. 

Enter  gadshill,  bardolph  and  peto  with  him. 

Gads.  Stand. 

Fal.  So  I  do,  against  my  will. 


Poins.  O,  ’tis  our  setter:  I  know  his  voice.  Bar¬ 
dolph,  what  news?, 

Bard.  Case  ye,  case  ye;  on  with  your  vizards: 
there’s  money  of  the  King’s  coming  down  the 
hill;  ’tis  going  to  the  King’s  exchequer. 

Fal.  You  lie,  ye  rogue;  ’tis  going  to  the  King’s 
tavern. 

Gads.  There’s  enough  to  make  us  all.  60 

Fal.  To  be  hanged. 

Prince.  Sirs,  you  four  shall  front  them  in  the 
narrow  lane;  Ned  Poins  and  I  will  walk  lower: 
if  they  ’scape  from  your  encounter,  then  they 
light  on  us. 

Peto.  How  many  be  there  of  them? 

Gads.  Some  eight  or  ten. 

Fal.  ’Zounds,  will  they  not  rob  us? 

Prince.  What,  a  coward.  Sir  John  Paunch? 

Fal.  Indeed,  I  am  not  John  of  Gaunt,  your  grand¬ 
father;  but  yet  no  coward,  Hal.  7/ 

Prince.  Well,  we  leave  that  to  the  proof. 

Poins.  Sirrah  Jack,  thy  horse  stands  behind  the 
hedge:  when  thou  needest  him,  there  thou  shalt 
find  him.  Farewell,  and  stand  fast. 

Fal.  Now  cannot  I  strike  him,  if  I  should  be 
hanged. 

Prince.  Ned,  where  are  our  disguises? 

Poins.  Here,  hard  by:  stand  close. 

[Exeunt  prince  and  poins. 

Fal.  Now,  my  masters,  happy  man  be  his  dole, 
say  I;  every  man  to  his  business. 

Enter  the  travellers. 

ist  Trav.  Come,  neighbour:  the  boy  shall  lead 
our  horses  down  the  hill;  we’ll  walk  afoot  awhile, 
and  ease  our  legs. 

Thieves.  Stand! 

Travellers.  Jesus  bless  us! 

Fal.  Strike;  down  with  them;  cut  the  villains’ 
throats:  ah!  whoreson  caterpillars!  bacon-fed 
knaves!  they  hate  us  youth:  down  with  them: 
fleece  them. 

Travellers.  O,  we  are  undone,  both  we  and  ours 
for  ever! 

Fal.  Hang  ye,  gorbellied  knaves,  are  ye  un¬ 
done?  No,  ye  fat  chuffs;  I  would  your  store  were 
here!  On,  bacons,  on! What,  ye  knaves!  young 
men  must  live.  You  are  grandjurors,  are  ye? 
we’ll  jure  ye,  ’faith. 

[Here  they  rob  them  and  bind  them.  Exeunt. 

Re-enter  prince  henry  and  poins  in  buckram. 

Prince.  The  thieves  have  bound  the  true  men. 
Now  could  thou  and  I  rob  the  thieves  and  go 
merrily  to  London,  it  would  be  argument  for  a 
week,  laughter  for  a  month  and  a  good  jest  for 
ever. 


SCENE  II 

Poins.  Stand  close;  I  hear  them  coming. 

Enter  the  thieves  again, 

Fal.  Come,  my  masters,  let  us  share,  and  then 
to  horse  before  day.  An  the  Prince  and  Poins  be 
not  two  arrant  cowards,  there’s  no  equity  stir¬ 
ring:  there’s  no  more  valour  in  that  Poins  than  in 
a  wild-duck. 

Prince,  Your  money! 

Poins.  VWhinsl  no 

As  they  are  sharings  the  prince  and  poins  set 
upon  them;  they  all  run  aivay;  and  falstaff, 
after  a  blow  or  two,  runs  away  too,  leaving  the 
booty  behind  them. 

Prince.  Got  with  much  ease.  Now  merrily  to 
horse: 

The  thieves  are  all  scatter’d  and  possess’d  with 
fear 

So  strongly  that  they  dare  not  meet  each  other; 
Each  takes  his  fellow  for  an  officer. 

Away,  good  Ned.  Falstaff  sweats  to  death. 

And  lards  the  lean  earth  as  he  walks  along: 

Were ’t  not  for  laughing,  I  should  pity  him. 

Poins.  How  the  rogue  roar’d!  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iii.  War kworth  castle 
Enter  hotspur,  solus,  reading  a  letter. 

Hot.  “But,  for  mine  own  part,  my  lord,  I  could 
be  well  contented  to  be  there,  in  respect  of  the 
love  I  bear  your  house.”  He  could  be  contented: 
why  is  he  not,  then?  In  respect  of  the  love  he 
bears  our  house:  he  shows  in  this,  he  loves  his 
own  barn  better  than  he  loves  our  house.  Let  me 
see  some  more.  “The  purpose  you  undertake  is 
dangerous”;  why,  that’s  certain:  ’tis  dangerous 
to  take  a  cold,  to  sleep,  to  drink;  but  I  tell  you, 
my  lord  fool,  out  of  this  nettle,  danger,  we  pluck 
this  flower,  safety.  “The  purpose  you  undertake 
is  dangerous;  the  friends  you  have  named  un¬ 
certain;  the  time  itself  unsorted;  and  your  whole 
plot  too  light  for  the  counterpoise  of  so  great  an 
opposition.”  Say  you  so,  say  you  so?  I  say  unto 
you  again,  you  are  a  shallow  cowardly  hind,  and 
you  lie.  What  a  lack-brain  is  this!  By  the  Lord, 
our  plot  is  a  good  plot  as  ever  was  laid;  our 
friends  true  and  constant:  a  good  plot,  good 
friends,  and  full  of  expectation;  an  excellent  plot, 
very  good  friends.  What  a  frosty-spirited  rogue 
is  this!  Why,  my  lord  of  York  commends  the 
plot  and  the  general  course  of  the  action.  ’Zounds, 
an  I  were  now  by  this  rascal,  I  could  brain  him 
with  his  lady’s  fan.  Is  there  not  my  father,  my 
uncle  and  myself?  lord  Edmund  Mortimer,  my 
lord  of  York  and  Owen  Glendower?  is  there  not 
besides  the  Douglas?  have  I  not  all  their  letters 
to  meet  me  in  arms  by  the  ninth  of  next  month? 


443 

and  are  they  not  some  of  them  set  forward  al¬ 
ready?  What  a  pagan  rascal  is  this!  an  infidel! 
Ha!  you  shall  see  now  in  very  sincerity  of  fear 
and  cold  heart,  will  he  to  the  King  and  lay  open 
all  our  proceedings.  O,  I  could  divide  myself  and 
go  to  buffets,  for  moving  such  a  dish  of  skim 
milk  with  so  honourable  an  action!  Hang  him! 
let  him  tell  the  King:  we  are  prepared.  I  will  set 
forward  to-night. 

Enter  lady  Percy. 

How  now,  Kate!  I  must  leave  you  within  these 
two  hours. 

Lady.  O,  my  good  lord,  why  arc  you  thus 
alone? 

For  what  offence  have  I  this  fortnight  been 
A  banish’d  woman  from  my  Harry’s  bed? 

Tell  me,  sweet  lord,  what  is’t  that  takes  from 
thee 

Thy  stomach,  pleasure,  and  thy  golden  sleep? 
Why  dost  thou  bend  thine  eyes  upon  the  earth. 
And  start  so  often  when  thou  sit’st  alone? 

Why  hast  thou  lost  the  fresh  blood  in  thy  cheeks; 
And  given  my  treasures  and  my  rights  of  thee 
To  thick-eyed  musing  and  cursed  melancholy? 

In  thy  faint  slumbers  I  by  thee  have  watch’d,  50 
And  heard  thee  murmur  tales  of  iron  wars; 

Speak  terms  of  manage  to  thy  bounding  steed; 
Cry  “Courage!  to  the  field!”  And  thou  hast 
'talk’d 

Of  sallies  and  retires,  of  trenches,  tents. 

Of  palisadoes,  frontiers,  parapets. 

Of  basilisks,  of  cannon,  culverin. 

Of  prisoners’  ransom,  and  of  soldiers  slain. 

And  all  the  currents  of  a  heady  fight. 

Thy  spirit  within  thee  hath  been  so  at  war 
And  thus  hath  so  bestirr’d  thee  in  thy  sleep,  60 
That  beads  of  sweat  have  stood  upon  thy  brow. 
Like  bubbles  in  a  late-disturbed  stream; 

And  in  thy  face  strange  motions  have  appear’d. 
Such  as  we  see  when  men  restrain  their  breath 
On  some  great  sudden  best.  O,  what  portents  are 
these? 

Some  heavy  business  hath  my  lord  in  hand. 

And  I  must  know  it,  else  he  loves  me  not. 

Hot.  LVTat,  ho! 

Enter  servant. 

Is  Gilliams  with  the  packet  gone? 
Serv.  He  is,  my  lord,  an  hour  ago. 

Hot.  Hath  Butler  brought  those  horses  from  the 
sheriff?  70 

Serv.  One  horse,  my  lord,  he  brought  even  now. 
Hot.  What  horse?  a  roan,  a  crop-ear,  is  it  not? 
Serv.  It  is,  my  lord. 

Hot.  That  roan  shall  be  my  throne. 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


ACT  II 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


444 

Well,  I  will  back  him  straight:  O  esperance! 

Bid  Butler  lead  him  forth  into  the  park. 

[Exit  SERVANT. 

Lady.  But  hear  you,  my  lord. 

Hot.  What  say’st  thou,  my  lady? 

Lady.  What  is  it  carries  you  away? 

Hot.  Why,  my  horse,  my  love,  my  horse. 

Lady.  Out,  you  mad-headed  ape!  So 

A  weasel  hath  not  such  a  deal  of  spleen 
As  you  are  toss’d  with.  In  faith. 

Ell  know  your  business,  Harry,  that  I  will. 

1  fear  my  brother  Mortimer  doth  stir 
About  his  title,  and  hath  sent  for  you 
To  line  his  enterprize:  but  if  you  go — 

Hot.  So  far  afoot,  I  shall  be  weary,  love. 

Lady.  Come,  come,  you  paraquito,  answer  me 
Directly  unto  this  question  that  I  ask: 

In  faith,  I’ll  break  thy  little  finger,  Harry, 

An  if  thou  wilt  not  tell  me  all  things  true. 

Hot.  Away, 

Away,  you  tri fieri  Love!  I  love  thee  not, 

I  care  not  for  thee,  Kate:  this  is  no  world 
To  play  with  mammets  and  to  tilt  with  lips: 

We  must  have  bloody  noses  and  crack’d  crowns. 
And  pass  them  current  too.  God’s  me,  my  horse! 
What  say’st  thou,  Kate?  what  would’st  thou 
have  with  me? 

I^ady.  Do  you  not  love  me?  do  you  not,  indeed? 
Well,  do  not  then;  for  since  you  love  me  not,  too 
I  will  not  love  myself.  Do  you  not  love  me? 

Nay,  tell  me  if  you  speak  in  jest  or  no. 

Hot.  Come,  wilt  thou  see  me  ride? 

And  when  I  am  o’  horseback,  I  will  swear 
I  love  thee  infinitely.  But  hark  you,  Kate; 

I  must  not  have  you  henceforth  question  me 
Whither  I  go,  nor  reason  whereabout: 

Whither  I  must,  I  must;  and,  to  conclude, 

This  evening  must  I  leave  you,  gentle  Kate. 

I  know  you  wise,  but  yet  no  farther  wise  no 
Than  Harry  Percy’s  wife:  constant  you  are, 

But  yet  a  woman:  and  for  secrecy. 

No  lady  closer;  for  I  well  believe 

Thou  wilt  not  utter  what  thou  dost  not  know; 

And  so  far  will  I  trust  thee,  gentle  Kate. 

Lady.  How!  so  far? 

Hot.  Not  an  inch  further.  But  hark  you,  Kate: 
Whither  I  go,  thither  shall  you  go  too; 

To-day  will  I  set  forth,  to-morrow  you. 

Will  this  content  you,  Kate? 

Lady.  It  must  of  force.  [Exeunt.  120 

Scene  iv.  The  Boar  s-Head  Tavern.,  Eastcheap 
Enter  the  prince,  and  poins. 

Prince.  Ned,  prithee,  come  out  of  that  fat  room, 
and  lend  me  thy  hand  to  laugh  a  little. 

Poins,  Where  hast  been,  Hal? 


Prince.  With  three  or  four  loggerheads  amongst 
three  or  four  sebre  hogsheads.  1  have  sounded 
the  very  base-string  of  humility.  Sirrah,  1  am 
sworn  brother  to  a  leash  of  drawers;  and  can 
call  them  all  by  their  christennames,  as  Tom,  Dick, 
and  Francis.  They  take  it  already  upon  their  sal¬ 
vation,  that  though  I  be  but  Prince  ofWales,  yet 
I  am  the  king  of  courtesy;  and  tell  me  fiatly  I  am 
no  proud  Jack,  like  Falstaff,  but  a  Corinthian,  a 
lad  of  mettle,  a  good  boy,  by  the  Lord,  so  they 
call  me,  and  when  I  am  King  of  England,  I  shall 
command  all  the  good  lads  in  Eastcheap.  They 
call  drinking  deep,  dyeing  scarlet;  and  when  you 
breathe  in  your  watering,  they  cry  “hem!”  and 
bid  you  play  it  off.  To  conclude,  I  am  so  good  a 
proficient  in  one  quarter  of  an  hour,  that  I  can 
drink  with  any  tinker  in  his  own  language  during 
my  life.  I  tell  thee,  Ned,  thou  hast  lost  much 
honour,  that  thou  wert  not  with  me  in  this  action. 
But,  sweet  Ned — to  sweeten  which  name  of  Ned, 
I  give  thee  this  pennyworth  of  sugar,  clapped 
even  now  into  my  hand  by  an  under-skinker,  one 
that  never  spake  other  English  in  his  life  than 
“Eight  shillings  and  sixpence,”  and  “You  are 
welcome,”  with  this  shrill  addition,  “Anon, 
anon,  sir!  Score  a  pint  of  bastard  in  the  Half¬ 
moon,”  or  so.  But,  Ned,  to  drive  away  the  time 
till  Falstaff  come,  I  prithee,  do  thou  stand  in 
some  by-room,  while  I  question  my  puny  drawer 
to  what  end  he  gave  me  the  sugar;  and  do  thou 
never  leave  calling  “Francis,”  that  his  tale  to  me 
may  be  nothing  but  “Anon.”  Step  aside,  and  I’ll 
show  thee  a  precedent. 

Poins.  Francis! 

Prince.  Thou  art  perfect. 

Poins.  Fr^ncisl  ^  [Exit  poins.  40 

Enter  francis. 

Fran.  Anon,  anon,  sir.  Look  down  into  the 
Pomgarnet,  Ralph. 

Prince.  Come  hither,  Francis. 

Fran.  My  lord? 

Prince.  How  long  hast  thou  to  serve,  Francis? 

Fran.  Forsooth,  five  years,  and  as  much  as  to — 

Poins.  [Within]  Francis! 

Fran.  Anon,  anon,  sir. 

Prince.  Five  year!  by’r  lady,  a  long  lease  for  the 
clinking  of  pewter.  But,  Francis,  darest  thou  be 
so  valiant  as  to  play  the  coward  with  thy  inden¬ 
ture  and  show  it  a  fair  pair  of  heels  and  run  from 
it? 

Fran.  O  Lord,  sir.  I’ll  be  sworn  upon  all  the 
books  in  England,  I  could  find  in  my  heart. 

Poins.  [Within]  Francis! 

Fran.  Anon,  sir. 

Prince.  How  old  art  thou,  Francis? 


SCENE  IV 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


Fran.  Let  me  see — about  Michaelmas  next  I 
shall  be —  6i 

Poins.  [Within]  Francis! 

Fran.  Anon,  sir.  Pray  stay  a  little,  my  lord. 
Prince.  Nay,  but  hark  you,  Francis:  for  the 
sugar  thou  gavest  me,  ’twas  a  pennyworth,  was’t 
not? 

Fran.  O  Lord,  I  would  it  had  been  two! 

Prince.  I  will  give  thee  for  it  a  thousand  pound: 
ask  me  when  thou  wilt,  and  thou  shalt  have  it.  70 
Poins.  [Within]  Francis! 

Fran.  Anon,  anon. 

Prince.  Anon,  Francis?  No,  Francis;  but  to¬ 
morrow,  Francis;  or  Francis,  o’  Thursday;  or 
indeed,  Francis,  when  thou  wilt.  But,  Francis! 
Fran.  My  lord? 

Prince.  Wilt  thou  rob  this  leathern  jerkin, 
crystal-button,  not-pated,  agate-ring,  puke¬ 
stocking,  caddis-garter,  smooth-tongue,  Spanish- 
pouch, — 

Fran.  O  Lord,  sir,  who  do  you  mean?  81 

Prince.  Why,  then,  your  brown  bastard  is  your 
only  drink;  for  look  you,  Francis,  your  white 
canvas  doublet  will  sully:  in  Barbary,  sir,  it  can¬ 
not  come  to  so  much. 

Fran.  What,  sir? 

Poins.  [Within]  Francis! 

Prince.  Away,  you  rogue!  dost  thou  not  hear 
them  call?  [Here  they  both  call  him;  the  dranjoer 
stands  amazed.,  not  knov^ing  ivhich  way  to  go. 

Enter  vintner. 

Vint.  What,  standest  thou  still,  and  hearest  such 
a  calling?  Look  to  the  guests  within.  [Exit  Fran¬ 
cis.]  My  lord,  old  Sir  John,  with  half-a-dozen 
more,  are  at  the  door:  shall  I  let  them  in? 

Prince.  Let  them  alone  awhile,  and  then  open 
the  door.  [£:r/V  vintner.]  Poins! 

Re-enter  poins. 

Poins.  Anon,  anon,  sir. 

Prince.  Sirrah,  FalstafF  and  the  rest  of  the  thieves 
are  at  the  door:  shall  we  be  merry?  pp 

Poins.  As  merry  as  crickets,  my  lad.  But  hark 
ye;  what  cunning  match  have  you  made  with  this 
jest  of  the  drawer?  come,  what’s  the  issue? 

Prince.  I  am  now  of  all  humours  that  have 
showed  themselves  humours  since  the  old  days  of 
goodman  Adam  to  the  pupil  age  of  this  present 
twelve  o’clock  at  midnight. 

Re-enter  francis. 

What’s  o’clock,  Francis? 

Fran.  Anon,  anon,  sir.  [Exit,  top 

Prince.  That  ever  this  fellow  should  have  fewer 
words  than  a  parrot,  and  yet  the  son  of  a  woman! 


445 

His  industry  is  up-stairs  and  down-stairs;  his  elo¬ 
quence  the  parcel  of  a  reckoning.  I  am  not  yet  of 
Percy’s  mind,  the  Hotspur  of  the  north;  he  that 
kills  me  some  six  or  seven  dozen  of  Scots  at  a 
breakfast,  washes  his  hands,  and  says  to  his  wife, 
“Fie  upon  this  quiet  life!  I  want  work.”  “O,  my 
sweet  Harry,”  says  she,  “how  many  hast  thou 
killed  to-day?”  “Give  my  roan  horse  a  drench,” 
says  he;  and  answers  “Some  fourteen,”  an  hour 
after;  “a  trifle,  a  trifle.”  I  prithee,  call  in  Fal¬ 
stafF:  I’ll  play  Percy,  and  that  damned  brawn 
shall  play  Dame  Mortimer  his  wife.  “Rivo!” 
says  the  drunkard.  Call  in  ribs,  call  in  tallow. 

Enter  falstaff,  gadshill,  rardolph,  and 
PETO;  FRANCIS  following  witli  wine. 

Poins.  Welcome,  Jack:  where  hast  thou  been? 

Fal.  A  plague  of  all  cowards,  I  say,  and  a  ven¬ 
geance  too!  marry,  and  amen!  Give  me  a  cup  of 
sack,  boy.  Ere  I  lead  this  life  long.  I’ll  sew  nether 
stocks  and  mend  them  and  foot  them  too.  A 
plague  of  all  cowards!  Give  me  a  cup  of  sack, 
rogue.  Is  there  no  virtue  extant? 

He  drinks. 

Prince.  Didst  thou  never  see  Titan  kiss  a  dish  of 
butter?  pitiful-hearted  Titan,  that  melted  at  the 
sweet  tale  of  the  sun’s!  if  thou  didst,  then  behold 
that  compound. 

Fal.  You  rogue,  here’s  lime  in  this  sack  too: 
there  is  nothing  but  roguery  to  be  found  in  vil¬ 
lainous  man:  yet  a  coward  is  worse  than  a  cup  of 
sack  with  lime  in  it.  A  villainous  coward!  Go 
thy  ways,  old  Jack;  die  when  thou  wilt,  if  man¬ 
hood,  good  manhood,  be  not  forgot  upon  the  face 
of  the  earth,  then  am  I  a  shotten  herring.  There 
live  not  three  good  men  unhanged  in  England; 
and  one  of  them  is  fat  and  grows  old:  God  help 
the  while!  a  bad  world,  I  say.  I  would  I  were  a 
weaver;  I  could  sing  psalms  or  anything,  A 
plague  of  all  cowards,  I  say  still. 

Prince.  How  now,  wool-sack!  what  mutter 
you?  14P 

Fal.  A  king’s  son!  If  I  do  not  beat  thee  out  of 
thy  kingdom  with  a  dagger  of  lath,  and  drive  all 
thy  subjects  afore  thee  like  a  flock  of  wild-geese. 
I’ll  never  wear  hair  on  my  face  more.  You  Prince 
of  Wales! 

Prince.  Why,  you  whoreson  round  man,  what’s 
the  matter? 

Fal.  Are  not  you  a  coward?  answer  me  to  that: 
and  Poins  there? 

Poins.  ’Zounds,  ye  fat  paunch,  an  ye  call  me 
coward,  by  the  Lord,  I’ll  stab  thee.  160 

Fal.  I  call  thee  coward!  I’ll  see  thee  damned  ere 
I  call  thee  coward:  but  I  would  give  a  thousand 


ACT  II 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


446 

pound  I  could  run  as  fast  as  thou  canst.  You  are 
straight  enough  in  the  shoulders,  you  care  not 
who  sees  your  back:  call  you  that  backing  of 
your  friends?  A  plague  upon  such  backing!  give 
me  them  that  will  face  me.  Give  me  a  cup  of 
sack:  I  am  a  rogue,  if  I  drunk  to-day. 

Prince.  O  villain!  thy  lips  are  scarce  wiped  since 
thou  drunkest  last.  171 

Fal.  All’s  one  for  that.  [He  drinks.]  A  plague  of 
all  cowards,  still  say  I. 

Prince.  What’s  the  matter? 

Fal.  What’s  the  matter!  there  be  four  of  us 
here  have  ta’en  a  thousand  pound  this  day  morn- 

Prince.  Where  is  it.  Jack?  where  is  it? 

Fal.  Where  is  it!  taken  from  us  it  is:  a  hundred 
upon  poor  four  of  us.  180 

Prince.  What,  a  hundred,  man? 

Fal.  I  am  a  rogue,  if  I  were  not  at  half-sword 
with  a  dozen  of  them  two  hours  together.  I  have 
’scaped  by  miracle.  I  am  eight  times  thrust 
through  the  doublet,  four  through  the  hose;  my 
buckler  cut  through  and  through;  my  sword 
hacked  like  a  hand-saw — ecce  signum!  I  never 
dealt  better  since  I  was  a  man:  all  would  not  do. 
A  plague  of  all  cowards!  Let  them  speak:  if  they 
speak  more  or  less  than  truth,  they  are  villains 
and  the  sons  of  darkness.  /y/ 

Prince.  Speak,  sirs;  how  was  it? 

Gads.  We  four  set  upon  some  dozen — 

Fal.  Sixteen  at  least,  my  lord. 

Gads.  And  bound  them. 

Peto.  No,  no,  they  were  not  bound. 

Fal.  You  rogue,  they  were  bound,  every  man  of 
them;  or  I  am  a  Jew  else,  an  Ebrew  Jew. 

Gads.  As  we  were  sharing,  some  six  or  seven 
fresh  men  set  upon  us —  200 

Fal.  And  unbound  the  rest,  and  then  come  in  the 
other. 

Prince.  What,  fought  you  with  them  all? 

Fal.  All!  I  know  not  what  you  call  all;  but  if  I 
fought  not  with  fifty  of  them,  I  am  a  bunch  of 
radish:  if  there  were  not  two  or  three  and  fifty 
upon  poor  old  Jack,  then  am  I  no  two-legged 
creature. 

Prince.  Pray  God  you  have  not  murdered  some 
of  them.  210 

Fal.  Nay,  that’s  past  praying  for:  I  have  pep¬ 
pered  two  of  them;  two  I  am  sure  I  have  paid, 
two  rogues  in  buckram  suits.  I  tell  thee  what, 
Hal,  if  I  tell  thee  a  lie,  spit  in  my  face,  call  me 
horse.  Thou  knowest  my  old  ward;  here  I  lay, 
and  thus  I  bore  my  point.  Four  rogues  in  buck¬ 
ram  let  drive  at  me — 

Prince.  What,  four?  thou  saidst  but  two  even 
now. 


Fal.  Four,  Hal;  I  told  thee  four.  220 

Poins.  Ay,  ay,  he'said  four. 

Fal.  These  four  came  all  a-front,  and  mainly 
thrust  at  me.  I  made  me  no  more  ado  but  took 
all  their  seven  points  in  my  target,  thus. 

Prince.  Seven?  why,  there  were  but  four  even 
now. 

Fal.  In  buckram? 

Poins.  Ay,  four,  in  buckram  suits. 

Fal.  Seven,  by  these  hilts,  or  I  am  a  villain  else. 

Prince.  Prithee,  let  him  alone;  we  shall  have 
more  anon.  252 

Fal.  Dost  thou  hear  me,  Hal? 

Prince.  Ay,  and  mark  thee  too.  Jack. 

Fal.  Do  so,  for  it  is  worth  the  listening  to. 

These  nine  in  buckram  that  I  told  thee  of — 

Prince.  So,  two  more  already. 

Fal.  Their  points  being  broken — 

Poins.  Down  fell  their  hose.  255? 

Fal.  Began  to  give  me  ground:  but  I  followed 
me  close,  came  in  foot  and  hand;  and  with  a 
thought  seven  of  the  eleven  I  paid. 

Prince.  O  monstrous!  eleven  buckram  men 
grown  out  of  two! 

Fal.  But,  as  the  devil  would  have  it,  three  mis¬ 
begotten  knaves  in  Kendal  green  came  at  my 
back  and  let  drive  at  me;  for  it  was  so  dark,  Hal, 
that  thou  couldst  not  see  thy  hand. 

Prince.  These  lies  are  like  their  father  that  be¬ 
gets  them;  gross  as  a  mountain,  open,  palpable. 
Why,  thou  clay-brained  guts,  thou  knotty-pated 
fool,  thou  whoreson,  obscene,  greasy  tallow- 
catch — 

Fal.  What,  art  thou  mad?  art  thou  mad?  is  not 
the  truth  the  truth? 

Prince.  Why,  how  couldst  thou  know  these  men 
in  Kendal  green,  when  it  was  so  dark  thou  couldst 
not  see  thy  hand?  come,  tell  us  your  reason: 
what  sayest  thou  to  this?  2551 

Poins.  Come,  your  reason.  Jack,  your  reason. 

Fal.  What,  upon  compulsion?  ’Zounds,  an  I 
were  at  the  strappado,  or  all  the  racks  in  the 
world,  I  would  not  tell  you  on  compulsion.  Give 
you  a  reason  on  compulsion!  if  reasons  were  as 
plentiful  as  blackberries,  I  would  give  no  man  a 
reason  upon  compulsion,  I. 

Prince.  I’ll  be  no  longer  guilty  of  this  sin;  this 
sanguine  coward,  this  bed-presser,  this  horse¬ 
back-breaker,  this  huge  hill  of  flesh —  2  6'y 

Fal.  ’Sblood,  you  starveling,  you  elf-skin,  you 
dried  neat’s  tongue,  you  bull’s  pizzle,  you  stock¬ 
fish!  O  for  breath  to  utter  what  is  like  thee!  you 
tailor’s-yard,  you  sheath,  you  bow-case,  you  vile 
standing-tuck — 

Prince.  Well,  breathe  awhile,  and  then  to  it 
again;  and  when  thou  hast  tired  thyself  in  base 


SCENE  IV 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


comparisons,  hear  me  speak  but  this. 

Poins.  Mark,  Jack. 

Prince,  We  two  saw  you  four  set  on  four  and 
bound  them,  and  were  masters  of  their  wealth. 
Mark  now,  how  a  plain  tale  shall  put  you  down. 
Then  did  we  two  set  on  you  four;  and,  with  a 
word,  out-faced  you  from  your  prize,  and  have 
it;  yea,  and  can  show  it  you  here  in  the  house: 
and,  Falstaff,  you  carried  your  guts  away  as 
nimbly,  with  as  quick  dexterity,  and  roared  for 
mercy  and  still  run  and  roared,  as  ever  I  heard 
bull-calf.  What  a  slave  art  thou,  to  hack  thy 
sword  as  thou  hast  done,  and  then  say  it  was  in 
fight!  What  trick,  what  device,  what  starting- 
hole,  canst  thou  now  find  out  to  hide  thee  from 
this  open  and  apparent  shame? 

Poins,  Q)me,  let’s  hear.  Jack;  what  trick  hast 
thou  now? 

Fal.  By  the  Lord,  I  knew  ye  as  well  as  he  that 
made  ye.  Why,  hear  you,  my  masters:  was  it  for 
me  to  kill  the  heir-apparent?  should  I  turn  upon 
the  true  prince?  why,  thou  knowest  I  am  as 
valiant  as  Hercules:  but  beware  instinct;  the  lion 
will  not  touch  the  true  prince.  Instinct  is  a  great 
matter;  I  was  now  a  coward  on  instinct.  I  shall 
think  the  better  of  myself  and  thee  during  my 
life;  I  for  a  valiant  lion,  and  thou  for  a  true  prince. 
But,  by  the  Lord,  lads,  I  am  glad  you  have  the 
money.  Hostess,  clap  to  the  doors:  watch  to¬ 
night,  pray  to-morrow.  Gallants,  lads,  boys, 
hearts  of  gold,  all  the  titles  of  good  fellowship 
come  to  you!  What,  shall  we  be  merry?  shall 
we  have  a  play  extempore? 

Prince.  Content;  and  the  argument  shall  be  thy 
running  away.  5// 

Fal.  Ah,  no  more  of  that,  Hal,  an  thou  lovest 
me! 

Enter  mistress  quickly,  the  Hostess. 

Quick.  O  Jesu,  my  lord  the  prince! 

Prince.  How  now,  my  lady  the  hostess!  what 
sayest  thou  to  me? 

Quick.  Marry,  my  lord,  there  is  a  nobleman  of 
the  court  at  door  would  speak  with  you:  he  says 
he  comes  from  your  father. 

Prince.  Give  him  as  much  as  will  make  him  a 
royal  man,  and  send  him  back  again  to  my 
mother. 

Fal.  What  manner  of  man  is  he? 

Quick.  An  old  man. 

Fal.  What  doth  gravity  out  of  his  bed  at  mid¬ 
night?  Shall  I  give  him  his  answer? 

Prince.  Prithee,  do.  Jack. 

Fal.  ’Faith,  and  I’ll  send  him  packing.  [Exit. 

Prince.  Now,  sirs:  by’r  lady,  you  fought  fair; 
so  did  you,  Peto;  so  did  you,  Bardolph:  you  are 


447 

lions  too,  you  ran  away  upon  instinct,  you  will 
not  touch  the  true  prince;  no,  fie! 

Bard.  ’Faith,  I  ran  when  I  saw  others  run. 

Prince.  ’Faith,  tell  me  now  in  earnest,  how  came 
Falstaff ’s  sword  so  hacked? 

Peto.  Why,  he  hacked  it  with  his  dagger,  and 
said  he  would  swear  truth  out  of  England  but  he 
would  make  you  believe  it  was  done  in  fight,  and 
persuaded  us  to  do  the  like.  ^^p 

Bard.  Yea,  and  to  tickle  our  noses  with  spear- 
grass  to  make  them  bleed,  and  then  to  beslubber 
our  garments  with  it  and  swear  it  was  the  blood 
of  true  men.  I  did  that  I  did  not  this  seven  year 
before,  I  blushed  to  hear  his  monstrous  devices. 
Prince.  O  villain,  thou  stolest  a  cup  of  sack 
eighteen  years  ago,  and  wert  taken  with  the 
manner,  and  ever  since  thou  hast  blushed  extem¬ 
pore.  Thou  hadst  fire  and  sword  on  thy  side,  and 
yet  thou  rannest  away:  what  instinct  hadst  thou 
for  it?  550 

Bard.  My  lord,  do  you  see  these  meteors?  do 
you  behold  these  exhalations? 

Prince.  I  do. 

Bard.  What  think  you  they  portend? 

Prince.  Hot  livers  and  cold  purses. 

Bard.  Choler,  my  lord,  if  rightly  taken. 

Prince.  No,  if  rightly  taken,  halter. 

Re-enter  falstaff. 

Here  comes  lean  Jack,  here  comes  bare-bone. 
How  now,  my  sweet  creature  of  bombast!  How 
long  is’t  ago.  Jack,  since  thou  sawest  thine  own 
knee?  ^61 

Fal.  My  own  knee!  when  I  was  about  thy  years, 
Hal,  I  was  not  an  eagle’s  talon  in  the  waist;  I 
could  have  crept  into  any  alderman’s  thumb¬ 
ring:  a  plague  of  sighing  and  grief!  it  blows  a 
man  up  like  a  bladder.  There’s  villainous  news 
abroad:  here  was  Sir  John  Bracy  from  your  fa¬ 
ther;  you  must  to  the  court  in  the  morning.  That 
same  mad  fellow  of  the  north,  Percy,  and  he  of 
Wales,  that  gave  Amamon  the  bastinado  and 
made  Lucifer  cuckold  and  swore  the  devil  his 
true  liegeman  upon  the  cross  of  aWelsh  hook — 
what  a  plague  call  you  him? 

Poins.  O,  Glendower. 

Fal.  Owen,  Owen,  the  same;  and  his  son-in-law 
Mortimer,  and  old  Northumberland,  and  that 
sprightly  Scot  of  Scots,  Douglas,  that  runs  o’ 
horseback  up  a  hill  perpendicular — 

Prince.  He  that  rides  at  high  speed  and  with  his 
pistol  kills  a  sparrow  flying.  380 

Fal.  You  have  hit  it. 

Prince.  So  did  he  never  the  sparrow. 

Fal.  Well,  that  rascal  hath  good  mettle  in  him; 
he  will  not  run. 


ACT  II 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


448 

Prince.  Why,  what  a  rascal  art  thou  then,  to 
praise  him  so  for  running! 

Fal.  O’  horseback,  ye  cuckoo;  but  afoot  he  will 
not  budge  a  foot. 

Prince.  Yes,  Jack,  upon  instinct.  5  i’p 

Fal.  I  grant  ye,  upon  instinct.  Well,  he  is  there 
too,  and  one  Mordake,  and  a  thousand  blue-caps 
more;  Worcester  is  stolen  away  to-night;  thy 
father’s  beard  is  turned  white  with  the  news:  you 
may  buy  land  now  as  cheap  as  stinking  mackerel. 

Prince.  Why,  then,  it  is  like,  if  there  come  a  hot 
June  and  this  civil  buffeting  hold,  we  shall  buy 
maidenheads  as  they  buy  hob-nails,  by  the  hun¬ 
dreds.  399 

Fal.  By  the  mass,  lad,  thou  sayest  true;  it  is  like 
we  shall  have  good  trading  that  way.  But  tell  me, 
Hal,  art  not  thou  horrible  afeard?  thou  being 
heir-apparent,  could  the  world  pick  thee  out 
three  such  enemies  again  as  that  fiend  Douglas, 
that  spirit  Percy,  and  that  devil  Glendower? 
Art  thou  not  horribly  afraid?  doth  not  thy  blood 
thrill  at  it? 

Prince.  Not  a  whit,  i’  faith;  I  lack  some  of  thy 
instinct.  409 

Fal.  Well,  thou  wilt  be  horribly  chid  to-morrow 
when  thou  comes  t  to  thy  father:  if  thou  love  me, 
practise  an  answer. 

Prince.  Do  thou  stand  for  my  father,  and  exam¬ 
ine  me  upon  the  particulars  of  my  life? 

Fal.  Shall  I?  content:  this  chair  shall  be  my 
state,  this  dagger  my  sceptre,  and  this  cushion  my 
crown. 

Prince.  Thy  state  is  taken  for  a  joined-stool,  thy 
golden  sceptre  for  a  leaden  dagger,  and  thy  pre¬ 
cious  rich  crown  for  a  pitiful  bald  crown!  420 

Fal.  Well,  an  the  fire  of  grace  be  not  quite  out 
of  thee,  now  shalt  thou  be  moved.  Give  me  a  cup 
of  sack  to  make  my  eyes  look  red,  that  it  may  be 
thought  I  have  wept;  for  I  must  speak  in  passion, 
and  I  will  do  it  in  King  Cambyses’  vein. 

Prince.  Well,  here  is  my  leg. 

Fal.  And  here  is  my  speech.  Stand  aside,  nobil- 
ity.  429 

Quick.  O  Jesu,  this  is  excellent  sport,  i’ faith! 

Fal.  Weep  not,  sweet  queen;  for  trickling  tears 
are  vain. 

Quick.  O,  the  father,  how  he  holds  his  counte¬ 
nance! 

Fal.  For  God’s  sake,  lords,  convey  my  tristful 
queen; 

For  tears  do  stop  the  flood-gates  of  her  eyes. 

Quick.  O  Jesu,  he  doth  it  as  like  one  of  these 
harlotry  players  as  ever  I  see! 

Fal.  Peace,  good  pint-pot;  peace,  good  tickle- 
brain.  Harry,  I  do  not  only  marvel  where  thou 
spendest  thy  time,  but  also  how  thou  art  accom¬ 


panied:  for  though  the  camomile,  the  more  it  is 
trodden  on  the  faster  it  grows,  yet  youth,  the 
more  it  is  wasted  the  sooner  it  wears.  That  thou 
art  my  son,  I  have  partly  thy  mother’s  word, 
partly  my  own  opinion,  but  chiefly  a  villainous 
trick  of  thine  eye  and  a  foolish  hanging  of  thy 
nether  lip,  that  doth  warrant  me.  If  then  thou  be 
son  to  me,  here  lies  the  point;  why,  being  son  to 
me,  art  thou  so  pointed  at?  Shall  the  blessed  sun 
of  heaven  prove  a  micher  and  eat  blackberries?  a 
question  not  to  be  asked.  Shall  the  son  of  England 
prove  a  thief  and  take  purses?  a  question  to  be 
asked.  There  is  a  thing,  Harry,  which  thou  hast 
often  heard  of  and  it  is  known  to  many  in  our 
land  by  the  name  of  pitch:  this  pitch,  as  ancient 
writers  do  report,  doth  defile;  so  doth  the  com¬ 
pany  thou  keepest:  for,  Harry,  now  I  do  not 
speak  to  thee  in  drink  but  in  tears,  not  in  pleasure 
but  in  passion,  not  in  words  only,  but  in  woes 
also:  and  yet  there  is  a  virtuous  man  whom  I 
have  often  noted  in  thy  company,  but  I  know  not 
his  name.  ^61 

Prince.  What  manner  of  man,  an  it  like  your 
Majesty? 

Fal.  A  goodly  portly  man,  i’faith,  and  a  corpu¬ 
lent;  of  a  cheerful  look,  a  pleasing  eye,  and  a 
most  noble  carriage;  and,  as  I  think,  his  age 
some  fifty,  or,  by’r  lady,  inclining  to  three  score; 
and  now  I  remember  me,  his  name  is  Fal  staff:  if 
that  man  should  be  lewdly  given,  he  deceiveth 
me;  for,  Harry,  I  see  virtue  in  his  looks.  If  then 
the  tree  may  be  known  by  the  fruit,  as  the  fruit 
by  the  tree,  then  peremptorily  I  speak  it,  there  is 
virtue  in  that  Falstaff:  him  keep  with,  the  rest 
banish.  And  tell  me  now,  thou  naughty  varlet, 
tell  me,  where  hast  thou  been  this  month? 

Prince.  Dost  thou  speak  like  a  king?  Do  thou 
stand  for  me,  and  I’ll  play  my  father. 

Fal.  Depose  me?  if  thou  dost  it  half  so  gravely, 
so  majestically,  both  in  word  and  matter,  hang 
me  up  by  the  heels  for  a  rabbit-sucker  or  a  poul- 
ter’s  hare.  481 

Prince.  Well,  here  I  am  set. 

Fal.  And  here  I  stand:  judge,  my  masters. 

Prince.  Now,  Harry,  whence  come  you? 

Fal.  My  noble  lord,  from  Eastcheap. 

Prince.  The  complaints  I  hear  of  thee  are  griev¬ 
ous. 

Fal.  ’Sblood,  my  lord,  they  are  false:  nay.  I’ll 
tickle  ye  for  a  young  prince,  i’faith.  489 

Prince.  Swearest  thou,  ungracious  boy?  hence¬ 
forth  ne’er  look  on  me.  Thou  art  violently  car¬ 
ried  away  from  grace:  there  is  a  devil  haunts  thee 
in  the  likeness  of  an  old  fat  man;  a  tun  of  man  is 
thy  companion.  Why  dost  thou  converse  with 
that  trunk  of  humours,  that  bolting-hutch  of 


SCENE  rv 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


beastliness,  that  swollen  parcel  of  dropsies,  that 
huge  bombard  of  sack,  that  stuffed  cloak-bag  of 
guts,  that  roasted  Manningtree  ox  with  the  pud¬ 
ding  in  his  belly,  that  reverend  vice,  that  grey 
iniquity,  that  father  ruffian,  that  vanity  in  years? 
Wherein  is  he  good,  but  to  taste  sack  and  drink 
it?  wherein  neat  and  cleanly,  but  to  carve  a  capon 
and  eat  it?  wherein  cunning,  but  in  craft?  where¬ 
in  crafty,  but  in  villainy?  wherein  villainous,  but 
in  all  things?  wherein  worthy,  but  in  nothing? 

FaL  I  v/ould  your  Grace  would  take  me  with 
you:  whom  means  your  Grace? 

Prince.  That  villainous  abominable  misleader  of 
youth,  Falstaff,  that  old  white-bearded  Satan. 

FaL  My  lord,  the  man  I  know.  j/o 

Prince.  I  know  thou  dost. 

Fal.  But  to  say  I  know  more  harm  in  him  than 
in  myself,  were  to  say  more  than  I  know.  That 
he  is  old,  the  more  the  pity,  his  white  hairs  do 
witness  it;  but  that  he  is,  saving  your  reverence, 
a  whoremaster,  that  I  utterly  deny.  If  sack  and 
sugar  be  a  fault,  God  help  the  wicked!  if  to  be 
old  and  merry  be  a  sin,  then  many  an  old  host 
that  I  know  is  damned:  if  to  be  fat  be  to  be  hated, 
then  Pharaoh’s  lean  kine  are  to  be  loved.  No,  my 
good  lord;  banish  Peto,  banish  Bardolph,  banish 
Poins:  but  for  sweet  Jack  Falstaff,  kind  Jack 
Falstaff,  true  Jack  Falstaff,  valiant  Jack  Falstaff, 
and  therefore  more  valiant,  being,  as  he  is,  old 
Jack  Falstaff,  banish  not  him  thy  Harry’s  com¬ 
pany,  banish  not  him  thy  Harry’s  company: 
banish  plump  Jack,  and  banish  all  the  world. 

Prince.  I  do,  I  will.  [A  knocking  heard.  Exeunt 

MISTRESS  QUICKLY,  FRANCIS,  and  BARDOLPH. 

Re-enter  bardolph,  running. 

Bard.  O,  my  lord,  my  lord!  the  sheriff  with  a 
most  monstrous  watch  is  at  the  door.  550 

Fal.  Out,  ye  rogue!  Play  out  the  play;  I  have 
much  to  say  in  the  behalf  of  that  Falstaff. 

Re-enter  mistress  quickly. 

Quick.  O  Jesu,  my  lord,  my  lord! 

Prince.  Heigh,  heigh!  the  devil  rides  upon  a 
fiddlestick:  what’s  the  matter? 

Quick.  The  sheriff  and  all  the  watch  are  at  the 
door:  they  are  come  to  search  the  house.  Shall  I 
let  them  in? 

Fal.  Dost  thou  hear,  Hal?  never  call  a  true  piece 
of  gold  a  counterfeit:  thou  art  essentially  mad, 
without  seeming  so.  54/ 

Prince.  And  thou  a  natural  coward,  without  in¬ 
stinct. 

Fal.  I  deny  your  major:  if  you  will  deny  the 
sheriff,  so;  if  not,  let  him  enter:  if  I  become  not 
a  cart  as  well  as  another  man,  a  plague  on  my 


449 

bringing  up!  I  hope  I  shall  as  soon  be  strangled 
with  a  halter  as  another. 

Prince.  Go,  hide  thee  behind  the  arras:  the  lest 
walk  up  above.  Now,  my  masters,  for  a  true  face 
and  good  conscience. 

Fal.  Both  which  I  have  had:  but  their  date  is 
out,  and  therefore  I’ll  hide  me. 

Prince.  Call  in  the  sheriff. 

[Exeunt  all  except  the  prince  and  peto. 

Enter  sheriff  and  the  first  carrier. 

Now,  master  sheriff,  what  is  your  will  with  me? 
Sher.  First,  pardon  me,  my  lord.  A  hue  and  cry 
Hath  follow’d  certain  men  unto  this  house. 

Prince.  What  men? 

Sher.  One  of  them  is  well  known,  my  gracious 
lord, 

A  gross  fat  man. 

ist  Car.  As  fat  as  butter.  ^60 

Prince.  The  man,  I  do  assure  you,  is  not  here; 

For  I  myself  at  this  time  have  employ’d  him. 

And,  sheriff,  I  will  engage  my  word  to  thee 
That  I  will,  by  to-morrow  dinner-time, 

Send  him  to  answer  thee,  or  any  man. 

For  anything  he  shall  be  charged  withal: 

And  so  let  me  entreat  you  leave  the  house. 

Sher.  I  will,  my  lord.  There  are  two  gentlemen 
Have  in  this  robbery  lost  three  hundred  marks. 
Prince.  It  may  be  so:  if  he  have  robb’d  these 
men,  570 

He  shall  be  answerable;  and  so  farewell. 

Sher.  Good  night,  my  noble  lord. 

Prince.  I  think  it  is  good  morrow,  is  it  not? 

Sher.  Indeed,  my  lord,  I  think  it  be  two  o’clock. 

[Exeunt  sheriff  and  first  carrier. 
Prince.  This  oily  rascal  is  known  as  well  as 
Paul’s.  Go,  call  him  forth. 

Peto.  Falstaff! — Fast  asleep  behind  the  arras,  and 
snorting  like  a  horse. 

Prince.  Hark,  how  hard  he  fetches  breath.  Search 
his  pockets.  [He  searcheth  his  pockets,  and  jindeth 
certain  papers^  What  hast  thou  found? 

Peto.  Nothing  but  papers,  my  lord. 

Prince.  Let’s  see  what  they  be:  read  them. 


Peto.  [Reads] ''Item,  A  c2ipon,  .  .  2s.  2d. 

Item,  Sauce,  .  .  ^d. 

Item,  Sack,  two  gallons,  .  5s.  8d. 
Item,  Anchovies  and  sack 

after  supper,  .  2s.  6d. 

Item,  Bread,  .  ob.” 


Prince.  O  monstrous!  but  one  half-penny- worth 
of  bread  to  this  intolerable  deal  of  sack!  What 
there  is  else,  keep  close;  we’ll  read  it  at  more 
advantage:  there  let  him  sleep  till  day.  I’ll  to  the 
court  in  the  morning.  We  must  all  to  the  wars, 
and  thy  place  shall  be  honourable*.  I’ll  procure 


ACT  in 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


450 

this  fat  rogue  a  charge  of  foot;  and  I  know  his 
death  will  be  a  march  of  twelve-score.  The 
money  shall  be  paid  back  again  with  advantage. 
Be  with  me  betimes  in  the  morning;  and  so,  good 
morrow,  Peto.  601 

Peto,  Good  morrow,  good  my  lord.  [Exeunt, 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  Bangor:  The  Archdeacon's  house 
Enter  hotspur,  Worcester,  Mortimer,  and 

GLENDOWER 

Mort,  These  promises  are  fair,  the  parties  sure. 
And  our  induction  full  of  prosperous  hope. 

Hot.  Lord  Mortimer,  and  cousin  Glendower, 
Will  you  sit  down? 

And  Uncle  Worcester:  a  plague  upon  it! 

I  have  forgot  the  map. 

Glend.  No,  here  it  is. 

Sit,  cousin  Percy;  sit,  good  cousin  Hotspur, 

For  by  that  name  as  oft  as  Lancaster 
Doth  speak  of  you,  his  cheek  looks  pale  and  with 
A  rising  sigh  he  wisheth  you  in  heaven.  10 

Hot.  And  you  in  hell,  as  oft  as  he  hears  Owen 
Glendower  spoke  of. 

Glend.  I  cannot  blame  him:  at  my  nativity 
The  front  of  heaven  was  full  of  fiery  shapes. 

Of  burning  cressets;  and  at  my  birth 
The  frame  and  huge  foundation  of  the  earth 
Shaked  like  a  coward. 

Hot.  Why,  so  it  would  have  done  at  the  same 
season,  if  your  mother’s  cat  had  but  kittened, 
though  yourself  had  never  been  born.  20 

Glend.  I  say  the  earth  did  shake  when  I  was 
born. 

Hot.  And  I  say  the  earth  was  not  of  my  mind. 

If  you  suppose  as  fearing  you  it  shook. 

Glend.  The  heavens  were  all  on  fire,  the  earth 
did  tremble. 

Hot.  O,  then  the  earth  shook  to  see  the  heavens 
on  fire. 

And  not  in  fear  of  your  nativity. 

Diseased  nature  oftentimes  breaks  forth 
In  strange  eruptions;  oft  the  teeming  earth 
Is  with  a  kind  of  colic  pinch’d  and  vex’d 
By  the  imprisoning  of  unruly  wind  50 

Within  her  womb;  which,  for  enlargement  striv¬ 
ing, 

Shakes  the  old  beldam  earth  and  topples  down 
Steeples  and  moss-grown  towers.  At  your  birth 
Our  grandam  earth,  having  this  distemperature. 

In  passion  shook. 

Glend.  Cousin,  of  many  men 

I  do  not  bear  these  crossings.  Give  me  leave 
To  tell  you  once  again  that  at  my  birth 
The  front  of  heaven  was  fiill  of  fiery  shapes, 


The  goats  ran  from  the  mountains,  and  the  herds 
Were  strangely  clamorous  to  the  frighted  fields. 
These  signs  have  mark’d  me  extraordinary; 

And  all  the  courses  of  my  life  do  show 
I  am  not  in  the  roll  of  common  men. 

Where  is  he  living,  clipp’d  in  with  the  sea 
That  chides  the  banks  of  England,  Scotland, 
Wales, 

Which  calls  me  pupil,  or  hath  read  to  me? 

And  bring  him  out  that  is  but  woman’s  son 
Can  trace  me  in  the  tedious  ways  of  art 
And  hold  me  pace  in  deep  experiments. 

Hot.  I  think  there’s  no  man  speaks  better 
Welsh.  I’ll  to  dinner.  5/ 

Mort.  Peace,  cousin  Percy;  you  will  make  him 
mad. 

Glend.  I  can  call  spirits  from  the  vasty  deep. 

Hot.  Why,  so  can  I,  or  so  can  any  man; 

But  will  they  come  when  you  do  call  for  them? 

Glend.  Why,  I  can  teach  you,  cousin,  to  com¬ 
mand 
The  devil. 

Hot.  And  I  can  teach  thee,  coz,  to  shame  the 
devil 

By  telling  truth:  tell  truth  and  shame  the  devil. 

If  thou  have  power  to  raise  him,  bring  him 
hither. 

And  I’ll  be  sworn  I  have  power  to  shame  him 
hence.  6i 

O,  while  you  live,  tell  truth  and  shame  the  devil! 
Mort.  Come,  come,  no  more  of  this  unprofitable 
chat. 

Glend.  Three  times  hath  Henry  Bolingbroke 
made  head 

Against  my  power;  thrice  from  the  banks  of  Wye 
And  sandy-bottom’d  Severn  have  I  sent  him 
Bootless  home  and  weather-beaten  back. 

Hot.  Home  without  boots,  and  in  foul  weather 
too! 

How  ’scapes  he  agues,  in  the  devil’s  name? 

Glend.  Come,  here’s  the  map:  shall  we  divide 
our  right  70 

According  to  our  threefold  order  ta’en? 

Mort.  The  Archdeacon  hath  divided  it 
Into  three  limits  very  equally: 

England,  from  Trent  and  Severn  hitherto. 

By  south  and  east  is  to  my  part  assign’d: 

All  westward,  Wales  beyond  the  Severn  shore. 
And  all  the  fertile  land  within  that  bound. 

To  Owen  Glendower:  and,  dear  coz,  to  you 
The  remnant  northward,  lying  off  from  Trent. 
And  our  indentures  tripartite  are  drawn;  80 

Which  being  sealed  interchangeably, 

A  business  that  this  night  may  execute, 

To-morrow,  cousin  Percy,  you  and  I 

And  my  good  Lord  of  Worcester  will  set  forth 


SCENE  I  FIRST  PART  OF 

To  meet  your  father  and  the  Scottish  power, 

As  is  appointed  us,  at  Shrewsbury. 

My  father  Glendower  is  not  ready  yet. 

Nor  shall  we  need  his  help  these  fourteen  days. 
Within  that  space  you  may  have  drawn  together 
Your  tenants,  friends,  and  neighbouring  gentle¬ 
men.  90 

Glend,  A  shorter  time  shall  send  me  to  you, 
lords : 

And  in  my  conduct  shall  your  ladies  come; 

From  whom  you  now  must  steal  and  take  no 
leave. 

For  there  will  be  a  world  of  water  shed 
Upon  the  parting  of  your  wives  and  you. 

Hot.  Methinks  my;  moiety,  north  from  Burton 
here. 

In  quantity  equals  not  one  of  yours : 

See  how  this  river  comes  me  cranking  in, 

And  cuts  me  from  the  best  of  all  my  land 
A  huge  half-moon,  a  monstrous  cantle  out.  100 
I’ll  hdve  the  current  in  this  place  damm’d  up; 

And  here  the  smug  and  silver  Trent  shall  run 
In  a  new  channel,  fair  and  evenly; 

It  shall  not  wind  with  such  a  deep  indent, 

To  rob  me  of  so  rich  a  bottom  here. 

Glend.  Not  wind?  it  shall,  it  must;  you  see  it 
doth. 

Mort.  Yea,  but 

Mark  how  he  bears  his  course,  and  runs  me  up 
With  like  advantage  on  the  other  side; 

Gelding  the  opposed  continent  as  much  no 

As  on  the  other  side  it  takes  from  you. 

Wor.  Yea,  but  a  little  charge  will  trench  him 
here 

And  on  this  north  side  win  this  cape  of  land; 

And  then  he  runs  straight  and  even. 

Hot.  I’ll  have  it  so:  a  little  charge  will  do  it. 
Glend.  I’ll  not  have  it  alter’d. 

Hot.  Will  not  you? 

Glend.  No,  nor  you  shall  not. 

Hot.  Who  shall  say  me  nay? 

Glend.  Why,  that  will  I. 

Hot.  Let  me  not  understand  you,  then;  speak  it 
in  Welsh.  120 

Glend.  I  can  speak  English,  lord,  as  well  as  you; 
For  I  was  train’d  up  in  the  English  court; 

Where,  being  but  young,  I  framed  to  the  harp 
Many  an  English  ditty  lovely  well 
And  gave  the  tongue  a  helpful  ornament, 

A  virtue  that  was  never  seen  in  you. 

Hot.  Marry, 

And  I  am  glad  of  it  with  all  my  heart: 

I  had  rather  be  a  kitten  and  cry  mew 

Than  one  of  these  same  metre  ballad-mongers; 

I  had  rather  hear  a  brazen  canstick  turn’d, 

Or  a  dry  wheel  grate  on  the  axle-tree; 


KING  HENRY  IV  451 

And  that  would  set  my  teeth  nothing  on  edge, 
Nothing  so  much  as  mincing  poetry: 

’Tis  like  the  forced  gait  of  a  shuffling  nag. 

Glend. you  shall  have  Trent  turn’d. 

Hot.  I  do  not  care:  I’ll  give  thrice  so  much  land 
To  any  well-deserving  friend; 

But  in  the  way  of  bargain,  mark  ye  me. 

I’ll  cavil  on  the  ninth  part  of  a  hair.  1^0 

x\re  the  indentures  drawn?  shall  we  be  gone? 
Glend.  The  moon  shines  fair;  you  may  away 
by  night: 

I’ll  haste  the  writer  and  withal 

Break  with  your  wives  of  your  departure  hence: 

I  am  afraid  my  daughter  will  run  mad. 

So  much  she  doteth  on  her  Mortimer.  [Exit. 
Aiort.  Fie,  cousin  Percy!  how  you  cross  my 
father! 

Hot.  I  cannot  choose:  sometime  he  angers  me 
With  telling  me  of  the  moldwarp  and  the  ant. 

Of  the  dreamer  Merlin  and  his  prophecies,  /jo 
And  of  a  dragon  and  a  finless  fish, 

A  clip-wing’d  griffin  and  a  moulten  raven, 

A  couching  lion  and  a  ramping  cat, 

And  such  a  deal  of  skimble-skamble  stuff 
As  puts  me  from  my  faith.  I  tell  you  what; 

He  held  me  last  night  at  least  nine  hours 
In  reckoning  up  the  several  devils’  names 
That  were  his  lackeys:  I  cried  “hum,”  and 
“well,  go  to,” 

But  mark’d  him  not  a  word.  O,  he  is  as  tedious 
As  a  tired  horse,  a  railing  wife;  160 

Worse  than  a  smoky  house:  I  had  rather  live 
With  cheese  and  garlic  in  a  windmill,  far. 

Than  feed  on  cates  and  have  him  talk  to  me 
In  any  summer-house  in  Christendom. 

Mort.  In  faith,  he  is  a  worthy  gentleman. 
Exceedingly  well  read,  and  profited 
In  strange  concealments,  valiant  as  a  lion 
And  wondrous  affable  and  as  bountiful 
As  mines  of  India.  Shall  I  tell  you,  cousin? 

He  holds  your  temper  in  a  high  respect  /70 

And  curbs  himself  even  of  his  natural  scope 
When  you  come  ’cross  his  humour;  faith,  he 
does: 

I  warrant  you,  that  man  is  not  alive 
Might  so  have  tempted  as  you  have  done. 
Without  the  taste  of  danger  and  reproof: 

But  do  not  use  it  oft,  let  me  entreat  you. 

Wor.  In  faith,  my  lord,  you  are  too  wilful- 
blame; 

And  since  your  coming  hither  have  done  enough 
To  put  him  quite  beside  his  patience. 

You  must  needs  learn,  lord,  to  amend  this  fault: 
Though  sometimes  it  show  greatness,  courage, 
blood —  iSi 

And  that’s  the  dearest  grace  it  renders  you — 


ACT  111 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


452 

Yet  oftentimes  it  doth  present  harsh  rage, 

Defect  of  manners,  want  of  government. 

Pride,  haughtiness,  opinion,  and  disdain: 

The  least  of  which  haunting  a  nobleman 
Loseth  men’s  hearts  and  leaves  behind  a  stain 
Upon  the  beauty  of  all  parts  besides. 

Beguiling  them  of  commendation. 

Hot.  Well,  I  am  school’d:  good  manners  be 
your  speed!  190 

Here  comes  our  wives,  and  let  us  take  our  leave. 

Re-enter  glendower  njoith  the  ladies. 

Mort.  This  is  the  deadly  spite  that  angers  me; 
My  wife  can  speak  no  English,  I  no  Welsh. 
Glend.  My  daughter  weeps:  she  will  not  part 
with  you; 

She’ll  be  a  soldier  too,  she’ll  to  the  wars. 

Mort.  Good  father,  tell  her  that  she  and  my 
aunt  Percy 

Shall  follow  in  your  conduct  speedily. 

GLENDOWER  Speaks  tO  LADY  MORTIMER  in  Welsk, 

and  she  answers  him  in  the  same. 
Glend.  She  is  desperate  here;  a  peevish  self- 
will’d  harlotry,  one  that  no  persuasion  can  do 
good  upon. 

The  LADY  MORTIMER  speaks  in  Welsh, 

Mort.  I  understand  thy  looks :  that  pretty 

Welsh  201 

Which  thou  pour’st  down  from  these  swelling 
heavens 

I  am  too  perfect  in;  and,  but  for  shame. 

In  such  a  parley  should  I  answer  thee. 

The  LADY  MORTIMER  speoks  again  in  Welsh, 

I  understand  thy  kisses  and  thou  mine, 

And  that’s  a  feeling  disputation: 

But  I  will  never  be  a  truant,  love. 

Till  I  have  learn’d  thy  language;  for  thy  tongue 
Makes  Welsh  as  sweet  as  ditties  highly  penn’d, 
Sung  by  a  fair  queen  in  a  summer’s  bower,  210 
With  ravishing  division,  to  her  lute. 

Glend.  Nay,  if  you  melt,  then  will  she  run  mad. 

The  LADY  MORTIMER  speaks  again  in  Welsh, 
Mort.  O,  I  am  ignorance  itself  in  this! 

Glend.  She  bids  you  on  the  wanton  rushes 
lay  you  down 

And  rest  your  gentle  head  upon  her  lap. 

And  she  will  sing  the  song  that  pleaseth  you 
And  on  your  eyelids  crown  the  god  of  sleep. 
Charming  your  blood  with  pleasing  heaviness. 
Making  such  difference  ’twixt  wake  and  sleep 
As  is  the  difference  betwixt  day  and  night  220 
The  hour  before  the  heavenly-harness’d  team 
Begins  his  golden  progress  in  the  east. 

Mort. With,  all  my  heart  I’ll  sit  and  hear  her  sing: 
By  that  time  will  our  book,  I  think,  be  drawn. 
Glend.  Do  so; 


And  those  musicians  that  shall  play  to  you 
Hang  in  the  air  a  thousand  leagues  from  hence. 
And  straight  they  shall  be  here:  sit,  and  attend. 
Hot.  Come,  Kate,  thou  art  perfect  in  lying 
down:  come,  quick,  quick,  that  I  may  lay  my 
head  in  thy  lap.  25/ 

Lady  F.  Go,  ye  giddy  goose. 

The  music  plays. 

Hot.  Now  I  perceive  the  devil  understands 
Welsh; 

And  ’tis  no  marvel  he  is  so  humorous. 

By’r,  lady,  he  is  a  good  musician. 

Lady.  P.  Then  should  you  be  nothing  but 
musical,  for  you  are  altogether  governed  by  hu¬ 
mours.  Lie  still,  ye  thief,  and  hear  the  lady  sing 
in  Welsh. 

Hot.  I  had  rather  hear  Lady,  my  brach,  howl 
in  Irish.  241 

Lady  P.  Wouldst  thou  have  thy  head  broken? 
Hot.  No. 

Lady.  P.  Then  be  still. 

Hot.  Neither;  ’tis  a  woman’s  fault. 

Lady  P.  Now  God  help  thee! 

Hot.  To  the  Welsh  lady’s  bed. 

Lady  P.  What’s  that? 

Hot.  Peace!  she  sings. 

Here  the  lady  mortimer  sings  a  Welsh  song. 
Hot.  Come,  Kate,  I’ll  have  your  song  too. 

Lady  P.  Not  mine,  in  good  sooth.  291 

Hot.  Not  yours,  in  good  sooth!  Heart!  you 
swear  like  a  comfit-maker’s  wife.  “Not  you,  in 
good  sooth,”  and  “as  true  as  I  live,”  and  “as 
God  shall  mend  me,”  and  “as  sure  as  day,” 

And  givest  such  sarcenet  surety  for  thy  oaths 
As  if  thou  never  walk’st  further  than  Finsbury. 
Swear  me,  Kate,  like  a  lady  as  thou  art, 

A  good  mouth-filling  oath,  and  leave  “in  sooth,” 
And  such  protest  of  pepper-gingerbread,  2  60 

To  velvet-guards  and  Sunday-citizens. 

Come,  sing. 

Lady  P.  I  will  not  sing. 

Hot.  ’Tis  the  next  way  to  turn  tailor,  or  be 
red-breast  teacher.  An  the  indentures  be  drawn. 
I’ll  away  within  these  two  hours;  and  so,  come 
in  when  ye  will.  [Exit. 

Glend.  Come,  come.  Lord  Mortimer;  you  arc 
as  slow 

As  hot  Lord  Percy  is  on  fire  to  go. 

By  this  our  book  is  drawn;  we’ll  but  seal,  270 
And  then  to  horse  immediately. 

Mort.  With  all  my  heart.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  London:  the  palace 
Enter  the  king,  prince  of  wales,  and  others. 
King.  Lords,  give  us  leave;  the  Prince  of 
Wales  and  I 


SCENE  II  FIRST  PART  OF 

Must  have  some  private  conference:  but  be  near 
at  hand, 

For  we  shall  presently  have  need  of  you. 

[Exeunt  Lords. 

I  know  not  whether  God  will  have  it  so, 

For  some  displeasing  service  I  have  done. 

That,  in  his  secret  doom,  out  of  my  blood 
He’ll  breed  revengement  and  a  scourge  for  me; 
But  thou  dost  in  thy  passages  of  life 
Make  me  believe  that  thou  art  only  mark’d 
For  the  hot  vengeance  and  the  rod  of  heaven  lo 
To  punish  my  mistreadings.  Tell  me  else. 

Could  such  inordinate  and  low  desires. 

Such  poor,  such  bare,  such  lewd,  such  mean 
attempts. 

Such  barren  pleasures,  rude  society. 

As  thou  art  match’d  withal  and  grafted  to, 
Accompany  the  greatness  of  thy  blood 
And  hold  their  level  with  thy  princely  heart? 
Prince.  So  please  your  Majesty,  I  would  I 
could 

Quit  all  offences  with  as  clear  excuse 

well  as  I  am  doubtless  I  can  purge  20 

Myself  of  many  I  am  charged  withal: 

Yet  such  extenuation  let  me  beg, 

As,  in  reproof  of  many  tales  devised, 

Which  oft  the  ear  of  greatness  needs  must  hear. 

By  smiling  pick-thanks  and  base  newsmongers, 

I  may,  for  some  things  true,  wherein  my  youth 
Hath  faulty  wander’d  and  irregular. 

Find  pardon  on  my  true  submission. 

King.  God  pardon  thee!  yet  let  me  wonder, 
Harry, 

At  thy  affections,  which  do  hold  a  wing  50 
Quite  from  the  flight  of  all  thy  ancestors. 

Thy  place  in  council  thou  hast  rudely  lost, 

Which  by  thy  younger  brother  is  supplied. 

And  art  almost  an  alien  to  the  hearts 
Of  all  the  court  and  princes  of  my  blood: 

The  hope  and  expectation  of  thy  time 
Is  ruin’d,  and  the  soul  of  every  man 
Prophetically  doth  forethink  thy  fall. 

Had  I  so  lavish  of  my  presence  been. 

So  common-hackney’d  in  the  eyes  of  men,  40 

So  stale  and  cheap  to  vulgar  company. 

Opinion,  that  did  help  me  to  the  crown. 

Had  still  kept  loyal  to  possession 
And  left  me  in  reputeless  banishment, 

A  fellow  of  no  mark  nor  likelihood. 

By  being  seldom  seen,  I  could  not  stir 
But  like  a  comet  I  was  wonder’d  at; 

That  men  would  tell  their  children  “This  is  he”; 
Others  would  say  “Wffiere,  which  is  Boling- 
broke?” 

And  then  I  stole  all  courtesy  from  heaven,  jo 
And  dress’d  myself  in  such  humility 


KING  HENRY  IV  453 

That  I  did  pluck  allegiance  from  men’s  hearts. 
Loud  shouts  and  salutations  from  theix  mouths. 
Even  in  the  presence  of  the  crowned  King. 

Thus  did  I  keep  my  person  fresh  and  new; 

My  presence,  like  a  robe  pontifical. 

Ne’er  seen  but  wonder’d  at:  and  so  my  state. 
Seldom  but  sumptuous,  showed  like  a  feast 
And  won  by  rareness  such  solemnity. 

The  skipping  King,  he  ambled  up  and  down  60 
With  shallow  jesters  and  rash  bavin  wits. 

Soon  kindled  and  soon  burnt;  carded  his  state, 
Mingled  his  royalty  with  capering  fools. 

Had  his  great  name  profaned  with  their  scorns 
And  gave  his  countenance,  against  his  name. 

To  laugh  at  gibing  boys  and  stand  the  push 
Of  every  beardless  vain  comparative. 

Grew  a  companion  to  the  common  streets. 
Enfeoff’d  himself  to  popularity; 

That,  being  daily  swallow’d  by  men’s  eyes,  70 
They  surfeited  with  honey  and  began 
To  loathe  the  taste  of  sweetness,  whereof  a  little 
More  than  a  little  is  by  much  too  much. 

So  when  he  had  occasion  to  be  seen. 

He  was  but  as  the  cuckoo  is  in  June, 

Heard,  not  regarded;  seen,  but  with  such  eyes 
As  sick  and  blunted  with  community. 

Afford  no  extraordinary  gaze. 

Such  as  is  bent  on  sun-like  majesty 

When  it  shines  seldom  in  admiring  eyes;  So 

But  rather  drowsed  and  hung  their  eyelids  down. 

Slept  in  his  face  and  render’d  such  aspect 

As  cloudy  men  use  to  their  adversaries. 

Being  with  his  presence  glutted,  gorged,  and  full. 
And  in  that  very  line,  Harry,  standest  thou; 

For  thou  hast  lost  thy  princely  privilege 
With  vile  participation:  not  an  eye 
But  is  a- weary  of  thy  common  sight. 

Save  mine,  which  hath  desired  to  see  thee  more; 
Which  now  doth  that  I  would  not  have  it  do,  po 
Make  blind  itself  with  foolish  tenderness. 

Prince.  I  shall  hereafter,  my  thrice  gracious 
lord. 

Be  more  myself. 

King.  For  all  the  world 

As  thou  art  to  this  hour  was  Richard  then 
When  I  from  France  set  foot  at  Ravenspurgh, 
And  even  as  I  was  then  is  Percy  now. 

Now,  by  my  sceptre  and  my  soul  to  boot. 

He  hath  more  worthy  interest  to  the  state 
Than  thou  the  shadow  of  succession; 

For  of  no  right,  nor  colour  like  to  right,  100 
He  doth  fill  fields  with  harness  in  the  realm. 

Turns  head  against  the  lion's  armed  jaws. 

And,  being  no  more  in  debt  to  years  than  thou. 
Leads  ancient  lords  and  reverend  bishops  on 
To  bloody  battles  and  to  bruising  arms. 


ACT  m 


454  FIRST  PART  OF 

What  never-dying  honour  hath  he  got 
Against  renowned  Douglas!  whose  high  deeds. 
Whose  hot  incursions  and  great  name  in  arms 
Holds  from  all  soldiers  chief  majority 
And  military  title  capital  no 

Through  all  the  kingdoms  that  acknowledge 
Christ; 

Thrice  hath  this  Hotspur,  Mars  in  swathling 
clothes. 

This  infant  warrior,  in  his  enterprises 
Discomfited  great  Douglas,  ta’en  him  once. 
Enlarged  him  and  made  a  friend  of  him. 

To  fill  the  mouth  of  deep  defiance  up 
And  shake  the  peace  and  safety  of  our  throne. 
And  what  say  you  to  this?  Percy,  Northumber¬ 
land, 

The  Archbishop’s  grace  of  York,  Douglas,  Mor¬ 
timer, 

Capitulate  against  us  and  are  up.  120 

But  wherefore  do  I  tell  these  news  to  thee? 

Why,  Harry,  do  I  tell  thee  of  my  foes. 

Which  art  my  near’st  and  dearest  enemy? 

Thou  that  art  like  enough,  through  vassal  fear. 
Base  inclination,  and  the  start  of  spleen, 

To  fight  against  me  under  Percy’s  pay. 

To  dog  his  heels  and  curtsy  at  his  frowns. 

To  show  how  much  thou  art  degenerate. 

Prince.  Do  not  think  so;  you  shall  not  find  it  so: 
And  God  forgive  them  that  so  much  have  sway’d 
Your  Majesty’s  good  thoughts  away  from  me!  75/ 
I  will  redeem  all  this  on  Percy’s  head 
And  in  the  closing  of  some  glorious  day 
Be  bold  to  tell  you  that  I  am  your  son; 

When  I  will  wear  a  garment  all  of  blood 
And  stain  my  favours  in  a  bloody  mask. 

Which,  wash’d  away,  shall  scour  my  shame  with 
it: 

And  that  shall  be  the  day,  whene’er  it  lights, 

That  this  same  child  of  honour  and  renown, 

This  gallant  Hotspur,  this  all-praised  knight,  /40 
And  your  unthought-of  Harry  chance  to  meet. 
For  every  honour  sitting  on  his  helm. 

Would  they  were  multitudes,  and  on  my  head 
My  shames  redoubled!  for  the  time  will  come 
That  I  shall  make  this  northern  youth  exchange 
His  glorious  deeds  for  my  indignities. 

Percy  is  but  my  factor,  good  my  lord. 

To  engross  up  glorious  deeds  on  my  behalf; 

And  I  will  call  him  to  so  strict  account 

That  he  shall  render  every  glory  up,  750 

Yea,  even  the  slightest  worship  of  his  time. 

Or  I  will  tear  the  reckoning  from  his  heart. 

This,  in  the  name  of  God,  I  promise  here: 

The  which  if  He  be  pleased  I  shall  perform, 

I  do  beseech  your  Majesty  may  salve 

The  long-grown  wounds  of  my  intemperance: 


KING  HENRY  IV 

If  not,  the  end  of  life  cancels  all  bands; 

And  I  will  die  a  hurtdred  thousand  deaths 
Ere  break  the  smallest  parcel  of  this  vow. 

King.  A  hundred  thousand  rebels  die  in  this: 
Thou  shalt  have  charge  and  sovereign  trust 
herein. 

Enter  blunt. 

How  now,  good  Blunt?  thy  looks  are  full  of 
speed. 

Blunt.  So  hath  the  business  that  I  come  to 
speak  of. 

Lord  Mortimer  of  Scotland  hath  sent  word 
That  Douglas  and  the  English  rebels  met 
The  eleventh  of  this  month  at  Shrewsbury: 

A  mighty  and  a  fearful  head  they  are. 

If  promises  be  kept  on  every  hand. 

As  ever  offer’d  foul  play  in  a  state. 

King.  The  Earl  of  Westmoreland  set  forth 
to-day;  770 

With  him  my  son.  Lord  John  of  Lancaster; 

For  this  advertisement  is  five  days  old: 

On  Wednesday  next,  Harry,  you  shall  set  for¬ 
ward; 

On  Thursday  we  ourselves  will  march:  our 
meeting 

Is  Bridgenorth:  and,  Harry,  you  shall  march 
Through  Gloucestershire;  by  which  account. 

Our  business  valued,  some  twelve  days  hence 
Our  general  forces  at  Bridgenorth  shall  meet. 

Our  hands  are  full  of  business:  let’s  away; 
Advantage  feeds  him  fat,  while  men  delay.  /80 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Eastcheap:  the  BoaP s-Head  Tavern 
Enter  falstaff  and  bardolph. 

Fal.  Bardolph,  am  I  not  fallen  away  vilely 
since  this  last -action?  do  I  not  bate?  do  I  not 
dwindle?  Why,  my  skin  hangs  about  me  like  an 
old  lady’s  loose  gown;  I  am  withered  like  an  old 
apple-john.  Well,  I’ll  repent,  and  that  suddenly, 
while  I  am  in  some  liking;  I  shall  be  out  of  heart 
shortly,  and  then  I  shall  have  no  strength  to 
repent.  An  I  have  not  forgotten  what  the  inside 
of  a  church  is  made  of,  I  am  a  peppercorn,  a 
brewer’s  horse:  the  inside  of  a  church!  Com¬ 
pany,  villainous  company,  hath  been  the  spoil  of 
me. 

Bard.  Sir  John,  you  are  so  fretful,  you  cannot 
live  long. 

Fal.  Why,  there  is  it:  come  sing  me  a  bawdy 
song;  make  me  merry.  I  was  as  virtuously  given 
as  a  gentleman  need  to  be;  virtuous  enough; 
swore  little;  diced  not  above  seven  times  a  week; 
went  to  a  bawdy-house  not  above  once  in  a 
quarter — of  an  hour;  paid  money  that  I  bor- 


SCENE  III 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


rowed,  three  or  four  times;  lived  well  and  in 
good  compass:  and  now  I  live  out  of  all  order, 
out  of  all  compass. 

Bard.  Why,  you  are  so  fat.  Sir  John,  that 
you  must  needs  be  out  of  all  compass,  out  of  all 
reasonable  compass.  Sir  John. 

Fal.  Do  thou  amend  thy  face,  and  I’ll  amend 
my  life:  thou  art  our  admiral,  thou  bearest  the 
lantern  in  the  poop,  but  ’tis  in  the  nose  of  thee; 
thou  art  the  Knight  of  the  Burning  Lamp.  50 

Bard.  Why,  Sir  John,  my  face  does  you  no 
harm. 

Fal.  No,  I’ll  be  sworn;  I  make  as  good  use 
of  it  as  many  a  man  doth  of  a  Death’s-head  or  a 
memento  mori:  I  never  see  thy  face  but  I  think 
upon  hell-fire  and  Dives  that  lived  in  purple; 
for  there  he  is  in  his  robes,  burning,  burning.  If 
thou  wert  any  way  given  to  virtue,  I  would 
swear  by  thy  face;  my  oath  should  be,  “By  this 
fire  that’s  God’s  angel:”  but  thou  art  altogether 
given  over;  and  wert  indeed,  but  for  the  light  in 
thy  face,  the  son  of  utter  darkness.  When  thou 
rannest  up  Gadshill  in  the  night  to  catch  my 
horse,  if  I  did  not  think  thou  hadst  been  an 
ignis  fatuus  or  a  ball  of  wildfire,  there’s  no  pur¬ 
chase  in  money.  O,  thou  art  a  perpetual  tri¬ 
umph,  an  everlasting  bonfire-light!  Thou  hast 
saved  me  a  thousand  marks  in  links  and  torches, 
walking  with  thee  in  the  night  betwixt  tavern 
and  tavern:  but  the  sack  that  thou  hast  drunk 
me  would  have  bought  me  lights  as  good  cheap 
at  the  dearest  chandler’s  in  Europe.  I  have 
maintained  that  salamander  of  yours  with  fire 
any  time  this  two  and  thirty  years;  God  reward 
me  for  it! 

Bard.  ’Sblood,  I  would  my  face  were  in  your 
belly! 

Fal.  God-a-mercy!  so  should  I  be  sure  to  be 
heart-burned. 

Enter  mistress  quickly. 

How  now.  Dame  Partlet  the  hen!  have  you 
inquired  yet  who  picked  my  pocket?  61 

Qiiick.  Why,  Sir  John,  what  do  you  think. 
Sir  John?  do  you  think  I  keep  thieves  in  my 
house?  I  have  searched,  I  have  inquired,  so 
has  my  husband,  man  by  man,  boy  by  boy, 
servant  by  servant:  the  tithe  of  a  hair  was  never 
lost  in  my  house  before. 

Fal.  Ye  lie,  hostess:  Bardolph  was  shaved 
and  lost  many  a  hair;  and  I’ll  be  sworn  my 
pocket  was  picked.  Go  to,  you  are  a  woman,  go. 

Quick.  Who,  I?  no;  I  defy  thee:  God’s  light,  I 
was  never  called  so  in  mine  own  house  before. 

Fal.  Go  to,  I  know  you  well  enough. 

Quick.  No,  Sir  John;  you  do  not  know  me. 


455 

Sir  John.  I  know  you.  Sir  John:  you  owe  me 
money.  Sir  John;  and  now  you  pick  a  quarrel  to 
beguile  me  of  it:  I  bought  you  a  dozen  of  shirts 
to  your  back. 

Fal.  Dowlas,  filthy  dowlas:  I  have  given 
them  away  to  bakers’  wives,  and  they  have  made 
bolters  of  them.  Si 

Quick.  Now,  as  I  am  a  true  woman,  holland 
of  eight  shillings  an  ell.  You  owe  money  here 
besides,  Sir  John,  for  your  diet  and  by-drink¬ 
ings,  and  money  lent  you,  four  and  twenty 
pound. 

Fal.  He  had  his  part  of  it;  let  him  pay. 

Quick.  He?  alas,  he  is  poor;  he  hath  nothing. 

Fal.  How!  poor?  look  upon  his  face;  what 
call  you  rich?  let  them  coin  his  nose,  let  them 
coin  his  cheeks:  I’ll  not  pay  a  denier.  W  hat,  will 
you  make  a  younker  of  me?  shall  I  not  take 
mine  ease  in  mine  inn  but  I  shall  have  my  pocket 
picked?  I  have  lost  a  seal-ring  of  my  grand¬ 
father’s  worth  forty  mark. 

Quick.  O  Jesu,  I  have  heard  the  Prince  tell 
him,  I  know  not  how  oft,  that  that  ring  was 
copper! 

Fal.  How!  the  Prince  is  a  Jack,  a  sneak-cup: 
’sblood,  an  he  were  here,  I  would  cudgel  him 
like  a  dog,  if  he  would  say  so.  loi 

Enter  the  prince  and  peto,  marchings  and  fal- 

STAFF,  meets  them  playing  on  his  truncheon  like  a 

How  now,  lad!  is  the  wind  in  that  door,  i’  faith? 
must  we  all  march? 

Bard.  Yea,  two  and  two,  Newgate  fashion. 

Quick.  My  lord,  I  pray  you,  hear  me. 

Prince.  VVhat  sayest  thou.  Mistress  Quickly? 
How  doth  thy  husband?  I  love  him  well;  he  is 
an  honest  man. 

Quick.  Good  my  lord,  hear  me. 

Fal.  Prithee,  let  her  alone,  and  list  to  me. 

Prince.  VVhat  sayest  thou.  Jack?  /// 

Fal.  The  other  night  I  fell  asleep  here  be¬ 
hind  the  arras  and  had  my  pocket  picked:  this 
house  is  turned  bawdy-house;  they  pick  pockets. 

Prince.  What  didst  thou  lose.  Jack? 

Fal.  Wilt  thou  believe  me,  Hal?  three  or 
four  bonds  of  forty  pound  a-piece,  and  a  seal-ring 
of  my  grandfather’s. 

Prince.  A  trifle,  some  eight-penny  matter. 

Quick.  So  I  told  him,  my  lord;  and  I  said  I 
heard  your  Grace  say  so:  and,  my  lord,  he 
speaks  most  vilely  of  you,  like  a  foul-mouthed 
man  as  he  is;  and  said  he  would  cudgel  you. 

Prince.  What!  he  did  not? 

Quick.  There’s  neither  faith,  truth,  nor  woman¬ 
hood  in  me  else. 


ACT  IV 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


456 

FaL  There’s  no  more  faith  in  thee  than  in  a 
stewed  prune;  nor  no  more  truth  in  thee  than  in 
a  drawn  fox;  and  for  womanhood,  Maid  Marian 
may  be  the  deputy’s  wife  of  the  ward  to  thee. 
Go,  you  thing,  go.  131 

Quick.  Say,  what  thing?  what  thing? 

Fal.  What  thing!  why,  a  thing  to  thank  God  on. 
Quick.  I  am  no  thing  to  thank  God  on,  I  would 
thou  shouldst  know  it;  I  am  an  honest  man’s 
wife;  and,  setting  thy  knighthood  aside,  thou 
art  a  knave  to  call  me  so. 

Fal.  Setting  thy  womanhood  aside,  thou  art  a 
beast  to  say  otherwise.  140 

Quick.  Say,  what  beast,  thou  knave,  thou? 

Fal.  What  beast!  why,  an  otter. 

Prince.  An  otter.  Sir  John!  why  an  otter? 

Fal.  Why,  she’s  neither  fish  nor  flesh;  a  man 
knows  not  where  to  have  her. 

Quick.  Thou  art  an  unjust  man  in  saying  so: 
thou  or  any  man  knows  where  to  have  me,  thou 
knave,  thou! 

Prince.  Thou  sayest  true,  hostess;  and  he 
slanders  thee  most  grossly.  i$o 

Quick.  So  he  doth  you,  my  lord;  and  said  this 
other  day  you  ought  him  a  thousand  pound. 

Prince.  Sirrah,  do  I  owe  you  a  thousand  pound? 
Fal.  A  thousand  pound,  Hal!  a  million:  thy 
love  is  worth  a  million:  thou  owest  me  thy  love. 

Quick.  Nay,  my  lord,  he  called  you  Jack,  and 
said  he  would  cudgel  you. 

Fal.  Did  I,  Bardolph?  160 

Bard.  Indeed,  Sir  John,  you  said  so. 

Fal.  Yea,  if  he  said  my  ring  was  copper. 

Prince.  I  say  ’tis  copper:  darest  thou  be  as  good 
as  thy  word  now? 

Fal.  Why,  Hal,  thou  knowest,  as  thou  art 
but  man,  I  dare:  but  as  thou  art  Prince,  I  fear 
thee  as  I  fear  the  roaring  of  the  lion’s  whelp. 
Prince.  And  why  not  as  the  lion? 

Fal.  The  King  himself  is  to  be  feared  as  the 
lion:  dost  thou  think  I’ll  fear  thee  as  I  fear  thy 
father?  nay,  an  I  do,  I  pray  God  my  girdle  break. 

Prince.  O,  if  it  should,  how  would  thy  guts 
fall  about  thy  knees!  But,  sirrah,  there’s  no 
room  for  faith,  truth,  nor  honesty  in  this  bosom 
of  thine;  it  is  all  filled  up  with  guts  and  midriff. 
Charge  an  honest  woman  with  picking  thy  pocket! 
why,  thou  whoreson,  impudent,  embossed  rascal, 
if  there  were  anything  in  thy  pocket  but  tavern- 
reckonings,  memorandums  of  bawdy-houses,  and 
one  poor  penny-worth  of  sugar-candy  to  make 
thee  long-winded,  if  thy  pocket  were  enriched 
with  any  other  injuries  but  these,  I  am  a  villain: 
and  yet  you  will  stand  to  it;  you  will  not  pocket 
up  wrong:  art  thou  not  ashamed? 

Fal.  Dost  thou  hear,  Hal?  thou  knowest  in  the 


state  of  innocency  Adam  fell;  and  what  should 
poor  Jack  Falstaff  do  in  the  days  of  villainy? 
Thou  seest  I  have  more  flesh  than  another  man, 
and  therefore  more  frailty.  You  confess  then, 
you  picked  my  pocket?  1^0 

Prince.  It  appears  so  by  the  story. 

Fal.  Hostess,  I  forgive  thee:  go,  make  ready 
breakfast;  love  thy  husband,  look  to  thy  servants, 
cherish  thy  guests:  thou  shalt  find  me  tractable 
to  any  honest  reason:  thou  seest  I  am  pacified 
still.  Nay,  prithee,  be  gone.  [Exit  mistress 
QUICKLY.]  Now,  Hal,  to  the  news  at  court:  for  the 
robbery,  lad,  how  is  that  answered? 

Prince.  O,  my  sweet  beef,  I  must  still  be  good 
angel  to  thee:  the  money  is  paid  back  again.  200 

Fal.  O,  I  do  not  like  that  paying  back;  ’tis  a 
double  labour. 

Prince.  I  am  good  friends  with  my  father  and 
may  do  anything. 

Fal.  Rob  me  the  exchequer  the  first  thing  thou 
doest,  and  do  it  with  unwashed  hands  too. 

Bard.  Do,  my  lord. 

Prince.  I  have  procured  thee.  Jack,  a  charge  of 
foot.  2  op 

Fal.  I  would  it  had  been  of  horse.  Where  shall 
I  find  one  that  can  steal  well?  O,  for  a  fine  thief, 
of  the  age  of  two  and  twenty  or  thereabouts! 
I  am  heinously  unprovided.  Well,  God  be 
thanked  for  these  rebels,  they  offend  none  but 
the  virtuous:  I  laud  them,  I  praise  them. 

Prince.  Bardolph! 

Bard.  My  lord? 

Prince.  Go  bear  this  letter  to  Lord  John  of 
Lancaster,  to  my  brother  John;  this  to  my  Lord 
ofWestmoreland.  [Exit  bardolph.]  Go,  Peto, 
to  horse,  to  horse;  for  thou  and  I  have  thirty 
miles  to  ride  yet  ere  dinner  time.  [Exit  peto.] 
Jack,  meet  me  to-morrow  in  the  Temple  hall  at 
two  o’clock  in  the  afternoon. 

There  shalt  thou  know  thy  charge;  and  there 
receive 

Money  and  order  for  their  furniture. 

The  land  is  burning;  Percy  stands  on  high; 

And  either  we  or  they  must  lower  lie.  [Exit. 

Fal.  Rare  words!  brave  world!  Hostess,  my 
breakfast,  come!  22 p 

O,  I  could  wish  this  tavern  were  my  drum!  [Exit. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  \.  The  rebel  camp  near  Shrewsbury 
Enter  hotspur,  Worcester,  and  douglas. 

Hot.  Well  said,  my  noble  Scot:  if  speaking 
truth 

In  this  fine  age  were  not  thought  flattery, 

Such  attribution  should  the  Douglas  have 


SCENE  I  FIRST  PART  OF 

As  not  a  soldier  of  this  season’s  stamp 
Should  go  so  general  current  through  the  world. 
By  God,  I  cannot  flatter;  I  do  defy 
The  tongues  of  soothers;  but  a  braver  place 
In  my  heart’s  love  hath  no  man  than  yourself: 
Nay,  task  me  to  my  word;  approve  me,  lord. 
Doug.  Thou  are  the  king  of  honour:  lo 

No  man  so  potent  breathes  upon  the  ground 
But  I  will  beard  him. 

Hot.  Do  so,  and  ’tis  well. 

Enter  a  MESSENGV.K  with  letters. 

What  letters  hast  thou  there? — I  can  but  thank 
you. 

Mess.  These  letters  come  from  your  father. 

Hot.  Letters  from  him!  why  comes  he  not 
himself? 

Mess.  He  cannot  come,  my  lord;  he  is  grievous 
sick. 

Hot.  ’Zounds!  how  has  he  the  leisure  to  be  sick 
In  such  a  justling  time?  Who  leads  his  power? 
Under  whose  government  come  they  along?  /y 
Mess.  His  letters  bear  his  mind,  not  I,  my 
lord. 

Wor.  I  prithee,  tell  me,  doth  he  keep  his  bed? 
Mess.  He  did,  my  lord,  four  days  ere  I  set  forth; 
And  at  the  time  of  my  departure  thence 
He  was  much  fear’d  by  his  physicians. 

Wor.  I  would  the  state  of  time  had  first  been 
whole 

Ere  he  by  sickness  had  been  visited: 

His  health  was  never  better  worth  than  now. 

Hot.  Sick  now!  droop  now!  this  sickness  doth 
infect 

The  very  life-blood  of  our  enterprise; 

’Tis  catching  hither,  even  to  our  camp.  50 

He  writes  me  here,  that  inward  sickness — 

And  that  his  friends  by  deputation  could  not 
So  soon  be  drawn,  nor  did  he  think  it  meet 
To  lay  so  dangerous  and  dear  a  trust 
On  any  soul  removed  but  on  his  own. 

Yet  doth  he  give  us  bold  advertisement 
That  with  our  small  conjunction  we  should  on 
To  see  how  fortune  is  disposed  to  us; 

For,  as  he  writes,  there  is  no  quailing  now. 
Because  the  King  is  certainly  possess’d  40 

Of  all  our  purposes.  What  say  you  to  it? 

Wor.  Your  father’s  sickness  is  a  maim  to  us. 

Hot.  A  perilous  gash,  a  very  limb  lopp’d  off: 

And  yet,  in  faith,  it  is  not;  his  present  want 
Seems  more  than  we  shall  find  it:  were  it  good 
To  set  the  exact  wealth  of  all  our  states 
All  at  one  cast?  to  set  so  rich  a  main 
On  the  nice  hazard  of  one  doubtful  hour? 

It  were  not  good;  for  therein  should  we  read 
The  very  bottom  and  the  soul  of  hope,  50 


KING  HENRY  IV  457 

The  very  list,  the  very  utmost  bound 
Of  all  our  fortunes. 

Doug.  ’Faith,  and  so  we  should; 

Where  now  remains  a  sweet  reversion: 

We  may  boldly  spend  upon  the  hope  of  what 
Is  to  come  in; 

A  comfort  of  retirement  lives  in  this. 

Hot.  A  rendezvous,  a  home  to  fly  unto, 

If  that  the  devil  and  mischance  look  big 
Upon  the  maidenhead  of  our  affairs. 

Wor.  But  yet  I  would  your  father  had  been 
here.  60 

The  quality  and  hair  of  our  attempt 
Brooks  no  division:  it  will  be  thought 
By  some,  that  know  not  why  he  is  away, 

That  wisdom,  loyalty,  and  mere  dislike 
Of  our  proceedings  kept  the  earl  from  hence: 

And  think  how  such  an  apprehension 
May  turn  the  tide  of  fearful  faction 
And  breed  a  kind  of  question  in  our  cause; 

For  well  you  know  we  of  the  offering  side 
Must  keep  aloof  from  strict  arbitrement,  70 

And  stop  all  sight-holes,  every  loop  from  whence 
The  eye  of  reason  may  pry  in  upon  us : 

This  absence  of  your  father’s  draws  a  curtain, 
That  shows  the  ignorant  a  kind  of  fear 
Before  not  dreamt  of. 

Hot.  You  strain  too  far. 

I  rather  of  his  absence  make  this  use: 

It  lends  a  lustre  and  more  great  opinion, 

A  larger  dare  to  our  great  enterprise. 

Than  if  the  earl  were  here;  for  men  must  think. 

If  we  without  his  help  can  make  a  head  80 

To  push  against  a  kingdom,  with  his  help 
We  shall  o’erturn  it  topsy-turvy  down. 

Yet  all  goes  well,  yet  all  our  joints  are  whole. 
Doug.  As  heart  can  think:  there  is  not  such  a 
word 

Spoke  of  in  Scotland  as  this  term  of  fear. 

Enter  sir  richard  vernon. 

Hot.  My  cousin  Vernon!  welcome,  by  my  soul. 
Ver.  Pray  God  my  news  be  worth  a  welcome, 
lord. 

The  Earl  of  Westmoreland,  seven  thousand 
strong. 

Is  marching  hitherwards;  with  him  Prince  John. 
Hot.  No  harm:  what  more? 

Ver.  And  further,  I  have  learn’d,  90 

The  King  himself  in  person  is  set  forth, 

Or  hitherwards  intended  speedily. 

With  strong  and  mighty  preparation. 

Hot.  He  shall  be  welcome  too.  Where  is  his  son. 
The  nimble-footed  madcap  Prince  of  W ales, 

And  his  comrades,  that  daff’d  the  world  aside, 
And  bid  it  pass? 


ACT  IV 


458  FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


Ver.  All  furnish’d,  all  in  arms; 

All  plumed  like  estridges  that  with  the  wind 
Baited  like  eagles  having  lately  bathed; 

Glittering  in  golden  coats,  like  images;  100 

As  full  of  spirit  as  the  month  of  May, 

And  gorgeous  as  the  sun  at  midsummer; 

Wanton  as  youthful  goats,  wild  as  young  bulls. 

I  saw  young  Harry,  with  his  beaver  on, 

His  cuisses  on  his  thighs,  gallantly  arm’d, 

Rise  from  the  ground  like  feather’d  Mercury, 

And  vaulted  with  such  case  into  his  seat. 

As  if  an  angel  dropp’d  down  from  the  clouds. 

To  turn  and  wind  a  fiery  Pegasus 
And  witch  the  world  with  noble  horsemanship. 
Hot.  No  more,  no  more:  worse  than  the  sun  in 
March,  in 

This  praise  doth  nourish  agues.  Let  them  come; 
They  come  like  sacrifices  in  their  trim. 

And  to  the  fire-eyed  maid  of  smoky  war 
All  hot  and  bleeding  will  we  offer  them: 

The  mailed  Mars  shall  on  his  altar  sit 

Up  to  the  ears  in  blood.  I  am  on  fire 

To  hear  this  rich  reprisal  is  so  nigh 

And  yet  not  ours.  Come,  let  me  taste  my  horse, 

Who  is  to  bear  me  like  a  thunderbolt  120 

Against  the  bosom  of  the  Prince  of  Wales: 

Harry  to  Harry  shall,  hot  horse  to  horse. 

Meet  and  ne’er  part  till  one  drop  down  a  corse. 

O  that  Glendower  were  come! 

Ver.  There  is  more  news : 

I  1  earn’d  in  Worcester,  as  I  rode  along, 

He  cannot  draw  his  power  this  fourteen  days. 
Doug.  That’s  the  worst  tidings  that  I  hear  of 
yet. 

VVor.  Ay,  by  my  faith,  that  bears  a  frosty 
sound. 

Hot.  What  may  the  King’s  whole  battle  reach 
unto? 

Ver.  To  thirty  thousand. 

Hot.  Forty  let  it  be:  /50 

My  father  and  Glendower  being  both  away, 

The  powers  of  us  may  serve  so  great  a  day. 

Come,  let  us  take  a  muster  speedily: 

Doomsday  is  near;  die  all,  die  merrily. 

Doug.  Talk  not  of  dying:  I  am  out  of  fear 
Of  death  or  death’s  hand  for  this  one-half  year. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  n.  A  public  road  near  Coventry 
Enter  falstaff  and  bardolph. 

Eal.  Bardolph,  get  thee  before  to  Coventry; 
fill  me  a  bottle  of  sack:  our  soldiers  shall  march 
through;  we’ll  to  Sutton  Cophill  to-night. 

Eard.  Will  ’/ou  give  me  money,  captain? 

Eal.  Lay  out,  lay  out. 

Bard.  This  bottle  makes  an  angel. 


Eal.  An  if  it  do,  take  it  for  thy  labour;  and  if  it 
make  twenty,  taj<e  them  all;  I’ll  answer  the 
coinage.  Bid  my  lieutenant  Peto  meet  me  at 
town’s  end.  10 

Bard.  I  will,  captain:  farewell.  [Exit. 

Eal.  If  I  be  not  ashamed  of  my  soldiers,  1  am 
a  soused  gurnet.  I  have  misused  the  King’s  press 
damnably.  I  have  got,  in  exchange  of  a  hundred 
and  fifty  soldiers,  three  hundred  and  odd  pounds. 
I  press  me  none  but  good  householders,  yeomen’s 
sons;  inquire  me  out  contracted  bachelors,  such 
as  had  been  asked  twice  on  the  banns;  such  a 
commodity  of  warm  slaves,  as  had  as  lieve  hear 
the  devil  as  a  drum;  such  as  fear  the  report  of  a 
caliver  worse  than  a  struck  fowl  or  a  hurt  wild- 
duck.  I  pressed  me  none  but  such  toast s-and- 
butter,  with  hearts  in  their  bellies  no  bigger  than 
pins’  heads,  and  they  have  bought  out  their  serv¬ 
ices;  and  now  my  whole  charge  consists  of 
ancients,  corporals,  lieutenants,  gentlemen  of 
companies,  slaves  as  ragged  as  Lazarus  in  the 
painted  cloth,  where  the  glutton’s  dogs  licked  his 
sores;  and  such  as  indeed  were  never  soldiers, 
but  discarded  unjust  serving-men,  younger  sons 
to  younger  brothers,  revolted  tapsters  and  ostlers 
trade-fallen,  the  cankers  of  a  calm  world  and  a 
long  peace,  ten  times  more  dishonourable  ragged 
than  an  old  faced  ancient:  and  such  have  I,  to 
fill  up  the  rooms  of  them  that  have  bought  out 
their  services,  that  you  would  think  that  I  had  a 
hundred  and  fifty  tattered  prodigals  lately  come 
from  swine-keeping,  from  eating  draff  and  husks. 
A  mad  fellow  met  me  on  the  way  and  told  me  I 
had  unloaded  all  the  gibbets  and  pressed  the 
dead  bodies.  No  eye  hath  seen  such  scarecrows. 
I’ll  not  march  through  Coventry  with  them, 
that’s  flat:  nay,  and  the  villains  march  wide 
betwixt  the  legs,  as  if  they  had  gyves  on;  for 
indeed  I  had  the  most  of  them  out  of  prison. 
There’s  but  a  shirt  and  a  half  in  all  my  company; 
and  the  half  shirt  is  two  napkins  tacked  together 
and  thrown  over  the  shoulders  like  a  herald’s 
coat  without  sleeves;  and  the  shirt,  to  say  the 
truth,  stolen  from  my  host  at  Saint  Alban’s,  or 
the  red-nose  innkeeper  of  Daventry.  But  that’s 
all  one;  they’ll  find  linen  enough  on  every  hedge. 

Enter  the  prince  and  Westmoreland. 

Prince.  How  now,  blown  Jack!  how  now, 
quilt! 

Eal.  What,  Hal!  how  now,  mad  wag!  what 
a  devil  dost  thou  in  Warwickshire?  My  good 
Lord  of  Westmoreland,  I  cry  you  mercy:  I 
thought  your  honour  had  already  been  at  Shrews¬ 
bury.  55? 

West.  Faith,  Sir  John,  ’tis  more  than  time  that 


SCENE  II 


FIRST  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


+59 


I  were  there,  and  you  too;  but  my  powers  are 
there  already.  The  King,  I  can  tell  you,  looks  for 
us  all:  we  must  away  all  night. 

FaL  lut,  never  fear  me:  I  am  as  vigilant  as  a 
cat  to  steal  cream. 

Prince.  I  think,  to  steal  cream  indeed,  for  thy 
theft  hath  already  made  thee  butter.  But  tell 
me.  Jack,  whose  fellows  are  these  that  come  after? 
Fal.  Mine,  Hal,  mine.  6p 

Prince.  I  did  never  see  such  pitiful  rascals. 

Fal.  Tut,  tut;  good  enough  to  toss;  food  for 
powder,  food  for  powder;  they’ll  fill  a  pit  as  well 
as  better:  tush,  man,  mortal  men,  mortal  men. 

West.  Ay,  but.  Sir  John,  methinks  they  are 
exceeding  poor  and  bare,  too  beggarly. 

Fal.  ’Faith,  for  their  poverty,  I  know  not 
where  they  had  that;  and  for  their  bareness,  I 
am  sure  they  never  learned  that  of  me. 

Prince.  No,  I’ll  be  sworn;  unless  you  call 
three  fingers  on  the  ribs  bare.  But,  sirrah,  make 
haste:  Percy  is  already  in  the  field.  8/ 

Fal.  What,  is  the  King  encamped? 

West.  He  is.  Sir  John:  I  fear  we  shall  stay 
too  lon^. 

Fal.  \\\ll, 

To  the  latter  end  of  a  fray  and  the  beginning  of  a 
feast 

Fits  a  dull  fighter  and  a  keen  guest.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  rebel  camp  near  Shreu'slniry 
Enter  hotspur,  Worcester,  douglas,  and 

VERNON. 

Hot.  We’ll  fight  with  him  to-night. 

Wor.  It  may  not  be. 

Doug.  You  give  him  then  advantage. 

Ver.  Not  a  whit. 

Hot.  Why  say  you  so?  looks  he  not  for  supply? 
Ver.  So  do  we. 

Hot.  His  is  certain,  ours  is  doubtful. 

Wor.  Good  cousin,  be  advised;  stir  not  tonight. 
Ver.  Do  not,  my  lord. 

Doug.  You  do  not  counsel  well: 

You  speak  it  out  of  fear  and  cold  heart. 

Ver.  Do  me  no  slander,  Douglas:  by  my  life. 

And  I  dare  well  maintain  it  with  my  life. 

If  well-respected  honour  bid  me  on,  lo 

I  hold  as  little  counsel  with  weak  fear 
As  you,  my  lord,  or  any  Scot  that  this  day  lives: 
Let  it  be  seen  to-morrow  in  the  battle 
Which  of  us  fears. 

Doug.  Yea,  or  to-night. 

Ver.  Content. 

Hot.  To-night,  say  I. 

Ver.  Come,  come,  it  may  not  be.  I  wonder 
much. 

Being  men  of  such  great  leading  as  you  are. 


That  you  foresee  not  what  impediments 
Drag  back  our  expedition:  certain  horse 
Of  my  cousin  Vernon’s  are  not  yet  come  up:  20 
Your  uncle  Worcester’s  horse  came  but  to-day; 
And  now  their  pride  and  mettle  is  asleep. 

Their  courage  with  hard  labour  tame  and  dull, 
That  not  a  horse  is  half  the  half  of  himself. 

Hot.  So  are  the  horses  of  the  enemy 
In  general,  journey-bated  and  brought  low: 

The  better  part  of  ours  are  full  of  rest. 

Wor.  The  number  of  the  King  exceedeth  ours: 
For  God’s  sake,  cousin,  stay  till  all  come  in. 

The  trumpet  sounds  a  parley. 

Enter  sir  Walter  blunt. 

Blunt.  I  come  with  gracious  offers  from  the 
King.  50 

If  you  vouchsafe  me  hearing  and  respect. 
Hot.Wdcomc,  SirWalter  Blunt;  and  would  to 
God 

You  were  of  our  determination! 

Some  of  us  love  you  well;  and  even  those  some 
Envy  your  great  deservings  and  good  name, 
Because  you  are  not  of  our  quality. 

But  stand  against  us  like  an  enemy. 

Blunt.  And  God  defend  but  still  I  should  stand 
so. 

So  long  as  out  of  limit  and  true  rule 
You  stand  against  anointed  majesty.  40 

But  to  my  charge.  The  King  hath  sent  to  know 
The  nature  of  your  griefs,  and  whereupon 
You  conjure  from  the  breast  of  civil  peace 
Such  bold  hostility,  teaching  his  duteous  land 
Audacious  cruelty.  If  that  the  King 
Have  any  way  your  good  deserts  forgot. 

Which  he  confesseth  to  be  manifold. 

He  bids  you  name  your  griefs;  and  with  all  speed 
You  shall  have  your  desires  with  interest 
And  pardon  absolute  for  yourself  and  these  50 
Herein  misled  by  your  suggestion. 

Hot.  The  King  is  kind;  and  well  we  know  the 
King 

Knows  at  what  time  to  promise,  when  to  pay. 

My  father  and  my  uncle  and  myself 
Did  give  him  that  same  royalty  he  wears; 

And  when  he  was  not  six  and  twenty  strong. 

Sick  in  the  world’s  regard,  wretched  and  low, 

A  poor  unminded  outlaw  sneaking  home. 

My  father  gave  him  welcome  to  the  shore; 

And  when  he  heard  him  swear  and  vow  to  God 
He  came  but  to  be  Duke  of  Lancaster,  6i 

To  sue  his  livery  and  beg  his  peace. 

With  tears  of  innocency  and  terms  of  zeal, 

My  father,  in  kind  heart  and  pity  moved. 

Swore  him  assistance  and  perform’d  it  too. 

Now  when  the  lords  and  barons  of  the  realm 


46o  first  part  of 

Perceived  Northumberland  did  lean  to  him. 

The  more  and  less  came  in  with  cap  and  knee; 

Met  him  in  boroughs,  cities,  villages, 

Attended  him  on  bridges,  stood  in  lanes,  70 
Laid  gifts  before  him,  proffer’d  him  their  oaths. 
Gave  him  their  heirs,  as  pages  follow’d  him 
Even  at  the  heels  in  golden  multitudes. 

He  presently,  as  greatness  knows  itself. 

Steps  me  a  little  higher  than  his  vow 
Made  to  my  father,  while  his  blood  was  poor, 
Upon  the  naked  shore  at  Ravenspurgh; 

And  now,  forsooth,  takes  on  him  to  reform 
Some  certain  edicts  and  some  strait  decrees 
That  lie  too  heavy  on  the  commonwealth,  80 
Cries  out  upon  abuses,  seems  to  weep 
Over  his  country’s  wrongs;  and  by  this  face. 

This  seeming  brow  of  justice,  did  he  win 
The  hearts  of  all  that  he  did  angle  for; 

Proceeded  further  ;  cut  me  off  the  heads 
Of  all  the  favourites  that  the  absent  King 
In  deputation  left  behind  him  here. 

When  he  was  personal  in  the  Irish  war. 

Blunt.  Tut,  I  came  not  to  hear  this. 

Hot.  Then  to  the  point. 

In  short  time  after,  he  deposed  the  King;  ^0 
Soon  after  that,  deprived  him  of  his  life; 

And  in  the  neck  of  that,  task’d  the  whole  state; 

To  m.ake  that  worse,  suffer’d  his  kinsman  March, 
Who  is,  if  every  owner  were  well  placed. 

Indeed  his  king,  to  be  engaged  in  Wales, 

There  without  ransom  to  lie  forfeited; 

Disgraced  me  in  my  happy  victories. 

Sought  to  entrap  me  by  intelligence; 

Rated  mine  uncle  from  the  council-board; 

In  rage  dismiss’d  my  father  from  the  court;  too 
Broke  oath  on  oath,  committed  wrong  on  wrong. 
And  in  conclusion  drove  us  to  seek  out 
This  head  of  safety;  and  withal  to  pry 
Into  his  title,  the  which  we  find 
Too  indirect  for  long  continuance. 

Blunt.  Shall  I  return  this  answer  to  the  King? 

Hot.  Not  so.  Sir  Walter:  we’ll  withdraw  awhile. 
Go  to  the  King;  and  let  there  be  impawn’d 
Some  surety  for  a  safe  return  again. 

And  in  the  morning  early  shall  my  uncle  no 
Bring  him  our  purposes:  and  so  farewell. 

Blunt.  I  would  you  would  accept  of  grace  and 
love. 

Hot.  And  may  be  so  we  shall. 

Blunt.  Pray  God  you  do. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  York:  The  Archbishop" s palace 
Enter  me  archbishop  of  york  and  sir  michael. 
Arch.  Hie,  good  Sir  Michael;  bear  this  sealed 
brief 


KING  HENRY  IV  act  v 

With  winged  haste  to  the  Lord  Marshal; 

This  to  my  cousin  Scroop,  and  all  the  rest 
To  whom  they  are  directed.  If  you  knew 
How  much  they  do  import,  you  would  make 
haste. 

Sir  M.  My  good  lord, 

I  guess  their  tenour. 

A rch .  Li ke  enough  you  do. 

To-morrow,  good  Sir  Michael,  is  a  day 
Wherein  the  fortune  of  ten  thousand  men 
Must  bide  the  touch;  for,  sir,  at  Shrewsbury,  10 
As  I  am  truly  given  to  understand, 

The  King  with  mighty  and  quick-raised  power 
Meets  with  Lord  Harry:  and,  I  fear.  Sir  Michael, 
What  with  the  sickness  of  Northumberland, 
Whose  power  was  in  the  first  proportion, 

And  what  with  Owen  Glendower’s  absence 
thence. 

Who  with  them  was  a  rated  sinew  too 
And  comes  not  in,  o’er-ruled  by  prophecies, 

I  fear  the  power  of  Percy  is  too  weak 
To  wage  an  instant  trial  with  the  King.  20 

Sir  M.  Why,  my  good  lord,  you  need  not  fear; 
There  is  Douglas  and  Lord  Mortimer. 

Arch.  No,  Mortimer  is  not  there. 

SirM.  But  there  is  Mordake,  Vernon,  Lord 
Harry  Percy, 

And  there  is  my  Lord  of  Worcester  and  a  head 
Of  gallant  warriors,  noble  gentlemen. 

Arch.  And  so  there  is:  but  yet  the  King  hath 
drawn 

The  special  head  of  all  the  land  together: 

The  Prince  of  Wales,  Lord  John  of  Lancaster, 
The  noble  Westmoreland,  and  warlike  Blunt;  50 
And  many  moe  corrivals  and  dear  men 
Of  estimation  and  command  in  arms. 

SirM.  Doubt  not,  my  lord,  they  shall  be  well 
opposed. 

Arch.  I  hope  no  less,  yet  needful  ’tis  to  fear; 
And,  to  prevent  the  worst.  Sir  Michael,  speed: 
For  if  Lord  Percy  thrive  not,  ere  the  King 
Dismiss  his  power,  he  means  to  visit  us. 

For  he  hath  heard  of  our  confederacy. 

And  ’tis  but  wisdom  to  make  strong  against  him: 
Therefore  make  haste.  I  must  go  write  again 
To  other  friends;  and  so  farewell.  Sir  Michael. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  The  King  s  camp  near  Shrewsbury 
Enter  the  king,  prince  of  wales,  lord  john  of 

LANCASTER,  EARL  OF  WESTMORELAND,  SIR  WAL¬ 
TER  BLUNT,  and  FALSTAFF. 

King.  How  bloodily  the  sun  begins  to  peer 
Above  yon  busky  hill!  the  day  looks  pale 
At  his  distemperature. 


SCENE  I  FIRST  PART  OF 

Prince.  The  southern  wind 

Doth  play  the  trumpet  to  his  purposes, 

And  by  his  hollow  whistling  in  the  leaves 
Foretells  a  tempest  and  a  blustering  day. 

King.  Then  with  the  losers  let  it  sympathise, 

For  nothing  can  seem  foul  to  those  that  win. 

The  trumpet  sounds. 

Enter  Worcester  and  vernon. 

How  now,  my  Lord  of  Worcester!  ’tis  not  well 
That  you  and  I  should  meet  upon  such  terms  lo 
As  now  we  meet.  You  have  deceived  our  trust. 
And  made  us  doff  our  easy  robes  of  peace, 

To  crush  our  old  limbs  in  ungentle  steel: 

This  is  not  well,  my  lord,  this  is  not  well. 

What  say  you  to  it?  will  you  again  unknit 
This  churlish  knot  of  all-abhorred  war? 

And  move  in  that  obedient  orb  again 
Where  you  did  give  a  fair  and  natural  light. 

And  be  no  more  an  exhaled  meteor, 

A  prodigy  of  fear  and  a  portent  20 

Of  broached  mischief  to  the  unborn  times? 

Wor.  Hear  me,  my  liege: 

For  mine  own  part,  I  could  be  well  content 
To  entertain  the  lag-end  of  my  life 
With  quiet  hours;  for  I  do  protest, 

I  have  not  sought  the  day  of  this  dislike. 

King.  You  have  not  sought  it!  how  comes  it, 
then? 

Fal.  Rebellion  lay  in  his  way,  and  he  found  it. 
Prince.  Peace,  chewet,  peace! 

Wor.  It  pleased  your  Majesty  to  turn  your 
looks  50 

Of  favour  from  myself  and  all  our  house; 

And  yet  I  must  remember  you,  my  lord. 

We  were  the  first  and  dearest  of  your  friends. 

For  you  my  staff  of  office  did  I  break 
In  Richard’s  time;  and  posted  day  and  night 
To  meet  you  on  the  way,  and  kiss  your  hand. 
When  yet  you  were  in  place  and  in  account 
Nothing  so  strong  and  fortunate  as  I. 

It  was  myself,  my  brother,  and  his  son. 

That  brought  you  home  and  boldly  did  outdare 
The  dangers  of  the  time.  You  swore  to  us,  4/ 
And  you  did  swear  that  oath  at  Doncaster, 

That  you  did  nothing  purpose  ’gainst  the  state; 
Nor  claim  no  further  than  your  new-fall’n  right. 
The  seat  of  Gaunt,  dukedom  of  Lancaster: 

To  this  we  swore  our  aid.  But  in  short  space 
It  rain’d  down  fortune  showering  on  your  head; 
And  such  a  flood  of  greatness  fell  on  you. 

What  with  our  help,  what  with  the  absent  King, 
What  with  the  injuries  of  a  wanton  time,  50 
The  seeming  sufferances  that  you  had  borne. 

And  the  contrarious  winds  that  held  the  King 
So  long  in  his  unlucky  Irish  wars 


KING  HENRY  IV  461 

That  all  in  England  did  repute  him  dead: 

And  from  this  swarm  of  fair  advantages 
You  took  occasion  to  be  quickly  woo’d 
To  gripe  the  general  sway  into  your  hand; 

Forgot  your  oath  to  us  at  Doncaster; 

And  being  fed  by  us  you  used  us  so 

As  that  ungentle  gull,  the  cuckoo’s  bird,  60 

Useth  the  sparrow;  did  oppress  our  nest; 

Grew  by  our  feeding  to  so  great  a  bulk 
That  even  our  love  durst  not  come  near  your 
sight 

For  fear  of  swallowing;  but  with  nimble  wing 
We  were  enforced,  for  safety  sake,  to  fly 
Out  of  your  sight  and  raise  this  present  head; 
Whereby  we  stand  opposed  by  such  means 
As  you  yourself  have  forged  against  yourself 
By  unkind  usage,  dangerous  countenance. 

And  violation  of  all  faith  and  troth  70 

Sworn  to  us  in  your  younger  enterprise. 

King.  These  things  indeed  you  have  articulate. 
Proclaim’d  at  market-crosses,  read  in  churches. 
To  face  the  garment  of  rebellion 
With  some  fine  colour  that  may  please  the  eye 
Of  fickle  changelings  and  poor  discontents. 
Which  gape  and  rub  the  elbow  at  the  news 
Of  hurlyburly  innovation: 

And  never  yet  did  insurrection  want 
Such  water-colours  to  impaint  his  cause;  80 
Nor  moody  beggars,  starving  for  a  time 
Of  pellmell  havoc  and  confusion. 

Prince.  In  both  your  armies  there  is  many  a  soul 
Shall  pay  full  dearly  for  this  encounter. 

If  once  they  join  in  trial.  Tell  your  nephew. 

The  Prince  of  Wales  doth  join  with  all  the  world 
In  praise  of  Henry  Percy:  by  my  hopes. 

This  present  enterprise  set  off  his  head, 

I  do  not  think  a  braver  gentleman. 

More  active-valiant  or  more  valiant-young,  po 
More  daring  or  more  bold,  is  now  alive 
To  grace  this  latter  age  with  noble  deeds. 

For  my  part,  I  may  speak  it  to  my  shame, 

I  have  a  truant  been  to  chivalry; 

And  so  I  hear  he  doth  account  me  too; 

Yet  this  before  my  father’s  majesty — 

I  am  content  that  he  shall  take  the  odds 
Of  his  great  name  and  estimation. 

And  will,  to  save  the  blood  on  either  side. 

Try  fortune  with  him  in  a  single  fight.  100 

King.  And,  Prince  of  Wales,  so  dare  we  venture 
thee. 

Albeit  considerations  infinite 

Do  make  against  it.  No,  good  Worcester,  no. 

We  love  our  people  well;  even  those  we  love 
That  are  misled  upon  your  cousin’s  part; 

And,  will  they  take  the  offer  of  our  grace. 

Both  he  and  they  and  you,  yea,  every  man 


462  FIRST  PART  OF 

Shall  be  my  friend  again  and  I’ll  be  his: 

So  tell  your  cousin,  and  bring  me  word 
What  he  will  do:  but  if  he  will  not  yield,  no 

Rebuke  and  dread  correction  wait  on  us 
And  they  shall  do  their  office.  So,  be  gone; 

We  will  not  now  be  troubled  with  reply: 

We  offer  fair;  take  it  advisedly. 

[Exeunt  Worcester  and  vernon. 
Prince.  It  will  not  be  accepted,  on  my  life: 

The  Douglas  and  the  Hotspur  both  together 
Are  confident  against  the  world  in  arms. 

King.  Hence,  therefore,  every  leader  to  his 
charge; 

For,  on  their  answer,  will  we  set  on  them: 

And  God  befriend  us,  as  our  cause  is  just!  120 
[Exeunt  all  but  the  prince  of  wales 

and  FALSTAFF. 

Fal.  Hal,  if  thou  see  me  down  in  the  battle  and 
bestride  me,  so;  ’tis  a  point  of  friendship. 

Prince.  Nothing  but  a  colossus  can  do  thee  that 
friendship.  Say  thy  prayers,  and  farewell. 

Fal.  I  would  ’twere  bed-time,  Hal,  and  all  well. 
Prince.  Why,  thou  owest  God  a  death. 

[Exit. 

Fal.  ’Tis  not  due  yet;  I  would  be  loath  to  pay 
him  before  his  day.  What  need  I  be  so  forward 
with  him  that  calls  not  on  me?  Well,  ’tis  no 
matter;  honour  pricks  me  on.  Yea,  but  how  if 
honour  prick  me  off  when  I  come  on?  how  then? 
Can  honour  set  to  a  leg?  no:  or  an  arm?  no:  or 
take  away  the  grief  of  a  wound?  no.  Honour 
hath  no  skill  in  surgery,  then?  no.  What  is  hon¬ 
our?  a  word.  What  is  in  that  word  honour?  what 
is  that  honour?  air.  A  trim  reckoning!  Who  hath 
it?  he  that  died  o’  Wednesday.  Doth  he  feel  it? 
no.  Doth  he  hear  it?  no.  ’Tis  insensible,  then? 
Yea,  to  the  dead.  But  will  it  not  live  with  the 
living?  no.  Why?  detraction  will  not  suffer  it. 
Therefore  I’ll  none  of  it.  Honour  is  a  mere 
scutcheon:  and  so  ends  my  catechism.  [Exit. 

Scene  ii.  The  rebel  camp 
Enter  Worcester  and  vernon. 

Wor.  O,  no,  my  nephew  must  not  know,  Sir 
Richard, 

The  liberal  and  kind  offer  of  the  King. 

Ver.  ’Twere  best  he  did. 

Wor.  Then  are  we  all  undone. 

It  is  not  possible,  it  cannot  be. 

The  King  should  keep  his  word  in  loving  us; 

He  will  suspect  us  still  and  find  a  time 
To  punish  this  offence  in  other  faults: 

Suspicion  all  our  lives  shall  be  stuck  full  of  eyes; 
For  treason  is  but  trusted  like  the  fox. 

Who,  ne’er  so  tame,  so  cherish’d,  and  lock’d  up. 
Will  have  a  wild  trick  of  his  ancestors.  ii 


KING  HENRY  IV  act  v 

Look  how  we  can,  or  sad  or  merrily. 
Interpretation  will  misquote  our  looks. 

And  we  shall  feed  like  oxen  at  a  stall, 

The  better  cherish’d,  still  the  nearer  death. 

My  nephew’s  trespass  may  be  well  forgot; 

It  hath  the  excuse  of  youth  and  heat  of  blood. 

And  an  adopted  name  of  privilege, 

A  hare-brain’d  Hotspur,  govern’d  by  a  spleen: 

All  his  offences  live  upon  my  head  20 

And  on  his  father’s;  we  did  train  him  on. 

And,  his  corruption  being  ta’en  from  us. 

We,  as  the  spring  of  all,  shall  pay  for  all. 
Therefore,  good  cousin,  let  not  Harry  know. 

In  any  case,  the  offer  of  the  King. 

Ver.  Deliver  what  you  will;  I’ll  say  ’tis  so. 

Here  comes  your  cousin. 

Enter  hotspur  and  douglas. 

Hot.  My  uncle  is  return’d: 

Deliver  up  my  Lord  of  Westmoreland. 

Uncle,  what  news?  50 

Wor.  The  King  will  bid  you  battle  presently. 
Doug.  Defy  him  by  the  Lord  of  Westmoreland. 
Hot.  Lord  Douglas,  go  you  and  tell  him  so. 
Doug.  Marry,  and  shall,  and  very  willingly. 

[Exit. 

Wor.  There  is  no  seeming  mercy  in  the  King. 
Hot.  Did  you  beg  any?  God  forbid! 

Wor.  I  told  him  gently  of  our  grievances. 

Of  his  oath-breaking;  which  he  mended  thus. 

By  now  forswearing  that  he  is  forsworn: 

He  calls  us  rebels,  traitors;  and  will  scourge  40 
With  haughty  arms  this  hateful  name  in  us. 

Re-enter  douglas. 

Doug.  Arm,  gentlemen;  to  arms!  for  I  have 
thrown 

A  brave  defiance  in  King  Henry’s  teeth. 

And  Westmoreland,  that  was  engaged,  did  bear 
it; 

Which  cannot  choose  but  bring  him  quickly  on. 
Wor.  The  Prince  of  Wales  stepp’d  forth  before 
the  King, 

And,  nephew,  challenged  you  to  single  fight. 

Hot.  O,  would  the  quarrel  lay  upon  our  heads, 
And  that  no  man  might  draw  short  breath  to-day 
But  I  and  Harry  Monmouth!  Tell  me,  tell  me,  50 
How  show’d  his  tasking?  seem’d  it  in  contempt? 

Ver.  No,  by  my  soul;  I  never  in  my  life 
Did  hear  a  challenge  urged  more  modestly. 

Unless  a  brother  should  a  brother  dare 
To  gentle  exercise  and  proof  of  arms. 

He  gave  you  all  the  duties  of  a  man; 

Trimm’d  up  your  praises  with  a  princely  tongue, 
Spoke  your  deservings  like  a  chronicle. 

Making  you  ever  better  than  his  praise 


SCENE  II  FIRST  PART  OF 

By  still  dispraising  praise  valued  with  you;  6o 
And,  which  became  him  like  a  prince  indeed, 

He  made  a  blushing  cital  of  himself; 

And  chid  his  truant  youth  with  such  a  grace 
As  if  he  master’d  there  a  double  spirit 
Of  teaching  and  of  learning  instantly. 

There  did  he  pause:  but  let  me  tell  the  world, 

If  he  outlive  the  envy  of  this  day, 

England  did  never  owe  so  sweet  a  hope. 

So  much  misconstrued  in  his  wantonness. 

Hot.  Cousin,  I  think  thou  art  enamoured  70 
On  his  follies:  never  did  I  hear 
Of  any  prince  so  wild  a  libertine. 

But  be  he  as  he  will,  yet  once  ere  night 
I  will  embrace  him  with  a  soldier’s  arm. 

That  he  shall  shrink  under  my  courtesy. 

Arm,  arm  with  speed:  and,  fellows,  soldiers, 
friends. 

Better  consider  what  you  have  to  do 
Than  I,  that  have  not  well  the  gift  of  tongue, 

Can  lift  your  blood  up  with  persuasion. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  My  lord,  here  are  letters  for  you.  80 
Hot.  I  cannot  read  them  now. 

O  gentlemen,  the  time  of  life  is  short! 

To  spend  that  shortness  basely  were  too  long, 

If  life  did  ride  upon  a  dial’s  point. 

Still  ending  at  the  arrival  of  an  hour. 

An  if  we  live,  we  live  to  tread  on  kings; 

If  die,  brave  death,  when  princes  die  with  us! 
Now,  for  our  consciences,  the  arms  are  fair, 
When  the  intent  of  bearing  them  is  just. 

Enter  another  messenger. 

Mess.  My  lord,  prepare;  the  King  comes  on 
apace.  po 

Hot.  I  thank  him,  that  he  cuts  me  from  my  tale, 
For  I  profess  not  talking;  only  this — 

Let  each  man  do  his  best:  and  here  draw  I 
A  sword,  whose  temper  I  intend  to  stain 
With  the  best  blood  that  I  can  meet  withal 
In  the  adventure  of  this  perilous  day. 

Now,  Esperance!  Percy!  and  set  on. 

Sound  all  the  lofty  instruments  of  war. 

And  by  that  music  let  us  all  embrace; 

For,  heaven  to  earth,  some  of  us  never  shall  too 
A  second  time  do  such  a  courtesy. 

[The  trumpets  sound.  They  embrace and  exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Elain  between  the  camps 
The  KING  enters  iwith  his  power.  Alarum  to  the 
battle.  Then  enter  douglas  and  sir  Walter  blunt. 

Blunt.  What  is  thy  name,  that  in  the  battle  thus 
Thon  Grossest  me?  what  honour  dost  thou  seek 
Upon  my  head? 


KING  HENRY  IV  463 

Doug.  Know  then,  my  name  is  Douglas; 

And  I  do  haunt  thee  in  the  battle  thus 
Because  some  tell  me  that  thou  art  a  king. 

Blunt.  They  tell  thee  true. 

Doug.  The  Lord  of  Stafford  dear  to-day  hath 
bought 

Thy  likeness,  for  instead  of  thee.  King  Harry, 
This  sword  hath  ended  him:  so  shall  it  thee, 
Unless  thou  yield  thee  as  my  prisoner.  10 

Blunt.  I  was  not  born  a  yi elder,  thou  proud  Scot; 
And  thou  shalt  find  a  king  that  will  revenge 
Lord  Stafford’s  death. 

They  fight,  douglas  kills  blunt. 

Enter  hotspur. 

Hot.  O  Douglas,  hadst  thou  fought  at  Holme- 
don  thus, 

I  never  had  triumph’d  upon  a  Scot. 

Doug.  All’s  done,  all’s  won;  here  breathless  lies 
the  King. 

Hot.  Where? 

Doug.  Here. 

Hot.  This,  Douglas?  no:  I  know  this  face  full 
well: 

A  gallant  knight  he  was,  his  name  was  Blunt;  20 
Semblably  furnish’d  like  the  King  himself. 

Doug.  A  fool  go  with  thy  soul,  whither  it  goes! 
A  borrow’d  title  hast  thou  bought  too  dear: 

Why  didst  thou  tell  me  that  thou  wert  a  king? 
Hot.  The  King  hath  many  marching  in  his  coats. 
Doug.  Now,  by  my  sword,  I  will  kill  all  his 
coats; 

I’ll  murder  all  his  wardrobe,  piece  by  piece, 

Until  I  meet  the  King. 

Hot.  Up,  and  away! 

Our  soldiers  stand  full  fairly  for  the  day.  2p 

[Exeunt. 

Alarum.  Enter  falstaff,  solus. 

Fal.  Though  I  could  ’scape  shot-free  at  London, 
I  fear  the  shot  here;  here’s  no  scoring  but  upon 
the  pate.  Soft!  who  are  you?  Sir  Walter  Blunt: 
there’s  honour  for  you!  here’s  no  vanity!  I  am  as 
hot  as  molten  lead,  and  as  heavy  too:  God  keep 
lead  out  of  me!  I  need  no  more  weight  than  mine 
own  bowels.  I  have  led  my  ragamuffins  where 
they  are  peppered:  there’s  not  three  of  my  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty  left  alive;  and  they  are  for  the 
town’s  end,  to  beg  during  life.  But  who  comes 
here?  40 

Enter  the  prince. 

Prince.  What,  stand’ st  thou  idle  here?  lend  me 
thy  sword  : 

Many  a  nobleman  lies  stark  and  stiff 
Under  the  hoofs  of  vaunting  enemies. 


ACT  V 


464  FIRST  PART  OF 

Whose  deaths  are  yet  unrevenged:  I  prithee,  lend 
me  thy  sword. 

Fal.  O  Hal,  I  prithee,  give  me  leave  to  breathe 
awhile.  Turk  Gregory  never  did  such  deeds  in 
arms  as  I  have  done  this  day.  I  have  paid  Percy, 
I  have  made  him  sure. 

Prince.  He  is,  indeed;  and  living  to  kill  thee. 

I  prithee,  lend  me  thy  sword.  50 

Fal.  Nay,  before  God,  Hal,  if  Percy  be  alive, 
thou  get’st  not  my  sword;  but  take  my  pistol,  if 
thou  wilt. 

Prince.  Give  it  me:  what,  is  it  in  the  case? 

Fal.  Ay,  Hal;  ’tis  hot,  ’tis  hot;  there’s  that  will 
sack  a  city. 

The  Prince  draws  it  outy  and  finds  it  to  be  a  bottle 
of  sack. 

Prince.  What,  is  it  a  time  to  jest  and  dally  now? 

[He  throws  the  bottle  at  him.  Exit. 

Fal.  Well,  if  Percy  be  alive.  I’ll  pierce  him.  If 
he  do  come  in  my  way,  so:  if  he  do  not,  if  I  come 
in  his  willingly,  let  him  make  a  carbonado  of  me. 
I  like  not  such  grinning  honour  as  Sir  Walter 
hath:  give  me  life:  which  if  I  can  save,  so;  if  not, 
honour  comes  unlooked  for,  and  there’s  an  end. 

[Exit. 

Scene  iv.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Alarum.  Excursions.  Enter  the  king,  the  prince, 

LORD  JOHN  OF  LANCASTER,  and  EARL  OF  WEST¬ 
MORELAND. 

King.  I  prithee, 

Harry,  withdraw  thyself;  thou  bleed’st  too 
much. 

Lord  John  of  Lancaster,  go  you  with  him. 

Lan.  Not  I,  my  lord,  unless  I  did  bleed  too. 
Prince.  I  beseech  your  Majesty,  make  up. 

Lest  your  retirement  do  amaze  your  friends. 

King.  I  will  do  so. 

My  Lord  of  Westmoreland,  lead  him  to  his  tent. 
West.  Come,  my  lord.  I’ll  lead  you  to  your  tent. 
Prince.  Lead  me,  my  lord?  I  do  not  need  your 
help:  10 

And  God  forbid  a  shallow  scratch  should  drive 
The  Prince  of  Wales  from  such  a  field  as  this. 
Where  stain’d  nobility  lies  trodden  on, 

And  rebels’  arms  triumph  in  massacres! 

Lan.  We  breathe  too  long:  come,  cousin  West¬ 
moreland, 

Our  duty  this  way  lies;  for  God’s  sake,  come. 

[Exeunt  prince  john  and  Westmoreland. 
Prince.  By  God,  thou  hast  deceived  me,  Lan¬ 
caster; 

I  did  not  think  thee  lord  of  such  a  spirit: 

Before,  I  loved  thee  as  a  brother,  John; 

But  now,  I  do  respect  thee  as  my  soul.  20 

King.  I  saw  him  hold  Lord  Percy  at  the  point 


KING  HENRY  IV 

With  lustier  maintenance  than  I  did  look  for 
Of  such  an  ungrown  warrior. 

Prince.  O,  this  boy 

Lends  mettle  to  us  all!  [Exit. 

Enter  douglas. 

Doug.  Another  king!  they  grow  like  Hydra’s 
heads: 

I  am  the  Douglas,  fatal  to  all  those 

That  wear  those  colours  on  them:  what  art  thou. 

That  counterfeit’st  the  person  of  a  king? 

King.  The  King  himself;  who,  Douglas,  grieves 
at  heart 

So  many  of  his  shadows  thou  hast  met  50 

And  not  the  very  King.  I  have  two  boys 
Seek  Percy  and  thyself  about  the  field: 

But,  seeing  thou  fall’st  on  me  so  luckily, 

I  will  assay  thee:  so,  defend  thyself. 

Doug.  I  fear  thou  art  another  counterfeit; 

And  yet,  in  faith,  thou  bear’st  thee  like  a  king; 
But  mine  I  am  sure  thou  art,  whoe’er  thou  be. 
And  thus  I  win  thee. 

They  fight;  the  king  being  in  danger,  re-enter 

prince  Of  WALES. 

Prince.  Hold  up  thy  head,  vile  Scot,  or  thou  art 
like 

Never  to  hold  it  up  again!  the  spirits  40 

Of  valiant  Shirley,  Stafford,  Blunt,  are  in  my 
arms: 

It  is  the  Prince  of  Wales  that  threatens  thee; 

Who  never  promiseth  but  he  means  to  pay. 

They  fight:  douglas  flies. 

Cheerly,  my  lord:  how  fares  your  Grace? 

Sir  Nicholas  Gawsey  hath  for  succour  sent. 

And  so  hath  Clifton:  I’ll  to  Clifton  straight. 

King.  Stay,  and  breathe  awhile: 

Thou  hast  redeem’d  thy  lost  opinion. 

And  show’d  thou  makest  some  tender  of  my  life 
In  this  fair  rescue  thou  hast  brought  to  me.  50 
Prince.  O  God!  they  did  me  too  much  injury 
That  ever  said  I  hearken’d  for  your  death. 

If  it  were  so,  I  might  have  let  alone 
The  insulting  hand  of  Douglas  over  you. 

Which  would  have  been  as  speedy  in  your  end 
As  all  the  poisonous  potions  in  the  world 
And  saved  the  treacherous  labour  of  your  son. 
King.  Make  up  to  Clifton:  I’ll  to  Sir  Nicholas 
Gawsey.  [Exit, 

Enter  hotspur. 

Hot.  If  I  mistake  not,  thou  art  Harry  Mon¬ 
mouth. 

Prince.  Thou  speak’st  as  if  I  would  deny  my 
name.  60 


SCENE  IV 


465 


FIRST  PART  OF 

Hot.  My  name  is  Harry  Percy. 

Prime.  Why,  then  1  see 

A  very  valiant  rebel  of  the  name. 

I  am  the  Prince  of  Wales;  and  think  not,  Percy, 
To  share  with  me  in  glory  any  more: 

Two  stars  keep  not  their  motion  in  one  sphere; 
Nor  can  one  England  brook  a  double  reign, 

Of  Harry  Percy  and  the  Prince  of  Wales. 

Hot.  Nor  shall  it,  Harry;  for  the  hour  is  come 
To  end  the  one  of  us;  and  would  to  God 
Thy  name  in  arms  were  now  as  great  as  mine!  70 
Prince.  I’ll  make  it  greater  ere  I  part  from  thee; 
And  all  the  budding  honours  on  thy  crest 
I’ll  crop,  to  make  a  garland  for  my  head. 

Hot.  I  can  no  longer  brook  thy  vanities. 

They  fight. 

Enter  falstaff. 

Fal.  Well  said,  Hal!  to  it,  Hal!  Nay,  you  shall 
find  no  boy’s  play  here,  I  can  tell  you. 

Re-enter  douglas;  he  fights  with  falstaff,  who 
falls  down  as  if  he  were  dead,  and  exit  douglas. 
HOTSPUR  is  wounded,  and  falls. 

Hot.  O,  Harry,  thou  hast  robb’d  me  of  my 
youth! 

I  better  brook  the  loss  of  brittle  life 
Than  those  proud  titles  thou  hast  won  of  me; 
They  wound  my  thoughts  worse  than  thy  sword 
my  flesh:  80 

But  thought’s  the  slave  of  life,  and  life  time’s  fool; 
And  time,  that  takes  survey  of  all  the  world, 

Must  have  a  stop.  O,  I  could  prophesy, 

But  that  the  earthy  and  cold  hand  of  death 
Lies  on  my  tongue:  no,  Percy,  thou  art  dust. 

And  food  for —  [Dies. 

Prince.  For  worms,  brave  Percy:  fare  thee  well, 
great  heart! 

1 11- weaved  ambition,  how  much  art  thou  shrunk! 
When  that  this  body  did  contain  a  spirit, 

A  kingdom  for  it  was  too  small  a  bound;  ^0 
But  now  two  paces  of  the  vilest  earth 
Is  room  enough:  this  earth  that  bears  thee  dead 
Bears  not  alive  so  stout  a  gentleman. 

If  thou  wert  sensible  of  courtesy, 

I  should  not  make  so  dear  a  show  of  zeal: 

But  let  my  favours  hide  thy  mangled  face; 

And,  even  in  thy  behalf,  I’ll  thank  myself 
For  doing  these  fair  rites  of  tenderness. 

Adieu,  and  take  thy  praise  with  thee  to  heaven! 
Thy  ignominy  sleep  with  thee  in  the  grave,  100 
But  not  remember’d  in  thy  epitaph! 

He  spieth  falstaff  on  the  ground. 

What,  old  acquaintance!  could  not  all  this  flesh 
Keep  in  a  little  life?  Poor  Jack,  farewell! 

I  could  have  better  spared  a  better  man: 


KING  HENRY  IV 

O,  I  should  have  a  heavy  miss  of  thee. 

If  I  were  much  in  love  with  vanity! 

Death  hath  not  struck  so  fat  a  deer  to-day, 
Though  many  dearer,  in  this  bloody  fray. 

Embo well’d  will  1  see  thee  by  and  by: 

Till  then  in  blood  by  noble  Percy  lie.  [Exit,  no 

Fal.  [Rising  up]  Embowelled!  if  thou  embowel 
me  to-day.  I’ll  give  you  leave  to  powder  me  and 
eat  me  too  to-morrow.  ’Sblood,  ’twas  time  to 
counterfeit,  or  that  hot  termagant  Scot  had  paid 
me  scot  and  lot  too.  Counterfeit?  I  lie,  I  am  no 
counterfeit:  to  die,  is  to  be  a  counterfeit;  for  he 
is  but  the  counterfeit  of  a  man  who  hath  not  the 
life  of  a  man:  but  to  counterfeit  dying,  when  a 
man  thereby  liveth,  is  to  be  no  counterfeit,  but 
the  true  and  perfect  image  of  life  indeed.  The 
better  part  of  valour  is  discretion;  in  the  which 
better  part  I  have  saved  my  life.  ’Zounds,  I  am 
afraid  of  this  gunpowder  Percy,  though  he  be 
dead:  how,  if  he  should  counterfeit  too  and  rise? 
by  my  faith,  I  am  afraid  he  would  prove  the 
better  counterfeit.  Therefore  I’ll  make  him  sure; 
yea,  and  I’ll  swear  I  killed  him.  Why  may  not  he 
rise  as  well  as  I?  Nothing  confutes  me  but  eyes, 
and  nobody  sees  me.  Therefore,  sirrah  [stabbing 
him],  with  a  new  wound  in  your  thigh,  come  you 
along  with  me.  [Takes  up  hotspur  on  his  back.] 

Re-enter  the  prince  of  wales  and  lord  john 

OF  LANCASTER. 

Prince.  Come,  brother  John;  full  bravely  hast 
thou  flesh’d 
Thy  maiden  sword. 

Lan.  But,  soft!  whom  have  we  here? 

Did  you  not  tell  me  this  fat  man  was  dead? 

Prince.  I  did;  I  saw  him  dead, 

Breathless  and  bleeding  on  the  ground.  Art  thou 
alive? 

Or  is  it  fantasy  that  plays  upon  our  eyesight? 

I  prithee,  speak;  we  will  not  trust  our  eyes  / 
VVithout  our  ears:  thou  art  not  what  thou  seem’st. 

Fal.  No,  that’s  certain;  I  am  not  a  double  man: 
but  if  I  be  not  Jack  Falstaff,  then  am  I  a  Jack. 
There  is  Percy  [throwing  the  body  down] :  if  your 
father  will  do  me  any  honour,  so;  if  not,  let  him 
kill  the  next  Percy  himself.  I  look  to  be  either 
earl  or  duke,  I  can  assure  you. 

Prince.  Why,  Percy  I  killed  myself  and  saw 
thee  dead. 

Fal.  Didst  thou?  Lord,  Lord,  how  this  world  is 
given  to  lying!  I  grant  you  I  was  down  and  out  of 
breath;  and  so  was  he:  but  we  rose  both  at  an 
instant  and  fought  a  long  hour  by  Shrewsbury 
clock.  If  I  may  be  believed,  so;  if  not,  let  them 
that  should  reward  valour  bear  the  sin  upon  their 
own  heads.  I’ll  take  it  upon  my  death,  I  gave  him 


ACT  V 


466  x^IRST  PART  OF 

this  wound  in  the  thigh:  if  the  man  were  alive 
and  would  deny  it,  ’zounds,  I  would  make  him 
cat  a  piece  of  my  sword. 

Lj77.  This  is  the  strangest  tale  that  ever  I  heard. 
Prime.  This  is  the  strangest  fellow,  brother 
John.  /5P 

Come,  bring  your  luggage  nobly  on  your  back: 
For  my  part,  if  a  lie  may  do  thee  grace, 

I’ll  gild  it  with  the  happiest  terms  I  have. 

A  retreat  is  sounded. 

The  trumpet  sounds  retreat;  the  day  is  ours. 
Come,  brother,  let  us  to  the  highest  of  the  field. 
To  see  what  friends  arc  living,  who  are  dead. 

[Exeunt  prince  of  wai  es  and  Lancaster. 
Fal.  I’ll  follow,  as  they  say,  for  reward.  He  that 
rewards  me,  God  reward  him!  If  1  do  grow  great. 
I’ll  grow  less;  for  I’ll  purge,  and  leave  sack,  and 
live  cleanly  as  a  nobleman  should  do.  [Exit, 

Scene  v.  Another  part  of  the  field 
The  immpets  sound.  Enter  the  king,  prince  of 

WALES,  LORD  JOHN  OF  LANCASTER,  EARL  OF 
WESTMORELAND,  'With  WORCESTER  and  VERNON 

prisoners. 

King.  Thus  ever  did  rebellion  find  rebuke. 
Ill-spirited  Worcester!  did  not  we  send  grace. 
Pardon,  and  terms  of  love  to  all  of  you? 

And  wouldst  thou  turn  our  offers  contrary? 
Misuse  the  tenour  of  thy  kinsman’s  trust? 

Three  knights  upon  our  party  slain  to-day, 

A  noble  earl,  and  many  a  creature  else 
Had  been  alive  this  hour. 

If  like  a  Christian  thou  hadst  truly  borne 
Betwixt  our  armies  true  intelligence.  10 

Wor  What  I  have  done  my  safety  urged  me  to; 
And  I  embrace  this  fortune  patiently. 

Since  not  to  be  avoided  it  falls  on  me. 


KING  HENRY  IV 

King.  Bear  Worcester  to  the  death  and  Vernon 
too: 

Other  offenders  we  will  pause  upon. 

[Exeunt  Worcester  and  vernon,  guarded. 
How  goes  the  field? 

Prince.  The  noble  Scot,  Lord  Douglas,  when  he 
saw 

The  fortune  of  the  day  quite  turn’d  from  him. 
The  noble  Percy  slain,  and  all  his  men 
Upon  the  foot  of  fear,  fled  with  the  rest;  20 

And  falling  from  a  hill,  he  was  so  bruised 
That  the  pursuers  took  him.  At  my  tent 
The  Douglas  is;  and  I  beseech  your  Grace 
I  may  dispose  of  him. 

King.  With  all  my  heart. 

Prince.  Then,  brother  John  of  Lancaster,  to  you 
This  honourable  bounty  shall  belong: 

Go  to  the  Douglas,  and  deliver  him 
Up  to  his  pleasure,  ransomless  and  free: 

His  valour  shown  upon  our  crests  to-day 
Hath  taught  us  how  to  cherish  such  high  deeds 
Even  in  the  bosom  of  our  adversaries.  5  / 

Lan.  I  thank  your  Grace  for  this  high  courtesy. 
Which  I  shall  give  away  immediately. 

King.  Then  this  remains,  that  we  divide  our 
power. 

You,  son  John,  and  my  cousin  Westmoreland 
Towards  York  shall  bend  you  with  your  dearest 
speed. 

To  meet  Northumberland  and  the  prelate  Scroop, 
Who,  as  we  hear,  are  busily  in  arms: 

Myself  and  you,  son  Harry,  will  towards  Wales, 
To  fight  with  Glendower  and  the  Earl  of  March. 
Rebellion  in  this  land  shall  lose  his  sway,  41 
Meeting  the  check  of  such  another  day: 

And  since  this  business  so  fair  is  done. 

Let  us  not  leave  till  all  our  own  be  won.  [Exeunt. 


The  Second  Part  of 


KING  HENRY  THE  FOURTH 


DRAMATIS  PERSON /E 


King  Henry  the  Fourth 
Henry,  Prince  of  Wales, 
afterwards  King  Henry  V 
Thomas,  Duke  of  Clarence  his  sons 

Prince  John  of  Lancaster 
Prince  Humphrey  of  Gloucester 
Earl  of  Warwick 
Earl  of  Westmoreland 
Gower 
Harcourt 

Lord  Chief  Justice  of  the  King's  Bench 
A  Servant  of  the  Chief  Justice 
Earl  of  Northumberland 
Scroop,  Archbishop  of  York 
Lord  Mowbray 
Lord  Hastings 
Lord  Bardolph 
Sir  John  Coleville 

M^t^  I  Northumberland 

Sir  John  Falstaff 
Page  to  Falstaff 
Bardolph 
Pistol 
PoiNs 
Peto 


Shallow  I  ,  . 

Silence  I  country  justices 

Davy,  servant  to  Shallow 
Mouldy 
Shadow 

Wart  recruits 
Feeble 
Bullcalf 

Sn^re  I 
A  Porter 
Two  Drawers 
A  Messenger 
A  Beadle 
Two  Grooms 
Rumour,  the  Presenter 
A  Dancer,  speaker  of  the  Epilogue 


Lady  Northumberland 
Lady  Percy 

Mistress  Quickly,  hostess  of  a  tavern  in  Eastcheap 
Doll  Tearsheet 


Non-Speaking:  Earl  of  Surrey^  Blunt,  Lords, 
Beadles,  Musicians,  and  Attendants 

Scene:  England 


INDUCTION 
Warkworth:  before  the  castle 
Enter  rumour,  painted  full  of  tongues. 

Rum.  Open  your  ears;  for  which  of  you  will 
stop 

The  vent  of  hearing  when  loud  Rumour  speaks? 

I,  from  the  orient  to  the  drooping  west, 

Making  the  wind  my  post-horse,  still  unfold 
The  acts  commenced  on  this  ball  of  earth: 

Upon  my  tongues  continual  slanders  ride. 

The  which  in  every  language  I  pronounce. 
Stuffing  the  ears  of  men  with  false  reports. 

I  speak  of  peace,  while  covert  enmity 

Under  the  smile  of  safety  wounds  the  world:  to 

And  who  but  Rumour,  who  but  only  I, 

Make  fearful  musters  and  prepared  defence, 
Whiles  the  big  year,  swoln  with  some  other 
grief, 

Is  thought  with  child  by  the  stern  tyrant  war. 
And  no  such  matter?  Rumour  is  a  pipe 
Blown  by  surmises,  jealousies,  conjectures. 


And  of  so  easy  and  so  plain  a  stop 

That  the  blunt  monster  with  uncounted  heads. 

The  still-discordant  wavering  multitude, 

Can  play  upon  it.  But  what  need  I  thus  20 

My  well-known  body  to  anatomize 

Among  my  household?  Why  is  Rumour  here? 

I  run  before  King  Harry’s  victory; 

Who  in  a  bloody  field  by  Shrewsbury 
Hath  beaten  down  young  Hotspur  and  his  troops, 
Quenching  the  flame  of  bold  rebellion 
Even  with  the  rebels’  blood.  But  what  mean  I 
To  speak  so  true  at  first?  my  office  is 
To  noise  abroad  that  Harry  Monmouth  fell 
Under  the  wrath  of  noble  Hotspur’s  sword,  50 
And  that  the  king  before  the  Douglas’  rage 
Stoop’d  his  anointed  head  as  low  as  death. 

This  have  I  rumour’d  through  the  peasant  towns 
Between  the  royal  field  of  Shrewsbury 
And  this  worm-eaten  hold  of  ragged  stone, 
Where  Hotspur’s  father,  old  Northumberland, 
Lies  crafty-sick:  the  posts  come  tiring  on. 

And  not  a  man  of  them  brings  other  news 


ACT  I 


468  SECOND  PART  OF 

Than  they  have  learn’d  of  me:  from  Rumour’s 
tongues 

They  bring  smooth  comforts  false,  worse  than 
true  wrongs.  [Exit.  40 

ACT  I 

Scene  i.  The  same 
Enter  lord  bardolph. 

L.  Bard.  Who  keeps  the  gate  here,  ho? 

The  PORTER  opens  the  gate. 

Where  is  the  Earl? 
Port.  What  shall  I  say  you  are? 

L.  Bard.  Tell  thou  the  Earl 

That  the  Lord  Bardolph  doth  attend  him  here. 

Port.  His  lordship  is  walk’d  forth  into  the  or¬ 
chard: 

Please  it  your  honour,  knock  but  at  the  gate. 

And  he  himself  will  answer. 

Enter  Northumberland. 

L.  Bard.  Here  comes  the  Earl. 

[Exit  PORTER. 

North.  What  news.  Lord  Bardolph?  every  min¬ 
ute  now 

Should  be  the  father  of  some  stratagem: 

The  times  are  wild;  contention,  like  a  horse 
Full  of  high  feeding,  madly  hath  broke  loose  10 
And  bears  down  all  before  him. 

L.  Bard.  Noble  Earl, 

I  bring  you  certain  news  from  Shrewsbury. 

North.  Good,  an  God  will! 

L.  Bard.  As  good  as  heart  can  wish: 

The  King  is  almost  wounded  to  the  death; 

And,  in  the  fortune  of  my  lord  your  son. 

Prince  Harry  slain  outright;  and  both  the 
Blunts 

Kill’d  by  the  hand  of  Douglas;  young  Prince 
John 

And  Westmoreland  and  Stafford  fled  the  field; 

And  Harry  Monmouth’s  brawn,  the  hulk  Sir 
John, 

Is  prisoner  to  your  son:  O,  such  a  day,  20 

So  fought,  so  follow’d,  and  so  fairly  won, 

Came  not  till  now  to  dignify  the  times. 

Since  Caesar’s  fortunes! 

North.  How  is  this  derived? 

Saw  you  the  field?  came  you  from  Shrewsbury? 

L.  Bard.  I  spake  with  one,  my  lord,  that  came 
from  thence, 

A  gentleman  well  bred  and  of  good  name, 

That  freely  render’d  me  these  news  for  true. 

North.  Here  comes  my  servant  Travers,  whom 
I  sent 

On  Tuesday  last  to  listen  after  news. 


KING  HENRY  IV 

Enter  travers. 

L.  Bard.  My  lord,  I  over-rode  him  on  the  way; 
And  he  is  furnish’d  with  no  certainties  5/ 

More  than  he  haply  may  retail  from  me. 

North.  Now,  Travers,  what  good  tidings  comes 
with  you? 

Tra.  My  lord.  Sir  John  Umfrevile  turn’d  me 
back 

With  joyful  tidings;  and,  being  better  horsed, 
Out-rode  me.  After  him  came  spurring  hard 
A  gentleman,  almost  forspent  with  speed. 

That  stopp’d  by  me  to  breathe  his  bloodied  horse. 
He  ask’d  the  way  to  Chester;  and  of  him 
I  did  demand  what  news  from  Shrewsbury:  40 
He  told  me  that  rebellion  had  bad  luck 
And  that  young  Harry  Percy’s  spur  was  cold. 
With  that,  he  gave  his  able  horse  the  head, 

And  bending  forward  struck  his  armed  heels 
Against  the  panting  sides  of  his  poor  jade 
Up  to  the  rowel-head,  and  starting  so 
He  seem’d  in  running  to  devour  the  way. 

Staying  no  longer  question. 

North.  Ha!  Again: 

Said  he  young  Harry  Percy’s  spur  was  cold? 

Of  Hotspur  Coldspur?  that  rebellion  jo 

Had  met  ill  luck? 

L.  Bard.  My  lord.  I’ll  tell  you  what; 

If  my  young  lord  your  son  have  not  the  day. 
Upon  mine  honour,  for  a  silken  point 
I’ll  give  my  barony:  never  talk  of  it. 

North.  Why  should  that  gentleman  that  rode  by 
Travers 

Give  then  such  instances  of  loss? 

L.  Bard.  Who,  he? 

He  was  some  hilding  fellow  that  had  stolen 
The  horse  he  rode  on,  and,  upon  my  life, 

Spoke  at  a  venture.  Look,  here  comes  more  news. 

Enter  morton. 

North.  Yea,  this  man’s  brow,  like  to  a  title-leaf. 
Foretells  the  nature  of  a  tragic  volume :  6} 

So  looks  the  strand  whereon  the  imperious  flood 
Hath  left  a  witness’d  usurpation. 

Say,  Morton,  didst  thou  come  from  Shrewsbury? 
Mor.  I  ran  from  Shrewsbury,  my  noble  lord; 
Where  hateful  death  put  on  his  ugliest  mask 
To  fright  our  party. 

North.  How  doth  my  son  and  brother? 

Thou  tremblest;  and  the  whiteness  in  thy  cheek 
Is  apter  than  thy  tongue  to  tell  thy  errand. 

Even  such  a  man,  so  faint,  so  spiritless,  70 

So  dull,  so  dead  in  look,  so  woe-begone, 

Drew  Priam’s  curtain  in  the  dead  of  night. 

And  would  have  told  him  half  his  Troy  was 
burnt; 


SCENE  1 


SECOND  PART  OF 

But  Priam  found  the  fire  ere  he  his  tongue, 

And  I  my  Percy’s  death  ere  thou  report’st  it. 

This  thou  wouldst  say,  “Your  son  did  thus  and 
thus; 

Your  brother  thus;  so  fought  the  noble  Douglas” : 
Stopping  my  greedy  ear  with  their  bold  deeds: 

But  in  the  end,  to  stop  my  ear  indeed. 

Thou  hast  a  sigh  to  blow  away  this  praise,  8o 
Ending  with  “Brother,  son,  and  all  are  dead.” 

Aior.  Douglas  is  living,  and  your  brother,  yet; 

But,  for  my  lord  your  son — 

North.  Why,  he  is  dead. 

See  what  a  ready  tongue  suspicion  hath! 

He  that  but  fears  the  thing  he  would  not  know 
Hath  by  instinct  knowledge  from  others’  eyes 
That  what  he  fear’d  is  chanced.  Yet  speak, 

Morton; 

Tell  thou  an  earl  his  divination  lies. 

And  I  will  take  it  as  a  sweet  disgrace 
And  make  thee  rich  for  doing  me  such  wrong.  90 
Mor.  You  are  too  great  to  be  by  me  gainsaid: 

Your  spirit  is  too  true,  your  fears  too  certain. 

North.  Yet,  for  all  this,  say  not  that  Percy’s 
dead. 

I  see  a  strange  confession  in  thine  eye: 

Thou  shakest  thy  head  and  hold’st  it  fear  or  sin 
To  speak  a  truth.  If  he  be  slain,  say  so; 

The  tongue  offends  not  that  reports  his  death: 

And  he  doth  sin  that  doth  belie  the  dead, 

Not  he  which  says  the  dead  is  not  alive. 

Yet  the  first  bringer  of  unwelcome  news  100 
Hath  but  a  losing  office,  and  his  tongue 
Sounds  ever  after  as  a  sullen  bell. 

Remember’d  tolling  a  departing  friend. 

L.  Bard.  I  cannot  think,  my  lord,  your  son  is 
dead. 

Mor.  I  am  sorry  I  should  force  you  to  believe 
That  which  I  would  to  God  I  had  not  seen; 

But  these  mine  eyes  saw  him  in  bloody  state. 
Rendering  faint  quittance,  wearied  and  out- 
breathed. 

To  Harry  Monmouth;  whose  swift  wrath  beat 
down 

The  never-daunted  Percy  to  the  earth,  no 

From  whence  with  life  he  never  more  sprung  up. 

In  few,  his  death,  whose  spirit  lent  a  fire 
Even  to  the  dullest  peasant  in  his  camp. 

Being  bruited  once,  took  fire  and  heat  away 
From  the  best-temper’d  courage  in  his  troops; 

For  from  his  metal  was  his  party  steel’d; 

Which  once  in  him  abated,  all  the  rest 
Turn’d  on  themselves,  like  dull  and  heavy  lead: 

And  as  the  thing  that’s  heavy  in  itself 

Upon  enforcement  flies  with  greatest  speed,  120 

So  did  our  men,  heavy  in  Hotspur’s  loss. 

Lend  to  this  weight  such  lightness  with  their  fear 


KING  HENRY  IV  465^ 

That  arrows  fled  not  swifter  toward  their  aim 
Than  did  our  soldiers,  aiming  at  their  safety. 

Fly  from  the  field.  Then  was  that  noble  Wor¬ 
cester 

Too  soon  ta’en  prisoner;  and  that  furious  Scot, 
The  bloody  Douglas,  whose  well-labouring 
sword 

Had  three  times  slain  the  appearance  of  the  King, 
’Gan  vail  his  stomach  and  did  grace  the  shame 
Of  those  that  turn’d  their  backs,  and  in  his  flight. 
Stumbling  in  fear,  was  took.  The  sum  of  all 
Is  that  the  King  hath  won,  and  hath  sent  out 
A  speedy  power  to  encounter  you,  my  lord. 
Under  the  conduct  of  young  Lancaster 
And  Westmoreland.  This  is  the  news  at  full. 
North.  For  this  I  shall  have  time  enough  to 
mourn. 

In  poison  there  is  physic;  and  these  news. 

Having  been  well,  that  would  have  made  me  siek. 
Being  sick,  have  in  some  measure  made  me  well: 
And  as  the  wretch,  whose  fever-weaken’d  joints. 
Like  strengthless  hinges,  buckle  under  life,  74/ 
Impatient  of  his  fit,  breaks  like  a  fire 
Out  of  his  keeper’s  arms,  even  so  my  limbs. 
Weaken’d  with  grief,  being  now  enraged  with 
grief. 

Are  thriee  themselves.  Hence,  therefore,  thou 
nice  crutch! 

A  scaly  gauntlet  now  with  joints  of  steel 
Must  glove  this  hand:  and  hence,  thou  sickly 
quoif! 

Thou  art  a  guard  too  wanton  for  the  head 
Which  princes,  flesh’d  with  conquest,  aim  to  hit. 
Now  bind  my  brows  with  iron;  and  approach  /50 
The  ragged’ St  hour  that  time  and  spite  dare  bring 
To  frown  upon  the  enraged  Northumberland! 

Let  heaven  kiss  earth!  now  let  not  Nature’s  hand 
Keep  the  wild  flood  confined!  let  order  die! 

And  let  this  world  no  longer  be  a  stage 
To  feed  contention  in  a  lingering  act; 

But  let  one  spirit  of  the  first-born  Cain 
Reign  in  all  bosoms,  that,  each  heart  being  set 
On  bloody  eourses,  the  rude  scene  may  end, 

And  darkness  be  the  burier  of  the  dead!  160 

Tra.  This  strained  passion  doth  you  wrong, 
my  lord. 

L.  Bard.  Sweet  Earl,  divoree  not  wisdom  from 
your  honour. 

Mor.  The  lives  of  all  your  loving  complices 
Lean  on  your  health;  the  which,  if  you  give  o’er 
To  stormy  passion,  must  perforee  decay. 

You  cast  the  event  of  war,  my  noble  lord. 

And  summ’d  the  aceount  of  chance,  before  you 
said 

“Let  us  make  head.”  It  was  your  presurmise 
That,  in  the  dole  of  blow.s,  your  son  might  drop: 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


You  knew  he  walk’d  o’er  perils,  on  an  edge,  /70 
More  likely  to  fall  in  than  to  get  o’er; 

You  were  advised  his  flesh  was  capable 
Of  wounds  and  scars  and  that  his  forward  spirit 
Would  lift  him  where  most  trade  of  danger 
ranged: 

Yet  did  you  say,  “Go  forth”;  and  none  of  this. 
Though  strongly  apprehended,  could  restrain 
The  stiflf-borne  action:  what  hath  then  befallen. 
Or  what  hath  this  bold  enterprise  brought  forth. 
More  than  that  being  which  was  like  to  be? 

L.  Bard.  We  all  that  are  engaged  to  this  loss  180 
Knew  that  we  ventured  on  such  dangerous  seas 
That  if  we  wrought  out  life  ’twas  ten  to  one; 

And  yet  we  ventured,  for  the  gain  proposed 
Choked  the  respect  of  likely  peril  fear’d; 

And  since  we  are  o’erset,  venture  again. 

Come,  we  will  all  put  forth,  body  and  goods. 
Mor.  ’Tis  more  than  time:  and,  my  most  noble 
lord, 

I  hear  for  certain,  and  do  speak  the  truth. 

The  gentle  Archbishop  of  York  is  up 
With  well-appointed  powers:  he  is  a  man  ipo 
Who  with  a  double  surety  binds  his  followers. 
My  lord  your  son  had  only  but  the  corpse. 

But  shadows  and  the  shows  of  men,  to  fight; 

For  that  same  word,  “rebellion,”  did  divide 
The  action  of  their  bodies  from  their  souls; 

And  they  did  fight  with  queasiness,  constrain’d, 
As  men  drink  potions,  that  their  weapons  only 
Seem’d  on  our  side;  but,  for  their  spirits  and 
souls. 

This  word,  “rebellion,”  it  had  froze  them  up. 

As  fish  are  in  a  pond.  But  now  the  Bishop  200 
Turns  insurrection  to  religion: 

Supposed  sincere  and  holy  in  his  thoughts. 

He’s  followed  both  with  body  and  with  mind; 
And  doth  enlarge  his  rising  with  the  blood 
Of  fair  King  Richard,  scraped  from  Pomfret 
stones; 

Derives  from  heaven  his  quarrel  and  his  cause; 
Tells  them  he  doth  bestride  a  bleeding  land. 
Gasping  for  life  under  great  Bolingbroke; 

And  more  and  less  do  flock  to  follow  him. 

North.  I  knew  of  this  before;  but,  to  speak 
truth,  210 

This  present  grief  had  wiped  it  from  my  mind. 

Go  in  with  me;  and  counsel  every  man 
The  aptest  way  for  safety  and  revenge: 

Get  posts  and  letters,  and  make  friends  with 
speed: 

Never  so  few,  and  never  yet  more  need.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  London:  a  street 

Enter  falstaff,  njoith  his  page  bearing  his 
sword  and  buckler. 


Fal.  Sirrah,  you  giant,  what  says  the  doctor  to 
my  water? 

Page.  He  said,  sir,  the  water  itself  was  a  good 
healthy  water;  but,  for  the  party  that  owed  it,  he 
might  have  more  diseases  than  he  knew  for. 

Fal.  Men  of  all  sorts  take  a  pride  to  gird  at  me: 
the  brain  of  this  foolish-compounded  clay,  man, 
is  not  able  to  invent  any  thing  that  tends  to  laugh¬ 
ter,  more  than  I  invent  or  is  invented  on  me:  I 
am  not  only  witty  in  myself,  but  the  cause  that 
wit  is  in  other  men.  I  do  here  walk  before  thee 
like  a  sow  that  hath  overwhelmed  all  her  litter 
but  one.  If  the  Prince  put  thee  into  my  service 
for  any  other  reason  than  to  set  me  off,  why  then 
I  have  no  judgement.  Thou  whoreson  mandrake, 
thou  art  fitter  to  be  worn  in  my  cap  than  to  wait 
at  my  heels.  I  was  never  manned  with  an  agate 
till  now:  but  I  will  inset  you  neither  in  gold  nor 
silver,  but  in  vile  apparel,  and  send  you  back 
again  to  your  master,  for  a  jewel — the  juvenal, 
the  Prince  your  master,  whose  chin  is  not  yet 
fledged.  I  will  sooner  have  a  beard  grow  in  the 
palm  of  my  hand  than  he  shall  get  one  on  his 
cheek;  and  yet  he  will  not  stick  to  say  his  face  is 
a  face-royal:  God  may  finish  it  when  he  will,  ’tis 
not  a  hair  amiss  yet:  he  may  keep  it  still  at  a  face- 
royal,  for  a  barber  shall  never  earn  sixpence  out 
of  it;  and  yet  he’ll  be  crowing  as  if  he  had  writ 
man  ever  since  his  father  was  a  bachelor.  He 
may  keep  his  own  grace,  but  he’s  almost  out  of 
mine,  I  can  assure  him.  What  said  Master  Dom- 
bledon  about  the  satin  for  my  short  cloak  and  my 
slops? 

Page.  He  said,  sir,  you  should  procure  him  better 
assurance  than  Bardolph:  he  would  not  take  his 
band  and  yours;  he  liked  not  the  security. 

Fal.  Let  him  be  damned,  like  the  glutton!  pray 
God  his  tongue  be  hotter!  A  whoreson  Achito- 
phel!  a  rascally  yea- forsooth  knave!  to  bear  a 
gentleman  in  hand,  and  then  stand  upon  security ! 
The  whoreson  smooth-pates  do  now  wear  noth¬ 
ing  but  high  shoes,  and  bunches  of  keys  at  their 
girdles;  and  if  a  man  is  through  with  them  in 
honest  taking  up,  then  they  must  stand  upon  se¬ 
curity.  I  had  as  lief  they  would  put  ratsbane  in 
my  mouth  as  offer  to  stop  it  with  security.  I 
looked  a’  should  have  sent  me  two  and  twenty 
yards  of  satin,  as  I  am  a  true  knight,  and  he  sends 
me  security.  Well,  he  may  sleep  in  security;  for 
he  hath  the  horn  of  abundance,  and  the  lightness 
of  his  wife  shines  through  it:  and  yet  cannot  he 
see,  though  he  have  his  own  lanthorn  to  light 
him.  Where’s  Bardolph? 

Page.  He’s  gone  into  Smithfield  to  buy  your 
worship  a  horse. 

Fal.  I  bought  him  in  Paul’s,  and  he’ll  buy  me  a 


SCENE  II 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


horse  in  Smithfield:  an  I  could  get  me  but  a  wife 
in  the  stews,  I  were  manned,  horsed,  and  wived. 

Enter  the  lord  chief  justice  and  servant. 

Page.  Sir,  here  comes  the  nobleman  that  com¬ 
mitted  the  Prince  for  striking  him  about  Bar- 
dolph. 

Fal.  Wait  close;  I  will  not  see  him. 

Ch.  Just.  What’s  he  that  goes  there? 

Serv.  Fal  staff,  an’t  please  your  lordship. 

Ch.  Just.  He  that  was  in  question  for  the  rob¬ 
bery?  69 

Serv.  He,  my  lord:  but  he  hath  since  done  good 
service  at  Shrewsbury;  and,  as  I  hear,  is  now 
going  with  some  charge  to  the  Lord  John  of 
Lancaster. 

Ch.  Just.  What,  to  York?  Call  him  back  again. 
Serv.  Sir  John  Falstaff! 

Fal.  Boy,  tell  him  I  am  deaf. 

Page.  You  must  speak  louder;  my  master  is  deaf. 
Ch.  Just.  I  am  sure  he  is,  to  the  hearing  of  any¬ 
thing  good.  Go,  pluck  him  by  the  elbow;  I  must 
speak  with  him. 

Serv.  Sir  John! 

Fal.  What!  a  young  knave,  and  begging!  Is 
there  not  wars?  is  there  not  employment?  doth 
not  the  King  lack  subjects?  do  not  the  rebels  need 
soldiers?  Though  it  be  a  shame  to  be  on  any  side 
but  one,  it  is  worse  shame  to  beg  than  to  be  on 
the  worst  side,  were  it  worse  than  the  name  of 
rebellion  can  tell  how  to  make  it.  90 

Serv.  You  mistake  me,  sir. 

Fal.  Why,  sir,  did  I  say  you  were  an  honest 
man?  setting  my  knighthood  and  my  soldiership 
aside,  I  had  lied  in  my  throat,  if  I  had  said  so. 

Serv.  I  pray  you,  sir,  then  set  your  knighthood 
and  your  soldiership  aside;  and  give  me  leave  to 
tell  you,  you  lie  in  your  throat,  if  you  say  I  am 
any  other  than  an  honest  man. 

Fal.  I  give  thee  leave  to  tell  me  so!  I  lay  aside 
that  which  grows  to  me!  If  thou  gettest  any  leave 
of  me,  hang  me;  if  thou  takest  leave,  thou  wert 
better  be  hanged.  You  hunt  counter:  hence! 
avaunt! 

Serv.  Sir,  my  lord  would  speak  with  you. 

Ch.  Just.  Sir  John  Falstaff,  a  word  with  you. 

Fal.  My  good  lord!  God  give  your  lordship 
good  time  of  day.  I  am  glad  to  see  your  lordship 
abroad:  I  heard  say  your  lordship  was  sick:  I 
hope  your  lordship  goes  abroad  by  advice.  Your 
lordship,  though  not  clean  past  your  youth,  hath 
yet  some  smack  of  age  in  you,  some  relish  of  the 
saltness  of  time;  and  I  most  humbly  beseech  your 
lordship  to  have  a  reverent  care  of  your  health. 

Ch.  Just.  Sir  John,  I  sent  for  you  before  your 
expedition  to  Shrewsbury. 


471 

Fal.  An’t  please  your  lordship,  I  hear  his  Ma¬ 
jesty  is  returned  with  some  discomfort  from 
Wales. 

Ch.  Just.  I  talk  not  of  his  Majesty;  you  would 
not  come  when  I  sent  for  you.  121 

Fal.  And  I  hear,  moreover,  his  Highness  is 
fallen  into  this  same  whoreson  apoplexy. 

Ch.  Just.  Well,  God  mend  him!  I  pray  you,  let 
me  speak  with  you. 

Fal.  This  apoplexy  is,  as  I  take  it,  a  kind  of 
lethargy,  an’t  please  your  lordship;  a  kind  of 
sleeping  in  the  blood,  a  whoreson  tingling. 

Ch.  Just.  What  tell  you  me  of  it?  be  it  as  it 
is.  /50 

Fal.  It  hath  it  original  from  much  grief,  from 
study  and  perturbation  of  the  brain:  I  have  read 
the  cause  of  his  effects  in  Galen:  it  is  a  kind  of 
deafness. 

Ch.  Just.  I  think  you  are  fallen  into  the  disease; 
for  you  hear  not  what  I  say  to  you. 

Fal.  Very  well,  my  lord,  very  well:  rather,  an’t 
please  you,  it  is  the  disease  of  not  listening,  the 
malady  of  not  marking,  that  I  am  troubled 
withal.  /40 

Ch.  Just.  To  punish  you  by  the  heels  would 
amend  the  attention  of  your  ears;  and  I  care  not 
if  I  do  become  your  physician. 

Fal.  I  am  as  poor  as  Job,  my  lord,  but  not  so 
patient:  your  lordship  may  minister  the  potion  of 
imprisonment  to  me  in  respect  of  poverty;  but 
how  I  should  be  your  patient  to  follow  your  pre¬ 
scriptions,  the  wise  may  make  some  dram  of  a 
scruple,  or  indeed  a  scruple  itself. 

Ch.  Just.  I  sent  for  you,  when  there  were  mat¬ 
ters  against  you  for  your  life,  to  come  speak 
with  me. 

Fal.  As  I  was  then  advised  by  my  learned  coun¬ 
sel  in  the  laws  of  this  land-service,  I  did  not 
come. 

Ch.  Just.  Well,  the  truth  is.  Sir  John,  you  live 
in  great  infamy. 

Fal.  He  that  buckles  him  in  my  belt  cannot  live 
in  less. 

Ch.  Just.  Your  means  are  very  slender,  and  your 
waste  is  great.  160 

Fal.  I  would  it  were  otherwise;  I  would  my 
means  were  greater,  and  my  waist  slenderer. 

Ch.  Just.  You  have  misled  the  youthful  Prince 

Fal.  The  young  Prince  hath  misled  me:  I  am 
the  fellow  with  the  great  belly,  and  he  my  dog. 

Ch.  Just.  Well,  I  am  loath  to  gall  a  new-healed 
wound:  your  day’s  service  at  Shrewsbury  hath  a 
little  gilded  over  your  night’s  exploit  on  Gadshill: 
you  may  thank  the  unquiet  time  for  your  quiet 
o’er-posting  that  action.  171 

Fal.  My  lord? 


ACT  1 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


472 

Ch.  Just.  But  since  all  is  well,  keep  it  so:  wake 
not  a  sleeping  wolf. 

Fal.  To  wake  a  wolf  is  as  bad  as  to  smell  a  fox. 

Ch.  Just.  What!  you  are  as  a  candle,  the  better 
part  burnt  out. 

Fal.  A  wassail  candle,  my  lord,  all  tallow:  if  I 
did  say  of  wax,  my  growth  would  approve  the 
truth.  iSi 

Ch.  Just.  There  is  not  a  white  hair  on  your  face 
but  should  have  his  effect  of  gravity. 

Fal.  His  effect  of  gravy,  gravy,  gravy. 

Ch.  Just.  You  follow  the  young  Prince  up  and 
down,  like  his  ill  angel. 

Fal.  Not  so,  my  lord;  your  ill  angel  is  light;  but 
I  hope  he  that  looks  upon  me  will  take  me  with¬ 
out  weighing:  and  yet,  in  some  respects,  I  grant, 
I  cannot  go:  I  cannot  tell.  Virtue  is  of  so  little 
regard  in  these  costermonger  times  that  true 
valour  is  turned  bear-herd:  pregnancy  is  made  a 
tapster,  and  hath  his  quick  wit  wasted  in  giving 
reckonings:  all  the  other  gifts  appertinent  to 
man,  as  the  malice  of  this  age  shapes  them,  are 
not  worth  a  gooseberry.  You  that  are  old  con¬ 
sider  not  the  capacities  of  us  that  are  young;  you 
do  measure  the  heat  of  our  livers  with  the  bitter¬ 
ness  of  your  galls:  and  we  that  are  in  the  vaward 
of  our  youth,  I  must  confess,  are  wags  too.  200 

^h.  Just.  Do  you  set  down  your  name  in  the 
scroll  of  youth,  that  are  written  down  old  with 
all  the  characters  of  age?  Have  you  not  a  moist 
eve?  a  dry  hand?  a  yellow  cheek?  a  white  beard? 
a  decreasing  leg?  an  increasing  belly?  is  not  your 
voice  broken?  your  wind  short?  your  chin 
double?  your  wit  single?  and  every  part  about 
you  blasted  with  antiquity?  and  will  you  yet 
call  yourself  young?  Fie,  fie,  fie.  Sir  John!  209 

Fal.  My  lord,  I  was  born  about  three  of  the 
clock  in  the  afternoon,  with  a  white  head  and 
something  a  round  belly.  For  my  voiee,  I  have 
lost  it  with  halloing  and  singing  of  anthems.  To 
approve  my  youth  further,  I  will  not:  the  truth 
is.  I  am  only  old  in  judgement  and  understanding; 
and  he  that  will  caper  with  me  for  a  thousand 
marks,  let  him  lend  me  the  money,  and  have  at 
him!  For  the  box  of  the  ear  that  the  Prince  gave 
you,  he  gave  it  like  a  rude  prince,  and  you  took 
it  like  a  sensible  lord.  I  have  checked  him  for  it, 
and  the  young  lion  repents;  marry,  not  in  ashes 
and  sackcloth,  but  in  new  silk  and  old  sack. 

Ch,  Just.  Well,  God  send  the  Prince  a  better 
companion! 

Fal.  God  send  the  companion  a  better  prince! 
I  cannot  rid  my  hands  of  him. 

Ch.  Just.  Well,  the  King  hath  severed  you 
and  Prince  Harry:  I  hear  you  are  going  with 
Lord  John  of  Lancaster  against  the  Archbishop 


and  the  Earl  of  Northumberland.  2^0 

Fal.  Yea;  I  thank  your  pretty  sweet  wit  for 
it.  But  look  you  pray,  all  you  that  kiss  my  lady 
Peace  at  home,  that  our  armies  join  not  in  a  hot 
day;  for,  by  the  Lord,  I  take  but  two  shirts  out 
with  me,  and  I  mean  not  to  sweat  extraordinarily: 
if  it  be  a  hot  day,  and  I  brandish  anything  but  a 
bottle,  I  would  I  might  never  spit  white  again. 
There  is  not  a  dangerous  action  can  peep  out  his 
head  but  I  am  thrust  upon  it:  well,  I  cannot 
last  ever:  but  it  was  alway  yet  the  trick  of  our 
English  nation,  if  they  have  a  good  thing,  to 
make  it  too  common.  If  ye  will  needs  say  I  am 
an  old  man,  you  should  give  me  rest.  I  would  to 
God  my  name  were  not  so  terrible  to  the  enemy 
as  it  is:  I  were  better  to  be  eaten  to  death  with 
a  rust  than  to  be  scoured  to  nothing  with  perpe¬ 
tual  motion. 

Ch.  Just.  Well,  be  honest,  be  honest;  and  God 
bless  your  expedition! 

Fal.  Will  your  lordship  lend  me  a  thousand 
pound  to  furnish  me  forth?  25/ 

Ch.  Just.  Not  a  penny,  not  a  penny;  you  are 
too  impatient  to  bear  crosses.  Fare  you  well: 
commend  me  to  my  cousin  Westmoreland. 

[Exeunt  chief  justice  and  servant. 

Fal.  If  I  do,  fillip  me  with  a  three-man  beetle. 
A  man  can  no  more  separate  age  and  covetous¬ 
ness  than  a’  can  part  young  limbs  and  lechery: 
but  the  gout  galls  the  one,  and  the  pox  pinches 
the  other;  and  so  both  the  degrees  prevent  my 
curses.  Boy!  260 

Page.  Sir? 

Fal.  What  money  is  in  my  purse? 

Page.  Seven  groats  and  two  pence. 

Fal.  I  can  get  no  remedy  against  this  con¬ 
sumption  of  the  purse:  borrowing  only  lingers 
and  lingers  it  out,  but  the  disease  is  incurable. 
Go  bear  this  letter  to  my  Lord  of  Lancaster;  this 
to  the  Prince;  this  to  the  Earl  of  Westmoreland; 
and  this  to  old  Mistress  Ursula,  whom  I  have 
weekly  sworn  to  marry  since  I  pereeiv  ed  the  first 
white  hair  on  my  chin.  About  it:  you  know 
where  to  find  me.  [Exit  page.]  A  pox  of  this 
gout!  or,  a  gout  of  this  pox!  for  the  one  or  the 
other  plays  the  rogue  with  my  great  toe.  ’Tis  no 
matter  if  I  do  halt;  I  have  the  wars  for  my  colour, 
and  my  pension  shall  seem  the  more  reasonable. 
A  good  wit  will  make  use  of  anything:  I  will 
turn  diseases  to  commodity.  [Exit. 

Scene  hi.  York:  the  Archbishop' s  palace 
Enter  the  archbishop,  the  lords  Hastings,  mow- 
bray,  and  bardolph. 

Arch.  Thus  have  you  heard  our  cause  and 
known  our  means; 


SCENE  III  SECOND  PART  OF 

And,  my  most  noble  friends,  I  pray  you  all. 

Speak  plainly  your  opinions  of  our  hopes : 

And  first.  Lord  Marshal,  what  say  you  to  it? 

Aiouob.  I  well  allow  the  occasion  of  our  arms; 

But  gladly  would  be  better  satisfied 
How  in  our  means  we  should  advance  ourselves 
To  look  with  forehead  bold  and  big  enough 
Upon  the  power  and  puissance  of  the  King. 

Hast.  Our  present  musters  grow  upon  the  file  lo 
To  five  and  twenty  thousand  men  of  choice; 

And  our  supplies  live  largely  in  the  hope 
Of  great  Northumberland,  whose  bosom  burns 
With  an  incensed  fire  of  injuries. 

L.  Bard.  The  question  then.  Lord  Hastings, 
standeth  thus; 

Whether  our  present  five  and  twenty  thousand 
May  hold  up  head  without  Northumberland? 

Hast.  With  him,  we  may. 

L.  Bard.  Yea,  marry,  there’s  the  point: 

But  if  without  him  we  be  thought  too  feeble, 

My  judgement  is,  we  should  not  step  too  far  20 
Till  we  had  his  assistance  by  the  hand; 

For  in  a  theme  so  bloody-faced  as  this 
Conjecture,  expectation,  and  surmise 
Of  aids  incertain  should  not  be  admitted. 

Arch.  ’Tis  very  true,  Lord  Bardolph;  for  indeed 
It  was  young  Hotspur’s  case  at  Shrewsbury. 

L.  Bard.  It  was,  my  lord;  who  lined  himself 
with  hope. 

Eating  the  air  on  promise  of  supply, 

Flattering  himself  in  project  of  a  power 
Much  smaller  than  the  smallest  of  his  thoughts: 

And  so,  with  great  imagination  5/ 

Proper  to  madmen,  led  his  powers  to  death 
And  winking  leap’d  into  destruction. 

Hast.  But,  by  your  leave,  it  never  yet  did  hurt 
To  lay  down  likelihoods  and  forms  of  hope. 

L.  Bard.  Yes,  if  this  present  quality  of  war, 

Indeed  the  instant  action:  a  cause  on  foot 
Lives  so  in  hope  as  in  an  early  spring 
We  see  the  appearing  buds;  which  to  prove  fruit, 
Hope  gives  not  so  much  warrant  as  despair  40 
That  frosts  will  bite  them.  When  we  mean  to 
build. 

We  first  survey  the  plot,  then  draw  the  model; 

And  when  we  see  the  figure  of  the  house. 

Then  must  we  rate  the  cost  of  the  erection; 

Which  if  we  find  outweighs  ability. 

What  do  we  then  but  draw  anew  the  model 
In  fewer  offices,  or  at  last  desist 
To  build  at  all?  Much  more,  in  this  great  work. 
Which  is  almost  to  pluck  a  kingdom  down 
And  set  another  up,  should  we  survey  50 

The  plot  of  situation  and  the  model. 

Consent  upon  a  sure  foundation. 

Question  surveyors,  know  our  own  estate, 


KING  HENRY  IV  473 

How  able  such  a  work  to  undergo. 

To  weigh  against  his  opposite;  or  else 
We  fortify  in  paper  and  in  figures. 

Using  the  names  of  men  instead  of  men: 

Like  one  that  draws  the  model  of  a  house 
Beyond  his  power  to  build  it;  who,  half  through. 
Gives  o’er  and  leaves  his  part-created  cost  60 
A  naked  subject  to  the  weeping  clouds 
And  waste  for  churlish  winter’s  tyranny. 

Hast.  Grant  that  our  hopes,  yet  likely  of  fair 
birth. 

Should  be  still-born,  and  that  we  now  possess’d 
The  utmost  man  of  expectation, 

I  think  we  are  a  body  strong  enough. 

Even  as  we  are,  to  equal  with  the  King. 

L.  Bard.  What,  is  the  King  but  five  and  twenty 
thousand? 

Hast.  To  us  no  more;  nay,  not  so  much.  Lord 
Bardolph. 

For  his  divisions,  as  the  times  do  brawl,  70 
Are  in  three  heads:  one  power  against  the  French, 
And  one  against  Glendower;  perforce  a  third 
Must  take  up  us:  so  is  the  unfirm  King 
In  three  divided;  and  his  coffers  sound 
With  hollow  poverty  and  emptiness. 

Arch.  That  he  should  draw  his  several  strengths 
together 

And  come  against  in  full  puissance. 

Need  not  be  dreaded. 

Hast.  If  he  should  do  so. 

He  leaves  his  back  unarm’d,  the  French  and  Welsh 
Baying  him  at  the  heels :  never  fear  that.  80 
L.  Bard.  Who  is  it  like  should  lead  his  forces 
hither? 

Hast.  The  Duke  of  Lancaster  and  Westmore¬ 
land; 

Against  the  Welsh,  himselfand  Harry  Monmouth . 
But  who  is  substituted  ’gainst  the  French, 

I  have  no  certain  notice. 

Arch.  Let  us  on. 

And  publish  the  occasion  of  our  arms. 

The  commonwealth  is  sick  of  their  own  choice; 
Their  over-greedy  love  hath  surfeited: 

An  habitation  giddy  and  unsure 
Hath  he  that  buildeth  on  the  vulgar  heart.  po 
O  thou  fond  many,  with  what  loud  applause 
Didst  thou  beat  heaven  with  blessing  Bolingbroke, 
Before  he  was  what  thou  wouldst  have  him  be! 
And  being  now  trimm’d  in  thine  own  desires. 
Thou,  beastly  feeder,  art  so  full  of  him 
That  thou  provokest  thyself  to  cast  him  up. 

So,  so,  thou  common  dog,  didst  thou  disgorge 
Thy  glutton  bosom  of  the  royal  Richard; 

And  now  thou  wouldst  eat  thy  dead  vomit  up. 
And  howl’st  to  find  it.  What  trust  is  in  these 
times? 


ACT  II 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


474 

They  that,  when  Richard  lived,  would  have  him 
die,  loi 

Are  now  become  enamour’d  on  his  grave: 

Thou,  that  threw’st  dust  upon  his  goodly  head 
When  through  proud  London  he  came  sighing  on 
After  the  admired  heels  of  Bolingbroke, 

Criest  now,  “O  earth,  yield  us  that  king  again, 
And  take  thou  this!”  O  thoughts  of  men  accursed! 
Past  and  to  come  seems  best;  things  present 
worst. 

Monjoh.  Shall  we  go  draw  our  numbers  and  set 
on? 

Hast,  We  are  time’s  subjects,  and  time  bids  be 
gone.  \Exeunt.  no 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  London:  a  street 

Enter  mistress  quickly,  fang  and  his  Boy  with 
her,  and  snare  following. 

Quick.  Master  Fang,  have  you  entered  the 
action? 

Fang.  It  is  entered. 

Quick.  Where’s  your  yeoman?  Is’t  a  lusty 
yeoman?  will  a’  stand  to’t? 

Fang.  Sirrah,  where’s  Snare? 

Quick.  O  Lord,  ay!  good  Master  Snare. 

Snare.  Here,  here. 

Fang.  Snare,  we  must  arrest  Sir  John  FalstafF. 

Quick.  Yea,  good  Master  Snare;  I  have  en¬ 
tered  him  and  all.  n 

Snare.  It  may  chance  cost  some  of  us  our  lives, 
for  he  will  stab. 

Quick.  Alas  the  day!  take  heed  of  him;  he 
stabbed  me  in  mine  own  house,  and  that  most 
beastly:  in  good  faith,  he  cares  not  what  mischief 
he  does,  if  his  weapon  be  out:  he  will  foin  like 
any  devil;  he  will  spare  neither  man,  woman, 
nor  child. 

Fang.  If  I  can  close  with  him,  I  care  not  for 
his  thrust.  21 

Quick.  No,  nor  I  neither:  I’ll  be  at  your  elbow. 

Fang.  An  I  but  fist  him  once:  an  a’  come  but 
within  my  vice — 

Quick.  I  am  undone  by  his  going;  I  warrant 
you,  he’s  an  infinitive  thing  upon  my  score.  Good 
Master  Fang,  hold  him  sure:  good  Master  Snare, 
let  him  not  ’scape.  A’  comes  continuantly  to  Pie- 
corner — saving  your  manhoods — to  buy  a  saddle; 
and  he  is  indited  to  dinner  to  the  Lubber’s-head 
in  Lumbert  street,  to  Master  Smooth’s  the  silk- 
man:  I  pray  ye,  since  my  exion  is  entered  and 
my  case  so  openly  known  to  the  world,  let  him 
be  brought  in  to  his  answer.  A  hundred  mark  is 
a  long  one  for  a  poor  lone  woman  to  bear:  and 
I  have  borne,  and  borne,  and  borne,  and  have 


been  fubbed  off,  ar^d  fubbed  off,  and  fubbed  off, 
from  this  day  to  that  day,  that  it  is  a  shame  to 
be  thought  on.  There  is  no  honesty  in  such 
dealing;  unless  a  woman  should  be  made  an  ass 
and  a  beast,  to  bear  every  knave’s  wrong.  Yonder 
he  comes;  and  that  arrant  malmsey-nose  knave, 
Bardolph,  with  him.  Do  your  offices,  do  your 
offices:  Master  Fang  and  Master  Snare,  do  me, 
do  me,  do  me  your  offices. 

Enter  falstaff,  page,  and  bardolph. 

Fal.  How  now!  whose  mare’s  dead?  what’s 
the  matter? 

Fang.  Sir  John,  I  arrest  you  at  the  suit  of  Mis¬ 
tress  Quickly. 

Fal.  Away,  varlets!  Draw,  Bardolph:  cut  me  off 
the  villain’s  head:  throw  the  quean  in  the  channel. 

Quick.  Throw  me  in  the  channel!  I’ll  throw 
thee  in  the  channel.  Wilt  thou?  wilt  thou?  thou 
bastardly  rogue!  Murder,  murder!  Ah,  thou 
honey-suckle  villain!  wilt  thou  kill  God’s  officers 
and  the  king’s?  Ah,  thou  honey-seed  rogue!  thou 
art  a  honey-seed,  a  man-queller,  and  a  woman- 
queller. 

Fal.  Keep  them  off,  Bardolph.  60 

Fang.  A  rescue!  a  rescue! 

Quick.  Good  people,  bring  a  rescue  or  two. 
Thou  wo’t,  wo’t  thou?  thou  wo’t,  wo’t  ta?  do, 
do,  thou  rogue!  do,  thou  hemp-seed! 

Fal.  Away,  you  scullion!  you  rampallian!  you 
fustilarian!  I’ll  tickle  your  catastrophe. 

Enter  the  lord  chief  justice,  and  his  men. 

Ch.  Just.  What  is  the  matter?  keep  the  peace 
here,  ho! 

Quick.  Good  my  lord,  be  good  to  me.  I  be¬ 
seech  you,  stand  to  me.  70 

Ch.  Just.  How  now.  Sir  John!  what  are  you 
brawling  here? 

Doth  this  become  your  place,  your  time,  and 
business? 

You  should  have  been  well  on  your  way  to  York. 
Stand  from  him,  fellow:  wherefore  hang’st  upon 
him? 

Quick.  O  my  most  worshipful  lord,  an’t  please 
your  Grace,  I  am  a  poor  widowof  Eastcheap, 
and  he  is  arrested  at  my  suit. 

Ch.  Just.  For  what  sum? 

Quick.  It  is  more  than  for  some,  my  lord;  it  is 
for  all,  all  I  have.  He  hath  eaten  me  out  of  house 
and  home;  he  hath  put  all  my  substance  into  that 
fat  belly  of  his:  but  I  will  have  some  of  it  out 
again,  or  I  will  ride  thee  o’nights  like  the  mare. 

Fal.  I  think  I  am  as  like  to  ride  the  mare,  if  I 
have  any  vantage  of  ground  to  get  up. 

Ch.  Just.  How  comes  this.  Sir  John?  Fie! 


SCENE 


475 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


what  man  of  good  temper  would  endure  this  tem¬ 
pest  of  exclamation?  Are  you  not  ashamed  to 
enforce  a  poor  widow  to  so  rough  a  course  to 
come  by  her  own?  pc 

Fal.  What  is  the  gross  sum  that  I  owe  thee? 
Quick.  Marry,  if  thou  wert  an  honest  man, 
thyself  and  the  money  too.  Thou  didst  swear  to 
me  upon  a  parcel-gilt  goblet,  sitting  in  my  Dol¬ 
phin-chamber,  at  the  round  table,  by  a  sea-coal 
fire,  upon  Wednesday  in  Wheeson  week,  when 
the  Prince  broke  thy  head  for  liking  his  father  to 
a  singing-man  of  Windsor,  thou  didst  swear  to 
me  then,  as  I  was  washing  thy  wound,  to  marry 
me  and  make  me  my  lady  thy  wife.  Canst  thou 
deny  it?  Did  not  goodwife  Keech,  the  butcher’s 
wife,  come  in  then  and  call  me  gossip  Quickly? 
coming  in  to  borrow  a  mess  of  vinegar;  telling  us 
she  had  a  good  dish  of  prawns;  whereby  thou 
didst  desire  to  eat  some;  whereby  I  told  thee  they 
were  ill  for  a  green  wound?  And  didst  thou  not, 
when  she  was  gone  downstairs,  desire  me  to  be 
no  more  so  familiarity  with  such  poor  people; 
saying  that  ere  long  they  should  call  me  madam? 
And  didst  thou  not  kiss  me  and  bid  me  fetch  thee 
thirty  shillings?  I  put  thee  now  to  thy  book- 
oath:  deny  it,  if  thou  canst. 

Fal.  My  lord,  this  is  a  poor  mad  soul;  and 
she  says  up  and  down  the  town  that  her  eldest 
son  is  like  you:  she  hath  been  in  good  case,  and 
the  truth  is,  poverty  hath  distracted  her.  But 
for  these  foolish  officers,  I  beseech  you  I  may 
have  redress  against  them. 

Ch.  Just.  Sir  John,  Sir  John,  I  am  well  acquainted 
with  your  manner  of  wrenching  the  true  cause 
the  false  way.  It  is  not  a  confident  brow,  nor 
the  throng  of  words  that  come  with  such  more 
than  impudent  sauciness  from  you,  can  thrust 
me  from  a  level  consideration:  you  have,  as  it 
appears  to  me,  practised  upon  the  easy-yielding 
spirit  of  this  woman,  and  made  her  serve  your 
uses  both  in  purse  and  in  person. 

Quick.  Yea,  in  truth,  my  lord. 

Ch.  Just.  Pray  thee,  peace.  Pay  her  the  debt 
you  owe  her,  and  unpay  the  villainy  you  have 
done  her:  the  one  you  may  do  with  sterling 
money,  and  the  other  with  current  repentance. 

Fal.  My  lord,  I  will  not  undergo  this  sneap 
vdthout  reply.  You  call  honourable  boldness 
impudent  sauciness :  if  a  man  will  make  courtesy 
and  say  nothing,  he  is  virtuous:  no,  my  lord,  my 
humble  duty  remembered,  I  will  not  be  your 
suitor.  I  say  to  you,  I  do  desire  deliverance  from 
these  officers,  being  upon  hasty  employment  in 
the  King’s  affairs.  i^o 

Ch.  Just.  You  speak  as  having  power  to  do 
wrong:  but  answer  in  the  effect  of  your  reputa¬ 


tion,  and  satisfy  the  poor  woman. 

Fal.  Come  hither,  hostess. 

Enter  gower. 

Ch.Just.  Now,  Master  Gower,  what  news? 

Go^.  The  King,  my  lord,  and  Harry  Prince  of 
Wales 

Are  near  at  hand:  the  rest  the  paper  tells. 

Fal.  As  I  am  a  gentleman. 

Quick.  Faith,  you  said  so  before. 

Fal.  As  I  am  a  gentleman.  Come,  no  more 
words  of  it.  75/ 

Quick.  By  this  heavenly  ground  I  tread  on,  I 
must  be  fain  to  pawn  both  my  plate  and  the 
tapestry  of  my  dining-chambers. 

Fal.  Glasses,  glasses,  is  the  only  drinking: 
and  for  thy  walls,  a  pretty  slight  drollery,  or  the 
story  of  the  Prodigal,  or  the  German  hunting  in 
water-work,  is  worth  a  thousand  of  these  bed- 
hangings  and  these  fly-bitten  tapestries.  Let  it 
be  ten  pound,  if  thou  canst.  Come,  an  ’twere  not 
for  thy  humours,  there’s  not  a  better  wench  in 
England.  Go,  wash  thy  face,  and  draw  the  action. 
Come,  thou  must  not  be  in  this  humour  with  me; 
dost  not  know  me?  come,  come,  I  know  thou 
wast  set  on  to  this. 

Quick.  Pray  thee.  Sir  John,  let  it  be  but  twenty 
nobles:  i’  faith,  I  am  loath  to  pawn  my  plate,  so 
God  save  me,  la! 

Fal.  Let  it  alone;  I’ll  make  other  shift:  you’ll 
be  a  fool  still.  770 

Quick.  Well,  you  shall  have  it,  though  I  pawn 
my  gown.  I  hope  you’ll  come  to  supper.  You’ll 
pay  me  all  together? 

Fal.  Will  I  live?  [To  bardolph]  Go,  with  her, 
with  her;  hook  on,  hook  on. 

Quick.  Will  you  have  Doll  Tearsheet  meet  you 
at  supper? 

Fal.  No  more  words;  let’s  have  her. 

[Exeunt  mistress  quickly,  bardolph,  Officers 
and  Boy. 

Ch.  Just.  I  have  heard  better  news. 

Fal.  What’s  the  news,  my  lord?  180 

Ch.  Just.  Where  lay  the  King  last  night? 

Gow.  At  Basingstoke,  my  lord. 

Fal.  I  hope,  my  lord,  all’s  well:  what  is  the 
news,  my  lord? 

Ch.  Just.  Come  all  his  forces  back? 

Gow.  No;  fifteen  hundred  foot,  five  hundred 
horse. 

Are  march’d  up  to  my  Lord  of  Lancaster, 

Against  Northumberland  and  the  Archbishop. 

Fal.  Comes  the  King  back  from  Wales,  my 
noble  lord? 

Ch.  Just.  You  shall  have  letters  of  me  pre¬ 
sently:  19^ 


476 

Come,  go  along  with  me,  good  Master  Gower. 

FaL  My  lord! 

Ch.  Just.  What’s  the  matter? 

Fal.  Master  Gower,  shall  I  entreat  you  with 
me  to  dinner? 

Gow.  I  must  wait  upon  my  good  lord  here;  I 
thank  you,  good  Sir  John. 

Ch.  Just.  Sir  John,  you  loiter  here  too  long, 
being  you  are  to  take  soldiers  up  in  counties  as 
you  go.  200 

Fal.  Will  you  sup  with  me.  Master  Gower? 

Ch.  Just.  What  foolish  master  taught  you  these 
manners.  Sir  John? 

Fal.  Master  Gower,  if  they  become  me  not, 
he  was  a  fool  that  taught  them  me.  This  is  the 
right  fencing  grace,  my  lord;  tap  for  tap,  and  so 
part  fair. 

Ch.  Just.  Now  the  Lord  lighten  thee!  thou  art 
a  great  fool.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  London:  another  street 
Enter  prince  henry  and  poins. 

Prince.  Before  God,  I  am  exceeding  weary. 

Poins.  Is’t  come  to  that?  I  had  thought  weari¬ 
ness  durst  not  have  attached  one  of  so  high  blood. 

Prince.  Faith,  it  does  me;  though  it  discolours 
the  complexion  of  my  greatness  to  acknowledge 
it.  Doth  it  not  show  vilely  in  me  to  desire  small 
beer? 

Poins.  Why,  a  prince  should  not  be  so  loosely 
studied  as  to  remember  so  weak  a  composition. 

Prince.  Belike  then  my  appetite  was  not 
princely  got;  for,  by  my  troth,  I  do  now  remem¬ 
ber  the  poor  creature,  small  beer.  But,  indeed, 
these  humble  considerations  make  me  out  of  love 
with  my  greatness.  What  a  disgrace  is  it  to  me 
to  remember  thy  name!  or  to  know  thy  face  to¬ 
morrow!  or  to  take  note  how  many  pair  of  silk 
stockings  thou  hast,  viz.  these,  and  those  that 
were  thy  peach-coloured  ones!  or  to  bear  the 
inventory  of  thy  shirts,  as,  one  for  superfluity, 
and  another  for  use!  But  that  the  tennis-court- 
keeper  knows  better  than  I;  for  it  is  a  low  ebb  of 
linen  with  thee  when  thou  keepest  not  racket 
there;  as  thou  hast  not  done  a  great  while,  be¬ 
cause  the  rest  of  thy  low  countries  have  made  a 
shift  to  eat  up  thy  holland:  and  God  knows, 
whether  those  that  bawl  out  the  ruins  of  thy 
linen  shall  inherit  his  kingdom:  but  the  mid¬ 
wives  say  the  children  are  not  in  the  fault; 
whereupon  the  world  increases,  and  kindreds  are 
mightily  strengthened. 

Poins.  How  ill  it  follows,  after  you  have 
laboured  so  hard,  you  should  talk  so  idly!  Tell 
me,  how  many  good  young  princes  would  do  so, 
their  fathers  being  so  sick  as  yours  at  this  time  is? 


ACT  II 

Prince.  Shall  I  tell  thee  one  thing,  Poins? 

Poins.  Yes,  faith;,  and  let  it  be  an  excellent 
good  thing. 

Prince.  It  shall  serve  among  wits  of  no  higher 
breeding  than  thine. 

Poins.  Go  to;  I  stand  the  push  of  your  one 
thing  that  you  will  tell.  41 

Prince.  Marry,  I  tell  thee,  it  is  not  meet  that 
I  should  be  sad,  now  my  father  is  sick:  albeit  I 
could  tell  to  thee,  as  to  one  it  pleases  me,  for 
fault  of  a  better,  to  call  my  friend,  I  could  be  sad, 
and  sad  indeed  too. 

Poins.  Very  hardly  upon  such  a  subject. 

Prince.  By  this  hand,  thou  thinkest  me  as  far  in 
the  devil’s  book  as  thou  and  Falstaff  for  ob¬ 
duracy  and  persistency:  let  the  end  try  the 
man.  But  I  tell  thee,  my  heart  bleeds  inwardly 
that  my  father  is  so  sick:  and  keeping  such  vile 
company  as  thou  art  hath  in  reason  taken  from 
me  all  ostentation  of  sorrow. 

Poins.  The  reason? 

Prince.  What  wouldst  thou  think  of  me,  if  I 
should  weep? 

Poins.  I  would  think  thee  a  most  princely 
hypocrite.  jp 

Prince.  It  would  be  every  man’s  thought;  and 
thou  art  a  blessed  fellow  to  think  as  every  man 
thinks:  never  a  man’s  thought  in  the  world  keeps 
the  road-way  better  than  thine:  every  man  would 
think  me  an  hypocrite  indeed.  And  what  accites 
your  most  worshipful  thought  to  think  so? 

Poins.  Why,  because  you  have  been  so  lewd 
and  so  much  engraffed  to  Falstaff. 

Prince.  And  to  thee. 

Poins.  By  this  light,  I  am  well  spoke  on;  I  can 
hear  it  with  mine  own  ears:  the  worst  that  they 
can  say  of  me  is  that  I  am  a  second  brother  and 
that  I  am  a  proper  fellow  of  my  hands;  and  those 
two  things,  I  confess,  I  cannot  help.  By  the  mass, 
here  comes  Bardolph. 

Enter  bardolph  and  page. 

Prince.  And  the  boy  that  I  gave  Falstaff:  a’ 
had  him  from  me  Christian;  and  look,  if  the  fat 
villain  have  not  transformed  him  ape. 

Bard.  God  save  your  Grace! 

Prince.  And  yours,  most  noble  Bardolph!  jp 

Bard.  Come,  you  virtuous  ass,  you  bashful 
fool,  must  you  be  blushing?  wherefore  blush  you 
now?  What  a  maidenly  man-at-arms  are  you 
become!  Is’t  such  a  matter  to  get  a  pottle-pot’s 
maidenhead? 

Page.  A’  calls  e’en  now,  my  lord,  through 
a  red  lattice,  and  I  could  discern  no  part  of  his 
face  from  the  window:  at  last  I  spied  his  eyes, 
and  methought  he  had  made  two  holes  in  the 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


SCENE  II 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


ale-wife’s  new  petticoat  and  so  peeped  through. 

Prince.  Has  not  the  boy  profited?  po 

Bard.  Away,  you  whoreson  upright  rabbit, 
away! 

Page.  Away,  you  rascally  Althaea’s  dream, 
away! 

Prince.  Instruct  us,  boy;  what  dream,  boy? 

Page.  Marry,  my  lord.  Althaea  dreamed  she 
was  delivered  of  a  fire-brand;  and  therefore  I 
call  him  her  dream. 

Prince.  A  crown’s  worth  of  good  interpretation: 
there  ’tis,  boy.  loo 

Poins.  O,  that  this  good  blossom  could  be 
kept  from  cankers!  Well,  there  is  sixpence  to 
preserve  thee. 

Bard.  An  you  do  not  make  him  hanged  among 
you,  the  gallows  shall  have  wrong. 

Prince.  And  how  doth  thy  master,  Bardolph? 

Bard.  Well,  my  lord.  He  heard  of  your  Grace’s 
coming  to  town:  there’s  a  letter  for  you. 

Poins.  Delivered  with  good  respect.  And  how 
doth  the  martlemas,  your  master?  no 

Bard.  In  bodily  health,  sir. 

Poins.  Marry,  the  immortal  part  needs  a  phy¬ 
sician;  but  that  moves  not  him:  though  that  be 
sick,  it  dies  not. 

Prince.  I  do  allow  this  wen  to  be  as  familiar 
with  me  as  my  dog;  and  he  holds  his  place; 
for  look  you  how  he  writes. 

Poms.  [Reads]  “John  Falstaff,  knight” — every 
man  must  know  that,  as  oft  as  he  has  occasion  to 
name  himself:  even  like  those  that  are  kin  to  the 
King;  for  they  never  prick  their  finger  but  they 
say,  “There’s  some  of  the  King’s  blood  spilt.” 
“How  comes  that?”  says  he,  that  takes  upon 
him  not  to  conceive.  The  answer  is  as  ready 
as  a  borrower’s  cap,  “I  am  the  King’s  poor 
cousin,  sir.” 

Prince.  Nay,  they  will  be  kin  to  us,  or  they 
will  fetch  it  from  Japhet.  But  to  the  letter: 

Poms.  [Reads]  “Sir  John  Falstaff,  knight,  to 
the  son  of  the  King,  nearest  his  father,  Harry 
Prince  of  Wales,  greeting.”  Why,  this  is  a 
certificate. 

Prince.  Peace! 

Poins.  [Reads]  “I  will  imitate  the  honour¬ 
able  Romans  in  brevity”:  he  sure  means  brevity 
in  breath,  short-winded.  “I  commend  me  to  thee, 
I  commend  thee,  and  I  leave  thee.  Be  not  too 
familiar  with  Poins;  for  he  misuses  thy  favours 
so  much  that  he  swears  thou  art  to  marry  his 
sister  Nell.  Repent  at  idle  times  as  thou  mayest; 
and  so,  farewell.  74/ 

“Thine,  by  yea  and  no,  which  is  as  much 
as  to  say,  as  thou  usest  him.  Jack  Fal- 
staff  with  my  familiars,  John  with  my 


477 

brothers  and  sisters,  and  Sir  John  with 
all  Europe.” 

xVIy  lord.  I’ll  steep  this  letter  in  sack  and  make 
him  eat  it. 

Prince.  That’s  to  make  him  eat  twenty  of  his 
words.  But  do  you  use  me  thus,  Ned?  must  I 
marry  your  sister?  7 

Poins.  God  send  the  wench  no  worse  fortune! 
But  I  never  said  so. 

Prince.  Well,  thus  we  play  the  fools  with 
the  time,  and  the  spirits  of  the  wise  sit  in  the 
clouds  and  mock  us.  Is  your  master  here  in 
London? 

Bard.  Yea,  my  lord. 

Prince.  Where  sups  he?  doth  the  old  boar  feed 
in  the  old  frank?  160 

Bard.  At  the  old  place,  my  lord,  in  Eastcheap. 

Prince.  What  company? 

Page.  Ephesians,  my  lord,  of  the  old  church. 

Prince.  Sup  any  women  with  him? 

Page.  None,  my  lord,  but  old  Mistress  Quickly 
and  Mistress  Doll  Tearsheet. 

Prince.  What  pagan  may  that  be? 

Page.  A  proper  gentlewoman,  sir,  and  a  kins¬ 
woman  of  my  master’s.  770 

Prince.  Even  such  kin  as  the  parish  heifers  are 
to  the  town  bull.  Shall  we  steal  upon  them,  Ned, 
at  supper? 

Poins.  I  am  your  shadow,  my  lord;  I’ll  follow 
you. 

Prince.  Sirrah,  you  boy,  and  Bardolph,  no 
word  to  your  master  that  I  am  yet  come  to  town: 
there’s  for  your  silence. 

Bard.  I  have  no  tongue,  sir. 

Page.  And  for  mine,  sir,  I  will  govern  it.  180 

Prince.  Fare  you  well;  go.  [Exeunt  bardolph 
and  PAGE.]  This  Doll  Tearsheet  should  be  some 
road. 

Poins.  I  warrant  you,  as  common  as  the  way 
between  Saint  Alban’s  and  London. 

Prince.  How  might  we  see  Falstaff  bestow 
himself  to-night  in  his  true  colours,  and  not  our¬ 
selves  be  seen? 

Poins.  Put  on  two  leathern  jerkins  and  aprons 
and  wait  upon  him  at  his  table  as  drawers.  ipi 

Prince.  From  a  God  to  a  bull?  a  heavy  descen- 
sion!  it  was  Jove’s  case.  From  a  prince  to  a 
prentice?  a  low  transformation!  that  shall  be 
mine;  for  in  every  thing  the  purpose  must  weigh 
with  the  folly.  Follow  me.  Ned.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iii.  Wark'worth:  before  the  castle 
Enter  Northumberland,  lady  Northumber¬ 
land,  and  LADY  PERCY. 

North.  I  pray  thee,  loving  wife,  and  gentle 
daughter, 


4/8  SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


Give  even  way  unto  my  rough  affairs: 

Put  not  you  on  the  visage  of  the  times 
And  be  like  them  to  Percy  troublesome. 

Lady  N.  I  have  given  over,  I  will  speak  no 
more: 

Do  what  you  will;  your  wisdom  be  your  guide. 
North.  Alas,  sweet  wife,  my  honour  is  at 
pawn; 

And,  but  my  going,  nothing  can  redeem  it. 

Lady  P.  O  yet,  for  God’s  sake,  go  not  to 
these  wars! 

The  time  was,  father,  that  you  broke  your  word. 
When  you  were  more  endear’d  to  it  than  now;  // 
When  your  own  Percy,  when  my  heart’s  dear 
Harry, 

Threw  many  a  northward  look  to  see  his  father 
Bring  up  his  powers;  but  he  did  long  in  vain. 

Who  then  persuaded  you  to  stay  at  home? 

There  were  two  honours  lost,  yours  and  your 
son’s. 

For  yours,  the  God  of  heaven  brighten  it! 

For  his,  is  stuck  upon  him  as  the  sun 
In  the  grey  vault  of  heaven,  and  by  his  light 
Did  all  the  chivalry  of  England  move  20 

To  do  brave  acts:  he  was  indeed  the  glass 
Wherein  the  noble  youth  did  dress  themselves: 
He  had  no  legs  that  practised  not  his  gait; 

And  speaking  thick,  which  nature  made  his 
blemish. 

Became  the  accents  of  the  valiant; 

For  those  that  could  speak  low  and  tardily 
Would  turn  their  own  perfection  to  abuse 
To  seem  like  him:  so  that  in  speech,  in  gait, 

In  diet,  in  affections  of  delight. 

In  military  rules,  humours  of  blood,  50 

He  was  the  mark  and  glass,  copy  and  book. 

That  fashion’d  others.  And  him,  O  wondrous 
him! 

O  miracle  of  men!  him  did  you  leave. 

Second  to  none,  unseconded  by  you. 

To  look  upon  the  hideous  god  of  war 
In  disadvantage;  to  abide  a  field 
Where  nothing  but  the  sound  of  Hotspur’s  name 
Did  seem  defensible:  so  you  left  him. 

Never,  O  never,  do  his  ghost  the  wrong 
To  hold  your  honour  more  precise  and  nice  40 
With  others  than  with  him!  let  them  alone: 

The  Marshal  and  the  Archbishop  are  strong: 

Had  my  sweet  Harry  had  but  half  their  numbers. 
To-day  might  I,  hanging  on  Hotspur’s  neck. 
Have  talk’d  of  Monmouth’s  grave. 

North.  Beshrew  your  heart. 

Fair  daughter,  you  do  draw  my  spirits  from  me 
With  new  lamenting  ancient  oversights. 

But  I  must  go  and  meet  with  danger  there, 

Or  it  will  seek  me  in  another  place 


And  find  me  worse  provided. 

Lady  N.  ’  O,  fly  to  Scotland,  50 

Till  that  the  nobles  and  the  armed  commons 
Have  of  their  puissance  made  a  little  taste. 

Lady  F.  If  they  get  ground  and  vantage  of  the 
King, 

Then  join  you  with  them,  like  a  rib  of  steel, 

To  make  strength  stronger;  but,  for  all  our  loves, 
First  let  them  try  themselves.  So  did  your  son; 

He  was  so  suffer’d:  so  came  I  a  widow; 

And  never  shall  have  length  of  life  enough 
To  rain  upon  remembrance  with  mine  eyes. 

That  it  may  grow  and  sprout  as  high  as  heaven. 
For  recordation  to  my  noble  husband.  61 

North.  Come,  come,  go  in  with  me.  ’Tis  with 
my  mind 

As  with  the  tide  swell’d  up  unto  his  height. 

That  makes  a  still-stand,  running  neither  way: 
Fain  would  I  go  to  meet  the  Archbishop, 

But  many  thousand  reasons  hold  me  back. 

I  will  resolve  for  Scotland:  there  am  I, 

Till  time  and  vantage  crave  my  company. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  London:  the  BoaP s-head  Tavern  in  East- 
cheap 

Enter  two  drawers. 

ist  Draw.  What  the  devil  hast  thou  brought 
there?  Apple-johns?  thou  knowest  Sir  John  can¬ 
not  endure  an  apple-john. 

2nd  Draw.  Mass,  thou  sayest  true.  The 
Prince  once  set  a  dish  of  apple-johns  before  him, 
and  told  him  there  were  five  more  Sir  Johns, 
and,  putting  off  his  hat,  said,  “I  will  now  take  my 
leave  of  these  six  dry,  round,  old,  withered 
knights.”  It  angered  him  to  the  heart:  but  he 
hath  forgot  that.  10 

ist  Draw.  Why,  then,  oover,  and  set  them 
down:  and  see  if  thou  canst  find  out  Sneak’s 
noise;  Mistress  Tear  sheet  would  fain  hear  some 
music.  Dispatch:  the  room  where  they  supped 
is  too  hot;  they’ll  come  in  straight. 

2nd  Draw.  Sirrah,  here  will  be  the  Prince  and 
Master  Poins  anon;  and  they  will  put  on  two  of 
our  jerkins  and  aprons;  and  Sir  John  must  not 
know  of  it :  Bardolph  hath  brought  word.  20 
ist  Draw.  By  the  mass,  here  will  be  old  utis: 
it  will  be  an  excellent  stratagem. 

2nd  Draw.  I’ll  see  if  I  can  find  out  Sneak.  [Exit. 

Enter  mistress  quickly,  the  Hostess  and  doll 

TEARSHEET. 

Quick,  r  faith,  sweetheart,  methinks  now  you 
are  in  an  excellent  good  temperality:  your  pul- 
sidge  beats  as  extraordinarily  as  heart  would 
desire;  and  your  colour,  I  warrant  you,  is  as 


SCENE  IV 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


red  as  any  rose,  in  good  truth,  la!  But,  i’  faith, 
you  have  drunk  too  much  canaries;  and  that’s 
a  marvellous  searching  wine,  and  it  perfumes 
the  blood  ere  one  can  say  “What’s  this?”  How 
do  you  now? 

Dol.  Better  than  I  was:  hem! 

Qiiick.  Why,  that’s  well  said;  a  good  heart’s 
worth  gold.  Lo,  here  comes  Sir  John. 

Enter  falstaff. 

Fal.  [Singing]  “When  Arthur  first  in  court” 
— Empty  the  Jordan.  [Exit  first  drawer]. — 
[Singing]  “And  was  a  worthy  king.”  How  now. 
Mistress  Doll! 

Qiiick.  Sick  of  a  calm:  yea,  good  faith.  40 

Fal.  So  is  all  her  sect;  an  they  be  once  in  a 
calm,  they  are  sick. 

Dol.  You  muddy  rascal,  is  that  all  the  comfort 
you  give  me? 

Fal.  You  make  fat  rascals.  Mistress  Doll. 

Dol.  I  make  them!  gluttony  and  diseases  make 
them;  I  make  them  not. 

Fal.  If  the  cook  help  to  make  the  gluttony, 
you  help  to  make  the  diseases,  Doll:  we  catch 
of  you,  Doll,  we  catch  of  you;  grant  that,  my 
poor  virtue,  grant  that.  5/ 

Dol.  Yea,  joy,  our  chains  and  our  jewels. 

Fal.  “Your  brooches,  pearls,  and  ouches”: 
for  to  serve  bravely  is  to  come  halting  off,  you 
know:  to  come  off  the  breach  with  his  pike  bent 
bravely,  and  to  surgery  bravely;  to  venture  upon 
the  charged  chambers  bravely — 

Dol.  Hang  yourself,  you  muddy  conger,  hang 
yourself!  55) 

Quick.  By  my  troth,  this  is  the  old  fashion;  you 
two  never  meet  but  you  fall  to  some  discord: 
you  are  both,  i’  good  truth,  as  rheumatic  as  two 
dry  toasts;  you  cannot  one  bear  with  another’s 
confirmities.  What  the  good-year!  one  must 
bear,  and  that  must  be  you:  you  are  the  weaker 
vessel,  as  they  say,  the  emptier  vessel. 

Dol.  Can  a  weak  empty  vessel  bear  such  a 
huge  full  hogshead?  there’s  a  whole  merchant’s 
venture  of  Bourdeaux  stuff  in  him;  you  have  not 
seen  a  hulk  better  stuffed  in  the  hold.  Come, 
I’ll  be  friends  with  thee.  Jack:  thou  art  going 
to  the  wars;  and  whether  I  shall  ever  see  thee 
again  or  no,  there  is  nobody  cares. 

Re-enter  first  drawer. 

ist  Draw.  Sir,  Ancient  Pistol’s  below,  and 
would  speak  with  you. 

Dol.  Hang  him,  swaggering  rascal!  let  him 
not  come  hither  :  it  is  the  foul-mouthed’st  rogue 
in  Enjrland. 

Qiiick.  If  he  swagger,  let  him  not  come  here: 


479 

no,  by  my  faith;  I  must  live  among  my  neigh¬ 
bours;  I’ll  no  swaggerers:  I  am  in  good  name 
and  fame  with  the  very  best:  shut  the  door; 
there  comes  no  swaggerers  here:  I  have  not 
lived  all  this  while,  to  have  swaggering  now: 
shut  the  door,  I  pray  you. 

Fal.  Dost  thou  hear,  hostess? 

Quick.  Pray  ye,  pacify  yourself.  Sir,  John:  there 
comes  no  swaggerers  here. 

Fal.  Dost  thou  hear?  it  is  mine  ancient.  8p 

Quick.  Tilly-fally,  Sir  John,  ne’er  tell  me: 
your  ancient  swaggerer  comes  not  in  my  doors. 
I  was  before  Master  Tisick,  the  deputy,  t’other 
day;  and,  as  he  said  to  me,  ’twas  no  longer  ago 
than  Wednesday  last,  “F  good  faith,  neighbour 
Quickly,”  says  he;  Master  Dumbe,  our  minister, 
was  by  then;  “neighbour  Quickly,”  says  he, 
“receive  those  that  are  civil;  for,”  said  he,  “you 
are  in  an  ill  nam.e”:  now  a’  said  so,  I  can  tell 
whereupon;  “for,”  says  he,  “you  are  an  honest 
woman,  and  well  thought  on;  therefore  take 
heed  what  guests  you  receive:  receive,”  says  he, 
“no  swaggering  companions.”  There  comes  none 
here:  you  would  bless  you  to  hear  what  he  said: 
no.  I’ll  no  swaggerers. 

Fal.  He’s  no  swaggerer,  hostess;  a  tame 
cheater,  i’  faith;  you  may  stroke  him  as  gently 
as  a  puppy  greyhound:  he’ll  not  swagger  with  a 
Barbary  hen,  if  her  feathers  turn  back  in  any 
show  of  resistance.  Call  him  up,  drawer. 

[Exit  FIRST  drawer. 

Quick.  Cheater,  call  you  him?  I  will  bar  no 
honest  man  from  my  house,  nor  no  cheater:  but 
I  do  not  love  swaggering,  by  my  troth;  I  am  the 
worse,  when  one  says  swagger:  feel,  masters, 
how  I  shake;  look  you,  I  warrant  you. 

Dol.  So  you  do,  hostess. 

Quick.  Do  I?  yea,  in  very  truth,  do  I,  an 
’twere  an  aspen  leaf:  I  cannot  abide  swag¬ 
gerers. 

Enter  pistol,  bardolph,  and  page. 

Fist.  God  save  you,  Sir  John!  up 

Fal.  Welcome,  Ancient  Pistol.  Here,  Pistol, 
I  charge  you  with  a  cup  of  sack:  do  you  discharge 
upon  mine  hostess. 

Fist.  I  will  discharge  upon  her.  Sir  John,  with 
two  bullets. 

Fal.  She  is  pistol-proof,  sir;  you  shall  hardly 
offend  her. 

Quick.  Come,  I’ll  drink  no  proofs  nor  no  bul¬ 
lets:  I’ll  drink  no  more  than  will  do  me  good, 
for  no  man’s  pleasure,  I. 

Fist.  Then  to  you.  Mistress  Dorothy;  I  will 
charge  you. 

Dol.  Charge  me!  I  scorn  you,  scurvy  com- 


48o  second  part  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


panion.  What!  you  poor,  base,  rascally,  cheat¬ 
ing,  lack-linen  mate!  Away,  you  mouldy  rogue, 
away!  I  am  meat  for  your  master. 

Pist.  I  know  you,  Mistress  Dorothy. 

Dol.  Away,  you  cut-purse  rascal!  you  filthy 
bung,  away!  by  this  wine.  Til  thrust  my  knife  in 
your  mouldy  chaps,  an  you  play  the  saucy  cuttle 
with  me.  Away,  you  bottle-ale  rascal!  you 
basket-hilt  stale  juggler,  you!  Since  when,  I 
pray  you,  sir?  God’s  light,  with  two  points  on 
your  shoulder?  much! 

Pist.  God  let  me  not  live,  but  I  will  murder 
your  ruff  for  this. 

Fal.  No  more.  Pistol;  I  would  not  have  you 
go  off  here:  discharge  yourself  of  our  company. 
Pistol. 

Quick.  No,  good  Captain  Pistol;  not  here, 
sweet  captain.  /jo 

Dol.  Captain!  thou  abominable  damned  cheater, 
art  thou  not  ashamed  to  be  called  captain?  An 
captains  were  of  my  mind,  they  would  truncheon 
you  out,  for  taking  their  names  upon  you  before 
you  have  earned  them.  You  a  captain:  you  slave, 
for  what?  for  tearing  a  poor  whore’s  ruff  in  a 
bawdy-house?  He  a  captain!  hang  him,  rogue! 
he  lives  upon  mouldy  stewed  prunes  and  dried 
cakes.  A  captain!  God’s  light,  these  villains 
will  make  the  word  as  odious  as  the  word 
“occupy”;  which  was  an  excellent  good  word 
before  it  was  ill  sorted:  therefore  captains  had 
need  look  to’t. 

Bard.  Pray  thee,  go  down,  good  ancient. 

Fal.  Hark  thee  hither.  Mistress  Doll. 

Pist.  Not  I:  I  tell  thee  what.  Corporal  Bar- 
dolph,  I  could  tear  her:  I’ll  be  revenged  of  her. 

Page.  Pray  thee,  go  down. 

Pist.  I’ll  see  her  damned  first;  to  Pluto’s 
damned  lake,  by  this  hand,  to  the  infernal  deep, 
with  Erebus  and  tortures  vile  also.  Hold  hook 
and  line,  say  I.  Down,  down,  dogs!  down, 
faitors!  Have  we  not  Hiren  here? 

Quick.  Good  Captain  Peesel,  be  quiet;  ’tis 
very  late,  i’  faith:  I  beseek  you  now,  aggravate 
your  choler. 

Pist.  These  be  good  humors,  indeed!  Shall 
pack-horses 

And  hohow  pamper’d  jades  of  Asia, 

Which  cannot  go  but  thirty  mile  a-day. 

Compare  with  Cassars,  and  with  Cannibals,  i8o 
And  Trojan  Greeks?  nay,  rather  damn  them  with 
King  Cerberus;  and  let  the  welkin  roar. 

Shall  we  fall  foul  for  toys? 

Quick.  By  my  troth,  captain,  these  are  very 
bitter  words. 

Bard.  Be  gone,  good  ancient:  this  will  grow 
to  a  brawl  anon. 


Pist.  Die  men  like  dogs!  give  crowns  like  pins! 
Have  we  not  Hiren  here?  i8^ 

Quick.  O’  my  word,  captain,  there’s  none  such 
here.  What  the  good-year!  do  you  think  I  would 
deny  her?  For  God’s  sake,  be  quiet. 

Pist.  Then  feed,  and  be  fat,  my  fair  Calipolis. 
Come,  give’s  some  sack. 

Si  fortune  me  tormente,  sperato  me  contento. 

Fear  we  broadsides?  no,  let  the  fiend  give  fire: 
Give  me  some  sack:  and,  sweetheart,  lie  thou 
there.  [Laying  dovm  his  sword.] 

Come  we  to  full  points  here;  and  are  etceteras 
nothing? 

Fal.  Pistol,  I  would  be  quiet. 

Pist.  Sweet  knight,  I  kiss  thy  neif:  what!  we 
have  seen  the  seven  stars.  201 

Dol.  For  God’s  sake,  thrust  him  downstairs: 
I  cannot  endure  such  a  fustian  rascal. 

Pist.  Thrust  him  downstairs!  know  we  not 
Galloway  nags? 

Fal.  Quoit  him  down,  Bardolph,  like  a  shove- 
groat  shilling:  nay,  and  a’  do  nothing  but  speak 
nothing,  a’  shall  be  nothing  here. 

Bard.  Come,  get  you  downstairs. 

Pist.  What!  shall  we  have  incision?  shall  we 
imbrue?  [Snatching  up  his  sword.]  210 

Then  death  rock  me  asleep,  abridge  my  doleful 
days! 

Why,  then,  let  grievous,  ghastly,  gaping  wounds 
Untwine  the  Sisters  Three!  Come,  Atropos,  I  say! 

Quick.  Here’s  goodly  stuff  toward! 

Fal.  Give  me  my  rapier,  boy 

Dol.  I  pray  thee.  Jack,  I  pray  thee,  do  not  draw. 

Fal.  Get  you  down  stairs. 

Drawing  and  driving  pistol  out. 

Quick.  Here’s  a  goodly  tumult!  I’ll  forswear 
keeping  house,  afore  I’ll  be  in  these  tirrits  and 
frights.  So;  murder,  I  warrant  now.  Alas,  alas! 
put  up  your  naked  weapons,  put  up  your  naked 
weapons.  [Exeunt  vistoi.  and  bardolph. 

Dol.  I  pray  thee.  Jack,  be  quiet;  the  rascal’s 
gone.  Ah,  you  whoreson  little  valiant  villain, 
you! 

Quick.  Are  you  not  hurt  i’  the  groin?  methought 
a’  made  a  shrewd  thrust  at  your  belly. 

Re-enter  bardolph. 

Fal.  Have  you  turned  him  out  o’doors? 

Bard.  Yea,  sir.  The  rascal’s  drunk:  you  have 
hurt  him,  sir,  i’  the  shoulder.  25/ 

Fal.  A  rascal!  to  brave  me! 

Dol.  Ah,  you  sweet  little  rogue,  you!  Alas,  poor 
ape,  how  thou  sweatest!  come,  let  me  wipe  thy 
face;  come  on,  you  whoreson  chops:  ah,  rogue! 
i’  faith,  I  love  thee:  thou  art  as  valorous  as 
Hector  of  Troy,  worth  five  of  Agamemnon,  and 


SCENE  IV 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


ten  times  better  than  the  Nine  Worthies:  ah, 
villain! 

Fal.  A  rascally  slave!  I  will  toss  the  rogue  in 
a  blanket.  241 

DoL  Do,  an  thou  darest  for  thy  heart:  an 
thou  dost,  I’ll  canvass  thee  between  a  pair  of 
sheets. 

Enter  Music. 

Page.  The  music  is  come,  sir. 

Fal.  Let  them  play.  Play,  sirs.  Sit  on  my 
knee,  Doll.  A  rascal  bragging  slave!  the  rogue 
fled  from  me  like  quicksilver. 

Dol.  V  faith,  and  thou  followedst  him  like  a 
church.  Thou  whoreson  little  tidy  Bartholomew 
boar-pig,  when  wilt  thou  leave  fighting  o’days 
and  foining  o’  nights,  and  begin  to  patch  up  thine 
old  body  for  heaven? 

Enter,  behind,  prince  henry  and  poins,  dis¬ 
guised. 

Fal.  Peace,  good  Doll!  do  not  speak  like  a 
death’s-head;  do  not  bid  me  remember  mine  end. 

Dol.  Sirrah,  what  humour’s  the  Prince  of? 

Fal.  A  good  shallow  young  fellow:  a’  would 
have  made  a  good  pantler,  a’  would  ha’  chipped 
bread  well. 

Dol.  They  say  Poins  has  a  good  wit.  2  60 

Fal.  He  a  good  wit?  hang  him,  baboon!  his 
wit’s  as  thick  as  Tewksbury  mustard;  there’s 
no  more  conceit  in  him  than  is  in  a  mallet. 

Dol.  Why  does  the  Prince  love  him  so,  then? 

Fal.  Because  their  legs  are  both  of  a  bigness, 
and  a’  plays  at  quoits  well,  and  eats  conger  and 
fennel,  and  drinks  off  candles’  ends  for  flap- 
dragons,  and  rides  the  wild-mare  with  the  boys, 
and  jumps  upon  joined-stools,  and  swears  with  a 
good  grace,  and  wears  his  boots  very  smooth, 
like  unto  the  sign  of  the  leg,  and  breeds  no  bate 
with  telling  of  discreet  stories;  and  such  other 
gambol  faculties  a’  has,  that  show  a  weak  mind 
and  an  able  body,  for  the  which  the  Prince  admits 
him:  for  the  Prince  himself  is  such  another;  the 
weight  of  a  hair  will  turn  the  scales  between 
their  avoirdupois. 

Prince.  Would  not  this  nave  of  a  wheel  have  his 
ears  cut  off? 

Poins.  Let’s  beat  him  before  his  whore.  2 So 

Prince.  Look,  whether  the  withered  elder  hath 
not  his  poll  clawed  like  a  parrot. 

Poins.  Is  it  not  strange  that  desire  should  so 
many  years  outlive  performance? 

Fal,.  Kiss  me,  Doll. 

Prince.  Saturn  and  Venus  this  year  in  con¬ 
junction!  what  says  the  almanac  to  that? 

Poins.  And,  look,  whether  the  fiery  Trigon,  his 


481 

man,  be  not  lisping  to  his  master’s  old  tables,  his 
note-book,  his  counsel-keeper.  2po 

Fal.  Thou  dost  give  me  flattering  busses. 

Dol.  By  my  troth,  I  kiss  thee  with  a  most 
constant  heart. 

Fal.  I  am  old,  I  am  old. 

Dol.  I  love  thee  better  than  I  love  e’er  a  scurvy 
young  boy  of  them  all. 

Fal.  What  stuff  wilt  have  a  kirtle  of?  I  shall 
receive  money  o’  Thursday:  shalt  have  a  cap  to¬ 
morrow.  A  merry  song,  come:  it  grows  late; 
we’ll  to  bed.  Thou’lt  forget  me  when  I  am  gone. 

Dol.  By  my  troth,  thou’lt  set  me  a- weeping, 
an  thou  sayest  so:  prove  that  ever  I  dress  myself 
handsome  till  thy  return:  well,  hearken  at  the 
end. 

Fal.  Some  sack,  Francis. 

Poins  )  anon,  sir.  [Coming  forward. 

Fal.  Ha!  a  bastard  son  of  the  King’s?  And  art 
not  thou  Poins  his  brother? 

Prince.  Why,  thou  globe  of  sinful  continents, 
what  a  life  dost  thou  lead !  5  /o 

Fal.  A  better  than  thou:  I  am  a  gentleman; 
thou  art  a  drawer. 

Prince.  Very  true,  sir;  and  I  come  to  draw  you 
out  by  the  ears. 

Quick.  O,  the  Lord  preserve  thy  good  Grace! 
by  my  troth,  welcome  to  London.  Now,  the 
Lord  bless  that  sweet  face  of  thine!  O  Jesu,  are 
you  come  from  Wales? 

Fal.  Thou  whoreson  mad  compound  of  ma¬ 
jesty,  by  this  light  flesh  and  corrupt  blood,  thou 
art  welcome.  ^21 

Dol.  How,  you  fat  fool!  I  scorn  you. 

Poins.  My  lord,  he  will  drive  you  out  of  your 
revenge  and  turn  all  to  a  merriment,  if  you  take 
not  the  heat. 

Prince.  You  whoreson  candle-mine,  you,  how 
vilely  did  you  speak  of  me  even  now  before  this 
honest,  virtuous,  civil  gentlewoman! 

Quick.  God’s  blessing  of  your  good  heart!  and 
so  she  is,  by  my  troth.  550 

Fal.  Didst  thou  hear  me? 

Prince.  Yea,  and  you  knew  me,  as  you  did 
when  you  ran  away  by  Gadshill:  you  knew  I  was 
at  your  back,  and  spoke  it  on  purpose  to  try  my 
patience. 

Fal.  No,  no,  no;  not  so;  I  did  not  think  thou 
wast  within  hearing. 

Prince.  I  shall  drive  you  then  to  confess  the 
wilful  abuse;  and  then  I  know  how  to  handle 
you. 

Fal.  No  abuse,  Hal,  o’  mine  honour;  no  abuse. 

Prince.  Not  to  dispraise  me,  and  call  me 
pantler  and  bread-chipper  and  I  know  not  what? 


482  SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


Fal.  No  abuse,  Hal. 

Poins.  No  abuse? 

Fal.  No  abuse,  Ned,  i’  the  world;  honest 
Ned,  none.  I  dispraised  him  before  the  wicked, 
that  the  wicked  might  not  fall  in  love  with  him; 
in  which  doing,  I  have  done  the  part  of  a  careful 
friend  and  a  true  subject,  and  thy  father  is  to 
give  me  thanks  for  it.  No  abuse,  Hal:  none, 
Ned,  none:  no,  faith,  boys,  none.  ^5/ 

Prince.  See  now,  whether  pure  fear  and  entire 
cowardice  doth  not  make  thee  wrong  this  vir¬ 
tuous  gentlewoman  to  close  with  us.  Is  she  of  the 
wicked?  is  thine  hostess  here  of  the  wicked?  or 
is  thy  boy  of  the  wicked?  or  honest  Bardolph, 
whose  zeal  burns  in  his  nose,  of  the  wicked? 

Poins.  Answer,  thou  dead  elm,  answer. 

Fal.  The  fiend  hath  pricked  down  Bardolph, 
irrecoverable;  and  his  face  is  Lucifer’s  privy- 
kitchen,  where  he  doth  nothing  but  roast  malt- 
worms.  For  the  boy,  there  is  a  good  angel  about 
him;  but  the  devil  outbids  him  too. 

Prince.  For  the  women? 

Fal.  For  one  of  them,  she  is  in  hell  already, 
and  burns  poor  souls.  For  the  other,  I  owe  her 
money;  and  whether  she  be  damned  for  that,  I 
know  not. 

Quick.  No,  I  warrant  you.  ^69 

Fal.  No,  I  think  thou  art  not;  I  think  thou 
are  quit  for  that.  Marry,  there  is  another  indict¬ 
ment  upon  thee,  for  suffering  flesh  to  be  eaten  in 
thy  house,  contrary  to  the  law;  for  the  which  I 
think  thou  wilt  howl. 

Quick.  All  victuallers  do  so:  what’s  a  joint  of 
mutton  or  two  in  a  whole  Lent? 

Prince.  You,  gentlewoman — 

Dol.  What  says  your  Grace? 

Fal.  His  Grace  says  that  which  his  flesh  rebels 
against. 

Knocking  within .  5  80 

Quick.  Who  knocks  so  loud  at  door?  Look  to 
the  door  there,  Francis. 

Enter  peto. 

Prince.  Peto,  how  now!  what  news? 

Peto.  The  King  your  father  is  at  Westminster; 
And  there  are  twenty  weak  and  wearied  posts 
Come  from  the  north :  and,  as  I  came  along, 

I  met  and  overtook  a  dozen  captains. 

Bare-headed,  sweating,  knocking  at  the  taverns. 
And  asking  every  one  for  Sir  John  Falstaff. 

Prince.  By  heaven,  Poins,  I  feel  me  much  to 
blame, 

So  idly  to  profane  the  precious  time. 

When  tempest  of  commotion,  like  the  south 
Borne  with  black  vapour,  doth  begin  to  melt 
And  drop  upon  our  bare  unarmed  heads. 


Give  me  my  sword  and  cloak.  Falstaff,  goodnight. 

[Exeunt  prince  henry,  poins,  peto, 

and  BARDOLPH. 

Fal.  Now  comes  in  the  sweetest  morsel  of  the 
the  night,  and  we  must  hence  and  leave  it  un¬ 
picked.  [Knocking  within.]  More  knocking  at 
the  door! 

Re-enter  bardolph. 

How  now!  what’s  the  matter?  400 

Bard.  You  must  away  to  court,  sir,  presently; 
A  dozen  captains  stay  at  door  for  you. 

Fal.  [To  the  page]  Pay  the  musicians,  sirrah. 
Farewell,  hostess;  farewell,  Doll.  You  see,  my 
good  wenches,  how  men  of  merit  are  sought  after: 
the  undeserver  may  sleep,  when  the  man  of  action 
is  called  on.  Farewell,  good  wenches:  if  I  be  not 
sent  away  post,  I  will  see  you  again  ere  I  go. 

Dol.  I  cannot  speak;  if  my  heart  be  not  ready 
to  burst — well,  sweet  Jack,  have  a  care  of  thyself. 
Fal.  Farewell,  farewell.  [Exeunt  falstaff  and 

BARDOLPH. 

Quick.  Well,  fare  thee  well:  I  have  known  thee 
these  twenty  nine  years,  come  peascod-time;  but 
an  honester  and  truer-hearted  man — well,  fare 
thee  well. 

Bard.  [Within]  Mistress  Tearsheet! 

Quick.  What’s  the  matter? 

Bard.  [Within]  Bid  Mistress  Tearsheet  come 
to  my  master.  4/p 

Quick.  O,  run,  Doll,  run;  run,  good  Doll:  come. 
[She  comes  blubbered.]  Yea,  will  you  come,  Doll? 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  Westminster:  the  palace. 

Enter  the  king  in  his  nightgown.,  with  a  Page. 
King.  Go  call  the  Earls  of  Surrey  and  of  War¬ 
wick; 

But,  ere  they  come,  bid  them  o’er-read  these 
letters. 

And  well  consider  of  them:  make  good  speed. 

[Exit  Page. 

How  many  thousand  of  my  poorest  subjects 
Are  at  this  hour  asleep!  O  Sleep,  O  gentle  Sleep, 
Nature’s  soft  nurse,  how  have  I  frighted  thee 
That  thou  no  more  wilt  weigh  my  eyelids  down 
And  steep  my  senses  in  forgetfulness? 

Why  rather.  Sleep,  liest  thou  in  smoky  cribs. 
Upon  uneasy  pallets  stretching  thee  10 

And  hush’d  with  buzzing  night-flies  to  thy  slum¬ 
ber. 

Than  in  the  perfumed  chambers  of  the  great, 
Under  the  canopies  of  costly  state. 

And  lull’d  with  sound  of  sweetest  melody? 


SCENE  I 


483 


SECOND  PART  OF 


O  thou  dull  god,  why  liest  thou  with  the  vile 
In  loathsome  beds,  and  leavest  the  kingly  couch 
A  watch-case  or  a  common  ’larum-bell? 

Wilt  thou  upon  the  high  and  giddy  mast 
Seal  up  the  ship-boy’s  eyes,  and  rock  his  brains 
In  cradle  of  the  rude  imperious  surge  20 

And  in  the  visitation  of  the  winds. 

Who  take  the  ruffian  billows  by  the  top. 

Curling  their  monstrous  heads  and  hanging  them 
With  deafening  clamour  in  the  slippery  clouds. 
That,  with  the  hurly,  death  itself  awakes? 

Canst  thou,  O  partial  Sleep,  give  thy  repose 
To  the  wet  sea-boy  in  an  hour  so  rude. 

And  in  the  calmest  and  most  stillest  night. 

With  all  appliances  and  means  to  boot. 

Deny  it  to  a  king?  Then  happy  low,  lie  down!  50 
Uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown. 

Enter  Warwick  and  surrey. 

War,  Many  good  morrows  to  your  Majesty! 
King.  Is  it  good  morrow,  lords? 

War.  ’Tis  one  o’clock,  and  past. 

King.  Why,  then,  good  morrow  to  you  all,  my 
lords. 

Have  you  read  o’er  the  letters  that  I  sent  you? 
War.  We  have,  my  liege. 

King.  Then  you  perceive  the  body  of  our 
kingdom 

How  foul  it  is;  what  rank  diseases  grow. 

And  with  what  danger,  near  the  heart  of  it.  40 
War.  It  is  but  as  a  body  yet  distemper’d; 

Which  to  his  former  strength  may  be  restored 
With  good  advice  and  little  medicine: 

My  Lord  Northumberland  will  soon  be  cool’d. 
King.  O  God!  that  one  might  read  the  book  of 
fate. 

And  see  the  revolution  of  the  times 
Make  mountains  level,  and  the  continent, 

Weary  of  solid  firmness,  melt  itself 

Into  the  sea!  and,  other  times,  to  see 

The  beachy  girdle  of  the  ocean  50 

Too  wide  for  Neptune’s  hips;  how  chances  mock. 

And  changes  fill  the  cup  of  alteration 

With  divers  liquors!  O,  if  this  were  seen. 

The  happiest  youth,  viewing  his  progress  through. 
What  perils  past,  what  crosses  to  ensue. 

Would  shut  the  book,  and  sit  him  down  and  die. 
’Tis  not  ten  years  gone 

Since  Richard  and  Northumberland,  great  friends. 
Did  feast  together,  and  in  two  years  after 
Were  they  at  wars :  it  is  but  eight  years  since  60 
This  Percy  was  the  man  nearest  my  soul. 

Who  like  a  brother  toil’d  in  my  affairs 
And  laid  his  love  and  life  under  my  foot. 

Yea,  for  my  sake,  even  to  the  eyes  of  Richard 
Gave  him  defiance.  But  which  of  you  was  by — 


KING  HENRY  IV 

You,  cousin  Nevil,  as  I  may  remember — 

To  WARWICK. 

When  Richard,  with  his  eye  brimful  of  tears. 
Then  check’d  and  rated  by  Northumberland, 

Did  speak  these  words,  now  proved  a  prophecy? 
“Northumberland,  thou  ladder  by  the  which  70 
My  cousin  Bolingbroke  ascends  my  throne”; 
Though  then,  God  knows,  1  had  no  such  intent. 
But  that  necessity  so  bow’d  the  state 
That  I  and  greatness  were  compel  I’d  to  kiss: 
“The  time  shall  come,”  thus  did  he  follow  it, 
“The  time  will  come,  that  foul  sin,  gathering 
head, 

Shall  break  into  corruption”:  so  went  on. 
Foretelling  this  same  time’s  condition 
And  the  division  of  our  amity. 

War.  There  is  a  history  in  all  men’s  lives.  So 
Figuring  the  nature  of  the  times  deceased; 

The  which  observed,  a  man  may  prophesy. 

With  a  near  aim,  of  the  main  chance  of  things 
As  yet  not  come  to  life,  which  in  their  seeds 
And  weak  beginnings  lie  intreasured. 

Such  things  become  the  hatch  and  brood  of  time; 
And  by  necessary  form  of  this 
King  Richard  might  create  a  perfect  guess 
That  great  Northumberland,  then  false  to  him, 
Would  of  that  seed  grow  to  a  greater  falseness; 
Which  should  not  find  a  ground  to  root  upon,  51/ 
Unless  on  you. 

King.  Are  these  things  then  necessities? 

Then  let  us  meet  them  like  necessities: 

And  that  same  word  even  now  cries  out  on  us; 
They  say  the  Bishop  and  Northumberland 
Are  fifty  thousand  strong. 

War.  It  cannot  be,  my  lord; 

Rumour  doth  double,  like  the  voice  and  echo, 

The  numbers  of  the  fear’d.  Please  it  your  Grace 
To  go  to  bed.  Upon  my  soul,  my  lord. 

The  powers  that  you  already  have  sent  forth  100 
Shall  bring  this  prize  in  very  easily. 

To  comfort  you  the  more,  I  have  received 
A  certain  instance  that  Glendower  is  dead. 

Your  Majesty  hath  been  this  fortnight  ill. 

And  these  unseason’d  hours  perforce  must  add 
Unto  your  sickness. 

King.  I  will  take  your  counsel : 

And  were  these  inward  wars  once  out  of  hand. 
We  would,  dear  lords,  unto  the  Holy  Land, 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Gloucestershire:  before  Justice  Shallow's 
house 

Enter  shallow  and  silence,  meeting;  mouldy, 
SHADOW,  WART,  FEEBLE,  BULLCALF,  a  Servant  or 
two  with  them. 

Shal.  Come  on,  eome  on,  come  on,  sir;  give 


ACT  m 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


484 

me  your  hand,  sir,  give  me  your  hand,  sir:  an 
early  stirrer,  by  the  rood!  And  how  doth  my 
good  cousin  Silence? 

Sil.  Good  morrow,  good  cousin  Shallow. 

Shal.  And  how  doth  my  cousin,  your  bedfel¬ 
low?  and  your  fairest  daughter  and  mine,  my 
god-daughter  Ellen? 

Sil.  Alas,  a  black  ousel,  cousin  Shallow!  p 

Shal.  By  yea  and  nay,  sir,  I  dare  say  my 
cousin  William  is  become  a  good  scholar:  he  is  at 
Oxford  still,  is  he  not? 

Sil.  Indeed,  sir,  to  my  cost. 

Shal.  A’must,  then,  to  the  Inns  o’Court  shortly. 
I  was  once  of  Clement’s  Inn,  where  I  think  they 
will  talk  of  mad  Shallow  yet. 

Sil.  You  were  called  “lusty  Shallow”  then, 
cousin. 

Shal.  By  the  mass,  I  was  called  any  thing; 
and  I  would  have  done  anything  indeed  too,  and 
roundly  too.  There  was  I,  and  little  John  Doit 
of  Staffordshire,  and  black  George  Barnes,  and 
Francis  Pickbone,  and  Will  Squele,  a  Cotswold 
man;  you  had  not  four  such  swinge-bucklers  in 
all  the  Inns  o’Court  again:  and  I  may  say  to  you, 
we  knew  where  the  bona-robas  were  and  had  the 
best  of  them  all  at  commandment.  Then  was 
Jack  Falstaff,  now  Sir  John,  a  boy,  and  page  to 
Thomas  Mowbray,  Duke  of  Norfolk. 

Sil.  This  Sir  John,  cousin,  that  comes  hither 
anon  about  soldiers?  5/ 

Shal.  The  same  Sir  John,  the  very  same.  I 
see  him  break  Skogan’s  head  at  the  court-gate, 
when  a’  was  a  crack  not  thus  high:  and  the  very 
same  day  did  I  fight  with  one  Sampson  Stockfish, 
a  fruiterer,  behind  Gray’s  Inn.  jesu,  Jesu,  the 
mad  days  that  I  have  spent!  and  to  see  how  many 
of  my  old  acquaintance  are  dead! 

Sil.  We  shall  all  follow,  cousin.  55) 

Shal.  Certain,  ’tis  certain;  very  sure,  very 
sure:  death,  as  the  Psalmist  saith,  is  certain  to 
all;  all  shall  die.  How  a  good  yoke  of  bullocks 
at  Stamford  fair? 

Sil.  By  my  troth,  1  was  not  there. 

Shal.  Death  is  certain.  Is  old  Double  of  your 
town  living  yet? 

Sil.  Dead,  sir. 

Shal.  Jesu,  Jesu,  dead!  a’  drew  a  good  bow; 
and  dead!  a’  shot  a  fine  shoot:  John  a  Gaunt 
loved  him  well,  and  betted  much  money  on  his 
head.  Dead!  a’  would  have  clapped  i’  the  clout 
at  twelve  score;  and  carried  you  a  forehand  shaft 
a  fourteen  and  fourteen  and  a  half,  that  it  would 
have  done  a  man’s  heart  good  to  see.  How  a 
score  of  ewes  now? 

Sil.  Thereafter  as  they  be:  a  score  of  good 
ewes  may  be  worth  ten  pounds. 


Shal.  i\nd  is  old  Double  dead? 

Sil.  Here  come  two  of  Sir  John  Falstaff ’s  men, 
as  I  think.  60 

Enter  bardoi.ph  and  one  'with  him. 

Bard.  Good  morrow,  honest  gentlemen:  I 
beseech  you,  which  is  Justice  Shallow? 

Shal.  I  am  Robert  Shallow,  sir;  a  poor  esquire 
of  this  county,  and  one  of  the  King’s  justices  of 
the  peace:  what  is  your  good  pleasure  with  me? 

Bard.  My  captain,  sir,  commends  him  to  you; 
my  captain.  Sir  John  Falstaff,  a  tall  gentleman, 
by  heaven,  and  a  most  gallant  leader. 

Shal.  He  greets  me  well,  sir.  1  knew  him  a 
good  backsword  man.  How  doth  the  good  knight? 
may  I  ask  how  my  lady  his  wife  doth?  7/ 

Bard.  Sir,  pardon;  a  soldier  is  better  accom¬ 
modated  than  with  a  wife. 

Shal.  It  is  well  said,  in  faith,  sir;  and  it  is  well 
said  indeed  too.  Better  accommodated!  it  is  good; 
yea,  indeed,  is  it:  good  phrases  are  surely,  and 
ever  were,  very  commendable.  Accommodated! 
it  comes  of  accommodo:  very  good,  a  good 
phrase.  jp 

Bard.  Pardon  me,  sir;  I  have  heard  the  word. 
Phrase  call  you  it?  by  this  good  day,  I  know  not 
the  phrase;  but  I  will  maintain  the  word  with 
my  sword  to  be  a  soldier-like  word,  and  a  word 
of  exceeding  good  command,  by  heaven.  Accom¬ 
modated;  that  is,  when  a  man  is,  as  they  say, 
accommodated;  or  when  a  man  is,  being,  where¬ 
by  a’  may  be  thought  to  be  accommodated;  which 
is  an  excellent  thing. 

Shal.  It  is  very  just.  8p 

Enter  falstaff. 

Look,  here  comes  good  Sir  John.  Give  me  your 
good  hand,  give  me  your  worship’s  good  hand: 
by  my  troth,  you  like  well  and  bear  your  years 
very  well:  welcome,  good  Sir  John. 

Fal.  I  am  glad  to  see  you  well,  good  Master 
Robert  Shallow:  Master  Surecard,  as  1  think? 

Shal.  No,  Sir  John;  it  is  my  cousin  Silence,  in 
commission  with  me. 

Fal.  Good  Master  Silence,  it  well  befits  you 
should  be  of  the  peace. 

Sil.  Your  good  worship  is  welcome.  100 

Fal.  Fie!  this  is  hot  weather,  gentlemen.  Have 
you  provided  me  here  half  a  dozen  sufficient 
men? 

Shal.  Marry,  have  we  sir.  Will  you  sit? 

Fal.  Let  me  see  them,  I  beseech  you. 

Shal.  Where’s  the  roll?  where’s  the  roll? 
where’s  the  roll?  Let  me  see,  let  me  see,  let  me 
see.  So,  so,  so,  so,  so,  so,  so:  yea,  marry,  sir: 
Ralph  Mouldy!  Let  them  appear  as  I  call;  let 


SCENE  II 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


them  do  so,  let  them  do  so.  Let  me  see;  where  is 
Mouldy?  Ill 

Moul.  Here,  an’t  please  you. 

Shal.  What  think  you,  Sir  John?  a  good-limbed 
fellow;  young,  strong,  and  of  good  friends. 

FaL  Is  thy  name  Mouldy? 

Moul.  Yea,  an’t  please  you. 

Fal.  ’Tis  the  more  time  thou  wert  used. 

Shal.  Ha,  ha,  ha!  most  excellent,  i’  faith!  things 
that  are  mouldy  lack  use:  very  singular  good!  in 
faith,  well  said.  Sir  John,  very  well  said. 

Fal.  Prick  him.  121 

Maul.  I  was  pricked  well  enough  before,  an 
you  could  have  let  me  alone:  my  old  dame  will 
be  undone  now  for  one  to  do  her  husbandry 
and  her  drudgery:  you  need  not  to  have  pricked 
me;  there  are  other  men  fitter  to  go  out 
than  I. 

Fal.  Go  to:  peace.  Mouldy;  you  shall  go. 
Mouldy,  it  is  time  you  were  spent. 

Moul.  Spent!  12 p 

Shal.  Peace,  fellow,  peace;  stand  aside:  know 
you  where  you  are?  For  the  other.  Sir  John:  let 
me  see:  Simon  Shadow! 

Fal.  Yea,  marry,  let  me  have  him  to  sit  under: 
he’s  like  to  be  a  cold  soldier. 

Shal.  Where’s  Shadow? 

Shad.  Here,  sir. 

Fal.  Shadow,  whose  son  art  thou? 

Shad.  My  mother’s  son,  sir. 

Fal.  Thy  mother’s  son!  like  enough,  and  thy 
father’s  shadow:  so  the  son  of  the  female  is  the 
shadow  of  the  male:  it  is  often  so,  indeed;  but 
much  of  the  father’s  substance! 

Shal.  Do  you  like  him.  Sir  John? 

Fal.  Shadow  will  serve  for  summer;  prick  him, 
for  we  have  a  number  of  shadows  to  fill  up  the 
muster-book. 

Shal.  Thomas  Wart! 

Fal.  Where’s  he. 

Wart.  Here,  sir. 

Fal.  Is  thy  name  Wart?  150 

Wart.  Yea,  sir. 

Fal.  Thou  art  a  very  ragged  wart. 

Shal.  Shall  I  prick  him  down.  Sir  John? 

Fal.  It  were  superfluous;  for  his  apparel  is  built 
upon  his  back  and  the  whole  frame  stands  upon 
pins:  prick  him  no  more. 

Shal.  Ha,  ha,  ha!  you  can  do  it,  sir;  you  can  do 
it:  I  commend  you  well.  Francis  Feeble! 

Fee.  Here,  sir. 

Fal.  What  trade  art  thou.  Feeble?  160 

Fee.  A  woman’s  tailor,  sir. 

Shal.  Shall  I  prick  him,  sir? 

Fal.  You  may:  but  if  he  had  been  a  man’s  tailor, 
he’ld  ha’  pricked  you.  Wilt  thou  make  as  many 


48  s 

holes  in  an  enemy’s  battle  as  thou  hast  done  in  a 
woman’s  petticoat? 

Fee.  I  will  do  my  good  will,  sir:  you  can  have 
no  more. 

Fal.  Well  said,  good  woman’s  tailor!  well  said, 
courageous  Feeble!  thou  wilt  be  as  valiant  as  the 
wrathful  dove  or  most  magnanimous  mouse. 
Prick  the  woman’s  tailor:  well.  Master  Shallow; 
deep.  Master  Shallow. 

Fee.  I  would  Wart  might  have  gone,  sir. 

Fal.  I  would  thou  wert  a  man’s  tailor,  that  thou 
mightest  mend  him  and  make  him  fit  to  go.  I 
cannot  put  him  to  a  private  soldier  that  is  the 
leader  of  so  many  thousands:  let  that  suffice, 
most  forcible  Feeble. 

Fee.  It  shall  suffice,  sir.  180 

Fal.  I  am  bound  to  thee,  reverend  Feeble.  Who 
is  next? 

Shal.  Peter  Bullcalf  o’  the  green! 

Fal.  Yea,  marry,  let’s  see  Bullcalf. 

Bull.  Here,  sir. 

Fal.  ’Fore  God,  a  likely  fellow!  Come,  prick 
me  Bullcalf  till  he  roar  again. 

Bull.  O  Lord!  good  my  lord  captain — 

Fal.  What,  dost  thou  roar  before  thou  art 
pricked?  i^o 

Bull.  O  Lord,  sir!  I  am  a  diseased  man. 

Fal.  What  disease  hast  thou? 

Bull.  A  whoreson  cold,  sir,  a  cough,  sir,  which 
I  caught  with  ringing  in  the  King’s  affairs  upon 
his  coronation-day,  sir. 

Fal.  Come,  thou  shalt  go  to  the  wars  in  a  gown; 
we  will  have  away  thy  cold;  and  I  will  take  such 
order  that  thy  friends  shall  ring  for  thee.  Is  here 
all?  199 

Shal.  Here  is  two  more  called  than  your  num¬ 
ber;  you  must  have  but  four  here,  sir:  and  so,  I 
pray  you,  go  in  with  me  to  dinner. 

Fal.  Come,  I  will  go  drink  with  you,  but  I  can¬ 
not  tarry  dinner.  I  am  glad  to  see  you,  by  my 
troth.  Master  Shallow. 

Shal.  O,  Sir  John,  do  you  remember  since  we 
lay  all  night  in  the  windmill  in  Saint  George’s 
field? 

Fal.  No  more  of  that,  good  Master  Shallow,  no 
more  of  that. 

Shal.  Ha!  ’twas  a  merry  night.  And  is  Jane 
Nightwork  alive?  211 

Fal.  She  lives.  Master  Shallow. 

Shal.  She  never  could  away  with  me. 

Fal.  Never,  never;  she  would  always  say  she 
could  not  abide  Master  Shallow. 

Shal.  By  the  mass,  I  could  anger  her  to  the 
heart.  She  was  then  a  bona-roba.  Doth  she  hold 
her  own  well? 

Fal.  Old,  old.  Master  Shallow. 


219 


486  SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


Shal.  Nay,  she  must  be  old;  she  cannot  choose 
but  be  old;  certain  she’s  old;  and  had  Robin 
Nightwork  by  old  Nightwork  before  I  came  to 
Clement’s  Inn. 

Sil.  That’s  fifty  five  year  ago. 

Shal.  Ha,  cousin  Silence,  that  thou  hadst  seen 
that  that  this  knight  and  I  have  seen!  Ha,  Sir 
John,  said  I  well? 

Fal.  We  have  heard  the  chimes  at  midnight. 
Master  Shallow.  229 

Shal.  That  we  have,  that  we  have,  that  we  have; 
in  faith.  Sir  John,  we  have:  our  watchword  was 
“Hem,  boys!”  Come,  let’s  to  dinner;  come,  let’s 
to  dinner:  Jesus,  the  days  that  we  have  seen! 
Come,  come. 

\Exeunt  falstaff  and  the  justices. 

Bull.  Good  Master  Corporate  Bardolph,  stand 
my  friend;  and  here’s  four  Harry  ten  shillings  in 
French  crowns  for  you.  In  very  truth,  sir,  I  had 
as  lief  be  hanged,  sir,  as  go:  and  yet,  for  mine 
own  part,  sir,  I  do  not  care;  but  rather,  because 
I  am  unwilling,  and,  for  mine  own  part,  have  a 
desire  to  stay  with  my  friends;  else,  sir,  I  did 
not  care,  for  mine  own  part,  so  much. 

Bard.  Go  to;  stand  aside. 

Mml.  And,  good  master  corporal  captain,  for 
my  old  dame’s  sake,  stand  my  friend:  she  has 
nobody  to  do  anything  about  her  when  I  am 
gone;  and  she  is  old,  and  cannot  help  herself:  you 
shall  have  forty,  sir. 

Bard.  Go  to;  stand  aside.  2^p 

Fee.  By  my  troth,  I  care  not;  a  man  can  die  but 
once:  we  owe  God  a  death:  I’ll  ne’er  bear  a  base 
mind:  an’t  be  my  destiny,  so;  an’t  be  not,  so: 
no  man  is  too  good  to  serve’s  prince;  and  let  it 
go  which  way  it  will,  he  that  dies  this  year  is 
quit  for  the  next. 

Bard.  Well  said;  thou’rt  a  good  fellow. 

Fee.  Faith,  I’ll  bear  no  base  mind. 

Re-enter  falstaff  and  the  justices. 

Fal.  Come,  sir,  which  men  shall  I  have? 

Shal.  Four  of  which  you  please. 

Bard.  Sir,  a  word  with  you:  I  have  three  pound 
to  free  Mouldy  and  Bullcalf.  261 

Fal.  Go  to;  well. 

Shal.  Come,  Sir  John,  which  four  will  you  have? 

Fal.  Do  you  choose  for  me. 

Shal.  Marry,  then.  Mouldy,  Bullcalf,  Feeble 
and  Shadow. 

Fal.  Mouldy  and  Bullcalf:  for  you,  Mouldy, 
stay  at  home  till  you  are  past  service:  and  for 
your  part,  Bullcalf,  grow  till  you  come  unto  it: 
I  will  none  of  you.  27/ 

Shal.  Sir  John,  Sir  John,  do  not  yourself  wrong: 


they  are  your  likeliest  men,  and  I  would  have 
you  served  with  the  best. 

Fal.  Will  you  tell  me.  Master  Shallow,  how  to 
choose  a  man?  Care  I  for  the  limb,  the  thewes, 
the  stature,  bulk,  and  big  assemblance  of  a  man! 
Give  me  the  spirit.  Master  Shallow.  Here’s 
Wart;  you  see  what  a  ragged  appearance  it  is:  a’ 
shall  charge  you  and  discharge  you  with  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  a  pewterer’s  hammer,  come  off  and  on 
swifter  than  he  that  gibbets  on  the  brewer’s 
bucket.  And  this  same  half-faced  fellow.  Shadow; 
give  me  this  man:  he  presents  no  mark  to  the 
enemy;  the  foeman  may  with  as  great  aim  level 
at  the  edge  of  a  penknife.  And  for  a  retreat; 
how  swiftly  will  this  Feeble  the  woman’s  tailor 
run  off!  O,  give  me  the  spare  men,  and  spare  me 
the  great  ones.  Put  me  a  caliver  into  Wart’s 
hand,  Bardolph.  2^0 

Bard.  Hold,  Wart,  traverse;  thus,  thus,  thus. 

Fal.  Come,  manage  me  your  caliver.  So:  very 
well:  go  to:  very  good,  exceeding  good.  O,  give 
me  always  a  little,  lean,  old,  chapt,  bald  shot. 
Well  said,  i’  faith.  Wart;  thou’rt  a  good  scab: 
hold,  there’s  a  tester  for  thee. 

Shal.  He  is  not  his  craft’s  master;  he  doth  not 
do  it  right.  I  remember  at  Mile-end  Green,  when 
I  lay  at  Clement’s  Inn — I  was  then  Sir  Dagonet 
in  Arthur’s  show — there  was  a  little  quiver 
fellow,  and  a’  would  manage  you  his  piece  thus; 
and  a’  would  about  and  about,  and  come  you  in 
and  come  you  in:  “rah,  tah,  tah,”  would  a’  say, 
“bounce”  would  a’  say;  and  away  again  would 
a’  go,  and  again  would  a’  come:  1  shall  ne’er  see 
such  a  fellow. 

Fal.  These  fellows  will  do  well.  Master  Shal¬ 
low.  God  keep  you.  Master  Silence:  I  will  not 
use  many  words  with  you.  Fare  you  well,  gen¬ 
tlemen  both:  I  thank  you:  I  must  a  dozen  mile 
to-night.  Bardolph,  give  the  soldiers  coats.  ^ii 

Shal.  Sir  John,  the  Lord  bless  you!  God  prosper 
your  affairs!  God  send  us  peace!  At  your  return 
visit  our  house;  let  our  old  acquaintance  be  re¬ 
newed:  peradventure  I  will  with  ye  to  the  court. 

Fal.  ’Fore  God,  I  would  you  would.  Master 
Shallow. 

Shal.  Go  to;  I  have  spoke  at  a  word.  God  keep 
you.  520 

Fal.  Fare  you  well,  gentle  gentlemen.  [Exeunt 
JUSTICES.]  On,  Bardolph;  lead  the  men  away. 
[Exeunt  bardolph,  recruits,  &c.]  As  I  return, 
I  will  fetch  off  these  justices:  I  do  see  the  bottom 
of  Justice  Shallow.  Lord,  Lord,  how  subject  we 
old  men  are  to  this  vice  of  lying!  This  same 
starved  justice  hath  done  nothing  but  prate  to  me 
of  the  wildness  of  his  youth,  and  the  feats  he  hath 
done  about  Turnbull  Street;  and  every  third 


SCENE  II 


487 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


word  a  lie,  duer  paid  to  the  hearer  than  the 
Turk’s  tribute.  I  do  remember  him  at  Clement’s 
Inn  like  a  man  made  after  supper  of  a  cheese- 
1  paring:  when  a’  was  naked,  he  was,  for  all  the 
world,  like  a  forked  radish,  with  a  head  fantasti¬ 
cally  carved  upon  it  with  a  knife:  a’  was  so  for- 
I  lorn,  that  his  dimensions  to  any  thick  sight  were 
invincible:  a’  was  the  very  genius  of  famine;  yet 
lecherous  as  a  monkey,  and  the  whores  called 
him  mandrake:  a’  came  ever  in  the  rearward  of 
the  fashion,  and  sung  those  tunes  to  the  over¬ 
scutched  huswives  that  he  heard  the  carmen 
whistle,  and  sware  they  were  his  fancies  or  his 
I  good-nights.  And  now  is  this  Vice’s  dagger  be- 
'  come  a  squire,  and  talks  as  familiarly  of  John  a 
,  Gaunt  as  if  he  had  been  sworn  brother  to  him; 

I  and  I’ll  be  sworn  a’  ne’er  saw  him  but  once  in  the 
Tilt-yard;  and  then  he  burst  his  head  for  crowd¬ 
ing  among  the  marshal’s  men.  I  saw  it,  and  told 
John  a  Gaunt  he  beat  his  own  name;  for  you 
*  might  have  thrust  him  and  all  his  apparel  into  an 
eel-skin;  the  case  of  a  treble  hautboy  was  a  man¬ 
sion  for  him,  a  court:  and  now  has  he  land  and 
beefs.  Well,  I’ll  be  acquainted  with  him,  if  I 
return;  and  it  shall  go  hard  but  I  will  make  him 
a  philosopher’s  two  stones  to  me:  if  the  young 
dace  be  a  bait  for  the  old  pike,  I  see  no  reason  in 
the  law  of  nature  but  I  may  snap  at  him.  Let 
time  shape,  and  there  an  end.  [Exit. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  Yorkshire:  Gaultree  Forest 
Enter  the  archbishop  of  york,  mowbray, 
HASTINGS,  and  others. 

Arch.  What  is  this  forest  call’d? 

Hast.  ’Tis  Gaultree  Forest,  an’t  shall  please 
your  Grace. 

I  Arch.  Here  stand,  my  lords;  and  send  discover¬ 
ers  forth 

To  know  the  numbers  of  our  enemies. 

Hast.  We  have  sent  forth  already. 

Arch.  ’Tis  well  done. 

My  friends  and  brethren  in  these  great  affairs, 

I  must  acquaint  you  that  I  have  received 
New-dated  letters  from  Northumberland; 

Their  cold  intent,  tenour,  and  substance,  thus: 
Here  doth  he  wish  his  person,  with  such  powers 
As  might  hold  sortance  with  his  quality. 

The  which  he  could  not  levy;  whereupon 
He  is  retired,  to  ripe  his  growing  fortunes. 

To  Scotland:  and  concludes  in  hearty  prayers 
That  your  attempts  may  overlive  the  hazard 
And  fearful  meeting  of  their  opposite. 

Aiowb.  Thus  do  the  hopes  we  have  in  him 
touch  ground 


And  dash  themselves  to  pieces. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Hast.  Now,  what  news. ^ 

Mess.  West  of  this  forest,  scarcely  off  a  mile, 

In  goodly  form  comes  on  the  enemy;  20 

And,  by  the  ground  they  hide,  I  judge  their 
number 

Upon  or  near  the  rate  of  thirty  thousand. 

Mowb.  The  just  proportion  that  we  gave  them 
out. 

Let  us  sway  on  and  face  them  in  the  field. 

Arch.  What  well-appointed  leader  fronts  us 
here? 

Enter  Westmoreland. 

Mowb.  I  think  it  is  my  Lord  of  Westmoreland. 
West.  Health  and  fair  greeting  from  our  general. 
The  Prince,  Lord  John  and  Duke  of  Lancaster. 
Arch.  Say  on,  my  Lord  of  Westmoreland,  in 
peace: 

What  doth  concern  your  coming? 

West.  Then,  my  lord,  50 

Unto  your  Grace  do  I  in  chief  address 
The  substance  of  my  speech.  If  that  rebellion 
Came  like  itself,  in  base  and  abject  routs, 

Led  on  by  bloody  youth,  guarded  with  rags, 

And  countenanced  by  boys  and  beggary, 

I  say,  if  damn’d  commotion  so  appear’d. 

In  his  true,  native,  and  most  proper  shape. 

You,  reverend  father,  and  these  noble  lords 
Had  not  been  here,  to  dress  the  ugly  form 
Of  base  and  bloody  insurrection  40 

With  your  fair  honours.  You,  Lord  Archbishop, 
Whose  see  is  by  a  civil  peace  maintain’d. 

Whose  beard  the  silver  hand  of  peace  hath 
touch’d. 

Whose  learning  and  good  letters  peace  hath 
tutor’d. 

Whose  white  investments  figure  innocence. 

The  dove  and  very  blessed  spirit  of  peace. 
Wherefore  do  you  so  ill  translate  yourself 
Out  of  the  speech  of  peace  that  bears  such  grace. 
Into  the  harsh  and  boisterous  tongue  of  war; 
Turning  your  books  to  graves,  your  ink  to  blood. 
Your  pens  to  lances  and  your  tongue  divine  5/ 
To  a  loud  trumpet  and  a  point  of  war? 

Arch.  Wherefore  do  I  this?  so  the  question 
stands. 

Briefly  to  this  end:  we  are  all  diseased. 

And  with  our  surfeiting  and  wanton  hours 
Have  brought  ourselves  into  a  burning  fever. 

And  we  must  bleed  for  it;  of  which  disease 
Our  late  king,  Richard,  being  infected,  died. 

But,  my  most  noble  Lord  of  Westmoreland, 

I  take  not  on  me  here  as  a  physician,  60 


4««  SECOND  PART  OF 

Nor  do  1  as  an  enemy  to  peace 
’I  roop  in  the  throngs  of  military  men; 

But  rather  show  awhile  like  fearful  war, 

To  diet  rank  minds  sick  of  happiness 

And  purge  the  obstructions  which  begin  to  stop 

Our  very  veins  of  life.  Hear  me  more  plainly. 

1  have  in  equal  balance  justly  weigh’d 
What  wrongs  our  arms  may  do,  what  wrongs  we 
suffer. 

And  find  our  griefs  heavier  than  our  offences. 

We  see  which  way  the  stream  of  time  doth  run. 
And  are  enforced  from  our  most  quiet  there  7/ 
By  the  rough  torrent  of  occasion; 

And  have  the  summary  of  all  our  griefs. 

When  time  shall  serve,  to  show  in  articles; 

Which  long  ere  this  we  offer’d  to  the  King, 

And  might  by  no  suit  gain  our  audience: 

When  we  are  wrong’d  and  would  unfold  our 
griefs. 

We  are  denied  access  unto  his  person 
Even  by  those  men  that  most  have  done  us 
wrong. 

The  dangers  of  the  days  but  newly  gone,  So 

Whose  memory  is  written  on  the  earth 
With  yet  appearing  blood,  and  the  examples 
Of  every  minute’s  instance,  present  now. 

Hath  put  us  in  these  ill-beseeming  arms. 

Not  to  break  peace  or  any  branch  of  it. 

But  to  establish  here  a  peace  indeed. 

Concurring  both  in  name  and  quality. 

West,  When  ever  yet  was  your  appeal  denied? 
Wherein  have  you  been  galled  by  the  King? 

What  peer  hath  been  suborn’d  to  grate  on  you 
That  you  should  seal  this  lawless  bloody  hook 
Of  forged  rebellion  with  a  seal  divine 
And  consecrate  commotion’s  bitter  edge? 

Arch,  My  brother  general,  the  commonwealth. 
To  brother  born  an  household  cruelty, 

I  make  my  quarrel  in  particular. 

West,  There  is  no  need  of  any  such  redress; 

Or  if  there  were,  it  not  belongs  to  you. 

Mowb,  Why  not  to  him  in  part,  and  to  us  all 
That  feel  the  bruises  of  the  days  before,  100 
And  suffer  the  condition  of  these  times 
To  lay  a  heavy  and  unequal  hand 
Upon  our  honours? 

West.  O,  my  good  Lord  Mowbray, 

Construe  the  times  to  their  necessities. 

And  you  shall  say  indeed,  it  is  the  time. 

And  not  the  King,  that  doth  you  injuries. 

Yet  for  your  part,  it  not  appears  to  me 
Either  from  the  King  or  in  the  present  time 
That  you  should  have  an  inch  of  any  ground 
To  build  a  grief  on :  were  you  not  restored  no 
To  all  the  Duke  of  Norfolk’s  signories. 

Your  noble  and  right  well  remember’d  father’s? 


KING  HENRY  IV  act  iv 

Monjob.  What  thing,  in  honour,  had  my  father 
lost. 

That  need  to  be  revived  and  breathed  in  me? 

The  King  that  loved  him,  as  the  state  stood 
then. 

Was  force  perforce  compell’d  to  banish  him: 

And  then  that  Henry  Bolingbroke  and  he. 

Being  mounted  and  both  roused  in  their  seats. 
Their  neighing  coursers  daring  of  the  spur,  //y 
Their  armed  staves  in  charge,  their  beavers 
down. 

Their  eyes  of  fire  sparkling  through  sights  of 
steel 

And  the  loud  trumpet  blowing  them  together. 
Then,  then,  when  there  was  nothing  could  have 
stay’d 

My  father  from  the  breast  of  Bolingbroke, 

O,  when  the  King  did  throw  his  warder  down. 
His  own  life  hung  upon  the  staff  he  threw; 

Then  threw  he  down  himself  and  all  their  lives 
That  by  indictment  and  by  dint  of  sword 
Have  since  miscarried  under  Bolingbroke. 

West.  You  speak.  Lord  Mowbray,  now  you 
know  not  what.  75 o 

The  Earl  of  Hereford  was  reputed  then 
In  England  the  most  valiant  gentleman: 

Who  knows  on  whom  Fortune  would  then  have 
smiled? 

But  if  your  father  had  been  victor  there. 

He  ne’er  had  borne  it  out  of  Coventry: 

For  all  the  country  in  a  general  voice 
Cried  hate  upon  him;  and  all  their  prayers  and 
love 

Were  set  on  Hereford,  whom  they  doted  on 
And  bless’d  and  graced  indeed,  more  than  the 
King. 

But  this  is  mere  digression  from  my  purpose.  /40 
Here  come  I  from  our  princely  general 
To  know  your  griefs;  to  tell  you  from  his  Grace 
That  he  will  give  you  audience;  and  wherein 
It  shall  appear  that  your  demands  are  just. 

You  shall  enjoy  them,  everything  set  off 
That  might  so  much  as  think  you  enemies. 

Mowb.  But  he  hath  forced  us  to  compel  this 
offer; 

And  it  proceeds  from  policy,  not  love. 

West.  Mowbray,  you  over  ween  to  take  it  so; 
This  offer  comes  from  mercy,  not  from  fear:  /50 
For,  lo!  within  a  ken  our  army  lies. 

Upon  mine  honour,  all  too  confident 
To  give  admittance  to  a  thought  of  fear. 

Our  battle  is  more  full  of  names  than  yours, 

Our  men  more  perfect  in  the  use  of  arms. 

Our  armour  all  as  strong,  our  cause  the  best; 
Then  reason  will  our  hearts  should  be  as  good: 
Say  you  not  then  our  offer  is  compell’d. 


SCENE 


489 


SECOND  PART  OF 

Mouob.  Well,  by  my  will  we  shall  admit  no 
parley. 

West.  That  argues  but  the  shame  of  your  of¬ 
fence:  160 

A  rotten  case  abides  no  handling. 

Hast.  Hath  the  Prince  John  a  full  commission, 

In  very  ample  virtue  of  his  father, 

To  hear  and  absolutely  to  determine 
Of  what  conditions  we  shall  stand  upon? 

West.  That  is  intended  in  the  general’s  name: 

I  muse  you  make  so  slight  a  question. 

Arch.  Then  take,  my  Lx)rd  of  Westmoreland, 
this  schedule. 

For  this  contains  our  general  grievances: 

Each  several  article  herein  redress’d,  ijo 

All  members  of  our  cause,  both  here  and  hence, 
That  are  insinew’d  to  this  action. 

Acquitted  by  a  true  substantial  form 
And  present  execution  of  our  wills 
To  us  and  to  our  purposes  confined. 

We  come  within  our  awful  banks  again 
And  knit  our  powers  to  the  arm  of  peace. 

West.  This  will  I  show  the  general.  Please  you, 
lords. 

In  sight  of  both  our  battles  we  may  meet; 

And  either  end  in  peace,  which  God  so  frame!  180 
Or  to  the  place  of  difference  call  the  swords 
Which  must  decide  it. 

Arch.  My  lord,  we  will  do  so. 

[Exit  WESTMORELAND. 

Mou'b.  There  is  a  thing  within  my  bosom  tells 
me 

That  no  conditions  of  our  peace  can  stand. 

Hast.  Fear  you  not  that:  if  we  can  make  our 
peace 

Upon  such  large  terms  and  so  absolute 
As  our  conditions  shall  consist  upon. 

Our  peace  shall  stand  as  firm  as  rocky  mountains. 
Aiou'b.  Yea,  but  our  valuation  shall  be  such 
That  every  slight  and  false-derived  cause,  ipo 
Yea,  every  idle,  nice,  and  wanton  reason 
Shall  to  the  King  taste  of  this  action; 

That,  were  our  royal  faiths  martyrs  in  love. 

We  shall  be  winnow’d  with  so  rough  a  wind 
That  even  our  corn  shall  seem  as  light  as  chaff 
And  good  from  bad  find  no  partition. 

ArcJi.  No,  no,  my  lord.  Note  this;  the  King  is 
weary 

Of  dainty  and  such  picking  grievances: 

For  he  hath  found  to  end  one  doubt  by  death 
Revives  two  greater  in  the  heirs  of  life,  200 
And  therefore  will  he  wipe  his  tables  clean 
And  keep  no  tell-tale  to  his  memory 
That  may  repeat  and  history  his  loss 
To  new  remembrance;  for  full  well  he  knows 
He  cannot  so  precisely  weed  this  land 


KING  HENRY  IV 

As  his  misdoubts  present  occasion: 

His  foes  are  so  enrooted  with  his  friends 
That,  plucking  to  unfix  an  enemy. 

He  doth  unfasten  so  and  shake  a  friend: 

So  that  this  land,  like  an  offensive  wife  210 

That  hath  enraged  him  on  to  offer  strokes. 

As  he  is  striking,  holds  his  infant  up 
And  hangs  resolved  correction  in  the  arm 
That  was  uprear’d  to  execution. 

Hast.  Besides,  the  King  hath  wasted  all  his  rods 
On  late  offenders,  that  he  now  doth  lack 
The  very  instruments  of  chastisement: 

So  that  his  power,  like  to  a  fangless  lion. 

May  offer,  but  not  hold. 

Arch.  ’Tis  very  true: 

And  therefore  be  assured,  my  good  Lord  Mar¬ 
shal, 

If  we  do  now  make  our  atonement  well,  221 
Our  peace  will,  like  a  broken  limb  united. 

Grow  stronger  for  the  breaking. 

Mo'ivb.  Be  it  so. 

Here  is  return’d  my  Lord  of  Westmoreland. 

Re-enter  Westmoreland. 

West.  The  Prince  is  here  at  hand:  pleaseth  your 
lordship 

To  meet  his  Grace  just  distance  ’tween  our 
armies. 

iMonjob.  Your  Grace  of  York,  in  God’s  name, 
then,  set  forward. 

Arch.  Before,  and  greet  his  Grace:  my  lord,  we 
come.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Another  part  of  the  forest 

Enter,  from  one  side,  mow  bray,  attended;  after- 
umds  the  archbishop,  Hastings,  and  others: 
from  the  other  side,  prince  john  of  Lancaster, 
and  WESTMORELAND;  Officers,  and  others  'with 
them. 

Lan.  You  are  well  encounter’d  here,  my  cousin 
Mowbray : 

Good  day  to  you,  gentle  Lord  Archbishop; 

And  so  to  you.  Lord  Hastings,  and  to  all. 

My  Lord  of  York,  it  better  show’d  with  you 
When  that  your  flock,  assembled  by  the  bell. 
Encircled  you  to  hear  with  reverence 
Your  exposition  on  the  holy  text 
Than  now  to  see  vou  here  an  iron  man. 

Cheering  a  rout  of  rebels  with  your  drum. 
Turning  the  Word  to  sword  and  life  to  death.  10 
That  man  that  sits  within  a  monarch’s  heart 
And  ripens  in  the  sunshine  of  his  favour. 

Would  he  abuse  the  countenance  of  the  King, 
Alack,  what  mischiefs  might  be  set  abroach 
In  shadow  of  such  greatness!  With  you.  Lord 
Bishop, 


ACT  IV 


490  SECOND  PART  OF 

It  is  even  so.  Who  hath  not  heard  it  spoken 
How  deep  you  were  within  the  books  of  God? 

To  us  the  speaker  in  His  parliament; 

To  us  the  imagined  voice  of  God  himself; 

The  very  opener  and  intelligencer  20 

Between  the  grace,  the  sanctities  of  Heaven 
And  our  dull  workings.  O,  who  shall  believe 
But  you  misuse  the  reverence  of  your  place, 

Employ  the  countenance  and  grace  of  Heaven, 

As  a  false  favourite  doth  his  prince’s  name. 

In  deeds  dishonourable?  You  have  ta’en  up, 

Under  the  counterfeited  zeal  of  God, 

The  subjects  of  His  substitute,  my  father. 

And  both  against  the  peace  of  Heaven  and  him 
Have  here  up-s warm’d  them. 

Arch.  Good  my  Lord  of  Lancaster,  50 

I  am  not  here  against  your  father’s  peace; 

But,  as  I  told  my  Lord  of  Westmoreland, 

The  time  misorder’d  doth,  in  common  sense, 

Crowd  us  and  crush  us  to  this  monstrous  form 
To  hold  our  safety  up.  I  sent  your  Grace 
The  parcels  and  particulars  of  our  grief. 

The  which  hath  been  with  scorn  shoved  from  the 
court. 

Whereon  this  Hydra  son  of  war  is  born; 

Whose  dangerous  eyes  may  well  be  charm’d 
asleep 

With  grant  of  our  most  just  and  right  desires,  40 
And  true  obedience,  of  this  madness  cured. 

Stoop  tamely  to  the  foot  of  majesty. 

Mowb.  If  not,  we  ready  are  to  try  our  fortunes 
To  the  last  man. 

Hast.  And  though  we  here  fall  down. 

We  have  supplies  to  second  our  attempt: 

If  they  miscarry,  theirs  shall  second  them; 

And  so  success  of  mischief  shall  be  born 
And  heir  from  heir  shall  hold  this  quarrel  up 
Whiles  England  shall  have  generation. 

Lan.  You  are  too  shallow,  Hastings,  much  too 
shallow,  50 

To  sound  the  bottom  of  the  after-times. 

West.  Pleaseth  your  Grace  to  answer  them 
directly 

How  far  forth  you  do  like  their  articles. 

Lan.  I  like  them  all,  and  do  allow  them  well. 

And  swear  here,  by  the  honour  of  my  blood. 

My  father’s  purposes  have  been  mistook. 

And  some  about  him  have  too  lavishly 
Wrested  his  meaning  and  authority. 

My  lord,  these  griefs  shall  be  with  speed  re¬ 
dress’d; 

Upon  my  soul,  they  shall.  If  this  may  please  you. 
Discharge  your  powers  unto  their  several  coun¬ 
ties. 

As  we  will  ours :  and  here  between  the  armies 
Let’s  drink  together  friendly  and  embrace, 


KING  HENRY  IV 

That  all  their  eyes  may  bear  those  tokens  home 
Of  our  restored  Idve  and  amity. 

Arch.  I  take  your  princely  word  for  these  re¬ 
dresses. 

Lan.  I  give  it  you,  and  will  maintain  my  word: 
And  thereupon  1  drink  unto  your  Grace. 

Hast.  Go,  captain,  and  deliver  to  the  army  6^ 
This  news  of  peace:  let  them  have  pay,  and  part: 

I  know  it  will  well  please  them  Hie  thee,  cap¬ 
tain.  [Exit  Officer, 

Arch.  To  you,  my  noble  Lord  of  Westmore¬ 
land. 

West.  I  pledge  your  Grace;  and,  if  you  knew 
what  pains 

I  have  bestow’d  to  breed  this  present  peace. 

You  would  drink  freely:  but  my  love  to  ye 
Shall  show  itself  more  openly  hereafter. 

Arch.  I  do  not  doubt  you. 

West.  I  am  glad  of  it. 

Health  to  my  lord  and  gentle  cousin,  Mowbray. 
Mouob.  You  wish  me  health  in  very  happy 
season; 

For  I  am,  on  the  sudden,  something  ill.  80 

Arch.  Against  ill  chances  men  are  ever  merry; 
But  heaviness  foreruns  the  good  event. 

West.  Therefore  be  merry,  coz;  since  sudden 
sorrow 

Serves  to  say  thus,  “some  good  thing  comes  to¬ 
morrow.” 

Arch.  Believe  me,  I  am  passing  light  in  spirit. 
Mowb.  So  much  the  worse,  if  your  own  rule  be 
true. 

Shouts  within. 

Lan.  The  word  of  peace  is  render’d:  hark,  how 
they  shout! 

Mowb.  This  had  been  cheerful  after  victory. 
Arch.  A  peace  is  of  the  nature  of  a  conquest; 

For  then  both  parties  nobly  are  subdued,  po 
And  neither  party  loser. 

Lan.  '  Go,  my  lord. 

And  let  our  army  be  discharged  too. 

[Exit  WESTMORELAND. 

And,  good  my  lord,  so  please  you,  let  our  trains 
March  by  us,  that  we  may  peruse  the  men 
We  should  have  coped  withal. 

Arch.  Go,  good  Lord  Hastings, 

And,  ere  they  be  dismiss’d,  let  them  march  by. 

[Exit  HASTINGS. 

Lan.  I  trust,  lords,  we  shall  lie  to-night  to¬ 
gether. 

Re-enter  Westmoreland. 

Now  cousin,  wherefore  stands  our  army  still? 
West.  The  leaders,  having  charge  from  you  to 
stand. 

Will  not  go  off  until  they  hear  you  speak.  too 


SCENE  II 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


Lan,  They  know  their  duties. 

Re-enter  Hastings. 

Hast.  My  lord,  our  army  is  dispersed  already: 
Like  youthful  steers  unyoked,  they  take  their 
courses 

East,  west,  north,  south;  or,  like  a  school  broke 
up. 

Each  hurries  toward  his  home  and  sporting-place. 
West.  Good  tidings,  my  Lord  Hastings;  for  the 
which 

I  do  arrest  thee,  traitor,  of  high  treason: 

And  you.  Lord  Archbishop,  and  you.  Lord 
Mowbray, 

Of  capital  treason  I  attach  you  both. 

Mawh.  Is  this  proceeding  just  and  honourable? 
West.  Is  your  assembly  so?  iii 

Arch.  Will  you  thus  break  your  faith? 

Lan.  I  pawn’d  thee  none: 

I  promised  you  redress  of  these  same  grievances 
VVhereof  you  did  complain;  which,  by  mine 
honour, 

I  will  perform  with  a  most  Christian  care. 

But  for  you,  rebels,  look  to  taste  the  due 
Meet  for  rebellion  and  such  acts  as  yours. 

Most  shallowly  did  you  these  arms  commence, 
Fondly  brought  here  and  foolishly  sent  hence. 
Strike  up  our  drums,  pursue  the  scatter’d  stray: 
God,  and  not  we,  hath  safely  fought  to-day.  121 
Some  guard  these  traitors  to  the  block  of  death. 
Treason’s  true  bed  and  yielder  up  of  breath. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  in.  Another  part  of  the  forest 
Alarum.  Excursions.  Enter  falstaff 
and  coLEviLLE,  meeting. 

Fal.  What’s  your  name,  sir?  of  what  condition 
are  you,  and  of  what  place,  I  pray? 

Cole.  I  am  a  knight,  sir;  and  my  name  is  Cole- 
ville  of  the  Dale. 

Fal.  Well,  then,  Coleville  is  your  name,  a 
knight  is  your  degree,  and  your  place  the  Dale: 
Coleville  shall  be  still  your  name,  a  traitor  your 
degree,  and  the  dungeon  your  place,  a  place  deep 
enough;  so  shall  you  be  still  Coleville  of  the 
Dale.  10 

Cole.  Are  not  you  Sir  John  Falstaff? 

Fal.  As  good  a  man  as  he,  sir,  whoe’er  I  am. 
Do  ye  yield,  sir?  or  shall  I  sweat  for  you?  If  I 
do  sweat,  they  are  the  drops  of  thy  lovers,  and 
they  weep  for  thy  death:  therefore  rouse  up  fear 
and  trembling,  and  do  observance  to  my  mercy. 

Cole.  I  think  you  are  Sir  John  Falstaff,  and  in 
that  thought  yield  me. 

Fal.  I  have  a  whole  school  of  tongues  in  this 
belly  of  mine,  and  not  a  tongue  of  them  all 


491 

speaks  any  other  word  but  my  name.  An  I  had 
but  a  belly  of  any  indifferency,  I  were  simply 
the  most  active  fellow  in  Europe:  my  womb, 
my  womb,  my  womb,  undoes  me.  Here  comes 
our  general. 

Enter  prince  john  of  Lancaster,  Westmore¬ 
land,  BLUNT,  and  others. 

Lan.  The  heat  is  past;  follow  no  further  now: 
Call  in  the  powers,  good  cousin  Westmoreland. 

[Exit  WESTMORELAND. 
Now,  Falstaff,  where  have  you  been  all  this 
while? 

When  everything  is  ended,  then  you  come:  50 
These  tardy  tricks  of  yours  will,  on  my  life. 

One  time  or  other  break  some  gallows’  back. 

Fal.  I  would  be  sorry,  my  lord,  but  it  should 
be  thus:  I  never  knew  yet  but  rebuke  and  check 
was  the  reward  of  valour.  Do  you  think  me  a 
swallow,  an  arrow,  or  a  bullet?  have  I,  in  my 
poor  and  old  motion,  the  expedition  of  thought? 
I  have  speeded  hither  with  the  very  extremest 
inch  of  possibility;  I  have  foundered  nine  score 
and  odd  posts:  and  here,  travel-tainted  as  I  am, 
have,  in  my  pure  and  immaculate  valour,  taken 
Sir  John  Coleville  of  the  Dale,  a  most  furious 
knight  and  valorous  enemy.  But  what  of  that? 
he  saw  me,  and  yielded;  that  I  may  justly  say, 
with  the  hook-nosed  fellow  of  Rome,  “I  came, 
I  saw,  and  overcame.” 

Ijxn.  It  was  more  of  his  courtesy  than  your  de¬ 
serving. 

Fal.  I  know  not:  here  he  is,  and  here  I  yield 
him:  and  I  beseech  your  Grace,  let  it  be  booked 
with  the  rest  of  this  day’s  deeds;  or,  by  the  Lord, 
I  will  have  it  in  a  particular  ballad  else,  with 
mine  own  picture  on  the  top  on’t,  Coleville 
kissing  my  foot:  to  the  which  course  if  I  be 
enforced,  if  you  do  not  all  show  like  gilt  two- 
pences  to  me,  and  I  in  the  clear  sky  of  fame 
o’ershine  you  as  much  as  the  full  moon  doth  the 
cinders  of  the  element,  which  show  like  pins’ 
heads  to  her,  believe  not  the  word  of  the  noble: 
therefore  let  me  have  right,  and  let  desert 
mount  6i 

Lan.  Thine’s  too  heavy  to  mount. 

Fal.  Let  it  shine,  then. 

Lan.  Thine’s  too  thick  to  shine. 

Fal.  Let  it  do  something,  my  good  lord,  that 
may  do  me  good,  and  call  it  what  you  will. 

Lan.  Is  thy  name  Coleville? 

Cole.  It  is,  my  lord. 

Lan.  A  famous  rebel  art  thou,  Coleville. 

Fal.  And  a  famous  true  subject  took  him.  70 

Cole.  I  am,  my  lord,  but  as  my  betters  are 
That  led  me  hither:  had  they  been  ruled  by  me, 


ACT  IV 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


492 

You  should  have  won  them  dearer  than  you  have. 

Fal.  I  know  not  how  they  sold  themselves:  but 
thou,  like  a  kind  fellow,  gavest  thyself  away 
gratis;  and  I  thank  thee  for  thee. 

Re-enter  Westmoreland. 

Lm.  Now,  have  you  left  pursuit? 

West.  Retreat  is  made  and  execution  stay’d. 

Lan.  Send  Coleville  with  his  confederates 
To  York,  to  present  execution:  80 

Blunt,  lead  him  hence;  and  sec  you  guard  him 
sure. 

[Exeunt  blunt  and  others  Toith  coleville. 
And  now  dispatch  we  toward  the  court,  my 
lords; 

I  hear  the  King  my  father  is  sore  sick: 

Our  news  shall  go  before  us  to  his  Majesty, 
Which,  cousin,  you  shall  bear  to  comfort  him. 
And  we  with  sober  speed  will  follow  you. 

Fal.  My  lord,  I  beseech  you,  give  me  leave  to 

go 

Through  Gloucestershire:  and,  when  you  come 
to  court. 

Stand  my  good  lord,  pray,  in  your  good  report. 

Lan.  Fare  you  well,  Falstaff:  I,  in  my  condi¬ 
tion,  5>o 

Shall  better  speak  of  you  than  you  deserve. 

[Exeunt  all  but  falstaff. 

Fal.  I  would  you  had  but  the  wit:  ’twere 
better  than  your  dukedom.  Good  faith,  this 
same  young  sober-blooded  boy  doth  not  love 
me;  nor  a  man  cannot  make  him  laugh;  but 
that’s  no  marvel,  he  drinks  no  wine.  There’s 
never  none  of  these  demure  boys  come  to  any 
proof;  for  thin  drink  doth  so  over-cool  their 
blood,  and  making  many  fish-meals,  that  they 
fall  into  a  kind  of  male  green-sickness;  and  then, 
when  they  marry,  they  get  wenches:  they  are 
generally  fools  and  cowards;  which  some  of  us 
should  be  too,  but  for  inflammation.  A  good 
sherris-sack  hath  a  two-fold  operation  in  it.  It 
ascends  me  into  the  brain;  dries  me  there  all  the 
foolish  and  dull  and  crudy  vapours  which  environ 
it;  makes  it  apprehensive,  quick,  forgetive,  full 
of  nimble,  fiery,  and  delectable  shapes;  which, 
delivered  o’er  to  the  voice,  the  tongue,  which 
is  the  birth,  becomes  excellent  wit.  The  second 
property  of  your  excellent  sherris  is  the  warming 
of  the  blood;  which,  before  cold  and  settled, 
left  the  liver  white  and  pale,  which  is  the  badge 
of  pusillanimity  and  cowardice;  but  the  sherris 
warms  it  and  makes  it  course  from  the  inwards 
to  the  parts  extreme:  it  illumineth  the  face, 
which  as  a  beacon  gives  warning  to  all  the  rest 
of  this  little  kingdom,  man,  to  arm;  and  then 
the  vital  commoners  and  inland  petty  spirits 


muster  me  all  to  their  captain,  the  heart,  who, 
great  and  puffed  mp  with  this  retinue,  doth  any 
deed  of  courage;  and  this  valour  comes  of  sherris. 
So  that  skill  in  the  weapon  is  nothing  without 
sack,  for  that  sets  it  a- work;  and  learning  a  mere 
hoard  of  gold  kept  by  a  devil,  till  sack  com¬ 
mences  it  and  sets  it  in  act  and  use.  Hereof 
comes  it  that  Prince  Harry  is  valiant;  for  the 
cold  blood  he  did  naturally  inherit  of  his  father, 
he  hath,  like  lean,  sterile,  and  bare  land,  manured, 
husbanded,  and  tilled  with  excellent  endeavour 
of  drinking  good  and  good  store  of  fertile  sherris, 
that  he  is  become  very  hot  and  valiant.  If  I 
had  a  thousand  sons,  the  first  humane  principle  I 
would  teach  them  should  be  to  forswear  thin 
potations  and  to  addict  themselves  to  sack. 

Enter  bardolph. 

How  now,  Bardolph? 

Bard.  The  army  is  discharged  all  and  gone. 

Fal.  Let  them  go.  I’ll  through  Gloucester¬ 
shire;  and  there  will  I  visit  Master  Robert  Shal¬ 
low,  esquire:  I  have  him  already  tempering 
between  my  finger  and  my  thumb,  and  shortly 
will  I  seal  with  him.  Come  away.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Westminster:  the  Jerusalem  Chamber 
Enter  the  king,  the  princes  thomas  of  clarence 

and  HUMPHREY  OF  GLOUCESTER,  WARWICK,  and 

others. 

King.  Now,  lords,  if  God  doth  give  successful 
end 

To  this  debate  that  bleedeth  at  our  doors. 

We  will  our  youth  lead  on  to  higher  fields 
And  draw  no  swords  but  what  are  sanctified. 

Our  navy  is  address’d,  our  power  collected. 

Our  substitutes  in  absence  well  invested. 

And  everything  lies  level  to  our  wish: 

Only,  we  want  a  little  personal  strength; 

And  pause  us,  till  these  rebels,  now  afoot. 

Come  underneath  the  yoke  of  government.  10 

War.  Both  which  we  doubt  not  but  your 
Majesty 

Shall  soon  enjoy. 

King.  Humphrey,  my  son  of  Gloucester, 
Where  is  the  Prince  your  brother? 

Glou.  I  think  he’s  gone  to  hunt,  my  lord,  at 
Windsor. 

King.  And  how  accompanied? 

Glou.  I  do  not  know,  my  lord. 

King.  Is  not  his  brother,  Thomas  of  Clarence, 
with  him? 

Glou.  No,  my  good  lord;  he  is  in  presence  here. 

Clar.  What  would  my  lord  and  father? 

King.  Nothing  but  well  to  thee,  Thomas  of 
Clarence. 


SCENE  IV  SECOND  PART  OF 

How  chance  thou  art  not  with  the  Prince  thy 
brother?  20 

He  loves  thee,  and  thou  dost  neglect  him, 

Thomas; 

Thou  hast  a  better  place  in  his  affection 
Than  all  thy  brothers:  cherish  it,  my  boy, 

And  noble  offices  thou  mayst  effect 
Of  mediation,  after  I  am  dead. 

Between  his  greatness  and  thy  other  brethren: 
Therefore  omit  him  not;  blunt  not  his  love. 

Nor  lose  the  good  advantage  of  his  grace 
By  seeming  cold  or  careless  of  his  will; 

For  he  is  gracious,  if  he  be  observed:  50 

He  hath  a  tear  for  pity  and  a  hand 
Open  as  day  for  melting  charity: 

Yet  notwithstanding,  being  incensed,  he’s  flint. 

As  humorous  as  winter  and  as  sudden 
As  flaws  congealed  in  the  spring  of  day. 

His  temper,  therefore,  must  be  well  observed: 
Chide  him  for  faults,  and  do  it  reverently. 

When  you  perceive  his  blood  inclined  to  mirth; 

But,  being  moody,  give  him  line  and  scope. 

Till  that  his  passions,  like  a  whale  on  ground,  40 
Confound  themselves  with  working.  Learn  this, 
Thomas, 

And  thou  shalt  prove  a  shelter  to  thy  friends, 

A  hoop  of  gold  to  bind  thy  brothers  in. 

That  the  united  vessel  of  their  blood. 

Mingled  with  venom  of  suggestion — 

As,  force  perforce,  the  age  will  pour  it  in — 

Shall  never  leak,  though  it  do  work  as  strong 
As  aconitum  or  rash  gunpowder. 

Clar.  I  shall  observe  him  with  all  care  and  love. 
King,  Why  art  thou  not  at  Windsor  with  him, 
Thomas?  $0 

Clar.  He  is  not  there  to-day;  he  dines  in 
London. 

King.  And  how  accompanied?  canst  thou  tell 
that? 

Clar.  With  Poins,  and  other  his  continual  fol¬ 
lowers. 

King.  Most  subject  is  the  fattest  soil  to  weeds; 
And  he,  the  noble  image  of  my  youth. 

Is  overspread  with  them:  therefore  my  grief 
Stretches  itself  beyond  the  hour  of  death: 

The  blood  weeps  from  my  heart  when  I  do  shape 
In  forms  imaginary  the  unguided  days 
And  rotten  times  that  you  shall  look  upon  60 
When  I  am  sleeping  with  my  ancestors. 

For  when  his  headstrong  riot  hath  no  curb. 

When  rage  and  hot  blood  are  his  counsellors. 

When  means  and  lavish  manners  meet  together, 

O,  with  what  wings  shall  his  affections  fly 
Towards  fronting  peril  and  opposed  decay! 

War.  My  gracious  lord,  you  look  beyond  him 
^uite: 


KING  HENRY  IV  493 

The  Prince  but  studies  his  companions 
Like  a  strange  tongue,  wherein,  to  gain  the  lan- 
guage, 

’Tis  needful  that  the  most  immodest  word  70 
Be  look’d  upon  and  learn’d;  which  once  attain’d. 
Your  Highness  knows,  comes  to  no  further  use 
But  to  be  known  and  hated.  So,  like  gross  terms. 
The  Prince  will  in  the  perfectness  of  time 
Cast  off  his  followers;  and  their  memory 
Shall  as  a  pattern  or  a  measure  live. 

By  which  his  Grace  must  mete  the  lives  of  others. 
Turning  past  evils  to  advantages. 

King.  ’Tis  seldom  when  the  bee  doth  leave  her 
comb 

In  the  dead  carrion. 

Enter  Westmoreland. 

Who’s  here?  Westmoreland?  80 
West.  Health  to  my  sovereign,  and  new  happi¬ 
ness 

Added  to  that  that  I  am  to  deliver! 

Prince  John  your  son  doth  kiss  your  Grace’s 
hand: 

Mowbray,  the  Bishop  Scroop,  Hastings,  and  all 
Are  brought  to  the  correction  of  your  law; 

There  is  not  now  a  rebel’s  sword  unsheathed. 

But  Peace  puts  forth  her  olive  everywhere. 

The  manner  how  this  action  hath  been  borne 
Here  at  more  leisure  may  your  Highness  read, 
With  every  course  in  his  particular.  po 

King.  O  Westmoreland,  thou  art  a  summer  bird. 
Which  ever  in  the  haunch  of  winter  sings 
The  lifting  up  of  day. 

Enter  harcourt. 

Look,  here’s  more  news. 
Har.  From  enemies  heaven  keep  your  Majesty; 
And,  when  they  stand  against  you,  may  they  fall 
As  those  that  I  am  come  to  tell  you  of! 

The  Earl  Northumberland  and  the  Lord  Bar- 
dolph. 

With  a  great  power  of  English  and  of  Scots, 

Are  by  the  sheriff  of  Yorkshire  overthrown: 

The  manner  and  true  order  of  the  fight  100 

This  packet,  please  it  you,  contains  at  large. 

King.  And  wherefore  should  these  good  news 
make  me  sick? 

Will  Fortune  never  come  with  both  hands  full, 
But  write  her  fair  words  still  in  foulest  letters? 
She  either  gives  a  stomach  and  no  food; 

Such  are  the  poor,  in  health;  or  else  a  feast 
And  takes  away  the  stomach;  such  are  the  rich. 
That  have  abundance  and  enjoy  it  not. 

I  should  rejoice  now  at  this  happy  news; 

And  now  my  sight  fails,  and  my  brain  is  giddy: 

O  me!  come  near  me;  now  I  am  much  ill.  ill 


494 

Glou.  Comfort,  your  Majesty! 

Clar.  O  my  royal  father! 

West.  My  sovereign  lord,  cheer  up  yourself, 
look  up. 

War.  Be  patient,  Princes;  you  do  know,  these 
fits 

Are  with  his  Highness  very  ordinary. 

Stand  from  him,  give  him  air;  he’ll  straight  be 
well. 

Clar.  No,  no,  he  cannot  long  hold  out  these 
pangs : 

The  incessant  care  and  labour  of  his  mind 
Hath  wrought  the  mure  that  should  confine  it  in 
So  thin  that  life  looks  through  and  will  break  out. 

Glou.  The  people  fear  me;  for  they  do  observe 
Unfather’d  heirs  and  loathly  births  of  nature: 

The  seasons  change  their  manners,  as  the  year 
Had  found  some  months  asleep  and  leap’d  them 
over. 

Clar.  The  river  hath  thrice  flow’d,  no  ebb  be¬ 
tween; 

And  the  old  folk,  time’s  doting  chronicles. 

Say  it  did  so  a  little  time  before 
That  our  great-grandsire,  Edward,  sick’d  and 
died. 

War.  Speak  lower.  Princes,  for  the  King  re¬ 
covers. 

Glou.  This  apoplexy  will  certain  be  his  end.  i^o 
King.  I  pray  you,  take  me  up,  and  bear  me 
hence 

Into  some  other  chamber:  softly,  pray.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  Another  chamber 
The  KING  lying  on  a  bed:  clarence,  Gloucester, 
WARWICK,  and  others  in  attendance. 

King.  Let  there  be  no  noise  made,  my  gentle 
friends; 

Unless  some  dull  and  favourabl':  hand 
Will  whisper  music  to  my  weary  spirit. 

War.  Call  for  the  music  in  the  other  room. 

King.  Set  me  the  crown  upon  my  pillow  here. 
Clar.  His  eye  is  hollow,  and  he  changes  much. 
War.  Less  noise,  less  noise! 

Enter  prince  henry. 

Prince.  Who  saw  the  Duke  of  Clarence? 

Clar.  I  am  here,  brother,  full  of  heaviness. 

Prince.  How  now!  rain  within  doors,  and  none 
abroad ! 

How  doth  the  King?  lo 

Glou.  Exceeding  ill. 

Prince.  Heard  he  the  good  news  yet? 

Tell  it  him. 

Glou.  He  alter’d  much  upon  the  hearing  it. 

Prince.  If  he  be  sick  with  joy,  he’ll  recover 
without  physic. 


ACT  IV 

War.  Not  so  much  noise,  my  lords:  sweet 
prince,  speak  low; 

The  King  your  father  is  disposed  to  sleep. 

Clar.  Let  us  withdraw  into  the  other  room. 

War.  Will’t  please  your  Grace  to  go  along 
with  us? 

Prince.  No;  I  will  sit  and  watch  here  by  the 
King.  [Exeunt  all  but  the  prince  20 

Why  doth  the  crown  lie  there  upon  his  pillow. 
Being  so  troublesome  a  bedfellow? 

O  polish’d  perturbation!  golden  care! 

That  keep’ St  the  ports  of  slumber  open  wide 
To  many  a  watchful  night!  sleep  with  it  now! 

Yet  not  so  sound  and  half  so  deeply  sweet 
As  he  whose  brow  with  homely  biggen  bound 
Snores  out  the  watch  of  night.  O  majesty! 

When  thou  dost  pinch  thy  bearer,  thou  dost  sit 
Like  a  rich  armour  worn  in  heat  of  day,  50 

That  scalds  with  safety.  By  his  gates  of  breath 
There  lies  a  downy  feather  which  stirs  not: 

Did  he  suspire,  that  light  and  weightless  down 
Perforce  must  move.  My  gracious  lord!  my 
father! 

This  sleep  is  sound  indeed;  this  is  a  sleep 
That  from  this  golden  rigol  hath  divorced 
So  many  English  kings.  Thy  due  from  me 
Is  tears  and  heavy  sorrows  of  the  blood. 

Which  nature,  love,  and  filial  tenderness 
Shall,  O  dear  father,  pay  thee  plenteously:  40 

My  due  from  thee  is  this  imperial  crown. 

Which,  as  immediate  from  thy  place  and  blood. 
Derives  itself  to  me.  [Puts  on  the  crovm.'\  Lo,  here 
it  sits. 

Which  God  shall  guard:  and  put  the  world’s 
whole  strength 

Into  one  giant  arm,  it  shall  not  force 
This  lineal  honour  from  me:  this  from  thee 
Will  I  to  mine  leave,  as  ’tis  left  to  me.  [Exit. 
King.  Warwick!  Gloucester!  Clarence! 

Re-enter  Warwick,  Gloucester,  clarence,  and 
the  rest. 

Clar.  Doth  the  King  call? 

War.  What  would  your  Majesty?  How  fares 
your  Grace?  jo 

King.  Why  did  you  leave  me  here  alone,  my 
lords? 

Clar.  We  left  the  Prince  my  brother  here,  my 
liege. 

Who  undertook  to  sit  and  watch  by  you. 

King.  The  Prince  of  Wales!  Where  is  he? 
let  me  see  him: 

He  is  not  here. 

War.  This  door  is  open;  he  is  gone  this  way. 
Glou.  He  came  not  through  the  chamber  where 
we  stay’d. 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


SCENE  V  SECOND  PART  OF 

King.  Where  is  the  crown?  who  took  it  from 
my  pillow? 

War.  When  we  withdrew,  my  liege,  we  left  it 
here. 

King.  The  Prince  hath  ta’en  it  hence:  go,  seek 
him  out.  6o 

Is  he  so  hasty  that  he  doth  suppose 
My  sleep  my  death? 

Find  him,  my  Lord  of  Warwick;  chide  him 
hither.  [Exit  Warwick. 

This  part  of  his  conjoins  with  my  disease. 

And  helps  to  end  me.  See,  sons,  what  things  you 
are! 

How  quickly  nature  falls  into  revolt 
When  gold  becomes  her  object! 

For  this  the  foolish  over-careful  fathers 
Have  broke  their  sleep  with  thoughts,  their 
brains  with  care. 

Their  bones  with  industry;  70 

For  this  they  have  engross’d  and  piled  up 
The  canker’d  heaps  of  strange-achieved  gold; 

For  this  they  have  been  thoughtful  to  invest 
Their  sons  with  arts  and  martial  exercises: 

When,  like  the  bee,  culling  from  every  flower 
The  virtuous  sweets. 

Our  thighs  pack’d  with  wax,  our  mouths  with 
honey. 

We  bring  it  to  the  hive,  and,  like  the  bees. 

Are  murdered  for  our  pains.  This  bitter  taste 
Yield  his  engrossments  to  the  ending  father.  80 

Re-enter  Warwick. 

Now,  where  is  he  that  will  not  stay  so  long 
Till  his  friend  sickness  hath  determined  me? 

War.  My  lord,  I  found  the  Prince  in  the  next 
room. 

Washing  with  kindly  tears  his  gentle  cheeks. 

With  such  a  deep  demeanour  in  great  sorrow 
That  tyranny,  which  never  quaff’d  but  blood. 
Would,  by  beholding  him,  have  wash’d  his  knife 
With  gentle  eye-drops.  He  is  coming  hither. 

King.  But  wherefore  did  he  take  away  the 
crown? 

Re-enter  prince  henry. 

Lo,  where  he  comes.  Come  hither  to  me,  Harry. 
Depart  the  chamber,  leave  us  here  along.  5?/ 
[Exeunt  Warwick  and  the  rest. 
Prince.  I  never  thought  to  hear  you  speak  again. 
King.  Thy  wish  was  father,  Harry,  to  that 
thought: 

1  stay  too  long  by  thee,  I  weary  thee. 

Dost  thou  so  hunger  for  mine  empty  chair 
That  thou  wilt  needs  invest  thee  with  my  hon¬ 
ours 

Before  thy  hour  be  ripe?  O  foolish  youth! 


KING  HENRY  IV  495 

Thou  seek’st  the  greatness  that  will  overwhelm 
thee. 

Stay  but  a  little;  for  my  cloud  of  dignity 

Is  held  from  falling  with  so  weak  a  wind  100 

That  it  will  quickly  drop:  my  day  is  dim. 

Thou  hast  stolen  that  which  after  some  few 
hours 

Were  thine  without  offense;  and  at  my  death 
Thou  hast  seal’d  up  my  expectation: 

Thy  life  did  manifest  thou  lovedst  me  not, 

And  thou  wilt  have  me  die  assured  of  it. 

Thou  hidst  a  thousand  daggers  in  thy  thoughts, 
Which  thou  hast  whetted  on  thy  stony  heart 
Tostabat  halfanhourofmy  life.  10^ 

What!  canst  thou  not  forbear  me  half  an  hour? 
Then  get  thee  gone  and  dig  my  grave  thyself. 

And  bid  the  merry  bells  ring  to  thine  ear 
That  thou  art  crowned,  not  that  I  am  dead. 

Let  all  the  tears  that  should  bedew  my  hearse 
Be  drops  of  balm  to  sanctify  thy  head: 

Only  compound  me  with  forgotten  dust; 

Give  that  which  gave  thee  life  unto  the  worms. 
Pluck  down  my  officers,  break  my  decrees; 

For  now  a  time  is  come  to  mock  at  form: 

Harry  the  Fifth  is  crown’d:  up,  vanity!  120 
Down,  royal  state!  all  you  sage  counsellors, 
hence! 

And  to  the  English  court  assemble  now. 

From  every  region,  apes  of  idleness! 

Now,  neighbour  confines,  purge  you  of  your 
scum: 

Have  you  a  ruffian  that  will  swear,  drink,  dance. 
Revel  the  night,  rob,  murder,  and  commit 
The  oldest  sins  the  newest  kind  of  ways? 

Be  happy,  he  will  trouble  you  no  more; 

England  shall  double  gild  his  treble  guilt, 

England  shall  give  him  office,  honour,  might;  /50 
For  the  fifth  Harry  from  curb’d  license  plucks 
The  muzzle  of  restraint,  and  the  wild  dog 
Shall  flesh  his  tooth  on  every  innocent. 

O  my  poor  kingdom,  sick  with  civil  blows! 

When  that  my  care  could  not  withhold  thy  riots, 
What  wilt  thou  do  when  riots  is  thy  care? 

O,  thou  wilt  be  a  wilderness  again. 

Peopled  with  wolves,  thy  old  inhabitants! 

Prince.  O,  pardon  me,  my  liege!  but  for  my 
tears. 

The  moist  impediments  unto  my  speech,  140 
I  had  forestall’d  this  dear  and  deep  rebuke 
Ere  you  with  grief  had  spoke  and  I  had  heard 
The  course  of  it  so  far.  There  is  your  crown; 

And  He  that  wears  the  crown  immortally 
Long  guard  it  yours!  If  I  affect  it  more 
Than  as  your  honour  and  as  your  renown. 

Let  me  no  more  from  this  obedience  rise. 

Which  my  most  inward,  true,  and  duteous  spirit 


496  SECOND  PART  OF 

Teacheth,  this  prostrate  and  exterior  bending. 

God  witness  with  me,  when  I  here  came  in,  /50 
And  found  no  course  of  breath  within  your  Ma¬ 
jesty, 

How  cold  it  struck  my  heart!  If  I  do  feign, 

O,  let  me  in  my  present  wildness  die 

And  never  live  to  show  the  incredulous  world 

The  noble  change  that  I  have  purposed! 

Coming  to  look  on  you,  thinking  you  dead. 

And  dead  almost,  my  liege,  to  think  you  were, 

I  spake  unto  this  crown  as  having  sense. 

And  thus  upbraided  it:  “The  care  on  thee  de¬ 
pending 

Hath  fed  upon  the  body  of  my  father;  160 

Therefore,  thou  best  of  gold  art  worst  of  gold: 
Other,  less  fine  in  carat,  is  more  precious. 
Preserving  life  in  medicine  potable; 

But  thou,  most  fine,  most  honour’d,  most  re- 
nown’d. 

Hast  eat  thy  bearer  up.”  Thus,  my  most  royal 
liege. 

Accusing  it,  1  put  it  on  my  head. 

To  try  with  it,  as  with  an  enemy 

That  had  before  my  face  murder’d  my  father. 

The  quarrel  of  a  tru<i  inheritor. 

But  if  it  did  infect  my  blood  with  joy,  /70 

Or  swell  my  thoughts  to  any  strain  of  pride; 

If  any  rebel  or  vain  spirit  of  mine 
Did  with  the  least  affection  of  a  welcome 
Give  entertainment  to  the  might  of  it. 

Let  God  for  ever  keep  it  from  my  head 
And  make  me  as  the  poorest  vassal  is 
That  doth  with  awe  and  terror  kneel  to  it! 

King.  O  my  son, 

God  put  it  in  thy  mind  to  take  it  hence. 

That  thou  mightst  win  the  more  thy  father’s 
love,  180 

Pleading  so  wisely  in  excuse  of  it! 

Come  hither,  Harry,  sit  thou  by  my  bed; 

And  hear,  I  think,  the  very  latest  counsel 
That  ever  I  shall  breathe.  God  knows,  my  son. 

By  what  by-paths  and  indirect  crook’d  ways 
I  met  this  crown  ;  and  I  myself  know  well 
How  troublesome  it  sat  upon  my  head. 

To  thee  it  shall  descend  with  better  quiet. 

Better  opinion,  better  confirmation; 

For  all  the  soil  of  the  achievement  goes  ipo 

With  me  into  the  earth.  It  seem’d  in  me 
But  as  an  honour  snatch’d  with  boisterous 
hand 

And  I  had  many  living  to  upbraid 
My  gain  of  it  by  their  assistances; 

Which  daily  grew  to  quarrel  and  to  bloodshed. 
Wounding  supposed  peace:  all  these  bold  fears 
Thou  see’st  with  peril  I  have  answered; 

For  all  my  reign  hath  been  but  as  a  scene 


KING  HENRY  IV  act  iv 

Acting  that  argument:  and  now  my  death 
Changes  the  mode;  for  what  in  me  was  pur¬ 
chased,  200 

Falls  upon  thee  in  a  more  fairer  sort; 

So  thou  the  garland  wear’st  successively. 

Yet,  though  thou  stand’st  more  sure  than  I  could 
do. 

Thou  art  not  firm  enough,  since  griefs  are  green; 
And  all  my  friends,  which  thou  must  make  thy 
friends. 

Have  but  their  stings  and  teeth  newly  ta’en  out; 
By  whose  fell  working  I  was  first  advanced 
And  by  whose  power  I  well  might  lodge  a  fear 
To  be  again  displaced:  which  to  avoid, 

I  cut  them  off;  and  had  a  purpose  now  210 

To  lead  out  many  to  the  Holy  Land, 

Lest  rest  and  lying  still  might  make  them  look 
Too  near  unto  my  state.  Therefore,  my  Harry, 

Be  it  thy  course  to  busy  giddy  minds 
With  foreign  quarrels;  that  action,  hence  borne 
out. 

May  waste  the  memory  of  the  former  days. 

More  would  I,  but  my  lungs  are  wasted  so 
That  strength  of  speech  is  utterly  denied  me. 
How  I  came  by  the  crown,  O  God  forgive; 

And  grant  it  may  with  thee  in  true  peace  live! 
Prince.  My  gracious  liege,  221 

You  won  it,  wore  it,  kept  it,  gave  it  me; 

Then  plain  and  right  must  my  possession  be: 
Which  I  with  more  than  with  a  common  pain 
’Gainst  all  the  world  will  rightfully  maintain. 

Enter  lord  john  of  Lancaster. 

King.  Look,  look,  here  comes  my  John  of 
Lancaster. 

Lan.  Health,  peace,  and  happiness  to  my  royal 
father! 

King.  Thou  bring’st  me  happiness  and  peace, 
son  John; 

But  health,  alack,  with  youthful  wings  is  flown 
From  this  bare  wither’d  trunk:  upon  thy  sight 
My  worldly  business  makes  a  period.  25/ 

Where  is  my  Lord  of  Warwick? 

Prince.  My  Lord  of  Warwick! 

Re-enter  Warwick,  and  others. 

King.  Doth  any  name  particular  belong 
Unto  the  lodging  where  I  first  did  swoon? 

War.  ’Tis  call’d  Jerusalem,  my  noble  lord. 

King.  Laud  be  to  God!  even  there  my  life  must 
end. 

It  hath  been  prophesied  to  me  many  years, 

I  should  not  die  but  in  Jerusalem; 

Which  vainly  I  supposed  the  Holy  Land: 

But  bear  me  to  that  chamber;  there  I’ll  lie;  240 
In  that  Jerusalem  shall  Harry  die.  [Exeunt. 


SCENE  V 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  Gloucestershire:  Shallow's  house 
Enter  shallow,  falstaff,  bardolph,  and  page. 

Shal.  By  cock  and  pie,  sir,  you  shall  not  away 
to-night.  What,  Davy,  I  say! 

FaL  You  must  excuse  me,  Master  Robert 
Shallow. 

Shal.  I  will  not  excuse  you;  you  shall  not  be 
excused;  excuses  shall  not  be  admitted;  there  is 
no  excuse  shall  serve;  you  shall  not  be  excused. 
Why,  Davy! 

Enter  davy. 

Davy.  Here,  sir.  p 

Shal.  Davy,  Davy,  Davy,  Davy,  let  me  see, 
Davy;  let  me  see,  Davy;  let  me  see:  yea,  marry, 
William  cook  bid  him  come  hither.  Sir  John, 
you  shall  not  be  excused. 

Davy.  Marry,  sir,  thus;  those  precepts  cannot 
be  served:  and,  again,  sir,  shall  we  sow  the 
headland  with  wheat.^ 

SIml.  With  red  wheat,  Davy.  But  for  William 
cook:  are  there  no  young  pigeons? 

Davy.  Yes,  sir.  Here  is  now  the  smith’s  note 
for  shoeing  and  plough-irons.  20 

Shal.  Let  it  be  cast  and  paid.  Sir  John,  you  shall 
not  be  excused. 

Davy.  Now,  sir,  a  new  link  to  the  bucket 
must  needs  be  had:  and,  sir,  do  you  mean  to  stop 
any  of  William’s  wages,  about  the  sack  he  lost 
the  other  day  at  Hinckley  fair? 

Shal.  A’  shall  answer  it.  Some  pigeons,  Davy, 
a  couple  of  short-legged  hens,  a  joint  of  mutton, 
and  any  pretty  little  tiny  kickshaws,  tell  William 
cook.  50 

Davy.  Doth  the  man  of  war  stay  all  night,  sir? 

Shal.  Yea,  Davy.  I  will  use  him  well:  a  friend 
i’  the  court  is  better  than  a  penny  in  purse.  Use 
his  men  well,  Davy;  for  they  are  arrant  knaves, 
and  will  backbite. 

Davy.  No  worse  than  they  are  backbitten,  sir; 
for  they  have  marvellous  foul  linen. 

Shal.  Well  conceited,  Davy;  about  thy  business, 
Davy.  40 

Davy.  I  beseech  you,  sir,  to  countenance 
William  Visor  of  Woncot  against  Clement 
Perkes  of  the  hill. 

Shal.  There  is  many  complaints,  Davy,  against 
that  Visor:  that  Visor  is  an  arrant  knave,  on  my 
knowledge. 

Davy.  I  grant  your  worship  that  he  is  a  knave, 
sir;  but  yet,  God  forbid,  sir,  but  a  knave  should 
have  some  countenance  at  his  friend’s  request. 
An  honest  man,  sir,  is  able  to  speak  for  himself. 


497 

when  a  knave  is  not.  I  have  served  your  wor¬ 
ship  truly,  sir,  this  eight  years;  and  if  1  cannot 
once  or  twice  in  a  quarter  bear  out  a  knave  against 
an  honest  man,  1  have  but  a  very  little  credit  with 
your  worship.  The  knave  is  mine  honest  friend, 
sir;  therefore,  I  beseech  your  worship,  let  him  be 
countenanced. 

Shal.  Go  to;  I  say  he  shall  have  no  wrong. 
Look  about,  Davy.  [Exit  davy.]  Where  are 
you.  Sir  John?  Come,  come,  come,  off  with 
your  boots.  Give  me  your  hand.  Master  Bar¬ 
dolph. 

Bard.  I  am  glad  to  see  your  worship. 

Shal.  I  thank  thee  with  all  my  heart,  kind 
Master  Bardolph:  and  welcome,  my  tall  fellow 
[to  the  page]  .  Come,  Sir  John, 

Fal.  I’ll  follow  you,  good  Master  Robert 
Shallow,  [Exit  shallow.]  Bardolph,  look  to 
our  horses.  [Exeunt  bardolph  and  page.]  If 
I  were  sawed  into  quantities,  I  should  make  four 
dozen  of  such  bearded  hermits’  staves  as  Master 
Shallow.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing  to  see  the  sem- 
blable  coherence  of  his  men’s  spirits  and  his:  they 
by  observing  of  him,  do  bear  themselves  like 
foolish  justices;  he,  by  conversing  with  them,  is 
turned  into  a  justice-like  serving-man:  their 
spirits  are  so  married  in  conjunction  with  the 
participation  of  society  that  they  flock  together 
in  consent,  like  so  many  wild-geese.  If  1  had  a 
suit  to  Master  Shallow,  I  would  humour  his  men 
with  the  imputation  of  being  near  their  master:  if 
to  his  men,  I  would  curry  with  Master  Shallow 
that  no  man  could  better  command  his  servants. 
It  is  certain  that  either  wise  bearing  or  ignorant 
carriage  is  caught,  as  men  take  diseases,  one  of 
another:  therefore  let  men  take  heed  of  their 
company.  I  will  devise  matter  enough  out  of 
this  Shallow  to  keep  Prince  Harry  in  continual 
laughter  the  wearing  out  of  six  fashions,  which  is 
four  terms,  or  two  actions,  and  a’  shall  laugh 
without  intervallums.  O,  it  is  much  that  a  lie 
with  a  slight  oath  and  a  jest  with  a  sad  brow  will 
do  with  a  fellow  that  never  had  the  ache  in  his 
shoulders!  O,  you  shall  see  him  laugh  till  his 
face  be  like  a  wet  cloak  ill  laid  up! 

Shal.  [Withm\  Sir  John! 

Fal.  I  come.  Master  Shallow;  I  come.  Master 
Shallow.  [Exit. 

Scene  ii.  Westminster:  the  Palace 

Enter  Warwick  and  the  lord  chief  ju.^ncE, 
meeting. 

War.  How  now,  my  Lord  Chief  Justice! 
whither  away? 

Ch.  Just.  How  doth  the  King? 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


498  SECOND  PART  OF 

War.  Exceeding  well;  his  cares  are  now  all 
ended. 

Ch.  Just.  I  hope,  not  dead. 

War.  He’s  walk’d  the  way  of  nature; 

And  to  our  purposes  he  lives  no  more. 

Ch.  Just.  I  would  his  Majesty  had  call’d  me 
with  him: 

The  service  that  I  truly  did  his  life 
Hath  left  me  open  to  all  injuries. 

War.  Indeed  I  think  the  young  King  loves  you 
not. 

Ch.  Just.  I  know  he  doth  not,  and  do  arm  my¬ 
self  10 

To  welcome  the  condition  of  the  time. 

Which  cannot  look  more  hideously  upon  me 
Than  I  have  drawn  it  in  my  fantasy. 

Enter  Lancaster,  clarence,  Gloucester,  West¬ 
moreland  and  others. 

War.  Here  come  the  heavy  issue  of  dead  Harry: 

O  that  the  living  Harry  had  the  temper 
Of  him,  the  worst  of  these  three  gentlemen! 

How  many  nobles  then  should  hold  their  places. 
That  must  strike  sail  to  spirits  of  vile  sort! 

Ch.  Just.  O  God,  I  fear  all  will  be  overturn’d! 
Lon.  Good  morrow,  cousin  Warwick,  good 
morrow.  20 

Glou.i 

Clar  j  morrow,  cousin. 

Lan.  We  meet  like  men  that  had  forgot  to 
speak. 

War.  We  do  remember;  but  our  argument 
Is  all  too  heavy  to  admit  much  talk. 

Lan.  Well,  peace  be  with  him  that  hath  made 
us  heavy! 

Ch.  Just.  Peace  be  with  us,  lest  we  be  heavier! 
Glou.  O,  good  my  lord,  you  have  lost  a  friend 
indeed; 

And  I  dare  swear  you  borrow  not  that  face 
Of  seeming  sorrow,  it  is  sure  your  own. 

Lan.  Though  no  man  be  assured  what  Grace 
to  find,  50 

You  stand  in  coldest  expectation: 

I  am  the  sorrier;  would  ’twere  otherwise. 

Clar.  Well,  you  must  now  speak  Sir  John 
Falstaff  fair; 

Which  swims  against  your  stream  of  quality. 

Ch.  Just.  Sweet  Princes,  what  I  did,  I  did  in 
honour. 

Led  by  the  impartial  conduct  of  my  soul: 

And  never  shall  you  see  that  I  will  beg 
A  ragged  and  forestall’d  remission. 

If  truth  and  upright  innocency  fail  me. 

I’ll  to  the  King  my  master  that  is  dead,  40 

And  tell  him  who  jiath  sent  me  after  him. 

War.  Here  comes  the  Prince. 


KING  HENRY  IV  actv 

Enter  king  henry  the  fifth,  attended. 

Ch.  Just.  Good  morrow;  and  God  save  your 
Majesty! 

King.  This  new  and  gorgeous  garment,  ma¬ 
jesty. 

Sits  not  so  easy  on  me  as  you  think. 

Brothers,  you  mix  your  sadness  with  some  fear: 
This  is  the  English,  not  the  Turkish  court; 

Not  Amurath  an  Amurath  succeeds. 

But  Harry  Harry.  Yet  be  sad,  good  brothers. 

For,  by  my  faith,  it  very  well  becomes  you :  50 

Sorrow  so  royally  in  you  appears 
That  I  will  deeply  put  the  fashion  on 
And  wear  it  in  my  heart:  why  then,  be  sad; 

But  entertain  no  more  of  it,  good  brothers. 

Than  a  joint  burden  laid  upon  us  all. 

For  me,  by  heaven,  I  bid  you  be  assured. 

I’ll  be  your  father  and  your  brother  too; 

Let  me  but  bear  your  love.  I’ll  bear  your  cares: 
Yet  weep  that  Harry’s  dead;  and  so  will  I; 

But  Harry  lives,  that  shall  convert  those  tears  60 
By  number  into  hours  of  happiness. 

Princes.  We  hope  no  other  from  your  Majesty. 
King.  You  all  look  strangely  on  me:  and  you 
most; 

You  are,  I  think,  assured  I  love  you  not. 

Ch.  Just.  I  am  assured,  if  I  be  measured  rightly. 
Your  Majesty  hath  no  just  cause  to  hate  me. 
King.  No! 

How  might  a  prince  of  my  great  hopes  forget 
So  great  indignities  you  laid  upon  me?  6p 

What!  rate,  rebuke,  and  roughly  send  to  prison 
The  immediate  heir  of  England!  Was  this  easy? 
May  this  be  wash’d  in  Lethe,  and  forgotten? 

Ch.  Just.  I  then  did  use  the  person  of  your 
father; 

The  image  of  his  power  lay  then  in  me: 

And,  in  the  administration  of  his  law. 

Whiles  I  was  busy  for  the  commonwealth. 

Your  Highness  pleased  to  forget  my  place. 

The  majesty  and  power  of  law  and  justice. 

The  image  of  the  King  whom  I  presented. 

And  struck  me  in  my  very  seat  of  judgement;  80 
Whereon,  as  an  offender  to  your  father, 

I  gave  bold  way  to  my  authority 
And  did  commit  you.  If  the  deed  were  ill. 

Be  you  contented,  wearing  now  the  garland. 

To  have  a  son  set  your  decrees  at  nought. 

To  pluck  down  justice  from  your  awful  bench. 
To  trip  the  course  of  law  and  blunt  the  sword 
That  guards  the  peace  and  safety  of  your  person; 
Nay,  more,  to  spurn  at  your  most  royal  image 
And  mock  your  workings  in  a  second  body.  po 
Question  your  royal  thoughts,  make  the  case 
yours; 


SCENE  II 


499 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


Be  now  the  father  and  propose  a  son, 

Hear  your  own  dignity  so  much  profaned, 

See  your  most  dreadful  laws  so  loosely  slighted. 
Behold  yourself  so  by  a  son  disdain’d; 

And  then  imagine  me  taking  your  part 
And  in  your  power  soft  silencing  your  son : 

After  this  cold  considerance,  sentence  me; 

,  And,  as  you  are  a  king,  speak  in  your  state 
j  What  I  have  done  that  misbecame  my  place,  wo 
My  person,  or  my  liege’s  sovereignty. 

'  King.  You  are  right.  Justice,  and  you  weigh 
this  well; 

Therefore  still  bear  the  balance  and  the  sword: 

I  And  I  do  wish  your  honours  may  increase, 

'  Till  you  do  live  to  see  a  son  of  mine 
'  Offend  you  and  obey  you,  as  I  did. 

I  So  shall  I  live  to  speak  my  father’s  words: 

I  “Happy  am  I,  that  have  a  man  so  bold, 

1  That  dares  do  justice  on  my  proper  son ; 

I  And  not  less  happy,  having  such  a  son,  no 

Ij  That  would  deliver  up  his  greatness  so 

Into  the  hands  of  justice.”  You  did  commit  me: 
For  which,  I  do  commit  into  your  hand 
The  unstained  sword  that  you  have  used  to  bear; 
With  this  remembrance,  that  you  use  the  same 
With  the  like  bold,  just  and  impartial  spirit 
As  you  have  done  ’gainst  me.  There  is  my  hand. 
You  shall  be  as  a  father  to  my  youth: 

My  voice  shall  sound  as  you  do  prompt  mine  ear, 
And  I  will  stoop  and  humble  my  intents  120 
To  your  well-practised  wise  directions. 

And,  Princes  all,  believe  me,  I  beseech  you; 

My  father  is  gone  wild  into  his  grave, 

For  in  his  tomb  lie  my  affections; 

And  with  his  spirit  sadly  I  survive. 

To  mock  the  expectation  of  the  world. 

To  frustrate  prophecies,  and  to  raze  out 
Rotten  opinion,  who  hath  writ  me  down 
After  my  seeming.  The  tide  of  blood  in  me 
Hath  proudly  flow’d  in  vanity  till  now:  /50 

Now  doth  it  turn  and  ebb  back  to  the  sea. 

Where  it  shall  mingle  with  the  state  of  floods 
And  flow  henceforth  in  formal  majesty. 

Now  call  we  our  high  court  of  parliament: 

And  let  us  choose  such  limbs  of  noble  counsel. 
That  the  great  body  of  our  state  may  go 
In  equal  rank  with  the  best  govern’d  nation; 

That  war,  or  peace,  or  both  at  once,  may  be 
As  things  acquainted  and  familiar  to  us; 

In  which  you,  father,  shall  have  foremdst  hand. 
Our  coronation  done,  we  will  accite,  i^i 

As  I  before  remember’d,  all  our  state: 

And,  God  consigning  to  my  good  intents. 

No  prince  nor  peer  shall  have  just  cause  to  say, 
God  shorten  Harry’s  happy  life  one  day! 

[Exeunt. 


Scene  hi.  Gloucestershire:  Shallow's 
orchard 

Enter  falstaff,  shallow,  silence,  davy,  bar- 
DOLPH,  and  the  page. 

Shal.  Nay,  you  shall  see  my  orchard,  where, 
in  an  arbour,  we  will  eat  a  last  year’s  pippin 
of  my  own  graffing,  with  a  dish  of  caraways, 
and  so  forth:  come,  cousin  Silence:  and  then  to 
bed. 

Fal.  ’Fore  God,  you  have  here  a  goodly 
dwelling  and  a  rich. 

Sh.d.  Barren,  barren,  barren;  beggars  all, 
beggars  all.  Sir  John:  marry,  good  air.  Spread, 
Davy;  spread,  Davy:  well  said,  Davy.  w 

Fal.  This  Davy  serves  you  for  good  uses;  he 
is  your  serving-man  and  your  husband. 

Shal.  A  good  varlet,  a  good  varlet,  a  very  good 
varlet.  Sir  John:  by  the  mass,  I  have  drunk  too 
much  sack  at  Supper:  a  good  varlet.  Now  sit 
down,  now  sit  down:  come,  cousin. 

Sil.  Ah,  sirrah!  qiioth-a,  we  shall  [Singing.] 

“Do  nothing  but  eat,  and  make  good  cheer. 

And  praise  God  for  the  merry  year; 

When  flesh  is  cheap  and  females  dear,  20 

And  lusty  lads  roam  here  and  there 
So  merrily. 

And  ever  among  so  merrily.” 

Fal.  There’s  a  merry  heart!  Good  Master 
Silence,  I’ll  give  you  a  health  for  that  anon. 

Shal.  Give  Master  Bardolph  some  wine, 

Davy. 

Davy.  Sweet  sir,  sit;  I’ll  be  with  you  anon; 
most  sweet  sir,  sit.  Master  page,  good  master 
page,  sit.  Proface!  What  you  want  in  meat, 
we’ll  have  in  drink:  but  you  must  bear;  the 
heart’s  all.  [Exit. 

Shal.  Be  merry.  Master  Bardolph;  and,  my 
little  soldier  there,  be  merry. 

Sil.  [Singing.]  “Be  merry,  be  merry,  my  wife 
has  all; 

For  women  are  shrews,  both  short  and  tall: 

’Tis  merry  in  hall  when  beards  wag  all. 

And  welcome  merry  Shrove-tide. 

Be  merry,  be  merry.” 

Fal.  I  did  not  think  Master  Silence  had  been  a 
man  of  this  mettle.  4/ 

Sil.  Who,  I?  I  have  been  merry  twice  and  once 
ere  now. 

Re-enter  davy. 

Davy.  There’s  a  dish  of  leather-coats  for  you. 

[To  BARDOLPH. 

Shal.  Davy! 

Davy.  Your  worship!  I’ll  be  with  you  straight 
[to  bardolph]  .  A  cup  of  wine,  sir? 


ACT  V 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


500 

Sil.  [5wg//2g.]  “A  cup  of  wine  that’s  brisk  and 
fine, 

And  drink  unto  the  leman  mine; 

And  a  merry  heart  lives  long-a.”  50 
Fal.  Well  said,  Master  Silence. 

Sil.  An  we  shall  be  merry,  now  comes  in  the 
sweet  o’  the  ni£jht. 

Fal.  Health  and  long  life  to  you,  Master  Silence. 
Sil.  [Singing.]  “Fill  the  cup,  and  let  it  come; 

ril  pledge  you  a  mile  to  the 
bottom.” 

Shal.  Honest  Bardolph,  welcome:  if  thou 
wantest  anything,  and  wilt  not  call,  beshrew  thy 
heart.  Welcome,  my  little  tiny  thief  [to  the 
page],  and  welcome  indeed  too.  I’ll  drink  to 
Master  Bardolph,  and  to  all  the  cavaleros  about 
London. 

Davy.  I  hope  to  see  London  once  ere  I  die. 

Bard.  An  I  might  see  you  there,  Davy — 

Shal.  By  the  mass,  you’ll  crack  a  quart  to¬ 
gether,  ha!  will  you  not.  Master  Bardolph? 

Bard.  Yea,  sir,  in  a  pottle-pot. 

Shal.  By  God’s  liggens,  I  thank  thee:  the 
knave  will  stick  by  thee,  I  can  assure  thee  that. 

A’  will  not  out;  he  is  true  bred.  7/ 

Bard.  And  I’ll  stick  by  him,  sir. 

Shal.  Why,  there  spoke  a  king.  Lack  nothing: 
be  merry.  [Knocking  voithin.]  Look  who’s  at 
door  there,  ho!  who  knocks? 

[Exit  DAVY. 

Fal.  Why,  now  you  have  done  me  right. 

To  SILENCE,  seeing  him  take  off  a  bumper. 

Sil.  [Singing^  “Do  me  right. 

And  dub  me  knight: 

Samingo.” 

Is’t  not  so?  So 

Fal.  ’Tis  so. 

Sil.  Is’t  so?  Why  then,  say  an  old  man  can  do 
somewhat. 

Re-enter  davy. 

Davy.  An’t  please  your  worship,  there’s  one 
Pistol  come  from  the  court  with  news. 

Fal.  From  the  court!  let  him  come  in. 

Enter  pistol. 

How  now.  Pistol! 

Fist.  Sir  John,  God  save  you! 

Fal.  What  wind  blew  you  hither.  Pistol?  8p 
Fist.  Not  the  ill  wind  which  blows  no  man  to 
good.  Sweet  knight,  thou  art  now  one  of  the 
greatest  men  in  this  realm. 

Sil.  By’r  lady,  I  think  a’  be,  but  goodman 
Puff  of  Bar  son. 

Fist.  Puff! 

PuflF  in  thy  teeth,  most  recreant  coward  base! 


Sir  John,  I  am  thy  Pistol  and  thy  friend. 

And  helter-skelter  have  I  rode  to  thee. 

And  tidings  do  I  bring  and  lucky  joys 
And  golden  times  and  happy  news  of  price.  100 

Fal.  I  pray  thee  now,  deliver  them  like  a  man 
of  this  world. 

Fist.  A  foutre  for  the  world  and  worldlings 
base! 

I  speak  of  Africa  and  golden  joys. 

Fal.  O  base  Assyrian  knight,  what  is  thy  news? 
Let  King  Cophetua  know  the  truth  thereof. 

Sil.  [Singing.]  “And  Robin  Hood,  Scarlet,  and 
John.” 

Fist.  Shall  dunghill  curs  confront  the  Helicons? 
And  shall  good  news  be  baffled? 

Then,  Pistol,  lay  thy  head  in  Furies’  lap.  no 
Shal.  Honest  gentleman,  I  know  not  your 
breeding. 

Fist.  Why  then,  lament  therefore. 

Shal.  Give  me  pardon,  sir:  if,  sir,  you  come 
with  news  from  the  court,  I  take  it  there’s  but 
two  ways,  either  to  utter  them,  or  to  conceal 
them.  I  am,  sir,  under  the  King,  in  some  au¬ 
thority. 

Fist.  Under  which  king,  Besonian?  speak,  or 
die. 

Shal.  Under  King  Harry. 

Fist.  Harry  the  Fourth?  or  Fifth? 

Shal.  Harry  the  Fourth. 

Fist.  A  foutre  for  thine  office!  121 

Sir  John,  thy  tender  lambkin  now  is  king; 

Harry  the  Fifth’s  the  man.  I  speak  the  truth: 
When  Pistol  lies,  do  this;  and  fig  me,  like 
The  bragging  Spaniard. 

Fal.  What,  is  the  old  king  dead? 

Fist.  As  nail  in  door:  the  things  I  speak  are  just. 
Fal.  Away,  Bardolph!  saddle  my  horse.  Master 
Robert  Shallow,  choose  what  office  thou  wilt  in 
the  land,  ’tis  thine.  Pistol,  I  will  double-charge 
thee  with  dignities . 

Bard.  O  joyful  day! 

I  would  not  take  a  knighthood  for  my  fortune. 
Fist.  What!  I  do  bring  good  news. 

Fal.  Carry  Master  Silence  to  bed.  Master 
Shallow,  my  Lord  Shallow — be  what  thou  wilt; 
I  am  fortune’s  steward — get  on  thy  boots:  we’ll 
ride  all  night.  O  sweet  Pistol!  Away,  Bardolph! 
[Exit  BARDOLPH.]  Come,  Pistol,  utter  more  to 
me;  and  withal  devise  something  to  do  thyself 
good.  Boot,  boot.  Master  Shallow:  I  know  the 
young  king  is  sick  for  me.  Let  us  take  any 
man’s  horses;  the  laws  of  England  are  at  my 
commandment.  Blessed  are  they  that  have  been 
my  friends;  and  woe  to  my  Lord  Chief  Justice! 
Fist.  Let  vultures  vile  seize  on  his  lungs  also! 
“Where  is  the  life  that  late  I  led?”  say  they: 


SCENE  III 

Why,  here  it  is;  welcome  these  pleasant  days! 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  London:  a  street. 

Enter  beadles,  dragging  in  mistress  quickly 

and  DOLL  TEARSHEET. 

Quick.  No,  thou  arrant  knave;  I  would  to  God 
that  I  might  die,  that  I  might  have  thee  hanged: 
thou  hast  drawn  my  shoulder  out  of  joint. 

ist  Bead.  The  constables  have  delivered  her 
over  to  me;  and  she  shall  have  whipping-cheer 
enough,  I  warrant  her:  there  hath  been  a  man  or 
two  lately  killed  about  her. 

Dol.  Nut-hook,  nut-hook,  you  lie.  Come  on; 
I’ll  tell  thee  what,  thou  damned  tripe-visaged 
rascal,  an  the  child  I  now  go  with  do  miscarry, 
thou  wert  better  thou  hadst  struck  thy  mother, 
thou  paper-faced  villain. 

Quick.  O  the  Lord,  that  Sir  John  were  come! 
he  would  make  this  a  bloody  day  to  somebody. 
But  I  pray  God  the  fruit  of  her  womb  miscarry! 

ist  Bead.  If  it  do,  you  shall  have  a  dozen  of 
cushions  again;  you  have  but  eleven  now.  Come, 
I  charge  you  both  go  with  me;  for  the  man  is 
dead  that  you  and  Pistol  beat  amongst  you.  19 

Dol.  I’ll  tell  you  what,  you  thin  man  in  a  censer, 
I  will  have  you  as  soundly  swinged  for  this — 
you  blue-bottle  rogue,  you  filthy  famished 
correctioner,  if  you  be  not  swinged.  I’ll  forswear 
half-kirtles. 

ist  Bead.  Come,  come,  you  she  knight-errant, 
come. 

Quick.  O  God,  that  right  should  thus  overcome 
might!  Well,  of  sufferance  comes  ease. 

Dol.  Come,  you  rogue,  come;  bring  me  to  a 
justice.  JO 

Quick.  Ay,  come,  you  starved  blood-hound. 

Dol.  Goodman  death,  goodman  bones! 

Qiiick.  Thou  atomy,  thou! 

Dol.  Come,  you  thin  thing;  some,  you  rascal. 

1st  Bead.  V ery  well .  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  A  public  place  near  Westminster  Abbey 
Enter  two  grooms,  strewing  rushes. 

ist  Groom.  More  rushes,  more  rushes. 

2nd  Groom.  The  trumpets  have  sounded  twice. 

ist  Groom.  ’Twill  be  two  o’clock  ere  they  come 
from  the  coronation:  dispatch,  dispatch. 

\Exeunt. 

Enter  falstaff,  shallow,  pistol,  bardolph, 
and  PAGE. 

Fal.  Stand  here  by  me.  Master  Robert  Shal¬ 
low;  I  will  make  the  King  do  you  grace:  I  will 
leer  upon  him  as  a’  comes  by;  and  do  but  mark 
the  countenance  that  he  will  give  me. 


501 

Pist.  God  bless  thy  lungs,  good  knight.  p 

Fal.  Come  here.  Pistol;  stand  behind  me.  O, 
if  I  had  had  time  to  have  made  new  liveries, 
I  would  have  bestowed  the  thousand  pound  I 
borrowed  of  you.  But  ’tis  no  matter;  this  poor 
show  doth  better:  this  doth  infer  the  zeal  I  had 
to  see  him. 

Shal.  It  doth  so. 

Fal.  It  shows  my  earnestness  of  affection — 

Shal.  It  doth  so. 

Fal.  My  devotion — 

Shal.  It  doth,  it  doth,  it  doth.  20 

Fal.  As  it  were,  to  ride  day  and  night;  and  not 
to  deliberate,  not  to  remember,  not  to  have 
patience  to  shift  me — 

Shal.  It  is  best,  certain. 

Fal.  But  to  stand  stained  with  travel  and  sweat¬ 
ing  with  desire  to  see  him;  thinking  of  nothing 
else,  putting  all  affairs  else  in  oblivion,  as  if  there 
were  nothing  else  to  be  done  but  to  see  him.  29 
Pist.  ’Tis  semper  idem.,  for  obsque  hoc  nihil  est: 
’tis  all  in  every  part. 

Shal.  ’Tis  so,  indeed. 

Pist.  My  knight,  I  will  inflame  thy  noble  liver, 
And  make  thee  rage. 

Thy  Doll,  and  Helen  of  thy  noble  thoughts. 

Is  in  base  durance  and  contagious  prison; 

Haled  thither 

By  most  mechanical  and  dirty  hand: 

Rouse  up  revenge  from  ebon  den  with  fell 
Alecto’s  snake, 

For  Doll  is  in.  Pistol  speaks  nought  but  truth, 

Fal.  I  will  deliver  her. 

Shouts  within  and  the  trumpets  sound. 

Pist.  There  roar’d  the  sea,  and  trumpet-clangor 
sounds. 

Enter  the  king  and  his  train,  the  lord  chief 
JUSTICE  among  them. 

Fal.  God  save  thy  Grace,  King  Hal!  my  royal 
Hal! 

Pist.  The  heavens  thee  guard  and  keep,  most 
royal  imp  of  fame! 

Fal,  God  save  thee,  my  sweet  boy! 

King.  My  Lord  Chief  Justice,  speak  to  that  vain 
man. 

Ch.  Just.  Have  you  your  wits?  know  you  what 
’tis  you  speak? 

Fal.  My  Kinor!  my  Jove!  I  speak  to  thee,  my 
heart!  50 

King.  I  know  thee  not,  old  man:  fall  to  thy 
prayers; 

How  ill  white  hairs  become  a  fool  a  ad  jester! 

I  have  long  dream’d  of  such  a  kind  of  man. 

So  surfeit-swell’d,  so  old,  and  so  profane; 

But,  being  awaked,  I  do  despise  my  dream. 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


ACT  V 


SECOND  PART  OF  KING  HENRY  IV 


502 

Make  less  thy  body  hence,  and  more  thy  grace; 
Leave  gormandizing;  know  the  grave  doth  gape 
For  thee  thrice  wider  than  for  other  men. 

Reply  not  to  me  with  a  fool-born  jest: 

Presume  not  that  I  am  the  thing  I  was;  60 

For  God  doth  know,  so  shall  the  world  perceive. 
That  I  have  turn’d  away  my  former  self; 

So  will  I  those  that  kept  me  company. 

When  thou  dost  hear  I  am  as  I  have  been. 
Approach  me,  and  thou  shalt  be  as  thou  wast, 

The  tutor  and  the  feeder  of  my  riots : 

Till  then,  I  banish  thee,  on  pain  of  death. 

As  I  have  done  the  rest  of  my  misleaders. 

Not  to  come  near  our  person  by  ten  mile. 

For  competence  of  life  I  will  allow  you,  70 
That  lack  of  means  enforce  you  not  to  evil: 

And,  as  we  hear  you  do  reform  yourselves. 

We  will,  according  to  your  strengths  and  quali¬ 
ties. 

Give  you  advancement.  Be  it  your  charge,  my 
lord. 

To  see  perform’d  the  tenour  of  our  word. 

Set  on.  [Exeunt  KmG, 

Fal.  Master  Shallow,  I  owe  you  a  thousand 
pound. 

SJjal.  Yea,  marry.  Sir  John;  which  I  beseech  you 
to  let  me  have  home  with  me.  80 

Fal.  That  can  hardly  be.  Master  Shallow.  Do 
not  you  grieve  at  this;  I  shall  be  sent  for  in  pri¬ 
vate  to  him:  look  you,  he  must  seem  thus  to  the 
world:  fear  not  your  advancements;  I  will  be  the 
man  yet  that  shall  make  you  great. 

Shal.  I  cannot  well  perceive  how,  unless  you 
should  give  me  your  doublet  and  stuff  me  out 
with  straw.  I  beseech  you,  good  Sir  John,  let  me 
have  five  hundred  of  my  thousand. 

Fal.  Sir,  I  will  be  as  good  as  my  word:  this  that 
you  heard  was  but  a  colour.  p/ 

Shal.  A  colour  that  I  fear  you  will  die  in.  Sir 
John. 

Fal.  Fear  no  colours:  go  with  me  to  dinner: 
come.  Lieutenant  Pistol;  come,  Bardolph:  I  shall 
be  sent  for  soon  at  night. 

Re-enter  prince  John,  the  lord  chief  justice; 
Officers  with  them. 

Ch.  Just.  Go,  carry  Sir  John  Falstaff  to  the 
Fleet: 

Take  all  his  company  along  with  him. 

Fal.  My  lord,  my  lord — 

Ch.  Just.  I  cannot  now  speak:  I  will  hear  you 
soon.  100 

Take  them  away. 

Fist.  Si  fortuna  me  tormenta.,  spero  contenta. 

[Exeunt  all  but  prince  john  and  the 

CHIEF  JUSTICE. 


Lan.  I  like  this  fair  proceeding  of  the  King’s: 

He  hath  intent  his  wonted  followers 
Shall  all  be  very  well  provided  for; 

But  all  are  banish’d  till  their  conversations 
Appear  more  wise  and  modest  to  the  world. 

Ch.  Just.  And  so  they  are. 

Lan.  The  King  hath  call’d  his  parliament,  my 
lord. 

Ch.  Just.  He  hath.  no 

Lan.  I  will  lay  odds  that,  ere  this  year  expire. 
We  bear  our  civil  swords  and  native  fire 
As  far  as  France:  I  heard  a  bird  so  sing. 

Whose  music,  to  my  thinking,  pleased  the 
King. 

Come,  will  you  hence?  [Exeunt. 

EPILOGUE 
Spoken  by  a  dancer. 

First  my  fear;  then  my  courtesy;  last  my 
speech.  My  fear  is,  your  displeasure;  my  cour¬ 
tesy,  my  duty;  and  my  speech,  to  beg  your  par¬ 
dons.  If  you  look  for  a  good  speech  now,  you 
undo  me:  for  what  I  have  to  say  is  of  mine  own 
making;  and  what  indeed  I  should  say  will,  I 
doubt,  prove  mine  own  marring.  But  to  the  pur¬ 
pose,  and  so  to  the  venture.  Be  it  known  to  you, 
as  it  is  very  well,  I  was  lately  here  in  the  end  of 
a  displeasing  play,  to  pray  your  patience  for  it 
and  to  promise  you  a  better.  I  meant  indeed  to 
pay  you  with  this;  which,  if  like  an  ill  venture  it 
come  unluckily  home,  I  break,  and  you,  my 
gentle  creditors,  lose.  Here  I  promised  you  I 
would  be  and  here  I  commit  my  body  to  your 
mercies:  bate  me  some  and  I  will  pay  you  some 
and,  as  most  debtors  do,  promise  you  infinitely. 

If  my  tongue  cannot  entreat  you  to  acquit  me, 
will  you  command  me  to  use  my  legs?  and  yet 
that  were  but  light  payment,  to  dance  out  of  your 
debt.  But  a  good  conscience  will  make  any  pos¬ 
sible  satisfaction,  and  so  would  I.  All  the  gentle¬ 
women  here  have  forgiven  me:  if  the  gentlemen 
will  not,  then  the  gentlemen  do  not  agree  with 
the  gentlewomen,  which  was  never  seen  before 
in  such  an  assembly. 

One  word  more,  I  beseech  you.  If  you  be  not 
too  much  cloyed  with  fat  meat,  our  humble  au¬ 
thor  will  continue  the  story,  with  Sir  John  in  it, 
and  make  you  merry  with  fair  Katharine  of 
France:  where,  for  anything  I  know,  Falstaff 
shall  die  of  a  sweat,  unless  already  a’  be  killed 
with  your  hard  opinions;  for  Oldcastle  died  a 
martyr,  and  this  is  not  the  man.  My  tongue  is 
weary;  when  my  legs  are  too,  I  will  bid  you  good 
night:  and  so  kneel  down  before  you;  but,  indeed, 
to  pray  for  the  Queen. 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


Don  Pedro,  Prince  of  Arragon 
Don  John,  his  bastard  brother 
Claudio,  a  young  lord  of  Florence 
Benedick,  a  young  lord  of  Paudua 
Leonato,  Governor  of  Messina 
Antonio,  his  brother 
Balthasar,  attendant  on  Don  Pedro 

Friar  Francis 
Dogberry,  a  constable 
Verges,  a  head  borough 
A  Sexton 
A  Boy 


Two  Messengers 
Two  Watchmen 
A  Lord 

Hero,  daughter  to  Leonato 
Beatrice,  niece  to  Leonato 

Urs*u^la  I  attending  on  Hero 

Non-Speaking:  Messengers^  Watch,  Attendants, 
and  Musicians 


Scene:  Messina 


ACT  I 

Scene  i.  Before  Leonaufs  house 
Enter  leonato,  hero,  and  Beatrice,  with  a 

MESSENGER. 

Leon.  I  learn  in  this  letter  that  Don  Peter  of 
Arragon  comes  this  night  to  Messina. 

Mess.  He  is  very  near  by  this:  he  was  not  three 
leagues  off  when  I  left  him. 

Leon.  How  many  gentlemen  have  you  lost  in 
this  action? 

Mess.  But  few  of  any  sort,  and  none  of  name. 

Leon.  A  victory  is  twice  itself  when  the  achie¬ 
ver  brings  home  full  numbers.  I  find  here  that 
Don  Peter  hath  bestowed  much  honour  on  a 
young  Florentine  called  Claudio.  ii 

Mess.  Much  deserved  on  his  part  and  equally 
remembered  by  Don  Pedro:  he  hath  borne  him¬ 
self  beyond  the  promise  of  his  age,  doing,  in  the 
figure  of  a  lamb,  the  feats  of  a  lion:  he  hath  in¬ 
deed  better  bettered  expectation  than  you  must 
expect  of  me  to  tell  you  how. 

Leon.  He  hath  an  uncle  here  in  Messina  will  be 
very  much  glad  of  it.  /y 

Mess.  I  have  already  delivered  him  letters,  and 
there  appears  much  joy  in  him;  even  so  much 
that  joy  could  not  show  itself  modest  enough 
without  a  badge  of  bitterness. 

Leon.  Did  he  break  out  into  tears? 

Mess.  In  great  measure. 

Leon.  A  kind  overflow  of  kindness:  there  are  no 
faces  truer  than  those  that  are  so  washed.  How 
much  better  is  it  to  weep  at  joy  than  to  joy  at 
weeping! 

Beat.  I  pray  you,  is  Signior  Mountanto  returned 


from  the  wars  or  no? 

Mess.  I  know  none  of  that  name,  lady:  there 
was  none  such  in  the  army  of  any  sort. 

Leon.  What  is  he  that  you  ask  for,  jiiece? 

Hero.  My  cousin  means  Signior  Benedick  of 
Padua. 

Mess.  O,  he’s  returned;  and  as  pleasant  as  ever 
he  was. 

Beat.  He  set  up  his  bills  here  in  Messina  and 
challenged  Cupid  at  the  flight;  and  my  uncle’s 
fool,  reading  the  challenge,  subscribed  for  Cupid, 
and  challenged  him  at  the  bird-bolt.  I  pray  you, 
how  many  hath  he  killed  and  eaten  in  these  wars? 
But  how  many  hath  he  killed?  for  indeed  I  pro¬ 
mised  to  eat  all  of  his  killing. 

Leon.  Faith,  niece,  you  tax  Signior  Benedick  too 
much;  but  he’ll  be  meet  with  you,  I  doubt  it  not. 

Mess.  He  hath  done  good  service,  lady,  in  these 
wars. 

Beat.  You  had  musty  victual,  and  he  hath  holp  to 
eat  it:  he  is  a  very  valiant  trencherman;  he  hath 
an  excellent  stomach. 

Mess.  And  a  good  soldier  too,  lady. 

Beat.  And  a  good  soldier  to  a  lady:  but  what  is 
he  to  a  lord? 

Mess.  A  lord  to  a  lord,  a  man  to  a  man;  stuffed 
with  all  honourable  virtues. 

Beat.  It  is  so,  indeed;  he  is  no  less  than  a  stuffed 
man:  but  for  the  stuffing — well,  we  are  all 
mortal.  6o 

Lean.  You  must  not,  sir,  mistake  my  niece. 
There  is  a  kind  of  merry  war  betwixt  Signior 
Benedick  and  her:  they  never  meet  but  there’s  a 
skirmish  of  wit  between  them. 

Beat.  Alas!  he  gets  nothing  by  that.  In  our  last 


503 


ACT  I 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


504 

conflict  four  of  his  five  wits  went  halting  off,  and 
now  is  the  whole  man  governed  with  one:  so  that 
if  he  have  wit  enough  to  keep  himself  warm,  let 
him  bear  it  for  a  difference  between  himself  and 
his  horse;  for  it  is  all  the  wealth  that  he  hath  left, 
to  be  known  a  reasonable  creature.  Who  is  his 
companion  now?  He  hath  every  month  a  new 
sworn  brother. 

Mess,  Is’t  possible? 

Beat.  Very  easily  possible:  he  wears  his  faith 
but  as  the  fashion  of  his  hat;  it  ever  changes  with 
the  next  block. 

Mess,  I  see,  lady,  the  gentleman  is  not  in  your 
books.  7y 

Beat.  No;  an  he  were,  I  would  burn  my  study. 
But,  I  pray  you,  who  is  his  companion?  Is  there 
no  young  squarer  now  that  will  make  a  voyage 
with  him  to  the  devil? 

Mess,  He  is  most  in  the  company  of  the  right 
noble  Claudio. 

Beat.  O  Lord,  he  will  hang  upon  him  like  a 
disease:  he  is  sooner  caught  than  the  pestilence, 
and  the  taker  runs  presently  mad.  God  help  the 
noble  Claudio!  if  he  have  caught  the  Benedick, 
it  will  cost  him  a  thousand  pound  ere  a’  be  cured. 

Mess.  I  will  hold  friends  with  you,  lady.  pi 

Beat.  Do,  good  friend. 

Lem,  You  will  never  run  mad,  niece. 

Beat,  No,  not  till  a  hot  January. 

Mess.  Don  Pedro  is  approached. 

Enter  don  pedro,  don  john,  claudio, 

BENEDICK,  and  BALTHASAR. 

D.  Pedro.  Good  Signior  Leonato,  you  are  come 
to  meet  your  trouble:  the  fashion  of  the  world  is 
to  avoid  cost,  and  you  encounter  it. 

Lem.  Never  came  trouble  to  my  house  in  the 
likeness  of  your  Grace:  for  trouble  being  gone, 
comfort  should  remain;  but  when  you  depart  from 
me,  sorrow  abides  and  happiness  takes  his  leave. 

D.  Pedro.  You  embrace  your  charge  too  wil¬ 
lingly.  I  think  this  is  your  daughter. 

Leon.  Her  mother  hath  many  times  told  me  so. 

Bene.  Were  you  in  doubt,  sir,  that  you  asked 
her? 

Lem.  Signior  Benedick,  no;  for  then  were  you 
a  child.  top 

D.  Pedro.  You  have  it  full,  Benedick:  we  may 
guess  by  this  what  you  are,  being  a  man.  Truly, 
the  lady  fathers  herself.  Be  happy,  lady;  for  you 
are  like  an  honourable  father. 

Bene.  If  Signior  Leonato  be  her  father,  she 
would  not  have  his  head  on  her  shoulders  for 
all  Messina,  as  like  him  as  she  is. 

Beat.  I  wonder  that  you  will  still  be  talking, 
Signior  Benedick:  nobody  marks  you. 


Bene.  What,  my  dear  Lady  Disdain!  are  you 
yet  living?  ,  120 

Beat.  Is  it  possible  disdain  should  die  while  she 
hath  such  meet  food  to  feed  it  as  Signior  Bene¬ 
dick?  Courtesy  itself  must  convert  to  disdain  if 
you  come  in  her  presence. 

Bene.  Then  is  courtesy  a  turncoat.  But  it  is  cer¬ 
tain  I  am  loved  of  all  ladies,  only  you  excepted: 
and  I  would  I  could  find  in  my  heart  that  I  had 
not  a  hard  heart;  for,  truly,  I  love  none. 

Beat.  A  dear  happiness  to  women:  they  would 
else  have  been  troubled  with  a  pernicious  suitor. 
I  thank  God  and  my  cold  blood,  I  am  of  your 
humour  for  that:  I  had  rather  hear  my  dog  bark 
at  a  crow  than  a  man  swear  he  loves  me. 

Bene.  God  keep  your  ladyship  still  in  that  mind! 
so  some  gentleman  or  other  shall  ’scape  a  pre¬ 
destinate  scratched  face. 

Beat.  Scratching  could  not  make  it  worse,  an 
’twere  such  a  face  as  yours  were. 

Bene.  Well,  you  are  a  rare  parrot-teacher. 

Beat.  A  bird  of  my  tongue  is  better  than  a  beast 
of  yours.  i^i 

Bene.  I  would  my  horse  had  the  speed  of  your 
tongue,  and  so  good  a  continuer.  But  keep  your 
way,  i’  God’s  name;  I  have  done. 

Beat.  You  always  end  with  a  jade’s  trick:  I 
know  you  of  old. 

D.  Pedro.  That  is  the  sum  of  all,  Leonato. 
Signior  Claudio  and  Signior  Benedick,  my  dear 
friend  Leonato  hath  invited  you  all.  I  tell  him  we 
shall  stay  here  at  the  least  a  month;  and  he 
heartily  prays  some  occasion  may  detain  us 
longer.  I  dare  swear  he  is  no  hypocrite,  but  prays 
from  his  heart. 

Leon.  If  you  swear,  my  lord,  you  shall  not  be 
forsworn.  [To  don  john]  Let  me  bid  you  wel¬ 
come,  my  lord:  being  reconciled  to  the  Prince 
your  brother,  I  owe  you  all  duty. 

D.  John.  I  thank  you:  I  am  not  of  many  words, 
but  I  thank  you. 

Lem.  Please  it  your  Grace  lead  on?  i6o 

D.  Pedro.  Your  hand,  Leonato;  we  will  go  to¬ 
gether. 

[Exeunt  all  except  benedick  and  claudio. 
Claud.  Benedick,  didst  thou  note  the  daughter 
of  Signior  Leonato? 

Bene.  I  noted  her  not;  but  I  looked  on  her. 

Claud.  Is  she  not  a  modest  young  lady? 

Bene.  Do  you  question  me,  as  an  honest  man 
should  do,  for  my  simple  true  judgement;  or 
would  you  have  me  speak  after  my  custom,  as 
being  a  professed  tyrant  to  their  sex?  77 0 

Claud.  No;  I  pray  thee  speak  in  sober  judge¬ 
ment. 

Bene.  Why,  i’  faith,  methinks  she’s  too  low  for 


SCENE  I 

a  high  praise,  too  brown  for  a  fair  praise  and  too 
little  for  a  great  praise:  only  this  commendation 
I  can  afford  her,  that  were  she  other  than  she  is, 
she  were  unhandsome;  and  being  no  other  but  as 
she  is,  I  do  not  like  her. 

Claud.  Thou  thinkest  I  am  in  sport:  I  pray  thee 
tell  me  truly  how  thou  likest  her.  i8o 

Bene.  Would  you  buy  her,  that  you  inquire 
after  her? 

Claud.  Can  the  world  buy  such  a  jewel? 

Bene.  Yea,  and  a  case  to  put  it  into.  But  speak 
you  this  with  a  sad  brow?  or  do  you  play  the 
flouting  Jack,  to  tell  us  Cupid  is  a  good  hare- 
finder  and  Vulcan  a  rare  carpenter?  Come,  in 
what  key  shall  a  man  take  you,  to  go  in  the  song? 

Claud.  In  mine  eye  she  is  the  sweetest  lady  that 
ever  I  looked  on.  i^o 

Bene.  I  can  see  yet  without  spectacles  and  I  see 
no  such  matter:  there’s  her  cousin,  an  she  were 
not  possessed  with  a  fury,  exceeds  her  as  much 
in  beauty  as  the  first  of  May  doth  the  last  of 
December.  But  I  hope  you  have  no  intent  to  turn 
husband,  have  you? 

Claud.  I  would  scarce  trust  myself,  though  I  had 
sworn  the  contrary,  if  Hero  would  be  my  wife. 

Bene.  Is’t  come  to  this?  In  faith,  hath  not  the 
world  one  man  but  he  will  wear  his  cap  with 
suspicion?  Shall  I  never  see  a  bachelor  of  three¬ 
score  again?  Go  to,  i’  faith;  an  thou  wilt  needs 
thrust  thy  neck  into  a  yoke,  wear  the  print  of  it 
and  sigh  away  Sundays.  Look;  Don  Pedro  is 
returned  to  seek  you. 

Re-enter  don  pedro. 

D.  Pedro.  What  secret  hath  held  you  here,  that 
you  followed  not  to  Leonato’s? 

Bene.  I  would  your  Grace  would  constrain  me 
to  tell. 

D.  Pedro.  I  charge  thee  on  thy  allegiance. 

Bene.  You  hear.  Count  Claudio:  I  can  be  secret 
as  a  dumb  man;  I  would  have  you  think  so;  but, 
on  my  allegiance,  mark  you  this,  on  my  alle¬ 
giance.  He  is  in  love.  With  who?  now  that  is 
your  Grace’s  part.  Mark  how  short  his  answer 
is — With  Hero,  Leonato’s  short  daughter. 

Claud.  If  this  were  so,  so  were  it  uttered. 

Bene.  Like  the  old  tale,  my  lord:  “It  is  not  so, 
nor  ’twas  not  so,  but,  indeed,  God  forbid  it 
should  be  so.”  220 

Claud.  If  my  passion  change  not  shortly,  God 
forbid  it  should  be  otherwise. 

D.  Pedro.  Amen,  if  you  love  her;  for  the  lady  is 
very  well  worthy. 

Claud.  You  speak  this  to  fetch  me  in,  my  lord. 

D.  Pedro.  By  my  troth,  I  speak  my  thought. 

Claud.  And,  in  faith,  my  lord,  1  spoke  mine. 


505 

Bene.  And,  by  my  two  faiths  and  troths,  my 
lord,  I  spoke  mine. 

Claud.  That  I  love  her,  I  feel.  2^0 

D.  Pedro.  That  she  is  worthy,  I  know. 

Bene.  That  I  neither  feel  how  she  should  be 
loved  nor  know  how  she  should  be  worthy,  is  the 
opinion  that  fire  cannot  melt  out  of  me:  I  will  die 
in  it  at  the  stake. 

D.  Pedro.  Thou  wast  ever  an  obstinate  heretic 
in  the  despite  of  beauty. 

Claud.  And  never  could  maintain  his  part  but 
in  the  force  of  his  will. 

Bene.  That  a  woman  conceived  me,  I  thank  her; 
that  she  brought  me  up,  I  likewise  give  her  most 
humble  thanks:  but  that  I  will  have  a  recheat 
winded  in  my  forehead,  or  hang  my  bugle  in  an 
invisible  baldrick,  all  women  shall  pardon  me. 
Because  I  will  not  do  them  the  wrong  to  mistrust 
any,  I  will  do  myself  the  right  to  trust  none;  and 
the  fine  is,  for  the  which  I  may  go  the  finer,  I 
will  live  a  bachelor. 

D.  Pedro.  I  shall  see  thee,  ere  I  die,  look  pale 
with  love.  250 

Bene.  With  anger,  with  sickness,  or  with  hun¬ 
ger,  my  lord,  not  with  love:  prove  that  ever 
I  lose  more  blood  with  love  than  I  will  get 
again  with  drinking,  pick  out  mine  eyes  with 
a  ballad-maker’s  pen  and  hang  me  up  at  the 
door  of  a  brothel-house  for  the  sign  of  blind 
Cupid. 

D.  Pedro.  Well,  if  ever  thou  dost  fall  from  this 
faith,  thou  wilt  prove  a  notable  argument. 

Bene.  If  I  do,  hang  me  in  a  bottle  like  a  cat  and 
shoot  at  me;  and  he  that  hits  me,  let  him  be 
clapped  on  the  shoulder,  and  called  Adam.  2  61 

D.  Pedro.  Well,  as  time  shall  try: 

“In  time  the  savage  bull  doth  bear  the  yoke.” 

Bene.  The  savage  bull  may;  but  if  ever  the 
sensible  Benedick  bear  it,  pluck  off  the  bull’s 
horns  and  set  them  in  my  forehead:  and  let  me 
be  vilely  painted,  and  in  such  great  letters  as  they 
write  “Here  is  good  horse  to  hire,”  let  them  sig¬ 
nify  under  my  sign  “Here  you  may  see  Benedick 
the  married  man.”  270 

Claud.  If  this  should  ever  happen,  thou  wouldst 
be  horn-mad. 

D.  Pedro.  Nay,  if  Cupid  have  not  spent  all  his 
quiver  in  Venice,  thou  wilt  quake  for  this  shortly. 

Bene.  I  look  for  an  earthquake  too,  then. 

D.  Pedro.  Well,  you  will  temporize  with  the 
hours.  In  the  meantime,  good  Signior  Benedick, 
repair  to  Leonato’s:  commend  me  to  him  and  tell 
him  I  will  not  fail  him  at  supper;  for  indeed  he 
hath  made  great  preparation.  280 

Bene.  I  have  almost  matter  enough  in  me  for 
such  an  embassage;  and  so  I  commit  you — 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


5o6  much  ado  about  NOTHING 


Claud.  To  the  tuition  of  God:  From  my  house, 
if  I  had  it — 

D.  Pedro.  The  sixth  of  July:  Your  loving  friend, 
Benedick. 

Bene.  Nay,  mock  not,  mock  not.  The  body  of 
your  discourse  is  sometime  guarded  with  frag¬ 
ments,  and  the  guards  are  but  slightly  basted  on 
neither:  ere  you  flout  old  ends  any  further, 
examine  your  conscience:  and  so  I  leave  you. 

[Exit.  2^1 

Claud.  My  liege,  your  Highness  now  may  do 
me  good. 

D.  Pedro.  My  love  is  thine  to  teach:  teach  it 
but  how. 

And  thou  shalt  see  how  apt  it  is  to  learn 
Any  hard  lesson  that  may  do  thee  good. 

Claud.  Hath  Leonato  any  son,  my  lord? 

D.  Pedro.  No  child  but  Hero;  she’s  his  only 
heir. 

Dost  thou  affect  her,  Claudio? 

Claud.  O,  my  lord. 

When  you  went  onward  on  this  ended  action, 

I  look’d  upon  her  with  a  soldier’s  eye,  500 

That  liked,  but  had  a  rougher  task  in  hand 
Than  to  drive  liking  to  the  name  of  love: 

But  now  I  am  return’d  and  that  war-thoughts 
Have  left  their  places  vacant,  in  their  rooms 
Come  thronging  soft  and  delicate  desires. 

All  prompting  me  how  fair  young  Hero  is. 
Saying,  I  liked  her  ere  I  went  to  wars. 

D.  Pedro.  Thou  wilt  be  like  a  lover  presently 
And  tire  the  hearer  with  a  book  of  words. 

If  thou  dost  love  fair  Hero,  cherish  it,  5/0 

And  I  will  break  with  her  and  with  her  father 
And  thou  shalt  have  her.  Was’t  not  to  this  end 
That  thou  began’st  to  twist  so  fine  a  story? 

Claud.  How  sweetly  you  do  minister  to  love. 
That  know  love’s  grief  by  his  complexion! 

But  lest  my  liking  might  too  sudden  seem, 

I  would  have  salved  it  with  a  longer 
treatise. 

D.  Pedro.  What  need  the  bridge  much  broader 
than  the  flood? 

The  fairest  grant  is  the  necessity. 

Look,  what  will  serve  is  fit:  ’tis  once,  thou 

lovest,  520 

And  I  will  fit  thee  with  the  remedy. 

I  know  we  shall  have  revelling  to-night: 

I  will  assume  thy  part  in  some  disguise 
And  tell  fair  Hero  I  am  Claudio, 

And  in  her  bosom  I’ll  unclasp  my  heart 
And  take  her  hearing  prisoner  with  the  force 
And  strong  encounter  of  my  amorous  tale; 

Then  after  to  her  father  will  I  break; 

And  the  conclusion  is,  she  shall  be  thine. 

In  practice  let  us  put  it  presently.  [Exeunt.  550 


Scene  ii.  A  room  in  Leonato' s  house 
Enter  leonato  and  antonio,  meeting. 

Leon.  How  now,  brother!  Where  is  my  cousin, 
your  son?  hath  he  provided  this  music? 

Ant.  He  is  very  busy  about  it.  But,  brother,  I 
can  tell  you  stranger  news  that  yoit  yet  dreamt 
not  of. 

Leon.  Are  they  good? 

Ant.  As  the  event  stamps  them:  but  they  have 
a  good  cover;  they  show  well  outward.  The 
Prince  and  Count  Claudio,  walking  in  a  thick- 
pleached  alley  in  mine  orchard,  were  thus  much 
overheard  by  a  man  of  mine:  the  Prince  dis¬ 
covered  to  Claudio  that  he  loved  my  niece  your 
daughter  and  meant  to  acknowledge  it  this  night 
in  a  dance;  and  if  he  found  her  accordant,  he 
meant  to  take  the  present  time  by  the  top  and 
instantly  break  with  you  of  it. 

Leon.  Hath  the  fellow  any  wit  that  told  you 
this? 

Ant.  A  good  sharp  fellow:  I  will  send  for  him; 
and  question  him  yourself.  20 

Leon.  No,  no;  we  will  hold  it  as  a  dream  till  it 
appear  itself:  but  I  will  acquaint  my  daughter 
withal,  that  she  may  be  the  better  prepared  for 
an  answer,  if  peradventure  this  be  true.  Go  you 
and  tell  her  of  it.  [Enter  attendants.^^  Cousins, 
you  know  what  you  have  to  do.  O,  I  cry  you 
mercy,  friend;  go  you  with  me,  and  I  will  use 
your  skill.  Good  cousin,  have  a  care  this  busy 
time.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  in.  The  same 
Enter  don  john  and  conrade. 

Con.  What  the  good-year,  my  lord!  why  are 
you  thus  out  of  measure  sad? 

D.  John.  There  is  no  measure  in  the  occasion 
that  breeds;  therefore  the  sadness  is  without 
limit. 

Con.  You  should  hear  reason. 

D.  John.  And  when  I  have  heard  it,  what 
blessing  brings  it? 

Con.  If  not  a  present  remedy,  at  least  a  patient 
sufferance.  w 

D.  John.  I  wonder  that  thou,  being,  as  thou 
sayest  thou  art,  born  under  Saturn,  goest  about 
to  apply  a  moral  medicine  to  a  mortifying  mis¬ 
chief.  I  cannot  hide  what  I  am:  I  must  be  sad 
when  I  have  cause  and  smile  at  no  man’s  jests, 
eat  when  I  have  stomach  and  wait  for  no  man’s 
leisure,  sleep  when  I  am  drowsy  and  tend  on  no 
man’s  business,  laugh  when  I  am  merry  and  claw 
no  man  in  his  humour. 

Con.  Yea,  but  you  must  not  make  the  full  show 
of  this  till  you  may  do  it  without  controlment. 


SCENE  III 

You  have  of  late  stood  out  against  your  brother, 
and  he  hath  ta’en  you  newly  into  his  grace; 
where  it  is  impossible  you  should  take  true  root 
but  by  the  fair  weather  that  you  make  yourself: 
it  is  needful  that  you  frame  the  season  for  your 
own  harvest. 

D.  John.  I  had  rather  be  a  canker  in  a  hedge  than 
a  rose  in  his  grace,  and  it  better  fits  my  blood  to 
be  disdained  of  all  than  to  fashion  a  carriage  to 
rob  love  from  any:  in  this,  though  I  cannot  be 
said  to  be  a  flattering  honest  man,  it  must  not  be 
denied  but  I  am  a  plain-dealing  villain.  I  am 
trusted  with  a  muzzle  and  enfranchised  with  a 
clog;  therefore  I  have  decreed  not  to  sing  in 
my  cage.  If  I  had  my  mouth,  I  would  bite;  if 
I  had  my  liberty,  I  would  do  my  liking:  in  the 
meantime  let  me  be  that  I  am  and  seek  not  to 
alter  me. 

Con.  Can  you  make  no  use  of  your  discon¬ 
tent?  40 

D.  John.  I  make  all  use  of  it,  for  I  use  it  only. 
Who  comes  here? 

Enter  borachio, 

What  news,  Borachio? 

Bora.  I  came  yonder  from  a  great  supper:  the 
Prince  your  brother  is  royally  entertained  by 
Leonato;  and  I  can  give  you  intelligence  of  an 
intended  marriage. 

D.  John.  Will  it  serve  for  any  model  to  build 
mischief  on?  What  is  he  for  a  fool  that  betroths 
himself  to  unquietness?  50 

Bora.  Marry,  it  is  your  brother’s  right  hand. 

D.  John.  Who?  the  most  exquisite  Claudio? 

Bora.  Even  he. 

D.  John.  A  proper  squire!  And  who,  and  who? 
which  way  looks  he? 

Bora.  Marry,  on  Hero,  the  daughter  and  heir  of 
Leonato. 

D.  John.  A  very  forward  March-chick!  How 
came  you  to  this? 

Bora.  Being  entertained  for  a  perfumer,  as  I  was 
smoking  a  musty  room,  comes  me  the  Prince  and 
Claudio,  hand  in  hand,  in  sad  conference:  I  whipt 
me  behind  the  arras;  and  there  heard  it  agreed 
upon  that  the  Prince  should  woo  Hero  for  him¬ 
self,  and  having  obtained  her,  give  her  to  Count 
Claudio. 

D.  John.  Come,  com.e,  let  us  thither:  this  may 
prove  food  to  my  displeasure.  That  young  start¬ 
up  hath  all  the  glory  of  my  overthrow:  if  I  can 
cross  him  any  way,  I  bless  myself  every  way. 
You  are  both  sure,  and  will  assist  me?  7/ 

Con.  To  the  death,  my  lord. 

^  D.  John.  Let  us  to  the  great  supper:  their  cheer 
is  the  greater  that  I  am  subdued.  Would  the  cook 


507 

were  of  my  mind!  Shall  we  go  prove  what’s  to 
be  done? 

Bora.  W'e’ll  wait  upon  your  lordship.  [Exeunt, 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  A  hall  in  Leonato' s  house 
Enter  leonato,  antonio,  hero,  Beatrice, 
and  others. 

Leon.  Was  not  Count  John  here  at  supper? 

Ant.  I  saw  him  not. 

Beat.  How  tartly  that  gentleman  looks!  I  never 
can  see  him  but  I  am  heart-burned  an  hour  after. 
Hero.  He  is  of  a  very  melancholy  disposition. 
Beat.  He  were  an  excellent  man  that  were  made 
just  in  the  midway  between  him  and  Benedick: 
the  one  is  too  like  an  image  and  says  nothing,  and 
the  other  too  like  my  lady’s  eldest  son,  evermore 
tattling.  // 

Leon.  Then  half  Signior  Benedick’s  tongue  in 
Count  John’s  mouth,  and  half  Count  John’s 
melancholy  in  Signior  Benedick’s  face — 

Beat.  With  a  good  leg  and  a  good  foot,  uncle, 
and  money  enough  in  his  purse,  such  a  man  would 
win  any  woman  in  the  world,  if  a’  could  get  her 
good-will. 

Leon.  By  my  troth,  niece,  thou  wilt  never  get 
thee  a  husband,  if  thou  be  so  shrewd  of  thy 
tongue.  21 

Ant.  In  faith,  she’s  too  curst. 

Beat.  Too  curst  is  more  than  curst:  I  shall  lessen 
God’s  sending  that  way;  for  it  is  said,  “God 
sends  a  curst  cow  short  horns,”  but  to  a  cow 
too  curst  he  sends  none. 

J^eon.  So,  by  being  too  curst,  God  will  send 
you  no  horns. 

Beat.  Just,  if  he  send  me  no  husband;  for  the. 
which  blessing  I  am  at  him  upon  my  knees  every 
morning  and  evening.  Lord,  I  could  not  endure 
a  husband  with  a  beard  on  his  face:  I  had  rather 
lie  in  the  woollen. 

Lem.  You  may  light  on  a  husband  that  hath  no 
beard. 

Beat.  What  should  I  do  with  him?  dress  him  in 
my  apparel  and  make  him  my  waiting-gentle¬ 
woman?  He  that  hath  a  beard  is  more  than  a 
youth,  and  he  that  hath  no  beard  is  less  than  a 
man:  and  he  that  is  more  than  a  youth  is  not  for 
me,  and  he  that  is  less  than  a  man,  I  am  not  for 
him:  therefore  I  will  even  take  sixpence  in  ear¬ 
nest  of  the  bear-ward,  and  lead  his  apes  into  hell. 
Lem.  Well,  then,  go  you  into  hell? 

Beat.  No,  but  to  the  gate;  and  there  will  the 
devil  meet  me,  like  an  old  cuckold,  with  horns 
on  his  head,  and  say  “Get  you  to  heaven,  Bea¬ 
trice,  get  you  to  heaven:  here’s  no  place  for  you 
maids”;  so  deliver  I  up  my  apes,  and  away  to 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


5o8  much  ado  about  NOTHING 


Saint  Peter  for  the  heavens;  he  shows  me  where 
the  bachelors  sit,  and  there  live  we  as  merry  as 
the  day  is  long. 

Ajit.  \To  hero]  Well,  niece,  I  trust  you  will  be 
ruled  by  your  father. 

Beat.  Yes,  faith;  it  is  my  cousin’s  duty  to  make 
curtsy  and  say,  “Father,  as  it  please  you.”  But 
yet  for  all  that,  cousin,  let  him  be  a  handsome 
fellow,  or  else  make  another  curtsy  and  say, 
“Father,  as  it  please  me.” 

Leon.  Well,  niece,  I  hope  to  see  you  one  day 
fitted  with  a  husband.  6i 

Beat.  Not  till  God  make  men  of  some  other 
metal  than  earth.  Would  it  not  grieve  a  woman 
to  be  overmastered  with  a  piece  of  valiant  dust? 
to  make  an  account  of  her  life  to  a  clod  of  way¬ 
ward  marl?  No,  uncle.  I’ll  none:  Adam’s  sons 
are  my  brethren;  and,  truly,  I  hold  it  a  sin  to 
match  in  my  kindred, 

Leon.  Daughter,  remember  what  I  told  you:  if 
the  Prince  do  solicit  you  in  that  kind,  you  know 
your  answer.  7/ 

Beat.  The  fault  will  be  in  the  music,  cousin,  if 
you  be  not  wooed  in  good  time:  if  the  Prince  be 
too  important,  tell  him  there  is  measure  in  every¬ 
thing  and  so  dance  out  the  answer.  For,  hear  me. 
Hero:  wooing,  wedding,  and  repenting,  is  as  a 
Scotch  jig,  a  measure,  and  a  cinque  pace:  the 
first  suit  is  hot  and  hasty,  like  a  Scotch  jig,  and 
full  as  fantastical;  the  wedding,  mannerly- 
modest,  as  a  measure,  full  of  state  and  ancientry; 
and  then  comes  repentance  and,  with  his  bad  legs, 
falls  into  the  cinque  pace  faster  and  faster,  till  he 
sink  into  his  grave. 

Leon.  Cousin,  you  apprehend  passing  shrewdly. 
Beat.  I  have  a  good  eye,  uncle;  I  can  see  a  church 
by  daylight. 

Leon.  The  revellers  are  entering,  brother:  make 
good  room .  [All  put  on  their  masks. 

Enter  don  pedro,  claudio,  benedick,  Bal¬ 
thasar,  DON  JOHN,  BORACHIO,  MARGARET,  UR¬ 
SULA,  and  others.,  masked. 

D.  Pedro.  Lady,  will  you  walk  about  with  your 
friend?  ^0 

Hero.  So  you  walk  softly  and  look  sweetly  and 
say  nothing,  I  am  yours  for  the  walk;  and 
especially  when  I  walk  away. 

D.  Pedro.  With  me  in  your  company? 

Hero.  I  may  say  so,  when  1  please. 

D.  Pedro.  And  when  please  you  to  say  so? 

Hero.  When  I  like  your  favour;  for  God  defend 
the  lute  should  be  like  the  case! 

D.  Pedro.  My  visor  is  Philemon’s  roof;  within 
the  house  is  Jove.  too 

Hero,  Why,  then,  your  visor  should  be  thatched. 


D.  Pedro.  Speak  lo>v,  if  you  speak  love. 

Drawing  her  aside. 

Balth.  Well,  I  would  you  did  like  me. 

Alarg.  So  would  not  I,  for  your  own  sake;  for 
I  have  many  ill  qualities. 

Balth.  Which  is  one? 

Marg.  I  say  my  prayers  aloud. 

Balth.  I  love  you  the  better:  the  hearers  may 
cry.  Amen.  no 

Marg.  God  match  me  with  a  good  dancer! 

Balth.  Amen. 

Marg.  And  God  keep  him  out  of  my  sight  when 
the  dance  is  done!  Answer,  clerk. 

Balth.  No  more  words:  the  clerk  is  answered. 

Urs.  I  know  you  well  enough;  you  are  Signior 
Antonio. 

Ant.  At  a  word,  I  am  not. 

Urs.  I  know  you  by  the  waggling  of  your  head. 

Ant.  To  tell  you  true,  I  counterfeit  him.  121 

Urs.  You  could  never  do  him  so  ill-well,  unless 
you  were  the  very  man.  Here’s  his  dry  hand  up 
and  down:  you  are  he,  you  are  he. 

Ant.  At  a  word,  I  am  not. 

Urs.  Come,  come,  do  you  think  I  do  not  know 
you  by  your  excellent  wit?  can  virtue  hide  itself? 
Go  to,  mum,  you  are  he.  Graces  will  appear,  and 
there’s  an  end. 

Beat.  Will  you  not  tell  me  who  told  you  so? 

Bene.  No,  you  shall  pardon  me.  /  j/ 

Beat.  Nor  will  you  not  tell  me  who  you  are? 

Bene.  Not  now. 

Beat.  That  I  was  disdainful,  and  that  I  had  my 
good  wit  out  of  the  “Hundred  Merry  Tales”: 
well,  this  was  Signior  Benedick  that  said  so. 

Bene.  What’s  he? 

Beat.  I  am  sure  you  know  him  well  enough. 

Bene.  Not  I,  believe'me. 

Beat.  Did  he  never  make  you  laugh?  1^0 

Bene.  I  pray  you,  what  is  he? 

Beat.  Why,  he  is  the  Prince’s  jester:  a  very  dull 
fool;  only  his  gift  is  in  devising  impossible 
slanders:  none  but  libertines  delight  in  him;  and 
the  commendation  is  not  in  his  wit,  but  in  his 
villainy;  for  he  both  pleases  men  and  angers 
them,  and  then  they  laugh  at  him  and  beat  him. 
I  am  sure  he  is  in  the  fleet:  I  would  he  had 
boarded  me. 

Bene.  When  I  know  the  gentleman.  I’ll  tell  him 
what  you  say.  /y/ 

Beat.  Do,  do:  he’ll  but  break  a  comparison  or 
two  on  me;  which,  peradventure  not  marked  or 
not  laughed  at,  strikes  him  into  melancholy;  and 
then  there’s  a  partridge  wing  saved,  for  the  fool 
will  eat  no  supper  that  night.  [Music.\  We  must 
follow  the  leaders. 

Bene.  In  every  good  thing. 


SCENE  I 

Beat.  Nay,  if  they  lead  to  any  ill,  I  will  leave 
them  at  the  next  turning.  i6o 

[Dame.  Then  exeunt  all  except  don 

JOHN,  BORACHIO,  and  CLAUDIO. 

D.  John.  Sure  my  brother  is  amorous  on  Hero 
and  hath  withdrawn  her  father  to  break  with  him 
about  it.  The  ladies  follow  her  and  but  one  visor 
remains. 

Bora.  And  that  is  Claudio:  I  know  him  by  his 
bearing. 

D.  John.  Are  not  you  Signior  Benedick? 

Claud.  You  know  me  well;  I  am  he. 

D.  John.  Signior,  you  are  very  near  my  brother 
in  his  love:  he  is  enamoured  on  Hero;  I  pray  you, 
dissuade  him  from  her:  she  is  no  equal  for  his 
birth:  you  may  do  the  part  of  an  honest  man  in  it. 
Claud.  How  know  you  he  loves  her? 

D.  John.  I  heard  him  swear  his  affection. 

Bora.  So  did  I  too;  and  he  swore  he  would  marry 
her  to-night. 

D.  John.  Come,  let  us  to  the  banquet. 

[Exeunt  don  john  and  borachio. 
Claud.  Thus  answer  I  in  name  of  Benedick, 

But  hear  these  ill  news  with  the  ears  of  Claudio. 
’Tis  certain  so;  the  Prince  wooes  for  himself.  iSi 
Friendship  is  constant  in  all  other  things 
Save  in  the  office  and  affairs  of  love: 

Therefore  all  hearts  in  love  use  their  own 
tongues; 

Let  every  eye  negotiate  for  itself 
And  trust  no  agent;  for  beauty  is  a  witch 
Against  whose  charms  faith  melteth  into  blood. 
This  is  an  accident  of  hourly  proof. 

Which  I  mistrusted  not.  Farewell,  therefore, 
Hero! 

Re-enter  benedick. 

Bene.  Count  Claudio?  i^o 

Claud.  Yea,  the  same. 

Bene.  Come,  will  you  go  with  me? 

Claud.  Whither? 

Bene.  Even  to  the  next  willow,  about  your  own 
business.  County.  What  fashion  will  you  wear 
the  garland  of?  about  your  neck,  like  an  usurer’s 
chain?  or  under  your  arm,  like  a  lieutenant’s 
scarf?  You  must  wear  it  one  way,  for  the  Prince 
hath  got  your  Hero. 

Claud.  I  wish  him  joy  of  her.  200 

Bene.  Why,  that’s  spoken  like  an  honest  dro- 
vier:  so  they  sell  bullocks.  But  did  you  think  the 
Prince  would  have  served  you  thus? 

Claud.  I  pray  you,  leave  me. 

Bene.  Ho!  now  you  strike  like  the  blind  man: 
’twas  the  boy  that  stole  your  meat,  and  you’ll 
beat  the  post. 

Claud.  If  it  will  not  be.  I’ll  leave  you.  [Exit. 


509 

Bene.  Alas,  poor  hurt  fowl!  now  will  he  creep 
into  sedges.  But  that  my  Lady  Beatrice  should 
know  me,  and  not  know  me!  the  Prince’s  fool! 
Ha?  It  may  be  I  go  under  that  title  because  I  am 
merry.  Yea,  but  so  I  am  apt  to  do  myself  wrong; 

I  am  not  so  reputed:  it  is  the  base,  though  bitter, 
disposition  of  Beatrice  that  puts  the  world  into 
her  person,  and  so  gives  me  out.  Well,  I’ll  be 
revenged  as  I  may. 

Re-enter  don  pedro. 

D.  Pedro.  Now,  signior,  where’s  the  Count? 
did  you  see  him?  219 

Bene.  Troth,  my  lord,  I  have  played  the  part  of 
Lady  Fame.  I  found  him  here  as  melancholy  as  a 
lodge  in  a  warren:  I  told  him,  and  I  think  I  told 
him  true,  that  your  Grace  had  got  the  good  will 
of  this  young  lady;  and  I  offered  him  my  com¬ 
pany  to  a  willow-tree,  either  to  make  him  a  gar¬ 
land,  as  being  forsaken,  or  to  bind  him  up  a  rod, 
as  being  worthy  to  be  whipped. 

D.  Pedro.  To  be  whipped!  What’s  his  fault? 

Bene.  The  flat  transgression  of  a  school-boy, 
who,  being  overjoyed  with  finding  a  birds’  nest 
shows  it  his  companion,  and  he  steals  it.  25/ 
D.  Pedro.  Wilt  thou  make  a  trust  a  trans¬ 
gression?  The  transgression  is  in  the  stealer. 

Bene.  Yet  it  had  not  been  amiss  the  rod  had  been 
made,  and  the  garland  too;  for  the  garland  he 
might  have  worn  himself,  and  the  rod  he  might 
have  bestowed  on  you,  who,  as  I  take  it,  have 
stolen  his  birds’  nest. 

D.  Pedro.  I  will  but  teach  them  to  sing,  and 
restore  them  to  the  owner.  240 

Bene.  If  their  singing  answer  your  saying,  by 
my  faith,  you  say  honestly. 

D.  Pedro.  The  Lady  Beatrice  hath  a  quarrel  to 
you:  the  gentleman  that  danced  with  her  told  her 
she  is  much  wronged  by  you. 

Bene.  O,  she  misused  me  past  the  endurance  of 
a  block!  an  oak  but  with  one  green  leaf  on  it 
would  have  answered  her;  my  very  visor  began 
to  assume  life  and  scold  with  her.  She  told  me, 
not  thinking  I  had  been  myself,  that  I  was  the 
Prince’s  jester,  that  I  was  duller  than  a  great 
thaw;  huddling  jest  upon  jest  with  such  impos¬ 
sible  conveyance  upon  me  that  I  stood  like  a  man 
at  a  mark,  with  a  whole  army  shooting  at  me. 
She  speaks  poniards,  and  every  word  stabs:  if 
her  breath  were  as  terrible  as  her  terminations, 
there  were  no  living  near  her;  she  would  infect 
to  the  north  star.  I  would  not  marry  her,  though 
she  were  endowed  with  all  that  Adam  had  left 
him  before  he  transgressed:  she  would  have  made 
Hercules  have  turned  spit,  yea,  and  have  cleft  his 
club  to  make  the  fire  too.  Come,  talk  not  of  her: 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


ACT  n 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


510 

you  shall  find  her  the  infernal  Ate  in  good  ap¬ 
parel.  I  would  to  God  some  scholar  would  con¬ 
jure  her;  for  certainly,  while  she  is  here,  a  man 
may  live  as  quiet  in  hell  as  in  a  sanctuary;  and 
people  sin  upon  purpose,  because  they  would  go 
thither;  so,  indeed,  all  disquiet,  horror,  and  per¬ 
turbation  follows  her. 

Z).  Pedro,  Look,  here  she  comes.  270 

Re-enter  claudio,  Beatrice,  hero,  and  leonato. 

Bene.  Will  your  Grace  command  me  any  serv¬ 
ice  to  the  world’s  end?  I  will  go  on  the  slight¬ 
est  errand  now  to  the  Antipodes  that  you  can 
devise  to  send  me  bn;  I  will  fetch  you  a  tooth- 
picker  now  from  the  furthest  inch  of  Asia,  bring 
you  the  length  of  Prester  John’s  foot,  fetch  you 
a  hair  off  the  great  Cham’s  beard,  do  you  any 
embassage  to  the  Pigmies,  rather  than  hold 
three  words’  conference  with  this  harpy.  You 
have  no  employment  for  me?  2  So 

D.  Pedro.  None,  but  to  desire  your  good  com- 
pany. 

Bene.  O  God,  sir,  here’s  a  dish  I  love  not:  I 
cannot  endure  my  Lady  Tongue.  [Exit. 

D.  Pedro.  Come,  lady,  come;  you  have  lost  the 
heart  of  Signior  Benedick. 

Beat.  Indeed,  my  lord,  he  lent  it  me  awhile;  and 
I  gave  him  use  for  it,  a  double  heart  for  his 
single  one:  marry,  once  before  he  won  it  of  me 
with  false  dice,  therefore  your  Grace  may  well 
say  I  have  lost  it.  2^1 

D.  Pedro.  You  have  put  him  down,  lady,  you 
have  put  him  down. 

Beat.  So  I  would  not  he  should  do  me,  my  lord, 
lest  I  should  prove  the  mother  of  fools.  I  have 
brought  Count  Claudio,  whom  you  sent  me  to 
seek. 

D.  Pedro.  Why,  how  now.  Count!  wherefore 
are  you  sad? 

Claud.  Not  sad,  my  lord.  500 

D.  Pedro.  How  then?  sick? 

Claud.  Neither,  my  lord. 

Beat.  The  Count  is  neither  sad,  nor  sick,  nor 
merry,  nor  well;  but  civil  Count,  civil  as  an 
orange,  and  something  of  that  jealous  com¬ 
plexion. 

D.  Pedro.  I’  faith,  lady,  I  think  your  blazon  to 
be  true;  though.  I’ll  be  sworn,  if  he  be  so,  his 
conceit  is  false.  Here,  Claudio,  I  have  wooed  in 
thy  name,  and  fair  Hero  is  won:  I  have  broke 
with  her  father,  and  his  good  will  obtained:  name 
the  day  of  marriage,  and  God  give  thee  joy! 

Leon.  Count,  take  of  me  my  daughter,  and  with 
her  my  fortunes:  his  Grace  hath  made  the  match, 
and  all  grace  say  “Amen”  to  it. 

Beat.  Speak,  Count,  ’tis  your  cue. 


Claud.  Silence  is  the  perfectest  herald  of  joy:  I 
were  but  little  happy,  if  I  could  say  how  much. 
Lady,  as  you  are  mine,  I  am  yours:  I  give  away 
myself  for  you  and  dote  upon  the  exchange.  520 

Beat.  Speak,  cousin;  or,  if  you  cannot,  stop  his 
mouth  with  a  kiss,  and  let  not  him  speak  neither. 

D.  Pedro.  In  faith,  lady,  you  have  a  merry  heart. 

Beat.  Yea,  my  lord;  I  thank  it,  poor  fool,  it 
keeps  on  the  windy  side  of  care.  My  cousin  tells 
him  in  his  ear  that  he  is  in  her  heart. 

Claud.  And  so  she  doth,  cousin. 

Beat.  Good  Lord,  for  alliance!  Thus  goes  every 
one  to  the  world  but  I,  and  I  am  sunburnt;  I  may 
sit  in  a  corner  and  cry  heigh-ho  for  a  husband! 

D.  Pedro.  Lady  Beatrice,  I  will  get  you  one. 

Beat.  I  would  rather  have  one  of  your  father’s 
getting.  Hath  your  Grace  ne’er  a  brother  like 
you?  Your  father  got  excellent  husbands,  if  a 
maid  could  come  by  them. 

D.  Pedro.  Will  you  have  me,  lady?  555^ 

Beat.  No,  my  lord,  unless  I  might  have  another 
for  working-days:  your  Grace  is  too  costly  to 
wear  every  day.  But,  I  beseech  your  Grace,  par¬ 
don  me:  I  was  born  to  speak  all  mirth  and  no 
matter. 

D.  Pedro.  Your  silence  most  offends  me,  and  to 
be  merry  best  becomes  you;  for,  out  of  question, 
you  were  born  in  a  merry  hour. 

Beat.  No,  sure,  my  lord,  my  mother  cried;  but 
then  there  was  a  star  danced,  and  under  that  was 
I  born.  Cousins,  God  give  you  joy!  550 

Leon.  Niece,  will  you  look  to  those  things  I  told 
you  of? 

Beat.  I  cry  you  mercy,  uncle.  By  your  Grace’s 
pardon.  [Exit. 

D.  Pedro.  By  my  troth,  a  pleasant-spirited  lady. 

Leon.  There’s  little  of  the  melancholy  element 
in  her,  my  lord:  she  is  never  sad  but  when  she 
sleeps,  and  not  ever  sad  then;  for  I  have  heard 
my  daughter  say,  she  hath  often  dreamed  of 
unhappiness  and  waked  herself  with  laughing. 

D.  Pedro.  She  cannot  endure  to  hear  tell  of  a 
husband. 

Leon.  O,  by  no  means:  she  mocks  all  her  wooers 
out  of  suit. 

D.  Pedro.  She  were  an  excellent  wife  for  Bene¬ 
dick. 

Leon.  O  Lord,  my  lord,  if  they  were  but  a  week 
married,  they  would  talk  themselves  mad. 

D.  Pedro.  County  Claudio,  when  mean  you  to 
go  to  church?  57/ 

Claud.  To-morrow,  my  lord:  time  goes  on 
crutches  till  love  have  all  his  rites. 

Leon.  Not  till  Monday,  my  dear  son,  which  is 
hence  a  just  seven-night;  and  a  time  too  brief, 
too,  to  have  all  things  answer  my  mind. 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


D.  Pedro,  Come,  you  shake  the  head  at  so  long 
a  breathing:  but,  I  warrant  thee,  Claudio,  the 
time  shall  not  go  dully  by  us.  I  will  in  the  interim 
undertake  one  of  Hercules’  labours;  which  is, 
to  bring  Signior  Benedick  and  the  Lady  Beatrice 
into  a  mountain  of  affection  the  one  with  the 
other.  I  would  fain  have  it  a  match,  and  I  doubt 
not  but  to  fashion  it,  if  you  three  will  but  minis¬ 
ter  such  assistance  as  I  shall  give  you  direction. 
Leon.  My  lord,  I  am  for  you,  though  it  cost  me 
ten  night’s  watchings. 

Claiid.  And  I,  my  lord. 

D.  Pedro.  And  you  too,  gentle  Hero? 

Hero.  I  will  do  any  modest  office,  my  lord,  to 
help  my  cousin  to  a  good  husband. 

D.  Pedro.  And  Benedick  is  not  the  unhopefullest 
husband  that  I  know.  Thus  far  can  I  praise  him; 
he  is  of  a  noble  strain,  of  approved  valour  and 
confirmed  honesty.  I  will  teach  you  how  to 
humour  your  cousin,  that  she  shall  fall  in  love 
with  Benedick;  and  I,  with  your  two  helps,  will 
so  practice  on  Benedick  that,  in  despite  of  his 
quick  wit  and  his  queasy  stomach,  he  shall  fall  in 
love  with  Beatrice.  If  we  can  do  this,  Cupid  is  no 
longer  an  archer:  his  glory  shall  be  ours,  for  we 
are  the  only  love-gods.  Go  in  with  me,  and  I  will 
tell  you  my  drift.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  same 
Enter  don  john  and  borachio. 

D.  John.  It  is  so;  the  Count  Claudio  shall  marry 
the  daughter  of  Leonato. 

Bora.  Yea,  my  lord;  but  I  can  cross  it. 

D.  John.  Any  bar,  any  cross,  any  impediment 
will  be  medicinable  to  me:  I  am  sick  in  dis¬ 
pleasure  to  him,  and  whatsoever  comes  athwart 
his  affection  ranges  evenly  with  mine.  How 
canst  thou  cross  this  marriage? 

Bora.  Not  honestly,  my  lord;  but  so  covertly 
that  no  dishonesty  shall  appear  in  me.  lo 

D.  John.  Show  me  briefly  how. 

Bora.  I  think  I  told  your  lordship  a  year  since, 
how  much  I  am  in  the  favour  of  Margaret,  the 
waiting  gentlewoman  to  Hero. 

D.  John.  I  remember. 

Bora.  I  can,  at  any  unseasonable  instant  of  the 
night,  appoint  her  to  look  out  at  her  lady’s 
chamber  window. 

D.  John.  What  life  is  in  that,  to  be  the  death  of 
this  marriage?  20 

Bora.  The  poison  of  that  lies  in  you  to  temper. 
Go  you  to  the  Prince  your  brother;  spare  not  to 
tell  him  that  he  hath  wronged  his  honour  in  mar¬ 
rying  the  renowned  Claudio — whose  estimation 
do  you  mightily  hold  up — to  a  contaminated 
stale,  such  a  one  as  Hero. 


D.  John.  What  proof  shall  I  make  of  that? 

Bora.  Proof  enough  to  misuse  the  Prince,  to  vex 
Claudio,  to  undo  Hero,  and  kill  Leonato.  Look 
you  for  any  other  issue?  50 

D.  John.  Only  to  despite  them,  I  will  endeavour 
anything. 

Bora.  Go,  then;  find  me  a  meet  hour  to  draw 
Don  Pedro  and  the  Count  Claudio  alone:  tell 
them  that  you  know  that  Hero  loves  me;  intend 
a  kind  of  zeal  both  to  the  Prince  and  Claudio,  as 
— in  love  of  your  brother’s  honour,  who  hath 
made  this  match,  and  his  friend’s  reputation,  who 
is  thus  like  to  be  cozened  with  the  semblance  of 
a  maid —  that  you  have  discovered  thus.  They 
will  scarcely  believe  this  without  trial:  offer 
them  instances;  which  shall  bear  no  less  likeli¬ 
hood  than  to  see  me  at  her  chamber-window,  hear 
me  call  Margaret  Hero,  hear  Margaret  term  me 
Claudio;  and  bring  them  to  see  this  the  very 
night  before  the  intended  wedding — for  in  the 
meantime  I  will  so  fashion  the  matter  that  Hero 
shall  be  absent — and  there  shall  appear  such 
seeming  truth  of  Hero’s  disloyalty  that  jealousy 
shall  be  called  assurance  and  all  the  preparation 
overthrown.  p 

D.  John.  Grow  this  to  what  adverse  issue  it  can, 
I  will  put  it  in  practice.  Be  cunning  in  the  work¬ 
ing  this,  and  thy  fee  is  a  thousand  ducats. 

Bora.  Be  you  constant  in  the  accusation,  and 
my  cunning  shall  not  shame  me. 

D.  John.  I  will  presently  go  learn  their  day  of 
marriage.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Leonato' s  orchard 

Enter  benedick. 

Bene.  Boy! 

Enter  boy. 

Boy.  Signior? 

Bene.  In  my  chamber- window  lies  a  book: 
bring  it  hither  to  me  in  the  orchard. 

Boy.  I  am  here  already,  sir. 

Betie.  I  know  that;  but  I  would  have  thee  hence, 
and  here  again.  [Exit  boy.]  I  do  much  wonder 
that  one  man,  seeing  how  much  another  man  is  a 
fool  when  he  dedicates  his  behaviours  to  love, 
will,  after  he  hath  laughed  at  such  shallow  fol¬ 
lies  in  others,  become  the  argument  of  his  own 
scorn  by  falling  in  love:  and  such  a  man  is 
Claudio.  I  have  known  when  there  was  no 
music  with  him  but  the  drum  and  the  fife;  and 
now  had  he  rather  hear  the  tabor  and  the  pipe; 
I  have  known  when  he  would  have  walked  ten 
mile  a- foot  to  see  a  good  armour;  and  now  will 
he  lie  ten  nights  awake,  carving  the  fashion  of  a 
new  doublet.  He  was  wont  to  speak  plain  and 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


to  the  purpose,  like  an  honest  man  and  a  soldier; 
and  now  is  he  turned  orthography;  his  words  are 
a  very  fantastical  banquet,  just  so  many  strange 
dishes.  May  1  be  so  converted  and  see  with  these 
eyes?  I  cannot  tell;  I  think  not:  I  will  not  be 
sworn  but  love  may  transform  me  to  an  oyster; 
but  ril  take  my  oath  on  it,  till  he  have  made  an 
oyster  of  me,  he  shall  never  make  me  such  a  fool. 
One  woman  is  fair,  yet  I  am  well;  another  is 
wise,  yet  I  am  well;  another  virtuous,  yet  I  am 
well;  but  till  all  graces  be  in  one  woman,  one 
woman  shall  not  come  in  my  grace.  Rich  she 
shall  be,  that’s  certain;  wise,  or  I’ll  none;  vir¬ 
tuous,  or  I’ll  never  cheapen  her;  fair,  or  I’ll  never 
look  on  her;  mild,  or  come  not  near  me;  noble, 
or  not  I  for  an  angel;  of  good  discourse,  an 
excellent  musician,  and  her  hair  shall  be  of  what 
colour  it  please  God.  Ha!  the  Prince  and  Mon¬ 
sieur  Love!  I  will  hide  me  in  the  arbour. 

[Withdraws. 

Enter  don  pedro,  claudio,  and  leonato. 

D.  Pedro.  Come,  shall  we  hear  this  music? 

Claud.  Yea,  my  good  lord.  How  still  the 

evening  is,  40 

As  hush’d  on  purpose  to  grace  harmony! 

D.  Pedro.  See  you  where  Benedick  hath  hid  him¬ 
self? 

Claud.  O,  very  well,  my  lord:  the  music  ended. 
We’ll  fit  the  kid-fox  with  a  pennyworth. 

Enter  balthasar  with  Music. 

D.  Pedro.  Come,  Balthasar,  we’ll  hear  that  song 
again. 

Balth.  O,  good  my  lord,  tax  not  so  bad  a  voice 
To  slander  music  any  more  than  once. 

D.  Pedro.  It  is  the  witness  still  of  excellency 
To  put  a  strange  face  on  his  own  perfection. 

I  pray  thee,  sing,  and  let  me  woo  no  more.  jo 

Balth.  Because  you  talk  of  wooing,  I  will  sing; 
Since  many  a  wooer  doth  commence  his  suit 
To  her  he  thinks  not  worthy,  yet  he  wooes. 

Yet  will  he  swear  he  loves. 

D.  Pedro.  Now,  pray  thee,  come; 

Or,  if  thou  wilt  hold  longer  argument. 

Do  it  in  notes. 

Balth.  Note  this  before  my  notes; 

There’s  not  a  note  of  mine  that’s  worth  the 
noting. 

D.  Pedro.  Why,  these  are  very  crotchets  that 
he  speaks; 

Note,  notes,  forsooth,  and  nothing.  [Air.] 

Bene.  Now,  divine  air!  now  is  his  soul  ravished! 
Is  it  not  strange  that  sheeps’  guts  should  hale 
souls  out  of  men’s  bodies?  Well,  a  horn  for  my 
money,  when  all’s  done. 


,  SONG 

Balth.  Sigh  no  more,  ladies,  sigh  no  more. 

Men  were  deceivers  ever. 

One  foot  in  sea  and  one  on  shore. 

To  one  thing  constant  never: 

Then  sigh  not  so,  but  let  them  go. 

And  be  you  blithe  and  bonny. 
Converting  all  your  sounds  of  woe  70 

Into  Hey  nonny,  nonny. 

Sing  no  more  ditties,  sing  no  moe. 

Of  dumps  so  dull  and  heavy; 

The  fraud  of  men  was  ever  so. 

Since  summer  first  was  leav)^: 

Then  sigh  not  so,  &c. 

D.  Pedro.  By  rriy  troth,  a  good  song. 

Balth.  And  an  ill  singer,  my  lord. 

D.  Pedro.  Ha,  no,  no,  faith;  thou  singest  well 
enough  for  a  shift.  80 

Bene.  An  he  had  been  a  dog  that  should  have 
howled  thus,  they  would  have  hanged  him:  and 
I  pray  God  his  bad  voice  bode  no  mischief.  I  had 
as  lief  have  heard  the  night-raven,  come  what 
plague  could  have  come  after  it. 

D.  Pedro.  Yea,  marry,  dost  thou  hear,  Baltha¬ 
sar?  I  pray  thee,  get  us  some  excellent  music;  for 
to-morrow  night  we  would  have  it  at  the  Lady 
Hero’s  chamber-windov/. 

Balth.  The  best  I  can,  my  lord. 

D.  Pedro.  Do  so:  farewell.  [Exit  balthasar.] 
Come  hither,  Leonato.  What  was  it  you  told  me 
of  to-day,  that  your  niece  Beatrice  was  in  love 
with  Signior  Benedick? 

Claud.  O,  ay:  stalk  on,  stalk  on;  the  fowl  sits. 
I  did  never  thinltthat  lady  would  have  loved  any 
man. 

Leon.  No,  nor  I  neither;  but  most  wonderful 
that  she  should  so  dote  on  Signior  Benedick, 
whom  she  hath  in  all  outward  behaviours  seemed 
ever  to  abhor.  loi 

Bene.  Is’t  possible?  Sits  the  wind  in  that  corner? 

Lean.  By  my  troth,  my  lord,  I  cannot  tell  what 
to  think  of  it  but  that  she  loves  him  with  an 
enraged  affection;  it  is  past  the  infinite  of 
thought. 

D.  Pedro.  May  be  she  doth  but  counterfeit. 

Claud.  Faith,  like  enough. 

Leon.  O  God,  counterfeit!  There  was  never 
counterfeit  of  passion  came  so  near  the  life  of 
passion  as  she  discovers  it.  in 

D.  Pedro.  Why,  what  effects  of  passion  shows 
she? 

Claud.  Bait  the  hook  well;  this  fish  will  bite. 

Leon.  What  effects,  my  lord?  She  will  sit  you, 
you  heard  my  daughter  tell  you  how. 


SCENE  III 

Claud.  She  did,  indeed. 

D.  Fedro.  How,  how,  I  pray  you?  You  amaze 
me:  I  would  have  thought  her  spirit  had  been 
invincible  against  all  assaults  of  affection.  120 

Leon.  I  would  have  sworn  it  had,  my  lord; 
especially  against  Benedick. 

Bene.  I  should  think  this  a  gull,  but  that  the 
white-bearded  fellow  speaks  it:  knavery  cannot, 
sure,  hide  himself  in  such  reverence. 

Claud.  He  hath  ta’en  the  infection:  hold  it  up. 

D.  Pedro.  Hath  she  made  her  affection  known 
to  Benedick? 

Leon.  No;  and  swears  she  never  will:  that’s  her 
torment.  130 

Claud.  ’Tis  true,  indeed;  so  your  daughter  says: 
“Shall  I,”  says  she,  “that  have  so  oft  encoun¬ 
tered  him  with  scorn,  write  to  him  that  I  love 
him?” 

Leon.  This  says  she  now  when  she  is  beginning 
to  write  to  him;  for  she’ll  be  up  twenty  times  a 
night,  and  there  will  she  sit  in  her  smock  till  she 
have  writ  a  sheet  of  paper:  my  daughter  tells  us 
all. 

Claud.  Now  you  talk  of  a  sheet  of  paper,  I 
remember  a  pretty  jest  your  daughter  told  us 
of. 

Leon.  O,  when  she  had  writ  it  and  was  reading 
it  over,  she  found  Benedick  and  Beatrice  between 
the  sheet? 

Claud.  That. 

Leon.  O,  she  tore  the  letter  into  a  thousand 
halfpence;  railed  at  herself,  that  she  should  be  so 
immodest  to  write  to  one  that  she  knew  would 
flout  her;  “I  measure  him,”  says  she,  “by  my 
own  spirit;  for  I  should  flout  him,  if  he  writ  to 
me;  yea,  though  I  love  him,  I  should.”  75/ 

Claud.  Then  down  upon  her  knees  she  falls, 
weeps,  sobs,  beats  her  heart,  tears  her  hair, 
prays,  curses;  “O  sweet  Benedick!  God  give  me 
patience!” 

Leon.  She  doth  indeed;  my  daughter  says  so: 
and  the  ecstasy  hath  so  much  overborne  her  that 
my  daughter  is  sometime  afeard  she  will  do  a 
desperate  outrage  to  herself:  it  is  very  true. 

D.  Pedro.  It  were  good  that  Benedick  knew  of  it 
by  some  other,  if  she  will  not  discover  it.  161 

Claud.  To  what  end?  He  would  make  but  a 
sport  of  it  and  torment  the  poor  lady  worse. 

D.  Pedro.  An  he  should,  it  were  an  alms  to  hang 
him.  She’s  an  excellent  sweet  lady;  and,  out  of 
all  suspicion,  she  is  virtuous. 

Claud.  And  she  is  exceeding  wise. 

D.  Pedro.  In  everything  but  in  loving  Benedick. 

Leon.  O,  my  lord,  wisdom  and  blood  combating 
in  so  tender  a  body,  we  have  ten  proofs  to  one 
that  blood  hath  the  victory.  I  am  sorry  for  her, 


513 

as  I  have  just  cause,  being  her  uncle  and  her 
guardian. 

D.  Pedro.  I  would  she  had  bestowed  this  dotage 
on  me:  I  would  hav^e  daffed  all  other  respects  and 
made  her  half  myself.  I  pray  you,  tell  Benedick 
of  it,  and  hear  what  a’  will  say. 

Leon.  Were  it  good,  think  you?  ijp 

Claud.  Hero  thinks  surely  she  will  die;  for  she 
says  she  will  die,  if  he  love  her  not,  and  she  will 
die,  ere  she  make  her  love  known,  and  she  will 
die,  if  he  woo  her,  rather  than  she  will  bate  one 
breath  of  her  accustomed  crossness. 

D.  Pedro.  She  doth  well:  if  she  should  make 
tender  of  her  love,  ’tis  very  possible  he’ll  scorn 
it;  for  the  man,  as  you  know  all,  hath  a  con¬ 
temptible  spirit. 

Claud.  He  is  a  very  proper  man. 

D.  Pedro.  He  hath  indeed  a  good  outward  hap¬ 
piness.  /p/ 

Claud.  Before  God!  and,  in  my  mind,  very  wise. 

D.  Pedro.  He  doth  indeed  show  some  sparks 
that  are  like  wit. 

Claud.  And  I  take  him  to  be  valiant. 

D.  Pedro.  As  Hector,  I  assure  you:  and  in  the 
managing  of  quarrels  you  may  say  he  is  wise;  for 
either  he  avoids  them  with  great  discretion,  or 
undertakes  them  with  a  most  Christian-like  fear. 

Leon.  If  he  do  fear  God,  a’  must  necessarily 
keep  peace:  if  he  break  the  peace,  he  ought  to 
enter  into  a  quarrel  with  fear  and  trembling. 

D.  Pedro.  And  so  will  he  do;  for  the  man  doth 
fear  God,  howsoever  it  seems  not  in  him  by  some 
large  jests  he  will  make,  Well,  I  am  sorry  for 
your  niece.  Shall  we  go  seek  Benedick,  and  tell 
him  of  her  love? 

Claud.  Never  tell  him,  my  lord:  let  her  wear  it 
out  with  good  counsel. 

Leon.  Nay,  that’s  impossible:  she  may  wear  her 
heart  out  first.  210 

D.  Pedro.  Well,  we  will  hear  further  of  it  by 
your  daughter:  let  it  cool  the  while.  I  love  Bene¬ 
dick  well;  and  I  could  wish  he  would  modestly 
examine  himself,  to  see  how  much  he  is  un¬ 
worthy  so  good  a  lady. 

Leon.  My  lord,  will  you  walk?  dinner  is  ready. 

Claud.  If  he  do  not  dote  on  her  upon  this,  I  will 
never  trust  my  expectation.  220 

D.  Pedro.  Let  there  be  the  same  net  spread  for 
her;  and  that  must  your  daughter  and  her  gentle¬ 
women  carry.  The  sport  will  be,  when  they  hold 
one  an  opinion  of  another’s  dotage,  and  no  such 
matter:  that’s  the  scene  that  I  would  see,  which 
will  be  merely  a  dumb-show.  Let  us  send  her  to 
call  him  in  to  dinner. 

[Exeunt  don  pedro,  claudio,  and  leonato. 

Bene.  [Coming  forward]  This  can  be  no  trick: 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


the  conference  was  sadly  borne.  They  have  the 
truth  of  this  from  Hero.  They  seem  to  pity  the 
lady:  it  seems  her  affections  have  their  full  bent. 
Love  me!  why,  it  must  be  requited.  I  hear  how 
I  am  censured:  they  say  I  will  bear  myself 
proudly,  if  I  perceive  the  love  come  from  her; 
they  say  too  that  she  will  rather  die  than  give  any 
sign  of  affection.  I  did  never  think  to  marry:  I 
must  not  seem  proud:  happy  are  they  that  hear 
their  detractions  and  can  put  them  to  mending. 
They  say  the  lady  is  fair;  ’tis  a  truth,  I  can  bear 
them  witness;  and  virtuous;  ’tis  so,  I  cannot 
reprove  it;  and  wise,  but  for  loving  me;  by  my 
troth,  it  is  no  addition  to  her  wit,  nor  no  great 
argument  of  her  folly,  for  I  will  be  horribly  in 
love  with  her.  I  may  chance  have  some  odd 
quirks  and  remnants  of  wit  broken  on  me, 
because  I  have  railed  so  long  against  marriage: 
but  doth  not  the  appetite  alter?  a  man  loves  the 
meat  in  his  youth  that  he  cannot  endure  in  his 
age.  Shall  quips  and  sentences  and  these  paper 
bullets  of  the  brain  awe  a  man  from  the  career 
of  his  humour?  No,  the  world  must  be  peopled. 
When  I  said  I  would  die  a  bachelor,  I  did  not 
think  I  should  live  till  I  were  married.  Here 
comes  Beatrice.  By  this  day!  she’s  a  fair  lady: 
I  do  spy  some  marks  of  love  in  her. 

Enter  BEATRICE. 

Beat,  Against  my  will  I  am  sent  to  bid  you  come 
in  to  dinner. 

Bene.  Fair  Beatrice,  I  thank  you  for  your  pains. 

Beat.  I  took  no  more  pains  for  those  thanks  than 
you  take  pains  to  thank  me:  if  it  had  been  pain¬ 
ful,  I  would  not  have  come.  261 

Bene.  You  take  pleasure  then  in  the  message? 

Beat.  Yea,  just  so  much  as  you  may  take  upon  a 
knife’s  point  and  choke  a  daw  withal.  You  have 
no  stomach,  signior:  fare  you  well. 

[Exit. 

Bene.  Ha!  “Against  my  will  I  am  sent  to  bid  you 
come  in  to  dinner”;  there’s  a  double  meaning  in 
that.  “I  took  no  more  pains  for  those  thanks  than 
you  took  pains  to  thank  me”;  that’s  as  much  as 
to  say,  “Any  pains  that  I  take  for  you  is  as  easy 
as  thanks.”  If  I  do  not  take  pity  of  her,  I  am  a 
villain;  if  I  do  not  love  her,  I  am  a  Jew.  I  will  go 
get  her  picture.  [Exit. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  Leonatd s  garden 
Enter  hero,  Margaret,  and  Ursula. 

Hero.  Good  Margaret,  run  thee  to  the  parlour; 
There  shalt  thou  find  my  cousin  Beatrice 
Proposing  with  the  Prince  and  Claudio: 


Whisper  her  ear  and  tell  her,  I  and  Ursula 
Walk  in  the  orchard  and  our  whole  discourse 
Is  all  of  her;  say  that  thou  overheard’st  us; 

And  bid  her  steal  into  the  pleached  bower. 

Where  honeysuckles,  ripen’d  by  the  sun. 

Forbid  the  sun  to  enter,  like  favourites. 

Made  proud  by  princes,  that  advance  their  pride 
Against  that  power  that  bred  it:  there  will  she 
hide  her,  // 

To  listen  our  purpose.  This  is  thy  office; 

Bear  thee  well  in  it  and  leave  us  alone. 

Marg.  I’ll  make  her  come,  I  warrant  you, 
presently.  [Exit. 

Hero.  Now,  Ursula,  when  Beatrice  doth  come. 
As  we  do  trace  alley  up  and  down. 

Our  talk  must  only  be  of  Benedick. 

When  I  do  name  him,  let  it  be  thy  part 
To  praise  him  more  than  ever  man  did  merit: 

My  talk  to  thee  must  be  how  Benedick  20 

Is  sick  in  love  with  Beatrice.  Of  this  matter 
Is  little  Cupid’s  crafty  arrow  made. 

That  only  wounds  by  hearsay. 

Enter  Beatrice,  behind. 

Now  begin; 

For  look  where  Beatrice,  like  a  lapwing,  runs 
Close  by  the  ground,  to  hear  our  conference. 

Urs.  The  pleasant’st  angling  is  to  see  the  fish 
Cut  with  her  golden  oars  the  silver  stream, 

And  greedily  devour  the  treacherous  bait: 

So  angle  we  for  Beatrice;  who  even  now 
Is  couched  in  the  woodbine  coverture.  50 

Fear  you  not  my  part  of  the  dialogue. 

Hero.  Then  go  we  near  her,  that  her  ear  lose 
nothing 

Of  the  false  sweet  bait  that  we  lay  for  it. 

Approaching  the  bower. 

No,  truly,  Ursula,  she  is  too  disdainful; 

I  know  her  spirits  are  as  coy  and  wild 
As  haggerds  of  the  rock. 

Urs.  But  are  you  sure 

That  Benedick  loves  Beatrice  so  entirely? 

Hero.  So  says  the  Prince  and  my  new-trothed 
lord. 

Urs.  And  did  they  bid  you  tell  her  of  it,  madam? 
Hero.  They  did  entreat  me  to  acquaint  her  of  it; 
But  I  persuaded  them  if  they  loved  Benedick,  4/ 
To  wish  him  wrestle  with  affection. 

And  never  to  let  Beatrice  know  of  it. 

Urs.  Why  did  you  so?  Doth  not  the  gentleman 
Deserve  as  full  as  fortunate  a  bed 
As  ever  Beatrice  shall  couch  upon? 

Hero.  O  god  of  love!  I  know  he  doth  deserve 
As  much  as  may  be  yielded  to  a  man: 

But  Nature  never  framed  a  woman’s  heart 
Of  prouder  stuff  than  that  of  Beatrice;  50 


SCENE  I 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING  515 


Disdain  and  scorn  ride  sparkling  in  her  eyes, 
Misprising  what  they  look  on,  and  her  wit 
Values  itself  so  highly  that  to  her 
All  matter  else  seems  weak:  she  cannot  love, 
Nor  take  no  shape  nor  project  of  affection. 

She  is  so  self-endeared. 

Urs.  Sure,  I  think  so; 

And  therefore  certainly  it  were  not  good 
She  knew  his  love,  lest  she  make  sport  at  it. 

Hero.  Why,  you  speak  truth.  I  never  yet  saw 
man. 

How  wise,  how  noble,  young,  how  rarely  fea¬ 
tured,  60 

But  she  would  spell  him  backward:  if  fair-faced. 
She  would  swear  the  gentleman  should  be  her 
sister; 

If  black,  why.  Nature,  drawing  of  an  antique. 
Made  a  foul  blot;  if  tall,  a  lance  ill-headed; 

If  low,  an  agate  very  vilely  cut; 

If  speaking,  why,  a  vane  blown  with  all  winds; 

If  silent,  why,  a  block  moved  with  none. 

So  turns  she  every  man  the  wrong  side  out 
And  never  gives  to  truth  and  virtue  that 
Which  simpleness  and  merit  purchaseth.  70 
Urs.  Sure,  sure,  such  carping  is  not  com¬ 
mendable. 

Hero.  No,  not  to  be  so  odd  and  from  all  fashions 
As  Beatrice  is,  cannot  be  commendable: 

But  who  dare  tell  her  so?  If  I  should  speak. 

She  would  mock  me  into  air;  O,  she  would  laugh 
me 

Out  of  myself,  press  me  to  death  with  wit. 
Therefore  let  Benedick,  like  cover’d  fire. 
Consume  away  in  sighs,  waste  inwardly: 

It  were  a  better  death  than  die  with  mocks, 
Which  is  as  bad  as  die  with  tickling.  So 

Urs.  Yet  tell  her  of  it:  hear  what  she  will  say. 
Hero.  No;  rather  I  will  go  to  Benedick 
And  counsel  him  to  fight  against  his  passion. 

And,  truly.  I’ll  devise  some  honest  slanders 
To  stain  my  cousin  with:  one  doth  not  know 
How  much  an  ill  word  may  empoison  liking. 

Urs.  O,  do  not  do  your  cousin  such  a  wrong. 

She  cannot  be  so  much  without  true  judgement — 
Having  so  swift  and  excellent  a  wit 
As  she  is  prized  to  have — as  to  refuse  ^0 

So  rare  a  gentleman  as  Signior  Benedick. 

Hero.  He  is  the  only  man  of  Italy, 

Always  excepted  my  dear  Claudio. 

Urs.  I  pray  you,  be  not  angry  with  me,  madam. 
Speaking  my  fancy:  Signior  Benedick, 

For  shape,  for  bearing,  argument,  and  valour. 
Goes  foremost  in  report  through  Italy. 

Hero.  Indeed,  he  hath  an  excellent  good  name. 
Urs.  His  excellence  did  earn  it,  ere  he  had  it. 
When  are  you  married,  madam?  100 


Hero.  Why,  every  day,  to-morrow.  Come,  go 
in: 

I’ll  show  thee  some  attires,  and  have  thy  counsel 
Which  is  the  best  to  furnish  me  to-morrow. 

Urs.  She’s  limed,  I  warrant  you:  we  have 
caught  her,  madam. 

Hero.  If  it  prove  so,  then  loving  goes  by  haps: 
Some  Cupid  kills  with  arrows,  some  with  traps. 

[Exeunt  hero  and  Ursula. 

Beat.  [Coming  forwarcf]  What  fire  is  in  mine 
ears?  Can  this  be  true? 

Stand  I  condemn’d  for  pride  and  scorn  so 
much? 

Contempt,  farewell!  and  maiden  pride,  adieu! 

No  glory  lives  behind  the  back  of  such.  no 
And,  Benedick,  love  on;  I  will  requite  thee. 
Taming  my  wild  heart  to  thy  loving  hand: 

If  thou  dost  love,  my  kindness  shall  incite  thee 
To  bind  our  loves  up  in  a  holy  band; 

For  others  say  thou  dost  deserve,  and  I 
Believe  it  better  than  reportingly.  [Exit. 

Scene  n.  A  room  in  Leonato's  house 
Enter  don  pedro,  claudio,  benedick,  and 

LEONATO. 

D.  Fedro.  I  do  but  stay  till  your  marriage  be 
consummate,  and  then  go  I  toward  Arragon. 

Claud.  I’ll  bring  you  thither,  my  lord,  if  you’ll 
vouchsafe  me. 

D.  Fedro.  Nay,  that  would  be  as  great  a  soil  in 
the  new  gloss  of  your  marriage  as  to  show  a  child 
his  new  coat  and  forbid  him  to  wear  it.  I  will 
only  be  bold  with  Benedick  for  his  company;  for, 
from  the  crown  of  his  head  to  the  sole  of  his  foot, 
he  is  all  mirth:  he  hath  twice  or  thrice  cut  Cupid’s 
bow-string  and  the  little  hangman  dare  not  shoot 
at  him;  he  hath  a  heart  as  sound  as  a  bell  and  his 
tongue  is  the  clapper,  for  what  his  heart  thinks 
his  tongue  speaks. 

Bene.  Gallants,  I  am  not  as  I  have  been. 

Leon.  So  say  I:  methinks  you  are  sadder. 

Claud.  I  hope  he  be  in  love. 

D.  Fedro.  Hang  him,  truant!  there’s  no  true  drop 
of  blood  in  him,  to  be  truly  touched  with  love:  if 
he  be  sad,  he  wants  money.  20 

Bene.  I  have  the  toothache. 

D.  Fedro.  Draw  it. 

Bene.  Hang  it! 

Claud.  You  must  hang  it  first,  and  draw  it  after¬ 
wards. 

D.  Fedro.  What!  sigh  for  the  toothache? 

Leon.  Where  is  but  a  humour  or  a  worm. 

Bene.  Well,  every  one  can  master  a  grief  but  he 
that  has  it. 

Claud.  Yet  say  I,  he  is  in  love.  50 

D.  Fedro.  There  is  no  appearance  of  fancy  in 


i6  MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


him,  unless  it  be  a  fancy  that  he  hath  to  strange 
disguises;  as,  to  be  a  Dutchman  to-day,  a  French¬ 
man  to-morrow,  or  in  the  shape  of  two  countries 
at  once,  as,  a  German  from  the  waist  downward, 
all  slops,  and  a  Spaniard  from  the  hip  upward,  no 
doublet.  Unless  he  have  a  fancy  to  this  foolery, 
as  it  appears  he  hath,  he  is  no  fool  for  fancy,  as 
you  would  have  it  appear  he  is. 

Claud.  If  he  be  not  in  love  with  some  woman, 
there  is  no  believing  old  signs:  a’  brushes  his  hat 
o’  mornings;  what  should  that  bode?  42 

D.  Pedro.  Hath  any  man  seen  him  at  the  bar¬ 
ber’s? 

Claud.  No,  but  the  barber’s  man  hath  been  seen 
with  him,  and  the  old  ornament  of  his  cheek  hath 
already  stuffed  tennis-balls. 

Leon.  Indeed,  he  looks  younger  than  he  did,  by 
the  loss  of  a  beard. 

D.  Pedro.  Nay,  a’  rubs  himself  with  civet:  can 
you  smell  him  out  by  that?  5/ 

Claud.  That’s  as  much  as  to  say,  the  sweet 
youth’s  in  love. 

D.  Pedro.  The  greatest  note  of  it  is  his  melan¬ 
choly. 

Claud.  And  when  was  he  wont  to  wash  his 
face? 

D.  Pedro.  Yea,  or  to  paint  himself?  for  the 
which,  I  hear  what  they  say  of  him. 

Claud.  Nay,  but  his  jesting  spirit;  which  is  now 
crept  into  a  lute-string  and  now  governed  by 
stops. 

D.  Pedro.  Indeed,  that  tells  a  heavy  tale  for  him: 
conclude,  conclude  he  is  in  love. 

Claud.  Nay,  but  I  know  who  loves  him. 

D.  Pedro.  That  would  I  know  too:  I  warrant, 
one  that  knows  him  not. 

Claud.  Yes,  and  his  ill  conditions;  and,  in  de¬ 
spite  of  all,  dies  for  him. 

D.  Pedro.  She  shall  be  buried  with  her  face  up¬ 
wards.  7/ 

Bene.  Yet  is  this  no  charm  for  the  toothache. 
Old  signior,  walk  aside  with  me:  I  have  studied 
eight  or  nine  wise  words  to  speak  to  you,  which 
these  hobby-horses  must  not  hear. 

[Exeunt  benedick  and  leonato. 

D.  Pedro.  For  my  life,  to  break  with  him  about 
Beatrice. 

Claud.  ’Tis  even  so.  Hero  and  Margaret  have 
by  this  played  their  parts  with  Beatrice;  and  then 
the  two  bears  will  not  bite  one  another  when 
they  meet.  81 

Enter  don  john. 

D.  John.  My  lord  and  brother,  God  save 
you! 

D.  Pedro.  Good  den,  brother. 


D.  John.  If  your  leisure  served,  I  would  speak 
with  you. 

D.  Pedro.  In  private? 

D.  John.  If  it  please  you:  yet  Count  Claudio 
may  hear;  for  what  I  would  speak  of  concerns 
him. 

D.  Pedro.  What’s  the  matter?  po 

D.  John.  [To  CLAUDio]  Means  your  lordship  to 
be  married  to-morrow? 

D.  Pedro.  You  know  he  does. 

D.  John.  I  know  not  that,  when  he  knows  what 
I  know. 

Claud.  If  there  be  any  impediment,  1  pray  you 
discover  it. 

D.  John.  You  may  think  I  love  you  not:  let  that 
appear  hereafter,  and  aim  better  at  me  by  that  I 
now  will  manifest.  For  my  brother,  I  think  he 
holds  you  well,  and  in  dearness  of  heart  hath 
holp  to  effect  your  ensuing  marriage — surely 
suit  ill  spent  and  labour  ill  bestowed. 

D.  Pedro.  Why,  what’s  the  matter? 

D.  John.  I  came  hither  to  tell  you;  and,  circum¬ 
stances  shortened,  for  she  has  been  too  long  a 
talking  of,  the  lady  is  disloyal. 

Claud.  Who,  Hero? 

D.  John.  Even  she;  Leonato’ s  Hero,  your  Hero, 
every  man’s  Hero.  no 

Claud.  Disloyal? 

D.  John.  The  word  is  too  good  to  paint  out  her 
wickedness;  I  could  say  she  were  worse:  think 
you  of  a  worse  title,  and  I  will  fit  her  to  it.  Won¬ 
der  not  till  further  warrant:  go  but  with  me 
tonight,  you  shall  see  her  chamber-window  en¬ 
tered,  even  the  night  before  her  wedding-day: 
if  you  love  her  then,  to-morrow  wed  her;  but 
it  would  better  fit  your  honour  to  change  your 
mind. 

Claud.  May  this  be  so?  120 

D.  Pedro.  I  will  not  think  it. 

D.  John.  If  you  dare  not  trust  that  you  see,  con¬ 
fess  not  that  you  know:  if  you  will  follow  me,  I 
will  show  you  enough;  and  when  you  have  seen 
more  and  heard  more,  proceed  accordingly. 

Claud.  If  I  see  anything  to-night  why  I  should 
not  marry  her  to-morrow,  in  the  congregation, 
where  I  should  wed,  there  will  I  shame  her. 

D.  Pedro.  And,  as  I  wooed  for  thee  to  obtain  her, 
I  will  join  with  thee  to  disgrace  her.  /50 

D.  John.  I  will  disparage  her  no  farther  till  you 
are  my  witnesses:  bear  it  coldly  but  till  mid¬ 
night,  and  let  the  issue  show  itself. 

D.  Pedro.  O  day  untoward ly  turned! 

Claud  O  mischief  strangely  thwarting! 

D.  John.  O  plague  right  well  prevented!  so  will 
you  say  when  you  have  seen  the  sequel. 

[Exeunt. 


SCENE  III 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


Scene  hi.  A  street 

Enter  Dogberry  and  verges  u'ith  the  watch. 

Dog.  Are  you  good  men  and  true? 

Verg.  Yea,  or  else  it  were  pity  but  they  should 
suffer  salvation,  body  and  soul. 

Dog.  Nay,  that  were  a  punishment  too  good  for 
them,  if  they  should  have  any  allegiance  in  them, 
being  chosen  for  the  Prince’s  watch. 

Verg.  Well,  give  them  their  charge,  neighbour 
Dogberry. 

Dog.  First,  who  think  you  the  most  desartless 
man  to  be  constable?  lo 

I  St  Watch.  Hugh  Otecake,  sir,  or  George  Sea- 
cole;  for  they  can  write  and  read. 

Dog.  Come  hither,  neighbour  Seacole.  God  hath 
blessed  you  with  a  good  name:  to  be  a  well- 
favoured  man  is  the  gift  of  fortune;  but  to  write 
and  read  comes  by  nature. 

2nd  Watch.  Both  which,  master  constable — 

Dog.  You  have:  I  knew  it  would  be  your  answer. 
Well,  for  your  favour,  sir,  why,  give  God  thanks, 
and  make  no  boast  of  it;  and  for  your  writing 
and  reading,  let  that  appear  when  there  is  no  need 
of  such  vanity.  You  are  thought  here  to  be  the 
most  senseless  and  fit  man  for  the  constable  of  the 
watch;  therefore  bear  you  the  lantern.  This  is 
your  charge:  you  shall  comprehend  all  vagrom 
men;  you  are  to  bid  any  man  stand,  in  the  Prince’s 
name. 

2nd  Watch.  How  if  a’  will  not  stand? 

Dog.  Why,  then,  take  no  note  of  him,  but  let 
him  go;  and  presently  call  the  rest  of  the  watch 
together  and  thank  God  you  are  rid  of  a  knave. 

Verg.  If  he  will  not  stand  when  he  is  bidden,  he 
is  none  of  the  Prince’s  subjects. 

Dog.  True,  and  they  are  to  meddle  with  none 
but  the  Prince’s  subjects.  You  shall  also  make  no 
noise  in  the  streets;  for  for  the  watch  to  babble 
and  to  talk  is  most  tolerable  and  not  to  be  en¬ 
dured. 

2nd  Watch.  We  will  rather  sleep  than  talk:  we 
know  what  belongs  to  a  watch.  40 

Dog.  Why,  you  speak  like  an  ancient  and  most 
quiet  watchman;  for  I  cannot  see  how  sleeping 
should  offend:  only,  have  a  care  that  your  bills 
be  not  stolen.  Well,  you  are  to  call  at  all  the  ale¬ 
houses,  and  bid  those  that  are  drunk  get  them  to 
bed. 

2nd  Watch.  How  if  they  will  not? 

Dog.  Why,  then,  let  them  alone  till  they  are 
sober:  if  they  make  you  not  then  the  better 
answer,  you  may  say  they  are  not  the  men  you 
took  them  for.  5/ 

2nd  Watch.  Well,  sir. 

Dog.  If  you  meet  a  thief,  you  may  suspect  him, 


517 

by  virtue  of  your  office,  to  be  no  true  man;  and, 
for  such  kind  of  men,  the  less  you  meddle  or 
make  with  them,  why,  the  more  is  for  your 
honesty. 

2nd  Watch.  If  we  know  him  to  be  a  thief,  shall 
we  not  lay  hands  on  him? 

Dog.  Truly,  by  your  office,  you  may;  but  I 
think  they  that  touch  pitch  will  be  defiled:  the 
most  peaceable  way  for  you,  if  you  do  take  a 
thief,  is  to  let  him  show  himself  what  he  is  and 
steal  out  of  your  company. 

Verg.  You  have  been  always  called  a  merciful 
man,  partner. 

Dog.  Truly,  I  would  not  hang  a  dog  by  my 
will,  much  more  a  man  who  hath  honesty  in 
him. 

Verg.  If  you  hear  a  child  cry  in  the  night,  you 
must  call  to  the  nurse  and  bid  her  still  it.  70 

2nd  Watch.  How  if  the  nurse  be  asleep  and  will 
not  hear  us? 

Dog.  Why,  then,  depart  in  peace,  and  let  the 
child  wake  her  with  crying;  for  the  ewe  that  will 
not  hear  her  lamb  when  it  baes  will  never  answer 
a  calf  when  he  bleats. 

Verg.  ’Tis  very  true. 

Dog.  This  is  the  end  of  the  charge:  you,  con¬ 
stable,  are  to  present  the  Prince’s  own  person: 
if  you  meet  the  Prince  in  the  night,  you  may  stay 
him.  81 

Verg.  Nay,  by’r  lady,  that  I  think  a’  cannot. 

Dog.  Five  shillings  to  one  on’t,  with  any  man 
that  knows  the  statues,  he  may  stay  him:  marry, 
not  without  the  Prince  be  willing;  for,  indeed, 
the  watch  ought  to  offend  no  man;  and  it  is  an 
offence  to  stay  a  man  against  his  will. 

Verg.  By’r  lady,  I  think  it  be  so.  8^ 

Dog.  Ha,  ah,  ha!  Well,  masters,  good  night:  an 
there  be  any  matter  of  weight  chances,  call  up 
me:  keep  your  fellows’  counsels  and  your  own; 
and  good  night.  Come,  neighbour. 

2nd  Watch.  Well,  masters,  we  hear  our  charge: 
let  us  go  sit  here  upon  the  church-bench  till  two, 
and  then  all  to  bed. 

Dog.  One  word  more,  honest  neighbours.  I 
pray  you,  watch  about  Signior  Leonato’s  door; 
for  the  wedding  being  there  to-morrow,  there  is  a 
great  coil  to-night.  Adieu:  be  vigitant,  I  beseech 
you.  [Exeunt  Dogberry  and  verges,  loi 

Enter  borachio  and  conrade. 

Bora.  What,  Conrade! 

2nd  Watch.  [Aside]  Peace!  stir  not. 

Bora.  Conrade,  I  sav! 

Cm.  Here,  man;  I  am  at  thy  elbow. 

Bora.  Mass,  and  my  elbow  itched;  I  thought 
there  would  a  scab  follow. 


ACT  III 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


518 

Cm.  I  will  owe  thee  an  answer  for  that:  and 
now  forward  with  thy  tale.  109 

Bora.  Stand  thee  close,  then,  under  this  pent¬ 
house,  for  it  drizzles  rain;  and  1  will,  like  a  true 
drunkard,  utter  all  to  thee. 

2nd  Watch.  [Aside]  Some  treason,  masters:  yet 
stand  close. 

Bora.  Therefore  know  I  have  earned  of  Don 
John  a  thousand  ducats. 

Cm.  Is  it  possible  that  any  villainy  should  be  so 
dear? 

Bora.  Thou  shouldst  rather  ask  if  it  were  pos¬ 
sible  any  villainy  should  be  so  rich;  for  when 
rich  villains  have  need  of  poor  ones,  poor  ones 
may  make  what  price  they  will. 

Con.  I  wonder  at  it. 

Bora.  That  shows  thou  art  unconfirmed.  Thou 
knowest  that  the  fashion  of  a  doublet,  or  a  hat, 
or  a  cloak,  is  nothing  to  a  man. 

Cm.  Yes,  it  is  apparel. 

Bora.  I  mean,  the  fashion. 

Cm.  Yes,  the  fashion  is  the  fashion.  12 p 

Bora.  Tush!  I  may  as  well  say  the  fool’s  the  fool. 
But  seest  thou  not  what  a  deformed  thief  this 
fashion  is? 

2nd  Watch.  [Aside]  I  know  that  Deformed;  a’ 
has  been  a  vile  thief  this  seven  year;  a’  goes  up 
and  down  like  a  gentleman:  I  remember  his  name. 

Bora.  Didst  thou  not  hear  somebody? 

Cm.  No;  ’twas  the  vane  on  the  house. 

Bora.  Seest  thou  not,  I  say,  what  a  deformed 
thief  this  fashion  is?  how  giddily  a’  turns  about 
all  the  hot  bloods  between  fourteen  and  five-and- 
thirty?  sometimes  fashioning  them  like  Pharaoh’s 
soldiers  in  the  reechy  painting,  sometime  like  god 
Bel’s  priests  in  the  old  church-window,  sometime 
like  the  shaven  Hercules  in  the  smirched  worm- 
eaten  tapestry,  where  his  codpiece  seems  as 
massy  as  his  club? 

Cm.  All  this  I  see;  and  I  see  that  the  fashion 
wears  out  more  apparel  than  the  man.  But  art  not 
thou  thyself  giddy  with  the  fashion  too,  that  thou 
hast  shifted  out  of  thy  tale  into  telling  me  of  the 
fashion? 

Bora.  Not  so,  neither:  but  know  that  I  have 
to-night  wooed  Margaret,  the  Lady  Hero’s  gen¬ 
tlewoman,  by  the  name  of  Hero:  she  leans  me 
out  at  her  mistress’  chamber-window,  bids  me  a 
thousand  times  good  night — I  tell  this  tale  vilely. 
I  should  first  tell  thee  how  the  Prince,  Claudio 
and  my  master,  planted  and  placed  and  possessed 
by  my  master  Don  John,  saw  afar  off  in  the 
orchard  this  amiable  encounter.  161 

Con.  And  thought  they  Margaret  was  Hero? 

Bora.  Two  of  them  did,  the  Prince  and  Claudio; 
but  the  devil  my  master  knew  she  was  Margaret; 


and  partly  by  hi&  oaths,  which  first  possessed 
them,  partly  by  the  dark  night,  which  did  deceive 
them,  but  chiefly  by  my  villainy,  which  did  con¬ 
firm  any  slander  that  Don  John  had  made,  away 
went  Claudio  enraged;  swore  he  would  meet  her, 
as  he  was  appointed,  next  morning  at  the  temple, 
and  there,  before  the  whole  congregation,  shame 
her  with  what  he  saw  o’er  night  and  send  her 
home  again  without  a  husband. 

I  St  Watch.  We  charge  you,  in  the  Prince’s  name, 
stand! 

2nd  Watch.  Call  up  the  right  master  constable. 
We  have  here  recovered  the  most  dangerous 
piece  of  lechery  that  ever  was  known  in  the 
commonwealth.  181 

I  St  Watch.  And  one  Deformed  is  one  of  them: 
I  know  him;  a’  wears  a  lock. 

Cm.  Masters,  masters — 

2nd  Watch.  You’ll  be  made  bring  Deformed 
forth,  I  warrant  you. 

Cm.  Masters — 

ist  Watch.  Never  speak:  we  charge  you  let  us 
obey  you  to  go  with  us. 

Bora.  We  are  like  to  prove  a  goodly  commodity, 
being  taken  up  of  these  men’s  bills.  ipi 

Con.  A  commodity  in  question,  I  warrant  you. 
Come,  we’ll  obey  you.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Hero' s  apartment 
Enter  hero,  Margaret,  and  Ursula. 

Hero.  Good  Ursula,  wake  my  cousin  Beatrice, 
and  desire  her  to  rise. 

Urs.  I  will,  lady. 

Hero.  And  bid  her  come  hither. 

Urs.  Well.  [Exit. 

Marg.  Troth,  I  think  your  other  rabato  were 
better. 

Hero.  No,  pray  thee,  good  Meg,  I’ll  wear  this. 

Marg.  By  my  troth,  ’s  not  so  good;  and  I  war¬ 
rant  your  cousin  will  say  so.  10 

Hero.  My  cousin’s  a  fool,  and  thou  art  another: 
I’ll  wear  none  but  this. 

Marg.  I  like  the  new  tire  within  excellently, 
if  the  hair  were  a  thought  browner;  and  your 
gown’s  a  most  rare  fashion,  i’  faith.  I  saw  the 
Duchess  of  Milan’s  gown  that  they  praise  so. 

Hero.  O,  that  exceeds,  they  say. 

Marg.  By  my  troth,  ’s  but  a  night-gown  in 
respect  of  yours:  cloth  o’  gold,  and  cuts,  and 
laced  with  silver,  set  with  pearls,  down  sleeves, 
side  sleeves,  and  skirts,  round  underborne  with  a 
bluish  tinsel:  but  for  a  fine,  quaint,  graceful,  and 
excellent  fashion,  yours  is  worth  ten  on’t. 

Hero.  God  give  me  joy  to  wear  it!  for  my  heart 
is  exceeding  heavy. 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


Marg.  ’Twill  be  heavier  soon  by  the  weight  of 
a  man. 

Hero.  Fie  upon  thee'  art  not  ashamed? 

Marg.  Of  what,  lady?  of  speaking  honourably? 
Is  not  marriage  honourable  in  a  beggar?  Is  not 
your  lord  honourable  without  marriage?  I  think 
you  would  have  me  say,  “saving  your  reverence, 
a  husband”:  an  bad  thinking  do  not  wrest  true 
speaking,  I’ll  offend  nobody:  is  there  any  harm 
in  “the  heavier  for  a  husband”?  None,  I  think, 
an  it  be  the  right  husband  and  the  right  wife; 
otherwise  ’tis  light,  and  not  heavy:  ask  my  Lady 
Beatrice  else;  here  she  comes. 

Enter  Beatrice. 

Hero.  Good  morrow,  coz. 

Beat.  Good  morrow,  sweet  Hero.  40 

Hero.  Why,  how  now?  do  you  speak  in  the  sick 
tune? 

Beat.  I  am  out  of  all  other  tune,  methinks. 

Marg.  Clap’s  into  “Light  o’  love”;  that  goes 
without  a  burden:  do  you  sing  it,  and  I’ll  dance  it. 

Beat.  Ye  light  o’  love,  with  your  heels!  then,  if 
your  husband  have  stables  enough,  you’ll  see  he 
shall  lack  no  barns. 

Marg.  O  illegitimate  construction!  I  scorn  that 
with  my  heels.  5/ 

Beat.  ’Tis  almost  five  o’clock,  cousin;  ’tis  time 
you  were  ready.  By  my  troth,  I  am  exceeding 
ill:  heigh-ho! 

Marg.  For  a  hawk,  a  horse,  or  a  husband? 

Beat.  For  the  letter  that  begins  them  all,  H. 

Marg.  Well,  an  you  be  not  turned  Turk,  there’s 
no  more  sailing  by  the  star. 

Beat.  What  means  the  fool,  trow? 

Marg.  Nothing  I;  but  God  send  every  one  their 
heart’s  desire!  61 

Hero.  These  gloves  the  Count  sent  me;  they  are 
an  excellent  perfume. 

Beat.  I  am  stuffed,  cousin;  I  cannot  smell. 

Marg.  A  maid,  and  stuffed!  there’s  goodlv 
catching  of  cold. 

Beat.  O,  God  help  me!  God  help  me!  how  long 
have  you  professed  apprehension? 

Marg.  Ever  since  you  left  it.  Doth  not  my  wit 
become  me  rarely?  70 

Beat.  It  is  not  seen  enough,  you  should  wear  it  in 
your  cap.  By  my  troth,  I  am  sick. 

Marg.  Get  you  some  of  this  distilled  Carduus 
Bcnedictus,  and  lay  it  to  your  heart:  it  is  the 
only  thing  for  a  qualm. 

Hero.  There  thou  prickest  her  with  a  thistle. 

Beat.  Benedictus!  why  Benedictus?  you  have 
some  moral  in  this  Benedictus. 

Marg.  Moral!  no,  by  my  troth,  I  have  no  moral 
meaning!  I  meant,  plain  holy-thistle.  You  may 


think  perchance  that  I  think  you  are  in  lovx:  nay, 
by’r  lady,  I  am  not  such  a  fool  to  think  what  I 
list,  nor  I  list  not  to  think  what  I  can,  nor  indeed 
I  cannot  think,  if  I  would  think  my  heart  out  of 
thinking,  that  you  are  in  love  or  that  you  will  be 
in  love  or  that  you  can  be  in  love.  Yet  Benedick 
was  such  another,  and  now  is  he  become  a  man: 
he  swore  he  would  never  marry,  and  yet  now,  in 
despite  of  his  heart,  he  eats  his  meat  without 
grudging:  and  how  you  may  be  converted  I  know 
not,  but  methinks  you  look  with  your  eyes  as 
other  women  do. 

Beat.  What  pace  is  this  that  thy  tongue  keeps? 

Marg.  Not  a  false  gallop. 

Re-enter  Ursula. 

Urs.  Madam,  withdraw:  the  Prince,  the  Count, 
Signior  Benedick,  Don  John,  and  all  the  gallants 
of  the  town,  are  come  to  fetch  you  to  church. 

Hero.  Help  to  dress  me,  good  coz,  good  Meg, 
good  Ursula.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  Another  room  in  Leonatds  house 
Enter  leonato,  with  Dogberry  and  verges. 

Leon.  What  would  you  with  me,  honest  neigh¬ 
bour? 

Dog.  Marry,  sir,  I  would  have  some  confidence 
with  you  that  decerns  you  nearly. 

Leon.  Brief,  I  pray  you;  for  you  see  it  is  a  busy 
time  with  me. 

Dog.  Marry,  this  it  is,  sir. 

Verg.  Yes,  truth  it  is,  sir. 

Leon.  What  is  it,  my  good  friends? 

Dog.  Goodman  Verges,  sir,  speaks  a  little  off 
the  matter:  an  old  man,  sir,  and  his  wits  are  not 
so  blunt  as,  God  help,  I  would  desire  they  were; 
but,  in  faith,  honest  as  the  skin  between  his 
brows. 

Verg.  Yes,  I  thank  God  I  am  as  honest  as  any 
man  living  that  is  an  old  man  and  no  honester 
than  I. 

Dog.  Comparisons  are  odorous:  palabras,  neigh¬ 
bour  Verges. 

Leon.  Neighbours,  you  are  tedious.  20 

Dog.  It  pleases  your  worship  to  say  so,  but  we 
are  the  poor  Duke’s  officers;  but  truly,  for  mine 
own  part,  if  I  were  as  tedious  as  a  king,  I  could 
find  it  in  my  heart  to  bestow  it  all  of  your  wor¬ 
ship. 

Leon.  All  thy  tediousness  on  me,  ah? 

Dog.  Yea,  an  ’twere  a  thousand  pound  more 
than  ’tis;  for  I  hear  as  good  exclamation  on  your 
worship  as  of  any  man  in  the  city;  and  though  I 
be  but  a  poor  man,  I  am  glad  to  hear  it. 

Verg.  And  so  am  I. 

Leon.  I  would  fain  know  what  you  have  to  say. 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


Verg.  Marry,  sir,  our  watch  to-night,  excepting 
your  worship’s  presence,  ha’  ta’en  a  couple  of  as 
arrant  knaves  as  any  in  Messina. 

Dog.  A  good  old  man,  sir;  he  will  be  talking:  as 
they  say,  “When  the  age  is  in,  the  wit  is  out.” 
God  help  us!  it  is  a  world  to  see.  Well  said,  i’ 
faith,  neighbour  Verges:  well,  God’s  a  good 
man;  an  two  men  ride  of  a  horse,  one  must  ride 
behind.  An  honest  soul,  i’  faith,  sir;  by  my  troth 
he  is,  as  ever  broke  bread;  but  God  is  to  be  wor¬ 
shipped;  all  men  are  not  alike;  alas,  good  neigh¬ 
bour! 

Lem.  Indeed,  neighbour,  he  comes  too  short  of 
you. 

Dog.  Gifts  that  God  gives. 

Leon.  I  must  leave  you. 

Dog.  One  word,  sir:  our  watch,  sir,  have  indeed 
comprehended  two  aspicious  persons,  and  we 
would  have  them  this  morning  examined  before 
your  worship. 

Lem.  Take  their  examination  yourself  and 
bring  it  me:  I  am  now  in  great  haste,  as  it  may 
appear  unto  you. 

Dog.  It  shall  be  sufiigance. 

Lem.  Drink  some  wine  ere  you  go:  fare  you 
well. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  My  lord,  they  stay  for  you  to  give  your 
daughter  to  her  husband.  6o 

Leon.  I’ll  wait  upon  them:  I  am  ready. 

{Exeunt  leonato  and  messenger. 

Dog.  Go,  good  partner,  go,  get  you  to  Francis 
Seacole;  bid  him  bring  his  pen  and  inkhorn  to  the 
gaol:  we  are  now  to  examination  these  men. 

Verg.  And  we  must  do  it  wisely. 

Dog.  We  will  spare  for  no  wit,  I  warrant  you; 
here’s  that  shall  drive  some  of  them  to  a  non- 
come:  only  get  the  learned  writer  to  set  down 
our  excommunication  and  meet  me  at  the  gaol. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  A  church 

Enter  don  pedro,  don  john,  leonato,  friar 

FRANCIS,  CLAUDIO,  BENEDICK,  HERO,  BEATRICE, 

and  attendants. 

Leon.  Come,  Friar  Francis,  be  brief;  only  to  the 
plain  form  of  marriage,  and  you  shall  recount 
their  particular  duties  afterwards. 

Friar.  You  come  hither,  my  lord,  to  marry  this 
lady. 

Claud.  No. 

Lem.  To  be  married  to  her:  friar,  you  come  to 
marry  her. 


Friar.  Lady,  you  come  hither  to  be  married  to 
this  Count.  /o 

Hero.  I  do. 

Friar.  If  either  of  you  know  any  inward  im¬ 
pediment  why  you  should  not  be  conjoined,  1 
charge  you,  on  your  souls,  to  utter  it. 

Claud.  Know  you  any.  Hero? 

Hero.  None,  my  lord. 

Friar.  Know  you  any,  Count? 

Lem.  I  dare  make  his  answer,  none. 

Claud.  O,  what  men  dare  do!  what  men  may  do! 
what  men  daily  do,  not  knowing  what  they  do!  2/ 
Bene.  How  now!  interjections?  Why,  then, 
some  be  of  laughing,  as,  ah,  ha,  he! 

Claud.  Stand  thee  by,  friar.  Father,  by  your 
leave: 

Will  you  with  free  and  unconstrained  soul 
Give  me  this  maid,  your  daughter? 

Leon.  As  freely,  son,  as  God  did  give  her  me. 
Claud.  And  what  have  I  to  give  you  back,  whose 
worth 

May  counterpoise  this  rich  and  precious  gift? 

D.  Pedro.  Nothing,  unless  you  render  her  again. 
Claud.  Sweet  Prince,  you  learn  me  noble 
thankfulness.  ^3 

There,  Leonato,  take  her  back  again: 

Give  not  this  rotten  orange  to  your  friend; 

She’s  but  the  sign  and  semblance  of  her  honour. 
Behold  how  like  a  maid  she  blushes  here! 

O,  what  authority  and  show  of  truth 
Can  cunning  sin  cover  itself  withal! 

Comes  not  that  blood  as  modest  evidence 
To  witness  simple  virtue?  Would  you  not  swear. 
All  you  that  see  her,  that  she  were  a  maid,  40 
By  th^se  exterior  shows?  But  she  is  none: 

She  knows  the  heat  of  a  luxurious  bed; 

Her  blush  is  guiltiness,  not  modesty. 

Lem.  What  do  you  mean,  my  lord? 

Claud.  Not  to  be  married. 

Not  to  knit  my  soul  to  an  approved  wanton. 

Lem.  Dear  my  lord,  if  you,  in  your  own  proof. 
Have  vanquish’d  the  resistance  of  her  youth. 

And  made  defeat  of  her  virginity — 

Claud.  I  know  what  you  would  say:  if  I  have 
known  her. 

You  will  say  she  did  embrace  me  as  a  husband. 
And  so  extenuate  the  ’forehand  sin:  5/ 

No,  Leonato, 

I  never  tempted  her  with  word  too  large; 

But,  as  a  brother  to  his  sister,  show’d 
Bashful  sincerity  and  eomely  love. 

Hero.  And  seem’d  I  ever  otherwise  to  you? 
Claud.  Out  on  thee!  Seeming!  I  will  write 
against  it: 

You  seem  to  me  as  Dian  in  her  orb. 

As  chaste  as  is  the  bud  ere  it  be  blown; 


521 


SCENE  I 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


But  you  are  more  intemperate  in  your  blood  6o 
Than  Venus,  or  those  pamper’d  animals 
That  rage  in  savage  sensuality. 

Hero.  Is  my  lord  well,  that  he  doth  speak  so 
wide? 

Leon.  Sweet  Prince,  why  speak  not  you? 

D.  Pedro.  What  should  I  speak? 

I  stand  dishonour’d,  that  have  gone  about 
To  link  my  dear  friend  to  a  common  stale. 

Lem.  Are  these  things  spoken,  or  do  I  but  dream? 
D.  John.  Sir,  they  are  spoken,  and  these  things 
are  true. 

Bene.  This  looks  not  like  a  nuptial. 

Hero.  True!  O  God! 

Claud.  Leonato,  stand  I  here?  70 

Is  this  the  Prince?  is  this  the  Prince’s  brother? 

Is  this  face  Hero’s?  are  our  eyes  our  own? 

Lem.  All  this  is  so:  but  what  of  this,  my  lord? 
Claud.  Let  me  but  move  one  question  to  your 
daughter; 

And,  by  that  fatherly  and  kindly  power 
That  you  have  in  her,  bid  her  answer  truly. 

Lem.  I  charge  thee  do  so,  as  thou  art  my  child. 
Hero.  O,  God  defend  me!  how  am  I  beset! 

What  kind  of  catechising  call  you  this? 

Claud.  To  make  you  answer  truly  to  your 
name.  So 

Hero.  Is  it  not  Hero?  Who  can  blot  that  name 
With  any  just  reproach? 

Claud.  Marry,  that  can  Hero; 

Hero  itself  can  blot  out  Hero’s  virtue. 

What  man  was  he  talk’d  with  you  yesternight 
Out  at  your  window  betwixt  twelve  and  one? 
Now,  if  you  are  a  maid,  answer  to  this. 

Hero.  I  talk’d  with  no  man  at  that  hour,  my  lord. 
D.  Pedro.  Why,  then  are  you  no  maiden. 
Leonato, 

I  am  sorry  you  must  hear:  upon  mine  honour, 
Myself,  my  brother  and  this  grieved  Count  90 
Did  see  her,  hear  her,  at  that  hour  last  night 
Talk  with  a  ruffian  at  her  chamber-window; 

Who  hath  indeed,  most  like  a  liberal  villain. 
Confess’d  the  vile  encounters  they  have  had 
A  thousand  times  in  secret. 

D.  John.  Fie,  fie!  they  are  not  to  be  named,  my 
lord, 

Not  to  be  spoke  of: 

There  is  not  chastity  enough  in  language 
Without  offence  to  utter  them.  Thus,  pretty  lady, 
I  am  sorry  for  thy  much  misgovernment.  too 
Claud.  O  Hero,  what  a  Hero  hadst  thou  been. 

If  half  thy  outward  graces  had  been  placed 
About  thy  thoughts  and  counsels  of  thy  heart! 

But  fare  thee  well,  most  foul,  most  fair!  farewell. 
Thou  pure  impiety  and  impious  purity! 

For  thee  I’ll  lock  up  all  the  gates  of  love. 


And  on  my  eyelids  shall  conjecture  hang. 

To  turn  all  beauty  into  thoughts  of  harm, 

And  never  shall  it  more  be  gracious. 

Lem.  Hath  no  man’s  dagger  here  a  point  for 
me?  uo 

[Hero  swoms.] 

Beat.  Why,  how  now,  cousin!  wherefore  sink 
you  down? 

D.  John.  Come,  let  us  go.  These  things,  come 
thus  to  light. 

Smother  her  spirits  up. 

[Exeunt  don  pedro,  don  john,  and  claudio. 
Bene.  How  doth  the  lady? 

Beat.  Dead,  I  think.  Help,  uncle! 

Hero!  why.  Hero!  Uncle!  Signior  Benedick! 
Friar! 

Lem.  O  Fate!  take  not  away  thy  heavy  hand. 
Death  is  the  fairest  cover  for  her  shame 
That  may  be  wish’d  for. 

Beat.  How  now,  cousin  Hero! 

Friar.  Have  comfort,  lady. 

Lem.  Dost  thou  look  up?  120 

Friar.  Yea,  wherefore  should  she  not? 

Lem.  Wherefore!  Why,  doth  not  every  earthly 
thing 

Cry  shame  upon  her?  Could  she  here  deny 
The  story  that  is  printed  in  her  blood? 

Do  not  live.  Hero;  do  not  ope  thine  eyes: 

For,  did  I  think  thou  wouldst  not  quickly  die. 
Thought  I  thy  spirits  were  stronger  than  thy 
shames. 

Myself  would,  on  the  rearward  of  reproaches. 
Strike  at  thy  life.  Grieved  I,  I  had  but  one? 

Chid  I  for  that  at  frugal  nature’s  frame?  /50 
O,  one  too  much  by  thee!  Why  had  I  one? 

Why  ever  wast  thou  lovely  in  my  eyes? 

Why  had  I  not  with  charitable  hand 
Took  up  a  beggar’s  issue  at  my  gates. 

Who  smirched  thus  and  mired  with  infamy, 

I  might  have  said  “No  part  of  it  is  mine; 

This  shame  derives  itself  from  unknown  loins”? 
But  mine  and  mine  I  loved  and  mine  I  praised 
And  mine  that  I  was  proud  on,  mine  so  much 
That  I  myself  was  to  myself  not  mine,  140 

Valuing  of  her — why,  she,  O,  she  is  fallen 
Into  a  pit  of  ink,  that  the  wide  sea 
Hath  drops  too  few  to  wash  her  clean  again 
And  salt  too  little  which  may  season  give 
To  her  foul-tainted  flesh! 

Bene.  Sir,  sir,  be  patient. 

For  my  part,  I  am  so  attired  in  wonder, 

I  know  not  what  to  say. 

Beat.  O,  on  my  soul,  my  cousin  is  belied! 

Bene.  Lady,  were  you  her  bedfellow  last  night? 
Beat.  No,  truly  not;  although,  until  last  night, 

I  have  this  twelvemonth  been  her  bedfellow.  i$i 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


Leon,  Confirm’d,  confirm’d!  O,  that  is  stronger 
made 

Which  was  before  barr’d  up  with  ribs  of  iron! 
Would  the  two  Princes  lie,  and  Claudio  lie. 

Who  loved  her  so,  that,  speaking  of  her  foulness. 
Wash’d  it  with  tears?  Hence  from  her!  let  her 
die. 

Friar.  Hear  me  a  little;  for  I  have  only  been 
Silent  so  long  and  given  way  unto 
This  course  of  fortune. 

By  noting  of  the  lady.  I  have  mark’d  i6o 

A  thousand  blushing  apparitions 
To  start  into  her  face,  a  thousand  innocent 
shames 

In  angel  whiteness  beat  away  those  blushes; 

And  in  her  eye  there  hath  appear’d  a  fire. 

To  burn  the  errors  that  these  Princes  hold 
Against  her  maiden  truth.  Call  me  a  fool; 

Trust  not  my  reading  nor  my  observations. 
Which  with  experimental  seal  doth  warrant 
The  tenour  of  my  book;  trust  not  my  age. 

My  reverence,  calling,  nor  divinity,  /70 

If  this  sweet  lady  lie  not  guiltless  here 
Under  some  biting  error. 

Lem.  Friar,  it  cannot  be. 

Thou  seest  that  all  the  grace  that  she  hath  left 
Is  that  she  will  not  add  to  her  damnation 
A  sin  of  perjury;  she  not  denies  it: 

Why  seek’st  thou  then  to  cover  with  excuse 
That  which  appears  in  proper  nakedness? 

Friar.  Lady,  what  man  is  he  you  are  accused  of? 
Hero.  They  know  that  do  accuse  me;  I  know 
none: 

If  I  know  more  of  any  man  alive  1 80 

Than  that  which  maiden  modesty  doth  warrant. 
Let  all  my  sins  lack  mercy!  O  my  father. 

Prove  you  that  any  man  with  me  conversed 
At  hours  unmeet,  or  that  I  yesternight 
Maintain’d  the  change  of  words  with  any 
creature. 

Refuse  me,  hate  me,  torture  me  to  death! 

Friar.  There  is  some  strange  misprision  in  the 
Princes. 

Bern.  Two  of  them  have  the  very  bent  of 
honour; 

And  if  their  wisdoms  be  misled  in  this. 

The  practice  of  it  lives  in  John  the  Bastard,  ipo 
Whose  spirits  toil  in  frame  of  villainies. 

Lem.  I  know  not.  If  they  speak  but  truth  of  her. 
These  hands  shall  tear  her;  if  they  wrong  her 
honour. 

The  proudest  of  them  shall  well  hear  of  it. 

Time  hath  not  yet  so  dried  this  blood  of  mine. 
Nor  age  so  eat  up  my  invention. 

Nor  fortune  made  such  havoc  of  my  means. 

Nor  my  bad  life  reft  me  so  much  of  friends. 


But  they  shall  find,  awaked  in  such  a  kind. 

Both  strength  of  limb  and  policy  of  mind,  200 

Ability  in  means  and  choice  of  friends. 

To  quit  me  of  them  throughly. 

Friar  Pause  awhile. 

And  let  my  counsel  sway  you  in  this  case. 

Your  daughter  here  the  Princes  left  for  dead: 

Let  her  awhile  be  secretly  kept  in. 

And  publish  it  that  she  is  dead  indeed; 

Maintain  a  mourning  ostentation 
And  on  your  family’s  old  monument 
Hang  mournful  epitaphs  and  do  all  rites 
That  appertain  unto  a  burial.  210 

Leon.  What  shall  become  of  this?  what  will  this 
do? 

Friar.  Marry,  this  well  carried  shall  on  her 
behalf 

Change  slander  to  remorse;  that  is  some  good: 
But  not  for  that  dream  I  on  this  strange  course. 
But  on  this  travail  look  for  greater  birth. 

She  dying,  as  it  must  be  so  maintain’d. 

Upon  the  instant  that  she  was  accused. 

Shall  be  lamented,  pitied,  and  excused 
Of  every  hearer:  for  it  so  falls  out 
That  what  we  have  we  prize  not  to  the  worth  220 
Whiles  we  enjoy  it,  but  being  lack’d  and  lost. 
Why,  then  we  rack  the  value,  then  we  find 
The  virtue  that  possession  would  not  show  us 
Whiles  it  was  ours.  So  will  it  fare  with  Claudio: 
When  he  shall  hear  she  died  upon  his  words, 

The  idea  of  her  life  shall  sweetly  creep 
Into  his  study  of  imagination. 

And  every  lovely  organ  of  her  life 
Shall  come  apparell’d  in  more  precious  habit. 
More  moving-delicate  and  full  of  life,  250 

Into  the  eye  and  prospect  of  his  soul. 

Than  when  she  lived  indeed;  then  shall  he  mourn. 
If  ever  love  had  interest  in  his  liver. 

And  wish  he  had  not  so  accused  her. 

No,  though  he  thought  his  accusation  true. 

Let  this  be  so,  and  doubt  not  but  success 
Will  fashion  the  event  in  better  shape 
Than  I  can  lay  it  down  in  likelihood. 

But  if  all  aim  but  this  be  levell’d  false. 

The  supposition  of  the  lady’s  death  24.0 

Will  quench  the  wonder  of  her  infamy: 

And  if  it  sort  not  well,  you  may  conceal  her. 

As  best  befits  her  wounded  reputation. 

In  some  reclusive  and  religious  life, 

Out  of  all  eyes,  tongues,  minds  and  injuries. 

Bene.  Signior  Leonato,  let  the  friar  advise  you: 
And  though  you  know  my  inwardness  and  love 
Is  very  much  unto  the  Prince  and  Claudio, 

Yet,  by  mine  honour,  I  will  deal  in  this 
As  secretly  and  justly  as  your  soul  250 

Should  with  your  body. 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


Lem,  Being  that  I  flow  in  grief, 

The  smallest  twine  may  lead  me. 

Friar.  ’Tis  well  consented:  presently  away; 

For  to  strange  sores  strangely  they  strain  the 
cure. 

Come,  lady,  die  to  live:  this  wedding-day 
Perhaps  is  but  prolong’d:  have  patience  and 
endure. 

[Exeunt  all  but  benedick  and  Beatrice. 
Bene.  Lady  Beatrice,  have  you  wept  all  this 
while? 

Beat.  Yea,  and  I  will  weep  a  while  longer. 

Bene.  I  will  not  desire  that. 

Beat.  You  have  no  reason;  I  do  it  freely.  260 
Bene.  Surely  I  do  believe  your  fair  cousin  is 
wronged. 

Beat.  Ah,  how  much  might  the  man  deserve  of 
me  chat  would  right  her! 

Bene.  Is  there  any  way  to  show  such  friendship? 
Beat.  A  very  even  way,  but  no  such  friend. 

Bene.  May  a  man  do  it? 

Beat.  It  is  a  man’s  office,  but  not  yours. 

Bene.  I  do  love  nothing  in  the  world  so  well  as 
you:  is  not  that  strange?  270 

Beat.  As  strange  as  the  thing  I  know  not.  It  were 
as  possible  for  me  to  say  I  loved  nothing  so  well 
as  you:  but  believe  me  not;  and  yet  I  lie  not;  I 
confess  nothing,  nor  I  deny  nothing.  I  am  sorry 
for  my  cousin. 

Bene.  By  my  sword,  Beatrice,  thou  lovest  me. 
Beat.  Do  not  swear,  and  eat  it. 

Bene.  I  will  swear  by  it  that  you  love  me;  and  I 
will  make  him  eat  it  that  says  I  love  not  you. 

Beat.  Will  you  not  eat  your  word?  2 So 

Bene.  With  no  sauce  that  can  be  devised  to  it. 
I  protest  I  love  thee. 

Beat.  Why,  then,  God  forgive  me! 

Bene.  What  offence,  sweet  Beatrice? 

Beat.  You  have  stayed  me  in  a  happy  hour:  I  was 
about  to  protest  I  loved  you. 

Bene.  And  do  it  with  all  thy  heart. 

Beat.  I  love  you  with  so  much  of  my  heart  that 
none  is  left  to  protest. 

Bene.  Come,  bid  me  do  anything  for  thee.  2^0 
Beat.  Kill  Claudio. 

Bene.  Ha!  not  for  the  wide  world. 

Beat.  You  kill  me  to  deny  it.  Farewell. 

Bene.  Tarry,  sweet  Beatrice. 

Beat.  I  am  gone,  though  I  am  here:  there  is  no 
love  in  you:  nay,  I  pray  you,  let  me  go. 

Bene.  Beatrice — 

Beat.  In  faith,  I  will  go. 

Bene.  We’ll  be  friends  first. 

Beat.  You  dare  easier  be  friends  with  me  than 
fight  with  mine  enemy.  50/ 

Bene.  Is  Claudio  thine  enemy? 


Beat.  Is  he  not  approved  in  the  height  a  villain, 
that  hath  slandered,  scorned,  dishonoured  my 
kinswoman?  O  that  I  were  a  man!  What,  bear 
her  in  hand  until  they  come  to  take  hands;  and 
then,  with  public  accusation,  uncovered  slander, 
unmitigated  rancour — O  God,  that  I  were  a  man! 
I  would  eat  his  heart  in  the  market-place. 

Bene.  Hear  me,  Beatri  ce —  ^10 

Beat.  Talk  with  a  man  out  at  a  window!  A 
proper  saying! 

Bene.  Nay,  but,  Beatrice — 

Beat.  Sweet  Hero!  She  is  wronged,  she  is 
slandered,  she  is  undone. 

Bene.  Beat — 

Beat.  Princes  and  counties!  Surely,  a  princely 
testimony,  a  goodly  count.  Count  Comfect;  a 
sweet  gallant,  surely!  O  that  I  were  a  man  for 
his  sake!  or  that  I  had  any  friend  would  be  a  man 
for  my  sake!  But  manhood  is  melted  into  cour¬ 
tesies,  valour  into  compliment,  and  men  are  only 
turned  into  tongue,  and  trim  ones  too:  he  is  now 
as  valiant  as  Hercules  that  only  tells  a  lie  and 
swears  it.  I  cannot  be  a  man  with  wishing,  there¬ 
fore  I  will  die  a  woman  with  grieving. 

Bene.  Tarry,  good  Beatrice.  By  this  hand,  I  love 
thee. 

Beat.  Use  it  for  my  love  some  other  way  than 
swearing  by  it.  ^50 

Bene.  Think  you  in  your  soul  the  Count  Claudio 
hath  wronged  Hero? 

Beat.  Yea,  as  sure  as  I  have  a  thought  or  a 
soul. 

Bene.  Enough,  I  am  engaged;  I  will  challenge 
him.  I  will  kiss  your  hand,  and  so  I  leave  you. 
By  this  hand,  Claudio  shall  render  me  a  dear 
account.  As  you  hear  of  me,  so  think  of  me.  Go, 
comfort  your  cousin:  I  must  say  she  is  dead;  and 
so,  farewell.  [Exeunt.  ^40 

Scene  ii.  A  prism 

Enter  Dogberry,  verges,  and  sexton,  in  govms; 
and  the  watch,  with  conrade  and  borachio. 
Dog.  Is  our  whole  dissembly  appeared? 

Verg.  O,  a  stool  and  a  cushion  for  the  sexton. 

Sex.  Which  be  the  malefactors? 

Dog.  Marry,  that  am  I  and  my  partner. 

Verg.  Nay,  that’s  certain;  we  have  the  exhi¬ 
bition  to  examine. 

Sex.  But  which  are  the  offenders  that  are  to  be 
examined?  let  them  come  before  master  con¬ 
stable. 

Dog.  Yea,  marry,  let  them  come  before  me. 
What  is  your  name,  friend?  // 

Bora.  Borachio. 

Dog.  Pray,  write  down,  Borachio.  Yours, 
sirrah? 


ACT  V 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


524 

Con.  I  am  a  gentleman,  sir,  and  my  name  is  Con- 
rade. 

Dog.  Write  down,  master  gentleman  Conrade. 
Masters,  do  you  serve  God? 

Bora.  I  Yea,  sir,  we  hope. 

Dog.  Write  down,  that  they  hope  they  serve 
God:  and  write  God  first;  for  God  defend  but 
God  should  go  before  such  villains!  Masters,  it 
is  proved  already  that  you  are  little  better  than 
false  knaves;  and  it  will  go  near  to  be  thought  so 
shortly.  How  answer  you  for  yourselves? 

Con.  Marry,  sir,  we  say  we  are  none. 

Dog.  A  marvellous  witty  fellow,  I  assure  you; 
but  I  will  go  about  with  him.  Come  you  hither, 
sirrah;  a  word  in  your  ear:  sir,  I  say  to  you,  it 
is  thought  you  are  false  knaves.  50 

Bora.  Sir,  1  say  to  you  we  are  none. 

Dog.  Well,  stand  aside.  Tore  God,  they  are 
both  in  a  tale.  Have  you  writ  down,  that  they 
are  none? 

Sex.  Master  constable,  you  go  not  the  way  to 
examine:  you  must  call  forth  the  watch  that  are 
their  accusers. 

Dog.  Yea,  marry,  that’s  the  eftest  way.  Let  the 
watch  come  forth.  Masters  I  charge  you,  in  the 
Prince’s  name,  accuse  these  men.  40 

ist  Watch.  This  man  said,  sir,  that  Don  John, 
the  Prince’s  brother,  was  a  villain. 

Dog.  Write  down  Prince  John  a  villain.  Why, 
this  is  flat  perjury,  to  call  a  Prince’s  brother 
villain. 

Bora.  Master  constable — 

Dog.  Pray  thee,  fellow,  peace:  I  do  not  like  thy 
look,  I  promise  thee. 

Sex.  What  heard  you  him  say  else? 

2nd  Watch.  Marry,  that  he  had  received  a  thou¬ 
sand  ducats  of  Don  John  for  accusing  the  Lady 
Hero  wrongfully.  5/ 

Dog.  Flat  burglary  as  ever  was  committed. 

Verg.  Yea,  by  mass,  that  it  is. 

Sex.  What  else,  fellow? 

ist  Watch.  And  that  Count  Claudio  did  mean, 
upon  his  words,  to  disgrace  Hero  before  the 
whole  assembly,  and  not  marry  her. 

Dog.  O  villain!  thou  wilt  be  condemned  into 
everlasting  redemption  for  this. 

Sex.  What  else?  60 

ist  Watch.  This  is  all. 

Sex.  And  this  is  more,  masters,  than  you  can 
deny.  Prince  John  is  this  morning  secretly  stolen 
away;  Hero  was  in  this  manner  accused,  in  this 
very  manner  refused,  and  upon  the  grief  of  this 
suddenly  died.  Master  constable,  let  these  men 
be  bound,  and  brought  to  Leonato’s:  I  will  go 
before  and  show  him  their  examination.  [Exit. 


Dog.  Come,  let  them  be  opinioned. 

Verg.  Let  them  be  in  the  hands —  70 

Con.  Off,  coxcomb! 

Dog.  God’s  my  life,  where’s  the  sexton?  let 
him  write  down  the  Prince’s  officer  coxcomb. 
Come,  bind  them.  Thou  naughty  varlet! 

Con.  Away!  you  are  an  ass,  you  are  an  ass. 

Dog.  Dost  thou  not  suspect  my  place?  dost  thou 
not  suspect  my  years?  O  that  he  were  here  to 
write  me  down  an  ass!  But,  masters,  remember 
that  I  am  an  ass;  though  it  be  not  written  down, 
yet  forget  not  that  I  am  an  ass.  No,  thou  villain, 
thou  art  full  of  piety,  as  shall  be  proved  upon  thee 
by  good  witness.  I  am  a  wise  fellow,  and,  which 
is  more,  an  officer,  and,  which  is  more,  a  house¬ 
holder,  and,  which  is  more,  as  pretty  a  piece  of 
flesh  as  any  is  in  Messina,  and  one  that  knows 
the  law,  go  to;  and  a  rich  fellow  enough,  go  to; 
and  a  fellow  that  hath  had  losses,  and  one  that 
hath  two  gowns  and  everything  handsome  about 
him.  Bring  him  away.  O  that  I  had  been  writ 
down  an  ass!  [Exeunt,  po 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  Before  Leonato's  house 
Enter  leonato  and  antonio. 

Ant.  If  you  go  on  thus,  you  will  kill  yourself; 
And  ’tis  not  wisdom  thus  to  second  grief 
Against  yourself. 

Leon.  I  pray  thee,  cease  thy  counsel, 

Which  falls  into  mine  ears  as  profitless 
As  water  in  a  sieve:  give  not  me  counsel; 

Nor  let  no  comforter  delight  mine  ear 
But  such  a  one  whose  wrongs  do  suit  with 
mine. 

Bring  me  a  father  that  so  loved  his  child. 

Whose  joy  of  her  is  overwhelm’d  like  mine. 

And  bid  him  speak  of  patience;  10 

Measure  his  woe  the  length  and  breadth  of  mine 
And  let  it  answer  every  strain  for  strain. 

As  thus  for  thus  and  such  a  grief  for  such. 

In  every  lineament,  branch,  shape,  and  form: 

If  such  a  one  will  smile  and  stroke  his  beard. 

Bid  sorrow  wag,  cry  “hem”!  when  he  should 
groan. 

Patch  grief  with  proverbs,  make  misfortune 
drunk 

With  candle-wasters;  bring  him  yet  to  me, 

And  I  of  him  will  gather  patience. 

But  there  is  no  such  man:  for,  brother,  men  20 
Can  counsel  and  speak  comfort  to  that  grief 
Which  they  themselves  not  feel;  but,  tasting  it, 
Their  counsel  turns  to  passion,  which  before 
Would  give  preceptial  medicine  to  rage. 

Fetter  strong  madness  in  a  silken  thread, 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


Charm  ache  with  air  and  agony  with  words: 

No,  no;  ’tis  all  men’s  office  to  speak  patience 
To  those  that  wrincr  under  the  load  of  sorrow, 

o  . 

But  no  man’s  virtue  nor  sufficiency 
To  be  so  moral  when  he  shall  endure  ?o 

The  like  himself.  Therefore  give  me  no  counsel: 
My  griefs  cry  louder  than  advertisement. 

Ant.  Therein  do  men  from  children  nothing 
differ. 

Leon.  I  pray  thee,  peace.  I  will  be  flesh  and 
blood; 

For  there  was  never  yet  philosopher 
That  could  endure  the  toothache  patiently. 
However  they  have  writ  the  style  of  gods 
And  made  a  push  at  chance  and  sufferance. 

Ant.  Yet  bend  not  all  the  harm  upon  yourself; 
Make  those  that  do  offend  you  suffer  too.  40 
Leon.  There  thou  speak’st  reason:  nay,  I  will 
do  so. 

My  soul  doth  tell  me  Hero  is  belied; 

And  that  shall  Claudio  know;  so  shall  the  Prince 
And  all  of  them  that  thus  dishonour  her. 

Ant.  Here  comes  the  Prince  and  Claudio  hastily. 

Enter  don  pedro  and  claudio. 

D.  Pedro.  Good  den,  good  den. 

Claud.  Good  day  to  both  of  you. 

Leon.  Hear  you,  my  lords — 

D.  Pedro.  We  have  some  haste,  Leonato. 
Leon.  Some  haste,  my  lord!  well,  fare  you  well, 
my  lord: 

Are  you  so  hasty  now?  well,  all  is  one. 

D.  Pedro.  Nay,  do  not  quarrel  with  us,  good 
old  man.  50 

Ant.  If  he  could  right  himself  with  quarrelling. 
Some  of  us  would  lie  low. 

Claud.  Who  wrongs  him? 

Leon.  Marry,  thou  dost  wrong  me;  thou  dis¬ 
sembler,  thou: — 

Nay,  never  lay  thy  hand  upon  thy  sword; 

I  fear  thee  not. 

Claud.  Marry,  beshrew  my  hand. 

If  it  should  give  your  age  such  cause  of  fear: 

In  faith,  my  hand  meant  nothing  to  my  sword. 
Leon.  Tush,  tush,  man;  never  fleer  and  jest  at 
me: 

I  speak  not  like  a  dotard  nor  a  fool. 

As  under  privilege  of  age  to  brag  60 

What  I  have  done  being  young,  or  what  would  do 
Were  I  not  old.  Know,  Claudio,  to  thy  head. 
Thou  hast  wrong’d  mine  innocent  child  and 
me 

That  I  am  forced  to  lay  my  reverence  by 
And,  with  grey  hairs  and  bruise  of  many  days, 

Do  challenge  thee  to  trial  of  a  man. 

1  say  thou  hast  belied  mine  innocent  child; 


Thy  slander  hath  gone  through  and  through  her 
heart. 

And  she  lies  buried  with  her  ancestors; 

O,  in  a  tomb  where  never  scandal  slept,  70 

Save  this  of  hers,  framed  by  thy  villainy! 

Claud.  My  villainy? 

Leon.  Thine,  Claudio;  thine,  I  say. 

D.  Pedro.  You  say  not  right,  old  man. 

Leon.  My  lord,  my  lord, 

I’ll  prove  it  on  his  body,  if  he  dare. 

Despite  his  nice  fence  and  his  active  practice. 

His  May  of  youth  and  bloom  of  lustihood. 

Claud.  Away!  I  will  not  have  to  do  with  you. 
Leon.  Canst  thou  so  daff  me?  Thou  hast  kill’d 
my  child: 

If  thou  kill’st  me,  boy,  thou  shalt  kill  a  man. 

Ant.  He  shall  kill  two  of  us,  and  men  indeed: 

But  that’s  no  matter;  let  him  kill  one  first;  81 
Win  me  and  wear  me;  let  him  answer  me. 

Come,  follow  me,  boy;  come,  sir  boy,  come,  fol¬ 
low  me: 

Sir  boy.  I’ll  whip  you  from  your  foining  fence; 
Nay,  as  I  am  a  gentleman,  I  will. 

Leon.  Brother — 

Ant.  Content  yourself.  God  knows  I  loved  my 
niece; 

And  she  is  dead,  slander’d  to  death  by  villains, 
That  dare  as  well  answer  a  man  indeed 
As  I  dare  take  a  serpent  by  the  tongue:  ^0 

Boys,  apes,  braggarts.  Jacks,  milksops! 

Leon.  Brother  Antony — 

Ant.  Hold  you  content.  What,  man!  I  know 
them,  yea. 

And  what  they  weigh,  even  to  the  utmost 
scruple — 

Scrambling,  out-facing,  fashion-monging  boys. 
That  lie  and  cog  and  flout,  deprave  and  slander, 
Go  anticly,  show  outward  hideousness. 

And  speak  off  half  a  dozen  dangerous  words. 
How  they  might  hurt  their  enemies,  if  they  durst; 
And  this  is  all. 

Leon.  But,  brother  Antony — 

Ant.  Come, ’tis  no  matter:  loo 

Do  not  you  meddle;  let  me  deal  in  this. 

D.  Pedro.  Gentlemen  both,  we  will  not  wake 
your  patience. 

My  heart  is  sorry  for  your  daughter’s  death: 

But,  on  my  honour,  she  was  charged  with  noth¬ 
ing 

But  what  was  true  and  very  full  of  proof. 

Leon.  My  lord,  my  lord — 

D.  Pedro.  I  will  not  hear  you. 

Leon.  No?  Come,  brother;  away!  I  will  be 
heard. 

Ant.  And  shall,  or  some  of  us  will  smart  for  it. 

[Exeunt  leonato  and  antonio. 


526  MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


D.  Pedro.  See,  see;  here  comes  the  man  we  went 
to  seek.  no 

Enter  benedick. 

Claud.  Now,  signior,  what  news? 

Bene.  Good  day,  my  lord. 

D.  Pedro.  Welcome,  signior:  you  are  almost 
come  to  part  almost  a  fray. 

Claud.  We  had  like  to  have  had  our  two  noses 
snapped  olF  with  two  old  men  without  teeth. 

D.  Pedro.  Leonato  and  his  brother.  What 
thinkest  thou?  Had  we  fought,  I  doubt  we  should 
have  been  too  young  for  them. 

Bene.  In  a  false  quarrel  there  is  no  true  valour. 
I  came  to  seek  you  both.  121 

Claud.  We  have  been  up  and  down  to  seek  thee; 
for  we  are  high-proof  melancholy  and  would  fain 
have  it  beaten  away.  Wilt  thou  use  thy  wit? 

Bene.  It  is  in  my  scabbard:  shall  I  draw  it? 

D.  Pedro.  Dost  thou  wear  thy  wit  by  thy  side? 
Claud.  Never  any  did  so,  though  very  many 
have  been  beside  their  wit.  I  will  bid  thee  draw, 
as  we  do  the  minstrels;  draw,  to  pleasure  us. 

D.  Pedro.  As  I  am  an  honest  man,  he  looks  pale. 
Art  thou  sick,  or  angry?  75/ 

Claud.  What,  courage,  man!  What  though  care 
killed  a  cat,  thou  hast  mettle  enough  in  thee  to 
kill  care. 

Bene.  Sir,  I  shall  meet  your  wit  in  the  career,  an 
you  charge  it  against  me.  I  pray  you  choose 
another  subject. 

Claud.  Nay,  then,  give  him  another  staff:  this 
last  was  broke  cross. 

D.  Pedro.  By  this  light,  he  changes  more  and 
more:  I  think  he  be  angry  indeed.  74/ 

Claud.  If  he  be,  he  knows  how  to  turn  his  girdle. 
Bene.  Shall  I  speak  a  word  in  your  ear? 

Claud.  God  bless  me  from  a  challenge! 

Bene.  [Aside  to  claudio]  You  are  a  villain;  I 
jest  not:  I  will  make  it  good  how  you  dare,  with 
what  you  dare,  and  when  you  dare.  Do  me  right, 
or  I  will  protest  your  cowardice.  You  have  killed 
a  sweet  lady,  and  her  death  shall  fall  heavy  on 
you.  Let  me  hear  from  you.  757 

Claud.  Well,  I  will  meet  you,  so  I  may  have 
good  cheer. 

D.  Pedro.  What,  a  feast,  a  feast? 

Claud,  r  faith,  I  thank  him;  he  hath  bid  me  to  a 
calf  s  head  and  a  capon;  the  which  if  I  do  not 
carve  most  curiously,  say  my  knife’s  naught. 
Shall  I  not  find  a  woodcock  too? 

Bene.  Sir,  your  wit  ambles  well;  it  goes  easily. 
D.  Pedro.  I’ll  tell  thee  how  Beatrice  praised  thy 
wit  the  other  day.  I  said,  thou  hadst  a  fine  wit: 
“True,”  said  she,  “a  fine  little  one.”  “No,”  said 
I,  “a  great  wit”:  “Right  ”  says  she,  “a  great 


gross  one.”  “Nay,”  said  I,  “a  good  wit”:  “Just,” 
said  she,  “it  hurt’s  nobody.”  “Nay,”  said  I,  “the 
gentleman  is  wise”:  “Certain,”  said  she,  “a  wise 
gentleman.”  “Nay,”  said  I,  “he  hath  the  ton¬ 
gues”:  “That  I  believe,”  said  she,  “for  he  swore 
a  thing  to  me  on  Monday  night,  which  he  for¬ 
swore  on  Tuesday  morning;  there’s  a  double 
tongue;  there’s  two  tongues.”  Thus  did  she,  an 
hour  together,  trans-shape  thy  particular  virtues: 
yet  at  last  she  concluded  with  a  sigh,  thou  wast 
the  properest  man  in  Italy. 

Claud.  For  the  which  she  wept  heartily  and  said 
she  cared  not. 

D.  Pedro.  Yea,  that  she  did;  but  yet,  for  all  that, 
an  if  she  did  not  hate  him  deadly,  she  would  love 
him  dearly:  the  old  man’s  daughter  told  us 
all.  180 

Claud.  All,  all;  and,  moreover,  God  saw  him 
when  he  was  hid  in  the  garden. 

D.  Pedro.  But  when  shall  we  set  the  savage  bull’s 
horns  on  the  sensible  Benedick’s  head? 

Claud.  Yea,  and  text  underneath,  “Here  dwells 
Benedick  the  married  man”? 

Bene.  Fare  you  well,  boy:  you  know  my  mind. 
I  will  leave  you  now  to  your  gossip-like  humour: 
you  break  jests  as  braggarts  do  their  blades, 
which,  God  be  thanked,  hurt  not.  My  lord,  for 
your  many  courtesies  I  thank  you:  I  must  dis¬ 
continue  your  company:  your  brother  the 
bastard  is  fled  from  Messina:  you  have  among 
you  killed  a  sweet  and  innocent  lady.  For  my 
Lord  Lackbeard  there,  he  and  I  shall  meet:  and, 
till  then,  peace  be  with  him.  [Exit. 

D.  Pedro.  He  is  earnest. 

Claud.  In  most  profound  earnest;  and.  I’ll  war¬ 
rant  you,  for  the  love  of  Beatrice. 

D.  Pedro.  And  hath  challenged  thee.  200 

Claud.  Most  sincerely. 

D.  Pedro.  What  a  pretty  thing  man  is  when  he 
goes  in  his  doublet  and  hose  and  leaves  off  his 
wit! 

Claud.  He  is  then  a  giant  to  an  ape;  but  then  is 
an  ape  a  doctor  to  such  a  man. 

D.  Pedro.  But,  soft  you,  let  me  be:  pluck  up,  my 
heart,  and  be  sad.  Did  he  not  say,  my  brother  was 
fled? 

Enter  dogberry,  verges,  and  the  watch, 
with  conrade  and  borachio. 

Dog.  Come  you,  sir:  if  justice  cannot  tame  you, 
she  shall  ne’er  weigh  more  reasons  in  her  balance: 
nay,  an  you  be  a  cursing  hypocrite  once,  you 
must  be  looked  to. 

D.  Pedro.  How  now?  two  of  my  brother’s  men 
bound!  Borachio  one! 

Claud.  Hearken  after  their  offence,  my  lord. 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


D.  Pedro.  Officers,  what  otfence  have  these  men 
done? 

Dog.  Marry,  sir,  they  have  committed  false 
report;  moreover,  they  have  spoken  untruths; 
secondarily,  they  are  slanders;  sixth  and  lastly, 
they  have  belied  a  lady;  thirdly,  they  have  veri¬ 
fied  unjust  things;  and,  to  conclude,  they  are 
lying  knaves. 

D.  Pedro.  First,  I  ask  thee  what  they  have  done; 
thirdly,  I  ask  thee  what’s  their  offence;  sixth 
and  lastly,  why  they  are  committed;  and,  to  con¬ 
clude,  what  you  lay  to  their  charge. 

Claud.  Rightly  reasoned,  and  in  his  own  divi¬ 
sion;  and,  by  my  troth,  there’s  one  meaning  well 
suited.  25/ 

D.  Pedro.  Who  have  you  offended,  masters, 
that  you  are  thus  bound  to  your  answer?  this 
learned  constable  is  too  cunning  to  be  under¬ 
stood:  what’s  your  offence? 

Bora.  Sweet  Prince,  let  me  go  no  farther  to  mine 
answer:  do  you  hear  me,  and  let  this  Count  kill 
me.  I  have  deceived  even  your  very  eyes:  what 
your  wisdoms  could  not  discover,  these  shallow 
fools  have  brought  to  light;  who  in  the  night 
overheard  me  confessing  to  this  man  how  Don 
John  your  brother  incensed  me  to  slander  the 
Lady  Hero,  how  you  were  brought  into  the  or¬ 
chard  and  saw  me  court  Margaret  in  Hero’s  gar¬ 
ments,  how  you  disgraced  her,  when  you  should 
marry  her:  my  villainy  they  have  upon  record; 
which  I  had  rather  seal  with  my  death  than  re¬ 
peat  over  to  my  shame.  The  lady  is  dead  upon 
mine  and  my  master’s  false  accusation;  and, 
briefly,  I  desire  nothing  but  the  reward  of  a 
villain.  2^1 

D.  Pedro.  Runs  not  this  speech  like  iron  through 
your  blood? 

Claud.  I  have  drunk  poison  whiles  he  utter’d  it. 

D.  Pedro.  But  did  my  brother  set  thee  on  to  this? 

Bora.  Yea,  and  paid  me  richly  for  the  practice  of 
it. 

D.  Pedro.  He  is  composed  and  framed  of 
treachery: 

And  fled  he  is  upon  this  villainy. 

Claud.  Sweet  Hero!  now  thy  image  doth  appear 
In  the  rare  semblance  that  I  loved  it  first.  2  60 

Dog.  Come,  bring  away  the  plaintiffs:  by  this 
time  our  sexton  hath  reformed  Signior  Leonato 
of  the  matter:  and,  masters,  do  not  forget  to 
specify,  when  time  and  place  shall  serve,  that  I 
am  an  ass. 

Verg.  Here,  here  comes  master  Signior  Leo¬ 
nato,  and  the  sexton  too. 

Re-enter  leonato  and  antonio,  'with  the  sexton. 

Leon.  Which  is  the  villain?  let  me  see  his  eyes. 


That,  when  I  note  another  man  like  him,  270 
I  may  avoid  him:  which  of  these  is  he? 

Bora.  If  you  would  know  your  wronger,  look 
on  me. 

Leon.  Art  thou  the  slave  that  with  thy  breath 
hast  kill’d 

Mine  innocent  child? 

Bora.  Yea,  even  I  alone. 

Leon.  No,  not  so,  villain;  thou  behest  thyself: 
Here  stand  a  pair  of  honourable  men; 

A  third  is  fled,  that  had  a  hand  in  it. 

I  thank  you.  Princes,  for  my  daughter’s  death: 
Record  it  with  your  high  and  worthy  deeds: 
’Twas  bravely  done,  if  you  bethink  you  of  it. 

Claud.  I  know  not  how  to  pray  your  patience; 
Yet  I  must  speak.  Choose  your  revenge  yourself; 
Impose  me  to  what  penance  your  invention 
Can  lay  upon  my  sin:  yet  sinn’d  I  not 
But  in  mistaking. 

D.  Pedro.  By  my  soul,  nor  I : 

And  yet,  to  satisfy  this  good  old  man, 

I  would  bend  under  any  heavy  weight 
That  he’ll  enjoin  me  to. 

Leon.  I  cannot  bid  you  bid  my  daughter  live; 
That  were  impossible;  but,  I  pray  you  both. 
Possess  the  people  in  Messina  here  2pi 

How  innocent  she  died;  and  if  your  love 
Can  labour  aught  in  sad  invention. 

Hang  her  an  epitaph  upon  her  tomb 
And  sing  it  to  her  bones,  sing  it  to-night: 
To-morrow  morning  come  you  to  my  house. 

And  since  you  could  not  be  my  son-in-law. 

Be  yet  my  nephew:  my  brother  hath  a  daughter. 
Almost  the  copy  of  my  child  that’s  dead. 

And  she  alone  is  heir  to  both  of  us :  500 

Give  her  the  right  you  should  have  given  her 
cousin. 

And  so  dies  my  revenge. 

Claud.  O  noble  sir. 

Your  over-kindness  doth  wring  tears  from  me! 
I  do  embrace  your  offer;  and  dispose 
For  henceforth  of  poor  Claudio. 

Leon.  To-morrow  then  I  will  expect  your 
coming; 

To-night  I  take  my  leave.  This  naughty  man 
Shall  face  to  face  be  brought  to  Margaret, 

Who  I  believe  was  pack’d  in  all  this  wrong. 

Hired  to  it  by  your  brother. 

Bora.  No,  by  my  soul,  she  was  not. 

Nor  knew  not  what  she  did  when  she  spoke  to 
me. 

But  always  hath  been  just  and  virtuous  5/2 

In  any  thing  that  I  do  know  by  her. 

Dog.  Moreover,  sir,  which  indeed  is  not  under 
white  and  black,  this  plaintiff  here,  the  offender, 
did  call  me  ass:  I  beseech  you,  let  it  be  remem- 


528  MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


bered  in  his  punishment.  And  also,  the  watch 
heard  them  talk  of  one  Deformed:  they  say  he 
wears  a  key  in  his  ear  and  a  lock  hanging  by  it, 
and  borrows  money  in  God’s  name,  the  which  he 
hath  used  so  long  and  never  paid  that  now  men 
grow  hard-hearted  and  will  lend  nothing  for 
God’s  sake:  pray  you,  examine  him  upon  that 
point. 

Leon.  I  thank  thee  for  thy  care  and  honest  pains. 

Dog.  Your  worship  speaks  like  a  most  thankful 
and  reverend  youth;  and  I  praise  God  for  you. 

Leon.  There’s  for  thy  pains. 

Dog.  God  save  the  foundation! 

Leon.  Go,  I  discharge  thee  of  thy  prisoner,  and 
I  thank  thee.  330 

Dog.  I  leave  an  arrant  knave  with  your  wor¬ 
ship;  which  I  beseech  your  worship  to  correct 
yourself,  for  the  example  of  others.  God  keep 
your  worship!  I  wish  your  worship  well;  God 
restore  you  to  health!  I  humbly  give  you  leave  to 
depart;  and  if  a  merry  meeting  may  be  wished, 
God  prohibit  it!  Come,  neighbour. 

[Exeunt  Dogberry  and  verges. 

Lem.  Until  to-morrow  morning,  lords,  farewell. 

Ant.  Farewell,  my  lords:  we  look  for  you 
to-morrow. 

D.  Pedro.  We  will  not  fail. 

Claud.  To-night  I’ll  mourn  with  Hero. 

Lem.  [To  the  watch]  Bring  you  these  fellows 
on.  We’ll  talk  with  Margaret,  341 

How  her  acquaintance  grew  with  this  lewd  fel¬ 
low. 

[Exeunt  severally. 

Scene  11.  Leonato' s  garden 
Enter  benedick  and  Margaret,  meeting. 

Bene.  Pray  thee,  sweet  Mistress  Margaret,  de¬ 
serve  well  at  my  hands  by  helping  me  to  the 
speech  of  Beatrice. 

Marg.  Will  you  then  write  me  a  sonnet  in 
praise  of  my  beauty? 

Bene.  In  so  high  a  style,  Margaret,  that  no  man 
living  shall  come  over  it;  for,  in  most  comely 
truth,  thou  deservest  it. 

Marg.  To  have  no  man  come  over  me!  why, 
shall  I  always  keep  below  stairs?  10 

Bene.  Thy  wit  is  as  quick  as  the  greyhound’s 
mouth;  it  catches. 

Marg.  And  yours  as  blunt  as  the  fencer’s  foils, 
which  hit,  but  hurt  not. 

Bene.  A  most  manly  wit,  Margaret;  it  will  not 
hurt  a  woman:  and  so,  I  pray  thee,  call  Beatrice: 
I  give  thee  the  bucklers. 

Marg.  Give  us  the  swords;  we  have  bucklers  of 
our  own. 

Bene.  If  you  use  them,  Margaret,  you  must  put 


in  the  pikes  with  a  vice;  and  they  are  dangerous 
weapons  for  maids. 

Marg.  Well,  I  will  call  Beatrice  to  you,  who  I 
think  hath  legs. 

Bene.  And  therefore  will  come. 

[Exit  MARGARET. 

[Siwgj]  The  god  of  love. 

That  sits  above. 

And  knows  me,  and  knows  me. 

How  pitiful  I  deserve — 

1  mean  in  singing;  but  in  loving,  Leander  the  good 
swimmer,  Troilus  the  first  employer  of  pandars, 
and  a  whole  bookful  of  these  quondam  carpet- 
mongers,  whose  names  yet  run  smoothly  in  the 
even  road  of  a  blank  verse,  why,  they  were 
never  so  truly  turned  over  and  over  as  my  poor 
self  in  love.  Marry,  I  cannot  show  it  in  rhyme; 
I  have  tried:  I  can  find  out  no  rhyme  to  “lady” 
but  “baby,”  an  innocent  rhyme;  for  “scorn,” 
“horn,”  a  hard  rhyme;  for  “school,”  “fool,”  a 
babbling  rhyme;  very  ominous  endings:  no,  I 
was  not  born  under  a  rhyming  planet,  nor  I  can¬ 
not  woo  in  festival  terms.  41 

Enter  Beatrice. 

Sweet  Beatrice,  wouldst  thou  come  when  I  called 
thee? 

Beat.  Yea,  signior,  and  depart  when  you  bid  me. 

Bene.  O,  stay  but  till  then! 

Beat.  “Then”  is  spoken;  fare  you  well  now: 
and  yet,  ere  1  go,  let  me  go  with  that  I  came; 
which  is,  with  knowing  what  hath  passed  be¬ 
tween  you  and  Claudio. 

Bene.  Only  foul  words;  and  thereupon  I  will 
kiss  thee.  5/ 

Beat.  Foul  words  is  but  foul  wind,  and  foul 
wind  is  but  foul  breath,  and  foul  breath  is  noi¬ 
some;  therefore  I  will  depart  unkissed. 

Bene.  Thou  hast  frighted  the  word  out  of  his 
right  sense,  so  forcible  is  thy  wit.  But  I  must  tell 
thee  plainly,  Claudio  undergoes  my  challenge; 
and  either  I  must  shortly  hear  from  him,  or  I 
will  subscribe  him  a  coward.  And,  I  pray  thee 
now,  tell  me  for  which  of  my  bad  parts  didst  thou 
first  fall  in  love  with  me?  61 

Beat.  For  them  all  together;  which  maintained 
so  politic  a  state  of  evil  that  they  will  not  admit 
any  good  part  to  intermingle  with  them.  But  for 
which  of  my  good  parts  did  you  first  suffer  love 
for  me? 

Bene.  Suffer  love!  a  good  epithet!  I  do  suffer 
love  indeed,  for  I  love  thee  against  my  will. 

Beat.  In  spite  of  your  heart,  I  think;  alas,  poor 
heart!  If  you  spite  it  for  my  sake,  I  will  spite  it 
for  yours;  for  I  will  never  love  that  which  my 
friend  hates. 


SCENE  II 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


Bene.  Thou  and  I  are  too  wise  to  woo  peaceably. 
Beat.  It  appears  not  in  this  confession:  there’s 
not  one  wise  man  among  twenty  that  will  praise 
himself. 

Bene.  An  old,  an  old  instance,  Beatrice,  that 
lived  in  the  time  of  good  neighbours.  If  a  man  do 
not  erect  in  this  age  his  own  tomb  ere  he  dies,  he 
shall  live  no  longer  in  monument  than  the  bell 
rings  and  the  widow  weep^. 

Beat.  And  how  long  is  that,  think  you? 

Bene,  Question:  why,  an  hour  in  clamour  and  a 
quarter  in  rheum:  therefore  is  it  most  expedient 
for  the  wise,  if  DonWorm,  his  conscience,  find 
no  impediment  to  the  contrary,  to  be  the  trumpet 
of  his  own  virtues,  as  I  am  to  myself.  So  much 
for  praising  myself,  who,  I  myself  will  bear  wit¬ 
ness,  is  praiseworthy:  and  now  tell  me,  how  doth 
your  cousin?  91 

Beat.  Very  ill. 

Bene.  And  how  do  you? 

Beat.  Very  ill  too. 

Bene.  Serve  God,  love  me,  and  mend.  There 
will  I  leave  you  too,  for  here  comes  one  in  haste. 

Enter  Ursula. 

Urs.  Madam,  you  must  come  to  your  uncle. 
Yonder’s  old  coil  at  home:  it  is  proved  my  Lady 
Hero  hath  been  falsely  accused,  the  Prince  and 
Claudio  mightily  abused;  and  Don  John  is  the 
author  of  all,  who  is  fled  and  gone.  Will  you 
come  presently? 

Beat.  Will  you  go  hear  this  news,  signior? 

Bene.  I  will  live  in  thy  heart,  die  in  thy  lap,  and 
be  buried  in  thy  eyes;  and  moreover  I  will  go 
with  thee  to  thy  uncle’s .  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  A  church 

Enter  don  pedro,  claudio,  and  three  or  four 
with  tapers. 

Claud.  Is  this  the  monument  of  Leonato? 

A  Lord.  It  is,  my  lord. 

Claud.  [Reading  out  of  a  scroll] 

“Done  to  death  by  slanderous  tongues 
Was  the  Hero  that  here  lies: 

Death,  in  guerdon  of  her  wrongs. 

Gives  her  fame  which  never  dies. 

So  the  life  that  died  with  shame 
Lives  in  death  with  glorious  fame.” 

Hang  thou  there  upon  the  tomb. 

Praising  her  when  I  am  dumb.  w 

Now,  music,  sound,  and  sing  your  solemn  hymn. 

SONG 

“Pardon,  goddess  of  the  night. 

Those  that  slew  thy  virgin  knight; 


529 

For  the  which,  with  songs  of  woe. 

Round  about  her  tomb  they  go. 

Midnight,  assist  our  moan; 

Help  us  to  sigh  and  groan. 

Heavily,  heavily: 

Graves,  yawn  and  yield  your  dead, 

Till  death  be  uttered,  20 

Heavily,  heavily.” 

Claud.  Now,  unto  thy  bones  good  night! 

Yearly  will  1  do  this  rite. 

D.  Pedro.  Good  morrow,  masters;  put  your 
torches  out: 

The  wolves  have  prey’d;  and  look,  the  gentle 
day. 

Before  the  wheels  of  Phoebus,  round  about 
Dapples  the  drowsy  east  with  spots  of  grey. 
Thanks  to  you  all,  and  leave  us:  fare  you  well. 
Claud.  Good  morrow,  masters:  each  his  several 
way. 

D.  Pedro.  Come,  let  us  hence,  and  put  on 
other  weeds;  50 

And  then  to  Leonato’s  we  will  go. 

Claud.  x\nd  Hymen  now  with  luckier  issue 
speed’s 

Than  this  for  whom  we  render’d  up  this  woe. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  A  room  in  Leonato* s  house 
Enter  leonato,  antonio,  benedick,  Beatrice, 

MARGARET,  URSULA,  FRIAR  FRANCIS,  and  HERO. 

Friar.  Did  I  not  tell  you  she  was  innocent? 

Leon.  So  are  the  Prince  and  Claudio,  who 
accused  her 

Upon  the  error  that  you  heard  debated: 

But  Margaret  was  in  some  fault  for  this. 

Although  against  her  will,  as  it  appears 
In  the  true  course  of  all  the  question. 

Ant.  Well,  I  am  glad  that  all  things  sort  so  well. 
Bene.  And  so  am  I,  being  else  by  faith  enforced. 
To  call  young  Claudio  to  a  reckoning  for  it. 

Leon.  Well,  daughter,  and  you  gentlewomen 
all, 

Withdraw  into  a  chamber  by  yourselves,  // 
And  when  I  send  for  you,  come  hither  mask’d. 

[Exeunt  ladies. 

The  Prince  and  Claudio  promised  by  this  hour 
To  visit  me.  You  know  your  offlce,  brother: 

You  must  be  father  to  your  brother’s  daughter. 
And  give  her  to  young  Claudio. 

Ant.  Which  I  will  do  with  comfirm’d  coun¬ 
tenance. 

Bene.  Friar,  1  must  entreat  your  pains,  I  think. 
Friar.  To  do  what,  signior? 

Bene.  To  bind  me,  or  undo  me;  one  of  them. 
Signior  Leonato,  truth  it  is,  good  signior,  21 


ACT  V 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


530 

Your  niece  regards  me  with  an  eye  of  favour. 
Leon.  That  eye  my  daughter  lent  her:  ’tis  most 
true. 

Bene.  And  I  do  with  an  eye  of  love  requite  her. 
Leon.  The  sight  whereof  I  think  you  had  from 
me, 

From  Claudio  and  the  Prince:  but  what’s  your 
will? 

Bene.  Your  answer,  sir,  is  enigmatical: 

But,  for  my  will,  my  will  is  your  good  will 
May  stand  with  ours,  this  day  to  be  conjoin’d 
In  the  state  of  honourable  marriage:  50 

In  which,  good  friar,  I  shall  desire  your  help. 
Leon.  My  heart  is  with  your  liking. 

Friar.  And  my  help. 

Here  comes  the  Prince  and  Claudio. 

Enter  don  pedro  and  claudio,  and  two  or 
three  others. 

D.  Pedro.  Good  morrow  to  this  fair  assembly. 
Lean.  Good  morrow.  Prince;  good  morrow, 
Claudio: 

We  here  attend  you.  Are  you  yet  determined 
To-day  to  marry  with  my  brother’s  daughter? 
Claud.  I’ll  hold  my  mind,  were  she  an  Ethiope. 
Leon.  Call  her  forth,  brother;  here’s  the  friar 
ready.  [Exit  antonio. 

D.  Pedro.  Good  morrow.  Benedick.  Why, 
what’s  the  matter,  40 

That  you  have  such  a  February  face. 

So  full  of  frost,  of  storm,  and  cloudiness? 

Claud.  I  think  he  thinks  upon  the  savage  bull. 
Tush,  fear  not,  man;  we’ll  tip  thy  horns  with 
gold 

And  all  Europa  shall  rejoice  at  thee. 

As  once  Europa  did  at  lusty  Jove, 

When  he  would  play  the  noble  beast  in  love. 

Bene.  Bull  Jove,  sir,  had  an  amiable  low; 

And  some  such  strange  bull  leap’d  your  father’s 
cow. 

And  got  a  calf  in  that  same  noble  feat  50 

Much  like  to  you,  for  you  have  just  his  bleat. 
Claud.  For  this  I  owe  you:  here  comes  other 
reckonings. 

Re-enter  antonio,  with  the  ladies  masked. 

Which  is  the  lady  I  must  seize  upon? 

Ant.  This  same  is  she,  and  I  do  give  you  her. 
Claud.  Why,  then  she’s  mine.  Sweet,  let  me  see 
your  face. 

Leon.  No,  that  you  shall  not,  till  you  take  her 
hand 

Before  this  friar  and  swear  to  marry  her. 

Claud.  Give  me  your  hand:  before  this  holy 
friar. 


I  am  your  husband,  if  you  like  of  me. 

Hero.  And  when’I  lived,  I  was  your  other 
wife:  [Unmasking.  60 

And  when  you  loved,  you  were  my  other  hus¬ 
band. 

Claud.  Another  Hero! 

Hero.  Nothing  certainer: 

One  Hero  died  defiled,  but  I  do  live. 

And  surely  as  I  live,  1  am  a  maid. 

D.  Pedro.  The  former  Hero!  Hero  that  is  dead! 
Leon.  She  died,  my  lord,  but  whiles  her  slander 
lived. 

Friar.  All  this  amazement  can  I  qualify; 

When  after  that  the  holy  rites  are  ended. 

I’ll  tell  you  largely  of  fair  Hero’s  death: 
Meantime  let  wonder  seem  familiar,  70 

And  to  the  chapel  let  us  presently. 

Bene.  Soft  and  fair,  friar.  Which  is  Beatrice? 

Beat.  [  Unmasking]  I  answer  to  that  name. 

What  is  your  will? 

Bene.  Do  not  you  love  me? 

Beat.  MTy,  no;  no  more  than  reason. 

Bene.  Why,  then  your  uncle  and  the  Prince  and 
Claudio 

Have  been  deceived;  they  swore  you  did. 

Beat.  Do  not  you  love  me? 

Bene.  Troth,  no;  no  more  than  reason. 

Beat.  Why,  then  my  cousin  Margaret  and 
Ursula 

Are  much  deceived;  for  they  did  swear  you  did. 
Bene.  They  swore  that  you  were  almost  sick 
for  me.  80 

Beat.  They  swore  that  you  were  well-nigh 
dead  for  me. 

Bene.  ’Tis  no  such  matter.  Then  you  do  not 
love  me? 

Beat.  No,  truly,  but  in  friendly  recompense. 
Leon.  Come,  cousin,  I  am  sure  you  love  the 
gentleman. 

Claud.  And  I’ll  be  sworn  upon’t  that  he  loves 
her; 

For  here’s  a  paper  written  in  his  hand, 

A  halting  sonnet  of  his  own  pure  brain. 

Fashion’d  to  Beatrice. 

Hero.  And  here’s  another 

Writ  in  my  cousin’s  hand,  stolen  from  her  pocket. 
Containing  her  affection  unto  Benedick.  po 
Bene.  A  miracle!  here’s  our  own  hands  against 
our  hearts.  Come,  I  will  have  thee;  but,  by  this 
light,  I  take  thee  for  pity. 

Beat.  I  would  not  deny  you;  but,  by  this  good 
day,  I  yield  upon  great  persuasion;  and  partly 
to  save  your  life,  for  1  was  told  you  were  in  a 
consumption. 

Bene.  Peace!  I  will  stop  your  mouth. 

Kissing  her. 


SCENE  IV 

D.  Pedro.  How  dost  thou,  Benedick,  the  married 
man?  loo 

Bene.  I’ll  tell  thee  what.  Prince;  a  college  of 
wit-crackers  cannot  flout  me  out  of  my  humour. 
Dost  thou  think  I  care  for  a  satire  or  an  epigram? 
No:  if  a  man  will  be  beaten  with  brains,  a’  shall 
wear  nothing  handsome  about  him.  In  brief, 
since  I  do  purpose  to  marry,  I  will  think  nothing 
to  any  purpose  that  the  world  can  say  against  it; 
and  therefore  never  flout  at  me  for  what  I  have 
said  against  it;  for  man  is  a  giddy  thing,  and  this 
is  my  conclusion.  For  thy  part,  Claudio,  I  did 
think  to  have  beaten  thee;  but  in  that  thou  art 
like  to  be  my  kinsman,  live  unbruised  and  love 
my  cousin. 

Claud.  I  had  well  hoped  thou  wouldst  have 
denied  Beatrice,  that  I  might  have  cudgelled 
thee  out  of  thy  single  life,  to  make  thee  a  double 
dealer;  which,  out  of  question,  thou  wilt  be,  if 


531 

my  cousin  do  not  look  exceeding  narrowly  to 
thee. 

Bene.  Come,  come,  we  are  friends:  let’s  have  a 
dance  ere  we  are  married,  that  we  may  lighten 
our  own  hearts  and  our  wives’  heels.  121 

Leon.  We’ll  have  dancing  afterward. 

Bene.  First,  of  my  word;  therefore  play,  music. 
Prince,  thou  art  sad;  get  thee  a  wife,  get  thee  a 
wife:  there  is  no  staff  more  reverend  than  one 
tipped  with  horn. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  My  lord,  your  brother  John  is  ta’en  in 
flight. 

And  brought  with  armed  men  back  to  Messina. 

Bene.  Think  not  on  him  till  to-morrow:  I’ll 
devise  thee  brave  punishments  for  him.  Strike 
up,  pipers. 

Dance,  [Exeunt. 


MUCH  ADO  ABOUT  NOTHING 


^  The  Life  of 

KING  HENRY  THE  FIFTH 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS 


brothers  to  the  Kin^ 


King  Henry  the  Fifth 
Duke  of  Gloucester 
Duke  of  Bedford 
Duke  of  Exeter,  Uncle  to  the  King 
Duke  of  York,  cousin  to  the  King 
Earl  of  Salisbury 
Earl  of  Westmoreland 
Earl  ofWarwick 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury 
Bishop  of  Ely 
Earl  of  Cambridge 
Lord  Scroop 
Sir  Thomas  Grey 
Sir  Thomas  Erpingham 
Gower 
Fluellen 
Macmorris 
Jamy 
Bates 
Court 
Williams 
Pistol 
Nym 

Bardolph 
Boy 

A  Herald 


officers  in  King  Henry's 
army 


soldiers  in  King  Henry's  army 


Three  Messengers 

Charles  the  Sixth,  King  of  France 

Lewis,  the  Dauphin 

Duke  of  Burgundy 

Duke  of  Orleans 

Duke  of  Bourbon 

The  Constable  of  France 

RaMBURES  I  77  u  T  J 

Grandpre  I 

Governor  of  Harfleur 
Montjoy,  a  French  Herald 
Ambassador  to  the  King  of  England 
French  Prisoner 


Isabel,  Queen  of  France 

Katharine,  daughter  to  Charles  and  Isabel 

Alice,  a  lady  attending  on  her . 

Hostess  of  a  tavern  in  Eastcheap^  formerly  Mistress 
Quickly,  and  novo  married  to  Pistol 


Chorus 

Non-Speaking:  Lords,  Ladies,  Officers,  Soldiers^ 
Citizens,  and  Attendants 

Scene:  England;  afterwards  France 


PROLOGUE 

Enter  chorus. 

Chor.  O  for  a  Muse  of  fire,  that  would  ascend 
The  brightest  heaven  of  invention 
A  kingdom  for  a  stage,  princes  to  act 
And  monarchs  to  behold  the  swelling  scene! 

Then  should  the  warlike  Harry,  like  himself. 
Assume  the  port  of  Mars;  and  at  his  heels. 
Leash’d  in  like  hounds,  should  famine,  sword, 
and  fire 

Crouch  for  employment.  But  pardon,  gentles 
all. 

The  flat  unraised  spirits  that  have  dared 

On  this  unworthy  scaffold  to  bring  forth  10 

So  great  an  object:  can  this  cockpit  hold 

The  vasty  fields  of  France?  or  may  we  cram 

Within  this  wooden  O  the  very  casques 

That  did  affright  the  air  at  Agincourt? 

O,  pardon!  since  a  crooked  figure  may 
Attest  in  little  place  a  million; 

And  let  us,  ciphers  to  this  great  accompt. 


On  your  imaginary  forces  work. 

Suppose  within  the  girdle  of  these  walls 
Are  now  confined  two  mighty  monarchies,  20 
Whose  high  upreared  and  abutting  fronts 
The  perilous  narrow  ocean  parts  asunder: 

Piece  out  our  imperfections  with  your 
thoughts; 

Into  a  thousand  parts  divide  one  man, 

And  make  imaginary  puissance: 

Think,  when  we  talk  of  horses,  that  you  see 
them 

Printing  their  proud  hoofs  i’  the  receiving 
earth; 

For  ’tis  your  thoughts  that  now  must  deck  our 
kings. 

Carry  them  here  and  there;  jumping  o’er 
times. 

Turning  the  accomplishment  of  many  years  50 

Into  an  hour-glass:  for  the  which  supply, 

Admit  me  Chorus  to  this  history; 

Who,  prologue-like,  your  humble  patience  pray. 
Gently  to  hear,  kindly  to  judge,  our  play.  [Exit. 


SCENE 


KING  HENRY  V 


533 


ACT  I 

Scene  i.  London:  an  ante-chamber  in  the 
Kings  palace 

Enter  the  archbishop  of  canterbury,  and  the 

BISHOP  OF  ELY. 

Cant.  My  lord.  I’ll  tell  you;  that  self  bill  is  urged. 
Which  in  the  eleventh  year  of  the  last  king’s  reign 
Was  like,  and  had  indeed  against  us  pass’d. 

But  that  the  scambling  and  unquiet  time 
Did  push  it  out  of  farther  question. 

Ely.  But  how,  my  lord,  shall  we  resist  it  now.^ 
Cant.  It  must  be  thought  on.  If  it  pass  against  us. 
We  lose  the  better  half  of  our  possession: 

For  all  the  temporal  lands  which  men  devout 
By  testament  have  given  to  the  Church  lo 

Would  they  strip  from  us;  being  valued  thus: 

As  much  as  would  maintain,  to  the  King’s  honour. 
Full  fifteen  earls  and  fifteen  hundred  knights. 

Six  thousand  and  two  hundred  good  esquires; 
And,  to  relief  of  lazars  and  weak  age. 

Of  indigent  faint  souls  past  corporal  toil, 

A  hundred  almshouses  right  well  supplied; 

And  to  the  coffers  of  the  King  beside, 

A  thousand  pounds  by  the  year:  thus  runs  the  bill. 
Ely.  This  would  drink  deep. 

Cant.  ’Twould  drink  the  cup  and  all.  20 

Ely.  But  what  prevention? 

Cant.  The  King  is  full  of  grace  and  fair  regard. 
Ely.  And  a  true  lover  of  the  holy  Church. 

Cant.  The  courses  of  his  youth  promised  it  not. 
The  breath  no  sooner  left  his  father’s  body. 

But  that  his  wildness,  mortified  in  him. 

Seem’d  to  die  too;  yea,  at  that  very  moment 
Consideration,  like  an  angel,  came 
And  whipp’d  the  offending  Adam  out  of  him. 
Leaving  his  body  as  a  paradise,  50 

To  envelope  and  contain  celestial  spirits. 

Never  was  such  a  sudden  scholar  made; 

Never  came  reformation  in  a  flood 

With  such  a  heady  currance,  scouring  faults; 

Nor  never  Hydra-headed  wilfulness 
So  soon  did  lose  his  seat  and  all  at  once 
As  in  this  King. 

Ely.  We  are  blessed  in  the  change. 

Cant.  Hear  him  but  reason  in  divinity. 

And  all-admiring  with  an  inward  wish 
You  would  desire  the  King  were  made  a  prelate: 
Hear  him  debate  of  commonwealth  affairs,  4/ 
You  would  say  it  hath  been  all  in  all  his  study: 
List  his  discourse  of  war,  and  you  shall  hear 
A  fearful  battle  render’d  you  in  music: 

Turn  him  to  any  cause  of  policy. 

The  Gordian  knot  of  it  he  will  unloose. 

Familiar  as  his  garter:  that,  when  he  speaks. 

The  air,  a  charter’d  libertine,  is  still, 


And  the  mute  wonder  lurketh  in  men’s  ears. 

To  steal  his  sweet  and  honey’d  sentences;  50 
So  that  the  art  and  practic  part  of  life 
Must  be  the  mistress  to  this  theoric: 

Which  is  a  wonder  how  his  Grace  should  glean  it. 
Since  his  addiction  was  to  courses  vain. 

His  companies  unletter’d,  rude,  and  shallow, 

His  hours  fill’d  up  with  riots,  banquets,  sports, 
And  never  noted  in  him  any  study. 

Any  retirement,  any  sequestration 
From  open  haunts  and  popularity. 

Ely.  The  strawberry  grows  underneath  the 
nettle  60 

And  wholesome  berries  thrive  and  ripen  best 
Neighbour’d  by  fruit  of  baser  quality: 

And  so  the  Prince  obscured  his  contemplation 
Under  the  veil  of  wildness;  which,  no  doubt. 
Grew  like  the  summer  grass,  fastest  by  night. 
Unseen,  yet  crescive  in  his  faculty. 

Cant.  It  must  be  so;  for  miracles  are  ceased; 

And  therefore  we  must  needs  admit  the  means 
How  things  are  perfected. 

Ely.  But,  my  good  lord. 

How  now  for  mitigation  of  this  bill  70 

Urged  by  the  commons?  Doth  his  Majesty 
Incline  to  it,  or  no? 

Cant.  He  seems  indifferent, 

Or  rather  swaying  more  upon  our  part 
Than  cherishing  the  exhibiters  against  us; 

For  I  have  made  an  offer  to  his  Majesty, 

Upon  our  spiritual  convocation 
And  in  regard  of  causes  now  in  hand. 

Which  I  have  open’d  to  his  Grace  at  large, 

As  touching  France,  to  give  a  greater  sum 
Than  ever  at  one  time  the  clergy  yet  So 

Did  to  his  predecessors  part  withal. 

Ely.  How  did  this  offer  seem  received,  my 
lord? 

Cant.  With  good  acceptance  of  his  Majesty; 
Save  that  there  was  not  time  enough  to  hear. 

As  I  perceived  his  Grace  would  fain  have  done. 
The  severals  and  unhidden  passages 
Of  his  true  titles  to  some  certain  dukedoms 
And  generally  to  the  crown  and  seat  of  France 
Derived  from  Edward,  his  great-grandfather. 

Ely.  What  was  the  impediment  that  broke  this 
off?  9^ 

Cant.  The  French  ambassador  upon  that  instant 
Craved  audience;  and  the  hour,  I  think,  is  come 
To  give  him  hearing:  is  it  four  o’clock? 

Ely.  It  is. 

Cant.  Then  go  we  in,  to  know  his  embassy; 
Which  I  could  with  a  ready  guess  declare. 

Before  the  Frenchman  speak  a  word  of  it. 

Ely.  I’ll  wait  upon  you,  and  I  long  to  hear  it. 

{Exeunt. 


534 


ACT  I 


KING  HENRY  V 


Scene  ii.  The  sa7n€:  the  presence  chamber 
Enter  king  henry,  Gloucester,  Bedford,  exe- 
TER,  WARWICK,  WESTMORELAND,  and  Attendants, 

K.  Hen.  Where  is  my  gracious  Lord  of  Canter¬ 
bury? 

Exe.  Not  here  in  presence. 

K.  Hen.  Send  for  him,  good  uncle. 

West.  Shall  we  call  in  the  ambassador,  my  liege? 
K.  Hen.  Not  yet,  my  cousin:  we  would  be 
resolved. 

Before  we  hear  him,  of  some  things  of  weight 
That  task  our  thoughts,  concerning  us  and  France. 

Enter  the  archbishop  of  canterbury,  and  the 

BISHOP  OF  ELY. 

Cant.  God  and  his  angels  guard  your  sacred 
throne 

And  make  you  long  become  it! 

K.  Hen.  Sure,  we  thank  you. 

My  learned  lord,  we  pray  you  to  proceed 
And  justly  and  religiously  unfold  to 

Why  the  law  Salique  that  they  have  in  France 
Or  should,  or  should  not,  bar  us  in  our  claim: 

And  God  forbid,  my  dear  and  faithful  lord. 

That  you  should  fashion,  wrest,  or  bow  your 
reading. 

Or  nicely  charge  your  understanding  soul 
With  opening  titles  miscreate,  whose  right 
Suits  not  in  native  colours  with  the  truth; 

For  God  doth  know  how  many  now  in  health 
Shall  drop  their  blood  in  approbation 
Of  what  your  reverence  shall  incite  us  to.  20 
Therefore  take  heed  how  you  impawn  our 
person. 

How  you  awake  our  sleeping  sword  of  war: 

We  charge  you,  in  the  name  of  God,  take  heed; 
For  never  two  such  kingdoms  did  contend 
Without  much  fall  of  blood;  whose  guiltless  drops 
Are  every  one  a  woe,  a  sore  complaint 
’Gainst  him  whose  wrongs  give  edge  unto  the 
swords 

That  make  such  waste  in  brief  mortality. 

Under  this  conjuration  speak,  my  lord; 

For  we  will  hear,  note,  and  believe  in  heart  50 
That  what  you  speak  is  in  your  conscience 
wash’d 

As  pure  as  sin  with  baptism. 

Cant.  Then  hear  me,  gracious  sovereign,  and 
you  peers. 

That  owe  yourselves,  your  lives,  and  services 
To  this  imperial  throne.  There  is  no  bar 
To  make  against  your  Highness’  claim  to  France 
But  this,  which  they  produce  from  Pharamond, 

In  ter  ram  Sal  team  mulieres  ne  succedant: 

*‘No  woman  shall  succeed  in  Salique  land”: 


Which  Salique  land  the  French  unjustly  glose  4.0 
To  be  the  realm  bf  France,  and  Pharamond 
The  founder  of  this  law  and  female  bar. 

Yet  their  own  authors  faithfully  affirm 
That  the  land  Salique  is  in  Germany, 

Between  the  floods  of  Sala  and  of  Elbe; 

Where  Charles  the  Great,  having  subdued  the 
Saxons, 

There  left  behind  and  settled  certain  French; 
Who,  holding  in  disdain  the  German  women 
For  some  dishonest  manners  of  their  life. 
Establish’d  then  this  law;  to  wit,  no  female  fo 
Should  be  inheritrix  in  Salique  land: 

Which  Salique,  as  I  said,  ’twixt  Elbe  and  Sala, 

Is  at  this  day  in  Germany  call’d  Meisen. 

Then  doth  it  well  appear  the  Salique  law 
Was  not  devised  for  the  realm  of  France; 

Nor  did  the  French  possess  the  Salique  land 
Until  four  hundred  one  and  twenty  years 
After  defunction  of  King  Pharamond, 

Idly  supposed  the  founder  of  this  law; 

Who  died  within  the  year  of  our  redemption  6g 
Four  hundred  twenty-six;  and  Charles  the  Great 
Subdued  the  Saxons,  and  did  seat  the  French 
Beyond  the  river  Sala,  in  the  year 
Eight  hundred  five.  Besides,  their  writers  say. 
King  Pepin,  which  deposed  Childeric, 

Did,  as  heir  general,  being  descended 
Of  Blithild,  which  was  daughter  to  King  Clothair, 
Make  claim  and  title  to  the  crown  of  France. 
Hugh  Capet  also,  who  usurp’d  the  crown  6^ 
Of  Charles  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  sole  heir  male 
Of  the  true  line  and  stock  of  Charles  the  Great, 
To  find  his  title  with  some  shows  of  truth. 
Though,  in  pure  truth,  it  was  corrupt  and  naught. 
Convey’d  himself  as  heir  to  the  Lady  Lingare, 
Daughter  to  Charlemain,  who  was  the  son 
To  Lewis  the  Emperor,  and  Lewis  the  son 
Of  Charles  the  Great.  Also  King  Lewis  the 
Tenth, 

Who  was  sole  heir  to  the  usurper  Capet, 

Could  not  keep  quiet  in  his  conscience. 

Wearing  the  crown  of  France,  till  satisfied  80 
That  fair  Queen  Isabel,  his  grandmother. 

Was  lineal  of  the  Lady  Ermengare, 

Daughter  to  Charles  the  foresaid  Duke  of 
Lorraine: 

By  the  which  marriage  the  line  of  Charles  the 
Great 

Was  re-united  to  the  crown  of  France. 

So  that,  as  clear  as  is  the  summer’s  sun. 

King  Pepin’s  title  and  Hugh  Capet’s  claim. 

King  Lewis  his  satisfaction,  all  appear 
To  hold  in  right  and  title  of  the  female: 

So  do  the  kings  of  France  unto  this  day;  po 
Howbeit  they  would  hold  up  this  Salique  law 


SCENE  II 


535 


KING  HENRY  V 


To  bar  your  Highness  claiming  from  the  female, 
And  rather  choose  to  hide  them  in  a  net 
Than  amply  to  imbar  their  crooked  titles 
Usurp’d  from  you  and  your  progenitors. 

K,  Hen,  May  I  with  right  and  conscience  make 
this  claim? 

Cant.  The  sin  upon  my  head,  dread  sovereign! 
For  in  the  book  of  Numbers  is  it  writ, 

“When  the  man  dies,  let  the  inheritance 
Descend  unto  the  daughter.”  Gracious  lord,  loo 
Stand  for  your  own;  unwind  your  bloody  flag; 
Look  back  into  your  mighty  ancestors : 

Go,  my  dread  lord,  to  your  great-grandsire’s 
tomb. 

From  whom  you  claim;  invoke  his  warlike  spirit. 
And  your  great-uncle’s  Edward  the  Black 
Prince, 

Who  on  the  French  ground  play’d  a  tragedy, 
Making  defeat  on  the  full  power  of  France, 
Whiles  his  most  mighty  father  on  a  hill 
Stood  smiling  to  behold  his  lion’s  whelp 
Forage  in  blood  of  French  nobility.  no 

O  noble  English,  that  could  entertain 
With  half  their  forces  the  full  pride  of  France 
And  let  another  half  stand  laughing  by, 

All  out  of  work  and  cold  for  action! 

Ely,  Awake  remembrance  of  these  valiant  dead 
And  with  your  puissant  arm  renew  their  feats : 
You  are  their  heir;  you  sit  upon  their  throne; 

The  blood  and  courage  that  renowned  them 
Runs  in  your  veins;  and  my  thrice-puissant  liege 
Is  in  the  very  May-morn  of  his  youth,  120 

Ripe  for  exploits  and  mighty  enterprises. 

Exe.  Your  brother  kings  and  monarchs  of  the 
earth 

Do  all  expect  that  you  should  rouse  yourself. 

As  did  the  former  lions  of  your  blood. 

West.  They  know  your  Grace  hath  cause  and 
means  and  might; 

So  hath  your  Highness;  never  King  of  England 
Had  nobles  richer  and  more  loyal  subjects. 
Whose  hearts  have  left  their  bodies  here  in  Eng¬ 
land 

And  lie  pavilion’d  in  the  fields  of  France.  129 

Cant.  O,  let  their  bodies  follow,  my  dear  liege, 
With  blood  and  sword  and  fire  to  win  your 
right; 

In  aid  whereof  we  of  the  spiritualty 
Will  raise  your  Highness  such  a  mighty  sum 
As  never  did  the  clergy  at  one  time 
Bring  in  to  any  of  your  ancestors. 

K.  Hen.  We  must  not  only  arm  to  invade  the 
French, 

But  lay  down  our  proportions  to  defend 
Against  the  Scot,  who  will  make  road  upon  us 
With  all  advantages. 


Cant.  They  of  those  marches,  gracious 

sovereign,  1^0 

Shall  be  a  wall  sufficient  to  defend 
Our  inland  from  the  pilfering  borderers. 

K.  Hen.  We  do  not  mean  the  coursing  snatchers 
only. 

But  fear  the  main  intendment  of  the  Scot, 

Who  hath  been  still  a  giddy  neighbour  to  us; 

For  you  shall  read  that  my  great-grandfather 
Never  went  with  his  forces  into  France 
But  that  the  Scot  on  his  unfurnish’d  kingdom 
Came  pouring,  like  the  tide  into  a  breach. 

With  ample  and  brim  fulness  of  his  force,  /50 
Galling  the  gleaned  land  with  hot  assays. 

Girding  with  grievous  siege  castles  and  towns; 
That  England,  being  empty  of  defence, 

Hath  shook  and  trembled  at  the  ill  neighbour¬ 
hood. 

Cant.  She  hath  been  then  more  fear’d  than 
harm’d,  my  liege; 

For  hear  her  but  exampled  by  herself: 

When  all  her  chivalry  hath  been  in  France 
And  she  a  mourning  widow  of  her  nobles, 

She  hath  herself  not  only  well  defended 

But  taken  and  impounded  as  a  stray  i6o 

The  King  of  Scots;  whom  she  did  send  to  France, 

To  fill  King  Edward’s  fame  with  prisoner  kings 

And  make  her  chronicle  as  rich  with  praise 

As  is  the  ooze  and  bottom  of  the  sea 

With  sunken  wreck  and  sumless  treasuries. 

West.  But  there’s  a  saying  very  old  and  true, 

“If  that  you  will  France  win. 

Then  with  Scotland  first  begin”: 

For  once  the  eagle  England  being  in  prey. 

To  her  unguarded  nest  the  weasel  Scot  170 

Comes  sneaking  and  so  sucks  her  princely  eggs. 
Playing  the  mouse  in  absence  of  the  cat. 

To  tear  and  havoc  more  than  she  can  eat. 

Exe.  It  follows  then  the  cat  must  stay  at  home: 
Yet  that  is  but  a  crush’d  necessity. 

Since  we  have  locks  to  safeguard  necessaries. 

And  pretty  traps  to  catch  the  petty  thieves. 

While  that  the  armed  hand  doth  fight  abroad. 

The  advised  head  defends  itself  at  home; 

For  government,  though  high  and  low  and  lower. 
Put  into  parts,  doth  keep  in  one  consent,  181 
Congreeing  in  a  full  and  natural  close. 

Like  music. 

Cant.  Therefore  doth  heaven  divide 
The  state  of  man  in  divers  functions. 

Setting  endeavour  in  continual  motion; 

To  which  is  fixed,  as  an  aim  or  butt. 

Obedience:  for  so  work  the  honey-bees. 
Creatures  that  by  a  rule  in  nature  teach 
The  act  of  order  to  a  peopled  kingdom. 

They  have  a  king  and  officers  of  sorts;  190 


ACT  I 


536  KING  HENRY  V 


Where  some,  like  magistrates,  correct  at  home. 
Others,  like  merchants,  venture  trade  abroad. 
Others,  like  soldiers,  armed  in  their  stings. 

Make  boot  upon  the  summer’s  velvet  buds. 
Which  pillage  they  with  merry  march  bring 
home 

To  the  tent-royal  of  their  emperor; 

Who,  busied  in  his  majesty,  surveys 
The  singing  masons  building  roofs  of  gold. 

The  civil  citizens  kneading  up  the  honey. 

The  poor  mechanic  porters  crowding  in  200 
Their  heavy  burdens  at  his  narrow  gate. 

The  sad-eyed  justice,  with  his  surly  hum. 
Delivering  o’er  to  executors  pale 
The  lazy  yawning  drone.  I  this  infer, 

That  many  things,  having  full  reference 
To  one  consent,  may  work  contrariously: 

As  many  arrows,  loosed  several  ways. 

Come  to  one  mark;  as  many  ways  meet  in  one 
town; 

As  many  fresh  streams  meet  in  one  salt  sea; 

As  many  lines  close  in  the  dial’s  centre;  210 
So  may  a  thousand  actions,  once  afoot. 

End  in  one  purpose,  and  be  all  well  borne 
Without  defeat.  Therefore  to  France,  my  liege. 
Divide  your  happy  England  into  four; 

Whereof  take  you  one  quarter  into  France, 

And  you  withal  shall  make  all  Gallia  shake. 

If  we,  with  thrice  such  powers  left  at  home. 
Cannot  defend  our  own  doors  from  the  dog. 

Let  us  be  worried  and  our  nation  lose 
The  name  of  hardiness  and  policy.  220 

K.  Hen.  Call  in  the  messengers  sent  from  the 
Dauphin.  [Exeunt  some  Attendants. 

Now  are  we  well  resolved;  and,  by  God’s  help, 
And  yours,  the  noble  sinews  of  our  power, 

France  being  ours,  we’ll  bend  it  to  our  awe. 

Or  break  it  all  to  pieces:  or  there  we’ll  sit. 

Ruling  in  large  and  ample  empery 

O’er  France  and  all  her  almost  kingly  dukedoms. 

Or  lay  these  bones  in  an  unworthy  urn. 

Tombless,  with  no  remembrance  over  them: 
Either  our  history  shall  with  full  mouth  250 
Speak  freely  of  our  acts,  or  else  our  grave. 

Like  Turkish  mute,  shall  have  a  tongueless 
mouth. 

Not  worshipp’d  with  a  waxen  epitaph. 

Enter  ambassadors  of  France. 

Now  are  we  well  prepared  to  know  the  pleasure 
Of  our  fair  cousin  Dauphin;  for  we  hear 
Your  greeting  is  from  him,  not  from  the  King. 
ist  Amb.  May’t  please  your  Majesty  to  give  us 
leave 

Freely  to  render  what  we  have  in  charge; 

Or  shall  we  sparingly  show  you  far  off 


The  Dauphin’s  meaning  and  our  embassy?  24.0 
K.  Hen.  We  are  no  tyrant,  but  a  Christian 
king: 

Unto  whose  grace  our  passion  is  as  subject 
As  are  our  wretches  fetter’d  in  our  prisons: 
Therefore  with  frank  and  with  uncurbed  plain¬ 
ness 

Tell  us  the  Dauphin’s  mind. 
istAmb.  Thus,  then,  in  few. 

Your  Highness,  lately  sending  into  France, 

Did  claim  some  certain  dukedoms,  in  the  right 
Of  your  great  predecessor.  King  Edward  the 
Third. 

In  answer  of  which  claim,  the  Prince  our  master 
Says  that  you  savour  too  much  of  your  youth. 
And  bids  you  be  advised  there’s  nought  in 

France  25/ 

That  can  be  with  a  nimble  galliard  won; 

You  cannot  revel  into  dukedoms  there. 

He  therefore  sends  you,  meecer  for  your  spirit, 
This  tun  of  treasure;  and,  in  lieu  of  this. 

Desires  you  let  the  dukedoms  that  you  claim 
Hear  no  more  of  you.  This  the  Dauphin  speaks. 
K.  Hen.  What  treasure,  uncle? 

Exe.  Tennis-balls,  my  liege. 

K.  Hen.  We  are  glad  the  Dauphin  is  so  pleasant 
with  us; 

His  present  and  your  pains  we  thank  you  for: 
When  we  have  match’d  our  rackets  to  these 
balls,  261 

We  will,  in  France,  by  God’s  grace,  play  a  set 
Shall  strike  his  father’s  crown  into  the  hazard. 
Tell  him  he  hath  made  a  match  with  such  a 
wrangler 

That  all  the  courts  of  France  will  be  disturb’d 
With  chaces.  And  we  understand  him  well, 

How  he  comes  o’er  us  with  our  wilder  days. 

Not  measuring  what  use  we  made  of  them. 

We  never  valued  this  poor  seat  of  England; 

And  therefore,  living  hence,  did  give  ourself  270 
To  barbarous  license;  as  ’tis  ever  common 
That  men  are  merriest  when  they  are  from  home. 
But  tell  the  Dauphin  I  will  keep  my  state. 

Be  like  a  king  and  show  my  sail  of  greatness 
When  I  do  rouse  me  in  my  throne  of  France: 

For  that  I  have  laid  by  my  majesty 
And  plodded  like  a  man  for  working-days. 

But  I  will  rise  there  with  so  full  a  glory 
That  I  will  dazzle  all  the  eyes  of  France, 

Yea,  strike  the  Dauphin  blind  to  look  on  us.  2S0 
And  tell  the  pleasant  prince  this  mock  of  his 
Hath  turn’d  his  balls  to  gun-stones;  and  his  soul 
Shall  stand  sore  charged  for  the  wasteful  venge¬ 
ance 

That  shall  fly  with  them:  for  many  a  thousand 
widows 


SCENE  II 


537 


KING  HENRY  V 


Shall  this  his  mock  mock  out  of  their  dear  hus¬ 
bands; 

Mock  mothers  from  their  sons,  mock  castles 
down; 

And  some  are  yet  ungotten  and  unborn 
That  shall  have  cause  to  curse  the  Dauphin’s 
scorn. 

But  this  lies  all  within  the  will  of  God, 

To  whom  I  do  appeal;  and  in  whose  name  2^0 
Tell  you  the  Dauphin  I  am  coming  on. 

To  venge  me  as  I  may  and  to  put  forth 
My  rightful  hand  in  a  well-hallow’d  cause. 

So  get  you  hence  in  peace;  and  tell  the  Dauphin 
His  jest  will  savour  but  of  shallow  wit, 

When  thousands  weep  more  than  did  laugh  at  it. 
Convey  them  with  safe  conduct.  Fare  you  well. 

[Exeunt  ambassadors. 
Exe.  This  was  a  merry  message. 

K.  Hen.  We  hope  to  make  the  sender  blush 
at  it. 

Therefore,  my  lord,  omit  no  happy  hour  500 
That  may  give  furtherance  to  our  expedition; 

For  we  have  now  no  thought  in  us  but  France, 
Save  those  to  God,  that  run  before  our  business. 
Therefore  let  our  proportions  for  these  wars 
Be  soon  collected  and  all  things  thought  upon 
That  may  with  reasonable  swiftness  add 
More  feathers  to  our  wings;  for,  God  before, 
We’ll  chide  this  Dauphin  at  his  father’s  door. 
Therefore  let  every  man  now  task  his  thought, 
That  this  fair  action  may  on  foot  be  brought.  5/0 

[Exeunt.  Flourish. 

ACT  II 
PROLOGUE 
Flourish.  Enter  chorus. 

Chor.  Now  all  the  youth  of  England  are  on  fire, 
And  silken  dalliance  in  the  wardrobe  lies: 

Now  thrive  the  armourers,  and  honour’s  thought 
Reigns  solely  in  the  breast  of  every  man: 

They  sell  the  pasture  now  to  buy  the  horse, 
Following  the  mirror  of  all  Christian  kings 
With  winged  heels,  as  English  Mercuries. 

For  now  sits  Expectation  in  the  air, 

And  hides  a  sword  from  hilts  unto  the  point 
With  crowns  imperial,  crowns,  and  coronets,  10 
Promised  to  Harry  and  his  followers. 

The  French,  advised  by  good  intelligence 
Of  this  most  dreadful  preparation. 

Shake  in  their  fear  and  with  pale  policy 
Seek  to  divert  the  English  purposes. 

O  England!  model  to  thy  inward  greatness. 

Like  little  body  with  a  mighty  heart. 

What  mightst  thou  do,  that  honour  would  thee 
do, 


Were  all  thy  children  kind  and  natural! 

But  see  thy  fault!  France  hath  in  thee  found  out 
A  nest  of  hollow  bosoms,  which  he  fills  20 

With  treacherous  crowns;  and  three  corrupted 
men. 

One,  Richard  Earl  of  Cambridge,  and  the  second, 
Henry  Lord  Scroop  of  Masham,  and  the  third. 

Sir  Thomas  Grey,  knight,  of  Northumberland, 
Have,  for  the  gilt  of  France — O  guilt  indeed! — 
Confirm’d  conspiracy  with  fearful  France; 

And  by  their  hands  this  grace  of  kings  must  die. 

If  hell  and  treason  hold  their  promises. 

Ere  he  take  ship  for  France,  and  in  Southampton, 
Linger  your  patience  on;  and  we’ll  digest  5/ 
The  abuse  of  distance;  force  a  play: 

The  sum  is  paid;  the  traitors  are  agreed; 

The  King  is  set  from  London;  and  the  scene 
Is  now  transported,  gentles,  to  Southampton; 
There  is  the  playhouse  now,  there  must  you  sit: 
And  thence  to  France  shall  we  convey  you  safe. 
And  bring  you  back,  charming  the  narrow  seas 
To  give  you  gentle  pass;  for,  if  we  may. 

We’ll  not  offend  one  stomach  with  our  play.  40 
But,  till  the  King  come  forth,  and  not  till  then. 
Unto  Southampton  do  we  shift  our  scene.  [Exit. 

Scene  i.  London:  a  street 

Enter  nym  and  lieutenant  bardolph. 

Bard.  Well  met.  Corporal  Nym. 

Nyin.  Good  morrow.  Lieutenant  Bardolph. 

Bard.  What,  are  Ancient  Pistol  and  you  friends 
yet? 

Nym.  For  my  part,  I  care  not:  I  say  little;  but 
when  time  shall  serve,  there  shall  be  smiles;  but 
that  shall  be  as  it  may.  I  dare  not  fight;  but  I  will 
wink  and  hold  out  mine  iron:  it  is  a  simple  one; 
but  what  though?  it  will  toast  cheese,  and  it  will 
endure  cold  as  another  man’s  sword  will:  and 
there’s  an  end.  n 

Bard.  I  will  bestow  a  breakfast  to  make  you 
friends;  and  we’ll  be  all  three  sworn  brothers  to 
France:  let  it  be  so,  good  Corporal  Nym. 

Nym.  Faith,  I  will  live  so  long  as  I  may,  that’s 
the  certain  of  it;  and  when  I  cannot  live  any 
longer,  I  will  do  as  I  may:  that  is  my  rest,  that 
is  the  rendezvous  of  it. 

Bard.  It  is  certain,  corporal,  that  he  is  married 
to  Nell  Quickly:  and  certainly  she  did  you 
wrong;  for  you  were  troth-plight  to  her.  21 

Nym.  I  cannot  tell;  things  must  be  as  they  may: 
men  may  sleep,  and  they  may  have  their  throats 
about  them  at  that  time;  and  some  say  kniv^es 
have  edges.  It  must  be  as  it  may:  though 
patience  be  a  tired  mare,  yet  she  will  plod.  There 
must  be  conclusions.  Well,  I  cannot  tell. 


ACT  II 


KING  HENRY  V 


538 

Enter  pistol  and  mistress  quickly,  the  hostess. 

Bard.  Here  comes  Ancient  Pistol  and  his  wife: 
good  corporal,  be  patient  here.  How  now,  mine 
host  Pistol!  50 

Pist.  Base  tike,  call’st  thou  me  host? 

Now,  by  this  hand,  I  swear,  I  scorn  the  term; 

Nor  shall  my  Nell  keep  lodgers. 

Qttick.  No,  by  my  troth,  not  long,  for  we  can¬ 
not  lodge  and  board  a  dozen  or  fourteen  gentle¬ 
women  that  live  honestly  by  the  prick  of  their 
needles,  but  it  will  be  thought  we  keep  a  bawdy 
house  straight,  [nym  and  pistol  drauo.]  O  well  a 
day.  Lady,  if  he  be  not  drawn  now!  we  shall  see 
wilful  adultery  and  murder  committed.  40 

Bard.  Good  lieutenant!  good  corporal!  offer 
nothing  here. 

Ny?n.  Pish! 

Pist.  Pish  for  thee,  Iceland  dog!  thou  prick-ear’d 
cur  of  Iceland! 

Quick.  Good  Corporal  Nym,  show  thy  valour, 
and  put  up  your  sword. 

Nym.  Will  you  shog  off?  I  would  have  you 
solus. 

Pist.  “Solus,”  egregious  dog?  O  viper  vile! 

The  “solus”  in  thy  most  mervailous  face;  50 
The  “solus”  in  thy  teeth,  and  in  thy  throat, 

And  in  thy  hateful  lungs,  yea,  in  thy  maw,  perdy. 
And,  which  is  worse,  within  thy  nasty  mouth! 

I  do  retort  the  “solus”  in  thy  bowels; 

For  I  can  take,  and  Pistol’s  cock  is  up, 

And  flashing  fire  will  follow. 

Nym.  I  am  not  Bar  bason;  you  cannot  conjure 
me.  I  have  an  humour  to  knock  you  indifferently 
well.  If  you  grow  foul  with  me.  Pistol,  I  will 
scour  you  with  my  rapier,  as  I  may,  in  fair  terms: 
if  you  would  walk  off,  I  would  prick  your  guts  a 
little,  in  good  terms,  as  I  may:  and  that’s  the 
humour  of  it. 

Pist.  O  braggart  vile  and  damned  furious  wight! 
The  grave  doth  gape,  and  doting  death  is  near; 
Therefore  exhale. 

Bard.  Hear  me,  hear  me  what  I  say:  he  that 
strikes  the  first  stroke,  I’ll  run  him  up  to  the  hilts, 
as  I  am  a  soldier.  [Drazus.] 

Pist.  An  oath  of  mickle  might;  and  fury  shall 
abate.  70 

Give  me  thy  fist,  thy  fore- foot  to  me  give: 

Thy  spirits  are  most  tall. 

Nym.  I  will  cut  thy  thoat,  one  time  or  other,  in 
fair  terms:  that  is  the  humour  of  it. 

Pist .  ‘  ‘ Couple  a  gorge/'  ’ 

That  is  the  word.  I  thee  defy  again. 

O  hound  of  Crete,  think’ st  thou  my  spouse  to  get? 
No;  to  the  spitalgo, 

And  from  the  powdering-tub  of  infamy 


Fetch  forth  the  lazar  kite  of  Cressid’s  kind,  80 

Doll  Tearsheet  she  by  name,  and  her  espouse: 

I  have,  and  I  will  hold,  the  quondam  Quickly 
For  the  only  she;  and — pauca,  there’s  enough. 

Go  to. 

Enter  the  boy. 

Boy.  Mine  host  Pistol,  you  must  come  to  my 
master,  and  you,  hostess:  he  is  very  sick,  and 
would  to  bed.  Good  Bardolph,  put  thy  face 
between  his  sheets,  and  do  the  office  of  a  warm¬ 
ing-pan.  Faith,  he’s  very  ill. 

Away,  you  rogue!  po 

Quick.  By  my  troth,  he’ll  yield  the  crow  a 
pudding  one  of  these  days.  The  King  has  killed 
his  heart.  Good  husband,  come  home  presently. 

[Exeunt  mistress  quickly  and  boy. 

Bard.  Come,  shall  I  make  you  two  friends?  We 
must  to  France  together:  why  the  devil  should 
we  keep  knives  to  cut  one  another’s  throats? 

Pist.  Let  floods  o’erswell,  and  fiends  for  food 
howl  on! 

Nym.  You’ll  pay  me  the  eight  shillings  I  won  of 
you  at  betting? 

Pist.  Base  is  the  slave  that  pays.  100 

Nym.  That  now  I  will  have:  that’s  the  humour 
of  it. 

Pist.  As  manhood  shall  compound:  push  home. 
They  draw. 

Bard.  By  this  sword,  he  that  makes  the  first 
thrust.  I’ll  kill  him;  by  this  sword,  I  will. 

Pist.  Sword  is  an  oath,  and  oaths  must  have 
their  course. 

Bard.  Corporal  Nym,  an  thou  wilt  be  friends,  be 
friends:  an  thou  wilt  not,  why,  then,  be  enemies 
with  me  too.  Prithee,  put  up. 

Nym.  I  shall  have  my  eight  shillings  I  won  of 
you  at  betting?  in 

Pist.  A  noble  shalt  thou  have,  and  present  pay; 
And  liquor  likewise  will  I  give  to  thee. 

And  friendship  shall  combine,  and  brotherhood: 
I’ll  live  by  Nym,  and  Nym  shall  live  by  me; 

Is  not  this  just?  for  I  shall  sutler  be 
Unto  the  camp,  and  profits  will  accrue. 

Give  me  thy  hand. 

Nym.  I  shall  have  my  noble? 

Pist.  In  cash  most  justly  paid.  120 

Nym.  Well,  then,  that’s  the  humour  oft. 

Re-enter  mistress  quickly. 

Quick.  As  ever  you  came  of  women,  come  in 
quickly  to  Sir  John.  Ah,  poor  heart!  he  is  so 
shaked  of  a  burning  quotidian  tertian,  that  it  is 
most  lamentable  to  behold.  Sweet  men,  come  to 
him. 

Nym.  The  King  hath  run  bad  humours  on  the 


SCENE  I 


539 


KING  HENRY  V 


knight;  that’s  the  even  of  it. 

Pist,  Nym,  thou  hast  spoke  the  right; 

His  heart  is  fr acted  and  corroborate.  75 o 

Nym,  The  King  is  a  good  King;  but  it  must  be 
as  it  may;  he  passes  some  humours  and  careers. 

Pist.  Let  us  condole  the  knight;  for,  lambkins, 
we  will  live. 

Scene  ii.  Southampton:  a  council-chamber 
Enter  exeter,  Bedford,  and  Westmoreland. 

Bed.  ’Fore  God,  his  Grace  is  bold,  to  trust  these 
traitors. 

Exe.  They  shall  be  apprehended  by  and  by. 

West.  How  smooth  and  even  they  do  bear 
themselves! 

As  if  allegiance  in  their  bosoms  sat. 

Crowned  with  faith  and  constant  loyalty. 

Bed.  The  King  hath  note  of  all  that  they  intend. 
By  interception  which  they  dream  not  of. 

Exe.  Nay,  but  the  man  that  was  his  bedfellow. 
Whom  he  hath  dull’d  and  cloy’d  with  gracious 
favours. 

That  he  should,  for  a  foreign  purse,  so  sell  10 
His  sovereign’s  life  to  death  and  treachery. 

Trumpets  sound.  Enter  king  henry,  scroop, 
CAMBRIDGE,  GREY,  and  Attendants. 

K.  Hen.  Now  sits  the  wind  fair,  and  we  will 
aboard. 

My  Lord  of  Cambridge,  and  my  kind  Lord  of 
Masham, 

And  you,  my  gentle  knight,  give  me  your 
thoughts: 

Think  you  not  that  the  powers  we  bear  with  us 
Will  cut  their  passage  through  the  force  of 
France, 

Doing  the  execution  and  the  act 

For  which  we  have  in  head  assembled  them? 

Scroop.  No  doubt,  my  liege,  if  each  man  do  his 
best. 

K.  Hen.  I  doubt  not  that:  since  we  are  well 
persuaded  20 

We  carry  not  a  heart  with  us  from  hence 
That  grows  not  in  a  fair  consent  with  ours. 

Nor  leave  not  one  behind  that  doth  not  wish 
Success  and  conquest  to  attend  on  us. 

Cam.  Never  was  monarch  better  fear’d  and 
loved 

Than  is  your  Majesty:  there’s  not,  I  think,  a 
subject 

That  sits  in  heart-grief  and  uneasiness 
Under  the  sweet  shade  of  your  government. 

Grey.  True:  those  that  were  your  father’s 
enemies 

Have  steep’d  their  galls  in  hone)^  and  do  serve 
you  30 


With  hearts  create  of  duty  and  of  zeal. 

K.  Hen.  We  therefore  have  great  cause  of 
thankfulness; 

And  shall  forget  the  office  of  our  hand 
Sooner  than  quittance  of  desert  and  merit 
According  to  the  weight  and  worthiness. 

Scroop.  So  service  shall  with  steeled  sinews  toil, 
And  labour  shall  refresh  itself  with  hope, 

To  do  your  Grace  incessant  services. 

K.  Hen.  We  judge  no  less.  Uncle  of  Exeter, 
Enlarge  the  man  committed  yesterday,  40 

That  rail’d  against  our  person:  we  consider 
It  was  excess  of  wine  that  set  him  on; 

And  on  his  more  advice  we  pardon  him. 

Scroop.  That’s  mercy,  but  too  much  security: 

Let  him  be  punish’d,  sovereign,  lest  example 
Breed,  by  his  sufferance,  more  of  such  a  kind. 

K.  Hen.  O,  let  us  yet  be  merciful. 

Cam.  So  may  your  Highness,  and  yet  punish  too. 
Grey.  Sir, 

You  show  great  mercy,  if  you  give  him  life  50 
After  the  taste  of  much  correction. 

K.  Hen.  Alas,  your  too  much  love  and  care  of 
me 

Are  heavy  orisons  ’gainst  this  poor  wretch! 

If  little  faults,  proceeding  on  distemper. 

Shall  not  be  wink’d  at,  how  shall  we  stretch  our 
eye 

When  capital  crimes,  chew’d,  swallow’d,  and 
digested. 

Appear  before  us?  We’ll  yet  enlarge  that  man. 
Though  Cambridge,  Scroop,  and  Grey,  in  their 
dear  care 

And  tender  preservation  of  our  person, 

Would  have  him  punish’d.  And  now  to  our 
French  causes:  60 

Who  are  the  late  commissioners? 

Cam.  I  one,  my  lord: 

Your  Highness  bade  me  ask  for  it  to-day. 

Scroop.  So  did  you  me,  my  liege. 

Grey.  And  I,  my  royal  sovereign. 

K.  Hen.  Then,  Richard  Earl  of  Cambridge, 
there  is  yours; 

There  yours.  Lord  Scroop  of  Masham;  and,  sir 
knight. 

Grey  of  Northumberland,  this  same  is  yours: 
Read  them;  and  know  I  know  your  worthiness. 
My  Lord  of  Westmoreland,  and  uncle  Exeter,  70 
We  will  aboard  to  night.  Why,  how  now,  gen¬ 
tlemen! 

What  see  you  in  those  papers  that  you  lose 
So  much  complexion?  Look  ye,  how  they  change! 
Their  cheeks  are  paper.  Why,  what  read  you 
there. 

That  hath  so  cowarded  and  chased  your  blood 
Out  of  appearance? 


ACT  U 


KING  HENRY  V 


Cam.  I  do  confess  my  fault; 

And  do  submit  me  to  your  Highness’  mercy. 

Grey.  I  ^hich  we  all  appeal. 

Scroop. )  ^  ^ 

K.  Hen.  The  mercy  that  was  quick  in  us  but 
late, 

By  your  own  counsel  is  suppress’d  and  kill’d:  8o 
You  must  not  dare,  for  shame,  to  talk  of  mercy; 
For  your  own  reasons  turn  into  your  bosoms. 

As  dogs  upon  their  masters,  worrying  you. 

See  you,  my  princes  and  my  noble  peers. 

These  English  monsters!  My  Lx)rd  of  Cambridge 
here. 

You  know  how  apt  our  love  was  to  accord 
To  furnish  him  with  all  appertinents 
Belonging  to  his  honour;  and  this  man 
Hath,  for  a  few  light  crowns,  lightly  conspired, 
And  sworn  unto  the  practices  of  France,  po 
To  kill  us  here  in  Hampton:  to  the  which 
This  knight,  no  less  for  bounty  bound  to  us 
Than  Cambridge  is,  hath  likewise  sworn.  But,  O, 
What  shall  I  say  to  thee.  Lord  Scroop?  thou 
cruel. 

Ingrateful,  savage,  and  inhuman  creature! 

Thou  that  didst  bear  the  key  of  all  my  counsels. 
That  knew’ St  the  very  bottom  of  my  soul. 

That  almost  mightst  have  coin’d  me  into  gold, 
Wouldst  thou  have  practised  on  me  for  thy  use! 
May  it  be  possible  that  foreign  hire  loo 

Could  out  of  thee  extract  one  spark  of  evil 
That  might  annoy  my  finger?  ’Tis  so  strange. 
That,  though  the  truth  of  it  stands  off  as  gross 
As  black  and  white,  my  eye  will  scarcely  see  it. 
Treason  and  murder  ever  kept  together. 

As  two  yoke-devils  sworn  to  either’s  purpose. 
Working  so  grossly  in  a  natural  cause 
That  admiration  did  not  hoop  at  them: 

But  thou,  ’gainst  all  proportion,  didst  bring  in 
Wonder  to  wait  on  treason  and  on  murder:  no 
And  whatsoever  cunning  fiend  it  was 
That  wrought  upon  thee  so  preposterously 
Hath  got  the  voice  in  hell  for  excellence: 

All  other  devils  that  suggest  by  treasons 
Do  botch  and  bungle  up  damnation 
With  patches,  colours,  and  with  forms  being 
fetch’d 

From  glistering  semblances  of  piety; 

But  he  that  temper’d  thee  bade  thee  stand  up, 
Gave  thee  no  instance  why  thou  shouldst  do 
treason. 

Unless  to  dub  thee  with  the  name  of  traitor.  120 
If  that  same  demon  that  hath  gull’d  thee  thus 
Should  with  his  lion  gait  walk  the  whole  world, 
He  might  return  to  vasty  Tartar  back. 

And  tell  the  legions,  “I  can  never  win 
A  soul  so  easy  as  that  Englishman’s.” 


O,  how  hast  thou  with  jealousy  infected 
The  sweetness  of  affiance!  Show  men  dutiful? 
Why,  so  didst  thou:  seem  they  grave  and 
learned? 

Why,  so  didst  thou:  come  they  of  noble  family? 
Why,  so  didst  thou:  seem  they  religious?  1^0 
Why,  so  didst  thou;  or  are  they  spare  in  diet. 

Free  from  gross  passion  or  of  mirth  or  anger, 
Constant  in  spirit,  not  swerving  with  the  blood. 
Garnish’d  and  deck’d  in  modest  complement. 

Not  working  with  the  eye  without  the  ear. 

And  but  in  purged  judgement  trusting  neither? 
Such  and  so  finely  bolted  didst  thou  seem: 

And  thus  thy  fall  hath  left  a  kind  of  blot. 

To  mark  the  full-fraught  man  and  best  indued 
With  some  suspicion.  I  will  weep  for  thee;  /40 
For  this  revolt  of  thine,  methinks,  is  like 
Another  fall  of  man.  Their  faults  are  open: 

Arrest  them  to  the  answer  of  the  law; 

And  God  acquit  them  of  their  practices! 

Exe.  I  arrest  thee  of  high  treason,  by  the  name 
of  Richard  Earl  of  Cambridge. 

I  arrest  thee  of  high  treason,  by  the  name  of 
Henry  Lord  Scroop  of  Masham. 

I  arrest  thee  of  high  treason,  by  the  name  of 
Thomas  Grey,  knight,  of  Northumberland,  ipo 
Scroop.  Our  purposes  God  justly  hath  dis¬ 
cover’d; 

And  I  repent  my  fault  more  than  my  death; 
Which  I  beseech  your  Highness  to  forgive. 
Although  my  body  pay  the  price  of  it. 

Cam.  For  me,  the  gold  of  France  did  not  seduce; 
Although  I  did  admit  it  as  a  motive 
The  sooner  to  effect  what  I  intended: 

But  God  be  thanked  for  prevention; 

Which  I  in  sufferance  heartily  will  rejoice, 
Beseeching  God  and  you  to  pardon  me.  160 
Grey.  Never  did  faithful  subject  more  rejoice 
At  the  discovery  of  most  dangerous  treason 
Than  I  do  at  this  hour  joy  o’er  myself. 

Prevented  from  a  damned  enterprise: 

My  fault,  but  not  my  body,  pardon,  sovereign. 

K.  Hen.  God  quit  you  in  his  mercy!  Hear  your 
sentence. 

You  have  conspired  against  our  royal  person. 
Join’d  with  an  enemy  proclaim’d,  and  from  his 
coffers 

Received  the  golden  earnest  of  our  death; 
Wherein  you  would  have  sold  your  King  to 

slaughter,  /70 

His  princes  and  his  peers  to  servitude. 

His  subjects  to  oppression  and  contempt. 

And  his  whole  kingdom  into  desolation. 

Touching  our  person  seek  we  no  revenge; 

But  we  our  kingdom’s  safety  must  so  tender. 
Whose  ruin  you  have  sought,  that  to  her  laws 


SCENE  n 


541 


KING  HENRY  V 


We  do  deliver  you.  Get  you  therefore  hence, 

Poor  miserable  wretches,  to  your  death: 

The  taste  whereof,  God  of  his  mercy  give 
You  patience  to  endure,  and  true  repentance  180 
Of  all  your  dear  offences!  Bear  them  hence. 

[Exeunt  Cambridge,  scroop  and  grey, 

guarded. 

Now,  lords,  for  France;  the  enterprise  whereof 
Shall  be  to  you,  as  us,  like  glorious. 

We  doubt  not  of  a  fair  and  lucky  war. 

Since  God  so  graciously  hath  brought  to  light 
This  dangerous  treason  lurking  in  our  way 
To  hinder  our  beginnings.  We  doubt  not  now 
But  every  rub  is  smoothed  on  our  way. 

Then  forth,  dear  countrymen:  let  us  deliver 
Our  puissance  into  the  hand  of  God,  1^0 

Putting  it  straight  in  expedition. 

Cheerly  to  sea;  the  signs  of  war  advance: 

No  king  of  England,  if  not  king  of  France. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  London:  before  a  tavern 

Ewffr  PISTOL,  MISTRESS  QUICKLY,  NYM,  BARDOLPH, 
and  BOY. 

Quick.  Prithee,  honey-sweet  husband,  let  me 
bring  thee  to  Staines. 

Pist.  No;  for  my  manly  heart  doth  yearn. 
Bardolph,  be  blithe:  Nym,  rouse  thy  vaunting 
veins: 

Boy,  bristle  thy  courage  up;  for  Falstaffhe  is 
dead. 

And  we  must  yearn  therefore. 

Bard.  Would  I  were  with  him,  wheresome’er  he 
is,  either  in  heaven  or  in  hell! 

Quick.  Nay,  sure,  he’s  not  in  hell:  he’s  in 
Arthur’s  bosom,  if  ever  man  went  to  Arthur’s 
bosom.  A’  made  a  finer  end  and  went  away  an 
it  had  been  any  christom  child;  a’  parted  even 
just  between  twelve  and  one,  even  at  the  turning 
o’  the  tide:  for  after  I  saw  him  fumble  with  the 
sheets  and  play  with  flowers  and  smile  upon  his 
fingers’  ends,  I  knew  there  was  but  one  way;  for 
his  nose  was  as  sharp  as  a  pen,  and  a’  babbled  of 
green  fields.  “How  now.  Sir  John!”  quoth  I: 
“what,  man!  be  o’good  cheer.”  So  a’  cried  out 
“God,  God,  God!”  three  or  four  times.  Now  I, 
to  comfort  him,  bid  him  a’  should  not  think  of 
God;  I  hoped  there  was  no  need  to  trouble  him¬ 
self  with  any  such  thoughts  yet.  So  a’  bade  me 
lay  more  clothes  on  his  feet:  I  put  my  hand  into 
the  bed  and  felt  them,  and  they  were  as  cold  as 
any  stone;  then  I  felt  to  his  knees,  an  they  were 
as  cold  as  any  stone,  and  so  upward  and  upward, 
an  all  was  as  cold  as  any  stone. 

Nym.  They  say  he  cried  out  of  sack. 

Ay,  that  a’ did.  50 


Bard.  And  of  women. 

Quick.  Nay,  that  a’  did  not. 

Boy.  Yes,  that  a’  did;  and  said  they  were  devils 
incarnate. 

Quick.  A’  could  never  abide  carnation;  ’twas  a 
colour  he  never  liked. 

Boy.  A’  said  once,  the  devil  would  have  him 
about  women. 

Quick.  A’  did  in  some  sort,  indeed,  handle 
women;  but  then  he  was  rheumatic,  and  talked 
of  the  whore  of  Babylon. 

Boy.  Do  you  not  remember,  a’  saw  a  flea  stick 
upon  Bardolph’s  nose,  and  a’  said  it  was  a  black 
soul  burning  in  hell-fire? 

Bard.  Well,  the  fuel  is  gone  that  maintained  that 
fire:  that’s  all  the  riches  I  got  in  his  service. 

Nym.  Shall  we  shog?  the  King  will  be  gone 
from  Southampton. 

Pist.  Come,  let’s  away.  My  love,  give  me 
thy  lips. 

Look  to  my  chattels  and  my  movables:  50 

Let  senses  rule;  the  word  is  “Pitch  and  Pay”: 
Trust  none; 

For  oaths  are  straws,  men’s  faiths  are  wafer- 
cakes. 

And  hold-fast  is  the  only  dog,  my  duck: 
Therefore,  Caveto  be  thy  counsellor. 

Go,  clear  thy  crystals.  Yoke- fellows  in  arms, 

Let  us  to  France;  like  horse-leeches,  my  boys. 

To  suck,  to  suck,  the  very  blood  to  suck! 

Boy.  And  that’s  but  unwholesome  food,  they 
say.  60 

Pist.  Touch  her  soft  mouth,  and  march. 

Bard.  Farewell,  hostess.  [Kissing  her.] 

Nym.  I  cannot  kiss,  that  is  the  humour  of  it; 
but,  adieu. 

Pist.  Let  housewifery  appear:  keep  close,  I  thee 
command. 

Quick.  Farewell;  adieu.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  France:  the  King^s  palace 
Flourish.  Enter  the  french  king,  the  dauphin,  the 

DUKES  OF  BERRI  and  BRETAGNE,  the  CONSTABLE, 

and  others. 

Fr.  King.  Thus  comes  the  English  with  full 
power  upon  us; 

And  more  than  carefully  it  us  concerns 
To  answer  royally  in  our  defences. 

Therefore  the  Dukes  of  Berri  and  of  Bretagne, 

Of  Brabant  and  of  Orleans,  shall  make  forth. 

And  you.  Prince  Dauphin,  with  all  swift  dispatch. 
To  line  and  new  repair  our  towns  of  war 
W^ith  men  of  courage  and  with  means  defendant; 
For  England  his  approaches  makes  as  fierce 
As  waters  to  the  sucking  of  a  gulf.  10 

It  fits  us  then  to  be  as  provident 


ACT  II 


KING  HENRY  V 


542 

As  fear  may  teach  us  out  of  late  examples 
Left  by  the  fatal  and  neglected  English 
Upon  our  fields. 

Dau.  My  most  redoubted  father, 

It  is  most  meet  we  arm  us  ’gainst  the  foe; 

For  peace  itself  should  not  so  dull  a  kingdom, 
Though  war  nor  no  known  quarrel  were  in  ques¬ 
tion. 

But  that  defences,  musters,  preparations. 

Should  be  maintain’d,  assembled,  and  collected. 
As  were  a  war  in  expectation.  20 

Therefore,  I  say  ’tis  meet  we  all  go  forth 
To  view  the  sick  and  feeble  parts  of  France: 

And  let  us  do  it  with  no  show  of  fear; 

No,  with  no  more  than  if  we  heard  that  England 
Were  busied  with  a  Whitsun  morris-dance: 

For,  my  good  liege,  she  is  so  idly  king’d. 

Her  sceptre  so  fantastically  borne 

By  a  vain,  giddy,  shallow,  humorous  youth, 

That  fear  attends  her  not. 

Con.  O  peace.  Prince  Dauphin! 

You  are  too  much  mistaken  in  this  king:  50 

Question  your  Grace  the  late  ambassadors. 

With  what  great  state  he  heard  their  embassy, 
How  well  supplied  with  noble  counsellors, 

How  modest  in  exception,  and  withal 
How  terrible  in  constant  resolution. 

And  you  shall  find  his  vanities  forespent 
Were  but  the  outside  of  the  Roman  Brutus, 
Covering  discretion  with  a  coat  of  folly. 

As  gardeners  do  with  ordure  hide  those  roots 
That  shall  first  spring  and  be  most  delicate.  40 
Dau.  Well,  ’tis  not  so,  my  Lord  High  Con¬ 
stable; 

But  though  we  think  it  so,  it  is  no  matter: 

In  cases  of  defence  ’tis  best  to  weigh 
The  enemy  more  mighty  than  he  seems : 

So  the  proportions  of  defence  are  fill’d; 

Which  of  a  weak  and  niggardly  projection 
Doth,  like  a  miser,  spoil  his  coat  with  scanting 
A  little  cloth. 

Fr.  King.  Think  we  King  Harry  strong; 

And,  Princes,  look  you  strongly  arm  to  meet  him. 
The  kindred  of  him  hath  been  flesh’d  upon  us;  50 
And  he  is  bred  out  of  that  bloody  strain 
That  haunted  us  in  our  familiar  paths: 

Witness  our  too  much  memorable  shame 
When  Cressy  battle  fatally  was  struck. 

And  all  our  princes  captived  by  the  hand 
Of  that  black  name,  Edward,  Black  Prince  of 
Wales; 

Whiles  that  his  mountain  sire,  on  mountain 
standing. 

Up  in  the  air,  crown’d  with  the  golden  sun. 

Saw  his  heroical  seed,  and  smiled  to  see  him. 
Mangle  the  work  of  nature  and  deface  60 


The  patterns  that  by  God  and  by  French  fathers 
Had  twenty  yea’rs  been  made.  This  is  a  stem 
Of  that  victorious  stock;  and  let  us  fear 
The  native  mightiness  and  fate  of  him. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  Ambassadors  from  Harry  King  of  Eng¬ 
land 

Do  crave  admittance  to  your  Majesty. 

Fr.  King.  We’ll  give  them  present  audience. 

Go,  and  bring  them. 

[Exeunt  messenger  and  certain  Lords. 
You  see  this  chase  is  hotly  follow’d,  friends. 

Dau.  Turn  head,  and  stop  pursuit;  for  coward 
dogs 

Most  spend  their  mouths  when  what  they  seem 
to  threaten  70 

Runs  far  before  them.  Good  my  sovereign. 

Take  up  the  English  short,  and  let  them  know 
Of  what  a  monarchy  you  are  the  head: 

Self-love,  my  liege,  is  not  so  vile  a  sin 
As  self-neglecting. 

Re-enter  Lords,  'with  exeter  and  train. 

Fr.  King.  From  our  brother  England.? 

Exe.  From  him;  and  thus  he  greets  your 
Majesty. 

He  wills  you,  in  the  name  of  God  Almighty, 
That  you  divest  yourself,  and  lay  apart 
The  borrow’d  glories  that  by  gift  of  heaven. 

By  law  of  nature  and  of  nations,  ’long  80 

To  him  and  to  his  heirs;  namely,  the  crown 
And  all  wide-stretched  honours  that  pertain 
By  custom  and  the  ordinance  of  times 
Unto  the  crown  of  France.  That  you  may  know 
’Tis  no  sinister  nor  no  awkward  claim. 

Pick’d  from  the  worm-holes  of  long-vanish’d 
days. 

Nor  from  the  dust  of  old  oblivion  raked. 

He  sends  you  this  most  memorable  line. 

In  every  branch  truly  demonstrative; 

Willing  you  overlook  this  pedigree:  po 

And  when  you  find  him  evenly  derived 
From  his  most  famed  of  famous  ancestors, 
Edward  the  Third,  he  bids  you  then  resign 
Your  crown  and  kingdom,  indirectly  held 
From  him  the  native  and  true  challenger. 

Fr.  King.  Or  else  what  follows? 

Exe.  Bloody  constraint;  for  if  you  hide  the 
crown 

Even  in  your  hearts,  there  will  he  rake  for  it: 
Therefore  in  fierce  tempest  is  he  coming. 

In  thunder  and  in  earthquake,  like  a  Jove,  too 
That,  if  requiring  fail,  he  will  compel; 

And  bids  y  ou,  in  the  bowels  of  the  Lord, 

Deliver  up  the  crown,  and  to  take  mercy 


SCENE  IV 


543 


KING  HENRY  V 


On  the  poor  souls  for  whom  this  hungry  war 
Opens  his  vasty  jaws;  and  on  your  head 
Turning  the  widows’  tears,  the  orphans’  cries, 
The  dead  men’s  blood,  the  pining  maidens’ 
groans. 

For  husbands,  fathers,  and  betrothed  lovers. 

That  shall  be  swallow’d  in  this  controversy. 

This  is  his  claim,  his  threatening,  and  my  mes¬ 
sage;  no 

Unless  the  Dauphin  be  in  presence  here. 

To  whom  expressly  I  bring  greeting  too. 

Fr,  King,  For  us,  we  will  consider  of  this 
further: 

To-morrow  shall  you  bear  our  full  intent 
Back  to  our  brother  England. 

Dau.  For  the  Dauphin, 

I  stand  here  for  him:  what  to  him  from  Eng¬ 
land? 

Exe,  Scorn  and  defiance;  slight  regard,  con¬ 
tempt. 

And  anything  that  may  not  misbecome 
The  mighty  sender,  doth  he  prize  you  at. 

Thus  says  my  king;  an  if  your  father’s  high¬ 
ness 

Do  not,  in  grant  of  all  demands  at  large,  121 
Sweeten  the  bitter  mock  you  sent  his  Majesty, 
He’ll  call  you  to  so  hot  an  answer  of  it 
That  caves  and  womby  vaultages  of  France 
Shall  chide  your  trespass  and  return  your  mock 
In  second  accent  of  his  ordnance. 

Dau.  Say,  if  my  father  render  fair  return. 

It  is  against  my  will;  for  I  desire 
Nothing  but  odds  with  England:  to  that  end. 

As  matching  to  his  youth  and  vanity,  75 o 

I  did  present  him  with  the  Paris  balls. 

Exe.  He’ll  make  your  Paris  Louvre  shake 
for  it. 

Were  it  the  mistress-court  of  mighty  Europe: 
And,  be  assured,  you’ll  find  a  difference. 

As  we  his  subjects  have  in  wonder  found. 
Between  the  promise  of  his  greener  days 
And  these  he  masters  now:  now  he  weighs 
time 

Even  to  the  utmost  grain:  that  you  shall  read 
In  your  own  losses,  if  he  stay  in  France. 

Fr.  King.  To-morrow  shall  you  know  our 
mind  at  full.  140 

Exe.  Dispatch  us  with  all  speed,  lest  that  our 
king 

Come  here  himself  to  question  our  delay; 

For  he  is  footed  in  this  land  already. 

Fr.  King.  You  shall  be  soon  dispatch’d  with 
fair  conditions; 

A  night  is  but  small  breath  and  little  pause 
To  answer  matters  of  this  consequence. 

[Flourish.  Exeunt. 


ACT  III 
PROLOGUE 
Enter  cvioRvs. 

Chor.  Thus  with  imagined  wing  our  swift  scene 
flies 

In  motion  of  no  less  celerity 
Than  that  of  thought.  Suppose  that  you  have  seen 
The  well-appointed  king  at  Hampton  pier 
Embark  his  royalty;  and  his  brave  fleet 
With  silken  streamers  the  young  Phcrbus 
fanning: 

Play  with  your  fancies,  and  in  them  behold 
Upon  the  hempen  tackle  ship-boys  climbing; 
Hear  the  shrill  whistle  which  doth  order  give 
To  sounds  confused;  behold  the  threaden  sails. 
Borne  with  the  invisible  and  creeping  wind,  7/ 
Draw  the  huge  bottoms  through  the  furrow’d  sea. 
Breasting  the  lofty  surge:  O,  do  but  think 
You  stand  upon  the  rivage  and  behold 
A  city  on  the  inconstant  billows  dancing; 

For  so  appears  this  fleet  majestical. 

Holding  due  course  to  Harfleur.  Follow,  follow: 
Grapple  your  minds  to  sternage  of  this  navy. 

And  leave  your  England,  as  dead  midnight  still. 
Guarded  with  grandsires,  babies,  and  old  women 
Either  past  or  not  arrived  to  pith  and  puissance; 
For  who  is  he,  whose  chin  is  but  enrich’d 
With  one  appearing  hair,  that  will  not  follow 
These  cull’d  and  choice-drawn  cavaliers  to 
France? 

Work,  work  your  thoughts,  and  therein  see  a 
siege; 

Behold  the  ordnance  on  their  carriages. 

With  fatal  mouths  gaping  on  girded  Harfleur. 
Suppose  the  ambassador  from  the  French  comes 
back; 

Tells  Harry  that  the  King  doth  offer  him 
Katharine  his  daughter,  and  with  her,  to  dowry, 
Some  petty  and  unprofitable  dukedoms.  57 

The  offer  likes  not:  and  the  nimble  gunner 
With  linstock  now  the  devilish  cannon  touches. 
Alarum,  and  clumbers  go  off. 

And  down  goes  all  before  them.  Still  be  kind. 

And  eke  out  our  performance  with  your  mind. 

[Exit. 

Scene  i.  France:  before  Harfleur 
Alarum.  Enter  king  henry,  exeter,  Bedford, 
GLOUCESTER,  and  Soldiers,  ni'ith  scaling-ladders. 
K.  Hen.  Once  more  unto  the  breach,  dear 
friends,  once  more; 

Or  close  the  wall  up  with  our  English  dead. 

In  peace  there’s  nothing  so  becomes  a  man 
As  modest  stillness  and  humility: 


ACT  HI 


KING  HENRY  V 


But  when  the  blast  of  war  blows  in  our  ears. 

Then  imitate  the  action  of  the  tiger; 

Stiffen  the  sinews,  summon  up  the  blood, 

Disguise  fair  nature  with  hard-favour’d  rage; 
Then  lend  the  eye  a  terrible  aspect; 

Let  it  pry  through  the  portage  of  the  head  lo 

Like  the  brass  cannon;  let  the  brow  o’er  whelm  it 
As  fearfully  as  doth  a  galled  rock 
O’erhang  and  jutty  his  confounded  base, 

Swill’d  with  the  wild  and  wasteful  ocean. 

Now  set  the  teeth  and  stretch  the  nostril  wide, 
Hold  hard  the  breath  and  bend  up  every  spirit 
To  his  full  height.  On,  on,  you  noblest  English, 
Whose  blood  is  fet  from  fathers  of  war-proof! 
Fathers  that,  like  so  many  Alexanders,  /y 

Have  in  these  parts  from  morn  till  even  fought 
And  sheathed  their  swords  for  lack  of  argument: 
Dishonour  not  your  mothers;  now  attest 
That  those  whom  you  call’d  fathers  did  beget  you. 
Be  copy  now  to  men  of  grosser  blood. 

And  teach  them  how  to  war.  And  you,  good 
yeoman. 

Whose  limbs  were  made  in  England,  show  us 
here 

The  mettle  of  your  pasture;  let  us  swear 
That  you  are  worth  your  breeding;  which  I 
doubt  not; 

For  there  is  none  of  you  so  mean  and  base. 

That  hath  not  noble  lustre  in  your  eyes.  50 

I  see  you  stand  like  greyhounds  in  the  slips. 
Straining  upon  the  start.  The  game’s  afoot: 
Follow  your  spirit,  and  upon  this  charge 
Cry  “God  for  Harry,  England,  and  Saint 
George!” 

[Exeunt.  Alarum.,  and  chambers  go  off. 
Scene  ii.  The  same 

Enter  nym,  bardolph,  pistol,  and  boy. 
Bard.  On,  on,  on,  on,  on!  to  the  breach,  to  the 
breach! 

Nym.  Pray  thee,  corporal,  stay:  the  knocks  are 
too  hot;  and,  for  mine  own  part,  I  have  not  a  case 
of  lives :  the  humour  of  it  is  too  hot,  that  is  the 
very  plain-song  of  it. 

Pist.  The  plain-song  is  most  just;  for  humours 
do  abound: 

“Knocks  go  and  come;  God’s  vassals  drop  and 
die; 

And  sword  and  shield. 

In  bloody  field,  10 

Doth  win  immortal  fame.” 

Boy.  Would  I  were  in  an  alehouse  in  London! 
I  would  give  all  my  fame  for  a  pot  of  ale  and 
safety. 

Pist.  And  I : 

“If  wishes  would  prevail  with  me, 


My  purpose  should  not  fail  with  me. 

But  thither  would  I  hie.” 

Boy.  “As  duly,  but  not  as  truly. 

As  bird  doth  sing  on  bough.”  20 

Enter  fluellen. 

Flu.  Up  to  the  breach,  you  dogs!  avaunt,  you 
cullions!  [Driving  them  forward.] 

Pist.  Be  merciful,  great  Duke,  to  men  of  mould. 
Abate  thy  rage,  abate  thy  manly  rage. 

Abate  thy  rage,  great  Duke! 

Good  bawcock,  bate  thy  rage;  use  lenity,  sweet 
chuck! 

Nym.  These  be  good  humours!  your  honour 
wins  bad  humours.  [Exeunt  all  but  boy. 

Boy.  As  young  as  I  am,  I  have  observed  these 
three  swashers.  I  am  boy  to  them  all  three:  but 
all  they  three,  though  they  would  serve  me,  could 
not  be  man  to  me;  for  indeed  three  such  antics 
do  not  amount  to  a  man.  For  Bardolph,  he  is 
white-livered  and  red- faced;  by  the  means  where¬ 
of  a’  faces  it  out,  but  fights  not.  For  Pistol,  he 
hath  a  killing  tongue  and  a  quiet  sword;  by  the 
means  whereof  a’  breaks  words,  and  keeps  whole 
weapons.  For  Nym,  he  hath  heard  that  men  of 
few  words  are  the  best  men;  and  therefore  he 
scorns  to  say  his  prayers,  lest  a’  should  be  thought 
a  coward:  but  his  few  bad  words  are  matched 
with  as  few  good  deeds;  for  a’  never  broke  any 
man’s  head  but  his  own,  and  that  was  against  a 
post  when  he  was  drunk.  They  will  steal  any 
thing,  and  call  it  purchase.  Bardolph  stole  a  lute- 
case,  bore  it  twelve  leagues,  and  sold  it  for  three 
half-pence.  Nym  and  Bardolph  are,  sworn  bro¬ 
thers  in  filching,  and  in  Calais  they  stole  a  fire- 
shovel:  I  knew  by  that  piece  of  service  the  men 
would  carry  coals.  They  would  have  me  as 
familiar  with  men’s  pockets  as  their  gloves  or 
their  handkerchers :  which  makes  much  against 
my  manhood,  if  I  should  take  from  another’s 
pocket  to  put  into  mine;  for  it  is  plain  pocketing 
up  of  wrongs.  I  must  leave  them,  and  seek  some 
better  service:  their  villainy  goes  against  my  weak 
stomach,  and  therefore  I  must  cast  it  up.  [Exit. 

Re-enter  fluellen,  cower  following. 

Gow.  Captain  Fluellen,  you  must  ^come  pre¬ 
sently  to  the  mines;  the  Duke  of  Gloucester 
would  speak  with  you.  60 

Flu.  To  the  mines!  tell  you  the  Duke,  it  is  not 
so  good  to  come  to  the  mines;  for,  look  you,  the 
mines  is  not  according  to  the  disciplines  of  the 
war:  the  concavities  of  it  is  not  sufficient;  for, 
look  you,  th’  athversary,  you  may  discuss  unto 
the  Duke,  look  you,  is  digt  himself  four  yard 
under  the  countermines:  by  Cheshu,  I  think  a’ 


SCENE  II 

will  plow  up  all,  if  there  is  not  better  directions. 

Gow.  The  Duke  of  Gloucester,  to  whom  the 
order  of  the  siege  is  given,  is  altogether  directed 
by  an  Irishman,  a  very  valiant  gentleman,  i’  faith. 

Flu.  It  is  Captain  Macmorris,  is  it  not? 

Gow.  I  think  it  be. 

Flu.  By  Cheshu,  he  is  an  ass,  as  in  the  world: 
I  will  verify  as  much  in  his  beard:  he  has  no 
more  directions  in  the  true  disciplines  of  the  wars, 
look  you,  of  the  Roman  disciplines,  than  is  a 
puppy-dog. 

Enter  macmorris  and  captain  jamy. 

G(nv.  Here  a’  comes;  and  the  Scots  captain. 
Captain  Jamy,  w'ith  him.  8o 

Flu.  Captain  Jamy  is  a  marvellous  falorous  gen¬ 
tleman,  that  is  certain;  and  of  great  expedition 
and  knowledge  in  th’  aunchient  wars,  upon  my 
particular  knowledge  of  his  directions:  by  Che¬ 
shu,  he  will  maintain  his  argument  as  well  as  any 
military  man  in  the  world,  in  the  disciplines  of 
the  pristine  wars  of  the  Romans. 

Jamy.  I  say  gud-day.  Captain  Fluellen. 

Flu.  God-den  to  your  worship,  good  Captain 
James.  90 

Gov).  How  now.  Captain  Macmorris!  have  you 
quit  the  mines?  have  the  pioners  given  o’er? 

Mac.  By  Chrish,  la!  tish  ill  done:  the  work  ish 
give  over,  the  trompet  sound  the  retreat.  By  my 
hand,  I  swear,  and  my  father’s  soul,  the  work  ish 
ill  done;  it  ish  give  over:  I  would  have  blowed  up 
the  town,  so  Chrish  save  me,  la!  in  an  hour:  O, 
tish  ill  done,  tish  ill  done;  by  my  hand,  tish  ill 
done!  99 

Flu.  Captain  Macmorris,  I  beseech  you  now, 
will  you  voutsafe  me,  look  you,  a  few  disputa¬ 
tions  with  you,  as  partly  touching  or  concerning 
the  disciplines  of  the  war,  the  Roman  wars,  in 
the  way  of  argument,  look  you,  and  friendly 
communication;  partly  to  satisfy  my  opinion, 
and  partly  for  the  satisfaction,  look  you,  of  my 
mind,  as  touching  the  direction  of  the  military 
discipline;  that  is  the  point. 

Jamy.  It  sail  be  vary  gud,  gud  feith,  gud  captains 
bath:  and  I  sail  quit  you  with  gud  leve,  as  I  may 
pick  occasion;  that  sail  I,  marry.  /// 

Mac.  It  is  no  time  to  discourse,  so  Chrish  save 
me:  the  day  is  hot,  and  the  weather,  and  the 
wars,  and  the  King,  and  the  Dukes:  it  is  no  time 
to  discourse.  The  town  is  beseeched,  and  the 
trumpet  call  us  to  the  breach;  and  we  talk,  and, 
be  Chrish,  do  nothing:  ’tis  shame  for  us  all:  so 
God  sa’  me,  ’tis  shame  to  stand  still;  it  is  shame, 
by  my  hand:  and  there  is  throats  to  be  cut,  and 
works  to  be  done;  and  there  ish  nothing  done,  so 
Chrish  sa’  me,  la!  12 1 


545 

Jamy.  By  the  mess,  ere  theise  eyes  of  mine  take 
themselves  to  slomber,  ay’ll  de  gud  service,  or 
ay’ll  lig  i’  the  grund  for  it;  ay,  or  go  to  death; 
and  ay’ll  pay ’t  as  valorously  as  I  may,  that  sail 
I  suerly  do,  that  is  the  breff  and  the  long.  Marry, 
I  wad  full  fain  hear  some  question  ’tween  you 
tway. 

Flu.  Captain  Macmorris,  I  think,  look  you, 
under  your  correction,  there  is  not  many  of  your 
nation —  /^/ 

Mac.  Of  my  nation!  What  ish  my  nation?  Ish  a 
villain,  and  a  bastard,  and  a  knave,  and  a  rascal — 
What  ish  my  nation?  Who  talks  of  my  nation? 
Flu.  Look  you,  if  you  take  the  matter  other¬ 
wise  than  is  meant.  Captain  Macmorris,  perad- 
venture  I  shall  think  you  do  not  use  me  with  that 
affability  as  in  discretion  you  ought  to  use  me, 
look  you;  being  as  good  a  man  as  yourself,  both 
in  the  disciplines  of  war,  and  in  the  derivation  of 
my  birth,  and  in  other  particularities. 

Mac.  I  do  not  know  you  so  good  a  man  as  myself: 
so  Chrish  save  me,  I  will  cut  off  your  head. 

Gow.  Gentlemen  both,  you  will  mistake  each 
other. 

Jamy.  A!  that’s  a  foul  fault. 

A  parley  sounded. 

Gow.  The  town  sounds  a  parley. 

Flu.  Captain  Macmorris,  when  there  is  more 
better  opportunity  to  be  required,  look  you,  I 
will  be  so  bold  as  to  tell  you  I  know  the  disciplines 
of  war;  and  there  is  an  end.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  same:  before  the  gates 
The  GOVERNOR  and  some  Citizens  on  the  'walls;  the 
English  forces  below.  Enter  king  henry  and  his 
train. 

K.  Hen.  How  yet  resolves  the  governor  of  the 
town? 

This  is  the  latest  parle  we  will  admit: 

Therefore  to  our  best  mercy  give  yourselves; 

Or  like  to  men  proud  of  destruction 
Defy  us  to  our  worst:  for,  as  I  am  a  soldier, 

A  name  that  in  my  thoughts  becomes  me  best, 
If  I  begin  the  battery  once  again, 

I  will  not  leave  the  half-achieved  Harfleur 
Till  in  her  ashes  she  lie  buried. 

The  gates  of  mercy  shall  be  all  shut  up.  10 

And  the  flesh’d  soldier,  rough  and  hard  of  heart. 

In  liberty  of  bloody  hand  shall  range 
With  conscience  wide  as  hell,  mowing  like  grass 
Your  fresh-fair  virgins  and  your  flowering 
infants. 

What  is  it  then  to  me,  if  impious  war, 

Array’d  in  flames  like  to  the  prince  of  fiends. 

Do,  with  his  smirch’d  complexion,  all  fell  feats 
Enlink’d  to  waste  and  desolation? 


KING  HENRY  V 


546 

What  is’t  to  me,  when  you  yourselves  are 
cause, 

If  your  pure  maidens  fall  into  the  hand 
Of  hot  and  forcing  violation? 

What  rein  can  hold  licentious  wickedness 
When  down  the  hill  he  holds  his  fierce  career? 
We  may  as  bootless  spend  our  vain  command 
Upon  the  enraged  soldiers  in  their  spoil 
As  send  precepts  to  the  leviathan 
To  come  ashore.  Therefore,  you  men  of  Harfleur, 
Take  pity  of  your  town  and  of  your  people. 
Whiles  yet  my  soldiers  are  in  my  command; 
Whiles  yet  the  cool  and  temperate  wind  of 
grace 

O’erblows  the  filthy  and  contagious  clouds  5/ 
Of  heady  murder,  spoil,  and  villainy. 

If  not,  why,  in  a  moment  look  to  see 
The  blind  and  bloody  soldier  with  foul  hand 
Defile  the  locks  of  your  shrill-shrieking 
daughters; 

Your  fathers  taken  by  the  silver  beards. 

And  their  most  reverend  heads  dash’d  to  the 
walls. 

Your  naked  infants  spitted  upon  pikes. 

Whiles  the  mad  mothers  with  their  howls  con¬ 
fused 

Do  break  the  clouds,  as  did  the  wives  of  Jewry 
At  Herod’s  bloody-hunting  slaughtermen.  4/ 
What  say  you?  will  you  yield  and  this  avoid. 
Or,  guilty  in  defence,  be  thus  destroy’d? 

Gov.  Our  expectation  hath  this  day  an  end: 
The  Dauphin,  whom  of  succours  we  entreated, 
Returns  us  that  his  powers  are  yet  not  ready 
To  raise  so  great  a  siege.  Therefore,  great 
King, 

We  yield  our  town  and  lives  to  thy  soft  mercy. 
Enter  our  gates;  dispose  of  us  and  ours; 

For  we  no  longer  are  defensible.  50 

K.  Hen.  Open  your  gates.  Come,  uncle  Exeter, 
Go  you  and  enter  Harfleur;  there  remain. 

And  fortify  it  strongly  ’gainst  the  French: 

Use  mercy  to  them  all.  For  us,  dear  uncle. 

The  winter  coming  on  and  sickness  growing 
Upon  our  soldiers,  we  will  retire  to  Calais. 
To-night  in  Harfleur  will  we  be  your  guest; 
To-morrow  for  the  march  are  we  addrest. 

[Flourish.  The  king  and  his  train  enter 

the  town. 

Scene  iv.  The  French  Kings  palace 
Enter  Katharine  and  alice. 

Kath.  Alice,  tu  as  ete  en  Angleterre,  et  tu  paries 
bien  le  langage. 

Alice.  Un  pen,  madame. 

Kath.  Je  teprie,  m' enseignez;  il  faut  quejapprenne 
a  parler.  Comment  appelez-vous  la  main  en  Anglois? 


act  III 

Alice.  La  mam?  elle  est  appelee  de  hand. 

Kath.  De  hand.  Et  les  doigts? 

Alice.  Les  doigts?  ma  foi,joublie  les  doigts;  mais 
je  me  souviendrai.  Les  doigts?  je  pense  quils  sont 
appeles  de  fingres;  oui,  de  fingres.  ii 

Kath.  La  main,  de  hand;  les  doigts,  de  fingres. 
Je  pense  que  je  suis  le  bon  ecolier;  j'ai  gagne  deux 
mots  d' Anglois  vhement.  Comment  appelez-vous  les 
ongles? 

Alice.  Les  ongles?  nous  les  appelons  de  nails. 
Kath.  De  nails.  Ecoutez;  dites-moi,  si  je  park 
bien:  de  hand,  de  fingres,  et  de  nails. 

Alice.  C'est  bien  dit,  madame;  il  est  fort  bon 
Anglois.  20 

Kath.  Dites-moi  r Anglois  pour  le  bras. 

Alice.  De  arm,  madame. 

Kath.  Et  le  coude? 

Alice.  De  elbow. 

Kath.  De  elbow.  Je  m'en  fais  la  repetition  de  tous 
les  mots  que  vous  m'avez  appris  dh  a  present. 

Alice.  Il  est  trop  difficile,  madame,  commeje pense. 
Kath.  Excusez-moi,  Alice;  koutez:  de  hand,  de 
fingres,  de  nails,  de  arma,  de  bilbow.  5/ 

Alice.  De  elbow,  madame. 

Kath.  0  Seigneur  Dieu,je  m'en  oublie!  de  elbow. 
Comment  appelez-vous  le  col? 

Alice.  De  nick,  madame. 

Kath.  De  nick.  Et  le  menton? 

Alice.  De  chin. 

Kath.  De  sin.  Le  col,  de  nick;  le  menton,  de  sin.55) 
Alice.  Oui.  Sauf  votre  honneur,  en  verite,  vous 
prononcez  les  mots  aussi  droit  que  les  natifs  d'Angle- 
terre.  ' 

Kath.  Je  ne  doute  point  d'apprendre,  par  la  grace  de 
Dieu,  et  en  pen  de  temps. 

Alice.  N'avez  vous  pas  deja  oublie  ce  queje  vous  ai 
enseigne? 

Kath.  Non,  je  reciter  ai  a  vous  promptement:  de 
hand,  de  fingres,  de  mails — 

Alice.  De  nails,  madame. 

Kath.  De  nails,  de  arm,  de  ilbow.  50 

Alice.  Sauf  votre  honneur,  de  elbow. 

Kath.  Ainsi  dis-je;  de  elbow,  de  nick,  et  de  sin. 
Comment  appelez-vous  le  pied  et  la  robe? 

Alice.  De  foot,  madame;  et  de  coun. 

Kath.  De  foot  et  de  coun!  0  Seigneur  Dieu!  ce  sont 
mots  de  son  mauvais,  corruptible,  gros,  et  impudique, 
et  non  pour  les  dames  T honneur  Tuser:je  ne  voudrais 
prononcer  ces  mots  devant  les  seigneurs  de  France 
pour  tout  le  monde.  Foh!  le  foot  et  le  coun! 
Neanmoins,  je  reciterai  une  autre  fois  ma  legon  en¬ 
semble:  de  hand,  de  fingres,  de  nails,  de  arm,  de 
elbow,  de  nick,  de  sin,  de  foot,  de  coun. 

Alice.  Excellent,  madame!  ^ 

Kath.  Cest  assez  pour  une  fois:  allons-nous  a  diner. 

[Exeunt. 


KING  HENRY  V 

20 


SCENE  V 


547 


KING  HENRY  V 


Scene  v.  The  same 

Enter  the  king  of  France,  the  dauphin,  the  duke 

OF  BOURBON,  the  CONSTABLE  OF  FRANCE,  and 

others. 

Fr.  King.  'Tis  certain  he  hath  pass’d  the  river 
Somme. 

Cm.  And  if  he  be  not  fought  withal,  my  lord. 

Let  us  not  live  in  France;  let  us  quit  all 
And  give  our  vineyards  to  a  barbarous  people. 

Dau.  0  Dieu  vivant!  shall  a  few  sprays  of  us, 
The  emptying  of  our  father’s  luxury. 

Our  scions  put  in  wild  and  savage  stock. 

Spirit  up  so  suddenly  into  the  clouds 
And  overlook  their  grafters? 

Emr.  Normans,  but  bastard  Normans,  Norman 
bastards!  lo 

Mort  de  ma  vie!  if  they  march  along 
Unfought  withal,  but  I  will  sell  my  dukedom, 

To  buy  a  slobbery  and  a  dirty  farm 
In  that  nook-shotten  isle  of  Albion. 

Cm.  Dieu  de  bataillesf  where  have  they  this 
mettle? 

Is  not  their  climate  foggy,  raw,  and  dull. 

On  whom,  as  in  despite,  the  sun  looks  pale. 
Killing  their  fruit  with  frowns?  Can  sodden 
water, 

A  drench  for  sur-rein’d  jades,  their  barley-broth. 
Decoct  their  cold  blood  to  such  valiant  heat?  20 
And  shall  our  quick  blood,  spirited  with  wine. 
Seem  frosty?  O,  for  honour  of  our  land. 

Let  us  not  hang  like  roping  icicles 
Upon  our  houses’  thatch,  whiles  a  more  frosty 
people 

Sweat  drops  of  gallant  youth  in  our  rich  fields! 
Poor  we  may  call  them  in  their  native  lords. 

Dau.  By  faith  and  honour. 

Our  madams  mock  at  us,  and  plainly  say 
Our  mettle  is  bred  out  and  they  will  give 
Their  bodies  to  the  lust  of  English  youth  50 
To  new-store  France  with  bastatd  warriors. 

Bour.  They  bid  us  to  the  English  dancing- 
schools. 

And  teach  lavoltas  high  and  swift  corantos; 
Saying  our  grace  is  only  in  our  heels. 

And  that  we  are  most  lofty  runaways. 

Fr.  King.  Where  is  Montjoy  the  herald? 
speed  him  hence: 

Let  him  greet  England  with  our  sharp  defiance. 
Up,  princes!  and,  with  spirit  of  honour  edged 
More  sharper  than  your  swords,  hie  to  the  field: 
Charles  Delabreth,  High  Constable  of  France; 
You  Dukes  of  Orleans,  Bourbon,  and  of  Berri,  4/ 
Alengon,  Brabant,  Bar,  and  Burgundy; 

Jaques,  Chatillon,  Rambures,  Vaudemont, 
Beaumont,  Grandpre,  Roussi,  and  Fauconberg, 


Foix,  Lestrale,  Bouciqualt,  and  Charolois; 

High  dukes,  great  princes,  barons,  lords,  and 
knights. 

For  your  great  seats  now  quit  you  of  great 
shames. 

Bar  Harry  England,  that  sweeps  through  our  land 
With  pennons  painted  in  the  blood  of  Harfleur: 
Rush  on  his  host,  as  doth  the  melted  snow  jo 
Upon  the  valleys,  whose  low  vassal  seat 
The  Alps  doth  spit  and  void  his  rheum  upon: 

Go  down  upon  him,  you  have  power  enough. 

And  in  a  captive  chariot  into  Rouen 
Bring  him  our  prisoner. 

Cm.  This  becomes  the  great. 

Sorry  am  I  his  numbers  are  so  few. 

His  soldiers  sick  and  famish’d  in  their  march. 

For  I  am  sure,  when  he  shall  see  our  army. 

He’ll  drop  his  heart  into  the  sink  of  fear 
And  for  achievement  offer  us  his  ransom.  60 
Fr.  King.  Therefore,  Lord  Constable,  haste  on 
Montjoy, 

And  let  him  say  to  England  that  we  send 
To  know  what  willing  ransom  he  will  give. 
Prince  Dauphin,  you  shall  stay  with  us  in  Rouen. 
Dau.  Not  so,  I  do  beseech  your  Majesty. 

Fr.  King.  Be  patient,  for  you  shall  remain  with 
us. 

Now  forth,  Lord  Constable  and  princes  all, 

And  quickly  bring  us  word  of  England’s  fall. 

[Exeunt, 

Scene  vi.  The  English  camp  in  Picardy 
Enter  gower  and  fluellen,  meeting. 

Govo.  How  now.  Captain  Fluellen!  come  you 
from  the  bridge? 

Flu.  I  assure  you,  there  is  very  excellent  serv¬ 
ices  committed  at  the  bridge. 

Govo.  Is  the  Duke  of  Exeter  safe? 

Flu.  The  Duke  of  Exeter  is  as  magnanimous  as 
Agamemnon;  and  a  man  that  I  love  and  honour 
with  my  soul,  and  my  heart,  and  my  duty,  and 
my  life,  and  my  living,  and  my  uttermost  power: 
he  is  not — God  be  praised  and  blessed! — any 
hurt  in  the  world;  but  kebps  the  bridge  most 
valiantly,  with  excellent  discipline.  There  is  an 
aunchient  lieutenant  there  at  the  pridge,  I  think 
in  my  very  conscience  he  is  as  valiant  a  man  as 
Mark  Antony;  and  he  is  a  man  of  no  estimation 
in  the  world;  but  I  did  see  him  do  as  gallant 
service. 

Govo.  What  do  you  call  him? 

Flu.  He  is  called  Aunchient  Pistol. 

Govo.  I  know  him  not.  20 

Enter  pistol. 

Flu.  Here  is  the  man. 


ACT  111 


KING  HENRY  V 


548 

Pist.  Captain,  I  thee  beseech  to  do  me  favours: 
The  Duke  of  Exeter  doth  love  thee  well. 

Flu.  Ay,  I  praise  God;  and  I  have  merited  some 
love  at  his  hands. 

Pist.  Bardolph,  a  soldier,  firm  and  sound  of 
heart. 

And  of  buxom  valour,  hath,  by  cruel  fate, 

And  giddy  Fortune’s  furious  fickle  wheel, 

That  goddess  blind. 

That  stands  upon  the  rolling  restless  stone —  50 
Flu.  By  your  patience,  Aunchient  Pistol.  For¬ 
tune  is  painted  blind,  with  a  muffler  afore  her 
eyes,  to  signify  to  you  that  Fortune  is  blind;  and 
she  is  painted  also  with  a  wheel,  to  signify  to  you, 
which  is  the  moral  of  it,  that  she  is  turning,  and 
inconstant,  and  mutability,  and  variation:  and 
her  foot,  look  you,  is  fixed  upon  a  spherical  stone, 
which  rolls,  and  rolls,  and  rolls:  in  good  truth, 
the  poet  makes  a  most  excellent  description  of  it: 
Fortune  is  an  excellent  moral.  40 

Pist.  Fortune  is  Bardolph’s  foe,  and  frowns  on 
him; 

For  he  hath  stolen  a  pax,  and  hanged  must  a’ 
be: 

A  damned  death! 

Let  gallows  gape  for  dog;  let  man  go  free 
And  let  not  hemp  his  wind-pipe  suffocate: 

But  Exeter  hath  given  the  doom  of  death 
For  pax  of  little  price. 

Therefore,  go  speak:  the  Duke  will  hear  thy 
voice; 

And  let  not  Bardolph’s  vital  thread  be  cut 
With  edge  of  penny  cord  and  vile  reproach:  50 
Speak,  captain,  for  his  life,  and  I  will  thee 
requite. 

Flu.  Aunchient  Pistol,  I  do  partly  understand 
your  meaning. 

Pist.  Why  then,  rejoice  therefore. 

Flu.  Certainly,  aunchient,  it  is  not  a  thing  to 
rejoice  at:  for  if,  look  you,  he  were  my  brother, 
I  would  desire  the  Duke  to  use  his  good  pleasure, 
and  put  him  to  execution;  for  discipline  ought  to 
be  used. 

Pist.  Die  and  be  damn’d!  and  Jigo  for  thy  friend¬ 
ship!  60 

Flu.  It  is  well. 

Pist.  The  fig  of  Spain !  [Exit. 

Flu.  Very  good. 

G(yw.  Why,  this  is  an  arrant  counterfeit  rascal; 
I  remember  him  now;  a  bawd,  a  cutpurse. 

Flu.  I’ll  assure  you,  a’  uttered  as  prave  words  at 
the  pridge  as  you  shall  see  in  a  summer’s  day. 
But  it  is  very  well;  what  he  has  spoke  to  me,  that 
is  well,  I  warrant  you,  when  time  is  serve.  6^ 
Gow.  Why,  ’tis  a  gull,  a  fool,  a  rogue,  that  now 
and  then  goes  to  the  wars,  to  grace  himself  at  his 


return  into  London  under  the  form  of  a  soldier. 
And  such  fellows  are  perfect  in  the  great  com¬ 
mander’s  names:  and  they  will  learn  you  by  rote 
where  services  were  done;  at  such  and  such  a 
sconce,  at  such  a  breach,  at  such  a  convoy;  who 
came  off  bravely,  who  was  shot,  who  disgraced, 
what  terms  the  enemy  stood  on;  and  this  they 
con  perfectly  in  the  phrase  of  war,  which  they 
trick  up  with  new-tuned  oaths:  and  what  a  beard 
of  the  general’s  cut  and  a  horrid  suit  of  the  camp 
will  do  among  foaming  bottles  and  ale-washed 
wits,  is  wonderful  to  be  thought  on.  But  you  must 
learn  to  know  such  slanders  of  the  age,  or  else 
you  may  be  marvellously  mistook. 

Flu.  I  tell  you  what.  Captain  Gower;  I  do  per¬ 
ceive  he  is  not  the  man  that  he  would  gladly  make 
show  to  the  world  he  is:  if  I  find  a  hole  in  his 
coat,  I  will  tell  him  my  mind. [Drum  heard.] 
Hark  you,  the  King  is  coming,  and  I  must  speak 
with  him  from  the  pridge. 

Drum  and  colours.  Enter  king  henry, 
GLOUCESTER,  and  Soldiers. 

God  pless  your  Majesty! 

K.  Hen.  How  now,  Fluellen!  earnest  thou  from 
the  bridge? 

Flu.  Ay,  so  please  your  Majesty.  The  Duke  of 
Exeter  has  very  gallantly  maintained  the  pridge: 
the  French  is  gone  off,  look  you;  and  there  is 
gallant  and  most  prave  passages;  marry,  th’  ad¬ 
versary  was  have  possession  of  the  pridge;  but 
he  is  enforced  to  retire,  and  the  Duke  of  Exeter 
is  master  of  the  pridge:  I  can  tell  your  Majesty, 
the  Duke  is  a  prave  man.  wi 

K.  Hen.  What  men  have  you  lost,  Fluellen? 

Flu.  The  perdition  of  th’  adversary  hath  been 
very  great,  reasonable  great:  marry,  for  my  part, 
I  think  the  Duke  hath  lost  never  a  man,  but  one 
that  is  like  to  be  executed  for  robbing  a  church, 
one  Bardolph,  if  your  Majesty  know  the  man: 
his  face  is  all  bubukles,  and  whelks,  and  knobs, 
and  flames  o’  fire:  and  his  lips  blows  at  his  nose, 
and  it  is  like  a  coal  of  fire,  sometimes  plue  and 
sometimes  red;  but  his  nose  is  executed,  and  his 
fire’s  out. 

K.  Hen.  We  would  have  all  such  offenders  so 
cut  off:  and  we  give  express  charge,  that  in  our 
marches  through  the  country,  there  be  nothing 
compelled  from  the  villages,  nothing  taken  but 
paid  for,  none  of  the  French  upbraided  or  abused 
in  disdainful  language;  for  when  lenity  and 
cruelty  play  for  a  kingdom,  the  gentler  gamester 
is  the  soonest  winner.  120 

Tucket.  Enter  montjoy. 

Mont.  You  know  me  by  my  habit. 


SCENE  V] 


549 


KING  HENRY  V 


K.  Hen.  Well  then  I  know  thee:  what  shall  I 
know  of  thee? 

Mont.  My  master’s  mind. 

K.  Hen.  Unfold  it. 

Mont.  Thus  says  my  king:  “Say  thou  to  Harry 
of  England:  Though  we  seemed  dead,  we  did  but 
sleep:  advantage  is  a  better  soldier  than  rashness. 
Tell  him  we  could  have  rebuked  him  at  Harfleur, 
but  that  we  thought  not  good  to  bruise  an  injury 
till  it  were  full  ripe:  now  we  speak  upon  our  cue, 
and  our  voice  is  imperial:  England  shall  repent 
his  folly,  see  his  weakness,  and  admire  our  suffer¬ 
ance.  Bid  him  therefore  consider  of  his  ransom; 
which  must  proportion  the  losses  we  have  borne, 
the  subjects  we  have  lost,  the  disgrace  we  have 
digested;  which  in  weight  to  re- answer,  his  petti¬ 
ness  would  bow  under.  For  our  losses,  his  exche¬ 
quer  is  too  poor;  for  the  effusion  of  our  blood,  the 
muster  of  his  kingdom  too  faint  a  number;  and 
for  our  disgrace,  his  own  person,  kneeling  at  our 
feet,  but  a  weak  and  worthless  satisfaction.  To 
this  add  defiance:  and  tell  him,  for  conclusion,  he 
hath  betrayed  his  followers,  whose  condemnation 
is  pronounced.”  So  far  my  King  and  master;  so 
much  my  office. 

K.  Hen.  What  is  thy  name?  I  know  thy  quality. 
Mont.  Mont  joy, 

K.  Hen.  Thou  dost  thy  office  fairly.  Turn  thee 
back. 

And  tell  thy  King  I  do  not  seek  him  now; 

But  could  be  willing  to  march  on  to  Calais  / jo 
Without  impeachment:  for,  to  say  the  sooth. 
Though  ’tis  no  wisdom  to  confess  so  much 
Unto  an  enemy  of  craft  and  vantage, 

My  people  are  with  sickness  much  enfeebled, 

My  numbers  lessen’d,  and  those  few  I  have 
Almost  no  better  than  so  many  French; 

Who  when  they  were  in  health,  I  tell  thee,  herald, 
I  thought  upon  one  pair  of  English  legs 
Did  march  three  Frenchmen.  Yet,  forgive  me, 
God, 

That  1  do  brag  thus!  This  your  air  of  France 
Hath  blown  that  vice  in  me;  I  must  repent. 

Go  therefore,  tell  thy  master  here  I  am; 

My  ransom  is  this  frail  and  worthless  trunk. 

My  army  but  a  weak  and  sickly  guard; 

Yet,  God  before,  tell  him  we  will  come  on. 
Though  France  himself  and  such  another  neigh¬ 
bour 

Stand  in  our  way.  There’s  for  thy  labour,  Mont- 

Go,  bid  thy  master  well  advise  himself: 

If  we  may  pass,  we  will;  if  we  be  hinder’d,  169 
We  shall  your  tawny  ground  with  your  red  blood 
Discolour:  and  so,  Mont  joy,  fare  you  well. 

The  sum  of  all  our  answer  is  but  this : 


We  would  not  seek  a  battle,  as  we  are; 

Nor,  as  we  are,  we  say  we  will  not  shun  it: 

So  tell  your  master. 

Mont.  I  shall  deliver  so.  Thanks  to  your 

Highness.  [Exit. 

Glou.  I  hope  they  will  not  come  upon  us  now. 

K.  Hen.  We  are  in  God’s  hand,  brother,  not  in 
theirs. 

March  to  the  bridge;  it  now  draws  toward  night: 
Beyond  the  river  we’ll  encamp  ourselves,  i8o 
And  on  to-morrow  bid  them  march  away. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  vii.  The  French  camp.,  near  Agincaurt 
Enter  the  constable  of  France,  the  lord  ram- 

BURES,  ORLEANS,  DAUPHIN,  with  Others . 

Con.  Tut!  I  have  the  best  armour  of  the  world. 
Would  it  were  day! 

Orl.  You  have  an  excellent  armour;  but  let  my 
horse  have  his  due. 

Con.  It  is  the  best  horse  of  Europe, 

Orl.  Will  it  never  be  morning? 

Dau.  My  Lx)rd  of  Orleans,  and  my  Lord  High 
Constable,  you  talk  of  horse  and  armour? 

Orl.  You  are  as  well  provided  of  both  as  any 
prince  in  the  world.  10 

Dau.  What  a  long  night  is  this!  I  will  not  change 
my  horse  with  any  that  treads  but  on  four  pas¬ 
terns,  C^7,  ha!  he  bounds  from  the  earth,  as  if  his 
entrails  were  hairs;  le  cheval  volant.,  the  Pegasus, 
chez  les  narines  de  feu!  When  I  bestride  him,  I 
soar,  I  am  a  hawk:  he  trots  the  air;  the  earth 
sings  when  he  touches  it;  the  basest  horn  of  his 
hoof  is  more  musical  than  the  pipe  of  Hermes. 

Orl.  He’s  of  the  colour  of  the  nutmeg.  20 

Dau.  And  of  the  heat  of  the  ginger.  It  is  a  beast 
for  Perseus:  he  is  pure  air  and  fire;  and  the  dull 
elements  of  earth  and  water  never  appear  in  him, 
but  only  in  patient  stillness  while  his  rider  mounts 
him:  he  is  indeed  a  horse;  and  all  other  jades  you 
may  call  beasts. 

Con.  Indeed,  my  lord,  it  is  a  most  absolute  and 
excellent  horse, 

Dau.  It  is  the  prince  of  palfreys;  his  neigh  is 
like  the  bidding  of  a  monarch  and  his  coun¬ 
tenance  enforces  homage.  31 

Orl.  No  more,  cousin. 

Dau.  Nay,  the  man  hath  no  wit  that  cannot, 
from  the  rising  of  the  lark  to  the  lodging  of  the 
lamb,  vary  deserved  praise  on  my  palfrey:  it  is  a 
theme  as  fluent  as  the  sea:  turn  the  sands  into 
eloquent  tongues,  and  my  horse  is  argument  for 
them  all:  ’tis  a  subject  for  a  sovereign  to  reason 
on,  and  for  a  sovereign’s  sovereign  to  ride  on; 
and  for  the  world,  familiar  to  us  and  unknown,  to 
lay  apart  their  particular  functions  and  wonder  at 


ACT  UI 


550 


KING  HENRY  V 


him.  I  once  writ  a  sonnet  in  his  praise  and  began 
thus:  “Wonder  of  nature” — 

Orl.  I  have  heard  a  sonnet  begin  so  to  one’s  mis¬ 
tress. 

Dm,  Then  did  they  imitate  that  which  I  com¬ 
posed  to  my  courser,  for  my  horse  is  my  mistress. 

Orl.  Your  mistress  bears  well. 

Dau.  Me  well;  which  is  the  prescript  praise  and 
perfection  of  a  good  and  particular  mistress. 

Cm.  Nay,  for  methought  yesterday  your  mis¬ 
tress  shrewdly  shook  your  back. 

Dau.  So  perhaps  did  yours. 

Cm.  Mine  was  not  bridled. 

Dau.  O  then  belike  she  was  old  and  gentle;  and 
you  rode,  like  a  kern  of  Ireland,  your  French 
hose  off,  and  in  your  strait  strossers. 

Cm.  You  have  good  judgement  in  horseman¬ 
ship.  59 

Dau.  Be  warned  by  me,  then:  they  that  ride  so 
and  ride  not  warily,  fall  into  foul  bogs.  I  had 
rather  have  my  horse  to  my  mistress. 

Cm.  I  had  as  lief  have  my  mistress  a  jade. 

Dau.  I  tell  thee,  Constable,  my  mistress  wears 


his  own  hair. 

Cm.  I  could  make  as  true  a  boast  as  that,  if  I 
had  a  sow  to  my  mistress. 

Dau.  Le  Men  est  retoume  a  son  propre  voniisse- 
ment,  et  la  truie  lavee  au  bofurbier:  thou  makest 
use  of  anything.  70 

Cm.  Yet  do  I  not  use  my  horse  for  my  mistress, 
or  any  such  proverb  so  little  kin  to  the  purpose. 

Kam.  My  Lord  Constable,  the  armour  that  I 
saw  in  your  tent  to-night,  are  those  stars  or  suns 
upon  it? 

Cm.  Stars,  my  lord. 

Dau.  Some  of  them  will  fall  to-morrow,  1  hope. 

Cm.  And  yet  my  sky  shall  not  want. 

Dau.  That  may  be,  for  you  bear  a  many  super¬ 
fluously,  and  ’twere  more  honour  some  were 
away. 

Cm.  Even  as  your  horse  bears  your  praises; 
who  would  trot  as  well,  were  some  of  your  brags 
dismounted. 

Dau.  Would  I  were  able  to  load  him  with  his 
desert!  Will  it  never  be  day?  I  will  trot  to¬ 
morrow  a  mile,  and  my  way  shall  be  paved  with 
English  faces. 

Cm.  I  will  not  say  so,  for  fear  I  should  be  faced 
out  of  my  way:  but  I  would  it  were  morning; 
for  I  would  fain  be  about  the  ears  of  the  English. 

Ram.  Who  will  go  to  hazard  with  me  for  twenty 
prisoners? 

Cm.  You  must  first  go  yourself  to  hazard,  ere 
you  have  them. 

Dau.  ’Tis  midnight;  I’ll  go  arm  myself.  [Exit. 

Orl.  The  Dauphin  longs  for  morning. 


Ram.  He  longs  to  eat  the  English. 

Con.  I  think  he  will  eat  all  he  kills.  100 

Orl.  By  the  white  hand  of  my  lady,  he’s  a  gallant 
prince. 

Cm.  Swear  by  her  foot,  that  she  may  tread  out 
the  oath. 

Orl.  He  is  simply  the  most  active  gentleman  of 
France. 

Cm.  Doing  is  activity;  and  he  will  still  be  doing. 
Orl.  He  never  did  harm,  that  I  heard  of. 

Cm.  Nor  will  do  none  to-morrow  he  will  keep 
that  good  name  still .  /// 

Orl.  I  know  him  to  be  valiant. 

Con.  I  was  told  that  by  one  that  knows  him 
better  than  you. 

Orl.  What’s  he? 

Cm.  Marry,  he  told  me  so  himself;  and  he  said 
he  cared  not  who  knew  it. 

Orl.  He  needs  not;  it  is  no  hidden  virtue  in 
him.  ii^ 

Cm.  By  my  faith,  sir,  but  it  is  ;  never  any  body 
saw  it  but  his  lackey:  ’tis  a  hooded  valour;  and 
when  it  appears,  it  will  bate. 

Orl.  Ill  will  never  said  well. 

Cm.  I  will  cap  that  proverb  with  “There  is 
flattery  in  friendship.” 

Orl.  And  I  will  take  up  that  with  “Give  the 
devil  his  due.” 

Con.  Well  placed:  there  stands  your  friend  for 
the  devil:  have  at  the  very  eye  of  that  proverb 
with  “A  pox  of  the  devil.”  /50 

Orl.  You  are  the  better  at  proverbs,  by  how 
much  “A  fool’s  bolt  is  soon  shot.” 

Cm.  You  have  shot  over. 

Orl.  ’Tis  not  the  first  time  you  were  overshot. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  My  Lord  High  Constable,  the  English  lie 
within  fifteen  hundred  paces  of  your  tents. 

Cm.  Who  hath  measured  the  ground? 

Mess.  The  Lord  Grandpre. 

Cm.  A  valiant  and  most  expert  gentleman. 
Would  it  were  day!  Alas,  poor  Harry  of  Eng¬ 
land!  he  longs  not  for  the  dawning  as  we  do.  74/ 
Orl.  What  a  wretched  and  peevish  fellow  is 
this  King  of  England,  fo  mope  with  his  fat¬ 
brained  followers  so  far  out  of  his  knowledge! 
Cm.  If  the  English  had  any  apprehension,  they 
would  run  away. 

Orl.  That  they  lack;  for  if  their  heads  had  any 
intellectual  armour,  they  could  never  wear  such 
heavy  head-pieces. 

Ram.  That  island  of  England  breeds  very  valiant 
creatures;  their  mastiffs  are  of  unmatchable 
courage. 

Orl.  Foolish  curs,  that  run  winking  into  the 


SCENE  VII 


KING  HENRY  V 


mouth  of  a  Russian  bear  and  have  their  heads 
crushed  like  rotten  apples!  You  may  as  well  say, 
that’s  a  valiant  flea  that  dare  eat  his  breakfast  on 
the  lip  of  a  lion. 

Cm.  Just,  just;  and  the  men  do  sympathize  with 
the  mastiffs  in  robustious  and  rough  coming  on, 
leaving  their  wits  with  their  wives:  and  then  give 
them  great  meals  of  beef  and  iron  and  steel,  they 
will  eat  like  wolves  and  fight  like  devils. 

Orl.  Ay,  but  these  English  are  shrewdly  out  of 
beef. 

Cm.  Then  shall  we  find  to-morrow  they  have 
only  stomachs  to  eat  and  none  to  fight.  Now  is  it 
time  to  arm:  come,  shall  we  about  it? 

Orl.  It  is  now  two  o’clock:  but,  let  me  see,  by 
ten 

We  shall  have  each  a  hundred  Englishmen. 

\Exeiint. 

ACT  IV 
PROLOGUE 
Enter  chorus. 

Chor.  Now  entertain  conjecture  of  a  time 
When  creeping  murmur  and  the  poring  dark 
Fills  the  wide  vessel  of  the  universe. 

From  camp  to  camp  through  the  foul  womb  of 
night 

The  hum  of  either  army  stilly  sounds. 

That  the  fix’d  sentinels  almost  receive 
The  secret  whispers  of  each  other’s  watch: 

Fire  answers  fire,  and  through  their  paly  flames 
Each  battle  sees  the  other’s  umber’d  face;  p 
Steed  threatens  steed,  in  high  and  boastful  neighs 
Piercing  the  night’s  dull  ear;  and  from  the  tents 
The  armourers,  accomplishing  the  knights. 

With  busy  hammers  closing  rivets  up. 

Give  dreadful  note  of  preparation: 

The  country  cocks  do  crow,  the  clocks  do  toll, 
And  the  third  hour  of  drowsy  morning  name. 
Proud  of  their  numbers  and  secure  in  soul, 

The  confident  and  over-lusty  French 
Do  the  low-rated  English  play  at  dice; 

And  chide  the  cripple  tardy-gaited  night  20 
Who,  like  a  foul  and  ugly  witch,  doth  limp 
So  tediously  away.  The  poor  condemned  English, 
Like  sacrifices,  by  their  watchful  fires 
Sit  patiently  and  inly  ruminate 
The  morning’s  danger,  and  their  gesture  sad 
Investing  lank-lean  cheeks  and  war-worn  coats 
Presenteth  them  unto  the  gazing  moon 
So  many  horrid  ghosts.  O  now,  who  will  behold 
The  royal  captain  of  this  ruin’d  band 
Walking  from  vyatch  to  watch,  from  tent  to  tent. 
Let  him  cry,  “Praise  and  glory  on  his  head!”  5/ 
For  forth  he  goes  and  visits  all  his  host. 

Bids  them  good  morrow  with  a  modest  smile 


And  calls  them  brothers,  friends,  and  country¬ 
men. 

Upon  his  royal  face  there  is  no  note 
How  dread  an  army  hath  enrounded  him; 

Nor  doth  he  dedicate  one  jot  of  colour 
Unto  the  weary  and  all-watched  night, 

But  freshly  looks  and  over-bears  attaint 
With  cheerful  semblance  and  sweet  majesty;  40 
That  every  wretch,  pining  and  pale  before, 
Beholding  him,  plucks  comfort  from  his  looks: 

A  largess  universal  like  the  sun 
His  liberal  eye  doth  give  to  ev^ery  one. 

Thawing  cold  fear,  that  mean  and  gentle  all 
Behold,  as  may  unworthiness  define, 

A  little  touch  of  Harry  in  the  night. 

And  so  our  scene  must  to  the  battle  fly; 

Where — O  for  pity! — we  shall  much  disgrace 
With  four  or  five  most  vile  and  ragged  foils,  50 
Right  ill-disposed  in  brawl  ridiculous. 

The  name  of  Agincourt.  Yet  sit  and  see. 

Minding  true  things  by  what  their  mockeries  be. 

[Exit. 

Scene  i.  The  English  camp  at  Agincourt 
Enter  king  henry,  Bedford,  and  Gloucester. 
K.  Hen.  Gloucester,  ’tis  true  that  we  are  in 
great  danger; 

The  greater  therefore  should  our  courage  be. 
Good  morrow,  brother  Bedford.  God  Almighty! 
There  is  some  soul  of  goodness  in  things  evil. 
Would  men  observingly  distil  it  out. 

For  our  bad  neighbour  makes  us  early  stirrers. 
Which  is  both  healthful  and  good  husbandry: 
Besides,  they  are  our  outward  consciences. 

And  preachers  to  us  all,  admonishing 

That  we  should  dress  us  fairly  for  our  end.  10 

Thus  may  we  gather  honey  from  the  weed. 

And  make  a  moral  of  the  devil  himself. 

Enter  erpingham. 

Good  morrow,  old  Sir  Thomas  Erpingham: 

A  good  soft  pillow  for  that  good  white  head 
Were  better  than  a  churlish  turf  of  France. 

Erp.  Not  so,  my  liege:  this  lodging  likes  me 
better. 

Since  I  may  say,  “Now  lie  I  like  a  king.” 

K.  Hen.  ’Tis  good  for  men  to  love  their  present 
pains 

Upon  example;  so  the  spirit  is  eased: 

And  when  the  mind  is  quicken’d,  out  of  doubt. 
The  organs,  though  defunct  and  dead  before,  21 
Break  up  their  drowsy  grave  and  newly  move. 
With  casted  slough  and  fresh  legerity. 

Lend  me  thy  cloak,  Sir  Thomas.  Brothers  both, 
Commend  me  to  the  princes  in  our  camp; 

Do  my  good  morrow  to  them,  and  anon 


ACT  IV 


KING  HENRY  V 


Desire  them  all  to  my  pavilion. 

Glou.  VVe  shall,  my  liege. 

Erp,  Shall  I  attend  your  Grace? 

K.  Hen.  No,  my  good  knight; 

Go  with  my  brothers  to  my  lords  of  England :  5  0 
I  and  my  bosom  must  debate  a  while. 

And  then  I  would  no  other  company. 

Erp.  The  Lord  in  heaven  bless  thee,  noble 
Harry!  [Exeunt  all  but  king. 

K.  Hen.  God-a-mercy,  old  heart!  thou  speak’st 
cheerfully. 

Enter  pistol. 

Pist.  Qui  va  la? 

K.  Hen.  A  friend. 

Pist.  Discuss  unto  me;  art  thou  officer? 

Or  art  thou  base,  common,  and  popular? 

K.  Hen.  I  am  a  gentleman  of  a  company. 

Pist.  Trail’st  thou  the  puissant  pike?  40 

K.  Hen.  Even  so.  What  are  you? 

Pist.  As  good  a  gentleman  as  the  Emperor. 

K.  Hen.  Then  you  are  a  better  than  the  King. 
Pist.  The  King’s  a  bawcock,  and  a  heart  of 
gold, 

A  lad  of  life,  an  imp  of  fame; 

Of  parents  good,  of  fist  most  valiant. 

I  kiss  his  dirty  shoe,  and  from  heart-string 
I  love  the  lovely  bully.  What  is  thy  name? 

K.  Hen.  Harry  le  Roy. 

Pist.  Le  Roy!  a  Cornish  name:  art  thou  of 
Cornish  crew?  yo 

K.  Hen.  No,  I  am  a  Welshman. 

Pist.  Know’st  thou  Fluellen? 

K.  Hen.  Yes. 

Pist.  Tell  him.  I’ll  knock  his  leek  about  his  pate 
Upon  Saint  Davy’s  day. 

K.  Hen.  Do  not  you  wear  your  dagger  in  your 
cap  that  day,  lest  he  knock  that  about  yours. 

Pist.  Art  thou  his  friend? 

K.  Hen.  And  his  kinsman  too. 

Pist  The  jigo  for  thee,  then !  60 

K.  Hen.  I  thank  you:  God  be  with  you! 

Pist.  My  name  is  Pistol  call’d.  [Exit. 

K.  Hen.  It  sorts  well  with  your  fierceness. 

Enter  fluellen  and  gower. 

Gow.  Captain  Fluellen! 

Flu.  So!  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  speak 
lower.  It  is  the  greatest  admiration  in  the  uni¬ 
versal  world,  when  the  true  and  aunchient  pre- 
rogatifes  and  laws  of  the  wars  is  not  kept:  if  you 
would  take  the  pains  but  to  examine  the  wars  of 
Pompey  the  Great,  you  shall  find,  I  warrant  you, 
that  there  is  no  tiddle  taddle  nor  pibble  pabble  in 
Pompey’s  camp;  I  warrant  you,  you  shall  find 
the  ceremonies  of  the  wars,  and  the  cares  of  it. 


and  the  forms  of  it,  and  the  sobriety  of  it,  and  the 
modesty  of  it,  to  be  otherwise. 

Gtrw.  Why,  the  enemy  is  loud;  you  hear  him  all 
night. 

Flu.  If  the  enemy  is  an  ass  and  a  fool  and  a 
prating  coxcomb,  is  it  meet,  think  you,  that  we 
should  also,  look  you,  be  an  ass  and  a  fool 
and  a  prating  coxcomb?  in  your  own  conscience, 
now? 

Gov).  I  will  speak  lower. 

Flu.  I  pray  you  and  beseech  you  that  you  will. 

[Exeunt  gower  and  fluellen. 

K.  Hen.  Though  it  appear  a  little  out  of  fashion. 
There  is  much  care  and  valour  in  this  Welshman. 

Enter  three  soldiers,  john  bates,  Alexander 
COURT,  and  michael  williams. 

Court.  Brother  John  Bates,  is  not  that  the  morn¬ 
ing  which  breaks  yonder? 

Bates.  I  think  it  be:  but  we  have  no  great  cause 
to  desire  the  approach  of  day.  po 

Will.  We  see  yonder  the  beginning  of  the  day, 
but  I  think  we  shall  never  see  the  end  of  it.  Who 
goes  there? 

K.  Hen.  A  friend. 

Will.  Under  what  captain  serve  you? 

K.  Hen.  Under  Sir  Thomas  Erpingham. 

Will.  A  good  old  commander  and  a  most  kind 
gentleman:  I  pray  you,  what  thinks  he  of  our 
estate? 

K.  Hen.  Even  as  men  wrecked  upon  a  sand,  that 
look  to  be  washed  off  the  next  tide.  loi 

Bates.  He  hath  not  told  his  thought  to^the  King? 

K.  Hen.  No;  nor  it  is  not  meet  he  should.  For, 
though  I  speak  it  to  you,  I  think  the  King  is  but  a 
man,  as  I  am:  the  violet  smells  to  him  as  it  doth 
to  me;  the  element  shows  to  him  as  it  doth  to  me; 
all  his  senses  have  but  human  conditions:  his 
ceremonies  laid  by,  in  his  nakedness  he  appears 
but  a  man;  and  though  his  affections  are  higher 
mounted  than  ours,  yet,  when  they  stoop,  they 
stoop  with  the  like  wing.  Therefore  when  he  sees 
reason  of  fears,  as  we  do,  his  fears,  our  of  doubt, 
be  of  the  same  relish  as  ours  are:  yet,  in  reason, 
no  man  should  possess  him  with  any  appearance 
of  fear,  lest  he,  by  showing  it,  should  dishearten 
his  army. 

Bates.  He  may  show  what  outward  courage  he 
will;  but  I  believe,  as  cold  a  night  as  ’tis,  he  could 
wish  himself  in  Thames  up  to  the  neck;  and  so  I 
would  he  were,  and  I  by  him,  at  all  adventures, 
so  we  were  quit  here. 

K.  Hen.  By  my  troth,  I  will  speak  my  con¬ 
science  of  the  King:  I  think  he  would  not  wish 
himself  any  where  but  where  he  is. 

Bates.  Then  I  would  he  were  here  alone;  so 


SCENE  I 


KING  HENRY  V 


should  he  be  sure  to  be  ransomed,  and  a  many 
poor  men’s  lives  saved. 

K.  Hen.  I  dare  say  you  love  him  not  so  ill,  to 
wish  him  here  alone,  howsoever  you  speak  this  to 
feel  other  men’s  minds:  methinks  I  could  not  die 
anywhere  so  contented  as  in  the  King’s  com¬ 
pany;  his  cause  being  just  and  his  quarrel  hon¬ 
ourable. 

Will.  That’s  more  than  we  know. 

Bates.  Ay,  or  more  than  we  should  seek  after; 
for  we  know  enough,  if  we  know  we  are  the 
King’s  subjects:  if  his  cause  be  wrong,  our  obe¬ 
dience  to  the  King  wipes  the  crime  of  it  out  of  us. 

Will.  But  if  the  cause  be  not  good,  the  King 
himself  hath  a  heavy  reckoning  to  make,  when 
all  those  legs  and  arms  and  heads,  chopped  off  in 
a  battle,  shall  join  together  at  the  latter  day  and 
cry  all,  “We  died  at  such  a  place”;  some  swear¬ 
ing,  some  crying  for  a  surgeon,  some  upon  their 
wives  left  poor  behind  them,  some  upon  the  debts 
they  owe,  some  upon  their  children  rawly  left.  I 
am  afeard  there  are  few  die  well  that  die  in  a 
battle;  for  hov  can  they  charitably  dispose  of 
anything,  when  blood  is  their  argument?  Now,  if 
these  men  do  not  die  well,  it  will  be  a  black 
matter  for  the  King  that  led  them  to  it;  whom  to 
disobey  were  against  all  proportion  of  subjection. 

K.  Hen.  So,  if  a  son  that  is  by  his  father  sent 
about  merchandise  do  sinfully  miscarry  upon  the 
sea,  the  imputation  of  his  wickedness,  by  your 
rule,  should  be  imposed  upon  his  father  that  sent 
him:  or  if  a  servant,  under  his  master’s  command 
transporting  a  sum  of  money,  be  assailed  by 
robbers  and  die  in  many  irreconciled  iniquities, 
you  may  call  the  business  of  the  master  the 
author  of  the  servant’s  damnation:  but  this  is  not 
so:  the  King  is  not  bound  to  answer  the  particular 
endings  of  his  soldiers,  the  father  of  his  son,  nor 
the  master  of  his  servant;  for  they  purpose  not 
their  death,  when  they  purpose  their  services. 
Besides,  there  is  no  king,  be  his  cause  never  so 
spotless,  if  it  come  to  the  arbitrement  of  swords, 
can  try  it  out  with  all  unspotted  soldiers:  some 
peradventure  have  on  them  the  guilt  of  premedit¬ 
ated  and  contrived  murder;  some,  of  beguiling 
virgins  with  the  broken  seals  of  perjury;  some, 
making  the  wars  their  bulwark,  that  have  before 
gored  the  gentle  bosom  of  peace  with  pillage  and 
robbery.  Now,  if  these  men  have  defeated  the 
law  and  outrun  native  punishment,  though  they 
can  outstrip  men,  they  have  no  wings  to  fly  from 
God:  war  is  his  beadle,  war  is  his  vengeance;  so 
that  here  men  are  punished  for  before-breach  of 
the  King’s  laws  in  now  the  King’s  quarrel:  where 
they  feared  the  death,  they  have  borne  life  away; 
and  where  they  would  be  safe,  they  perish:  then 


553 

if  they  die  unprovided,  no  more  is  the  King  guilty 
of  their  damnation  than  he  was  before  guilty  of 
those  impieties  for  the  which  they  are  now  visited. 
Every  subject’s  duty  is  the  King’s;  but  every 
subject’s  soul  is  his  own.  Therefore  should  every 
soldier  in  the  wars  do  as  every  sick  man  in  his 
bed,  wash  every  mote  out  of  his  conscience:  and 
dying  so,  death  is  to  him  advantage;  or  not 
dying,  the  time  was  blessedly  lost  wherein  such 
preparation  was  gained:  and  in  him  that  escapes, 
it  were  not  sin  to  think  that,  making  God  so  free 
an  offer.  He  let  him  outlive  that  day  to  see  His 
greatness  and  to  teach  others  how  they  should 
prepare. 

Will.  ’Tis  certain,  every  man  that  dies  ill,  the 
ill  upon  his  own  head,  the  King  is  not  to  answer 
it. 

Bates.  I  do  not  desire  he  should  answer  for  me; 
and  yet  I  determine  to  fight  lustily  for  him. 

K.  Hen.  I  myself  heard  the  King  say  he  would 
not  be  ransomed. 

Will.  Ay,  he  said  so,  to  make  us  fight  cheer¬ 
fully:  but  when  our  throats  are  cut,  he  may  be 
ransomed,  and  we  ne’er  the  wiser. 

K.  Hen.  If  I  live  to  see  it,  I  will  never  trust  his 
word  after. 

Will.  You  pay  him  then.  That’s  a  perilous  shot 
out  of  an  elder-gun,  that  a  poor  and  a  private  dis¬ 
pleasure  can  do  against  a  monarch!  you  may  as 
well  go  about  to  turn  the  sun  to  ice  with  fanning 
in  his  face  with  a  peacock’s  feather.  You’ll  never 
trust  his  word  after!  come,  ’tis  a  foolish  saying. 

K.  Hen.  Your  reproof  is  something  too  round:  I 
should  be  angry  with  you,  if  the  time  were  con¬ 
venient. 

Will.  Let  it  be  a  quarrel  between  us,  if  you  live. 

K.  Hen.  I  embrace  it.  221 

Will.  How  shall  I  know  thee  again? 

K.  Hen.  Give  me  any  gage  of  thine,  and  I  will 
wear  it  in  my  bonnet:  then,  if  ever  thou  darest 
acknowledge  it,  I  will  make  it  my  quarrel. 

Will.  Here’s  my  glove:  give  me  another  of  thine. 

K.  Hen.  There. 

Will.  This  will  I  also  wear  in  my  cap:  if  ever 
thou  come  to  me  and  say,  after  to-morrow,  “This 
is  my  glove,”  by  this  hand,  I  will  take  thee  a  box 
on  the  ear. 

K.  Hen.  If  ever  I  live  to  see  it,  I  will  challenge  it. 

Will.  Thou  darest  as  well  be  hanged. 

K.  Hen.  Well,  I  will  do  it,  though  I  take  thee  in 
the  King’s  company. 

Will.  Keep  thy  word:  fare  thee  well. 

Bates.  Be  friends,  you  English  fools,  be  friends: 
we  have  French  quarrels  enow,  if  you  could  tell 
how  to  reckon.  2^1 

K.  Hen.  Indeed,  the  French  may  lay  twenty 


ACT  IV 


KING  HENRY  V 


French  crowns  to  one,  they  will  beat  us;  for  they 
bear  them  on  their  shoulders:  but  it  is  no  English 
treason  to  cut  French  crowns,  and  to-morrow  the 
King  himself  will  be  a  clipper. 

[Exnmt  SOLDIERS. 

Upon  the  King!  let  us  our  lives,  our  souls. 

Our  debts,  our  careful  wives. 

Our  children,  and  our  sins  lay  on  the  King! 

We  must  bear  all.  O  hard  condition,  250 

Twin-born  with  greatness,  subject  to  the  breath 
Of  every  fool,  whose  sense  no  more  can  feel 
But  his  own  wringing!  What  infinite  heart’s-ease 
Must  kings  neglect,  that  private  men  enjoy! 

And  what  have  kings,  that  privates  have  not  too, 
Save  ceremony,  save  general  ceremony? 

And  what  art  thou,  thou  idol  Ceremony? 

What  kind  of  god  art  thou,  that  suffer’ st  more 
Of  mortal  griefs  than  do  thy  worshippers? 

What  are  thy  rents?  what  are  thy  comings  in? 

O  Ceremony,  show  me  but  thy  worth!  261 

What  is  thy  soul  of  adoration? 

Art  thou  aught  else  but  place,  degree,  and  form. 
Creating  awe  and  fear  in  other  men? 

Wherein  thou  art  less  happy  being  fear’d 
Than  they  in  fearing. 

What  drink’st  thou  oft,  instead  of  homage  sweet. 
But  poison’d  flattery?  O,  be  sick,  great  greatness, 
And  bid  thy  Ceremony  give  thee  cure! 

Think’st  thou  the  fiery  fever  will  go  out  270 
With  titles  blown  from  adulation? 

Will  it  give  place  to  flexure  and  low  bending? 
Canst  thou,  when  thou  command’st  the  beggar’s 
knee. 

Command  the  health  of  it?  No,  thou  proud  dream. 
That  play’st  so  subtly  with  a  king’s  repose; 

I  am  a  king  that  find  thee,  and  I  know 
’Tis  not  the  balm,  the  sceptre,  and  the  ball. 

The  sword,  the  mace,  the  crown  imperial. 

The  intertissued  robe  of  gold  and  pearl, 

The  farced  title  running  ’fore  the  King,  280 
The  throne  he  sits  on,  nor  the  tide  of  pomp 
That  beats  upon  the  high  shore  of  this  world. 

No,  not  all  these,  thrice-gorgeous  Ceremony, 

Not  all  these,  laid  in  bed  majestical. 

Can  sleep  so  soundly  as  the  wretched  slave. 

Who  with  a  body  fill’d  and  vacant  mind 
Gets  him  to  rest,  cramm’d  with  distressful 
bread; 

Never  sees  horrid  night,  the  child  of  hell. 

But,  like  a  lackey,  from  the  rise  to  set 

Sweats  in  the  eye  of  Phoebus  and  all  night  2^0 

Sleeps  in  Elysium;  next  day  after  dawn. 

Doth  rise  and  help  Hyperion  to  his  horse, 

And  follows  so  the  ever-running  year. 

With  profitable  labour,  to  his  grave: 

And,  but  for  ceremony,  such  a  wretch. 


Winding  up  days  with  toil  and  nights  with  sleep. 
Had  the  fore-hand  and  vantage  of  a  king. 

The  slave,  a  member  of  the  country’s  peace, 
Enjoys  it;  but  in  gross  brain  little  wots 
What  watch  the  King  keeps  to  maintain  the 
peace. 

Whose  hours  the  peasant  best  advantages.  50/ 
Re-enter  erpingham. 

Erp.  My  lord,  your  nobles,  jealous  of  your 
absence. 

Seek  through  your  camp  to  find  you. 

K.  Hen.  Good  old  knight. 

Collect  them  all  together  at  my  tent: 

I’ll  be  before  thee. 

Erp.  I  shall  do’t,  my  lord.  [Exit, 

K.  Hen.  O  God  of  battles!  steel  my  soldiers’ 
hearts; 

Possess  them  not  with  fear;  take  from  them 
now 

The  sense  of  reckoning,  if  the  opposed  numbers 
Pluck  their  hearts  from  them.  Not  to-day,  O 
Lord, 

O,  not  to-day,  think  not  upon  the  fault  5/0 

My  father  made  in  compassing  the  crown! 

I  Richard’s  body  have  interred  new; 

And  on  it  have  bestow’d  more  contrite  tears 
Than  from  it  issued  forced  drops  of  blood; 

Five  hundred  poor  I  have  in  yearly  pay. 

Who  twice  a-day  their  wither’d  hands  hold  up 
Toward  heaven,  to  pardon  blood;  and  I  have 
built 

Two  chantries,  where  the  sad  and  solemn  priests 
Sing  still  for  Richard’s  soul.  Mor^  will  I  do; 
Though  all  that  I  can  do  is  nothing  worth,  520 
Since  that  my  penitence  comes  after  all. 

Imploring  pardon. 

Re-enter  Gloucester. 

Glm.  My  liege! 

K.  Hen.  My  brother  Gloucester’s  voice?  Ay; 

I  know  thy  errand,  I  will  go  with  thee: 

The  day,  my  friends,  and  all  things  stay  for  me. 

[Exeunt, 

Scene  ii.  The  French  camp 
Enter  the  dauphin,  Orleans,  rambures, 
and  others. 

Orl.  The  sun  doth  gild  our  armour;  up,  my 
lords! 

Dau.  Montez  a  cheval!  My  horse!  varlet!  laquaisf 
ha! 

Orl.  O  brave  spirit! 

Dau.  Via!  les  eaux  et  la  terre, 

Orl.  Rien  puis?  V air  et  lefeu, 

Dau.  del.,  cousin  Orleans. 


SCENE  II 


555 


KING  HENRY  V 


Enter  constable. 

Now,  my  Lord  Constable! 

Cm.  Hark,  how  our  steeds  for  present  service 
neigh! 

Dau.  Mount  them,  and  make  incision  in  their 
hides. 

That  their  hot  blood  may  spin  in  English  eyes,  lo 
And  dout  them  with  superfluous  courage,  ha! 
Ram.  What,  will  you  have  them  weep  our 
horses’  blood? 

How  shall  we,  then,  behold  their  natural  tears? 
Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  The  English  are  embattled,  you  French 
peers. 

Con.  To  horse,  you  gallant  princes!  straight  to 
horse! 

Do  but  behold  yon  poor  and  starved  band. 

And  your  fair  show  shall  suck  away  their  souls. 
Leaving  them  but  the  shales  and  husks  of  men. 
There  is  not  work  enough  for  all  our  hands; 
Scarce  blood  enough  in  all  their  sickly  veins  20 
To  give  each  naked  curtle-axe  a  stain. 

That  our  French  gallants  shall  to-day  draw  out 
And  sheathe  for  lack  of  sport:  let  us  but  blow  on 
them. 

The  vapour  of  our  valour  will  o’erturn  them. 

’Tis  positive  ’gainst  all  exceptions,  lords. 

That  our  superfluous  lackeys  and  our  peasants, 
Who  in  unnecessary  action  swarm 
About  our  squares  of  battle,  were  enow 
To  purge  this  field  of  such  a  hilding  foe. 

Though  we  upon  this  mountain’s  basis  by  50 
Took  stand  for  idle  speculation: 

But  that  our  honours  must  not.  What’s  to  say? 

A  very  little  little  let  us  do. 

And  all  is  done.  Then  let  the  trumpets  sound 
The  tucket  sonance  and  the  note  to  mount; 

For  our  approach  shall  so  much  dare  the  field 
That  England  shall  couch  down  in  fear  and  yield. 

Enter  grandpre. 

Grand.  Why  do  you  stay  so  long,  my  lords  of 
France? 

Yon  island  carrions,  desperate  of  their  bones, 

1 11-fa vouredly  become  the  morning  field :  4.0 

Their  ragged  curtains  poorly  are  let  loose. 

And  our  air  shakes  them  passing  scornfully: 

Big  Mars  seems  bankrupt  in  their  beggar’d  host 
And  faintly  through  a  rusty  beaver  peeps : 

The  horsemen  sit  like  fixed  candlesticks. 

With  torch-staves  in  their  hand;  and  their  poor 
jades 

Lob  down  their  heads,  dropping  the  hides  and  hips. 
The  gum  down-roping  from  their  pale-dead  eyes. 


And  in  their  pale  dull  mouths  the  gimmal  bit 
Lies  foul  with  chew’d  grass,  still  and  motionless; 
And  their  executors,  the  knavish  crows,  5/ 
Fly  o’er  them,  all  impatient  for  their  hour. 
Description  cannot  suit  itself  in  words 
To  demonstrate  the  life  of  such  a  battle 
In  life  so  lifeless  as  it  shows  itself. 

Con.  They  have  said  their  prayers,  and  they 
stay  for  death. 

Dau.  Shall  we  go  send  them  dinners  and  fresh 
suits 

And  give  their  fasting  horses  provender. 

And  after  fight  with  them? 

Con.  I  stay  but  for  my  guidon:  to  the  field! 

I  will  the  banner  from  a  trumpet  take,  61 

And  use  it  for  my  haste.  Come,  come,  away! 

The  sun  is  high,  and  we  outwear  the  day. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  English  camp 
Enter  Gloucester,  Bedford,  exeter,  erping- 
HAM,  'with  all  his  host:  Salisbury  and  West¬ 
moreland. 

Glou.  Where  is  the  King? 

Bed.  The  King  himself  is  rode  to  view  their 
battle. 

West.  Of  fighting  men  they  have  full  three 
score  thousand. 

Exe.  There’s  five  to  one;  besides,  they  all  are 
fresh. 

Sal.  God’s  arm  strike  with  us!  ’tis  a  fearful  odds. 
God  be  wi’  you,  princes  all;  I’ll  to  my  charge: 

If  we  no  more  meet  till  we  meet  in  heaven. 

Then,  joyfully,  my  noble  Lord  of  Bedford, 

My  dear  Lord  Gloucester,  and  my  good  Lord 
Exeter, 

And  my  kind  kinsman,  warriors  all,  adieu!  10 
Bed.  Farewell,  good  Salisbury;  and  good  luck 
go  with  thee! 

Exe.  Farewell,  kind  lord;  fight  valiantly  to-day; 
And  yet  I  do  thee  wrong  to  mind  thee  of  it. 

For  thou  art  framed  of  the  firm  truth  of  valour. 

[Exit  SALISBURY. 

Bed.  He  is  as  full  of  valour  as  of  kindness; 
Princely  in  both. 

Enter  the  king. 

West.  O  that  we  now  had  here 

But  one  ten  thousand  of  those  men  in  England 
That  do  no  work  to-day ! 

K.  Hen.  What’s  he  that  wishes  so? 

My  cousin  Westmoreland?  No,  my  fair  cousin: 

If  we  are  mark’d  to  die,  we  are  enow  20 

To  do  our  country  loss;  and  if  to  live. 

The  fewer  men,  the  greater  share  of  honour. 
God’s  will!  I  pray  thee,  wish  not  one  man  more. 


ACT  IV 


556  KING  HENRY  V 


By  Jove,  I  am  not  covetous  for  gold, 

Nor  care  I  who  doth  feed  upon  my  cost; 

It  yearns  me  not  if  men  my  garments  wear; 

Such  outward  things  dwell  not  in  my  desires: 

But  if  it  be  a  sin  to  covet  honour, 

I  am  the  most  offending  soul  alive. 

No,  faith,  my  coz,  wish  not  a  man  from  England: 
God’s  peace!  I  would  not  lose  so  great  an  honour 
As  one  man  more,  methinks,  would  share  from 
me 

For  the  best  hope  I  have.  O,  do  not  wish  one 
more! 

Rather  proclaim  it,  Westmoreland,  through  my 
host, 

That  he  which  hath  no  stomach  to  this  fight. 

Let  him  depart;  his  passport  shall  be  made 
And  crowns  for  convoy  put  into  his  purse: 

We  would  not  die  in  that  man’s  company 
That  fears  his  fellowship  to  die  with  us. 

This  day  is  call’d  the  feast  of  Crispian:  40 

He  that  outlives  this  day  and  comes  safe  home 
Will  stand  a  tip-toe  when  this  day  is  named, 

And  rouse  him  at  the  name  of  Crispian. 

He  that  shall  live  this  day  and  see  old  age. 

Will  yearly  on  the  vigil  feast  his  neighbours. 

And  say,  “To-morrow  is  Saint  Crispian”: 

Then  will  he  strip  his  sleeve  and  show  his  scars, 
And  say,  “These  wounds  I  had  on  Crispin’s 
day.” 

Old  men  forget;  yet  all  shall  be  forgot, 

But  he’ll  remember  with  advantages  50 

What  feats  he  did  that  day:  then  shall  our  names. 
Familiar  in  his  mouth  as  household  words, 

Harry  the  King,  Bedford  and  Exeter, 

Warwick  and  Talbot,  Salisbury  and  Gloucester, 
Be  in  their  flowing  cups  freshly  remember’d. 
This  story  shall  the  good  man  teach  his  son; 

And  Crispin  Crispian  shall  ne’er  go  by. 

From  this  day  to  the  ending  of  the  world. 

But  we  in  it  shall  be  remembered; 

We  few,  we  happy  few,  we  band  of  brothers;  60 
For  he  to-day  that  sheds  his  blood  with  me 
Shall  be  my  brother;  be  he  ne’er  so  vile. 

This  day  shall  gentle  his  condition: 

And  gentlemen  in  England  now  a-bed 
Shall  think  themselves  accursed  they  were  not 
here. 

And  hold  their  manhoods  cheap  whiles  any 
speaks 

That  fought  with  us  upon  Saint  Crispin’s  day. 
Re-enter  Salisbury. 

Sal.  My  sovereign  lord,  bestow  yourself  with 
speed : 

The  French  are  bravely  in  their  battles  set. 

And  will  with  all  expedience  charge  on  us.  70 


K.  Hen.  All  things  are  ready,  if  our  minds  be  so. 
West.  Perish  the  man  whose  mind  is  backward 
now! 

K.  Hen.  Thou  dost  not  wish  more  help  from 
England,  coz? 

West.  God’s  will!  my  liege,  would  you  and  I 
alone. 

Without  more  help,  could  fight  this  royal  battle! 
K.  Hen.  Why,  now  thou  hast  unwish’d  five 
thousand  men; 

Which  likes  me  better  than  to  wish  us  one. 

You  know  your  places:  God  be  with  you  all! 

Tucket.  Enter  montjoy. 

Mont.  Once  more  I  come  to  know  of  thee.  King 
Harry, 

If  for  thy  ransom  thou  wilt  now  compound,  80 
Before  thy  most  assured  overthrow: 

For  certainly  thou  art  so  near  the  gulf. 

Thou  needs  must  be  englutted.  Besides,  in  mercy, 
The  Constable  desires  thee  thou  wilt  mind 
Thy  followers  of  repentance;  that  their  souls 
May  make  a  peaceful  and  a  sweet  retire 
From  off  these  fields,  where,  wretches,  their 
poor  bodies 
Must  lie  and  fester. 

K.  Hen.  Who  hath  sent  thee  now? 

Mont.  The  Constable  of  France. 

K.  Hen.  I  pray  thee,  bear  my  former  answer 
back:  ^0 

Bid  them  achieve  me  and  then  sell  my  bones. 
Good  God!  why  should  they  mock  poor  fellows 
thus? 

The  man  that  once  did  sell  the  lion’s  skin 
While  the  beast  lived,  was  killed  with  hunting 
him. 

A  many  of  our  bodies  shall  no  doubt 
Find  native  graves;  upon  the  which,  I  trust. 

Shall  witness  live  in  brass  of  this  day’s  work: 

And  those  that  leave  their  valiant  bones  in 
France, 

Dying  like  men,  though  buried  in  your  dunghills. 
They  shall  be  famed;  for  there  the  sun  shall  greet 
them,  100 

And  draw  their  honours  reeking  up  to  heaven; 
Leaving  their  earthly  parts  to  choke  your  clime. 
The  smell  whereof  shall  breed  a  plague  in 
France. 

Mark  then  abounding  valour  in  our  English, 

That  being  dead,  like  to  the  bullet’s  grazing, 
Break  out  into  a  second  course  of  mischief, 

Killing  in  relapse  of  mortality. 

Let  me  speak  proudly:  tell  the  Constable 
We  are  but  warriors  for  the  working-day; 

Our  gayness  and  our  gilt  are  all  besmirch’d  uo 
With  rainy  marching  in  the  painful  field; 


SCENE  III 


KING  HENRY  V 


There’s  not  a  piece  of  feather  in  our  host — 

Good  argument,  I  hope,  we  will  not  fly — 

And  time  hath  worn  us  into  slovenry; 

But,  by  the  mass,  our  hearts  are  in  the  trim; 

And  my  poor  soldiers  tell  me,  yet  ere  night 
They’ll  be  in  fresher  robes,  or  they  will  pluck 
The  gay  new  coats  o’er  the  French  soldiers’ 
heads 

And  turn  them  out  of  service.  If  they  do  this — 
As,  if  God  please,  they  shall — my  ransom  then 
Will  soon  be  levied.  Herald,  save  thou  thy 

labour;  121 

Come  thou  no  more  for  ransom,  gentle  herald; 
They  shall  have  none,  I  swear,  but  these  my 
joints; 

Which  if  they  have  as  I  will  leave  ’em  them, 

Shall  yield  them  little,  tell  the  Constable. 

Mont.  I  shall.  King  Harry.  And  so  fare  thee 
well: 

Thou  never  shalt  hear  herald  any  more.  [Exit. 

K.  Hen.  I  fear  thou’lt  once  more  come  again  for 
ransom. 

Enter  york. 

York.  My  lord,  most  humbly  on  my  knee  I  beg 
The  leading  of  the  vaward .  75  0 

K.  Hen.  Take  it,  brave  York.  Now,  soldiers, 
march  away: 

And  how  thou  pleasest,  God,  dispose  the  day! 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  The  field  of  battle 
Alarum.  Excursions.  Enter  pistol,  french 
SOLDIER,  and  boy. 

Pist.  Yield,  cur! 

Fr.  Sol.  Je  pense  que  vous  etes  gentilhomme  de 
bonne  qualite. 

Pist.  Qualtitie  calmie  custure  me!  Art  thou  a  gen¬ 
tleman?  what  is  thy  name?  discuss. 

Fr.  Sol.  O  Seigneur  Dieu! 

Pist.  O,  Signieur  Dew  should  be  a  gentleman: 
Perpend  my  words,  O  Signieur  Dew,  and  mark; 
O  Signieur  Dew,  thou  diest  on  point  of  fox. 
Except,  O  signieur,  thou  do  give  to  me  10 

Egregious  ransom. 

Fr.  Sol.  O,  prenez  misericorde!  ayezpitie  de  moi! 
Pist.  Moy  shall  not  serve;  I  will  have  forty 
moys; 

Or  I  will  fetch  thy  rim  out  at  thy  throat 
In  drops  of  crimson  blood. 

Fr.  Sol.  Est-il  impossible  d'echapper  la  force  de  ton 
bras? 

Pist.  Brass,  cur! 

Thou  damned  and  luxurious  mountain  goat,  20 
Offer’st  me  brass? 

Fr.  Sol.  0  pardonnez  moi! 


Pist.  Say’st  thou  me  so?  is  that  a  ton  of  moys? 
Come  hither,  boy:  ask  me  this  slave  in  French 
What  is  his  name. 

Boy.  Ecoutez:  comment  Hes-vous  appele? 

Fr.  Sol.  Monsieur  le  Fer. 

Boy.  He  says  his  name  is  Master  Fer. 

Pist.  Master  Fer!  I’ll  fer  him,  and  firk  him,  and 
ferret  him:  discuss  the  same  in  French  unto  him. 

Boy.  I  do  not  know  the  French  for  fer,  and 
ferret,  and  firk.  ^2 

Pist.  Bid  him  prepare;  for  I  will  cut  his  throat. 
Fr.  Sol.  Que  dit-iL  monsieur? 

Boy.  II  me  commande  de  vous  dire  que  vous  faites 
vous  pret;  car  ce  soldat  id  est  dispose  tout  a  cette  heure 
de  couper  votre  gorge. 

Pist.  Owy,  cuppele  gorge,  permafoy. 

Peasant,  unless  thou  give  me  crowns,  brave 
crowns; 

Or  mangled  shalt  thou  be  by  this  my  sword. 

Fr.  Sol.  0,je  vous  supplie,  pour  V amour  de  Dieu, 
me  par donner!  Je  suis  gentilhomme  de  bonne  maism: 
gardez  ma  vie,  etje  vous  donnerai  deux  cents  ecus. 
Pist.  What  are  his  words? 

Boy.  He  prays  you  to  save  his  life:  he  is  a  gen¬ 
tleman  of  a  good  house;  and  for  his  ransom  he 
will  give  you  two  hundred  crowns. 

Pist.  Tell  him  my  fury  shall  abate,  and  I  50 
The  crowns  will  take. 

Fr.  Sol.  Petit  monsieur,  quedit-il? 

Boy.  Encore  qu^il  est  contre  son  jurement  de  par- 
donner  aucun  prisonnier,  neanmoins,  pour  les  ecus 
que  vous  Vavez  promts,  il  est  content  de  vous  donner 
la  liberte,  le  franchisement. 

Fr.  Sol.  Sur  mes  genouxje  vous  donne  mille  remer- 
ctmens:  et  je  m'estime  heiireux  que  je  suis  tombe 
entre  les  mains  Tun  chevalier,  je  pense,  le  plus  brave, 
vaillant,  et  trd  distingue  seigneur  d'Atigleterre.  61 
Pist.  Expound  unto  me,  boy. 

Boy.  He  gives  you,  upon  his  knees,  a  thousand 
thanks;  and  he  esteems  himself  happy  that  he 
hath  fallen  into  the  hands  of  one,  as  he  thinks,  the 
most  brave,  valorous,  and  thrice- worthy  seigneur 
of  England. 

Pist.  As  I  suck  blood,  I  will  some  mercy  show. 
Follow  me!  ^9 

Boy.  Suivez-vous  le  grand  capitaine.  [Exeunt  pis¬ 
tol,  and  FRENCH  SOLDIER.]  1  did  never  know  so 
full  a  voice  issue  from  so  empty  a  heart:  but  the 
saying  is  true,  “The  empty  vessel  makes  the 
greatest  sound.”  Bardolph  and  Nym  had  ten 
times  more  valour  than  this  roaring  devil  i’  the 
old  play,  that  every  one  may  pare  his  nails  with  a 
wooden  dagger:  and  they  are  both  hanged;  and 
so  would  this  be,  if  he  durst  steal  anything  ad¬ 
venturously.  I  must  stay  with  the  lackeys,  with 
the  luggage  of  our  camp:  the  French  might  have 


ACT  IV 


558  KING  HENRY  V 


a  good  prey  of  us,  if  he  knew  of  it;  for  there  is 
none  to  guard  it  but  boys.  [Exit. 

Scene  v.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Enter  constable,  Orleans,  bourbon, 

DAUPHIN,  and  RAMBURES. 

Con.  O  diable! 

Orl.  O  seigneur!  lejour  est  perdu,  tout  est  perdu! 
Dau.  Mort  de  ma  vie!  all  is  confounded,  all! 
Reproach  and  everlasting  shame 
Sits  mocking  in  our  plumes.  0  mkhante fortune! 
Do  not  run  away. 

A  short  alarum. 

Cm.  Why,  all  our  ranks  are  broke. 

Dau.  O  perdurable  shame!  let’s  stab  ourselves. 
Be  these  the  wretches  that  we  play’d  at  dice  for.^ 
Orl.  Is  this  the  king  we  sent  to  for  his  ransom? 
Bmr.  Shame  and  eternal  shame,  nothing  but 
shame!  to 

Let  us  die  in  honour:  once  more  back  again; 

And  he  that  will  not  follow  Bourbon  now, 

Let  him  go  hence,  and  with  his  cap  in  hand. 

Like  a  base  pandar,  hold  the  chamber-door 
Whilst  by  a  slave,  no  gentler  than  my  dog. 

His  fairest  daughter  is  contaminated. 

Cm.  Disorder,  that  hath  spoil’d  us,  friend  us 
now! 

Let  us  on  heaps  go  offer  up  our  lives. 

Orl.  We  are  enow  yet  living  in  the  field 
To  smother  up  the  English  in  our  throngs,  20 
If  any  order  might  be  thought  upon. 

Bmr.  The  devil  take  order  now!  I’ll  to  the 
throng: 

Let  life  be  short;  else  shame  will  be  too  long. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  vi.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Alarums.  Enter  king  henry  and  forces, 
EXETER,  and  others. 

K.  Hen.  Well  have  we  done,  thrice  valiant 
countrymen: 

But  all’s  not  done;  yet  keep  the  French  the  field. 
Exe.  The  Duke  of  York  commends  him  to  your 
Majesty. 

K.  Hen.  Lives  he,  good  uncle?  thrice  within  this 
hour 

I  saw  him  down;  thrice  up  again,  and  fighting; 
From  helmet  to  the  spur  all  blood  he  was. 

Exe.  In  which  array,  brave  soldier,  doth  he  lie. 
Larding  the  plain;  and  by  his  bloody  side. 
Yoke-fellow  to  his  honour-owing  wounds. 

The  noble  Earl  of  Suffolk  also  lies.  10 

Suffolk  first  died:  and  York,  all  haggled  over. 
Comes  to  him,  where  in  gore  he  lay  insteep’d. 
And  takes  him  by  the  beard;  kisses  the  gashes 
That  bloodily  did  yawn  upon  his  face; 


And  cries  aloud,  “Tarry,  dear  cousin  Suffolk! 

My  soul  shall  thine  keep  company  to  heaven; 
Tarry,  sweet  soul,  for  mine,  then  fly  abreast. 

As  in  this  glorious  and  well-foughten  field 
We  kept  together  in  our  chivalry!” 

Upon  these  words  I  came  and  cheer’d  him  up:  20 
He  smiled  me  in  the  face,  raught  me  his  hand. 
And,  with  a  feeble  gripe,  says,  “Dear  my  lord. 
Commend  my  service  to  my  sovereign.” 

So  did  he  turn  and  over  Suffolk’s  neck 
He  threw  his  wounded  arm  and  kiss’d  his  lips; 
And  so  espoused  to  death,  with  blood  he  seal’d 
A  testament  of  noble-ending  love. 

The  pretty  and  sweet  manner  of  it  forced 
Those  waters  from  me  which  I  would  have 
stopp’d; 

But  I  had  not  so  much  of  man  in  me,  50 

And  all  my  mother  came  into  mine  eyes 
And  gave  me  up  to  tears. 

K.  Hen.  I  blame  you  not; 

For,  hearing  this,  I  must  perforce  compound 
With  mistful  eyes,  or  they  will  issue  too. 

Alarum. 

But,  hark!  what  new  alarum  is  this  same? 

The  French  have  reinforced  their  scatter’d  men: 
Then  every  soldier  kill  his  prisoners; 

Give  the  word  through.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  vii.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Enter  fluellen  and  gower. 

Flu.  Kill  the  poys  and  the  luggage!  ’tis  expressly 
against  the  law  of  arms:  ’tis  as  arrant  a  piece  of 
knavery,  mark  you  nbw,  as  can  be  offer’t;  in 
your  conscience,  now,  is  it  not? 

Govo.  ’Tis  certain  there’s  not  a  boy  left  alive; 
and  the  cowardly  rascals  that  ran  from  the  battle 
ha’  done  this  slaughter:  besides,  they  have 
burned  and  carried  away  all  that  was  in  the 
King’s  tent;  wherefore  the  King,  most  worthily, 
hath  caused  every  soldier  to  cut  his  prisoner’s 
throat.  O,  ’tis  a  gallant  king!  // 

Flu.  Ay,  he  was  porn  at  Monmouth,  Captain 
Gower.  What  call  you  the  town’s  name  where 
Alexander  the  Pig  was  born! 

Govo.  Alexander  the  Great. 

Flu.  Why,  I  pray  you,  is  not  pig  great?  the  pig, 
or  the  great,  or  the  mighty,  or  the  huge,  or  the 
magnanimous,  are  all  one  reckonings,  save  the 
phrase  is  a  little  variations. 

Govo.  I  think  Alexander  the  Great  was  born  in 
Macedon:  his  father  was  called  Phillip  of  Mace- 
don,  as  I  take  it. 

Flu.  I  think  it  is  in  Macedon  where  Alexander 
is  porn.  I  tell  you,  captain,  if  you  look  in  the 
maps  of  the  ’orld,  I  warrant  you  sail  find,  in  the 
comparisons  between  Macedon  and  Monrriouth, 


SCENE  VII 


559 


KING  HENRY  V 


that  the  situations,  look  you,  is  both  alike.  There 
is  a  river  in  Macedon;  and  there  is  also  moreover 
a  river  at  Monmouth:  it  is  called  Wye  at  Mon¬ 
mouth;  but  it  is  out  of  my  prains  what  is  the 
name  of  the  other  river;  but  ’tis  all  one,  ’tis  alike 
as  my  fingers  is  to  my  fingers,  and  there  is  sal¬ 
mons  in  both.  If  you  mark  Alexander’s  life  well, 
Harry  of  Monmouth’s  life  is  come  after  it  indif¬ 
ferent  well;  for  there  is  figures  in  all  things. 
Alexander,  God  knows,  and  you  know,  in  his 
rages,  and  his  furies,  and  his  wraths,  and  his 
cholers,  and  his  moods,  and  his  displeasures,  and 
his  indignations,  and  also  being  a  little  intoxicates 
in  his  prains,  did,  in  his  ales  and  his  angers,  look 
you,  kill  his  best  friend,  Cleitus.  4/ 

G(nv.  Our  King  is  not  like  him  in  that:  he  never 
killed  any  of  his  friends. 

Flu.  It  is  not  well  done,  mark  you  now,  to  take 
the  tales  out  of  my  mouth,  ere  it  is  made  and 
finished.  I  speak  but  in  the  figures  and  compari¬ 
sons  of  it:  as  Alexander  killed  his  friend  Cleitus, 
being  in  his  ales  and  his  cups;  so  also  Harry 
Monmouth,  being  in  his  right  wits  and  his  good 
judgements,  turned  away  the  fat  knight  with  the 
great-belly  doublet:  he  was  full  of  jests,  and 
gipes,  and  knaveries,  and  mocks;  I  have  forgot 
his  name. 

Gaiv.  Sir  John  Falstaff. 

Flu.  That  is  he:  I’ll  tell  you  there  is  good  men 
porn  at  Monmouth. 

Gov:.  Here  comes  his  Majesty. 

Alarum.  Enter  king  hexry,  and  forces;  Warwick, 
GLOUCESTER,  EXETER,  and  Others. 

K.  Hen.  I  was  not  angry  since  I  came  to  France 
Until  this  instant.  Take  a  trumpet,  herald; 

Ride  thou  unto  the  horsemen  on  yon  hill :  60 

If  they  will  fight  with  us,  bid  them  come  down. 

Or  void  the  field;  they  do  offend  our  sight: 

If  they’ll  do  neither,  we  will  come  to  them 
And  make  them  skirr  away,  as  swift  as  stones 
Enforced  from  the  old  Assyrian  slings: 

Besides,  we’ll  cut  the  throats  of  those  we  have. 
And  not  a  man  of  them  that  we  shall  take 
Shall  taste  our  mercy.  Go  and  tell  them  so. 

Enter  montjoy. 

Exe.  Here  comes  the  herald  of  the  French,  my 
liege. 

Glo.  His  eyes  are  humbler  than  they  used  to  be. 

K.  Hen.  How  now!  what  means  this,  herald.^ 
know’  St  thou  not  7  / 

That  I  have  fined  these  bones  of  mine  for  ransom? 
Comest  thou  again  for  ransom? 

Mont.  No,  great  King: 

I  come  to  thee  for  charitable  license. 


That  we  may  wander  o’er  this  bloody  field 
To  look  our  dead,  and  then  to  bury  them; 

To  sort  our  nobles  from  our  common  men. 

For  many  of  our  princes — woe  the  while! — 

Lie  drown’d  and  soak’d  in  mercenary  blood; 

So  do  our  vulgar  drench  their  peasant  limbs  80 
In  blood  of  princes;  and  their  wounded  steeds 
Fret  fetlock  deep  in  gore  and  with  wild  rage 
Yerk  out  their  armed  heels  at  their  dead  masters, 
Killing  them  twice.  O,  give  us  leave,  great  King, 
To  view  the  field  in  safety  and  dispose 
Of  their  dead  bodies! 

K.  Hen.  I  tell  thee  truly,  herald, 

I  know  not  if  the  day  be  ours  or  no; 

For  yet  a  many  of  your  horsemen  peer 
And  gallop  o’er  the  field. 

Mont.  The  day  is  yours. 

K.  Hen.  Praised  be  God,  and  not  our  strength, 
for  it! 

What  is  this  castle  call’d  that  stands  hard  by? 
Mont.  They  call  it  Agincourt. 

K.  Hen.  Then  call  we  this  the  field  of  Agin¬ 
court, 

Fought  on  the  day  of  Crispin  Crispianus. 

Flu.  Your  Grandfather  of  famous  memory,  an’t 
please  your  Majesty,  and  your  great-uncle  Ed¬ 
ward  the  Plack  Prince  of  Wales,  as  I  have  read 
in  the  chronicles,  fought  a  most  prave  pattle  here 
in  France. 

K.  Hen.  They  did,  Fluellen.  100 

Flu.  Your  Majesty  says  very  true:  if  your 
Majesties  is  remembered  of  it,  the  Welshmen  did 
good  service  in  a  garden  where  leeks  did  grow, 
wearing  leeks  in  their  Monmouth  caps;  which, 
your  Majesty  know,  to  this  hour  is  an  honourable 
badge  of  the  service;  and  I  do  believe  your  Ma¬ 
jesty  takes  no  scorn  to  wear  the  leek  upon  Saint 
Tavy’s  day. 

K.  Hen.  I  wear  it  for  a  memorable  honour; 

For  I  am  Welsh,  you  know,  good  countryman. 
Flu.  All  the  water  in  Wye  cannot  wash  your 
Majesty’s  Welsh  plood  out  of  your  pody,  1  can 
tell  you  that:  God  pless  it  and  preserve  it,  as  long 
as  it  pleases  His  Grace,  and  His  Majesty  too! 

K.  Hen.  Thanks,  good  my  countryman. 

Flu.  By  Jeshu,  I  am  your  Majesty’s  country¬ 
man,  I  care  not  who  know  it;  I  will  confess  it  to 
all  the  ’orld:  I  need  not  be  ashamed  of  your  Ma¬ 
jesty,  praised  be  God,  so  long  as  your  Alajesty  is 
an  honest  man.  ^20 

K.  Hen.  God  keep  me  so!  Our  heralds  go  with 
him: 

Bring  me  just  notice  of  the  numbers  dead 
On  both  our  parts.  Call  yonder  fellow  hither, 

[Points  to  WILLIAMS.  Exeunt  Heralds 
Ti'ith  .MONTJOY. 


ACT  IV 


KING  HENRY  V 


560 

Exe.  Soldier,  you  must  come  to  the  King. 

K.  Hen.  Soldier,  why  wearest  thou  that  glove  in 
thy  cap? 

Will.  An’t  please  your  Majesty,  ’tis  the  gage  of 
one  that  1  should  fight  withal,  if  he  be  alive. 

K.  Hen.  An  Englishman?  12^ 

Will.  An’t  please  your  Majesty,  a  rascal  that 
swaggered  with  me  last  night;  who,  if  alive  and 
ever  dare  to  challenge  this  glove,  I  have  sworn  to 
take  him  a  box  o’  th’  ear:  or  if  I  can  see  my  glove 
in  his  cap,  which  he  swore,  as  he  was  a  soldier,  he 
he  would  wear  if  alive,  I  will  strike  it  out  soundly. 

K.  Hen.  What  think  you.  Captain  Fluellen?  is 
it  fit  this  soldier  keep  his  oath? 

Flu.  He  is  a  craven  and  a  villain  else,  an’t  please 
your  Majesty,  in  my  conscience.  140 

K.  Hen.  It  may  be  his  enemy  is  a  gentleman  of 
great  sort,  quite  from  the  answer  of  his  degree. 

Flu.  Though  he  be  as  good  a  gentleman  as  the 
devil  is,  as  Lucifer  and  Belzebub  himself,  it  is 
necessary,  look  your  Grace,  that  he  keep  his  vow 
and  his  oath:  if  he  be  perjured,  see  you  now,  his 
reputation  is  as  arrant  a  villain  and  a  Jacksauce, 
as  ever  his  black  shoe  trod  upon  God’s  ground 
and  his  earth,  in  my  conscience,  la!  /jo 

K.  Hen.  Then  keep  thy  vow,  sirrah,  when  thou 
meetest  the  fellow. 

Will.  So  I  will,  my  liege,  as  I  live. 

K.  Hen.  Who  servest  thou  under? 

Will.  Under  Captain  Gower,  my  liege. 

Flu.  Gower  is  a  good  captain,  and  is  good 
knowledge  and  literatured  in  the  wars. 

K.  Hen.  Call  him  hither  to  me,  soldier. 

Will.  I  will,  my  liege.  [Exit. 

K.  Hen.  Here,  Fluellen;  wear  thou  this  favour 
for  me  and  stick  it  in  thy  cap:  when  Alengon  and 
myself  were  down  together,  I  plucked  this  glove 
from  his  helm:  if  any  man  challenge  this,  he  is  a 
friend  to  Alengon,  and  an  enemy  to  our  person; 
if  thou  encounter  any  such,  apprehend  him,  an 
thou  dost  me  love. 

Flu.  Your  Grace  doo’s  me  as  great  honours  as 
can  be  desired  in  the  hearts  of  his  subjects:  I 
would  fain  see  the  man,  that  has  but  two  legs, 
that  shall  find  himself  aggriefed  at  this  glove; 
that  is  all;  but  I  would  fain  see  it  once,  an  please 
God  of  His  grace  that  I  might  see. 

K.  Hen.  Knowest  thou  Gower? 

Flu.  He  is  my  dear  friend,  an  please  you. 

K.  Hen.  Pray  thee,  go  seek  him,  and  bring  him 
to  my  tent. 

Flu.  I  will  fetch  him.  [Exit. 

K.  Hen.  My  Lord  of  Warwick,  and  my  brother 
Gloucester, 

Follow  Fluellen  closely  at  the  heels: 

The  glove  which  I  have  given  him  for  a  favour 


May  haply  purchase  him  a  box  o’  th’  ear;  181 
It  is  the  soldier’s;  I  by  bargain  should 
Wear  it  myself.  Follow,  good  cousin  Warwick: 
If  that  the  soldier  strike  him,  as  I  judge 
By  his  blunt  bearing  he  will  keep  his  word, 

Some  sudden  mischief  may  arise  of  it; 

For  I  do  know  Fluellen  valiant 

And,  touch’d  with  choler,  hot  as  gunpowder. 

And  quickly  will  return  an  injury:  iS^ 

Follow,  and  see  there  be  no  harm  between  them. 
Go  you  with  me,  uncle  of  Exeter.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  viii.  Before  King  Henry' s  pavilion 
Enter  gower  and  williams. 

Will.  I  warrant  it  is  to  knight  you,  captain. 

Enter  fluellen. 

Flu.  God’s  will  and  his  pleasure,  captain,  I  be¬ 
seech  you  now,  come  apace  to  the  King:  there  is 
more  good  toward  you  peradventure  than  is  in 
your  knowledge  to  dream  of. 

Will.  Sir,  know  you  this  glove? 

Flu.  Know  the  glove!  I  know  the  glove  is  a 
glove. 

Will.  I  know  this;  and  thus  I  challenge  it. 

Strikes  him. 

Flu.  ’Sblood!  an  arrant  traitor  as  any  is  in  the 
universal  world,  or  in  France,  or  in  England!  // 

Govo.  How  now,  sir!  you  villain! 

Will.  Do  you  think  I’ll  be  forsworn? 

Flu.  Stand  away.  Captain  Gower;  I  will  give 
treason  his  payment  into  plows,  I  warrant  you. 

Will.  I  am  no  traitor. 

Flu.  That’s  a  lie  an  thy  throat.  I  charge  you  in 
his  Majesty’s  name,  apprehend  him:  he’s  a  friend 
of  the  Duke  of  Alengon’s.  /p 

Enter  Warwick  and  Gloucester. 

War.  How  now,  how  now!  what’s  the  matter? 

Flu.  My  Lord  of  Warwick,  here  is — praised  be 
God  for  it! — a  most  contagious  treason  come  to 
light,  look  you,  as  you  shall  desire  in  a  summer’s 
day.  Here  is  his  Majesty. 

Enter  king  henry  and  exeter. 

K.  Hen.  How  now!  what’s  the  matter? 

Flu.  My  liege,  here  is  a  villain  and  a  traitor, 
that,  look  your  Grace,  has  struck  the  glove  which 
your  Majesty  is  tjfke  out  of  the  helmet  of  Alen- 
gon. 

Will.  My  liege,  this  was  my  glove;  here  is  the 
fellow  of  it;  and  he  that  I  gave  it  to  in  change 
promised  to  wear  it  in  his  cap:  I  promised  to 
strike  him,  if  he  did:  I  met  this  man  with  my 
glove  in  his  cap,  and  I  have  been  as  good  as  my 
word. 

Flu.  Your  Majesty  hear  now,  saying  your  Ma- 


SCENE  VIII 


KING  HENRY  V 


jesty’s  manhood,  what  an  arrant,  rascally,  beg¬ 
garly,  lousy  knave  it  is:  I  hope  your  Majesty  is 
pear  me  testimony  and  witness,  and  will  avouch- 
ment,  that  this  is  the  glove  of  Alengon,  that  your 
Majesty  is  give  me;  in  your  conscience,  now.  40 

K,  Hen.  Give  me  thy  glove,  soldier:  look,  here 
is  the  fellow  of  it. 

’Twas  I,  indeed,  thou  promised’st  to  strike; 

And  thou  hast  given  me  most  bitter  terms. 

Flu.  And  please  your  Majesty,  let  his  neck 
answer  for  it,  if  there  is  any  martial  law  in  the 
world. 

K.  Hai.  How  canst  thou  make  me  satisfaction? 

Will.  All  offences,  my  lord,  come  from  the 
heart:  never  came  any  from  mine  that  might 
offend  your  Majesty.  5/ 

K.  Hen.  It  was  ourself  thou  didst  abuse. 

Will.  Your  Majesty  came  not  like  yourself:  you 
appeared  to  me  but  as  a  common  man;  witness 
the  night,  your  garments,  your  lowliness;  and 
what  your  Highness  suffered  under  that  shape,  I 
beseech  you  take  it  for  your  own  fault  and  not 
mine:  for  had  you  been  as  I  took  you  for,  I  made 
no  offence;  therefore,  I  beseech  your  Highness, 
pardon  me.  60 

K.  Hen.  Here,  uncle  Exeter,  fill  this  glove  with 
crowns. 

And  give  it  to  this  fellow.  Keep  it,  fellow; 

And  wear  it  for  an  honour  in  thy  cap 
Till  I  do  challenge  it.  Give  him  the  crowns: 

And,  captain,  you  must  needs  be  friends  with 
him. 

Flu.  By  this  day  and  this  light,  the  fellow  has 
mettle  enough  in  his  belly.  Hold,  there  is  twelve 
pence  for  you;  and  I  pray  you  to  serve  God,  and 
keep  you  out  of  prawls,  and  prabbles,  and  quar¬ 
rels,  and  dissensions,  and,  I  warrant  you,  it  is  the 
better  for  you.  7/ 

Will.  I  will  none  of  your  money. 

Flu.  It  is  with  a  good  will;  I  can  tell  you,  it  will 
serve  you  to  mend  your  shoes:  come,  wherefore 
should  you  be  so  pashful?  your  shoes  is  not  so 
good:  ’tis  a  good  silling,  I  warrant  you,  or  I  will 
change  it. 

Enter  an  English  herald. 

K.  Hen.  Now,  herald,  are  the  dead  number’d? 

Her.  Here  is  the  number  of  the  slaughter’d 
French. 

K.  Hen.  What  prisoners  of  good  sort  are  taken, 
uncle?  80 

Exe.  Charles  Duke  of  Orleans,  nephew  to  the 
King; 

John  Duke  of  Bourbon,  and  Lord  Bouciqualt: 

Of  other  lords  and  barons,  knights  and  squires, 
Full  fifteen  hundred,  besides  common  men. 


561 

K.  Hen.  This  note  doth  tell  me  of  ten  thousand 
French 

That  in  the  field  lie  slain:  of  princes,  in  this 
number. 

And  nobles  bearing  banners,  there  lie  dead 
One  hundred  twenty  six:  added  to  these. 

Of  knights,  esquires,  and  gallant  gentlemen,  89 

Eight  thousand  and  four  hundred;  of  the  which. 
Five  hundred  were  but  yesterday  dubb’d  knights: 
So  that,  in  these  ten  thousand  they  have  lost. 
There  are  but  sixteen  hundred  mercenaries; 

The  rest  are  princes,  barons,  lords,  knights, 
squires, 

And  gentlemen  of  blood  and  quality. 

The  names  of  those  their  nobles  that  lie  dead: 
Charles  Delabreth,  High  Constable  of  France; 
Jacques  of  Chatillon,  admiral  of  France; 

The  master  of  the  cross-bows.  Lord  Rambures; 
Great  Master  of  France,  the  brave  Sir  Guichard 
Dolphin,  100 

John  Dukeof  Alengon,  Anthony  Duke  of  Brabant, 
The  brother  to  the  Duke  of  Burgundy, 

And  Edward  Duke  of  Bar:  of  lusty  earls, 
Grandpre  and  Roussi,  Fauconberg  and  Foix, 
Beaumont  and  Marie,  Vaudemont  and  Lestrale. 
Here  was  a  royal  fellowship  of  death! 

Where  is  the  number  of  our  English  dead? 

Herald  shews  him  another  paper. 

Edward  the  Duke  of  York,  the  Earl  of  Suffolk, 

Sir  Richard  Ketly,  Davy  Gam,  esquire: 

None  else  of  name;  and  of  all  other  men  no 

But  five  and  twenty.  O  God,  thy  arm  was  here; 
And  not  to  us,  but  to  thy  arm  alone. 

Ascribe  we  all!  When,  without  stratagem. 

But  in  plain  shock  and  even  play  of  battle. 

Was  ever  known  so  great  and  little  loss 
On  one  part  and  on  the  other?  Take  it,  God, 

For  it  is  none  but  thine! 

Exe.  ’Tis  wonderful! 

K.  Hen.  Come,  go  we  in  procession  to  the 
village: 

And  be  it  death  proclaimed  through  our  host 
To  boast  of  this  or  take  that  praise  from  God  120 
Which  is  his  only. 

Flu.  Is  it  not  lawful,  an  please  your  Majesty,  to 
tell  how  many  is  killed? 

K.  Hen.  Yes,  captain;  but  with  this  acknow¬ 
ledgement. 

That  God  fought  for  us. 

Flu.  Yes,  my  conscience,  he  did  us  great  good. 
K.  Hen.  Do  we  all  holy  rites; 

Let  there  be  sung  Non  nobis  and  Te  Deum; 

The  dead  with  charity  enclosed  in  clay: 

And  then  to  Calais;  and  to  England  then;  /50 
Where  ne’er  from  France  arrived  more  happy 
men.  [Exeunt. 


562 


KING  HENRY  V 


ACT  V 


ACT  V 
PROLOGUE 
Enter  CHOKm, 

Chor.  Vouchsafe  to  those  that  have  not  read  the 
story, 

That  I  may  prompt  them:  and  of  such  as  have, 

I  humbly  pray  them  to  admit  the  excuse 
Of  time,  of  numbers,  and  due  course  of  things. 
Which  cannot  in  their  huge  and  proper  life 
Be  here  presented.  Now  we  bear  the  King 
Toward  Calais:  grant  him  there;  there  seen. 
Heave  him  away  upon  your  winged  thoughts 
Athwart  the  sea.  Behold,  the  English  beach  p 
Pales  in  the  flood  with  men,  with  wives  and 
boys. 

Whose  shouts  and  claps  out-voice  the  deep- 
mouth’d  sea. 

Which  like  a  mighty  whiffler  ’fore  the  King 
Seems  to  prepare  his  way :  so  let  him  land. 

And  solemnly  see  him  set  on  to  London. 

So  swift  a  pace  hath  thought  that  even  now 
You  may  imagine  him  upon  Blackheath; 

Where  that  his  lords  desire  him  to  have  borne 
His  bruised  helmet  and  his  bended  sword 
Before  him  through  the  city:  he  forbids  it,  ip 
Being  free  from  vainness  and  self-glorious  pride; 
Giving  full  trophy,  signal,  and  ostent 
Quite  from  himself  to  God.  But  now  behold. 

In  the  quick  forge  and  working-house  of  thought. 
How  London  doth  pour  out  her  citizens! 

The  mayor  and  all  his  brethren  in  best  sort, 

Like  to  the  senators  of  the  antique  Rome, 

With  the  plebeians  swarming  at  their  heels. 

Go  forth  and  fetch  their  conquering  Caesar  in: 

As,  by  a  lower  but  loving  likelihood. 

Were  now  the  general  of  our  gracious  Empress, 
As  in  good  time  he  may,  from  Ireland  coming,  5/ 
Bringing  rebellion  broached  on  his  sword. 

How  many  would  the  peaceful  city  quit. 

To  welcome  him!  much  more,  and  much  more 
cause. 

Did  they  this  Harry.  Now  in  London  place  him; 
As  yet  the  lamentation  of  the  French 
Invites  the  King  of  England’s  stay  at  home; 

The  Emperor’s  coming  in  behalf  of  France, 

To  order  peace  between  them;  and  omit 

All  the  occurrences,  whatever  chanced,  40 

Till  Harry’s  back-return  again  to  France: 

There  must  we  bring  him;  and  myself  have 
play’d 

The  interim,  by  remembering  you  ’tis  past. 

Then  brook  abridgement,  and  your  eyes  advance 
After  your  thoughts,  straight  back  again  to 

France.  [Exit. 


Scene  i.  France:  the  English  camp 
Enter  fluellen  and  cower. 

Gov).  Nay,  that’s  right;  but  why  wear  you 
your  leek  to-day?  Saint  Davy’s  day  is  past. 

Flu.  There  is  occasions  and  causes  why  and 
wherefore  in  all  things:  I  will  tell  you,  asse  my 
friend.  Captain  Gower;  the  rascally,  scauld,  beg¬ 
garly,  lousy,  pragging  knave.  Pistol,  which  you 
and  yourself  and  all  the  world  know  to  be  no 
petter  than  a  fellow,  look  you  now,  of  no  merits, 
he  is  come  to  me  and  prings  me  pread  and  salt 
yesterday,  look  you,  and  bid  me  eat  my  leek:  it 
was  in  a  place  where  I  could  not  breed  no  conten¬ 
tion  with  him;  but  I  will  be  so  bold  as  to  wear  it 
in  my  cap  till  I  see  him  once  again,  and  then  I  will 
tell  him  a  little  piece  of  my  desires. 

Enter  pistol. 

Gov).  Why,  here  he  comes,  swelling  like  a 
turkey-cock. 

Flu.  ’Tis  no  matter  for  his  swellings  nor  his 
turkey-cocks.  God  pless  you,  Aunchient  Pistol! 
you  scurvy,  lousy  knave,  God  pless  you! 

Fist.  Ha!  art  thou  bedlam?  dost  thou  thirst, 
base  Trojan,  20 

To  have  me  fold  up  Parca’s  fatal  web? 

Hence!  I  am  qualmish  at  the  smell  of  leek. 

Flu.  I  peseech  you  heartily,  scurvy,  lousy  knave, 
at  my  desires,  and  my  requests,  and  my  petitions, 
to  eat,  look  you,  this  leek:  because,  look  you, 
you  do  not  love  it,  nor  your  affections  and  your 
appetites  and  your  disgestions  doo’s  not  agree 
with  it,  I  would  desire  you  to  eat  it.  ^ 

Fist.  Not  for  Cadwallader  and  all  his  goats. 

Flu.  There  is  one  goat  for  you.  [Strikes  him.] 
Will  you  be  so  good,  scauld  knave,  as  eat  it?  5/ 

Fist.  Base  Trojan,  thou  shalt  die. 

Flu.  You  say  very  true,  scauld  knave,  when 
God’s  will  is:  I  will  desire  you  to  live  in  the  mean 
time,  and  eat  your  victuals:  come,  there  is  sauce 
for  it.  [Strikes  him.]  You  called  me  yesterday 
mountain-squire;  but  I  will  make  you  to-day  a 
squire  of  low  degree.  I  pray  you,  fall  to:  if  you 
can  mock  a  leek,  you  can  eat  a  leek. 

Gonjo.  Enough,  captain:  you  have  astonished 
him.  41 

Flu.  I  say,  I  will  make  him  eat  some  part  of  my 
leek,  or  I  will  peat  his  pate  four  days.  Bite,  I 
pray  you;  it  is  good  for  your  green  wound  and 
your  ploody  coxcomb. 

Fist.  Must  I  bite? 

Flu.  Yes,  certainly,  and  out  of  doubt  and  out  of 
question  too,  and  ambiguities. 

Fist.  By  this  leek,  I  will  most  horribly  revenge: 
I  eat  and  eat,  I  swear —  po 


SCENE  I 

Flu.  Eat,  I  pray  you:  will  you  have  some  more 
sauce  to  your  leek?  there  is  not  enough  leek  to 
swear  by. 

Pist.  Quiet  thy  cudgel;  thou  dost  see  I  eat. 

Flu.  Much  good  do  you,  scauld  knave,  heartily. 
Nay,  pray  you,  throw  none  away;  the  skin  is 
good  for  your  broken  coxcomb.  When  you  take 
occasions  to  see  leeks  hereafter,  I  pray  you, 
mock  at  ’em;  that  is  all. 

Pist.  Good.  6o 

Flu.  Ay,  leeks  is  good:  hold  you,  there  is  a 
groat  to  heal  your  pate. 

Flu.  Yes,  verily  and  in  truth,  you  shall  take  it; 
or  I  have  another  leek  in  my  pocket,  which  you 
shall  eat. 

Pist.  I  take  thy  groat  in  earnest  of  revenge. 

Flu.  If  I  owe  you  anything,  I  will  pay  you  in 
cudgels;  you  shall  be  a  woodmonger,  and  buy 
nothing  of  me  but  cudgels.  God  b’  wi’  you,  and 
keep  you,  and  heal  your  pate.  [Exit.  7/ 

Pist.  All  hell  shall  stir  for  this. 

Gow.  Go,  go;  you  are  a  counterfeit  cowardly 
knave.  Will  you  mock  at  an  ancient  tradition, 
begun  upon  an  honourable  respect,  and  worn  as  a 
memorable  trophy  of  predeceased  valour  and  dare 
not  avouch  in  your  deeds  any  of  your  words?  I 
have  seen  you  gleeking  and  galling  at  this  gentle¬ 
man  twice  or  thrice.  You  thought,  because  he 
could  not  speak  English  in  the  native  garb,  he 
could  not  therefore  handle  an  English  cudgel: 
you  find  it  otherwise;  and  henceforth  let  a  Welsh 
correction  teach  you  a  good  English  condition. 
Fare  ye  well.  [Exit. 

Pist.  Doth  Fortune  play  the  huswife  with  me 
now? 

News  have  I,  that  my  Nell  is  dead  i’  the  spital 
Of  malady  of  France; 

And  there  my  rendezvous  is  quite  cut  off. 

Old  I  do  wax;  and  from  my  weary  limbs 
Honour  is  cudgelled.  Well,  bawd  I’ll  turn,  po 
And  something  learn  to  cutpurse  of  quick  hand. 
To  England  will  I  steal,  and  there  I’ll  steal: 

And  patches  will  I  get  unto  these  cudgell’d  scars. 
And  swear  I  got  them  in  the  Gallia  wars.  [Exit. 

Scene  ii.  France:  a  royal  palace 
Enter,  atone  door,  king  henry,  exeter,  Bedford, 

GLOUCESTER,  WARWICK,  WESTMORELAND,  and 

Other  Lords;  at  another,  the  french  king,  queen 

ISABEL,  the  PRINCESS  KATHARINE,  ALICE  and 

other  Ladies;  the  duke  of  burgundy,  and  his 

train. 

K.  Hen.  Peace  to  this  meeting,  wherefore  we 
are  met! 

Unto  our  brother  France,  and  to  our  sister. 
Health  and  fair  time  of  day;  joy  and  good  wishes 


563 

To  our  most  fair  and  princely  cousin  Katharine; 
And,  as  a  branch  and  member  of  this  royalty. 

By  whom  this  great  assembly  is  contrived. 

We  do  salute  you,  Duke  of  Burgundy; 

And,  princes  French,  and  peers,  health  to  you  all! 
Fr.  King.  Right  joyous  are  we  to  behold  your 
face. 

Most  worthy  brother  England;  fairly  met:  10 

So  are  you,  princes  English,  every  one. 

Q.  Isa.  So  happy  be  the  issue,  brother  England, 
Of  this  good  day  and  of  this  gracious  meeting. 

As  we  are  now  glad  to  behold  your  eyes; 

Your  eyes,  which  hitherto  have  borne  in  them 
Against  the  French  that  met  them  in  their  bent 
The  fatal  balls  of  murdering  basilisks: 

The  venom  of  such  looks,  we  fairly  hope. 

Have  lost  their  quality,  and  that  this  day 
Shall  change  all  griefs  and  quarrels  into  love.  20 
K.  Hen.  To  cry  amen  to  that,  thus  we  appear. 

Q.  Isa.  You  English  princes  all,  I  do  salute  you. 
Bur.  My  duty  to  you  both,  on  equal  love. 

Great  Kings  of  France  and  England!  That  I 
have  labour’d. 

With  all  my  wits,  my  pains,  and  strong  endea¬ 
vours 

To  bring  your  most  imperial  Majesties 
Unto  this  bar  and  royal  interview. 

Your  mightiness  on  both  parts  best  can  witness. 
Since  then  my  office  hath  so  far  prevail’d 
That,  face  to  face  and  royal  eye  to  eye,  50 

You  have  congreeted,  let  it  not  disgrace  me. 

If  I  demand,  before  this  royal  view. 

What  rub  or  what  impediment  there  is. 

Why  that  naked,  poor,  and  mangled  Peace, 

Dear  nurse  of  arts,  plenties,  and  joyful  births. 
Should  not  in  this  best  garden  of  the  world. 

Our  fertile  France,  put  up  her  lovely  visage? 

Alas,  she  hath  from  France  too  long  been  chased, 
And  all  her  husbandry  doth  lie  on  heaps. 
Corrupting  in  its  own  fertility.  40 

Her  vine,  the  merry  cheerer  of  the  heart. 
Unpruned  dies;  her  hedges  even-pleach’d. 

Like  prisoners  wildly  overgrown  with  hair. 

Put  forth  disorder’d  twigs;  her  fallow  leas 
The  darnel,  hemlock,  and  rank  fumitory 
Doth  root  upon,  while  that  the  coulter  rusts 
That  should  deracinate  such  savagery; 

The  even  mead,  that  erst  brought  sweetly  forth 
The  freckled  cowslip,  burnet,  and  green  clover. 
Wanting  the  scythe,  all  uncorrected,  rank,  50 
Conceives  by  idleness  and  nothing  teems 
But  hateful  docks,  rough  thistles,  kecksies,  burs. 
Losing  both  beauty  and  utility. 

And  as  our  vineyards,  fallows,  meads,  and 
hedges. 

Defective  in  their  natures,  grow  to  wildness. 


KING  HENRY  V 


ACT  V 


564  KING  HENRY  V 


Even  so  our  houses  and  ourselves  and  children 
Have  lost,  or  do  not  learn  for  want  of  time, 

The  sciences  that  should  become  our  country; 

But  grow  like  savages — as  soldiers  will 
That  nothing  do  but  meditate  on  blood —  60 

To  swearing  and  stern  looks,  diffused  attire 
And  everything  that  seems  unnatural. 

Which  to  reduce  into  our  former  favour 
You  are  assembled:  and  my  speech  entreats 
That  I  may  know  the  let  why  gentle  Peace 
Should  not  expel  these  inconveniences 
And  bless  us  with  her  former  qualities. 

K.  Hen.  If,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  you  would  the 
peace. 

Whose  want  gives  growth  to  the  imperfections 
Which  you  have  cited,  you  must  buy  that  peace 
With  full  accord  to  all  our  just  demands;  7/ 
Whose  tenours  and  particular  effects 
You  have  enscheduled  briefly  in  your  hands. 

Bur.  The  King  hath  heard  them;  to  the  which 
as  yet 

There  is  no  answer  made. 

K.  Hen.  Well  then  the  peace. 

Which  you  before  so  urged,  lies  in  his  answer. 

Fr.  King.  I  have  but  with  a  cursorary  eye 
O’erglanced  the  articles:  pleaseth  your  Grace 
To  appoint  some  of  your  council  presently 
To  sit  with  us  once  more,  with  better  heed  80 
To  re-survey  them,  we  will  suddenly 
Pass  our  accept  and  peremptory  answer. 

K.  Hen.  Brother,  we  shall.  Go,  uncle  Exeter, 
And  brother  Clarence,  and  you,  brother  Glou¬ 
cester. 

Warwick  and  Huntingdon,  go  with  the  King; 
And  take  with  you  free  power  to  ratify. 
Augment,  or  alter,  as  your  wisdoms  best 
Shall  see  advantageable  for  our  dignity. 

Anything  in  or  out  of  our  demands. 

And  we’ll  consign  thereto.  Will  you,  fair 
sister. 

Go  with  the  princes,  or  stay  here  with  us?  p; 
Q.  ha.  Our  gracious  brother,  I  will  go  with 
them: 

Haply  a  woman’s  voice  may  do  some  good. 
When  articles  too  nicely  urged  be  stood  on. 

K.  Hen.  Yet  leave  our  cousin  Katharine  here 
with  us: 

She  is  our  capital  demand,  comprised 
Within  the  fore-rank  of  our  articles. 

Q.  ha.  She  hath  good  leave. 

[Exeunt  all  except  henry,  Katharine, 
and  ALICE. 

K.  Hen.  Fair  Katharine,  and  most  fair. 

Will  you  vouchsafe  to  teach  a  soldier  terms 
Such  as  will  enter  at  a  lady’s  ear  100 

And  plead  his  love-suit  to  her  gentle  heart? 


Kath.  Your  Majesty  shall  mock  at  me;  I  can¬ 
not  speak  your  England. 

K.  Hen.  O  fair  Katharine,  if  you  will  love  me 
soundly  with  your  French  heart,  I  will  be  glad  to 
hear  you  confess  it  brokenly  with  your  English 
tongue.  Do  you  like  me,  Kate? 

Kath.  Pardonnez-moi,  I  cannot  tell  vat  is  “like 
me.” 

K.  Hen.  An  angel  is  like  you,  Kate,  and  you  are 
like  an  angel.  in 

Kath.  Que  dit-il?  queje  suis  semblable  a  les  anges? 
Alice.  Oui,  vraiment,  sauf  votre  grace,  ainsi  dit-il. 
K.  Hen.  I  said  so,  dear  Katharine;  and  I  must 
not  blush  to  affirm  it. 

Kath.  0  bon  Dieu!  les  langues  des  homines  sont 
pleines  de  tromperies. 

K.  Hen.  What  says  she,  fair  one?  that  the  ton¬ 
gues  of  men  are  full  of  deceits?  121 

Alice.  Out,  dat  de  tongues  of  de  mans  is  be  full 
of  deceits:  dat  is  de  princess. 

K.  Hen.  The  princess  is  the  better  English¬ 
woman.  r  faith,  Kate,  my  wooing  is  fit  for  thy 
understanding:  I  am  glad  thou  canst  speak  no 
better  English:  for,  if  thou  couldst,  thou  wouldst 
find  me  such  a  plain  king  that  thou  wouldst  think 
I  had  sold  my  farm  to  buy  my  crown.  I  know 
no  ways  to  mince  it  in  love,  but  directly  to  say 
“I  love  you”:  then  if  you  urge  me  farther  than  to 
say  “do  you  in  faith?”  I  wear  out  my  suit.  Give 
me  your  answer;  i’  faith,  do:  and  so  clap  hands 
and  a  bargain:  how  say  you,  lady? 

Kath.  Sauf  votre  honneur,  me  understand  veil. 

K.  Hen.  Marry,  if  you  would  put  me  to  verses 
or  to  dance  for  your  sake,  Kate,  why  you  undid 
me:  for  the  one,  I  have  neither  words  lior  mea¬ 
sure,  and  for  the  other,  I  have  no  strength  in 
measure,  yet  a  reasonable  measure  in  strength. 
If  I  could  win  a  lady  at  leap-frog,  or  by  vaulting 
into  my  saddle  with  my  armour  on  my  back, 
under  the  correction  of  bragging  be  it  spoken,  I 
should  quickly  leap  into  a  wife.  Or  if  I  might 
buffet  for  my  love,  or  bound  my  horse  for  her 
favours,  I  could  lay  on  like  a  butcher  and  sit  like 
a  jack-an-apes,  never  off.  But,  before  God,  Kate, 
I  cannot  look  greenly  nor  gasp  out  my  eloquence, 
nor  I  have  no  cunning  in  protestation;  only  down¬ 
right  oaths,  which  I  never  use  till  urged,  nor 
never  break  for  urging.  If  thou  canst  love  a 
fellow  of  this  temper,  Kate,  whose  face  is  not 
worth  sun-burning,  that  never  looks  in  his  glass 
for  love  of  anything  he  sees  there,  let  thine  eye 
be  thy  cook.  I  speak  to  thee  plain  soldier:  if 
thou  canst  love  me  for  this  take  me;  if  not,  to 
say  to  thee  that  I  shall  die,  is  true;  but  for  thy 
love,  by  the  Lord,  no;  yet  I  love  thee  too.  And 
while  thou  livest,  dear  Kate,  take  a  fellow  of 


SCENE  II 


KING  HENRY  V 


plain  and  uncoined  constancy;  for  he  perforce 
must  do  thee  right,  because  he  hath  not  the  gift 
to  woo  in  other  places :  for  these  fellows  of  infi¬ 
nite  tongue,  that  can  rhyme  themselves  into 
ladies’  favours,  they  do  always  reason  themselves 
out  again.  What!  a  speaker  is  but  a  prater;  a 
rhyme  is  but  a  ballad.  A  good  leg  will  fall;  a 
straight  back  will  stoop;  a  black  beard  will  turn 
white;  a  curled  pate  will  grow  bald;  a  fair  face 
will  wither;  a  full  eye  will  wax  hollow:  but  a 
good  heart,  Kate,  is  the  sun  and  the  moon;  or 
rather  the  sun  and  not  the  moon;  for  it  shines 
bright  and  never  changes,  but  keeps  his  course 
truly.  If  thou  would  have  such  a  one,  take  me; 
and  take  me,  take  a  soldier;  take  a  soldier,  take  a 
king.  And  what  sayest  thou  then  to  my  love? 
speak,  my  fair,  and  fairly,  I  pray  thee. 

Kath.  Is  it  possible  dat  I  sould  love  de  enemy  of 
France? 

K.  Hen.  No;  it  is  not  possible  you  should  love 
the  enemy  of  France,  Kate:  but,  in  loving  me, 
you  should  love  the  friend  of  France;  for  I  love 
France  so  well  that  I  will  not  part  with  a  village 
of  it;  I  will  have  it  all  mine:  and,  Kate,  when 
France  is  mine  and  I  am  yours,  then  yours  is 
France  and  you  are  mine. 

Kath.  I  cannot  tell  vat  is  dat. 

K.  Hen.  No,  Kate?  I  will  tell  thee  in  French; 
which  I  am  sure  will  hang  upon  my  tongue  like 
a  new-married  wife  about  her  husband’s  neck, 
hardly  to  be  shook  off.  ]e  auand  sur  le  possession 
de  France^  et  quand  vous  avez  le  possession  de  moi — 
let  me  see,  what  then?  Saint  Denis  be  my 
speed! — done  votre  est  France  et  vous  etes  mienne. 
It  is  easy  for  me,  Kate,  to  conquer  the  kingdom 
as  to  speak  so  much  more  French:  I  shall  never 
move  thee  in  French,  unless  it  be  to  laugh  at  me. 

Kath.  Sauf  votre  honneiir.,  le  Francois  que  vous  par- 
lez,  il  est  meilleur  que  I'Anglois  lequelje park.  201 

K.  Hen.  No,  faith,  is’t  not,  Kate:  but  thy  speak¬ 
ing  of  my  tongue,  and  I  thine,  most  truly-falsely, 
must  needs  be  granted  to  be  much  at  one.  But, 
Kate,  dost  thou  understand  thus  much  English: 
canst  thou  love  me? 

Kath.  I  cannot  tell. 

K.  Hen.  Can  any  of  your  neighbours  tell,  Kate? 
I’ll  ask  them.  Come,  I  know  thou  lovest  me:  and 
at  night,  when  you  come  into  your  closet,  you’ll 
question  this  gentlewoman  about  me;  and  I  know 
Kate,  you  will  to  her  dispraise  those  parts  in  me 
that  you  love  with  your  heart:  but,  good  Kate, 
mock  me  mercifully;  the  rather,  gentle  princess, 
because  I  love  thee  cruelly.  If  ever  thou  beest 
mine,  Kate,  as  I  have  a  saving  faith  within  me 
tells  me  thou  shalt,  I  get  thee  with  scambling, 
and  thou  must  therefore  needs  prove  a  good 


565 

soldier-breeder:  shall  not  thou  and  1,  between 
Saint  Denis  and  Saint  George,  compound  a  boy, 
half  French,  half  English,  that  shall  go  to  Con¬ 
stantinople  and  take  the  Turk  by  the  beard? 
shall  we  not?  what  sayest  thou,  my  fair  flower- 
de-luce? 

Kath.  I  do  not  know  dat. 

K.  Hen.  No;  ’tis  hereafter  to  know,  but  now  to 
promise:  do  but  now  promise,  Kate,  you  will 
endeavour  for  your  French  part  of  such  a  boy; 
and  for  my  English  moiety  take  the  word  of  a 
king  and  bachelor.  How  answer  you,  la  plus 
belle  Katharine  du  nionde.,  inon  trh  cher  et  devin 
deesse? 

Kath.  Your  majestee  ave  fausse  French  enough 
to  deceive  de  most  sage  demoiselle  dat  is  en 
France. 

K.  Hen.  Now,  fie  upon  my  false  French!  By 
mine  honour,  in  true  English,  I  love  thee,  Kate: 
by  which  honour  I  dare  not  swear  thou  lovest  me; 
yet  my  blood  begins  to  flatter  me  that  thou  dost, 
notwithstanding  the  poor  and  untempering  effect 
of  my  visage.  Now,  beshrew  my  father’s  am¬ 
bition!  he  was  thinking  of  civil  wars  when  he  got 
me:  therefore  was  I  created  with  a  stubborn  out¬ 
side,  with  an  aspect  of  iron,  that,  when  I  come  to 
woo  ladies,  I  fright  them.  But,  in  faith,  Kate,  the 
elder  I  wax,  the  better  I  shall  appear:  my  com¬ 
fort  is,  that  old  age,  that  ill  layer  up  of  beauty, 
can  do  no  more  spoil  upon  my  face:  thou  hast  me, 
if  thou  hast  me,  at  the  worst;  and  thou  shalt  wear 
me,  if  thou  wear  me,  better  and  better:  and  there¬ 
fore  tell  me,  most  fair  Katharine,  will  you  have 
me?  Put  off  your  maiden  blushes;  avouch  the 
thoughts  of  your  heart  with  the  looks  of  an  em¬ 
press;  take  me  by  the  hand,  and  say,  “Harry  of 
England,  I  am  thine”:  which  word  thou  shalt  no 
sooner  bless  mine  ear  withal,  but  I  will  tell  thee 
aloud,  “England  is  thine,  Ireland  is  thine,  France 
is  thine,  and  Henry  Plantagenet  is  thine”;  who, 
though  I  speak  it  before  his  face,  if  he  be  not 
fellow  with  the  best  king,  thou  shalt  find  the 
best  king  of  good  fellows.  Come,  your  answer 
in  broken  music;  for  thy  voice  is  music  and  thy 
English  broken;  therefore,  queen  of  all,  Katha¬ 
rine,  break  thy  mind  to  me  in  broken  English; 
wilt  thou  have  me? 

Kath.  Dat  is  as  it  sail  please  de  roi  monpere. 

K.  Hen.  Nay,  it  will  please  him  well,  Kate;  it 
shall  please  him,  Kate. 

Kath.  Den  it  sail  also  content  me.  270 

K.  Hen.  Upon  that  I  kiss  your  hand,  and  I  call 
you  my  queen. 

Kath.  Laissez,  inon  seigneur,  laissez,  laissez: ma foi, 
je  ne  veux  point  que  vous  abaissiez  votre  grandeur 
en  baisant  la  main  d'une  de  votre  seigneurie  indigne 


ac  :  t  V 


566  KING  HENRY  V 


serviteur;  excusez-?noi,  je  vous  supplie,  mm  trh- 
pmssant  seigneur. 

K.  Hen.  Then  I  will  kiss  your  lips,  Kate. 

Kath.  Les  dames  et  demoiselles  pour  etre  baisees 
devant  leur  noces,  il  nest  pas  la  coutume  de  France. 

281 

K.  Hen.  Madam  my  interpreter,  what  says 
she? 

Alice.  Dat  it  is  not  be  de  fashion  pmr  les 
ladies  of  France — I  cannot  tell  vat  is  baiser  en 
Anglish. 

K.  Hen.  To  kiss. 

Alice.  Your  Majesty  entendre  bettre  que  moi. 

K.  Hen.  It  is  not  a  fashion  for  the  maids  in 
France  to  kiss  before  they  are  married,  would 
she  say? 

Alice.  Old,  vraimenu 

K.  Hen.  O  Kate,  nice  customs  curtsy  to  great 
kings.  Dear  Kate,  you  and  I  cannot  be  confined 
within  the  weak  list  of  a  country’s  fashion:  we 
are  the  makers  of  manners,  Kate;  and  the  liberty 
that  follows  our  places  stops  the  mouth  of  all 
find-faults;  as  I  will  do  yours,  for  upholding  the 
nice  fashion  of  your  country  in  denying  rhe  a 
kiss:  therefore,  patiently  and  yielding.  [Kissing 
her.]  You  have  witchcraft  in  your  lips,  Kate: 
there  is  more  eloquence  in  a  sugar  touch  of  them 
than  in  the  tongues  of  the  French  council;  and 
they  should  sooner  persuade  Harry  of  England 
than  a  general  petition  of  monarchs.  Here  comes 
your  father. 

Re-enter  the  french  king  and  his  queen,  bur¬ 
gundy,  and  other  Lords. 

Bur.  God  save  your  Majesty!  my  royal  cousin, 
teach  you  our  princess  English? 

K.  Hen.  I  would  have  her  learn,  my  fair  cousin, 
how  perfectly  I  love  her;  and  that  is  good  Eng¬ 
lish. 

Bur.  Is  she  not  apt? 

K.  Hen.  Our  tongue  is  rough,  coz,  and  my 
condition  is  not  smooth;  so  that,  having  neither 
the  voice  nor  the  heart  of  flattery  about  me,  I 
cannot  so  conjure  up  the  spirit  of  love  in  her, 
that  he  will  appear  in  his  true  likeness. 

Bur.  Pardon  the  frankness  of  my  mirth,  if  I 
answer  you  for  that.  If  you  would  conjure  in 
her,  you  must  make  a  circle;  if  conjure  up  love 
in  her  in  his  true  likeness,  he  must  appear  naked 
and  blind.  Can  you  blame  her  then,  being  a 
maid  yet  rosed  over  with  the  virgin  crimson  of 
modesty,  if  she  deny  the  appearance  of  a  naked 
blind  boy  in  her  naked  seeing  self?  It  were,  my 
lord,  a  hard  condition  for  a  maid  to  consign  to. 

K.  Hen.  Yet  they  do  wink  and  yield,  as  love 
is  blind  and  enforces. 


Bur.  They  are  then  excused,  my  lord,  when 
they  see  not  what  they  do.  550 

K.  Hen.  Then,  good  my  lord,  teach  your  cousin 
to  consent  winking. 

Bur.  I  will  wink  on  her  to  consent,  my  lord, 
if  you  will  teach  her  to  know  my  meaning:  for 
maids,  well  summered  and  warm  kept,  are  like 
flies  at  Bartholomew-tide,  blind,  though  they 
have  their  eyes;  and  then  they  will  endure  hand¬ 
ling,  which  before  would  not  abide  looking  on. 

K.  Hen.  This  moral  ties  me  over  to  time  and  a 
hot  summer;  and  so  I  shall  catch  the  fly,  your 
cousin,  in  the  latter  end  and  she  must  be  blind 
too. 

Bur.  As  love  is,  my  lord,  before  it  loves. 

K.  Hen.  It  is  so:  and  you  may,  some  of  you, 
thank  love  for  my  blindness,  who  cannot  see 
many  a  fair  French  city  for  one  fair  French  maid 
that  stands  in  my  way. 

Fr.  King.  Yes,  my  lord,  you  see  them  per- 
spectively,  the  cities  turned  into  a  maid;  for  they 
are  all  girdled  with  maiden  walls  that  war  hath 
never  entered.  550 

K.  Hen.  Shall  Kate  be  my  wife? 

Fr.  King.  So  please  you. 

K.  Hen.  I  am  content;  so  the  maiden  cities 
you  talk  of  may  wait  on  her:  so  the  maid  that 
stood  in  the  way  for  my  wish  shall  show  me  the 
way  to  my  will. 

Fr.  King.  We  have  consented  to  all  terms  of 
reason. 

K.  Hen.  Is’t  so,  my  lords  of  England?  555^ 

West.  The  king  hath  granted  every  article: 

His  daughter  first,  and  then  in  sequel  all. 
According  to  their  firm  proposed  natures. 

Exe.  Only  he  hath  not  yet  subscribed  this: 
Where  your  Majesty  demands,  that  the  King  of 
France,  having  any  occasion  to  write  for  matter 
of  grant,  shall  name  your  Highness  in  this  form 
and  with  this  addition,  in  French,  Notre  trh- 
cher  fils  Henri,  Roi  d' Angleterre,  Heritier  de 
France;  and  thus  in  Latin,  Prceclarissimus  filius 
noster  Henricus,  Rex  Anglia,  et  Hares  Francia. 

Fr.  King.  Nor  this  I  have  not,  brother,  so 
denied. 

But  your  request  shall  make  me  let  it  pass. 

K.  Hen.  I  pray  you  then,  in  love  and  dear  alli¬ 
ance. 

Let  that  one  article  rank  with  the  rest; 

And  thereupon  give  me  your  daughter. 

Fr.  King.  Take  her,  fair  son,  and  from  her 
blood  raise  up 

Issue  to  me;  that  the  contending  kingdoms 
Of  France  and  England,  whose  very  shores  look 
pale 

With  envy  of  each  other’s  happiness. 


SCENE  II 


KING  HENRY  V 


May  cease  their  hatred,  and  this  dear  conjunc¬ 
tion  380 

Plant  neighbourhood  and  Christian-like  accord 
In  their  sweet  bosoms,  that  never  war  advance 
His  bleeding  sword  ’twixt  England  and  fair 
France. 

AIL  Amen! 

K.  Hen,  Now,  welcome,  Kate:  and  bear  me 
witness  all. 

That  here  I  kiss  her  as  my  sovereign  queen. 

[Flourish. 

Q.  Isa.  God,  the  best  maker  of  all  marriages. 
Combine  your  hearts  in  one,  your  realms  in  one! 
As  man  and  wife,  being  two,  are  one  in  love. 

So  be  there  ’twixt  your  kingdoms  such  a  spousal 
That  never  may  ill  office,  or  fell  jealousy. 

Which  troubles  oft  the  bed  of  blessed  marriage. 
Thrust  in  between  the  paction  of  these  kingdoms. 
To  make  divorce  of  their  incorporate  league; 
That  English  may  as  French,  French  English¬ 
men, 

Receive  each  other.  God  speak  this  Amen! 

All.  Amen! 

K.  Hen.  Prepare  we  for  our  marriage:  on  which 
day. 

My  Lord  of  Burgundy,  we’ll  take  your  oath, 


567 

And  all  the  peers’,  for  surety  of  our  leagues.  400 
Then  shall  I  swear  to  Kate,  and  you  to  me; 

And  may  our  oaths  well  kept  and  prosperous  be! 

[Sennet.  Exeunt. 

EPILOGUE 
Enter  chorus. 

Chor.  Thus  far,  with  rough  and  all-unable  pen, 
Our  bending  author  hath  pursued  the  story. 

In  little  room  confining  mighty  men. 

Mangling  by  starts  the  full  course  of  their 
glory. 

Small  time,  but  in  that  small  most  greatly  lived 
This  star  of  England:  Fortune  made  his  sword; 
By  which  the  world’s  best  garden  he  achieved. 
And  of  it  left  his  son  imperial  lord. 

Henry  the  Sixth,  in  infant  bands  crown’d  King 
Of  France  and  England,  did  this  king  suc¬ 
ceed;  10 

Whose  state  so  many  had  the  managing. 

That  they  lost  France  and  made  his  England 
bleed: 

Which  oft  our  stage  hath  shown;  and,  for  their 
sake. 

In  your  fair  minds  let  this  acceptance  take. 

[Exit. 


^JULIUS  C^SAR 


DRAMATIS  PERSON/E 


Triumvirs  after  the  death 
of  Julius  Casar 


Senators 


Julius  C/Esar,  later  as  a  ghost 
Octavius  C^sar 
Marcus  Antonius 
M.  i^^MiLius  Lepidus 
Cicero 
Publius 
PopiLius  Lena 
Marcus  Brutus 
Cassius 
Casca 
Trebonius 
Ligarius 
Decius  Brutus 
Metellus  Cimber 
CiNNA 

Flavius  I  Tribunes 
Marullus  1 

Artemidorus  of  Cnidos,  a  teacher  of  rhetoric 
A  Soothsayer 
CiNNA,  a  poet 
Another  Poet 
Lucilius 


conspirators  against  Julius 
Casar 


Titinius 
Messala 
Young  Cato 

VOLUMNIUS 


friends  to  Brutus  and  Cassius 


servants  to  Brutus 


Varro 
Clitus 
Claudius 
Strato 
Lucius 
Dardanius 
Pindar  us,  servant  to  Cassius 
Two  Commoners 
A  Servant  to  Ccesar 
A  Servant  to  Antony 
A  Servant  to  Octavius 
Four  Citizens 
Three  Soldiers 
A  Messenger 

Calpurnia,  wife  to  Casar 
Portia,  wife  to  Brutus 


Non-Speaking;  Senators,  Citizens,  Guards,  Soldiers, 
and  Attendants 


Scene:  Rome,  the  neighborhood  of  Sardis,  and  the 
neighborhood  of  Philippi 


act  I 

Scene  i.  Rome:  a  street 
Enter  flavius,  marullus,  and  certain 

COMMONERS. 

Flav.  Hence!  home,  you  idle  creatures,  get 
you  home: 

Is  this  a  holiday?  what!  know  you  not, 

Being  mechanical,  you  ought  not  walk 
Upon  a  labouring  day  without  the  sign 
Of  your  profession?  Speak,  what  trade  art  thou? 
ist  Com.  Why,  sir,  a  carpenter. 

Mar.  Where  is  thy  leather  apron  and  thy  rule? 
What  dost  thou  with  thy  best  apparel  on? 

You,  sir,  what  trade  are  you? 

2nd  Com.  Truly,  sir,  in  respect  of  a  fine  work¬ 
man,  I  am  but,  as  you  would  say,  a  cobbler.  // 
Mar.  But  what  trade  art  thou?  answer  me 
directly. 

2nd  Com.  A  trade,  sir,  that  I  hope  I  may  use 
with  a  safe  conscience;  which  is,  indeed,  sir, 
a  mender  of  bad  soles. 

Mar.  What  trade,  thou  knave?  thou  naughty 
knave,  what  trade? 

2nd  Com.  Nay,  I  beseech  you,  sir,  be  not  out 
with  me:  yet,  if  you  be  out,  sir,  I  can  mend  you. 

568 


Mar.  What  meanest  thou  by  that?  mend  me 
thou  saucy  fellow!  21 

2nd  Com.  Why,  sir,  cobble  you. 

Flav.  I  hou  art  a  cobbler,  art  thou? 

2nd  Com.  Truly,  sir,  all  that  I  live  by  is  with 
the  awl:  I  meddle  with  no  tradesman’s  matters, 
nor  women’s  matters,  but  with  awl.  I  am,  in¬ 
deed,  sir,  a  surgeon  to  old  shoes;  when  they  are 
in  great  danger,  I  recover  them.  As  proper  men 
as  ever  trod  upon  neat’s  leather  have  gone  upon 
my  handiwork.  50 

Flav.  But  wherefore  art  not  in  thy  shop  today? 
Why  dost  thou  lead  these  men  about  the  streets? 
2nd  Com.  Truly,  sir,  to  wear  out  their  shoes, 
to  get  myself  into  more  work.  But,  indeed,  sir, 
we  make  holiday,  to  see  Caesar  and  to  rejoice  in 
his  triumph. 

Mar.  Wherefore  rejoice?  What  conquest  brings 
he  home? 

What  tributaries  follow  him  to  Rome 
To  grace  in  captive  bonds  his  chariot-wheels? 
You  blocks,  you  stones,  you  worse  than  sense¬ 
less  things!  40 

O  you  hard  hearts,  you  cruel  men  of  Rome, 

Knew  you  not  Pompey?  Many  a  time  and  oft 
Have  you  climb’d  up  to  walls  and  battlements. 


SCENE  I  JULIUS 

To  towers  and  windows,  yea,  to  chimney-tops. 
Your  infants  in  your  arms,  and  there  have  sat 
The  live-long  day,  with  patient  expectation. 

To  see  great  Pompey  pass  the  streets  of  Rome: 
And  when  you  saw  his  chariot  but  appear. 

Have  you  not  made  an  universal  shout. 

That  Tiber  trembled  underneath  her  banks  jo 
To  hear  the  replication  of  your  sounds 
Made  in  her  concave  shores? 

And  do  you  now  put  on  your  best  attire? 

And  do  you  now  cull  out  a  holiday? 

And  do  you  now  strew  flowers  in  his  way 
That  comes  in  triumph  over  Pompey’s  blood? 

Be  gone! 

Run  to  your  houses,  fall  upon  your  knees. 

Pray  to  the  gods  to  intermit  the  plague 
That  needs  must  light  on  this  ingratitude.  6o 
Flav.  Go,  to,  good  countrymen,  and,  for  this 
fault. 

Assemble  all  the  poor  men  of  your  sort; 

Draw  them  to  Tiber  banks,  and  weep  your  tears 
Into  the  channel,  till  the  lowest  stream 
Do  kiss  the  most  exalted  shores  of  all. 

[Exeunt  all  the  cOxMmoners. 
See,  whether  their  basest  metal  be  not  moved; 
They  vanish  tongue-tied  in  their  guiltiness. 

Go  you  down  that  way  towards  the  Capitol; 

This  way  will  I:  disrobe  the  images. 

If  you  do  find  them  deck’d  with  ceremonies.  70 
Mar.  May  we  do  so? 

You  know  it  is  the  feast  of  Lupercal. 

Flav.  It  is  no  matter;  let  no  images 
Be  hung  with  Caesar’s  trophies.  I’ll  about 
And  drive  away  the  vulgar  from  the  streets : 

So  do  you  too,  where  you  perceive  them  thick. 
These  growing  feathers  pluck’d  from  Caesar’s 
wing 

Will  make  him  fly  an  ordinary  pitch, 

Who  else  would  soar  above  the  view  of  men  /y 
And  keep  us  all  in  servile  fearfulness.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  A  public  place 

Flourish.  Enter  c^sar;  antony,  for  the  course; 

CALPURNIA,  PORTIA,  DECIUS,  CICERO,  BRUTUS, 
CASSIUS,  and  casca;  a  great  crowd  following., 
among  them  a  soothsayer. 

Cces.  Calpurnia! 

Casca.  Peace,  ho!  Caesar  speaks. 

Cas.  Calpurnia! 

Cal.  Here,  my  lord. 

Cas.  Stand  you  directly  in  Antonius’  way. 

When  he  doth  run  his  course.  Antonius! 

Ant.  Caesar,  my  lord? 

Cas.  Forget  not,  in  your  speed,  Antonius, 

To  touch  Calpurnia;  for  our  elders  say. 

The  barren,  touched  in  this  holy  chase. 


CiTSAR  569 

Shake  off  their  sterile  curse. 

Ant.  I  shall  remember: 

When  Caesar  says  “do  this,”  it  is  perform’d.  10 
Cces.  Set  on;  and  leave  no  ceremony  out. 

Flourish. 

Sooth.  Cxsar! 

Cces.  Ha!  who  calls? 

Casca.  Bid  every  noise  be  still:  peace  yet  again! 
Cces.  Who  is  it  in  the  press  that  calls  on  me? 

I  hear  a  tongue,  shriller  than  all  the  music. 

Cry  “Caesar!”  Speak;  Caesar  is  turn’d  to  hear. 
Sooth.  Beware  the  ides  of  March. 

Cces.  What  man  is  that? 

Bru.  A  soothsayer  bids  you  beware  the  ides  of 
March. 

Cces.  Set  him  before  me;  let  me  see  his  face. 

Cas.  Fellow,  come  from  the  throng;  look  upon 
Cxsar. 

Cces.  What  say’st  thou  to  me  now?  speak  once 
again. 

Sooth.  Beware  the  ides  of  March. 

C^s.  He  is  a  dreamer;  let  us  leave  him:  pass. 

[Sennet.  Exeunt  all  except 
BRUTUS  and  cassius. 

Cas.  Will  you  go  see  the  order  of  the  course? 
Bru.  Not  I. 

Cas.  I  pray  you,  do. 

Bru.  I  am  not  gamesome:  I  do  lack  some  part 
Of  that  quick  spirit  that  is  in  Antony. 

Let  me  not  hinder,  Cassius,  your  desires;  50 
I’ll  leave  you. 

Cas.  Brutus,  I  do  observe  you  now  of  late: 

I  have  not  from  your  eyes  that  gentleness 
And  show  of  love  as  I  was  wont  to  have: 

You  bear  too  stubborn  and  too  strange  a  hand 
Over  your  friend  that  loves  you. 

Bru.  Cassius, 

Be  not  deceived:  if  I  have  veil’d  my  look, 

I  turn  the  trouble  of  my  countenance 
Merely  upon  myself.  Vexed  I  am 
Of  late  with  passions  of  some  difference, 
Conceptions  only  proper  to  myself. 

Which  give  some  soil  perhaps  to  my  behaviours; 
But  let  not  therefore  my  good  friends  be  grieved — 
Among  which  number,  Cassius,  be  you  one — 

Nor  construe  any  further  my  neglect. 

Than  that  poor  Brutus,  with  himself  at  war. 
Forgets  the  shows  of  love  to  other  men. 

Cas.  Then,  Brutus,  I  have  much  mistook  your 
passion; 

By  means  whereof  this  breast  of  mine  hath  buried 
Thoughts  of  great  value,  worthy  cogitations.  $0 
Tell  me,  good  Brutus,  can  you  see  your  face? 

Bru.  No,  Cassius;  for  the  eye  sees  not  itself 
But  by  reflection,  by  some  other  things. 

Cas.  ’Tis  just: 


570  JULIUS 

And  it  is  very  much  lamented,  Brutus, 

That  you  have  no  such  mirrors  as  will  turn 
Your  hidden  worthiness  into  your  eye 
That  you  might  see  your  shadow.  I  have  heard. 
Where  many  of  the  best  respect  in  Rome, 

Except  immortal  Csesar,  speaking  of  Brutus  6o 
And  groaning  underneath  this  age’s  yoke. 

Have  wish’d  that  noble  Brutus  had  his  eyes. 

Bru.  Into  what  dangers  would  you  lead  me, 
Cassius, 

That  you  would  have  me  seek  into  myself 
For  that  which  is  not  in  me? 

Cas,  Therefore,  good  Brutus,  be  prepared  to 
hear: 

And  since  you  know  you  cannot  see  yourself 
So  well  as  by  reflection,  I,  your  glass. 

Will  modestly  discover  to  yourself 

That  of  yourself  which  you  yet  know  not  of.  70 

And  be  not  jealous  on  me,  gentle  Brutus: 

Were  I  a  common  laugher,  or  did  use 
To  stale  with  ordinary  oaths  my  love 
To  every  new  protester;  if  you  know 
That  I  do  fawn  on  men  and  hug  them  hard 
And  after  scandal  them,  or  if  you  know 
That  I  profess  myself  in  banqueting 
To  all  the  rout,  then  hold  me  dangerous. 

Flourish,  and  shout. 

Bru.  What  means  this  shouting?  I  do  fear,  the 
people 

Choose  Caesar  for  their  king. 

Cas.  Ay,  do  you  fear  it?  80 

Then  must  I  think  you  would  not  have  it  so. 

Bru.  I  would  not,  Cassius;  yet  I  love  him  well. 
But  wherefore  do  you  hold  me  here  so  long? 

What  is  it  that  you  would  impart  to  me? 

If  it  be  aught  toward  the  general  good. 

Set  honour  in  one  eye  and  death  i’  the  other, 

And  I  will  look  on  both  indifferently: 

For  let  the  gods  so  speed  me  as  I  love 
The  name  of  honour  more  than  I  fear  death.  8^ 
Cas.  I  know  that  virtue  to  be  in  you,  Brutus, 

As  well  as  I  do  know  your  outward  favour. 

Well,  honour  is  the  subject  of  my  story. 

I  cannot  tell  what  you  and  other  men 

Think  of  this  life;  but,  for  my  single  self, 

I  had  as  lief  nor  be  as  live  to  be 
In  awe  of  such  a  thing  as  I  myself. 

I  was  born  free  as  Caesar;  so  were  you: 

We  both  have  fed  as  well,  and  we  can  both 
Endure  the  winter’s  cold  as  well  as  he: 

For  once,  upon  a  raw  and  gusty  day,  100 

The  troubled  Tiber  chafing  with  her  shores, 

Caesar  said  to  me,  “Darest  thou,  Cassius,  now 
Leap  in  with  me  into  this  angry  flood. 

And  swim  to  yonder  point?”  Upon  the  word, 
Accoutred  as  I  was,  I  plunged  in 


CiTSAR  ACT  I 

And  bade  him  follow;  so  indeed  he  did. 

The  torrent  roar’d,  and  we  did  buffet  it 
With  lusty  sinews,  throwing  it  aside 
And  stemming  it  with  hearts  of  controversy; 

But  ere  we  could  arrive  the  point  proposed,  no 
Caesar  cried,  “Help  me,  Cassius,  or  I  sink!” 

I,  as  iTneas,  our  great  ancestor. 

Did  from  the  flames  of  Troy  upon  his  shoulder 
The  old  Anchises  bear,  so  from  the  waves  of 
Tiber 

Did  I  the  tired  Caesar.  And  this  man 
Is  now  become  a  god,  and  Cassius  is 
A  wretched  creature  and  must  bend  his  body. 

If  Caesar  carelessly  but  nod  on  him. 

He  had  a  fever  when  he  was  in  Spain, 

And  when  the  fit  was  on  him,  I  did  mark  120 
How  he  did  shake:  ’tis  true,  this  god  did  shake: 
His  coward  lips  did  from  their  colour  fly, 

And  that  same  eye  whose  bend  doth  awe  the 
world 

Did  lose  his  lustre:  I  did  hear  him  groan: 

Ay,  and  that  tongue  of  his  that  bade  the  Romans 
Mark  him  and  write  his  speeches  in  their  books, 
Alas,  it  cried,  “Give  me  some  drink,  Titinius,” 
As  a  sick  girl.  Ye  gods,  it  doth  amaze  me 
A  man  of  such  a  feeble  temper  should 
So  get  the  start  of  the  majestic  world  75  0 

And  bear  the  palm  alone. 

Slwut.  Flourish. 

Bru.  Another  general  shout! 

I  do  believe  that  these  applauses  are 
For  some  new  honours  that  are  heap’d  on  Caesar. 
Cas.  Why,  man,  he  doth  bestride  the  narrow 
world 

Like  a  Colossus,  and  we  petty  men 
Walk  under  his  huge  legs  and  peep  about 
To  find  ourselves  dishonourable  graves. 

Men  at  some  time  are  masters  of  their  fates: 

The  fault,  dear  Brutus,  is  not  in  our  stars,  /40 
But  in  ourselves,  that  we  are  underlings. 

Brutus  and  Caesar:  what  should  be  in  that 
“Cxsar”? 

Why  should  that  name  be  sounded  more  than 
yours? 

Write  them  together,  yours  is  as  fair  a  name; 
Sound  them,  it  doth  become  the  mouth  as  well; 
Weigh  them,  it  is  as  heavy;  conjure  with  ’em, 
Brutus  will  start  a  spirit  as  soon  as  Caesar. 

Now,  in  the  names  of  all  the  gods  at  once. 

Upon  what  meat  doth  this  our  Cxsar  feed  1^9 
That  he  is  grown  so  great?  Age,  thou  art  shamed! 
Rome,  thou  hast  lost  the  breed  of  noble  bloods ! 
When  went  there  by  an  age,  since  the  great  flood. 
But  it  was  famed  with  more  than  with  one  man? 
When  could  they  say  till  now,  that  talk’d  of 
Rome, 


SCENE  II 


57 


JULIUS 

Thar  her  wide  walls  encompass’d  but  one  man? 
Now  is  it  Rome  indeed  and  room  enough, 

When  there  is  in  it  but  one  only  man. 

O,  you  and  I  have  heard  our  fathers  say 
There  was  a  Brutus  once  that  would  have  brook’d 
The  eternal  devil  to  keep  his  state  in  Rome  i6o 
As  easily  as  a  king. 

Bru.  That  you  do  love  me,  I  am  nothing  jealous; 
What  you  would  work  me  to,  I  have  some  aim: 
How  I  have  thought  of  this  and  of  these  times, 

I  shall  recount  hereafter;  for  this  present, 

I  would  not,  so  with  love  I  might  entreat  you, 

Be  any  further  moved.  What  you  have  said 
I  will  consider;  what  you  have  to  say 
I  will  with  patience  hear,  and  find  a  time  i6^ 
Both  meet  to  hear  and  answer  such  high  things. 

Till  then,  my  noble  friend,  chew  upon  this: 

Brutus  had  rather  be  a  villager 
Than  to  repute  himself  a  son  of  Rome 
Under  these  hard  conditions  as  this  time 
Is  like  to  lay  upon  us. 

Cas.  I  am  glad  that  my  weak  words 
Have  struck  but  thus  much  show  of  fire  from 
Brutus. 

Bni.  The  games  are  done  and  Caesar  is  re¬ 
turning. 

Cas.  As  they  pass  by,  pluck  Casca  by  the  sleeve; 
And  he  will,  after  his  sour  fashion,  tell  you  i8o 
What  hath  proceeded  worthy  note  to-day. 

Re-enter  c^^sar  and  his  Train. 

Bru.  I  will  do  so.  But,  look  you,  Cassius, 

The  angry  spot  doth  glow  on  Caesar’s  brow. 

And  all  the  rest  look  like  a  chidden  train: 
Calpurnia’s  cheek  is  pale;  and  Cicero 
Looks  with  such  ferret  and  such  fiery  eyes 
As  we  have  seen  him  in  the  Capitol, 

Being  cross’d  in  conference  by  some  senators. 

Cas.  Casca  will  tell  us  what  the  matter  is. 

Antonius !  /yo 

Ant.  Caesar? 

Cces.  Let  me  have  men  about  me  that  are  fat; 
Sleek-headed  men  and  such  as  sleep  o’nights: 

Yond  Cassius  has  a  lean  and  hungry  look; 

He  thinks  too  much:  such  men  are  dangerous. 

Ant.  Fear  him  not,  Caesar;  he’s  not  dangerous; 
He  is  a  noble  Roman  and  well  given. 

C^es.  Would  he  were  fatter!  But  I  fear  him  not: 
Yet  if  my  name  were  liable  to  fear, 

I  do  not  know  the  man  I  should  avoid  200 

So  soon  as  that  spare  Cassius.  He  reads  much; 

He  is  a  great  observer  and  he  looks 

Quite  through  the  deeds  of  men;  he  loves  no  plays. 

As  thou  dost,  Antony;  he  hears  no  music; 

Seldom  he  smiles,  and  smiles  in  such  a  sort 
As  if  he  mock’d  himself  and  scorn’d  his  spirit 


C^SAR 

That  could  be  moved  to  smile  at  anything. 

Such  men  as  he  be  never  at  heart’s  ease 
Whiles  they  behold  a  greater  than  themselves. 
And  therefore  are  they  very  dangerous.  210 
I  rather  tell  thee  what  is  to  be  fear’d 
Than  what  I  fear;  for  always  I  am  Caesar. 

Come  on  my  right  hand,  for  this  ear  is  deaf. 

And  tell  me  truly  what  thou  think’ st  of  him. 

[Sennet.  Exeunt  c^sar  and  all  his 
Train.,  but  casca. 

Casca.  You  pull’d  me  by  the  cloak;  would  you 
speak  with  me? 

Bru.  Ay,  Casca;  tell  us  what  hath  chanced 
to-day 

That  Caesar  looks  so  sad. 

Casca.  Why,  you  were  with  him,  were  you  not? 

Bru.  I  should  not  then  ask  Casca  what  had 
chanced.  2/y 

Casca.  Why,  there  was  a  crown  offered  him: 
and  being  ofered  him,  he  put  it  by  with  the  back 
of  his  hand,  thus;  and  then  the  people  fell  a-shout- 
ing. 

Bru.  What  was  the  second  noise  for? 

Casca.  Why,  for  that  too. 

Cas.  They  shouted  thrice:  what  was  the  last 
cry  for? 

Casca.  Why,  for  that  too. 

Bru.  Was  the  crown  offered  him  thrice? 

Casca.  Ay,  marry,  was’t,  and  he  put  it  by 
thrice,  every  time  gentler  than  other,  and  at 
every  putting-by  mine  honest  neighbours  shouted. 

Cas.  Who  offered  him  the  crown? 

Casca.  Why,  Antony. 

Bru.  Tell  us  the  manner  of  it,  gentle  Casca. 

Casca.  I  can  as  well  be  hanged  as  tell  the  manner 
of  it:  it  was  mere  foolery;  I  did  not  mark  it.  I 
saw  Mark  Antony  offer  him  a  crown;  yet  ’twas 
not  a  crown  neither,  ’twas  one  of  these  coronets; 
and,  as  I  told  you,  he  put  it  by  once:  but,  for  all 
that,  to  my  thinking,  he  would  fain  have  had  it. 
Then  he  offered  it  to  him  again;  then  he  put  it 
by  again:  but,  to  my  thinking,  he  was  very  loath 
to  lay  his  fingers  off  it.  And  then  he  offered  it  the 
third  time;  he  put  it  the  third  time  by:  and  still 
as  he  refused,  the  rabblement  hooted  and  clapped 
their  chopped  hands  and  threw  up  their  sweaty 
night-caps  and  uttered  such  a  deal  of  stinking 
breath  because  Cxsar  refused  the  crown  that  it 
had  almost  choked  Cassar;  for  he  swounded  and 
fell  down  at  it:  and  for  mine  own  part,  I  durst 
not  laugh,  for  fear  of  opening  my  lips  and  re¬ 
ceiving  the  bad  air. 

Cas.  But,  soft,  I  pray  you:  what,  did  Caesar 
s  wound? 

Casca.  He  fell  down  in  the  market-place,  and 
foamed  at  mouth,  and  was  speechless. 


572  JULIUS 

Bru.  ’Tis  very  like:  he  hath  the  falling  sickness. 

Cas.  No,  Caesar  hath  it  not;  but  you  and  I 
And  honest  Casca,  we  have  the  falling  sickness. 

Casca.  I  know  not  what  you  mean  by  that;  but, 

I  am  sure,  Caesar  fell  down.  If  the  tag-rag 
people  did  not  clap  him  and  hiss  him,  according 
as  he  pleased  and  displeased  them,  as  they  use  to 
do  the  players  in  the  theatre,  I  am  no  true  man. 

Bru,  What  said  he  when  he  came  unto  him¬ 
self? 

Casca.  Marry,  before  he  fell  down,  when  he 
perceived  the  common  herd  was  glad  he  refused 
the  crown,  he  plucked  me  ope  his  doublet  and 
offered  them  his  throat  to  cut.  An  I  had  been  a 
man  of  any  occupation,  if  I  would  not  have  taken 
him  at  a  word,  I  would  I  might  go  to  hell  among 
the  rogues.  And  so  he  fell.  When  he  came  to 
himself  again,  he  said,  if  he  had  done  or  said  any 
thing  amiss,  he  desired  their  worships  to  think  it 
was  his  infirmity.  Three  or  four  wenches,  where 
I  stood,  cried,  “Alas,  good  soul!”  and  forgave 
him  with  all  their  hearts:  but  there’s  no  heed  to 
be  taken  of  them;  if  Csesar  had  stabbed  their 
mothers,  they  would  have  done  no  less. 

Bru.  And  after  that,  he  came,  thus  sad,  away? 

Casca.  280 

Cas.  Did  Cicero  say  anything? 

Casca.  Ay,  he  spoke  Greek. 

Cas.  To  what  effect? 

Casca.  Nay,  an  I  tell  you  that.  I’ll  ne’er  look 
you  i’  the  face  again:  but  those  that  understood 
him  smiled  at  one  another  and  shook  their  heads; 
but,  for  mine  own  part,  it  was  Greek  to  me.  I 
could  tell  you  more  news  too:  Marullus  and 
Flavius,  for  pulling  scarfs  off  Cxsar’s  images,  are 
put  to  silence.  Fare  you  well.  There  was  more 
foolery  yet,  if  I  could  remember  it.  2pi 

Cas.  Will  you  sup  with  me  to-night,  Casca? 

Casca.  No,  I  am  promised  forth. 

Cas.  Will  you  dine  with  me  to-morrow? 

Casca.  Ay,  if  I  be  alive  and  your  mind  hold  and 
your  dinner  worth  the  eating. 

Cas.  Good:  I  will  expect  you. 

Casca.  Do  so.  Farewell,  both.  [Exit. 

Bru.  What  a  blunt  fellow  is  this  grown  to  be! 

He  was  quick  mettle  when  he  went  to  school.  300 

Cas.  So  is  he  now  in  execution 
Of  any  bold  or  noble  enterprise, 

However  he  puts  on  this  tardy  form. 

This  rudeness  is  a  sauce  to  his  good  wit, 

Which  gives  men  stomach  to  digest  his  words 
With  better  appetite. 

Bru.  And  so  it  is.  For  this  time  I  will  leave  you: 
To-morrow,  if  you  please  to  speak  with  me, 

I  will  come  home  to  you;  or,  if  you  will. 

Come  home  to  me,  and  I  will  wait  for  you.  5/0 


Ci^SAR  ACT  I 

Cas.  I  will  do  so;  till  then,  think  of  the  world. 

[Exit  BRUTUS. 

Well,  Brutus,  thou  art  noble;  yet,  I  see. 

Thy  honourable  metal  may  be  wrought 
From  that  it  is  disposed:  therefore  it  is  meet 
That  noble  minds  keep  ever  with  their  likes; 

For  who  so  firm  that  cannot  be  seduced? 

Caesar  doth  bear  me  hard;  but  he  loves  Brutus: 

If  I  were  Brutus  now  and  he  were  Cassius, 

He  should  not  humour  me.  I  will  this  night. 

In  several  hands,  in  at  his  windows  throw,  ^20 
As  if  they  came  from  several  citizens. 

Writings  all  tending  to  the  great  opinion 
That  Rome  holds  of  his  name;  wherein  obscurely 
Caesar’s  ambition  shall  be  glanced  at: 

And  after  this  let  Cxsar  seat  him  sure; 

For  we  will  shake  him,  or  worse  days  endure. 

[Exit. 

Scene  hi.  The  same:  a  street 

Thunder  and  lightning.  Enter.,  from  opposite  sides^ 
CASCA,  with  his  sword  drawn,  and  cicero. 

Cic.  Good  even,  Casca:  brought  you  Caesar 
home? 

Why  are  you  breathless?  and  why  stare  you  so? 
Casca.  Are  not  you  moved,  when  all  the  sway  of 
earth 

Shakes  like  a  thing  unfirm?  O  Cicero, 

I  have  seen  tempests,  v/hen  the  scolding  winds 
Have  rived  the  knotty  oaks,  and  I  have  seen 
The  ambitious  ocean  swell  and  rage  and  foam, 

To  be  exalted  with  the  threatening  clouds: 

But  never  till  to-night,  never  till  now. 

Did  I  go  through  a  tempest  dropping  fire.  10 
Either  there  is  a  civil  strife  in  heaven. 

Or  else  the  world,  too  saucy  with  the  gods, 
Incenses  them  to  send  destruction.^ 

Cic.  Why,  saw  you  anything  more  wonderful? 
Casca.  A  common  slave — you  know  him  well  by 
sight — 

Held  up  his  left  hand,  which  did  flame  and  burn 
Like  twenty  torches  join’d,  and  yet  his  hand, 

Not  sensible  of  fire,  remain’d  unscorch’d. 

Besides — I  ha’  not  since  put  up  my  sword — 
Against  the  Capitol  I  met  a  lion,  20 

Who  glared  upon  me,  and  went  surly  by 
Without  annoying  me:  and  there  were  drawn 
Upon  a  heap  a  hundred  ghastly  women. 
Transformed  with  their  fear,  who  swore  they  saw 
Men  all  in  fire  walk  up  and  down  the  streets. 

And  yesterday  the  bird  of  night  did  sit 
Even  at  noon-day  upon  the  market-place. 

Hooting  and  shrieking.  When  these  prodigies 
Do  so  conjointly  meet,  let  not  men  say 
‘  ‘These  are  their  reasons ;  they  are  natural” ;  5  o 

For,  I  believe,  they  are  portentous  things 


SCENE  III 


JULIUS 

Unto  the  climate  that  they  point  upon. 

Ck.  Indeed,  it  is  a  strange-disposed  time: 

But  men  may  construe  things  after  their  fashion, 
Clean  from  the  purpose  of  the  things  themselves. 
Comes  Caesar  to  the  Capitol  to-morrow.^ 

Casca.  He  doth;  for  he  did  bid  Antonius 
Send  word  to  you  he  would  be  there  to-morrow. 

Cic.  Good  night  then,  Casca:  this  disturbed  sky 
Is  not  to  walk  in. 

Casca.  Farewell,  Cicero.  cicero.  40 

Enter  cassius. 

Cas.  Who’s  there? 

Casca.  A  Roman. 

Cas.  Casca,  by  your  voice. 

Casca.  Your  ear  is  good.  Cassius,  what  night  is 
this! 

Cas.  A  very  pleasing  night  to  honest  men. 

Casca.  Who  ever  knew  the  heavens  menace  so? 
Cas.  Those  that  have  known  the  earth  so  full  of 
faults. 

For  my  part,  I  have  walk’d  about  the  streets, 
Submitting  me  unto  the  perilous  night. 

And,  thus  unbraced,  Casca,  as  you  see. 

Have  bared  my  bosom  to  the  thunder-stone; 

And  when  the  cross  blue  lightning  seem’d  to  open 
The  breast  of  heaven,  I  did  present  myself  5/ 
Even  in  the  aim  and  very  flash  of  it. 

Casca.  But  wherefore  did  you  so  much  tempt 
the  heavens? 

It  is  the  part  of  men  to  fear  and  tremble 
When  the  most  mighty  gods  by  tokens  send 
Such  dreadful  heralds  to  astonish  us. 

Cas.  You  are  dull,  Casca,  and  those  sparks  of 
life 

That  should  be  in  a  Roman  you  do  want. 

Or  else  you  use  not.  You  look  pale  and  gaze 
And  put  on  fear  and  cast  yourself  in  wonder  60 
To  see  the  strange  impatience  of  the  heavens: 

But  if  you  would  consider  the  true  cause 
Why  all  these  fires,  why  all  these  gliding  ghosts. 
Why  birds  and  beasts  from  quality  and  kind. 

Why  old  men  fool  and  children  calculate. 

Why  all  these  things  change  from  their  ordinance 
Their  natures  and  preformed  faculties 
To  monstrous  quality,  why,  you  shall  find 
That  heaven  hath  infused  them  with  these  spirits 
To  make  them  instruments  of  fear  and  warning  70 
Unto  some  monstrous  state. 

Now  could  I,  Casca,  name  to  thee  a  man 
Most  like  this  dreadful  night. 

That  thunders,  lightens,  opens  graves,  and  roars 
As  doth  the  lion  in  the  Capitol, 

A  man  no  mightier  than  thyself  or  me 
In  personal  action,  yet  prodigious  grown 
And  fearful,  as  these  strange  eruptions  are. 


CiTSAR  573 

Casca.  ’Tis  Caesar  that  you  mean;  is  it  not, 
Cassius? 

Cas.  Let  it  be  who  it  is:  for  Romans  now  80 
Have  thews  and  limbs  like  to  their  ancestors; 

But,  woe  the  while!  our  fathers’  minds  are  dead. 
And  we  are  govern’d  with  our  mothers’  spirits; 
Our  yoke  and  suflFerance  show  us  womanish. 
Casca.  Indeed,  they  say  the  senators  to-morrow 
Mean  to  establish  Cassar  as  a  king; 

And  he  shall  wear  his  crown  by  sea  and  land. 

In  every  place,  save  here  in  Italy. 

Cas.  I  know  where  I  will  wear  this  dagger  then; 
Cassius  from  bondage  will  deliver  Cassius:  po 
Therein,  ye  gods,  you  make  the  weak  most 
strong; 

Therein,  ye  gods,  you  tyrants  do  defeat: 

Nor  stony  tower,  nor  walls  of  beaten  brass. 

Nor  airless  dungeon,  nor  strong  links  of  iron, 

Can  be  retentive  to  the  strength  of  spirit; 

But  life,  being  weary  of  these  worldly  bars, 
Never  lacks  power  to  dismiss  itself. 

If  I  know  this,  know  all  the  world  besides. 

That  part  of  tyranny  that  I  do  bear 
I  can  shake  off  at  pleasure.  [Thunder  still. 

Casca.  So  can  1 :  100 

So  every  bondman  in  his  own  hand  bears 
The  power  to  cancel  his  captivity. 

Cas.  And  why  should  Caesar  be  a  tyrant  then? 
Poor  man!  I  know  he  would  not  be  a  wolf. 

But  that  he  sees  the  Romans  are  but  sheep: 

He  were  no  lion,  were  not  Romans  hinds. 

Those  that  with  haste  will  make  a  mighty  fire 
Begin  it  with  weak  straws:  what  trash  is  Rome, 
What  rubbish,  and  what  offal,  when  it  serves 
For  the  base  matter  to  illuminate  no 

So  vile  a  thing  as  Caesar!  But,  O  grief. 

Where  hast  thou  led  me?  I  perhaps  speak  this 
Before  a  willing  bondman;  then  I  know 
My  answer  must  be  made.  But  I  am  arm’d. 

And  dangers  are  to  me  indifferent. 

Casca.  You  speak  to  Casca,  and  such  a  man 
That  is  no  fleering  tell-tale.  Hold,  my  hand: 

Be  factious  for  redress  of  all  these  griefs. 

And  I  will  set  this  foot  of  mine  as  far 
As  who  goes  farthest. 

Cas.  There’s  a  bargain  made.  120 

Now  know  you,  Casca,  1  have  moved  already 
Some  certain  of  the  noblest-minded  Romans 
To  undergo  with  me  an  enterprise 
Of  honourable-dangerous  consequence; 

And  I  do  know,  by  this,  they  stay  for  me 
In  Pompey’s  porch:  for  now,  this  fearful  night. 
There  is  no  stir  or  walking  in  the  streets; 

And  the  complexion  of  the  element 
In  favour’s  like  the  work  we  have  in  hand. 

Most  bloody,  fiery,  and  most  terrible.  /50 


574  JULIUS 

Casca.  Stand  close  awhile,  for  here  comes  one  in 
haste. 

Cas.  ’Tis  Cinna;  I  do  know  him  by  his  gait; 

He  is  a  friend. 

Enter  cinna. 

Cinna,  where  haste  you  so? 

Cin.  To  find  out  you.  Who’s  that?  Metellus 
Cimber? 

Cas.  No,  it  is  Casca;  one  incorporate 
To  our  attempts.  Am  I  not  stay’d  for,  Cinna? 

Cin.  I  am  glad  on’t.  What  a  fearful  night  is  this! 
There’s  two  or  three  of  us  have  seen  strange 
sights. 

Cas.  Am  I  not  stay’d  for?  tell  me. 

Cin.  Yes,  you  are. 

O  Cassius,  if  you  could  140 

But  win  the  noble  Brutus  to  our  party — 

Cas.  Be  you  content:  good  Cinna,  take  this 
paper. 

And  look  you  lay  it  in  the  praetor’s  chair, 

Where  Brutus  may  but  find  it;  and  throw  this 
In  at  his  window;  set  this  up  with  wax 
Upon  old  Brutus’  statue:  all  this  done, 

Repair  to  Pompey’s  porch,  where  you  shall  find 
us. 

Is  Decius  Brutus  and  Trebonius  there? 

Cin.  All  but  Metellus  Cimber;  and  he’s  gone 
To  seek  you  at  your  house.  Well,  I  will  hie,  i$o 
And  so  bestow  these  papers  as  you  bade  me. 

Cas.  That  done,  repair  to  Pompey’s  theatre. 

[Exit  CINNA. 

Come,  Casca,  you  and  I  will  yet  ere  day 
See  Brutus  at  his  house:  three  parts  of  him 
Is  ours  already,  and  the  man  entire 
Upon  the  next  eneounter  yields  him  ours. 

Casca.  O,  he  sits  high  in  all  the  people’s  hearts: 
And  that  which  would  appear  offence  in  us. 

His  countenance,  like  richest  alchemy, 

Will  change  to  virtue  and  to  worthiness.  160 
Cas.  Him  and  his  worth  and  our  great  need  of 
him 

You  have  right  well  eonceited.  Let  us  go, 

For  it  is  after  midnight;  and  ere  day 

We  will  awake  him  and  be  sure  of  him.  [Exeunt. 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  Rome:  Brutus's  orchard 
Enter  brutus. 

Bru.  What,  Lucius,  ho! 

I  cannot  by  the  progress  of  the  stars 
Give  guess  how  near  to  day.  Lueius,  I  say! 

I  would  it  were  my  fault  to  sleep  so  soundly. 
When,  Lucius,  when?  awake,  I  say!  what, 
Lucius! 


C^SAR  ACT  II 

Enter  lucius. 

Luc.  Call’d  you,  my  lord? 

Bru.  Get  me  a  taper  in  my  study,  Lucius: 

When  it  is  lighted,  come  and  call  me  here. 

Luc.  I  will,  my  lord.  [Exit. 

Bru.  It  must  be  by  his  death:  and  for  my  part, 

I  know  no  personal  cause  to  spurn  at  him  // 
But  for  the  general.  He  would  be  crown’d: 

How  that  might  change  his  nature,  there’s  the 
question. 

It  is  the  bright  day  that  brings  forth  the  adder; 
And  that  craves  wary  walking.  Crown  him? 
That— 

And  then,  I  grant,  we  put  a  sting  in  him 
That  at  his  will  he  may  do  danger  with. 

The  abuse  of  greatness  is  when  it  disjoins 
Remorse  from  power:  and,  to  speak  truth  of 
Caesar, 

I  have  not  known  when  his  affections  sway’d  20 
More  than  his  reason.  But  ’tis  a  common  proof 
That  lowliness  is  young  ambition’s  ladder, 
Whereto  the  climber-upward  turns  his  face; 

But  when  he  once  attains  the  upmost  round, 

He  then  unto  the  ladder  turns  his  back. 

Looks  in  the  clouds,  scorning  the  base  degrees 
By  which  he  did  ascend.  So  Caesar  may. 

Then,  lest  he  may,  prevent.  And,  since  the 
quarrel 

Will  bear  no  colour  for  the  thing  he  is. 

Fashion  it  thus;  that  what  he  is,  augmented,  50 
Would  run  to  these  and  these  extremities: 

And  therefore  think  him  as  a  serpent’s  egg 
Whieh,  hateh’d,  would,  as  his  kind,  grow  mis¬ 
chievous, 

And  kill  him  in  the  shell. 

Re-enter  lucius. 

^  \ 

Luc.  The  taper  burneth  in  your  closet,  sir. 
Searehing  the  window  for  a  flint,  I  found 
This  paper,  thus  seal’d  up;  and  I  am  sure 
It  did  not  lie  there  when  I  went  to  bed. 

Gives  him  the  letter. 

Bru.  Get  you  to  bed  again;  it  is  not  day. 

Is  not  to-morrow,  boy,  the  ides  of  March?  40 
Luc.  I  know  not,  sir. 

Bru.  Look  in  the  calendar,  and  bring  me  word. 
Luc.  I  will,  sir.  [Exit. 

Bru.  The  exhalations  whizzing  in  the  air 
Give  so  much  light  that  I  may  read  by  them. 

Opens  the  letter  and  reads. 

“Brutus,  thou  sleep’st:  awake,  and  see  thyself. 
Shall  Rome,  &c.  Speak,  strike,  redress! 

Brutus,  thou  sleep’st:  awake!” 

Such  instigations  have  been  often  dropp’d 
Where  I  have  took  them  up.  $0 


SCENE  I  JULIUS 

“Shall  Rome,  &c.”  Thus  must  I  piece  it  out: 

Shall  Rome  stand  under  one  man’s  awe?  What, 
Rome? 

My  ancestors  did  from  the  streets  of  Rome 
The  Tarquin  drive,  when  he  was  call’d  a  king. 
“Speak,  strike,  redress!”  Am  I  entreated 
To  speak  and  strike?  O  Rome,  I  make  thee 
promise; 

If  the  redress  will  follow,  thou  receivest 
Thy  full  petition  at  the  hand  of  Brutus! 

Re-enter  lucius. 

Luc,  Sir,  March  is  wasted  fourteen  days. 
Knocking  within, 

Bru,  ’Tis  good.  Go  to  the  gate;  somebody 
knocks.  [Exit  Lucius  6o 

Since  Cassius  first  did  whet  me  against  Ca:^sar, 

I  have  not  slept. 

Between  the  acting  of  a  dreadful  thing 
And  the  first  motion,  all  the  interim  is 
Like  a  phantasma  or  a  hideous  dream: 

The  Genius  and  the  mortal  instruments 
Are  then  in  council;  and  the  state  of  man, 

Like  to  a  little  kingdom,  suffers  then 
The  nature  of  an  insurrection. 

Re-enter  lucius. 

Luc,  Sir,  ’tis  your  brother  Cassius  at  the  door. 
Who  doth  desire  to  see  you. 

Bru,  Is  he  alone?  7/ 

Luc.  No,  sir,  there  are  more  with  him. 

Bru.  Do  you  know  them? 

Luc.  No,  sir;  their  hats  are  pluck’d  about  their 
ears, 

And  half  their  faces  buried  in  their  cloaks, 

That  by  no  means  I  may  discover  them 
By  any  mark  of  favour. 

Bru.  Let  ’em  enter.  [Exit  lucius. 

They  are  the  faction.  O  Conspiracy, 

Shamest  thou  to  show  thy  dangerous  brow  by 
night, 

When  evils  are  most  free?  O,  then  by  day 
Where  wilt  thou  find  a  cavern  dark  enough  So 
To  mask  thy  monstrous  visage?  Seek  none  con¬ 
spiracy; 

Hide  it  in  smiles  and  affability: 

For  if  thou  path,  thy  native  semblance  on, 

Not  Erebus  itself  were  dim  enough 
To  hide  thee  from  prevention. 

Enter  the  conspirators,,  cassius,  casca,  decius, 

CINNA,  METELLUS  CIMBER  and,,  TREBONIUS. 

Cas,  I  think  we  are  too  bold  upon  your  rest: 

Good  morrow,  Brutus;  do  we  trouble  you? 

Bru.  I  have  been  up  this  hour,  awake  all  night. 
Know  I  these  men  that  come  along  with  you? 


CiTSAR  575 

Cas.  Yes,  every  man  of  them,  and  no  man 
here  po 

But  honours  you;  and  every  one  doth  wish 
You  had  but  that  opinion  of  yourself 
Which  every  noble  Roman  bears  of  you. 

This  is  Trebonius. 

Bru.  He  is  welcome  hither. 

Cas.  This,  Decius  Brutus. 

Bru.  He  is  welcome  too. 

Cas.  This,  Casca;  this,  Cinna;  and  this,  Me- 
tellus  Cimber. 

Bru.  They  are  all  welcome. 

What  watchful  cares  do  interpose  themselves 
Betwixt  your  eyes  and  night? 

Cas.  Shall  I  entreat  a  word?  100 

BRUTUS  and  cassius  whisper. 

Dec.  Here  lies  the  east:  doth  not  the  day  break 
here? 

Casca.  No. 

Cin.  O,  pardon,  sir,  it  doth;  and  yon  gray  lines 
That  fret  the  clouds  are  messengers  of  day. 

Casca.  You  shall  confess  that  you  are  both  de¬ 
ceived. 

Here,  as  I  point  my  sword,  the  sun  arises. 

Which  is  a  great  way  growing  on  the  south. 
Weighing  the  youthful  season  of  the  year. 

Some  two  months  hence  up  higher  toward  the 
north 

He  first  presents  his  fire,  and  the  high  east  no 
Stands,  as  the  Capitol,  directly  here. 

Bru.  Give  me  your  hands  all  over,  one  by  one. 
Cas.  And  let  us  swear  our  resolution. 

Bru.  No,  not  an  oath:  if  not  the  face  of  men. 

The  sufferance  of  our  souls,  the  time’s  abuse — 

If  these  be  motives  weak,  break  off  betimes. 

And  every  man  hence  to  his  idle  bed; 

So  let  high-sighted  tyranny  range  on. 

Till  each  man  drop  by  lottery.  But  if  these. 

As  I  am  sure  they  do,  bear  fire  enough  120 

To  kindle  cowards  and  to  steel  with  valour 
The  melting  spirits  of  women,  then,  countrymen. 
What  need  we  any  spur  but  our  own  cause 
To  prick  us  to  redress?  what  other  bond 
Than  secret  Romans,  that  have  spoke  the  word 
And  will  not  palter?  and  what  other  oath 
Than  honesty  to  honesty  engaged 
That  this  shall  be,  or  we  will  fall  for  it? 

Swear  priests  and  cowards  and  men  cautelous. 
Old  feeble  carrions  and  such  suffering  souls  /50 
That  welcome  wrongs;  unto  bad  causes  swear 
Such  creatures  as  men  doubt;  but  do  not  stain 
The  even  virtue  of  our  enterprise, 

Nor  the  insuppressive  mettle  of  our  spirits. 

To  think  that  or  our  cause  or  our  performance 
Did  need  an  oath;  when  every  drop  of  blood 
That  every  Roman  bears,  and  nobly  bears. 


576  JULIUS 

Is  guilty  of  a  several  bastardy, 

If  he  do  break  the  smallest  particle 
Of  any  promise  that  hath  pass’d  from  him.  14.0 

Cas.  But  what  of  Cicero?  shall  we  sound  him? 

I  think  he  will  stand  very  strong  with  us. 

Casca.  Let  us  not  leave  him  out. 

Cm.  No,  by  no  means. 

Met.  O,  let  us  have  him,  for  his  silver  hairs 
Will  purchase  us  a  good  opinion 
And  buy  men’s  voices  to  commend  our  deeds: 

It  shall  be  said  his  judgement  ruled  our  hands; 

Our  youths  and  wildness  shall  no  whit  appear. 

But  all  be  buried  in  his  gravity. 

Bru.  O,  name  him  not:  let  us  not  break  with 
him; 

For  he  will  never  follow  any  thing 
That  other  men  begin. 

Cas.  Then  leave  him  out. 

Casca.  Indeed  he  is  not  fit. 

Dec.  Shall  no  man  else  be  touch’d  but  only 
Caesar? 

Cas.  Decius,  well  urged:  I  think  it  is  not  meet, 
Mark  Antony,  so  well  beloved  of  Caesar, 

Should  outlive  Caesar:  we  shall  find  of  him 
A  shrewd  contriver;  and,  you  know,  his  means, 

If  he  improve  them,  may  well  stretch  so  far 
As  to  annoy  us  all:  which  to  prevent,  160 

Let  Antony  and  Caesar  fall  together. 

Bru.  Our  course  will  seem  too  bloody,  Caius 
Cassius, 

To  cut  the  head  off  and  then  hack  the  limbs. 

Like  wrath  in  death  and  envy  afterwards; 

For  Antony  is  but  a  limb  of  Cxsar : 

Let  us  be  sacrificers,  but  not  butchers,  Caius. 

We  all  stand  up  against  the  spirit  of  Caesar; 

And  in  the  spirit  of  men  there  is  no  blood: 

O,  that  we  then  could  come  by  Caesar’s  spirit. 

And  not  dismember  Caesar!  But,  alas,  /70 

Caesar  must  bleed  for  it!  And,  gentle  friends. 

Let’s  kill  him  boldly,  but  not  wrathfully; 

Let’s  carve  him  as  a  dish  fit  for  the  gods. 

Not  hew  him  as  a  carcass  fit  for  hounds: 

And  let  our  hearts,  as  subtle  masters  do. 

Stir  up  their  servants  to  an  act  of  rage. 

And  after  seem  to  chide  ’em.  This  shall  make 
Our  purpose  necessary  and  not  envious : 

Which  so  appearing  to  the  common  eyes. 

We  shall  be  call’d  purgers,  not  murderers.  180 
And  for  Mark  Antony,  think  not  of  him; 

For  he  can  do  no  more  than  Caesar’s  arm 
When  Caesar’s  head  is  off. 

Cas.  Yet  I  fear  him; 

For  in  the  ingrafted  love  he  bears  to  Caesar — 

Bru.  Alas,  good  Cassius,  do  not  think  of  him: 

If  he  love  Caesar,  all  that  he  can  do 

Is  to  himself,  take  thought  and  die  for  Caesar: 


CiTSAR  act  II 

And  that  were  mjjch  he  should;  for  he  is  given 
To  sports,  to  wildness,  and  much  company. 

Treb.  There  is  no  fear  in  him;  let  him  not  die; 
For  he  will  live,  and  laugh  at  this  hereafter.  i^i 
Clock  strikes. 

Bru.  Peace!  count  the  clock. 

Cas.  The  clock  hath  stricken  three. 

Treb.  ’Tis  time  to  part. 

Cas.  But  it  is  doubtful  yet 

Whether  Caesar  will  come  forth  today  or  no; 

For  he  is  superstitious  grown  of  late. 

Quite  from  the  main  opinion  he  held  once 
Of  fantasy,  of  dreams,  and  ceremonies: 

It  may  be  these  apparent  prodigies. 

The  unaccustom’d  terror  of  this  night, 

And  the  persuasion  of  his  augurers,  200 

May  hold  him  from  the  Capitol  to-day. 

Dec.  Never  fear  that:  if  he  be  so  resolved, 

I  can  o’er  sway  him;  for  he  loves  to  hear 
That  unicorns  may  be  betray’d  with  trees, 

And  bears  with  glasses,  elephants  with  holes. 
Lions  with  toils,  and  men  with  flatterers; 

But  when  I  tell  him  he  hates  flatterers. 

He  says  he  does,  being  then  most  flattered. 

Let  me  work; 

For  I  can  give  his  humour  the  true  bent,  210 
And  I  will  bring  him  to  the  Capitol. 

Cas.  Nay,  we  will  all  of  us  be  there  to  fetch  him. 
Bru.  Bv  the  eighth  hour:  is  that  the  uttermost? 
Cin.  Be  that  the  uttermost,  and  fail  not  then. 

Met.  Caius  Ligarius  doth  bear  Caesar  hard. 

Who  rated  him  for  speaking  well  of  Pompey: 

I  wonder  none  of  you  have  thought  of  him. 

Bru.  Now,  good  Metellus,  go  along  by  him: 

He  loves  me  well,  and  I  have  given  him  reasons; 
Send  him  but  hither,  and  I’ll  fashion  him.  220 
Cas.  The  morning  comes  upon’s:  we’ll  leave 
you,  Brutus. 

And,  friends,  disperse^ yourselves;  but  all  re¬ 
member 

What  you  have  said,  and  show  yourselves  true 
Romans. 

Bru.  Good  gentlemen,  look  fresh  and  merrily: 
Let  not  our  looks  put  on  our  purposes. 

But  bear  it  as  our  Roman  actors  do. 

With  untired  spirits  and  formal  constancy: 

And  so  good  morrow  to  you  every  one. 

[Exeunt  all  but  brutus. 
Boy!  Lucius!  Fast  asleep?  It  is  no  matter; 

Enjoy  the  honey-heavy  dew  of  slumber:  250 

Thou  hast  no  figures  nor  no  fantasies. 

Which  busy  care  draws  in  the  brains  of  men; 
Therefore  thou  sleep’st  so  sound. 

Enter  portia. 

For.  Brutus,  my  lord! 


SCENE  I 

Bru.  Portia,  what  mean  you?  wherefore  rise 
you  now? 

It  is  not  for  your  health  thus  to  commit 
Your  weak  condition  to  the  raw  cold  morning. 
For.  Nor  for  yours  neither.  You’ve  ungently, 
Brutus, 

Stole  from  my  bed:  and  yesternight,  at  supper, 
You  suddenly  arose  and  walk’d  about, 

Musing  and  sighing,  with  your  arms  across,  240 
And  when  I  ask’d  you  what  the  matter  was. 

You  stared  upon  me  with  ungentle  looks; 

I  urged  you  further;  then  you  scratch’d  your 
head 

And  too  impatiently  stamp’d  with  your  foot; 

Yet  I  insisted,  yet  you  answer’d  not. 

But,  with  an  angry  wafture  of  your  hand. 

Gave  sign  for  me  to  leave  you:  so  I  did; 

Fearing  to  strengthen  that  impatience 
Which  seem’d  too  much  enkindled,  and  withal 
Hoping  it  was  but  an  effect  of  humour,  250 
Which  sometime  hath  his  hour  with  every  man. 

It  will  not  let  you  eat,  nor  talk,  nor  sleep. 

And  could  it  work  so  much  upon  your  shape 
As  it  hath  much  prevail’d  on  your  condition, 

I  should  not  know  you,  Brutus.  Dear  my  lord. 
Make  me  acquainted  with  your  cause  of  grief. 
Bru.  I  am  not  well  in  health,  and  that  is  all. 

For.  Brutus  is  wise,  and,  were  he  not  in  health. 
He  would  embrace  the  means  to  come  by  it. 

Bru.  Why,  so  I  do.  Good  Portia,  go  to  bed. 

For.  Is  Brutus  sick?  and  is  it  physical  261 

To  walk  unbraced  and  suck  up  the  humours 
Of  the  dank  morning?  What,  is  Brutus  sick. 

And  will  he  steal  out  of  his  wholesome  bed 
To  dare  the  vile  contagion  of  the  night 
And  tempt  the  rheumy  and  unpurged  air 
To  add  unto  his  sickness?  No,  my  Brutus; 

You  have  some  sick  offence  within  your  mind. 
Which,  by  the  right  and  virtue  of  my  place, 

I  ought  to  know  of:  and,  upon  my  knees,  270 
I  charm  you,  by  my  once-commended  beauty. 

By  all  your  vows  of  love  and  that  great  vow 
Which  did  incorporate  and  make  us  one. 

That  you  unfold  to  me,  yourself,  your  half. 

Why  you  are  heavy,  and  what  men  to-night 
Have  had  resort  to  you:  for  here  have  been 
Some  six  or  seven,  who  did  hide  their  faces 
Even  from  darkness, 

Bru.  Kneel  not,  gentle  Portia. 

For.  I  should  not  need,  if  you  were  gentle 
Brutus. 

Within  the  bond  of  marriage,  tell  me,  Brutus,  280 
Is  it  excepted  I  should  know  no  secrets 
That  appertain  to  you?  Am  I  yourself 
But,  as  it  were,  in  sort  or  limitation. 

To  keep  with  you  at  meals,  comfort  your  bed, 


JULIUS  CT^ISAR 


577 

And  talk  to  you  sometimes?  Dwell  I  but  in  the 
suburbs 

Of  your  good  pleasure?  If  it  be  no  more, 

Portia  is  Brutus’  harlot,  not  his  wife. 

Bru.  You  are  my  true  and  honourable  wife. 

As  dear  to  me  as  are  the  ruddy  drops 
That  visit  my  sad  heart.  2po 

For.  If  this  were  true,  then  should  I  know  this 
secret. 

I  grant  I  am  a  woman;  but  withal 
A  woman  that  Lord  Brutus  took  to  wife: 

I  grant  I  am  a  woman;  but  withal 
A  woman  well-reputed,  Cato’s  daughter. 

Think  you  I  am  no  stronger  than  my  sex. 

Being  so  father’d  and  so  husbanded? 

Tell  me  your  counsels,  I  will  not  disclose  ’em: 

I  have  made  strong  proof  of  my  constancy. 

Giving  myself  a  voluntary  wound  500 

Here,  in  the  thigh:  can  I  bear  that  with  patience. 
And  not  my  husband’s  secrets? 

Bru.  O  ye  gods. 

Render  me  worthy  of  this  noble  wife! 

Knocking  'within. 

Hark,  hark!  one  knocks:  Portia,  go  in  awhile; 
And  by  and  by  thy  bosom  shall  partake 
The  secrets  of  my  heart. 

All  my  engagements  I  will  construe  to  thee, 

All  the  charactery  of  my  sad  brows: 

Leave  me  with  haste.  [Exit  portia]  Lucius, 
who’s  that  knocks? 

Re-enter  lucius  'with  ligarius. 

Luc.  Here  is  a  sick  man  that  would  speak  with 
you.  5/0 

Bru.  Caius  Ligarius,  that  Metellus  spake  of. 
Boy,  stand  aside.  Caius  Ligarius!  how? 

Lig.  Vouchsafe  good  morrow  from  a  feeble 
tongue. 

Bru.  O,  what  a  time  have  you  chose  out,  brave 
Caius, 

To  wear  a  kerchief!  Would  you  were  not  sick! 
Lig.  I  am  not  sick,  if  Brutus  have  in  hand 
Any  exploit  worthy  the  name  of  honour. 

Bru.  Such  an  exploit  have  I  in  hand,  Ligarius, 
Had  you  a  healthful  ear  to  hear  of  it. 

Lig.  By  all  the  gods  that  Romans  bow  before, 

I  here  discard  my  sickness !  Soul  of  Rome!  52/ 
Brave  son,  derived  from  honourable  loins! 

Thou,  like  an  exorcist,  hast  conjured  up 
My  mortified  spirit.  Now  bid  me  run, 

And  I  will  strive  with  things  impossible; 

Yea,  get  the  better  of  them.  What’s  to  do? 

Bru.  A  piece  of  work  that  will  make  sick  men 
whole. 

Lig.  But  are  not  some  whole  that  we  must  make 
sick? 


578  JULIUS 

Bru.  That  must  we  also,  What  it  is,  my  Caius, 

I  shall  unfold  to  thee  as  we  are  going  550 

To  whom  it  must  be  done. 

Lig.  Set  on  your  foot. 

And  with  a  heart  new-fired  I  follow  you. 

To  do  1  know  not  what:  but  it  sufficeth 
That  Brutus  leads  me  on. 

Bru.  Follow  me,  then.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  11.  Ccesar  s  house 

Thunder  and  lightning.  Enter  C/Esar,  in  his  night- 
gonjdfi. 

Cces.  Nor  heaven  nor  earth  have  been  at  peace 
to-night: 

Thrice  hath  Calpurnia  in  her  sleep  cried  out, 
“Help,  ho!  they  murder  Cxsar!”  Who’s  within? 

Enter  a  servant. 

Serv.  My  lord? 

Cces.  Go  bid  the  priests  do  present  sacrifice 
And  bring  me  their  opinions  of  success. 

Serv.  I  will,  my  lord.  [Exit, 

Enter  calpurnia. 

Cal.  What  mean  you,  Caesar?  think  you  to 
walk  forth? 

You  shall  not  stir  out  of  your  house  to-day. 

Cces.  Caesar  shall  forth:  the  things  that  threat¬ 
en’d  me  10 

Ne’er  look’d  but  on  my  back;  when  they  shall  see 
The  face  of  Cxsar,  they  are  vanished. 

Cal.  Caesar,  I  never  stood  on  ceremonies. 

Yet  now  they  fright  me.  There  is  one  within, 
Besides  the  things  that  we  have  heard  and  seen. 
Recounts  most  horrid  sights  seen  by  the  w'atch. 

A  lioness  hath  whelped  in  the  streets; 

And  graves  have  yawn’d,  and  yielded  up  their 
dead; 

Fierce  fiery  warriors  fought  upon  the  clouds 
In  ranks  and  squadrons  and  right  form  of  war,  20 
Which  drizzled  blood  upon  the  Capitol; 

The  noise  of  battle  hurtled  in  the  air. 

Horses  did  neigh,  and  dying  men  did  groan. 

And  ghosts  did  shriek  and  squeal  about  the 
streets. 

O  Caesar!  these  things  are  beyond  all  use, 

And  I  do  fear  them. 

Cces.  What  can  be  avoided 

Whose  end  is  purposed  by  the  mighty  gods? 

Yet  Caesar  shall  go  forth;  for  these  predictions 
Are  to  the  world  in  general  as  to  Caesar. 

Cal.  When  beggars  die,  there  are  no  comets 
seen;  50 

The  heavens  themselves  blaze  forth  the  death  of 
princes. 


CiTSAR  ACT  II 

Cae5.  Cowards  die  many  times  before  their 
deaths; 

The  valiant  never  taste  of  death  but  once. 

Of  all  the  wonders  that  I  yet  have  heard. 

It  seems  to  me  most  strange  that  men  should  fear; 
Seeing  that  death,  a  necessary  end. 

Will  come  when  it  will  come. 

Re-enter  servant. 

What  say  the  augurers? 
Serv.  They  would  not  have  you  to  stir  forth 
to-day. 

Plucking  the  entrails  of  an  offering  forth. 

They  could  not  find  a  heart  within  the  beast.  40 
Cces.  The  gods  do  this  in  shame  of  cowardice: 
Caesar  should  be  a  beast  without  a  heart. 

If  he  should  stay  at  home  to-day  for  fear. 

No,  Caesar  shall  not:  Danger  knows  full  well 
That  Caesar  is  more  dangerous  than  he: 

We  are  two  lions  litter’d  in  one  day, 

And  I  the  elder  and  more  terrible: 

And  Caesar  shall  go  forth. 

Cal.  Alas,  my  lord. 

Your  wisdom  is  consumed  in  confidence. 

Do  not  go  forth  to-day:  call  it  my  fear  50 

That  keeps  you  in  the  house,  and  not  your  own. 
We’ll  send  Mark  Antony  to  the  senate-house; 
And  he  shall  say  you  are  not  well  to-day: 

Let  me,  upon  my  knee,  prevail  in  this. 

Cces.  Mark  Antony  shall  say  I  am  not  well; 

And,  for  thy  humour,  I  will  stay  at  home. 

Enter  decius. 

Here’s  Decius  Brutus,  he  shall  tell  them  so. 

Dec.  Csesar,  all  hail!  good  morrow,  worthy 
Caesar: 

I  come  to  fetch  you  to  the  senate-house. 

Cces.  And  you  are  come  in  very  happy  time,  60 
To  bear  my  greeting  to  the  senators 
And  tell  them  that  I  will  not  come  to-day: 
Cannot,  is  false,  and  that  I  dare  not,  falser: 

I  will  not  come  to-day:  tell  them  so,  Decius. 

Cal.  Say  he  is  sick. 

Cces.  Shall  Caesar  send  a  lie? 

Have  I  in  conquest  stretch’d  mine  arm  so  far. 

To  be  afeard  to  tell  graybeards  the  truth? 

Decius,  go  tell  them  Caesar  will  not  come. 

Dec.  Most  mighty  Caesar,  let  me  know  some 
cause. 

Lest  I  be  laugh’d  at  when  I  tell  them  so.  70 
Cces.  The  cause  is  in  my  will:  I  will  not  come; 
That  is  enough  to  satisfy  the  senate. 

But  for  your  private  satisfaction. 

Because  I  love  you,  I  will  let  you  know: 
Calpurnia  here,  my  wife,  stays  me  at  home: 

She  dreamt  to-night  she  saw  my  statua. 


SCENE  11  JULIUS 

Which,  like  a  fountain  with  an  hundred  spouts, 
Did  run  pure  blood;  and  many  lusty  Romans 
Came  smiling  and  did  bathe  their  hands  in  it: 

And  these  does  she  apply  for  warnings,  and 
portents,  8o 

And  evils  imminent;  and  on  her  knee 
Hath  begg’d  that  I  will  stay  at  home  to-day. 

Dec.  This  dream  is  all  amiss  interpreted; 

It  was  a  vision  fair  and  fortunate: 

Your  statue  spouting  blood  in  many  pipes. 

In  which  so  many  smiling  Romans  bathed. 

Signifies  that  from  you  great  Rome  shall  suck 
Reviving  blood,  and  that  great  men  shall  press 
For  tinctures,  stains,  relics,  and  cognizance. 

This  by  Calpurnia’s  dream  is  signified. 

Cces.  And  this  way  have  you  well  expounded  it. 
Dec.  I  have,  when  you  have  heard  what  I  can 
say: 

And  know  it  now:  the  senate  have  concluded 
To  give  this  day  a  crown  to  mighty  Cxsar. 

If  you  shall  send  them  word  you  will  not  come, 
Their  minds  may  change.  Besides,  it  were  a 
mock 

Apt  to  be  render’d,  for  some  one  to  say, 

“Break  up  the  senate  till  another  time. 

When  Cxsar’s  wife  shall  meet  with  better 
dreams.” 

If  Caesar  hide  himself,  shall  they  not  whisper  loo 
“Lo,  Caesar  is  afraid”? 

Pardon  me,  Caesar;  for  my  dear  dear  love 
To  your  proceeding  bids  me  tell  you  this; 

And  reason  to  my  love  is  liable. 

Cces.  How  foolish  do  your  fears  seem  now,  Cal- 
purnia! 

I  am  ashamed  I  did  yield  to  them. 

Give  me  my  robe,  for  I  will  go. 

Enter  publius,  brutus,  ligarius,  metellus, 

CASCA,  TREBONIUS,  and  CINNA. 

And  look  where  Publius  is  come  to  fetch  me. 

Pub.  Good  morrow,  Caesar. 

Cces.  Welcome,  Publius. 

What,  Brutus,  are  you  stirr’d  so  early  too?  no 
Good  morrow,  Casca.  Caius  Ligarius, 

Caesar  was  ne’er  so  much  your  enemy 
As  that  same  ague  which  hath  made  you  lean. 
What  is ’t  o’clock? 

Bru.  Caesar,  ’tis  strucken  eight. 

Cces.  I  thank  you  for  your  pains  and  courtesy. 

Enter  antony. 

See!  Antony,  that  revels  long  o’nights. 

Is  notwithstanding  up.  Good  morrow,  Antony. 
Ant.  So  to  most  noble  Caesar. 

Cces.  Bid  them  prepare  within: 

I  am  to  blame  to  be  thus  waited  for. 


CiTSAR 

Now,  Cinna:  now,  Metellus:  what,  Trebonius! 

I  have  an  hour’s  talk  in  store  for  you;  121 

Remember  that  you  call  on  me  to-day: 

Be  near  me,  that  I  may  remember  you. 

Treb.  Caesar,  I  will:  [Aside]  and  so  near  will  I 
be 

That  your  best  friends  shall  wish  1  had  been 
further. 

Cces.  Good  friends,  go  in,  and  taste  some  wine 
with  me; 

And  we,  like  friends,  will  straightway  go  to¬ 
gether. 

Bru.  [Aside]  That  every  like  is  not  the  same,  O 
Caesar, 

The  heart  of  Brutus  yearns  to  think  upon! 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  A  street  near  the  Capitol 
Enter  artemidorus,  reading  a  paper. 

Art.  “Caesar,  beware  of  Brutus;  take  heed  of 
Cassius;  come  not  near  Casca;  have  an  eye  to 
Cinna;  trust  not  Trebonius;  mark  well  Me¬ 
tellus  Cimber:  Decius  Brutus  loves  thee  not: 
thou  hast  wronged  Caius  Ligarius.  There  is 
but  one  mind  in  all  these  men,  and  it  is  bent 
against  Caesar.  If  thou  beest  not  immortal,  look 
about  you:  security  gives  way  to  conspiracy. 
The  mighty  gods  defend  thee!  Thy  lover, 

“x\rtemidorus” 

Here  will  I  stand  till  Cxsar  pass  along,  ii 

And  as  a  suitor  will  I  give  him  this. 

My  heart  laments  that  virtue  cannot  live 
Out  of  the  teeth  of  emulation. 

If  thou  read  this,  O  Caesar,  thou  mayst  live; 

If  not,  the  Fates  with  traitors  do  contrive.  [Exit. 

Scene  iv.  Another  part  of  the  same  street,  before 
the  house  of  Brutus 
Enter  portia  and  lucius. 

For.  I  prithee,  boy,  run  to  the  senate-house; 

Stay  not  to  answer  me,  but  get  thee  gone: 

Why  dost  thou  stay? 

Luc.  To  know  my  errand,  madam. 

For.  I  would  have  had  thee  there,  and  here 
again. 

Ere  I  can  tell  thee  what  thou  shouldst  do  there. 

O  constancy,  be  strong  upon  my  side, 

Set  a  huge  mountain  ’tween  my  heart  and  tongue! 

I  have  a  man’s  mind,  but  a  woman’s  might. 

How  hard  it  is  for  women  to  keep  counsel! 

Art  thou  here  yet? 

Luc.  Madam,  what  should  I  do?  10 

Run  to  the  Capitol,  and  nothing  else? 

And  so  return  to  you,  and  nothing  else? 

For.  Yes,  bring  me  word,  boy,  if  thy  lord  look 
well. 


ACT  III 


580  JULIUS 

For  he  went  sickly  forth:  and  take  good  note 
What  Caesar  doth,  what  suitors  press  to  him. 
Hark,  boy!  what  noise  is  that? 

Luc,  I  hear  none,  madam. 

For.  Prithee,  listen  well; 

I  heard  a  bustling  rumour,  like  a  fray. 

And  the  wind  brings  it  from  the  Capitol. 

Luc.  Sooth,  madam,  I  hear  nothing.  20 

Enter  the  soothsayer. 

For.  Come  hither,  fellow:  which  way  hast  thou 
been? 

Sooth.  At  mine  own  house,  good  lady. 

For.  What  is’t  o’clock? 

Sooth.  About  the  ninth  hour,  lady. 

For.  Is  Caesar  yet  gone  to  the  Capitol? 

Sooth.  Madam,  not  yet:  1  go  to  take  my  stand. 

To  see  him  pass  on  to  the  Capitol. 

For.  Thou  hast  some  suit  to  Cxsar,  hast  thou 
not? 

Sooth.  That  I  have,  lady:  if  it  will  please  Caesar 
To  be  so  good  to  Caesar  as  to  hear  me, 

I  shall  beseech  him  to  befriend  himself.  50 

For.  Why  know’st  thou  any  harm’s  intended 
towards  him? 

Sooth.  None  that  I  know  will  be,  much  that  I  fear 
may  chance. 

Good  morrow  to  you.  Here  the  street  is  narrow: 
The  throng  that  follows  Caesar  at  the  heels. 

Of  senators,  of  praetors,  common  suitors. 

Will  crowd  a  feeble  man  almost  to  death: 

I’ll  get  me  to  a  place  more  void,  and  there 
Speak  to  great  Caesar  as  he  comes  along.  [Exit. 

For.  I  must  go  in.  Ay  me,  how  weak  a  thing 
The  heart  of  woman  is!  O  Brutus,  40 

The  heavens  speed  thee  in  thine  enterprise! 

Sure,  the  boy  heard  me:  Brutus  hath  a  suit 
That  Caesar  will  not  grant.  O,  I  grow  faint. 

Run,  Lucius,  and  commend  me  to  my  lord; 

Say  I  am  merry:  come  to  me  again. 

And  bring  me  word  what  he  doth  say  to  thee. 

[Exeunt  severally. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  Rome:  Before  the  Capitol;  the  Senate 
sitting  above 

A  crowd  of  people;  among  them  artemidorus  and 
the  SOOTHSAYER.  Flourish.  Enter  C/Esar,  brutus, 
CASSIUS,  CASCA,  DECIUS,  METELLUS,  TREBONIUS, 
CINNA,  ANTONY,  LEPIDUS,  POPILIUS,  PUBLIUS, 

and  others. 

Cics.  [To  the  soothsayer]  The  ides  of  March 
are  come. 

Sooth.  Ay,  Caesar;  but  not  gone. 

Art.  Hail,  Caesar!  read  this  schedule. 

Dec.  Trebonius  doth  desire  you  to  o’er-read. 


C^SAR 

At  your  best  leisure,  this  his  humble  suit. 

Art.  O  Caesar,’  read  mine  first;  for  mine’s  a 
suit 

That  touches  Caesar  nearer:  read  it,  great  Caesar. 
Cces.  What  touches  us  ourself  shall  be  last 
served. 

Art.  Delay  not,  Caesar;  read  it  instantly. 

Cces.  What,  is  the  fellow  mad? 

Fub.  Sirrah,  give  place.  10 

Cas.  What,  urge  you  your  petitions  in  the 
street? 

Come  to  the  Capitol. 

c^sAR  goes  up  to  the  Senate-House^  the  rest 
following. 

Fop.  I  wish  your  enterprise  to-day  may  thrive. 
Cas.  What  enterprise,  Popilius? 

Fop.  Fare  you  well. 

Advances  to  c^sar. 

Bru.  What  said  Popilius  Lena? 

Cas.  He  wish’d  to-day  our  enterprise  might 
thrive. 

I  fear  our  purpose  is  discovered. 

Bru.  Look,  how  he  makes  to  Caesar:  mark  him. 
Cas.  Casca,  be  sudden,  for  we  fear  prevention. 
Brutus,  what  shall  be  done?  If  this  be  known,  20 
Cassius  or  Cxsar  never  shall  turn  back. 

For  I  will  slay  myself. 

Bru.  Cassius,  be  constant: 

Popilius  Lena  speaks  not  of  our  purposes; 

For,  look,  he  smiles,  and  Caesar  doth  not  change. 
Cas.  Trebonius  knows  his  time;  for,  look  you, 
Brutus, 

He  draws  Mark  Antony  out  of  the  way. 

[Exeunt  antony  and  trebonius. 
Dec.  Where  is  Metellus  Cimber?  Let  him  go 
And  presently  prefer  his  suit  to  Caesar. 

Bru.  He  is  address’d:  press  near  and  second 
him. 

Cin.  Casca,  you  are  the  first  that  rears  your 
hand.  jo 

Cces.  Are  we  all  ready?  What  is  now  amiss 
That  Caesar  and  his  senate  must  redress? 

Met.  Most  high,  most  mighty,  and  most  puis¬ 
sant  Caesar, 

Metellus  Cimber  throws  before  thy  seat 
An  humble  heart — [Kneeling] . 

Cces.  I  must  prevent  thee,  Cimber. 

These  couchings  and  these  lowly  courtesies 
Might  fire  the  blood  of  ordinary  men. 

And  turn  pre-ordinance  and  first  decree 
Into  the  law  of  children.  Be  not  fond. 

To  think  that  Caesar  bears  such  rebel  blood  40 
That  will  be  thaw’d  from  the  true  quality 
With  that  which  melteth  fools;  I  mean,  sweet 
words, 


SCENE  I  JULIUS 

Low-crooked  courtesies,  and  base  spaniel-fawn- 
ing. 

Thy  brother  by  decree  is  banished: 

If  thou  dost  bend  and  pray  and  fawn  for  him, 

I  spurn  thee  like  a  cur  out  of  my  way. 

Know,  Csesar  doth  not  wrong,  nor  without  cause 
Will  he  be  satisfied. 

Met.  Is  there  no  voice  more  worthy  than  my 
own, 

To  sound  more  sweetly  in  great  Cxsar’s  ear  50 
For  the  repealing  of  my  banish’d  brother? 

Bni.  1  kiss  thy  hand,  but  not  in  flattery,  Cxsar; 
Desiring  thee  that  Publius  Cimber  may 
Have  an  immediate  freedom  of  repeal. 

Cas.  What,  Brutus ! 

Cm.  Pardon,  Caesar;  Caesar,  pardon: 

As  low  as  to  thy  foot  doth  Cassius  fall. 

To  beg  enfranchisement  for  Publius  Cimber. 

Cas.  I  could  be  well  moved,  if  I  were  as  you; 

If  I  could  pray  to  move,  prayers  would  move  me: 
But  I  am  constant  as  the  northern  star,  60 

Of  whose  true-fix’d  and  resting  quality 
There  is  no  fellow  in  the  firmament. 

The  skies  are  painted  with  unnumber’d  sparks. 
They  are  all  fire  and  every  one  doth  shine. 

But  there’s  but  one  in  all  doth  hold  his  place: 

So  in  the  world;  ’tis  furnish’d  well  with  men. 

And  men  are  flesh  and  blood,  and  apprehensive; 
Yet  in  the  number  I  do  know  but  one 
That  unassailable  holds  on  his  rank, 

Unshaked  of  motion:  and  that  I  am  he,  70 

Let  me  a  little  show  it,  even  in  this; 

That  I  was  constant  Cimber  should  be  banish’d, 
And  constant  do  remain  to  keep  him  so. 

Cin.  O  Caesar — 

Cas.  Hence!  wilt  thou  lift  up  Olympus? 

Dec.  Great  Caesar — 

Cas.  Doth  not  Brutus  bootless  kneel? 

Casca.  Speak,  hands,  for  me! 

CASCA  first.,  then  the  other  Conspirators  and 

MARCUS  BRUTUS  Stab  Casar. 
Cas.  Et  tu.  Brute/  Then  fall,  Caesar!  [Dies. 
Cin.  Liberty!  Freedom!  Tyranny  is  dead! 

Run  hence,  proclaim,  cry  it  about  the  streets. 

Cas.  Some  to  the  common  pulpits,  and  cry  out 
“Liberty,  freedom,  and  enfranchisement!”  81 
Bru.  People  and  senators,  be  not  affrighted; 

Fly  not;  stand  still:  ambition’s  debt  is  paid. 

Casca.  Go  to  the  pulpit,  Brutus. 

Dec.  And  Cassius  too. 

Bru.  Where’s  Publius? 

Cin.  Here,  quite  confounded  with  this  mutiny. 
Met.  Stand  fast  together,  lest  some  friend  of 
Caesar’s 

Should  chance — 

Bru.  Talk  not  of  standing.  Publius,  good  cheer; 


CiTSAR  581 

There  is  no  harm  intended  to  your  person,  po 
Nor  to  no  Roman  else:  so  tell  them,  Publius. 

Cas.  And  leave  us,  Publius;  lest  that  the  people, 
Rushing  on  us,  should  do  your  age  some  mischief. 

Bru.  Do  so:  and  let  no  man  abide  this  deed. 

But  we  the  doers. 

Re-enter  trebonius. 

Cas.  Where  is  Antony? 

Tre.  Fled  to  his  house  amazed: 

Men,  wives,  and  children  stare,  cry  out  and  run 
As  it  were  doomsday. 

Bru.  Fates,  we  will  know  your  pleasures : 
That  we  shall  die,  we  know;  ’tis  but  the  time 
And  drawing  days  out  that  men  stand  upon.  100 
Cas.  Why,  he  that  cuts  off  twenty  years  of  life 
Cuts  off  so  many  years  of  fearing  death. 

Bru.  Grant  that,  and  then  is  death  a  benefit: 

So  are  we  Caesar’s  friends,  that  have  abridged 
His  time  of  fearing  death.  Stoop,  Romans,  stoop. 
And  let  us  bathe  our  hands  in  Caesar’s  blood 
Up  to  the  elbows,  and  besmear  our  swords: 

Then  walk  we  forth,  even  to  the  market-place. 
And,  waving  our  red  weapons  o’er  our  heads. 
Let’s  all  cry,  “Peace,  freedom,  and  liberty!”  no 
Cas.  Stoop,  then,  and  wash.  How  many  ages 
hence 

Shall  this  our  lofty  scene  be  acted  over 
In  states  unborn  and  accents  yet  unknown! 

Bru.  How  many  times  shall  Caesar  bleed  in 
sport. 

That  now  on  Pompey’s  basis  lies  along 
No  worthier  than  the  dust! 

Cas.  So  oft  as  that  shall  be. 

So  often  shall  the  knot  of  us  be  call’d 
The  men  that  gave  their  country  liberty. 

Dec.  What,  shall  we  forth? 

Cas.  Ay,  every  man  away: 

Brutus  shall  lead;  and  we  will  grace  his  heels  120 
With  the  most  boldest  and  best  hearts  of  Rome. 

Enter  a  servant. 

Bru.  Soft!  who  comes  here?  A  friend  of  An¬ 
tony’s. 

Serv.  Thus,  Brutus,  did  my  master  bid  me 
kneel; 

Thus  did  Mark  Antony  bid  me  fall  down; 

And,  being  prostrate,  thus  he  bade  me  say: 

Brutus  is  noble,  wise,  valiant,  and  honest; 

Caesar  was  mighty,  bold,  royal,  and  loving: 

Say  I  love  Brutus,  and  I  honour  him; 

Say  I  fear’d  Caesar,  honour’d  him,  and  loved  him. 
If  Brutus  will  vouchsafe  that  x\ntony  /50 

May  safely  come  to  him,  and  be  resolved 
How  Caesar  hath  deserved  to  lie  in  death, 

Mark  Antony  shall  not  love  Caesar  dead 


582  JULIUS 

So  well  as  Brutus  living;  but  will  follow 
The  fortunes  and  affairs  of  noble  Brutus 
7'horough  the  hazards  of  this  untrod  state 
With  all  true  faith.  So  says  my  master  Antony. 
Bm.  Thy  master  is  a  wise  and  valiant  Roman; 

I  never  thought  him  worse. 

Tell  him,  so  please  him  come  unto  this  place,  /40 
He  shall  be  satisfied;  and,  by  my  honour. 

Depart  untouch’d. 

Serv.  I’ll  fetch  him  presently.  [Exit. 

Bru.  I  know  that  we  shall  have  him  well  to 
friend. 

Cas.  I  wish  we  may:  but  yet  have  I  a  mind 
That  fears  him  much;  and  my  misgiving  still 
Falls  shrewdly  to  the  purpose. 

Bru.  But  here  comes  Antony. 

Re-enter  antony. 

Welcome,  Mark  Antony. 
Ant.  O  mighty  Caesar!  dost  thou  lie  so  low? 

Are  all  thy  conquests,  glories,  triumphs,  spoils, 
Shrunk  to  this  little  measure?  Fare  thee  well. 

I  know  not,  gentlemen,  what  you  intend,  i$i 
Who  else  must  be  let  blood,  who  else  is  rank: 

If  I  myself,  there  is  no  hour  so  fit 
As  Caesar’s  death’s  hour,  nor  no  instrument 
Of  half  that  worth  as  those  your  swords,  made 
rich 

With  the  most  noble  blood  of  all  this  world. 

I  do  beseech  ye,  if  you  bear  me  hard. 

Now,  whilst  your  purpled  hands  do  reek  and 
smoke, 

Fulfil  your  pleasure.  Live  a  thousand  years, 

I  shall  not  find  myself  so  apt  to  die:  160 

No  place  will  please  me  so,  no  mean  of  death. 

As  here  by  Caesar,  and  by  you  cut  off. 

The  choice  and  master  spirits  of  this  age. 

Bru.  O  Antony,  beg  not  your  death  of  us. 
Though  now  we  must  appear  bloody  and  cruel. 
As,  by  our  hands  and  this  our  present  act. 

You  see  we  do,  yet  see  you  but  our  hands 
And  this  the  bleeding  business  they  have  done: 
Our  hearts  you  see  not;  they  are  pitiful; 

And  pity  to  the  general  wrong  of  Rome —  ijo 

As  fire  drives  out  fire,  so  pity  pity — 

Hath  done  this  deed  on  Cassar.  For  your  part. 

To  you  our  swords  have  leaden  points,  Mark 
Antony: 

Our  arms,  in  strength  of  malice,  and  our  hearts 

Of  brothers’  temper,  do  receive  you  in 

With  all  kind  love,  good  thoughts,  and  reverence. 

Cas.  Your  voice  shall  be  as  strong  as  any  man’s 
In  the  disposing  of  new  dignities. 

Bru.  Only  be  patient  till  we  have  appeased 
The  multitude,  beside  themselves  with  fear,  180 
And  then  we  will  deliver  you  the  cause 


CiTSAR  ACT  III 

Why  I,  that  did  love  Csesar  when  I  struck  him. 
Have  thus  proceeded. 

Ant.  I  doubt  not  of  your  wisdom. 

Let  each  man  render  me  his  bloody  hand: 

First,  Marcus  Brutus,  will  I  shake  with  you; 
Next,  Caius  Cassius,  do  I  take  your  hand; 

Now,  Decius  Brutus,  yours;  now  yours,  Me- 
tellus; 

Yours,  Cinna;  and,  my  valiant  Casca,  yours; 
Though  last,  not  least  in  love,  yours,  good  Tre- 
bonius. 

Gentlemen  all — alas,  what  shall  I  say?  1^0 

My  credit  now  stands  on  such  slippery  ground 
That  one  of  two  bad  ways  you  must  conceit  me. 
Either  a  coward  or  a  flatterer. 

That  I  did  love  thee,  Caesar,  O,  ’tis  true: 

If  then  thy  spirit  look  upon  us  now. 

Shall  it  not  grieve  thee  dearer  than  thy  death. 

To  see  thy  Antony  making  his  peace. 

Shaking  the  bloody  fingers  of  thy  foes. 

Most  noble!  in  the  presence  of  thy  corse? 

Had  I  as  many  eyes  as  thou  hast  wounds,  200 
Weeping  as  fast  as  they  stream  forth  thy  blood. 

It  would  become  me  better  than  to  close 
In  terms  of  friendship  with  thine  enemies. 

Pardon  me,  Julius!  Here  wast  thou  bay’d,  brave 
hart; 

Here  didst  thou  fall;  and  here  thy  hunters  stand. 
Sign’d  in  thy  spoil,  and  crimson’d  in  thy  lethe. 

O  world,  thou  wast  the  forest  to  this  hart; 

And  this,  indeed,  O  world,  the  heart  of  thee. 

How  like  a  deer,  strucken  by  many  princes. 

Dost  thou  here  lie!  210 

Cas.  Mark  Antony — 

Ant.  Pardon  me,  Caius  Cassius : 

The  enemies  of  Caesar  shall  say  this; 

Then,  in  a  friend,  it  is  cold  modesty. 

Cas.  I  blame  you  not  for  praising  Caesar  so; 

But  what  compact  mean  you  to  have  with  us? 
Will  you  be  prick’d  in  number  of  our  friends; 

Or  shall  we  on,  and  not  depend  on  you? 

Ant.  Therefore  I  took  your  hands,  but  was, 
indeed. 

Sway’d  from  the  point,  by  looking  down  on 
Caesar. 

Friends  am  I  with  you  all  and  love  you  all,  220 
Upon  this  hope,  that  you  shall  give  me  reasons 
Why  and  wherein  Caesar  was  dangerous. 

Bru.  Or  else  were  this  a  savage  spectacle: 

Our  reasons  are  so  full  of  good  regard 
That  were  you,  Antony,  the  son  of  Caesar, 

You  should  be  satisfied. 

Ant.  That’s  all  I  seek: 

And  am  moreover  suitor  that  1  may 
Produce  his  body  to  the  market-place; 

And  in  the  pulpit,  as  becomes  a  friend. 


SCENE  I  JULIUS 

Speak  in  the  order  of  his  funeral.  250 

Bru.  You  shall,  Mark  Antony. 

Cas.  Brutus,  a  word  with  you. 

[Aside  to  brutus]  You  know  not  what  you  do:  do 
not  consent 

That  Antony  speak  in  his  funeral: 

Know  you  how  much  the  people  may  be  moved 
Uy  that  which  he  will  utter? 

Bru,  By  your  pardon ; 

I  will  myself  into  the  pulpit  first 

And  show  the  reason  of  our  Cxsar’s  death: 

What  Antony  shall  speak,  I  will  protest 
He  speaks  by  leave  and  by  permission. 

And  that  we  are  contented  Caesar  shall  240 
Have  all  true  rites  and  lawful  ceremonies. 

It  shall  advantage  more  than  do  us  wrong. 

Cas.  I  know  not  what  may  fall;  I  like  it  not. 

Bru.  Mark  Antony,  here,  take  you  Caesar’s 
body. 

You  shall  not  in  your  funeral  speech  blame  us, 

But  speak  all  good  you  can  devise  of  Caesar, 

And  say  you  do’t  by  our  permission; 

Else  shall  you  not  have  any  hand  at  all 
About  his  funeral:  and  you  shall  speak 
In  the  same  pulpit  whereto  I  am  going,  250 
After  my  speech  is  ended. 

AfJt.  Be  it  so; 

I  do  desire  no  more. 

Bru.  Prepare  the  body  then,  and  follow  us. 

[Exeunt  all  but  antony. 
Ant.  O,  pardon  me,  thou  bleeding  piece  of 
earth. 

That  I  am  meek  and  gentle  with  these  butchers! 
Thou  are  the  ruins  of  the  noblest  man 
That  ever  lived  in  the  tide  of  times. 

Woe  to  the  hand  that  shed  this  costly  blood! 

Over  thy  wounds  now  do  I  prophesy —  25P 

Which,  like  dumb  mouths,  do  ope  their  ruby  lips 
To  beg  the  voice  and  utterance  of  my  tongue — 

A  curse  shall  light  upon  the  limbs  of  men; 
Domestic  fury  and  fierce  civil  strife 
Shall  cumber  all  the  parts  of  Italy; 

Blood  and  destruction  shall  be  so  in  use 
And  dreadful  objects  so  familiar 
That  mothers  shall  but  smile  when  they  behold 
Their  infants  quarter’d  with  the  hands  of  war; 

All  pity  choked  with  custom  of  fell  deeds: 

And  Caesar’s  spirit,  ranging  for  revenge,  270 
With  Ate  by  his  side  come  hot  from  hell. 

Shall  in  these  confines  with  a  monarch’s  voice 
Cry  “Havoc,”  and  let  slip  the  dogs  of  war; 

That  this  foul  deed  shall  smell  above  the  earth 
With  carrion  men,  groaning  for  burial. 

Enter  a  servant. 

You  serve  Octavius  Caesar,  do  you  not? 


CiTSAR  583 

Serv.  I  do,  Mark  Antony. 

Ant.  Caesar  did  write  for  him  to  come  to  Rome. 
Serv.  He  did  receive  his  letters,  and  is  coming; 
And  bid  me  say  to  you  by  word  of  mouth —  2^*0 
O  Caesar! —  [Seeing  the  body.] 

Ant.  Thy  heart  is  big,  get  thee  apart  and  weep. 
Passion,  I  see,  is  catching;  for  mine  eyes. 

Seeing  those  beads  of  sorrow  stand  in  thine. 

Began  to  water.  Is  thy  master  coming? 

Serv.  He  lies  to-night  within  seven  leagues  of 
Rome. 

Ant.  Post  back  with  speed,  and  tell  him  what 
hath  chanced: 

Here  is  a  mourning  Rome,  a  dangerous  Rome, 

No  Rome  of  safety  for  Octavius  yet;  28^ 

Hie  hence,  and  tell  him  so.  Yet,  stay  awhile; 

Thou  shalt  not  back  till  I  have  borne  this  corse 
Into  the  market-place:  there  shall  I  try. 

In  my  oration,  how  the  people  take 
The  cruel  issue  of  these  bloody  men; 

According  to  the  which,  thou  shalt  discourse 
To  young  Octavius  of  the  state  of  things. 

Lend  me  your  hand.  [Exeunt  with  C/esar’s  body. 

Scene  ii.  The  Forum. 

Enter  brutus  and  cassius,  and  a  throng 
of  citizens. 

Citizens.  We  will  be  satisfied;  let  us  be  satisfied. 
Bru.  Then  follow  me,  and  give  me  audience, 
friends. 

Cassius,  go  you  into  the  other  street, 

And  part  the  numbers. 

Those  that  will  hear  me  speak,  let  ’em  stay  here; 
Those  that  will  follow  Cassius,  go  with  him; 

And  public  reasons  shall  be  rendered 
Of  Caesar’s  death. 
ist  Cit.  I  will  hear  Brutus  speak. 

2nd  Cit.  I  will  hear  Cassius;  and  compare  their 
reasons 

When  severally  we  hear  them  rendered.  10 
[Exit  CASSIUS,  with  some  of  the  citizens. 

BRUTUS  goes  into  the  pulpit, 
^rd  Cit.  The  noble  Brutus  is  ascended:  silence! 
Bru.  Be  patient  till  the  last. 

Romans,  countrymen,  and  lovers!  hear  me  for  my 
cause,  and  be  silent,  that  you  may  hear:  believe 
me  for  mine  honour,  and  have  respect  to  mine 
honour,  that  you  may  believe:  censure  me  in 
your  wisdom,  and  awake  your  senses,  that  you 
may  the  better  judge.  If  there  be  any  in  this 
assembly,  any  dear  friend  ofOxsar’s,  to  him  I  say, 
that  Brutus’  love  to  Caesar  was  no  less  than  his. 
If  then  that  friend  demand  why  Brutus  rose 
against  Caesar,  this  is  my  answer:  Not  that  I 
loved  Caesar  less,  but  that  I  loved  Rome  more. 
Had  you  rather  Caesar  were  living  and  die  all 


ACT  UI 


584  JULIUS 

slaves,  than  that  Caesar  were  dead,  to  live  all  free 
men?  As  Caesar  loved  me,  I  weep  for  him;  as 
he  was  fortunate,  I  rejoice  at  it;  as  he  was  valiant, 

I  honour  him:  but,  as  he  was  ambitious,  I  slew 
him.  There  is  tears  for  his  love;  joy  for  his  for¬ 
tune;  honour  for  his  valour;  and  death  for  his 
ambition.  Who  is  here  so  base  that  would  be  a 
bondman?  If  any,  speak;  for  him  have  I  offended. 
Who  is  here  so  rude  that  would  not  be  a  Roman? 
If  any,  speak;  for  him  have  I  offended.  Who  is 
here  so  vile  that  will  not  love  his  country?  If 
any,  speak;  for  him  have  I  offended.  I  pause 
for  a  reply. 

All.  None,  Brutus,  none. 

Bni.  Then  none  have  I  offended.  I  have  done 
no  more  to  Caesar  than  you  shall  do  to  Brutus. 
The  question  of  his  death  is  enrolled  in  the  Capi¬ 
tol;  his  glory  not  extenuated,  wherein  he  was 
worthy,  nor  his  offences  enforced,  for  which  he 
suffered  death. 

Enter  antony  and  others.,  with  c^sar’s  body. 

Here  comes  his  body,  mourned  by  Mark  Antony: 
who,  though  he  had  no  hand  in  his  death,  shall 
receive  the  benefit  of  his  dying,  a  place  in  the 
commonwealth;  as  which  of  you  shall  not?  With 
this  I  depart,  that,  as  I  slew  my  best  lover  for 
the  good  of  Rome,  I  have  the  same  dagger  for 
myself,  when  it  shall  please  my  country  to  need 
my  death. 

All.  Live,  Brutus!  live,  live! 
ist  Cit.  Bring  him  with  triumph  home  unto 
his  house. 

2nd  Cit.  Give  him  a  statue  with  his  ancestors. 

^rd  Cit.  Let  him  be  Caesar. 

4th  Cit.  Caesar’s  better  parts 

Shall  be  crown’d  in  Brutus. 

ist  Cit.  We’ll  bring  him  to  his  house 
With  shouts  and  clamours. 

Bru.  My  countrymen — 

2nd  Cit.  Peace,  silence!  Brutus  speaks. 
ist  Cit.  Peace,  ho! 

Bru.  Good  countrymen,  let  me  depart  alone, 
And,  for  my  sake,  stay  here  with  Antony:  61 

Do  grace  to  Caesar’s  corpse,  and  grace  his  speech 
Tending  to  Caesar’s  glories;  which  Mark  Antony, 
By  our  perrriission,  is  allow’d  to  make. 

I  do  entreat  you,  not  a  man  depart 
Save  I  alone,  till  Antony  have  spoke.  [Exit, 
ist  Cit.  Stay,  ho!  and  let  us  hear  Mark  Antony. 

^rd  Cit.  Let  him  go  up  into  the  public  chair; 

We’ll  hear  him.  Noble  Antony,  go  up. 

Ant.  For  Brutus’  sake,  I  am  beholding  to  you. 

[Goes  into  the  pulpit.]  70 

4th  Cit.  What  does  he  say  of  Brutus? 

^rd  Cit.  He  says,  for  Brutus’  sake, 


ct:sar 

He  finds  himself  beholding  to  us  all. 

4th  Cit.  ’Twere  best  he  speak  no  harm  of 
Brutus  here. 

ist  Cit.  This  Cassar  was  a  tyrant. 

^rd  Cit.  Nay,  that’s  certain; 

We  are  blest  that  Rome  is  rid  of  him. 

2nd  Cit.  Peace!  let  us  hear  what  Antony  can  say. 
Ant.  You  gentle  Romans — 

Citizens.  Peace,  ho!  let  us  hear  him. 

Ant.  Friends,  Romans,  countrymen,  lend  me 
your  ears; 

I  come  to  bury  Caesar,  not  to  praise  him. 

The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them;  80 

The  good  is  oft  interred  with  their  lx)nes; 

So  let  it  be  with  Caesar.  The  noble  Brutus 
Hath  told  you  Caesar  was  ambitious: 

If  it  were  so,  it  was  a  grievous  fault. 

And  grievously  hath  Caesar  answer’d  it. 

Here,  under  leave  of  Brutus  and  the  rest — 

For  Brutus  is  an  honourable  man; 

So  are  they  all,  all  honourable  men — 

Come  I  to  speak  in  Caesar’s  funeral. 

He  was  my  friend,  faithful  and  just  to  me:  po 

But  Brutus  says  he  was  ambitious; 

And  Brutus  is  an  honourable  man. 

He  hath  brought  many  captives  home  to  Rome, 
Whose  ransoms  did  the  general  coffers  fill: 

Did  this  in  Caesar  seem  ambitious? 

When  that  the  poor  have  cried,  Caesar  hath  wept: 
Ambition  should  be  made  of  sterner  stuff: 

Yet  Brutus  says  he  was  ambitious; 

And  Brutus  is  an  honourable  man. 

You  all  did  see  that  on  the  Lupercal  100 

I  thrice  presented  him  a  kingly  crown. 

Which  he  did  thrice  refuse:  was  this  ambition? 
Yet  Brutus  says  he  was  ambitious; 

And,  sure,  he  is  an  honourable  man. 

I  speak  not  to  disprove  what  Brutus  spoke. 

But  here  I  am  to  speak  what  I  do  know. 

You  all  did  love  him  once,  not  without  cause: 
What  cause  withholds  you  then  to  mourn  for 
him? 

O  judgement!  thou  art  fled  to  brutish  beasts,  top 
And  men  have  lost  their  reason.  Bear  with  me; 
My  heart  is  in  the  coffln  there  with  Caesar, 

And  I  must  pause  till  it  come  back  to  me. 
ist  Cit.  Methinks  there  is  much  reason  in  his 
sayings. 

2nd  Cit.  If  thou  consider  rightly  of  the  matter, 
Caesar  has  had  great  wrong. 

^rd  Cit  Has  he,  masters? 

I  fear  there  will  a  worse  come  in  his  place. 

4th  Cit.  Mark’d  ye  his  words?  He  would  not 
take  the  crown; 

Therefore  ’tis  certain  he  was  not  ambitious. 
ist  Cit.  If  it  be  found  so,  some  will  dear  abide  it. 


SCENE  II  JULIUS 

2nd  Cit.  Poor  soul!  his  eyes  are  red  as  fire  with 
weeping.  120 

^rd  Cit.  There’s  not  a  nobler  man  in  Rome 
than  Antony. 

4th  Cit.  Now  mark  him,  he  begins  again  to 
speak. 

Ant.  But  yesterday  the  word  of  Caesar  might 
Have  stood  against  the  world;  now  lies  he  there, 
And  none  so  poor  to  do  him  reverence. 

O  masters,  if  I  were  disposed  to  stir 
Your  hearts  and  minds  to  mutiny  and  rage, 

I  should  do  Brutus  wrong,  and  Cassius  wrong. 
Who,  you  all  know,  are  honourable  men: 

I  will  not  do  them  wrong;  I  rather  choose  75 o 

To  wrong  the  dead,  to  wrong  myself  and  you. 
Than  I  will  wrong  such  honourable  men. 

But  here’s  a  parchment  with  the  seal  of  Caesar; 

I  found  it  in  his  closet,  ’tis  his  will: 

Let  but  the  commons  hear  this  testament — 

Which,  pardon  me,  I  do  not  mean  to  read — 

And  they  would  go  and  kiss  dead  Caesar’s  wounds 
x\nd  dip  their  napkins  in  his  sacred  blood. 

Yea,  beg  a  hair  of  him  for  memory, 

x\nd,  dying,  mention  it  within  their  wills,  740 

Bequeathing  it  as  a  rich  legacy 

Unto  their  issue. 

^th  Cit.  We’ll  hear  the  will:  read  it,  Mark 
Antony. 

All.  The  will,  the  will!  we  will  hear  Caesar’s 
will. 

Ant.  Have  patience,  gentle  friends,  I  must  not 
read  it; 

It  is  not  meet  you  know  how  Caesar  loved  you. 

You  are  not  wood,  you  are  not  stones,  but  men; 
And,  being  men,  hearing  the  will  of  Caesar, 

It  will  inflame  you,  it  will  make  you  mad :  745) 

’Tis  good  you  know  not  that  you  are  his  heirs; 

For,  if  you  should,  O,  what  would  come  of  it! 

^th  Cit.  Read  the  will;  we’ll  hear  it,  Antony; 

You  shall  read  us  the  will,  Caesar’s  will. 

Ant.  Will  you  be  patient?  will  you  stay  awhile? 

I  have  o’ershot  myself  to  tell  you  of  it: 

I  fear  I  wrong  the  honourable  men 
Whose  daggers  have  stabb’d  Caesar;  I  do  fear  it. 
4th  Cit.  They  were  traitors:  honourable  men! 

All.  The  will!  the  testament! 

2nd  Cit.  They  were  villains,  murderers:  the 
will!  read  the  will.  160 

Ant.  You  will  compel  me,  then,  to  read  the  will? 
Then  make  a  ring  about  the  corpse  of  Caesar, 

And  let  me  show  you  him  that  made  the  will. 

Shall  I  descend?  and  will  you  give  me  leave? 

Several  Cit.  Come  down. 

2nd  Cit.  Descend. 

^rd  Cit.  You  shall  have  leave. 

[antony  comes  donxm. 


C^SAR  585 

4th  Cit.  A  ring;  stand  round. 

1st  Cit.  Stand  from  the  hearse,  stand  from  the 
body.  169 

2nd  Cit.  Room  for  Antony,  most  noble  Antony. 
Ant.  Nay,  press  not  so  upon  me;  stand  far  off. 
Several  Cit.  Stand  back;  room;  bear  back. 

Ant.  If  you  have  tears,  prepare  to  shed  them 
now. 

You  all  do  know  this  mantle:  I  remember 
The  first  time  ever  Caesar  put  it  on; 

’Twas  on  a  summer’s  evening,  in  his  tent. 

That  day  he  overcame  the  Nervii : 

Look,  in  this  place  ran  Cassius’  dagger  through: 
See  what  a  rent  the  envious  Casca  made: 

Through  this  the  well-beloved  Brutus  stabb’d; 
And  as  he  pluck’d  his  cursed  steel  away,  181 
Mark  how  the  blood  of  Caesar  follow’d  it. 

As  rushing  out  of  doors,  to  be  resolved 
If  Brutus  so  unkindly  knock’d  or  no; 

For  Brutus,  as  you  know,  was  Caesar’s  angel: 
Judge,  O  you  gods,  how  dearly  Caesar  loved 
him! 

This  was  the  most  unkindest  cut  of  all; 

For  when  the  noble  Caesar  saw  him  stab. 
Ingratitude,  more  strong  than  traitors’  arms. 
Quite  vanquish’d  him:  then  burst  his  mighty 
heart;  ipo 

And,  in  his  mantle  muffling  up  his  face. 

Even  at  the  base  of  Pompey’s  statua. 

Which  all  the  while  ran  blood,  great  Caesar  fell. 
O,  what  a  fall  was  there,  my  countrymen! 

Then  I,  and  you,  and  all  of  us  fell  down, 

Whilst  bloody  treason  flourish’d  over  us. 

O,  now  you  weep;  and,  I  perceive,  you  feel 
The  dint  of  pity:  these  are  gracious  drops. 

Kind  souls,  what,  weep  you  when  you  but  behold 
Our  Caesar’s  vesture  wounded?  Look  you  here 
[lifting  C/ES ar’ s  mantle^  200 

Here  is  himself,  marr’d,  as  you  see,  with  traitors. 
ist  Cit.  O  piteous  spectacle! 

2nd  Cit.  O  noble  Caesar! 

^rd  Cit.  O  woeful  day! 

4th  Cit.  O  traitors,  villains! 
ist  Cit.  O  most  bloody  sight! 

2nd  Cit.  We  will  be  revenged. 

All.  Revenge!  About!  Seek!  Burn!  Fire!  Kill! 
Slay!  Let  not  a  traitor  live! 

Ant.  Stay,  countrymen.  -270 

ist  Cit.  Peace  there!  hear  the  noble  Antony. 

2nd  Cit.  We’ll  hear  him,  we’ll  follow  him, 
we’ll  die  with  him. 

Ant.  Good  friends,  sweet  friends,  let  me  not 
stir  you  up 

To  such  a  sudden  flood  of  mutiny. 

They  that  have  done  this  deed  are  honourable: 
What  private  griefs  they  have,  alas,  I  know  not. 


586  JULIUS 

That  made  them  do  it:  they  are  wise  and  honour¬ 
able 

And  will,  no  doubt,  with  reasons  answer  you. 

I  come  not,  friends,  to  steal  away  your  hearts : 

1  am  no  orator,  as  Brutus  is;  221 

But,  as  you  know  me  all,  a  plain  blunt  man, 

That  love  my  friend;  and  that  they  know  full 
well 

That  gave  me  public  leave  to  speak  of  him: 

For  I  have  neither  wit,  nor  words,  nor  worth, 
Action,  nor  utterance,  nor  the  power  of 
speech. 

To  stir  men’s  blood:  I  only  speak  right  on; 

I  tell  you  that  which  you  yourselves  do  know; 
Show  you  sweet  Caesar’s  wounds,  poor  poor  dumb 
mouths,  22^ 

And  bid  them  speak  for  me:  but  were  I  Brutus, 
And  Brutus  Antony,  there  were  an  Antony 
Would  ruffle  up  your  spirits  and  put  a  tongue 
In  every  wound  of  Caesar  that  should  move 
The  stones  of  Rome  to  rise  and  mutiny. 

All.  We’ll  mutiny. 

ist  Cit.  We’ll  burn  the  house  of  Brutus. 

^rd  Cit.  Away,  then!  come,  seek  the  conspira¬ 
tors. 

Ant.  Yet  hear  me,  countrymen;  yet  hear  me 
speak. 

All.  Peace,  ho!  Hear  Antony.  Most  noble 
Antony! 

Ant.  Why,  friends,  you  go  to  do  you  know  not 
what:  2^0 

Wherein  hath  Cxsar  thus  deserved  your  loves? 
Alas,  you  know  not:  I  must  tell  you,  then: 

You  have  forgot  the  will  I  told  you  of. 

All.  Most  true.  The  will!  Let’s  stay  and  hear 
the  will. 

Ant.  Here  is  the  will,  and  under  Caesar’s  seal. 

To  every  Roman  citizen  he  gives. 

To  every  several  man,  seventy  five  drachmas. 

2nd  Cit.  Most  noble  Caesar!  We’ll  revenge  his 
death. 

^rd  Cit.  O  royal  Cxsar! 

Ant.  Hear  me  with  patience.  2^0 

All.  Peace,  ho! 

Ant.  Moreover,  he  hath  left  you  all  his  walks. 

His  private  arbours  and  new-planted  orchards. 

On  this  side  Tiber;  he  hath  left  them  you 
And  to  your  heirs  for  ever,  common  pleasures. 

To  walk  abroad  and  recreate  yourselves. 

Here  was  a  Caesar!  when  comes  such  another? 
ist  Cit.  Never,  never.  Come,  away,  away! 

We’ll  burn  his  body  in  the  holy  place, 

And  with  the  brands  fire  the  traitors’  houses.  260 
Take  up  the  body. 

2nd  Cit.  Go  fetch  fire. 

^rd  Cit.  Pluck  down  benches. 


C^SAR  ACT  ui 

4th  Cit.  Pluck  down  forms,  windows,  anything. 

’  [Exeunt  CITIZENS  njoith  the  body. 
Ant.  Now  let  it  work.  Mischief,  thou  art  afoot. 
Take  thou  what  course  thou  wilt' 

Enter  a  servant. 

How  now,  fellow! 
Serv.  Sir,  Octavius  is  already  come  to  Rome. 
A?2t.  Where  is  he? 

Serv.  He  and  Lepidus  are  at  Caesar’s  house. 

Ant.  And  thither  will  I  straight  to  visit  him: 

He  comes  upon  a  wish.  Fortune  is  merry,  27/ 
And  in  this  mood  will  give  us  anything. 

Serv.  I  heard  him  say,  Brutus  and  Cassius 
Are  rid  like  madmen  through  the  gates  of  Rome. 
Ant.  Belike  they  had  some  notice  of  the  people. 
How  I  had  moved  them.  Bring  me  to  Octavius. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  A  street 
Enter  cinna  the  poet. 

Cin.  I  dreamt  to-night  that  1  did  feast  with 
Caesar, 

And  things  unluckily  charge  my  fantasy: 

I  have  no  will  to  wander  forth  of  doors. 

Yet  something  leads  me  forth. 

Enter  citizens. 

ist  Cit.  What  is  your  name? 

2nd  Cit.  Whither  are  you  going? 

^rd  Cit.  Where  do  you  dwell? 

4th  Cit.  Are  you  a  married  man  or  a  bachelor? 
2nd  Cit.  Answer  every  man  directly.  10 

ist  Cit.  Ay,  and  briefly. 

4th  Cit.  Ay,  and  wisely. 

^rd  Cit.  Ay,  and  truly,  you  were  best. 

Cin.  What  is  my  name?  Whither  am  I  going? 
Where  do  I  dwell?  Am  I  a  married  man  or  a 
bachelor?  Then,  to  answer  every  man  directly 
and  briefly,  wisely  and  truly:  wisely  I  say,  I  am 
a  bachelor. 

2nd  Cit.  That’s  as  much  as  to  say,  they  are 
fools  that  marry:  you’ll  bear  me  a  bang  for  that, 
I  fear.  Proceed;  directly.  21 

Cin.  Directly,  I  am  going  to  Caesar’s  funeral. 
ist  Cit.  As  a  friend  or  an  enemy? 

Cin.  As  a  friend. 

2nd  Cit.  That  matter  is  answered  directly. 

4th  Cit.  For  your  dwelling — briefly. 

Cin.  Briefly,  I  dwell  by  the  Capitol. 

^rd  Cit.  Your  name,  sir,  truly. 

Cin.  Truly,  my  name  is  Cinna. 
ist  Cit.  Tear  him  to  pieces;  he’s  a  conspirator.  50 
Cin.  I  am  Cinna  the  poet,  I  am  Cinna  the  poet. 
4th  Cit.  Tear  him  for  his  bad  verses,  tear  him 
for  his  bad  verses. 


SCENE  III  JULIUS 

Cin.  I  am  not  Cinna  the  conspirator. 

4th  Cit.  It  is  no  matter,  his  name’s  Cinna;  pluck 
but  his  name  out  of  his  heart,  and  turn  him 
going. 

^rd  Cit.  Tear  him,  tear  him!  Come,  brands,  ho! 
fire-brands:  to  Brutus’,  to  Cassius’;  burn  all: 
some  to  Decius’  house,  and  some  to  Casca’s; 
some  to  Ligarius’ :  away,  go!  [Exeunt. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  A  house  in  Rome 
ANTONY,  OCTAVIUS,  and  LEPiDus,  Seated  at  a  table. 
Ant.  These  many,  then,  shall  die;  their  names 
are  prick’d. 

Oct.  Your  brother  too  must  die;  consent  you, 
Lepidus? 

Lep.  I  do  consent — 

Oct.  Prick  him  down,  Antony. 

Lep.  Upon  condition  Publius  shall  not  live, 

Who  is  your  sister’s  son,  Mark  Antony. 

Ant.  He  shall  not  live;  look,  with  a  spot  I  damn 
him. 

But,  Lepidus,  go  you  to  Caesar’s  house; 

Fetch  the  will  hither,  and  we  shall  determine 
How  to  cut  off  some  charge  in  legacies. 

Lep.  What,  shall  I  find  you  here?  10 

Oct.  Or  here,  or  at  the  Capitol. 

[Exit  LEPIDUS. 

Ant.  This  is  a  slight  unmeritable  man, 

Meet  to  be  sent  on  errands:  is  it  fit. 

The  three-fold  world  divided,  he  should  stand 
One  of  the  three  to  share  it? 

Oct.  So  you  thought  him; 

And  took  his  voice  who  should  be  prick’d  to  die. 

In  our  black  sentence  and  proscription. 

Ant.  Octavius,  I  have  seen  more  days  than  you: 
And  though  we  lay  these  honours  on  this  man 
To  ease  ourselves  of  divers  slanderous  loads,  20 
He  shall  but  bear  them  as  the  ass  bears  gold. 

To  groan  and  sweat  under  the  business. 

Either  led  or  driven,  as  we  point  the  way; 

And  having  brought  our  treasure  where  we  will; 
Then  take  we  down  his  load,  and  turn  him  off. 
Like  to  the  empty  ass,  to  shake  his  ears 
And  graze  in  commons. 

Oct.  You  may  do  your  will; 

But  he’s  a  tried  and  valiant  soldier. 

Ant.  So  is  my  horse,  Octavius;  and  for  that 
I  do  appoint  him  store  of  provender:  50 

It  is  a  creature  that  I  teach  to  fight. 

To  wind,  to  stop,  to  run  directly  on. 

His  corporal  motion  govern’d  by  my  spirit. 

And,  in  some  taste,  is  Lepidus  but  so; 

He  must  be  taught  and  train’d  and  bid  go  forth; 

A  barren-spirited  fellow;  one  that  feeds 


CiTSAR  587 

On  abjects,  orts,  and  imitations. 

Which,  out  of  use  and  staled  by  other  men. 

Begin  his  fashion:  do  not  talk  of  him 
But  as  a  property.  And  now,  Octavius,  40 

Listen  great  things:  Brutus  and  Cassius 
Are  levying  powers:  we  must  straight  make 
head: 

Therefore  let  our  alliance  be  combined. 

Our  best  friends  made,  our  means  stretch’d; 

And  let  us  presently  go  sit  in  council 
How  covert  matters  may  be  best  disclosed 
And  open  perils  surest  answered. 

Oct.  Let  us  do  so:  for  we  are  at  the  stake 
And  bay’d  about  with  many  enemies;  4^ 

And  some  that  smile  have  in  their  hearts,  I  fear. 
Millions  of  mischiefs.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  Camp  near  Sardis:  before  Brutus's  tent 
Drum.  Enter  brutus,  lucilius,  lucius,  and 
soldiers;  titinius  and  pindarus  meeting  them. 
Bru.  Stand,  ho! 

Lucil.  Give  the  word,  ho!  and  stand. 

Bru.  What  now,  Lucilius!  is  Cassius  near? 

Lucil.  He  is  at  hand;  and  Pindarus  is  come 
To  do  you  salutation  from  his  master. 

Bru.  He  greets  me  well.  Your  master,  Pindarus, 
In  his  own  change,  or  by  ill  officers, 

Hath  given  me  some  worthy  cause  to  wish 
Things  done,  undone:  but,  if  he  be  at  hand, 

I  shall  be  satisfied. 

Pin.  I  do  not  doubt  10 

But  that  my  noble  master  will  appear 
Such  as  he  is,  full  of  regard  and  honour. 

Bru.  He  is  not  doubted.  A  word,  Lucilius; 

How  he  received  you,  let  me  be  resolved. 

Lucil.  With  courtesy  and  with  respect  enough; 
But  not  with  such  familiar  instances. 

Nor  with  such  free  and  friendly  conference, 

As  he  hath  used  of  old. 

Bru.  Thou  hast  described 

A  hot  friend  cooling:  ever  note,  Lucilius, 

When  love  begins  to  sicken  and  decay  20 

It  useth  an  enforced  ceremony. 

There  are  no  tricks  in  plain  and  simple  faith; 

But  hollow  men,  like  horses  hot  at  hand. 

Make  gallant  show  and  promise  of  their  mettle; 
But  when  they  should  endure  the  bloody  spur, 
They  fall  their  crests,  and,  like  deceitful  jades. 
Sink  in  the  trial.  Comes  his  army  on? 

Lucil.  They  mean  this  night  in  Sardis  to  be 
quarter’d; 

The  greater  part,  the  horse  in  general. 

Are  come  with  Cassius. 

Bru.  Hark!  he  is  arrived.  30 

Low  march  within. 

March  gently  on  to  meet  him. 


588  JULIUS 

Enter  cassius  and  his  powers, 

Cas.  Stand,  ho! 

Bru.  Stand,  ho!  Speak  the  word  along. 
i St  Sol.  Stand! 

2nd  Sol.  Stand! 

^rd Sol.  Stand! 

Cas.  Most  noble  brother,  you  have  done  me 
wrong. 

Bru.  Judge  me,  you  gods !  wrong  I  mine  enemies? 
And,  if  not  so,  how  should  I  wrong  a  brother? 

Cas.  Brutus,  this  sober  form  of  yours  hides 
wrongs;  40 

And  when  you  do  them — 

Bru.  Cassius,  be  content; 

Speak  your  griefs  softly:  I  do  know  you  well. 
Before  the  eyes  of  both  our  armies  here. 

Which  should  perceive  nothing  but  love  from  us. 
Let  us  not  wrangle:  bid  them  move  away; 

Then  in  my  tent,  Cassius,  enlarge  your  griefs. 
And  I  will  give  you  audience. 

Cas.  Pindarus, 

Bid  our  commanders  lead  their  charges  off 
A  little  from  this  ground. 

Bru.  Lucilius,  do  you  the  like;  and  let  no 
man  50 

Come  to  our  tent  till  we  have  done  our  conference. 
Let  Lucius  and  Titinius  guard  our  door.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Brutus'  tent 
Enter  brutus  and  cassius. 

Cas.  That  you  have  wrong’d  me  doth  appear 
in  this: 

You  have  condemn’d  and  noted  Lucius  Pella 
For  taking  bribes  here  of  the  Sardians; 

Wherein  my  letters,  praying  on  his  side. 

Because  I  knew  the  man,  were  slighted  off. 

Bru.  You  wrong’d  yourself  to  write  in  such  a 
case. 

Cas.  In  such  a  time  as  this  it  is  not  meet 
That  every  nice  offence  should  bear  his  comment. 
Bru.  Let  me  tell  you,  Cassius,  you  yourself 
Are  much  condemn’d  to  have  an  itching  palm;  10 
To  sell  and  mart  your  offices  for  gold 
To  undeservers. 

Cas.  I  an  itching  palm! 

You  know  that  you  are  Brutus  that  speak  this, 

Or,  by  the  gods,  this  speech  were  else  your  last. 
Bru.  The  name  of  Cassius  honours  this  cor¬ 
ruption. 

And  chastisement  doth  therefore  hide  his  head. 
Cas.  Chastisement! 

Bru.  Remember  March,  the  ides  of  March 
remember: 

Did  not  great  Julius  bleed  for  justice’  sake? 

What  villain  touch’d  his  body,  that  did  stab  20 


CAESAR  ACT  IV 

And  not  for  justice?  What,  shall  one  of  us, 

That  struck  the  foremost  man  of  all  this  world 
But  for  supporting  robbers,  shall  we  now 
Contaminate  our  fingers  with  base  bribes. 

And  sell  the  mighty  space  of  our  large  honours 
For  so  much  trash  as  may  be  grasped  thus? 

I  had  rather  be  a  dog,  and  bay  the  moon. 

Than  such  a  Roman. 

Cas.  Brutus,  bay  not  me; 

I’ll  not  endure  it:  you  forget  yourself 
To  hedge  me  in;  I  am  a  soldier,  I,  50 

Older  in  practice,  abler  than  yourself 
To  make  conditions. 

Bru.  Go  to;  you  are  not,  Cassius. 

Cas.  lam. 

Bru.  I  say  you  are  not. 

Cas.  Urge  me  no  more,  I  shall  forget  myself; 
Have  mind  upon  your  health,  tempt  me  no  farther. 
Bru.  Away,  slight  man! 

Cas.  Is’t  possible? 

Bru.  Hear  me,  for  I  will  speak. 

Must  I  give  way  and  room  to  your  rash  choler? 
Shall  I  be  frighted  when  a  madman  stares?  40 
Cas.  O  ye  gods,  ye  gods!  must  I  endure  all  this? 
Bru.  All  this!  ay,  more:  fret  till  your  proud 
heart  break; 

Go  show  your  slaves  how  choleric  you  are. 

And  make  your  bondmen  tremble.  Must  I 
budge? 

Must  I  observe  you?  must  I  stand  and  crouch 
Under  your  testy  humour?  By  the  gods. 

You  shall  digest  the  venom  of  your  spleen. 
Though  it  do  split  you;  for,  from  this  day  forth. 
I’ll  use  you  for  my  mirth,  yea,  for  my  laughter, 
When  you  are  waspish. 

Cas.  Is  it  come  to  this?  50 

Bru.  You  say  you  are  a  better  soldier: 

Let  it  appear  so;  make  your  vaunting  true. 

And  it  shall  please  me  well :  for  mine  own  part, 

I  shall  be  glad  to  learn  of  noble  men. 

Cas.  You  wrong  me  every  way;  you  wrong  me, 
Brutus; 

I  said,  an  elder  soldier,  not  a  better: 

Did  I  say  “better”? 

Bru.  If  you  did,  I  care  not. 

Cas.  When  Caesar  lived,  he  durst  not  thus  have 
moved  me. 

Bru.  Peace,  peace!  you  durst  not  so  have 
tempted  him. 

I  durst  not!  60 

Bru.  No. 

Cas.  What,  durst  not  tempt  him! 

Bru.  For  your  life  you  durst  not. 

Cas.  Do  not  presume  too  much  upon  my  love; 

I  may  do  that  I  shall  be  sorry  for. 

Bru.  You  have  done  that  you  should  be  sorry  for 


SCENE  III  JULIUS 

There  is  no  terror,  Cassius,  in  your  threats, 

,  For  I  am  arm’d  so  strong  in  honesty 
i  That  they  pass  by  me  as  the  idle  wind, 

!  Which  I  respect  not.  I  did  send  to  you 
'  For  certain  sums  of  gold,  which  you  denied  me: 
For  I  can  raise  no  money  by  vile  means :  7/ 

By  heaven,  I  had  rather  coin  my  heart 
And  drop  my  blood  for  drachmas  than  to  wring 
From  the  hard  hands  of  peasants  their  vile  trash 
By  any  indirection:  I  did  send 
To  you  for  gold  to  pay  my  legions, 

Which  you  denied  me:  was  that  done  like  Cas¬ 
sius? 

Should  I  have  answer’d  Caius  Cassius  so? 

When  Marcus  Brutus  grows  so  covetous 
To  lock  such  rascal  counters  from  his  friends,  80 
Be  ready,  gods,  with  all  your  thunderbolts; 

Dash  him  to  pieces! 

Cas.  I  denied  you  not. 

Bru.  You  did. 

Cas.  I  did  not:  he  was  but  a  fool  that  brought 
My  answer  back.  Brutus  hath  rived  my  heart: 

A  friend  should  bear  his  friend’s  infirmities, 

But  Brutus  makes  mine  greater  than  they  are. 

Bru.  I  do  not,  till  you  practise  them  on  me. 

Cas.  You  love  me  not. 

Bru.  I  do  not  like  your  faults. 

Cas.  A  friendly  eye  could  never  see  such  faults. 
Bru.  A  flatterer’s  would  not,  though  they  do 
appear  pi 

As  huge  as  high  Olympus. 

Cas.  Come,  Antony,  and  young  Octavius,  come, 
Revenge  yourselves  alone  on  Cassius, 

For  Cassius  is  aweary  of  the  world; 

Hated  by  one  he  loves;  braved  by  his  brother; 
Check’d  like  a  bondman;  all  his  faults  observed. 

Set  in  a  note-book,  learn’d,  and  conn’d  by  rote. 

To  cast  into  my  teeth.  O,  I  could  weep 
My  spirit  from  mine  eyes!  There  is  my  dagger. 
And  here  my  naked  breast;  within  a  heart  loi 

Dearer  than  Plutus’  mine,  richer  than  gold: 

If  that  thou  be’st  a  Roman,  take  it  forth; 

I,  that  denied  thee  gold,  will  give  my  heart: 

Strike,  as  thou  didst  at  Csesar;  for,  I  know. 

When  thou  didst  hate  him  worst,  thou  lovedst 
him  better 

Than  ever  thou  lovedst  Cassius. 

Bru.  Sheathe  your  dagger: 

Be  angry  when  you  will,  it  shall  have  scope; 

Do  what  you  will,  dishonour  shall  be  humour. 

O  Cassius,  you  are  yoked  with  a  lamb  no 

That  carries  anger  as  the  flint  bears  fire; 

Who,  much  enforced,  shows  a  hasty  spark, 

And  straight  is  cold  again. 

Cas.  Hath  Cassius  lived 

To  be  but  mirth  and  laughter  to  his  Brutus, 


C^SAR  589 

When  grief  and  blood  ill-temper’d  vexeth  him? 
Bru.  When  I  spoke  that,  I  was  ill-temper’d  too. 
Cas.  Do  you  confess  so  much?  Give  me  your 
hand. 

Bru.  And  my  heart  too. 

Cas.  O  Brutus ! 

Bru.  What’s  the  matter? 

Cas.  Have  not  you  love  enough  to  bear  with 
me. 

When  that  rash  humour  which  my  mother  gave 
me. 

Makes  me  forgetful? 

Bru.  Yes,  Cassius;  and,  from  henceforth. 
When  you  are  over-earnest  with  your  Brutus, 
He’ll  think  your  mother  chides,  and  leave  you  so. 
Poet.  [Within]  Let  me  go  in  to  see  the  generals; 
There  is  some  grudge  between  ’em,  ’tis  not  meet 
They  be  alone. 

Lucil.  [Within]  You  shall  not  come  to  them. 

Poet.  [Within]  Nothing  but  death  shall  stay  me. 

Enter  poet,  followed  by  lucilius,  titinius,  and 

LUCIUS. 

Cas.  How  now!  what’s  the  matter? 

Poet.  For  shame,  you  generals!  what  do  you 
mean?  75  0 

Love,  and  be  friends,  as  two  such  men  should  be; 
For  I  have  seen  more  years.  I’m  sure,  than  ye. 

Cas.  Ha,  ha!  how  vilely  doth  this  cynic  rhyme! 
Bru.  Get  you  hence,  sirrah;  saucy  fellow, 
hence! 

Cas.  Bear  with  him,  Brutus;  ’tis  his  fashion. 

Bru.  I’ll  know  his  humour,  when  he  knows  his 
time: 

What  should  the  wars  do  with  these  jigging 
fools? 

Companion,  hence! 

Cas.  Away,  away,  be  gone! 

[Exit  POET. 

Bru.  Lucilius  and  Titinius,  bid  the  commanders 
Prepare  to  lodge  their  companies  to-night.  140 
Cas.  And  come  yourselves,  and  bring  Messala 
with  you 

Immediately  to  us. 

[Exeunt  lucilius  and  titlntus. 
Bru.  Lucius,  a  ho\v\  of  wine!  [Exit  lucius. 

Cas.  I  did  not  think  you  could  have  been  so 
angry. 

Bru.  O  Cassius,  I  am  sick  of  many  griefs. 

Cas.  Of  your  philosophy  you  make  no  use. 

If  you  give  place  to  accidental  evils. 

Bru.  No  man  bears  sorrow  better.  Portia  is 
dead. 

Cas.  Ha!  Portia! 

Bru.  She  is  dead. 

Cas.  How’scaped  I  killing  when  I  cross’d  you  so? 


590  JULIUS 

O  insupportable  and  touching  loss !  i$i 

Upon  what  sickness? 

Bru.  Impatient  of  my  absence, 

And  grief  that  young  Octavius  with  Mark  An¬ 
tony 

Have  made  themselves  so  strong — for  with  her 
death 

That  tidings  came — with  this  she  fell  distract, 
And,  her  attendants  absent,  swallow’d  fire. 

Cas.  And  died  so? 

Bru.  Even  so. 

Cas.  O  ye  immortal  gods ! 

Re-enter  lucius,  njoith  njoine  and  taper. 

Bru.  Speak  no  more  of  her.  Give  me  a  bowl 
of  wine. 

In  this  I  bury  all  unkindness,  Cassius. 

Cas.  My  heart  is  thirsty  for  that  noble  pledge. 
Fill,  Lucius,  till  the  wine  o’erswell  the  cup;  i6i 
I  cannot  drink  too  much  of  Brutus’  love. 

Bru.  Come  in  Titinius!  [Exit  lucius. 

Re-enter  titinius,  'with  messala. 

Welcome,  good  Messala. 
Now  sit  we  close  about  this  taper  here 
And  call  in  question  our  necessities. 

Cas.  Portia,  art  thou  gone? 

Bru.  No  more,  I  pray  you. 

Messala,  I  have  here  received  letters 
That  young  Octavius  and  Mark  Antony 
Come  down  upon  us  with  a  mighty  power. 
Bending  their  expedition  toward  Philippi.  170 
Mes.  Myself  have  letters  of  the  selfsame  tenour. 
Bru.  With  what  addition? 

Mes.  That  by  proscription  and  bills  of  outlawry, 
Octavius,  Antony,  and  Lepidus, 

Have  put  to  death  an  hundred  senators. 

Bru.  Therein  our  letters  do  not  well  agree; 

Mine  speak  of  seventy  senators  that  died 
By  their  proscriptions,  Cicero  being  one. 

Cas.  Cicero  one! 

Mes.  Cicero  is  dead. 

And  by  that  order  of  proscription.  180 

Had  you  your  letters  from  your  wife,  my  lord? 
Bru.  No,  Messala. 

Mes.  Nor  nothing  in  your  letters  writ  of  her. 
Bru.  Nothing,  Messala. 

Mes.  That,  methinks,  is  strange. 

Bru.  Why  ask  you?  hear  you  aught  of  her  in 
yours? 

Mes.  No,  my  lord. 

Bru.  Now,  as  you  are  a  Roman,  tell  me  true. 
Mes.  Then  like  a  Roman  bear  the  truth  I  tell: 

For  certain  she  is  dead,  and  by  strange  manner. 
Bru.  Why,  farewell,  Portia.  We  must  die, 
Messala:  1^0 


CiTSAR  ACT  IV 

With  meditating  that  she  must  die  once, 

I  have  the  patience  to  endure  it  now. 

Mes.  Even  so  great  men  great  losses  should  en¬ 
dure. 

Cas.  I  have  as  much  of  this  in  art  as  you. 

But  yet  my  nature  could  not  bear  it  so. 

Bru.  Well,  to  our  work  alive.  What  do  you  think 
Of  marching  to  Philippi  presently? 

Cas.  I  do  not  think  it  good. 

Bru.  Your  reason? 

Cas.  This  it  is: 

’Tis  better  that  the  enemy  seek  us :  ipp 

So  shall  he  waste  his  means,  weary  his  soldiers. 
Doing  himself  offence;  whilst  we,  lying  still, 

Are  full  of  rest,  defence,  and  nimbleness. 

Bru.  Good  reasons  must,  of  force,  give  place  to 
better. 

The  people  ’twixt  Philippi  and  this  ground 
Do  stand  but  in  a  forced  affection; 

For  they  have  grudged  us  contribution: 

The  enemy,  marching  along  by  them. 

By  them  shall  make  a  fuller  number  up. 

Come  on  refresh’d,  new-added,  and  encouraged; 
From  which  advantage  shall  we  cut  him  off,  210 
If  at  Philippi  we  do  face  him  there. 

These  people  at  our  back. 

Cas.  Hear  me,  good  brother. 

Bru.  Under  your  pardon.  You  must  note  beside 
That  we  have  tried  the  utmost  of  our  friends. 

Our  legions  are  brim- full,  our  cause  is  ripe: 

The  enemy  increaseth  every  day; 

We,  at  the  height,  are  ready  to  decline. 

There  is  a  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men 
Which,  taken  at  the  flood,  leads  on  to  fortune; 
Omitted,  all  the  voyage  of  their  life  220 

Is  bound  in  shallows  and  in  miseries. 

On  such  a  full  sea  are  we  now  afloat; 

And  we  must  take  the  current  when  it  serves 
Or  lose  our  ventures. 

Cas.  Then,  with  your  will,  go  on; 

We’ll  along  ourselves,  and  meet  them  at  Philippi. 

Bru.  The  deep  of  night  is  crept  upon  our  talk. 
And  nature  must  obey  necessity; 

Which  we  will  niggard  with  a  little  rest. 

There  is  no  more  to  say? 

Cas.  No  more.  Goodnight: 

Early  to-morrow  will  we  rise,  and  hence.  250 
Rn/.  Lucius!  [Enter  lvcius.]  My  gown. 

[Ejr/f  LUCIUS.]  Farewell,  good  Messala: 

Good  night,  Titinius.  Noble,  noble  Cassius, 

Good  night,  and  good  repose. 

Cas.  .  O  my  dear  brother! 

This  was  an  ill  beginning  of  the  night: 

Never  come  such  division  ’tween  our  souls! 

Let  it  not,  Brutus. 

Bru.  Everything  is  well. 


SCENE  HI 


JULIUS  C^SAR 


591 


Cas.  Good  night,  my  lord. 

Bru.  Good  night,  good  brother. 

Txt.  Mes.  Good  night.  Lord  Brutus. 

Bru,  Farewell,  every  one. 

[Exeimt-all  but  brutus. 

Re-enter  lucius,  uoith  the  gaum. 

Give  me  the  gown.  Where  is  thy  instrument? 

Luc.  Here  in  the  tent. 

Bru.  What,  thou  speak’st  drowsily?  240 
Poor  knave,  I  blame  thee  not;  thou  art  o’er- 
watch’d. 

Call  Claudius  and  some  other  of  my  men; 
ril  have  them  sleep  on  cushions  in  my  tent. 

Luc.  Varro  and  Claudius! 

Enter  varro  and  Claudius. 

Var.  Calls  my  lord? 

Bru.  I  pray  you,  sirs,  lie  in  my  tent  and  sleep; 

It  may  be  I  shall  raise  you  by  and  by 
On  business  to  my  brother  Cassius. 

Var.  So  please  you,  we  will  stand  and  watch 
your  pleasure. 

Bru.  I  will  not  have  it  so:  lie  down,  good 
sirs;  250 

It  may  be  I  shall  otherwise  bethink  me. 

Look,  Lucius,  here’s  the  book  I  sought  for  so; 

I  put  it  in  the  pocket  of  my  gown. 

VARRO  and  Claudius  lie  dawn. 

Luc.  I  was  sure  your  lordship  did  not  give  it  me. 
Bru.  Bear  with  me,  good  boy,  I  am  much  for¬ 
getful. 

Canst  thou  hold  up  thy  heavy  eyes  awhile. 

And  touch  thy  instrument  a  strain  or  two? 

Luc.  Ay,  my  lord,  aft’t  please  you. 

Bru.  It  does,  my  boy : 

I  trouble  thee  too  much,  but  thou  art  willing. 

Luc.  It  is  my  duty,  sir.  2  60 

Bru.  I  should  not  urge  thy  duty  past  thy  might; 

I  know  young  bloods  look  for  a  time  of  rest. 

Luc.  I  have  slept,  my  lord,  already. 

Bru.  It  was  well  done;  and  thou  shalt  sleep 
again; 

I  will  not  hold  thee  long:  if  I  do  live, 

I  will  be  good  to  thee. 

Music,  and  a  song. 

This  is  a  sleepy  tune.  O  murderous  slumber, 
Lay’s  thou  thy  leaden  mace  upon  my  boy. 

That  plays  thee  music?  Gentle  knave,  good 
night;  26^ 

I  will  not  do  thee  so  much  wrong  to  wake  thee: 

If  thou  dost  nod,  thou  break’ st  thy  instrument; 

I’ll  take  it  from  thee;  and,  good  boy,  good  night. 
Let  me  see,  let  me  see;  is  not  the  leaf  turn’d 
down 

Where  I  left  reading?  Here  it  is,  I  think. 


Enter  the  ghost  of  C/esar. 

How  ill  this  taper  burns!  Ha!  who  comes  here? 

I  think  it  is  the  weakness  of  mine  eyes 
That  shapes  this  monstrous  apparition. 

It  comes  upon  me.  Art  thou  anything? 

Art  thou  some  god,  some  angel,  or  some  devil. 
That  makest  my  blood  cold  and  my  hair  to  stare? 
Speak  to  me  what  thou  art.  2  Si 

Ghost.  Thy  evil  spirit,  Brutus. 

Bru.  Why  comest  thou? 

Ghost.  To  tell  thee  thou  shalt  see  me  at  Philippi. 
Bru.  Well;  then  I  shall  see  thee  again? 

Ghost.  Ay,  at  Philippi. 

Bru.  Why,  I  will  see  thee  at  Philippi,  then. 

[Exit  GHOST. 

Now  I  have  taken  heart  thou  vanishest: 

III  spirit,  I  would  hold  more  talk  with  thee. 

Boy,  Lucius!  Varro!  Claudius!  Sirs,  awake! 
Claudius!  291 

Luc.  The  strings,  my  lord,  are  false. 

Bru.  He  thinks  he  still  is  at  his  instrument. 
Lucius,  awake! 

Luc.  My  lord? 

Bru.  Didst  thou  dream,  Lucius,  that  thou  so 
criedst  out? 

Ltic.  My  lord,  I  do  not  know  that  I  did  cry. 

Bru.  Yes,  that  thou  didst:  didst  thou  see  any 
thing? 

Luc.  Nothing,  my  lord. 

Bru.  Sleep  again,  Lucius.  Sirrah  Claudius! 

[To  varro]  Fellow  thou,  awake!  50/ 

Var.  My  lord? 

Clou.  My  lord? 

Bru.  Why  did  you  so  cry  out,  sirs,  in  your 
sleep? 

Var.  and  Clou.  Did  we,  my  lord? 

Bru.  Ay:  saw  you  anything? 

Var.  No,  my  lord,  I  saw  nothing. 

Clou.  Nor  I,  my  lord. 

Bru.  Go  and  commend  me  to  my  brother  Cas¬ 
sius; 

Bid  him  set  on  his  powers  betimes  before. 

And  we  will  follow. 

Var.  and  Clou.  It  shall  be  done,  my  lord, 

[Exeunt. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  The  plains  of  Philippi 
Enter  octavius,  antony,  and  their  army. 
Oct.  Now,  Antony,  our  hopes  are  answered: 
You  said  the  enemy  would  not  come  down. 

But  keep  the  hills  and  upper  regions: 

It  proves  not  so:  their  battles  are  at  hand; 

They  mean  to  warn  us  at  Philippi  here. 


592  JULIUS 

Answering  before  we  do  demand  of  them. 

Ant.  Tut,  1  am  in  their  bosoms,  and  I  know 
Wherefore  they  do  it:  they  could  be  content 
To  visit  other  places;  and  come  down 
With  fearful  bravery,  thinking  by  this  face  lo 
To  fasten  in  our  thoughts  that  they  have  courage; 
But  ’tis  not  so. 

Enter  a  messenger. 

Mess.  Prepare  you,  generals : 

The  enemy  comes  on  in  gallant  show; 

Their  bloody  sign  of  battle  is  hung  out. 

And  something  to  be  done  immediately. 

Ant.  Octavius,  lead  your  battle  softly  on. 

Upon  the  left  hand  of  the  even  field. 

Oct.  Upon  the  right  hand  I;  keep  thou  the  left. 
Ant.  Why  do  you  cross  me  in  this  exigent? 

Oct.  I  do  not  cross  you;  but  I  will  do  so.  20 
March. 

Drum.  Enter  brutus,  cassius,  and  their  Army; 
LuciLius,  TiTiNius,  MESSALA,  and  Others. 

Bru.  They  stand,  and  would  have  parley. 

Cas.  Stand  fast,  Titinius:  we  must  out  and  talk. 
Oct.  Mark  Antony,  shall  we  give  sign  of  battle? 
Ant.  No,  Caesar,  we  will  answer  on  their 
charge. 

Make  forth;  the  generals  would  have  some  words. 
Oct.  Stir  not  until  the  signal. 

Bru.  Words  before  blows:  is  it  so,  countrymen? 
Oct.  Not  that  we  love  words  better,  as  you  do. 
Bru.  Good  words  are  better  than  bad  strokes, 
Octavius. 

Ant.  In  your  bad  strokes,  Brutus,  you  give 
good  words:  50 

Witness  the  hole  you  made  in  Caesar’s  heart, 
Crying,  “Long  live!  hail,  Caesar!” 

Cas.  Antony, 

The  posture  of  your  blows  are  yet  unknown; 

But  for  your  words,  they  rob  the  Hybla  bees. 

And  leave  them  honeyless. 

Ant.  Not  stingless  too. 

Bru.  O,  yes,  and  soundless  too; 

For  you  have  stol’n  their  buzzing,  Antony, 

And  very  wisely  threat  before  you  sting. 

Ant.  Villains,  you  did  not  so,  when  your  vile 
daggers 

Hack’d  one  another  in  the  sides  of  Caesar:  40 

You  show’d  your  teeth  like  apes,  and  fawn’d  like 
hounds. 

And  bow’d  like  bondmen,  kissing  Caesar’s  feet; 
Whilst  damned  Casca,  like  a  cur,  behind 
Struck  Caesar  on  the  neck.  O  you  flatterers! 

Cas.  Flatterers!  Now,  Brutus,  thank  yourself: 
This  tongue  had  not  offended  so  to-day. 

If  Cassius  might  have  ruled. 


CiTSAR  ACT  V 

Oct.  Come,  comq,  the  cause:  if  arguing  make  us 
sweat. 

The  proof  of  it  will  turn  to  redder  drops. 

Look;  50 

I  draw  a  sword  against  conspirators; 

When  think  you  that  the  sword  goes  up  again? 
Never,  till  Caesar’s  three  and  thirty  wounds 
Be  well  avenged;  or  till  another  Caesar 
Have  added  slaughter  to  the  sword  of  traitors. 
Bru.  Caesar,  thou  canst  not  die  by  traitors’ 
hands. 

Unless  thou  bring’ st  them  with  thee. 

Oct.  So  I  hope; 

I  was  not  born  to  die  on  Brutus’  sword. 

Bru.  O,  if  thou  wert  the  noblest  of  thy  strain. 
Young  man,  thou  couldst  not  die  more  honour¬ 
able.  60 

Cas.  A  peevish  school  boy,  worthless  of  such 
honour. 

Join’d  with  a  masker  and  a  reveller! 

Ant.  Old  Cassius  still! 

Oct.  Come,  Antony,  away! 

Defiance,  traitors,  hurl  we  in  your  teeth: 

If  you  dare  fight  to-day,  come  to  the  field; 

If  not,  when  you  have  stomachs. 

[Exeunt  octavius,  antony,  and  their  army. 
Cas.  Why,  now,  blow  wind,  swell  billow,  and 
swim  bark! 

The  storm  is  up,  and  all  is  on  the  hazard. 

Bru.  Ho,  Lucilius!  hark,  a  word  with  you. 

Lucil.  [Standing  forth]  My  Lord? 

BRUTUS  and  lucilius  converse  apart. 

Cas.  Messala! 

Mes.  [Standing  forth]  What  says  my  general? 
Cas.  Messala,  7/ 

This  is  my  birthday;  as  this  very  day 
Was  Cassius  born.  Give  me  thy  hand,  Messala: 
Be  thou  my  witness  that  against  my  will. 

As  Pompey  was,  am  I  compell’d  to  set 
Upon  one  battle  all  our  liberties. 

You  know  that  I  held  Epicurus  strong 
And  his  opinion:  now  I  change  my  mind, 

And  partly  credit  things  that  do  presage. 

Coming  from  Sardis,  on  our  former  ensign  So 

Two  mighty  eagles  fell,  and  there  they  perch’d. 
Gorging  and  feeding  from  our  soldiers’  hands 
Who  to  Philippi  here  consorted  us : 

This  morning  are  they  fled  away  and  gone; 

And  in  their  steads  do  ravens,  crows,  and  kites, 
Fly  o’er  our  heads  and  downward  look  on  us. 

As  we  were  sickly  prey:  their  shadows  seem 

A  canopy  most  fatal,  under  which 

Our  army  lies,  ready  to  give  up  the  ghost. 

Mes.  Believe  not  so. 

Cas.  I  but  believe  it  partly;  90 

For  I  am  fresh  of  spirit  and  resolved 


SCENE  I 


593 


JULIUS 

To  meet  all  perils  very  constantly. 

Bru,  Even  so,  Lucilius. 

Cas,  Now,  most  noble  Brutus, 

The  gods  to-day  stand  friendly,  that  we  may. 
Lovers  in  peace,  lead  on  our  days  to  age! 

But  since  the  affairs  of  men  rest  still  incertain. 
Let’s  reason  with  the  worst  that  may  befall. 

If  we  do  lose  this  battle,  then  is  this 
The  very  last  time  we  shall  speak  together: 

What  are  you  then  determined  to  do?  loo 

Bru.  Even  by  the  rule  of  that  philosophy 
By  which  I  did  blame  Cato  for  the  death 
Which  he  did  give  himself,  I  know  not  how. 

But  I  do  find  it  cowardly  and  vile. 

For  fear  of  what  might  fall,  so  to  prevent 
The  time  of  life:  arming  myself  with  patience 
To  stay  the  providence  of  some  high  powers 
That  govern  us  below. 

Cas.  Then,  if  we  lose  this  battle, 

You  are  contented  to  be  led  in  triumph 
Thorough  the  streets  of  Rome?  no 

Bru.  No,  Cassius,  no:  think  not,  thou  noble 
Roman, 

That  ever  Brutus  will  go  bound  to  Rome; 

He  bears  too  great  a  mind.  But  this  same  day 
Must  end  that  work  the  ides  of  March  begun; 

And  whether  we  shall  meet  again  I  know  not. 
Therefore  our  everlasting  farewell  take: 

For  ever,  and  for  ever,  farewell,  Cassius! 

If  we  do  meet  again,  why,  we  shall  smile; 

If  not,  why  then,  this  parting  was  well  made. 

Cas.  For  ever,  and  for  ever,  farewell,  Brutus! 

If  we  do  meet  again,  we’ll  smile  indeed;  121 

If  not,  ’tis  true  this  parting  was  well  made. 

Bru.  Why,  then,  lead  on.  O,  that  a  man  might 
know 

The  end  of  this  day’s  business  ere  it  come! 

But  it  sufficeth  that  the  day  will  end. 

And  then  the  end  is  known.  Come,  ho!  away! 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  u.  The  same:  the  field  of  battle 
Alarum.  Enter  brutus  and  messala. 

Bru.  Ride,  ride,  Messala,  ride,  and  give  these 
bills 

Unto  the  legions  on  the  other  side.  [Loud  alarum.] 
Let  them  set  on  at  once;  for  I  perceive 
But  cold  demeanour  in  Octavius’  wing. 

And  sudden  push  gives  them  the  overthrow. 

Ride,  ride,  Messala:  let  them  all  come  down. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Alarums.  Enter  cassius  and  titinius. 

Cas.  O,  look,  Titinius,  look,  the  villains  fly! 
Myself  have  to  mine  own  turn’d  enemy: 


C^SAR 

This  ensign  here  of  mine  was  turning  back; 

I  slew  the  coward,  and  did  take  it  from  him. 

Tit.  O  Cassius,  Brutus  gave  the  word  too  early: 
Who,  having  some  advantage  on  Octavius, 

Took  it  too  eagerly:  his  soldiers  fell  to  spoil. 
Whilst  we  by  Antony  are  all  enclosed. 

Enter  pindarus. 

Pin.  Fly  further  off,  my  lord,  fly  further  off; 
Mark  Antony  is  in  your  tents,  my  lord:  10 

Fly,  therefore,  noble  Cassius,  fly  far  off. 

Cas.  This  hill  is  far  enough.  Look,  look,  Titin¬ 
ius; 

Are  those  my  tents  where  I  perceive  the  fire? 

Tit.  They  are,  my  lord. 

Cas.  Titinius,  if  thou  lovest  me. 

Mount  thou  my  horse,  and  hide  thy  spurs  in  him 
Till  he  have  brought  thee  up  to  yonder  troops 
And  here  again;  that  I  may  rest  assured 
Whether  yond  troops  are  friend  or  enemy 
Tit.  I  will  be  here  again,  even  with  a  thought. 

[Exit. 

Cas.  Go,  Pindarus,  get  higher  on  that  hill;  20 
My  sight  was  ever  thick;  regard  Titinius, 

And  tell  me  what  thou  notest  about  the  field. 

pindarus  ascends  the  hill. 

This  day  I  breathed  first:  time  is  come  round, 
And  where  I  did  begin,  there  shall  I  end; 

My  life  is  run  his  compass.  Sirrah,  what  news? 
Pin.  [Above]  O  my  lord! 

Cas.  What  news? 

Pin.  [Above]  Titinius  is  enclosed  round  about 
With  horsemen,  that  make  to  him  on  the  spur; 
Yet  he  spurs  on.  Now  they  are  almost  on  him. 
Now,  Titinius!  Now  some  light.  O,  he  lights 
too.  5/ 

He’s  ta’en.  [Shout.]  And,  hark!  they  shout  for 
joy. 

Cas.  Come  down,  behold  no  more. 

O,  coward  that  I  am,  to  live  so  long. 

To  see  my  best  friend  ta’en  before  my  face! 

PINDARUS  descends. 

Come  hither,  sirrah: 

In  Parthia  did  I  take  thee  prisoner; 

And  then  I  swore  thee,  saving  of  thy  life. 

That  whatsoever  I  did  bid  thee  do. 

Thou  shouldst  attempt  it.  Come  now,  keep  thine 
oath;  4^0 

Now  be  a  freeman:  and  with  this  good  sword. 
That  ran  through  Caesar’s  bowels,  search  this 
bosom. 

Stand  not  to  answer:  here,  take  thou  the  hilts; 
And,  when  my  face  is  cover’d,  as  ’tis  now. 

Guide  thou  the  sword,  [pindarus  subs  him.] 
Caesar,  thou  art  revenged. 


594  JULIUS 

Even  with  the  sword  that  kill’d  thee.  [Dies. 
Pin.  So,  I  am  free;  yet  would  not  so  have  been, 
Durst  I  have  done  my  will.  O  Cassius, 

Far  from  this  country  Pindarus  shall  run, 

Where  never  Roman  shall  take  note  of  him.  50 

[Exit. 

Re-enter  titinius  with  messala. 

Mes.  It  is  but  change,  Titinius;  for  Octavius 
Is  overthrown  by  noble  Brutus'  power. 

As  Cassius’  legions  are  by  Antony. 

Tit.  These  tidings  will  well  comfort  Cassius. 
Mes.  Where  did  you  leave  him? 

Tit.  All  disconsolate, 

With  Pindarus  his  bondman,  on  this  hill. 

Ales.  Is  not  that  he  that  lies  upon  the  ground? 

Tit.  He  lies  not  like  the  living.  O  my  heart! 

Mes.  Is  not  that  he? 

Tit.  No,  this  was  he,  Messala, 

But  Cassius  is  no  more.  O  setting  sun,  60 

As  in  thy  red  rays  thou  dost  sink  to  night. 

So  in  his  red  blood  Cassius’  day  is  set; 

The  sun  of  Rome  is  set!  Our  day  is  gone; 

Clouds,  dews,  and  dangers  come;  our  deeds  are 
done! 

Mistrust  of  my  success  hath  done  this  deed. 

Mes.  Mistrust  of  good  success  hath  done  this 
deed. 

O  hateful  error,  melancholy’s  child. 

Why  dost  thou  show  to  the  apt  thoughts  of  men 
The  things  that  are  not?  O  error,  soon  con¬ 
ceived. 

Thou  never  comest  unto  a  happy  birth,  70 

But  kill’st  the  mother  than  engender’d  thee! 

Tit.  What,  Pindarus!  where  art  thou,  Pin¬ 
darus? 

Mes.  Seek  him,  Titinius,  whilst  I  go  to  meet 
The  noble  Brutus,  thrusting  this  report 
Into  his  ears;  I  may  say,  thrusting  it; 

For  piercing  steel  and  darts  envenomed 
Shall  be  as  welcome  to  the  ears  of  Brutus 
As  tidings  of  this  sight. 

Tit.  Hie  you,  Messala, 

And  I  will  seek  for  Pindarus  the  while. 

[Exit  MESSALA. 

Why  didst  thou  send  me  forth,  brave  Cassius?  80 
Did  I  not  meet  thy  friends?  and  did  not  they 
Put  on  my  brows  this  wreath  of  victory. 

And  bid  me  give  it  thee?  Didst  thou  not  hear 
their  shouts? 

Alas,  thou  hast  misconstrued  everything! 

But,  hold  thee,  take  this  garland  on  thy  brow; 

Thy  Brutus  bid  me  give  it  thee,  and  I 
Will  do  his  bidding.  Brutus,  come  apace. 

And  see  how  I  regarded  Caius  Cassius. 

By  your  leave,  gods;  this  a  Roman’s  part:  89 


CTISAR  ACT  V 

Come,  Cassius’  sword,  and  find  Titinius’  heart. 

[Kills  himself. 

Alarum.  Re-enter  messala,  with  brutus,  young 

CATO,  STRATO,  VOLUMNIUS,  dfwi  LUCILIUS. 

Bru.  Where,  where,  Messala,  doth  his  body 
lie? 

Mes.  Lo,  yonder,  and  Titinius  mourning  it. 

Bru.  Titinius’  face  is  upward. 

Cato.  He  is  slain. 

Bru.  O  Julius  Cxsar,  thou  art  mighty  yet! 

Thy  spirit  walks  abroad  and  turns  our  swords 
In  our  own  proper  entrails.  [Low  alarums.] 

Cato.  Brave  Titinius! 

Look,  whether  he  have  not  crown’d  dead  Cas¬ 
sius! 

Bru.  Are  yet  two  Romans  living  such  as  these? 
The  last  of  all  the  Romans,  fare  thee  well! 

It  is  impossible  that  ever  Rome  100 

Should  breed  thy  fellow.  Friends,  I  owe  more 
tears 

To  this  dead  man  than  you  shall  see  me  pay. 

I  shall  find  time,  Cassius,  I  shall  find  time. 

Come,  therefore,  and  to  Thasos  send  his  body: 
His  funerals  shall  not  be  in  our  camp. 

Lest  it  discomfort  us.  Lucilius,  come; 

And  come,  young  Cato;  let  us  to  the  field. 

Labeo  and  Flavius,  set  our  battles  on: 

’Tis  three  o’clock;  and,  Romans,  yet  ere  night 
We  shall  try  fortune  in  a  second  fight.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  Another  part  of  the  field 
Alarum.  Enter  fighting,  soldiers  of  both  armies; 
then  BRUTUS,  young  cato,  lucilius,  and  others. 
Bru.  Yet,  countrymen,  O,  yet  hold  up  your 
heads! 

Cato.  WLat  bastard  doth  not?  Who  will  go 
with  me? 

I  will  proclaim  my  name  about  the  field: 

I  am  the  son  of  Marcus  Cato,  ho! 

A  foe  to  tyrants  and  my  country’s  friend; 

I  am  the  son  of  Marcus  Cato,  ho! 

Bru.  And  I  am  Brutus,  Marcus  Brutus,  I; 

Brutus,  my  country’s  friend;  know  me  for 
Brutus!  [Exit. 

Lucil.  O  young  and  noble  Cato,  art  thou  down? 
Why,  now  thou  diest  as  bravely  as  Titinius;  10 
And  mayst  be  honour’d,  being  Cato’s  son. 
istSold.  Yield,  or  thou  diest. 

Lucil.  Only  I  yield  to  die: 

There  is  so  much  that  thou  wilt  kill  me  straight; 
Offering  money. 

Kill  Brutus,  and  be  honour’d  in  his  death. 
ist  Sold.  We  must  not.  A  noble  prisoner! 

2nd  Sold.  Room,  ho!  Tell  Antony,  Brutus  is 
ta’en. 


SCENE  IV  JULIUS 

I  St  Sold.  I’ll  tell  the  news.  Here  comes  the 
general. 

Enter  antony. 

Brutus  is  ta’en,  Brutus  is  ta’en,  my  lord. 

Ant.  Where  is  he? 

Lucil.  Safe,  Antony;  Brutus  is  safe  enough: 

I  dare  assure  thee  that  no  enemy  21 

Shall  ever  take  alive  the  noble  Brutus: 

The  gods  defend  him  from  so  great  a  shame! 

When  you  do  find  him,  or  alive  or  dead. 

He  will  be  found  like  Brutus,  like  himself. 

Ant.  This  is  not  Brutus,  friend;  but,  I  assure 
you, 

A  prize  no  less  in  worth:  keep  this  man  safe; 

Give  him  all  kindness:  I  had  rather  have 
Such  men  my  friends  than  enemies.  Go  on. 

And  see  whether  Brutus  be  alive  or  dead;  50 

And  bring  us  word  unto  Octavius’  tent 

How  everything  is  chanced.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  Another  part  of  the  field. 

Enter  brutus,  dardanius,  clitus,  strato,  and 

VOLUMNIUS. 

Bru.  Come,  poor  remains  of  friends,  rest  on 
this  rock. 

Cli.  Statilius  show’d  the  torch-light,  but,  my 
lord. 

He  came  not  back :  he  is  or  ta’en  or  slain. 

Bru.  Sit  thee  down,  Clitus:  slaying  is  the  word; 

It  is  a  deed  in  fashion.  Hark  thee,  Clitus. 

Whispers. 

Cli.  What,  I,  my  lord?  No,  not  for  all  the  world. 
Bru.  Peace  then!  no  words. 

Cli.  ril  rather  kill  myself. 

Bru.  Hark  thee,  Dardanius.  [Whispers.] 

Dar.  Shall  I  do  such  a  deed? 

Cli.  O  Dardanius! 

Dar.  O  Clitus!  to 

Cli.  What  ill  request  did  Brutus  make  to  thee? 
Dar.  To  kill  him,  Clitus.  Look,  he  meditates. 

Cli.  Now  is  that  noble  vessel  full  of  grief. 

That  it  runs  over  even  at  his  eyes. 

Bru.  Come  hither,  good  Volumnius;  list  a 
word. 

Vol.  What  says  my  lord? 

Bru.  Why,  this,  Volumnius: 

The  ghost  of  Caesar  hath  appear’d  to  me 
Two  several  times  by  night;  at  Sardis  once. 

And,  this  last  night,  here  in  Philippi  fields: 

I  know  my  hour  is  come. 

Vol.  Not  so,  my  lord.  20 

Bru.  Nay,  I  am  sure  it  is.  Volumnius. 

Thou  seest  the  world,  Volumnius,  how  it  goes; 
Our  enemies  have  beat  us  to  the  pit: 

Low  alarums. 


CTLSAR  595 

It  is  more  worthy  to  leap  in  ourselves 
Than  tarry  till  they  push  us.  Good  Volumnius, 
Thou  know’st  that  we  two  went  to  school  to¬ 
gether: 

Even  for  that  our  love  of  old,  I  prithee, 

Hold  thou  my  sword-hilts,  whilst  I  run  on  it. 

Vol.  That’s  not  an  office  for  a  friend,  my  lord. 
[Alarum  still.] 

Cli.  Fly,  fly,  my  lord;  there  is  no  tarrying 
here.  jo 

Bru.  Farewell  to  you;  and  you;  and  you, 
Volumnius. 

Strato,  thou  hast  been  all  this  while  asleep; 
Farewell  to  thee  too,  Strato.  Countrymen, 

My  heart  doth  joy  that  yet  in  all  my  life 
I  found  no  man  but  he  was  true  to  me. 

I  shall  have  glory  by  this  losing  day 
More  than  Octavius  and  Mark  Antony 
By  this  vile  conquest  shall  attain  unto. 

So  fare  you  well  at  once;  for  Brutus’  tongue 
Hath  almost  ended  his  life’s  history:  40 

Night  hangs  upon  mine  eyes;  my  bones  would 
rest. 

That  have  but  labour’d  to  attain  this  hour. 
Alarum.  Cry  within,  “Fly,  fly,  fly!” 

Cli.  Fly,  my  lord,  fly. 

Bru.  Hence,  I  will  follow. 

[Exeunt  clitus,  dardanius,  and  volumnius. 
I  prithee,  Strato,  stay  thou  by  thy  lord: 

Thou  art  a  fellow  of  a  good  respect; 

Thy  life  hath  had  some  smatch  of  honour  in  it: 
Hold  then  my  sword,  and  turn  away  thy  face. 
While  I  do  run  upon  it.  Wilt  thou,  Strato? 

Stra.  Give  me  your  hand  first.  Fare  you  well, 
my  lord. 

Bru.  Farewell,  good  Strato.  [Runs  on  his  sword.] 
Caesar,  now  be  still:  jo 

I  kill’d  not  thee  with  half  so  good  a  will.  [Dies. 

Alarum.  Retreat.  Enter  octavius,  antony,  mes- 
SALA,  LuciLius,  and  the  army. 

Oct.  What  man  is  that? 

Mes.  My  master’s  man.  Strato,  where  is  thy 
master? 

Free  from  the  bondage  you  are  in,  Messala: 
The  conquerors  can  but  make  a  fire  of  him; 

For  Brutus  only  overcame  himself. 

And  no  man  else  hath  honour  by  his  death. 

Lucil.  So  Brutus  should  be  found.  I  thank  thee, 
Brutus, 

That  thou  has  proved  Lucilius’  saying  true. 

Oct.  All  that  served  Brutus,  I  will  entertain 
them. 

Fellow,  wilt  thou  bestow  thy  time  with  me? 

Stra.  Ay,  if  Messala  will  prefer  me  to  you. 

Oct.  Do  so,  good  Messala. 


596  JULIUS 

Mes.  How  died  my  master,  Strato? 

Stra.  I  held  the  sword,  and  he  did  run  on  it. 

Mes.  Octavius,  then  take  him  to  follow  thee. 

That  did  the  latest  service  to  my  master. 

Ant.  This  was  the  noblest  Roman  of  them  all: 

All  the  conspirators  save  only  he 

Did  that  they  did  in  envy  of  great  Caesar;  70 

He  only,  in  a  general  honest  thought 

And  common  good  to  all,'made  one  of  them. 


CiTSAR  ACT  V 

His  life  was  gentle,  and  the  elements 
So  mix’d  in  him  that  Nature  might  stand  up 
And  say  to  all  the  world,  “This  was  a  man!” 

Oct.  According  to  his  virtue  let  us  use  him. 

With  all  respect  and  rites  of  burial. 

Within  my  tent  his  bones  to-night  shall  lie. 

Most  like  a  soldier,  order’d  honourably. 

So  call  the  field  to  rest;  and  let’s  away  So 

To  part  the  glories  of  this  happy  day.  [Exeunt. 


^  AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


DRAMATIS  PERSON /E 


Duke  Senior,  living  in  banishment 

Frederick,  his  brother^  and  usurper  of  his  dominions 


Amiens 

Jaques 


lords  attending  on  the  banished  Duke 

Le  Beau^  a  courtier  attending  upon  Frederick 

Charles,  wrestler  to  Frederick 

Oliver 

Jaques  sons  of  Sir  Rowland  de  Boys 
Orlando 
Adam 
Dennis 
Touchstone,  a  clown 
Sir  Oliver  Martext,  a  vicar 

{shepherds 
SiLVIUS  I  ^ 

William,  a  courUry  fellow^  in  love  with  Audrey 


servants  to  Oliver 


Three  Lords,  attending  on  the  banished  Fhike 
Two  Lords,  attending  on  Frederick 
Two  Pages,  attending  on  the  banished  Duke 
Hymen 

A  Forester 

Rosalind,  daughter  to  the  banished  Duke 
Celia,  daughter  to  Frederick 
Phebe,  a  shepherdess 
Audrey,  a  country  wench 

Non-Speaking:  Lords,  Foresters,  and  Attendants 

Scene:  Oliver  s  house,  Duke  Frederick’s  court,  and  the 
Forest  of  A  rden 


ACT  I 

Scene  i.  Orchard  of  Oliver  s  house 
Enter  orlando  and  adam, 

Orl.  As  I  remember,  Adam,  it  was  upon  this 
fashion;  bequeathed  me  by  will  but  poor  a  thou¬ 
sand  crowns,  and,  as  thou  sayest,  charged  my 
brother,  on  his  blessing,  to  breed  me  well:  and 
there  begins  my  sadness.  My  brother  Jaques 
he  keeps  at  school,  and  report  speaks  goldenly  of 
his  profit:  for  my  part,  he  keeps  me  rustically  at 
home,  or,  to  speak  more  properly,  stays  me  here 
at  home  unkept;  for  call  you  that  keeping  for  a 
gentleman  of  my  birth,  that  differs  not  from  the 
stalling  of  an  ox?  His  horses  are  bred  better; 
for,  besides  that  they  are  fair  with  their  feeding, 
they  are  taught  their  manage,  and  to  that  end 
riders  dearly  hired:  but  I,  his  brother,  gain 
nothing  under  him  but  growth;  for  the  which  his 
animals  on  his  dunghills  are  as  much  bound  to 
him  as  L  Besides  this  nothing  that  he  so  plenti¬ 
fully  gives  me,  the  something  that  nature  gave 
me  his  countenance  seems  to  take  from  me:  he 
lets  me  feed  with  his  hinds,  bars  me  the  place  of 
a  brother,  and,  as  much  as  in  him  lies,  mines  my 
gentility  with  my  education.  This  is  it,  Adam, 
that  grieves  me;  and  the  spirit  of  my  father, 
which  I  think  is  within  me,  begins  to  mutiny 
against  this  servitude:  I  will  no  longer  endure 
it,  though  yet  I  know  no  wise  remedy  how  to 
avoid  it. 

Adam.  Yonder  comes  my  master,  your  brother. 


Orl.  Go  apart,  Adam,  and  thou  shalt  hear  how 
he  will  shake  me  up.  50 

Enter  Oliver. 

OH.  Now,  sir!  what  make  you  here? 

Orl.  Nothing:  I  am  not  taught  to  make  any 
thing. 

OH.  What  mar  you  then,  sir? 

Orl.  Marry,  sir,  I  am  helping  you  to  mar  that 
which  God  made,  a  poor  unworthy  brother  of 
yours,  with  idleness. 

OH.  Marry,  sir,  be  better  employed,  and  be 
naught  awhile.  ^5? 

Orl.  Shall  I  keep  your  hogs  and  eat  husks 
with  them?  What  prodigal  portion  have  I  spent, 
that  I  should  come  to  such  penury? 

OH.  Know  you  where  you  are,  sir? 

Orl.  O,  sir,  very  well:  here  in  your  orchard. 

OH.  Know  you  before  whom,  sir? 

Orl.  Ay,  better  than  him  I  am  before  knows 
me.  I  know  you  are  my  eldest  brother;  and,  in 
the  gentle  condition  of  blood,  you  should  so  know 
me.  The  courtesy  of  nations  allows  you  my 
better,  in  that  you  are  the  first-born;  but  the 
same  tradition  takes  not  away  my  blood,  were 
there  twenty  brothers  betwixt  us:  I  have  as  much 
of  my  father  in  me  as  you;  albeit,  I  confess,  your 
coming  before  me  is  nearer  to  his  reverence. 

OH.  What,  boy! 

Orl.  Come,  come,  elder  brother,  you  are  too 
young  in  this. 

OH.  Wilt  thou  lay  hands  on  me,  villain? 

Orl.  I  am  no  villain;  I  am  the  youngest  son 


597 


ACT  I 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


598 

of  Sir  Rowland  de  Boys;  he  was  my  father,  and 
he  is  thrice  a  villain  that  says  such  a  father  begot 
villains.  Wert  thou  not  my  brother,  I  would  not 
take  this  hand  from  thy  throat  till  this  other  had 
pulled  out  thy  tongue  for  saying  so:  thou  hast 
railed  on  thyself. 

Adam.  Sweet  masters,  be  patient:  for  your 
father’s  remembrance,  be  at  accord. 

OH.  Let  me  go,  I  say. 

Orl.  I  will  not,  till  I  please:  you  shall  hear  me. 
My  father  charged  you  in  his  will  to  give  me 
good  education:  you  have  trained  me  like  a 
peasant,  obscuring  and  hiding  from  me  all  gen¬ 
tleman-like  qualities.  The  spirit  of  my  father 
grows  strong  in  me,  and  I  will  no  longer  endure 
it:  therefore  allow  me  such  exercises  as  may  be¬ 
come  a  gentleman,  or  give  me  the  poor  allottery 
my  father  left  me  by  testament;  with  that  I  will 
go  buy  my  fortunes. 

OH.  And  what  wilt  thou  do?  beg,  when  that  is 
spent?  Well,  sir,  get  you  in:  I  will  not  long 
be  troubled  with  you;  you  shall  have  some  part 
of  your  will:  I  pray  you,  leave  me. 

Orl.  I  will  no  further  offend  you  than  becomes 
me  for  my  good. 

OH.  Get  you  with  him,  you  old  dog. 

Adam.  Is  “old  dog”  my  reward?  Most  true, 
I  have  lost  my  teeth  in  your  service.  God  be 
with  my  old  master!  he  would  not  have  spoke 
such  a  word.  [Exeunt  orlando  and  adam. 

OH.  Is  it  even  so?  begin  you  to  grow  upon 
me?  I  will  physic  your  rankness,  and  yet  give  no 
thousand  crowns  neither.  Holla,  Dennis! 

Enter  dennis. 

Den.  Calls  your  worship? 

OH.  Was  not  Charles,  the  Duke’s  wrestler, 
here  to  speak  with  me? 

Den.  So  please  you,  he  is  here  at  the  door  and 
importunes  access  to  you. 

OH.  Call  him  in.  [Exit  dennis.]  ’Twill  be  a 
good  way;  and  to-morrow  the  wrestling  is. 

Enter  Charles. 

Cha.  Good  morrow  to  your  worship.  100 

OH  Good  Monsieur  Charles,  what’s  the  new 
news  at  the  new  court? 

Cha.  There’s  no  news  at  the  court,  sir,  but 
the  old  news:  that  is,  the  old  Duke  is  banished 
by  his  younger  brother  the  new  Duke;  and  three 
or  four  loving  lords  have  put  themselves  into 
voluntary  exile  with  him,  whose  lands  and  re¬ 
venues  enrich  the  new  Duke;  therefore  he  gives 
them  good  leave  to  wander. 

OH.  Can  you  tell  if  Rosalind,  the  Duke’s 
daughter,  be  banished  with  her  father?  in 


Cha.  O,  no;  foi;  the  Duke’s  daughter,  her 
cousin,  so  loves  her,  being  ever  from  their  cradles 
bred  together,  that  she  would  have  followed  her 
exile,  or  have  died  to  stay  behind  her.  She  is  at 
the  court,  and  no  less  beloved  of  her  uncle  than 
his  own  daughter;  and  never  two  ladies  loved  as 
they  do. 

OH.  Where  will  the  old  Duke  live? 

Cha.  They  say  he  is  already  in  the  forest  of 
Arden,  and  a  many  merry  men  with  him;  and 
there  they  live  like  the  old  Robin  Hood  of  Eng¬ 
land:  they  say  many  young  gentlemen  flock  to 
him  every  day,  and  fleet  the  time  carelessly  as 
they  did  in  the  golden  world. 

OH.  What,  you  wrestle  to-morrow  before  the 
new  Duke? 

Cha.  Marry,  do  I,  sir;  and  I  came  to  acquaint 
you  with  a  matter.  I  am  given,  sir,  secretly  to 
understand  that  your  younger  brother  Orlando 
hath  a  disposition  to  come  in  disguised  against 
me  to  try  a  fall.  To-morrow,  sir,  I  wrestle 
for  my  credit;  and  he  that  escapes  me  without 
some  broken  limb  shall  acquit  him  well.  Your 
brother  is  but  young  and  tender;  and,  for  your 
love,  I  would  be  loath  to  foil  him,  as  I  must,  for 
my  own  honour,  if  he  come  in:  therefore,  out  of 
my  love  to  you,  I  came  hither  to  acquaint  you 
withal,  that  either  you  might  stay  him  from  his 
intendment  or  brook  such  disgrace  well  as  he 
shall  run  into,  in  that  it  is  a  thing  of  his  own 
search  and  altogether  against  my  will. 

OH.  Charles,  I  thank  thee  for  thy  love  to  me, 
which  thou  shalt  find  I  will  most  kindly  requite. 
I  had  myself  notice  of  my  brother’s  purpose 
herein  and  have  by  underhand  means  laboured 
to  dissuade  from  it,  but  he  is  resolute.  I’ll 
tell  thee,  Charles:  it  is  the  stubbornest  young 
fellow  of  France,  full  of  ambition,  an  envious 
emulator  of  every  man’s  good  parts,  a  secret  and 
villainous  contriver  against  me  his  natural 
brother;  therefore  use  thy  discretion;  I  had  as  lief 
thou  didst  break  his  neck  as  his  finger.  And  thou 
wert  best  look  to’t;  for  if  thou  dost  him  any 
slight  disgrace  or  if  he  do  not  mightily  grace 
himself  on  thee,  he  will  practise  against  thee  by 
poison,  entrap  thee  by  some  treacherous  device, 
and  never  leave  thee  till  he  hath  ta’en  thy  life  by 
some  indirect  means  or  other;  for,  I  assure  thee, 
and  almost  with  tears  I  speak  it,  there  is  not  one 
so  young  and  so  villainous  this  day  living.  I 
speak  but  brotherly  of  him;  but  should  I  ana¬ 
tomize  him  to  thee  as  he  is,  I  must  blush  and 
weep,  and  thou  must  look  pale  and  wonder. 

Cha.  I  am  heartily  glad  I  came  hither  to  you. 
If  he  come  to-morrow.  I’ll  give  him  his  payment: 
if  ever  he  go  alone  again.  I’ll  never  wrestle  for 


SCENE  I 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


prize  more:  and  so  God  keep  your  worship! 

OH.  Farewell,  good  Charles.  [&/? Charles.] 
Now  will  1  stir  this  gamester:  I  hope  I  shall  see 
an  end  of  him;  for  my  soul,  yet  I  know  not  why, 
hates  nothing  more  than  he.  Yet  he’s  gentle, 
never  schooled,  and  yet  learned,  full  of  noble 
device,  of  all  sorts  enchantingly  beloved,  and 
indeed  so  much  in  the  heart  of  the  world,  and 
especially  of  my  own  j)eople.  w'ho  best  know  him, 
that  I  am  altogether  misprised:  but  it  shall  not 
be  so  long;  this  wrestler  shall  clear  all:  nothing 
remains  but  that  I  kindle  the  boy  thither;  which 
now  I’ll  go  about.  [Exit.  i8o 

Scene  ii.  Lawn  before  the  Duke's  palace 
Enter  celia  and  Rosalind. 

Cel.  I  pray  thee,  Rosalind,  sweet  my  coz,  be 
merry. 

Ros.  Dear  Celia,  I  show  more  mirth  than  I 
am  mistress  of;  and  would  you  yet  I  were  mer¬ 
rier?  Unless  you  could  teach  me  to  forget  a 
banished  father,  you  must  not  learn  me  how  to 
remember  any  extraordinary  pleasure. 

Cel.  Herein  I  see  thou  lovest  me  not  with  the 
full  weight  that  I  love  thee.  If  my  uncle,  thy 
banished  father,  had  banished  thy  uncle,  the 
Duke  my  father,  so  thou  hadst  been  still  with 
me,  I  could  have  taught  my  love  to  take  thy 
father  for  mine:  so  wouldst  thou,  if  the  truth  of 
thy  love  to  me  were  so  righteously  tempered  as 
mine  is  to  thee. 

Ros.  Well,  I  will  forget  the  condition  of  my 
estate,  to  rejoice  in  yours. 

Cel.  You  know  my  father  hath  no  child  but  I, 
nor  none  is  like  to  have:  and,  truly,  when  he 
dies,  thou  shalt  be  his  heir,  for  what  he  hath 
taken  away  from  thy  father  perforce,  I  will  ren¬ 
der  thee  again  in  affection;  by  mine  honour,  I 
will;  and  when  I  break  that  oath,  let  me  turn 
monster:  therefore,  my  sweet  Rose,  my  dear 
Rose,  be  merry. 

Ros.  From  henceforth  I  will,  coz,  and  devise 
sports.  Let  me  see;  what  think  you  of  falling  in 
love? 

Cel.  Marry,  I  prithee,  do,  to  make  sport 
withal:  but  love  no  man  in  good  earnest;  nor  no 
further  in  sport  neither  than  with  safety  of  a  pure 
blush  thou  mayst  in  honour  come  off  again. 

Ros.  What  shall  be  our  sport,  then? 

Cel.  Let  us  sit  and  mock  the  good  housewife 
Fortune  from  her  wheel,  that  her  gifts  may 
henceforth  be  bestowed  equally. 

Ros.  I  would  we  could  do  so,  for  her  benefits 
are  mightily  misplaced,  and  the  bountiful  blind 
v/oman  doth  most  mistake  in  her  gifts  to  women. 

CeL  ’Tis  true;  for  those  that  she  makes  fair 


599 

she  scarce  makes  honest,  and  those  that  she 
makes  honest  she  makes  very  ill-fa vouredly. 

Ros.  Nay,  now  thou  goest  from  Fortune’s 
office  to  Nature’s:  Fortune  reigns  in  gifts  of  the 
world,  not  in  the  lineaments  of  Nature. 

Enter  touchstone. 

Cel.  No?  when  Nature  hath  made  a  fair  crea¬ 
ture,  may  she  not  by  Fortune  fall  into  the  fire? 
Though  Nature  hath  given  us  wit  to  flout  at  For¬ 
tune,  hath  not  Fortune  sent  in  this  fool  to  cut  off 
the  argument?  jo 

Ros.  Indeed,  there  is  Fortune  too  hard  for 
Nature,  when  Fortune  makes  Nature’s  natural 
the  cutter-off  of  Nature’s  wit. 

Cel.  Peradventure  this  is  not  Fortune’s  work 
neither,  but  Nature’s;  who  perceiveth  our  natural 
wits  too  dull  to  reason  of  such  goddesses  and 
hath  sent  this  natural  for  our  whetstone;  for  al¬ 
ways  the  dulness  of  the  fool  is  the  whetstone  of 
the  wits.  How  now,  wit!  whither  wander  you? 

Touch.  Mistress,  you  must  come  away  to 
your  father.  6i 

Cel.  Were  you  made  the  messenger? 

Touch.  No,  by  mine  honour,  but  I  was  bid  to 
come  for  you. 

Ros.  Where  learned  you  that  oath,  fool? 

Touch.  Of  a  certain  knight  that  swore  by  his 
honour  they  were  good  pancakes  and  swore  by 
his  honour  the  mustard  was  naught:  now  I’ll 
stand  to  it,  the  pancakes  were  naught  and  the 
mustard  was  good,  and  yet  was  not  the  knight 
forsworn.  7/ 

Cel.  How  prove  you  that,  in  the  great  heap  of 
your  knowledge? 

Ros.  Ay,  marry,  now  unmuzzle  your  wisdom. 
Touch.  Stand  you  both  forth  now:  stroke 
your  chins,  and  swear  by  your  beards  that  I  am 
a  knave. 

Cel.  By  our  beards,  if  we  had  them,  thou  art.  /y 
Touch.  By  my  knavery,  if  I  had  it,  then  I 
were;  but  if  you  swear  by  that  that  is  not,  you 
are  not  forsworn:  no  more  was  this  knight, 
swearing  by  his  honour,  for  he  never  had  any; 
or  if  he  had,  he  had  sworn  it  away  before  ever 
he  saw  those  pancakes  or  that  mustard. 

Cel.  Prithee,  who  is’t  that  thou  meanest? 

Touch.  One  that  old  Frederick,  your  father, 
loves. 

Cel.  My  father’s  love  is  enough  to  honour 
him:  enough!  speak  no  more  of  him;  you’ll  be 
whipped  for  taxation  one  of  these  days.  91 

Touch.  The  more  pity,  that  fools  may  not  speak 
wisely  what  wise  men  do  foolishly. 

Cel.  By  my  troth,  thou  sayest  true;  for  since 
the  little  wit  that  fools  have  was  silenced,  the 


6oo 


ACT  I 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


little  foolery  that  wise  men  have  makes  a  great 
show.  Here  comes  Monsieur  Le  Beau. 

Ros.  With  his  mouth  full  of  news. 

Cel.  Which  he  will  put  on  us,  as  pigeons  feed 
their  young.  loo 

Ros.  Then  shall  we  be  news-crammed. 

Cel.  All  the  better;  we  shall  be  the  more  mar¬ 
ketable. 

Enter  le  beau. 

Bon  jour.,  Monsieur  Le  Beau:  what’s  the  news? 

Le  Beau.  Fair  princess,  you  have  lost  much 
good  sport. 

Cel.  Sport!  of  what  colour? 

Le  Beau.  What  colour,  madam!  how  shall  I 
answer  you? 

As  wit  and  fortune  will.  no 

Touch.  Or  as  the  Destinies  decree. 

Cel.  Well  said:  that  was  laid  on  with  a  trowel. 
Touch.  Nay,  if  I  keep  not  my  rank — 

Ros.  Thou  losest  thy  old  smell. 

Le  Beau.  You  amaze  me,  ladies:  I  would  have 
told  you  of  good  wrestling,  which  you  have  lost 
the  sight  of. 

Ros.  Yet  tell  us  the  manner  of  the  wrestling. 

Le  Beau.  I  will  tell  you  the  beginning;  and, 
if  it  please  your  ladyships,  you  may  see  the  end; 
for  the  best  is  yet  to  do;  and  here,  where  you 
are,  they  are  coming  to  perform  it. 

Cel.  Well,  the  beginning,  that  is  dead  and 
buried. 

Le  Beau.  There  comes  an  old  man  and  his 
three  sons — 

Cel.  I  could  match  this  beginning  with  an  old 
tale. 

Le  Beau.  Three  proper  young  men,  of  excellent 
growth  and  presence.  /50 

Ros.  With  bills  on  their  necks,  “Be  it  known 
unto  all  men  by  these  presents.” 

Le  Beau.  The  eldest  of  the  three  wrestled  with 
Charles,  the  Duke’s  wrestler;  which  Charles 
in  a  moment  threw  him  and  broke  three  of  his 
ribs,  that  there  is  little  hope  of  life  in  him:  so  he 
served  the  second,  and  so  the  third.  Yonder 
they  lie;  the  poor  old  man,  their  father,  making 
such  pitiful  dole  over  them  that  all  the  beholders 
take  his  part  with  weeping.  1^0 

Ros.  Alas! 

Touch.  But  what  is  the  sport,  monsieur,  that 
the  ladies  have  lost? 

Le  Beau.  Why,  this  that  I  speak  of. 

Touch.  Thus  men  may  grow  wiser  every  day: 
it  is  the  first  time  that  ever  I  heard  breaking  of 
ribs  was  sport  for  ladies. 

Cel.  Or  I,  I  promise  thee. 

Ros.  But  is  there  any  else  longs  to  see  this 


broken  music  in, his  sides?  is  there  yet  another 
dotes  upon  rib-breaking?  Shall  we  see  this 
wrestling,  cousin? 

Le  Beau.  You  must,  if  you  stay  here;  for 
here  is  the  place  appointed  for  the  wrestling, 
and  they  are  ready  to  perform  it. 

Cel.  Yonder,  sure,  they  are  coming:  let  us 
now  stay  and  see  it. 

Flourish.  Enter  duke  Frederick,  Lords,  orlando, 

CHARLES,  and  Attendants. 

Duke  F.  Come  on:  since  the  youth  will  not  be 
entreated,  his  own  peril  on  his  forwardness. 

Ros.  Is  yonder  the  man?  160 

Le  Beau.  Even  he,  madam. 

Cel.  Alas,  he  is  too  young!  yet  he  looks  suc¬ 
cessfully. 

Duke  F.  How  now,  daughter  and  cousin!  are 
you  crept  hither  to  see  the  wrestling? 

Ros.  Ay,  my  liege,  so  please  you  give  us  leave. 

Duke  F.  You  will  take  little  delight  in  it,  I  can 
tell  you;  there  is  such  odds  in  the  man.  In  pity 
of  the  challenger’s  youth  I  would  fain  dissuade 
him,  but  he  will  not  be  entreated.  Speak  to  him, 
ladies;  see  if  you  can  move  him. 

Cel.  Call  him  hither,  good  Monsieur  Le  Beau. 

Duke  F.  Do  so:  I’ll  not  be  by. 

Le  Beau.  Monsieur  the  challenger,  the  prin¬ 
cesses  call  for  you. 

Orl.  I  attend  them  with  all  respect  and  duty. 

Ros.  Young  man,  have  you  challenged  Charles 
the  wrestler? 

Orl.  No,  fair  princess;  he  is  the  general  chal¬ 
lenger:  I  come  but  in,  as  others  do,  to  try  with 
him  the  strength  of  my  youth. 

Cel.  Young  gentleman,  your  spirits  are  too 
bold  for  your  years.  You  have  seen  cruel  proof 
of  this  man’s  strength:  if  you  saw  yourself  with 
your  eyes  or  knew  yourself  with  your  judge¬ 
ment,  the  fear  of  your  adventure  would  counsel 
you  to  a  more  equal  enterprise.We  pray  you,  for 
your  own  sake,  to  embrace  your  own  safety  and 
give  over  this  attempt.  190 

Ros.  Do,  young  sir;  your  reputation  shall  not 
therefore  be  misprised:  we  will  make  it  our  suit 
to  the  Duke  that  the  wrestling  might  not  go  for¬ 
ward. 

Orl.  I  beseech  you,  punish  me  not  with  your 
hard  thoughts;  wherein  I  confess  me  much  guilty, 
to  deny  so  fair  and  excellent  ladies  any  thing. 
But  let  your  fair  eyes  and  gentle  wishes  go  with 
me  to  rny  trial:  wherein  if  I  be  foiled,  there  is 
but  one  shamed  that  was  never  gracious;  if  killed, 
but  one  dead  that  is  willing  to  be  so:  I  shall  do 
my  friends  no  wrong,  for  I  have  none  to  lament 
me,  the  world  no  injury,  for  in  it  I  have  nothing; 


SCENE  II 


6or 


AS  YOU 

only  in  the  world  I  fill  up  a  place,  which  may  be 
better  supplied  when  I  have  made  it  empty. 

Ros.  The  little  strength  that  I  have,  1  would 
it  were  with  you. 

Cel.  And  mine,  to  eke  out  hers. 

Ros.  Fare  you  well:  pray  heaven  1  be  de¬ 
ceived  in  you!  2i0 

Cel.  Your  heart’s  desires  be  with  you! 

Cha.  Come,  where  is  this  young  gallant  that  is 
so  desirous  to  lie  with  his  mother  earth? 

Orl.  Ready,  sir;  but  his  will  hath  in  it  a  more 
modest  working. 

Duke  F.  You  shall  try  but  one  fall. 

Cha.  No,  1  warrant  your  Grace,  you  shall  not 
entreat  him  to  a  second,  that  have  so  mightily 
persuaded  him  from  a  first.  21^ 

Orl.  An  you  mean  to  mock  me  after,  you  should 
not  have  mocked  me  before:  but  come  your  ways. 
Ros.  Now  Hercules  be  thy  speed,  young  man! 

Cel.  I  would  I  were  invisible,  to  catch  the 
strong  fellow  by  the  leg. 

They  wrestle. 

Ros.  O  excellent  young  man! 

Cel.  If  I  had  a  thunderbolt  in  mine  eye,  I  can 
tell  who  should  down. 

Shout.  CHARLES  is  throwTi. 

Duke  F.  No  more,  no  more. 

Orl.  Yes,  I  beseech  your  Grace:  I  am  not  yet 
well  breathed.  2^0 

Duke  F.  How  dost  thou,  Charles? 

Le  Beau.  He  cannot  speak,  my  lord. 

Duke  F.  Bear  him  away.  What  is  thy  name, 
young  man? 

Orl.  Orlando,  my  liege;  the  youngest  son  of 
Sir  Rowland  de  Boys. 

Duke  F.  I  would  thou  hadst  been  son  to  some 
man  else: 

The  world  esteem’d  thy  father  honourable. 

But  I  did  find  him  still  mine  enemy: 

Thou  shouldst  have  better  pleased  me  with  this 
deed 

Hadst  thou  descended  from  another  house.  240 
But  fare  thee  well;  thou  art  a  gallant  youth: 

I  would  thou  hadst  told  me  of  another  father. 
[Exeunt  duke  Frederick,  train,  and  le  beau. 
Cel.  Were  I  my  father,  coz,  would  I  do  this? 

Orl.  I  am  more  proud  to  be  Sir  Rowland’s  son. 
His  youngest  son;  and  would  not  change  that 
calling. 

To  be  adopted  heir  to  Frederick. 

Ros.  My  father  loved  Sir  Rowland  as  his  soul. 
And  all  the  world  was  of  my  father’s  mind: 

Had  I  before  known  this  young  man  his  son, 

I  should  have  given  him  tears  unto  entreaties,  2^0 
Ere  he  should  thus  have  ventured. 

Cel.  Gentle  cousin. 


LIKE  IT 

Let  us  go  thank  him  and  encourage  him: 

My  father’s  rough  and  envious  disposition 
Sticks  me  at  heart.  Sir,  you  have  well  deserved. 

If  you  do  keep  your  promises  in  love 
But  justly,  as  you  have  exceeded  all  promise. 
Your  mistress  shall  be  happy. 

Ros.  Gentleman, 

Giving  him  a  chain  from  her  neck. 

W  ear  this  for  me,  one  out  of  suits  with  fortune. 
That  could  give  more,  but  that  her  hand  lacks 
means. 

Shall  we  go,  coz? 

Cel.  Ay.  Fare  you  well,  fair  gentleman. 
Orl.  Can  I  not  say,  I  thank  you?  My  better 
parts  261 

Are  all  thrown  down,  and  that  which  here  stands 

.  . 

Is  but  a  quintain,  a  mere  lifeless  block. 

Ros.  He  calls  us  back:  my  pride  fell  with  my 
fortunes; 

I’ll  ask  him  what  he  would.  Did  you  call,  sir? 

Sir,  you  have  wrestled  well  and  overthrown 
More  than  your  enemies. 

Cel.  Will  you  go,  coz? 

Ros.  Have  with  you.  Fare  you  well. 

[Exeunt  rosalind  and  celia. 
Orl.  What  passion  hangs  these  weights  upon 
my  tongue? 

I  cannot  speak  to  her,  yet  she  urged  conference. 

O  poor  Orlando,  thou  art  overthrown!  27/ 
Or  Charles  or  something  weaker  masters  thee. 

Re-enter  le  beau. 

Le  Beau.  Good  sir,  I  do  in  friendship  counsel  you 
To  leave  this  place.  Albeit  you  have  deserved 
High  commendation,  true  applause,  and  love. 
Yet  such  is  now  the  Duke’s  condition 
That  he  misconstrues  all  that  you  have  done. 

The  Duke  is  humorous:  what  he  is,  indeed. 

More  suits  you  to  conceive  than  I  to  speak  of. 

Orl.  I  thank  you,  sir:  and,  pray  you,  tell  me 
this;  2S0 

Which  of  the  two  was  daughter  of  the  Duke 
That  here  was  at  the  wrestling? 

Le  Beau.  Neither  his  daughter,  if  we  judge  by 
manners; 

But  yet  indeed  the  lesser  is  his  daughter: 

The  other  is  daughter  to  the  banish’d  Duke, 

And  here  detain’d  by  her  usurping  uncle 
To  keep  his  daughter  company;  whose  loves 
Are  dearer  than  the  natural  bond  of  sisters. 

But  I  can  tell  you  that  of  late  this  Duke 
Hath  ta’en  displeasure  ’gainst  his  gentle  niece. 
Grounded  upon  no  other  argument  291 

But  that  the  people  praise  her  for  her  virtues 
And  pity  her  for  her  good  father’s  sake; 


602  AS  YOU 

And,  on  my  life,  his  malice  ’gainst  the  lady 
Will  suddenly  break  forth.  Sir,  fare  you  well: 
Hereafter,  in  a  better  world  than  this, 

I  shall  desire  more  love  and  knowledge  of  you. 

Orl.  I  rest  much  bounden  to  you:  fare  you 
well.  [Exit  LE  BEAU. 

Thus  must  I  from  the  smoke  into  the  smother; 
From  tyrant  Duke  unto  a  tyrant  brother:  500 

But  heavenly  Rosalind!  [Exit. 

Scene  Ill.  room  in  the  palace 
Enter  celia  and  rosalind. 

Cel.  Why,  cousin!  why,  Rosalind!  Cupid  have 
mercy!  not  a  word? 

Ros.  Not  one  to  throw  at  a  dog. 

Cel.  No,  thy  words  are  too  precious  to  be 
cast  away  upon  curs;  throw  some  of  them  at  me; 
come,  lame  me  with  reasons. 

Ros.  Then  there  were  two  cousins  laid  up; 
when  the  one  should  be  lamed  with  reasons  and 
the  other  mad  without  any. 

Cel.  But  is  all  this  for  your  father?  10 

Ros.  No,  some  of  it  is  for  my  child’s  father. 

O,  how  full  of  briers  is  this  working-day 
world! 

Cel.  They  are  but  burs,  cousin,  thrown  upon 
thee  in  holiday  foolery:  if  we  walk  not  in  the 
trodden  paths,  our  very  petticoats  will  catch 
them. 

Ros.  I  could  shake  them  off  my  coat:  these 
burs  are  in  my  heart. 

Cel.  Hem  them  away. 

Ros.  I  would  try,  if  I  could  cry  “hem”  and 
have  him.  20 

Cel.  Come,  come,  wrestle  with  thy  affec¬ 
tions. 

Ros.  O,  they  take  the  part  of  a  better  wrestler 
than  myself! 

Cel.  O,  a  good  wish  upon  you!  you  will  try 
in  time,  in  despite  of  a  fall.  But,  turning  these 
jests  out  of  service,  let  us  talk  in  good  earnest:  is 
it  possible,  on  such  a  sudden,  you  should  fall  into 
so  strong  a  liking  with  old  Sir  Rowland’s  young¬ 
est  son? 

Ros.  The  Duke  my  father  loved  his  father 
dearly.  5/ 

Cel.  Doth  it  therefore  ensue  that  you  should 
love  his  son  dearly?  By  this  kind  of  chase,  I 
should  hate  him,  for  my  father  hated  his  father 
dearly;  yet  I  hate  not  Orlando. 

Ros.  No,  faith,  hate  him  not,  for  my  sake. 

Cel.  Why  should  I  not?  doth  he  not  deserve 
well? 

Ros.  Let  me  love  him  for  that,  and  do  you  love 
him  because  I  do.  Look,  here  comes  the  Duke.  4/ 

Cel.  With  his  eyes  full  of  anger. 


LIKE  IT  ACT  I 

Enter  duke  Frederick,  unth  Lords. 

Duke  F.  Mistress,  dispatch  you  with  your 
safest  haste 

And  get  you  from  our  court. 

Ros.  Me,  uncle? 

Duke  F.  You,  cousin: 

Within  these  ten  days  if  that  thou  be’st  found 
So  near  our  public  court  as  twenty  miles. 

Thou  diest  for  it. 

Ros.  I  do  beseech  your  Grace, 

Let  me  the  knowledge  of  my  fault  bear  with  me: 
If  with  myself  I  hold  intelligence 
Or  have  acquaintance  with  mine  own  desires,  50 
If  that  I  do  not  dream  or  be  not  frantic — 

As  I  do  trust  I  am  not — then,  dear  uncle. 

Never  so  much  as  in  a  thought  unborn 
Did  I  offend  your  Highness. 

Duke  F.  Thus  do  all  traitors: 

If  their  purgation  did  consist  in  words, 

They  are  as  innocent  as  grace  itself: 

Let  it  suffice  thee  that  I  trust  thee  not. 

Ros.  Yet  your  mistrust  cannot  make  me  a 
traitor : 

Tell  me  whereon  the  likelihood  depends. 

Duke  F.  Thou  art  thy  father’s  daughter;  there’s 
enough.  60 

Ros.  So  was  I  when  your  Highness  took  his 
dukedom; 

So  was  I  when  your  Highness  banish’d  him: 
Treason  is  not  inherited,  my  lord; 

Or,  if  we  did  derive  it  from  our  friends, 

What’s  that  to  me?  my  father  was  no  traitor: 
Then,  good  my  liege,  mistake  me  not  so  much 
To  think  my  poverty  is  treacherous. 

Cel.  Dear  sovereign,  hear  me  speak. 

Duke  F.  Ay,  Celia  we  stay’d  her  for  your  sake. 
Else  had  she  with  her  father  ranged  along.  70 
Cel.  I  did  not  then  entreat  to  have  her  stay; 

It  was  your  pleasure  and  your  own  remorse: 

I  was  too  young  that  time  to  value  her; 

But  now  I  know  her:  if  she  be  a  traitor. 

Why  so  am  I;  we  still  have  slept  together. 

Rose  at  an  instant,  learn’d,  play’d,  eat  together, 
And  wheresoe’er  we  went,  like  Juno’s  swans. 
Still  we  went  coupled  and  inseparable. 

Duke  F.  She  is  too  subtle  for  thee;  and  her 
smoothness. 

Her  very  silence,  and  her  patience  80 

Speak  to  the  people,  and  they  pity  her. 

Thou  art  a  fool:  she  robs  thee  of  thy  name; 

And  thou  wilt  show  more  bright  and  seem  more 
virtuous 

When  she  is  gone.  Then  open  not  thy  lips: 

Firm  and  irrevocable  is  my  doom 

Which  I  have  pass’d  upon  her;  she  is  banish’d. 


SCENE  III 


AS  YOU 

Cel,  Pronounce  that  sentence  then  on  me,  my 
liege: 

I  cannot  live  out  of  her  company. 

Duke  F.  You  are  a  fool.  You,  niece,  provide 
yourself: 

If  you  outstay  the  time,  upon  mine  honour, 

And  in  the  greatness  of  my  word,  you  die. 

[Exeunt  duke  Frederick  and  Lords. 
Cel.  O  my  poor  Rosalind,  whither  wilt  thou  go? 
Wilt  thou  change  fathers?  I  will  give  thee  mine. 

1  charge  thee,  be  not  thou  more  grieved  than  I  am. 
Ros.  I  have  more  cause. 

Cel.  Thou  hast  not,  cousin; 

Prithee,  be  cheerful:  know’st  thou  not,  the  Duke 
Hath  banish’d  me,  his  daughter? 

Ros.  That  he  hath  not. 

Cel.  No,  hath  not?  Rosalind  lacks  then  the  love 
Which  teacheth  thee  that  thou  and  I  am  one: 

Shall  we  be  sunder’d?  shall  we  part,  sweet  girl? 
No:  let  my  father  seek  another  heir.  loi 

Therefore  devise  with  me  how  we  may  fly, 
Whither  to  go,  and  what  to  bear  with  us; 

And  do  not  seek  to  take  your  change  upon  you. 

To  bear  your  griefs  yourself  and  leave  me  out; 
For,  by  this  heaven,  now  at  our  sorrows  pale, 

Say  what  thou  canst.  I’ll  go  along  with  thee. 

Ros.  Why,  whither  shall  we  go? 

Cel.  To  seek  my  uncle  in  the  forest  of  Arden. 

Ros.  Alas,  what  danger  will  it  be  to  us,  no 
Maids  as  we  are,  to  travel  forth  so  far! 

Beauty  provoketh  thieves  sooner  than  gold. 

Cel.  I’ll  put  myself  in  poor  and  mean  attire 
And  with  a  kind  of  umber  smirch  my  face; 

The  like  do  you:  so  shall  we  pass  along 
And  never  stir  assailants. 

Ros.  Were  it  not  better, 

Because  that  I  am  more  than  common  tall. 

That  I  did  suit  me  all  points  like  a  man? 

A  gallant  curtle-axe  upon  my  thigh, 

A  boar-spear  in  my  hand;  and — in  my  heart 
Lie  there  what  hidden  woman’s  fear  there  will — 
We’ll  have  a  swashing  and  a  martial  outside. 

As  many  other  mannish  cowards  have 
That  do  outface  it  with  their  semblances. 

Cel.  What  shall  I  call  thee  when  thou  art  a  man? 
Ros.  I’ll  have  no  worse  a  name  than  Jove’s  own 
page; 

And  therefore  look  you  call  me  Ganymede. 

But  what  will  you  be  call’d? 

Cel.  Something  that  hath  a  reference  to  my  state; 
No  longer  Celia,  but  Aliena.  75 o 

Ros.  But,  cousin,  what  if  we  assay’d  to  steal 
The  clownish  fool  out  of  your  father’s  court? 
Would  he  not  be  a  comfort  to  our  travel? 

Cel.  He’ll  go  along  o’er  the  wide  world  with  me; 
Leave  me  alone  to  woo  him.  Let’s  away, 


LIKE  IT  603 

And  get  our  jewels  and  our  wealth  together. 
Devise  the  fittest  time  and  safest  way 
To  hide  us  from  pursuit  that  will  be  made 
After  my  flight.  Now  go  we  in  content 
To  liberty  and  not  to  banishment.  [Exeunt.  1^0 

ACT  II 

Scene  i.  The  forest  of  Arden 
Enter  duke  senior,  amiens,  and  two  or  three 
LORDS,  like  foresters. 

Duke  S.  Now,  my  co-mates  and  brothers  in 
exile. 

Hath  not  old  custom  made  this  life  more  sweet 
Than  that  of  painted  pomp?  Are  not  these  woods 
More  free  from  peril  than  the  envious  court? 

Here  feel  we  but  the  penalty  of  Adam, 

The  seasons’  difference,  as  the  icy  fang 
And  churlish  chiding  of  the  winter’s  wind. 
Which,  when  it  bites  and  blows  upon  my  body 
Even  till  I  shrink  with  cold,  I  smile  and  say 
“This  is  no  flattery:  these  are  counsellors  10 
That  feelingly  persuade  me  what  I  am.” 

Sweet  are  the  uses  of  adversity, 

Which,  like  the  toad,  ugly  and  venomous, 

Wears  yet  a  precious  jewel  in  his  head; 

And  this  our  life  exempt  from  public  haunt 
Finds  tongues  in  trees,  books  in  the  running 
brooks. 

Sermons  in  stones,  and  good  in  everything. 

I  would  not  change  it. 

Ami.  Happy  is  your  Grace, 

That  can  translate  the  stubbornness  of  fortune 
Into  so  quiet  and  so  sweet  a  style.  20 

Duke  S.  Come,  shall  we  go  and  kill  us  venison? 
And  yet  it  irks  me  the  poor  dappled  fools. 

Being  native  burghers  of  this  desert  city. 

Should  in  their  own  confines  with  forked  heads 
Have  their  round  haunches  gored. 

ist  Lord.  Indeed,  my  lord. 

The  melancholy  Jaques  grieves  at  that. 

And,  in  that  kind,  swears  you  do  more  usurp 
Than  doth  your  brother  that  hath  banish’d  you. 
To-day  my  Lord  of  Amiens  and  myself 
Did  steal  behind  him  as  he  lay  along  50 

Under  an  oak  whose  antique  root  peeps  out 
Upon  the  brook  that  brawls  along  this  wood: 

To  the  which  place  a  poor  sequester’d  stag. 

That  from  the  hunter’s  aim  had  ta’en  a  hurt. 

Did  come  to  languish,  and  indeed,  my  lord, 

The  wretched  animal  heaved  forth  such  groans 
That  their  discharge  did  stretch  his  leathern  coat 
Almost  to  bursting,  and  the  big  round  tears 
Coursed  one  another  down  his  innocent  nose 
Is  piteous  chase;  and  thus  the  hairy  fool,  40 
Much  marked  of  the  melancholy  jaques. 


ACT  II 


604  AS  YOU 

Stood  on  the  extremest  verge  of  the  swift  brook, 
Augmenting  it  with  tears. 

Duke  S,  But  what  said  Jaques? 

Did  he  not  moralize  this  spectacle? 
ist  Lord.  O,  yes,  into  a  thousand  similes. 

First,  for  his  weeping  into  the  needless  stream; 
“Poor  deer,”  quoth  he  “thou  makest  a  testament 
As  worldlings  do,  giving  thy  sum  of  more 
To  that  which  had  too  much”:  then,  being  there 
alone. 

Left  and  abandon’d  of  his  velvet  friends,  50 

“’Tis  right,”  quoth  he;  “thus  misery  doth  part 
The  flux  of  company” :  anon  a  careless  herd, 

Full  of  the  pasture,  jumps  along  by  him 
And  never  stays  to  greet  him;  “Ay,”  quoth 
Jaques, 

“Sweep  on,  you  fat  and  greasy  citizens; 

’Tis  just  the  fashion:  wherefore  do  you  look 
Upon  that  poor  and  broken  bankrupt  there?” 
Thus  most  invectively  he  pierceth  through 
The  body  of  the  country,  city,  court. 

Yea,  and  of  this  our  life,  swearing  that  we  60 
Are  mere  usurpers,  tyrants,  and  what’s  worse. 

To  fright  the  animals  and  to  kill  them  up 
In  their  assign’d  and  native  dwelling-place. 

Duke  S.  And  did  you  leave  him  in  this  con¬ 
templation? 

2nd  Lord.  We  did,  my  lord,  weeping  and  com¬ 
menting 

Upon  the  sobbing  deer. 

DukeS.  Show  me  the  place: 

I  love  to  cope  him  in  these  sullen  fits. 

For  then  he’s  full  of  matter. 
ist  Lord.  I’ll  bring  you  to  him  straight. 

[Exezmt. 

Scene  11.  A  room  in  the  palace 
Enter  duke  Frederick,  'with  lords. 

Duke  F.  Can  it  be  possible  that  no  man  saw 
them? 

It  cannot  be:  some  villains  of  my  court 
Are  of  consent  and  sufferance  in  this. 

ist  Lord.  I  cannot  hear  of  any  that  did  see  her. 
The  ladies,  her  attendants  of  her  chamber. 

Saw  her  a-bed,  and  in  the  morning  early 
They  found  the  bed  untreasured  of  their  mistress. 
2nd  Lord.  My  lord,  the  roynish  clown,  at 
whom  so  oft 

Your  Grace  was  wont  to  laugh,  is  also  missing. 
Hisperia,  the  princess’  gentlewoman,  10 

Confesses  that  she  secretly  o’erheard 
Your  daughter  and  her  cousin  much  commend 
The  parts  and  graces  of  the  wrestler 
That  did  but  lately  foil  the  sinewy  Charles; 

And  she  believes,  wherever  they  are  gone, 

That  youth  is  surely  in  their  company. 


LIKE  IT 

Duke  F.  Send  to  his  brother;  fetch  that  gallant 
hither; 

If  he  be  absent,  bring  his  brother  to  me; 

I’ll  make  him  find  him:  do  this  suddenly. 

And  let  not  search  and  inquisition  quail  20 

To  bring  again  these  foolish  runaways.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  Before  Oliver  s  house 
Enter  orlando  and  adam,  meeting. 

Orl.  Who’s  there? 

Adam.  What,  my  young  master?  O  my  gentle 
master! 

O  my  sweet  master!  O  you  memory 
Of  old  Sir  Rowland!  why,  what  make  you  here? 
Why  are  you  virtuous?  why  do  people  love  you? 
And  wherefore  are  you  gentle,  strong  and  valiant? 
Why  would  you  be  so  fond  to  overcome 
The  bonny  priser  of  the  humorous  Duke? 

Your  praise  is  come  too  swiftly  home  before  you. 
Know  you  not,  master,  to  some  kind  of  men  10 
Their  graces  serve  them  but  as  enemies? 

No  more  do  yours:  your  virtues,  gentle  master, 
Are  sanctified  and  holy  traitors  to  you. 

O,  what  a  world  is  this,  when  what  is  comely 
Envenoms  him  that  bears  it! 

Orl.  Why,  what’s  the  matter? 

A  dam.  O  unhappy  youth ! 

Come  not  within  these  doors;  within  this  roof 
The  enemy  of  all  your  graces  lives: 

Your  brother — no,  no  brother;  yet  the  son — 

Yet  not  the  son,  I  will  not  call  him  son  20 

Of  him  I  was  about  to  call  his  father — 

Hath  heard  your  praises,  and  this  night  he  means 
To  burn  the  lodging  where  you  use  to  lie 
And  you  within  it:  if  he  fail  of  that. 

He  will  have  other  means  to  cut  you  off. 

I  overheard  him  and  his  practices. 

This  is  no  place;  this  house  is  but  a  butchery: 
Abhor  it,  fear  it,  do  not  enter  it. 

Orl.  Why,  whither,  Adam,  wouldst  thou  have 
me  go? 

Adam.  No  matter  whither,  so  you  come  not 
here.  50 

Orl.  What,  wouldst  thou  have  me  go  and  beg 
my  food? 

Or  with  a  base  and  boisterous  sword  enforce 
A  thievish  living  on  the  common  road? 

This  I  must  do,  or  know  not  what  to  do: 

Yet  this  I  will  not  do,  do  how  I  can; 

I  rather  will  subject  me  to  the  malice 
Of  a  diverted  blood  and  bloody  brother. 
Adam.^^wx.  do  not  so.  I  have  five  hundred 
crowns. 

The  thrifty  hire  I  saved  under  your  father. 

Which  I  did  store  to  be  my  foster-nurse  40 
When  service  should  in  my  old  limbs  lie  lame 


SCENE  III  AS  YOU 

!  And  unregarded  age  in  corners  thrown : 

I  Take  that,  and  He  that  doth  the  ravens  feed, 

Yea,  providently  caters  for  the  sparrow, 

'  Be  comfort  to  my  age!  Here  is  the  gold; 

All  this  I  give  you.  Let  me  be  your  servant: 
Though  I  look  old,  yet  1  am  strong  and  lusty; 

For  in  my  youth  I  never  did  apply 
Hot  and  rebellious  liquors  in  my  blood. 

Nor  did  not  with  unbashful  forehead  woo  jo 
The  means  of  weakness  and  debility; 

Therefore  my  age  is  as  a  lusty  winter. 

Frosty,  but  kindly:  let  me  go  with  you; 

Fll  do  the  service  of  a  younger  man 
In  all  your  business  and  necessities. 

Orl.  O  good  old  man,  how  well  in  thee  appears 
The  constant  service  of  the  antique  world. 

When  service  sweat  for  duty,  not  for  meed! 

Thou  art  not  for  the  fashion  of  these  times. 

Where  none  will  sweat  but  for  promotion,  6o 
And  having  that,  do  choke  their  service  up 
Even  with  the  having:  it  is  not  so  with  thee. 

But,  poor  old  man,  thou  prunest  a  rotten  tree. 

That  cannot  so  much  as  a  blossom  yield 
In  lieu  of  all  thy  pains  and  husbandry. 

But  come  thy  ways;  we’ll  go  along  together, 

And  ere  we  have  thy  youthful  wages  spent. 

We’ll  light  upon  some  settled  low  content. 

Adam.  Master,  go  on,  and  I  will  follow  thee 
To  the  last  gasp,  with  truth  and  loyalty.  70 
From  seventeen  years  till  now  almost  fourscore 
Here  lived  I,  but  now  live  here  no  more. 

At  seventeen  years  many  their  fortunes  seek; 

But  at  fourscore  it  is  too  late  a  week: 

Yet  fortune  cannot  recompense  me  better 
Than  to  die  well  and  not  my  master’s  debtor. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  The  Forest  of  Arden 
Enter  Rosalind  for  Ganymede.,  celia  for  Aliena., 

and  TOUCHSTONE. 

Ros.  O  Jupiter,  how  weary  are  my  spirits! 

Touch.  I  care  not  for  my  spirits,  if  my  legs 
were  not  weary. 

Ros.  I  could  find  in  my  heart  to  disgrace  my 
man’s  apparel  and  to  cry  like  a  woman;  but  I 
must  comfort  the  weaker  vessel,  as  doublet  and 
hose  ought  to  show  itself  courageous  to  petticoat: 
therefore  courage,  good  Aliena! 

Cel.  I  pray  you,  bear  with  me;  I  cannot  go  no 
further.  10 

Touch.  For  my  part,  I  had  rather  bear  with 
you  than  bear  you;  yet  I  should  bear  no  cross  if 
I  did  bear  you,  for  I  think  you  have  no  money 
in  your  purse. 

Ros.  Well,  this  is  the  forest  of  Arden. 

Touch,  Ay,  now  am  I  in  Arden;  the  more  fool 


LIKE  IT  605 

I;  when  I  was  at  home,  I  was  in  a  better  place: 
but  travellers  must  be  content. 

Ros.  Ay,  be  so,  good  Touchstone. 

Enter  corin  and  silvius. 

Look  you,  who  comes  here;  a  young  man  and  an 
old  in  solemn  tal k .  21 

Cor.  That  is  the  way  to  make  her  scorn  you 
still. 

Sil.  O  Corin,  that  thou  knew’st  how  I  do  love 
her! 

Cor.  I  partly  guess;  for  I  have  loved  ere  now. 

Sil.  No,  Corin,  being  old,  thou  canst  not  guess. 
Though  in  thy  youth  thou  wast  as  true  a  lover 
As  ever  sigh’d  upon  a  midnight  pillow: 

But  if  thy  love  were  ever  like  to  mine — 

As  sure  I  think  did  never  man  love  so — 

How  many  actions  most  ridiculous 
Hast  thou  been  drawn  to  by  thy  fantasy? 

Cor.  Into  a  thousand  that  I  have  forgotten. 

Sil.  O,  thou  didst  then  ne’er  love  so  heartily! 

If  thou  remember’st  not  the  slightest  folly 
That  ever  love  did  make  thee  run  into. 

Thou  hast  not  loved: 

Or  if  thou  hast  not  sat  as  I  do  now. 

Wearying  thy  hearer  in  thy  mistress’  praise. 
Thou  hast  not  loved: 

Or  if  thou  hast  not  broke  from  company  ^0 

Abruptly,  as  my  passion  now  makes  me. 

Thou  hast  not  loved. 

O  Phebe,  Phebe,  Phebe!  [Exit. 

Ros.  Alas,  poor  shepherd!  searching  of  thy 
wound, 

I  have  by  hard  adventure  found  mine  own. 

Touch.  And  I  mine.  I  remember,  when  I 
was  in  love  I  broke  my  sword  upon  a  stone  and 
bid  him  take  that  for  coming  a-night  to  Jane 
Smile;  and  I  remember  the  kissing  of  her  batlet 
and  the  cow’s  dugs  that  her  pretty  chopt  hands 
had  milked;  and  I  remember  the  wooing  of  a 
peascod  instead  of  her,  from  whom  I  took  two 
cods  and,  giving  her  them  again,  said  with  weep¬ 
ing  tears,  “Wear  these  for  my  sake.”  We  that 
are  true  lovers  run  into  strange  capers;  but  as  all 
is  mortal  in  nature,  so  is  all  nature  in  lovx  mortal 
in  folly. 

Ros.  Thou  speakest  wiser  than  thou  art  ware  of. 
Touch.  Nay,  I  shall  ne’er  be  ware  of  mine  own 
wit  till  I  break  my  shins  against  it.  60 

Ros.  Jove,  Jove!  this  shepherd’s  passion 
Is  much  upon  my  fashion. 

Touch.  And  mine;  but  it  grows  something  stale 
with  me. 

Cel.  I  pray  you,  one  of  you  question  yond  man 
If  he  for  gold  will  give  us  any  food: 

I  faint  almost  to  death. 


6o6 


ACT  II 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


Touch.  Holla,  you  clown! 

Ros.  Peace,  fool:  he’s  not  thy  kinsman. 

Cor.  Who  calls? 

Touch.  Your  betters,  sir. 

Cor.  Else  are  they  very  wretched. 

Ros.  Peace,  I  say.  Good  even  to  you,  friend. 

Cor.  And  to  you,  gentle  sir,  and  to  you  all. 

Ros.  I  prithee,  shepherd,  if  that  love  or  gold 
Can  in  this  desert  place  buy  entertainment. 

Bring  us  where  we  may  rest  ourselves  and  feed: 
Here’s  a  young  maid  with  travel  much  oppress’d 
And  faints  for  succour. 

Cor.  Fair  sir,  I  pity  her 

And  wish,  for  her  sake  more  than  for  mine  own, 
My  fortunes  were  more  able  to  relieve  her; 

But  I  am  shepherd  to  another  man 
And  do  not  shear  the  fleeces  that  I  graze: 

My  master  is  of  churlish  disposition  8o 

And  little  recks  to  find  the  way  to  heaven 
By  doing  deeds  of  hospitality : 

Besides,  his  cote,  his  flocks,  and  bounds  of  feed 
Are  now  on  sale,  and  at  our  sheepcote  now, 

By  reason  of  his  absence,  there  is  nothing 
That  you  will  feed  on;  but  what  is,  come  see. 

And  in  my  voice  most  welcome  shall  you  be. 

Ros.  What  is  he  that  shall  buy  his  flock  and 
pasture? 

Cor.  That  young  swain  that  you  saw  here  but 
erewhile. 

That  little  cares  for  buying  any  thing.  po 

Ros.  I  pray  thee,  if  it  stand  with  honesty, 

Buy  thou  the  cottage,  pasture,  and  the  flock, 

And  thou  shalt  have  to  pay  for  it  of  us. 

Cel.  And  we  will  mend  thy  wages.  I  like  this 
place. 

And  willingly  could  waste  my  time  in  it. 

Cor.  Assuredly  the  thing  is  to  be  sold: 

Go  with  me:  if  you  like  upon  report 
The  soil,  the  profit,  and  this  kind  of  life, 

I  will  your  very  faithful  feeder  be 

And  buy  it  with  your  gold  right  suddenly.  loo 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  The  forest 
Enter  amiens,  jaques,  and  others. 

SONG 

Ami.  Under  the  greenwood  tree 
Who  loves  to  lie  with  me. 

And  turn  his  merry  note 
Unto  the  sweet  bird’s  throat. 

Come  hither,  come  hither,  come  hither: 
Here  shall  he  see 
No  enemy 

But  winter  and  rough  weather. 


Ami.  It  will  make  you  melancholy.  Monsieur 
Jaques.  // 

Jaq.  I  thank  it.  More,  I  prithee,  more.  I  can 
suck  melancholy  out  of  a  song,  as  a  weasel  sucks 
eggs.  More,  I  prithee,  more. 

Ami.  My  voice  is  ragged:  I  know  I  cannot 
please  you. 

Jaq.  I  do  not  desire  you  to  please  me;  I  do 
desire  you  to  sing.  Come,  more;  another  stanzo: 
call  you  ’em  stanzos? 

Ami.  What  you  will.  Monsieur  Jaques.  20 

Jaq.  Nay,  I  care  not  for  their  names;  they  owe 
me  nothing.  Will  you  sing? 

Ami.  More  at  your  request  than  to  please 
myself. 

Jaq.  Well  then,  if  ever  I  thank  any  man.  I’ll 
thank  you;  but  that  they  call  compliment  is  like 
the  encounter  of  two  dog-apes,  and  when  a  man 
thanks  me  heartily,  methinks  I  have  given  him  a 
penny  and  he  renders  me  the  beggarly  thanks. 
Come,  sing;  and  you  that  will  not,  hold  your 
tongues. 

Ami.  Well,  I’ll  end  the  song.  Sirs,  cover  the 
while;  the  Duke  will  drink  under  this  tree.  He 
hath  been  all  this  day  to  look  you. 

Jaq.  And  I  have  been  all  this  day  to  avoid  him. 
He  is  too  disputable  for  my  company;  I  think  of 
as  many  matters  as  he,  but  I  give  heaven  thanks 
and  make  no  boast  of  them.  Come,  warble,  come. 

SONG 

[All  together  here.] 

Who  doth  ambition  shun 

And  loves  to  live  i’  the  sun,  qi 

Seeking  the  food  he  eats 

And  pleased  with  what  he  gets. 

Come  hither,  come  hither,  come  hither: 

Here  shall  he  see 
No  enemy 

But  winter  and  rough  weather. 

Jaq.  I’ll  give  you  a  verse  to  this  note  that  I  made 
yesterday  in  despite  of  my  invention. 

Ami.  And  I’ll  sing  it.  50 

Jaq.  Thus  it  goes: 

If  it  do  come  to  pass 
That  any  man  turn  ass. 

Leaving  his  wealth  and  ease, 

A  stubborn  will  to  please, 

Duedame,  duedame,  duedame: 

'  Here  shall  he  see 
Gross  fools  as  he. 

An  if  he  will  come  to  me. 


Jaq.  More,  more,  I  prithee,  more. 


Ami.  What’s  that  “duedame”? 


60 


SCENE  V 


AS  YOU 

]aq.  ’Tis  a  Greek  invocation,  to  call  fools  into 
a  circle.  I’ll  go  sleep,  if  I  can;  If  I  cannot.  I’ll 
rail  against  all  the  first-born  of  Egypt. 

Ami,  And  I’ll  go  seek  the  Duke:  his  banquet  is 
prepared.  [Exeunt  Severally. 

Scene  vi.  The  forest 
Enter  orlando  and  adam. 

Adam,  Dear  master,  I  can  go  no  further:  O,  I 
die  for  food!  Here  lie  I  down,  and  measure  out 
my  grave.  Farewell,  kind  master. 

Or/.  Why,  how  now,  Adam!  no  greater  heart 
in  thee?  Live  a  little;  comfort  a  little;  cheer 
thyself  a  little.  If  this  uncouth  forest  yield  any 
thing  savage,  I  will  either  be  food  for  it  or  bring 
it  for  food  to  thee.  Thy  conceit  is  nearer  death 
than  thy  powers.  For  my  sake  be  comfortable; 
hold  death  awhile  at  the  arms’  end:  I  will  here 
be  with  thee  presently;  and  if  I  bring  thee  not 
something  to  eat,  I  will  give  thee  leave  to  die: 
but  if  thou  diest  before  I  come,  thou  art  a  mocker 
of  my  labour.  Well  said!  thou  lookest  cheerly, 
and  I’ll  be  with  thee  quickly.  Yet  thou  best  in 
the  bleak  air:  come,  I  will  bear  thee  to  some 
shelter;  and  thou  shalt  not  die  for  lack  of  a 
dinner,  if  there  live  any  thing  in  this  desert. 
Cheerly,  good  Adam!  [Exeunt. 

Scene  vii.  The  forest 

A  table  set  out.  Enter  duke  senior,  amiens,  and 
LORDS  like  outlaws. 

Duke  S.  I  think  he  be  transform’d  into  a  beast; 

For  I  can  no  where  find  him  like  a  man. 
ist  Lord.  My  lord,  he  is  but  even  now  gone 
hence: 

Here  was  he  merry,  hearing  of  a  song. 

Duke  S.  If  he,  compact  of  jars,  grow  musical. 

We  shall  have  shortly  discord  in  the  spheres. 

Go,  seek  him:  tell  him  I  would  speak  with  him. 

Enter  jaques. 

ist  Lord.  He  saves  my  labour  by  his  own  ap¬ 
proach. 

Duke  S.  Why,  how  now,  monsieur!  what  a  life 
is  this. 

That  your  poor  friends  must  woo  your  com¬ 
pany? 

What,  you  look  merrily!  // 

Jaq.  A  fool,  a  fool!  I  met  a  fool  i’  the  forest, 

A  motley  fool;  a  miserable  world! 

As  I  do  live  by  food,  I  met  a  fool; 

Who  laid  him  down  and  bask’d  him  in  the  sun. 

And  rail’d  on  Lady  Fortune  in  good  terms. 

In  good  set  terms  and  yet  a  motley  fool. 

“Good  morrow,  fool,”  quoth  1.  “No,  sir,” 
quoth  he. 


LIKE  IT  607 

“Call  me  not  fool  till  heaven  hath  sent  me  for¬ 
tune”: 

And  then  he  drew  a  dial  from  his  poke,  20 

And,  looking  on  it  with  lack-lustre  eye. 

Says  very  wisely,  “It  is  ten  o’clock: 

Thus  we  may  see,”  quoth  he,  “how  the  world 
wags: 

’Tis  but  an  hour  ago  since  it  was  nine. 

And  after  one  hour  more  ’twill  be  eleven; 

And  so,  from  hour  to  hour,  we  ripe  and  ripe. 

And  then,  from  hour  to  hour,  we  rot  and  rot; 

And  thereby  hangs  a  tale.”  When  I  did  hear 
The  motley  fool  thus  moral  on  the  time. 

My  lungs  began  to  crow  like  chanticleer,  50 
That  fools  should  be  so  deep-contemplative, 

And  I  did  laugh  sans  intermission 
An  hour  by  his  dial.  O  noble  fool! 

A  worthy  fool!  Motley’s  the  only  wear. 

Duke  S.  What  fool  is  this? 

Jaq.  O  worthy  fool!  One  that  hath  been  a 
courtier. 

And  says,  if  ladies  be  but  young  and  fair. 

They  have  the  gift  to  know  it:  and  in  his  brain. 
Which  is  as  dry  as  the  remainder  biscuit 
After  a  voyr^ge,  he  hath  strange  places  cramm’d 
With  observation,  the  which  he  vents  4/ 

In  mangled  forms.  O  that  I  were  a  fool! 

I  am  ambitious  for  a  motley  coat. 

Duke  S.  Thou  shalt  have  one. 

Jaq.  It  is  my  only  suit; 

Provided  that  you  weed  your  better  judgments 
Of  all  opinion  that  grows  rank  in  them 
That  I  am  wise.  I  must  have  liberty 
Withal,  as  large  a  charter  as  the  wind. 

To  blow  on  whom  I  please;  for  so  fools  have; 

And  they  that  are  most  galled  with  my  folly,  jo 
They  most  must  laugh.  And  why,  sir,  must  they 
so? 

The  “why”  is  plain  as  way  to  parish  church: 

He  that  a  fool  doth  very  wisely  hit 
Doth  very  foolishly,  although  he  smart. 

Not  to  seem  senseless  of  the  bob:  if  not. 

The  wise  man’s  folly  is  anatomized 
Even  by  the  squandering  glances  of  the  fool. 

Invest  me  in  my  motley;  give  me  leave 
To  speak  my  mind,  and  I  will  through  and 
through 

Cleanse  the  foul  body  of  the  infected  world,  60 
If  they  will  patiently  receive  my  medicine. 

Duke  S.  Fie  on  thee!  I  can  tell  what  thou 
wouldst  do. 

Jaq.  What,  for  a  counter,  would  I  do  but  good? 
Duke  S.  Most  mischievous  foul  sin,  in  chiding 
sin: 

For  thou  thyself  hast  been  a  libertine. 

As  sensual  as  the  brutish  sting  itself; 


ACT  II 


608  AS  YOU 

And  all  the  embossed  sores  and  headed  evils 
That  thou  with  license  of  free  foot  hast  caught, 
Wouldst  thou  disgorge  into  the  general  world. 
]aq.  Why,  who  cries  out  on  pride  70 

That  can  therein  tax  any  private  party 
Doth  it  not  flow  as  hugely  as  the  sea, 

Till  that  the  weary  very  means  do  ebb? 

What  woman  in  the  city  do  I  name, 

When  that  I  say  the  city-woman  bears 
The  cost  of  princes  on  unworthy  shoulders? 

Who  can  come  in  and  say  that  I  mean  her. 

When  such  a  one  as  she  such  is  her  neighbour? 

Or  what  is  he  of  basest  function 
That  says  his  bravery  is  not  on  my  cost,  So 
Thinking  that  I  mean  him,  but  therein  suits 
His  folly  to  the  mettle  of  my  speech? 

There  then;  how  then?  what  then?  Let  me  see 
wherein 

My  tongue  hath  wrong’d  him:  if  it  do  him  right. 
Then  he  hath  wrong’d  himself;  if  he  be  free, 

Why  then  my  taxing  like  a  wild-goose  flies, 
Unclaim’d  of  any  man.  But  who  comes  here? 

Enter  orlando,  with  his  sword  drawn, 

Orl.  Forbear,  and  eat  no  more. 

Jaq.  Why,  I  have  eat  none  yet. 

Orl.  Nor  shalt  not,  till  necessity  be  served. 

Jaq.  Of  what  kind  should  this  cock  come  of? 
Duke  S.  Art  thou  thus  bolden’d,  man,  by  thy 
distress, 

Or  else  a  rude  despiser  of  good  manners, 

That  in  civility  thou  seem’st  so  empty? 

Orl.  You  touch’d  my  vein  at  first:  the  thorny 
point 

Of  bare  distress  hath  ta’en  from  me  the  show 
Of  smooth  civility:  yet  am  I  inland  bred 
And  know  some  nurture.  But  forbear,  I  say: 

He  dies  that  touches  any  of  this  fruit 
Till  I  and  my  affairs  are  answered. 

Jaq.  An  you  will  not  be  answered  with  reason, 
I  must  die.  loi 

Duke  S.  What  would  you  have?  Your  gentleness 
shall  force 

More  than  your  force  move  us  to  gentleness. 

Orl.  I  almost  die  for  food;  and  let  me  have  it. 
Duke  S.  Sit  down  and  feed,  and  welcome  to  our 
table. 

Orl.  Speak  you  so  gently?  Pardon  me,  I  pray 
you: 

I  thought  that  all  things  had  been  savage  here; 
And  therefore  put  I  on  the  countenance 
Of  stern  commandment.  But  whate’er  you  are 
That  in  this  desert  inaccessible,  no 

Under  the  shade  of  melancholy  boughs. 

Lose  and  neglect  the  creeping  hours  of  time; 

If  ever  you  have  look’d  on  better  days. 


LIKE  IT 

If  ever  been  where  bells  have  knoll’d  to  church. 

If  ever  sat  at  any  good  man’s  feast, 

If  ever  from  your  eyelids  wiped  a  tear 
And  know  what  ’tis  to  pity  and  be  pitied. 

Let  gentleness  my  strong  enforcement  be: 

In  the  which  hope  I  blush,  and  hide  my  sword. 

Duke  S.  True  is  it  that  we  have  seen  better 
days,  120 

And  have  with  holy  bell  been  knoll’d  to  church 
And  sat  at  good  men’s  feasts,  and  wiped  our  eyes 
Of  drops  that  sacred  pity  hath  engender’d: 

And  therefore  sit  you  down  in  gentleness 
And  take  upon  command  what  help  we  have 
That  to  your  wanting  may  be  minister’d. 

Or/.Then  but  forbear  your  food  a  little  while. 
Whiles,  like  a  doe,  I  go  to  find  my  fawn 
And  give  it  food.  There  is  an  old  poor  man. 

Who  after  me  hath  many  a  weary  step  75  0 

Limp’d  in  pure  love:  till  he  be  first  sufficed. 
Oppress’d  with  two  week  evils,  age  and  hunger, 

I  will  not  touch  a  bit. 

Duke  S.  Go  find  him  out. 

And  we  will  nothing  waste  till  you  return. 

Orl.  I  thank  ye;  and  be  blest  for  your  good  com¬ 
fort!  [Exit. 

Duke  S.  Thou  seest  we  are  not  all  alone  un¬ 
happy: 

This  wide  and  universal  theatre 

Presents  more  woeful  pageants  than  the  scene 

Wherein  we  play  in. 

Jaq.  All  the  world’s  a  stage, 

And  all  the  men  and  women  merely  players :  iq.o 
They  have  their  exits  and  their  entrances; 

And  one  man  in  his  time  plays  many  parts, 

His  acts  being  seven  ages.  At  first  the  infant, 
Mewling  and  puking  in  the  nurse’s  arms. 

And  then  the  whining  school-boy,  with  his  satchel 
And  shining  morning  face,  creeping  like  snail 
Unwillingly  to  school.  And  then  the  lover. 
Sighing  like  furnace,  with  a  woeful  ballad 
Made  to  his  mistress’  eyebrow.  Then  a  soldier. 
Full  of  strange  oaths  and  bearded  like  the  pard, 
Jealous  in  honour,  sudden  and  quick  in  quarrel, 
Seeking  the  bubble  reputation 
Even  in  the  cannon’s  mouth.  And  then  the  justice, 
In  fair  round  belly  with  good  capon  lined, 

With  eyes  severe  and  beard  of  formal  cut. 

Full  of  wise  saws  and  modern  instances; 

And  so  he  plays  his  part.  The  sixth  age  shifts 
Into  the  lean  and  slipper’d  pantaloon, 

With  spectacles  on  nose  and  pouch  on  side, 

His  youthful  hose,  well  saved,  a  world  too  wide 
For  his  shrunk  shank;  and  his  big  manly  voice. 
Turning  again  toward  childish  treble,  pipes 
And  whistles  in  his  sound.  Last  scene  of  all. 

That  ends  this  strange  eventful  history. 


SCENE  VII 


609 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


Is  second  childishness  and  mere  oblivion, 

Sans  teeth,  sans  eyes,  sans  taste,  sans  everything. 

Re-enter  orlando,  zuith  adam. 

Duke  S.  Welcome.  Set  down  your  venerable 
burden 

And  let  him  feed. 

Orl.  I  thank  you  most  for  him. 

Adam,  So  had  you  need : 

I  scarce  can  speak  to  thank  you  for  myself.  /70 
Duke  S.  Welcome;  fall  to:  I  will  not  trouble  you 
As  yet,  to  question  you  about  your  fortunes. 

Give  us  some  music;  and,  good  cousin,  sing. 

SONG 

Ami.  Blow,  blow,  thou  winter  wind, 

Thou  art  not  so  unkind 
As  man’s  ingratitude; 

Thy  tooth  is  not  so  keen. 

Because  thou  art  not  seen. 

Although  thy  breath  be  rude.  17^ 

Heigh-ho!  sing,  heigh-ho!  unto  the  green  holly: 
Most  friendship  is  feigning,  most  loving  mere 
folly: 

Then,  heigh-ho,  the  holly! 

This  life  is  most  jolly. 

Freeze,  freeze,  thou  bitter  sky, 

That  dost  not  bite  so  nigh 
As  benefits  forgot: 

Though  thou  the  waters  warp, 

Thy  sting  is  not  so  sharp 
As  friend  remember’d  not. 

Heigh-ho!  sing,  &c.  1^0 

Duke  5.  If  that  you  were  the  good  Sir  Row¬ 
land’s  son. 

As  you  have  whisper’d  faithfully  you  were. 

And  as  mine  eye  doth  his  effigies  witness 
Most  truly  limn’d  and  living  in  your  face. 

Be  truly  welcome  hither:  I  am  the  Duke 
That  loved  your  father:  the  residue  of  your  for¬ 
tune. 

Go  to  my  cave  and  tell  me.  Good  old  man. 

Thou  art  right  welcome  as  thy  master  is. 

Support  him  by  the  arm.  Give  me  your  hand. 

And  let  me  all  your  fortunes  understand.  [Exeunt. 

ACT  III 

Scene  i.  A  room  in  the  palace 
Enter  duke  Frederick,  lords,  and  Oliver. 
Duke  F.  Not  see  him  since?  Sir,  sir,  that  cannot 
be: 

But  were  I  not  the  better  part  made  mercy, 

I  should  not  seek  an  absent  argument 
Of  my  revenge,  thou  present.  But  look  to  it: 


Find  out  thy  brother,  wheresoe’er  he  is; 

Seek  him  with  candle;  bring  him  dead  or  living 
Within  this  twelvemonth,  or  turn  thou  no  more 
To  seek  a  living  in  our  territory. 

Thy  lands  and  all  things  that  thou  dost  call  thine 
Worth  seizure  do  we  seize  into  our  hands,  10 
Till  thou  canst  quit  thee  by  thy  brother’s  mouth 
Of  what  we  think  against  thee. 

Oli.  O  that  your  Highness  knew  my  heart  in 
this! 

I  never  loved  my  brother  in  my  life. 

Duke  F.  More  villain  thou.  Well,  push  him  out 
of  doors; 

And  let  my  officers  of  such  a  nature 
Make  an  extent  upon  his  house  and  lands: 

Do  this  expediently  and  turn  him  going.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  forest 
Enter  orlando,  njoith  a  paper. 

Orl.  Hang  there,  my  verse,  in  witness  of  my 
love: 

And  thou,  thrice-crowned  queen  of  night, 
survey 

With  thy  chaste  eye,  from  thy  pale  sphere  above. 
Thy  huntress’  name  that  my  full  life  doth 
sway. 

O  Rosalind!  these  trees  shall  be  my  books 

And  in  their  barks  my  thoughts  I’ll  character; 
That  every  eye  which  in  this  forest  looks 
Shall  see  thy  virtue  witness’d  every  where. 
Run,  run,  Orlando;  carve  on  every  tree  5> 

The  fair,  the  chaste,  and  unexpressive  she.  [Exit. 

Enter  corin  and  touchstone. 

Cor.  And  how  like  you  this  shepherd’s  life, 
Master  Touchstone? 

Touch.  Truly,  shepherd,  in  respect  of  itself, 
it  is  a  good  life;  but  in  respect  that  it  is  a  shep¬ 
herd’s  life,  it  is  naught.  In  respect  that  it  is 
solitary,  I  like  it  very  well;  but  in  respect  that  it 
is  private,  it  is  a  very  vile  life.  Now,  in  respect 
it  is  in  the  fields,  it  pleaseth  me  well;  but  in 
respect  it  is  not  in  the  court,  it  is  tedious.  As  it 
is  a  spare  life,  look  you,  it  fits  my  humour  well; 
but  as  there  is  no  more  plenty  in  it,  it  goes  much 
against  my  stomach.  Hast  any  philosophy  in 
thee,  shepherd? 

Cor.  No  more  but  that  I  know  the  more  one 
sickens  the  worse  at  ease  he  is;  and  that  he  that 
wants  money,  means,  and  content  is  without 
three  good  friends;  that  the  property  of  rain  is  to 
wet  and  fire  to  burn;  that  good  pasture  makes  fat 
sheep,  and  that  a  great  cause  of  the  night  is  lack 
of  the  sun;  that  he  that  hath  learned  no  wit  by 
nature  nor  art  may  complain  of  good  breeding  or 
comes  of  a  very  dull  kindred. 


ACT  HI 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


6io 

Touch  Such  a  one  is  a  natural  philosopher. 
Wast  ever  in  court,  shepherd? 

Cor.  No,  truly. 

Touch.  Then  thou  art  damned. 

Cor.  Nay,  I  hope. 

Touch.  Truly,  thou  art  damned,  like  an  ill- 
roasted  egg  all  on  one  side.  39 

Cor.  For  not  being  at  court?  Your  reason. 

Touch.  Why,  if  thou  never  wast  at  court, 
thou  never  sawest  good  manners;  if  thou  never 
sawest  good  manners,  then  thy  manners  must 
be  wicked;  and  wickedness  is  sin,  and  sin  is 
damnation.  Thou  art  in  a  parlous  state,  shepherd. 

Cor.  Not  a  whit.  Touchstone:  those  that  are 
good  manners  at  the  court  are  as  ridiculous  in 
the  country  as  the  behaviour  of  the  country  is 
most  mockable  at  the  court.  You  told  me  you 
salute  not  at  the  court,  but  you  kiss  your  hands: 
that  courtesy  would  be  uncleanly,  if  courtiers 
were  shepherds. 

Touch.  Instance,  briefly;  come,  instance. 

Cor.  Why,  we  are  still  handling  our  ewes, 
and  their  fells,  you  know,  are  greasy. 

Touch.  Why,  do  not  your  courtier’s  hands 
sweat?  and  is  not  the  grease  of  a  mutton  as 
wholesome  as  the  sweat  of  a  man?  Shallow, 
shallow.  A  better  instance,  I  say;  come. 

Cor.  Besides,  our  hands  are  hard.  6o 

Touch.  Your  lips  will  feel  them  the  sooner. 
Shallow  again.  A  more  sounder  instance,  come. 

Cor.  And  they  are  often  tarred  over  with  the 
surgery  of  our  sheep;  and  would  you  have  us 
kiss  tar?  The  courtier’s  hands  are  perfumed 
with  civet. 

Touch.  Most  shallow  man!  thou  worms-meat, 
in  respect  of  a  good  piece  of  flesh  indeed!  Learn 
of  the  wise,  and  perpend:  civet  is  of  a  baser  birth 
than  tar,  the  very  uncleanly  flux  of  a  cat.  Mend 
the  instance,  shepherd.  7/ 

Cor.  You  have  too  courtly  a  wit  for  me:  I’ll 
rest. 

Touch.  Wilt  thou  rest  damned?  God  help 
thee,  shallow  man!  God  make  incision  in  thee! 
thou  art  raw. 

Cor.  Sir,  I  am  a  true  labourer:  I  earn  that  I 
eat,  get  that  I  wear,  owe  no  man  hate,  envy  no 
man’s  happiness,  glad  of  other  men’s  good,  con¬ 
tent  with  my  harm,  and  the  greatest  of  my  pride 
is  to  see  my  ewes  graze  and  my  lambs  suck. 

Touch.  That  is  another  simple  sin  in  you, 
to  bring  the  ewes  and  the  rams  together  and 
to  offer  to  get  your  living  by  the  copulation  of 
cattle;  to  be  bawd  to  a  bell-wether,  and  to  betray 
a  she-lamb  of  a  twelvemonth  to  a  crooked-pated, 
old,  cuckoldy  ram,  out  of  all  reasonable  match. 
If  thou  beest  not  damned  for  this,  the  devil  him¬ 


self  will  have  no  shepherds;  I  cannot  see  else 
how  thou  shouldst  ’scape.  po 

Cor.  Here  comes  young  Master  Ganymede, 
my  new  mistress’s  brother. 

Enter  rosalind,  with  a  paper.,  reading. 

Ros.  “From  the  east  to  western  Ind, 

No  jewel  is  like  Rosalind. 

Her  worth,  being  mounted  on  the  wind. 
Through  all  the  world  bears  Rosalind. 

All  the  pictures  fairest  lined 
Are  but  black  to  Rosalind. 

Let  no  fair  be  kept  in  mind 

But  the  fair  of  Rosalind.”  100 

Touch.  I’ll  rhyme  you  so  eight  years  together, 
dinners  and  suppers  and  sleeping-hours  excepted: 
it  is  the  right  butter-women’s  rank  to  market. 

Ros.  Out  fool! 

Touch.  For  a  taste: 

If  a  hart  do  lack  a  hind. 

Let  him  seek  out  Rosalind. 

If  the  cat  will  after  kind. 

So  be  sure  will  Rosalind.  no 

Winter  garments  must  be  lined. 

So  must  slender  Rosalind. 

They  that  reap  must  sheaf  and  bind; 

Then  to  cart  with  Rosalind. 

Sweetest  nut  hath  sourest  rind. 

Such  a  nut  is  Rosalind. 

He  that  sweetest  rose  will  find 
Must  find  love’s  prick  and  Rosalind. 

This  is  the  very  false  gallop  of  verses:  why  do 
you  infect  yourself  with  them?  120 

Ros.  Peace,  you  dull  fool!  I  found  them  on  a 
tree. 

Touch.  Truly,  the  tree  yields  bad  fruit. 

Ros.  I’ll  graff  it  with  you,  and  then  I  shall 
graff  it  with  a  medlar:  then  it  will  be  the  earliest 
fruit  i’  the  country;  for  you’ll  be  rotten  ere  you 
be  half  ripe,  and  that’s  the  right  virtue  of  the 
medlar. 

Touch.  You  have  said;  but  whether  wisely  or 
no,  let  the  forest  judge.  1^0 

Enter  celia,  with  a  writing. 

Ros.  Peace! 

Here  comes  my  sister,  reading:  stand  aside. 

Cel.  [Reads] 

“Why  should  this  a  desert  be? 

For  it  is  unpeopled?  No: 

Tongues  I’ll  hang  on  every  tree, 

,  That  shall  civil  sayings  show: 

Some,  how  brief  the  life  of  man 
Runs  his  erring  pilgrimage. 

That  the  stretching  of  a  span 

Buckles  in  his  sum  of  age;  140 


SCENE  II 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


Some,  of  violated  vows 

’Twixt  the  souls  of  friend  and  friend; 
But  upon  the  fairest  boughs, 

Or  at  every  sentence  end. 

Will  I  Rosalind  write. 

Teaching  all  that  read  to  know 
The  quintessence  of  every  sprite 
Heaven  would  in  little  show. 

Therefore  Heaven  Nature  charged 
That  one  body  should  be  fill’d  /yo 
With  all  graces  wide-enlarged: 

Nature  presently  distill’d 
Helen’s  cheek,  but  not  her  heart, 
Cleopatra’s  majesty, 

Atalanta’s  better  part. 

Sad  Lucretia’s  modesty. 

Thus  Rosalind  of  many  parts 
By  heavenly  synod  was  devised. 

Of  many  faces,  eyes,  and  hearts. 

To  have  the  touches  dearest  prized.  i6o 
Heaven  would  that  she  these  gifts  should 
have. 

And  I  to  live  and  die  her  slave.” 

Kos.  O  most  gentle  pulpiter!  what  tedious 
homily  of  love  have  you  wearied  your  parish¬ 
ioners  withal,  and  never  cried  “Have  patience, 
good  people”! 

Cel,  How  now!  back,  friends!  Shepherd,  go 
off  a  little.  Go  with  him,  sirrah. 

Touch,  Come,  shepherd,  let  us  make  an  hon¬ 
ourable  retreat;  though  not  with  bag  and  bag¬ 
gage,  yet  with  scrip  and  scrippage.  /// 

[Exeunt  corin  and  touchstone. 

Cel.  Didst  thou  hear  these  verses? 

Ros.  O,  yes,  I  heard  them  all,  and  more  too; 
for  some  of  them  had  in  them  more  feet  than  the 
verses  would  bear. 

Cel.  That’s  no  matter:  the  feet  might  bear  the 
verses. 

Ros.  Ay,  but  the  feet  were  lame  and  could  not 
bear  themselves  without  the  verse  and  therefore 
stood  lamely  in  the  verse.  i8o 

Cel.  But  didst  thou  hear  without  wondering 
how  thy  name  should  be  hanged  and  carved  upon 
these  trees? 

Ros.  I  was  seven  of  the  nine  days  out  of  the 
wonder  before  you  came;  for  look  here  what  I 
found  on  a  palm-tree.  I  was  never  so  berhymed 
since  Pythagoras’  time,  that  I  was  an  Irish  rat, 
which  I  can  hardly  remember. 

Cel.  Trow  you  who  hath  done  this? 

Ros.  Is  it  a  man?  i^o 

Cel.  And  a  chain,  that  you  once  wore,  about 
his  neck.  Change  you  colour? 

Ros.  I  prithee,  who? 

Cel.  O  Lord,  Lord!  it  is  a  hard  matter  for 


6i  1 

friends  to  meet;  but  mountains  may  be  removed 
with  earthquakes  and  so  encounter. 

Ros.  Nay,  but  who  is  it? 

Cel.  Is  it  possible? 

Ros.  Nay,  I  prithee  now  with  most  petitionary 
vehemence,  tell  me  who  it  is.  200 

Cel.  O  wonderful,  wonderful,  and  most  won¬ 
derful  wonderful!  and  yet  again  wonderful,  and 
after  that,  out  of  all  hooping! 

Ros.  Good  my  complexion!  dost  thou  think, 
though  I  am  caparisoned  like  a  man,  I  have  a 
doublet  and  hose  in  my  disposition?  One  inch  of 
delay  more  is  a  South-sea  of  discovery;  I  prithee, 
tell  me  who  is  it  quickly,  and  speak  apace.  I 
would  thou  couldst  stammer,  that  thou  mightst 
pour  this  concealed  man  out  of  thy  mouth,  as 
wine  comes  out  of  a  narrow-mouthed  bottle, 
either  too  much  at  once,  or  none  at  all.  I 
prithee,  take  the  cork  out  of  thy  mouth  that  I 
may  drink  thy  tidings. 

Cel.  So  you  may  put  a  man  in  your  belly. 

Ros.  Is  he  of  God’s  making?  What  manner 
of  man?  Is  his  head  worth  a  hat,  or  his  chin 
worth  a  beard? 

Cel.  Nay,  he  hath  but  a  little  beard.  219 

Ros.  Why,  God  will  send  more,  if  the  man 
will  be  thankful:  let  me  stay  the  growth  of  his 
beard,  if  thou  delay  me  not  the  knowledge  of 
his  chin. 

Cel.  It  is  young  Orlando,  that  tripped  up  the 
wrestler’s  heels  and  your  heart  both  in  an  in¬ 
stant. 

Ros.  Nay,  but  the  devil  take  mocking:  speak, 
sad  brow  and  true  maid. 

Cel.  r  faith,  coz,  ’tis  he. 

Ros.  Orlando? 

Cel.  Orlando.  2^0 

Ros.  Alas  the  day!  what  shall  I  do  with  my 
doublet  and  hose?  What  did  he  when  thou 
sawest  him?  What  said  he?  How  looked  he? 
Wherein  went  he?  What  makes  he  here?  Did 
he  ask  for  me?  Where  remains  he?  How  parted 
he  with  thee?  and  when  shalt  thou  see  him 
again?  Answer  me  in  one  word. 

Cel.  You  must  borrow  me  Gargantua’s  mouth 
first:  ’tis  a  word  too  great  for  any  mouth  of  this 
age’s  size.  To  say  ay  and  no  to  these  particulars 
is  more  than  to  answer  in  a  catechism.  241 

Ros.  But  doth  he  know  that  I  am  in  this  forest 
and  in  man’s  apparel?  Looks  he  as  freshly  as  he 
did  the  day  he  wrestled? 

Cel.  It  is  easy  to  count  atomies  as  to  resolve 
the  propositions  of  a  lover;  but  take  a  taste  of 
my  finding  him,  and  relish  it  with  good  observ¬ 
ance.  I  found  him  under  a  tree,  like  a  dropped 
acorn. 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


ACT  III 


612 

Ros.  It  may  well  be  called  Jove’s  tree,  when 
It  drops  forth  such  fruit.  250 

Cel.  Give  me  audience,  good  madam. 

Ros.  Proceed. 

Cel.  There  lay  he,  stretched  along,  like  a 
wounded  knight, 

Ros.  Though  it  be  pity  to  see  such  a  sight,  it 
well  becomes  the  ground. 

Cel.  Cry  “holla”  to  thy  tongue,  I  prithee;  it 
curvets  unseasonably.  He  was  furnished  like  a 
hunter.  2^9 

Ros.  O,  ominous!  he  comes  to  kill  my  heart. 

Cel.  I  would  sing  my  song  without  a  burden: 
thou  br  ingest  me  out  of  tune. 

Ros.  Do  you  not  know  I  am  a  woman?  when 
1  think,  1  must  speak.  Sweet,  say  on. 

Cel.  You  bring  me  out.  Soft!  comes  he  not  here? 

Enter  orlando  and  jaques. 

Ros.  ’Tis  he:  slink  by,  and  note  him. 

Jaq.  I  thank  you  for  your  company;  but,  good 
faith,  I  had  as  lief  have  been  myself  alone.  270 

Orl.  And  so  had  I;  but  yet,  for  fashion  sake,  I 
thank  you  too  for  your  society. 

Jaq.  God  be  wi’  you:  let’s  meet  as  little  as  we 
can. 

Orl.  I  do  desire  we  may  be  better  strangers. 

Jaq.  I  pray  you,  mar  no  more  trees  with  writing 
love-songs  in  their  barks. 

Orl.  I  pray  you,  mar  no  moe  of  my  verses 
with  reading  them  ill-favouredly. 

Jaq.  Rosalind  is  your  love’s  name?  280 

Orl.  Yes,  just. 

Jaq.  I  do  not  like  her  name. 

Orl.  There  was  no  thought  of  pleasing  you 
when  she  was  christened. 

Jaq.  What  stature  is  she  ot? 

Orl.  Just  as  high  as  my  heart. 

Jaq.  You  are  full  of  pretty  answers.  Have  you 
not  been  acquainted  with  goldsmiths’  wives, 
and  conned  them  out  of  rings?  289 

Orl.  Not  so;  but  I  answer  you  right  painted 
cloth,  from  whence  you  have  studied  your  ques¬ 
tions. 

Jaq.  You  have  a  nimble  wit:  I  think  ’twas 
made  of  Atalanta’s  heels.  Will  you  sit  down  with 
me?  and  we  two  will  rail  against  our  mistress  the 
world  and  all  our  misery. 

Orl.  I  will  chide  no  breather  in  the  world  but 
myself,  against  whom  I  know  most  faults. 

Jaq.  The  worst  fault  you  have  is  to  be  in 
love.  300 

Orl.  ’Tis  a  fault  I  will  not  change  for  your  best 
virtue.  I  am  weary  of  you. 

Jaq.  By  my  troth,  I  was  seeking  for  a  fool 
when  I  found  you. 


Orl.  He  is  drowned  in  the  brook:  look  but  in, 
and  you  shall  see  him. 

Jaq.  There  I  shall  see  mine  own  figure. 

Orl.  Which  I  take  to  be  either  a  fool  or  a 
cipher. 

Jaq.  I’ll  tarry  no  longer  with  you:  farewell, 
good  Signior  Love.  5/0 

Orl.  I  am  glad  of  your  departure:  adieu,  good 
Monsieur  Melancholy.  [Exit  jaques. 

Ros.  [Aside  to  celia]  I  will  speak  to  him  like  a 
saucy  lackey  and  under  that  habit  play  the  knave 
with  him.  Do  you  hear,  forester? 

Orl.  Very  well:  what  would  you? 

Ros.  I  pray  you,  what  is’t  o’clock? 

Orl.  You  should  ask  me  what  time  o’day: 
there’s  no  clock  in  the  forest. 

Ros.  Then  there  is  no  true  lover  in  the  forest; 
else  sighing  every  minute  and  groaning  every 
hour  would  detect  the  lazy  foot  of  Time  as  well 
as  a  clock. 

Orl.  And  why  not  the  swift  foot  of  Time?  had 
not  that  been  as  proper? 

Ros.  By  no  means,  sir:  Time  travels  in  divers 
paces  with  divers  persons.  I’ll  tell  you  who 
Time  ambles  withal,  who  Time  trots  withal, 
who  Time  gallops  withal,  and  who  he  stands  still 
withal. 

Orl.  1  prithee,  who  doth  he  trot  withal?  330 

Ros.  Marry,  he  trots  hard  with  a  young  maid 
between  the  contract  of  her  marriage  and  the  day 
it  is  solemnized:  if  the  interim  be  but  a  se’nnight. 
Time’s  pace  is  so  hard  that  it  seems  the  length  of 
seven  year. 

Orl.  Who  ambles  Time  withal? 

Ros.  With  a  priest  that  lacks  Latin  and  a  rich 
man  that  hath  not  the  gout,  for  the  one  sleeps 
easily  bec'ause  he  cannot  study  and  the  other 
lives  merrily  because  he  feels  no  pain,  the  one 
lacking  the  burden  of  lean  and  wasteful  learning, 
the  other  knowing  no  burden  of  heavy  tedious 
penury;  these  Time  ambles  withal. 

Orl.  Who  doth  he  gallop  withal? 

Ros.  With  a  thief  to  the  gallows,  for  though 
he  go  as  softly  as  foot  can  fall,  he  thinks  himself 
too  soon  there. 

Orl.  Who  stays  it  still  withal? 

Ros.  With  lawyers  in  the  vacation;  for  they 
sleep  between  term  and  term  and  then  they  per¬ 
ceive  not  how  Time  moves.  331 

Orl.  Where  dwell  you,  pretty  youth? 

Ros.  With  this  shepherdess,  my  sister;  here  in 
the  skirts  of  the  forest,  like  fringe  upon  a  petti¬ 
coat. 

Orl.  Are  you  native  of  this  place? 

Ros.  As  the  cony  that  you  see  dwell  where  she 
is  kindled. 


SCENE  II  A  S  Y  O  U 

Orl.  Your  accent  is  something  finer  than  you 
could  purchase  in  so  removed  a  dwelling.  5  60 

Ros.  1  have  been  told  so  of  many:  but  indeed 
an  old  religious  uncle  of  mine  taught  me  to  speak, 
who  was  in  his  youth  an  inland  man;  one  that 
knew  courtship  too  well,  for  there  he  fell  in  love. 

I  have  heard  him  read  many  lectures  against  it, 
and  1  thank  God  I  am  not  a  woman,  to  be  touched 
with  so  many  giddy  offences  as  he  hath  generally 
taxed  their  whole  sex  withal. 

Orl.  Can  you  remember  any  of  the  principal 
evils  that  he  laid  to  the  charge  of  women?  5  70 

Ros.  There  were  none  principal;  they  were  all 
like  one  another  as  half-pence  are,  every  one 
fault  seeming  monstrous  till  his  fellow-fault  came 
to  match  it. 

Orl.  I  prithee,  recount  some  of  them. 

Ros.  No,  I  will  not  cast  away  my  physic  but 
on  those  that  are  sick.  There  is  a  man  haunts 
the  forest,  that  abuses  our  young  plants  with 
carving  “Rosalind”  on  their  barks;  hangs  odes 
upon  hawthorns  and  elegies  on  brambles,  all,  for¬ 
sooth,  deifying  the  name  of  Rosalind:  if  1  could 
meet  that  fancy-monger,  I  would  give  him  some 
good  counsel,  for  he  seems  to  have  the  quotidian 
of  love  upon  him. 

Orl.  I  am  he  that  is  so  love-shaked:  I  pray  you, 
tell  me  your  remedy. 

Ros.  There  is  none  of  my  uncle’s  marks  upon 
you:  he  taught  me  how  to  know  a  man  in  love; 
in  which  cage  of  rushes  I  am  sure  you  are  not 
prisoner. 

Orl.  WTat  were  his  marks? 

Ros.  A  lean  cheek,  which  you  have  not,  a 
blue  eye  and  sunken,  which  you  have  not,  an  un¬ 
questionable  spirit,  which  you  have  not,  a  beard 
neglected,  which  you  have  not;  but  I  pardon  you 
for  that,  for  simply  your  having  in  beard  is  a 
younger  brother’s  revenue:  then  your  hose  should 
be  ungartered,  your  bonnet  unbanded,  your  sleeve 
unbuttoned,  your  shoe  untied,  and  everything 
about  you  demonstrating  a  careless  desolation; 
but  you  are  no  such  man;  you  are  rather  point- 
device  in  your  accoutrements  as  loving  yourself 
than  seeming  the  lover  of  any  other. 

Orl.  Fair  youth,  I  would  I  could  make  thee 
believe  I  love. 

Ros.  Me  believe  it!  you  may  as  soon  make  her 
that  you  love  believe  it;  which,  I  warrant,  she 
is  apter  to  do  than  to  confess  she  does:  that  is 
one  of  the  points  in  the  which  women  still  give 
the  lie  to  their  consciences.  But,  in  good  sooth, 
are  you  he  that  hangs  the  verses  on  the  trees, 
wherein  Rosalind  is  so  admired? 

Orl.  I  swear  to  thee,  youth,  by  the  white  hand 
of  Rosalind,  1  am  that  he,  that  unfortunate  he. 


LIKE  IT  613 

Ros.  But  are  you  so  much  in  love  as  your 
rhymes  speak? 

Orl.  Neither  rhyme  nor  reason  can  express 
how  much. 

Ros.  Love  is  merely  a  madness,  and,  I  tell 
you,  deserves  as  well  a  dark  house  and  a  whip  as 
madmen  do:  and  the  reason  why  they  are  not  so 
punished  and  cured  is  that  the  lunacy  is  so  ordi¬ 
nary  that  the  whippets  are  in  love  too.  Yet  I 
profess  curing  it  by  counsel. 

Orl.  Did  you  ever  cure  any  so? 

Ros.  Yes,  one,  and  in  this  manner.  He  was  to 
imagine  me  his  love,  his  mistress;  and  I  set 
him  every  day  to  woo  me:  at  which  time  would 
I,  being  but  a  moonish  youth,  grieve,  be  effemi¬ 
nate,  changeable,  longing  and  liking,  proud,  fan¬ 
tastical,  apish,  shallow,  inconstant,  full  of  rears, 
full  of  smiles,  for  every  passion  something  and 
for  no  passion  truly  anything,  as  boys  and  women 
are  for  the  most  part  cattle  of  this  colour;  would 
now  like  him,  now  loathe  him;  then  entertain 
him,  then  forswear  him;  now  weep  for  him,  then 
spit  at  him;  that  I  drave  my  suitor  from  his  mad 
humour  of  love  to  a  living  humour  of  madness; 
which  was,  to  forswear  the  full  stream  of  the 
world  and  to  live  in  a  nook  merely  monastic. 
And  thus  I  cured  him;  and  this  way  will  I  take 
upon  me  to  wash  your  liver  as  clean  as  a  sound 
sheep’s  heart,  that  there  shall  not  be  one  spot 
of  love  in’t. 

Orl.  I  would  not  be  cured,  youth. 

Ros.  I  would  cure  you,  if  you  would  but  call 
me  Rosalind  and  come  every  day  to  my  cote  and 
woo  me. 

Orl.  Now,  by  the  faith  of  my  love,  I  will:  tell 
me  where  it  is.  450 

Ros.  Go  with  me  to  it  and  I’ll  show  it  you: 
and  by  the  way  you  shall  tell  me  where  in  the 
forest  you  live.  Will  you  go? 

Orl.  With  all  my  heart,  good  youth. 

Ros.  Nay,  you  must  call  me  Rosalind.  Come, 
sister,  will  you  go?  [Exeunt. 

Scene  iii.  The  forest 

Enter  touchstone  and  Audrey;  jaques 
behind. 

Touch.  Come  apace,  good  Audrey:  I  will  fetch 
up  your  goats,  Audrey.  And  how,  Audrey?  am 
I  the  man  yet?  doth  my  simple  feature  content 
you? 

Aud.  Your  features!  Lord  warrant  us!  what 
features? 

Touch.  I  am  here  with  thee  and  thy  goats,  as 
the  most  capricious  poet,  honest  Ovid,  was 
among  the  Goths. 


ACT  II 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


614 

Jaq.  [Aside]  O  knowledge  ill-inhabited,  worse 
than  Jove  in  a  thatched  house!  // 

Touch.  When  a  man’s  verses  cannot  be  un¬ 
derstood,  nor  a  man’s  good  wit  seconded  with  the 
forward  child  Understanding,  it  strikes  a  man 
more  dead  than  a  great  reckoning  in  a  little  room. 
Truly,  I  would  the  gods  had  made  thee  poetical. 

Aud.  I  do  not  know  what  “poetical”  is:  is  it 
honest  in  deed  and  word?  is  it  a  true  thing? 

Touch.  No,  truly;  for  the  truest  poetry  is  the 
most  feigning;  and  lovers  are  given  to  poetry, 
and  what  they  swear  in  poetry  may  be  said  as 
lovers  they  do  feign. 

Aud.  Do  you  wish  that  the  gods  had  made 
me  poetical? 

Touch.  I  do,  truly;  for  thou  swearest  to  me 
thou  art  honest:  now,  if  thou  wert  a  poet,  I 
might  have  some  hope  thou  didst  feign. 

Aud.  Would  you  not  have  me  honest? 

Touch.  No,  truly,  unless  thou  wert  hard- 
favoured;  for  honesty  coupled  to  beauty  is  to 
have  honey  a  sauce  to  sugar.  5 / 

]aq.  [Aside]  A  material  fool! 

Aud.  Well,  I  am  not  fair;  and  therefore  1 
pray  the  gods  make  me  honest. 

Touch.  Truly,  and  to  cast  away  honesty  upon 
a  foul  slut  were  to  put  good  meat  into  an  unclean 
dish. 

Aud.  I  am  not  a  slut,  though  I  thank  the  gods 
I  am  foul.  39 

Touch.  Well,  praised  be  the  gods  for  thy  foul¬ 
ness!  sluttishness  may  come  hereafter.  But  be 
it  as  it  may  be,  I  will  marry  thee,  and  to  that  end 
I  have  been  with  Sir  Oliver  Martext,  the  vicar  of 
the  next  village,  who  hath  promised  to  meet  me 
in  this  place  of  the  forest  and  to  couple  us. 

]aq.  [Aside]  1  would  fain  see  this  meeting. 

Aud.  Well,  the  gods  give  us  joy! 

Touch.  Amen.  A  man  may,  if  he  were  of  a 
fearful  heart,  stagger  in  this  attempt;  for  here 
we  have  no  temple  but  the  wood,  no  assembly 
but  horn-beasts.  But  what  though?  Courage! 
As  horns  are  odious,  they  are  necessary.  It  is 
said,  “many  a  man  knows  no  end  of  his  goods”: 
right;  many  a  man  has  good  horns,  and  knows 
no  end  of  them.  Well,  that  is  the  dowry  of  his 
wife;  ’tis  none  of  his  own  getting.  Horns?  Even 
so.  Poor  men  alone?  No,  no;  the  noblest  deer 
hath  them  as  huge  as  the  rascal.  Is  the  single 
man  therefore  blessed?  No:  as  a  walled  town  is 
more  worthier  than  a  village,  so  is  the  forehead 
of  a  married  man  more  honourable  than  the  bare 
brow  of  a  bachelor;  and  by  how  much  defence 
is  better  than  no  skill,  by  so  much  is  a  horn 
more  precious  than  to  want.  Here  comes  Sir 
Oliver. 


Enter  sir  Oliver  martext. 

Sir  Oliver  Martext,  you  are  well  met:  will  you 
dispatch  us  here  under  this  tree,  or  shall  we  go 
with  you  to  your  chapel? 

Sir  Oli.  Is  there  none  here  to  give  the  woman? 

Touch.  I  will  not  take  her  on  gift  of  any  man. 

Sir  Oli.  Truly,  she  must  be  given,  or  the  mar¬ 
riage  is  not  lawful.  7/ 

]aq.  [Advancing]  Proceed,  proceed:  I’ll  give 
her. 

Touch.  Good  even,  good  Master  What-ye- 
call’t:  how  do  you,  sir?  You  are  very  well  met: 
God  ’ild  you  for  your  last  company;  I  am  very 
glad  to  see  you:  even  a  toy  in  hand  here,  sir: 
nay,  pray  be  covered. 

Jaq.  Will  you  be  married,  motley?  yp 

Touch.  As  the  ox  hath  his  bow,  sir,  the  horse 
his  curb,  and  the  falcon  her  bells,  so  man  hath 
his  desires;  and  as  pigeons  bill,  so  wedlock  would 
be  nibbling. 

Jaq.  And  will  you,  being  a  man  of  your  breed¬ 
ing,  be  married  under  a  bush  like  a  beggar? 
Get  you  to  church,  and  have  a  good  priest  that 
can  tell  you  what  marriage  is:  this  fellow  will 
but  join  you  together  as  they  join  wainscot;  then 
one  of  you  will  prove  a  shrunk  panel  and,  like 
green  timber,  warp,  warp.  po 

Touch.  [Aside]  I  am  not  in  the  mind  but  I  were 
better  to  be  married  of  him  than  of  another:  for 
he  is  not  like  to  marry  me  well;  and  not  being 
well  married,  it  will  be  a  good  excuse  for  me 
hereafter  to  leave  my  wife. 

Jaq.  Go  thou  with  me,  and  let  me  counsel  thee. 

Touch.  Come,  sweet  Audrey: 

We  must  be  married,  or  we  must  live  in  bawdry. 
Farewell,^ good  Master  Oliver:  not —  too 

O  sweet  Oliver, 

O  brave  Oliver, 

Leave  me  not  behind  thee: 
but — 

Wind  away. 

Begone,  I  say, 

I  will  not  to  wedding  with  thee. 

[Exeunt  jaques,  touchstone  and  Audrey. 

Sir  Oli.  Tis  no  matter:  ne’er  a  fantastical  knave 
of  them  all  shall  flout  me  out  of  my  calling. 

[Exit,  top 

Scene  iv.  The  forest 
Enter  Rosalind  and  celia. 

Ros.  Never  talk  to  me;  I  will  weep. 

Cel.  Do,  I  prithee;  but  yet  have  the  grace  to 
consider  that  tears  do  not  become  a  man. 

Ros.  But  have  I  not  cause  to  weep? 


SCENE  IV  A  S  Y  O  U 

Cel.  As  good  cause  as  one  would  desire;  there¬ 
fore  weep. 

Ros.  His  very  hair  is  of  the  dissembling  colour. 

Cel.  Something  browner  than  Judas’:  marry,  his 
kisses  are  Judas’  own  children.  lo 

Ros.  V  faith,  his  hair  is  of  a  good  colour. 

Cel.  An  excellent  colour:  your  chestnut  was 
ever  the  only  colour. 

Ros.  And  his  kissing  is  as  full  of  sanctity  as 
the  touch  of  holy  bread. 

Cel.  He  hath  bought  a  pair  of  cast  lips  of  Diana: 
a  nun  of  winter’s  sisterhood  kisses  not  more  re¬ 
ligiously;  the  very  ice  of  chastity  is  in  them. 

Ros.  But  why  did  he  swear  he  would  come  this 
morning,  and  comes  not?  21 

Cel.  Nay,  certainly,  there  is  no  truth  in  him. 

Ros.  Do  you  think  so? 

Cel.  Yes;  I  think  he  is  not  a  pick-purse  nor  a 
horse-stealer,  but  for  his  verity  in  love,  I  do 
think  him  as  concave  as  a  covered  goblet  or  a 
worm-eaten  nut. 

Ros.  Not  true  in  love? 

Cel.  Yes,  when  he  is  in;  but  I  think  he  is  not 
in.  30 

Ros.  You  have  heard  him  swear  downright  he 
was. 

Cel.  “Was”  is  not  “is”;  besides,  the  oath  of  a 
lover  is  no  stronger  than  the  word  of  a  tapster; 
they  are  both  the  confirmer  of  false  reckonings. 
He  attends  here  in  the  forest  on  the  Duke  your 
father. 

Ros.  I  met  the  Duke  yesterday  and  had  much 
question  with  him:  he  asked  me  of  what  parent¬ 
age  I  was;  I  told  him,  of  as  good  as  he;  so  he 
laughed  and  let  me  go.  But  what  talk  we  of 
fathers,  when  there  is  such  a  man  as  Orlando? 

Cel.  O,  that’s  a  brave  man!  he  writes  brave 
verses,  speaks  brave  words,  swears  brave  oaths, 
and  breaks  them  bravely,  quite  traverse,  athwart 
the  heart  of  his  lover;  as  a  puisny  tilter,  that 
spurs  his  horse  but  on  one  side,  breaks  his  staff 
like  a  noble  goose:  but  all’s  brave  that  youth 
mounts  and  folly  guides.  Who  comes  here? 

Enter  corin. 

Cor.  Mistress  and  master,  you  have  oft  in¬ 
quired  50 

After  the  shepherd  that  complain’d  of  love. 

Who  you  saw  sitting  by  me  on  the  turf. 

Praising  the  proud  disdainful  shepherdess 
That  was  his  mistress. 

Cel.  Well,  and  what  of  him? 

Cor.  If  you  will  see  a  pageant  truly  play’d. 
Between  the  pale  complexion  of  true  love 
And  the  red  glow  of  scorn  and  proud  disdain. 

Go  hence  a  little  and  I  shall  conduct  you. 


LIKE  IT  615 

If  you  will  mark  it. 

Ros.  O,  come,  let  us  remove: 

The  sight  of  lovers  feedeth  those  in  love.  60 

Bring  us  to  this  sight,  and  you  shall  say 

I’ll  prove  a  busy  actor  in  their  play.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  v.  Another  part  of  the  forest 
Enter  silvius  and  phebe. 

Sil.  Sweet  Phebe,  do  not  scorn  me;  do  not, 
Phebe; 

Say  that  you  love  me  not,  but  say  not  so 
In  bitterness.  The  common  executioner. 

Whose  heart  the  accustom’d  sight  of  death  makes 
hard. 

Falls  not  the  axe  upon  the  humbled  neck 
But  first  begs  pardon:  will  you  sterner  be 
Than  he  that  dies  and  lives  by  bloody  drops? 

Enter  Rosalind,  celia,  and  corin,  behind. 

Phe.  I  would  not  be  thy  executioner: 

I  fly  thee,  for  I  would  not  injure  thee. 

Thou  tell’st  me  there  is  murder  in  mine  eye:  10 
’Tis  pretty,  sure,  and  very  probable. 

That  eyes,  that  are  the  frail’st  and  softest  things, 
Who  shut  their  coward  gates  on  atomies. 

Should  be  call’d  tyrants,  butchers,  murderers! 
Now  I  do  frown  on  thee  with  all  my  heart; 

And  if  mine  eyes  can  wound,  now  let  them  kill 
thee: 

Now  counterfeit  to  swoon;  why  now  fall 
down; 

Or  if  thou  canst  not,  O,  for  shame,  for  shame. 

Lie  not,  to  say  mine  eyes  are  murderers! 

Now  show  the  wound  mine  eye  hath  made  in 
thee:  20 

Scratch  thee  but  with  a  pin,  and  there  remains 
Some  scar  of  it;  lean  but  upon  a  rush. 

The  cicatrice  and  capable  impressure 
Thy  palm  some  moment  keeps;  but  now  mine 
eyes. 

Which  I  have  darted  at  thee,  hurt  thee  not. 

Nor,  I  am  sure,  there  is  no  force  in  eyes 
Thar  can  do  hurt. 

Sil.  O  dear  Phebe, 

If  ever — as  that  ever  may  be  near — 

You  meet  in  some  fresh  cheek  the  power  of 
fancy. 

Then  shall  you  know  the  wounds  invisible  50 
That  love’s  keen  arrows  make. 

Phe.  But  till  that  time 

Come  not  thou  near  me:  and  when  that  time 
comes. 

Afflict  me  with  thy  mocks,  pity  me  not; 

As  till  that  time  I  shall  not  pity  thee. 

Ros.  And  why,  I  pray  you?  Who  might  be 
your  mother. 


6i6 


ACT  HI 


AS  YOU 

That  you  insult,  exult,  and  all  at  once. 

Over  the  wretched?  What  though  you  have  no 
beauty — 

As,  by  my  faith,  I  see  no  more  in  you 
Than  without  candle  may  go  dark  to  bed — 

Must  you  be  therefore  proud  and  pitiless?  40 
Why,  what  means  this?  Why  do  you  look  on  me? 

I  see  no  more  in  you  than  in  the  ordinary 
Of  nature’s  sale-work.  ’Od’s  my  little  life, 

I  think  she  means  to  tangle  my  eyes  too! 

No,  faith,  proud  mistress,  hope  not  after  it: 

’Tis  not  your  inky  brows,  your  black  silk  hair, 
Your  bugle  eyeballs,  nor  your  cheek  of  cream. 
That  can  entame  my  spirits  to  your  worship. 

You  foolish  shepherd,  wherefore  do  you  follow 
her, 

Like  foggy  south  puffing  with  wind  and  rain?  50 
You  are  a  thousand  times  a  properer  man 
Than  she  a  woman:  ’tis  such  fools  as  you 
That  makes  the  world  full  of  ill-favour’d  chil¬ 
dren: 

’Tis  not  her  glass,  but  you,  that  flatters  her; 

And  out  of  you  she  sees  herself  more  proper 
Than  any  of  her  lineaments  can  show  her. 

But,  mistress,  know  yourself:  down  on  your 
knees, 

And  thank  heaven,  fasting,  for  a  good  man’s  love: 
For  I  must  tell  you  friendly  in  your  ear. 

Sell  when  you  can:  you  are  not  for  all  markets: 
Cry  the  man  mercy;  love  him;  take  his  offer:  61 
Foul  is  most  foul,  being  foul  to  be  a  scoffer. 

So  take  her  to  thee,  shepherd :  fare  you  well. 

Phe.  Sweet  youth,  I  pray  you,  chide  a  year 
together: 

I  had  rather  hear  you  chide  than  this  man  woo. 
Ros,  He’s  fallen  in  love  with  your  foulness  and 
she’ll  fall  in  love  with  my  anger.  If  it  be  so,  as 
fast  as  she  answers  thee  with  frowning  looks.  I’ll 
sauce  her  with  bitter  words.  Why  look  you  so 
upon  me?  70 

Phe.  For  no  ill  will  I  bear  you. 

Ros.  I  pray  you,  do  not  fall  in  love  with  me. 

For  I  am  falser  than  vows  made  in  wine: 

Besides,  I  like  you  not.  If  you  will  know  my 
house, 

’Tis  at  the  tuft  of  olives  here  hard  by. 

Will  you  go,  sister?  Shepherd,  ply  her  hard. 
Come,  sister.  Shepherdess,  look  on  him  better. 
And  be  not  proud:  though  all  the  world  could  see. 
None  could  be  so  abused  in  sight  as  he. 

Come,  to  our  flock.  So 

[Exeunt  rosalind,  celia  and  corin. 
Phe.  Dead  shepherd,  now  I  find  thy  saw  of 
might, 

“Who  ever  loved  that  loved  not  at  first  sight?” 
S/7.  Sweet  Phebe — 


LIKE  IT 

Phe.  ,  Ha,  what  say’st  thou,  Silvius? 

S/7.  Sweet  Phebe,  pity  me. 

Phe.  Why,  I  am  sorry  for  thee,  gentle  Silvius. 
S/7.  Wherever  sorrow  is,  relief  would  be: 

If  you  do  sorrow  at  my  grief  in  love. 

By  giving  love  your  sorrow  and  my  grief 
Were  both  extermined. 

Phe.  Thou  hast  my  love:  is  not  that  neighbour¬ 
ly?  5)0 

S/7. 1  would  have  you. 

Phe.  Why,  that  were  covetousness. 

Silvius,  the  time  was  that  I  hated  thee. 

And  yet  it  is  not  that  I  bear  thee  love; 

But  since  that  thou  canst  talk  of  love  so  well. 

Thy  company,  which  erst  was  irksome  to  me, 

I  will  endure,  and  I’ll  employ  thee  too: 

But  do  not  look  for  further  recompense 
Than  thine  own  gladness  that  thou  art  employ’d. 

S/7.  So  holy  and  so  perfect  is  my  love. 

And  I  in  such  a  poverty  of  grace,  100 

That  I  shall  think  it  a  most  plenteous  crop 
To  glean  the  broken  ears  after  the  man 
That  the  main  harvest  reaps:  loose  now  and  then 
A  scatter’d  smile,  and  that  I’ll  live  upon. 

Phe.  Know’st  thou  the  youth  that  spoke  to  me 
erewhile? 

S/7.  Not  very  well,  but  I  have  met  him  oft; 

And  he  hath  bought  the  cottage  and  the  bounds 
That  the  old  carlot  once  was  master  of. 

Phe.  Think  not  I  love  him,  though  I  ask  for 
him; 

’Tis  but  a  peevish  boy;  yet  he  talks  well;  no 
But  what  care  I  for  words?  yet  words  do  well 
When  he  that  speaks  them  pleases  those  that 
hear. 

It  is  a  pretty  youth:  not  very  pretty: 

But,  sure,  he’s  proud,  and  yet  his  pride  becomes 
him: 

He’ll  make  a  proper  man:  the  best  thing  in  him 
Is  his  complexion;  and  faster  than  his  tongue 
Did  make  offence  his  eye  did  heal  it  up. 

He  is  not  very  tall;  yet  for  his  years  he’s  tall: 

His  leg  is  but  so  so;  and  yet  ’tis  well: 

There  was  a  pretty  redness  in  his  lip,  120 

A  little  riper  and  more  lusty  red 
Than  that  mix’d  in  his  cheek;  ’twas  just  the 
difference 

Betwixt  the  constant  red  and  mingled  damask. 
There  be  some  women,  Silvius,  had  they  mark’d 
him 

In  parcels  as  I  did,  would  have  gone  near 
To  fall  in  love  with  him;  but,  for  my  part, 

I  love  him  not  nor  hate  him  not;  and  yet 
I  have  more  cause  to  hate  him  than  to  love  him: 
For  what  had  he  to  do  to  chide  at  me? 

He  said  mine  eyes  were  black  and  my  hair  black; 


SCENE  V 

And,  now  I  am  remember’d,  scorn’d  at  me: 

I  marvel  why  I  answer’d  not  again: 

But  that’s  all  one;  omittance  is  no  quittance. 

I’ll  write  to  him  a  very  taunting  letter. 

And  thou  shalt  bear  it:  wilt  thou,  Silvius? 

Sil.  Phebe,  with  all  my  heart. 

Phe.  I’ll  write  it  straight; 

The  matter’s  in  my  head  and  in  my  heart: 

I  will  be  bitter  with  him  and  passing  short. 

Go  with  me,  Silvius.  [Exetmt. 

ACT  IV 

Scene  i.  The  forest 
Enter  Rosalind,  celia,  and  jaques. 

Jaq.  I  prithee,  pretty  youth,  let  me  be  better 
acquainted  with  thee. 

Ros.  They  say  you  are  a  melancholy  fellow. 

Jaq,  I  am  so;  I  do  love  it  better  than  laughing. 
Ros,  Those  that  are  in  extremity  of  either  are 
abominable  fellows  and  betray  themselves  to 
every  modern  censure  worse  than  drunkards. 

Jaq,  Why,  ’tis  good  to  be  sad  and  say  nothing. 
Ros,  Why  then,  ’tis  good  to  be  a  post.  y 

Jaq,  I  have  neither  the  scholar’s  melancholy, 
which  is  emulation,  nor  the  musician’s,  which  is 
fantastical,  nor  the  courtier’s,  which  is  proud, 
nor  the  soldier’s,  which  is  ambitious,  nor  the 
lawyer’s,  which  is  politic,  nor  the  lady’s,  which 
is  nice,  nor  the  lover’s,  which  is  all  these:  but  it  is 
a  melancholy  of  mine  own,  compounded  of  many 
simples,  extracted  from  many  objects,  and  indeed 
the  sundry  contemplation  of  my  travels,  in  which 
my  often  rumination  wraps  me  in  a  most  humor¬ 
ous  sadness.  20 

Ros,  A  traveller!  By  my  faith,  you  have  great 
reason  to  be  sad:  I  fear  you  have  sold  your  own 
lands  to  see  other  men’s;  then,  to  have  seen  much 
and  to  have  nothing,  is  to  have  rich  eyes  and 
poor  hands. 

Jaq,  Yes,  I  have  gained  my  experience. 

Ros.  And  your  experience  makes  you  sad:  I  had 
rather  have  a  fool  to  make  me  merry  than  experi¬ 
ence  to  make  me  sad;  and  to  travel  for  it  too! 

Enter  OKLA^TK}, 

Orl,  Good  day  and  happiness,  dear  Rosalind! 
Jaq,  Nay,  then,  God  be  wi’  you,  an  you  talk  in 
blank  verse.  [Exit, 

Ros,  Farewell,  Monsieur  Traveller:  look  you 
lisp  and  wear  strange  suits,  disable  all  the  bene¬ 
fits  of  your  own  country,  be  out  of  love  with 
your  nativity,  and  almost  chide  God  for  making 
you  that  countenance  you  are,  or  I  will  scarce 
think  you  have  swam  in  a  gondola.  Why,  how 
now,  Orlando!  where  have  you  been  all  this 


617 

while?  You  a  lover!  An  you  serve  me  such  an¬ 
other  trick,  never  come  in  my  sight  more.  4/ 

Orl,  My  fair  Rosalind,  I  come  within  an  hour  of 
my  promise. 

Ros,  Break  an  hour’s  promise  in  love!  He  that 
will  divide  a  minute  into  a  thousand  parts  and 
break  but  a  part  of  the  thousandth  part  of  a 
minute  in  the  affairs  of  love,  it  may  be  said  of 
him  that  Cupid  hath  clapped  him  o’  the  shoulder, 
but  I’ll  warrant  him  heart-whole. 

Orl,  Pardon  me,  dear  Rosalind.  jo 

Ros.  Nay,  an  you  be  so  tardy,  come  no  more  in 
my  sight:  1  had  as  lief  be  wooed  of  a  snail. 

Orl.  Of  a  snail? 

Ros,  Ay,  of  a  snail;  for  though  he  comes  slowly, 
he  carries  his  house  on  his  head;  a  better  jointure, 
I  think,  than  you  make  a  woman:  besides,  he 
brings  his  destiny  with  him. 

Orl.  What’s  that? 

Ros.  Why,  horns,  which  such  as  you  are  fain  to 
be  beholding  to  your  wives  for:  but  he  comes 
armed  in  his  fortune  and  prevents  the  slander  of 
his  wife. 

Orl.  Virtue  is  no  horn-maker;  and  my  Rosalind 
is  virtuous. 

Ros.  And  I  am  your  Rosalind. 

Cel.  It  pleases  him  to  call  you  so;  but  he  hath 
a  Rosalind  of  a  better  leer  than  you. 

Ros.  Come,  woo  me,  woo  me,  for  now  I  am  in  a 
holiday  humour  and  like  enough  to  consent. 
What  would  you  say  to  me  now,  an  I  were  your 
very  very  Rosalind?  7/ 

Orl.  I  would  kiss  before  I  spoke. 

Ros.  Nay,  you  were  better  speak  first,  and 
when  you  were  gravelled  for  lack  of  matter,  you 
might  take  occasion  to  kiss.  Very  good  orators, 
when  they  are  out,  they  will  spit;  and  for  lovers 
lacking— ^od  warn  us! — matter,  the  cleanliest 
shift  is  to  kiss. 

Orl.  How  if  the  kiss  be  denied? 

Ros.  Then  she  puts  you  to  entreaty,  and  there 
begins  new  matter.  81 

Orl.  Who  could  be  out,  being  before  his  be¬ 
loved  mistress? 

Ros.  Marry,  that  should  you,  if  I  were  your 
mistress,  or  I  should  think  my  honesty  ranker 
than  my  wit. 

Orl.  What,  of  my  suit? 

Ros.  Not  out  of  your  apparel,  and  yet  out  of 
your  suit.  Am  not  I  your  Rosalind? 

Orl.  I  take  some  joy  to  say  you  are,  because  I 
would  be  talking  of  her.  9^ 

Ros.  Well  in  her  person  I  say  I  will  not  have 
you. 

Orl.  Then  in  mine  own  person  I  die. 

Ros.  No,  faith,  die  by  attorney.  The  poor  world 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


6i8 


ACT  IV 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


is  almost  six  thousand  years  old,  and  in  all  this 
time  there  was  not  any  man  died  in  his  own  per¬ 
son,  videlicet,  in  a  love-cause.  Troilus  had  his 
brains  dashed  out  with  a  Grecian  club;  yet  he 
did  what  he  could  to  die  before,  and  he  is  one  of 
the  patterns  of  love.  Leander,  he  would  have 
lived  many  a  fair  year,  though  Hero  had  turned 
nun,  if  it  had  not  been  for  a  hot  midsummer 
night;  for,  good  youth,  he  went  but  forth  to  wash 
him  in  the  Hellespont  and  being  taken  with  the 
cramp  was  drowned:  and  the  foolish  chroniclers 
of  that  age  found  it  was  ^‘Hero  of  Sestos.”  But 
these  are  all  lies:  men  have  died  from  time  to 
time  and  worms  have  eaten  them,  but  not  for 
love. 

Orl.  I  would  not  have  my  right  Rosalind  of  this 
mind,  for,  I  protest,  her  frown  might  kill  me. 

Ros.  By  this  hand,  it  will  not  kill  a  fly.  But  come, 
now  I  will  be  your  Rosalind  in  a  more  coming-on 
disposition,  and  ask  me  what  you  will,  I  will 
grant  it. 

Orl.  Then  love  me,  Rosalind. 

Ros.  Yes,  faith,  will  I,  Fridays  and  Saturdays 
and  all. 

Orl.  And  wilt  thou  have  me? 

Ros.  Ay,  and  twenty  such. 

Orl.  What  sayest  thou?  120 

Ros.  Are  you  not  good? 

Orl.  I  hope  so. 

Ros.  Why  then,  can  one  desire  too  much  of  a 
good  thing?  Come,  sister,  you  shall  be  the  priest 
and  marry  us.  Give  me  your  hand,  Orlando. 
What  do  you  say,  sister? 

Orl.  Pray  thee,  marry  us. 

Cel.  I  cannot  say  the  words. 

Ros.  You  must  begin,  “Will  you,  Orlando — ” 

Cel.  Go  to.  Will  you,  Orlando,  have  to  wife 
this  Rosalind?  75/ 

Orl.  I  will. 

Ros.  Ay,  but  when? 

Orl.  Why  now;  as  fast  as  she  can  marry  us. 

Ros.  Then  you  must  say,  “I  take  thee,  Rosalind, 
for  wife.” 

Orl.  I  take  thee,  Rosalind,  for  wife. 

Ros.  I  might  ask  you  for  your  commission;  but 
I  do  take  thee,  Orlando,  for  my  husband:  there’s 
a  girl  goes  before  the  priest;  and  certainly  a 
woman’s  thought  runs  before  her  actions.  74/ 

Orl.  So  do  all  thoughts;  they  are  winged. 

Ros.  Now  tell  me  how  long  you  would  have  her 
after  you  have  possessed  her. 

Orl.  For  ever  and  a  day. 

Ros.  Say  “a  day,”  without  the  “ever.”  No,  no, 
Orlando;  men  are  April  when  they  woo,  Decem¬ 
ber  when  they  wed:  maids  are  May  when  they 
are  maids,  but  the  sky  changes  when  they  are 


wives.  I  will  be  more  jealous  of  thee  than  a  Bar¬ 
bary  cock-pigeon  over  his  hen,  more  clamorous 
than  a  parrot  against  rain,  more  new-fangled 
than  an  ape,  more  giddy  in  my  desires  than  a 
monkey:  I  will  weep  for  nothing,  like  Diana  in 
the  fountain,  and  I  will  do  that  when  you  are 
disposed  to  be  merry;  I  will  laugh  like  a  hyen, 
and  that  when  thou  art  inclined  to  sleep. 

Orl.  But  will  my  Rosalind  do  so? 

Ros.  By  my  life,  she  will  do  as  I  do. 

Orl.  O,  but  she  is  wise.  160 

Ros.  Or  else  she  could  not  have  the  wit  to  do 
this:  the  wiser,  the  way  warder:  make  the  doors 
upon  a  woman’s  wit  and  it  will  out  at  the  case¬ 
ment;  shut  that  and  ’twill  out  at  the  key-hole; 
stop  that,  ’twill  fly  with  the  smoke  out  at  the 
chimney. 

Orl.  A  man  that  had  a  wife  with  such  a  wit,  he 
might  say,  “Wit,  whither  v/ilt?” 

Ros.  Nay,  you  might  keep  that  check  for  it  till 
you  met  your  wife’s  wit  going  to  your  neigh¬ 
bour’s  bed.  777 

Orl.  And  what  wit  could  wit  have  to  excuse 
that? 

Ros.  Marry,  to  say  she  came  to  seek  you  there. 
You  shall  never  take  her  without  her  answer, 
unless  you  take  her  without  her  tongue.  O,  that 
woman  that  cannot  make  her  fault  her  husband’s 
occasion,  let  her  never  nurse  her  child  herself, 
for  she  will  breed  it  like  a  fool! 

Orl.  For  these  two  hours,  Rosalind,  I  will  leave 
thee.  181 

Ros.  Alas!  dear  love,  I  cannot  lack  thee  two 
hours. 

Orl.  I  must  attend  the  Duke  at  dinner:  by  two 
o’clock  I  will  be  with  thee  again. 

Ros.  A)/,  go  your  ways,  go  your  ways;  I  knew 
what  you  would  prove:  my  friends  told  me  as 
much,  and  I  thought  no  less :  that  flattering  tongue 
of  yours  won  me:  ’tis  but  one  cast  away,  and  so, 
come,  death!  Two  o’clock  is  your  hour? 

Orl.  Ay,  sweet  Rosalind.  191 

Ros.  By  my  troth,  and  in  good  earnest,  and  so 
God  mend  me,  and  by  all  pretty  oaths  that  are 
not  dangerous,  if  you  break  one  jot  of  your  prom¬ 
ise  or  come  one  minute  behind  your  hour,  I  will 
think  you  the  most  pathetical  break-promise  and 
the  most  hollow  lover  and  the  most  unworthy  of 
her  you  call  Rosalind  that  may  be  chosen  out  of 
the  gross  band  of  the  unfaithful :  therefore  beware 
my  censure  and  keep  your  promise.  200 

Orl.  ‘With  no  less  religion  than  if  thou  wert 
indeed  my  Rosalind:  so  adieu. 

Ros.  Well,  Time  is  the  old  justice  that  exam¬ 
ines  all  such  offenders,  and  let  Time  try:  adieu. 

[Exit  ORLANDO. 


SCENE  I  A  S  Y  O  U 

CeL  You  have  simply  misused  our  sex  in  your 
love-prate:  we  must  have  your  doublet  and  hose 
plucked  over  your  head,  and  show  the  world 
what  the  bird  hath  done  to  her  own  nest. 

Ros.  O  coz,  coz,  coz,  my  pretty  little  coz,  that 
thou  didst  know  how  many  fathom  deep  I  am  in 
love!  But  it  cannot  be  sounded:  my  affection 
hath  an  unknown  bottom,  like  the  bay  of  Por¬ 
tugal. 

CeL  Or  rather,  bottomless,  that  as  fast  as  you 
pour  affection  in,  it  runs  out. 

Ros.  No,  that  same  wicked  bastard  of  Venus 
that  was  begot  of  thought,  conceived  of  spleen, 
and  born  of  madness,  that  blind  rascally  boy  that 
abuses  every  one’s  eyes  because  his  own  are  out, 
let  him  be  judge  how  deep  I  am  in  love.  I’ll  tell 
thee,  Aliena,  I  cannot  be  out  of  the  sight  of 
Orlando:  I’ll  go  find  a  shadow  and  sigh  till  he 
come. 

CeL  And  I’ll  sleep.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  forest 
jAQUES,  LORDS,  and  Foresters. 

Jaq.  Which  is  he  that  killed  the  deer? 

istLord.  Sir,  it  was  I. 

Jaq.  Let’s  present  him  to  the  Duke,  like  a  Ro¬ 
man  conqueror;  and  it  would  do  well  to  set  the 
deer’s  horns  upon  his  head,  for  a  branch  of  vic¬ 
tory.  Have  you  no  song,  forester,  for  this  pur¬ 
pose? 

ist  For.  Yes,  sir. 

Jaq.  Sing  it:  ’tis  no  matter  how  it  be  in  tune,  so 
it  make  noise  enough.  lo 

Song 

ist  For.  What  shall  he  have  that  kill’d  the 
deer? 

His  leather  skin  and  horns  to  wear. 
Then  sing  him  home; 

The  rest  shall  bear  this  burden. 

Take  thou  no  scorn  to  wear  the  horn; 

It  was  a  crest  ere  thou  wast  born: 

Thy  father’s  father  wore  it. 

And  thy  father  bore  it: 

The  horn,  the  horn,  the  lusty  horn 

Is  not  a  thing  to  laugh  to  scorn.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  hi.  The  forest 
Enter  Rosalind  and  celia. 

Ros.  How  say  you  now?  Is  it  not  past  two 
o’clock?  and  here  much  Orlando! 

CeL  I  warrant  you,  with  pure  love  and  troubled 
brain,  he  hath  ta’en  his  bow  and  arrows  and  is 
gone  forth  to  sleep.  Look,  who  comes  here. 


LIKE  IT  619 

Enter  silvius. 

Sil.  My  errand  is  to  you,  fair  youth; 

My  gentle  Phebe  bid  me  give  you  this: 

I  know  not  the  contents;  but,  as  I  guess 
By  the  stern  brow  and  waspish  action 
Which  she  did  use  as  she  was  writing  of  it,  lo 

It  bears  an  angry  tenour:  pardon  me; 

I  am  but  as  a  guiltless  messenger. 

Ros.  Patience  herself  would  startle  at  this  letter 
And  play  the  swaggerer;  bear  this,  bear  all: 

She  says  I  am  not  fair,  that  I  lack  manners; 

She  calls  me  proud,  and  that  she  could  not  love 
me. 

Were  man  as  rare  as  phoenix.  ’Od’s  my  will! 

Her  love  is  not  the  hare  that  I  do  hunt: 

Why  writes  she  so  to  me?  Well,  shepherd,  well. 
This  is  a  letter  of  your  own  device.  20 

Sil.  No,  I  protest,  I  know  not  the  contents: 
Phebe  did  write  it. 

Ros.  Come,  come,  you  are  a  fool 

And  turn’d  into  the  extremity  of  love. 

I  saw  her  hand:  she  has  a  leathern  hand, 

A  freestone-colour’d  hand;  I  verily  did  think 
That  her  old  gloves  were  on,  but  ’twas  her  hands: 
She  has  a  huswife’s  hand;  but  that’s  no  matter: 

I  say  she  never  did  invent  this  letter; 

This  is  a  man’s  invention  and  his  hand. 

Sil.  Sure,  it  is  hers.  50 

Ros.  Why,  ’tis  a  boisterous  and  a  cruel  style, 

A  style  for  challengers;  why,  she  defies  me. 

Like  Turk  to  Christian:  women’s  gentle  brain 
Could  not  drop  forth  such  giant-rude  invention. 
Such  Ethiope  words,  blacker  in  their  effect 
Than  in  their  countenance.  Will  you  hear  the 
letter? 

Sil.  So  please  you,  for  I  never  heard  it  yet; 

Yet  heard  too  much  of  Phebe’s  cruelty. 

Ros.  She  Phebes  me;  mark  how  the  tyrant 
writes.  [Reads.] 

“Art  thou  god  to  shepherd  turn’d,  40 

That  a  maiden’s  heart  hath  burn’d?” 

Can  a  woman  rail  thus? 

Sil.  Call  you  this  railing? 

Ros.  [Reads] 

“Why,  thy  godhead  laid  apart, 

Warr’st  thou  with  a  woman’s  heart?” 

Did  you  ever  hear  such  railing? 

“Whiles  the  eye  of  man  did  woo  me. 

That  could  do  no  vengeance  to  me.” 
Meaning  me  a  beast. 

“If  the  scorn  of  your  bright  eyne  50 

Have  power  to  raise  such  love  in  mine, 
Alack,  in  me  what  strange  effect 
Would  they  work  in  mild  aspect! 

Whiles  you  chid  me,  I  did  love; 


620  AS  YOU 

How  then  might  your  prayers  move! 

He  that  brings  this  love  to  thee 
Little  knows  this  love  in  me: 

And  by  him  seal  up  thy  mind; 

Whether  that  thy  youth  and  kind 

Will  the  faithful  offer  take  6o 

Of  me  and  all  that  I  can  make; 

Or  else  by  him  my  love  deny, 

And  then  I’ll  study  how  to  die.” 

Sil.  Call  you  this  chiding? 

Cel.  Alas,  poor  shepherd! 

Ros.  Do  you  pity  him?  no,  he  deserves  no  pity. 
Wilt  thou  love  such  a  woman?  What,  to  make 
thee  an  instrument  and  play  false  strains  upon 
thee!  not  to  be  endured!  Well,  go  your  way  to 
her,  for  I  see  love  hath  made  thee  a  tame  snake, 
and  say  this  to  her:  that  if  she  love  me,  I  charge 
her  to  love  thee;  if  she  will  not,  I  will  never  have 
her  unless  thou  entreat  for  her.  If  you  be  a  true 
lover,  hence,  and  not  a  word;  for  here  comes 
more  company .  [Exit  sil vius . 

Enter  Oliver. 

Oil.  Good  morrow,  fair  ones:  pray  you,  if  you 
know. 

Where  in  the  purlieus  of  this  forest  stands 
A  sheep-cote  fenced  about  with  olive  trees? 

Cel.  West  of  this  place,  down  in  the  neighbour 
bottom: 

The  rank  of  osiers  by  the  murmuring  stream  So 
Left  on  your  right  hand  brings  you  to  the  place. 
But  at  this  hour  the  house  doth  keep  itself; 

There’s  none  within. 

on.  If  that  an  eye  may  profit  by  a  tongue. 

Then  should  I  know  you  by  description; 

Such  garments  and  such  years:  “The  boy  is  fair, 
Of  female  favour,  and  bestows  himself 
Like  a  ripe  sister:  the  woman  low 
And  browner  than  her  brother.”  Are  not  you 
The  owner  of  the  house  I  did  enquire  for?  90 
Cel.  It  is  no  boast,  being  ask’d,  to  say  we  are. 

OIL  Orlando  doth  commend  him  to  you  both. 
And  to  that  youth  he  calls  his  Rosalind 
He  sends  this  bloody  napkin.  Are  you  he? 

Ros.  I  am:  what  must  we  understand  by  this? 

Oli.  Some  of  my  shame;  if  you  will  know  of  me 
What  man  I  am,  and  how,  and  why,  and  where 
This  handkercher  was  stain’d. 

Cel.  I  pray  you,  tell  it. 

Oli.  When  last  the  young  Orlando  parted  from 
you 

He  left  a  promise  to  return  again  100 

Within  an  hour,  and  pacing  through  the  forest. 
Chewing  the  food  of  sweet  and  bitter  fancy, 

Lo,  what  befel!  he  threw  his  eye  aside. 

And  mark  what  object  did  present  itself: 


LIKE  IT  ACT  IT 

Under  an  oak,  whose  boughs  were  moss’d  with 

And  high  top  bald  with  dry  antiquity, 

A  wretched  ragged  man,  o’ergrown  with  hair. 
Lay  sleeping  on  his  back:  about  hfs  neck 
A  green  and  gilded  snake  had  wreathed  itself, 
Who  with  her  head  nimble  in  threats  approach’d 
The  opening  of  his  mouth;  but  suddenly,  iii 
Seeing  Orlando,  it  unlink’d  itself. 

And  with  indented  glides  did  slip  away 
Into  a  bush:  under  which  bush’s  shade 
A  lioness,  with  udders  all  drawn  dry. 

Lay  couching,  head  on  ground,  with  catlike 
watch. 

When  that  the  sleeping  man  should  stir;  for  ’tis 
The  royal  disposition  of  that  beast 
To  prey  on  nothing  that  doth  seem  as  dead: 

This  seen,  Orlando  did  approach  the  man  120 
And  found  it  was  his  brother,  his  elder  brother. 
Cel.  O,  I  have  heard  him  speak  of  that  same 
brother; 

And  he  did  render  him  the  most  unnatural 
That  lived  amongst  men. 

Oli.  And  well  he  might  so  do. 

For  well  I  know  he  was  unnatural. 

Ros.  But,  to  Orlando:  did  he  leave  him  there. 
Food  to  the  suck’d  and  hungry  lioness? 

Oli.  Twice  did  he  turn  his  back  and  purposed 
so; 

But  kindness,  nobler  ever  than  revenge. 

And  nature,  stronger  than  his  just  occasion,  0 
Made  him  give  battle  to  the  lioness. 

Who  quickly  fell  before  him:  in  which  hurtling 
From  miserable  slumber  I  awaked. 

Cel.  Are  you  hir  brother? 

Ros.  Was’t  you  he  rescued? 

Cel.  Was’t  you  that  did  so  oft  contrive  to  kill 
him? 

Oli.  ’Twas  I;  but  ’tis  not  I:  I  do  not  shame 
To  tell  you  what  I  was,  since  my  conversion 
So  sweetly  tastes,  being  the  thing  I  am. 

Ros.  But,  for  the  bloody  napkin? 

Oli.  By  and  by. 

When  from  the  first  to  last  betwixt  us  two  140 
Tears  our  recountments  had  most  kindly 
bathed. 

As  how  I  came  into  that  desert  place: 

In  brief,  he  led  me  to  the  gentle  Duke, 

Who  gave  me  fresh  array  and  entertainment. 
Committing  me  unto  my  brother’s  love; 

Who  led  me  instantly  unto  his  cave. 

There  stripp’d  himself,  and  here  upon  his  arm 
The  lioness  had  torn  some  flesh  away, 

Which  all  this  while  had  bled;  and  now  he 
fainted 

And  cried,  in  fainting,  upon  Rosalind.  /yo 


SCENE  III 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


Brief,  I  recover’d  him,  bound  up  his  wound; 

And,  after  some  small  space,  being  strong  at 
heart. 

He  sent  me  hither,  stranger  as  I  am. 

To  tell  this  story,  that  you  might  excuse 
His  broken  promise,  and  to  give  this  napkin 
Dyed  in  his  blood  unto  the  shepherd  youth 
That  he  in  sport  doth  call  his  Rosalind. 

[ROSALIND  swoons. 

Cel.  Why,  how  now,  Ganymede!  sweet  Gany¬ 
mede! 

Oli.  Many  will  swoon  when  they  do  look  on 
blood. 

Cel.  There  is  more  in  it.  Cousin  Ganymede! 

Oli.  Look,  he  recovers.  i6i 

Ros.  I  would  I  were  at  home. 

Cel.  We’ll  lead  you  thither. 

I  pray  you,  will  you  take  him  by  the  arm? 

Oli.  Be  of  good  cheer,  youth:  you  a  man!  you 
lack  a  man’s  heart. 

Ros.  I  do  so,  I  confess  it.  Ah,  sirrah,  a  body 
would  think  this  was  well  counterfeited!  I  pray 
you,  tell  your  brother  how  well  I  counterfeited. 
Heigh-ho!  i6p 

Oli.  This  was  not  counterfeit:  there  is  too  great 
testimony  in  your  complexion  that  it  was  a  pas¬ 
sion  of  earnest. 

Ros.  Counterfeit,  I  assure  you. 

Oli.  Well  then,  take  a  good  heart  and  counter¬ 
feit  to  be  a  man. 

Ros.  So  I  do:  but,  i’ faith,  I  should  have  been  a 
woman  by  right. 

Cel.  Come,  you  look  paler  and  paler:  pray  you, 
draw  homewards.  Good  sir,  go  with  us. 

Oli.  That  will  I,  for  I  must  bear  answer  back 
How  you  excuse  my  brother,  Rosalind.  i8i 

Ros.  I  shall  devise  something:  but,  I  pray  you, 
commend  my  counterfeiting  to  him.  Will  you 
go?  [Exeunt. 

ACT  V 

Scene  i.  The  forest 
Enter  touchstone  and  Audrey. 

Touch.  We  shall  find  a  time,  Audrey;  patience, 
gentle  Audrey. 

Aud.  Faith,  the  priest  was  good  enough,  for  all 
the  old  gentleman’s  saying. 

Touch.  A  most  wicked  Sir  Oliver,  Audrey,  a 
most  vile  Martext.  But,  Audrey,  there  is  a  youth 
here  in  the  forest  lays  claim  to  you. 

Aud.  Ay,  I  know  who  ’tis;  he  hath  no  interest 
in  me  in  the  world:  here  comes  the  man  you 
mean.  w 

Touch.  It  is  meat  and  drink  to  me  to  see  a 
clown:  by  my  troth,  we  that  have  good  wits 


62 1 

have  much  to  answer  for;  we  shall  be  flouting; 
we  cannot  hold. 

Enter  william. 

Will.  Good  even,  Audrey. 

Aud.  God  ye  good  even,  William. 

Will.  And  good  even  to  you,  sir. 

Touch.  Good  even,  gentle  friend.  Cover  thy 
head,  cover  thy  head;  nay,  prithee,  be  covered. 
How  old  are  you,  friend?  20 

Will.  Five  and  twenty,  sir. 

Touch.  A  ripe  age.  Is  thy  name  William? 

Will.  William,  sir. 

Touch.  A  fair  name.  Wast  born  i’  the  forest 
here? 

Will.  Ay,  sir,  I  thank  God. 

Touch.  “Thank  God”;  a  good  answer.  Art 
rich? 

Will.  Faith,  sir,  so  so. 

Touch.  “So  so”  is  good,  very  good,  very  excel¬ 
lent  good;  and  yet  it  is  not;  it  is  but  so  so.  Art 
thou  wise?  5/ 

Will.  Ay,  sir,  I  have  a  pretty  wit. 

Touch.  Why,  thou  sayest  well.  I  do  now  re¬ 
member  a  saying,  “The  fool  doth  think  he  is 
wise,  but  the  wise  man  knows  himself  to  be  a 
fool.”  The  heathen  philosopher,  when  he  had  a 
desire  to  eat  a  grape,  would  open  his  lips  when 
he  put  it  into  his  mouth;  meaning  thereby  that 
grapes  were  made  to  eat  and  lips  to  open.  You 
do  love  this  maid?  40 

Will.  I  do,  sir. 

Touch.  Give  me  your  hand.  Art  thou  learned? 

Will.  No,  sir. 

Touch.  Then  learn  this  of  me:  to  have,  is  to 
have;  for  it  is  a  figure  in  rhetoric  that  drink, 
being  poured  out  of  a  cup  into  a  glass,  by  filling 
the  one  doth  empty  the  other;  for  all  your  writers 
do  consent  that  ipse  is  he:  now,  you  are  not  ipse., 
for  I  am  he. 

Will.  Which  he,  sir?  50 

Touch.  He,  sir,  that  must  marry  this  woman. 
Therefore,  you  clown,  abandon — which  is  in  the 
vulgar  leave — the  society — which  in  the  boorish 
is  company — of  this  female — which  in  the  com¬ 
mon  is  woman;  which  together  is,  abandon  the 
society  of  this  female,  or,  clown,  thou  perishest; 
or,  to  thy  better  understanding,  diest;  or,  to  wit, 
I  kill  thee,  make  thee  away,  translate  thy  life 
into  death,  thy  liberty  into  ix)ndage:  I  will  deal 
in  poison  with  thee,  or  in  bastinado,  or  in  steel; 
I  will  bandy  with  thee  in  faction;  I  will  o’er-run 
thee  with  policy;  I  will  kill  thee  a  hundred  and 
fifty  ways:  therefore  tremble,  and  depart. 

Aud.  Do,  good  William. 

Will.  God  rest  you  merry,  sir.  [Exit. 


622 


ACT  V 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


Enter  corin. 

Cor,  Our  master  and  mistress  seeks  you;  come, 
away,  away! 

Touch.  Trip,  Audrey!  trip,  Audrey!  I  attend,  I 
attend.  [Exeunt. 

Scene  ii.  The  forest 
Enter  orlando  and  Oliver. 

Orl.  Is’t  possible  that  on  so  little  acquaintance 
you  should  like  her?  that  but  seeing  you  should 
love  her?  and  loving  woo?  and,  wooing,  she 
should  grant?  and  will  you  persever  to  enjoy  her? 

0/i.  Neither  call  the  giddiness  of  it  in  question, 
the  poverty  of  her,  the  small  acquaintance,  my 
sudden  wooing,  nor  her  sudden  consenting;  but 
say  with  me,  I  love  Aliena;  say  with  her  that 
she  loves  me;  consent  with  both  that  we  may 
enjoy  each  other:  it  shall  be  to  your  good;  for 
my  father’s  house  and  all  the  revenue  that  was 
old  Sir  Rowland’s  will  I  estate  upon  you,  and 
here  live  and  die  a  shepherd. 

Orl.  You  have  my  consent.  Let  your  wedding 
be  to-morrow:  thither  will  I  invite  the  Duke  and 
all’s  contented  followers.  Go  you  and  prepare 
Aliena;  for  look  you,  here  comes  my  Rosalind. 

Enter  rosalind. 

Ros.  God  save  you,  brother.  20 

on.  And  you,  fair  sister.  [Exit. 

Ros.  O,  my  dear  Orlando,  how  it  grieves  me 
to  see  thee  wear  thy  heart  in  a  scarf! 

Orl.  It  is  my  arm. 

Ros.  I  thought  thy  heart  had  been  wounded  with 
the  claws  of  a  lion. 

Orl.  Wounded  it  is,  but  with  the  eyes  of  a  lady. 

Ros.  Did  your  brother  tell  you  how  I  counter¬ 
feited  to  swoon  when  he  showed  me  your  hand- 
kercher?  50 

Orl.  Ay,  and  greater  wonders  than  that. 

Ros.  O,  I  know  where  you  are:  nay,  ’tis  true: 
there  was  never  any  thing  so  sudden  but  the  fight 
of  two  rams  and  Caesar’s  thrasonical  brag  of  “I 
came,  saw,  and  overcame”;  for  your  brother  and 
my  sister  no  sooner  met  but  they  looked,  no 
sooner  looked  but  they  loved,  no  sooner  loved 
but  they  sighed,  no  sooner  sighed  but  they  asked 
one  another  the  reason,  no  sooner  knew  the  rea¬ 
son  but  they  sought  the  remedy;  and  in  these 
degrees  have  they  made  a  pair  of  stairs  to  mar¬ 
riage  which  they  will  climb  incontinent,  or  else 
be  incontinent  before  marriage:  they  are  in  the 
very  wrath  of  love  and  they  will  together;  clubs 
cannot  part  them. 

Orl.  They  shall  be  married  to-morrow,  and  I 
will  bid  the  Duke  to  the  nuptial.  But,  O,  how 


bitter  a  thing  it  is  to  look  into  happiness  through 
another  man’s  eyes!  By  so  much  the  more  shall 
I  to-morrow  be  at  the  height  of  heart-heaviness, 
by  how  much  I  shall  think  my  brother  happy  in 
having  what  he  wishes  for. 

Ros.  Why  then,  to-morrow  I  cannot  serve  your 
turn  for  Rosalind? 

Orl.  I  can  live  no  longer  by  thinking. 

Ros.  I  will  weary  you  then  no  longer  with  idle 
talking.  Know  of  me,  then,  for  now  I  speak  to 
some  purpose,  that  I  know  you  are  a  gentleman 
of  good  conceit:  I  speak  not  this  that  you  should 
bear  a  good  opinion  of  my  knowledge,  insomuch 
I  say  I  know  you  are;  neither  do  I  labour  for  a 
greater  esteem  than  may  in  some  little  measure 
draw  a  belief  from  you,  to  do  yourself  good  and 
not  to  grace  me.  Believe  then,  if  you  please,  that 
I  can  do  strange  things:  I  have,  since  I  was  three 
year  old,  conversed  with  a  magician,  most  pro¬ 
found  in  his  art  and  yet  not  damnable.  If  you  do 
love  Rosalind  so  near  the  heart  as  your  gesture 
cries  it  out,  when  your  brother  marries  Aliena, 
shall  you  marry  her:  I  know  into  what  straits  of 
fortune  she  is  driven;  and  it  is  not  impossible  to 
me,  if  it  appear  not  inconvenient  to  you,  to  set 
her  before  your  eyes  to-morrow,  human  as  she 
is,  and  without  any  danger. 

Orl.  Speakest  thou  in  sober  meanings? 

Ros.  By  my  life,  I  do;  which  I  tender  dearly, 
though  I  say  I  am  a  magician.  Therefore,  put 
you  in  your  best  array;  bid  your  friends;  for  if 
you  will  be  married  to-morrow,  you  shall,  and  to 
Rosalind,  if  you  will.  8t 

Enter  silvius  and  phebe. 

Look,  here  comes  a  lover  of  mine  and  a  lover  of 
hers. 

The.  Youth,  you  have  done  me  much  ungentle¬ 
ness, 

To  show  the  letter  that  I  writ  to  you. 

Ros.  I  care  not  if  I  have:  it  is  my  study 
To  seem  despiteful  and  ungentle  to  you: 

You  are  there  followed  by  a  faithful  shepherd; 
Look  upon  him,  love  him;  he  worships  you. 

Phe.  Good  shepherd,  tell  this  youth  what  ’tis  to 
love. 

Sil.  It  is  to  be  all  made  of  sighs  and  tears; 

And  so  am  I  for  Phebe. 

Phe.  And  I  for  Ganymede. 

Orl.  And  I  for  Rosalind. 

Ros.  And  I  for  no  woman. 

Sil.  It  is  to  be  all  made  of  faith  and  service; 

And  so  am  I  for  Phebe. 

Phe.  And  I  for  Ganymede. 

Orl.  And  I  for  Rosalind. 

Ros.  And  I  for  no  woman. 


SCENE  II 


AS  YOU  LIKE  IT 


Sil.  It  is  to  be  all  made  of  fantasy,  loo 

All  made  of  passion,  and  all  made  of  wishes. 

All  adoration,  duty,  and  observance. 

All  humbleness,  all  patience,  and  impatience. 

All  purity,  all  trial,  all  observance; 

And  so  am  I  for  Phebe. 

Phe.  And  so  am  I  for  Ganymede. 

Orl.  And  so  am  I  for  Rosalind. 

Ros.  And  so  am  I  for  no  woman. 

Phe.  If  this  be  so,  why  blame  you  me  to  love 
you?  no 

Sil,  If  this  be  so,  why  blame  you  me  to  love 
you? 

OrL  If  this  be  so,  why  blame  you  me  to  love 
you? 

Ros.  Who  do  you  speak  to,  “Why  blame  you 
me  to  love  you?” 

Orl.  To  her  that  is  not  here,  nor  doth  not  hear. 

Ros.  Pray  you,  no  more  of  this;  ’tis  like  the 
howling  of  Irish  wolves  against  the  moon.  [To 
siLvius]  I  will  help  you,  if  I  can:  \To  phebe]  I 
would  love  you,  if  I  could.  To-morrow  meet  me 
all  together.  \To  phebe]  I  will  marry  you,  if  ever 
I  marry  woman,  and  I’ll  be  married  to-morrow: 
[To  ORLANDo]  I  will  Satisfy  you,  if  ever  I  satis¬ 
fied  man,  and  you  shall  be  married  to-morrow: 
[To  siLvius]  I  will  content  you,  if  what  pleases 
you  contents  you,  and  you  shall  be  married  to¬ 
morrow.  \To  ORLANDo]  As  you  love  Rosalind, 
meet:  [To  silvius]  as  you  love  Phebe,  meet:  and 
as  I  love  no  woman.  I’ll  meet.  So  fare  you  well: 
I  have  left  you  commands,  75/ 

Sil.  I’ll  not  fail,  if  I  live. 

Phe.  Nor  I. 

Or/.  Nor  I.  [Exeunt. 


Scene  hi.  The  forest 
Enter  touchstone  and  Audrey. 

Touch.  To-morrow  is  the  joyful  day,  Audrey; 
to-morrow  will  we  be  married. 

Aud.  I  do  desire  it  with  all  my  heart;  and  I 
hope  it  is  no  dishonest  desire  to  desire  to  be  a 
woman  of  the  world.  Here  come  two  of  the 
banished  Duke’s  pages. 

Enter  two  pages. 

ist  Page.  Well  met,  honest  gentleman. 

Touch.  By  my  troth,  well  met.  Come,  sit,  sit, 
and  a  song.  p 

2nd  Page.  We  are  for  you:  sit  i’  the  middle. 

ist  Page.  Shall  we  clap  into’t  roundly,  without 
hawking  or  spitting  or  saying  we  are  hoarse, 
which  are  the  only  prologues  to  a  bad  voice? 

2nd  Page.  I’faith,  i’faith;  and  both  in  a  tune,  like 
two  gipsies  on  a  horse. 


It  was  a  lover  and  his  lass. 

With  a  hey,  and  a  ho,  and  a  hey  nonino. 
That  o’er  the  green  corn-field  did  pass 

In  the  spring  time,  the  only  pretty  ring  time, 
When  birds  do  sing,  hey  ding  a  ding,  ding:  21 
Sweet  lovers  love  the  spring. 

Between  the  acres  of  the  rye. 

With  a  hey,  and  a  ho,  and  a  hey  nonino. 
These  pretty  country  folks  would  lie. 

In  spring  time,  &c. 


This  carol  they  began  that  hour. 

With  a  hey,  and  a  ho,  and  a  hey  nonino, 
How  that  a  life  was  but  a  flower 
In  spring  time,  &c. 

And  therefore  take  the  present  time. 
With  a  hey,  and  a  ho,  and  a  hey  nonino; 
For  love  is  crowned  with  the  prime 
In  spring  time,  &c. 


Touch.  Truly,  young  gentlemen,  though  there 
was  no  great  matter  in  the  ditty,  yet  the  note  was 
very  untuneable. 

ist  Page.  You  are  deceived,  sir:  we  kept  time, 
we  lost  not  our  time. 

Touch.  By  my  troth,  yes;  I  count  it  but  time 
lost  to  hear  such  a  foolish  song.  God  be  wi’  you; 
and  God  mend  your  voices!  Come,  Audrey. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene  iv.  The  forest 

Enter  duke  senior,  amiens,  jaques,  orlando, 

OLIVER,  andCElA\. 

Duke  S.  Dost  thou  believe,  Orlando,  that  the 
boy 

Can  do  all  this  that  he  hath  promised? 

Orl.  I  sometimes  do  believe,  and  sometimes  do 
not; 

As  those  that  fear  they  hope,  and  know  they  fear. 

Enter  Rosalind,  silvius,  and  phebe. 

Ros.  Patience  once  more,  whiles  our  compact  is 
urged: 

You  say,  if  I  bring  in  your  Rosalind, 

You  will  bestow  her  on  Orlando  here? 

Duke  S.  That  would  I,  had  I  kingdoms  to  give 
with  her. 

Ros.  And  you  say,  you  will  have  her,  when  I 
bring  her? 

Orl.  That  would  I,  were  I  of  all  kingdoms 
king.  to 

Ros.  You  say,  you’ll  marry  me,  if  1  be  willing? 
Phe.  That  will  L  should  I  die  the  hour  after. 


ACT  V 


624  AS  YOU 

Ros.  But  if  you  do  refuse  to  marry  me, 

You’ll  give  yourself  to  this  most  faithful  shep¬ 
herd? 

Phe.  So  is  the  bargain. 

Ros.  You  say,  that  you’ll  have  Phebe,  if  she 
will? 

SiL  Though  to  have  her  and  death  were  both 
one  thing. 

Ros.  I  have  promised  to  make  all  this  matter 
even. 

Keep  you  your  word,  O  Duke,  to  give  your 
daughter; 

You  yours,  Orlando,  to  receive  his  daughter:  20 
Keep  your  word,  Phebe,  that  you’ll  marry 
me, 

Or  else,  refusing  me,  to  wed  this  shepherd: 

Keep  your  word,  Silvius,  that  you’ll  marry 
her, 

If  she  refuse  me:  and  from  hence  I  go, 

To  make  these  doubts  all  even. 

[Exeunt  Rosalind  and  celia. 
Duke  S.  I  do  remember  in  this  shepherd  boy 
Some  lively  touches  of  my  daughter’s  favour. 

Orl.  My  lord,  the  first  time  that  I  ever  saw 
him 

Methought  he  was  a  brother  to  your  daughter: 
But,  my  good  lord,  this  boy  is  forest-born,  50 
And  hath  been  tutor’d  in  the  rudiments 
Of  many  desperate  studies  by  his  uncle. 

Whom  he  reports  to  be  a  great  magician. 
Obscured  in  the  circle  of  this  forest. 

Enter  touchstone  and  Audrey. 

Jaq.  There  is,  sure,  another  flood  toward,  and 
these  couples  are  coming  to  the  ark.  Here  comes 
a  pair  of  very  strange  beasts,  which  in  all  tongues 
are  called  fools. 

Touch.  Salutation  and  greeting  to  you  all! 

Jaq.  Good  my  lord,  bid  him  welcome:  this  is 
the  motley-minded  gentleman  that  I  have  so  often 
met  in  the  forest:  he  hath  been  a  courtier,  he 
swears. 

Touch.  If  any  man  doubt  that,  let  him  put  me  to 
my  purgation.  I  have  trod  a  measure;  I  have 
flattered  a  lady;  I  have  been  politic  with  my 
friend,  smooth  with  mine  enemy;  I  have  undone 
three  tailors;  I  have  had  four  quarrels,  and  like 
to  have  fought  one. 

Jaq.  And  how  was  that  ta’en  up?  50 

Touch.  Faith,  we  met,  and  found  the  quarrel 
was  upon  the  seventh  cause. 

Jaq.  How  seventh  cause?  Good  my  lord,  like 
this  fellow. 

Duke  S.  I  like  him  very  well. 

Touch.  God  ’ild  you,  sir;  I  desire  you  of  the 
like.  1  press  in  here,  sir,  amongst  the  rest  of 


LIKE  IT 

the  country  copulatives,  to  swear  and  to  for¬ 
swear;  according  as  marriage  binds  and  blood 
breaks:  a  poor  virgin,  sir,  an  ill-favoured  thing, 
sir,  but  mine  own;  a  poor  humour  of  mine,  sir,  to 
take  that  that  no  man  else  will:  rich  honesty 
dwells  like  a  miser,  sir,  in  a  poor  house;  as  your 
pearl  in  your  foul  oyster. 

Duke  S.  By  my  faith,  he  is  very  swift  and  sen¬ 
tentious. 

Touch.  According  to  the  fool’s  bolt,  sir,  and 
such  dulcet  diseases. 

Jaq.  But,  for  the  seventh  cause;  how  did  you 
find  the  quarrel  on  the  seventh  cause?  70 

Touch.  Upon  a  lie  seven  times  removed — bear 
your  body  more  seeming,  Audrey — as  thus,  sir. 
I  did  dislike  the  cut  of  a  certain  courtier’s  beard: 
he  sent  me  word,  if  I  said  his  beard  was  not  cut 
well,  he  was  in  the  mind  it  was:  this  is  called  the 
Retort  Courteous.  If  I  sent  him  word  again  “it 
was  not  well  cut,”  he  would  send  me  word,  he 
cut  it  to  please  himself:  this  is  called  the  Quip 
Modest.  If  again  “it  was  not  well  cut,”  he  dis¬ 
abled  my  judgement:  this  is  called  the  Reply 
Churlish.  If  again  “it  was  not  well  cut,”  he 
would  answer,  I  spake  not  true:  this  is  called  the 
Reproof  Valiant.  If  again  “it  was  not  well  cut,” 
he  would  say,  I  lied:  this  is  called  the  Counter¬ 
check  Quarrelsome:  and  so  to  the  Lie  Circum¬ 
stantial  and  the  Lie  Direct. 

Jaq.  And  how  oft  did  you  say  his  beard  was  not 
well  cut? 

Touch.  I  durst  go  no  further  than  the  Lie  Cir¬ 
cumstantial,  nor  he  durst  not  give  me  the  Lie 
Direct;  and  so  we  measured  swords  and  parted. 

Jaq.  Can  you  nominate  in  order  now  the  degrees 
of  the  lie? 

Touch.  O  sir,  we  quarrel  in  print,  by  the  book; 
as  you  have  books  for  good  manners:  I  will  name 
you  the  degrees.  The  first,  the  Retort  Courteous; 
the  second,  the  Quip  Modest;  the  third,  the  Re¬ 
ply  Churlish;  the  fourth,  the  Reproof  Valiant; 
the  fifth,  the  Countercheck  Quarrelsome;  the 
sixth,  the  Lie  with  Circumstance;  the  seventh, 
the  Lie  Direct.  All  these  you  may  avoid  but  the 
Lie  Direct;  and  you  may  avoid  that  too,  with  an 
If.  I  knev"  when  seven  justices  could  not  take  up 
a  quarrel,  but  when  the  parties  were  met  them¬ 
selves,  one  of  them  thought  but  of  an  If,  as,  “If 
you  said  so,  then  I  said  so”;  and  they  shook 
hands  and  swore  brothers.  Your  If  is  the  only 
peace-maker;  much  virtue  in  If. 

Jaq.  Is  not  this  a  rare  fellow,  my  lord?  he’s  as 
good  as  anything  and  yet  a  fool.  no 

Duke  S.  He  uses  his  folly  like  a  stalking-horse 
and  under  the  presentation  of  that  he  shoots  his 
wit. 


SCENE  IV 


AS  YOU 

Enter  hymen,  Rosalind,  and  celia.  Still  Music, 
Hym.  Then  is  there  mirth  in  heaven. 

When  earthly  things  made  even 
Atone  together. 

Good  Duke,  receive  thy  daughter: 

Hymen  from  heaven  brought  her. 

Yea,  brought  her  hither. 

That  thou  mightst  join  her  hand  with  his 
Whose  heart  within  his  bosom  is.  iii 
Ros.  [To  duke]  To  you  I  give  myself,  for  I  am 
yours. 

[To  ORLANDo]  To  you  I  give  myself,  for  I  am 
yours. 

Duke  S.  If  there  be  truth  in  sight,  you  are  my 
daughter. 

Orl.  If  there  be  truth  in  sight,  you  are  my  Rosa¬ 
lind. 

The.  If  sight  and  shape  be  true, 

Why  then,  my  love  adieu! 

Ros.  ril  have  no  father,  if  you  be  not  he: 

I’ll  have  no  husband,  if  you  be  not  he: 

Nor  ne’er  wed  woman,  if  you  be  not  she.  /50 
Hym.  Peace,  ho!  I  bar  confusion: 

’Tis  I  must  make  conclusion 
Of  these  most  strange  events. 

Here’s  eight  that  must  take  hands 
To  join  in  Hymen’s  bands. 

If  truth  holds  true  contents. 

You  and  you  no  cross  shall  part: 

You  and  you  are  heart  in  heart: 

You  to  his  love  must  accord, 

Or  have  a  woman  to  your  lord:  14.0 

You  and  you  are  sure  together, 

As  the  winter  to  foul  weather. 

Whiles  a  wedlock-hymn  we  sing, 

Feed  yourselves  with  questioning; 

That  reason  wonder  may  diminish. 

How  thus  we  met,  and  these  things  finish. 

Song 

Wedding  is  great  Juno’s  crown: 

O  blessed  bond  of  board  and  bed! 

’Tis  Hymen  peoples  every  town; 

High  wedlock  then  be  honoured:  /50 
Honour,  high  honour,  and  renown. 

To  Hymen,  god  of  every  town! 

Duke  S.  O  my  dear  niece,  welcome  thou  art  to  me ! 
Even  daughter,  welcome,  in  no  less  degree. 

Phe.  I  will  not  eat  my  word,  now  thou  art  mine; 
Thy  faith  my  fancy  to  thee  doth  combine. 

Enter  jAQiJES  de  boys. 

Jaq.  de  B.  Let  me  have  audience  for  a  word  or 
two. 

I  am  the  second  son  of  old  Sir  Rowland, 


LIKE  IT  625 

That  bring  these  tidings  to  this  fair  assembly. 
Duke  Frederick,  hearing  how  that  every  day  160 
Men  of  great  worth  resorted  to  this  forest. 
Address’d  a  mighty  power;  which  were  on 
foot. 

In  his  own  conduct,  purposely  to  take 
His  brother  here  and  put  him  to  the  sword: 

And  to  the  skirts  of  this  wild  wood  he  came; 
Where  meeting  with  an  old  religious  man, 

After  some  question  with  him,  was  converted 
Both  from  his  enterprise  and  from  the  world. 

His  crown  bequeathing  to  his  banish’d  brother. 
And  all  their  lands  restored  to  them  again  /70 
That  were  with  him  exiled.  This  to  be  true, 

I  do  engage  my  life. 

Duke  S .  W elcome,  young  man ; 

Thou  offer’st  fairly  to  thy  brothers’  wedding: 

To  one  his  lands  withheld,  and  to  the  other 
A  land  itself  at  large,  a  potent  dukedom. 

First,  in  this  forest  let  us  do  those  ends 
That  here  were  well  begun  and  well  begot: 

And  after,  every  of  this  happy  number 
That  have  endured  shrewd  days  and  nights  with 
us 

Shall  share  the  good  of  our  returned  fortune,  180 
According  to  the  measure  of  their  states. 
Meantime,  forget  this  new-fall’n  dignity 
And  fall  into  our  rustic  revelry. 

Play,  music!  And  you,  brides  and  bridegrooms  all. 
With  measure  heap’d  in  joy,  to  the  measures  fall. 
Jaq.  Sir,  by  your  patience.  If  I  heard  you 
rightly, 

The  Duke  hath  put  on  a  religious  life 
And  thrown  into  neglect  the  pompous  court? 

Jaq  de  B.  He  hath. 

Jaq.  To  him  will  I;  out  of  these  convertites 
There  is  much  matter  to  be  heard  and  learn’d. 

[To  duke]  You  to  your  former  honour  I  be¬ 
queath; 

Your  patience  and  your  virtue  well  deserves  it: 
[To  ORLANDo]  You  to  a  love  that  your  true  faith 
doth  merit: 

[To  Oliver]  You  to  your  land  and  love  and  great 
allies: 

[To  siLvius]  You  to  a  long  and  well-deser\^ed 
bed: 

[To  touchstone]  And  you  to  wrangling;  for 
thy  loving  voyage 

Is  but  for  two  months  victuall’d.  So,  to  your 
pleasures: 

I  am  for  other  than  for  dancing  measures. 

Duke  S.  Stay,  Jaques,  stay.  200 

Jaa.  To  see  no  pastime:  what  you  would  have 
I’ll  stay  to  know  at  your  abandon’d  cave.  [Exit. 
Duke  S.  Proceed,  proceed;  we  will  begin  these 
rites. 


626 


AS  YOU 

As  we  do  trust  they’ll  end,  in  true  delights, 

A  dance. 

EPILOGUE 

Ros.  It  is  not  the  fashion  to  see  the  lady  the 
epilogue;  but  it  is  no  more  unhandsome  than  to 
see  the  lord  the  prologue.  If  it  be  true  that  good 
wine  needs  no  bush,  ’tis  true  that  a  good  play 
needs  no  epilogue;  yet  to  good  wine  they  do  use 
good  bushes,  and  good  plays  prove  the  better  by 
the  help  of  good  epilogues.  What  a  case  am  I  in 
then,  that  am  neither  a  good  epilogue  nor  cannot 
insinuate  with  you  in  the  behalf  of  a  good  play! 

I  am  not  furnished  like  a  beggar,  therefore  to 


LIKE  IT  ACTv  [ 

beg  will  not  become  me:  my  way  is  to  conjure  ; 
you;  and  I’ll  begin  with  the  women.  I  charge 
you,  O  women,  for  the  love  you  bear  to  men,  to  ^ 
like  as  much  of  this  play  as  please  you:  and  I  1 
charge  you,  O  men,  for  the  love  you  bear  to 
women — as  I  perceive  by  your  simpering,  none 
of  you  hates  them — that  between  you  and  the  I 
women  the  play  may  please.  If  I  were  a  woman  I 
I  would  kiss  as  many  of  you  as  had  beards  that  I 
pleased  me,  complexions  that  liked  me  and  breaths  | 
that  I  defied  not:  and,  I  am  sure,  as  many  as  . 
have  good  beards  or  good  faces  or  sweet  breaths 
will,  for  my  kind  offer,  when  I  make  curtsy,  bid 
me  farewell.  [Exeunt,  j 

i 

» 

( 

I 

I. 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.SJi. 


'tn; 


**d''rr« 


.  *f  u  *’ 

<  pi  .  t? 

.  '  fhf  y>/  J  ’W  TV 
•*'jr*w  r- 

^  •  Wu  orf 

i,  ■*.'/’  ■’ •:  itji  »''  /  * 


ii,  niv  w  V  a  to  ii>a^e 

,-'  n,<  h  f 
I  '•  .  Vt**-i  y  ■  Cl 
'  •;,  ,r'  {♦!‘C*«^j:  i.'wl  i 

*'  '  *v’‘  %  1  lx_^.r  ro 

.•  ’-v  '. I  '  ;  .<jf,  n:'!/- 

u  :r  U-{  v-'(  vM  '•'  '‘^u!  tlfii 
<i'^rx■  K  '  in**  lAvcmari 

v<  ■;  Ch^ 

•  I  iKr*  1  rr^*  aiid  hrcs»' 

•:  ;  ..in  lie,,  J..1 

■'V)  'n.Ki  ic  ifi'vct  tirair' 

'  V  !  -iKi 

[Etrf^r. 


#'■'  ■ 


/ 


I 


>• 

< 


.•< 


e 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


5^^ 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


6^^ 


ap^^ 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


