>^SS  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


P^S^P=£ 


P=s2p^£^ 


^?5£p££p^* 


r--^ 


5&T&5&Z&- 


P^p£^P=£* 


*p£^^p£2 


^p^p^p^ 


P^T^PV^V^ 


^p^p^p^ 


^ir* 


>p=s^p^p 


^p^p^p^ 


?p^’p=^p=^p^' 


^p^p^p^ 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 


5.  AESCHYLUS 


10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 


11.  EUCLID 

ARCHIMEDES 

APOLLONIUS 

NICOMACHUS 


12, 


LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 


13. 

14, 

15. 

16, 


VIRGIL 

PLUTARCH 

TACITUS 


PTOLEMY 

COPERNICUS 

KEPLER 


SOPHOCLES 

17. 

EURIPIDES 

ARISTOPHANES 

18 

6.  HERODOTUS 

19, 

THUCYDIDES 

20 

7.  PLATO 

21. 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

22, 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 

23. 

PLOTINUS 

AUGUSTINE 

THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

DANTE 

CHAUCER 


MACHIAVELLI 

HOBBES 


24. 

25. 

26. 
27. 


RABELAIS 
MONTAIGNE 
SHAKESPEARE  I 
SHAKESPEARE  II 


£^p=sH 


«£p£3 


f=S^Pi 


P=£p£* 


£=^5s 


w^5a 


p^p^pS 


p££p^p5 


p^p^ 


52£SS^*i 


55^ 


P^fPP^PPg 


p^p~£pSi 


p2£p2£p= 


ya^P^ 


i=s^3 


PP^PPX^P^  ^Py<^^^^’'^^’P^iPP^^P^ii^P^P,P^P’P^:'  ^P1  ^P>  ^P*  <r^  >r^  y^'p^p^p^p 


S^^p* 


M.  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  5 


V^v^v^f5 


f2^^ 


££5- 


.^v^- 


■5^-y^ 


w^- 


S^ 


Z&T& 


t^T^iP 


Sr^ 


WPW? 


^FW? 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 


29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 


31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 


32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 


34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 


35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 


36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 


37.  FIELDING 


38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 


39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 


«^M^j 


43.  AMERICAN  STATE 
PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 


3sH3;H^2; 


44.  BOSWELL 


45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 


46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 


5SN3H3; 


3£w£«^Sf 


5Wa?K^wi 


3sH2£S3WSs 


3 


3 


50.  MARX 
ENGELS 


5S^2£i3H3 


51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


^2^53 


r'W-' 


^'V^’^rTS 


S3N3£»H3y>j3 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011 


http://www.archive.org/details/greatideassyntop01adle 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


2. 

THE  GREAT  IDEAS :  I 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


25  OOE  'A£  T  D 


' 


I  %tKixQ\  T  '.RT 


*»•."  L1  ..  Vc  '/r  ioM 

itjfc'tf  MHOt.KAKMOU<!’  V.  .03  ,JH.  -OV  2  vV.\or<Y3V'  lfv 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 

A  Synto-picon  of 

Great  Books  of  the  Western  World 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Editor  in  Chief 
William  Gorman,  General  Editor 


VOLUME  I 


William  Benton,  Publisher 
ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 
CHICAGO  ■  LONDON  ■  TORONTO  ■  GENEVA  ■  SYDNEY  •  TOKYO 


p  A  qrri 

G  J.  X  ul  '-A 


■r 


TAE  510  HHT 


*  ' 


A  V' 


>\vAt) 


V'O 


■•  .  .  . 

»  w  7 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 
The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

AvV  .a  (  ••  ,.i  i'fi 

© 

1  1952  G.:kc1  OJ  3  Y  3^3 

by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Editor  in  Chief 
William  Gorman,  General  Editor 


Associate  Editors 

Herman  Bernick  Otto  Bird 


Robert  Anderson 
Aaron  Bell 
Saul  Bellow 
Joan  Bernick 
Seymour  Cain 
Robert  Campbell 
Frederic  Camper 
Joyce  Connor 
Mary  Jane  Deiches 
Gordon  Dupee 
Raymond  Ellinwood 
William  Gerhard 
Robert  Hemenway 


Editorial  Staff 

Donald  Hollenhorst 
Leonard  Olsen 
Janet  Pollak 
John  Sledge 
William  Sparks 
Dorothy  Hodson  Vining 
Ursula  von  Eckardt 
Eleanor  Frank  White 
Benjamin  Zimmerman 


Thomas  Cosgrove 
James  Doyle 
James  Ellington 


Assistant  Editors  Executive  Editor 

Virginia  Colton  George  Bryson 

Ruth  Gustafson 

Bibliographical  Assistants  Supe  rviso  rs 

Marie  Sachey  Martha  Dubois 

-  Lorraine  Heath 

Robert  Malim  Joseph  J.  Roddy 

Gladys  Moore 
James  Vail 


Peter  Wolff 


Daniel  Fetler 
Norman  Atwood  Garis 
John  Harmon 
Gertrude  Jaeger 
Jack  Landau 
Richard  Lewis 
Werner  Low 
Charles  Nelson 
Heloise  Olsen 
Mary  Reis 
Iola  Scofield 
Shirley  Shapiro 
Margaret  Stern 


Editorial  Assistants 

Rosalie  Gittelson 
Miyo  Urakawa 

Special  Consultants 
Arthur  Hyman 
Janet  Kalven 
Herbert  Lamm 
Milton  Mayer 
Joseph  Schwab 


\  '  ~v'v  '  .  J  •  .  UiO}^ 


>:■  ‘  A  V  . r  ■•  :  K 

»<*.:oW  jm(t34  axir.  o'  aotmaS  km;juH 


;hjth3  jar^Ct 
komhaH  vip.o[ 

SIZ  Y  ;  ■  iH  v 

UA  C:  J  Y3/J 

/'3i  .  '3 

oj  ;  .Y/ir.-:  :VT 
KOJ'YHV-  23  YlAfO 
n  -  0  32ioiaH 

aJliHOD^  ajoI 
OHI  •  '  31  '.r?. 

HHHIY  T  '  3 At  •  I.-  M 


'V.  V  ,  \  -.aVva 

MO*  133  A  »  -  :;f 

A  wa^iajiU  oyiM 

yy  *  ; 

;<AMYH  3U:iTv  /V 
MHVJA>I  T3KA{_ 
)/,>  .  1  ;  Y-irI  >H 
Y.  ;  5*03  M 

ha  mssoT 


■■  i 

Ti  5D-'  •■•;  '  •  '  -  Hf  .  : 

/  !?..iO  c  i/  -4oaJ 
‘I  av'  Y 
a;;-'  -  (_ 

~MU  ;>■'  :o: *  -;rr--j;.oCI 

TQ/L*.  .*.<  Axmvi 

ViAMa .  v  •  :.>.</  :a8L 

;:08-  ~>  <i  hT 

Y  A  P3MA[ 

■  -  i  -  ;o's  D 

r  ■  i 

ei<:  •  r-.iv' 

1  CASH  :(V  ;  .  .' 

Yoqo>I  .^F  .  :  [_ 


wo?Jtn  avi.-s  raaaoJI 

*  ViOAaA 

*•  I  ija2 
I  VIAOj^ 
v  ,/:ig 

jjan  i  ■  O  a  0.3 
aaai  •>[*  aa»3 
aoD  aovof 

23HOi.  iaM 

:  •  ><J  vjonaoD 
aooTT^u  ;3  jviomya£ 
CKAHMc.:  7/ 

YA  Hi.  ;g 


ito* v  •'•  v  ’\al- 

>iOTioI)  /  r/uoaiV 
K<  23A  >  HTijjl 

AV.uV-  .i 

&  z;rs.:.M 


VI  ddOtf 

"s*  i  2ya;.  O 

jiaV  *  r/A( 


GENERAL  CONTENTS 


VOLUME  I 

Preface  .........  xi 

Explanation  of  Reference  Style  ....  xxxiii 

Chapters  1-50:  Angel  to  Love  ....  .1-1082. 

VOLUME  II 

Explanation  of  Reference  Style  ix 

Chapters  51-101:  Man  to  World  ....  .1-1140 

Appendix  I.  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  .  1143 

Appendix  II.  The  Principles  and  Methods  of 

Syntopical  Construction  .....  1x19 

Inventory  of  Terms  .......  1303 


2T/HTM03  JA./I3M30 


XX 

t.il/:xx  . 
.1801-1  . 

xi 

c|iir-j. . 
£fll  . 

^I-JI 
fO£I  . 


r  3  i/TJ.iO  / 

aoATan'l 

non 

f  /o3  cn\  jaonA  :of-; 

TJ  JMUJOY 

.  .  j.jytB  SoniiTHTa  /I  to  noiTAVLf.jq.'J 

- 

8omo.‘.a3  jAKOirraai.  10  /  <*  Aitooi.,  rS  xibnyTqA 

to  qoh  '71  an/  uti  : ■  >  .11  xiL  uqnA 

VI01TDU«T2>to3  JADITOTVr/3 

.  2MS3T  TO  xjiomavvfl 


CONTENTS 


Preface 

xi 

Explanation  of  Reference 
Style 

xxxiii 

Chapter  i .  Angel 

1 

2.  Animal 

l9 

3.  Aristocracy 

50 

4.  Art 

64 

5.  Astronomy 

87 

6.  Beauty 

1 12 

7.  Being 

126 

8.  Cause 

155 

9.  Chance 

179 

10.  Change 

:93 

11.  Citizen 

218 

12.  Constitution 

233 

13.  Courage 

252 

14.  Custom  and 
Convention 

268 

15.  Definition 

286 

16.  Democracy 

3°3 

17.  Desire 

323 

18.  Dialectic 

345 

19.  Duty 

358 

20.  Education 

376 

21.  Element 

400 

22.  Emotion 

4*3 

23.  Eternity 

437 

Chapter  24.  Evolution 

451 

25.  Experience 

468 

26.  Family 

486 

27.  Fate 

515 

28.  Form 

526 

29.  God 

543 

30.  Good  and  Evil 

605 

31.  Government 

637 

32.  Habit 

665 

33.  Happiness 

684 

34.  History 

711 

35.  Honor 

728 

36.  Hypothesis 

749 

37.  Idea 

761 

38.  Immortality 

784 

39.  Induction 

805 

40.  Infinity 

816 

41.  Judgment 

835 

42.  Justice 

850 

43.  Knowledge 

880 

44.  Labor 

921 

45.  Language 

94 1 

46.  Law 

962 

47.  Liberty 

99 1 

48.  Life  and  Death 

I0I3 

49.  Logic 

!°35 

50.  Love 

1051 

IX 


;"MCo 


:0!LIJJC'C.  4r:  '  0 

377  7 

vxo f  ik 

£R 

1 80 

j  rzoH  .?f 

zr^iin-  H  .i  - 

fix 

mi/TH:  'Ml  -8£ 

V  )1TD  JG/  -  ; 

TV3*/;xrjT 

ron  .r*. 

3CG  LlWO>  X  ,£f 

.  'SO 

flOHA  .U 

ho/  idvaJ 

£• 

h  ft..i  .  ■  3 4 1  :  .8 

i°  r 

>100 J  .  , 

1  go  1 

HVO  T  ,o£ 

H ryy,s}  <  r7  .* 

•  j  /tR 

i  IO  .1  wdj 

Oi 

c)s.i 

Q^I 

W» 

8is 

cgs 

8  • 

£0£ 

d,v£ 

OOf 

£ff  v 

m 


X  *ix/.  .£ 
YD/  -r 

T,y.  .* 

/  •• 

atu/O  .8 
)Ka;  O  .p 
)  .01 
.  T  • 

V!Oi  Trrjf  O  .ir 

v  ;  i/  \y-j3  .j.: 
K*  •'  z.iw.c  . 

vrorrr/  '7  .51 

YOA>f:>OM  .0  • 

DI  lAld  P 

Cl  .qi 

KOITAOUaH  >£. 

tx  !'*  x !  .  rs 
moiTO'/H  .ti 
YTivr^arrM  .££ 


PREFACE 


I.  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  SYNTOPICON 

BY  calling  this  work  “a  Syntopicon  of  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western 
1  World,"  the  editors  hope  to  characterize  its  nature,  to  indicate  the 
function  it  performs  in  relation  to  the  set  as  a  whole,  and  to  assert  its 
originality  as  an  intellectual  instrument.  The  relation  of  these  two  volumes 
of  T he  Great  Ideas  to  the  rest  of  the  set  is  the  key  to  the  nature  of  the  Syn¬ 
topicon  and  its  originality  as  an  instrument.  Apart  from  this  relation,  T he 
Great  Ideas,  though  to  some  extent  readable  in  itself,  does  not  perform 
the  function  for  which  it  was  created — to  show  that  the  443  works  which 
comprise  Volumes  4  to  54  can  be  seen  and  used  as  something  more  than  a 
collection  of  books. 

The  great  books  are  pre-eminently  those  which  have  given  the  western 
tradition  its  life  and  light.  The  unity  of  this  set  of  books  does  not  consist 
merely  in  the  fact  that  each  member  of  it  is  a  great  book  worth  reading. 
A  deeper  unity  exists  in  the  relation  of  all  the  books  to  one  tradition,  a 
unity  shown  by  the  continuity  of  the  discussion  of  common  themes  and 
problems.  It  is  claimed  for  this  set  of  great  books  that  all  the  works  in  it 
are  significantly  related  to  one  another  and  that,  taken  together,  they  ade¬ 
quately  present  the  ideas  and  issues,  the  terms  and  topics,  that  have  made 
the  western  tradition  what  it  is.  More  than  a  collection  of  books,  then,  this 
set  is  a  certain  kind  of  whole  that  can  and  should  be  read  as  such. 

The  Great  Ideas  results  from  and  records  such  a  reading  of  the  great 
books.  The  aim  of  this  “syntopical  reading”  was  to  discover  the  unity  and 
continuity  of  western  thought  in  the  discussion  of  common  themes  and 
problems  from  one  end  of  the  tradition  to  the  other.  The  Syntopicon  does 
not  reproduce  or  present  the  results  of  this  reading  in  a  digest  to  save 
others  the  trouble  of  reading  the  great  books  for  themselves.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  it  only  lays  down  the  lines  along  which  a  syntopical  reading  of  the 
great  books  can  be  done,  and  shows  why  and  how  it  should  be  done.  The 


XI 


xu 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


various  uses  of  the  Syntopicon,  described  in  Section  III  of  this  Preface,  all 
derive  from  its  primary  purpose— to  serve  as  a  guide  to  the  reading  of 
Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World  as  a  unified  whole. 

The  lines  along  which  a  syntopical  reading  of  the  great  books  can  and 
should  be  done  are  the  main  lines  of  the  continuous  discussion  that  runs 
through  the  thirty  centuries  of  western  civilization.  This  great  conversa¬ 
tion  across  the  ages  is  a  living  organism  whose  structure  the  Syntopicon 
tries  to  articulate.  It  tries  to  show  the  many  strands  of  this  conversation  be¬ 
tween  the  greatest  minds  of  western  civilization  on  the  themes  which  have 
concerned  men  in  every  epoch,  and  which  cover  the  whole  range  of  man’s 
speculative  inquiries  and  practical  interests.  To  the  extent  that  it  succeeds, 
it  reveals  the  unity  and  continuity  of  the  western  tradition. 

It  was  with  these  considerations  in  mind  that  the  editors  called  The 
Great  Ideas  a  syntopicon  of  the  great  books — literally,  a  collection  of  the 
topics  which  are  the  main  themes  of  the  conversation  to  be  found  in  the 
books.  A  topic  is  a  subject  of  discussion.  It  is  a  place  at  which  minds  meet 
— to  agree  or  disagree,  but  at  least  to  communicate  with  one  another 
about  some  common  concern.  Just  as  a  number  of  minds,  or  what  they 
have  to  say,  can  be  related  by  their  relevance  to  a  common  theme,  so  a 
number  of  topics  can  be  related  by  their  relevance  to  a  common  term — a 
single  concept  or  category  which  generates  a  number  of  problems  or 
themes  for  discussion.  Hence  the  Syntopicon  is  organized,  first,  by  a  list¬ 
ing  of  the  ideas  that  are  the  important  common  terms  of  discussion;  and, 
then,  by  an  enumeration  of  the  topics  that  are  the  various  particular  points 
about  which  the  discussion  of  each  of  these  ideas  revolves. 

The  full  title  of  this  work — The  Great  Ideas,  a  Syntopicon  of  Great 
Boohs  of  the  Western  World — thus  indicates  not  only  that  its  structure 
consists  of  terms  and  topics,  but  also  that  it  functions  as  a  guide  to  the 
great  books  from  which  its  terms  and  topics  are  drawn.  But  the  title  may 
fail  to  indicate  another  equally  important  function  which  the  Syntopicon 
performs  when  it  is  taken  together  with  the  great  books.  By  serving  as  a 
guide  to  the  syntopical  reading  of  the  great  books,  it  does  more  than  trans¬ 
form  them  from  a  mere  collection  of  books  into  a  unified  whole;  it  trans¬ 
forms  them  into  a  new  kind  of  encyclopaedic  whole — a  new  kind  of 
reference  library.  Without  in  any  way  interfering  with  all  the  values  the 
great  books  have  as  books  to  be  read  individually,  the  Syntopicon  gives 


PREFACE 


them  the  further  utility  of  a  unified  reference  library  in  the  realm  of 
thought  and  opinion. 

Because  of  the  traditional  and  proved  importance  of  the  thought  and 
opinion  contained  in  the  great  books,  the  Syntopicon,  in  the  editors’  opin¬ 
ion,  creates  an  intellectual  instrument  which  is  comparable  to,  though 
quite  distinct  from,  the  dictionary  and  the  encyclopaedia.  The  dictionary 
is  a  basic  reference  work  in  the  sphere  of  language.  1’he  general  encyclo¬ 
paedia  is  a  basic  reference  work  in  the  sphere  of  fact,  concerned  with  all 
matters  ascertainable  in  the  present  state  of  historical  and  scientific  knowl¬ 
edge.  The  Syntopicon — these  two  volumes  taken  together  with  the  rest  of 
the  set — is  a  basic  reference  work  in  the  sphere  of  ideas,  comprehending  the 
wisdom  and  understanding  accumulated  thus  far  in  all  major  fields  of 
inquiry.  As  its  utility  is  realized,  it  will,  the  editors  hope,  take  its  place 
beside  the  dictionary  and  the  encyclopaedia  in  a  triad  of  fundamental  ref¬ 
erence  works. 


II.  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  SYNTOPICON 

The  Great  Ideas  consists  of  102  chapters,  each  of  which  provides  a  syn- 
topical  treatment  of  one  of  the  basic  terms  or  concepts  in  the  great  books. 
As  the  Table  of  Contents  indicates,  the  chapters  are  arranged  in  the  alpha¬ 
betical  order  of  these  102  terms  or  concepts:  from  Angel  to  Love  in  Vol¬ 
ume  I,  and  from  Man  to  World  in  Volume  II. 

Following  the  chapter  on  World,  there  are  two  appendices.  Appendix  I 
is  a  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings.  Appendix  II  is  an  essay  on  the 
Principles  and  Methods  of  Syntopical  Construction.  These  two  appendices 
are  in  turn  followed  by  an  Inventory  of  Terms. 

THE  IOl  CHAPTERS 

Each  of  the  102  chapters  is  constructed  according  to  the  same  pattern. 
Each  consists  of  five  parts — an  Introduction,  an  Outline  of  Topics,  Refer¬ 
ences,  Cross-References,  and  Additional  Readings.  The  inner  structure  of 
the  Syntopicon  is  constituted  by  the  order  and  relation  of  these  five  parts, 
and  by  the  integral  relation  of  the  Inventory  of  Terms  to  the  102  chapters 
as  a  whole. 


XIV 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1)  INTRODUCTION.  Each  chapter  begins  with  an  essay  which  com¬ 
ments  on  the  various  meanings  of  the  idea  under  consideration,  and  takes 
note.of  the  problems  it  has  raised  and  the  controversies  it  has  occasioned 
in  the  tradition  of  western  thought. 

The  Introduction  to  a  great  idea  is  designed  to  serve  as  a  guide  to  its 
topics  and,  through  them,  to  the  content  of  the  references.  For  certain  of 
the  most  important  topics,  it  frequently  provides,  in  the  words  of  the  au¬ 
thors  themselves,  a  foretaste  of  the  great  conversation  contained  in  the 
passages  referred  to.  The  Introduction  usually  expands  on  the  necessarily 
brief  statement  of  the  themes  or  issues  in  the  Outline  of  Topics,  and  fur¬ 
nishes  some  comment  on  the  structure  of  the  Outline  as  a  whole,  and  on 
the  relation  of  particular  topics  to  one  another. 

The  Introduction  serves  one  other  purpose.  It  indicates  some  of  the  con¬ 
nections  between  the  idea  it  discusses  and  other  great  ideas,  thus  function¬ 
ing  as  a  commentary  on  the  Cross-References.  In  some  cases,  the  Introduc¬ 
tion  also  calls  attention  to  the  way  in  which  certain  works  recommended 
in  the  Additional  Readings  supplement  the  references  to  the  great  books 
in  the  discussion  of  certain  aspects  of  the  idea  under  consideration. 

(2)  OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS.  In  each  chapter,  the  Outline  of  Topics 
follows  the  Introduction.  It  states  the  major  themes  of  the  conversation  to 
be  found  in  the  great  books  on  the  idea  of  that  chapter.  It  exhibits  the  in¬ 
ternal  structure  of  the  idea  by  presenting  its  topics  in  relation  to  one  an¬ 
other.  There  are  about  3000  topics  in  the  Syntopicon  as  a  whole,  an  average 
of  30  to  a  chapter,  though  the  actual  number  varies  from  as  few  as  six  top¬ 
ics  in  a  chapter  to  as  many  as  76. 

The  3000  topics  provide  a  statement  of  the  scope  and  variety  of  subjects 
with  which  the  great  books  deal  in  a  substantial  and  significant  fashion. 
Since  the  topics  are  divided  among  102  chapters,  according  to  the  great 
ideas  under  which  they  fall,  the  user  of  the  Syntopicon  can  find  a  particu¬ 
lar  topic  by  turning  to  the  chapter  on  the  idea  which  is  a  central  term  ex¬ 
pressed  in  the  statement  of  that  topic  or,  if  not  actually  present  in  the 
phrasing  of  the  topic,  is  implied  by  it. 

Almost  all  the  topics  involve  one  or  more  terms  other  than  the  name  of 
the  great  idea  under  which  they  fall.  Hence,  by  consulting  the  Inventory 
of  Terms,  the  user  of  the  Syntopicon  can  ascertain  whether  the  particular 
subject  in  which  he  is  interested  is  represented  by  one  or  more  of  the  3000 


PREFACE 


xv 


topics.  As  will  be  seen  below,  the  prime  function  of  the  Inventory  is  to 
enable  the  user  of  the  Syntopicon  to  find  topics  in  which  he  is  interested 
and  which  he  could  not  otherwise  find  except  by  examining  the  Outlines 
of  Topics,  chapter  by  chapter. 

Since  the  references  to  the  great  books  are  organized  by  topics,  the  indi¬ 
vidual  topic,  rather  than  a  great  idea,  is  the  elementary  unit  of  the  Syntop¬ 
icon.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  references,  the  great  ideas  are  collec¬ 
tions  of  topics.  The  same  is  true  of  all  the  other  terms  listed  in  the  Inven¬ 
tory  of  Terms.  For  each  of  these,  one  or  more  topics  are  the  headings  un¬ 
der  which  the  discussion  of  the  subject  can  be  found  in  the  great  books. 
The  user  of  the  Syntopicon  must,  therefore,  always  use  a  topic  rather  than 
a  term  to  discover  what  the  great  books  have  to  say  on  a  particular  subject. 
However,  with  the  help  of  the  Inventory  of  Terms,  he  can  always  use  a 
term  to  find  the  topics  which  either  state  or  approximately  represent  the 
subject  of  his  interest. 

For  the  convenience  of  the  reader,  the  Outline  of  Topics  in  each  chap¬ 
ter  is  keyed  to  the  pages  of  the  Reference  section  which  immediately  fol¬ 
lows.  In  the  Outline,  the  number  to  the  right  of  a  particular  topic  indicates 
on  which  page  of  the  Reference  section  it  begins. 

(3)  REFERENCES.  The  References  are  the  heart  of  each  chapter.  As 
the  Introduction  and  the  Outline  of  Topics  are  designed  to  help  the  reader 
use  the  References,  so  the  References,  organized  topically,  are  designed  to 
enable  him  to  turn  to  the  great  books  for  the  discussion  of  a  particular 
subject.  For  each  topic  they  locate,  by  volume  and  page,  the  relevant  works 
and  passages  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World.  There  are  about 
163,000  references  in  the  Syntopicon  as  a  whole,  an  average  of  1500  to  a 
chapter,  though  the  actual  number  varies  from  as  few  as  284  references 
in  a  chapter  to  as  many  as  7065. 

Under  each  topic,  the  references  are  arranged  in  the  order  in  which  the 
authors  and  their  works  appear  in  Great  Boof(s  of  the  Western  World. 
References  to  the  Bible,  when  present,  are  always  placed  first.  The  order 
of  references  enables  the  user  of  the  Syntopicon  either  to  follow  the  dis¬ 
cussion  of  some  theme  through  the  great  books  in  the  historical  sequence, 
or  to  select  particular  authors  or  the  authors  of  a  particular  period,  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  interest. 


XVI 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Ideally,  a  syntopical  reading  of  the  great  books  in  relation  to  any  single 
topic  should  cover  all  the  works  or  passages  cited  under  that  topic.  Ideally, 
such  a  reading  should  proceed,  in  the  first  instance  at  least,  in  the  order  in 
which  the  references  are  presented.  Reading  the  materials  in  chronological 
order  enables  the  reader  to  follow  the  actual  development  of  thought  on 
a  topic.  In  many  passages,  later  authors  explicitly  refer  to  earlier  ones ;  and 
even  more  frequently,  the  expression  of  later  views  presupposes  an  under¬ 
standing  of  earlier  ones,  on  which  they  are  based  or  with  which  they  take 
issue. 

But  the  individual  reader  may  deviate  from  this  ideal  procedure  in  a 
number  of  ways,  according  to  his  particular  interests.  He  may  wish  only  to 
sample  the  materials  referred  to  under  a  given  topic;  or  he  may  wish  to 
examine  what  a  certain  group  of  authors  have  to  say  on  a  particular  topic. 
The  reader  may  know  sufficiently  well  the  position  of  certain  authors  on 
the  topic  in  question,  and  so  may  turn  his  attention  to  other  authors  whose 
works  are  cited  there;  or  he  may  wish  to  examine  thoroughly  the  thought 
of  certain  authors,  while  merely  forming  a  general  impression  of  what 
others  have  to  say.  The  Reference  section  is  so  constructed  that  it  permits 
the  reader,  almost  at  a  glance,  to  follow  any  one  of  a  wide  variety  of  pro¬ 
cedures. 

A  brief  explanatory  note,  repeated  at  the  beginning  of  every  Reference 
section,  gives  the  minimum  necessary  directions  for  going  from  the  refer¬ 
ences  to  the  passages  to  which  they  refer.  For  the  sake  of  brevity,  it  offers 
only  such  information  as  is  uniform  for  all  of  the  works  cited.  If  the 
reader  wishes  complete  information  concerning  the  way  in  which  each 
particular  work  is  cited,  he  will  find  this  set  forth,  by  authors  and  titles,  in 
the  Explanation  of  Reference  Style,  which  immediately  follows  this  Pref¬ 
ace  (see  pg.  xxxiii)  and  is  also  printed,  for  the  reader’s  convenience,  at  the 
opening  of  Volume  II.  The  Explanation  of  Reference  Style  contains  a  com¬ 
plete  account  of  all  the  symbols  and  abbreviations  used  in  the  Reference 
section  and  gives  examples  of  the  usual  typographical  form  of  the  refer¬ 
ences. 

Only  one  further  point  requires  comment  here.  In  some  chapters,  a  few 
topics  contain  no  references.  These  topics  serve  in  the  Outline  as  headings 
for  other  topics  grouped  analytically  under  them.  The  user  of  the  Syn- 
topicon  who  wants  to  know  what  the  great  books  have  to  say  on  a  partic¬ 
ular  subject,  and  finds  that  subject  represented  by  a  topic  without  reference 


PREFACE 


xvii 


content,  will  find  in  its  subordinate  topics  references  to  the  great  books 
on  various  aspects  of  the  general  subject  he  has  in  mind. 

(4)  CROSS-REFERENCES.  The  Cross-References  follow  the  Refer- 
ences  in  each  chapter.  They  direct  the  reader  to  other  chapters  in  which 
similar  or  related  matters  are  considered.  By  relating  the  topics  of  one 
chapter  to  those  of  other  chapters,  the  Cross-References  show  the  inter¬ 
connection  of  the  great  ideas. 

In  general,  the  order  of  the  Cross-References  follows  that  of  the  Outline 
of  Topics.  Each  entry  in  the  Cross-References  indicates,  by  its  phrasing, 
the  subject  of  the  topic  in  a  given  chapter  to  which  topics  in  other  chapters 
are  related  or  similar. 

The  phrasing  of  the  Cross-References  enables  the  reader  to  determine 
whether  the  topics  in  the  other  chapters  mentioned  are  similar  or  related 
to  the  topic  in  this  chapter.  The  related  topics  will  usually  offer  a  quite 
different  set  of  references. 

The  user  of  the  Syntopicon  will  find  that  topics  in  different  chapters 
often  resemble  one  another,  both  in  their  phrasing  and  in  the  references 
set  forth  under  them.  In  a  few  cases  they  are  identical  or  almost  identical. 
But  similar  topics  will  usually  differ  in  their  reference  content  because  the 
meaning  of  a  topic  is  partly  determined  by  the  idea  under  which  it  falls, 
and  by  the  surrounding  topics  which  form  its  context.  Hence,  in  most 
cases,  the  reader  who  turns  to  similar  topics  in  other  chapters  will  find 
some  proportion  of  different  references. 

(5)  ADDITIONAL  READINGS.  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World 
comprises  443  works  by  74  authors;  if  we  add  the  77  books  of  the  Bible, 
which  are  syntopically  treated  along  with  these  published  works,  the  num¬ 
ber  is  520.  But  this  large  number  does  not  represent  all  the  books  which 
make  signal  contributions  to  the  great  conversation  in  the  sphere  of  each 
of  the  great  ideas. 

The  list  of  Additional  Readings  which  is  the  last  part  of  each  chapter  is 
a  list  of  books  recommended  as  companions  to  the  works  and  passages 
cited  in  the  Reference  section.  For  the  ideas  and  topics  of  each  chapter, 
they  supplement  or  amplify  the  discussion  to  be  found  in  the  great  books. 
They  represent  some  of  the  works  in  the  wider  field  of  literature,  in  which 
the  great  books  occupy  a  central  position. 


xvm 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


In  each  list  of  Additional  Readings,  the  recommended  titles  are  divided 
into  two  groups:  first,  works  written  by  authors  represented  in  Great 
Booths  of  the  Western  World ;  and  second,  works  by  other  authors.  Each 
group  is  listed  chronologically.  Whenever  they  are  available,  translations 
of  foreign  works  are  suggested.  The  existence  of  English  translations  is 
always  indicated  by  the  use  of  English  titles;  these  are  usually  accom¬ 
panied  by  the  title  in  the  original  language. 

The  102  lists  of  Additional  Readings,  each  constructed  for  the  idea  and 
topics  of  a  particular  chapter,  contain  in  all  2603  titles  by  1181  authors.  For 
the  convenience  of  the  reader,  the  authors  and  titles  in  the  102  separate 
lists  of  Additional  Readings  are  compiled  into  a  single  list  in  the  Bibliog¬ 
raphy  of  Additional  Readings,  which  is  Appendix  I  (see  Volume  II,  pg. 
II43)- 

In  the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings,  the  authors’  names  are  in 
alphabetical  order  and  the  works  of  each  author  are  listed  alphabetically 
under  his  name.  In  addition,  the  Bibliography  provides  useful  information 
concerning  authors  and  works,  such  as  birth  and  death  dates  of  authors, 
date  and  place  of  writing  or  publication,  names  of  editors  or  translators, 
names  of  publishers,  and  names  of  standard  collections  in  which  individual 
works  appear.  A  note,  preceding  the  Bibliography,  explains  the  principles 
of  its  construction. 


THE  INVENTORY  OF  TERMS 

The  Inventory  of  Terms  is  an  integral  part  of  the  Syntopicon  placed  for 
convenience  at  the  end  of  Volume  II. 

The  Syntopicon  is  both  a  book  to  be  read  and  a  reference  book.  The 
Table  of  Contents  sets  forth  its  contents  as  a  book  to  be  read.  But  since  this 
is  limited  to  listing  the  102  great  ideas  chapter  by  chapter,  it  cannot  indi¬ 
cate  the  scope  and  range  of  the  Syntopicon  as  a  reference  book.  The  In¬ 
ventory  of  Terms  performs  that  function;  it  serves  as  a  table  of  contents 
for  the  Syntopicon  as  a  reference  book. 

The  person  who  wishes  to  use  the  Syntopicon  as  a  reference  book,  in 
order  to  learn  what  the  great  books  have  to  say  on  a  particular  subject, 
must  be  able  to  find  that  subject  among  the  3000  topics.  The  primary  func¬ 
tion  of  the  Inventory  of  Terms  is  to  enable  him  to  find  the  topic  or  topics 
which  either  clearly  express  or  approximately  represent  the  subject  of  his 
inquiry.  It  does  so  by  citing,  for  each  term  listed,  the  topics  in  which  that 


PREFACE 


XIX 


term  is  a  principal  element.  It  cites  these  by  giving  the  name  of  the  chapter 
in  which  the  topic  appears,  and  the  number  of  the  topic  in  that  chapter. 
The  reader  can  find  the  topic  in  which  he  is  interested  by  looking  in  the 
Inventory  for  the  term  or  terms  that  would  appear  in  a  statement  of  the 
subject. 

The  user  of  the  Syntopicon  may  have  a  broader  interest  than  can  be  ex¬ 
pressed  in  a  particular  topic.  He  may  wish  to  examine  the  whole  range  of 
discussion  of  a  basic  concept,  whether  that  be  one  of  the  great  ideas  or 
some  other  term.  This  may  involve,  not  one  or  two  topics,  but  a  large 
number,  as  is  certainly  the  case  for  the  great  ideas,  and  for  many  other 
important  concepts  as  well.  Since  the  Inventory  of  Terms  cites  all  the  top¬ 
ics  in  which  each  term  is  significantly  involved,  it  enables  the  reader  to 
investigate  the  whole  range  of  the  discussion  in  the  great  books  relevant  to 
that  term. 

Among  the  terms  listed  in  the  Inventory  are  the  names  of  the  102 
great  ideas.  This  does  not  duplicate  the  information  furnished  by  the 
Table  of  Contents.  For  each  of  the  great  ideas,  the  Table  of  Contents  lo¬ 
cates  only  the  whole  chapter  which  deals  with  that  great  idea;  whereas 
the  Inventory  of  Terms  usually  cites  topics  in  many  other  chapters,  in  ad¬ 
dition  to  the  chapter  on  that  idea  itself.  For  the  reader  who  wishes  to  ex¬ 
plore  the  discussion  of  a  great  idea  as  thoroughly  as  possible,  the  Inven¬ 
tory  of  Terms  supplements  the  topics  to  be  found  in  the  chapter  on  that 
idea,  and  even  those  mentioned  in  the  Cross-References  of  that  chapter. 

The  1800  terms  in  the  Inventory  are  listed  alphabetically,  and  for  each 
term  the  relevant  topics  are  cited  in  the  alphabetical  order  of  the  chapters 
in  which  the  topics  occur.  Sometimes  the  topics  are  divided  into  two 
groups,  of  primary  and  secondary  importance.  Within  each  group,  the 
chapters  are  alphabetically  arranged. 

The  Inventory  is  likely  to  present  only  one  difficulty  to  the  person  who 
consults  it  in  order  to  find  a  particular  topic.  The  first  step  in  the  location 
of  a  topic  is  accomplished  when  the  reader  turns  in  the  Inventory  to  the 
term  that  he  thinks  is  involved  in  a  statement  of  the  subject  of  his  interest. 
But,  finding  a  number  of  topics  cited  there,  he  must  choose  among  them. 

There  are  two  ways  for  him  to  proceed:  (x)  he  can  examine  the  topics 
one  after  another,  until  he  finds  the  one  which  satisfies  him  as  z  state¬ 
ment  of  the  subject;  or  (2)  he  can  use  the  names  of  the  chapters  in  which 
the  topics  occur  as  a  clue  to  finding  the  topic  which  states  the  subject  of 


XX 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


his  inquiry.  Since  the  content  of  particular  topics  is  largely  determined  by 
the  idea  under  which  they  fall,  the  chapter  names  will  quite  frequently 
prove  a  reliable  guide. 

A  brief  note,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Inventory  of  Terms,  explains  its 
construction  and  furnishes  directions  for  its  use.  Nothing  more  need  be 
said  here  of  its  structure,  or  of  its  utility  in  making  the  Syntopicon  a  ref¬ 
erence  book.  But  a  word  should  be  added  about  the  significance  of  the  In¬ 
ventory  in  relation  to  the  great  ideas. 

The  division  of  the  Syntopicon  into  102  chapters  may  give  rise  to  the 
notion  that  its  editors  think  there  are  only  102  ideas  worth  discussing.  The 
number  of  really  great,  that  is,  primary  or  pivotal  ideas  may  be  smaller  or 
larger  than  102.  That  number  represents  an  editorial  judgment  which  was 
made  in  the  course  of  constructing  the  Syntopicon.  How  it  was  reached  is 
explained  elsewhere  (see  Appendix  II,  Section  I) ;  but  here  it  should  be 
said  that  it  does  not  represent  a  judgment  by  the  editors  that  the  102  terms 
selected  by  them  are  the  only  concepts  or  ideas  which  have  notable  sig¬ 
nificance  in  the  tradition  of  western  thought.  The  Inventory  of  Terms 
manifests  exactly  the  opposite  judgment.  Its  1800  words  or  phrases  express 
important  concepts.  Though  many  of  these  will  immediately  be  seen  to 
have  much  less  comprehensive  or  critical  meaning  than  the  102  major 
terms  of  the  Syntopicon,  they  all  have  general  currency  or  importance 
in  some  special  field  of  inquiry.  They  also  represent  notions  or  topics 
which  fall  under  one  or  more  of  the  102  great  ideas. 

■>  oi  ’  ih:  i 

THE  PRINCIPLES  AND  METHODS  OF 

SYNTOPICAL  CONSTRUCTION 

:  si  i  ’  '  . .  .•*  •  u  u  •  -  -  i  . 1  •  •'  m 

The  essay  on  the  Principles  and  Methods  of  Syntopical  Construction  is 
Appendix  II  (see  Volume  II,  pg.  1219).  It  is  intended  as  a  supplement  to 
this  Preface.  The  foregoing  brief  descriptions  of  the  parts  of  the  Syntopi¬ 
con  indicate  its  structure,  but  they  do  not  explain  how  it  was  constructed. 

The  work  of  creating  each  part  of  the  Syntopicon  raised  many  difficult 
intellectual  and  editorial  problems.  These  problems,  and  especially  the 
principles  and  methods  by  which  they  were  solved,  may  be  of  interest  to 
the  reader  after  he  has  had  some  experience  in  using  the  Syntopicon,  but 
probably  not  before.  The  editors  decided  to  make  the  essay  on  the  Syn- 
topicon’s  construction  an  appendix  to  the  work,  rather  than  burden  the 
Preface  with  an  account  of  the  methods  employed  and  an  exposition  of 


PREFACE 


xxi 


the  principles  adopted.  While  freeing  the  Preface  from  the  burden  of 
fuller  explanations,  they  nevertheless  hoped  to  provide  systematic  an¬ 
swers  to  questions  which  might  arise  in  the  reader’s  mind  as  a  result  of 
using  the  Syntopicon. 

>■  >•  .■  •  1  k*  j  f  1  :hi  dgt  o  l  <i  <*  1-.  ■  .r 

-nr,;'  ir  -1  •  in  ivt  sr't  ,  r>v  U,  ’  .  '.>  >■ 

III.  THE  USES  OF  THE  SYNTOPICON 

The  foregoing  discussion  of  the  nature  and  structure  of  the  Syntopicon 
has  expressed  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  designed,  but  it  does  not  fully 
state  all  its  possible  uses.  There  are  four  basic  types  of  usefulness  which  the 
editors  hope  the  Syntopicon  will  have.  Two  of  these  have  already  been 
mentioned.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  Syntopicon  is  both  a  reference 
book  and  a  book  to  be  read.  But  the  Syntopicon  is  also  intended  to  serve 
as  an  instrument  of  liberal  education,  through  the  aid  it  can  give  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  kind  of  study  and  teaching  of  the  great  books.  It  is  not  inconsistent 
with  its  primary  function  as  a  reference  book  that  it  should,  in  addition, 
prove  to  be  an  instrument  of  research  and  discovery. 

Anal  n 

(i)  The  Syntopicon  as  a  reference  book. 

The  description  (in  Section  II  of  this  Preface)  of  the  parts  of  the  Syn¬ 
topicon,  and  their  function  in  the  structure  of  the  whole,  includes  some 
indication  of  how  it  may  be  used  as  a  reference  book.  Here  we  are  con¬ 
cerned  with  its  general  character  as  a  reference  work,  as  evidenced  by  die 
types  of  questions  it  has  been  constructed  to  answer. 

In  contradistinction  to  books  of  other  sorts,  reference  books  are  de¬ 
signed  to  help  the  reader  who  comes  to  them  with  inquiries  on  particular 
subjects.  If,  in  addition  to  answering  the  questions  he  brings,  they  raise 
further  questions  in  his  mind  and  excite  him  to  further  inquiries,  which, 
in  turn,  they  are  able  to  satisfy,  they  are  more  than  answer-books.  They  are 
pedagogues,  leading  the  mind  from  question  to  question  in  the  pursuit  of 
learning.  Reference  books  at  their  best  perform  an  educational  function, 
not  simply  by  answering  questions,  but  by  arousing  and  sustaining  inquiry. 

Nevertheless,  the  field  of  any  reference  book  is  defined,  in  the  first  in¬ 
stance,  by  the  types  of  questions  it  is  able  to  answer.  The  specific  type  of 
inquiry  which  the  Syntopicon  is  able  to  satisfy,  and  which  gives  it  its  spe¬ 
cial  character  as  a  reference  book,  can  be  formulated  by  the  question,  What 


xxu 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


do  the  great  boo\s  have  to  say  on  this  subject?  This  is  not  the  only  ques¬ 
tion  the  Syntopicon  is  designed  to  answer,  but  it  is  the  primary  one. 

The  topics  are  the  units  through  which  the  Syntopicon  functions  as  a 
reference  book,  since  it  is  under  the  topics  that  the  references  to  the  great 
books  are  assembled ;  and  it  is  through  reading  the  works  or  passages  rec¬ 
ommended  by  these  references  that  the  person  who  consults  the  Syntopi¬ 
con  finds  the  answer  to  his  question,  What  do  the  great  books  have  to  say 
on  this  subject? 

The  range  and  variety  of  the  particular  subjects  of  inquiry  on  which 
the  Syntopicon  can  be  consulted,  is  indicated  quantitatively  by  the  num¬ 
ber  of  topics  and  terms:  2987  topics  are  covered  in  the  102  chapters;  1798 
terms  are  listed  in  the  Inventory  of  Terms.  Qualitatively,  the  range  and 
variety  of  the  inquiries  the  Syntopicon  is  able  to  satisfy,  can  be  seen  only 
through  an  examination  of  the  topics,  chapter  by  chapter,  or  by  an  exami¬ 
nation  of  the  chapter  titles  in  the  Table  of  Contents  and  the  words  or 
phrases  listed  in  the  Inventory  of  Terms. 

To  every  question  expressed  in  this  way — What  do  the  great  books  have 
to  say  on  this  subject? — the  Syntopicon  helps  the  reader  to  discover  the 
answer  for  himself  by  a  syntopical  reading  of  the  great  books  in  the  light 
of  the  topics  and  guided  by  the  references  assembled  under  them.  This 
fact  distinguishes  the  Syntopicon  from  all  other  familiar  reference  books, 
which  contain  within  themselves  the  answers  to  the  questions  on  which 
they  are  consulted.  The  Syntopicon  does  not  contain  the  answers,  but  only 
a  guide  to  where  the  answers  can  be  found  in  the  pages  of  the  great  books. 
The  references  which  constitute  this  guide  do  not  tell  the  reader  what  the 
great  books  have  to  say  on  a  particular  subject.  They  only  tell  him  where 
to  read  in  the  great  books  in  order  to  discover  for  himself  the  thought 
and  opinion,  the  imagination  and  emotion,  in  which  the  authors  of  these 
books  have  expressed  their  minds  on  this  or  that  particular  subject.  For 
this  reason  it  was  said  earlier  in  this  Preface  that  only  when  it  is  taken  to¬ 
gether  with  the  great  books  themselves,  does  the  Syntopicon  create  a  ref¬ 
erence  library  in  the  sphere  of  thought  and  opinion. 

While  this  is  true  for  the  primary  type  of  question  which  the  Syntopi¬ 
con  is  designed  to  answer  through  its  system  of  references  to  the  great 
books,  it  is  not  true,  at  least  not  to  the  same  extent,  for  the  subordinate 
types  of  questions  now  to  be  considered. 


PREFACE  xxiii 

The  question,  What  themes  have  been  discussed  in  the  tradition  of  west¬ 
ern  thought  under  this  idea?  is  answered  in  the  first  instance  by  the  Out¬ 
line  of  Topics  in  the  chapter  on  each  of  the  great  ideas.  If  the  reader  be¬ 
comes  interested  in  the  actual  content  of  the  discussion  under  one  or  more 
of  these  topics,  he  will  then  be  asking  the  primary  sort  of  question,  to 
which  the  references,  assembled  under  these  topics,  provide  the  beginning 
of  an  answer,  and  the  great  books  the  fullness  of  it. 

The  question,  To  which  of  the  other  great  ideas  is  this  idea  related  and 
how  is  it  related?  is  answered  by  the  Cross-References  in  the  chapter  on 
each  of  the  great  ideas.  The  Cross-References  enumerate  the  topics  in 
other  chapters  which  are  related  to  the  topics  covered  by  the  idea  in  ques¬ 
tion.  The  introductory  essay  on  the  idea  also  usually  contains  references 
to  other  Introductions  in  which  related  ideas  are  considered.  By  reading 
the  Introduction  and  examining  the  Cross-References,  a  person  can  use  the 
Syntopicon  to  discover,  at  least  initially,  the  connections  between  one  great 
idea  and  others. 

The  question,  W hat  boo\s  other  than  those  published  in  this  set  contain 
important  discussions  of  this  idea?  is  answered,  to  some  extent,  by  the 
Additional  Readings  listed  in  the  chapter  on  each  of  the  great  ideas. 

The  question,  What  is  the  history  of  the  idea,  its  various  meanings,  and 
the  problems  or  controversies  it  has  raised?  is  answered,  at  least  initially, 
by  the  Introduction  to  the  chapter  on  each  of  the  great  ideas.  Here  as  be¬ 
fore,  if  the  reader’s  interest  is  aroused  to  further  inquiry,  the  topics,  the 
references  under  them,  the  passages  in  the  great  books  referred  to,  and  the 
books  listed  in  the  Additional  Readings,  provide  the  means  for  a  fuller  ex¬ 
ploration  of  the  idea,  in  varying  degrees  of  thoroughness  and  ramification. 

(z)  The  Syntopicon  as  a  book  to  be  read. 

With  respect  to  its  102  essays  on  the  great  ideas,  the  Syntopicon  is  first 
of  all  a  book  to  be  read.  These  essays  are  arranged  in  the  alphabetical  or¬ 
der  of  the  ideas,  but  they  need  not  be  read  in  that  order.  Each  is  intended 
to  be  intelligible  in  itself,  independently  of  the  others. 

The  reader  can  therefore  begin  according  to  his  interests  with  any  one  of 
the  Introductions  to  the  great  ideas.  No  matter  where  he  begins,  he  will 
find  that  the  reading  of  no  other  Introduction  is  presupposed.  But  he  will 
also  find  that  each  Introduction  traces  some  of  the  connections  between 
the  particular  idea  which  it  treats  and  other  great  ideas. 


XXIV 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


With  whatever  idea  he  begins,  the  introductory  essay  will  at  least  sug¬ 
gest  other  ideas  as  subjects  of  related  interest.  These  in  turn  will  turn  his 
attention,  to,  and  may  arouse  his  interest  in,  still  others.  Since  each  of  the 
great  ideas  is  directly  or  remotely  related  to  many  others — perhaps  to  all- — 
through  a  network  of  connections  radiating  from  each  idea  as  a  point  of 
origin,  the  reader,  starting  at  any  point  in  the  realm  of  thought,  can  ex¬ 
plore  the  whole  of  it  by  going  from  any  one  idea  to  all  the  rest  by  circuits 
or  pathways  of  his  own  choosing. 

The  reading  of  one  or  more  Introductions  should  also  turn  attention  to 
the  Outlines  of  Topics  in  these  same  chapters;  and,  through  them  and  the 
references  organized  under  them,  to  the  great  books  themselves.  As  in¬ 
tegral  parts  of  the  Syntopicon,  the  Introductions  to  the  great  ideas  are  not 
intended  to  satisfy  the  reader’s  interest,  but  rather  to  arouse  it,  and  then 
direct  it  to  the  great  books.  The  name  “Introduction”  specifies  the  func¬ 
tion  these  essays  were  designed  to  perform.  When  they  function  effective¬ 
ly  as  introductions  to  the  Outlines  of  Topics  and  the  References,  they  im¬ 
plement  the  use  of  the  Syntopicon,  not  simply  as  a  reference  book,  but  as 
an  instrument  of  liberal  education. 

(3)  The  Syntopicon  as  an  instrument  of  liberal  education. 

The  Syntopicon  serves  the  end  of  liberal  education  to  the  extent  that  it 
facilitates  the  reading  of  the  great  books  and,  beyond  that,  the  study  and 
teaching  of  them.  To  make  the  nature  of  this  educational  contribution 
clear,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  the  integral  and  the  syntopical 
reading  of  great  books. 

Integral  reading  consists  simply  in  reading  a  whole  book  through.  But 
syntopical  reading  does  not  consist  simply  in  reading  parts  of  a  book 
rather  than  the  whole.  It  involves  the  reading  of  one  book  in  relation  to 
others,  all  of  them  relevant  to  the  consideration  of  the  same  topic. 

In  some  cases,  as  the  References  show,  whole  works  are  cited  along  with 
passages  from  other  works,  which  may  be  as  short  as  a  paragraph  or  as 
long  as  a  chapter  or  a  series  of  chapters.  For  the  most  part,  a  syntopical 
reading  consists  in  reading  passages  of  varying  length  rather  than  whole 
works;  but  the  point  remains  that  the  essence  of  syntopical  reading  lies  in 
the  juxtaposition  of  many  authors  under  the  same  topic  and,  in  conse¬ 
quence,  the  reading  together  of  their  works,  in  whole  or  part. 


PREFACE 


XXV 


Neither  of  these  two  types  of  reading  can  ever  be  a  substitute  for  the 
other,  nor  can  either  be  taken  as  sufficient  in  itself.  On  the  contrary,  each 
is  incomplete  without  the  other.  Those  who  begin  by  reading  in  the  great 
books  and  reading  them  syntopically  must  eventually  read  at  least  some 
of  them  integrally.  Those  who  have  already  read  some  of  the  great  books 
through  must  read  them  syntopically  to  discover  what  an  integral  reading 
of  the  great  books  seldom  reveals,  except,  perhaps,  to  the  most  mature 
student  or  conscientious  scholar.  For  each  of  these  two  sorts  of  persons — 
the  beginning  reader  and  the  more  advanced  student  or  scholar — the  Syn- 
topicon  functions  differently  and  the  syntopical  reading  of  the  great  books 
serves  a  different  purpose. 

.1  ;  -  iVJ  'XOt!  I  '  sab  '  '•  !•>,!  >  <71  •  .  !  ’• 

For  the  beginning  reader — in  the  extreme  case,  a  person  who  has  read 
none  of  the  great  books — a  syntopical  reading,  done  in  accordance  with 
the  references  under  even  a  few  topics,  works  in  three  ways:  initiatively, 
suggestively,  and  instructively. 

It  works  initiatively  by  overcoming  the  initial  difficulty  that  anyone 
faces  when  confronted  by  a  collection  of  books  as  vast  and,  in  a  sense,  as 
overpowering  as  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World.  The  problem  is 
where  to  begin  and  in  what  order  to  proceed.  There  are  many  solutions  to 
this  problem,  usually  in  the  form  of  courses  of  reading  based  on  different 
principles  of  selection;  but  these  usually  require  the  reading  of  whole 
books  or,  at  least,  the  integral  reading  of  large  parts  of  them. 

It  is  a  matter  of  general  experience  that  this  kind  of  solution  seldom 
achieves  the  intended  result.  A  syntopical  reading  of  the  great  books  pro¬ 
vides  a  radically  different  sort  of  solution,  which  promises  to  be  more  ef¬ 
fective.  It  initiates  the  reading  of  the  great  books  by  enabling  persons  to 
read  in  them  on  the  subjects  in  which  they  are  interested;  and  on  those 
subjects,  to  read  relatively  short  passages  from  a  large  number  of  authors. 
It  assumes  only  that  every  educable  mind  has  some  interest  in  one  or  more 
of  the  themes,  problems,  or  ideas  on  which  the  great  books  touch. 

A  syntopical  reading  may  also  work  suggestively .  Starting  from  a  read¬ 
er’s  existing  interest  in  a  particular  topic,  it  may  arouse  or  create  an  interest 
in  other  topics  related  to  those  which  initiated  his  reading  in  the  great 
books.  The  syntopical  reading  of  a  collection  of  authors  under  a  particular 
topic  may  also  impel  the  reader  to  look  beyond  the  passages  cited.  Except 
-ii/tiir  •_,»  :r(ri  *  y,  .  . •  •  *  \r,  i  n  r  -  i  t:»  v  r,rjifiOc 


xxvi 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


when  they  cite  whole  works,  the  references  cite  passages  which  neces¬ 
sarily  exist  in  a  context,  ultimately  the  context  of  the  whole  book.  Few  of 
these  passages  are  absolutely  self-contained.  For  few  of  them  can  it  be  said 
that  it  will  be  finally  satisfactory  to  read  them  without  looking  further 
into  the  author’s  thought.  Hence,  proceeding  along  the  natural  lines  of 
his  own  interests,  the  reader  may  be  led  from  reading  small  parts  of  cer¬ 
tain  books  to  reading  larger  parts  and,  eventually,  to  reading  whole  books. 
If  this  process  is  repeated,  each  syntopical  reading  may  occasion  and  stimu¬ 
late  a  more  and  more  extensive  integral  reading  of  the  great  books. 

Working  initiatively  and  suggestively,  syntopical  reading  opens  the 
great  books  at  the  pages  of  maximum  interest  to  the  individual  and,  by 
the  force  of  the  passages  read  and  their  dependence  on  context,  carries  him 
from  reading  parts  to  reading  whole  works.  Syntopical  reading  works  in¬ 
structively  when  it  guides  the  mind  in  interpreting  and  understanding  the 
passages  or  works  being  read.  It  does  this  in  three  ways. 

First,  the  topic  in  connection  with  which  the  passage  is  being  read  serves 
to  give  direction  to  the  reader  in  interpreting  the  passage.  But  it  does  not 
tell  him  what  the  passage  means,  since  the  passage  cited  may  be  relevant 
to  the  topic  in  any  one  of  a  number  of  ways.  Hence  the  reader  is  called 
upon  to  discover  precisely  what  relevance  the  passage  has  to  the  topic.  To 
learn  to  do  this  is  to  acquire  a  major  skill  in  the  art  of  reading. 

Second,  die  collection  of  a  number  of  passages  on  the  same  topic,  but 
from  different  works  and  different  authors,  serves  to  sharpen  the  reader’s 
interpretation  of  each  passage  read.  Sometimes,  when  passages  from  the 
same  book  or  author  are  read  in  sequence  and  in  the  context  of  one  an¬ 
other,  each  becomes  clearer.  Sometimes  the  meaning  of  each  of  a  series  of 
contrasting  or  conflicting  passages  from  different  books  or  authors  is  ac¬ 
centuated  when  they  are  read  against  one  another.  And  sometimes  the 
passages  from  one  author,  by  amplifying  or  commenting  on  the  passages 
cited  from  another,  materially  help  the  reader’s  understanding  of  the  sec¬ 
ond  author. 

Third,  if  the  individual  does  a  syntopical  reading  of  the  great  books 
under  a  number  of  distinct  topics,  the  fact  that  the  same  passage  will  often 
be  found  cited  under  two  or  more  topics  will  have  its  instructive  effect. 
As  relevant  to  distinct  topics,  the  passage  must  have  an  amplitude  of 
meaning  which  the  reader  will  come  to  perceive  when  he  interprets  it 
somewhat  differently  in  relation  to  different  topics.  Such  multiple  inter- 


PREFACE 


XXV 11 


pretation  not  only  is  a  basic  exercise  in  the  art  of  reading,  but  also  tends 
to  make  the  mind  habitually  alert  to  the  many  strains  of  meaning  which 
any  rich  or  complex  passage  can  contain. 

In  this  description  of  the  ways  in  which  a  syntopical  reading  instructs  in 
the  art  of  reading  the  great  books,  we  have  emphasized  only  the  influence 
of  the  topic  under  which  the  reading  is  done  and  the  effect  of  reading  one 
passage  in  relation  to  another  or  in  relation  to  several  distinct  topics.  But 
to  assure  or  reinforce  its  instructive  effect,  two  other  factors  may  operate 
in  the  background  of  a  syntopical  reading.  One  is  the  whole  Outline  of 
Topics,  which  places  a  particular  topic  in  the  context  of  other  topics  under 
the  same  idea.  The  other  is  the  Introduction  to  that  idea,  which  may  help 
the  reader  to  interpret  the  particular  topic,  thereby  increasing  the  effective¬ 
ness  of  that  topic  as  a  guide  to  the  interpretation  of  the  works  or  passages 
referred  to  under  it. 

If  we  turn  now  from  the  beginning  reader  to  the  more  mature  student 
or  scholar — in  the  extreme  case,  a  person  who  has  read  through  many,  if 
not  all,  of  the  great  books — we  shall  see  that  a  syntopical  reading  works 
in  a  different  way.  It  no  longer  need  function  initiatively  or  suggestively; 
nor,  for  the  competent  reader,  need  it  serve  instructively,  to  develop  skill 
in  the  art  of  reading.  But  it  does  provide  the  occasion  and  the  materials 
for  a  more  intensive  and  critical  reading  of  passages  already  read;  and  it 
supplements  the  reading  of  whole  works  independently  of  one  another  by 
requiring  an  examination  of  these  works,  or  passages  from  them,  in  mu¬ 
tual  relation,  as  relevant  to  the  same  topic. 

It  is  the  general  experience  of  highly  competent  readers  that  a  great 
book  can  be  read  through  many  times  without  the  attainment  of  such 
complete  mastery  that  the  reader  knows  the  relevance  of  every  passage  in 
it  to  every  theme  it  touches.  On  the  contrary,  the  integral  reading  of  a 
great  book,  even  when  done  more  than  once,  seldom  reveals  even  a  large 
part  of  its  meaning.  Only  the  most  intensive  scholarly  study  of  a  particu¬ 
lar  book  or  author  ever  arrives  at  such  mastery. 

Short  of  that,  reading  a  great  book  through  one  or  more  times  will  in¬ 
evitably  leave  unnoticed  or  only  partly  recognized  many  passages  of  criti¬ 
cal  significance  to  a  particular  theme  or  problem.  Only  when  the  book  is 
read  with  that  particular  subject  in  mind  will  these  passages,  hitherto 
unobserved,  be  found. 


xxviii  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 

The  truth  of  this  can  be  verified  by  accomplished  readers  of  the  great 
books  if  they  will  examine,  under  particular  topics,  passages  from  books 
they  have  already  read  or  even  studied  to  some  extent.  Unless  their  previ¬ 
ous  reading  of  the  books  was  done  in  the  light  of  the  particular  intellec¬ 
tual  interest  represented  by  this  topic,  they  are  likely  to  find  some  passages 
that  they  never  saw  before,  or  at  least  never  fully  recognized  as  having 
the  significance  they  take  on  when  read  syntopically — in  the  light  of  this 
topic  and  in  relation  to  other  works  and  passages  relevant  to  the  same 
theme. 

The  Syntopicon  can  thus  serve  those  who  have  already  done,  to  a  greater 
or  less  extent,  an  integral  reading  of  the  great  books.  The  method  of  syn- 
topical  reading  not  only  provides  a  different  and  rewarding  way  of  read¬ 
ing  them,  but  also  carries  the  study  of  them  to  deeper  and  deeper  levels  of 
understanding.  It  overcomes  the  defects  of  the  ordinary  integral  reading 
in  several  ways.  It  involves  reading  the  great  books  in  relation  to  one 
another  rather  than  in  isolation.  It  supplements  the  knowledge  of  whole 
works  by  concentration  on  the  significance  of  parts.  Taking  each  of  3000 
topics  as  the  occasion  for  a  purposeful  reading  in  all  the  great  books,  it 
makes  possible  the  close  study  of  each  work  in  relation  to  all  the  problems 
or  issues  on  which  it  bears. 

There  is  still  another  way  in  which  the  method  of  syntopical  reading 
can  advance  the  study  of  the  great  books,  or  rather  a  studious  use  of  them. 
Here  the  aim  is  not  to  study  the  books  themselves,  but  to  consider  a  prob¬ 
lem  or  an  issue  to  the  solution  or  clarification  of  which  they  contribute. 

The  particular  problem  may  involve  many  topics  in  one  or  more  chap¬ 
ters.  It  may  involve  a  number  of  great  ideas  and  many  subordinate  terms. 
The  organization  of  the  Syntopicon  enables  the  student  of  such  a  problem 
to  discover  the  range  of  the  terms  and  topics  traditionally  involved  in  its 
consideration.  The  References  enable  him  to  examine  systematically,  in 
their  chronological  order  or  in  any  order  he  wishes,  the  record  of  western 
thought  concerning  this  problem,  so  far  as  it  is  contained  in  the  great 
books.  The  Additional  Readings  supplement  these  materials  by  citing 
other  books  which  bear  upon  the  problem  more  or  less  directly. 

It  does  not  seem  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  a  person  who  has  done  all 
the  syntopical  reading  suggested  by  the  References  and  the  Additional 
Readings  on  a  particular  problem,  will  have  a  fairly  adequate  knowledge 
of  that  problem  and  its  proposed  solutions  in  the  development  of  western 


PREFACE 


XXIX 


thought.  The  Syntopicon  should  be  able  to  save  the  person  who  is  begin¬ 
ning  his  inquiry  into  a  certain  problem  much  of  the  preliminary  labor  of 
research,  and  advance  him  rapidly  to  the  point  where  he  can  begin  to 
think  independently  about  it,  because  he  knows  what  thinking  has  been 
done.  For  the  scholar,  already  advanced  in  his  research  on  a  given  problem, 
it  may  still  be  possible  for  the  Syntopicon  to  serve  some  good  purpose  as 
a  reminder  or  a  check ;  it  may  even  uncover  a  neglected  passage,  or  throw 
new  light  upon  one  by  placing  it  in  the  context  of  other  passages. 

What  has  just  been  said  about  the  studious  or  scholarly  use  of  the  Syn¬ 
topicon  suggests  how  it  may  serve  as  an  instrument  in  teaching  the  great 
books,  or  in  using  them  as  teaching  materials.  For  the  most  part,  the  great 
books  enter  the  curricula  of  schools  and  colleges  engaged  in  liberal 
education  only  by  way  of  courses  in  which  some  of  these  books,  or  most 
of  them,  are  read  integrally.  Even  when  they  are  read  in  selections  rather 
than  as  wholes,  they  are,  for  the  most  part,  used  as  materials  in  a  general 
course  of  study  rather  than  as  applicable  to  the  study  of  particular  subject 
matters. 

Without  detracting  from  or  competing  with  the  unquestionable  value 
of  such  procedures,  the  Syntopicon  offers  another  pedagogical  use  of  the 
great  books.  The  method  of  syntopical  reading  makes  them  available  in 
the  teaching  of  courses  concerned  with  particular  subject  matters,  or  in 
the  conduct  of  seminars  devoted  to  the  study  of  particular  problems.  In 
certain  cases,  it  may  encourage  the  reading  of  the  great  texts  in  place  of 
textbooks. 

For  a  particular  problem  or  subject  matter,  whose  name  is  either  one  of 
the  great  ideas  or  a  major  term  in  the  Inventory  of  Terms,  the  Syntopicon 
suggests  some,  if  not  all,  of  the  topics  which  deserve  to  be  studied,  and 
some,  if  not  all,  of  the  works  which  deserve  to  be  read  in  whole  or  part. 
It  thus  provides  a  set  of  materials  organized  so  as  to  be  adaptable  to  the 
method  and  interest  of  the  individual  teacher.  For  example,  at  one  ex¬ 
treme,  the  teacher  can  use  the  Syntopicon  merely  as  a  guide  to  supplemen¬ 
tary  reading;  at  the  other  extreme,  he  can  use  it  to  construct  his  own  set 
of  textual  materials,  selected  from  the  References  and  the  Additional 
Readings  and  organized  in  the  framework  of  a  sequence  of  topics. 


XXX 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4)  The  Syntopicon  as  an  instrument  of  discovery  and  research. 

What  has  already  been  said  about  the  use  of  the  Syntopicon  by  the  seri¬ 
ous  student,  or  even  the  advanced  scholar,  in  the  sphere  of  a  particular 
problem  or  subject  matter,  obviously  covers  part  of  the  Syntopicon’s  utility 
as  an  instrument  of  research  or  discovery.  But  there  are  three  special  types 
of  inquiry  for  the  pursuit  of  which  the  Syntopicon  seems  to  be  especially 
adapted. 

The  first  of  these  is  the  study  of  the  history  of  ideas.  The  chapter  on 
each  of  the  102  great  ideas  presents  the  record  of  thought  in  the  form  of 
references  to  the  great  books,  organized  under  each  topic.  Since  the  ref¬ 
erences  are  arranged  in  the  order  in  which  the  authors  and  works  appear 
in  the  set  of  great  books,  and  since,  with  few  exceptions,  this  is  a  strictly 
chronological  order,  the  record  of  thought  is  presented  in  an  order  suited 
to  the  historian’s  interest.  The  Additional  Readings,  which  supplement 
the  great  books  in  the  record,  are  also  arranged  chronologically.  Hence 
the  Syntopicon  provides  an  organization  of  materials  eminently  useful  to 
the  scholar  engaged  in  the  historical  study  of  ideas. 

The  second  type  of  special  inquiry  concerns  the  thought  of  a  single  au¬ 
thor,  in  its  historical  relation  to  the  thought  of  predecessors  who  influ¬ 
enced  him  and  followers  influenced  by  him.  If  that  author  happens  to  be 
one  of  the  authors  of  the  great  books,  the  Syntopicon  can  facilitate  such 
research,  since,  for  hundreds  of  distinct  topics,  it  places  references  to  the 
work  of  the  particular  author  in  the  context  of  references  to  other  authors 
— earlier,  later,  or  contemporary — whom  he  may  have  influenced  or  by 
whom  he  may  have  been  influenced. 

The  third  type  of  special  inquiry  is  limited  to  the  thought  of  a  particu¬ 
lar  period  rather  than  a  particular  author.  Within  this  limitation,  the  his¬ 
torical  interest  may  extend  to  all  the  great  and  near-great  minds  who 
formed  the  thought  of  this  period,  as  well  as  to  all  the  ideas  with  which 
they  dealt.  So  far  as  the  formative  minds  of  the  particular  period  are  repre¬ 
sented  by  authors  of  the  great  books  and  by  other  authors  cited  in  the 
Additional  Readings,  the  Syntopicon  can  assist  such  research.  Instead  of 
using  its  references  vertically,  from  one  end  of  the  tradition  to  the  other, 
as  would  the  student  of  the  history  of  an  idea,  the  student  of  an  epoch  of 
thought  would  cut  through  the  references  horizontally.  He  would  take 
all  the  authors  and  books  which  fell  within  the  period  under  considera- 


PREFACE 


XXXI 


tion;  he  would  examine  the  materials  referred  to  under  every  idea  or  topic 
which  appeared  to  have  been  considered  by  the  minds  of  that  period. 

In  these  three  types  of  historical  inquiry,  the  Syntopicon  is  at  best  an 
auxiliary  instrument  in  the  service  of  scholarship.  If  it  proves  to  be  more 
than  that  for  the  ordinary  student,  it  will  probably  be  less  than  that  for 
the  accomplished  scholar  whose  documentary  resources  in  a  particular 
field  are  more  extensive  than  those  from  which  the  Syntopicon  is  con¬ 
structed.  This  is  especially  true  of  those  problems  in  the  history  of  ideas 
which  have  been  investigated  by  prolonged  research.  But  some  problems 
have  not  been  so  investigated,  and  the  Syntopicon  may  have  something  to 
contribute  to  the  study  of  these.  It  is  even  possible  that  the  Syntopicon  may 
uncover  or  call  attention  to  new  problems,  or  may  cause  the  re-formulation 
of  old  problems  in  a  new  way. 

The  grand  research  suggested  by  the  existence  of  the  Syntopicon  is  not 
historical,  however,  but  philosophical.  Stated  simply,  it  is  the  project  of 
creating  in  and  for  the  twentieth  century  a  synthesis  or  summation  of 
western  thought,  past  and  present,  which  will  serve  the  intellectual  needs 
of  our  time,  as  analogous  syntheses  or  summations  have  served  antiquity, 
the  Middle  Ages,  and  the  period  of  the  enlightenment. 

The  102  great  ideas,  the  1800  other  terms,  and  the  3000  topics  of  the 
Syntopicon  are  a  fair  representation  of  the  objects,  as  the  materials  to  be 
found  in  the  443  works  here  published  and  the  2600  other  works  listed  in 
the  Additional  Readings  are  a  fair  representation  of  the  content,  of  west¬ 
ern  inquiry  and  discussion.  The  Syntopicon  is,  therefore,  an  instrument 
adapted  to  the  sort  of  research  which  might  produce  a  summation  of  west¬ 
ern  thought  from  the  beginning  to  the  present. 

Because  the  existence  of  the  Syntopicon  makes  it  possible  and  suggests 
that  it  be  undertaken,  the  project  envisaged  might  be  called  a  Program 
of  Syntopical  Research.  Because  the  method  of  this  research,  like  the 
method  which  produced  the  Syntopicon,  would  be  thoroughly  dialectical 
in  character,  the  intellectual  summation  which  would  be  its  product  could 
be  called  a  Summa  Dialectica. 

Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Editor 

Chicago,  1952 


IV 


/.'’I” 


i  '  ■  •  '  .  t  -  •  ■ . f  ■  ■ .  ■  v/  ;  (i  i« 

Jx.it  ;^i  fr.ih  ‘  -biiim  ^ !  .  !  i»3T>  f.o  v.«?  »rl  ifaufaf 

1  "  -  I  l  -.,1  ;  .  •.  _  •[  ■  .  \:  |[J 

•  .  •  .... 

11; !  • 
•,.  r,  .  ■  I  . 

1  ”  v  •  .  f.Sit 

.  i  •  ..  n 

?rnvl  ii|  m  •:  Itfil  J  .  Opi;cr-i  -.rt}  ;d  b-  w  <u  mvt\  .  rwl  till  !  .v 

ifui  B<>  il  '1 11  U  ;  1  {LilJJ*  *.  ;  j«!i  nqa 

'  •  .  r  .  •  ■  _  •  ..  •  •  '•  : . : 

iof*.  St  p,Ggrjc.ln?<?  ah  to  :oir.  •  •  ad  yd  bjj  >  shT 

Il  III  .  ;au»*  V*  I  •  •’ll  Jr  (  ..  7ui  ivi;i  ,.  .'l> 

t 

,|Ji  pdnfi  i)9vr>-:  uv  d  10  t&.-dwi  eun;  >L  lu  git  .  •■  jtvo  .  o 

'd:  Id  }■  ,'r.oi  <•  3)  vrrrai  ’  xlio  cw8i  nib  ."i.at  -rm  a])  ajU 

3tl  OJ  <1. ft  *B  £>’V*\‘ta  J  !»  ■  Jf  t  -  ii.it- 

.}'■  ■-  :  "  •  :  d  r  '  !'•  I.  ;;:UJ  ::  ;•> 

.  i  j;:mnLiu<  .  uijjui  rbid’iy  '31c  Juw  ;  JOJ  I»*  •  ^ct  t 

rfT f*J  £iur  'ipd  !i  a.qjJ  nr> 

. •-•  bee  :4di?«d{|  u  wjIw  iB»  Vi  aa  .-oto  #»t;  murj/H 

jj  •  ;r  b  bolb.  j  i  1  #ai  bt,.  i.'./r:3  5:o(cnq  sift  .(uj  ]  ji  j$ih 

'.  si  y. 

-  towrft  ad  f/iuow  ,ik  3 

bit  ■  "  '  '  ■■  '  i'-  •  •  .  -  ■  •  !••;.«  -sfL:  ,t >13;  ~ 

rjt'j  ■  <y.  hi  ■■! 

•w'-  .mUhA  ^  .. 

i  r  r  ,  'j  y  J 


EXPLANATION  OF  REFERENCE  STYLE 


THE  references  have  a  uniform  typographical  style,  but  the  manner 
of  referring  to  particular  works  varies  in  certain  respects.  The  Expla¬ 
nation  of  Reference  Style  describes  the  typographical  construction  of  the 
references,  with  some  comment  on  the  variations.  It  is  divided  into  four 
parts: 

I.  General  Typographical  Style 

II.  Style  of  Bible  References 

III.  Punctuation,  Symbols,  Abbreviations 

IV.  Table  of  Authors,  Titles,  and  Author’s  Divisions  Cited 

I.  GENERAL  TYPOGRAPHICAL  STYLE 

The  two  examples  below  illustrate  die  general  typographical  pattern  of 
the  references  to  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ;  and  the  headings 
above  the  examples  call  attention  to  the  five  elements  commonly  present 


in  the 

construction  of  the  references. 

Volume 

Number 

Author's 

Name 

Title  of  Work 

Author’s  Divisions 

Page 

Sections 

35 

Locke: 

Human  Understanding , 

BK  II,  CH  XXI 

178a-200d 

41 

Gibbon: 

Decline  and  Fall, 

. /  .I  .  •  r.  rn  i  1  i  . 

365b-378d 

(1)  Volume  Number: 

The  volume  number  indicates  in  which  volume  of  Great  Books  of  the 
Western  World  the  work  or  passage  referred  to  can  be  found.  Most  vol¬ 
umes  contain  the  work  of  one  author.  When  a  single  volume  contains  the 
works  of  two  or  more  authors,  the  volume  number  is  given  for  each 
author.  When  the  work  of  a  single  author  is  contained  in  two  volumes, 
the  volume  number  is  assigned  according  to  the  contents  of  the  volume. 

'  .  i  ^  •  I  ; 

(2)  Author’s  Name: 

The  author’s  name  immediately  follows  the  volume  number,  except  in 
the  case  of  the  American  State  Papers  and  the  Federalist,  which  are  in¬ 
cluded  in  Volume  43.  Authors’  names  are  usually  given  in  shortened  form. 

xxxiii 


XXXIV 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3)  Title  of  Work: 

The  title  follows  the  author’s  name,  with  the  two  exceptions  above 
noted.  Titles  are  also  frequently  abbreviated  or  shortened.  When  two  or 
more  works  are  cited  for  a  single  author,  the  titles  are  listed  in  the  order 
in  which  the  works  appear  in  the  volume. 

(4)  Author’s  Divisions: 

By  “author’s  divisions”  is  meant  all  such  subdivisions  of  a  work  as  book, 
part,  section,  chapter,  paragraph,  line  number.  The  phrase  “author’s  divi¬ 
sions”  does  not  necessarily  mean  divisions  made  by  the  author;  they 
may  have  been  made  by  an  editor  of  his  work. 

Author’s  divisions  are  given  only  for  some  works,  according  as,  in  the 
judgment  of  the  editors,  their  inclusion  would  prove  meaningful  or  help¬ 
ful  to  the  reader.  References  to  Locke,  for  instance,  as  in  the  example, 
always  cite  author’s  divisions;  whereas  references  to  Gibbon,  as  in  the 
example,  do  not. 

For  some  works,  author’s  divisions  are  completely  given,  as  for  Locke. 
For  other  works,  only  the  most  important  or  largest  divisions  are  given. 
Thus  for  Rabelais  only  the  book  but  not  the  chapter  is  given. 

Line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  for  all  works  of  poetry,  including 
those  published  in  prose  translations.  For  Goethe’s  Faust,  the  line  num¬ 
bers  cited  refer  to  the  lines  of  the  English  translation  as  well  as  to  the  lines 
of  the  original  German.  For  other  poetical  works  in  translation — the 
works  of  Homer,  the  Greek  dramatists,  Lucretius,  Virgil,  and  Dante — the 
line  numbers  cited  refer  to  the  lines  of  the  works  in  their  original  lan¬ 
guages;  for  these  works,  the  line  numbers  printed  on  the  pages  of  this 
edition  furnish  only  an  approximate  indication  of  the  location  of  the 
equivalent  lines  in  the  English  translation.  For  all  poetical  works  written 
in  English,  the  line  numbers  are  the  numbers  of  the  English  lines.  In  the 
case  of  Chaucer’s  Canterbury  Tales,  the  numbering  of  the  lines  is  consecu¬ 
tive  for  all  the  tales  written  in  verse. 

In  references  to  the  works  of  Aristotle  (in  Volumes  8  and  9),  the  figures 
and  letters  enclosed  in  the  brackets  signify  the  page,  column,  and  approxi¬ 
mate  line  in  the  Berlin  edition  of  the  Greek  text  edited  by  Immanuel 
Bekker.  In  references  to  the  American  State  Papers  (in  Volume  43), 


REFERENCE  STYLE 


XXXV 


the  bracketed  line  numbers  refer  to  the  lines  on  the  pages  of  this 
edition  only. 

In  references  to  the  Summa  Theologica  of  Thomas  Aquinas  (in  Vol¬ 
umes  19  and  20),  the  author’s  division  “Part  I-II”  stands  for  Part  I  of  the 
Second  Part,  and  “Part  II— II”  stands  for  Part  II  of  the  Second  Part.  In  the 
case  of  the  Summa  Theologica ,  the  author’s  divisions  cited  may  include 
not  only  questions  and  articles,  but  the  subdivisions  of  articles.  In  such 
cases  the  page  sections  correspond  in  extent  to  that  of  a  whole  article,  to 
enable  the  reader  to  see  the  subdivision  of  an  article,  when  it  is  cited,  in 
the  context  of  other  parts  to  which  it  is  related. 

Author’s  divisions  precede  page  sections  except  in  the  case  of  footnote 
and  note  numbers,  which  follow  page  sections.  When  more  than  one  pas¬ 
sage  is  cited  within  the  same  author’s  division,  the  author’s  division  is  not 
repeated;  as,  for  example: 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  403a-404a;  405d-406a 
(5)  Page  Sections: 

The  pages  of  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World  are  printed  in  either 
one  or  two  columns.  The  upper  and  lower  halves  of  a  one-column  page 
are  indicated  by  the  letters  a  and  b.  When  the  text  is  printed  in  two  col¬ 
umns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  column,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the 
right-hand  column.  These  half  and  quarter  page  sections  are  based  on 
divisions  of  a  full  text  page. 

Page  sections  give  the  page  numbers  and  locate  the  sections  of  the  page 
in  which  the  passage  referred  to  begins  and  ends.  For  example,  in  the 
reference: 

53  James:  Psychology,  116a-119b 

the  passage  cited  begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the 
lower  half  of  page  119.  In  the  reference: 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  163b-164c 

the  passage  cited  begins  in  the  lower  half  of  the  left-hand  column  of  page 
163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  column  of  page  164. 

In  references  to  works  printed  in  two  columns,  the  format  of  the  page 


XXX  VI 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


sometimes  places  continuous  reading  matter  in  the  a  and  c  sections  of  the 
upper  half  of  the  page,  or  in  the  b  and  d  sections  of  the  lower  half  of  the 
page.  This  occurs  when  a  work  or  an  author’s  division  begins  in  the  lower, 
or  ends  in  the  upper,  half  of  the  two-column  page.  Where  continuous  read¬ 
ing  matter  thus  appears  in  discontinuous  page  sections,  it  is  indicated  by 
a,c  or  b,d.  For  example: 

14  Plutarch:  Solon  64b,d-77a,c 

v  ..  ’r,  ,  / :  <  ...  .  >noi? 

means  that  the  work  cited  begins  in  the  lower  half  of  page  64  and  ends  in 
the  upper  half  of  page  77. 

Footnotes  or  notes  are  sometimes  specifically  cited  by  themselves  in  the 
references,  in  which  case  the  page  sections  given  correspond  to  their  loca¬ 
tion  on  the  pages  referred  to.  When  a  footnote  or  a  note  is  not  specifically 
cited,  the  page  sections  given  mark  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  text 

referred  to.  The  reader  is  expected  to  consult  the  footnotes  or  notes  indi- 

. 

cated  in  the  body  of  that  text. 

Chaucer’s  works  (in  Volume  22)  are  printed  in  two  columns;  the  inside 
column  of  each  page  contains  the  Middle  English  text,  the  outside  column 
a  Modern  English  version.  Since  both  columns  contain  equivalent  pas¬ 
sages,  die  references  to  this  volume  employ  page  sections  (a  and  b)  which 
divide  each  page  only  into  an  upper  and  a  lower  half. 

v  i  :  uq  pj  ..:•*!  1  b  ’  0.-  :>  r  r  1  *>-b  ,  mul,  ! 

II.  STYLE  OF  BIBLE  REFERENCES 

All  Bible  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse  in  both  the  King 
James  and  Douay  versions  of  the  Bible.  When  the  King  James  and  Douay 
versions  differ  in  the  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or 
verses,  the  King  James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by 
a  ( D ),  follows.  For  example: 

1  •  .  t  ...  ,  . 

Old  Testament  :  Nehemiah,  7  :45 — (I))  II  Esdras,  7:46 

-u> I  i  !;,i  ,  1  <■  : 

In  references  to  the  Bible,  a  colon  is  used  to  separate  chapter  and  verse 
numbers;  and  a  comma  separates  the  numbers  of  verses  in  the  same  chap¬ 
ter.  For  example: 

x  O  '  '  <■'  X 

,*■  f  f  V  f  »  .  •  r  c 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  6:1-4,16-18 

.  ‘.o~>  v  .  ,1  •  :•  17  -  •  Iji*'-.  !  I 


REFERENCE  STYLE 


XXXVll 


III.  PUNCTUATION,  SYMBOLS,  ABBREVIATIONS 

(i)  Punctuation 

Diagonal  line:  When  a  series  of  references  to  one  author  includes  two 
or  more  of  his  works  published  in  the  same  volume,  a  diagonal  line  is  used 
to  separate  references  to  one  work  from  references  to  another.  The  diago¬ 
nal  line  is  used  in  the  same  way  to  separate  references  to  different  books 
of  the  Bible.  For  example: 

t  ,  l 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  33:12-23  /  Job ,  11:7-9 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  302d-303a  /  Representative  Government ,  327b,d-332d 

-  .  -*<2?  ■  ♦;<:  •  •  •  ;  1  .1  r..  '  ?  .  •, 

Semi-Colon:  When  a  series  of  references  includes  the  citation  of  two  or 

more  passages  in  the  same  work,  a  semi-colon  is  used  to  separate  the  refer¬ 
ences  to  these  passages.  For  example: 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:12-14;  9:1-11 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  403a-404a;  405d-406a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  265c-266a;  part  iv,  346c-348a 

Comma:  When  a  comma  separates  the  title  of  a  work,  or  an  author’s 
division  of  a  work,  from  the  page  sections  which  follow,  passages  cited  are 
only  a  part  of  the  whole  work  or  of  the  author’s  division  indicated.  For 
example,  in  the  references : 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-b;  44d-45c 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  73a-74b 

the  passages  from  Plutarch  are  only  a  part  of  Lycurgus,  and  the  passage 
from  Swift  is  only  a  few  pages  from  Part  II  of  Gulliver’s  Travels. 

When  the  title  of  a  work,  or  an  author’s  division  of  a  work,  is  not 
separated  by  a  comma  from  the  page  sections  which  follow,  the  reference 
is  to  the  whole  work  or  to  the  whole  of  the  indicated  author’s  division. 
For  example,  in  the  references : 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii  45a-87b 

the  whole  of  Lycurgus  and  the  whole  of  Part  II  of  Gulliver’s  Travels 
are  cited. 


xxxviii 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2)  Symbols 

esp :  The  abbreviation  “esp”  precedes  one  or  more  especially  relevant 
passages  which  are  contained  within  the  page  boundaries  of  a  larger  pas¬ 
sage  or  a  whole  work  that  has  just  been  cited. 

Whenever  passages  contained  within  a  single  reference  are  especially 
referred  to,  a  comma  after  the  page  sections  separates  these  passages.  For 
example : 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-441d  esp  435c-436b,  437c-d,  438d-441d 

Whenever  passages  contained  within  a  single  reference  to  the  Bible  are 
especially  referred  to,  a  comma  is  also  used  to  separate  these  passages.  For 
example: 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  1-8  esp  2:11-16,  2:27-29,  7:21-25,  8:27 

passim:  The  word  “passim”  following  a  reference  signifies  that  the 
work  or  passage  referred  to  discusses  the  topic  under  which  it  is  cited, 
intermittently  rather  than  continuously.  For  example: 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  7  461d-463c  passim  /  Athenian 
Constitution ,  ch  1-4 i  553a-572d  passim 

(3)  Abbreviations 

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  abbreviations  used  in  the  references.  Unless 
an  abbreviation  for  the  plural  is  listed  below,  the  singular  abbreviation  is 
used  for  both  singular  and  plural  words. 


A 

ARTICLE 

[nj  .  . 

.  note 

AA  . 

ARTICLES 

OT  .  . 

.  Old  Testament 

ANS 

ANSWER 

par  . 

.  paragraph 

APH 

APHORISM 

PREF 

.  PREFACE 

BK  . 

BOOK 

PROP 

PROPOSITION 

CH  . 

CHAPTER 

Q  •  • 

.  QUESTION 

COROL  . 

COROLLARY 

QQ  •  . 

.  QUESTIONS 

(D).  . 

Douay 

REP 

.  REPLY 

DEF  . 

DEFINITION 

SC  . 

.  SCENE 

DEMONST 

.  DEMONSTRATION 

SCHOL  . 

SCHOLIUM 

DIV  . 

DIVISION 

SECT 

SECTION 

EXPL 

EXPLANATION 

SUPPL  . 

SUPPLEMENT 

[fn],  . 

INTRO  . 

footnote 

INTRODUCTION 

TR  . 

.  TRACTATE 

REFERENCE  STYLE 


XXXIX 


IV.  TABLE  OF  AUTHORS,  TITLES,  AND 
AUTHOR’S  DIVISIONS  CITED 

The  following  pages  present  a  tabulation  of  the  contents  of  Great  Bookj 
of  the  Western  World,  Volumes  4-54.  The  authors  are  enumerated  in  the 
order  in  which  they  appear  in  the  successive  volumes  of  the  set;  and  under 
each  author’s  name  the  titles  of  his  works  are  listed  in  the  order  of  their 
appearance. 

In  the  references,  the  name  of  the  author  is  frequently  given  in  short¬ 
ened  form.  In  this  table,  their  full  names  are  given,  followed  by  their  life 
dates  when  these  are  ascertainable.  Because  some  volumes  contain  the 
works  of  two  or  more  authors  who  may  be  separated  by  centuries,  the 
order  in  which  the  authors  are  cited  in  the  references  sometimes  departs 
from  the  strict  chronological  order.  The  life  dates  help  the  reader  to  place 
the  authors  and  their  works  in  the  right  chronological  order. 

In  the  references,  the  title  of  a  work  is  frequently  given  in  an  abbrevi¬ 
ated  or  shortened  form.  In  this  table,  the  titles  are  first  given  exactly  as 
they  appear  in  the  references.  Whenever  this  is  an  abbreviated  or  short¬ 
ened  title,  the  full  title  follows. 

The  table  also  includes  a  notation  of  the  author’s  divisions  that  are  used 
in  references  to  particular  works. 


A  dash  in  the  column  headed  “Author’s  Divisions  Cited”  means  that  references 
to  the  work  or  works  in  question  cite  page  sections  only.  Where  the  author’s  divisions 
cited  are  the  same  for  several  titles,  they  are  named  only  once,  either  opposite  the  set 
of  titles  as  a  whole,  or  opposite  the  last  title  in  the  group. 

Titles  in  brackets  are  collective  titles  which  appear  on  the  title  page  of  the  work, 
but  do  not  appear  in  the  references.  The  names  of  the  authors  of  The  Federalist  (in 
Volume  43)  are  bracketed  because  they  do  not  appear  in  the  references. 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  and  Title 

Author's  Divisions  Cited 

4  Homer 

The  Iliad 

The  Odyssey 

book,  Line 

5  Aeschylus  ( c .  525-456  b.c.) 

The  Suppliant  Maidens 

Agamemnon 

The  Persians 

Choephoroe 

The  Seven  Against  Thebes 

Eumenides 

Line 

Prometheus  Bound 

xl 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  and  Title 


Author's  Divisions  Cited 


5 

Sophocles  (^.  495-406  b<6.) 

r.  a .  ;/.  40  4 j>  1  a‘i  ;/i 

Oedipus  the  King 

Oedipus  at  Colonus 

Electra  t 

Trachiniae 

Antigone 

Philoctetes 

t  -  —  Line 

Ajax  '  ' 

•  '  .i-i  it-’ ,  •;  r]  }inrw 

.  .  ,  .  )  '  \  '  Vi  , .  .  - . 

T  ^f)T 

5 

Euripides  ( [c .  480-406  b.c.) 

,  /ftM  .»..}  ■/  .  •  ,  1  V. 

*  *  T  * 

;  j  «  \ 

Rhesus 

Electra 

'j'j !  no 

Medea 

The  Bacchantes 

Hippolytus 

Hecuba 

1  -J '  * 

Alcestis 

Heracles  Mad 

Heracleidae 

The  Phoenician  Maidens 

•  rii  fii 

The  Suppliants 

Orestes 

r.  fvjUO 

The  Trojan  Women 

Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri 

-dv/  '.j'i.L 

Ion 

Ipkigenia  at  Aulis 

'  tx'lOW 

Helen 

The  Cyclops 

Line 

Andromache 

I  i  •  -  U  r  U  1  liv/  - 

T  '  jlO 

5 

Aristophanes  (c.  445-c.  380  b.c.) 

a  J  »•  »  •  .  /  O i  n 

The  Acharnians 

The  Frogs 

:  J I  *  L>  *J !  J 

The  Knights 

The  Lysistrata 

yt  ;;,!j  fli 

The  Clouds 

The  Thesmophoriazusae 

m  *  . .  ji; 

The  Wasps 

The  Ecclesiazusae 

The  Peace 

The  Plutus 

Line 

The  Birds 

1 1  <  * .  tj: .  ip  -ji\ 

[rjr>1  v.;t 

6 

Herodotus  ( c .  484 -c.  425  b.c.) 

The  History 

book 

6 

Thucydides  ( c .  460-r.  400  b.c.) 

Peloponnesian  War - The  History  of  the  Peloponnesian  War 

book 

7 

Plato  ( c .  42 S-c.  348  b.c.) 

Charmides 

Phaedo 

Lysis 

Gorgias 

Laches 

The  Republic 

'i fj »*/ 

Protagoras 

Timaeus 

Euthydemus 

Critias 

T 

W.i 

Cratylus 

Parmenides 

Phaedrus 

Theaetetus 

Ion 

Sophist 

Symposium 

Statesman 

Meno 

Philebus 

•  ■  A  c 

Euthyphro 

Laws 

Apology 

The  Seventh  Letter  — 

—  except  Republic 

Crito 

and  Laws,  book 

REFERENCE  STYLE 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  Title 


8  Aristotle  (384-322  b.c.) 

Categories 

Interpretation - On  Interpretation 

Prior  Analytics 
Posterior  Analytics 
Topics 

Sophistical  Refutations - On  Sophistical  Refutations 

Physics 

Heavens - On  the  Heavens 

Generation  and  Corruption - On  Generation  and  Corruption 

Meteorology 
Metaphysics 
Soul - On  the  Soul 

Sense  and  the  Sensible - On  Sense  and  the  Sensible 

Memory  and  Reminiscence - On  Memory  and  Reminiscence 

Sleep - On  Sleep  and  Sleeplessness 

Dreams - - On  Dreams 

Prophesying - On  Prophesying  by  Dreams 

Longevity - On  Longevity  and  Shortness  of  Life 

Youth ,  Life,  and  Breathing - On  Youth  and  Old  Age ,  On 

Life  and  Death ,  On  Breathing 


9  Aristotle 

History  of  Animals 

Parts  of  Animals - On  the  Parts  of  Animals 

Motion  of  Animals - On  the  Motion  of  Animals 

Gait  of  Animals - On  the  Gait  of  Animals 

Generation  of  Animals - On  the  Generation  of  Animals 

Ethics - Nicomachean  Ethics 

Politics  ,  ,,, 

The  Athenian  Constitution 
Rhetoric 

Poetics - On  Poetics 

10  Hippocrates  ( fl .  400  b.c.) 

The  Oath 

Ancient  Medicine - On  Ancient  Medicine 

Airs ,  Waters ,  Places - On  Airs ,  Waters ,  and  Places 

Prognostics - The  Bool{  of  Prognostics 

Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases - On  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases 

Epidemics - Of  the  Epidemics 

Injuries  of  the  Head - On  Injuries  of  the  Head 

Surgery - On  the  Surgery 

Fractures — ■ — On  Fractures 
Articulations— -On  the  Articulations 
Instruments  of  Reduction 


xli 

Author's  Divisions  Cited 

chapter,  Line 

book,  chapter,  Line 
chapter,  Line 

book,  chapter,  Line 

chapter,  Line 

book,  chapter,  Line 
chapter,  Line 

book,  chapter,  Line 

chapter,  paragraph 
book,  chapter,  Line 
chapter,  Line 

paragraph 

paragraph,  appendix 
:,  section,  paragraph,  case 

paragraph 


xlii 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  and  Title 

10  Hippocrates  (continued) 

Aphorisms 
The  Law 

Ulcers - On  Ulcers 

Fistulae - On  Fistulae 

Hemorrhoids - On  Hemorrhoids 

Sacred  Disease - On  the  Sacred  Disease 

10  Galen  (< c .  130-c.  200  a.d.) 

Natural  Faculties - On  the  Natural  Faculties 

11  Euclid  (/?.  c.  300  b.c.) 

Elements - The  Thirteen  Boohs  of  Euclid's  Elements 


Author's  Divisions  Cited 

section,  paragraph 
paragraph 


BOOK,  CHAPTER 

BOOK,  DEFINITION,  POSTULATE, 
COMMON  NOTION,  PROPOSITION,  LEMMA 


11  Archimedes  (c.  287-212  b.c.) 

Sphere  and  Cylinder - On  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder , 

Books  I— II 

Measurement  of  a  Circle 

Conoids  and  Spheroids - On  Conoids  and  Spheroids 

Spirals - On  Spirals 

Equilibrium  of  Planes - On  the  Equilibrium  of  Planesy 

Books  I— II 
The  Sand'Rechpner 
Quadrature  of  the  Parabola 

Floating  Bodies - On  Floating  Bodies ,  Books  I— II 

Booh  of  Lemmas 

Method - The  Method  Treating  of  Mechanical  Problems 

11  Apollonius  of  Perga  ( c .  262-r.  200  b.c.) 

Conics - On  Conic  Sections 

11  Nicomachus  of  Geras  a  (/?.  c.  100  a.d.) 

Arithmetic - Introduction  to  Arithmetic 

12  Lucretius  ( c .  98 -c.  55  b.c.) 

Nature  of  Things - On  the  Nature  of  Things 

12  Epictetus  (c.  60-c.  138  a.d.) 

The  Discourses 

12  Aurelius  (Marcus  Aurelius)  (121-180  a.d.) 

The  Meditations 

13  Virgil  (70-19  b.c.) 

The  Eclogues 
The  Georgies 
The  Aeneid 


BOOK,  DEFINITION,  ASSUMPTION, 
PROPOSITION,  COROLLARY,  LEMMA 
PROPOSITION 
DEFINITION,  LEMMA,  PROPOSITION 
PROPOSITION,  DEFINITION 

BOOK,  POSTULATE,  PROPOSITION 

PROPOSITION,  DEFINITION 
BOOK,  POSTULATE,  PROPOSITION 

>  PROPOSITION 


BOOK,  DEFINITION,  PROPOSITION 


BOOK 


book,  Line 


BOOK,  CHAPTER 


BOOK,  SECTION 


Number  of  Eclogue,  Line 
Number  of  Georgic,  Line 
book,  Line 


REFERENCE  STYLE 


xliii 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  and  Title 


Author's  Divisions  Cited 


14 


Plutarch  (c.  4 6-r.  120  a.d.) 

[T^<f  Lives  of  the  Noble  Grecians  and  Romans] 


Theseus 

Romulus 

Romulus-Theseus - Romulus  and 

Theseus  Compared 
Lycurgus 
Numa  Pompilius 

Lycurgus-Numa - Lycurgus  and 

Numa  Compared 
Solon 
Poplicola 

Poplicola-Solon - Poplicola  and 

Solon  Compared 
Themistocles 
Camillus 
Pericles 
Fabius 

Fabius-Pericles - Fabius  and 

Pericles  Compared 
Alcibiades 
Coriolanus 

Alcibiades-  Corio  lanus - A  Icibiades 

and  Coriolanus  Compared 
Timoleon 
Aemilius  Paulus 

Aemilius  Paulus -Timoleon - 

Aemilius  Paulus  and  Timoleon 
Compared 
Pelopidas 
Marcel lus 

Marcellus-Pelo pidas - Marcellus 

and  Pelopidas  Compared 
Aristides 
Marcus  Cato 

Aristides-M arcus  Cato - Aristides 

and  Marcus  Cato  Compared 
Philopoemen 
Flamininus 

Flamininus-Philopoemen - 

Flamininus  and  Philopoemen 
Compared 
Pyrrhus 
Caius  Marius 
Lysander 
Sulla 

Lysander -Sulla - Lysander  and 

Sulla  Compared 


Cimon 

Lucullus 

Cimon-Lucullus - Cimon  and 

Lucullus  Compared 
Nicias 
Crassus 

Crassus-Nicias - Crassus  and 

Nicias  Compared 
Sertorius 
Eumenes 

Eumenes-Sertorius - Eumenes  and 

Sertorius  Compared 
Agesilaus 
Pompey 

Agesilaus-Pompey - Agesilaus  and 

Pompey  Compared 
Alexander 
Caesar 
Phocion 

Cato  the  Younger 
Agis 

Cleomenes 
Tiberius  Gracchus 
Caius  Gracchus 

Caius  and  Tiberius  Gracchus- Agis 

and  Cleomenes - Caius  and 

Tiberius  Gracchus  and  Agis  and 
Cleomenes  Compared 
Demosthenes 
Cicero 

Demosthenes-  Cicero - Demosthenes 

and  Cicero  Compared 
Demetrius 
Antony 

Antony-Demetrius - Antony  and 

Demetrius  Compared 
Dion 

Marcus  Brutus 

Brutus-Dion - Brutus  and 

Dion  Compared 
Aratus 
Artaxerxes 
Galba 
Otho 


xliv 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Volume  'Number ,  Author ,  and  Title 


Author's  Divisions  Cited 


15  Tacitus,  P.  Cornelius  ( c .  55-c.  117  a.d.) 

The  Annals  The  Histories  book 

16  Ptolemy  (c.  ioo -c.  178  a.d.) 

The  Almagest  \  book 


16  Copernicus,  Nicolaus  (1473-1543) 

Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres - On  the  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres  book 

16  Kepler,  Johannes  (1571-1630) 

Epitome - Epitome  of  Copernican  Astronomy :  IV  and  V  book 

The  Harmonies  of  the  World:  V  - 

17  Plotinus  (205-270) 

First-Sixth  Ennead - The  Six  Enneads  tractate,  chapter 

18  Augustine,  Saint  (354-430) 

The  Confessions 

The  City  of  God 

Christian  Doctrine - On  Christian  Doctrine 

19  Aquinas,  Saint  Thomas  (c.  1225-1274) 

The  Summa  Theologica ,  First  Part;  prologue,  part,  question,  article, 

Part  I  of  the  Second  Part,  Questions  1-48  answer,  contrary,  reply 

20  Aquinas,  Saint  Thomas 

The  Summa  Theologica ,  Part  I  of  the  Second 
Part  (continued),  Questions  49-114;  Part  II 
of  the  Second  Part,  Questions  1-46,  179-189; 

Third  Part,  Questions  1-26,  60-65;  Supplement 
to  the  Third  Part,  Questions  69-99 


prologue,  part,  question,  article, 

ANSWER,  CONTRARY,  REPLY 


book,  paragraph 

BOOK, PREFACE,  CHAPTER 
PREFACE,  BOOK,  CHAPTER 


21  Dante  Alighieri  (1265-1321) 

The  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  purgatory,  paradise 


Number  of  Canto,  Line 


22  Chaucer,  Geoffrey  ( c .  1340-1400) 
Troilus  and  Cressida 
[The  Canterbury  Tales ] 

The  Prologue 
The  Knight's  Tale 
The  Miller's  Prologue 
The  Miller's  Tale 
The  Reeve's  Prologue 
The  Reeve's  Tale 
The  Cool(s  Prologue 
The  Cookes  Tale 

Introduction  to  the  Man  of  Law's 
Prologue 

The  Prologue  of  the  Man  of  Law's 
Tale 


BOOK, STANZA 

Line,  except  prose  parts  (see  below) 
The  Tale  of  the  Man  of  Law 
The  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue 
The  Tale  of  the  Wife  of  Bath 
The  Friar's  Prologue 
The  Friar's  Tale 
The  Summoner's  Prologue 
The  Summoner's  Tale 
The  Clerks  Prologue 
The  Clerks  Tale 
The  Merchant's  Prologue 
The  Merchant's  Tale 
Epilogue  to  the  Merchant's  Tale 


REFERENCE  STYLE 


xlv 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  dW  77//*’ 


Author's  Divisions  Cited 


22  Chaucer,  Geoffrey  (continued) 

[The  Canterbury  Tales] 

The  Squire's  Tale 

The  Words  of  the  Franklin 

The  Franklin's  Prologue 

The  Franklin's  Tale 

The  Physician's  Tale 

The  Words  of  the  Host 

The  Prologue  of  the  Pardoner's  Tale 

The  Pardoner's  Tale 

The  Shipman  s  Prologue 

The  Shipman  s  Tale 

The  Prioress's  Prologue 

The  Prioress's  Tale 

Prologue  to  Sir  Thopas 

Sir  Thopas 

Prologue  to  Melibeus 

23  Machiavelli,  Nicolo  (1469-1527) 

The  Prince 


The  Tale  of  Melibeus 
The  Monk's  Prologue 
The  Monies  Tale 

The  Prologue  of  the  Nun's  Priest's  Tale 

The  Nun's  Priest's  Tale 

Epilogue  to  the  Nun's  Priest's  Tale 

The  Second  Nun's  Prologue 

The  Second  Nun's  Tale 

The  Canon' s  Yeoman  s  Prologue 

The  Canon's  Yeoman's  Tale 

The  Manciple's  Prologue 

The  Manciple's  Tale 

The  Parson's  Prologue 

The  Parson's  Tale 

L'Envoi 


paragraph 


paragraph 


CHAPTER 


23  Hobbes,  Thomas  (1588-1679) 

Leviathan - Leviathan ,  or,  Matter ,  Formy  and  Power 

of  a  Commonwealth ,  Ecclesiastical  and  Civil  introduction,  part,  conclusion 

24  Rabelais,  Francois  ( c .  1495-1553) 

Gargantua  and  Pantagruel  book 


25  Montaigne,  Michel  Eyquem  de  (1533-1592) 
The  Essays 


26  Shakespeare,  William  (1564-1616) 

1st  Henry  VI - The  First  Part 

of  King  Henry  the  Sixth 

2nd  Henry  VI - The  Second  Part 

of  King  Henry  the  Sixth 

3rd  Henry  VI - The  Third  Part 

of  King  Henry  the  Sixth 

Richard  III - The  Tragedy  of 

King  Richard  the  Third 
The  Comedy  of  Errors 
Titus  Andronicus 
The  Taming  of  the  Shrew 
The  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona 
Love's  Labour's  Lost 
Romeo  and  Juliet 


Richard  II - The  Tragedy  of  King 

Richard  the  Second 
A  Midsummer-Night' s  Dream 

King  John - The  Life  and  Death  of 

King  John 

The  Merchant  of  Venice 

1st  Henry  IV - The  First  Part  of 

King  Henry  the  Fourth 

2nd  Henry  IV - The  Second  Part  of 

King  Henry  the  Fourth 
Much  Ado  About  Nothing 

Henry  V - The  Life  of  King  Henry  the  Fifth 

Julius  Caesar 

As  You  Li^e  It  prologue,  act,  scene,  epilogue,  Line 


xlvi 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  and  Title 


Author's  Divisions  Cited 


27  Shakespeare,  William 

Twelfth  Night - Twelfth  Night; 

or,  What  You  Will 

Hamlet - Hamlet ,  Prince  of  Denmark 

The  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor 
Troilus  a?id  Cressida 
All's  Well  That  Ends  Well 
Measure  for  Measure 

Othello - Othello ,  the  Moor  of  Venice 

King  Lear 
Macbeth 


Antony  and  Cleopatra 

Coriolanus 

Timon  of  Athens 

Pericles - Pericles ,  Prince  of  Tyre 

Cymbeline 
The  Winter's  Tale 
The  Tempest 

Henry  VIII - The  Famous  History 

of  the  Life  of  King  Henry 

the  Eighth  prologue,  act,  scene,  epilogue,  Line 


Sonnets 


Number  of  Sonnet 


28  Gilbert,  William  (1540-1603) 

Loadstone - On  the  Loadstone  and  Magnetic  Bodies  preface,  book 

28  Galileo  Galilei  (1564-1642) 

Two  New  Sciences - Concerning  the  Two  New  Sciences  day 

28  Harvey,  William  (1578-1657) 

Motion  of  the  Heart - On  the  Motion  of  the  Heart  and  Blood  in  Animals 

Circulation  of  the  Blood - On  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood 

On  Animal  Generation - On  the  Generation  of  Animals  - 

29  Cervantes,  Miguel  de  (1547-1616) 

Don  Quixote - The  History  of  Don  Quixote  c 

30  Bacon,  Sir  Francis  (1561-1626) 

Advancement  of  Learning 
Novum  Organum 
New  Atlantis 

31  Descartes,  Rene  (1596-1650) 

Rules - Rules  for  the  Direction  of  the  Mind 

Discourse - Discourse  on  the  Method 

Meditations - Meditations  on  First  Philosophy 

Objections  and  Replies - Objections  Against 

the  Meditations  and  Replies 
The  Geometry 

31  Spinoza,  Benedict  de  (1632-1677) 

Ethics  part,  preface,  definition,  axiom,  proposition,  demonstration, 

SCHOLIUM,  COROLLARY,  LEMMA,  POSTULATE,  EXPLANATION,  APPENDIX 


la  Mancha  part 


PREFACE,  BOOK,  APHORISM 


Number  of  Rule 

PART 

Number  of  Meditation 

DEFINITION,  POSTULATE,  AXIOM,  PROPOSITION 

BOOK 


REFERENCE  STYLE 


xlvii 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  and  Title 


Author's  Divisions  Cited 


32 


Milton,  John  (1608-1674) 

[English  Minor  Poems] 

Christs  Nativity - On  the  Morning 

of  Christs  Nativity  and  The  Hymn 
A  Paraphrase  on  Psalm  114 
Psalm  136 
The  Passion 
On  Time 

Upon  the  Circumcision 
At  a  Solemn  Musicl ( 

An  Epitaph  on  the  Marchioness  of 
Winchester 

Song  on  May  Morning 
On  Shake  spear.  1630 
On  the  University  Carrier 
Another  on  the  Same 
L' Allegro 
II  Penseroso 
Arcades 
Lycidas 
Comus 
Paradise  Lost 
Samson  Agonistes 
Areopagitica 


Line,  except  Sonnets  and  Psalms 

Death  of  a  Fair  Infant - On  the  Death  of 

a  Fair  Inf  a  fit 

Vacation  Exercise - At  a  Vacation  Exercise 

The  Fifth  Ode  of  Horace - The  Fifth  Ode 

of  Horace.  Lib.  1 

Sonnets ,  1,  vii-xix 

New  Forcers  of  Conscience - On  the  New 

Forcers  of  Conscience  under  the  Long 
Parliament 

Lord  Gen.  Fairfax - On  the  Lord  Gen. 

Fairfax  at  the  siege  of  Colchester 

Lord  Gen.  Cromwell - To  the  Lord  Generali 

Cromwell  May  1652 

Sr  Henry  Vane - To  Sr  Henry  Vane  the 

Younger 

Mr.  Cyriack  Skinner - To  Mr.  Cyriack 

Skinner  upon  his  Blindness 

Psalms ,  i-viii,  lxxx— lxxxviii 

book,  Line 
Line 


33  Pascal,  Blaise  (1623-1662) 

The  Provincial  Letters 
Pensees 

Vacuum - Preface  to  the  Treatise  on  the  Vacuum  and 

New  Experiments  Concerning  the  Vacuum 

Great  Experiment - Account  of  the  Great  Experiment 

Concerning  the  Equilibrium  of  Fluids 
Equilibrium  of  Liquids  and 

Weight  of  Air - Treatises  on  the  Equilibrium  of 

Liquids  and  on  the  Weight  of  the  Mass  of  the  Air 

Geometrical  Demonstration - On  Geometrical 

Demonstration 

Arithmetical  Triangle - Treatise  on  the  Arithmetical 

Triangle 

Correspondence  with  Fermat - Correspondence  with 

Fermat  on  the  Theory  of  Probabilities 


Number  of  Pensee 


34  Newton,  Sir  Isaac  (1642-1727) 

Principles - Mathematical  Principles  definition,  scholium,  law,  corollary,  book,  rule, 

of  Natural  Philosophy  lemma,  proposition,  phenomenon,  hypothesis 

Optics 


BOOK 


xlviii 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  and  Title 


Author's  Divisions  Cited 


34 

35 


35 

35 


36 

36 

37 

38 

38 


39 


40 


41 


Huygens,  Christiaan  (1629-1695) 

Light - Treatise  on  Light 

Locke,  John  (1632-1704) 

Toleration - A  Letter  Concerning  Toleration 

Civil  Government - Concerning  Civil  Government ,  Second  Essay 

Human  Understanding - An  Essay  Concerning  Human  Understanding 


PREFACE,  CHAPTER 


CHAPTER,  SECTION 
INTRODUCTION,  BOOK, 
CHAPTER,  SECTION 


Berkeley,  George  (1685-1753) 

Human  Knowledge - The  Principles  of  Human  Knowledge  preface,  introduction,  section 

Hume,  David  (1711-1776) 

Human  Understanding - An  Enquiry  Concerning  Human 

Understanding  introduction,  section,  division 

Swift,  Jonathan  (1667-1745) 

Gulliver - Gulliver's  Travels  part 


Sterne,  Laurence  (1713-1768) 

Tristram  Shandy 

Fielding,  HexNry  (1707-1754) 

Tom  Jones - The  History  of  Tom  Jones ,  A  Eoundling 


Montesquieu,  Charles  de  Secondat,  Baron  de  (1689-1755) 

The  Spirit  of  Laws  book 

Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques  (1712-1778) 

Inequality - On  the  Origin  of  Inequality  - 

Political  Economy - On  Political  Economy  - 

The  Social  Contract  book 

Smith,  Adam  (1723-1790) 

Wealth  of  Nations - An  Inquiry  Into  the 

Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations  introduction,  book 

Gibbon,  Edward  (1737-1794) 

Decline  and  Fall - The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the 

Roman  Empire ,  Chapters  1-40  - 

i,  .  <  , 

Gibbon,  Edward 

Decline  and  Fall - The  Decline  and  Fall  of  the 

Roman  Empire  (continued),  Chapters  41-71  - 


i>  •» 


REFERENCE  STYLE 


xlix 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  and  Title 

42  Kant,  Immanuel  (1724-1804) 

Pure  Reason - The  Critique  of  Pure  Reason 

Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals - Fundamental 

Principles  of  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals 

Practical  Reason - The  Critique  of  Practical  Reason 

Prcf  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics - Preface 

and  Introduction  to  the  Metaphysical  Elements 
of  Ethics  With  a  Note  on  Conscience 

Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals - General  Introduction 

to  the  Metaphysic  of  Morals 
The  Science  of  Right 

Judgement - The  Critique  of  Judgement 

43  Declaration  of  Independence 
43  Articles  of  Confederation 

Tt  '  l  ■  y.i 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.  article, 

43  [Hamilton,  Alexander  (1757-1804),  Madison,  James  (1751-1836), 
Jay,  John  (1745-1829)) 

The  Federalist 

43  Mill,  John  Stuart  (1806-1873) 

Liberty - On  Liberty 

Representative  Government 
Utilitarianism 

. 

44  Boswell,  James  (1740-1795) 

Johnson - Life  of  Samuel  Johnson ,  L.L.D, 

45  Lavoisier,  Antoine  Laurent  (1743-1794) 

Elements  of  Chemistry 

45  Fourier,  Jean  Baptiste  Joseph  (1768-1830) 

Theory  of  Heat - Analytical  Theory  of  Heat 

45  Faraday,  Michael  (1791-1867) 

Researches  in  Electricity - Experimental  Researches  in  Electricity 

46  Hegel,  Georg  Wilhelm  Friedrich  (1770-1831) 

The  Philosophy  of  Right  preface,  introduction 

The  Philosophy  of  History 

47  Goethe,  Johann  Wolfgang  von  (1749-1832) 

Faust ,  Parts  I  and  II 


Author's  Divisions  Cited 


Line 

Number  of  Article,  Line 
section,  amendment,  Line 

Papers,  by  number 


PREFACE,  PART 


,  part,  paragraph,  addition 
introduction,  part 


48 


Melville,  Herman  (1819-1882) 

Moby  Dic\ - Moby  Dic\;  or ,  The  Whale 


dedication,  prelude,  prologue,  part,  Line 


1 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Volume  Number ,  Author ,  and  Title 


Author's  Divisions  Cited 


49  Darwin,  Charles  (1809-1882) 

Origin  of  Species - The  Origin  of  Species  by  Means  of 

Natural  Selection 

Descent  of  Man - The  Descent  of  Man  and  Selection  in 

Relation  to  Sex  - 

50  Marx,  Karl  (1818-1883) 

Capital  - 

50  Marx,  Karl  and  Engels,  Friedrich  (1820-1895) 

Communist  Manifesto - Manifesto  of  the  Communist  Party  - 

51  Tolstoy,  Leo  (1828-1910) 

War  and  Peace  book,  epilogue 


52  Dostoevsky,  Fyodor  Mikhailovich  (1821-1881) 

The  Brothers  Karamazov  book,  epilogue 

53  James,  William  (1842-1910) 

Psychology - The  Principles  of  Psychology  - 


54  Freud,  Sigmund  (1856-1939) 

The  Origin  and  Development  of 
Psycho -  A  na lysis 

Hysteria - Selected  Papers  on 

Hysteria ,  Chapters  1-10 
The  Sexual  Enlightenment  of 
Children 

Psycho -Analytic  Therapy - The 

Future  Prospects  of  Psycho- 
Analytic  Therapy 

“  Wild"  Psycho-Analysis - Observa¬ 

tions  on  “Wild"  Psycho-Analysis 
The  Interpretation  of  Dreams 

Narcissism - On  Narcissism 

Instincts - Instincts  and  Their 

Vicissitudes 


Repression 
The  Unconscious 

General  Introduction - A  General 

Introduction  to  Psycho-Analysis 
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle 

Group  Psychology - Group  Psychology 

and  the  Analysis  of  the  Ego 
The  Ego  and  the  Id 
Inhibitions ,  Symptoms ,  and  Anxiety 

War  and  Death - Thoughts  for  the 

Times  on  War  and  Death 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents 

New  Introductory  Lectures - New 

Introductory  Lectures  on  Psycho- 
Analysis 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS :  I 


Chapters  1-50:  Angel  to  Love 


avoJ  ca  jaoviA  :o£-i 


"I 


Chapter  i:  ANGEL 


INTRODUCTION 


INFLUENCED  by  a  long  tradition  of  reli¬ 
gious  symbolism  in  painting  and  poetry,  our 
imagination  responds  to  the  word  “angel”  by 
picturing  a  winged  figure  robed  in  dazzling 
white  and  having  the  bodily  aspect  of  a  human 
being. 

This  image,  common  to  believers  and  unbe¬ 
lievers,  contains  features  which  represent  some 
of  the  elements  of  meaning  in  the  abstract  con¬ 
ception  of  angels  as  this  is  found  in  the  writings 
of  Jewish  and  Christian  theologians  and  in  re¬ 
lated  discussions  by  the  philosophers.  The  hu¬ 
man  appearance  suggests  that  angels,  like  men, 
are  persons;  that  they  are  most  essentially  char¬ 
acterized  by  their  intelligence.  The  wings  sug¬ 
gest  the  function  of  angels — their  service  as 
messengers  from  God  to  man.  The  aura  of  light 
which  surrounds  them  signifies,  according  to 
established  conventions  of  symbolism,  the  spir¬ 
ituality  of  angels.  It  suggests  that  to  imagine 
angels  with  bodies  is  to  use  a  pictorial  metaphor. 

Another  interpretation  might  be  put  upon 
this  aura  of  light  if  one  considers  the  role  which 
the  notion  of  angel  has  played  in  the  history  of 
thought.  Wherever  that  notion  has  entered  in¬ 
to  discussions  of  God  and  man,  of  matter, 
mind,  and  soul,  of  knowledge  and  love,  and 
even  of  time,  space,  and  motion,  it  has  cast 
light  upon  these  other  topics.  The  illumination 
which  has  been  and  can  be  derived  from  the 
idea  of  angels  as  a  special  kind  of  being  or  nature 
is  in  no  way  affected  by  doubts  or  denials  of 
their  existence. 

Whether  such  beings  exist  or  not,  the  fact 
that  they  are  conceivable  has  significance  for 
theory  and  analysis.  Those  who  do  not  believe 
in  the  existence — or  even  the  possible  exist¬ 
ence — of  utopias  nevertheless  regard  them  as 
fictions  useful  analytically  in  appraising  ac¬ 
cepted  realities.  What  an  ideal  society  would  be 
like  can  be  considered  apart  from  the  question 


of  its  existence;  and,  so  considered,  it  functions 
as  an  hypothesis  in  political  and  economic 
thought.  What  sort  of  being  an  angel  would  be 
if  one  existed  can  likewise  serve  as  an  hypothe¬ 
sis  in  the  examination  of  a  wide  variety  of 
theoretical  problems. 

The  idea  of  angels  does  in  fact  serve  in  pre¬ 
cisely  this  way  as  an  analytical  tool.  It  sharpens 
our  understanding  of  what  man  is,  how  his  mind 
operates,  what  the  soul  is,  what  manner  of  ex¬ 
istence  and  action  anything  would  have  apart 
from  matter.  Hence  it  suggests  how  matter  and 
its  motions  in  time  and  space  determine  the 
characteristics  of  corporeal  existence.  Pascal’s 
remark — that  “man  is  neither  angel  nor  brute, 
and  the  unfortunate  thing  is  that  he  who  would 
act  the  angel  acts  the  brute” — points  to  the 
different  conceptions  of  man  which  result  from 
supposing  him  to  be  either  angel  or  brute  rather 
than  neither.  Such  views  of  human  nature,  con¬ 
sidered  in  the  chapters  on  Animal  and  Man, 
cannot  be  fully  explored  without  reference  to 
theories  of  the  human  mind  or  soul  in  its  rela¬ 
tion  to  matter  and  to  body.  As  the  chapters  on 
Mind  and  Soul  indicate,  theories  carrying  the 
names  of  Plato  and  Descartes,  which  attribute 
to  the  human  mind  or  soul  the  being  and  pow¬ 
ers  of  a  purely  spiritual  substance  or  entity, 
seem  to  place  man  in  the  company  of  the  angels. 
In  this  tradition  Locke  applies  the  word  “spir¬ 
its”  equally  to  human  minds  and  to  supra- 
human  intelligences. 

It  would  be  misleading  to  suppose  that  the 
idea  of  angels  is  primarily  a  construction  of  the 
philosophers — a  fiction  invented  for  their  ana¬ 
lytical  purposes;  or  that  it  is  simply  their  con¬ 
ception  of  a  supra-mundane  reality,  concerning 
the  existence  and  nature  of  which  they  dispute. 
In  the  literature  of  western  civilization,  angels 
first  appear  by  name  or  reference  in  the  Old 


1 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


2 

and  the  New  Testaments.  Readers  of  the  Bible 
will  remember  many  scenes  in  which  an  angel 
of  the  Lord  performs  the  mission  of  acquainting 
man  with  God’s  will.  Among  the  most  memor¬ 
able  of  such  occasions  are  the  visits  of  the  angels 
to  Abraham  and  Lot  and  the  angelic  ministry 
of  Gabriel  in  the  Annunciation  to  Mary. 

In  one  book  of  the  Bible,  Tobias  (Tobit,  as 
it  is  called  in  the  King  James  Apocrypha),  one 
of  the  leading  characters  is  the  angel  Raph¬ 
ael.  Through  most  of  the  story  he  appears  as 
a  man,  but  at  the  end,  after  he  has  accomplished 
his  mission,  he  reveals  his  identity.  “I  am  the 
angel  Raphael,”  he  declares, 

one  of  the  seven,  who  stand  before  the  Lord. 

And  when  they  had  heard  these  things  they  were 
troubled;  and  being  seized  with  fear  they  fell  upon 
the  ground  on  their  face. 

And  the  angel  said  to  them:  Peace  be  to  you. 
Fear  not. 

For  when  I  was  with  you,  I  was  there  by  the  will 
of  God :  bless  ye  him  and  sing  praises  to  him. 

I  seemed  to  eat  and  to  drink  with  you;  but  I  use 
an  invisible  meat  and  drink,  which  cannot  be  seen 
by  men. 

It  is  time  therefore  that  I  return  to  him  that  sent 
me.  .  .  . 

And  when  he  had  said  these  things,  he  was  taken 
from  their  sight;  and  they  could  see  him  no  more. 

As  a  result  of  scriptural  exegesis  and  commen¬ 
tary,  the  angels  become  a  fundamental  topic  for 
Jewish  theologians  from  Philo  to  Maimonides, 
and  for  such  Christian  theologians  as  Augustine, 
Scotus  Erigena,  Gregory  the  Great,  Aquinas, 
Luther,  Calvin,  Pascal,  and  Schleiermacher. 
They  figure  in  the  great  poetry  of  the  Judaeo- 
Christian  tradition — in  the  Divine  Comedy  of 
Dante,  in  Paradise  Lost  of  Milton,  and  in 
Chaucer’s  Canterbury  Tales  and  Goethe’s  Faust. 

The  philosophers,  especially  in  the  17th  and 
1 8th  centuries,  are  motivated  by  Scripture  or 
provoked  by  theology  to  consider  the  existence, 
the  nature,  and  the  activity  of  angels.  Hobbes, 
for  example,  attacks  the  supposition  that  angels 
are  immaterial  on  the  ground  that  the  notion 
of  incorporeal  substance  is  self-contradictory, 
and  undertakes  to  re-interpret  all  the  scriptural 
passages  in  which  angels  are  described  as  spirits. 
After  examining  a  great  many,  he  says  that  “to 
mention  all  the  places  of  the  Old  Testament 
where  the  name  of  Angel  is  found,  would  be 
too  long.  Therefore  to  comprehend  them  all  at 
once,  I  say,  there  is  no  text  in  that  part  of  the 


Old  Testament,  which  the  Church  of  England 
holdeth  for  Canonical,  from  which  we  can  con¬ 
clude,  there  is,  or  hath  been  created,  any  per¬ 
manent  thing  (understood  by  the  name  of  Spirit 
or  Angel)  that  hath  not  quantity  .  .  .  and,  in 
sum,  which  is  not  (taking  Body  for  that  which 
is  somewhat  or  somewhere)  Corporeal.” 

All  the  passages  can  be  interpreted,  Hobbes 
thinks,  simply  in  the  sense  in  which  “angel” 
means  “messenger”  and  “most  often,  a  messen¬ 
ger  of  God,”  which  signifies  “anything  that 
makes  known  his  extra-ordinary  presence.”  If, 
instead  of  existing  only  when  they  carry  God’s 
word  to  men,  the  angels  are  supposed  to  have 
permanent  being,  then  they  must  be  corporeal. 
As  “in  the  resurrection  men  shall  be  permanent 
and  not  incorporeal,”  Hobbes  writes,  “so  there¬ 
fore  also  are  the  angels  ...  To  men  that  under¬ 
stand  the  signification  of  these  words,  substance 
and  incorporeal ” — and  mean  by  “incorporeal” 
having  no  body  at  all,  not  just  a  subtle  body — 
the  words  taken  together  “imply  a  contradic¬ 
tion.”  Hence  Hobbes  argues  that  to  say  “an 
angel,  or  spirit,  is  (in  that  sense)  an  incorporeal 
substance,  is  to  say  in  effect  that  there  is  no 
angel  or  spirit  at  all.  Considering  therefore  the 
signification  of  the  word  angel  in  the  Old  Testa¬ 
ment,  and  the  nature  of  dreams  and  visions  that 
happen  to  men  by  the  ordinary  way  of  nature,” 
Hobbes  concludes  that  the  angels  are  “nothing 
but  supernatural  apparitions  of  the  fancy,  raised 
by  the  special  and  extraordinary  operation  of 
God,  thereby  to  make  his  presence  and  com¬ 
mandments  known  to  mankind,  and  chiefly  to 
his  own  people.” 

Locke  seems  to  take  the  exactly  opposite  po¬ 
sition.  Asserting  that  we  have  “no  clear  or 
distinct  idea  of  substance  in  general,”  he  does 
not  think  spirits  any  less  intelligible  than  bodies. 
“The  idea  of  corporeal  substance ,”  he  writes,  “is 
as  remote  from  our  conceptions  and  apprehen¬ 
sions,  as  that  of  spiritual  substance  or  spirit;  and 
therefore,  from  our  not  having  any  notion  of 
the  substance  of  spirit,  we  can  no  more  con¬ 
clude  its  non-existence,  than  we  can,  for  the 
same  reason,  deny  the  existence  of  body.”  Just 
as  we  form  the  complex  idea  of  bodies  by  sup¬ 
posing  their  qualities,  such  as  figure  and  motion, 
or  color  and  weight,  to  co-exist  in  some  sub¬ 
stratum;  so  by  supposing  the  activities  we  find 
in  ourselves — such  as  “thinking,  understanding, 


Chapter  1 :  ANGEL 


willing,  knowing,  and  the  power  of  beginning 
motion,  etc.” — to  co-exist  in  some  substance, 
“we  are  able  to  frame  the  complex  idea  of  an 
immaterial  spirit .” 

Not  only  does  Locke  think  that  “we  have  as 
clear  a  perception  and  notion  of  immaterial  sub¬ 
stances  as  we  have  of  material,”  but  he  also 
finds  the  traditional  doctrine  of  a  hierarchy  of 
angels  quite  acceptable  to  reason.  “It  is  not  im¬ 
possible  to  conceive,  nor  repugnant  to  reason, 
that  there  may  be  many  species  of  spirits,  as 
much  separated  and  diversified  one  from  an¬ 
other  by  distinct  properties  whereof  we  have 
no  ideas,  as  the  species  of  sensible  things  are  dis¬ 
tinguished  one  from  another  by  qualities  which 
we  know  and  observe  in  them.” 

Locke  goes  even  further — beyond  the  mere 
possibility  of  angels  to  the  likelihood  of  their 
real  existence.  His  reasoning  resembles  the  tra¬ 
ditional  argument  of  the  theologians  on  this  dif¬ 
ficult  point.  “When  we  consider  the  infinite 
power  and  wisdom  of  the  Maker,”  he  writes, 
“we  have  reason  to  think  that  it  is  suitable  to 
the  magnificent  harmony  of  the  Universe,  and 
the  great  design  and  infinite  goodness  of  the 
Architect,  that  the  species  of  creatures  should 
also,  by  gentle  degrees,  ascend  upward  from  us 
toward  his  infinite  perfection,  as  we  see  they 
gradually  descend  from  us  downwards.” 

Such  speculations  concerning  the  existence 
and  the  order  of  angels  are  usually  thought  to 
be  the  province  of  the  theologian  rather  than 
the  philosopher.  But  Bacon,  like  Locke,  does 
not  think  it  unfitting  for  the  philosopher  to  in¬ 
quire  into  such  matters.  In  natural  theology — 
for  him  a  part  of  philosophy — Bacon  thinks  it  is 
improper  “from  the  contemplation  of  nature, 
and  the  principles  of  human  reason,  to  dispute 
or  urge  anything  with  vehemence  as  to  the 
mysteries  of  faith.”  But  “it  is  otherwise,”  he 
declares,  “as  to  the  nature  of  spirits  and  angels; 
this  being  neither  unsearchable  nor  forbid,  but 
in  a  great  part  level  to  the  human  mind  on 
account  of  their  affinity.” 

He  does  not  further  instruct  us  concerning 
angels  in  the  Advancement  of  Learning ,  but  in 
the  Novum  Organum  he  throws  light  on  their 
nature  as  well  as  ours  by  touching  on  one  char¬ 
acteristic  difference  between  the  human  and 
the  angelic  mind.  Discussing  there  the  theory  of 
induction,  he  holds  that  “it  is  only  for  God 


3 

(the  bestower  and  creator  of  forms),  and  per¬ 
haps  for  angels  or  intelligences  at  once  to  recog¬ 
nize  forms  affirmatively  at  the  first  glance  of 
contemplation.” 

Unlike  most  of  the  great  ideas  with  which 
we  are  concerned,  the  idea  of  angel  seems  to  be 
limited  in  its  historical  scope.  It  is  not  merely 
that  since  the  1 8th  century  the  discussion  has 
dwindled,  but  also  that  the  idea  makes  no  ap¬ 
pearance  in  the  great  books  of  pagan  antiquity 
— certainly  not  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term, 
whereby  “angel”  signifies  a  creature  of  God, 
spiritual  in  substance  and  nature,  and  playing 
a  role  in  the  divine  government  of  the  universe. 

There  are,  nevertheless,  analogous  concep¬ 
tions  in  the  religion  and  philosophy  of  the  an¬ 
cients;  and  in  philosophy  at  least,  the  points  of 
resemblance  between  the  analogous  concepts 
are  sufficiently  strong  to  establish  a  continuity 
of  discussion.  Furthermore,  elements  in  the 
thought  of  Plato,  Aristotle,  and  Plotinus  exer¬ 
cise  a  critical  influence  on  Judaeo-Christian 
angelology. 

Gibbon  relates  how  the  early  Christians  made 
the  connection  between  the  gods  of  polytheism 
and  their  doctrine  about  angels.  “It  was  the 
universal  sentiment  both  of  the  church  and  of 
heretics,”  he  writes,  “that  the  daemons  were 
the  authors,  the  patrons,  and  the  objects  of 
idolatry.  Those  rebellious  spirits  who  had  been 
degraded  from  the  rank  of  angels,  and  cast 
down  into  the  infernal  pit,  were  still  permitted 
to  roam  upon  the  earth,  to  torment  the  bodies 
and  to  seduce  the  minds  of  sinful  men.  The 
daemons  soon  discovered  and  abused  the  nat¬ 
ural  propensity  of  the  human  heart  towards 
devotion,  and,  artfully  withdrawing  the  adora¬ 
tion  of  mankind  from  their  Creator,  they 
usurped  the  place  and  honors  of  the  Supreme 
Deity.” 

In  the  polytheistic  religions  of  antiquity,  the 
demi-gods  or  inferior  deities  are  beings  supe¬ 
rior  in  nature  and  power  to  man.  “The  poly¬ 
theist  and  the  philosopher,  the  Greek  and  the 
barbarian,”  writes  Gibbon,  “were  alike  accus¬ 
tomed  to  conceive  a  long  succession,  an  infinite 
chain  of  angels,  or  daemons,  or  deities,  or  aeons, 
or  emanations,  issuing  from  the  throne  of  light.” 
In  Plato’s  Symposium ,  for  example,  Diotima 
tells  Socrates  that  Love  “is  intermediate  be- 


4 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


tween  the  divine  and  the  mortal  .  .  .and  inter¬ 
prets  between  gods  and  men;  conveying  and 
taking  across  to  the  gods  the  prayers  and  sacri¬ 
fices  of  men,  and  to  men  the  commands  and  re¬ 
plies  of  the  gods;  he  is  the  mediator  who  spans 
the  chasm  which  divides  them.”  Love,  Diotima 
explains,  is  only  one  of  “these  spirits  and  inter¬ 
mediate  powers”  which  “are  many  and  diverse.’’ 

Such  demi-gods  are  intermediate  by  their 
very  nature.  Although  superhuman  in  knowl¬ 
edge  and  action,  they  still  are  not  completely 
divine.  Occupying  a  place  between  men  and 
gods,  they  are,  according  to  Plato,  “by  nature 
neither  mortal  nor  immortal.”  Their  existence 
is  necessary  to  fill  out  the  hierarchy  of  natures. 
They  are  links  in  what  has  come  to  be  called 
“the  great  chain  of  being.” 

The  analogy  with  the  angels  arises  primarily 
from  this  fact  of  hierarchy.  Both  pagan  and 
Christian  religions  believe  in  an  order  of  super¬ 
natural  or  at  least  superhuman  beings  graded  in 
perfection  and  power.  In  both,  these  beings 
serve  as  messengers  from  the  gods  to  men;  they 
act  sometimes  as  guardians  or  protectors,  some¬ 
times  as  traducers,  deceivers,  and  enemies  of 
man.  But  the  analogy  cannot  be  carried  much 
further  than  this.  The  angels,  according  to 
Christian  teaching,  are  not  inferior  gods,  or 
even  demi-gods.  As  compared  with  the  “inter¬ 
mediate  spirits”  of  pagan  religion,  they  are  less 
human  in  character,  as  well  as  less  divine. 
Nevertheless,  the  reader  of  the  great  poems  of 
antiquity  will  find  a  striking  parallelism  be¬ 
tween  the  heavenly  insurrection  which  under¬ 
lies  the  action  of  Prometheus  Bound  and  the 
angelic  warfare  in  Paradise  Lost . 

’b  r  ;'n  J'-  •  V  \ 

In  the  writings  of  Plato,  Aristotle,  and  Ploti¬ 
nus,  philosophical  inquiry  turns  from  the  sensi¬ 
ble  world  of  material  things  to  consider  the  ex¬ 
istence  and  nature  of  an  order  of  purely  intelli¬ 
gible  beings.  As  there  is  an  inherent  connection 
between  being  perceptible  to  the  senses  and  be¬ 
ing  material,  so  that  which  is  purely  intelligible 
must  be  completely  immaterial.  If  ideas  exist 
independently— in  their  own  right  and  apart 
from  knowing  or  thinking  minds — then  they 
constitute  such  an  order  of  purely  intelligible 
entities. 

At  this  point  a  number  of  difficult  questions 
arise.  Are  the  intelligiblcs  also  intelligences,  /.<?., 


are  they  an  order  of  knowers  as  well  as  a  realm  j  ac 
of  knowables?  Can  they  be  regarded,  as;  sub-  i!) 
stances?  And  if  so,  do  they  have  a  mode  of  ac-  re; 
tion  appropriate  to  their  mode  of  being— action  1 11 
which  is  other  than  knowing,  action  which  in  m 
some  way  impinges  on  the  course  of  events  or  fr< 
the  motions  of  the  physical  world  ? 

Plotinus  answers  affirmatively  that  the  pure¬ 
ly  intelligible  beings  are  also  pure  intelligences,  \\ 
but  he  does  not  conceive  them  as  having  any  $t 
power  or  action  except  that  of  knowledge.  An-  cit 
other  answer  to  these  questions  given  in  antiq-  $e 
uity  and  the  Middle  Ages  is  that  the  intelli- 
gences  are  the  celestial  motors,  the  movers  of  v( 
the  heavenly  bodies.  “Since  we  see,”  Aristotle 
writes,  “that  besides  the  simple  spatial  move- 
ment  of  the  universe,  which  we  say  that  the  ^ 
first  and  unmovable  substance  produces,  there  # 
are  other  spatial  movements — those  of  the  3f 
planets— which  are  eternal  (for  a  body  which 
moves  in  a  circle  moves  eternally),  each  of  these  j 
movements  also  must  be  caused  by  a  substance, 
both  unmovable  in  itself  and  eternal.”  These  ] 
secondary  movers,  Aristotle  thinks,  are  “of  the  jf 
same  number  as  the  movements  ol  the  stars,”  x 
and  not  only  must  they  be  eternal  and  unmov¬ 
able,  as  is  the  prime  mover,  but  also  “without  jj 
magnitude”  or  immaterial.  jt 

Plato,  offers  an  alternative  hypothesis — that  t, 

the  celestial  bodies  are  alive  and  have  souls.  H 
This  hypothesis,  like  Aristotle’s,  tends  in  the  6 
Middle  Ages  to  be  restated  in  terms  of  the  0 
theory  of  angels,  Aquinas  reports  Augustine  as  j 
thinking  that  “if  the  heavenly  bodies  are  really  , 
living  beings,  their  souls  must  be  akin  to  the  0 
angelic  nature.”  He  himself  holds  that  “spirit-  j 
ual  substances  are  united  to  them  as  movers  to  0 
things  moved,”  the  proof  of  which,  he  says, 
“lies  in  the  fact  that  whereas  nature  moves  to 
one  fixed  end,  in  which  having  attained  it,  it  a 
rests;  this  does  not  appear  in  the  movement  of  s 
the  heavenly  bodies.  Hence  it  follows  that  they 
are  moved  by  some  intellectual  substances.” 

The  question  whether  intelligences  govern 
the  planets  also  occupies  the  attention  of  an  ] 
astronomer  like  Kepler.  Although  he  denies  j, 
any  need  for  such  intelligences — among  other 
reasons  because  planetary  motion  is  not  circular  a 
but  elliptical— he  argues  that  the  celestial  E 
movements  are  the  work  either  “of  the  natural  Q 
power  of  the  bodies,  or  else  a  work  of  the  soul 


Chapter  1 :  ANGEL 


acting  uniformly  in  accordance  with  those  bod¬ 
ily  powers.”  But  whether  or  not  they  are  to  be 
regarded  as  movers ,  as  well  as  ^powers  and  hpow- 
ables ,  the  intelligences  represent  for  ancient  and 
mediaeval  thought  a  mode  of  being  exempt 
from  the  vicissitudes  of  physical  change  even  as 
it  is  separate  from  matter. 

When  modern  philosophers  consider  spirits  or 
spiritual  being,  they  seldom  deal  with  the  an¬ 
cient  speculations  about  pure  intelligibles  or 
separate  intelligences  without  being  influenced 
by  the  theological  doctrine  of  angels  which  de¬ 
veloped  in  mediaeval  thought. 

The  extent  of  this  doctrine  may  be  judged 
from  the  fact  that  the  Summa  Theologica  of 
Aquinas  contains  a  whole  treatise  on  the  angels, 
as  well  as  additional  questions  on  the  speech  of 
angels,  their  hierarchies  and  orders,  the  division 
between  the  good  and  the  bad  angels,  and 
their  action  on  men — the  guardianship  of  the 
good  angels  and  the  assaults  of  the  demons. 
That  these  additional  questions  are  contained 
in  the  treatise  on  divine  government  throws 
some  light  on  their  theological  significance. 

The  primary  fact  about  the  angelic  nature  is 
immateriality.  An  angel  is  immaterial  both  in 
its  substantial  being  and  in  its  characteristic  ac¬ 
tivity  which,  says  Aquinas,  is  “an  altogether 
immaterial  mode  of  operation.”  Being  imma¬ 
terial,  they  are  also  incorruptible.  “Nothing  is 
corrupted  except  by  its  form  being  separated 
from  the  matter  .  .  .  Consequently,”  Aquinas 
writes,  “a  subject  composed  of  matter  and  form 
ceases  to  be  actually  when  the  form  is  separated 
from  the  matter.  But  if  the  form  subsists  in  its 
own  being,  as  happens  in  the  angels,  it  cannot 
lose  its  being.”  To  signify  that  they  are  intelli¬ 
gences  existing  apart  from  matter,  the  angels 
are  sometimes  called  “subsisting  forms”  and 
sometimes  “separate  substances.” 

Although  they  are  imperishable  in  being  and 
have  immortal  life,  the  angels  are  not,  like  God, 
truly  eternal.  “That  heaven  of  heavens  which 
Thou  createdst  in  the  beginning  is  some  intellec¬ 
tual  creature,”  Augustine  writes,  but  it  is  in 
“no  ways  coeternal  unto  Thee.”  As  created,  the 
angels  have  a  beginning.  Yet,  while  not  eternal, 
neither  are  they  temporal  creatures  in  contin¬ 
ual  flux,  but,  according  to  Augustine,  they 
“partake  of  Thy  eternity  .  .  .  through  the 


5 

sweetness  of  that  most  happy  contemplation  of 
Thyself.  .  .  cleaving  close  unto  Thee,  placed  be¬ 
yond  all  the  rolling  vicissitudes  of  times.”  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  the  angels  are  spoken  of  as 
“aeviternal.” 

The  familiar  question  concerning  the  num¬ 
ber  of  angels  able  to  stand  on  a  needle’s  point— 
if  it  was  ever  asked  by  mediaeval  theologians — 
merely  poses  the  problem  of  how  an  incorpo¬ 
real  substance  occupies  space.  The  way  in  which 
Aquinas  discusses  “angels  in  relation  to  place” 
discloses  how  the  question  serves  to  raise  gen¬ 
erally  significant  issues  concerning  the  nature  of 
space  and  quantity,  and  their  relation  to  causal¬ 
ity.  He  points  out  that  a  body  occupies  place  in 
a  circumscribed  fashion,  i.e.,  its  dirnensive 
quantity  is  contained  within  the  space;  whereas 
“an  angel  is  said  to  be  in  a  corporeal  place  by 
application  of  the  angelic  power  in  any  manner 
whatever  to  the  place.  .  .  .  An  incorporeal  sub¬ 
stance  virtually  contains  the  thing  with  which  it 
comes  into  contact,  and  is  not  contained  by  it.” 
To  an  objector  who  thinks  that  since,  unlike 
bodies,  angels  do  not  fill  a  place,  several  can  be 
in  the  same  place  at  the  same  time,  Aquinas  re¬ 
plies  that  two  angels  cannot  be  in  the  same 
place  because  “it  is  impossible  for  two  complete 
causes  to  be  immediately  the  cause  of  one  and 
the  same  thing.”;  Since  an  angel  is  where  he 
acts,  and  since  by  the  power  of  his  action  he 
contains  the  place  at  which  he  acts,  “there  can¬ 
not  be  but  one  angel  at  one  place.” 

Angels  are  also  said  to  go  from  one  place  to 
another  without  traversing  the  intervening 
space  and  without  the  lapse  of  time.  Consider¬ 
ing  their  immateriality,  such  action  is  less  re¬ 
markable  for  angels  to  perform  than  is  the  ac¬ 
tion  of  electrons,  which,  according  to  modern 
quantum  mechanics,  jump  from  outer  to  inner 
orbits  of  the  atom  without  taking  time  or  pas¬ 
sing  through  inter-orbital  space. 

The  immateriality  of  angels  has  other  conse¬ 
quences  which  throw  comparative  light  on  the 
conditions  of  corporeal  existence.  In  the  world 
of  physical  things  we  ordinarily  think  of  a 
species  as  including  a  number  of  individuals. 
While  all  men  have  the  same  specific  nature, 
they  differ  numerically  or  individually.  But  be¬ 
cause  angels  are  immaterial  substances,  it  is 
held  that  each  angel  is  a  distinct  species. 
“Things  which  agree  in  species  but  differ  in 


6 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


number/’  Aquinas  explains,  “agree  in  form  but 
are  distinguished  materially.  If,  therefore,  the 
angels  are  not  composed  of  matter  and  form  .  .  . 
it  follows  that  it  is  impossible  for  two  angels  to 
be  of  one  species.” 

Furthermore,  as  Aquinas  states  in  another 
place,  among  “incorporeal  substances  there  can¬ 
not  be  diversity  of  number  without  diversity 
of  species  and  inequality  of  nature.”  Each 
species  is  necessarily  higher  or  lower  than  an¬ 
other,  so  that  the  society  of  angels  is  a  perfect 
hierarchy  in  which  each  member  occupies  a  dis¬ 
tinct  rank.  No  two  angels  are  equal  as,  on  the 
supposition  that  they  share  in  the  same  specific 
humanity,  all  men  are.  Yet  such  names  as  “sera¬ 
phim”  and  “cherubim”  and  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  archangels  and  angels  indicate  an  organi¬ 
zation  of  spiritual  substances  into  various 
groups — according  to  the  tradition,  into  nine 
orders  or  subordinate  hierarchies. 

The  nine  orders  or  ranks  of  angelic  being  are 
described  by  Dante  in  the  Paradiso  as  dis¬ 
tinct  circles  of  love  and  light.  Using  these  meta¬ 
phors  he  thus  reports  his  vision  of  the  heavenly 
hierarchy.  “I  saw  a  Point  which  was  raying  out 
light  so  keen  that  the  sight  on  which  it  blazes 
must  needs  close  because  of  its  intense  bright¬ 
ness.  .  .  .  Perhaps  as  near  as  a  halo  seems  to 
girdle  the  light  which  paints  it,  when  the  vapor 
that  bears  it  is  most  dense,  at  such  distance 
around  the  Point  a  circle  of  fire  was  whirling  so 
rapidly  that  it  would  have  surpassed  that  mo¬ 
tion  which  most  swiftly  girds  the  world;  and 
this  was  girt  around  by  another,  and  that  by 
the  third,  and  the  third  then  by  the  fourth,  by 
the  fifth  the  fourth,  and  then  by  the  sixth  the 
fifth.  Thereon  the  seventh  followed,  so  wide¬ 
spread  now  in  compass  that  the  messenger  of 
Juno  entire  would  be  narrow  to  contain  it.  So 
the  eighth  and  ninth.” 

Beatrice  explains  to  him  how  the  relation  of 
the  circles  to  one  another  and  to  the  Point 
which  is  God  depends  upon  their  measure  of 
love  and  truth,  whereby  there  is  “in  each 
heaven  a  marvellous  agreement  with  its  Intelli¬ 
gence,  of  greater  to  more  and  of  smaller  to  less.” 
She  then  amplifies  her  meaning:  “The  first  cir¬ 
cles  have  shown  to  thee  the  Seraphim  and  the 
Cherubim.  Thus  swiftly  they  follow  their  own 
bonds,  in  order  to  liken  themselves  to  the  Point 
as  most  they  can,  and  they  can  in  proportion 


as  they  are  exalted  to  see.  Those  other  loves, 
which  go  around  them,  are  called  Thrones  of 
the  divine  aspect,  because  they  terminated  the 
first  triad.  .  .  .  The  next  triad,  that  in  like  man¬ 
ner  bourgeons  in  this  sempiternal  spring  which 
the  nightly  Aries  despoils  not,  perpetually  sing 
Hosannah  with  three  melodies,  which  sound  in 
the  three  orders  of  joy  .  .  .  first  Dominations, 
and  then  Virtues;  the  third  order  is  of  Powers. 
Then  in  the  two  penultimate  dances,  the  Prin¬ 
cipalities  and  Archangels  circle;  the  last  is 
wholly  of  Angelic  sports.  These  orders  all  gaze 
upward,  and  downward  so  prevail,  that  towards 
God  all  are  drawn,  and  all  draw.” 

The  theory  of  angels  raises  many  questions 
regarding  the  similarity  and  difference  between 
them  and  disembodied  souls.  But  for  compari¬ 
son  with  men,  perhaps  the  most  striking  conse¬ 
quences  of  the  theory  of  angels  as  bodiless  in¬ 
telligences  concern  the  manner  of  their  knowl¬ 
edge  and  government.  The  comparison  can  be 
made  on  quite  different  views  of  the  nature  of 
man  and  the  soul.  In  fact,  diverse  conceptions 
of  man  or  the  soul  can  themselves  be  compared 
by  reference  to  the  angelic  properties  which 
one  conception  attributes  to  human  nature  and 
another  denies. 

Lacking  bodies,  the  angels  are  without  sense- 
perception  and  imagination.  Not  being  im¬ 
mersed  in  time  and  motion,  they  do  not  reason 
or  think  discursively  as  men  do  by  reasoning 
from  premises  to  conclusion.  Whereas  “human 
intellects,”  according  to  Aquinas,  “obtain  their 
perfection  in  the  knowledge  of  truth  by  a  kind 
of  movement  and  discursive  intellectual  opera¬ 
tion  ...  as  they  advance  from  one  known  thing 
to  another,”  the  angels,  “from  the  knowledge 
of  a  known  principle  .  .  .  straightway  perceive 
as  known  all  its  consequent  conclusions .  .  .  with 
no  discursive  process  at  all.”  Their  knowledge 
is  intuitive  and  immediate,  not  by  means  of 
concepts  abstracted  from  experience  or  other¬ 
wise  formed,  but  through  the  archetypal  ideas 
infused  in  them  at  their  creation  by  God.  That 
is  why,  Aquinas  goes  on  to  say,  angels  “are 
called  intellectual  beings”  as  contrasted  with 
such  rational  natures  as  “human  souls  which  ac¬ 
quire  knowledge  of  truth  discursively.”  If  men 
“possessed  the  fulness  of  intellectual  light,  like 
the  angels,  then  in  the  first  grasping  of  princi- 


Chapter  1 :  ANGEL 


pics  they  would  at  once  comprehend  their 
whole  range,  by  perceiving  whatever  could  be 
reasoned  out  from  them.” 

It  would  appear  from  this  that  conceptions  of 
the  human  intellect  which  minimize  its  depend¬ 
ence  on  sense  and  imagination,  and  which  em¬ 
phasize  the  intuitive  rather  than  the  discursive 
character  of  human  thought,  attribute  angelic 
power  to  man.  The  same  may  be  said  of  theories 
of  human  knowledge  which  account  for  its  ori¬ 
gin  in  terms  of  innate  ideas  or  implanted  prin¬ 
ciples.  Still  another  example  of  the  attribution 
of  angelic  properties  to  man  is  to  be  found  in 
the  supposition  that  human  beings  can  commu¬ 
nicate  with  one  another  by  telepathy.  The  an¬ 
gels  are  telepathic;  one  angel,  it  is  said,  can 
make  its  ideas  known  to  another  simply  by  an 
act  of  will  and  without  any  exterior  means  of 
communication. 

Lacking  bodies,  the  angels  are  without  bodily 
emotions,  free  from  the  human  conflict  be¬ 
tween  reason  and  passion,  and  completely  di¬ 
rected  in  their  love — or  the  motion  of  their  will 
— by  what  they  know.  In  the  Divine  Comedy 
Beatrice  speaks  of  the  angelic  society  as  one  in 
which  “the  Eternal  Love  disclosed  himself  in 
new  loves.”  Adverting  to  the  division  between 
the  good  and  the  bad  angels,  she  tells  Dante, 
“those  whom  thou  seest  here  were  modest  in 
grateful  recognition  of  the  Goodness  which  had 
made  them  apt  for  intelligence  so  great,  where¬ 
fore  their  vision  was  exalted  with  illuminant 
grace  and  by  their  merit,  so  that  they  have  full 
and  steadfast  will.”  Yet  their  vision  and  love  of 
God  is  not  equal.  In  heaven  “the  Primal  Light 
that  irradiates  it  all  is  received  in  it  by  as  many 
modes  as  are  the  splendors  with  which  the 
Light  pairs  Itself.  Wherefore,  since  the  affection 
follows  upon  the  act  that  conceives,  in  this  na¬ 
ture  the  sweetness  of  love  diversely  glows  and 
warms.” 

Such  a  society,  governed  by  knowledge  and 
love,  has  no  need  for  the  application  of  coercive 
force,  for  angels  are  ordered  to  one  another  in 
such  a  way  that  no  misunderstandings  or  dis¬ 
agreements  can  occur  among  them.  The  philo¬ 
sophical  anarchist  who  proposes  the  ideal  of  a 
human  society  without  restraint  or  coercion 
seems,  therefore,  to  be  angelicizing  men,  or  at 
least  to  be  wishing  for  heaven  on  earth.  Con¬ 
ceiving  government  on  earth  in  other  terms, 


7 

the  writers  of  The  Federalist  remark  that  “if 
men  were  angels,  no  government  would  be 
necessary.”  If  they  had  considered  that  the  an¬ 
gelic  society  is  governed  by  love  alone  and 
without  force,  they  might  have  said,  “if  men 
were  angels,  no  coercion  would  be  necessary  in 
their  government.” 

One  of  the  great  theological  dogmas  asserts 
that,  from  the  beginning,  the  angels  are  divided 
into  two  hosts — the  good  and  evil  spirits.  The 
sin  of  Lucifer,  or  Satan,  and  his  followers  is  that 
of  disobedience,  or  rebellion  against  God,  moti¬ 
vated  by  a  pride  which  refuses  to  be  satisfied 
with  being  less  than  God.  As  Satan  himself  says, 
in  Paradise  Lost , 

.  .  .  pride  and  worse  Ambition  threw  me  down 
Warring  in  Heav’n  against  Heav’ns  matchless  King. 
...  All  his  good  prov’d  ill  in  me, 

And  wrought  but  malice;  lifted  up  so  high 
I  ’sdeind  subjection,  and  thought  one  step  higher 
Would  set  me  highest,  and  in  a  moment  quit 
The  debt  immense  of  endless  gratitude  .  .  . 

. And  that  word 

Disdain  forbids  me,  and  my  dread  of  shame 
Among  the  spirits  beneath,  whom  I  seduc’d 
Then  to  submit,  boasting  I  could  subdue 
Th’  Omnipotent. 

The  theologians  try  to  define  precisely  the 
nature  of  Satan's  pride  in  wishing  to  be  God. 
“To  be  as  God”  Aquinas  explains,  “can  be  un¬ 
derstood  in  two  ways:  first,  by  equality;  sec¬ 
ondly,  by  likeness.  An  angel  could  not  seek  to 
be  as  God  in  the  first  way,  because  by  natural 
knowledge  he  knew  that  this  was  impossible  .  .  . 
And  even  supposing  it  were  possible,  it  would 
be  against  natural  desire,  because  there  exists  in 
everything  the  natural  desire  to  preserve  its 
own  nature  which  would  not  be  preserved  were 
it  to  be  changed  into  another  nature.  Conse¬ 
quently,  no  creature  of  a  lower  nature  can  ever 
covet  the  grade  of  a  higher  nature,  just  as  an  ass 
does  not  desire  to  be  a  horse.” 

It  must  be  in  the  other  way,  then,  Aquinas 
thinks,  that  Satan  sinned  by  wishing  to  be  like 
God.  But  this  requires  further  explanation.  “To 
desire  to  be  as  God  according  to  likeness  can 
happen  in  two  ways.  In  one  way,  as  to  that 
likeness  whereby  everything  is  likened  unto 
God.  And  so,  if  anyone  desire  in  this  way  to  be 
Godlike,  he  commits  no  sin;  provided  that  he 
desires  such  likeness  in  proper  order,  that  is  to 


8 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


say,  that  he  may  obtain  it  from  God.  But  he 
would  sin  were  he  to  desire  to  be  like  God  even 
in  the  right  way,  but  of  his  own  power,  and  not 
of  God’s.  In  another  way,  he  may  desire  to  be 
like  God  in  some  respect  which  is  not  natural 
to  one;  <?.g.,  if  one  were  to  desire  to  create 
heaven  and  earth,  which  is  proper  to  God,  in 
which  desire  there  would  be  sin.” 

In  this  last  way,  Aquinas  asserts,  “the  devil 
desired  to  be  as  God.  Not  that  he  desired  to 
resemble  God  by  being  subject  to  no  one  else 
absolutely,  for  thus  he  would  be  desiring  his 
own  non-being,  since  no  creature  can  exist  ex¬ 
cept  by  participating  under  God.”  But  he  “de¬ 
sired  as  the  last  end  of  his  beatitude  something 
which  he  could  attain  by  virtue  of  his  own  na¬ 
ture,  turning  his  appetite  away  from  the  super¬ 
natural  beatitude  which  is  attained  by  God’s 
grace.” 

In  the  original  sin  of  Lucifer  and  the  other 
fallen  angels,  as  well  as  in  all  subsequent  inter¬ 
vention  by  Satan  or  his  demons  in  the  affairs 
of  men,  lie  the  theological  mysteries  of  the  ori¬ 
gin  of  evil  in  a  world  created  by  God’s  love  and 
goodness,  and  of  the  liberty  of  those  creatures 
who,  while  free,  can  only  do  God’s  will.  As  in¬ 
dicated  in  the  chapter  on  Sin,  the  fall  of  Adam 
from  grace  and  innocence  involves  the  same 
mysteries.  Man’s  destiny  is  connected  with  the 
career  of  Lucifer  in  traditional  Christian  teach¬ 
ing,  not  only  on  the  side  of  sin,  but  also  with 
regard  to  man’s  redemption — salvation  replac¬ 
ing  the  fallen  angels  by  the  souls  of  the  elect  in 
the  heavenly  choir. 

Among  the  most  extraordinary  moments  in 
our  literature  are  those  in  which  Lucifer  talks 
with  God  about  mankind,  as  in  Paradise  Lost ; 
or  about  a  particular  man,  as  in  the  Book  of 
Job  or  in  the  Prologue  in  Heaven  in  Faust. 
Their  pagan  parallel  is  the  speech  of  Prome¬ 
theus  to  a  silent  Zeus,  but  Prometheus,  un¬ 
like  Satan,  is  man’s  benefactor  and  he  can  defy 
Zeus  because  the  Fates,  whose  secret  he 
knows,  rule  over  the  gods.  Lucifer,  on  the 
contrary,  seems  always  to  be  in  the  service  of 
God.  When  he  appears  to  Ivan  in  the  Brothers 
Kara?nazov ,  he  protests,  “I  love  men  genuinely 
.  .  £.  and  against  the  grain  I  serve  to  produce 
events  and  do  what  is  irrational  because  I  am 


commanded  to.”  If  it  were  otherwise,  the  war¬ 
fare  between  the  powers  of  light  and  darkness 
would  have  to  be  construed  as  a  battle  between 
equals,  which,  according  to  Christian  ortho¬ 
doxy,  is  the  Manichean  heresy  that  regards  the 
world  as  the  battle  ground  of  the  forces  of  good 
and  evil. 

The  word  “angelic”  usually  has  the  connota¬ 
tion  of  perfect  moral  goodness,  but  that  must 
not  lead  us  to  forget  that  the  demons  are  an¬ 
gelic  in  their  nature  although  of  a  diabolical  or 
evil  will.  Nor  should  the  fact  of  Satan’s  subser¬ 
vience  to  God  cause  us  to  forget  that  Christian 
theology  tries  not  to  underestimate  the  power 
of  the  devil  in  his  goings  and  comings  on  earth. 
Satan  tried  to  tempt  even  Christ,  and  through¬ 
out  the  New  Testament  the  destruction  of  the 
diabolical  influence  over  men  occupies  a  promi¬ 
nent  place.  The  intervention  of  the  devil  in 
man’s  life  provides,  if  not  the  theme,  the  back¬ 
ground  of  Goethe’s  Faust. 

As  the  theory  of  demonic  influences  and  dia¬ 
bolical  possession  is  an  integral  part  of  the  tra¬ 
ditional  doctrine  of  angels,  so,  in  modern  times, 
demonology  has  been  a  major  focus  of  attack 
upon  theological  teaching  concerning  spirits. 
Moralists  have  thought  it  possible  to  explain 
human  depravity  without  recourse  to  the  se¬ 
ductions  of  the  devil,  and  psychiatrists  have 
thought  it  possible  for  men  to  go  mad  or  to 
behave  as  if  bewitched  without  the  help  of  evil 
spirits.  The  idea  of  the  devil,  according  to 
Freud,  is  a  religious  fiction — “the  best  way  out 
in  acquittal  of  God”  for  those  who  try  “to  rec¬ 
oncile  the  undeniable  existence  ...  of  evil  with 
His  omnipotence  and  supreme  goodness.” 

The  characteristic  skepticism  of  our  age  has 
been  directed  against  the  belief  in  angels  gener¬ 
ally.  It  casts  doubt  by  satire  or  denies  by  argu¬ 
ment  the  existence  of  spirits  both  good  and  evil. 
Yet,  all  arguments  considered,  it  may  be  won¬ 
dered  whether  the  existence  of  angels— or,  in 
philosophical  terms,  the  existence  of  pure  intelli¬ 
gences — is  or  is  not  still  a  genuine  issue.  Or  are 
there  two  issues  here,  one  philosophical  and  the 
other  theological,  one  to  be  resolved  or  left  un¬ 
resolved  on  the  level  of  argument,  the  other  to 
be  answered  dogmatically  by  the  declarations 
of  a  religious  faith? 


* 


Chapter  1 :  ANGEL 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

1.  Inferior  deities  or  demi-gods  in  polytheistic  religion 

2.  The  philosophical  consideration  of  pure  intelligences,  spiritual  substances,  supra- 

human  persons 

2 a.  The  celestial  motors  or  secondary  prime  movers:  the  intelligences  attached  to 
the  celestial  bodies 

2 b.  Our  knowledge  of  immaterial  beings 

3.  The  conception  of  angels  in  Judaeo-Christian  doctrine 

30.  The  first  creatures  of  God:  their  place  in  the  order  of  creation 
3b.  The  angelic  nature 

3c.  The  aeviternity  and  incorruptibility  of  angels 
3d.  The  angelic  intellect  and  angelic  knowledge 
3<?.  The  angelic  will  and  angelic  love 
3/  Angelic  action:  its  characteristics  in  general 

3g.  The  angelic  hierarchy:  the  inequality,  order,  and  number  of  the  angels  and  their 
relation  to  one  another 

4.  Comparison  of  angels  with  men  and  with  disembodied  souls:  their  relation  to  the 

blessed  in  the  heavenly  choir 

5.  The  distinction  and  comparison  of  the  good  and  the  bad  angels 

5<7.  The  origin  of  the  division  between  angels  and  demons:  the  sin  of  Lucifer  or 
Satan 

5 b.  The  society  of  the  demons:  the  rule  of  Satan  over  the  powers  of  darkness 

6.  The  role  of  the  angels  in  the  government  of  the  universe 

6a.  The  ministry  of  the  good  angels  in  the  affairs  of  men:  guardianship 

6b.  The  intervention  of  the  demons  in  the  affairs  of  men:  temptation,  possession 

7.  God  and  Satan 

7 a.  Warfare  between  the  powers  of  light  and  darkness:  their  struggle  for  dominion 
over  man 

7 b.  Lucifer  in  the  service  of  God 

8.  Criticism  and  satire  with  respect  to  the  belief  in  angels  and  demons 


V 

PAGE 

10 

11 

12 


*3 


x5 

16 

*7 


10 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  '.Psychology,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  1 16  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  1 19.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45— (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Inferior  deities  or  demi-gods  in  polytheistic 
religion 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  viii  51a-56d  esp  [1-40] 
51a-b;  bk  xiv  [135-360]  99c-101d;  bk  xv 
[1-235]  104a-106c;  bk  xviii  [368-467]  133d- 
134d;  bk  xx  142a-147d;  bk  xxi  [383-513] 
152a-153c  /  Odyssey ,  bk  v  [1— 147]  208a-209c; 
bk  ix  [231-280]  231c-232a;  bk  xiii  [125-164] 
256b-d 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d  / 
Eumenides  81a-91d 

5  Sophocles:  Trachiniae  170a-181a,c  /  Phil - 
octetes  [1 409-1 471]  194d-195a,c 

5  Euripides  :  Rhesus  [890-982]  210d-211d  /  Hip - 
polytus  225a-236d  esp  [1-55]  225a-c,  [1268- 
1440]  235b-236d  /  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  /  Tro¬ 
jan  Women  [1-97]  270a-271a  /  Ion  282a-297d 
/  Helen  298a-314a,c  /  Andromache  [1226-1288] 
325c-326a,c  /  Electra  [1233-1359]  338b-339a,c 
/  Bacchantes  340a-352a,c  /  Heracles  Mad  365a- 
377d  esp  [1-59]  365a-c  /  Orestes  [1625-1693] 
410b-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [595-626]  496a-b  / 
Peace  526a-541d  /  Birds  542a-563d  esp  [571— 
638]  549d-550d,  [1199-1261]  557c-558b, 

[1494-1693]  560c-562d  /  Frogs  564a-582a,c  / 
Plutus  629a-642d 


6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  21d-22a;  31a-b; 
48c;  bk  11,  58a-60d;  79d-80c;  82d-83b;  bk  iv, 
155c-156a;  bk  viii,  266c-d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  44a-45a  /  Euthydemus , 
81d-82b l  Cratylus,  92b-97 d  / Phaedrus,  116b-d; 
122c-125b  passim,  esp  124d-125a;  130d-131a; 
141c  /  Symposium,  152b;  153b-d;  159d-161a; 
163a-164c  /  Euthyphro,  193a-c  /  Apology, 
204c-205c  /  Republic ,  bk  ii-iii,  320d-328a  / 
Timaeus,  452b  /  Critias ,  481c-482a  /  States¬ 
man,  588a-589c  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  653a-c;  662c-d; 
bk  iv,  680c-684a  passim;  bk  vii,  730a-d;  bk  x 
757d-771b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  iii,  ch  4  [ioooa8- 
18]  518d-519a;  bk  xii,  ch  8  [io74bi-i4]  604d- 
605a 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  iii,  ch  18  [i4ioa8— 1^3] 
673d-674a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [1— 41]  la-c; 
bk  11  [581-660]  22b-23b;  bk  v  [396-404]  66b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  3  108b-c; 
ch  12  118d-120b;  ch  14  120d-121c;  bk  ii, 
ch  16, 158b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  4,  226d-228a;  ch  ii, 
240d-241a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  ii  258a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid  103a-379a  esp  bk  i  [223-233] 
109a,  [297-304)1113,  [657~694]121a-122a,  bkiv 
[218-258]  173a-174a,  bk  x  [1-117]  302a-305a 


2  to  2  a 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  50d-51c;  57b- 
58a  /  Coriolanus,  189a-c  /  Aemilius  Paulus , 
220d-221b  /  Pelopidas ,  238a-b;  239d-240c  / 
Aristides ,  268a-d  /  Z)zo/i,  781d-782a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  ii,  35d-36a;  bk  iii, 
59d-60c  /  Histories ,  bk  ii,  214d-215a;  bk  iv, 
293b-294a;  bk  v,  294d-296a 

17  Plotinus  :  Second Ennead,  tr  ix,  cii  9  70d-72a 
passim  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  v  100c-106b  /  Fourth 
Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  14  149d-150a  / 
Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  3,  241a;  ch  10  244c-245a 

18  Augustine:  G/y  0/ Go*/,  bk  i-x  129a-322a,c 
passim;  bk  xviii,  ch  8-19  475d-482c;  ch  21 
482d-483b;  ch  24  485a  b;  bk  xix,  ch  9  516a-c 
/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  17  645d-646a 

19  Aquinas:  Siimma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  22, 
a  3,  ans  130d-131c;  q  63,  a  7,  ans  331c-332b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxxi  46a-47c; 
paradise,  viii  [1— 15]  116d 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [1902-2482]  191a- 
200b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  79d-82c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
132b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  246d-248c;  256d-257d; 
269a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  As  You  Like  It,  act  v,  sc  iv 
[1 14-152]  625a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Tempest,  act  iv,  sc  i  541c- 
544d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  20b-c 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  la-7b  /  Ly Allegro 
17b-21a  /  II  Penseroso  21a-25a  /  Arcades  25a- 
27b  /  Lycidas  27b-32a  /  Comus  33a-56b  /  Par¬ 
adise  Lost ,  bk  1  [331-621]  100b-107a  /  Samson 
Agonistes  [896-902]  359a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  15  116c-d 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  152b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  12b-d;  184c-185d; 
345b-347d  esp  346c-347a;  461b-c;  583d-584a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  135b;  226a-227c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  196d- 
197c;  part  1,  224a-b;  228a-c;  238d-239b; 
252d-253c;  part  ii,  263d-265c;  268b-271c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [5300-5392]  131a- 
133a; [7005-8487]  171b-206b  esp  [7005-7039] 
171b-172a,  [7080-7248]  173b-177b,  [7263- 
7270]  178a,  [7495-7820]  183b-190b 

2.  The  philosophical  consideration  of  pure 
intelligences,  spiritual  substances,  supra- 
human  persons 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  17  76b- 
77a  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  ii  88b-c;  tr  v 
100c-106b;  tr  viii,  ch  8-10  132d-136a  /  Fifth 
Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  4  209d-210c;  tr  viii,  ch  3, 
241a  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  3  344a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii  99b-110d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  22, 
a  3,  ans  130d-131c;  q  45,  a  5,  ans  245c-247a; 
Q  47,  a  1,  ans  256a-257b;  q  50,  a  3,  ans  272a- 


11 

273b;  q  65,  a  4,  ans  342b  343c;  q  79,  a  4 
417a-418c;  a  10,  ans  423d-424d;  q  84,  a  4, 
ans  and  rep  1,3  444d  446b;  q  87,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  3  465a-466c;  q  88,  a  i,  ans  469a- 
471c;  q  iio,  a  1,  rep  3  564c-565d;  q  115,  a  i, 
ans  585d-587c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  92,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  9-10  1025c-1032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  ii  [112- 
123]  109a;  xxviii  [1-78]  148d-149c;  xxix  [13— 
45]  150b-c 

23  Hobbes  ’.Leviathan,  partiii,  174b-176d;  part 
iv,  258b-260c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 
172d-173c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  41d-42a  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  15  149a 

31  Descartes  :  Objections  and  Replies,  225d  226a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [1 42-154]  114b; 
bk  iii  [694-735]  150b-15lb;  bk  v  [388-450] 
183b-185a;  [469-505]  185b-186a;  bk  vi  [316- 
353]  203a-204a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  xv, 
sect  ii  165a-b;  ch  xxi,  sect  2  178c;  ch  xxiii, 
sect  5  205a-b;  sect  15-37  208c-214b  passim; 
bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  n-12  271b-272b;  bk  iv, 
ch  iii,  sect  6,  315a-b;  sect  27  321d-322a; 
ch  xvi,  sect  12  370b-371a;  ch  xvii,  sect  14 
378c-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  25-27 
417d-418b;  sect  135— 145  440a-442a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  136b;  136d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  237c-d  /  Fund .  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253d-254a;  259c-d; 
263a;  263d-264d;  266a-c;  271a-277b;  278a; 
280b-281a;  282c;  286a-287b  /  Practical  Reason, 
296a-c;  300a-c;  303b-304a;  305c-d;  308c- 
309b;  321b-c;  325d-327a;  328b;  340c-d;  347d- 
348b/  Judgement,  508b;  572d-574b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  238d- 
239a 

2a,  The  celestial  motors  or  secondary  prime 
movers:  the  intelligences  attached  to  the 
celestial  bodies 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  452c-d  /  Laws ,  bk  x,  765b 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [284a27~b6] 
376a;  ch  12  383b-384c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii, 
ch  8  603b-605a  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  3  [4o6b27~ 
4°7bi3]  636b-637b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [110-145] 
62c-63a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [724-732]  23Cb 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  890a-895b  esp  890b- 
893b;  896a-897a;  914a-b;  930b;  932a-933a; 
959a-960a  /  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1080b- 
1085b  esp  1083b-1085b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  i  40a-41a; 
ch  3  41c-42a;  tr  iii,  ch  2  42c-d  /  Third 
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  3,  84b;  tr  iv,  ch  6,  99d; 
tr  v,  cii  6  103b-104a  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv, 
ch  8,  162b-d;  ch  22-27  168d-172a;  ch  30 


Chapter  1 :  ANGEL 


12 

(2.  The  philosophical  consideration  of  pure  in¬ 
telligences,  spiritual  substances,  supra - 
human  persons.  2a.  The  celestial  motors  or 
secondary  prime  movers :  the  intelligences 
attached  to  the  celestial  bodies .) 

174b-c;  ch  35,  177c;  ch  42  180d-181b;  tr 
viii,  ch  2,  202a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  47, 
a  1,  ans  256a-257b;  q  50,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3 
272a-273b;  q  51,  a  3,  rep  3  277a-278c;  q  52, 
a  2  279b-280a;  q  66,  a  2,  ans  345d'347b;  q  70, 
a  3  365b-367a;  q  76,  a  6,  rep  3  396a-d;  q  iio, 
a  1,  rep  2-3  564c-565d;  a  3,  ans  566d-567b; 
q  115,  a  4,  rep  i  589d-590c;  q  117,  a  4,  rep  i 
599b-d;  part  i-ii,  q  6,  a  5,  rep  2  648b-649a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  hi  suppl, 
q  91,  a  2,  rep  10  1017c-1020c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [67-96] 
lOb-c;  paradise,  i  [103-126]  107b-c;  11  [112- 
138]  109a;  viii  [16-39]  116d-117a;  [97-114] 
118a;  xiii  [52-72]  126a;  xxvm  148d*150b; 
xxix  [37-45]  150c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  v,  104b*105d 

2b.  Our  knowledge  of  immaterial  beings 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vin,  ch  8-10 
132d-136a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii,  par  2-9  99c- 
101c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  50, 
a  2,  ans  270a-272a;  q  84,  a  7,  rep  3  449b- 
450b;  q  88,  aa  1-2  469a-472c;  q  94,  a  2  503a- 
504a;  q  hi,  a  i,  rep  3  568c-569b;  part  i-ii, 
q  3,  a  6,  ans  627b-628a;  a  7  628a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  92,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  9  1025c-1032b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  41d-42a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  122c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  11  165a-b;  ch  xxiii,  sect  5  205a-b; 
sect  13  207d-208b;  sect  15-37  208c-214b; 
bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  ii-x2  271b*272b;  ch  xi, 
sect  23  305a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  17  317c; 
sect  27  321d-322a;  ch  vi,  sect  14,  336a-b; 
ch  xi,  sect  12  357c-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  12  370b* 
371a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  27 
418a-b;  sect  81  428c-d;  sect  89  430b-c; 
sect  135-145  440a-442a 

3.  The  conception  of  angels  in  Judaeo-Christian 
doctrine 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii-xii  264b, d- 
360a, c 

19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  qq  50-64 
269a-338d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xxviii- 
xxix  148d-151d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  174b-176d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  93a-110b  esp 
[84-191]  95b-97b,  [423-431]  102b;  bk  v  [769- 
904]  192a-195a;  bk  vi  [320-353]  203a-204a 


2b  to  3b 

3 a.  The  first  creatures  of  God:  their  place  in  the 
order  of  creation 

Old  Testament:  7  Kings,  8:27— (79)  W  Kings, 
8:27  /  II  Chronicles,  2:6;  6:18— (79)  II  Para - 
lipomenon,  2:6;  6:18  /  Psalms ,  8:4-5;  115:16; 
148:4— (D)  Psalms,  8:5-6;  113:16;  148:4  / 
Isaiah,  6:1-3— (D)  Isaias,  6:1-3  /  Ezekiel, 
1  —  (79)  Ezechiel ,  1  /  Daniel,  7:10 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  18:10  /  John ,  1:51  / 
Acts ,  23:8  /  Hebrews,  1-2  esp  1:1-8,  2:1-9  / 
I  Peter,  3:22  /  Revelation,  5:11-14— (79)  Apoc¬ 
alypse,  5:11-14 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xii  99b-110d;  bk 
xiii,  par  4  111c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi  322b, d- 
342a, c;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b,d-587b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  45, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  245c-247a;  q  47,  a  i,  ans 
256a-257b;  a  2,  ans  257b-258c;  q  50,  aa  1-3 
269b-273b;  q  61  314d-317c;  q  62,  a  1  317d- 
318c;  a  3  319c-320b;  q  65,  aa  3-4  341c-343c; 
q  66,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  347b-348d;  a  4,  ans 
and  rep  1  348d-349d;  q  67,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  4 
352a-354a;  q  85,  a  i,  ans  451c-453c;  q  90, 
a  3  482c-483a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xii  [25— 
27]  70c;  paradise,  vii  [121-148]  116b-c;  xix 
[40-51]  135c;  xxix  [1-48]  150b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  174d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
132b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  17c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [86-102]  137a-b; 
bk  v  [800-868]  192b-194a  /  Samson  Agonistes 
[667-673]  354a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  140  199a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  11-12  271b-272b;  bk  iv,  cii  xvi,  sect  12 
370b-371a 

3 b.  The  angelic  nature 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  103:20-22;  104:4— (79) 
Psalms,  102:20-22;  103:4  /  Isaiah,  6:1-3— (D) 
Isaias ,  6:1-3  /  Ezekiel,  1;  10 — (79)  Ezechiel ,  1; 
10 

New  Testament:  Hebrews,  1-2  esp  1:1-8  /  77 
Peter,  2:10-11  /  Revelation,  18:1 — (79)  Apoc¬ 
alypse,  18:1 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii,  par  7  lOOd- 
101a;  par  9  lOlb-c;  par  12  101d-102a;  par 
18-22,  103b-104a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xxi,  ch  i 
560a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq  50- 
53  269a-284d;  q  79,  a  i,  rep  3  414a-d;  q  87, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  2-3  465a-466c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xxix  [i- 
48]  150b-d;  [127-145]  151c*d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  174b-176d 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  218d; 
225d-226a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [84-191]  95b-97b; 
[423-431]  102b;  bk  v  [800-868]  192b-194a; 
bk  vi  [320-353]  203a-204a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


3c  to  3g  Chapter 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  87a  88a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  x, 
sect  9,  143a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  11-12 
271b-272b 

3c.  The  aeviternity  and  incorruptibility  of 
angels 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii,  par  9  lOlb-c; 
par  12  101d'102a;  par  15-16  102bl03a;  par 
18-22,  103b'104a;  par  28,  105c  /  City  of  God , 
bk  xii,  ch  15  351b-352d;  bk  xiii,  ch  i  360a  b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  1  42c-43b;  aa  5-6  44b-46d; 
q  50,  a  5  274b-275a;  q  61,  a  2  315c-316a;  q  97, 
a  1,  ans  513c-514c;  q  104,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 
1,3  534c-536c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  vii  [64-69] 
115d;  [121-148]  116b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Lei'iathan ,  part  iii,  175d-176d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagrucl ,  bk  iii, 
173a-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [116-159]  96a-97a; 
bk  ii  [81-105]  113a-b;  bk  v  [846-860]  193b- 
194a;  [8S9-892]  194b;  bk  vi  [296-353]  202b- 
204a  esp  [320-353]  203a-204a;  [430-436]  205b 

3d.  The  angelic  intellect  and  angelic  knowl¬ 
edge 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  16:7-12;  18:9-15; 

22:15-18  /  Judges^  6:11-16;  13:2-14  /  II  Samuel, 
14:20— (D)  II  Kings ,  14:20  /  Daniel ,  10-12 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  24:35-36  /  Mar\, 
13:28-32  /  I  Timothy ,  3:16  /  /  PrtdT,  1:12 
/  Revelation ,  17;  18:21-24;  21:9-22:7— (D) 
Apocalypse ,  17;  18:21-24;  21:9-22:7 

18  Augustine:  Confessionsy  bk  xii,  par  12  101  d- 
102a;  par  16  102d-103a;  par  20  103c-d  /  C//y 
of  Gody  bk  ix,  ch  20-22  296a-297a;  bk  x,  ch  2 
299d-300a;  bk  xi,  ch  ii  328d-329b;  ch  13-15 
329c-331a;  ch  29  339a-b;  bk  xvi,  ch  6  426c- 
427a;  bk  xxii,  ch  1  586b,d-587b;  ch  29, 
614b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i,  q  7,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  2  31d-32c;  q  12,  a  4,  rep  2 
53b-54c;  qq  54-58  284d-306b;  q  64,  a  i  334a- 
335c;  q  75,  a  7,  rep  3  384d-385c;  q  79,  a  i, 
rep  3  414a-d;  a  2,  ans  414d-416a;  a  8,  ans 
and  rep  3  421c-422b;  a  10,  ans  423d-424d; 
q  84,  a  2,  ans  442b-443c;  a  3,  rep  i  443d- 
444d;  a  7,  ans  449b-450b;  q  85,  a  i,  ans 
451c-453c;  a  5,  ans  457d-458d;  q  87,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  2  465a-466c;  a  3,  ans  467b- 
468a;  q  89,  a  3,  ans  475d-476c;  a  4,  ans 
476c-477a;  q  117,  a  2  597c-598c;  part  i-ii, 
q  3,  a  8,  rep  2  628d  629c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  6  lla-12a;  q  51,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2  12b-13c; 
part  11— 11,  q  5,  aa  1-2  410a-412a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xix  [40- 
57]  135c;  xxi  [73-102]  139a-b;  xxviii  [98- 
1 14]  149d-150a;  xxix  [67-84]  151a;  [127-145] 
151c-d 


1:  ANGEL  13 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organumy  bk  ii,  aph  15  149a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Losty  bk  i  [242-255]  98b- 
99a;  bk  ii  [142—15 1  ]  114b;  bk  iii  [654  735] 
149b-151b  esp  [681-693]  150a-b;  bk  v  [388- 
505]  183b-186a  esp  [388-413]  183b-184a,  [469- 
505]  185b-186a;  bk  viii  [66-79]  233b-234a 

33  Pascal:  PcnseeSy  285  224a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understandingy  bk  ii,  ch  x, 
sect  9  143a-c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  13  207d-208b; 
sect  36  213c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  3  268d; 
ch  xi,  sect  23  305a  b;  bk  iv,  cii  iii,  sect  6, 
315a-b;  sect  23  320a-c;  ch  xvii,  sect  14 
378c-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledgey  sect  81 
428c-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  318b 

3e.  The  angelic  will  and  angelic  love 

18  Augustine:  Confessionsy  bk  xii,  par  9  101b  c; 
par  12-13  101d-102b;  par  15  102b-c;  par  18, 
103b-c;  par  21-22,  103d-104a;  par  28,  105c  / 
City  of  Gody  bk  ix,  ch  20-22  296a-297a;  bk  x, 
ch  7  302d-303a;  bk  xii,  ch  3  343d-344b; 
cii  6-9  345b-348b;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b, d- 
587b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  qq  59- 
60  306b-314c;  q  62,  a  2  318d-319c;  q  64,  aa 
2-3  335d-337c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  6  lla-12a;  part  ii-ii,  q  5,  a  2  411b-412a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  viii  [31- 
39]  117a;  xxiii  [70-139]  142a-c;  xxviii  148d- 
150b  esp  [106-114]  150a;  xxix  [55-66]  150d- 
151a;  [127-145]  151c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Losty  bk  v  [535-543]  187a; 
bk  viii  [612-643]  245b-246a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understandingy  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  50-51  191b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [11,676-824]  284a- 
287b;  [11,854-12,111]  288b-294b 

3/.  Angelic  action:  its  characteristics  in  general 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i,  q  45, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  245c-247a;  qq  51-53  275a- 
284d;  q  91,  a  2,  rep  i  485b-486b;  a  4,  rep  2 
487d-488c;  qq  106-107  545c-552b;  qq  iio-iii 
564c-571d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  part  iii,  174c;  175c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Losty  bk  viii  [107-114] 
234b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understandingy  bk  ii,  ch 
xxiii,  sect  13  207d-208b 

3 g.  The  angelic  hierarchy:  the  inequality,  order, 
and  number  of  the  angels  and  their  rela¬ 
tion  to  one  another 

Old  Testament:  Psalms ,  80:1 —(D)  Psalms , 
79:2  /  Isaiah,  6:1-7;  37:i^~(^)  Isaias,  6:1-8; 
37:16  /  Ezekiel ,  10;  11:22 — (D)  Ezechiel ,  10; 
11:22  /  Daniel,  7:10 

Apocrypha:  Tobit ,  12:15-21  —  ( D )  OT,  Tobias , 
12:15-21 


14 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  The  conception  of  angels  in  Judaeo-Christian 
doctrine.  3 g>  The  angelic  hierarchy :  the 
inequality,  order,  and  number  of  the  a?igels 
and  their  relation  to  one  another .) 

New  Testament:  Colossians ,  i:i 6/1  Thessa- 
lonians ,  4:16 — ( D )  I  Thessalonians,  4:15  /  He¬ 
brews ,  12:22-23  /  9  /  Revelation ,  5:11  — 

(D)  Apocalypse ,  5:11 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii,  par  12,  102a; 
par  31,  106c-d  /  Ci/y  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  24, 
283b;  bk  xxii,  ch  30,  617c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Tkeologica ,  part  i,  q  47, 
a  2,  ans  257b-258c;  q  50,  aa  3-4  272a-274b; 
q  63,  a  7  331c-332b;  a  9,  rep  3  333b-d;  qq 
106-109  545c-564b;  part  i-ii,  q  4,  a  5,  rep  6 
632c634b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Tkeologica ,  part  hi,  q  8, 
a  4  759b-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  ii  [112- 
138]  109a;  xxviii  148d-150b;  xxix  [127-145] 
151c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  17d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [600-904]  188b- 
195a  esp  [769-799]  192a-b,  [809-845]  193a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  27  321d-322a;  ch  xvi,  sect  12,  370c- 
371a 

35  Berkeley  :  Human  Knowledge,  sect  81  428c-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  [243-270]  7a-b; 
part  11  [11,844-12,111]  288a-294b 

4.  Comparison  of  angels  with  men  and  with 
disembodied  souls:  their  relation  to  the 
blessed  in  the  heavenly  choir 

Old  Testament:  Job,  4:18-19  /  Psalms,  8:4-5— 
(D)  Psalms,  8:5-6 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  22:23-33  /  Mar\, 
12:18-27  /  Lul^e,  20:27-38  /  I  Corinthians, 
6:2-3  /  Hebrews,  1:13-14;  2:7;  12:22-23  /  Rev¬ 
elation,  22:8-9 — (P)  Apocalypse,  22:8-9 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii,  par  23  104b-c 
/  City  of  God,  bk  vii,  ch  30,  261d;  bk  viii, 
ch  14-18  273d-277a;  ch  25  283b-c;  bk  ix,  ch 
5-13  288b-292d;  CH22  296d-297a;  bkxi,  CH29 
339a-b;  bk  xiii,  ch  i  360a-b;  bk  xvi,  ch  6 
426c-427a;  bk  xxi,  ch  10  569d-570b;  bk  xxii, 
ch  29,  614b-d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  23 
630a-c;  ch  30  632c-633b;  ch  33  633d-634b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Tkeologica,  part  i,  q  7, 
a  2,  rep  2  31d-32c;  q  23,  a  i,  rep  3  132c-133b; 
q  47,  a  2,  ans  257b-258c;  q  51,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  2-3  275b-276b;  qq  54-60  284d-314c  pas¬ 
sim;  q  62  317c-325b  passim;  q  66,  a  3,  ans 
and  rep  3  347b-348d;  q  75,  a  7  384d-385c; 
q  76,  a  2,  rep  1  388c-391a;  a  5,  ans  394c- 
396a;  q  79,  a  i,  rep  3  414a-d;  a  2,  ans  414d- 
416a;  a  8,  ans  and  rep  3  421c-422b;  q  84, 
a  3,  rep  1  443d-444d;  a  7,  ans  449b-450b; 
Q  85,  a  1,  ans  451c-453c;  a  5,  ans  457d-458d; 
q  87,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2-3  465a-466c;  a  3, 
ans  467b-468a;  q  89,  a  3,  ans  475d-476c; 


4  to  5  1 

a  4,  ans  476c-477a;  a  7,  rep  2  478d-479c;  # 

q  93,  a  3  493d-494c;  Q  97,  a  i,  ans  513c-514c; 
q  108,  a  1,  ans  552c-553c;  a  8  561a-562a;  1 
q  1 17,  a  2  597c-598c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  3, 
rep  1  617b-618a;  q  4,  a  5,  rep  6  632c-634b; 

Q  5,  a  1,  rep  1  636d-637c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Tkeologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50,  47 

a  6  lla-12a;  q  51,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2  12b-13c;  4$ 

part  ii-ii,  q  5,  a  2  411b-412a;  part  iii,  q  6, 

a  3,  rep  2  742a-743a;  q  8,  a  4  759b-d;  part  1  ')l 

III  suppl,  q  69,  a  3,  REP  5  887d-889c;  q  70, 

a  3,  contrary  897d-900d;  q  89,  a  3  1007d-  0 

1008b;  a  8  1011b-1012a;  q  95,  a  4  1046d- 
1047d;  q  96,  a  9  1062d-1063b;  q  99,  A3  A 
1081d-1083a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  iv  [28-48] 

111a;  vii  [121-148]  116b-c;  viii  [22-39]  116d- 
117a;  xix  [40-66]  135c-d;  xxi  [73-102]  139a-b;  1 

xxix  [13-36]  150b-c;  xxxi  153b-154c;  xxxii 
[85-114]  155c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [314-322] 

43d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  80d-81a  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  15  149a 

32  Milton:  At  a  Solemn  Music\  13a-b  /  Para¬ 
dise  Lost,  bk  11  [345-353]  118b-119a;  bk  iii 
[654-735]  149b-151b  esp  [681-693]  150a-b;  bk 

IV  [358-365]  160a-b;  bk  v  [388-450]  183b- 
185a;  [469-505]  185b-186a;  bk  vi  [316-353] 
203a-204a;  bk  viii  [66-178]  233b-236a;  bk  x 
[888-908]  293b-294a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  140  199a-b;  418  243a;  793, 

326b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  x, 
sect  9  143a-c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  13  207d-208b; 

BK  IV,  CH  III,  SECT  17  317c;  CH  XVII,  SECT  14 
378c-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  318b-319a;  394a 

43  Federalist:  number  51,  163b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  363a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [11,894-12,111]  289b- 
294b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vii,  295b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  22c- 
23a 

5.  The  distinction  and  comparison  of  the  good 
and  the  bad  angels 

Old  Testament:  Job ,  4:18 

New  Testament:  II  Peter ,  2:4  /  Jude,  6 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  67  88b-c  / 

City  of  God,  bk  ix  285b,d-298a,c  passim;  bk 
xi  322b,d-342a,c  passim,  esp  ch  11-13  328d- 
330b,  ch  19-20  332b-333a;  bk  xii,  ch  1-9 
342b,d-348b;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b,d-587b  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  33,  633d-634a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Tkeologica,  part  i,  q  47, 
a  2,  ans  257b-258c;  qq  63-64  325b-338d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xxix  [49- 
Si]  150d-151a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  174d-175a; 
part  iv,  258d-259b 


Chapter  1 :  ANGEL 


15 


5  a  to  6a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  93a- 110b  csp 
[27-282]  94a-99b,  [587-615]  106a-b;  bk  ii 
[229-283]  116a'117a;  [477-485]  121b;  bk  iii 
[613-742]  148b-151b;  bk  iv  [1—130]  152b-155a; 
[788-1015]  169b-174b;  bk  v  [577EBK  vi  [912] 
187b-216a  passim 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  prologue  [243-292]  7a-8a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  219b 

5 a.  The  origin  of  the  division  between  angels 
and  demons:  the  sin  of  Lucifer  or  Satan 

Old  Testament:  Isaiah ,  14:4-27 — ( D )  Isaias , 
1 4:4-27 

Apocrypha  :  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  2:24 — ( D )  OT, 
BooJ{  of  Wisdom,  2:24-25 

New  Testament:  II  Peter ,  2:4  /  Jude ,  6  /  Revela¬ 
tion ,  12:7-10— (D)  Apocalypse ,  12:7-10 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  67  88b-c/ 
C//y  0/  bk  xi,  ch  9-20  326d-333a;  bk 
xii,  ch  3  343d-344b;  ch  6-9  345b-348b;  bk 
xxii,  ch  1  586b,d-587b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  47, 
a  2,  ans  257b-258c;  q  63  325b-333d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  iii  [22-51]  4b-c; 
xxxiv  [28-36]  51c;  purgatory,  xii  [25-27] 
70c;  paradise,  xix  [40-51]  135c;  xxix  [49- 
66]  150d-151a 

22  Chaucer:  Monies  Tale  [14,005-012]  434a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  81a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  93a-110b  esp 
[27-83]  94a-95a;  bk  iv  [32-104]  153a-154b; 
bk  v  [600-904]  188b-195a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [10,075-121]  246a- 
247a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xi, 
344c- d 

5b.  The  society  of  the  demons:  the  rule  of  Satan 
over  the  powers  of  darkness 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  39:28 — (£))  OT, 

Ecclesiasticus,  39:33-34 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  9:34;  10:25;  12:22-30 
/  Marl{,  3:22  /  Lu\e,  11:14-23  /  John,  8:31-59  / 
Ephesians ,  2:1-3;  6:12  /  Hebrews ,  2:13-15  / 
I  John,  3:8-12  /  Revelation ,  2:9,13;  9:1-11; 
18:2— (D)  Apocalypse,  2:9,13;  9:1-11;  18:2 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xx,  ch  ii  541a-c 
/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  iii,  ch  37,  673d-674a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  63, 
aa  8-9  332c-333d;  q  109  562a-564b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell  la-52d  esp  viii 
[65E1X  [103]  llc-13b,  xviii  [19-39]  25c-d, 
xxi-xxiii  30a-34c,  xxvm  [1-42]  41b-c,  xxxiv 
[16-31]  51c 

22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale  [6957-7220]  279a-283b 
/  Summoned s  Prologue  284b-285a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  195a;  part  iv, 
247a-248a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [242-263]  98b- 
99a;  bk  ii  [1-520]  llla-122b  esp  [11-42] 
lllb-112a;  bk  iv  [89-92]  154b;  bk  v  [600-904] 
188b-195a 


33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  116a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [2338-2604]  56b  63b 
esp  [2465-2531]  60a-61b;  [3835-4222]  93b- 
103a;  part  11  [1 1 ,636—675]  283a-284a 

6.  The  role  of  the  angels  in  the  government  of 
the  universe 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3:24;  28:12  /  Psalms, 
103:20-22 —(D)  Psalms,  102:20-22  /  Daniel, 
7:10  /  Zechariah,  1:7-21;  4:i-6:8— (D)  Zacha - 
rias,  1:7-21;  4: 1-6:8 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  24:31  /  Mar\,  13:27 
/  John,  1:51  /  Revelation ,  5:2,11-14;  8-20 
passim— (D)  Apocalypse,  5:2,11-14;  8-20  pas¬ 
sim 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  vii,  cii  30,  261d; 
bk  viii,  ch  24,  283a-b;  bk  x,  ch  15  308a-b; 
ch  21  311c-312a;  bk  xii,  ch  27  359c-360a,c; 
bk  xvi,  cii  5-6,  426a-c;  bk  xxii,  ch  i,  586b,d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  45, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  245c-247a;  q  63,  a  7,  ans 
331c-332b;  q  64,  a  4,  ans  337d-338d;  q  66, 
a  3,  rep  2  347b-348d;  q  89,  a  8,  rep  2  479c- 
480c;  q  91,  a  2,  rep  1,3  485b-486b;  a  4,  rep  2 
487d-488c;  qq  106-114  545c-585c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [67-96] 
lOb-c;  purgatory,  ii  [10-51]  54c-55a;  viii 
[22-36]  64c;  xv  [1-36]  75b-d;  xvii  [40-63] 
78d-79a;  xxiv  [133-154]  91a-b;  paradise,  ii 
[112-138]  109a;  viii  [91-148]  117d-118c;  xm 
[52-72]  126a;  xxvm  [120-129]  150a;  xxix 
[13-45]  150b-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagrucl,  bk  ii, 
117d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [1 19-134]  113b- 
114a;  [237-249]  116b;  [402-416]  120a;  bk  vii 
[550— 601]  2 29a- 230a  /  Areopagitica,  410a 

6a.  The  ministry  of  the  good  angels  in  the 
affairs  of  men:  guardianship 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  16:7-12;  18:1-19:22; 
21:9-21 ;  22:1-19;  24:7,40;  32:1-2,24-3°;  48:15— 

16  /  Exodus,  14:19-20;  23:20-23;  32:34;  33:2  / 
Numbers,  20:16;  22:22-35  /  Joshua,  5:13-15  — 
(D)  Josue,  5:13-16  /  Judges,  2:1-4;  6:11-24:13 
/  II  Samuel,  24:15-17  —(D)  II  Kings,  24:15- 

17  II  Kings,  19:5-8 —(D)  III  Kings,  19:5-8  / 
II  Kings,  19:32-35 — (D)  IV  Kings,  19:32-35 
/  I  Chronicles ,  21:11-30— (D)  I  Paralipomenon, 
21:11-30  /  II  Chronicles,  32:21  —  (D)  II  Para¬ 
lipomenon,  32:21  /  Psalms,  34:7;  35:5-6;  91:10- 
13 — ( D )  Psalms,  33:8;  34:5-6;  90:10-13  / 
Isaiah,  6:6-7;  37:36— (D)  Isaias,  6:6-7;  37 :36 
/  Daniel,  3:28;  6:22;  8-12— (D)  Daniel,  3:95' 
6:2258-12  /  Hosea,  12:2-4 —(D)  Osee,  12:2-4 
/  Zechariah ,  1:7-21;  3 —(D)  Zacharias,  1:7- 

2U3 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  3:17;  5-12 —(D)  OT,  Tobias , 
3:25;  5-12  /  Baruch,  6:7 —(D)  OT,  Baruch , 
6:6  /  Song  of  Three  Children,  25-26— (D)  OT, 
Daniel,  3:49-50  /  Bel  and  Dragon,  31-42— 
(D)  OT,  Daniel,  14:30-41 


16 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(6.  The  role  of  the  angels  in  the  government  of 
the  universe.  6a.  The  ministry  of  the  good 
angels  in  the  affairs  of  men:  guardianship.) 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  1:18-25;  2:13,19-20; 

r3:24-3°> 36-43> 47-51;  24:3!;  28:i~7  / 

Mar\,  1:13;  13:27  /  Lufe,  1:1-38;  2:8-15;  16:22 
/  JoJm,  5:4;  12:28-29  /  Acts,  5:17-20;  7:52-53; 
8:26;  10:1-7,22,30-32;  12:5-11;  23:9;  27:21-24 
/  Galatians ,  3:19  /  Hebrews ,  1:13-14  /  Revela¬ 
tion,  1:1;  7-1 1 ;  14:6-20;  15-18;  19:17-18;  22:16 
—(D)  Apocalypse ,  1:1;  7-1 1;  14:6-20;  15-18; 
19:17-18;  22:16 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii,  par  37,  108d 
/  Ctfjy  0/ Go*/,  bk  viii,  ch  25  283b-c;  bk  x,  ch 
8  303a-d;  ch  12-13  306d-307c;  bx  xix,  ch  9 
516a-c  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  30  632c- 
633b;  ch  33  633d-634b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  64, 
a  4,  ans  337d-338d;  q  66,  a  3,  rep  2  347b- 
348d;  q  86,  a  4,  rep  2  463d-464d;  q  89,  a  8, 
rep  2  479c-480c;  q  91,  a  2,  rep  1,3  485b-486b; 
qq  111-113  568b-581d;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  7, 
rep  2  628a-d;  q  5,  a  6  641a-642a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  98, 
a  3  241c-242b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  76,  a  3 
942 b-d;  Q  89,  a  3  1007d-1008b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  viii  [65E1X 
[103]  llc-13b;  purgatory,  v  [85-129]  59d- 
60c;  viii  [1-108]  64a-65b;  ix  [70-145]  66c-67b; 
xii  [73-136]  71a-d;  xvii  [40-63]  78d-79a; 
paradise,  xxxii  [85-114]  155c-d 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,588-825] 
463b-467b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  174d-175a; 
175c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
132b-c;  158c-159b;  168c 

27  Shakespeare:  King  l^ar,  act  iv,  sc  ii  [38- 
50]  270d-271a 

32  Milton:  Comus  33a-56b  esp  [170-229]  37a- 
38b  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [1024-1033]  133b; 
bk  iv  [549-588]  164b-165a;  [776—843]  169b- 
170b;  bk  v  [224-247]  180a-b;  bk  vi  [893-912] 
215b-216a;  bk  viii  [630-643]  246a  /  Areopa - 
gitica,  410a-b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  letters,  124a  /  Pensees,  722, 
309b-312a;  846  339a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [11,676-12,111]  284a- 
294b 

48  Melville: Moby  Dic\,  409b-410a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vii, 
185a-c 

6b.  The  intervention  of  the  demons  in  the 
affairs  of  men:  temptation,  possession 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  3  /  /  Samuel,  16:14-23 
—(D)  I  Kings ,  16:14-23  /  I  Kings,  22:20-23 — 
(D)  III  Kings,  22:20-23  /  /  Chronicles,  21:1  — 
(D)  I  Paralipomenon,  21:1  /  II  Chronicles ,  18:20- 
22 —(D)  II  Paralipomenon,  18:20-22  / 

1-2 


6b 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  3:8— (D)  OT,  Tobias,  3:8  / 
Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  2:24— (D)  OT,  £00^  0/ 
Wisdom,  2:24-25 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  4:1-11;  8:28-34; 
9:32-34;  12:22-30,43-45;  13:19,24-30,36-43; 
17:14-18  /  1:13;  4:15;  5:1-20  /  Lu{e, 

4:1-13;  8:2-3,12,26-36;  11:14-26;  22:3-6  / 
/0A/2,  8:31-59;  10:19-21;  13:2,21-27  / 

5:1-11;  8:5-8;  10:37-38;  16:16-18  /  Romans , 
8:38-39  /  II  Corinthians,  2:10-11;  11:13-15  / 
Galatians,  1:8  /  Ephesians ,  2:2/1  Thessalon- 
ians,  2:18  /  /  5:8-9  /  Revelation,  2:10; 

9;  12-13— (D)  Apocalypse,  2:10;  9;  12-13 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  67  88b-c  / 
C//jy  0/*  Goif,  bk  11,  ch  24-26,  164c-i66d;  bk 
viii,  ch  15-24  274d-283b;  bk  ix,  ch  18  295c- 
d;  bk  x,  ch  9-1 1  303d-306d;  ch  21-22  311c- 
312b;  bk  xviii,  ch  18  480d-482a;  bk  xix,  ch  9 
516a-c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  23-24 
648a-649a;  bk  iii*  ch  37,  673d-674a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  63, 
a  9,  rep  3  333b-d;  q  64,  a  4,  ans  337d-338d; 
q  86,  a  4,  rep  2  463d-464d;  q  89,  a  8,  rep  2 
479c-480c;  q  114  581d-585c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  80 
159d-162d;  part  iii,  q  8,  aa  7-8  761d-763b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  viii  [65R1X 
[103]  llc-13b;  xxvii  [55-136]  40a-41b;  xxxm 
[91-157]  50c-51b;  purgatory,  v  [85-129]  59d- 
60c;  viii  [1-108]  64a-65b 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Man  of  Law  [4778-4805] 
240b-241a  /  Friar's  Tale  278a-284a  /  Physi¬ 
cian's  Tale  [12,055-072]  368a-b  /  Pardoner's 
Tale  [12,778-828]  380b-381b  /  Parson's  Tale, 
par  20  508b-509a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  69c-71a;  part  iii, 
174d-175a;  195a;  part  iv,  258c-261a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
93d-94a;  bk  iii,  169d-173d;  bk  iv,  261a-265a; 
285c-288d;  300b-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Othello ,  act  ii,  sc  iii  [356— 
379]  220c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [27-36]  94a; 
[331-621]  100b-107a;  bk  ii  [310-389]  118a- 
119b;  [496-505]  122a;  [1024-1033]  133b;  bk  iv 
[32-113]  153a-155a;  [358-392]  160a-161a;  [502- 
535]  163b-164a;  [776-1015]  169b-174b;  bk  vi 
[893~9i21  215b-216a;  bk  ix  [404-794]  256a- 
264b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  140a  /  Pensees,  784 
325b;  843,  337b-338a;  850  340a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  184c-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  7a-9b;  part  i 
[482-517]  14a-b;  [1178-2336]  29b-56a  esp 
[1322-1384]  32b-34a,  [1530-1867]  37a-44b; 
[3776-3834]  92a-93b;  [4176-4205]  102a-103a; 
part  ii  [4941-4970]  122b-123a;  (5357^53921 
132b-133a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 
21d-22b;  bk  iv,  86b-c;  bk  v,  130b-132c; 
bk  vi,  169c-170b;  bk  vii,  175b-176b;  bk  x, 
295a-c 


7  to  8 


17 


Chapter  1:  ANGEL 


7.  God  and  Satan 

18  Augustine:  City  of  Gody  bk  xx  530a-560a,c 
passim 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  63 
325b-333d  esp  a  3  327b-328b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  So, 
a  1,  rep  2-3  159d-160c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxxiv  51b-52d 

22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale  278a-284a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  195a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost  93a-333a  esp  bk  i-ii 
93a-134a,  bk  iii  [56-134]  136b-138a,  bk  iv 
[1006-1015]  174b,  bk  v  [224-245]  180a-b,  bk 
v  [563LBK  vi  [892]  187b-215b,  bk  x  [1-62] 
274b-275b,  [460-584]  284b-287a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  784  325b;  820  331b;  826 
332b-333a;  846  339a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  xi, 
337a-346a 

la.  Warfare  between  the  powers  of  light  and 
darkness:  their  struggle  for  dominion 
over  man 

Old  Testament:  I  Samuel ,  16:14-23 —(D) 

I  Kings ,  16:14-23  /  ]oby  1-2  /  Zechariahy  3:1- 
7 —(D)  Zachariasy  3:1-7 

Apocrypha:  7o£zV,  8:3— (£>)  OT,  Tobias ,  8:3 
New  Testament:  Matthew,  4:1-11;  12:22-30; 
13:19,24-30,36-43;  25:41  /..Mai\y  1:13;  5:1-20 
/  4:1-13;  8:26-36;  10:17-20;  11:14-23; 

22:31-34  / )ohny  12:31-32  /  8:5-8;  19:11- 

20;  26:9-29  /  Romans ,  16:17-20  /  /  Corin¬ 
thians,  10:20-21  /  II  Corinthians ,  2:10-11; 
4:3-4;  10:2-5;  ii:i3-i5  /  Ephesians ,  4:27;  6:10- 
18///  Thessalonians ,  2:8-9/  J  Timothy ,  4:1-5  / 

II  Timothy ,  2:24-26  /  Hebrews ,  2:13-15  / 
James,  4:7  /  /  Pdtt?r,  5:8-9  /  /  John,  3:8-12  / 

9  /  Revelation,  2:9-13;  3:9-13;  12-14; 
16:13-14;  20:1-10— (D)  Apocalypse,  2:9-13; 
3:9-13;  12-14;  16:13-14;  20:1-10 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  24-27 
25b-26a;  bk  v,  par  20  32d-33a;  bk  x,  par  .67 
88b-c  /  Ctfy  q/* bk  ii,  ch  25  165c-166b; 
bk  xii,  ch  6  345b-346c;  bk  xx,  ch  11-13 
541a-542d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  23 
648a-c;  bk  iii,  ch  37,  673d-674a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  8,  a  i, 
rep  4  34d-35c;  a  3,  ans  36b-37c;  q  49,  a  3 
266d-268a,c;  q  63,.  a  2,  ans  326c-327b 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  74,  a  1,  rep  i  925c-926c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  viii  [65L1X 
[103]  llc-13b;  xxvii  [55-136]  40a-41b;  purga¬ 
tory,  v  [85-129]  59d-60c;  viii  [1-108]  64a- 
65b;  xi  [1-30]  68d-69a;  xiv  [130-151]  75a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale  [7227-7246]  284a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  247a-248a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [890-1009]  130b- 
133a;  bk  iii  [1-415]  135b-144b;  bk  ix  [679- 
779]  262a-264a 


33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  116a  b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  330b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  7a-9b;  part  i 
lI335-^1  S7S]  33a-34a;  part  ii  [11,612-843] 
282b-288a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl^  esp  4b  5a,  117a-122b, 
131a-138a,  144a-b,  370b  372a,  418a-419b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iii,  50c- 
54b  esp  54a-b;  bk  iv,  86b-c;  bk  v,  130b-136b; 
bk  vi,  15lb-d;  169c-170b;  bk  vii,  175b-176c; 
185a-c;  bk  xi,  342d-343b 

lb,  Lucifer  in  the  service  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Job ,  1-2  /  Psalms,  78:49— (D) 
Psalms,  77:49 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  39:28  —  (D)  OT,  Ec- 
clesiasticus,  39:33-34 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  24,  283a- 
b;  bk  x,  ch  21  311c-312a;  bk  xii,  cii  27  359c- 
360a, c;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b,d-587b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  64, 
a  4,  ans  337d-338d;  q  114,  a  1  581d-582c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  89,  a  4  1008b-1009b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xviii  [19-39] 
25c-d;  xxi-xxiii  30a-34c;  xxvii  [55]-xxvm 
[42]  40a-41c;  xxxiv  51b-52d 

22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale  [7055-7085]  281a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [157-168]  97a; 

[209-220]  98a;  bk  x  [616-640]  288a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  [271-353]  7b-9b; 
part  ii  [7127-7137]  174b-175a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
151b-d;  bk  xi,  341a-344d 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  790d 

8.  Criticism  and  satire  with  respect  to  the  belief 
in  angels  and  demons 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  51d-52b;  69c-71a; 
part  iii,  174b-176d;  195a;  part  iv,  258b- 
261a;  276c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
171a-173d;  bk  iv,  285c-288d;  300b-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  500a-501a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  41d-42a  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  62,  113d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii,  86d- 
87b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  184c-d;  189c;  347a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  229d;  231b;  244c; 
334c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  592a-c;  599d-600a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  354c- 
355b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  31d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  21d- 
22b;  bk  xi,  337a-346a 

53  James:  Psychology,  148b 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  876d-877a; 
877c 


18 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  discussions  relevant  to  the  theory  of  angels,  see  Eternity  4a;  Idea  ie;  Knowledge 
7b;  Mind  ioc;  SouL4d(2);  and  for  the  metaphysical  consideration  of  immaterial  substances, 
see  Being  7b(2). 

The  theological  doctrine  of  the  fallen  angels,  see  Sin  3,  3b;  and  for  the  related  doctrines  of 
Heaven  and  Hell,  see  Eternity  4d;  Good  and  Evil  id,  2b;  Immortality  5e~5f;  Punish¬ 
ment  5e(i). 

The  theory  of  the  celestial  motors,  see  Astronomy  8b;  Change  14. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Augustine.  De  Genesi  ad  Litteram 
Aquinas.  On  Being  and  Essence ,  ch  4 

- .  Summa  Contra  Gentiles ,  bk  ii,  ch  46-55,  91- 

101;  bk  hi,  ch  104-110 

- .  Quaesiiones  Disputatae ,  De  Veritate,  qq  8-9;  De 

Malo ,  q  16;  De  Amnia,  a  7 

- .  On  Spiritual  Creatures ,  a  a  1-3,  5-8 

- .  De  Substantiis  Separatis 

Dante.  Convivio  (The  Banquet ),  second  treatise, 
ch  5-7 

Machiavelli.  Belfagor 

II. 

Philo  Judaeus.  On  the  Cherubim 
Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology,  (m) 
“Dionysius’*.  On  the  Celestial  Hierarchy 
Erigena.  De  Divisione  Naturae,  bk  i  (4,  7-9),  11  (6, 
22),  IV  (7-9),  V  (13) 

Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed,  part  i, 

CH  49;  PART  II,  CH  2-7 
Bonaventura.  Breviloquium,  part  ii  (6-8) 

R.  Bacon.  Opus  Majus,  part  vii 
Albo.  The  Boo \  of  Principles  (Sefer  ha-I%arim),  bk 
ii,  ch  12 

Calvin.  Institutes  of  the  Christian  Religion,  bk  i, 

CH  14  (3) 

Luther.  Table  Tal\ 

Donne.  Aire  and  Angells 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xn  (14), 
xxxiv  (3,  5),  xxxv,  xli  (2),  li  (3-4) 
Marlowe.  The  Tragical  History  of  Doctor  Faustus 


Heywood.  The  Hier archie  of  the  Blessed  Angells 
H.  Lawrence.  Of  Our  Communion  and  Wane  with 
Angels 

Camfield.  A  Theological  Discourse  of  Angels  and 
Their  Ministries 

Leibnitz.  Discourse  on  Metaphysics ,  xxm,  xxxiv- 
xxxvi 

John  Reynolds.  Inquiries  Concerning  the  State  and 
Economy  of  the  Angelical  Worlds 
Swedenborg.  Angelic  Wisdom  Concerning  the  Divine 
Providence 

Voltaire.  “Angels,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 
Schleiermacher.  The  Christian  Faith,  par  42-45 
W.  Scott.  Letters  on  Demonology  and  Witchcraft 
J.  H.  Newman.  “The  Powers  of  Nature,”  in  vol  ii. 
Parochial  and  Plain  Sermons 
Heine.  Gods  in  Exile 
Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  ix,  ch  2 
Michelet.  Satanism  and  Witchcraft 
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough,  part  iv,  bk  i,  ch  4; 

PART  VI ;  PART  VII,  CH  4-7 

Wendell.  “Were  the  Witches  of  Salem  Guiltless?” 
in  Stelligeri 

Lea.  Materials  Toward  a  History  of  Witchcraft 
France.  The  Revolt  of  the  Angels 
Farnell.  Gree\Hero  Cults  and  Ideas  of  Immortality 
Williams.  The  Place  of  the  Lion 
Glover.  “The  Daemon  Environment,”  in  Gree\ 
Byways 

Zilboorg.  The  Medical  Man  and  the  Witch  During 
the  Renaissance 
Vonier.  The  Angels 
C.  S.  Lewis.  Out  of  the  Silent  Planet 
- .  The  Screwtape  Letters 


Chapter  z:  ANIMAL 


INTRODUCTION 


ALPHABETICAL  ordering  places  Animal 
r\  after  Angel  in  this  list  of  ideas.  There 
is  a  third  term  which  belongs  with  these  two 
and,  but  for  the  alphabet,  might  have  come  be¬ 
tween  them.  That  term  is  Man. 

These  three  terms — and  a  fourth,  God, 
which  rounds  out  the  comparison — are  con¬ 
joined  in  Shakespeare’s  statement  of  what  is 
perhaps  the  most  universal  reflection  of  man 
upon  himself.  “What  a  piece  of  work  is  man!” 
says  Hamlet,  “How  noble  in  reason!  how  infi¬ 
nite  in  faculty!  in  form  and  moving,  how  ex¬ 
press  and  admirable!  in  action,  how  like  an  an¬ 
gel!  in  apprehension,  how  like  a  god!  the  beauty 
of  the  world!  the  paragon  of  animals!”  Animal, 
angel,  god — in  each  of  these  man  has  seen  his 
image.  And  at  different  moments  in  the  history 
of  thought,  he  has  tended  to  identify  himself 
with  one  to  the  exclusion  of  the  others. 

Yet  predominantly  man  has  regarded  him¬ 
self  as  an  animal,  even  when  he  has  understood 
himself  to  be  created  in  God’s  image,  and  to 
share  with  the  angels,  through  the  possession  of 
intellect,  the  dignity  of  being  a  person.  As  his 
understanding  of  himself  has  varied,  so  has  he 
altered  his  conception  of  what  it  is  to  be  an 
animal. 

In  terms  of  a  conception  of  personality  which 
involves  the  attributes  of  reason  and  free  will, 
man  has  legally,  as  well  as  morally  and  meta¬ 
physically,  drawn  a  sharp  line  between  persons 
and  things,  and  placed  brute  animals  in  the 
class  of  things.  According  to  the  principle  of 
this  distinction,  being  alive  or  even  being  sen¬ 
sitive  does  not  give  animals,  any  more  than 
plants  and  stones,  the  dignity  or  status  of  per¬ 
sons. 

When  man’s  animality — either  in  terms  of 
his  biological  affinities  or  his  evolutionary  ori¬ 
gins — has  seemed  an  adequate  definition  of  his 
nature,  man  has  attributed  to  animals  many  of 


his  own  traits,  his  intelligence  and  freedom, 
even  his  moral  qualities  and  political  propensi¬ 
ties.  Nevertheless,  he  has  seldom  ceased  to  re¬ 
gard  himself  as  the  paragon  of  animals,  possess¬ 
ing  in  a  higher  degree  than  other  animals  the 
characteristic  properties  of  all. 

There  are  exceptions  to  this,  however.  Ani¬ 
mals  have  been  glorified  by  man  for  skeptical 
or  satiric  purposes. 

Montaigne,  for  example,  doubts  that  man 
can  lay  claim  to  any  special  attributes  or  excel¬ 
lences,  and  further  suggests  that,  in  some  par¬ 
ticulars  at  least,  men  are  less  able  and  less  noble 
than  the  beasts.  Relying  on  legends  found  in 
Pliny  and  Plutarch  which  describe  the  marvel¬ 
ous  exploits  of  animals,  he  argues  that  “it  is  not 
upon  any  true  ground  of  reason,  but  by  a  fool¬ 
ish  pride  and  vain  opinion,  that  we  prefer  our¬ 
selves  before  other  animals,  and  separate  our¬ 
selves  from  their  conditions  and  society.” 

Why,  Montaigne  asks,  “should  we  attribute 
to  I  know  not  what  natural  and  servile  inclina¬ 
tion  the  works  that  surpass  all  we  can  do  by  na¬ 
ture  and  art”  ?  We  have  no  grounds  for  believ¬ 
ing  that  “beasts,  by  natural  and  compulsory 
tendency,  do  the  same  things  that  we  do  by  our 
choice  and  industry.”  Rather  “we  ought,”  he 
continues,  “from  like  effects,  to  conclude  like 
faculties,  and  consequently  confess  that  the 
same  reason,  the  same  method,  by  which  we  op¬ 
erate,  are  common  with  them,  or  that  they  have 
others  that  are  better.” 

Nor  can  we  excuse  our  presumption  of  su¬ 
periority  by  the  fact  that  we  are  compelled  to 
look  at  animals  from  our  human  point  of  view. 
“When  I  play  with  my  cat,”  Montaigne  writes, 
“who  knows  whether  I  do  not  make  her  more 
sport  than  she  makes  me?  We  mutually  divert 
one  another  with  our  monkey  tricks;  if  I  have 
my  hour  to  begin  or  to  refuse,  she  also  has  hers.” 
Suppose  animals  were  to  tell  us  what  they 


19 


20 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


thought  of  us.  “The  defect  that  hinders  com¬ 
munication  betwixt  them  and  us,  why  may  it 
not  be  on  our  part  as  well  as  theirs?  ’Tis  yet  to 
determine,”  Montaigne  thinks,  “where  the  fault 
lies  that  we  understand  not  one  another;  for  we 
understand  them  no  more  than  they  do  us;  by 
the  same  reason  they  may  think  us  to  be  beasts 
as  we  think  them.” 

If  Montaigne’s  view  were  to  prevail,  no  spe¬ 
cial  significance  could  be  given  to  “brute”  as 
opposed  to  “rational”  animal.  For  that  matter, 
the  same  holds  true  whenever  man  is  conceived 
as  just  an  animal,  paragon  or  not.  Animals  are 
brute  only  when  man  is  not — only  when  to  be 
human  is  to  be  somehow  more  than  an  animal, 
different  in  kind,  not  merely  in  degree. 

Satirists  like  Swift  idealize  an  animal  nature 
to  berate  the  folly  and  depravity  of  man.  In  his 
last  voyage,  Gulliver  finds  in  the  land  of  the 
Houvhnhnms  a  race  of  human-looking  crea¬ 
tures,  the  Yahoos,  who  by  contrast  with  their 
noble  masters,  the  horses,  are  a  miserable  and 
sorry  lot.  Here  it  is  the  Yahoos  who  are  brutes, 
bereft  as  they  are  of  the  intelligence  and  virtue 
which  grace  the  splendid  Houyhnhnms. 

The  comparison  of  men  and  animals  takes  still 
another  direction  in  the  allegories  of  fable  and 
poetry.  From  Aesop  to  the  mediaeval  Bestiaries , 
there  is  the  tradition  of  stories  in  which  animals 
are  personified  in  order  to  teach  a  moral  lesson. 
In  the  Divitie  Comedy  Dante  uses  specific  ani¬ 
mals  to  symbolize  the  epitome  of  certain  pas¬ 
sions,  vices,  and  virtues.  The  intent  of  his  alle¬ 
gory  is,  however,  never  derogatory  to  man  as 
man.  But  when  Machiavelli  allegorizes  the  qual¬ 
ities  required  for  political  power,  he  advises  the 
prince  “knowingly  to  adopt  the  beast”  and  “to 
choose  the  fox  and  the  lion.”  This  tends  to  re¬ 
duce  human  society  to  the  jungle  where  strength 
and  guile  compete  for  supremacy. 

The  comparison  of  men  and  animals  fails  to 
touch  the  distinction,  or  lack  of  distinction,  be¬ 
tween  animals  and  plants.  This  is  basic  to  the 
definition  or  conception  of  animal  nature.  As  in 
the  case  of  men  and  animals,  this  problem  can 
be  approached  in  two  ways:  either  from  the  side 
of  plant  life,  and  with  respect  to  those  functions 
which  seem  to  be  common  to  all  living  things; 
or  from  the  side  of  animal  life,  and  with  respect 
to  those  functions  which  seem  to  belong  only  to 


animals,  never  to  plants.  On  either  approach 
the  issue  remains  whether  plants  and  animals 
are  different  in  kind,  not  merely  in  degree. 

On  the  one  hand,  it  may  be  argued  that  sensi¬ 
tivity,  desire,  and  locomotion  (even  perhaps 
sleeping  and  waking)  are,  in  some  form  or  de¬ 
gree,  to  be  found  in  all  living  things.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  may  be  argued  that  such  func¬ 
tions  as  nutrition,  growth,  and  reproduction, 
though  obviously  common  to  plants  and  ani¬ 
mals,  are  performed  by  animals  in  a  distinctive 
manner.  If  plants  manifest  all  the  vital  powers 
or  activities  present  in  animals;  or  if  in  func¬ 
tions  common  to  both,  animals  differ  only  in 
degree,  then  the  scale  of  life  would  seem  to  be  a 
continuous  gradation  rather  than  a  hierarchy. 

The  opposite  position,  which  affirms  a  differ¬ 
ence  in  kind  and  consequently  a  hierarchy,  is 
taken  by  Aristotle.  In  his  biological  writings,  as 
well  as  in  his  treatise  On  the  Soul ,  he  draws  a 
sharp  line  between  plant  and  animal  life  by  ref¬ 
erence  to  faculties  or  functions  absent  in  the  one 
and  found  in  the  other.  Aristotle  first  points  out 
that  “living  may  mean  thinking  or  perception 
or  local  movement  and  rest,  or  movement  in  the 
sense  of  nutrition,  decay,  and  growth.  Hence,” 
he  goes  on,  “we  think  of  plants  also  as  living, 
for  they  are  observed  to  possess  in  themselves 
an  originative  power  through  which  they  in¬ 
crease  or  decrease  in  all  spatial  directions;  they 
grow  up  and  down,  and  everything  that  grows 
increases  its  bulk  alike  in  both  directions  or  in¬ 
deed  in  all,  and  continues  to  live  so  long  as  it 
can  absorb  nutriment.” 

This  leads  him  to  assign  to  plants  what  he 
calls  a  nutritive  or  vegetative  soul,  whereby 
they  have  the  three  basic  faculties  common  to 
all  living  things — nutrition,  growth,  and  repro¬ 
duction.  But  Aristotle  does  not  find  in  plants 
any  evidence  of  the  functions  performed  by 
animals,  such  as  sensation,  appetite,  and  local 
motion.  These  are  the  characteristic  powers  of 
the  animal  soul,  called  by  him  the  “sensitive 
soul”  because  sensation  is  the  source  both  of 
animal  desire  and  animal  movement. 

Galen  follows  Aristotle  in  this  distinction.  In 
his  'Natural  Faculties  he  limits  his  investigations 
to  the  functions  common  to  all  living  things. 
He  uses  the  word  “natural”  for  those  effects, 
such  as  “growth  and  nutrition  .  .  .  common  to 
plants  as  well  as  animals,”  which,  in  his  view, 


arc 

vol 

k 

ms; 

of 

od 

k 

fun 

fei 

ft 

ad 

ms 

tc 

k 

P 

ms 

tie 

tv 

vn 

an 

ui; 

A) 


q 

li 

01 

k 


ti 


c 

i 

c 

I 

i 

i 

I 

i 

| 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


21 


are  opposed  to  such  activities  as  “feeling  and 
voluntary  motion  . . .  peculiar  to  animals,”  that 
he  calls  “effects  of  the  soul,”  or  “psychic.”  It 
may  seem  surprising  at  first  that  Galen’s  study 
of  nutrition,  growth,  and  reproduction — not 
only  of  the  functions  themselves  but  of  the 
bodily  organs  and  processes  involved  in  these 
functions — should  be  restricted  to  their  mani¬ 
festation  in  animals,  and  not  in  plants  as  well. 
The  reason  may  be  that  for  the  naturalists  of 
antiquity,  the  biological  functions  of  vegetable 
matter  did  not  yield  their  secrets  readily  enough 
to  observation.  A  treatise  on  plants,  not  written 
by  Aristotle  but  attributed  to  his  school,  be¬ 
gins  with  the  remark  that  “life  is  found  in  ani¬ 
mals  and  plants;  but  whereas  in  animals  it  is 
clearly  manifest,  in  plants  it  is  hidden  and  less 
evident.” 

This  view  of  the  world  of  living  things  as  di¬ 
vided  into  the  two  great  kingdoms  of  plant  and 
animal  life  prevailed  through  centuries  of  spec¬ 
ulation  and  research.  But  from  the  time  that 
Aristotle  began  the  work  of  classification,  it  has 
been  realized  that  there  exist  numerous  exam¬ 
ples  of  what  Bacon  called  “bordering  instances 
. . .  such  as  exhibit  those  species  of  bodies  which 
appear  to  be  composed  of  two  species,  or  to  be 
the  rudiments  between  the  one  and  the  other.” 

Within  the  last  hundred  years  the  difficulty 
of  classifying  such  specimens,  particularly  those 
which  seem  to  fall  between  plant  and  animal, 
has  raised  the  question  whether  the  traditional 
distinction  can  be  maintained.  “If  we  look  even 
to  the  two  main  divisions,  namely,  to  the  ani¬ 
mal  and  vegetable  kingdoms,”  writes  Darwin, 
“certain  low  forms  are  so  far  intermediate  in 
character  that  naturalists  have  disputed  to  which 
kingdom  they  should  belong.”  Yet  Darwin 
does  not  find  the  evidence  available  to  him  suf¬ 
ficient  to  determine  whether  all  living  things 
have  descended  “from  one  primordial  form”  or 
whether  the  evolution  of  life  is  to  be  represented 
in  two  distinct  lines  of  development. 

Since  Darwin’s  day  the  researches  of  scien¬ 
tists  like  Loeb  and  Jennings  on  the  behavior  of 
micro-organisms,  and  the  phenomena  of  tro- 
pisms  (e.g.j  the  sunflower’s  turning  toward  the 
sun),  and  the  study  of  what  appears  to  be  local 
motion  in  plants,  have  contributed  additional 
evidence  relevant  to  the  issue.  It  is,  however, 
still  considered  open  and  arguable. 


The  fact  that  organisms  exist  which  do  not 
readily  fall  into  either  classification  may  signify 
con  t  i  n  u  i  t  y  ra  t  he  r  t  ha  n  sepa  ra  t  ion  be  twee  n  pla  n  t  s 
and  animals;  but  it  may  also  be  taken  to  mean 
that  more  acute  observations  are  required  to 
classify  these  so-called  “intermediate  forms.” 
Plant  tropisms  may  or  may  not  require  us  to 
deny  that  sensitivity  belongs  to  animals  alone. 
The  apparent  local  motion  of  plants  may  be  a 
mode  of  growth  or  a  random  movement  rather 
than  a  directed  change  from  place  to  place;  and 
the  attachment  to  place  of  apparently  station¬ 
ary  animals,  such  as  barnacles  and  mussels,  may 
be  different  from  the  immobility  of  rooted 
plants. 

Against  the  background  of  these  major  issues 
concerning  plants,  animals,  and  men  as  con¬ 
tinuous  or  radically  distinct  forms  of  life,  the 
study  of  animal  organisms — their  anatomy  and 
physiology — acquires  much  of  its  critical  sig¬ 
nificance. 

Anatomy  is  an  ancient  science.  Several  sur¬ 
gical  treatises  of  Hippocrates  display  an  exten¬ 
sive  knowledge  of  the  human  skeletal  structure 
and  the  disposition  of  some  of  the  organs  of  the 
human  body.  The  dissection  of  animals,  as  well 
as  gross  observation,  provides  Aristotle  with  a 
basis  for  the  comparative  anatomy  of  different 
species  of  animal.  For  Galen  as  well  as  Aris-' 
to  tie,  much  of  this  anatomical  study  was  mo¬ 
tivated  by  an  interest  in  the  structure  and  rela¬ 
tion  of  the  organs  involved  in  the  local  motion 
of  the  body  as  a  whole,  and  in  local  motions 
within  the  body,  such  as  the  motions  of  the 
alimentary  or  reproductive  systems. 

It  remains  for  a  later  investigator,  schooled  in 
the  tradition  of  ancient  biology,  to  make  the 
startling  discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the 
blood  through  the  motions  of  the  heart.  Harvey 
not  only  does  this,  but  he  also  suggests  the 
functional  interdependence  of  respiration  and 
circulation,  based  on  his  observation  of  the  in¬ 
timate  structural  connections  between  heart, 
arteries,  veins,  and  lungs.  His  contribution  is  at 
once  a  departure  from  and  a  product  of  the 
scientific  tradition  in  which  he  worked,  for 
though  his  conclusions  are  radically  new,  he 
reaches  them  by  a  method  of  research  and  rea¬ 
soning  which  follows  the  general  principles  of 
Aristotle  and  Galen.  His  insistence,  moreover. 


22 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


on  the  necessity  of  finding  a  functional  purpose 
for  an  organic  structure  stands  as  the  classic 
rejoinder  to  Francis  Bacon’s  recommendation 
that  formal  and  final  causes  be  separated  from 
material  and  efficient  causes  in  the  study  of 
nature.  Bacon  assigns  the  first  two  types  of 
cause  to  metaphysics,  and  limits  physics  to  the 
last  two. 

Harvey’s  work  on  the  generation  of  animals 
is  another  example  of  the  continuity  between 
ancient  and  modern  biology.  In  some  respects, 
Aristotle’s  researches  on  the  reproductive  or¬ 
gans  and  their  functions  are  more  general  than 
Harvey’s.  They  represent  for  him  only  part  of 
the  large  field  of  comparative  anatomy,  and 
have  significance  for  the  study  of  mating  habits 
in  different  classes  of  animals.  Yet  on  the  prob¬ 
lem  of  the  act  of  generation  itself,  its  causes  and 
consequences,  especially  the  phenomena  of  em¬ 
bryonic  development,  Harvey’s  treatise  reads 
partly  as  a  conversation  with  Aristotle,  and 
partly  as  the  record  of  original  observations  un¬ 
dertaken  experimentally. 

“Respect  for  our  predecessors  and  for  antiq¬ 
uity  at  large,”  he  writes,  “inclines  us  to  defend 
their  conclusions  to  the  extent  that  love  of 
truth  will  allow.  Nor  do  I  think  it  becoming  in 
us  to  neglect  and  make  little  of  their  labors  and 
conclusions,  who  bore  the  torch  that  has  lighted 
us  to  the  shrine  of  philosophy.”  The  ancients, 
in  his  opinion,  “by  their  unwearied  labor  and 
variety  of  experiments,  searching  into  the  na¬ 
ture  of  things,  have  left  us  no  doubtful  light 
to  guide  us  in  our  studies.”  Yet,  Harvey  adds, 
“no  one  of  a  surety  will  allow  that  all  truth  was 
engrossed  by  the  ancients,  unless  he  be  utterly 
ignorant ...  of  the  many  remarkable  discoveries 
that  have  lately  been  made  in  anatomy.”  Re¬ 
ferring  to  his  own  method  of  investigation,  he 
proposes  as  a  “safer  way  to  the  attainment  of 
knowledge”  that  “in  studying  nature,”  we 
“question  things  themselves  rather  than  by 
turning  over  books.” 

It  is  particularly  with  respect  to  animal  gen¬ 
eration  that  the  great  books  exhibit  continuity 
in  the  statement  of  basic  problems  in  biology, 
as  well  as  indicate  the  logical  conditions  of  their 
solution.  The  issue  of  spontaneous  generation 
as  opposed  to  procreation  runs  through  Aris¬ 
totle,  Lucretius,  Aquinas,  Harvey,  and  Dar¬ 
win.  The  problem  of  sexual  and  asexual  repro¬ 


duction,  with  all  the  relevant  considerations  of 
sexual  differentiation  and  sexual  characteristics, 
is  to  be  found  in  Aristotle,  Darwin,  and  Freud. 
Questions  of  heredity,  though  they  are  raised 
with  new  significance  by  Darwin  and  William 
James,  have  a  lineage  as  ancient  as  Plato. 

Scientific  learning  has,  of  course,  advanced 
in  recent  times  with  regard  to  the  nature  and 
behavior  of  animals.  On  such  topics  as  heredity, 
the  work  of  Mendel,  Bateson,  and  Morgan  is 
crucial;  or,  to  take  another  example,  our 
knowledge  of  the  functioning  of  the  respira¬ 
tory  and  the  nervous  system  has  been  greatly 
enlarged  by  the  researches  of  Haldane,  Sher¬ 
rington,  and  Pavlov.  Yet  even  in  these  areas, 
the  background  of  recent  scientific  contribu¬ 
tions  is  to  be  found  in  the  great  books — in  the 
writings,  for  example,  of  Harvey,  Darwin,  and 
William  James. 

Another  interest  which  runs  through  the 
whole  tradition  of  man’s  study  of  animals  lies 
in  the  problem  of  their  classification — both 
with  respect  to  the  principles  of  taxonomy  it¬ 
self,  and  also  in  the  systematic  effort  to  con¬ 
struct  schemes  whereby  the  extraordinary  va¬ 
riety  of  animal  types  can  be  reduced  to  order. 
In  this  field  Aristotle  and  Darwin  are  the  two 
great  masters.  If  the  names  of  Buffon  and  Lin¬ 
naeus  also  deserve  to  be  mentioned,  it  must  be 
with  the  double  qualification  that  they  are  fol¬ 
lowers  of  Aristotle  on  the  one  hand,  and  pre¬ 
cursors  of  Darwin  on  the  other. 

The  Aristotelian  classification  is  most  fully 
set  forth  in  the  History  of  Animals.  There  one 
kind  of  animal  is  distinguished  from  another  by 
many  “properties”:  by  locale  or  habitat;  by 
shape  and  color  and  size ;  by  manner  of  locomo¬ 
tion,  nutrition,  association,  sensation;  by  or¬ 
ganic  parts  and  members;  by  temperament,  in¬ 
stinct,  or  characteristic  habits  of  action.  With 
respect  to  some  of  these  properties,  Aristotle 
treats  one  kind  of  animal  as  differing  from  an¬ 
other  by  a  degree — by  more  or  less — of  the  same 
trait.  With  respect  to  other  properties,  he  finds 
the  difference  to  consist  in  the  possession  by  one 
species  of  a  trait  totally  lacking  in  another.  He 
speaks  of  the  lion  as  being  more  “ferocious” 
than  the  wolf,  the  crow  as  more  “cunning” 
than  the  raven;  but  he  also  observes  that  the 
cow  has  an  “organ  of  digestion”  which  the  spi- 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


23 


der  lacks,  the  lizard  an  “organ  of  locomotion” 
which  the  oyster  lacks.  The  sponge  lives  in  one 
manner  so  far  as  “locale”  is  concerned,  and  the 
viper  in  another;  reptiles  have  one  manner  of 
locomotion,  birds  another.  So  ample  were  Aris¬ 
totle’s  data  and  so  expert  were  his  classifica¬ 
tions,  that  the  major  divisions  and  sub-divisions 
of  his  scheme  remain  intact  in  the  taxonomy 
constructed  by  Linnaeus. 

The  radical  character  of  Darwin’s  departure 
from  the  Linnaean  classification  stems  from  a 
difference  in  principle  rather  than  a  correction 
of  observational  errors  or  inadequacies.  Where 
Aristotle  and  all  taxonomists  before  Darwin 
classify  animals  by  reference  to  their  similarities 
and  differences,  Darwin  makes  inferred  geneal- 
f  ogy  or  descent  the  primary  criterion  in  terms 
of  which  he  groups  animals  into  varieties,  spe¬ 
cies,  genera,  and  larger  phyla. 

Naturalists,  according  to  Darwin,  “try  to  ar¬ 
range  the  species,  genera,  and  families  in  each 
class,  on  what  is  called  the  Natural  System.  But 
what  is  meant  by  this  system?  Some  authors 
look  at  it  merely  as  a  scheme  for  arranging  to¬ 
gether  those  living  objects  which  are  most  alike, 
and  for  separating  those  which  are  most  unlike. 

. . .  The  ingenuity  and  utility  of  this  system  are 
indisputable,”  but  Darwin  thinks  that  its  rules 
cannot  be  explained  or  its  difficulties  overcome 
except  “on  the  view  that  the  Natural  System  is 
founded  on  descent  with  modification — that 
the  characters  which  naturalists  consider  as 
showing  true  affinity  between  any  two  or  more 
species,  are  those  which  have  been  inherited 
from  a  common  parent,  all  true  classification 
being  genealogical — that  community  of  descent 
is  the  hidden  bond  which  naturalists  have  been 
unconsciously  seeking,  and  not  some  unknown 
plan  of  creation,  or  the  enunciation  of  general 
propositions,  and  the  mere  putting  together 
and  separating  objects  more  or  less  alike.” 

In  Darwin’s  opinion,  classification  “must  be 
strictly  genealogical  in  order  to  be  natural.” 
Only  by  the  principle  of  descent — “the  one 
certainly  known  cause  of  similarity  in  organic 
beings” — can  we  arrange  “all  organic  beings 
throughout  all  time  in  groups  under  groups”; 
see  “the  nature  of  the  relationships  by  which  all 
living  and  extinct  organisms  are  united  by  com¬ 
plex,  radiating,  and  circuitous  lines  of  affinities 
into  a  few  grand  classes”;  and  understand  “the 


wide  opposition  in  value  between  analogical  or 
adaptive  characters,  and  characters  of  true  af¬ 
finity.”  Furthermore,  “the  importance  of  em- 
bryological  characters  and  of  rudimentary  or¬ 
gans  in  classification”  becomes  “intelligible  on 
the  view  that  a  natural  arrangement  must  be 
genealogical.”  By  reference  to  “this  element  of 
descent,”  not  only  shall  we  be  able  to  “under¬ 
stand  what  is  meant  by  the  Natural  System,” 
but  also,  Darwin  adds,  “our  classifications  will 
come  to  be,  as  far  as  they  can  be  so  made,  gene¬ 
alogies;  and  will  then  truly  give  what  may  be 
called  the  plan  of  creation.” 

Whereas  the  Aristotelian  classification  is  static 
in  principle,  having  no  reference  to  temporal 
connections  or  the  succession  of  generations, 
the  Darwinian  is  dynamic — almost  a  moving 
picture  of  the  ever-shifting  arrangement  of  ani¬ 
mals  according  to  their  affinities  through  com¬ 
mon  ancestry  or  their  diversities  through  ge¬ 
netic  variation.  Connected  with  this  opposition 
between  static  and  dynamic  principles  of  clas¬ 
sification  is  a  deeper  conflict  between  two  ways 
of  understanding  the  nature  of  scientific  classi¬ 
fication  itself. 

The  point  at  issue  is  whether  the  classes  which 
the  taxonomist  constructs  represent  distinct 
natural  forms.  Do  they  exist  independently  as 
objects  demanding  scientific  definition  or  are 
the  scientist’s  groupings  somewhat  arbitrary 
and  artificial?  Do  they  divide  and  separate 
what  in  nature  is  more  like  a  continuous  distri¬ 
bution  with  accidental  gaps  and  unevennesses  ? 
This  issue,  in  turn,  tends  to  raise  the  metaphysi¬ 
cal  question  concerning  the  reality  and  fixity  of 
species,  which  relates  to  the  problem  of  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  real  and  nominal  definitions, 
and  the  difference  between  natural  and  arbi¬ 
trary  systems  of  classification. 

On  these  matters  Aquinas  and  Locke  have 
much  to  say,  as  well  as  Aristotle  and  Darwin. 
Fuller  discussion  of  such  questions  is  to  be  found 
in  the  chapters  on  Definition  and  Evolu¬ 
tion.  Insofar  as  problems  of  classification  and 
the  nature  of  species  have  a  bearing  on  evolu¬ 
tion,  they  are  treated  in  that  chapter,  as  are  the 
related  issues  of  continuity  or  hierarchy  in  the 
world  of  living  things,  and  of  difference  in  de¬ 
gree  or  l$ind  as  between  plants  and  animals,  ani¬ 
mals  and  men.  The  last  two  problems  also  occur 
in  the  chapters  on  Life  and  Man. 


24 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


On  the  theme  of  comparisons  between  ani¬ 
mals  and  men,  two  further  points  should  be 
noted. 

The  first  concerns  the  soul  of  animals.  When 
soul  is  conceived  as  the  principle  or  source  of 
life  in  whatever  is  alive,  plants  and  animals  can 
be  said  to  have  souls.  Like  Aristotle,  Augustine 
distinguishes  “three  grades  of  soul  in  universal 
nature”:  one  which  has  “only  the  power  of 
life  .  .  .  the  second  grade  in  which  there  is  sen¬ 
sation  .  .  .  the  third  grade  .  .  .  where  intelli¬ 
gence  has  its  throne.” 

Though  he  also  follows  Aristotle  in  defining 
three  kinds  of  soul,  Aquinas  distinguishes  four 
grades  of  life,  and  in  so  doing  differentiates  be¬ 
tween  perfect  and  imperfect  animals.  “There  are 
some  living  things,”  he  writes,  “in  which  there 
exists  only  vegetative  power,  as  the  plants. 
There  are  others  in  which  with  the  vegetative 
there  exists  also  the  sensitive,  but  not  the  loco¬ 
motive  power;  such  are  immovable  animals,  as 
shellfish.  There  are  others  which  besides  this 
have  locomotive  power,  as  perfect  animals, 
which  require  many  things  for  their  life,  and 
consequently  movement  to  seek  the  neces¬ 
saries  of  life  from  a  distance.  And  there  are 
some  living  things  which  with  these  have  in¬ 
tellectual  power — namely,  men.” 

On  this  theory,  man,  viewed  in  terms  of  his 
animal  nature,  is  a  perfect  animal.  Viewed  in 
terms  of  his  reason  or  intellect,  he  stands  above 
the  highest  animals.  Yet  having  a  soul  is  not 
peculiar  to  man,  just  as  being  alive,  or  sensi¬ 
tive,  or  mobile,  is  not.  But  when,  as  with  Des¬ 
cartes,  soul  is  identified  with  intellect — as  “a 
thing  which  thinks,  that  is  to  say  a  mind  ...  or 
an  understanding,  or  a  reason” — and,  in  addi¬ 
tion,  soul  is  conceived  as  a  spiritual  and  im¬ 
mortal  substance,  then  the  conclusion  seems 
to  follow  that  animals  do  not  have  souls. 

For  Descartes,  the  theory  of  the  animal  as  a 
machine  or  automaton  follows  as  a  further  cor¬ 
ollary.  “If  there  had  been  such  machines,  pos¬ 
sessing  the  organs  and  outward  form  of  a  mon¬ 
key  or  some  other  animal  without  reason,” 
Descartes  claims  that  “we  should  not  have  had 
any  means  of  ascertaining  that  they  were  not 
of  the  same  nature  as  those  animals.”  Hobbes 
likewise  would  account  for  all  the  actions  of 
animal  life  on  mechanical  principles.  “For  what 
is  the  heart,  but  a  spring,”  he  asks,  “and  the 


nerves,  but  so  many  strings;  and  the  joints,  but 
so  many  wheels,  giving  motion  to  the  whole 
body?”  The  animal  is  thus  pictured  as  an  elab¬ 
orate  system  of  moving  parts,  inflexibly  de¬ 
termined  to  behave  in  certain  ways  under  the 
impact  of  stimulation  by  external  forces. 

The  doctrine  of  the  animal  automaton  is 
sometimes  generalized,  as  by  La  Met  trie,  a 
follower  of  Descartes,  to  include  the  conception 
of  man  as  a  machine.  The  same  conclusions 
which  are  reached  from  the  denial  of  soul  in 
animals  seem  to  follow  also  from  the  theory 
that  the  soul,  even  in  the  case  of  man,  is  ma¬ 
terial  or  a  function  of  matter.  According  to 
those  who,  like  Lucretius,  hold  this  view,  the 
phenomena  of  life,  sensation,  and  thought  can 
be  explained  by  the  movement  of  atomic  par¬ 
ticles  and  their  interaction. 

The  second  point  concerns  the  relation  be¬ 
tween  instinct  and  intelligence  in  animals.  The 
nature  of  animal  instincts  (or  innate  habits)  is 
considered  in  the  chapters  on  Emotion  and 
Habit,  as  is  the  nature  of  animal  intelligence 
in  the  chapters  on  Man  and  Reasoning.  But 
here  we  face  the  issue  whether  instinct  func¬ 
tions  in  animals,  as  reason  does  in  man,  to  meet 
the  exigencies  of  life;  or  whether  in  both, 
though  varying  in  degree,  intelligence  cooper¬ 
ates  with  instinct  to  solve  the  problems  of  ad¬ 
justment  to  environment. 

Those  who,  like  Aquinas,  regard  instinct  and 
reason  as  the  alternative  and  exclusive  means 
which  God  provides  for  the  ends  of  animal  and 
human  life,  necessarily  tend  to  interpret  ani¬ 
mal  behavior  in  all  its  detail  as  pre-determined 
by  elaborate  instinctive  endowments.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  animal  behavior,  even  when  voluntary 
rather  than  purely  the  action  of  physiological 
reflexes,  is  said  not  to  be  free,  or  an  expression  of 
free  choice  on  the  part  of  the  animal;  for,  as 
is  pointed  out  in  the  chapter  on  Will,  Aquinas 
calls  behavior  “voluntary”  if  it  involves  some 
knowledge  or  consciousness  of  the  objects  to 
which  it  is  directed. 

Instinctive  behavior,  such  as  an  animal’s 
flight  from  danger  or  its  pursuit  of  food  or  a 
mate,  involves  sense-perception  of  the  objects 
of  these  actions,  as  well  as  feelings  or  emotions 
about  them.  But  though  it  is  “voluntary”  in 
the  sense  in  which  Aquinas  uses  that  word,  in¬ 
stinctive  behavior  is,  according  to  him,  the 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


25 


exact  opposite  of  action  based  upon  free  will. 
It  is  completely  determined  by  the  inborn  pat¬ 
tern  of  the  instinct.  It  may  vary  in  operation 
with  the  circumstances  of  the  occasion,  but  it 
does  not  leave  the  animal  the  freedom  to  act 
or  not  to  act,  or  to  act  this  way  rather  than 
that.  Such  freedom  of  choice,  Aquinas  holds, 
depends  on  reason’s  ability  to  contemplate  al¬ 
ternatives,  to  none  of  which  is  the  human  will 
bound  by  natural  necessity. 

Aquinas  does  not  limit  human  reason  and 
will  to  a  role  analogous  to  the  one  he  ascribes 
to  instinct  and  emotion  in  animal  life.  Their 
power  enables  man  to  engage  in  speculative 
thought  and  to  seek  remote  ends.  Never¬ 
theless,  on  the  level  of  his  biological  needs,  man 
must  resort  to  the  use  of  his  reason  and  will  where 
other  animals  are  guided  by  instinct.  “Man 
has  by  nature,”  Aquinas  writes,  “his  reason  and 
his  hands,  which  are  the  organs  of  organs,  since 
by  their  means  man  can  make  for  himself  in¬ 
struments  of  an  infinite  variety,  and  for  any 
number  of  purposes.”  Just  as  the  products  of 
reason  take  the  place  of  hair,  hoofs,  claws, 
teeth,  and  horns — “fixed  means  of  defense  or 
of  clothing,  as  is  the  case  with  other  animals” — 
so  reason  serves  man’s  needs,  in  the  view  of 
Aquinas,  as  instinct  serves  other  animals. 

Others,  like  Darwin,  James,  and  Freud,  seem 
to  take  a  different  view.  They  attribute  in¬ 
stinct  to  men  as  well  as  to  animals.  In  their 
opinion  instinctively  determined  behavior  is 
influenced  by  intelligence,  and  affected  by 
memory  and  imagination,  in  animals  as  well  as 
in  men.  They  recognize,  however,  that  instinct 
predominates  in  some  of  the  lower  forms  of 
animal  life,  and  acknowledge  that  the  contribu¬ 
tion  of  intelligence  is  great  only  among  the 
more  highly  developed  organisms. 

“Man  has  a  far  greater  variety  of  impulses 
than  any  lower  animal,”  writes  James;  “and  any 
one  of  these  impulses  taken  in  itself,  is  as  ‘blind’ 
as  the  lowest  instinct  can  be;  but,  owing  to 
man’s  memory,  power  of  reflection,  and  power 
of  inference,  they  come  each  one  to  be  felt  by 
him,  after  he  has  once  yielded  to  them  and  ex¬ 
perienced  their  results  in  connection  with  a 
foresight  of  those  results.”  On  the  same  grounds, 
James  argues  that  “ every  instinctive  act ,  in  an  ani¬ 
mal  with  memory ,  must  cease  to  be  ‘ blind ’  after 
being  once  repeated ,  and  must  be  accompanied 


with  foresight  of  its  ‘end’  just  so  far  as  that  end 
may  have  fallen  under  the  animal’s  cognizance.” 

If  instinct,  in  animals  or  men,  were  sufficient 
for  solving  the  problems  of  survival,  there 
would  be  no  need  for  what  James  calls  “sagac¬ 
ity”  on  the  part  of  animals,  or  of  learning  from 
experience.  Like  Montaigne,  James  assembles 
anecdotes  to  show  that  animals  exercise  their 
wits  and  learn  from  experience.  “No  matter 
how  well  endowed  an  animal  may  originally  be 
in  the  way  of  instincts,”  James  declares,  “his 
resultant  actions  will  be  much  modified  if  the 
instincts  combine  with  experience,  if  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  impulses  he  have  memories,  associations, 
inferences,  and  expectations,  on  any  consider¬ 
able  scale.” 

In  his  consideration  of  “the  intellectual  con¬ 
trast  between  brute  and  man,”  James  places 
“the  most  elementary  single  difference  between 
the  human  mind  and  that  of  brutes”  in  the 
“deficiency  on  the  brute’s  part  to  associate 
ideas  by  similarity,”  so  that  “characters,  the 
abstraction  of  which  depends  on  this  sort  of 
association,  must  in  the  brute  always  remain 
drowned.”  Darwin  similarly  makes  the  differ¬ 
ence  in  degree  between  human  and  animal  in¬ 
telligence  a  matter  of  greater  or  less  power  to 
associate  ideas.  In  consequence,  human  in¬ 
stincts  are  much  more  modified  by  learning 
and  experience  than  the  instincts  of  other  ani¬ 
mals,  as  in  turn  the  higher  animals  show  much 
greater  variability  in  their  instinctive  behavior 
than  do  lower  organisms. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  deny  that  men  alone 
have  reason  in  order  to  affirm  that,  in  addition 
to  instinct,  animals  have  intelligence  in  some 
proportion  to  the  development  of  their  sensi¬ 
tive  powers,  especially  their  memory  and  im¬ 
agination.  The  position  of  Aristotle  and  Aqui¬ 
nas  seems  to  involve  both  points.  But  if  we  at¬ 
tribute  the  extraordinary  performances  of  ani¬ 
mals  to  their  intelligence  alone,  rather  than 
primarily  to  instinct,  then  we  are  led  to  con¬ 
clude  with  Montaigne  that  they  possess  not 
merely  a  sensitive  intelligence,  but  a  reasoning 
intellect. 

“Why  does  the  spider  make  her  web  tighter 
in  one  place  and  slacker  in  another?”  Mon¬ 
taigne  asks.  “Why  now  one  sort  of  knot  and 
then  another,  if  she  has  not  deliberation, 
thought,  and  conclusion?”  And  in  another 


26 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


place  he  asks,  “What  is  there  in  our  intelli¬ 
gence  that  we  do  not  see  in  the  operations  of 
animals?  Is  there  a  polity  better  ordered,  the 
offices  better  distributed,  and  more  inviolably 
observed  and  maintained  than  that  of  bees? 
Can  we  imagine  that  such  and  so  regular  a  dis¬ 
tribution  of  employments  can  be  carried  on 
without  reason  and  prudence?” 

Gregariousness  in  animals  and  the  nature  of 
animal  communities  are  considered  in  the  chap¬ 
ter  on  State,  in  connection  with  the  formation 
of  human  society.  But  so  far  as  human  society 
itself  is  concerned,  the  domestication  of  ani¬ 
mals  signifies  an  advance  from  primitive  to 
civilized  life  and  an  increase  in  the  wealth  and 
power  of  the  tribe  or  city. 

Aeschylus  includes  the  taming  of  animals 
among  the  gifts  of  Prometheus,  who  “first 
brought  under  the  yoke  beasts  of  burden,  who 
by  draft  and  carrying  relieved  men  of  their 
hardest  labors  .  .  .  yoked  the  proud  horse  to 
the  chariot,  teaching  him  obedience  to  the 
reins,  to  be  the  adornment  of  wealth  and  lux¬ 
ury.”  The  Iliad  pays  eloquent  testimony  to  the 
change  in  the  quality  of  human  life  which  ac¬ 
companied  the  training  of  animals  to  respond 
to  human  command.  Homer's  reference  to 
Castor  as  “breaker  of  horses”  indicates  the 
sense  of  conquest  or  mastery  which  men  felt 
when  they  subdued  wild  beasts;  and  the  oft- 
repeated  Homeric  epithet  “horse- taming,” 
which  is  intended  as  a  term  of  praise  for  both 
the  Argives  and  the  Trojans,  implies  the  rise  of 
a  people  from  barbarous  or  primitive  condi¬ 
tions — their  emancipation  from  the  discom¬ 
forts  and  limitations  of  animal  life. 

Aristotle  points  out  that  one  mark  of  wealthy 
men  is  “the  number  of  horses  which  they  keep, 
for  they  cannot  afford  to  keep  them  unless  they 
are  rich.”  For  the  same  reason,  he  explains, 
“in  old  times  the  cities  whose  strength  lay  in 
their  cavalry  were  oligarchies.” 

Legend  and  history  are  full  of  stories  of  the 
loyalty  and  devotion  of  animals  to  their  human 
masters,  and  of  the  reciprocal  care  and  affection 
which  men  have  given  them.  But,  motivated  as 
it  is  by  their  utility  for  economic  or  military 
purposes,  the  breaking  of  animals  to  human  will 
also  frequently  involves  a  violent  or  wanton 
misuse. 


The  use,  or  even  the  exploitation,  of  animals 
by  man  seems  to  be  justified  by  the  inferiority 
of  the  brute  to  the  rational  nature.  As  plants 
exist  for  the  sake  of  animals,  so  animals,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Aristotle,  “exist  for  the  sake  of  man,  the 
tame  for  use  and  food,  the  wild,  if  not  all,  at 
least  the  greater  part  of  them,  for  food,  and  for 
the  provision  of  clothing  and  various  instru¬ 
ments.”  Aristotle’s  conception  of  the  natural 
slave,  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Slavery, 
uses  the  domesticated  animal  as  a  kind  of 
model  for  the  treatment  of  human  beings  as 
tools  or  instruments. 

Though  he  does  not  share  Aristotle's  view 
that  some  men  are  by  nature  slaves,  Spinoza 
takes  a  comparable  position  with  regard  to 
man’s  domination  and  use  of  animals.  “The 
law  against  killing  animals,”  he  writes,  “is 
based  upon  an  empty  superstition  and  woman¬ 
ish  tenderness,  rather  than  upon  sound  reason. 
A  proper  regard,  indeed,  to  one’s  own  profit 
teaches  us  to  unite  in  friendship  with  men,  and 
not  with  brutes,  nor  with  things  whose  nature 
is  different  from  human  nature  ...  I  by  no 
means  deny,”  he  continues,  “that  brutes  feel, 
but  I  do  deny  that  on  this  account  it  is  unlaw¬ 
ful  for  us  to  consult  our  own  profit  by  using 
them  for  our  pleasure  and  treating  them  as  is 
most  convenient  to  us,  inasmuch  as  they  do  not 
agree  in  nature  with  us.” 

But  other  moralists  declare  that  men  can  be¬ 
friend  animals,  and  insist  that  charity,  if  not 
justice,  should  control  man’s  treatment  of 
beasts.  Nor  is  such  contrary  teaching  confined 
to  Christianity,  or  to  the  maxims  of  St.  Francis, 
who  would  persuade  men  to  love  not  only  their 
neighbors  as  themselves,  but  all  of  God’s  crea¬ 
tures.  Plutarch,  for  instance,  argues  that  al¬ 
though  “law  and  justice  we  cannot,  in  the  na¬ 
ture  of  things,  employ  on  others  than  men,” 
nevertheless,  “we  may  extend  our  goodness  and 
charity  even  to  irrational  creatures.”  In  kind¬ 
ness  to  dumb  animals  he  finds  the  mark  of  the 
“gentle  nature” — the  sign  of  a  man’s  humane¬ 
ness.  “Towards  human  beings  as  they  have 
reason,  behave  in  a  social  spirit,”  says  Marcus 
Aurelius;  but  he  also  writes:  “As  to  animals 
which  have  no  reason,  and  generally  all  things 
and  objects,  do  thou,  since  thou  hast  reason  and 
they  have  none,  make  use  of  them  with  a  gen¬ 
erous  and  liberal  spirit.” 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


27 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  General  theories  about  the  animal  nature  29 

1  ci.  Characteristics  of  animal  life:  the  animal  soul 

(1)  Animal  sensitivity:  its  degrees  and  differentiations  30 

(2)  Animal  memory,  imagination,  and  intelligence 

(3)  Animal  appetite:  desire  and  emotion  in  animals 

(4)  Locomotion:  degrees  of  animal  motility  31 

(5)  Sleeping  and  waking  in  animals 

1  b.  The  distinction  between  plants  and  animals  in  faculty  and  function :  cases  difficult 
to  classify 

ic.  The  distinction  between  animal  and  human  nature  32 

(1)  Comparison  of  brutes  and  men  as  animals  33 

(2)  Comparison  of  animal  with  human  intelligence  34 

id.  The  habits  or  instincts  of  animals:  types  of  animal  habit  or  instinct;  the  habits 

or  instincts  of  different  classes  of  animals 

le.  The  conception  of  the  animal  as  a  machine  or  automaton  33 

2.  The  classification  of  animals 

2 a.  General  schemes  of  classification:  their  principles  and  major  divisions 

2 b.  Analogies  of  structure  and  function  among  different  classes  of  animals 

2 c.  Continuity  and  discontinuity  in  the  scale  of  animal  life:  gradation  from  lower 

to  higher  forms  36 

3.  The  anatomy  of  animals 

3 a.  Physical  elements  of  the  animal  body:  kinds  of  tissue 
3 b.  The  skeletal  structure 

3c.  The  visceral  organs  37 

3 d.  The  utility  or  adaptation  of  bodily  structures 

4.  Animal  movement 

4 a.  Comparison  of  animal  movement  with  other  kinds  of  local  motion 

4 b.  The  cause  of  animal  movement:  voluntary  and  involuntary  movements 

4 c.  The  organs,  mechanisms,  and  characteristics  of  locomotion  38 

5.  Local  motion  within  the  animal  body 

5 a.  The  ducts,  channels,  and  conduits  involved  in  interior  bodily  motions 
5 b.  The  circulatory  system:  the  motions  of  the  heart,  blood,  and  lymph  39 

5 c.  The  glandular  system:  the  glands  of  internal  and  external  secretion 
5 d.  The  respiratory  system:  breathing,  lungs,  gills 

5^.  The  alimentary  system:  the  motions  of  the  digestive  organs  in  the  nutritive  process 


28 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


5 f.  The  excretory  system:  the  motions  of  elimination 

5  g.  The  brain  and  nervous  system:  the  excitation  and  conduction  of  nervous  impulses 

6.  Animal  nutrition 

6a.  The  nature  of  the  nutriment 

6b.  The  process  of  nutrition:  ingestion,  digestion,  assimilation 

7.  Animal  growth  or  augmentation:  its  nature,  causes,  and  limits 

8.  The  generation  of  animals 

8*7.  The  origin  of  animals:  creation  or  evolution 

8b.  Diverse  theories  of  animal  generation:  procreation  and  spontaneous  generation 
8c.  Modes  of  animal  reproduction:  sexual  and  asexual 

(1)  Sexual  differentiation:  its  origins  and  determinations;  primary  and  secondary 

characteristics 

(2)  The  reproductive  organs:  their  differences  in  different  classes  of  animals 

(3)  The  reproductive  cells  and  secretions:  semen  and  catamenia,  sperm  and  egg 

(4)  The  mating  of  animals:  pairing  and  copulation 

(5)  Factors  affecting  fertility  and  sterility 

8d.  Comparison  of  human  with  animal  reproduction 

9.  The  development  of  the  embryo:  birth  and  infancy 

9 a.  Oviparous  and  viviparous  development 

9 b.  The  nourishment  of  the  embryo  or  foetus 

9 c.  The  process  of  embryogeny:  the  stages  of  foetal  growth 

9 d.  Multiple  pregnancy:  superfoetation 

gc.  The  period  of  gestation:  parturition,  delivery,  birth 

9 f.  The  care  and  feeding  of  infant  offspring:  lactation 

9 g.  Characteristics  of  the  offspring  at  birth 

10.  Heredity  and  environment:  the  genetic  determination  of  individual  differences  and 

similarities 

11.  The  habitat  of  animals 

11  a.  The  geographical  distribution  of  animals:  their  natural  habitats 
11b.  The  relation  between  animals  and  their  environments 

12.  The  treatment  of  animals  by  men 

12 a.  The  taming  of  animals 

12 b.  The  use  and  abuse  of  animals 

12 c.  Friendship  or  love  between  animals  and  men 

13.  The  attribution  of  human  qualities  or  virtues  to  animals:  personification  in  allegory 

and  satire 


PAGE 

39 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


29 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology,  116a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  I2d. 

Bible  References  :  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —  (D)  II  Esdras,  7:4 6. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  General  theories  about  the  animal  nature 

la.  Characteristics  of  animal  life:  the  animal 
soul 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  93c-d  /  Phaedo ,  233b-c  / 
Republic ,  bk  x,  440b-c/  Timaeus,  476d-477a,c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  8  [ioi7bio- 
17]  538b  /  Soul  631a-668d  esp  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[4i3a2o-b4]  643  b-c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  1 
[487aio~488b29]  7d-9d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  114b, d- 
115b  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [641^3— bio] 
164b-c;  ch  5  [645bi4-646a5]  169c-d;  bk  iii, 
ch  5  [667b2i-32]  196a  /  Motion  of  Animals , 
ch  6-1 1  235d-239d  esp  ch  10  238c-239a  / 
Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  23  [73  ia24— b8] 
271c-d;  bk  11,  ch  3  [736a24~ 737ai 9]  276d-278a; 
ch  5  [74ia6— 31]  282a-b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  i  167a-b; 
ch  12  172d-173c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [94-416] 
31b-35c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  16,  262d; 
bk  ix,  sect  9  292b-d 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  855a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  ii  5b-c  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  23  153d-154b 


18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  11  74a-b  f 
City  of  God,  bk  vii,  ch  23,  256b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i8, 
a  1  104c-105c;  q  72,  a  1,  rep  i  368b-369d; 
q  75,  a  3  380c-381b;  a  6,  rep  i  383c-384c; 
q  78,  a  1  407b-409a;  q  118,  a  i  600a-601c; 
part  1— 11,  q  17,  a  2,  rep  2  687d-688b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  79,  a  i,  ans  951b-953b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxv 
[34-78]  91d-92a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
138a-b;  192d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  302d-303a  /  On 
Animal  Generation,  369d-370b;  372b;  384d- 
390b  passim;  403d-404b;  418b-419d;  431b- 
434a  esp  433c-d;  456b-458a  esp  457a-d;  488d- 
496d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  48,  186a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  19d-20a  /  Discourse , 
part  v,  56a-b;  59a-60c  /  Objections  and 
Replies,  156a-d;  208c;  226a-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  12  140c;  ch  xxvn,  sect  3-5  219d-220c 
passim;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  33  278b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  4a-6b;  8a-14b  passim,  esp 
llb-12a;  47b-52a  passim 


30 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  1*(1)  to  1  a(3) 


(1.  General  theories  about  the  animal  nature,  la. 
Characteristics  of  animal  life:  the  animal 
soul.) 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  651d- 
657d  esp  651d-652c,  655b-656a  /  New  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures ,  851a-c 

l<z(l)  Animal  sensitivity:  its  degrees  and  differ¬ 
entiations 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  453b-454a 

8  Aristotle:  Souly  bk  ii,  ch  2  [4i3bi— 13] 
643c-d;  [4i4ai— 3]  644a;  bk  ii,  ch  5-BK  hi, 
ch  3  647b-661b;  bk  hi,  ch  8-13  664b-668d  / 
Sense  and  the  Sensible  673a-689a,c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[489*17-20]  10b;  ch  4  [489*23-27]  10c;  ch 
9-11  13b-15a;  ch  15  [494^1 1— 18]  16d;  bk  ii, 
ch  10  25b-c;  ch  12  [504*19-29]  26c-d;  ch  13 
[505*33-39]  27d-28a;  bk  iv,  ch  6  [531*27^4] 
58b;  ch  7  [532*5-10]  58d-59a;  ch  8  59d-62a; 
bk  v,  ch  16  [548bio— 15]  75b-c;  bk  viii,  ch  i 
[588bi7— 31]  115a-b;  bk  ix,  ch  34  [620*1-5] 
145c  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [647*i-bio] 
171a-d;  ch  8  [653b22-29]  179b;  ch  10-17  181d- 
188a, c  esp  ch  10  [656*14]-^  12  [657*25]  182b- 
183d,  ch  16-17  185d-188a,c;  bk  iii,  ch  4 
[666*34-bi]  194b;  [667*10-15]  195b;  bk  iv,  ch 
5  [68 ibi 4-682*9]  212b-d;  ch  i  i  [690^7-691*28] 
222d-223c  /  Gait  of  Animals ,  ch  4  [705^-13] 
244b  /  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  23 
[73i*24-b8]  271c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [732*12-14] 
272c;  ch  3  [736*25^14]  276d-277b;  ch  5 
[741*6-30]  282a-b;  ch  6  [743^5— 744bi  1]  285a- 
d;  bk  v,  ch  1  [778b2o]-cH  2  [78ib3o]  321a-324a 
/  Ethics ,  bk  1,  ch  7  [1097^3-1098*2]  343b; 
bk  hi,  ch  10  [m8*i7-b8]  364d-365a;  bk  vi, 
ch  2  [1139*17-21]  387d;  bk  ix,  ch  9  [1170*13- 
19]  423d-424a;  bk  x,  ch  4  [ii74b  15-1175*2] 
429a-b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  i  167a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [398-477] 
20a-21a;  bk  hi  [231-287]  33a-d;  [323-416] 
34b-35c;  bk  iv  [216-268]  47a-d;  [524-548] 
51a-b;  [615-721]  52b-53d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  16,  262d 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  855a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  11  74a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  75,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2 
380c-381b;  q  78,  aa  3-4  410a-413d;  q  91,  a  3, 
rep  1,3  486b-487d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  49a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  286a-287b;  290c-291b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  369d-370b; 
433c-435a;  456b-458a  esp  457a-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  27, 
157b-d;  aph  40,  173c-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  59a-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understandings  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  11-15  140b-141a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiv,  103a-c 


38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  337c-d 

48  Melville:  Moby  Did {y  244a-245b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  261c-262a;  301c- 
302a;  397d-398a;  402b-c;  406c;  432c-434c 
passim;  447b-d;  474a-b;  480a-482b  passim; 
529a-b;  553d-554a;  568d-569b;  595b-596a 
esp  595d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  8a;  9b-13a  passim,  esp  13a; 
27a-42b  passim 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principles  647a- 
648a 

la{2)  Animal  memory,  imagination,  and  in¬ 
telligence 

4  Homer:  Odyssey ,  bk  xvii  [290-327]  280a-c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  112b-c 

7  Plato:  Republics  bk  ii,  319c-320b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysicsy  bk  i,  ch  i  [980*28- 
b27]  499a-b  /  Souly  bk  iii,  ch  3  [427b  14-429*9] 
660a-661b;  ch  10  [433a8— 12]  665d;  ch  10 
[433b27]-cH  11  [434*9]  666c-d  /  Memory  and 
Reminiscence  690a-695d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animalsy  bk  i,  ch  i 
[488^5-27]  9d;  bk  viii,  ch  1  [588*18-31] 
114b, d;  [589*1-3]  115b;  bk  ix,  ch  i  [6o8*ii- 
32]  133b, d;  ch  7  [6i2bi8~32]  138b-c;  ch  46 
[630b  17-23]  156a  /  Ethics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3 
frl47b3— 5l  397d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [962- 
1036]  56d-57c 

18  Augustine:  Confessionsy  bk  x,  par  26,  78b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i,  q  78, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  3,5-6  411d-413d;  part  i-ii, 
q  13,  a  2,  rep  3  673c-674c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  50a-51b;  52b; 
53d;  64b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  218c-219b;  229d-230b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generations  454a 

31  Descartes:  Rulesy  xn,  19d-20a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Losty  bk  viii  [369-451] 
240a-242a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understandings  bk  ii,  ch  x, 
sect  10  143c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understandings  sect  ix,  div  83 
487c-d 

36  Swift:  Gullivery  part  iv,  163b-164b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  337d-338a;  341d-342a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  291d-294c;  296c- 
297b;  400a-c;  412d;  447b-c;  480a-481b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  3b-6b  esp  5b;  13a-14a; 
49a-50a;  51a-52a;  679a-683a;  704a-706b 

1^(3)  Animal  appetite:  desire  and  emotion  in 
animals 

4  Homer:  Iliady  bk  xvii  [426-455]  126c-d  / 
Odysseys  «k  xvii  [290-327]  280a-c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iv,  146c-d 

7  Plato:  Symposiums  165c-166b  /  Republics  bk 
ii,  319c-320b  /  LawSs  bk  vi,  712b 

8  Aristotle:  Souly  bk  iii,  ch  9-1  i  664d-667a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animalsy  bk  vi,  ch  18 
97b-99c;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [588^4-589*10]  115b; 


1^(4)  to  1  b  Chapter  2: 

bk  ix,  cn  4  [611*9-14]  136d;  ch  37  [62ib28- 
622*10]  147c  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  cii  4 
[650^0-651*15]  175c-176a;  bk  iii,  ch  4 
[667*10-22]  195b;  bk  iv,  ch  5  [679*5-32] 
209a-c;  ch  ii  [692*22-27]  224b-c  /  Motion  of 
Animals ,  ch  6—1 1  235d-239d  /  Ethics ,  bk  iii, 
ch  8  [ni6b23-in7*9]  363a-c;  ch  10  [1118*17- 
b8]  364d-365a;  bk  vii,  ch  6  [ii49b30~36]  400c; 
ch  12  [1153*27-35]  404c-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  iii,  ch  6  202d- 
203a;  ch  8,  206b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [136-160] 
31d  32a;  [288-322]  33d-34b;  [741-753]  39c-d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  xi  [745-760]  348b;  bk  xii 
[5-1 1  ]  354a 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  23,  154b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  6,  a  i, 
rep  2  28b-d;  qq  80-81  427a-431d;  part  i-ii, 
q  6,  a  2  646a-c;  q  ii,  a  2  667b-d;  q  12,  a  5 
672a-c;  q  13,  a  2  673c-674c;  q  15,  a  2  682a-c; 
q  16,  a  2  684d-685b;  q  17,  a  2  687d-688b; 
q  40,  a  3  794c-795a;  q  46,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2 
815b-d 

22  Chaucer:  Manciple's  Tale  [17,104-135]  490a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61a-d;  64a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  224c-225b 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear ,  act  iv,  sc  vi  [109- 
125]  274c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  346a-347d; 
349a-350a;  391a-c;  402a-d;  405c-406a;  476c- 
477a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  57,  schol  415b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  343d-345a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  215d-216a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  289b-291a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  289a-291a;  303c; 
305c-309d;  371c-372c;  447b-c;  480a-481b; 
543d-545d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xiii,  575b;  bk 
xiv,  605d-606a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  14a-b;  49b-51a;  700b-711a 
passim,  esp  702a-703a;  717b;  723b-725a;  729b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  607d-609b  esp 
609b  /  Inhibitions ,  Symptoms ,  and  Anxiety , 
721a;  737c-d 

1^(4)  Locomotion:  degrees  of  animal  motility 

8  Aristotle:  Soul ,  bk  iii,  ch  9-1  i  664d-667a; 
ch  12  [434a30-b9]  667b-c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[487^-34]  8b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [497bi8-498bio] 
20a-d;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [523^0-524*24]  48d-49d; 
ch  4  [528*30^11]  55b;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [588bn- 
24]  115a;  bk  ix,  ch  37  [62^2-13]  147a-b;  ch 
48  [631*20-30]  156c-d  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk 
iv,  ch  6-9  213b-217b  passim;  ch  10  [686*25- 
b35]  217d-218c;  ch  12  [693*25]-^  13  [696*34] 
225b-228a  /  Motion  of  Animals ,  ch  1-2  233a- 
234a;  ch  8  [702*22]-^  10  [703bi]  237c-239a  / 
Gait  of  Animals  243a-252a,c  /  Generation  of 
Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [732*12-24]  272c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  ii,  ch  8,  193b-c 


ANIMAL  31 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [837-859] 
72a  b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  1,  ans  104c  105c;  a  2,  rep  i  105c-106b;  a  3, 
ans  106b-107c;  q  78,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  4  407b- 
409a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagrucl,  bk  iii, 
192d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  19d-20a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  ii  140b-c;  sect  13  140d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  279a-280c;  371d- 
372c 

53  James:  Psychology,  10a-12b  esp  12a-b;  699a 

l<z(5)  Sleeping  and  waking  in  animals 

8  Aristotle:  Sleep  696a-701d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  19 
[521*15-17]  46a;  bk  iv,  ch  10  63c-64b;  bk  vi, 
ch  12  [566bi3~ 15]  92d;  bk  viii,  ch  14  [599*20]- 
ch  17  [6oobi5]  125b-126d  /  Parts  of  Animals, 
bk  11,  ch  7  [653*10-20]  178b-c  /  Motion  of 
Animals,  ch  ii  [703b8-i5]  239b  /  Generation 
of  Animals,  bk  v,  ch  i  [778b2o-779*28]  321a-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [907-961] 
56a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  81,  a  4,  ans  966d-967d;  q  82,  a  3,  ans  971a- 
972d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337c 

1  b.  The  distinction  between  plants  and  animals 
in  faculty  and  function:  cases  difficult  to 
classify 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  469d-470a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  10  [148*23-38] 
202b-c  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [199*20-^3] 
276c-d  /  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [292bi-n]  384a 
/  Soul,  bk  1,  ch  5  [4iobi6-4ii*2]  640d-641a; 
bk  11,  ch  2  [4i3*2o-bio]  643b-c;  ch  3  644c- 
645b;  bk  iii,  ch  12  [434*22^9]  667a-c  /  Sleep, 
ch  1  696a-697c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  6 
[53ib8— 9]  58b;  bk  v,  ch  i  [539*15-25]  65b-d; 
bk  viii,  ch  i  [588b4-589*2]  114d-115b  /  Parts 
of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [650*1-37]  174c-175a; 
ch  10  [655b27-656*8]  181d-182a;  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[677^6-678*15]  207d-208a;  ch  5  [68i*io-b9] 
211c-212b;  ch  6  [6S2b26-28]  213d;  ch  10 
[686b2  3-687*1]  218b-c  /  Gait  of  Animals,  ch  4 
[705*26-b9]  244a- b  /  Generation  of  Animals, 
bk  1,  ch  1  [7i5bi8-7i6*i]  255d-256a;  ch  23 
271b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [732*12-14]  272c;  [735*16- 
19]  275d;  ch  3  [736*25~bi4]  276d-277b;  ch  4 
[74ob25]-CH  5  [741*30]  281d-282b;  bk  iii,  ch  7 
l757bl5— 3°1  298c-d;  ch  ii  302b-304d;  bk  v, 
ch  1  [778b30-779*4]  321a-b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  i  167a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [700-710] 
23d-24a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  viii,  sect  7  286a; 
bk  ix,  sect  9,  292c 


32 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  General  theories  about  the  animal  nature,  lb. 
The  distinction  betiveen  plants  and  animals 
in  faculty  and  function :  cases  difficult  to 
classify .) 

18  Augustine  :  City  of  God ,  bk  vii,  ch  23,  256b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  1,  rep  2  104c-105c;  a  2,  rep  1  105c-106b; 
a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  69,  a  2,  rep  i  361c-362c; 
q  72,  a  1,  rep  i  368b-369d;  q  78,  a  i,  ans 
407b-409a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  278b  /  Circula¬ 
tion  of  the  Blood ,  327d-328a  /  On  Animal 
Generation ,  368a-b;  369d-370b;  372b;  397c- 
398c;  457c-d;  461b-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  11,  apii  30 
159c-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  11-15  140b-141a;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  12 
271d-272b 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  119c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  241  b-c  /  Descent  of 
Man ,  372b-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  8a 

54  Freud:  Unconscious ,  429c-d 

lc.  The  distinction  between  animal  and  human 
nature 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1:20-30  /  Psalms ,  8  esp 
8:4-8— (D)  Psalms ,  8  esp  8:5-9  /  Ecclesiastes , 
3:18-22 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [436-505]  44c- 
45a 

5  Euripides:  Trojan  Women  [669-672]  275d 

7  Plato:  Laches ,  35b-d  /  Protagoras ,  44a-45a  / 
Cratylus,  93a-b  /  Timaeus ,  452d-453a  /  Laws, 
bk  11,  653b-c;  bk  vii,  723c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  v,  ch  3  [132*17-22] 
183a  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [292bi-n]  384a  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [98oa28-b27]  499a-b  / 

bk  11,  ch  3  [4i4bi7~2o]  644d;  [415*7-12] 
645b;  bk  iii,  ch  3  [427b7~i4]  659d-660a; 
[428*20-24]  660c;  ch  10  [433a8— 13]  665d  / 
Memory  and  Reminiscence,  ch  2  [453*5-14] 
695b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[488b20-27]  9d;  bk  iv,  ch  9  [536*34-b8]  63a-b; 
bk  viii,  ch  1  [588^18—^4]  114b, d  /  PtfrA?  o/* 
Animals ,  bk  1,  ch  i  [64 1^5— 10]  164b-c;  bk  ii, 
ch  10  [656*4-14]  182a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  10  [673*4- 
10]  201d-202a;  bk  iv,  ch  10  [686a25— 687^*5] 
217d-219a  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  v,  ch  7 
[786bi5-22]  328c-d  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  7 
[i097b33“i°98a4]  343b;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [1 1 1  ib6— 9] 
357b;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [ii39ai7-2o]  387d;  ch  13 
[ii44bi-io]  394b;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [i i45ai5— 26] 
395a;  ch  5  399a-d;  ch  6  [1 149^4-1  i5oa8] 
400b-c;  bk  x,  ch  8  [ii78b23~32]  433c  /  Poli¬ 
tics, ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1253*7-18]  446b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  9 
[1280^1-34]  477d-478a;  bk  vii,  ch  13 
{i332a39-b5J  537a-b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[I355bl~3]  594d  /  Poetics,  ch  4  [i448b4~8]  682c 


\c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  3  108b-c; 
ch  6,  lila  c;  ch  9,  114c-115a;  cii  16  121d- 
122d;  ch  28,  134a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  8,  146a-c; 
bk  iii,  ch  7,  183d;  bk  iv,  ch  5,  228c-d;  ch  7, 
233a-b;  ch  ii,  240d-241a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  16  262d- 
263a, c;  bk  v,  sect  16  271c-d;  bk  vi,  sect  24 
276b;  bk  ix,  sect  9  292b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  11  74a-b; 
bk  xiii,  par  35-37  120b-121a  esp  par  37,  121a 
/  City  of  God,  bk  vii,  ch  23,  256b-c;  bk  xi, 
ch  27-28  337b-338d;  bk  xxix,  ch  24,  610c-d 
/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  8  626c-627a; 
ch  22,  629b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  i, 
rep  2  14b-15b;  a  4,  rep  i  16d-17c;  q  18,  a  2, 
rep  1  105c-106b;  a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  19, 
a  10,  ans  117d-118b;  q  30,  a  2,  rep  3  168a- 
169b;  q  59,  a  3,  ans  308b-309a;  q  72,  a  i, 
rep  1,3  368b-369d;  q  75,  aa  2-3  379c-381b; 
a  6,  rep  1  383c-384c;  q  76,  a  5,  rep  4  394c- 
396a;  q  78,  a  i,  ans  407b-409a;  a  4,  ans 
411d-413d;  q  79,  a  8,  rep  3  421c-422b;  q  81, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  430c-431d;  q  83,  a  1,  ans 
436d-438a;  q  91,  a  3,  rep  1-3  486b-487d; 
q  92,  a  1,  ans  488d-489d;  q  96,  a  i  510b-511b; 
q  1 15,  a  4,  ans  589d-590c;  q  118,  aa  1-2 
600a-603b;  part  i-ii,  q  i,  a  1,  ans  609b-610b; 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  1,3  610b-611b;  q  2,  a  5, 
contrary  618d-619c;  q  6,  a  2  646a-c;  q  10, 
a  3,  ans  664d-665c;  Q  11,  a  2  667b-d;  q  12, 
a  5  672a-c;  q  13,  a  2  673c-674c;  q  15,  a  2 
682a-c;  q  16,  a  2  684d-685b;  q  17,  a  2  687d- 
688b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3,  rep  2  8b-9a;  q  no,  a  4,  rep  3  350d-351d; 
part  iii,  q  2,  a  2,  rep  2  711d-712d;  q  7,  a  9, 
ans  751d-752c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  79,  a  i, 
ans  951b-953b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxvi  [112-120] 
39b;  purgatory,  xxv  [34-78]  91d-92a;  para¬ 
dise,  v  [19-24]  112b;  vii  [121-148]  116b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [1303-1333]  181b- 
182a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  52b;  53a-b;  54a; 
59b-c;  63a;  79b-c;  part  ii,  lOOa-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  207a-c;  215a-232c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iv,  sc  iv  [32-39] 
59a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19d-20a  /  Discourse, 
part  1,  41d;  part  v,  56a-b;  59a-60b  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies,  156a-d;  226a-d;  276c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  57,  schol 
415b;  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  r,  435a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  vii  [449-549]  227a- 
229a;  bk  viii  [369-451]  240a-242a;  bk  ix 
[549-566]  259b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  140  199a-b;  339-344  233a-b; 
418  243a  /  Vacuum ,  357a-358a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  intro,  sect  i 
93a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  xi,  sect  4-1  i  144d-146a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  sect  io-ii  145d-146a;  ch  xxvii,  sect 


lc(  1)  Chapter  2:  ANIMAL  33 


8  221a-222a;  sect  12  223a  b;  bk  iii,  ch  i, 
sect  1-3  251b,d-252a;  ch  vi,  sect  12  271d- 
272b;  sect  22  273d-274a;  sect  26-27  274d- 
276a;  sect  29  276b-d;  sect  33  278b-c;  ch  xi, 
sect  20  304c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  xvi,  sect  12, 
370c-371a;  ch  xvii,  sect  i  37lc-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
11  407b-408a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ix  487b- 
488c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  I^aws,  bk  i,  Id  2a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  334d-335a;  337d-338d; 
341d;  357c-d  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  393 b  e 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  6d-8b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  164a-c;  199c-200c  /  Prac¬ 
tical  Reason ,  316c-317a  /  Pref  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics ,  372a-b  /  Intro.  Meta  physic 
of  Morals ,  385c-386d  /  Judgemefit ,  479a-c; 
584d-585c;  587a-588a;  602b, d  [fn  1] 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  448a-449c  passim; 

469 b-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  47 
24a-b;  part  ii,  par  132  46b-47a;  par  139  48d- 
49b;  part  iii,  par  190  66a-b;  par  21 1,  70a-b; 
additions,  4-5,  116a-d;  8  117c-d;  10  117d- 
118a;  28  121b;  62  126a;  118  136a-b;  121  136c-d 
/  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156c;  168d; 
178a-b;  186a;  part  i,  257d-258a;  part  iii, 
304d-305a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  255a-b;  278a-c; 
287a-c;  294c-305c  esp  294c-295a,  297a-298a, 
304a;  311d-312c;  319b-d;  349d;  591d-593c 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  85b-c;  86b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  689c- 
690a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi,  167c 

53  James:  Psychology,  85a-b;  677a;  678b-686b 
esp  678b,  683b-684a,  686a-b;  691a-b;  704a- 
706b  esp  704a-b;  721a;  873a 

54  Freud:  Sexual  Enlightenment  of  Children ,  122c 
/  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  385b-c  /  General 
Introduction,  616b-c 

lc(l)  Comparison  of  brutes  and  men  as  ani¬ 
mals 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  iii  [1-35]  19a-b;  bk  v  [133— 
143]  31c;  [159-165]  31d;  bk  vi  [503-516] 
45b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  ii,  cii  9  [421*6-26]  652c- 
d;  [42ib8— 33]  653a-b  /  Sense  and  the  Sensible, 
ch  1  [436bi7— 437*17]  673d-674a;  ch  4  [440^ 5- 
44ia3)  678b-c;  ch  5  [443bl7-445“3i]  681c- 
683b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals  7a-158d  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  bk  1,  ch  1  [488*5-10]  8d-9a,  bk  i,  ch  6 
[49iai4]-BK  iii,  ch  22  [523*27]  12d-48a,c,  bk 
vii  106b,d-114a,c,  bk  ix,  ch  i  [6o8aio-bi9] 
133b,d-134a  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  7 
[653^29— b5]  178d;  ch  9  [655b3-i6]  181c;  ch  10 
[656*3-14]  182a-b;  ch  14  184d-185c;  ch  16 
[659b28]-cH  17  [66ob3]  186d-187c;  bk  iii,  ch  i 
[66ib5~ 15]  188b, d;  [662bi7~23]  190a;  ch  6 


[669b4-8J  197d-198a;  bk  iv,  ch  io  [686*25- 
690bio]  217d  222c  /  Gait  of  Animals  243a- 
252a, c  esp  cii  4  [705^0-706*25]  244c-245a, 
ch  5  [7o6b7 -16]  245b,  ch  n-12  248d  249d  / 
Generation  of  Animals  255a-331a,c  esp  bk  ii, 
ch  4  278b-282a,  ch  6  [744*15-31]  285b  c  / 
Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  10  [iu8Bi8  -b7]  364d  365a; 
ch  1 1  [1 1 19*5-11] 365c;  bk  viii,  ch  12  [1162*16- 
25]  414c  /  Politics,  bk  i,  cii  2  [1253*29-39]  446d 

10  Hippocrates:  Articulations ,  par  8  93c-94b; 
par  13  96b-c;  par  46,  106a  /  Instruments  of 
Reduction,  par  1,  122b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251  293] 
18b-d;  bk  iii  [288-322]  33d-34b;  bk  iv  [962- 
1036]  56d-57c;  [1192-1208]  59d-60a;  f  1 251— 
1267]  60c-d;  bk  v  [878-900]  72c-d;  [1028-1090] 
74c-75b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  75, 
a  6,  rep  1  383c-384c;  q  76,  a  5,  ans  and  rep 
3-4  394c-396a;  q  78,  a  4,  ans  411d-413d;  qq 
80-81  427a-431d;  q  91,  a  3,  rep  1-3  486b- 
487d;  q  98,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  517d-519a; 
q  99,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  519b-520a;  part  i— ii, 
q  2,  a  5,  contrary  618d-619c;  a  6,  contrary 
619d-620d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  2, 
a  2,  rep  2  711d-712d 

22  Chaucer:  Manciple's  Tale  [17,104  -144] 
490a- b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  215a-232c  passim;  286a- 
287b;  290c-291b;  424d-425c 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear,  act  iv,  sc  vi  [109- 
125] 274c 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  268d-304a,c  esp 
280c-283a  /  On  Animal  Generation,  338a-496d 
esp  449a-454a,  463d-464a,  470c-472c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  40, 
173c-d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19d-20a  /  Discourse, 
part  v,  56a-b;  59a-60b  /  Objections  and 
Replies,  156a-d;  226a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  57,  schol  415b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  78-80 
42b-43a  /  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  ix, 
sect  12-15  140c-141a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  58a- b;  part  iv,  147b- 
148b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  334b,d-337d;  338c; 
346b-d;  348d-349c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  [281-292]  8a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicf{,  284a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  255a-236d  esp 
265c-d,  273d-275c,  285c-286d;  287d-290c; 
310a-312d;  331a-336a;  590a-593a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689c- 
690a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
122d-123a 

53  James:  Psychology,  49a-50a;  702a-b;  704a- 
706b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  782a-d 
[fn  1  ];  785a-b,d  [fn  1] 


34 

(lc.  The  distinction  between  animal  and  human 
nature .) 

lc(2)  Comparison  of  animal  with  human  in¬ 
telligence 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  319c-320c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [199^0-23] 
276c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [98oa28-98iai2] 
499a-c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[488b2o-27]  9d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [588ai8-b4] 
114b, d;  bk  ix,  ch  i  [6o8aio-bi9]  133b,d-134a; 
ch  7  [6i2bi8~32]  138b-c  /  Parts  of  Animals , 
bk  1,  ch  1  [64 1^5— 10]  164 b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  10 
[686b22-687a23]  218b-d  /  Generation  of  Ani¬ 
mals ,  bk  1,  ch  23  [73ia24-b8]  271c-d;  bk  ii, 
ch  6  [744*27-31]  285c  /  Ethics ,  bk  vi,  ch  7 
[1141*20-35]  390a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [1  i47b3— 5] 
397d  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i254b2o-25]  448b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  12  172d- 
173c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ix,  sect  9  292b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  59, 
a  3,  ans  308b-309a;  q  76,  a  5,  rep  4  394c- 
396a;  q  79,  a  8,  rep  3  421c-422b;  q  83,  a  i, 
ans  436d-438a;  q  96,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  4 
510b-511b;  part  i— ii,  q  12,  a  5  672a-c;  q  17, 
a  2  687d-688b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  79,  a  1,  ans  95lb-953b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  52b;  53a-b;  53d- 
54a;  59b-c;  63a;  64b-c;  79b-c;  part  ii,  lOOa-c; 
part  iv,  267b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  215a-224a;  231d-232c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  428a-b;  454a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  73  117d- 
118a;  bk  11,  aph  35,  163d-164a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19d-20a  /  Discourse , 
part  v,  59d-60b  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
156a-d;  226a-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [369-451]  240a- 
242a;  bk  ix  [549-566]  259b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  339-344  233a-b  /  Vacuum , 
357a-358a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  12-15  140c-141a;  ch  x,  sect  10  143c-d; 
ch  xi,  sect  4-1 1  144d-146a  passim;  ch  xxvii, 
sect  8  221a-222a;  sect  12  223a-b;  bk  iii, 
ch  vi,  sect  12  271d-272b;  bk  iv,  ch  xvi, 
sect  12,  370c-371a;  ch  xvii,  sect  i  371c-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
ii  407b-408a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ix  487b- 
488c;  sect  xii,  div  118,  504c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv  135a-184a  esp  151b- 
152a,  159b-160a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  337d-338a;  341d-342a 
/  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  393b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  6d-8b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  199c-200c;  235c-d  /  Prtf 
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  372a-b  / 
Judgement,  479a-c;  584d-585c;  602 b,d  [fn  1] 


M2)  to  Id 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  469c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  25 
121a;  121  136c-d 

48  Melville:  Moby  Did [,  134b-135a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  287a-303d  esp  291c- 
297b;  319b-d;  591d-592a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689c- 
690a 

53  James:  Psychology,  5a-6b;  13a-15a  passim; 
49a-50a;  85a-b;  665a-666b;  677a;  678b-686b; 
704a-706b;  873a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  385b-c 

Id.  The  habits  or  instincts  of  animals:  types  of 
animal  habit  or  instinct;  the  habits  or  in¬ 
stincts  of  different  classes  of  animals 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  62c-64c  passim; 
67b-c;  bk  iii,  llld-112c;  bk  vii,  236c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  320b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [199*20-30] 
276c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[487aio-488b29]  7d-9d;  bk  iv,  ch  9  62a-63c; 
bk  v-vi  65a-106d  esp  bk  v,  ch  8  [542ai8-b2] 
68d-69a;  bk  viii-ix  114b,d-158d  esp  bk  viii, 
ch  1  [5 8 8b23— 5 8 9a9]  115b,  ch  12  [596b2o-28] 
122d  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [65obi9- 
65  ia5]  175c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  5  [679a5~32]  209a-c  / 
Generation  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  2  [753s8— 17] 
294a-b  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i254b23~24]  448b; 
ch  8  [1256*18-30]  450a;  bk  vii,  ch  13  [i332b3- 
4]  537b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12, 
173a-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [333-370] 
19b-d;  [661-668]  23b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  10,  ans  117d-118b;  q  59,  a  3,  ans  308b-309a; 
q  78,  a  4,  ans  411d-413d;  q  81,  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  2  430c-431d;  q  83,  a  i,  ans  436d-438a; 
q  96,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2,4  510b-511b;  q  115, 
a  4,  ans  589d-590c;  part  i-ii,  q  12,  a  5,  ans 
and  rep  3  672a-c;  q  13,  a  2  esp  rep  3  673c- 
674c;  q  15,  a  2,  ans  682a-c;  q  16,  a  2,  rep  2 
684d-685b;  q  17,  a  2,  rep  3  687d-688b;  q  40, 
a  3  794c-795a;  q  41,  a  i,  rep  3  798b-d;  q  46, 
a  4,  rep  2  8l5b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3,  rep  2  8b-9a 

22  Chaucer:  Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [15,282-287] 
457b  /  Manciple's  Tale  [17,104-144]  490a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  lOOa-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv, 
247d-248b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  184a-b;  216b-219a 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  ii  [187-204] 
535d-536a 

27  Shakespeare:  Timon  of  Athens ,  act  iv,  sc 
iii  [320-348]  414b-c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  339a-b; 
346a-347d;  349a-350a;  361c-362a;  402a-d; 
405c-406a;  428a-c;  476b-477b 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


\e  to  2b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  72c  /  No¬ 
vum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  73  117d-118a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  60b  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  156a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  prop  57,  sciiol 
415b 

33  Pascal:  PensSes ,  342-344  233  b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div  38, 
466b;  div  45  469c;  sect  ix,  div  85  488c; 
sect  xii,  div  1 18,  504c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  162a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  334d-335a;  337d-338a; 
343d-344a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
256d-257a  /  Practical  Reason ,  316c-317a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  469c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  221b-d 

48  Melville:  Moby  DicJ{ ,  144a-b;  146b-147a; 
283b-284a;  289b-292a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  66a-69c  passim; 
82d-85c;  108d-lllb;  119a-135a,c  esp  119a- 
122d,  134d-135a,c  /  Descent  of  Man,  287d- 
289a;  304b-310d  esp  308a-310a;  312c-d; 
369b-371b;  456b-457c;  463a-464b;  470d-475c 
passim,  esp  475c;  504d-507a  passim,  esp  506c; 
583a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  499c-500c 

53  James:  Psychology,  49b-50a;  68a-73b;  700a- 
711a;  724a-b;  730a-b;  890b-891b  [fn  3] 

54  Freud:  Narcissism ,  401a-c  /  Instincts,  412b- 
41 5 d  /  General  Introduction,  615b-616c  /  Be¬ 
yond  the  Pleasure  Principle, 650c-662b  esp  65ld- 
654a  /  Group  Psychology,  684d-686c  esp  684d- 
685b  /  Ego  and  Id,  711c-712a  /  New  Introduc¬ 
tory  Lectures,  846a-851d  esp  846b-d,  849c- 
850a,  851a 

le.  The  conception  of  the  animal  as  a  machine 
or  automaton 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[640b5~i8]  163a-b  /  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  7 
[70ibi— 13]  236d-237a  /  Generation  of  Animals, 
bk  11,  ch  i  [734b3~2o]  275a-b;  ch  5  [74ib5~io] 
282c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  ii,  ch  3, 
185a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  intro,  47a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  56a-b;  59a- 
60c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  156a-d;  226a-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  340  233a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  x, 
sect  10  143c-d;  ch  xi,  sect  ii  145d-146a; 
ch  xxvii,  sect  5  220b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d-338a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  558b-559a;  575b-578a; 
578d-582c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  190d  [fn  2] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  449 b-c; 
epilogue  ii,  689c-690a 

53  James:  Psychology,  3b-6b  passim,  esp  5b-6b; 
lla-12a;  47b-52besp  51a-52a;  84a-94b;  700a- 
706b  esp  705a-706b 


35 

2.  The  classification  of  animals 

2a.  General  schemes  of  classification:  their 
principles  and  major  divisions 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:20-31;  2:19  20  / 
Leviticus,  11 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  13 
[96b25~97a6]  132a-b;  ch  14  133c-134a  /  Top¬ 
ics,  bk  vi,  ch  6  [i44a27-i45a2]  197d-198c 
passim  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  28  546b  c; 
bk  vii,  ch  12  [io37b28-io38a35]  561c-562a  / 
Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  3  644c-645b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[486bi5]-ch  6  [491*5]  7b-12c  esp  ch  i  [4863i 5— 
487*1]  7b-d;  bk  11,  ch  1  [497b4-i8]  19b,d-20a; 
ch  15  [505b25~32]  28b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [523*30- 
b2o]  48b, d;  bk  v,  ch  i  [539*4-15]  65b;  bk 
viii,  ch  1  [588b4]-cn  2  [590*18]  114d-116c  / 
Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  2-4  165d-168c;  cii  5 
[645b20-28]  169c-d;  bk  hi,  ch  6  [669b7^ 14] 
198a  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[7i5*i8-b25]  255b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [732*13- 
733bl7]  272c-274a;  bk  hi,  ch  ii  [76^9-24] 
302c-d  /  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i29ob25-36] 
489d-490a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3, 
a  4,  rep  1  16d-17c;  q  50,  a  4,  rep  i  273b-274b; 
qq  71--72  367a-369d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  468b- 
469b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  27, 
158b-c;  aph  30  159c-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  vi 
268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect  7  270b,  sect  36- 
37  279a-b;  ch  xi,  sect  19-20  304b-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  193a-200c  /  Judgement, 
579b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  95b-105b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  24a-b;  25d-29a 
esp  28c-29a;  30d-31d;  63d-64d;  207a-212c; 
215b-217b;  224d-225b;  228c-229a,c;  238b- 
239a;  241d-242a  /  Descent  of  Man,  331a-341d 
esp  331b-333a,  337a-338c;  342a-350b  passim, 
esp342a-b 

2b.  Analogies  of  structure  and  function  among 
different  classes  of  animals 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  14 
[98*20-23]  134a  /  Youth,  Life ,  and  Breathing 
714a-726d  passim 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals  7a-158d  esp 
bk  1,  ch  1-6  7a-13a,  bk  ii,  ch  i  19b,d-23d, 
bk  iv,  ch  8-bk  v,  ch  i  59d-66a,  bk  viii,  ch  i 
114b,d-115b  /  Parts  of  Animals  161a-229d  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  bk  i,  ch  4  167d-168c,  ch  5  [645bi- 
646*5]  169b-d  /  Gait  of  Animals  243a-252a,c  / 
Generation  of  Animals  255a-331a,c  esp  bk  ii, 
ch  1  272a-276a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  iii,  ch  2  199d- 
200a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  274b-d;  277b- 
278d;  280c-283a;  299b-302c  /  On  Animal 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


36 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2c  to  3b 


(2.  The  classification  of  animals.  2b.  Analogies 
of  structure  and  function  among  different 
classes  of  animals.) 

Generation ,  336b-d;  338a-496d  esp  449a-454a, 
463d-464a,  468b-472c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  APH27, 157b- 
158c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understandings  bk  hi,  ch  vi, 
sect  12  271d-272b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ix,  div  82 
487b-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  579 b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  273a-b;  279b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  75b-78c;  82d-94c; 
112b-113c;  212d-2l5a;  217b-219d;  225c-228c; 
238c-239a  /  Descent  of  Man,  255a-265d;  271c- 
275c;  279a-284b;  331a-335a;  338d-340c  pas¬ 
sim;  348b-c 

2c.  Continuity  and  discontinuity  in  the  scale  of 
animal  life:  gradation  from  lower  to 
higher  forms 


9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i-iv  7a- 
65a, c  esp  bk  i,  ch  1-6  7a-13a  /  Parts  of  Ani¬ 
mals,  bk  ii-iv  170a-229d 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  91, 
a  3  486b-487d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv, 
271a-272d  ^ 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  343b-345d; 
377c-380c  passim;  485a-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  52b-c  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  7  139c-140a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  56b-57a 
42  Kant:  Judgement,  579b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  243b-252a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  14c-15b  passim; 
85d-87b;  89b-90c;  217b-219d  /  Descent  of 
Man,  255c-265a  passim;  266a-c;  271c-274d; 
278c-284b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  647a- 
648a 

3  a.  Physical  elements  of  the  animal  body:  kinds 
of  tissue 


Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:20-25 

8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [4i3b4-io]  643c; 
[4i4si-3]  644a;  bk  hi,  ch  ii  [433b32-434B9] 
666d;  ch  12  [434^-30]  667c-d  /  Sense  and  the 
Sensible,  ch  i  [436bi2-437*i7]  673c-674a;  ch  5 
[443bl7"445a3]  681c-682d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  viii,  ch  i 
114b,d-115b  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  10 
[686b23~687ai]  218b-c/  Generation  of  Animals, 
bk  11,  ch  1  [732°i3-733bi7]  272c-274a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  18, 
a  2,  rep  1  105c-106b;  a  3,  ans  106b-107c; 
q  50,  a  4,  rep  1  273b-274b;  q  71,  a  i,  rep  4-5 
367a-368b;  q  72,  a  i,  rep  i  368b-369d;  q  76, 
a  5,  rep  3  394c-396a;  q  78,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  4 
407b-409a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  336b- d; 
400d-401a;  412c-413a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  30 
159c-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  11-15  140b-141a  passim,  esp  sect  12 
140c;  bk  hi,  ch  vi,  sect  12  271d-272b;  bk 
iv,  ch  xvi,  sect  12,  370c-371a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  199c-200c  /  Judgement, 
578d-580a  esp  579b-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  3a-b;  55b-62a  esp 
60b-61a;  64a-d;  80a-82d;  117a-118d;  167a- 
180d  esp  180a-d;  207a-208a;  224d-225b; 
228c-229a,c;  238b-243d  esp  241a-d,  243b-c  / 
Descent  of  Man,  337a-338c;  340d-341c 

53  James:  Psychology,  41b;  51a-52b;  95b-98a; 
705b-706b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  768d- 
769a 

3.  The  anatomy  of  animals 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  63b-64c  passim 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  466a-469c 


7  Plato:  Timaeus,  468a-469d 

8  Aristotle:  Meteorology,  bk  iv, ch  10  [389*19- 

23]  493b;  ch  11  [389b7-i8]  493c-d;  ch  12 
493d-494d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[486*5-15]  7a;  [487*1-10]  7d;  bk  iii,  ch  2 
[5iibi-io]  35a;  ch  5  [515*27]-^  20  [52^17] 
39c-46c  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [640^1- 

24]  163a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [646*7]-^  2  [648*20] 
170a-172c;  ch  3  [649b22]-CH  9  [655^6]  174b- 
181d;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [663*22-36]  191b-c  / 
Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [715*8-11] 
255a;  ch  18  [722*i8-bi]  262a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  6 
[743*i— bi8]  284b-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  6  169c- 
170c;  bk  11,  ch  6  188c-191a;  bk  iii,  ch  ii 
207d-208b;  ch  15,  215a-b 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  79,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  1  955c-956b 
28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  274d-275c; 
302c-d  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  316d  /  On 
A?iimal  Generation,  414c-415b 
45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i, 
39a-41a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Did {,  226b-228b;  276b- 
277b 

53  James:  Psychology,  53a-b;  118a 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  647a-d 

3 b.  The  skeletal  structure 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  91b-c;  112a; 
bk  ix, 306b 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  468a-469d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  7 
13a-b;  ch  13  [493*21-24]  15b;  ch  15  [493^2- 
494*18]  15d-16b;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [499*18-500*14] 
21c-22b;  [500^0-25]  23a;  ch  i  [5oi*2]-ch  5 
[502*3]  23b-24b;  ch  15  [506*7-10]  28c;  bk  iii, 
ch  7-9  40b-41d;  ch  ao  [*52^4-17]  46c;  bk  iv. 


37 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


3c  to  4  b 

ch  i  [523bi-i8]  48b, d;  [524^1-30]  50c-d;  ch 
2  [525bu-i4]  5ld;  ch  4  [528ai~3o]  54d-55b; 
ch  7  [532^3 1— b5]  59b;  bk  vii,  ch  10  [58yb  1 1  18] 
113d-114a  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  6 
176d-177c;  ch  7  [653^4^2]  178d;  cii  8 
[653b3°]-cH  9  [655V10]  179b-181c;  bk  iii,  ch 
1-2  188b,d-191d;  cii  4  [666hij-22]  194c-d;  bk 
iv,  ch  5  [679bi3— 35]  209d-210a;  ch  10  [690*5- 
29]  221d-222b;  ch  12  [695*1-26]  226c-227a; 
ch  13  [696bi— 7]  228a-b  /  Motion  of  Animals , 
cii  1  [698*1 5— b9]  233b-c  /  Gait  of  Animals , 
ch  11  248d-249a  /  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk 
ii,  CH  6  [744b28-745b9]  286a-d 

10  Hippocrates:  Injuries  of  the  Head ,  par  1-2 
63b,d-64c;  par  18  69a-b  /  Fractures  74b,d-91d 
esp  par  2-4  75a-76c,  par  9-12  78c-80a,  par  18 
82b-c,  par  20  83a,  par  37  89a-b  /  Articulations 
91b,d-12!d  passim  /  Instruments  of  Reduction 
121b,d-130d  passim,  esp  par  1  121b,d-122c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  iii,  ch  15, 
215a-b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  132c; 
second  day,  187b-188c;  195c-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  443d-444c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  333b-338a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  15a-b;  94a;  107a- 
113c  passim;  217b-219d  /  Descent  of  Man, 
263c-264d;  273a;  280c-282c 

3c.  The  visceral  organs 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  466a-468a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  vii,  ch  10 
[i035b26-28]  559b  f  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [42ob23~ 
27]  652a-b  /  Sleep,  ch  3  [458*14-19]  701c  / 
Youth,  Life ,  and  Breathing ,  ch  3  [468b28]-cH 
4  [469b20]  715b-716b;  ch  14  720d-721a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  16-17 
16d-19d;  bk  ii,  ch  15-BK  iii,  ch  i  28b-35a; 
bk  iii,  ch  3  [513*22-39]  36d-37a;  ch  13—15 
44a-c;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [524bi-22]  50a-c;  ch  2 
[526b22~527a2o]  53b-d;  ch  3-7  54b-59d  pas¬ 
sim  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  4  193a-195d; 
ch  6-14  197b-205c;  bk  iv,  ch  1-5  205b,d-213b 
/  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  3-16  256c- 
261b  passim 

10  Hippocrates  :  Ancient  Medicine,  par  22  8a-d  / 
Sacred  Disease,  156a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  13  173d- 
177a;  bk  iii,  ch  8  205a-207b;  ch  ii  207d-208b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  80,  a  2,  ans  957c-958b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
14a-b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  271b- 273a; 
274d-275c;  278b-c;  299b-302d  /  On  Animal 
Generation ,  339c-343a;  344d-345a;  350a-352d; 
375d-376c;  450d-451b;  452c-453b;  473b- 
476b;  485a-b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  56a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  266c;  281a-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  19a-42b;  118a 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  647a-b 


3 d.  The  utility  or  adaptation  of  bodily  struc¬ 
tures 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[528b29-529Ai]  55d;  cii  5  [530^9-24]  57c; 
bk  ix,  ch  37  [62obio-33]  146b-c;  [622^9-15] 
148a  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  ii-iv  170a  2 29d 
passim  /  Gait  of  Animals  243a-252a,c  esp  cii  1 
243a- b  /  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  cii  2 
[7 i6“i8— b2]  256b-c;  ch  4-13  257a-260b;  bk  iv, 
ch  i  [765b33-766aio]  307a-b;  bk  v,  cii  8 
330b-331a,c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  cii  6,  170b-c; 
ch  10  171b-172b;  ch  13,  173d-174d;  bk  ii, 
ch  4,  187c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  3  200a-201a;  cii  8 
205a-207b;  cii  11  207d-208b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [823-857] 
55a-b;  bk  v  [837-877]  72a-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xxii,  ch  24, 
610c-611b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  269a-b;  299b- 
304a, c  /  Chi  Animal  Generation ,  390b-c;  401b; 
402c;418b-c;453c-454c 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  529a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  227b-228a;  277b- 
279b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  lc;  lOd-llb;  38c; 
41c-44c  esp  43a-b,  43d-44a;  66a-68b;  82 d- 
98a, c  esp  97b-98a,c;  103c-113c;  115c-116b; 
225c-228c  /  Descent  of  Man,  258b-259a;  320b; 
532d-543d 

53  James:  Psychology,  701a 

4.  Animal  movement 

4a.  Comparison  of  animal  movement  with  other 
kinds  of  local  motion 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  viii,  ch  4  [254bi2~33] 
339a- b  /  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  2  376b-377c 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  i  233a-c; 
ch  4  [700*5-27]  235b-c;  ch  6  235d-236b;  ch  7 
[7oibi]-CH  8  [702bi2]  236d-238a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  1,  rep  1-3  104c-105c;  q  70,  a  3  365b-367a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  59a-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxvii,  sect  4-5  220a-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  115b 

53  James:  Psychology,  4a-6b 

4b.  The  cause  of  animal  movement:  voluntary 
and  involuntary  movements 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  241d-242a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  viii,  ch  2  [252^6- 
28]  336c-d;  [253*6-21]  337a-b;  ch  4  [254b 
12-33]  339a-b  /  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  9-1  i  664d- 
667a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[640b30-64ibio]  163c-164c  /  Motion  of  Ani¬ 
mals,  ch  6-1 1  235d-239d  /  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  2 
[1  r  1  ib6— 9]  357b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  1,  ch  i  167a-b 


38 


4c  to  5a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  Animal  movement .  4b.  The  cause  of  animal 
movement:  voluntary  and  involuntary  move¬ 
ments .) 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-293] 
18b-d;  bk  hi  [161-167]  32b;  bk  iv  [877-906] 
55d-56a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  78,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  4 
407b-409a;  q  80,  a  2,  rep  3  428a-d;  q  1 15, 
a  4,  ans  589d-590c;  part  i— ii,  q  6,  a  2  646a-c; 
q  12,  a  5  672a-c;  q  13,  a  2  673c-674c;  q  15, 
a  2  682a-c;  q  16,  a  2  684d-685b;  q  17,  a  2 
687d-688b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
192d-193a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  267a-b;  285d- 
286a;  302d-303a  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood , 
316d;  325d-326d  /  On  Animal  Generation , 
369d-370b;  415b-429c  esp  417a-419b,  423b- 
424a,  427c-428c;  456b-458a;  488d-496d 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  xn,  19d-20a  /  Discourse , 
part  v,  58d-59a;  60b  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
156a-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  5  179c-d;  sect  7-1  i  180a-d;  ch  xxxiii, 
sect  6  249a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  19  354a-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vii,  div 
51-52  472b-473c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  164b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic 
of  Morals ,  386b-d 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  115b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  3b;  5a;  8a- 15a  esp  12a-b, 
15a;  71b  [fn  1];  694a-702a;  705a-706b;  761a- 
765b;  767b-768a;  827a-835a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams ,  35ld-352a; 
363b-d  /  Instincts ,  412b-414b  passim 

4c.  The  organs,  mechanisms,  and  characteris¬ 
tics  of  locomotion 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  454b 

8  Aristotle:  So#/,  bk  iii,  ch  10  [433bi3— 27] 
666b-c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  1 
[487^14—34]  8c-d;  ch  4  [489*27-29]  10c;  ch  5 
[489b20-490b6]  lla-12a;  ch  15  [493^6-494®^] 
16a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [497bi8-498bio]  20a-d; 
ch  12  26b-27a  passim;  bk  iii,  ch  5  39c-40a; 
bk  iv,  ch  1  [523b2i~524a32]  48d-50a;  ch  2 
[525bi5-526bi8]  51d-53b;  ch  4  [528*29^1 1] 
55b;  ch  7  [532ai9-29]  59a-b  /  Parts  of  Animals , 
bk  11,  ch  9  [654*3  i-b3 5]  180a-d;  bk  iv,  ch  6-9 
213b-217b  passim;  ch  10  [690a4-bn]  221d- 
222c;  ch  12  [693*24]— ch  13  [696*34]  225b- 
228a  /  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  1-2  233a-234a; 
ch  7  [7oibi— 13]  236d-237a;  ch  8  [702*22]- 
ch  10  [703bi]  237c-239a  /  Gait  of  Animals 
243a-252a,c 

10  Hippocrates:  Articulations ,  par  60  113b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [877-897] 
55d-56a 


16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  855b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  71, 
a  1,  rep  2  367a-368b;  q  99,  a  i,  ans  519b- 
520a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  84,  a  1,  rep  4  983c-984c 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  301d-302a  / 
Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  319b  /  On  Animal 
Generation ,  450a-b 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19d-20a  /  Discourse , 
part  v,  58d-59a  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
156a-d 

34  Newton:  Principles,  corol  ii  15a-16b  esp  16b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  276b-278a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  23a-b;  66a-67a; 
83b-84b;  93b-c;  94d-95a;  105c-106a  /  Descent 
of  Man,  278c-280c;  365b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  9a-12b;  19b-26b;  714a- 
715b  passim 

5.  Local  motion  within  the  animal  body 

5 a.  The  ducts,  channels,  and  conduits  involved 
in  interior  bodily  motions 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  470a-471b 

8  Aristotle:  Youth,  Life,  and  Breathing,  ch  14 
[474b2-9]  720d;  ch  17  [476*26— b8]  722b-c; 
ch  22  724b-d  passim 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[488b29]-cH  3  [489*14]  9d-10b;  ch  4  [489*20- 
23]  lOb-c;  ch  12  15a;  ch  16  [495*i8]-ch  17 
[497*29]  17b-19d;  bk  ii,  ch  15-BK  iii,  ch  4 
28b-39c;  bk  iii,  ch  20  [52ib4— 8]  46c;  bk  v, 
ch  5  [54ob29-54iai2]  67b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  ii 
[566*2-14]  92a-b;  bic  vii,  ch  8  [586bi2-24] 
112d-113a  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  9 
[654*3i-bi2]  180a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  3  191d-193a; 
ch  4  [665bio]-cH  5  [668b3 1]  193b-197b;  ch  7 
[670*7-18]  198c-d;  ch  8  [67ob34]~cH  9  [67ib28] 
199c-200c;  ch  14  203b-205c;  bk  iv,  ch  2 
[676bi 6-677*24]  206b-207a;  ch  4  [677b36- 
678*20]  207d-208a  /  Generation  of  Animals, 
bk  1,  ch  2  [7i6*33]-ch  16  [721*26]  256b-261a 
passim;  bk  ii,  ch  4  [738*9-739*2]  278d-279d; 
[740*21-35]  281a-b;  ch  6  [743*1-11]  284b;  ch  7 
[745^2-746*19]  287a-c;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [773^3- 
29]  315a-b 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  22  8a-d/ 
Sacred  Disease,  156a-b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  10  171b- 
172b;  ch  13  173d-177a;  bk  i,  ch  15-BK  11,  ch 
3,  179d-185b;  bk  ii,  ch  5-6  188b-191a;  ch  9 
195c-199a,c;  bk  iii  199a-215d  passim 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  268d-304a,c  esp 
295d-296a  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood  305a- 
328a, c  /  On  Animal  Generation,  339c-340c; 
342d-345a;  347d;  350a-353b;  368b-371c; 
373b-374d;  378b-d;  379b-c;  388d-389a;  401c- 
402c;  430b-d;  438c-441a;  449c-d;  473d-476b; 
485a-487b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  56b-59a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  257c 


5b  to  5/ 


Chapter  2 

5b.  The  circulatory  system:  the  motions  of  the 
heart,  blood,  and  lymph 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  466c-d;  471c  d 

8  Aristotle:  Youth ,  Life ,  Breathing,  ch  2 6 

725d-726b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  iii,  ch  19 
[52ia6— 3 1  ]  45d-46b;  bk  vi,  ch  3  [561*9-15]  87c 
/  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  4-3  193al97b  / 
Generation  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [735aio-26] 
275d-276a;  ch  5  [74ibi5~24]  282d;  ch  6 
[742b33~743ai]  284a;  bk  iv,  cii  1  [766a3o-b2] 
307c  d 

10  Hippocrates:  Sacred  Disease,  160a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  15-BK  11, 
ch  2  179d'185a;  bk  ii,  ch  4-6,  188a-d;  bk  iii, 
ch  13-15,  213a-2l5d 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  23,  154b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  17, 
a  9,  rep  2  692d-693d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagrucl,  bk  iii, 
138a-d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  268d-304a,c  esp 
285b-296a  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood  305a- 
328a, c  esp  309b-d,  324a-326d  /  On  Animal 
Generation,  368a-371b;  374a-d;  429c-441a; 
449c-d;  456b-d;  488d-496d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  48, 
186d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  56b-59a  / 
Objections  and  Replies,  156c-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  64a-65a;  695a-696a 

5c.  The  glandular  system:  the  glands  of  in¬ 
ternal  and  external  secretion 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  472a-474b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  12 
[493aio-i6]  15a;  bk  ii,  ch  13  [504^2-27]  27a- 
b;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [5 1  ibi— 10]  35a;  ch  20  [52ib2i]- 
ch  21  [523*13]  46d-48c;  bk  vi,  ch  20  [574b7- 
13]  100b;  ch  21  [575b9— 12]  101b;  ch  26  103d; 
ch  33  [580*2-4]  105c-d;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [583*26- 
34]  108d-109a;  ch  5  [585*29-32]  111b;  ch  ii 
114a, c  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [653b8- 
19]  179a;  bk  iii,  ch  5  [668bi-iol  196d;  ch  15 
205d;  bk  iv,  ch  10  [688ai9~b34]  219d-220d  / 
Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  20  [727b34- 
728*9]  268a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [752b23-24]  293d; 
bk  iv,  ch  8  318b-319c 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  19  6d-7b 
/  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  8,  12a-b  /  Prognos¬ 
tics,  par  6  20c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  13,  175d- 
177a;  bk  ii,  ch  2  184b-185a;  ch  4-5,  188a-c; 
ch  8-9  191b-199a,c;  bk  iii,  ch  5  202c-d;  ch 
12, 209a-b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  288d  /  Circula¬ 
tion  of  the  Blood,  320a-b  /  On  Animal  Genera¬ 
tion,  396c-d;  435a-c;  451b;  461b;  464c-d; 
487c-488a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  pref  451a-452c 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  538a 


:  ANIMAL  39 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  llOc-llla  /  Descent 
of  Man,  339d~340c;  547c-548c 

53  James:  Psychology,  66b  67a;  696b-697b 

5 d.  The  respiratory  system:  breathing,  lungs, 
gills 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  470b  471b 

8  Aristotle:  Youth,  Life ,  and  Breathing,  ch  7- 
27  717a-726d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[487*14— b3]  8a-b;  ch  5  [489*34-b6]  lOd;  cii  11 
[492b5-i2]  14b-c;  ch  16  [495a2o-bi9]  17b-d; 
ch  17  [496*27-34]  18c;  bk  11,  ch  13  [504b27- 
505*19]  27b-c;  ch  15  [505b32-5o6a4]  28c;  bk 
iv,  ch  2  [526bi8-22]  53b;  bk  vi,  ch  12  [566b2- 
14]  92c-d;  bk  vm,  ch  2  [589*io-b29]  115c-116b 
/  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  16  [658^6- 
659bi 9]  185d-186c;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [662*16-28] 
189b-c;  ch  3  191d-193a;  ch  6  197b  l98a; 
bk  iv,  ch  13  [696*37-b24]  228a-c;  [697*i6-bi] 
229a-b  /  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  ii  [703b3~ 1 5  j 
239a-b 

10  Hippocrates:  Prognostics,  par  5  20b  c  / 
Articulations,  par  41  103c-104b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  iii,  ch  13, 
211b-d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  268d-273a  pas¬ 
sim;  282b-285b;  303d-304a,c  /  Circulation  of 
the  Blood,  309c;  317c-d;  324a;  325d  /  On 
Animal  Generation,  339c-340c;  458a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  12, 
141d-142a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  58b-c 

33  Pascal:  Weight  of  Air,  415a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  272b-276b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  87d-88c;  90c-91a; 
238d  /  Descent  of  Man,  339a 

53  James:  Psychology,  696a-b;  740b  [fn  1] 

5e.  The  alimentary  system:  the  motions  of  the 
digestive  organs  in  the  nutritive  process 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  467d-468a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
[650*1-37]  174c-175a;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [66i*34-bi2] 
188b;  ch  3  191d-193a;  ch  14  203b-205c;  bk 
iv,  ch  11  [690bi8-69iai]  222d-223a;  [691*28- 
b27] 223c-d 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine ,  par  n  4b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  9-10  171b- 
172b;  ch  16,  180c-181b;  bk  iii,  ch  4-5  201b- 
202d;  ch  7-8  203b-207b;  ch  13,  211d-212d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  279a-b  /  On 
Animal  Generation,  350a-c;  451b;  452d-453a; 
456d;  460a-461a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  58c-d 

5/.  The  excretory  system:  the  motions  of  elim¬ 
ination 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  15 
44b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  1  [524*9-14]  49d;  bk  vi, 
ch  20  [574bi9~25]  lOOb-c;  bk  vii,  ch  10  [587* 
27-33]  113ci  BK  VIII>  CH  5  [594b2i— 26]  120d; 


5 g  to  6  b 


40 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5,  Local  motion  within  the  animal  body.  5f.  The 
excretory  system:  the  motions  of  elimination.) 
bk  ix,  ch  45  [630^7—17]  155d-156a  /  Parts  of 
Animals ,  bk  hi,  ch  7  [67ob23]-CH  9  [672*26] 
199b-201a;  ch  14  [675a3i-b38]  204d-205c;  bk 
iv,  ch  1  [676*29-35]  206a;  ch  2  206b-207b; 
ch  5  [679*5-32]  209a-c;  ch  10  [689*3-34]  220d- 
221b  /  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  13 
[7i9b29-720au]  259d-260a 
10  Hippocrates: Airs,  Waters ,  Places ,  par  9  12d- 
13b  /  Prognostics ,  par  n-12  21c-22b 
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  13,  173d- 
175d;  ch  15-17  179d-183d;  bk  ii,  ch  2  184b- 
185a;  bk  iii,  ch  5  202c-d;  ch  12-13  208b-213b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  119, 
a  1,  rep  1  604c-607b 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  80,  a  2,  rep  1  957c-958b;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2 
958b-959c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
16c-18b;  bk  iii,  138b-c;  bk  iv,  293a-b;  310d- 
3ild 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  273b-c;  283ab 
/  On  Animal  Generation ,  344b-345a;  351a-b; 
356c-d;  380c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  26a-b 
45  Lavoisier:  FJements  of  Chemistry ,  part  i, 
45c-d 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  lllb-c;  120b-c 

5g.  The  brain  and  nervous  system:  the  excita¬ 
tion  and  conduction  of  nervous  im¬ 
pulses 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  7 
177c-179a;  ch  10  [6 5 6a  1 4— b2 8 ]  182b-183a 
10  Hippocrates:  Sacred  Disease ,  156a-160b 
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  188c- 
191a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  855a-b 

17  Plotinus  :  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  23, 153d- 
154a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  99, 
a  1,  ans  519b-520a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  49b-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
190a-c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  456b-458a 
31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  19d-20a  /  Discourse , 
part  v,  58d-59a  /  Meditations ,  vi,  102a-d  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  156a-d 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  pref  451a-452c 
34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  518b'519b;  522a-b 
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  540a-541a,c 

53  James:  Psychology,  2b-3a;  8a-67b  esp  9b-17a, 
42a-b,  46b-47a;  70a-77b  esp  70a-71a;  152a- 
153a;  497a-501b  esp  500b-501b;  694a-695a; 
698b-699a;  705a-b;  758b-759a;  827b-835a 

54  Freud  :  Hysteria,  87a  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams, 

351c-352d;  363c-364b;  378a-b  /  Instincts , 
413a-d  /  Unconscious ,  431  d  /  Beyond  the 
Pleasure  Principle ,  646b-649d  /  Eg-o  Id , 

700a-b 


6.  Animal  nutrition 

6^.  The  nature  of  the  nutriment 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:29-30 

5  Aristophanes:  Peace  [1-172]  526a-527d 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  469d-470a;  471d-472a 

8  Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  i, 
ch  5  [322*4-28]  419d-420b  /  Metaphysics,  bk 
1,  ch  3  [983bi9— 25]  501d-502a  /  Soul ,  bk  ii, 
ch  4  [416*18— b3i]  646c-647b  /  Sense  and  the 
Sensible ,  ch  4  [44 ^24-442*1 2]  679b-d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[488*15-20]  9a;  BK  III,  CH  20  [52Ib2l]-CH  21 
[523ai3l  46d-48c;  bk  viii,  ch  2  [59o*i8]-ch  ii 
[596bi9]  116d-122d;  ch  21  [6o3b25T34]  129d; 
bk  ix,  ch  1  [6o8bi9]-CH  2  [6iobi9]  134a-136b; 
ch  9  140a-b  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[651*12-19]  176a  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk 
iv,  ch  8  [777*4—19]  319a-b  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  8 
[1256*18-30]  450a;  [i256bn-2o]  450b-c 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  3-8  ld- 
3b;  par  13-15  4c-5d  /  Regimen  in  Acute  Dis¬ 
eases,  par  4  27c-28a;  par  14-17  32c-34c; 
appendix,  par  18  41a-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2,  168a-b; 
ch  io-ii  171b-172d;  bk  ii,  ch  8,  191b-193d 
esp  192d-193b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [633-672] 
52c-53a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  97, 
a  3,  rep  2  515a  d;  a  4  515d-516d;  q  119,  a  i 
604c-607b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
138b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  378b-d; 
398d-399c;  408c-d;  409c-d;  414a-b;  435a- 
438b;  439a-440a;  448a-c;  461a-d;  463b-466b; 
486c-d;  487c-488a;  494a-496d  esp  494b, 
495c-496a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  50, 
193b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d 

6b.  The  process  of  nutrition:  ingestion,  diges¬ 
tion,  assimilation 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  467d-468a;  471c-472a 

8  Aristotle:  Meteorology,  bk  iv,  ch  2  [379bio- 
24]  483d-484a  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [4i6*i8-b29] 
646c-647b  /  Sleep,  ch  3  699b-701d  passim 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  viii,  ch  4 
[594*11-21]  120a-b;  ch  6  [595°6-i3]  121a;  ch 
17  [6oob7~i2]  126c  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii, 
ch  3  [650*1-^13]  174c-l75b;  bk  iii,  ch  i 
[66i*36-bi2]  188b;  ch  3  191d-193a;  ch  14 
203b-205c;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [677b3o]-cH  4  [678*20] 
207d-208a;  ch  ii  [690b20-69i*i]  222d-223a; 
[69i*28-b27]  223c-d 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  11  4b  / 
Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases,  appendix,  par  18 
41a-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2  167b- 
168c;  ch  7-12  170c-173c  esp  ch  io-ii  171b- 


41 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


7  to  U 

172d;  ch  1 6,  180c-181b;  bk  ii,  cii  4,  187a  b; 
ch  6-7  188c-191b;  bk  iii,  ch  i  199a-c;  cn  4 
201b  202c;  ch  6-9  202d  207b;  ch  13  209b- 
213b  esp  211d-213a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bic  ii  [871  882] 
26a;  [1 118-1147]  29b-c;  bk  iv  [858-876]  55b  c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  97, 
a  3,  rep  2  515a-d;  a  4  515d  516d;  q  1 18,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  3-4  600a-601c;  q  119,  a  1  604c- 
607b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  80,  a  3,  ans  958b-959c;  a  4  959c-963a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
134d-135a;  138a-139b 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus ,  act  i,  sc  i  [92-150] 
352b-353a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  279a  b;  296a- 
297a  esp  296d-297a;  297d-298b  /  Circulation 
of  the  Blood ,  307c-308c;  319b;  320a-b  /  On 
Animal  Generation ,  350a-c;  408c-d;  413a-415a; 
435a-438b;  441b-443b;  446c-447a;  455c-d; 
460b-461d;  465b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  48, 
184a-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  58c-d 

7.  Animal  growth  or  augmentation:  its  nature, 
causes,  and  limits 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  63b 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  471d-472a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i93bi3— 19] 
269d-270a;  bk  vi,  ch  10  [24i*27-b2]  325b-c; 
bk  viii,  ch  7  [26oa27~bi]  346b-c  /  Generation 
and  Corruption ,  bk  i,  ch  5  417b-420b  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  v,  ch  4  [ioi4b20-26]  535a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  v,  ch  19 
[55ob26-3i]  77d;  ch  33  [558*18-24]  84d-85a  / 
Motion  of  Animals ,  ch  5  235c-d  /  Generation 
of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  18  [723*9-23]  263a-b; 
bk  ii,  ch  1  [735ai3— 23]  275d-276a;  ch  3 
l737a35-b7l  278b;  ch  4  [739b34-74i“2]  280d- 
281d;  ch  6  (744b32— 745b9]  286a-d;  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[77 ib33— 772s r ]  313d  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  4 
[1326*35-40]  530c 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine ,  par  3  ld-2b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  1-2,  167a- 
d;  ch  5  169b-c;  ch  7  170c-171a;  bk  ii,  ch  3, 
186c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [184-214] 
3b-d;  bk  ii  [1105-1147]  29a-c;  bk  v  [783-820] 
71b-d;  [878-900]  72c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  97, 
a  4  515d-516d;  q  99,  a  1  519b-520a;  q  119, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  4  604c-607b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  80,  a  4,  ans  959c-963a;  a  5,  rep  i  963a-964b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  second  day, 
187b-188c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  353b-354b; 
374b-d;  388c-d;  408c-409b;  412b-415b  esp 
415a;  441a-443b;  450b-d;  494a-496d  esp 
495c-496a 


48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl(,  338a-339a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  71a-d;  227c  228b  / 
Descent  of  Man,  402a  b;  405a-d;  540a-541c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  770b 

8.  The  generation  of  animals 

8a.  The  origin  of  animals:  creation  or  evolu¬ 
tion 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:11-12,20-28;  2:4- 
9>I9~23 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  452c-454a;  476b-477a,c 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  iii,  ch 
ii  [762^8—763*8]  303d-304a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [783-836] 
71b-72a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  21  357a- 
b;  ch  27  359c-360a,c;  bk  xvi,  ch  7  427a  b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq  71- 
72  367a-369d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  vii  [387-550] 
225b-229a 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  542b 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  578d-580a  esp  579b-c; 
581b-582c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [8245-8264]  201a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species  la-251a,c  esp  la- 
7d,  63b-64d,  85b-c,  217d~219a,  230a-243d  / 
Descent  of  Man,  265a-d 

8^.  Diverse  theories  of  animal  generation:  pro¬ 
creation  and  spontaneous  generation 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  476b-477a,c 

8  Aristotle:  Meteorology,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [379b6— 
8]  483c;  ch  3  [38 ib9~ 13]  485d;  ch  ii  [389*28- 
b7]  493c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  vii,  ch  9  [1034*32- 
b8]  557c-d;  bk  xii,  cii  6  [io7ib29~3i]  601c; 
ch  7  [io72b30-io73*2]  603a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  v,  cii  i 
[539ai5-bl3]  65b-66a;  ch  ii  [543bi8— 19]  70b; 
ch  15  [546bi7-547*i]  73c;  ch  15  [547bi2]-cn 
16  [548^]  74b-75b;  ch  19  [550^1-551*13] 
77d-78a;  [55 ibi9— 552b27]  78c-79c;  ch  21 
[553Bi6-b2]  80a-b;  ch  31  [556b25]-cH  32 
[557bj4]  83c-84b;  bk  vi,  ch  15-16  95a-96a  / 
Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [715*18- 
716*2]  255b-256a;  ch  16  [721*3-11]  260d-261a; 
bk  11,  ch  1  [732b8-i4]  272d-273a;  ch  3  [737*1- 
5]  277d;  bk  iii,  ch  9  299b-300a;  ch  ii 
[76ib24~763bi7]  302d-304d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [865-943] 
26a-27a;  bk  v  [783-820]  71b-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bkxii,ch  n349a-b; 
bk  xvi,  ch  7  427a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  25, 
a  2,  rep  2  144c-145b;  q  45,  a  8,  rep  3  249b- 
250a;  q  71,  a  i,  rep  i  367a-368b;  q  72,  a  i, 
rep  5  368b-369d;  q  92,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i 
488d-489d;  q  118,  aa  1-2  600a-603b;  q  119, 
a  2  607b-608d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  60, 
a  1,  ans  49d-50c 


42 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(8.  The  generatioti  of  animals.  8b.  Diverse  the¬ 
ories  of  animal  generation:  procreation  and 
spontaneous  generation.') 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
114b-c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  v,  105a-b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  338b-d; 
390b-c;  400d-401a;  406c-d;  412c-413a;  428c- 
d;  449a-b;  454d-455a;  468b-472c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  50, 
192a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  lc;  61a 

8c.  Modes  of  animal  reproduction:  sexual  and 
asexual 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  157d-158b  /  Timaeus, 
476b-d  /  Statesman ,  587a-588a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  iv,  ch  ii 
[537b22_53^a2Il  64b-d;  bk  v-vii  65a-114a,c 
csp  bk  v,  ch  1  65a-66a,  bk  vi,  ch  18  97b-99c 
/  Generation  of  Animals  255a-331a,c  esp  bk  i, 
ch  1-2  255a-256c,  bk  i,  ch  21-bk  ii,  ch  i  269c- 
276a,  bk  11,  ch  5  282a-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  ii,  ch  3  185a- 
186d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  119, 
a  2,  ans  607b-608d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  331a;  338a- 
496d  esp  390b-429c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  47c-49c;  220a-b  / 
Descent  of  Many  390c-391b;  395a-399c  pas¬ 
sim 

54  Freud:  Instincts ,  415b  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure 
Principle ,  655b-657d;  659d-660c 

8c(l)  Sexual  differentiation:  its  origins  and 
determinations;  primary  and  secondary 
characteristics 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  15 7b- 159b  /  Timaeusy 
476b-d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
[5oib2o-25]  24a;  bk  hi,  ch  7  [5i6ai5~2o]  40c; 
ch  11  [5i8a30-b4]  42d-43a;  ch  19  [52ia2i~3i] 
46b;  ch  20  [522an-2i]  47a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  1 
[52^3 1-525^3]  50d-51a;  ch  2  [525b34~526a6] 
52b;  ch  3  [527b30-34]  54c-d;  ch  11  64b-65a,c; 
bk  v,  ch  5  [54(^14-28]  67b;  ch  7  [54ib3o]-cH 
8  [542ai]  68c;  ch  14  [544b32~545a22]  71c-72a; 
ch  18  [550^7-21]  77c-d;  ch  28  [555bi8-23] 
82c;  ch  30  [556bi  1— 13]  83b;  bk  vi,  ch  2 
[559a27~29]  86a;  ch  10  [565bi3— 15]  91d;  ch  19 
l573b32— 574aj ]  "d;  BK  VII>  CH  1  [582^7— 32] 
107d-108a;  ch  3  [583bi4-29]  109b-c;  ch  6 
[585b2i-27]  llld;  bk  viii,  ch  2  [589b29~59oa4] 
116b-c;  bk  ix,  ch  1  [6o8a2i-bi9]  133b,d-134a 
/  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [66ib33-662a5] 
189a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  10  [688a2o-26]  219d-220a; 
[688b3o-34]  220c-d  /  Generation  of  Animals , 
bk  1,  ch  2  256a-c;  ch  18  [723a23~b3]  263b-c; 
ch  19-20  266c-269c;  bk  ii,  ch  i  (73ibi8- 
732ai2]  272a-b;  bk  hi,  ch  10  [759bi— 7]  300c; 


8c  to  8c(2) 

bk  iv,  ch  1-2  304b,d-308d  esp  ch  i  [766^0- 
b8]  307c-d;  ch  3  [767b5~ 14]  309a;  bk  v,  ch  7 
[786bi6-788ai3]~328c-330a 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters ,  Places ,  par  9  12d- 
13b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [122=;- 
1232]  60b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  92, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  i  488d-489d;  q  98,  a  2,  ans 
517d-519a;  q  99,  a  2  520a-d;  q  115,  a  3,  rep  4 
588c-589c;  q  118,  a  i,  rep  4  600a-601c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  hi  suppl, 
q  81,  a  3  966a-c;  a  4,  rep  2  966d-967d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  346b;  400c- 
401b;  402c-d;  454a-b;  462b;  481c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  27,  158a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xvi,  116d- 
117a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  339b-340c;  364a- 
561d  esp  364a-366b,  373b-374c,  384c-d; 
586b-587d;  594a-595b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  659d- 
661c  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  785a 
[fn  1]  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  853d-855b 

8c(2)  The  reproductive  organs:  their  differ¬ 
ences  in  different  classes  of  animals 
7  Plato:  Timaeus,  476b- d 
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[489a8— 14]  10b;  ch  13  [493^4]-^  14  [493b6] 
15b-c;  ch  17  [497a24~ 34]  19c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[500a32-b25]  22c-23a;  ch  10  [503^-7]  25b-c; 
ch  13  [504bi8— 19]  27a;  bk  iii,  ch  i  32a-35a; 
bk  iv,  ch  1  [524^-9]  49a-c;  [524b3 1— 525a8] 
50d;  ch  2  [527an~3o]  53c-d;  bk  v,  ch  2 
[54°a3l-CH  3  [54°a33l  66c-67a;  ch  5  [540^9- 
54iai2]  67b-c;  ch  6  [54ib7~i2]  68a-b;  bk  vi, 
ch  9  [564bio]-CH  10  [564^4]  90d-91a;  ch  10 
[565ai2-22]  91b-c;  ch  ii  [566^-14]  92a-b;  ch 
12  [567an]-cH  13  [567a24]  93b;  ch  32  105b-c; 
bk  ix,  ch  50  [63ib22-25]  157a;  [632^2-27] 
157c  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [68oai2- 
68ia5]  210b-211c;  ch  10  [689a3— 34]  220d-221b; 
ch  12  [695^6-27]  227a;  ch  13  [697aio-i4] 
228d-229a  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch 
1-16  255a-261b;  bk  iii,  ch  5  [755b5“756a5] 
296c-297a;  ch  6  [756b30— 757ai3]  297d-298a; 
ch  8  [758a7— 15]  299a;  bk  iv,  ch  1  [765b35- 
766b26]  307a-308a;cH  4  [772b27~773a25]  314d- 
315b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  iii,  ch  2-3  199d- 
201a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
lOc-lla;  15a-c;  bk  ii,  70b-c;  95a-97b;  bk  iii, 
131b, d;  143a-144c;  178b-185d;  192b-193b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  338d-352d; 
401b-405c;  452c;  473b-476b;  477b-479c;  485a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  27,  158a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  310a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  136b  /  Descent  of 
Man,  264d-265a;  272a-d;  339b-c;  364a-b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  592a 


8<r(3)  to  8<r( 5) 


Chapter  2: 

8c(3)  The  reproductive  cells  and  secretions: 
semen  and  catamenia,  sperm  and  egg 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  vii,  cm  9  [1034® 
32— b8]  557c-d;  bk  ix,  ch  7  [1049*12-19]  574d; 
bk  xii,  ch  6  [107^29-31]  601c;  ch  7  [io72b36- 
io73a2]  603a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[489b6-io]  lOd;  bk  iii,  ch  22  48c;  bk  iv,  cii  i 
[525^2—8]  50d;  ch  2  [527^  1— 33]  53d-54a;  bk 
vi,  ch  2  [559*1 5~56ob2]  85d-87a;  ch  10  [564^ 
24-26]  91a;  ch  13  [567ai6— bi5]  93b-d;  bk  vii, 
ch  1  [582ai6]-cH  2  [583ai3]  107d-108c  /  Gen¬ 
eration  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [7i6a2— 17]  256a; 
ch  17-23  261b-271d;  bk  11,  ch  i  [733b23]-CH 
4  [739b33]  274a-280d;  ch  5  [741*6-32]  282a-b; 

BK  II,  CH  7  [746b25]-BK  III,  ch  2  [752bI5] 

288a-293d;  bk  iii,  ch  3-5  295b-297c;  ch  7-9 
298a-300a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [764b4— 2 1  ]  305c-d; 
ch  1  [765bio]-cH  2  [767*8]  306d-308b;  ch  3 
[767bi6-769bio]  309a-311b  /  Politics ,  bk  vii, 
ch  16  [1335*24-27]  540b 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters ,  Places ,  par  14  15a- 
b  /  Sacred  Disease ,  155d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  ii,  ch  3  185a- 
186d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [1037- 
1051]  57d;  [1209-1277]  60a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  71, 
a  1,  rep  1  367a-368b;  q  92,  a  3,  rep  2  490c- 
491b;  a  4,  ans  491b-d;  q  97,  a  2,  rep  3  514c- 
515a;  q  118,  aa  1-2  600a-603b;  q  119,  a  i,  ans 
604c-607b;  a  2  607b-608d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  80,  a  2,  rep  2  957c-958b;  a  3,  ans  958b- 
959c;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2,4-5  959c-963a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xxv 
[37-51]  91  d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
144b; 189b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  269b-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation, 338a-d;340c- 
342d;  347d-348d;  353a-363d;  365a;  383d- 
407a  esp  402d-405c;  417a-429c;  461d-472c; 
473c-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  192a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  257c;  372b-c 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  653b-c; 
655b- d  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  853d-854c 

8c(4)  The  mating  of  animals:  pairing  and 
copulation 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  67b;  BKin,113a-b 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  158a-b  /  Republic,  bk  v, 
361c-d  /  Laws,  bk  viii,  737d-738b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[5oob7~i4]  22d;  bk  v,  ch  2-14  66b-73b;  ch  19 
[55ob2i-26]  77d;  ch  28  [555^8-23]  82c;  ch  30 
[556*25-28]  83a;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [56ob25~32]  87b; 
ch  4  [562^6-29]  89a;  ch  13  [567a28-bi2]  93c; 
ch  17  [570*27-29]  96b;  ch  18-37  97b-106d; 
bk  vii,  ch  7  [586*1 5—20]  112b;  bk  ix,  ch  i 


ANIMAL  43 

[6o9b2i  26]  135b;  cii  8  [61 ^24-614*30]  139b 
140a;  ch  37  [62ib22~28]  147b;  ch  41  [628^3- 
17]  153  d;  ch  47  156b  /  Generation  of  Animals, 
bk  1,  ch  4-7  257a-258b;  ch  14-16  260b  261b; 
cii  18  [72  3b9— 724*3]  263c-264a;  cii  19  [727b7] 
-ch  23  [73 ib  1 4]  267c  271d  passim;  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[737b25~739b2o]  278c-280c;  ch  7  [746*29)^11 
8  [749*5]  287c-290a,c;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [749b7~ 
750*7]  290d-291b;  cii  5-6  296c-298a;  ch  8 
298d-299b;  ch  10  [760^3-761*12]  302a;  bk 
iv,  cii  5  [773b23-774*i3]  315d-316a  /  Politics, 
bk  1,  ch  2  [1252*26-31]  445c 
10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters ,  Places,  par  21 
17b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1037- 
l057]  57d;  [1073-1120]  58a-d;  [1192-1208] 
59d-60a;  [1263-1279]  60d 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, 
a  3,  rep  2  490c-491b;  q  97,  a  2,  rep  3  514c- 
515a;  q  98,  a  2  517d-519a 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  224a-225b;  399a-b 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  343b-350a 
passim;  394b-398c;  401b-406a;  406d-407a; 
417a-429c  passim,  esp  423b-c;  476b-477b 
36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  162b;  166a-b 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  555a-556a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  287a-b;  289b-292a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  43d-44a;  47c-d; 
49b-c  /  Descent  of  Man ,  366c-368b;  369b- 
372c;  387d;  395a-480a  passim;  482b-486c; 
532a-d;  543d-545d;  580c-581b 

53  James:  Psychology,  14b 

54  Freud:  Ego  and  Id,  711d-712a 

8r(5)  Factors  affecting  fertility  and  sterility 
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  ii 
[5 i8bi— 3]  43a;  bk  v,  ch  ii  [543b2i— 3 i]  70c; 
ch  14  71b-73b;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [58ib22]-cH  3 
[583*25]  107b-108d  passim;  ch  5  [585*33]-^  6 
[585b29]  lllb-d;  bk  ix,  ch  50  [63 ^19-632*32] 
157a-c  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  4 
[717*29^5]  257b;  ch  7  258a-b;  ch  18  [725*4- 
726*7]  265a-266a;  ch  19  [727b6-26]  267c-268a; 
bk  11,  ch  4  [739*26-35]  280b;  ch  7  [746bi2]-cH 
8  [749*5]  287d-290a,c;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [749^6- 
75°ai3l  291a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [767*13-35]  308c- 
d;  ch  5  [773b29— 33]  315d  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch 
r6  [1335*7— bi ]  540a-c 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  3  9c- 
10a;  par  19-23  16c-18c  /  Aphorisms,  sect  v, 
par  46  139b;  par  59  139d;  par  62-63  139d- 
140a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [1233— 
1277] 60b-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  474b-475a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xxiii, 
190c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  404b-c 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  lOa-b;  47d-48a; 
132a-133a;  136a-151d  esp  136a-b,  141a-c, 
143b-145c;  230b-231b/  Descent  of  Man,  354b- 
355a 


ci4 

(8.  The  generation  of  animals.) 

8d.  Comparison  of  human  with  animal  repro¬ 
duction 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[489^ 6— bi8]  lOd-lla;  bk  v-vii  65a-114a,c  esp 
bk  v,  ch  i  65a-66a,  ch  8  [542aiy-bi]  68d-69a, 
bk  vi,  ch  18  97b-99c,  bk  vii  106b,d-114a,c  / 
Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  9-1  i  258d- 
259b;  bk  11,  ch  i  [732a24-733b23]  272c-274a; 
ch  4-7  278b-288b  esp  ch  4  [737b25~739b33] 
278c-280d  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i252a26-3i] 
445c;  bk  vii,  ch  16  [1335^  1-18]  540a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xxii,  ch  24, 
609b-610a 

19  Aquinas:  Sumtna  Theologica,  part  i,  q  75, 
a  6,  rep  1  383c-384c;q  92,  a  i,  ans  488d-489d; 
q  98,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1,3  517d-519a;  q  118, 
aa  1-2  600a-603b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xxv 
[34-78]  91d-92a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  399a-b;  424d-425c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  338a-496d 
esp  449a-454a,  463d-464a,  470c-472c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  555a-556a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  346b-d;  348d 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [6838-6847]  167b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  256c-257a;  354b- 
355a 

54  Freud:  Sexual  Enlightenment  of  Children , 

121d 

9.  The  development  of  the  embryo:  birth  and 
infancy 

9a.  Oviparous  and  viviparous  development 
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[489^4— bi 9]  lOd-lla;  bk  v,  ch  18  [549b3o- 
55°a3ij  76d-77b;  bk  vi,  ch  3  87c-88d;  ch  10 
[56^26-565*12]  91a-b;  ch  13  [56; ^27 -568^] 
93d-94a;  bk  vii,  ch  7  112b-c  /  Parts  of  Ani¬ 
mals  y  bk  iv,  ch  12  [693b2i-27]  225c  /  Genera¬ 
tion  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  8-13  258b-260b; 
bk  11,  ch  1  [732a24~733b23]  272c-274a;  ch  4 
[737b7“25l  278b-c;  [739^  1-33]  280c-d;  bk 
iii,  ch  1  [749ai2-33]  290b-d;  ch  i  [75ia5]-cH  4 
[755a34]  292a-296c  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  8 
[i256bi  1— 1 5]  450b-c 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  277c-d;  298b-c 
/  On  Animal  Generation ,  338a-496d  esp  449a- 
454a,  463d-464a,  470c-472c 

9b.  The  nourishment  of  the  embryo  or  foetus 
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  v,  ch  18 
[550ai6-24]  77a;  bk  vi,  ch  3  87c-88d;  ch  10 
[564b26-565ai2]  91a-b;  [565b2-io]  91c-d;  ch 
13  [568ai— 4]  94a;  bk  vii,  ch  8  112c-113a  / 
Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  22  [730a33-b9] 
270d;  bk  11,  ch  4  [74oai7-74ia2]  281a-d;  ch  7 
[745b22~746a28]  287a-c;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [75 ia6— 7] 
292a;  ch  2  [752a24-b28]  293b-294a;  [753^6- 
754*15]  294c-295b;  ch  3  [754°!— 755a6]  295c- 


8 d  to  9d  >•' 

296a;  bk  iv,  ch  6  [775b2-24]  317c-d;  ch  8 
318b-319c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  ii8, 
a  i,  rep  4  600a-601c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl,  0. 
q  8o,  a  4,  rep  5  959c-963a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  298b-c  /  On 
Animal  Generation ,  366d-367b;  373b-c;  378b- 
d;  379b-381a;  396b;  398d-399c;  408b-415b; 
438c-443b;  446c-447a;  458a-461d  esp461a-d; 
463b-466b;  471d-472a;  481d-482b;  484c; 
485c-488c 

9c.  The  process  of  embryogeny:  the  stages  of 
foetal  growth 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  4  [ioi4b20- 
22] 535a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  vi,  ch  3 
87c-88d;  ch  10  [564b26~565ai2]  91a-b;  ch  13 
[567b27~568a4]  93d-94a;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [583b2- 
8]  109a;  ch  7-8  112b-113a;  bk  viii,  ch  2 
[589b29-59oan]  116b-c  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk 
iii,  ch  4  [665a3 1— bi]  193a  /  Generation  of  Ani¬ 
mals ,  bk  1,  ch  20  [729ai2]-CH  23  [731^1]  269b- 
271c;  bk  ii,  ch  1  [733b22~735a28]  274a-276a; 
ch  3  [737ai 8—34]  278a-b;  ch  4  [739^7^5] 
280c-282a;  ch  5  [74ib5]-cH  6  [745b22]  282c- 
287a;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [752bi2]-cn  4  [755a34] 
293d-296c;  ch  ii  [762aio-bi9]  303a-d;  bk  iv, 
ch  1  304b,d-308a;  ch  4  [77 ibi 9-772^9]  313c- 
314b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  5-6  169b- 
170c;  bk  11,  ch  3  185a-186d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  118, 
a  1,  rep  4  600a-601c;  a  2,  rep  2  601c-603b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xxv 
[34-78]  91d-92a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  277c-d;  298b-c; 
302b-c  /  On  Animal  Generation ,  359a-c;  363d- 
398c  esp  394b-d;  402d-405c;  407c-431b  esp 
415a-b;  438c-456a  esp  451c-453b;  478a-488d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy \  352b-353b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  143d-144a;  219d- 
225b  esp  219d-222a  /  Descent  of  Man ,  257c- 
258b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  509d-510a 

9 d.  Multiple  pregnancy:  superfoetation 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  25:24-26;  38:27-30 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  112d-113a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  v,  ch  9 
[542b3o-33]  69c;  bk  vi,ch  3  [562*24^2]  88c-d; 
ch  11  [566*15— 16]  92b;  ch  12  [566b6-8]  92c-d: 
ch  19  [573bi9-32]  99c-d;  ch  20  [574b25~26] 
100c;  ch  22  [575b34— 576a3]  101c;  ch  30  [579s* 
20-21]  104d;  ch  31  [579a34-bi2]  105a-b;  ch 
33-35  105c-106a;  ch  37  [58obio-2o]  106b-c; 
bk  vii,  ch  4  [584b26~585a27]  llOc-lllb  /  Parts  5 
of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  10  [688a28-b25]  220a-c  / 
Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  18  [723b9~i6] 
263c-d;  ch  20  [72^33-72^20]  269a-b;  bk  iv,  , 
ch  4-5  311c-316c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


9e  to  10 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


10  Hippocrates:  Aphorisms,  sect  v,  par  38  139a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  363a;  382d- 
384a;  481a;  482b;  482d-483a;  484b;  488a; 
488c 

S>e.  The  period  of  gestation:  parturition,  de¬ 
livery,  birth 

Old  Testament:  Getiesis,  25:24-26;  38:27-30  / 
Job,  39:1-4 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  7:2— (D)  OT, 
Bool{  of  Wisdom ,  7 :2 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  1 1 2d-l  13b ;  bk 
vi,  197b-c;  198b-d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  v,  ch  ii 
[543bi4— 17]  70b;  ch  12  [544*1— 3]  70c;  ch  14 
[545b6-9]  72b;  [546bi-i4]  73a-b;  cm  17  [549* 
14-20]  76a;  [549bi— 13]  76b-c;  ch  18  [550*26- 
29]  77b;  [550b6— 14]  77c;  ch  20  [553a2~n]  79d; 
bk  vi,  cii  2  [559bi  1— 16]  86b;  [56obi7— 24]  87a- 
b;  ch  4  [562bi5— 3 1  ]  89a;  ch  10  [565*22—3 1  ] 
91c;  [565b24~32]  92a;  ch  ii  [566*15— 16]  92b; 
ch  12  [566^9-20]  92d;  ch  13  [567*28-b27] 
93c-d;  ch  17  96b-97b;  ch  18  [57^31—573*32] 
98d-99a;  ch  19  [573b2i]  99c;  ch  20  [574a20-b7] 
lOOa-b;  ch  21  [575*25-29]  101a;  ch  22  [575b 
26-27]  101c;  [576*21-25]  101d-I02a;  ch  23 
[577*24^10]  102d-103a;  ch  26  [578*io]-ch  29 
[578bi8]  103d-104b;  ch  30  [579*19^11  31 
[579b5]  104d-105a;  ch  33  [579b3i]-CH  35 
[580*19]  105c-106a;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [582*16-21] 
107d;  ch  3  [583bn]-CH  4  [584^5]  109b-110c; 
ch  9  [586b26]-cH  10  [587b5]  113a-d;  bk  viii, 
ch  21  [6o3b3 4-604*3]  129d;  ch  24  [604^9- 
605*1]  130c  /  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  cii 
ii  [719*2-30]  259a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  8  [748*27-31] 
289c;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [752*10-^7]  293a-d;  bk  iv, 
ch  4  [772b5— 1 1  ]  314b-c;  ch  6  [775*28-b2] 
317b-c;  ch  8  [777*22}-^  10  [778*12]  319b- 
320a, c  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  16  [1335*11-22] 
540a;  [i335bi2-i9]  540c 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  4-5 
lOa-d;  par  7,  lla-c  /  Aphorisms ,  sect  v,  par 
29-62  138d-139d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  iii,  ch  3  200a- 
201a;  ch  12,  208c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
5c-6b;  8c-9c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  343d;  353a- 
b;  381b-382d;  406a-b;  458c-459d;  476c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  268a-b;  2 70a- 2 74a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl 254a-255a;  287a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  94a  /  Descent  of 
Man ,  341b, d  [fn  32];  384b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  180d-183b 

54  Freud:  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety , 
737c-738a  passim 

9/.  The  care  and  feeding  of  infant  offspring: 
lactation 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  362b-c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[500*13-33]  22b-c;  ch  13  [504b22-27]  27a-b; 


45 

bk  iii,  ch  20  [52 ib2i]— cii  21  [523*13]  46d-48c; 
bk  v,  cii  18  [550*32  b6]  77b  c;  cii  22  [55^24- 
554b6]  80c  81b;  cii  26  27  82a  c;  cii  33 
[558*41-011  34  [558b4]  84d-85a,c;  bk  vi,  cii  4 
88d  89b;  ch  6-9  89c-90d;  cii  12  [566bi6- 
567*7]  92d-93a;  cii  14  (568bi3— 569*4]  94c- 
95a;  cii  20  (574b7  13]  100b;  ch  21  [575b9-i2] 
101b;  cii  22  [576bi  1— 12]  102a  b;  cii  26-27 
103d;  cii  33  [580*2-5]  105c-d;  bk  vii,  ch  3 
[583*26-33]  108d-109a;  cii  5  [585*29-33]  111b; 
cii  11  114a, c;  bk  viii,  cii  i  [588b3 1-589*3] 
115b;  bk  ix,  ch  4  [6ii*9]-ch  5  [611*21]  136d; 
ch  7  [6 1 2b2 6-6 1 3*  1 6]  138c-d;  ch  8  [6 1 3b7~ 33 ] 
139a-c;  ch  ii  [6i4b3 1— 34]  140c;  ch  29  143c  d; 
ch  32-34  144b-145c  passim;  ch  37  [621*21  -bi] 
146d-147a;  ch  49  [63 ibi3— 17]  156d-157a  / 
Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  cii  10  [688*19 -b3 4] 
219d-220d  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch 
2  [752bi7-753*i7]  293d-294b;  cii  10  [759a36— 
b8]  300c;  bk  iv,  ch  8  318b-319c  /  Politics, 
bk  1,  ch  8  [i256b7— 15]  450b-c;  bk  vii,  cii  17 
[i336*3-22]  541a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [806-815] 
71c 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  288d  /  On 
Animal  Generation,  350c-d;  361b-362c;  381b- 
382d;  402a-b;  439a-d;  461b;  464c-d;  487c- 
488a 

33  Pascal:  Weight  of  Air,  415a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  78-80 
42b-43a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  316b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  336a-b;  337b;  340c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  510b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  286b-287b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  llOc-lllb  /  De¬ 
scent  of  Man,  289d-290a;  339d-340c;  441c-d; 
443b-444a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  i,  661d; 
662c-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  709a-710a 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  854c 

9g .  Characteristics  of  the  offspring  at  birth 
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  vi,  ch  20 
[574*20-29]  100a;  ch  30  [579*21]-^  31  [579b9] 
104d-105b;  ch  33  [580*4]-^  35  [580*29] 
105d-106a  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  6 
[774b5"775a6]  316c-317a;  bk  v  320a-331a,c 
passim 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  222b-223b 

53  James:  Psychology,  49b-50a;  691a-b;  710a 

10.  Heredity  and  environment:  the  genetic 
determination  of  individual  differences 
and  similarities 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii,  340b-341a 
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  vi,  ch  19 
[573b32— 574*9]  99d;  ch  29  [578b26-3o]  104c; 
bk  vii,  ch  6  [585b29— 586*1 4]  llld-112b  /  Parts 
of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [640*14-28]  162c-d; 
[64ib27— 39]  164d-165a;  ch  17  [72ibi4]-CH  18 


46 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(10.  Heredity  and  environment:  the  genetic  de¬ 
termination  of  individual  differences  and 
similarities .) 

[724ai3]  261c-264b;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [766b7-i2] 
307d;  ch  3-4  308d-315b  /  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
[i262ai4~24]  457a;  bk  vii,  ch  16  [i335bi7— 19] 
540c 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters ,  Places,  par  14 
15a-b  /  Sacred  Disease ,  155d-156a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [741-753] 
39c-d;  bk  iv  [1209-1232]  60a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  119, 
a  2,  rep  2  607b-608d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  363a-c; 
386d-387b;  391c-393b;  395a-396a;  425b-d; 
446b'C;  455d-456a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  23  274b-c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  191b-192b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  335a-b;  337a;  347a-b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  7d-8a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  580a;  581d-582a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  9b-12a  esp  9b-10d; 
53b-55b;  62a-63a;  65a-71a;  98c;  132a-134c 
esp  134a-c;  144a;  149b-150c;  182d-183a;  220b- 
228a  esp  222a-224b  /  Descent  of  Man,  268b- 
269a;  375a-382d  esp  381c-382a;  413d  [fn  61]; 
429d-430c;  500a-525a  passim,  esp  500a-502a, 
511a-b,  524d-525a;  529d-531a,c 

53  James:  Psychology,  853a-858a  esp  857b;  890b- 
897b  esp  896a-897a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  594d-595a 
1 1.  The  habitat  of  animals 

1  la.  The  geographical  distribution  of  animals: 
their  natural  habitats 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:20-21,24-2 6 
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  113a-b;  bk  v, 
161b-c;  bk  vii,  236d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[487*14^5]  8a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [525ai2-25]  51a- 
c;  bk  v,  ch  15  [547^-12]  73d;  ch  15  [547bn]- 
ch  16  [548a28]  74b-75a;  ch  16  [548bi8— 30] 
75c-d;  ch  17  [549bi4-22]  76c;  ch  22  [554b8- 
18]  81b-c;  ch  28  [556^-6]  82d;  ch  30  [556^1- 
24]  83a;  ch  31  [557*4-32]  83d-84a;  bk  vi,  ch  5 
[5^3a5-12]  89b;  BK  VIII»  CH  2~20  115c-129b  esp 
ch  2  [589aio-590ai9]  115c-116c,  ch  12-17 
122d-127b;  ch  28-29  131c-132d;  bk  ix,  ch 
11-27  140c-143c  passim;  ch  32  [6 1 8b  1 8—6 1 9a8] 
144b-c  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  ii 
[76^9-24]  302c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [532-540] 
21d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq  71- 
72  367a-369d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  vii  [387-498]  225b- 
228a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  630b-c  [n  43] 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  146b-148a 


11  to  \la 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  181a-206a,c  esp 
181a-184d,  196a-199d,  204d-206a,c;  231b-c; 
237c-238b 

11&.  The  relation  between  animals  and  their 
environments 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv,  129a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i98bi6— 33] 
275d-276a  /  Longevity  710a-713a,c  passim 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[487ai4-b33]  8a-d;  bk  iii,  ch  12  [519*3-19] 
43d-44a;  ch  21  [52213 12-523^]  47d-48a;  bk 
iv,  ch  5  [53obi9-24]  57c;  bk  v,  ch  ii  [543bi9— 
31]  70b-c;  ch  22  [553^0-24]  80c;  bk  viii,  ch 
2-29  115c-132d;  bk  ix,  ch  i  [6o8bi8-6ioa34] 
134a-136a;  ch  37  [622^-15]  147c  /  Parts  of 
Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  16  [658^0-659^6]  185d- 
186b;  bk  iv,  ch  5  [68oa28-b3]  210d;  ch  8 
[684ai— 14]  215b;  ch  12  [693aio-24]  225a/  Gait 
of  Animals,  ch  15  [7i3a4]-cH  18  [7i4b8]  250d- 
252a  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[73^a9~27]  278d-279a;  bk  iv,  ch  2  308b-d; 
bk  v,  ch  3  [782b23~783b22]  324d-325d 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  12 
14b-d;  par  19  16c-17a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [845-854] 
72a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv, 
242a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  223c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  160c- 
d;  second  day,  187b-188c 
30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  13,  146c 
33  Pascal:  Equilibrium  of  Liquids ,  401a-403a 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  79a-b 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  224b;  295b-296b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiv, 
102b,d-104a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  553c-554b;  585b 

43  Federalist:  number  ii,  56a 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  ii, 
57b-c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  209b 
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  534c-535b 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  9a-10d;  32a-39a,c 
passim,  esp  34c-36a,  39a, c;  40d-42c;  53d-55b; 
65a-69c  esp  65b-66a;  106b-107a;  144a-145c; 
182d-183a;  230d-231b  /  Descent  of  Man, 
268b-269a;  320a-c;  341b, d  [fn  32];  354c-355a; 
430d-432c;  442a-443b;  468d-469a;  525b- 
527c; 554d-555b 

53  James  :  Psychology,  857b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  791d- 
792a 

12.  The  treatment  of  animals  by  men 

12 a.  The  taming  of  animals 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  iv  [625-637]  205c 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [459-468]  44d 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-352]  134a 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  128a-d 


m  to  \2c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[488a26— 31  ]  9b;  bk  vi,  ch  21  [575bi— 3]  101a; 
bk  ix,  ch  i  [608^24-27]  133b, d;  [6o8b3<v- 
609^)  134b;  [6ioa24~34]  135d;  ch  26  143b; 
ch  46  [63obi8-2i]  156a  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  cii  5 
[i254b4-i3J  448a 

14  Plutarch:  Alexander ,  542d-543b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  Q96,  a  i, 
rep  2  510b-511b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3,  rep  2  8b-9a 

25  Montaigne:  Essaysy  220d-222c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  146b-  148b;  164b; 
167b-168a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  337a;  356d-357a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  86d;  107a-b;  221  d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  56 
26b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  13c-d;  121b-122c 
passim;  233c-d 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  87b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  708a-709a 

12&.  The  use  and  abuse  of  animals 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  4:4;  8:6-12;  22:1-13  / 
Exodus ,  20:8-11;  22:19;  23:i2  /  Leviticus  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  11, 18:23,  20:15-16  /  Numbers ,  22:21- 
34  /  Deuteronomy ,  5:12-14;  22:6-7,10;  25:4; 
27:21  /  Proverbs ,  12:10  /  Daniel ,  6:6-28 

Apocrypha:  Pc/  wwz/  Dragony  23-28 — (D)  OT, 
Daniel ,  14:22-27 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  21  :i-ii  /  Mar\,  1 :6; 
6:34-44;  1 1 : 1— 1 1  /  Lu\ ey  19:29-38  /  John , 
12:14-15  /  /  Corinthians ,  9:9  f  1  Timothy ,  5:18 

4  Homer:  Iliad  3a-179d  passim,  esp  bk  i  [428- 
471]  7c-8a,  bk  11  [394-431]  14a-b,  [760-779] 
17c-d,  bk  iv  [104-111]  25a,  bk  v  [191-208] 
32a-b,  bk  xxiii  [262-611]  164a-167c  /  Odyssey , 
bk  hi  [418-463]  197b-d;  bk  xi  [23-50]  243b-c; 
bk  xii  [260-419]  252d-254c 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [459-468]  44d 

5  Aristophanes:  Pcwcc  [1-181]  526a-528a  / 

[294-382]  545d-547b;  [1076-1087]  556a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  57b-58b;  59b-c; 
62c-64c;  bk  hi,  95b-c;  llld-112c;  113c-d;  bk 
iv,  127d-128a;  146d-147a;  bk  v,  183b-d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  iii,  ch  20 
[522a25]-cH  21  [523ai3]  47b-48c;  bk  v,  ch  22 
80b-81c;  bk  ix,  ch  i  [610^5-34]  135d  /  Po/z- 
ticsy  bk  1,  ch  8  [i256b8-26]  450b-c;  ch  ii 
[i258bi2-2o]  452d-453a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [i289b33- 
40]  488d-489a;  bk  vi,  ch  7  [i32ia9-i2]  524d; 
bk  vii,  ch  2  [i324b36-4i]  528d-529a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [860-870] 
72b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  16, 121d-122a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  vi,  sect  23  276b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid  103a-379a  esp  bk  iii  [218-257] 
153a-154a,  bk  v  [84-99]  189b,  BK  VIn  [81—87] 
261a 

14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato ,  278d-279c  /  /£/<?*- 

541  b-c 


47 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  72, 
a  1,  rep  6  368b  369d;  q  96,  a  i  510b  511b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i  ii,  q 
102,  a  3  272b-276c;  q  105,  a  2,  rep  11-12 
309d316a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
143b  d;  bk  iv,  245d-248c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  139c-143c;  206b-208a; 
219b-d;  220d-222c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  sciiol  i, 
435a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv  135a-184a 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  474b-477a;  483b- 
485a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  330d-331b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  38b  39a;  139c- 
140a;  411d-412c;  619d-620a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  107a-b;  221c- 
222a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  312b 

48  Melville:  Dzc^,  82b-83a;  307b-310b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  13c-d;  233c-d 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  86b;  183b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  19c-d;  bk  vii, 
278a-287a;  296d-297d;  bk  viii,  330d-332a; 
bk  xii,  538a-d;  bk  xiv,  592a-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  705a;  720a 

54  Freud:  IFtfr  tfzzz/  Death ,  758b-c  /  Civilization 
and  Its  Discontents ,  771d-772a 

12c.  Friendship  or  love  between  animals  and 
men 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  xvii  [426-455]  126c-d;  bk 
xix  [399-424]  141a, c;  bk  xxiii  [272-286]  164a 
/  Odyssey ,  bk  xvii  [290-327]  280a-c 

5  Aristophanes:  Bzty&  [294-382]  545d-547b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  5b-d 

9  Aristotle  :  History  of  Animals ,  bk  ix,  ch  44 
[63oa9-i2]  155b;  ch  48  [63ia7~io]  156b-c 
14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  121a-b  /  Marcus  Catoy 
278d-279c  /  Alexander ,  562b;  570a-b 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q  25, 
a  3  502c-503b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  206b-208a;  224c-225b; 
227b-228b 

26  Shakespeare:  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  act 
iv,  sc  iv  [1-42]  248b-d 

29  Cervantes:  Dow  Quixote ,  part  i,  2c-d; 
112b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  i, 
435a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  xixa;  part  iv,  180a 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  483b-485a 
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  221c-d  passim 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  229a 
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  289c;  303c;  307a-c; 
317d 

51  Tolstoy:  TEwr  tf/zz/  Pcwcc,  bk  vii,  278a-287a 
passim;  bk  xiii,  575b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
167c;  bk  x,  282a-288d 

53  James:  Psychology,  722ai-b 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


48 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  13 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  i  [i-iii]  la- 
2b;  vi  [1-33]  8b-d;  xn  [1-30]  16b-c;  xvi  [106]- 
xvii  [36]  23c-24b;  purgatory,  xiv  [16—66] 
73d-74b;  xxix  97d-99b;  xxxii  [106-160] 
103c-104a 

22  Chaucer:  Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [14,853-15,452] 
450b-460b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xviii,  25a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel,  bk  i,  2b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  215a-232b  passim 
27  Shakespeare:  Timon  of  Athens ,  act  iv,  sc 

iii  [320-348]  414b-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  39b-d; 
40d-41a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ix  [48-96]  248b- 
249b;  [523-612]  258b-260b  esp  [549-566] 
259b;  bk  x  [209-590]  279a-287a 
36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv  135a-184a 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  215b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  253b- 
254d 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [1202-1209]  30a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{  esp  131a-145a,  248b- 
249a,  289b-292a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xii,  553d-554a 

^  :  ;  •  .  ,  Vl 


For:  The  general  discussion  of  the  grades  of  life  and  the  kinds  of  soul,  see  Life  and  Death  3,  3b; 
Soul  20-20(3). 

Other  considerations  of  the  issue  concerning  continuity  or  discontinuity  in  the  relation  of 
plants,  animals,  and  men,  as  well  as  between  living  and  non-living  things,  see  Evolution 
3e,  7a~7b;  Life  and  Death  2,  3a;  Man  ia-ic;  Nature  3b;  Sense  2a. 

The  comparison  of  men  and  animals,  or  of  different  species  of  animals,  with  respect  to 
sensitivity,  memory,  imagination,  and  intelligence,  see  Memory  and  Imagination  i  ; 
Mind  3a~3b;  Reasoning  ia;  Sense  2b-2c. 

The  general  theory  of  instinct,  see  Habit  3~3e;  and  for  the  emotional  aspect  of  instincts,  see 
Emotion  ic. 

Diverse  theories  of  classification,  see  Definition  2a-2e;  Evolution  ia-ib. 

Alternative  theories  of  the  origin  and  development  of  living  organisms,  see  Evolution  4a,  4c. 
Other  discussions  of  heredity,  see  Evolution  3~3e;  Family  6b. 

Other  discussions  of  sexual  attraction,  mating,  and  reproduction,  see  Change  10b;  Family  7a; 
Love  2a(i),  2d. 

The  causes  of  animal  movement,  see  Cause  2;  Desire  2c;  Will  3a(i),  6c. 

Another  consideration  of  sleeping  and  waking,  see  Life  and  Death  5b. 

The  comparison  of  human  and  animal  societies,  see  State  ia. 


13.  The  attribution  of  human  qualities  or  vir¬ 
tues  to  animals:  personification  in  alle¬ 
gory  and  satire 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  3:1-5  /  Numbers, 
22:21-31 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xvii  [426-455]  126c-d; 
bk  xix  [399-424]  141a, c;  bk  xxiii  [272-286] 
164a 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [591-610]  477b-d  / 
Wasps  507a-525d  /  Birds  542a-563d  /  Frogs 
[205-270]  566d-567b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  21d-22a;  33a-b; 
bk  11,  61a-b;  bk  vi,  211a 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  128a-d  /  Republic ,  bk  ii, 
319c-320c  /  Statesman ,  583c-d;  588b-c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[488b3~25]  9c-d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [588ai8-b3] 
114b, d;  bk  ix,  ch  i  [6o8an-bi9]  133b,d-134a; 
ch  29  [618*25-30]  143d;  ch  38  148b;  ch  48 
[63ia8-2o]  156b-c  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  13 
[1284*11-18]  482b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  20 
fI393b8— i394&i]  641b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Ly sander,  357a  /  Sulla,  382c-d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  2,  98a 


CROSS-REFERENCES 


Chapter  2:  ANIMAL 


49 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booty  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Galen.  On  the  Utility  of  Parts 
Hobbes.  Concerning  Body ,  part  iv,  ch  25 
Goethe.  Metamorphose  der  Pflanzen 

II. 

Aesop's  Fables 

Theophrastus.  Enquiry  into  Plants 

Ovid.  Metamorphoses 

Pliny.  Natural  History 

Vesalius.  The  Epitome 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xliv  (3) 

La  Fontaine.  Fables 
Linnaeus.  Sy sterna  Naturae 
Lamettrie.  Man  a  Machine 
Condillac.  Traite  des  animaux 
Buffon.  Natural  History 
E.  Darwin.  The  Loves  of  the  Plants 
Cuvier.  The  Animal  Kingdom 
Balzac.  A  Passion  in  the  Desert 
Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy ,  bk  v 
Schwann.  Microscopical  Researches  into  the  Accord¬ 
ance  in  the  Structure  and  Growth  of  Animals  and 
Plants 

Lotze.  Microcosmos ,  bk  i,  ch  5 


Bernard.  Introduction  to  Experimental  Medicine 
E.  Hartmann.  Philosophy  of the  Unconscious,  (c)ii, 

IV 

T.  H.  Huxley.  Methods  and  Results ,  v 
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough ,  part  v,  cii  9,  13-17 
Wundt.  Outlines  of  Psychology,  (19) 

Iennings.  Behavior  of  the  Lower  Organisms 
Sherrington.  The  Integrative  Action  of  the  Nervous 
System 

Driesch.  The  Science  and  Philosophy  of  the  Organism 
Henderson.  The  Fitness  of  the  Environment 
Koehler.  The  Mentality  of  Apes 
D.  W.  Thompson.  On  Growth  and  Form 
Loeb.  The  Organism  as  a  Whole 

- .  Forced  Movements ,  Tropisms  and  Animal 

Conduct 

J.  S.  Haldane  and  J.  G.  Priestley.  Respiration 
Pavlov.  Conditioned  Reflexes 
Alverdes.  Social  Life  in  the  Animal  World 
Wheeler.  Foibles  of  Insects  and  Men 
Bose.  Life  Movements  in  Plants 

- .  Growth  and  Tropic  Movements  of  Plants 

Needham.  Order  and  Life 
Whitehead.  Modes  of  Thought,  lect  vii-viii 
Large.  The  Advance  of  the  Fungi 
Wiener.  Cybernetics 


1 


t 


/ 


Chapter  3:  ARISTOCRACY 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  forms  of  government  have  been  vari¬ 
ously  enumerated,  differently  classified, 
and  given  quite  contrary  evaluations  in  the 
great  books  of  political  theory.  In  the  actual 
history  of  political  institutions,  as  well  as  in  the 
tradition  of  political  thought,  the  major  prac¬ 
tical  issues  with  respect  to  the  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment — the  choices  open,  the  ideals  to  be 
sought,  or  the  evils  to  be  remedied — have  shifted 
with  the  times. 

In  an  earlier  day — not  merely  in  ancient 
times,  but  as  late  as  the  18th  century — the 
form  of  government  called  “aristocracy”  pre¬ 
sented  a  genuine  alternative  to  monarchy,  and 
set  a  standard  by  which  the  defects  and  infir¬ 
mities  of  democracy  were  usually  measured.  If 
aristocracy  was  not  always  regarded  as  the  ideal 
form  of  government,  the  principle  of  aristoc¬ 
racy  always  entered  into  the  definition  of  the 
political  ideal. 

Today,  both  in  theory  and  practice,  aristoc¬ 
racy  is  at  the  other  end  of  the  scale.  For  a 
large  part  of  mankind,  and  for  the  political 
philosopher  as  well  as  in  prevailing  popular 
sentiment,  aristocracy  (together  with  mon¬ 
archy)  has  become  a  subject  of  historical  inter¬ 
est.  It  is  a  form  of  government  with  a  past 
rather  than  a  future.  It  no  longer  measures,  but 
is  measured  by,  democracy.  If  the  aristocratic 
principle  still  signifies  a  factor  of  excellence  in 
government  or  the  state,  it  does  so  with  a  mean¬ 
ing  now  brought  into  harmony  with  demo¬ 
cratic  standards. 

This  change  accounts  for  one  ambiguity 
which  the  word  “aristocracy”  may  have  for 
contemporary  readers.  Formerly  its  primary, 
if  not  only,  significance  was  to  designate  a  form 
of  government.  It  is  currently  used  to  name  a 
special  social  class,  separated  from  the  masses 
by  distinctions  of  birth,  talent,  property,  power, 
or  leisure.  We  speak  of  “the  aristocracy”  as  we 


speak  of  “the  elite”  and  “the  four  hundred”; 
or  we  follow  Marx  and  Engels  in  thinking  of  the 
“feudal  aristocracy”  as  the  class  “that  was 
ruined  by  the  bourgeoisie.”  The  Communist 
Manifesto  wastes  little  sympathy  on  the  aristo¬ 
crats  who,  while  seeking  an  ally  in  the  prole¬ 
tariat,  forgot  that  “they  [too]  exploited  under 
circumstances  and  conditions  that  were  quite 
different.”  For  Marx  and  Engels,  the  aristoc¬ 
racy  and  the  bourgeoisie  alike  represent  the 
propertied  classes,  but  they  differ  in  the  man¬ 
ner  in  which  they  came  by  their  property  and 
power.  The  landed  gentry  and  the  feudal  no¬ 
bility  got  theirs  largely  by  inheritance,  the 
bourgeoisie  by  industry  and  trade. 

Today,  for  the  most  part,  we  call  a  man  an 
“aristocrat”  if,  justly  or  unjustly,  he  claims  a 
right  to  certain  social  distinctions  or  privileges. 
We  seldom  use  that  word  today  to  indicate  a 
man  who  deserves  special  political  status  or  pre¬ 
eminence,  though  we  do  sometimes  use  it  to 
name  the  proponent  of  any  form  of  government 
which  rests  upon  the  political  inequality  of 
men. 

Since  the  discussion  of  aristocracy  in  the 
great  books  is  largely  political,  we  shall  here  be 
primarily  concerned  with  aristocracy  as  a  form 
of  government.  The  general  consideration  of 
the  forms  of  government  will  be  found  in  the 
chapter  on  Government.  Here  and  in  the 
other  chapters  which  are  devoted  to  particular 
forms  of  government,  we  shall  consider  each  of 
the  several  forms,  both  in  itself  and  in  relation 
to  the  others. 

There  is  one  element  in  the  conception  of 
aristocracy  which  does  not  change  with  chang¬ 
ing  evaluations  of  aristocratic  government.  All 
of  the  writers  of  the  great  political  books  agree 
with  Plato  that  aristocracy  is  a  “government 
of  the  few,”  according  as  the  few  rather  than 


50 


Chapter  3:  ARISTOCRACY 


the  one  or  the  many  exercise  political  power 
and  dominate  the  state.  By  this  criterion  of 
number,  aristocracy  is  always  differentiated 
from  monarchy  and  democracy. 

Though  he  uses  the  word  “oligarchy”  to 
name  what  others  call  “aristocracy,”  Locke 
defines  the  three  forms  of  government  by  refer¬ 
ence  to  numbers.  When  the  majority  them¬ 
selves  exercise  the  whole  power  of  the  commu¬ 
nity,  Locke  says,  “then  the  form  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  is  a  perfect  democracy.”  When  they  put 
“the  power  of  making  laws  into  the  hands  of  a 
few  select  men  .  .  .  then  it  is  an  oligarchy;  or 
else  into  the  hands  of  one  man,  and  then  it  is 
a  monarchy.”  Kant  proceeds  similarly,  though 
again  in  somewhat  different  language.  “The  re¬ 
lation  of  the  supreme  power  to  the  people,”  he 
says,  “is  conceivable  in  three  different  forms: 
either  one  in  the  state  rules  over  all;  or  some , 
united  in  relation  of  equality  with  each  other, 
rule  over  all  the  others;  or  all  together  rule 
over  each  individually,  including  themselves. 
The  form  of  the  state  is  therefore  either  auto¬ 
cratic,  or  aristocratic ,  or  democratic .” 

Hegel  claims,  however,  that  “purely  quanti¬ 
tative  distinctions  like  these  are  only  super¬ 
ficial  and  do  not  afford  the  concept  of  the 
thing.”  The  criterion  of  number  does  not  seem 
to  suffice  when  other  forms  of  government 
are  considered.  It  fails  to  distinguish  monarchy 
from  tyranny  or  despotism,  which  may  consist 
of  rule  by  one  man,  as  has  usually  been  the  case 
historically.  Number  alone  likewise  fails  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  aristocracy  from  oligarchy.  In  the  de¬ 
liberations  of  the  Medean  conspirators,  which 
Herodotus  reports  or  invents,  the  rule  of  “a 
certain  number  of  the  worthiest”  is  set  against 
both  democracy  and  monarchy  and  identified 
as  “oligarchy.”  How,  then,  shall  aristocracy  be 
distinguished  from  oligarchy? 

There  seem  to  be  two  answers  to  this  ques¬ 
tion.  In  the  Statesman ,  Plato  adds  to  the  char¬ 
acteristic  of  number  the  “criterion  of  law  and 
the  absence  of  law.”  The  holders  of  political 
power,  whatever  their  number,  may  govern 
either  according  to  the  established  laws,  or  by 
arbitrary  caprice  in  violation  of  them.  “To  go 
against  the  laws,  which  are  based  upon  long  ex¬ 
perience,  and  the  wisdom  of  counsellors  who 
have  graciously  recommended  them  and  per¬ 
suaded  the  multitude  to  pass  them,  would  be,” 


51 

the  Eleatic  Stranger  declares  in  the  Statesman , 
“a  far  greater  and  more  ruinous  error  than  any 
adherence  to  written  law.” 

Taking  the  division  of  governments  accord¬ 
ing  to  number,  “the  principle  of  law  and  the 
absence  of  law  will  bisect  them  all.”  Monarchy 
divides  into  “royalty  and  tyranny”  depending 
on  whether  “an  individual  rules  according  to 
law  ...  or  governs  neither  by  law  nor  by  cus¬ 
tom,  but  .  .  .  pretends  that  he  can  only  act  for 
the  best  by  violating  the  laws,  while  in  reality 
appetite  and  ignorance  are  the  motives.”  By 
the  same  criterion,  the  rule  of  the  few  divides 
“into  aristocracy,  which  has  an  auspicious 
name,  and  oligarchy.”  While  democracy  is  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  same  division,  Plato  makes  the  same 
name  apply  to  both  its  good  and  bad  forms. 

The  second  way  in  which  aristocracy  differs 
from  oligarchy  is  also  brought  out  in  the  States¬ 
man.  Since  “the  science  of  government,”  ac¬ 
cording  to  Plato,  is  “among  the  greatest  of  all 
sciences  and  most  difficult  to  acquire  .  .  .  any 
true  form  of  government  can  only  be  supposed 
to  be  the  government  of  one,  two,  or,  at  any 
rate,  of  a  few  .  .  .  really  found  to  possess  sci¬ 
ence.”  Because  of  this  demand  for  “science,” 
which  presupposes  virtue  and  competence  in 
ruling,  monarchy  and  aristocracy  came  to  be 
defined  as  government  by  the  single  best  man 
or  by  the  few  best  men  in  the  community. 

A  high  degree  of  competence  or  virtue  is, 
however,  not  the  only  mark  by  which  the  few 
may  be  distinguished  from  the  many.  The 
possession  of  wealth  or  property  in  any  size¬ 
able  amount  also  seems  to  divide  a  small  class 
in  the  community  from  the  rest,  and  Plato  at 
times  refers  to  aristocracy  simply  as  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  rich.  Yet  if  wealth  is  the  criterion 
by  which  the  few  are  chosen  to  govern,  then 
oligarchy  results,  at  least  in  contrast  to  that 
sense  of  aristocracy  in  which  the  criterion  is 
excellence  of  mind  and  character.  Aristocracy 
is  called  aristocracy,  writes  Aristotle,  “either 
because  the  rulers  are  the  best  men,  or  because 
they  have  at  heart  the  best  interests  of  the  state 
and  of  the  citizens.” 

By  these  additional  criteria — never  by  num¬ 
bers  alone — the  ancients  conceive  aristocracy. 
When  it  is  so  defined,  it  always  appears  to 
be  a  good  form  of  government,  but  never  the 
only  good  form,  or  even  the  best.  The  same 


52 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


criteria  also  place  monarchy  among  the  good 
forms,  and — at  least  in  Plato’s  Statesman— de¬ 
mocracy  is  a  third  good  form,  when  it  is  lawful 
government  by  the  many,  the  many  being  com¬ 
petent  or  virtuous  to  some  degree.  In  this  triad 
of  good  forms,  aristocracy  ranks  second-best, 
because  government  by  one  man  is  supposed  to 
be  more  efficient,  or  because,  in  the  hierarchy 
of  excellence,  the  few  may  be  superior,  but  only 
the  one  can  be  supreme.  Aristotle,  however, 
seems  to  rank  aristocracy  above  monarchy. 
“If  we  call  the  rule  , of  many  men,  who  are  all 
of  them  good,  aristocracy,  and  the  rule  of  one 
man  royalty,”  he  writes,  “then  aristocracy  will 
be  better  for  states  than  royalty.” 

The  introduction  of  democracy  into  the  com¬ 
parison  tends  to  complicate  the  discussion.  Not 
only  are  the  many  usually  the  poor,  but  they 
are  also  seldom  considered  pre-eminent  in  vir¬ 
tue  or  competence.  According  to  the  way  in 
which  either  wealth  or  human  excellence  is  dis¬ 
tributed,  both  oligarchy  and  aristocracy  organ¬ 
ize  the  political  community  in  terms  of  inequal¬ 
ities  in  status,  power,  and  privilege.  This  fact 
leads  Rousseau,  for  example,  to  use  the  different 
kinds  of  inequality  among  men  as  a  basis  for 
distinguishing  “three  sorts  of  aristocracy — nat¬ 
ural,  elective,  and  hereditary.” 

Natural  aristocracy,  according  to  Rousseau, 
is  based  on  that  inequality  among  men  which  is 
due  primarily  to  age  and  is  found  among  simple 
peoples,  where  “the  young  bowed  without 
question  to  the  authority  of  experience.”  Elec¬ 
tive  aristocracy  arose  “in  proportion  as  artificial 
inequality  produced  by  institutions  became 
predominant  over  natural  inequality,  and  rich¬ 
es  or  power  were  put  before  age.”  This  form,  in 
Rousseau’s  opinion,  is  “the  best,  and  is  aris¬ 
tocracy  properly  so  called.”  The  third,  which 
is  characterized  as  “the  worst  of  all  govern¬ 
ments,”  came  about  when  “the  transmission  of 
the  father’s  power  along  with  his  goods  to  his 
children,  by  creating  patrician  families,  made 
government  hereditary.” 

This  emphasis  upon  inequality  radically  sep¬ 
arates  aristocracy  from  democracy.  From  Aris¬ 
totle  down  to  Montesquieu,  Rousseau,  and  ouf 
own  day,  equality  has  been  recognized  as  the 
distinctive  element  of  democracy.  Disregarding 
slaves  who,  for  the  ancients,  were  political 


pariahs,  Aristotle  makes  liberty  the  other  mark 
of  democracy — all  freemen  having,  apart  from 
wealth  or  virtue,  an  equal  claim  to  political 
status.  As  “the  principle  of  an  aristocracy  is 
virtue,”  Aristotle  writes,  so  wealth  is  the  prin¬ 
ciple  “of  an  oligarchy,  and  freedom  of  a  de¬ 
mocracy.” 

To  the  defenders  of  democracy,  ancient  or 
modern,  aristocracy  and  oligarchy  stand  to¬ 
gether,  at  least  negatively,  in  their  denial  of 
the  principle  of  equality.  To  the  defenders  of 
aristocracy,  oligarchy  is  as  far  removed  as  de¬ 
mocracy,  since  both  oligarchy  and  democracy 
neglect  or  underestimate  the  importance  of 
virtue  in  organizing  the  state.  Yet  oligarchy 
more  than  democracy  is  the  characteristic  per¬ 
version  of  aristocracy.  It  also  puts  government 
in  the  hands  of  the  few,  but  it  substitutes 
wealth  for  virtue  as  the  criterion.  The  demo¬ 
cratic  critic  of  aristocracy  usually  calls  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  way  in  which  oligarchy  tries  to  wear 
the  mask  of  aristocracy.  However  far  apart  aris¬ 
tocracy  and  oligarchy  may  be  in  definition,  he 
insists  that  in  actual  practice  they  tend  to  be¬ 
come  identical,  in  proportion  as  wealth,  or 
noble  birth,  or  social  class  is  taken  as  the  sign 
of  intrinsic  qualities  which  are  thought  to  de¬ 
serve  special  political  recognition. 

The  defenders  of  aristocracy  have  admitted 
the  tendency  of  aristocratic  government  to  de¬ 
generate  into  oligarchy.  Its  critics  are  not  satis¬ 
fied  with  this  admission.  They  deny  that  aris¬ 
tocracy  has  ever  existed  in  purity  of  principle — 
they  deny  that  the  governing  few  have  ever 
been  chosen  solely  for  their  virtue.  Machiaveili 
assumes  it  to  be  a  generally  accepted  fact  that 
“the  nobles  wish  to  rule  and  oppress  the  people 
.  .  .  and  give  vent  to  their  ambitions.”  Mon¬ 
tesquieu,  although  more  optimistic  about  the 
possibility  of  a  truly  virtuous  aristocracy,  rec¬ 
ognizes  its  tendency  to  profit  at  the  expense  of 
the  people.  To  overcome  this  he  would  have 
the  laws  make  it  “an  essential  point  .  .  .  that 
the  nobles  themselves  should  not  levy  the  taxes 
...  and  should  likewise  forbid  the  nobles  all 
kinds  of  commerce  .  .  .  and  abolish  the  right  of 
primogeniture  among  the  nobles,  to  the  end 
that  by  a  continual  division  of  the  inheritances 
their  fortunes  may  be  always  upon  a  level.” 

But  perhaps  the  strongest  attack  upon  aris¬ 
tocracy  in  all  of  the  great  political  books  is 


I 

Chapter  3 :  ARISTOCRACY  53 


made  by  Mill  in  his  Representative  Government . 
He  admits  that  “the  governments  which  have 
been  remarkable  in  history  for  sustained  mental 
ability  and  vigour  in  the  conduct  of  affairs  have 
generally  been  aristocracies.”  But  he  claims 
that,  whatever  their  abilities,  such  govern¬ 
ments  were  “essentially  bureaucracies,”  and 
j  the  “dignity  and  estimation”  of  their  ailing 
members  were  “quite  different  things  from  the 
prosperity  or  happiness  of  the  general  body  of 
the  citizens,  and  were  often  wholly  incompati¬ 
ble  with  it.”  When  their  actions  are  dictated  by 
“sinister  interests,”  as  frequently  happens,  the 
aristocratic  class  “assumes  to  themselves  an 
endless  variety  of  unjust  privileges,  sometimes 
benefiting  their  pockets  at  the  expense  of  the 
people,  sometimes  merely  tending  to  exalt 
them  above  others,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing 
in  different  words,  to  degrade  others  below 
themselves.” 

Yet  except  by  those  political  thinkers  who 
deny  the  distinction  between  good  and  bad 
government,  and  hence  the  relevance  of  virtue 
to  institutions  which  are  solely  expressions  of 
power,  the  aristocratic  principle  is  seldom  en¬ 
tirely  rejected.  Even  when  the  notion  of  a  pure 
aristocracy  is  dismissed  as  an  ideal  which  can 
never  be  fully  realized,  the  aristocratic  princi- 
1  pie  reappears  as  a  counsel  of  perfection  in  the 
improvement  of  other  forms  of  government. 

Even  so,  one  difficulty  remains,  which  tends 
to  prevent  aristocracy  from  being  realized  in 
practice,  quite  apart  from  any  question  of  its 
soundness  in  principle.  It  lies  in  the  reluctance 
of  the  best  men  to  assume  the  burdens  of  public 
office.  The  parable  told  in  the  Book  of  Judges 
applies  to  aristocracy  as  much  as  to  monarchy. 

The  trees  went  forth  on  a  time  to  anoint  a  king 
over  them;  and  they  said  unto  the  olive  tree,  Reign 
thou  over  us. 

But  the  olive  tree  said  unto  them,  Should  I  leave 
my  fatness,  wherewith  by  me  they  honor  God  and 
man,  and  go  to  be  promoted  over  the  trees? 

And  the  trees  said  to  the  fig  tree,  Come  thou,  and 
reign  over  us. 

But  the  fig  tree  said  unto  them,  Should  I  forsake 
my  sweetness,  and  my  good  fruit,  and  go  to  be 
promoted  over  the  trees? 

Then  said  the  trees  unto  the  vine.  Come  thou, 
and  reign  over  us. 

And  the.  vine  said  unto  them,  Should  I  leave  my 
wine,  which  cheereth  God  and  man,  and  go  to  be 
promoted  over  the  trees? 


Then  said  all  the  trees  unto  the  bramble,  Come 
thou,  and  reign  over  us. 

And  the  bramble  said  unto  the  trees,  If  in  truth  ye 
anoint  me  king  over  you,  then  come  and  put  your 
trust  in  my  shadow:  and  if  not,  let  fire  come  out  of 
the  bramble,  and  devour  the  cedars  of  Lebanon. 

Socrates  thinks  he  has  a  solution  for  this  prob¬ 
lem.  In  the  Republic ,  he  proposes  a  new  way 
to  induce  good  men  to  rule.  Since  “money  and 
honor  have  no  attraction  for  them,”  necessity, 
Socrates  says,  “must  be  laid  upon  them,  and 
they  must  be  induced  to  serve  from  fear  of 
punishment.  .  .  .  Now  the  worst  part  of  the 
punishment  is  that  he  who  refuses  to  rule  is  lia¬ 
ble  to  be  ruled  by  one  who  is  worse  than  him¬ 
self.  And  the  fear  of  this,  as  I  conceive,  induces 
the  good  to  take  office  .  .  .  not  under  the  idea 
that  they  are  going  to  have  any  benefit  or  en¬ 
joyment  themselves,  but  as  a  necessity,  and 
because  they  are  not  able  to  commit  the  task 
of  ruling  to  anyone  who  is  better  than  them¬ 
selves,  or  indeed  as  good.” 

The  political  issues,  in  which  monarchy, 
aristocracy,  oligarchy,  and  democracy  represent 
the  major  alternatives,  cannot  be  clarified  with¬ 
out  recourse  to  the  distinction  between  govern¬ 
ment  by  laws  and  government  by  men. 

It  has  already  been  noted  that  in  the  States' 
man  Plato  makes  respect  for  the  laws  and  vio¬ 
lation  of  the  laws  the  marks  of  good  and  bad 
government  respectively.  But  he  also  proposes 
that  “the  best  thing  of  all  is  not  that  the  law 
should  rule,  but  that  a  man  should  rule,  sup¬ 
posing  him  to  have  wisdom  and  royal  power.” 
The  imperfections  of  law  could  then  be  avoided, 
because  one  or  a  few  men  of  almost  superhuman 
wisdom  would  govern  their  inferiors  even  as 
the  gods  could  direct  the  affairs  of  men  without 
the  aid  of  established  laws.  But  if  no  man  is  a 
god  in  relation  to  other  men,  then,  in  Plato’s 
opinion,  it  is  better  for  laws  or  customs  to  be 
supreme,  and  for  men  to  rule  in  accordance 
with  them. 

The  larger  issue  concerning  rule  by  law  and 
rule  by  men  is  discussed  in  the  chapters  on 
Constitution  and  Monarchy.  But  here  we 
must  observe  how  the  difference  between  these 
two  types  of  rule  affects  the  understanding  of 
all  other  forms  of  government.  This  can  be  seen 
in  terms  of  Aristotle’s  distinction  between  royal 


54 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


and  political  government,  which  closely  resem¬ 
bles  the  modern  conception  of  the  difference 
between  absolute  or  despotic  government  on 
the  one  hand,  and  limited,  constitutional,  or 
republican  government  on  the  other. 

There  are  passages  in  which  Aristotle  regards 
absolute  rule  by  one  or  a  few  superior  men  as 
the  divine  or  godlike  form  of  government. 
When  one  man  or  a  few  excel  “all  the  others  to¬ 
gether  in  virtue,  and  both  rulers  and  subjects 
are  fitted,  the  one  to  rule,  the  others  to  be 
ruled,”  it  is  right,  in  Aristotle’s  opinion,  for  the 
government  to  be  royal  or  absolute  rather  than 
political  or  constitutional — whether  one  man 
rules  or  a  few.  “Royal  rule  is  of  the  nature  of  an 
aristocracy,”  he  says.  “It  is  based  upon  merit, 
whether  of  the  individual  or  of  his  family.” 

But  in  other  passages  Aristotle  seems  to  re¬ 
gard  absolute  government  as  a  despotic  regime, 
appropriate  to  the  family  and  the  primitive 
tribe,  but  not  to  the  state,  in  which  it  is  better 
for  equals  to  rule  and  be  ruled  in  turn.  In  either 
case,  it  makes  a  difference  to  the  meaning  of 
aristocracy,  as  also  to  monarchy,  whether  it  be 
conceived  as  absolute  or  constitutional  govern¬ 
ment. 

When  it  is  conceived  as  absolute  government, 
aristocracy  differs  from  monarchy  only  on  the 
point  of  numbers — the  few  as  opposed  to  the 
one.  Otherwise,  aristocracy  and  monarchy  are 
defended  in  the  same  way.  The  defense  usually 
takes  one  of  two  directions.  One  line  of  argu¬ 
ment  which  stems  from  Plato  and  Aristotle 
claims  that  inequality  in  wisdom  or  virtue  be¬ 
tween  ruler  and  ruled  justifies  absolute  rule  by 
the  superior.  The  other  line  is  followed  by  those 
who,  like  Hobbes,  maintain  that  since  sover¬ 
eignty  is  absolute,  unlimited,  and  indivisible, 
the  difference  between  kinds  of  government 
“consisteth  not  in  the  difference  of  Power,  but 
in  the  difference  of  Convenience,  or  Aptitude 
to  produce  the  Peace,  and  Security  of  the  peo¬ 
ple.”  When  they  are  conceived  as  forms  of  ab¬ 
solute  government,  aristocracy  and  monarchy 
are  attacked  for  the  same  reason;  to  those  who 
regard  absolutism  or  despotism  in  government 
as  unjust  because  it  violates  the  basic  equality 
of  men,  an  absolute  monarchy  and  a  despotic 
aristocracy  are  both  unjust. 

Aristocracy,  however,  can  also  be  conceived 
as  a  form  or  aspect  of  constitutional  govern¬ 


ment.  Montesquieu,  for  example,  divides  gov¬ 
ernments  into  “republican,  monarchical,  and 
despotic,”  and  under  “republican”  places  those 
“in  which  the  body,  or  only  a  part,  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  is  possessed  of  the  supreme  power,”  thus 
including  both  democracy  and  aristocracy.  In 
both,  laws,  not  men,  are  supreme,  but  the  spirit 
of  the  laws  is  different.  In  democracy,  the 
“spring,”  or  principle,  “by  which  it  is  made  to 
act,”  is  virtue  resting  on  equality;  in  aristoc¬ 
racy,  “moderation  is  the  very  soul ...  a  mod¬ 
eration  .  .  .  founded  on  virtue,  not  that  which 
proceeds  from  indolence  and  pusillanimity.” 
Hegel’s  comment  on  this  theory  deserves  men¬ 
tion.  “The  fact  that  ‘moderation’  is  cited  as  the 
principle  of  aristocracy,”  he  writes,  “implies 
the  beginning  at  this  point  of  a  divorce  between 
public  authority  and  private  interest.” 

For  Aristotle,  in  contrast  to  Montesquieu, 
the  two  major  types  of  constitution  are  the 
democratic  and  the  oligarchical,  according  as 
free-birth  or  wealth  is  made  the  chief  qualifica¬ 
tion  for  citizenship  and  public  office.  Aristoc¬ 
racy  enters  the  discussion  of  constitutional 
governments  mainly  in  connection  with  the 
construction  of  the  polity  or  mixed  constitu¬ 
tion.  Although  in  most  states  “the  fusion  goes 
no  further  than  the  attempt  to  unite  the  free¬ 
dom  of  the  poor  and  the  wealth  of  the  rich,” 
he  points  out  that  “there  are  three  grounds  on 
which  men  claim  an  equal  share  in  the  govern¬ 
ment,  freedom,  wealth,  and  virtue.” 

When  the  fusion  goes  no  further  than  the 
attempt  to  unite  the  freedom  of  the  poor  and 
the  wealth  of  the  rich,  “the  admixture  of  the 
two  elements,”  Aristotle  says,  is  “to  be  called  a 
polity.”  But  sometimes  the  mixture  of  democ¬ 
racy  with  oligarchy  may  include  an  ingredient 
of  aristocracy,  as  in  “the  distribution  of  offices 
according  to  merit.”  The  union  of  these  three 
elements  “is  to  be  called  aristocracy  or  the 
government  of  the  best,”  and  “more  than  any 
other  form  of  government,  except  the  true  and 
the  ideal,”  it  has,  in  Aristotle’s  judgment,  “a 
right  to  this  name.”  Polity  and  aristocracy,  as 
mixed  constitutions,  are  fusions  of  some  of  the 
same  elements;  hence,  he  says,  it  is  “obvious 
that  they  are  not  very  unlike.” 

Beginning  in  the  18th  century,  and  with  the 
rise  of  representative  government,  the  discus- 


Chapter  3:  ARISTOCRACY 


sion  of  aristocracy  as  a  distinct  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  is  largely  superceded  by  the  consideration 
of  the  role  which  the  aristocratic  principle  plays 
in  the  development  of  republican  institutions. 

The  writers  of  The  Federalist ,  for  example, 
respond  in  several  places  to  the  charge  that  the 
constitution  which  they  are  defending  shows 
tendencies  toward  aristocracy  or  oligarchy.  Yet 
in  their  consideration  and  defense  of  the  new 
instrument  of  government  as  essentially  repub - 
lican,  they  frequently  appeal  to  principles  that 
are  aristocratic  in  nature. 

In  giving  their  own  meanings  to  the  terms 
“republic”  and  “pure  democracy” — that  is, 
government  by  elected  representatives  on  the 
one  hand,  and  by  the  direct  participation  of  the 
whole  people  on  the  other — the  Federalists  also 
give  an  aristocratic  bent  to  the  very  notion  of 
representation.  They  seem  to  share  the  opinion 
of  Montesquieu  that  “as  most  citizens  have 
sufficient  ability  to  choose,  though  unqualified 
to  be  chosen,  so  the  people,  though  capable  of 
calling  others  to  account  for  their  administra¬ 
tion,  are  incapable  of  conducting  administra¬ 
tions  themselves.” 

Thus  Madison  praises  “the  delegation  of  the 
government  ...  to  a  small  number  of  citizens 
elected  by  the  rest”  as  tending  “to  refine  and 
'enlarge  the  public  views,  by  passing  them 
through  the  medium  of  a  chosen  body  of  citi¬ 
zens,  whose  wisdom  may  best  discern  the  true 
interest  of  their  country.”  He  further  points 
out  that  “it  may  well  happen  that  the  public 
voice,  pronounced  by  the  representatives  of 
the  people,  will  be  more  consonant  to  the  pub¬ 
lic  good  than  if  pronounced  by  the  people 
themselves,  convened  for  the  purpose.” 

On  such  a  view,  the  people’s  representatives 
in  the  legislature,  or  other  branches  of  govern¬ 
ment,  are  supposed  to  be  not  their  minions, 
but  their  betters.  For  the  American  constitu¬ 
tionalists,  as  for  Edmund  Burke,  the  represent¬ 
ative  serves  his  constituents  by  making  inde¬ 
pendent  decisions  for  the  common  good,  not  by 
doing  their  bidding.  This  theory  of  representa¬ 
tion,  to  which  Mill  and  other  democratic  think¬ 
ers  agree  in  part,  supposes  that  the  representa¬ 
tive  knows  better  than  his  constituents  what  is 
for  their  good. 

The  effort  to  ensure  leadership  by  superior 
men  may  involve  the  aristocratic  principle,  yet 


55 

it  is  also  claimed  by  Hamilton,  Madison,  and 
Jay  to  be  a  necessary  safeguard  for  popular  gov¬ 
ernment.  The  senate,  for  instance,  is  not  only 
to  provide  elder  statesmen,  but  is  also  to  serve 
as  “a  salutary  check  on  the  government  .  .  . 
[which]  doubles  the  security  to  the  people,  by 
requiring  the  concurrence  of  two  distinct  bodies 
in  schemes  of  usurpation  or  perfidy,  where  the 
ambition  or  corruption  of  one  would  otherwise 
be  sufficient.”  The  electoral  college  aims  di¬ 
rectly  at  placing  the  immediate  election  of  the 
president  in  the  hands  of  “men  most  capable 
of  analyzing  the  qualities  adapted  to  the  sta¬ 
tion  .  .  .  under  circumstances  favorable  to  de¬ 
liberation.”  In  addition  it  may  serve  as  an 
“obstacle  .  .  .  opposed  to  cabal,  intrigue,  and 
corruption,”  which  are  the  “most  deadly  ad¬ 
versaries  of  republican  government.” 

In  all  these  respects,  as  well  as  in  the  restric¬ 
tions  on  suffrage  which  it  permitted  the  states 
to  impose,  the  unamended  American  constitu¬ 
tion  appears  to  have  adopted  an  aristocratic 
principle  in  government.  Whether  the  motiva¬ 
tion  of  its  proponents  was  in  fact  simply  aris¬ 
tocratic,  or  whether  it  was  partly  or  even 
largely  oligarchical — leadership  being  the  right 
of  men  of  “good”  family  and  substantial  prop¬ 
erty — will  always  be  a  question  to  be  decided 
in  the  light  of  the  documents  and  the  relevant 
historic  evidence. 

More  democratic  than  the  American  consti¬ 
tutionalists  of  the  1 8th  century,  certainly  so 
with  regard  to  the  extension  of  suffrage,  John 
Stuart  Mill  appears  to  be  no  less  concerned 
than  they  are  to  introduce  aristocratic  elements 
into  the  structure  of  representative  govern¬ 
ment. 

According  to  Mill,  two  grave  dangers  con¬ 
front  a  democracy:  “Danger  of  a  low  grade  of 
intelligence  in  the  representative  body,  and 
in  the  popular  opinion  which  controls  it;  and 
danger  of  class  legislation  on  the  part  of  the 
numerical  majority.”  Claiming  that  much  of 
the  blame  for  both  dangers  lies  in  the  rule  of 
the  majority,  Mill  looks  for  means  to  overcome 
the  situation  in  which  “the  numerical  majority 
.  .  .  alone  possess  practically  any  voice  in  the 
State.” 

His  major  remedy  was  a  system  of  propor¬ 
tional  representation.  This  would  supposedly 


56 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


constitute  a  democratic  improvement  by  secur¬ 
ing  representation  for  “every  minority  in  the 
whole  nation  ...  on  principles  of  equal  justice.” 
But  it  may  also  serve  to  increase  an  aristocratic 
element,  since  it  “affords  the  best  security  for 
the  intellectual  qualifications  desirable  in  the 
representatives.”  This  would  be  brought  about 
by  making  possible  the  election  of  “hundreds 
of  able  men  of  independent  thought,  who 
would  have  no  chance  whatever  of  being  chosen 
by  the  majority,”  with  the  result  that  Parlia¬ 
ment  would  contain  the  “very  elite  of  the 
country.” 

To  make  still  more  certain  that  men  of  su¬ 
perior  political  intelligence  exert  an  effect  upon 
government,  Mill  also  proposes  a  plurality  of 
votes  for  the  educated  and  the  establishment  of 
an  upper  legislative  chamber  based  on  a  spe¬ 
cially  qualified  membership.  Such  proposals 
seem  to  indicate  Mill’s  leanings  toward  aris¬ 
tocracy,  not  only  because  they  aim  at  procur¬ 
ing  a  “government  of  the  best,”  but  also  be¬ 
cause  they  are  designed  to  prevent  a  govern¬ 
ment  based  on  a  majority  of  “manual  labour¬ 
ers”  with  the  consequent  danger  of  “too  low  a 
standard  of  political  intelligence.” 

The  issues  raised  by  the  theory  of  aristocracy, 
or  by  the  aristocratic  principle  in  government, 
seem  to  be  basically  the  same  in  all  centuries, 
however  different  the  terms  or  the  context  in 
which  they  are  expressed.  Even  when,  as  today, 
a  purely  aristocratic  form  of  government  does 
not  present  a  genuine  political  alternative  to 
peoples  who  have  espoused  democracy,  there 
remains  the  sense  that  pure  or  unqualified  de¬ 
mocracy  is  an  equally  undesirable  extreme.  The 
qualifications  proposed  usually  add  an  aristo¬ 
cratic  leaven. 

One  issue  concerns  the  equality  and  in¬ 
equality  of  men.  The  affirmation  that  all  men 
are  created  equal  does  not  exclude  a  recognition 
of  their  individual  inequalities — the  wide  di¬ 
versity  of  human  talents  and  the  uneven  dis¬ 
tribution  of  intelligence  and  other  abilities. 
Nor  does  it  mean  that  all  men  use  their  native 
endowments  to  good  purpose  or  in  the  same 
degree  to  acquire  skill  or  knowledge  or  virtue. 

To  grasp  the  double  truth — that  no  man  is 
essentially  more  human  than  another,  though 
one  may  have  more  of  certain  human  abilities 


than  another— is  to  see  some  necessity  for  the 
admixture  of  democratic  and  aristocratic  prin¬ 
ciples  in  constructing  a  political  constitution. 
But  the  issue  is  whether  distributive  justice  re¬ 
quires,  as  a  matter  of  right,  that  the  best  men 
should  rule  or  hold  public  office. 

Some  political  philosophers,  like  Plato  and 
Aristotle,  tend  to  take  the  aristocratic  view 
that  men  of  superior  ability  have  a  right  to 
govern— that  for  them  to  be  ruled  by  their  in¬ 
feriors  would  be  unjust.  This  theory  places 
greater  emphasis  on  the  inequality  than  on 
the  equality  of  men.  Their  democratic  oppo¬ 
nents  insist  that  the  equality  of  men  as  men  is 
the  fundamental  fact  and  the  only  fact  hav¬ 
ing  a  bearing  on  the  just  distribution  of  suffrage. 
That  certain  individuals  have  superior  aptitude 
for  the  exercise  of  political  authority  does  not 
automatically  confer  that  authority  upon  them. 
The  inequality  of  men  in  merit  or  talent  does 
not  establish  a  political  right,  as  does  their 
equality  in  human  nature.  The  selection  of  the 
best  men  for  public  office  is,  on  this  theory,  not 
a  matter  of  justice,  but  of  expediency  or  pru¬ 
dence. 

Another  issue  concerns  the  weight  to  be  given 
the  opinion  of  the  majority  as  against  the 
opinion  of  the  wise  or  the  expert  when,  as 
frequently  happens,  these  opinions  diverge  or 
conflict.  As  the  chapter  on  Opinion  indicates, 
the  experts  themselves  disagree  about  the 
soundness  of  the  popular  judgment. 

Where  Thucydides  believes  that  “ordinary 
men  usually  manage  public  affairs  better  than 
their  more  gifted  fellows,”  because  “the  latter 
are  always  wanting  to  appear  wiser  than  the 
laws,”  Herodotus  observes  that  “it  seems  easier 
to  deceive  the  multitude  than  one  man.” 
Where  Hegel  holds  it  to  be  “a  dangerous  and  a 
false  prejudice,  that  the  People  alone  have  rea¬ 
son  and  insight,  and  know  what  justice  is,” 
John  Jay  declares  that  “the  people  of  any  coun¬ 
try  (if,  like  the  Americans,  intelligent  and  well- 
informed)  seldom  adopt  and  steadily  persevere 
for  many  years  in  an  erroneous  opinion  respect¬ 
ing  their  interests,”  and  Hamilton  adds  that 
“the  people  commonly  intend  the  public  good.” 

Sometimes  the  same  author  seems  to  take 
both  sides  of  the  issue,  as  Aristotle  does  when, 
though  he  says  that  “a  multitude  is  a  better 
judge  of  many  things  than  any  individual,”  he 


- 

I 

Chapter  3:  ARISTOCRACY 


yet  prefers  government  by  the  one  or  few  who 
are  eminent  in  wisdom  or  virtue.  Each  side, 
perhaps,  contributes  only  part  of  the  truth. 
Certainly  those  who  acknowledge  a  political 
wisdom  in  the  preponderant  voice  of  the  many, 
but  who  also  recognize  another  wisdom  in  the 
skilled  judgment  of  the  few,  cannot  wish  to  ex¬ 
clude  either  from  exerting  its  due  influence 
upon  the  course  of  government. 

Still  another  issue  has  to  do  with  education. 
Shall  educational  opportunity  be  as  universal 
as  the  franchise?  Shall  those  whose  native  en¬ 
dowments  fit  them  for  political  leadership  be 
trained  differently  or  more  extensively  than 
their  fellow  citizens?  Shall  vocational  educa¬ 
tion  be  given  to  the  many,  and  liberal  educa¬ 
tion  be  reserved  for  the  few? 

These  questions  provide  some  measure  of  the 
extent  to  which  anyone’s  thinking  is  aristo¬ 
cratic  or  democratic — or  involves  some  admix¬ 
ture  of  both  strains.  In  the  great  discussion  of 
these  questions  and  issues,  there  is  one  ever- 


57 

present  ambiguity.  We  have  already  noted  it  in 
considering  the  reality  of  the  line  between  aris¬ 
tocracy  and  oligarchy.  The  agreement  or  dis¬ 
agreement  of  Mill  and  Aristotle,  of  Burke  and 
Plato,  of  Hamilton  and  Paine,  of  Veblen  arid 
Pareto,  or  John  Dewey  and  Matthew  Arnold 
cannot  be  judged  without  determining  whether 
the  distinction  between  the  many  and  the  few 
derives  from  nature  or  convention. 

It  is  this  distinction  which  Jefferson  had  in 
mind  when,  writing  to  Adams  in  1813,  he  said, 
“There  is  a  natural  aristocracy  among  men. 
The  grounds  of  this  are  virtue  and  talents  .  .  . 
There  is  also  an  artificial  aristocracy  founded  on 
wealth  and  birth,  without  either  virtue  or  tal¬ 
ents;  for  with  these  it  would  belong  to  the  first 
class.  The  natural  aristocracy  I  consider  as  the 
most  precious  gift  of  nature,  for  the  instruc¬ 
tion,  the  trusts,  the  government  of  society  .  .  . 
The  artificial  aristocracy  is  a  mischievous  in¬ 
gredient  in  government,  and  provision  should 
be  made  to  prevent  its  ascendancy.” 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  general  theory  and  evaluation  of  aristocracy  58 

1  a.  Aristocracy  as  a  good  form  of  government 

ib.  Criticisms  of  aristocracy  as  unrealizable  or  unjust  59 

2.  The  relation  of  aristocracy  to  other  forms  of  government 

2 a.  Aristocracy  and  monarchy 

2 b.  Aristocracy  and  constitutional  government:  the  polity  or  mixed  constitution 
2 c.  Aristocracy  and  democracy  60 

2 d.  Aristocracy  and  oligarchy 
2e.  Aristocracy  and  tyranny 

3.  The  causes  of  degeneration  or  instability  in  aristocracies:  aristocracy  and  revolution 

4.  Aristocracy  and  the  issue  of  rule  by  men  as  opposed  to  rule  by  law  61 

5.  The  training  of  those  fitted  for  rule:  aristocratic  theories  of  education 

6.  The  selection  of  the  best  men  for  public  office:  the  aristocratic  theory  of  representation 

in  modern  constitutional  government 


7.  Historic  and  poetic  exemplifications  of  aristocracy 


62 


58 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (£>),  follows;  e.g..  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 — (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  general  theory  and  evaluation  of  aristoc¬ 
racy 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii-vii,  316a-401d  / 
Statesman ,  598b-604b  /  Laws ,  bk  iii,  665c- 
666c;  669d-672a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  ch  10  [n6ob32- 
n6ia2]  413a-b;  ch  ii  [1161^3-25]  413c  /  Poli¬ 
tics,  bk  iii,  ch  7  [1279^3— 37]  476d;  ch  9 
[i28ia2-8]  478c-d;  ch  15  [i286b4— 5]  484d;  ch 
17  [i288a8-io]  486d;  ch  18  487a, c;  bk  iv,  ch  7 
493a-b;  ch  8  [1294^24]  493d-494a;  ch  14 
[i298b5~io]  499a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  8 
[I3^5b32-39]  608a-b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d- 
309d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  104d'lC5a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  319-324  229b-230b;  335 
232b;  337-338  232b-233a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  x,  sect  132 
55a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  6b-7c; 
bk  iii,  lOc-lla;  bk  v,  23a-25a;  bk  vii, 
45b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  359a-c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  410b-c;  411c-412c;  418c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450a-d 


la.  Aristocracy  as  a  good  form  of  government 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  18:13-26  /  Deuteron¬ 
omy,  1:9-17  /  Proverbs,  29:2 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  10:1-2 — ( D )  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  10:1-2 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107d-108a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iv,  478d- 
479b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii-iv,  339b-350a;  bk 
viii,  401d-402d  /  Timaeus,  442a-443b  / 
Statesman,  598b-604b  esp  603d-604b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  ii  [ii6is23-24] 
413c  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  7  [1279*28-38]  476d; 
ch  15  [1286^-7]  484d;  ch  18  487a, c;  bk  iv, 
ch  7  493a-b;  ch  8  [1294^-24]  493d-494a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  47a-48d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  106a-107b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  12,  218d- 
219b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d-309d 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c  esp 
act  1,  sc  1  [51-192]  351d-353c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  7c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  411c-412a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  340a-c, 
353b-354b;  363d-364b 

44  Boswell: Johnson,  125c-d;  141a;  211b-c;  220b 


1  b  to  2b 


Chapter  3:  ARISTOCRACY 


lb.  Criticisms  of  aristocracy  as  unrealizable  or 
unjust 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  108b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  vi, 
520a-c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  v,  368c-369c;  bk  vi, 
380b'383a;  bk  vii,  401c-d;  bk  ix,  426d-427b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  10-13  478d- 
483a;  bk  iv,  ch  8  [1293^1-28]  493c 
15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  i,  193c-194a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  105a;  part  iv, 
273a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xi,  sect  138 
57b-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  7c 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iii,  411d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  442c-d;  445a-c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  366a-367b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  297 

99b  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  356c- 
357a;  365a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  420c 

2.  The  relation  of  aristocracy  to  other  forms  of 
government 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  viii, 
579c-590c  passim 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  i,  301c-d;  bk  viii-ix, 
401d-421a  esp  bk  viii,  401d-402d  /  Statesman , 
598b-604b  /  Laws ,  bk  iii,  669d-672a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  3  [113^24-29] 
378d;  bk  viii,  ch  io-ii  412c-413d  /  Politics , 
bk  iii,  ch  5  [i278ai5~34]  475b-c;  ch  7  476c- 
477a;  ch  13  [1284^— ^34]  482a-483a;  ch  15 
[i286b8-22]  484d-485a;  ch  17  [i287b37)-cH  18 
[1288^7]  486c-487a,c;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [i289a26-b4] 
488b-c;  ch  3  [i290ai3~29]  489b;  ch  14  [i298a 
34-bio]  498d-499a;  ch  15  [i299b20-i300a8] 
500b-d;  ch  16  [i30iaio-i6]  502c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk 
1,  ch  8  608a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  34d-35d 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  Q95, 
a  4,  ans  229b'230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d- 
309d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  73b;  part  ii, 
104d-108b  passim;  154b-c 
33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  304  227b-228a 
35  Locke:  GV/7  Government ,  ch  x,  sect  132 
55a-b;  ch  xi,  sect  138  57b-c 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii-iii  4a- 
13d  esp  bk  11,  4a,  6b-7c,  bk  iii,  lOc-lla; 
bk  vi,  34d-35a;  bk  viii,  56b-57c;  bk  xii, 
90b-c;  bk  xv,  109a-b;  bk  xviii,  125a-b 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  359a-c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  410b-c;  415d;  418c;  bk  iv,  427a-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81c-d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450a-452a  esp  450b-d 

43  Federalist:  number  39,  125b-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  363b-369b 
passim;  387c-d 


59 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273, 
90d-91c;  par  279,  94b 

2a.  Aristocracy  and  monarchy 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  355d-356a  /  States¬ 
man,  598b-604b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  7  476c-477a; 
ch  13  [1284*3—35]  482a'C;  ch  15  [i286a23~b8] 
484c-d  esp  [i286b4~8]  484d;  ch  16  [i287b8— 35 ] 
486a-c;  ch  17  [i28Sa5-25]  486c-487a;  ch  18 
487a, c;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [1 289*26— 35]  488b;  bk  v, 
ch  10  [i3ioa39~bi4]  512d-513a;  [i3iob3i- 
1311*8]  513b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8  608a-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  97b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  12,  218d- 
219b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 
1-2  307d-309d 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  iv  7a-8a;  ch  ix 
14c-16a  passim;  ch  xix,  27a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  104d-109a  pas¬ 
sim;  part  iii,  201a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  6b-8c; 
bk  iii,  lOc-lld;  bk  v,  23a-25d;  32b-c;  bk  viii, 
53d-54a;  bk  xi,  75b-d;  77b-c;  bk  xii,  90c; 
bk  xx,  147a-d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  418c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  308b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81c-d 

43  Federalist:  number  17,  70a-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  351d-352b; 
366a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273, 
90c-91d;  par  279,  94b  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
part  iv,  356d-357a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  241c-242b; 
bk  ix,  384c-388a,c;  epilogue  i,  668a-669c 

2b.  Aristocracy  and  constitutional  government: 
the  polity  or  mixed  constitution 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  viii, 
579d-580d;  581b-c;  582a;  587a-b;  588a-589a; 
590a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  7  476c-477a*, 
bk  iv,  ch  8  493c-494a;  ch  ii  [1295^1-34] 
495b-c;  ch  14  [i298b5~io]  499a;  bk  v,  ch  7 
[I3°7a5_27]  509a-b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8 
[i365b22-i366a2]  608a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d  /  Dion,  800c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  72a-b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d- 
309 d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a; 
6b-8c;  bk  v,  21d-22c;  bk  viii,  52c;  bk  xi, 
71d-72b;  75b-d;  76c-77c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81c-d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  439c-440a;  450a-d 

43  Federalist:  number  39,  125b-d;  number 
63,  194b-195b;  number  71,  216a-b 


60 


2c  to  3 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  relation  of  aristocracy  to  other  forms  of 
government .  2  b.  Aristocracy  and  constitu¬ 
tional  government:  the  polity  or  mixed  con¬ 
stitution .) 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  353d-354b; 
406a-409c;  419b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  279, 
94b  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  275  b- 
276a;  277c-d;  part  iv,  356d-357a 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  238c- 243d 
passim,  esp  241c-242b;  bk  ix,  384c-388a,c 
passim 

2c.  Aristocracy  and  democracy 

6  Herodotus:. History,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi,  520a- 
c;  533a-c;  bk  viii,  579c-581c;  582b-c;  590a-b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  401d-402d;  408b- 
409d  /  Statesman,  598b-604b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  ii  [1281*39- 
b25]  479b-c;  ch  13  [i284a3~b25]  482a-d;  bk  iv, 
ch  7  [i293bi2-i8]  493b;  bk  v,  ch  7  [i307a5~27] 
509a-b;  ch  8  [i307b39-i3o8a24]  510a-b; 

[1308^1-1309*10]  511a-b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8 
[i365b22-i366a2]  608a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d  /  Lycurgus-Numa, 
62b-c  /  Dion,  792d-802a,c  esp  800c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  97b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  1,  ans  307d-309d 
23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  ix  14c-16a  passim 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  104d-105a 
27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-47] 
351a-d;  act  ii,  sc  i  [1-106]  361a-362a;  act  iii, 
sc  1  [140-161]  370d-371a 
33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  294  225b-226b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-7c; 
bk  iii,  9b-lla;  bk  v,  23a-b;  23d;  bk  vii,  44d- 
45c;  bk  viii,  51d;  53d-54a;  bk  ix,  58b;  bk  x, 
64a-d;  bk  xii,  90b-c;  bk  xv,  109b 
38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  369c-d  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  iv,  427a-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81c-d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450a-d 

43  Federalist:  number  39, 125b-d;  number  57 
176d-179b  passim;  number  58,  181b-c;  num¬ 
ber  60,  185b-187a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  298b-299a  /  Representative 
Government,  353b-354b;  364b-d;  366a-369b 
passim;  376b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  125c-d;  141a;  211b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273, 
91b-c;  par  279,  94b  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
part  11,  275b-276a;  277c-d;  part  iii,  285b-d; 
310a-c 

2d.  Aristocracy  and  oligarchy 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii,  401d-402d;  405c- 
407a  /  Statesman,  598b-604b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  3  [n3ia24-29] 
378d;  bk  viii,  ch  10  [1  i6obi  1— 16]  412d; 


[n6ob32-n6ia2]  413a-b  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  10 
[i272a27~bio]  468c-469a;  ch  ii  469a-470b; 
bk  iii,  ch  5  [1278*15-24]  475b-c;  ch  7  476c- 
477a  esp  [i279b4~io]  476d-477a;  ch  13 
[i2S3a25-b26]481b-d;  ch  15  [i286bi2-i6]  485a; 
bk  iv,  ch  2  [i289a26-b4]  488b-c;  ch  4 
[i29obi7-2o]  489d;  ch  5  [i292a39-b6]  491d- 
492a;  ch  7  [i293b2-i2]  493a-b;  ch  8  [i293b3o- 
i294a28]  493c-494a;  ch  12  [1297^6—9]  497b; 
bk  v,  ch  7  508c-509d;  ch  12  [i3i6*39-bio] 
519c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8  [i365b22-i  366*6] 
608a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-37b;  47a-48a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  ii,  35d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xvi  [64-78] 
23a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  104d-105a;  part 
iv, 273a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  7b-c; 
bk  v,  23a-25a;  bk  xx,  151c-152a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iii,  419b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iii,  165c-166a; 
bk  v.  309c-310d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450a-c 

43  Federalist:  number  63,  194d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  363d-364d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  partii,  277c-d; 
part  iii,  292d-293b 

2e.  Aristocracy  and  tyranny 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi, 
533a-c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  401d-402d;  bk  viii- 
ix,  411d-421a  /  Statesman,  598b-604b  passim, 
esp  603b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  679c-680b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  v,  ch  10  [1310*40- 
1311*7]  512d-513b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8 
[l365b32-i366a6]  608a-b 
15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i,  193c-194a 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  273a-b 
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  380  238a 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xviii,  sect  201 
71c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a;  bk 
vi,  34d-35a;  bk  viii,  52c-d;  bk  xi,  70c;  78d- 
79b;  bk  xv,  109a-b 

43  Federalist:  number  47,  153d;  number  48, 
157b-c;  number  70,  213d-214a 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273, 
91c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  277c-d 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bki,  9b-c;  epilogue 
1,  668a-669d 

3.  The  causes  of  degeneration  or  instability  in 
aristocracies:  aristocracy  and  revolution 

Old  Testament:  I  Samuel,  7:15-8:5— (D) 
I  Kings,  7:15-8:5 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  108b-c 


4  to  6 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  v,  482d- 
483a;  bk  viii,  579c-583c;  587a-589a;  590a-c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  iii~iv,  339b-350a;  bk 
viii,  403a-404a  /  Critias ,  485a-c  /  Seventh 
Letter ,  806d-807b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i27ob7-34] 
466d-467a;  ch  12  [1 273^ 6-1 274*7]  470c;  bk 
hi,  ch  15  [i286bi2-i6]  485a;  bk  v,  ch  3 
[1303*2-10]  504b-c;  ch  4  [1304*18-29]  505d- 
506a;  ch  7  508c-509d;  ch  8  [1307^9-1308*24] 
510a-b;  ch  12  [i3i6*39-b3]  519c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  35c-d;  47a-48a  /  Corio- 
lanus,  180a-184a  /  Lysander,  361a-368a,c  / 
Ctfz'z/5  Gracchus,  683 b  e  /  Cicero ,  708a- b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  lb-2a;  3a-b  /  //zV- 
tories,  bk  i,  193c-194a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xvi  [64-78] 
23a-b;  paradise,  xv-xvi  128b-132a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  iv  7a-8a;  cn  ix 
14c-16a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  158a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  6c-7b; 
bk  hi,  lOc-lla;  bk  v,  23a-25a;  bk  vii,  45b; 
bk  viii,  52c-53a;  bk  x,  64a-d;  bk  xii,  91c- 
92b;  bk  xiii,  96d-97a;  bk  xx,  15lc-152a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  411c-d; 
418c-419b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  420b-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  451a 

43  Federalist:  number  17,  70a-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  366a-367b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  273, 
91c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  355d- 
357a  esp  356c-357a;  364a-b 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  423d- 
424b;  429c-430b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  666c- 
669d 

4.  Aristocracy  and  the  issue  of  rule  by  men  as 

opposed  to  rule  by  law 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,  380b-c  /  Statesman, 
598b-604bV  Seventh  Letter,  806d-807b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  10  [1281*29-38] 
479a;  ch  13  [1284*3-18]  482a-b;cH  15  [1286*7- 
b8]  484b-d;  ch  17  486c-487a  esp  [1288*5-14] 
486c-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  273a-c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xviii,  sect  199- 
202  71a-72a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a;  bk 
viii,  52c;  bk  xi,  69a-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450d-451d 

5.  The  training  of  those  fitted  for  rule:  aristo¬ 

cratic  theories  of  education 

Old  Testaxient:  Exodus,  18:13-26  /  Deuteron¬ 
omy,  1:9-17 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  38:24-34 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus ,  38:25-39 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii— iii,  320c-339a;  bk  vi- 
vii,  383b-401d  esp  bk  vii,  389d-401d  / 


61 

Timaeus,  442c  d  /  Statesman,  607b  608a  / 
Laws,  bk  vii,  728b;  bk  xii,  794b-798b  esp 
796d-798b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  cii  4  [1277*14  bi5] 
474a-d;  ch  18  487a, c;  bk  iv,  cii  15  [1300*3-8] 
500d;  bk  vi,  cii  8  [i322b37~i323*6]  526d;  bk 
vii,  cii  14  [i332bi3-i333*i6]  537b  538a  / 
Rhetoric,  p>k  i,  ch  8  [1365^*32—39]  608a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  38a-45c  /  Alcibiades, 
156b-158b  /  Marcus  Cato,  286c-287b  /  Lysan- 
der,  354b,d-355a  /  Dion,  781b,d-788b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  34c-d;  bk  xiii,  125d- 
126a  /  Histories,  bk  iv,  267c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  viii  [115- 
148]  118b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  intro,  47b-d;  part  i, 
94b-c;  part  ii,  112d;  154a;  158c-d;  164a, c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
18b-19d;  24a-30c;  bk  ii,  75a-77a;  7Sb-33b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  60a-62a;  63d-64a;  71d- 
72b 

26  Shakespeare:  Taming  of  the  Shrew ,  act  1, 
sc  1  [1-45]  202c-203a/  1st  Henry  IV,  act  i,  sc 
ii  [218-240]  437c-d  /  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  i  [22- 
66]  533b-c  /  As  You  Like  It,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-28] 
597a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  332c- 
336a;  362a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b-31a;  part  iv, 
158a-b; 166b-167a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  ek  v,  18d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  347c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  86c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  508d-509d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  298b-299a  /  Representative 
Government ,  384a-387d;  415a-417c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  169 
145d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  310a-c; 
part  iv,  368a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  244d-245c 

6.  The  selection  of  the  best  men  for  public 
office:  the  aristocratic  theory  of  repre¬ 
sentation  in  modern  constitutional  gov¬ 
ernment 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  41:33-40  /  Exodus, 
18:13-26  /  Deuteronomy,  1:9-18  /  Judges  esp 
9:8-15  /  I  Samuel ,  1:1-25:1  — (D)  /  Kings, 
1:1-25:1  /  I  Kings ,  3:5-15— (D)  III  Kings , 
3:5-15  /  II  Chronicles,  1:7-12— (D)  II  Para- 
lipomenon ,  1:7-12  /  Proverbs,  29:2  /  Daniel, 
6:1-4 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  6;  9 —(D)  OT, 
Book  °f  Wisdom,  6;  9  /  Ecclesiasticus,  10:1-3— 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  10:1-3 

5  Euripides:  Electra  [367-400]  330c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  93c;  107d-108a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396c- 
d;  bk  iii,  425b-c;  bk  iv,  478d;  bk  vi,  520b-c 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  44d-45b  /  Republic,  bk  ii, 
319a-320c;  bk  iii,  339b-341a;  bk  v,  369c- 
370a;  bk  vi,  373c-375b;  383b-d;  bk  vii. 


Chapter  3:  ARISTOCRACY 


62 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(6.  The  selection  of  the  best  men  for  public  office : 
the  aristocratic  theory  of  representation  in 
modem  constitutional  government.) 

390b-391b  /  Statesman ,  598b-604b;  608c-d  / 
Laws ,  bk  vi,  697a-705c  passim;  bk  xii,  786b- 
787b;  794b-799a,c  esp  796d-798b  /  Seventh 
Letter ,  807a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Politicsy  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i2johy- 
I27iai7]  466d-467b;  ch  ii  [i272b33~i273a2] 
469 b-c;  [i273a22-b7]  469d-470a;  bk  iii,  ch  4 
[i277ai3~23]  474a- b;  ch  5  [i278a4o-b5]  475d; 
ch  7  [i279a24~b4]  476c-d;  ch  10-13  478d- 
483a;  ch  15  [i286a22-bi4]  484c-485a;  ch  16 
[i287bi2-i4]  486a;  ch  18  487a, c;  bk  iv,  ch  7 
[i293b2-2i]  493a-b;  ch  8  [1294^-24]  493d- 
494a;  ch  14  [i298b5-io]  499a;  ch  15  [i3ooa9~ 
b4]  500d-501b;  bk  v,  ch  8  [i3o8b3i-i309aio] 
511a-b;  ch  9  [1309^3— ^13]  511c-d;  bk  vi,  ch  4 
[i3i8b2i— 1319*4]  522b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  9  [i328b 
3?-i^2Qai7]  533b-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  8 
[i365b32-39l  608a- b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  45c-d  /  Ly  sander,  365a- 
366a  /  Ly sander -Sulla,  387d-388a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  105d-107b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  92, 
a  1,  rep  3  213c-214c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 
1-2  307d-309d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  136b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  364b-365a;  411a-d; 

452a-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [90-166] 
352b-353a;  act  ii  361a-369a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  94, 
46b;  ch  viii,  sect  105-112  48c-51b  passim 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  28b-29a;  part  ii, 
73a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4d-5a; 
bk  hi,  lOc-lla;  bk  v,  21d-22c;  bk  xi,  71a-72b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  412b-c; 
bk  iv,  427a-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  269d-271d; 
bk  v,  309c-311c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  61d-62a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  i,  sect  2 
[11-16]  lib;  sect  3  [67-72]  12a;  article  ii, 
sect  1  14b-15a;  sect  2  [424-439]  15b; 

AMENDMENTS,  XII  18a-C 

43  Federalist:  number  3,  33d-34a;  number 
10,  51d-53a;  number  28,  98a;  number  35, 
113a-114b;  number  52-63  165a-195b  passim, 
esp  number  57,  176d-177a;  number  68  205b- 
207a;  number  76-77,  225a-229b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  290d-291a;  320c-322a  /  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government,  336b-337a;  338a-b; 
341d-424c  passim,  esp  363b-366a,  384a-387d; 
439d-442a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  125c-d;  141a;  178b-c;  191c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  279, 

94b-c;  par  291-295  97d-99a;  par  308  102c- 


6  to  7 

103a;  additions,  169  145d;  182  148c-d  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  277c-d;  part 
iv,  368b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  241c-242b 

7.  Historic  and  poetic  exemplifications  of 
aristocracy 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108d;  bk  v, 
160d-161a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  355a- 
356a;  bk  ii,  409a;  bk  iii,  434c-438b  passim; 
bk  iv,  458d-459c;  463a-b;  465c;  478d-479b; 
bk  v,  482d-483a;  bk  vi,  533a-c;  bk  viii,  568d- 
569a;  579c-590c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i27ob7~34] 
466d-467a;  bk  v,  ch  7  [i307a27~b24]  509b-d  / 
Athenian  Constitution,  ch  1-41  553a-572a 
passim,  esp  ch  23-26  563c-565a 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus ,  9a-d  /  Romulus ,  20c-21a 
/  Lycurgus  32a-48d  /  Pericles  121a-141a,c  esp 
126d-127a  /  Coriolanus,  174b,d-184a  /  Aris¬ 
tides,  263c-266a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  lb-2a;  3a-b;  bk  ii, 
32b-d;  34a-c;  bk  iv,  65a-c;  72a-b;  bk  vi,  97b; 
bk  xi,  105d-107b  /  Histories,  bk  i,  193c-194a; 
212a-b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  12,  218d- 
219b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  viii 
[1 12-139]  65c-d 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Wife  of  Bath  [6701-6758] 
274b-275b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  181d-183c 

2 7  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i, 
sc  iii  [33-54]  108c  /  All's  Well  That  Ends  Well, 
act  11,  sc  iii  [115-151]  152c-153a  /  Coriolanus 
351a-392a,c  esp  act  i,  sc  i  [1-47]  351a-d,  act 
ii,  sc  1  [1-106]  361a-362a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  73a-76b;  part  iv, 
157a-158b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  6b-7c; 
bk  v,  23a-25a;  bk  vii,  45b-c;  bk  xi,  76c-84c 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  369c-d  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  iii,  418c-d  [fn  2] 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iii,  165b-181a,c 
passim 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  61d-62a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71d-73c  passim; 
217d-219a;  387d-390b  passim;  427d-428a; 
452d-456a,c  esp  452d-453a,c,  453a-b;  570d; 
574b-582c;  588a-589a 

43  Federalist:  number  17,  70a-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  363d-364d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  277c-d; 
part  iii,  285b-d;  310a-c;  part  iv,  368b-d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  355d-364a  esp  356a-357a, 
359a-c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  419b, d; 
420b-c;  423d-424b;  429c-430b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ix,  384c-388a,c 


Chapter  3:  ARISTOCRACY 


63 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  general  theory  of  the  forms  of  government,  see  Government  2-2e. 

Other  chapters  on  particular  forms  of  government,^  Constitution;  Democracy;  Mon¬ 
archy;  Oligarchy;  Tyranny;  and  for  the  conception  of  the  ideal  state,  see  State  6-6b. 
The  comparison  of  aristocratic  with  democratic  theories  of  education,  see  Education  8d. 
Discussions  of  the  role  of  virtue  in  political  theory,  in  relation  to  citizenship  and  public 
office,  see  Citizen  5;  Virtue  and  Vice  7~7d. 

Another  discussion  of  the  theory  of  representation,  see  Constitution  9-9R 

The  role  of  honor  in  the  organization  of  the  state,  and  the  theory  of  timocracy,  see  Honor  4a. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

i 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Dante.  Corwivio(The  Banquet ),  fourth  treatise, 
ch  10-14 

Spinoza.  Tractatus  Politicus  (Political  Treatise) ,  ch 
8-10 

II. 

Volsung  Saga 

Spenser.  The  Faerie  Queene 
Campanella.  A  Discourse  Touching  the  Spanish 
Monarchy 
Filmer.  Patriarcha 
Harrington.  Oceana 
Sevigne.  Letters 

A.  Sidney.  Discourses  Concerning  Government 
Millar.  Observations  Concerning  the  Distinction  of 
Ranh?  in  Society 
Paine.  Common  Sense 

J.  Adams.  A  Defense  of  the  Constitutions  of  Govern¬ 
ment  of  the  United  States  of  America 
Iefferson.  Notes  on  the  State  of  Virginia 
Sieyes.  An  Essay  on  Privileges 
Godwin.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  Political  Justice , 
bk  v,  ch  10-1 1,  13 

Burke.  An  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs 

- .  Letter  to  Sir  Hercules  Langrishe 

- .  Letter  to  a  Noble  Lord 

Austen.  Pride  and  Prejudice 

].  Mill.  An  Essay  on  Government,  m-v 

Stendhal.  The  Red  and  the  Blac\ 

Balzac.  Gobsec\ 

Tocqueville.  Democracy  in  America 
Thackeray.  Vanity  Fair 
Gobineau.  The  Inequality  of  Human  Races 
Emerson.  “Aristocracy,”  in  English  Traits 


Montalembert.  On  Constitutional  Liberty 
Arnold.  Culture  and  Anarchy 
Whitman.  Democratic  Vistas 
Renan.  The  Future  of  Science 

- .  Philosophical  Dialogues 

H.  I ames.  The  American 
T.  H.  Huxley.  Methods  and  Results ,  vi-vn 
Ibsen.  An  Enemy  of  the  People 
Nietzsche.  Thus  Spa^e  Zarathustra 
Mosca.  The  Ruling  Class 
Mallock.  Social  Equality 

- .  Aristocracy  and  Evolution 

T.  Veblen.  The  Theory  of  the  Leisure  Class 
Santayana.  Reason  in  Society,  ch  4 
Bougle.  Essais  sur  le  regime  des  castes 
Sorel.  Reflexions  on  Violence 
Wendell.  The  Privileged  Classes 
Shaw.  Socialism  and  Superior  Brains 
Wells.  The  New  Machiavelli 
Weber.  Essays  in  Sociology ,  part  iv 
Ponsonby.  The  Decline  of  Aristocracy 
P.  E.  More.  Aristocracy  and  Justice 
Pareto.  The  Mind  and  Society 
Bryce.  Modern  Democracies ,  part  1,  ch  7;  part  hi, 
ch  75 

Dewey.  The  Public  and  Its  Problems 

Mairet.  Aristocracy  and  the  Meaning  of  Class  Ride 

Tawney.  Equality 

Bergson.  Two  Sources  of  Morality  and  Religion , 
ch  1,  pp  62-82 

J.  B.  S.  Haldane.  The  Inequality  of  Man 
Nock.  The  Theory  of  Education  in  the  United  States 
Madariaga.  Anarchy  or  Hierarchy 
Landtman.  The  Origin  of  the  Inequality  of  the  Social 
Classes 

T.S.  Eliot.  Notes  Towards  the  Definition  of  Culture 


Chapter  4:  ART 

(  ■ 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  word  “art”  has  a  range  of  meanings 
which  may  be  obscured  by  the  current 
disposition  to  use  the  word  in  an  extremely 
restricted  sense.  In  contemporary  thought,  art 
is  most  readily  associated  with  beauty;  yet  its 
historic  connections  with  utility  and  knowledge 
are  probably  more  intimate  and  pervasive. 

The  prevalent  popular  association  reflects  a 
tendency  in  the  19th  century  to  annex  the 
theory  of  art  to  aesthetics.  This  naturally  led 
to  the  identification  of  art  with  one  kind  of  art 
— the  so-called  “fine  arts,”  “beaux  arts”  or 
“Schone  Klinste”  (arts  of  the  beautiful).  The 
contraction  of  meaning  has  gone  so  far  that  the 
word  “art”  sometimes  signifies  one  group  of 
the  fine  arts — painting  and  sculpture— as  in 
the  common  phrase  “literature,  music,  and 
the  fine  arts.”  This  restricted  usage  has  be¬ 
come  so  customary  that  we  ordinarily  refer  to 
a  museum  of  art  or  to  an  art  exhibit  in  a 
manner  which  seems  to  assume  that  the  word 
“art”  is  exclusively  the  name  for  something 
which  can  be  hung  on  a  wall  or  placed  on  a 
pedestal. 

A  moment’s  thought  will,  of  course,  correct 
the  assumption.  We  are  not  unfamiliar  with  the 
conception  of  medicine  and  teaching  as  arts. 
We  are  acquainted  with  such  phrases  as  “the 
industrial  arts”  and  “arts  and  crafts”  in  which 
the  reference  is  to  the  production  of  useful 
things.  Our  discussions  of  liberal  education 
should  require  us  to  consider  the  liberal  arts 
which,  however  defined  or  enumerated,  are 
supposed  to  constitute  skills  of  mind.  We  rec¬ 
ognize  that  “art”  is  the  root  of  “artisan”  as 
well  as  “artist.”  We  thus  discern  the  presence 
of  skill  in  even  the  lowest  forms  of  productive 
labor.  Seeing  it  also  as  the  root  of  “artifice” 
and  “artificial,”  we  realize  that  art  is  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  and  sometimes  even  opposed 
to  nature. 


The  ancient  and  traditional  meanings  are  all 
present  in  our  daily  vocabulary.  In  our  thought 
the  first  connotation  of  “art”  is  fine  art;  in  the 
thought  of  all  previous  eras  the  useful  arts 
came  first.  As  late  as  the  end  of  the  18th  cen¬ 
tury,  Adam  Smith  follows  the  traditional  usage 
which  begins  with  Plato  when,  in  referring  to 
the  production  of  a  woolen  coat,  he  says:  “The 
shepherd,  the  sorter  of  the  wool,  the  wool- 
comber  or  carder,  the  dyer,  the  scribbler,  the 
spinner,  the  weaver,  the  fuller,  the  dresser, 
with  many  others,  must  all  join  their  different 
arts  in  order  to  complete  even  this  homely 
production.” 

In  the  first  great  conversation  on  art— that 
presented  in  the  Platonic  dialogues — we  find 
useful  techniques  and  everyday  skills  typify¬ 
ing  art,  by  reference  to  which  all  other  skills 
are  analyzed.  Even  when  Socrates  analyzes  the 
art  of  the  rhetorician,  as  in  the  Gorgias ,  he  con¬ 
stantly  turns  to  the  productions  of  the  cobbler 
and  the  weaver  and  to  the  procedures  of  the 
husbandman  and  the  physician.  If  the  liberal 
arts  are  praised  as  highest,  because  the  logician 
or  rhetorician  works  in  the  medium  of  the  soul 
rather  than  in  matter,  they  are  called  arts  “only 
in  a  manner  of  speaking”  and  by  comparison 
with  the  fundamental  arts  which  handle  phys¬ 
ical  material. 

The  Promethean  gift  of  fire  to  men,  which 
raised  them  from  a  brutish  existence,  carried 
with  it  various  techniques  for  mastering  matter 
— the  basic  useful  arts.  Lucretius,  writing  in 
a  line  that  goes  from  Homer  through  Thucy¬ 
dides  and  Plato  to  Bacon,  Adam  Smith,  and 
Rousseau,  attributes  the  progress  of  civilization 
and  the  difference  between  civilized  and  primi¬ 
tive  society  to  the  development  of  the  arts  and 
sciences.  “Ships  and  tillage,  walls,  laws,  arms, 
roads,  dress,  and  all  such  like  things,  all  the 
prizes,  all  the  elegancies  too  of  life  without 


64 


Chapter  4:  ART 


exception,  poems,  pictures,  and  the  chiselling 
of  fine-wrought  statues,  all  these  things  prac¬ 
ticed  together  with  the  acquired  knowledge  of 
the  untiring  mind  taught  men  by  slow  degrees 
as  they  advanced  on  the  way  step  by  step.” 

At  the  beginning  of  this  progress  Lucretius 
places  man's  discovery  of  the  arts  of  metal¬ 
working,  domesticating  animals,  and  cultivat¬ 
ing  the  soil.  “Metallurgy  and  agriculture,”  says 
Rousseau,  “were  the  two  arts  which  produced 
this  great  revolution”— the  advance  from  prim¬ 
itive  to  civilized  life.  The  fine  arts  and  the 
speculative  sciences  come  last,  not  first,  in  the 
progress  of  civilization. 

The  fine  arts  and  the  speculative  sciences 
complete  human  life.  They  are  not  necessary 
—except  perhaps  for  the  good  life.  They  are 
the  dedication  of  human  leisure  and  its  best 
fruit.  The  leisure  without  which  they  neither 
could  come  into  being  nor  prosper  is  found 
for  man  and  fostered  by  the  work  of  the  use¬ 
ful  arts.  Aristotle  tells  us  that  is  “why  the 
mathematical  arts  were  founded  in  Egypt;  for 
there  the  priestly  caste  was  allowed  to  be  at 
leisure.” 

There  is  another  ambiguity  in  the  reference 
of  the  word  “art.”  Sometimes  we  use  it  to  name 
the  effects  produced  by  human  workmanship. 
We  elliptically  refer  to  worlds  of  art  as  art.  Some¬ 
times  we  use  it  to  signify  the  cause  of  the  things 
produced  by  human  work— that  skill  of  mind 
which  directs  the  hand  in  its  manipulation  of 
matter.  Art  is  both  in  the  artist  and  in  the  work 
of  art — in  the  one  as  cause ,  in  the  other  as  the 
effect .  What  is  effected  is  a  certain  ennoble¬ 
ment  of  matter,  a  transformation  produced 
not  merely  by  the  hand  of  man,  but  by  his 
thought  or  knowledge. 

The  more  generic  meaning  of  art  seems  to 
be  that  of  art  as  cause  rather  than  as  effect. 
There  are  many  spheres  of  art  in  which  no 
tangible  product  results,  as  in  navigation  or 
military  strategy.  We  might,  of  course,  call  a 
landfall  or  a  victory  a  work  of  art,  but  we 
tend  rather  to  speak  of  the  art  of  the  navi¬ 
gator  or  the  general.  So,  too,  in  medicine  and 
teaching,  we  look  upon  the  health  or  knowledge 
which  results  from  healing  or  teaching  as  natural. 
We  do  not  find  art  in  them,  but  rather  in  the 
skill  of  the  healer  or  teacher  who  has  helped 


65 

to  produce  that  result.  Hence  even  in  the  case 
of  the  shoe  or  the  statue,  art  seems  to  be 
primarily  in  the  mind  and  work  of  the  cobbler 
or  sculptor  and  only  derivatively  in  the  objects 
produced. 

Aristotle,  in  defining  art  as  a  “capacity  to 
make,  involving  a  true  course  of  reasoning,” 
identifies  it  with  making  as  distinct  from  doing 
and  knowing.  Though  art,  like  science  and 
moral  action,  belongs  to  the  mind  and  involves 
experience  and  learning,  imagination  and 
thought,  it  is  distinct  from  both  in  aiming  at 
production,  in  being  knowledge  of  how  to  make 
something  or  to  obtain  a  desired  effect.  Science, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  knowledge  that  something 
is  the  case,  or  that  a  thing  has  a  certain  nature. 
Knowledge  is  sometimes  identified  with  science, 
to  the  exclusion  of  art  or  skill;  but  we  depart 
from  this  narrow  notion  whenever  we  recognize 
that  skill  consists  in  knowing  how  to  make  some¬ 
thing. 

“Even  in  speculative  matters,”  writes  Aqui¬ 
nas,  “there  is  something  by  way  of  work;  e.g.y 
the  making  of  a  syllogism,  or  a  fitting  speech, 
or  the  work  of  counting  or  measuring.  Hence 
whatever  habits  are  ordained  to  suchlike  works 
of  the  speculative  reason,  are,  by  a  kind  of  com¬ 
parison,  called  arts  indeed,  but  liberal  arts,  in 
order  to  distinguish  them  from  those  arts  which 
are  ordained  to  works  done  by  the  body,  which 
arts  are,  in  a  fashion,  servile,  inasmuch  as  the 
body  is  in  servile  subjection  to  the  soul,  and 
man  as  regards  his  soul  is  free.  On  the  other 
hand,  those  sciences  which  are  not  ordained  to 
any  suchlike  work,  are  called  sciences  simply, 
and  not  arts.” 

The  discussion  of  medicine  in  the  great  books 
throws  light  on  the  relation  of  art  and  science, 
in  their  origin  as  well  as  their  development. 
Hippocrates  writes  of  medicine  as  both  an  art 
and  a  science.  In  his  treatise  on  Ancient  Medicine , 
he  says,  “It  appears  to  me  necessary  to  every 
physician  to  be  skilled  in  nature,  and  strive  to 
know — if  he  would  wish  to  perform  his  duties 
— what  man  is  in  relation  to  the  articles  of  food 
and  drink,  and  to  his  other  occupations,  and 
what  are  the  effects  of  each  of  them  on  every 
one.  And  it  is  not  enough  to  know  simply  that 
cheese  is  a  bad  article  of  food,  as  disagreeing 
with  whoever  eats  of  it  to  satiety,  but  what 
sort  of  disturbance  it  creates,  and  wherefore, 


66 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


and  with  what  principle  in  man  it  disagrees.  .  . . 
Whoever  does  not  know  what  effect  these 
things  produce  upon  a  man,  cannot  know  the 
consequences  which  result  from  them,  nor  how 
to  apply  them.”  As  a  science,  medicine  in¬ 
volves  knowledge  of  the  causes  of  disease,  the 
different  kinds  of  diseases,  and  their  charac¬ 
teristic  courses.  Without  such  knowledge,  di¬ 
agnosis,  prognosis,  and  therapy  would  be  a 
matter  of  guesswork — of  chance ,  as  Hippocrates 
says — or  at  best  the  application  of  rule-of- 
thumb  in  the  light  of  past  experience. 

But  the  scientific  knowledge  does  not  by  it¬ 
self  make  a  man  a  healer,  a  practitioner  of  med¬ 
icine.  The  practice  of  medicine  requires  art  in 
addition  to  science — art  based  on  science,  but 
going  beyond  science  in  formulating  general 
rules  for  the  guidance  of  practice  in  particular 
cases.  The  habit  of  proceeding  according  to 
rules  derived  from  science  distinguishes  for 
Galen  the  artist  in  medicine  from  the  mere 
empiric.  The  antithesis  of  artist  and  empiric 
— suggesting  the  contrast  between  operation 
by  tested  rule  and  operation  by  trial  and 
error — parallels  the  antithesis  between  scientist 
and  man  of  opinion. 

It  has  seldom,  if  ever,  been  suggested  that  an 
art  can  be  originally  discovered  or  developed 
apart  from  some  science  of  the  subject  matter 
with  which  the  art  deals.  This  does  not  mean 
that  an  individual  cannot  acquire  the  habit  of 
an  art  without  being  taught  the  relevant  scien¬ 
tific  knowledge.  An  art  can  be  learned  by  prac¬ 
tice;  skill  can  be  formed  by  repeated  acts.  But 
the  teacher  of  an  art  cannot  direct  the  learning 
without  setting  rules  for  his  pupils  to  follow; 
and  if  the  truth  or  intelligibility  of  the  rules 
is  questioned,  the  answers  will  come  from  the 
science  underlying  the  art. 

According  to  Kant,  “every  art  presupposes 
rules  which  are  laid  down  as  the  foundation 
which  first  enables  a  product  if  it  is  to  be  called 
one  of  art,  to  be  represented  as  possible.”  In 
the  case  of  “fine  art,”  which  he  distinguishes 
from  other  kinds  of  art  as  being  the  product  of 
“genius,”  Kant  claims  that  it  arises  only  from 
“a  talent  for  producing  that  for  which  no  definite 
rule  can  be  given.”  Yet  he  maintains  that  a 
“rule”  is  still  at  its  basis  and  may  be  “gathered 
from  the  performance,  /.<?.,  from  the  product, 


which  others  may  use  to  put  their  own  talent 
to  the  test.” 

Granting  that  there  is  no  art  without  science, 
is  the  reverse  true,  and  is  science  possible  with¬ 
out  art  ?  The  question  has  two  meanings.  First, 
are  there  arts  peculiarly  indispensable  to  the 
development  of  science?  Second,  does  every 
science  generate  a  correlative  art  and  through 
it  work  productively? 

Traditionally,  the  liberal  arts  have  been  con¬ 
sidered  indispensable  to  science.  This  has  been 
held  to  be  particularly  true  of  logic.  Because 
they  were  intended  to  serve  as  the  instrument 
or  the  art  for  all  the  sciences,  Aristotle’s  logical 
treatises,  which  constitute  the  first  systematic 
treatment  of  the  subject,  deserve  the  title  Or- 
ganon  which  they  traditionally  carry.  Bacon’s 
Novum  Organum  was  in  one  sense  an  effort  to 
supply  a  new  logic  or  art  for  science,  and  to 
institute  a  renovation  of  the  sciences  by  the 
experimental  method. 

As  an  art,  logic  consists  of  rules  for  the  con¬ 
duct  of  the  mind  in  the  processes  of  inquiry, 
inference,  definition,  and  demonstration,  by 
which  sciences  are  constructed.  Scientific  meth¬ 
od  is,  in  short,  the  art  of  getting  scientific 
knowledge.  In  the  experimental  sciences,  there 
are  auxiliary  arts — arts  controlling  the  instru¬ 
ments  or  apparatus  employed  in  experimenta¬ 
tion.  The  experiment  itself  is  a  work  of  art, 
combining  many  techniques  and  using  many 
products  of  art:  the  water-clock,  the  inclined 
plane,  and  the  pendulum  of  Galileo;  the  prisms, 
mirrors,  and  lenses  of  Newton. 

The  second  question — whether  all  sciences 
have  related  arts  and  through  them  productive 
power — raises  one  of  the  great  issues  about  the 
nature  of  scientific  knowledge,  discussed  in  the 
chapters  on  Philosophy  and  Science. 

For  Francis  Bacon,  and  to  some  extent  Des¬ 
cartes,  art  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  sci¬ 
ence.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Novum  Organum , 
Bacon  declares  that  “knowledge  and  human 
power  are  synonymous  since  the  ignorance  of 
the  cause  frustrates  the  effect;  for  nature  is  only 
subdued  by  submission,  and  that  which  in  con¬ 
templative  philosophy  corresponds  with  the 
cause,  in  practical  science  becomes  the  rule.” 
The  distinction  Bacon  makes  here  between  the 
speculative  and  practical  parts  of  knowledge 
corresponds  to  the  distinction  between  science 


Chapter  4:  ART 


67 


and  art,  or  as  we  sometimes  say,  “pure  and 
applied  science.”  He  opposes  their  divorce  from 
one  another.  If  science  is  the  indispensable  foun¬ 
dation  of  art  and  consists  in  a  knowledge  of 
causes,  art  in  Bacon’s  view  is  the  whole  fruit 
of  science,  for  it  applies  that  knowledge  to  the 
production  of  effects. 

His  theory  of  science  and  his  new  method  for 
its  development  are  directed  to  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  man’s  “empire  over  creation”  which 
“is  founded  on  the  arts  and  sciences  alone.” 
Just  as  the  present  state  of  the  arts  accounts 
for  “the  immense  difference  between  men’s 
lives  in  the  most  polished  countries  of  Europe, 
and  in  any  wild  and  barbarous  region  of  the 
new  Indies,”  so  further  advances  in  science 
promise  the  untold  power  of  new  inventions 
and  techniques. 

On  Bacon’s  view,  not  only  the  value,  but 
even  the  validity,  of  scientific  knowledge  is  to 
be  measured  by  its  productivity.  A  useless  nat¬ 
ural  science — a  science  of  nature  which  cannot 
be  used  to  control  nature — is  unthinkable.  With 
the  exception  of  mathematics,  every  science 
has  its  appropriate  magic  or  special  productive 
power.  Even  metaphysics,  in  Bacon’s  concep¬ 
tion  of  it,  has  its  “true  natural  magic,  which 
is  that  great  liberty  and  latitude  of  opera¬ 
tion  which  dependeth  upon  the  knowledge  of 
forms.” 

The  opposite  answer  to  the  question  about 
science  and  art  is  given  by  Plato,  Aristotle,  and 
others  who  distinguish  between  speculative  and 
productive  sciences.  They  differ  from  Bacon  on 
the  verbal  level  by  using  the  word  “practical” 
for  those  sciences  which  concern  moral  and 
political  action  rather  than  the  production  of 
effects.  The  sciences  Bacon  calls  “practical” 
they  call  “productive,”  but  under  either  name 
these  are  the  sciences  of  making  rather  than 
doing — sciences  which  belong  in  the  sphere  of 
art  rather  than  prudence.  But  the  significant 
difference  lies  in  the  evaluation  of  the  purely 
speculative  sciences  which  consist  in  knowledge 
for  its  own  sake,  divorced  from  art  and  morals, 
or  from  the  utilities  of  production  and  the 
necessities  of  action. 

In  tracing  the  history  of  the  sciences,  Aris¬ 
totle  notes  that  those  men  who  first  found  the 
useful  arts  were  thought  wise  and  superior. 
“But  as  more  arts  were  invented,  and  some  were 


directed  to  the  necessities  of  life,  others  to 
recreation,  the  inventors  of  the  latter  were  nat¬ 
urally  always  regarded  as  wiser  than  the  in¬ 
ventors  of  the  former,  because  their  branches 
did  not  aim  at  utility.  Hence,  when  all  such  in¬ 
ventions  were  already  established,  the  sciences 
which  do  not  aim  at  giving  pleasure  or  at  the 
necessities  of  life  were  discovered,  and  first  in 
the  places  where  men  first  began  to  have  lei¬ 
sure.  ...  So  that  the  man  of  experience  is 
thought  to  be  wiser  than  the  possessors  of  any 
sense-perception  whatever,  the  artist  wiser  than 
the  man  of  experience,  the  master-worker  than 
the  mechanic,  and  the  theoretical  kinds  of 
knowledge  to  be  more  of  the  nature  of  Wisdom 
than  the  productive.”  That  the  theoretic  sci¬ 
ences  are  useless,  in  the  sense  of  not  providing 
men  with  the  necessities  or  pleasures  of  life,  is  a 
mark  of  their  superiority.  They  give  what  is 
better  than  such  utility— the  insight  and  un¬ 
derstanding  which  constitute  wisdom. 

The  Baconian  reply  condemns  the  concep¬ 
tion  that  there  can  be  knowledge  which  is 
merely  contemplation  of  the  truth.  It  an¬ 
nounces  the  revolution  which,  for  John  Dewey, 
ushered  in  the  modern  world.  The  pragmatic 
theory  of  knowledge  had  its  origin  in  a  concep¬ 
tion  of  science  at  every  point  fused  with  art. 

The  ancients,  trying  to  understand  the  nat¬ 
ural  phenomena  of  change  and  generation, 
found  that  the  processes  of  artistic  production 
provided  them  with  an  analytic  model.  Through 
understanding  how  he  himself  worked  in  mak¬ 
ing  things,  man  might  come  to  know  how  na¬ 
ture  worked. 

When  a  man  makes  a  house  or  a  statue,  he 
transforms  matter.  Changes  in  shape  and  posi¬ 
tion  occur.  The  plan  or  idea  in  the  artist’s  mind 
comes,  through  his  manipulation  of  matter,  to 
be  embodied  and  realized  objectively.  To  the 
ancients  a  number  of  different  causes  or  factors 
seemed  to  be  involved  in  every  artistic  produc¬ 
tion — material  to  be  worked  on;  the  activity 
of  the  artist  at  work;  the  form  in  his  mind 
which  he  sought  to  impose  on  the  matter,  thus 
transforming  it;  and  the  purpose  which  moti¬ 
vated  his  effort. 

In  the  medical  tradition  from  Aristotle 
through  Galen  to  Harvey,  there  is  constant 
emphasis  upon  the  artistic  activity  of  nature. 


68 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Galen  continually  argues  against  those  who  do 
not  conceive  Nature  as  an  artist.  Harvey  con¬ 
sciously  compares  the  activity  of  nature  in 
biological  generation  to  that  of  an  artist.  “Like 
a  potter  she  first  divides  her  material,  and  then 
indicates  the  head  and  trunk  and  extremities; 
like  a  painter,  she  first  sketches  the  parts  in 
outline,  and  then  fills  them  in  with  colours; 
or  like  the  ship-builder,  who  first  lays  down  his 
keel  by  way  of  foundation,  and  upon  this  raises 
the  ribs  and  roof  or  deck:  even  as  he  builds  his 
vessel  does  nature  fashion  the  trunk  of  the  body 
and  add  the  extremities.” 

Of  all  natural  changes,  the  one  most  closely 
resembling  artistic  production  appears  to  be 
generation,  especially  the  production  of  living 
things  by  living  things.  In  both  cases,  a  new 
individual  seems  to  come  into  being.  But  upon 
further  examination,  artistic  production  and 
natural  generation  reveal  significant  differences 
— differences  which  divide  nature  from  art. 

Aquinas  considers  both  and  distinguishes 
them  in  his  analysis  of  divine  causation.  In 
things  not  generated  by  chance,  he  points  out 
that  there  are  two  different  ways  in  which  the 
form  that  is  in  the  agent  is  passed  on  to  another 
being.  “In  some  agents  the  form  of  the  thing  to 
be  made  pre-exists  according  to  its  natural 
being,  as  in  those  that  act  by  their  nature;  as 
a  man  generates  a  man,  or  fire  generates  fire. 
Whereas  in  other  agents  the  form  of  the  thing 
to  be  made  pre-exists  according  to  intelligible 
being,  as  in  those  that  act  by  the  intellect; 
and  thus  the  likeness  of  a  house  pre-exists  in 
the  mind  of  the  builder.  And  this  may  be  called 
the  idea  of  the  house,  since  the  builder  intends 
to  build  his  house  like  to  the  form  conceived 
in  his  mind.” 

Thus  in  biological  procreation  the  progeny 
have  the  form  of  their  parents— a  rabbit  pro¬ 
ducing  a  rabbit,  a  horse,  a  horse.  But  in  artistic 
production,  the  product  has,  not  the  form  of 
the  artist,  but  the  form  he  has  conceived  in  his 
mind  and  which  he  seeks  to  objectify.  Further¬ 
more,  in  generation,  and  in  other  natural  changes 
as  well,  the  mat  ter  which  undergoes  change  seems 
to  have  in  itself  a  tendency  to  become  what  fit 
changes  into,  as  for  example  the  acorn  naturally 
tends  to  become  an  oak,  whereas  the  oaken 
wood  does  not  have  in  itself  any  tendency  to 
become  a  chair  or  a  bed.  The  material  the 


artist  works  on  is  entirely  passive  with  respect 
to  the  change  he  wishes  to  produce.  The  artistic 
result  is  in  this  sense  entirely  of  his  making. 

The  realm  of  art,  or  of  the  artificial,  is  then 
opposed  to  the  natural  and  differentiated  from 
it.  Kant,  for  whom  art  is  distinguished  from 
nature  “as  making  is  from  acting  or  operating 
in  general,”  claims  that  “by  right,  it  is  only 
production  through  freedom,  /.<?.,  through  an 
act  of  will  that  places  reason  at  the  basis  of  its 
action,  that  should  be  termed  art.”  Conse¬ 
quently,  art  is  that  which  would  not  have  come 
into  being  without  human  intervention.  The 
man-made  object  is  produced  by  man,  not  in 
any  way,  but  specifically  by  his  intelligence, 
by  the  reason  which  makes  him  free. 

Animals  other  than  man  are  apparently  pro¬ 
ductive,  but  the  question  is  whether  they  can 
be  called  “artists.”  “A  spider  conducts  opera¬ 
tions  that  resemble  those  of  a  weaver,  and  a 
bee  puts  to  shame  many  an  architect  in  the 
construction  of  her  cells.  But,”  according  to 
Marx,  “what  distinguishes  the  worst  architect 
from  the  best  of  bees  is  this,  that  the  architect 
raises  his  structure  in  imagination  before  he 
erects  it  in  reality.  At  the  end  of  every  labour- 
process,  we  get  a  result  that  already  existed 
in  the  imagination  of  the  labourer  at  its  com¬ 
mencement.  He  not  only  effects  a  change  of 
form  in  the  material  on  which  he  works,  but 
he  also  realizes  a  purpose  of  his  own  that  gives 
the  law  to  his  modus  operandi ,  and  to  which  he 
must  subordinate  his  will.” 

As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Animal,  some 
writers,  like  Montaigne,  attribute  the  produc¬ 
tivity  of  animals  to  reason  rather  than  to 
instinct.  Art  then  ceases  to  be  one  of  man’s  dis¬ 
tinctions  from  the  brutes.  But  if  man  alone  has 
reason,  and  if  the  productions  of  art  are  works 
of  reason,  then  those  who  refer  to  animals  as 
artists  speak  metaphorically,  on  the  basis  of 
what  Kant  calls  “an  analogy  with  art  ...  As 
soon  as  we  call  to  mind,”  he  continues,  “that 
no  rational  deliberation  forms  the  basis  of  their 
labor,  we  see  at  once  that  it  is  a  product  of  their 
nature  (of  instinct),  and  it  is  only  to  their 
Creator  that  we  ascribe  it  as  art.” 

This  in  turn  leads  to  the  question  whether 
nature  itself  is  a  work  of  art.  “Let  me  suppose,” 
the  Eleatic  Stranger  says  in  the  Sophist ,  “that 
things  which  are  said  to  be  made  by  nature 


Chapter  4:  ART 


69 


are  the  work  of  divine  art,  and  that  things 
which  are  made  by  man  out  of  these  are  the 
work  of  human  art.  And  so  there  are  two  kinds 
of  making  and  production,  the  one  human  and 
the  other  divine.” 

If  we  suppose  that  the  things  of  nature  are 
originally  made  by  a  divine  mind,  how  docs 
their  production  differ  from  the  work  of  hu¬ 
man  artists,  or  from  biological  generation? 
One  answer,  given  in  Plato’s  Timaeus ,  con¬ 
ceives  the  original  production  of  things  as  a 
fashioning  of  primordial  matter  in  the  patterns 
set  by  the  eternal  archetypes  or  ideas.  In  conse¬ 
quence,  the  divine  work  would  be  more  like 
human  artistry  than  either  would  be  like  nat¬ 
ural  reproduction.  The  emanation  of  the  world 
from  the  One,  according  to  Plotinus,  and  the 
production  of  things  out  of  the  substance  of 
God  in  Spinoza’s  theory,  appear,  on  the  other 
hand,  to  be  more  closely  analogous  to  natural 
generation  than  to  art. 

Both  analogies — of  creation  with  art  and 
with  generation— are  dismissed  as  false  by 
Christian  theologians.  God’s  making  is  abso¬ 
lutely  creative.  It  presupposes  no  matter  to 
be  formed;  nor  do  things  issue  forth  from 
God’s  own  substance,  but  out  of  nothing. 

Thus  Augustine  asks;  “How  didst  Thou 
ma\e  the  heaven  a?id  the  earthV ’  And  he  answers; 
“It  was  not  as  a  human  artificer,  forming  one 
body  from  another,  according  to  the  discretion 
of  his  mind,  which  can  in  some  way  invest  with 
such  a  form,  as  it  seeth  in  itself  by  its  inward 
eye  .  .  .  Verily,  neither  in  the  heaven,  nor  in 
the  earth,  didst  Thou  mal^e  heaven  and  earth\ 
nor  in  the  air,  or  waters,  seeing  these  also  be¬ 
long  to  the  heaven  and  the  earth;  nor  in  the 
whole  world  didst  Thou  make  the  whole  world; 
because  there  was  no  place  where  to  make  it, 
before  it  was  made,  that  it  might  be  .  .  .  For 
what  is,  but  because  Thou  art  ?  Therefore  Thou 
sparest,,  and  they  were  made ,  and  in  Thy  Word 
Thou  madest  them.”  According  to  this  view, 
human  art  cannot  be  called  creative,  and  God 
cannot  be  called  an  artist,  except  metaphor¬ 
ically. 

The  issue  concerning  various  theories  of  cre¬ 
ation,  or  of  the  origin  of  the  universe,  is  dis¬ 
cussed  in  the  chapter  on  World.  But  here  we 
must  observe  that,  according  to  the  view  we 
take  of  the  similitude  between  human  and  di¬ 


vine  workmanship,  the  line  we  are  able  to  draw 
between  the  realms  of  art  and  nature  becomes 
shadowy  or  sharp. 

The  discussions  of  art  in  the  great  books  af¬ 
ford  materials  from  which  a  systematic  classi¬ 
fication  of  the  arts  might  be  constructed,  but 
only  fragments  of  such  a  classification  are  ever 
explicitly  presented. 

For  example,  the  seven  liberal  arts  are  enu¬ 
merated  by  various  authors,  but  their  distinc¬ 
tion  from  other  arts,  and  their  ordered  relation 
to  one  another,  do  not  receive  full  explication. 
There  is  no  treatment  of  grammar,  rhetoric, 
and  logic  (or  dialectic)  to  parallel  Plato’s  con¬ 
sideration  of  arithmetic,  geometry,  music,  and 
astronomy  in  the  Republic ;  nor  is  there  any 
analysis  of  the  relation  of  the  first  three  arts 
to  the  other  four — traditionally  organized  as 
the  trivium  and  the  quadrivium. 

However,  in  Augustine’s  work  On  Christian 
Doctrine  we  have  a  discussion  of  these  arts  as 
they  are  ordered  to  the  study  of  theology. 
That  orientation  of  the  liberal  arts  is  also  the 
theme  of  Bona ventura’s  Reduction  of  the  Arts 
to  Theology.  Quite  apart  from  the  problem  ot 
how7  they  are  ordered  to  one  another,  particular 
liberal  arts  receive  so  rich  and  varied  a  dis¬ 
cussion  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books  that 
the  consideration  of  them  must  be  distributed 
among  a  number  of  chapters,  such  as  Logic, 
Rhetoric,  Language  (for  the  discussion  of 
grammar),  and  Mathematics. 

The  principles  of  classification  of  the  fine 
arts  are  laid  down  by  Kant  from  “the  analogy 
w'hich  art  bears  to  the  mode  of  expression  of 
wrhich  men  avail  themselves  in  speech,  with  a 
view  to  communicating  themselves  to  one 
another  as  completely  as  possible.”  Since  such 
expression  “consists  in  word,  gesture,  and 
tone,”  he  finds  three  corresponding  fine  arts; 
“the  art  of  speech,  formative  art,  and  the  art 
of  the  play  of  sensations.”  In  these  terms  he 
analyzes  rhetoric  and  poetry,  sculpture,  archi¬ 
tecture,  painting  and  landscape  gardening,  and 
music. 

A  different  principle  of  division  is  indicated 
in  the  opening  chapters  of  Aristotle’s  Poetics. 
The  principle  that  all  art  imitates  nature  sug¬ 
gests  the  possibility  of  distinguishing  and  re¬ 
lating  the  various  arts  according  to  their  char- 


70 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


acteristic  differences  as  imitations — by  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  object  imitated  and  to  the  medium 
and  manner  in  which  it  is  imitated  by  the  poet, 
sculptor  or  painter,  and  musician.  “Color  and 
form,”  Aristotle  writes,  “are  used  as  means  by 
some  .  .  .  who  imitate  and  portray  many  things 
by  their  aid,  and  the  voice  is  used  by  others. .  .  . 
Rhythm  alone,  without  harmony,  is  the  means 
in  the  dancer’s  imitations. .  .  .  There  is,  further, 
an  art  which  imitates  by  language  alone,  with¬ 
out  harmony,  in  prose  or  in  verse.”  Aristotle’s 
treatise  deals  mainly  with  this  art — poetry;  it 
does  not  develop  for  the  other  fine  arts  the 
analysis  it  suggests. 

Aristotle’s  principle  also  suggests  questions 
about  the  useful  arts.  Are  such  arts  as  shoe¬ 
making  and  house-building  imitations  of  na¬ 
ture  in  the  same  sense  as  poetry  and  music? 
Does  the  way  in  which  the  farmer,  the  physi¬ 
cian,  and  the  teacher  imitate  nature  distinguish 
these  three  arts  from  the  way  in  which  a  statue 
is  an  imitation,  or  poem,  or  a  house? 

The  Aristotelian  dictum  about  art  imitating 
nature  has,  of  course,  been  as  frequently  chal¬ 
lenged  as  approved.  Apart  from  the  issue  of 
its  truth,  the  theory  of  art  as  imitation  poses 
many  questions  which  Aristotle  left  unanswered. 
If  there  are  answers  in  the  great  books,  they 
are  there  by  implication  rather  than  by  state¬ 
ment. 

The  most  familiar  distinction  between  arts — 
that  between  the  useful  and  the  fine — is  also  the 
one  most  frequently  made  in  modern  discus¬ 
sion.  The  criterion  of  the  distinction  needs  little 
explanation.  Some  of  man’s  productions  are 
intended  to  be  used;  others  to  be  contemplated 
or  enjoyed.  To  describe  them  in  terms  of  imi¬ 
tation,  the  products  of  the  useful  arts  must  be 
said  to  imitate  a  natural  function  (the  shoe,  for 
example,  the  protective  function  of  calloused 
skin).  The  imitation  merely  indicates  the  use, 
and  it  is  the  use  which  counts.  But  in  the  pro¬ 
ducts  of  the  fine  arts,  the  imitation  of  the  form, 
quality,  or  other  aspect  of  a  natural  object  is 
considered  to  be  the  source  of  pleasure. 

The  least  familiar  distinction  among  the  arts 
is  implied  in  any  thorough  discussion,  yet  its 
divisions  are  seldom,  if  ever,  named.  Within 
the  sphere  of  useful  art,  some  arts  work  toward 
a  result  which  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  an 


artificial  product.  Fruits  and  grains  would  grow 
without  the  intervention  of  the  farmer,  yet 
the  farmer  helps  them  to  grow  more  abundantly 
and  regularly.  Health  and  knowledge  are 
natural  effects,  even  though  the  arts  of  medi¬ 
cine  and  teaching  may  aid  in  their  production. 

These  arts,  more  fully  discussed  in  the  chap¬ 
ters  on  Medicine  and  Education,  stand  in 
sharp  contrast  to  those  skills  whereby  man  pro¬ 
duces  the  useful  things  which,  but  for  man’s 
work,  would  be  totally  lacking.  In  the  one  case, 
it  is  the  artist’s  activity  itself  which  imitates 
or  cooperates  with  nature’s  manner  of  working; 
in  the  other,  the  things  which  the  artist  makes 
by  operating  on  passive  materials  supplied  by 
nature  imitate  natural  forms  or  functions. 

For  the  most  part,  the  industrial  arts  are  of 
the  second  sort.  They  transform  dead  matter 
into  commodities  or  tools.  The  arts  which  co¬ 
operate  with  nature  usually  work  with  living 
matter,  as  in  agriculture,  medicine,  and  teach¬ 
ing.  The  distinction  seems  warranted  and  clear. 
Yet  it  is  cut  across  by  Adam  Smith’s  division 
of  labor  into  productive  and  non-productive. 
The  work  of  agriculture  is  associated  with  in¬ 
dustry  in  the  production  of  wealth,  but  what¬ 
ever  other  use  they  may  have,  physicians  and 
teachers,  according  to  Smith,  do  not  directly 
augment  the  wealth  of  nations. 

If  to  the  foregoing  we  add  the  division  of  the 
arts  into  liberal  and  servile,  the  major  tradi¬ 
tional  distinctions  are  covered.  This  last  di¬ 
vision  had  its  origin  in  the  recognition  that 
some  arts,  like  sculpture  and  carpentry',  could 
not  effect  their  products  except  by  shaping 
matter,  whereas  some  arts,  like  poetry  or  logic, 
were  free  from  matter,  at  least  in  the  sense  that 
they  worked  productively  in  symbolic  medi¬ 
ums.  But  by  other  principles  of  classification, 
poetry  and  sculpture  are  separated  from  logic 
and  carpentry,  as  fine  from  useful  art.  Logic, 
along  with  grammar,  rhetoric,  and  the  mathe¬ 
matical  arts,  is  separated  from  poetry  and 
sculpture,  as  liberal  from  fine  art.  When  the 
wTord  “liberal”  is  used  to  state  this  last  distinc¬ 
tion,  its  meaning  narrows.  It  signifies  only  the 
speculative  arts,  or  arts  concerned  with  pro¬ 
cesses  of  thinking  and  knowing. 

The  adequacy  of  any  classification,  and  the 
intelligibility  of  its  principles,  must  stand  the 
test  of  questions  about  particular  arts.  The 


Chapter  4:  ART 


71 


great  books  frequently  discuss  the  arts  of  ani¬ 
mal  husbandry  and  navigation,  the  arts  of 
cooking  and  hunting,  the  arts  of  war  and  gov¬ 
ernment.  Each  raises  a  question  about  the  na¬ 
ture  of  art  in  general,  and  challenges  any  anal¬ 
ysis  of  the  arts  to  classify  them  and  explain 
their  peculiarities. 

There  are  two  other  major  issues  which  have 
been  debated  mainly  with  respect  to  the  fine 
arts. 

One,  already  mentioned,  concerns  the  imi¬ 
tative  character  of  art.  The  opponents  of  imi¬ 
tation  do  not  deny  that  there  may  be  some 
perceptible  resemblance  between  a  work  of  art 
and  a  natural  object.  A  drama  may  remind  us  of 
human  actions  we  have  experienced;  music  may 
simulate  the  tonal  qualities  and  rhythms  of  the 
human  voice  registering  the  course  of  the  emo¬ 
tions.  Nevertheless,  the  motivation  of  artistic 
creation  lies  deeper,  it  is  said,  than  a  desire  to 
imitate  nature,  or  to  find  some  pleasure  in  such 
resemblances. 

According  to  Tolstoy,  the  arts  serve  pri¬ 
marily  as  a  medium  of  spiritual  communica¬ 
tion,  helping  to  create  the  ties  of  human 
brotherhood.  According  to  Freud,  it  is  emotion 
j  or  subconscious  expression,  rather  than  imita¬ 
tion  or  communication,  which  is  the  deepest 
spring  of  art;  the  poet  or  artist  “forces  us  to 
become  aware  of  our  inner  selves  in  which  the 
same  impulses  are  still  extant  even  though  they 
are  suppressed.”  Freud’s  theory  of  sublimation 
of  emotion  or  desire  through  art  seems  to  con¬ 
nect  with  Aristotle’s  theory  of  emotional  ca¬ 
tharsis  or  purgation.  But  Freud  is  attempting 
to  account  for  the  origin  of  art,  and  Aristotle 
is  trying  to  describe  an  effect  proper  to  its  en¬ 
joyment. 

The  theories  of  communication,  expression, 
or  imitation,  attempt  to  explain  art,  or  at  least 
its  motivation.  But  there  is  also  a  conception 
of  art  which,  foregoing  explanation,  leaves  it  a 
mystery — the  spontaneous  product  of  inspi¬ 
ration,  of  a  divine  madness,  the  work  of  un¬ 
fathomable  genius.  We  encounter  this  notion 
first,  but  not  last,  in  Plato’s  Ion. 


The  other  major  controversy  concerns  the 
regulation  of  the  arts  by  the  state  for  human 
welfare  and  the  public  good. 

Here,  as  before,  the  fine  arts  (chiefly  poetry 
and  music)  have  been  the  focus  of  the  debate. 
It  is  worth  noting,  however,  that  a  parallel 
problem  of  political  regulation  occuis  in  the 
sphere  of  the  industrial  arts.  On  the  question 
of  state  control  over  the  production  and  dis¬ 
tribution  of  wealth,  Smith  and  Marx  represent 
extreme  opposites,  as  Milton  and  Plato  are  poles 
apart  on  the  question  of  the  state’s  right  to 
censor  the  artist’s  work.  In  this  debate,  Aris¬ 
totle  stands  on  Plato’s  side  in  many  particulars, 
and  Mill  with  Milton. 

The  problem  of  censorship  or  political  regu¬ 
lation  of  the  fine  arts  presupposes  some  prior 
questions.  Plato  argues  in  the  Republic  that  all 
poetry  but  “hymns  to  the  gods  and  praises  of 
famous  men”  must  be  banned  from  the  State; 
“for  if  you  go  beyond  this  and  allow  the 
honeyed  muse  to  enter,  either  in  epic  or  lyric 
verse,  not  law  and  the  reason  of  mankind, 
which  by  common  consent  have  ever  been 
deemed  the  best,  but  pleasure  and  pain  will  be 
the  rulers  in  our  State.”  Such  a  view  pre¬ 
supposes  a  certain  theory  of  the  fine  arts  and 
of  their  influence  on  the  citizens  and  the  whole 
character  of  the  community.  Yet  because  both 
Plato  and  Aristotle  judge  that  influence  to  be 
far  from  negligible,  they  do  not  see  any  reason 
in  individual  liberty  for  the  state  to  refrain 
from  interfering  with  the  rights  of  the  artist 
for  the  greater  good  of  the  community. 

To  Milton  and  Mill,  the  measure  of  the 
artist’s  influence  does  not  affect  the  question 
of  the  freedom  of  the  arts  from  political  or  ec¬ 
clesiastical  interference.  While  admitting  the 
need  for  protecting  the  interests  of  peace  and 
public  safety,  Milton  demands:  “Give  me  the 
liberty  to  know,  to  utter,  and  to  argue  freely 
according  to  conscience,  above  all  liberties.” 
The  issue  for  them  is  entirely  one  of  liberty. 
They  espouse  the  cause  of  freedom — for  the 
artist  to  express  or  communicate  his  work  and 
for  the  community  to  receive  from  him  what¬ 
ever  he  has  to  offer. 


72 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  generic  notion  of  art:  skill  of  mind  in  making  y 3 

2.  Art  and  nature 

2 a.  Causation  in  art  and  nature :  artistic  production  compared  with  natural  generation 
2 b.  The  role  of  matter  and  form  in  artistic  and  natural  production  74 

2 c.  The  natural  and  the  artificial  as  respectively  the  work  of  God  and  man 

3.  Art  as  imitation  y 5 

4.  Diverse  classifications  of  the  arts:  useful  and  fine,  liberal  and  servile 

5.  The  sources  of  art  in  experience,  imagination,  and  inspiration  76 

6.  Art  and  science 

6a.  The  comparison  and  distinction  of  art  and  science 

6b.  The  liberal  arts  as  productive  of  science:  means  and  methods  of  achieving  knowl- 

edge  77 

6c.  Art  as  the  application  of  science:  the  productive  powers  of  knowledge 

7.  The  enjoyment  of  the  fine  arts  78 

7 a.  Art  as  a  source  of  pleasure  or  delight 

7 b.  The  judgment  of  excellence  in  art  79 

8.  Art  and  emotion:  expression,  purgation,  sublimation 

9.  The  useful  arts  80 

9 a.  The  use  of  nature  by  art:  agriculture,  medicine,  teaching 

9 b.  The  production  of  wealth:  the  industrial  arts  81 

9 c.  The  arts  of  war 

9 d.  The  arts  of  government  82 

10.  The  moral  and  political  significance  of  the  arts  83 

10 a.  The  influence  of  the  arts  on  character  and  citizenship:  the  role  of  the  arts  in  the 
training  of  youth 

io£.  The  political  regulation  of  the  arts  for  the  common  good:  the  problem  of  censor¬ 
ship 

11.  Myths  and  theories  concerning  the  origin  of  the  arts  84 

12.  The  history  of  the  arts:  progress  in  art  as  measuring  stages  of  civilization 


Chapter  4:  ART 


73 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology,  116a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right  hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b- 164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References  :  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  ( D)>  follows;  e.g,y  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Ncketniah,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


11.  The  generic  notion  of  art:  skill  of  mind  in 
making 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  44a-45b  /  Phaedrus ,  136b; 
138c-139a  /  Iony  145d-146c  /  Symposium , 
160c-d;  164d  /  Gorgias ,  260a-262a;  280d-283c 
/  Republic ,  bk  i,  302c-306a;  307a-308a;  bk 
hi,  333 b-d;  bkx,427c-434c/  Statesman,  593d- 
595a  /  PhilebuSy  633a-c  /  Lawsy  bk  iv,  679a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Physicsy  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i92b23~32] 
268d-269a;  [i93bi2-i6]  269d-270a;  ch  8 
[1 99b2<>— 3 1]  277a  /  Metaphysicsy  bk  i,  ch  1 
[98ob25-98ib34]  499b-500b;  bk  vii,  ch  7 
[i032a25~b29]  555b-d;  bk  ix,  ch  2  571c-572a; 
ch  5  573a-c;  ch  7  [i048b35~i049ai2]  574c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animahy  bk  i,  ch  i 
[640*25-33]  162d  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [1 097^3- 
1098*18]  343a-c;  bk  vi,  ch  4  388d-389a;  bk 
ix,  ch  7  [n67b34-n68ai8]  421b-c  /  Politicsy 
bk  1,  ch  ii  [1258^35—39]  453b;  bk  vii,  ch  13 
[I33lb3°~3S]  536c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[1354*1-12]  593a;  [i355b9— 14]  594d-595a;  ch  2 
[I355t>26— 36]  595b;  [1336^26—1357^7]  596b-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  vi,  sect  16,  275c 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Enneady  tr  viii,  ch  i  239b- 
240a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  Gody  bk  xxii,  ch  24, 
610a -c  /  Christian  Doctriney  bk  ii,  ch  30 
651c-d 


19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  8  82c-83b;  q  15,  a  i,  ans  91b-92a;  a  2,  ans 
and  rep  2  92a-93b;  q  36,  a  3,  ans  194c-195d; 
q  117,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  595d-597c;  part 
1— ii,  Q  14,  a  4,  ans  679b-d;  q  21,  a  2,  rep  2 
718a-d;  q  34,  a  i,  rep  3  768c-769d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
aa  3-4  37b-39a;  q  58,  a  2,  rep  i  42a-43a; 
a  5,  rep  2  44d-45c;  q  65,  a  i,  rep  4  70b-72a 

25  Montaigne:  Essaysy  437b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generationy  333a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organumy  bk  i,  aph  85,  121  d- 
122b 

31  Descartes:  Discoursey  part  vi,  61b-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  523c-524b;  525c-527b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Righty  part  i,  par  68 
29d-30a  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  176a-c; 
part  ii,  266a-274a;  part  iv,  346c-d 

47  Goethe:  Fausty  prelude  [134— 157]  4a-b 

49  Darwin  :  Descent  of  Man ,  278b-^ 

50  Marx:  CapitaJ  85b-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  186b;  774a 

2.  Art  and  nature 

2a,  Causation  in  art  and  nature:  artistic  produc¬ 
tion  compared  with  natural  generation 

7  Plato:  Iony  144b  /  Symposiumy  155d-157a  / 
TimaeuSy  447a-449c  /  Lawsy  bk  x,  760a-761d 


74 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  Art  and  nature.  2a.  Causation  in  art  and  na¬ 
ture:  artistic  production  compared  with 
natural  generation .) 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii 
[95a3“9l  129d  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  8  [191^3—^9] 
267b;  bk  11,  ch  1  [i92b8~32]  268b,d-269a;  CH2 
tI94a33_b8]  270d-271a;  ch  8-9  275d-278a,c 
esp  ch  8  [i99a8-b7]  276b-d  /  Generation  and 
Corruption ,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [335bi8— 336ai3]  437b-d 
/  Meteorology ,  bk  iv,  ch  12  [390b2-i4]  494c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [988^-7]  506a;  ch  9 
[992^9-34]  510c;  bk  vi,  ch  1  [io25bi8-27] 
547d;  bk  vii,  ch  7-9  555a-558a;  bk  ix,  ch  2 
571c-572a;  ch  5  573a-c;  bk  xi,  ch  7  [1064^0- 
16]  592b-c;  bk  xii,  ch  3  [1070^-8]  599b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[63  9b  12-640^5]  161d-162d;  [64ibi3~29]  164c- 
d  /  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  21-22 
269c-271a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [734*17— 735a5]  274c- 
275c;  ch  4  [738bi8— 28]  279c;  [740ai3-i8]  281a; 
[740b25~74ia2]  281d;  ch  6  [743b20-25]  285a; 
bk  iii,  ch  11  [762^5-20]  303b;  bk  iv,  ch  2 
[767ai6-25]  308c;  ch  6  [775^0-23]  317b  / 
Ethics ,  bk  1,  ch  9  [io99bi8-24]  345a-b;  bk  vi, 
ch  4  [ii4oan-i6]  388d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  1,  ch  7  170c- 
171a;  ch  12  172d-173c;  bk  ii,  ch  3  185a-186d; 
ch  6,  189a-190a 

12  Lucretius  :  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [823-857] 
55a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  2  259d- 
260a;  bk  vi,  sect  40  277d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  3-4 
130a-131a  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  10  147c- 
148b;  tr  iv,  ch  31,  174d-175a  /  Fifth  Ennead , 
tr  viii,  ch  1-2  239b-240c;  ch  5,  242a;  tr  ix, 
ch  2,  247a  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  ii,  275c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  36,  a  3,  ans  194c-195d; 
q  41,  a  3,  ans  219d-221c;  q  45,  a  2,  ans  242d- 
244a;  q  104,  a  i,  ans  534c-536c;  q  105,  a  5, 
ans  542a-543b;  q  117,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1-2 
595d-597c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  80,  aa  1-2  956c-958b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xi  [91-111] 
16a-b;  paradise,  i  [94-142]  107b-d;  11  [112- 
138]  109a;  viii  [91-111]  117d-118a;  xm  [52- 
84]  126a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Physician's  Tale  [11,941-972]  366b- 
367a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  intro,  47a- b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  93b-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  385a-c;400d- 
401a;  407c;412b-415b;427d-428c;442d-443b; 
443d-444c;  447d-448a;  450c;  492a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  251d-252a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  4  107b 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  437a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxvi, 
sect  2  217b-d 


2 a  to  2c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  188c-189a  /  JudgemetU , 
523c-d;  557c-558b;  564d-565b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  327b,d-328d 
passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  266a- 
267b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  85b-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  186b 

2&.  The  role  of  matter  and  form  in  artistic  and 
natural  production 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [i9ia7~ 12] 
266d;  bk  11,  ch  1  [i93a9~bi9]  269b-270a;  ch  2 
[i94a2i-bi3]  270c-271a;  ch  3  271a-272c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [988^-7]  506a;  bk 
vii,  ch  7-9  555a-558a  esp  ch  8  556b-557b; 
bk  viii,  ch  3  [i043b5~24]  567d-568b  /  Soul , 
bk  ii,  ch  1  [4i2bio-i8]  642c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[64oaio-64ib42]  162b-165a  /  Generation  of 
Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  20  [729a9]-cH  22  [730^2] 
269b-271a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [734b8-735aio]  275a-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties  167a-215d  esp  bk 
ii,  ch  3  185a-186d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  vii,  sect  23 

281b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  2-3  21d- 
23a  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  1-2  239b-240c; 
tr  ix,  ch  2,  247a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xi,  par  7  90d-91a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  41, 
a  3,  ans  219d-221c;  q  45,  a  2,  ans  242d-244a; 
q  47,  a  1,  rep  1  256a-257b;  q  91,  a  3,  ans 
486b-487d;  q  104,  a  i,  ans  534c-536c;  q  105, 
a  5,  ans  542a-543b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  2, 
a  1,  ans  710a-711c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  79,  a  2, 
rep  4  953b-955c;  q  80,  aa  1-2  956c-958b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [127-142] 
107c-d;  xm  [52-84]  126a-b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  412b-415b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  17b-d;  43c- 
45a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [468-505] 
185b-186a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  56-57 
26b-27a;  additions,  32  121d-122a  /  Philos - 
ophy  of  History,  intro,  165a-166b;  185c-d; 
part  11,  266a-267b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  17a;  85b-c;  86d-87c 

2c.  The  natural  and  the  artificial  as  respectively 
the  work  of  God  and  man 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1-2  /  Leviticus,  26:1  / 
Numbers,  33:52  /  Deuteronomy ,  5:7-10;  16:21- 
22  /  Job,  37:1-40:5— (D)  /o£,  37-39  /  Isaiah, 
40:18-2 6— (D)  Isaias,  40:18-26 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  x,  427c-428d  /  Timaeus, 
447a-449c  /  Sophist,  577d-578d  /  bk  x, 

760a-761d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vi,  sect  40  277d 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1048a 


75 


Chapter  4:  ART 


3  to  4 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  $i,  174d- 
175a  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  cii  5,  242a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xi,  par  7  90d-91a 
/  C/Vy  0/ God,  bk  xxii,  cii  24,  610ad  /  C/inV- 
tara  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  30  651c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Sutmna  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  2  12c-14a;  q  14,  a  8  82c-83b;  a 
ii,  ans  84c-85c;  q  15  91b-94a;  q  16,  a  1 
94b'95c;  q  17,  a  1  lOOdlOld;  q  22,  a  2,  ans 
and  rep  3  128d'130d;  q  41,  a  3,  ans  219d- 
221c;  qq  44-46  238a-255d  passim;  qq  65-66 
339a-349d  passim;  q  74,  a  3,  rep  i  375a- 
377a, c;  q  91,  a  3,  ans  486b-487d;  q  93,  a  2, 
rep  4  493a-d;  q  103,  a  i,  rep  1,3  528b-529a; 
q  104,  a  1  534c-536c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  2 
610b-611b;  q  13,  a  2,  rep  3  673c-674c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  3, 
a  8,  ans  729b-730b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  75, 
a  3,  rep  4  938a-939d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xi  [91-111] 
16a-b;  paradise,  viii  [91-111]  117d-118a;  ix 
[103-108]  119d;  x  [7-21]  120b-c;  xm  [52-84] 
126a-b;  xviii  [70-117]  134b-d  esp  [109-111] 
134d 

22  Chaucer:  Physician's  Tale  [11,941-972]  366b- 
367a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  intro,  47a-b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  427d-428c; 
442d-443b;  492a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [694-735] 
150b-l51b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  663d-664a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  188c- 189a  /  Judgement , 
521b-523d 

•  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  87a-b 
3.  Art  as  imitation 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  xviii  [478-608]  135a-136c 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  104c-106c;  108c-110d  / 

Republic ,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-334b;  bk  vi,  382a-c; 
bk  x,  427c-434c  /  Timaeus ,  443b-d;  455b-c  / 
Critias,  478c-d  /  552c-d;  560b-561d; 

577c-579d  /  Statesman ,  596c-d  /  bk  ii, 

654a-c;  660a-662a;  bk  x,  760a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [i94a22-26] 
270c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  ii  [i28ibio-i5] 
479b-c;  bk  viii,  cii  5  [i340ai4— bi 9]  545c-546a 
/  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [i37ib4— 10]  615a  / 
Poetics  681a-699a,c  esp  ch  1-5  681a-684a 

12  Lucretius:  FI ature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [1379- 
1383] 79a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  2  259d- 
260a;  bk  xi,  sect  10  303b-c 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1048a 

17  Plotinus  :  Ffir/  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  2-3  21d-23a 
/  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  10  147c-148b  / 
Fi^/A  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  1-2  239b-240c;  tr 
ix,  ch  2,  247a;  ch  ii  250c-251a  /  S/x/A 
Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  ii,  275c 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  25 
649b-d 


19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  1,  a  9, 
rep  1  8d  9c;  q  93,  a  2,  rep  4  493a  d;  q  117, 
a  1,  ans  595d-597c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xi  [91  iii] 
16a  b;  purgatory,  x  [22-99]  67c-68b;  xii 
[10-72]  70b-71a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  ii,  stanza 
149  41a  /  Physician's  Tale  [11,941-972]  366b- 
367a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  intro,  47a-b;  part  iv, 
262c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [576-592] 
46b;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [1-39]  49a-b  /  Tirnon  of 
Athens ,  act  i,  sc  i  [28—38]  393d-394a;  [156- 
160]  395b-c  /  Winter's  Tale ,  act  iv,  sc  iv 
[77-108]  508c-509a  /  Sonnets ,  lxvii-lxviii 
596c-d 

28  Harvey:  O/2  Animal  Generation ,  332c-333c; 
438c;  444b-c;  492b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  82c  d; 
184a-185b;  part  ii,  237b-c;  251d-252a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  33c-d  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  29  159b-c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  1,  76a-b 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes ,  337a-338a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  29  176a;  32-33  176a-b;  120 
195a;  134  196a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div  5, 
452d-453a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  121b,d-123a;  243a-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  158d 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  521b-524b;  525a-528c  esp 
527b-528c;  557a-558b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  196d-197a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  68 
29d-30a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  219b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  x, 
284b-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  186b;  686b-688a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams ,  265c  /  Civil¬ 
ization  and  Its  Discontents ,  779c-d 

4.  Diverse  classifications  of  the  arts:  useful  and 
fine,  liberal  and  servile 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus ,  74b-76b  /  /cm,  145d- 
148a, c  /  Gorgias,  253c-255c;  260a-262a;  280d- 
282b  /  Republic ,  bk  i,  305b-306a  /  Sophist , 
552c-553a;  560b-561d;  577c-579d  /  Statesman , 
592d-593a;  593d-595a  /  Philebus ,  633a-635b 
/  Laws ,  bk  11,  662c-663b;  bk  x,  760a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [i94a33~b9] 
270d-271a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  1,  ch  i  [98ibi3- 
24] 500a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  339a-b;  ch  7 
[1 097^5-23]  342c  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  ii 
[i258b9-39]  452d-453b;  bk  viii,  ch  2  [i337b3~ 
23]  542c-d  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i355b26~36] 
595b  /  Poetics ,  ch  1-3  681a-682c 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  31,  175a 
/  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  ii  250c-251a 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  30 
651c-d 


76 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  D/verse  classifications  of  the  arts :  useful  and 
fine ,  liberal  and  servile .) 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i8, 
a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  103,  a  2,  rep  2  529a- 
530a;  part  i-ii,  q  8,  a  2,  rep  3  656a-d;  q  9, 
a  1,  ans  657d-658d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Thcologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  3,  rep  3  37b-38a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
82c-d;  bk  hi,  190d-191a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  69d-70d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  251b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  38c-39d; 
56a-b  /  Novum  Organumy  bk  i,  aph  83,  121d- 
122b 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  524a-b;  526a-527b;  532a- 
536d 

5.  The  sources  of  art  in  experience,  imagina¬ 
tion,  and  inspiration 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  31:1-11;  35:30-36:8 

4  Homer:  lliady  bk  i  [1-7]  3a;  bk  ii  [484-493] 
14d-15a  /  Odysseyy  bk  i  [i-io]  183a 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124a  /  Ion  142a-148a,c  / 
Symposium ,  160c-d  /  Apology ,  202b-d  / 
Gorgiasy  253a;  260a-262a  /  Sophisty  561b-d; 
577d-579d  /  Laws ,  bk  iv,  684b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analyticsy  bk  ii,  ch  19 
[100^-9]  136c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[98ob25-982ai]  499b-500b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethicsy  bk  ii,  ch  1  [ii03a26-bi3] 
348d-349a;  bk  x,  ch  9  [ri8ob29-n8ib23] 
435d-436a,c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1354*1-12] 
593a;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [i404ai3~i9]  654b;  ch  2 
[1405^-9]  655b;  ch  10  [i4iob5— 8]  662c  / 
Poetics ,  ch  17  [i453a22~36]  690c 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine  la-9a,c  esp 
par  1-8  la-3b  /  Articulations ,  par  10,  94d 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues ,  iv  [1-3]  14a;  vi  [1— 12]  19a 
/  Aeneid,  bk  i  [i-ii]  103a;  bk  vii  [37-44] 
237a 

14  Plutarch:  Demosthenes ,  692d-695d 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Enneady  tr  viii,  ch  i  239b- 
240a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  68, 
a  4,  rep  1  91b-92c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  ii  [7-9]  2c; 
xxxii  [1-12]  47c;  purgatory,  i  [1— 12]  53a; 
xxiv  [49-63]  90a-b;  xxix  [37-42]  98a;  para¬ 
dise,  1  [1-36]  106a-b;  11  [1— 18]  107d;  [91-105] 
108d;  xviii  [70-117]  134b-d  esp  [109-111] 
134d;  xxii  [1 12-123]  140d;  xxm  [55—69] 
141d-142a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  part  iv,  262c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruely  bk  i, 
2d-3a,c;  bk  iii,  129c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  52d-53a;  309c-310c; 
450d-451a;  523c-524a;  532a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  Midsummer-Night' s  Dreamy 
act  v,  sc  1  [1-27]  370d-371a  /  Henry  Vy  pro¬ 
logue  532b, d;  act  iii,  prologue  543c-d 


5  to  6a 

27  Shakespeare:  Sonnetsy  xxxii  591a-b; 
lxxviii— lxxxv  598b-599b;  c-cvi  601c-602c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  332c-333c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixotey  part  ii,  251d- 
252a;  340b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  32d;  38c- 
39b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  i,  43b  /  Medi¬ 
tations ,  1,  76a-b 

32  Milton:  On  Sha\espear.  1630  16a  /  Paradise 
Lost ,  bk  1  [1-26]  93b-94a;  bk  iii  [1-55]  135b- 
136b;  bk  vii  [1-39]  217a-218a;  bk  ix  [1-47] 
247a-248a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  97a-98a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  198a-b;  302a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jonesy  152a-155b;  190b-191c; 
273a-274c;  280a;  296b,d-298a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  185b;  627b-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  528c 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  463a-464c;  473a-c;  482b- 
483d;  523d-524b;  525c-532a  esp  526a-d, 
528c-530c;  542b-543c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  153a-c; 
176a-c;  part  ii,  263d-268b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  dedication  la-b;  part  ii 

[9945-996°] 2423 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  288d-289a;  292a-b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  85b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  165b  [fn  1] ;  686b-688a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  181a-b;  239c- 
240a;  246c-248c;  383d  /  General  Introduction, 
483c;  600d-601b  /  Group  Psychology,  670a-b; 
692c-693a 

6.  Art  and  science 

6a.  The  comparison  and  distinction  of  art  and 
science 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,  386d-388a;  bk  vii, 
391b-398c;  bk  x,  427c-434c  /  Laws ,  bk  iv, 
684b-685a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  19 
[iooa6~9]  136c  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [i94a2i- 
bi3]  270c-271a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[98ob25-982ai]  499b-500b;  bk  vi,  ch  1 
[io25bi8-28]  547 d;  bk  xi,  ch  7  [io64aio-i8] 
592b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  339a-d;  bk 
iii,  ch  3  [ni2a30-bio]  358b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  3 
[ii39bi4-i8]  388b;  ch  4  [ii40aio-i6]  388d; 
ch  5  [ii4oa33-b2]  389b;  ch  7  390a-d 

10  Hippocrates:  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases,  par 
3  27a-c 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  3-4 
130a-131a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  16, 
a  1,  ans  94b-95c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, 
q  57,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  1,3  37b-38a;  a  4, 
ans  and  rep  2  38a-39a;  q  95,  a  2,  ans  227c- 
228c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  333a-b 


6b  to  6c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  5b-6a; 
48d-49b;  50c-51d;  53a-b 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  i,  la  b  /  Discourse,  part 
vi,  61b-d 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  la-b 

42  Kant:  Intro .  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  388d  / 
Judgement,  463a-464c;  515bc;  523d-524a; 
526a-527b  esp  527a-b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  445c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  346c- 
348a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  687a-688a;  863a-866a 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  874c-875a 

6b.  The  liberal  arts  as  productive  of  science: 
means  and  methods  of  achieving  knowl¬ 
edge 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  50d-52d;  57a-c  /  Phaedrus, 
134a-d;  139d-140b  /  Meno,  179d-183c  /  Gor- 
gias,  252a-262a  /  Republic ,  bk  vi,  386d-388a; 
bk  vii,  391b-398c  /  Parmenides ,  491a-d  / 
Theaetetus,  525d-526b  /  Sophist,  571a-c  / 
Statesman,  594d-595d  /  Philebus,  610d-613a; 
633a-635a  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  30  63d- 
64b  /  Posterior  Analytics  97a-137a,c  esp  bk  i, 
ch  1-3  97a-100a,  bk  ii,  ch  i-io  122b,d-128d  / 
Topics,  bk  1,  ch  1-3  143a-144b;  ch  io-ii 
147b-148c;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [i55bi— 16]  211a-b; 
ch  14  [i63b8-i6]  222a  /  Sophistical  Refuta¬ 
tions,  ch  9-1 1  234b-237c;  ch  16  [i75ai-i2] 
241a;  ch  34  252c-253d  /  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  i 
259a-b;  ch  2  [i84b25~i85ai9]  259c-260a  / 
Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  10  [279b4-i2]  370d;  bk  iii, 
ch  7  [3o6ai-i8]  397b-c  /  Generation  and  Cor¬ 
ruption,  bk  1,  ch  2  [3i6a5— 14]  411c-d  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  ii,  ch  3  513c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  i 
[995&23-b4]  513b, d;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [ioo5bi~4] 
524c;  ch  4  [ioo5b35~ioo6a28]  525a-c;  bk  xi, 
ch  3  589a-d;  ch  5  [io6ib34~io62ai9]  590a-c; 
bk  xiii,  ch  2  [io77bi]-cH  3  [1078^2]  608d- 
609d;  ch  4  [io78bi8-32]  610b-c  /  Soul ,  bk  i, 
ch  1  631a-632d;  bk  ii,  ch  4  [415^4-22]  645b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
161a-165d  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  339d-340b; 
ch  7  [i098a20-b8]  343c-344a;  bk  vi,  ch  3 
388b-c  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1252^8-24]  445b 
/  Rhetoric,  bk  1,  ch  2  [1358^-33]  597d- 
598b 

11  Archimedes:  Method,  569b-570a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  7  112b-113d; 
ch  17  122d-124a;  bk  ii,  ch  25  174b-c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii  10a-12b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  20-24  6a- 
7a  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  3-4  266a-267c 
esp  ch  4,  267b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch 
31-37  651d-654b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  117, 
a  1  595d-597c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  3,  rep  3  37b-38a;  a  6,  rep  3  40a-41a;  part 
iii,  q  9,  a  3,  rep  2  765b-766b 


77 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  56b;  58a  61a; 
65c  d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  69d-77a  passim;  240c- 
242a; 446d-450a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  331a-337a,c 

30  Bacon:  Advancemetit  of  learning,  56b  69c 
esp  56b-58c  /  Novum  Organum,  pref  105a- 
106d;  bk  i  107a-136a,c  esp  aph  11-26  107d- 
108d,  aph  39-69  109c-116b,  aph  103-106 
127d-128c  /  New  Atlantis,  210d-214d 

31  Descartes:  Rules  la-40a,c  esp  x  15d  l7a  / 
Discourse  41a-67a,c  esp  part  i,  41d-42b,  part 
ii,  46c-48b,  part  iii,  50b-51a,  part  iv,  52a, 
part  vi,  61d-62c  /  Meditations,  1  75a- 7 7c  / 
Objections  and  Replies,  128a-129a  /  Geometry, 
bk  1,  295a-298b;  bk  ii,  304a-305a;  bk  iii,  353a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  1-4  171a-172d  /  Vacuum, 
355a-358b  passim;  365b-366a  /  Great  Experi¬ 
ment  382a-389b  /  Geometrical  Demonstration, 
430a-434a;  442a-446b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  rules  270a-271b; 
lemma  5  338b-339a;  general  schol,  371b- 
372a  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  542a;  543a-544a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  intro,  sect 
4-7  94a-95c;  bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  18-20  317d- 
319c;  ch  vii,  sect  11  340a-342d;  ch  xii,  sect 
1-8  358c-360c  passim;  sect  14-15  362d-363b; 
ch  xvii,  sect  11  378b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  7-10 
453c-455b  passim;  sect  vii,  div  48  470d-471c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  339d-342b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  335d-336a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  299b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-13d;  15c-16c;  17d-19a; 
36d-37d;  60a-c;  109d-112d;  119a-b;  146a- 
149d;  193d-194b;  211c-218d;  223a-d  /  Fund. 
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a-254d;  261c- 
d;  264b-d  /  Practical  Reason ,  291a-296d;  310a- 
b;  319c-321b;  329a-330c 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  283d-284d;  287c-288c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  lc-2d 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  172a-173b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  659a;  774d- 
775a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  31 
19c-20a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  lOa-lld 

53  James:  Psychology,  175a-176a;  385a-b;  674a- 
675b;  677b;  687a;  862a-865a;  869a-878a 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  879c; 
881b-c 

6c.  Art  as  the  application  of  science:  the  pro¬ 
ductive  powers  of  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  16c-18b  /  Protagoras,  43b-d  / 
Euthydemus,  70a-c  /  Ion  142a-148a,c  /  Gor- 
gias ,  261a-262a  /  Republic,  bk  vii,  391b-397a 
esp  392b,  394b,  394d  /  Statesman,  580d-582a  / 
Laws,  bk  iv,  684c-685a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [i94a2i-bi3] 
270c-271a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  1  [980^ 5- 


Chapter  4:  ART 


78 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(6.  Art  and  science.  6c.  Art  as  the  application  of 
science:  the  productive  powers  of  knowledge. ) 
982ai]  499b-500b;  bk  vii,  ch  7  [1032*25- 
I033a4]  555b-556a;  ch  9  [1034*21-32]  557c; 
bk  ix,  ch  2  571c-572a;  ch  5  573a-c;  ch  7 
[1049*5-12]  574c-d;  bk  xi,  ch  7  [1064*10-14] 
592b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  339a-b;  ch  7 
[1098*28-32]  343d;  bk  11,  ch  4  [iio5ai7~b4] 
350d-351a;  bk  vi,  ch  4  388d-389a 

10  Hippocrates  :  Ancient  Medicine  la-9a,c  esp 
par  1-4  la-2c,  par  14  5a-c,  par  20-22  7b-8d  / 
Epidemics ,  bk  hi,  sect  iii,  par  16  59b-c  / 
Surgery ,  par  1  70b  /  Articulations ,  par  58, 
112d  /  The  Law  144a-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  ii,  ch  9,  195c- 
197b 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  812d-813a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  17,  158d- 
159b 

13  Virgil:  Georgies  37a-99a  passim,  esp  11  [475— 
515]  65a-66a 

14  Plutarch:  Marcellus,  252a-255a 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  bk  i,  510b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xxii,  ch  24, 
610a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  8  82c-83b;  q  17,  a  i,  ans  lOOd-lOld;  q  19, 
a  4,  rep  4  lllc-112c;  part  i-ii,  q  14,  a  4,  ans 
679b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  3,  rep  3  37b-38a;  a  4  38a-39a;  q  95,  a  2, 
ans  227c-228c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  60a-b;  73b;  part 
ii,  158c-d;  part  iv,  267a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  450d-451a;  523c-524b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  v,  IOOc-IOIc 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  289d-292a  esp 
289d,  291d-292a  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood, 
305a-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  145c-d; 
part  11,  251b-252a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  42a-c;  48d- 
49b;  50c-51d;  53a-b;  56b-58c  /  Novum  Orga - 
num  105a-195d  esp  bk  i,  aph  1-3  107a-b, 
aph  ii  107d,  aph  19-21  108b-c,  aph  81-82 
120b-121b,  aph  85  121d-122d,  aph  92  125b-d, 
aph  103-105  127d-128c,  aph  124  133c-d,  aph 
129-130  134d-136a,c,  bk  ii,  aph  1-9  137a-140c, 
aph  44-52  175d-195d  /  New  Atlantis,  210d- 
214d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61b-c;  66d- 
67a, c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xii, 
sect  11-12  361c-362c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  5 
452d-453b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  103b-115b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  5b-6a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  633c;  661c-663c 


6c  to  la 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  388d  / 
Judgement,  523d-524a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  369a 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  170a;  184a;  213a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  218d- 
219a;  251a-b;  part  iv,  347b-348a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  170b-c;  177a;  183b-189a; 
239c-241a;  299b-d 

54  Freud:  Psycho- Analytic  Therapy,  123a-125a  / 
General  Introduction,  484a  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents,  777a-c;  778b-779a  esp  778d 

7.  The  enjoyment  of  the  fine  arts 

la.  Art  as  a  source  of  pleasure  or  delight 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  260a-262a  /  Republic,  bk  x, 
433a-434c  /  Timaeus,  455b-c  /  Statesman, 
596c-d  /  Philebus,  628d-630c  /  Laws,  bk  ii, 
654b-d;  658d-660d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [98 ibi3— 
19] 500a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  ii  [1152^18—19] 
403d;  ch  12  [1153*24-27]  404c;  bk  ix,  ch  7 
[n67b34-ii68*i8]  421b-c  /  Politics,  bk  viii, 
CH  3  [I337b27~I33^a29]  543a-c;  ch  5  544c- 
546a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [137^4-11]  615a; 
bk  iii,  ch  1  [i403bi5]-cH  12  [i4i4ai3]  653b, d- 
667a  esp  ch  i  653b,d-654c  /  Poetics ,  ch  4 
[i448b4~23]  682c-d;  ch  14  688b-689a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1379- 
1411]  79a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [440-493]  115a-116b; 
bk  viii  [608-731]  275a-278b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  510a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  20-27  6a- 
7d;  bk  iii,  par  2-4  13c-14b;  bk  x,  par  49-53 
83c-85a  /  City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  31-33  147d- 
149a;  bk  xxii,  ch  24,  610a-c  /  Christian  Doc¬ 
trine,  bk  ii,  ch  6  638a- d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  9, 
rep  1  8d-9c;  part  i-ii,  q  32,  a  8,  ans  764c- 
765b;  q  34,  a  1,  rep  3  768c-769d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  ii  [106- 
1:33]  55c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Garganiua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
lb,d-3a,c;  bk  iii,  129d-130c;  190d-191a;  bk 
iv,  232a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  104d-105c;  191c-192d; 
399d-401a 

26  Shakespeare:  Taming  of  the  Shrew,  act  iii, 
sc  1  [10-12]  212d  /  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  v, 
sc  1  [66-88]  431b-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  184a-185b; 
part  11,  251b-c 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes,  337a-338a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  la-2a;  35a-d;  49a-50c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  502c-503a 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  471d-473a;  476a-483d; 
516d-518d;  527b-528c;  532a-d;  534c-539d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  446d-447a;  451c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  254c-d 


lb  to  8  Chapter  4:  AR I  79 


46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  185c- 
186a 

47  Goetiie:  Faust ,  prelude  2a-6a  csp  [89-132] 
3a-4a;  part  ii  [9863-9869]  239b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  569a-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  37a-d;  bk  ii, 
64d-65d;  bk  iv,  190d-192b;  bk  vi,  257c- 
259a;  268b;  bk  vii,  288c-290b;  295c-296a; 
bk  viii,  318a-321d;  324b-325a;  bk  xiv,  601c- 
602d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  x, 
284b-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  157a;  727b;  755a-758a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  601a-b  /  Beyond 
the  Pleasure  Principle ,  643c  /  IFtfr  and  Death , 
756b-c  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  773d- 
774c; 775b 

7&.  The  judgment  of  excellence  in  art 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [518-562]  494d-495c  / 
Pcacc  [732-774]  534c-535a  /  Frog.?  [758-1533] 
573a-582a,c 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  130c-141a,c  /  Ion  142a- 
148a, c  /  Republic ,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-334b  /  CnY- 
478c-d  /  Theaetetus ,  513c-d;  531c-532a  / 
Statesman ,  594a-595a  /  bk  ii,  653c-656b 

esp  656a-b;  660a-662a;  bk  iii,  675c-676b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [io97b23~ 
I098ai8]  343a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  6  [no6a26-bi5] 
351d-352a;  bk  vi,  ch  5  [1140^0-25]  389c;  ch 
7  [1  i4ia9— 12]  390a;  bk  x,  ch  9  [u8iai3-bi3] 
436a, c  /  Politics ,  bk  1,  ch  9  [i257b25-i258ai8] 
451d-452b;  bk  iii,  ch  ii  [i28ib39-i282a23] 
479d-480a;  ch  12  [i282b32-i283ai3]  480d- 
481a;  ch  13  [i284b3~i2]  482c-d;  bk  viii,  ch  5 
[i339®4i-b4]  544d-545a;  ch  6  [i34ob2o-25] 
546b;  [i340b35-4o]  546b-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  iii, 
ch  1-12  653b,d-667b  /  Poetics ,  ch  26  698c- 
699a, c 

10  Hippocrates:  Fractures ,  par  30  86a-d  /  yfrt/c- 
ulations ,  par  78,  119d 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  121c-122a;  128a-b 

17  Plotinus:  F/rr/  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  2-3  21d- 
23a  /  S/T/A  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  ii,  275c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  14  16d- 
17a;  bk  iv,  par  20  24b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  21, 
a  2,  ans  125c-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
aa  3-4  37b-39a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xi  [79— 
120]  69c-70a;  xxvi  [91-126]  93d-94b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  105a;  453d-454a;  455a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  v,  sc  i 
[89-110]  431d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [454-471] 
45a 

29  Cervantes:  D0/2  Quixote ,  part  i,  184a-187c; 
189d-193a;  part  ii,  212a-215b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  44c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ix  [1-47]  247a-248a 
/  Samson  Agonistes ,  337a-338a 


33  Pascal:  Pcnsces ,  28-33  176a  b:  114  194b;  381 
238b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  la  2a;  19a  20a;  35a  d; 
49b-50c;  73b-d;  121b,d~123a;  152a-155b; 
189a  191c;  204b,d-205c;  223a-225a;  246a- 
247a;  273a-274c;  296b, d  298a;  357a-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  300a- b;  573a- 
574a 

42  Kant: /«r/g^w^;7/,461a-495a,c  csp  492b-493b; 
513b-518d;  527b-528c 

43  Federalist:  number  47,  154a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  446d-447a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  115c;  196d-197a;  202b; 
284a-b;  373b-c;  546d-547a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  185c-d; 
part  i,  219b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  prelude  [95—103]  3b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  277a-b;  335b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  302a 

51  Tolstoy:  IFtfr  and  Peace,  bk  i,  37a-d;  bk  iv, 
186c-188a;  191d-192a;  bk  vi,  257c-259a;  bk 
vii,  288c-290b;  295c-296a;  bk  viii,  318a- 
321d;  324b-325a;  bk  x,  444a-445d  esp  445a-c 

53  JaxMes:  Psychology,  157a;  288a;  689b-690a; 
755a-758a;  886b  ' 

8.  Art  and  emotion:  expression,  purgation, 
sublimation 

Old  Testament:  Judges,  11:34/  I  Samuel,  16:15- 
23;  18:6-7—  (D)  I  Kings ,  16:15-23;  18:6-7/ 
//  Samuel,  6:14-15— (D)  II  Kings ,  6:14-15  / 
Psalms,  150:4  /  Ecclesiastes,  3:4  /  Jeremiah, 
31:13 —(D)  Jeremias,  31:13 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  i  [325-359]  186b-c;  bk 
viii  [71-103]  222d-223a;  [482-547]  227a-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vi,  189c 

7  Plato:  Ion,  145a-b  /  Republic,  bk  iii,  325b- 
326b;  bk  x,  431b-434a  /  Timaeus ,  455b-c  / 
Philebus,  628d-630c  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  654b-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ix,  ch  7  [u67b34- 
u68ai8]  421b-c  /  Politics ,  bk  viii,  ch  5  544c- 
546a;  ch  6  [i34ia2o-23]  546d;  ch  7  [i34ib33- 
I342bi8]  547c-548a,c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[I354ai3_I355a3l  593b-594a;  ch  2  [i356ai-25] 
595b-d;  ch  ii  [i37ib4-u]  615a;  bk  ii,  ch  i-ii 
622b,d-636a;  bk  iii,  ch  7  659a-660a;  ch  16 
[i4i7a37~b7]  671c-d;  ch  19  [i4i9bio-27]  674c-d 
/  Poetics,  ch  6  [i449b23-28]  684a;  ch  9 
[i452ai-io]  686c-d;  ch  ii  [i452a37~b4]  687a; 
ch  13-14  687c-689a;  ch  15  [i454b7— 14]  689c; 
ch  17  [1455^9-39]  690c;  ch  18  [i456ai9-23] 
691c-d;  ch  19  [i456a33~b8]  691d-692a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1379- 
1435]  79a-d 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues,  v-vi  16a-21a  /  Aeneid,  bk  i 
[440-493]  115a-116b;  bk  viii  [608-731]  275a- 
278b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  510a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  20-22  6a-c; 
par  25-27  7a-d;  bk  iii,  par  2-4  13c-14b;  bk  x, 
par  49-50  83c-84b 


80 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(8.  Art  and  emotion :  expression,  purgation,  sub¬ 
limation.) 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  v  [73-142]  7d- 
8b;  purgatory,  ii  [76— 133]  55b-d;  xxiv  [49- 
63]  90a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  69c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
190a-191a;  bk  iv,  232a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  104d-105c;  191c-192d; 
399d-401a;  410a-c;  507b-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  act 

iii,  sc  11  [66-95]  245a-b  /  Richard  11,  act  v, 
sc  v  [41-66]  350a- b  /  Merchant  of  Venice,  act 
v,  sc  1  [66-88]  431b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [575-633] 
46b-d  /  Measure  for  Measure,  act  iv,  sc  i 
[1-15]  192c  /  Cymbeline,  act  ii,  sc  iii  [1-35] 
459b-c  /  Tempest ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [375-397]  529d- 
530a;  act  v,  sc  i  [58-61]  545c  /  Henry  VIII , 
act  iii,  sc  1  [1-14]  566a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  184a-185b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  38c-39d; 
78a-d;  87c-d 

32  Milton:  U Allegro  17b-21a  /  II  Penseroso  21a - 
25a  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [549-559]  105b  / 
Samson  Agonistes,  337a-338a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  11  173b-174a;  13-16  174a-b; 
135 196a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  306b-307a;  350b- 
351a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  94a- b 
42  Kant:  Judgement,  509c-d;  532a-539d 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  53c-d;  308b-c;  362b-c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  153b; 
part  iv,  323b-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  570b-571b 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  64d-65d;  bk 

iv,  190d-192b;  bk  vi,  267d-268c;  bk  vn,  288c- 
290b;  bk  x,  444a-445d  esp  445a-c;  bk  xii, 
554c-d;  bk  xiv,  601c-602d;  bkxv,  638c-639c 

53  James:  Psychology,  288a;  747b-748a;  751a- 
753b  esp  752b-753b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  239c-240a; 
246b-248c  /  General  Introduction,  483b-c; 
581d-582b;  600d-601b  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure 
Principle,  643c  /  Group  Psychology,  692c-693a 
/  War  and  Death,  762c  /  Civilization  and  Its 
Discontents,  7  73  d- 7  7 4c 

9.  The  useful  arts 

9*z.  The  use  of  nature  by  art:  agriculture,  medi¬ 
cine,  teaching 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  2:15;  3:17-19,23 
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  38:1-15 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  38:1-15 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xviii  [541-589]  135d-136c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-364]  134a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  117a-c 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  21d  /  Phaedrus,  136c-d  /  Sym¬ 
posium,  155d-156c/  Gorgias,  261a-262a;  289d- 


9  to  9a 

290a  /  Republic,  bk  iii,  334b-337a;  bk  vii, 
391c-d  /  Timaeus ,  475a-d  /  Statesman,  599a-b; 
599d-600a  /  Laws,  bk  x,  760c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i92b8~3i] 
268b,d-269a;  [i93bi2-i7]  269d-270a;  ch  2 
[194*22-27]  270c;  ch  8  [199^6-31]  277a  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  vii,  ch  7  [i032b6-29]  555c-d; 
ch  9  [1034^-29]  557b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  1,  ch  8  [1256s! 5^25] 
450a-c;  ch  ii  [i258b9~34]  452d-453b;  bk  vii, 
ch  17  [i336b40-i337a2]  542a, c 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine ,  par  3  ld-2b; 
par  20-21  7b-8a  /  Prognostics ,  par  1  19a- b  / 
Injuries  of  the  Head,  par  17  68d-69a  /  Surgery, 
par  15  73b-c  /  Fractures,  par  1-3  74b,d-76a; 
par  33  88a-b  /  Articulations ,  par  2-3  92a-c; 
par  14  96d-97d;  par  42  104b-c  /  Aphorisms, 
sect  1,  par  1  131a;  sect  ii,  par  4  132b  /  The 
Law,  par  2-3  144b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1361— 
1378]  78d-79a 

13  Virgil:  Georgies  37a-99a  esp  1  [50-159]  38b- 
41b,  11  [8-46]  52a-53b 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  31,  175a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xxii,  ch  24, 
610a-d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  30  651c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  no, 
a  2,  rep  3  565d-566d;  q  117,  a  i  595d-597c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  1,  ans  12b-13c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi  [91-111] 
16a-b;  paradise,  viii  [115-148]  118b-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
207c-d;  bk  iv,  303c-304a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  52c-d;  63d-66b;  93b-d; 
368d-370c;  523c-524a;  527a-529b 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear,  act  iv,  sc  iv  [1— 19] 
272b-c  /  Winter's  Tale ,  act  iv,  sc  iv  [79—103] 
508c-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  438c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  48d-49b; 
53a-d  /  Novum  Organum ,  pref  105a-106d; 
bk  1  107a-136a,c  esp  aph  1-9  107a-d,  aph  129 
134d-135d;  bk  ii,  aph  4  137d-138b;  aph  29 
159b-c  /  New  Atlantis,  211b-214d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61b-c;  66d- 
67a, c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  78a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  195b-196a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  34b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  336b-337a;  349a; 

352a-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  ii,  157a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  21c-22b;  367d- 
368a;  655d-656b  passim 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  221c-222a 

43  Federalist:  number  14,  61d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  331b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  56 
26b;  part  iii,  par  196  67a;  par  203  68a-c  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  244b-c;  part  ii, 
267a-b 


81 


Chapter  4:  ART 


9b  to  9c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  18a  22c  esp  18b-c, 
20d'21a;  41c-d 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  16d-17a;  85a-88d  csp  86a  b; 
250a, c;  298c-d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  421d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  372a-373b; 
bk  x,  449b-c;  epilogue  i,  654a-655c 

53  James:  Psychology,  711b-712b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  2a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 
777a-b;  778b;  779a 

9 b.  The  production  of  wealth:  the  industrial 
arts 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  35-39  /  I  Kings ,  5-7 — 
( D )  III  Kings,  5-7  /  /  Chronicles,  22:15-16— 
(D)  I  Paralipomenon,  22:15-16  /  //  Chronicles, 
2:11-5:14 — (£>)  II  Paralipomenon ,  2:11-5:14 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  38:27-34 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  38  ^8-39 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  316c-319a  /  Statesman , 
591c-593d;  596a-597b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  1,  ch  i  [98 1^13—19] 
500a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  4  447b-c;  ch 
8-1 1  449d-453d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1241- 
1268]  77b-c;  [1350-1360]  78c-d 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  30 
651c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  2, 
a  1  615d-616c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  85  121d- 
122d  /  New  Atlantis,  210d-214d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  78a-b;  part  hi, 
106a-112a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiii, 
191a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  349a;  352a-d;  365b- 
366b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  i,  6a-d;  27b- 
28a;  52d-53b;  bk  ii,  157a-b;  bk  iv,  288c-300d 
esp  288c-291c,  294d-295a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  88d-89d;  368a; 
655d-656b;  658a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  314c-315b 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  524a-b 

43  Federalist:  number  8,  45d-46a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  56 
26b;  additions,  125  137a  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  i,  243d-244c;  part  ii,  267a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  79a-82a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  16d-17a;  31a-37c  passim:  85a- 
89b;  96a-97a;  100a-147b  passim;  157a-188c 
esp  158a-159a,  164a-166c,  180d-188c;  205a- 
207c;  251b-255a  esp  254a-b;  279d-280a;  292d; 
299b-c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  420d- 
421a; 421d-422c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  654a- 
655c 


9 c.  The  arts  of  war 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  14  /  Exodus,  17:8-16  / 
Numbers,  31  /  Deuteronomy,  2-3;  20  /  Joshua, 
1-12  esp  6,  8 —(D)  Josue,  1-12  csp  6,  8  / 
Judges  esp  4,  7,  15  /  /  Samuel  csp  17— (D) 

I  Kings  esp  17  /  //  Samuel — (D)  II  Kings 

Apocrypha:  Judith,  7:8-31 —(D)  OT,  Judith , 

7 18-25  /  I  Maccabees— (D)  OT,  /  Machabees  / 

II  Maccabees—  (D)  OT,  II  Machabees 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  iv  [292-309]  26d-27a;  bk 
vii  [433-463]  50b-c;  bk  viii  [489-565]  56a-d; 
bk  xiii  [125-154]  89c-d;  bk  xviii  [509-540] 
135b-d  /  Odyssey,  bk  viii  [491-520]  227a-b 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [632-730]  264a-d  / 
Trojan  Women  [1-14]  270a;  [511—571]  274b-d  / 
Heracles  Mad  [188-205]  366d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  41c-42b;  bk  iv, 
141b-c;  144d-148d;  158d-159b;  bk  vi,  206d- 
208d;  bk  vii,  239a-241c;  247d-259a;  bk  viii 
260a-287d  passim;  bk  ix  288a-314a,c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  389d- 
391b;  bk  vi,  514d-516a;  bk  vii  538a-563a,c 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  75a-b  /  Republic,  bk  ii, 
319a-c;  bk  iv,  343b-d;  bk  v,  366a-c  /  Sophist, 
552d-554c  /  Laws,  bk  vii,  716c-717c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  7  [i255b38— 39] 
449c;  ch  8  [i256b20-2 6]  450c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1281- 
1349]  77d-78c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ii  [13-198]  124b-129b;  bk 
vii  [519-530]  250b;  bk  ix  [25-76]  279b-281a; 
[590-620]  295a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Themistocles,  90b-95b  /  Pericles , 
131b-139a  /  Fa bius-Pericles,  154a-d  /  Aemilius 
Paulus,  216a-223a  /  Marcellus ,  252a-255a; 
2 5 7c- 2 60c  /  Aristides,  266b-272c  /  Philopoe - 
men  293a-302a,c  /  Caius  Marius ,  338c-344c  / 
Sulla,  382c-d  /  Lucullus  400a-421a,c  /  Nicias 
423a-438d/  Sertorius  457b,d-470d  esp  464c-d 
/  Agesilaus,  498a-d  /  Pompey,  528c-534d  / 
Alexander,  546b-550a;  555d-556b;  569b-d  / 
Caesar,  583a-596a  /  Antony,  770a-773c  /  Mar¬ 
cus  Brutus,  816d-824a,c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  26c-28c  esp  26c-27a; 
bk  hi,  63a-b;  bk  xiii,  134a-136c  /  Histories, 
bk  1,  210b-d;  bk  iii,  247a-c;  bk  iv,  275b-c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  4,  rep  3  38a-39a;  part  ii-ii,  q  40,  a  3 
580d-581b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  iii-v  3c-8c;  ch  x 
16a-d;  ch  xii-xiv  17d-22a;  ch  xviii,  25a-c; 
ch  xx-xxi  30a-33a;  ch  xxv  35a-36b;  ch 
xxvi,  37b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  73b;  part  ii, 
103b-c;  159a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
28a-29b;  31d-35a;  39c-44a;  50c-52d;  55b-57c; 
bk  11,  95a-d;  bk  iii,  127d-128b;  bk  iv,  276a- 
282d;  304a-305a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  llb-13c;  21a-b;  133b-d; 
136b-143c;  193a-194b;  327d-329d;  354b-358b 


82 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(9.  The  useful  arts.  9c.  The  arts  of  war.) 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI ,  act  ii,  sc  i  [50- 
77]  9b- d;  act  iv,  sc  iv  23b-d  /  1st  Henry  IV, 
act  iv,  sc  hi  [1-29]  459b-c  /  2nd  Henry  IV, 
act  1,  sc  hi  472d-474a  /  Henry  V,  act  iii,  sc 
ii  [59-152]  544d-545d  /  Julius  Caesar ,  act  iv, 
sc  iii  [196-225]  590c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i, 
sc  iii  [197-210]  llOa-b  /  Othello,  act  i, 
sc  iii  [1-47]  208d-209b;  [220-229]  211b  / 
Antony  and  Cleopatra,  act  iii,  sc  vn-x 
331b-333a  /  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  ii  354d- 
355b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  145c- 
147d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  23a;  54a 

36  Swift:  Gtilliver,  part  i,  23a-25b;  part  ii, 

77a-78a;  part  iv,  150a-151b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  237b-238a;  448b- 
453a;  505b-510b;  535a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  241a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ix-x  58b, d- 
68d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  301a-309a,c 
esp  303d-305c,  308c-309a,c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  4b-8a;  85a-86d; 
281b-287d  passim;  365b-375d;  377c-378d; 
411d-412c;  563a-566c  esp564d;  633b-c;  638d- 
639a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  3d-4c;  120a;  126d- 
131d  esp  127d-128a;  256a;  291d-292c;  311d- 
312a;  321b-325a;  394d-395c;  499a-b;  509a- 
510a, c;  542b-548d  esp  542b-543a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  453d-454c  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  502d-504b 

43  Federalist:  number  8,  44c-45a;  45d-46a; 
number  25,  91a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  343d- 
344a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  52c-53c;  54c- 
55c;  bk  11,  88b-89b;  92c-93d;  96c-97c;  bk  iii, 
135c-137c;  144d-146d;  bk  v,  208c-210b;  bk 
vii,  278a-287a;  bk  ix,  350d-354a;  358b-365c; 
bk  x,  389a-391c;  405a-b;  421c-426a;  430b- 
432c;  440c-443b;  445d-448c;  449c;  bk  xi, 
470d-475a;  bk  xiii,  563a-571a;  bk  xiii-xiv, 
582a-590c;  bk  xiv,  609a-613d;  bk  xv,  618b- 
621b 

9 d.  The  arts  of  government 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  18:13-26 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [147-222]  471d-472c/ 
Lysistrata  [506-586]  589c-590d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  366d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  43b-47c  /  Euthydemus, 
75c-76b  /  Ion,  147d-148a,c  /  Meno,  188b- 
190a, c  /  Gorgias,  285a-292b  /  Republic ,  bk 
iii-iv,  339b-347a;  bk  vi,  382a-c;  bk  vii, 
390c-391b  /  Critias ,  479c  /  Theaetetus ,  531a-b  / 
Statesman  580a-608d  esp  585c-586a,  598b- 
608d  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  679a-c 


9d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  339a-d;  bk 
vi,  ch  7  [ii4ia2o-33]  390a-b;  ch  8  [ii4ib 
23-28]  390d;  bk  x,  ch  9  434a-436a,c  / 
Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  12  470b-471d;  bk  iii, 
ch  11  [i28ia39~i282a4i]  479b-480b;  bk  iv, 
ch  1  487a-488b;  bk  v,  ch  8-9  509d-512d; 
ch  11  515d-518c;  bk  vii,  ch  2  528a-529a; 
ch  4  [i325b34~i326a4]  530a;  ch  13-14  536b- 
538d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [1136- 
1160]  76a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c; 
bk  vi,  sect  30  276d-277a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [418-440]  114b-115a;  bk 
vi  [847-853]  233b-234a 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus -Theseus,  30c-d  /  Popli- 
cola,  81b-c  /  Poplicola-Solon ,  87b-d  /  Camillus, 
102d  /  Pericles  121a-141a,c  esp  137b-138b  / 
Fabius,  143b-d;  145d-146a  /Alcibiades  155b, d- 
174d  passim,  esp  167c-168a  /  Coriolanus,  180d- 
181b  /  Aristides  262b,d-276a,c  esp  263d- 
267a,  273d-275c  /  Crassus-Nicias  455b,d-457d 
/  Agesilaus,  482a-c  /  Phocion,  604b,d-605d  / 
Cato  the  Younger,  625b-627b  /  Agis,  648b, d- 
649b  /  Cains  and  Tiberius  Gracchus- Agis  and 
Cleomenes  689b,d-691a,c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  63d-67a;  72a-b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  16 
521d-522a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
104,  a  4,  ans  306d-3Q7c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xiii  [91— 
108]  126b-c 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince  la-37d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  intro  47a-d;  part  i, 
67d-68a;  80d-81a;  82b-d;  part  ii,  112d;  122b- 
124b;  127a-130a;  148c-159c;  164a, c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
131b,d-133b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  3a-5a;  324c-326b  esp 
326a-b;  437b-c;  450d-451a;  451d-452d 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  iii,  sc  iv  [29- 
66]  340c-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  217a-b; 
331a-336a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  4c-7c;  23a- 
26a;  54a-b;  93c-95a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [430-456]  120b- 
121a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  82  186b-188b;  291-338  225a- 
233a  passim 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  9b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  78a-b;  part  iii, 
112a-115b;  part  iv,  157a-158a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  3b-d; 
bk  11-v  4a-33a,c;  bk  vi,  40a-b;  43c-d;  bk 
viii,  51a-53c;  bk  xi,  69a-75a;  bk  xii,  93c- 
96a, c;  bk  xix,  135a-141a;  bk  xxvi,  214b, d; 
bk  xxix  262a-269a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy  367a-385a,c  esp 
370c-d  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  400c-406a; 
bk  iii,  409d-410a;  412c-414d 


io  to  m 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b,d-32d  passim; 
48a;  61d-63b;  142c-144a;  153c-157c  esp  155b, 
157c;  240b-255d  passim;  284a-c;  288b  289a; 
338d-344a,c  esp  338d-339a,  343a-c;  577a  578c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  102c-I03a;  176c- 
177c;  504c-505c 

43  Federalist:  number  35, 113b-c;  number  37, 
119c-120a;  number  62,  190b-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  322a  b  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  327b,d-328d;  331b-c;  338d-339a;  356b- 
362c  passim;  411d-412a;  442a-d  /  Utilitarian¬ 
ism,  445c- d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  275d- 
276a;  part  iv,  360b-c;  361d-362a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  238c-243d; 
260a-262a;  bk  ix,  350d-354a 

53  James:  Psychology,  201a 

10.  The  moral  and  political  significance  of  the 
arts 

10^.  The  influence  of  the  arts  on  character  and 
citizenship:  the  role  of  the  arts  in  the 
training  of  youth 

5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  [626-658]  462b-d 
/  Wasps  [1009-1070]  519d-520c  /  Frogs  [1008- 
1098]  576b-577c;  [1482-1533]  581d-582a,c 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  46b-c  /  Phaedrus,  140a-d/ 
Symposium,  156b-c  /  Gorgias,  280d-282b  / 
Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-339a;  bk  iv,  344b-d; 
bk  vii  388a-401d  esp  389d-398c;  bk  x,  427c- 
434c  /  Timaeus,  455a-c  /  Laws,  bk  ii  653a- 
663d;  bk  hi,  675c-676b;  bk  v,  696b-d;  bk 
vii,  717b-728b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  17  [1336*30- 
b24]  541b-d;  bk  viii  542a-548a,c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  7,  253c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [441-493]  115a-116b;  bk 
vi  [847-853]  233b-234a;  bk  viii  [608-731] 
275a-278b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  33d-34a;  43b-d  /  Solon, 
76a  /  Pericles,  121a-122b  /  Timoleon,  195a-b  / 
Demetrius,  726a-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiv,  146b-d 

16  Copernicus  :  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  510a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2  lOa-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  20-22  6a-c; 
par  25-27  7a-d;  bk  hi,  par  2-4  13c-14b;  bk  x, 
par  49-53  83c-85a  /  City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  31- 
33  147d-149a;  bk  ii,  ch  8-14  153d-157c;  bk 
iv,  ch  26-27  202a-203c  /  Christian  Doctrine, 
bk  11,  ch  6  638a-d;  ch  25  649b-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxii 
[55-93]  87a-c;  paradise,  i  [1-36]  106a-b;  11 
[1— 18]  107d;  xvii  [100-142]  133a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Intro,  to  Man  of  Law's  Prologue 
[4465-4510]  234b-235b  /  Prologue  to  Melibeus 
400b-401a  /  L'Envoi  550a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Garvantua  and  Pantavruel,  bk  i, 
26d-30c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  69d-80b  passim 


83 

26  Shakespeare:  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  act 
iii,  sc  11  [66-95]  245a-b  /  Richard  II,  act  v,  sc 
v  [41-63]  350a  b  /  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  v, 
sc  1  [66-88]  431b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure,  act  iv, 
sc  1  [1  -15]  192c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  la  3b; 
12b-16c;  184a-187c;  189d-193c;  part  ii,  427c- 
429d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  4c-6c;  38c- 
39a;  78a-d;  79c-80a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ix  [1-47]  247a-248a 
/  Areopagitica,  385a-386b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  11  173b-174a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div  i 
451a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  xviib-xviiia 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  250b-251a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  253d-254d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  17b- 
18d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  365c-366b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  337d-343d; 
347c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  3a-b;  79a-b;  94a-b; 
629a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  40d-41a;  225a-226a 
esp  225c;  300a-b;  573a-574b 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  521b-523c;  586d-587a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  158a-b;  259b-c;  308b-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  259b-c; 

263d-265c;  267b-268b;  276a-d;  part  iv, 
347b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  47b-48d;  bk 
ii,  64d-65d;  bk  iv,  172d-173d;  bk  viii,  316b- 
321d;  324b-325d 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  582a-b  /  War 
and  Death,  762c 

\0b.  The  political  regulation  of  the  arts  for  the 
common  good:  the  problem  of  censor¬ 
ship 

5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  [366-382]  459c-d; 
[480-508]  460d-461a 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-339a;  bk  iv, 
344b-d;  bk  x,  427c-434c  esp  432d-434c  / 
Statesman,  601c-602c  /  Laws,  bk  ii  653a-663d; 
bk  iii,  675c-676b;  bk  vii,  717b-730c;  bk  viii, 
731d-732c;  bk  xi,  782d-783b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  339a-d  /  Poli¬ 
tics,  bk  vii,  ch  17  [1336^2-23]  541c-d 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  76a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  56d-57b;  bk  iv, 
67b-c;  72b-73a;  bk  xiv,  152d-153c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  31-33 
147d-149a;  bk  ii,  ch  9-14  154a-157c;  bk  viii, 
ch  13  273b-d 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxi,  32d-33a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  102d-103a;  150c- 
151a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  79d-80b;  191d-192b 


Chapter  4:  ART 


84 

(10.  The  moral  and  political  significance  of  the 
arts .  10 h.  The  political  regulation  of  the 
arts  for  the  common  good:  the  problem  of 
censorship.) 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  13b-16c; 
117d-119d;  184a-187c 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,  214a-b 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica  381a-412b  esp  384b- 
389a,  398a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  253d-254d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  iv,  17b- 
18d;  bk  xii,  90b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  347c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  148a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  220b-221b;  223a-c  / 
Science  of  Right,  425c-426a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  i,  sect  8 
[214-217]  13b;  amendments,  i  17a 

43  Federalist:  number  43,  139d-140a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  368d-369b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  259b-c;  300c-301a  esp 
301a-d  [fn  1] 

11.  Myths  and  theories  concerning  the  origin 
of  the  arts 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  4:20-22;  10:8-9  / 
I  Chronicles,  4:14 — (D)  I  Paralipomenon,  4:14 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d 
esp  [109-113]  41b,  [248-236]  42d,  [459-461] 
44d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  44a-45a  /  Phaedrus,  138c- 
139a  /  Symposium ,  160c-d  /  Republic,  bk  ii, 
316c-319c  /  Statesman,  589a-c  /  Philebus, 
610d-613a  esp  611d-613a  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  653a- 
c;  662c-663b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  viii,  ch  6  [i34ib2— 8] 
547a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  hi,  ch  i  [i403bi5-i404a39] 
653b,d-654c  /  Poetics ,  ch  3  [i448a25]-CH  5 
[i449bi9]  682b-684a 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  3  ld-2b; 
par  7  3a;  par  12  4b-c;  par  14,  5a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1028- 
1104]  74c-75c;  [1241-1457]  77b-80a,c 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  1  [121-146]  40b-41a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv, 
299a-300b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  38d-39a  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  109  128d-129c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  352a-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  655d-656a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  239a-b; 
252a-c;  part  ii,  261b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  278a-279c;  298a- 
301c;  329c;  348d-349d;  567c-571a  esp  569d- 
570a,  570d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  x, 
284b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  727b-728a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  512d-513a  / 

Group  Psychology,  670a-b;  692a-693a  / 

Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  778b,d  [fn  2] 
/  New  Introductory  Lectures,  86 2d 


11  to  12 

12.  The  history  of  the  arts:  progress  in  art  as 
measuring  stages  of  civilization 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  iv  [104-m]  25a;  bk  ix 
[185-189]  59a;  bk  xi  [15-46]  72b-c;  bk  xviii 
[368-617]  133d-136d  /  Odyssey,  bk  ix  [105-115] 
230b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  5b;  5d-6a;  bk  ii, 
49d-50a;  75b-76a;  bk  iii,  102c;  bk  vii,  220d- 
221b 

6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian  War,  BKi,350b-d 

7  Plato:  Critias,  479d  /  Statesman,  602b-c  / 
Laws,  bk  11,  654c-655b;  bk  hi,  675c-676b 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations ,  ch  34 
[i83bi6-i84b8]  253a-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i, 
ch  1  [98^13-24]  500a;  bk  xii,  ch  8  [i074bn] 
605a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  7  [1098^1-25] 
343c-d/  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i26Sh2^-i26f2g] 
464d-465b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  hi,  ch  i  [i403bi5~ 
1404^9]  653b,d-654c  /  Poetics,  ch  4-5  682c- 
684a 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  1-4  la- 
2c;  par  12  4b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [324-337] 
65b-c;  [925-1160]  73b-76b;  [1241-1457]  77b- 
80a, c 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  1  [121-146]  40b-41a 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  127a-129b  /  Marcellus, 
252a-255a  /  Aratus,  830b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xv,  167c-168a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  10, 
348b-c;  bk  xviii,  ch  13-14  478d-479d;  bk 
xxii,  ch  24,  610a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  46, 
a  2,  rep  4  253a-255a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xi  [79- 
120]  69c-70a;  xxiv  [49-63]  90a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  85c;  part  iv, 
267c-269b  passim 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
81d-82c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning  la-lOld  esp 
la-15a,  18b,  20b-25c,  29a-32c,  33d-34a,  35b- 
36c,  38d-39a,  51d-54b  /  Novum  Organum, 
bk  1,  aph  85  121d-122d;  aph  129  134d-135d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  61a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  103b-115b  esp 
106a-107a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  338d-340a;  346d-347a; 
352a-d;  365b-366b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  6a-d;  bk  iii, 
173d-175b;  bk  iv,  191a;  bk  v,  308c-309a,c; 
337d-338c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  18b-24a,c;  88d- 
89d;  157d-159a;  171c;  237c-239a;  502d-503a; 
633b-634a,c;  641b-642b;  655d-658b;  661c- 
664d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  1 95 d- 19 7a;  225a-c; 

291d-292c;  298a-300b;  327a-328a,c;  355a-d; 
451c-452d;  509d-510a,c;  522b-528a,c  esp 

528a, c;  573a-574a;  590a-598a  passim,  esp 
596d-598a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


12 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  586a-587a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  i,  sect  8 
[214-217]  13b 

43  Federalist:  number  43,  139d-140a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  367b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  70d-71b;  307c-d;  380d- 
381a;  406c;  408d-409a;  446d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  69, 
30b;  part  hi,  par  356  113a-b  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  intro,  153a-b;  182b-c;  185a-186a; 
part  1,  219b-c;  229b-d;  243d-244c;  247c- 
248d;  251a-b;  253b-c;  part  ii,  259a-282d  esp 
261b,  267b-268b,  276a-d,  277d-278a;  part 


85 

hi,  312c-d;  part  iv,  323c  d;  335a  d;  346c- 
348a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  13c;  19c-d  /  De¬ 
scent  of  Man ,  278a-279a;  320a-321a;  329a- 
330a, c;  349b-d;  569d 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  86b-c  esp  86d  [fn  4];  181  d 
[fn  3] 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  420d- 
421a;  421d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  727b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  776c- 
780b  esp  779a-b  /  New  Introductorv  lectures, 
882d-883b 


Chapter  4:  ART 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For :  The  conception  of  art  as  a  habit  of  mind  or  an  intellectual  virtue,  see  Habit  5a,  3d ;  Virtue 
and  Vice  2a(2). 

The  applications  of  science  in  the  useful  arts,  see  Knowledge  8a;  Physics  5;  Science  ib(i), 
3b;  and  for  the  dependence  of  science  on  art,  see  Physics  4a;  Science  5b,  6a. 

The  distinction  between  art  and  prudence  and  the  spheres  of  making  and  doing,  see 
Prudence  2b. 

Other  discussions  of  art  and  nature,  see  Nature  2a;  and  for  the  comparison  of  artistic  pro¬ 
duction,  natural  generation,  and  divine  creation,  see  Form  id(i)-id(2);  World  4e(i). 

Experience  as  a  source  of  art,  see  Experience  3;  for  the  distinction  between  artist  and 
empiric,  see  Experience  3a;  and  for  the  opposition  between  art  and  chance,  see  Chance  5. 

The  enjoyment  of  beauty  in  nature  and  in  art,  ^Beauty  2;  Pleasure  and  Pain  4c(i);  and 
for  discussions  of  the  aesthetic  judgment  or  the  judgment  of  taste,  see  Beauty  5. 

Other  considerations  of  the  educational  influence  of  the  arts,  see  Education  4d;  Poetry  9a; 
Virtue  and  Vice  4d(4);  and  for  the  problem  of  political  regulation  or  censorship  of  art, 
see  Emotion  5e;  Poetry  9b. 

More  extended  treatments  of  the  liberal  arts,  see  Language  4-8;  Logic;  Mathematics; 
Rhetoric;  and  for  an  analysis  of  one  of  the  fine  arts,  see  Poetry. 

Discussions  of  the  useful  and  industrial  arts,  see  Education  5a-5b;  Labor  2b;  Medicine; 
Progress  3c,  4a,  6a;  State  8d-8d(3);  War  and  Peace  io-iof;  Wealth  3c~3d. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 


Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boofy  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 


For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Dante.  Convivio  (The  Banquet) 

Hume.  Of the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  Arts  and  Sciences 
Rousseau.  Discourse  on  the  Arts  and  Sciences 
A.  Smith.  “Of  the  Affinity  Between  Music,  Danc¬ 
ing  and  Poetry,’’  in  Essays  Philosophical  and 
Literary 


Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind ,  vn  (b) 

- .  The  Philosophy  of  Mind ,  sect  hi,  sub-sect  a 

- .  The  Philosophy  of  Fine  Art 

Goethe.  Poetry  and  Truth 

- .  Travels  in  Italy 

- .  Conversations  with  Eckermann 

- .  Maxims  and  Reflections 

J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic ,  bk  vi,  ch  ii 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


86 

Tolstoy.  What  Is  Art? 

Freud.  Leonardo  da  Vinci 

- .  The  Theme  of  the  Three  Caskets 

- .  The  Moses  of  Michelangelo 

- .  A  Childhood  Memory  from  “ Dichtung  nnd 

Wahrheir 

II. 

Epicurus.  Letter  to  Herodotus 
Horace.  The  Art  of  Poetry 
Vitruvius.  On  Architecture 

Quintilian.  InstitutioOratoria  (Institutes  of  Oratory ), 
BK  xii 

Bona  ventura.  On  the  Reduction  of  the  Arts  to  The¬ 
ology 

Leonardo  da  Vinci.  Notebooks 

■ - .  A  Treatise  on  Painting 

Cellini.  Autobiography 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae ,  xliv  (13) 
Corneille.  Trois  discours  sur  V art  dramatique 
- .  Ex  amen  s 

f.  Harris.  Three  Treatises.  The  First  Concerning  Art. 
The  Second  Concerning  Music ,  Painting ,  and  Poetry. 
The  Third  Concerning  Happiness 
Burke.  A  Philosophical  Enquiry  into  the  Origin  of 
Our  Ideas  of  the  Sublime  and  Beautiful 
Voltaire.  “Fine  Arts,’’  in  A  Philosophical  Diction¬ 
ary 

Lessing.  Laocoon 

Beattie.  An  Essay  on  Poetry  and  Music 
Herder.  Plasti\ 

Joshua  Reynolds.  Discourses  on  Art 
Schiller.  Letters  upon  the  Esthetic  Education  of  Man 
Schelling.  Philosophic  der  Kunst 
Coleridge.  Biographia  Literaria,  ch  4 
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea ,  vol  i, 
bk  iii;  vol  iii,  sup,  ch  34-36 
Wh  ewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences , 
VOL  11,  bk  xi,  ch  8 
Emerson.  “Art,”  in  Essays ,  1 
E.  Delacroix.  Journal 
Baudelaire.  Curiosites  esthetiques 
Comte.  System  of  Positive  Polity ,  vol  i,  General  View 
of  Positivism ,  ch  5 


Lotze.  Microcosmos ,  bk  viii,  ch  3 
Burckhardt.  The  Civilization  of  the  Renaissance  in 
Italy 

Ruskin.  Modern  Painters 

- .  The  Stones  of  Venice 

- .  Sesame  and  Lilies 

Taine.  The  Philosophy  of  Art 

E.  Hartman.  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious ,  (b)  v 

Arnold.  Essays  in  Criticism 

Van  Gogh.  Letters 

Morris.  Hopes  and  Fears  for  Art 

- .  Art  and  Socialism 

- .  The  Aims  of  Art 

Guyau.  U art  au  point  de  vue  sociologique 

Nietzsche.  The  Will  to  Power ,  bk  iii  (4) 

Brunetiere.  An  Apology  for  Rhetoric 

Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough ,  part  i,  ch  17 

Grosse.  The  Beginnings  of  Art 

Shaw.  The  Sanity  of  Art 

Hirn.  The  Origins  of  Art 

Mann.  Tonio  Kroger 

Santayana.  Reason  in  Art 

Croce.  Aesthetic  as  Science  of  Expression 

- .  The  Essence  of  Esthetics 

Harrison.  Ancient  Art  and  Ritual 
Bosanquet.  Three  Lectures  on  Aesthetic ,  11 
T.  Veblen.  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship,  and  the 
State  of  the  Industrial  Arts ,  ch  2-4,  6-7 
- .  The  Vested  Interests  and  the  State  of  the  Indus¬ 
trial  Arts,  ch  3 

Alain.  Systeme  des  beaux-arts 
Maritain.  Art  and  Scholasticism 

- .  An  Introduction  to  Philosophy,  part  ii  (9) 

Abercrombie.  An  Essay  Towards  a  Theory  of  Art 
Lalo.  L’ art  et  la  morale 

Ortega  y  Gasset.  The  Dehumanization  of  Art 
Rank.  Art  and  Artist 
H.  Delacroix.  Psychologie  de  Part 
Gill.  Art-Nonsense 

Coomaraswamy.  The  Transformation  of  Nature  in 
Art 

Dewey.  Art  as  Experience 
Mumford.  Technics  and  Civilization 
Adler.  Art  and  Prudence 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


INTRODUCTION 


ASTRONOMY  could  take  its  place  in  this 
l  \  catalog  of  ideas  on  the  ground  that  several 
of  the  great  books  are  monuments  of  astronom¬ 
ical  science,  exemplifying  the  imaginative  and 
analytical  powers  which  have  made  it  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  triumphs  of  the  human  mind. 
Its  claim  might  further  be  supported  by  the 
fact  that  other  great  books — of  mathematics, 
physics,  theology,  and  poetry — have  a  context 
of  astronomical  imagery  and  theory.  But  the  in¬ 
clusion  of  astronomy  can  be  justified  by  what  is 
perhaps  an  even  more  significant  fact,  namely, 
that  astronomical  speculation  raises  problems 
and  suggests  conclusions  which  have  critical  rel¬ 
evance  for  the  whole  range  of  the  great  ideas. 

Man  has  used  astronomy  to  measure,  not  only 
the  passage  of  time  or  the  course  of  a  voyage, 
but  also  his  position  in  the  world,  his  power  of 
knowing,  his  relation  to  God.  When  man  first 
turns  from  himself  and  his  immediate  earthly 
surroundings  to  the  larger  universe  of  which  he 
is  a  part,  the  object  which  presses  on  his  vision 
is  the  overhanging  firmament  with  its  luminous 
bodies,  moving  with  great  basic  regularity  and, 
upon  closer  observation,  with  certain  perplex¬ 
ing  irregularities.  Always  abiding  and  always 
changing,  the  firmament,  which  provides  man 
with  the  visible  boundary  of  his  universe,  also 
becomes  for  him  a  basic,  in  fact  an  inescapable, 
object  of  contemplation. 

Careful  and  precise  astronomical  observa¬ 
tions  antedate  the  birth  of  astronomy  as  a 
science.  The  early  interest  in  the  heavenly  bod¬ 
ies  and  their  motions  is  often  attributed  to  the 
usefulness  of  the  predictions  which  can  be  made 
from  a  knowledge  of  celestial  phenomena. 

Whether  their  motive  was  entirely  utilitar¬ 
ian,  or  partly  religious  and  speculative,  the 
Egyptians  and  Babylonians,  we  learn  from 
Herodotus,  undertook  patient  study  of  the 
heavens.  They  observed  and  recorded  with 


immense  persistence.  They  calculated  and  pre¬ 
dicted.  They  turned  their  predictions  to  use 
through  the  priestly  office  of  prophecy  to  fore¬ 
tell  eclipses,  tides,  and  floods,  and  they  em¬ 
ployed  their  calculations  in  the  mundane  arts  of 
navigation  and  surveying  to  guide  travel  and 
fix  boundaries.  But  they  did  not,  like  the  Greeks, 
develop  elaborate  theories  which  sought  to  or¬ 
ganize  all  the  observed  facts  systematically. 

With  the  Greeks,  the  down-to-earth,  every¬ 
day  utility  of  astronomy  seems  to  count  for 
less  than  its  speculative  grandeur.  The  dignity 
which  they  confer  upon  astronomy  among  the 
disciplines  reflects  the  scope  and  majesty  of  its 
subject  matter.  The  Greek  astronomer,  con¬ 
cerned  as  he  is  with  figuring  motions  that  range 
through  the  whole  of  space  and  are  as  old  as 
time  or  as  interminable,  takes  for  his  object  the 
structure  of  the  cosmos. 

Aristotle  and  Plato  pay  eloquent  tribute  to 
the  special  worth  of  astronomy.  In  the  opening 
chapters  of  his  Metaphysics ,  Aristotle  associates 
astronomical  inquiry  with  the  birth  of  philos¬ 
ophy.  “Apart  from  usefulness,”  he  says,  “men 
delight  ...  in  the  sense  of  sight”  and,  he  adds, 
“it  is  owing  to  their  wonder  that  men  both  now 
begin  and  at  first  began  to  philosophise.”  They 
wondered  first  about  “the  obvious  difficulties,” 
but  little  by  little  they  advanced  to  “greater 
matters,”  and  “stated  difficulties  .  .  .  about  the 
phenomena  of  the  moon  and  sun  and  stars,  and 
about  the  genesis  of  the  universe.”  In  his  own 
philosophical  thought,  Aristotle’s  treatise  On 
the  Heavens  is  not  only  one  of  the  basic  natural 
sciences,  but  certain  of  its  principles  have  gen¬ 
eral  significance  for  all  the  other  parts  of  his 
physical  science. 

A  wider  view  of  the  importance  of  astronomy 
is  taken  by  Plato.  In  the  Timaeus ,  he  dwells  on 
“the  higher  use  and  purpose  for  which  God  has 
given  eyes  to  us.  .  .  .  Plad  we  never  seen  the 


87 


88 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


stars,  and  the  sun,  and  the  heaven,”  Timaeus 
says,  “none  of  the  words  which  we  have  spoken 
about  the  universe  would  ever  have  been  ut¬ 
tered.  .  .  .  God  invented  and  gave  us  sight,”  he 
continues,  “to  the  end  that  we  might  behold 
the  courses  of  intelligence  in  the  heaven,  and 
apply  them  to  the  courses  of  our  own  intelli¬ 
gence  which  are  akin  to  them,  the  unperturbed 
to  the  perturbed;  and  that  we,  learning  them 
and  partaking  of  the  natural  truth  of  reason, 
might  imitate  the  absolutely  unerring  courses 
of  God  and  regulate  our  own  vagaries.” 

For  Plato,  then,  man’s  intellectual  relation  to 
the  heavens  does  more  than  initiate  philosophy. 
Man’s  self-rule,  his  purity  and  peace  of  soul,  is 
at  stake  in  that  relation.  That  is  one  reason  why, 
in  both  the  Republic  and  the  Laws ,  Plato  makes 
astronomy  a  required  part  of  the  curriculum 
for  the  education  of  rulers.  “He  who  has  not 
contemplated  the  mind  of  nature  which  is  said 
to  exist  in  the  stars  .  .  .  and  seen  the  connection 
of  music  with  these  things,  and  harmonized 
them  all  with  laws  and  institutions,  is  not  able,” 
the  Athenian  Stranger  says  in  the  Laws ,  “to 
give  a  reason  for  such  things  as  have  a  reason.” 

Plato  considers  the  opposition  to  astronomy 
on  religious  grounds  by  those  who  think  that 
men  who  approach  celestial  phenomena  by  the 
methods  of  astronomy  “may  become  godless 
because  they  see  .  .  .  things  happening  by  ne¬ 
cessity,  and  not  by  an  intelligent  will  accom¬ 
plishing  good.”  His  answer  points  out  that  one 
of  the  “two  things  which  lead  men  to  believe  in 
the  gods  ...  is  the  argument  from  the  order  of 
the  motion  of  the  stars  and  of  all  things  under 
the  dominion  of  the  mind  which  ordered  the 
universe.”  It  was  a  false  understanding  of  these 
matters  which  “gave  rise  to  much  atheism  and 
perplexity.” 

The  issues  raised  by  Plato  concerning  the  im¬ 
portance  of  astronomy  for  purification  and  pi¬ 
ety,  for  education  and  politics,  run  through  the 
tradition  of  western  thought.  Though  they  are 
somewhat  transformed  in  the  context  of  Jewish 
and  Christian  beliefs,  and  altered  by  later  de¬ 
velopments  in  the  science  of  astronomy  itself, 
they  remain  as  matters  on  which  an  author’s 
strong  assent  or  dissent  forcefully  reflects  his 
whole  intellectual  position. 

On  the  one  hand,  astronomers  like  Ptolemy, 


Copernicus,  and  Kepler,  for  all  their  differences 
on  points  of  scientific  theory,  seem  to  concur  in 
reaffirming  Plato’s  conception  of  the  bearing  of 
their  science  on  religion  and  morals.  Lucretius 
and  Augustine,  on  the  other  hand,  while  not 
agreeing  with  each  other,  seem  to  disagree  with 
Plato.  In  the  tradition  of  western  thought,  they 
represent  different  types  of  opposition  to  the 
Platonic  view. 

Where  Plato  and  his  followers,  including  re¬ 
ligious  Christians  like  Copernicus  and  Kep¬ 
ler,  hold  that  true  piety  profits  from  astronom¬ 
ical  study,  Lucretius  hopes  that  astronomy  may 
help  to  free  men  from  religious  superstitions.  If 
when  they  ‘  ‘gaze  on  the  heavenly  quarters  of  the 
great  upper  world”  and  direct  their  thoughts 
“to  the  courses  of  the  sun  and  moon,”  they  do 
so  with  “a  mind  at  peace”  because  they  see  only 
the  workings  of  natural  law  and  no  evidences  of 
a  controlling  power  in  the  will  of  the  gods,  then 
men  achieve  the  natural  piety  of  the  scientist 
— different  in  the  opinion  of  Lucretius  from  the 
false  worship  which  is  based  on  fear. 

From  his  own  experiences  in  dealing  with  the 
astronomy  of  the  Manichean  sect  in  relation  to 
their  religious  doctrine,  Augustine  insists  that 
the  teachings  of  religion  in  no  way  depend  upon 
astronomy.  He  denies  that  such  knowledge  is  in 
any  way  essential  to  true  piety.  Though  a  man 
does  not  know  “even  the  circles  of  the  Great 
Bear,  yet  is  it  folly  to  doubt,”  he  writes,  “that 
he  is  in  a  better  state  than  one  who  can  measure 
the  heavens  and  number  the  stars,  and  poise  the 
elements,  yet  neglecteth  Thee  ‘Who  hast  made 
all  things  in  number,  weight,  and  measure.’  ” 

When  Faustus,  the  leader  of  the  Manicheans, 
“was  found  out  to  have  taught  falsely  of  the 
heaven  and  stars,  and  of  the  motions  of  the  sun 
and  moon  (although  these  things  pertain  not  to 
the  doctrine  of  religion),”  his  religious  teach¬ 
ings,  according  to  Augustine,  inevitably  suffered 
ridicule  because  of  his  pretension  that  they  de¬ 
rived  support  from  a  science  of  the  heavenly 
bodies.  Augustine  would  disengage  theology 
from  astronomy.  His  position  anticipates  that 
later  taken  by  Cardinal  Barberini  who,  during 
the  controversy  over  the  Copernican  hypothe¬ 
sis,  is  reported  to  have  told  Galileo  that  as¬ 
tronomy  and  religion  have  quite  separate  tasks, 
the  one  teaching  how  the  heavens  go,  the  other 
how  to  go  to  heaven. 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


89 


Still  another  point  of  view  on  the  importance 
of  astronomy  is  represented  in  the  skeptical  and 
humanist  attitude  of  Montaigne.  “I  am  very 
well  pleased  with  the  Milesian  girl,”  he  remarks, 
“who  . . .  advised  the  philosopher  Thales  rather 
to  look  to  himself  than  to  gaze  at  heaven.”  In 
saying  this,  or  in  quoting  with  approval  the 
question  asked  of  Pythagoras  by  Anaximenes — 
“To  what  purpose  should  I  trouble  myself  in 
searching  out  the  secrets  of  the  stars,  having 
death  or  slavery  continually  before  my  eyes?” 
—Montaigne  intends  more  than  a  preference 
for  the  moral  over  the  natural  sciences.  He  re¬ 
gards  astronomical  inquiry  as  a  prime  example 
of  man’s  “natural  and  original  disease— pre¬ 
sumption.”  It  is  presumptuous  to  suppose  that 
our  minds  can  grasp  and  plot  the  course  of  the 
heavens  when  vve  fail  to  comprehend  things 
much  nearer  at  hand.  Hence  Montaigne  ad¬ 
vises  everyone  to  say,  in  the  spirit  of  Anaxi¬ 
menes:  “Being  assaulted  as  I  am  by  ambition, 
avarice,  temerity,  superstition,  and  having  so 
many  other  enemies  of  life,  shall  I  go  cudgel 
my  brains  about  the  world’s  revolutions?” 

Kant  can  be  as  critical  as  Montaigne  of  the 
frailty  of  human  knowledge.  “The  investiga¬ 
tions  and  calculations  of  the  astronomers,”  he 
writes,  have  shown  us  “the  abyss  of  our  igno¬ 
rance  in  relation  to  the  universe.”  But  Kant — an 
astronomer  himself  as  well  as  a  moralist — does 
not,  therefore,  advise  us  to  forsake  the  study  of 
the  heavens.  On  the  contrary,  he  recommends 
it  not  only  for  its  scientific  value,  but  for  its 
moral  significance. 

“Two  things,”  Kant  declares  in  a  passage 
which  has  become  famous,  “fill  the  mind  with 
ever  new  and  increasing  admiration  and  awe, 
the  oftener  and  more  steadily  we  reflect  on 
them:  the  starry  heavens  above  and  the  moral 
law  within.”  The  two  fit  together  to  produce  a 
single  effect.  Astronomy  with  its  view  “of  a 
countless  multitude  of  worlds  annihilates,  as  it 
were,  my  importance  as  an  animal  creature.” 
Morality  “elevates  my  worth  as  an  intelligence 
by  my  personality,  in  which  the  moral  law  re¬ 
veals  to  me  a  life  independent  of  animality  and 
even  of  the  whole  sensible  world.” 

Kant’s  association  of  the  starry  heavens  with 
the  moral  life  is  not  so  much  an  echo  of,  as  a 
variant  upon,  Plato’s  precept  that  we  apply 
“the  courses  of  intelligence  in  heaven  ...  to  the 


courses  of  our  own  intelligence.”  But  in  one 
passage  of  Freud  we  find  an  almost  complete  re¬ 
turn  to  the  Platonic  insight.  “Order  has  been 
imitated  from  nature,”  he  writes;  “man’s  ob¬ 
servations  of  the  great  astronomical  periodici¬ 
ties  not  only  furnished  him  with  a  model,  but 
formed  the  ground  plan  of  his  first  attempts  to 
introduce  order  into  his  own  life.” 

Astronomy  has  connections  with  biology  and 
psychology,  as  well  as  with  mathematics  and 
physics.  The  obvious  fact  that  the  sun  supports 
terrestrial  life — operating  here  as  a  unique  and 
indispensable  cause — occasions  the  inference  by 
Aquinas  that  it  may  also  operate  as  a  cause  in 
the  production  of  new  species  by  spontaneous 
generation  from  putrefying  matter.  This  no¬ 
tion  bears  some  resemblance  to  the  theory  in 
contemporary  genetics  of  the  effect  of  cosmic 
radiations  upon  gene  mutations. 

Unlike  these  notions  in  biology,  speculations 
concerning  celestial  influences  upon  psycho¬ 
logical  phenomena  seem  to  cross  the  line  be¬ 
tween  astronomy  and  astrology.  Sometimes  the 
influence  upon  man  and  his  actions  is  found  in 
the  constellations  attending  a  nativity;  some¬ 
times  it  is  a  particular  influence  of  the  sort  still 
signified  by  the  meaning  of  the  word  “lunacy”; 
and  sometimes  omens  and  auguries  are  read  in 
the  aspect  of  the  heavens. 

The  chapters  on  Prophecy  and  Sign  and 
Symbol  deal  with  the  issues  raised  by  astrol¬ 
ogy.  Problems  more  closely  associated  with 
astronomical  science  and  speculation  are  treat¬ 
ed  in  other  chapters.  The  cosmological  prob¬ 
lem  of  the  origin  of  the  material  universe 
is  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Eternity, 
Time,  and  World;  the  question  of  its  size  in  the 
chapter  on  Space;  the  question  of  whether  the 
celestial  spheres  are  themselves  alive  or  are 
moved  by  intelligences  or  spirits  in  the  chapters 
on  Angel  and  Soul;  and  the  question  of  the 
nature  of  the  heavenly  bodies  in  the  chapter  on 
Matter. 

This  last  problem  is  of  crucial  significance  in 
the  history  of  astronomy  itself.  Opposed  the¬ 
ories  of  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  be¬ 
come  correlated  with  opposed  theories  con¬ 
cerning  their  matter — whether  that  is  different 
in  kind  from  terrestrial  matter  or  the  same.  It 
is  with  reference  to  these  related  issues  that  what 


90 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


has  come  to  be  called  “the  Copernican  revo¬ 
lution”  represents  one  of  the  great  crises,  cer¬ 
tainly  one  of  the  most  dramatic  turning  points, 
in  the  development  of  astronomy,  and  of  phys¬ 
ics  and  natural  science  generally. 

The  Copernican  revolution  did  not  take  place 
by  the  improvement  and  enlargement  of  astro¬ 
nomical  observations  alone,  nor  even  by  the  ef¬ 
fect  of  these  on  alternative  mathematical  for¬ 
mulations.  If  it  had  not  been  accompanied  by 
the  radical  shift  from  ancient  to  modern  physics 
— especially  with  regard  to  the  diversity  or  uni¬ 
formity  of  the  world’s  matter — the  Copernican 
hypothesis  concerning  the  celestial  motions 
would  have  been  no  more  than  a  mathematical 
alternative  to  the  Ptolemaic  hypothesis.  Coper¬ 
nicus  seems  to  advance  it  only  as  such,  but  in  the 
hands  of  Kepler,  Galileo,  and  Newton  it  be¬ 
comes  much  more  than  that.  They,  rather  than 
Copernicus,  seem  to  accomplish  the  revolution 
connected  with  his  name. 

When  their  contribution  is  neglected  or  in¬ 
adequately  grasped,  the  Copernican  revolution 
appears  to  be,  as  is  often  popularly  supposed, 
merely  a  shift  in  astronomical  theory.  The  prob¬ 
lem  being  to  organize  mathematically  the  ap¬ 
parent  motions  of  the  heavens,  Copernicus  of¬ 
fers  an  alternative  solution  to  that  of  Ptolemy. 
Instead  of  treating  the  earth  as  stationary  and 
central  in  the  cosmic  system,  Copernicus  at¬ 
tributes  three  motions  to  the  earth  by  treating 
it  as  a  planet  which  revolves  around  the  sun, 
spins  on  its  axis,  and  varies  the  inclination  of  its 
axis  with  reference  to  the  sun. 

What  is  usually  supposed  to  be  revolutionary 
about  this  hypothesis  is  its  effect  on  man’s  esti¬ 
mate  of  himself  and  his  place  or  rank  in  the 
universe.  On  either  of  the  rival  hypotheses,  the 
apparent  motions  of  the  heavens  remain  unal¬ 
tered,  but  not  man’s  conception  of  himself,  of 
his  earth,  or  of  the  universe  in  which  the  earth’s 
orbit  cuts  so  small  a  figure.  As  Kant  suggests, 
man’s  stature  seems  to  shrink.  He  becomes  “a 
mere  speck  in  the  universe”  which  has  been  en¬ 
larged  to  infinity,  or  at  least  to  an  unimaginable 
immensity.  He  is  displaced  from  its  center  to 
become  a  wanderer  with  his  planet.  Humanity’s 
self-esteem,  according  to  Freud,  was  thus  for 
the  first  time  deeply  wounded;  he  refers  to  the 
theory  that  “is  associated  in  our  minds  with  the 
name  of  Copernicus”  as  the  “first  great  outrage” 


which  humanity  “had  to  endure  from  the 
hands  of  science.” 

It  has  been  questioned  whether  this  interpre¬ 
tation  of  the  Copernican  revolution  fits  all  the 
documents  in  the  case.  Freud  may  be  accurately 
reporting  a  popular  feeling  which,  since  the  1 8th 
century,  has  become  a  widespread  consequence 
of  Copernican  and  post-Copernican  astronomy. 
But  in  earlier  centuries  when  the  Ptolemaic 
system  prevailed,  or  even  after  Copernicus,  the 
appraisal  of  man’s  rank  seems  to  depend  more 
upon  the  position  he  occupies  in  the  hierarchy 
of  God’s  creatures — below  the  angels  and  above 
the  brutes — than  upon  the  place  or  motion  of 
the  earth,  or  the  size  of  the  world. 

Boethius,  for  example,  finds  the  Ptolemaic 
universe  large  enough  to  remind  man  of  the 
infinitesimal  space  he  occupies.  Dante,  too, 
comments  on  the  smallness  of  the  earth  in  the 
scheme  of  things.  When  in  his  visionary  travel 
Dante  reaches  the  Empyrean,  he  looks  down 
upon  the  earth  and  “with  my  sight,”  he  tells  us, 
“I  returned  through  all  and  each  of  the  seven 
spheres,  and  saw  this  globe,  such  that  I  smiled  at 
its  mean  semblance;  and  that  counsel  I  approve 
as  best  which  holds  it  of  least  account.” 

Kepler,  a  passionate  Copernican  deeply  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  human  significance  of  astron¬ 
omy,  can  be  found  arguing  that  the  new  hy¬ 
pothesis  involves  something  more  fitting  for 
man  than  the  old.  In  his  last  argument  in  de¬ 
fense  of  the  Copernican  view  against  that  of 
Tycho  Brahe  as  well  as  that  of  Ptolemy,  he  de¬ 
clares,  “it  was  not  fitting  that  man,  who  was 
going  to  be  the  dweller  in  this  world  and  its 
contemplator,  should  reside  in  one  place  as  in  a 
closed  cubicle.  ...  It  was  his  office  to  move 
around  in  this  very  spacious  edifice  by  means  of 
the  transportation  of  the  Earth  his  home.”  In 
order  properly  to  view  and  measure  the  parts 
of  his  world,  the  astronomer  “needed  to  have 
the  Earth  a  ship  and  its  annual  voyage  around 
the  sun.” 

Yet  the  very  fact  that  Kepler  argues  in  this 
manner  may  be  interpreted  as  indicating  his 
sense  of  the  drastic  implications  for  man  of  the 
altered  structure  of  the  universe.  Kepler  may 
even  be  thought  to  announce  the  problem  of  the 
so-called  “Copernican  revolution”  when,  in  de¬ 
nying  that  the  earth  can  any  longer  “be  reck¬ 
oned  among  the  primary  parts  of  the  great 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


world,”  since  it  is  only  a  part  of  a  part,  /.<?.,  the 
planetary  region,  he  deliberately  adds  the  quali¬ 
fication:  “But  1  am  speaking  now  of  the  Earth 
in  so  far  as  it  is  a  part  of  the  edifice  of  the  world, 
and  not  of  the  dignity  of  the  governing  crea¬ 
tures  which  inhabit  it.” 

Whether  or  not  it  was  the  traumatic  blow  to 
the  human  ego  which  Freud  conjectures,  there 
can  be  little  doubt  that  the  shift  from  Ptolemy 
to  Copernicus  involved  a  real  shock  to  the  imag¬ 
ination.  The  Ptolemaic  system  conforms  to  the 
look  of  the  world,  which  is  indeed  the  reason 
why  it  is  still  the  one  used  in  practical  courses  in 
navigation.  Here  again  Kepler  defends  Coperni¬ 
cus  by  explaining  why  “our  uncultivated  eye¬ 
sight”  cannot  be  other  than  deceived  and  why 
it  “should  learn  from  reason”  to  understand 
that  things  a  re  really  different  from  the  way  they 
appear. 

A  certain  disillusionment  may  result  from 
this  affirmation— repeated  by  every  schoolboy 
who  is  taught  the  Copernican  system — that,  de¬ 
spite  what  we  see,  the  sun  does  not  move  around 
the  earth,  and  the  earth  both  rotates  and  re¬ 
volves.  It  undermines  the  trust  men  placed  in 
their  senses  and  the  belief  that  science  would 
describe  the  world  as  they  saw  it.  In  order  to 
“save  the  appearances,”  that  is,  to  account  for 
the  phenomena,  science  might  henceforward  be 
expected  to  destroy  any  naive  acceptance  of 
them  as  the  reality. 

Furthermore,  though  the  Ptolemaic  world 
was  very  large,  the  Copernican  universe  was 
much  larger.  Whereas  in  the  former  the  radius 
of  the  earth  was  deemed  negligible  in  relation  to 
the  radius  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  in  the 
new  universe  the  radius  of  the  earth’s  orbit 
around  the  sun  was  negligible  in  relation  to  the 
same  radius  of  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars.  It 
can  hardly  be  doubted  that  this  intensified  some 
men’s  sense  of  almost  being  lost  in  an  abyss  of 
infinity.  “I  see  those  frightful  spaces  of  the  uni¬ 
verse  which  surround  me,”  Pascal  writes,  “and 
I  find  myself  tied  to  one  corner  of  this  vast  ex¬ 
panse,  without  knowing  why  I  am  put  in  this 
place  rather  than  in  another.”  When  he  regards 
the  world’s  immensity  as  “the  greatest  sensible 
mark  of  the  almighty  power  of  God,”  Pascal  ex¬ 
periences  an  awe  which  for  him  is  qualified  by 
reverence.  Other  men  may  experience  the  same 
feeling,  but  less  with  reverence  than  with  a 


9i 

gnawing  loneliness,  born  of  the  doubt  that  so 
vast  a  cosmos — if  cosmos  it  is  rather  than  chaos 
— can  have  been  beneficently  designed  as  man’s 
habitation. 

Whatever  the  truth  about  the  effect  of  the 
Copernican  theory  in  the  order  of  opinion,  im¬ 
agination,  and  feeling,  it  did  produce  a  direct 
result  on  the  intellectual  plane.  It,  more  than 
any  other  single  factor,  led  to  the  overthrow  of 
certain  crucial  doctrines  which  had  been  linked 
together  in  the  physics  and  astronomy  of  Aris¬ 
totle;  it  thus  radically  changed  the  fundamen¬ 
tal  principles  in  terms  of  which  man  had  under¬ 
stood  the  order  and  unity  of  nature.  That  scien¬ 
tific  event  deserves  not  only  the  name  but  the 
fame  of  the  “Copernican  revolution.” 

The  revolution  in  the  realm  of  theory  goes 
much  deeper  than  the  substitution  of  one  math¬ 
ematical  construction  for  another  to  describe 
the  motions  of  the  world’s  great  bodies.  As 
Freud  points  out,  the  heliocentric  hypothesis 
associated  with  the  name  of  Copernicus  was 
known  to  the  Alexandrian  astronomers  of  anti¬ 
quity.  It  is,  for  example,  attributed  to  Aris¬ 
tarchus  by  Archimedes  in  the  Sand- Reckoner. 

As  far  as  the  earth’s  rotation  is  concerned, 
Ptolemy  admits  it  is  quite  “plausible”  to  sup¬ 
pose  “the  heavens  immobile  and  the  earth  turn¬ 
ing  on  the  same  axis  from  west  to  east  very 
nearly  one  revolution  a  day.  ...  As  far  as  the 
appearances  of  the  stars  are  concerned,”  he  goes 
on,  “nothing  would  perhaps  keep  things  from 
being  in  accordance  with  this  simpler  con¬ 
jecture.” 

Why,  then,  does  Ptolemy  reject  a  supposi¬ 
tion  which  is  not  only  plausible  but  also,  in 
accounting  for  the  appearances,  simpler}  In  part 
the  answer  may  be  that  he  does  so  because  the 
contrary  supposition  conforms  to  our  ordinary 
sense-experience  of  the  earth’s  immobility  and 
the  motions  of  the  heavens  from  east  to  west. 
But  that  is  far  from  being  the  most  important 
part  of  the  answer.  Ptolemy  indicates  the  cru¬ 
cial  part  wrhen  he  tells  us  that  the  otherwise 
plausible  supposition  of  a  rotating  earth  be¬ 
comes  “altogether  absurd”  when  we  consider 
the  speed  and  direction  of  the  motions  of  bodies 
within  the  earth’s  own  atmosphere.  His  strong¬ 
est  count  against  the  supposition  is  that  it  does 
not  conform  to  the  Aristotelian  physics  which 


92 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


distinguishes  between  natural  and  violent  mo¬ 
tions,  assigns  certain  fixed  directions  to  the  nat¬ 
ural  motions  of  each  of  the  four  elements  of 
matter,  and  denies  that  these  elementary  kinds 
of  terrestrial  matter  enter  into  the  composition 
of  the  heavenly  bodies. 

That  Aristotle’s  physics  and  cosmology  lie  at 
the  very  heart  of  the  issue  is  confirmed  by  the 
way  in  which  Kepler  later  argues  for  the  Coper- 
nican  theory  against  Ptolemy.  He  does  not  de¬ 
fend  its  truth  on  the  ground  that  it  accounts  for 
observable  facts  which  the  Ptolemaic  hypoth¬ 
esis  cannot  handle.  Nor  does  he  prefer  it  merely 
because  it  is  mathematically  the  simpler  hy¬ 
pothesis.  On  the  contrary,  he  specifically  notes 
that  anything  which  can  be  claimed  on  math¬ 
ematical  grounds  for  Copernicus  over  Ptolemy 
can  be  equally  claimed  for  Tycho  Brahe  over 
Ptolemy.  (Brahe’s  theory  was  that  while  the 
other  planets  revolve  around  the  sun,  the  sun, 
with  its  planets,  revolves  around  a  stationary 
earth.)  According  to  Kepler,  the  truth  of  these 
competing  theories  must  finally  be  judged  phys¬ 
ically,  not  mathematically ,  and  when  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  put  that  way,  as  it  is  not  by  Copernicus 
himself,  Copernicans  like  Kepler,  Galileo,  and 
Newton  take  issue  with  what  had  been  asso¬ 
ciated  with  the  Ptolemaic  theory — the  physics 
of  Aristotle. 

In  order  to  examine  this  issue,  it  is  necessary 
to  state  briefly  here  certain  features  of  Aris¬ 
totle’s  physics  which  are  more  fully  discussed 
in  the  chapters  on  Change,  Element,  Me¬ 
chanics,  and  Physics. 

Just  as  Ptolemy’s  astronomy  conforms  to 
what  we  see  as  we  look  at  the  heavens,  so  Aris¬ 
totle’s  physics  represents  a  too  simple  conform¬ 
ity  with  everyday  sense-experience.  We  observe 
fire  rising  and  stones  falling.  Mix  earth,  air,  and 
water  in  a  closed  container,  and  air  bubbles  will 
rise  to  the  top,  while  the  particles  of  earth  will 
sink  to  the  bottom.  To  cover  a  multitude  of 
similar  observations,  Aristotle  develops  the 
theory  of  the  natural  motions  and  places  of  the 
four  terrestrial  elements — earth,  air,  fire,  and 
water.  Since  bodies  move  naturally  only  to  at¬ 
tain  their  proper  places,  the  great  body  which 
is  the  earth,  already  at  the  bottom  of  all  things, 
need  not  move  at  all.  Being  in  its  proper  place, 
it  is  by  nature  stationary. 


Two  other  observations  exercise  a  decisive 
influence  on  Aristotle’s  theory.  The  naked  eye 
sees  no  type  of  change  in  the  heavenly  bodies 
other  than  local  motion  or  change  of  place.  Un¬ 
like  terrestrial  bodies,  they  do  not  appear  to 
come  into  being  or  perish;  they  do  not  change 
in  size  or  quality.  Furthermore,  whereas  the 
natural  local  motion  of  sub-lunary  bodies  ap¬ 
pears  to  approximate  the  path  of  a  straight  line, 
the  local  motion  of  the  celestial  bodies  appears 
to  be  circular  rather  than  rectilinear. 

To  cover  these  observations,  Aristotle’s  the¬ 
ory  posits  a  different  kind  of  matter  for  celestial 
and  terrestrial  bodies.  An  incorruptible  matter 
must  constitute  the  great  orbs  which  are  sub¬ 
ject  to  local  motion  alone  and  have  the  most 
perfect  kind  of  local  motion — that  of  a  circle. 
Since  they  are  subject  to  generation  and  cor¬ 
ruption,  to  change  of  quality  and  quantity,  and 
are  in  local  motion  along  straight  lines,  terres¬ 
trial  bodies  are  of  a  corruptible  matter. 

The  interconnection  of  all  these  points  is 
marked  by  Aquinas  when  he  summarizes  Aris¬ 
totle’s  doctrine.  “Plato  and  all  who  preceded 
Aristotle,”  he  writes,  “held  that  all  bodies  are 
of  the  nature  of  the  four  elements”  and  con¬ 
sequently  “that  the  matter  of  all  bodies  is  the 
same.  But  the  fact  of  the  incorruptibility  of 
some  bodies  was  ascribed  by  Plato,  not  to  the 
condition  of  matter,  but  to  the  will  of  the 
artificer,  God.  .  .  .  This  theory,”  Aquinas  con¬ 
tinues,  “Aristotle  disproves  by  the  natural 
movements  of  bodies.  For  since  he  says  that 
the  heavenly  bodies  have  a  natural  movement, 
different  from  that  of  the  elements,  it  follows 
that  they  have  a  different  nature  from  them. 
For  movement  in  a  circle,  which  is  proper  to 
the  heavenly  bodies,  is  not  by  contraries,  where¬ 
as  the  movements  of  the  elements  are  mutually 
opposite,  one  tending  upwards,  another  down¬ 
wards.  .  .  .  And  as  generation  and  corruption 
are  from  contraries,  it  follows  that,  whereas  the 
elements  are  corruptible,  the  heavenly  bodies 
are  incorruptible.” 

The  same  points  which  Aquinas  relates  in  his 
defense  of  the  Aristotelian  theory,  Kepler  also 
puts  together  when  he  expounds  that  theory  in 
order  to  attack  it  and  the  Ptolemaic  astronomy 
which  tries  to  conform  to  it.  “By  what  argu¬ 
ments  did  the  ancients  establish  their  opinion 
which  is  the  opposite  of  yours?”  he  asks.  “By 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


four  arguments  in  especial:  (i)  From  the  na¬ 
ture  of  moveable  bodies.  (2)  From  the  nature 
of  the  motor  virtue.  (3)  From  the  nature  of  the 
place  in  which  the  movement  occurs.  (4)  From 
the  perfection  of  the  circle.”  He  then  states  each 
of  these  arguments,  and  answers  each  in  turn. 

What  is  extraordinary  about  Kepler’s  attack 
upon  the  Ptolemaic  astronomy  cannot  be  un¬ 
derstood  without  examining  Ptolemy’s  defense 
of  his  theory,  a  defense  which  Copernicus  meets 
in  Ptolemy’s  own  terms  rather  than,  as  Kepler 
does,  by  going  outside  them. 

Though  his  expressed  intention  was  to  con¬ 
struct  a  mathematical  theory  of  the  celestial 
motions  which  would  also  conform  to  Aris¬ 
totle’s  physics,  Ptolemy,  when  he  finished, 
recognized  that  the  complications  he  had  been 
compelled  to  add  in  order  “to  save  the  appear¬ 
ances”  left  him  with  a  theory  that  did  not  con¬ 
form  to  Aristotle’s  doctrine  of  the  perfect  cir¬ 
cular  motion  of  the  heavenly  spheres.  Instead 
of  abandoning  Aristotle’s  physics,  he  defended 
his  theory  on  the  ground  that  astronomy,  being 
mathematical  rather  than  physical,  could  ad¬ 
mit  such  “unrealistic”  complications  if  they 
served  the  purposes  of  calculation  and  of  “sav¬ 
ing  the  appearances.” 

In  the  thirteenth  and  last  book  of  the  Alma¬ 
gest ,  when  he  faces  the  fact  that  his  mathemat¬ 
ical  devices  have  become  exceedingly  difficult 
—and  strained  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
Aristotelian  reality — Ptolemy  writes:  “Let  no 
one,  seeing  the  difficulty  of  our  devices,  find 
troublesome  such  hypotheses.  ...  It  is  proper 
to  try  and  fit  as  far  as  possible  the  simpler 
hypotheses  to  the  movements  of  the  heavens; 
and  if  this  does  not  succeed,  then  any  hypoth¬ 
eses  possible.  Once  all  the  appearances  are 
saved  by  the  consequences  of  the  hypotheses, 
why  should  it  seem  strange  that  such  compli¬ 
cations  can  come  about  in  the  movements  of 
heavenly  things?”  We  ought  not  to  judge  the 
simplicity  of  heavenly  things  by  comparison 
with  what  seems  to  be  simple  in  the  explanation 
of  earthly  phenomena.  “We  should  instead 
judge  their  simplicity  from  the  unchangeable¬ 
ness  of  the  natures  in  the  heavens  and  their 
movements.  For  thus  they  would  all  appear 
simple,  more  than  those  things  which  seem  so 
here  with  us.” 


93 

Ignoring  the  supposition  that  simplicity  must 
be  judged  differently  in  different  spheres,  Co¬ 
pernicus  challenges  Ptolemy  on  his  own  grounds 
when  he  proposes  “simpler  hypotheses”  to  fit 
“the  movements  of  the  heavens.”  But  in  doing 
so,  he  seems  to  adopt  the  traditional  view  of  the 
mathematical  character  of  astronomical  hy¬ 
potheses.  Yet,  as  will  appear,  he  does  not  adopt 
this  view  in  the  unqualified  form  in  which 
Osiander  states  it  in  his  Preface  to  the  Revolu¬ 
tions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres. 

“It  is  the  job  of  the  astronomer,”  Osiander 
writes,  “to  use  painstaking  and  skilled  observa¬ 
tion  in  gathering  together  the  history  of  the 
celestial  movements,  and  then — since  he  cannot 
by  any  line  of  reasoning  reach  the  true  causes 
of  these  movements — to  think  or  construct 
whatever  causes  or  hypotheses  he  pleases,  such 
that,  by  the  assumption  of  these  causes,  these 
same  movements  can  be  calculated  from  the 
principles  of  geometry,  for  the  past  and  for  the 
future  too. 

“It  is  not  necessary,”  he  adds,  “that  these 
hypotheses  should  be  true,  or  even  probable; 
it  is  enough  if  they  provide  a  calculus  which 
fits  the  observations.  When  for  one  and  the 
same  movement  varying  hypotheses  are  pro¬ 
posed,  as  eccentricity  or  epicycle  for  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  sun,  the  astronomer  much  prefers 
to  take  the  one  which  is  easiest  to  grasp.” 

What  distinguishes  Kepler  from  both  Ptol¬ 
emy  and  Osiander  is  the  way  in  which  he  is 
concerned  with  the  truth  of  alternative  hypoth¬ 
eses  in  astronomy.  He  looks  upon  the  truth  of 
an  hypothesis  as  something  to  be  judged  not 
merely  in  mathematical  terms  according  to  the 
adequacy  and  simplicity  of  a  calculating  de¬ 
vice,  but  to  be  measured  by  its  conformity  to 
all  the  physical  realities.  At  the  very  beginning 
of  his  Epitome  of  Coper nican  Astronomy ,  he 
flatly  declares  that  “astronomy  is  part  of  phys¬ 
ics.”  And  in  the  opening  pages  of  the  fourth 
book,  he  insists  that  astronomy  has  not  one, 
but  “two  ends:  to  save  the  appearances  and  to 
contemplate  the  true  form  of  the  edifice  of  the 
World.”  He  follows  this  immediately  by  ob¬ 
serving  that,  if  astronomy  had  only  the  first 
end,  Tycho  Brahe’s  theory  would  be  as  satis¬ 
factory  as  that  of  Copernicus. 

Early  in  his  scientific  career,  before  writing 
the  Epitome ,  Kepler  asserts  that  “one  cannot 


94 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


leave  to  the  astronomer  absolute  license  to  feign 
no  matter  what  hypotheses.”  He  complains  that 
astronomers  “too  often  .  .  .  constrain  their 
thought  from  exceeding  the  limits  ofgeometry 

It  is  necessary  to  go  beyond  geometry  into 
physics  to  test  the  consequences  of  competing 
hypotheses  which  are  equally  good  mathemat¬ 
ically.  “You  must  seek  the  foundations  of  your 
astronomy,”  he  tells  his  fellow  scientists,  “in 
a  more  elevated  science,  I  mean  in  physics  or 
metaphysics.” 

Because  Kepler  thus  conceives  the  task  and 
truth  of  astronomy,  Duhem  in  his  great  history 
of  astronomy  calls  him  a  “realistic  Copernican.” 
Galileo  also,  Duhem  thinks,  was  a  realistic 
Copernican.  “To  confirm  by  physics  the  Co¬ 
pernican  hypotheses,”  he  writes,  “is  the  center 
towards  which  converge  Galileo’s  observations 
as  an  astronomer  and  his  terrestrial  mechanics.” 

Newton  was  the  third  member  of  this  trium¬ 
virate.  For  him  there  remained  the  solution  of 
the  problem  of  deducing  Kepler’s  formulation 
of  the  planetary  orbits  in  a  manner  consistent 
with  Galileo’s  laws  of  motion  in  the  dynamics 
of  bodies  falling  on  the  earth’s  surface.  But  the 
very  posing  of  this  problem  itself  depended  on 
the  insight  that  terrestrial  and  celestial  me¬ 
chanics  can  proceed  according  to  the  same  prin¬ 
ciples  and  laws.  That  insight  entailed  the  com¬ 
plete  overthrow  of  the  ancient  physics,  with  its 
division  of  the  universe  into  two  distinct  parts, 
having  different  kinds  of  matter  and  different 
laws  of  motion. 

Copernicus,  who,  despite  Osiander’s  apolo¬ 
getics,  believed  his  theory  to  be  true,  did  not 
himself  face  the  great  point  at  issue  in  the 
Copernican  revolution — the  material  uniform¬ 
ity  of  the  physical  universe.  We  shall  subse¬ 
quently  consider  the  question  of  the  truth  of 
astronomical  hypotheses,  but  whether  or  not 
Copernicus  and  the  Copernicans  had  in  their 
own  day  a  right  to  believe  their  theory  true, 
it  was  the  acceptance  of  the  Copernican  hy¬ 
pothesis  as  true  which  led  Kepler  and  Galileo 
to  deny  the  truth  of  Aristotelian  physics. 

If  the  earth  is  not  at  the  center  and  station¬ 
ary,  then  the  basic  doctrine  of  a  natural  direc¬ 
tion  in  motion  and  a  natural  place  of  rest  for 
the  various  elements  is  completely  upset.  If  the 
earth  is  one  of  the  planets,  then  anything  true 


on  the  earth — or  of  the  earth,  such  as  Gilbert’s 
theory  of  the  magnetic  fields  generated  by  the 
earth’s  axial  rotation — could  be  equally  true  of 
all  the  other  planets. 

“Read  the  philosophy  of  magnetism  of  the 
Englishman  William  Gilbert,”  writes  Kepler; 
“for  in  that  book,  although  the  author  did  not 
believe  that  the  Earth  moved  .  .  .  nevertheless 
he  attributes  a  magnetic  nature  to  it  by  very 
many  arguments.  Therefore,  it  is  by  no  means 
absurd  or  incredible  that  any  one  of  the  pri¬ 
mary  planets  should  be,  what  one  of  the  pri¬ 
mary  planets,  namely,  the  Earth,  is.”  Such  a 
statement  plainly  shows  that  when  the  earth 
becomes  a  planet,  as  it  does  in  Copernican 
theory,  no  obstacle  remains  to  the  assertion  of 
a  homogeneity  between  the  earth  and  the  other 
planets  both  in  matter  and  motion.  The  old 
physical  dualism  of  a  supralunar  and  a  sublunar 
world  is  abandoned. 

“Not  the  movement  of  the  earth,”  White- 
head  remarks,  “but  the  glory  of  the  heavens 
was  the  point  at  issue,”  for  to  assert  the  heavens 
to  be  of  the  same  stuff  and  subject  to  the  same 
laws  as  the  rest  of  nature  brings  them  down  to 
the  plane  of  earthly  physics.  That  is  precisely 
what  Newton  finally  does  when,  in  the  enun¬ 
ciation  of  his  Third  Rule  of  reasoning  in  natural 
philosophy,  he  dryly  but  explicitly  completes 
the  Copernican  Revolution.  Those  “qualities 
of  bodies  .  .  .  which  are  found  to  belong  to  all 
bodies  within  the  reach  of  our  experiments, 
are,”  Newton  maintains,  “to  be  esteemed  the 
universal  qualities  of  all  bodies  whatsoever.” 

In  the  bifurcated  world  of  ancient  theory, 
astronomy  had  a  very  special  place  among  the 
natural  sciences,  proportionate  to  the  “glory 
of  the  heavens.”  But  with  Newton  it  could  be 
completely  merged  into  a  general  mechanics 
whose  laws  of  motion  have  universal  applica¬ 
tion.  That  merger,  begun  by  Newton,  has  been 
perfected  since  his  day.  The  last  obstacle  to  the 
generalization  lay  in  the  apparent  discrepancies 
between  electrical  phenomena  on  the  subatomic 
scale  and  gravitational  phenomena  on  the  astro¬ 
nomic  scale.  But  in  our  own  time  the  unified  field 
equations  of  Einstein’s  theory  of  relativity  em¬ 
brace  the  very  large  and  the  very  small  motions 
of  matter  within  a  single  conceptual  scheme, 
with  radical  consequences  for  the  revision  of 
the  Newtonian  or  classical  mechanics. 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


95 


But  the  unification  of  nature  which  Kepler 
began  and  Newton  completed,  when  set  against 
Aristotle’s  physics,  may  be  even  more  radical. 
Newton’s  theory,  because  of  the  amazing  way 
in  which  it  covered  the  widest  variety  of  phe¬ 
nomena  by  the  simplest,  most  universal  for¬ 
mula,  is  considered  by  Kant  to  have  “estab¬ 
lished  the  truth  of  that  which  Copernicus  at 
first  assumed  only  as  an  hypothesis.’’  But  the 
larger  contribution,  in  Whitehead’s  opinion,  is 
“the  idea  of  the  neutrality  of  situation  and  the 
universality  of  physical  laws  .  .  .  holding  indif¬ 
ferently  in  every  part.’’ 

Whatever  position  we  take  today  concerning 
the  kind  of  truth  which  is  possessed  by  hypoth¬ 
eses  in  mathematical  physics,  we  now  demand, 
in  the  spirit  of  the  three  Copernicans — Kepler, 
Galileo,  and,  above  all,  Newton — that  physical 
hypotheses  account  at  once  for  all  the  phenom¬ 
ena  of  the  inanimate  universe.  Whatever  the 
truth  of  modern  as  opposed  to  ancient  physics, 
the  Newtonian  universe  is  so  thoroughly  estab¬ 
lished  in  our  minds  and  feelings  that,  when  we 
are  reminded  of  the  other  universe  in  which 
men  lived  before  the  Copernican  revolution, 
we  tend  to  think  it  quaint,  incredible,  prepos¬ 
terous,  superstitious,  none  of  which  it  was. 

Finally,  from  the  point  of  view  of  our  under¬ 
standing  of  natural  science  itself,  the  astro¬ 
nomical  controversy  we  have  been  considering 
is  almost  an  archetypical  model.  It  is  necessary, 
of  course,  to  appreciate  the  real  achievement  of 
Ptolemy  as  well  as  of  Copernicus  and  Kepler  in 
order  to  realize  how  genuine  and  difficult  the 
issues  were.  Facts  unknown  to  all  of  them  may 
now  have  closed  the  dispute  decisively,  but 
issues  in  other  spheres  of  modern  science,  almost 
identical  in  pattern  with  that  great  astronom¬ 
ical  one,  are  not  yet  closed;  and  to  the  degree 
that  we  are  able  to  re-enact  in  our  minds  the 
motion  of  thought  on  both  sides  of  the  Coper¬ 
nican  controversy,  we  can  confront  comparable 
scientific  issues — still  open — with  open  minds. 

Darwin,  for  example,  finds  in  the  astronomi¬ 
cal  controversy  a  precedent  to  which  he  can 
appeal  in  the  defense  of  natural  selection  against 
its  adversaries.  “The  belief  in  the  revolution  of 
the  earth  on  its  own  axis,”  he  writes,  “was  until 
lately  not  supported  by  any  direct  evidence.” 
But  the  absence  of  direct  evidence  does  not 
leave  a  scientific  theory  without  foundation, 


Darwin  argues,  if  it  has  the  power  to  explain 
several  large  classes  of  facts,  which  “it  can 
hardly  be  supposed  that  a  false  theory  would 
explain”  in  so  satisfactory  a  manner.  Darwin 
defends  the  theory  of  natural  selection  as  having 
such  power.  To  those  who  object  that  “this  is 
an  unsafe  method  of  arguing,”  he  replies — 
citing  an  example  from  astronomy — that  “it 
has  often  been  used  by  the  greatest  natural 
philosophers.” 

The  great  books  of  astronomy  most  lucidlv 
exhibit  the  essential  pattern  of  that  kind  of  nat¬ 
ural  science  which  has,  in  modern  times,  come 
to  be  called  “mathematical  physics.”  Though 
that  phrase  may  be  modern,  the  ancients  recog¬ 
nized  the  special  character  of  the  sciences  which 
apply  mathematics  to  nature  and  which  consult 
experience  to  choose  among  hypotheses  arising 
from  different  mathematical  formulations. 

Outlining  a  curriculum  for  liberal  education, 
Plato,  in  the  Republic ,  groups  music  and  astron¬ 
omy  along  with  arithmetic  and  geometry  as 
mathematical  arts  or  sciences.  In  that  context 
he  treats  them  as  pure  mathematics.  Astronomy 
is  no  more  concerned  with  the  visible  heavens 
than  music  is  with  audible  tones.  Music  is 
rather  the  arithmetic  of  harmonies,  astronomy 
the  geometry  of  motions.  But  in  the  Timaeus 
Plato  turns  mathematical  formulae  and  calcula¬ 
tions  to  use  in  telling  what  he  calls  “a  likely 
story”  concerning  the  formation  and  structure 
of  the  sensible  world  of  becoming.  Here  rather 
than  in  the  Republic  we  have,  according  to 
Whitehead,  the  initial  conception  of  mathe¬ 
matical  physics  as  well  as  deep  insight  into  its 
nature  and  pattern. 

Aristotle  criticizes  the  notion  of  astronomy 
as  a  purely  mathematical  science.  Just  as  “the 
things  of  which  optics  and  mathematical  har¬ 
monies  treat”  cannot  be  divorced  from  the 
sensible,  so  the  objects  of  astronomy  are  also 
the  visible  heavens.  “Astronomical  experience,” 
Aristotle  writes,  “supplies  the  principles  of 
astronomical  science.”  Yet,  though  its  subject 
matter  is  physical  and  its  method  is  in  part  em¬ 
pirical,  astronomy  like  optics  and  harmonics 
takes  the  form  of  mathematical  demonstration; 
and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  Aquinas  later  calls 
such  disciplines  “mixed  and  intermediate 
sciences.” 


96 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


The  development  of  astronomy  from  Plato 
and  Aristotle  through  Ptolemy,  Copernicus, 
and  Kepler  to  Galileo  and  Newton  thus  con¬ 
stitutes  an  extraordinary  set  of  “case  histories’  * 
for  the  study  of  what  J.  B.  Conant  calls  the 
“tactics  and  strategy”  of  science,  and  especially 
mathematical  physics.  But  astronomy  has  one 
peculiar  feature  which  distinguishes  it  from 
other  branches  of  mathematical  physics.  It  is 
empirical  rather  than  experimental.  The  astron¬ 
omer  does  not  control  the  phenomena  he  ob¬ 
serves.  He  does  not,  like  the  physicist,  chemist, 
or  physiologist,  produce  an  isolated  system  of 
events  by  means  of  the  laboratory  arts. 

Harvey  comments  on  this  aspect  of  astron¬ 
omy  when  he  proposes  an  experiment  that  will 
enable  the  physiologist  to  do  what  the  astron¬ 
omer  cannot  do,  namely,  deliberately  prepare 
phenomena  for  examination  by  the  senses.  The 
astronomer  must  be  content  with  the  appear¬ 
ances  as  they  are  given.  Defending  psycho¬ 
analysis  against  attack  “on  the  ground  that  it 
admits  of  no  experimental  proof,”  Freud  points 
out  that  his  critics  “might  have  raised  the  same 
objection  against  astronomy;  experimentation 
with  the  heavenly  bodies  is,  after  all,  exceedingly 
difficult.  There  one  has  to  rely  on  observation.” 

Since  the  invention  of  the  telescope,  the 
astronomer  has  had  instruments  of  all  sorts  to 
increase  the  range  and  accuracy  of  his  observa¬ 
tions;  but  the  fact  that  the  place  where  he  uses 
such  apparatus  is  called  an  observatory  rather 
than  a  laboratory  indicates  that  these  instru¬ 
ments  do  not  make  astronomy  an  experimental 
science.  Nevertheless,  as  Bacon  points  out,  the 
telescope  enabled  Galileo  to  do  more  than  im¬ 
prove  upon  the  accuracy  of  prior  observations. 
It  brought  within  the  range  of  observation 
certain  celestial  phenomena,  hitherto  imper¬ 
ceptible  to  the  naked  eye,  such  as  the  phases  of 
Venus,  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  and  the  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  Milky  Way. 

Concerning  the  last  of  these,  Pascal  later  re¬ 
marks  that  the  ancients  can  be  excused  for  the 
idea  they  had  of  the  cause  of  its  color.  “The 
weakness  of  their  eyes  not  yet  having  been 
artificially  helped,  they  attributed  this  color  to 
the  great  solidity  of  this  part  of  the  sky”;  but  it 
would  be  inexcusable  for  us,  he  adds,  “to  retain 
the  same  thought  now  that,  aided  by  the  ad¬ 
vantages  of  the  telescope,  we  have  discovered 


in  the  Milky  Way  an  infinity  of  small  stars  whose 
more  abundant  splendor  has  made  us  recognize 
the  real  cause  of  this  whiteness.” 

Because  it  is  a  mixed  science,  both  empirical 
and  mathematical,  astronomy  advances  not 
only  with  the  improvement  and  enlargement 
of  observation,  but  also  with  new  insights  or 
developments  in  mathematics.  Kant  gives  us 
striking  examples  of  how  the  work  of  the  pure 
mathematicians  contributes  to  the  advance  of 
physics  and  astronomy.  Their  discoveries  are 
often  made  without  any  knowledge  of  their  ap¬ 
plication  to  natural  phenomena.  “They  inves¬ 
tigated  the  properties  of  the  parabola,”  he 
writes,  “in  ignorance  of  the  law  of  terrestrial 
gravitation  which  would  have  shown  them  its 
application  to  the  trajectory  of  heavy  bodies. 
.  .  .  So  again  they  investigated  the  properties  of 
the  ellipse  without  a  suspicion  that  a  gravitation 
was  also  discoverable  in  the  celestial  bodies,  and 
without  knowing  the  law  that  governs  it  as  the 
distance  from  the  point  of  attraction  varies,  and 
that  makes  the  bodies  describe  this  curve  in  free 
motion.” 

So  amazing  are  such  mathematical  anticipa¬ 
tions  that  Kant  thinks  Plato  may  be  pardoned 
for  supposing  that  pure  mathematics  “could 
dispense  with  all  experience”  in  discovering  the 
constitution  of  things.  Whether  or  not  Plato 
goes  to  this  extreme,  he  does,  in  the  Republic , 
seem  to  suggest  the  reverse  of  Kant’s  concep¬ 
tion  of  the  relationship  between  mathematics 
and  astronomy.  “The  spangled  heavens  should 
be  used  as  a  pattern,”  he  writes,  “and  with  a 
view  to  that  higher  knowledge” — mathemat¬ 
ics.  Astronomy  should  be  used  to  instigate  dis¬ 
coveries  in  pure  mathematics  by  suggesting  good 
problems  and  by  requiring  formulations  which 
transcend  an  interest  in  the  truth  about  the 
heavens. 

This  twofold  relation  between  mathematical 
discovery  and  empirical  observation  is  pres¬ 
ent  in  the  development  of  astronomy  itself,  and 
of  all  branches  of  mathematical  physics.  But 
there  is  another  aspect  of  the  relationship  which 
must  be  taken  into  account  if  we  are  to  consider 
the  problem  of  truth  in  such  sciences.  The  way 
in  which  mathematical  formulations  fit  the 
phenomena  measures  the  truth  of  rival  hypoth¬ 
eses  with  respect  to  the  same  reality. 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


97 


The  logic  of  such  verification  has  already 
been  suggested  in  the  discussion  of  the  geo¬ 
centric  and  heliocentric  hypotheses.  It  is  fur¬ 
ther  considered  in  the  chapter  on  Hypothesis. 
To  be  satisfactory,  an  hypothesis  must — in  the 
language  used  ever  since  Simplicius — “save  the 
appearances,”  that  is,  account  for  the  relevant 
phenomena.  But  two  hypotheses  (as  for  exam¬ 
ple  the  geocentric  and  heliocentric)  may,  at  a 
certain  time,  do  an  equally  good  job  of  saving 
the  appearances.  Then  the  choice  between  them 
becomes  a  matter  of  the  greater  mathematical 
elegance  of  one  than  the  other. 

That,  however,  does  not  give  the  mathe¬ 
matically  superior  theory  a  greater  claim  to 
truth.  So  far  as  reality  is  concerned,  it  is  only, 
in  Plato’s  words,  “a  likely  story”;  or  as  Aquinas 
points  out  with  reference  to  the  geocentric 
hypothesis,  “the  theory  of  eccentrics  and  epi¬ 
cycles  is  considered  as  established  because  there¬ 
by  the  sensible  appearances  of  the  heavenly 
movements  can  be  explained;  not  however,  as 
if  this  reason  were  sufficient,  since  some  other 
theory  might  explain  them.” 

Two  hypotheses  may  be  equally  satisfactory 
for  the  range  of  phenomena  they  were  both  de¬ 
vised  to  fit.  But  only  one  of  them  may  have  the 
quite  amazing  virtue  of  fitting  other  sets  of 
observations  not  originally  thought  to  be  re¬ 
lated  to  the  phenomena  for  which  the  hypoth¬ 


esis  was  devised.  The  word  “consilience”  has 
been  used  to  name  the  property  of  an  hypoth¬ 
esis  which,  in  addition  to  saving  a  limited  field 
of  appearances,  succeeds  in  fitting  many  other 
phenomena  which  seem  to  have  become  related 
— to  have  jinnped  together  under  its  covering  ex¬ 
planation.  The  heliocentric  hypothesis,  as  de¬ 
veloped  by  Newton’s  laws  of  motion  and  theory 
of  gravitation,  certainly  has  this  property  of 
consilience  to  a  high  degree,  for  it  covers  both 
celestial  and  terrestrial  phenomena,  and  a  wide 
variety  of  the  latter. 

Is  the  heliocentric  hypothesis  true  then?  If 
the  truth  of  an  hypothesis  depends  on  the  range 
of  the  phenomena  it  fits  or  saves,  it  might  seem 
to  be  so,  for  by  its  consilience  it  accounts  for 
phenomena  that  the  Ptolemaic  theory  cannot 
handle.  But  though  this  may  cause  us  to  reject 
the  unsuccessful  hypothesis,  does  it  establish 
beyond  doubt  the  truth  of  the  successful  one  ? 
Or,  to  put  the  question  another  way,  is  not  our 
judgment  here  a  comparative  one  rather  than 
absolute?  Are  we  saying  more  than  that  one 
hypothesis  is  more  successful  than  another  in 
doing  what  an  hypothesis  should  do?  Are  we 
logically  entitled  to  regard  that  success  as  the 
sign  of  its  exclusive  truth,  or  must  we  restrict 
ourselves  to  the  more  modest  statement  that, 
as  the  better  hypothesis,  it  simply  tells  a  more 
likely  story  about  reality? 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  end,  dignity,  and  utility  of  astronomy  99 

2.  The  method  of  astronomy 

2a.  Observation  and  measurement:  instruments  and  tables 

2 b.  The  use  of  hypotheses:  the  heliocentric  and  geocentric  theories  100 

2 c.  The  relation  of  astronomy  to  mathematics:  the  use  of  mathematics  by  astronomy 

3.  Causes  in  astronomy  10 1 

3#.  Formal  archetypal  causes:  the  number  and  the  music  of  the  spheres 
3^>.  Physical  efficient  causes:  gravitation  and  action-at-a-distance 

4.  The  relation  of  astronomy  to  the  other  liberal  arts  and  sciences:  the  place  of  astronomy 

in  the  educational  curriculum 

5.  Astronomy  and  cosmology:  the  theory  of  the  world  or  universe  as  reflecting  astronomi¬ 

cal  conceptions 


98 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


PAGB 

6.  Astronomy  and  theology:  astronomy  as  affecting  views  of  God,  creation,  the  divine 

plan,  and  the  moral  hierarchy  102 

7.  Astronomy  and  the  measurement  of  time:  calendars  and  clocks;  days  and  seasons 

8.  The  heavenly  bodies  in  general  103 

8a.  The  special  character  of  matter  in  the  supra-lunar  spheres 
8b.  Soul  and  intellect  in  the  heavenly  bodies 

8c.  Celestial  motion:  periodicity  and  the  great  year  104 

(1)  The  eternity  of  celestial  motion 

(2)  The  form  of  celestial  motion:  circles,  the  equant,  ellipses 

(3)  The  laws  of  celestial  motion:  celestial  mechanics  105 

8d.  The  creation  of  the  heavens 

9.  The  particular  heavenly  bodies 

9 a.  The  sun:  its  position,  distance,  size,  and  mass 

9 b.  The  moon:  its  irregularities  106 

9 c.  The  planets:  their  eccentricities,  retrogradations,  and  stations 
9 d.  The  earth:  its  origin,  position,  shape,  and  motions 

ge.  The  fixed  stars:  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  107 

9/  The  comets  and  meteors 

10.  The  influence  of  the  heavenly  bodies  upon  terrestrial  phenomena 

10a.  The  influence  of  the  heavenly  bodies  on  living  matter:  generation  and  corrup¬ 
tion  108 

10 A  The  influence  of  the  heavenly  bodies  on  the  tides 

11.  The  influence  of  the  stars  and  planets  upon  the  character  and  actions  of  men 

12.  The  worship  of  the  earth,  sun,  moon,  and  stars  109 

13.  The  history  of  astronomy 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


99 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  '.Psychology,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  Forexample,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  ( D ),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —  (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. 


*  1.  The  end,  dignity,  and  utility  of  astronomy 

Old  Testament:  Job ,  38:4-38 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  156d  /  Gorgias ,  254c  / 
Republic ,  bk  vii,  394d-396b  /  Timaeus ,  447a- 
452b;  455b-c  /  Laws ,  bk  vii,  728b-c;  729d- 
730d;  bk  xii,  797c-798b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982bu- 
17]  500d;  bk  xi,  ch  6  [1063*10-17]  591b;  bk 
xii,  ch  8  [io73bi— 7]  603d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  1,  ch  5 
[644b2i-645a5]  168c-d 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  2 
9b-c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  812b-813a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [509-771] 
67d-71a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  xi,  sect  27  306b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [847-853]  233b-234a 

14  Plutarch:  Nicias,  435 b-d 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6b;  bk  hi,  83a; 
bk  iv,  135b;  bk  ix,  270b-273a;  bk  xm,429a-b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  505a-506a;  509a-b;  bk  i,  510a-511a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  846a-851a;  852a- 
853a;  888b-890a;  929a-b;  bk  v,  961a-965a  / 
Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1080a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c-28c 
/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  29  650d-651c 


19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32, 
a  1,  rep  2  175d-178a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii  [46-148] 
108b-109b;  x  [1-27]  120b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  69d-70c;  213d-215a; 
257d-259d 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  1,  76 c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [1-202]  232a- 
236b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72  181a-184b;  242  217b-218a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  la-2a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  hi,  94b-103a  passim 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  229a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  299b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  175b  [fn  1]  /  Practical 
Reason,  360d-361c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  120, 
136c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  365b-367a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  562c  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents,  779c  /  New  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures,  832a;  876b-d 

2.  The  method  of  astronomy 

2a.  Observation  and  measurement:  instru¬ 
ments  and  tables 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vii,  394d-396b /  Timaeus , 
455a-b 


100 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  method  of  astronomy.  2a.  Observation  and 
measure7nent :  instruments  and  tables.) 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  30 
[46s!  8-27]  64a  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  13 
[78b3 1-79*7]  108b-c  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[27obi-24]  361c-362a;  bk  ii,  ch  4  [287a3i-bi4] 
379a;  ch  ii  383b;  ch  12  [292*2-9]  383c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  8  [io73bi7-io74ai7] 
604a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  1 
[639b7~i2]  161c-d 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  i,  24b-26a;  bic  i-iii, 
29a-86b;  bk  iii-iv,  93a-119b;  bk  iv-viii, 
123a-269a;  bk  ix,  273a-290b;  bk  ix-xiii, 
296a-465b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  bk  ii-iii,  557b-626a;  bk  iii,  631b- 
652b;  657b-674b;  bk  iv-v,  680a-739b;  bk  v, 
744b-812a;  bk  vi,  818a-838a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  907b-908b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c-28c 
/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  29,  651b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  32, 
a  1,  rep  2  175d-178a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  ii  [46-105] 
108b-d 

22  Chaucer:  Franklin's  Tale  [11,582-605]  360b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  267a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,29c 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  320b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  109, 
129b;  bk  11,  aph  39,  170b-c;  aph  45,  176a; 
aph  46,  178a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [284-291]  99b; 
bk  iii  [588-590]  148a;  bk  v  [261-263]  181a 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  358a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  phenomena  272a- 
275a;  prop  41-42  342a-368b  /  Optics ,  bk  i, 
412a-423b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  58-59 
424a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  102a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  299b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\ ,  365b-367a 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  815a 

2b.  The  use  of  hypotheses:  the  heliocentric  and 
geocentric  theories 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  241c-242b;  247c  /  Republic , 
bk  vi,  386d-387d;  bk  vii,  395c-396b;  bk  x, 
438c-439a/  Timaeus ,  447b-d;  452a-b  /  Laws , 
bk  xii,  797d-798a 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [27obi-24] 
361c-362a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  375b,d-376a;  ch  8 
381a-382a;  ch  ii  [29ibio]-CH  13  [293b33] 
383b-385b;  ch  14  [296*24-297*9]  387d-388c  / 
Meteorology ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [344*5-9]  450b  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  8  [io73bi7-io74*i7] 
604a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals ,  ch  3  234a-c 

11  Archimedes:  Sand-Reckoner,  520a-b 


2b  to  2c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [526-533] 
67d-68a;  [720-730]  70c 
14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  55a-b 
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  7a-8b;  9a-12b;  bk 
iii,  83a;  86b-93a;  bk  iv,  120a-122b;  bk  ix, 
270b-273a;  291a-296a;  bk  xiii,  429a-b 
16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  505a-506a;  507a-508b;  bk  i,  513b- 
515b;  517b-521a;  bk  iii,  628b-629a;  653b- 
656b;  bk  iv,  675b-678a;  bk  v,  740a-b 
16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  852a-853a;  857b- 
860b;  887a-890a;  907b-916a;  bk  v,  964b; 
966a-967a  /  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1014b- 
1016a 

19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32, 
a  1,  rep  2  175d-178a 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  257d-261c;  276c 
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi,  107c-116a 
30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  5,  139a; 
aph  36,  165c-166b;  aph  46,  178b-c;  aph  48, 
186b-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [552-587]  147b- 
148a;  bk  iv  [589-597]  165a-b;  bk  viii  [66—178] 
233b-236a  esp  [122-158]  234b-235b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  165a  /  Vacuum, 
368b-369a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  phenomenon  iii 
273d-274a;  general  schol,  371b-372a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  226b-227a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  8d  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  284a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  239c 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  563a-b; 
epilogue  11,  694d-696d 

2c.  The  relation  of  astronomy  to  mathematics: 
the  use  of  mathematics  by  astronomy 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vii,  394d-396b  / 
Timaeus,  451b-c;  455b 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  13 
[78b3 1-79*1 6]  108b-c  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[i93b25-i94an]  270a-c  /  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  14 
[297*3-9]  388c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  iii,  ch  2 
[997bl3— 998a! 9]  516b-d;  bk  xii,  ch  8  [io73bi- 
17]  603d-604a;  bk  xiii,  ch  3  [1078*9-14]  609c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[639b6-i2]  161c-d 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  813d-814a 
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  i,  5a-6a;  14a-24b; 
26a-28b 

16  Copernicus  :  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  507a-508a;  bk  i,  510a-b;  532b- 
556b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  v,  964b-965a;  968a- 
986b  passim 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c-28c 
/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  29,  651b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32, 
a  1,  rep  2  175d-178a;  part  i-ii,  q  35,  a  8, 
ans  779c-780c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  9, 
a  2,  rep  3  424b-425a 


3  to  5 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  37b;  46b  c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  i,  76c 

34  Newton:  Priticiple$y  la-2a;  bk  iii  269a-372a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  94b-103a  passim 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  361c  /  Judgement , 
551a-552a 

3.  Causes  in  astronomy 

3<z.  Formal  archetypal  causes:  the  number  and 
the  music  of  the  spheres 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  241b-242b  /  Republic ,  dk  vii, 
395d-396b;  bk  x,  438c-439a  /  Timaeus,  447a- 
452b 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  2-5  359d-364a; 
bk  11,  ch  1-12  375b,d-384c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk 
1,  ch  5  [985b22-986a2i]  503d-504b;  ch  8 
[989b29~99oai2]  508a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  8  603b- 
605a 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  811a-814b 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  8a;  bk  ix,  270b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  511b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  846a-847b;  857b- 
860b;  863b-887a  passim;  913a-b;  915b-916a; 
925b-928a;  932a-933a  /  Harmonies  of  the 
World,  1016b-1018a;  1023b-1085b  esp  1049b- 
1050b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c-28c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  i  [76-126] 
107a-c;  xxvm  [1-78]  148d-149c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  48, 
185c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix,  371d-372a 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  [1 17-140]  4b-5a  /  At 
a  Solemn  MusicJ{  13a-b  /  Arcades  [54—83]  26b- 
27a  /  Comus  [238-243]  38b  /  Paradise  Lost, 
bk  iv  [660-688]  166b-167b;  bk  v  [153-184] 
178b-179a;  [616-627]  188b-189a;  bk  viii  [15- 
168]  232b-235b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
369b-370a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  9, 
454c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  96b-97a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  [243-246]  7a 

3 b.  Physical  efficient  causes:  gravitation  and 
action-at-a-distance 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  8  381a-382a; 
ch  12  [292^6— 293s! 2]  384b-c  /  Meteorology , 
bk  1,  ch  4-8  447d-452d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii, 
ch  8  603b-605a  esp  [io73bi7-io74ai7]  604a-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [509-533] 
67d-68a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  895b-905a;  922a-b; 
935a-952a  passim;  959a-960a;  bk  v,  965a-967a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  vi  106a-121a,c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  35-37 
162a-169c;  aph  45  176a-177c;  aph  48,  183b-c 

31  Descartes  :  Rules,  ix,  15c  /  Discourse ,  part  v, 
55b-c 


101 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [573-587]  148a; 
bk  vm  [122-158]  234b  235b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  prop  1-9  276a- 
284a  esp  prop  7  281b  282b;  prop  35,  schol 
320b  324a;  general  schol,  371b-372a  / 
Optics,  bk  iii,  531b;  540a-541b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  102-108 
432d-434a  passim 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  9, 
454c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  94b-103a;  118b- 
119a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  8d  [fn  2] 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  670a-673d; 
817a-b;  824a-b;  832b  [fn  1] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  694c- 
695c 

4.  The  relation  of  astronomy  to  the  other  liberal 

arts  and  sciences:  the  place  of  astronomy 
in  the  educational  curriculum 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  254b-c  /  Republic,  bk  vii, 
391b-398c  esp  394d-396b  /  Laws,  bk  vii, 
728b-730d;  bk  xii,  797b-798b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [1 93b25— 
i94au]  270a-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xi,  ch  6 
[io63aio-i7]  591b;  bk  xii,  ch  8  [io73bi— 7] 
603d 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  812b-813d 

13  Virgil:  Acneid,  bk  vi  [847-853]  233b-234a 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6a 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  1,  510a-b 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  29, 
651b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  9, 
a  2,  rep  3  424b-425a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  72a-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
29c;  bk  11,  82c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  69d-70c;  257d-259d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  80  120a-b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  1,  76c 

5.  Astronomy  and  cosmology:  the  theory  of  the 

world  or  universe  as  reflecting  astro¬ 
nomical  conceptions 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  447a-452b;  455a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [2i2b7-2i] 
291d-292a  /  Heavens  359a-405a,c  /  Meteor¬ 
ology,  bk  1,  ch  1-3  445a-447d  /  Metaphysics, 
bk  xii,  ch  8  603b-605a 

11  Archimedes:;  Sand-Reckoner,  520a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [951-1113] 
12d-14d;  bk  ii  [1048-1104]  28b-29a;  bk  vi 
[647-652]  89a 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  55a-b 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  i,  10b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  511b;  516a-529a  esp  516a-517b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  853b-857b;  882a- 
886b 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


102 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  Astronomy  and  cosmology:  the  theory  of  the 
world  or  universe  as  reflecting  astronomical 
conceptions .) 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i  35a-39d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  x  [7-21] 
120b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  213d-215a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  54d-56a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [890-920]  130b- 
131a;  [1010-1055]  133a-134a;  bk  iii  [418-429] 
144b;  [501-539]  146b-147a;  [552-587]  147b- 
148a;  bk  vii  [261-273]  222b-223a;  [551-557] 
229a;  [617-625]  230b;  bk  viii  [66-178]  233b- 
236a;  bk  x  [282-329]  280b-281b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72  181a-184b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  hypothesis  i- 
prop  12  285a-286a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  24  320c-d 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  360d-361a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 
695c-d 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  562c 

6.  Astronomy  and  theology:  astronomy  as 
affecting  views  of  God,  creation,  the 
divine  plan,  and  the  moral  hierarchy 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:1-19/  Joshua,  10:12- 
13 —(D)  Josue,  10:12-13  /  Job,  9:6-9;  38:1-38 
/  Psalms,  19:1-6;  147:4— (D)  Psalms,  18:1-7; 
146:4  /  Jeremiah,  33:22;  51:15— (D)  Jeremias , 

33:22;  51:15 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  43 — (D)  OT,  Ecclesi - 
asticus,  43  /  Song  of  Three  Children,  34-51  — 
( D )  OT,  Daniel,  3  ^6-73 

New  Testament:  I  Corinthians,  15:40-41 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vii,  396a  /  Timaeus, 
455b-c  /  Statesman,  586c-589c  /  Laws,  bk  vii, 
729d-730d;  bk  xii,  797d-798b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [i96a25~b4] 
272d-273a;  bk  viii  334a-355d  esp  ch  4-6 
338d-346b,  ch  10  353b-355d  /  Heavens,  bk 
ii,  ch  1  375b,d-376a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii, 
ch  6-8  601b-605a 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a-814b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [55-771] 
61d-71a  esp  [55-234]  61d-64a;  [1161-1217] 
76b-77a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  xi,  sect  27  306b 

14  Plutarch:  Nicias ,  435b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  v,  295c 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6b  passim 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  510a-511a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  853b-854a;  915b- 
916a;  933a  /  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1017b- 
1018a; 1025a-b;  1048a; 1061a;  1071b;  1080b- 
1085b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  i  40a- 
41a;  tr  ix,  ch  8-9  70a-72a  /  Fourth  Ennead, 
tr  iii,  ch  17  150d-151b 


6  to  7  I j 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c- 
28c;  bk  xiii,  par  6-48  112a-124a  /  Christian 
Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  16,  644 d- 645a;  ch  29 
650d-651c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  23,  1 
a  7,  ans  and  rep  2  138d-140a;  q  50,  a  3,  ans 
and  rep  3  272a-273b;  q  58,  a  1  300c-301a; 

q  63,  a  1,  rep  2  325c-326c;  a  7,  ans  331c-332b; 
qq  66-68  343d-359b;  q  70  362c-367a;  q  102, 
a  2,  rep  1  525a-526a;  q  ho,  a  i,  rep  2-3 
564c-565d;  q  115,  aa  3-6  588c-592d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  5, 
a  2  736d-737c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  77,  aa  1-3 
943a-947a;  q  91,  aa  2-3  1017c-1022c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [67-96] 
lOb-c;  xxxiv  [100-139]  52b-d;  paradise,  i 
[94-142]  107b-d;  11  [46—148]  108b-109b;  iv 
[22-63]  110d-lllb;  viii  [16-39]  116d-117a; 
[91-148]  117d-118c;  x  [1-45]  120b-d;  xiii  [52— 

84]  126a-b;  xxn  [124-154]  140d-141b;  xxvii 
[97-120]  148b-c;  xxviii  148d-150b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  213d-215a 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  i, 
sc  iii  [85-101]  109a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  89  124a-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  54d-56a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [694-732]  150b- 
151b;  bk  v  [153-184]  178b-179a;  bk  viii 
[66-178]  233b-236a  esp  [66-84]  233b-234a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72  181a-184b;  194,  207b; 
242  217b-218a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
369b-371a  /  Optics ,  bk  iii,  542a-543a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  226a-b;  227b-c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  360d-361a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  [243-266]  7a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  239c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  695d- 
696d 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  562c  /  New  In¬ 
troductory  Lectures,  832a;  876b-d 

7.  Astronomy  and  the  measurement  of  time: 
calendars  and  clocks;  days  and  seasons 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:4-5,14-18  /  Isaiah, 
38:7-8;  60:19-21— (D)  Isaias,  38:7-8;  60:19- 
21  /  Jeremiah,  33:20,25— (D)  Jeremias,  33:20, 

25 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  43:6-8— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  43 :6-8 

New  Testament:  Revelation,  21:23-24;  22:5 — 

( D )  Apocalypse,  21:23-24;  22:5 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [454-461] 
44c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [607-626]  496a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  49d-50a;  79c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v,  487d 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vn,394d-396b/  Timaeus, 
451a-d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  iv,  ch  14  [223bi2- 
224ai]  303c-d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  x,  ch  i 
[io52b34-io53ai2]  579b-c 


8  to  8b 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  iv,  cii 
io  [777bi6~778a9]  319d~320a,c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [614-750] 
69a-70d 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius ,  58d-59c  /  Solon , 
74a  /  Caesar ,  599d-600a 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  ii,  34b-38a;  bk  iii, 
77a-86b;  104b-107a 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  bk  i,  510b;  bk  ii,  568a-576a;  bk  iii, 
646a-652b;  672a-674b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vii,  ch  7-8  122d- 
124c;  ch  n-13  126a-129a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xi,  par  29-30 
95d-96c  /  C/Vy  of  God ,  bk  xi,  ch  6  325c-d; 
bk  xii,  ch  15  351b-352d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  io, 
a  6,  ans  45c-46d;  q  67,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2-3 
352a-354a;  q  70,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3,5  364b- 
365a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  77,  a  2,  ans  945a-946b;  q  91,  a  2,  rep  1-3, 
5,8  1017c-1020c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  i  [37-45]  lb-c; 
purgatory,  i  [13— 2i]  53a-b;  11  [1-9]  54c;  iv 
[55-84]  58a-b;  ix  [1-12]  65d-66a;  xv  [1— 15] 
75b-c;  xxv  [1-9]  91b-c;  xxvn  [1-6]  94c;  para¬ 
dise,  1  [38-48]  106c;  x  [28-33]  120c;  xxvn 
[97-120]  148b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  267b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
69b,d-70a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  497b-c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  46, 
177c-178b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [40-44]  136b; 
[555-623]  147b-149a;  [726-732]  151a;  bk  v 
[166-179]  179a;  bk  viii  [66-84]  233b-234a; 
bk  x  [651-679]  288b-289a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  definitions,  schol,  9b- 
10a;  bk  iii,  prop  20  291b-294b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv, 
sect  17-31  158a-162a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  169a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  229a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  376a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  219a-b; 
251a-b 

8.  The  heavenly  bodies  in  general 

8a .  The  special  character  of  matter  in  the 
supra-lunar  spheres 

New  Testament:  I  Corinthians ,  15:40-41 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  247b-248c  /  Timaeus,  448a- 
449c;  451d-452a  /  Laws,  bk  xii,  797d-798a 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  3  [27oai2-b26] 
361b-362a;  bk  i,  ch  9  [279ai2]-BK  11,  ch  i 
[284b6]  370b-376a;  bk  ii,  ch  7  380c-d  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  viii,  ch  4  [io44b2-8]  569a-b;  bk  ix, 
ch  8  [i050b6-27]  576b-d;BK  xi,ch  6  [1063*10- 
17]  591b;  bk  xii,  ch  2  [io69b24~27]  598d-599a 


103 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[644b2i— 645^5)  168c  d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [418-448] 
6bc;  [1052-1094]  14a-c;  bk  v  [534-563] 
68a-b 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6a;  8b;  10b  lib; 
bk  xiii,  429a-b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  517b-518a;  519b-520a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  853b-857b;  888b- 
890b;  894a-b;  904b-905a;  919b;  929b-930b; 
931b-932a;  934b-935b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i  35a-39d  / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  6  103b-104a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  io, 
a  5,  ans  44b-45c;  a  6,  rep  2  45c-46d;  q  46, 
a  1,  rep  2-3,5  250a-252d;  q  55,  a  2,  ans 
289d-290d;  q  58,  a  i,  ans  300c-301a;  a  3, 
ans  301d-302d;  q  63,  a  i,  rep  2  325c-326c; 
q  66,  a  2  345d-347b;  q  68,  a  i,  ans  354a-355c; 
q  70,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  365b-367a;  q  75,  a  6, 
ans  383c-384c;  q  84,  a  3,  rep  i  443d-444d; 
q  97,  a  1,  ans  513c-514c;  q  104,  a  i,  rep  1,3 
534c-536c;  q  115,  a  3,  ans  588c-589c;  q  119, 
a  1,  ans  604c-607b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  4,  ans  5a-6a;  part  iii,  q  5,  a  2,  ans  and  rep 
3  736d-737c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  91,  a  3,  rep  3 
1020d-1022c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  iii  [28- 
30]  56a;  paradise,  ii  [19-45]  108a;  [112-148] 
109a-b;  xxvm  [1-78]  148d-149c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  213d-215a;  257d-258b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  vi,  llOb-c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  13, 146c- 
147a 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  358a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  rule  iii  270b- 
271a;  prop  1-7  276a-282b  esp  prop  7  281b- 
282b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  226b 

8b .  Soul  and  intellect  in  the  heavenly  bodies 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124c-d/  Apology,  204d-205a 
/  Timaeus,  449b-450c;  451d-452b  /  Philebus , 
618b-619c  /  Laws,  bk  x,  762b-765c  esp  764a- 
765c;  bk  xii,  797c-798b 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  1-2  375b, d- 
377c;  ch  12  383b-384c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii, 
ch  8  603b-605a  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  3  [406^6- 
407^3]  636b-637b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [76-90] 
62a-b;  [1 10-145]  62c-63a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [724-738]  230b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  854b-856a;  890a- 
895b;  896a-897a;  914a-b;  930b;  932a-933a; 
959a-960a  /  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1080b- 
1085b  esp  1083b-1085b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ii-iii  40a-50a  / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  3,  84b;  tr  iv,  ch  6, 
99d;  tr  v,  ch  6  103b-104a  /  Fourth  Ennead , 
tr  iv,  ch  6-8  161b-162d;  ch  22-27  168d-172a; 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


104 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Sc  to  Sc(2) 


(8.  The  heavenly  bodies  in  general.  8b.  Soul  and 
intellect  in  the  heavenly  bodies.) 

ch  30  174b-c;  ch  35,  177c;  ch  42  180d-181b; 
tr  vni,  ch  2,  202a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  vii,  ch  6  248a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  1,  rep  1  104c-105c;  q  47,  a  1,  ans  256a-257b; 
q  50,  a  3  272a-273b;  q  51,  a  3,  rep  3  277a- 
278c;  q  52,  a  2  279b-280a;  q  66,  a  2,  ans 
345d-347b;  q  70,  a  3  365b-367a;  q  no,  a  i, 
rep  2-3  564c-565d;  a  3,  ans  566d-567b;  q 
115,  a  4,  rep  1  589d-590c;  q  117,  a  4,  rep  i 
599b-d;  part  i-ii,  q  6,  a  5,  rep  2  648b-649a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  79,  a  i,  ans  951b-953b;  q  91,  a  2,  rep  10 
1017c-1020c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [67-96] 
lOb-c;  paradise,  i  [103-126]  107b-c;  11  [112- 
138]  109a;  vni  [16-39]  116d-117a;  [97-114] 
118a;  xiii  [52-72]  126a;  xxvm  148d-150b; 
xxix  [37-45]  150c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  213d-215a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  ii,  38b;  bk  v,  104  b- 
105d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  482  258a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  226b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  prologue  [243-270]  7a-b 

8c.  Celestial  motion:  periodicity  and  the  great 
year 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  x,  438c-439a  /  Timaeus , 
451a-452b  /  Statesman ,  586c-587b  /  Laws ,  bk 
vii,  730a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens ,  bk  i-ii  359a-389d  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  8  603b-605a 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  3  [699*1  1]- 
ch  4  [700^]  234a-235a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [509-533] 
67d-68a;  [614-649]  69a-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vi,  sect  13  271b; 
bk  xi,  sect  27  306b 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  7a-8b;  12b-14a;  bk 
iv,  109a-112b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  513b-514b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  928a-933a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  i  40a-41a 
/  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  8,  162b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c-28c 
/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  29,  651b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32, 
a  1,  rep  2  175d-178a;  q  115,  a  3,  ans  588c- 
589c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  2, 
a  3,  ans  392d-393c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii  [112- 
148]  109a-b;  xxvii  [97-120]  148b-c;  xxvm 
[1-78]  148d-149c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi,  llOb-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  fourth  day, 
245b-d 


30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  46, 177d; 
aph  48,  185c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [726-732]  151a; 
bk  vii  [339-386]  224b-225b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  ii,  prop  53,  schol 
2S6a-267a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv, 
sect  19-22  158b-159d  passim 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  779c 

8c(l)  The  eternity  of  celestial  motion 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  447b-c;  450b-451a;  460c-d 

8  Aristotle  :  Physics,  bk  viii,  ch  1-2  334a-337b; 
ch  8-9  348b-353b  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[269^—10]  360c-d;  ch  3  [27obi7-26]  361d- 
362a;  ch  9  [279ai2-b4]  370b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i 
375b,d-376a;  ch  6  379c-380c  /  Metaphysics, 
bk  ix,  ch  8  [i050b20-27]  576c-d;  bk  xii,  ch  7 
[l073a3-i°]  603a-b;  ch  8  [1073*26-38]  603c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [55-70] 
61d-62a;  [110-125]  62c-d;  [235-246]  64a-b; 
[351— 379]  65c-66a;  [1209-1217]  76d-77a;  bk 
vi  [601-607]  88b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ix,  sect  28  293d- 
294a 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  xiii,  429a-b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  846a-848b;  888b- 
891a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  3-5,  67b- 
68b;  ch  7-8  69c-70d  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii, 
ch  7-8  122d-124c;  ch  n-13  126a-129a  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  7-8  161d-162d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  2,  rep  2  41d-42c;  a  4,  ans  43b-44b;  a  5, 
ans  44b-45c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
Q77,  A2,  ans  945a-946b;  q  91,  a  2l017c-1020c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  i  [73-81] 
107a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  35, 
163a-b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  prop  10  284a- 
285a  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  540a-541b 

36  Swift-:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  98a-b 

8c( 2)  The  form  of  celestial  motion:  circles,  the 
equant,  ellipses 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vii,  394d-396b;  bk  x, 
438c-439a  /  Timaeus,  451a-452b  /  Laws,  bk 
vii,  730a-d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  viii,  ch  8-9  348b-353b 
/  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  2-5  359d-364a;  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[287a2-3i]  378c-379a;  ch  5  379b-c;  ch  8  381a- 
382a;  ch  12  [293*4-14]  384c  /  Metaphysics,  bk 
xii,  ch  6  [io7ib32]-cH  7  [1072*22]  601d-602b; 
ch  8  [io73bi7-io74ai4]  604a-c 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  7a-8b;  bk  iii,  83a; 
86b;  bk  v,  148b-157a;  bk  ix,  270b;  291a-296a 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  507a-508a;  bk  i,  513b-514b;  bk  iii, 
628b-629a;  bk  iv,  675b-678a  esp  677b-678a; 
bk  v,  740a-b;  784b-785b 


8r(3)  to  9a  Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY  105 


16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  888b-893b;  929a- 
933a;  bk  v,  968a-979b  esp  975a-977b;  984b- 
985b  /  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1018a  b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  8  39o d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  66, 
a  2,  ans  345d-347b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  77,  a  2,  ans  945a-946b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  vi,  llObd 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  fourth  day, 
245b-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  apii  48, 
186b-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [616-627]  188b- 
189a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72,  181a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  i,  prop  ii  42b-43b; 
prop  17  48b-50a 

8c(3)  The  laws  of  celestial  motion:  celestial 
mechanics 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  888a-895b  passim; 
897a-907a  passim,  esp  897a,  904b-905a;  933a- 
952a  passim;  bk  v,  975a-979b  /  Harmonies  of 
the  World ,  1018a-b;  1019b-1020b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  i,  prop  1-3  and  schol 
32b-35b;  prop  4,  corol  vi  36a;  prop  11-13 
42b-46a  esp  prop  ii  42b-43b;  prop  15  46b- 
47a;  prop  17  48b-50a;  bk  ii,  prop  51-53  and 
schol  259a-267a;  bk  iii  269a-372a  passim,  esp 
rule  i-iii  270a-271a,  phenomenon  i-prop  7 
272a-282b,  prop  13  286a-b,  prop  35,  schol 
320b-324a,  prop  40  337b  338a,  general 
schol,  369a,  371b-372a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div  9, 
454c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  8d  [fn  2] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xiii,  563b; 
epilogue  11,  694d-695c 

8d.  The  creation  of  the  heavens 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1:1-8,14-19;  2:1-4  / 
Nehemiah ,  9:6— (D)  II  Esdras ,  9:6  /  Job ,  26:7; 
37:18;  38  /  Psalms ,  8:3-4;  19:1;  89:11;  102:25; 
j36 :5~ 9;  148:1-6— (D)  Psalms ,  8:4-5;  J8:2; 
88:12;  101:26;  135:5-9;  i48:i-6/Pror^i-,3:i9; 
8:27  /  Jeremiah ,  31:35;  51:15— (D)  Jerernias , 
31:35;  51:15  /  5:8 

New  Testament:  ytor,  14:15;  17:24— (D) 

14:14;  17:24  /  Hebrews ,  1:10  /  77  3:5  / 

Revelation ,  14:7 — (£))  Apocalypse ,  14:7 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  450c-452b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  viii,  ch  i  [25^13-19] 
335b  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  10-12  370d-375d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[64ibi3~29]  164c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [416-508] 
66c-67c;  [1204-1213]  76d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xi,  par  4-1 1 
90a-92b;  bk  xii,  par  2-9  99c-101c;  par  14-40 
102b-110a;  bk  xiii,  par  6-48  112a-124a  /  C/Vy 
o/* Go*/,  bk  xi,  ch  7  326a-c;  ch  9  326d-327d; 


cii  19-21  332b  333d;  cii  23  334c  335c;  bk 
xii,  ch  15  351b-352d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  46, 
a  1,  rep  2-3,5  250a-252d;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i 
255a-d;  q  66,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  to  contrary 
343d-345c;  a  3  347b  348d;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  5 
348d-349d;  q  67,  a  4  352a-354a;  q  68,  a  i 
354a-355c;  q  70,  aa  1-2  362c-365a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [73-81]  10b; 
paradise,  vii  [121-148]  116b-c;  x  [1-6]  120b; 
xxix  [13-45]  150b-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day,  214d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  17b-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  54b-56a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [708-735]  150b- 
151b;  bk  vii  [192-386]  221b  225b;  bk  viii 
[15-178]  232b-236a 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  542a-543a 
9.  The  particular  heavenly  bodies 

9a,  The  sun:  its  position,  distance,  size,  and  mass 

Old  Testament:  Joshua,  10:12-14— (D)  Jo  sue, 
10:12-14  /  Psalms,  136:7-8— (D)  Psalms, 
135:7-8  /  Isaiah,  13:9-11;  30:26;  60:19-20— 
( D )  Isaias,  13:9-11;  30:26;  60:19-20  /  Joel, 
2:10,31;  3:15  /  Amos,  8:9 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  43:1-5— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  43:1-5 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  24:29-30  /  Mar\, 
13:24-25  /  Luke,  23:44-45 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  53d-54b;  79c; 
bk  iv,  130d-131a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  394c 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  98a  /  Apology,  204d-205a  / 
Republic ,  bk  vi,  385c-386c  /  Timaeus ,  451b-d 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [289^6-35] 
380d;  ch  12  [2 9 1  b2 9— 292^7]  383c-384b;  ch  13 
[293b3 4— 294&i2]  385c  /  Meteorology ,  bk  i,  ch  8 
[345bl-9]  451c-d 

11  Archimedes:  Sand- Reckoner,  520a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [564-574] 
68b-c;  [592-704]  68d-70b;  [751— 771]  70d-71a 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  138d 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  iii  77a-107a;  bk  v, 
171b-182b;  bk  vi,  215a-222b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  520b-529a;  bk  iii,  646a-674b; 
bk  iv,  710b-714a;  716a-731a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  854b-856a;  857b- 
860b;  873a-876a;  882a-883b;  885b-886b; 
895b-905a;  907b-916a  passim  /  Harmonies  of 
the  World,  1014b-1016a;  1080b-1085b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  iii,  ch  15,  176d- 
177a 

19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  70,  a  i, 
rep  5  362c-364b;  q  119,  a  i,  ans  604c-607b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  91,  a  1,  rep  1  1016b-1017c;  a  2  1017c-1020c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  iv  [55- 
84]  58a-b;  paradise,  i  [38-63]  106c-d;  x 
[1-48]  120b-d 


106 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(9.  The  particular  heavenly  bodies .  9a.  The  sun: 
its  position ,  distance ,  size,  and  mass.) 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  257d-258b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  vi,  112d-113a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  36, 
165c-166b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  54d-56a  pas¬ 
sim  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  231a;  233c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  hi  [555-623]  147b- 
149a;  bk  iv  [539-543]  164a;  bk  vii  [354—373] 
224b-225a;  bk  viii  [66-168]  233b-235b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72,  181a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  i,  prop  66  118a-128b; 
bk  hi,  phenomenon  iii  273d-274a;  prop  2 
276a-b;  hypothesis  i-prop  12  285a-286a; 
prop  25  299b-300b;  prop  36  324a-b;  prop  40 
337b-338a  /  Optics ,  bk  iii,  5l8a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  98a-b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  819d 

9b.  The  moon:  its  irregularities 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:14-18  /  Psalms , 
I3^:7_9 — iP)  Lsalms,  135:7-9  /  Isaiah ,  13:9- 
11 ;  30:26;  60:19-20 — ( D )  Isaias ,  13:9-11; 
30:26;  60:19-20  /  Joel ,  2:10,31;  3:15 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  43:6-8 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus ,  43 :6~9 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  24:29-30  /  Mar\, 
I3:24_25 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  98a-b  /  Apology ,  204d-205a 
/  Timaeus ,  451b-d 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii  [29ib  18-23] 
383b;  ch  12  [29ib29~292b27]  383c-384b;  ch  14 
[297b2i~3i]  389b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [471-479] 
67b;  [575-584]  68c;  [629-649]  69b-c;  [705- 
771]  70b-71a 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  74a  /  Aemilius  Paulus, 
220d-221b  /  Nicias,  435b-d  /  D/ow,  789b- 
790a 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  iv-vi  108a-222b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  iv  675a-731a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  876a-878a;  918a- 
928a;  952a-960a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  5,  43d- 
44a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  70, 
a  1,  rep  5  362c-364b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii  [46-148] 
108b-109b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
188c 

26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Juliet,  act  ii,  sc  ii 
[107-110]  295b  /  Midsummer -Night's  Dream, 
act  11,  sc  1  [103-114]  357a-b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  36, 
167a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [662-666]  125b; 
bk  iii  [708-735]  150b-151b;  bk  v  [257-266] 
180b-lSla;  bk  vii  [346-386]  224b-225b;  bk 


9b  to  9 d 

viii  [122-158]  234b-235b  /  Samson  Agonistes 
[86-89]  341b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  164a  /  Pensees,  18 
174b-175a;  817,  330b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  i,  prop  43-45  92b- 
101a;  prop  66  118a-128b;  bk  iii,  phenomenon 
vi  275a;  prop  3-4  and  schol  276b-278b; 
prop  22-38  294b-329a 

34  Huygens:  Light ,  ch  i,  554b-555a 

9c.  The  planets:  their  eccentricities,  retrogra- 
dations,  and  stations 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  x,  438c-439a  /  Timaeus, 
451a-d 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [285b28~33] 
377b-c;  ch  7-12  380c-384c  /  Metaphysics,  bk 
xii,  ch  8  603b-605a 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  ix-xiii  270a-465b 
16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  bk  i,  521b-529a;  bk  v-vi  732a-838a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  860b-872b;  878b- 
882a;  888b-905a;  907b-910a;  928a-952a  pas¬ 
sim;  bk  v  961a-1004a  /  Harmonies  of  the 
World,  1015b-1080b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  5,  44a 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  32, 

a  1,  rep  2  175d-178a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii  [46-148] 
108b-109b;  x  [1-27]  120b-c;  xxii  [124-154] 
140d-141b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
29c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  36, 
165c-166b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  54d-56a  pas¬ 
sim 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [481-483]  146a; 
[573-587]  148a;  bk  v  [166-170]  179a;  [618-627] 
188b-189a;  bk  vii  [557-564]  229a-b;  bk  viii 
[122-152]  234b-235b;  bk  ix  [48-51]  248b;  bk 
x  [657-661]  288b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  368b-369a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  i,  prop  1-3  and 
schol  32b-35b;  prop  4,  corol  vi  36a;  prop 
ii  42b-43b;  prop  15  46b-47a;  prop  17  48b- 
50a;  prop  57-63  lllb-115a;  prop  65-69 
116b-130b;  bk  iii,  phenomenon  i-v  272a- 
275a;  prop  1-2  276a-b;  prop  5-6  278b- 
281b;  prop  8-10  282b-285a;  prop  13-19  286a- 
291b 

34  Huygens:  Light,  ch  i,  556a-557b 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  102a 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  227a 
45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  171b 
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  632b 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  563b 

9d.  The  earth:  its  origin,  position,  shape,  and 
motions 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:1-10  /  Job ,  38:4-7  / 
Psalms,  90:2;  102:25;  119:90 — ( D )  Psalms, 
89:2;  101:26;  118:90  /Proverbs,  3:19;  8:23-29/ 


9e  to  10 

Isaiah ,  45:12;  48:13— (D)  Isaias,  45:12;  48:13 
/  Jeremiah ,  51:15—  (D)  Jeremias ,  51:15 

New  Testament:  Hebrews ,  1:10 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  241b-242b;  247b-c/  Timaeus , 
452a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  13-14  384d- 
389d 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals ,  ch  3  [699*27]- 
ch  4  [699^9]  234b-235a 

11  Archimedes:  Sand-Reckoner ,  520a  b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [416-508] 
66c-67c;  [534-563]  68a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius ,  55a- b 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  i,  8b-12b;  bk  ii,  40a- 
44  b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  bk  i,  511b-513a;  514b-521a;  529a- 
532a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  854a-b;  873a-876a; 
911b-928a 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  26-27 
171b-l72a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  i,  23b-25d;  bk  vi 
106a-121a,c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  36, 
165c-166b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  54d-56a  pas¬ 
sim 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  hi  [702-734]  150b- 
151b;  bk  iv  [996-1004]  174a;  bk  v  [577-579] 
187b-188a;  bk  vii  [216-337]  221b-224b;  bk 
viii  [15-38]  232b-233a;  [66-168]  233b-235b; 
bk  ix  [99-1 18]  249b-250a;  bk  x  [668-678]  289a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  165a  /  Pensees ,  72, 
181a  /  Vacuum ,  368b-369a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  i,  prop  66,  corol 
xxii  127b-128b;  bk  hi,  prop  18-21  288b-294b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  58 
424a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  hi,  98a- b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  819 d 

51  Tolstoy:  IKzr  azz*/  Peace,  bk  xiii,  563b; 
epilogue  ii,  695d-696d 

9*.  The  fixed  stars:  the  precession  of  the  equi¬ 
noxes 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1:14-18  /  Psalms, 
i36:j-$—(D)  Psalms,  135:7-9 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  43:9-10 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  43 19- 1 1 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  451d-452a 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  7-12  380c- 
384c  /  Meteorology ,  bk  i,  ch  8  [345br— 9]  451c-d 

11  Archimedes:  Sand-Reckoner,  520a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [509-533] 
67d-68a;  [585-591]  68d 

14  Plutarch:  Ly sander,  358d-359c 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  7a-8b;  bk  iii,  77a- 
b;  bk  vii-viii  223a-269a 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  517b-520b;  bk  ii,  585b-621b; 
bk  iii,  622a-652b  esp  622a-646a 


107 

16  Kepler:  Epitotne,  bk  iv,  882a  887a;  887b- 
888a; 918a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  70, 
a  1,  rep  5  362c-364b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii  [46-148] 
108b-109b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
29c;  bk  11,  69d-70a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi,  107c-116a;  117c- 
121a, c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  36,  165c- 
166b;  aph  48,  185c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [481-483]  146a; 
bk  iv  [641-676]  166b-167a;  bk  vii  [346-352] 
224b;  bk  viii  [15-38]  232b-233a;  bk  x  [65 1— 
667]  288b-289a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  i,  prop  66,  corol 
xx-xxi  126b-127b;  bk  iii,  prop  21  294b; 
lemma  i— prop  39  329a-333a  /  Optics,  bk  i, 
419a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  102a 

9/.  The  comets  and  meteors 

8  Aristotle:  Meteorology,  bk  i,  ch  4  447d- 
448d;  ch  6-8  449b-452d 

14  Plutarch:  Lysander,  358d-359c 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  856b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xv  [13-24] 
128c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  30 
159c-d;  aph  35,  163a-b;  aph  36,  166a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [535-537]  105a; 
[742-746]  109b;  bk  ii  [706-711]  126b;  bk  iv 
[555-560]  164b;  bk  xii  [632-644]  333a 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  358a 

34  Newton:  Prmciples,  bk  iii,  lemma  4-PROP  42 
333a-368b;  general  schol,  369a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  98a-b;  102b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  68c-69a;  615a-b 
[n  74-81] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  viii,  340d- 
341a, c 

10.  The  influence  of  the  heavenly  bodies  upon 
terrestrial  phenomena 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  79c 

7  Plato:  Theaetetus ,  518b  /  Statesman,  586c- 
589c 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  9  [279*22-30] 
370c;  bk  ii,  ch  3  377c-378a  /  Meteorology, 
bk  1,  ch  2  445b-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  6 
[1072*9-18]  602a 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  1-7 
9a-12a  passim;  par  10-11  13b-14b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  1,  rep  1  104c-105c;  q  19,  a  6,  ans  113c-114d; 
q  65,  a  4,  rep  3  342b-343c;  q  67,  a  3  351b- 
352a;  q  82,  a  4,  ans  434c-435c;  q  86,  a  4, 
rep  2-3  463d-464d;  Q  103,  a  5,  rep  i  531b- 
532b;  q  no,  a  1,  rep  2-3  564c-565d;  q  115, 
aa  3-6  588c-592d;  q  116,  a  i,  ans  592d- 
593d 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


108 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(10.  The  influence  of  the  heavenly  bodies  upon 
tei'restrial  phenomena.) 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  76,  a  1,  rep  2  939d-941a;  q  77,  a  i,  ans 
943a-944d;  q  86,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1-2  993c- 
994d;  q  91,  a  i,  rep  1  1016b-1017c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii  [112- 
148]  109a-b;  vii  [121-141]  116b-c;  vm  [97-114] 
118a;  x  [1-27]  120b-c;  xiii  [52-78]  126a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Miller's  Tale  [3187-3212]  212b- 
213a;  [35x3-3533]  218a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
72c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  i, 
sc  hi  [85-101]  109a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  i,  14a 

32  Milton:  Arcades  [61-73]  26b  /  Paradise  Lost , 
bk  hi  [606-612]  148b;  bk  iv  [660-688]  166b- 
167b;  bk  viii  [85-106]  234a-b;  bk  x  [641-719] 
288b-290a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  18  174b-175a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  98a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  226b 

10a.  The  influence  of  the  heavenly  bodies  on 
living  matter:  generation  and  corruption 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  98a  /  Theaetetus ,  518b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [i94bi3]  271a 
/  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  9  [279*^22-30]  370c;  bk  ii, 
ch  3  377c-378a  /  Generation  and  Corruption, 
bk  ii,  ch  10  437d-439c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii, 
ch  5  [io7iai2-i7]  600c;  ch  6  [1072^-18]  602a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  5 
[680^0-35]  210d  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk 
1,  ch  2  [7i6ai5~2o]  256b;  bk  ii,  ch  3  [736b3o- 
737*5]  277c-d;  ch  4  [738*9-25]  278d-279a;  bk 
iv,  ch  2  [767*2-9]  308b;  ch  10  [777bi5~ 778aio] 
319d-320a,c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [76-81] 
62a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  25, 
a  2,  rep  2  144c-145b;  q  70,  a  i,  rep  4  362c- 
364b;  a  3,  rep  3  365b-367a;  q  71,  a  i,  rep  i 
367a-368b;  q  82,  a  4,  ans  434c-435c;  q  86, 
a  4,  rep  2-3  463d-464d;  q  91,  a  2,  rep  2 
485b-486b;  q  92,  a  1,  ans  488d-489d;  q  105, 
a  1,  rep  1  538d-539c;  q  115,  a  3  588c-589c;  a  5, 
rep  1  590d-591c;  q  118,  a  i,  rep  3  600a-601c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  60, 
a  1,  ans  49d-50c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  76,  a  i, 
rep  2  939d-941a;  q  84,  a  2,  rep  3  984c-985d; 
q  86,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1-2  993c-994d;  q  91, 
a  1,  rep  1  1016b-1017c;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1,4 
1017c-1020c;  a  3,  rep  2  1020d-1022c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  vii  [121- 
141]  116b-c;  x  [7-21]  120b-c;  xiii  [52-78] 
126a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Franklin's  Tale  [11,343-347]  356b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  v,  105a-b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  416a;  427b- 
d;  428c-429a 


10  a  to  11 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  340b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organurn,  bk  ii,  aph  ii, 
140d-141a;  aph  12*  141d;  aph  35,  162b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [634-688]  166a- 
167b;  bk  viii  [66-178]  233b-236a  esp  [90-97] 
234a;  bk  ix  [99-113]  249b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  18  174b-175a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  256c 

10b.  The  influence  of  the  heavenly  bodies  on 
the  tides 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  53d-54b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  919b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  105, 
a  6,  rep  1  543b-544a;  q  no,  a  3,  rep  i  566d- 
567b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  2, 
a  3,  ans  392d-393c 

22  Chaucer:  Franklin's  Tale  [11,355-388]  356b- 
357a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  47a-b;  bk  vi, 
113a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organurn,  bk  ii,  aph  36, 
164b-165c;  aph  45,  176b;  aph  46,  178c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  55c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  817,  330b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  i,  prop  66,  corol 
xviii-xix  126a-b;  bk  iii,  prop  24  296a-299b; 
prop  36-37  324a-328b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  104 
433a-b 

11.  The  influence  of  the  stars  and  planets  upon 
the  character  and  actions  of  men 

Old  Testament:  Isaiah,  47:13— (D)  Isaias,  47:13 
/  Jeremiah,  10:2 —(D)  Jeremias,  10:2 

Apocrypha:  Baruch,  6:60-69 — (P)  OT,  Baruch , 
6:60-68 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  65b;  bk  vii, 
223b-c;  bk  ix,  289d-290a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vii, 
552a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  20b-c  /  Nicias,  435b-d  / 
Dion,  789b-790a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  9a-b;  9d;  bk  iv,  79b; 
bk  vi,  91a-d  /  Histories,  bk  i,  195b-c;  bk  v, 
295c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  iii  42a-50a  / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  2  78d-79b;  ch  5-6 
80a-81b;  tr  ii,  ch  10  88a-b  /  Fourth  Ennead, 
tr  iv,  ch  30-45  174b-183a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  4-6  20a-d; 
bk  vii,  par  8-10  45d-47a  /  City  of  God,  bk  iii, 
ch  15,  176d-177a;  bk  v,  ch  1-7  207d-212c  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  21-23  647a-648d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  70, 
a  2,  rep  1  364b-365a;  q  86,  a  4,  rep  2-3  463d- 
464d;  q  96,  a  3,  ans  512a-c;  q  115,  a  4  589d- 
590c;  a  5,  rep  1  590d-591c;  q  116,  a  i,  ans 
592d-593d;  part  i-ii,  q  9,  a  5  660d-662a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [67-96] 
lOb-c;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-84]  77b-d;  para- 


109 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


12  to  13 

dise,  iv  [49-63]  111b;  viii  [1-12]  116d;  [91- 
148]  117d-118c;  xiii  [52-78]  126a-b;  xxn  [1 12- 
123] 140d 

22  Ciiaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [2438-2482]  200a-b 
/  Tale  of  Man  of  Law  [4610-4623]  237b; 
[4715-4735]  239b  240a  /  Wife  of  Bath's  Pro¬ 
logue  [6187-6202]  266a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagrnel,  bk  i, 
66b-67d;  bk  ii,  69b,d-70d;  bk  hi,  136c-137c; 
176a  b;  bk  iv,  267c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  18d-20d;  213d-215a; 
246d-247c 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar ,  act  i,  sc  ii 
[139-141]  570d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  i  [1 13-125] 
30d-31a  /  Othello,  act  v,  sc  ii  [105-111]  240b 
/  King  Lear ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [112-166]  249a-c; 
act  iv,  sc  hi  [34—37]  272a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  iii,  73a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  94c;  part 
ii,  222c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  14b-c;  54c- 
55a 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  [1 25-1 40]  4b-5a  / 
Arcades  [61-73]  26^  /  Comus  [93-144]  35b-36b 
/  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [594-599]  106b;  bk  viii 
[5 1 1— 514]  243b;  bk  x  [657-661]  288b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  173  203b-204a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  98a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  194b-195a;  332a- 
334b;  407b-408b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [4947-4976]  122b- 
123a;  [6667-6670]  163  b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  viii,  340 d- 
341a, c 

12.  The  worship  of  the  earth,  sun,  moon,  and 
stars 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  37:9-10  /  Deuteron¬ 
omy,  4:19;  17:3  /  II  Kings,  23:4-5,11  — (D) 
IV  Kings,  23:4-5,11  /  Jeremiah ,  8:1-2;  10:2— 
( D )  Jeremias ,  8:1-2;  10:2  /  Ezekiel,  8:16— (D) 
Ezechiel,  8:16  /  Zephaniah ,  1:4-5— (D)  Soph - 
onias,  1:4-5 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  13:1-9— (D) 
OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  13:1-9  /  Baruch ,  6:60- 
69— (D)  OT,  Baruch,  6:60-68 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-340]  134a 

5  Euripides:  Orestes  [1625-1693]  410b-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [563-626]  495c-496b 
/  Peace  [406-416]  530d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  31a-b;  48c;  bk 
vii,  226c 

7  Plato:  Apology,  204d-205a  /  Laws ,  bk  vii, 
728b-730d;  bk  xii,  797b-798b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  8  [i074br- 
14]  604d-605a 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[7i6ai5~2o]  256b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [581-660] 
22b-23b;  bk  v  [396-411]  66b;  [821-836]  71d- 
72a 


14  Plutarcii:  Aemilius  Panins,  220d~221b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xv,  176a 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1080b- 
1085b 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  24-26 

170b-171d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica,  part  i,  q  ii, 
a  3,  rep  1  49a-c;  q  67,  a  4,  ans  352a-354a; 
Q  1 1 5,  a  3,  rep  1  588c-589c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  iv  [49-63] 
111b;  viii  [1-12]  116d 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [2209-2482]  196b- 
200b  /  Franklin's  Tale  [1 1,339-393], 356b-357a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  246d-247c 

27  Shakespeare:  Antony  a?id  Cleopatra ,  act  iv, 
sc  ix  [5-18]  340c-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  94 
431b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  59c-60a;  81  d;  93b- 
d;  346d-347a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  226a-b;  227c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  238d- 
239a; 252a-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [7900-7950]  192b- 
193b;  [8034-8043]  195b;  [8078-8081]  196b; 
[8285-8302] 202a 

13.  The  history  of  astronomy 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [442-461] 
44c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  49d-50a;  65b;  79c 

7  Plato  :  Phaedrus,  138c-d  /  Apology,  204d-205a 
/  Statesman,  586c-589c  /  Laws,  bk  vii,  728b- 
730d;  bk  xii,  797b-798b 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  3  [27obi2-26] 
361d-362a;  ch  10  370d-371d;  bk  ii,  ch  1-2 
375b,d-377c;  ch  12  [292*^6-9]  383c;  ch  13 
384d-387d  /  Meteorology,  bk  i,  ch  6  449b- 
450b;  ch  8  451b-452d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [354^7-32] 
460b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982^1-17] 
500d;  bk  xii,  ch  8  603b-605a 

11  Archimedes:  Sand-Reckoner,  520a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [720-730] 
70c 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  20b-c  /  Numa  Pompi- 
lius,  55a-b  /  Solon,  74a  /  Pericles,  138d 
/  Aemilius  Paulus ,  220d-221b  /  Ly sander, 
358d-359c  /  Nicias,  435b-d 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  iii,  77a-83a;  bk  iv, 
109a-110b;  bk  vii,  223a-232b  passim;  bk  ix, 
272a-b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  508a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  861b-863a;  888b- 
891b;  907b-910a;  929a-933a  passim;  955a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c- 
28c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32, 
a  1,  rep  2  175d-178a 

22  Chaucer:  Miller's  Tale  [3187-3212]  212b-213a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagrnel,  bk  ii, 
69d-70a 


110 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(13.  The  history  of  astronomy.) 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  257d-258b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  vi,  107c-d;  117c-d; 
118d-119c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  24d  /  2Vo- 
vum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  8o  120a-b;  aph  89 
124a-d;  bk  ii,  aph  36,  165c-167b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [284-291]  99b; 
bk  v  [261-263]  181a;  bk  viii  [66-168]  233b- 
235b  /  Areopagitica ,  400a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  165a  /  Vacuum , 
358a;  368b-369a 


13 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  58 
424a-b;  sect  104  433a-b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div  9, 
454c-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  227a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  68c-69a;  226b; 
299b-c;  664d  [n  55-56] 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  8d  [fn  2];  175b  [fn  1]  / 
Practical  Reason ,  361  b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  1,  219a-b; 
251a  b 

51  Tolstoy:  IKzr  0/2^  P^zc?,  bk  viii,  340d- 
341a, c;  bk  xiii,  563b;  epilogue  ii,  694d-696d 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  discussion  of  related  disciplines,  see  Mathematics;  Mechanics;  Physics. 

The  consideration  of  mathematical  physics,  see  Mathematics  5b;  Mechanics  3;  Physics 
ib,  3;  Science  5c. 

Other  treatments  of  observation  and  measurement  in  natural  science,  see  Experience  5-5C; 

Mechanics  2a;  Physics  3,  4a,  4d;  Quantity  6-6c;  Science  5a~5b;  Sense  5. 

The  logic  of  hypotheses  and  their  verification  in  scientific  method,  see  Hypothesis  4b-4d; 
Physics  4b;  Principle  3c(2)  ;  Science  5e. 

The  general  consideration  of  scientific  method,  see  Logic  4b;  Reasoning  6c;  Science 

5-5e- 

The  distinction  between  formal  and  efficient  causes,  see  Cause  ia;  and  for  the  role  of  causes 
and  causal  explanation  in  natural  science,  see  Cause  5b;  Nature  3c;  Physics  2b; 
Science  4c. 

The  consideration  of  certain  mathematical  forms  used  in  astronomy,  see  Quantity  3b(i)- 

3b0).3e(2)- 

Other  discussions  of  celestial  and  terrestrial  mechanics,  see  Mechanics  4a,  5f~5f(2),  6c. 

The  theory  of  gravitation  and  the  problem  of  action-at-a-distance,  see  Mechanics  6d(i)- 
6d(2);  Space  2c. 

The  issues  concerning  matter  and  soul  or  intellect  in  relation  to  the  heavenly  bodies,  see 
Angel  2a;  Matter  ib;  Soul  ia;  World  6a. 

Other  discussions  of  the  measurement  of  time,  see  Quantity  5b;  Time  4. 

The  interpretation  of  celestial  phenomena  in  divination  and  augury,  see  Language  10; 

Prophecy  3b;  Sign  and  Symbol  5b. 

Criticisms  of  astrology,  see  Religion  6a. 

The  cosmological  and  theological  implications  of  astronomy,  see  Angel  2a;  Change  i  3— 14; 
Eternity  2;  Infinity  3d~3e;  Space  3a;  Time  2b;  World  4a,  4e,  5,  7. 


Chapter  5:  ASTRONOMY 


111 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Ptolemy.  Tetrabiblos 

Aquinas.  Summa  Contra  Gentiles ,  bk  hi,  ch  84-87 

- .  On  the  Trinity  of  Boethius,  q  5 

Dante.  Corwivio  {The  Banquet),  second  treatise, 

CH  3-4 

Chaucer.  A  Treatise  on  the  Astrolabe 
Copernicus.  Commentariolus 

- .  Letter  Against  Werner 

Kepler.  Mysterium  Cosmo  graphic  urn 

- .  De  Motibus  Stellae  Martis 

- .  Harmonices  Mundi,  bk  i-iv 

Galileo.  The  Sidereal  Messenger 

- .  Dialogo  dei  massimi  sistemi 

Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy,  part  iii, 
5-47,  1 03-120,  126-157 
Hobbes.  Concerning  Body,  part  iv,  ch  26 
Kant.  Cosmogony 

A.  Smith.  The  History  of  Astronomy 

II. 

Aristarchus.  On  the  Sizes  and  Distances  of  the  Sun 
and  Moon 

Epicurus.  Letter  to  Pythocles 

- .  Letter  to  Herodotus 

I  bn  Ezra.  The  Beginning  of  Wisdom 
Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed,  part  ii, 
ch  8-12,  24 

R.  Bacon.  Opus  Majus,  part  iv 
Rheticus.  Narratio  Prima 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xm  (10-13), 

xv  (3) 

Fontenelle.  Conversations  on  the  Plurality  of  Worlds 
Voltaire.  “Astrology,”  “Astronomy,”  in  A  Philo¬ 
sophical  Dictionary 
Lagrange.  Mecanique  analytique 


Laplace.  The  System  of  the  World 

- .  Mecanique  celeste  {Celestial  Mechanics) 

Gauss.  Inaugural  Lecture  on  Astronomy 
Whewell.  Astronomy  and  General  Physics  Considered 
with  Reference  to  Natural  Theology 
Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy,  bk  ii 

A.  Humboldt.  Cosmos 

Herschel.  Familiar  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects,  11 
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough,  part  iv,  bk  iii,  ch  7-9; 
part  v,  note  (Pliades  in  Primitive  Calendars) 

G.  H.  Darwin.  The  Evolution  of  the  Satellites 
- .  The  Tides  and  Kindred  Phenomena  in  the  Solar 

System 

Santayana.  Reason  in  Society,  ch  4 
Dreyer.  History  of  the  Planetary  Systems 
Poincare.  The  Value  of  Science,  part  ii,  ch  6 

- .  Science  and  Method,  bk  iii,  ch  3;  bk  iv 

Kapteyn.  Recent  Researches  in  the  Structure  of  the 
Universe 

Duhem.  Le  systeme  du  monde 
Arrhenius.  The  Destinies  of  the  Stars 
T.  Chamberlin.  The  Origin  of  the  Earth 
E.  Huntington.  Earth  and  Sun 
Dingle.  Modern  Astrophysics 
Shapley.  Starlight 

Eddington.  The  Internal  Constitution  of  the  Stars 
- .  Stars  and  Atoms 

Jeans.  Problems  of  Cosmogony  and  Stellar  Dynamics 

- .  Astronomy  and  Cosmogony 

Tolman.  Relativity,  Thermodynamics,  and  Cosmology 

H.  N.  Russell.  The  Solar  System  and  Its  Origin 
Abetti.  The  Sun:  Its  Phenomena  and  Physical 

Features 

Hubble.  The  Realm  of  the  Nebulae 
Gamow.  The  Birth  and  Death  of  the  Sun 

B.  Russell.  Human  Knowledge,  Its  Scope  and 
Limits,  part  i,  ch  2 


Chapter  6:  BEAUTY 


INTRODUCTION 


TRUTH,  goodness,  and  beauty  form  a  triad 
of  terms  which  have  been  discussed  to¬ 
gether  throughout  the  tradition  of  western 
thought. 

They  have  been  called  “transcendental”  on 
the  ground  that  everything  which  is  is  in  some 
measure  or  manner  subject  to  denomination 
as  true  or  false,  good  or  evil,  beautiful  or  ugly. 
But  they  have  also  been  assigned  to  special 
spheres  of  being  or  subject  matter — the  true 
to  thought  and  logic,  the  good  to  action  and 
morals,  the  beautiful  to  enjoyment  and  aes¬ 
thetics. 

They  have  been  called  “the  three  fundamen¬ 
tal  values”  with  the  implication  that  the  worth 
of  anything  can  be  exhaustively  judged  by 
reference  to  these  three  standards — and  no 
others.  But  other  terms,  such  as  pleasure  or 
utility,  have  been  proposed,  either  as  additional 
values  or  as  significant  variants  of  the  so-called 
fundamental  three;  or  even  sometimes  as  more 
fundamental.  Pleasure  or  utility,  for  example, 
has  been  held  by  men  like  Spinoza  or  Mill  to  be 
the  ultimate  criterion  of  beauty  or  goodness. 

Truth,  goodness,  and  beauty,  singly  and  to¬ 
gether,  have  been  the  focus  of  the  age-old  con¬ 
troversy  concerning  the  absolute  and  the  rela¬ 
tive,  the  objective  and  the  subjective,  the  uni¬ 
versal  and  the  individual.  At  certain  times  it  has 
been  thought  that  the  distinction  of  true  from 
false,  good  from  evil,  beautiful  from  ugly,  has 
its  basis  and  warranty  in  the  very  nature  of 
things,  and  that  a  man’s  judgment  of  these  mat¬ 
ters  is  measured  for  its  soundness  or  accuracy  by 
its  conformity  to  fact.  At  other  times  the  oppo¬ 
site  position  has  been  dominant.  One  meaning 
of  the  ancient  saying  that  man  is  the  measure  of 
all  things  applies  particularly  to  the  true,  good, 
and  beautiful.  Man  measures  truth,  goodness, 
and  beauty  by  the  effect  things  have  upon  him, 
according  to  what  they  seem  to  him  to  be.  What 


seems  good  to  one  man  may  seem  evil  to  anoth¬ 
er.  What  seems  ugly  or  false  may  also  seem 
beautiful  or  true  to  different  men  or  to  the 
same  man  at  different  times. 

Yet  it  is  not  altogether  true  that  these  three 
terms  have  always  suffered  the  same  fortunes. 
For  Spinoza  goodness  and  beauty  are  subjec¬ 
tive,  but  not  truth.  Because  he  “has  persuaded 
himself  that  all  things  which  exist  are  made  for 
him,”  man,  Spinoza  says,  judges  that  to  be  “of 
the  greatest  importance  which  is  most  useful  to 
him,  and  he  must  esteem  that  to  be  of  surpass¬ 
ing  worth  by  which  he  is  most  beneficially 
affected.”  The  notions  of  good  and  evil,  beauty 
and  ugliness,  do  not  conform  to  anything  in  the 
nature  of  things.  “The  ignorant,”  says  Spinoza, 
nevertheless,  “call  the  nature  of  a  thing  good, 
evil,  sound,  putrid,  or  corrupt  just  as  they  are 
affected  by  it.  For  example,  if  the  motion  by 
which  the  nerves  are  affected  by  means  of  ob¬ 
jects  represented  to  the  eye  conduces  to  well¬ 
being,  the  objects  by  which  it  is  caused  are 
called  beautiful ;  while  those  exciting  a  con¬ 
trary  motion  are  called  def owned” 

Beauty  has  been  most  frequently  regarded  as 
subjective,  or  relative  to  the  individual  judg¬ 
ment.  The  familiar  maxim,  de  gustibus  non  dis - 
putandum,  has  its  original  application  in  the 
sphere  of  beauty  rather  than  truth  and  good¬ 
ness.  “Truth  is  disputable,”  Hume  writes,  “not 
taste  .  .  .  No  man  reasons  concerning  another’s 
beauty;  but  frequently  concerning  the  justice 
or  injustice  of  his  actions.”  Thus  even  when  it 
was  supposed  that  judgments  of  the  true  and 
the  good  could  have  a  certain  absoluteness  or 
universality — or  at  least  be  considered  as  some¬ 
thing  about  which  men  might  reach  agreement 
through  argument — opinions  about  beauty 
were  set  apart  as  useless  to  dispute.  Beauty 
being  simply  a  matter  of  individual  taste,  it 


112 


Chapter  6:  BEAUTY 


113 


could  afford  no  basis  for  argument  or  reasoning 
— no  objective  ground  for  settling  differences 
of  opinion. 

From  the  ancient  skeptics  down  to  our  own 
day,  men  have  noted  the  great  variety  of  traits, 
often  sharply  opposed,  which  have  been  con¬ 
sidered  beautiful  at  different  times  and  places. 
“We  fancy  its  forms/’  Montaigne  says  of  beau¬ 
ty,  “according  to  our  appetite  and  liking  .  .  . 
Indians  paint  it  black  and  tawny,  with  great 
swollen  lips,  big  flat  noses,  and  load  the  carti¬ 
lage  betwixt  the  nostrils  with  great  rings  of  gold 
to  make  it  hang  down  to  the  mouth  ...  In 
Peru,  the  greatest  ears  are  the  most  beautiful, 
and  they  stretch  them  out  as  far  as  they  can  by 
art  .  .  .  There  are,  elsewhere,  nations  that  take 
great  care  to  blacken  their  teeth,  and  hate  to 
see  them  white;  elsewhere,  people  that  paint 
them  red  .  .  .  The  Italians  fashion  beauty  gross 
and  massive;  the  Spaniards,  gaunt  and  slender; 
among  us  one  makes  it  white,  another  brown; 
one  soft  and  delicate,  another  strong  and  vig¬ 
orous  ....  Just  as  the  preference  in  beauty  is 
given  by  Plato  to  the  spherical  figure,  the 
Epicureans  give  it  to  the  pyramidal  or  the 
square,  and  cannot  swallow  a  god  in  the  form 
of  a  ball.” 

Like  Montaigne,  Darwin  gives  an  extensive 
account  of  the  things  men  have  found  beauti¬ 
ful,  many  of  them  so  various  and  contradictory 
that  it  would  seem  there  could  be  no  objective 
basis  for  judgments  of  beauty.  If  any  consensus 
is  found  among  individuals  about  what  is  beau¬ 
tiful  or  ugly,  the  skeptics  or  relativists  usually 
explain  it  by  reference  to  the  prevalence  of 
certain  prejudices,  or  customary  standards, 
which  in  turn  vary  with  different  tribes  and 
cultures,  and  at  different  times  and  places. 

Beginning  in  the  sphere  of  beauty,  subjec¬ 
tivism  or  relativism  spreads  first  to  judgments 
of  good  and  evil,  and  then  to  statements  about 
truth,  never  in  the  opposite  direction.  It  be¬ 
comes  complete  when,  as  so  frequently  happens 
in  our  own  time,  what  is  good  or  true  is  held 
to  be  just  as  much  a  matter  of  private  taste  or 
customary  opinion  as  what  is  beautiful. 

The  problem  of  the  objectivity  or  subjec¬ 
tivity  of  beauty  can,  of  course,  be  separated 
from  similar  problems  with  regard  to  truth  and 
goodness,  but  any  attempt  to  solve  it  will  neces¬ 
sarily  both  draw  on  and  bear  on  the  discussion 


of  these  related  problems.  The  degree  to  which 
the  three  problems  must  be  considered  inter- 
dependently  is  determined  by  the  extent  to 
which  each  of  the  three  terms  requires  the  con¬ 
text  of  the  other  two  for  its  definition  and  anal¬ 
ysis. 

Beauty  is,  perhaps,  not  definable  in  any  strict 
sense  of  definition.  But  there  have  been,  never¬ 
theless,  many  attempts  to  state,  with  the  brevi¬ 
ty  of  definition,  what  beauty  is.  Usually  notions 
of  goodness,  or  correlative  notions  of  desire  and 
love,  enter  into  the  statement. 

Aquinas,  for  example,  declares  that  “the 
beautiful  is  the  same  as  the  good,  and  they 
differ  in  aspect  only.  .  .  .  The  notion  of  good  is 
that  which  calms  the  desire,  while  the  notion 
of  the  beautiful  is  that  which  calms  the  desire, 
by  being  seen  or  known.”  This,  according  to 
Aquinas,  implies  that  “beauty  adds  to  goodness 
a  relation  to  the  cognitive  faculty;  so  that  good 
means  that  which  simply  pleases  the  appetite, 
while  the  beautiful  is  something  pleasant  to 
apprehend.” 

Because  of  its  relation  to  the  cognitive  pow¬ 
er,  Aquinas  defines  the  beautiful  as  “that  which 
pleases  upon  being  seen”  (id  quod  visum  placet ). 
Hence,  he  continues,  “beauty  consists  in  due 
proportion,  for  the  senses  delight  in  things  duly 
proportioned  .  .  .  because  the  sense  too  is  a 
sort  of  reason,  as  is  every  cognitive  power.” 

The  pleasure  or  delight  involved  in  the  per¬ 
ception  of  beauty  belongs  to  the  order  of  know¬ 
ing  rather  than  to  desire  or  action.  The  know¬ 
ing,  furthermore,  seems  to  be  different  from 
that  which  is  proper  to  science,  for  it  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  individual  thing  rather  than 
with  universal  natures,  and  it  occurs  intuitively 
or  contemplatively,  rather  than  by  judgment 
and  reasoning.  There  is  a  mode  of  truth  pe¬ 
culiar  to  the  beautiful,  as  well  as  a  special  kind 
of  goodness. 

Fully  to  understand  what  Aquinas  is  saying 
about  beauty  we  are  required  to  understand 
his  theory  of  goodness  and  truth.  But  enough 
is  immediately  clear  to  give  meaning  to  Eric 
Gill’s  advice  to  those  who  are  concerned  with 
making  things  beautiful:  “Look  after  goodness 
and  truth,”  he  says,  “and  beauty  will  take  care 
of  herself.” 

To  define  beauty  in  terms  of  pleasure  would 


114 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


seem  to  make  it  relative  to  the  individual,  for 
what  gives  pleasure — even  contemplative  pleas¬ 
ure — to  one  man,  may  not  to  another.  It  should 
be  noted,  however,  that  the  pleasure  in  ques¬ 
tion  is  attributed  to  the  object  as  its  cause.  It 
may  be  asked,  therefore,  what  in  the  object  is 
the  cause  of  the  peculiar  satisfaction  which  con¬ 
stitutes  the  experience  of  beauty?  Can  the  same 
object  just  as  readily  arouse  displeasure  in 
another  individual,  and  a  consequent  judgment 
of  ugliness?  Are  these  opposite  reactions  en¬ 
tirely  the  result  of  the  way  an  individual  feels? 

Aquinas  appears  to  meet  this  difficulty  by 
specifying  certain  objective  elements  of  beau¬ 
ty,  or  “conditions,”  as  he  calls  them.  “Beauty 
includes  three  conditions,”  he  writes:  “ integ¬ 
rity  or  perfection,  since  those  things  which  are 
impaired  are  by  that  very  fact  ugly;  due  pro¬ 
portion  or  harmony',  and  lastly,  brightness  or 
clarity,  whence  things  are  called  beautiful  which 
have  a  bright  color.”  Quite  apart  from  indi¬ 
vidual  reactions,  objects  may  differ  in  the  de¬ 
gree  to  which  they  possess  such  properties — 
traits  which  are  capable  of  pleasing  or  displeas¬ 
ing  their  beholder. 

This  does  not  mean  that  the  individual  re¬ 
action  is  invariably  in  accordance  with  the  ob¬ 
jective  characteristics  of  the  thing  beheld.  Men 
differ  in  the  degree  to  which  they  possess  good 
perception — and  sound  critical  judgment — 
even  as  objects  differ  in  the  degree  to  which 
they  possess  the  elements  of  beauty.  Once 
again  in  the  controversy  concerning  the  objec¬ 
tivity  or  subjectivity  of  beauty,  there  seems  to 
be  a  middle  ground  between  the  two  extreme 
positions,  which  insists  upon  a  beauty  intrinsic 
to  the  object  but  does  not  deny  the  relevance 
of  differences  in  individual  sensibility. 

William  James  would  seem  to  be  indicating 
such  a  position  when,  in  his  discussion  of  aes¬ 
thetic  principles,  he  declares:  “We  are  once  and 
for  all  so  made  that  when  certain  impressions 
come  before  our  mind,  one  of  them  will  seem  to 
call  for  or  repel  the  others  as  its  companions.” 
As  an  example,  he  cites  the  fact  that  “a  note 
sounds  good  with  its  third  and  fifth.”  Such  an 
aesthetic  judgment  certainly  depends  upon  in¬ 
dividual  sensibility,  and,  James  adds,  “to  a  cer¬ 
tain  extent  the  principle  of  habit  will  explain 
[it].”  But  he  also  points  out  that  “to  explain  all 
aesthetic  judgements  in  this  way  would  be  ab¬ 


surd;  for  it  is  notorious  how  seldom  natural  ex¬ 
periences  come  up  to  our  aesthetic  demands.” 
To  the  extent  that  aesthetic  judgments  “ex¬ 
press  inner  harmonies  and  discords  between 
objects  of  thought,”  the  beautiful,  according 
to  James,  has  a  certain  objectivity;  and  good 
taste  can  be  conceived  as  the  capacity  to  be 
pleased  by  objects  which  should  elicit  that  re¬ 
action. 

Kant’s  theory  of  the  beautiful,  to  take 
another  conception,  must  also  be  understood  in 
the  general  context  of  his  theory  of  knowledge, 
and  his  analysis  of  such  terms  as  good,  pleasure, 
and  desire.  His  definition,  like  that  of  Aquinas, 
calls  an  object  beautiful  if  it  satisfies  the  ob¬ 
server  in  a  very  special  way — not  merely  pleas¬ 
ing  his  senses,  or  satisfying  his  desires,  in  the 
ways  in  which  things  good  as  means  or  ends  fit 
a  man’s  interests  or  purposes.  The  beautiful, 
according  to  Kant,  “pleases  hnmediately  .  .  . 
apart  from  all  interest .”  The  pleasure  that  re¬ 
sults  from  its  contemplation  “may  be  said  to  be 
the  one  and  only  disinterested  and  free  delight; 
for,  with  it,  no  interest,  whether  of  sense  or 
reason,  extorts  approval.” 

The  aesthetic  experience  is  for  Kant  also 
unique  in  that  its  judgment  “is  represented  as 
universal,  i.e.  valid  for  every  man,”  yet  at  the 
same  time  it  is  “incognizable  by  means  of  any 
universal  concept.”  In  other  words,  “all  judge¬ 
ments  of  taste  are  singular  judgements”;  they 
are  without  concept  in  the  sense  that  they  do 
not  apply  to  a  class  of  objects.  Nevertheless, 
they  have  a  certain  universality  and  are  not 
merely  the  formulation  of  a  private  judgment. 
When  “we  call  the  object  beautiful,”  Kant 
says,  “we  believe  ourselves  to  be  speaking  with 
a  universal  voice,  and  lay  claim  to  the  concur¬ 
rence  of  every  one,  whereas  no  private  sensa¬ 
tion  would  be  decisive  except  for  the  observer 
alone  and  his  liking.” 

In  saying  that  aesthetic  judgments  have  sub¬ 
jective,  not  objective,  universality,  and  in  hold¬ 
ing  that  the  beautiful  is  the  object  of  a  neces¬ 
sary  satisfaction,  Kant  also  seems  to  take  the 
middle  position  which  recognizes  the  subjec¬ 
tivity  of  the  aesthetic  judgment  without  deny¬ 
ing  that  beauty  is  somehow  an  intrinsic  prop¬ 
erty  of  objects.  With  regard  to  its  subjective 
character,  Kant  cites  Hume  to  the  effect  that 


Chapter  6:  BEAUTY 


115 


“although  critics  are  able  to  reason  more  plau¬ 
sibly  than  cooks,  they  must  still  share  the  same 
fate.”  The  universal  character  of  the  aesthetic 
judgment,  however,  keeps  it  from  being  com¬ 
pletely  subjective  and  Kant  goes  to  some  length 
to  refute  the  notion  that  in  matters  of  the  beau¬ 
tiful  one  can  seek  refuge  in  the  adage  that 
“every  one  has  his  own  taste.” 

The  fact  that  the  aesthetic  judgment  re¬ 
quires  universal  assent,  even  though  the  uni¬ 
versal  rule  on  which  it  is  based  cannot  be 
formulated,  does  not,  of  course,  preclude  the 
failure  of  the  object  to  win  such  assent  from 
many  individuals.  Not  all  men  have  good  taste 
or,  having  it,  have  it  to  the  same  degree. 

The  foregoing  considerations — selective 
rather  than  exhaustive — show  the  connection 
between  definitions  of  beauty  and  the  problem 
of  aesthetic  training.  In  the  traditional  discus¬ 
sion  of  the  ends  of  education,  there  is  the  prob¬ 
lem  of  how  to  cultivate  good  taste — the  ability 
to  discriminate  critically  between  the  beautiful 
and  the  ugly. 

If  beauty  is  entirely  subjective,  entirely  a 
matter  of  individual  feeling,  then,  except  for 
conformity  to  standards  set  by  the  customs  of 
the  time  and  place,  no  criteria  would  seem  to 
be  available  for  measuring  the  taste  of  individ¬ 
uals.  If  beauty  is  simply  objective — something 
immediately  apparent  to  observation  as  are  the 
simple  sensible  qualities — no  special  training 
would  seem  to  be  needed  for  sharpening  our 
perception  of  it. 

The  genuineness  of  the  educational  problem 
in  the  sphere  of  beauty  seems,  therefore,  to 
depend  upon  a  theory  of  the  beautiful  which 
avoids  both  extremes,  and  which  permits  the 
educator  to  aim  at  a  development  of  individual 
sensibilities  in  accordance  with  objective  cri¬ 
teria  of  taste. 

The  foregoing  considerations  also  provide 
background  for  the  problem  of  beauty  in  na¬ 
ture  and  in  art.  As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on 
Art,  the  consideration  of  art  in  recent  times 
tends  to  become  restricted  to  the  theory  of  the 
fine  arts.  So  too  the  consideration  of  beauty  has 
become  more  and  more  an  analysis  of  excellence 
in  poetry,  music,  painting,  and  sculpture.  In 
consequence,  the  meaning  of  the  word  “aes¬ 


thetic”  has  progressively  narrowed,  until  now 
it  refers  almost  exclusively  to  the  appreciation 
of  works  of  fine  art,  where  before  it  connoted 
any  experience  of  the  beautiful,  in  the  things 
of  nature  as  well  as  in  the  works  of  man. 

The  question  is  raised,  then,  whether  natural 
beauty,  or  the  perception  of  beauty  in  nature, 
involves  the  same  elements  and  causes  as  beau¬ 
ty  in  art.  Is  the  beauty  of  a  flower  or  of  a  flower¬ 
ing  field  determined  by  the  same  factors  as  the 
beauty  of  a  still  life  or  a  landscape  painting? 

The  affirmative  answer  seems  to  be  assumed 
in  a  large  part  of  the  tradition.  In  his  discus¬ 
sion  of  the  beautiful  in  the  Poetics ,  Aristotle 
explicitly  applies  the  same  standard  to  both 
nature  and  art.  “To  be  beautiful,”  he  writes, 
“a  living  creature,  and  every  whole  made  up 
of  parts,  must  not  only  present  a  certain  order 
in  its  arrangement  of  parts,  but  also  be  of  a 
certain  magnitude.”  Aristotle’s  notion  that  art 
imitates  nature  indicates  a  further  relation  be¬ 
tween  the  beautiful  in  art  and  nature.  Unity, 
proportion,  and  clarity  would  then  be  elements 
common  to  beauty  in  its  every  occurrence, 
though  these  elements  may  be  embodied  dif¬ 
ferently  in  things  which  have  a  difference  in 
their  mode  of  being,  as  do  natural  and  artificial 
things. 

With  regard  to  the  beauty  of  nature  and  of 
art,  Kant  tends  to  take  the  opposite  position. 
He  points  out  that  “the  mind  cannot  reflect  on 
the  beauty  of  nature  without  at  the  same  time 
finding  its  interest  engaged.”  Apart  from  any 
question  of  use  that  might  be  involved,  he 
concludes  that  the  “interest”  aroused  by  the 
beautiful  in  nature  is  “akin  to  the  moral,”  par¬ 
ticularly  from  the  fact  that  “nature  ...  in  her 
beautiful  products  displays  herself  as  art,  not  as 
a  mere  matter  of  chance,  but,  as  it  were,  design¬ 
edly,  according  to  a  law-directed  arrangement.” 

The  fact  that  natural  things  and  works  of  art 
stand  in  a  different  relation  to  purpose  or  in¬ 
terest  is  for  Kant  an  immediate  indication  that 
their  beauty  is  different.  Their  susceptibility 
to  disinterested  enjoyment  is  not  the  same.  Yet 
for  Kant,  as  for  his  predecessors,  nature  pro¬ 
vides  the  model  or  archetype  which  art  fol¬ 
lows,  and  he  even  speaks  of  art  as  an  “imi¬ 
tation”  of  nature. 

The  Kantian  discussion  of  nature  and  art 
moves  into  another  dimension  when  it  con- 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


116 

siders  the  distinction  between  the  beautiful 
and  the  sublime.  We  must  look  for  the  sub¬ 
lime,  Kant  says,  “not  ...  in  works  of  art  .  .  . 
nor  yet  in  things  of  nature,  that  in  their  very 
concept  import  a  definite  end,  e.g.  animals  of 
a  recognized  natural  order,  but  in  rude  nature 
merely  as  involving  magnitude.”  In  company 
with  Longinus  and  Edmund  Burke,  Kant  char¬ 
acterizes  the  sublime  by  reference  to  the  limi¬ 
tations  of  human  powers.  Whereas  the  beauti¬ 
ful  “consists  in  limitation,”  the  sublime  “im¬ 
mediately  involves,  or  else  by  its  presence  pro¬ 
vokes,  a  representation  of  limitlessness,”  which 
“may  appear,  indeed,  in  point  of  form  to  con¬ 
travene  the  ends  of  our  power  of  judgement, 
to  be  ill-adapted  to  our  faculty  of  presentation, 
and  to  be,  as  it  were,  an  outrage  on  the  imagi¬ 
nation.” 

Made  aware  of  his  own  weakness,  man  is 
dwarfed  by  nature’s  magnificence,  but  at  that 
very  moment  he  is  also  elevated  by  realizing 
his  ability  to  appreciate  that  which  is  so  much 
greater  than  himself.  This  dual  mood  signal¬ 
izes  man’s  experience  of  the  sublime.  Unlike 
the  enjoyment  of  beauty,  it  is  neither  disin¬ 
terested  nor  devoid  of  moral  tone. 

Truth  is  usually  connected  with  perception 
and  thought,  the  good  with  desire  and  action. 
Both  have  been  related  to  love  and,  in  different 
ways,  to  pleasure  and  pain.  All  these  terms  nat¬ 
urally  occur  in  the  traditional  discussion  of 
beauty,  partly  by  way  of  definition,  but  also 
partly  in  the  course  of  considering  the  faculties 
engaged  in  the  experience  of  beauty. 

Basic  here  is  the  question  whether  beauty  is 
an  object  of  love  or  desire.  The  meaning  of 
any  answer  will,  of  course,  vary  with  different 
conceptions  of  desire  and  love. 

Desire  is  sometimes  thought  of  as  funda¬ 
mentally  acquisitive,  directed  toward  the  ap¬ 
propriation  of  a  good;  whereas  love,  on  the 
contrary,  aims  at  no  personal  aggrandizement 
but  rather,  with  complete  generosity,  wishes 
only  the  well-being  of  the  beloved.  In  this 
context,  beauty  seems  to  be  more  closely  asso¬ 
ciated  with  a  good  that  is  loved  than  with  a 
good  desired. 

Love,  moreover,  is  more  akin  to  knowledge 
than  is  desire.  The  act  of  contemplation  is 
sometimes  understood  as  a  union  with  the  ob¬ 


ject  through  both  knowledge  and  love.  Here 
again  the  context  of  meaning  favors  the  align¬ 
ment  of  beauty  with  love,  at  least  for  theories 
which  make  beauty  primarily  an  object  of  con¬ 
templation.  In  Plato  and  Plotinus,  and  on 
another  level  in  the  theologians,  the  two  con¬ 
siderations — of  love  and  beauty — fuse  together 
inseparably. 

It  is  the  “privilege  of  beauty,”  Plato  thinks, 
to  offer  man  the  readiest  access  to  the  world  of 
ideas.  According  to  the  myth  in  the  Phaedrus , 
the  contemplation  of  beauty  enables  the  soul 
to  “grow  wings.”  This  experience,  ultimately 
intellectual  in  its  aim,  is  described  by  Plato  as 
identical  with  love. 

The  observer  of  beauty  “is  amazed  when  he 
sees  anyone  having  a  godlike  face  or  form, 
which  is  the  expression  of  divine  beauty;  and 
at  first  a  shudder  runs  through  him,  and  again 
the  old  awe  steals  over  him;  then  looking  upon 
the  face  of  his  beloved  as  of  a  god,  he  reverences 
him,  and  if  he  were  not  afraid  of  being  thought 
a  downright  madman,  he  would  sacrifice  to  his 
beloved  as  to  the  image  of  a  god.”  When  the 
soul  bathes  herself  “in  the  waters  of  beauty,  her 
constraint  is  loosened,  and  she  is  refreshed,  and 
has  no  more  pangs  and  pains.”  This  state  of 
the  soul  enraptured  by  beauty,  Plato  goes  on 
to  say,  “is  by  men  called  love.” 

Sharply  opposed  to  Plato’s  intellectualiza- 
tion  of  beauty  is  that  conception  which  con¬ 
nects  it  with  sensual  pleasure  and  sexual  attrac¬ 
tion.  When  Darwin,  for  instance,  considers  the 
sense  of  beauty,  he  confines  his  attention  almost 
entirely  to  the  colors  and  sounds  used  as  “at¬ 
tractions  of  the  opposite  sex.”  Freud,  likewise, 
while  admitting  that  “psycho-analysis  has  less 
to  say  about  beauty  than  about  most  things,” 
claims  that  “its  derivation  from  the  realms  of 
sexual  sensation  .  .  .  seems  certain.” 

Such  considerations  may  not  remove  beauty 
from  the  sphere  of  love,  but,  as  the  chapter  on 
Love  makes  clear,  love  has  many  meanings, 
and  is  of  many  sorts.  The  beautiful  which  is 
sexually  attractive  is  the  object  of  a  love  which 
is  almost  identical  with  desire — sometimes  with 
lust — and  certainly  involves  animal  impulses 
and  bodily  pleasures.  “The  taste  for  the  beau¬ 
tiful,”  writes  Darwin,  “at  least  as  far  as  female 
beauty  is  concerned,  is  not  of  a  special  nature  in 
the  human  mind.” 


Chapter  6:  BEAUTY 


117 


On  the  other  hand,  Darwin  attributes  to 
man  alone  an  aesthetic  faculty  for  the  appre¬ 
ciation  of  beauty  apart  from  love  or  sex.  No 
other  animal,  he  thinks,  is  “capable  of  admiring 
such  scenes  as  the  heavens  at  night,  a  beautiful 
landscape,  or  refined  music;  but  such  high 
tastes  are  acquired  through  culture  and  depend 
on  complex  associations;  they  are  not  enjoyed 
by  barbarians  or  by  uneducated  persons.”  For 
Freud,  however,  the  appreciation  of  such  beau¬ 
ties  remains  ultimately  sexual  in  motivation, 
no  matter  how  sublimated  in  effect.  “The  love 
of  beauty,”  he  says,  “is  the  perfect  example  of 
a  feeling  with  an  inhibited  aim.  ‘Beauty’  and 
‘attraction’  are  first  of  all  the  attributes  of  a 
sexual  object.” 

The  theme  of  beauty’s  relation  to  desire  and 
love  is  connected  with  another  basic  theme — 
the  relation  of  beauty  to  sense  and  intellect, 
or  to  the  realms  of  perception  and  thought. 
The  two  discussions  naturally  run  parallel. 

The  main  question  here  concerns  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  beauty  in  the  order  of  purely  intelli¬ 
gible  objects,  and  its  relation  to  the  sensible 
beauty  of  material  things.  Plotinus,  holding 
that  beauty  of  every  kind  comes  from  a  “form” 
or  “reason,”  traces  the  “beauty  which  is  in 
bodies,”  as  well  as  that  “which  is  in  the  soul” 
to  its  source  in  the  “eternal  intelligence.”  This 
“intelligible  beauty”  lies  outside  the  range  of 
desire  even  as  it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  sense- 
perception.  Only  the  admiration  or  the  adora¬ 
tion  of  love  is  proper  to  it. 

These  distinctions  in  types  of  beauty — nat¬ 
ural  and  artificial,  sensible  and  intelligible, 
even,  perhaps,  material  and  spiritual — indicate 
the  scope  of  the  discussion,  though  not  ail 
writers  on  beauty  deal  with  all  its  manifes¬ 
tations. 

Primarily  concerned  with  other  subjects, 
many  of  the  great  books  make  only  an  indirect 
contribution  to  the  theory  of  beauty :  the  moral 
treatises  which  consider  the  spiritual  beauty  of 
a  noble  man  or  of  a  virtuous  character;  the 
cosmologies  of  the  philosophers  or  scientists 
which  find  beauty  in  the  structure  of  the  world 
— the  intelligible,  not  sensible,  order  of  the 
universe;  the  mathematical  works  which  ex¬ 
hibit,  and  sometimes  enunciate,  an  awareness 
of  formal  beauty  in  the  necessary  connection 


of  ideas;  the  great  poems  which  crystallize 
beauty  in  a  scene,  in  a  face,  in  a  deed;  and, 
above  all,  the  writings  of  the  theologians  which 
do  not  try  to  do  more  than  suggest  the  ineffable 
splendor  of  God’s  infinite  beauty,  a  beauty 
fused  with  truth  and  goodness,  all  absolute  in 
the  one  absolute  perfection  of  the  divine  be¬ 
ing.  “The  Divine  Goodness,”  observes  Dante, 
“which  from  Itself  spurns  all  envy,  burning  in 
Itself  so  sparkles  that  It  displays  the  eternal 
beauties.” 

Some  of  the  great  books  consider  the  various 
kinds  of  beauty,  not  so  much  with  a  view  to 
classifying  their  variety,  as  in  order  to  set  forth 
the  concordance  of  the  grades  of  beauty  with 
the  grades  of  being,  and  with  the  levels  of  love 
and  knowledge. 

The  ladder  of  love  in  Plato’s  Symposium  de¬ 
scribes  an  ascent  from  lower  to  higher  forms  of 
beauty.  “He  who  has  been  instructed  thus  far 
in  the  things  of  love,”  Diotima  tells  Socrates, 
“and  who  has  learned  to  see  beauty  in  due  or¬ 
der  and  succession,  when  he  comes  toward  the 
end  will  suddenly  perceive  a  nature  of  won¬ 
drous  beauty  .  .  .  beauty  absolute,  separate, 
simple,  and  everlasting,  which  without  diminu¬ 
tion  and  without  increase,  or  any  change,  is 
imparted  to  the  ever-growing  and  perishing 
beauties  of  all  other  things.  He  who  from  these, 
ascending  under  the  influence  of  true  love,  be¬ 
gins  to  perceive  that  beauty,  is  not  far  from 
the  end.” 

The  order  of  ascent,  according  to  Diotima, 
begins  “with  the  beauties  of  earth  and  mounts 
upwards  for  the  sake  of  that  other  beauty,”  go¬ 
ing  from  one  fair  form  to  “all  fair  forms,  and 
from  fair  forms  to  fair  practises,  and  from  fair 
practises  to  fair  notions,  until  from  fair  notions” 
we  come  to  “the  notion  of  absolute  beauty  and 
at  last  know  what  the  essence  of  beauty  is.  This, 
my  dear  Socrates,”  she  concludes,  “is  the  life 
above  all  others  which  man  should  live,  in  the 
contemplation  of  beauty  absolute.” 

For  Plotinus  the  degrees  of  beauty  corre¬ 
spond  to  degrees  of  emancipation  from  matter. 
“The  more  it  goes  towards  matter  .  .  .  the 
feebler  beauty  becomes.”  A  thing  is  ugly  only 
because,  “not  dominated  by  a  form  and  reason, 
the  matter  has  not  been  completely  informed 
by  the  idea.”  If  a  thing  could  be  completely 
“without  reason  and  form,”  it  would  be  “abso- 


118 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


lute  ugliness.”  But  whatever  exists  possesses 
form  and  reason  to  some  extent  and  has  some 
share  of  the  effulgent  beauty  of  the  One,  even 
as  it  has  some  share  through  emanation  in  its 
overflowing  being — the  grades  of  beauty,  as  of 
being,  signifying  the  remotion  of  each  thing 
from  its  ultimate  source. 

Even  separated  from  a  continuous  scale  of 
beauty,  the  extreme  terms — the  beauty  of  God 
and  the  beauty  of  the  least  of  finite  things — 
have  similitude  for  a  theologian  like  Aquinas. 
The  word  visum  in  his  definition  of  the  beauti¬ 
ful  (id  quod  visum  placet,  “that  which  pleases 
upon  being  seen”)  is  the  word  used  to  signify 


the  type  of  supernatural  knowledge  promised 
to  the  souls  of  the  blessed — the  beatific  vision  in 
which  God  is  beheld  intuitively,  not  known 
discursively,  and  in  which  knowledge  united 
with  love  is  the  principle  of  the  soul’s  union 
with  God. 

An  analogy  is  obviously  implied.  In  this  life 
and  on  the  natural  level,  every  experience  of 
beauty — in  nature  or  art,  in  sensible  things  or 
in  ideas — occasions  something  li\e  an  act  of 
vision,  a  moment  of  contemplation,  of  enjoy¬ 
ment  detached  from  desire  or  action,  and  clear 
without  the  articulations  of  analysis  or  the 
demonstrations  of  reason. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 


1.  The  general  theory  of  the  beautiful  119 

1  a.  The  beautiful  and  the  good:  beauty  as  a  kind  of  fitness  or  order 

ib.  Beauty  and  truth:  the  beautiful  as  an  object  of  contemplation  120 

1  c.  The  elements  of  beauty:  unity,  proportion,  clarity 

id.  The  distinction  between  the  beautiful  and  the  sublime  121 

2.  Beauty  in  nature  and  in  art 

3.  Beauty  in  relation  to  desire  and  love,  as  object  or  cause 

4.  Beauty  and  ugliness  in  relation  to  pleasure  and  pain  122 


5.  Judgments  of  beauty:  the  objective  and  the  subjective  in  aesthetic  judgments  or 

judgments  of  taste 

6.  The  role  of  the  beautiful  in  education 

7.  Intelligible  beauty  123 

7 a.  The  beauty  of  God 
7 b.  The  beauty  of  the  universe 
7 c.  Beauty  in  the  order  of  ideas 
7 d.  Beauty  in  the  moral  order 


124 


Chapter  6:  BEAUTY 


119 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  c.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (JD),  follows;  e.g .,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  general  theory  of  the  beautiful 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus ,  81a-b  /  Cratylus ,  101c- 
102a;  113c-d  /  Phaedrus ,  126b-d  /  Symposium , 
167a-d  /  Phaedo ,  242c-243a  /  Gorgias ,  266d- 
267a  /  Republic ,  bk  v,  370d-373c;  bk  vi, 
385c  /  Parmenides ,  490 b-c  /  Laws ,  bk  ii, 
654a-662a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  vt  ch  i  [1013s 
20-24]  533b;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72a23~b4] 
602b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Poetics ,  ch  7  [i450b23-i45iai5] 
685b-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  hi,  sect  2  259d- 
260a;  bk  iv,  sect  20  265a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  2  lOd;  tr 
vi  21a-26a  /  Second  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  17  76b- 
77a  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  12,  234a-c; 
tr  viir,  ch  i-tr  ix,  ch  2  239b-247b  /  Sixth 
Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  18,  278a;  tr  iii,  ch  ii, 
287b-c;  tr  vii,  ch  22  332d-333b;  ch  31-33 
336d-338b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  12  llc-d; 
bk  iv,  par  20  24b-c;  par  24-27  25b-26a; 
bk  x,  par  53  84d-85a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  4,  rep  i  25d-26c;  q  91,  a  3,  rep  3  486b-487d; 
part  1-11,  q  27,  a  1,  rep  3  737b-d 


20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2,  rep  1  2b-4a;  part  ii-ii,  q  180,  a  2,  rep  3 
608c-609c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix,  371b-372d 
33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  32-33  176a-b 
42  Kant  : Judgement ,  461a-549d  esp  479c-d,  483d, 
491c,  493b-495a,c;  550a;  560b-c;  564d-565b 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  194b 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  95a-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iii,  54a-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  865a-b;  886b-888a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  775a- 
c;  779b-d 

la.  The  beautiful  and  the  good:  beauty  as  a 
kind  of  fitness  or  order 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  21b-c  /  Symposium,  162d-163a; 
164c-d  /  Gorgias,  266d-267a  /  Republic,  bk 
iii,  333b-334b;  bk  v,  357d-358a  /  Timaeus, 
474d-475a  /  Statesman,  594a-c  /  Philebus, 
637d-638a  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  654a-655b;  660a- 
662a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  iii,  ch  3  [nSb20-24] 
165d  /  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246aio-bi9]  329c- 
330a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [984b8-22] 
502d;  bk  v,  ch  1  [1013*20-24]  533b;  bk  xii, 
ch  7  [io72a23-b4]  602b-c;  [io72b30-io73a2] 
603a;  bk  xiii,  ch  3  [i078a3 1— b6]  609d-610a 


120 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  The  general  theory  of  the  beautiful,  la.  The 
beautiful  and  the  good:  beauty  as  a  kind  of 
fitness  or  order.) 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[645a4~26]  168d-169a  /  Ethics ,  bk  iv,  ch  2 
[ii22a34-ii23a33l  369a-370b  passim  /  Politics, 
bk  vii,  ch  4  [1326^0-35]  530c  /  Poetics ,  ch  7 
[i45ob23-i45iai5]  685b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  175a- 
177c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  47a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  868b 

17  Plotinus:  F/rtf  Ennead ,  tr  vi  21a-26a  /  Fifth 

Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  12,  234a-c;  tr  viii  239b-246c 
/  Ennead ,  tr  vii,  ch  22  332d-333b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  12  llc-d; 
bk  iv,  par  20  24b-c;  par  24-27  25b-26a;  bk 
vii,  par  23  50b-c  /  G'/y  o/* GoJ,  bk  xxii,  ch  24, 
610c-611b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  4,  rep  1  25d-26c;  q  91,  a  3  486b-487d;  q  96, 
a  3,  rep  3  512a-c;  part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  i,  rep  3 
737b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
49,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  2b-4a;  a  4,  ans 
5a-6a;  q  50,  a  3,  rep  2  8b-9a;  q  54,  a  i,  ans 
22d-23d;  part  ii-ii,  q  180,  a  2,  rep  3  608c- 
609c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  62a 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  476a-482b;  486d-489a; 
521b-523c;  540d-542a;  544c-545b;  546d-548c; 
550a:  557c-558b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  266a- 
268b;  280b-281b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
153b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  755a;  865b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  779b-d 

lb.  Beauty  and  truth:  the  beautiful  as  an  object 
of  contemplation 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-d  /  Phaedrus,  124c-129d 
/  Symposium,  167a-d  /  Republic,  bk  v,  370d- 
373c;  bk  vi,  383d-388a  /  Theaetetus,  525c-d  / 
Philebus,  630d-631d  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  660a-661b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1072^3- 
b4]  602b-c;  bk  xiii,  ch  3  [i078a32-b6]  609d- 
610a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iv,  sect  20 
265a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2  lOa-d; 
tr  vi  21a-26a  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  viii  239b- 
246c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  31-33  336d- 
338b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  23 
50b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  4,  rep  1  25d-26c;  q  39,  a  8,  ans  210a-213a; 
part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  1,  rep  3  737b-d;  a  2,  ans 
737d-738c 


1  b  to  1  c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
180,  a  2,  rep  3  608c-609c;  part  iii  suppl, 
q  94,  a  I,  REP  2  1040d-1041b 
27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets,  xiv  588b;  liv  594c 
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  1,  184b-d 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  5, 
452d-453a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  476a-479d  esp  479a-d; 
484d-485b;  496d;  501d-502a;  518a-d;  521b- 
523c; 525a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  266a- 
267a;  278a-c;  part  iv,  346d-347a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
153b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  865b-866a;  8S6b-888a 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  880b 

1c.  The  elements  of  beauty:  unity,  proportion, 
clarity 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii,  333b-334b;  bi<  iv, 
342b-c  /  Timaeus,  448a-c;  474d-475a  f  Sophist, 
561  b-d  /  Statesman,  594a-c  /  Philebus,  630d- 
631d;  637c-638a  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  660a-661b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246aio-bi9] 
329c-330a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [984b8-22] 
502d;  bk  xiii,  ch  3  [1078^ 9— b5]  610a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[645a4~26]  168d-169a  /  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  6 
[no6b6-i4]  352a;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [1122^4- 
1123^3]  369a-370b  passim;  ch  3  [ii23b4~7] 
370b  /  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  ii  [i28ibio-i5] 
479b-c;  ch  13  [i284b3~i2]  482c-d;  bk  v,  ch  9 
[i309b23-3o]  512a;  bk  vii,  ck  4  [1326^0-35] 
530c  /  Poetics,  ch  7  [i45ob23~i  43^15]  685  b-c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  814a;  820a; 
826d-827a;  bk  ii,  839d-840b 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1079b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  1-2  21a- 
22b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  22,  333b;  tr 
ix,  ch  1  353d-354b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  20  24b-c 
/  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  21, 161b-c;  bk  xi,  ch 
22,  334b;  bk  xvii,  ch  14,  464d;  bk  xxii,  ch 
19,  604d-605a;  ch  24,  610c-611b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  4,  rep  1  25d-26c;  q  39,  a  8,  ans  210a-213a; 
q  91,  a  3  486b-487d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2,  rep  1  2b-4a;  q  54,  a  i,  ans  22d-23d; 
part  ii-ii,  q  180,  a  2,  rep  3  608c-609c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  184b 
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  44c-d 
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  28  176a 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xii, 
sect  5,  148b 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  471b-473a;  485c-491c; 
493c-495a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  185c-d; 
part  1,  219b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  277a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  301d-302a 
53  James:  Psychology,  186b;  755a 


Id  to  3 


Chapter  6:  BEAUTY 


id.  The  distinction  between  the  beautiful  and 
the  sublime 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  473a;  480a-482b;  488a- 
489a;  495a-539d  esp  495a-496d,  499b-c, 
501d-502a,  502d  512a 

2.  Beauty  in  nature  and  in  art 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  167a-d  /  Republic ,  bk  ii- 
iii,  320c-334b  /  Tinmens ,  447a-448c  /  So/?/tL7, 
561  b-d  /  Statesman ,  594a-c  /  Philebus ,  630d- 
631  d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246*io-bi9] 
329c-330a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  xiii,  ch  3 
[io7Sa3 1— b6]  609d-610a 

9  Aristotle:  Ptfr/r  0/  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[645a4~ 26]  168d-169a  /  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  ii 
[i28ibio-i5]  479b-c;  bk  viii,ch  5  [1340*24-29] 
545 d  /  Poetics ,  ch  7  685 b-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  2  259d- 
260a;  bk  iv,  sect  20  265a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  1-3  239b- 

241a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  39, 
a  8,  ans  210a-213a;  q  91,  a  3  486b-487d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2,  rep  1  2b-4a;  q  50,  a  3,  rep  2  8b-9a;  q  54, 
a  1,  ans  22d-23d 

22  Chaucer:  Physician's  1 'ale  [11,941-972]  366b- 
367a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  93b-d;  230b-231c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [291-297]  181b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  29  176a;  32  176a-b;  134  196a 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  473a- d;  488a-489a;  494c- 

496c;  501d-502a;521b-524bcsp523c-d;  525a- 
528c;  544c-546d  esp  546a-c;  557a-558b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  219b-c; 
254b-d;  part  ii,  264a-268b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  prelude  [134-157]  4a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  276b-277b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  94c-95c;  235c-d  / 
Descent  of  Man,  576b-577d 

53  James:  Psychology,  186b 

3.  Beauty  in  relation  to  desire  and  love,  as 

object  or  cause 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3:6;  6:1-2;  12:11-20; 
26:7-11;  29:15-31;  39:6-20  /  Deuteronomy, 
21:10-13  /  1  Samuel,  16:7 — ( D )  I  Kings,  16:7  / 
II  Samuel,  11;  13:1-19 — (D)  II  Kings ,  11; 
13:1-19  /  Esther,  2:15-17  /  Proverbs,  6:24-26  / 
Song  of  Solomon — (D)  Canticle  of  Canticles  / 
Isaiah,  53:2— (D)  Isaias,  53:2 

Apocrypha:  Judith ,  11:20-23;  12:16-20;  16:7-9 — 
(D)  OT,  Judith,  11:18-21;  12:16-20;  16:8-11  / 
Ecclesiasticus,  9:8;  25:21;  36:22 — ( D )  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  9:8-9;  25:28;  36:24  /  Susanna — 
(D)  OT,  Daniel,  13 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  iii  [121-160]  20b-c;  bk  xiv 
[153-351]  99d-101d 

5  Euripides:  Helen  [1-67]  298a-d;  [229-305] 
300b-d 


121 

5  Aristophanes:  Ecclcsiazusae  [61 1  634]  622a- 
b;  [877-1111]  625b  628a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2d  3d;  bk  v, 
168d-169a;  bk  vi,  196d  197b 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  lb-2a  /  Phaedrus ,  120a  c; 
126b^ 1 29  d/  Symposium,  159d-160c;  161bl67d 
/  Republic ,  bk  iii,  333b-334b/  Timaeus, 455a-c 
/  Laws,  bk  v,  687b;  bk  viii,  735c-736c;  738a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  7 
[io72a23-b4]  602 b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1141- 
1170]  59a  b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  22,  169b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [657-722]  121a-123a;  bk 
iv  [1-30]  167a-b;  bk  viii  [369-393]  269a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ejuiead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2  lOa-d; 
tr  vi  21a-26a  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  v,  cii  i  100c- 
101c  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  12  234a-d;  tr 
viii,  ch  9,  244b-c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  22 
332d-333b;  ch  30-34  336b-338d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  15  23a- b; 
par  20  24b-c;  par  24-27  25b-26a;  bk  vii,  par  23 
50b-c;  bk  x,  par  8-38  73b-81a;  par  51-53 
84b-85a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  6,  346a-b; 
bk  xxn,  ch  24,  610c-611b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5,  a  4, 
rep  1  25d-26c;  part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  i,  rep  3 
737b-d;  a  2,  ans  737d-738c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
180,  a  2,  rep  3  608c-609c;  part  iii,  q  6,  a  i, 
rep  3  740b-741b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  v  [73-142]  7d- 
8b;  purgatory,  xxvii  94c-96a;  xxx-xxxi 
99b-102b;  paradise,  xxvii  [88—96]  148b; 
xxx  [1-33]  151d-152a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 
48-50  27b-28a  /  Physician's  Tale  366a-371a  esp 
[12,055-191]  368a-370b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  84b-85a;  230b-231c; 
310d-312a;  398c-399d;  432d-434c;  513a-514a 

26  Shakespeare:  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  act  iv, 
sc  iii  [299-332]  271c-d  /  Romeo  and  Juliet, 
act  1,  sc  1  [214-244]  287d-288a;  sc  v  [43-55] 
292b;  act  11,  sc  11  [1—32]  294b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii, 
sc  11  [61-92]  114b-c  /  Antony  and  Cleopatra, 
act  11,  sc  11  [196-250]  320d-321b  /  Sonnets,  xx 
589b; xxiv  589d-590a;  liv  594c;  cxxx  606a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  381d-382a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix,  371d 

32  Milton:  Comus  [667-823]  48a-52a  /  Paradise 
Lost,  bk  viii  [500-560]  243a-244a  /  Samson 
Agonistes  [1003-1007]  361b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  15b-c;  17b-c;  50d-51a; 
130b-c;  331b-332a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345d-346a;  347b-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  476a-483d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  485a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  220b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [6377-6565]  156a- 
160a  esp  [6483-6500]  158b;  [8516-8523]  207b; 
[9192-9355]  223b-227a 


122 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  Beauty  in  relation  to  desire  arid  love,  as  object 
or  cause.) 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  95c  /  Descent  of 
Many  301c;  366b-c;  481c-482b;  571b-576b 
passim 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  4a;  5d-6b; 
49a-b;  bk  ii,  80d-81a;  bk  hi,  113a-115a; 
120c-123a;  141b-d;  bk  vi,  235a-238a;  bk  viii, 
316d-317d;  bk  xi,  497d-498b;  530c-d;  bk 
xii,  541b-542b;  epilogue  i,  659a;  660b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  iii, 
53d-54b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  865b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  775b-c 

4.  Beauty  and  ugliness  in  relation  to  pleasure 

and  pain 

7  Plato:  Gorgias ,  266d-267a  /  Philebus ,  630d- 
631d  /  Laws ,  bk  ii,  654a-656c;  bk  vii,  720c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  7  [146*21-32] 
200a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[645^-26]  168d-169a  /  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  10 
[iii 8ai— 1 6]  364c  /  Politics ,  bk  viii,  ch  3 
[i337b27~i338a29]  543a-c;  ch  5  [1340*24-29] 
545d  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [1362^5—9]  603b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  2  259d- 
260a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  1-7  21a-25a 
passim  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  12,  234a-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  51-53 
84b-85a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  4,  rep  1  25d-26c;  q  91,  a  3,  rep  3  486b- 
487d;  part  i-ii,  q  ii,  a  i,  rep  2  666b,d-667a; 
q  27,  a  1,  rep  3  737b-d;  q  32,  a  8,  ans  764c- 
765b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  62a-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  184b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix,  371d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  32  176a-b 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  471d-473a;  476a-495a,c  esp 
488a-489a;  502d-503d;  5l6d-518d;  527b-528c 
esp  527d-528a;  537a-539d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  220b-c; 
part  11,  267b-268b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [8697-8811]  211b- 
214a;  [11,288-303]  274b-275a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  95a-d  /  Descent  of 
Man,  301d-302a;  568d-571b  passim;  577b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  190d-192b 

53  James:  Psychology,  157a;  755a-757b  esp 
755a-b;  886b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  643c  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  775  b 

5.  Judgments  of  beauty:  the  objective  and  the 

subjective  in  aesthetic  judgments  or 
judgments  of  taste 

7  Plato:  Ion  142a-148a,c  /  Symposium,  167a-d 
/  Gorgias,  261a-c  / Republic ,  bk  iii,  333b-334b 


4  to  6 

/  Statesman,  593d-595a  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  654a- 
656b;  660a-662a;  bk  iii,  675c-676b;  bk  vii, 
720c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bkiii,  ch  ii  [i28ia43-bi5] 
479b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [1141- 
1 170] 59a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  175a-177c 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  2  259d- 
260a;  bk  iv,  sect  20  265a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  2-3  21d- 
23a  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  ii,  287b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  20  24b-c; 
bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch 
6,  269b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  4,  rep  1  25d-26c;  part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  i,  rep  3 
737b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q 
180,  a  2,  rep  3  608c-609c;  part  iii  suppl,  q 
94,  a  1,  rep  2  1040d-1041b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xi  [79— 
120]  69c-70a;  xxvi  [91-126]  93d-94b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv, 
273d-274a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  230b-231c 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  v,  sc 
1  [98-110]  431d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix,  371b-372d 
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  32-33  176a-b;  105  193a;  114 
194b; 381  238b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xii, 
sect  5 148a-b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div 
132, 509c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  23d  [fn  1]  /  Judgement, 
471b-473a;  476a-495a,c;  513b-516b;  5l6d- 
517c;  524d-525a;  540a-546d 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  202b;  362b-c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  185c-d; 

part  11,  264b-268c;  280b-c 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  95a-d  /  Descent  of 
Man,  301c-302a;  462d-463a;  569c;  571c-577d 
esp  575d,  577b-c;  595c-596a 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  191b-192b; 
bk  viii,  318a-320b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  755b-757b;  886b-888a 

6.  The  role  of  the  beautiful  in  education 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  167a-d  /  Gorgias,  261a-c 
/  Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-334b  esp  bk  iii, 
333b-334b;  bk  viii,  409d  /  Laws,  bk  ii  653a- 
663d;  bk  iii,  675c-676b;  bk  vii,  720c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  viii,  ch  3  542d-543d; 
ch  5-7  544c-548a,c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  242a-d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2  lOa-d; 
tr  vi  2 la-2 6a  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  2 
246d-247b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c 
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  381  238b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24a 


Chapter  6:  BEAUTY 


7  to  1c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  300a- b 

42  Kant:  judgement,  462 b-d;  485b-491c;  493a-b; 
513d-514b;  521b  523c;  528b-c;  548c-549d; 
586d-587a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  185c-d; 
part  ii,  267a-268b;  part  iv,  346d-347a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  302a-b;  595c- 
596a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  288a;  757a-b 

7.  Intelligible  beauty 

la.  The  beauty  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Psalms ,  27:4;  90:17;  93 ;  97:6— 
(D)  Psalms ,  26:4;  89:17;  92;  96:6  /  Isaiah , 
28:5;  33;i5-r7 — 28:5;  33:15-17  / 
Zechariah ,  9:17— (D)  Zacharias ,  9:17 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  13:1-5 — (Z)) 
OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  13:1-5 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  167a-d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  7  602a- 
603b;  bk  xiv,  ch  4  [109^29-1092^]  624a-d 

17  Plotinus  :  Fir#  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  6-9  24a-26a 

/  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  i-tr  ix,  ch  2 

239b-247b  /  S/Y/Z  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  30-36 
336b-339d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  4  2a;  bk 
ii,  par  12  llc-d;  bk  iii,  par  10,  15b;  bk  iv, 
par  29  26b;  bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c;  bk  x,  par 
8—38  73b-81a;  par  53  84d-85a;  bk  xi,  par  6 
90c-d/  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  6,  269b-c;  bk 
xi,  ch  4,  324b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  39, 
a  8,  ans  210a-213a;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  aa  4-5 
625a-627a;  a  8  628d-629c;  q  4,  a  1  esp  rep  2 
629d-630b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  vii  [64-66] 
115d;  xxx-xxxiii  151d-157d 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  in,  88d-89a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  hi  [372-389]  143b- 
144a 

lb.  The  beauty  of  the  universe 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  8;  19:1-6;  104;  136:1-9 
—  (D)  Psalms,  8;  18:1-7;  103;  135:1-9 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  13:1-9 — (D) 
OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  13:1-9  /  Ecclesiasticus, 
16:26-27;  43 — (&)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  16:26- 
27>  43 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  447a-448c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [984^-22] 
502d;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1072^0-1073^]  603a; 
ch  10  [i075ai2-24]  605d-606a;  bk  xiv,  ch  4 
[i09ia29~i092a9]  624a-d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[645V26]  168d-169a 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  ii,  839d-840b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  hi,  sect  2  259d- 
260a;  bk  vi,  sect  36-38  277c-d 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  1,  5a 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  526a-529a 


123 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  853b  887a  passim, 
csp  863b  872b  /  Harmonies  of  the  World, 
1023b  1085b  esp  1049b-1050a,  1071b,  1077b- 
1080b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  cii  17  76b- 
77a  /  Third  Entiead ,  tr  ii,  cii  3  83d-84c;  cii 
10-14  88a-89d  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  8-9 
243c-244c;  ch  12-13  245c-246c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  16-23 
48c-50c;  bk  x,  par  8-10  73b-74a  /  City  of  God, 
bk  v,  ch  11  216c-d;  bk  viii,  ch  6  268d-269c; 
bk  x,  ch  14  307c-308a;  bk  xi,  cii  4,  324a-b; 
ch  18  331d-332a;  ch  22-23  333d-335c;  bk  xii, 
cii  4-5  344b-345b;  bk  xxii,  ch  24  609a-612a 
/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  cii  4  625b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  9,  rep  2  116d-117d;  q  23,  a  8,  rep  2  140a- 
141a;  q  66,  a  1  343d-345c;  q  74,  a  3,  rep  3 
375a-377a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  91  1016a-1025b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  x  [1-36] 
120b-c;  xxviii  148d-150b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  v,  104b-105d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  491d-492a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  36-appendix 
369b-372d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  vii  [548-568] 
229a-b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
369b-370a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  109 
434b;  sect  146  442a-b;  sect  151-154  443b- 
444b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  186c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  187c-188c  /  Judgement, 
544c-546d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
153b-d 

lc.  Beauty  in  the  order  of  ideas 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  7:24-29; 
8:1-2— (D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  7:24-29; 
8:1-2 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-d  /  Phaedrus,  126b-d  / 
Symposium,  167a-d  /  Gorgias,  266d  /  Repub¬ 
lic,  bk  iii,  333b-334b;  bk  v,  370d-373c;  bk 
vi,  383d-388a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xiii,  ch  3 
[io78a3i-b6]  609d-610a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2  lOa-d  / 
Fifth  Ennead,  tr  viii  239b-246c;  tr  ix,  ch  2, 
246d;  ch  11  250c-251a  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii, 
ch  22  332d-333b;  ch  30-33,  336d-338b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  12  llc-d  / 
City  of  God ,  bk  xxii,  ch  24,  611a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
180,  a  2,  rep  3  608c-609c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxvii 
94c-96a;  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b;  paradise,  xiv 
[67— r39]  127c-128b;  xxx  [1—33]  151d-152a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  381d-382a 


124 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  7d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  93, 
a  8,  rep  3  499b-500c;  q  96,  a  3,  rep  3  512a-c; 
part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  2,  ans  737d-738c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  1,  contrary  307d-309d;  part  ii-ii, 
q  180,  a  2,  rep  3  608c-609c;  part  hi  suppl, 
q  82,  a  I,  rep  5  968a-970c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xxvii 
94c-96a;  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b;  paradise,  xiv 
[67_I39l  127c-128b;  xxvii  [88—96]  148b;  xxx 
[1-33]  151d-152a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  84b-85a 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  hi,  sc 
11  [73-107]  420d-421a 

27  Shakespeare:  Twelfth  Night ,  act  i,  sc  ii 
[47-51]  2b  /  Hamlet ,  act  hi,  sc  i  [103-116] 
48a  /  Sonnets ,  liv  594c;  lxvi-lxx  596b-597a; 
xciii-xcvi  600b-601a 

29  Cervantes:  £>0/2  Quixote ,  part  ii,  381d- 
382a 

32  Milton:  Comus  [417-475]  42b-44a 
42  Kant:  Judgement ,  488b-489a;  508 b-c;  5 2 lb- 
5230 ;  546d-548c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  266a- 
267a;  276a-d;  278a-c;  280b-c;  part  iv,  346d- 
347a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xii,  543b-544b; 
epilogue  1,  670c 

53  James:  Psychology,  755a;  757a 

CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  discussions  of  the  relation  of  beauty  to  goodness  and  truth,  see  Good  and  Evil  ic; 
Truth  ic;  and  for  the  relation  of  grades  of  beauty  to  degrees  of  perfection  in  being,  see 
Being  3a. 

Unity,  order,  and  proportion  as  elements  of  beauty,  see  Relation  5c. 

The  consideration  of  beauty  as  an  object  of  love  or  desire,  see  Desire  2b;  Love  id. 

The  theory  of  the  aesthetic  judgment  or  the  judgment  of  taste,  see  Sense  6;  and  for  the 
controversy  over  the  objectivity  and  universality  of  such  judgments,  see  Custom  9a; 
Relation  6c;  Universal  and  Particular  7c. 

The  problem  of  cultivating  good  taste  and  critical  judgment  in  the  field  of  the  fine  arts,  see 
Art  7b;  Poetry  8a-8b. 

The  context  of  the  comparison  of  beauty  in  nature  and  in  art,  see  Art  2a~3;  Nature  2a,  5d; 
Pleasure  and  Pain  4c(i). 

Consideration  of  the  kind  of  knowledge  which  is  involved  in  the  apprehension  of  beauty,  see 
Knowledge  6a (2),  6c (1). 

Another  discussion  of  sensible  and  intelligible  beauty,  see  Sense  6;  and  for  the  intelligible 
beauty  of  God  and  of  the  universe,  see  God  4I1;  World  6d. 


(7.  Intelligible  beauty .  7c.  Beauty  in  the  order  q f 
ideas.) 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  33  176b 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  508b-c;  553b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  755a;  757a-758a 

Id.  Beauty  in  the  moral  order 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  lb-2a  /  Symposium ,  154b- 
167b  /  Republic ,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-334b  esp  bk 
hi,  333b-334b;  bk  v,  357d-358a  /  Theaetetus , 
513a-b;  535c  /  Philebus,  637c-638a  /  Laws,  bk 
ii,  654a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  6  351c-352d;  bk 
iv,  ch  2  368d-370b;  ch  3  [1  i23b4~ 7]  370b  / 
Politics ,  bk  hi,  ch  11  [i28ibio-i5]  479b-c;  ch 
13  [i284b3~i2]  482c-d;  bk  v,  ch  9  [i309bi8- 
i3ioa2]  511d-512b;  bk  vii,  ch  4  [i326a3o~35] 
530c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  i  175a- 
177c;  bk  iv,  ch  11,  242a-d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  47a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2  lOa-d; 
tr  vi  21a-26a  passim  /  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix, 
ch  17,  76c  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  2  246d- 
247b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  12  llc-d  / 
City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  21,  161b-c;  bk  xvii,  ch 
14,  464d;  bk  xxii,  ch  19,  605b 


Chapter  6:  BEAUTY 


125 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  arc  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Beauty,”  “Of  Deformity,”  in  Essays* 
Hobbes.  Concerning  Body ,  part  ii,  ch  io 
Berkeley.  Alciphron,  iii 

A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments ,  part 
iv 

Hegel.  The  Philosophy  of  Fine  Art 

C.  R.  Darwin.  The  Different  Forms  of  Flowers  on 
Plants  of  the  Same  Species 

II. 

Longinus.  On  the  Sublime 
Ebreo.  The  Philosophy  of  Love ,  dialogue  iii 
Shaftesbury.  Characteristics  of  Men,  Manners ,  Opin¬ 
ions ,  Times 

Leibnitz.  Monadology ,  par  1-9 
Hutcheson.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Original  of  Our 
Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Virtue 
Burke.  A  Philosophical  Enquiry  into  the  Origin  of 
Our  Ideas  of  the  Sublime  and  Beautiful ,  part  i-iv 
1  Voltaire.  “Beautiful,”  “Taste,”  in  A  Philosophical 
Dictionary 

T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man , 

VIII 

Schiller.  Letters  upon  the  Esthetic  Education  of 
Man 

Jean  Paul.  Vorschule  der  Astheti\ 

D.  Stewart.  Philosophical  Essays ,  part  ii 


Cousin.  Lectures  on  the  True ,  the  Beautiful  and  the 
Good 

Hazlitt.  On  Taste 

Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea ,  vol 
iii,  sup,  ch  33 
Stendhal.  On  Love 

Chalmers.  On  the  Power ,  Wisdom ,  and  Goodness  of 
God 

Kierkegaard.  Either/ Or,  part  ii 
A.  Humboldt.  Cosmos 
Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  viii,  ch  3 
Emerson.  “Love,”  in  Essays,  1 

- .  “Beauty,”  in  The  Conduct  of  Life 

Ruskin.  Sesame  and  Lilies 
Veron.  Aesthetics 
Lipps.  Astheti\ 

Santayana.  The  Sense  of  Beauty,  part  i-iv 

- .  Reason  in  Art,  ch  io 

Poincare.  Science  and  Method,  bk  i,  ch  3 
Croce.  Aesthetic  as  Science  of  Expression 
— — .  The  Essence  of  Esthetics 
Carritt.  The  Theory  of  Beauty 
Bosanquet.  Science  and  Philosophy,  22-24 

- .  Three  Lectures  on  Aesthetic,  1,  iii 

Whitehead.  Process  and  Reality,  part  iii,  ch  2(2), 

3(3 o)>  5(7.8) 

Birkhoff.  Aesthetic  Measure 
Gill.  Beauty  Loo\s  After  Herself 
Mauron.  Aesthetics  and  Psychology 


r 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  words  “is” and  “(is)  not”  are  probably 
the  words  most  frequently  used  by  anyone. 
They  are  unavoidable,  by  implication  at  least, 
in  every  statement.  They  have,  in  addition, 
a  greater  range  of  meaning  than  any  other 
words. 

Their  manifold  significance  seems  to  be  of  a 
very  special  kind,  for  whatever  is  said  not  to  he 
in  one  sense  of  being  can  always  be  said  to  he  in 
another  of  its  senses.  Children  and  practiced 
liars  know  this.  Playing  on  the  meanings  of  be¬ 
ing,  or  with  “is”  and  “not,”  they  move  smooth¬ 
ly  from  fact  to  fiction,  imagination  to  reality, 
or  truth  to  falsehood. 

Despite  the  obviousness  and  commonplace¬ 
ness  of  the  questions  which  arise  with  any  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  meanings  of  “is,”  the  study  of 
being  is  a  highly  technical  inquiry  which  only 
philosophers  have  pursued  at  length.  Berkeley 
gives  one  reason  why  they  cannot  avoid  this 
task.  “Nothing  seems  of  more  importance,”  he 
says,  “towards  erecting  a  firm  system  of  sound 
and  real  knowledge  .  .  .  than  to  lay  the  begin¬ 
ning  in  a  distinct  explication  of  what  is  meant 
by  thing ,  reality,  existence',  for  in  vain  shall  we 
dispute  concerning  the  real  existence  of  things, 
or  pretend  to  any  knowledge  thereof,  so  long 
as  we  have  not  fixed  the  meaning  of  those 
words.” 

In  the  whole  field  of  learning,  philosophy  is 
distinguished  from  other  disciplines — from  his¬ 
tory,  the  sciences,  and  mathematics — by  its 
concern  with  the  problem  of  being.  It  alone 
asks  about  the  nature  of  existence,  the  modes 
and  properties  of  being,  the  difference  between 
being  and  becoming,  appearance  and  reality, 
the  possible  and  the  actual,  being  and  non- 
being.  Not  all  philosophers  ask  these  questions; 
nor  do  all  who  ask  such  questions  approach  or 
formulate  them  in  the  same  way.  Nevertheless, 
the  attempt  to  answer  them  is  a  task  peculiar  to 


philosophy.  Though  it  often  leads  to  subtleties, 
it  also  keeps  the  philosopher  in  deepest  touch 
with  common  sense  and  the  speculative  wonder 
of  all  men. 

As  a  technical  concept  in  philosophy,  being 
has  been  called  both  the  richest  and  the  empti¬ 
est  of  all  terms  in  the  vocabulary  of  thought. 
Both  remarks  testify  to  the  same  fact,  namely, 
that  it  is  the  highest  abstraction,  the  most  uni¬ 
versal  of  predicates,  and  the  most  pervasive 
subject  of  discussion. 

William  James  is  in  that  long  line  of  philoso¬ 
phers  which  began  with  the  early  Greeks  when 
he  points  out  that  “in  the  strict  and  ultimate 
sense  of  the  word  ‘existence,’  everything  which 
can  be  thought  of  at  all  exists  as  some  sort  of 
object,  whether  mythical  object,  individual 
thinker’s  object,  or  object  in  outer  space  and 
for  intelligence  at  large.”  Even  things  which  do 
not  really  exist  have  being  insofar  as  they  are 
objects  of  thought — things  remembered  which 
once  existed,  things  conceivable  which  have 
the  possibility  of  being,  things  imaginary  which 
have  being  at  least  in  the  mind  that  thinks 
them.  This  leads  to  a  paradox  which  the  an¬ 
cients  delighted  in  pondering,  that  even  noth¬ 
ing  is  something,  even  non-being  has  being,  for 
before  we  can  say  “non-being  is  not”  we  must 
be  able  to  say  “non-being  is.”  Nothing  is  at  least 
an  object  of  thought. 

Any  other  word  than  “being”  will  tend  to 
classify  things.  The  application  of  any  other 
name  will  divide  the  world  into  things  of  the 
sort  denominated  as  distinct  from  everything 
else.  “Chair,”  for  example,  divides  the  world 
into  things  which  are  chairs  and  all  other  ob¬ 
jects;  but  “being”  divides  something  or  any¬ 
thing  from  nothing  and,  as  we  have  seen,  even 
applies  to  nothing. 

“All  other  names,”  Aquinas  writes,  “are 


126 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


either  less  universal,  or,  if  convertible  with  it, 
add  something  above  it  at  least  in  idea;  hence 
in  a  certain  way  they  inform  and  determine 
it.”  The  concepts  which  such  words  express 
have,  therefore,  a  restricted  universality.  They 
apply  to  all  things  of  a  certain  kind ,  but  not  to 
all  things,  things  of  every  kind  or  type.  With 
the  exception  of  a  few  terms  inseparably  associ¬ 
ated  with  ‘being’  (or,  as  Aquinas  says,  converti¬ 
ble  with  it),  only  being  is  common  to  all  kinds 
of  things.  When  every  other  trait  peculiar  to  a 
thing  is  removed,  its  being  remains — the  fact 
that  it  is  in  some  sense. 

If  we  start  with  a  particular  of  any  sort,  clas¬ 
sifying  it  progressively  according  to  the  char¬ 
acteristics  which  it  shares  with  more  and  more 
things,  we  come  at  last  to  being.  According  to 
this  method  of  abstraction,  which  Hegel  fol¬ 
lows  in  his  Science  of  Logic,  ‘being’  is  the  empti¬ 
est  of  terms  precisely  because  it  is  the  com¬ 
monest.  It  signifies  the  very  least  that  can  be 
thought  of  anything.  On  this  view,  if  all  we  are 
told  of  something  is  that  it  is — that  it  has  being 
—we  learn  as  little  as  possible  about  the  thing. 
We  have  to  be  told  that  a  thing  is  a  material  or 
a  spiritual  being,  a  real  or  an  imaginary  being,  a 
living  or  a  human  being,  in  order  to  apprehend 
a  determinate  nature.  Abstracted  from  every¬ 
thing  else,  ‘being’  has  only  the  positive  meaning 
of  excluding  ‘non-being.’ 

There  is  an  opposite  procedure  by  which  the 
term  being  has  the  maximal  rather  than  the 
minimal  significance.  Since  whatever  else  a 
thing  is,  it  is  a  being,  its  being  lies  at  the  very 
heart  of  its  nature  and  underlies  all  its  other 
properties.  Being  is  indeterminate  only  in  the 
sense  that  it  takes  on  every  sort  of  determina¬ 
tion.  Wherever  being  is  found  by  thought,  it 
is  understood  as  a  determined  mode  of  being. 
To  conceive  being  in  this  way,  we  do  not  re¬ 
move  every  difference  or  determination,  but  on 
the  contrary,  embrace  all,  since  all  are  differ¬ 
ences  or  determinations  of  being. 

Aquinas,  for  example,  conceives  “being  tak¬ 
en  simply  as  including  all  perfections  of  being”; 
and  in  the  Judaeo-Christian  tradition,  ‘being’ 
without  qualification  is  taken  as  the  most  prop¬ 
er  name  for  God.  When  Moses  asked  God  His 
name,  he  received  as  answer:  “I  AM  THAT  I 
AM  .  .  .  Thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  the  children 
of  Israel,  I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you.”  Used 


127 

in  this  sense,  ‘being’  becomes  the  richest  of 
terms— the  one  which  has  the  greatest  ampli¬ 
tude  of  meaning. 

Both  ways  of  thinking  about  being  are  rele¬ 
vant  to  the  problem  of  the  relations  among  the 
various  meanings  of  ‘being.’  Both  are  also  re¬ 
lated  to  the  problem  of  whether  being  is  one  or 
many — the  problem  first  raised  by  the  Eleatics, 
exhaustively  explored  in  Plato’s  Parmenides, 
and  recurrent  in  the  thought  of  Plotinus,  Spi¬ 
noza,  and  Hegel. 

The  two  problems  are  connected.  If  every¬ 
thing  that  is  exists  only  as  a  part  of  being  as  a 
whole,  or  if  the  unity  of  being  requires  every¬ 
thing  to  be  the  same  in  being,  then  whatever 
diversities  there  are  do  not  multiply  the  mean¬ 
ings  of  being .  Although  he  speaks  of  substance 
rather  than  of  being,  Spinoza  argues  that 
“there  cannot  be  any  substance  excepting  God, 
and  consequently  none  other  can  be  con¬ 
ceived.”  From  this  it  follows  that  “whatever 
is,  is  in  God,  and  nothing  can  be  or  be  con¬ 
ceived  without  God.” 

Since  “there  cannot  be  two  or  more  sub¬ 
stances  of  the  same  nature  or  attribute,”  and 
since  God  is  defined  as  a  “substance  consisting 
of  infinite  attributes,  each  one  of  which  ex¬ 
presses  eternal  and  infinite  essence,”  it  is  ab¬ 
surd,  in  Spinoza’s  opinion,  to  think  of  any 
other  substance.  “If  there  were  any  substance 
besides  God,  it  would  have  to  be  explained,” 
he  says,  “by  some  attribute  of  God,  and  thus 
two  substances  would  exist  possessing  the  same 
attribute,”  which  is  impossible. 

Spinoza’s  definition  of  substance,  attribute, 
and  mode  or  affection,  combined  with  his  axi¬ 
om  that  “everything  which  is,  is  either  in  itself 
or  in  another,”  enables  him  to  embrace  what¬ 
ever  multiplicity  or  diversity  he  finds  in  the 
world  as  aspects  of  one  being.  Everything 
which  is  not  substance,  existing  in  and  of  itself, 
exists  in  that  one  substance  as  an  infinite  attri¬ 
bute  or  a  finite  mode.  “The  thing  extended 
( rem  extensani)  and  the  thinking  thing  ( rem 
cogitantem ),”  he  writes,  “are  either  attributes 
of  God  or  affections  of  the  attributes  of  God.” 

If,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  no  unitary  whole 
of  being,  but  only  a  plurality  of  beings  which 
are  alike  in  being  and  yet  are  diverse  in  being 
from  one  another,  then  our  conception  of  being 


128 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


must  involve  a  system  of  meanings,  a  stem  of 
many  branches.  Descartes,  for  example,  dis¬ 
tinguishes  between  an  infinite  being,  whose 
essence  involves  its  existence,  and  finite  beings, 
which  do  not  necessarily  exist  of  themselves 
but  must  be  caused  to  exist.  The  infinite  being 
which  is  God  causes,  but  does  not  contain  with¬ 
in  itself,  other  finite  substances;  and  among 
finite  things,  Descartes  holds,  “two  substances 
are  said  to  be  really  distinct,  when  each  of  them 
can  exist  apart  from  the  other.” 

In  addition  to  God — “that  substance  which 
we  understand  to  be  supremely  perfect” — Des¬ 
cartes  defines  two  kinds  of  finite  substance. 
“That  substance  in  which  thought  immediately 
resides,  I  call  Mind,”  he  writes;  and  “that  sub¬ 
stance,  which  is  the  immediate  subject  of  ex¬ 
tension  in  space,  and  of  the  accidents  that  pre¬ 
suppose  extension,  e.g .,  figure,  situation,  move¬ 
ment  in  space,  etc.,  is  called  Body.”  All  these 
substances,  and  even  their  accidents,  have  be¬ 
ing,  but  not  being  of  the  same  kind  or  to  the 
same  degree.  “There  are,”  according  to  Des¬ 
cartes,  “diverse  degrees  of  reality,  or  (the  qual¬ 
ity  of  being  an)  entity.  For  substance  has  more 
reality  than  accident  or  mode;  and  infinite  sub¬ 
stance  has  more  than  finite  substance.”  Its  be¬ 
ing  is  independent,  theirs  dependent. 

The  issue  between  Spinoza  and  Descartes — a 
single  substance  or  many — is  only  one  of  the 
ways  in  which  the  problem  of  the  unity  or  db 
versity  of  being  presents  itself.  Both  Plato  and 
Aristotle,  for  example,  affirm  a  multiplicity  of 
separate  existences,  but  though  both  are,  in 
this  sense,  pluralists,  being  seems  to  have  one 
meaning  for  Plato,  many  fob  Aristotle. 

According  to  Plato’s  distinction  between  be¬ 
ing  and  becoming,  only  the  immutable  es¬ 
sences,  the  eternal  ideas,  are  beings,  and  though 
they  are  many  in  number,  they  all  belong  to 
one  realm  and  possess  the  same  type  of  being. 
But  for  Aristotle,  not  only  do  perishable  as  well 
as  imperishable  substances  exist;  not  only  is 
there  sensible  and  mutable  as  well  as  immaterial 
and  eternal  being;  but  the  being  which  sub¬ 
stances  possess  is  not  the  same  as  that  of  acci¬ 
dents;  essential  is  not  the  same  as  accidental 
being;  potential  being  is  not  the  same  as  being 
actual;  and  to  be  is  not  the  same  as  to  be  con¬ 
ceived,  that  is,  to  exist  in  reality  is  not  the 
same  as  to  exist  in  mind. 


Again  and  again  Aristotle  insists  that  “there 
are  many  senses  in  which  a  thing  is  said  to  be 
.  .  .  Some  things  are  said  to  be  because  they  are 
substances,  others  because  they  are  affections 
of  substance,  others  because  they  are  in  process 
towards  substance,  or  destructions  or  priva¬ 
tions  or  qualities  of  substance,  or  productive  or 
generative  of  substance,  or  of  things  which  are 
relative  to  substance,  or  negations  of  one  of 
these  things  or  of  substance  itself.  It  is  for  this 
reason,”  he  continues,  “that  we  say  even  of 
non-being  that  it  is  non-being”;  and,  in  another 
place,  he  adds  that  “besides  all  these  there  is 
that  which  ‘is’  potentially  or  actually.” 

All  these  senses  of  being,  according  to  Aris¬ 
totle,  “refer  to  one  starting  point,”  namely, 
substance,  or  that  which  has  being  in  and  of 
itself.  “That  which  is  primarily,  i.e.,  not  in  a 
qualified  sense,”  he  writes,  “must  be  a  sub¬ 
stance.”  But  when  he  also  says  that  “that 
which  ‘is’  primarily  is  the  ‘what’  which  indi¬ 
cates  the  substance  of  a  thing,”  he  seems  to  be 
using  the  words  “substance”  and  “essence” 
interchangeably.  This,  in  turn,  seems  to  be  re¬ 
lated  to  the  fact  that,  although  Aristotle  dis¬ 
tinguishes  between  actual  and  potential  being, 
and  between  necessary  or  incorruptible  and 
contingent  or  corruptible  beings,  he,  like  Plato 
and  unlike  Aquinas,  Descartes,  or  Spinoza, 
does  not  consider  whether  the  essence  and  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  being  are  identical  or  separate. 

It  may  be  held  that  this  distinction  is  im¬ 
plied,  since  a  contingent  being  is  one  which  is 
able  not  to  exist,  whereas  a  necessary  being 
cannot  not  exist.  A  contingent  being  is,  there¬ 
fore,  one  whose  essence  can  be  divorced  from 
existence;  a  necessary  being,  one  which  must  be 
precisely  because  its  essence  is  identical  with 
its  existence.  But  the  explicit  recognition  of  a 
real  distinction  between  essence  and  existence 
seems  to  be  reserved  for  the  later  theologians 
and  philosophers  who  conceive  of  an  infinite 
being,  as  Aristotle  does  not. 

The  infinity  of  a  being  lies  not  only  in  its 
possession  of  all  perfections,  but  even  more 
fundamentally  in  its  requiring  no  cause  outside 
itself  for  its  own  existence.  “That  thing,”  says 
Aquinas,  “whose  being  differs  from  its  essence, 
must  have  its  being  caused  by  another.  . . .  That 
which  has  being,  but  is  not  being,  is  a  being  by 
participation.”  Where  Aristotle  makes  sub- 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


stance  the  primary  type  of  being,  and  the 
“starting-point”  of  all  its  other  meanings, 
Aquinas  makes  the  infinite  being  of  God, 
whose  very  essence  it  is  to  be,  the  source  of 
all  finite  and  participated  beings,  in  which  there 
is  a  composition  of  existence  and  essence, 
or  “of  that  whereby  they  are  and  that  which 
they  are.” 

Since  “being  itself  is  that  whereby  a  thing 
is,”  being  belongs  to  God  primarily  and  to  all 
other  things  according  to  modes  of  derivation 
or  participation.  God  and  his  creatures  can  be 
called  “beings”  but,  Aquinas  points  out,  not  in 
the  identically  same  sense,  nor  yet  with  utter 
diversity  of  meaning.  A  similarity — a  sameness- 
in-diversity  or  analogy — obtains  between  the 
unqualified  being  of  God  and  the  being  of  all 
other  things,  which  have  being  subject  to  vari¬ 
ous  qualifications  or  limitations. 

All  other  questions  about  being  are  affected 
by  the  solution  of  these  basic  problems  con¬ 
cerning  the  unity  of  being,  the  kinds  of  being, 
and  the  order  of  the  various  kinds.  If  they  are 
solved  in  one  way — in  favor  of  unity —  certain 
questions  are  not  even  raised,  for  they  are  gen¬ 
uine  only  on  the  basis  of  the  other  solution 
which  finds  being  diverse.  The  discussion,  in  the 
chapters  on  Same  and  Other,  and  on  Sign 
and  Symbol,  of  sameness,  diversity,  and  anal¬ 
ogy  is,  therefore,  relevant  to  the  problem  of 
how  things  are  at  once  alike  and  unlike  in  being. 

The  Greeks,  notably  Plato  and  Aristotle, 
began  the  inquiry  about  being.  They  realized 
that  after  all  other  questions  are  answered, 
there  still  remains  the  question,  What  does  it 
mean  to  say  of  anything  that  it  is  or  is  not ?  After 
we  understand  what  it  means  for  a  thing  to  be 
a  man,  or  to  be  alive,  or  to  be  a  body,  we  must 
still  consider  what  it  means  for  that  thing  sim¬ 
ply  to  be  in  any  way  at  all ;  or  to  be  in  one  sense, 
and  not  to  be  in  another. 

The  discussion  of  being,  in  itself  and  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  unity  and  truth,  rest  and  motion,  runs 
through  many  dialogues  of  Plato.  It  is  central 
in  the  Sophist  and  Parmenides.  The  same  terms 
and  problems  appear  in  Aristotle’s  scientific 
treatise  which  makes  being  its  distinctive  sub¬ 
ject  matter,  and  which  he  sometimes  calls  “first 
philosophy”  and  sometimes  “theology.”  It  be¬ 
longs  to  this  science,  he  declares,  “to  consider 


129 

being  qua  being — both  what  it  is  and  the  prop¬ 
erties  which  belong  to  it  qua  being.” 

As  pointed  out  in  the  chapter  on  Meta¬ 
physics,  it  is  an  historical  accident  that  this 
inquiry  concerning  being  came  to  be  called 
“metaphysics.”  That  is  the  name  which,  ac¬ 
cording  to  legend,  the  ancient  editors  gave  to  a 
collection  of  writings  in  which  Aristotle  pur¬ 
sued  this  inquiry.  Since  they  came  after  the 
books  on  physics,  they  were  called  “meta¬ 
physics”  on  the  supposition  that  Aristotle  in¬ 
tended  the  discussion  of  being  to  follow  his 
treatise  on  change  and  motion. 

If  one  were  to  invent  a  word  to  describe  the 
science  of  being,  it  would  be  “ontology,”  not 
“metaphysics”  or  even  “theology.”  Yet  “meta¬ 
physics”  has  remained  the  traditionally  accept¬ 
ed  name  for  the  inquiry  or  science  which  goes 
beyond  physics — or  all  of  natural  science — in 
that  it  asks  about  the  very  existence  of  things, 
and  their  modes  of  being.  The  traditional  con¬ 
nection  of  metaphysics  with  theology,  discussed 
in  the  chapters  on  Theology  and  Meta¬ 
physics,  seems  to  have  its  origin  in  the  fact 
that  Aristotle’s  treatise  on  being  passes  from  a 
consideration  of  sensible  and  mutable  substan¬ 
ces  to  the  problem  of  the  existence  of  imma¬ 
terial  beings,  and  to  the  conception  of  a  divine 
being,  purely  actual,  absolutely  immutable. 

In  a  science  intended  to  treat  “of  that  which 
is  primarily,  and  to  which  all  the  other  cate¬ 
gories  of  being  are  referred,  namely,  substance,” 
Aristotle  says,  “we  must  first  sketch  the  nature 
of  substance.”  Hence  he  begins  with  what  he 
calls  “the  generally  recognized  substances. 
These  are  the  sensible  substances.”  He  post¬ 
pones  until  later  his  critical  discussion  of  “the 
Ideas  and  the  objects  of  mathematics,  for  some 
say  these  are  substances  in  addition  to  the  sen¬ 
sible  substances”;  yet  he  directs  his  whole  in¬ 
quiry  to  the  ultimate  question  “whether  there 
are  or  are  not  any  besides  sensible  substances.” 
His  attempt  to  answer  this  question  in  the 
twelfth  book  makes  it  the  theological  part  of 
his  Metaphysics. 

Though  their  order  of  discussion  is  different, 
the  metaphysicians  of  the  17th  century,  like 
Descartes,  Spinoza,  and  Leibnitz,  deal  with 
many,  if  not  all,  major  points  in  the  analysis 
of  being  which  the  Greek  philosophers  initi- 


130 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ated  and  the  mediaeval  theologians  developed. 
Later  philosophers,  whose  main  concern  is  with 
the  origin  and  validity  of  human  knowledge, 
come  to  the  traditional  metaphysical  questions 
through  an  analysis,  not  of  substance  or  essence, 
existence  or  power,  but  of  our  ideas  of  substance 
and  power. 

This  transformation  of  the  ancient  problem 
of  being  is  stated  by  Berkeley  in  almost  epi¬ 
grammatic  form.  Considering  “what  is  meant 
by  the  term  exist ,”  he  argues  from  the  experi¬ 
ence  of  sensible  things  that  “their  esse  is  per  dpi, 
nor  is  it  possible  they  should  have  any  exist¬ 
ence,  out  of  the  minds  or  thinking  things  which 
perceive  them.”  Locke,  too,  although  he  does 
not  identify  being  with  perception,  makes  the 
same  shift  on  the  ground  that  “the  first  step 
towards  satisfying  several  inquiries  the  mind  of 
man  was  apt  to  run  into,  was  to  make  a  survey 
of  our  own  understandings,  examine  our  own 
powers,  and  see  to  what  things  they  were 
adapted.” 

Once  the  problems  of  being  are  viewed  first 
in  terms  of  the  mind,  the  questions  for  the 
philosopher  become  primarily  those  of  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  our  definitions  to  real  and  nominal  es¬ 
sences,  the  conditions  of  our  knowledge  of  ex¬ 
istence,  and  the  identification  of  the  real  and 
ideal  with  perceptible  matters  of  fact  and  intel¬ 
ligible  relations  between  ideas. 

For  Kant  the  basic  distinction  is  between 
the  sensible  and  supra-sensible,  or  the  phenom¬ 
enal  and  noumenal,  realms  of  being.  From  an¬ 
other  point  of  view,  Kant  considers  the  being 
of  things  in  themselves  apart  from  human  ex¬ 
perience  and  the  being  of  natural  things  or, 
what  is  the  same  for  him,  the  things  of  experi¬ 
ence.  The  former  are  unconditioned,  the  latter 
conditioned,  by  the  knowing  mind  which  is 
formative  or  constitutive  of  experience. 

“The  sole  aim  of  pure  reason,”  Kant  writes, 
“is  the  absolute  totality  of  the  synthesis  on  the 
side  of  the  conditions  ...  in  order  to  preposit 
the  whole  series  of  conditions,  and  thus  present 
them  to  the  understanding  a  priori .”  Having 
obtained  these  “conditions,”  we  can  ascend 
through  them  “until  we  reach  the  uncondi¬ 
tioned,  that  is,  the  principles.”  It  is  with  these 
ideas  of  pure  reason  that  metaphysics,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Kant,  properly  deals.  Instead  of  being,  its 
object  consists  in  “three  grand  ideas:  God, 


Freedom,  and  Immortality,  and  it  aims  at 
showing  that  the  second  conception,  conjoined 
with  the  first,  must  lead  to  the  third  as  a  neces-  I  - 
sary  conclusion.” 

Hegel,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  approach 
the  problem  of  being  or  reality  through  a  cri-  ! 
tique  of  knowledge.  For  Hegel,  as  for  Plotinus  !  . 
before  him,  the  heart  of  metaphysics  lies  in 
understanding  that  “nothing  is  actual  except 
the  Idea”  or  the  Absolute,  “and  the  great  thing 
is  to  apprehend  in  the  show  of  the  temporal 
and  the  transient,  the  substance  which  is  imma¬ 
nent,  and  the  eternal  which  is  present.”  Plo- 
tinus  calls  the  absolute,  not  the  Idea,  but  the 
All-one,  yet  he  tries  to  show  that  the  One  is  the 
principle,  the  light,  and  the  life  of  all  things, 
just  as  Hegel  reduces  everything  to  a  manifes-  j 
tation  of  the  underlying  reality  of  the  Absolute 
Idea. 

Despite  all  such  changes  in  terminology,  de¬ 
spite  radical  differences  in  philosophical  princi¬ 
ple  or  conclusion,  and  regardless  of  the  attitude 
taken  toward  the  possibility  of  metaphysics  as  a 
science,  the  central  question  which  is  faced  by 
anyone  who  goes  beyond  physics,  or  natural 
philosophy,  is  a  question  about  being  or  exist¬ 
ence.  It  may  or  may  not  be  asked  explicitly, 
but  it  is  always  present  by  implication. 

The  question  about  God,  for  example,  or 
free  will  or  immortality,  is  first  of  all  a  question 
about  whether  such  things  exist,  and  how  they 
exist.  Do  they  have  reality  or  are  they  only 
fictions  of  the  mind  ?  Similarly,  questions  about 
the  infinite,  the  absolute,  or  the  unconditioned 
are  questions  about  that  primary  reality  apart 
from  whose  existence  nothing  else  could  be  or 
be  conceived,  and  which  therefore  has  an  exist¬ 
ence  different  from  the  things  dependent  on  it 
for  their  being.  Here  again  the  first  question  is 
whether  such  a  reality  exists. 

Enough  has  been  said  to  indicate  why  this 
discussion  cannot  consider  all  topics  which  have 
some  connection  with  the  theory  of  being.  To 
try  to  make  this  Introduction  adequate  even 
for  the  topics  outlined  here,  under  which  the 
references  to  the  great  books  are  assembled, 
would  be  to  make  it  almost  co-extensive  in  scope 
with  the  sum  of  many  other  Introductions — all, 
in  fact,  which  open  chapters  dealing  with  meta¬ 
physical  concepts  or  problems. 

It  is  to  be  expected,  of  course,  that  the  special 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


problems  of  the  existence  of  God,  of  an  immor¬ 
tal  soul,  and  of  a  free  will  should  be  treated  in 
the  chapters  on  God,  Immortality,  and  Will. 
But  it  may  not  be  realized  that  such  chapters 
as  Cause,  Eternity,  Form,  Infinity,  Idea, 
Matter,  One  and  Many,  Same  and  Other, 
Relation,  Universal  and  Particular — all 
these  and  still  others  cited  in  the  Cross-Refer¬ 
ences  below — include  topics  which  would  have 
to  be  discussed  here  if  we  were  to  try  to  cover 
all  relevant  considerations. 

Reasons  of  economy  and  intelligibility  dic¬ 
tate  the  opposite  course.  Limiting  the  scope  of 
.  this  Introduction  to  a  few  principal  points  in 
the  theory  of  being,  we  can  also  exhibit, 
through  the  relation  of  this  chapter  to  others, 
the  interconnection  of  the  great  ideas.  The  var¬ 
ious  modes  of  being  (such  as  essence  and  exist¬ 
ence,  substance  and  accident,  potentiality  and 
actuality,  the  real  and  the  ideal)  and  the  basic 
correlatives  of  being  (such  as  unity,  goodness, 
truth)  are,  therefore,  left  for  fuller  treatment 
in  other  contexts.  But  two  topics  deserve  fur¬ 
ther  attention  here.  One  is  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  being  and  becoming,  the  other  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  being  to  knowledge. 

The  fact  of  change  or  motion — of  coming  to 
1  be  and  passing  away — is  so  evident  to  the  senses 
that  it  has  never  been  denied,  at  least  not  as  an 
experienced  phenomenon.  But  it  has  been  re¬ 
garded  as  irrational  and  unreal,  an  illusion  per¬ 
petrated  by  the  senses.  Galen,  for  instance, 
charges  the  Sophists  with  “allowing  that  bread 
in  turning  into  blood  becomes  changed  as  re¬ 
gards  sight,  taste,  and  touch,”  but  denying 
that  “this  change  occurs  in  reality.”  They  ex¬ 
plain  it  away,  he  says,  as  “tricks  and  illusions  of 
our  senses  .  .  .  which  are  affected  now  in  one 
way,  now  in  another,  whereas  the  underlying 
substance  does  not  admit  of  any  of  these 
changes.” 

The  familiar  paradoxes  of  Zeno  are  reductio 
ad  absurdum  arguments  to  show  that  motion  is 
unthinkable,  full  of  self-contradiction.  The  way 
of  truth,  according  to  Parmenides,  Zeno’s  mas¬ 
ter  in  the  Eleatic  school,  lies  in  the  insight  that 
whatever  is  always  was  and  will  be,  that  noth¬ 
ing  comes  into  being  out  of  non-being,  or 
passes  out  of  being  into  nothingness. 

The  doctrine  of  Parmenides  provoked  many 


131 

criticisms.  Yet  his  opponents  tried  to  preserve 
the  reality  of  change,  without  having  to  accord 
it  the  fullness  of  being.  The  Greek  atomists,  for 
example,  think  that  change  cannot  be  explained 
except  in  terms  of  permanent  beings— in  fact 
eternal  ones.  Lucretius,  who  expounds  their 
views,  remarks  that  in  any  change  “something 
unchangeable  must  remain  over,  that  all  things 
be  not  utterly  reduced  to  nothing;  for  when¬ 
ever  a  thing  changes  and  quits  its  proper  limits, 
at  once  this  change  of  state  is  the  death  of  that 
which  was  before.”  The  “something  unchange¬ 
able”  is  thought  to  be  the  atom,  the  absolutely 
indivisible,  and  hence  imperishable,  unit  of 
matter.  Change  does  not  touch  the  being  of  the 
atoms,  “but  only  breaks  up  the  union  amongst 
them,  and  then  joins  anew  the  different  ele¬ 
ments  with  others;  and  thus  it  comes  to  pass 
that  all  things  change”— that  is,  all  things  com¬ 
posite,  not  the  simple  bodies  of  solid  singleness 
— “when  the  clashings,  motions,  arrangement, 
position,  and  shapes  of  matter  change  about.” 

In  a  conversation  with  Cratylus,  who  favors 
the  Heraclitean  theory  of  a  universal  flux,  Soc¬ 
rates  asks,  “How  can  that  be  a  real  thing  which 
is  never  in  the  same  state?”  How  “can  we 
reasonably  say,  Cratylus,”  he  goes  on,  “that 
there  is  any  knowledge  at  all,  if  everything  is  in 
a  state  of  transition  and  there  is  nothing 
abiding”  ? 

When  he  getsGlaucon  to  admit  in  the  Repub¬ 
lic  that  “being  is  the  sphere  or  subject  matter  of 
knowledge,  and  knowing  is  to  know  the  nature 
of  being,”  Socrates  leads  him  to  see  the  correla¬ 
tion  of  being,  not-being,  and  becoming  with 
knowledge,  ignorance,  and  opinion.  “If  opinion 
and  knowledge  are  distinct  faculties  then  the 
sphere  of  knowledge  and  opinion  cannot  be  the 
same  ...  If  being  is  the  subject  matter  of 
knowledge,  something  else  must  be  the  subject 
matter  of  opinion.”  It  cannot  be  not-being,  for 
“of  not-being  ignorance  was  assumed  to  be  the 
necessary  correlative.” 

Since  “opinion  is  not  concerned  either  with 
being  or  with  not-being”  because  it  is  obviously 
intermediate  between  knowledge  and  igno¬ 
rance,  Socrates  concludes  that  “if  anything  ap¬ 
peared  to  be  of  a  sort  which  is  and  is  not  at  the 
same  time,  that  sort  of  thing  would  appear  also 
to  lie  in  the  interval  between  pure  being  and 
absolute  not-being,”  and  “the  corresponding 


132 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


faculty  is  neither  knowledge  nor  ignorance,  but 
will  be  found  in  the  interval  between  them.” 
This  “intermediate  flux”  or  sphere  of  becom¬ 
ing,  this  “region  of  the  many  and  the  variable,” 
can  yield  only  opinion.  Being,  the  realm  of  the 
“absolute  and  eternal  and  immutable  [Ideas],” 
is  the  only  object  that  one  “may  be  said  to 
know.” 

Aristotle  would  seem  to  agree  with  Plato 
that  change  “partakes  equally  of  the  nature  of 
being  and  not-being,  and  cannot  rightly  be 
termed  either,  pure  and  simple.”  He  points 
out  that  his  predecessors,  particularly  the  Eleat- 
ics,  held  change  to  be  impossible,  because  they 
believed  that  “what  comes  to  be  must  do  so 
either  from  what  is  or  from  what  is  not,  both  of 
which  are  impossible.”  It  is  impossible,  so  they 
argued,  since  “what  is  cannot  come  to  be  (be¬ 
cause  it  is  already),  and  from  what  is  not  noth¬ 
ing  could  have  come  to  be.”  Aristotle  concedes 
the  cogency  of  this  argument  on  one  condition, 
namely,  that  the  terms  ‘being’  and  ‘not-being’ 
are  taken  “without  qualification.”  But  his 
whole  point  is  that  they  need  not  be  taken  with¬ 
out  qualification  and  should  not  be,  if  we  wish 
to  explain  change  rather  than  make  a  mystery 
of  it. 

The  qualification  Aristotle  introduces  rests 
on  the  distinction  between  two  modes  of  being 
— the  potentiality  and  actuality  correlative 
with  matter  and  form.  This  makes  it  possible 
for  him  to  maintain  that  “a  thing  may  come  to 
be  from  what  is  not ...  in  a  qualified  sense.”  He 
illustrates  his  meaning  by  the  example  of  the 
bronze,  which  from  a  mere  lump  of  metal  comes 
to  be  a  statue  under  the  hands  of  the  artist.  The 
bronze,  he  says,  was  “potentially  a  statue,”  and 
the  change  whereby  it  came  to  be  actually  a 
statue  is  the  process  between  potentiality  and 
actuality.  While  the  change  is  going  on,  the 
bronze  is  neither  completely  potential  nor  fully 
actual  in  respect  of  being  a  statue. 

Like  Plato,  Aristotle  recognizes  that  there  is 
“something  indefinite”  about  change.  “The 
reason,”  he  explains,  “is  that  it  cannot  be 
classed  simply  as  a  potentiality  or  as  an  actuali¬ 
ty— a  thing  that  is  merely  capable  of  having  a 
certain  size  is  not  undergoing  change,  nor  yet 
a  thing  that  is  actually  of  a  certain  size.”  Change 
is  “a  sort  of  actuality,  but  incomplete  .  .  .  hard 
to  grasp,  but  not  incapable  of  existing.” 


If  to  exist  is  to  be  completely  actual,  then  M 
changing  things  and  change  itself  do  not  fully  * 
exist.  They  exist  only  to  the  extent  that  they 
have  actuality.  Yet  potentiality,  no  less  than  ' 
actuality,  is  a  mode  of  being.  That  potentiality 
—power  or  capacity— belongs  to  being  seems 
also  to  be  affirmed  by  the  Elea  tic  Stranger  in 
Plato’s  Sophist.  “Anything  which  possesses  any  k 
sort  of  power  to  affect  another,  or  to  be  affected 
by  another,”  he  says,  “if  only  for  a  single  mo¬ 
ment,  however  trifling  the  cause  and  however  sc: 
slight  the  effect,  has  real  existence  ...  I  hold,”  A 
he  adds,  “that  the  definition  of  being  is  simply 
power.”  \  Fc 

The  basic  issue  concerning  being  and  becom-  » 
ing,  and  the  issue  concerning  eternal  as  opposed  in 
to  mutable  existence,  recur  again  and  again  in  1  k 
the  tradition  of  western  thought.  They  are  in¬ 
volved  in  the  distinction  between  corruptible  sc 
and  incorruptible  substances  (which  is  in  turn  k 
connected  with  the  division  of  substances  into  it 
corporeal  and  spiritual),  and  with  the  nature  of  si 
God  as  the  only  purely  actual,  or  truly  eternal, 
being.  They  are  implicit  in  Spinoza’s  distinc-  : 
tion  between  natura  naturans  and  natura  natu -  t) 
rata ,  and  in  his  distinction  between  God’s 
knowledge  of  things  under  the  aspect  of  eter¬ 
nity  and  man’s  temporal  view  of  the  world  in 
process.  They  are  relevant  to  Hegel’s  Absolute 
Idea  which,  while  remaining  fixed,  progressively 
reveals  itself  in  the  ever-changing  face  of  nature 
and  history.  In  our  own  day  these  issues  engage 
Dewey,  Santayana,  and  Whitehead  in  contro¬ 
versy,  as  yesterday  they  engaged  Bradley, 
William  James,  and  Bergson. 

As  already  noted,  Plato’s  division  of  reality 
into  the  realms  of  being  and  becoming  has  a 
bearing  on  his  analysis  of  knowledge  and  opin¬ 
ion.  The  division  relates  to  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  the  intelligible  and  the  sensible,  and  be¬ 
tween  the  opposed  qualities  of  certainty  and 
probability,  or  necessity  and  contingency,  in 
our  judgments  about  things.  The  distinctions 
between  essence  and  existence  and  between 
substance  and  accident  separate  aspects  or 
modes  of  being  which  function  differently  as 
objects  for  the  knowing  mind. 

Aristotle,  for  example,  holds  that  “there  can 
be  no  scientific  treatment  of  the  accidental .  .  . 
for  the  accidental  is  practically  a  mere  name. 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


133 


And,”  he  adds,  “Plato  was  in  a  sense  not  wrong 
in  ranking  sophistic  as  dealing  with  that  which 
is  not.  For  the  arguments  of  the  sophists  deal, 
we  may  say,  above  all,  with  the  accidental.” 
That  the  accidental  is  “akin  to  non-being,” 
Aristotle  thinks  may  be  seen  in  the  fact  that 
“things  which  are  in  another  sense  come  into 
being  and  pass  out  of  being  by  a  process,  but 
things  which  are  accidentally  do  not.”  But 
though  he  rejects  the  accidental  as  an  object  of 
science,  he  does  not,  like  Plato  or  Plotinus,  ex¬ 
clude  the  whole  realm  of  sensible,  changing 
things  from  the  sphere  of  scientific  knowledge. 
For  him,  both  metaphysics  and  physics  treat  of 
sensible  substances,  the  one  with  regard  to  their 
mutable  being ,  the  other  with  regard  to  their 
being  mutable — their  becoming  or  changing. 

For  Plotinus,  on  the  other  hand,  “the  true 
sciences  have  an  intelligible  object  and  contain 
no  notion  of  anything  sensible.”  They  are  di¬ 
rected,  not  “to  variable  things,  suffering  from 
all  sorts  of  changes,  divided  in  space,  to  which 
the  name  of  becoming  and  not  being  belongs,” 
but  to  the  “eternal  being  which  is  not  divided, 
existing  always  in  the  same  way,  which  is  not 
born  and  does  not  perish,  and  has  neither  space, 
place,  nor  situation  .  .  .  but  rests  immovable  in 
itself.” 

1  According  to  another  view,  represented  by 
Locke,  substance  is  as  such  unknowable,  wheth¬ 
er  it  be  body  or  spirit.  We  use  the  word  “sub¬ 
stance”  to  name  the  “support  of  such  qualities, 
which  are  capable  of  producing  simple  ideas  in 
us;  which  qualities  are  commonly  called  acci¬ 
dents.”  The  sensible  accidents  are  all  that  we 
truly  know  and  “we  give  the  general  name  sub- 

i  stance”  to  “the  supposed,  but  unknown,  sup¬ 
port  of  those  qualities  we  find  existing.”  Some 
of  these  sensible  accidents  are  what  Locke  calls 
“primary  qualities” — the  powers  or  potentiali¬ 
ties  by  which  things  affect  one  another  and  also 
our  senses. 

But  to  the  extent  that  our  senses  fail  to  dis¬ 
cover  “the  bulk,  texture,  and  figure  of  the  mi¬ 
nute  parts  of  bodies,  on  which  their  constitu¬ 
tions  and  differences  depend,  we  are  fain  to 
make  use  of  their  secondary  qualities,  as  the 
characteristical  notes  and  marks  whereby  to 
frame  ideas  of  them  in  our  mind.”  Neverthe¬ 
less,  powers — which  are  qualities  or  accidents, 
not  substances — seem  to  be,  for  Locke,  the 


ultimate  reality  we  can  know.  “The  secondary 
sensible  qualities,”  he  writes,  “are  nothing  but 
the  powers”  which  corporeal  substances  have 
“to  produce  several  ideas  in  us  by  our  sense, 
which  ideas” — unlike  the  primary  qualities — 
“are  not  in  the  things  themselves,  otherwise 
than  as  anything  is  in  its  cause.” 

Hobbes  exemplifies  still  another  view.  “A 
man  can  have  no  thought,”  he  says,  “represent¬ 
ing  anything  not  subject  to  sense.”  Hobbes 
does  not  object  to  calling  bodies  “substances,” 
but  thinks  that  when  we  speak  of  “an  incorpo¬ 
real  body,  or  (which  is  all  one)  an  incorporeal 
substance,”  we  talk  nonsense;  “for  none  of  these 
things  ever  have,  or  can  be  incident  to  sense; 
but  are  absurd  speeches,  taken  upon  credit 
(without  any  signification  at  all)  from  deceived 
Philosophers,  and  deceived,  or  deceiving, 
Schoolmen.” 

He  enumerates  other  absurdities,  such  as  “the 
giving  of  names  of  bodies  to  accidents,  or  of 
accidents  to  bodies,”  e.g .,  by  those  who  say 
that  “extension  is  body. ’’Criticism  of  the  fallacy 
of  reification — the  fallacy  first  pointed  out  by 
Ockham  and  criticized  so  repeatedly  in  con¬ 
temporary  semantics — also  appears  in  Hobbes’ 
warning  against  making  substances  out  of  ab¬ 
stractions  or  universals  “by  giving  the  names  of 
bodies  to  names  or  speeches.” 

Whenever  a  theory  of  knowledge  is  concerned 
with  how  we  know  reality,  as  opposed  to  mere 
appearances,  it  considers  the  manner  in  which 
existing  beings  can  be  known — by  perception, 
intuition,  or  demonstration;  and  with  respect 
to  demonstration,  it  attempts  to  formulate  the 
conditions  of  valid  reasoning  about  matters  of 
fact  or  real  existence.  But  it  has  seldom  been 
supposed  that  reality  exhausts  the  objects  of 
our  thought  or  knowledge.  We  can  conceive 
possibilities  not  realized  in  this  world.  We  can 
imagine  things  which  do  not  exist  in  nature. 

The  meaning  of  reality — of  real  as  opposed 
to  purely  conceptual  or  ideal  being — is  derived 
from  the  notion  of  thinghood,  of  having  being 
outside  the  mind,  not  merely  in  it.  In  tradition¬ 
al  controversies  about  the  existence  of  ideas — 
or  of  universals,  the  objects  of  mathematics,  or 
relations — it  is  not  the  being  of  such  things 
which  is  questioned,  but  their  reality,  their 
existence  outside  the  mind.  If,  for  example, 


134 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ideas  exist  apart  from  minds,  the  minds  of  men 
and  God,  they  have  real,  not  ideal,  existence. 
If  the  objects  of  mathematics,  such  as  numbers 
and  figures,  have  existence  only  as  figments  of 
the  mind,  they  are  ideal  beings. 

The  judgment  of  the  reality  of  a  thing,  James 
thinks,  involves  “a  state  of  consciousness  sui 
generis ”  about  which  not  much  can  be  said 
“in  the  way  of  internal  analysis.”  The  focus  of 
this  problem  in  modern  times  is  indicated  by 
James’  phrasing  of  the  question,  “Under  what 
circumstances  do  we  think  things  real?”  And 
James  gives  a  typically  modern  answer  to  the 
question. 

He  begins  by  saying  that  “any  object  which 
remains  uncontradicted  is  ipso  facto  believed 
and  posited  as  absolute  reality.”  He  admits 
that  “for  most  men  .  .  .  the  ‘things  of  sense’  .  .  . 
are  the  absolutely  real  world’s  nucleus.  Other 
things,”  James  writes,  “may  be  real  for  this 
man  or  that — things  of  science,  abstract  moral 
relations,  things  of  the  Christian  theology,  or 
what  not.  But  even  for  the  special  man, 
these  things  are  usually  real  with  a  less  real 
reality  than  that  of  the  things  of  sense.”  But 
his  basic  conviction  is  that  “our  own  reality, 
that  sense  of  our  own  life  which  we  at  every 
moment  possess,  is  the  ultimate  of  ultimates  for 
our  belief.  ‘As  sure  as  I  exist!’ — this  is  our  utter¬ 
most  warrant  for  the  being  of  all  other  things. 
As  Descartes  made  the  indubitable  reality  of 
the  cogito  go  bail  for  the  reality  of  all  that  the 
cogito  involved,  so  all  of  us,  feeling  our  own 
present  reality  with  absolutely  coercive  force, 
ascribe  an  all  but  equal  degree  of  reality,  first  to 
whatever  things  we  lay  hold  on  with  a  sense  of 


personal  need,  and  second,  to  whatever  farther 
things  continuously  belong  with  these.” 

The  self  or  ego  is  the  ultimate  criterion  of 
being  or  reality.  “The  world  of  living  realities 
as  contrasted  with  unrealities,”  James  writes, 
“is  thus  anchored  in  the  Ego.  .  .  .  That  is  the 
hook  from  which  the  rest  dangles,  the  absolute 
support.  And  as  from  a  painted  hook  it  has 
been  said  that  one  can  only  hang  a  painted 
chain,  so  conversely  from  a  real  hook  only  a 
real  chain  can  properly  be  hung.  Whatever  things 
have  intimate  and  continuous  connection  with  my 
life  are  things  of  whose  reality  I  cannot  doubt . 
Whatever  things  fail  to  establish  this  connection 
are  things  which  are  practically  no  better  for 
me  than  if  they  existed  not  at  all.”  James 
would  be  the  first  to  concede  to  any  critic  of  his 
position,  that  its  truth  and  good  sense  depend 
upon  noting  that  word  “practically,”  for  it  is 
“the  world  of  ‘practical  realities’  ”  with  which 
he  professes  to  be  concerned. 

We  can  in  conclusion  observe  one  obvious 
measure  of  the  importance  of  being  in  philo¬ 
sophical  thought.  The  major  isms  by  which  the 
historians  of  philosophy  have  tried  to  classify 
its  doctrines  represent  affirmations  or  denials 
with  respect  to  being  or  the  modes  of  being. 
They  are  such  antitheses  as  realism  and  ideal¬ 
ism;  materialism  and  spiritualism;  monism,  du¬ 
alism,  and  pluralism;  even  atheism  and  theism. 
Undoubtedly,  no  great  philosopher  can  be  so 
simply  boxed.  Yet  the  opposing  isms  do  indi¬ 
cate  the  great  speculative  issues  which  no  mind 
can  avoid  if  it  pursues  the  truth  or  seeks  the 
ultimate  principles  of  good  and  evil. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  Diverse  conceptions  of  being  and  non-being:  being  as  a  term  or  concept;  the  meanings 

of  is  and  is  not  136 

2.  Being  and  the  one  and  the  many  137 

2 a.  Infinite  being  and  the  plurality  of  finite  beings 
2 b.  The  unity  of  a  being 

3.  Being  and  good  138 

$a.  The  hierarchy  of  being:  grades  of  reality,  degrees  of  intelligibility 
3 A  Being  as  the  object  of  love  and  desire 


139 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


135 


PACF. 

4.  Being  and  truth  139 

40.  Being  as  the  pervasive  object  of  mind,  and  the  formal  object  of  the  first  philoso¬ 
phy,  metaphysics,  or  dialectic  140 

4 b.  Being  as  the  measure  of  truth  in  judgments  of  the  mind:  clarity  and  distinctness 
as  criteria  of  the  reality  of  an  idea 

5.  Being  and  becoming:  the  reality  of  change;  the  nature  of  mutable  being 

6.  The  cause  of  existence  14 1 

7.  The  divisions  or  modes  of  being  142 

ya.  The  distinction  between  essence  and  existence:  existence  as  the  act  of  being 

yb.  The  distinction  between  substance  and  attribute,  accident  or  modification: 

independent  and  dependent  being 

(1)  The  conceptions  of  substance  143 

(2)  Corporeal  and  spiritual  substances,  composite  and  simple  substances:  the 

kinds  of  substance  in  relation  to  matter  and  form 

(3)  Corruptible  and  incorruptible  substances  144 

(4)  Extension  and  thought  as  dependent  substances  or  as  attributes  of  infinite 

substance 

(5)  Substance  as  subject  to  change  and  to  different  kinds  of  change:  the  role  of 

accidents  or  modifications  145 

(6)  The  nature  and  kinds  of  accidents  or  modifications 

7 c.  The  distinction  between  potentiality  and  actuality:  possible  and  actual  being  146 

(1)  The  order  of  potentiality  and  actuality 

(2)  Types  of  potency  and  degrees  of  actuality 

(3)  Potentiality  and  actuality  in  relation  to  matter  and  form  147 

yd.  The  distinction  between  real  and  ideal  being,  or  between  natural  being  and 

being  in  mind 

(1)  The  being  of  the  possible  148 

(2)  The  being  of  ideas,  universal,  rights 

(3)  The  being  of  mathematical  objects  149 

(4)  The  being  of  relations 

(5)  The  being  of  fictions  and  negations  150 

ye.  The  distinction  between  appearance  and  reality,  between  the  sensible  and  supra- 

sensible,  between  the  phenomenal  and  noumenal  orders 

8.  Being  and  knowledge 

8 a.  Being  and  becoming  in  relation  to  sense:  perception  and  imagination 

Sb.  Being  and  becoming  in  relation  to  intellect:  abstraction  and  intuition  15 1 

8c.  Essence  or  substance  as  the  object  of  definition:  real  and  nominal  essences 

Sd.  The  role  of  essence  in  demonstration:  the  use  of  essence,  property,  and  accident 

in  inference  152 

8c.  The  accidental  in  relation  to  science  and  definition 

Sf.  Judgments  and  demonstrations  of  existence:  their  sources  and  validity 


1 36 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 


To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45— (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Diverse  conceptions  of  being  and  non-being: 
being  as  a  term  or  concept;  the  meanings 
of  is  and  is  not 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  v,  370d-373c  /  Timaeus , 
447b-d;  455c-458b  /  Parmenides  486a-511d  / 
Theaetetus ,  517d-518b;  520b;  521d-522a  / 
Sophist ,  561d-563b  esp  562a-563a;  565a-566b; 
567a-569a;  571d-573b  passim 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  3  [1 6^9-26] 
25d-26a;  ch  13  [23ai8-26]35b-c/ Prior  Analyt¬ 
ics,  bk  1,  ch  36  [48a4o-b9]  66d  /  Posterior 
Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [92bi3]  126c  /  Topics,  bk 
iv,  ch  1  [i2iai4~26]  169a-b;  [i2ibi-8]  169c; 
ch  6  [127^6-40]  176d-177a;  bk  vi,  ch  7 
[146^1-32]  200a-b  /  Sophistical  Refutations , 
ch  5  [i66b37~i67a7]  229d;  ch  7  [169^2-24] 
232 d;  ch  25  [180^2-38]  248c  /  Physics,  bk  i, 
ch  2  [i85a20-b4]  260a-b;  ch  3  [i86a23-i87aio] 
261b-262a;  ch  5  [i88ai8-23]  263c;  bk  hi,  ch  6 
[2o6ai3~34]  284b-d;  bk  v,  ch  i  [225^0-29] 
305b-c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  3 
413c-416c  passim  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3-10 
501c-511d  passim;  bk  iii,  ch  3  [998bi4~28] 
517b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [ioo3a33~bio]  522b;  ch  5 
[1009^2-38]  528d;  bk  v,  ch  7  537c-538b;  bk 
vii,  ch  1  550b,d-551a;  ch  4  [i030ai7-bi4] 
552d-553b;  bk  ix,  ch  10  [iQ5ia34-b2]  577c; 


bk  xi,  ch  2  [io6oa36-bio]  588c;  ch  3  [io6ob3i] 
io6iaio]  589a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  2  [io69bi5~34- 
598d-599a;  ch  4  [1070^-8]  599d-600a  /  Soul, 
bk  11,  ch  1  [4i2b6~9]  642c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  3,  28a-b / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  6-7  109d-lllc;  tr 
vii,  ch  6  122a-d  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  4 
209d-210c;  tr  ii,  ch  i  214c-215a;  tr  vi,  ch  6 
237b-d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  7-8  272a- 
273c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  1-2  43  b- 
44a/  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  ii,  272c;  bkxii, 
ch  2  343c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  32 
633c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq  2-13 
10c-75b  passim,  esp  q  3,  a  4,  rep  i  16d-17c, 
q  11,  a  1  46d-47d,  q  13,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  i 
66b-67d,  a  10,  ans  72c-73c;  q  14,  a  9,  ans 
83 b-d;  q  16,  a  3,  rep  2  96b-d;  q  22,  a  4,  rep  3 
131c-132b;  q  29,  a  i,  rep  4  162a-163b;  qq 
44-45  238a-250a;  q  48,  a  2,  rep  2  260c-261b; 
q  54,  a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  q  104  534c-538c; 
q  105,  a  5,  ans  542a-543b;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  5 
esp  rep  2-3  618d-619c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
a  1,  rep  1  54d-55c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  269d-270c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  292d-294a 


2  to  2b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv  51b-54b  / 
Meditations ,  iv,  89c-d  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
139b-c;  214d-215a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  ii,  demonst, 
358d;  schol,  359a;  part  ii,  prop  40,  sciiol  i 
387b  388a 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  432b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  vii, 
sect  1  283a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  2-3 
413b-d;  sect  17  416a~b;  sect  45-46  421b-c; 
sect  48  422a;  sect  81  428c-d;  sect  88-91 
430a-431a;  sect  139  440d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  43d-44a;  52a-b;  107  b- 
108a, c;  133c;  177b-187a  esp  179c-182b,  185c- 
187a;  197b-198a  /  Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements 
of  Ethics,  367d-368a  /  Judgement ,  603b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b;  part  1,  224a-b;  233b-235a;  237d-238d; 
251d-252d;  part  iv,  322a-b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  636a-661b  esp  639a-640a, 
641a-b,  643a-645b;  871b-872a 

2.  Being  and  the  one  and  the  many 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bic  iii,  333b-d;  bk  v,  370a- 
373c  esp  372d-373c;  bk  vii,  392b-394b;  bk  x, 
421  cA29c/ Parmenides  4%6&-5l\d.  /  Theaetetus , 
537a-c;  544d-547c  esp  547a  /  Sophist ,  564d- 
574c  /  Statesman ,  594d-595a  /  Philebus ,  610d- 
617d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  2-3  259b-262a  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [988^4— b5]  506c;  bk 
iii,  ch  1  [996a4~8]  514c;  ch  4  [iooia4~b25] 
519d-520c;  bk  vii,  ch  16  [i040bi6-27]  564d; 
bk  x,  ch  2  580b-d;  bk  xi,  ch  2  [io6oa36-bi9] 
588c-d;  bk  xiv,  ch  2  [io88b28-ic>9oa2]  621b- 
622c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  14, 120d-121a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b; 
bk  iv,  sect  29  266a;  sect  40  267a-b;  bk  v, 
sect  30  273a;  bk  vi,  sect  36-45  277c-278c; 
bk  vii,  sect  9  280b-c;  sect  19  281a;  bk  ix, 
sect  8-9  292b-d;  bk  x,  sect  6-7  297a-c;  bk 
xii,  sect  30  310a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  4  79d-80a; 
tr  ii,  ch  1-2  82c-83d;  tr  viii,  ch  8-10  132d- 
136a;  tr  ix,  ch  3  137b-138a,c  /  Fifth  Ennead , 
tr  1,  ch  4-9  209d-213c;  tr  ii,  ch  i  214c-215a; 
tr  iii,  ch  11-12  222b-223c;  ch  15-16  224c- 
226a;  tr  iv  226d-228b;  tr  vi,  ch  6  237b-d  / 
Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  ii  268d-280d;  tr  iv,  ch  ii 
302c-d;  tr  v,  ch  i  305c-306a;  ch  5-8  307a- 
308c;  tr  vi,  ch  5-6  312c-313d;  ch  8-16  314a- 
319d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  15-17 
23a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3, 
a  3,  ans  16a-d;  q  ii  46d-50b;  q  30,  a  3  169b- 
170c;  q  93,  a  9,  ans  500c-501c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  ii  (112- 
123]  109a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  123c-d 


137 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  2  355a;  def  6 
355b;  prop  5-16  356b  362a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  iii, 
sect  19  259c-260a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  43d-44a;  49c-51d  esp 
51c  d;  99a-101b;  107b-c;  173b-177b;  193a- 
200c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  218c; 
224a  b;  232d;  237d-238a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiv,  608a-b 

2a.  Infinite  being  and  the  plurality  of  finite 
beings 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  8  [i9ia24~bi2] 
267a-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [986^ 8- 
987^]  504d-505a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iv,  sect  29  266a; 
sect  40  267a-b;  bk  xii,  sect  30  310a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  1-2  82c- 
83d;  tr  vii,  ch  6  122a-d;  tr  viii,  ch  8-10 
132d-136a  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  2  205c- 
206a;  ch  5  206d-207a,c  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  i, 
ch  4-7  209d-212c;  tr  iii,  ch  n-12  222b-223c; 
ch  15-16  224c-226a;  tr  iv  226d-228b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  20-21 
49d-50a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a  3, 
ans  16a-d;  a  7,  rep  2  19a-c;  qq  7-8  31a-38c;  q 
ii,  aa  3-4  49a-50b;  q  13,  a  ii  73c-74b;  qq 
44-45  238a-250a;  q  47  256a-259a;  q  50,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  3  269b-270a;  q  90,  a  1  480d- 
481d;  qq  103-105  528a-545b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations^  iii,  84a-b;  86a-88d/ 
Objections  and  Replies,  121d-122c;  123c-d; 
139b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i  355a-372d  esp  def  2 
355a,  def  6  355b,  prop  7-16  356c-362a,  prop 
21-25  364a-365b,  prop  28  365c-366a,  prop  29, 
schol  366b-c,  prop  30  366c-d;  part  ii,  prop 
45,  schol  390b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  121  195a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  130b-133c  /  Judgement, 
550a-551a,c;  564c-565d  esp  565c-d;  566c-d; 
580c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  227d- 
228a; 234d-235a 

2b.  The  unity  of  a  being 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  2  [ib3~ 9]  5c  /  Top¬ 
ics,  bk  iv,  ch  1  [i2iai4~i9]  169a;  [12 ib4— 8] 
169c;  ch  6  [i27a26~4o]  176d-177a;  bk  vi,  ch  4 
[i4ia26-b2]  194c-d  /  Sophistical  Refutations , 
ch  7  [169^2-36]  233a/  Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  ch 
2  [ioo3b23-34]  522d;  bk  v,  ch  6  536a-537c; 
ch  9  [1018^-9]  538d;  bk  viii,ch  6  569d-570d; 
bk  x,  ch  1-2  578b,d-580d;  ch  3  [io54a33~ 35] 
581a;  bk  xii,  ch  10  [ro75b34— 37]  606d;  bk 
xiii,  ch  2  [i077a20-23]  608c  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[4 i2b6— 9]  642c 

11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  vii,  definitions,  i 
127a 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  ii,  840a-b 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


138 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  Being  and  the  one  and  the  many.  2b.  The 
unity  of  a  being.) 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  i  139c- 
140c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  ii-i6  315d- 
319d;  tr  ix,  ch  1-2  353d-355a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  6, 
a  3,  rep  i  29c-30b;  q  ii,  aa  1-4  46d-50b 
passim;  q  39,  a  3,  ans  204c-205c;  q  76  385c- 
399b  passim;  q  103,  a  3,  ans  530a-c;  part  i-ii, 
q  12,  a  3,  rep  2-3  670d'671b;  q  17,  a  4,  ans 
688d-689c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  2, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  710a-711c;  a  9  719d- 
720c;  q  17  806d-809d;  q  19,  a  i,  rep  4  816a- 
818b;  PART  III  suppl,  q  83,  a  3,  rep  4  978c- 
980d 

31  Descartes  :  Objections  and  Replies,  153b-154a; 
213d-214a;  224d-225d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  12-13  359b-d; 
part  ii,  def  7  373c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  26  154b-c;  ch  xvi,  sect  i  165c-d;  ch 
xxiii,  sect  1-6  204a-205c;  ch  xxiii,  sect 
37-CH  xxiv,  sect  3  213d-214d;  ch  xxvii 
218d-228c;  bk  hi,  ch  vi,  sect  2-5  268c-269d; 
sect  10  271b;  sect  49  282c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  i  413a-b; 
sect  12  415b-c;  sect  99  432b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  120c-129c  esp  121a-124d, 
126a-128b  /  Judgement,  566c-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  104a-107b  esp  104a-b; 
215b-216a;  406b 

3.  Being  and  good 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1 

New  Testament:  I  Timothy,  4:4 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124c-125b  /  Republic ,  bk 
vi-vii,  383d-398c/  Timaeus,  447b-448b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  5  [143*9-12] 
196c;  ch  6  [145*19-27]  198d-199a;  ch  8  [1 46b9— 
i47au]  200c-201a;  ch  12  [149^1—39]  204b-c  / 
Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  10 
[336b28-3o]  43 8 d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  6 
[988^8—16]  506a-b;  ch  7  [988b6-i6]  506c-d; 
ch  9  [992*29-34]  510c;  bk  xii,  ch  7  602a- 
603b;  ch  10  [io75an-24]  605d-606a;  bk  xiv, 
ch  4  [i09ia29]-CH  5  [1092*17]  624a-625a 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[73^26-29]  272a  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  6  [1096*23- 
29] 341c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  hi  10a-12b;  tr 
vii,  ch  1,  26c;  tr  viii,  ch  3-12  28a-34a  / 
Fifth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  15-16  224c-226a;  tr 
ix,  ch  10,  250c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  i 
305c-306a;  tr  vii,  ch  24-26  333d-334d;  ch  28 
335b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  10  15b-d; 
par  12  16b;  bk  iv,  par  24  25b-c;  bk  v,  par  20 
32d-33a;  bk  vii,  par  3-7  44a-45d;  par  16-23 
48c-50c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  22,333d-334a; 
bk  xii,  ch  3  343d-344b 


3  to  la 

19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  2, 
ans  15c-16a;  qq  4-6  20c-30d;  q  13,  a  ii,  rep 
2  73c-74b;  q  21,  a  i,  rep  4  124b-125b;  q  22, 
a  1,  ans  127d-128d;  q  25,  a  6,  ans  149a-150a; 
q  48,  aa  1-3  259b-262a;  q  73,  a  1  370a-371a; 
a  3,  rep  3  371d-372c;  q  74,  a  3,  rep  3  375a- 
377a, c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  5  618d-619c;  q  18, 
aa  1-4  694a-696d  esp  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i 
694a-d,  a  2,  ans  694d-695c;  q  29,  a  5,  ans 
747c-748b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  54, 
a  3,  rep  2  24c-25b;  q  55,  a  4,  rep  1-2  28c-29d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  parti,  appendix 369b-372d; 
part  11,  def  6  373c;  part  iv,  def  1-2  424a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
278b-c  /  Practical  Reason,  307b-c 

3 a.  The  hierarchy  of  being:  grades  of  reality, 
degrees  of  intelligibility 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  124c-126a  /  Symposium, 
167a-d  /  Republic ,  bk  v,  370c-373c;  bk  vi-vii, 
383d-398c;  bk  ix,  422c-425b  esp  423b-424d  / 
Timaeus,  447a-455c  /  Philebus,  637c-639a,c 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  13  [23*18-26] 
35b-c  /  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  4  [141*26-142*22] 
194c-195c  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  2  359d-360d; 
bk  11,  ch  12  383b-384c;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [3iob32- 
311*3]  402 b-c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk 
1,  ch  3  413c-416c;  bk  ii,  ch  10  [336b25~34] 
438d  /  Meteorology,  bk  iv,  ch  12 
390*17]  493d-494b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  6 
505b-506b;  ch  7  [988*34^5]  506c;  ch  8 
[989b2i-990*8]  507d-508a;  ch  9  508c-511c; 
bk  11,  ch  1  [993bi9— 31  ]  512a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[ioo8b32-ioo9*5]  528b;  bk  ix,  ch  9  [1051*4- 
22]  577a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  5  [1071*30-36]  601a; 
ch  7  602a-603b;  ch  10  605d-606d;  bk  xiii, 
ch  2  [io77*i4-bi4]  608b-609a;  bk  xiv,  ch  4 
[io9i*29]-ch  5  [1092*17]  624a-625a  /  Soul, 
bk  iii,  ch  4  [429*29~b4]  661c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[644^0-645*5]  168c-d/  Generation  of  Animals, 
bk  11,  ch  1  [73ib24~33]  272a-b  /  Ethics,  bk  i, 
ch  6  [1096*17-23]  341b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  vi  [724-751]  230b-231a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  1-2  26a-d; 
tr  viii,  ch  3-10  28a-33a;  ch  12  33d-34a  / 
Second  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  11-12  46b-c;  ch 
16-18  48b-50a;  tr  ix,  ch  3  67b-c  /  Third 
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  1-2  82c-83d;  tr  viii,  ch 
8-10  132d-136a  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch 
6  203d-204b  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  i  214c- 
215a;  tr  iii,  ch  n-12  222b-223c;  tr  iv  226d- 
228b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  18  320c-321b; 
tr  vii,  ch  28-29  335b-336b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  ii,  272c; 
bk  xi,  ch  16  331a-c;  ch  22,  334b-c;  bk  xii, 
ch  2-5  343c-345b;  bk  xiv,  ch  13,  387d  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  8  626c-627a;  ch  32 
633c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, 
rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  3,  ans  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  1,  ans 


b  \b  to  4 

2,  14b-15b;  a  2,  ans  15c-16a;  a  7,  rep  2  19ac; 

qq  4-6  20c-30d  passim;  q  n,  a  4  49d-50b; 
2,  q  16,  a  6,  rep  1  98b  d;  q  18,  a  3  106b-107c; 
q  19,  a  8  116a-d;  q  22,  a  4,  ans  131c-132b;  q 
23,  a  5,  rep  3  135d-137d;  q  25,  a  6,  ans  and 
i-  rep  1,3  149al50a;  q  36,  a  2,  ans  192a-194c; 
\  q  42,  a  i,  rep  1-2  224b-225d;  q  44,  a  i,  ans 
238b-239a;  q  47,  a  2  257b-258c;  q  48,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  3  260c-261b;  q  50,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  1  269b-270a;  a  2,  rep  i  270a-272a;  a  3, 
ans  272a-273b;  q  57,  a  i,  ans  295a-d;  q  65, 
i  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  340b-341b;  q  70,  a  3,  rep  2 
365b-367a;  q  75,  a  7  384d-385c;  q  76,  a  3, 
ans  391a-393a;  a  4,  rep  3  393a-394c;  q  77, 

,  a  2  401b-d;  a  4,  rep  i  403a  d;  q  79,  a  9,  rep  3 
422b-423d;  q  82,  a  3,  ans  433c-434c;  q  93, 
a  3  493d-494c;  q  106,  a  4,  ans  548b-549a; 
q  108,  a  4  555b-d;  Q  118,  a  2,  rep  2  601c- 
603b;  part  1— 11,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  1  612a-613a;  q 
2,  a  5,  rep  2  618d-619c;  a  8,  rep  i  621c-622b; 
q  3,  a  7,  ans  628a-d;  q  18,  aa  1-4  694a- 
696d  passim 

20  Aquinas:  Surnrna  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  52, 
a  1,  ans  15d-18a;  q  71,  a  3,  rep  i  107c-108b; 
Q  85,  A  4  181b-d;  PART  II— II,  Q  23,  A  3,  REP  3 
485a-d;  part  hi,  q  7,  a  9,  ans  751d-752c; 
PART  III  SUPPL,  Q  74,  A  I,  REP  3  925c-926c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [103-142] 
107b-d;  11  [112-148]  109a-b;  vn  [64-75]  115d- 
116a;  [121-148]  116b-c;  xm  [52-87]  126a-b; 
xxviii  [64-72]  149b-c;  xxix  [13-36]  150b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  52d  /  Medi¬ 
tations ,  hi,  84a-b  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
llld-112a;  121d-122c;  axiom  vi  132a;  139b-c; 

,  211b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix,  372c-d; 
part  iv,  pref  422b,d-424a;  part  v,  prop  40, 
demonst462c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [468-490]  185b- 
186a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understandings  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  2  178c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  28  211b-d;  sect 
36  213c-d;  bk  hi,  ch  vi,  sect  ir-12  271b- 
272b;  bk  iv,  ch  xvi,  sect  12  370b-371a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  206d-207c  /  judgement, 
556b-558b;  566d-567a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  224a-d; 
233b-235a;  237d-238d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  217c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  639a-645b  esp  641b-644a 

3 b.  Being  as  the  object  of  love  and  desire 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124c-126a  /  Symposium , 
165b-167d  /  Republic,  bk  v-vi,  369c-375b; 
bk  vi,  376d;  bk  ix,  422c-425b  esp  423b-424d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  cii  9  [192^6-24] 
268b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [984b8]-cH  4 
[985^8]  502d-503c;  ch  7  [988^5—16]  506c-d; 
bk  xii,  ch  7  602a-603b;  ch  10  605d-606d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ix,  ch  7  [n67b34- 
n68ai8]  421b-c;  ch  9  [n7oai4-bi9]  423d- 
424b 


139 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  7  24c-25a  / 
Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  9,  244b-c;  tr  ix,  ch  i 
246cd 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  1,  ch  5 
625d-626a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  5 
23b-28b;  q  16,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-2  97a-c; 
q  19,  a  1,  ans  108d-109c;  q  20,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  4  121b  l22a;  q  48,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  4 
259b-260c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  8  615a-c;  q  2, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  3  618d-619c;  q  8,  a  1,  ans 
and  rep  3  655b-656a;  q  22,  a  2,  ans  721c- 
722c;  q  27,  a  3  738c-739c;  q  29,  a  i,  rep  i 
745a-c;  a  5  747c-748b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [103-142] 
107b-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  73a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  4-9  398d- 
399c;  prop  12-13  400b-d;  part iv,  prop  19-22 
429d-430c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  224a- 
225b;  233d-234b 

4.  Being  and  truth 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  71c-74a  /  Cratylus,  86a; 
113b-114a,c  /  Phaedrus ,  124c-126c  /  Republic, 
bk  vi,386b-388a;BK  ix,423b-424a  /  Timaeus, 
447a-d  /  Parmenides ,  508d  /  Theaetetus,  534d- 
536a;  537a-c  /  Sophist,  561d-577b  /  Philebus, 
634b-635b  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810c 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  3  [i6bi9~26] 
25d-26a  /  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  36  [48840- 
b9]  66d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  511b, d- 
512b;  bk  v,  ch  7  [ioi7a3i~34]  538a;  ch  29 
[i024bi6-26]  546c-d;  bk  vi,  ch  4  550a, c;  bk 
ix,  ch  10  577c-578a,c 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  8  132d- 
133c  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  5,  218b;  tr  v, 
ch  1-2  228b-229d;  tr  vi,  ch  6  237b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  10  15b-d; 
bk  v,  par  5  28b-c;  bk  vii,  par  16-23  48c-50c  / 
City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  10,  328c-d  /  Christian 
Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  34  634 b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3, 
a  4,  rep  2  16d-17c;  q  14,  a  9,  rep  i  83b-d; 
Q  16  94b-100d;  q  17,  a  1  lOOd-lOld;  a  4,  rep 
1-2  103c-104b;  q  18,  a  4,  rep  3  107d-108c; 
q  44,  a  1,  ans  238b-239a;  q  79,  a  9,  rep  3 
422b-423d;  q  119,  a  i,  ans  604c-607b;  part 
i-ii,  q  3,  a  7,  ans  628a-d;  q  22,  a  2,  ans  721c- 
722c;  q  29,  a  5,  ans  747c-748b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  iv  [124- 
126]  112a;  xxxiii  [49-54]  156d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv  51b-54b  / 
Objections  and  Replies,  124c-125b;  axiom  x 
132b;  226d;  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  axiom  6  355d;  part 
ii,  prop  10,  schol  376d-377a;  prop  20-21 
382d-383a;  prop  32  385c;  prop  43  388c-389b; 
prop  44,  corol  2  and  demonst  390a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  v, 
sect  8  330d 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


140 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  Being  and  truth.) 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  36a-37b;  91d-93b;  102c- 
103a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  23 
17d;  part  hi,  par  280  94d-95a  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  intro,  156d-157b;  part  i,  237d-238a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  141a-b;  636a;  852a 

4a.  Being  as  the  pervasive  object  of  mind,  and 
the  formal  object  of  the  first  philosophy, 
metaphysics,  or  dialectic 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  125a-b  /  Republic ,  bk  v, 
368c-373c;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Parmenides , 
486a-491c  esp  489a-c;  507c-509a  /  Theaetetus , 
535b-536a  /  Sophist ,  561d-574c  esp  571a-c  / 
Philebus ,  633a-635a  esp  634b-635a  /  Seventh 
Letter ,  809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  Vi,  ch  12  [149*3-23] 
203d-204a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  1,  ch  9  [992*18- 
993aio]  511a-c;  bk  11,  ch  i  [993*19-31]  512a-b; 
bk  iv  522a-532d;  bk  vi,  ch  i-bk  vii,  ch  i 
547b,d-551a;  bk  xi,  ch  3-6  589a-592b 

17  Plotinus:  EzVt/  Ennead ,  tr  iii  10a-12b  /  Fifth 
Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  4  209d-210c;  tr  v,  ch  1-2 
228b-229d;  tr  ix,  ch  ii  250c-251a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i,  a  i, 
rep  1-2  3b-4a;  q  3,  a  4,  rep  i  16d-17c;  q  5, 
a  2  24b-25a;  q  ii,  a  2,  rep  4  47d-48d;  q  14, 
a  9,  rep  1  83b-d;  q  16,  aa  3-4  96b-97c;  q  79, 
a  7,  ans  420d-421c;  a  9,  rep  3  422b-423d; 
q  82,  a  4,  rep  1  434c-435c;  q  87,  a  3,  rep  i 
467b-468a;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  7,  ans  628a-d; 
q  9,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  657d-658d;  q  10,  a  i, 
rep  3  662d-663d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  2,  ans  221d-223a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  269b-270c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  40a-48d  esp 
40a-41b,  43a-c,  43d-45a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  53b-d  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  261a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  44,  corol  2 
and  demonst  390a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  vii, 
sect  7 132d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  la-4a,c;  119a-c;  120b 
[fn  1]  /  Judgement ,  551a-552c;  603d-607c  esp 
606d-607c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  pref,  6a-7a; 
part  iii,  par  360  113d-114a,c  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  intro,  156d-157b;  part  i,  234b-c; 
245d-246c 

4^.  Being  as  the  measure  of  truth  in  judgments 
of  the  mind:  clarity  and  distinctness  as 
criteria  of  the  reality  of  an  idea 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus ,  71c- 74a  esp  72b-c  / 
Cratylus ,  85a-89b  /  Parmenides ,  507c-509a  esp 
508d-509a  /  Sophist,  558c-d;  575a-577b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  5  [4aio-bi2]  8b-9a; 
ch  10  [12*6-13]  17d-18a;  ch  12  [14*10-21]  20b 


4  a  to  5 

/  Interpretation,  ch  3  [16*19-26]  25d-26a  / 
Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [53*11-26]  72d-73a 
/  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  1,  ch  19  [81*17-24] 
lllc-d  /  Physics,  bk  1,  ch  i  259a-b  / 
physics ,  bk  iv,  ch  3-8  524b-532d;  bk  v,  ch  7 
[ioi7a3i— 34]  538a;  ch  29  [1024*22-39]  546c- 
547a;  bk  vi,  ch  4  550a, c;  bk  ix,  ch  10  577c- 
578a, c;  bk  xi,  ch  4-6  589d-592b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3, 
a  4,  rep  2  16d-17c;  q  14,  a  8,  rep  3  82c-83b; 
q  16,  aa  1-2  94b-96b;  q  16,  a  8-q  17,  a  i 
99d-101d;  q  21,  a  2,  ans  125c-d;  part  i-ii, 
q  2,  a  3,  ans  617b-618a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
154  108b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv  51b-54b  / 
Meditations,  i-iv,  75a-89b;  iv-v,  92d-96a;  vi, 
98c-d  /  Objections  and  Replies,  108a-115a,c; 
121b-122c;  124c-125b;  126b-127c;  def  iii-iv 
130b;  postulate  iv-vii  131a-c;  axiom  vi 
132a;  axiom  x  132b;  prop  ii-iii  132c-133a; 
237c-238b;  257d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  def  4  373b;  prop  32 
385c;  prop  43  388c-389b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  24-25  120a-d;  Bfc  11,  ch  viii,  sect  1-6 
133b-134a;  ch  xiii,  sect  ii  150d-151b;  sect 
25-26  154a-c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  5  205a-b;  sect 
15  208c-d;  sect  32  212c-d;  ch  xxxii  243c- 
248b  passim,  esp  sect  19  247a-b;  bk  iii,  ch 
vi,  sect  46-47  281d-282b;  bk  iv,  ch  v,  sect 
7-9  330b-331a;  ch  x,  sect  7  350d-351a;  ch 
x,  sect  19-CH  xi,  sect  i  354a-c;  ch  xi,  sect 
12  357c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  36b-c;  85d-88a;  179c- 
182  b  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 
367d-368a  /  Judgement,  603d-604b 

53  James:  Psychology,  141a-142a;  636a;  638a- 
641a;  879b-882a  esp  881a-b 

5.  Being  and  becoming:  the  reality  of  change; 
the  nature  of  mutable  being 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  94c-d;  99b-104b;  113c-114a,c 
J  Phaedrus,  124c-126c  /  Symposium ,  165c-166b; 
167a-d  /  Phaedo,  231b-232b;  247b-248c  / 
Republic,  bk  ii,  322d-323a;  bk  v,  368c-373c; 
bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c;  bk  viii,  403a-b  /  Ti- 
maeus  442a-477a,c  esp  447a-d,  455c-458b  / 
Parmenides  486sL-$lld  /  Theaetetus,  517d-534b 
/  Sophist,  561d-574c  /  Statesman,  587a-b  / 
Philebus ,  610d-617d;  631d-635a  esp  634b-635a 
/  Laws ,  bk  x,  760a-765c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i  259a-268d  esp  ch  8 
267a-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  268b,d-270a;  bk  iii,  ch 
1-3  278a-280c;  ch  6  [2o6ai8-*i6]  284c-285a; 
bk  iv,  ch  ii  [219*23-31]  299c-d;  bk  vi,  ch  6 
319c-321a  /  Heavens,  bk  1,  ch  3  360d-362a; 
ch  9  [277*29-278*9]  369a-d;  bk  iv,  ch  3 
[310*22-31  iai2]  402b-c;  ch  4  [311*29-33]  403c 
/  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  3  413c- 
416c;  bk  11,  ch  9-n  436d-441a,c  /  Meta - 


5  to  6  Chapter 

physics ,  bk  i,  ch  3-10  501c-511d  passim;  bk 
11,  ch  2  512b-513b;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [996*2-4]  514c; 
ch  2  [996*18— b26]  514d-515b;  ch  4  [1000*5- 
100 1*2]  518d'519d;  bk  iv,  ch  5  528c-530c; 
ch  7  [ioiib23-ioi2a9]  531c-532a;  cii  8  [ioi2b 
22-33]  532d;  bk  v,  cii  4  534d-535c;  bk  vii, 
ch  7-9  555a-558a;  bk  ix,  ch  3  [1047*10-29] 
572b-c;  cii  6  [i048bi 8— 34]  574a-c;  ch  8 
[io49b29~io5o*3]  575c-d;  cii  10  [io5ib26-3o] 
578a;  bk  x,  ch  10  586c-d;  bk  xi,  ch  6  590d- 
592b;  ch  9  593d-594d;  ch  n-12  596a-598a,c; 
bk  xii  598a-606d  esp  ch  2-3  598c-599d,  ch 
6-8  601b-605a 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  v,  ch  i 
[778*29^7]  320a-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2  167b- 
168c;  ch  5  169b  c;  bk  ii,  ch  3,  186d 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  811b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [146-328] 
2d-5a;  bk  ii  [294-307]  18d-19a;  [749-754] 
24c;  [1002-1022]  27d-28a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  17,  259c- 
d;  bk  iv,  sect  36  266d;  sect  42-43  267b; 
sect  46  267c;  bk  v,  sect  23  272b;  bk  vi,  sect 
15  275a-b;  bk  vii,  sect  18  281a;  sect  49-50 
282d-283a;  bk  viii,  sect  6  285d-286a;  bk  ix, 
sect  19  293b;  sect  35-36  294d-295a;  bk  x, 
sect  7  297b-c 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1051b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  3-4  36b- 
37b;  tr  iv,  ch  6  51d-52a;  tr  v  57d-60c  passim 
/  Third  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  1-2  82c-83d;  tr  vi, 
ch  7-19  110d-119a  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch 
12-13  245c-246c  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  17-22 
261c-264c;  ch  25-30  265b-268c;  tr  iii  281a- 
297b  esp  ch  1-8  281a-285d,  ch  21-27  293a- 
297a;  tr  v,  ch  2  306a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  10  15b-d; 
bk  iv,  par  15-19  23a-24b;  bk  vii,  par  1-7 
43b-45d;  par  16-23  48c-50c;  bk  xi,  par  6 
90c-d;  bk  xii,  par  3-6  99d-100c  esp  par  6, 
100c;  par  8,  101b;  par  15  102b-c;  par  24-26 
104c-105b;  par  28  105c-d;  bk  xiii,  par  48  124a 
/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  9  627a;  bk  ii,  ch 
38  654b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
ans  12c-14a;  q  4,  a  1,  rep  i  20d-21b;  q  9,  a  1, 
ans  38c-39c;  q  10,  a  4,  rep  3  43b-44b;  a  5, 
ans  44b-45c;  q  26,  a  i,  rep  2  150b-c;  q  29, 
a  1,  rep  4  162a-163b;  q  65,  a  4  342b-343c; 
q  86,  a  3  463 b-d;  part  i-ii,  q  10,  a  i,  rep  2 
662d-663d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
no,  a  2,  rep  3  349a-d;  part  iii,  q  62,  a  4, 
rep  2  861a-862a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  91,  a  3, 
rep  2  1020d-1022c 

22  Chaucer: Knight' sTale [2987-3040] 209a-210a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  292a-294b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52d  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  212a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  2  355a;  part  ii, 
prop  31  385b-c 


:  BEING  Hi 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  iv, 
sect  8  260d-261a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  89 430b- 
c;  sect  102  432d-433a;  sect  141  441a  b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15a-b;  27a-33d  esp  27a, 
28b  c,  31d-32a;  43a-b;  74b~76c;  82a-83b; 
91d-93c;  95a-d;  138b-139b  [thesis];  141b, d- 
145c;  200c-204c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  178a- 
179d;  186dl90b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiv,  608a-b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  882a-884b  passim 

6.  The  cause  of  existence 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1-2;  7:1-5  /  Nehcmiah , 
9:6— (D)  II  Esdras,  9:6  /  Job,  26:7;  38:1-42:2 
/  Psalms,  8  esp  8:3-6;  19:1;  89:11-12;  102:25; 
136:5-9— (D)  Psalms,  8  esp  8:4-6;  18:2; 
88:12-13;  101-26;  135:5-9  /  Jeremiah,  31:35— 
(D)  Jeremias,  31 135  /  Amos ,  5:8 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  18:1— (D)  OT,  Eccle- 
siasticus,  18:1 

New  Testament:  Acts,  14:15;  17 :22-32— (D) 
Acts,  14:14;  17:22-32  /  Romans,  11:36  / 
Colossians,  1:16-17  /  Hebrews,  1:10  /  Revela¬ 
tion,  4  :i  1 —(D)  Apocalypse,  4:11 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  447b-448a  /  Laws,  bk  x, 
760a-765d  esp  763d-764a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  1-2 
122b,d-123c;  ch  7  [92bi8-25]  126d;  ch  8-12 
127a-131b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  7  [988b5~i6] 
506c-d;  ch  9  [99^1-9]  509c-d;  ch  10  511c-d; 
bk  ii,  ch  1  [993^7— 3 1  ]  512a-b;  bk  v,  ch  8 
[ioi7bio-i7]  538b;  bk  vii,  ch  17  565a-566a,c; 
bk  xii,  ch  6-7  601b-603b  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[4i5bu-i4]  645d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[640*4-9]  162  b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  14,  120d- 
121a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  10  3b-c  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  32  633c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  3,  ans  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  4,  ans  16d-17c;  a  5, 
rep  2  17c-18b;  q  5,  a  2,  rep  1-2  24b-25a;  q  8, 
a  1  34d-35c;  a  2,  ans  35c-36b;  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  1  36b-37c;  a  4,  ans  37c-38c;  q  9,  a  2, 
ans  39c-40d;  q  14,  a  8  82c-83b;  qq  44-46 
238a-255d;  q  57,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  295d- 
297a;  q  61,  a  1  314d-315b;  q  65  339a-343c; 
q  75,  a  6,  rep  2  383c-384c;  q  104  534c-538c; 
q  105,  a  3,  ans  540c-541b;  a  5,  ans  542a- 
543b;  part  i-ii,  q  18,  a  4,  ans  696b-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  443b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  55d-56a  / 
Meditations,  iii,  87c-d  /  Objections  and  Re¬ 
plies,  axiom  ix  132b;  213 b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  i  355a;  prop  17, 
schol  362c-363c;  prop  24-29  365a-366c; 
prop  33  367b-369a;  part  ii,  prop  6-7  374d- 
375c;  prop  10,  schol  376d-377a;  prop  45, 
schol  390b 


142 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


7  to  lb 


(6.  The  cause  of  existence.) 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  hi  [80-134]  137a- 
138a;  bk  vii  217a-231a  esp  [162-169]  220b, 
[601-640]  230a-231a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  12  165b-c;  ch  xxvi,  sect  1-2,  2l7a-c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  2-4 
413b-414a;  sect  25-33  417d-419a;  sect  36 
419c-d;  sect  45-46  421b-c;  sect  48  422a; 
sect  88-91  430a-431a;  sect  146-150  442a- 
443  b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
74,  484a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  140b,d-145c;  177b-179b 
/  Practical  Reason ,  334b-337a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  245d- 
246c 

7.  The  divisions  or  modes  of  being 

la.  The  distinction  between  essence  and  exist¬ 
ence:  existence  as  the  act  of  being 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  3:14 
8  Aristotle  :  Metaphysics ,  bk  ix,  ch  3  [1047  **30- 
b2] 572c 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  6  122a-d 
/  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  13,  234d-235a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  10,  328c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3, 
a  4  16d-17c;  a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  17c-18b;  a  6, 
ans  18c-19a;  a  7,  ans  and  rep  i  19a-c;  q  4, 
a  1,  rep  3  20d-21b;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  21b- 
22b;  a  3,  rep  3  22b-23b;  q  6,  a  3  29c-30b; 
q  7,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  31a-d;  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  1  31d-32c;  q  8,  a  1,  ans  34d-35c;  q  9,  a  2, 
ans  39c-40d;  q  10,  a  2,  ans  41d-42c;  q  ii,  a  4, 
ans  49d-50b;  q  12,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3 
51c-52c;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  53b-54c;  q  13, 
a  ii,  ans  73c-74b;  q  25,  a  i,  rep  2  143d-144c; 
q  29,  a  1,  rep  4  162a-163b;  q  34,  a  i,  rep  2 
185b-187b;  q  39,  a  2,  rep  3  203b-204c;  q  44, 
a  1  238b-239a;  q  50,  a  2,  rep  3  270a-272a; 
q  54,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  285a-d;  a  2,  rep  2 
285d-286c;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  286c-287b; 
q  75,  a  5,  rep  4  382a-383b;  q  88,  a  2,  rep  4 
471c-472c;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  7,  ans  628a-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52d-53a  / 
Meditations,  v  93a-96a  /  Objections  and  Re¬ 
plies, U0a-112a;  112d-113b;  126b-127c;  postu¬ 
late  v  131b-c;  axiom  i  131d;  axiom  x-prop  i 
132b  c;  158b-162a  passim;  217d-218a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  8  355c;  axiom 
7  355d;  prop  7  356c;  prop  8,  schol  2  356d- 
357d;  prop  ii  358b-359b;  prop  17,  schol, 
363 b-c;  prop  20  363d-364a;  prop  24-25  365a- 
b;  prop  34  369a;  part  ii,  def  2  373b;  axiom  i 
373c;  part  hi,  prop  7  399a;  part  iv,  def  3 
424a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  v, 
sect  1-6  263d-265a;  bk  iv,  ch  ix,  sect  i  349a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  179c-182b;  191d-192b 


46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  280 
94d-95a  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  165a- 
b;  178c-d;  part  i,  233d-234b 

53  James:  Psychology,  640b  [fn  1];  644b  31 

lb.  The  distinction  between  substance  and 
attribute,  accident  or  modification:  inde¬ 
pendent  and  dependent  being 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  2  [ia20-b9]  5b-c; 
ch  5  6a-9a;  ch  7  [8ai2-b24]  13a-d  /  Topics, 
bk  v,  ch  4  [i33bi5-i34a4]  184d-185b  /  Sophis¬ 
tical  Refutations ,  ch  7  [i69a33— 36]  233a;  ch  22 
[i78b37-i79aio]  246c  /  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[i85a2o]-CH3  [i87aio]260a-262a/  Metaphysics,  3; 
bk  1,  ch  9  [99ob22~99ia2]  509a;  [992^ 8-24] 
511a;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [ioo7a2o-bi8]  526c-527a; 

bk  v,  ch  7  [1017^3-31]  537d-538a;  ch  ii 
[ioi9ai-i4]  540a;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [1029^-26]  { 

551c-d;  ch  4-6  552b-555a;  bk  viii,  ch  3 
[i043bi8-24]  568a-b;  ch  4  [io44b8-2o]  569b; 
bk  ix,  ch  1  [io45b28-32]  570b;  ch  7  [i049ai9~ 
bi]  574d-575a;  bk  x,  ch  2  580b-d;  bk  xii,  ch  { 
1  [io69ai8-25]  598a;  ch  4-5  599d-601a;  ch  7 
[io72b4-i3]  602c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  2  $ 

[648b35]-cH  3  [649b22]  173b-174b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  xii,  sect  30,  $ 

310a 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  6  203d- 
204b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3  253a-b;  ch  5, 
254c-d;  ch  15  260c-d;  ch  25  265b-d;  tr  ii, 
ch  14-15  276c-277b;  tr  iii,  ch  3  282a-c;  ch  6 
284a-c;  ch  8,  285b-c  !  1 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  3,  a  6 
18c-19a;  q  6,  a  3,  ans  29c-30b;  q  7,  a  2,  ans 
31d-32c;  q  9,  a  2  39c-40d;  q  ii,  a  i,  rep  1-2 
46d-47d;  a  2,  rep  i  47d-48d;  a  4,  rep  2 
49d-50b;  q  29,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  162a-163b; 
q  39,  a  3,  ans  204c-205c;  q  40,  a  i,  rep  i 
213b-214b;  a  2,  rep  4  214b-215b;  q  44,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  i  239b-240a;  q  45,  a  4  244d-245c; 
q  54,  a  1  285a-d;  a  3  286c-287b;  q  67,  a  3 
351b-352a;  q  76,  a  4  393a-394c;  a  6  396a-d; 

q  77,  a  1  399c-401b;  a  6  404c-405c;  q  85,  a  5,  ; 

rep  3  457d-458d;  q  90,  a  2,  ans  481d-482c;  ii 
q  1 15,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  5  585d-587c;  parti-ii, 
q  7,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2-3  651d-652c;  a  4, 
rep  3  654b-655a;  q  17,  a  4,  ans  688d-689c;  | ; 
q  18,  a  3,  rep  3  695d-696b;  q  29,  a  2,  rep  i 
745c-746b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  2b-4a;  q  50,  a  2  7c-8a;  q 
52,  a  1,  ans  15d-18a;  q  53,  a  2,  rep  3  21a-d; 
q  66,  a  4,  ans  78c-79b;  part  ii-ii,  q  23,  a  3, 
rep  3  485a-d;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  i,  ans  710a- 
711c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  70,  a  i,  ans  893d- 
895d;  q  79,  a  1,  rep  4  951b-953b;  q  83,  a  3, 
ans  978c-980d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  66,  114d- 
115a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  41d;  part  iv, 

52d  /  Meditations,  iii  81d-89a  passim,  esp 


7b(  1)  to  7b( 2)  Chapter 

8 7b- 88c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  def  v  130b  c; 
def  ix  130d;  135b-136b;  136c;  139b-c;  153d; 
162d-165d;  170d;  211b-c;  228c-229c 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  3-5  355b;  axiom 
1-2  355c-d;  prop  1-9  355d-357d;  prop  10, 
schol  358a-b;  prop  19  363c-d;  prop  20, 
corol  2  364a;  prop  21-23  364a-365a 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  hi, 
sect  19  117c-d;  BK  11,  ch  xii,  sect  3-6  147d- 
148c;  ch  xni,  sect  17-20  152a-d;  ch  xxiii 
204a-214b  esp  sect  1-15  204a'208d;cn  xxxn, 
sect  24  247c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  ix,  sect  12-13 
287d-288d 

35  Berkeley;  Human  Knowledge,  sect  1-7 
413a-414c;  sect  25-33  417d-419a  passim; 
sect  49  422b;  sect  73-78  427b-428b;  sect 
88-91  430a-431a;  sect  101-102  432c-433a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  33a-d;  74b-76c;  130b- 
133c  esp  131c-d;  140b,d-143a  /  Practical 
Reason,  310d-311d  /  Judgement,  529c-530a; 
550a-551a,c;  566b-d;  580c-d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  26 
121a-b;  39  122d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
160c-161a;  part  i,  211a-c 
53  James  :  Psychology,  572a-b 

7^(1)  The  conceptions  of  substance 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  5  6a-9a;  ch  7 
[8ai2-b24]  13a-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  8 
538b-c;  bk  vii-viii  550b,d-570d;  bk  x,  ch  2 
580b-d;  bk  xii,  ch  i  598a-c;  bk  xiii,  ch  2 
[io77ai4-bu]  608b-609a 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vii,  sect  23  281b 
17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  2-3  252c- 
,  253b;  ch  10  257b-258b;  ch  25  265b-d;  tr  iii, 

ch  2-10  281c-286d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3, 
a  5,  rep  1-2  17c-18b;  a  6  18c-19a;  q  ii,  a  3, 
ans  49a-c;  q  13,  a  9,  ans  71b-72c;  qq  29-43 
161d-237a,c  passim,  esp  q  29,  a  2  163b-164b; 
q  45,  a  4  244d-245c;  qq  75-76  378a-399b 
passim;  q  88,  a  2,  rep  4  471c-472c;  part  i-ii, 
q  17,  a  4,  ans  688d-689c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  4, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  i  402a-403d;  part  iii,  qq  1-3 
701b, d- 730b;  q  17  806d-809d  passim;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  83  974d-983b  passim 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  172b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  37  168d- 
169c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  def  v- 
viii  130b-d;  153c-155c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  3,6  355b;  prop 
1-9  355d-357d;  prop  11-14  358b-360a;  prop 
15,  schol  360b-361d;  prop  19  363c-d;  part 
ii,  prop  10  376c-377a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  19  117c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  xii,  sect  6  148b-c; 
ch  xiii,  sect  17-20  152a-d;  ch  xxiii  204a- 
214b;  ch  xxxi,  sect  6-13  240d-243b;  ch 
xxxii,  sect  24  247c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  21 
273c-d;  sect  42  280b-c;  ch  ix,  sect  11-17 


:  BEING  143 

287d  290a;  bk  iv,  cii  vi,  sect  4-16  331d  336d 
passim,  esp  sect  ii  334b  335b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  6-7 
414b-c;  sect  26-27  418a-b;  sect  73  427b-c; 
sect  88-91  430a-431a;  sect  135-136  440a-b; 
sect  139  440d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15b-c;  63a;  63d-64a; 
69c-72c;  74b-76c;  81b-83b;  86c-87b;  91d-93b; 
95a-d;  lOOd-lOlb;  121a-128b;  131c-d;  137a- 
140c;  162b-163a;  186b-d  /  Judgement,  565b-d; 
566d-567a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  146 
55c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b;  part  i,  211a-c;  227d-228a 

53  James:  Psychology,  221b;  223a 

7b(2)  Corporeal  and  spiritual  substances,  com¬ 
posite  and  simple  substances:  the  kinds 
of  substance  in  relation  to  matter  and 
form 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  7  265b-267a; 
bk  11,  ch  1  268b,d-270a;  bk  iv,  ch  2  288b- 
289a  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [277b26-278b9] 
369a-d;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [3i2ai2-i7]  403d  /  Gen¬ 
eration  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  3  413c-416c  / 
Meteorology,  bk  iv,  ch  12  493d-494d  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  iii,  ch  1  [995bi3— 18]  514a;  [995b3 1— 
39]  514b;  [996^3-15]  514c;  ch  2  [997*34- 
998ai9]  516a-d;  ch  4  [999a24~b23]  518a-c;  ch 
5  520c-521b;  ch  6  [ioo2bii~32]  521b-d;  bk  v, 
ch  8  538b-c;  bk  vii-viii  550b,d-570d;  bk  xi, 
cii  1  [io59a33-bi4]  587b-c;  ch  2  [io6oa3~27] 
588a-b;  [io6ob23~29]  588d-589a;  bk  xii-xiv 
598a-626d  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  1-2  642a-644c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  240d- 
241a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  21  265b- 
c;  bk  vii,  sect  23  281b;  bk  viii,  sect  ii 
286b;  bk  xii,  sect  30  310a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  2-4 
50b-51a;  ch  6  51d-52a;  tr  v,  ch  2  58b-d  / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  7-19  110d-119a  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  6  203d-204b  / 
Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  2  208c-209b;  tr  ix,  ch  3 
247b-d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  27-28  266c- 
267c;  tr  iii,  ch  2-10  281c-286d;  tr  v,  ch  5-8 
307a-308c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  1-2  43  b- 
44a;  par  7  45a-d;  par  16  48c-49a;  par  20  49d; 
par  26  51c-d;  bk  xii,  par  5-6  lOOa-c;  par  8 
101a  b;  par  16  102d-103a;  par  18-22  103a- 
104b;  par  24-26  104c-105b;  par  28-30  105c- 
106c;  par  38-40  108d-110a;  bk  xiii,  par  48 
124a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  10  327d-328d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3 
14a-20c;  q  6,  a  3,  rep  i  29c-30b;  q  7,  a  1,  ans 
31a-d;  q  8,  a  1,  rep  2  34d-35c;  a  2  35c-36b; 
q  9,  a  2,  rep  3  39c-40d;  q  ii,  a  4,  rep  3  49d- 
50b;  q  14,  a  2,  rep  1,3  76d-77d;  Q  18,  a  4, 
rep  3  107d-108c;  q  29,  a  i,  rep  4  162a-163b; 
a  2,  rep  3,5  163b-164b;  Q  40,  a  i,  rep  i  213b- 
214b;  q  45,  a  4  244d-245c;  q  50  269a-275a; 


144 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(Jb.  The  distinction  between  substance  and  attri¬ 
bute,  accident  or  modification :  independent 
and  dependent  being.  lb{2)  Corporeal  and 
spiritual  substances,  composite  and  simple 
substances:  the  kinds  of  substance  in  relation 
to  ?natter  and  form.) 

q  70,  a  3,  rhp  2  365b-367a;  qq  75-76  378a- 
399b;  q  77,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2-3,6  399c-401b; 
q  85,  a  5,  rep  3  457d-458d;  q  86,  a  3  463b-d; 
q  88,  a  2,  rep  4  471c-472c;  q  104,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  1  534c-536c;  q  115,  a  i  585d-587c;  a  .3, 
rep  2  588c-589c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  52, 
a  1,  ans  15d-18a;  part  ii-ii,  q  24,  a  ii,  ans 
498b-499c;  part  hi,  q  2,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2 
710a-711c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  69,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  2  885c-886c;  q  79,  a  2,  rep  2  953b-955c; 
q  92,  a  1,  ans  1025c-1032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  vii  [121- 
148]  116b-c;  xxix  [13—36]  150b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  hi,  172a-177c;  part 
iv,  258b-261a;  269d-271b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  17b-d  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  37  168d-169c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  51d-52a  / 
Meditations ,  vi  96b-103d  /  Objections  and  Re¬ 
plies ,  def  vi-viii  130c-d;  153c-155c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  15  360a-361d; 
part  ii,  prop  1-2  373d-374a;  prop  6  374d- 
375a;  prop  7,  schol  375b-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  16-18  151d-152c;  ch  xv,  sect  ii  165a-b; 
ch  xxi,  sect  2-4  178c-179c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  5 
205a-b;  sect  15-37  208c-214b;  ch  xxvii,sect 
2  219b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  x,  sect  15  295a-c;  bk  iv, 
ch  iii,  sect  6  313c-315b;  ch  x,  sect  9-19 
351b-354c  passim;  ch  xvi,  sect  12,  370c-371a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  1-29 
413a-418c;  sect  35-38  419c-420a;  sect  47-50 
421c-422c;  sect  67-81  426b-428d;  sect  86*91 
429c-431a  passim;  sect  133-142  439c-441c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  lOOd-lOlb;  121a-128b; 
186b-d;  203d-204c  /  Judgement ,  557c-558b; 
565b-d;  566d-567a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b;  160c-161a;  165a-b;  part  i,  227d-228a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  118b-119b  passim;  220b- 
226a  esp  221a-223a 

7&(3)  Corruptible  and  incorruptible  substances 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  13  [23*18-26] 
35b-c  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  1-3  359a-362a;  ch  9 
[279ai2-b4]  370b-d;  bk  i,  ch  io-bk  ii,  ch  i 
370d-376a;  bk  iii,  ch  6  396a-c  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  iii,  ch  2  [996*21-28]  514d;  bk  iv,  ch  5 
[1009*36-39]  528d;  bk  v,  ch  5  [ioi5b9-i6] 
536a;  bk  ix,  ch  8  [i050b5]-CH  9  [1051*21] 
576b'577b;  bk  x,  cii  10  586c-d;  bk  xi,  ch  6 
[1063*10-17]  591b;  bk  xii,  ch  1  [io69*3o-b2] 
598b-c;  ch  2  [io69b24-27]  598d-599a;  ch  3 
[1070*20-27]  599c;  ch  6-8  601b-605a;  ch  10 


7b(S)  to  lb{\) 

[io75bi3-i4]  606b  /  Soul ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [4i3b24- 
29]  643d-644a 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  4  [699bi2- 
700*5]  234d-235a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [215-250] 
3d-4b;  [483-634]  7a-8d 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6a;  bk  xiii, 
429a-b  ^6 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  929b-930b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  1-4  35a- 
37b;  ch  8  39c-d;  tr  iv,  ch  6  51d-52a  /  Fourth 
Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  10-12  198d'200a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  9,  a  2 
39c-40d;  q  10,  a  2,  rep  1-2  41d-42c;  a  3,  ans 
and  rep  1  42c-43b;  aa  5-6  44b-46d;  q  18,  a  3, 
rep  3  106b-107c;  q  22,  a  2,  ans  128d-130d; 
q  46,  a  1,  rep  2-3  250a-252d;  q  48,  a  2,  ans 
and  rep  3  260c-261b;  q  50,  a  5  274b-275a; 
q  63,  a  1,  rep  2  325c-326c;  q  66,  a  2  345d- 
347b;  q  68,  a  i,  ans  354a-355c;  q  75,  a  6 
383c-384c;  q  76,  a  3,  rep  1-2  391a-393a;  q  97, 
a  1  513c-514c;  a  4  5l5d-516d;  q  104,  a  i,  rep 
1,3  534c-536c;  q  113,  a  2,  ans  576d-577d; 
part  i-ii,  q  22,  a  1,  rep  3  720d-721c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  4,  ans  5a-6a;  q  85,  a  6  182d-184a;  part 
ii-ii,  q  24,  a  11,  ans  498b-499c;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  91,  a  i  1016b-1017c;  aa  4-5  1022d- 
1025b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  vii  [64-84] 
115d-116a;  [i2i-i48]116b-c;xm  [52-87]126a-b 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  127c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  6-8  356b-357d; 
prop  12-13  359b-d;  prop  15,  schol,  361d  1 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [116-156]  96a- 
97a;  bk  ii  [94-105]  113a-b;  bk  vi  [320-347] 
203a-b;  [430-436]  205b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  358a 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  541b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  iii, 
sect  19,  259c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  141 
441a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  121a-128b;  203d-204c  / 
Practical  Reason ,  348d-349a 

53  James:  Psychology,  221b-222b;  224a-b 

7b(4)  Extension  and  thought  as  dependent 
substances  or  as  attributes  of  infinite  sub¬ 
stance 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  51d-52a  / 
Meditations,  vi  96b-103d  /  Objections  and 
Replies,  def  vi-viii  130c-d;  prop  iv  133c; 
135d-136b;  152d-155d  esp  153c-155c;  224d- 
225d;  231a-232d;  248b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  14,  corol  2 
360a;  part  ii,  def  1-2  373a-b;  prop  1-2  373d- 
374a;  prop  5-6  374c-375a;  prop  7,  schol 
375b-c 

35  Loc  <:e:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  18  152a-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  580c-d 


7b{ 5)  to  7b{6) 

7^(5)  Substance  as  subject  to  change  and  to 
different  kinds  of  change:  the  role  of 
accidents  or  modifications 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  5  [4*io-bi9)  8b-9a 
/  Physics ,  bk  1,  cn  6-bk  ii,  ch  i  264c  270a; 
bk  hi,  ch  1-3  278a-280c;  bk  v-viii  304a  355d 
/  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  i,  ch  1-5 
409a-420b;  bk  ii,  ch  9-10  436d-439c  /  Meta¬ 
physics ,  bk  1,  ch  3  (983b7— 984b8]  501d-502c; 
bk  hi,  ch  4  [999a24~b24]  518a-c;  bk  vii,ch  7-9 
555a-558a;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [ic>42a24-b7)  566bd; 
ch  3  [1043^5-23]  568a-b;  ch  4-5  568d-569d; 
bk  ix,  ch  1  570b,d-571b;  ch  3  572a-c;  ch  6-7 
573c-575a;  bk  xi,  ch  9  593d-594d;  ch  ii 
596ad;  ch  12  [io68*7~b26]  596d-597d;  bk 
xii,  ch  1-5  598a-601a  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[4  i6b8— 17]  646d-647a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2  167b- 
168c;  ch  5  169b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  4,  187a  b;  bk  hi, 
ch  7  203b-205a;  ch  15,  214d-215d 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3-4  36b- 
37b;  tr  iv,  ch  6  51d-52a;  tr  vi,  ch  1-2  60c- 
62b  /  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  7-19  llOd- 
119a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3, 
a  6,  ans  18c-19a;  q  9,  a  2  39c-40d;  q  41,  a  3 
219d-221c;  a  5  222b-223b;  q  44,  a  2  239b- 
240a;  Q  45,  aa  1-5  242a-247a  passim;  a  8 
249b-250a;  q  50,  a  5  274b-275a;  q  53  280d- 
284d;  q  65,  a  4  342b-343c;  q  66,  aa  1-2  343d- 
347b;  Q  67,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i  351b-352a; 
q  73,  a  3  371d-372c;  q  75,  a  6  383c-384c; 
q  76,  a  4  393a-394c;  q  78,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  4 
409a-410a;  q  90,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  481d-482c; 
q  92,  a  3,  rep  1  490c-491b;  q  98,  a  1  516d- 
517d;  q  104  534c-538c;  q  105,  aa  1-2  538d- 
540c;  a  5,  ans  542a-543b;  q  115,  aa  1-3  585d- 
589c;  a  6,  ans  591d-592d;  q  118,  a  i  600a- 
601c;  q  119  604c-608d;  part  i-ii,  q  22,  a  i 
720d-721c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  1—2  13c-14b;  q  52,  aa  1-2 
15d-19a;  q  53,  a  i,  rep  i  19d-21a;  a  2,  rep  1-3 
21a-d;  q  no,  a  2,  rep  3  349a-d;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  75,  a  3,  ans  938a-939d;  q  80,  a  4 
959c-963a;  Q  82,  aa  1-2  968a-971a;  q  83,  a  i 
974d-976b;  a  5,  ans  981b-982c;  q  84  983c- 
989b;  q  86,  aa  2^3  993c-996a,c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  66, 
115a-b 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  162d- 
165d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  6  356b-c;  prop 
12-13  359b-d;  prop  23  364d-365a;  prop  28 
365c-366a;  part  ii,  prop  13  377d-378c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxii, 
sect  ii  203c-d;  ch  xxvi,  sect  1-2  217a-d; 
bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  42  280b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  74b-76c;  82a-83b;  86c- 
87b;  141b,d-143a  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d- 
157b;  178c-d 


145 

lb{6)  The  nature  and  kinds  of  accidents  or 
modifications 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  2  [ia20— ^9]  5b  c; 
ch  4  5d  6a;  ch  5  [2*27~b6]  6b-c;  [3*6-21  ]  7b; 
ch  6-9  9a  16d  /  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  13 
(32b4  14]  48bc/  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  cii  4 
[73a33-bi6]  lOOb-d  /  Topics,  bk  i,  cii  9  147a  b 
/  Physics,  bk  1,  ch  2  [185*20-186*4]  260a-d;  ch 
4  [188*5-13]  263b;  bk  11,  ch  i  [i92b35“39] 
269a;  bk  iv,  cii  3  [2iobi-8]  289b-c;  bk  vii,  ch 
3  329a-330d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [ioi5b 
16-34]  536a-b;  ch  7  [1017*23-30]  537d-538a; 
ch  9  [ioi7b27-ioi8*3]  538c;  ch  30  547ad; 
bk  vii,  ch  1  [1028*10-18]  550b;  ch  4-6  552b- 
555a;  bk  viii,  ch  4  [i044b8~2o]  569b;  bk  x, 
ch  9  586a-c;  bk  xii,  cii  i  [1069*18-25]  598a  / 
Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  6  [445^*4-446*20] 
683  b- 684c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [449-482] 
6c-7a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  vi  60c-62d  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  4-24  253b-265b;  ch  30 
268 b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3, 
a  6  18c-19a;  q  8,  a  2,  rep  3  35c-36b;  q  9,  a  2, 
ans  39c-40d;  q  28,  a  2  158d-160a;  q  29,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  4-5  163b-164b;  q  44,  a  2, 
ans  239b-240a;  q  45,  a  4,  ans  244d-245c; 
q  54,  a  1  285a-d;  a  3  286c-287b;  q  66, 
a  1,  rep  3  343d-345c;  q  67,  a  3  351b-352a; 
q  76,  a  6  396a-d;  a  8,  ans  397d-399b; 
q  77  399b-407a  passim;  q  ioi,  a  i,  rep  i  522c- 
523a;  q  108,  a  5,  ans  555d-558b;  q  115,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  3,5  585d-587c;  a  6,  ans  591  d- 
592d;  q  1 16,  a  1,  ans  592d-593d;  part  i-ii, 
q  2,  a  6,  ans  619d-620d;  q  7  651d-655a 
passim;  Q  17,  a  4,  ans  688d-689c;  q  18,  a  3 
695d-696b;  q  35,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  774d- 
775d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  qq 
d  49-54  la-25d  passim,  esp  q  49,  aa  1-2  lb- 

43;  Q  56,  a  i,  rep  1,3  30a-c;  part  ii-ii,  q  23, 
a  3,  rep  3  485a-d;  q  24,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  i 
492b-493d;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  6  716b-718b; 
part  iii  suppl,  q  70,  a  1,  ans  893d-895d; 
q  79,  a  1,  rep  4  951b-953b;  q  83,  a  3  978c- 
980d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  57a-b;  S9c-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  66,  114d- 
115a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  i,  41d  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies,  135b-136b;  136c;  162d-165d; 
228c-229c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  4-5  355b;  prop 
10  358a-b;  prop  19,  demonst  363c-d;  prop 
20,  corol  2  364a;  prop  21-23  364a-365a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  viii 
133b-138b  esp  sect  8-10  134b-d;  ch  xii, 
sect  3-6  147d-148c;  ch  xiii,  sect  17-20 
152a-d;  ch  xxi,  sect  3  178d;  sect  75  200b- 
d;  ch  xxiii,  sect  7-10  205d-206d;  sect  37 
213d-214b;  ch  xxx,  sect  2  238b-c;  ch  xxxi, 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


146  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  7  c  to  7c{ 2) 


(lb.  The  distinction  between  substance  and  attri¬ 
bute,  accident  or  modification:  independent 
and  dependent  being.  1  b(6)  The  nature 
and  kinds  of  accidents  or  modifications .) 
sect  2  239b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  iv,  sect  i6  263b-c; 
ch  ix,  sect  13  288a-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  1-15 
413a-416a;  sect  25  417d-418a;  sect  49  422b; 
sect  73  427b-c;  sect  78  428a-b;  sect  102 
432d-433a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
122  505c-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  503a-b;  572a-b;  650b-651a 

7c.  The  distinction  between  potentiality  and 
actuality:  possible  and  actual  being 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  9  [i9a6-b4]  29b- 
d;  ch  13  [23^8-26]  35b-c  /  Topics ,  bk  v,  ch  8 
[i38b27~i39a9]  191c-d /Physics,  bk  iii,  ch  1-3 
278a-280c;  bk  iv,  ch  9  [2i7a20-b26]  297a-c  / 
Heavens ,  bk  iii,  ch  2  [30ib33~302a9]  393b  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [1009^2-39]  528d; 
bk  v,  ch  2  [1014*7-9]  534b;  [1014*19-25] 
534b-c;  ch  7  [ioi7a35— b9]  538a-b;  ch  12  540b- 
541b;  bk  ix  570b,d-578a,c;  bk  xii,  ch  2 
[io69bi5— 34]  598d-599a;  ch  5  600b-601a;  bk 
xiii,  ch  3  [1078*21-31]  609d;  ch  10  [1087*10- 
25]  619c  /  Soul ,  bk  11,  ch  2  [414*14-28]  644b-c; 
ch  5  [417^— 4i8a6]  647c-648d 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  v  57d-60c  / 
Third  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  8-19  lllc-119a;  tr  ix, 
ch  3, 137d-138a  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  15-17 
260c-261d;  ch  25-30  265b-268c;  tr  iii,  ch  22, 
293d-294a;  ch  27  296b-297a 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  35, 
653c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  3,  ans  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  1,  ans  14b-15b;  a  2, 
ans  15c-16a;  a  4,  ans  16d-17c;  a  5,  ans  17c- 
18b;  a  6,  ans  18c-19a;  a  7,  ans  19a-c;  a  8, 
ans  19d-20c;  q  4,  a  1  20d-21b;  a  2,  ans  21b- 
22b;  q  5,  a  1  23c-24a;  a  2,  rep  2  24b-25a; 
a  3,  rep  3  25a-d;  q  6,  a  3,  rep  i  29c-30b; 
q  7,  a  2.  rep  3  31d-32c;  q  9,  a  1,  ans  and 
rep  1  38c-39c;  a  2,  ans  39c-40d;  q  ii,  a  i, 
rep  2  46d-47d;  q  14,  a  2  76d-77d;  a  3,  ans 
77d-78b;  a  4,  ans  78b-79a;  q  18,  a  i,  ans 
104c-105c;  a  3,  rep  1  106b-107c;  a  4,  rep 
3  107d-108c;  q  25,  a  i,  rep  i  143d-144c; 
q  45,  a  5,  rep  3  245c-247a;  q  46,  a  i,  rep 
1  250a-252d;  q  54,  a  1,  ans  285a-d;  a  3,  ans 
and  rep  2  286c-287b;  q  75,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  2  378b-379c;  q  86,  a  3  463b-d;  q  115, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  1,4  585d-587c;  part  i-ii, 
q  10,  a  1,  rep  2  662d-663d;  q  27,  a  3  738c- 
739c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  iii,  86d-87a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  def  4  424a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  90c-91a  /  Practical  Reason , 
291a-292a  /  Judgement ,  570c-571c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b;  160d-161c;  178a-179d 


7c(l)  The  order  of  potentiality  and  actuality 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  13  [23a2i-26] 
35b-c  /  Physics ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [201*19-27]  278d  / 
Heavens ,  bk  iv,  ch  3  [3iob22-3iiai2]  402b-c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  iii,  ch  6  [ioo2b32-ioo3a5] 
521d;  bk  v,  ch  11  [ioi9ai-i4]  540a;  bk  vii,  ch 
9  [i034bi6-i9]  558a;  bk  ix,  ch  8-9  575b-577c; 
bk  xii,  ch  5  [1071*30-36]  601a;  ch  6-7  601b- 
603b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  v  57d-60c  / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  7,  llla-b;  ch  ii,  113b- 
c;  ch  14-15  115b-116c;  tr  ix,  ch  3, 137d-138a 
/  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  15-22  260c-264c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a  i, 
ans  14b-15b;  a  8,  ans  19d-20c;  q  4,  a  i,  rep  2 
20d-21b;  a  2,  ans  21b-22b;  q  9,  a  1,  ans 
38c-39c;  q  ii,  a  2,  rep  i  47d-48d;  q  25,  a  i, 
rep  2  143d-144c;  q  94,  a  3,  ans  504a-505a; 
part  1-11,  q  2,  a  7,  ans  620d-621c;  q  3,  a  2, 
ans  623a-624b;  q  9,  a  1,  ans  657d-658d;  q  22, 
a  2,  rep  1  721c-722c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  2,  rep  3  7c-8a;  q  71,  a  3  107c-108b;  part  iii, 
q  10,  a  3,  ans  769d-771b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  i  [103-142] 
107b-d;  xiii  [52-87]  126a-b;  xxix  [22-36]  150c 

7c(2)  Types  of  potency  and  degrees  of  actu¬ 
ality 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  13  [22b35~23ai7] 
34d-35b  /  Physics,  bk  iii,  ch  6  [206*18-24] 
284c;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [2o8b8-209ai]  287b-c;  bk 
vii,  ch  3  [247bi-248a6]  330b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  4 
[255a3o-b3i]  340a-c  /  Heavens,  bk  iv,  ch  3 
[3iob22-3iiai2]  402b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v, 
ch  12  540b-541b;  bk  ix,  ch  1-9  570b,d-577c; 
bk  xii,  ch  5  600b-601a  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[4i2a6-i2]  642a;  [4i2a22-28]  642b;  bk  hi,  ch 
4-5  661b-662d  /  Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  4 
[44ibi6-24]  679b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [no3a26-b24] 
348d-349b;  ch  5  [iio6a7~io]  351c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  v  57d-60c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  1,  par  10  3b-c  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  8  626c-627a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  4, 
a  2,  ans  21b-22b;  q  5,  a  1,  rep  i  23c-24a;  q  14, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  2-3  76d-77d;  q  18,  a  3,  ans 
and  rep  1  106b-107c;  q  25  143c-150a;  q  48, 
a  4,  ans  262a-263a;  q  50,  a  2  270a-272a;  q  52, 
aa  1-2  278d-280a;  q  58,  a  1  300c-301a;  Q  63, 
a  1,  rep  1  325c-326c;  q  66,  a  2  345d-347b; 
q  75,  a  5  382a-383b;  a  6,  rep  2  383c-384c; 
q  77,  a  1  399c-401b;  a  3  401d-403a;  a  6  404c- 
405c;  q  79,  a  2  414d-416a;  a  10  423d-424d; 
q  87,  a  2,  ans  466c-467b;  q  92,  a  4,  rep  3 
491b-d;  q  104,  a  4,  rep  2  538a-c;  q  105,  a  5, 
ans  542a-543b;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  1  623a-624b;  q  10,  a  i,  rep  2  662d-663d; 
q  22,  a  1  720d-721c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  3  4b-5a;  q  50,  a  2  7c-8a;  a  6  lla-12a;  q  51, 


147 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


7c(3)  to  Id 

a  2  13c-14b;  q  55,  a  2,  ans  27a-d;  q  71,  a  4, 
rep  3  108b-109a 

35  Locki::  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  vii, 
sect  8  132d-133a;  ch  xxi,  sect  1-4  178b- 
179c;  sect  74,  199d-200b;  ch  xxiii,  sect  7 
205d-206a;  sect  28  211b  d 

7c(3)  Potentiality  and  actuality  in  relation  to 
matter  and  form 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [i92a25— 33] 
268c;  bk  11,  ch  i  1 193*9— J 1  269b-270a;  bk 
iii,  ch  1-3  278a-280c  /  Heavens ,  bk  iv,  ch  3 
[3iob22~3iiai2]  402b-c  /  Generation  and  Cor¬ 
ruption,  bk  1,  ch  3  413c-416c;  ch  7  421d-423b; 
ch  9  425d-426c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  4 
534d-535c;  bk  vii,  ch  16  [i040b5*i6]  564c; 
bk  viii,  ch  6  569d-570d;  bk  ix,  ch  6-9  573c- 
577c;  bk  xi,  ch  9  593d-594d;  bk  xii,  ch  5 
600b'601a;  bk  xiii,  ch  3  [1078*21-31]  609d  / 
Soul ,  bk  ii,  ch  1-2  642a-644c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  3-8  28a- 
31c;  ch  10  32a-33a;  ch  12  33d-34a  /  Second 
Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  6  51d-52a;  tr  v  57d-60c  / 
Third  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  7-19  110d-119a;  tr 
ix,  ch  3,  137d-138a  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  2 
208c-209b;  tr  ix,  ch  3  247b-d/  S/rM  Ennead , 
tr  1,  ch  25-30  265b-268c;  tr  v,  ch  5-8  307a- 
308c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii,  par  3-6  99d- 
100c;  par  8,  101b;  par  9,  101c;  par  14-16 
102b-103a;  par  24-26  104c-105b;  par  28-31 
105c-107a;  par  38-40  108d-110a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  3  15c-16a;  a  4,  ans  16d-l7c;  q  4, 
a  1  20d-21b;  a  2,  ans  21b-22b;  q  7,  a  1,  ans 
31a-d;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  31d-32c;  q  14,  a  2, 
rep  3  76d-77d;  q  18,  a  3,  rep  i  106b-107c; 
q  25,  a  1,  rep  1  143d-144c;  q  44,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  3  239b-240a;  q  45,  a  5,  rep  2  245c-247a; 
q  50,  a  2,  rep  3  270a-272a;  a  5,  ans  274b- 
275a;  q  55,  a  2,  ans  289d-290d;  q  62,  a  7, 
rep  1  322d-323b;  q  66,  a  2  345d-347b;  q  75, 
a  2,  ans  379c-380c;  a  5  382a-383b;  q  77,  a  i, 
rep  2  399c-401b;  q  86,  a  3  463b-d;  q  90, 
a  2,  rep  2  481d-482c;  q  92,  a  3,  rep  i  490c- 
491b;  q  104,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  i  534c-536c; 
q  105,  a  1,  ans  538d-539c;  part  i-ii,  q  i, 
a  3,  ans  611b-612a;  q  10,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 
2  662d-663d;  q  22,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i  720d- 
721c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  i  5a-6a;  q  85,  a  6  182d-184a; 
part  iii,  q  2,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  710a-711c; 
part  iii  suppl,  q  82,  a  1,  rep  2  968a-970c; 
Q  92,  a  1,  ans  1025c-1032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [121-141] 
107c-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  384c-d; 
494a-b 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  212a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b 


Id,  The  distinction  between  real  and  idea! 
being,  or  between  natural  being  and 
being  in  mind 

7  Plato:  Parmenides ,  489a  b 

8  Aristotle  :  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,ch  36  [48u4o- 
b9]  66 d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  7  [10 17*3 1-34) 
538a;  bk  vi,  cii  4  550a, c;  bk  ix,  ch  3  [104711 
3o-b2]  572c;  ch  10  577c-578a,c;  bk  xii,  ch  7 
[n>72bi8-24]  602d-603a;  ch  9  [io74b35~ 
1075*11]  605c-d  /  Soul ,  bk  iii,  ch  4  [429*13- 
29]  661b-c;  cii  8  [^\h20-^2^]  664b  c  / 
Memory  and  Reminiscence ,  cii  1  [450^2- 
45iai4)  691c-692b 

11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder ,  bk  i, 
403  b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  8  132d- 
133c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  1,  rep  2  lOd-lld;  q  3,  a  4,  rep  2  16d-17c; 
q  11,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  46d-47d;  q  12,  a  2 
51c-52c;  q  13,  a  3,  rep  3  64d-65c;  a  7,  ans 
and  rep  2,4-5  68d-70d;  a  9,  ans  and  rep  2 
71b-72c;  a  12  74c-75b;  q  14,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  3  75d-76c;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2-3  76d-77d; 
a  6,  rep  1  80a-81c;  a  8,  ans  82c-83b;  a  9, 
ans  83b-d;  a  13,  rep  2-3  86d-88c;  q  15,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  1,3  91b-92a;  a  3,  rep  4  93b-94a; 
q  16,  a  2  95c-96b;  a  7,  rep  2  99a-d;  q  17,  a  3, 
ans  102d-103c;  q  18,  a  4,  rep  2-3  107d-108c; 
Q  19,  A  3,  REP  6  110b-lllc;  Q  29,  A  I,  REP  3 
162a-163b;  q  30,  a  i,  rep  4  167a-168a;  a  4 
170c-171b;  q  34,  a  1,  rep  3  185b-187b;  q  50, 
a  2,  ans  270a-272a;  q  55,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i 
289d-290d;  a  3  esp  rep  i  291a-d;  q  56,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  3  292d-294a;  a  3,  ans  294a-d; 
Q  57,  a  2  295d-297a;  q  58,  a  6,  ans  and  rep 
1,3  304c-305b;  a  7,  ans  305c-306b;  q  66,  a  2, 
rep  2  345d-347b;  q  67,  a  3,  ans  351b-352a; 
Q  74,  a  3,  rep  5  375a-377a,c;  q  76,  a  3,  rep  4 
391a-393a;  a  6,  rep  2  396a-d;  q  84  440b-451b; 
q  85,  a  2  453d-455b;  a  3,  rep  1,4  455b-457a; 
a  5,  rep  3  457d-458d;  q  88,  a  2,  rep  4  471c- 
472c;  part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  6,  rep  2  641a-642a; 
q  6,  a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  649a-650a;  q  8,  a  1, 
ans  and  rep  3  655b-656a;  q  12,  a  3,  rep  2-3 
670d-671b;  q  17,  a  4,  ans  688d-689c;  q  22, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  721c-722c;  q  28,  a  i,  rep  3 
740b-741a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  2, 
a  5,  rep  2  715a-716b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  82, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  971a-972d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  53c;  part  iii, 
172a-d;  part  iv,  262a-d;  270a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  //,  act  v,  sc  v  [1-4 1] 
349d-350a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote  esp  part  i,  la-8c, 
18d-22a,  part  ii,  285a-288c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  71d-72a;  iii,  83b- 
86a;  v,  93a-94a  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  108b- 
109d;  121a-c;  def  iii-iv  130b;  axiom  v  131d- 
132a;  157b-158a;  212c-213a 


148 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  7d(  1)  to  7d(2) 


(7.  The  divisions  or  modes  of  being.  Id.  The  dis¬ 
tinction  between  real  and  ideal  being,  or 
between  natural  being  and  being  in  mind.) 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d 
esp  371c-372c;  part  ii,  prop  5-9  374c-376c 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxii, 
sect  2  201a-b;  ch  xxx,  sect  2  238b-c;  ch 
xxxi,  sect  2  239b-d;  ch  xxxii,  sect  14-18 
245c-247a  passim;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect  15-19 
258b-260a;  ch  vi  268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect 
2-3  268c-d,  sect  8  270b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  ii, 
sect  14  312b-d;  ch  iv,  sect  6-8  325a-c;  ch 
ix,  sect  1  349a;  ch  xi,  sect  4-9  355b-357a 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  1-96 
413a-431d  esp  sect  1-24  413a-417d,  sect  29- 
44  418c-421a,  sect  48-49  422a-b,  sect  82-84 
428d-429c,  sect  86-91  429c-431a 
35  Hume:  Human  Under standing,  sect  v,  div  44 
468d-469c  esp  469b-c;  sect  xii,  div  117-123 
504a-506a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  24a-33d  esp  25c-26a, 
28a-b,  31d-32c;  85d-93c;  200c-209d;  211c- 
212a  /  Practical  Reason ,  295  b-d  /  Judgement , 
551a-553c;  604a-b 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  134c-d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  153a-c; 
158a-160b;  188d-189a;  part  i,  219d-220a; 
236a-c;  257c-d;  part  iv,  354b;  364b-c 
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  385b 
50  Marx:  Capital ,  llb-c 

53  James : Psychology,  128a-b;  142a-b;  176a-177a; 
191b-192a;  302a;  639a-645b  esp  640a,  644b- 
645b;  659a-660b;  851b-852a;  865b-866a; 
868b;  879b-886a  esp  881a-882a;  889a-890a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  597d-598a 

7d(l)  The  being  of  the  possible 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  v-vi,  368c-383a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  ix,  ch  3  572a-c  / 
Soul ,  bk  iii,  ch  4  [429^8-23]  661c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  4-5  59c- 
60c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  7,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  3  31d-32c;  q  9,  a  2,  ans  39c-40d; 
q  14,  a  2,  rep  3  76d-77d;  a  9,  rep  i  83b-d; 
a  13,  rep  2-3  86d-88c;  q  18,  a  4,  rep  3  107d- 
108c;  q  46,  a  1,  rep  1-2  250a-252d 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  33,  schol  i 
367c-d;  part  ii,  prop  8  375c-376a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  lc 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  85d-88a;  95a-d;  97a-b; 
176d-177a;  179c-180c  /  Judgement,  550a-578a 
esp  550c-d,  552c-d,  555a-b,  564a-565b,  568a- 
c,  569a,  570c-575b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  153a-c; 
156d-157b;  178a-179d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  233b  [fn  1];  301b-302a 

ld{2)  The  being  of  ideas,  universals,  rights 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  87d-89a;  113c-114a,c  / 
Phaedo,  224a-225a;  228d-230c;  231b-232b; 


240b-246c  esp  242c-244b  /  Republic,  bk  v-vi, 
368c-388a;  bk  ix-x,  426d-429c  /  Timaeus, 
447a-d;  457b-458a  /  Parmenides ,  486c-491a 
esp  489a-c  /  Sophist,  567b;  570a-574c  /  Phile - 
bus,  610d-613a  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  ii 
[77a5“9]  105d-106a;  ch  22  [83^3-35]  113c-d; 
ch  24  [85a3i-b3]  116c;  [85bi7-22]  117a  / 
Topics,  bk  11,  ch  7  [113^4-33]  158d;  bk  vi, 
ch  8  [i47a5~n]  201a  /  Sophistical  Refutations, 
ch  22  [i78b37~i79aio]  246c  /  Physics,  bk  ii, 
ch  2  [i93b3 1— i94a6]  270b;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [203^- 
9]  280d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  6  505b-506b; 
ch  9  508c-511c;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [995bi3~i8]  514a; 
[995b27-996ai°]  514b-c;  ch  2  [997a34~bi2] 
516a-b;  [998a6— 13]  516d;  ch  4  [999b24-ioooa4] 
518c-d;  [iooia4-b25]  519d-520c;  ch  6  [ioo2b 
11-31]  521b-d;  [1003^-17]  521d-522a,c;  bk 

vii,  ch  8  [io33bi9-io34a8]  556d-557b;  ch  10 
[io35b28-32]  559b;  ch  13-16  562a-565a;  bk 

viii,  ch  6  569d-570d;  bk  ix,  ch  8  [io5ob35~ 
105^2]  576d-577a;  bk  x,  ch  2  [io53b9~23] 
580b-c;  ch  10  586c-d;  bk  xi,  ch  i  [io59a34-b8] 
587b-c;  ch  i  [io59b2i]-cH  2  [io6oa27]  587d- 
588b;  ch  2  [io6oa36-b3o]  588c-589a;  bk  xii, 
ch  1  [1069^7-37]  598b;  ch  3  [io7o&4]-ch  5 
[io7ib2]  599b-601a;  bk  xiii,  ch  i  [io76ai7— 33] 
607a-b;  ch  4-5  610a-611d;  ch  10  618c-619a,c 
/  Sold,  bk  11,  ch  5  [4i7bi7— 28]  648b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  6  341b-342c  pas¬ 
sim 

17  Plotinus  :  Second  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  3  58d-59c; 
tr  vi,  ch  3  62b-d  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch 
8  132d-133c  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  i,  229a; 
tr  vii  238a-239b;  tr  ix,  ch  5-8  248a-250a  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  5-8  307a-308c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  9,  3a  / 
City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  6,  269b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  8, 
a  4,  rep  1  37c-38c;  q  14,  preamble  75c-d; 
Q  15  91b-94a;  q  16,  a  7,  rep  2  99a-d;  q  18, 
a  4  107d-108c;  q  29,  a  2,  rep  4  163b-164b; 
q  44,  a  3  240b-241a;  q  47,  a  i,  rep  2  256a- 
257b;  q  55  288d-291d;  q  57,  aa  1-2  295a- 
297a;  q  65,  a  4  342b-343c;  q  76,  a  2,  rep  4 
388c-391a;  q  79,  a  3,  ans  416a-417a;  q  84,  aa 
1-7  440d-450b;  q  85,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1-2 
451c-453c;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  453d-455b; 
a  3,  rep  1,4  455b-457a;  a  8,  ans  460b-461b; 
q  86,  a  4,  rep  2  463d-464d;  q  87,  a  i,  ans 
465a-466c;  q  88,  a  i,  ans  469a-471c;  a  2, 
ans  471c-472c;  Q  105,  a  3,  ans  540c-541b; 
q  no,  a  1,  rep  3  564c-565d;  a  2,  ans  565d- 
566d;  q  115,  a  1,  ans  585d-587c;  a  3,  rep 
2  588c-589c;  part  i-ii,  q  29,  a  6,  ans  748b- 
749a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  2, 
a  5,  rep  2  715a-716b;  q  4,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2 
733a-734a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i,  ans 
1025c-1032b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  55b-c;  59d;  part 
iv,  262a-b 


7d(3)  to  7d{ 4)  Chapter 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43d-44c  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  51  111c;  bk  ii,  aph 
2  137b-c;  aph  17  149b*d 

31  Descartes:  Meditations f  hi,  84a  85a  /  0£- 
jections  and  Replies ,  121a-c;  def  i-iv  130a  b; 
axiom  vi  132a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  37-40  386b- 
388b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  cii  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  bk  ii,  cii  viii  133b-138b 
passim;  ch  xi,  sect  8-9  145b-c;  ch  xxii,  sect 
2  201a-b;  ch  xxx  238a-239b;  ch  xxxi,  sect  2 
239b-d;  ch  xxxii,  sect  6-8  244b-d;  sect 
14-18  245c-247a;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect  11-20 
257a-260a;  ch  v-vi  263d  283a  passim,  esp  ch 
vi,  sect  32-33  277c-278c,  sect  36-37  279a- 
b;  bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  4-5  324c-d;  sect  11-12 
326b-d;  ch  vi,  sect  4  331d-332b;  ch  ix,  sect 
1  349a;  ch  xi,  sect  4-9  355b-357a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
12-16  408a-409d;  sect  2-4  413b-414a;  sect 
48-49  422a-b;  sect  86-91  429c-431a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
122  505c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  93c-99a;  112d-209d  esp 
112d-120c,  121a-128b,  129c-145c,  173b-190a; 
237b  /  Fund .  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  281c- 
282d  /  Science  of  Right,  404d-408b;  416b-417b 
/  Judgement,  461a-c;  489b-c;  504d-505a; 
528d-530c;  542b-544c;  551a-552c;  570b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  6a-7a; 
intro,  par  1  9a;  part  i,  par  66-67  29a-c; 
par  71  31b-c;  part  iii,  par  184  64b;  par  280 
94d-95a;  additions,  2  115d  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  156d-190b  esp  156d-157b, 
158a-160b,  165a-b;  part  iv,  364b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  113a-115a  esp  113b-114a; 
128a-b;  300a-313a  passim,  esp  300a-301a, 
304b,  307a-b,  309a-311a;  641b-643a  passim; 
659a-b;  865b;  881b-882a 

7*/(3)  The  being  of  mathematical  objects 

7  Plato:  Phaedo,  228b-229d  /  Republic ,  bk  vi, 
387b-c;  bk  vii,  392a-394c;  395c-397a  / 
Theaetetus,  535 b-c;  541  b-d  /  Sophist,  562c-d  / 
Philebus,  636b-c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810b 

8  Aristotle  :  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  13 

[79a6-io]  108c;  ch  18  [8ia40-b5]  lllb-c  /  Top¬ 
ics,  bk  vi,  ch  6  [i43bi  1—33]  197b-c  /  Physics, 
bk  11,  ch  2  [i93b23— 1 94ai  1]  270a-c;  bk  iii,  ch  4 
[203a4~9]  280d;  ch  5  [204^-34]  282a-b;  bk 
iv,  ch  1  [2o8bi9-24]  287b-c;  ch  ii  [2 1 9b5~ 8] 
299b;  ch  14  [223a2i-29]  303a  /  Metaphysics, 
bk  1,  ch  5  [985b22~986a2i]  503d-504b;  ch  6 
[987bio~34]  505c-506a;  ch  8  [989b29~99oa32] 
508a-c;  ch  9  [99ib9~992bi8]  509d-511a;  bk  iii, 
ch  1  [995bi3~i8]  514a;  [996ai3~ 15]  514c;  ch  2 
[997bi2-998ai9]  516b-d;  ch  5  [iooib26]-cii  6 
[ioo2b25]  520c-521c;  bk  vii,  ch  2  [io28bi8-28] 
551a-b;  ch  10  [i035b32-i036ai2]  559b-c;  ch 
ii  [io36b32-io37a4]  560b-c;  bk  xi,  ch  2 
[io6oa36-bi9]  588c-d;  ch  3  [io6ia29-b4] 


:  BEING  149 

589c;  bk  xii,  ch  i  [io69a3o-37]  598b;  ch  10 
[io75b25-io76u4]  606c-d;  bk  xiii,  ch  1-3  607a- 
610a;  ch  6-9  611d-618c;  bk  xiv  619b,d-626d 
/  Soul,  bk  in,  ch  7  [43 1^13—19]  664b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  cii  6  [i096ai7~-i9] 
341b;  bk  vi,  cii  8  [1 1 42ai 6— 1 9]  391b 
11  Nicomaciius:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  811a-812a; 
813d-814b 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi  310d-321b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  19  76a- b  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  cii  38  654 b  e 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  5, 
a  3,  rep  4  25a-d;  q  iq,  a  6,  ans  45c-46d;  q  ii, 
a  1,  rep  1  46d-47d;  a  3,  rei> 2  49a-c;  q  30,  a  i, 
rep  4  167a-168a;  q  44,  a  i,  rep  3  238b-239a; 
q  85,  a  1,  rep  2  451c-453c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  83,  a  2,  ans  976c-978c;  a  3,  rep  2  978c-980d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiv,  30b-32a  /  Discourse , 
part  iv,  52d-53a  /  Meditations,  1,  76c;  v, 
93a-d;  v-vi,  96a-b  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
169c-170a;  216d-217c;  218c;  228c-229a 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  chxiii, 
sect  5-6  149b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  hi,  sect  19, 
259c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  5-8  324d-325c 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
12-16  408a-409d;  sect  12-16  415b-416a;  sect 
118-128  436b-438d  passim,  esp  sect  121-122 
436d-437c,  sect  125-126  438a-c 
35  Hume  :  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv,  div  20 
458a-b;  sect  xii,  div  122  505c-d 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  16a-b;  17d-18d;  24d-25b; 
31b-d;  46a-c;  55c;  62a-d;  68a-69c;  86b-c; 
87b-c;  91c-d;  94b-95a;  2ilc-213c;  217c-d  / 
Practical  Reason ,  312c  /  Judgement,  551a-552c 
53  James:  Psychology,  874a-878a  passim;  880b- 
881a 

7 d(4)  The  being  of  relations 

7  Plato  :  Phaedo,  242c-245b  /  Parmenides,  489a- 
c  /  Sophist,  570a-574c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [99ob9-i7] 
508d;  bk  xiv,  ch  i  [io88ai5-b4]  620b-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  6  [io96ai8-22] 
341b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  1,  ch  6-9  254d- 
257a 

19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  13,  a  7, 
ans  and  rep  2,4-5  68d-70d;  q  28,  aa  1-2  157c- 
160a;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1,3-4  160c-161d;  Q  40, 
a  2,  rep  4  214b-215b;  q  45,  a  3,  rep  1-3  244a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  2, 
a  7,  rep  2  718b-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  1,  aph  45  110b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxv, 
sect  i  214d-215b;  sect  io216d-217a;cHXXx, 
sect  4  238d-239a 

35  Berkeley:  Hwnan  Knowledge,  sect  ii,  415a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  24a-33d  esp  31d-32c; 
61a-64a  esp  62d-63c;  72c-85d;  99a-108a,c; 
119b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156b-c 


150 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  7d(5)  to  8* 


{Id.  The  distinction  between  real  and  ideal  being, 
or  between  natural  being  and  being  in 
mind.  7d{4)  The  being  of  relations .) 

53  James:  Psychology ,  157b-161a  esp  158b-159b; 
458a-459b;  865b;  873a-b;  879b-886a  esp 
884b-885a;  889a-890a 

ld{5)  The  being  of  fictions  and  negations 

7  Plato:  Sophist ,  561d-564b;  571d-574c  esp 
573a-574c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [99ob9— 15] 
508d;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [ioo4a9~i5]  523a;  bk  v,  ch  7 
[ioi7ai8]  537d;  [1017^31—34]  538a;  bk  vii,  ch 
4  [i030a24-27]  553a;  ch  7  [ic>32bi-6]  555b-c; 
bk  ix,  ch  3  [i047a30-b2]  572c;  bk  xii,  ch  i 
[io69si8-24]  598a 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  24  [i402a3~6] 
651b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [722-748] 
53d-54a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  12  16b  / 
City  of  God ,  bk  xi,  ch  22  333d-334c;  bk  xii, 
ch  7  346c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  13, 
a  7,  ans  68d-70d;  q  34,  a  3,  rep  5  188b-189a; 
q  48,  a  2  esp  rep  2  260c-261b;  q  51,  a  2,  ans 
276b-277a;  part  i-ii,  q  8,  a  i,  rep  3  655b- 
656a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  50d;  53c;  57b-c; 
part  iv,  262a-d 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  157b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  viii, 
sect  1-6  133b-134a;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect  19 
259c-260a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  345c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  62d-63a;  174d-175b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  160a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  639a-644a  esp  642b  [fn  2] 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  597b-598a  esp 
598a 

7e.  The  distinction  between  appearance  and 
reality,  between  the  sensible  and  supra- 
sensible,  between  the  phenomenal  and 
noumenal  orders 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus ,  124d- 
127a  /  Symposium ,  167a-d  /  Phaedo ,  224a- 
225a;  228a-232a  /  Republic ,  bk  v,  370d-373c; 
bk  vi,  383d-388a;  bk  vii,  396d-398c  / 
Timaeus,  447a-d;  450b-c;  455c-458a  esp  457c- 
458a  /  Theaetetus,  534d-536a  /  Sophist ,  567a- 
568c  /  Statesmany  595b-c  /  Philebus ,  634b- 
635b  /  Seventh  Letter ,  809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  4  [1 87^7— ^7] 
262 b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  29  [i024b22- 
27] 546c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [308-332] 
19a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  i,  60c- 
61b  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  6  203d-204b 
/  5/rM  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2  281a-282a 


18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  10  lla-b; 
bk  iii,  par  10  15b-d;  bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c; 
bk  x,  par  13  74c-d;  par  16-19  75b-76b  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  38  654b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  2,  ans  105c-106b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  291b-294b 
31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  238a-b; 
257d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix,  372a-c 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  viii 
133b-138b  passim,  esp  sect  7-10  134b-d,  sect 
15-20  135c-136c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  5  205a-b; 
sect  15  208c-d;  sect  29  211d-212a;  sect  32 
212c-d;  ch  xxxi,  sect  6-13  240d-243b;  bk 

iii,  ch  iii,  sect  15-18  258b-259c;  ch  vi 
268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect  9  270d-271a;  bk 

iv,  ch  xvi,  sect  12  370b-371a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  25-27 
417d-418b;  sect  86-91  429c-431a  passim; 
sect  101-102  432c-433a;  sect  135-142  440a- 
441c;  sect  148  442b-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv,  div  29 
461a-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  15c-16c;  19a;  19d-20c; 
27b-33d;  53b-59b  esp  58a-b;  86c-88c;  93c- 
99a;  101b-108a,c;  112b-d;  113c-115a;  153a-c; 
164a-165c;  172c-173a;  227a-228b  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  281c-282d  /  Practical 
Reason ,  292a-c;  307d-314d;  319c-321b;  328a- 
329a;  331a-337c;  340a-342d  esp  340c-341c; 
348b-353d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383c- 
d  /  Science  of  Right,  416b-417b  /  judgement , 
465a-c;  474b-475d;  500c-d;  501d-502a;  506d- 
507a;  510b-c;  530a;  541a-542a;  543a;  543c- 
544c;  551a-552c;  558d;  560c;  564a-c;  570b- 
572b  esp  571c-572a;  574b-577a;  579a;  581a- 
b;  584c-d;  587d-588a;  594d  [fn  1];  599d- 
600d;  603a-b;  604a-b;  606d-607c;  611c-613a,c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  82-83 
34d-35a;  additions,  52-53  124d-125a  /  Phi- 
losophy  of  History,  intro,  156d-157b;  part  ii, 
270d-271c;  part  iv,  349b-350a 
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  120a-121a;  385b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
168b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  185a-b;  234a-b;  503a-b; 
569b-570a;  606b-608b  esp  608a-b;  648a 

54  Freud:  Unconscious,  430b-c 

8.  Being  and  knowledge 

8a.  Being  and  becoming  in  relation  to  sense: 
perception  and  imagination 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  126b-d  /  Phaedo,  224a-225a; 
231b-232a  /  Republic,  bk  iii,  333b-334b;  bk 

v,  368c-373c;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Timaeus , 
447b-d;  450b-c;  453b-454a;  455c-458b  esp 
457b-458a  /  Theaetetus,  517b-536b  /  Sophist, 
565a-569a  esp  568a-569a  /  Philebus,  610d-613a 

8  Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i, 
ch  3  [3 1 8b  1 8—3 1 9^2]  415c-d;  ch  4  [3i9b5~24] 


8b  to  8c  Chapter 

416c-d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  r,  cn  5  [986b25- 
987^1]  504d-505a;  cii  6  [987a29-bi8]  505b  d; 
bk  iv,  ch  5-6  528c-531c;  bk  xi,  ch  6  [io62b33- 
106^8]  591ad  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  2  [404b7~ 
405^9]  633d-635a;  ch  5  [409br8— 4 1  ia7]  639c- 
641a;  bk  ii,  ch  5  647b-648d;  bk  ii,  ch  12 
(424ai6]-BK  iii,  ch  2  [426a25]  656a-658c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811c-d 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  i  228b- 
229c;  tr  ix,  ch  5  248a-249a  /  Sixth  Ennead , 
tr  1,  ch  27-28  266c-267c  esp  ch  28  267b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  10  15b  d; 
bk  iv,  par  15-17  23a-c;  bk  vii,  par  23  50b  c  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  38  654b  c 

19  Aquinas:  Snmma  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  67, 
a  3,  ans  351b-352a;  q  78,  a  3,  ans  410a-411d; 
q  86,  a  3  463b-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  292d-293d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  51c-53b  / 
Meditations,  74a, c;  11,  81d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  2-3 
413b-d;  sect  25-27  417d-418b;  sect  88-91 
430a-431a;  sect  135-142  440a-441c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  34a-72c  esp  34a-c,  39a-c, 
41c-42b,  45b-59b,  61a-64a,  65d-72c  /  Fund. 
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  281c-282d  / 
Judgement,  603d-604b 

8b.  Being  and  becoming  in  relation  to  intellect: 
abstraction  and  intuition 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-114a,c/  Phaedrus ,  125a- 
126c  /  Symposium,  167a-d  /  Phaedo ,  224a- 
226c;  228a-232a  /  Republic ,  bk  iii,  333b- 
334b;  bk  v-vi,  368c-375b;  bk  vi,  376d; 
382a-c;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c/  Timaeus,  447b- 
d;450b-c;  455c-458b/  Theaetetus,  534d-536b/ 
Sophist ,  565a-569a  esp  568a-569a  /  Philebus, 
610d-613a;  615c-619d  esp  619a-d;  634b-635b 
/  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  8 
104a-b  /  Topics,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [i2ia20-26]  169a- 
b  /  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  ii  [2i9b23~3i]  299c-d; 
bk  vii,  ch  3  [247bi-248a8]  330b-d  /  Heavens , 
bk  iii,  ch  1  [298bi5-24]  390a-b  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  1,  ch  5  [986b25~987ai]  504d-505a;  ch  6 
[987a29~bi8]  505b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [995b4~26] 
513d-514b;  ch  2  [996s!  8-997^4]  514d-516a; 
bk  iv  522a-532d;  bk  vi  547b,d-550a,c;  bk 
vii,  ch  15  [i039b20-i040a8]  563c-564a;  bk  xi, 
ch  1-8  587a-593d;  bk  xii,  ch  7  602a-603b; 
ch  9  605a-d  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  2  [404b7~405b29] 
633d-635a;  ch  5  [40915 1 8—4 1  ia7]  639c-641a; 
bk  11,  ch  5  [4 1 7a2 1—4 1 8a3 ]  647d-648c;  bk  iii, 
ch  4-8  661b-664d 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a-d 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  1-2 
228b-229d;  tr  ix,  ch  5  248a-249a  /  Sixth 
Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  27-28  266c-267c  esp  ch  28 
267b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c 
/  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  10,  328c-d  /  Christian 
Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  38  654b-c 


:  BEING  151 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  2,  ANS  24b  25a;  q  12,  a  i  50c-51c;  aa  3-4 
52c-54c;  q  16,  aa  2-3  95c  96d;  q  26,  a  2,  ans 
150c-151a;  q  34,  a  i,  rep  2  185b  187b;  q  50, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  1  270a  272a;  q  54,  a  2  285d 
286c;  q  78,  a  1,  ans  407b  409a;  q  79,  aa  i  10 
413d-424d  passim;  q  84,  aa  12  440d-443c; 
aa  6-7  447c-450b;  q  85,  a  1  451c-453c;  a  5, 
rep  3  457d  458d;  q  86,  a  1  461c-462a;  a  3 
463b-d;  q  88  468d-473a;  q  89,  a  4  476c-477a; 
q  105,  a  3,  ans  540c-541b;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  8, 
ans  628d-629c;  q  10,  a  i,  rep  3  662d-663d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  2, 
a  3,  ans  392d-393c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i 
1025c-1032b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  51c-53b  / 
Meditations,  11,  81b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  25-27 
417d-418b;  sect  88-91  430a-431a;  sect  135— 
142  440a-441c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  38a-108a,c  esp  39a-c, 
41c-93c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
281c-282d;  285a-287d  /  Judgement,  465a  c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  343 
llOd-llla  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  160d- 
161c 

8c.  Essence  or  substance  as  the  object  of  defini¬ 
tion:  real  and  nominal  essences 

7  Plato:  Meno,  174a-179b  passim  /  Euthyphro, 
196a-b/  Gorgias ,  252d-253b/  Republic,  bk  vi, 
384a-386c  esp  385b-c/  Theaetetus,  514b-515c; 
547c-549c  /  Sophist,  551a-552c  /  Laws,  bk  x, 
763c-d  /  Seventh  Letter,  809a-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  5  [2ai9~3b24]  6b-8a 
/  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  22  113b-115b; 
ch  33  [89ai7-b5]  121d-122a,c;  bk  ii,  ch  3-10 
123c-128d;  ch  13  131b-133c  /  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch 
4  [ioibi7-23]  144b-c;  ch  5  [ioib37-io2a5] 
144d;  ch  8  [io3bi-n]  146d;  ch  18  [io8a38-b9] 
152d;  [io8bi9-32]  153a, c  ;  bk  vi,  ch  1  [i39a24~ 
34]  192a;  bk  vi,  ch  4-BK  vii,  ch  5  194c-211a,c 
passim  /  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [186^4-34]  261c- 
262a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [193*30— bi9]  269c-270a;  ch  2 
[i94ai  1— 14]  270c  /  Meteorology ,  bk  iv,  ch  12 
493d-494d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [983^4- 
29]  501c;  ch  5  [987^9-27]  505b;  ch  6  [987a35~ 
bio]  505c;  [987b3o-33]  506a;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [994b 
16-27]  513a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [996bi2-2i]  515a- 
b;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [ioo6a29~bi8]  525c-d;  [ioo7a20- 
bi8]  526c-527a;  bk  v,  ch  2  [ioi3a27-28]  533b* 
bk  vi,  ch  1  [i025b28-i02 6a6]  547d-548a;  br 
vii,  ch  1  [1028^1-37]  550d;cH4~6  552b-555a, 
ch  10-17  558a-566a,c;  bk  viii,  ch  2-3  566d- 
568d;  ch  6  569d-570d;  bk  xi,  ch  7  [io64ai9- 
28]  592c;  bk  xii,  ch  9  [1074^7-1075^]  605c; 
bk  xiii,  ch  2  [io77bi-io]  608d-609a;  ch  4 
[io78bi8-32]  610b-c  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  i  631a- 
632d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [4 i2ai— b24]  642a-d;  bk  iii, 
ch  6  [43ob26~3i]  663 b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[64^14-31]  163d-164a;  ch  2-3  165d-167d 


152 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Sd  to  8/ 


(8.  Being  and  knowledge.  8c.  Essence  or  substance 
as  the  object  of  definition:  real  and  nominal 
essences.) 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i,  a  7, 
rep  i  7a-c;  q  2,  a  1,  rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  2,  rep  2 
lld-12c;  q  3,  a  3,  ans  16a-d;  a  5,  ans  17c- 
18b;  q  17,  a  3  102d-103c;  q  18,  a  2,  ans  105c- 
106b;  q  29,  a  1  162a-163b;  a  2,  rep  3  163b- 
164b;  q  44,  a  1,  rep  i  238b-239a;  a  3,  rep  3 
240b-241a;  q  58,  a  5  303c-304c;  q  75,  a  4, 
ans  381b-382a;  q  85,  a  6  458d-459c;  q  116, 
a  1,  contrary  592d-593d;  part  i-ii,  q  10, 
a  1,  rep  3  662d-663d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  2, 
a  1,  ans  710a-711c;  a  2,  ans  711d-712d;  q  60, 
a  4,  rep  1  849c-850b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  55b-c;  56b;  part 
iv,  269b-271a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  142d- 
143a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  43d-44c  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  4  137d-138b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  51d-52a  / 
Objections  and  Replies,  postulate  iv  131a-b; 
153d;  160d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  4  355b;  prop  8, 
schol  2,  357b-d;  prop  10  358a-b;  part  ii, 
def  2  373b;  prop  37  386b-c;  part  iii,  prop  4 
398d 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  372b-373b;  376b-377a  / 
Geometrical  Demonstration ,  430b-431b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxiii,  sect  1-16  204a-209a  esp  sect  6  205b-c, 
sect  14  208b-c;  sect  29-32  211d-212d;  ch 
xxxi,  sect  3  240a-b;  sect  6-13  240d-243b; 
ch  xxxii,  sect  18  246c-247a;  sect  24  247c-d; 
bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect  12-20  257b-260a;  ch  iv, 
sect  3  260b;  ch  v,  sect  14  267b-c;  ch  vi 
268b-283a;  ch  ix,  sect  11-17  287d-290a;  ch 
x,  sect  17-21  295d-297b;  ch  xi,  sect  15-23 
303b-305b;  bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  11-17  326b- 
328d;  chvi,  SECT4-i6331d-336d;  chxii.sect 
7-12  360b-362c  passim,  esp  sect  9  360d-361b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
18  410a-c;  sect  101-102  432c-433a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  179d-180a;  215d-216c  / 
Science  of  Right,  404d;  423d-424b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  176c 

53  James:  Psychology,  185a-b;  668a-670b 

8d.  The  role  of  essence  in  demonstration:  the 
use  of  essence,  property,  and  accident  in 
inference 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  27 
[70*3-39]  92a-c  /  Posterior  Analytics  97a-137a,c 
esp  bk  11  122b,d-137a,c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i, 
ch  3  [983*24-29]  501c;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [996bi2-2i] 
515a-b;  [997*25-34]  515d-516a;  bk  vi,  ch  i 
[i025bi-i8]  547b, d;  bk  xi,  ch  1  [1059*29-34] 
587b;  ch  7  [io63b36-io64a9]  592b  /  Soul,  bk 
ii,  ch  2  [4i3aio-bi3]  643a-d;  ch  4  [415*14- 
23]  645b-c 


19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i,  q  2,  a  2, 
rep  2-3  lld-12c;  q  3,  a  5,  ans  17c-18b;  q  17, 
a  3,  rep  1-2  102d-103c;  q  18,  a  2,  ans  105c- 
106b;  q  46,  a  2,  ans  253a-255a;  q  77,  a  i,  rep 
7  399c-401b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  269d-270c 
31  Descartes:  Meditations,  v,  93b-c  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  207b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  xi, 
sect  15-17  303b-304a  esp  sect  16  303c-d; 
bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  9-17  315c-317c  passim,  esp 
sect  14  316b-d;  ch  vi,  sect  4-16  331d-336d 
passim;  ch  xii,  sect  6-9  360a-361b 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  180c-182b 
53  James:  Psychology,  666b-673a  esp  667b-671a 

8e.  The  accidental  in  relation  to  science  and 
definition 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [32b4- 
23]  48b-d  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  4  100a- 
101b;  ch  6  [75*18-38]  103a-c;  ch  8  104a-b; 
ch  30  119d  /  Topics,  bk  ii-iii  153a-168a,c; 
bk  iv,  ch  1  [121*6-9]  168d-169a;  ch  2  [i22bi2- 
18]  170d-171a;  ch  4  [i25*33-bio]  174b-c;  ch  6 
[i27bi-4]  177a;  bk  v  178b,d-192a,c;  bk  vi,  ch 
6  196d-199c;  ch  14  [i5i*32-b2]  206b-c  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  1,  ch  9  [990b22~99ia2]  509a;  bk  iii, 
ch  i  [995bi8-27]  514a-b;  ch  2  [997*25-34] 
515d-516a;  bk  iv,  ch  2  522b-524b  esp  [1005“ 
13-17]  524b;  bk  vi,  ch  2  548c-549c;  bk  vii, 
ch  4-6  552b-555a;  bk  viii,  ch  4  [i044b8-2o] 
569b;  bk  xi,  ch  i  [1059*29-34]  587b;  ch  3 
589a-d;  bk  xiii,  ch  2  [i077a23~bi4]  608c-609a 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811b-812a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  13,  ans  and  rep  3  86d-88c;  q  18,  a  2,  ans 
105c-106b;  q  57,  a  3,  ans  297b-298a;  q  86, 
a  3  463 b-d;  part  i-ii,  q  7,  a  2  esp  rep  2 
652d-653c;  q  18,  a  3,  rep  2  695d-696b 
31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  135b- 
136b;  153d;  170d;  207b;  209c-210b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxiii,  sect  3-16  204c-209a  esp  sect  6  205b-c, 
sect  14  208b-c;  sect  29-32  211d-212d;  sect 
37  213d-214b;  ch  xxxi,  sect  8-1  i  242a-243a; 
sect  13  243a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  vi  268b-283a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  sect  2-5  268c-269d;  ch  ix,  sect 
13-17  288a-290a;  ch  xi,sect  19-22  304b-305a 
35  Berkeley://#^??  Knowledges ect  i  413a-b; 
sect  49  422b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
67  480c-481a 

8f.  Judgments  and  demonstrations  of  existence: 
their  sources  and  validity 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  x,  757d-765d  esp  758c-760a, 
760d-762b,  765b-d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  9  (99ob9-22] 
508d-509a;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [i025bi-i8]  547b, d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ix,  ch  9  [ii7o*i6-b8] 
423d-424b  passim,  esp  [ii7oa28-bi]  424a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [418-448] 
6b-c 


8/ 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  26  336d- 
337b 

19  Aquinas:  Sutwna  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  1,  rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  2  lld-12c;  q  3,  a  4,  rep  2 
16d  17c;  a  5,  ans  17c-18b;  q  12,  a  12,  ans  and 
rep  1  60d-61c;  q  46,  a  2,  ans  253a-255a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  269d  270c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  51c-53b  / 
Meditations ,  71d-72a;  11,  78a-b;  111,  85a-86d; 
v-vi  93a- 103d  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  llOb-c; 
121b-c;  122c-123a;  126b-127c;  postulate  iv- 
vii  131a-c;  140b-c;  207b;  209d-210b;  224b, d; 
261a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  ii  358b-359b; 
prop  14  359d-360a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  vii, 
sect  7  132d;  ch  xiv,  sect  3  155c-d;  ch  xxiii, 
sect  5  205a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  sect  14  312b-d; 


153 

ch  hi,  sect  21  319c;  cii  vii,  sect  7  338c;  cn 
ix  xi  349a-358c;  cii  xvii,  sect  2,  371d 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  18  20 
416b-417a;  sect  25-29  417d-418c;  sect  88-89 
430a-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv,  mv 
20-sect  v,  mv  38  458a-466c  passim,  csp  sect 
iv,  div  30  461d  462b,  sect  v,  div  35  464c  d, 
div  38,  466b;  sect  xi  497b-503c  passim,  csp 
div  1 15  503b-c;  sect  xii,  div  1 17-123  504a- 
506a;  div  132  509a-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  85d-88a;  179c*201c  csp 
193a-b;  228c-d 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  134c-d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  280 
94d-95a 

53  James:  Psychology,  176a-177a;  640b  [fn  1]; 
643a-659a  csp  643b-645b,  648a 


Chapter  7:  BEING 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For :  ‘Being’  as  a  transcendental  term  or  concept,  see  Idea  4b(4);  Metaphysics  2b;  Opposition 
2c;  for  the  analysis  of  the  meaning  of  words  like  “being,”  and  for  the  theory  of ‘being’  as  an 
analogical  term  or  concept,  see  Relation  id;  Same  and  Other  4c;  Sign  and  Symbol  3d. 

The  discussion  of  unity,  goodness,  and  truth  as  properties  of  being,  or  as  convertible  with 
being,  see  Good  and  Evil  ib;  One  and  Many  i;  Same  and  Other  ia,  2e;  Truth  ib. 

Other  treatments  of  the  distinction  between  being  and  becoming,  and  of  the  problem  of  the 
reality  of  mutable  as  compared  with  immutable  being,  see  Change  i,  10c;  Eternity  4a- 
4b;  Matter  i;  Necessity  and  Contingency  2c. 

Considerations  relevant  to  the  distinction  between  essence  and  existence,  see  Form  2a;  God 
2a-2b,  4a;  Necessity  and  Contingency  2a-2b;  Soul  4b;  Universal  and  Particular 
2a;  for  considerations  relevant  to  the  distinction  between  substance  and  accident,  or 
between  the  essential  and  the  accidental,  see  Form  2c(2);  Matter  ib;  Nature  ia(i); 
Necessity  and  Contingency  2d;  Quality  i;  Quantity  i;  Same  and  Other  3a; 
Soul  2a;  and  for  the  problem  of  the  being  of  qualities,  quantities,  and  relations,  see 
Quality  i;  Quantity  i;  Relation  ia. 

Considerations  relevant  to  the  distinction  between  potentiality  and  actuality,  or  matter  and 
form,  see  Change  2a;  Desire  2a;  Form  2c(i);  Habit  ia;  Infinity  ib,  4c;  Matter  i-ia, 
3b;  Mind  2b,  4c;  Necessity  and  Contingency  1;  for  considerations  relevant  to  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  the  real  and  the  ideal,  see  Idea  3c,  6a— 6b;  Knowledge  6a(3);  and  for  the 
controversy  over  the  real  existence  of  ideas,  forms,  mathematical  objects,  universal,  see 
Form  ia,  2a;  Mathematics  2b;  Space  5;  Universal  And  Particular  2a-2c. 

Considerations  relevant  to  the  distinction  between  sensible  and  supra-sensible  being,  see 
Knowledge  6a(i),  6a (4);  Mind  ia(i). 

Elaborations  of  the  theory  of  substance  and  treatments  of  the  distinction  between  material  and 
immaterial,  corruptible  and  incorruptible  substances,  see  Angel  2;  Change  10c;  Element 
5a;  Form  2d;  Man  3a~3a(i),  3b;  Matter  2,  2d,  3a;  Mind  ib,  2a,  ioc-iod;  Soul  3a~3c,  4b. 

The  relation  of  being  and  becoming  as  objects  of  knowledge  to  the  faculties  of  sense  and 
reason,  /^Change  ii;  Knowledge  6a(i);  Opinion  1;  Sense  ib. 

Essence  in  relation  to  the  natures  of  things  and  to  their  definitions,  see  Definition  ia;  Form 
3c;  Knowledge  6a(2);  Nature  ia,  ia(2),  4a. 

The  relation  of  the  concept  ‘being’  to  the  principle  of  contradiction,  both  as  a  principle  of 
being  and  of  thought,  see  Opposition  2a;  Principle  ic. 

Logical  problems  concerning  judgments  of  existence  and  proofs  of  existence,  see  God  2c; 
Judgment  8c;  Knowledge  6a(3);  Necessity  and  Contingency  2b;  Reasoning  6a. 


154 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Aquinas.  On  Being  and  Essence 
Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy ,  part  i, 
5I-54 

Hobbes.  Concerning  Body ,  part  ii,  ch  8,  io 
Berkeley.  Three  Dialogues  Between  Hylas  and 
Philonous 

Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  i,  part  i, 
sect  vi ;  part  ii,  SECT  VI 

Kant.  Metaphysical  Foundations  of  Natural  Science 
Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind ,  vm 

- .  Science  of  Logic,  vol  i,  bk  i,  sect  i;  sect  iii, 

ch  i  (c),  3;  bk  ii,  sect  1,  ch  1 ;  sect  ii,  ch  1 ;  sect 
iii,  ch  2,  3  (a) 

- .  Logic ,  ch  7-8 

W.  James.  Some  Problems  of  Philosophy ,  ch  2-3 

II. 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Against  the  Physicists ,  bk  ii,  ch  5 
Porphyry.  Introduction  to  Aristotle's  Predicaments 
Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology ,  (c,  j) 
Boethius.  In  Isagogem  Porphyri  Commenta 

- .  De  Trinitate  (On  the  Trinity) 

Erigena.  De  Divisione  Naturae 
Bonaventura.  Itinerarium  Mentis  in  Deum  ( The 
Itinerary  of  the  Mind  to  God ) 

Duns  Scotus.  Tractatus  de  Primo  Principio  ( A 
Tract  Concerning  the  First  Principle ) 

Crescas.  Or  Adonai,  propositions  18-25 
Albo.  The  Boo\  of  Principles  (Sefer  ha-Ikftarim),  bk 

II,  CII  1 

G.  Pico  della  Mirandola.  Of  Being  and  Unity 
Cajetan.  De  Conceptu  Entis 
Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae 
John  of  SaintThomas.  Cursus Philo  sophicusThomis- 
ticuSy  Ars  Logicay  part  ii,  qq  2,  13-19 
Malebranche.  Dialogues  on  Metaphysics  and 
Religion 

Leibnitz.  Discourse  on  Metaphysics ,  vm-xiii 

- .  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Understandingy 

bk  ii,  ch  23-24 

- .  Monadology ,  par  1-9 

Wolff.  Ontologia 
Diderot.  Le  reve  de  d'Alembert 


J.  G.  Fichte.  The  Science  of  Knowledge 
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea ,  vol  i, 

bk  1,  IV 

I.  H.  Fichte.  Ontologie 

Kierkegaard.  Concluding  Unscientific  Postscript 
Clifford.  “On  the  Nature  of  Things-In-Them- 
selves,”  in  vol  ii,  Lectures  and  Essays 
Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  ix,  ch  1-3 

- .  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-3 

C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers ,  vol  i,  par  545-567; 
vol  vi,  par  327-372,  385 

Bradley.  The  Principles  of  Logic ,  Terminal  Essays, 

VII,  XI 

- .  Appearance  and  Reality ,  bk  i,  ch  2,  7-8;  bk  11, 

ch  13-15,  24,  26 

Royce.  The  World  and  the  Individual,  series  i 
(t-4.  8) 

Cassirer.  Substance  and  Function,  part  i;  part  ii, 
ch  6 

Husserl.  Ideas:  General  Introduction  to  Pure  Phe¬ 
nomenology 

Garrigou-Lagrange.  God,  His  Existence  and  Na¬ 
ture,  part  ii,  appendix  2 
Bergson.  Creative  Evolution 

- .  The  Creative  Mind ,  ch  3,  6 

McTaggart.  The  Nature  of  Existence,  bk  i 

Moore.  Philosophical  Studies,  ch  6 

Dewey.  Experience  and  Nature ,  ch  2,  8,  io 

Heidegger.  Sein  und  Zeit 

B.  Russell.  The  Analysis  of  Matter ,  ch  23 

Santayana.  The  Realm  of  Essence,  ch  i-i  i 

Whitehead.  Process  and  Reality 

Lovejoy.  The  Great  Chain  of  Being 

A.  E.  Taylor.  Philosophical  Studies,  ch  iii 

Blondel.  L'etre  et  les  etres 

Weiss.  Reality 

Sartre.  L'etre  et  le  neant 

- .  Existentialism 

Maritain.  An  Introduction  to  Philosophy,  part  ii 

(5-7) 

- .  The  Degrees  of  Knowledge,  ch  4 

- .  A  Preface  to  Metaphysics,  lect  i-iv 

- .  Existence  and  the  Existent 

Gilson.  L'etre  et  l' essence 
- .  Being  and  Some  Philosophers 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


INTRODUCTION 


EXPLANATION  is  an  inveterate  human 
tendency.  Even  philosophers  who  think 
that  we  cannot  attain  to  knowledge  of  causes 
get  involved  in  explaining  why  that  is  so.  Nor 
will  their  disputes  about  the  theory  of  causes 
ever  remove  the  word  “because’’  from  the  vo¬ 
cabulary  of  common  speech.  It  is  as  unavoid¬ 
able  as  the  word  “is.”  “The  impulse  to  seek 
causes,”  says  Tolstoy,  “is  innate  in  the  soul  of 
man.” 

The  question  “Why  ?”  remains  after  all  other 
questions  are  answered.  It  is  sometimes  the  only 
unanswerable  question — unanswerable  either  in 
the  very  nature  of  the  case  or  because  there  are 
secrets  men  cannot  fathom.  Sometimes,  as  Dan¬ 
te  says,  man  must  be  “content  with  the  quia” 
the  knowledge  that  something  is  without  know¬ 
ing  why.  “Why?”  is  the  one  question  which  it 
has  been  deemed  the  better  part  of  wisdom  not 
to  ask;  yet  it  has  also  been  thought  the  one 
question  which  holds  the  key  to  wisdom.  As 
Virgil  writes,  in  one  of  his  most  famous  lines, 
Felix,  qui potuit  rerum  cognoscere  causas  (Happy 
the  man  who  has  been  able  to  know  the  causes 
of  things). 

The  question  “Why  ?”  takes  many  forms  and 
can  be  answered  in  many  ways.  Other  knowl¬ 
edge  may  prove  useful  in  providing  the  answers. 
A  definition,  for  example,  which  tells  us  what  a 
thing  is,  may  explain  why  it  behaves  as  it  does 
or  why  it  has  certain  properties.  A  narrative, 
which  tells  us  how  something  happened  by  de¬ 
scribing  a  succession  of  events,  may  also  be  part 
of  the  total  explanation  of  some  event  in  ques¬ 
tion. 

In  other  circumstances,  a  demonstration  or  a 
statement  of  grounds  or  reasons  may  be  ex¬ 
planatory.  “How  do  you  know  ?”  is  often  a  con¬ 
cealed  form  of  the  “Why”  question.  To  answer 
it  we  may  have  to  give  our  reasons  for  thinking 
that  something  or  other  is  the  case;  or  perhaps 


give  the  genesis  of  our  opinion.  Things  as  differ¬ 
ent  as  a  logical  demonstration  and  a  piece  of 
autobiography  seem  to  be  relevant  in  account¬ 
ing  for  our  convictions;  as,  in  accounting  for 
our  behavior,  we  may  refer  to  our  purposes  and 
to  our  past. 

The  Greek  word  for  cause,  from  which  our 
English  word  “aetiology”  is  derived,  came  into 
the  vocabulary  of  science  and  philosophy  from 
the  language  of  the  law  courts.  In  its  legal  sense 
it  was  used  to  point  out  where  the  responsibility 
lay.  A  suit  at  law  is  based  upon  a  cause  of  action; 
he  who  demands  redress  for  an  injury  suffered 
is  expected  to  place  the  blame.  The  charge  of 
responsibility  for  wrongdoing — the  blame  or 
fault  which  is  the  cause  for  legal  redress  or  pun¬ 
ishment — naturally  calls  for  excuses,  which  may 
include  a  man’s  motives. 

In  the  context  of  these  legal  considerations, 
two  different  meanings  of  cause  begin  to  ap¬ 
pear.  One  man’s  act  is  the  cause  of  injury  to 
another,  in  the  sense  of  being  responsible  for 
its  occurrence.  If  the  act  was  intentional,  it 
probably  had  a  cause  in  the  purpose  which  mo¬ 
tivated  it. 

These  two  types  of  cause  appear  in  the  ex¬ 
planations  of  the  historians  as  well  as  in  trials  at 
law.  Herodotus  and  Thucydides,  trying  to  ac¬ 
count  for  the  Persian  or  the  Peloponnesian  war, 
enumerate  the  incidents  which  led  up  to  the 
outbreak  of  hostilities.  They  cite  certain  past 
events  as  the  causes  of  war — the  factors  which 
predisposed  the  parties  toward  conflict,  and 
even  precipitated  it.  The  historians  do  not 
think  they  can  fully  explain  why  the  particular 
events  become  the  occasions  for  war  except  by 
considering  the  hopes  and  ambitions,  or,  as 
Thucydides  suggests,  the  fears  of  the  contest¬ 
ants.  For  the  ancient  historians  at  least,  finding 
the  causes  includes  a  search  for  the  motives 


155 


156 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


which  underlie  other  causes  and  help  to  explain 
how  other  factors  get  their  causal  efficacy. 

Thucydides  explicitly  distinguishes  these  two 
kinds  of  causes  in  the  first  chapter  of  his  history. 
After  noting  that  the  “immediate  cause”  of  the 
war  was  the  breaking  of  a  treaty,  he  adds  that 
the  “real  cause”  was  one  “which  was  formally 
most  kept  out  of  sight,”  namely,  the  “growth 
of  the  power  of  Athens,  and  the  alarm  which 
this  inspired  in  Lacedaemon.” 

It  is  sometimes  supposed  that  Thucydides 
owes  his  conception  of  causes  to  the  early  medi¬ 
cal  tradition.  That  might  very  well  be  the  case, 
for  Hippocrates  constantly  seeks  the  “natural 
causes”  of  disease;  and  in  his  analysis  of  the 
various  factors  involved  in  any  particular  dis¬ 
ease,  he  tries  to  distinguish  between  the  pre¬ 
disposing  and  the  exciting  causes. 

But  the  classification  of  causes  was  not  com¬ 
pleted  in  the  Athenian  law  courts,  in  the  Greek 
interpretation  of  history,  or  in  the  early  prac¬ 
tice  of  medicine.  Causes  were  also  the  pre¬ 
occupation  of  the  pre-Socratic  physicists.  Their 
study  of  nature  was  largely  devoted  to  an  anal¬ 
ysis  of  the  principles,  elements,  and  causes  of 
change.  Concerned  with  the  problem  of  change 
in  general,  not  merely  with  human  action,  or 
particular  phenomena  such  as  crime,  war,  or 
disease,  Greek  scientists  or  philosophers,  from 
Thales  and  Anaxagoras  to  Empedocles,  Democ¬ 
ritus,  Plato,  and  Aristotle,  tried  to  discover  the 
causes  involved  in  any  change.  Aristotle  carried 
the  analysis  furthest  and  set  a  pattern  for  all 
later  discussions  of  cause. 

The  explanation  of  a  thing,  according  to 
Aristotle,  must  answer  all  of  the  queries  “com¬ 
prehended  under  the  question  ‘why.’  ”  This 
question  can  be  answered,  he  thinks,  in  at  least 
four  different  ways,  and  these  four  ways  of  say¬ 
ing  why  something  is  the  case  constitute  his  fa¬ 
mous  theory  of  the  four  causes. 

“In  one  sense,”  he  writes,  “that  out  of  which 
a  thing  comes  to  be  and  which  persists,  is  called 
‘cause’  ” — the  material  cause.  “In  another  sense, 
the  form  or  the  archetype”  is  a  cause — the  for¬ 
mal  cause.  “Again  the  primary  source  of  the 
change  or  coming  to  rest”  is  a  cause — the  effi¬ 
cient  cause.  “Again  the  end  or  ‘that  for  the 
sake  of  which’  a  thing  is  done”  is  a  cause — the 
final  cause.  “This,”  he  concludes,  “perhaps  ex¬ 


hausts  the  number  of  ways  in  which  the  term 
‘cause’  is  used.” 

The  production  of  works  of  art,  to  which 
Aristotle  himself  frequently  turns  for  examples, 
most  readily  illustrates  these  four  different 
kinds  of  causes.  In  making  a  shoe,  the  material 
cause  is  that  out  of  which  the  shoe  is  made — the 
leather  or  hide.  The  efficient  cause  is  the  shoe¬ 
maker,  or  more  precisely  the  shoemaker’s  acts 
which  transform  the  raw  material  into  the 
finished  product.  The  formal  cause  is  the  pat¬ 
tern  which  directs  the  work;  it  is,  in  a  sense, 
the  definition  or  type  of  the  thing  to  be 
made,  which,  beginning  as  a  plan  in  the  artist’s 
mind,  appears  at  the  end  of  the  work  in  the 
transformed  material  as  its  own  intrinsic  form. 
The  protection  of  the  foot  is  the  final  cause  or 
end — that  for  the  sake  of  which  the  shoe  was 
made. 

Two  of  the  four  causes  seem  to  be  less  dis¬ 
cernible  in  nature  than  in  art.  The  material  and 
efficient  causes  remain  evident  enough.  The 
material  cause  can  usually  be  identified  as  that 
which  undergoes  the  change — the  thing  which 
grows,  alters  in  color,  or  moves  from  place  to 
place.  The  efficient  cause  is  always  that  by 
which  the  change  is  produced.  It  is  the 
moving  cause  working  on  that  which  is  sus¬ 
ceptible  to  change,  e.g .,  the  fire  heating  the 
water,  the  rolling  stone  setting  another  stone 
in  motion. 

But  the  formal  cause  is  not  as  apparent  in 
nature  as  in  art.  Whereas  in  art  it  can  be  iden¬ 
tified  by  reference  to  the  plan  in  the  maker’s 
mind,  it  must  be  discovered  in  nature  in  the 
change  itself,  as  that  which  completes  the  pro¬ 
cess.  For  example,  the  redness  which  the  apple 
takes  on  in  ripening  is  the  formal  cause  of  its 
alteration  in  color.  The  trouble  with  the  final 
cause  is  that  it  so  often  tends  to  be  inseparable 
from  the  formal  cause;  for  unless  some  extrinsic 
purpose  can  be  found  for  a  natural  change — 
some  end  beyond  itself  which  the  change  serves 
—the  final  cause,  or  that  for  the  sake  of  which 
the  change  took  place,  is  no  other  than  the 
quality  or  form  which  the  matter  assumes  as  a 
result  of  its  transformation. 

This  summary  of  Aristotle’s  doctrine  of  the 
four  causes  enables  us  to  note  some  of  the  basic 
issues  and  shifts  in  the  theory  of  causation. 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


The  attack  on  final  causes  does  not,  at  the 
beginning  at  least,  reject  them  completely. 
Bacon,  for  example,  divides  natural  philosophy 
into  two  parts,  of  which  one  part,  “physics, 
inquireth  and  handleth  the  material  and  effi¬ 
cient  causes;  and  the  other,  which  is  meta¬ 
physics,  handleth  the  formal  and  final  causes.’’ 
The  error  of  his  predecessors,  of  which  he  com¬ 
plains,  is  their  failure  to  separate  these  two 
types  of  inquiry.  The  study  of  final  causes  is 
inappropriate  in  physics,  he  thinks. 

“This  misplacing,”  Bacon  comments,  “hath 
caused  a  deficiency,  or  at  least  a  great  impro- 
ficiency  in  the  sciences  themselves.  For  the 
handling  of  final  causes,  mixed  with  the  rest  in 
physical  inquiries,  hath  intercepted  the  severe 
and  diligent  inquiry  of  all  real  and  physical 
causes,  and  given  men  the  occasion  to  stay  upon 
these  satisfactory  and  specious  causes,  to  the 
great  arrest  and  prejudice  of  further  discov¬ 
ery.”  On  this  score,  he  charges  Plato,  Aristotle, 
and  Galen  with  impeding  the  development  of 
science,  not  because  “final  causes  are  not  true, 
and  worthy  to  be  inquired,  being  kept  within 
their  own  province;  but  because  their  excur¬ 
sions  into  the  limits  of  physical  causes  hath  bred 
a  vastness  and  solitude  in  that  tract.” 

Such  statements  as  “the  hairs  of  the  eyelids 
are  for  a  quickset  and  fence  about  the  sight,” 
or  that  “the  leaves  of  trees  are  for  protecting  of 
the  fruit, ”or  that  “the  clouds  are  for  watering 
of  the  earth,”  are,  in  Bacon’s  opinion,  “imper¬ 
tinent”  in  physics.  He  therefore  praises  the 
mechanical  philosophy  of  Democritus.  It  seems 
to  him  to  inquire  into  the  “particularities  of 
physical  causes”  better  “than  that  of  Aristotle 
and  Plato,  whereof  both  intermingled  final 
causes,  the  one  as  a  part  of  theology,  the  other 
as  a  part  of  logic.” 

As  Bacon’s  criticisms  indicate,  the  attack  on 
final  causes  in  nature  raises  a  whole  series  of 
questions.  Does  every  natural  change  serve 
some  purpose,  either  for  the  good  of  the  chang¬ 
ing  thing  or  for  the  order  of  nature  itself?  Is 
there  a  plan,  analogous  to  that  of  an  artist, 
which  orders  the  parts  of  nature,  and  their  ac¬ 
tivities,  to  one  another  as  means  to  ends?  A 
natural  teleology,  which  attributes  final  causes 
to  everything,  seems  to  imply  that  every  nat¬ 
ural  thing  is  governed  by  an  indwelling  form 
working  toward  a  definite  end,  and  that  the 


157 

whole  of  nature  exhibits  the  working  out  of  a 
divine  plan  or  design. 

Spinoza  answers  such  questions  negatively. 
“Nature  has  set  no  end  before  herself,”  he  de¬ 
clares,  and  “all  final  causes  are  nothing  but 
human  fictions.”  Furthermore,  he  insists,  “this 
doctrine  concerning  an  end  altogether  over¬ 
turns  nature.  For  that  which  is  in  truth  the 
cause  it  considers  as  the  effect,  and  vice  versa." 
He  deplores  those  who  “will  not  cease  from 
asking  the  causes  of  causes,  until  at  last  you  fly 
to  the  will  of  God,  the  refuge  of  ignorance.” 

Spinoza  denies  that  God  acts  for  an  end  and 
that  the  universe  expresses  a  divine  purpose. 
He  also  thinks  that  final  causes  are  illusory  even 
in  the  sphere  of  human  action.  When  we  say 
that  “having  a  house  to  live  in  was  the  final 
cause  of  this  or  that  house,”  we  do  no  more  than 
indicate  a  “particular  desire,  which  is  really  an 
efficient  cause,  and  is  considered  as  primary,  be¬ 
cause  men  are  usually  ignorant  of  the  causes  of 
their  desires.” 

Though  Descartes  replies  to  Pierre  Gassen¬ 
di’s  arguments  “on  behalf  of  final  causality,”  by 
saying  that  they  should  “be  referred  to  the 
efficient  cause,”  his  position  more  closely  re¬ 
sembles  that  of  Bacon  than  of  Spinoza.  When 
we  behold  “the  uses  of  the  various  parts  in 
plants  and  animals,”  we  may  be  led  to  admire 
“the  God  who  brings  these  into  existence,”  but 
“that  does  not  imply,”  he  adds,  “that  we  can 
divine  the  purpose  for  which  He  made  each 
thing.  And  although  in  Ethics,  where  it  is  often 
allowable  to  employ  conjecture,  it  is  at  times 
pious  to  consider  the  end  which  we  may  con¬ 
jecture  God  set  before  Himself  in  ruling  the 
universe,  certainly  in  Physics,  where  every¬ 
thing  should  rest  upon  the  securest  arguments, 
it  is  futile  to  do  so.” 

The  elimination  of  final  causes  from  natural 
science  leads  Descartes  to  formulate  Harvey’s 
discoveries  concerning  the  motion  of  the  heart 
and  blood  in  purely  mechanical  terms.  But 
Harvey  himself,  as  Boyle  points  out  in  his  Dis¬ 
quisition  About  the  Final  Causes  of  Natural 
Things ,  interprets  organic  structures  in  terms  of 
their  functional  utility;  and  Boyle  defends  the 
soundness  of  Harvey’s  method — employing  fi¬ 
nal  causes — against  Descartes. 

Guided  as  it  is  by  the  principle  of  utility  or 
function,  Harvey’s  reasoning  about  the  circula- 


158 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


tion  of  the  blood— especially  its  venal  and  ar¬ 
terial  flow  in  relation  to  the  action  of  the  lungs 
—appeals  to  final  causes.  He  remarks  upon  the 
need  of  arguing  from  the  final  cause  in  his  work 
on  animal  generation.  “It  appears  advisable  to 
me,”  he  writes,  “to  look  back  from  the  perfect 
animal,  and  to  inquire  by  what  process  it  has 
arisen  and  grown  to  maturity,  to  retrace  our 
steps,  as  it  were,  from  the  goal  to  the  starting 
place.” 

Kant  generalizes  this  type  of  argument  in  his 
Critique  of  Teleological  Judgement .  “No  one  has 
ever  questioned,”  he  says,  “the  correctness  of 
the  principle  that  when  judging  certain  things 
in  nature,  namely  organisms  and  their  possi¬ 
bility,  we  must  look  to  the  conception  of  final 
causes.  Such  a  principle  is  admittedly  necessary 
even  where  we  require  no  more  than  a  guiding- 
thread  for  the  purpose  of  becoming  acquainted 
with  the  character  of  these  things  by  means  of 
observation.”  Kant  criticizes  a  mechanism 
which  totally  excludes  the  principle  of  finality 
— whether  it  is  based  on  the  doctrine  of  “blind 
chance”  of  Democritus  and  Epicurus,  or  the 
“system  of  fatality”  he  attributes  to  Spinoza. 
Physical  science,  he  thinks,  can  be  extended  by 
the  principle  of  final  causes  “without  interfer¬ 
ing  with  the  principle  of  the  mechanism  of 
physical  causality.” 

The  tendency  to  dispense  with  final  causes 
seems  to  prevail,  however,  in  the  science  of  me¬ 
chanics  and  especially  in  the  domain  of  inani¬ 
mate  nature.  Huygens,  for  example,  defines 
light  as  “the  motion  of  some  sort  of  matter.” 
He  explicitly  insists  that  conceiving  natural 
things  in  this  way  is  the  only  way  proper  to 
what  he  calls  the  “true  Philosophy,  in  which 
one  conceives  the  causes  of  all  natural  effects  in 
terms  of  mechanical  motions.” 

Mechanical  explanation  is  distinguished  by 
the  fact  that  it  appeals  to  no  principles  except 
matter  and  motion.  The  material  and  the  mov¬ 
ing  (or  efficient)  causes  suffice.  The  philosoph¬ 
ical  thought  of  the  17th  century,  influenced  by 
that  century’s  brilliant  accomplishments  in  me¬ 
chanics,  tends  to  be  mechanistic  in  its  theory 
of  causation.  Yet,  being  also  influenced  by  the 
model  and  method  of  mathematics,  thinkers 
like  Descartes  and  Spinoza  retain  the  formal 
cause  as  a  principle  of  demonstration,  if  not  of 


explanation.  Spinoza,  in  fact,  claims  that  the 
reliance  upon  final  causes  “would  have  been 
sufficient  to  keep  the  human  race  in  darkness 
to  all  eternity,  if  mathematics,  which  does  not 
deal  with  ends,  but  with  the  essences  and  prop¬ 
erties  of  forms,  had  not  placed  before  us  another 
rule  of  truth.” 

Nevertheless,  the  tendency  to  restrict  causal¬ 
ity  to  efficiency — a  motion  producing  a  motion 
— gains  headway.  By  the  time  Hume  questions 
man’s  ability  to  know  causes,  the  term  cause 
signifies  only  efficiency ,  understood  as  the  energy 
expended  in  producing  an  effect.  Hume’s  doubt 
concerning  our  ability  to  know  causes  presup¬ 
poses  this  conception  of  cause  and  effect,  which 
asserts  that  “there  is  some  connection  between 
them,  some  power  in  the  one  by  which  it  in¬ 
fallibly  produces  the  other.”  The  identification 
of  cause  with  the  efficient  type  of  cause  becomes 
a  commonly  accepted  notion,  even  among  those 
who  do  not  agree  with  Hume  that  “we  are  ig¬ 
norant  ...  of  the  manner  in  which  bodies  oper¬ 
ate  on  each  other”;  and  that  “their  force  and 
energy  is  entirely  incomprehensible”  to  us. 

The  narrowing  of  causality  to  efficiency  also 
appears  in  the  doctrine,  more  prevalent  today 
than  ever  before,  that  natural  science  describes, 
but  does  not  explain — that  it  tells  us  how  things 
happen,  but  not  why .  If  it  does  not  require  the 
scientist  to  avoid  all  reference  to  causes,  it 
does  limit  him  to  the  one  type  of  causality 
which  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  sequences 
and  correlations.  The  exclusion  of  all  causes  ex¬ 
cept  the  efficient  tends  furthermore  to  reduce 
the  causal  order  to  nothing  but  the  relation  of 
cause  and  effect. 

The  four  causes  taken  together  as  the  suffi¬ 
cient  reason  for  things  or  events  do  not  as  such 
stand  in  relation  to  an  effect,  in  the  sense  in 
which  an  effect  is  something  separable  from  and 
externally  related  to  its  cause.  That  way  of  con¬ 
ceiving  causation — as  a  relation  of  cause  to 
effect — is  appropriate  to  the  efficient  cause 
alone.  When  the  efficient  cause  is  regarded  as 
the  only  cause,  having  a  power  proportionate  to 
the  reality  of  its  effect,  the  very  meaning  of 
cause  involves  relation  to  an  effect. 

In  the  other  conception  of  causation,  the 
causal  order  relates  the  four  causes  to  one  an¬ 
other.  Of  the  four  causes  of  any  change  or  act, 
the  first,  says  Aquinas,  “is  the  final  cause;  the 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


J59 


reason  of  which  is  that  matter  does  not  receive 
form,  save  in  so  far  as  it  is  moved  by  an  agent, 
for  nothing  reduces  itself  from  potentiality  to 
act.  But  an  agent  docs  not  move  except  from 
the  intention  of  an  end.”  Hence  in  operation 
the  order  of  the  four  causes  is  final,  efficient, 
material,  and  formal;  or,  as  Aquinas  states  it, 
“first  comes  goodness  and  the  end,  moving  the 
agent  to  act;  secondly  the  action  of  the  agent 
moving  to  the  form;  thirdly,  comes  the  form.” 

The  theory  of  causes,  as  developed  by  Aris¬ 
totle  and  Aquinas,  proposes  other  distinctions 
beyond  that  of  the  four  causes,  such  as  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  the  essential  cause  or  the  cause 
per  se  and  the  accidental  or  coincidental  cause. 
As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Chance,  it  is  in 
terms  of  coincidental  causes  that  Aristotle 
speaks  of  chance  as  a  cause. 

A  given  effect  may  be  the  result  of  a  number 
of  efficient  causes.  Sometimes  these  form  a  se¬ 
ries,  as  when  one  body  in  motion  sets  another  in 
motion,  and  that  moves  a  third ;  or,  to  take  an¬ 
other  example,  a  man  is  the  cause  of  his  grand¬ 
son  only  through  having  begotten  a  son  who 
later  begets  a  son.  In  such  a  succession  of  causes, 
the  first  cause  may  be  indispensable,  but  it  is 
not  by  itself  sufficient  to  produce  the  effect. 
With  respect  to  the  effect  which  it  fails  to  pro¬ 
duce  unless  other  causes  intervene,  it  is  an  ac¬ 
cidental  cause.  In  contrast,  an  essential  cause  is 
one  which,  by  its  operation,  immediately  brings 
the  effect  into  existence. 

Sometimes,  however,  a  number  of  efficient 
causes  may  be  involved  simultaneously  rather 
than  successively  in  the  production  of  a  single 
effect.  They  may  be  related  to  one  another  as 
cause  and  effect  rather  than  by  mere  coinci¬ 
dence.  One  cause  may  be  the  essential  cause  of 
another  which  in  turn  is  the  essential  cause  of 
the  effect.  When  two  causes  are  thus  simulta¬ 
neously  related  to  the  same  effect,  Aquinas  calls 
one  the  principal,  the  other  the  instrumental 
cause;  and  he  gives  as  an  example  the  action  of 
a  workman  sawing  wood.  The  action  of  the  saw 
causes  a  shaping  of  the  wood,  but  it  is  instru¬ 
mental  to  the  operation  of  the  principal  cause, 
which  is  the  action  of  the  workman  using  the 
saw. 

These  two  distinctions — between  essential 
and  accidental  causes  and  between  principal 


and  instrumental  causes — become  of  great  sig¬ 
nificance  in  arguments,  metaphysical  or  theo¬ 
logical,  concerning  the  cause  of  causes— a  first 
or  ultimate  cause.  Aristotle’s  proof  of  a  prime 
mover,  for  example,  depends  upon  the  proposi¬ 
tion  that  there  cannot  be  an  infinite  number  of 
causes  for  a  given  effect.  But  since  Aristotle 
also  holds  that  the  world  is  without  beginning 
or  end  and  that  time  is  infinite,  it  may  be  won¬ 
dered  why  the  chain  of  causes  cannot  stretch 
back  to  infinity. 

If  time  is  infinite,  a  temporal  sequence  of 
causes  reaching  back  to  infinity  would  seem  to 
present  no  difficulty.  As  Descartes  points  out, 
you  cannot  “prove  that  that  regress  to  infinity 
is  absurd,  unless  you  at  the  same  time  show  that 
the  world  has  a  definite  beginning  in  time.” 
Though  it  is  a  matter  of  their  Jewish  and  Chris¬ 
tian  faith  that  the  world  had  a  beginning  in 
time,  theologians  like  Maimonides  and  Aquinas 
do  not  think  the  world’s  beginning  can  be 
proved  by  reason.  They  do,  however,  think  that 
the  necessity  of  a  first  cause  can  be  demon¬ 
strated,  and  both  adopt  or  perhaps  adapt  the 
argument  of  Aristotle  which  relies  on  the  im¬ 
possibility  of  an  infinite  regression  in  causes. 

The  argument  is  valid,  Aquinas  makes  clear, 
only  if  we  distinguish  between  essential  and 
accidental  causes.  “It  is  not  impossible,”  he 
says,  “to  proceed  to  infinity  accidentally  as  re¬ 
gards  efficient  causes.  ...  It  is  not  impossible 
for  man  to  be  generated  by  man  to  infinity.” 
But,  he  holds,  “there  cannot  be  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber  of  causes  that  are  per  se  required  for  a  cer¬ 
tain  effect;  for  instance,  that  a  stone  be  moved 
by  a  stick,  the  stick  by  the  hand,  and  so  on  to 
infinity.”  In  the  latter  case,  it  should  be  ob¬ 
served,  the  cooperating  causes  are  simultaneous 
and  so  if  there  were  an  infinity  of  them,  that 
would  not  require  an  infinite  time.  The  crux  of 
the  argument,  therefore,  lies  either  in  the  im¬ 
possibility  of  an  infinite  number  of  simulta¬ 
neous  causes,  or  in  the  impossibility  of  an  infinite 
number  of  causes  related  to  one  another  as  in¬ 
strumental  to  principal  cause. 

Among  causes  so  related,  Descartes,  like 
Aquinas,  argues  that  there  must  be  one  first  or 
principal  cause.  “In  the  case  of  causes  which  are 
so  connected  and  subordinated  to  one  another, 
that  no  action  on  the  part  of  the  lower  is  possi¬ 
ble  without  the  activity  of  the  higher;  e.g.,  in 


160 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


the  case  where  something  is  moved  by  a  stone, 
itself  impelled  by  a  stick,  which  the  hand  moves 
.  .  .  we  must  go  on  until  we  come  to  one  thing 
in  motion  which  first  moves.”  But  for  Des¬ 
cartes,  unlike  Aquinas,  this  method  of  proving 
God  as  the  first  cause  of  all  observable  effects 
has  less  elegance  than  the  so-called  “ontological 
argument”  in  which  the  conception  of  God  as 
a  necessary  being,  incapable  of  not  existing, 
immediately  implies  his  existence. 

The  argument  from  effect  to  cause  is  tradi¬ 
tionally  called  a  posteriori  reasoning,  in  contrast 
to  a  priori  reasoning  from  cause  to  effect.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  Aristotle  and  Aquinas,  the  latter 
mode  of  reasoning  can  only  demonstrate  the 
nature  of  a  thing,  not  its  existence.  Aquinas, 
furthermore,  does  not  regard  the  ontological 
argument  as  a  form  of  reasoning  at  all,  but 
rather  as  the  assertion  that  God’s  existence  is 
self-evident  to  us,  which  he  denies. 

The  various  forms  which  these  arguments 
take  and  the  issue  concerning  their  validity  are 
more  fully  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Being, 
God,  and  Necessity  and  Contingency.  But 
here  it  is  worth  noting  that  Kant  questions 
whether  the  a  posteriori  method  of  proving 
God’s  existence  really  differs  from  the  ontologi¬ 
cal  argument.  It  is,  according  to  him,  not  only 
“illusory  and  inadequate,”  but  also  “possesses 
the  additional  blemish  of  an  ignoratio  elenchi — 
professing  to  conduct  us  by  a  new  road  to  the 
desired  goal,  but  bringing  us  back,  after  a  short 
circuit,  to  the  old  path  which  we  had  deserted 
at  its  call.”  Hence  the  causal  proof  does  not,  in 
Kant’s  opinion,  succeed  in  avoiding  the  fallacies 
which  he,  along  with  Maimonides  and  Aquinas, 
finds  in  the  ontological  argument. 

The  analysis  of  causation  figures  critically 
in  the  speculation  of  the  theologians  concerning 
creation,  providence,  and  the  government  of 
the  world. 

The  dogma  of  creation,  for  example,  requires 
the  conception  of  a  unique  type  of  cause.  Even 
if  the  world  always  existed — a  supposition 
which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  contrary  to  Jewish 
and  Christian  faith  but  not  to  reason — the  re¬ 
ligious  belief  in  a  Creator  would  remain  a  belief 
in  that  unique  cause  without  whose  action  to 
preserve  its  being  at  every  moment  the  world 
would  cease  to  be. 


On  the  assumption  that  God  created  the 
world  in  the  beginning,  it  is,  perhaps,  easy 
enough  to  see  with  Augustine  how  “the  creat¬ 
ing  and  originating  work  which  gave  being  to 
all  natures,  differs  from  all  other  types  of  causa¬ 
tion  which  cause  motions  or  changes,  or  even 
the  generation  of  things,  father  than  their  very 
existence.”  It  may,  however,  be  more  difficult 
to  understand  the  creative  action  of  God  in  rej 
lation  to  a  world  already  in  existence. 

But  a  theologian  like  Aquinas  explains  that 
“as  long  as  a  thing  has  being,  so  long  must  God 
be  present  to  it”  as  the  cause  of  its  being — a 
doctrine  which  Berkeley  later  reports  by  saying 
that  this  makes  “the  divine  conservation  ...  to 
be  a  continual  creation.”  Aquinas  agrees  that 
“the  conservation  of  things  by  God  is  not  by  a 
new  action,  but  by  the  continuation  of  that 
action  whereby  He  gives  being.”  But  in  the 
conservation  of  things  Aquinas  thinks  that  God 
acts  through  natural  or  created  causes,  whereas 
in  their  initiation,  being  is  the  proper  effect  of 
God  alone. 

The  dogma  of  divine  providence  also  requires 
a  theory  of  the  cooperation  of  the  first  cause 
with  natural  or  secondary  causes.  Dante,  in  de¬ 
scribing  the  direction  which  providence  gives 
to  the  course  of  nature,  uses  the  image  of  a  bow. 
“Whatsoever  this  bow  shoots  falls  disposed  to 
its  foreseen  end,  even  as  a  thing  directed  to  its 
aim.”  That  God  governs  and  cares  for  all  things 
may  be  supposed  to  reduce  nature  to  a  puppet 
show  in  which  every  action  takes  place  in  obe¬ 
dience  to  the  divine  will  alone.  Natural  causes 
would  thus  cease  to  be  causes  or  to  have  any 
genuine  efficacy  in  the  production  of  their  own 
effects. 

Some  theologians  have  tended  toward  this 
extreme  position,  but  Aquinas  argues  contrari¬ 
wise  that  natural  causes  retain  their  efficacy  as 
instrumental  causes,  subordinate  to  God’s  will 
as  the  one  principal  cause.  “Since  God  wills 
that  effects  be  because  of  their  causes,”  he 
writes,  “all  effects  that  presuppose  some  other 
effect  do  not  depend  solely  on  the  will  of  God”; 
and,  in  another  place,  he  says,  “whatsoever 
causes  He  assigns  to  certain  effects,  He  gives 
them  the  power  to  produce  those  effects  ...  so 
that  the  dignity  of  causality  is  imparted  even  to 
creatures.” 

In  addition  to  the  role  of  divine  causality  in 


161 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


the  regular  processes  of  nature,  still  another 
kind  of  divine  causation  is  presupposed  by  the 
religious  belief  in  supernatural  events,  such  as 
the  elevation  of  nature  by  grace  and  the  devia¬ 
tions  from  the  course  of  nature  which  are  called 
“miracles.”  All  these  considerations,  and  espe¬ 
cially  the  matter  of  God’s  miraculous  interven¬ 
tion  in  the  regular  course  of  nature,  have  been 
subjects  of  dispute  among  theologians  and  phi¬ 
losophers  (and  sometime  physicists  and  histo¬ 
rians).  Some  of  those  who  do  not  deny  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  a  Creator,  or  the  divine  government 
of  the  universe  through  natural  law,  neverthe¬ 
less  question  the  need  for  divine  cooperation 
with  the  action  of  every  natural  cause,  or  God’s 
intervention  in  the  order  of  nature. 

Throughout  these  controversies,  the  theory 
of  causes  defines  the  issues  and  determines  the 
lines  of  opposing  argument.  But  since  other 
basic  notions  are  also  involved  in  the  debate  of 
these  issues,  the  further  consideration  of  them 
is  reserved  for  other  chapters,  especially  God, 
Nature,  and  World. 

The  discussion  of  cause  takes  a  new  turn  in 
modern  times.  The  new  issues  arise,  not  from 
different  interpretations  of  the  principle  of 
causality,  but  from  the  skeptic’s  doubts  con¬ 
cerning  our  ability  to  know  the  causes  of  things, 
and  from  the  tendency  of  the  physical  sciences 
to  limit  or  even  to  abandon  the  investigation  of 
causes. 

According  to  the  ancient  conception  of  sci¬ 
ence,  knowledge,  to  be  scientific,  must  state  the 
causes  of  things.  The  essence  of  scientific  meth¬ 
od,  according  to  the  Posterior  Analytics  of  Aris¬ 
totle,  consists  in  using  causes  both  to  define  and 
to  demonstrate.  Sometimes  genus  and  differ¬ 
entia  are  translated  into  material  and  formal 
cause;  sometimes  a  thing  is  defined  genetically 
by  reference  to  its  efficient  cause,  and  sometimes 
teleologically  by  reference  to  its  final  cause. 

The  degree  to  which  this  conception  of  sci¬ 
ence  is  realized  in  particular  fields  may  be  ques¬ 
tioned.  The  treatises  of  the  astronomers,  for 
example,  do  not  seem  to  exemplify  it  as  much 
as  do  Aristotle’s  own  physical  treatises  or  Har¬ 
vey’s  work  on  the  circulation  of  the  blood.  Yet 
until  modern  developments  in  mathematical 
physics,  the  ascertainment  of  causes  seems  to  be 
the  dominant  conception  of  the  scientific  task; 


and  until  the  separation  widens  between  the  ex¬ 
perimental  and  the  philosophical  sciences,  the 
possibility  of  knowing  causes  is  not  generally 
doubted. 

Galileo’s  exposition  of  the  new  mechanics 
explicitly  announces  a  departure  from  the  tra¬ 
ditional  interest  of  the  natural  philosopher  in 
the  discovery  of  causes.  The  aim,  he  says  in  his 
Two  New  Sciences,  is  not  “to  investigate  the 
cause  of  the  acceleration  of  natural  motion, 
concerning  which  various;  opinions  have  been 
expressed  by  various  philosophers”;  but  rather 
“to  investigate  and  to  demonstrate  some  of  the 
properties  of  accelerated  motion.”  The  “var¬ 
ious  opinions”  about  causes  are  referred  to  as 
“fantasies”  which  it  is  “not  really  worth  while” 
for  the  scientist  to  examine. 

This  attitude  toward  causes,  especially  effi¬ 
cient  causes,  characterizes  the  aim  of  mathe¬ 
matical  physics,  both  in  astronomy  and  me¬ 
chanics.  For  Newton  it  is  enough — in  fact,  he 
says,  it  “would  be  a  very  great  step  in  philos¬ 
ophy” — “to  derive  two  or  three  general  prin¬ 
ciples  of  motion  from  phenomena  .  .  .  though 
the  causes  of  those  principles  were  not  yet  dis¬ 
covered.  And,  therefore,  I  scruple  not  to  pro¬ 
pose  the  principles  of  motion  .  .  .  and  leave 
their  causes  to  be  found  out.”  In  other  passages, 
Newton  disparages  the  search  for  “hidden  or 
occult  causes”  as  no  part  of  the  business  of 
science. 

Hume  goes  further.  He  insists  that  all  causes 
are  hidden.  By  the  very  nature  of  what  causes 
are  supposed  to  be  and  because  of  the  manner 
in  which  the  human  mind  knows,  man  can 
have  no  knowledge  of  how  causes  really  pro¬ 
duce  their  effects.  “We  never  can,  by  our  ut¬ 
most  scrutiny,”  he  says,  “discover  anything 
but  one  event  following  another,  without 
being  able  to  comprehend  any  force  or  power 
by  which  the  cause  operates,  or  any  connexion 
between  it  and  its  supposed  effect.” 

All  that  men  can  be  referring  to  when  they 
use  the  words  “cause”  and  “effect,”  Hume 
thinks,  is  the  customary  sequence  of  “one  ob¬ 
ject  followed  by  another,  and  where  all  objects 
similar  to  the  first  are  followed  by  objects  simi¬ 
lar  to  the  second.”  So  far  as  any  knowledge 
based  upon  reason  or  experience  can  go,  the 
relation  of  cause  and  effect  is  simply  one  of 
succession,  impressed  upon  the  mind  “by  a 


162 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


customary  transition.”  That  one  event  leads  to 
another  becomes  more  and  more  probable — but 
never  more  than  probable — as  the  sequence 
recurs  more  and  more  frequently  in  experience. 

Hume’s  skepticism  about  causes,  and  his  re¬ 
interpretation  of  the  meaning  of  cause,  gains 
wide  acceptance  in  subsequent  thought,  es¬ 
pecially  among  natural  scientists.  William 
James,  for  example,  considering  “the  principle 
that  ‘nothing  can  happen  without  a  cause,’  ” 
declares  that  “we  have  no  definite  idea  of  what 
we  mean  by  cause,  or  of  what  causality  consists 
in.  But  the  principle  expresses  a  demand  for 
some  deeper  sort  of  inward  connection  between 
phenomena  than  their  merely  habitual  time- 
sequence  seems  to  be.  The  word  ‘cause’  is,  in 
short,  an  altar  to  an  unknown  god;  an  empty 
pedestal  still  marking  the  place  for  a  hoped-for 
statue.  Any  really  inward  belonging-together 
of  the  sequent  terms,”  he  continues,  “if  dis¬ 
covered,  would  be  accepted  as  what  the  word 
cause  was  meant  to  stand  for.” 

Though  Hume  holds  that  we  cannot  pene¬ 
trate  beyond  experience  to  the  operation  of 
real  causes  imbedded  in  the  nature  of  things, 
he  does  not  deny  the  reality  of  causation  as  a 
principle  of  nature.  On  the  contrary,  he  denies 
that  anything  happens  by  chance  or  that  any 
natural  occurrence  can  be  uncaused.  “It  is  uni¬ 
versally  allowed,”  Hume  says  with  approval, 
“that  nothing  exists  without  a  cause  of  its  exist¬ 
ence,  and  that  chance,  when  strictly  examined, 
is  a  mere  negative  word,  and  means  not  any 
real  power  which  has  anywhere  a  being  in  na¬ 
ture.”  But  “though  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
chance  in  the  world,  our  ignorance  of  the  real 
cause  of  any  event  has  the  same  influence  on 
the  understanding,  and  begets  a  like  species  of 
belief  or  opinion.” 

In  other  words,  Hume’s  position  seems  to  be 
that  man’s  ignorance  of  real  causes,  and  the 
mere  probability  of  his  opinions  about  custom¬ 
ary  sequences  of  “cause”  and  “effect,”  indicate 
human  limitations,  not  limits  to  causal  deter¬ 
mination  in  the  order  of  nature  itself.  Adversar¬ 
ies  of  Hume,  coming  before  as  well  as  after 
him  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books,  take 
issue  with  him  on  both  points. 

Against  Hume’s  determinism,  which  is  no 
less  complete  than  Spinoza’s,  Aristotle,  for 
example,  affirms  the  existence  of  chance  or  real 


contingency  in  the  happenings  of  nature. 
Against  Hume’s  reduction  of  statements  about 
causes  to  probable  opinion,  Kant  insists  that, 
in  the  metaphysics  of  nature,  such  judgments 
can  be  made  with  absolute  certainty.  These 
related  issues  are  discussed  in  the  chapters  on 
Chance,  Fate,  and  Necessity  and  Contin¬ 
gency. 

In  the  development  of  the  natural  sciences 
since  Hume’s  day,  his  translation  of  cause  and 
effect  into  observed  sequences  or  correlations 
reinforces  the  tendency,  which  first  appears 
with  Galileo  and  Newton,  to  describe  rather 
than  to  explain  natural  phenomena.  Yet  to  the 
extent  that  the  findings  of  science  bear  fruit 
in  technology,  man’s  control  over  nature  seems 
to  confirm  Bacon’s  view  of  science  rather  than 
Hume’s — at  least  to  the  extent  that  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  scientific  knowledge  to  the  production 
of  effects  implies  a  knowledge  of  their  causes. 

The  principle  of  causality — that  nothing 
happens  without  a  cause  or  sufficient  reason, 
or,  as  Spinoza  puts  it,  “nothing  exists  from 
whose  nature  an  effect  does  not  follow” — has 
been  made  the  basis  for  denials  of  human  free¬ 
dom  as  well  as  of  chance  or  contingency  in  the 
order  of  nature.  The  problem  of  man’s  free  will 
is  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Fate,  Liberty, 
and  Will,  but  we  can  here  observe  how  the 
problem  is  stated  in  terms  of  cause,  with  re¬ 
spect  to  both  divine  providence  and  natural 
causation. 

If  God’s  will  is  the  cause  of  everything  which 
happens,  if  nothing  can  happen  contrary  to  His 
will  or  escape  the  foresight  of  His  providence, 
then  how  is  man  free  from  God’s  foreordination 
when  he  chooses  between  good  and  evil  ?  If,  as 
the  theologians  say,  “the  very  act  of  free  choice 
is  traced  to  God  as  to  a  cause,”  in  what  sense 
can  the  act  be  called  “free”?  Is  it  not  neces¬ 
sarily  determined  to  conform  to  God’s  will  and 
to  His  plan?  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  “every¬ 
thing  happening  from  the  exercise  of  free 
choice  must  be  subject  to  divine  providence,” 
must  not  the  evil  that  men  do  be  attributed  to 
God  as  cause  ? 

The  problem  takes  another  form  for  the  scien¬ 
tist  who  thinks  only  in  terms  of  natural  causes, 
especially  if  he  affirms  a  reign  of  causality  in 
nature  from  which  nothing  is  exempt — just  as, 


Chapter 

for  the  theologian,  nothing  is  exempt  from  Cod’s 
will.  Since  the  realm  of  nature  includes  human 
nature,  must  not  human  acts  be  caused  as  are 
all  other  natural  events?  Are  some  human  acts 
free  in  the  sense  of  being  totally  uncaused,  or 
only  in  the  sense  of  being  caused  differently 
from  the  motions  of  matter?  Are  causality  and 
freedom  opposed  principles  within  the  order  of 
nature,  appropriate  to  physical  and  psychologi¬ 
cal  action;  or  do  they  constitute  distinct  realms 
— as  for  Kant,  the  realms  of  phenomena  and 
noumena,  the  sensible  and  the  supra-sensible; 
or  as  for  Hegel,  the  realms  of  nature  and 
history  ? 

The  different  answers  which  the  great  books 


:  CAUSE  163 

give  to  these  questions  have  profound  conse¬ 
quences  for  man’s  view  of  himself,  the  universe, 
and  his  place  in  it.  As  the  issue  of  necessity  and 
chance  is  central  in  physics  or  the  philosophy  of 
nature,  so  the  issue  of  determinism  and  freedom 
is  central  in  psychology  and  ethics,  in  political 
theory  and  the  philosophy  of  history,  and  above 
all  in  theology.  It  makes  opponents  of  James 
and  Freud,  of  Hegel  and  Marx,  of  Hume  and 
Kant,  of  Spinoza  and  Descartes,  of  Lucretius 
and  Marcus  Aurelius.  It  raises  one  of  the  most 
perplexing  of  all  theological  questions  for  Au¬ 
gustine,  Aquinas,  Pascal,  and  for  the  two  great 
poets  of  God’s  will  and  man’s  freedom — Dante 
and  Milton. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  general  theory  of  causation  164 

1  a.  The  kinds  of  causes:  their  distinction  and  enumeration  165 

ib .  The  order  of  causes:  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect 

2.  Comparison  of  causes  in  animate  and  inanimate  nature  166 

3.  Causality  and  freedom  167 

4.  The  analysis  of  means  and  ends  in  the  practical  order 

5.  Cause  in  relation  to  knowledge  168 

5 a.  Cause  as  the  object  of  our  inquiries 

5 b.  Cause  in  philosophical  and  scientific  method:  the  role  of  causes  in  definition, 

demonstration,  experiment,  hypothesis  169 

5 c.  The  nature  and  sources  of  our  knowledge  of  causes  170 

5 d.  The  limits  of  our  knowledge  of  causes 


6.  The  existence  and  operation  of  final  causes  171 

7.  The  causality  of  God  or  the  gods  1 72 

7 a.  Divine  causality  in  the  origin  and  existence  of  the  world:  creation  and  conserva¬ 
tion 

7 b.  Divine  causality  in  the  order  of  nature  or  change:  the  first  cause  in  relation  to  all 
other  causes 

7 c.  Divine  causality  in  the  government  of  the  universe:  providence  and  free  will  173 

7 d.  Divine  causality  in  the  supernatural  order:  grace,  miracles  175 


8.  The  operation  of  causes  in  the  process  of  history 


176 


164 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12, 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James:  Psychology,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  general  theory  of  causation 

7  Plato:  Euthyphro ,  195c-d  /  Phaedo,  226d- 
228a;  240b-246c  /  Timaeus,  447b-d  /  Philebus, 
615c-619d  /  Laws ,  bk  x,  760a-765c 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  11-12 
128d-131b  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  3-9  271a-278a,c 
/  Metaphysics ,  bk  iii,  ch  2  [996^  8-997^  4] 
514d-515d;  bk  v,  ch  1-2  533a-534c;  bk  vi,  ch 
2  [i026b24~i027ai5]  549a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  17 
565a-566a,c;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [1043^-14]  567d- 
568a;  ch  4  568d-569b;  ch  6  569d-570d;  bk  x, 
ch  1  [io52b8-i4]  579a;  bk  xii,  ch  4-5  599d- 
601a;  bk  xiv,  ch  6  625d-626d 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  1,  ch  5  [i36ib39~ 
i362au]  602c-d;  ch  10  [i369a5~b27]  612b-613a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  vi  [703—71 1] 
89c-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 
270b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  i  78a-c; 
ch  4  79d-80a;  ch  10  82b  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr 
iv,  ch  31  174d-175c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii, 
ch  2  322b-323a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  3  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  4,  ans  16d-17c;  q  33,  a  i, 
rep  1  180d-181c;  q  49  264d-268a,c  passim; 
q  52,  a  3,  ans  280a-d;  q  65,  a  1  339b-340b; 


a  3  341c-342b;  q  82,  a  3,  rep  i  433c-434c; 
q  87,  a  2,  rep  3  466c-467b;  q  103,  a  7  533b-d; 
q  104,  aa  1-2  534c-537b;  q  105,  aa  1-2  538d- 
540c;  a  5  542a-543b;  q  106,  a  3  547c-548b; 
q  1 15,  aa  1-2  585d-588c;  q  115,  a  6-q  116,  a  4 
591d-595c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
aa  2-3  13c-15a;  q  75,  a  1  137d-138c;  a  4 
140a-d;  q  76,  a  1  141a-c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  76, 
a  1  939d-941a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  80b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  42a-46a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  84b-86b  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  llld-112a;  121b-c; 
axiom  i-iv  131d;  212a;  212c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  i  355a;  def  7 
355b;  axiom  3-5  355d;  prop  3  356a;  prop  8, 
schol  2,  357b-d;  prop  36  369b;  appendix 
369b-372d;  part  ii,  prop  7,  corol  and  schol 
375a-c 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  rule  i-ii  270a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  1-5  178b-179d;  sect  19  182b-c;  ch  xxii, 
sect  11  203c-d;  ch  xxvi,  sect  1-2  217a-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  25-33 
417d-419a  passim;  sect  60-66  424b-426a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iii,  div 
i8-sect  viii,  div  75  457c-485a  passim 


1  a  to  1 b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  15a-b;  17c-d;  46d-47c; 
57c-d;  58d  59b;  63b;  67d-68b  [fn  i];  76c-83b; 
95a- d;  133a;  140b,d-143a;  152a-153a;  164a- 
171a;  187c-189a;  214b, d  [fn  i];  225c-226b  / 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  279b,d- 
287d  csp  285c-286a  /  Practical  Reason ,  291a- 
292a;  294c-295d;  311d-314d;  339a  /  Judge - 
550a-578a  esp  550a-551a,c,  555a-558b, 
564a-c,  566a-b,  568c-570a,  577c-578a;  587a- 
591b;  592a-d;  597a-599d;  611d-613a,c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  885b-886a 

la.  The  kinds  of  causes:  their  distinction  and 
enumeration 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  240c-245c  /  Timaeus ,  447b-c; 

455a-458a;  465d-466a  /  577d-578b  / 

Statesman ,  592d-593a;  596a-b  /  Philehus ,  615c- 
619d;  637c-d  /  bk  x,  760a-765c  esp 

762b-763b 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[7ib33-72&6]  98b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  ii  128d-129d  / 
Physics,  bk  11,  ch  3-7  271a-275d  esp  ch  3 
271a-272c;  bk  iii,  ch  7  [207b35-2o8a4]  286c; 
bk  iv,  ch  1  [20^18-23]  288a  /  Generation  and 
Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  9-10  436d-439c  / 
physics ,  bk  1,  ch  3-10  501c-511d;  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[994b2S— 31]  513b;  bk  hi,  ch  2  [996ai8-b26] 
514d-515b;  bk  v,  ch  2  533b-534c;  ch  18  543c- 
d;  ch  30  547a-d;  bk  vi,  ch  2-3  548c-549d; 
bk  vii,  ch  17  565a-566a,c;  bk  viii,  ch  2  566d- 
567d;  ch  3  [ic>43b5-24]  567d-568b;  ch  4 
568d-569b;  bk  xi,  ch  8  [io65a26-b4]  593d; 
bk  xii,  ch  4-5  599d-601a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[639b8-642b4]  161d-165d/  Generation  of  Ani¬ 
mals ,  bk  1,  ch  r  [715*1—18]  255a-b;  ch  20 
[729aio]-CH  22  [730^3]  269b-271a  passim; 
bk  v,  ch  1  [778*16— bi9]  320a-321a  /  Ethics , 
bk  hi,  ch  3  [1112^0-33]  358b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i, 
ch  10  [1369*3 1— b5]  612c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  2,  a  3 
12c-14a;  q  3,  a  8,  rep  i  19d-20c;  q  4,  a  3, 
ans  22b-23b;  q  5,  a  2,  rep  1-2  24b-25a;  a  4 
25d-26c;  q  ii,  a  3,  ans  49a-c;  q  13,  a  5,  ans 
and  rep  i  66b-67d;  q  14,  a  8,  ans  and  rep  i 
82c-83b;  a  ii,  ans  84c-85c;  a  16,  rep  i  90b- 
91b;  q  19,  a  6,  ans  113c-114d;  q  25,  a  2,  rep 
2-3  144c-145b;  q  36,  a  3,  ans  194c-195d;  q  39, 
a  2,  rep  5  203b-204c;  q  44  238a-241d;  q  46, 
a  2,  rep  7  253a-255a;  q  48,  a  i,  rep  4  259b- 
260c;  q  49,  a  1,  ans  264d-265d;  q  51,  a  i, 
rep  3  275b-276b;  q  52,  a  3,  ans  280a-d;  q  65 
339a-343c;  q  75,  a  5,  rep  3  382a-383b;  q  82, 
a  4,  ans  434c-435c;  q  87,  a  2,  rep  3  466c- 
467b;  q  104  534c-538c;  q  105,  a  5,  ans  542a- 
543b;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  5,  rep  3  618d-619c; 
q  7,  a  3,  ans  653c-654b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  60, 
a  1,  ans  49d-50c;  q  72,  a  3  113b-114a;  q  75, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  137d-138c;  q  76,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  1  141a-c;  q  85,  a  i,  rep  4  178b-179b; 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  181d-182d;  part  iii,  q  62, 


165 

a  i  858c  859d;  a  4  861a  862a;  part  iii  suppl, 
q  76,  a  i,  ans  939d-941a 

22  Chaucer:  Talc  of  Melibeus ,  par  37  417b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  78c-d 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  36d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  335d;  407c; 
408b;  415b-417a;  425a-429b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  43a  d;  45a- 
46a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  nr,  87c-88c;  iv, 
90a-b  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  llOc-llld; 
axiom  vi  11  132b;  158b-161d  passim,  esp  158c- 
161b; 212a;  213b-c; 214c;  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  i  355a;  prop  ii 
358b-359b;  prop  17,  schol-prop  18  362c- 
363c;  prop  28,  schol  366a;  appendix  369b- 
372d;  part  11,  prop  45,  schol  390b;  part  hi, 
def  1-3  395d-396a;  prop  1-3  396a-398c;  part 
iv,  pref  422b,d-424a;  def  7  424b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxvi, 
sect  2  217b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  51-53 
422d-423a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  229b-230a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  133a;  164a-171a  /  Judge¬ 
ment ,  550a-551a,c;  553c-555a;  556b-558b; 
577c-578a;  584c-d;  594b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  165a- 
166b 

lb.  The  order  of  causes:  the  relation  of  cause 
and  effect 

7  Plato:  Lysis ,  24b  /  Phaedrus ,  124b-c  / 
Euthyphro ,  195c-d  /  Gorgias ,  267c-268a  / 
Timaeus ,  455a- b;  460c;  465d-466a  /  Theaete- 
tus ,  521b-522b  /  Philebus ,  617b-c  /  Laws ,  bk 
X,  760a-765c  esp  762b-763b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  12  [i4bio-22]  20b  / 
Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  1,  ch  2  [7ib33~72a6) 
98b-c;  bk  11,  ch  12  129d-131b;  ch  16-18  134b- 
136a  /  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [198*5—13]  275a; 
ch  8-9  275d-278a,c;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [202a2]-CH  3 
[202b22]  279c-280c;  bk  vii,  ch  1-2  326a-329a; 
bk  viii  334a-355d  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  7 
[275ai~b29]  366a-367a  /  Generation  and  Cor¬ 
ruption ,  bk  1,  ch  7  421d-423b  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  11,  ch  1  [993b23]-CH  2  [994b3o]  512a-513b; 
bk  v,  ch  2  [ioi3b3~i6]  533c-d;  [1014^0-25] 
534b-c;  bk  xi,  ch  8  [io63b2~4]  593d;  bk  xii, 
ch  3  [1070^0-24]  599c;  ch  4  [io7ob22-35] 
600b;  ch  6-8  601b-605a  /  Soul ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[406^-12]  635b-c;  [4o6b5— 9]  635d-636a;  ch  4 
[408^9-33]  638a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[639bi3-642a24]  161d-165b  esp  [639bi3~ 32] 
161d-162a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [646a25-bio]  170b-c  / 
Motion  of  Animals ,  ch  5  235c-d  /  Generation 
of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [742ai6-bi7]  283b-d  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [1 364*^3 3-36]  606a;  bk  ii, 
ch  23  [i400a28~35]  649a-b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2,  168b-c; 
ch  4 169a 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


166 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


( 1 .  The  general  theory  of  causation.  X  b.  The  order 
of  causes :  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.) 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  854b;  940b-941a 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  i  214c-215a 
/  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  vii,  ch  2  322b-323a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xii,  ch  24-25 
358a-359a;  bk  xxii,  ch  2  587b-588a;  ch  24 
609a-612a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3 
12c-14a;  q  3,  a  1,  ans  14b-15b;  a  2,  ans  15c- 
16a;  a  4,  ans  16d-17c;  a  6,  ans  18c-19a;  a  7, 
ans  and  rep  i  19a-c;  a  8,  ans  and  rep  1-2 
19d-20c;  q  4,  a  2,  ans  21b-22b;  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  4  22b-23b;  q  5,  a  2,  rep  i  24b-25a;  a  4, 
ans  25d-26c;  q  8,  a  1  34d-35c;  q  13,  a  5,  ans 
and  rep  i  66b-67d;  a  ii,  rep  2  73c-74b;  q  18, 
a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  19,  aa  4-5  lllc-113c; 
a  6,  ans  and  rep  3  113c-114d;  a  7,  rep  2 
114d-115d;  a  8  116a-d;  q  22,  aa  2-3  128d-131c; 
q  23,  a  5,  ans  135d-137d;  q  36,  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  4  194c-195d;  q  39,  a  2,  rep  5  203b-204c; 
q  41,  a  1,  rep  2  217d-218c;  a  2,  ans  218c-219d; 
q  42,  a  2,  ans  225d-227a;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2 
227a-d;  q  44,  a  i,  rep  i  238b-239a;  a  2  239b- 
240a;  q  45,  a  2,  rep  2  242d-244a;  a  3  244a-d; 
a  5,  ans  245c-247a;  q  46,  a  i,  rep  6  250a- 
252d;  a  2,  rep  1  253a-255a;  q  48,  a  i,  rep  4 
259b-260c;  q  50,  a  i,  ans  269b-270a;  q  52,  a 
3,  ans  280a-d;  q  63,  a  8,  rep  i  332c-333b; 
q  65,  a  3  341c-342b;  q  75,  a  i,  rep  i  378b- 
379c;  q  82,  a  3,  rep  1  433c-434c;  a  4  434c- 
435c;  q  87,  a  2,  rep  3  466c-467b;  q  88,  a  3, 
rep  2  472c-473a;  q  90,  a  3  482c-483a;  q  103, 
aa  6-8  532b-534b;  q  104,  a  i,  ans  534c-536c; 
a  2  536c-537b;  q  105  538d-545b;  q  112,  a  i, 
ans  571d-573a;  q  114,  a  3,  ans  583b-d;  qq 
115-116  585c-595c;  q  118,  a  2,  rep  3  601c- 
603b;  part  i-ii,  q  t,  a  2  610b-611b;  q  46,  a  i, 
ans  813b-814a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  66, 
a  6,  rep  3  80c-81b;  q  75,  a  4  140a-d;  q  112, 
aa  1-3  356c-358d;  q  113,  a  8  367d-368c;  part 
ii-ii,  q  1,  a  7,  rep  3  385c-387a;  q  9,  a  2,  ans 
424b-425a;  part  iii,  q  6,  a  i,  ans  740b-741b; 
a  5,  ans  744a-d;  q  18,  a  i,  rep  2  810a-811c; 
q  19,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  816a-818b;  q  62  858b- 
864c  passim;  q  64,  a  i,  ans  870c-871b;  a  8, 
rep  1  876c-877c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  70,  a  3, 
ans  897d-900d;  q  74,  A3,  rep  2  927c-928d; 
q  76,  a  1,  rep  1  939d-941a;  a  2  941b-942b; 
q  80,  a  1,  rep  1  956c-957c;  q  86,  a  3,  rep  2 
994d-996a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  ii  [112-148] 
109a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus,  par  37  417b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  78c-79a;  79d- 
80a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day,  135c- 
136b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  390c;  415b- 
416c;  426a-429b;  442c-443c;  445c;  447a-b 


\b  to  2 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43a-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  55d-56a  / 
Meditations ,  iii,  84b-86b;  87c-88c  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  110a-112a  esp  llld-112a;  120b- 
121c;  axiom  i-v  131d-132a;  axiom  viii  132b; 
prop  ii  132c;  158b-161d  passim;  212a;  213b-d; 
229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  i  355a;  axiom 
3-5  355d;  prop  3  356a;  prop  8,  schol  2, 
357b-d;  prop  ii  358b-359b;  prop  21-29  364a- 
366c  esp  prop  28  365c-366a;  prop  33  367b- 
369a;  prop  36  369b;  appendix  369b-372d; 
part  ii,  def  5  373b-c;  def  7  373c;  prop  7, 
corol  and  schol 375a-c;  lemma  3  378d-379a; 
prop  48,  demonst  391a;  part  iii,  def  2-3 
395d-396a;  prop  1-3  396a-398c;  part  v, 
axiom  2  452c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [469-490]  185b- 
186a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  505  261a-b  /  Vacuum , 
369a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  rule  i-ii  270a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  1-5  178b-179d;  sect  19  182b-c;  ch  xxii, 
sect  ii  203c-d;  ch  xxvi,  sect  1-2  217a-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  25-33 
417d-419a  passim;  sect  65—66  425d-426a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iii,  div 
i8-sect  viii,  div  75  457c-485a  passim,  esp 
sect  vii,  div  60  477a-c;  sect  xi  497b-503c 
passim,  esp  div  105  498d-499a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  15a-b;  17c-d;  47b-c; 
57c-d;  58d-59b;  63b;  67d-68b  [fn  1];  76c- 
83b  esp  81c-d;  95a-d;  140b,d-145c;  152a- 
153a;  187c-189c;  214b, d  [fn  1]  /  Practical 
Reason ,  311d-314d;  339a  /  Judganent ,  550a- 
551a, c;  553c-555a;  561c-562a,c;  577c-578a; 
582c-583b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  582b-584a 
passim 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  9b-c;  lOd;  65a-66a 
/  Descent  of  Man,  285b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  447c-448d; 
bk  xi,  470a-c;  epilogue  i,  650b-c;  epilogue 
ii  675a-696d 

53  James:  Psychology,  772b;  884b-885a 

2.  Comparison  of  causes  in  animate  and  in¬ 
animate  nature 

7  Plato:  Phaedo,  241d-242b  /  Laws,  bk  x,  763a- 
765d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bkii,  CH8-9  275d-278a,c; 
bk  viii,  ch  2  [252bi6-28]  336c-d;  [253^-21] 
337a-b;  ch  4  [254bi2-33]  339a-b  /  Heavens , 
bk  11,  ch  12  383b-384c  /  Meteorology ,  bk  iv, 
ch  12  493d-494d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  4 
[ioi4b20-26]  535a;  bk  vii,  ch  9  [1034^2- 
b8]  557c-d;  ch  10  [io35bi4~28]  559a-b;  ch  16 
[1040^-16]  564c;  bk  ix,  ch  2  571c-572a;  ch  5 
573a-c;  ch  7  [i049ai2-i9]  574d  /  Soul,  bk  ii, 
ch  4  [4i5b8— 28]  645d-646a;  bk  iii,  ch  9-13 
664d-668d  /  Sleep,  ch  2  [455bi3~28]  698b-c 


3  to  4 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[639bi2-642ai4]  161d-165b  /  Gait  of  Animals , 
ch  2  [704bi2-i8]  243c  /  Generation  of  Animals , 
bk  i,  ch  i  [715*1-7]  255a;  bk  ii,  cii  i  [734*17- 
735*4]  274c-275c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  12  172d- 
173c;  ch  14-17  177a-183d;  bk  ii,  ch  1-7 
183b,d-191b  passim;  ch  9,  197b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [700-729] 
23d-24b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  930b-931b;  959a- 
960a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  8, 
a  1,  rep  3  34d-35c;  q  14,  a  8,  ans  82c-83b; 
q  18,  a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  22,  a  2,  ans  128d- 
130d;  q  70,  a  3  365b-367a;  q  98,  a  i,  ans 
516d-517c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  2  610b-611b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  75,  a  3,  rep  4  938a-939d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xviii 
[I9~39l  80a-b;  paradise,  i  [94-142]  107b-d; 
11  [112-148]  109a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  50a;  part  iv, 
271d 

27  Shakespeare:  Othello,  act  v,  sc  ii  [7-14] 
239a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  385a-c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  iv,  90a- b  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies,  215a-b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi,  rule  i-ii  270a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxiii,  sect  28-29  211b-212a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  555a-558b  esp  557c-558b; 
564a-c;  566a-b;  578d-580a;  581a-582c 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  540a-541a,c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  9b-10d 

53  James:  Psychology,  4a-6b;  84a-94b  esp  85a- 
87b,  88b-90b 

3.  Causality  and  freedom 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  ix,  ch  5  573a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  3  [ui2ai8-bi2] 
358a-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  10  [i368b7-i369b27] 
611d-613a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-293] 
18b-d;  bk  v  [306-310]  65a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 
270b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  49c;  bk  iv,  69a;  bk 
vi,  91b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i  78a-82b  esp 
ch  4  79d-80a,  ch  9-10  82a-b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  9-10  213b- 
216c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19, 
aa  3-10 110b-118b  passim;  q  41,  A2  218c-219d; 
q  46,  a  1,  rep  9-10  250a-252d;  q  47,  a  i,  rep  i 
256a-257b;  q  59,  a  3  308b-309a;  q  62,  a  8, 
rep  2  323c-324a;  q  83,  a  1  436d-438a;  q  103, 
a  1,  rep  1,3  528b-529a;  q  115,  a  6,  ans  591d- 
592d;  part  i-ii,  q  10  662d-666a,c;  q  13,  a  6 
676c-677b 


167 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  71, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  108b-109a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi  [52- 
84]  77b-d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
138-154  106b-108b  /  Nun's  Priest's  ' Tale 
[15,238-256]  456b-457a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  112d-113c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  452a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  i,  sc  ii 
[135-141]  570d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  7  355b;  prop 
16-17  362a-363c;  prop  26-36  365b-369b; 
appendix  369b-372d;  part  ii,  prop  48-49 
391a-394d;  part  iii,  395a-d;  part  iv,  pref, 
423b-c 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  154b-159a  /  Pen- 
sees,  821  331b-332a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  14,  108d-109a;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  7-27 
180a-184c;  sect  48-53  190c-192b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii  478b 
487a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  337d-338a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113b- 11 5a;  132d-133a; 
140b,d-145c;  164a-171a;  234c-235a;  236d- 
237a;  238b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
264d-265a;  275b;  279b,d-287d  esp  282c, 
286a-c  /  Practical  Reason ,  292a-293b;  296a-d: 
301d-302d;  310b-321b  esp314b-d,  320c-321b; 
327d-329a;  331c-337a,c/  Intro.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  383c;  386b-387a,c;  390b;  392d-393c 
/  Judgement,  463a-465c;  571c-572a;  587a-588a; 
594d  [fn  1] 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  392d-393a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  39 
21d;  par  66,  29a;  part  ii,  par  139  48d-49b; 
part  iii,  par  187  65a-c;  par  352  112b;  addi¬ 
tions,  90  130b-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  in¬ 
tro,  160c-164d;  170c-172b;  178a-d 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  158b-159a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  x,  389a-391c;  bk  xi,  469a-472b;  bk  xiii, 
563a-572a;  bk  xv,  619d-621b;  epilogue  i, 
645a-650c;  epilogue  ii,  688a-696d 

53  James:  Psychology,  84a-94b  esp  85a-87b,  88b- 
90b;  291a-295b;  388a;  820b-826a  esp  825b- 
826b  [fn  2] 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  13c  /  General  Introduction,  454b-c; 
486c-487a 

4.  The  analysis  of  means  and  ends  in  the 
practical  order 

7  Plato:  Lysis ,  23a-b  /  Laches ,  29b-c  /  Gorgias , 
262a-264b;  280b-d  /  Republic ,  bk  ii,  310c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [n6b22~36] 
163b-c  /  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [292*14-^6] 
383d-384b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [994b8- 
16]  512d-513a;  bk  v,  ch  2  [ioi3*32-b3]  533c; 
[ioi3b25-28]  533d-534a;  bk  ix,  ch  8  [1050*4- 
bi]  575d-576b  /  Soul ,  bk  iii,  ch  10  665d-666d 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


168 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  analysis  of  means  and  ends  in  the  practical 
order.) 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  i-2  339a-d;  ch  5 
340d-341b  esp  [i(>96a5-io]  341a-b;  ch  6 
[i096b8-26]  341d-342a;  ch  7  342c-344a  pas¬ 
sim;  ch  9  [i099b25~32]  345b;  bk  iii,  ch  3 
358a-359a;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [ii39ai7-b5]  387d- 
388a;  ch  5  389a-c  passim;  ch  9  [1 142^7-33] 
391d-392b  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  13  [133^24- 
38]  536b-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  6-7  602d-607d; 
ch  8  [i366a3~i6]  608b-c;  ch  10  [i369a5~b27] 
612b-613a 

12  Epictetus  :  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  2  177c-178d; 
ch  10  185d-187a;  ch  14,  189d;  bk  iv,  ch  4 
225a-228a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  16  271c-d; 
bk  vi,  sect  40-45  277d-278c;  bk  vii,  sect  44 
282b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  19-20  286d-287a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  6  15a-b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  4  266d- 
267c;  ch  8  270a-d;  bk  xix,  ch  1-3  507a- 
511a;  ch  13-17  519a-523a;  ch  20  523d-524a  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  3-5  625b-626a; 
ch  22  629b-630a;  ch  31-33  633b-634b;  ch  35 
634c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  5,  a  4 
25d-26c;  a  6,  ans  27c-28b;  q  18,  a  3,  ans 
106b-107c;  q  19,  a  2,  rep  2  109c-110b;  a  3, 
ans  HOb-lllc;  aa  4-5  lllc-113c;  q  23,  a  7, 
ans  138d-140a;  q  44,  a  4  241a-d;  q  65,  a  2 
340b-341b;  q  82,  aa  1-4  431d-435c;  q  83,  a  3, 
ans  438d-439c;  a  4,  ans  439c-440b;  q  103, 
a  2  529a-530a;  part  i-ii,  qq  1-2  609a-622b; 
q  3,  a  1,  ans  622c-623a;  q  4,  aa  1-4  629d-632c; 
q  5,  a  6,  rep  1  641a-642a;  q  6,  aa  1-2  644d- 
646c;  q  8,  aa  2-3  656a-657c;  q  9,  a  1,  ans 
657d-658d;  a  3,  ans  659c-660a;  Q  10,  a  2, 
rep  3  663d-664d;  q  11,  a  3  667d-668d;  q  12, 
aa  2-4  670b-672a;  q  13,  a  3  674c-675a;  q  14, 
a  2  678b-c;  q  15,  a  3  682c-683b;  Q  16,  a  3 
685b-686a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  54, 
a  2,  rep  3  23d-24c;  q  57,  a  5,  ans  39a-40a; 
q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d-223a;  a  4,  ans  223d-224d; 
q  95,  a  3  228c-229b;  q  107,  a  i,  ans  325c-327b; 
q  1 14,  a  4,  rep  1  373a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  27,  a  6, 
ans  524c-525c 

22  Chaucer:  TaleofMelibeus  401a-432a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  53a-b;  76c-d; 
90a;  part  iii,  237d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  330b-332a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  91d-92a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  44c-45b; 
part  iii,  50b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i, appendix,  369b-370a; 
part  iv,  def  7  424b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  98  190  b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  52-53  191d-192b;  sect  62  194c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  235a-b  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253d-254c;  256a-b; 


4  to  5a 

257c-d;  260a-c;  265c-268b;  271c-279d  esp 
274d-275b;  282c;  286a-287b  /  Practical  Rea¬ 
son,  307a-d;  314d-329a  esp  320c-321b,  327d- 
329a;  357c-360d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements 
of  Ethics,  367c  /  Science  of  Right,  397b-398a  / 
Judgement,  477b-c;  478a-b;  557d  [fn  2];  586a- 
b;  588b  [fn  2];  594b-595c;  605d-606b  [fn  2] 

43  Federalist:  number  23,  85b;  number  31, 
103c-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  445a-d;  446d-447a; 
461c-463c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  45 
23c-d;  par  61  27b-c;  part  ii,  par  119-128  43b- 
45d  esp  par  122  44a;  par  140  49b-54a;  part  iii, 
par  182  64a;  par  191-193  66b-c;  par  328 
108b-c;  par  340  llOb-c;  additions,  38  122c-d; 
76-81  128a-129a/  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
162a-170c;  part  ii,  267a-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  4a-6b;  203a;  381b-382a; 
788a-789a 

5.  Cause  in  relation  to  knowledge 

5a.  Cause  as  the  object  of  our  inquiries 

7  Plato:  Meno,  188b-189a  /  Phaedo,  240a-246c 
/  Gorgias,  260a-262a  /  Timaeus,  465d-466a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[7ibi9~33]  98a-b;  ch  13  107c-108c;  bk  ii,  ch 
1-2  122b, d-1 23c  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [i84aio- 
16]  259a;  bk  ii,  ch  3  [194^6-23]  27la-b; 
[i95b2i-28]  272b;  ch  7  275b-d  /  Meteorology, 
bk  iv,  ch  12  [390bi4~i9]  494d  /  Metaphysics, 
bk  1  499a-511d  esp  ch  1-2  499a-501c,  ch  7 
506b-d,  ch  10  511c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [996ai8-b2 6] 
514d-515b;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [ioo3a33-bi9]  522b-c; 
bk  vi,  ch  1  [i025bi-i8]  547b, d;  bk  vii,  ch  17 
[i04iaio-bn]  565b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  4  [i044a33~ 
b2o]  569a-b;  bk  xi,  ch  1  [io59ai7-23]  587a; 
[io59a34— 38]  587b;  ch  7  [io63b36-io64a9] 
592b;  bk  xii,  ch  i  598a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  A.nimals,  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[646a6-i3]  170a/  Gait  of  Animals,  ch  i  243a-b 
/  Generation  of  Animals,  ek  i,  ch  i  [715s!— 18] 
255a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  6  [742bi7~743ai]  283d-284a; 
bk  iv,  ch  1  [765^5— b6]  306c;  bk  v,  ch  i 
[778b7_io]  320d  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  7  [1098^4- 
b2]  343d;  bk  iii,  ch  3  [ni2bi5-24]  358c-d  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i  [i354ai— i i]  593a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2,  168b- 
c;  ch  4  169a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iii  [1053- 
1075]  43c-d;  bk  v  [526-533]  67d-68a 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  11  [475-493]  65a-b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  505a-506a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  959a-960a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  2,  78d  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  ii,  348b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19, 
A  5,  REP  2  H2d-113c;  Q  85,  A  7,  CONTRARY 
459c-460b;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  8,  ans  628d- 
629c 


5b 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q  9, 
a  2,  ans  424b-425a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  53a- b;  60a-c;  63a; 
78a-80a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  497d-498a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  i,  5a-7a  passim 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences, third  day,  202a- 
203a 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  316a-b;319c 
/  O/z  Animal  Generation ,  335c-336c;  425a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  42a-46a; 

46c-47c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  apii  48  llOd- 
111a;  apii  117-119  131a-132a;  bk  ii  137a-195d 
esp  aph  2  137b-c  /  Atlantis ,  210d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61d-62c  / 
Meditations ,  iv,  90a- b  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
110a;  llOc-d;  axiom  1 131d;  158b-162a;215a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b- 
372d;  part  11,  prop  40,  demonst  387a;  prop 
45,  demonst  390b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  lb-2a  /  Optics ,  bk  iii, 
543a- b 

34  Huygens:  Light,  ch  i,  553a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  16  317a-c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect 32  418d- 
419a;  sect  102-109  432d-434b  passim,  esp 
sect  107  433d-434a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div  9 
454c-455a;  sect  iv,  div  26  460b-c;  sect  vii, 
div  60  477a-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  335b-337a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
285c-d  /  Practical  Reason ,  311d-314d 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  169a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  6d-7a  passim 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  xiii,  563a-b;  epilogue  ii  675a-696d 

53  James:  Psychology,  2a;  89b-90a;  745b;  885b- 
886a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  454b-c 

5 b.  Cause  in  philosophical  and  scientific 
method:  the  role  of  causes  in  definition, 
demonstration,  experiment,  hypothesis 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  24Qb-246c/  Timaeus ,  455a-b; 
465d-466a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics  97a-137a,c  esp 
bk  1,  ch  13  107c-108c,  bk  ii  122b,d-137a,c  / 
Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  6  [i45a32-b2o]  199a-b  / 
Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  7  275b-d;  ch  9  [2ooa3o-b9] 
277d-278a,c;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [2iia6-n]  290a  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [983^4-32]  501c;  bk 
iii,  ch  2  [996ai8-b26]  514d-515b;  bk  v,  ch  5 
[ioi5b6-9]  535d-536a;  bk  viii,  ch  4  [i044bi2- 
15]  569b  /  Soul,  bk  1,  ch  1  [405*25-**']]  632 b-c; 
bk  ii,  ch  2  [4i3ai  1— 19]  643a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  161a- 
165d  esp  [642ai4~b4]  165 b-d  /  Generation  of 
Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [7i5ai— 18]  255a-b;  bk  ii, 
ch  6  (742bi7— 743ai]  283d-284a;  bk  iv,  ch  i 
[765a35~b6]  306c;  bk  v,  ch  i  [778b7~n]  320d 


169 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  cii  4  169a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [526—533] 
67d-68a;  bk  vi  [703-71  i]  89c-d 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  505a-506a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  846b  847b;  959a- 
960a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  2-3  lld-12c;  q  14,  a  7  81d-82b; 
a  11,  ans  84c-85c;  q  19,  a  5,  ans  112d-113c; 
q  44,  a  1,  rep  1  238b-239a;  q  57,  a  2,  ans 
295d-297a;  part  i-ii,  q  14,  a  5,  ans  680a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  55, 
a  4  28c-29d;  part  ii-ii,  q  9,  a  2,  ans  424b- 
425a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  60a-b;  part  iv, 
267ab 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day,  202a- 
203a;  fourth  day,  252a-b 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  316a-b; 
319c  /  On  Animal  Generation,  335c-336c; 
393b-c;  425a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43a-d;  56c- 
59c  /  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  73  117d- 
118a;  aph  117,  131a-b;  bk  ii,  apii  2  137b-c  / 
New  Atlantis,  210d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  52a-d;  part 
vi,  61d-62c;  66a-b  /  Meditations,  iii  81d-89a 
esp  84b-85a,  87c-88c;  iv,  90a-b  /  Objections 
and  Replies,  108a-115a,c;  120c-122c;  axiom  v 
131d-132a;  212c;  215a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  axiom  2,4  355d; 
prop  8,  schol  2  356d-357d  esp  357b-d; 
appendix  369b-372d;  part  iii,  395a-d;  part 
iv,  pref,  422b,d-423c;  appendix,  i  447a 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  368b-369a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  lb-2a;  def  viii  7b-8a; 
bk  iii,  rule  i-ii  270a  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  531b; 
541b-542a;  543a-b 

34  Huygens:  Light,  ch  i,  553b-554a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  9-17  315c-317c;  sect  28-29  322a-323a; 
ch  xii,  sect  9  360d-361b;  ch  xvii,  sect  2 
371d-372b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  50-53 
422c-423a  passim;  sect  60-66  424b-426a 
passim;  sect  102-109  432d-434b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 
57,  475d-476b  [fn  2];  div  60,  477a;  sect  viii, 
div  70,  481d-482a;  sect  ix,  div  82  487b-c; 
sect  xi,  div  1 15  503b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  348a, c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  46d-47c  /  Fund .  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  285c-286a  /  Practical 
Reason,  311d-314d;  339a  /  Judgement,  574a-b; 
578a-d;  579b-c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemisiry,  part  i,  9b- 

10b 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  169a;  183a-184a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  3  116a 
/  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156c-158a;  part 
iv,  361a-b 


170 

(5.  Cause  in  relation  to  knowledge.  5b.  Cause  in 
philosophical  and  scientific  method:  the  role 
of  causes  in  definition ,  demonstration,  ex¬ 
periment,  hypothesis .) 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  217d-218a;  239c- 
240d 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  lOb-llb 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xi,  470a-c;  bk 
xiii,  563b;  epilogue  ii  675a-696d  passim,  esp 
677b- 680b,  687b-688a,  694d-695c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  89b-90a;  324b;  668a-671a 
esp  670a-b;  745b;  824b'825a;  884b-886a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  454 b-c;  483d- 
484a 

5c.  The  nature  and  sources  of  our  knowledge 
of causes 

7  Plato:  Meno,  188b-189a  /  Phaedo,  240c-245c 
/  Republic ,  bk  vi,  383d-388a  /  Timaeus ,  455a- 
c;  465d-466a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[7ib33~72a6]  98b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  19  136a-137a,c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  499a-501c;  bk  ii,  ch 
1  [993bi9~ 31]  512a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [996ai8-b26] 
514d-515b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  4  169a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xi,  ch  7  326a-c; 
ch  29  339a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  13, 
a  5,  ans  66b-67d;  q  14,  a  8,  rep  i  82c-83b; 
q  19,  a  5,  ans  112d-113c;  q  57,  a  2,  ans  295d- 
297a 

23  Hobbes  \  Leviathan,  part  i,  53a-b;  60a-b;  63a; 
78c-d;  79b-80a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  442c;  443c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  42a-c; 
43a-c;  45a-46a;  46c-47c  /  Novum  Organum , 
bk  1,  aph  48  llOd-llla;  aph  99  127b-c;  bk  ii 
137a-195d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  62a-b  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  llOa-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  axiom  4  355d; 
appendix  369b-372d 

33  Pascal:  Pences,  234-235  216b  /  Graz/  Experi¬ 
ment ,  388b 

34  Newton:  Optics ,  bk  iii,  543a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  1-7  178b-180a;  ch  xxv,  sect  ii-ch 
xxvi,  sect  2  217a-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iii,  div 
i8-sect  viii,  div  75  457c-485a  passim;  sect 
ix  487b-488c  passim;  sect  xi  497b-503c 
passim,  esp  div  105  498d-499a,  div  115  503b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  335b-337a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15a-b;  17c-d;  46d-47c; 
57c-58b;  58d-59b;  66d-67b;  76c-83b;  85a  b; 
86c-d;  95a-d;  110b;  164a-171a;  194d  l95a; 
214b, d  [fn  1] ;  225c-226b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals ,  285c-286a  /  Practical  Reason, 
294c-295d;  311d-314d  /  Intro .  Metaphysic  of 
Morals ,  387a-b  /  Judgement ,  562d-563b 

53  James:  Psychology,  88a-90b  passim 


5c  to  5 d 

5 d.  The  limits  of  our  knowledge  of  causes 

Old  Testament:  Job,  38-39 — (£))  Job,  38:1- 
39:3° 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  vi,  383d-388a  /  Timaeus, 
447b-d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [i96b5~ 7]  273a 
/  Metaphysics,  bk  1,  ch  2  [982b28-983an] 
501a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [996ai8-b26]  514d-515b 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  6 
[742b  1 7— 743*1  ]  283d-284a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [526-533] 
67d-68a;  bk  vi  [703-71  i]  89c-d 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  505a-506a 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  ii  348b-c 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12, 

a  8,  ans  57b-58b;  q  19,  a  5,  rep  2  112d-113c; 
Q  57,  a  3,  ans  297b-298a 
21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  iii  [24- 
45]  56a-b;  xviii  [49-60]  80b-c 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54a;  78a-80c 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  80b-82b;  271b-273b; 
497b-502c  passim 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  45a-46a  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  2  137b-c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iv,  90a-b  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies,  llOa-b;  2l5a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d; 
part  iv,  pref,  422b,d-423c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  184-241  205a-217b  passim, 
esp  233-241  213b-217b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
371b-372a 

35  Locke  :  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  4  178d-179c;  sect  70  197a-b;  ch  xxiii, 
sect  28-29  211b-212a;  bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  10- 
16  315c-317c;  sect  28-29  322a-323a;  ch  vi, 
sect  5-16  332b-336d  passim;  ch  xvi,  sect 
12,  370b-c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  102-109 
432d-434b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv-vii 
458a-478a;  sect  viii,  div  71-72  482c-483c; 
sect  xi  497b-503c  passim,  esp  div  105  498d- 
499a,  div  1 15  503b-c;  sect  xii,  div  127  507b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  348a, c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  335b-336c 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  46d-47c;  140b,d-145c; 

171a-172c;  234c-235a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic 
of  Morals ,  267d-268a;  285c-d  /  Practical 
Reason,  291a-292a;  294c-295d;  313b-314d  / 
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  390b  /  Judgement, 
550a-551a,c;  557c-558b;  564a-c;  584c-d;611d- 
613a, c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  169a 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  65a;  92d-94c  pas¬ 
sim 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  x,  405a-b;  bk  xi,  469a-470c;  bk  xiii, 
563a-b;  epilogue  i,  646c-647b;  650b-c; 
epilogue  11  675a-696d  esp  687d-688a,  693c 
53  James:  Psychology,  90a;  822b;  885b-886a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


6 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


6.  The  existence  and  operation  of  final  causes 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  241b-242b  /  Timaeus,  447d- 
448a; 465d-466a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii 
l94b8— 95*9]  129b-d  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  9 
[192*16-24]  268b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i93bi2-i9] 
269d-270a;  ch  2  [i94a27~b8]  270d-271a;  cn  3 
[r 94b33— 195*2]  271b-c;  [195*22-26]  271d;  ch 
8-9  275d-278a,c  /  Heavens ,  bk  11,  ch  12 
[292*1 4~b26]  383d-384b  /  Meteorology ,  bk  iv, 
ch  12  [389b22-390b2]  493d-494c  /  Metaphys - 
iW,  bk  1,  ch  2  [982b4~n]  500d;  ch  7  [988b6— 1 5] 
506c-d;  ch  9  [992*29-34]  510c;  bk  ii,  cii  2 
[994b8— 16]  512d-513a;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [996*22-36] 
514d-515a;  bk  v,  ch  2  [ioi3*33-b2]  533c;  ch  4 
[ioi4b34-ioi5*io]  535b;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [i072bi- 
4]  602c;  ch  10  [io75*i2-bi6]  605d-606c  /  Sow/, 
bk  ii,  ch  4  [4i5bi5~22]  645d-646a;  ch  8 
[42obi6-23]  652a;  bk  iii,  ch  9  [432^1-26] 
665b-c;  ch  12-13  667a-668d  passim  /  Sleep, 
ch  2  [455bi3— 28]  698b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 

[639b8-640*i2]  161d-162b;  [64ibio-642b4] 

164c-165d;  ch  5  [645*23-26]  169a;  bk  ii-iv 
170a-229d  passim,  esp  bk  ii,  ch  i  [646*25~b27] 
170b-d,  bk  in,  ch  2  [663b22-23]  191b,  bk  iv, 
ch  2  [677*15-19]  206d-207a  /  Gait  of  Animals , 
ch  2  [704bi2-i8]  243c;  ch  12  249b-d  passim  / 
Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  1,  ch  i  [715*1-11] 
255a;  ch  4-13  257a-260b;  bk  ii,  ch  5  [74ib2- 
4]  282c;  ch  6  [742*i6-bi7]  283b-d;  [744*36- 
b28]  285c-286a;  bk  iii,  ch  4  296b-c;  bk  iv,  ch 
3  [767b6— 15]  309a;  bk  v,  ch  i  [778*15-^9] 
320a-321a;  ch  8  [788b22-789bi5]  330c-331a,c 
/  Politics ,  bk  1,  ch  2  [i252b30-i253*i]  446a-b; 
ch  8  [1256^-26]  450b-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  6,  170b-c; 
ch  10  171b-172b;  ch  12  172d-173c;  ch  13, 
174d-175c;  bk  ii,  ch  3  185a-186d;  ch  4,  187c; 
bk  iii,  ch  1  199a-c;  ch  3  200a-201a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [1022-1037] 
13c-d;  bk  11  [1052-1063]  28b-c;  bk  iv  [823— 
857]  55a-b;  bk  v  [76-90]  62a-b;  [156-234] 
63a-64a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 
270b;  bk  vi,  sect  40  277d 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  bk  i,  511b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  846b-847a;  857b- 
860b;  863b-887a  passim;  913a-b;  915b-916a; 
925b-928a;  932a-933a  /  Harmonies  of  the 
World ,  1023b-1080b  esp  1049b-1050a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  i  40a- 
41a  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  7  242d-243c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xi,  ch  22  333d- 
334c;  bk  xii,  ch  4-5  344b-345b;  bk  xix, 
ch  12-14,  518c-520c;  bk  xxii,  ch  24,  610c- 
611c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  2  12c-14a;  q  5,  a  2,  rep  1-2 
24b-25a;  a  4  25d-26c;  q  6,  a  1,  rep  2  28b-d; 


171 

Q  18,  a  3,  ans  106b  107c;  q  19,  a  i,  ans  108d 
109c;  a  4,  ans  111c  112c;  q  22,  a  2,  ans 
128d-130d;  q  23,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1-2  132c 
133b;  q  36,  a  3,  ans  194c  195d;  q  44,  a  4 
241a-d;  q  48,  a  i,  rep  4  259b  260c;  q  59,  a  i, 
ans  306c-307b;  q  60,  a  5,  ans  313b-314c;  q 
65,  a  2  340b  341b;  q  70,  a  3,  ans  365b-367a; 
q  76,  a  5,  ans  394c-396a;  0  78,  a  i,  rep  3 
407b-409a;  q  82,  a  4,  ans  434c-435c;  q  85, 
a  3,  rep  1  455b-457a;  q  91,  a  3  486b  487d; 
Q  92,  a  1,  rep  1  488d-489d;  q  98,  a  i,  ans 
516d-517c;  q  103  528a-534b  passim;  q  105, 
a  5,  ans  542a-543b;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  2 
610b-611b;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  611b-612a; 
a  6,  ans  614a-c;  a  8  615a-c;  q  2,  a  5,  rep  3 
618d-619c;  q  8,  a  1,  ans  655b-656a;  q  9,  a  1, 
ans  657d-658d;  q  12,  a  5,  ans  672a-c;  q  21, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  1-2  717a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  75,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  4  938a-939d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xviii 
[19-39]  80a-b;  paradise,  i  [94-142]  107b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  50a;  part  iv, 
271d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  302c  /  Circula¬ 
tion  of  the  Blood ,  309b-d  /  On  Animal  Genera¬ 
tion,  349a-b;  355c-d;  390b-c;  402c;  418b-c; 
439c-440a;  442d-443c;  447a-b;  453c;  454b-c; 
461a-c;  462c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43a-d; 
45a-46a  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  48 
llOd-llla 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  44c -45a  / 
Meditations,  iv,  90a- b  /  Objections  and  Re¬ 
plies,  215a-b 

31  Spinoza :  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d; 
part  iv,  pref  422b,d-424a;  def  7  424b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72,  184b;  75  185b-186a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
371a  /  Optics ,  bk  iii,  528b-529a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  i, 
sect  15, 125b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  60-66 
424b-426a  passim;  sect  107  433d-434a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  v,  div  44, 
469b-c;  sect  xi,  div  iii  501b-c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  229b-230a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  187a-190a;  205a-209b; 
239a-240b  /  Judgeme?it,  467d-470b;  473a- 
474b;  523c-d;  550a-613a,c  esp  550a-562a,c, 
568c-570b,  575b-578a,  587a-588a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  157b-c; 
161d-162a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  40c-d;  41c-42a; 
60b-61d  passim;  95d-97a  esp  96b;  217d-218a 
/  Descent  of  Man,  593d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  646c- 
647b;  650b-c;  epilogue  ii,  687d-688a 

53  James:  Psychology,  4a-6b;  671b  [fn  1] 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  401b  /  Instincts ,  415b  / 
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  651d-654c  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  654a-c 


172 

7.  The  causality  of  God  or  the  gods 

la .  Divine  causality  in  the  origin  and  existence 
of  the  world:  creation  and  conservation 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1-2;  7:4  /  Nehemiah , 
9:6— -(D)  //  Esdrasy  9:6  /  /o£,  26:7;  37:18; 
38:1-42:2  /  Psalms,  8  esp  8:3-5;  x9:i?  33:6~9; 
74:16-17;  89:11-12;  95:4-5;  96:5;  102:25;  104; 
115:3;  119:73;  121:2;  136:5-9;  146:5-6;  148:1- 
6—(D)  Psalms,  8  esp  8:4-6;  18:2;  32:6-9; 
73:16-17;  88:12-13;  94:4-5;  95:5;  101:26;  103; 
113:3;  118:73;  120:2;  135:5-9;  i45:5-6;  M8:i“ 
6  /  Proverbs,  3:19-20;  8:23-29  /  Isaiah,  40:26- 
28;  42:5;  44:24;  45:7-12,18;  48:13;  65:17— 
(D)  Isaias ,  40:26-28;  42:5;  44:24;  45:7-12,18; 
48:13;  65:17  /  Jeremiah ,  10:12;  27:5;  31:35; 
51:15-16—  (D)  Jeremias,  10:12;  27:5;  31:35; 
51:15-16  /  Amos,  5:8  /  Zechariah,  12:1  —  (D) 
Zacharias,  12:1 

Apocrypha:  Judith,  16:14 —(D)  OT,  Judith, 
16:17  /  Rest  of  Esther,  13:10— (D)  OT,  Esther, 
13:10  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:14;  11:17—  (D) 
OT,  Boo!^  of  Wisdom,  1:14;  11:18  /  Ecclesias - 
ticus,  24:8-9;  33:10-13;  39:16-35;  43— (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  24:12-14;  33:10-14;  39:21- 
41;  43  /  Bel  and  Dragon,  5 —(D)  OT,  Daniel, 
14:4  /  II  Maccabees,  7:23,28— (D)  OT,  II 
Machabees,  7:23,28 

New  Testament:  Acts,  7:49-50;  14:15;  17:22-28 
—  (D)  Acts,  7:49-50;  14:14;  17:22-28  /  Colos- 
sians,  1:16-17  /  Hebrews ,  1:10;  3:4;  11:3  / 
II  Peter,  3:5  /  Revelation,  4:11;  14:7— (D) 
Apocalypse,  4:11;  14:7 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  447a-452d;  465d-466a  / 
Sopto,  577d-578b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [146-158] 
2d-3a;  bk  v  [146-234]  63a-64a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  1-12 
65d-73d  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  i  214c-215a; 
tr  viii,  ch  7  242d-243c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  10  3b-c; 
bk  vii,  par  16-23  48c-50c;  bk  xi,  par  4-1 1 
90a-92b;  bk  xii,  par  2-9  99c-101c;  par  14-40 
102b-110a;  bk  xiii,  par  6-48  112a-124a  /  City 
of  God,  bk  vii,  ch  29-31  261a-262a;  bk  xi, 
ch  4-24  324a-336a;  bk  xii,  ch  10-27  348b- 
360a, c;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b,d-587b  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  32  633c- d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  8,  a  i 
34d-35c;  a  2,  ans  35c-36b;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i 
36b-37c;  q  9,  a  2,  ans  39c-40d;  q  21,  a  4, 
rep  4  126c-127c;  qq  44-46  238a-255d;  q  50, 
a  i,  ans  269b-270a;  a  3,  ans  272a-273b;  q  56, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  4  292d-294a;  q  57,  a  2,  ans 
and  rep  2  295d-297a;  q  61  314d-317c;  q  65 
339a-343c;  q  75,  a  6,  rep  2  383c-384c;  q  84, 
a  3,  rep  2  443d-444d;  qq  90-93  480c-501c; 
q  94,  a  3,  ans  504a-505a;  q  104,  a  i  esp  rep  4 
534c-536c;  q  118,  aa  2-3  601c-604b;  part  i-ii, 
q  17,  a  8,  rep  2  692a-c 

21  Dante  :  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxv  [37- 
78]  91d-92a;  paradise,  vii  [121-148]  116b-c; 


1  to  lb 

x  [1-6]  120b;  xiii  [52-84]  126a-b;  xix  [40-51] 
135c;  xxix  [13-45]  150b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [2987-3010]  209a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  173d;  part  iv, 
251a-b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  fourth  day, 
245b-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  17b-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  54d-56a  / 
Meditations,  hi,  87b-88c  /  Objections  and  Re¬ 
plies,  axiom  ix  132b;  prop  iii  132d-133a; 
137d-138a;  214c;  215a-b;  228a-c;  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  16-18  362a- 
363c;  prop  25  365b;  prop  33,  schol  2,  368c- 
369a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [650-659]  107b; 
bk  ii  [345-353]  118b-119a;  bk  iii  [708-735] 
150b-151b;  bk  iv  [720-735]  168a-b;  bk  v 
[468-505]  185b-186a;  [577-594]  187b-188a; 
[800-868]  192b-194a;  bk  vii  [59-640]  218b- 
231a  esp  [139-161]  220a-b,  [216-550]  221b- 
229a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  482  258a 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  542a-543a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  12,  165c;  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  15  352d- 
353a;  sect  18-19  353c-354c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  25-33 
417d-419a  esp  sect  29-33  418C'419a;  sect 
45-46  421b-c;  sect  48  422a  passim;  sect  57 
423d-424a;  sect  146-150  442a-443b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
132,  509d  [fn  1] 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  81d-82a;  143a-145c  / 
Judgement,  597a-599d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  245d- 
246c;  part  iv,  361a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  239c-d;  243d 

7b.  Divine  causality  in  the  order  of  nature  or 
change:  the  first  cause  in  relation  to  all 
other  causes 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  455a-b;  465d-466a  /  States¬ 
man,  587a-589c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  1-2  326a-329a; 
bk  viii  334a-355d  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  12 
383b-384c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii, 
ch  10  [336b25— 34]  438d;  [337*15-23]  439a-b  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [983*7-9]  501b;  bk 
xii,  ch  4  [1070^22—25]  600b;  ch  5  [1071^0-36] 
601a;  ch  6-10  601b-606d 

10  Hippocrates:  Sacred  Disease ,  154a-156a; 
160b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [146-158] 
2d-3a;  bk  ii  [167-183]  17a-b;  [1090-1104]  29a; 
bk  vi  [43-95]  80d-81c;  [379-422]  85b-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  6  110c-112b; 
ch  14  120d-121c 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1049b-1050a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  2  41a-c  / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  ii-iii  82c-97b  passim;  tr  viii 
129a-136a  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  2  208c-209b 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


lb  to  7c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  io  3b  c; 
bk  vii,  par  16-23  48c~50c/  City  of  God,  bk  vii, 
ch  29-31  261a-262a;  bk  x,  ch  14  307C'308a; 
bk  xi,  ch  22  333d'334c;  bk  xii,  ch  2'  358b- 
359a;  bk  xix,  ch  12-17  517b-523a;  bk  xxii, 
ch  24  609a-612a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  3  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  1,  ans  14bl5b;  a  2,  ans 
15c-16a;  a  4,  ans  16d-17c;  a  6,  ans  18c-19a; 
a  7,  ans  and  rep  i  19a-c;  a  8,  ans  and  rep  1-2 
19d-20c;  q  4  20c-23b;  q  12,  a  i,  ans  50c-51c; 
q  18,  a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  19,  a  5  112d-113c; 
q  23,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  1-2  132c-133b;  q  46, 
a  2,  rep  7  253a-255a;  q  47,  aa  1-2  256a-258c; 
q  49,  a  2  266a-c;  q  51,  a  i,  rep  3  275b-276b; 
a  3,  rep  3  277a-278c;  q  52,  a  2  279b-280a; 
q  60,  a  1,  rep  2-3  310b-311a;  q  75,  a  i,  rep  i 
378b-379c;  q  76,  a  5,  rep  i  394c-396a;  q  83, 
a  1,  rep  3  436d-438a;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  442b- 
443c;  a  4,  rep  1  444d-446b;  a  5  446c-447c; 
q  88,  a  3,  rep  2  472c-473a;  q  89,  a  i,  rep  3 
473b-475a;  q  92,  a  i,  rep  i  488d-489d;  a  2, 
rep  2  489d-490c;  a  4  491b-d;  q  94,  a  3,  ans 
504a-505a;  qq  104-105  534c-545b;  q  116 
592d-595c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  3,  ans  617b-618a; 
a  5,  rep  3  618d-619c;  q  6,  a  1,  rep  3  644d- 
646a;  q  9,  a  6  662a-d;  q  12,  a  5,  ans  672a-c; 
q  17,  a  8,  rep  2  692a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  79, 
a  2,  ans  157b-158a;  q  85,  a  6  182d-184a; 
q  109,  a  1,  ans  338b-339c;  q  no,  a  i,  rep  2 
347d-349a;  part  ii-ii,  q  9,  a  2,  ans  424b- 
425a;  q  18,  a  4,  ans  464c-465a;  part  hi,  q  6, 
a  1,  rep  1  740b-741b;  q  13,  a  3,  contrary 
782b-783b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  74,  a  2,  rep  3 
926c-927c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [94-142] 
107b-d;  11  [112-148]  109a-b;  xm  [52-84] 
126a-b;  xxvii  [97-120]  148b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [2987-3040]  209a- 
210a  /  Tale  of  Melibeus ,  par  37-38  417b- 
418a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78d-79a;  79d-80a; 
part  iii,  241c-242a;  part  iv,  272b-c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  390d-391a; 
406b-407b;  416b-c;  426a-429b;  443a-c;  490d- 
493a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-d;  4b-c  / 
New  Atlantis ,  203a-b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  55d-56a  / 
Meditations ,  iii,  87c-88c;  iv,  90a-b  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  110a;  123b;  axiom  ix  132b; 
158a-162a;  213b-d;  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  16-18  362a- 
363c;  prop  24-29  365a-366c;  prop  33  367b- 
369a;  appendix  369b-372d;  part  ii,  prop  5-7 
374c-375c;  prop  9-10  376a-377a;  prop  45 
390a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [468-474]  185b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  77  186a;  513,  262a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
369b-371a  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  528b-529a 


173 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  2  178c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  28  211b  d;  bk  iv, 
ch  iii,  sect  28-29  322a-323a 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  25-33 
417d-419a  passim,  esp  sect  29-33  418c-419a; 
sect  51-53  422d-423a;  sect  57  423d-424a; 
sect  60-66  424b-426a;  sect  105-109  433b 
434b  passim;  sect  146-153  442a-444a  passim, 
esp  sect  150  442d-443b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 
54-57  474b-475d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  140b,d-145c;  164a-165c; 
171a-172c;  177b-179b;  183b  [fn  1];  184b  c; 
187a-189c  esp  188c-189a;  190a-b;  191a-d; 
205a-209a ;  239a-240b  /  Practical  Reason,  334b- 
335c;  345a-c  /  Judgement,  564a-567b;  572b- 
578a;  581b-582c;  587a-592d;  597a-599d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  161d- 
162a;  part  i,  245d-246c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  396b-397a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  243b-d 

7c.  Divine  causality  in  the  government  of  the 
universe:  providence  and  free  will 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1-3;  4:5-7;  6-9  esp 
8:21-22;  12-13  esP  12:1-3,  I2:7>  13:14-18;  15 
esp  15:13-21;  17-18;  21-22  esp  22:1-19;  26:1- 
6,22-25;  28:10-22;  35:9-15;  37-50  esp  45:7-8 
/  Exodus,  3;  4:21;  7-14  esp  7:3,  9:12,  10:1, 
10:20,  10:27,  11:10,  12:1-51,  13:21-22,  14:4, 
14:8,  14:17;  15:18;  19-20  esp  19:3-9;  23:20-33; 
33:18-19;  40:34-38— (p)  Exodus,  3;  4:21; 
7-14  esp  7:3,  9:12,  10:1,  10:20,  10:27,  1 1:10, 
12:1-51,  13:21-22,  14:4,  14:8,  14:17;  15:18; 
19-20  esp  19:3-9;  23:20-33;  33:18-19;  40:32- 
36  /  Numbers,  9:15-23;  12;  22-24  /  Deuteron¬ 
omy,  4:1-40;  5-1 1  esp  11:26-28;  29:1-31:8  esp 
30:1-4,  30:19-20  /  Joshua,  1— 11 ;  23-24  esp 
24:14-28— (D)  Josue,  1— 1 1 ;  23-24  esp  24:14- 
28  /  Judges ,  1-16  /  /  Samuel,  8-10;  15-16— (D) 

I  Kuigs,  8-10;  15-16  /  II  Samuel,  7— (D) 

II  Kings,  7  f  I  Kings,  11;  13-22  passim— (D) 

III  Kings,  11 ;  13-22  passim  /  II  Kings  passim 
—(D)  IV  Kings  passim  /  I  Chronicles ,  17:4-14; 
29:11-12— (D)  I  Paralipomenon,  17:4-14; 
29:11-12  /  II  Chronicles,  11-36  passim,  esp  36— 
(D)  II  Paralipomenon,  11-36  passim,  esp  36  / 
Esther  esp  4:12-17— (D)  Esther,  1:1-10:3  esp 
4:12-17  /  Job  esp  1-2,  24,  27,  38-41  /  Psalms 
passim,  esp  3-4,  9-1 1,  13,  17-18,  20,  23,  65, 
104 — (D)  Psalms  passim,  esp  3-4,  9-10,  12, 
16-17,  T9»  22*  64,  103  /  Proverbs,  16:33  / 
Ecclesiastes,  3;  8-9;  n-12  /  Isaiah,  36-37;  46; 
51;  52:7— (D)  Isaias,  36-37;  46;  51;  52:7  / 
Jeremiah,  17:5-8;  18-19;  31;  45~(^)  Jcremias, 
17:5-8;  18-19;  3H  45  /  Ezeljel,  18 —(D) 
Ezechiel,  18  /  Daniel  esp  3,  6 — (D)  Daniel, 
1:1-3:23  esp  3:1-23;  3:91-12:13  esp  3:91-971 
6:1-28  /  Jonah,  1-2 —(D)  Jonas,  1-2 

Apocrypha:  Tobit — (D)  OT,  Tobias /  Judith  esp 
5-6,  8-16— (D)  OT,  Judith  esp  5-6,  8-16  / 
Rest  of  Esther—  (D)  OT,  Esther,  10:4-16:24  / 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


174 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  The  causality  of  God  or  the  gods.  1c.  Divine 
causality  in  the  government  of  the  universe: 
providence  and  free  will.) 

Ecclesiasticus,  15:11-20— (D)  OT,  Ecclesias¬ 
ticus,  15:11-22  /  Song  of  Three  Children—  (D) 
OT,  Daniel,  3:24-90  /  Susanna— (D)  OT, 
Daniel ,  13:1-64  /  Bel  and  Dragon— (D)  OT, 
Daniel,  13:65-14:42  /  I  Maccabees ,  3:13-26— 
(D)  OT,  I  Machabees,  3 : 13-26  /  II  Maccabees, 
6:1-16— (D)  OT,  II  Machabees,  6:1-16 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  6:25-34;  10:29-33; 
23:37  /  Luke,  12:4-7,22-34;  21  :i2-i9  esp  21  :i8 
/  6:22-71  esp  6:40,  6:44-45,  6:64-65— 

(D)  John,  6:22-72  esp  6:40,  6:44-45,  6:65-66 
/  6:8-7:60  esp  7:51;  13:48— (£>) 

6 :8~7 :59  esp  7 :5 1 ;  13  ^8  /  Romans ,  8  :28-i  1 136 
/  Ephesians,  1:4-2:10;  4:1-7  /  Philippians, 
2:12-13  /  //  Timothy,  1:9  /  Hebrews,  13:5-6 
/  7  1:1-5  /  Revelation,  11:15-18— (D) 

Apocalypse,  1 1 : 15-18 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  viii  [130-144]  52c;  bk  xxiv 
[522-551]  176d-177a 

5  Euripides  :  ZfaZftf  [703-733]  304d-305a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  112d-113b 

7  Plato :  Republic,  bk  ii,  321d-322d;  bk  x,439b 
/  Critias,  479c 

8  Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  ii, 
ch  10  [336^5-34]  438d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii, 
ch  10  605d-606d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  8  [1179*23-32] 
434a  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  4  [1326*29-32] 
530b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [167-183] 
17a-b;  [1090-1104]  29a;  bk  v  [146-234]  63a- 
64a;  [1161-1240]  76b-77b;  bk  vi  [43-95]  80d- 
81c;  [379-422]  85b-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  6  110c-112b; 
ch  12  118d-120b;  ch  16  121d-122d;  bk  ii,  ch 
14  153d-155b;  bk  iii,  ch  17  191d-192a;  ch  22 
195a-201a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  224b-d;  ch  5  228a- 
230b;  ch  7  232c-235a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b; 
sect  11  258a-b;  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b;  bk  v, 
sect  8  269d-270b;  bk  vi,  sect  8  274b;  sect 
ii  274c;  sect  40-45  277d-278c;  sect  58  279d; 
bk  vii,  sect  8  280b;  sect  58  283c-d;  sect  68 
284c-d;  bk  viii,  sect  17  286d;  sect  35  288b; 
sect  46-47  289b-c;  sect  51  289d-290a;  bk  x, 
sect  3  296d;  sect  6  297a-b;  sect  25  299c; 
sect  35  301b;  bk  xii,  sect  3  307b-d;  sect  5 
307d-308a;  sect  11-14  308b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [254-296]  llOa-llla;  bk 
IV  [33^—363]  176a-177a;BKix  [123-139]  282a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  l&9a-c/  Nicias, 435b-d 

17  Plotinus  :  Second  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  7  44c-45a 
/  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii-iii  82c-97b  passim  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  13  149b-d;  tr  iv, 
ch  31,  175b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  14  12a-b; 
bk  ix,  par  1  61c-d  /  City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  8-9 
133a-135a;  bk  iv,  ch  33  206c-d;  bk  v,  ch  i-ii 
207d-216d;  ch  21-22  226a-227a;  bk  vii,  ch  30 


7c 

261b-d;  bk  ix,  ch  22  296d-297a;  bk  x,  ch 
14-15  307c-308b;  bk  xi,  ch  17  331c-d;  ch  22 
333d-334c;  bk  xii,  ch  1-9  342b, d-348b;  ch  22 
357c;  ch  25  358b-359a;  ch  27  359c-360a,c; 
bk  xiv,  ch  27  396c-397a;  bk  xix,  ch  12-17 
517b-523a;  bk  xxii,  ch  1-2  586b,d-588a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
ans  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  1,  rep  i  14b-15b;  q  8,  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  2-3  36b-37c;  q  13,  a  8,  ans  and 
rep  1  70d-71b;  q  15,  a  3,  rep  4  93b-94a;  q  19, 
a  3  HOb-lllc;  qq  22-24  127c-143c;  q  63,  a  7, 
ans  331c-332b;  q  96,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2  510b- 
511b;  qq  103-119  528a-608d  esp  qq  103-105 
528a-545b:  part  i-ii,  q  9,  a  6  662a-d;  q  10, 
a  4  665d-666a,c;  q  19,  a  4  705b-c;  q  21,  a  4, 
rep  2  719d-720a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
aa  1-2  208b-209d;  q  93  215b,d-220d  passim; 
part  11— 11,  q  1,  a  7,  ans  385c-387a;  q  25,  A  11, 
rep  3  508d-509c;  part  iii,  q  61,  a  i,  ans 
855a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [61-96] 
lOb-c;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-114]  77b-78a;  xxi 
[40-72]  85b-d;  paradise,  i  [94-142]  107b-d; 
11  [112-148]  109a-b;  viii  [85-148]  117c-118c; 
xi  [28-39]  122b;  xii  [37—45]  124a;  xx  [118-138] 
138a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
X37_I54  106b-108b  /  Knight's  Tale  [1251-1267] 
180b;  [1303-1333]  181b-182a;  [1663-1672] 
187b;  [2987-3046]  209a-210a  /  Friar's  Tale 
[7064-7085]  281a-b  /  Franklin's  Tale  [11,177- 
206]  353b-354a  /  Monies  Tale  434a-448b  / 
Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [15,236-256]  456b-457a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxv,  35a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  53d;  96b;  part  ii, 
113b-c;  160b-c;  163d-164a;  part  iv,  254b; 
271b;  272b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  98b-99a 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  v,  sc  ii  [7—1 1] 
68a;  [230-235]  70a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  491d-492a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  408c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  38a;  94b-c 
/  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  93  125d-126a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  iv  89a-93a;  vi,  99c 
/  Objections  and  Replies,  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  7  355b;  prop  17, 
corol  1-2  and  schol  362b-363c;  appendix 
369b-372d;  part  ii,  prop  3,  schol  374b-c 

32  Milton  :  Sonnets,  xvi  66b-67a  /  Paradise  Lost, 
bk  11  [310-328]  118a;  bk  iii  [80-134]  137a- 
138a;  bk  v  [600-615]  188b;  bk  vi  [171-188] 
200a;  bk  vii  [139— 173]  220a-221a;  bk  x  [1-62] 
274b-275b  /  Samson  Agonistes  [667-709]  354a- 
355a  /  Areopagitica,  394b-395b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  205  211a;  619-641  284b- 
290a;  876  345a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxviii,  sect  8  230a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect  3 
405b-c;  sect  29-33  418c-419a  passim;  sect  57 
423d-424a;  sect  60-66  424b-426a;  sect  93- 


Id 

94  431b-c;  sect  105-109  433b  434b  passim; 
sect  1 4 6— 155  442a-444c  passim 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vii,  div 
54-57  474b-475d;  sect  viii,  div  78-81  485c- 
487a;  sect  xi  497b-503c  passim,  csp  div  108- 
109  500b-501a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  75c-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  la  2b 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iii,  414d;  bk 

iv,  437d-438b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Tally  292d-293b 
42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  334a-335c  /  Judge¬ 
ment ,  594d  [fn  1] 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
160b;  161d-168b;  168d-170b;  182d-184d; 
part  iv,  368d-369a,c 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  prologue  [243-270]  7a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic^y  85a;  237a;  396b-397a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peacey  bk  vi,  272a-b;  bk 
viii,  303d-304b;  bk  ix,  342a-344b;  357b- 
358b;  bk  x,  389a-391c;  447c-448a;  465c-467a 
passim;  bk  xiii,  563a-b;  bk  xv,  619d-620a; 
631a-c;  epilogue  i,  645a-650c  passim,  esp 
646c-647b,  650b-c;  epilogue  ii,  675a-676a; 
680b-c;  684b-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
127b-137c  passim;  bk  xi,  343b-c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  771a-b 
/  New  Introductory  Lecturesy  878a-b 

Id.  Divine  causality  in  the  supernatural  order: 
grace,  miracles 

Old  Testament:  Gene sis ,  19:24-26;  21:1-8  / 
Exodus ,  3-12  passim,  esp  3:2,  3:20;  14;  16-17  / 
NumberSy  9:15-23;  11-12;  16-17;  20:1-13; 
21:5-9;  22:21-34  /  Joshua,  3:13-4:24;  6:1- 
20;  10:12-14;  24:6-7— (D)  Josne,  3:13-4:25; 
6:1-20;  10:12-14;  24:6-7  /  Judges ,  6:36-40  / 
/  Samuel,  12:17-19— (D)  I  Kings ,  12:17-19  / 
I  Kings,  17;  18:30-39— (D)  III  Kings,  17; 
18:30-39/  II  Kings,  1—6;  13:20-21;  20:1-11  — 
(D)  IV  Kings,  1-6;  13:20-21;  20:1-11  /  Nehe- 
miah,  9 —(D)  II  Esdras,  9  /  Psalms,  78;  84:11; 
85:1-3;  86:5;  103:1-5;  105;  106:7-11 ;  130—  (D) 
Psalms,  77;  83:12;  84:2-4;  85:5;  102:1-5;  104; 
105:7-11;  129  /  Proverbs,  3:1-4,21-26  /  Isaiah, 
38;  44:22;  55:7 —(D)  to,  38;  44:22;  55:7 
/  Jeremiah,  33:1-14— (D)  Jeremias,  33:1-14  / 
Daniel,  3:1-43;  5-6;  9:9 —(D)  Daniel,  3:1- 
23,91-100;  5-6;  9:9  /  Joel,  2:30-31  /  Jonah — 
(D)  Jonas  /  Micah ,  7:18-20— (D)  Micheas, 
7:18-20  /  Zechariah,  12:10— (D)  Zacharias, 
12:10 

Apocrypha:  Sozzg  0/  Three  Children— (D)  OT, 
Daniel,  3:24-90  /  Zte/  Dragon ,  28-42 — (D) 
OT,  Daniel,  14:27-42  /  //  Maccabees ,  1  :i8-22; 
2:10 —(D)  OT,  //  Machabees,  1:18-22;  2:10 
New  Testament:  Matthew,  8-9;  12:22-29; 
*4:i3-36;  15**22-39;  17:1-8;  20:29-34  / 
i:29-34, 40-44;  2:3-12;  4:34-41;  5;  6:34-56; 
7:24-8:26;  9:2-10,17-30;  10:46-52;  13:24-26 
—  (D)  Mar\,  1:29-34,40-44;  2:3-12;  4:34-40; 
5;  6:34-56;  7:24-8:26;  9:1-9,16-29;  10:46-52; 


175 

13:24-26  /  Lube,  1:5-66;  4:31-5:26;  7:1  16; 
8:22-56;  9:12-17,28-42;  11:14-26;  13:11-17; 
14:1  6;  17:11  19;  18:35-43 — (D)  L/%,  1:5-66; 
4 :3 1- 5 :26;  7:1-16;  8:22-56;  9:12-17,28-43; 
11:14-26;  13:11-17;  14:1-6;  17:11-19;  18:35-43 
/  John,  1:14-17;  2:1-11;  4:46-54;  11:1-45  / 
//rtt,  2:1-22;  3:1-16;  4:33;  5:12-16;  9:36-43; 
14:8-10;  19:11-12;  20:7-12;  28:1-10— (D)  Acts, 
2:1-22;  3:1-16;  4:33;  5:12-16;  9:36-43;  14:7- 
9;  19:11-12;  20:7-12;  28:1-10  /  Romans ,  1 :3~5*, 
3:19-7:25;  1 1  /  /  Corinthians,  3:1-15;  15:9-10  / 
//  Corinthians,  4:15;  8-9  passim;  12:1-10  / 
Galatians,  5:4  /  Ephesians ,  1  :i-ii  /  Philippians, 
2:12-13;  4:13  /  //  Thessalonians,  2:16-17  —  (D) 
//  Thessalonians,  2:15-16  /  //  Timothy,  2:1  / 
2:11-15;  3:3_9  /  Hebrews,  2:9;  12:14-29 
/  James,  4:6//  Peter,  5 15 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  191d-192b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  5-6  2b-c; 
bk  11,  par  15  12b-c;  bk  vi,  par  4  36a-b  /  Cz/y  ©y* 
Goz/,  bk  x,  ch  8  303a-d;  ch  12-18  306d-310d; 
bk  xiii,  ch  3-5  361a-362c;  ch  7  362d-363b; 
ch  14-15  366b-d;  ch  20  370c-371a;  bk  xiii, 
ch  23-BK  xiv,  ch  1  372a-377a;  bk  xiv,  ch 
26-27,  396b-397a;  bk  xv,  ch  1-3  397b,d-399c; 
bk  xvi,  ch  26  438c-439a;  ch  37  444b-445a; 
bk  xvm,  ch  11  477c-d;  bk  xxi,  ch  5-8  563d- 
568d;  ch  15—16  572c-574a;  bk  xxii,  ch  5-10 
589a-599b  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
624b, d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  2, 
rep  1  lld-12c;  q  8,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  4  36b- 
37c;  q  12,  a  2  51c-52c;  aa  4-5  53b-55b;  a  13 
61c-62b;  q  62  317c-325b;  q  89,  a  i,  rep  3 
473b-475a;  a  2,  rep  3  475a-d;  a  8,  rep  2 
479c-480c;  q  92,  a  4,  ans  491b-d;  q  95  506b- 
510a;  q  104,  a  4,  ans  538a-c;  q  105,  aa  6-8 
543b-545b;  Q  106,  a  3,  ans  547c-548b;  q  108, 
a  8,  ans  and  rep  1-2  561a-562a;  q  no,  a  4 
567c-568b;  q  113,  a  i,  rep  2  576a-d;  q  114, 
a  4  584a-585a;  q  119,  a  i,  ans  604c-607b; 
part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  6,  rep  2  641a-642a;  q  10,  a  4, 
rep  2  665d-666a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  4  15a-d;  q  55,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  6  28c-29d; 
q  58,  a  3,  rep  3  43b-44a;  q  62,  a  1  60a-d; 
q  63,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1-2  64b-65a;  q  65,  a  3, 
ans  72d-73d;  q  66,  a  2,  rep  i  76c-77c;  q  76, 
a  2,  rep  2  141d-142c;  q  79,  a  3,  ans  158a-d; 
q  81,  a  3,  rep  3  165d-166b;  a  4  166b-167a; 
q  85,  a  6,  ans  182d-184a;  q  98,  a  i,  ans  239b- 
240c;  q  106,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  1,3  321a-322a; 
qq  109-114  338a-378a,c  esp  q  113,  a  10  369c- 
370b;  part  ii-ii,  q  24,  a  3,  rep  i  491a-d;  part 
iii,  qq  7-8  745c-763b;  q  61,  a  i,  rep  2  855a-d; 
q  62  858b-864c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  75,  a  3  938a- 
939d;  q  83,  a  3  978c-980d;  q  92,  a  1  1025c- 
1032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  vii  [16- 
120]  115b-116b;  xiii  [52-87]  126a-b;  xx 
t79_I3^1  137c-138a;  xxix  [58-66]  150d-151a; 
xxxii  [40-87]  155a-c;  xxxn  [i39]-xxxm  [145] 
156a-157d 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


176 


8 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  The  causality  of  God  or  the  gods .  Id.  Divine 
causality  in  the  supernatural  order :  grace, 
miracles .) 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Man  of  Law  236b-255b  esp 
[4869-4924]  242b-243b,  [5247-5253]  249b  / 
Prioress's  Tale  [13,418-620]  392a-395b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  83c;  88c-89a; 
part  11,  137b-c;  149c-d;  160b-c;  part  hi, 
165d-167b;  172a-177c  passim;  183d-187a; 
188a-191a;  241c-242a;  part  iv,  249b-250a; 
264a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  212a-d;  267d-268a; 

273a-b;  294a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  19b-c; 
33c-d;  41b-c  /  New  Atlantis ,  201d-203c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  125d- 
126a 

32  Milton  :  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [1024-1033]  133b; 
bk  hi  [56-415]  136b-144b  esp  [130-134]  138a, 
[167-184]  139a-b,  [227-238]  140b;  bk  xi  [1— 21] 
299a-b;  [251-262]  304b-305a;  bk  xii  [173-222] 
323a-324a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [356-372]  347b; 
[652-666]  353b-354a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  la-14a;  19a-26b; 
29b;  154b-159a  /  Pensees ,  202  211a;  430-435 
245a-251a;  458  254a;  505  261a-b;  508-511 
261b;  513-517  262a-263b  5520-524  263b-264a; 
643-644  290b-291b;  803-856  328b-341b;  876 
345a;  881  345b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  xvi, 
sect  13  371a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  62-63 
425a-c;  sect  84  429bc 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 
54  474b-c;  sect  x  488d-497b 
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  38d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  180b-c;  189b-191a; 
206b-d;  295b-296b;  465d-467a;  605b-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  227d-228a;  232a-c; 
398b-399b 

42  Kant;  Pure  Reason,  238b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  126b-c;  359a 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  307a- 
b;  part  iv,  338b-c;  348d-349a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  219b-220a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,  11a- 
b:  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim;  bk  vii,  171a-177b; 
189d-190a 

8.  The  operation  of  causes  in  the  process  of 
history 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  21d-22a;  bk  ix, 
291b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  354d- 
355a;  bk  iv,  462a-b 

7  Plato:  Statesman,  587a-589c  /  Laws,  bk  iii, 
663d-666d;  bk  iv,  679a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  v  502a-519d  passim 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [449-482] 
6c-7a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 


270b;  bk  vii,  sect  1  279b;  sect  49  282d; 
bk  ix,  sect  28  293d-294a;  bk  x,  sect  27  299d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid  103a-379a  esp  bk  i  [254-296] 
llOa-llla,  bk  vi  [713-853]  230a-234a 

14  Plutarch:  Camillus,  107 c  /  Timoleon,  201a- 
203b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  49c;  bk  vi,  91b-d  / 
Histories,  bk  i,  190a-b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  i,  pref  129a-d; 
ch  36  149c-d;  bk  11,  ch  2-3  150c-151c;  bk  iv, 
ch  33  206c-d;  bk  v,  ch  i  207d-208c;  ch  11-26 
216c-230a,c;  bk  xi,  ch  i  322b,d-323a;  ch  18 
331d-332a;  bk  xiv,  ch  28-BK  xv,  ch  i  397a- 
398c;  bk  xv,  ch  21-22  415b-416c;  bk  xviii, 
ch  1-2  472b,d-473d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [61-96] 
lOb-c;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-114]  77b-78a; 
paradise,  vi  [28-111]  113d-114d 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xiv,  21b;  ch  xxv 
35a-36b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  76c- d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  464b-465c  passim 

26  Shakespeare:  Jidius  Caesar,  act  iv,  sc  iii 
[215-224]  590d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  34c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  505  261a-b;  619-641  284b- 
290a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  hi,  121a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  viii,  56b- 
57c;  bk  xvii  122a-125a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  348a, c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  456d-457a,c; 
609b-c;  630b,d-634a,c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and F«//,451c-453a,c;  590a-b 

43  Federalist:  number  3,  33c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  327b,d-332d 
passim,  esp  331b-332d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,,  part  ii,  par  115 
42b-c;  part  iii,  par  340-360  110b-114a,c  esp 
par  342  llOc-d,  par  347  lllb-c  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  155c;  156d-l70b;  173a-175c; 
190b-201a,c  esp  190b-d,  194b-196a;  203a- 
206a, c;  part  i,  235d-237a;  258b-d;  part  ii, 
262c-263d;  274a-275a;  281d-282d;  283c- 

284a, c;  part  iii,  300a-301c;  part  iv,  337d- 
342a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  323a-b;  327a-328d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  7b;  8a-lld  passim;  377c-378d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  416c- 
417a, c;  419b,d-425b  passim;  428b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  x,  389a-391c;  430b-432c;  447c-448c;  bk 
xi,  469a-472b;  bk  xiii,  563a-575a;  bk  xiv, 
588a-590c;  609a-613d;  bk  xv,  618b-621b; 
epilogue  1,  645a-650c;  epilogue  ii  675a- 
696d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
127b-137c 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  761a-c  /  Civilization 
and  Its  Discontents,  781a-782d;  787a-788d; 
791b-d;  799a-802a,c  esp  801d-802a,c  /  New 
Introductory  Lectures,  834b-c;  882b-884c 


Chapter  8:  CAUSE 


177 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  consideration  of  cause  in  relation  to  principle  and  element,  see  Element  2;  Principle  ia. 

The  distinction  between  necessary  and  contingent  causes,  and  for  the  conception  of  chance 
in  relation  to  cause,  see  Chance  ia-ib;  Nature  30-30(1);  Necessity  and  Contingency 
3a“3c* 

The  issue  concerning  determinism  in  nature  or  history,  see  Fate  5-6;  History  4a(i); 
Mechanics  40(1);  Nature  2f,  3c(2). 

Other  discussions  of  the  controversy  concerning  causality  and  free  will,  and  of  the  problem 
of  man’s  freedom  in  relation  to  God’s  will,  see  Fate  2,  4;  History  4a(i);  Liberty  43-4 b, 
5a,  5<d;  Will  5a(3)-5a(4),  5K2),  5c,  7c. 

The  theory  of  divine  causality  in  creation,  providence,  and  the  performance  of  miracles,  see 
Astronomy  8d;  God  5a,  ja-je;  Matter  3d;  Nature  30(4);  World  4b,  4d~4e. 

The  role  of  ends  or  final  causes  in  the  order  of  nature  and  the  structure  of  the  universe,  see 
Desire  i  ;  God  5b;  Nature  30(3) ;  World  ic,  6c;  and  for  the  general  theory  of  means  and 
ends,  see  Good  and  Evil  4b,  5c;  Judgment  3;  Prudence  3a,  4b;  Will  2c(2)-2c(3). 

The  discussion  of  cause  as  an  object  of  knowledge  and  in  relation  to  the  methods  and  aims  of 
philosophy,  science,  and  history,  see  Astronomy  3a~3b;  Definition  2d;  History  3b; 
Knowledge  53(3) ;  Mechanics  2c;  Physics  2b;  Reasoning  5b(4)”5fc>(5);  Science  ib(i), 
4c. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Aquinas.  Snmma  Contra  Gentiles ,  bk  iii,  ch  1-16, 
64-83,  88-98 

Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy,  part  i,  28 
Hobbes.  Concerning  Body ,  part  ii,  ch  9 
Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  i,  part  hi, 
sect  ii-iv,  xv 
Berkeley.  Siris 

Kant.  Metaphysical  Foundations  of  Natural 
Science ,  div  hi 

Gibbon.  An  Essay  on  the  Study  of  Literature,  xlviii- 
lv,  lxxviii— lxxxii 

Hegel.  Science  of  Logic,  vol  i,  bk  ii,  sect  i,  ch  3; 

SECT  III,  CH  3(b);  VOL  II,  SECT  II,  CH  3 

J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic,  bk  hi,  ch  4-6,  9-10, 
15,  21 

- .  An  Examination  of  Sir  William  Hamilton's 

Philosophy,  ch  16 

Freud.  The  Psychopathology  of  Everyday  Life ,  ch  12 
W.  James.  Some  Problems  of  Philosophy,  ch  12-13 


II. 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism,  bk  iii, 
ch  1-20 

- .  Against  the  Physicists,  bk  i  (Concerning  Cause 

and  the  Passive) 

Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology ,  (b,g,i) 

Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed ,  part  i, 
ch  69;  PART  II,  CH  48 

Duns  Scotus.  Tractatus  de  Primo  Principio  (. A 
Tract  Concerning  the  First  Principle) 

Bruno.  De  la  causa,  principio,  e  uno 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xi  (3),  xn- 
xxvii, xxix, xxxi  (8-10),  xxxiv(6-7),xlviii  (1) 

John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philosophicus  Tho- 
misticus,  Philosophia  Naturalis  part  i,  qq  10-13, 
25-26 

Boyle.  A  Disquisition  About  the  Final  Causes  of 
Natural  Things 

Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite,  bk  vi(ii), 
ch  3;  Eclaircissement  15 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


178 

Malebranche.  Dialogues  on  Metaphysics  and  Reli- 
gion ,  vii 

Leibnitz.  Discourse  on  Metaphysics ,  xv-xxn 
- .  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Understandings 

BK  II,  ch  2 6 

Voltaire.  Candide 

- .  “Change  or  Generation  of  Events,”  “Final 

Causes,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 
T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Active  Powers  of  the  Human 
Mind,  i 

Schopenhauer.  On  the  Fourfold  Root  of  the  Princi¬ 
ple  of  Sufficient  Reason 

- ,  The  World  as  Will  and  Ideas  vol  iii,  sup,  ch 

26;  appendix 

Brown.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Relation  of  Cause  and 
Effect 

- .  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mindy 

vol  1,  pp  189-220;  vol  11,  pp  128-134 
Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy ,  intro,  ch  i  ;  bk  hi, 
ch  1 

W.  Hamilton.  Lectures  on  Metaphysics  and  Logicy 
vol  1  (38-40) 

Whewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences, 

VOL  I,  BK  III,  CH  1-4;  BK  IX,  CH  6‘,  BK  X,  CH  5 ;  VOL 
II,  BK  XI,  CH  7 

Helmholtz.  Popular  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects , 

VIII 

Wundt.  Die  Prinzipien  der  mechanischen  Naturlehre 
Jevons.  The  Principles  of  Sciences  ch  i  i 
Lotze.  Logic s  bk  1,  ch  2  (b) 

P.  A.  Janet.  Final  Causes 

C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers ,  vol  vi,  par  66-87, 
393~394 

Domet  de  Vorges.  Cause  efficiente  et  cause  finale 

Watts.  The  Reign  of  Causality 

Venn.  Principles  of  Empirical  or  Inductive  Logic,  ch  2 


Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough ,  part  i,  ch  3 
Pearson.  The  Grammar  of  Science ,  ch  4 
Bradley.  The  Principles  of  Logic ,  bk  iii,  part  ii, 
ch  2 

- .  Appearance  and  Reality ,  bk  i,  ch  6 

Bosanquet.  Science  and  Philosophy ,  8 
Bergson.  Creative  Evolution 
Broad.  Perception ,  Physics ,  and  Reality ,  ch  1-2 
Henderson.  The  Order  of  Nature 
W.  E.  Johnson.  Logic ,  part  iii,  ch  3-1  i 
Meyerson.  Identity  and  Reality ,  ch  i 

- .  De  V explication  dans  les  sciences 

Ducasse.  Causation  and  the  Types  of  Necessity 
Whitehead.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  the  Principles  of 
Natural  Knowledge ,  ch  16 

- .  Symbolism ,  Its  Meaning  and  Effects 

Eddington.  The  Nature  of  the  Physical  World, 
ch  14 

McTaggart.  The  Nature  of  Existence ,  ch  24-26 
Santayana.  The  Realm  of  Matter,  ch  7 
M.  R.  Cohen.  Reason  and  Nature ,  bk  i,  ch  4(2); 
bk  11,  ch  2 

Lenzen.  The  Nature  of  Physical  Theory,  part  iv, 
ch  16 

Weyl.  The  Open  World,  lect  ii 

Maritain.  A  Preface  to  Metaphysics ,  lect  v-vii 

A.  J.  Toynbee.  A  Study  of  History 
Planck.  Where  Is  Science  Going?,  ch  4-5 

- .  The  Philosophy  of  Physics,  ch  2 

Dewey.  Logic ,  the  Theory  of  Inquiry ,  ch  22 

B.  Russell.  Principles  of  Mathematics,  ch  55 

- .  Our  Knowledge  of  the  External  World,  vm 

- .  Mysticism  and  Logic ,  ch  9 

- .  The  Analysis  of  Matter ,  ch  30-31,  35 

- - .  Human  Knowledge,  Its  Scope  and  Limits, 

PART  IV,  CH  9-10;  PART  VI,  CH  5 ~6 


Chapter 9:  CHANCE 


INTRODUCTION 


ONE  sense  in  which  we  use  the  word 
“chance”  does  not  exclude  the  operation 
of  causes.  The  chance  event,  in  this  sense,  is 
not  uncaused.  But  within  this  meaning  of 
chance,  there  is  the  question  of  how  the  chance 
event  is  caused. 

On  one  view,  what  happens  by  chance  is  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  what  happens  by  nature  in 
terms  of  a  difference  in  manner  of  causation — 
the  difference  between  the  contingent  and  the 
necessary.  On  another  view,  the  chance  event 
does  not  differ  causally  from  that  which  hap¬ 
pens  regularly  or  uniformly.  The  difference  lies 
not  in  the  pattern  of  causes,  but  in  our  knowl¬ 
edge  of  them.  The  chance  event  is  unpredict¬ 
able  or  less  predictable  because  of  our  ignorance 
of  its  causes,  not  because  of  any  real  contingency 
in  the  order  of  nature. 

There  is  still  a  third  sense  of  “chance”  in 
which  it  means  that  which  happens  totally 
without  cause — the  absolutely  spontaneous  or 
fortuitous. 

These  three  meanings  of  chance  at  once  in¬ 
dicate  the  basic  issues  in  which  the  concept  is 
involved.  The  third  meaning  is  the  most  radi¬ 
cal.  It  stands  in  opposition  to  the  other  two. 
Their  opposition  to  one  another  can  be  con¬ 
sidered  after  we  examine  the  sense  in  which 
chance  excludes  every  type  of  cause. 

The  doctrine  of  absolute  fortuitousness  is 
indeterminism  in  its  most  extreme  form.  The 
familiar  phrase,  “a  fortuitous  concourse  of 
atoms,”  indicates  the  classical  statement  of 
this  doctrine,  and  identifies  it  in  the  great  books 
with  the  theory  of  atomism.  It  would  be  more 
precise  to  say  “with  Lucretius’  version  of  that 
theory,”  because  it  is  with  regard  to  chance 
that  he  departs  from  the  teachings  of  Democ¬ 
ritus  and  Epicurus,  and  adds  an  hypothesis  of 
his  own. 


The  swerve  of  the  atoms,  according  to  Lu¬ 
cretius,  accounts  for  the  origin  of  the  world, 
the  motions  of  nature,  and  the  free  will  of  man. 
But  nothing  accounts  for  the  swerve  of  the 
atoms.  It  is  uncaused,  spontaneous,  fortuitous. 
“When  the  atoms  are  being  carried  downwards 
straight  through  the  void  by  their  own  weight, 
they  push  a  little  from  their  path  at  times  quite 
undetermined  and  at  undetermined  places, 
yet  only  just  so  much  as  you  would  call  a 
change  of  trend.  If  they  did  not  swerve,  all 
things  would  fall  downward  through  the  deep 
void  like  drops  of  rain,  nor  could  collision  come 
to  be,  nor  blows  be  brought  to  pass  among  the 
atoms;  thus  nature  would  never  have  brought 
anything  to  being.” 

Since  the  atoms  differ  in  shape,  size,  and 
weight,  it  might  be  supposed  that  the  heavier 
atoms,  falling  straight  yet  more  rapidly,  would 
overtake  and  hit  the  lighter  atoms,  thus  bring¬ 
ing  about  their  grouping  or  interlocking.  But 
this  supposition,  says  Lucretius,  is  contrary  to 
reason.  It  may  hold  for  things  falling  through 
water  or  thin  air,  but  through  the  empty  void 
“all  things,  even  of  unequal  weight,  move  with 
an  equal  velocity  through  the  unresisting  void.” 
Therefore  heavier  things  will  never  be  able  to 
fall  on  the  lighter  from  above  nor  of  themselves 
bring  about  the  blows  sufficient  to  produce  the 
varied  motions  by  which  nature  carries  things 
on.  Wherefore,  Lucretius  concludes,  the  atoms 
“must  swerve  a  little.” 

Once  the  atoms  have  collided,  the  way  in 
which  they  are  locked  together  in  the  patterns 
of  composite  things,  and  all  the  subsequent  mo-* 
tions  of  these  things,  can  be  accounted  for  by 
reference  to  the  natural  properties  of  the  atoms. 
The  atomic  sizes,  shapes,  and  weights  determine 
how  they  behave  singly  or  in  combination.  But 
the  swerve  of  the  atoms  is  not  so  determined. 
It  is  completely  spontaneous. 


179 


180 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


“If  each  motion  is  always  due  to  another,  and 
the  new  always  springs  from  the  old  in  a  deter¬ 
mined  order,  and  if  the  atoms  do  not  by  swerv¬ 
ing  break  through  the  decrees  of  fate,  so  that 
cause  does  not  follow  cause  through  infinite 
time”;  whence,  asks  Lucretius,  “is  it  wrested 
from  fate,  this  will  whereby  we  move  forward 
where  pleasure  leads  each  one  of  us,  and  swerve 
likewise  in  our  motions,  neither  at  a  fixed  time 
nor  at  a  fixed  place,  but  only  when  and  where 
the  mind  itself  has  prompted  us?”  The  answer 
he  gives  is  that  there  must  be  “in  the  atoms  .  .  . 
another  cause  of  motion  besides  blows  and 
weights,  whence  comes  this  power  born  in  us, 
since  we  see  that  nothing  can  come  to  be  from 
nothing.” 

Being  absolutely  fortuitous,  the  swerve  of 
the  atoms  is  absolutely  unintelligible.  There  is 
no  answer  to  the  question  why  they  chance  to 
swerve  at  undetermined  times  and  places.  This 
unintelligibility  may  not,  however,  make  the 
fortuitous  either  unreal  or  impossible.  It  can 
be  argued  that  chance  may  exist  even  though, 
for  our  limited  understanding,  it  remains  mys¬ 
terious. 

The  same  problem  of  intelligibility  arises 
with  respect  to  that  meaning  of  chance  wherein 
it  is  identified  with  coincidence  or  contingency. 
Here,  as  in  the  case  of  the  absolutely  fortuitous, 
chance  belongs  to  reality  or  nature.  “Some 
things  always  come  to  pass  in  the  same  way,  and 
others  for  the  most  part,”  writes  Aristotle  as  an 
observer  of  nature,  but  there  is  also  “a  third 
class  of  events  besides  these  two — events  which 
all  say  are  ‘by  chance/  ”  Things  of  this  last 
kind,  he  goes  on  to  say,  are  those  which  “come 
to  pass  incidentally” — or  accidentally. 

According  to  this  theory,  a  real  or  objective 
indeterminism  exists.  Chance  or  contingency  is 
not  just  an  expression  of  human  uncertainty 
born  of  insufficient  knowledge.  Contingency, 
however,  differs  from  the  fortuitousness  or 
spontaneity  of  the  atom’s  swerve,  in  that  it  is 
a  product  of  causes,  not  their  total  absence. 
Of  the  contingent  event,  “there  is  no  definite 
cause,”  in  Aristotle’s  opinion,  but  there  is  “a 
chance  cause,  i.e.,  an  indefinite  one.” 

In  the  chance  happening,  two  lines  of  action 
coincide  and  thereby  produce  a  single  result. 
This  is  our  ordinary  understanding  of  the  way 


accidents  happen.  The  chance  meeting  of  old 
friends  who  run  across  each  other  in  a  railroad 
station  after  a  separation  of  many  years  is  a 
coincidence^-a  coinciding  of  the  two  quite 
separate  and  independent  lines  of  action  which 
brought  each  of  them  to  the  same  station  at 
the  same  time,  coming  from  different  places, 
going  to  different  places,  and  proceeding  un¬ 
der  the  influence  of  different  causes  or  pur¬ 
poses.  That  each  is  there  can  be  explained  by 
the  operation  of  causes.  That  both  are  there 
together  cannot  be  explained  by  the  causes 
determining  their  independent  paths. 

So  understood,  the  chance  event  exemplifies 
what  Aquinas  calls  a  “clashing  of  two  causes.” 
And  what  makes  it  a  matter  of  chance  is  the 
fact  that  “the  clashing  of  these  two  causes,  in¬ 
asmuch  as  it  is  accidental,  has  no  cause.”  Pre¬ 
cisely  because  it  is  accidental,  “this  clashing  of 
causes  is  not  to  be  reduced  to  a  further  pre-ex¬ 
isting  cause  from  which  it  follows  of  necessity.” 

The  illustration  is  not  affected  by  considera¬ 
tions  of  free  will.  Whether  men  have  free  will 
or  not,  whether  free  acts  are  caused  or  are,  as 
Kant  suggests,  uncaused  and  spontaneous,  the 
event  we  call  a  “chance  meeting”  remains  acci¬ 
dental  or,  more  precisely,  a  coincidence.  What¬ 
ever  the  factors  are  which  control  the  motions 
of  each  man,  they  operate  entirely  within  that 
single  man’s  line  of  action.  Prior  to  the  meeting, 
they  do  not  influence  the  other  man’s  conduct. 
If  we  could  state  the  cause  for  the  coincidence 
of  the  two  lines  of  motion,  it  would  have  to  be 
some  factor  which  influenced  both  lines.  Were 
there  such  a  cause  and  were  it  known  to  us,  we 
could  not  say  that  the  meeting  happened  by 
chance.  It  would  still  be  a  coincidence  in  the 
merely  physical  sense  of  coming  together,  but 
it  would  not  be  a  coincidence  causally. 

That  free  will  is  irrelevant  to  this  meaning  of 
chance  can  be  seen  from  the  fact  that  the  col¬ 
lision  of  particles  which  produces  atomic  fission 
is  regarded  as  resulting  from  chance  or  coinci¬ 
dence  in  a  manner  no  different  from  the  acci¬ 
dental  meeting  of  friends.  Causes  control  the 
speeds  and  directions  of  the  colliding  particles, 
but  no  cause  determines  their  collision;  or,  in 
other  words,  there  is  no  cause  for  the  coinci¬ 
dence  of  two  separate  lines  of  causation.  Con¬ 
temporary  physics  affirms  a  real  or  objective 
indeterminism  insofar  as  it  does  not  merely  say 


Chapter  9:  CHANCE 


181 


that  the  cause  of  the  coincidence  is  unknown 
to  us,  but  rather  holds  that  no  such  cause  exists 
to  be  known. 

The  conception  of  the  chance  event  as  an 
uncaused  coincidence  of  causes  is  an  ancient  as 
well  as  a  modern  doctrine.  In  his  Physics,  Aris¬ 
totle  distinguishes  between  what  happens  by 
nature  and  what  happens  by  chance  in  terms  of 
different  types  of  causality.  “Chance,”  he 
writes,  is  “reckoned  among  causes;  many  things 
are  said  both  to  be  and  to  come  to  be  as  a  result 
of  chance.”  But  the  fact  that  its  effects  cannot 
be  “identified  with  any  of  the  things  that  come 
to  pass  by  necessity  and  always,  or  for  the  most 
part”  at  once  distinguishes  the  causality  of 
chance  from  that  of  nature. 

“The  early  physicists,”  Aristotle  observes, 
“found  no  place  for  chance  among  the  causes 
which  they  recognized  .  .  .  Others  there  are 
who,  indeed,  believe  that  chance  is  a  cause,  but 
that  it  is  inscrutable  to  human  intelligence,  as 
being  a  divine  thing  and  full  of  mystery.”  But  to 
Aristotle  himself  “it  is  clear  that  chance  is  an 
incidental  cause”  and  “that  the  causes  of  what 
comes  to  pass  by  chance  are  infinite.”  For  this 
reason,  he  explains,  “chance  is  supposed  to  be¬ 
long  to  the  class  of  the  indefinite,  and  to  be  in¬ 
scrutable  to  man.”  Though  he  distinguishes  be¬ 
tween  spontaneity  and  chance,  he  says  that  both 
“are  causes  of  effects  which,  though  they  might 
result  from  intelligence  or  nature,  have  in  fact 
been  caused  by  something  incidentally .” 

What  happens  by  nature  happens  regularly, 
or  for  the  most  part,  through  causal  necessity. 
This  necessity  results  from  the  operation  of  es¬ 
sential  causes,  causes  in  the  very  nature  of  the 
moving  things.  When  the  regularity  fails,  it  is 
due  to  the  intervention  of  some  accidental 
cause.  What  happens  by  chance,  then,  or  con¬ 
tingently,  is  always  due  to  an  accidental  (or 
better,  incidental)  cause.  As  indicated  in  the 
chapter  on  Cause,  an  accidental  as  opposed  to 
an  essential  cause  is,  in  Aristotle’s  theory,  one 
which  does  not  by  itself  produce  the  given  effect. 
It  does  so  only  through  the  conjunction  of  other 
causes.  But  since  it  does  not  determine  these 
other  causes  to  operate,  the  effect — contingent 
on  their  combined  activity— \%  produced  by 
chance,  that  is,  by  the  contingency  of  several 
incidental  causes  working  coincidentally. 


A  world  in  which  chance  really  exists  is  re¬ 
markably  different  from  a  world  in  which  neces¬ 
sity  prevails,  in  which  everything  is  determined 
by  causes  and  there  are  no  uncaused  coinci¬ 
dences.  William  James  vividly  epitomizes  their 
difference  by  calling  the  world  of  absolute  ne¬ 
cessity  or  determinism— the  world  of  Spinoza 
or  Hegel— a  “block  universe”  in  contrast  to 
what  he  describes  as  a  “concatenated  universe.” 
Voltaire  before  him,  in  his  Philosophical  Dic¬ 
tionary,  had  used  the  phrase  “the  concatenation 
of  events”  to  express  the  meaning  of  chance. 

The  phrase  evokes  the  right  image,  the  pic¬ 
ture  of  a  world  in  which  many  concurrent  lines 
of  causality,  exercising  no  influence  upon  one 
another,  may  nevertheless  concatenate  or  be 
joined  together  to  produce  a  chance  result. 
The  block  universe  presents  the  contrasting  pic¬ 
ture  of  a  world  in  which  each  motion  or  act  de¬ 
termines  and  is  determined  by  every  other  in 
the  fixed  structure  of  the  whole. 

Spinoza  claims,  for  example,  that  “in  nature 
there  is  nothing  contingent,  but  all  things  arc 
determined  from  the  necessity  of  the  divine 
nature  to  exist  and  act  in  a  certain  manner.” 
Chance,  in  other  words,  does  not  exist  in  nature. 
A  thing  is  said  to  be  contingent,  Spinoza  writes, 
only  “with  reference  to  a  deficiency  in  our 
knowledge.  For  if  we  do  not  know  that  the  es¬ 
sence  of  a  thing  involves  a  contradiction,  or  if 
we  actually  know  that  it  involves  no  contra¬ 
diction,  and  nevertheless  we  can  affirm  nothing 
with  certainty  about  its  existence  because  the 
order  of  causes  is  concealed  from  us,  that  thing 
can  never  appear  to  us  either  as  necessary  or 
impossible,  and  therefore  we  call  it  either  con¬ 
tingent  or  possible.”  Hence,  for  Spinoza,  con¬ 
tingency  or  chance  is  illusory  rather  than  real 
— a  projection  of  the  mind’s  ignorance  or  of  its 
inadequate  knowledge  of  causes. 

The  issue  between  real  indeterminism  and 
absolute  determinism — further  discussed  in  the 
chapters  on  Fate  and  Necessity  and  Con¬ 
tingency — inevitably  raises  theological  ques¬ 
tions.  Just  as  the  theologian  must  reconcile 
man’s  free  will  with  God’s  predestination,  so 
must  he,  if  he  accepts  its  reality,  also  reconcile 
chance  with  divine  providence,  apart  from 
which  nothing  can  happen  either  necessarily 
or  contingently. 

For  Augustine  it  would  seem  that  divine 


182 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


providence  leaves  no  room  for  chance  among 
natural  things.  After  noting  that  causes  are 
sometimes  divided  into  a  “fortuitous  cause,  a 
natural  cause,  and  a  voluntary  cause,”  he  dis¬ 
misses  “those  causes  which  are  called  fortui¬ 
tous”  by  saying  that  they  “are  not  a  mere  name 
for  the  absence  of  causes,  but  are  only  latent, 
and  we  attribute  them  either  to  the  will  of  the 
true  God,  or  to  that  of  spirits  of  some  kind  or 
other.” 

In  certain  places  Aquinas  seems  to  talk  in 
much  the  same  fashion — as  though  chance 
existed  only  for  our  limited  intellects  and  not 
for  God.  “Nothing,”  he  declares,  “hinders 
certain  things  from  happening  by  luck  or 
chance,  if  compared  to  their  proximate  causes; 
but  not  if  compared  to  divine  providence,  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  ‘nothing  happens  at  random 
in  the  world,’  as  Augustine  says.”  The  example 
he  uses  to  illustrate  his  point  is  that  of  two  serv¬ 
ants  who  have  been  sent  by  their  master  to  the 
same  place:  “the  meeting  of  the  two  servants, 
although  to  them  it  appears  a  chance  circum¬ 
stance,  has  been  fully  foreseen  by  their  master, 
who  has  purposely  sent  them  to  meet  at  one 
place,  in  such  a  way  that  one  has  no  knowledge 
of  the  other.”  In  such  a  way  also  “all  things 
must  of  necessity  come  under  God’s  ordering,” 
from  which  it  follows  that  God  directly  causes 
the  action  of  even  accidental  causes,  and  their 
coincidence.  The  chance  event  would  then  be 
necessitated  by  God.  It  would  be  determined 
by  His  will,  however  indeterminate  it  might  ap¬ 
pear  to  us. 

Yet  in  other  places  Aquinas  writes  that  “God 
wills  some  things  to  be  done  necessarily,  some 
contingently  ....  To  some  effects  He  has  at¬ 
tached  unfailing  necessary  causes,  from  which 
the  effects  follow  necessarily;  but  to  other 
defectible  and  contingent  causes,  from  which 
effects  arise  contingently.”  For  some  minds 
this  may  only  deepen  the  mystery  rather  than 
solve  it.  At  least  it  leaves  many  questions  un¬ 
answered. 

Does  Aquinas  mean  that  a  coincidence  of 
causes  is  not  itself  uncaused  ?  Does  he  mean  that 
God  causes  the  concatenation  of  events,  and 
that  a  sufficient  reason  for  every  contingency 
exists  in  God’s  will?  If  so,  is  chance  an  illusion, 
a  function  of  our  ignorance  of  divine  provi¬ 
dence  ?  May  chance  be  quite  real  on  the  level  of 


nature  where  no  natural  causes  determine  the 
coincidence,  while  not  real — at  least  not  in  the 
same  sense — for  God?  Or  does  the  statement 
that  what  “divine  providence  plans  to  happen 
contingently,  happens  contingently”  mean  that 
chance  remains  a  real  feature  of  the  universe 
even  for  God  ? 

One  thing  is  clear.  In  one  sense  of  the  word, 
the  Christian  theologians  completely  deny 
chance.  If  “chance”  means  something  which 
God  does  not  foresee,  something  unplanned 
by  His  providence,  then  according  to  their 
faith  nothing  happens  by  chance.  It  is  in  this 
sense  also  that  what  happens  by  chance  is 
opposed  to  what  happens  on  purpose,  or  has  a 
final  as  well  as  an  efficient  cause.  As  the  chapter 
on  Cause  indicates,  those  who  deny  final  causes 
in  nature  sometimes  use  the  word  “chance”  to 
signify  not  lack  of  cause,  nor  even  contingency, 
but  only  the  blindness  of  causality — working 
to  no  end. 

The  controversy  discussed  in  the  chapter  on 
World — between  those  who  see  in  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  the  universe  the  grand  design  of  a  di¬ 
vine  plan  and  those  who  attribute  whatever 
order  there  is  in  nature  to  blind  chance — further 
indicates  the  sense  in  which  theologians  like  Au¬ 
gustine  and  Aquinas  deny  chance.  But  if 
“chance”  means  no  more  than  contingency ,  then 
to  affirm  chance  excludes,  not  providence,  but 
fate,  at  least  that  sense  of  “fate”  according  to 
which  everything  is  blindly  necessitated.  Here 
it  is  Spinoza’s  statement  that  “in  nature  there 
is  nothing  contingent,  but  all  things  are  de¬ 
termined  from  the  necessity  of  the  divine  na¬ 
ture”  which  opposes  the  statement  of  Aqui¬ 
nas  that  “the  mode  both  of  necessity  and  con¬ 
tingency  falls  under  the  foresight  of  God.” 

The  theory  of  chance  has  obvious  bearings  on 
the  theory  of  knowledge,  especially  with  regard 
to  the  distinction  between  knowledge  and  opin¬ 
ion  and  between  certainty  and  probability. 

On  any  view  of  chance — whether  it  is  real  or 
illusory — when  men  call  a  future  event  con¬ 
tingent  they  mean  that  they  cannot  predict  it 
with  certitude.  So  far  as  human  prediction  goes, 
it  makes  no  difference  whether  the  future  event 
is  necessarily  determined  and  we  lack  adequate 
knowledge  of  its  causes,  or  the  event  has  a  gen¬ 
uine  indeterminacy  in  the  way  it  is  caused  or 


Chapter  9:  CHANCE 


uncaused.  Regardless  of  what  the  objective 
situation  is,  the  assurance  with  whicli  we  pre¬ 
dict  anything  reflects  the  state  of  our  knowl¬ 
edge  about  it. 

The  ancients  who,  for  the  most  part,  regard 
chance  as  real  and  objective,  treat  probability 
as  subjective.  For  them,  the  different  degrees  of 
probability  which  men  attach  to  their  state¬ 
ments  measure  the  inadequacy  of  their  knowl¬ 
edge  and  the  consequent  uncertainty  of  their 
opinions  about  matters  which  cannot  be  known 
but  only  guessed.  Holding  different  theories 
of  the  distinction  between  knowledge  and 
opinion,  both  Plato  and  Aristotle  exclude  the 
accidental  and  the  contingent,  along  with  the 
particular,  from  the  objects  of  science.  Since  in 
their  view  certitude  belongs  to  the  essence  of 
science — or  of  knowledge  as  contrasted  with 
opinion-science  for  them  deals  not  only  with 
the  universal  but  with  the  necessary. 

In  the  Republic  Socrates  assigns  opinion  to 
the  realm  of  becoming— the  realm  of  changing 
and  contingent  particulars.  Unlike  Plato,  Aris¬ 
totle  does  not  restrict  knowledge  to  the  realm  of 
eternal  and  immutable  being,  but  he  does  in¬ 
sist  that  physics,  as  a  science  of  changing  things, 
preserve  the  certitude  of  science  by  concerning 
itself  only  with  the  essential  and  the  necessary. 
“That  a  science  of  the  accidental  is  not  even 
possible,”  he  writes,  “will  be  evident  if  we  try 
to  see  what  the  accidental  really  is.”  It  is  a  mat¬ 
ter  of  chance  that  cold  weather  occurs  during  the 
dog-days,  for  “this  occurs  neither  always  and 
of  necessity,  nor  for  the  most  part,  though  it 
might  happen  sometimes.  The  accidental,  then, 
is  what  occurs,  but  not  always  nor  of  necessity, 
nor  for  the  most  part.  Now  ...  it  is  obvious 
why  there  is  no  science  of  such  a  thing.” 

Though  he  disagrees  with  Aristotle  and 
Aquinas  about  the  reality  of  chance  or  con¬ 
tingency,  Spinoza  agrees  with  them  that  knowl¬ 
edge — at  least  adequate  knowledge — has  the 
necessary  for  its  object.  Of  individual  things, 
he  says,  “we  can  have  no  adequate  knowledge 
.  .  .  and  this  is  what  is  to  be  understood  by  us  as 
their  contingency.”  To  be  true  to  itself  and  to 
the  nature  of  things,  reason  must  “perceive 
things  truly,  that  is  to  say,  as  they  are  in  them¬ 
selves,  that  is  to  say,  not  as  contingent  but  as 
necessary.” 

The  position  of  Aquinas  is  worth  stating  for 


183 

comparison.  To  the  question  “whether  our 
intellect  can  know  contingent  things,”  he  re¬ 
plies  that  “the  contingent,  considered  as  such, 
is  known  directly  by  sense  and  indirectly  by 
the  intellect,  while  the  universal  and  necessary 
principles  of  contingent  things  are  known  by 
the  intellect.  Hence,”  he  goes  on,  “if  we  con¬ 
sider  knowable  things  in  their  universal  prin¬ 
ciples,  then  all  science  is  of  necessary  things. 
But  if  we  consider  the  things  themselves,  thus 
some  sciences  are  of  necessary  things,  some  of 
contingent  things.” 

Among  the  sciences  of  contingent  things, 
Aquinas  includes  not  only  “the  sciences  of  na¬ 
ture”  but  also  “the  moral  sciences,”  because  the 
latter,  dealing  with  human  action,  must  reach 
down  to  contingent  particulars.  In  the  sphere 
of  morals  as  of  nature,  certainty  can  be  achieved 
only  on  the  level  of  universal  principles.  De¬ 
liberation  about  particular  acts  to  be  done 
moves  on  the  level  of  probable  opinion.  In  con¬ 
trast  to  the  moral  scientist,  the  man  of  action 
must  weigh  chances  and  make  decisions  with 
regard  to  future  contingencies.  It  would  be  as 
foolish,  Aristotle  says,  to  expect  the  certitude 
of  scientific  demonstration  from  an  orator  or  a 
judge,  as  “to  accept  probable  reasoning  from  a 
mathematician.” 

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  modern  theory  of 
probability — or,  as  it  was  later  called  by  Boole, 
Venn,  and  others,  the  “logic  of  chance” — 
should  have  its  origin  in  the  sphere  of  practical 
problems.  Pascal’s  correspondence  with  Fermat 
illustrates  the  early  mathematical  speculations 
concerning  formulae  for  predicting  the  out¬ 
come  in  games  of  pure  chance.  For  Pascal  the 
logic  of  chance  also  has  moral  implications.  If 
we  are  willing  to  risk  money  at  the  gaming 
table  on  the  basis  of  calculated  probabilities, 
how  much  more  willing  should  we  be  to  act 
decisively  in  the  face  of  life’s  uncertainties, 
even  to  risking  life  itself  on  the  chance  of  eternal 
salvation. 

When  we  act  “on  an  uncertainty,  we  act 
reasonably,”  Pascal  writes,  “for  we  ought  to 
work  for  an  uncertainty  according  to  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  chance.”  If  the  chance  of  there  being 
an  after-life  is  equal  to  the  chance  of  there 
being  none — if  the  equiprobability  reflects  our 
equal  ignorance  of  either  alternative — then, 


184 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Pascal  argues,  we  ought  to  wager  in  favor  of 
immortality  and  act  accordingly.  “There  is 
here  the  infinity  of  an  infinitely  happy  life  to 
gain,  a  chance  to  gain  against  a  finite  number  of 
chances  of  loss,  and  what  you  stake  is  finite.” 

Like  Pascal,  Hume  thinks  that  we  must  be 
content  with  probability  as  a  basis  for  action. 
“The  great  subverter  of  Pyrrhonism  or  the  ex¬ 
cessive  principles  of  skepticism,”  he  writes,  “is 
action,  and  employment,  and  the  occupations 
of  common  life.”  But  unlike  the  ancients, 
Hume  also  thinks  we  should  be  content  with 
probabilities  in  the  sphere  of  the  natural  sci¬ 
ences.  Certitude  is  attainable  only  by  the 
mathematician  who  deals  with  the  relations  be¬ 
tween  ideas.  Since  the  natural  sciences  deal 
with  matters  of  fact  or  real  existence,  and  since 
to  know  such  things  we  must  rely  entirely  upon 
our  experience  of  cause  and  effect,  we  cannot 
reach  better  than  probable  conclusions. 

The  scientist,  according  to  Hume,  “weighs 
opposite  experiments.  He  considers  which  side 
is  supported  by  the  greater  number  of  experi¬ 
ments;  to  that  side  he  inclines,  with  doubt  and 
hesitation;  and  when  at  last  he  fixes  his  judg¬ 
ment,  the  evidence  exceeds  not  what  we  prop¬ 
erly  call  probability.  All  probability,  then,  sup¬ 
poses  an  opposition  of  experiments  and  observa¬ 
tions  ...  A  hundred  instances  or  experiments 
on  one  side,  and  fifty  on  another,  afford  a 
doubtful  expectation  of  any  event;  though  a 
hundred  uniform  experiments,  with  only  one 
that  is  contradictory,  reasonably  beget  a  pretty 
strong  degree  of  assurance.” 

Hume  applies  the  logic  of  chance  to  weighing 
the  evidence  against  and  the  testimony  in 
favor  of  miracles,  as  well  as  to  contrary  hy¬ 
potheses  in  science.  As  much  as  Spinoza,  he 
denies  the  existence  of  chance  or  contingency 
in  the  order  of  nature.  Chance  is  entirely  sub¬ 
jective.  It  is  identical  with  the  probability  of 
our  opinions.  In  the  throw  of  dice,  the  mind,  he 
says,  “considers  the  turning  up  of  each  particu¬ 
lar  side  as  alike  probable;  and  this  is  the  very 
nature  of  chance,  to  render  all  the  particular 
events,  comprehended  in  it,  entirely  equal.” 
But  there  may  also  be  “a  probability,  which 
arises  from  a  superiority  of  chances  on  any  side; 
and  according  as  this  superiority  increases,  and 
surpasses  the  opposite  chances,  the  probability 
receives  a  proportionate  increase  .  .  .  The  case,” 


Hume  asserts,  “is  the  same  with  the  probability 
of  causes,  as  with  that  of  chance.” 

Since  Hume’s  day,  the  theory  of  probability 
has  become  an  essential  ingredient  of  empirical 
science.  The  development  of  thermodynamics 
in  the  19th  century  would  have  been  impossible 
without  it.  This  is  also  true  of  the  quantum 
mechanics  and  atomic  physics  of  our  own  time. 
But  like  the  doctrine  of  chance,  the  theory  of 
probability  tends  in  one  of  two  directions: 
either  toward  the  subjective  view  that  proba¬ 
bility  is  only  a  quality  of  our  judgments,  meas¬ 
uring  the  degree  of  our  ignorance  of  the  real 
causes  which  leave  nothing  in  nature  unde¬ 
termined;  or  toward  the  objective  view  that 
there  is  genuine  indeterminism  in  nature  and 
that  mathematical  calculations  of  probability 
estimate  the  real  chance  of  an  event’s  occurring. 

The  element  of  chance  also  has  a  bearing  on 
the  general  theory  of  art.  The  hypothesis  of  the 
melody  which  a  kitten  might  compose  by  walk¬ 
ing  on  the  keyboard,  is  obviously  intended  to 
contrast  a  product  of  chance  with  a  work  of 
art.  The  competent  musician  knows  with 
certainty  that  he  can  do  what  the  meandering 
kitten  has  only  one  chance  in  many  millions 
of  ever  accomplishing. 

In  proportion  as  an  art  is  developed,  and  to 
the  degree  that  its  rules  represent  a  mastery  of 
the  medium  in  which  the  artist  works,  chance 
is  excluded  from  its  productions.  This  point  is 
strikingly  exemplified  in  the  history  of  medi¬ 
cine.  “If  there  had  been  no  such  thing  as  medi¬ 
cine,”  Hippocrates  suggests,  “and  if  nothing 
had  been  investigated  or  found  out  in  it,”  all 
practitioners  “would  have  been  equally  un¬ 
skilled  and  ignorant  of  it,  and  everything  con¬ 
cerning  the  sick  would  have  been  directed 
by  chance.”  On  the  same  principle,  Galen  dis¬ 
tinguishes  the  physician  from  the  empiric,  who, 
“without  knowing  the  cause,”  pretends  that  he 
is  “able  to  rectify  the  failures  of  function.” 
The  empiric  works  by  trial  and  error — the  very 
opposite  of  art  and  science,  for  trial  and  error 
can  succeed  only  by  chance.  The  physician, 
learned  and  skilled  in  medicine,  works  from  a 
knowledge  of  causes  and  by  rules  of  art  which 
tend  to  eliminate  chance. 

Augustine  reports  a  conversation  with  the 
proconsul  concerning  the  relative  merits  of 


Chapter  9:  CHANCE 


185 


medicine  and  astrology.  When  the  proconsul 
tells  him  that,  as  compared  with  medicine, 
astrology  is  a  false  art,  Augustine,  at  this  time 
himself  “much  given  to  the  books  of  the  horo¬ 
scope-casters,”  asks  how  the  fact  that  “many 
things  were  foretold  truly  by  [astrology]”  can  be 
explained.  The  proconsul  “answered,  very  rea¬ 
sonably,  that  it  was  due  to  the  force  of  chance, 
which  is  always  to  be  allowed  for  in  the  order  of 
things.”  Thus,  Augustine  says  later,  “I  saw  it 
as  obvious  that  such  things  as  happened  to  be 
said  truly  from  the  casting  of  horoscopes  were 
true  not  by  skill  but  by  chance;  and  such  things 
as  were  false  were  not  due  to  want  of  skill  in  the 
art  but  merely  that  luck  had  fallen  the  other 
way.” 

Neither  art  itself,  nor  skill  in  its  practice, 
can  ever  be  perfect  enough  to  remove  chance 
entirely,  for  the  artist  deals  with  particulars. 
Yet  the  measure  of  an  art  is  the  certainty  which 
its  rules  have  as  directions  for  achieving  the  de¬ 
sired  result;  and  the  skill  of  the  artist  is  meas¬ 
ured  by  the  extent  to  which  he  succeeds  by 
rule  and  judgment  rather  than  by  chance. 

When  Aristotle  quotes  Agathon’s  remark  that 
“art  loves  chance  and  chance  loves  art,”  he  ex¬ 
plains  its  sense  to  be  that  “chance  and  art  are 
concerned  with  the  same  objects” — that  which 
does  not  come  to  be  by  nature  nor  from  neces¬ 
sity.  Hence  art  sometimes  fails,  either  from  un¬ 
controllable  contingencies  or  from  insufficient 
knowledge  of  causes.  “All  causes,”  says  Hume, 
“are  not  conjoined  to  their  usual  effects  with 
like  uniformity.  An  artificer,  who  handles  only 
dead  matter,  may  be  disappointed  of  his  aim,  as 
well  as  the  politician,  who  directs  the  conduct 
of  sensible  and  intelligent  agents.” 

In  the  realm  of  human  affairs — in  morals, 
politics,  and  history — the  factor  of  chance  is 
usually  discussed  in  terms  of  good  and  bad  for¬ 
tune.  The  word  “fortune” — as  may  be  seen  in 
the  root  which  it  shares  with  “fortuitous” — 
has  the  same  connotations  as  “chance.”  Aris¬ 
totle  treats  fortune  as  the  kind  of  chance  that 
operates  in  the  sphere  of  human  action  rather 
than  natural  change.  Fortune,  he  thinks,  can 
be  attributed  properly  only  to  intelligent  be¬ 
ings  capable  of  deliberate  choice.  The  sense  of 
this  distinction  between  chance  and  fortune 
seems  to  be  borne  out  in  history  by  the  fact 


that  fortune,  unlike  chance,  receives  personifi¬ 
cation  in  myth  and  legend.  Fortune  is  a  goddess 
or,  like  the  Fates  whom  she  combats,  a  power 
with  which  even  the  gods  must  reckon. 

The  doctrine  of  chance  or  fortune  occupies 
an  important  place  in  moral  theory.  Aristotle’s 
classification  of  goods  tends  to  identify  external 
goods  with  goods  of  fortune— the  goods  which, 
unlike  knowledge  and  virtue,  we  cannot  ob¬ 
tain  merely  by  the  exercise  of  our  will  and 
faculties.  Considering  the  elements  of  happi¬ 
ness,  Aquinas  groups  together  wealth,  honor, 
fame,  and  power  as  goods  of  the  same  sort  be¬ 
cause  they  are  “due  to  external  causes  and  in 
most  cases  to  fortune.” 

The  goods  of  fortune,  as  well  as  its  ills,  con¬ 
sist  in  things  beyond  man’s  power  to  command 
and,  in  consequence,  to  deserve.  Recognizing 
the  unpredictable  operation  of  fortune,  Epicte¬ 
tus,  the  Stoic,  argues  that  “we  must  make  the 
best  of  those  things  that  are  in  our  power,  and 
take  the  rest  as  nature  gives  it.”  We  have  “the 
power  to  deal  rightly  with  our  own  impres¬ 
sions.”  Hence  the  Stoics  advise  us  to  control  our 
reactions  to  things  even  though  we  cannot  con¬ 
trol  the  things  themselves.  Yet  men  will  always 
ask,  as  Hamlet  does,  “Whether  ‘tis  nobler  in 
the  mind  to  suffer  the  slings  and  arrows  of  out¬ 
rageous  fortune,  or  to  take  arms  against  a  sea  of 
troubles,  and  by  opposing  end  them?” 

The  fact  that  the  goods  and  ills  of  fortune  are 
beyond  our  power  to  control  raises  the  fur¬ 
ther  question  of  man’s  responsibility  regarding 
them.  We  can  hardly  be  held  responsible  for 
everything  that  happens  to  us,  but  only  for 
those  things  which  are  subject  to  our  will. 
This  traditional  moral  distinction  between  the 
good  or  evil  which  befalls  us  by  fortune  and 
that  which  we  willfully  obtain  or  accomplish, 
parallels  the  legal  distinction  between  acciden¬ 
tal  and  intentional  wrongdoing. 

What  is  true  of  the  individual  life  seems  to 
apply  to  history —  the  life  of  states  and  the  de¬ 
velopment  of  civilization  generally.  For  the 
most  part,  the  historians — Herodotus  and 
Thucydides,  Plutarch,  Tacitus,  and  Gibbon — 
find  fortune  a  useful  principle  of  interpretation. 
To  Machiavelli  history  seems  to  be  so  full  of 
accidents  and  contingencies — “great  changes  in 
affairs  .  .  .  beyond  all  human  conjecture” — 
that  he  tries  to  advise  the  prince  how  to  make 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


186 

use  of  fortune  in  order  to  avoid  being  ruined  by 
it.  Such  advice  can  be  followed  because,  in  his 
opinion,  “Fortune  is  the  arbiter  of  one  half  of 
our  actions,  but  still  leaves  us  to  direct  the 
other  half,  or  perhaps  a  little  less.” 

Hegel,  on  the  contrary,  does  not  admit  chance 
or  fortune  in  his  view  of  world  history  as  a 
“necessary  development  out  of  the  concept  of 
the  mind’s  freedom  alone.”  For  Tolstoy  also, 
either  necessity  or  freedom  rules  the  affairs  of 
men.  Chance,  he  writes,  does  “not  denote  any 
really  existing  thing,”  but  only  “a  certain  stage 
of  understanding  of  phenomena.”  Once  we 
succeed  in  calculating  the  composition  of  forces 
involved  in  the  mass  movements  of  men,  “we 


shall  not  be  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  chance 
for  an  explanation  of  those  small  events  which 
made  these  people  what  they  were,  but  it  will 
be  clear  that  ail  those  small  events  were  inevi¬ 
table.” 

As  the  contingent  is  opposed  to  the  neces¬ 
sary,  as  that  which  happens  by  chance  is  op¬ 
posed  to  that  which  is  fully  determined  by 
causes,  so  fortune  is  opposed  to  fate  or  destiny. 
This  opposition  is  most  evident  in  the  great 
poems,  especially  the  tragedies,  which  depict 
man’s  efforts  to  direct  his  own  destiny,  now 
pitting  his  freedom  against  both  fate  and  for¬ 
tune,  now  courting  fortune  in  his  struggle 
against  fate. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  conception  of  chance  187 

la.  Chance  as  the  coincidence  of  causes 

ib.  Chance  as  the  absolutely  fortuitous,  the  spontaneous  or  uncaused 

2.  The  issue  concerning  the  existence  of  chance  or  fortune  188 

2 a.  The  relation  of  chance  to  causality:  philosophical  or  scientific  determinism 
2 b.  The  relation  of  chance  to  fate,  providence,  and  predestination 

3.  Chance,  necessity,  and  design  or  purpose  in  the  origin  and  structure  of  the  world  189 

4.  Cause  and  chance  in  relation  to  knowledge  and  opinion:  the  theory  of  probability 

5.  The  control  of  chance  or  contingency  by  art 

6.  Chance  and  fortune  in  human  affairs:  the  mythology  of  Fortune  190 

6a.  Chance  and  fortune  in  the  life  of  the  individual 

6b.  Chance  and  fortune  in  politics  and  history  1 91 


Chapter  9:  CHANCE 


187 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  arc  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology,  116a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  sideof  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  iower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.y  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.y  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiahy  7:45  —  (D)  II  EsdraSy  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideasy  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  conception  of  chance 

la.  Chance  as  the  coincidence  of  causes 

7  Plato:  Timaeusy  455a- b 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  9  [i8b5— 9]  28c  / 
Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  13  [32b4~ 14]  48b-c  / 
Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii  [95*3-9]  129d/ 
TopicSy  bk  11,  ch  6  [ii2bi— 21]  157d-158a;  bk 

iii,  ch  1  [1  i6bi— 7]  162d-163a  /  Physics ,  bk  ii, 
ch  4-6  272c-275a;  ch  8  275d-277b  /  Heavens , 
bk  1,  ch  12  [283a3o-b6]  375a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  5 
[287^2—26]  379b;  ch  8  [289b22-28]  381b;  bk 

iv,  ch  3  [3 1  oa23— 3 1  ]  401d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v, 
ch  30  [i025ai3~29]  547a-c;  bk  vi,  ch  2-3 
548c-549d;  bk  xi,  ch  8  593a-d;  bk  xii,  ch  3 
[io7oa4~9]  599b  /  Memory  and  Reminiscence , 
ch  2  [452a30-b6]  694b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animalsy  bk  i,  ch  i 
[640^2-33]  162b-d  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  10 
[I3^9a3I_b5l  612c-d 

12  Aurelius:  MeditationSy  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Enneady  tr  hi,  ch  16,  150c 
/  Sixth  Enneady  tr  viii,  ch  10,  347c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  4-6  20a-d; 
bk  vii,  par  8-10  45d-47a  passim 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i,  q  22, 
a  2,  rep  1  128d-130d;  q  47,  a  i,  ans  256a- 
257b;  q  57,  a  3,  ans  297b-298a;  q  103,  a  5, 


rep  1  531b-532b;  a  7,  rep  2  533b-d;  Q  115, 
a  6,  ans  and  rep  3  591d-592d;  q  116,  a  i 
592d-593d 

23  Hobbes: Leviathany  partiv,  272b 

31  Spinoza:  EthicSy  part  iii,  def  1-3  395d- 
396a 

35  Hume:  Human  Under standing ,  sect  vi  469d- 
470d  passim;  sect  viii,  div  67  480c-481a 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  566a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  xiii,  584d-585b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  71a;  91a-92a;  765b;  857b- 
858a  passim 

lb.  Chance  as  the  absolutely  fortuitous,  the 
spontaneous  or  uncaused 

8  Aristotle:  Physicsy  bk  ii,  ch  4  [1 96^5— b4] 
272d-273a;  ch  6  [i98a5— 1 4]  275a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  i  [1022- 
1029]  13c-d;  bk  ii  [184-293]  17b-18d  esp  [284- 
293]  18c-d;  [1048-1066]  28b-c;  bk  v  [181-194] 
63b-c;  [416-431]  66c-d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Enneady  tr  i,  ch  3  79b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  Gody  bk  iv,  ch  18  197c- 
198a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  16, 
a  1,  rep  2  94b-95c;  q  22,  a  2,  ans  128d-130d; 
q  47,  a  1,  ans  256a-257b 


188 


2  to  2b 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  The  conception  of  chance .  1  b.  Chance  as  the 
absolutely  fortuitous,  the  spontaneous  or 
uncaused.) 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  132d-133a;  140b,d-143a 
/  Practical  Reason ,  331c-332a  /  Judgement , 
566a-b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  454b  c 

2.  The  issue  concerning  the  existence  of  chance 
or  fortune 

2a.  The  relation  of  chance  to  causality:  philo¬ 
sophical  or  scientific  determinism 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  x,  438c -439a  /  Timaeus , 

455c-456a;  465d-466a  /  Statesman ,  587a-589c 
esp  587a-b  /  bk  x,  759d-765d 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  9  28a-29d  / 
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  ii  [95*3-9]  129d/ 
Physics ,  bk  11,  ch  4-5  272c-274b;  ch  8  [199*33- 
b26]  276c-277a  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  5  [287^2- 
26]  379b;  ch  8  [289b22-28]  381b;  bk  iv,  ch  3 
[310^3-31]  401d  /  Generation  and  Corruption , 
bk  11,  ch  6  [333a35-b2o]  434b-c  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  v,  ch  30  547a-d;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [io27a8~i8] 
549b;  ch  3  549c-d;  bk  xi,  ch  8  [io65a6-b4] 
593b-d;  bk  xii,  ch  3  [1070^-9]  599b  / 
Memory  and  Reminiscence ,  ch  2  [452a3o-b6] 
694b 

9  Aristotle  :  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[640ai2-b4]  162b-163a  /  Ethics ,  bk  hi,  ch  3 
[11 12^0-33]  358b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  10 
[I369a3I-b5l  612c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [184-307] 
17b-19a;  [1048-1066]  28b-c;  bk  v  [55—58]  61d; 
[181-194]  63b-c;  [306-310]  65a;  [416-431]  66c-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  vii,  sect  i  279b; 
sect  49  282d;  bk  ix,  sect  28  293d-294a; 
sect  35-36  294d-295a;  sect  39  295a;  bk  x, 
sect  27  299d 

17  Plotinus  :  Third Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  2,  78d;  ch  3 
79b-c;  tr  11,  ch  1,  82c  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  hi, 
ch  16  150c-d;  tr  iv,  ch  33  176b-d  /  Sixth 
Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  9-10  347a-348a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  13,  rep  1  86d-88c;  q  19,  a  8  116a-d;  q  22, 
a  2,  rep  1  128d-130d;  a  4  131c-132b;  q  103,  a 

5,  rep  1  531b-532b;  a  7,  rep  2  533b-d;  q  115, 
a  6  591d-592d;  q  116,  a  i  592d-593d;  a  3 
594c-595a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  113b-c;  part  iv, 
272b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  412c-413a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  45b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  7  355b;  axiom  3 
355d;  prop  16  362a;  prop  21-23  364a-365a; 
prop  26-29  365b-366c;  prop  33-36  367b- 
369b;  part  11,  prop  31,  corol  385c;  prop  44 
389b-390a;  part  hi,  395a-d;  prop  2,  schol 
396d-398b;  part  iv,  pref  422b,d-424a;  def 
3-4  424a;  appendix,  vi  447c-d;  part  v,  prop 

6,  demon st  454a 


34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  542a-b 

35  Hume  :  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vi,  div  46, 
469d;  div  47,  470b;  sect  viii  478b-487a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  div  67  480c-481a,  div  74  484a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  397a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  72c-85d  esp  74b-76c; 
91d-92c;  132d-133a;  140b,d-143a;  153a;  171a- 
172c;  184b-c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  285c-d  /  Practical  Reason,  331c-333a  / 
Judgement ,  558b-c;  564a-c;  566a-b;  587a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  342 
llOc-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  157b- 
158a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  159a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  37c-d;  65a  / 
Descent  of  Man,  593  d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  lOb-llb 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  x,  389a-391c;  bk  xi,  469a-472b;  epilogue 
1,  646c-650c  esp  646c-647b;  epilogue  ii  675a- 
696d 

53  James:  Psychology,  71a;  90b-93a  esp  91a-92a; 
377b;  387b-388a;  765b;  823a-825a  passim 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  454b-c;  486c- 
487a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  660c 

2b.  The  relation  of  chance  to  fate,  providence, 
and  predestination 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  16:33  /  Jonah,  1:1-10 
—  (D)  Jonas,  1:1-10 

New  Testament:  John,  6:44-45,64-65 —(D) 
John,  6:44-45,65-66  /  Acts,  1:15-26;  13:48  / 
Romans,  8:28-11:36  esp  8:28-30,  9:15,  10:13- 
14,  11:5  /  Ephesians,  1:4-2:10 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xxiv  [522-551]  176d-177a 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [507-520] 
45a-b 

5  Sophocles:  Trachiniae  [95-140]  171a-b  / 
Philoctetes  [169-200]  183d-184a 

5  Euripides:  Helen  [712-720]  304d-305a  / 
Heracles  Mad  [60-81]  365c- d 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iv,  679a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [i96b5— 7]  273a 
/  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,ch  10  [1075°!  1-24]  605d- 
606a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  9  [io99b8-24] 
345a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  6  110c-112b; 
ch  12  118d-120b;  ch  16  121d-122d;  bk  iii,  ch 
1 7  191d-192a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  224b-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b; 
sect  ii  258a-b;  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b;  bk  iv, 
sect  3,  263c;  bk  ix,  sect  28  293d-294a;  bk 
xii,  sect  14  308c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [194-209]  108a-b;  [595- 
624]  119b-120a;  bk  xii  [631-649]  370b-371a 

14  Plutarch:  Camillus,  107c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  91b-d  /  Histories,  bk 
1, 194a-c 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  1-2  82c- 
83d;  tr  iii,  ch  2  93d  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii, 
ch  16  150c-d 


3  to  5 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  v,  cii  i  207d- 
208c;  ch  9  213b-2l5c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  13  86d  88c;  q  15,  a  i,  ans  91b-92a;  Q  16, 
a  1,  rep  2  94b'95c;  q  19,  a  8  116a-d;  q  22, 
a  2,  rep  1  128d-130d;  a  4  131c-132b;  q  47, 
a  1,  ans  256a-257b;  q  57,  a  3,  ans  297b' 
298a;  q  86,  a  4,  ans  463d-464d;  q  103,  a  5, 
rep  1  531b-532b;  a  7,  rep  2  533b  d;  q  116, 
a  1  592d-593d;  a  3  594c-595a;  part  i-ii, 
q  10,  a  4  665d-666a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [49-99] 
lOa-c;  paradise,  viii  [91-148]  117d-118c;  xm 
[52-87] 126a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilusand  Cressida ,  bk  iii,  stanza 
89  66a;  bk  iv,  stanza  138-154  106b-108b; 
bk  v,  stanza  221  149a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xxv,  35a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  149d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  514d-515a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  408c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [80-134]  137a- 
138a;  bk  vii  [170-173]  220b-221a;  bk  x  [613— 
640]  287b-288b  /  Samson  Agonistes  [667-709] 
354a-355a  /  Areopagitica ,  394b-395b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  205  211a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  93  431b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  75c-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  la-b 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  334a-335c  /  Judge¬ 
ment ,  594 d  [fn  1] 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  343 
llOd-llla  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  158c- 
159b;  169d-170b;  part  iii,  300c-301c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  593d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  x,  389a-391c;  447c-448c;  epilogue  i, 
646c-650c  esp  646c-647b;  epilogue  ii  675a- 
696d 

3.  Chance,  necessity,  and  design  or  purpose  in 
the  origin  and  structure  of  the  world 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  450b-c  /  Philebus,  618b-619c 
/  Laws,  bk  x,  760a-765c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [196^5—^4] 
272d-273a;  ch  6  [198^-13]  275a  /  Metaphys¬ 
ics,  bk  1,  ch  3  [984^-22]  502d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[64ibi3~24]  164c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [1008- 
1051]  13c-14a;  bk  ii  [167-183]  17a-b;  [1048- 
1066]  28b-c;  bk  v  [146-194]  63a-c;  [416-508] 
66c-67c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  27  266a; 
bk  vi,  sect  10  274b-c 

17  Plotinus  :  Second  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  7  44c-45a 
/  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3  79b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  15, 
a  1,  ans  91b-92a;  q  19,  a  4,  ans  lllc-112c; 
q  22,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  128d-130d;  a  4  131c- 
132b;  q  47,  a  1,  ans  256a-257b;  q  103,  a  i 
528b-529a;  a  7,  rep  2  533b-d 


189 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  33  367b  369a; 
appendix  369b  372d 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
369b-370a  /  Optics ,  bk  iii,  541b-542b 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  558b-559d;  560d-562a,c; 

562d-567b;  568c-570b;  575b-588a 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b;  158c-159b 
53  James:  Psychology,  5a 

4.  Cause  and  chance  in  relation  to  knowledge 

and  opinion:  the  theory  of  probability 

7  Plato:  Meno ,  189c  /  Crito,  214a 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  9  28a-29d  / 
Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  cii  13  [^2h^-2^]  48b-d  / 
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [7ib8-i6]  97d- 
98a;  ch  6  102b-103c;  ch  30  119d;  ch  33 
[88b30-89aio]  121b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  vi,  ch 
2  548c-549c;  bk  vii,  ch  15  [io39b3 1-1040*8] 
563d-564a;  bk  ix,  ch  10  [io5ib6-i7]  577d; 
bk  xi,  ch  8  593a-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [io94b  12-27] 
339d-340a;  bk  iii,  ch  3  [ni2ai9-bi2]  358a-c; 
bk  vi,  ch  3  [ii39bi8— 24]  388b-c;  ch  5  389a-c 
/  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i357ai4~39]  596d- 
597a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3  79b-c  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  10  347c-348a 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  13,  ans  and  rep  3  86d-88c;  q  16,  a  1,  rep  2 
94b-95c;  Q  57,  a  3,  ans  297b-298a;  q  79,  a  9, 
rep  3  422b-423d;  q  86,  aa  3-4  463b-464d; 
q  1 16,  a  1,  ans  592d-593d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  272b 
31  Descartes:  Rules,  11  2a-3b 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  29-30  384d- 
385c;  prop  44  389b-390a 
33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  233-241  213b- 217b  /  Arith¬ 
metical  Triangle,  460a-468b  /  Correspondence 
with  Fermat,  474a-477b;  479b-486a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  70  197a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  14  316b-d; 
sect  29  322c-323a;  ch  vi,  sect  5-16  332b- 
336d  passim;  ch  xv-xvi  365a-371c;  ch  xvii, 
sect  2  371d-372b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vi  469d- 
470d;  sect  x,  div  86-91  488d-491c  passim,  esp 
div  87  489b-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  228c-d  /  Fund .  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  285c-d  /  Judgement, 
603d-604b 

49  Darwin  :  Origin  of  Species,  65a 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  iv,  188a-190c; 
bk  ix,  365a-c;  bk  x,  441b-d;  bk  xiii,  584c- 
585b;  epilogue  i,  646c-647b;  epilogue  ii, 
694d-695c 

53  James:  Psychology,  851b  esp  [fn  1] 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  454b-c 

5.  The  control  of  chance  or  contingency  by  art 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a  /  Gorgias,  253a  / 
Laws,  bk  iv,  679a-c;  bk  x,  760a-b 


Chapter  9:  CHANCE 


190 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  control  of  chance  or  contingency  hy  art.) 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii 
[95a3“9l  129d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980** 
25-981*5]  499b;  bk  xii,  ch  3  [1070*4-9]  599b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[640*25-33]  162d  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  9  [io99bi8- 
24]  345a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  4  [1105*18-26]  350d;  bk 
hi,  ch  3  [ni2*i9-bi2]  358a-c;  bk  vi,  ch  4 
[1140*10-23]  388d-389a  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  ii 
[i258b35~ 36]  453b;  bk  ii,  ch  ii  [1273^7-24] 
470b;  bk  vii,  ch  13  [1332*28-32]  537a  /  Rhet¬ 
oric,  bk  1,  ch  1  [1354*1-11]  593a;  ch  5  [i36ib 
39-1362*4]  602c 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine ,  par  1  la-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  xii  [391-440]  364b- 
365b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  57, 
a  3,  ans  297b-298a;  part  i-ii,  q  14,  a  4,  ans 
679b-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xiii  [52- 
84] 126a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  52c-53c;  377a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  iii,  sc  iv  [29- 
66]  340c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  50c-51d; 
56b-57b;  85c-86c;  90b-91a  /  Novum  Organum , 
bk  1,  aph  8  107c-d;  aph  82,  121a;  aph  108- 
109  128d-129c;  bk  ii,  aph  31  159d-161a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
67  480c-481a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  452a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prelude  [134-157]  4a-b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  183b-184a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  iv,  188a-190c; 
bk  ix,  359a-365c;  bk  x,  425b-426a;  441b- 
442c;  445d-448c;  456a-459d  esp  458c-459d; 
bk  xi,  471c-472b;  505a-507a  esp  505d-506a, 
507a;  bk  xiii,  563c-575aesp  563c-564d,  570d- 
572a,  573c-575a;  582a-587d  esp  584c-585b; 
bk  xiv,  609a-613d;  bk  xv,  618b-621b 

53  James  :  Psychology,  673a-b 

6.  Chance  and  fortune  in  human  affairs:  the 
mythology  of  Fortune 

6a.  Chance  and  fortune  in  the  life  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual 

Old  Testament:  Ecclesiastes,  9:11 

4  Homer:  Iliad  3a-179d  esp  bk  xxiv  [522-551] 
176d-177a 

5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [909-1076]  24d-26d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  esp 
[1522-1530]  113c  /  Antigone  [1155-1171]  140d- 
141a  /  Trachiniae  [1-48]  170a-c;  [293-306] 
172c-d;  [932-946]  178b  /  Philoctetes  [500-506] 
186c 

5  Euripides:  Heracleidae  248a- 2 5 7a, c esp  [853- 
866]  255d  /  Suppliants  [263-270]  260c;  [549- 
557]  263a  /  Trojan  Women  270a-281a,c  esp 
[1200-1206]  280a-b  /  Heracles  Mad  365a-377d 
esp  [474-496]  369a 


6  to  6a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  7b-8a;  46c;  bk 

iii,  91d-92b;  98a-99a;  116a-b;  bk  vii,  225b-d; 
252b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
398c-d 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a  /  Republic,  bk  x, 
439b-440c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  5  [197*25-32] 
274a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  9-10  345a-346c; 
bk  vii,  ch  13  [1 153bi4— 24]  405a  /  Politics,  bk 
vii,  ch  i  [i323b22-36]  527c-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i, 
ch  5  [136^39-1362*11]  602c-d;  ch  10  [i368b 
33-x369a7]  612a-b;  [i369*3i-b5]  612c-d;  bk 
ii,  ch  12  [1388^1-1389*1]  636a;  ch  15-17 
638a-639a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b; 
sect  17  259b-d;  bk  iii,  sect  4  260b-261a; 
sect  10-11  261d-262b;  bk  iv,  sect  26  265d; 
sect  33-36  266c-d;  sect  44  267b;  sect  49 
268a-c;  bk  v,  sect  8  269d-270b;  sect  24 
272c;  sect  27  272d;  bk  vi,  sect  ii  274c; 
sect  20  276a;  sect  39  277d;  sect  58  279d; 
bk  vii,  sect  8  280b;  sect  34  282a;  sect  54 
283b;  sect  57-58  283c-d;  sect  68  284c-d; 
sect  75  285c;  bk  viii,  sect  17  286d;  sect  32 
287d-288a;  sect  35  288b;  sect  44-47  289a-c; 
sect  51  289d-290a;  bk  ix,  sect  28  293d- 
294a;  bk  x,  sect  3  296d;  sect  5-6  296d-297b; 
sect  25  299c;  sect  33  300c-301a;  sect  35 
301b;  bk  xii,  sect  3  307b-d;  sect  11-14 
308b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [194-209]  108a-b;  [595- 
624]  119b-120a;  bk  xii  [391-440]  364b-365b; 
[631-649]  370b-371a 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  66b-d;  74c-75c  /  Sulla, 
370c-371b  /  Sertorius,  457b,d-458b  /  Pompey, 
535c-d  /  Demetrius,  739c-740d;  744b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  91b-d  /  Histories,  bk 

iv,  281a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Second Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  10  46a-b 
/  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii-iii  82c-97b  passim  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  16  150c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  4-6  20a-d; 
bk  vii,  par  8-10  45d-47a  /  City  of  God,  bk  iv, 
ch  18-19  197c-198b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [49-99] 
10a-c;  xv  [22-99]  21b-22a;  paradise,  viii 
[94-148]  118a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
120-122  16b-17a;  bk  ii,  stanza  40-42  26b- 
27a;  bk  iii,  stanza  89  66a;  bk  iv,  stanza  41 
94a;  stanza  55-56  95b-96a  /  Words  of  the  Host 
[12,226-231]  371a  /  Tale  of  Melibcus,  par  42 
419a-b/  Monl(s  Tale  434a-448b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxv  35a-36b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  79b-80d;  81b-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
144d-156c;  158b-178a;  204c-215c;  bk  iv,  258c- 
259d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  26d-28a;  52c-53c;  100a- 
101c;  169c-170a;  302b-306a  passim;  312d- 


6b 

314b;  318a-319b;  393b  394a;  451d-452d; 
484b-d;  489b-490c;  506d~508a;  514d-515a 

26  Shakespeare:  Comedy  of  Errors  149a-169d 
esp  act  i,  sc  i  [29-159]  149b-150d  /  Merchant 
of  Venice ,  act  ii,  sc  i  [23-46]  411d-412a  / 
Henry  V ,  act  iii,  sc  vi  [21-40]  547d-548a  / 
Julius  Caesar ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [135-141]  570d;  act 
iv,  sc  iii  [218-224]  590d  /  As  You  Lif^e  It ,  act 
1,  sc  11  [29-60]  599b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  iv  [23-37] 
36a-b;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [68-79]  49c-d;  [210-223] 
51b  /  Troilus  and  Cress  ida,  act  i,  sc  iii  [1—54] 
108a-c;  act  iii,  sc  iii  [74-174]  123b-124b  / 
All's  Well  That  Ends  Well ,  act  v,  sc  ii  [1-36] 
169a-c  /  King  Lear ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [162-180] 
257d-258a;  act  iv,  sc  i  [1-9]  269b-c  /  Antony 
and  Cleopatra ,  act  iv,  sc  xii  [19-30]  341b-c  / 
Timon  of  Athens ,  act  i,  sc  i  [63-94]  394b-c; 
act  iv,  sc  iii  [3-18]  410c-d  /  Sonnets ,  xxv 
590a;  cxi  603b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  408c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  76d-77a 

32  Milton:  On  Time  12a-b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
67-70  480c-482c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  194b-195a;  202b- 
208b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  15d;  32a  d;  275d-276a; 
283a-b;  310b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  44d-47b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  347b-c  / 
Utilitarianism,  45 2d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  311a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  158b-159a;  237a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  188a-190c; 
bk  v,  221b-d;  epilogue  i,  646c-650c;  epi¬ 
logue  ii,  688a-696d  passim 

6b.  Chance  and  fortune  in  politics  and  history 

5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [909-1076]  24d-26d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2b;  bk  vii,  225b-d; 
252b-c 


CROSS-REFERENCES 


191 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  368d- 
369a;  bk  iv,  451a-c;  462a  b;  bk  v,  506a-c;  bk 
vii,  560a  b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  366a-c  /  Laws,  bk  iv, 
679a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii  [i273bi7  24] 
470b;  bk  vii,  cii  13  [1332*28-32]  537a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [441-495]  115a-116b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  18d  /  Camillus,  107b-c; 
109c  110a  /  Timoleon  195a-213d  esp  196b, 
203b,  205b-c  /  Aemilius  Paulus,  225a-c  / 
Philopoemen,  300b-c  /  Phocion,  604b,d-605d  / 
Demosthenes,  698b- d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  49b-c;  bk  vi,  91b-d 
/  Histories,  bk  iv,  281a-b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  i  207d-208c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [49-99] 
lOa-c;  paradise,  xvi  [73-87]  131a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
20  3b;  bk  v,  stanza  221  149a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  vi,  8c-9b;  ch  vii, 
10a-c;  ch  xxi,  32d;  ch  xxiv-xxv,  34d-36b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  52c-53c;  136b-139b; 
451d-452d 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  iv,  sc  iii 
[215-224]  590d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
70,  481d-482a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  609b-c;  615a;  630b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  590a-b 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  29a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  323- 
324  107a-d;  par  340  llOb-c;  par  345  111b  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  166b-c;  part  iii, 
300c-301c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [10,849-872]  264a-b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  378b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  359a-365c; 
bk  x,  389a-391c;  447c-448c;  449a;  456a-459d 
esp  458c-459d;  bk  xi,  505a-507a  esp  505d- 
506a,  507a;  epilogue  i,  646c-650c;  epilogue 
ii,  688a-696d  passim 


Chapter  9:  CHANCE 


For:  Other  discussions  of  the  issue  of  determinism  and  chance,  see  Fate  3,  5-6;  History  4a(i); 
Nature  3c~3c(i);  Necessity  and  Contingency  3a~3c;  and  for  the  relation  of  chance  to 
free  will,  see  Liberty  4a;  Will  53(3),  5c. 

The  general  theory  of  cause  and  its  bearing  on  the  concept  of  chance,  see  Cause  i-ib,  5d-6; 
Nature  30(3). 

The  theological  problems  of  chance  in  relation  to  fate,  providence,  and  predestination,  see 
Cause  7b~7c;  Fate  4;  God  7b. 

Other  discussions  of  the  theory  of  probability,  see  Judgment  6c;  Knowledge  4b,  6d(i)- 
6d (3) ;  Necessity  and  Contingency  4a;  Opinion  i,  3b;  Science  4e;  Truth  4d. 
Discussions  bearing  on  the  relation  of  art  to  chance,  see  Art  1,  2a;  and  for  the  role  of  chance 
in  the  sphere  of  prudence,  see  Prudence  4a~4b,  5a. 

The  theory  of  the  goods  of  fortune,  see  Good  and  Evil  4d;  Happiness  2b(i);  Virtue  and 
Vice  6c;  Wealth  10a. 


192 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Plutarch.  “Of  Fortune,”  “Of  the  Tranquillity  of 
the  Mind,”  in  Moralia 
F.  Bacon.  “Of  Fortune,”  in  Essays 
Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  bk  i,  part  iii, 
sect  XI-XIII 

Kant.  Introduction  to  Logic ,  x 
J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic,  bk  iii,  ch  17-18 
Freud.  The  Psychopathology  of  Everyday  Life ,  ch  12 
W.  James.  “The  Dilemma  of  Determinism,”  in 
The  Will  to  Believe 

- .  Some  Problems  of  Philosophy,  ch  9-13 

II. 

Boethius.  The  Consolation  of  Philosophy,  bk  ii, 
iv-v 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xix  (12) 

J.  Butler.  The  Analogy  of  Religion,  intro 
Voltaire.  “Change  or  Generation  of  Events,” 
“Necessary-Necessity,”  “Power-Omnipotence,” 
in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 
Schopenhauer.  On  the  Fourfold  Root  of  the  Princi¬ 
ple  of  Sufficient  Reason 

Laplace.  A  Philosophical  Essay  on  Probabilities 
De  Morgan.  An  Essay  on  Probabilities 
Cournot.  Exposition  de  la  theorie  des  chances  et  des 
probabilites 

Boole.  An  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought,  ch 
16-18,  21 

Todhunter.  History  of  the  Mathematical  Theory  of 
Probability 


Venn.  The  Logic  of  Chance 

Whitworth.  Choice  and  Chance 

Boutroux.  The  Contingency  of  the  Laws  of  Nature 

Jevons.  The  Principles  of  Science,  ch  10-12 

Bradley.  The  Principles  of  Logic,  Terminal  Essays, 

VIII 

C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers,  vol  ii,  par  645-754; 

vol  vi,  par  35-65 
T.  Hardy.  Life's  Little  Ironies 
Pearson.  The  Chances  of  Death 
Meyerson.  Identity  and  Reality ,  ch  9 
Poincare.  Science  and  Hypothesis ,  part  iv,  ch  ii 

- .  Science  and  Method,  bk  i,  ch  4 

Henderson.  The  Fitness  of  the  Environment 
N.  R.  Campbell.  Physics;  the  Elements ,  ch  7 
W.  E.  Johnson.  Logic ,  part  iii,  ch  2 
J.  M.  Keynes.  A  Treatise  on  Probability,  part  i-ii, 
iv-v 

G.  N.  Lewis.  The  Anatomy  of  Science,  essay  vi 
Dewey.  The  Quest  for  Certainty,  ch  i 
Heisenberg.  The  Physical  Principles  of  the  Quantum 
Theory 

Nagel.  On  the  Logic  of  Measurement 
M.  R.  Cohen.  Reason  and  Nature,  bk  i,  ch  3(4) 
Maritain.  A  Preface  to  Metaphysics ,  lect  vii 
Reichenbach.  Theory  of  Probability 
Santayana.  The  Realm  of  Truth,  ch  ii 
Von  Neumann  and  Morgenstern.  Theory  of  Games 
and  Economic  Behavior 
Jeffreys.  Theory  of  Probability 
B.  Russell.  Human  Knowledge,  Its  Scope  and 
Limits,  part  v 


Chapter  io:  CHANGE 


INTRODUCTION 


FROM  the  pre-Soc ratio  physicists  and  the 
ancient  philosophers  to  Darwin,  Marx,  and 
James— and,  in  our  own  day,  Dewey  and  White¬ 
head — the  fact  of  change  has  been  a  major  focus 
of  speculative  and  scientific  inquiry. 

Except  by  Parmenides  and  his  school,  the 
existence  of  change  has  never  been  denied.  Nor 
can  it  be  without  rejecting  all  sense-perception 
as  illusory,  which  is  precisely  what  Zeno’s  para¬ 
doxes  seem  to  do,  according  to  one  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  them.  But  if  argument  cannot  refute 
the  testimony  of  the  senses,  neither  can  reason¬ 
ing  support  it.  The  fact  of  change,  because  it 
is  evident  to  the  senses,  does  not  need  proof. 

That  change  is,  is  evident,  but  what  change  is, 
is  neither  evident  nor  easy  to  define.  What  prin¬ 
ciples  or  factors  are  common  to  every  sort  of 
change,  how  change  or  becoming  is  related  to 
permanence  or  being,  what  sort  of  existence  be¬ 
longs  to  mutable  things  and  to  change  itself — 
these  are  questions  to  which  answers  are  not 
obtainable  merely  by  observation.  Nor  will 
simple  observation,  without  the  aid  of  experi¬ 
ment,  measurement,  and  mathematical  calcu¬ 
lation,  discover  the  laws  and  properties  of  mo¬ 
tion. 

The  analysis  of  change  or  motion  has  been  a 
problem  for  the  philosophers  of  nature.  They 
have  been  concerned  with  the  definition  of 
change,  its  relation  to  being,  the  classification 
of  the  kinds  of  change.  The  measurement  of 
motion,  on  the  other  hand,  and  the  mathemat¬ 
ical  formulation  of  its  laws  have  occupied  the 
experimental  natural  scientists.  Both  natural 
philosophy  and  natural  science  share  a  common 
subject  matter,  though  they  approach  it  by  dif¬ 
ferent  methods  and  with  different  interests. 
Both  are  entitled  to  use  the  name  “physics” 
for  their  subject  matter. 

The  Greek  word  phiisis  from  which  “phys¬ 
ics”  comes  has,  as  its  Latin  equivalent,  the  word 


natitra  from  which  “nature”  comes.  In  their 
original  significance,  both  words  had  reference 
to  the  sensible  world  of  changing  things,  or  to 
its  underlying  principle — to  the  ultimate  source 
of  change.  The  physics  of  the  philosopher  and 
the  physics  of  the  empirical  scientist  are  alike 
inquiries  concerning  the  nature  of  things,  not  in 
every  respect  but  in  regard  to  their  change  and 
motion.  The  conclusions  of  both  inquiries  have 
metaphysical  implications  for  the  nature  of  the 
physical  world  and  for  the  character  of  physi¬ 
cal  existence. 

The  philosopher  draws  these  implications  for 
being  from  the  study  of  becoming.  The  scien¬ 
tist,  in  turn,  draws  upon  philosophical  dis¬ 
tinctions  in  order  to  define  the  objects  of  his 
study.  Galileo,  for  example,  in  separating  the 
problem  of  freely  falling  bodies  from  the 
motion  of  projectiles,  employs  the  traditional 
philosophical  distinction  between  natural  and 
violent  motion.  The  analysis  of  time  and  space 
(basic  variables  in  Newtonian  mechanics),  the 
distinction  between  discontinuous  and  contin¬ 
uous  change,  and  the  problem  of  the  divisibility 
of  a  continuous  motion — these  are  philosoph¬ 
ical  considerations  pre-supposed  by  the  scien¬ 
tific  measurement  of  motion. 

We  have  so  far  used  the  words  “change”  and 
“motion,”  as  well  as  “becoming,”  as  if  all  three 
were  interchangeable  in  meaning.  That  is 
somewhat  inaccurate,  even  for  the  ancients 
who  regarded  all  kinds  of  change  except  one 
as  motions;  it  is  much  less  accurate  for  the 
moderns  who  have  tended  to  restrict  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  “motion”  to  local  motion  or  change  of 
place.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  examine 
briefly  the  kinds  of  change  and  to  indicate  the 
problems  which  arise  with  these  distinctions. 

In  his  physical  treatises,  Aristotle  distin¬ 
guishes  four  kinds  of  change.  “When  the  change 


193 


194 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


from  contrary  to  contrary  is  in  quantity”  he 
writes,  “it  is  ‘growth  and  diminution’;  when 
it  is  in  place ,  it  is  ‘motion’;  when  it  is  .  .  .  in 
quality ,  it  is  ‘alteration’;  but  when  nothing  per¬ 
sists  of  which  the  resultant  is  a  property  (or  an 
‘accident’  in  any  sense  of  the  term),  it  is  ‘com¬ 
ing  to  be,’  and  the  converse  change  is  ‘passing 
away.’  ”  Aristotle  also  uses  other  pairs  of  words 
—“generation”  and  “corruption,”  “becom¬ 
ing”  and  “perishing” — to  name  the  last  kind  of 
change. 

Of  the  four  kinds  of  change,  only  the  last  is 
not  called  “motion.”  But  in  the  context  of 
saying  that  “becoming  cannot  be  a  motion,” 
Aristotle  also  remarks  that  “every  motion  is  a 
kind  of  change.”  He  does  not  restrict  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  motion  to  change  in  place,  which  is  usu¬ 
ally  called  “local  motion”  or  “locomotion.” 
There  are,  then,  according  to  Aristotle’s  vocab¬ 
ulary,  three  kinds  of  motion:  (i)  local  motion, 
in  which  bodies  change  from  place  to  place; 
(2)  alteration  or  qualitative  motion,  in  which 
bodies  change  with  respect  to  such  attributes 
as  color,  texture,  or  temperature;  (3)  increase 
and  decrease,  or  quantitative  motion,  in  which 
bodies  change  in  size.  And,  in  addition,  there 
is  the  one  kind  of  change  which  is  not  motion — 
generation  and  corruption.  This  consists  in  the 
coming  to  be  or  passing  away  of  a  body  which, 
while  it  has  being,  exists  as  an  individual  sub¬ 
stance  of  a  certain  sort. 

Becoming  and  perishing  are  most  readily  ex¬ 
emplified  by  the  birth  and  death  of  living 
things,  but  Aristotle  also  includes  the  transfor¬ 
mation  of  water  into  ice  or  vapor  as  examples  of 
generation  and  corruption.  One  distinctive 
characteristic  of  generation  and  corruption, 
in  Aristotle’s  conception  of  this  type  of  change, 
is  their  instantaneity.  He  thinks  that  the  other 
three  kinds  of  change  are  continuous  processes, 
taking  time,  whereas  things  come  into  being 
or  pass  away  instantaneously.  Aristotle  thus 
applies  the  word  “motion”  only  to  the  con¬ 
tinuous  changes  which  time  can  measure.  He 
never  says  that  time  is  the  measure  of  change, 
but  only  of  motion. 

But  the  contrast  between  the  one  mode  of 
change  which  is  not  motion  and  the  three  kinds 
of  motion  involves  more  than  this  difference 
with  regard  to  time  and  continuity.  Aristotle’s 
analysis  considers  the  subject  of  change — that 


which  undergoes  transformation — and  the 
starting-point  and  goal  of  motion.  “Every  mo¬ 
tion,”  he  says,  “proceeds  from  something  and 
to  something,  that  which  is  directly  in  motion 
being  distinct  from  that  to  which  it  is  in  mo¬ 
tion  and  that  from  which  it  is  in  motion;  for  in¬ 
stance,  we  may  take  the  three  things  ‘wood,’ 
‘hot,’  and  ‘cold,’  of  which  the  first  is  that  which 
is  in  motion,  the  second  is  that  which  to  which 
the  motion  proceeds,  and  the  third  is  that  from 
which  it  proceeds.” 

In  the  alteration  which  occurs  when  the 
wood  changes  quality,  just  as  in  the  increase 
or  decrease  which  occurs  with  a  body’s  change 
in  quantity  and  in  the  local  motion  which 
occurs  with  a  body’s  change  of  place,  that  which 
changes  persists  throughout  the  change  as  the 
same  kind  of  substance.  The  wood  does  not 
cease  to  be  wood  when  it  becomes  hot  or  cold; 
the  stone  does  not  cease  to  be  a  stone  when  it 
rolls  from  here  to  there,  or  the  organism  an 
animal  of  a  certain  kind  when  it  grows  in  size. 
In  all  these  cases,  “the  substratum” — that 
which  is  the  subject  of  change — “persists  and 
changes  in  its  own  properties.  .  .  .  The  body, 
although  persisting  as  the  same  body,  is  now 
healthy  and  now  ill;  and  the  bronze  is  now 
spherical  and  at  another  time  angular,  and  yet 
remains  the  same  bronze.” 

Because  the  substance  of  the  changing  thing 
remains  the  same  while  changing  in  its  proper¬ 
ties — i.e.,  in  such  attributes  or  accidents  as 
quality,  quantity,  and  place — Aristotle  groups 
the  three  kinds  of  motion  together  as  accidental 
change .  The  changing  thing  does  not  come  to  be 
or  pass  away  absolutely,  but  only  in  a  certain 
respect.  In  contrast,  generation  and  corruption 
involve  a  change  in  the  very  substance  of  a 
thing.  “When  nothing  perceptible  persists  in 
its  identity  as  a  substratum,  and  the  thing 
changes  as  a  whole,”  then,  according  to  Aris¬ 
totle,  “it  is  a  coming-to-be  of  one  substance, 
and  the  passing-away  of  another.” 

In  such  becoming  or  perishing,  it  is  matter 
itself  rather  than  a  body  or  a  substance  which 
is  transformed.  Matter  takes  on  or  loses  the 
form  of  a  certain  kind  of  substance.  For  exam¬ 
ple,  when  the  nutriment  is  assimilated  to  the 
form  of  a  living  body,  the  bread  or  corn  be¬ 
comes  the  flesh  and  blood  of  a  man.  When  an 
animal  dies,  its  body  decomposes  into  the  ele- 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


ments  of  inorganic  matter.  Because  it  is  a 
change  of  substance  itself,  Aristotle  calls  the 
one  kind  of  change  which  is  not  motion  sub - 
stantial  change ,  and  speaks  of  it  as  “a  coming-to- 
be  or  passing-avvay  simply” — that  is,  not  in  a 
certain  respect,  but  absolutely  or  “without 
qualification.” 

These  distinctions  are  involved  in  a  long 
tradition  of  discussion  and  controversy.  They 
cannot  be  affirmed  or  denied  without  opposite 
sides  being  taken  on  the  fundamental  issues 
concerning  substance  and  accident,  matter  and 
form,  and  the  causes  of  change  or  motion.  The 
adoption  or  rejection  of  these  distinctions  af¬ 
fects  one’s  view  of  the  difference  between  inor¬ 
ganic  and  organic  change,  and  the  difference 
between  the  motions  of  matter  and  the  changes 
which  take  place  in  mind.  The  statement  of 
certain  problems  is  determined  accordingly; 
as,  for  example,  the  problem  of  the  transmu¬ 
tation  of  the  elements,  which  persists  in  various 
forms  from  the  physics  of  the  ancients  through 
mediaeval  alchemy  and  the  beginnings  of 
modern  chemistry  to  present  considerations 
of  radioactivity  and  atomic  fission. 

Since  the  17TH  century,  motion  has  been 
identified  with  local  motion.  “I  can  conceive 
no  other  kind”  of  motion,  Descartes  writes, 
“and  do  not  consider  that  we  ought  to  conceive 
any  other  in  nature.”  As  it  is  expressed  “in  com¬ 
mon  parlance,”  motion,  he  says,  “is  nothing 
more  than  the  action  by  which  any  body  passes 
from  one  place  to  another .” 

This  can  hardly  be  taken  to  mean  that 
change  of  place  is  the  only  observable  type  of 
change.  That  other  kinds  of  change  are  ob¬ 
servable  cannot  be  denied.  The  science  of 
mechanics  or  dynamics  may  be  primarily  or  ex¬ 
clusively  concerned  with  local  motions,  but 
other  branches  of  natural  science,  certainly 
chemistry,  deal  with  qualitative  transforma¬ 
tions;  and  the  biological  sciences  study  growth 
and  decay,  birth  and  death. 

The  emphasis  on  local  motion  as  the  only 
kind  of  motion,  while  it  does  not  exclude  ap¬ 
parent  changes  of  other  sorts,  does  raise  a  ques¬ 
tion  about  their  reality.  The  question  can  be 
put  in  several  ways.  Are  the  various  apparently 
different  kinds  of  change  really  distinct,  or  can 
they  all  be  reduced  to  aspects  of  one  underlying 


195 

mode  of  change  which  is  local  motion?  Even 
supposing  that  the  kinds  of  change  are  not  re¬ 
ducible  to  one  another,  is  local  motion  pri¬ 
mary  in  the  sense  that  it  is  involved  in  all  the 
others? 

When  mechanics  dominates  the  physical 
sciences  (as  has  been  so  largely  the  case  in 
modern  times),  there  is  a  tendency  to  reduce  all 
the  observable  diversity  of  change  to  various 
appearances  of  local  motion.  Newton,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  explicitly  expresses  this  desire  to  formu¬ 
late  all  natural  phenomena  in  terms  of  the 
mechanics  of  moving  particles.  In  the  Preface 
to  the  first  edition  of  his  Mathematical  Princi¬ 
ples,  after  recounting  his  success  in  dealing  with 
celestial  phenomena,  he  says,  “I  wish  we  could 
derive  the  rest  of  the  phenomena  of  Nature  by 
the  same  kind  of  reasoning  from  mechanical 
principles,  for  I  am  induced  by  many  reasons 
to  suspect  that  they  may  all  depend  upon  cer¬ 
tain  forces  by  which  the  particles  of  bodies,  by 
some  causes  hitherto  unknown,  are  either  mu¬ 
tually  impelled  towards  one  another,  and  co¬ 
here  in  regular  figures,  or  are  repelled  and  re¬ 
cede  from  one  another.” 

The  notion  that  all  change  can  be  reduced  to 
the  results  of  local  motion  is  not,  however,  of 
modern  origin.  Lucretius  expounds  the  theory 
of  the  Greek  atomists  that  all  the  phenomena 
of  change  can  be  explained  by  reference  to  the 
local  motion  of  indivisible  particles  coming  to¬ 
gether  and  separating.  Change  of  place  is  the 
only  change  which  occurs  on  the  level  of  the 
ultimate  physical  reality.  The  atoms  neither 
come  to  be  nor  pass  away,  nor  change  in  quality 
or  size. 

But  though  we  find  the  notion  in  ancient 
atomism,  it  is  only  in  modern  physics  that  the 
emphasis  upon  local  motion  tends  to  exclude  all 
other  kinds  of  change.  It  is  characteristic  of 
what  James  calls  “the  modern  mechanico- 
physical  philosophy”  to  begin  “by  saying  that 
the  only  facts  are  collocations  and  motions  of 
primordial  solids,  and  the  only  laws  the  changes 
of  motion  which  changes  in  collocation  bring.” 
James  quotes  Helmholtz  to  the  effect  that  “the 
ultimate  goal  of  theoretic  physics  is  to  find  the 
last  unchanging  causes  of  the  processes  of  Na¬ 
ture.”  If,  to  this  end,  “we  imagine  the  world 
composed  of  elements  with  unalterable  quali¬ 
ties,”  then,  Helmholtz  continues,  “the  only 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


196 

changes  that  can  remain  in  such  a  world  are 
spatial  changes,  i.e.,  movements,  and  the  only 
outer  relations  which  can  modify  the  action  of 
the  forces  are  spatial  too,  or,  in  other  words,  the 
forces  are  motor  forces  dependent  for  their  ef¬ 
fect  on  spatial  relations.” 

In  the  history  of  physics,  Aristotle  represents 
the  opposite  view.  No  one  of  the  four  kinds  of 
change  which  he  distinguishes  has  for  him 
greater  physical  reality  than  the  others.  Just  as 
quality  cannot  be  reduced  to  quantity,  or  either 
of  these  to  place,  so  in  his  judgment  the  mo¬ 
tions  associated  with  these  terms  are  irreducible 
to  one  another.  Yet  Aristotle  does  assign  to  lo¬ 
cal  motion  a  certain  primacy.  “Motion  in  its 
most  general  and  primary  sense,”  he  writes,  “is 
change  of  place,  which  we  call  locomotion.”  He 
does  not  mean  merely  that  this  is  the  primary 
sense  of  the  word,  but  rather  that  no  other 
kind  of  motion  can  occur  without  local  motion 
being  somehow  involved  in  the  process.  Show¬ 
ing  how  increase  and  decrease  depends  on  alter¬ 
ation,  and  how  that  in  turn  depends  on  change 
of  place,  he  says  that  “of  the  three  kinds  of 
motion  ...  it  is  this  last,  which  we  call  locomo¬ 
tion,  that  must  be  primary.” 

The  shift  in  meaning  of  the  word  “motion” 
would  not  by  itself  mark  a  radical  departure  in 
the  theory  of  change,  but  it  is  accompanied  by 
a  shift  in  thought  which  has  the  most  radical 
consequences.  At  the  same  time  that  motion  is 
identified  with  local  motion,  Descartes  con¬ 
ceives  motion  as  something  completely  actual 
and  thoroughly  intelligible.  For  the  ancients, 
becoming  of  any  sort  had  both  less  reality  and 
less  intelligibility  than  being. 

Aristotle  had  defined  motion  as  the  actuality 
of  that  which  is  potential  in  a  respect  in  which 
it  is  still  potential  to  some  degree.  According 
to  what  Descartes  calls  its  strict  as  opposed  to 
its  popular  meaning,  motion  is  “the  transfer¬ 
ence  of  one  part  of  matter  or  one  body  from 
the  vicinity  of  those  bodies  that  are  in  immedi¬ 
ate  contact  with  it,  and  which  we  regard  as  in 
repose,  into  the  vicinity  of  others.”  This  defi¬ 
nition — contrasted  with  the  Aristotelian  con¬ 
ception  which  it  generally  supersedes  in  the 
subsequent  tradition  of  natural  science — is  as 
revolutionary  as  the  Cartesian  analytical  geom¬ 
etry  is  by  comparison  with  the  Euclidean.  Nor 


is  it  an  unconnected  fact  that  the  analytical 
geometry  prepares  the  way  for  the  differential 
calculus  that  is  needed  to  measure  variable  mo¬ 
tions,  their  velocities,  and  their  accelerations. 

The  central  point  on  which  the  two  defini¬ 
tions  are  opposed  constitutes  one  of  the  most 
fundamental  issues  in  the  philosophy  of  nature. 
Does  motion  involve  a  transition  from  poten¬ 
tial  to  actual  existence,  or  only  the  substitution 
of  one  actual  state  for  another — only  a  “trans¬ 
portation,”  as  Descartes  says,  from  one  place  to 
another? 

While  motion  is  going  on,  the  moving  thing, 
according  to  Aristotle’s  definition,  must  be 
partly  potential  and  partly  actual  in  the  same 
respect.  The  leaf  turning  red,  while  it  is  altering , 
has  not  yet  fully  reddened.  When  it  becomes 
as  red  as  it  can  get,  it  can  no  longer  change  in 
that  respect.  Before  it  began  to  change,  it  was 
actually  green;  and  since  it  could  become  red, 
it  was  potentially  red.  But  while  the  change  is 
in  process,  the  potentiality  of  the  leaf  to  be¬ 
come  red  is  being  actualized.  This  actualization 
progresses  until  the  change  is  completed. 

The  same  analysis  would  apply  to  a  ball  in 
motion.  Until  it  comes  to  rest  in  a  given  place, 
its  potentiality  for  being  there  is  undergoing 
progressive  actualization.  In  short,  motion  in¬ 
volves  some  departure  from  pure  potentiality 
in  a  given  respect,  and  never  complete  attain¬ 
ment  of  full  actuality  in  that  same  respect. 
When  there  is  no  departure  from  potentiality, 
motion  has  not  yet  begun;  when  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  actuality  is  complete,  the  motion  has 
terminated. 

The  Aristotelian  definition  of  motion  is  the 
object  of  much  ridicule  in  the  17th  century. 
Repeating  the  phrasing  which  had  become  tra¬ 
ditional  in  the  schools — “the  actualization  of 
what  exists  in  potentiality,  in  so  far  as  it  is 
potential” — Descartes  asks:  “Now  who  under¬ 
stands  these  words  ?  And  who  at  the  same  time 
does  not  know  what  motion  is  ?  Will  not  every¬ 
one  admit  that  those  philosophers  have  been 
trying  to  find  a  knot  in  a  bulrush?”  Locke  also 
finds  it  meaningless.  “What  more  exquisite 
jargon  could  the  wit  of  man  invent  than  this 
definition  .  .  .  which  would  puzzle  any  rational 
man  to  whom  it  was  not  already  known  by  its 
famous  absurdity,  to  guess  what  word  it  could 
ever  be  supposed  to  be  the  explication  of.  If 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


197 


Tully,  asking  a  Dutchman  what  beweeginge 
was/’  Locke  continues,  “should  have  received 
this  explication  in  his  own  language,  that  it 
was  actus  entis  in  potentia  quatenus  in  potcntia ; 
I  ask  whether  any  one  can  imagine  he  could 
thereby  have  guessed  what  the  word  beweeginge 
signified  ?’’ 

Locke  docs  not  seem  to  be  satisfied  with  any 
definition  of  motion.  “The  atomists,  who  define 
motion  to  be  ‘a  passage  from  one  place  to  an¬ 
other,’  what  do  they  more  than  put  one  synon¬ 
ymous  word  for  another?  For  what  is  passage 
other  than  motion ?  .  .  .  Nor  will  ‘the  successive 
application  of  the  superficies  of  one  body  to 
those  of  another,’  which  the  Cartesians  give  us, 
prove  a  much  better  definition  of  motion,  when 
well  examined.”  But  though  Locke  rejects  the 
definition  of  the  atomists  and  the  Cartesians 
on  formal  grounds,  he  accepts  their  idea  of 
motion  as  simply  change  of  place;  whereas  he 
dismisses  the  Aristotelian  definition  as  sheer 
absurdity  and  rejects  the  idea  that  motion  or 
change  necessarily  involves  a  potentiality  capa¬ 
ble  of  progressive  fulfillment. 

As  we  have  already  remarked,  the  omission 
of  potentiality  from  the  conception  of  motion 
is  a  theoretical  shift  of  the  deepest  significance. 
It  occurs  not  only  in  Descartes’  Principles  of 
Philosophy  and  in  the  atomism  of  Hobbes  and 
Gassendi,  but  also  in  the  mechanics  of  Galileo 
and  Newton.  According  to  these  modern  philos¬ 
ophers  and  scientists,  a  moving  body  is  always 
actually  somewhere.  It  occupies  a  different 
place  at  every  moment  in  a  continuous  motion. 
The  motion  can  be  described  as  the  successive 
occupation  by  the  body  of  different  places  at 
different  times.  Though  all  the  parts  of  the  mo¬ 
tion  do  not  coexist,  the  moving  particle  is  com¬ 
pletely  actual  throughout.  It  loses  no  reality 
and  gains  none  in  the  course  of  the  motion, 
since  the  various  positions  the  body  occupies 
lie  totally  outside  its  material  nature.  It  would, 
of  course,  be  more  difficult  to  analyze  alteration 
in  color  or  biological  growth  in  these  terms,  but 
it  must  be  remembered  that  efforts  have  been 
made  to  apply  such  an  analysis  through  the  re¬ 
duction  of  all  other  modes  of  change  to  local 
motion. 

The  principle  of  inertia,  first  discerned  by 
Galileo,  is  critically  relevant  to  the  issue  be¬ 
tween  these  two  conceptions  of  motion.  It  is 


stated  by  Newton  as  the  first  of  his  “axioms  or 
laws  of  motion.”  “Every  body/’  he  writes, 
“continues  in  its  state  of  rest,  or  of  uniform 
motion  in  a  right  line,  unless  it  is  compelled  to 
change  that  state  by  forces  impressed  upon  it.” 
As  applied  to  the  motion  of  projectiles,  the 
law  declares  that  they  “continue  in  their  mo¬ 
tions,  so  far  as  they  are  not  retarded  by  the  re¬ 
sistance  of  air,  or  impelled  downwards  by  the 
force  of  gravity.” 

In  his  experimental  reasoning  concerning  the 
acceleration  of  bodies  moving  down  inclined 
planes,  Galileo  argues  that  a  body  which  has 
achieved  a  certain  velocity  on  the  descent 
would,  if  it  then  proceeded  along  a  horizontal 
plane,  continue  infinitely  at  the  same  velocity 
— except  for  the  retardation  of  air  resistance 
and  friction.  “Any  velocity  once  imparted  to  a 
moving  body,”  he  maintains,  “will  be  rigidly 
maintained  as  long  as  the  external  causes  of  ac¬ 
celeration  or  retardation  are  removed.”  So  in 
the  case  of  projectiles,  they  would  retain  the 
velocity  and  direction  imparted  to  them  by  the 
cannon,  were  it  not  for  the  factors  of  gravity 
and  air  resistance.  Bodies  actually  in  motion 
possess  their  motion  in  themselves  as  a  complete 
actuality.  They  need  no  causes  acting  on  them 
to  keep  them  in  motion,  but  only  to  change 
their  direction  or  bring  them  to  rest. 

The  motion  of  projectiles  presents  a  difficulty 
for  the  theory  which  describes  all  motion  as  a 
reduction  of  potency  to  act.  “If  everything  that 
is  in  motion,  with  the  exception  of  things  that 
move  themselves,  is  moved  by  something  else, 
how  is  it,”  Aristotle  asks,  “that  some  things, 
e.g.y  things  thrown,  continue  to  be  in  motion 
when  their  movent  is  no  longer  in  contact  with 
them  ?”  This  is  a  problem  for  Aristotle  precisely 
because  he  supposes  that  the  moving  cause 
must  act  on  the  thing  being  moved  throughout 
the  period  of  the  motion.  For  the  potentiality 
to  be  progressively  reduced  to  actuality,  it 
must  be  continuously  acted  upon. 

Aristotle’s  answer  postulates  a  series  of  causes 
so  that  contact  can  be  maintained  between  the 
projectile  and  the  moving  cause.  “The  original 
movent,”  he  writes,  “gives  the  power  of  being 
a  movent  either  to  air  or  to  water  or  to  some¬ 
thing  else  of  the  kind,  naturally  adapted  for 
imparting  and  undergoing  motion. .  .  .  The  mo¬ 
tion  begins  to  cease  when  the  motive  force  pro- 


198 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


duced  in  one  member  of  the  consecutive  series 
is  at  each  stage  less  than  that  possessed  by  the 
preceding  member,  and  it  finally  ceases  when 
one  member  no  longer  causes  the  next  member 
to  be  a  movent  but  only  causes  it  to  be  in  mo¬ 
tion.”  It  follows  that  inertia  must  be  denied  by 
those  who  hold  that  a  moving  body  always  re¬ 
quires  a  mover;  or  even  that  a  body  cannot  sus¬ 
tain  itself  in  motion  beyond  a  point  propor¬ 
tionate  to  the  quantity  of  the  impressed  force 
which  originally  set  it  in  motion. 

For  the  ancients,  the  basic  contrast  between 
being  and  becoming  (or  between  the  permanent 
and  the  changing)  is  a  contrast  between  the  in¬ 
telligible  and  the  sensible.  This  is  most  sharply 
expressed  in  Plato’s  distinction  between  the 
sensible  realm  of  material  things  and  the  intel¬ 
ligible  realm  of  ideas.  “What  is  that  which  al¬ 
ways  is  and  has  no  becoming,”  Timaeus  asks; 
“and  what  is  that  which  is  always  becoming 
and  never  is?”  He  answers  his  own  question  by 
saying  that  “that  which  is  apprehended  by  in¬ 
telligence  and  reason  is  always  in  the  same  state; 
but  that  which  is  conceived  by  opinion  with 
the  help  of  sensations  and  without  reason,  is  al¬ 
ways  in  a  process  of  becoming  and  perishing, 
and  never  really  is.” 

Even  though  Aristotle  differs  from  Plato  in 
thinking  that  change  and  the  changing  can  be 
objects  of  scientific  knowledge,  he,  too,  holds 
becoming  to  be  less  intelligible  than  being,  pre¬ 
cisely  because  change  necessarily  involves  po¬ 
tentiality.  Yet  becoming  can  be  understood  to 
the  extent  that  we  can  discover  the  principles 
of  its  being — the  unchanging  principles  of 
change.  “In  pursuing  the  truth,”  Aristotle  re¬ 
marks — and  this  applies  to  the  truth  about 
change  as  well  as  everything  else — “one  must 
start  from  the  things  that  are  always  in  the 
same  state  and  suffer  no  change.” 

For  Aristotle,  change  is  intelligible  through 
the  three  elements  of  permanence  which  are  its 
principles:  (i)  the  enduring  substratum  of 
change,  and  the  contraries — (2)  that  to  which, 
and  (3)  that  from  which,  the  change  takes 
place.  The  same  principles  are  sometimes  stated 
to  be  (1)  matter,  (2)  form,  and  (3)  privation; 
the  matter  or  substratum  being  that  which 
both  lacks  a  certain  form  and  has  a  definite  po¬ 
tentiality  for  possessing  it.  Change  occurs  when 


the  matter  undergoes  a  transformation  in  which 
it  comes  to  have  the  form  of  which  it  was  de¬ 
prived  by  the  possession  of  a  contrary  form. 

Neither  of  the  contrary  forms  changes.  Only 
the  thing  composite  of  matter  and  form  changes 
with  respect  to  the  forms  of  its  matter.  Hence 
these  principles  of  change  are  themselves  un¬ 
changing.  Change  takes  place  through ,  not  in , 
them.  As  constituents  of  the  changing  thing, 
they  are  the  principles  of  its  mutable  being, 
principles  of  its  being  as  well  as  of  its  being 
mutable. 

The  explanation  of  change  by  reference  to 
what  does  not  change  seems  to  be  common  to 
all  theories  of  becoming.  Lucretius,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  explains  the  coming  to  be  and 
passing  away  of  all  other  things  by  the  motions 
of  atoms  which  neither  come  to  be  nor  pass 
away.  The  eternity  of  the  atoms  underlies  the 
mutability  of  everything  else. 

Yet  the  atoms  are  not  completely  immutable. 
They  move  forever  through  the  void  which, 
according  to  Lucretius,  is  required  for  their 
motion.  Their  local,  motion  is,  moreover,  an 
actual  property  of  the  atoms.  For  them,  to  be 
is  to  be  in  motion .  Here  then,  as  in  the  Cartesian 
theory,  no  potentiality  is  involved,  and  motion 
is  completely  real  and  completely  intelligible. 

The  notions  of  time  and  eternity  are  insep¬ 
arable  from  the  theory  of  change  or  motion.  As 
the  chapters  on  Time  and  Space  indicate,  local 
motion  involves  the  dimensions  of  space  as  well 
as  time,  but  all  change  requires  time,  and  time 
itself  is  inconceivable  apart  from  change  or  mo¬ 
tion.  Furthermore,  as  appears  in  the  chapters 
on  Time  and  Eternity,  the  two  fundamentally 
opposed  meanings  of  eternity  differ  according  to 
whether  they  imply  endless  change  or  absolute 
changelessness. 

Eternity  is  sometimes  identified  with  infinite 
time.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  Plato,  in  the  Ti¬ 
maeus,  refers  to  time  as  “the  moving  image  of 
eternity”  and  implies  that  time,  which  belongs 
to  the  realm  of  ever-changing  things,  resembles 
the  eternal  only  through  its  perpetual  endur¬ 
ance.  The  other  sense  of  the  eternal  is  also  im¬ 
plied— the  sense  in  which  eternity  belongs  to 
the  realm  of  immutable  being.  The  eternal  in 
this  sense,  as  Montaigne  points  out,  is  not  mere¬ 
ly  that  “which  never  had  beginning  nor  never 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


199 


shall  have  ending,”  but  rather  that  “to  which 
time  can  bring  no  mutation.” 

There  are  two  great  problems  which  use  the 
word  “eternity”  in  these  opposite  senses.  One 
is  the  problem  of  the  eternity  of  motion:  the 
question  whether  motion  has  or  can  have  either 
a  beginning  or  an  end.  The  other  is  the  prob¬ 
lem  of  the  existence  of  eternal  objects — im¬ 
mutable  things  which  have  their  being  apart 
from  time  and  change. 

The  two  problems  are  connected  in  ancient 
thought.  Aristotle,  for  example,  argues  that  “it 
is  impossible  that  movement  should  either  have 
come  into  being  or  cease  to  be,  for  it  must  al¬ 
ways  have  existed.”  Since  “nothing  is  moved 
at  random,  but  there  must  always  be  something 
present  to  move  it,”  a  cause  is  required  to  sus¬ 
tain  the  endless  motions  of  nature.  This  cause, 
which  Aristotle  calls  “the  prime  mover,”  must 
be  “something  which  moves  without  being 
moved,  being  eternal,  substance,  and  actual¬ 
ity.” 

Aristotle's  theory  of  a  prime  mover  sets  up  a 
hierarchy  of  causes  to  account  for  the  different 
kinds  of  motion  observable  in  the  universe.  The 
perfect  circular  motion  of  the  heavens  serves  to 
mediate  between  the  prime  mover  which  is 
totally  upmoved  and  the  less  regular  cycles  of 
terrestrial  change.  The  “constant  cycle”  of 
movement  in  the  stars  differs  from  the  irregular 
cycle  of  “generation  and  destruction”  on 
earth.  For  the  first,  Aristotle  asserts  the  neces¬ 
sity  of  “something  which  is  always  moved  with 
an  unceasing  motion,  which  is  motion  in  a  cir¬ 
cle.”  He  calls  this  motion  of  the  first  heavenly 
sphere  “the  simple  spatial  movement  of  the 
universe”  as  a  whole.  Besides  this  “there  are 
other  spatial  movements — those  of  the  planets 
— which  are  eternal”  but  are  “always  acting  in 
different  ways”  and  so  are  able  to  account  for 
the  other  cycle  in  nature — the  irregular  cycle 
of  generation  and  corruption. 

In  addition,  a  kind  of  changelessness  is  attrib¬ 
uted  to  all  the  celestial  bodies  which  Aristotle 
calls  “eternal.”  Eternally  in  motion,  they  are 
also  eternally  in  being.  Though  not  immovable, 
they  are  supposed  to  be  incorruptible  sub¬ 
stances.  They  never  begin  to  be  and  never 
perish. 

The  theory  of  a  world  eternally  in  motion  is 
challenged  by  Jewish  and  Christian  theologians 


who  affirm,  as  an  article  of  their  religious  faith, 
that  “in  the  beginning  God  created  heaven  and 
earth.”  The  world’s  motions,  like  its  existence, 
have  a  beginning  in  the  act  of  creation.  Crea¬ 
tion  itself,  Aquinas  insists,  is  not  change  or  mo¬ 
tion  of  any  sort,  “except  according  to  our  way 
of  understanding.  For  change  means  that  the 
same  thing  should  be  different  now  from  what 
it  was  previously. .  .  .  But  in  creation,  by  which 
the  whole  substance  of  a  thing  is  produced,  the 
same  thing  can  be  taken  as  different  now  and 
before,  only  according  to  our  way  of  under¬ 
standing,  so  that  a  thing  is  understood  as  first 
not  existing  at  all,  and  afterwards  as  existing.” 
Since  creation  is  an  absolute  coming  to  be  from 
non-being,  no  pre-existent  matter  is  acted  upon 
as  in  generation,  in  artistic  production,  or  in 
any  of  the  forms  of  motion. 

The  philosophical  and  theological  issues  con¬ 
cerning  creation  and  change,  eternity  and  time, 
are  further  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Cause, 
Eternity,  and  World.  Other  problems  aris¬ 
ing  from  the  analysis  of  change  must  at  least 
be  briefly  mentioned  here. 

Though  less  radical  than  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  creation  and  change,  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  motions  of  inert  or  non-living  things 
and  the  vital  activities  of  plants  and  animals 
raises  for  any  theory  of  change  the  question 
whether  the  same  principles  apply  to  both.  The 
rolling  stone  and  the  running  animal  both  move 
locally,  but  are  both  motions  locomotion  in  the 
same  sense?  Augmentation  occurs  both  in  the 
growth  of  a  crystal  and  the  growth  of  a  plant, 
but  are  both  of  them  growing  in  the  same  sense  ? 
In  addition,  there  seems  to  be  one  kind  of 
change  in  living  things  which  has  no  parallel  in 
the  movements  of  inert  bodies.  Animals  and 
men  learn.  They  acquire  knowledge,  form  hab¬ 
its  and  change  them.  Can  change  of  mind  be 
explained  in  the  same  terms  as  change  in  mat¬ 
ter? 

The  issues  raised  by  questions  of  this  sort  are 
more  fully  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Animal, 
Habit,  and  Life.  Certain  other  issues  must  be 
entirely  reserved  for  discussion  elsewhere.  The 
special  problems  of  local  motion — such  as  the 
properties  of  rectilinear  and  circular  motion, 
the  distinction  between  uniform  and  variable 
motion,  and  the  uniform  or  variable  accelera- 


200 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


tion  of  the  latter— are  problems  which  belong 
to  the  chapters  on  Astronomy  and  Me¬ 
chanics.  Change,  furthermore,  is  a  basic  fact 
not  only  for  the  natural  scientist,  but  for  the 
historian — the  natural  historian  or  the  histori¬ 
an  of  man  and  society.  The  considerations 
relevant  to  this  aspect  of  change  receive  treat¬ 
ment  in  the  chapters  on  Evolution,  History, 
and  Progress. 

Even  these  ramifications  of  discussion  do  not 
exhaust  the  significance  of  change.  The  cyclical 
course  of  the  emotions  and  the  alternation  of 
pleasure  and  pain  have  been  thought  inexpli¬ 
cable  without  reference  to  change  of  state  in  re¬ 
gard  to  desire  and  aversion — the  motion  from 
want  to  satisfaction,  or  from  possession  to  dep¬ 
rivation.  Change  is  not  only  a  factor  in  the 
analysis  of  emotion,  but  it  is  also  itself  an  object 
of  man’s  emotional  attitudes.  It  is  both  loved 
and  hated,  sought  and  avoided. 

According  to  Pascal,  man  tries  desperately  to 
avoid  a  state  of  rest.  He  does  everything  he  can 
to  keep  things  in  flux.  “Our  nature  consists  in 
motion,”  he  writes;  “complete  rest  is  death. .  .  . 
Nothing  is  so  insufferable  to  man,”  he  contin¬ 
ues,  “as  to  be  completely  at  rest,  without  pas¬ 


sions,  without  business,  without  diversion, 
without  study.  He  then  feels  his  nothingness, 
his  forlornness,  his  dependence,  his  weakness, 
his  emptiness.”  Darwin  does  not  think  that  the 
desire  for  change  is  peculiar  to  man.  “The  lower 
animals,”  he  writes,  “are  .  .  .  likewise  capricious 
in  their  affections,  aversions,  and  sense  of  beau¬ 
ty.  There  is  also  reason  to  suspect  that  they  love 
novelty  for  its  own  sake.” 

But  men  also  wish  to  avoid  change.  The  old 
Prince  Bolkonski,  in  War  and  Peace ,  “could  not 
comprehend  how  anyone  could  wish  to  alter  his 
life  or  introduce  anything  new  into  it.”  This  is 
not  merely  an  old  man’s  view.  For  the  most 
part,  it  is  permanence  rather  than  transiency, 
the  enduring  rather  than  the  novel,  which  the 
poets  celebrate  when  they  express  man’s  dis¬ 
content  with  his  own  mutability.  The  with¬ 
ering  and  perishing  of  all  mortal  things,  the 
assault  of  time  and  change  upon  all  things  fa¬ 
miliar  and  loved,  have  moved  them  to  elegy 
over  the  evanescent  and  the  ephemeral.  From 
Virgil’s  Sunt  lacrimae  rerum  et  mentem  mortalia 
tangunt  to  Shakespeare’s  “Love  is  not  love 
which  alters  when  it  alteration  finds,”  the  poets 
have  mourned  the  inevitability  of  change. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGB 


1.  The  nature  and  reality  of  change  or  motion  202 

2.  The  unchanging  principles  of  change  203 

2a.  The  constituents  of  the  changing  thing 

2 b.  The  factor  of  opposites  or  contraries  in  change  204 

3.  Cause  and  effect  in  motion:  the  relation  of  mover  and  moved,  or  action  and  passion 

4.  Motion  and  rest:  contrary  motions  205 


5.  The  measure  of  motion 

5 a.  Time  or  duration  as  the  measure  of  motion 
5 b.  The  divisibility  and  continuity  of  motion 

6.  The  kinds  of  change 

6a.  The  reducibility  of  all  modes  of  motion  to  one  kind  of  change  206 

6b.  The  primacy  of  local  motion 

6c.  Comparison  of  change  in  living  and  non-living  things 

6d.  Comparison  of  the  motions  of  matter  with  changes  in  the  order  of  mind 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


201 


7.  The  analysis  of  local  motion 

7 0.  Space,  place,  and  void 
7 b.  Natural  and  violent  motion 
7 c.  Kinds  of  local  motion 

(1)  Rectilinear  and  rotary  or  circular  motion 

(2)  Uniform  or  variable  motion 

(3)  Absolute  or  relative  motion 

(4)  Terrestrial  and  celestial  motion 

yd.  The  properties  of  variable  motion:  the  laws  of  motion 

8.  Change  of  size 

80.  The  increase  and  decrease  of  inanimate  bodies 
8b.  Growth  in  living  organisms 

9.  Change  of  quality 

9 a.  Physical  and  chemical  change :  compounds  and  mixtures 
9 b.  Biological  change:  vital  alterations 

10.  Substantial  change:  generation  and  corruption 

1  otf.  Substantial  change  in  the  realm  of  bodies:  the  transmutation  of  the  elements 
10b.  Plant,  animal,  and  human  reproduction 

ioc.  The  incorruptibility  of  atoms,  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  spiritual  substances 

11.  The  apprehension  of  change  :  by  sense,  by  reason 

12.  Emotional  aspects  of  change 

120.  Rest  and  motion  in  relation  to  pleasure  and  pain 
12b.  The  love  and  hatred  of  change 

13.  The  problem  of  the  eternity  of  motion  or  change 

14.  The  theory  of  the  prime  mover:  the  order  and  hierarchy  of  movers  and  moved 

15.  The  immutable 

150.  The  immutability  of  the  objects  of  thought:  the  realm  of  truth 
15b.  The  unalterability  of  the  decrees  of  fate 
15c.  The  immutability  of  God 


PAGE 

207 


208 


209 


210 


21 1 


212 


213 

214 


215 


202 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 


To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  116a-119b,the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  Forexample,in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g..  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45— (D)  II  Esdras,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  nature  and  reality  of  change  or  motion 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  86b-89b;  94c-d;  99b-104b; 
112a-114a,c  /  Phaedrus,  124c-126c/  Symposium, 
165c-166b  /  Phaedo ,  231c-232b  /  Republic ,  bk 
ii,  322d-323a;  bk  v,  370a-373c  /  Timaeus , 
447b-d;  455c-458b  passim;  460c-d  /  Par¬ 
menides \  504c-505c  /  Theaetetus ,  517d-534b 
esp  517d-518b,  532a-534b  /  Sophist,  564d- 
574c  /  Statesman ,  587a-b  /  Philebus ,  632a-d  / 
Laws ,  bk  x,  760a-765d  esp  762b-765d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i84bi5— 185*14] 
259b-d;  ch  4-9  262a-268d;  bk  hi,  ch  1-3 
278a-280c;  bk  iv,  ch  ii  [ai9b9— 31]  299b-d; 
bk  vi,  ch  6  319c-321a  /  Heavens ,  bk  iv,  ch  3 
[310^22—3 1  iai2]  402b-c;  ch  4  [31^29-33]  403c 
/  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  ii,  ch  10 
[336b25~34]  438 d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  3-10 
501c-511d  passim;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [ioo4b27~29] 
523d;  ch  5  [ioioa6~38]  529c-530a;  ch  8 
[ioi2b22— 33]  532d;  bk  ix,  ch  3  [1047^0-29] 
572b-c;  ch  6  573c-574c;  ch  8  [i049b29-i050a3] 
575c-d;  ch  10  [105^28-30]  578a;  bk  xi,  ch  6 
590d-592b;  ch  9  593d-594d;  ch  11-12  596a- 
598a, c  esp  ch  ii  [io67bi5-io68a7]  596b-d,  ch 
12  [io68b2o-25]  597c-d;  bk  xii,  ch  5  [1070^6- 
107^4]  600b-c  /  Soul ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [4o6bn-i4] 
636a;  bk  hi,  ch  7  [431*1—8]  663c 


9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  v,  ch  i 
[778b2-7]  320c-d  /  Ethics ,  bk  x,  ch  4  [1174®^- 
bi4]  428b-429a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2  167b- 
168c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  811b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [146-448] 
2d-6c;  bk  ii  [62-332]  15d-19b;  [1105-1174] 
29a-30a,c;  bk  v  [235-415]  64a-66c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  35-36 
266d;  sect  42-43  267b;  sect  46  267c;  bk  v, 
sect  23  272b;  bk  vi,  sect  15  275a-b;  bk  vii, 
sect  18  281a;  sect  50  283a;  bk  viii,  sect  6 
285d-286a;  bk  ix,  sect  19  293b;  sect  28 
293d-294a 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1051b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3-4  36b- 
37b;  tr  v  57d-60c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch 
15-22  260c-264c;  tr  hi,  ch  21-28  293a-297b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  15-17 
23a-c;  bk  vii,  par  17-18  49a-b;  bk  xi,  par  6 
90c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  3,  ans  12c-14a;  q  9,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i  38c- 
39c;  q  10,  a  4,  rep  3  43b-44b;  a  5,  ans  44b- 
45c;  q  18,  a  1,  ans  104c-105c;  a  3,  rep  i 
106b-107c;  q  23,  a  i,  rep  3  132c-133b;  q  53, 
a  1,  rep  2-3  280d-282a;  a  3,  ans  283b-284d; 


2  to  2  a 

O  65,  a  4  342b-343c;  q  67,  a  3,  rep  i  351b 
352a;  a  3,  ans  352a-354a;  q  73,  a  i,  rep  2 
370a-371a;  a  2,  ans  371b-d;  q  79,  a  9,  ans 
422b-423d;  q  103,  a  5,  rep  2  531b-532b; 
part  1— 11,  q  10,  a  1,  rep  2  662d-663d;  q  23, 
aa  3-4  725c-727a;  q  25,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2 
730b-731b;  q  31,  a  3,  rep  2  754a  d;  a  8 
758b-759a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  15, 
a  10,  rep  1  795b-796a;  q  62,  a  4  861a-862a; 
PART  III  SUPPL,  Q  91,  A  3,  REP  2  1020d-1022c 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [298 7-3040 J  209a- 
210a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  292d-294b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  third  day- 
fourth  day  197a-260a,c  esp  third  day,  224d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  66  114d- 
115c;  bk  11,  aph  48  179d-188b 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  xii,  24a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  lemma  3  378d-379a 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  433b- 
434a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  definitions-bk  ii  5a- 
267a  esp  definitions,  schol  8b-13a,  law  i 
14a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  iv, 
sect  8-9  260d-261b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  102 
432d-433a;  sect  110-115  434b-435c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  27a;  28b-c;  29c-d;  31d- 
32a;  55c-56a;  72c-85d  esp  74b-76c,  82a-83b; 
91d-93c;  95a-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  178a- 
179d;  186d-190b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiv,  608a-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  882a-884b 

2.  The  unchanging  principles  of  change 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  124b-c/  Timaeus,  455c-458a 
/  Sophist,  564d-574c  /  Philebus,  610d-619d  / 
Laws,  bk  x,  760a-765d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  BKi259a-268d  /  Heavens, 
bk  1,  ch  3  [270*12-17]  361b  /  Metaphysics, 
bk  iii,  ch  4  [999a24-b24]  518a-c;  bk  xii,  ch  10 
[1075*25-34]  606a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2  167b- 
168c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [146-920] 
2d-12b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a; 
bk  vi,  sect  15  275a-b;  bk  ix,  sect  28  293d- 
294a; bk  x,  sect  7  297b-c 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  854b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  1-4  35a- 
37b;  tr  iv-v  50a-60c  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  vi, 
ch  7-19  110d-119a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  1,  ans  108d-109c;  q  84,  a  i,  rep  3  440d- 
442a;  q  86,  a  3  463b-d;  q  113,  a  i,  ans  576a-d; 
q  1 15,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  588c-589c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  23a-33d  esp  27a,  29c- d; 
49c-51d  esp  51c-d;  72c-76c;  82a-83b;  91d- 


203 

93c;  120c  129c  esp  121a  124d,  126a  128b; 
141b, d  145c;  200c  204c 

2a.  The  constituents  of  the  changing  thing 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  458a-460d  /  Philebus,  610d- 
619d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a  b;  ch  6-9 
264c  268d;  bk  iii,  ch  1-3  278a-280c;  bk  iv, 
ch  9  [2iya20-h2y]  297a-c;  bk  v,  cii  i  [225*12- 
29]  305b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  10  [240^-24 1*26]  324c- 
3%ib  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  3  [270*12-17]  361b; 
bk  iv,  ch  4  [312*3-22]  403c-d  /  Generation  and 
Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  i  [3 r 4b26— 3 1 5a3 ]  410a-b; 
ch  3  413c-416c  esp  [318*1-319^*4]  414b-416c; 
ch  4  [320*2-6]  417a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [329*24~b2] 
429a- b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  6  [987b3o- 
988*8]  506a;  cii  8  [988b22~989b24]  506d-508a; 
bk  iii,  ch  4  [999a24~b24]  518a-c;  bk  iv,  ch  5 
[1009*22-38]  528d;  bk  v,  ch  i  [1013*3-7]  533a; 
ch  2  [1013*24-27]  533b;  ch  4  534d-535c;  bk 
vii,  ch  8-10  556b-559d;  ch  15  [io39b2o- 
1040*8]  563c-564a;  bk  viii-ix  566a-578a,c; 
bk  xi,  ch  9  [io65b25-3i]  594b;  ch  12  [io68bio- 
14]  597c;  bk  xii,  ch  1-5  598a-601a;  ch  10 
[1075*25-34]  606a 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  18 
[724*20-^3]  264b-d;  ch  20  [729*6]-^  22 
[73°b33]  269b-271a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2-3  167b- 
169a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [146-634] 
2d-8d;  bk  ii  [62-1022]  15d-28a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  xii,  sect  30 
310a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  8  30d-31c 
/  Second  Ennead,  tr  1,  ch  1-4  35a-37b;  tr  iv, 
ch  6-8  51d-53a;  tr  v,  ch  i-tr  vi,  ch  2  57d- 
62b  /  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  8-19  lllc-119a 
/  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  22  293d-294c;  tr  v, 
ch  8  307d-308c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xii,  par  3-16  99d- 
103a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  9, 
a  1,  ans  38c-39c;  q  19,  a  i,  ans  108d-109c; 
q  29,  a  1,  rep  4  162a-163b;  q  45,  a  2,  rep  2 
242d-244a;  q  48,  a  3,  ans  2611>262a;  q  58, 
a  7,  rep  3  305c-306b;  q  62,  a  7,  rep  i  322d- 
323b;  q  66,  a  2,  ans  345d-347b;  q  75,  a  5, 
rep  2  382a-383b;  q  92,  a  2,  rep  2  489d-490c; 
a  3,  rep  1  490c-491b;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i 
491b-d;  q  104,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1-2  534c- 
536c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  3,  ans  611b-612a;  q  10, 
a  1,  rep  2  662d-663d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q  24, 
aii,  ans  498b-499c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  172b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  494a-496d 
esp  494b,  495c-496a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  6 
139b-c 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  541b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  74b-76c 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


204 

(2.  The  unchanging  principles  of  change.') 

2b.  The  factor  of  opposites  or  contraries  in 
change 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  165c-166b  /  Phaedo,  226d- 
228a;  243c-246c  /  Republic ,  bk  iv,  350d-351b 
/  Theaetetus,  519d-520b  /  Sophist ,  565a-c  / 

bk  x,  760a-c;  762b-764c 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  5  [4aio-bi9]  8b-9a; 
ch  10  [13*17-37]  18d-19a;  ch  14  [15^1—1 6] 
21b-c  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  5-9  263c-268d;  bk  ii, 
cii  1  [193^9-22]  270a;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [20ia4-8] 
278c;  bk  iv,  ch  9  [2i7a2o-b26]  297a-c;  bk  v, 
ch  1  [224^7—225*12]  304d-305a;  [225*34^9] 
305d;  ch  2  [226a23~b9]  306d-307a;  ch  3 
[226b24~34]  307c;  ch  5  310a-311a;  ch  6 
[230^7— 23 1*2]  312b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  4  [234^0-21] 
316d-317a;  bk  viii,  ch  2  [252b9~ii]  336b-c; 
ch  7  [26oa29~bi]  346b-c  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  cii  3 
[270*13-23]  361b-c;  ch  4  362a-c;  ch  8  [277*13- 
34]  368b-c;  ch  12  [283bi7~23]  375c-d;  bk  iv, 
ch  3  401c-402c;  ch  4  [3iib29-3i2a22]  403c-d 
/  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  i,  ch  4  416c- 
417a:  ch  7  421d-423b;  bk  ii,  ch  1-5  428b,d- 
433d  esp  ch  4-5  431b-433d  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  1,  ch  8  [989*18-29]  507b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[994*^19— b6]  512c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  7  [ionb29-38] 
531d;  bk  viii,  ch  5  569b-d;  bk  ix,  ch  9 
[1051*4-13]  577a;  bk  x,  ch  7  [i057ai8-34] 
584c-d;  bk  xi,  ch  9  [io65b5-i4]  593d-594a; 
ch  11  596a-d;  bk  xii,  ch  2  598c-599a;  ch  10 
[1075*25-34]  606a  /  Soul ,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [416*18- 
b8]  646c-d  /  Longevity ,  ch  3  710d-711b 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  1,  ch  18 
[724a20-bi3]  264b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [768*2-7] 
309c  /  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  ch  8  [1  i59bi9— 23]  411d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2,  167b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  8  lllc-d  / 
Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  22  293d-294c;  ch  27 
296b-297a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  1,  ans  108d-109c;  q  23,  a  i,  rep  3  132c-133b; 
q  26,  a  1,  rep  2  150b-c;  q  58,  a  7,  rep  3  305c- 
306b;  q  62,  a  7,  rep  1  322d-323b;  part  i-ii, 
q  18,  a  8,  rep  i  699d-700b;  q  23,  a  2  724c- 
725c 

28  Harvey:  Oa  Animal  Generation ,  408c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  4-6  398d- 
399a;  part  iv,  prop  29-35  431d-434a;  part 
v,  axiom  1  452c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  27a;  76c-83b  esp  76c-d; 
91d-93c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  160c-d; 
165a-b;  178a-d;  179b-d 

3.  Cause  and  effect  in  motion:  the  relation  of 
mover  and  moved,  or  action  and  passion 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-c  /  Gorgias ,  267c-268a 

/  Timaeus,  460c-d  /  bk  x,  760a-765d 

esp  761b-765d 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  9  [1  ibi— 7]  16c-d  / 
Physics ,  bk  in,  cii  1  [200^9-32]  278b;  ch  2 


2£  /o  3 

[202a2]-CH3[202b29]  279c-280c;  bk  vii,  ch  1-2 
326a-329a;  bk  viii,  ch  10  [266b27~267a2i] 
354b-d  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [270^2-17]  361b; 
ch  7  [275ai-b29]  366a-367a;  ch  8  [277^1—8] 
368c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [3oob8-3oiai2]  391d-392c; 
[30^2-32]  392d-393b;  bk  iv,  ch  3  401c-402c  / 
Genei-ation  and  Corruption ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [323^2- 
34]  421b-c;  cii  7-9  421d-426c;  bk  ii,  ch  9-10 
436d-439c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [987b3o- 
988a8]  506a;  ch  7  [988a3i-bi6]  506c-d;  bk  v, 
ch  2  [ioi3b3-i6]  533c-d;  bk  ix,  ch  1-5 
570b,d-573c;  ch  7  [i048b35~i049ai8]  574c-d; 
bk  xi,  ch  9  [1066*27-34]  594d;  bk  xii,  ch  3 
[1069^5-1070*9]  599a-b;  [1070*21-30]  599c-d; 
ch  4  [io7ob22]-cH  8  [io74bi4]  600b-605a;  ch 
10  [io75bi— 37]  606b-d  /  Soul ,  bk  ii,  ch  5 
647b-648d;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [426*2-6]  658a-b 
9  Aristotle  :  Motion  of  Animals ,  ch  8  [702*5- 
22]  237b-c  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  cii  20 
[729*9]-ch  21  [729^1]  269b-270a;  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[740bi8-26]  281c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [768^6-24] 
310b-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2,  168 b-c; 
bk  iii,  ch  7,  203b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [80-141] 
16a-d;  [184-293]  17b-18d 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  854b;  855b;  940b- 
941a;  959a-960a 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  15-22  260c- 
264c;  tr  iii,  ch  23  294d-295a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  8,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  2  34d-35c;  q  41,  a  i,  rep  2  217d- 
218c;  q  44,  a  2,  rep  2  239b-240a;  q  48,  a  i, 
rep  4  259b-260c;  q  60,  a  i,  rep  2  310b-311a; 
q  75,  a  1,  rep  3  378b-379c;  q  80,  a  2,  ans 
428a-d;  q  115,  a  i  585d-587c;  part  i-ii,  q  i, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  1  611b-612a;  a  6,  ans  614a-c; 
q  9,  a  4,  ans  660a-d;  q  22  720b,d-723b;  q  23, 
a  4  726a-727a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  113, 
a  8  367d-368c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  26d-40b  passim; 
bk  vi,  109a-b;  112d 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day, 
202a-203a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  423d 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  87c-88a  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  axiom  ii  131d;  212a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  axiom  1-5  373c-d; 
lemma  3  378d-379a;  part  iii,  def  1-3  395d- 
396a;  prop  1-4  396a-398d;  part  iv,  axiom- 
prop  7  424c-426b;  part  v,  axiom  2  452c; 
prop  3-4  453a-d 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  def  iii-iv  5b-6a;  law 
1— iii  14a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  1-5  178b-179d;  sect  74,  199d-200b;  ch 
xxii,  sect  11  203c-d;  ch  xxiii,  sect  28-29 
211b-212a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iii,  div 
i8-sect  viii,  div  74  457c-484c  passim,  esp 
sect  vii,  div  60  477a-c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


4  to  6 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  15a-b;  43a  b;  76c-83b; 
91d  93c 

4.  Motion  and  rest:  contrary  motions 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  112b  /  Republic ,  hk  iv,  350d- 
351b  /  Timaeus ,  453b-c;  460c  d  /  Sophist , 
567a-574c  /  Statesman ,  587a-589c  csp  587a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  cn  14  [i5bi-i6]  21b-c 
/  Physics ,  bk  v,  ch  5-6  310a-312d  /  l  leave  ns, 
bk  1,  ch  4  362a-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  cii  2 
[ioo4b27~29]  523d;  bk  xi,  cii  12  [io68b2o~25] 
597c-d  /  So///,  bk  1,  ch  3  [406*22-27]  635c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  cii  2,  167b  d 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  ii,  832c 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  bk  i,  517b-518a;  519b-520b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  931b 

17  Plotinus:  S/r/A  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  24  295b-c; 
ch  27  296b-297a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  4,  rep  3  43b-44b;  q  18,  a  i,  rep  2  104c-105c; 
q  53,  a  3,  ans  283b-284d;  q  73,  a  2,  ans 
371b  d;  part  i-ii,  q  6,  a  i  644d-646a;  a  4 
647b-648a;  q  9,  a  4,  rep  2  660a-d;  q  41,  a  3 
799c-800b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  75,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3-5  938a-939d;  q  84, 
a  3,  rep  2  985d-989b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  50a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  ii,  26a-b;  bk  vi, 
110b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  35,  163a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  axiom  i  378c; 
lemma  1-3  378c-379a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  def  iii  5b;  law  i  14a 

5.  The  measure  of  motion 

5a .  Time  or  duration  as  the  measure  of  motion 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  450c-45ld  /  Parmenides, 
504c-505c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  10-14  297c- 
304a, c;  bk  vi  312b,d-325d  esp  ch  2  314a-315d 
/  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  ii,  ch  10 
[337*22-34]  439b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  13 
[1020*25-33]  541c;  bk  x,  ch  1  [1053*9-12] 
579c;  bk  xii,  ch  6  [107^6-12]  601b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  cii  4  [1 174ai2— bi 4] 
428b-429a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vi,  sect  15  275a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  7-13 
122d-129a  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  15 
165c-d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  5,  254c-d;  ch 
16  260d-261c;  tr  iii,  ch  22,  294c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par  12-40 
92b-99a;  bk  xii,  par  9  lOlb-c  /  City  of  God, 
bk  xi,  ch  6  325c-d;  bk  xii,  ch  15  351b- 
352d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  7, 
a  3,  rep  4  32c-33c;  q  10,  a  i,  ans  40d-41d;  aa 
4-6  43b-46d;  q  53,  a  3  283b-284d;  q  57,  a  3, 
rep  2  297b-298a;  q  63,  a  5,  ans  329a-330c; 


205 

a  6,  rep  4  330c  331c;  q  66,  a  4,  rep  4  348d- 
349d;  part  1  11,  q  31,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i 
753c-754a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i  ii,  9  1 1  3, 
a  7,  rep  5  366a-367c;  part  iii  suppl,  9  84, 
a  3  985d  989b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xxvii 
[106-120]  148b-c 

28  Galileo:  'Two  New  Sciences,  third  day, 
201a-202a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  apii  46  177c- 
179a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  def  5  373b  c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [580-582]  188a 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  432b- 
433b;  434a-439b  passim 

34  Newton:  Principles,  definitions,  schol,  8b- 
10a; 12a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv, 
sect  22  159d;  ch  xvm,  sect  2  174a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  292a-293a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  27a;  29c-d;  72c-76c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  249a-251b 

5 b.  The  divisibility  and  continuity  of  motion 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  iv,  ch  ii  [219*10-13] 
298d-299a;  bk  v,  ch  4  308b-310a;  bk  vi 
312b,d-325d;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [242a32-b4]  326c-d; 
bk  vin,  ch  7  [261*28]— ch  8  [265*12]  347c-352a 
/  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [1016*4-7]  536b-c; 
ch  13  [1020*25-33]  541c;  bk  x,  cii  i  [1052*15- 
21]  578b;  bk  xii,  ch  6  [io7ib8-n]  601b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  4  [ii74b9~i4] 
428d-429a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  fR  vii,  ch  8-9  123b- 
125d 

19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  7,  a  3, 
rep  4  32c-33c;  q  53  280d-284d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  parti-ii,  q  113, 
a  7  366a-367c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day,  201a- 
202a 

30  Bacon  :  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  6  139b-c; 
aph  41  173d-174b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  87c-d  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  213b-c 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  434a- 
439b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  i,  lemma  ii,  schol, 
31b-32a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  26b-27a;  74b-76c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xi,  469a-d 

6.  The  kinds  of  change 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  449b-450c  esp  450a  /  Par¬ 
menides,  492a-493b  esp  492d-493b;  504c-505a 
/  Theactetus,  533a-b  /  Laws,  bk  x,  762b-763b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  14  20d-21c  /  Phys¬ 
ics,  bk  iii,  ch  1  [200b32— 201*14]  278b-c;  bk  v, 
ch  1-2  304a-307b;  ch  5  310a-311a;  bk  vii, 
ch  4  330d-333a  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  2  [268bi5~ 
269*8]  359d-360a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  401c-402c  / 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


206 

(6.  The  kinds  of  change.') 

Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  i,  ch  1-5  409a- 
420b  esp  ch  4  [319^2-320*2]  417a  /  Metaphys¬ 
ics ,  bk  11,  ch  2  [994ai9~b6]  512c-d;  bk  vii, 
ch  9  [i034b8-i9]  557d-558a;  bk  xi,  ch  9 
[io65b7-i4]  593d-594a;  ch  11  [io67bi]-cH  12 
[io68b25]  596a-597d;  bk  xii,  ch  2  [io69b8— 14] 
598d  /  Soul ,  bk  1,  ch  3  [406*12-21]  635c 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  18 
[724a20-bi3]  264b-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2,  167b-d; 
ch  5  169b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  21-27 
293a-297a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  44, 
a  2,  ans  239b-240a;  q  45,  a  i,  rep  2  242a-d; 
q  66,  a  1,  ans  343d-345c;  q  118,  a  2,  rep  2 
601c-603b;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  3,  ans  611b-612a; 
q  23,  a  2,  ans  724c-725c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  107, 
a  1,  ans  325c-327b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  84,  a  2, 
rep  1,4  984c-985d;  a  3,  ans  985d-989b 

28  Harvey:  On  Ajiimal  Generation ,  407c-409b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  66  114d- 
115c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxii, 
sect  11  203c-d 

6a.  The  reducibility  of  all  modes  of  motion  to 
one  kind  of  change 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  viii,  ch  7  [26oa26-bi4] 
346b-c  /  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  i,  ch 
1-5  409a-420b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2,  167b- 
168b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [418-448] 
6b-c;  bk  ii  [730-1022]  24b-28a;  bk  iii  [417— 
869]  35c-41a;  bk  iv  [522-817]  51a-54d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61a-c;  part  iii, 
173a;  part  iv,  271a-b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  50  111b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  lb-2a  /  Optics ,  bk  iii, 
541b 

34  Huygens:  Light ,  ch  i,  553b-554a 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  169a-b;  182a-b 

53  James  :  Psychology,  882a-884b 

6b.  The  primacy  of  local  motion 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [2o8a28~33] 
287a;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [25obi5-i8]  334a;  ch  7 
346b-348a  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [268bi 5— 17] 
359d;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [310^2-34]  402b  /  Genera¬ 
tion  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  10  437d-439c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  6  [io7ib2-u]  601b; 
[io7ib32-38]  601d;  ch  7  [io72b4-io]  602c;  ch 
8  [io73a24-39]603c 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  5  235c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  67, 
a  2,  rep  3  350b-351a;  q  78,  a  3,  ans  410a- 
411d;  Q  no,  a  3,  ans  566d-567b 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  84,  a  2,  rep  1,4  984c-985d 


6a  to  6d 

6c.  Comparison  of  change  in  living  and  non¬ 
living  things 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  2  [244bi- 
245ai2]  328b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  4  338d-340d;  ch 
6  [259a2o-b3i]  345a-d  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  7 
[275b26-28]  367a;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [284b3o-285ai] 
376c  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [4i5b22-4i6b3i]  646a- 
647b 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  1  [698*15- 
21]  233b;  ch  4  [700*5-27]  235b-c;  ch  6  235d- 
236b;  ch  7  [7oibi]-CH  8  [702bi2]  236d-238a  / 
Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  21-22  269c- 
271a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [734*17-735*15]  274c-275d; 
ch  4  [740ai3-i8]  281a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  7  170c- 
171a;  bk  11,  ch  3,  186c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [700-729] 
23d-24b;  [1105-1174]  29a-30a,c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  1  104c-105c;  q  27,  a  2,  ans  154c-155b;  part 
i-ii,  q  17,  a  9,  rep  2  692d-693d 

27  Shakespeare:  Othello ,  act  v,  sc  ii  [7-15] 
239a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  iii,  67b-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  412b-415b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  27  157b- 
158d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  59a-60c  / 
Objections  and  Replies,  156a-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  11  140b-c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  22  209d;  sect 
28-29  211b-212a;  ch  xxvi,  sect  2  217b-d; 
ch  xxvii,  sect  5  220b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  19 
354a-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  579d-580a;  582b-c 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  836d 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  62a-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  4a-6b;  68a-69b;  71a 

6d.  Comparison  of  the  motions  of  matter  with 
changes  in  the  order  of  mind 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  x,  764c-765a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [247^- 
248*8]  330b-d  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk 
ii,  ch  6  [334*10-15]  435a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ix, 
ch  2  571c-572a  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  3  635b-637b; 
ch  4  [4o8a29~b3i]  638a-d;  bk  ii,  ch  5  [417*21- 
b2i]  647d-648b;  bk  iii,  ch  ii  [434*16-22] 
667a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [177-207] 
32b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  1-3  106b- 
108c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  15  89b-90b;  q  18,  a  i,  ans  104c-105c;  a  3, 
rep  1  106b-107c;  q  19,  a  7  114d-115d;  q  27, 
aa  1-2  153b-l55b;  q  34,  a  i,  rep  2  185b-187b; 
q  46,  a  2,  rep  3  253a-255a;  q  50,  a  i,  rep  2 
269b-270a;  q  73,  a  2,  ans  371b-d;  q  75, 
a  5,  rep  2  382a-383b;  q  78,  a  3,  ans  410a- 
411d;  q  82,  a  2,  rep  2-3  432d-433c;  q  94, 
a  2,  ans  503a-504a;  part  i-ii,  q  22,  a  i,  ans 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1  to  lb 

and  rep  i  720d-721c;  a  2,  rep  3  721c-722c; 
q  35,  a  6,  rep  2  777b-778c;  q  36,  a  i,  ans 
780c-781b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  52, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  15d-18a;  q  72,  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  1-2  113bll4a;  q  1 13,  a  7,  ans  and  rep  1,4 
366a-367c;  part  ii-ii,  q  180,  a  6  613a-614d; 
part  hi  suppl,  q  82,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2 
971a-972d;  q  84,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i  985d- 
989b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xviii 
[10—33]  80a 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  49a-d;  61a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  7  375a-c;  part 
iii,  395a-d;  prop  1-3  396a-398c;  part  iv, 
prop  7  426a-b;  part  v,  prop  i  452d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cm  xii, 
sect  1  147b-d;  ch  xxi,  sect  74  199c-200b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  144  441  d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  160c- 
161a;  178a-179c;  186d-190b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  95b-97a 

7.  The  analysis  of  local  motion 

la .  Space,  place,  and  void 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  460c-d;  471  b-c  /  bk 

x,  762b-d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  iii,  ch  5  [205aio- 
2o6a8]  283b-284b;  bk  iv,  ch  1-9  287a-297c  / 
Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [274^ 0-33]  366a;  [275b30- 
276ai8]  367a-b;  ch  8  [276^2-27]  367b-c; 
[277bi4~23]  368d-369a;  bk  ii,  ch  2  376b-377c; 
bk  iii,  ch  6  [305^7-28]  396c;  bk  iv,  ch  1-5 
399a-404d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  13  [1020s 
25-33]  541c;  bk  ix,  ch  6  [i048b9— 17]  574a; 
bk  xi,  ch  10  [io67a8-33]  595c-596a  /  Soul , 
bk  1,  ch  3  [406aI2-2l]  635c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  1,  ch  16, 181a-d; 
bk  11,  ch  1-2,  183b,d-184c;  ch  6  188c-191a; 
bk  iii,  ch  14-15,  213b-214c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  ii,  832c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [329-448] 
5b-6c;  [958-1007]  12d-13b;  [1052-1082]  14a-c; 
bk  ii  [80-250]  16a-18a;  bk  vi  [830-839]  91b-c; 
[998-1041]  93c-94a 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  lOb-llb 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  517b-518a;  519a-520b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  855b;  900b-903a; 
922a-b;  931b-932a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  8,  123d- 
124a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  8, 
a  i,  rep  3  34d-35c;  a  4  37c-38c;  q  52,  aa  1-2 
278d-280a;  q  53,  aa  1-2  280d-283b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  83,  aa  2-5  976c-982c;  q  84,  a  2,  rep  i  984c- 
985d;  a  3  985d-989b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  50a;  61b;  part 
iii,  173a:  part  iv,  271d 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  ii,  32c;  bk  vi,  llOb-c 


207 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  157b- 
160a  passim;  third  day,  202d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  apii  37  168d- 
169c;  aph  45  176a-177c;  aph  48,  180a 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  ix,  15c 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  366a-367a;  370a  /  Weight 
of  Air,  405  b  415  b  passim 

34  Newton:  Principles,  definitions,  schol  8b- 
13a;  bk  iii,  general  schol,  370a-372a  / 
Optics,  bk  iii,  520a-522b;  542a-543a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  23  153c-d;  ch  xvii,  sect  4  168b  d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  110-117 
434b-436a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  29c-d;  31d-32a;  55c-56a; 
84b-c;  135d  [fn  2] 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  513d-514c; 
685d-686c;  816b,d-819a,c;  824a-b;  855a, c 

lb.  Natural  and  violent  motion 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  463d-464b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [2o8b9~22] 
287b;  ch  8  [2i5ai— 13]  294c-d;  bk  v,  ch  6 
[230ai8-23iai9]  311c-312d;  bk  viii,  ch  4 
338d-340d  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  2  [268bi2]- 
ch  3  [270^3]  359d-361b;  ch  7  [274b3o~33] 
366a;  [275bi2-29]  366d-367a;  ch  7  [276^]- 
ch  8  [277^5]  367b-369a;  ch  9  [278^2- 
279a8]  370a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  13  [294^  1-295^9] 
386b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  2  391c-393b;  ch  5  [304b 
n-23]  395d-396a;  ch  6  [305a22-28]  396c  / 
Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [33315 
22~33l  434c-d  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  3  [406^2-29] 
635c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [1052- 
1094]  14a-c;  bk  11  [184-215]  17b-d 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  i,  lla-b;  bk  iii,  86b; 
bk  ix,  270b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  517b-520b  passim 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  929b-930b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  8,  39d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  1,  rep  2  104c-105c;  q  105,  a  4,  rep  1  541c- 
542a;  a  6,  rep  i  543b-544a;  part  i-ii,  q  6, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  644d-646a;  a  4  647b-648a; 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  2-3  648b-649a;  q  41,  a  3 
799c-800b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  75,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3-5  938a-939d;  q  91, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  6  1017c-1020c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  i  [94-142] 
107b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  50a;  part  iv, 
271d 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi,  109a-b;  llOb-d 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  157d- 
158a;  third  day,  200a-d;  203d;  fourth  day, 
238a-b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  66,  115b- 
c;  bk  11,  aph  36  164a-168d  passim;  aph  48 
179d-188b 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


208 

7  c.  Kinds  of  local  motion 

7c(l)  Rectilinear  and  rotary  or  circular  mo¬ 
tion 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  iv,  350d-351b  /  Parmen¬ 
ides ,  492d-493b  /  Laws ,  bk  x,  762b-d;  764b- 
765a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [2i2a3i-b2] 
291d;  bk  vii,  ch  4  [248aio-b6]  330d-331b;  bk 
viii,  ch  8-9  348b-353b/  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  2- 
6  359d-365c;  ch  7  [2y4b22-29]  365d-366a; 
[275bi2-iS]  366d;  ch  8  [277*12-26]  368b-c; 
[277bS— 1 S]  368d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  6 
[io7ibio-n]  601b;  ch  7  [io72a2o-22]  602b 
/  Sow/,  bk  1,  ch  3  [4o6b26-407bi3j  636b- 
637b 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  i,  6a;  7a-8b;  bk  iii, 
86b;  bk  ix,  270b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  bk  i,  514a;  517b-518a;  519b-520b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  887a;  913a;  931b- 
933a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  3,  36b-c; 
ch  8  39c-d;  tr  ii,  ch  i,  40b-c;  ch  2,  41b-c  / 
SwrM  Ennead ,  tr  hi,  ch  24  295b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Sitmma  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  7, 
a  3,  ans  32c-33c;  q  66,  a  2,  ans  345d-347b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  vi,  llOb-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  Sciences ,  fourth  day, 

240d:  245b-c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  35, 
163a-d;  aph  48,  186b-d 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  def  iii  5b;  def  v  6a-7a; 
definitions,  schol,  llb-12a;  law  i  14a; 
laws  of  motion,  schol,  19b-20a;  bk  i,  prop 
1-3  and  schol  32b-35b;  bk  ii,  prop  53,  schol 
266a-267a 

7c(2)  Uniform  or  variable  motion 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  iv,  ch  8  [215*24- 
2 1 6a2 1  ]  295a-d;  bk  v,  ch  4  [22Sbi 5-229*7] 
309d-310a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [225-242] 
17d-18a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  157b- 
160a;  third  day,  197b-198b;  200a-d:  203d; 
205b-d;  209a-c;  224d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  48, 
186b-d 

34  Newton:  Principles,  def  iii-iv  5b-6a;  law 
1— ii  14a-b;  corol  iv-vi  18a-19b 

7c(3)  Absolute  or  relative  motion 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [387-390] 
49b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  514b-515a;  519a;  bk  ii, 
557a-b 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1015a-b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi,  115a-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk-ii,  aph  36, 165c- 
166b 


1c  to  Id 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  definitions,  schol  8b- 
13a  esp  9a-b;  corol  v-vi  19a-b:  bk  i,  prop 
57-61  lllb-114b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  7-10  149d-150d  passim 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  110-115 
434b-435c 

53  James:  Psychology,  511b-512a 

7 c(4)  Terrestrial  and  celestial  motion 

7  Plato:  Statesman,  587a-b  /  Laws,  bk  vii, 
729d-730d;  bk  x,  763d-765c 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens  359a-405a,c  esp  bk  i, 
ch  2-3  359d-362a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ix,  ch  8 
[io5ob20-28]  576c-d;  bk  xii,  ch  2  [1069^4- 
27]  599a;  ch  6  [io7ib32]-CH  7  [1072*22]  601d- 
602b  /  Soul,  bk  1,  ch  3  [4o6b26-407bi3]  636b- 
637b 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  3  234a-c 
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6a;  7a-8b;  12a; 

bk  iii,  86b-87a;  bk  ix,  270b;  bk  xiii,  429a-b 
16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  513b-514b;  517b-518a;  519b- 
520b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  888b-895b;  897a- 
905a  passim,  esp  904b-905a;  929a-933a;  934b- 
935b;  940b-941a;  959a-960a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  1-4  35a- 
37b;  tr  1,  ch  8-tr  ii,  ch  2  39c-41c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  66, 
a  2,  ans  345d-347b;  q  70,  a  3  365b-367a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  4,  ans  5a-6a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  84,  a  3,  rep  2 
985d-989b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  vi,  llOb-c 
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  fourth  day, 
245b-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  35, 
163a-b;  aph  36,  165d-166a;  aph  48,  186b-d 
34  Newton:  Principles,  la-2a;  bk  iii  269a-372a 
passim,  esp  rule  i-iii  270a-271a,  prop  1-7 
276a-282b,  prop  35,  schol  320b-324a,  gen¬ 
eral  schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  540a- 
541b 

7 d.  The  properties  of  variable  motion:  the  laws 
of  motion 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  8  [215*24- 
2 1 6a2 1  ]  295a-d;  bk  vii,  ch  4  330d-333a 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  1-4  233a- 
235c  passim  /  Gait  of  Animals,  ch  3  243d-244a 
/  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  3  [768bi6- 
24]  310b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [80-99] 
16a-b;  [184-250]  17b-18b 
16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  894a;  899a-900a; 

905a-906b;  933b-934b;  936a-937a;  938b-939a 
23  Hobbes: Leviathan,  parti,  50a;  partiv,  271d 
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  56b-c 
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  157b- 
172d  passim;  third  day-fourth  day  197a- 
260a, c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


8  to  9 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


30  Bacon:  Novum  Organ umy  bk  ii,  aph  35, 
163c-d;  aph  36,  166b-c;  167b-c;  aph  48  179d- 
188b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  axiom  i  lemma  7 
378c-380b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  def  iii  5b;  laws  of 
motion  14a-24a:  bk  i,  prop  1-17  and  sciiol 
32b  50a;  prop  30-69  and  schol  76a-  131a; 
prop  94-98  and  sciiol  152b-l57b;  bk  ii 
159a-267a  passim  /  Optics ,  bk  iii,  540a-542a 

34  Huygens:  Light ,  cii  1,  558b  563b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  xxi, 
sect  4  178d-179c;  cii  xxm,  sect  17  209a; 
sect  22  209d;  sect  28-29  211b-212a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  50  422c; 
sect  102  432d-433a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv,  mv 
27,  460c;  sect  vii,  div  57,  475d-476b  [fn  2] 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  1,  lb 
45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  169a-b 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  694d- 
695c 

8.  Change  of  size 

8a.  The  increase  and  decrease  of  inanimate 
bodies 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  460c- d  /  La  tvs,  bk  x,  762  b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [209a27-29] 
288a;  ch  6  [2i3bi9-22]  293b;  ch  9  296b-297c; 
bk  vii,  ch  2  [245*12-18]  328d-329a;  bk  viii, 
ch  3  [253bi2-23]  337d  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[270*23-36]  361c  /  Generation  and  Corruption , 
bk  ii,  ch  6  [333a35~b3]  434b/  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[4 i5b28— 4i6ai8]  646a-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  7  170c- 
171a;  bk  11,  ch  3,  186c-d 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [311-328] 
5a;  bk  11  [62-79]  15d-16a;  [1105-1174]  29a- 
30a, c;  bk  v  [235-323]  64a-65b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  1 19, 
a  1,  ans  604c-607b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  52, 
aa  1-2  15d-19a;  part  ii-ii,  q  24,  a  5  492b- 
493d;  a  6,  ans  493d-494b;  part  iii,  q  7,  a  12, 
rep  i  754c-755c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  271d-272a 
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day, 
139b-141d;  151c-154b 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  412b 
30  Bacon:  Novum  Organttm,  bk  ii,  aph  40,  171a- 
172d;  aph  48,  180a-181a;  184a-c 
34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  prop  6,  corol  iv 
281b  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  539b 
45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i,  9a- 
15c  esp  9a-10b 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  184a-185b;  192a-b 

8b.  Growth  in  living  organisms 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  471d-472a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [1 93b  13-19] 
269d-270a;  bk  vi,  ch  10  [24i*32-b2]  325c;  bk 


209 

vm,  cii  7  [260*29  hi]  346b  c  /  Generation  and 
Corruption,  bk  i,  cii  2  [} 15*26  b3)  410d  411a; 
cii  5  417b  420b;  bk  ii,  cii  6  [333*35  b$]  434b; 
cii  8  [335*10-14]  436c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v, 
cii  4  [ioi4b2o-26|  535a  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  cii  4 
[4 i5b28— 4 i6»ai8]  646a-c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  v,  ch  19 
[550b26-3i]  77d;  ch  33  [558*17-24]  84d  85a; 
bk  vii,  ch  1  [582*21-25]  107d  /  Motion  of 
Animals,  cii  5  235c  d  /  Generation  of  Animals, 
bk  1,  ch  18  [723*9-23]  263a-b;  ch  22  [730*33- 
b9]  270d:  bk  ii,  cii  1  [733bi-4]  273d;  [735*13- 
26]  275d-276a;  ch  4  (739b34— 74 ia2]  280d- 
281  d ;  ch  6  [744b28-745b9j  286a  d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2,  167b-dj 
ch  5  169b-c;  ch  7  170c-171a;  cii  11  172b-d; 
bk  11,  ch  3  185a-186d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  iik  i  [146-264] 
2d-4b:  bk  ii  [i  105-1 174]  29a-30a,c;  bkiv[858- 
876]  55b-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  second  day, 

187b-d 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  320a- b  /  On 
Animal  Generation ,  353b-354a;  388c-d;  408c- 
409b;  412b-415b  esp  415a;  441a-443b;  494a-d 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  71a-c 

9.  Change  of  quality 

7  Plato:  Parmenides,  509a-510a  /  Theaetetus, 
533a-534a 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  5  [4aio-bi9]  8b-9a; 
ch  14  [15*14-32]  20d-21a  /  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  6 
[145*2-13]  198c-d  /  Physics,  bk  i,  cii  7  [  1 90^5— 
9]  266b;  bk  v,  ch  2  [226*26-29]  306d;  [226bi- 
9]  307a;  bk  vi,  ch  10  [241*26-32]  325b-c; 
bk  vii,  ch  2  [244bi-245*i2]  328b-d;  ch  3 
329a-330d;  bk  viii,  ch  7  [26o*26-bi4]  346b-c 
/  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [270*26-36]  361c;  ch  12 
[283bi7-23]  375c-d  /  Generation  and  Corrup¬ 
tion,  bk  1,  ch  1-4  409a-417a  esp  ch  4  416c- 
417a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  8  [989*18-29] 
507b-c;  bk  v,  ch  21  544a-b;  bk  xi,  ch  12 
[io68bi5— 19]  597c  /  Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  6 
[446b27-447“9l  685b-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2.  167b- 
168b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  8-10  111c- 
113a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  48, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  262a-263a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  1,  rep  3  6a-7b;  q  52,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 
3  15d-18a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  82,  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  2  971a-972d;  q  91,  a  i,  rep  2,4  1016b- 
1017c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  172b 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  541b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  11,  ch  xxvi, 
sect  1-2  217a-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  25- 
33  417d-419a  passim,  esp  sect  25-26  41 7d- 

418a 


210 

(9.  Change  of  quality .) 

9 a.  Physical  and  chemical  change:  compounds 
and  mixtures 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  448b-d;  459d-462b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  14  [15^20-32] 

206a  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [27oa26~36]  361c; 
ch  5  [27ibi8-23]  362d'363a;  bk  hi,  ch  3 
393c-d;  ch  8  [3o6b22-29]  398a  /  Generation 
and  Corruption ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [315^8-33]  410d; 
ch  10  426c-428d;  bk  ii,  ch  6-8  433d-436d  / 
Meteorology ,  bk  hi,  ch  6  [378ai3]-BK  iv,  ch  12 
[390b2i]  482c-494d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  vii,  ch 
17  [ic>4ibi2-33]  565d-566a,c  /  the 

Sensible,  ch  3  [440a33~bi3]  677d-678a 

9  Aristotle:  Tarts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[646^2-24]  170a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [635-920] 
8d-12b;  bk  ii  [730-864]  24b-26a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  x,  sect  7  297b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  6-8  37d- 
39d;  tr  vii,  ch  1-2  62d'64b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  71, 
a  1,  rep  1-2  367a-368b;  q  76,  a  4,  rep  4 
393a-394c;  q  91,  a  1  484a-485b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  1,  rep  3  6a-7b;  part  hi,  q  2,  a  i,  ans  710a- 
711c;  part  in  suppl,  q  74,  a  i,  rep  3  925c- 
926c;  a  5  929d-931b;  q  8o,  a  3,  rep  3  958b- 
959c;  q  82,  a  1,  ans  968a-970c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  i,  13b-14d;  bk  ii, 
29c-30a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day, 
148c-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  495c-496d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  50  111b; 
bk  11,  aph  7  139c-140a;  aph  48,  181a-183a 

34  Newton:  Optics ,  bk  iii,  517b-518a;  531b- 
542a  esp  541b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxvi, 
sect  1-2  217a-d 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i-ii, 
22c-86a,c;  part  hi,  87cd;  103b-c;  105d; 
117a-128c  esp  117a-118a 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  169b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  309a-312a; 
312c-313d;  314a-b;  315ab;  327a-422a,c  pas¬ 
sim;  541b,d-584a,c  passim 

53  James:  Psychology,  68a-b;  104a-105a;  876a 

9 b.  Biological  change:  vital  alterations 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  ii,  659c-d;  bk  vii,  713d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246^0-^9] 
329c  330a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  v,  ch  19 

[55iai3-552b5]  78a-79b;  ch  30  [556b5-9]  83b; 
bk  vii,  ch  i  106b,d-108a;  bk  ix,  ch  50 
[63ibi9~632a32]  T57a-c;  ch  49B  [632*^4- 

633*29]  157d-158c  /  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  5 
235c-d;  ch  7  [7oibi]-CH  8  [702^2]  236d-237c; 
ch  11  [703b8-2i]  239b-c  /  Generation  of  Ani¬ 
mals,  bk  1,  ch  18  [724a20-bi3]  264b-d;  bk  ii, 


9  a  to  10 

ch  1  [733bi-i7]  273d-274a;  ch  5  £74^5-15] 
282c;  ch  6  [742^-16]  283a;  bk  v,  ch  i  [778s 
15-20]  320ab;  ch  3  [782^-20]  324a-b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  5,  169b; 
ch  8  171a;  bk  hi,  ch  7,  203c-204c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1030- 
1057]  57c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  292d-293d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  412a-415b; 
450b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  38-39  436b- 
437a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  10a-c;  61d-62a; 
219d-222a  esp  221b-222a;  224b-c  /  Descent  of 
Man,  354c-355a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  665a-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  68b-73b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  655a- 
657d  esp  655b,  656b-657c  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents,  770b 

10.  Substantial  change:  generation  and  corrup¬ 
tion 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  165c-166b  /  Phaedo,  226d- 
228a  /  Republic ,  bk  viii,  403a-b;  bk  x,  434c- 
436a  /  Parmenides,  504c-d;  509a-d  /  Laws, 
bk  x,  761b-762c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [i53b3 1—34] 
209a  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i93bi9-22]  270a  / 
Generation  and  Corruption  409a-441a,c  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [983b8— 19]  501d;  ch  8 
[988b22-989b24]  506d-508a;  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[994ai9-b8]  512c-d;  bk  vii,  ch  7-9  555a-558a; 
bk  xi,  ch  11  596a-d;  bk  xii,  CH2-3  598c-599d 
/  Soul,  bk  11,  ch  4  [416^-17]  646d-647a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2,  167d- 
168b;  ch  5  169b-c;  ch  12  172d-173c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [569-580] 
22b;  [865-1022]  26a-28a;  bk  hi  [117-129] 
31c-d;  [203-230]  32c-33a;  [323-349]  34b-c; 
[417-869]  35c-41a;  bk  v  [783-836]  71b-72a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vii,  sect  23  281b; 
sect  25  281c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  18  49a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  15, 
a  1,  ans  91b-92a;  q  19,  a  9,  ans  116d-117d; 
q  27,  a  2  154c-155b;  q  33,  a  2,  rep  4  181c- 
182b;  q  41,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  222b-223b; 
q  44,  a  2,  ans  239b-240a;  q  45,  a  2,  rep  2 
242d-244a;  q  50,  a  5,  rep  3  274b-275a;  q  53, 
a  3,  ans  283b-284d;  Q  65,  a  4,  ans  342b-343c; 
q  66,  a  1,  ans  343d-345c;  a  2,  ans  345d-347b; 
q  67,  a  3,  rep  1  351b-352a;  q  71,  a  i,  rep  i 
367a-368b;  Q  72,  a  i,  rep  5  368b-369d;  q  75, 
a  6,  ans  383c-384c;  q  90,  a  2,  ans  481d-482c; 
q  96,  a  1,  ans  510b-511b;  q  119  604c-608d; 
part  i-ii,  q  22,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  720d-721c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  53, 
a  1  19d-21a;  a  3  21d-22d;  q  85,  a  6  182d-184a; 
q  no,  a  2,  rep  3  349a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  1,  a  7, 
rep  3  385c-387a;  part  hi  suppl,  q  75,  a  3, 
ans  938a-939d;  q  79,  a  i,  rep  3-4  951b-953b; 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


211 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


10a  to  10c 

a  2,  rep  i  953b-955c;  q  8o,  a  5,  rep  3  963a- 
964b;  q  82,  a  1,  rep  2  968a-970c;  q  86,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  1-2  993c-994d 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [3011-3034]  209b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  249b- 2 50a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  v,  104d  105d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  35,  162c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  127c  d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  6  356b-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxvi, 
sect  1-2  217a-d  passim;  bk  iii,  cii  iii,  sect 
19  259c-260a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  74b- 76c;  82a-83b 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i, 
41b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  187a-b; 
189b-190a 

53  James:  Psychology,  95b-98a  passim 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  652b- 
653c; 655a-657d 

10a.  Substantial  change  in  the  realm  of  bodies: 
the  transmutation  of  the  elements 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  456b-c;  458b-460b 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  3  360d-362a; 
bk  iii,  ch  1  [298a24-299ai]  389b,d-390b;  CH2 
[30lb33~302a9l  393b;  ch  6  [304b23]-cH  8 
[3o6b29]  396a-398a/  Generation  and  Corruption 
409a-441a,c  esp  bk  i,  ch  1-3  409a-416c,  ch  6 
[322bi-2i]  420b-d,  bk  11,  ch  4-11  431b-441a,c 
/  Meteorology,  bk  i,  ch  3  [339a36— b3]  445d;  bk 
iv,  ch  i  482b,d-483c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[9^3b7'9^4&1^]  501d-502b;  ch  8  [989ai8-29] 
507b-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  1,  ch  2,  167d- 
168b;  bk  11,  ch  3,  185c-d;  ch  4,  187a-b;  bk 
iii,  ch  7,  203c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [635-920] 
8d-12b;  bk  ii  [80-108]  16a-b;  bk  v  [235-305] 
64a-65a;  [380-415]  66a-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  13,  189a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b; 
bk  iv,  sect  21  265b-c;  sect  46  267c;  bk  v, 
sect  13  271b;  bk  vii,  sect  18  281a;  sect  23 
281b;  sect  25  281c;  sect  50  283a;  bk  x, 
sect  7  297b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3-4  36b- 
37b;  tr  iv,  ch  6  51d-52a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  66, 
a  2,  ans  345d-347b;  q  67,  a  2,  ans  350b- 
351a;  q  91,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  484a-485b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  74,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  925c-926c;  a  5,  ans 
929d-931b;  q  91,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  4  1024a- 
1025b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  vii  [121- 
148]  116b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Canon's  Yeoman's  Prologue  471b- 
474a  /  Canon's  Yeoman's  Tale  474b-487a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  14b-c  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  66  114d-115c;  bk 
ii,  aph  35,  162c 


34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  531a  b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  ii, 
sect  2  128a  b;  cii  xxvi,  sect  12  217a  d 
passim 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  148a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  299d  300a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  582  b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  262c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  u 
41b  c 

10b.  Plant,  animal,  and  human  reproduction 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  476b-d  /  Statesman,  586c- 
588a 

8  Aristotle:  Meteorology,  bk  iv,  ch  i  (379b6— 8] 
483c;  ch  3  [38 ib9— 13]  485d;  ch  ii  [389^8^7] 
493c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  vii,  ch  9  [io34a32-b8] 
557c-d;  bk  ix,  ch  7  [i049ai2-i8]  574d;  bk 
xii,  ch  6  [io7ib29~3i]  601c;  ch  7  [io72b3o- 
1073^]  603a 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals 255a-331a,c 
passim,  esp  bk  i,  ch  1-2  255a-256c,  ch  17-22 
261b-271a,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [733b23)-CH  5  [74^24] 
274a-282d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  5-6  169b- 
170c;  bk  ii,  ch  3  185a-186d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  25  358b- 
359a;  bk  xxii,  ch  24,  609c-610a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  41, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  222b-223b;  q  72,  a  i,  rep  4 
368b-369d;  q  73,  a  3,  ans  371d-372c;  q  78, 
a  2,  rep  2-3  409a-410a;  q  90,  a  2,  ans  481d- 
482c;  q  92,  a  1,  ans  488d-489d;  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  1  491b-d;  q  98  516d-519a;  q  115,  a  2, 
rep  3-4  587c-588c;  a  3  588c-589c;  q  118,  a  i 
600a-601c;  q  119  604c-608d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxv 
[34-78]  91d-92a;  paradise,  vii  [121-141] 
116b-c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  i,  14b-c;  bk  v,  105a-b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  278a  /  On  Ani¬ 
mal  Generation  329a-496d  passim,  esp  331a-b, 
383d-396a,  400c-429c,  496b-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  50, 
192a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [660-673]  166b- 
167a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxvi, 
sect  2  217b-d 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  582 b-c 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  654c- 
656d;  659d-660b 

10c.  The  incorruptibility  of  atoms,  the  heavenly 
bodies,  and  spiritual  substances 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  3  [270^2-36] 
361b-c;  ch  9  [279ai2]-cH  12  [283b24]  370b- 
375d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ix,  ch  8  [i050b20-28] 
576c-d;  bk  xii,  ch  2  [1069^4-27]  599a;  ch 
6-8  601b-605a 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  4  [699^2- 
7ooa6]  234d-235b 


212 


11  to  \2b 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(10.  Substantial  change:  generation  and  corrup¬ 
tion.  10 c.  The  incorruptibility  of  atoms,  the 
heavenly  bodies,  and  spiritual  substances .) 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  12, 173a-b; 
bk  11,  ch  6,  189c-190a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [483-634] 
7a-8d;  bk  ii  [842-864]  25c-26a 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  i,  5a-6a;  bk  xiii, 
429a-b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  929b-930b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  1-4  35a- 
37b;  ch  8  39c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  9, 
a  2  39c-40d;  q  10,  a  2,  rep  1-2  41d-42c;  a  3, 
ans  42c-43b;  a  5  44b-45c;  q  46,  a  i,  rep 
2-3,5  250a-252d;  q  50,  a  5  274b-275a;  q  58, 
a  3,  ans  301d-302d;  q  63,  a  i,  rep  2  325c- 
326c;  q  66,  a  2  345d-347b;  q  68,  a  i,  ans 
354a-355c;  q  70,  a  3  365b-367a;  q  97,  a  i,  ans 
513c-514c;  q  104,  a  i,  rep  1,3  534c-536c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  4,  ans  5a-6a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  vii  [121- 
148]  116b-c;  xiii  [52-60]  126a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i  355a-372d  passim,  esp 
def  1  355a,  def  3,6  355b,  axiom  1-2  355c-d, 
prop  1-15  355d-361d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [128-142]  96a-b; 
bk  ii  [81-105]  113a-b;  bk  vi  [296-353]  202b- 
204a  esp  [320-353]  203a-204a;  [430-436]  205b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  358a 

34  Newton:  Optics ,  bk  iii,  541b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  137a-140c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  68a- b 

11.  The  apprehension  of  change:  by  sense,  by 
reason 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedo ,  231c- 
232a  /  Timaeus ,  447b-d;  457c-d  /  Sophist , 
565a-569a  esp  568a-569a/  Laws ,  bk  x,  765a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  iv,  ch  ii  298c-300a 
/  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [987^9^18]  505b-d; 
ch  9  [990^-15]  508d;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [996s! 8— b26] 
514d-515b;  bk  iv,  ch  5  528c-530c;  ch  8  [ioi2b 
23-32]  532d;  bk  xi,  ch  6  [io63aio-b8]  591b-d 
/  Soul ,  bk  hi,  ch  1  [425ai4~bio]  657b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  1  [311-328] 
5a;  bk  11  [62-141]  15d-16d;  [308-332]  19a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c; 
bk  xi,  par  17-41  93b-99b  /  Christian  Doctrine, 
bk  1,  ch  8-9  626c-627a;  bk  ii,  ch  38  654b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  15,  rep  2  89b-90b;  q  78,  a  3,  rep  2  410a- 
411d;  q  84,  a  1  esp  rep  3  440d-442a;  q  86, 
a  3  463b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  172b;  part  iv, 
249c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  291b-294b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  5-6 
138b-139c;  aph 23  153d-154c;  aph  40-41 170c- 
174b 


31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  24a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  v 
131b;  ch  vii,  sect  8-9  132d-133a;  ch  viii, 
sect  18  136a-b;  ch  xiv,  sect  6-12  156b-157c; 
ch  xxiii,  sect  28-29  211b-212a;  ch  xxvi, 
sect  1-2  2l7a-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  27a-33d  esp  28b-c,  29c- 
d;  43a-b;  55c-56a;  76c-83b  esp  76c-d;  91d- 
93c 

53  James:  Psychology,  405b-406b;  418b-419b; 
510a-512a;  563a-567a;  612a-616b  esp  616a; 
634b-635a 

12.  Emotional  aspects  of  change 

12^.  Rest  and  motion  in  relation  to  pleasure 
and  pain 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  275c-277c  /  Timaeus,  463d- 
464b  /  Philebus ,  619d-620b;  626a-c;  631d- 
632d  /  Laws,  bk  vii,  713c-715a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [12^27-39] 

169b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  ii  [ii52b8]-cH 
12  [ii53ai7]  403c-404b;  ch  14  [ii54b20-3o] 
406c;  bk  x,  ch  3  [ii73a29~b7]  427c-d;  ch  4 
[ii74ai3~bi4]  428b-429a  /  Politics,  bk  viii, 
ch  5  [i34oai-bi9]  545c-546a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i, 
ch  11  [i369b33-i37oai7]  613a-c;  [137^26-30] 
614d 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  18-21, 
167a-168c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  32, 
a  2  759d-760d 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  50a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii  395a-422a,c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  29-48  184d-190d  passim 

50  Marx:  Capital,  166b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  410a 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  403d-404a  /  General  In - 
troduction,  592c-593a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure 
Principle,  639b-640a;  648d-649c  /  Ego  and  Id, 
701a-b 

12£.  The  love  and  hatred  of  change 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [1211-1248] 
125b-c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii,  224d-225a 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  344b-d  /  Laws,  bk 
vii,  717d-718d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  14  [11 54^0-30] 
406c 

10  Hippocrates:  Fractures,  par  1  74b,d-75a  / 
Aphorisms,  sect  ii,  par  50  133d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1105- 
1174]  29a-30a,c;  bk  iii  [912-977]  41d-42c; 
[1053-1084]  43c-44a;  bk  v  [156-173]  63a-b; 
[i379-x435]  79a-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  14  258d; 
sect  17  259b-d;  bk  iv,  sect  3  263b-264a; 
sect  5  264b;  sect  12  264c;  sect  33  266c-d; 
sect  35-36  266d;  sect  42-43  267b;  bk  v, 


12  b  to  13 

sect  io  270c-d;  sect  13  271b;  sect  23  272b; 
sect  33  273b-c;  bk  vi,  sect  15  275a-b;  sect 
36  277c;  bk  vii,  sect  18-19  281a;  sect  35 
282a;  sect  49  282d;  bk  viii,  sect  6  285d- 
286a;  sect  16,18  286d;  bk  ix,  sect  21  293b-c; 
sect  28  293d  294a;  bk  x,  sect  7  297b-c; 
sect  31  300a  b;  sect  34  301a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [441-462]  115ab  csp 
[462]  115b 

14  Plutarch:  Aemilius  Paulus,  225b-c;  229a-c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iv  12b-19b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  viii,  par  18  57d- 
58a;  par  25-26  60a  b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk 
1,  ch  9  627a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [61-96] 
lOb-c;  xiv  [94-120]  20c-d;  xxvi  [90-142]  39a- 
c;  purgatory,  xi  [73— 1 17]  69c-70a;  xiv  [91- 
126]  74c-75a;  xxvm  [76-148]  96d-97c;  para¬ 
dise,  xv-xvi  128bl32a 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath' s  Prologue  [5583-6410] 
256a-269b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  cii  vi,  9b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  79c-d;  part  ii, 
150c;  154b-c;  part  iv,  271d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  33b-36a;  47a-51a;  131b- 

132a;  281a-282a;  292d-294b;  318c-319b; 

458b-c;  462c-465c;  478c-479c;  540d-541c 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Ilenry  IV ,  act  iii,  sc  i 
[45-56]  483b 

27  Shakespeare:  Ha?nlet ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [68-73] 
32b;  act  v,  sc  1  [202-240]  66c-d  /  Troilus  and 
Cressida,  act  iii,  sc  iii  [145-189]  124a-c;  act 
iv,  sc  iv  [26-50]  128c  /  King  Lear ,  act  iv,  sc  i 
[10  -12]  269c  /  Sonnets ,  xv  588b-c;  xxv  590a; 
xlix  593d;  lx  595b-c;  lxiv-lxv  596a-b; 
cxvi  604a;  cxxm  605a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  pref,  2a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  274a;  285b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  14c-15c  esp 
15a-b;  16c-d;  61b;  65b-c;  90b-d  /  Novum 
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  90  124d-125a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  ii,  45d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  4-1  i  398d- 
400b;  part  v,  prop  6,  schol  454a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  129-131  195b;  135  196a; 
I39_I43  196b-200a;  164-172  202b-203b;  181 
204b  /  Vacuum,  355a-358b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xix,  sect  223 
76c-d  /  Human  Understanding,  85a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  105a-106b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  335c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [15-20]  lb 

43  Federalist:  number  14,  62a-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  293b-302c  passim  /  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government ,  336b-c;  350c;  377d- 
378a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  178a-c; 
part  1,  209b;  258b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  dedication  la-b;  part  ii 
[11,573-586]  281b-282a;  [11,612-622]  282b- 
283a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  302b;  577c-d 


213 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  221b  d;  bk  vi, 
238c  243d  passim;  267c;  bk  vii,  275a  276b; 
294a  b;  bk  viii,  305b  d;  307d~309c;  bk  ix, 
356b  d;  bk  x,  394d;  403a  405a;  bk  mi,  538a- 
539c;  556d-557a;  bk  xv,  639c;  epilogue,  i, 
645a  646c;  668a-669c 

53  James:  Psychology,  524a-525a;  707b  708a 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  651b  d 

13.  The  problem  of  the  eternity  of  motion  or 
change 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-c  /  Timaeus,  450c- 
451a;  460c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  13  [222*29 -b8] 
302b;  bk  viii,  cii  1-4  334a-340d;  cii  8  348b 
352a  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  cii  2  [269b2-io]  360c  d; 
cii  3  [27obi  -24]  361c-362a;  bk  i,  cii  9  [279*12]- 
bk  ii,  cii  1  [284b6]  370b-376a;  bk  ii,  cii  6 
379c-380c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii, 
ch  io-ii  437d-441a,c  /  Meteorology ,  bk  i,  cii 
14  [352*1 6-353*27]  458b-459a,c  passim;  bk  ii, 
cii  3  [3 5 6b2— 3 5 7^4 ]  462b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk 
ix,  cei  8  [io50b2o-28]  576c-d;  bk  xii,  ch  6 
[io7ib3]-cn  7  [1072*22]  601b-602b;  ch  7 
[1073*2-34]  603a-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [951-1051] 
12d-14a  csp  [988-1007]  13b;  bk  ii  [80-141] 
16a-d;  [294-302]  18d;  [569-580]  22b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  13  271b; 
sect  23  272b;  bk  vi,  sect  15  275a  b;  bk  ix, 
sect  28  293d-294a;  bk  xi,  sect  27  306b 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  xiii,  429a-b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  888b-891a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  7-8  122d- 
124c;  ch  1 1— 13  126a-129a  /  Fourth  Ennead, 
tr  iv,  ch  7-8  161d-162d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par  10-17 
91d-93c;  bk  xii,  par  8-9  lOla-c;  par  12-16 
101d-103a;  par  29  105d-106a;  par  33  107b-c; 
par  39-40  109a-110a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi, 
ch  4-6  324a-325d;  bk  xii,  ch  10-20  348b- 
357a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  io, 
a  2,  rep  2  41d-42c;  a  4,  ans  43b-44b;  q  14, 
a  12,  ans  85d-86d;  q  46,  aa  1-2  250a-255a; 
q  75,  a  1,  rep  1  378b-379c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  77,  a  2,  ans  945a-946b;  q  91,  a  2  1017c- 
1020c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  ii,  56b  c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  third  day, 
224d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  35, 
163a;  aph  48,  186b-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiii,  27b-c 

34  Newton:  Prmciples,  law  i  14a;  bk  iii,  prop  io 
284a-285a  /  Optics ,  bk  iii,  540a-541b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv, 
sect  26  160c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  135a-137a,c;  152a-d; 
160b-161d 

53  James:  Psychology,  882a 


Chapter  10:  CHANGF 


214 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


14.  The  theory  of  the  prime  mover:  the  order 

and  hierarchy  of  movers  and  moved 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  124b-c  /  Statesman ,  587a- 
589c  /  Laws ,  bk  x,  758d-765c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  Vii,  ch  1-2  326a-329a; 
bk  viii  334a-355d  /  Heavens ,  bk  iii,  ch  2 
[300b8-30iai2]  391d-392c  /  Generation  and 
Corruption ,  bk  1,  ch  7  421d-423b;  bk  11,  ch  6 
[334a6-9]  435a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  ch  8 
[ioi2b22— 32]  532d;  bk  v,  ch  ii  [ioi8bi9-22] 
539c-d;  bk  ix,  ch  8  [io49bi7~28]  575b-c; 
[i050a3~b6]  575d-576b;  bk  xii,  ch  4  [io7ob22- 
35]  600b;  ch  5  [io7ia30~36]  601a;  ch  6-8 
601b-605a 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  1  [698aio- 
15]  233a;  ch  3-6  234a-236b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  14,  120d- 
121a 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  i,  5a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  3,  ans  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  1,  ans  14b-15b;  q  9, 
a  1,  rep  1  38c-39c;  q  19,  a  i,  rep  3  108d-109c; 
q  25,  a  2,  rep  3  144c-145b;  q  46,  a  i,  rep  5 
250a-252d;  q  51,  a  3,  rep  3  277a-278c;  q  60, 
a  i,  rep  2  310b-311a;  q  75,  a  i,  rep  i  378b- 
379c;  qq  105-119  538d-608d  passim;  part  i-ii, 
q  1,  a  4,  ans  612a-613a;  a  6,  ans  614a-c;  q  6, 
a  1,  rep  3  644d-646a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
109,  a  1,  ans  338b-339c;  part  hi  suppl,  q  91, 
A  I,  REP  2  1016b-1017c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [103-1-42] 
107b-d;  xiii  [52-84]  126a-b;  xxvn  [106-120] 
148b-c;  xxviii  [1—78]  148d-149c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  79d-80a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  vi,  107c-110d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  415b-417a 
esp  416b-c;  426a-429b;  443a-c;  490d-493a  esp 
492b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [469-505]  185b- 
186a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  77  186a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  140b,d-145c;  177b-179b; 
239a-240b  /  Practical  Reason ,  334b-337a,c  / 
Judgement ,  597d-599d;  610b-613a,c 

15.  The  immutable 

15rf.  The  immutability  of  the  objects  of 
thought:  the  realm  of  truth 

Old  Testament:  Psalms ,  100:5;  117:2;  119:160; 
146:6— (D)  Psalms ,  99:5;  116:2;  118:160;  145:7 
/  Proverbs ,  8:22-30 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  24:9 —(D)  OT,  Eccle - 
siasticus,  24:14 

New  Testament:  //  John ,  2 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  113c-114a,c/  Phaedrus ,  125a- 
b  /  Symposium ,  167b-d  /  Phaedo,  231b-232b  / 
Republic ,  bk  v,  371a-373c  /  Timaeus ,  447a-d; 
457b-458a  /  Parmenides ,  487c-491a  /  Sophist , 


14  /o  15a 

568a-b  /  Philebus,  634b-635b  /  Seventh  Letter , 
809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  CategorieSy  ch  5  [4aio-bi2]  8b-9a 

/  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  8  104a-b  /  M^/a- 
physics,  bk  1,  ch  6  505b-506b;  ch  9  508c-511c; 
bk  hi,  ch  i  [995bi3— 18]  514a;  [995b3i— 996ai] 
514b;  [996a4~ 9]  [996ai3~i5]  514c;  ch  2 

[997a34~99^ai9]  516a-d;  ch  3  [998bi4]-CH  4 
[999^4]  517b-5l8c;  ch  4  [iooia4]-cH  6 
[ioo2b3i]  519d-521d;  bk  vii,  ch  8  [i033bi9~ 
1034^]  556d-557b;  ch  10  [i035b32-i036ai2] 
559b-c;  ch  11  [i036b32-i037a4]  560b-c;  ch 
13-14  562a-563c;  ch  15  [i040a8-b4]  564a-c;  ch 
16  [i040b28-i04ia4]  564d-565a;  bk  ix,  ch  8 
[io5ob35-io5ia2]  576d-577a;  bk  x,  ch  10 
586c-d;  bk  xi,  ch  i  [io59a33~bi4]  587b-c; 
bk  xii,  ch  1  [io69a3o-b2]  598b-c;  ch  3 
[1070^-30]  599b-d;  bk  xiii,  ch  1-5  607a- 
611d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  6  341b-342c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  811b-d;  813d- 
814b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  3  58d-59c 
/  Third  Ennead,  tr  ix  136a-138a,c  /  Fifth 
Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  i  238a-b;  tr  ix,  ch  5-13 
248a-251c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  9,  3a;  bk 
xi,  par  9-1 1  91c-92b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, 
ch  8-10  626c-627b;  bk  ii,  ch  38  654b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  3,  rep  4  25a-d;  q  10,  a  3,  rep  3  42c-43b; 
q  16,  aa  7-8  99a-100d;  q  44,  a  i,  rep  3 
238b-239a;  q  84,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  440d- 
442a;  q  85,  a  i,  rep  2  451c-453c;  q  86,  a  3 
463b-d;  q  113,  a  i,  ans  576a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  53, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  2-3  19d-21a;  q  94,  aa  5-6 
224d-226b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  27d-28c; 
43d-44c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52d-53a  / 
Meditations ,  v  93a-96a  /  Objections  and  Re¬ 
plies,  123b;  216d-217d;  228a-c;  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  8  355c;  prop  7 
356c;  prop  8,  schol  2  356d-357d;  prop  17, 
schol  362c-363c;  part  ii,  prop  32  385c;  prop 
34  385d;  prop  37-39  386b-387a;  prop  40, 
demonst  387a;  prop  43-47  388c-391a 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  384a-b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  358b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ii, 
sect  2  128a-b;  bk  hi,  ch  hi,  sect  19  259c- 
260a;  ch  vi,  sect  6  269d-270a;  bk  iv,  ch  i, 
sect  9  308c-309b;  ch  hi,  sect  31  323c-d; 
ch  xi,  sect  14  358b-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  55 la- 5 53c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  i, 
115a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d- 
157b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  prelude  [73-74]  3a 

50  Marx-Engels  :  Communist  Manifesto ,  428b-d 


15 b  to  15c 

53  James:  Psychology,  299a-304b  csp  301a,  302a- 
304b;  869a;  879b  882a 

15 b.  The  unalterability  of  the  decrees  of  fate 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  xviii  [52-126]  130c-131c; 
bk  xxii  [13 1-223]  156c-157c 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [507-525]  45a- 
b  /  Agamemnon  [1018-1033]  63a 

5  Euripides:  Heracles  Mad  [13 13-1353]  376c-d 
/  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [1435-1499] 
424a~d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6c-10a;  20b-22a; 
bk  11,  77ab 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-293] 
18b-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  12  118d-120b; 
bk  ii,  ch  8  146a-147c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a- 
b;  bk  x,  sect  5  296d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  x  [606-632]  318b-319b 

14  Plutarch:  Caesar ,  601c-604d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  v,  ch  i-io  207d- 
216c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  116, 
a  3  594c-595a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
136-154  106a-108b 

32  Milton:  Arcades  [54-83]  26b-27a  /  Paradise 
Lost ,  bk  vii  [170-173]  220b-221a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
epilogue  1,  645a-650c;  epilogue  ii,  675a-c 

15c.  The  immutability  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  15:18  /  Deuteron¬ 
omy,  32:39-40  /  I  Chronicles ,  16:34-36— (D) 
I  Paralipomenon ,  16:34-36  /  Psalms ,  9:5-8; 
10:16;  29:10-11;  33:10-11;  45:6;  48  esp  48:8, 
48:14;  66: 7;  89-90  esp  89:30-35,  90:1-4;  93:2; 
102  esp  102:11-12,  102:26-27;  103:17-18;  136; 
145-146  esp  145:13,  146:10— (D)  Psalms,  9:6- 
9;  9:16;  28:10;  32:10-11;  44:7;  47  esp  47:9, 
47:15;  65:7;  88-89  esP  88:31-36,  89:1-4;  92:2; 
101  esp  101:12-13,  101:27-28;  102:17-18;  135; 
144-145  esp  144:13,  145:10  /  Ecclesiastes,  3:14- 
15  /  Isaiah,  40:8,28;  43:10-13;  57:15— (D) 
Isaias,  40:8,28;  43:10-13;  57:15  /  Jeremiah , 
10:10— (D)  Jeremias,  10:10  /  Lamentations , 
5:19  /  Daniel,  6:25-27  /  Malachi ,  3:6 — ( D ) 
Malachias,  3:6 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  36:17;  39:20;  42:21 — 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  36:18-19;  39 125  *,42:21- 
22 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  24:35/  John ,  1:1-5  / 
Romans ,  1:21-25;  6:23  /  Colossians,  1:16-17  / 
I  Timothy,  1:17  /  Hebrews,  1:10-12;  7:23-28; 
13:7-8  /  James,  1:17  /  I  John,  5:11-12  /  Revela¬ 
tion,  1:17-18;  10:6;  11  .*15-18— (D)  Apocalypse, 
1:17-18;  10:6;  11:15-18 

5  Sophocles  :  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [607-615]  120a 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  322d-323c;  324a-b 


215 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  viii,  cii  6  [258*^10- 
259b3i]  344b  345d  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  9 
[279H23-b4)  370c  d;  bk  ii,  ch  3  [286a8—  1 3]  377c 
/  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  ii,  cii  10 
[337“i 5— 2Sl  439a-b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  cii  5 
[ioi5b9-i6]  536a;  bk  xii,  cii  6-7  60lb  603b; 
cii  9  605a-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vii,  ch  14  [1154^0- 
30] 406c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  v,  296a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  1-6  119b- 
122d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  cii  18-21  351d- 
353d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  10  3b-c; 
bk  iv,  par  26  25c-d;  par  29  26b;  bk  vii,  par 
1-6  43b  45a;  par  17-18  49a-b;  par  23  50b-c; 
par  26,  51c;  bk  xii,  par  1 1  lOld;  par  18  103a  c; 
bk  xiii,  par  44  122d  /  City  of  God ,  bk  vii,  ch 
30  261b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  ii,  272c;  bk  x,  ch  i, 
298b, d;  bk  xi,  ch  10  327d-328d;  ch  21-22 
333a-334c;  bk  xii,  ch  1-3  342b,d-344b;  ch  14 
350d-351b;  ch  17  353a-354a  /  Christian  Doc¬ 
trine,  bk  1,  ch  5  625d-626a;  ch  8  626c-627a; 
ch  10  627b;  ch  22-23  629b-630c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  3,  ans  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  4  14b- 
15b;  qq  9-10  38c-46d;  q  14,  a  7  81d-82b;  a  15 
89b-90b;  q  18,  a  3  106b-107c;  q  19,  a  7  114d- 
115d;  q  26,  a  1,  rep  2  150b-c;  q  43,  a  2,  rep  2 
230d-231c;  q  51,  a  3,  rep  3  277a-278c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
a  5,  ans  58b-59d;  part  iii,  q  i,  a  i,  rep  3 
701d-703a;  q  2,  a  1,  ans  710a-711c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xiii  [52— 
84]  126a-b;  xxiv  [130-141]  144a;  xxvm  [1-78] 
148d-149c;  xxix  [13—36]  150b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [2994-3015]  209a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  173a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  292d-294b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52b  d  / 
Meditations,  in,  86a-87a;  v  93a-96a  esp  93d- 
95b  /  Objections  and  Replies,  228a-c;  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i  355a-372d  esp  def  i 
355a,  def  3,6-7  355b,  prop  3  356a,  prop  5-8 
356b-357d,  prop  11-15  358b-361d,  prop  17 
362b-363c,  prop  19-20  363c-364a,  prop  33, 
schol  1  367c-d,  prop  34  369a;  part  v,  prop 
17  456c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [372-389]  143b- 
144a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  469  256a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
370a-371a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xvii, 
sect  20  172d-173c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  21  209c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  117  436a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  175d-176c;  177b-179b; 
190c;  192d;  201b-c  /  Practical  Reason,  352a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  270, 
85c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  306a 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


216 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  broad  philosophical  context  of  the  theory  of  change,  see  Being  5;  Desire  i  ;  Form  i-ib; 
Matter  i-ib,  2b. 

The  distinction  between  the  mutable  and  the  immutable,  see  Astronomy  8a;  Being  7^3); 

Element  5a;  Eternity  4~4d;  Form  ia;  Truth  5. 

The  issue  concerning  time  and  eternity  in  relation  to  change,  see  Astronomy  8c(i);  Eter¬ 
nity  1;  Time  2,  2b;  World  4a. 

A  discussion  relevant  to  the  theory  of  the  prime  mover,  see  Angel  2a. 

The  mathematical  and  experimental  approach  to  the  study  of  local  motion  and  the  formula¬ 
tion  of  its  laws,  see  Astronomy  8c-8c(3);  Mechanics  5-5^2),  6c-6e;  One  and  Many 
3a(2);  Quantity  5c;  Space  2a. 

The  discussion  of  biological  and  psychological  change,  see  Animal  4a,  6b~7,  8b;  Cause  2; 
Desire  2c-2d;  Education  4,  5c,  6;  Emotion  ib,  2b;  Habit  4b;  Reasoning  ib;  Time  7; 
Virtue  and  Vice  4b-4c. 

Other  discussions  of  the  distinction  between  generation  and  other  kinds  of  change,  see  Art 
2a;  Form  id(2);  World  4e(i);  and  for  the  problem  of  the  transmutation  of  the  elements, 
see  Element  3c. 

The  theory  of  historical  change  in  nature  and  society,  see  Evolution  4d,  6a,  7c;  History 
4b;  Progress  ia,  ic-2;  Time  8a. 

The  consideration  of  economic,  political,  and  cultural  change,  see  Constitution  7-73, 
8—8 b ;  Progress  3-4C,  6- 6b;  Revolution  2-2C,  4-4^  Wealth  12. 

The  discussion  of  change  or  becoming  as  an  object  of  knowledge,  see  Being  8a-8b;  Knowl¬ 
edge  6a(i);  Opinion  i. 

Other  considerations  of  man’s  attitude  toward  change  and  mutability,  see  Custom  and 
Convention  8;  Progress  5;  Time  7. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Aquinas.  De  Prmcipiis  Naturae 
Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy ,  part  ii, 
24~53 

Hobbes.  Concerning  Body,  part  iii,  cii  15-16,  21-22 
Berkeley.  Siris 

Kant.  Metaphysical  Foundations  of  Natural 
Science 

Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind ,  in 

- .  Science  of  Logic ,  vol  i,  bk  i,  sect  i,  ch  i(c) 

- .  Logic ,  cii  7 

W.  James.  Some  Problems  of  Philosophy ,  ch  9-10, 
12 


II. 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Against  the  Physicists ,  bk  ii, 
ch  2,  5 

- .  Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism,  bk  hi,  ch  1-20 

Crescas.  Or  Adonai,  propositions  4-9,  13-14, 

*7*  25 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xvm  (11), 

XXX  (8-9),  LX  (8),  XLVI  (3),  XLVIII-L 

John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philosophicus  Tho - 
misticus ,  Philosophia  Naturalis,  part  i,  qq  14,  19, 
22-24;  PART  in,  QQ  1-2,  10-12 
Leibnitz.  Discourse  on  Metaphysics,  xv-xxii 
- .  Monadology,  par  10-18 


Chapter  10:  CHANGE 


Voltaire.  “Motion,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea 
Wiiew  ell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences  * 
vol  i,  bk  ii,  ch  13 

Helmholtz.  Popular  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects , 

VII 

Maxwell.  Matter  and  Motion 
Clifford.  The  Common  Sense  of  the  Exact  Sciences , 
ch  5 

Lotze.  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  4-5;  bk  ii,  ch  4 
Bradley.  Appearance  and  Reality ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
Croce.  History ,  Its  Theory  and  Practice 
Bergson.  Creative  Evolution 
- .  The  Creative  Mind ,  cii  5 


217 

G.  N.  Lewis.  The  Anatomy  of  Science ,  essay  iii-iv 
H  eidecger.  Sein  und  Zeit 

B.  Russell.  Principles  of  Mathematics ,  cii  54, 
56-59 

- .  The  Analysis  of  Matter,  cii  27,  33-34 

Eddington.  The  Nature  of  the  Physical  World, 
cii  5 

Dewey.  Experience  and  Nature ,  cii  2 

- .  The  Quest  for  Certainty,  ch  2 

Whitehead.  The  Concept  of  Nature,  cii  5 

- .  Process  and  Reality ,  part  ii,  cii  10 

Santayana.  Scepticism  and  Animal  Faith ,  cii  5 

- .  The  Realm  of  Matter ,  ch  5-6 

Riezler.  Physics  and  Reality 


Chapter  n:  CITIZEN 


INTRODUCTION 


CITIZEN,”  like  “comrade,”  has  been  and 
still  is  a  revolutionary  word.  Both  words 
have  been  titles  proudly  adopted  by  men  to 
mark  their  liberation  from  the  yoke  of  despo¬ 
tism  or  tyranny.  Both  titles  are  still  sought  by 
those  who  have  not  yet  gained  admission  to  the 
fraternity  of  the  free  and  equal. 

The  rank  and  status  of  citizenship  first  ap¬ 
peared  in  the  ancient  world  with  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  constitutional  government  in  the  city- 
states  of  Greece.  The  Greeks  were  conscious 
of  this  fact,  and  proud  of  it.  In  terms  of  it, 
they  set  themselves  apart  from  the  barbarians 
who  were  subjects  of  the  Great  King  of  Persia 
or  the  Egyptian  Pharaoh.  The  Spartan  heralds, 
according  to  Herodotus,  thus  address  the 
Persian  commander:  “Thou  hast  experience 
of  half  the  matter;  but  the  other  half  is  beyond 
thy  knowledge.  A  slave’s  life  thou  under- 
standest;  but,  never  having  tasted  liberty, 
thou  canst  not  tell  whether  it  is  sweet  or  no. 
Ah!  hadst  thou  known  what  freedom  is,  thou 
wouldst  have  bidden  us  fight  for  it,  not  with 
the  spear  only,  but  with  the  battle-axe.” 

Not  only  Herodotus  and  Thucydides  but 
also  the  great  tragic  poets,  notably  Aeschylus 
in  the  Persians ,  record  this  Hellenic  sense  of 
distinction  from  the  surrounding  peoples  who 
still  lived  in  childlike  submission  to  absolute 
rule.  But  the  Greeks  were  also  conscious  that 
their  political  maturity  as  self-governing  cit¬ 
izens  was,  as  Aristotle  intimates  in  the  Politics , 
a  recent  development  from  the  primitive  con¬ 
dition  in  which  tribal  chieftains  ruled  despot¬ 
ically. 

The  basic  distinction  between  subjection  and 
citizenship  is  inseparable  from  the  equally  basic 
distinction  between  absolute  and  limited,  or 
between  despotic  and  constitutional,  govern¬ 
ment.  The  difference  between  these  two  modes 
of  government  is  treated  in  the  chapter  on 


Constitution.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  note  that 
the  difference  in  the  authority  and  power  pos¬ 
sessed  by  rulers — according  as  it  is  absolute  or 
limited— corresponds  with  a  difference  in  the 
status,  the  degree  of  freedom,  and  the  rights 
and  privileges  of  the  people  ruled. 

In  order  to  understand  citizenship  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  understand  the  several  ways  in  which 
men  can  belong  to  or  be  parts  of  a  political 
community.  There  are  two  divisions  among 
men  within  a  community  which  help  us  to 
define  citizenship. 

According  to  one  of  these  divisions,  the 
native-born  are  separated  from  aliens  or  foreign¬ 
ers.  In  the  Greek  city-states  it  was  almost  im¬ 
possible  for  aliens  to  become  citizens.  Plutarch 
notes  that  Solon’s  law  of  naturalization,  which 
he  qualifies  as  “of  doubtful  character,”  would 
not  allow  strangers  to  become  citizens  unless 
“they  were  in  perpetual  exile  from  their 
own  country,  or  came  with  their  whole  family 
to  trade  there.”  The  metics ,  or  aliens,  who 
were  allowed  in  the  city  were  usually  a  class 
apart. 

In  Rome  the  situation  was  different;  it  was 
possible  for  outsiders  to  receive  the  high  honor 
of  Roman  citizenship.  “The  aspiring  genius  of 
Rome,”  Gibbon  writes,  “sacrificed  vanity  to 
ambition,  and  deemed  it  more  prudent,  as  well 
as  honourable,  to  adopt  virtue  and  merit  for 
her  own  wheresoever  they  were  found,  among 
slaves  or  strangers,  enemies  or  barbarians.” 

Most  modern  republics  set  up  naturalization 
proceedings  for  the  regular  admission  of  some, 
if  not  all,  immigrants  to  membership  in  the 
state.  Yet  a  difference  always  remains  between 
a  citizen  and  a  denizen,  or  mere  resident.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  Rousseau  criticizes  Bodin  for  con¬ 
fusing  citizens  with  townsmen.  “M.  D’Alem¬ 
bert,”  he  says,  “has  avoided  this  error,  and  in 


218 


Chapter  11:  CITIZEN 


219 


his  article  on  Geneva,  has  clearly  distinguished 
the  four  orders  of  men  (or  even  five,  counting 
mere  foreigners)  who  dwell  in  our  town,  of 
which  two  only  compose  the  Republic. ” 

According  to  a  second  way  in  which  men 
are  divided  within  the  political  community, 
free  men  are  separated  from  slaves.  The  latter, 
though  they  may  be  native-born,  are  not 
members  of  the  political  community,  but 
merely  part  of  its  property.  A  slave,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Aristotle,  is  one  “who,  being  a  human 
being,  is  also  a  possession.”  But,  he  says  in 
another  place,  “property,  even  though  living 
beings  are  included  in  it,  is  no  part  of  a  state; 
for  a  state  is  not  a  community  of  living  beings 
only,  but  a  community  of  equals.” 

On  this  principle,  Aristotle  excludes  more 
than  the  chattel  slave  from  the  status  and  priv¬ 
ilege  of  citizenship.  “We  cannot  consider  all 
those  to  be  citizens,”  he  writes,  “who  are  neces¬ 
sary  to  the  existence  of  the  state;  for  example, 
children  are  not  citizens  equally  with  grown-up 
men.  ...  In  ancient  times,  and  among  some 
nations,”  he  continues,  “the  artisan  class  were 
slaves  or  foreigners,  and  therefore  the  majority 
of  them  are  so  now.  The  best  form  of  state  will 
not  admit  them  to  citizenship.” 

The  “slaves  who  minister  to  the  wants  of 
individuals,”  and  the  “mechanics  or  laborers 
who  are  the  servants  of  the  community”  are 
to  be  counted  as  its  “necessary  people”  but  not 
as  members  of  the  state.  When  he  discusses  the 
size  and  character  of  the  population  for  an  ideal 
state,  Aristotle  says,  “we  ought  not  to  include 
everybody,  for  there  must  always  be  in  cities  a 
multitude  of  slaves  and  sojourners  and  foreign¬ 
ers;  but  we  should  include  only  those  who  are 
members  of  the  state,  and  who  form  an  essential 
part  of  it.” 

The  exclusion  of  slaves  and  resident  aliens 
from  membership  in  the  political  community 
has  a  profound  bearing  on  the  meaning  of  the 
political  concept  expressed  by  the  words  “the 
people.”  The  people  is  not  the  same  as  the  pop¬ 
ulation — all  those  human  beings  who  live  with¬ 
in  the  state’s  borders.  Even  in  societies  which 
have  abolished  chattel  slavery  and  in  which 
suffrage  tends  to  be  unrestricted,  infants  and 
aliens  remain  outside  the  pale  of  political  life. 
The  people  is  always  a  part — the  active  polit¬ 
ical  part— of  the  population. 


The  distinction  of  citizen  from  slave,  infant, 
or  alien  does  not  complete  the  picture.  The 
subjects  of  a  king  are  not  slaves,  nor  are  they 
citizens  of  a  republic.  Yet  like  citizens,  subjects 
have  membership  in  the  political  community. 
They  constitute  the  people  the  king  serves  as 
well  as  rules,  unless  he  is  a  tyrant,  for  only  if  he 
is  a  tyrant  does  he  treat  them  as  if  they  were 
his  property,  to  be  used  for  his  own  pleasure  or 
interest.  Sometimes  a  distinction  is  made  be¬ 
tween  first-  and  second-class  citizens,  and  then 
the  latter,  who  occupy  an  intermediate  position 
between  citizenship  and  slavery,  are  regarded 
as  subjects.  “Since  there  are  many  forms  of 
government,”  Aristotle  writes,  “there  must  be 
many  varieties  of  citizens,  and  especially  of  cit¬ 
izens  who  are  subjects;  so  that  under  some  gov¬ 
ernments  the  mechanic  and  the  laborer  will  be 
citizens,  but  not  in  others.”  The  whole  meaning 
of  citizenship  changes  for  Aristotle  when  the 
working  classes  are  admitted  to  it. 

From  a  somewhat  different  point  of  view, 
Aquinas  holds  that  a  man  can  be  “said  to  be  a 
citizen  in  two  ways:  first,  absolutely;  secondly, 
in  a  restricted  sense.  A  man  is  a  citizen  abso¬ 
lutely  if  he  has  all  the  rights  of  citizenship;  for 
instance,  the  right  of  debating  or  voting  in  the 
popular  assembly.  On  the  other  hand,  any  man 
may  be  called  citizen  only  in  a  restricted  sense 
if  he  dwells  within  the  state,  even  lowly  people, 
or  children,  or  old  men,  who  are  not  fit  to  enjoy 
power  in  matters  pertaining  to  the  common 
welfare.”  Those  who  are  thus  disfranchised,  but 
are  not  slaves,  are  subjects  rather  than  citizens 
in  the  full  sense. 

It  is  possible,  of  course,  for  men  to  have  the 
dual  status  of  subject  and  citizen,  as  is  the  case 
now  in  England  and  the  self-governing  domin¬ 
ions  of  the  British  commonwealth.  This  double 
status  does  not  blur  the  distinction  between  cit¬ 
izen  and  subject;  rather  it  signifies  the  mixed 
nature  of  a  form  of  government  which  is  both 
royal — at  least  in  its  vestiges  of  monarchy — and 
constitutional.  In  the  time  of  Locke,  when  a 
great  constitutional  victory  had  been  won 
against  the  despotism  of  the  last  Stuart,  the 
English  people  did  not  yet  regard  themselves 
as  citizens.  Observing  that  the  title  of  citizen 
has  never  been  given  “to  the  subjects  of  any 
prince,  not  even  the  ancient  Macedonians,” 
Rousseau  finds  himself  compelled  to  add:  “not 


220 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


even  the  English  of  today,  though  they  are 
nearer  liberty  than  anyone  else.” 

Unlike  citizens,  the  subjects  of  a  king,  espe¬ 
cially  of  one  claiming  absolute  power,  have  no 
voice  in  their  own  government,  and  no  legal 
means  for  protecting  their  natural  rights  as 
men.  So  long  as  the  absolute  ruler  does  not 
tyrannize,  he  governs  for  the  welfare  of  his 
people;  and  so,  though  a  despot  in  the  sense  of 
wielding  absolute  power  over  political  inferiors, 
he  is  benevolent  in  the  sense  of  serving  rather 
than  using  them.  But  if  he  ceases  to  be  benevo¬ 
lent  and  turns  tyrannical,  his  subjects  have  no 
recourse  except  rebellion.  They  must  resort  to 
violence  in  order  to  emancipate  themselves 
from  a  condition  which  amounts  to  slavery. 

A  citizen,  on  the  other  hand,  is  safeguarded 
in  his  legal  as  well  as  in  his  natural  rights  and, 
in  some  modern  republics  at  least,  he  is  pro¬ 
vided  with  juridical  means  for  rectifying  sup¬ 
posed  injustices.  For  citizens,  the  right  of  re¬ 
bellion  is  the  last,  not  the  only ,  resort. 

The  distinct  conditions  of  slavery,  subjec¬ 
tion,  and  citizenship  can  be  summarized  by  de¬ 
fining  three  ways  in  which  rulers  are  related  to 
the  persons  they  rule.  These  three  relations 
seem  to  have  been  first  clearly  differentiated  by 
Aristotle. 

He  finds  all  three  relationships  in  the  struc¬ 
ture  of  the  household,  as  that  is  constituted  in 
antiquity.  Of  household  management,  he  writes, 
“there  are  three  parts — one  is  the  rule  of  a 
master  over  slaves  .  .  .  another  ot  a  father,  and 
a  third  of  a  husband.”  In  each  case,  “the  kind  of 
rule  differs:  the  freeman  rules  over  the  slave 
after  another  manner  from  that  in  which  the 
male  rules  over  the  female,  or  the  man  over  the 
child.” 

As  we  have  already  seen,  Aristotle  conceives 
the  slave  as  a  piece  of  property.  When  he  says 
that  the  slave  “wholly  belongs  to  his  master” 
or  that  “he  is  a  part  of  his  master,  a  living  but 
separated  part  of  his  bodily  frame,”  he  is  ob¬ 
viously  considering  only  the  chattel  slave. 
There  are,  as  the  chapter  on  Slavery  indicates, 
other  kinds  or  degrees  of  slavery  less  extreme 
than  this. 

But  chattel  slavery,  more  clearly  than  the 
attenuated  forms  of  servitude,  defines  the  na¬ 
ture  of  mastery.  The  master  manages  or  uses 


the  slave  as  he  manages  and  uses  other  instru¬ 
ments — inanimate  tools  or  domesticated  ani¬ 
mals.  “The  rule  of  a  master,”  Aristotle  declares, 
is  “exercised  primarily  with  a  view  to  the  in¬ 
terest  of  the  master.”  Yet  it  “accidentally  con¬ 
siders  the  slave,  since,  if  the  slave  perish,  the 
rule  of  the  master  perishes  with  him.” 

Thus  conceived,  the  slave  lacks  every  vestige 
of  political  liberty.  He  is  treated  as  radically 
inferior  to  his  master — almost  as  if  he  were 
something  less  than  a  man.  He  has  no  voice  in 
his  own  government,  nor  is  his  welfare  the  para¬ 
mount  consideration  of  his  ruler.  In  short,  we 
have  slavery  when  one  man  governs  another  in 
the  way  in  which  a  man  manages  his  property, 
using  it  for  his  own  good. 

When  one  man  governs  another  in  the  way 
in  which  good  parents  administer  the  affairs  of 
children  as  members  of  the  household,  we  have 
the  type  of  rule  which  also  appears  in  the  rela¬ 
tion  between  absolute  kings  or  benevolent  des¬ 
pots  and  their  subjects.  “The  rule  of  a  father 
over  his  children  is  royal,”  Aristotle  writes,  “for 
he  rules  by  virtue  of  both  love  and  of  the  re¬ 
spect  due  to  age,  exercising  a  kind  of  royal 
power.  ...  A  king,”  Aristotle  adds,  “is  the  nat¬ 
ural  superior  of  his  subjects,  but  he  should  be 
of  the  same  kin  or  kind  with  them,  and  such  is 
the  relation  of  elder  and  younger,  father  and 
son.” 

From  the  analogous  type  of  rule  in  the  fam¬ 
ily,  we  see  two  differences  between  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  a  slave  and  that  of  a  subject  under  abso¬ 
lute  or  despotic  rule  in  the  state.  The  inferiority 
of  children,  unlike  that  of  slaves,  is  not  their 
permanent  condition.  It  is  an  aspect  of  their 
immaturity.  They  are  temporarily  incapable 
of  judging  what  is  for  their  good,  and  so  need 
the  direction  of  their  superiors  in  age,  ex¬ 
perience,  and  prudence.  But  children  have 
some  equality  with  their  parents,  to  the  ex¬ 
tent  that  their  humanity  is  recognized  as  the 
reason  why  they  should  not  be  ruled  as  slaves, 
but  governed  for  their  own  welfare. 

The  government  of  children,  Aristotle  de¬ 
clares,  “is  exercised  in  the  first  instance  for  the 
good  of  the  governed,  or  for  the  common  good 
of  both  parties,  but  essentially  for  the  good  of 
the  governed.”  In  the  same  way,  the  subjects  of 
a  benevolent  despot,  or  of  any  absolute  mon¬ 
arch  who  rules  paternalistically,  are  said  to  be 


Chapter  11:  CITIZEN 


221 


governed  for  their  own  good.  They  are  served, 
not  used,  by  their  rulers;  and  to  this  extent 
they  have  a  degree  of  political  liberty.  But  they 
do  not  have  the  complete  liberty  which  exists 
only  with  self-government. 

That  occurs  only  under  constitutional  rule, 
which  for  Aristotle  has  an  imperfect  analogue 
in  the  family  in  the  relation  of  husband  and 
wife.  In  the  state,  however,  it  is  perfectly  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  relation  between  the  holders  of 
public  office  and  other  citizens.  “In  the  consti¬ 
tutional  state,”  Aristotle  says,  “the  citizens  rule 
and  are  ruled  by  turns;  for  the  idea  of  a  consti¬ 
tutional  state  implies  that  the  natures  of  the 
citizens  are  equal,  and  do  not  differ  at  all.”  The 
citizen,  in  other  words,  is  one  “who  has  the 
power  to  take  part  in  the  deliberative  or  judi¬ 
cial  administration  of  the  state.”  Rousseau 
seems  to  have  a  similar  conception  of  the  citi¬ 
zen  as  both  ruling  and  ruled,  though  he  uses 
the  word  “subject”  to  designate  the  citizen  as 
ruled.  “The  people,”  he  writes,  “are  called 
citizens ,  as  sharing  in  the  sovereign  power,  and 
subjects ,  as  being  under  the  laws  of  the  State.” 

Because  the  man  who  holds  office  in  a  con¬ 
stitutional  government  is  first  of  all  a  citizen 
himself,  and  only  secondly  an  official  vested 
with  the  authority  of  a  political  office,  the  citi¬ 
zen  is  a  man  ruled  by  his  equals  and  ruled  as  an 
equal.  Observing  these  facts,  Aristotle  describes 
citizenship  as  the  one  “ indefinite  office”  set  up 
by  a  constitution.  It  is  indefinite  both  in  tenure 
and  by  comparison  with  the  various  magistra¬ 
cies  or  other  offices  which  have  more  definitely 
assigned  functions.  Since  a  citizen  is  ruled  only 
by  other  citizens,  and  since  he  has  the  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  ruling  others  in  turn,  citizenship  in¬ 
volves  political  liberty  in  the  fullest  sense.  This 
does  not  mean  freedom  from  government,  but 
freedom  through  self-government — all  the  free¬ 
dom  a  man  can  have  in  society,  liberty  under 
law  and  proportioned  to  justice. 

Two  of  these  three  political  conditions — 
slavery  and  subjection — naturally  receive  fuller 
treatment  in  the  chapter  on  Slavery.  The 
discussion  of  the  third,  citizenship,  belongs  not 
only  to  this  chapter,  but  also  to  the  chapter 
on  Constitution,  and  to  other  chapters  which 
deal  with  forms  of  constitutional  government, 
such  as  Aristocracy,  Democracy,  and  Oli¬ 
garchy. 


For  the  same  reason  that  the  revolutionists 
against  absolutism  or  despotism  in  the  1 8th  cen¬ 
tury  use  the  phrase  “free  government”  for  re¬ 
publican  institutions,  they  also  use  “citizen”  to 
designate  a  free  man,  a  man  who  possesses  the 
political  liberty  and  equality  which  they  re¬ 
gard  as  the  natural  right  of  men  because  they 
are  men.  In  this  respect  they  do  not  differ 
substantially  from  their  Greek  or  Roman  an¬ 
cestors  who  prize  constitutional  government 
and  citizenship  as  conditions  of  freedom  and 
equality. 

Furthermore,  like  the  constitutionalists  of 
antiquity,  the  republicans  of  the  i8th  century 
are,  with  few  if  any  exceptions,  not  democrats 
in  the  sense  of  extending  the  rights  and  privi¬ 
leges  of  citizenship  to  all  adults.  In  the  1 8th 
century  slavery  still  exists;  and  a  large  part  even 
of  those  who  are  not  in  economic  bondage  re¬ 
mains  outside  the  pale  of  citizenship,  disqual¬ 
ified  by  accidents  of  birth  such  as  race  or  sex, 
and  by  the  lack  of  sufficient  wealth  or  property 
which  makes  it  necessary  for  them  to  labor  in 
order  to  live.  It  is  not  only  an  ancient  oligarch 
like  Aristotle  who  thinks  that  “the  ruling  class 
should  be  the  owners  of  property,  for  they  are 
citizens,  and  the  citizens  of  a  state  should  be  in 
good  circumstances;  whereas  mechanics”  should 
have  “no  share  in  the  state.”  In  the  1 8th  cen¬ 
tury,  as  well  as  in  ancient  Greece,  extending  the 
privileges  of  citizenship  to  indentured  appren¬ 
tices,  day  laborers,  or  journeymen,  is  a  form  of 
radicalism  known  as  “extreme  democracy.” 

Kant  may  be  taken  as  representative  of  an 
enlightened  point  of  view  in  the  1 8th  century. 
He  finds  that  there  are  “three  juridical  attri¬ 
butes”  that  belong  by  right  to  the  citizens: 
“i.  constitutional  freedom,  as  the  right  of 
every  citizen  to  have  to  obey  no  other  law  than 
that  to  which  he  has  given  his  consent  or  ap¬ 
proval;  2.  civil  equality,  as  the  right  of  the 
citizen  to  recognize  no  one  as  a  superior  among 
the  people  in  relation  to  himself  .  .  .  and  3. 
political  independence,  as  the  right  to  owe  his 
existence  and  continuance  in  society  not  to  the 
arbitrary  will  of  another,  but  to  his  own  rights 
and  powers  as  a  member  of  the  commonwealth.” 

The  last  attribute  leads  Kant  to  distinguish 
between  “active  and  passive  citizenship.”  Al¬ 
though  he  admits  that  this  “appears  to  stand  in 
contradiction  to  the  definition  of  a  citizen  as 


222 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


such,”  he  concludes  that  there  are  some  in  the 
community  not  entitled  to  the  full  privileges 
of  citizenship.  It  is  his  contention,  widely  shared 
in  the  1 8th  century,  that  suffrage,  which  “prop¬ 
erly  constitutes  the  political  qualification  of  a 
citizen,”  presupposes  the  “independence  or 
self-sufficiency  of  the  individual  citizen  among 
the  people.” 

Consequently  he  denies  suffrage  to  “every¬ 
one  who  is  compelled  to  maintain  himself  not 
according  to  his  own  industry,  but  as  it  is  ar¬ 
ranged  by  others.”  Such  a  restriction,  he  says, 
includes  “the  apprentice  of  a  merchant  or 
tradesman,  a  servant  who  is  not  in  the  employ 
of  the  state,  a  minor”  and  “all  women.”  They 
are  “passive  parts”  of  the  state  and  do  not  have 
“the  right  to  deal  with  the  state  as  active  mem¬ 
bers  of  it,  to  reorganize  it,  or  to  take  action  by 
way  of  introducing  certain  laws.”  Kant  insists, 
however,  that  “it  must  be  made  possible  for 
them  to  raise  themselves  from  this  passive  con¬ 
dition  in  the  State,  to  the  condition  of  active 
citizenship.” 

The  foregoing  discussion  shows  the  connec¬ 
tion  between  the  idea  of  citizenship  and  the  two 
revolutionary  movements  which  John  Stuart 
Mill  notes  in  the  history  of  political  thought 
and  action.  The  first  is  the  movement  to  obtain 
“recognition  of  certain  immunities,  called  po¬ 
litical  liberties  or  rights,  which  it  was  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  breach  of  duty  in  the  ruler  to  in¬ 
fringe,  and  which  if  he  did  infringe,  specific 
resistance,  or  general  rebellion,  was  held  to  be 
justifiable.”  This  is  the  revolutionary  effort  to 
overthrow  despotism  and  to  establish  constitu¬ 
tional  government,  with  the  status  of  citizen¬ 
ship  for  at  least  some  part  of  the  population — 
frequently  much  less  than  half  of  the  total. 

The  second  revolutionary  movement  goes 
further.  It  presupposes  the  existence  of  govern¬ 
ment  by  law  and  aims  to  perfect  it.  It  therefore 
seeks  to  obtain  “the  establishment  of  constitu¬ 
tional  checks,  by  which  the  consent  of  the  com¬ 
munity,  or  of  a  body  of  some  sort,  supposed  to 
represent  its  interests,  is  made  a  necessary  con¬ 
dition  to  some  of  the  more  important  acts  of  the 
governing  power.”  Since,  according  to  Mill,  it 
aims  to  make  the  consent  of  the  governed  ef¬ 
fective  through  an  adequate  representation  of 
their  wishes,  this  movement  inevitably  leads  to 


the  fight  against  franchise  restrictions  and  for 
universal  suffrage,  which  would  admit  every 
normal,  adult  human  being  to  the  freedom  and 
equality  of  citizenship. 

The  first  revolution  has  a  long  history.  It  be¬ 
gins  with  the  Greek  city-states  which,  having 
won  this  victory  against  the  Persians,  lost  it  to 
the  Macedonian  conquerors.  It  happens  again 
with  the  establishment  of  the  Roman  republic 
after  the  expulsion  of  the  Tarquins,  and  again  it 
is  undone  when  the  Caesars  assume  absolute 
power.  This  part  of  the  story  is  told  with  vary¬ 
ing  emotions  by  Plutarch  and  Polybius,  Tacitus 
and  Gibbon.  During  the  Middle  Ages  the  same 
struggle  appears  in  the  various  efforts  to  estab¬ 
lish  the  supremacy  of  law,  particularly  through 
the  development  of  customary  and  canon  law. 
The  revolution  still  continues  in  the  17th  and 
1 8th  centuries  and  the  new  heights  it  reaches 
are  reflected  in  the  writings  of  a  constitution¬ 
alist  like  Locke  and  republicans  like  Rousseau, 
Kant,  and  the  American  Federalists.  The  Dec¬ 
laration  of  Independence  and  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States  are  perhaps  the  classic 
documents  of  this  historical  phase. 

The  second  revolution,  particularly  as  iden¬ 
tified  with  the  fight  for  universal  suffrage,  is  a 
relatively  recent  event.  Its  roots  may  go  back 
as  far  as  Cromwell’s  time  to  the  activity  of  the 
Levellers,  and  in  the  1 8th  century  to  the  writ¬ 
ings  of  John  Cartwright.  But  what  is,  perhaps, 
its  first  full  expression  does  not  appear  until 
Mill’s  Representative  Government.  In  that  book, 
Mill  lays  down  the  principles  of  the  franchise 
reforms  which  began  in  the  19th  century,  but 
which,  as  in  the  case  of  woman  suffrage  or  the 
repeal  of  the  poll  tax,  were  carried  through  only 
yesterday  or  are  still  in  progress. 

Yet  the  struggle  for  universal  suffrage — or, 
as  Mill  would  say,  against  treating  any  human 
being  as  a  “political  pariah” — does  have  an  an¬ 
cient  parallel  in  the  conflict  between  demo¬ 
cratic  and  oligarchical  constitutions  in  Greek 
political  life  and  thought.  These  two  types  of 
constitution  were  opposed  on  the  qualifications 
for  citizenship  and  public  office.  The  oligarchi¬ 
cal  constitution  restricted  both  to  men  of  con¬ 
siderable  wealth.  At  the  other  extreme,  as  Aris¬ 
totle  observes,  the  most  radical  forms  of  Greek 
democracy  granted  citizenship  to  the  working 
classes,  and  gave  no  advantage  to  the  rich  in 


Chapter  1 1 :  CITIZEN 


223 


filling  the  magistracies,  for  they  selected  offi¬ 
cials  from  the  whole  citizenry  by  lot. 

The  parallelism  goes  no  further  than  that. 
Greek  democracy,  even  when  it  denied  special 
privileges  to  the  propertied  classes,  never  con¬ 
templated  the  abolition  of  slavery  or  the  polit¬ 
ical  emancipation  of  women. 

There  are  other  differences  between  ancient 
and  modern  institutions  which  affect  the  char¬ 
acter  of  citizenship.  The  problem  of  who  shall 
be  admitted  to  citizenship  is  fundamental  in 
both  epochs.  Insofar  as  it  connotes  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  political  liberty  and  equality,  the  status 
of  citizenship  remains  essentially  the  same.  But 
the  rights  and  duties,  the  privileges  and  im¬ 
munities,  which  belong  to  citizenship  vary  with 
the  difference  between  ancient  and  modem 
constitutionalism. 

Even  if  they  had  been  written ,  the  consti¬ 
tutions  of  the  ancient  world  would  not  have 
declared  the  rights  of  man  and  the  citizen, 
nor  would  they  have  had  bills  of  rights  ap¬ 
pended  to  them.  The  significance  of  these 
modern  innovations  (which  begin,  perhaps,  with 
Magna  Carta)  lies,  not  in  a  new  conception 
of  citizenship,  but  in  the  invention  of  juridical 
means  to  endow  the  primary  office  of  citizen¬ 
ship  with  sufficient  legal  power  to  protect  it 
from  invasion  by  government. 

In  The  Federalist ,  Hamilton  maintains  that 
“bills  of  rights  are,  in  their  origin,  stipulations 
between  kings  and  their  subjects,  abridgments 
of  prerogative  in  favour  of  privilege,  reserva¬ 
tions  of  rights  not  surrendered  to  the  prince.” 
Defending  the  absence  of  a  special  bill  of  rights 
in  the  original  Constitution,  he  insists  that  “the 
Constitution  is  itself,  in  every  rational  sense, 
and  to  every  useful  purpose,  a  bill  of  rights.” 
It  declares  and  specifies  “the  political  privileges 
of  the  citizens  in  the  structure  and  adminis¬ 
tration  of  the  government,”  and  “defines  cer¬ 
tain  immunities  and  modes  of  proceeding, 
which  are  relative  to  personal  and  private 
concerns.” 

Nevertheless,  the  right  of  free  speech  and 
free  assembly  and  the  right  to  trial  by  a  jury 
of  peers,  along  with  the  immunity  from  un¬ 
warranted  searches  and  seizures  or  from  ex  post 
facto  laws  and  bills  of  attainder,  provided  by 
the  early  amendments  to  the  Constitution,  do 


give  the  citizen  additional  protection  against 
interference  in  the  performance  of  his  civic 
duties,  such  as  independent  political  thought 
and  action,  or  in  the  exercise  of  his  human 
privileges,  such  as  freedom  of  religious  worship. 
The  invention  of  these  constitutional  devices 
sprang  from  the  bitter  experience  of  coercion 
and  intimidation  under  Star  Chamber  proceed¬ 
ings,  royal  censorship,  and  unlimited  police 
power.  A  citizen  who  can  be  coerced  or  intim¬ 
idated  by  his  government  differs  only  in  name 
from  the  subject  of  an  absolute  despot. 

In  addition  to  having  these  legal  safeguards, 
modern  differs  from  ancient  citizenship  in  the 
way  in  which  its  rights  and  privileges  are  exer¬ 
cised.  The  machinery  of  suffrage  is  not  the  same 
when  citizens  act  through  elected  representa¬ 
tives  and  when  they  participate  directly  in  the 
deliberations  and  decisions  of  government,  by 
voting  in  the  public  forum. 

The  problem  of  education  for  citizenship  is 
in  some  respects  stated  in  almost  identical  terms 
by  such  different  political  philosophers  as  Plato 
and  John  Stuart  Mill. 

In  both  the  Republic  and  the  Laws ,  Plato 
emphasizes  that  “education  is  the  constraining 
and  directing  of  youth  towards  that  right  reason 
which  the  law  affirms.”  By  this  he  means  not 
only  that  education  will  affect  the  laws,  but 
also  that  the  laws  themselves  have  an  educa¬ 
tional  task  to  perform.  The  educational  pro¬ 
gram  is  thus  planned  and  conducted  by  the 
state.  The  guardians — the  only  citizens  in  the 
Republic  in  the  full  sense  of  the  term — are 
trained  for  public  life,  first  by  the  discipline  of 
their  passions,  and  second  by  the  cultivation  of 
their  minds.  Their  passions  are  disciplined  by 
music  and  gymnastics,  their  minds  cultivated 
by  the  liberal  arts  and  dialectic. 

In  the  democracy  which  Mill  contemplates  as 
an  ideal,  “the  most  important  point  of  excel¬ 
lence  ...  is  to  promote  the  virtue  and  intelli¬ 
gence  of  the  people  themselves.”  He  does  not 
outline  a  specific  curriculum  for  the  training  of 
citizens,  but  it  is  clear  that  he  thinks  their  edu¬ 
cation  cannot  be  accomplished  in  the  schools 
alone.  The  superiority  of  democracy,  according 
to  Mill,  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  calls  upon  the 
citizen  “to  weigh  interests  not  his  own;  to  be 
guided,  in  case  of  conflicting  claims,  by  another 


224 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


rule  than  his  private  partialities;  to  apply  at 
every  turn,  principles  and  maxims  which  have 
for  their  reason  of  existence  the  common  good; 
and  he  usually  finds  associated  with  him  in  the 
same  work  minds  more  familiarized  than  his 
own  with  these  ideas  and  operations,  whose 
study  it  will  be  to  supply  reasons  to  his  under¬ 
standing,  and  stimulation  to  his  feeling  for  the 
general  interest.”  In  this  “school  of  public 
spirit”  a  man  becomes  a  citizen  by  doing  the 
work  of  a  citizen  and  so  learning  to  act  like  one. 

If  the  future  citizen  is  to  act  like  a  free  man, 
must  he  not  also  be  trained  in  youth  to  think 
like  one?  Vocational  training  prepares  a  man 
to  be  an  artisan,  not  a  citizen.  Only  liberal 
education  is  adequate  to  the  task  of  creating 
the  free  and  critical  intelligence  required  for 
citizenship.  Hence  in  a  state  which  rests  on 
universal  suffrage,  the  educational  problem  be¬ 
comes  greatly  enlarged  in  scope,  if  not  in 
intrinsic  difficulty. 

With  the  advent  of  universal  suffrage,  which 
Mill  advocates,  the  state  must  face  the  re¬ 
sponsibility  for  making  liberal  education  avail¬ 
able  to  every  future  citizen.  To  say  that  all 
normal  children  have  enough  intelligence  to 
become  citizens,  but  to  regard  the  native  en¬ 
dowment  of  a  large  number  of  them  as  in¬ 
capable  of  liberal  education,  makes  a  travesty 
of  citizenship.  Will  the  child  who  cannot  profit 
by  liberal  education  be  able  to  discharge  the 
duties  of  the  office  to  which  he  will  be  ad¬ 
mitted  upon  coming  of  age? 

The  training  of  character  is  always  more  dif¬ 
ficult  than  the  training  of  mind.  In  education 
for  citizenship,  the  problem  of  moral  training 
involves  the  question — discussed  in  the  chapter 
on  Virtue — whether  the  good  man  and  the 
good  citizen  are  identical  in  virtue. 

For  Aristotle,  and  seemingly  also  for  Mill, 
the  virtue  of  the  good  man  under  an  ideal  con¬ 
stitution  would  be  identical  with  that  of  the 
good  citizen.  As  both  ruling  and  being  ruled, 
“the  good  citizen  ought  to  be  capable  of  both,” 
Aristotle  writes.  “He  should  know  how  to  gov¬ 
ern  like  a  freeman,  and  how  to  obey  like  a  free¬ 
man — these  are  the  virtues  of  a  citizen.  And  al¬ 
though  the  temperance  and  justice  of  a  ruler 
are  distinct  from  those  of  a  subject,  the  virtue 
of  a  good  man  will  include  both;  for  the  virtue 


of  the  good  man  who  is  free  and  also  a  subject, 
e.g.  his  justice,  will  not  be  one  but  will  comprise 
distinct  kinds,  the  one  qualifying  him  to  rule, 
the  other  to  obey.” 

The  virtues  of  the  citizen  direct  him  pri¬ 
marily  in  the  performance  of  his  obligations  to 
the  state.  But  if  the  welfare  of  the  state  is  not 
the  ultimate  end  of  man,  if  there  are  higher 
goods  which  command  human  loyalty,  if  man's 
common  humanity  takes  precedence  over  his 
membership  in  a  particular  state,  then  civic 
virtue  does  not  exhaust  human  excellence.  More 
may  be  morally  required  of  the  good  man  than 
of  the  good  citizen.  The  virtues  of  the  saint  and 
the  patriot  may  be  of  a  different  order. 

On  this  question,  the  great  books  reveal  a 
fundamental  disagreement  among  moralists  and 
political  philosophers,  who  differ  as  Plato  and 
Hegel  differ  from  Augustine  and  Aquinas,  or 
from  Locke  and  Mill,  on  the  place  of  the  state 
in  human  life. 

The  ancients  frequently  appeal  to  a  law  high¬ 
er  than  that  of  the  state.  Socrates  forever  stands 
as  the  classic  example  of  one  who  would  rather 
die  than  disobey  his  inner  voice — the  command 
of  his  conscience.  A  Stoic  like  Marcus  Aurelius 
is  willing  to  give  unqualified  allegiance  to  the 
political  community  only  when  it  is  the  ideal 
city  of  man,  embracing  the  whole  human  broth¬ 
erhood.  “My  city  and  my  country,  so  far  as  I 
am  Antoninus,”  he  says,  “is  Rome,  but  so  far  as 
I  am  a  man” — whose  “nature  is  rational  and 
social” — “it  is  the  world.” 

For  Christian  theologians,  membership  in  the 
city  of  God  is  a  higher  vocation  than  citizen¬ 
ship  in  any  earthly  community — even  when 
that  is  the  city  of  man  at  its  best.  The  city  of 
God  demands  a  higher  order  of  virtue  than  the 
city  of  man.  Referring  to  the  earthly  city,  Au¬ 
gustine  says  that  “the  things  which  this  city  de¬ 
sires  cannot  justly  be  said  to  be  evil,  for  it  is  it¬ 
self,  in  its  own  kind,  better  than  all  other  human 
goods.  For  it  desires  earthly  peace  for  the  sake 
of  enjoying  earthly  goods.”  It  is  all  right  for 
men  to  seek  “these  things”  for  they  “are  good 
things,  and  without  doubt  the  gifts  of  God.” 
But,  Augustine  goes  on  to  say,  “if  they  neglect 
the  better  things  of  the  heavenly  city,  which 
are  secured  by  eternal  victory  and  peace  never- 
ending,  and  so  inordinately  covet  these  present 
good  things  that  they  believe  them  to  be  the 


Chapter  1 1 :  CITIZEN 


225 


only  desirable  things,**  then,  in  Augustine’s 
opinion,  they  are  misdirected  in  their  love. 

In  giving  precedence  to  the  commandments 
of  God,  the  theologians  do  not  deprecate  the 
commands  of  the  state  or  the  obligations  of 
citizenship.  But  those  who  belong  to  both  cities 
may  find  themselves  laced  with  a  conflict  be¬ 
tween  the  law  of  the  state  and  the  divine  law. 
In  such  circumstances,  the  faithful  have  no 
choice.  They  must  obey  God  before  man. 
“Laws  that  are  contrary  to  the  commandments 
of  God,*’  Aquinas  holds,  do  not  “bind  a  man 
in  conscience”  and  “should  not  be  obeyed.” 

This  conflict  between  human  and  divine  law 
finds  expression  in  antiquity  in  the  Antigone  of 
Sophocles.  “It  was  not  Zeus  who  had  pub¬ 
lished  me  that  edict, ”  Antigone  says  of  the 
human  law  she  disobeys;  “nor  deemed  I  that 
the  decrees  were  of  such  force,  that  a  mortal 
could  override  the  unwritten  and  unfailing 
statutes  of  heaven.  For  their  life  is  not  of 
to-day  or  yesterday,  but  from  all  time,  and 
no  man  knows  when  they  were  first  put  forth.” 

The  problem  which  Antigone  faces  can  occur 
in  as  many  other  ways  as  there  are  possibilities 
of  tension  between  individual  conscience  or  de¬ 


sire  and  political  obligation.  Whatever  form 
this  takes,  the  conflict  confronts  the  political 
philosopher  with  all  the  questions  that  consti¬ 
tute  the  problem  of  the  individual  and  society, 
or  man  and  the  state. 

To  what  extent  and  in  what  respects  is  the 
individual’s  personality  sacred  and  inviolable 
by  the  state?  Mow  much  freedom  from  govern¬ 
ment  has  the  individual  a  right  to  demand? 
How  much  individual  sacrifice  has  the  state  a 
right  to  expect?  Is  the  state  merely  a  means  in 
the  individual’s  pursuit  of  happiness,  or  the  end 
to  which  all  other  goods  must  be  ordered?  Is 
man  made  for  the  state,  or  the  state  for  man? 

To  questions  of  this  sort,  the  answers  range 
from  philosophical  anarchism  at  one  extreme  to 
equally  philosophical  totalitarianism  at  the 
other,  with  all  degrees  of  individualism  and 
communism  in  between.  The  general  problem 
of  man  and  the  state,  with  all  its  controversial 
issues,  runs  through  many  other  chapters — such 
as  Constitution,  Good  and  Evil,  Law,  Lib¬ 
erty,  and  State — but  we  have  placed  its  prin¬ 
cipal  formulation  in  this  chapter  because  the 
concept  of  citizenship  signifies  the  ideal  con¬ 
dition  of  the  human  individual  as  a  member 
of  the  political  community. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  individual  in  relation  to  the  state  226 

2.  The  conception  of  citizenship  227 

2 a.  The  status  or  office  of  citizenship  in  relation  to  the  principle  of  constitutional 
government 

2b.  The  distinction  between  citizen  and  subject:  the  distinction  between  the  sub¬ 
jects  of  a  constitutional  monarchy  and  of  a  despotism  228 

2 c.  The  character  and  extent  of  citizenship  under  different  types  of  constitutions 

3.  The  qualifications  for  citizenship:  extent  of  suffrage 

4.  The  rights,  duties,  privileges,  and  immunities  of  citizenship 

5.  The  virtues  of  the  citizen  and  the  virtues  of  the  good  man  229 

6.  Education  for  citizenship  230 

7.  Political  citizenship  and  membership  in  the  city  of  God 

8.  The  idea  of  world  citizenship:  the  political  brotherhood  of  man 

9.  Historical  episodes  and  stages  in  the  struggle  for  citizenship 


231 


226 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions  :  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —  (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  individual  in  relation  to  the  state 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [366-401] 
5c-6a  /  Seven  Against  Thebes  [1005-1078]  38b- 
39a,  c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d  /  Ajax  [1071- 
1090}  152b;  [1226-1263]  153c-154a  /  Philoctetes 
182a-195a,c 

5  Euripides:  Heracleidae  [500-534]  252c-d  / 
Suppliants  [338-364]  261  b-c  /  Phoenician 
Maidens  [991-1020]  387a-b;  [1625-1682] 

392b-d  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d  esp 
[1255-1275]  436c,  [1368-1401]  437c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  455a-469a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6c-7a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a;  402b-404a;  bk  vi,  511c-d 

7  Plato:  Apology  200a-212a,c  /  Crito  213a- 
219a, c  esp  216d-219a,c  /  Republic ,  bk  iv, 
342a-d;  350a-d;  bk  v,  365c-d;  bk  vi,  379d- 
380c;  bk  vii,  390b-391b;  401a-b;  bk  viii 
401d-416a  esp  402b-c  /  Laws ,  bk  iii,  672d- 
676b;  bk  v,  692c-693c;  bk  vi,  707b-708a;  bk 
vii,  721d;  bk  ix,  754a-b;  bk  xi,  775d-778a; 
bk  xii,  791c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [io94b5-io] 
339c-d;  bk  v,  ch  ii  [i i38a4~ 13]  386b-c  / 
Politics ,  bk  1,  ch  2  [1253*19-39]  446c-d;  bk  ii, 
ch  1  [i26ob37-i26ia7]  455b, d;  ch  2  [1261*15- 


30]  455d-456a;  ch  5  [i264bi6-25]  459d-460a; 
bk  iii,  ch  6  [i278bi5~29]  475d-476a;  bk  vii, 
ch  1-3  527a-530a;  ch  9  [1329*22-24]  533c; 
ch  13  [1332*28-38]  537a;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1337® 
27-32]  542b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [1-61] 
15a-d;  bk  iii  [59-93]  30d-31b;  [978-1002] 
42d-43a;  bk  v  [1105-1135]  75c-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  19  125b-126c; 
bk  11,  ch  10  148c-150a;  bk  iii,  ch  22  195a- 
201a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  22  272b; 
bk  vii,  sect  5  280a-b;  bk  xi,  sect  21  305d- 
306a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [418-465]  114b-115b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  44d-45c  /  Numa  Pom - 
pilius ,  51c-52b  /  Solon ,  71b;  71d  /  Marcus 
Cato ,  284b  /  Lysander ,  361a-d  /  Cato  the 
Younger ,  626d-627b;  632b-c  /  Demosthenes , 
699c-700a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  5  513d- 
514b;  ch  17  522b-523a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  21, 
a  3  718d-719c;  a  4,  rep  3  719d-720a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
aa  2-3  206b-207c;  q  92,  a  i,  rep  3  213c-214c; 
q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d-223a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvi  [52- 
114]  77b-78a;  paradise,  viii  [115-148]  118b-c 


1  to  2  a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  73b  c;  part  ii, 
99a-b;  104a-d;  105c-d;  112b-117b;  153a  157c; 
conclusion,  279a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essaysy  7a  d;  46d;  48a  51a  pas¬ 
sim;  381a-388c;  480b  482b;  486b~489b;  490c- 
491d 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  i,  sc  i  [i8o- 
206]  35c-d  /  Henry  Vy  act  i,  sc  ii  [174-220] 
535d-536b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressiday  act  i,  sc 
iii  [78-134]  109a-c  /  Coriolanus ,  act  i,  sc  i 
[67-167]  352a-353a;  act  hi,  sc  i  369a-373b  / 
Henry  VIII ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [68-102]  553c-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  68b-73a; 
177a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71a-72c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iii,  48b-49a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a;  prop  73  446c-447a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [843-902]  358a- 
359a  /  Areopagitica ,  398a-b 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  15d  /  Civil  Government ,  ch 
ii,  sect  9  27a-b;  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d;  ch  vi, 
sect  58-63  37b-38c;  sect  72-73  40d-41a; 
ch  vii,  sect  87-CH  viii,  sect  99  44a-47c;  ch 
viii,  sect  113-CH  ix;  sect  131  51b-54d;  ch  xi 
55b-58b;  ch  xii,  sect  145  58d-59a;  ch  xiv, 
sect  163-164  63a-c;  ch  xv,  sect  171  65a-b; 
ch  xvi,  sect  190-192  69b-d;  ch  xviii,  sect 
208  73a-b;  ch  xix,  sect  243  81d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  28b-29a;  part  iii, 
112a-115b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  2d-3a; 
bk  v,  18d-19d;  31c;  bk  viii,  52a-b;  bk  xi, 
69a-c;  bk  xii,  92b-c;  bk  xxiii,  199b-200a,c; 
bk  xxvi,  221c-222a;  bk  xxvii,  229a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  323d  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy ,  368d-369c;  374a-375b;  376a-b  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  i,  389d-390c;  391b-394d;  bk  ii, 
396d-399a;  406a-c;  bk  iii,  407c-408b;  bk  iv, 
425a-427a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  58d-61b  esp 
61b;  109d-110d;  bk  ii,  140b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  91b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436c-437c;  438d-441d 
esp  439a-b 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-15I  la-b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  i,  sect  9 

[267-272]  13d;  [289-295]  14a;  article  iii, 
sect  3  [507-51 1]  16a;  article  iv,  sect  2 
16a-b;  amendments,  i-x  17a-d;  xiv,  sect  i 
18c 

43  Federalist:  number  16,  67d-68a;  number 
17,  69c;  number  27,  95c-d;  number  45, 
14  7c- 148a 

43  Mill:  Liberty  267a-323a,c  esp  271c-273d, 
302d-312a,  322d-323a,c  /  Utilitarianism ,  453a- 
454a;  460a-461c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  195c-d;  261c-d;  393a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 

142-157  55a-57d;  par  184-185  64b-d;  par  187 
65a-c ;  par  257-270  80b-89c ;  par  308 102c-103a ; 
par  323-324  107a-d;  additions,  47  124a-b; 


227 

1 1 6-1 18  13 5c- 136b;  158  142d  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  164b;  170c  172b;  186b  c; 
part  r,  211a  c;  222a-c;  25la-b;  part  ii,  271c- 
d;  part  iii,  289b  d;  302d  303c;  part  iv,  320c- 
321a;  328b-330a;  365b-c;  366c-367a 

50  Marx-Encels:  Communist  Manifesto,  419a- 
434d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  206d  207b; 
216a;  233b-234a;  bk  vi,  260a  262a;  bk  ix, 
343c-d;  bk  xi,  475b-476c;  505a-511b  esp 
509d-5l0a;  bk  xii,  537b-538a;  bk  xiii,  577b 
c;  bk  xv,  634a-635a;  epilogue  i,  668a-669c; 
670d-671c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xii, 
369a-370d 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  757b-c;  761a-c  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  780b- 781a 

2.  The  conception  of  citizenship 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  45d-46a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  cii  1-5  471b, d- 
475d;  ch  13  [i283b27~i284a3]  481d-482a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  3,  rep  2  316a-318b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  viii  [115- 
148] 118b-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-6b 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  368d-369c  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  391b-393b;  bk  iii,  407b- 
d; 420d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436c-437c  esp  436d; 
449d-450a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments, 
xiv,  sect  1  18c 

43  Federalist:  number  42,  138d-139c  passim 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  349a-350a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  47 
124a-b 

2a.  The  status  or  office  of  citizenship  in  relation 
to  the  principle  of  constitutional  govern¬ 
ment 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396c- 
397c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  12  [i259b5— 8] 
454a;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [i275a22-b2i]  472a-c;  ch  4 
[i277b7-i5]  474c-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  105, 
a  2,  ans  309d-316a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  bk  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2, 
435d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-7c; 
bk  iii,  9a-lla;  bk  v,  18b,d-25a;  bk  viii,  51a- 
52b;  bk  xi,  68b,d-75a;  bk  xii,  84b,d-85a; 
bk  xix,  142a-143c;  145c-146a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  358b-c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  1,  392a  esp  392b  [fn  1];  bk  iii,  424a-d; 
bk  iv,  425d-427a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113b- 115a  /  Science  of 
Right,  401  b-c;  436c-437c;  438d-439a  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  586a-587a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments, 
xiv,  sect  1  18c 


Chapter  1 1 :  C1T1ZF,N 


228 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  conception  of  citizenship .  2  a.  The  status 
or  office  of  citizenship  in  relation  to  the 
principle  of  constitutional  government .) 

43  Federalist:  number  52,  165a-c;  number  84, 
251a-253d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267b,d-268c  /  Representative 
Government ,  344d-350a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  272a-d 

2b.  The  distinction  between  citizen  and  subject: 
the  distinction  between  the  subjects  of  a 
constitutional  monarchy  and  of  a  despot¬ 
ism 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [338-456]  261b-262b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vii,  233a-d;  238b-c 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  viii,  733d-734a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [i252a7~i7] 
445a-b;  ch  7  [1255^6-20]  449b;  bk  iii,  ch  5 
475a-d  passim;  ch  6  [i278b3o-i279a22]  476a-c; 
ch  14  [i285ai7~29]  483b-c;  ch  15  [i286b8-i4] 
484d-485a;  ch  17  486c-487a;  bk  vii,  ch  14 
[i332bi4— 27]  537b-c 
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  106a-d 
23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  v  8a-c 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  104d-106b;  113c- 
115a;  150c-151a;  154b-c 
25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  383c-d 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  87-94 
44a-46c;  ch  xi  55b-58b;  ch  xiv,  sect  163-164 
63a-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  lla-13c; 
bk  iv,  13b,d-15c;  bk  v,  25d-26d;  bk  v-vi, 
30c-34d;  bk  vi,  36a-b;  bk  vii,  47d-48a;  bk 
xii,  93c-96a,c;  bk  xix,  142a-146a,c  passim 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  356b-d;  359a-b /Social 
Contract,  bk  i,  392a  esp  392b  [fn  1];  bk  iii, 
417c;  420d;  bk  iv,  426b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Declme  and  Fall,  14a-15c  passim; 
16c-17b;  17d;  521a-523a,c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81c-82a;  161c-162a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d-437c;  450b-d 

43  Federalist:  number  42, 138d-139c;  number 
43,  142b-c;  number  54,  171a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267b,d-268c  /  Representative 
Government,  339d-340c;  341d-344d  passim; 
348c-355b:  427a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  155 
142a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  213b; 
part  ii,  271c-d;  part  iv,  356d 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  384c-388a,c 
passim 

2c.  The  character  and  extent  of  citizenship  un¬ 
der  different  types  of  constitutions 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a;  bk  vi,  520b-c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii  ix,  401d-420d  / 
Laws,  bk  viii,  733d-734a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  ii  413b-d  pas¬ 
sim  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  1  471b,d-472c;  ch  5 
475a  d;  ch  13  [i283b44~i284a3]  482a;  bk  iv, 


2b  to  4 

ch  3  488d-489b;  ch  8-9  493c-494d;  bk  v,  ch  i 
[i3oia25-i302ai5]  502b-503b;  bk  vi,  ch  4 
[i3i9b2~32]  523a-b;  ch  6  524b-c  /  Rhetoric, 
bk  1,  ch  8  [i365b29~i366a3]  608a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  xxiia-d;  bk  ii, 
4a-7c;  bk  iii,  9a-lla;  bk  v,  18b,d-25a;  31b- 
33a, c  passim;  bk  xi,  68b,d-75a;  bk  xii,  84b, d- 
85c;  bk  xiii,  99b-100c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  271a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  223c-224a;  403b- 
404d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 
450b-d 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  51c-52d  passim; 
number  14,  60b-c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  350a;  370b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  273d- 
274a 

3.  The  qualifications  for  citizenship:  extent  of 

suffrage 

5  Aristophanes:  Frogs  [686-705]  572a-b  / 
Lysistrata  [575-580]  590c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  39b-c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii  401d-416a  /  States¬ 
man,  605d-608d  /  Laws,  bk  v,  690d-691b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i2yoA^-^] 
466c;  bk  iii,  ch  1-5  471b,d-475d;  bk  vi,  ch  4 
[i3i9b2~32]  523a-b;  ch  6  524b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  4 
[i32oa5-b25]  530a-d;  ch  9  533a-d  passim,  esp 
[1329^8-30]  533c-d  /  Athenian  Constitution, 
ch  21  562b-c;  ch  26,  par  3-4  565a;  ch  42 
572b-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8  [i365b29-i366a^] 
608a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  73d  /  Pericles ,  139c-140a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  106a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Sitmma  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  316a-318b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-6b; 
bk  xv,  114c-115b;  bk  xxiii,  189a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  428a-432b 
passim 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iii,  168d-169a; 
bk  iv,  269d-271d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  14a-d;  15c;  17a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d-437c;  450d- 
452a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  i,  sect  8 
[204-205]  13b;  amendments,  xiv,  sect  1-2 
18c-d;  XV  19b;  XIX  19d;  xxiii  20d 

43  Federalist:  number  42,  138d-139c  passim; 
number  52,  165a-c;  number  54,  171a-b; 
number  57,  177a;  178c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  380c-389b; 
395b-c 

4.  The  rights,  duties,  privileges,  and  immuni¬ 

ties  of  citizenship 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  12:48-49;  22:21;  23:9 
/  Leviticus,  19:33-34;  24:22  /  Numbers,  35:30  / 
Deuteronomy,  10:18-19;  17:6;  19:15;  20:1-9 


4  to  5 

Apocrypha:  Susanna  esp  48  —  (D)  OT,  Daniel , 
13:1-64  esp  13:48 

New  Testament:  MarJ^  12:13-17  /  Acts ,  16:16- 
39;  21:27-28:31  /  Romans ,  13:1-7  /  T/V/cc,  3:1 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [338-364]  261b  c 

5  Aristophanes:  Ecclesiazusae  615a  628d  esp 
[730-876]  623c-625b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  dk  yii,  233c  d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a;  bk  iii,  425a-427c;  432b-c;  bk  vi,  520a-d 

7  Plato:  Cn/o  213a-219a,c/  Gorgias ,  287c-292a 
/  Republic ,  bk  vni,  409b-c  /  Statesman ,  601b-c 
/  Laics,  bk  vi,  697a-705c  'passim;  viii, 
732b-735a;  bk  xii,  791c  /  Seventh  letter, 
804a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [i26ia23-b6] 
456a-b;  ch  9  [1269*33-36]  465c;  [1271*27-37] 
467c;  ch  10  [1 272ai3— 17]  468b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  1-2 
471b,d-472d;  ch  5  475a-d;  ch  12  [1282^5]- 
ch  13  [i284a2]  480c-482a;  bk  vi,  ch  2  520d- 
521b  /  Athenian  Constitution ,  cii  8,  par  5  556c; 
ch  42,  par  1  572b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  22  195a- 
201a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  44d-47a  /  Numa  Pom- 
pilius,  51c-52c  /  Solon,  71b;  71  d  /  Crassus - 
Nicias,  455d-456d  /  Gi/o  //;<?  Younger  620a- 
648a, c  passim  /  Tiberius  Gracchus ,  675b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  21b-d;  bk  xi,  106a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Sumtna  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  105 

307c-321a  passim 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  101a-104d:  113c- 
116d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  381a-388c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c  esp 
act  11,  sc  iii  [1-52]  366a-c,  [165-272]  367d- 
369a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71a-75a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica  381a-412b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  75b 

38  Montesquieu:  Sp/rtf  o/* Laics,  bk  ii,  4a-6b; 
bk  v-vi,  31b-35a;  bk  vi,  37c;  bk  viii,  51a-52c; 
54b-c;  bk  xi,  68b,d-75a;  bk  xii,  84b,d-90c; 
92b-c;  bk  xix,  142a-143c;  145c-146a,c;  bk 
XXVI,  221c-222a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  323d-324a;  324c-325b; 
358d-359a  /  Political  Economy,  369b-c;  377c-d 
/  Social  Contract,  bk  1,  387b;  392a  esp  392b 
[fn  ij;  bk  11,  396d-398b;  bk  iii,  421b-423a; 
424a-b;  bk  iv,  428a-432b  passim 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  58d-61b  esp 
61b;  bk  v,  303b-304c;  395c-396a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  4b-c;  15c;  90d-92c 
passim;  630b,d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73b;  94c-95c;  96a- 
d;  161c-d;  587a 

42  Kant:  Intro .  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  389c- 
390a, c  /  Science  of  Right,  400b,d-402a,c; 
429a-c;  434a;  436c-437c;  439a-441d;  450d- 
452a 


229 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  iv  [17-36]  5b- 
c;  vi  [87—93]  6b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect  2 
[5-16]  lib:  sect  3  [67-72]  12a;  sect  9  [267- 
272]  13d;  [289-295]  14a;  article  ii.  sect  i 
[375-382]  14d;  article  iii,  sect  3  15d  16a; 

ARTICLE  IV,  SECT  2  [5 1 9-52 1 ]  16a;  AMEND¬ 
MENTS,  i-x  17a-d;  xiii,  sect  i-xiv,  sect  2 
18c-d;  xv  19b;  xix  19d;  xxm  20d 
43  Federalist:  number  42,  138d-139c  passim; 
number  44,  144d  l45a;  number  52,  165c; 
number  54,  171a-b;  number  62,  188d  l89a; 
number  80,  236a  b;  number  84,  251a-253d 
43  Mill:  Liberty,  267b,d-268c;  271c-273d;  302d- 
303a  /  Representative  Government ,  3 48c -3  50a; 
392b-396d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  230 
75c;  par  261  83a-d;  par  291  97d-98a:  par  324- 
326  107a-108a;  additions,  14  i  139c  /  Philos¬ 
ophy  of  History,  part  ii,  273c;  part  iv,  365bc 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  lOa-b 
54  Freud:  War  and  Death ,  757b  c 

5.  The  virtues  of  the  citizen  and  the  virtues  of 
the  good  man 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  470a-487a,c  esp 
[1316-1408]  486a-487a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  v,  175b:  bk  vii, 
233a-d;  258d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i.  370a- 
c;  bk  11,  395d-399a;  402b-404a;  bk  iii,  425a- 
427c  passim;  bk  vi,  511c-d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  43b-47c  /  Meno ,  174d- 
176a  esp  175d-176a  /  Apology  200a-212a,c  / 
Crito  2 13a- 2 19a, c  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  346a-355a 
/  Statesman,  605d-608d  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  669b- 
670c;  672d-674d;  bk  v,  6S6d-691b;  bk  vi, 
706b-c;  bk  viii,  740d-741a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  cii  9  [i099b29~32] 
345b;  bk  iii,  ch  8  [  1 1 1 6a  1 5—^3 ]  362b-d;  bk  v, 
ch  1  [1 129bi2-i  130*13]  377a-c;  ch  2  [ii3ob25- 
29]  378b;  bk  vi,  ch  8  [ii4ib23-ii42an]  390d- 
391a;  bk  x,  ch  9  434a-436a,c  /  Politics,  bk  i, 
ch  13  [i259b33-i26oa2o]  454b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  4 
473c-475a;  ch  5  [i278a40-b5]  475d;  ch  9 
[i28ob3-u]  478a-b;  ch  13  [i283b44-i284H3] 
482a;  ch  15  [i286a22~5b]  484c-d;  cii  18  487a, c; 
bk  iv,  ch  7  [i293b2-7]  493a-b:  bk  vii,  cii  2 
[i324a24-b6]  528b-c;  ch  3  529b-530a;  cii  7 
531d-532c;  ch  9  [i328b33-i 329*2]  533b;  ch  13 
[1332*28-38]  537a;  cii  14  [  1 3 3 2— 1 3 3 3®  1 6] 
537d-538a;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1337*11-18]  542a  / 
Rhetoric .  bk  i,ch  9  [r366a33~ 1367^1  ]  608d-609c 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  10  148c- 
150a;  bk  iii.  ch  7  182b-184a 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
bk  iii,  sect  4-5  260b-261a;  bk  iv,  sect  4 
264a;  sect  29  266a;  p.k  v,  sect  16  271c-d; 
sect  22  272b;  bk  vi,  sect  14  274d-275a;  bk 
vii,  sect  5  280a-b;  sect  13  280c;  sect  66 
284b-c;  bk  ix,  sect  23  293c;  bk  x,  sect  6 
297a-b;  bk  xi,  sect  8  303a-b;  sect  21  305d- 
306a 


Chapter  11:  CITIZEN 


230 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  virtues  of  the  citizen  ayid  the  virtues  of 
the  good  man.) 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  45b;48b-c/  Coriolanus , 
174b,d-175a  /  Aristides ,  263d  /  Lysander , 
361a-d  /  Agesilaus ,  480b,d-481a  /  Cleomenes, 
659d-660a  /  Demosthenes ,  699c- 700a 

15  Tacitus :  Histories,  bk  i,  191c-d;  bk  iv,  267c-d 

17  Plotinus:  Fzw/  Ennead ,  tr  ii  6b-10a 

18  Augustine:  CzVy  q/"  Go*/,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b- 
162d;  bk  xix,  ch  17  522b-523a;  ch  21  524a- 
525a;  ch  24-26  528b-529a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
a  5  58b-59d;  q  92,  a  i  esp  rep  3  213c-214c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vi  [58-75]  9a; 
xi  [1-66]  15a-d;  xv  [55-78]  21d;  xvi  [64—78] 
23a-b;  xxxii  [7o]-xxxiii  [90]  48c-50c  passim; 
purgatory,  vi  [58-151]  61b-62c;  xvn  [91-123] 
79b-d;  paradise,  xx  [97HXV1  [154]  129b-132a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  conclusion,  279a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  48a-b;  381a-388c;  390c- 
391c;  480b-482b;  486b-489b;  490c-491d 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar ,  act  v,  sc  v 
[68-81]  596a, c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  74b-c;  81d- 
82a;  94b-95b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  hi,  48b-49a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ix,  prop  73  446c- 
447a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [843-870]  358a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  6  173a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  15d  /  Human  Understand¬ 
ing,  bk  1,  ch  ii,  sect  5-6  105a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  112a-115b 

38  Montesquieu:  S/wvVq/'Ltftt'.sxxiia-d;  bk  iii, 
9b-12a;  bk  iv,  13b,d-15a;  15c-16a;  bk  v,  18d- 
19d;  21b-23a;  31b-c;  bk  yti,  44d-45c;  bk  viii, 
51a-52c;  55c-d;  bk  xix,  137a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  323a-328a:  360b, d 
[fn  1];  366b-d  /  Political  Economy ,  369b-370a; 
372a-377b  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  402b-403a; 
bk  in,  411a-c;  412a-b;  bk  iv,  428a-432b 
passim;  434b-435a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  \r,  337d-338c; 
340c-343d;  346c-347d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  630b,d-631a;  644b- 
645c 

43  Federalist:  number  55,  174c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  329b-330a; 
334b;  336c-341c  passim,  esp  337a-b;  346c- 
350a  passim 

44  Boswell*:  Johnson ,  393a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  268 
84c- d  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  171b-c; 
part  ii,  272a-d;  part  iv,  365b-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  314c-316a;  321b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  244d-245d; 
bk  xii,  537b-538a;  bk  xv,  634a-635a;  epi¬ 
logue  1,  668a-669c;  epilogue  ii,  686c-687a 

6.  Education  for  citizenship 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [857-917]  266a-b 
5  Aristophanes:  Frogs  [1008-1098]  576b-577c 


6  to  7 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370a- 
c;  bk  11,  396c-397d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  43a-47c/  Crito  213a-219a,c 
/  Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-339a;  bk  iv,  344b- 
d:  bk  y\  366a-c;  bk  vi,  380d-381a  /  Statesman, 
607b-608d  /  Laws,  bk  i-ii  640a-663d  esp  bk 
1,  644b-645c;  bk  vii  713c-731d;  bk  viii,  732b- 
735a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i094a28-bn] 
339c-d;  ch  9  [ioggh2^-^2]  345b;  bk  v,  ch  2 
[ii3ob25-29]  378b;  bk  x,  ch  9  434a-436a,c  / 
Politics,  bk  11,  ch  5  [i263b36-i264ai]  459a; 
[1264^6-32]  459c;  ch  7  [i266b27~35]  462b-c; 
bk  hi,  ch  4  [i277ai4-b29]  474a-475a;  bk  iv, 
ch  9  [i294bi9~24]  494c;  bk  v,  ch  9  [1310^3- 
22]  512b-c;  bk  vii, ch  13  [i332a28-bio]  537a-b; 
ch  14  [i332b42-i334an]  537d-538d;  ch  15 
[r334b7-28]  539b-d;  ch  17  541a-542a,c;  bk 
viii  542a-548a,c  passim  /  Athenian  Constitu¬ 
tion,  ch  42  572b-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i  253a-256d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  33c-34a;  39a-45b  / 
Lycurgus-Numa  61b,d-64a,c  /  Solon  64b,  d- 
77a, c  passim  /  Agesilaus,  480b,d-481a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  viii  [115- 
148]  118b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  114b-115a;  150c- 
151a;  part  iv,  273a-c;  conclusion,  282 d- 
283a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  60c-62a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  23a;  79c- 
80a 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica  381a-412b  esp  384b- 
389a,  398a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iy’  13b, d- 
18d 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  373c-377b  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  402b-403a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  y*,  303b-305c; 
337d-343d;  347c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  6b;  669a-b 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  586a-587a 

43  Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  317d-319b;  320a-c;  322d- 
323a, c  /  Representative  Government,  336c-341d 
passim,  esp  339a-340c;  349a-350a;  381b-387d 
passim;  417c-418d;  424b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  187 
65a-c;  par  239  76d;  par  315  104c;  additions, 
98  133a;  147  140c;  166  145b-c;  183  148d- 
149a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  244d-245c 

54  Freud:  Sexual  Enlightenment  of  Children, 
122a,  c 

7.  Political  citizenship  and  membership  in  the 
city  of  God 

Old  Testament:  I  Samuel,  8:9-18 — ( D )  I  Kings , 
8:9-18  /  Jeremiah ,  29:4-7  esp  29:7— (D)  Jere- 
mias,  29:4-7  esp  29:7 

Apocrypha:  I  Maccabees,  1:41-2:70 —(D)  OT, 
I  Machabees,  1:43-2:70  /  II  Maccabees,  6:8- 
7:42 —(D)  OT,  II  Machabees,  6:8-7:42 


8/o  9 


Chapter  11:  CITIZEN 


New  Testament:  Matthew ,  22:15-22  /  Mar\, 
12:13-17  /  Lukt ?,  20:21-25  /  Romans,  13:1-10  / 
Ephesians ,  2:19-22/  7V///J,  3:1  /  Hebrews ,  13:17 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  hk  i,  ch  30  138a,c; 

bk  11,  ch  5,  143d-144a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  224b  d 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a- 
b;  sect  13  262c;  bk  iv,  sect  23  265c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b  / 
O/y  o/" God ,  bk  i,  pref  129a-d;  bk  v,  cii  15-16 
220d-221b;  bk  xi,  ch  i  322b,d-323a;  bk  xiv, 
ch  28-BK  xv,  ch  4  397a-400a;  bk  xviii,  ch 
1-2  472b-473d;  ch  47  500d-501b;  bk  xix,  ch 
ii  516d-517b;  ch  14  520a-d;  ch  17  522b-523a; 
ch  21  524a-525a;  ch  24-26  528b-529a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i— ii,  q  21, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  7l9d-720a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xiii 
[79-96]  72d;  xvi  [85-114]  77d-78a;  xix  [127- 
141]  82d-83a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  151a-c;  part  iii, 
198d-199a;  240a-246a,c;  part  iv,  275a-277d 
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [485—551]  329b- 
331a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  15d;  16c-17b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv-xxvi, 
200a-215a;  bk  xxvi,  218a-219d 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  327a-c;  358d-359a  / 
Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  401c-402a;  bk  iv,  435a- 
439c  esp  437d-438c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  193c-194a;  226a-b; 
291d-292d;  299b-300d  passim 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  444a-c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  vi  [591- 
599]  16d;  amendments,  i  [6 1 5-6 1 7]  17a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  279a-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  270 
84d-89c;  additions,  162  143b-144c  /  Philos¬ 
ophy  of  History,  intro,  205d-206a,c;  part  i, 
216b-217c;  245d-247b;  part  iii,  308b-c; 
309d-310a;  310d-311a;  part  iv,  316a-d;  321b- 
322a;  325d-326b;  331b-d;  333b-c;  336c-337d; 
345c-346c;  350b-c;  351b-354a;  365b-c 
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  28d- 
32a;  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim 

8.  The  idea  of  world  citizenship:  the  political 
brotherhood  of  man 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  9  114c-116b; 
ch  13  120b-c;  bk  11,  ch  10  148c-150a;  ch  20, 
164d-165c;  bk  iii,  ch  ii  187a-b;  ch  22,  199c- 
d;  ch  24  203c-210a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  4  260b- 
261a;  sect  ii  262a-b;  bk  iv,  sect  3-4  263b- 
264a;  bk  vi,  sect  44  278b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [254-296]  llOa-llla;  bk 
vi  [845-853]  233b-234a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  7  5l5a-c; 
ch  17,  522d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  471a-c 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  31d-32a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  355b-c  /  Political 
Economy ,  369a-b;  373c  /  Social  Contract,  bk 
iv,  437c 


231 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  452c-d;  455a  458a, c  / 
Judgement ,  586a -587a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  424c-428a 
passim,  esp  426a  b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  317c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  244d-245d; 
bk  x,  466b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
166c-167b 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  755a-761c  esp  755b- 
757c  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  785 d- 
788d 

9.  Historical  episodes  and  stages  in  the  struggle 
for  citizenship 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  104b-108d  esp 
107c-108c;  bk  iv,  152d-153b;  bk  v,  171c-175b; 
bk  vi,  193b-c;  bk  vii,  245b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iv,  468a- 
469a;  bk  vi,  520a-d;  534b-c 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iii,  672d-676b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  12  470b-471d; 
bk  iii,  ch  15  [i286b8-2i]  484d-485a;  bk  iv, 
ch  13  [i297bi6-28]  498a;  bk  v,  ch  4  [1304*18- 
38]  505d-506a  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  1-41 
553a-572a  passim,  esp  ch  41  571c-572a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [756-853]  231a-234a; 
bk  viii  [626-731]  275b-278b 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  9c-d  /  Romulus ,  21a-27c 
esp  22c  /  Poplicola,  79d-80a  /  Coriolanus 
174b,d-193a,c  esp  176b-184c  /  Tiberius 
Gracchus  671b,d-681a,c  /  Caius  Gracchus 
681b,d-689a,c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  51b-52a;  bk  xi, 
106a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar  568a-596a,c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c 

32  Milton:  New  Forcers  of  Conscience  68a- b  / 
Lord  Gen.  Cromwell  69a- b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vi,  sect  74-76 
41b-42a;  ch  vii,  sect  94  46a-c;  ch  viii,  sect 
ioo-iii  47c-51a;  ch  xiv,  sect  162-166  63a-64a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  413b  [fn  1] 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  58d-61b  esp 
61b;  bk  iii,  170c-173b;  176a-179a;  bk  iv, 
269d-271d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  14a-d;  15c;  29c-d; 
90d-92a;  521a-523a,c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  202a-d;  215c-219a; 
403b-404d  esp  404c;  452d-453a,c;  562b-564b; 
574b-582b;  586c-589a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  451d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  lla-20d 

43  Federalist:  number  14,  62b-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267b,d-268c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  263a-d; 
275b-276a;  part'iii,  288c;'295d-296c;  299c- 
300a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  415bs 
416c;  423d-425b;  431c-433d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  1,  lOa-b;  bk  vi, 
238c-243d 


232 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  considerations  of  the  issues  involved  in  the  relation  between  the  individual  and  the 
state,  see  Good  and  Evil  3d;  Happiness  3b;  Justice  10b;  State  2f,  3c,  3c,  8e. 

The  context  of  the  concept  of  citizenship  in  the  theory  of  constitutional  government  or 
government  by  law  rather  than  by  men,  ^Constitution;  Law  ya-yb;  Liberty  id,  if—  ig; 
Monarchy  ia(i);  Tyranny  5~5d. 

Other  comparisons  of  citizens  with  subjects  or  slaves,  see  Justice  9d;  Slavery  6a-6c. 

The  bearing  of  different  types  of  constitution  on  the  character  of  citizenship  and  especially 
on  the  extent  of  the  franchise,  see  Constitution  5 — 5b ;  Democracy  4~4a(2),  5b(2); 
Oligarchy  5~5a. 

The  political  machinery,  such  as  elections  and  representation,  by  which  the  citizen  exercises 
his  suffrage,  see  Constitution  9-9^  Democracy  3b— 5b(4) ;  Government  ih. 

The  consideration  of  civic  virtue  in  relation  to  virtue  generally,  see  Virtue  and  Vice  7b;  and 
for  the  problem  of  education  for  citizenship,  see  Aristocracy  5;  Democracy  6;  Educa¬ 
tion  8d;  State  yd;  Virtue  and  Vice  ya. 

Another  discussion  of  the  distinction  between  the  city  of  man  and  the  city  of  God,  see 
State  2g;  and  for  matters  relevant  to  the  ideal  of  world  citizenship,  see  Love  4c;  State  iof; 
War  and  Peace  1  id. 

Descriptions  of  the  historical  struggle  for  citizenship,  and  for  the  extension  of  the  franchise, 
see  Labor  yd;  Liberty  6b;  Slavery  6c;  Tyranny  8. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 


Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Machiavelli.  The  Discourses ,  bk  i 
Montesquieu.  Considerations  on  the  Causes  of  the 
Grandeur  and  Decadence  of  the  Romans 
J.  S.  Mill.  The  Subjection  of  Women 

II. 

Cicero.  De  Officiis  ( On  Duties ),  1 
Bodin.  The  Six  Bootes  of  a  Commonweale,  bk  i, 
ch  6-7;  bk  in,  ch  8 

Hooker.  Of  the  Laws  of  Ecclesiastical  Polity 
Pufendorf.  De  Officio  Hominiset  Civis  Juxta  Legem 
Naturalem  (Of the  Duties  of  Man  and  of  the  Citizen 
According  to  Natural  Law) 

Diderot.  Citoyen 

Mably.  Des  droits  et  devoirs  du  citoyen 
Cartwright.  Take  Your  Choice ! 

Burke.  Letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol 

- .  On  the  Reform  of  the  Representation  in  the 

House  of  Commons 


Paine.  Rights  of  Man 

Godwin.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  Political  justice , 

BK  IV,  CH  2,  SECT  I 

Tocqueville.  Democracy  in  America 
Thoreau.  Civil  Disobedience 
Fustel  de  Coulanges.  The  Ancient  City 
T.  H.  Green.  Principles  of  Political  Obligation ,  (h) 
Spencer.  The  Man  Versus  the  State 
Jellinek.  The  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man  and 
Citizens 

Bosanquet.  Science  and  Philosophy,  16 
Hobhouse.  The  Metaphysical  Theory  of  the  State 
Bryce.  The  Hindrances  to  Good  Citizenship 
- .  Modern  Democracies 

G.  Newman.  Citizenship  and  the  Survival  of  Civili¬ 
zation 

Merriam.  The  Maying  of  Citizens 
Tawney.  Equality 

Maritain.  The  Rights  of  Man  and  Natural  Law 
Ewing.  The  Individual ,  the  State  and  World 
Government 


I 


Chapter  n:  CONSTITUTION 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  idea  of  a  constitution  as  establishing 
and  organizing  a  political  community;  the 
principle  of  constitutionality  as  determining  a 
generic  form  of  government  having  many 
varieties;  and  the  nature  of  constitutional 
government — these  three  problems  are  so  inti¬ 
mately  connected  that  they  must  be  treated 
together.  We  have  used  the  word  “constitu¬ 
tion”  to  express  the  root  notion  from  which  all 
other  matters  considered  in  this  chapter  are 
derived. 

It  is  impossible  to  say  precisely  what  a  con¬ 
stitution  is  in  a  way  that  will  fit  the  political 
reality  of  the  Greek  city-states,  the  Roman  re¬ 
public  and  its  transformation  into  the  empire, 
mediaeval  kingdoms  and  communes  and  their 
gradual  metamorphosis  into  the  limited  mon¬ 
archies  and  republics  of  modern  times.  No  defi¬ 
nition  can  adequately  comprehend  all  the  vari¬ 
ations  of  meaning  to  be  found  in  the  great 
works  of  political  theory  and  history.  But  there 
are  a  number  of  related  points  in  the  various 
meanings  of  “constitution”  which  indicate 
what  is  common  to  the  understanding  of  such 
diverse  thinkers  as  Plato  and  Locke,  Aristotle 
and  Rousseau,  Kant  and  Mill,  Montesquieu 
and  Hegel,  Aquinas,  Hobbes,  and  the  American 
Federalists. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  constitution  is  the 
form  of  the  state.  This  can  be  interpreted  to 
mean  that  th*e  political,  as  opposed  to  the  do¬ 
mestic,  community  requires  a  constitution  in 
order  to  exist;  just  as  a  work  of  art  has  the  very 
principle  of  its  being  in  the  form  which  the 
artist  imposes  upon  matter.  In  the  context  of 
his  general  theory  of  political  association,  Aris¬ 
totle’s  remark  that  “the  man  who  first  founded 
the  state  was  the  greatest  of  benefactors,”  may 
imply  that  the  idea  of  a  constitution  is  the 
creative  principle  by  which  the  state  was  orig¬ 


inally  formed — or  at  least  differentiated  from 
the  tribe  and  family. 

Kant  gives  explicit  expression  to  the  notion 
that  the  invention  of  constitutions  is  coeval 
with  the  formation  of  states.  “The  act  by  which 
a  People  is  represented  as  constituting  itself  in¬ 
to  a  State,”  he  writes,  “is  termed  the  Original 
Contract”  and  this  in  turn  signifies  “the  right¬ 
fulness  of  the  process  of  organizing  the  Consti¬ 
tution.” 

In  this  sense,  the  constitution  appears  to  be 
identical  with  the  organization  of  a  state.  It 
would  then  seem  to  follow  that  every  state,  no 
matter  what  its  form  of  government,  is  consti¬ 
tutional  in  character.  But  this  would  leave  no 
basis  for  the  fundamental  distinction  between 
constitutional  and  non-constitutional — or  what 
is  usually  called  “absolute,”  “royal,”  or  “des¬ 
potic” — government. 

That  basic  distinction  among  forms  of  gov¬ 
ernment  is  as  old  as  Plato  and  Aristotle.  It  is 
first  made  by  Plato  in  the  Statesman  in  terms 
of  the  role  of  law  in  government.  It  occurs  at 
the  very  opening  of  Aristotle’s  Politics  with 
his  insistence  on  the  difference  between  the 
king  and  the  statesman,  and  between  royal  and 
political  government.  But  Locke  seems  to  go 
further  than  the  ancients  when  he  says  that 
“absolute  monarchy  ...  is  inconsistent  with 
civil  society,  and  so  can  be  no  form  of  civil 
government  at  all.” 

In  addition  to  affirming  the  gravity  of  the 
distinction  between  constitutional  and  non¬ 
constitutional  government,  he  seems  to  be 
denying  that  the  latter  can  constitute  the  form 
of  a  truly  civil  society,  as  opposed  to  a  domestic 
society  or  the  primitive  patriarchate  of  a  tribe. 
Yet  Locke  obviously  does  not  deny  the  his¬ 
toric  fact  that  there  have  been  communities, 
which  otherwise  appear  to  be  states,  that  have 
their  character  or  form  determined  bv  absolute 


233 


234 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


government.  His  point,  therefore,  seems  to  be 
that  among  types  of  government,  absolute 
monarchy  does  not  fit  the  nature  of  civil 
society. 

If  “constitution”  is  used  merely  as  a  syno¬ 
nym  for  “form”  or  “type,”  then  even  a  state 
under  absolute  monarchy  or  despotic  govern¬ 
ment  can  be  said  to  have  a  constitution.  Since 
every  state  is  of  some  type,  it  can  be  said  that 
it  has  a  certain  constitution,  or  that  it  is  con¬ 
stituted  in  a  certain  way.  If,  however,  we  use 
the  word  “constitution”  to  conform  to  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  constitutional  and  non-con¬ 
stitutional  government,  we  are  compelled  to 
say  that  there  are  states  which  do  not  have 
constitutions. 

With  this  distinction  in  mind,  the  statement 
that  “the  constitution  is  the  form  of  the  state” 
takes  on  a  different  and  more  radical  meaning. 
It  signifies  that  there  are  communities,  larger 
than  and  distinct  from  the  family  or  the  tribe, 
which  cannot  be  called  “states”  in  the  strict 
sense  because  they  do  not  have  constitutions. 
Hegel,  for  instance,  points  out  that  “it  would 
be  contrary  even  to  commonplace  ideas  to  call 
patriarchal  conditions  a  ‘constitution’  or  a 
people  under  patriarchal  government  a  ‘state’ 
or  its  independence  ‘sovereignty.’”  In  such 
conditions,  what  is  lacking,  he  writes,  is  “the 
objectivity  of  possessing  in  its  own  eyes  and  in 
the  eyes  of  others,  a  universal  and  universally 
valid  embodiment  in  laws.”  Without  such  an 
“objective  law  and  an  explicitly  established  ra¬ 
tional  constitution,  its  autonomy  is  .  .  .  not 
sovereignty.” 

From  this  it  would  appear  that  a  despotically 
governed  community,  such  as  ancient  Persia, 
is  a  political  anomaly.  It  is  intermediate  be¬ 
tween  the  family  and  the  state,  for  it  is  like  a 
state  in  its  extent  and  in  the  size  and  character 
of  its  population,  yet  it  is  not  a  state  in  its  po¬ 
litical  form.  The  truly  political  community  is 
constitutionally  organized  and  governed.  In 
this  sense,  the  English  words  “political”  and 
“constitutional”  become  almost  interchange¬ 
able,  and  we  can  understand  how  these  two 
English  words  translate  a  single  word  in  Greek 
political  discourse. 

As  the  form  of  the  state,  the  constitution  is 
the  principle  of  its  organization.  Whether  writ¬ 


ten  or  unwritten,  whether  a  product  of  custom 
or  explicit  enactment,  a  constitution,  Aristotle 
writes,  “is  the  organization  of  offices  in  a  state, 
and  determines  what  is  to  be  the  governing 
body,  and  what  is  the  end  of  each  community.” 

The  idea  of  political  office — of  officials  and 
official  status — is  inseparable  from  the  idea  of 
constitution.  That  is  why  the  concept  of  citi¬ 
zenship  is  also  inseparable  from  constitution. 
As  the  chapter  on  Citizen  indicates,  citizen¬ 
ship  is  the  primary  or  indefinite  office  set  up  by 
a  constitution.  Citizenship  is  always  the  pre¬ 
requisite  for  holding  any  other  more  definite 
office  in  a  constitutional  government,  from 
juryman  to  chief  magistrate.  In  specifying  the 
qualifications  for  citizenship,  a  constitution 
sets  the  minimum  qualifications  for  all  other 
offices  which  usually,  though  not  always,  de¬ 
mand  more  than  citizenship  of  the  man  who  is 
to  fill  them. 

A  political  office  represents  a  share  of  polit¬ 
ical  power  and  authority.  “Those  are  to  be 
called  offices,”  Aristotle  explains,  “to  which 
the  duties  are  assigned  of  deliberating  about 
certain  measures  and  of  judging  and  command¬ 
ing,  especially  the  last;  for  to  command  is  the 
especial  duty  of  a  magistrate.”  As  representing 
a  share  of  political  power  and  authority,  a 
political  office  can  be  said  to  constitute  a  share 
of  sovereignty.  That  would  not  seem  to  be  true, 
however,  for  those  who,  like  Rousseau,  main¬ 
tain  that  “sovereignty  is  indivisible.”  Yet 
Rousseau  also  admits  that  “each  magistrate  is 
almost  always  charged  with  some  governmental 
function”  and  exercises  a  “function  of  sover¬ 
eignty.” 

Since  it  is  an  arrangement  of  offices,  a  con¬ 
stitution  is,  therefore,  also  a  division  or  parti¬ 
tion  of  the  whole  sovereignty  of  government — 
or  at  least  of  the  exercise  of  sovereignty — into 
units  which  have  certain  functions  to  perform, 
and  which  must  be  given  the  requisite  power 
and  authority  to  perform  them.  These  units  are 
political  offices,  defined  according  to  their 
functions,  and  vested  with  a  certain  power  and 
authority  depending  on  their  place  and  pur¬ 
pose  within  the  whole. 

Hamilton’s  maxim  that  “every  power  ought 
to  be  in  proportion  to  its  object”  formulates 
the  equation  by  which  the  function  of  an  office, 
or  its  duties,  determines  its  rights  and  powers, 


Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION 


235 


privileges  and  immunities.  And  except  for  the 
provision  of  a  temporary  dictatorship  in  the 
early  Roman  constitution,  or  its  modern  con¬ 
stitutional  equivalent  in  emergency  grants  of 
power,  political  offices  under  constitutional 
government  always  represent  limited  amounts 
of  power  and  authority — limited  in  that  each 
is  always  only  a  part  of  the  whole. 

A  constitution  defines  and  relates  the  various 
political  offices.  It  determines  the  qualifica¬ 
tions  of  office-holders.  But  it  does  not  name  the 
individuals  who,  from  all  those  qualified,  shall 
be  selected  for  any  office.  Because  its  provisions 
have  this  sort  of  generality,  a  constitution  has 
the  character  of  law.  This  is  equally  true  of 
written  and  unwritten  constitutions,  of  those 
shaped  by  custom  and  those  enacted  by  con¬ 
stituent  assemblies. 

Unlike  all  other  man-made  laws,  a  constitu¬ 
tion  is  the  law  which  creates  and  regulates 
government  itself,  rather  than  the  law  which  a 
government  creates  and  by  which  it  regulates 
the  conduct  of  men,  their  relation  to  one  an¬ 
other  and  to  the  state.  This  is  perhaps  the  basic 
distinction  with  regard  to  the  laws  of  the  state. 
“The  fundamental  law  in  every  common¬ 
wealth,”  says  Hobbes,  “is  that  which  being 
taken  away  the  commonwealth  faileth  and  is 
utterly  dissolved.”  Montesquieu  distinguishes 
what  he  calls  “the  law  politic,”  which  consti¬ 
tutes  the  state,  from  ordinary  legislation;  and 
Rousseau  likewise  divides  the  laws  into  the 
“political”  or  “fundamental”  laws  and  the 
“civil  laws” — those  “which  determine  the 
form  of  the  government”  and  those  which  the 
government,  once  it  is  constituted,  enacts 
and  enforces. 

In  addition  to  being  the  source  of  all  other 
positive  laws  of  the  state — for  it  sets  up  the 
very  machinery  of  lawmaking — a  constitution 
is  fundamental  law  in  that  it  establishes  the 
standard  of  legality  by  which  all  subsequent 
laws  are  measured.  Aristotle  observes  that  “the 
justice  or  injustice  of  laws  varies  of  necessity 
with  constitutions.”  What  may  be  a  just  enact¬ 
ment  in  one  state  may  be  unjust  in  another 
according  to  the  difference  of  their  consti¬ 
tutions. 

In  American  practice  and  that  modeled  upon 
it,  a  law  which  violates  the  letter  or  spirit  of  the 


constitution  is  judged  to  be  unconstitutional 
and  is  deprived  thereby  of  the  authority  of  law. 
“Every  act  of  a  delegated  authority,”  Hamil¬ 
ton  writes  in  The  Federalist ,  “contrary  to  the 
tenor  of  the  commission  under  which  it  is 
exercised,  is  void.  No  legislative  act,  therefore, 
contrary  to  the  Constitution  can  be  valid.  To 
deny  this  would  be  to  affirm  that  the  deputy  is 
greater  than  his  principal;  that  the  servant  is 
above  his  master;  that  the  representatives  of 
the  people  are  superior  to  the  people  them¬ 
selves;  that  men  acting  by  virtue  of  powers  may 
do  not  only  what  their  powers  do  not  authorize, 
but  what  they  forbid.” 

The  conception  of  a  constitution  as  a  law  or 
set  of  laws  antecedent  to  all  acts  of  government 
inevitably  raises  the  question  of  how  or  by 
whom  constitutions  are  made.  If  the  provisions 
of  a  constitution  were  precepts  of  natural  law, 
they  would,  according  to  the  theory  of  natural 
law,  be  discovered  by  reason,  not  positively  in¬ 
stituted.  But  though  constitutions  have  the 
character  of  positive  law,  they  cannot  be  made 
as  other  positive  laws  are  made — by  legislators, 
i.e.,  men  holding  that  office  under  the  consti¬ 
tution . 

The  generally  accepted  answer  is  that  a  con¬ 
stitution  is  made  by  the  people  who  form  the 
political  community.  But,  as  Madison  observes, 
some  evidence  exists  to  the  contrary.  “It  is  not 
a  little  remarkable,”  he  writes,  “that  in  every 
case  reported  by  ancient  history,  in  which 
government  has  been  established  with  delibera¬ 
tion  and  consent,  the  task  of  framing  it  has  not 
been  committed  to  an  assembly  of  men,  but  has 
been  performed  by  some  individual  citizen  of 
pre-eminent  wisdom  and  approved  integrity.” 
He  cites  many  examples  from  Plutarch  to  sup¬ 
port  this  observation,  but  he  adds  the  comment 
that  it  cannot  be  ascertained  to  what  extent 
these  lawgivers  were  “clothed  with  the  legiti¬ 
mate  authority  of  the  people.”  In  some  cases, 
however,  he  claims  that  “the  proceeding  was 
strictly  regular.” 

The  writers  of  The  Federalist  are,  of  course, 
primarily  concerned  with  a  constitution  that  is 
not  the  work  of  one  man  but  the  enactment  of 
a  constituent  assembly  or  constitutional  con¬ 
vention.  From  their  knowledge  of  British  law, 
they  are  also  well  aware  that  a  constitution  may 


236 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


sometimes  be  the  product  of  custom,  growing 
and  altering  with  change  of  custom.  But  how¬ 
ever  it  is  exercised,  the  constitutive  power  is 
held  by  them  to  reside  in  the  constituents  of 
the  state,  the  sovereign  people.  This  power  may 
be  exercised  through  force  of  custom  to  pro¬ 
duce  an  unwritten  constitution,  or  through 
deliberative  processes  to  draft  a  written  one; 
but  it  can  never  be  exercised  by  a  government 
except  with  popular  consent ,  since  all  the  powers 
of  a  duly  constituted  government  derive  from 
its  constitution.  In  the  American  if  not  the 
British  practice,  the  amendment  of  the  con¬ 
stitution  also  involves,  at  least  indirectly,  an 
appeal  to  the  people. 

Rousseau  assigns  the  constitutive  power  to  a 
mythical  figure  he  calls  “the  legislator”  or  “the 
law-giver,”  describing  him  as  the  man  who 
“sets  up  the  Republic.”  Yet  Rousseau  says  of 
this  special  office  that  it  “nowhere  enters  into 
the  constitution.”  He  thus  reaffirms  the  essen¬ 
tial  point  that  a  constitution  cannot  create  the 
office  of  constitution-making. 

These  remarks  in  the  Social  Contract  have 
another  significance.  Rousseau  tries  to  distin¬ 
guish  the  formation  of  a  government  by  the 
constitution  (the  political  or  fundamental  law 
made  by  the  legislator)  from  the  formation  of 
the  state  by  the  social  contract  entered  into  by 
the  people  in  their  original  act  of  association. 
But  is  not  the  constitution  also  a  formative  con¬ 
tract  or  convention?  If  it  is  popular  in  origin, 
either  through  custom  or  enactment,  is  there 
more  than  a  verbal  difference  between  these 
two  contracts — the  one  which  establishes  a 
political  society  and  the  one  which  establishes 
its  government? 

For  Hobbes,  and  seemingly  also  for  Locke, 
the  compact  by  which  men  abandon  the  state 
of  nature  and  establish  a  civil  society  results  at 
the  same  time  in  the  establishment  of  a  govern¬ 
ment.  It  is,  Hobbes  writes,  “as  if  every  man 
should  say  to  every  man,  I  authorize  and  give 
my  right  of  governing  my  self,  to  this  Man  or 
to  this  Assembly  of  men,  on  this  condition, 
that  thou  give  up  thy  right  to  him,  and  author¬ 
ize  all  his  actions  in  like  manner.”  According  to 
Rousseau,  “there  is  only  one  contract  in  the 
State,  and  that  is  the  [original]  act  of  associa¬ 
tion.”  For  him,  “the  institution  of  government 
is  not  a  contract.” 


The  reality  and  significance  of  the  difference 
between  these  three  political  philosophers 
would  seem  to  depend  on  the  precise  historical 
meaning  each  gives  to  the  hypothesis  of  men 
living  in  a  state  of  nature  prior  to  political 
association.  If,  prior  to  the  state,  men  live  in 
non-political  societies,  and  if  the  state,  as  op¬ 
posed  to  the  family  or  the  despotically  ruled 
community,  begins  to  exist  only  when  it  is 
constituted,  then  the  formation  of  the  state 
and  the  formation  of  its  government  would 
seem  to  be  the  product  of  a  single  convention. 

The  principle  of  constitutionality  is  also 
necessary  in  order  to  understand  the  familiar 
distinction  between  government  by  laws  and 
government  by  men.  Except  for  the  divine 
sort  of  government  which  is  above  both  law 
and  lawlessness,  Plato  employs  “the  distinction 
of  ruling  with  law  or  without  law”  to  divide  the 
various  forms  of  government  into  two  groups. 
“The  principle  of  law  and  the  absence  of  law 
will  bisect  them  all,”  the  Eleatic  Stranger  says 
in  the  Statesman. 

In  the  ordinary  meaning  of  law  as  an  instru¬ 
ment  of  government,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive 
government  by  laws  without  men  to  make  and 
administer  them,  or  government  by  men  who 
do  not  issue  general  directives  which  have  the 
character  of  law.  Government  always  involves 
both  laws  and  men.  But  not  all  government 
rests  upon  the  supremacy  of  law,  a  supremacy 
which  consists  in  the  equality  of  all  before  the 
law  and  the  predominance  of  regular  law  as 
opposed  to  arbitrary  decision.  Nor  is  all  govern¬ 
ment  based  upon  a  law  that  regulates  the  offi¬ 
cials  of  government  as  well  as  the  citizens,  and 
determines  the  legality  of  official  acts,  legisla¬ 
tive,  judicial,  or  executive.  That  law  is,  of 
course,  the  constitution. 

Locke  makes  a  distinction  between  govern¬ 
ing  by  “absolute  arbitrary  power”  and  govern¬ 
ing  by  “settled  standing  laws.”  It  is  his  con¬ 
tention  that  “whatever  form  the  common¬ 
wealth  is  under,  the  ruling  power  ought  to 
govern  by  declared  and  received  laws,  and  not 
by  extemporary  dictates  and  undetermined 
resolutions,  for  then  mankind  will  be  in  a  far 
worse  condition  than  in  a  state  of  Nature.  .  .  . 
All  the  power  the  government  has,  being  only 
for  the  good  of  the  society,  as  it  ought  not  to 


Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION 


237 


be  arbitrary  and  at  pleasure,  so  it  ought  to  be 
exercised  by  established  and  promulgated  laws, 
that  both  the  people  may  know  their  duty, 
and  be  safe  and  secure  within  the  limits  of  the 
law,  and  the  rulers,  too,  kept  within  their  due 
bounds.” 

As  Locke  slates  the  distinction  between 
government  by  laws  and  government  by  men, 
it  seems  to  be  identical  with  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  constitutional  and  non-constitutional 
government.  In  the  latter,  an  individual  man 
invests  himself  with  sovereignty  and,  as  sover¬ 
eign,  puts  himself  above  all  human  law,  being 
both  its  source  and  the  arbiter  of  its  legality. 
Such  government  is  absolute,  for  nothing  limits 
the  power  the  sovereign  man  exercises  as  a 
prerogative  vested  in  his  person.  In  constitu¬ 
tional  government,  men  are  not  sovereigns  but 
office-holders,  having  only  a  share  of  the  sov¬ 
ereignty.  They  rule  not  through  de  facto  pow¬ 
er,  but  through  the  juridical  power  which  is 
vested  in  the  office  they  hold.  That  power  is 
both  created  and  limited  by  the  law  of  the  con¬ 
stitution  which  defines  the  various  offices  of 
government. 

Although  abstractly  or  in  theory  absolute 
and  constitutional  government  are  clearly  dis¬ 
tinct — more  than  that,  opposed — political  his¬ 
tory  contains  the  record  of  intermediate  types. 
These  can  be  regarded  as  imperfect  embodi¬ 
ments  of  the  principle  of  constitutionality,  or 
as  attenuations  of  absolute  rule  by  constitu¬ 
tional  encroachments.  Despite  their  incompati¬ 
bility  in  principle,  historic  circumstances  have 
managed  to  combine  absolute  with  constitu¬ 
tional  government.  It  is  this  combination  which 
mediaeval  jurists  and  philosophers  call  “the 
mixed  regime”  or  the  regimen  regale  et  politi - 
cum ,  “royal  and  political  government.” 

It  may  be  thought  that  a  foreshadowing  of 
the  mediaeval  mixed  regime  can  be  found  in 
Plato’s  Laws ,  in  the  passage  in  which  the 
Athenian  Stranger  says  that  monarchy  and 
democracy  are  the  “two  mother  forms  of  states 
from  which  the  rest  may  be  truly  derived.”  He 
then  asserts  that,  to  combine  liberty  with  wis¬ 
dom,  “you  must  have  both  these  forms  of  gov¬ 
ernment  in  a  measure.”  Since  the  Persian  des¬ 
potism  is  cited  as  the  “highest  form”  of  monar¬ 
chy  and  the  Athenian  constitution  as  the  arche¬ 


type  of  democracy,  the  combination  proposed 
would  seem  to  be  a  mixture  of  absolute  with 
constitutional  government.  But  the  Athenian 
Stranger  also  says  that  “there  ought  to  be  no 
great  and  unmixed  powers”  if  the  arbitrary  is 
to  be  avoided;  and  since  the  whole  tenor  of  the 
book,  as  indicated  by  its  title,  is  to  uphold  the 
supremacy  of  law,  it  is  doubtful  that  a  truly 
mixed  regime  is  intended — a  government  which 
is  partly  absolute  and  partly  constitutional. 

Aristotle,  furthermore,  gives  us  reason  to 
think  that  such  a  mixture  would  be  unthink¬ 
able  to  a  Greek.  At  least  in  his  own  vocabulary, 
the  terms  royal  and  political  are  as  contradictory 
as  round  and  square.  Royal,  or  kingly,  govern¬ 
ment  for  Aristotle  is  “absolute  monarchy,  or 
the  arbitrary  rule  of  a  sovereign  over  all.”  In 
royal  government,  there  are  no  political  offices, 
and  no  citizens.  The  ruler  is  sovereign  in  his 
own  person  and  the  ruled  are  subject  to  his 
will,  which  is  both  the  source  of  law  and 
exempt  from  all  legal  limitations. 

To  Aristotle,  political  government  means 
pure  constitutionalism.  It  exists  only  where 
“the  citizens  rule  and  are  ruled  in  turn,”  for 
“when  the  state  is  framed  upon  the  principle  of 
equality  and  likeness,  the  citizens  think  they 
ought  to  hold  office  by  turns.”  To  the  generic 
form  of  constitutional  government,  Aristotle 
sometimes  gives  the  name  of  “polity,”  though 
he  also  uses  this  name  for  the  mixed  constitu¬ 
tion  which  combines  democratic  with  oligar¬ 
chical  criteria  for  citizenship  and  public  office. 
The  mixed  constitution  is  not  to  be  confused 
with  the  mixed  regime,  for  it  is  a  mixture  of 
different  constitutional  principles,  not  of  con¬ 
stitutionalism  itself  with  absolute  government. 
When  the  word  “polity”  signifies  constitutional 
government  generally,  it  has  the  meaning 
which  the  Romans  express  by  the  word  “re¬ 
public”  and  which  the  constitutionalists  of  the 
1 8th  century  call  “free  government.” 

The  distinctive  characteristics  of  such  gov¬ 
ernment — wffiether  it  is  called  political,  repub¬ 
lican,  constitutional,  or  free — lie  in  the  fact 
that  the  citizens  are  both  rulers  and  ruled;  that 
no  man,  not  even  the  chief  magistrate,  is  above 
the  law;  that  all  political  power  or  authority  is 
derived  from  and  limited  by  the  constitution 
which,  being  popular  in  origin,  cannot  be 
changed  except  by  the  people  as  a  whole. 


238 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


It  is  perhaps  only  in  the  Middle  Ages  that 
we  find  the  mixed  regime  in  actual  existence. 
“That  rule  is  called  politic  and  royal,”  Aquinas 
writes,  “by  which  a  man  rules  over  free  sub¬ 
jects  who,  though  subject  to  the  government  of 
the  ruler,  have  nevertheless  something  of  their 
own,  by  reason  of  which  they  can  resist  the 
orders  of  him  who  commands.”  These  words 
seem  to  present  an  accurate  picture  of  the  pe¬ 
culiarly  mediaeval  political  formation  which 
resulted  from  the  adaptation  of  Roman  law  (it¬ 
self  partly  republican  and  partly  imperial)  to 
feudal  conditions  under  the  influence  of  local 
customs  and  the  Christian  religion. 

The  mediaeval  mixed  regime  is  not  to  be  con¬ 
fused  with  modern  forms  of  constitutional 
monarchy  any  more  than  with  the  mixed  con¬ 
stitution  or  polity  of  the  Greeks.  “The  so- 
called  limited  monarchy,  or  kingship  according 
to  law,”  Aristotle  remarks,  “is  not  a  distinct 
form  of  government.”  The  chapter  on  Mon¬ 
archy  deals  with  the  nature  of  constitutional 
monarchy  and  its  difference  from  the  mixed 
regime  as  well  as  its  relation  to  purely  republi¬ 
can  government.  The  mediaeval  king  was  not  a 
constitutional  monarch,  but  a  sovereign  person, 
in  one  sense  above  the  law  and  in  another 
limited  by  it. 

To  the  extent  that  he  had  powers  and  pre¬ 
rogatives  unlimited  by  law,  the  mediaeval  king 
was  an  absolute  ruler.  He  was,  as  Aquinas  says, 
quoting  the  phrase  of  the  Roman  jurists,  legibus 
solutus — exempt  from  the  force  of  all  man¬ 
made  law.  Aquinas  also  describes  him  as  “above 
the  law”  insofar  as  “when  it  is  expedient,  he 
can  change  the  law,  and  rule  without  it  accord¬ 
ing  to  time  and  place.”  Yet  he  was  also  bound 
by  his  coronation  oath  to  perform  the  duties  of 
his  office,  first  among  which  was  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  the  laws  of  the  realm — the  immemorial 
customs  of  the  people  which  define  their 
rights  and  liberties.  The  king’s  subjects  could 
be  released  from  their  oath  of  allegiance  by  his 
malfeasance  or  dereliction  in  office. 

To  this  extent,  then,  the  mediaeval  king  was 
a  responsible  ruler,  and  the  mixed  regime  was 
constitutional.  Furthermore,  the  king  did  not 
have  jurisdiction  over  customary  law;  yet 
where  custom  was  silent,  the  king  was  free  to 
govern  absolutely,  to  decree  what  he  willed, 
and  even  to  innovate  laws. 


Mediaeval  in  origin,  the  institution  of  a 
government  both  royal  and  political,  or  what 
Fortescue,  describing  England  in  the  15th  cen¬ 
tury,  called  a  “political  kingdom,”  exerted 
great  influence  on  modern  constitutional  de¬ 
velopments.  As  late  as  the  end  of  the  17th  cen¬ 
tury,  Locke’s  conception  of  the  relation  of  king 
and  parliament,  royal  prerogative  and  legal 
limitations,  may  emphasize  the  primacy  of  law, 
but  it  does  not  entirely  divest  the  king  of  per¬ 
sonal  sovereignty.  Locke  quotes  with  approval 
the  speech  from  the  throne  in  1609,  in  which 
James  I  said  that  “the  king  binds  himself  by  a 
double  oath,  to  the  observation  of  the  funda¬ 
mental  laws  of  his  kingdom.  Tacitly,  as  by 
being  a  king,  and  so  bound  to  protect  as  well 
the  people,  as  the  laws  of  his  kingdom,  and  ex¬ 
pressly  by  his  oath  at  his  coronation.”  To  this 
extent  the  British  kingdom  is,  as  Fortescue  had 
said,  “political.”  But  the  king  also  retains  the 
prerogative  to  dispense  with  law  and  to  govern 
in  particular  matters  by  decree  apart  from  law, 
and  to  this  extent  the  government  still  remains 
royal. 

Locke  recognizes  the  difficulty  of  combining 
the  absolute  power  of  the  king  in  administra¬ 
tion  with  the  limitations  on  that  power  repre¬ 
sented  by  Parliament’s  jurisdiction  over  the 
laws  which  bind  the  king.  To  the  question, 
Who  shall  be  judge  of  the  right  use  of  the  royal 
prerogative  ?  he  replies  that  “between  an  execu¬ 
tive  power  in  being,  with  such  prerogative,  and 
a  legislative  that  depends  upon  his  will  for  their 
convening,  there  can  be  no  judge  on  earth  .  .  . 
The  people  have  no  other  remedy  .  .  .  but  to 
appeal  to  heaven.” 

Montesquieu  as  well  as  Locke  can  conceive 
monarchy,  as  distinct  from  despotism,  in  no 
other  terms  than  those  of  the  mixed  regime. 
He  separates  despotism  as  lawless,  or  arbitrary 
and  absolute,  government  from  all  forms  of 
government  by  law,  and  divides  the  latter  into 
monarchies  and  republics.  Montesquieu  insists 
that  the  ancients  had  no  notion  of  the  kind 
of  monarchy  which,  while  it  is  legal  govern¬ 
ment,  is  not  purely  constitutional  in  the  sense  of 
being  republican.  He  calls  this  kind  of  mon¬ 
archy  “Gothic  government,”  and,  as  Hegel 
later  points  out,  it  is  clear  that  “by  ‘monarchy’ 
he  understands,  not  the  patriarchal  or  any  an¬ 
cient  type,  nor  on  the  other  hand,  the  type  or- 


Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION 


ganized  into  an  objective  constitution,  but  only 
feudal  monarchy.” 

It  is  not  until  the  1 8th  century  that  the 
slightest  vestige  of  royal  power  comes  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  inimical  to  law.  For  Rousseau  “every 
legitimate  government  is  republican”;  for  Kant, 
“the  only  rightful  Constitution  ...  is  that  of  a 
Pure  Republic,”  which,  in  his  view,  “can  only 
be  constituted  by  a  representative  system  of  the 
people.”  The  writers  of  The  Federalist  take  the 
same  stand.  They  interpret  the  “aversion  of  the 
people  to  monarchy”  as  signifying  their  espousal 
of  purely  constitutional  or  republican  govern¬ 
ment.  In  the  tradition  of  the  great  books,  only 
Hegel  speaks  thereafter  in  a  contrary  vein. 
Constitutional  monarchy  represents  for  him 
the  essence  of  constitutionalism  and  the  only 
perfect  expression  of  the  idea  of  the  state. 

Because  modern  republics,  and  even  modern 
constitutional  or  limited  monarchies,  have  de¬ 
veloped  gradually  or  by  revolution  out  of  mixed 
regimes;  and  because  this  development  came 
as  a  reaction  against  the  increasing  absolutism 
or  despotism  of  kings,  the  principle  of  constitu¬ 
tionality  has  been  made  more  effective  in  mod¬ 
ern  practice  than  it  was  in  the  ancient  world. 
In  addition  to  asserting  limitations  upon  gov¬ 
ernments,  constitutions  have  also  provided 
means  of  controlling  them.  They  have  been 
given  the  force ,  as  well  as  the  authority,  of 
positive  law.  They  have  made  office-holders  ac¬ 
countable  for  their  acts;  and  through  such  ju¬ 
ridical  processes  as  impeachment  and  such  po¬ 
litical  devices  as  frequent  elections  and  short 
terms  of  office,  they  have  brought  the  adminis¬ 
tration  of  government  within  the  purview  of 
the  law. 

Following  Montesquieu,  the  Federalists  rec¬ 
ommend  the  separation  of  powers,  with  checks 
and  balances,  as  the  essential  means  of  enforc¬ 
ing  constitutional  limitations  of  office  and  of  pre¬ 
venting  one  department  of  government  from 
usurping  the  power  of  another.  The  citizens  are 
further  protected  from  the  misuse  of  power  by 
constitutional  declarations  of  their  rights  and 
immunities;  and  constitutional  government  is 
itself  safeguarded  from  revolutionary  violence 
by  such  institutions  as  judicial  review  and  by 
the  availability  of  the  amending  power  as  a 
means  of  changing  the  constitution  through 
due  process  of  law. 


239 

In  the  history  of  political  change,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  distinguish  change  from  or  to  constitu¬ 
tional  government  and,  within  the  sphere  of 
constitutional  government,  the  change  of  con¬ 
stitutions. 

Republics  are  set  up  and  constitutions  estab¬ 
lished  by  the  overthrow  of  despots  or  with  their 
abdication.  Republics  are  destroyed  and  consti¬ 
tutions  overthrown  by  dictators  who  usurp  the 
powers  of  government.  Violence,  or  the  threat 
of  violence,  usually  attends  these  changes. 

The  other  sort  of  change  may  take  place  in 
two  ways:  either  when  one  constitution  re¬ 
places  another,  as  frequently  occurs  in  the  revo¬ 
lutions  of  the  Greek  city-states;  or  when  an 
enduring  constitution  is  modified  by  amend¬ 
ment,  as  is  customary  in  modern  republics. 
Every  constitutional  change  is  in  a  sense  revo¬ 
lutionary,  but  if  it  can  be  accomplished  by  due 
process  of  law,  violence  can  be  avoided. 

All  the  changes  in  which  constitutional  gov¬ 
ernment  or  constitutions  are  involved  raise 
fundamental  questions  of  justice.  Is  republican 
government  always  better  than  absolute  mon¬ 
archy  and  the  mixed  regime— better  in  the 
sense  of  being  more  just,  better  because  it  gives 
men  the  liberty  and  equality  they  justly  de¬ 
serve?  Is  it  better  relative  to  the  nature  and 
condition  of  certain  peoples  but  not  all,  or  of  a 
people  at  a  certain  stage  of  their  development, 
but  not  always?  In  what  respects  does  one  con¬ 
stitution  embody  more  justice  than  another? 
What  sorts  of  amendment  or  reform  can  rectify 
the  injustice  of  a  constitution?  Without  an¬ 
swering  such  questions,  we  cannot  discriminate 
between  progress  and  decline  in  the  history  of 
constitutionalism. 

Divergent  answers  will,  of  course,  be  found  in 
the  great  books.  Among  the  political  philoso¬ 
phers,  there  are  the  defenders  of  absolutism 
and  those  who  think  that  royal  government  is 
most  like  the  divine;  the  exponents  of  the  su¬ 
premacy  of  the  mixed  regime;  the  republicans 
who  insist  that  nothing  less  than  constitutional 
government  is  fit  for  free  men  and  equals.  And 
there  are  those  who  argue  that  the  justice  of 
any  form  of  government  must  be  considered 
relative  to  the  condition  of  the  people,  so  that 
republican  government  may  be  better  only  in 
some  circumstances,  not  in  all. 

The  issue  arising  from  these  conflicting  views 


240 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


concerning  constitutional  and  absolute  govern¬ 
ment  is  treated  in  the  chapters  on  Citizen, 
Monarchy,  and  Tyranny.  But  one  other 
issue  remains  to  be  discussed  here.  It  concerns 
the  comparative  justice  of  diverse  constitutions. 
Constitutions  can  differ  from  one  another  in  the 
way  in  which  they  plan  the  operations  of  gov¬ 
ernment,  or  in  the  qualifications  they  set  for 
citizenship  and  public  office.  Usually  only  the 
second  mode  of  difference  seriously  affects 
their  justice. 

In  Greek  political  life,  the  issue  of  justice  as 
between  the  democratic  and  the  oligarchical 
constitution  is  a  conflict  between  those  who 
think  that  all  free  men  deserve  the  equality  of 
citizenship  and  the  opportunity  to  hold  office, 
and  those  who  think  it  is  unjust  to  treat  the 
rich  and  the  poor  as  equals.  The  latter  insist 
that  citizenship  should  be  restricted  to  the 
wealthy  and  that  the  magistracies  should  be 
reserved  for  men  of  considerable  means. 

Finding  justice  and  injustice  on  both  sides, 
Aristotle  favors  what  he  calls  “the  mixed  con¬ 
stitution.”  This  unites  the  justice  of  treating 
free  men  alike  so  far  as  citizenship  goes,  with 
the  justice  of  discriminating  between  rich  and 
poor  with  respect  to  public  office.  Such  a  mix¬ 
ture,  he  writes,  “may  be  described  generally  as 
a  fusion  of  oligarchy  and  democracy,”  since  it 
attempts  “to  unite  the  freedom  of  the  poor  and 
the  wealth  of  the  rich.”  The  mixed  constitution, 
especially  if  accompanied  by  a  numerical  pre¬ 
dominance  of  the  middle  class,  seems  to  him  to 
have  greater  stability,  as  well  as  more  justice, 
than  either  of  the  pure  types  of  constitution 
which,  oppressive  to  either  poor  or  rich,  pro¬ 
voke  revolution. 

In  modern  political  life,  the  issue  between 
oligarchy  and  democracy  tends  toward  a  differ¬ 
ent  resolution.  The  last  defenders  of  the  oligar¬ 
chical  constitution  were  men  like  Burke,  Ham¬ 
ilton,  and  John  Adams  in  the  1 8th  century. 
Since  then,  the  great  constitutional  reforms 
have  progressively  extended  the  franchise  al¬ 
most  to  the  point  of  universal  suffrage.  These 
matters  are,  of  course,  further  treated  in  the 
chapters  on  Democracy  and  Oligarchy. 

Political  representation,  with  a  system  of 
periodic  elections,  seems  to  be  indispensable  to 
constitutional  government  under  modern  con¬ 


ditions.  The  territorial  extent  and  populousness 
of  the  nation-state  as  compared  with  the  an¬ 
cient  city-state  makes  impossible  direct  partici¬ 
pation  by  the  whole  body  of  citizens  in  the 
major  functions  of  government. 

Considering  the  ancient  republics  of  Sparta, 
Rome,  and  Carthage,  the  writers  of  The  Fed - 
eralist  try  to  explain  the  sense  in  which  the 
principle  of  representation  differentiates  the 
American  republic  from  these  ancient  consti¬ 
tutional  governments.  “The  principle  of  repre¬ 
sentation,”  they  say,  “was  neither  unknown  to 
the  ancients  nor  wholly  overlooked  in  their 
political  constitutions.  The  true  distinction  be 
tween  these  and  the  American  government  lies 
in  the  total  exclusion  of  the  people ,  in  their  collec - 
tive  capacity ,  from  any  share  in  the  latter ,  and 
not  in  the  total  exclusion  of  the  representatives  of 
the  people  from  the  administration  of  the 

y*  >» 

ormer . 

The  Federalists  then  go  on  to  say  that  “the 
distinction  .  . .  thus  qualified  must  be  admitted 
to  leave  a  most  advantageous  superiority  in 
favor  of  the  United  States.  But  to  insure  to 
this  advantage  its  full  effect,  we  must  be  careful 
not  to  separate  it  from  the  other  advantage  of 
an  extensive  territory.  For  it  cannot  be  be¬ 
lieved  that  any  form  of  representative  govern¬ 
ment  could  have  succeeded  within  the  narrow 
limits  occupied  by  the  democracies  of  Greece.” 

In  their  opinion,  representative  government 
is  not  merely  necessitated  by  the  conditions  of 
modern  society,  but  also  has  the  political  ad¬ 
vantage  of  safeguarding  constitutional  govern¬ 
ment  from  the  masses.  As  pointed  out  in  the 
chapter  on  Aristocracy,  where  the  theory  of 
representation  is  discussed,  the  officers  of  gov¬ 
ernment  chosen  by  the  whole  body  of  citizens 
are  supposed — at  least  on  one  conception  of 
representatives — to  be  more  competent  in  the 
business  of  government  than  their  constituents. 
It  is  in  these  terms  that  the  Federalists  advo¬ 
cate  what  they  call  “republican  government” 
as  opposed  to  “pure  democracy.” 

Like  the  idea  of  political  offices,  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  representation  seems  to  be  inseparable 
from  constitutionalism  and  constitutional  gov¬ 
ernment.  Though  the  principle  appears  to  a 
certain  extent  in  ancient  republics— whether 
oligarchies  or  democracies — ancient  political 
writing  does  not  contain  a  formal  discussion  of 


Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION  241 


the  theory  of  representation.  That  begins  in 
mediaeval  treatises  which  recognize  the  consult¬ 
ative  or  advisory  function  of  those  who  repre¬ 
sent  the  nobles  and  the  commons  at  the  king’s 
court.  But  it  is  only  in  recent  centuries — when 
legislation  has  become  the  exclusive  function  of 


representative  assemblies — that  the  idea  of  rep¬ 
resentation  and  the  theory  of  its  practice  as¬ 
sume  a  place  of  such  importance  that  a  political 
philosopher  like  Mill  docs  not  hesitate  to  iden¬ 
tify  representative  with  constitutional  govern¬ 
ment. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  difference  between  government  by  law  and  government  by  men:  the  nature  of 

constitutional  government  242 

2.  The  notion  of  a  constitution  243 

2a.  The  constitution  as  the  form  or  organization  of  a  political  community:  arrange¬ 
ment  of  offices;  division  of  functions 

2 b.  The  constitution  as  the  fundamental  law:  its  relation  to  other  laws,  as  a  source  or 
measure  of  legality  or  justice 


3.  The  relation  of  constitutional  government  to  other  forms  of  government 

3<7.  The  combination  of  constitutional  with  absolute  government:  the  mixed  regime; 
constitutional  or  limited  monarchy 

3 b.  The  merits  of  constitutional  government  compared  with  royal  government  and 

the  mixed  regime  244 

4.  The  constitutional  conception  of  political  office:  the  qualifications  and  duties  of 

public  officials 

5.  The  diversity  of  constitutions  among  the  forms  of  government  245 

5<7.  The  justice  of  different  constitutions:  the  extent  and  character  of  citizenship 
under  each 

5 b.  The  mixed  constitution:  its  advantages 

6.  The  origin  of  constitutions:  the  lawgiver,  the  social  contract,  the  constituent  assembly  246 

7.  The  preservation  of  constitutions:  factors  tending  toward  their  dissolution 

7 a.  The  relative  stability  of  different  types  of  constitutions  247 

7  b.  The  safeguards  of  constitutional  government:  bills  of  rights;  separation  of  powers; 
impeachment 


8.  The  change  of  constitutions 

8tf.  Methods  of  changing  a  constitution:  revolution,  amendment 

8b.  The  violation  and  overthrow  of  constitutional  government  248 

9.  The  theory  of  representation 

ga.  The  functions  and  duties  of  representatives:  their  relation  to  their  constituents 
9 b.  Types  of  representation:  diverse  methods  of  selecting  representatives  249 

10.  The  origin,  growth,  and  vicissitudes  of  constitutional  government 


242 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  116a-119b,the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  sideof  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  Forexample,in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  difference  between  government  by  law 
and  government  by  men:  the  nature  of 
constitutional  government 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [681-710]  88b-c 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [904-931] 
122d-123a 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

5  Aristophanes:  Wasps  [463-507]  512d-513c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c;  bk 
vii,  233a-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  i,  368c- 
d;  bk  hi,  425a-c;  438a-b 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  v,  369c-d;  bk  vi,  380b-c 
/  Statesman ,  598b-604b  /  Laws ,  bk  iii,  667c- 
676b  esp  671c;  bk  iv,  681b-682c;  bk  viii, 
733d-734a;  bk  ix,  745c-746a;  754a-b  / 
Seventh  Letter ,  805 d;  807a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  6  [ii34a24-bi7] 
382a-c  esp  [1134*35-37]  382b;  bk  x,  ch  9 
[n8oai4-24]  434d-435a  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  1 
[i252ai3-i7]  445a-b;  ch  5  [i254a34-b9]  448a; 
ch  7  [i255bi5-2o]  449b;  ch  12  453d-454a; 
bk  11,  ch  10  [i272a35~bio]  468d-469a;  bk  iii, 
ch  10  [128^29-39]  479a;  ch  ii  [i282bi-i3] 
480b-c;  ch  15-17  484b-487a;  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[i29ib30-i292a37]  491a-d;  ch  6  492b-493a; 
bk  v,  ch  9  [i3ioa25-36]  512c;  bk  vii,  ch  2 


12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Caesar ,  591d  /  Cato  the  Younger , 
635a-b;  638b-639a/  Tiberius  Gracchus,  678b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  la-2b;  bk  iii,  51b-c; 
61c-62a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  1,  rep  3  205b-206b;  a  3  207a-c;  q  95,  a  1 
esp  rep  2  226c-227c;  q  96,  a  5,  rep  3  233d- 
234d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  104d-106d;  114b- 
115a;  131d-132a;  138b-c;  149b-151a;  part  iv, 
272c; 273a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  iii 
[1— 15]  44c-d;  act  iii,  sc  1  [223-242]  49c 

27  Shakespeare:  Henry  VIII ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [91- 
101]  553d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  xii  [63-110]  320b- 
321b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government  25a-81d  esp  ch  iv, 
sect  21  29d,  ch  vi,  sect  57  36d-37b,  ch  vii, 
sect  87-94  44a-46c,  ch  xi  55b-58b,  ch  xiv 
62b-64c,  ch  xvm,  sect  199-202  71a-72a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  268c-269b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a;  7c- 
9a, c;  bk  iii,  12a-13c;  bk  iv,  15a-c;  bk  v,  25d- 


2  to  3a 


Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION 


57c  58d;  bk  xi,  69a-c;  bk  xix,  137c-d;  bk 
xxv,  211c  d;  bk  xxvi.  223c  d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  323d~324a;  357b  c; 
358b-d;  361c-362a  /  Political  Economy ,  370b- 
371a  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  387b,d-391b; 
bk  ii,  400a;  406a-b;  bk  iii,  408c;  419a-c;  bk 
iv,  433a-434b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  24b.d-28b  passim; 
51b  d;  154a-c;  342a-c;  592a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  73d-75a ;  96d; 
125a;  161c-162a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113b- 115a  /  Science  of 
Right ,  435c-437c;  450d-452a  /  Judge?nent, 
586a-587a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 
passim 

43  Federalist:  number  i6,  68b-c;  number  33 
107b-109b  passim;  number  43,  146d-147a; 
number  47,  153c-154d;  number  53,  167d- 
168b;  number  55,  174c-d;  number  57,  176d- 
178a;  number  75,  223c-d  passim;  number  78, 
230d-232a;  number  81,  237d-238b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267d-268b  /  Representative 
Government ,  327b,d-355b  passim 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  203d-205d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  260- 
265  82a-84b;  par  278  92c-93a;  par  286  96c- 
97a;  par  298-299  99c-100b;  additions,  132 
137d-138b;  171  146b-c/  Philosophy  of  History, 
intro,  198b-199c;  part  1,  207d-208c;  213b- 
214d;  part  11,  261d-262c;  271d-272a;  part 
iii,  301c-302d;  part  iv,  327a-328a;  342a-d; 
363c-365c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  780b-d 

2.  The  notion  of  a  constitution 

2a.  The  constitution  as  the  form  or  organiza¬ 
tion  of  a  political  community:  arrange¬ 
ment  of  offices;  division  of  functions 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  697a-705c  esp  697a 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [1274^3 6—37] 
471b;  ch  3  [i276a35~bi4]  473b-c;  ch  6  [i278b 
10-14]  475d;  ch  7  476c-477a  passim,  esp 
[1279*25-27]  476c;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [i289ai5— 17] 
488a;  ch  3  [1290*8-12]  489a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105, 
a  1,  ans  307d-309d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  x-xiv  55a-64c 
passim;  ch  xvii,  sect  198  70d-71a;  ch  xix, 
sect  212-220  74a-75d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  69d-75a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  406b, d- 
410a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  la;  521c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  562  be 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-439a;  450d-452a 
/  Judgement,  557d  [fn  2] 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  lla-20d  esp 
article  1— iii  lla-16a 

43  Federalist:  number  39  125a-128b  passim; 
number  47-83  153c-251a  passim 


243 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  321b  c  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  327b,d  332d  passim;  355b  356a;  401d- 
402a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  267 
84b;  par  269  84d;  par  271-273  89c  92a;  par 
290  97d;  additions,  161  143ab;  164  144c- 
145a  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  173a- 
175c 

2b.  The  constitution  as  the  fundamental  law: 
its  relation  to  other  laws,  as  a  source  or 
measure  of  legality  or  justice 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,  380b  c  /  Laws,  bk  iv, 
681b-682c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  cii  3  [1 276br— 1 5] 
473b-c;  ch  ii  [i282bi— 13]  480b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  i 
[1289*13-25]  488a-b;  ch  ii  [i295a40-bi]  495c; 
bk  v,  ch  9  [1310*12-35]  512b-c;  bk  viii,  ch  i 
[I337a7“I9 1  542a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  101a-104d; 
138b-c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xix,  sect  212 
74a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i-ii,  2d-6b; 
bk  v,  18b,d-25c;  bk  xxvi,  214b, d;  bk  xxix, 
265d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  358b-d  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  ii,  405d-406d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113b-115a  esp  114b-d  / 
Science  of  Right,  435a-441d  esp  435c-436b, 
437c-d,  438d-441d;  450d-452a 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  xiii-conclu- 
sion  9c-d 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  i,  sect  8 
13a-d  esp  [254-259]  13c-d;  article  vi  [583— 
590]  16d 

43  Federalist:  number  33  107b-109b;  number 
44,  146d-147a;  number  53,  167d-168b;  num¬ 
ber  78  229d-233c;  number  80,  236d-237a; 
number  81,  237d-238b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  430a-431a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  260- 
269  82a-84d;  par  274  92a;  par  298  99c;  par 
349  llld-112a;  additions,  166  145b-c  /  Phi¬ 
losophy  of  History,  intro,  173a-175c;  part  iv, 
364b 

3.  The  relation  of  constitutional  government 
to  other  forms  of  government 

3 a.  The  combination  of  constitutional  with  ab¬ 
solute  government:  the  mixed  regime; 
constitutional  or  limited  monarchy 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [359-422]  5b- 
6b;  [600-624]  8d-9a 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [339-358]  261  b-c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iv,  152d-153b 

7  Plato:  Statesman,  598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  iii, 
667a-676b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  14  483a-484a; 
ch  15-16  484b-486c  esp  ch  15  [i286b3i]-CH  16 
[1287*8]  485b-c;  bk  v,  ch  ii  [1313*18-33] 


244 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  The  relation  of  constitutional  government  to 
other  forms  of  government.  3  a.  The  com - 
bination  of  constitutional  with  absolute  gov¬ 
ernment:  the  mixed  regime;  constitutional 
or  limited  monarchy .) 

515d-516a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8  [1365^39— 
1366*2]  608b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  34b-35d  /  Dion,  800c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  59d 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  iv  7a-8a;  ch  xix, 
27a-b; 29c-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  103d-104b;  106d- 
107c;  151c-152a;  part  hi,  228a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  94 
46a-c;  ch  x,  sect  132  55a-b;  ch  xi  55b-58b; 
ch  xiii  59b-62b  passim;  ch  xiv  62b-64c; 
ch  xviii,  sect  199-206  71a-72c;  ch  xix  73d- 
81d  passim,  esp  sect  213  74b-c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  216b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  266d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  h,  7c-8c; 
bk  hi,  llc-12b;  13c;  bk  vi,  36a-b;  bk  ix, 
58b,d-60a;  bk  xi,  69a-77b  esp  69d-75a;  bk 
xix,  142a-146a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  357b-c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  414d-415b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  26d-28b;  622d- 
623a 

42  KaxNt:  Science  of  Right,  439c-440a;  441b-c; 
450a-452a 

43  Federalist:  number  39,  125c;  number  43, 
141a-d;  number  47,  154a-c;  number  69  207a- 
210c  passim;  number  70,  213b-c;  number  71, 
216a-b;  number  84,  252b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267d-268c  /  Representative 
Government,  343c-344a;  351a-c;  353d-354b; 
401d-402b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  178a-b;  255a-d;  390a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273 

90c-92a;  par  275-286  92a-97a;  additions, 
1 70-1 72  145d-146d  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
part  1,  208b-c;  part  iv,  342b-d;  368c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  238c-243d; 
bk  ix,  384c-388a,c  passim 

3 b.  The  merits  of  constitutional  government 
compared  with  royal  government  and 
the  mixed  regime 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [391-460]  261d-262b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

7  Plato:  Statesman,  598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  iii, 
672c-676c;  bk  iv,  681d-682c;  bk  ix,  754a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [1134*24^17] 
382a-c  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i254*24-b24] 
447d-448b;  ch  7  [i255bi6-2o]  449b;  ch  13 
[i259b32-i26ob7]  454b-455a,c;  bk  iii,  ch  7 
476c-477a;  ch  15-17  484b-487a;  bk  iv,  ch  2 
[i289a26-bio]  488b-c;  ch  io-ii  495a-496d; 
bk  v,  ch  8  [i3o8bio-3o]  510d-511a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  51b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  151c-152a 


3b  to  4 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  13  28a- 
b;  ch  vii,  sect  87-94  44a-46c:  cii  xi  55b-58b; 
ch  xiv,  sect  162-163  63a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  216b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  7c-9a,c; 
bk  iii,  12a-13c;  bk  iv,  13b, d  15c:  bk  v,  25d- 
31b;  bk  vi,  33a-35a;  36a-b;  37d-38c;  bk  vii, 
45c-46a;  47d-48a;  bk  xi,  69a-75d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  356b-359c  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  i,  387b,d-391b;  bk  iii,  408b-c; 
412c-414d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b;  32b-34a,c; 
68b,d-69b;  521d;  522c-523a,c;  523d-524a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  439c-440a;  450a-452a 
/  Judgement,  586a- 58 7a 

43  Federalist:  number  6,  40a-41a;  number  69 
207a-210c  passim 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-269a  /  Representative 
Government,  338d-340d;  341d-350a;  351a- 
354a;  363b-366a;  436b-437a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  301, 
101a;  additions,  180  148b  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  i,  213b-214d;  part  iv,  359b 

4.  The  constitutional  conception  of  political 
office:  the  qualifications  and  duties  of 
pubJic  officials 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  697a-705c 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  12  [1259^-9] 
454a;  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i27ob7~i27iai8]  466d-467b; 
ch  10  [i272a35~bio]  468d-469a;  bk  iii,  cii  6 
[i278b30-i279a22]  476a-c;  cii  11  479b-480c 
passim;  ch  12  [i282bi5]-CH  13  [1284*2]  480c- 
482a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [1290*5-13]  489a;  ch  14-16 
498b-502a,c;  bk  v,  ch  9ji309*33-bi4]  511c-d; 
bk  vi,  ch  4  [i3i8b2i-i3i9*4]  522b-c/  Rhetoric, 
bk  1,  ch  8  [i365b3 1— 36]  608a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  45c  /  Cato  the  Younger, 
625b-627b  /  Tiberius  Gracchus,  678b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  105d-107b 

20  x^quixNas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  3  207a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  122b-124b 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  ii,  sc  ii-iii 
364a-369a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  cii  vii,  sect  94 
46a-c;  ch  ix,  sect  131  54d;  cii  xn,  sect 
143  58c-d;  ch  xiii  59b-62b;  ch  xvii,  sect  198 
70d-71a;  ch  xix,  sect  221-222  75d-76c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  28b-29b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  71a- 
72a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324d-325b;  356a-c; 
358b-d  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  hi,  423c-424d; 
bk  iv,  427a-428a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  26d-27a;  27d-28a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73d;  94c-95c; 
563d-564b;  586c-587a 

43  Articles  of  Co^nfederation:  v  5d-6a;  ix 
[299-310]  8b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
2-6  llb-12d;  article  ii-iii,  sect  i  14b-15c; 


5  to  5b 

ARTICLE  VI  [583-599]  16d;  AMENDMENTS, 

xir  18a-c;  xiv,  sect  2-3  18d-19a;  xx-xxil 
19d-20b 

43  Federalist:  number  39,  125c-126b;  number 
52-80  165a-237d  passim,  csp  number  57, 
176d-177a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  268b  c;  320c-323a,c  /  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government ,  354b  362c;  363a  b; 

365b-366a;  398d-406a;  409d-417c  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  277 
92b-c;  par  293-297  98b-99b;  additions,  169 
145d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  241c  242b 

5.  The  diversity  of  constitutions  among  the 
forms  of  government 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii-ix,  401d-421a  / 
Statesman ,  598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  679c- 
682c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  ch  10  [  1 160*3 1— 
b22]  412c-413a  /  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  7-1  i  461d- 
470b:  bk  iii,  ch  5  [1278*3-33]  475a-c;  ch  6-9 
475d-478d  esp  ch  8  [i279bi 7]— cn  9  [1280*33] 
477a-d;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [i289bi3]-cn  9  [i294bn] 
488c-494c;  ch  n-12  495b-497b;  ch  14  [i297b 
37~i298b4o]  498b-499c;  bk  v,  ch  i  [1301*25- 
35]  502b;  bk  vi  520a-526d;  bk  vii,  ch  8-10 
532c-534d  /  Athenian  Constitution ,  ch  41 
571c-572a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  8  608a-c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i— ii,  q  105, 
a  1,  ans  307c-309d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  104d-108a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  x,  sect  132 
55a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  4a-8c; 
bk  iii,  9a-12a;  bk  v,  18d-19d;  23a-c;  bk  xi, 
75d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  359a-d  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  419b-c;  bk  iv,  427a-428a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450  b-d 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  51c-52d  passim; 
number  14,  60b-d;  number  39,  125b-c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  355b-356b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273- 
274,  90d-92a;  additions,  166  145b-c  /  Philos- 
ophy  of  History ,  intro,  173a-175c;  part  iv, 
367c-368b 

5 a.  The  justice  of  different  constitutions:  the 
extent  and  character  of  citizenship  under 
each 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a:  bk  vi,  520b-c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii-ix,  401d-421a  / 
Statesman,  598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  667c- 
676b;  bk  iv,  679c-680d;  bk  viii,  733d-734a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  3  [1131*24-29) 
378d;  ch  7  [1  i35a2— 4]  382d;  bk  viii,  ch  io-ii 
412c-413d/Po//to’,  bk  iii,  ch  1-2  471b,d-472d; 
ch  5  475a-d;  ch  9  477c-478d;  ch  13  [i283b44~ 


245 

1284*3]  482a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  488d-489b;  ch  8-9 
493c-494d;  bk  v,  ch  i  [1301*25-1302*15]  502b 
503b;  ch  3  [i303b5-8]  505a;  bk  vi,  ch  3 
521c-522a;  ch  4  [1 3 i9b2 -32]  523a-b;  ch  6 
524b-c  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  2  553a-c; 
ch  12  557b  558a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  cii  8  [1365b 
31-1366*6]  608a  b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b  c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105, 
a  1,  ans  307d-309d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-8c; 
bk  iii,  9a  lla;  bk  v,  18b,d-25a;  31b-33a,c 
passim;  bk  vi  33a-43d;  bk  xi,  68b, d- 75a;  bk 
xii,  84b,d-85c;  bk  xiii,  99b-100c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  405a- 
406a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  271a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  616d-617d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81d-82a;  223c- 
224a;  403b-404d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 
401b-402a;  436d-437c;  450b-451d 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  51c-52d:  number 
57  176d-179b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  350a;  370a- 
372b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  274 
92a;  additions,  166  145b-c  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  173a-175c;  part  ii,  272a-d; 
273d-274a;  275b-276a;  part  iv,  367c-368b 

5b,  The  mixed  constitution:  its  advantages 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  viii, 
590a-b 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iii,  667a-676b;  bk  iv,  680d- 
681a;  bk  vi,  699d-700b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [i265b25- 
1266*30]  461b-d  esp  [i265b33-39]  461b;  ch  11 
[1272^4]— ch  12  [1274*13]  469b-470d;  bk  iv, 
ch  8-9  493c-494d;  ch  n-12  495b-497b;  bk  v, 
ch  7  [1307*5-28]  509a-b;  ch  8  [i3o8bio- 
I3°9*32]  510d-511c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d-35d  /  Dion,  800c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  72a;  bk  vi,  97b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d-309d 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xix.  27a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  228a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  x,  sect  132 
55a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  216b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ix,  58b, d- 
60a;  bk  xi  68b,d-84d  esp  69d-75a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  410c;  414d- 
415b;  bk  iv,  427a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b;  630b, d- 
631a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71d;  81c-d;  218c- 
219a;  403c-d;  404c-d;  428a 

43  Federalist:  number  39,  125c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  355b-356b; 
401d-402b 


Chapter  12:  CONSTfrUTION 


246 

6.  The  origin  of  constitutions:  the  lawgiver, 
the  social  contract,  the  constituent  as¬ 
sembly 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  14a-c;  bk  iv,  152d- 
153b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  311b-c  /  Statesman , 
603c  /  Laws,  bk  hi,  664a-667d  /  Seventh 
Letter ,  807a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  2  445b-446d  esp 
[1253^0]  446d;  bk  ii,  ch  12  470b-471d;  bk 
hi,  ch  15  [i286b8-22]  484d-485a;  bk  iv,  ch  13 
[i297bi6-28]  498a  /  Athenian  Constitution 
553a-584a,c  esp  ch  5-12  554d-558a,  ch  29-31 
566b-567d,  ch  41  571c-572a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [ioii- 
1027]  74b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  9a-d  /  Romulus,  20c-28a 
/  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  33c-35d,  47a-c  / 
Solon,  68a- 74b  /  Poplicola-Solon,  86a-87b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  51b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  84c-90d;  97c-d; 
part  ii,  99a-104d;  109b-c;  133b;  part  iii, 
200a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  462d-463b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  16a-c  /  Civil  Government, 
ch  vi,  sect  76  42a;  ch  vii,  sect  87  44a-b; 
ch  viii  46c-53c  esp  sect  96-97  47a-b;  ch  x, 
sect  132  55a-b;  ch  xi,  sect  141  58a-b; 
ch  xv,  sect  171  65a-b;  ch  xvi,  sect 
175  65d;  ch  xix,  sect  220  75c-d;  sect  243 
81d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  216b;  262a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ix,  58b, d- 
60a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  353c-355b;  358b-d  / 
Political  Economy,  370b  d  /  Social  Contract, 
bk  1,  391a-393c;  bk  ii,  400a-402a;  bk  111,423a- 
424d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71d-72d;  403b-c; 
562b-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  434b-c;  435a-436c; 
437c-d;  439a-441d;  450d-452a  esp  450d- 
451c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-28]  la-b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  11a, c; 

article  vii  [604-610]  17a, c 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  29a-b;  number  2, 
32a-33b;  number  22,  84d-85a;  number  37- 
38,  117d-124a;  number  40  128b-132a;  num¬ 
ber  49,  159b-c;  number  53,  167d-168b; 
number  78,  232a-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  302d-303a  /  Representative 
Government,  327b,d-332d  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  258, 
80d-81b;  par  273,  91d-92a;  additions,  116 
135c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  173a- 
175c;  part  iv,  365c-366b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  680b- 
684a 


6  to  7 

7.  The  preservation  of  constitutions:  factors 
tending  toward  their  dissolution 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
396c-d 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,  380b-c;  bk  viii-ix, 
401d-421a  esp  bk  viii,  403a-404a,  405c-406a, 
408b-409b,  411d-414b  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  667c- 
676b;  bk  xii,  786c-787d;  794a-799a,c  / 
Seventh  Letter,  801b-c;  806d-807b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [1270^-2 6] 
466d-467a;  ch  10  [i272a35-bn]  468d-469a; 
bk  iv,  ch  n-12  495b-497b;  bk  v  502a-519d 
passim,  esp  ch  7-9  508c-512d,cH  11 515d-5l8c; 
bk  vi,  ch  5  [i3i9b33-i32oa4]  523b-c;  bk  vii, 
ch  9  [i329a3~i2]  533 b-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  4 
[i36oa2o-29]  600c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  35c-d;  47a-48a  /  Cori - 
olanus,  180b-d  /  Lysander,  361a-d  /  Agesilaus, 
482a-c;  495c-d  /  Agis,  649b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i,  210d-212d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i— ii,  q  97, 
aa  2-3  236d-238b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  148c-153a; 
154b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  47a-51a;  318c-319b; 
462c-465c;  504c-506a 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar  568a-596a,c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  90, 125a  / 
New  Atlantis ,  205d-207b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  viii,  sect  97- 
98  47a-c;  ch  xiii,  sect  155  60d-61a;  ch 
xiv,  sect  162-168  63a-64c;  ch  xviii,  sect 
203-210  72a-73c;  ch  xix,  sect  223-225  76c- 
77a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  9b-10c; 
bk  iv,  15d-16a;  bk  v,  21d-22b;  bk  vii,  44d- 
45b;  bk  viii,  51a-57a;  bk  x,  63b-c;  bk  xi, 
74c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  361a-362a  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  ii,  403a-404a;  405d-406a;  bk  iii, 
408b-c;  418a-421c;  bk  iv,  432b-435a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  622d-623a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  441b-c;  450d-452a  esp 
450d-451a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Federalist:  number  8,  45a-47a;  number  10 
49c-53a;  number  15-16,  64b-68d;  number 
18-22  71a-85a  esp  number  20,  77c;  number 
25,  91b-d;  number  27-28  94d-98b  passim; 
number  41,  133a-134c;  number  43,  141a- 
142d;  number  44,  147a-b;  number  71,  215b- 
c;  number  78  229d-233c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  320a-c  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  327b,d-332d;  350b-356b;  401d-402b; 
413c-414d;  425b-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  120a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273, 
91d-92a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  272c- 
273a;  part  iv,  365c-d;  367c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  668a- 
669c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


la  to  8a 


Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION 


7a .  The  relative  stability  of  different  types  of 
constitutions 

6  Herodotxjs:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  viii, 
587a-b 

7  Plato:  Republic}  bk  viii-ix,  401d-421a  esp  bk 
viii,  403a-404a,  405c-406a,  408b  409b,  411d- 
414b  /  Laws ,  bk  iii,  667c-676b  /  Seventh 
Letter ,  801  b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  9-1  i  465b-470b 
passim;  bk  iii,  ch  13  [1284*3— b34]  482a-483a; 
bk  iv,  ch  11  [i295b35-i296b2]  496a-c;  ch  12 
496d-497b;  bk  v  502a-519d  esp  ch  i  [i3oib5~ 
1302*16]  502d-503b,  ch  3  [i302b34~i303bi8] 
504b-505a.  ch  4  [i304ai8-bi8]  505d-506b,  ch 
7  [I3°7a5— 2?]  509a-b,  ch  12  [13 i5bi  1— 39]  518c- 
d;  bk  vi,  ch  5  [1319^3-1320*3]  523b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iv,  72a-b  /  Histories ,  bk 
ii,  224d-225a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  parti-ii, q  105, 
a  1,  ans  307d-309d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  105c-106d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  iii,  lOc-d; 
bk  viii,  51a-54b;  57b-c;  bk  xv,  112c-114a;  bk 
xix,  142a-143c;  145d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iii,  411  b-c; 
413d-414c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  48d-49a;  522d- 
523a, c 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  51c-53a;  number 
27,  96b;  number  48,  157b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  321  b-c  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment ,  355b-356b;  401d-402b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  195c-d;  390a-b 

7b.  The  safeguards  of  constitutional  govern¬ 
ment:  bills  of  rights;  separation  of  pow¬ 
ers;  impeachment 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  34d-35d  /  Solon ,  70c- 
71c  /  Coriolanus,  179c-184c  /  Tiberius  Grac¬ 
chus,  678b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii.  51b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  103d-104a;  150b; 
151d-152a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  viii,  sect  107 
49b-d;  ch  xi,  sect  134-CH  xii,  sect  143 
55b-58d;  ch  xiii  59b-62b;  ch  xvii,  sect  198 
70d-71a;  ch  xix  73d-81d  passim 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  7c-8c; 
bk  v,  29a;  31d;  bk  vi,  33a-35a;  bk  viii,  54b-c; 
bk  xi,  68b,d-75a;  82c-83a;  bk  xii,  84b,d-85c; 
bk  xix,  142a-143c 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  370b-377b  / 
Social  Contract ,  bk  iii,  407d-408a;  410d-411a; 
414d-415b;  423a;  424a-d;  bk  iv,  432b-433a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  24b;  25a;  27a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81c-d;  93a-c;  94c- 
95c;  96c-d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  435c-441d  passim; 
450d-452a  esp  451d-452a 


247 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-28]  la- 
t>;  I52-55]  2a;  [66-67]  [70-71]  2b;  [95-105I 
3a 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  v  [7^]-vi  [93] 
6a  b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  lla,c; 
article  1,  sect  2  [45-47]  lid;  sect  3  [81-95] 
12a-b;  sect  6  [i43]-sect  7  [169]  12c-d;  sect  9 
[267-275]  13d;  [283-295]  13d-14a;  sect  10 
[300-303]  14a;  article  ii,  sect  i  [331-334] 
14b;  sect  4  15c;  article  iii,  sect  2  [4931- 
sect  3  [51 1]  15d-16a;  article  iv,  sect  4 
16b-c;  article  vi  [583-599]  16d;  amend¬ 
ments,  i-x  17a-d;  xiii,  sect  i-xiv,  sect  i 
18c;  xv  19b;  xix  19d 

43  Federalist:  number  8,  46c-d;  number  9-10 
47a-53a;  number  21,  78d-79b;  number  25, 
90a-b;  number  26-28  92a-98b  passim;  num¬ 
ber  41,  133a-134c;  number  43,  140c-142d; 
number  44,  144d-145a;  146c-d;  number  46- 
51,  151a-165a;  number  53,  167b-168b;  num¬ 
ber  55,  173b-174c;  number  57,  176d-178b 
passim;  number  58,  180d;  number  62,  189d- 
191c;  number  63,  192c-193c;  number  65-66 
198a-203a;  number  68,  205d-206a;  number 
69,  207b-d;  number  73  218d-221c;  number 
76,  226a-227b;  number  78  229d-233c;  num¬ 
ber  80,  236a-b;  number  81,  237d-239c; 
number  83-84  244b-256a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267d-268b;  269a-c  /  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government ,  355b-356b;  361b;  365b- 
366a;  369b-389b;  392b-401a;  401d-402b; 
406c-407d;  412b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  195c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  272 
89d-90c;  par  286  96c-97a;  additions,  164 
144c-145a;  184  149a  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
part  iv,  368c-d 

8.  The  change  of  constitutions 

8a.  Methods  of  changing  a  constitution:  rev¬ 
olution,  amendment 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  viii, 
575c-577d 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  vii,  401c-d;  bk  viii-ix, 
401d-421a  esp  bk  viii,  403a-404a,  405c-406a, 
408b-409b,  411d-414b  /  Seventh  Letter ,  800b- 
801b;  804a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  ch  10  [u6o*3i-b22] 
412c-413a  /  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [1273^6- 
1274*22]  470c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  3  [1276*35^1 5] 
473b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [i288b43-i289*8]  487d- 
488a;  ch  5  [i292bi2-22]  492a;  bk  v,  ch  1-2 
502a-503d;  ch  3  [1303*14-24]  504c-d;  ch  4 
[i304b8]-CH  7  [i307b25]  506b-509d  /  Athenian 
Constitution ,  ch  5  554d-555a;  ch  29  566b-d; 
ch  33-34  568b-569a;  ch  38  570a-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  6a-b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  97, 
a  3  237b-238b 


248 


8b  to  9 a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(8.  The  change  of  constitutions .  8a.  Methods  of 

changing  a  constitution:  revolution,  amend¬ 
ment .) 

23  Hobbes:  Ijeviathan ,  part  ii,  150c-151a;  con¬ 
clusion,  280c-281a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  47a-51a;  462c-465c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xix  73d-81d 
passim 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,77a;  77d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  hi,  424a-d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  441  b-c;  450d-451a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-28]  la- 
b;  [95-108]  3a 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  xiii  9c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  v  16c; 
•AMENDMENTS,  XVIII,  SECT  3  19c;  XX,  SECT  6 
20b;  XXI,  SECT  3  20b;  xxn,  SECT  2  20b-d 

43  Federalist:  number  14,  62a-d;  number  21, 
78d-79b;  number  39-40,  127d-132a;  number 
43,  143a-b;  number  49-50  159b-162c;  num¬ 
ber  53,  167d-168b;  number  78,  232a-c; 
number  85,  257a-259a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  321a-b  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  327b,d-332d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  273- 
274,  91d-92a;  additions,  161  143a-b;  166 
145b-c;  176  147c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
part  iv,  364a-c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  424c- 
d;  425 b-c;  432b-c 

8b.  The  violation  and  overthrow  of  constitu¬ 
tional  government 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
438a-b;  bk  viii,  579c-583c;  585d-586b;  587a- 
589a;  590a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i292a5-37] 
491b-d;  ch  5  [i292b6— 1 1]  492a;  ch  6  [i293ai- 
10]  492c;  [1293^7-34]  492d-493a;  bk  v,  ch 
5-7  506b-509d;  bk  vi,  ch  4  [1319^-31]  523a- 
b;  ch  6  [1320^9-37]  524c  /  Athenian  Consti¬ 
tution,  ch  14-19  558d-561d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i, 
ch  4  [i36oai7~29]  600c 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  180b-d  /  Ly sander, 
361a-362a  / Agesilaus ,  482a-c;495c-d  /  Pompey 
499a-538a,c  /  Caesar  577a-604d  esp  578b-c  / 
Cato  the  Younger,  629d-639c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  la-2a;  3a-b;  23c  / 
Histories,  bki,  210d-212d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  47a-51a;  318c-319b; 
462c-465c;  504c-506a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xiii,  sect  149 
59b-d;  sect  155  60d-61a;  ch  xvi-xix65d-81d 
passim 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  viii,  51a- 
52c;  53c-d;  bk  xi,  82c-83a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  358b-359d  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  iii,  407c;  408b-c;  418a-419c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b,d-28b;  51c-d; 
153c-154b;  592a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  74b-d 


42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450d-451a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Federalist:  number  16,  68a-c;  number  20, 
77c;  number  21,  78d-79b;  number  25,  91b-d; 
number  26,  93c-94d;  number  28  96c-98b; 
number  44,  146c-d;  number  47-48  153c-159a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  350c-351c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  176a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  300b- 
301c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  8d-10d 

9.  The  theory  of  representation 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  8  [1 294^1 5] 
493d-494a;  ch  14  498b-499c  passim,  esp 
[i298b2i-22]  499b 

20  Aquinas:  Siimma  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  207a-c;  q  97,  a  3,  rep  3 
237b-238b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  96c-98a,c;  part  ii, 
lOla-b;  105a-c;  117b-121a;  153a-159c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  88-89 
44c-d;  ch  xi,  sect  140  58a:  ch  xix,  sect  222 
75d-76c;  sect  240  81b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4c-5a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  396b-d; 
bk  iii,  421c-423a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  269d-271d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  451c-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [41-47]  2a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i  11a- 

14b  passim 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  51d-53a  esp  51d- 
52a;  number  14,  60a-61b;  number  35,  113a- 
114b;  number  52-66  165a-203a  passim,  esp 
number  57,  176d-178b,  number  63,  193c- 
194a;  number  76,  227a;  number  78,  231a-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  268b-c  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment  327 a-442d  passim,  esp338a-b,355b-362c, 
370a-372b,  401a-406a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
301-303  100b-102a;  par  308-311  102c-104a; 
additions,  182  148c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
intro,  175b-c 

9 a.  The  functions  and  duties  of  representatives: 
their  relation  to  their  constituents 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  97c-98a,c;  part 
ii,  105a-c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xii,  sect  143 
58c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  73a-74b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  71a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  421c- 
423a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  522c-d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  438d-439a;  441b-c; 
450a-b;  451d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [35-47] 
lb-2a;  [109-121]  3a-b 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  v  [49-58]  5d; 
ix-x  7a-9a;  conclusion  9c-d 


249 


Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION 


9b  to  10 

43  Constitution  of  tiie  U.S.:  article  i  11a- 
14b 

43  Federalist:  number  io,  51d-52c;  number 
28,  97b-d;  number  35-36, 113a  ll5a;  number 
44,  146c-d;  number  48,  157c;  number  49, 
160c-d;  number  52-66  165a-203a  passim,  esp 
number  53,  168b  169d,  number  62,  190a  b, 
number  63,  192b  193a;  number  78,  231a  c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  351a-c; 
353b;  355b-362c;  400a-406a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  86a  b;  176a  b 

9b.  Types  of  representation:  diverse  methods 
of  selecting  representatives 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  vi,  697a-705c;  bk  xii,  786b- 
787b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  hi,  ch  io  478d-479a; 
ch  13  [1283*21^34]  481b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  9 
[1294^6—13]  494c;  ch  14  498b-499c;  ch  15 
[i3ooa9-b4]  500d-501b;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [i3i7b2- 
16]  520d;  ch  3  fi3 18*19— b5]  521c-522a;  ch  4 
[i3i8b2i-26]  522b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  45c-46a 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  ii  361a-369a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  viii,  sect  95-99 
46c-47c;  ch  xiii,  sect  154-158  60c-62b;  ch 
xix,  sect  216  74d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  73a-74b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  4a-6d; 
bk  xi,  71a-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  324c-325b  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  i,  391b;  bk  iv,  425d-428a  esp 
426d-427a 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  v  [49-73]  5d- 
6a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect  2 
[5]-sect  4  [102]  llb-12b;  SECT5  [107-115]  12b; 
AMENDMENTS,  XII  18a-CJ  XIV,  SECT  2  18d;  XVII 
19b-c 

43  Federalist:  number  22,  82a-c;  number  35, 
113a-114b;  number  52-63  165a-195b  passim, 
esp  number  54  170a-172b,  number  62  188d- 
191c;  number  68  205b-207a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  369b-399d; 
407d-409c;  412a-414d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  176a-b;  251a;  261c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par 
3 1 1-3 13  103d-104b  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
intro,  172d-173c;  part  ii,  277c-d;  part  iv, 
365a;  368a-b 

10.  The  origin,  growth,  and  vicissitudes  of  con¬ 
stitutional  government 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iv,  152d-153b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  396b- 
397d;  bk  iii,  432b-c;  438a-b;  bk  viii,  575c- 
576c;  579c-583c;  585d-586b;  587a-589a; 

590a-c 


7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iii,  667c  676b 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  qii  9  [1 1 8 ibi  3  24] 
436c  /  Politics ,  bk  ii,  cii  12  470b  471d;  bk  ii r, 
ch  15  [i286b8  21]  484d-485a;  bk  iv,  ch  13 
[i297bi6— 28]  498a;  bk  v,  ch  4  [1304*1 8—38 1 
505d  506a;  ch  5-7  506b-509d  /  Athenian 
Constitution ,  ch  1-4 i  553a  572a  passim,  esp 
ch  41  571c-572a 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus ,  9a  d  /  Romulus ,  20c-28a/ 
Lycurgus  32a-48d  /  Solon  64b,d-77a,c  /  Popli- 
cola ,  77a-82a  /  Poplicola - Solon ,  86a  87b  / 
Coriolanus  174b,d-193a,c  esp  176b  184c  / 
Lysander ,  365a-368a,c  /  Cato  the  Younger 
620a-648a,c  /  Agis  648b,d-656d  /  Cleomenes , 
657a-663c  /  Tiberius  Gracchus  671b,d-681a,c  / 
Caius  Gracchus  681b,d-689a,c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  la-2a;  3a-b;  21b-22d; 
bk  iii,  51b-c;  bk  iv,  72a-b;  bk  vi,  97b  / 
Histories ,  bk  i,  210d-212d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105, 
a  1,  ans  307d-309d 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c 

32  Milton:  Sonnets ,  xii  65a-b  /  Lord  Gen.  Pair- 
fax  68b-69a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vii,  sect  94 
46a-c;  ch  viii,  sect  ioo-iii  47c-51a  passim; 
ch  xiv,  sect  162-166  63a-64a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  74a-76b;  part  iii, 
120a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi  68b, d- 
84d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  356a-b;  357b-c  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  iii,  420a-c;  bk  iv,  428a-434b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  269d-271d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  la;  24b,d-28a;  51a- 
d;  153c-154b;  241b-244a  passim;  521a-523a,c; 
622d-623c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71d-75b  esp  71d- 
72a,  73b-c;  202a-d;  217a-b;  403b-404d; 
562b-565a;  574b-582b;  586c-589a  esp  587a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  451d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  5a-9d 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  lla-20d 

43  Federalist:  number  2  31a-33b;  number  9, 
47a-d;  number  18-20  71a-78b  passim;  num¬ 
ber  37-38  117d-125a;  number  40  128b-132a; 
number  48  156d-159a;  number  52,  165d- 
167b;  number  63  191d-195b  passim;  number 
85  256a-259a,c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267b,d-268c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  176a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  176 
147c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  192 d- 
193a;  part  ii,  275b-276a;  part  iii,  295d- 
296c;  part  iv,  335a-336c;  362b-368d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  238c- 243d; 
260b-c;  epilogue  i,  668a-669c 


250 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  considerations  of  the  distinction  between  government  by  law  and  government  by  men, 
and  for  the  comparison  of  constitutional  government  with  other  forms  of  government,  see 
Aristocracy  4;  Law  6b,  7a-yb;  Liberty  id,  if;  Monarchy  ia-ia(2),  40-46(4); 
Tyranny  5~5d. 

The  exposition  of  different  types  of  constitutions  and  different  forms  of  constitutional  govern- 
ment  in  themselves  and  in  relation  to  one  another,  see  Aristocracy  i-2e;  Citizen  2C-3; 
Democracy  3-30,  4a(i)~4a(2),  4d;  Oligarchy  1-2,  4,  5a. 

Other  discussions  of  the  mixed  regime  and  the  mixed  constitution,  see  Aristocracy  2b; 

Democracy  33-3  b;  Government  2b;  Monarchy  ib(i)-ib(2). 

The  idea  of  citizenship  in  relation  to  constitutional  government,  see  Citizen  2a-2b;  and  for 
the  conception  of  the  statesman  as  a  constitutional  office-holder,  see  State  8. 

The  conception  of  constitutional  law  and  its  relation  to  other  bodies  of  law  and  legal  justice, 
see  Justice  9c,  10a;  Law  7a. 

Matters  relevant  to  the  conventional  character  of  constitutions  and  the  relation  of  the  idea  of 
a  constitution  to  the  theory  of  the  social  contract,  see  Custom  and  Convention  6a;  Law 
7c;  Nature  2b;  State  3d. 

Constitutional  government  in  relation  to  the  theory  of  sovereignty,  see  Democracy  4b; 

Government  ig(i)-ig(3);  Law  6b;  Monarchy  40(3);  State  2c;  Tyranny  5c. 

Other  discussions  of  the  safeguards  of  constitutional  government  and  of  the  theory  and 
machinery  of  representation,  see  Aristocracy  6;  Democracy  4b,  5 — 5c ;  Government  ih; 
Liberty  ig. 

The  problem  of  constitutional  change  and  the  stability  of  different  types  of  constitution,  see 
Aristocracy  3;  Democracy  j-ja;  Revolution  2a,  30(2);  State  3g. 

The  issues  involved  in  the  development  of  constitutional  government  and  the  establishment 
of  liberty  under  law,  see  Government  6;  Liberty  6b;  Monarchy  40(2);  Progress  4a; 
Revolution  3a;  Tyranny  4b,  8. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 


Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 


I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 


For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Machiavelli.  The  Discourses ,  bk  i 
Milton.  The  Tenure  of  Kings  and  Magistrates 
Hume.  Idea  of  a  Perfect  Commonwealth 

II. 

Polybius.  Histories ,  vol  i,  bk  vi 
Cicero.  De  Republica  {The  Republic) 
Marsilius  of  Padua.  Defensor  Pads 


Fortescue.  Governance  of  England. 

Guicciardini.  Dialogo  e  discorsi  del  reggimento  di 
Firenze 

Bodin.  The  Six  Bootes  of  a  Commonweale 
Bellarmine.  The  Treatise  on  Civil  Government  {De 
Laicis) 

Hooker.  Of  the  Laws  of  Ecclesiastical  Polity 
Bolingbroke.  Dissertation  upon  Parties ,  letter  18 
Vattel.  The  Law  of  Nations ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
J.  Wilson.  Worlds,  part  i,  ch  ii,  v,  x-xi;  part  ii 


Chapter  12:  CONSTITUTION 


Bentham.  Fragment  on  Government ,  ch  i  (36-48),  3 
J.  Adams.  A  Defense  of  the  Constitutions  of  Govern¬ 
ment  of  the  United  States  of  America 
Paine.  Rights  of  Man 
Burke.  Letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol 

- .  On  the  Reform  of  the  Representation  in  the 

House  of  Commons 

- .  An  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs 

- .  Letter  to  Sir  Hercules  Langrishe 

Godwin.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  Political  Justice,  bk 
vi,  ch  7 

Si  eyes.  Discours  dans  les  debats  constitutionels  de  Van 

III 

Jefferson.  Notes  on  the  State  of  Virginia 
- .  Democracy ,  ch  3 

Whewell.  The  Elements  of  Morality ,  bk  v,  ch  4-5 
Calhoun.  A  Disquisition  on  Government 
- .  A  Discourse  on  the  Constitution  and  Govern¬ 
ment  of  the  United  States 
Tocqueville.  Democracy  in  America 

- .  Uancien  regime  ( Ancient  Regime) 

Bagehot.  The  English  Constitution 


251 

Dicey.  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Law  of  the 
Constitution 

Mosca.  The  Ruling  Class 
Jellinek.  Allgemeine  Staatslehre 
Bryce.  The  American  Commonwealth 

- .  Studies  in  History  and  Jurisprudence 

Beard.  The  Supre?ne  Court  and  the  Constitution 
Duguit.  Law  in  the  Modern  State 
Farrand.  The  Framing  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States 

J.  Dickinson.  Administrative  Justice  and  the  Su¬ 
premacy  of  Law  in  the  United  States 
Merriam.  The  Written  Constitution  and  the  Unwrit¬ 
ten  Attitude 

McIlwain.  The  Fundamental  Law  Behind  the 
Constitution 

- ,  Constitutionalism  and  the  Changing  World 

- .  Constitutionalism ,  Ancient  and  Modern 

Kelsen.  General  Theory  of  Law  and  State 
Rossiter.  Constitutional  Dictatorship 
Borges e  et  al.  Preliminary  Draft  of  a  World 
Constitution 


Chapter  13:  COURAGE 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  heroes  of  history  and  poetry  may  be 
cruel,  violent,  self-seeking,  ruthless,  intem¬ 
perate,  and  unjust,  but  they  are  never  cowards. 
They  do  not  falter  or  give  way.  They  do  not 
despair  in  the  face  of  almost  hopeless  odds.  They 
have  the  strength  and  stamina  to  achieve  what¬ 
ever  they  set  their  minds  and  wills  to  do.  They 
would  not  be  heroes  if  they  were  not  men  of 
courage. 

This  is  the  very  meaning  of  heroism  which 
gives  the  legendary  heroes  almost  the  stature 
of  gods.  In  the  Homeric  age  they  do  in  fact  con¬ 
tend  with  gods  as  well  as  men.  The  two  Homeric 
epics,  especially  the  Iliad ,  are  peopled  with  men 
who  cannot  be  dared  or  daunted.  In  Tenny¬ 
son’s  poem,  Ulysses,  now  restive  in  Ithaca, 
remembering  the  years  at  Troy  and  the  long 
voyage  home,  says  to  his  companions, 

Some  work  of  noble  note  may  yet  be  done 
Not  unbecoming  men  that  strove  with  Gods 

. and  though 

We  are  not  now  that  strength  which  in  old  days 
Moved  earth  and  heaven;  that  which  we  are,  we  are: 
One  equal  temper  of  heroic  hearts, 

Made  weak  by  time  and  fate,  but  strong  in  will 
To  strive,  to  seek,  to  find,  and  not  to  yield. 

In  the  Iliad ,  courage  is  the  quality  above  all 
others  which  characterizes  the  great  figures  of 
Achilles  and  Hector,  Ajax,  Patroclus,  and  Dio- 
medes,  Agamemnon  and  Menelaus.  The  only 
other  quality  which  seems  to  be  equally  prized, 
and  made  the  subject  of  rivalry  and  boast,  is 
cunning — the  craft  of  Odysseus,  that  man  of 
many  devices,  and  the  cleverness  in  speech  of 
Nestor.  Yet  the  best  speech  is  only  the  prelude 
to  action,  and  except  for  the  night  expedition 
of  Odysseus  and  Diomedes  into  the  Trojan 
camp,  the  great  actions  of  the  Iliad  are  un¬ 
planned  deeds  of  prowess — stark,  not  stealthy. 

The  heroes  have  boundless  passions,  and  fear 
is  among  them.  When  they  are  called  fearless, 


it  is  not  because  nothing  affrights  them  or  turns 
their  blood  cold.  Fear  seizes  them,  as  does  anger, 
with  all  its  bodily  force.  They  are  fearless  only 
in  the  sense  that  they  do  not  act  afraid  or  fail 
to  act.  Their  courage  is  always  equal  to  the 
peril  sensed  or  felt,  so  that  they  can  perform 
what  must  be  done  as  if  they  had  no  fear  of  pain 
or  death. 

Yet  brave  men  often  speak  of  courage  as  if  it 
were  fearlessness  and  mark  the  coward  as  one 
who  is  undone  by  fear.  An  ambush,  Indomen- 
eus  says  in  the  Iliad ,  will  show  “who  is  coward¬ 
ly  and  who  is  brave;  the  coward  will  change 
color  at  every  touch  and  turn;  he  is  full  of  fears, 
and  keeps  shifting  his  weight  first  on  one  knee 
and  then  on  the  other;  his  heart  beats  fast  as  he 
thinks  of  death,  and  one  can  hear  the  chatter¬ 
ing  of  his  teeth.”  The  brave  man,  mastering 
fear,  will  appear  to  be  fearless. 

This  is  the  courage  of  men  of  action,  men  in 
war,  found  not  only  in  the  heroes  of  Troy’s 
siege,  but  in  the  stalwarts  of  all  other  battles — 
Leonidas  at  Thermopylae,  Aeneas  and  Turnus 
engaged  in  single  combat,  the  conquerors  in 
Plutarch,  the  warrior-nobility  in  Shakespeare, 
the  civilized  Prince  Andrew  and  young  Rostov 
in  War  and  Peace.  It  is  the  sort  of  courage  which 
goes  with  physical  strength,  with  feats  of  en¬ 
durance;  and,  as  signified  by  the  root-meaning 
of  “fortitude,”  which  is  a  synonym  for  courage, 
it  is  a  reservoir  of  moral  or  spiritual  strength  to 
sustain  action  even  when  flesh  and  blood  can 
carry  on  no  further.  Such  courage  is  a  virtue  in 
the  primary  sense  of  the  Latin  word  virtns — 
manliness,  the  spirit,  or  strength  of  spirit,  re¬ 
quired  to  be  a  man. 

There  are  other  sorts  of  courage.  The  courage 
of  the  tragic  hero,  of  Oedipus  and  Antigone, 
goes  with  strength  of  mind,  not  body.  This, 
perhaps  even  more  than  being  lion-hearted,  is 


252 


Chapter  13:  COURAGE 


253 


a  specifically  human  strength.  Courage  does  not 
consist  only  in  conquering  fear  and  in  with¬ 
holding  the  body  from  flight  no  matter  what 
the  risk  of  pain.  It  consists  at  least  as  much  in 
steeling  the  will,  reinforcing  its  resolutions,  and 
turning  the  mind  relentlessly  to  seek  or  face 
the  truth. 

Civil  no  less  than  martial  action  requires  cour¬ 
age.  Weary  of  empire,  Marcus  Aurelius  sum¬ 
mons  courage  each  day  for  the  performance  of 
an  endless  round  of  duties.  “In  the  morning 
when  thou  risest  unwilling,”  he  reminds  him¬ 
self,  “let  this  thought  be  present— I  am  rising 
to  the  work  of  a  human  being.”  How  he  con¬ 
ceives  the  work  of  an  emperor,  he  makes  plain. 
“Let  the  deity  which  is  in  thee  be  the  guardian 
of  a  living  being,  manly  and  of  ripe  age,  and  en¬ 
gaged  in  matter  political,  and  a  Roman,  and  a 
ruler,  who  has  taken  his  post  like  a  man  waiting 
for  the  signal  which  summons  him  from  life, 
and  ready  to  go,  having  need  neither  of  oath 
nor  of  any  man’s  testimony.”  The  burdens  are 
heavy,  the  task  difficult  but  not  impossible,  for 
a  man  “can  live  well  even  in  a  palace.” 

Civil  courage  is  as  necessary  for  the  citizen  as 
for  the  ruler.  This  virtue,  in  Mill’s  opinion,  is 
especially  necessary  for  citizens  of  a  free  gov¬ 
ernment.  “A  people  may  prefer  a  free  govern¬ 
ment,”  he  writes,  “but  if,  from  indolence,  or 
carelessness,  or  cowardice,  or  want  of  public 
spirit,  they  are  unequal  to  the  exertions  neces¬ 
sary  for  preserving  it;  if  they  will  not  fight  for 
it  when  it  is  directly  attacked;  if  they  can  be 
deluded  by  the  artifices  used  to  cheat  them  out 
of  it;  if  by  momentary  discouragement,  or  tem¬ 
porary  panic,  or  a  fit  of  enthusiasm  for  an  in¬ 
dividual,  they  can  be  induced  to  lay  their  liber¬ 
ties  at  the  feet  even  of  a  great  man,  or  trust  him 
with  powers  which  enable  him  to  subvert  their 
institutions;  in  all  these  cases  they  are  more  or 
less  unfit  for  liberty:  and  though  it  may  be  for 
their  good  to  have  had  it  even  for  a  short  time, 
they  are  unlikely  long  to  enjoy  it.” 

The  courage  or  pusillanimity  of  a  people  is 
sometimes  regarded  as  the  cause,  and  sometimes 
as  the  effect,  of  their  political  institutions.  “The 
inhabitants  of  Europe,”  Hippocrates  writes,  are 
“more  courageous  than  those  of  Asia;  for  a 
climate  which  is  always  the  same  induces  indo¬ 
lence,  but  a  changeable  climate,  laborious  exer¬ 
tions,  both  of  body  and  mind;  and  from  rest 


and  indolence  cowardice  is  engendered,  and 
from  laborious  exertions  and  pains,  courage.” 
This,  according  to  Hippocrates,  partly  explains 
w  hy  the  Asiatics  readily  submit  todespotismand 
why  the  Europeans  fight  for  political  liberty. 
But  the  character  of  the  Europeans,  he  adds,  is 
also  the  result  of  “their  institutions,  because 
they  are  not  governed  by  kings  ...  for  where 
men  are  governed  by  kings,  there  they  must  be 
very  cowardly  .  .  .  and  they  will  not  readily 
undergo  dangers  in  order  to  promote  the  power 
of  another;  but  those  that  are  free  undertake 
dangers  on  their  own  account  .  .  .  and  thus 
their  institutions  contribute  not  a  little  to  their 
courage.” 

For  Hegel,  on  the  contrary,  civic  courage 
consists  in  undertaking  dangers,  even  to  the 
point  of  sacrifice,  for  the  state.  Moreover,  for 
him  true  courage  is  entirely  a  civic  virtue.  “The 
intrinsic  w'orth  of  courage  as  a  disposition  of  the 
mind,”  he  wrrites,  “is  to  be  found  in  the  gen¬ 
uine,  absolute,  final  end,  the  sovereignty  of  the 
state.  The  work  of  courage  is  to  actualize  this 
final  end,  and  the  means  to  this  end  is  the  sacri¬ 
fice  of  personal  actuality.”  Though  he  admits 
that  courage  “is  multiform,”  he  insists  that 
“tljg  mettle  of  an  animal  or  a  brigand,  courage 
for  the  sake  of  honor,  the  courage  of  a  knight, 
these  are  not  true  forms  of  courage.  The  true 
courage  of  civilized  nations  is  readiness  for  sac¬ 
rifice  in  the  service  of  the  state,  so  that  the 
individual  counts  as  only  one  amongst  many.” 

The  work  of  man  is  learning  as  well  as  ac¬ 
tion.  Man  has  a  duty  to  the  truth  as  well  as  to 
the  state.  The  ability  to  face  without  flinching 
the  hard  questions  reality  can  put  constitutes 
the  temper  of  a  courageous  mind.  “The  huge 
world  that  girdles  us  about,”  William  James 
writes,  “puts  all  sorts  of  questions  to  us,  and 
tests  us  in  all  sorts  of  ways.  Some  of  the  tests  we 
meet  by  actions  that  are  easy,  and  some  of  the 
questions  w7e  answer  in  articulately  formulated 
words.  But  the  deepest  question  that  is  ever 
asked  admits  of  no  reply  but  the  dumb  turning 
of  the  will  and  tightening  of  our  heart-strings 
as  wre  say,  ‘Yes,  I  will  even  have  it  so!’  When  a 
dreadful  object  is  presented,  or  w7hen  life  as  a 
whole  turns  up  its  dark  abysses  to  our  view7, 
then  the  worthless  ones  among  us  lose  their  hold 
on  the  situation  altogether  ...  But  the  heroic 


254 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


mind  does  differently  ...  It  can  face  them  if 
necessary,  without  for  that  losing  its  hold  upon 
the  rest  of  life.  The  world  thus  finds  in  the 
heroic  man  its  worthy  match  and  mate  ...  He 
can  stand  this  Universe.” 

Not  only  in  answering  questions,  but  in  ask¬ 
ing  them,  courage  is  required.  The  story  which 
St.  Augustine  tells  in  the  Confessions,  of  his  per¬ 
sistent  questioning  of  doctrines  and  dogmas,  his 
refusal  to  rest  in  any  creed  which  did  not 
wholly  satisfy  his  mind,  is  a  story  of  speculative 
courage,  capped  by  the  fortitude  with  which  he 
bore  the  agony  of  irresolution  and  doubt. 

Learning  is  never  an  easy  enterprise,  nor 
truth  an  easy  master.  The  great  scientists  and 
philosophers  have  shown  the  patience  and  per¬ 
severance  of  courage  in  surmounting  the  social 
hardships  of  opposition  and  distrust,  as  well  as 
the  intellectual  difficulties  which  might  discour¬ 
age  men  less  resolved  to  seek  and  find  the  truth. 
The  great  religious  martyrs,  as  indomitable  in 
their  humility  as  soldiers  are  in  daring,  have 
been  as  resolute — never  yielding  to”a  despair 
which  would  have  dishonored  their  faith. 

In  all  these  types  of  fortitude,  different  mo¬ 
tivations  are  apparent,  as  diverse  as  the  forms 
which  courage  takes  under  the  various  demdhds 
of  life.  Not  all  the  forms  of  courage  may  be 
equally  admirable,  partly  because  they  are  un¬ 
equal  in  degree,  but  also  partly  because  the 
courageous  acts  themselves,  or  the  purposes  for 
which  fortitude  is  needed,  are  not  of  equal 
moral  worth.  Yet  the  essence  of  courage  seems 
to  be  the  same  throughout.  It  sustains  the  honor 
of  Don  Quixote  and  in  some  sense  even  of  Sir 
John  Falstaff;  it  burnishes  the  fame  of  Alexan¬ 
der  and  Caesar;  it  fortifies  Socrates  and  Galileo 
to  withstand  their  trials.  Whether  in  the  dis¬ 
charge  of  duty  or  in  the  pursuit  of  happiness, 
courage  confirms  a  man  in  the  hard  choices  he 
has  been  forced  to  make. 

As  the  chapter  on  Virtue  indicates,  the  tra¬ 
ditional  theory  of  the  moral  qualities  places 
courage  or  fortitude  among  the  four  principal 
virtues.  The  other  three  are  temperance,  jus¬ 
tice,  and  either  wisdom  or  prudence,  according 
to  the  enumeration  of  different  writers. 

Plato  names  these  virtues  when,  in  the  Re¬ 
public,  he  compares  the  parts  of  the  state  with 
the  parts  of  the  soul.  “The  same  principles 


which  exist  in  the  State  exist  also  in  the  individ¬ 
ual,”  Socrates  says,  and  “they  are  three  in  num¬ 
ber.”  There  is  one  “with  which  a  man  reasons 
. . .  the  rational  part  of  the  soul,  another  with 
which  he  loves  and  hungers  and  thirsts  and  feels 
the  flutterings  of  any  other  desire — the  irra¬ 
tional  or  appetitive,  the  ally  of  sundry  pleas¬ 
ures  and  satisfactions.”  The  third  part  is  “pas¬ 
sion  or  spirit”  which  “when  not  corrupted  by 
bad  education  is  the  natural  auxiliary  of  reason.” 

Corresponding  to  these  three  parts  of  the 
soul,  there  are,  or  should  be,  according  to  Plato, 
three  classes  in  the  state:  the  guardians  or  rulers, 
the  husbandmen  and  artisans,  or  the  workers, 
and  the  auxiliaries  or  the  soldiers. 

The  virtues  which  belong  to  the  several  parts 
of  the  soul  also  belong  to  the  corresponding 
parts  of  the  state.  Wise  is  the  man,  Socrates  de¬ 
clares,  “who  has  in  him  that  little  part  which 
rules,  and  which  proclaims  commands,  that 
part  too  being  supposed  to  have  a  knowledge  of 
what  is  for  the  interest  of  each  of  the  three 
parts  and  of  the  whole.”  Courageous  is  he 
“whose  spirit  retains  in  pleasure  and  in  pain  the 
commands  of  reason  about  what  he  ought  or 
ought  not  to  fear.” 

Temperance,  however,  instead  of  being  ex¬ 
clusively  the  perfection  of  one  part,  pervades 
the  whole,  and  is  found,  according  to  Socrates, 
in  the  man  “who  has  these  same  elements  in 
friendly  harmony,  in  which  the  one  ruling  prin¬ 
ciple  of  reason,  and  the  two  subject  ones  of 
spirit  and  desire  are  equally  agreed  that  reason 
ought  to  rule.”  Justice — “the  only  virtue  which 
remains  .  .  .  when  the  other  virtues  of  temper¬ 
ance  and  courage  and  wisdom  are  abstracted” — 
“is  the  ultimate  cause  and  condition  of  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  all  of  them,  and  while  remaining  in 
them  is  also  their  preservative.”  It  is  the  virtue 
which  “does  not  permit  the  several  elements 
within  a  man  to  interfere  with  one  another,  or 
any  of  them  to  do  the  work  of  others.” 

The  political  analogy  finds  justice  in  the  well- 
ordered  state,  where  wisdom  rules,  courage  de¬ 
fends  the  laws  and  peace,  and  temperance  bal¬ 
ances  the  economy.  Wisdom  would  belong  most 
properly  to  the  guardians,  courage  to  the  aux¬ 
iliaries,  while  all  three  classes  would  need  tem¬ 
perance.  Hegel  also  associates  courage  with  “the 
military  class” — “that  universal  class  which  is 
charged  with  the  defence  of  the  state”  and 


Chapter  13:  COURAGE 


255 


whose  duty  it  is  “to  make  real  the  ideality  im¬ 
plicit  within  itself,  i.e .,  to  sacrifice  itself.”  But 
whereas  for  Hegel  courage  seems  to  be  the  fore¬ 
most  political  virtue,  Plato  puts  it  last  in  the 
order  of  goods.  “Wisdom  is  chief,”  the  Athe¬ 
nian  Stranger  says  in  the  Laws ;  “next  follows 
temperance;  and  from  the  union  of  these  two 
with  courage  springs  justice,  and  fourth  in  the 
scale  of  virtue  is  courage.” 

In  the  context  of  a  different  psychological 
analysis,  and  a  theory  of  the  virtues  which  con¬ 
siders  them  primarily  as  habits,  Aristotle’s  con¬ 
ception  of  courage  differs  from  Plato’s  in  a 
number  of  respects.  It  is  most  closely  allied 
with  temperance.  These  two  virtues  together 
belong  to  the  irrational  part  of  the  soul — the 
passions  or  appetites — and  are  concerned  with 
our  attitude  toward  pleasure  and  pain.  They 
discipline  us,  both  in  feeling  and  action,  with 
regard  to  the  pleasurable  objects  of  desire  and 
the  painful  objects  of  fear  or  aversion.  Aris¬ 
totle  seems  to  think  courage  more  praiseworthy 
than  temperance,  “for  it  is  harder  to  face  what 
is  painful  than  to  abstain  from  what  is  pleasant.” 

Just  as  the  temperate  man  is  one  who  habit¬ 
ually  forgoes  certain  pleasures  and  seeks  other 
pleasures  moderately  for  the  sake  of  achieving 
some  greater  good,  so  the  courageous  man  is  one 
who  can  at  any  time  endure  pain  and  hardship, 
or  overcome  fear  of  danger  and  death,  in  order 
to  achieve  a  paramount  end.  Since  death  is  “the 
most  terrible  of  all  things,”  Aristotle  declares 
that  “properly,  he  will  be  called  brave  who  is 
fearless  in  face  of  a  noble  death,  and  of  all 
emergencies  that  involve  death.”  But  it  must 
be  “for  a  noble  end  that  the  brave  man  endures 
and  acts  as  courage  directs.” 

The  paramount  end,  the  greatest  good,  which 
the  moderation  of  temperance  and  the  endur¬ 
ance  of  courage  serve,  is  for  Aristotle  happi¬ 
ness.  Yet  through  their  relation  to  justice, 
which  concerns  the  good  of  others  and  the  wel¬ 
fare  of  the  state,  temperance  and  courage  help 
a  man  to  perform  his  social  duties,  whether 
as  ruler  or  citizen,  in  peace  or  war.  The  man 
who  acts  lawfully  will  not  only  be  just,  but  also 
courageous  and  temperate,  for,  in  Aristotle’s 
view,  “the  law  bids  us  do  both  the  acts  of  a 
brave  man,  e.g.,  not  to  desert  our  post  nor  take 
to  flight  nor  throw  away  our  arms,  and  those  of 
a  temperate  man,  e.g .,  not  to  commit  adultery 


nor  to  gratify  one’s  lust.”  Not  only  may  the 
law-abiding  man  be  called  upon  to  be  coura¬ 
geous  in  the  respects  which  Aristotle  indicates, 
but  it  may  sometimes  take  great  courage  to  up¬ 
hold  the  law  itself  against  many  temptations  to 
the  contrary.  “After  the  death  of  Moses  .  .  .  the 
Lord  spake  unto  Joshua,”  and  said  unto  him: 
“Be  thou  strong  and  very  courageous,  that 
thou  mayest  observe  to  do  according  to  all  the 
law  which  Moses  my  servant  commanded  thee: 
turn  not  from  it  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the 
left.” 

The  fourth  virtue  with  which  courage,  tem¬ 
perance,  and  justice  are  associated  in  the  con¬ 
duct  of  private  or  public  life  is  prudence,  or 
“practical  wisdom.”  Though  Aristotle  classifies 
prudence  as  an  intellectual  virtue,  consisting  in 
the  capacity  for  making  a  right  judgment  about 
things  to  be  done,  he  also  regards  prudence  as 
inseparable  in  origin  and  exercise  from  these 
other  three  virtues  which  he  calls  “moral” 
rather  than  “intellectual.”  Later  writers  call 
the  four  virtues  taken  together — courage,  tem¬ 
perance,  justice,  and  prudence — the  “cardinal” 
virtues  in  order  to  signify,  as  Aquinas  explains, 
that  the  whole  of  moral  life  “hinges”  upon  them. 

The  theory  of  the  cardinal  virtues,  and  of 
their  connection  with  one  another  in  such  wise 
that  none  can  be  perfect  in  the  absence  of  the 
others,  is  treated  in  the  chapter  on  Virtue. 
The  chapters  on  Justice,  Temperance,  and 
Prudence  discuss  the  doctrine  that  each  of 
these  virtues  is  only  a  part  of  virtue,  which 
must  be  integrated  with  the  other  parts.  The 
special  role  which  prudence  plays  in  relation  to 
virtues  like  courage  and  temperance — at  least 
according  to  Aristotle’s  view  that  “it  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  to  be  good  in  the  strict  sense  without  prac¬ 
tical  wisdom,  nor  practically  wise  without  moral 
virtue” — must  be  reserved  for  the  chapter  deal¬ 
ing  with  that  virtue.  Nevertheless,  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  consider  here  how  its  dependence  on 
prudence  may  qualify  the  meaning  or  nature  of 
courage. 

The  connection  which  some  writers  see  be¬ 
tween  courage  and  prudence  affects  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  courage  in  two  ways.  The  first  involves 
the  doctrine  of  the  mean  which  enters  into  the 
consideration  of  all  the  moral  virtues,  but  espe¬ 
cially  courage  and  temperance. 


256 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Aristotle  originates  the  analysis  of  virtue  as 
“a  mean  between  two  vices  .  .  .  because  the 
vices  respectively  fall  short  of  or  exceed  what  is 
right  in  both  passions  and  actions/’  It  requires 
prudence  to  decide  what  things  should  be  feared, 
when  they  should  be  feared,  and  how  much; 
and  so  a  prudent  judgment  is  involved  in  fear¬ 
ing  the  right  things  at  the  right  time  and  in  the 
right  manner— neither  too  much  nor  too  little. 
“The  coward,  the  rash  man,  and  the  brave 
man,”  Aristotle  writes,  “are  concerned  with  the 
same  objects  but  are  differently  disposed  to 
them;  for  the  first  two  exceed  and  fall  short, 
while  the  third  holds  the  middle,  which  is  the 
right,  position;  and  rash  men  are  precipitate 
and  wish  for  dangers  beforehand  but  draw  back 
when  they  are  in  them,  while  brave  men  are 
keen  in  the  moment  of  action,  but  quiet  before¬ 
hand.” 

Aristotle  is  not  the  only  one  to  define  cour¬ 
age  as  a  middleground  between  contrary  ex¬ 
tremes.  Most  writers  who  devote  any  attention 
to  the  nature  of  courage  come  to  somewhat  the 
same  conclusion.  Epictetus,  for  example,  in  de¬ 
claring  that  we  should  “combine  confidence 
with  caution  in  everything  we  do,”  seems  also 
to  make  courage  a  mean.  He  points  out  that 
such  a  combination  at  first  “may  appear  a  para¬ 
dox”  since  “caution  seems  to  be  contrary  to 
confidence,  and  contraries  are  by  no  means 
compatible.”  But  this,  he  says,  is  only  due  to 
“confusion.”  There  would  be  a  paradox  “if  we 
really  called  upon  a  man  to  use  caution  and  con¬ 
fidence  in  regard  to  the  same  things  ...  as  unit¬ 
ing  qualities  which  cannot  be  united.”  But,  as 
Epictetus  explains,  caution  and  confidence  can 
be  united  because  they  concern  different  ob¬ 
jects. 

The  difference  in  objects  which  he  has  in 
mind  becomes  clear  in  the  light  of  the  Stoic 
maxim,  “Be  confident  in  all  that  lies  beyond 
the  will’s  control,  be  cautious  in  all  that  is  de¬ 
pendent  on  the  will.”  Sharply  distinguishing 
between  what  does  and  does  not  lie  within  our 
control,  Epictetus  tells  us  to  look  with  care  and 
caution  only  to  those  things  in  which  we  can  do 
evil  by  making  an  evil  choice.  “In  such  matters 
of  will  it  is  right  to  use  caution.”  But  in  other 
matters,  “in  things  outside  the  will’s  control, 
which  do  not  depend  on  us  .  .  .  we  should  use 
confidence.” 


By  uniting  caution  and  confidence,  we  avoid 
the  extremes  of  foolhardiness  and  cowardice 
and  achieve  the  mean  in  which  Aristotle  says 
courage  consists.  Both  are  necessary.  Coward¬ 
ice  is  not  the  only  vice  opposed  to  courage.  The 
man  who  acts  without  caution  in  the  face  of 
danger,  recklessly  disregarding  what  might  be 
reasonably  feared,  is  foolhardy  rather  than  cou¬ 
rageous;  even  as  the  coward  is  held  back  by  fears 
which  his  reason  tells  him  should  be  overcome. 

Because  he  agrees  that  courage  consists  in 
avoiding  both  extremes,  Spinoza  writes  that 
“flight  at  the  proper  time,  just  as  well  as  fight¬ 
ing,  is  to  be  reckoned  as  showing  strength  of 
mind.”  These  two  acts  are  allied,  since  it  is  by 
“the  same  virtue  of  the  mind”  that  a  man 
“avoids  danger  .  .  .  and  seeks  to  overcome  it.” 

To  determine  at  a  given  moment  whether  to 
flee  or  to  fight,  so  as  to  avoid  either  foolhardi¬ 
ness  or  cowardice,  obviously  involves  a  decision 
of  reason.  Such  a  decision,  according  to  Spinoza, 
demands  “strength  of  mind,”  bv  which  he 
means  “the  desire  by  which  each  person  en¬ 
deavours  from  the  dictates  of  reason  alone  to 
preserve  his  own  being.”  Without  rational  di¬ 
rection  or,  as  Aristotle  would  say,  without 
prudence,  one  may  be  fearless  but  not  cou¬ 
rageous. 

Those  who,  like  Hobbes,  do  not  include  rea¬ 
son  or  prudence  as  an  essential  element  in  their 
conception  of  courage,  treat  courage  as  an  emo¬ 
tion  rather  than  a  virtue,  and  tend  to  identify 
it  with  fearlessness,  making  its  opposite  the 
condition  of  being  over-fearlul.  “Amongst  the 
passions,”  writes  Hobbes,  “ courage  (by  which  I 
mean  the  contempt  of  wounds  and  violent 
death)  inclines  men  to  private  revenges,  and 
sometimes  to  endeavor  the  unsettling  of  the 
public  peace;  and  timorousness  many  times  dis¬ 
poses  to  the  desertion  of  the  public  defense.” 
As  Hobbes  describes  courage,  it  may  be  of 
doubtful  value  to  the  individual  or  to  the  state. 
Melville  seems  to  have  this  meaning  of  courage 
in  mind  when  he  says  that  “the  most  reliable 
and  useful  courage  is  that  which  arises  from  the 
fair  estimation  of  the  encountered  peril”— the 
lack  of  which  makes  “an  utterly  fearless  man 
...  a  far  more  dangerous  companion  than  a 
coward.” 

If  apparent  fearlessness  were  courage,  then 
certain  animals  might  be  called  “courageous,” 


Cjiaptkr  13:  COURAGE 


257 


and  men  of  sanguine  temperament,  extremely 
self-confident  or  at  least  free  from  fear,  would 
be  as  courageous  as  those  who  succeed  in  mas¬ 
tering  their  fears  in  order  to  do  what  is  expected 
of  them.  But,  as  Aristotle  observes,  drunken 
men  often  behave  fearlessly  and  we  do  not 
praise  them  for  their  courage.  Plato  likewise 
presents  a  view  of  courage  which  requires  fore¬ 
thought  and  a  genuine  concern  for  danger. 

“I  do  not  call  animals  .  .  .  which  have  no  fear 
of  dangers,  because  they  are  ignorant  of  them, 
courageous,”  says  Nicias  in  the  Laches.  They 
are  “only  fearless  and  senseless  .  .  .  There  is  a 
difference  to  my  way  of  thinking,”  he  goes  on, 
“between  fearlessness  and  courage.  I  am  of  the 
opinion  that  thoughtful  courage  is  a  quality 
possessed  by  very  few,  but  that  rashness  and 
boldness,  and  fearlessness,  which  has  no  fore¬ 
thought,  are  very  common  qualities  possessed 
by  many  men,  many  women,  many  children, 
and  many  animals.”  According  to  this  concep¬ 
tion  of  courage,  “courageous  actions,”  Nicias 
says,  “are  wise  actions.” 

In  line  with  these  considerations,  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  courage  would  involve  a  reasonable,  a 
wise  or  prudent,  discrimination  between  what 
should  be  feared  and  what  should  be  under¬ 
taken  in  spite  of  peril  or  pain.  As  the  Parson 
declares,  in  his  discourse  on  the  Seven  Deadly 
Sins  in  the  Canterbury  Tales,  “this  virtue  is  so 
mighty  and  so  vigorous  that  it  dares  to  with¬ 
stand  sturdily,  and  wisely  to  keep  itself  from 
dangers  that  are  wicked,  and  to  wrestle  against 
the  assaults  of  the  Devil.  For  it  enhances  and 
strengthens  the  soul  ...  It  can  endure,  by  long 
suffering,  the  toils  that  are  fitting.” 

To  be  able  to  make  decisions  of  this  sort  in 
particular  cases,  a  man  must  have  some  view  of 
the  order  of  goods  and  the  end  of  life.  For  a 
man  to  act  habitually  in  a  courageous  manner, 
he  must  be  generally  disposed  to  value  certain 
things  as  more  important  than  others,  so  that 
he  is  willing  to  take  risks  and  endure  hardships 
for  their  sake. 

Freud  seems  to  be  skeptical  of  what  he  calls 
“the  rational  explanation  for  heroism,”  accord¬ 
ing  to  which  “it  consists  in  the  decision  that  the 
personal  life  cannot  be  so  precious  as  certain 
abstract  general  ideals.”  More  frequent,  in  his 
opinion,  “is  that  instinctive  and  impulsive  hero¬ 


ism  which  knows  no  such  motivation  and  flouts 
danger  in  the  spirit  of  Anzengruber’s  Hans  the 
Road-Mender:  ‘Nothing  can  happen  to  me'  ” 
But  Aquinas,  who  emphasizes  rational  motiva¬ 
tion  as  much  as  Freud  discounts  it,  insists  that 
courageous  men  “face  the  danger  on  account  of 
the  good  of  virtue,  which  is  the  abiding  object 
of  their  will,  however  great  the  danger  be.” 

Courage  as  Aquinas  conceives  it,  though  only 
a  part  of  virtue  in  the  sense  of  being  one  virtue 
among  many,  nevertheless  represents  the  whole 
moral  life  from  one  point  of  view.  The  quality 
of  courage,  he  points  out,  “overflows  into  the 
rest”  of  the  virtues,  as  these  in  turn  enter  into 
courage.  “Whoever  can  curb  his  desires  for  the 
pleasures  of  touch,”  Aquinas  writes,  “so  that 
they  keep  within  bounds,  which  is  a  very  hard 
thing  to  do,  for  this  very  reason  is  more  able  to 
check  his  daring  in  dangers  of  death,  so  as  not 
to  go  too  far,  which  is  much  easier;  and  in  this 
sense  fortitude  is  said  to  be  temperate. 

“Again,”  he  continues,  “temperance  is  said 
to  be  brave  because  fortitude  overflows  into 
temperance.  This  is  true  in  so  far  as  he  whose 
soul  is  strengthened  by  fortitude  against  dan¬ 
gers  of  death,  which  is  a  matter  of  very  great 
difficulty,  is  more  able  to  remain  firm  against 
the  onslaught  of  pleasures;  for,  as  Cicero  says, 
it  would  be  inconsistent  for  a  man  to  be  unbroken 
by  fear ,  and  yet  vanquished  by  cupidity ,  or  that  he 
should  be  conquered  by  lust ,  after  showing  himself 
to  be  unconquered  by  toil." 

As  the  man  who  is  temperate  because  he  has 
rationally  ordered  his  actions  to  a  certain  end 
can  be  expected  to  be  courageous  for  the  same 
reason,  so,  according  to  Aquinas,  he  will  also  be 
prudent,  since  both  his  temperance  and  his 
courage  result  from  a  prudent  or  rational  choice 
of  means  to  the  end  he  pursues. 

Writing  as  a  theologian,  Aquinas  distinguishes 
what  he  calls  “the  perfecting  virtues”  of  the 
religious  life  from  “the  social  virtues”  of  the 
political  life — the  virtues  with  which  the  moral 
philosopher  is  concerned.  He  holds  courage  to 
be  inseparable  from  the  other  virtues  on  either 
plane — whether  directed  to  a  natural  or  super¬ 
natural  end — because  it  is  the  sameness  of  the 
end  in  each  case  which  binds  the  virtues  to¬ 
gether.  “Thus  prudence  by  contemplating  the 
things  of  Cod,”  he  explains,  “counts  as  nothing 
all  the  things  of  this  world”  and  “temperance,  so 


258 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


far  as  nature  allows,  neglects  the  needs  of  the 
body;  fortitude  prevents  the  soul  from  being 
afraid  of  neglecting  the  body  and  rising  to 
heavenly  things;  and  justice  consists  in  the 
soul’s  giving  a  whole-hearted  consent  to  follow 
the  way  thus  proposed.” 

We  are  thus  brought  to  the  second  qualifica¬ 
tion  upon  courage  which  arises  from  its  connec¬ 
tion  with  prudence,  and  through  prudence  with 
the  other  virtues.  Does  it  make  any  difference 
whether  the  end  for  which  a  man  strives  val¬ 
iantly  is  itself  something  commendable  rather 
than  despicable  ?  If  not,  then  the  thief  can  have 
courage  just  as  truly  as  the  man  who  fears  dis¬ 
honor  more  than  death;  the  tyrant  can  be  cou¬ 
rageous  no  less  and  no  differently  than  the  law- 
abiding  citizen. 

In  his  advice  to  the  prince,  Machiavelli  seems 
to  consider  only  the  utility  of  courage.  Refer¬ 
ring  to  the  end  which  he  says  “every  man  has 
before  him,  namely  glory  and  riches,”  he  points 
out  that  men  proceed  in  various  ways:  “one 
with  caution,  another  with  haste;  one  by  force, 
another  by  skill;  one  by  patience,  another  by 
its  opposite;  and  each  one  succeeds  in  reaching 
the  goal  by  a  different  method.”  Fortune,  he 
thinks,  plays  a  large  part  in  their  success,  and 
for  that  reason  he  holds  no  method  certain. 
Any  method  requires  us  to  use  fortune  to  the 
best  advantage.  This  demands  courage  and  even 
audacity. 

“It  is  better  to  be  adventurous  than  cau¬ 
tious,”  he  writes,  “because  fortune  is  a  woman, 
and  if  you  wish  to  keep  her  under  it  is  necessary 
to  beat  and  ill-use  her;  and  it  is  seen  that  she 
allows  herself  to  be  mastered  by  the  adven¬ 
turous  rather  than  by  those  who  go  to  work 
more  coldly.  She  is,  therefore,  always  woman¬ 
like,  a  lover  of  young  men,  because  they  are 
less  cautious,  more  violent,  and  with  more 
audacity  command  her.” 

It  would  appear  that  Machiavelli  recommends 
courage,  or  at  least  daring,  to  those  who  wish  to 
succeed  in  great  undertakings,  whether  the  end 
in  view  is  commendable  or  not.  In  either  case, 
courage  may  improve  the  chances  of  success, 
and  it  is  success  that  counts.  According  to  their 
notions  of  courage  as  a  virtue,  Plato,  Aristotle, 
and  Aquinas  sharply  disagree  with  this,  as  we 
have  already  seen.  So  do  Kant  and  Hegel. 


“It  is  the  positive  aspect,  the  end  and  con¬ 
tent,”  Hegel  writes,  which  “gives  significance 
to  the  spiritedness”  of  courageous  actions.  “Rob¬ 
bers  and  murderers  bent  on  crime  as  their  end, 
adventurers  pursuing  ends  planned  to  suit  their 
own  whims,  etc.,  these  too  have  spirit  enough 
to  risk  their  lives.”  Because  their  ends  are 
either  malicious  or  unworthy,  the  mettle  of 
a  brigand  and  even  the  courage  of  a  knight 
do  not  seem  to  Hegel  to  be  true  forms  of 
courage. 

According  to  Kant,  “intelligence,  wit,  judge¬ 
ment,  and  other  talents  of  the  mind,  however 
they  be  named,  or  courage,  resolution,  perse¬ 
verance,  as  qualities  of  temperament,  are  un¬ 
doubtedly  good  and  desirable  in  many  respects; 
but  these  gifts  of  nature  may  also  become  ex¬ 
tremely  bad  and  mischievous  if  the  will  which 
is  to  make  use  of  them,  and  which,  therefore, 
constitutes  what  is  called  character ,  is  not  good.” 
If  a  good  will  is  necessary  to  make  courage  vir¬ 
tuous,  then  the  behavior  of  a  scoundrel  may 
look  courageous,  but  it  can  only  be  a  counter¬ 
feit.  “Without  the  principles  of  a  good  will,” 
such  things  as  the  ability  to  face  dangers  or  to 
bear  hardships,  Kant  thinks,  “may  become  ex¬ 
tremely  bad  .  .  .  The  coolness  of  a  villain,”  he 
adds,  “not  only  makes  him  far  more  dangerous, 
but  also  makes  him  more  abominable  in  our 
eyes  than  he  would  have  been  without  it.” 

It  may  still  remain  true  that  courage  can 
take  many  forms  according  to  the  variety  of 
objects  which  inspire  fear,  or  according  to  the 
types  of  action  which  men  find  burdensome  or 
painful.  But  if  the  truly  courageous  man  must 
always  be  generally  virtuous  as  well,  then  many 
of  the  appearances  of  courage  do  not  spring 
from  genuine  virtue.  The  conception  of  virtue 
as  a  habit  adds  the  criterion  of  a  settled  disposi¬ 
tion:  even  the  habitual  coward  may  perform  a 
single  courageous  act.  Nor  should  courage  be 
attributed  to  those  who  by  freak  of  tempera¬ 
ment  are  utterly  fearless.  The  merit  of  virtue — 
overcoming  fear — cannot  be  claimed  by  them. 

In  the  great  political  books,  especially  those 
of  antiquity,  the  place  of  courage  in  the  state 
and  in  the  training  of  citizens  receives  particular 
attention.  The  constitutions  of  Crete  and  Sparta 
seem  to  make  courage  the  only  essential  virtue 
for  the  citizen. 


Chapter  13:  COURAGE 


259 


Plutarch,  in  his  life  of  Lycurgus,  shows  how 
“the  city  was  a  sort  of  camp.”  The  training  and 
education  of  all  was  directed  to  military  valor. 
“Their  very  songs  had  a  life  and  spirit  in  them 
that  inflamed  and  possessed  men’s  minds  with 
an  enthusiasm  and  ardour  for  action  .  .  .  The 
subject  always  serious  and  moral;  most  usually, 
it  was  in  praise  of  such  men  as  had  died  in  de¬ 
fence  of  their  country,  or  in  derision  of  those 
that  had  been  cowards;  the  former  they  de¬ 
clared  happy  and  glorified;  the  life  of  the  latter 
they  described  as  most  miserable  and  abject.” 
The  result  was,  according  to  Plutarch,  that 
“they  were  the  only  people  in  the  world  to 
whom  war  gave  repose.” 

Both  Plato  and  Aristotle  criticize  the  con¬ 
stitutions  of  Crete  and  Sparta  for  making  war 
the  end  of  the  state  and  exalting  courage,  which 
is  only  a  part,  above  “the  whole  of  virtue.” 
Courage  must  be  joined  with  the  other  virtues  to 
make  a  man  good,  not  only  as  a  citizen  but  as  a 
man.  “Justice,  temperance,  and  wisdom,”  says 
the  Athenian  Stranger  in  the  Laws,  “when 
united  with  courage  are  better  than  courage 
only.” 

Furthermore,  military  courage  is  not  even 
the  whole  of  courage.  While  recognizing  the 
need  for  it,  Plato  thinks  that  a  wise  statesman 
would  put  it  in  its  proper  place,  if  men  are  to  be 


trained  to  be  good  citizens,  not  merely  good 
soldiers.  Arguing  that  no  sound  legislator  would 
order  “peace  for  the  sake  of  war,  and  not  war 
for  the  sake  of  peace,”  the  Athenian  Stranger 
suggests  that  a  broader  conception  of  courage 
than  the  Cretans  and  Spartans  seem  to  have 
would  recognize  its  use,  not  only  in  external 
warfare,  but  in  the  tasks  of  peace — in  the  strug¬ 
gle  to  lead  a  good  life  and  build  a  good  society. 
“What  is  there,”  he  asks  Megillus  the  Spartan 
and  Cleinias  the  Cretan,  “which  makes  your 
citizens  equally  brave  against  pleasure  and  pain, 
conquering  what  they  ought  to  conquer,  and 
superior  to  the  enemies  who  are  most  dangerous 
and  nearest  home?” 

Nevertheless,  through  the  centuries  the  type 
of  courage  which  the  poets  and  historians  cele¬ 
brate  has  been  the  bravery  of  men  who  put 
their  very  lives  in  jeopardy  for  their  fellow 
men — the  courage  of  the  citizen  doing  his  duty, 
or,  what  is  still  more  spectacular,  of  the  soldier 
confronting  the  enemy.  This  fact  among  others 
is  one  reason  why  many  writers,  from  the  Greeks 
to  Flegel,  have  found  a  moral  stimulus  in  war; 
or,  like  William  James,  have  sought  for  its  moral 
equivalent.  On  this  point  they  are  answered 
not  merely  by  those  who  see  only  degradation 
in  war,  but  also  by  the  many  expressions  of  the 
insight  that  peace  can  have  its  heroes  too. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 


1.  The  nature  of  courage  260 

2.  The  vices  opposed  to  courage:  cowardice,  foolhardiness  261 

3.  The  passions  in  the  sphere  of  courage:  fear,  daring,  anger,  hope,  despair 

4.  The  relation  and  comparison  of  courage  with  other  virtues  262 

5.  The  motivations  of  courage:  fame  or  honor,  happiness,  love,  duty,  religious  faith  263 

6.  The  formation  or  training  of  the  courageous  man  264 

7.  The  political  or  civic  significance  of  courage  265 


7 a.  The  courage  required  of  citizens  and  statesmen:  the  political  recognition  of 
courage 

7 b.  Courage  in  relation  to  law  and  liberty 

7 c.  Courage  in  war  266 


260 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halvesof  the  right-hand  sideof 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  thelowerhalf 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douav  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  ( D ),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 — ( D )  II  Esdras,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  ‘‘passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  nature  of  courage 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xii  [310-328]  85b-c;  bk  xiii 
[266-294]  91a-b;  bk  xvi  [493-501]  117c 

5  Euripides:  Heracles  Mad  [140-160]  366b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396d- 
398c  passim 

7  Plato:  Laches  26a-37d  esp  32a-37d  /  Protag¬ 
oras,  57d-64d  /  Cratylus ,  100c  /  Apology, 
205d-206d  /  Phaedo,  225b-226c  /  Republic,  bk 
iv,  346a-355a  esp  347a-d  /  Statesman,  605d- 
608d  /  Laws,  bk  i,  644c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [125^0-27] 
174d-175a;  bk  vi,  ch  13  [i5ia3— 13]  205d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [ii04b4~8] 
350a;  ch  6  [no7a9]-cH  7  [no7b3j  352c-353a; 
bk  hi,  ch  6-9  361a-364b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  9 
[i366a33-bi4]  608d-609a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  i  138b, d- 
140c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  xi,  sect  18  304b- 
305b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  x  [466-472]  315a 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  50c  /  Pelopidas, 
232a-233a  /  Clcomenes,  659d-660a 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  ii,  227a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  59, 
a  4,  rep  3  309a-310a;  part  i-ii,  q  45,  a  4, 
ans  812b-813a 


20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
aa  2-4  55c-58b;  q  66,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  78c- 
79b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xiv  [67]— 
xviii  [51]  127c-134a 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  60-61  529b- 
530a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  62d;  75b;  con¬ 
clusion,  279b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  20d-22a:  96b-c;  115b- 
121c  esp  117d-119d;  167a-170a 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  ii,  sc  ii 
[32-37]  578c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i,  sc 
iii  [45-54]  108c  /  Coriolanus,  act  iv,  sc  i  [i-ii] 
377a  /  Titnon  of  Athens,  act  iii,  sc  v  [24-58] 
407a-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  256c-d; 
291d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  59,  schol 
415d-416b;  part  iv,  prop  69,  corol  and 
schol  445c;  prop  72-73  446b-447a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [652-666]  353b- 
354a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  70a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  93a- b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  159a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
256a-b 


26  i 


Chapter  13:  COURAGE 


2/o  3 

46  Hec.il:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  327- 
328  108a-c;  additions,  189  149d  /  Philosophy 
of  History,  intro,  195c-d;  part  i,  243d  244c; 
part  iv,  343d-344a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  83a  86  b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ii,  77d-78a;  bk 
ix,  369c-d;  bk  xi,  480a-482b  esp  481d-482a; 
bk  xiii,  577a-578b;  bk  xiv,  589c-590c  esp 
590a;  605b-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  826a-827a 

2.  The  vices  opposed  to  courage:  cowardice, 
foolhardiness 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  14:9-14  /  Leviticus » 
26:32-40  /  Deuteronomy ,  20:8  /  /  Samuel ,  17 
esp  17:11,  17:24— (D)  I  Kings,  17  esp  17:11, 
17:24  /  Proverbs ,  28:1  /  Isaiah,  30:15-18 —(D) 
Isaias,  30:15-18 

Apocrypha:  Eccle  siasticus,  3:26— (D)  OT,  Eccle- 
siasticus ,  3:27 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  26:56,69-75  /  Marl^, 
14:50,66-72  /  22:55-61  /  John ,  7:13; 

18:15-18,25-27 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  iii  19a-23d;  bk  xiii  [266- 
294]  91a-b:  bk  xxii  [1-366]  155a-159a  / 
Odyssey ,  bk  ix  [461-542]  234a-d;  bk  xii  [iii- 
126]  251b 

5  Aeschylus:  Sexwi  Against  Thebes  [631-723] 
34a-35a 

5  Sophocles:  [733-782]  149b-d  /  Electra 

[947-1057]  163d-164d 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [473-510]  262c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  [277-311]  567c-d;  [460- 

674]  569c-571d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  120d-121b;  bk 
vii,  216b-218b;  225c-d;  bk  ix,  303c-304a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370a- 
c;  bk  11,  389d-390b;  bk  iv,  462d-463a;  bk  v, 
484a-c 

7  Plato:  Laches ,  35c-d  /  Protagoras ,  58a-59a; 
63a-d  /  Phaedo,  225d-226b  /  Republic,  bk  v, 
366c-d  /  Timaeus,  474b-d  /  Theaetetus ,  513b  / 
Sophist ,  557b-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [iio48i9]-ch  3 
[ii04bi3]  349c-350a;  ch  7  [no7a32-b3]  353a; 
ch  8  354a-d;  bk  iii,  ch  6  [1115^0-24]  361a  b; 
ch  7  361c-362b;  ch  8  [m6bi5-22]  363a;  ch  12 
[iii 9a2i— 34]  365d-366a;  bk  v,  ch  2  [1130*13- 
b8]  377c-378a  passim;  bk  vii,  ch  5  [1149*5-8] 
399c  /  Politics ,  bk  viii,  ch  4  [i338b8— 38]  544a- 
b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [i366bi  1— 14]  609a;  bk 
11,  ch  13  [1389^9-1390*6]  637b;  ch  14  [1390* 
28— b9]  637d-638a 

12  Epictetl’s:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  i  138b, d- 
140c;  cii  7  145b-146a;  bk  iv,  ch  7  232c-235a 

13  Virgil:  AeJieid,  bk  xi  [336-444]  337a-340a 

14  Plutarch:  Aemilius  Paulus,  219d-229c  / 
Pelopidas,  232a-233a;  244c-245d  /  Marcellas - 
Pelopidas  261a-262d  /  Nicias  423a-438d  / 
Demosthenes,  695d-703b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  8,  86d- 
87b 


19  Aouinas:  Surnma  1'heologica,  part  i-ii,  q  44, 
a  4,  ans  809c-810a;  q  45,  a  4,  ans  812b  813a 

20  Aquinas:  Surnma  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105, 
a  3,  rep  5-6  316a  318b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  i-ii  la-4a;  iii 
[22-69]  4b-d;  viii  [67E1X  [105]  llc-13b 

23  Maciiiavelli  :  Prince,  cii  xii-xm  17d-21a 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  ii,  115d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv, 
264c-265a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  22d-24a;  25c-26d;  115b- 
119d;  167a  170a;  334b-335a;  337b-c 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  i  [9- 
47]  20a-b  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  ii,  sc  iv  [126- 
312]  445c-447b;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [1-29]  459b-c  / 
Julius  Caesar ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [32-37]  578c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [575-633] 
46b-d;  act  iv,  sc  iv  [31-66]  59a-c  /  Macbeth , 
act  1,  sc  vii  [29-82]  289c-290b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  256c- d; 
291c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [204-208]  115b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  272b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxviii, 
239d-240a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  392 b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  partii [971 1-9904]  235b-240b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  305a-307a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  16a-18b;  bk  ii, 
80d-81b;  102a-c;  bk  v,  203c-d;  bk  viii,  330d- 
332a;  bk  ix,  344b-346a;  366d-367b;  bk  x, 
419b-420d;  426b;  bk  xi,  475b-476c;  480a- 
482b;  bk  xiii,  569d-570a;  bk  xiv,  596c-d; 
603a-604b;  610c-611c;  bk  xv,  618d-619d; 
epilogue  1,  648b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  x, 
273a-d 

3.  The  passions  in  the  sphere  of  courage:  fear, 
daring,  anger,  hope,  despair 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  23:27  /  Leviticus, 
26:36-38  /  Numbers,  13:16-14:10— (D)  Num¬ 
bers,  13:17-14:10  /  Deuteronomy ,  11:23-25; 
20:1-9  /  Joshua,  2:8-11,23-24 — (D)  Josue , 
2:8-11,23-24  /  Judges,  14:19  /  Psalms,  31:24— 
(D)  Psalms,  30:25  /  Proverbs,  29:25 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  17 — (D)  OT, 
Bool{  of  Wisdom,  17  /  Eccle  siasticus,  22:16-18; 
40:1-7— (D)  OT,  Eccle  siasticus,  22:19-23; 

4°:i-7 

New  Testament:  Romans,  5  n-5  /  II  Corinthians , 
1 :8-io  /  II  Timothy,  1:7//  John,  4:18 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  iii  19a-23d;  bk  xxii  [1-366] 
155a-159a  /  Odyssey,  bk  ix  [461-542]  234a-d 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d  esp 
[944-1093]  50b-51d 

5  Sophocles:  Electra  [949-1 195]  163d-166a 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [473-510]  262c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Frogs  [277-31 1]  567c-d;  [460- 
674]  569c-571d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ix,  303c-304a;  309d- 
310a 


262 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  The  passions  in  the  sphere  of  courage:  fear, 
daring,  anger,  hope,  despair.) 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  402c- 
404a;  bk  iv,  460c-d;  bk  vii,  555b-557b;  559b- 
560b 

7  Plato:  Laches,  36b-c  /  Phaedo ,  225d-226b  / 
Republic,  bk  iv,  346a-355a  esp  347a-d  / 
Timaeus ,  466a-c  /  Laws,  bk  i,  651a-c;  bk  iii, 
675a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [125^0-27] 
174d-175a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  hi,  ch  6-9  361a-364b  / 
Politics ,  bk  viii,  ch  4  [i338b8-38]  544a-b  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  5  628b-629d;  ch  13 
[i389b29~i39oaii]  637b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [62-158] 
ld-3a;  bk  ii  [1— 61]  15a-d;  bk  iii  [1-93]  30a- 
31b;  [830-1094]  40c-44a,c;  bk  v  [1194-1240] 
76d-77b;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  xi,  sect  18  304b- 
305b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [194-209]  108a-b;  [450- 
465]  115b;  bk  vii  [445-474]  248b-249a;  bk  ix 
[123-158]  282a-283a;  bk  xii  [593-611]  370a; 
[650-696]  371b-372b 

14  Plutarch:  Aemilius  Paulus ,  224d-229c  / 
Pelopidas ,  232a-233a;  244c-245d  /  Caesar , 
583b-585d  /  Cleomenes,  659d-660a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  49d-50a  /  Histories , 
bk  11,  226b-227a;  235a;  bk  iii,  249a;  265b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vi,  par  13  39a-c  / 
City  of  God,  bk  ix,  ch  4-5  287a-289a;  bk  xix, 
ch  4  511a-513c  esp  512b-513c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  59, 
a  4,  rep  3  309a-310a;  part  i-ii,  q  35,  a  6, 
rep  3  777b-778c;  qq  40-48  792d-826a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  60, 
a  4,  ans  52b-53a;  a  5,  ans  and  rep  4  53a-54d; 
q  61,  aa  2-3  55c-57a;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-2 
57a-58b;  a  5,  ans  and  kep  1-2  58b-59d;  q  66, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  78c-79b;  part  iii  suppl, 
q  96,  a  6  1058a-1061b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  i-ii  la-4a; 
viii  [67R1X  [105]  llc-13b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
68-70  10a;  stanza  80-81  lib;  bk  iii,  stanza 
129  71a-b;  bk  iv,  stanza  89  100a;  bk  v, 
stanza  258  154a  /  Nun  s  Priest's  Tale  [14,914- 
928]  451b  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  60-61  529b- 
530a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xvii,  24a-b;  ch  xix, 
26c-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  62c-63a  esp  62d; 
68d;  77d;  79b-d;  96b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iv, 
261a-266c;  297b-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  20d-22a;  25c-26d;  53c- 
55d;  115b-119d;  167a-170a;  334b-335a;  337b- 
c;  342a-d;  435a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  IV,  act  i,  sc  iii 
437d-440d;  act  ii,  sc  iii  443b-444b;  act  iv, 
sc  iii  [1-29]  459b-c  /  Julius  Caesar,  act  ii,  sc 


l  to  4 

11  [34-37]  578c;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [145-195]  589d- 
590c 

27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth ,  act  i,  sc  vii  289b- 
290b  /  Coriolanus,  act  iv,  sc  i  [1-33]  377a-b  / 
Timon  of  Athens,  act  iii,  sc  v  [24-58]  407a-c  / 
Henry  VIII,  act  i,  sc  ii  [68-88]  553c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  51,  schol 
411d-412a;  the  affects,  def  39-41  420d; 
part  iv,  prop  69,  corol  and  schol  445c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  215  212a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  9-12  177b-c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  52a-53b;  69a-70c;  llld- 
112b;  234a-b 

38  Montesquieu;  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  335c-d 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  502d-503d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  394a-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [5407-5456]  133b- 
134b;  [9711-9904]  235b-240b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  83a-85a;  90b;  118a- 
131a;  417b-418a  * 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  17b-18a;  48c; 
bk  11,  77c-81b;  95a-c;  97c-106d;  bk  iii,  134a- 
135c;  150a-164a,c;  bk  iv,  173d-177a;  188a- 
190c;  bk  v,  203c-d;  bk  ix,  369a-372a;  bk  x, 
419b-420c;  451c-456a;  457a-c;  461d-463c; 
467a-468a,c;  bk  xi,  480a-482b;  513d-515a  esp 
514c-d;  527b-532a,c;  bk  xii,  549d-551c; 
560a-562d;  bk  xiii,  569d-570a;  586d-587c; 
bk  xv,  614a-618b;  627a-c;  epilogue  i,  648b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
155d-157b 

53  James:  Psychology,  826a-b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  607d-608c;613d- 
614a  /  War  and  Death,  762b-c;  765a-b 

4.  The  relation  and  comparison  of  courage  with 
other  virtues 

5  Sophocles:  Electra  [947-1057]  163d-164d 

5  Euripides:  Phoenician  Maidens  [697-747] 
384a-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,370a-c; 
bk  11,  402d-403b;  411b-c;  bk  vii,  555b-557b 

7  Plato:  Laches,  31d-37d  /  Protagoras,  57d-64d 
esp  58a-c,  63a-64a  /  Cratylus,  100c  /  Meno, 
183d-184c  /  Phaedo,  225d-226b  /  Gorgias, 
284a-c  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  346a-350a;  bk  viii, 
404a-405c  /  Timaeus,  466a-c  /  Sophist,  557b-d 
/  Statesman,  605d-608d  /  Laws,  bk  i,  643a-d; 
644b-645c;  651a-c;  bk  iii,  673d-674a;  675a-c; 
bk  xii,  795c-796b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  iii,  ch  2  [1 17^5— b2] 
164a;  [1 1 8ai  6—17]  165a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [iio4&i9]-ch  3 
[uo4bi3]349c-350a;  ch  8  354a-d;  bk  iii,  ch  ii 
[1 1  i8b28— 34]  365b-c;  ch  12  [ni9a2i-34]  365d- 
366a;  bk  v,  ch  2  [ii30ai3-b8]  377c-378a  pas¬ 
sim;  bk  vi,  ch  13  [1  i44bi— 1  i45a5]  394a-d;  bk 
ix,  ch  4  [n66b8-i2]  419d;  bk  x,ch  7  [1177^8- 
b25]  432a-c  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  i  [1323^2-34] 
527a-b;  ch  2  [i324a23-i325ai5]  528b-529a 
passim;  ch  7  531d-532c;  ch  15  [i334an-b8] 


5 


Chapter  13:  COURAGE 


539a-c;  bk  viii,  ch  4  [i338b8  38]  544a  b  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [ 1 3 66*3 b  1 4 ]  608d  609a; 
bk  11,  ch  14  637d-638a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  138b, d- 
140c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  xi,  sect  18  304b- 
305b 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus ,  175b  /  Cato  the 
Younger ,  637b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  i,  211c-212b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  cii  8,  86d-87b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  4,  51  ld- 
513c;  ch  20  523d-524a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  35, 
a  6,  rep  3  777b-778c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  60, 
a  4-Q  61,  a  5  52b-59d;  q  65,  aa  1-3  70b-73d; 
q  66,  aa  1-4  75b-79b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  96, 
a  6,  ans  and  rep  3-4, 8-9  1058a-1061b;  a  12 
1064d-1065b 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Taley  par  60-61  529b-530a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  part  i,  62c-63a;  conclu¬ 
sion,  279c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruely  bk  iii, 
133b-134d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  183a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar ,  act  iv,  sc  iii 
[145-195]  589d-590c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [86— 
91]  365a  /  Timon  of  Athensy  act  iii,  sc  v  [24- 
58]  407a-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  256c-d; 
291d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learningy  80a-81a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethicsy  part  iii,  prop  51,  schol 
411d-412a;  part  iv,  prop  73,  schol  446d- 
447a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [38-59]  340b; 
[652-666]  353b-354a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a- 
b  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  377d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  251a;  539b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  343d- 
344a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  45a-46a;  83a-85a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  315b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  440d-442a;  bk 
xi,  481a-482a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
155d-157b 

5.  The  motivations  of  courage:  fame  or  honor, 
happiness,  love,  duty,  religious  faith 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  22:1-14  /  Numbers, 
13:16-14:10— (D)  Numbers,  13:17-14:10  / 
Deuteronomy,  7:16-24;  20:1-9;  31:6-8 /Joshua, 
1:5-9;  23:6-11  —  (D)  Josue,  1:5-9;  23:6-11  / 
Judges ,  7  /  I  Samuel,  17;  20 —(D)  I  Kings, 
17;  20  /  /  Chronicles,  22:12-1 3;  28:20 — (D) 
I  Paralipomenon ,  22:12-13;  28:20  /  Esther,  4  :i- 
5:8  /  Psalms,  27;  46;  56:4;  91;  118— (D) 
Psalms,  26;  45;  55:5;  90;  117/  Proverbs,  28:1; 
29:25  f  Isaiah,  12:2;  35:4;  41:10-16;  43:1-7; 


263 

51:7-13  — (D)  Isaias,  12:2;  35:4;  41:10-16; 
43:1-7;  51:7-13  /  Daniel,  1;  ^1-4:3;  6:1  22  — 
(D)  Daniel ,  1;  3:1-23,91-100;  6:1-22 

Apocrypha:  Judith ,  8-13  — (D)  OT,  Judith ,  8:1- 
13:26  /  Song  of  Three  Children— (D)  OT, 
Daniel ,  3:24-90  /  Susanna— (D)  OT,  Daniel, 
13:1-64  /  I  Maccabees ,  2:49-64;  6:43-46;  9:7- 
10;  13:1-6— (D)  OT,  I  Machabees,  2:49-64; 
6:43-46;  9:7-10;  13:1-6  /  II  Maccabees,  6:18- 
7:42;  8:12-22;  11:7-11;  13:10-15;  14:37-46; 
15:7-27— (D)  OT,  II  Machabees ,  6:18-7:42; 
8:12-22;  11:7-11;  13:10-15;  14:37-46;  15:7-27 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:10-12;  10:26-31  / 
Luke ,  1:70-75;  12:32  /  John ,  15:13  /  Acts  esp 
4:1-30,  5:40-41,  6:8-7:60,  16:1-40,  19:1-41, 
20:22-24 —(D)  Acts  esp  4:1-30,  5:40-41, 
6:8-7:59,  16:1-40, 19:1-40,  20:22-24/ Romans, 
8:3i-39  /  H  Corinthians,  1:1-12;  6:4-10;  11:23- 
30  /  Philippians,  1:27-28;  2:29-30  /  II  Thes - 
salonians,  1:4-5  /  Hebrews,  11;  13:6  /  I  Peter , 
3 :8-22 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  v  [520-532]  35c;  bk  vi 
[369-502]  43d-45a;  bk  viii  [130-156]  52c;  bk 
xii  [310-328]  85b-c;  bk  xiii  [206-294]  90b- 
91b;  bk  xvi  [493-501]  117c;  bk  xxii  [77-130] 
156a-c;  [289-305]  158b 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [630-723] 
34a-35a  /  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d  /  Ajax  [430- 
480]  146d-147b/  Electra  [949— 1 195]  163d-166a 

5  Euripides:  Heracleidae  [484-573]  252c-253a  / 
Suppliants  [297-356]  261a-c  /  Hecuba  [343— 
383]  355d-356a;  [482-603]  357a-358a  /  Her¬ 
acles  Mad  [275-31 1]  367c-d  /  Phoenician 
Maidens  [991-1030]  387a-b  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis 
[1375— 1565]  437c-439b 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [565-580]  477a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iv,  126a-b;  bk  vii, 
216b-220b;  226b-c;  233a-234b;  255c-d;  bk 
viii,  264c;  274d;  bk  ix,  291c-292a;  303c-304a; 
309d-310a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370a- 
c;  bk  11,  396b-399a  esp  397d-398c;  402c-404a; 
bk  v,  484a-c;  501a-b;  bk  vi,  527b-d;  bk  vii, 
542b-c;  555b-557b;  559d-560b 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  152b-153b;  160c  /  Phaedo, 
225b-226c  /  Republic,  bk  v,  366c-367b  /  Laws, 
bk  1,  651a-652a;  bk  iii,  675a-c  /  Seventh  Letter , 
800c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  6-9  361a-364b; 
bk  iv,  ch  3  [ii24b7~9]  371b-c  /  Politics ,  bk  v, 
ch  10  [1312^4-39]  514d;  bk  vii,  ch  2  [i324b 
10-23]  528c-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  9  [i366bn- 
14]  609a 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places ,  par  16  15d- 
16a;  par  23  18a-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  22  195a- 
201a;  ch  24  203c-210a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [441-493]  115a-116b;  bk 
viii  [520-540]  273a-b;  bk  x  [276-286]  309b- 
310a;  [466-472]  315a;  bk  xi  [376-444]  338b- 
340a;  bk  xii  [53-80]  355b-356a;  [650-696] 
37lb-372b 


264 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


5  to  6 


(5.  The  motivations  of  courage:  fame  or  honor, 
happiness,  love ,  duty,  religious  faith  f 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus ,  2c-9aesp3a-d  / Romulus- 
Theseus,  30a-b  /  Coriolanus ,  175d-176b  / 
Aemilius  Paulus ,  224d-229c  /  Pelopidas,  232a- 
233a;  238b-239c  /  Flamininus ,  302b  / 

542a-d  /  Caesar ,  583b-585d;  599b-c  / 
Ctf/o  Younger  620a-648a,c  /  Cleomenes , 
659d-660a  /  Aratus,  826c-836d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  lla-b;  bk  iii,  49d-50a; 
bk  xv,  171d;  bk  xvi,  180d-184a  /  Histories , 
bk  i,  195a-b;  200b-c;  211c-212b;  bk  ii,  217d- 
218a;  226d-228a;  234b-235c;  bk  iii,  248b-c; 
249a;  256b-c;  259c-260a;  265b-c;  bk  iv,  266d; 
267b-c 

17  Plotinus:  F/rrf  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  4-16  14a- 
19b  passim 

18  Augustine:  C/Vy  0/ bk  ix,  ch  4  287a- 
288b;  bk  x,  ch  21  311c-312a;  bk  xix,  ch  4 
511a-513c  csp  512b-513c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  45, 
a  4,  ans  812b-813a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  96,  a  6  1058a-1061b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  i-ii  la-4a; 
iii  [22-69]  4b-d;  viii  [67R1X  [105]  llc-13b; 
xxvi  [85-142]  39a-c;  paradise,  xvii  [106-142] 
133b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
68-70  10a;  stanza  80-81  lib;  bk  iv,  stanza 
89  100a;  bk  v,  stanza  258  154a  /  Knight's  Tale 
[859-1029]  174a-177a  /  Tale  of  Man  of  Law 
236b-255b  /  Clerks  Tale  296a-318a  /  Physi¬ 
cian's  Tale  366a-371a  esp  [12,147-191]  369b- 
370b  /  Prioress's  Tale  [13,418-620]  392a-395b 
/  Second  Nun's  Tale  463b-471b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  x,  16c-d;  ch  xix 
26a-30a;  ch  xxvi  36b-37d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  74c-d;  part  iii, 
210b-211a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
32c-35a;  bk  iv,  265b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  23b-24a;  115b-119d; 
340a-343b  passim;  494b-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  HI,  act  v,  sc  iii  [237— 
270]  146b-c  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  i,  sc  iii  437d- 
440d;  act  11,  sc  iii  443b-444b;  act  iv,  sc  iii 
[1-29]  459b-c;  act  v,  sc  i  [127-143]  462a-b  / 
Henry  V,  act  iii,  sc  i  543d-544b;  act  iv,  sc 
iii  [1-78]  555c-556c;  sc  v  558a-b  /  Julius 
Caesar,  act  i,  sc  ii  [84-96]  570b;  act  v,  sc  v 
[68-81]  596a, c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [575-633] 
46b-d;  act  iv,  sc  iv  [39-66]  59b-c  /  Troilus 
and  Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  ii  113c-115d  /  Mac¬ 
beth,  act  1,  sc  vii  289b-290b  /  Timon  of 
Athens,  act  iii,  sc  v  406d-408a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote  esp  part  i,  41b-c, 
147b  d,  part  11,  203a-b,  227c-228d,  256a-d, 
280b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ix  [856-1016]  266a- 
269b 


33  Pascal:  Pensees,  153  201b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  36a-38b  esp  38b;  94b- 
95a;  142b-c;  146b-147a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  13b, d- 
14a;  14d-15a;  bk  xxviii,  239d-240a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  437d-438c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92a-93b;  93d-94b; 
217d-220d  esp  219c-220b;  370b-d;  376a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  159a;  224a;  238c; 
324c-325a;  385a-386b 

42  Kant:  Fund .  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  259d- 
260b  [fn  2]  /  Practical  Reason,  326b-327d  / 
Science  of  Right,  448d-449c  /  Judgement,  504b- 
505a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  452c-453a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  384b-c;  394a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  327 
108a-b;  additions,  189  149d  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  166b  l68a;  184b-d;  part  i, 
224d-225a;  part  iii,  308b  c;  part  iv,  322c; 
341a-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [884-902]  23a;  part  ii 
[9855-9862]  239b;  [10,407-422]  253b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\ ,  45b-46a;  118a-122b; 
174a-b;  349a-350a 

49  Darwin  :  Descent  of  Man,  311a-d;316a-c;322c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  21d-22b;  bk 
ii,  77c-81b;  89b-d;  97c-106d;  bk  iii,  135c-137c 
esp  136b-137c;  142b-d;  146d-147c;  149a- 
164a,c;  bk  iv,  173d-179b;  bk  viii,  330d-332a; 
bk  ix,  366d-367b;  370a-372a;  bk  x,  437c-d; 
445c;  448a-b;  451c-456a;  457a-c;  467a-c;  bk 
xi,  481a-d;  514c-d;  527b-528b;  bk  xii,  560a- 
562d;  bk  xiii,  569d-570a;  586d-587c;  bk  xiv 
596c-600d;  605b-d;  bk  xv,  618d-619d;  627a-* 
c;  epilogue  i,  673d-674a,c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
155d-157b;  bk  x,  273a-d 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  765a-b 

6.  The  formation  or  training  of  the  courageous 
man 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [857-917]  266a-b  / 
Hecuba  [530-603]  357b-358a 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d  esp  [882- 
1104]  499b-502a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  35c-d;  bk  v,  175b; 
bk  vii,  233a-d;  bk  ix,  314a, c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396d- 
397a;  bk  v,  501a-b 

7  Plato:  Laches,  26a-32a  /  Symposiwn,  152b- 
153b  /  Republic ,  bk  ii— iii,  320c-339a  /  Laws, 
bk  1  640a-652d;  bk  viii,  732d-733b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [1 103^4-26] 
349a-b;  ch  2  [no4ai9]-CH  3  [uo4bi3]  349c- 
350a  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  2  [1  ^^4b5— 23]  528c- 
d;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [i237b24-27]  542d-543a;  ch  4 
[i338b8— 38]  544a-b 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  16 
I5d-16a;  par  23  18a-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  2  106d-108b; 
bk  ii,  ch  1  138b,d-140c;  bk  iii,  ch  3  I78d- 
180a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a-223d 


Chapter  13:  COURAGK 


7  to  lb 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  viii  [494-520]  272a  273a; 
bk  ix  [590-620]  295a~b;  bk  xii  [425-440)3655 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  39a-45c  /  Coriolanus, 
175b  /  Pelopidas ,  238b  239c  /  Cleomenes,  661a- 
663c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantna  and  Pant  a  gruel,  bk  i, 
28a-29b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  331a-332a;  336c-337b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  23a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  303b-305c; 
337d-338a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  93d-94b;  644b- 
645d  esp  645a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  223a;  224a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  325d-327d  /  Judge - 
ment ,  504a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  282b-283a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  175a-b;  bk 
ix,  369c-d;  bk  xi,  481a-482a;  bk  xiv,  605b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  82b-83a 

7.  The  political  or  civic  significance  of  courage 

la.  The  courage  required  of  citizens  and  states¬ 
men:  the  political  recognition  of  courage 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xii  [310-328]  85b-c 

5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [1264-1363]  154a-d  /  Phil - 
octetes  [1418-1433]  195a 

5  Euripides:  Rhesus  [150-202]  204c-205a  / 
Heracleidae  [489-573]  252c-253a  /  Suppliants 
[297-356]  261a-c  /  Hecuba  [300-330]  355b-c  / 
Phoenician  Maidens  [991-1018]  387a-b  /  I  phi- 
genia  at  Aulis  [1368-1562]  437c-439b 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [565-580]  477a-b  / 
Wasps  [1060-1121]  520c-521b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vii,  225c-d;  226b-c; 
233a-234b;  239a-c;  256d-25rc;  bk  viii,  282c- 
283a;  bk  ix,  291c-292a;  293c-294d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396b- 
399a;  402c-404a;  bk  vii,  555b-557b;  559d- 
560b 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  207b-d  /  Crito,  217b-c  / 
Republic ,  bk  ii,  319c-320c;  bk  iv,  347a-d;  bk 
v,  366c-367b  /  Statesman,  605d-608d  /  Laws, 
bk  1,  644a-645c;  bk  xii,  784d-786b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  8  [1 1  i6ai5— ^3] 
362b-d;  bk  v,  ch  i  [ii29bi 9-24]  377a  /  Politics, 
bk  iii,  ch  4  [i277a8-25]  474a-b;  ch  12  [1283* 
18-20]  481b;  bkvii,  ch  2  [1324^-23]  528c-d; 
ch  7  531d-532c;  ch  15  [1334s! i-b6]  539a-b; 
bk  viii,  ch  4  [i338b8— 38]  544a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  10  148c- 
150a;  bk  iii,  ch  24  203c-210a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  5  261a; 
bk  v,  sect  1  268b, d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [781-807]  232a-b;  bk 
xi  [225-444]  334a-340a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  40c-45c  /  Poplicola , 
83b-84a  /  Coriolanus,  177b-179a;  180d-181b 
/  Aemilius  Paulus,  226c-229c  /  Pyrrhus,  328c- 
330a  /  Nicias,  423a-430d  /  Cato  the  Younger 
620a-648a,c  /  Cleomenes,  659d-660a  /  Demos¬ 
thenes,  695d-703b  /  Aratus,  835b-c 


265 

15  Tacitus:  Annuls,  bk  i,  16d-17a;  bk  xii,  117a 
17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  cii  8,  86d  87b 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i  ii,  q  105, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  5-6  316a-318b 
23  Maciiiavelli:  Prince,  cii  iii,  5c;  cn  vi,  9b  c; 
cii  vm,  14b  c;  cii  ix,  15a-b;  cii  x,  16b  c; 
cii  xvii  23d-24d;  cii  xix  26a  30a;  ch  xxi, 
32a-d;  cii  xxiv-xxvi,  34d-37d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  115d;  conclu¬ 
sion,  279b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  53c-55d;  181d  183c; 
327d-329d;  331a-332a 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  v,  sc  iii  [247- 
341]  146b-147c  /  Henry  V,  act  iii,  sc  i  543d- 
544b;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [1-78]  555c-556c;  sc  v 
558a-b  /  Julius  Caesar  568a-596a,c  esp  act  i, 
sc  11  [84-96]  570b,  act  v,  sc  v  [68-81]  596a, c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i, 
sc  iii  [33-54]  108c  /  Coriolanus,  act  ii,  sc  ii 
[86—138]  365a-c;  act  iv,  sc  i  [i— i  i ]  377a  / 
Timon  of  Athens,  act  iii,  sc  v  406d-408a  / 
Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  iii  479d-480d  /  Henry 
VIII,  act  i,  sc  ii  [68-88]  553c-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  40d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  23a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  72-73  446b- 
447a 

32  Milton:  Lord  Gen.  Cromwell  69a-b /  Sr  Henry 
Vane  69b  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [430-456]  120b- 
121a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  12b-c; 

bk  iv,  15a-c;  bk  xiv,  107b-d;  bk  xxx,  281a 
38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  375a  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  iii,  411b-c;  bk  iv,  437d-438c 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  23c;  369d-370c; 

427a-c;  630b,d-631a;  644d-645c 
43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  329b-c; 

334b-c;  392b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  325 
107d;  par  328  108b-c;  additions,  189  149d  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  213d-214a 
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  315b-c;  321b-c 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  9c-10d;  bk  iii, 
149d-150a;  bk  x,  445c;  bk  xi,  475b-476c; 
513d-515a;  bk  xii,  537b-538a;  bk  xiv,  610c- 
611c;  epilogue  i,  648b-c;  668a-669c 

lb.  Courage  in  relation  to  law  and  liberty 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  v,  175b;  bk  vii, 
232c-233d;  238a-c;  239a-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396b- 
399a;  402c-404a;  bk  iv,  469d-470b;  478d- 
479b;  bk  v,  484a-c;  bk  vii,  555b-557b 

7  Plato:  Apology  200a-212a,c  /  Crito  213a- 
219a, c  /  Laws,  bk  i,  644a-645c;  bk  iii,  675a-c; 
bk  xii,  784d-786b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  8  [1 1  i6ai 5— b^4] 
362b-363a  /  Politics,  bk  v,  ch  10  [i3i2ai8— 39] 
5l4d;  ch  ii  [13 13^4— bi o]  5l6a  b;  bk  vii,  ch  7 
531d-532c;  ch  15  [i334ai9-22]  539a  /  Rhetoric, 
bk  1,  ch  9  [i366bi  14]  608d-609a 
10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters ,  Places,  par  16  15d- 
16a;  par  23  18a-c 


266 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  The  political  or  civic  significance  of  courage . 
lb.  Courage  in  relation  to  law  and  liberty .) 

14  Plutarch:  Cato  the  Younger  620a-648a,c  esp 
643a-644b  /  Cleomenes,  659d-660a  /  Aratus , 
826c-836d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  xii,  117a;  bk  xvi,  180d- 
184a  /  Histories ,  bk  iv,  271b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  8,  86d- 
87b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  105, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  5-6  316a-318b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  v  8a-c;  ch  x,  16b-d; 
ch  xxvi  36b-37d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  113b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  23b-24a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  72-73  446b- 
447a 

32  Milton:  Lord  Gen.  Fairfax  68b-69a  /  Samson 
Agonistes  [888-902]  359a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  iii,  12b-c; 
bk  iv,  15a-c;  bk  xiv,  107b-d;  bk  xvii,  122a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  324c  /  Social  Contract , 
bk  1,  388c;  bk  iii,  411b-c;  bk  iv,  437d-438c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  23c;  523d-524a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  223a;  224a;  324c- 
325a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  448d-449c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  282b-283a  /  Representative 
Government ,  329b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  324, 
107c-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [9855-9862]  239b 

51  Tolstoy:  fHzr  aW  Peace,  bk  xi,  513d-515a; 
epilogue  1,  668a-669c 

7c.  Courage  in  war 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  20:1-4,8  / 
Judges ,  14-16  /  /  Samuel,  14:4-13;  17— (D) 
/  K/tfgr,  14:4-13;  17 

Apocrypha :  Judith,  8-13— (D)  OT,  Judith,  8:1- 
13:26  /  /  Maccabees,  6:43-46;  9:1-22— (D) 
OT,  /  Machabees ,  6:43-46;  9:1-22 

4  Homer:  Iliad  3a-179d  esp  bk  iii  19a-23d,  bk 
VI  [369-502]  43d-45a,  bk  xii  [310-328]  85b-c, 
bk  xiii  [206-294]  90b-91b,  bk  xvi  [493-501] 
117c,  bk  xxii  [77-130]  156a-c,  bk  xxiii  [i- 
367]  161a-165a 

5  Aeschylus:  Persians  15a-26d  esp  [331-432] 
18d-19d  /  Seven  Against  Thebes  [630-723]  34a- 
35a 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [857-917]  266a-b  / 
Phoenician  Maidens  [697-747]  384a-d;  [991- 
1030]  387a-b 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [565-580]  477a-b  / 
Wasps  [1060-1121]  520c-521b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vii,  233a-d;  239a-c; 
252a-259a  esp  256d-257c;  bk  ix,  291c-292a; 
298c-304c;  309d-310a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  367c- 
368a;  370a-c;  bk  ii,  389d-390b;  396b-399a; 
402c-404a;  411b-412c;  bk  iv,  457b-c;  460c-d; 
469d-470b;  478d-479b;  bk  v,  484a-c;  491b-c; 


lc 

501a-b;  bk  vi,  522b-c;  527b-c;  bk  vii,  555b- 
557b;  559b-560b;  561a-b 

7  Plato:  Laches,  32a-c  /  Symposium,  172a-b  / 
Apology,  205d-206a  /  Crito,  217b-c  /  Republic, 
bk  iii,  324c-325b;  bk  iv,  347a-d;  bk  v,  366c- 
367b/  Timaeus,  445d-446b/L^^,  bk  i,642b- 
643a;  bk  xii,  784d-786b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  13  [15^3-13] 
205d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  6  [1115^4-35] 
361b-c;  ch  8  [1 1  i6ai5— ^24]  362b-363a;  bk  v, 
ch  1  [ii29bi9-24]  377a  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9 
[i269b34~39]  466a;  bk  iii,  ch  7  [i279a4o-b3] 
476d;  bk  v,  ch  10  [i3i2a25~39]  514d;  bk  vii, 
ch  11  [i33ob32-i33ia8]  535c;  bk  viii,  ch  4 
[1338^-38]  544a- b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  9 
[i366bi— 14]  608d-609a 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  16 
15d-16a;  par  23  18a-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ii  124a-146b;  bk  ix-xii 
279a-379b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  40c-45c  /  Poplicola, 
83b-84a  /  Coriolanus,  177b-179a  /  Aemilius 
Paulus,  219d-229c  /  Pelopidas,  232a-233a; 
238b-239c/  Marcellus  246b, d-261a,c  /  Marcel - 
lus-Pelopidas  261a-262d  /  Philopoemen  293a- 
302a, c  /  Pyrrhus ,  328c-330a  /  Mc/^423a-438d 
/  Caesar,  583b-585d  /  Cleomenes,  659d-660a; 
661a-663c  /  Demosthenes,  695d-703b  /  Aratus, 
826c-836d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  44d-45a;  bk  iii,  49d- 
50a;  bk  xii,  117a-b  /  Histories,  bk  i,  210c; 
211c-212b;  bk  ii,  226d-227a;  232d-233a;  bk 
iii,  246b-c;  248b-c;  249a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  parti-ii,  q  105, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  5-6  316a-318b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
68-70  10a;  bk  11,  stanza  88-93  33a-b;  bk  v, 
stanza  258  154a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  x,  16c-d;  ch  xii- 
xiii  17d-21a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  115d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
32c-35a;  bk  iv,  297b-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  3a-5a;  20d-22a;  22d- 
24a;  25c-26d;  53c-55d;  95d-97b;  302b-306a; 
327d-329d;  336c-337a;  532d-533a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  v-vi 
23d-25a  /  3rd  Hetiry  VI,  act  v,  sc  iv  [1-59] 
lOla-c  /  Richard  III,  act  v,  sc  iii  [237-341] 
146b-147c  /  King  John,  act  v,  sc  i  [44-79]  399d- 
400a  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  i,  sc  iii  437d-440d; 
act  11,  sc  iii  443b-444b;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [i- 
29]  459b-c  /  Henry  V,  act  iii,  sc  i  543d- 
544b;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [1-78]  555c-556c;  sc  v 
558a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iv,  sc  iv  [46-66] 
59b-c  /  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  ii  113c- 
115d  /  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  iv  [8-63]  356c- 
357c;  sc  vi  [55-87]  358d-359a;  act  ii,  sc  ii 
[86-135]  365a-c  /  Timon  of  Athens ,  act  iii, 
sc  v  406d-408a  /  Cymbeline ,  act  v,  sc  iii 
479d-480d 


7c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  147b  d; 
part  ii,  203ab;  280b-c 

32  Milton:  Lord  Gen.  Fairfax  68b-69a  /  Para - 
dise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [430-466]  120b  121a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xiv, 
102b,d-103a;  bk  xxviii,  239d-240a 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  437d- 
438c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  93d-94b;  94d; 
369d-376a  esp  370a-c,  375b-c;  427a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  19d-20a;  238c; 
324c-325a;  357c-359c;  534b-536d  passim; 
543a-551a  passim,  esp  543d-544a,  549c'550c 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  504a-b 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  384b-c 


267 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  189 
149d  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  242d- 
243b;  part  ii,  274a  275a;  part  iv,  343d  344a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [9435-9505]  228b- 
230b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  321c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  11,  77c-81b; 
95a-c;  97c  106d;  bk  iii,  134a-135c;  149a- 
164a, c;  bk  ix,  344b-346a;  366d-367b;  369a- 
372a;  bk  x,  426b;  441d-442c;  445c;  451c- 
456a;  457a-c;  461d-463c;  467a-468a,c;  bk  xi, 
475b-476c;  480a-482b;  517d-518a;  bk  xii, 
537b-538a;  bk  xiii,  569d-570a;  586d-587c; 
bk  xiv,  589c-590c;  590d-604b  passim;  610c- 
611c;  613a-c;  bk  xv,  627a-c 


Chapter  13:  COURAGE 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  general  theory  of  virtue  and  the  virtues,  see  Virtue  and  Vice. 

The  virtues  most  closely  related  to  courage,  see  Justice;  Prudence;  Temperance. 

The  relation  of  these  other  virtues  to  courage,  see  Prudence  33-3  b,  3e;  Temperance  ia; 
Virtue  and  Vice  2-3  b. 

Courage  and  other  virtues  in  relation  to  happiness  and  duty,  see  Happiness  26(3);  Virtue 
and  Vice  id,  6a. 

Matters  relevant  to  the  emotional  aspects  of  courage,  see  Emotion  4b(i);  Pleasure  and 
Pain  8a;  Virtue  and  Vice  5a. 

The  general  consideration  of  moral  training,  see  Education  4~4d;  Virtue  and  Vice  4-^(3). 
The  general  consideration  of  civic  virtue,  see  Citizen  5;  State  8b-8c;  Virtue  and  Vice 
7— 7d ;  and  for  courage  as  a  military  virtue,  see  War  and  Peace  ioc. 

The  analysis  of  the  heroic  and  the  conception  of  the  hero,  see  Honor  5~5a,  5c. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boofy  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 


For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Aquinas.  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  qq  1 23-1 40 
F.  Bacon.  “Of  Boldness,”  in  Essays 
Milton.  The  Readie  and  Easie  Way  to  Establish  a 
Free  Commonwealth 
Dostoevsky.  The  Idiot 

II. 

Theophrastus.  The  Characters 
Cicero.  De  Officiis  ( On  Duties ),  hi 
Seneca.  De  Const antia  Sapientis  (On  the  Firmness  of 
the  Wise  Man) 

Sir  G a  wain  and  the  Green  Knight 

P.  Sidney.  The  Countess  of  Pembroke's  Arcadia 

Corneille.  Polyeucte 


Vauvenargues.  Introduction  a  la  connaissance  de 
V esprit  humain ,  part  i,  ch  i 
Morgann.  Essay  on  the  Dramatic  Character  of  Sir 
John  Falstajf 

Leopardi.  Essays ,  Dialogues ,  and  Thoughts 
Stendhal.  The  Charterhouse  of  Parma 
T.  Carlyle.  On  Heroes ,  Hero-Worship  and  the  He¬ 
roic  in  History 

Emerson.  “Courage,”  in  Society  and  Solitude 
T.  H.  Green.  Prolegomena  to  Ethics ,  iv 
Crane.  The  Red  Badge  of  Courage 
Rostand.  Cyrano  de  Bergerac 
Rank.  The  Myth  of  the  Birth  of  the  Hero 
G.  W.  Russell.  The  Hero  in  Man 
Routh.  God ,  Man ,  and  Epic  Poetry 
Raglan.  The  Hero 


Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVENTION 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  contrast  between  the  artificial  and  the 
natural  is  generally  understood  in  terms  of 
the  contribution  which  man  does  or  does  not 
make  to  the  origin  or  character  of  a  thing.  Works 
of  art  are  man-made.  The  artificial  is  somehow 
humanly  caused  or  contrived.  The  contrast  be¬ 
tween  the  natural  and  the  conventional  or  cus¬ 
tomary  involves  the  same  point  of  difference. 
Though  customs  are  not,  in  the  strict  sense, 
wade  by  man,  as  are  works  of  art,  they  do  grow 
only  as  the  result  of  the  kind  of  acts  which  men 
perform  voluntarily  rather  than  instinctively. 
Similarly,  conventions,  like  contracts,  are  so¬ 
cial  arrangements  or  agreements  into  which 
men  enter  voluntarily. 

The  fundamental  notions  with  which  this 
chapter  deals  are  thus  seen  to  be  closely  related 
to  ideas  and  distinctions  treated  in  the  chapters 
on  Art  and  Nature.  For  example,  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  human  action  and  production,  or 
doing  and  making,  helps  us  to  understand  how 
the  conventional  and  the  artificial  differ  from 
one  another  as  opposites  of  the  natural.  Art  in¬ 
volves  voluntary  making.  Customs  result  from 
voluntary  doing.  In  both  cases,  the  distinction 
between  the  voluntary  and  the  instinctive — 
the  latter  representing  the  natural — seems  to 
be  presupposed. 

A  third  term — habit — is  traditionally  associ¬ 
ated  with  the  consideration  of  the  voluntary 
and  the  instinctive.  Like  these  others,  it  seems 
to  have  a  critical  bearing  on  the  discussion  of 
custom  and  art.  Aristotle,  for  example,  con¬ 
ceives  art  as  an  intellectual  virtue,  that  is,  a 
habit  of  mind,  an  acquired  skill.  For  Hume 
the  customary  and  the  habitual  are  almost 
the  same.  Whether  they  are  to  be  identified 
or  are  only  connected  causally,  the  relation  of 
habit  to  custom  not  only  throws  some  light 
on  the  nature  of  custom,  but  also  calls  our  at¬ 
tention  to  the  fact  that  the  words  “custom” 


and  “convention”  cannot  be  treated  simply 
as  synonyms. 

In  the  tradition  of  the  great  books,  the  word 
“convention”  has  at  least  two  meanings,  in 
only  one  of  which  is  it  synonymous  with  “cus¬ 
tom.”  When  “convention”  is  used  to  signify 
habitual  social  practices  it  is,  for  the  most  part, 
interchangeable  with  “custom.”  In  this  signif¬ 
icance,  the  notion  of  convention,  like  that  of 
custom,  is  an  extension  of  the  idea  of  habit. 
What  habit  is  in  the  behavior  of  the  individual, 
customary  or  conventional  conduct  is  in  the  be¬ 
havior  of  the  social  group. 

The  other  meaning  of  “convention”  does  not 
connote  the  habitual  in  social  behavior,  but 
stresses  rather  the  voluntary  as  opposed  to  the 
instinctive  origin  of  social  institutions,  arrange¬ 
ments,  or  practices.  For  example,  different  sorts 
of  family  organization  are  conventional  in  the 
sense  that  at  different  times  or  in  different  com¬ 
munities  men  have  set  up  their  domestic  ar¬ 
rangements  in  different  ways.  In  each  case  they 
tend  to  perpetuate  the  particular  institutions 
which  they  or  their  ancestors  originated.  What¬ 
ever  is  conventional  about  social  institutions 
might  have  been  otherwise,  if  men  had  seen  fit 
to  invent  and  adopt  different  schemes  for  the 
organization  of  their  social  life.  This  indicates 
the  connection  between  the  two  senses  of  the 
word  “convention,”  for  all  customs  are  con¬ 
ventional  in  origin,  and  all  conventions  become 
customary  when  perpetuated. 

The  fact  that  men  can  depart  from,  as  well  as 
abide  by,  their  conventions — that  they  can 
transgress  as  well  as  conform  to  custom — seems 
to  indicate  that  custom  and  convention  belong 
to  the  sphere  of  human  freedom.  Yet  there  is 
also  a  sense  in  which  custom  is  a  constraining 
force,  which  reduces  the  tendency  of  individ¬ 
uals  to  differ  from  one  another,  and  which  has 


268 


Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVENTION 


269 


the  effect  of  moulding  them  alike  and  rcgi- 

I  men  ting  their  lives. 

The  repressive  effect  of  custom  can  he  seen, 
according  to  Freud,  in  the  neurotic  disorders 
from  which  men  suffer  when  their  instinctive 
impulses  come  into  conflict  with  “accepted  cus¬ 
tom.”  Discussing  the  influence  of  custom  upon 
the  developing  individual,  he  says  that  “its  or¬ 
dinances,  frequently  too  stringent,  exact  a  great 
deal  from  him,  much  self-restraint,  much  re¬ 
nunciation  of  instinctual  gratification.”  It  be¬ 
comes,  therefore,  one  of  the  aims  of  psychoan¬ 
alytic  therapy  to  release  the  individual  from 
his  bondage  to  custom,  or  at  least  to  make  him 
conscious  of  the  way  in  which  certain  desires 
have  been  submerged  or  distorted,  and  his 
whole  personality  shaped,  by  the  constraints 
which  the  mores  and  taboos  of  the  tribe  have 
imposed  upon  him. 

Considered  in  relation  to  society,  custom  also 
seems  to  exercise  a  conservative,  if  not  repres¬ 
sive  effect.  Established  customs  tend  to  resist 
change.  They  are  sometimes  thought  to  impede 
progress.  But  to  the  extent  that  they  conserve 
the  achievements  of  the  past,  they  may  be  in¬ 
dispensable  to  progress  because  they  provide 
the  substance  of  what  we  call  “tradition.”  A 
passage  in  Bacon's  Advancement  of  Learning  il¬ 
lustrates  these  apparently  contrary  effects  of 
custom. 

Over-emphasis  upon  either  antiquity  or  nov¬ 
elty  seems  to  Bacon  a  disease  of  learning,  or  an 
obstacle  to  its  advancement.  “Antiquity  en- 
vieth  there  should  be  new  additions,”  he  writes, 
“and  novelty  cannot  be  content  to  add  but  it 
must  deface.”  If  custom  tends  to  support  an¬ 
tiquity  against  novelty,  it  may  also  encourage 
inventions  or  discoveries  which  genuinely  en¬ 
hance  the  tradition  without  defacing  it.  “An¬ 
tiquity  deserveth  that  reverence,”  Bacon  says, 
“that  men  should  make  a  stand  thereupon  and 
discover  what  is  the  best  way;  but  when  the 
discovery  is  well  taken,  then  to  make  progres¬ 
sion.”  As  the  preserver  of  antiquity,  custom 
thus  appears  to  afford  a  basis  for  progress. 

One  other  fact  about  customs  which  most 
commentators  from  Herodotus  to  Montaigne 
and  Freud  have  observed  is  their  variety  and 
variability.  Customs  differ  from  time  to  time, 
and  from  place  to  place.  But  this  diversity  and 
variation  in  custom  does  not  necessarily  mean 


that  no  uniformity  at  all  exists  in  the  actions  of 
men.  “Were  there  no  uniformity  in  human  ac¬ 
tions,”  1 1 ume  points  out,  it  would  be  impossible 
“to  collect  any  general  observations  concerning 
mankind.”  At  least  enough  uniformity  is  found, 
in  his  opinion,  for  it  to  be  “universally  acknowl¬ 
edged  that  human  nature  remains  still  the 
same.”  To  whatever  extent  human  behavior  is 
purely  natural  or  instinctive,  it  is  common  to 
all  members  of  the  species,  and  does  not,  like 
customary  conduct,  vary  remarkably  from  one 
part  of  the  human  race  to  another,  or  from 
generation  to  generation. 

The  diversity  and  variation  of  customs  seems 
therefore  to  be  of  their  essence  and  to  show  that 
they  are  both  man-made  and  voluntary  in  or¬ 
igin.  “If  they  were  not  devices  of  men,”  Augus¬ 
tine  writes,  “they  would  not  be  different  in  dif¬ 
ferent  nations,  and  could  not  be  changed  among 
particular  nations.”  The  distinction  between 
nature  and  convention  can  be  formulated, 
therefore,  partly  in  terms  of  the  contrast  be¬ 
tween  the  constant  and  the  variable,  and  partly 
in  terms  of  the  difference  between  the  instinc¬ 
tive  and  the  voluntary. 

The  early  Greeks  had  an  apt  way  of  express¬ 
ing  this.  As  Aristotle  phrases  their  insight,  they 
referred  to  the  natural  as  “that  which  every¬ 
where  has  the  same  force  and  does  not  exist  by 
people’s  thinking  this  or  that,”  as,  for  example, 
“fire  burns  both  here  and  in  Persia.”  The  con¬ 
ventional  and  those  things  which  are  “not  by 
nature  but  by  human  enactment  are  not  every¬ 
where  the  same.”  The  laws  of  Persia  differ  from 
the  laws  of  Greece,  and  in  Greece  or  in  Persia, 
they  change  from  time  to  time. 

The  variability  of  custom  in  contrast  to  the 
constancy  or  uniformity  of  nature  puts  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  nature  and  convention  at  the 
service  of  the  skeptic.  One  form  of  the  skeptical 
attack  upon  natural  law,  universal  moral  stand¬ 
ards,  and  the  objectivity  of  truth  or  beauty 
consists  in  making  custom  the  only  measure  of 
the  acceptability  of  human  actions  or  judg¬ 
ments.  To  say,  for  example,  as  Hume  does,  that 
the  connection  which  the  mind  seems  to  make 
between  cause  and  effect  is  based  on  custom 
rather  than  reason,  has  the  skeptical  effect  which 
Hume  intends.  It  substitutes  the  arbitrary  for 
the  rational.  It  dispossesses  reason  as  a  source  of 


270 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


either  the  validity  or  the  intelligibility  of  our 
conclusions  concerning  cause  and  effect. 

As  the  chapters  on  Knowledge  and  Opinion 
indicate,  the  skeptical  argument  takes  other 
forms.  The  reduction  of  all  human  judgments 
to  opinion  makes  the  differences  between  men, 
in  either  action  or  thought,  unresolvable  by  ar¬ 
gument  or  debate.  One  opinion  can  predomi¬ 
nate  over  another  only  by  force  or  by  the  weight 
of  numbers.  When  it  predominates  by  weight 
of  numbers,  it  prevails  by  custom  or  conven¬ 
tion.  It  is  the  opinion  which  the  majority  have 
agreed  upon  at  a  given  time  or  place.  To  settle 
every  controversy  about  what  men  should  think 
or  do  by  counting  heads  is  to  hold  that  every¬ 
thing  is  a  matter  of  opinion  and  purely  conven¬ 
tional. 

Whether  the  skeptic  reduces  everything  to 
opinion  or  to  convention,  he  achieves  the  same 
effect.  What  he  means  by  calling  everything  an 
“opinion”  or  a  “convention”  is  equally  inimical 
to  reason.  In  either  case,  the  willful  or  arbitrary 
is  enthroned  in  reason's  place  and  only  force  can 
be  finally  decisive.  The  two  ideas — opinion  and 
convention — seem  to  be  corollaries  of  one 
another.  Both  imply  a  kind  of  relativity.  Opin¬ 
ion  normally  suggests  relativity  to  the  individ¬ 
ual,  custom  or  convention  relativity  to  the  so¬ 
cial  group.  Either  may  be  involved  in  the  or¬ 
igin  of  the  other.  The  individual  may  form  his 
opinions  under  the  pressure  of  prevailing  cus¬ 
toms  of  thought  or  action;  the  customary  be¬ 
liefs  or  practices  of  a  society  or  culture  may,  and 
usually  do,  result  from  opinions  which  have 
come  to  prevail. 

The  Greek  sophists,  we  learn  from  the  dia¬ 
logues  of  Plato,  appealed  to  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  nature  and  convention  and  to  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  knowledge  and  opinion  in  exactly 
the  same  way.  They  used  the  notions  of  opinion 
and  convention  with  equal  force  in  their  efforts 
to  question  absolute  standards  of  conduct  and 
the  objectivity  or  universality  of  truth.  The 
most  familiar  of  all  the  sophistical  sayings — the 
remark  attributed  to  Protagoras  that  “man  is 
the  measure  of  all  things” — is  interpreted  by 
both  Plato  and  Aristotle  to  mean  that  what  men 
wish  to  think  or  do  determines/or  them  what  is 
true  or  right.  Man’s  will  governs  his  reason,  and 
convention,  or  the  agreement  of  individual 
wills,  decides  what  is  acceptable  to  the  group. 


In  the  Gorgias ,  which  is  named  after  another 
of  the  leading  sophists  of  the  day,  Plato  puts 
into  the  mouth  of  Callicles  the  sophistic  posi¬ 
tion  that  there  is  no  law  or  standard  of  justice 
except  the  rule  of  the  stronger.  Insisting  that 
“convention  and  nature  are  generally  at  vari¬ 
ance,,  with  one  another,”  Callicles  attempts  to 
show  that  all  of  Socrates’  efforts  to  discover  an 
absolute  standard  of  justice  come  to  naught,  be¬ 
cause  he  cannot  help  but  resort  “to  the  popular 
and  vulgar  notions  of  right,  which  are  not  natu¬ 
ral,  but  conventional.” 

As  they  appear  in  Plato’s  dialogues,  the  soph¬ 
ists  are  obviously  impressed  by  the  kind  of  in¬ 
formation  which  fills  the  History  of  Herodotus 
— information  about  the  great  diversity  of  hu¬ 
man  beliefs  and  practices  which  anyone  could 
discover  for  himself  if  he  traveled,  as  Herodotus 
did,  from  people  to  people,  observing  their  in¬ 
stitutions  and  collecting  their  legends.  Herodo¬ 
tus  himself  does  not  explicitly  draw  the  skep¬ 
tical  conclusion,  yet  his  own  suspended  judg¬ 
ment  on  many  matters  betokens  a  turn  of  mind 
made  cautious  by  the  impact  of  contrary  opin¬ 
ions  and  conflicting  customs. 

In  the  Hellenistic  period  when  the  main  stream 
of  Greek  philosophy  divides  into  a  number  of 
Roman  schools  of  thought,  the  skeptical  posi¬ 
tion  receives  what  is  perhaps  its  fullest  and  most 
explicit  statement.  But  in  the  writings  of  Lu¬ 
cian  and  Pyrrho,  to  take  two  examples,  it  is  not 
so  much  the  conflict  of  customs  as  it  is  what 
Lucian  calls  “the  warfare  of  creeds,”  which  oc¬ 
casions  universal  doubt.  Yet  whatever  the 
source  of  doubt,  Pyrrhonism  states  the  tradi¬ 
tional  denials  of  the  skeptic  in  their  most  ex¬ 
treme  form.  The  senses  are  entirely  untrust¬ 
worthy.  Reason  is  both  impotent  and  self-de¬ 
ceiving.  Men  possess  no  knowledge  or  science. 
No  truth  is  self-evident;  none  can  be  demon¬ 
strated. 

The  critical  temper  of  the  Greek  sophists, 
and  of  an  observer  of  men  and  manners  like 
Herodotus,  reappears  later  in  the  questionings 
of  Montaigne — sharpened  somewhat,  perhaps, 
by  his  acquaintance  with  the  Roman  skeptics. 
In  his  case,  perhaps  more  than  any  other,  it  is 
the  implications  of  custom  which,  everywhere 
expatiated  on  in  his  Essays ,  give  them  their 
skeptical  tone.  Not  himself  a  traveler  in  distant 


Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVENTION 


271 


parts,  Montaigne  traverses  the  world  of  time 
and  space  by  reading.  He  becomes  conversant 
with  the  strange  customs  of  the  aborigines  and 
of  the  Orient  through  the  reports  of  returned 
explorers.  He  culls  from  the  historians  and  ge¬ 
ographers  of  antiquity  every  difference  in  cus¬ 
tom  which  their  books  set  forth  as  fact  or  fable. 

Montaigne’s  insatiable  appetite  for  collecting 
and  comparing  customs  is  not  an  aimless  fascina¬ 
tion  on  his  part  with  the  spectacle  of  human  va¬ 
riety.  It  steadfastly  leads  him  to  the  conclusion 
which  is  for  him  the  only  one  possible.  Since 
every  belief  or  practice  can  be  paired  with  its 
opposite  in  the  customs  of  some  other  time  or 
place,  no  belief  or  practice  can  demand  unquali¬ 
fied  or  universal  assent.  “There  is  nothing,”  he 
writes,  “which  custom  does  not,  or  may  not  do; 
and  therefore,  with  every  good  reason  it  is  that 
Pindar  calls  her  the  ruler  of  the  world.” 

To  say,  as  Montaigne  does,  that  “the  taste  for 
good  and  evil  depends  in  good  part  upon  the 
opinion  we  have  of  them”  and  that  “everyone 
is  well  or  ill  at  ease,  according  as  he  so  finds  him¬ 
self,”  amounts  to  saying  that  all  moral  judg¬ 
ments  are  matters  of  opinion,  either  individual 
or  customary  in  origin.  Beauty,  too,  is  a  matter 
of  taste.  “We  fancy  its  forms,”  Montaigne 
thinks,  “according  to  our  own  appetite  and  lik¬ 
ing.”  As  may  be  seen  in  the  chapter  on  Beauty, 
Montaigne  assembles  an  abundance  of  evidence 
to  show  that  standards  of  beauty  vary  with  dif¬ 
ferent  peoples.  The  tastes  or  preferences  of  one 
group  are  as  unaccountable  as  they  are  frequent¬ 
ly  revolting  to  another. 

Even  in  the  field  of  speculative  thought  about 
the  nature  of  things,  Montaigne  regards  the 
things  men  hold  to  be  true  as  nothing  more  than 
prevailing  opinions — the  cultural  conventions 
of  a  time  or  place.  “We  have  no  other  level  of 
truth  and  reason,”  he  declares,  “than  the  exam¬ 
ple  and  idea  of  the  opinions  and  customs  of  the 
place  wherein  we  live:  there  is  always  the  per¬ 
fect  religion,  there  the  most  perfect  govern¬ 
ment,  there  the  most  exact  and  accomplished 
usage  of  all  things.” 

Of  all  human  deceptions  or  impostures,  none 
is  worse  than  that  which  Hows  from  a  man’s  un¬ 
willingness  to  qualify  every  remark  with  the  ad¬ 
mission  that  this  is  the  way  it  seems  to  me.  In 
Montaigne’s  eyes,  “there  is  no  greater  folly  in 
the  world”  than  the  failure  to  recognize  that 


we  reduce  truth  and  falsity  “to  the  measure  of 
our  capacity  and  the  bounds  of  our  sufficiency.” 
When  new  ideas  or  the  strange  beliefs  of  others 
at  first  seem  incredible  simply  because  they  are 
not  our  own,  “we  shall  find  that  it  is  rather  cus¬ 
tom  than  knowledge  that  takes  away  their 
strangeness.”  For  his  own  part,  Montaigne 
makes  his  “emblem”  the  question,  “What  do  I 
know?”  This,  he  says,  sums  up  his  Pyrrhonian 
philosophy. 

According  to  the  modern  social  scientist  who 
claims  that  custom  is  the  ultimate  standard  of 
conduct  and  that  it  provides  the  only  criterion 
of  moral  judgment,  no  questions  can  be  raised 
about  the  goodness  or  evil  of  particular  cus¬ 
toms.  The  customs  of  one  people  cannot  be 
judged  by  another,  at  least  not  objectively  or 
impartially,  for  those  who  judge  must  do  so  on 
the  basis  of  their  own  customs.  Since  there  is  no 
arbiter  above  conflicting  customs  to  say  which 
is  right,  a  particular  custom  has  validity  only 
for  the  group  in  which  it  prevails.  Within  that 
social  group  the  character  or  conduct  of  its  in¬ 
dividual  members  is  measured  by  conformity 
to  the  prevailing  customs. 

The  descriptive  science  of  sociology  or  com¬ 
parative  ethnology  thus  tends  to  replace  the 
normative  science  of  ethics — or  moral  philoso¬ 
phy.  The  only  scientifically  answerable  questions 
about  human  conduct  take  the  form  of  “How  do 
men  behave  ?”or  “How  have  they  acted  individ¬ 
ually  or  in  groups?”  but  not  “How  should  they?” 
The  study  of  morality,  as  in  Sumner’s  Folkways, 
becomes  a  study  of  the  mores — how  the  customs 
which  measure  conduct  develop  and  dominate; 
or,  as  in  the  writings  of  Freud,  it  becomes  a 
study  of  how  the  individual  is  psychologically 
formed  or  deformed  by  the  mores  of  his  tribe 
and  culture,  according  to  the  way  in  which  the 
growing  child  reacts  to  the  pressures  which  the 
community  imposes  through  parental  discipline. 

With  these  views,  many  philosophers  and  the¬ 
ologians,  both  ancient  and  modern,  take  issue. 
But  their  opposing  doctrine  seldom  goes  so  far 
as  to  deny  that  morality  has  certain  conven¬ 
tional  aspects.  In  arguing  that  there  are  “no  in¬ 
nate  practical  principles,”  Locke,  for  example, 
like  Montaigne,  cites  instances  of  contradictory 
customs  to  show  that  “there  is  scarce  that  prin¬ 
ciple  of  morality  to  be  named,  or  rule  of  virtue 


272 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


to  be  thought  on  . . .  which  is  not,  somewhere  or 
other,  slighted  and  condemned  by  the  general 
fashion  of  whole  societies  of  men,  governed  by 
practical  opinions  and  rules  of  living  quite  op¬ 
posite  to  others.” 

But  Locke  does  not  leave  this  observation  of 
the  diversity  of  customs  unqualified.  He  goes  on 
to  assert  that  “though  perhaps,  by  the  different 
temper,  education,  fashion,  maxims,  or  interest 
of  different  sorts  of  men,  it  fell  out,  that  what 
was  thought  praiseworthy  in  one  place,  escaped 
not  censure  in  another;  and  so  in  different  soci¬ 
eties,  virtues  and  vices  were  changed:  yet,  as  to 
the  main,  they  for  the  most  part  kept  the  same 
everywhere.  For,  since  nothing  can  be  more  nat¬ 
ural  than  to  encourage  with  esteem  and  reputa¬ 
tion  that  wherein  every  one  finds  his  advantage, 
and  to  blame  and  discountenance  the  contrary; 
it  is  no  wonder  that  esteem  and  discredit,  vir¬ 
tue  and  vice,  should,  in  a  great  measure,  every¬ 
where  correspond  with  the  unchangeable  rule  of 
right  and  wrong,  which  the  law  of  God  hath  es¬ 
tablished.  .  .  .  Even  in  the  corruption  of  man¬ 
ners,  the  true  boundaries  of  the  law  of  nature, 
which  ought  to  be  the  rule  of  virtue  and  vice, 
were  pretty  well  preferred.” 

For  Locke,  then,  as  for  many  others,  there  ap¬ 
pear  to  be,  underlying  the  variety  of  customs, 
moral  principles  of  universal  validity  that  draw 
their  truth  from  the  nature  of  man  which  rep¬ 
resents  a  constant  and  common  factor  through¬ 
out  the  diversity  of  cultures.  Accordingly,  it 
would  seem  to  follow  that  just  as  habits  are 
modifications  of  instinct  or  developments  of  the 
individual’s  native  capacities  for  action,  so  cus¬ 
toms  are  conventional  elaborations  of  what  is 
natural  to  man  as  a  social  animal.  On  this 
theory,  the  conventional  cannot  be  understood 
except  by  reference  to  the  natural,  z.<?.,  the 
nature  of  man  or  society. 

The  view  that  conventions  have  a  natural 
basis  is  most  readily  exemplified  by  Aristotle’s 
theory  of  natural  and  legal  (or  conventional) 
justice,  and  by  the  teaching  of  Aquinas  concern¬ 
ing  natural  and  positive  law.  For  the  Greeks  the 
legal  and  the  conventional  are  almost  identical, 
so  that  it  is  a  kind  of  justice  rather  than  a  kind 
of  law  which  Aristotle  calls  “natural.”  Roman 
philosophers  like  Cicero,  and  Roman  jurists  like 
Gaius  and  Ulpian,  make  what  seems  to  be  an 


equivalent  distinction  in  terms  of  law  rather  than 
justice.  In  his  analysis,  Aquinas  follows  the  Lat¬ 
in,  not  the  Greek  vocabulary. 

The  Roman  system  of  jurisprudence,  Gibbon 
tells  us,  distinguished  between  those  laws  which 
are  “positive  institutions”  and  those  which  “rea¬ 
son  prescribes,  the  laws  of  nature  and  nations.” 
The  former  are  man-made — the  “result  of  cus¬ 
tom  and  prejudice.”  This  holds  true  of  both 
written  and  unwritten  laws,  although  only  the 
unwritten  precepts  are  now  usually  called  “cus¬ 
tomary  laws.”  These  customary  laws  are positive 
in  the  sense  that  they  are  humanly  instituted  or 
enacted — posited  by  the  will  of  the  legislator 
rather  than  merely  discovered  by  the  reason  of 
the  philosopher.  They  are  conventional  in  the 
sense  that  they  represent  some  voluntary  agree¬ 
ment  on  the  part  of  the  members  of  the  com¬ 
munity  they  govern,  whether  that  consist  in 
obeying  the  edicts  of  the  emperor  or  in  giving 
consent  to  the  enactments  of  the  senate. 

So  far  as  it  is  conventional,  the  law  of  one 
community  differs  from  another ;  and  within  the 
history  of  a  single  community,  the  positive  law 
changes  from  time  to  time.  But  such  bodies  of 
law,  “however  modified  by  accident  or  custom,” 
the  Roman  jurists,  Gibbon  says,  conceived  as 
“drawn  from  the  rule  of  right.”  The  fact  that 
“reason  prescribes”  this  rule  was  their  explana¬ 
tion  of  certain  common  elements  which  all  bod¬ 
ies  of  positive  law  seem  to  contain. 

The  principles  underlying  all  codes  of  civil 
law,  whether  discovered  directly  by  reason  or 
drawn  inductively,  as  Grotius  later  suggests, 
from  the  comparative  study  of  diverse  legal  sys¬ 
tems,  comprise  the  precepts  of  what  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  and  later  Aquinas,  call  “natural  law.” 
Thus  these  writers  seem  to  re-aflirm,  though  in 
somewhat  different  language,  Aristotle’s  point 
that  what  is  naturally  just  is  the  same  for  all 
men  everywhere  and  always,  while  the  laws  of 
Greece  and  Persia  represent  diverse  convention¬ 
al  determinations  of  the  universal  principles  of 
justice. 

The  theory  of  natural  right  and  natural  law, 
as  expressed  in  the  writings  of  Hobbes,  Locke, 
and  Kant,  as  well  as  in  the  ancient  and  mediae¬ 
val  tradition,  is,  of  course,  more  fully  treated  in 
the  chapters  on  Justice  and  Law.  But  one  ex¬ 
ample  of  the  distinction  between  natural  and 
conventional  justice  may  be  instructive  here. 


Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVENTION 


273 


Aquinas  conceives  positive  rules  as  “deter¬ 
minations”  of,  rather  than  “deductions”  from, 
natural  law.  He  treats  such  precepts  as  “Thou 
shalt  not  kill”  and  “Thou  shall  not  steal”  as 
conclusions  that  reason  can  draw  deductively 
from  the  first  principle  of  natural  law,  which  is 
sometimes  stated  in  the  form  of  the  command: 
Do  good,  harm  no  one ,  and  render  to  each  his  own. 
Because  these  precepts  arc  the  prescriptions  of 
reason  rather  than  enactments  of  the  state,  they 
can  be  interpreted  as  declaring  that  murder  and 
larceny  are  always  and  everywhere  unjust.  But 
what ‘sort  of  killing  and  taking  of  what  is  not 
one’s  own  shall  be  defined  as  murder  and  theft; 
and  how  offenders  shall  be  tried,  judged,  and 
punished  —  these  are  matters  which  natural  jus¬ 
tice  or  the  precepts  of  natural  law  leave  open  for 
determination  by  the  positive  laws  of  each  com¬ 
munity,  according  to  its  own  constitution  and 
its  local  customs. 

The  theory  thus  exemplified,  of  the  relation 
between  conventional  and  natural  justice,  or  be¬ 
tween  positive  and  natural  law,  applies  to  moral 
rules  and  ethical  standards  generally.  For  the 
same  reason  that  a  positive  law  which  violates 
natural  justice  cannot  be  called  “just”  even 
though  it  is  harmonious  with  the  customs  of  the 
community,  so  no  rule  of  conduct,  however 
much  it  represents  prevailing  custom,  can  be 
approved  as  morally  right  if  it  violates  the  right 
as  reason  sees  it.  The  defenders  of  natural  law, 
which  is  also  sometimes  called  “the  law  of  rea¬ 
son,”  proclaim  the  existence  of  an  absolute 
standard,  above  the  diversity  and  conflict  of 
customs,  by  which  their  soundness  is  measured. 

Conflicting  ethical  doctrines  raise  many  is¬ 
sues  concerning  what  it  is  right  for  men  to  do  or 
good  for  them  to  seek;  but  the  moralists  at 
least  agree  that  morality  is  based  on  reason  or 
nature.  For  them  the  facts  of  human  nature  or 
the  intuitions  of  reason  will  ultimately  decide 
the  points  in  issue.  However  far  apart  Plato 
and  Aristotle,  Aquinas  and  Hegel,  Kant  and 
Mill  may  be  in  their  conceptions  or  analyses 
of  the  right  and  the  good,  they  stand  together, 
at  least  negatively,  on  the  question  of  how  their 
disputes  can  be  resolved:  not  by  appealing  to 
the  mores  of  the  tribe,  not  by  looking  to  the 
conventions  of  the  community  as  a  measure, 
not  by  letting  the  customs  of  the  majority 
decide. 


The  deepest  of  all  moral  issues  therefore  ex¬ 
ists  between  those  who  think  that  morality  some¬ 
how  derives  from  nature  or  reason  and  those 
who,  like  the  ancient  sophists  or  Montaigne  or 
Freud,  find  its  source  in  custom  and  convention. 
According  to  the  side  a  man  takes  on  this  issue, 
he  does  or  docs  not  believe  it  possible  to  discover 
standards  independent  of  custom,  thereby  to 
judge  whether  customs  are  good,  bad,  or  indif¬ 
ferent.  On  one  belief,  public  manners  arc  con¬ 
ventional  determinations  of  moral  principles  or 
they  are  sometimes  violations  of  them,  just  as 
positive  laws  arc  either  determinations  or  vio¬ 
lations  of  natural  law.  On  the  other  belief,  the 
individual  may  be  approved  or  condemned  for 
conforming  to  or  transgressing  the  manners  or 
mores  of  his  group;  but  those  manners  or  mores, 
whether  they  are  liked  or  disliked  by  the  in¬ 
dividual,  are  above  any  tenable,  objective  criti¬ 
cism. 

The  controversy  in  jurisprudence  and  moral¬ 
ity  between  the  naturalists  or  rationalists  who 
appeal  to  man’s  nature  or  reason,  and  the  posi¬ 
tivists  who  hold  that  human  customs  cannot  be 
appealed  from,  parallels  a  controversy  in  the 
theory  of  knowledge  or  science.  The  parallel  is¬ 
sue,  considered  at  greater  length  in  the  chapters 
on  Hypothesis  and  Principle,  can  be  stated  by 
the  question  whether  the  foundation  of  science 
— even  of  such  sciences  as  logic  and  mathemat¬ 
ics — consists  of  postulates  or  axioms. 

Axioms,  like  the  precepts  of  natural  law,  are 
supposed  to  have  a  universality  derived  from 
the  nature  of  human  reason.  They  are  self-evi¬ 
dent  truths,  compelling  assent.  Postulates,  on 
the  contrary,  are  like  rules  of  positive  law — vol¬ 
untarily  accepted  assumptions  which,  when 
agreed  upon  by  the  experts  in  a  certain  science, 
become  its  conventional  basis.  In  science  as  in 
law,  the  positivists  recognize  nothing  beyond 
the  agreement  of  men  to  determine  what  shall 
be  fallen  for  granted  as  true  or  just. 

The  difference  between  nature  and  conven¬ 
tion  also  enters  into  the  traditional  discussion  of 
two  of  the  most  characteristic  activities  of  man  : 
speech  and  political  association. 

No  one  disputes  whether  the  faculty  of  speech 
is  natural  to  man.  It  is  as  natural  for  man  to 
speak  as  for  dogs  to  bark  or  birds  to  sing.  But 
the  question  is  whether  any  human  language, 


274 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


having  a  certain  vocabulary  and  syntax,  is  nat¬ 
ural  or  conventional.  The  answer  seems  to  be 
dictated  at  once  by  the  facts  of  the  matter. 

Human  languages  exist  or  have  existed  in 
great  number  and  diversity,  and  those  which 
still  endure  have  gradually  developed  and  are 
undoubtedly  subject  to  further  change.  Hence, 
according  to  the  traditional  understanding  of 
the  natural  and  the  conventional,  these  various 
tongues  must  represent  conventional  languages 
— originally  invented  by  this  human  group  or 
that,  perpetuated  by  custom,  altered  by  the 
conventions  of  usage.  In  contrast,  the  expres¬ 
sive  sounds  instinctively  made  by  other  ani¬ 
mals  show  themselves  to  be  natural  by  the  fact 
that  they  are  common  to  all  members  of  a  spe¬ 
cies  and  do  not  change  as  long  as  the  species 
endures. 

Nevertheless,  as  the  chapter  on  Language  in¬ 
dicates,  the  writers  of  the  great  books  consider 
the  hypothesis  of  a  natural  human  language. 
The  Old  Testament  story  of  the  Tower  of  Ba¬ 
bel  is  sometimes  interpreted  as  implying  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  one  language  for  all  men  before  God 
confounded  their  speech  and  diversified  their 
tongues.  The  story  of  Adam’s  giving  names  to 
the  various  species  of  plants  and  animals  in  the 
Garden  of  Eden  is  also  cited  by  those  who  think 
there  can  be  natural  as  well  as  conventional 
signs.  In  Plato’s  Cratylus  the  attempt  is  made  to 
discover  the  natural  names  for  things,  or  at  least 
to  discern  some  natural  basis  for  the  words  of  a 
conventional  language  like  Greek. 

These  who  reject  the  hypothesis  of  a  single 
human  language  from  which  all  others  have  de¬ 
veloped  by  di  versifica  tion,  or  who  regard  a  pu  rely 
natural  language  as  impossible  in  the  very  na¬ 
ture  of  the  case,  sometimes  acknowledge  the 
possibility  of  certain  common  elements — prin¬ 
ciples  of  syntax,  if  not  words — present  in  all  hu¬ 
man  languages.  The  discovery  of  the  common 
rules  of  speech  was  the  object  of  the  speculative 
grammarians  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  of  those 
who,  like  Arnauld  and  others,  later  tried  to 
formulate  a  “universal  grammar.’’  On  their 
view,  all  languages,  even  if  they  are  convention¬ 
al  as  written  or  spoken,  may  have  the  same  nat¬ 
ural  basis  in  the  fact  that  they  are  all  used  to 
express  what  men  can  naturally  perceive  or 
think. 

As  in  the  case  of  language,  so  in  the  case  of  so¬ 


ciety,  the  question  is  whether  the  family  and 
the  state  are  wholly  natural,  wholly  convention¬ 
al,  or  partly  one  and  partly  the  other — their  in¬ 
stitutions  being  erected  by  choice  and  custom 
upon  a  natural  basis.  And  as  in  the  case  of  lan¬ 
guage,  here  too  the  great  books  do  not,  for  the 
most  part,  give  either  of  the  extreme  answers. 
They  do  not  say  that  the  state  is  entirely  natu¬ 
ral,  that  it  is  the  expression  of  human  instinct 
as  the  bee-hive  and  the  ant-mound  are  instinc¬ 
tive  formations.  Nor  do  they  say  that  the  state 
is  completely  conventional,  that  it  comes  into 
existence  only  as  the  result  of  voluntary  associa¬ 
tion  on  the  part  of  men  contracting  to  live  to¬ 
gether  in  a  political  community. 

While  Aristotle  says  that  “man  is  by  nature  a 
political  animal,”  and  that  the  state  is,  there¬ 
fore,  “a  creation  of  nature,”  he  also  distinguishes 
between  the  ways  in  which  men  and  other  ani¬ 
mals  are  gregarious.  Unlike  the  association  of 
animals,  which  he  attributes  to  instinct,  the  so¬ 
ciety  of  men  rests  on  reason  and  speech.  “Man 
is  the  only  animal,”  he  writes,  “endowed  with 
the  gift  of  speech  .  .  .  intended  to  set  forth  the 
expedient  and  the  inexpedient,  and  therefore 
likewise  the  just  and  the  unjust.”  Because  of 
these  things,  cities  differ  from  one  another,  as 
bee-hives  or  ant-mounds  do  not. 

The  diversity  of  states  represents  for  Aristotle 
a  deliberate  inventiveness  on  the  part  of  reason 
and  an  exercise  of  free  choice — certainly  inso¬ 
far  as  states  are  politically  constituted,  each  with 
its  own  constitution.  Aristotle’s  remark  that 
while  “a  social  impulse  is  implanted  in  all  men 
by  nature,”  yet  “he  who  first  founded  the  state 
was  the  greatest  of  benefactors,”  may  look  self¬ 
contradictory;  but  its  two  parts  can  be  read  as 
quite  consistent  with  one  another,  if  the  first  is 
taken  as  signifying  the  natural  basis  of  the  state 
(in  a  social  impulse),  and  the  second  as  saying 
that  a  certain  convention  (a  constitution)  is  re¬ 
quired  to  shape  that  impulse  before  any  state  is 
actually  established. 

As  Aristotle  is  sometimes  interpreted  to  up¬ 
hold  the  theory  that  the  state  is  entirely  natu¬ 
ral,  so  Hobbes,  Locke,  and  Rousseau  are  often 
read  as  maintaining  the  opposite  extreme — that 
it  is  entirely  conventional.  The  extreme  inter¬ 
pretation  is  based  on  the  sharpness  with  which 
each  of  them  distinguishes  between  men  living 
in  a  state  of  nature  and  in  a  state  of  civil  society. 


Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVENTION 


275 


Though  they  differ  among  themselves  in  their 
exposition  of  these  two  conditions  of  man,  they 
seem  to  agree  that  for  men  to  pass  from  a  state 
of  nature,  whether  hypothetical  or  historical,  in 
which  men  live  in  anarchy  or  at  least  in  isola¬ 
tion,  it  is  necessary  for  them  to  enter  into  a 
contract  or  compact  with  one  another.  Since 
this  social  contract  is  the  original,  or  origi¬ 
nating,  convention  by  which  the  common¬ 
wealth  or  civil  society  is  established,  it  would 
seem  to  follow  that,  on  their  view,  the  state  is 
entirely  a  product  of  convention,  and  in  no 
way  natural. 

Yet  Hobbes,  Locke,  and  Rousseau,  each  in 
his  own  way,  add  a  qualification  in  favor  of  the 
naturalness  of  the  state,  justasAristotlequalifies 
his  remark  that  “the  state  is  a  creation  of  na¬ 
ture”  by  praising  the  man  “who  first  founded 
the  state.”  The  exponents  of  the  social  contract 
theory  of  the  state’s  origin  find  in  the  nature  of 
man  or  in  his  reason  an  instinct,  a  need,  or  a  law 
which  impels  or  bids  him  to  seek  association 
with  others  for  the  sake  of  advantages  which  he 
cannot  enjoy  apart  from  civil  society.  This  suf¬ 
fices  to  affirm  the  existence  of  a  natural  basis 
for  the  convention  or  contract  which  establishes 
the  state. 

These  apparently  opposed  theories  of  what  is 
natural  and  what  conventional  about  the  state 
thus  appear  to  approach  each  other,  though  one 
starts  from  an  emphasis  on  the  state’s  natural¬ 
ness,  the  other  from  its  conventional  origin.  The 
whole  problem  is,  of  course,  further  treated  in 
the  chapters  on  Family  and  State;  but  one 
point  which  the  foregoing  discussion  suggests 
receives  special  consideration  in  still  another 
chapter.  The  point  concerns  the  relation  be¬ 
tween  the  idea  of  a  constitution  and  the  idea  of 
a  social  contract.  Both  are  conceived  as  the 
basic  or  primary  convention  which  establishes 
the  state.  The  question  whether  the  two  ideas 
are  interchangeable  or  only  analogous  is  exam¬ 
ined  in  the  chapter  on  Constitution. 

Custom  is  both  a  cause  and  an  effect  of  habit. 
The  habits  of  the  individual  certainly  reflect  the 
customs  of  the  community  in  which  he  lives; 
and  in  turn,  the  living  customs  of  any  social 
group  get  their  vitality  from  the  habits  of  its 
members.  A  custom  which  does  not  command 
general  compliance  is  as  dead  as  a  language  no 


longer  spoken  ora  law  no  longer  observed.  This 
general  compliance  consists  in  nothing  more 
than  a  certain  conformity  among  the  habits  of 
individuals. 

The  continuity  between  custom  and  statute 
as  parts  or  phases  of  the  positive  law  rests  upon 
the  relation  of  both  to  habit.  “Custom,”  accord¬ 
ing  to  Aquinas,  “has  the  force  of  a  law,  abolishes 
law,  and  is  the  interpreter  of  law”  precisely  be¬ 
cause  it  operates  through  the  habits  of  the  peo¬ 
ple.  “By  repeated  external  actions,”  such  as 
produce  a  custom,  “the  inward  movement  of 
the  will  and  the  conceptions  of  the  reason  are 
most  revealingly  declared,”  and,  according  to 
Aquinas,  “all  law  proceeds  from  the  reason  and 
will  of  the  lawgiver.”  The  law  which  a  prince  or 
a  people  enacts,  to  become  effective  as  social 
regulation,  must  develop  a  particular  habit  of 
conduct  in  many  individuals.  Then  and  only 
then  does  a  new  enactment  obtain  the  full  force 
of  law.  To  remain  effective  it  must  continue  to 
have  the  support  of  “the  customs  of  the  coun¬ 
ty-” 

Without  that  support  it  may  be  a  law  on  the 
books  but  not  in  practice,  for  the  authority  of  a 
law  cannot  long  prevail  against  a  contrary  cus¬ 
tom,  except  through  a  degree  of  coercion  so  op¬ 
pressive  as  to  produce  rebellion.  That  is  also 
why  the  customary  or  unwritten  rule — usually 
the  primitive  form  of  positive  law — is  less  flex¬ 
ible,  less  amenable  to  change  or  modification. 
Custom  is  a  conservative  factor.  “There  is 
nothing  more  difficult  to  take  in  hand,”  writes 
Machiavelli,  nothing  “more  perilous  to  con¬ 
duct,  or  more  uncertain  in  its  success,  than  to 
take  the  lead  in  the  introduction  of  a  new  order 
of  things.  The  innovator  has  for  enemies  all 
those  who  have  done  well  under  the  old  con¬ 
ditions,  and  lukewarm  defenders  in  those  who 
may  do  well  under  the  new.” 

Just  as  custom  may  either  support  the  written 
law  or  render  it  ineffective,  so  custom  works  in 
opposite  directions  as  a  social  force.  It  is  both  a 
factor  of  cohesion  and  of  division  among  men — 
a  cause  of  what  is  called  “social  solidarity”  and  a 
barrier  separating  peoples  from  one  another. 
When  the  Athenians  refuse  to  ally  themselves 
with  the  Persians,  they  chide  the  Spartans,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Herodotus,  for  fearing  that  they 
“might  make  terms  with  the  barbarian.”  For 
all  the  gold  on  earth,  they  tell  the  Spartan 


276 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


envoys,  they  could  not  “take  part  with  the 
Medes.”  To  do  so  would  betray  “our  common 
brotherhood  with  the  Greeks,  our  common 
language,  the  altars  and  sacrifices  of  which  we 
all  partake,  and  the  common  character  which 
we  bear.” 

The  barbarians  or  the  gentiles — to  use  the 
traditional  names  for  aliens  or  foreigners —  are 
excluded  by  a  social,  not  a  geographic,  bound¬ 
ary  line,  the  line  drawn  between  those  who 
share  a  set  of  customs  and  all  outsiders.  When  the 
stranger  is  assimilated,  the  group  does  not  adopt 
him;  he  adopts  the  customs  of  the  community. 
The  very  word  “community”  implies  a  multi¬ 
tude  having  much  in  common.  More  important 
than  the  land  they  occupy  are  the  customs  they 
share. 


The  Federalists,  advocating  the  political  union 
of  the  thirteen  American  states,  could  urge  its 
feasibility  on  the  ground  that  a  social  union  al¬ 
ready  existed.  “Providence  has  been  pleased  to 
give  this  one  connected  country,”  Jay  writes, 
“toone  united  people— a  people  descended  from 
the  same  ancestors,  speaking  the  same  language, 
professing  the  same  religion,  attached  to  the 
same  principles  of  government,  very  similar  in 
their  manners  and  customs.” 

Those  who  today  advocate  world  federal 
union  cannot  similarly  point  to  a  world  society 
already  in  existence.  They  can  only  hope  that 
if  the  separate  states  were  to  unite  politically, 
the  social  cohesion  of  the  world’s  people  might 
subsequently  develop  as  a  result  of  the  fostering 
of  universal  customs  by  universal  law. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGB 

1.  The  distinction  between  nature  and  convention:  its  application  to  the  origin  of  the 

state  and  of  language  277 

2.  The  origin,  development,  and  transmission  of  customs  278 

3.  The  conflict  of  customs:  their  variation  from  place  to  place 

4.  The  change  of  customs:  their  variation  from  time  to  time  279 

5.  Custom  and  convention  in  the  moral  order 

5^7.  The  conventional  determination  of  moral  judgments:  the  moral  evaluation  of 
conventions 

5 b.  The  effect  of  custom  on  the  training  and  character  of  men  280 

6.  Custom  in  relation  to  law 

6a.  Constitutions,  social  contracts,  positive  laws,  and  manners  as  conventions 

6b.  The  force  of  custom  with  respect  to  law  281 

7.  Custom  in  social  life 

ja.  Custom  as  unifying  a  community 

7 b.  Custom  as  a  barrier  between  communities  282 

7 c.  Custom  as  determining  economic  needs  or  standards 
7 d.  The  influence  of  custom  on  the  liberty  of  the  individual 

8.  Custom  in  relation  to  order  and  progress:  the  factors  of  tradition  and  invention  283 

9.  The  bearing  of  custom  on  thought 

9 a.  Custom  as  a  source  of  opinion  and  belief:  its  influence  on  judgments  of  beauty 
9 b.  The  conventionality  of  truth:  postulation,  choice  among  hypotheses  284 


Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVEN  TION 


277 


1 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283)  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James:  Psychology,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  1 19.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  thelettersc  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  cii, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g .,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehetniah,  7:45— (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  distinction  between  nature  and  conven¬ 
tion:  its  application  to  the  origin  of  the 
state  and  of  language 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  49a-c 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  52b  /  Cratylus  85a-114a,c 
esp  104d-105a,  106b-c,  llOc-lllc  /  Gorgias , 
271b-272b  /  Republic ,  bk  ii,  311b-c  /  Theaete - 
tus,  528b-c  /  Lams,  bk  iii,  663d-666c;  bk  x, 
760a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations ,  ch  12 
[I73a7"3°]  238b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  7  [ii34bi8-ii35a 
7]  382c-383a  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  445b-446d 
esp  [i253a2~3i]  446b-d;  ch  6  448c-449b  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  chi?  [1 37  ^bi— 17I  617c-d;  ch  15 
[I375a25-b3l619d-620a 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs ,  Waters ,  Places ,  par  14 
15a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [823-857] 
55a-b;  bk  v  [925-1090]  73b-75b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  7  515a-c 
/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  19-27  646b-650a 
passim,  esp  ch  24  648d-649a 

20  Aquinas:  Sumtna  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  2  227c-228c;  a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  Q  96,  a  2, 
ans  231c-232b:  q  97,  a  3,  rep  i  237b-238b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xxvi  [70- 
142]  146c-147b  esp  [124-138]  147a-b 


23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  intro,  47a-b;  part  i, 
84c-87b;  91a-b;  94b-c;  95a;  part  ii,  99a-101a 
esp  100c;  113c;  131a-c;  136d-137a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 

lld-14b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  46b-47c;  63d-64b:  93b- 
94a;  102a-103a;  *218a-c;  278a-279a;  424d- 
426b;  489b-490c 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1-22] 
247d-248a;  act  ii,  sc  iv  [267-274]  261c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d;  94d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  89-98  189b-190b;  294  225b- 
226b;  306  228a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  16a-c  /  Civil  Government , 
ch  i-ix  25a-54d  passim;  ch  xix,  sect  21  i, 
73d  /  Human  Understanding,  bk  11,  cji  xxviii, 
sect  2-3  228c-229b;  bk  iii,  cii  i,  sect  5 
252b-c;  ch  ii,  sect  i  252d-253a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  lc  d; 
2b-3a;  bk  viii,  52a;  bk  xvi,  119d-120a;  bk 
xxvi,  215b-217b  passim;  219d-221c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  329a-331d;  340a-342c; 
348b,d-363a,c  /  Political  Economy,  367b; 
369a-b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i  387b,d-394d; 
bk  11,  399b-c;  405d-406a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  397a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  409d-410a 


278 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  The  distinction  between  nature  and  conven¬ 
tion:  its  application  to  the  origin  of  the  state 
and  of  language .) 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  402c;  405d-406c; 
433c-434d  esp  433d-434a;  435a-436b;  437c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  294b-295b  /  Representative 
Government ,  327b,d-332d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  363c-364a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  75 
31d-32b;  part  hi,  par  168  60b-c;  additions, 
47  124a-b;  97  132c-133a;  108  134b-c  /  Philos¬ 
ophy  of  History ,  intro,  170d-171d;  part  ii, 
260b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  298a-b;  349d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  733b-734b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  20c-d  /  General  Introduction ,  452c-d; 
573c  /  JFtfr  and  Death ,  757d-759d  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents ,  776b-802a,c  esp  776b- 
777a,  778a,  780b-781d,  783c-784b,  787a-c, 
788d-789b,  791b-792a,  799b-802a,c  / 
Introductory  Lectures ,  853a-b 

2.  The  origin,  development,  and  transmission 
of  customs 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  31a-b;  38a-b;  bk 
ii,  58a-b;  59d-60a;  62b-c;  66c-d;  69b-d;  87a- 
b;  bk  hi,  107b-c;  bk  iv,  125d-126a;  129c-130a; 
bk  v,  I77a-b;  183d-184a;  bk  vi,  201b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  395c- 
d;  bk  hi,  442c-443a 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iii,  663d-666c  esp  666a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  v  [42-83]  188a-189a;  bk 
vii  [601-615]  252b-253a;  bk  viii  [152-279] 
263a-266b 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus  la-1 5a, c  passim  /  Romu¬ 
lus  15a-30a,c  passim  /  Lycurgus ,  36a-47c  pas¬ 
sim  /  Numa  Pompilius  49a-61d  passim  /  Solon, 
70c-74b  /  Poplicola,  80d;  84d-85a  /  Camillus, 
116a-c  /  Coriolanus,  175c-d  /  Marcellus,  254c- 
256b 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  ii,  214d-215a 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  24- 
25  648d-649d;  bk  hi,  ch  12  662c-663c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  97, 
a  3  237b-238b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  278a-279a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  the  affects,  def 
27,  expl  419a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  80a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  309b-310a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiv,  107a- 
b;  bk  xvi,  116a-117c;  118a-119c;  bk  xviii, 
132a-b;  bk  xx,  146a-b;  bk  xxi,  169a-170b; 
bk  xxiii,  187b,d-189d;  bk  xxiv,  205d-206a; 
bk  xxv,  209a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  416c-417a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  154b-155a:  583d- 
584b;  704d  [n  79] 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  227b;  389b-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  308b  [fn  1] 


2  to  3 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  259c-d; 
265c-266a;  part  iv,  315d-316b;  347b-d; 
351d-353a;  367a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  228b-229b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  317a-c;  318b-c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  799a- 
800c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  834b-c 

3.  The  conflict  of  customs:  their  variation  from 
place  to  place 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  i  [1-5]  183a;  bk  viii  [234- 
255]  224c-d;  bk  ix  [82-115]  230a-b 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [234-245]  3d 

5  Euripides:  Andromache  [147-245]  316c-317b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  22d-23a;  31a-33a; 
35b-c;  39a-c;  44b-45b;  48a, c;  bk  ii,  56c-68a; 
80a-c;  bk  iii,  93d-94a;  97d-98a;  lllb-113d; 
bk  iv,  128c-d;  129c-130b;  132a-b;  134a;  137a- 
138c;  142b-144b;  154b-158d  passim;  bk  v, 
160b-161c;  bk  vi,  195d-196c;  bk  vii,  238c; 
253b-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  350b-d 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  154a-155c  /  Laws,  bk  iv, 
678c-679a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [994^2- 
995a5]  513c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  7  [ii34bi8- 
ii35a4]  382c-d 

10  Hippocrates  :  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  1  9a-b; 
par  14-18  15a-16c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [520-543]  117b-118a;  bk 
ix  [590-620]  295a-b;  bk  xii  [791-842]  375a- 
376b 

14  Plutarch:  Themistocles,  99b-c  /  Marcellus, 
254c-256b  esp  256a-b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  23d-24a 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  25 
649b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  96, 
a  2,  ans  231c-232b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
22-23  3b-4a;  bk  ii,  stanza  6-7  22a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  44a-47a;  91d-98b  esp 
93b-94a;  102a-103a;  230b-231a;  246b-257d 
passim;  278a-279c;  281a-284c;  415a-416b; 
524b-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  v,  sc  i  [1-84] 
562c-563b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  ii,  46b-c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  294  225b-226b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  8-12  105d-107d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
66,  480b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  76b-78b;  part  iii, 
98b-99a;  105a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  38b; 
bk  xv,  llOa-b;  bk  xvi,  116a-119c;  bk  xix, 
139c-140a;  bk  xxi,  153a-c;  bk  xxv,  209a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  416c-417a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  89d-94b  passim; 
99c;  260d-261a;  409d-415a  passim;  670d-671a 


4  to  5a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  33d36c  passim; 
85c-d;  223c-227b  passim;  337c-339b  passim 

43  Federalist:  number  6o,  184d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  269c  d;  301b  302c;  307b  312a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  250cd; 
part  iv,  347b  d;  351d-353a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  43b-44a;  60b-65a; 
351b-352a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  571b-577d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bkv,  122d- 
125c 

4.  The  change  of  customs:  their  variation  from 
time  to  time 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [957-1002]  500a-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  31a-b;  39a- b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  i,  350b-d 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  iv,  344b-d;  bk  v,  357d- 
358a  /  Laws ,  bk  iv,  678c-679a;  bk  vii,  717d- 
718c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i268b23~ 
I269a28]  464d-465b 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs ,  Waters ,  Places ,  par  14, 15b 

12  Lucretius  '.Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [925-1027] 
73b-74c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  xii  [791-842]  375a-376b 

14  Plutarch:  Ly sander,  361a-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  58b-d;  bk  iv,  67d- 
68a;  bk  xi,  105d-107b;  bk  xii,  lllb-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  13  16c-d/ 
City  of  God,  bk  xv,  ch  16  410b-411d  /  Chris¬ 
tian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  25  649b-d  esp  649d; 
bk  iii,  ch  12  662c-663c;  ch  18-22  664d-666c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  97, 
a  2  236d-237b;  a  3,  rep  1-2  237b-238b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xvi  [64-78] 
23a-b;  purgatory,  vi  [58-151]  61b-62c;  xi 
[73-117]  69c-70a;  paradise,  xv  [97]-xvi  [154] 
129b-132a;  xxvi  [124-138]  147a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza  4 
22a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  131b-132a;  143c-145c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  294  225b-226b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xiii,  sect  157 
61c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
66,  480b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  105a-106b;  128a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiv,  104c; 
bk  xix  135a-146a,c  esp  136c;  bk  xx,  146a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  402b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  545c-d;  638c- 
639a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  6b;  107b;  485b- 
486b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  269c-d;  300d-302c/  Representa¬ 
tive  Government,  377d-378a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  204c-205b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  528c-529a;  579b- 
582a  passim 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  403a-c;  bk  xi, 
498a-499a;  epilogue  i,  647b-c 


279 

5.  Custom  and  convention  in  the  moral  order 

5a,  The  conventional  determination  of  moral 
judgments:  the  moral  evaluation  of  con¬ 
ventions 

5  Euripides:  Hecuba  [798-805]  359d  /  Phoeni¬ 
cian  Maidens  [499-522]  382b  c 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [1031—1 1 14]  501a- 

502b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  32a;  bk  iii,  92c- 
93a; 97d-98a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  368b-c 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  154a-155c/  Gorgias, 271b- 
284b  /  Republic,  bk  v,  357d-358a  /  Theaetetus , 
525c-526a;  527b-528c  esp  528b-c  /  Laws , 
bk  x,  759d-760c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [i094bi2-28] 
339d-340a;  ch  8  [i098b9-29]  344a-b;  bk  v, 
ch  7  [ii34bi8-ii35a4]  382c-d  /  Politics ,  bk  i, 
ch  6  448c-449b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [1412— 
1435]  79b-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  2,  107a-b;  ch 

ii,  117b  c;  bk  11,  ch  ii,  150a-151a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  18  264d 

14  Plutarch:  Themistocles, 99b-c  /  Marcus  Cato , 
285c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  24a;  bk  iii,  58b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  14-16  4c- 

5b;  par  19-30  5d-8d  esp  par  25-27  7a-d;  bk 

iii,  par  13  16c-d;  par  15  17a-b;  bk  vi,  par  2 
35a-c;  par  1 1— 13  38b-39c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xv, 
ch  16  410b-411d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii, 
ch  19-26  646b-650a;  ch  39-40  654c-656a; 
bk  iii,  ch  10,  661d-662a;  ch  12-14  662c-663d; 
ch  18-22  664d-666c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61d-62a;  75a-b; 
78b-c;  96a;  part  ii,  140b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
141d-142b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  46b-47c;  93b-c;  102a- 
103a;  143c-144a;  ’  281a-284c;  307b;  424d- 
426b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [249-259] 
43b  /  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [1-206] 
113c-115c  /  King  Lear,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1-22]  247d- 
248a  /  Henry  VIII,  act  i,  sc  iii  [3-5]  555b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  32c-33a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  ii,  46b-c;  part 
iii,  48b-49d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  the  affects,  def 
27  419a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  309  228b;  312  229a;  325 
230b-231a;  381-385  238b-239a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  90a-d;  bk  i, 
ch  11,  sect  8-12  105d-107d  passim;  sect  21-26 
llla-112b;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  71,  197d;  ch 
xxviii,  sect  10-13  230b-231c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div 
132,  509c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  21b-23a;  part  ii, 
76b-77a 


Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVENTION 


280 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  Custom  and  convention  in  the  moral  order, 
5 a.  The  conventional  determination  of 
moral  judgments :  the  moral  evaluation  of 
conventions.') 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  261a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  295b;  303d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xviii,  132c; 
bk  xix,  139b-140d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  362a-b  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  369a-370a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  iv, 
434b435a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  346c-347a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  270d- 
271a  /  Practical  Reason,  307a-b  /  Intro.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals ,  387b;  387d-388a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  269b-271d;  286b-287a;  293b- 
302c  passim;  307b-312a  /  Utilitarianism,  457c- 
458a;  475a-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  197a-b;  198b-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  2b-c;  part 
ii,  par  132,  46c-d;  par  138  48c-d;  part  iii,  par 
150-152  56c-57b;  par  339  110b;  par  355  112d- 
113a;  additions,  i  115a-d;  89  129d-130a;  91 
131a-d;  96-97  132c-133a  /  Philosophy  of  His¬ 
tory,  intro,  166a-b;  170d-171c;  part  ii,  271d- 
272d;  273c;  279c-d;  280b-281b;  part  iii, 
311a-b;  part  iv,  333b-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  305a;  313b-d;  314c- 
316a; 317a-d; 592d-593a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  427a- 
b;  428b  d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  15d-16a;  bk 
iv,  177d-178a;  bk  vi,  263a-265d  passim;  bk 
viii,  303a-305b  esp  304c-305a;  bk  x,  403a- 
405a;  442c-443b;  bk  xi,  476c-480a  passim; 
514c-d;  bk  xii,  542d;  bk  xiv,  589a-c;  611a-c; 
epilogue  1,  645a-646c;  647b-649d 

53  James:  Psychology,  190a-191a;  886b-887a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  625a  /  War  and 
Death,  757d-759a  esp  759a  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents,  792  b  e 

5b.  The  effect  of  custom  on  the  training  and 
character  of  men 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [886-1  no]  499b-502b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  35c-d 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  314b-c;  bk  iv,  344b- 
d;  bk  vi,  377a-379c  /  Laws,  bk  vii,  717d- 
718c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [994b3i- 
995a5l  513c 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  22 
18a-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iv,  sect  18  264d 

14  Plutarch:  Ly sander,  361a-d  /  Cleomenes, 
663  b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  14-16  4c- 
5b;  par  19-30  5d-8d;  bk  vi,  par  2  35a-c;  par 

1 1—  13  38b-39c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch 

12- 13  662c-663c;  ch  18-22  664d-666c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  92, 
a  1,  rep  1  213c-214c;  a  2,  rep  4  214d-215a,c; 


5  b  to  6a 

q  95,  a  1,  ans  226c-227c;  a  3  228c-229b;  q  97, 
aa  2-3  236d-238b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  -  hell,  xvi  [64-78] 
23a-b;  purgatory,  vi  [58-151]  61b-62c;  para¬ 
dise,  xv  [97]-xvi  [154]  129b-132a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  1,  78b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  22a-c;  42b-43d;  46b- 
47c;  63d-64b;  131b-132a;  524b-525d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iii,  sc  iv  [161- 
170]  56b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  78d-80a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  46b-c;  part 
iii,  48b-49d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  6  173a;  97-98  190b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  8-12  105d-107d  passim;  sect  20  110c- 
111a;  sect  25  llld-112a;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect 
71,  197d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
66,  480b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  303d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  21d-22b; 
bk  vii,  50c;  bk  xix,  138c-140d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  347a-b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  337c-338c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92c-94b;  101b; 
291d-292d;  409d-413b  passim 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  389b-390b  esp  389d 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387b; 
387d-388a 

43  Federalist:  number  49, 159d-160a;  number 
60,  184d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  269b-c;  293b-302c  passim  / 
Utilitarianism,  449c-d;  458a-b;  460a-461c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  150- 
152  56c-57b;  par  164  59a-d;  par  257  80b; 
additions,  96-97  132c-133a;  106  134a  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  271c-273c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  313a-314b;  317a-d; 
328c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  221b-d;  bk 
viii,  303a-305b  esp  303d-304b;  309b-c;  bk 
xii,  542d;  bk  xv,  640d-641a 

53  James:  Psychology,  733b  734b 

54  Freud:  Sexual  Enlightenment  of  Children  119a- 
122a, c  passim  /  War  and  Death,  757d-759d  / 
Civilization  a  fid  Its  Discontents,  799c-801a  esp 
800c-801a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  834b-c; 
843c;  854d-855a 

6.  Custom  in  relation  to  law 

6a.  Constitutions,  social  contracts,  positive 
laws,  and  manners  as  conventions 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  154a  c  /  Crito,  216d- 
219a, c  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  311b-c  /  Theaetetus, 
528b-c;  531a-532a  /  Statesman,  600a- b  /  Laws, 
bk  iii,  665c-666c;  bk  vii,  716a-b;  718b-c; 
730d-731d;  bk  viii,  736c-737a;  bk  x,  760a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  12 
[i73a27-3i]  238c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  7  [n34bi8- 
ii35a7]  382c-383a  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  16 


6b  to  la  Chapter  14:  CUSTOM 

[i287b5~7]  486a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  13  [i373bi— 
17]  617c-d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  33d  34b  /  Themistocles , 
99b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b  / 
07)’  0/ Go*/,  bk  iv,  cii  4  190d;  ijk  xix,  cii  17, 
522d-523a;  ch  24  528b  c 

20  Aquinas:  Surnma  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
aa  2-3  227c-229b;  a  4,  ans  229b-230c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78b-c;  part  ii, 
99a-101b  esp  100c,  lOla-b;  140b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  46b-48b;  93b  94a;  102a- 
b:  281a-283c;  426a-b;  462d-463b:  519a-520b 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1-22] 
247d-248a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  ii,  45b-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  291-338  225a-233a  esp  294 
225b-226b,  312  229a,  325-326  230b-231a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  ii,  sect  12  27d- 
28a;  sect  14-15  28b-c;  ch  vii,  sect  94-CH 
vm,  sect  122  46a-53c  esp  ch  viii,  sect  95-99 
46c-47c;  ch  x,  sect  132  55a-b;  ch  xiii,  sect 
157-158  61c-62b:  ch  xv,  sect  171  65a-b;  ch 
xix,  sect  243  81d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  22a-23a;  28a- b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  lc-d; 
2d-3d;  bk  xix,  140c-142b;  bk  xxvi,  214d- 
215a;  bk  xxviii,  240b;  261a-262a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  i  387b,d-394d 
esp  391a-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  616d-617a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  7 Id- 73a  passim; 
75b-d;  86d-89c  esp  87a,  87d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  419a-420b;  435a-436c; 
437c-d;  450d-451c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-28]  la-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  269c-d;  270c-271b;  305b-312a 
passim,  esp  307b-d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  327b,d-332d  passim 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  276a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  211 
70a-c;  par  217  72b-c;  par  234  75d-76a  / 
Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  271c-273c; 
part  iv,  365b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1972-1979]  46b-47a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-297a  esp  294a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  427a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  avid  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  680b- 
684a 

6b.  The  force  of  custom  with  respect  to  law 

5  Euripides:  Bacchantes  [877-911]  347b-c  / 
Hecuba  [798-805]  359d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  97d-98a 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  344b-d;BK  vii,401c-d 
/  Laws,  bk  iii,  665c-666c;  bk  iv,  678d-679a; 
bk  v,  692b-c;  bk  vii,  713c-714c;  716a-b; 
718b-c;  bk  viii,  736c-737a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [995*4-6] 
513c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  6  448c-449b; 
bk  11,  ch  8  [1269s! 4-23]  465b;  bk  iii,  ch  16 


AND  CONVENTION  281 

[i287b5-8]  486a;  bk  v,cii  8  [i307b3o-38]  509d- 
510a;  cii  9  [i3ioai2-i9]  512b  c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36b-37b;  38b  d;  46b  c; 
47a-48a  /  Lycurgus-Numa,  63d-64a  /  Solon, 
73d-74b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  57d-58b:  bk  iv, 
67d~68a;  bk  xi,  106a-107b;  bk  xii,  lllb-c; 
bk  xiv,  151d-152c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a  b; 
bk  v,  par  14  30c-31a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xv, 
cii  16  410b  411d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  3  228c-229b;  q  96,  a  2,  ans  231c-232b;  q  97, 
aa  2-3  236d-238b 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  78b-c;  part  ii, 
108c; 130d-131a;  131c;  136d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  47a-51a;  131b-132a; 
283c;  462c-465c 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure ,  act  ii, 
sc  1  [1-4]  178d-179a 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,  205d-206b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  ii,  45b-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  308  228b;  312  229a:  325-32 6 
230b-231a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxviii,  sect  10-13  230b-231c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  22a-23a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  3c-d; 
bk  x,  65b;  bk  xiv,  106b;  bk  xviii,  127c; 
bk  xix,  135b-136b;  137c-140c;  bk  xxi,  168d- 
169a;  bk  xxiii,  188b-189a;  189d;  197c-198a; 
bk  xxv,  212a;  bk  xxvi,  218d;  221a-c;  223a  c; 
bk  xxviii,  237a-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324d  /  Social  Contract, 
bk  ii,  402b-c;  406c-d;  bk  iii,  419d-420a;  bk 
iv,  434b-435a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  464c- d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  77c-d;  80a; 
96b-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  448d-449c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [15-22]  lb 

43  Federalist:  number  27,  95C-d;  number  49, 

159d-160a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  270c-271b;  308b  [fn  1]  /  Rep¬ 
resentative  Government,  329d-330a;  330d-331a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  204c-205b;  276a-b;  277b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  257 
80b;  par  274  92a;  par  339  110b;  par  355  112d- 
113a;  additions,  132  137d-138b  /  Philosophy 
of  History,  part  ii,  271c-273c;  277c-d;  part 
iii,  294c-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1972-1979]  46b- 
47a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-297a  esp  294a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  317a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  137c-139a 

7.  Custom  in  social  life 

la.  Custom  as  unifying  a  community 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  viii,  287c-d 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iv,  678c-679a;  BKVii,716a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  xii  [791-842]  375a-376b 


282 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  Custom  in  social  life.  la.  Custom  as  unifying 
a  community .) 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 46b-c  /  Alexander, 562b- 
563c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b/ 
City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  7  515a-c;  ch  17,  522d- 
523a;  ch  24  528b-c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii, 
ch  25-26  649b-650a;  ch  39-40  654c-656a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  3  228c-229b;  Q  97,  aa  2-3  236d-238b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  vi  [58- 
151]  61b-62c;  paradise,  xv  [97]-xvi  [154] 
129b-132a  passim 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  46b-47a;  131b-132a 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,  205d-206b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  45b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  xv  448c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  294  225b-226b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xix,  137c- 
d;  138c-140c 

40  Gibbon:  Declitie  and  Fall,  la;  15d-16c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  389c-d 

43  Federalist:  number  2,  31c-d;  number  27, 
95c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  424c-425b; 
428b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  274 
92a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  176b; 
part  1,  240d-241a;  part  ii,  260b-c;  277c; 
280b-281b 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  421a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  254c-260a; 
263a-265d;  bk  vii,  288c-290b;  bk  x,  403a- 
405a;  bk  xi,  499c-500c;  bk  xii,  533a-534d; 
538d-539c;  556c-557b;  epilogue  i,  647b-c 

52  Dostoevsky  :  Brothers  Karamazov,  epilogue, 
406a-c 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  756a-d 

lb.  Custom  as  a  barrier  between  communities 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  vii  [27-36]  218b 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [825-965]  lld- 
13b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2a;  31d-32a;  bk  iv, 
137a-138c;  143b-144b;  bk  viii,  287c-d 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iv,  678c-679a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [520-543]  117b-118a; 
bk  ix  [590-620]  295a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  46b-c  /  Themistocles, 
99b-c  /  Marcus  Cato,  287d-288c  /  Alexander , 
562b-563c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  v,  295b-296a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  7  515a-c 
/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  iii,  ch  14  663c- d 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Man  of  Law  [4638-4644] 
238a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  96a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  44b-c;  46b-47a;  91d-98b 
esp  93b-94a;  477d-478a;  524b-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  iii  [154— 
173]  325b  /  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  i,  sc  iii 


lb  to  Id 

[41— 53]  410a;  [106-138]  410c-411a;  act  iv,  sc  i 
[35—62]  425d-426a 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,  205d-207b 
32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  385b 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  21b-23a;  25b-26a; 
part  iv,  149b-150b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xv,  llOa-b; 
bk  xix,  139c-140a;  bk  xx,  146a-b;  bk  xxiv, 
206c;  207c-208a,c;  bk  xxv,  209a-b 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  355b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  15d-16b;  179d-183a 
csp  179d,  180d-181a;  207b-211c  esp  208b-d; 
638d-639a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  224b-225a;  423d 
43  Mill:  Liberty,  300a-302c  passim  /  Representa¬ 
tive  Government,  424c-428a  passim,  esp  427d; 
437b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  60b-65a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  viii,  309b-c; 
bk  ix,  362d-363a;  bk  xi,  515c-521c  passim 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  epilogue, 
406a-c 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  755c-757a  passim  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  788b-c 

lc.  Custom  as  determining  economic  needs  or 

standards 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  318a-d 

14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato,  285c-d  /  Ly sander, 
361a-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  58b-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  131b-132a;  489b-490c 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v,  sect  46-49 
35a-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  184  68b-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xviii,  128b- 
c;  bk  xix,  136c-137b;  bk  xxi,  153a-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  10b-12c;  bk  v, 
383c-d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  17d-18a;  28d-29b;  44d-45c; 
66c-67a;  81b-c;  112a-c 

ld.  The  influence  of  custom  on  the  liberty  of 

the  individual 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  n,396c-d 
25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  22a-c;  42b-c;  46b-47c; 

143c-144a;  307b;  424d-426b  esp  426a-b 
27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [136- 
164]  365c-366a;  sc  iii  [119-131]  367b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii,  84b, d; 
bk  xix,  138a-c;  142a;  145b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324a-b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  41a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  269b-271d;  293b-302c;  307b- 
312a  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  355 
112d-113a;  additions,  123  136d-137a  /  Phi¬ 
losophy  of  History,  part  ii,  279c-281b;  part 
iii,  310d-311b;  part  iv,  333b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  viii,  303a-305b 
54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 

Analysis,  20c-d  /  General  Introduction,  452c-d; 
573c  /  War  and  Death ,  755d;  757c-759d  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  776b-802a,c 


8  to  9  a 


Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVENTION 


csp  780d-781d,  783b  785a,  788d  789b,  796b  c, 
799a-801c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  853a  b 

8.  Custom  in  relation  to  order  and  progress: 
the  factors  of  tradition  and  invention 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  iv,  344b-d  /  Laws ,  bk  ii, 
654c-655b;  bk  iv,  678c-679a;  bk  v,  692b-c; 
bk  vii,  717d-718c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  ii,  cii  3  [995a3-6] 
513c 

10  Hippocrates:  Fractures ,  par  1  74b,d-75a 

14  Plutarch:  Agis  648b,d-656d  passim  /  Cleo- 
menes ,  663 b  e 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  xi,  105d-107b;  bk  xii, 
lllb'c;  bk  xiv,  151d-152c 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  506a- b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  846a-850a  passim 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  97, 
a  2  236d-237b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xiv  [91— 
126]  74c-75a;  xxvm  [76-126]  96d-97c;  para- 
dise,  xv-xvi  128b-132a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  vi,  9b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  154b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  46b-51a;  131b-132a; 
143c-144a;  208b-c;’318c-319b;  458b-c;  462c- 
465c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus ,  act  ii,  sc  hi  [i i 9— 
128] 367b 

28  Galileo:  7Vo  Afcw  Sciences ,  first  day,  166c- 
d;  third  day,  203c-d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Hearty  285b-c  /  Circu¬ 
lation  of  the  Bloody  306a-c;  319c-d  /  Ofl  Animal 
Generation ,  364a-c;  457b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  14c-15d  esp 
15a-b;  16c;  29b-c;  65b-c  /  Novum  Organum , 
bk  i,  aph  39-46  109c-110c;  aph  74  118b;  aph 
77  118d-119b;  aph  90  124d-125a  /  A7^  Atlan¬ 
tis,  205d-207b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  ii,  45c-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  294  225b-226b;  325  230b- 
231a  /  Vacuum,  355a-358b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xiii,  sect  157 
61c-d;  ch  xix,  sect  223  76c-d  /  Human 
Understanding,  85a-c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  pref  404a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  105a-106b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  22a-b; 
bk  xiv,  104c;  bk  xix,  137c-138c;  139b-140a; 
bk  xxvi,  217b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  324a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  ii,  402b-403a;  bk  hi,  419d-420a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  96b-97b  csp 
97a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  23d-24a;  459a-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  513d-514b 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [15-22]  lb 

43  Federalist:  number  14,  62a-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  293b-302c  esp  300a-302c  / 
Representative  Government ,  329a-b;  330d-331a; 
344a-b;  352d-353a;  357c;  377b-378a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  189d-190b 


283 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  part  i,  33a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  274 
92a;  par  355  112d-113a;  additions,  166  145b- 
c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  166d;  187d- 
188b;  part  1,  209b;  2*22a-224a;  235d  236c; 
257a-c;  part  ii,  260b  c;  280b  281b:  part  iv, 
315d-316b;  351d-353a;  367a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [7963-7964]  194a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  228b-229b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  323a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  6d-7a;  234a-235a;  239b- 
241a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  426b- 
428d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  132b-c;  bk 
vi,  239a-240d;  bk  viii,  305b-d;  307d-309c; 
bk  ix,  354b-c;  bk  x,  403a-c;  bk  xv,  639c; 
epilogue  1,  645a-646c;  647b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  79b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  776c- 
778a;  785c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  834c; 
849 d 

9.  The  bearing  of  custom  on  thought 

9 a.  Custom  as  a  source  of  opinion  and  belief: 
its  influence  on  judgments  of  beauty 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  44b;  bk  ii,  56c-d; 
bk  iii,  92c-93a;  97d-98a;  bk  iv,  137a;  142c; 
144a-b; 157b 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  116b-d  /  Republic ,  bk  iii, 
333b-334b  /  Laws ,  bk  iii,  675c-676b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [994b32- 
995ai  4]  513c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  ii  [1281*43- 
bio]  479b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  13  16c-d  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch  10,  661d-662a; 
ch  12-14  662c-663d;  ch  18-22  664d-666c 
passim 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xi  [73- 
117]  69c-70a;  xxvi  [91-126]  93d-94b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 
4-7  22a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78b-c;  96a;  part 
iv,  274b-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
12d-13b;  bk  iv,  273d-274a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  43d-44c;  46b-48b;  80b- 

d;  93b;  143c-144a;  208b-c;  209c-212a  esp 
211b-c;  230b-231a;  259d-261c;  281a-284c 

passim;  497d-502c  passim 

26  Shakespeare:  As  You  Like  It,  act  ii,  sc  i 
[1-20]  603c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [454-471] 
45a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  285b-c  /  Cir¬ 
culation  of  the  Blood ,  306a-c;  319c-d  /  On 
Animal  Generation ,  411c-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  xia-xvid; 
part  ii,  251a-252b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  61b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  ii,  45b-46c 


284 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(9.  The  bearing  of  custom  on  thought .  9a.  Custo?n 
as  a  source  of  opinion  and  belief:  its  influ- 
ence  on  judgments  of  beauty .) 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  408b-409a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  33  176b;  89-96  189b-190a; 
98  190b;  245  218b;  252  219b-220a;  291-338 
225a-233a  passim 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  85a-c;  bk  i, 
ch  11,  sect  8  105d-106a;  sect  20-26 110c-112b 
passim;  bk  ii,  ch  xxxiii,  sect  5-18  248d-251c 
passim 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
132,  509c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  21b-23a;  27b-28a; 
part  ii,  76b-77a;  part  iii,  95a- b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  309b-310a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  223a-225a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xix,  135b- 
d;  136c;  139b-140c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  296b -c;  464c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  221b-222a  /  Judgement , 
513d-514b 

43  Federalist:  number  49, 159d-160a;  number 
60,  184d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  269b-271d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  202b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  160 
142d-143a  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii, 
265c-266a;  273c;  part  iv,  351d-353a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  60b-65a;  229a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  95a-d  /  Descent  of 
Man ,  302a-b;  462d-463a;  569c;  571b-577d  esp 
577b-d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  427a- 
b;  428b-d 


9 a  to  9b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  247a-248a; 
260b-c;  bk  viii,  304c-d;  309b-c;  313d-314a; 
318a-320b;  324b-325a;  bk  x,  403a-405a;  bk 
xi v,  611a-c;  epilogue  i,  645a-646c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  642a;  886b-887a 

54  Freud:  Psycho-Analytic  Therapy ,  125a-126d  / 
General  Introduction ,  452c-453a  /  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures ,  849 d;  864a-865a 

9&.  The  conventionality  of  truth:  postulation, 
choice  among  hypotheses 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  85d-86d;  107d-109a  / 

Phaedrus ,  131b-133b  /  Theaetetus ,  525c-528c 
esp  528b-c;  531a-532a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[72b5~i4]  99b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  ch  5-6 
528c-531c 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  505a- 506a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  65c 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  44b-c;  46b-d;240c-246a; 
259c-261c;  267c-d;  276b-278a;  281a-284c; 
318a-319b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [254-257] 
43b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  57d-58b  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  41  109c-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  ii,  46b-c 
33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  72  181a- 184b  esp  182b 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  118a-119a 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  362c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  2b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  645a- 

646c 

53  James:  Psychology,  8841?-886a 

54  Freud:  Instincts,  412a-b 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  discussions  of  the  distinction  between  nature  and  convention,  and  for  the  examination 
of  related  distinctions,  see  Art  2c;  Habit  i,  7;  Nature  2a— 2c. 

The  consideration  of  the  natural  and  the  conventional  in  language  and  society,  see  Family  i  ; 

Language  2-2b;  Nature  2b,  5c;  Sign  and  Symbol  ia-if;  State  3b~3d. 

Applications  of  the  distinction  between  nature  and  convention  in  law  and  jurisprudence,  see 
Justice  6a-6b,  9a,  10a;  Law  4-4I1,  5c,  7c;  and  for  the  relation  of  law  to  custom  and  habit, 
see  Habit  7;  Law  5 f. 

The  discussion  of  custom  as  a  conservative  force  in  relation  to  progress,  see  Change  12b; 
History  4b;  Progress  4a,  5. 

The  bearing  of  custom  and  convention  on  the  issues  of  morality,  see  Good  and  Evil  3a,  6d; 

Nature  5a;  Opinion  6a;  Relation  6c;  Universal  and  Particular  7b. 

The  relativity  of  truth  to  the  customs  of  the  time  and  place,  and  for  the  theory  that  the 
foundations  of  science  are  conventional,  see  Hypothesis  3;  Knowledge  4b,  5c;  Opinion 
3c;  Principle  3c (2),  5;  Relation  6b;  Truth  7 — 7b ;  Universal  and  Particular  7a. 
Matters  relevant  to  the  influence  of  custom  on  taste  or  judgments  of  beauty,  see  Beauty  5; 

Nature  5d;  Relation  6c;  Universal  and  Particular  7c. 

The  significance  of  nature  and  custom  in  the  sphere  of  economic  activity,  see  Nature  5b; 
Wealth  i,  10  b. 


Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVENTION 


285 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings,  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Custom  and  Education,”  in  Essays 

Montesquieu.  Persian  Letters 

Hume.  Of  Sotne  Remarkable  Customs 

A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments ,  part  v 

Sterne.  A  Sentimental  Journey 

Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind,  v  (b) 

Melville.  Typee 

- .  Omoo 

Dostoevsky.  A  Raw  Youth 

Freud.  “ Civilized ”  Sexual  Morality  and  Modern 
Nervousness 

- .  Totem  and  Taboo 

II. 

Horace.  Satires 
Juvenal.  Satires 
Beowulf 
Volsung  Saga 

Spenser.  The  Faerie  Queene 
Gracian  y  Morales.  The  Art  of  Worldly  Wis¬ 
dom 

Browne.  Hydriotaphia 
Pepys.  Diary 

Le  Sage.  The  Adventures  of  Gil  Bias 
Defoe.  Moll  Flanders 
Richardson.  Pamela 
Chesterfield.  Letters  to  His  Son 
Voltaire.  “Customs  . . .  Usages,”  in  A  Philosophi¬ 
cal  Dictionary 

Smollett.  The  Expedition  of  Humphry  Clinker 
Goldsmith.  The  Citizen  of  the  World 

- .  She  Stoops  to  Conquer 

Bentham.  A  Comment  on  the  Commentaries ,  sect 
13-20 

Sheridan.  The  School  for  Scandal 

Lamb.  On  the  Custom  of  Hissing  at  the  Theatres 

Austen.  Pride  and  Prejudice 

Manzoni.  The  Betrothed 

T.  Carlyle.  Sartor  Resartus ,  bk  i 

Lermontov.  A  Hero  of  Our  Own  Times 


Savigny.  Vom  Beruf  ttnserer  Zeit  fi'ir  Gcsetzgcbung 
und  Rechtswissenschaft 

- .  Jural  Relations 

Gogol.  Taras  Bulba 

- .  Dead  Souls 

Dickens.  Bleak  House 

Thackeray.  The  History  of  Henry  Esmond ,  Esq. 

Lotze.  Microcosmos ,  bk  vi,  ch  3 

Flaubert.  Madame  Bovary 

Trollope.  Barchester  Towers 

Daudet,  Letters  from  My  Mill 

Bagehot.  Physics  and  Politics 

Tylor.  Primitive  Culture 

H.  James.  Daisy  Miller 

Meredith.  The  Egoist 

L.  Stephen.  The  Science  of  Ethics 

Maine.  Ancient  Law 

- .  Lectures  on  the  Early  History  of  Institutions 

- .  Dissertations  on  Early  Law  and  Customs 

Lang.  Custom  and  Myth 
Wundt.  Ethics ,  part  i,  ch  3 
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough 
Tarde.  The  Laws  of  Imitation 
Kovalevsky.  Modern  Customs  and  Ancient  Laws  of 
Russia 

Duguit.  Vet  at,  le  droit  objectif  et  la  loi  positive 
Mann.  Buddenbrooks 

Westermarck.  The  Origin  and  Deiclopment  of  the 
Moral  Ideas 
Sumner.  Folkways 

T.  Veblen.  The  Vested  Interests  and  the  State  of  the 
Industrial  Arts,  ch  2 

T.  S.  Eliot.  “Tradition  and  the  Individual 
Talent,”  in  The  Sacred  Wood 
Dewey.  Reconstruction  in  Philosophy,  cii  1,  5 

- .  Human  Nature  and  Conduct ,  part  i-ii 

S.  Lewis.  Babbitt 

Undset.  Kristin  Lavransdatter 

Vinogradoff.  Custom  and  Right 

Malinowski.  Crime  and  Custom  in  Savage  Society 

- .  The  Sexual  Life  of  Savages 

Diamond.  Primitive  Law 


Chapter  15:  DEFINITION 


INTRODUCTION 


DEFINITION  has  been  variously  defined 
in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books.  These 
diverse  conceptions  of  what  a  definition  is  raise 
many  issues. 

At  one  extreme,  writers  like  Hobbes  look 
upon  definition  as  nothing  more  than  an  at¬ 
tempt  to  say  what  a  word  means — how  it  has 
been  or  is  being  used.  At  the  other,  writers  like 
Aquinas  regard  definition  as  that  act  of  the 
mind  by  which  it  expresses  the  nature  of  a  thing 
or  formulates  its  essence. 

In  one  technical  view  associated  with  the 
name  of  Aristotle,  to  define  is  to  state  the  genus 
and  differentia  by  which  the  species  of  a  thing 
is  constituted.  In  another  theory  of  definition 
advanced  by  Locke  and  others,  any  combina¬ 
tion  of  traits  which  distinguishes  one  class  or 
kind  of  thing  from  another  defines  the  charac¬ 
ter  common  to  all  members  of  that  class.  In  still 
another  view,  to  be  found  in  Spinoza,  definition 
consists  in  giving  the  cause  or  genesis  of  a  thing, 
in  saying  how  the  thing  originated  or  was 
produced. 

Sometimes  definition  through  causes  employs 
the  final  rather  than  the  efficient  or  productive 
cause,  and  characterizes  the  thing  by  the  end  it 
naturally  serves.  And  sometimes,  as  with  Wil¬ 
liam  James,  definitions  simply  express  the  pur¬ 
poses  or  interests  which  we  have  in  mind  when 
we  classify  things  to  suit  ourselves. 

In  the  tradition  of  the  liberal  arts  of  gram¬ 
mar,  rhetoric,  and  logic,  these  various  concep¬ 
tions  of  definition  are  connected  with  contro¬ 
versies  concerning  the  power  and  activity  of 
the  human  mind,  the  relation  of  language  to 
thought,  the  structure  of  science  or,  more  gen¬ 
erally,  the  nature  of  knowledge,  and  the  con¬ 
stitution  of  reality,  with  particular  reference  to 
the  existence  of  universal  and  individuals  and 
their  relation  to  one  another. 

These  connections  appear  in  the  thought  of 


Aristotle  and  Spinoza,  Hobbes  and  Locke,  Aqui¬ 
nas  and  William  James.  Their  views  of  the  way 
in  which  definitions  should  be  constructed  or 
their  conceptions  of  the  function  of  definitions 
determine  and  reflect  lines  of  agreement  and 
opposition  on  many  other  matters.  The  use  of 
definitions  in  the  great  works  of  mathematics 
and  natural  science — by  Euclid,  Descartes, 
Galileo,  Newton,  Lavoisier,  and  Darwin — 
tends  to  exemplify  now  one,  now  another, 
theory  of  definition.  Modern  discussions  of  the 
nature  of  science  and  mathematics,  especially 
discussions  influenced  by  the  development  of 
mathematical  logic — from  Whewell,  Mill,  and 
Poincare  to  Whitehead,  Russell,  and  Dewey — 
focus  critical  attention  on  the  nature  and  role 
of  definitions. 

Many  other  chapters  provide  an  illuminating 
context  for  topics  discussed  in  this  one,  espe¬ 
cially  the  chapters  on  Language  and  Logic, 
Idea,  Principle  and  Reasoning,  Philosophy 
and  Science,  and  Truth.  Though  the  issues 
concerning  definition  cannot  be  resolved  apart 
from  this  larger  context  of  controversy  about 
the  mind,  reality,  and  knowledge,  we  can  nev¬ 
ertheless  formulate  these  issues  in  isolation.  But 
in  doing  so  we  ought  to  bear  in  mind  that  they 
can  be  more  readily  understood  in  proportion 
as  they  are  seen  in  the  light  of  other  relevant 
considerations. 

There  is,  first  of  all,  the  question  about  the 
object  of  definition.  What  is  being  defined 
when  men  make  or  defend  definitions?  This 
question  broadens  into  the  problem  of  nominal 
as  opposed  to  real  definitions.  That  is  a  complex 
problem  which  raises  a  number  of  further  ques¬ 
tions.  Are  all  definitions  arbitrary,  expressing 
the  conventions  of  our  speech  or  the  particular 
purpose  we  have  in  mind  when  we  classify 
things?  Or  do  some,  if  not  all,  definitions  ex- 


Chapter  15:  DEFINITION 


287 


press  the  real  natures  of  the  things  defined  ?  Do 
they  classify  things  according  to  natural  kinds 
which  have  reality  apart  from  our  mind  and  its 
interests? 

These  issues  are  in  turn  related  to  the  issue 
concerning  the  limits  of  definition  and  its  ulti- 
mate  principles — whether  all  things,  or  only 
some,  are  definable,  and  whether  the  indefin¬ 
able  terms,  without  which  definition  is  itself 
impossible,  can  be  arbitrarily  chosen  or  must 
always  be  terms  of  a  certain  sort.  The  sense  in 
which  definitions  may  be  true  or  false  and  the 
sense  in  which  they  cannot  be  either,  have  a 
bearing  on  all  these  issues;  and  through  them 
all  run  the  divergent  conceptions  of  how  defini¬ 
tions  can  or  should  be  constructed. 

When  in  the  course  of  argument  one  man  dis¬ 
misses  the  opinion  of  another  by  saying,  “That 
is  just  a  matter  of  definition,”  the  usual  im¬ 
plication  is  that  the  rejected  opinion  has  no 
truth  apart  from  the  way  in  which  the  man 
who  proposed  it  uses  words.  He  may  even  be 
accused  of  begging  the  question,  of  framing 
definitions  which  implicitly  contain  the  con¬ 
clusion  he  subsequently  draws  from  them. 

The  underlying  supposition  here  seems  to  be 
expressed  by  Pascal  when,  in  his  essay  On  Geo¬ 
metrical  Demonstration ,  he  asserts  that  “there  is 
great  freedom  of  definition  and  definitions  are 
never  subject  to  contradiction,  for  nothing  is 
more  permissible  than  to  give  whatever  name 
we  please  to  a  thing  we  have  clearly  pointed 
out.”  He  calls  “true  definitions”  those  which 
are  “arbitrary,  permissible,  and  geometrical.” 
The  only  restriction  he  would  place  upon  our 
freedom  to  make  definitions  is  that  “we  must 
be  careful  not  to  take  advantage  of  our  freedom 
to  impose  names  by  giving  the  same  name  to 
two  different  things.”  And  even  this  case,  he 
claims,  is  permissible  “if  we  avoid  confusion  by 
not  extending  the  consequences  of  one  to  the 
other.” 

If  we  are  free  to  make  whatever  definitions 
we  please,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  defini¬ 
tions  cannot  be  matters  of  argument;  and  dif¬ 
ferences  of  opinion  which  result  from  differ¬ 
ences  in  definition  would  seem  to  be  irrecon¬ 
cilable  by  any  appeal  to  reason  or  to  fact. 

Such  a  conception  of  definition  as  verbal 
does  not  seem  to  prevent  Hobbes  from  holding 


that  definitions  are  first  principles  or  foundations 
of  science.  “In  Geometry  (which  is  the  only  sci¬ 
ence  that  it  hath  pleased  God  hitherto  to  be¬ 
stow  on  mankind),  men  begin,”  he  writes,  “at 
settling  the  signification  of  their  words;  which 
settling  of  significations,  they  call  Definitions ; 
and  place  them  in  the  beginning  of  their  reckon¬ 
ing.”  This  shows,  Hobbes  thinks,  “how  neces¬ 
sary  it  is  for  any  man  that  aspires  to  true  knowl¬ 
edge  to  examine  the  definitions  of  former  au¬ 
thors;  and  either  to  correct  them,  where  they 
are  negligently  set  down;  or  to  make  them  him¬ 
self.  For  the  errors  of  definitions  multiply  them¬ 
selves,  according  as  the  reckoning  proceeds.” 

For  Hobbes,  then,  definition  is  verbal;  yet 
definitions  can  also  be  true  or  false,  and  on  the 
truth  of  definitions  depends  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  knowledge  and  opinion.  “In  the  right 
definition  of  names,”  he  says,  “lies  the  first  use 
of  speech;  which  is  the  acquisition  of  science.” 
Only  when  discourse  “begins  with  the  defini¬ 
tions  of  words”  can  it  reach  conclusions  that 
have  the  character  of  knowledge.  “If  the  first 
ground  of  such  discourse  be  not  definitions  .  .  . 
then  the  end  or  conclusion  is  opinion.” 

Hobbes  accurately  reports  the  nature  of  ge¬ 
ometry  when  he  says  that  in  that  science  defini¬ 
tions  serve  as  principles  in  reasoning  or  proof. 
The  words  “by  definition”  mark  one  of  the 
steps  in  many  Euclidean  proofs.  Descartes  and 
Spinoza,  proceeding  in  the  geometrical  man¬ 
ner,  place  definitions  at  the  head  of  their  works 
as  ultimate  principles  to  be  used  in  validating 
their  conclusions.  But,  unlike  Hobbes,  these 
writers  do  not  seem  to  regard  their  definitions 
as  merely  verbal.  Euclid  goes  further,  as  we 
shall  presently  see,  and  offers  what  amounts 
to  proofs  of  his  definitions,  or  at  least  of  their 
geometrical  reality.  Aristotle  and  Aquinas  cer¬ 
tainly  take  the  position  not  only  that  definitions 
are  principles,  but  also  that  definitions  them¬ 
selves  are  capable  of  being  demonstrated.  But 
they  complicate  the  matter  by  insisting  that 
definitions  are  neither  true  nor  false,  since,  as 
Aristotle  says,  they  do  not  involve  “the  asser¬ 
tion  of  something  concerning  something.” 

At  least  two  questions  seem  to  be  involved  in 
this  familiar  dispute  about  the  arguability  of 
definitions  and  their  role  in  argumentation.  To 
avoid  confusion,  they  should  be  kept  distinct. 
One  is  the  question  of  the  truth  and  falsity  of 


288 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


definitions.  It  should  be  separated  from,  even 
though  it  is  related  to,  the  other  question  about 
whether  all  definitions  are  nominal,  i.e.,  con¬ 
cerned  only  with  assigning  meanings  to  the 
words  by  which  we  name  things.  To  under¬ 
stand  what  is  involved  in  this  second  question, 
it  may  be  helpful  to  consider  the  relation  of 
words,  thoughts,  and  things  in  the  process  of 
definition. 

A  dictionary  is  supposed  to  contain  defini¬ 
tions.  It  does  in  part — insofar  as  the  meaning  of 
any  word  is  expressed  in  a  phrase  containing 
other  words  which  are  not  synonyms  for  the 
word  in  question.  The  combined  meanings  of 
these  other  words  determine  the  meaning  of 
the  word  being  defined. 

For  example,  one  definition  of  the  word 
“brother”  is  “a  male  relative,  the  son  of  the 
same  parents  or  parent.”  Another  is  “a  male 
member  of  a  religious  order.”  These  two  defini¬ 
tions  give  different  meanings  for  the  same  word. 
The  dictionary  is  here  recording  two  ways  in 
which,  as  a  matter  of  historical  fact,  the  word 
has  been  used.  It  has  been  and  can  be  used  in 
still  other  ways.  No  one  of  these  definitions  can 
be  called  “right”  and  the  others  “wrong.” 

Dictionary  definitions  seem  to  be  verbal  and 
arbitrary  in  a  number  of  ways.  That  the  word 
“brother”  should  carry  any  of  the  meanings 
which  the  dictionary  records  is  an  accident  of 
English  usage.  It  is  arbitrary  that  that  partic¬ 
ular  sound  or  mark  should  be  the  name  for  a 
male  relative  who  is  the  son  of  the  same  par¬ 
ents.  It  would  be  equally  arbitrary  to  restrict 
the  meaning  of  the  word  “brother”  to  any  one 
of  its  definitions. 

Nothing  about  a  word  limits  the  number  of 
distinct  meanings  with  which  it  can  be  used.  As 
Locke  says,  “every  man  has  so  inviolable  a  lib¬ 
erty  to  make  words  stand  for  what  ideas  he 
pleases,  that  no  one  hath  the  power  to  make 
others  have  the  same  ideas  in  their  minds  that 
he  has,  when  they  use  the  same  words  that  he 
does.”  A  word  is  thus  a  conventional  sound  or 
mark,  which  can  be  given  any  meaning  con¬ 
vention  assigns  to  it.  When  that  meaning  is  ex¬ 
pressed  in  other  words ,  we  have  a  verbal  defini¬ 
tion,  and  such  definitions  are  certainly  nominal 
in  this  sense — that  they  state  the  meaning  of 
a  name. 


But  are  they  merely  nominal  ?  Are  they  en¬ 
tirely  arbitrary?  That  this  word  should  be  used 
to  name  this  thing  is  arbitrary,  but  that  when 
it  is  so  used  a  certain  definition  also  applies 
may  not  be  arbitrary.  Among  the  several  verbal 
definitions  of  a  word,  the  one  which  applies  in 
any  particular  case  will  depend  upon  the  char¬ 
acter  of  the  thing  which  the  word  is  used 
to  name. 

For  example,  if  John  and  James  are  sons  of 
the  same  parents,  the  name  “brother”  applies, 
but  not  with  the  same  definition  which  is  re¬ 
quired  for  the  application  of  the  name  to  Mark 
and  Matthew  who,  unrelated  by  blood,  are 
members  of  the  same  monastic  order.  What  the 
word  “brother”  is  used  to  mean  may  be  arbi¬ 
trary,  but  when  it  is  used  now  of  John  and 
James,  and  now  of  Mark  and  Matthew,  it 
would  be  misapplied  if  it  did  not  carry  the  ap¬ 
propriate  definition.  Which  definition  is  appro¬ 
priate  in  each  case  does  not  seem  to  be  arbi¬ 
trary,  since  that  appropriateness  depends  not 
on  our  will  but  on  the  objective  facts  of  the 
case — the  actual  relation  of  the  persons  called 
“brothers.” 

Precisely  because  the  word  is  used  to  name  a 
thing,  the  definition  of  the  word  as  so  used  does 
more  than  state  the  meaning  of  the  word.  It 
states  something  about  the  character  of  the 
thing  named.  Definitions  remain  merely  verbal 
only  so  long  as  the  words  they  define  are  not 
actually  used  to  name  or  to  signify  things  in 
some  way.  Whenever  a  thing  is  named  or  sig¬ 
nified,  the  definition  which  gives  the  meaning 
of  the  word  must  also  signify  something  about 
the  nature  of  the  thing. 

“In  the  natural  order  of  ideas,”  writes  Lavoi¬ 
sier,  “the  name  of  the  class  or  genus  is  that 
which  expresses  a  quality  common  to  a  great 
number  of  individuals;  the  name  of  the  species, 
on  the  contrary,  expresses  a  quality  peculiar  to 
certain  individuals  only.  These  distinctions  are 
not,  as  some  may  imagine,  merely  metaphysical, 
but  are  established  by  Nature.” 

Yet  it  may  be  said  that  the  definition  is  still 
nominal,  for  it  depends  entirely  on  the  mean¬ 
ings  of  the  words  which  express  it.  For  example, 
one  definition  of  “brother”  involves  the  mean¬ 
ings  of  such  words  as  “male”  and  “relative,” 
“son,”  “parent,”  and  “same.”  If  we  were  to 


Chapter  15:  DEFINITION 


289 


look  these  words  up  in  a  dictionary,  the  def¬ 
initions  we  found  would  involve  the  meanings 
of  still  other  words,  and  so  on  in  an  endlessly 
circular  fashion.  Furthermore,  we  would  find 
the  account  of  certain  w  ords,  such  as  “relative” 
and  “same,”  somew  hat  unsatisfactory  as  defini¬ 
tions  because  the  meaning  of  the  defining  words 
w  ould  immediately  involve  the  meaning  of  the 
word  to  be  defined.  To  say  that  “same”  means 
“not  other”  or  “not  different”  seems  the  same 
as  saying  “same”  means  “same.”  Yet  we  must 
know  the  meaning  of  “same,”  for  otherw  ise  w7e 
could  not  understand  the  meaning  of  “brother,” 
in  the  definition  of  which  the  word  “same” 
appears. 

That  some  words  seem  to  have  indefinable 
meanings  suggests  that  not  all  meanings  are 
merely  verbal  or  nominal,  and  that  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  every  word  cannot  be  found  in  the  mean¬ 
ings  of  other  w  ords.  In  the  Preface  to  his  dic¬ 
tionary,  Dr.  Johnson  observes  that  “as  nothing 
can  be  proved  but  by  supposing  something  in¬ 
tuitively  known,  and  evident  w  ithout  proof,  so 
nothing  can  be  defined  but  by  the  use  of  w  ords 
too  plain  to  admit  of  definition.”  The  circular¬ 
ity  of  the  dictionary  is  thus  avoided.  When  we 
trace  meanings  from  one  word  to  another,  we 
finally  come  to  words  whose  meanings  we  seem 
to  understand  immediately,  or  at  least  without 
reference  to  the  meanings  of  other  w7ords. 

Just  as  the  arbitrary  character  of  verbal  def¬ 
initions  seems  to  be  removed  by  the  considera¬ 
tion  of  the  things  which  words  name  or  signify, 
so  the  purely  nominal  character  of  definitions 
seem  to  be  removed  by  recourse  to  meanings 
wThich  are  understood  without  further  verbal 
explanation — meanings  w7hich  may  in  fact  be 
incapable  of  such  explanation. 

Not  all  writers  agree  with  Dr.  Johnson.  All 
of  them  would  admit  that  some  words  must  be 
left  undefined  in  order  to  define  others,  but 
w7hich  shall  be  used  as  indefinable  and  w7hich 
shall  be  defined  is,  in  the  opinion  of  some,  a 
matter  of  choice.  It  is  not  something  wrhich  can 
be  determined  by  the  order  intrinsic  to  our 
ideas  or  meanings.  The  issue  between  the  math¬ 
ematical  logicians  w7ho  think  that  w7e  are  free 
to  choose  our  primitive  or  indefinable  terms, 
and  those  w7ho,  like  Aquinas,  think  that  cer¬ 
tain  terms,  such  as  being ,  same ,  one ,  and  rela¬ 


tion ,  impose  themselves  upon  our  minds  as  prin¬ 
ciples,  leaving  us  no  choice,  parallels  the  issue 
between  the  view7  that  the  principles  of  a  sci¬ 
ence  consist  of  postulates  voluntarily  assumed 
and  the  view  that  they  are  axiomatic  or  un¬ 
avoidable. 

Far  from  regarding  such  basic  indefinable 
terms  as  clearest  and  most  indisputable  in  mean¬ 
ing,  Spinoza  thinks  that  “these  terms  signify 
ideas  in  the  highest  degree  confused.”  For  him 
“the  true  definition  of  any  one  thing  .  .  .  ex¬ 
presses  nothing  but  the  nature  of  the  thing  de¬ 
fined.”  But  to  arrive  at  the  true  definition,  it  is 
necessary  to  discover  the  cause  of  the  thing. 
For  “every  existing  thing,”  he  writes,  “there  is 
some  certain  cause  by  reason  of  which  it  exists.” 
This  cause  “must  either  be  contained  in  the 
nature  itself  and  definition  of  the  existing  thing 
.  .  .  or  it  must  exist  outside  the  thing.”  In  the 
latter  case,  the  definition  of  the  thing  always 
involves  a  statement  of  the  external  cause  of  its 
existence. 

Accordingly,  Spinoza  rejects  the  traditional 
type  of  Aristotelian  definition  as  purely  sub¬ 
jective — a  matter  of  individual  memory  and 
imagination.  “Those  who  have  more  frequently 
looked  with  admiration  upon  the  stature  of 
men,”  he  writes,  “by  the  name  man  will  under¬ 
stand  an  animal  of  erect  stature,  while  those 
who  have  been  in  the  habit  of  fixing  their 
thoughts  on  something  else  will  form  another 
common  image  of  men,  describing  man,  for  in¬ 
stance,  as  an  animal  capable  of  laughter,  a  biped 
without  feathers,  a  rational  animal,  and  so 
on;  each  person  forming  universal  images  of 
things  according  to  the  temperament  of  his  own 
body.” 

However  the  issue  betw  een  Spinoza  and  Aris¬ 
totle  is  resolved,  both  seem  to  agree  that  more 
is  involved  in  the  process  of  definition  than  the 
statement  of  verbal  equivalences.  “We  have  a 
definition,”  Aristotle  says,  “not  where  we  have 
a  word  and  formula  identical  in  meaning  (for  in 
that  case  all  formulae  or  sets  of  w  ords  w  ould  be 
definitions).”  The  formula  which  is  expressed 
in  a  phrase  or  combination  of  words  must  state 
the  nature  or  essence  of  a  thing,  not  just  the 
meaning  of  a  w7ord.  “The  formula  ...  in  which 
the  term  itself  is  not  present  but  its  meaning  is 
expressed,  this,”  according  to  Aristotle,  “is  the 
formula  of  the  essence  of  each  thing”  and,  he 


290 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


adds,  “there  is  an  essence  only  of  those  things 
whose  formula  is  a  definition.” 

Even  supposing  the  truth  of  these  state¬ 
ments,  which  Hobbes  or  Locke  certainly  would 
question,  the  problem  of  real  as  opposed  to 
nominal  definition  requires  further  examina¬ 
tion.  To  explore  the  matter  further,  let  us  take 
two  of  the  most  famous  definitions  to  be  found 
in  the  great  books.  Both  are  definitions  of  man 
— “featherless  biped”  and  “rational  animal.” 
As  we  have  seen,  these  definitions  must  remain 
purely  nominal — only  stating  the  meaning  of 
the  word  “man” — until  that  word  is  used  to 
name  some  kind  of  thing.  If,  however,  we  apply 
the  word  “man”  to  existing  entities  which 
combine  the  characteristics  of  having  two  legs 
and  lacking  feathers,  then  “featherless  biped” 
defines,  not  the  word  “man,”  but  a  class  of  real, 
that  is,  existing  things.  In  addition  to  being 
nominal,  the  definition  is  now  also  real  in  the 
sense  that  the  class  or  kind  which  it  determines 
has  existing  members. 

That  animals  exist  may  similarly  be  a  fact  of 
observation.  But  “animal”  is  only  one  of  the 
two  terms  in  the  other  nominal  definition  of 
“man.”  In  order  to  make  “rational  animal” 
more  than  a  nominal  definition,  it  is  necessary 
to  verify  the  existence  of  animals  which  possess 
a  certain  characteristic,  rationality ,  not  pos¬ 
sessed  by  all  animals.  If  rationality  in  some  de¬ 
gree  belonged  to  all  animals,  then  the  word 
“man”  (nominally  defined  by  “rational  ani¬ 
mal”)  would  be  synonymous  with  “animal.” 
But,  unlike  feathers,  the  presence  or  absence  of 
which  seems  readily  observable,  the  possession 
or  lack  of  rationality  is  difficult  to  ascertain. 

Here  we  face  two  possibilities.  One  is  that  we 
can  never  be  sure  that  some  existing  animals 
are  and  some  are  not  rational.  Then  the  defini¬ 
tion  “rational  animal”  will  never  become  real. 
It  will  always  remain  merely  nominal,  the  state¬ 
ment  of  a  possible  meaning  for  “man,”  but  one 
which  we  cannot  employ  when  we  apply  the 
word  to  name  any  existing  thing.  The  other 
possibility  is  that  we  can  infer  the  existence  of  a 
special  class  of  animals  (distinguished  by  the 
possession  of  reason)  from  such  evident  facts  as 
the  activities  of  reading  and  writing,  activities 
not  performed  by  all  animals.  Then,  members 
of  the  class  defined  having  been  found  to  exist, 
“rational  animal”  becomes  a  real  definition  of 


the  beings  to  which  we  also  arbitrarily  assign 
the  name  “man.” 

The  process  of  verification  by  which  a  nom¬ 
inal  is  converted  into  a  real  definition  can  be 
regarded  as  the  demonstration  of  a  definition. 
Strictly  speaking,  it  is  not  the  definition  which 
is  thereby  proved.  It  is  rather  a  proposition  in 
which  the  subject  of  the  definition  is  affirmed 
to  exist,  or  in  which  a  subject  already  known  to 
exist  is  said  to  have  a  certain  definition.  For 
example,  it  is  not  the  definition  “rational  ani¬ 
mal”  which  is  proved,  but  the  proposition 
“there  exists  an  animal  which  differs  from  other 
animals  in  being  rational,”  or  the  proposition 
“the  real  being  which  we  call  ‘man’  is  both  an 
animal  and  rational,  and  he  alone  is  rational.” 
If  these  propositions  cannot  be  proved,  “ration¬ 
al  animal”  remains  a  purely  nominal  definition. 

That  definitions  are  not  as  such  either  true  or 
false  is  unaffected  by  the  distinction  between 
real  and  nominal  definitions.  The  point  is  sim¬ 
ply  that  a  definition,  which  is  always  linguisti¬ 
cally  expressed  by  a  phrase,  never  a  sentence, 
neither  affirms  nor  denies  anything,  and  so  can¬ 
not  be  either  true  or  false.  “Featherless  biped” 
or  “son  of  the  same  parents”  makes  no  assertion 
about  reality  or  existence. 

Yet  there  is  a  special  sense  in  which  defini¬ 
tions  can  be  true  or  false,  which  does  have  a 
bearing  on  the  distinction  between  real  and 
nominal  definitions.  Pascal  suggests  three  alter¬ 
natives  with  regard  to  the  truth  or  falsity  of 
definitions.  “If  we  find  it  impossible,”  he 
writes,  “it  passes  for  false;  if  we  demonstrate 
that  it  is  true,  it  passes  for  a  truth;  and  as  long 
as  it  cannot  be  proved  to  be  either  possible  or 
impossible,  it  is  considered  a  fancy.” 

According  to  Aquinas,  there  are  two  ways  in 
which  a  definition  can  be  false.  In  one  way, 
when  the  intellect  applies  “to  one  thing  the 
definition  proper  to  another;  as  that  of  a  circle 
to  a  man.  In  another  way,  by  composing  a  def¬ 
inition  of  parts  which  are  mutually  repugnant. 
A  definition  such  as  ‘a  four-footed  rational  ani¬ 
mal’  would  be  of  this  kind  ...  for  such  a  state¬ 
ment  as  ‘some  rational  animals  are  four-footed’ 
is  false  in  itself.” 

But  the  truth  or  falsity  of  that  statement  can 
conceivably  be  argued,  and  therefore  it  is  not 
so  clear  an  example  of  a  false  definition  as  one 


Chapter  15:  DEFINITION 


291 


which,  in  Pascal’s  terms,  plainly  represents  an 
impossibility.  Suppose  someone  offered  “round 
square”  as  the  nominal  definition  of  “rectacy- 
cle.”  The  phrase  “round  square”  expresses  a 
self-contradiction,  and  in  consequence  the  defi¬ 
nition  is  false.  Its  falsity  is  tantamount  to  the 
impossibility  of  there  being  any  such  figure  as  a 
rectacycle  which  has  the  definition  proposed. 

The  truth  of  a  definition — which  is  nothing 
more  than  its  freedom  from  self-contradiction 
— is  equivalent  to  the  possibility ,  as  opposed  to 
the  impossibility,  of  the  thing  defined.  To  call 
the  definition  “son  of  the  same  parents”  or 
“featherless  biped”  true  is  to  say  that  the  words 
defined — “brother”  or  “man” — signify  possible 
existences.  In  short,  only  those  nominal  defini¬ 
tions  which  are  true  can  ever  become  real,  and 
they  become  real  only  when  the  possibility 
they  signify  is  actually  known  to  be  realized  in 
existence. 

The  method  of  Euclid’s  Elements  illustrates 
the  foregoing  points.  Euclid  defines  certain  geo¬ 
metrical  figures,  such  as  triangle,  parallelogram, 
square.  These  definitions  may  appear  to  be  free 
from  contradiction,  but  that  does  not  tell  us 
whether  they  are  more  than  nominal.  The  de¬ 
fined  figures  are  possible,  but  the  question  is 
whether  they  exist  in  the  space  determined  by 
Euclid’s  postulates. 

To  show  that  they  do  exist,  Euclid  under¬ 
takes  to  construct  them  according  to  his  postu¬ 
lates  which  permit  him  the  use  of  a  straight 
edge  and  a  compass  for  purposes  of  construc¬ 
tion.  When  in  Proposition  i  Euclid  proves  that 
he  can  construct  an  equilateral  triangle,  he  es¬ 
tablishes  the  geometrical  reality  of  the  figure 
defined  in  Definition  20.  A  geometrical  con¬ 
struction  is  thus  seen  to  be  what  is  called  an 
“existence  proof.”  It  converts  a  nominal  into  a 
real  definition.  Figures  which  cannot  be  con¬ 
structed  must  be  postulated;  as,  for  example, 
the  straight  line  and  the  circle.  Postulates  1  and 
3  ask  us  to  assume  that  a  straight  line  can  be 
drawn  between  any  two  points  and  that  a  circle 
can  be  described  with  any  center  and  radius. 
These  postulates  give  Definitions  4  and  15  their 
geometrical  reality. 

Though  the  method  of  construction  is  pecu¬ 
liar  to  geometry,  the  relation  of  definitions  to 
proofs  or  postulates  of  existence  is  the  same  for 


all  sciences.  Until  a  definition  ceases  to  be  nom¬ 
inal  and  becomes  real,  it  cannot  be  used  scien¬ 
tifically  in  the  demonstration  of  other  conclu¬ 
sions;  to  use  a  merely  nominal  definition  in  the 
proof  begs  the  question. 

If  the  existence  of  the  thing  defined  is  either 
directly  observable  or  self-evident,  no  proof  or 
postulation  of  existence  is  required.  In  theol¬ 
ogy,  for  example,  there  are  those  who  think 
that  the  existence  of  God  is  immediately  seen 
in  the  definition  of  God.  Descartes  and  Spinoza 
seem  to  be  of  this  opinion. 

Descartes  argues  that  “eternal  existence”  is 
necessarily  included  in  the  idea  of  God  as  “a 
supremely  perfect  Being.”  This  is  so  evident, 
he  declares,  that  “existence  can  no  more  be 
separated  from  the  essence  of  God  than  can  its 
having  its  three  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles 
be  separated  from  the  essence  of  a  triangle,  or 
the  idea  of  a  mountain  from  the  idea  of  a  val¬ 
ley.”  Concerning  substance  or  God,  Spinoza 
holds  that,  since  it  pertains  to  its  nature  to 
exist,  “its  definition  must  involve  necessary 
existence,  and  consequently  from  its  definition 
alone  its  existence  must  be  concluded.” 

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  those  who  think 
that  the  existence  of  God  must  be  proved  by 
inference  from  effect  to  cause.  Supposing  that  a 
man  understands  the  meaning  of  the  word 
“God,”  Aquinas  maintains  that  it  “does  not 
therefore  follow  that  he  understands  that  what 
the  name  signifies  exists  actually,  but  only  that 
it  exists  mentally.”  Hence,  he  declares,  it  is  nec¬ 
essary  to  prove  the  existence  of  God,  “accept¬ 
ing  as  a  middle  term  the  meaning  of  the  name,” 
but  using  an  effect  in  “place  of  the  definition  of 
the  cause  in  proving  the  cause’s  existence.” 

The  difference  between  these  two  positions 
might  be  summed  up  by  saying  that  Descartes 
and  Spinoza,  like  Anselm  before  them,  think 
the  definition  of  God  is  intrinsically  real,  where¬ 
as  Aquinas  thinks  we  must  begin  with  a  nom¬ 
inal  definition  of  God,  which  becomes  real  only 
with  proof  of  God’s  existence.  For  some  con¬ 
firmed  atheists,  any  definition  of  God  is  not 
only  nominal,  but  false — the  definition  of  an 
impossible  being,  incapable  of  existing. 

There  is  still  another  issue  about  nominal  and 
real  definitions.  The  point  involved  is  the  one 
raised  by  Locke’s  discussion  of  nominal  and  real 


292 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


essences.  It  is  also  raised  by  Aristotle’s  discrim¬ 
ination  between  essential  and  accidental  uni¬ 
ties,  i.e.y  the  difference  between  the  unity  sig¬ 
nified  by  the  phrase  “featherless  biped”  and  by 
the  phrase  “black  man.”  Both  phrases  look  like 
definitions.  Each  designates  a  possible  class  of 
individuals  and  sets  up  the  conditions  for  mem¬ 
bership  in  that  class  or  exclusion  from  it. 

The  distinction  between  them  does  not  rest, 
according  to  Aristotle,  on  the  criterion  of  exist¬ 
ence.  Both  of  the  objects  defined  may  exist,  but 
whereas  the  first  is  truly  a  species,  the  second  is 
only,  in  Aristotle’s  opinion,  an  accidental  vari¬ 
ety  within  the  species  man.  Man ,  being  a  spe¬ 
cies,  can  have  a.  real  essence,  and  so  any  defini¬ 
tion  of  man — whether  “featherless  biped”  or 
“rational  animal” — can  be  a  real  definition,  con¬ 
stituted  by  genus  and  differentia.  But  negro  or 
aryany  not  being  a  species,  but  only  a  race  or 
variety,  has  no  essence  as  such.  The  definitions 
— “black  man”  and  “white  man” — indicate 
this  in  that  they  are  constituted  by  two  terms 
which  are  related  as  substance  and  accident,  not 
as  genus  and  differentia. 

Though  Aristotle  distinguishes  these  two 
types  of  formulae  as  essential  and  accidental 
definitions  rather  than  as  real  and  nominal  defi¬ 
nitions,  the  one  principle  of  distinction  is  close¬ 
ly  related  to  the  other,  for  only  essential  defini¬ 
tions  can  have  real  essences  for  their  objects. 
Accidental  definitions  do  little  more  than  state 
the  meanings  of  words,  or  express  what  Locke 
calls  the  “nominal  essences”  of  things.  He 
doubts  that  the  definition  of  anything  except  a 
mathematical  object  can  ever  grasp  the  real  es¬ 
sence  of  a  thing.  For  him  all  definitions  are 
nominal,  which  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  we 
never  define  by  means  of  the  true  genus  and 
differentia,  but  always  by  accidental  and  exter¬ 
nal  signs,  or  by  stating  the  component  parts  of 
a  complex  whole. 

“Speaking  of  a  man,  or  gold,”  Locke  ex¬ 
plains,  “or  any  other  species  of  natural  sub¬ 
stance,  as  supposed  constituted  by  a  precise  and 
real  essence  which  nature  regularly  imparts  to 
every  individual  of  that  kind,  whereby  it  is 
made  to  be  of  that  species,  we  cannot  be  certain 
of  the  truth  of  any  affirmation  or  negation 
made  of  it.  For  man  or  gold,  taken  in  this  sense, 
and  used  for  species  of  things  constituted  by 
real  essences,  different  from  the  complex  idea 


in  the  mind  of  the  speaker,  stand  for  we  know 
not  what;  and  the  extent  of  these  species,  with 
such  boundaries,  are  so  unknown  and  undeter¬ 
mined,  that  it  is  impossible  with  any  certainty 
to  affirm,  that  all  men  are  rational,  or  that  all 
gold  is  yellow.” 

This  issue  has  many  ramifications.  In  one 
direction  it  leads  into  Aristotle’s  quarrel  with 
Plato  over  the  method  of  definition  by  division 
or  dichotomy.  In  the  Sophist  and  the  Statesman , 
the  search  for  definitions  proceeds  by  the  divi¬ 
sion  of  a  class  of  things  into  two  sub-classes,  one 
of  which  is  then  further  subdivided,  and  so  on 
until  a  class  is  reached  which  has  the  character¬ 
istics  of  the  object  to  be  defined.  The  attempt 
to  define  a  sophist,  for  example,  starts  with  the 
notion  that  he  is  a  man  of  art,  and  proceeds  by 
dividing  and  subdividing  the  various  kinds  of 
art.  At  one  point  in  the  course  of  doing  this,  the 
Athenian  Stranger  summarizes  the  process  to 
that  point. 

“You  and  I,”  he  says  to  Theaetetus,  “have 
come  to  an  understanding  not  only  about  the 
name  of  the  angler’s  art,  but  about  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  thing  itself.  One  half  of  all  art  was 
acquisitive— half  of  the  acquisitive  art  was  con¬ 
quest  or  taking  by  force,  half  of  this  was  hunt¬ 
ing,  and  half  of  hunting  was  hunting  animals, 
half  of  this  was  hunting  water  animals — of  this 
again,  the  under  half  was  fishing,  half  of  fishing 
was  striking;  a  part  of  striking  was  fishing  with 
a  barb,  and  one  half  of  this  again,  being  the 
kind  which  strikes  with  a  hook  and  draws  the 
fish  from  below  upwards,  is  the  art  which  we 
have  been  seeking,  and  which  from  the  nature 
of  the  operation  is  denoted  angling  or  drawing 
up  .  .  .  And  now,  following  this  pattern,”  he 
continues,  “let  us  endeavor  to  find  out  what  a 
Sophist  is.” 

The  pattern  as  illustrated  indicates  that,  in 
the  course  of  div  ision,  one  of  the  two  classes  is 
discarded  while  the  other  is  subject  to  further 
subdivision.  Aristotle’s  criticism  of  this  pro¬ 
cedure  turns  partly  on  the  fact  that  the  divi¬ 
sion  is  always  dichotomous,  or  into  two  sub¬ 
classes,  and  partly  on  the  fact  that  the  terms 
which  Plato  uses  in  a  succession  of  subdivisions 
do  not  seem  to  have  any  systematic  relation  to 
one  another.  If  the  class  of  animals,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  is  divided  into  those  with  and  those  with- 


Chapter  15:  DEFINITION 


293 


out  feet,  it  makes  a  difference,  according  to 
Aristotle,  what  terms  are  then  used  to  differ¬ 
entiate  footed  animals  into  their  proper  sub¬ 
classes. 

“It  is  necessary,”  he  insists,  “that  the  divi¬ 
sion  be  by  the  differentia  of  the  differentia ;  e.g.y 
‘endowed  with  feet’  is  a  differentia  of  ‘animal’; 
again  the  differentia  of  ‘animal  endowed  with 
feet’  must  be  of  it  qua  endowed  with  feet. 
Therefore  we  must  not  say,  if  we  are  to  speak 
rightly,  that  of  that  which  is  endowed  with  feet 
one  part  has  feathers  and  one  is  featherless  (if 
we  do  this  we  do  it  through  incapacity);  we 
must  divide  it  only  into  cloven-footed  and  not- 
cloven;  for  these  are  differentiae  in  the  foot; 
cloven-footedness  is  a  form  of  footedness.  And 
the  process  wants  always  to  go  on  so  till  it 
reaches  the  species  that  contains  no  difference. 
And  then  there  will  be  as  many  kinds  of  foot  as 
there  are  differentiae,  and  the  kinds  of  animals 
endowed  with  feet  will  be  equal  in  number  to 
the  differentiae.  If  then  this  is  so,  clearly  the 
last  differentia  will  be  the  essence  of  the  thing 
and  its  definition.” 

As  Aristotle  quarrels  with  Plato’s  method  of 
division,  so  William  James  takes  issue  with  Aris¬ 
totle’s  theory  that  a  real  essence  is  defined  when 
the  right  differentia  is  properly  chosen  within  a 
certain  genus  of  things.  He  tends  to  follow 
Locke’s  notion  that  definitions  indicate  no 
more  than  the  nominal  essences  of  things,  but 
he  gives  this  theory  a  special  twist  by  adding 
the  notion  that  all  our  definitions  merely  group 
things  according  to  the  interest  or  purpose, 
whether  theoretical  or  practical,  which  moti¬ 
vates  our  classification  of  them.  This  has  come 
to  be  known  as  the  pragmatic  theory  of 
definition. 

“My  thinking,”  writes  James,  “is  first  and 
last  and  always  for  the  sake  of  my  doing.”  After 
pointing  out  that  Locke  “undermined  the  fal¬ 
lacy”  of  supposing  that  we  can  define  the  real 
essences  of  things,  he  goes  on  to  say  that  “none 
of  his  successors,  as  far  as  I  know,  have  radically 
escaped  it,  or  seen  that  the  only  meaning  of  es¬ 
sence  is  teleological ,  and  that  classification  and 
conception  are  purely  teleological  weapons  of  the 
mind.  The  essence  of  a  thing  is  that  one  of  its 
properties  which  is  so  important  for  my  interests 
that  in  comparison  with  it  I  may  neglect  the 
rest.  .  .  .  The  properties  which  are  important 


vary  from  man  to  man  and  from  hour  to  hour.” 

In  a  footnote  James  adds:  “A  substance  like 
oil  has  as  many  different  essences  as  it  has  uses 
to  different  individuals.”  The  classification  of 
natural  as  well  as  artificial  objects  should  there¬ 
fore  proceed  according  to  the  advice  Mephis- 
topheles  gives  to  the  student  in  Goethe’s  Faust. 
“You  will  have  more  success,”  he  says,  “if  vou 
will  learn  to  reduce  all,  and  to  classify  each  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  use.”  But  if  this  is  so,  then  no  one 
scheme  of  classification,  more  than  any  other, 
represents  the  real  structure  or  order  of  nature. 
Nature  indifferently  submits  to  any  and  all  divi¬ 
sions  which  we  wish  to  make  among  existing 
things.  Some  classifications  may  be  more  sig¬ 
nificant  than  others,  but  only  by  reference  to 
our  interests,  not  because  they  represent  reality 
more  accurately  or  adequately.  It  does  not  mat¬ 
ter,  therefore,  whether  we  define  by  genus  and 
differentia,  by  other  characteristics  in  combina¬ 
tion,  or  by  reference  to  origins  or  functions. 

Darwin’s  scheme  of  classification  provides 
evidence  relevant  to  this  whole  issue.  As  indi¬ 
cated  in  the  chapters  on  Animal  and  Evolu¬ 
tion,  Darwin  thinks  that  his  genealogical  clas¬ 
sification  of  plants  and  animals  comes  nearer  to 
the  natural  system  of  living  organisms  than  the 
classifications  proposed  by  his  predecessors. 
“The  Natural  System,”  he  writes,  “is  a  genea¬ 
logical  arrangement,  with  the  acquired  grades 
of  difference,  marked  by  the  terms,  varieties, 
species,  genera,  families,  etc.;  and  we  have  to 
discover  the  lines  of  descent  by  the  most  per¬ 
manent  characters  whatever  they  may  be  and 
of  however  slight  vital  importance.”  Hence¬ 
forth,  following  his  method,  “systematists  will 
have  only  to  decide  .  .  .  whether  any  form  be 
sufficiently  constant  and  distinct  from  other 
forms,  to  be  capable  of  definition;  and  if  de¬ 
finable,  whether  the  differences  be  sufficiently 
important  to  deserve  a  specific  name.” 

But  Darwin’s  statement  re-opens  rather  than 
resolves  the  great  traditional  questions.  Are  the 
various  groupings  made  in  classification  divi¬ 
sions  which  the  classifier  finds  useful  to  impose 
on  nature,  or  do  they  represent  lines  of  real 
distinction  in  the  very  nature  of  things?  If  the 
latter  is  the  case,  either  wholly  or  in  part,  are 
we  able  to  do  more  than  approximate  real  dis¬ 
tinction  by  whatever  method  of  definition  we 
employ?  Can  we  discover  real  species,  essen- 


294 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


tially  distinct  from  one  another,  and  can  our 
definitions  formulate  the  essence  of  each? 

The  search  for  definitions  basically  belongs  to 
the  activity  of  the  human  mind  in  all  its  scien¬ 
tific  or  dialectical  efforts  to  clarify  discourse,  to 
achieve  precision  of  thought,  to  focus  issues  and 
to  resolve  them. 

Men  have  no  other  way  of  coming  to  terms 
with  one  another  than  by  defining  the  words 
they  use  to  express  their  concepts  or  meanings. 
They  make  terms  out  of  words  by  endowing 
words  with  exactness  or  precision  of  meaning. 
Definition  does  this  and  makes  possible  the 
meeting  of  minds  either  in  agreement  or  in  dis¬ 
pute.  Definition  also  makes  it  possible  for  any 


mind  to  submit  itself  to  the  test  of  agreement 
with  reality.  Definition  helps  man  to  ask  nature 
or  experience  the  only  sort  of  question  to  which 
answers  can  be  found. 

The  search  for  definitions  has,  perhaps,  its 
most  dramatic  exemplification  in  the  dialogues 
of  Plato.  Socrates  usually  leads  the  conversation 
in  quest  of  them;  though  it  is  only  in  certain 
dialogues,  such  as  the  Sophist  and  the  States - 
man ,  that  the  making  of  definitions  is  practiced 
in  detail.  Two  other  books  in  this  set  are  largely 
concerned  with  ways  of  reaching  and  defending 
definitions — Aristotle’s  Topics  (which  should  be 
considered  together  with  the  opening  chapters 
of  his  Parts  of  Animals)  and  Bacon’s  Novum 
Organum. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  theory  of  definition  295 

1a .  The  object  of  definition:  definitions  as  arbitrary  and  nominal  or  real  and  con¬ 
cerned  with  essence 

1  h.  The  purpose  of  definition:  the  clarification  of  ideas  296 

1  c.  The  limits  of  definition:  the  definable  and  the  indefinable 

1  d.  The  unity  of  a  definition  in  relation  to  the  unity  of  the  thing  defined  297 

le.  The  truth  and  falsity  of  definitions 

2.  The  various  methods  of  definition  or  classification 

2 a.  The  use  of  division  or  dichotomy  in  definition 
2 A  Definition  by  genus  and  differentia:  properties 

2 c.  Definition  by  accidental  or  extrinsic  signs  or  by  component  parts  298 

2 d.  The  appeal  to  genesis,  origin,  cause,  or  end  in  definition 
2<?.  Definition  by  reference  to  purpose  or  interest 

3.  The  grammatical  or  verbal  aspects  of  definition  299 

4.  The  search  for  definitions  and  the  methods  of  defending  them 

5.  Definition  and  demonstration:  definitions  as  principles  and  as  conclusions 

6.  The  character  of  definitions  in  diverse  disciplines  300 

6a.  The  formulation  of  definitions  in  physics,  mathematics,  and  metaphysics 

6b.  The  use  of  definition  in  speculative  philosophy  and  empirical  science 

6c.  The  role  of  definitions  in  practical  or  moral  philosophy  and  the  social  sciences  301 


Chapter  15:  DEFINITION 


295 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  n  [265-283)  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  sideof  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References  :  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “pass^m’’  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  theory  of  definition 

7  Plato:  Meno ,  174a-177d  /  Theaetetus ,  544d- 
549d  /  Sophist  551a-579d  /  Statesman  580a- 
608d  /  Laws,  bk  x,  763c-d  /  Seventh  Letter , 
809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  3-10 
123c-128d;  ch  13  131b-133c  /  Topics ,  bk  vi- 
vii  192a-211a,c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  vii,  ch  4-6 
552b-555a;  ch  10-17  558a-566a,c;  bk  viii, 
ch  2-3  566d-568d;  ch  6  569d-570d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  2-4 
165d-168c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  35 
653b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56b-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii  137a-195d  esp 
aph  17  149b-d,  aph  22-51  153b-194c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  23c-24a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  8,  schol  2 
356d-357d;  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  i  387b- 
388a 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  430b- 
434b;  442a-443b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch 
iii-vi  254d-283a  passim 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 
48-49  470d-471d 


42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  44c-45b;  215d-217a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  82a-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  314a-b;  668a-673b 

la.  The  object  of  definition:  definitions  as  ar¬ 
bitrary  and  nominal  or  real  and  con¬ 
cerned  with  essence 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  104d-105b;  113a-114a,c  / 
Gorgias,  252d-253b  /  Republic,  bk  vi,  384a- 
387d;  bk  ix,  426d-427b  /  Timaeus,  457b- 
458b  /  Theaetetus,  514b-515c;  547c-549c  / 
Sophist,  551a-d  /  Philebus ,  610d-613a  /  Laws, 
bk  x,  763c-d  /  Seventh  Letter,  809a-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  5  [2ai9-3b24]  6b- 

8a  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  1,  ch  22  113b-115b; 
ch  33  [88b30-89ai]  121b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  3-10  123c- 
128d;  ch  13  131b-133c  /  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  4 
[ioibi7-23]  144b-c;  ch  5  [ioib37-io2a5] 

144d;  ch  8  [io3bi-n]  146d;  ch  18  [io8a38-b9] 
152d;[io8bi9-32]153a,c;BKVi,  chi  [i39a24~ 34] 
192a;  bk  vi,  ch  4-BK  vii,  ch  5  194c-211a,c 
passim  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i93a30— bi 9] 
269c-270a  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  1, 
ch  2  [3 17ai7— 27]  413b  /  Meteorology,  bk  iv, 
ch  12  493d-494d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[986b8— 987ai ]  504c-505a;  [987^9-27]  505b; 
ch  6  [987bi-io]  505c;  [987^30—33]  506a;  bk 
ii,  ch  2  [994bi6— 27]  513a-b;  bk  hi,  ch  2  [996b 
12-21]  515a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  4  525a-528b;  bk  vi, 


296 

(1.  The  theory  of  definition,  la.  The  object  of 
definition:  definitions  as  arbitrary  and  nom¬ 
inal  or  real  and  concerned  with  essence.) 
ch  i  [i025b28-i026a6]  547d-548a;  bk  vii, 
ch  i  [1028*31-37]  550d;  ch  4-6  552b-555a; 
ch  10-17  558a-566a,c;  bk  viii,  ch  2-3  566d- 
568d;  ch  6  569d-570d;  bk  x,  ch  i  [io52bi- 
15]  578d-579a;  bk  xi,  ch  5  590a-d;  bk 
xiii,  ch  4  [io78bi8-32]  610b-c  /  Soul ,  bk  i, 
ch  1  631a-632d;  bk  hi,  ch  6  [43ob26~3i] 
663b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  1 
[641*14-31]  163d-164a;  ch  2-4  165d-168c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i,  a 
7,  rep  1  7a-c;  q  2,  a  1,  rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  2, 
rep  2  lld-12c;  q  3,  a  3,  ans  16a-d;  a  5,  ans 
17c-18b:  q  17,  a  3  102d-103c;  q  29,  a  i, 
rep  1,3-4  162a-163b;  a  2,  rep  3  163b-164b; 
q  44,  a  1,  rep  1  238b-239a;  a  3,  rep  3  240b- 
241a;  q  58,  a  5  303c-304c;  q  75,  a  4,  ans 
381b-382a;  q  85,  a  6  458d-459c;  q  116,  a  i, 
contrary  592d-593d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q  4, 
a  1,  ans  402a-403d;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  2,  ans 
711d-712d;  q  60,  a  4,  rep  i  849c-850b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  55b-c;  56b;  59c- d; 
part  iv,  270a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  518d-519a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  142d- 
143a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  4  137d- 
138b 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiii,  26b-c  /  Objections 
and  Replies,  postulate  iv  131a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  8,  schol  2 
356d-357d;  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  i  387b- 
388a;  part  hi,  prop  4  398d 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  372b-373b;  376b-377a  / 
Geometrical  Demonstration ,  430b-431b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxi,  sect  6-13  240d-243b;  ch  xxxii, 
sect  18  246c-247a;  sect  24  247c-d;  bk  hi, 
ch  iii,  sect  11-20  257a-260a  esp  sect  18-20 
259b-260a;  ch  v,  sect  14  267b-c;  ch  vi 
268b-283a;  ch  x,  sect  17-21  295d-297b;  ch 
xi,  sect  15-24  303b-305d;  bk  iv,  ch  iv, 
sect  11-17  326b-328d  passim;  ch  vi,  sect 
4-16  331d-336d  passim;  ch  xii,  sect  9  360d- 
361b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
18  410a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  179d-182b;  215d-216c  / 
Science  of  Right,  404d;  423d-424b 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i, 
lOa-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  176c; 
184d-185a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  27b-29a  esp  29a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii, 
694b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  106a;  185a-b;  668a-671a; 
882b-883a 


\d  tO  Ic  1 

lb.  The  purpose  of  definition:  the  clarification 

of  ideas 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120a-b  /  Meno,  174a-179b  / 
Euthyphro,  193c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  14 
[98*1-2]  133c-d  /  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  18  [io8a 
17-37]  152b-d;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [i39bi  1— 15] 

192b-c;  ch  4  [141*26-32]  194c;  bk  viii,  ch  3 
[158*31-159*2]  214d-215c  /  Metaphysics,  bk 
iv,  ch  4  525a-528b;  bk  xi,  ch  5  590a-d  /  Soul, 
bk  1,  ch  1  [402^5-403*2]  631d-632a 

9  Aristotle  :  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[648bi~5]  172d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  23  [1398* 

15-27]  646c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  85, 
a  3,  rep  3  455b-457a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56b;  58d-59a; 
part  iv,  269b-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day, 
142d-143a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  60b-c; 

61b-c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  59 
112b-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  23c-24a;  xiii,  26b-c 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  430b- 
434b  passim 

34  Newton:  Principles,  definitions,  schol,  8b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  iv, 
sect  6-14  260d-263a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii, 

Div62  478b-c;  Div74  484a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113b-c  /  Practical  Reason, 
293c-294b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  37 7d 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  4a- 
5c;  parti,  lOa-b;  21a-22c 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  361a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  2 
9b-10a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  207d-208a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  694b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  314a-b;  669a-671a;  871a-b 

lc.  The  limits  of  definition:  the  definable  and 

the  indefinable 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,  384a-388a  /  Theaete - 
tus,  544c-547c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [992b 
24-993*1]  511a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [994^6-27] 

513a-b;  bk  v,  ch  3  [ioi4b3~i3]  534d;  bk  vii, 
ch  4-5  552b-554a;  ch  io-ii  558a-561a;  ch 
J3  [i°39ai5— 23l  563a;  ch  15  563c-564c;  bk 
viii,  ch  3  [i043b23~33]  568b;  bk  x,  ch  8-9 
585b-586c 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  6  231b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a 
7,  rep  i  7a-c;  q  2,  a  1,  rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  2, 
rep  2  lld-12c;  q  3,  a  3,  ans  16a-d;  a  5,  ans 
17c-18b;  q  29,  a  1,  rep  1  162a-163b:  a  2, 
rep  3  163b-164b;  q  44,  a  3,  rep  3  240b- 
241a;  q  85,  a  i,  rep  2  451c-453c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1  dto  lb 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  59  112b  c 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  xir,  23c-24a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  axiom  2  355d 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  431b 
434b;  442a-443b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii, 
sect  1  127d-128a;  ch  iv,  sect  6  131a;  ch 
xx,  sect  1  176b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  iv,  sect  4-17 
260b-263c;  ch  vi  268b-283a  passim,  esp 
sect  7-10  270b-271b;  ch  xi,  sect  13-25 
302d-306c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vii,  div 
49  471c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  29d-33d;  53b-54b; 

179d-182b;  215d-216c  /  Judgement,  603a-604b 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  119b-120b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  82b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  242a  /  Descent  of 
Man ,  346d-347b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  694b-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  314a 

1  d.  The  unity  of  a  definition  in  relation  to  the 
unity  of  the  thing  defined 

7  Plato:  Laches ,  32a-33a  /  Cratylus  85a-114a,c 
esp  85a-89a,  104b-114a,c  /  Meno ,  174a-179b 
/  Theaetetus,  514b-515d  /  Sophist ,  559a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  6 
[92^8-33]  126b;  ch  10  [93b28~94a7]  128b-c; 
ch  13  [97b6-25]  133a- b  /  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch 
4  [i4ia26-b2]  194c-d;  ch  5  [i42b30-i43ai2] 
196b-c;  ch  13-14  204c-206d;  bk  vii,  ch  3 
[I53a6~22]  208a-b;  [154^—1 1]  209b  /  Physics , 
bk  i,  ch  3  [i86bi4-3o]  261c-d  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  1,  ch  5  [986b8— 987ai]  504c-505a;  bk  v,  ch 
6  [ioi6a33-bn]  536d-537a;  bk  vii,  ch  4-6 
552b-555a;  ch  10-17  558a-566a,c;  bk  viii, 
ch  2-3  566d-568d;  ch  6  569d-570d;  bk  x, 
ch  1  [io52a28~37]  578d  /  Soul ,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
[4i4b20-4i5ai4]  644d-645b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  35  162a- 
164a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxii,  sect  4  201c-d;  ch  xxiii,  sect  1-2 
204a-c;  bk  iii,  ch  v,  sect  4  264b;  ch  vi, 
sect  21  273c-d;  sect  28-30  276a-277b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  i  413a- b 

53  James:  Psychology,  503a- b 

le.  The  truth  and  falsity  of  definitions 

7  Plato:  Cratylus  85a-114a,c  esp  85a-89a,  104b- 
114a,c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi-vii  192a-211a,c 
passim,  esp  bk  vi,  ch  4-14  194c-206d  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  v,  ch  29  [io24b27~38]  546d-547a; 
bk  vi,  ch  4  [io27bi7~28]  550a, c;  bk  ix,  ch 
10  [io5ibi8— 33]  577d-578a  /  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch 
6  [43ob26~3o]  663b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a 
1,  rep  2  lOd-lld;  q  17,  a  3  102d-103c;  Q  58, 
a  5  303c-304c;  q  85,  a  6  458d-459c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  56b-d 


297 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day, 
200a-b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  apii  59  1 1 2b- 
c;  bk  ii,  apii  35  162a  l64a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xm,  26b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  8,  schol  2, 
357b-d;  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2  387b- 
388b 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  430b- 

431b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  cii 
xxxii  243c-248b  passim 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  179d-182b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  469a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  82a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  2  9  b- 
10a 

53  James:  Psychology,  669a-671a 

2.  The  various  methods  of  definition  or  classi¬ 
fication 

2a .  The  use  of  division  or  dichotomy  in  defi¬ 
nition 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  134a-c  /  Sophist ,  552b-561d; 
577c-579d  /  Statesman  580a-608d  /  Philebus , 
610d-613a 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  31 
64b-65a  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  5  125b- 
d;  ch  13  [96b25~97b6]  132a-133a  /  Topics ,  bk 
vi,  ch  6  [i43bu-i44a4]  197b-c  /  Metaphysics, 
bk  vii,  ch  12  [i037b28-ic>38a35]  561c-562a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  2-4 
165d-168c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  4  lla-c  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  8-10  285a-286d;  ch 
16-18  289c-291d 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  35 
653b-c 

2b.  Definition  by  genus  and  differentia:  proper¬ 
ties 

7  Plato:  Theaetetus ,  548c-549d 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  3  [ibi6— 24]  5d; 
ch  5  [2aii~3b24]  6a-8a;  ch  13  [i4b32— 15^8] 
20c-d  /  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  27  [43a25~44] 
60c- d  /  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  22  113b- 
115b;  bk  11,  ch  13-14  131b-134a  /  Topics,  bk 
1,  ch  4-9  144b-147b;  ch  18  [io8a38-b9]  152d; 
[io8bi9-32]  153a, c;  bk  iv-vii  168b,d-211a,c 
/  Physics,  bk  1,  ch  3  [i86bi4— 34]  261c-262a  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [995b27~3i]  514b; 
ch  3  517a-518a;  bk  v,  ch  3  [ioi4b3— 13]  534d; 
ch  25  [io23b22-25]  545c;  ch  28  [io24a37~b9] 
546b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  4  [io3oa7~i4]  552d;  ch 
12-14  561b-563c;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [i043b24~i044a 
14]  568b-d;  ch  6  569d-570d;  bk  x,  ch  8-9 
585b-586c;  bk  xi,  ch  i  [ic>59b2i-io6oai] 
587d-588a  /  Soul,  bk  1,  ch  i  [402bi5-403a2] 
631d-632a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  1 
(486ai  5-487^]  7b-d  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i, 


Chapter  15:  DEFINITION 


29S 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  various  methods  of  definition  or  classifi¬ 
cation.  2b.  Definition  by  genus  and  differ¬ 
entia:  properties.) 

ch  i  [641*14-31]  163d-164a;  CH2-4  165d-168c/ 
Ethics,  bk  11,  ch  5  [no5bi9]-cH  6  [1107*9] 
351b-352c 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  i,  281a-b; 
ch  8-10  285a-286d;  ch  16-18  289c-291d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
4,  rep  1  16d-17c;  a  5,  ans  17c-18b;  q  29,  a  i, 
rep  3-4  162a-163b;  Q  50,  a  2,  rep  i  270a- 
272a;  a  4,  rep  i  273b-274b;  q  66,  a  2,  rep 
2  345d-347b;  Q  75,  a  3,  rep  i  380c-381b; 
q  76,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2,4  391a-393a;  q  77, 
a  1,  rep  7  399c-401b;  q  85,  a  3  455b-457a; 
q  88,  a  2,  rep  4  471c-472c;  part  i-ii,  q  i, 
a  3  611b-612a;  Q  18,  aa  5-1 1  697a-703a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  a  7  698c-699c;  q  23  723c-727a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  a  1  723c-724c;  q  35,  a  4  774d- 
775d;  a  8,  ans  and  rep  3  779c-780c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  a  1-2  lb-4a;  q  52,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2 
15d-18a;  q  53,  a  2,  rep  3  21a-d;  q  54  22d- 
25d  passim;  q  55,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-2 
28c-29d:  qq  60-61  49d-59d  passim;  q  71,  a 
6  llOb-lllb;  q  72  lllb-119b  passim;  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  part  ii-ii,  q  4,  a  i 
402a-403d;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  i,  ans  710a-711c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii  137a-195d 
passim,  esp  aph  20-52  150d-195d 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  154a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  iii 
254d-260a  passim,  esp  sect  6-10  255c-257a; 
ch  vi  268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect  6  269d- 
270a,  sect  30-32  276d-278b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  193a-200c;  215d-216c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  4a- 
5c;  part  1,  21d;  25c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  176c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  98a-b;  104a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  12c-13a;  25d-29a 
esp  28b-29a;  30d-31d;  207d-210b  esp  207d- 
208a  /  Descent  of  Man ,  331b-332a;  346d- 
347c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  344b-345b;  669a-671a; 
869a-871a  esp  870a-871a 

2c.  Definition  by  accidental  or  extrinsic  signs 
or  by  component  parts 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  6  [144*23-27] 
197d;  [i44b3-i45b33]  198a-199c;  ch  13  [150*1]- 
ch  14  [151*32]  204c-206a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk 
vii,  ch  12  [1038*8-30]  561d-562a 

9  Aristotle  :  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i29ob25~36] 
489d-490a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  29, 
a  1,  rep  3  162a-163b;  q  77,  a  i,  rep  7  399c- 
401b;  part  i-ii,  q  35,  a  8,  ans  and  rep  3 
779c-780c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2, 
387b-388a 


2c  to  2e 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxii,  sect  3  201b-c;  sect  9  202c-203a;  ch 
xxiii,  sect  3-10  204c-206d;  sect  14-18 
208b-209a;  sect  37  213d-214b;  bk  iii,  ch 

iii,  sect  10  256c-257a;  ch  iv,  sect  12-14 
262b-263a;  ch  vi  268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect 
2-3  268c-d,  sect  29  276b-d;  ch  xi,  sect  19- 
22  304b-305a;  sect  25  305d-306c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vii,  div 
49  471c-d 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  part  i, 
21a-22c;  25c-29d 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  95b-105b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  207a-210b  esp 
207a,  208b,  210b;  212d-215a  /  Descent  of 
Man ,  332b-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  503a-b;  742a-b 

2d.  The  appeal  to  genesis,  origin,  cause,  or 
end  in  definition 

7  Plato:  Theaetetus ,  544c-548d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  5  [143*9-12] 
196c;  ch  6  [145*19-27]  198d-199a;  [145*32- 
b2o]  199a-b;  ch  8  [i46b9-i47*n]  200c-201a; 
ch  12  [i49b3i— 39]  204b-c  /  Meteorology t,  bk 

iv,  ch  12  493d-494d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  1,  ch  3 
[983*24-29]  501c;  bk  v,  ch  28  [io24*29-b9] 
546b-c;  bk  viii,  ch  2  [1043*2-17]  567b-c; 
ch  4  [io44bi2-i5]  569b;  bk  xii,  ch  3  [1070* 
21-24]  599c  /  Soul ,  bk  1,  ch  1  [4<>3a25-b7] 
632b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [413*11-19]  643a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  445a-446d; 
bk  iii,  ch  9  [1280*25-1281*2]  477d-478c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  44, 
a  1,  rep  1  238b-239a;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  3 
611b-612a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  55, 
a  4  28c-29d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43a-d  /  No¬ 
vum  Organum,  bk  i,  .aph  63  113d-114a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  8,  schol  2 
356d-357d;  appendix  369b-372d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch 
iv,  sect  10  261b-d;  sect  16  263b-c;  ch  vi, 
sect  23  274b-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  574a-b;  579b-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  207a-229a,c  esp 
207d-208a,  211b-c,  217d-218a,  228c-d;  238b- 
239a  /  Descent  of  Man,  331b-333a  esp  332b-c; 
337a-341d  passim 

53  James:  Psychology,  742a-b 

2e.  Definition  by  reference  to  purpose  or  in¬ 
terest 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d; 
part  11,  prop  40,  schol  i  387b-388a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xviii,  sect  7  174d-175a;  ch  xxii,  sect  5-7 
201d-202b;  bk  iii,  ch  v  263d-268a  passim, 
esp  sect  6  264c-265a;  ch  vi,  sect  30  276d- 
277b  esp  277a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1942-1945]  46a 


3  to  5 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  27c-29a  passim, 
csp  29a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  184a  186a;  314a  b;  668a- 
671a 

3.  The  grammatical  or  verbal  aspects  of  defini¬ 

tion 

7  Plato:  Charmides ,  6b-d/  Cratylus  85a-  114a, c 
/  Theaetetus ,  544d-545b  /  Laws ,  bk  x,  763c-d 
/  Seventh  Letter ,  809c-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  i  5a  b;  ch  5  [3s 
32-b9]  7c- d  /  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch 
13  [97^7—39]  133 b-c;  ch  14  [98*13-23]  133d- 
134a  /  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [ioib37-io2an] 
144d;  ch  15  149d-152a;  ch  18  [io8ai7— 37] 
152b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [123*27-29]  171d;  ch  6 
[127^-6]  177a;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [i39bi2— 18]  192b- 
c;  ch  2-14  192c-206d  passim,  esp  ch  io-ii 
202b-203d;  bk  vii  206b,d-211a,c  passim;  bk 
viii,  ch  3  [i58b8-i59a2]  215b-c  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  iv,  ch  4  525a-528b;  ch  7  [1012*22-24] 
532b;  bk  vii,  ch  4-5  552b-554a;  ch  15 
[1040*9-14]  564a;  bk  x,  ch  i  [ic>52bi-i5] 
578d-579a;  bk  xi,  ch  5  590a-d  /  Soul ,  bk  1, 
ch  1  [402^-8]  631c-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q 
4,  a  1,  ans  402a-403d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  56b-57c;  part 
iv,  269b-c;  270a-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  23c-24a;  xm,  26b-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxii,  sect  3-10  201b-203c  passim;  bk  iii,  ch 
iii,  sect  10  256c-257a;  ch  iv,  sect  6-7  260d; 
ch  v,  sect  4  264b;  sect  io-ii  266b-d;  ch  vi, 
sect  32  277c-278b 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  119b-120b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  82a-c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  4a- 
5d;  part  1, 10a;  21a-22c;  25c-29d 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  361a- 
362c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  171b-172a 

4.  The  search  for  definitions  and  the  methods 

of  defending  them 

7  Plato:  Charmides ,  4a-13d  /  Laches ,  31c-37c  / 
Meno  174a-190a,c  esp  174a-179b  /  Republic , 
bk  i-iv  295a-356a  esp  bk  iv,  346a-355a  /  The - 
aetetus  512a-550a,c  /  Sophist ,  552b-579d  / 
Statesman  580a-608d 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  i-io 
122b,d-128d;  ch  13-14  131b-134a  /  Topics ,  bk 
i-vii  143a-211a,c  esp  bk  i,  ch  4-9  144b-147b  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [987s! 9-27]  505b;  ch 
6  [987bi-io]  505c;  [987b3o— 33]  506a;  bk  ix, 
ch  6  [1048^5^9]  573c-574a;  bk  xiii,  ch  4 
[io78bi8-32]  610b-c  /  Sow/,  bk  i  631a-641d 
esp  ch  1  631a-632d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [4i2ai]-cH  4 
[4 1 5a23]  642a-645c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  2-4 
165d-168c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  hi,  sect  ii  262a-b 


299 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  4  11a  c  / 
Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  6  231b  d  /  Sixth  En- 
nead ,  tr  iii,  cii  6  10  284a  286d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  io, 
a  1  40d-41d;  q  29,  a  i  162a  163b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  'Theologica,  part  i  ii,  q  49, 
aa  1-2  lb  4a;  Q  55,  a  4  28c  29d;  q  71,  a  6 
1 10b-  111b;  q  90  205a-208b;  part  ii-ii,  q  4, 
a  i  402a-403d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  518d-519a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  third  day, 
200a-203d  csp  200a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  61b  c  /  No¬ 
vum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  59  112b  c;  apii  105 
128b-c;  bk  ii,  aph  10-20  140c-153a;  apii  24-25 
154c-155d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  23c-24a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2 
387b-388b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  xi, 
sect  24  305b-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii  470 d- 
478a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  330a-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  215d-216d  /  Practical 
Reason ,  293c-294b 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  119b-120b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  241d-242a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii, 
683d-684c;  690b 

5.  Definition  and  demonstration:  definitions  as 
principles  and  as  conclusions 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  31  64b- 
65a;  ch  43  68d  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch 
2  [72*19-24]  98d;  ch  8  [75^1-32]  104a;  ch 
io  [76^5— 77*4]  105c-d;  ch  22  113b-115b; 
ch  33  [88b3o-89ai]  121b-c;  [89*17— b5]  121d- 
122a, c;  bk  ii,  ch  3-10  123c-128d  /  Topics,  bk 
vi,  ch  4  [141*26-32]  194c;  bk  vii,  ch  3  208a- 
209b;  ch  5  [i54*23-bi3]  209d-210a;  [155*17- 
23]  210d;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [158*31-159*2]  214d- 
215c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  9  [992b30~993*i] 
511b;  bk  in,  ch  2  [996b8-2i]  515a-b;  bk  iv, 
ch  4  525a-528b;  ch  7  [ioi2ai8-24]  532a-b; 
ch  8  [ioi2b5-8]  532c;  bk  xi,  ch  5  590a-d; 
bk  xm,  ch  4  [io78bi7~3o]  610b-c  /  Soul, 
bk  1,  ch  1  [402*10-23]  631b;  [402bi5-403a2] 
631d-632a;  ch  3  [407*22-30]  636d-637a;  ch  5 
[409*3i-bi8]  639b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [413*11-19] 
643a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[639b7-642b5]  161d-165c 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  2  306a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i, 
a  7,  rep  1  7a-c;  q  2,  a  1,  rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  2, 
rep  2  lld-12c;  q  3,  a  5,  ans  17c-18b;  q  17, 
a  3,  rep  1-2  102d-103c;  q  58,  a  5  303c-304c; 
q  85,  a  6  458d-459c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56b-60c;  65c-d 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  128c- 
129a 


Chapter  15:  DEFINITION 


300 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  Definition  and  demonstration :  definitions  as 
principles  and  as  conclusions .) 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  i  171a-172a  /  Geometrical 
Demonstration ,  430b-434b  passim,  esp  430b, 
431b-432a;  442a-443b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  hi,  ch  ix, 
sect  15-16  288d-289c;  ch  xi,  sect  15-17 
303b-304a;  bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  20,  319b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
131  508d-509a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  179d-182b;  211c-218d  esp 
215d-216d  /  Practical  Reason ,  293c-294b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  2  9b- 
10a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  690b 

54  Freud:  Instincts ,  412a-b 

6.  The  character  of  definitions  in  diverse  dis¬ 
ciplines 

6a.  The  formulation  of  definitions  in  physics, 
mathematics,  and  metaphysics 

7  Plato:  Seventh  Letter ,  809c-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  4  [i4ia26-b24] 
194c-195a;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [1 53a6— 1 1]  208a-b  / 
Physics ,  bk  1,  ch  9  [i92a25~b2]  268c-d;  bk 
ii,  ch  2  270a-271a;  bk  hi,  ch  1-2  278a-279c; 
ch  6  [206^3-207^4]  285b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  1-5 
287a-292c;  ch  ii  298c-300a  /  Meteorology , 
bk  iv,  ch  12  493d-494d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  iv, 
ch  4  525a-528b;  bk  v,  ch  i-bk  vi,  ch  i 
533a-548c;  bk  ix,  ch  6  [io48a25~b9]  573c- 
574a;  bk  xi,  ch  5  590a-d;  ch  7  592b-593a; 
bk  xiii,  ch  2  [io77bi]-CH  3  [io78a32]  608d- 
609d  /  Sold ,  bk  1,  ch  i-bk  11,  ch  3  631a-645b 
esp  bk  1,  ch  1  631a-632d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  2-4 
165d-168c  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [i098a2o-b8] 
343c-344a 

11  Euclid:  Elements ,  bk  i,  definitions  la-2a 
esp  1-2,4,10  la,  15  lb,  23  2a;  bk  ii,  defini¬ 
tions  30a;  bk  iii,  definitions  41a-b  esp 
2-3  41a;  bk  iv,  definitions  67a-b;  bk  v, 
definitions  81a-82a  esp  3-7  81a-b;  bk  vi, 
definitions  99a;  bk  vii,  definitions  127a- 
128a  esp  1-2  127a,  11-12,20  127b;  bk  x,  def¬ 
initions  1 191a-b  esp  1,3  191a;  definitions  ii 
229a;  definitions  iii  264b;  bk  xi,  defini¬ 
tions  301a-302b  esp  14  301b,  18,21  302a 

11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder ,  bk  i,  def¬ 
initions  404a  /  Conoids  and  Spheroids ,  452a- 
454a  passim;  definitions  455a-b  /  Spirals , 
definitions  490a  /  Equilibrium  of  Planes,  bk 
ii,  511a  /  Sand-Rectyner,  524a-b  /  Quadrature 
of  the  Parabola,  def  534b-535a 

11  Apollonius:  Conics,  bk  i,  first  defini¬ 
tions  604a-b  esp  1  604a;  second  definitions 
626a 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  814b-c 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  v,  986b-1004a  passim 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  i,  281a-b 


6  to  6b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i, 
a  7,  rep  1  7a-c;  q  2,  a  2,  rep  2  lld-12c;  q  3, 
a  5,  ANS  17c-18b;  q  10,  a  1  40d-41d;  q  29, 
a  1  162a-163b;  q  75,  a  4,  ans  381b-382a;  q 
85,  a  1,  rep  2  451c-453c;  a  8,  rep  2  460b- 
461b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  56b;  part  iv, 
269b-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day, 
142d-143a;  third  day,  197b-c;  200a-203d 

30  Bacon  :  Advancement  of  Learning ,  43a-d 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  xii,  23c-24a;  xiii,  26b-c  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  128c-129a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b- 
372d;  part  11,  prop  40,  schol  1-2  387b-388b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  1  171a-172a/  Vacuum,  372b- 
373b;  376b-377a  /  Geometrical  Demonstra¬ 
tion,  430b-434b  passim,  esp  430b-431b 

34  Newton  '.Principles,  definitions  5a-13a  /  Op¬ 
tics,  bk  1,  379a-380b 

35  Hume  '.Human  Understanding,  sectvii,  div  48- 
49  470d-471d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15c-16c;  17d-19a;  68a- 
69c;  215d-217a;  245c-248d 

6b.  The  use  of  definition  in  speculative  philos¬ 
ophy  and  empirical  science 

7  Plato:  Theaetetus ,  544c-549d  /  Statesman, 
595b-c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  13-14 
131b-134a  /  Soul,  bk  i  631a-641d  esp  ch  i 
631a-632d;  bk  ii,  ch  1-3  642a-645b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  1-4 
161a-168c  passim  /  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[i29<)b25-4o]  489d-490a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  ii,  43c-44d 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day, 
200a-203d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  63  113d- 
114a;  bk  11,  aph  10-20  140c-153a;  aph  48 
179d-188b 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  xii,  23c-24a;  xiii,  26b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  40,  sciiol  1-2 

387b-388b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  372b-373b;  376b-377a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  definitions  5a-13a/  Op¬ 
tics,  bk  1,  379a-380b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxiii,  sect  3-10  204c-206d;  sect  14-18  208b- 
209a;  sect  37  213d-214b;  bkiii,  ch  ix,  sect 
15-17  288d-290a;  ch  xi,  sect  10  302b;  sect 
19-25  304b-306c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ii,  div 
17,  457b, d  [fn  1];  sect  vii,  div  48-49  470d- 
471d;  sect  viii,  div  74  484a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15c-16c;  215d-216d; 
243c-244c  /  Practical  Reason,  293c-294b  /  In¬ 
tro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  388a-c  /  Judgement, 
603b-d 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  119b-120b 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i,  10a- 
b;  21a-22c;  25c-29d 


6c 

45  Four i  ur  :  Theory  of  Heat,  184a-187b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  361a  d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  2 
9b-10a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  it.  690b; 
694b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  3b-4a;  869a-871a  csp  870a- 
871a 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  400d-401a  /  Instincts, 
412a-413b 

6c.  The  role  of  definitions  in  practical  or  moral 
philosophy  and  the  social  sciences 

7  Plato:  Phaedrtis,  120a-c  /  Seventh  Letter, 
809C'810b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  i-bk  ii,  ch  6 
339a-352d  passim;  bk  x,  ch  i-8  426a-434a  / 
Politics,  bk  i,  ch  i-2  445a-446d;  bk  iii,  ch 
i-6  471b,d-476c;  ch  9  [i28oa25~i28ia2]  477d- 
478c 

12  Aurelius;  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  21-24 
524b-528c  esp  ch  21  524b-525a,  ch  24  528b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49 
la-6a;  q  55,  a  4  28c-29d;  Q  71,  a  6  110b- 


301 

lllb;  q  90  205a  208b;  part  ii  ii,  q  4,  a  i 
402a  403d 

23  I  Iobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  57d-58a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  xi, 
sect  17  303d-304a;  bk  iv,  gii  iii,  sect  20, 
319b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  mi,  div 
48-49  470d-471d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  330a-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  271a 
c;  280d-281a  /  Practical  Reason,  297a-3I4d; 
330d-331a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386b- 
d;  390b,d-391a  /  Science  of  Right,  398c-399c 

43  Federalist:  number  47, 119b  120b;  number 
39  125a-128b  passim,  esp  125b  c;  number  42, 
137a  b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  469a- b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  2  9b- 
10a  /  Philosophy  of  history',  intro,  158a-162a 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  6c-lld  passim;  178d-179c 
passim;  265a-266a;  267c-d 

51  Tolstoy':  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  365a- b; 
epilogue  ii,  683d-684a;  690b 

53  James:  Psychology,  887a-888a 


Chapter  15;  DEFINITION 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  linguistic  aspects  of  definition  and  the  general  theory  of  the  meaning  of  words,  see 
Language  ia;  Sign  and  Sy'mbol  4a. 

The  logical  aspects  of  definition,  see  Idea  4a. 

Other  discussions  of  the  object  of  definition  and  the  problem  of  essences  or  universal,  see 
Being  8c;  Nature  4a;  Universal  and  Particular  2a-2c. 

The  notions  of  genus  and  differentia,  species  and  property,  see  Being  8d;  Idea  4^3); 

Nature  ia(i);  Relation  53(4);  Universal  and  Particular  5b. 

Other  considerations  of  indefinable  terms,  see  Infinity  2c;  Principle  2a (3);  and  for  the 
indefinability  of  individuals,  see  Universal  and  Particular  4c. 

The  use  of  definitions  as  principles  in  reasoning  or  proof,  and  for  the  problem  of  demonstrat¬ 
ing  definitions,  see  Principle  2a(2);  Reasoning  5b(2). 

The  discussion  of  matters  related  to  the  truth  or  falsity  of  definitions,  see  Idea  6f;  Truth 
3b(0- 

The  role  of  definitions  in  dialectic  and  science,  and  in  the  various  sciences,  see  Dialectic 
22.(2),  2b(i);  Mathematics  3a;  Matter  4b;  Metaphysics  2b;  Philosophy  3b~3c; 
Physics  2a;  Science  4a. 


302 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Aquinas.  On  Being  and  Essence ,  ch  2-3 
Hobbes.  Concerning  Body ,  part  i,  ch  2 
Spinoza.  Correspondence ,  ix 
Locke.  Conduct  of  the  Understanding 
Kant.  Introduction  to  Logic,  vm 
Hegel.  Science  of  Logic ,  vol  i,  bk  ii,  sect  i,  ch  i 
J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic,  bk  i,  ch  7-8;  bk  4, 
ch  7-8 

II. 

Quintilian.  Institutio  Oratoria  ( Institutes  of  Ora¬ 
tory ),  bk  vii,  ch  3 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism ,  bk 
ii 

John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philo sophicus  Tho - 
misticus ,  Ars  Logic  a,  part  ii,  qq  6-12 
Arnauld.  Logic  or  the  Art  of  Thinking,  part  i, 
ch  12-14;  part  iv,  ch  4-5 
Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing ,  bk  hi,  ch  3 

T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of 
Man ,  1 

J.  Mill.  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Human 
Mind ,  ch  8 

W.  Hamilton.  Lectures  on  Metaphysics  and  Logic , 
vol  11  (24) 


Whewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences , 

vol  1,  BK  VIII 

SlGWART.  Logic ,  PART  I,  CH  I,  SECT  44;  PART  III,  CH  I, 
SECT  74 

Jevons.  The  Principles  of  Science ,  ch  30 

- .  Studies  in  Deductive  Logic ,  ch  1-2,  7 

Venn.  Principles  of  Empirical  or  Inductive  Logic , 
ch  11-13 

Poincare.  Science  and  Method ,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
Whitehead  and  Russell.  Principia  Mathematica , 

INTRO,  CH  I,  esp  pp  1 1— 19;  PART  I,  SECT  A,  esp 

PP  9I_94 

B.  Russell.  Principles  of  Mathematics ,  part  i 

- .  Introduction  to  Mathematical  Philosophy ,  ch 

13, 16-17 

Whitehead.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  the  Principles  of 
Natural  Knowledge ,  ch  8-13 

- .  The  Concept  of  Nature ,  ch  4 

W.  E.  Johnson.  Logic ,  part  i,  ch  7-8 

Ogden  and  Richards.  The  Meaning  of  Meaning 

Dubislav.  Die  Definition 

Maritain.  The  Degrees  of  Knowledge ,  ch  3 

Carnap.  The  Logical  Syntax  of  Language ,  part  i, 

SECT  8;  PART  II,  SECT  22;  PART  III,  SECT  29 

Dewey.  Logic ,  the  Theory  of  Inquiry ,  ch  13-14, 
16-18,  20. 

Dewey  and  Bentley.  Knowing  and  the  Known , 
ch  7 


Chapter  1 6:  DEMOCRACY 


INTRODUCTION 


OF  all  the  traditional  names  for  forms  of 
government,  “democracy”  has  the  liveli¬ 
est  currency  today.  Yet  like  all  the  others,  it 
has  a  long  history  in  the  literature  of  political 
thought  and  a  career  of  shifting  meanings.  How 
radically  the  various  conceptions  of  democracy 
differ  may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that,  in  one 
of  its  meanings,  democracy  flourished  in  the 
Greek  city-states  as  early  as  the  fifth  century 
b.c.;  while  in  another,  democracy  only  began 
to  exist  in  recent  times  or  perhaps  does  not  yet 
exist  anywhere  in  the  world. 

In  our  minds  democracy  is  inseparably  con¬ 
nected  with  constitutional  government.  We 
tend  to  think  of  despotism  or  dictatorship  as  its 
only  opposites  or  enemies.  That  is  how  the  ma¬ 
jor  political  issue  of  our  day  is  understood.  But 
as  recently  as  the  1 8th  century,  some  of  the 
American  constitutionalists  prefer  a  republican 
form  of  government  to  democracy;  and  at  other 
times,  both  ancient  and  modern,  oligarchy  or 
aristocracy,  rather  than  monarchy ordespotism, 
is  the  major  alternative.  “Democracy”  has  even 
stood  for  the  lawless  rule  of  the  mob — either  it¬ 
self  a  kind  of  tyranny  or  the  immediate  pre¬ 
cursor  of  tyranny. 

Throughout  all  these  shifts  in  meaning  and 
value,  the  word  “democracy”  preserves  certain 
constant  political  connotations.  Democracy  ex¬ 
ists,  according  to  Montesquieu,  “when  the  body 
of  the  people  is  possessed  of  the  supreme  power.” 
As  the  root  meaning  of  the  word  indicates,  de¬ 
mocracy  is  the  “rule  of  the  people.”  While  there 
may  be,  and  in  fact  often  has  been,  a  difference  of 
opinion  with  respect  to  the  meaning  of  “the 
people,”  this  notion  has  been  traditionally  asso¬ 
ciated  with  the  doctrine  of  popular  sovereignty, 
which  makes  the  political  community  as  such 
the  origin  and  basis  of  political  authority.  In  the 
development  of  the  democratic  tradition,  par¬ 
ticularly  in  modern  times,  this  has  been  accom¬ 


panied  by  the  elaboration  of  safeguards  for  the 
rights  of  man  to  assure  that  government  actu¬ 
ally  functions  for  the  people,  and  not  merely  for 
one  group  of  them. 

Although  they  are  essential  parts  of  democ¬ 
racy,  neither  popular  sovereignty  nor  the  safe¬ 
guarding  of  natural  rights  provides  the  specific 
characteristic  of  democracy,  since  both  are  com¬ 
patible  with  any  other  just  form  of  government. 
The  specifically  democratic  element  is  apparent 
from  the  fact  that  throughout  the  many  shifts 
of  meaning  which  democracy  has  undergone, 
the  common  thread  is  the  notion  of  political 
power  in  the  hands  of  the  many  rather  than  the 
few  or  the  one.  Thus  at  the  very  beginning  of 
democratic  government,  we  find  Pericles  calling 
Athens  a  democracy  because  “its administration 
favours  the  many  instead  of  the  few.”  Close  to 
our  own  day,  Mill  likewise  holds  that  democ¬ 
racy  is  “the  government  of  the  whole  people  by 
the  whole  people”  in  which  “the  majority  .  .  . 
will  outvote  and  prevail.” 

According  as  the  many  exercise  legal  power 
as  citizens  or  merely  actual  power  as  a  mob,  de¬ 
mocracy  is  aligned  with  or  against  constitution¬ 
al  government.  The  quantitative  meaning  of 
“many”  can  vary  from  more  than  the  few  to  all 
or  something  approximating  all,  and  with  this 
variance  the  same  constitution  may  be  at  one 
time  regarded  as  oligarchical  or  aristocratic,  and 
at  another  as  democratic.  The  way  in  which  the 
many  who  are  citizens  exercise  their  power — 
either  directly  or  through  representatives — oc¬ 
casions  the  1 8th  century  distinction  between  a 
democracy  and  a  republic,  though  this  verbal 
ambiguity  can  be  easily  avoided  by  using  the 
phrases  “direct  democracy”  and  “representa¬ 
tive  democracy,”  as  was  sometimes  done  by  the 
writers  of  The  Federalist  and  their  American 
contemporaries. 

These  last  two  points — the  extension  of  the 
303 


304 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


franchise  and  a  system  of  representation — mark 
the  chief  differences  between  ancient  and  con¬ 
temporary  institutions  of  democracy.  Today 
constitutional  democracy  tends  to  be  represent¬ 
ative,  and  the  grant  of  citizenship  under  a  dem¬ 
ocratic  constitution  tends  toward  universal  suf¬ 
frage.  That  is  why  we  no  longer  contrast  democ¬ 
racy  and  republic.  That  is  why  even  the  most 
democratic  Greek  constitutions  may  seem  un¬ 
democratic — oligarchical  or  aristocratic — to  us. 

To  the  extent  that  democracy,  ancient  or 
modern,  is  conceived  as  a  lawful  form  of  govern¬ 
ment,  it  has  elements  in  common  with  other 
forms  of  lawful  government  which,  for  one  rea¬ 
son  or  another,  may  not  be  democratic.  The  sig¬ 
nificance  of  these  common  elements — the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  constitutionality  and  the  status  of  citi¬ 
zenship — will  be  assumed  here.  They  are  dis¬ 
cussed  in  the  chapters  on  Constitution  and 
Citizen.  The  general  theory  of  the  forms  of 
government  is  treated  in  the  chapter  on  Gov¬ 
ernment,  and  the  two  forms  most  closely  re¬ 
lated  to  democracy,  in  the  chapters  on  Aristoc¬ 
racy  and  Oligarchy. 

The  evaluations  of  democracy  are  even  more 
various  than  its  meanings.  It  has  been  denounced 
as  an  extreme  perversion  of  government.  It  has 
been  grouped  with  other  good,  or  other  bad, 
forms  of  government,  and  accorded  the  faint 
praise  of  being  called  either  the  most  tolerable 
of  bad  governments  or  the  least  efficient  among 
acceptable  forms.  It  has  been  held  up  as  the  po¬ 
litical  ideal,  the  only  perfectly  just  state — that 
paragon  of  justice  which  has  always  been, 
whether  recognized  or  not,  the  goal  of  political 
progress. 

Sometimes  the  same  writer  will  express  di¬ 
vergent  views.  Plato,  for  example,  in  the  States' 
man,  claims  that  democracy  has  “a  twofold 
meaning”  according  as  it  involves  “ruling  with 
law  or  without  law.”  Finding  it  “in  every  re¬ 
spect  weak  and  unable  to  do  either  any  great 
good  or  any  great  evil,”  he  concludes  that  it  is 
“the  worst  of  all  lawful  governments,  and  the 
best  of  all  lawless  ones.”  The  rule  of  the  many  is 
least  efficient  for  either  good  or  evil.  But  in  the 
Republic,  he  places  democracy  at  only  one  re¬ 
move  from  tyranny.  On  the  ground  that  “the 
excessive  increase  of  anything  often  causes  a  re¬ 
action  in  the  opposite  direction,”  tyranny  is 


said  to  “arise  naturally  out  of  democracy,  and 
the  most  aggravated  form  of  tyranny  and  slav¬ 
ery  out  of  the  most  extreme  form  of  liberty.” 

Similarly,  Aristotle,  in  the  Politics,  calls  de¬ 
mocracy  “the  most  tolerable”  of  the  three  per¬ 
verted  forms  of  government,  in  contrast  to  oli¬ 
garchy,  which  he  thinks  is  only  “a  little  better” 
than  tyranny,  “the  worst  of  governments.”  Yet 
he  also  notes  that,  among  existing  governments, 
“there  are  generally  thought  to  be  two  princi¬ 
pal  forms — democracy  and  oligarchy,  .  .  .  and 
the  rest  are  only  variations  of  these.”  His  own 
treatment  conforms  with  this  observation.  He 
devotes  the  central  portion  of  his  Politics  to  the 
analysis  of  oligarchy  and  democracy.  In  his  view 
they  are  equal  and  opposite  in  their  injustice, 
and  to  him  both  seem  capable  of  degenerating 
into  despotism  and  tyranny. 

Among  the  political  philosophers  of  modern 
times  a  certain  uniformity  of  treatment  seems 
to  prevail  in  the  context  of  otherwise  divergent 
theories.  Writers  like  Hobbes,  Locke,  and 
Rousseau,  or  Machiavelli,  Montesquieu,  and 
Kant  differ  in  many  and  profound  respects.  But 
they  classify  the  forms  of  government  in  much 
the  same  fashion.  As  Hobbes  expresses  it,  “when 
the  representative  is  one  man,  then  is  the  com¬ 
monwealth  a  monarchy;  when  an  assembly  of  all 
that  will  come  together,  then  it  is  a  democracy, 
or  popular  commonwealth;  when  an  assembly 
of  a  part  only,  then  it  is  called  an  aristocracy.” 
Though  Hobbes  favors  monarchy  and  Montes¬ 
quieu  either  aristocracy  or  democracy,  these 
writers  do  not  make  the  choice  among  the  three 
traditional  forms  a  significant  expression  of 
their  own  political  theories.  For  them  the  more 
important  choice  is  presented  by  other  alterna¬ 
tives:  for  Hobbes  between  absolute  and  limited 
government;  for  Montesquieu  and  Locke,  be¬ 
tween  government  by  law  and  despotism;  for 
Rousseau  and  Kant,  between  a  republic  and  a 
monarchy. 

The  authors  of  The  Federalist  definitely 
show  their  preference  for  “popular  govern¬ 
ment”  as  opposed  to  monarchy,  aristocracy,  or 
oligarchy.  They  usually  refer  to  it  as  a  “repub¬ 
lic,”  by  which  they  mean  “a  government  which 
derives  all  its  powers  directly  or  indirectly  from 
the  great  body  of  the  people,  and  is  administered 
by  persons  holding  their  offices  during  pleasure, 
for  a  limited  period,  or  during  good  behavior.” 


Chapter  16:  DEMOCRACY 


Alexander  Hamilton  and  others  involved  in  the 
American  constitutional  debates,  as  for  example 
James  Wilson,  occasionally  call  this  system  a 
“representativedemocracy,”  but  in  The  Federal¬ 
ist  a  republic  is  sharply  differentiated  from  a 
democracy.  The  “great  points  of  difference,” 
however,  turn  out  to  be  only  “the  delegation 
of  the  government  (in  a  republic)  to  a  small 
number  of  citizens  elected  by  the  rest,”  and  the 
“greater  number  of  citizens,  and  greater  sphere 
of  country”  to  which  a  republic  may  extend. 
The  difference,  as  already  noted,  is  best  ex¬ 
pressed  in  the  words  “representative”  and  “di¬ 
rect”  democracy. 

In  Mill's  Representative  Government  we  find 
democracy  identified  with  the  ideal  state.  “The 
ideally  best  form  of  government,”  he  writes,  “is 
that  in  which  the  sovereignty,  or  supreme  con¬ 
trolling  power  in  the  last  resort,  is  vested  in  the 
entire  aggregate  of  the  community,  every  citi¬ 
zen  not  only  having  a  voice  in  the  exercise  of 
that  ultimate  sovereignty,  but  being,  at  least  oc¬ 
casionally,  called  on  to  take  an  actual  part  in  the 
government,  by  the  personal  discharge  of  some 
public  function,  local  or  general.”  Though  Mill 
recognizes  the  infirmities  of  democracy  and 
though  he  readily  concedes  that  it  may  not  be 
the  best  government  for  all  peoples  under  all 
circumstances,  his  argument  for  its  superiority 
to  all  other  forms  of  government  remains  sub¬ 
stantially  unqualified. 

In  Mill’s  construction  of  the  democratic  ideal 
as  providing  liberty  and  equality  for  all,  the  es¬ 
sential  distinction  from  previous  conceptions  lies 
in  the  meaning  of  the  word  all.  The  republicans 
of  the  1 8th  century,  in  their  doctrines  of  popu¬ 
lar  sovereignty  and  natural  rights,  understood 
citizenship  in  terms  of  equality  of  status  and 
conceived  liberty  in  terms  of  a  man’s  having  a 
voice  in  his  own  government.  The  ancients,  see¬ 
ing  that  men  could  be  free  and  equal  members 
of  a  political  community  only  when  they  lived 
as  citizens  under  the  rule  of  law,  recognized  that 
the  democratic  constitution  alone  bestowed 
such  equality  upon  all  men  not  born  slaves. 
But  generally  neither  the  ancients  nor  the  1 8th 
century  republicans  understood  liberty  and 
equality  for  all  men  to  require  the  abolition  of 
slavery,  the  emancipation  of  women  from  polit¬ 
ical  subjection,  or  the  eradication  of  all  con- 


305 

stitutional  discriminations  based  on  wealth,  race, 
or  previous  condition  of  servitude. 

With  Mill,  all  means  every  human  person 
without  regard  to  the  accidents  of  birth  or  for¬ 
tune.  “There  ought  to  be  no  pariahs  in  a  full- 
grown  and  civilized  nation,”  he  writes,  “no  per¬ 
sons  disqualified,  except  through  their  own  de¬ 
fault.”  Under  the  latter  condition,  he  would 
withhold  the  franchise  from  infants,  idiots,  or 
criminals  (including  the  criminally  indigent), 
but  with  these  exceptions  he  would  make  suf¬ 
frage  universal.  He  sums  up  his  argument  by 
claiming  that  “it  is  a  personal  injustice  to  with¬ 
hold  from  any  one,  unless  for  the  prevention  of 
greater  evils,  the  ordinary  privilege  of  having 
his  voice  reckoned  in  the  disposal  of  affairs  in 
which  he  has  the  same  interest  as  other  people,” 
and  whoever  “has  no  vote,  and  no  prospect  of 
obtaining  it,  will  either  be  a  permanent  malcon¬ 
tent,  or  will  feel  as  one  whom  the  general  affairs 
of  society  do  not  concern.”  But  it  should  be 
added  that  for  Mill  the  franchise  is  not  merely  a 
privilege  or  even  a  right;  “it  is,”  he  says, 
“strictly  a  matter  of  duty.”  How  the  voter  uses 
the  ballot  “has  no  more  to  do  with  his  personal 
wishes  than  the  verdict  of  a  juryman.  ...  He  is 
bound  to  give  it  according  to  his  best  and  most 
conscientious  opinion  of  the  public  good.  Who¬ 
ever  has  any  other  idea  of  it  is  unfit  to  have  the 
suffrage.” 

The  notion  of  universal  suffrage  raises  at  once 
the  question  of  the  economic  conditions  pre¬ 
requisite  to  the  perfection  of  political  democra¬ 
cy.  Can  men  exercise  the  political  freedom  of 
citizenship  without  freedom  from  economic  de¬ 
pendence  on  the  will  of  other  men  ?  It  was  com¬ 
monly  thought  by  i8th  century  republicans 
that  they  could  not.  “A  power  over  a  man’s  sub¬ 
sistence,”  Hamilton  declares,  “amounts  to  a 
power  over  his  will.”  On  that  basis  it  was  urged 
by  many  during  the  Philadelphia  convention 
that  a  property  qualification  was  necessary  for 
suffrage. 

Kant  also  argues  that  suffrage  “presupposes  . 
the  independence  or  self-sufficiency  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  citizen.”  Because  apprentices,  servants, 
minors,  women,  and  the  like  do  not  maintain 
themselves,  each  “according  to  his  own  industry, 
but  as  it  is  arranged  by  others,”  he  claims  that 
they  are  “mere  subsidiaries  of  the  Common¬ 
wealth  and  not  active  independent  members  of 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


306 

it,”  being  “of  necessity  commanded  and  pro¬ 
tected  by  others.”  For  this  reason,  he  concludes, 
they  are  “passive,”  not  “active,”  citizens  and 
can  be  rightfully  deprived  of  the  franchise. 

For  political  democracy  to  be  realized  in  prac¬ 
tice,  more  may  be  required  than  the  abolition 
of  poll  taxes  and  other  discriminations  based  on 
wealth.  In  the  opinion  of  Karl  Marx,  the  “bat¬ 
tle  for  democracy”  will  not  be  won,  nor  even 
the  “first  step”  taken  towards  it,  until  “the 
working  class  raises  the  proletariat  to  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  ruling  class.”  Quite  apart  from  the  mer¬ 
its  of  the  revolutionary  political  philosophy 
which  Marx  erects,  his  views,  and  those  of  other 
social  reformers  of  the  19th  century,  have  made 
it  a  central  issue  that  democracy  be  conceived  in 
social  and  economic  terms  as  well  as  political. 
Otherwise,  they  insist,  what  is  called  “democ¬ 
racy”  will  permit,  and  may  even  try  to  con¬ 
done,  social  inequalities  and  economic  injustices 
which  vitiate  political  liberty. 

There  is  one  other  condition  of  equality  which 
the  status  of  citizenship  demands.  This  is  equal¬ 
ity  of  educational  opportunity.  According  to 
Mill,  it  is  “almost  a  self-evident  axiom  that  the 
State  should  require  and  compel  the  education, 
up  to  a  certain  standard,  of  every  human  being 
who  is  born  its  citizen.”  All  men  may  not  be 
endowed  with  the  same  native  abilities  or  tal¬ 
ents,  but  all  born  with  enough  intelligence  to 
become  citizens  deserve  the  sort  of  education 
which  fits  them  for  the  life  of  political  freedom. 
Quantitatively,  this  means  a  system  of  educa¬ 
tion  as  universal  as  the  franchise;  and  as  much 
for  every  individual  as  he  can  take,  both  in 
youth  and  adult  life.  Qualitatively,  this  means 
liberal  education  rather  than  vocational  train¬ 
ing,  though  in  contemporary  controversy  this 
point  is  still  disputed. 

The  way  in  which  it  recognizes  and  discharges 
its  educational  responsibility  tests  the  sincerity 
of  modern  democracy.  No  other  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  has  a  comparable  burden,  for  no  other 
calls  all  men  to  citizenship.  In  such  a  govern¬ 
ment,  Montesquieu  declares,  “the  whole  power 
of  education  is  required.”  Whereas  despotism 
may  be  preserved  by  fear  and  a  monarchy  by  a 
system  of  honor,  a  democracy  depends  on  civic 
virtue.  For  where  “government  is  intrusted  to 
private  citizens,”  it  requires  “love  of  the  laws 


and  of  the  country,”  and  this,  according  to 
Montesquieu,  is  generally  “conducive  to  purity 
of  morals.” 

Universal  schooling  by  itself  is  not  sufficient 
for  this  purpose.  Democracy  also  needs  what 
Mill  calls  the  “school  of  public  spirit.”  It  is  only 
by  participating  in  the  functions  of  govern¬ 
ment  that  men  can  become  competent  as  citi¬ 
zens.  By  engaging  in  civic  activities,  a  man  “is 
made  to  feel  himself  one  of  the  public,  and 
whatever  is  for  their  benefit  to  be  for  his  bene¬ 
fit.”  The  “moral  part  of  the  instruction  afforded 
by  the  participation  of  the  private  citizen,  if 
even  rarely,  in  public  functions,”  results,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Mill,  in  a  man’s  being  able  “to 
weigh  interests  not  his  own;  to  be  guided,  in 
case  of  conflicting  claims,  by  another  rule  than 
his  private  partialities;  to  apply,  at  every  turn, 
principles  and  maxims  which  have  for  their 
reason  of  existence  the  common  good.”  If 
national  affairs  cannot  afford  an  opportunity 
for  every  citizen  to  take  an  active  part  in  govern¬ 
ment,  then  that  must  be  achieved  through  local 
government,  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  Mill 
advocates  the  revitalization  of  the  latter. 

There  are  other  problems  peculiar  to  modern 
democracy.  Because  of  the  size  of  the  territory 
and  population  of  the  national  state,  democratic 
government  has  necessarily  become  representa¬ 
tive.  Representation,  according  to  The  Federal - 
ist ,  becomes  almost  indispensable  when  the 
people  is  too  large  and  too  dispersed  for  assem¬ 
bly  or  for  continuous,  as  well  as  direct,  partici¬ 
pation  in  national  affairs.  The  pure  democracy 
which  the  Federalists  attribute  to  the  Greek 
city-states  may  still  be  appropriate  for  local 
government  of  the  town-meeting  variety,  but 
for  the  operations  of  federal  or  national  govern¬ 
ment,  the  Federalists  think  the  republican  in¬ 
stitutions  of  Rome  a  better  model  to  follow. 

The  Federalists  have  another  reason  for  es¬ 
pousing  representative  government.  The  “mor¬ 
tal  disease”  of  popular  government,  in  their 
view,  is  the  “violence  of  faction”  which  decides 
measures  “not  according  to  the  rules  of  justice 
and  the  rights  of  the  minor  party,  but  by  the 
superior  force  of  an  interested  and  overbearing 
majority.”  Believing  the  spirit  of  faction  to  be 
rooted  in  the  nature  of  man  in  society,  the 
American  statesmen  seek  to  cure  its  evil  not  by 


Chapter  16:  DEMOCRACY 


“removing  its  causes,”  but  by  “controlling  its 
effects.”  The  principle  of  representation,  Madi¬ 
son  claims,  “promises  the  cure.” 

Representation,  by  delegating  government 
to  a  small  number  of  citizens  elected  by  the 
rest,  is  said  “to  refine  and  enlarge  the  public 
views  by  passing  them  through  the  medium  of 
a  chosen  body  of  citizens,  whose  wisdom  may 
best  discern  the  true  interest  of  their  country.” 
From  this  it  appears  that  representation  pro¬ 
vides  a  way  of  combining  popular  government 
with  the  aristocratic  principle  of  government 
by  the  best  men. 

The  assumption  that  representation  would 
normally  secure  the  advantages  of  aristocratic 
government  is  not  unmixed  with  oligarchical 
prejudices.  If,  as  the  Federalists  frankly  sup¬ 
pose,  the  best  men  are  also  likely  to  be  men  of 
breeding  and  property,  representative  govern¬ 
ment  would  safeguard  the  interests  of  the  gen¬ 
try,  as  well  as  the  safety  of  the  republic,  against 
the  dernos — in  Hamilton’s  words,  “that  great 
beast.”  Their  concern  with  the  evil  of  factions 
seems  to  be  colored  by  the  fear  of  the  dominant 
faction  in  any  democracy — the  always  more 
numerous  poor. 

The  leavening  of  popular  government  by 
representative  institutions  in  the  formation  of 
modern  democracies  raises  the  whole  problem  of 
the  nature  and  function  of  representatives.  To 
what  extent  does  representation  merely  pro¬ 
vide  an  instrument  which  the  people  employs  to 
express  its  will  in  the  process  of  self-govern¬ 
ment?  To  what  extent  is  it  a  device  whereby 
the  great  mass  of  the  people  select  their  betters 
to  decide  for  them  what  is  beyond  their  com¬ 
petence  to  decide  for  themselves  ? 

According  to  the  way  these  questions  are 
answered,  the  conception  of  the  representative’s 
function — especially  in  legislative  matters — will 
vary  from  that  of  serving  as  the  mere  messenger 
of  his  constituents  to  that  of  acting  indepen¬ 
dently,  exercising  his  own  judgment,  and  rep¬ 
resenting  his  constituents  not  in  the  sense  of  do¬ 
ing  their  bidding,  but  only  in  the  sense  that  he 
has  been  chosen  by  them  to  decide  what  is  to 
be  done  for  the  common  good. 

At  one  extreme,  the  representative  seems  to 
be  reduced  to  the  ignominious  role  of  a  mouth¬ 
piece,  a  convenience  required  by  the  exigencies 


307 

of  time  and  space.  Far  from  being  a  leader,  or 
one  of  the  best  men,  he  need  not  even  be  a 
better  man  than  his  constituents.  At  the  other 
extreme,  it  is  not  clear  why  the  completely  in¬ 
dependent  representative  need  even  be  popu¬ 
larly  elected.  In  Edmund  Burke’s  theory  of 
virtual  representation,  occasioned  by  his  argu¬ 
ment  against  the  extension  of  the  franchise,  even 
those  who  do  not  vote  are  adequately  repre¬ 
sented  by  men  who  have  the  welfare  of  the 
state  at  heart.  They,  no  less  than  voting  constit¬ 
uents,  can  expect  the  representative  to  consider 
what  is  for  their  interest,  and  to  oppose  their 
wishes  if  he  thinks  their  local  or  special  interest 
is  inimical  to  the  general  welfare. 

Between  these  two  extremes,  Mill  tries  to 
find  a  middle  course,  in  order  to  achieve  the 
“two  great  requisites  of  government:  responsi¬ 
bility  to  those  for  whose  benefit  political  power 
ought  to  be,  and  always  professes  to  be,  em¬ 
ployed;  and  jointly  therewith  to  obtain,  in  the 
greatest  measure  possible,  for  the  function  of 
government  the  benefits  of  superior  intellect, 
trained  by  long  meditation  and  practical  disci¬ 
pline  to  that  special  task.”  Accordingly,  Mill 
would  preserve  some  measure  of  independent 
judgment  for  the  representative  and  make  him 
both  responsive  and  responsible  to  his  constit¬ 
uents,  yet  without  directing  or  restraining  him 
by  the  checks  of  initiative,  referendum,  and 
recall. 

Mill’s  discussion  of  representation  leaves  few 
crucial  questions  unasked,  though  it  may  not 
provide  clearly  satisfactory  answers  to  all  of 
them.  It  goes  beyond  the  nature  and  function 
of  the  representative  to  the  problem  of  securing 
representation  for  minorities  by  the  now  famil¬ 
iar  method  of  proportional  voting.  It  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  details  of  electoral  procedure — 
the  nomination  of  candidates,  public  and  secret 
balloting,  plural  voting — as  well  as  the  more 
general  question  of  the  differences  among  the 
executive,  judicial,  and  legislative  departments 
of  government  with  respect  to  representation, 
especially  the  difference  of  representatives  in 
the  upper  and  lower  houses  of  a  bicameral 
legislature.  Like  the  writers  of  The  Federalist , 
Mill  seeks  a  leaven  for  the  democratic  mass  in 
the  leadership  of  men  of  talent  or  training.  He 
would  qualify  the  common  sense  of  the  many 
by  the  expertness  or  wisdom  of  the  few. 


308 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


The  ancient  issue  between  the  democratic 
and  the  oligarchical  constitution  turns  primari¬ 
ly  on  a  question  of  justice,  not  on  the  relative 
competence  of  the  many  and  the  few  to  rule. 
Either  form  of  government  may  take  on  a 
more  or  less  aristocratic  cast  according  as  men 
of  eminent  virtue  or  ability  assume  public 
office,  but  in  neither  case  does  the  constitution 
itself  guarantee  their  choice,  except  possibly  on 
the  oligarchical  assumption  that  the  possession  of 
wealth  signifies  superior  intelligence  and  virtue. 

The  justice  peculiar  to  the  democratic  con¬ 
stitution,  Aristotle  thinks,  “arises  out  of  the 
notion  that  those  who  are  equal  in  any  respect 
are  equal  in  all  respects;  because  men  are  equally 
free,  they  claim  to  be  absolutely  equal.”  It  does 
not  seem  to  him  inconsistent  with  democratic 
justice  that  slaves,  women,  and  resident  aliens 
should  be  excluded  from  citizenship  and  public 
office. 

In  the  extreme  form  of  Greek  democracy,  the 
qualifications  for  public  office  are  no  different 
from  the  qualifications  for  citizenship.  Since 
they  are  equally  eligible  for  almost  every  gov¬ 
ernmental  post,  the  citizens  can  be  chosen  by 
lot  rather  than  elected  by  vote.  Rousseau  agrees 
with  Montesquieu’s  opinion  of  the  Greek  prac¬ 
tice,  that  “election  by  lot  is  democratic  in  na¬ 
ture.”  He  thinks  it  “would  have  few  disad¬ 
vantages  in  a  real  democracy,  but,”  he  adds, 
“I  have  already  said  that  a  real  democracy  is 
only  an  ideal.” 

The  justice  peculiar  to  the  oligarchical  con¬ 
stitution  is,  according  to  Aristotle,  “based  on 
the  notion  that  those  who  are  unequal  in  one 
respect  are  in  all  respects  unequal;  being  un¬ 
equal,  that  is,  in  property,  they  suppose  them¬ 
selves  to  be  unequal  absolutely.”  The  oligarchi¬ 
cal  constitution  consequently  does  not  grant 
citizenship  or  open  public  office  to  all  the  free¬ 
born,  but  in  varying  degrees  sets  a  substantial 
property  qualification  for  both. 

Though  he  admits  that  the  opposite  claims 
of  the  oligarch  and  the  democrat  “have  a  kind 
of  justice,”  Aristotle  also  points  out  the  in¬ 
justice  of  each.  The  democratic  constitution, 
he  thinks,  does  injustice  to  the  rich  by  treating 
them  as  equal  with  the  poor  simply  because 
both  are  freeborn,  while  the  oligarchical  con¬ 
stitution  does  injustice  to  the  poor  by  failing 
to  treat  all  free  men,  regardless  of  wealth,  as 


equals.  “Tried  by  an  absolute  standard,”  Aris¬ 
totle  goes  on  to  say,  “they  are  faulty,  and, 
therefore,  both  parties,  whenever  their  share 
in  the  government  does  not  accord  with  their 
preconceived  ideas,  stir  up  a  revolution.” 

Plato,  Thucydides,  and  Plutarch,  as  well  as 
Aristotle,  observe  that  this  unstable  situation 
permits  demagogue  or  dynast  to  encourage 
lawless  rule  by  the  mob  or  by  a  coterie  of  the 
rich.  Either  paves  the  way  to  tyranny. 

To  stabilize  the  state  and  to  remove  injus¬ 
tice,  Aristotle  proposes  a  mixed  constitution 
which,  by  a  number  of  different  methods,  “at¬ 
tempts  to  unite  the  freedom  of  the  poor  and 
the  wealth  of  the  rich.”  In  this  way  he  hopes  to 
satisfy  the  two  requirements  of  good  govern¬ 
ment.  “One  is  the  actual  obedience  of  citizens 
to  the  laws,  the  other  is  the  goodness  of  the 
laws  which  they  obey.”  By  participating  in  the 
making  of  laws,  all  free  men,  the  poor  included, 
would  be  more  inclined  to  obey  them.  But 
since  the  rich  are  also  given  a  special  function, 
there  is,  according  to  Aristotle,  the  possibility 
of  also  getting  good  laws  passed,  since  “birth 
and  education  are  commonly  the  accompani¬ 
ments  of  wealth.” 

To  Aristotle  the  mixed  constitution  is  per¬ 
fectly  just,  and  with  an  aristocratic  aspect  added 
to  the  blend,  it  approaches  the  ideal  polity. 
Relative  to  certain  circumstances  it  has  “a 
greater  right  than  any  other  form  of  govern¬ 
ment,  except  the  true  and  ideal,  to  the  name  of 
the  government  of  the  best.” 

Yet  the  true  and  the  ideal,  or  what  he  some¬ 
times  calls  the  “divine  form  of  government,” 
seems  to  be  monarchy  for  Aristotle,  or  rule  by 
the  one  superior  man;  and  in  his  own  sketch  of 
the  best  constitution  at  the  end  of  the  Politics — 
the  best  practicable,  if  not  the  ideal — Aristotle 
clearly  opposes  admitting  all  the  laboring  classes 
to  citizenship. 

As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Constitu¬ 
tion,  Aristotle’s  mixed  constitution  should  be 
distinguished  from  the  mediaeval  mixed  re¬ 
gime,  which  was  a  combination  of  constitu¬ 
tional  with  non-constitutional  or  absolute  gov¬ 
ernment,  rather  than  a  mixture  of  different  con¬ 
stitutional  principles.  The  mixed  regime— or 
“royal  and  political  government” — seems  to 
have  come  into  being  not  as  an  attempt  to 


Chapter  16:  DEMOCRACY 


reconcile  conflicting  principles  of  justice,  but 
as  the  inevitable  product  of  a  decaying  feudal¬ 
ism  and  a  rising  nationalism.  Yet  Aquinas 
claims  that  a  mixed  regime  was  established  by 
divine  law  for  the  people  of  Israel;  for  it  was 
“partly  kingdom,  since  there  is  one  at  the  head 
of  all;  partly  aristocracy,  in  so  far  as  a  number 
of  persons  are  set  in  authority;  partly  democra¬ 
cy,  government  by  the  people,  in  so  far  as 
the  rulers  can  be  chosen  from  the  people,  and 
the  people  have  the  right  to  choose  their  rul¬ 
ers.”  In  such  a  system,  the  monarchical  princi¬ 
ple  is  blended  with  aristocratic  and  democratic 
elements  to  whatever  extent  the  nobles  and  the 
commons  play  a  part  in  the  government.  But 
neither  group  functions  politically  as  citizens 
do  under  purely  constitutional  government. 

The  question  of  constitutional  justice  can, 
however,  be  carried  over  from  ancient  to 
modern  times.  Modern  democracy  answers  it 
differently,  granting  equality  to  all  men  on  the 
basis  of  their  being  born  human.  It  recognizes 
in  wealth  or  breeding  no  basis  for  special  politi¬ 
cal  preferment  or  privilege.  By  these  standards, 
the  mixed  constitution  and  even  the  most  ex¬ 
treme  form  of  Greek  democracy  must  be  re¬ 
garded  as  oligarchical  in  character  by  a  writer 
like  Mill. 

Yet  Mill,  no  less  than  Aristotle,  would  agree 
with  Montesquieu’s  theory  that  the  rightness 
of  any  form  of  government  must  be  considered 
with  reference  to  the  “humor  and  disposition  of 
the  people  in  whose  favor  it  is  established.”  The 
constitution  and  laws,  Montesquieu  writes, 
“should  be  adapted  in  such  a  manner  to  the 
people  for  whom  they  are  framed  that  it  would 
be  a  great  chance  if  those  of  one  nation  suit 
another.” 

Mill  makes  the  same  point  somewhat  differ¬ 
ently  when  he  says,  “the  ideally  best  form  of 
government  .  .  .  does  not  mean  one  which  is 
practicable  or  eligible  in  all  states  of  civiliza¬ 
tion.”  But  although  he  is  willing  to  consider 
the  forms  of  government  in  relation  to  the  his¬ 
toric  conditions  of  a  people,  not  simply  by  ab¬ 
solute  standards,  Mill  differs  sharply  from 
Montesquieu  and  Aristotle  in  one  very  impor¬ 
tant  respect.  For  him,  as  we  have  seen,  repre¬ 
sentative  democracy  founded  on  universal  suf¬ 
frage  is,  absolutely  speaking,  the  only  truly 
just  government — the  only  one  perfectly  suited 


309 

to  the  nature  of  man.  Peoples  whose  accidental 
circumstances  temporarily  justify  less  just  or 
even  unjust  forms  of  government,  such  as  oli¬ 
garchy  or  despotism,  must  not  be  forever  con¬ 
demned  to  subjection  or  disfranchisement,  but 
should  rather  be  raised  by  education,  experi¬ 
ence,  and  economic  reforms  to  a  condition  in 
which  the  ideal  polity  becomes  appropriate  for 
them. 

The  basic  problems  of  democratic  govern¬ 
ment — seen  from  the  point  of  view  of  those  who 
either  attack  or  defend  it — remain  constant 
despite  the  altered  conception  of  democracy  in 
various  epochs. 

At  all  times,  there  is  the  question  of  leader¬ 
ship  and  the  need  for  obtaining  the  political 
services  of  the  best  men  without  infringing  on 
the  political  prerogatives  of  all  men.  The  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  many  and  the  few,  between 
the  equality  of  men  as  free  or  human  and  their 
individual  inequality  in  virtue  or  talent,  must 
always  be  given  political  recognition,  if  not  by 
superiority  in  status,  then  by  allocation  of  the 
technically  difficult  problems  of  statecraft  to 
the  expert  or  specially  competent,  with  only 
certain  broad  general  policies  left  to  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  a  majority  vote.  Jefferson  and  Mill 
alike  hope  that  popular  government  may  abol¬ 
ish  privileged  classes  without  losing  the  bene¬ 
fits  of  leadership  by  peculiarly  gifted  individ¬ 
uals.  The  realization  of  that  hope,  Jefferson 
writes  Adams,  depends  on  leaving  “to  the  citi¬ 
zens  the  free  election  and  separation  of  the 
aristoi  from  the  pseudo- aristoi,  of  the  wheat 
from  the  chaff.” 

At  all  times  there  is  the  danger  of  tyranny 
by  the  majority  and,  under  the  threat  of  rev¬ 
olution,  the  rise  of  a  demagogue  who  uses  mob 
rule  to  establish  a  dictatorship.  Hobbes  phrases 
this  peculiar  susceptibility  of  democracy  to  the 
mischief  of  demagogues  by  saying  of  popular 
assemblies  that  they  “are  as  subject  to  evil 
counsel,  and  to  be  seduced  by  orators,  as  a 
monarch  by  flatterers,”  with  the  result  that 
democracy  tends  to  degenerate  into  govern¬ 
ment  by  the  most  powerful  orator. 

The  democratic  state  has  seldom  been  tempt¬ 
ed  to  undertake  the  burdens  of  empire  without 
suffering  from  a  discordance  between  its  domes¬ 
tic  and  its  foreign  policy.  Again  and  again, 


310 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Thucydides  describes  the  efforts  of  the  Atheni¬ 
ans  to  reconcile  their  imperialism  abroad  with 
democracy  at  home. 

In  his  oration  at  the  end  of  the  first  year  of 
the  Peloponnesian  war,  Pericles  praises  the 
democracy  of  Athens  and  at  the  same  time  cele¬ 
brates  the  might  of  her  empire.  “It  is  only  the 
Athenians,”  he  says,  “who,  fearless  of  conse¬ 
quences,  confer  their  benefits  not  from  calcu¬ 
lations  of  expediency,  but  in  the  confidence  of 
liberality.”  But  four  years  later,  after  the  re¬ 
volt  of  Mitylene,  Cleon  speaks  in  a  different 
vein.  Thucydides  describes  him  as  being  “at 
that  time  by  far  the  most  powerful  with  the 
commons.”  He  tells  his  fellow  citizens  of  demo¬ 
cratic  Athens  that  he  has  “often  before  now 
been  convinced  that  a  democracy  is  incapable 
of  empire,”  but  “never  more  so  than  by  your 
present  change  of  mind  in  the  matter  of  Mity¬ 
lene.”  He  urges  them  to  return  to  their  earlier 
decision  to  punish  the  Mitylenians,  for,  he  says, 
if  they  reverse  that  decision  they  will  be  “giv¬ 
ing  way  to  the  three  failings  most  fatal  to  empire 
— pity,  sentiment,  and  indulgence.” 

Diodotus,  who  in  this  debate  recommends  a 
policy  of  leniency,  does  not  do  so  in  the  “con¬ 
fidence  of  liberality”  which  Pericles  had  said 
was  the  attitude  of  a  democratic  state  toward 
its  dependencies.  “The  question  is  not  of  jus¬ 
tice,”  Diodotus  declares,  “but  how  to  make 
the  Mitylenians  useful  to  Athens.  .  .  .  We  must 
not,”  he  continues,  “sit  as  strict  judges  of  the 
offenders  to  our  own  prejudice,  but  rather  see 
how  by  moderate  chastisements  we  may  be  en¬ 
abled  to  benefit  in  the  future  by  the  revenue- 
producing  powers  of  our  dependencies.  ...  It  is 
far  more  useful  for  the  preservation  of  our 
empire,”  he  concludes,  “voluntarily  to  put  up 
with  injustice,  than  to  put  to  death,  however 
justly,  those  whom  it  is  our  interest  to  keep 
alive.” 

Twelve  years  later,  Alcibiades,  no  democrat 
himself,  urges  the  Athenians  to  undertake  the 
Sicilian  expedition  by  saying,  “we  cannot  fix 
the  exact  point  at  which  our  empire  shall  stop; 
we  have  reached  a  position  in  which  we  must 
not  be  content  with  retaining  but  must  scheme 


to  extend  it,  for,  if  we  cease  to  rule  others,  we 
are  in  danger  of  being  ruled  ourselves.”  In  the 
diplomatic  skirmishes  which  precede  the  in¬ 
vasion  of  Sicily,  Hermocrates  of  Syracuse  tries 
to  unite  the  Sicilian  cities  so  that  they  may  es¬ 
cape  “disgraceful  submission  to  an  Athenian 
master.”  The  Athenian  ambassador,  Euphemus, 
finds  himself  compelled  to  speak  at  first  of  “our 
empire  and  of  the  good  right  we  have  to  it”; 
but  he  soon  finds  himself  frankly  confessing 
that  “for  tyrants  and  imperial  cities  nothing  is 
unreasonable  if  expedient.” 

The  denouement  of  the  Peloponnesian  war, 
and  especially  of  the  Syracusan  expedition,  is 
the  collapse  of  democracy,  not  through  the  loss 
of  empire  but  as  a  result  of  the  moral  sacrifices 
involved  in  trying  to  maintain  or  increase  it. 
Tacitus,  commenting  on  the  decay  of  republi¬ 
can  institutions  with  the  extension  of  Rome’s 
conquests,  underlines  the  same  theme.  It  is  still 
the  same  theme  when  the  problems  of  British 
imperialism  appear  in  Mill’s  discussion  of  how  a 
democracy  should  govern  its  colonies  or  de¬ 
pendencies. 

The  incompatibility  of  empire  with  democ¬ 
racy  is  one  side  of  the  picture  of  the  democratic 
state  in  external  affairs.  The  other  side  is  the 
tension  between  democratic  institutions  and 
military  power  or  policy — in  the  form  of  stand¬ 
ing  armies  and  warlike  maneuvers.  The  in¬ 
efficiency  traditionally  attributed  to  democ¬ 
racy  under  peaceful  conditions  does  not,  from 
all  the  evidences  of  history,  seem  to  render  de¬ 
mocracy  weak  or  pusillanimous  in  the  face  of 
aggression. 

The  deeper  peril  for  democracy  seems  to  lie 
in  the  effect  of  war  upon  its  institutions  and  on 
the  morality  of  its  people  As  Hamilton  writes 
in  The  Federalist:  “The  violent  destruction  of 
life  and  property  incident  to  war,  the  continual 
effort  and  alarm  attendant  on  a  state  of  con¬ 
tinual  danger,  will  compel  nations  the  most  at¬ 
tached  to  liberty  to  resort  for  repose  and  se¬ 
curity  to  institutions  which  have  a  tendency  to 
destroy  their  civil  and  political  rights.  To  be 
more  safe,  they  at  length  become  willing  to 
run  the  risk  of  being  less  free.” 


Chapter  16:  DEMOCRACY 


31! 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

1.  Conceptions  of  democracy:  the  comparison  of  democracy  with  other  forms  of  govern¬ 

ment 

2.  The  derogation  of  democracy:  the  anarchic  tendency  of  freedom  and  equality 

2 a.  Lawless  mob-rule:  the  tyranny  of  the  majority 

2 b.  The  incompetence  of  the  people  and  the  need  for  leadership:  the  superiority  of 
monarchy  and  aristocracy 

3.  The  acceptance  of  democracy  as  one  of  several  good  forms  of  government 

3 a.  Comparison  of  democratic  and  oligarchic  justice:  the  mixed  constitution  as  a 
compromise  between  the  interests  of  the  poor  and  rich 

3^.  Comparison  of  the  political  wisdom  of  the  many  and  the  few:  the  mixed  regime 
as  including  both 

y.  Comparison  of  democracy,  aristocracy,  and  monarchy  with  respect  to  efficiency 

4.  The  praise  of  democracy:  the  ideal  state 

40.  Liberty  and  equality  for  all  under  law 

(1)  Universal  suffrage:  the  abolition  of  privileged  classes 

(2)  The  problem  of  economic  j  ustice :  the  choice  between  capitalism  and  socialism 

4 b.  The  democratic  realization  of  popular  sovereignty:  the  safeguarding  of  natural 
rights 

4 c.  The  infirmities  of  democracy  in  practice  and  the  reforms  or  remedies  for  these 
defects 

4 d.  The  suitability  of  democratic  constitutions  to  all  men  under  all  circumstances: 
conditions  favorable  to  democracy;  progress  toward  democracy 

5.  Democracy  and  representative  government 

5 a.  The  distinction  between  direct  democracy  and  representative,  or  republican, 
government:  the  territorial  limits  of  democracy 

5 b.  The  theory  of  representation 

(1)  Majority  rule  and  minority  or  proportional  representation 

(2)  Ultimate  limitations  on  the  franchise 

(3)  Methods  of  election  and  voting 

(4)  The  role  of  political  parties:  factions 

y.  The  distribution  of  functions  and  powers:  checks  and  balances  in  representative 
democracy 

6.  The  educational  task  of  democracy:  the  training  of  all  citizens 

7.  The  growth  and  vicissitudes  of  democracy 

ja.  Demagoguery  and  the  danger  of  revolution 
7 b.  The  dangers  of  imperialism:  the  treatment  of  dependencies 
7 c.  The  challenge  of  war  and  peace:  the  citizen  army 


PAGB 

312 

3J3 


3M 


3*5 


3t6 


3l7 


3l8 


3X9 

320 


312 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 


To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions  :  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 — ( D )  II  Esdras,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Conceptions  of  democracy:  the  comparison 
of  democracy  with  other  forms  of  gov¬ 
ernment 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a  esp  396c-d 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  i,  301c-d;  bk  viii,  408b- 
413d  /  Statesman,  598b-604b  esp  603d-604b  / 
Laws,  bk  iii,  667c-676b  esp  672d-676b;  bk 
iv,  679c-682c;  bk  vi,  699d-700c;  bk  viii, 
733d-734a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  i  471b,d-472c; 
ch  6  [i278b7-i4]  475d;  ch  7-8  476c-477c; 
bk  iv,  ch  2-6  488b-493a;  ch  11-12  495b-497b; 
ch  16  [1301^0-15]  502c;  bk  v,  ch  i  502a- 
503b;  bk  vi,  ch  1-6  520a-524c  /  Rhetoric,  bk 
1,  ch  8  608a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa ,  62b-c  /  Solon, 
70d-71c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d-309d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  partii,  104b-106d;  114b- 
115a;  150c-151a;  154b-c;  part  iii,  228b;  part 
iv,  273a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Governmejit ,  ch  ii  25d-28c;  ch 
iv,  sect  21  29d;  ch  vii,  sect  87-89  44a-d; 


ch  viii  46c-53c  passim;  ch  x,  sect  132  55a-b; 
ch  xi  55b-58b  passim;  ch  xiii,  sect  149 
59b-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii-iii  4a- 
13d  esp  bk  11,  4a-6b,  bk  iii,  9b-10c;  bk  v, 
18d-25a;  31b-33a,c;  bk  vi,  34d-35c;  bk  vii, 
44d-45b;  47c-48a;  bk  viii,  51a-52c;  bk  ix, 
59c;  bk  xi,  68b,d-69c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  359a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  1,  391a-393c;  bk  ii,  395a-398b; 
bk  iii,  410b-411c;  413c;  420a-424d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81  d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Right , 
436c-d;  445a-c;  450a-452a  esp  450a-d 

43  Federalist:  number  9,  47a-48d;  number 
10,  51c-53a;  number  14,  60a-61b;  number 
39,  125b-126b;  number  48,  157c;  number  63, 
193d-194a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268c  /  Representative 
Government  327a-442d  passim,  esp  341d-350a, 
355b-356a,  366c-367a,  370a-372b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273 
90c-92a;  par  279,  93d-94c  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  172d-175c;  part  ii,  271c-274a 
esp  27id-272d,  273d-274a;  275b-276d 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  84b-85a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  428d- 
429c 


2  to  lb 


313 


Chapter  16:  DEMOCRACY 


2.  The  derogation  of  democracy:  the  anarchic 
tendency  of  freedom  and  equality 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-425]  261d-262a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi, 
533a-c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  408b-414b  /  Laws , 
bk  hi,  674c-676b;  bk  iv,  681b  682c;  bk 
viii,  733d-734a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  cii  10  [1161*7-9] 
413b  /  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  2  [128 9*3 5— b  1 1  ] 
488b-c;  ch  4  [1292*4-37]  491b-d;  ch  6  [i292b 
40-1293*9]  492c;  bk  v,  ch  9  [1310*23-36] 
512c;  ch  11  [i3i3b33-i3i4ai]  516c;  bk  vi, 
ch  4  [i3i9b2~32]  523a  b  /  Athenian  Consti- 
tution ,  ch  28  565c-566b 
14  Plutarch:  Dion,  800c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  11,  114b-115a; 

150c-151a;  part  iv,  273a-b 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  iv,  sect  21 
29d;  ch  vi,  sect  57,  37a-b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  10a; 

bk  viii,  51a-52c;  bk  xi,  68b,d-69c 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  424b 
43  Federalist:  number  10,  51c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  298b-299a  /  Representative 
Government,  354b-355b;  387b-c;  403d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  125c-d;  127b-c;  211b-c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  301 

lOOb-lOla;  par  308  102c-103a  /  Philosophy 
of  History,  intro,  175b-c;  part  iv,  366c- 
367a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  431c 

2a.  Lawless  mob-rule:  the  tyranny  of  the  ma¬ 
jority 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [409-427]  261d-262a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  108a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi, 
525a-b;  533a-c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  411d-412d  /  States¬ 
man,  598b-604b  esp  603d-604b  /  Laws,  bk 

iii,  675c-676b;  bk  iv,  681b-682c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [1274*5-14] 
470c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  10  [1281*11-28]  478d- 
479a;  ch  ii  [i28ib39-i282*4i]  479d-480b; 
bk  iv,  ch  4  [1292*4-37]  491b-d;  ch  6  [i292b 
40-1293*9]  492c;  bk  v,  ch  9  [1310*25-36] 
512c;  ch  10  [1312*40^8]  514d-515a;  bk  vi, 
ch  4  [i3i9b2-32]  523a-b 
14  Plutarch:  Agis,  648b,d-649b 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  114d-115a;  part 

iv,  273b 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc 
vi-viii  61a-63b 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-225] 
351a-353d;  act  iii,  sc  i  [140-161]  370d-371a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  878  345a- b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  10a; 

bk  vi,  35c-36a;  bk  viii,  51a-52c 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  419b 


40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Pall,  14b 

41  Gib ron :  Decline  and  Pall,  73b  c;  94d 

43  Federalist:  number  9,  47a-c;  number  10, 
50b  d;  number  22,  84c-d;  number  51, 
164a-165a;  number  58,  181b  c;  number  63, 
192c-193a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  268d-271c;  298b  299a;  302b  c 
/  Representative  Government,  366c  380b  passim, 
esp  376b-c;  406c-d 

44  13oswell:  Johnson,  260b;  422c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  303 
101c-102a;  additions,  180  148b  /  Philosophy 
of  History ,  intro,  172d-173a;  part  iii, 
300a-b;  part  iv,  365a 

2b.  The  incompetence  of  the  people  and  the 
need  for  leadership:  the  superiority  of 
monarchy  and  aristocracy 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  470a-487a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
425a-d;  bk  v,  504c-505a;  bk  vi,  520b-c; 
533a-c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  346c-347a;  bk  vi, 
375d-376c;  bk  viii,  409a-d;  411d-414b  / 
Statesman,  598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  674d- 
676b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i27ob7~i7] 
466d;  bk  iii,  ch  10-13  478d-483a;  ch  15 
[i286*22-b8]  484c-d  /  Athenian  Constitution, 
ch  28  565c-566b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  xi,  sect  23  306a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d  /  Lycurgus-Numa, 
62b-64a,c  /  Agis,  648b,d-649b  /  Dion,  792d- 
802a, c  esp  800c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  94b-c;  part  ii, 
104d-106d;  129b-130a;  152b-c;  part  iv, 
273a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  147b-148a 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  i,  sc  i-ii 
568b,d-572c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-225] 
351a-353d;  act  ii,  sc  i  [1-106]  361a-362a; 
act  iii,  sc  1  [140-161]  370d-371a;  act  iv,  sc 
vi  [74-156]  383a-384a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  44d-45a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  878  345a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xix,  sect  223 
76c-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4d-5a; 
bk  iii,  lOc-d;  bk  v,  25c-d;  bk  viii,  51a-52c; 
bk  xi,  71a-c;  72b;  bk  xix,  142c-143a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  401c-d; 
bk  iii,  411a;  412a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  68b,d-69a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450a-d 

43  Federalist:  number  55,  172d-173a;  num¬ 
ber  58,  181b-c;  number  63,  192c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  298b-299a;  319d-323a,c  pas¬ 
sim  /  Representative  Govermnent,  353b-354b; 
363b-366a;  375a-377a 


314 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  derogation  of  democracy:  the  anarchic 
tendency  of  freedom  and  equality.  2b.  The 
incompetence  of  the  people  and  the  need  for 
leadership:  the  superiority  of  monarchy  and 
aristocracy.) 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  S6a-b;  172d-173a;  178a-c; 
220a-d;  414c;  422c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  281 
95b-d;  par  308  102c-103a;  par  317-318  104d- 
105b;  additions,  186  149b  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  intro,  173a-175c;  part  ii,  272c- 
273a;  part  iii,  300a-301c 

3.  The  acceptance  of  democracy  as  one  of  sev¬ 
eral  good  forms  of  government 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

7  Plato:  Statesman ,  600c-604b  esp  603  d- 
604b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  471b,d-472c; 
ch  6  [i278b6-i4]  475d;  ch  7-8  476c-477c; 
ch  11  479b-480c;  bk  iv,  ch  n-12  495b-497b  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  1,  ch  8  608a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d- 
309d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  154b-c;  part 
iii,  228b;  part  iv,  273a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  x,  sect  132 
55a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  4a-6b; 
bk  iii,  9b-10c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  359a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  410b-411c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450a-d 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  51c-53a;  number 
14,  60a-d;  number  39, 125b-126b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
273  90c-92a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
173a-175c;  part  ii,  271c-274a  passim 

3 a.  Comparison  of  democratic  and  oligarchic 
justice:  the  mixed  constitution  as  a  com¬ 
promise  between  the  interests  of  the 
poor  and  rich 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
396b-c;  bk  vi,  520a-d;  bk  viii,  575d-576b; 
590a-b 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iv,  681b-682c;  bk  vi, 
699d-700b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [i265b26- 
1266^0]  461b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  8-13  477a-483a; 
bk  iv,  ch  3  [i289b26]-CH  4  [i290b2i]  488d- 
489d;  ch  8-9  493c-494d;  ch  11-12  495b-497b; 
bk  iv,  ch  14-BK  v,  ch  1  498b-503b;  bk  vi, 
ch  2  [i3i8a4l-CH  3  [13 i8b5]  521b-522a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  34d-35d  /  Solon,  70d- 
71c  /  Dion,  800c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  156b-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  5b-c; 
bk  xi,  71d-72b 


3  to  3b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  412b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  90d-91a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81  d;  94c-95b; 
96b-d;  403b-404d 

43  Federalist:  number  54,  171b-172b;  num¬ 
ber  57  176d-179b  passim 
43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  384a-387d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  275b- 
276a 

50  Marx-Engels  :  Communist  Manifesto,  432b-d 

3 b.  Comparison  of  the  political  wisdom  of  the 
many  and  the  few:  the  mixed  regime  as 
including  both 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108c;  bk 
v,  180c-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
425a-d;  bk  vi,  520a-d 

7  Plato:  Crito  213a-219a,c  esp  213a-215d  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  iv,  346c-347a;  bk  vi,  375d-376c; 
377a-379c  /  Statesman,  598b-604b  /  Laws, 
bk  iii,  674d-676b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  10-13  478d- 
483a;  ch  15  [i286a7~b8]  484b-d;  ch  16  [128715 
8-36]  486a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d-35d  /  Agis,  648b, d- 
649a  /  Dion,  800c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  1-2  307d-309d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  105d-106b; 
129b-130a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  303c-304a 
27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c 
31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  ii,  44d-45a 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xix,  sect  223 
76c-d;  sect  240-242  81b-d 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4d-5a; 

bk  xi,  71a-c;  bk  xix,  145c-d 
38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  369c-d  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  iii,  411d-412a;  413c;  414d-415b; 
bk  iv,  427a-428a  passim 
41  Gi  b  bon  :  Decline  and  Fall ,  94c-95  b 
43  Federalist:  number  3,  33b;  number  10, 
51d-52a;  number  40,  130d-132a;  number 
49-50  159b-162c  passim;  number  55,  172d- 
173a;  number  57  176d-179b  passim;  num¬ 
ber  58,  181b-c;  number  63,  192c-193a;  num¬ 
ber  68,  205b-d;  number  71,  214d-215a; 
number  76,  227a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  298b-299a;  319d-323a,c  pas¬ 
sim  /  Representative  Government,  353b-354b; 
356b-362c  passim;  363b-366a;  374c-377a; 
384a-387d;  401a-406a  passim,  esp  402b-c; 
407d-409c;  410d-412a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  86a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  281 
95b-d;  par  297  99b;  par  301  lOOb-lOla;  par 
308  102c-103a;  par  317-318  104d-105b;  ad¬ 
ditions,  186  149b 


3c  to  4(7(1) 


Chapter  16:  DEMOCRACY  315 


3 c.  Comparison  of  democracy,  aristocracy,  and 
monarchy  with  respect  to  efficiency 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

7  Plato:  Statesman ,  603d  604b  /  Laws,  bk 
iv,  679b  680c;  bk  vi,  699d-700c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  cii  11-13  479b- 
483a;  cii  15-18  484b  487a, c;  bk  iv,  ch  ii 
495b-496d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  4d-5b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  104d  106d;  107d- 
108a;  129b  130a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  lOc-d; 
bk  v,  25c-d;  bk  xi,  72b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iii,  411d-412a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  450b-c 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  118d  119b;  num¬ 
ber  70,  210c-211a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  344a-d; 
363b  366a 

4.  The  praise  of  democracy:  the  ideal  state 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-d;  bk  v, 
175b;  bk  vii,  238b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
395d-399a  esp  396c-397c;  bk  vi,  520a-d 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  408b-413d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  11-12  479b- 
481b;  bk  iv,  ch  n-12  495b-497b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa,  62b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  114b-ll5a; 
150c-151a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xix,  sect  223 
76c-d;  sect  240-242  81b-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4c-5a; 
bk  iii,  9b-10c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323a-328a,c  passim  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  411a-c;  bk  iv,  42 7d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 
450d-452a  /  Judgement,  586a-587a 

43  Federalist:  number  10  49c-53a;  number 
14,  60c-d;  number  39,  125b-126b;  number 
46,  150c;  number  55,  174c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  341d-350a 
esp  344d,  350a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  276a-d 

48  Melville:  Moby  DicJ{,  84b-85a 

4a.  Liberty  and  equality  for  all  under  law 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108d;  bk 
vii,  232d-233d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
396c-d;  bk  vi,  520a-d 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iii,  674c-676c;  bk  iv, 
681b-682c;  bk  vi,  699d-700c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [1 134^4— bi7] 
382a-c  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  i  471b,d-472c; 
ch  6  [i278b30-i279a22]  476a-c;  ch  8-13 
477a-483a  passim;  ch  16—17  485b-487a  pas¬ 
sim;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i29ib30-38]  491a-b;  ch  14 


[1 298*^4  -34]  498b  d;  bk  v,  ch  1  502a-503b; 
ch  8  [i3o8“io-25]  510a  b;  ch  9  [  1 3 1  ott25— 36] 
512c;  bk  vi,  cn  2  520d  521b 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-37b 

15  T  'acitus:  Annals,  bk  xiii,  132a-c 
23  Maciiiavelli:  Prince,  cn  v  8a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  94b  d;  part  ii, 
113c-116b;  150c-151a;  156b-c;  part  iv,  273a-c 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  cn  iv,  sect  21 
29d;  cn  vi,  sect  54-57  36c-37b;  cn  vii, 
sect  87-94  44a-46c;  cn  xi,  sect  136-139 
56c-58a;  sect  142  58b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  19a-21a; 

bk  vi,  34d;  bk  vm,  51a-52c;  bk  xi,  68b,d-69c 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  359a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  11,  396d-398b;  405a-c;  bk  iv,  427d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  14b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81  d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114bd  /  Science  of  Right, 
398c-399c;  400b,d-402a,c;  408c-409c;  436c-d: 
438d-439a;  450d-452a  esp  451b-c  /  Judgement, 
586a-587a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-28] 
la-b  passim 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  iv  [17-36] 
5b-c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  11a, c; 

ARTICLE  IV,  SECT  2  [519— 521]  16a;  AMEND¬ 
MENTS,  i-x  17a-d;  xm,  sect  i-xiv,  sect  2 
18c-d;  xv  19b;  xix  19d 

43  Federalist:  number  26  92a-94d;  number 
37,  118d-119b;  number  57,  177d-178a;  num¬ 
ber  84,  251b-254b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267a-274a  /  Representative 
Government,  346a-c;  365b-366a:  370a-372b; 
387b-d;  403d/  Utilitarianism,  460a-c;  467a-b; 
474d-476a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  125c-d;  127b-c;  211b-c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  1,  213b; 

part  ii,  271d-272d;  275b-276d;  part  iv, 
362d-363a 

48  Melville  :  Moby  Dic\,  84b-85a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  429b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  lOa-b 

4a(  1)  Universal  suffrage:  the  abolition  of  priv¬ 
ileged  classes 

5  Aristophanes:  Ecclesiazusae  615a-628d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi, 
520b-c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  406a-407a  /  Laws, 
bk  vi,  705b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  9-12  477c-481b 
passim;  bk  iv,  ch  6  492b-493a;  bk  vi,  ch  4 
[13  i9b2— 32]  523a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-5c; 
bk  xi,  71d-72b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  427d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  14b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73b-c;  81d-82b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  43 6 d- 43 7c;  445a-c 


316  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4a(2)  to  4c 


(4a.  Liberty  and  equality  for  all  under  law . 
4a  ( l)  Universal  suffrage:  the  abolition  of 
privileged  classes .) 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  vi  [87-93] 

6b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
9  [289-295]  14a;  article  vi  [597-599]  16d; 
AMENDMENTS,  XIV,  SECT  1-3  18c-19a;  XV 

19b;  xvii  19b-c;  xix  19d;  xxm  20d 
43  Federalist:  number  39,  125c-126b;  num¬ 
ber  57, 177a-b;  number  84,  252a 
43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  344d-346c; 
350a;  369b-370a;  380c-389b;  394a-396d; 
403d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  416c- 
d;  425b-c;  428d-429c 

4^(2)  The  problem  of  economic  justice:  the 
choice  between  capitalism  and  social¬ 
ism 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 
5  Aristophanes:  Ecclesiazusae  615a-628d 
7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  hi,  341c-d;  bk  v,  363  b- 
365d  /  Laws ,  bk  v,  691b-697a 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  2  [ii30b3o]-cH 
4  [n32b2o]  378b-380b  /  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  5 
458a-460a;  ch  6  [1265*27-37]  460c-d;  ch  7 
461d-463c;  bk  v,  ch  i  502a-503b;  bk  vi,  ch 
3  521c-522a;  ch  5  [i320ai7-bn]  523d-524b 
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  36a 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i— ii,  q 
105,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1-6  309d-316a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  156b-157a 
27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-226] 
351a-353d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v  30b-36a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  16a-17b; 
bk  v,  19d-21d;  bk  vii,  44d-45b;  bk  xiii, 
96a-102a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  375 b  d;  377b- 
d  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393d-394d;  bk  ii, 
405a-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  28a-d; 
61c-d;  109d-110d;  bk  iv,  201b-d;  239c-240a; 
287c-d 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments, 
v[645~648]  17b;  xiii  18c;  XVI  19b 
43  Federalist:  number  10,  50b-53a;  number 
35,  113a-114b;  number  60,  184d-186b;  num¬ 
ber  79,  233c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  309a-c  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  345b-346a;  369b-370a  /  Utilitarianism, 
467a-b;  472d-473c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  304c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 
356d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  33b-37a;  104b-105a;  113c- 
115c;  377c-378d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  419a- 
434d  esp  428d-429c,  432b-c,  433b,  434c-d 
54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  787d- 
788b 


4b.  The  democratic  realization  of  popular  sov¬ 
ereignty:  the  safeguarding  of  natural 
rights 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [3 *4-2^81  261b-c: 

[399-462]  261d-262b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-d;  bk  vii, 
245b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
396b-397c 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iv,  681d-682c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  i  471b,d-472c; 
ch  6  [i278b7~i4]  475d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8 
[i365b22~3i]  608a 

14  Plutarch:  Tiberius  Gracchus,  678b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  101a-104d; 
part  iii,  228b-c;  part  iv,  273a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d; 
ch  vii,  sect  87-CH  viii,  sect  99  44a-47c; 
ch  ix,  sect  127-cH  x,  sect  132  54a-55b; 
ch  xi  55b-58b;  ch  xiii,  sect  149  59b-d;  ch 
xix  73d-81d  passim,  esp  sect  212  74a-b, 
sect  243  81d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-6b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323d;  356b-359a  / 
Political  Economy,  369b-c  /  Social  Contract , 
bk  1,  387b,d-392a;  bk  ii,  395a-396a;  bk  iii, 
420a-424d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  14b;  91a  d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  94d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  429a-c;  434a,  435a- 
458a, c  esp  436c,  437c-d,  450a  b,  451c-d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [1-28] 
b;  [41-47]  2a;  [109-121]  3a-b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  11a, c; 
amendments,  i-x  17a-d;  xm-xv  I8c-19b; 
xix  19d 

43  Federalist:  number  10  49c-53a;  number 
14,  60c-d;  number  22,  84d-85a;  number  39 
125a-128b;  number  40,  131b;  number  44, 
144d-145a;  146c-d;  number  46,  150b-c;  num¬ 
ber  51,  164a-165a;  number  78,  231a-232c; 
number  83,  246a-b;  number  84,  251b-254b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267a-274a  /  Representative 
Government,  344d;  350a ;  382b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
279,  93d-94d;  par  308  102c-103a  /  Philosophy 
of  History,  intro,  175b-c;  part  ii,  272a-d 

4c.  The  infirmities  of  democracy  in  practice 
and  the  reforms  or  remedies  for  these 
defects 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  455a-469a,c  / 
Knights  470a-487a,c  esp  [1111-1150]  483d- 
484b  /  Wasps  507a-525d  /  Peace  526a-541d 
esp  [601-692]  532d-534a  /  Birds  542a-563d  / 
Frogs  [686-705]  572a-b  /  Lysistrata  [486-586] 
589a-590d  /  Ecclesiazusae  [169-188]  617a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  108a-c;  bk  v, 
180c-d 


4 d  to  5b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  iii, 
425a-d;  bk  v,  504c-505a;  bk  vi,  533a-c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii,  411d  413d  /  Laws , 
bk  iii,  674c-676b;  bk  vi,  699d-700c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i292B4~37] 
491b  d;  ch  6  [i292b4(>-i293a9]  492c;  bk  v,  ch 
9  [1410*25-36]  512c;  bk  vi,  cn  4  [13 i8b6  1419’’ 
32]  522a-523b  /  Athenian  Constitution ,  cn  28 
565c-566b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d-35c  /  Lycurgus - 
Nutna ,  62b-64a,c  /  648b,d-649b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  148d  149b; 
150c-d 

35  Locke:  C/it7  Government ,  ch  xiii,  sect  157- 
158  61c-62b 

38  Montesquieu:  Sp/W/  0/ Laws ,  bk  ii,  5a;  bk 
iii,  lOa-c;  bk  vi,  35c-36a;  bk  viii,  51a-52c; 
bk  ix,  58b,d-59b;  bk  xi,  69a-c;  bk  xix,  142c- 
143a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iii,  418a-420a; 
bk  iv,  433a-434b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  14b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  94d-95c;  562c- 
565a  esp  563d-564a 

43  Federalist:  number  10  49c-53a  passim; 
number  22,  83b-d;  number  44,  146c-d; 
number  48,  157c;  number  49-50  159b-162c; 
number  55,  172b-173b;  number  58,  181b-c; 
number  62,  189d-191c;  number  63,  192b- 
195b;  number  75,  223c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  268d-271a;  298b-299b;  309a-b 
/  Representative  Government ,  354b-355b:  362c- 
389b  passim,  esp  380c-381a,  387b-d;  392b- 
399d;  403b-d;  406a-409c  passim 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  178a-c;  374b  c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  303 
10Ic-102a  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro, 
172d-173a 

4d.  The  suitability  of  democratic  constitutions 
to  all  men  under  all  circumstances:  con¬ 
ditions  favorable  to  democracy;  progress 
toward  democracy 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vi,  193b-c;  bk  ix, 
314a, c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ix,  425c-427b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  15  [i286b8-22] 
484d-485a;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [i289bi3-2o]  488c-d; 
ch  n-12  495b-497b;  bk  vi,  ch  4  522a-523b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  3b-d; 
bk  viii,  56b-c;  57b-c;  bk  xiv,  107b-d;  bk 
xvi,  118b-c;  bk  xvii-xviii,  122a-126c;  bk 
xix,  139c-140a 

38  Roitsseau:  Inequality ,  324a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  ii,  402b-405a;  405c-406a;  bk  iii, 
410c;  411a-c;  415d;  421c-423a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  5 62c- 565a  esp 
562c-d,  563d-564a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-115a  /  Science  of 
Right,  436d-437c;  451a-b 

43  Federalist:  number  14,  60a-61b;  number 
39,  125b;  number  55, 174c-d 


317 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268c;  272a  /  Represen¬ 
tative  Government ,  328d-332d;  338b  340d; 
344d-345a;  350b  355b;  387c-d;  395b  c;  413d 
414d;  424c-428a  passim,  esp  427a  b;  433b- 
44 2d  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  161a-c; 
172d-175c;  part  ii,  271c-274a;  part  iii, 
300c  d 

5.  Democracy  and  representative  government 

5 a.  The  distinction  between  direct  democracy 
and  representative,  or  republican,  gov¬ 
ernment:  the  territorial  limits  of  democ¬ 
racy 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  vi,  cii  4  [13 i8b2 1--27] 
522b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  x,  sect  132 
55a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  viii,  56c-d; 
bk  ix,  58b,d-60a;  bk  xi,  71a-c;  bk  xix,  142c- 
143a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  410c;  420a- 
423a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  451c-452a 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  51c-53a:  number 
14,  60a-61b;  number  48,  157c;  number  63, 
192c-194a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  330a-b; 
350a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  175b-c; 
part  ii,  273d-274a 

5b.  The  theory  of  representation 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  69 7a- 705c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  14  498b-499c 
passim;  ch  15  499c-501c;  bk  vi,  ch  3-4 
521c-523b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d-35d  /  Solon,  70d- 
71c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i— ii,  q  90, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  2  207a-c;  q  97,  a  3,  rep  3 
237b-238b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  96c-98a,c;  part 
ii,  lOla-b;  104d-105c;  117b-121a;  153a-159c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  87-89 
44a-d;  ch  xi,  sect  140  58a;  ch  xii,  sect 
143  58c-d;  ch  xiii,  sect  154-158  60c-62b; 
ch  xix,  sect  240  81b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  71a-d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  421c-423a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  269d-271d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  522c-523a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436c;  450a-b;  451c- 
452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [35-47] 
lb-2a;  [109-121]  3a-b  passim 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i  11a- 
14b  passim 

43  Federalist:  number  10  49c-53a:  number 
14,  60a-61b;  number  22,  82a-83a;  num¬ 
ber  28,  97b-d;  number  35,  113a-114b; 


Chapter  16:  DEMOCRACY 


318 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5b(i)  to  5b( 4) 


(5.  Democracy  and  representative  government, 
5b,  The  theory  of  representation.) 

number  52-66  165a-203a  passim,  esp  num¬ 
ber  57,  176d-178b,  number  63,  192b-194a; 
number  76,  227a;  number  78,  231a-232c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  268b-c  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment  327a-442d  passim,  esp  329d-330b, 
338a-b,  350a,  355b-356b,  370a-372b,  389c- 
392b,  401a-406a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  hi,  par  301- 
303  100b-102a;  par  308-311  102c-104a;  addi¬ 
tions,  182  148c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
intro,  175b-c 

56(1)  Majority  rule  and  minority  or  propor¬ 
tional  representation 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  10  478d-479a; 
ch  13  [i283a2i-b34]  481  b-d;  ch  15  [i286a22- 
b22]  484c-485a;  bk  iv,  ch  8  [1294^2-15] 
493d-494a;  bk  v,  ch  9  [i3ioa25~35]  512c; 
bk  vi,  ch  2  [i3i7b2-i6]  520d;  ch  3  [1318^9- 
b5]  521c-522a;  ch  4  [i3i8b2i-26]  522b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  301-303  227b;  878  345a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  viii,  sect  95-99 
46c-47c;  ch  x,  sect  132  55a-b;  ch  xi,  sect 
140  58a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  4b-6d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  391b;  bk 
iv,  425d-427a  esp  426d-427a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  269d-271d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  91b 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  v  [49-73] 
5d-6a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments, 
xiv,  sect  2  18d 

43  Federalist:  number  10  49c-53a;  number 
22,  82a-83a;  number  35,  113a-114b;  num¬ 
ber  37,  120b-c;  number  43,  141d-142d; 
number  51,  164a-165a  passim;  number  54 
170a-172b;  number  58,  181d-182a;  number 
62,  189b-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  268d-271c;  298b-302c;  307b- 
312a  /  Representative  Government,  366a-380b; 
386a-387d;  406d-407d;  410b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  261c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 
3 1 1-3 13  103d-104b  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
intro,  172d-173a;  part  iv,  365a 

5b(2)  Ultimate  limitations  on  the  franchise 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  697d-700b;  bk  viii, 
740d-741a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  6  492b-493a; 
bk  vi,  ch  3  521c-522a;  ch  4  [1319^-32] 
523a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  9  533a-d  /  Athenian  Con¬ 
stitution,  ch  4  554b-d;  ch  42  5 72 b-d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa,  62 b-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-5c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  427c-432b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d-437c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
2  [5-10]  lib 


43  Federalist:  number  52,  165a-c;  number  54 
170a-172b;  number  57,  177a 
43  Mill:  Represetitative  Government,  375a-b; 
380c-389b  passim,  esp  382c-383c;  394b- 
396d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  31 1 
103d-104a 

5^(3)  Methods  of  election  and  voting 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  697a-705c;  bk  xii, 
786b-787b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  9  [i294b6-i3] 
494c;  ch  14  [i298bi3~i299ai]  499a-c;  ch  15 
[1300^4]  500d-501b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  45d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  6a-b  /  Histories,  bk 

iv,  267d-268c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xiii,  sect  154- 
158  60d-62b;  ch  xix,  sect  216  74d 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  5b-6a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324c-325b  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  iv,  426c-428a 
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i, 
sect  2  [5-10]  lib;  sect  2  [17]— sect  3  [66] 
llb-12a;  sect  4  [96-102],  sect  5  [107-109] 
12b;  article  11,  sect  i  [32 1— 374]  14b-d; 
AMENDMENTS,  XII  18a-CJ  XVII  19b-CJ  XXIII 

20d 

43  Federalist:  number  52-61  165a-188d  pas¬ 
sim;  number  62,  189a-b;  number  68  205b- 
207a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  370a-406a; 
412a-414d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  176a-b;  251a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
309-3 1 1  103b-104a  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
part  11,  277c-d 

5 b(4)  The  role  of  political  parties:  factions 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  [577-580]  590c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
434c-438b;  bk  iv,  458d-459c;  463a-465c;  bk 

v,  502d-504a;  bk  viii  564a-593a,c  esp  568d- 
569a,  575c-576c,  577b-d,  579c-583c,  584b- 
585a,  585d-586b,  587a-590c 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  v,  695a-c;  bk  ix,  744c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ix,  ch  6  420c-421a  / 
Politics,  bk  v,  ch  9  [i309bi4-i3ioai2]  511d- 
512b  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  5  554d-555a; 
ch  8,  par  5  556c 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  68d;  75c-d  /  Pericles, 
126c-d  /  Pompey,  521  d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  97b-c  /  Histories , 
bk  11,  224d-225a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  ix,  14c-d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  121c-d;  148d- 
149b; 150b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  9d;  bk 
xix,  142b-143a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  396b-d; 
bk  iii,  424b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  269d-271a; 
bk  v,  420c-421a 


319 


Ciiapti-r  16:  DEMOCRACY 


5  c  to  7 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  652b-655c 
43  Federalist:  number  io  49c-53a;  number 
43,  141d-142d;  number  50,  161d-162c  passim; 
number  51,  164a-165a;  number  60,  185b- 
187a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  289c-d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment ,  366a-370a;  371c-372a;  376a-377a;  412b- 
413a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  261c-d;  374b-c 

46  Hegel  \  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  275bd; 
279b;  part  hi,  285d;  part  iv,  336a-c; 
366d-367a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  423d- 
425b 

5c.  The  distribution  of  functions  and  powers: 
checks  and  balances  in  representative  de¬ 
mocracy 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  vi,  697a-705c 
9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  14-16  498b- 
502a, c;  bk  vi,  ch  8  525b-526d  /  Athenian 
Constitution,  ch  42-69  572b-584a,c  passim 
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d-35d  /  Solon ,  70d- 
71c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  103d-104b; 
150b;  151c-152a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  viii,  sect  107 
49b-d;  ch  xii-xiii  58c-62b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  69d- 
75a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  428a- 
435a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  26d-27b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436b-c;  438a-439a; 
451d-452a 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  ix  7a-9a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
1  lla-b;  sect  2  [41-47]  lid;  sect  3  [73-87] 
12a;  sect  4  [96-102]  12b;  sect  5  12b-c; 

ARTICLE  I,  SECT  7  [l52]-ARTICLE  II,  SECT  I 

[326]  12d-14b;  article  ii,  sect  2  [409]— 
ARTICLE  III,  SECT  2  [492]  15a-d 

43  Federalist:  number  47-48  153c-159a  esp 
number  48,  157c;  number  51  162d-165a; 
number  52,  167a-b;  number  57  176d-179b; 
number  58,  180d;  number  60,  184d-185b; 
number  62,  189d-191c;  number  63,  192c- 
193c;  number  66,  200c-201d;  number  69 
207a-210c  passim;  number  73,  219b-221c; 
number  76,  226a-227b;  number  78,  230a- 
233a;  number  81,  237d-239c 
43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  355b-356b; 
365b-366a;  369b-370a;  401d-402b;  406a- 
409c;  412b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  272 
89d-90c;  additions,  178  147d-148a  /  Phi¬ 
losophy  of  History,  intro,  192d-193a 

6.The  educational  task  of  democracy:  the  train¬ 
ing  of  all  citizens 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
395d-399a 


7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iii,  675c-676b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  9  [i294bi9  24] 
494c;  bk  v,  cn  9  [i3io“i2 -35]  512b  c;  bk  vii, 
ch  14  537b-538d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  542a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  1 14d  1 15a ; 
153a-155c 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica  381a  412b  csp  384b- 
389a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  15c- 
18d 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  375d-377b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  340c- 
343d 

43  Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d;  number  84, 
253d-254b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  317d-323a,c  /  Representative 
Government ,  330a-b;  339a-341c;  349a-350a; 
351a-c;  381b-382b;  386b-387d;  401a-406a 
passim;  418b-d;  420b-d;  424b-c 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  237d-240d  esp  238b-c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  427c; 
429b 

7.  The  growth  and  vicissitudes  of  democracy 

5  Aristophanes:  Ecclesiazusae  [169-188]  617a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  120b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  iii, 
434c-438b;  bk  viii,  579d-580a 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii,  408b-414b  /  Laws, 
bk  iii,  674d-676b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [i273b27~ 
i274a22]  470b-d  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch 
1-41  553a-572a  esp  ch  41  571c-572a  /  Rhetoric, 
bk  1,  ch  4  [136(^17-29]  600c 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  9a-d  /  Themistocles , 
96b-c  /  Pericles  121a-141a,c  /  Alcibiades,  166a- 
174d  /  Phocion  604b,d-619d  /  Tiberius  Grac¬ 
chus,  675b-d;  678b-d  /  Caius  Gracchus 
681b,d-689a,c  esp  683b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  la-2a 

23  Machiavelli  :  Prince,  ch  v  8a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  114b-115a;  150c- 
151a;  part  iv,  273a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar  568a-596a,c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  9b- 
10c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  418a- 
419b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71d-73d  passim; 
2l7a-b;  218c-219a;  427b-428b;  562b-565a 
esp  562c-d;  574b-582b  esp  574b-577d;  587b- 
588b 

43  Federalist:  number  i  29a-31a  passim;  num¬ 
ber  6  38d-41c  passim;  number  9-10  47a- 
53a;  number  22,  82d-83d;  number  43,  141a- 
142d;  number  44,  146c-d;  number  51,  164a- 
165a;  number  58  179c-182a  passim;  number 
63,  192c-194a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-269c  /  Representative 
Government ,  376b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  271c- 
274a;  275b-276a  * 


320 

(7.  The  growth  and  vicissitudes  of  democracy .) 

la.  Demagoguery  and  the  danger  of  revolution 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  470a-487a,c  esp 
[111 1— 1 150]  483d-484b  /  Wasps  [655-724] 
515c-516d  /  Peace  [601-692]  532d-534a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  108a-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 

434c-438b;  bk  iv,  463a-465c;  466a-469b; 
bk  vi,  519c-d;  520a-d;  533a-c;  bk  viii,  575c- 
582c  esp  575c-576c,  577b-d,  579c-581c, 

582a-c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii,  411d-414b  /  Laws , 
bk  ix,  744c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [i273b36- 
i274ai4]  470c-d;  bk  v,  ch  i  [i302a8-i6]  503b; 
ch  5  506b-507a;  ch  8  [i3o8an-24]  510a-b; 
ch  9  [i3d9bi4~i3ioai2]  5lid-512b;  bk  vi,  ch 
4  [i3i9b2]-cH  5  [i320bi7]  523a-524b  /  Atheni¬ 
an  Constitution ,  ch  14-15  558d-559c;  ch  28-29 
565c-566d;  ch  34  568c-569a 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus ,  13a-14c  /  Solon,  75c- 
76d  /  Camillus,  117c-121a,c  /  Coriolanus , 
180b-d  /  Pompey,  521c-d  /  Caesar  577a-604d 
esp  577d-583a  /  Phocion  604b,d-619d  /  Cato 
the  Younger,  628b-d  /  Caius  Gracchus  681b, d- 
689a, c  esp  684c-685c  /  Dion,  792d-802a,c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  la-2a  /  Histories ,  bk 
ii,  224d-225a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  105c-106d;  127d- 
129d; 152a-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  23a-26a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xix,  sect  224- 
228  76d-78a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  viii, 
52b-c;  bk  xix,  142d-143a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iii,  419b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  439c-441d 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  30b;  number  9, 
47a-b;  number  21,  78d-79a;  number  48, 
157c;  number  58,  181b-c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  329b-330c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  300a- 
301c 

lb.  The  dangers  of  imperialism:  the  treatment 

of  dependencies 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  [572-586]  590c-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
403b-c;  bk  iii,  425a-429a 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  698c-d 


la  to  7c 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  21a-27c  esp  22c  /  Peri¬ 
cles,  129a-141a,c  passim 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  ii,  224d-225a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  107a;  107c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xvi  65d-70c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  182b-183a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  x,  64a-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  252d-253a; 
267c-271d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  79b-d;  630b, d- 
631b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  413d:  454a-455a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  427a-b; 
433b-442d 

lc.  The  challenge  of  war  and  peace:  the  citizen 
army 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

5  Aristophanes  :  Acharnians  455a-469a,c  / 
Knights  470a-487a,c  /  Peace  526a-541d  esp 
[601-692]  532d-534a  /  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c 
esp  [486-586]  589a-590d ' 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  v,  175b;  177d-178a; 
180c-d;  bk  vii,  232d-233d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  402b- 
404d;  bk  iii,  425a-d;  434c-438b;  bk  vi, 
513d-514d;  515d-516a;  bk  viii,  564a-c 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  i,  640b-642b;  bk  iii,  674d- 
675c;  bk  viii,  732b-735a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vi,  ch  7  [1321*5-26] 
524d-525a;  bk  vii,  ch  9  [1329*3-17]  533b-c; 
ch  14  [i333bi-i334aio]  538b-d  /  Athenian 
Constitution,  ch  8,  par  5  556c;  ch  15  559b-c; 
ch  27,  par  1-2  565a-b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  v  8a-c;  ch  xii- 
xiii  17d-21a;  ch  xxvi  36b-37d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xix,  sect  224- 
230  76d-78c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  80a -b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  lOa-c; 
bk  ix,  58b,d-60a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324c  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  380b-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  4b-5c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  452d-458a,c  esp  454d- 
455a,  457a-458a,c  /  Judgement,  586a-587a 

43  Federalist:  number  6,  40a-41a;  number  8 
44c-47a;  number  22,  83a-b;  number  29 
98c-101a  passim;  number  46,  152b-153a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  274b- 
275b;  278c-279b 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Chapter  16:  DEMOCRACY 


321 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For :  The  general  theory  of  government  and  the  forms  of  government,  see  Government;  and 
for  the  forms  of  government  most  closely  related  to  democracy,  see  Aristocracy; 
Oligarchy. 

The  theory  of  constitutional  or  representative  government,  in  itself  and  in  contrast  to 
monarchy  or  absolute  government,  see  Constitution;  Monarchy. 

Other  discussions  of  the  mixed  constitution  and  the  mixed  regime,  see  Aristocracy  2b; 

Constitution  3a,  5b;  Government  2b;  Monarchy  i b(i ). 

Other  expositions  of  the  theory  of  the  conditions  relative  to  which  democracy  is  a  suitable 
form  of  government,  see  Monarchy  4e(2);  Slavery  6c;  Tyranny  4b. 

The  general  discussion  of  political  liberty  and  equality  in  relation  to  the  rights  of  citizenship, 
see  Justice  9e;  Liberty  if. 

The  problem  of  suffrage  and  the  debate  concerning  the  extension  of  the  franchise,  see  Citizen 
2C-3;  Labor  yd;  Oligarchy  4,  5a;  Slavery  5b. 

The  relation  between  economic  and  political  democracy,  and  the  problems  of  economic  as 
well  as  political  justice,  see  Labor  yf;  Liberty  2d;  Slavery  5a~5b. 

The  theory  of  popular  sovereignty  and  natural  rights,  see  Government  ig(3);  Justice  6-6e; 
Law  yb-yc;  State  2c;  Tyranny  5c. 

The  consideration  of  majority  rule  and  the  tyranny  of  the  majority,  see  Opinion  y-yb; 
Tyranny  2c. 

Other  discussions  of  the  theory  of  representation,  see  Aristocracy  6;  Constitution  <y-fb. 
Matters  relevant  to  the  educational  problems  of  democracy,  see  Aristocracy  5;  Education 
Sd ;  State  yd. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 


the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  whi 

I. 

Plutarch.  “Of  the  Three  Sorts  of  Government — 
Monarchy,  Democracy  and  Oligarchy,”  in  Mo- 
ralia 

Spinoza.  Tractatus  Politicus  {Political  Treatise ), 
ch  1 1 

J.  S.  Mill.  “M.  De  Tocqueville  on  Democracy  in 
America,”  “Enfranchisement  of  Women,”  in  vol 
11,  Dissertations  and  Discussions 

- .  Socialism 

Marx.  The  Civil  War  in  France 

- .  Critique  of  the  Gotha  Programme 

II. 

Clarke  Papers ,  The  Putney  Debates 

Voltaire.  “Democracy,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dic¬ 
tionary 


s  the  last  chapter  of  lhe  Great  Ideas . 

J.  Wilson.  Wor\s,  part  i,  ch  vi-ix;  part  ii,  ch 
xii 

Cartwright.  Ta\e  Your  Choice ! 

Burke.  An  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs 

- .  Letter  to  Sir  Hercules  Langrishe 

Paine.  Rights  of  Man ,  part  ii,  ch  i 

- .  Dissertation  on  First  Principles  of  Government 

Jefferson.  Democracy ,  ch  1-2 
Tocqueville.  Democracy  in  America 
T.  Carlyle.  Chartism 
Michelet.  The  People 
Calhoun.  A  Disquisition  on  Government 
- .  A  Discourse  on  the  Constitution  and  Govern¬ 
ment  of  the  United  States 
Mazzini.  The  Duties  of  Man 
Thoreau.  A  Plea  for  Captain  John  Brown 
Whitman.  Democratic  Vistas 
J.  F.  Stephen.  Liberty ,  Equality ,  Fraternity 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


322 

Acton.  Essays  on  Freedom  and  Power ,  ch  5,  7-8 
Arnold.  “Democracy,”  “Equality,”  in  Mixed 
Essays . 

Maine.  Popular  Government 
Lecky.  Democracy  and  Liberty 
Giddings.  Democracy  and  Empire 
M.  Hirsch.  Democracy  Versus  Socialism 
H.  Adams.  The  Degradation  of  the  Democratic 
Dogma 

Ostrogorski.  Democracy  and  the  Organization  of 
Political  Parties 

Dicey.  The  Relation  Between  Law  and  Public  Opin¬ 
ion  in  England  During  the  Nineteenth  Century 
Santayana.  Reason  in  Society ,  ch  5 
Sorel.  Reflexions  on  Violence 
Michels.  Political  Parties 
Morley.  Notes  on  Politics  and  History 
Beard.  Economic  Origins  of  Jeffersonian  Democracy 
Croly.  Progressive  Democracy 
Pareto.  The  Mind  and  Society ,  vol  iv 
T.  Veblen.  The  Vested  Interests  and  the  State  of 
the  Industrial  Arts 

Lenin.  The  State  and  Revolution ,  ch  5 
- .  “ Left-Wing ”  Communism ,  an  Infantile  Dis¬ 
order 

Trotsky.  The  Defense  of  Terrorism 
Bryce.  The  American  Commonwealth 
- .  Modern  Democracies 


Tawney.  Equality 

Nock.  The  Theory  of  Education  in  the  United  States 
Kelsen.  Vom  Wesen  und  Wert  der  Demokratie 

- .  Staatsform  und  Weltanschauung 

Laski.  Democracy  in  Crisis 

J.  A.  Hobson.  Democracy  and  a  Changing  Civilisa¬ 
tion 

Friedrich.  Constitutional  Government  and  Democ¬ 
racy 

Benes.  Democracy  Today  and  Tomorrow 
Dewey.  Characters  and  Events ,  vol  ii,  bk  v  (17) 

- .  The  Public  and  Its  Problems ,  ch  3 

- .  Freedom  and  Culture ,  ch  4-7 

MacIver.  Leviathan  and  the  People 
Hook.  Reason ,  Social  Myths  and  Democracy 
Becker.  Modern  Democracy 
Merriam.  The  New  Democracy  and  the  New  Despot¬ 
ism 

- .  What  Is  Democracy? 

Agard.  What  Democracy  Meant  to  the  Greeks 
Barker.  Reflections  on  Government 
Lindsay.  The  Modern  Democratic  State 
Maritain.  Scholasticism  and  Politics ,  ch  iii-iv 

- .  Ransoming  the  Time ,  ch  2 

- .  Christianity  and  Democracy 

- .  Principes  d' une  politique  humaniste 

Perry.  Puritanism  and  Democracy 
Simon.  Community  of  the  Free ,  ch  4 


Chapter  17:  DESIRE 


INTRODUCTION 


IN  Darwin,  Mill,  James,  and  Freud,  at  the 
modern  end  of  the  great  tradition,  the  word 
“desire”  primarily  signifies  a  cause  of  animal  and 
human  behavior.  It  is  one  of  the  basic  terms  in 
psychological  analysis,  covering  that  whole 
range  of  phenomena  which  are  also  referred  to 
by  such  terms  as  wanting ,  needing ,  craving ,  wish - 
ing,  willing,  all  of  which  are  discussed  in  con¬ 
nection  with  theories  of  instinct  and  emotion, 
libido  and  love,  motivation  and  purpose. 

If  we  turn  to  traditional  beginnings,  to  the 
writings  of  Plato,  Aristotle,  Galen,  and  Ploti¬ 
nus,  we  find  that  the  psychological  considera¬ 
tion  of  desire  is  part  of  a  much  larger  context. 
The  ancients  are,  of  course,  concerned  with  the 
role  of  desire  in  causing  animal  or  human  be¬ 
havior,  and  with  the  causes  of  such  desire,  but 
they  are  also  interested  in  cravings  which  seem 
to  be  present  in  plants  as  well  as  animals.  Plato, 
for  example,  attributes  to  plants  “feelings  of 
pleasure  and  pain  and  the  desires  which  accom¬ 
pany  them.”  The  vegetative  activities  of  nu¬ 
trition,  growth,  and  reproduction  seem  to 
spring  from  basic  appetites — or,  in  modern 
phraseology,  “biological  needs” — inherent  in 
all  living  matter. 

Because  hunger  and  thirst  so  readily  sym¬ 
bolize  the  essence  of  desire  (or  certainly  repre¬ 
sent  its  most  general  manifestation  in  living 
things),  the  words  “appetite”  and  “desire”  are 
frequently  used  as  synonyms  in  the  earlier 
phase  of  the  tradition.  As  Hobbes  observes, 
when  he  proposes  to  use  “appetite”  and  “de¬ 
sire”  as  synonyms,  desire  is  “the  general  name,” 
and  appetite  is  “oftentimes  restrained  to  signify 
the  desire  for  food,  namely  hunger  and  thirst.” 
So,  too,  Spinoza  says  that  “there  is  no  difference 
between  appetite  and  desire,”  yet  he  adds, 
“unless  in  this  particular,  that  desire  is  gener¬ 
ally  related  to  men  in  so  far  as  they  are  con¬ 
scious  of  their  appetites,  and  it  may  therefore 


be  defined  as  appetite  of  which  we  are  con¬ 
scious.” 

Spinoza  here  seems  to  be  reflecting  the  dis¬ 
tinction  made  by  earlier  writers  between 
natural  appetite  and  conscious  desire,  which  we 
today  would,  perhaps,  express  in  terms  of 
“need”  and  “wish.”  The  ancient  conception 
of  tendencies  inherent  in  all  things— inanimate 
as  well  as  living — which  seek  a  natural  fulfill¬ 
ment  broadens  the  meaning  of  appetite  or  de¬ 
sire.  When  Aristotle  says  that  “each  thing  seeks 
its  own  perfection”  and  that  “nature  does 
nothing  in  vain,”  he  is  thinking  of  non-living 
as  well  as  living  bodies.  Wherever  in  the  phys¬ 
ical  world  things  seem  to  have  a  natural  tend¬ 
ency  to  move  in  a  certain  direction  or  to  change 
in  a  certain  way,  there  appetite,  belonging  to 
the  very  nature  of  the  moving  thing,  operates 
as  a  cause.  Adopting  this  view,  Dante  declares 
that  “neither  Creator  nor  creature  was  ever 
without  love,  either  natural  or  of  the  mind”; 
and  in  his  Convivio  he  shows  how  each  thing 
has  its  “specific  love.”  The  love,  or  desire,  of 
the  elements  is  their  “innate  affinity  to  their 
proper  place”;  minerals  desire  “the  place  where 
their  generation  is  ordained”  with  the  result 
that  “the  magnet  ever  receives  powrer  from  the 
direction  of  its  generation.” 

According  to  this  view  it  is  possible  to  speak 
of  the  natural  desire  of  raindrops  to  fall  or  of 
smoke  to  rise.  Such  a  manner  of  speaking  may 
at  first  seem  metaphorical — an  expression  of 
primitive  animism  or  anthropomorphism — but 
the  ancients,  observing  different  natural  tend¬ 
encies  in  heavy  and  light  bodies,  mean  this 
literally. 

The  sense  of  such  statements  is  no  different 
from  what  is  meant  when  it  is  said  that  the  sun¬ 
flower,  without  consciousness,  naturally  tends 
to  turn  toward  the  sun,  or  that  all  men  by 
nature  desire  to  know. 


324 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


From  its  narrowest  meaning  with  reference 
to  the  behavior  of  animals  and  men,  desire 
gains  a  wider  connotation  when  it  is  conceived 
as  covering  the  appetites  found  in  living  organ¬ 
isms.  But  in  its  broadest  significance,  it  refers 
to  the  innate  tendency  inherent  in  matter  it¬ 
self.  As  we  shall  presently  see,  appetite,  desire, 
or  tendency  is  seated  in  matter  according  to 
that  conception  of  matter  which  identifies  it 
with  potentiality  or  potential  being.  These 
considerations  are  more  fully  treated  in  the 
chapters  on  Being,  Change,  and  Matter,  but 
their  significance  for  the  notion  of  desire  can 
be  briefly  indicated  here. 

Plotinus  suggests  the  basic  insight  when  he 
describes  matter  as  “in  beggardom,  striving  as 
it  were  by  violence  to  acquire,  and  always  dis¬ 
appointed. Matter  is  that  in  natural  things 
which  is  the  reason  for  their  motion  and  change. 
Considering  natural  change,  Aristotle  names 
what  he  thinks  are  its  three  principles.  In  addi¬ 
tion  to  “something  divine,  good,  and  desirable,” 
he  writes,  “we  hold  that  there  are  two  other 
principles,  the  one  contrary  to  it,  the  other  such 
as  of  its  own  nature  to  desire  and  yearn  for  it.” 
These  are  respectively  form,  privation,  and 
matter.  The  relation  between  matter  and  form 
is  expressed  by  Aristotle  in  terms  of  desire. 
“The  form  cannot  desire  itself,”  he  says,  “for 
it  is  not  defective;  nor  can  the  contrary  desire 
it,  for  contraries  are  mutually  destructive.  The 
truth  is  that  what  desires  the  form  is  matter, 
as  the  female  desires  the  male.” 

Conceived  most  generally  as  natural  appe¬ 
tite  or  tendency,  desire  becomes  a  physical  or 
metaphysical  term.  “ Natural  appetite ,”  says 
Aquinas,  “is  that  inclination  which  each  thing 
has  of  its  own  nature.”  The  significance  of  de¬ 
sire  in  this  sense  extends,  far  beyond  psycho¬ 
logical  phenomena,  to  all  things  in  motion 
under  the  impetus  or  inclination  of  their  own 
natures,  rather  than  moved  violently  by  forces 
impressed  on  them  from  without. 

In  ancient  physics  every  natural  tendency 
has  an  end  or  fulfillment  in  which  the  motion 
governed  by  that  tendency  comes  to  rest.  Eros 
and  telos — desire  and  end — are  complementary 
concepts,  each  implying  the  other  as  principles 
of  physics,  i.e.>  as  factors  operating  together 
throughout  nature  in  the  order  of  change.  The 
telos  of  each  thing  is  the  perfection  which  satis¬ 


fies  the  tendency  of  its  nature.  That  nature 
does  nothing  in  vain  means  simply  that  no 
natural  desire— need  or  appetite— exists  with¬ 
out  the  possibility  of  fulfillment. 

Considering  the  design  of  the  universe  and 
the  relation  of  creatures  to  God,  theologians  like 
Augustine  and  Aquinas  use  the  concept  of  de¬ 
sire  in  both  its  psychological  and  its  meta¬ 
physical  sense. 

Considered  metaphysically,  desire  can  be 
present  only  in  finite  beings,  for  to  be  finite  is 
to  be  in  want  of  some  perfection.  Hence  desire 
can  in  no  way  enter  into  the  immutable,  infi¬ 
nite,  and  perfect  being  of  God.  In  desire, 
Aquinas  points  out,  “a  certain  imperfection  is 
implied,”  namely,  the  lack  “of  the  good  which 
we  have  not.”  Since  God  is  perfect,  desire  can¬ 
not  be  attributed  to  Him,  “except  metaphor¬ 
ically.”  Love,  however,  implies  perfection 
rather  than  imperfection,  since  it  flows  from 
the  act  of  the  will  “to  diffuse  its  own  goodness 
among  others.”  For  that  reason,  although  the 
infinite  perfection  of  God  precludes  desire,  it 
does  not  preclude  love. 

The  theologian  goes  beyond  the  metaphysi¬ 
cian  or  physicist  when  he  carries  the  analysis  of 
desire  to  the  supernatural  plane.  As  God  is  the 
supernatural  efficient  cause  of  all  created  things, 
so  God  is  also  the  supernatural  final  cause — the 
end  or  ultimate  good  toward  which  all  creatures 
tend.  The  metaphysical  maxim  that  each  thing 
seeks  its  own  perfection  is  then  transformed. 
“All  things,”  Aquinas  writes,  “by  desiring 
their  own  perfection,  desire  God  Himself,  inas¬ 
much  as  the  perfections  of  all  things  are  so 
many  similitudes  of  the  divine  being.  ...  Of 
those  things  which  desire  God,  some  know  Him 
as  He  is  Himself,  and  this  is  proper  to  the  ra¬ 
tional  creature;  others  know  some  participation 
of  His  goodness,  and  this  belongs  also  to  sensible 
knowledge;  others  have  a  natural  desire  with¬ 
out  knowledge,  as  being  directed  to  their  ends 
by  a  higher  intelligence.” 

The  existence  in  the  creature  of  a  desire  for 
God  raises  difficult  questions  concerning  the 
manner  in  which  this  desire  is  fulfilled.  A  super¬ 
natural  end  cannot  be  attained  by  purely  nat¬ 
ural  means,  i.e.,  without  God’s  help.  The  vision 
of  God  in  which  the  souls  of  the  blessed  come 
to  rest  is,  according  to  the  theologian,  the  ulti- 


Chapter  17:  DESIRE  325 


mate  gift  of  grace.  Hence,  in  man’s  case  at  least, 
it  becomes  necessary  to  ask  whether  he  can  have 
a  purely  natural  desire  to  see  God  if  the  goal 
of  such  desire  cannot  be  achieved  by  purely 
natural  means. 

The  question  is  not  whether  men  to  whom 
God  has  revealed  the  promise  of  ultimate  glory 
can  consciously  desire  the  beatific  vision.  Glear- 
ly  that  is  possible,  though  to  sustain  such  desire 
the  theological  virtue  of  hope,  inseparable  from 
faith  and  charity,  may  be  required.  Rather  the 
question  is  whether  the  beatific  vision  which  is 
man’s  supernatural  end  can  be  the  object  of 
natural  desire.  On  this  the  theologians  appear 
to  be  less  clearly  decided. 

Aquinas  holds  that  “neither  man,  nor  any 
creature,  can  attain  final  happiness  by  his  nat¬ 
ural  powers.’’  Yet  he  also  seems  to  maintain 
that  man  has  a  natural  desire  for  the  perfect 
happiness  of  eternal  life.  “The  object  of  the 
will,  i.e.y  of  man’s  appetite,”  he  writes,  “is  the 
universal  good,  just  as  the  object  of  the  intel¬ 
lect  is  the  universal  truth.”  Man’s  natural  de¬ 
sire  to  know  the  truth — not  just  some  truths 
but  the  whole  truth,  the  infinite  truth — would 
seem  to  require  the  vision  of  God  for  its  fulfill¬ 
ment.  Aquinas  argues  similarly  from  the  will’s 
natural  desire  for  the  infinite  good.  “Naught 
can  lull  man’s  will,”  he  writes,  “save  the  uni¬ 
versal  good  ...  to  be  found  not  in  any  creature, 
but  in  God  alone.”  Some  writers  find  this  con¬ 
firmed  in  the  fact  that  whatever  good  a  man 
sets  his  heart  upon  he  pursues  to  infinity.  No 
finite  amount  of  pleasure  or  power  or  wealth 
seems  to  satisfy  him.  He  always  wants  more. 
But  there  is  no  end  to  wanting  more  of  such 
things.  The  infinity  of  such  desires  must  result 
in  frustration.  Only  God,  says  the  theologian, 
only  an  infinite  being,  can  satisfy  man’s  infinite 
craving  for  all  the  good  there  is. 

Seeing  man’s  restlessness,  no  matter  where  he 
turns  to  find  rest,  Augustine  declares:  “Thou 
madest  us  for  Thyself,  and  our  heart  is  restless, 
until  it  repose  in  Thee.”  Pascal  reaches  the 
same  conclusion  when  he  considers  the  ennui 
of  men  which  results  from  the  desperation  of 
their  unending  search.  “Their  error,”  he 
writes,  “does  not  lie  in  seeking  excitement,  if 
they  seek  it  only  as  a  diversion;  the  evil  is  that 
they  seek  it  as  if  the  possession  of  the  objects  of 
their  quest  would  make  them  really  happy.” 


With  regard  to  the  frantic  pursuit  of  diversions, 
he  claims  that  “both  the  censurersand  the  cen¬ 
sured  do  not  understand  man’s  true  nature” 
and  the  “misery  of  man  without  God.”  In  such 
restlessness  and  vain  seeking,  the  theologian  sees 
evidence  of  man’s  natural  desire  to  be  with  God. 

Admitting  the  same  facts,  the  skeptics  inter¬ 
pret  the  infinity  of  man’s  desire  as  a  craving  to 
be  God.  If  this  is  not  every  man’s  desire,  it  is 
certainly  Satan’s  in  Paradise  Lost.  Skeptic  or 
believer,  every  man  understands  the  question 
which  Goethe  and  Dante  among  the  great 
poets  make  their  central  theme.  At  what  mo¬ 
ment,  amid  man’s  striving  and  restlessness,  will 
the  soul  gladly  cry,  “Ah,  linger  on,  thou  art  so 
fair?”  Confident  that  there  can  be  no  such 
moment,  Faust  makes  that  the  basis  of  his 
wager  with  Mephistopheles. 

The  two  poets  appear  to  give  opposite  an¬ 
swers  to  the  question.  Faust  finds  surcease  in  an 
earthly  vision  of  progressive  endeavor.  Heaven¬ 
ly  rest  comes  to  the  soul  of  Dante  at  the  very 
moment  it  relinquishes  its  quest,  winning  peace 
through  surrender. 

In  the  broadest  or  theological  sense  of  the 
word,  God  alone  does  not  desire.  In  the  nar¬ 
rowest  or  psychological  sense,  only  animals  and 
men  do.  The  contrast  of  meanings  is  useful. 
Natural  appetite  or  tendency  throws  light  on 
the  nature  of  conscious  desire. 

In  order  to  “determine  the  nature  and  seat  of 
desire,”  Socrates  in  the  Philebus  considers  such 
things  as  “hunger,  thirst,  and  the  like”  as  “in 
the  class  of  desires.”  He  points  out  that  “when 
we  say  ‘a  man  thirsts,’  we  mean  to  say  that  he 
‘is  empty.’  ”  It  is  not  drink  he  desires,  but  re¬ 
plenishment  by  drink,  which  is  a  change  of 
state.  This  insight  Socrates  generalizes  by  say¬ 
ing  that  “he  who  is  empty  desires  .  .  .  the  op¬ 
posite  of  what  he  experiences;  for  he  is  empty 
and  desires  to  be  full.”  In  the  Symposium ,  using 
the  words  “love”  and  “desire”  as  if  they  were 
interchangeable,  Socrates  declares  that  “he  who 
desires  something  is  in  want  of  something”  and 
“love  is  of  something  which  a  man  wants  and 
has  not.” 

In  the  psychological  sphere,  desire  and  love 
are  often  identified — at  least  verbally.  The  one 
word  is  frequently  substituted  for  the  other. 
Here  the  fact  already  noted,  that  God  loves  but 


326 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


does  not  desire,  suggests  the  root  of  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  desire  and  love.  Desire  always  in¬ 
volves  some  lack  or  privation  to  be  remedied  by 
a  change;  whereas  love,  certainly  requited 
love,  implies  the  kind  of  satisfaction  which  ab¬ 
hors  change.  Love  and  desire  are,  of  course, 
frequently  mixed,  but  this  does  not  affect  their 
essential  difference  as  tendencies.  They  are  as 
different  as  giving  and  getting.  Love  aims  at 
the  well-being  of  the  beloved,  while  desire  seeks 
to  enjoy  a  pleasure  or  possess  a  good. 

Not  all  writers,  however,  contrast  the  gener¬ 
osity  of  love  with  the  acquisitiveness  of  desire. 
Locke,  for  example,  finds  self-interest  and  self- 
seeking  in  both.  The  meaning  of  love,  he  ob¬ 
serves,  is  known  to  anyone  who  reflects  “upon 
the  thought  he  has  of  the  delight  which  any 
present  or  absent  thing  is  apt  to  produce  in  him. 
.  .  .  For  when  a  man  declares  in  autumn  when 
he  is  eating  them,  or  in  spring  when  there  are 
none,  that  he  loves  grapes,  it  is  no  more  but 
that  the  taste  of  grapes  delights  him.”  The 
meaning  of  desire  is,  in  Locke’s  opinion,  closely 
related.  It  consists  in  “the  uneasiness  a  man 
finds  in  himself  upon  the  absence  of  anything 
whose  present  enjoyment  carries  the  idea  of 
delight  with  it.”  We  desire,  in  short,  the  things 
we  love  but  do  not  possess. 

The  distinction  between  love  and  desire,  the 
question  whether  they  are  distinct  in  animals 
as  well  as  in  men,  and  their  relation  to  one 
another  when  they  are  distinct,  are  matters 
more  fully  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Love. 
It  is  enough  to  observe  here  that  when  writers 
use  the  two  words  interchangeably,  they  use 
both  words  to  signify  wanting  and  seeking. 

In  the  case  of  animals  and  men,  the  thing 
wanted  is  an  object  of  conscious  desire  only  if 
it  is  something  known.  In  addition  to  being 
known  as  an  object  of  science  is  known,  it  must 
also  be  deemed  good  or  pleasant — in  other 
words,  worth  having.  For  Locke,  desire,  as  we 
have  seen,  is  no  more  than  “an  uneasiness  of  the 
mind  for  want  of  some  absent  good,”  which  is 
measured  in  terms  of  pleasure  and  pain.  “What 
has  an  aptness  to  produce  pleasure  in  us  is  that 
we  call  good ,  and  what  is  apt  to  produce  pain 
in  us  we  call  evil."  That  which  we  consciously 
desire,  that  which  we  judge  to  be  desirable, 
would  thus  be  something  we  regard  as  good  for 
us,  while  the  “bad”  or  “evil”  would  be  that 


which  we  seek  to  avoid  as  somehow  injurious 
rather  than  beneficial  to  us. 

There  is  no  question  that  desire  and  aversion 
are  psychologically  connected  with  estimations 
of  good  and  evil  or  pleasure  and  pain.  This  is 
the  case  no  matter  how  we  answer  the  moral¬ 
ist’s  question,  Do  we  desire  something  because 
it  is  good,  or  do  we  call  it  “good”  simply  be¬ 
cause  we  desire  it?  The  ethical  significance  of 
the  question,  and  of  the  opposite  answers  to  it, 
is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Good  and  Evil. 

The  metaphysical  conception  of  natural  de¬ 
sire  provides  terms  for  the  psychological  anal¬ 
ysis  of  conscious  desire  and  its  object.  Viewed 
as  belonging  to  the  very  nature  of  a  thing, 
appetite,  according  to  Aristotle,  consists  in  the 
tendency  toward  “something  we  do  not  have” 
and  “which  we  need.”  Both  factors  are  essen¬ 
tial — the  privation  and  the  capacity,  or  poten¬ 
tiality,  for  having  what  is  lacked.  Privation  in 
the  strict  sense  is  always  correlative  to  poten¬ 
tiality. 

The  writers  who  use  these  terms  would  not 
speak  of  the  sunflower  being  deprived  of  wis¬ 
dom,  even  as  they  would  not  call  a  stone  blind. 
Blindness  is  the  deprivation  of  sight  in  things 
which  have  by  nature  a  capacity  to  see.  So 
when  it  is  said  that  man  by  nature  desires  to 
know,  or  that  certain  animals,  instinctively 
gregarious,  naturally  tend  to  associate  with  one 
another  in  herds  or  societies,  the  potentiality  of 
knowledge  or  social  life  is  indicated;  and  pre¬ 
cisely  because  of  these  potentialities,  ignorance 
and  solitariness  are  considered  privations. 

We  observe  here  two  different  conditions  of 
appetite  or  desire.  As  the  opposite  of  privation 
is  possession — or  of  lacking,  having — so  the  op¬ 
posite  states  of  appetite  are  the  drive  toward 
the  unpossessed  and  satisfaction  in  possession. 
We  do  not  strive  for  that  which  we  have,  unless 
it  be  to  retain  our  possession  of  it  against  loss; 
and  we  do  not  feel  satisfied  until  we  get  that 
which  we  have  been  seeking. 

“If  a  man  being  strong  desired  to  be  strong,” 
says  Socrates  in  the  Symposium ,  “or  being  swift 
desired  to  be  swift,  or  being  healthy  desired  to 
be  healthy,  he  might  be  thought  to  desire  some¬ 
thing  which  he  already  has  or  is.”  This  would  be 
a  misconception  which  we  must  avoid.  To  any¬ 
one  who  says  “I  desire  to  have  simply  what  I 


Chapter  17:  DESIRE  327 


have,”  Socrates  thinks  we  should  reply:  “You, 
my  friend,  having  wealth  and  health  and 
strength,  want  to  have  the  continuance  of 
them.  .  .  .  When  you  say,  ‘I  desire  that  which  I 
have  and  nothing  else,’  is  not  your  meaning 
that  you  want  to  have  in  the  future  what  you 
now  have?”  This  “is  equivalent  to  saying  that  a 
man  desires  something  which  is  for  him  non¬ 
existent,  and  which  he  has  not  got”;  from  which 
Socrates  draws  the  conclusion  that  everyone 
“desires  that  which  he  has  not  already,  which  is 
future  and  not  present  .  .  .  and  of  which  he  is 
in  want.” 

The  object  of  desire — natural  or  conscious — 
thus  seems  to  be  an  altered  condition  in  the 
desirer,  the  result  of  union  with  the  object  de¬ 
sired.  Man’s  natural  desire  to  know  impels  him 
to  learn.  Every  act  of  learning  which  satisfies 
this  natural  desire  consists  in  a  changed  condi¬ 
tion  of  his  mind,  a  change  which  both  Plato 
and  Aristotle  describe  as  a  motion  from  igno¬ 
rance  to  knowledge. 

When  we  consciously  desire  food,  it  is  not 
the  edible  thing  as  such  we  seek,  but  rather  the 
eating  of  it.  Only  the  eating  of  it  will  quiet  our 
desire,  with  that  change  in  our  condition  we 
call  “nourishment.”  That  the  edible  thing  is 
only  incidentally  the  object  of  our  desire  may 
be  seen  in  the  fact  that  no  way  in  which  we  can 
possess  food,  other  than  eating  it>  satisfies  hunger. 

The  distinction  between  natural  and  con¬ 
scious  desire  is  complicated  by  other  closely  re¬ 
lated  distinctions  which  psychologists  have 
made.  Freud,  for  example,  distinguishes  be¬ 
tween  conscious  and  unconscious  desire;  Dar¬ 
win  separates  instinctive  from  learned  desires; 
and  fames  observes  how  a  conscious  desire  may 
become  habitual  and  operate  almost  automat¬ 
ically,  without  our  awareness  of  either  its 
object  or  its  action. 

Part  of  the  complication  is  verbal  and  can  be 
removed  by  referring  to  natural  desires  as  non - 
conscious  rather  than  w/z-conscious.  The  word 
“conscious”  literally  means  with  knowledge. 
Creatures  which  lack  the  faculty  of  knowing 
cannot  desire  consciously.  It  does  not  follow, 
however,  that  sentient  or  conscious  beings 
cannot  have  natural  appetites.  Man’s  natural 
desire  to  know  is  a  case  in  point.  That  natural 
human  tendency  is  not  excluded  by  the  fact 


that  many  men  also  consciously  seek  knowl¬ 
edge,  knowing  what  knowledge  is  and  consider¬ 
ing  it  something  worth  having. 

The  instinctive  desires  of  animals  are  not 
generally  thought  to  operate  apart  from  the 
perception  of  the  object  toward  which  the  an¬ 
imal  is  emotionally  impelled.  The  instinctive 
desire  works  consciously,  both  on  the  side  of 
perception  and  on  the  side  of  the  emotionally 
felt  impulse.  If,  because  it  is  innate  rather  than 
learned,  or  acquired  through  experience,  we 
call  the  instinctive  desire  “natural,”  it  is  well 
to  remember  that  we  are  not  here  using  the 
word  to  signify  lack  of  consciousness.  Yet  both 
instinctive  and  acquired  desires  may  operate 
unconsciously. 

What  Freud  means  by  a  repressed  desire 
illustrates  this  point.  The  repressed  desire, 
whether  instinctual  in  origin  or  the  result  of 
some  acquired  fixation  of  the  libido  on  object 
or  ego,  would  be  a  conscious  tendency  if  it  were 
not  repressed.  Freud  compares  the  process  of  re¬ 
pression  to  the  efforts  of  a  man  to  get  from  one 
room  to  another  past  the  guard  of  a  door¬ 
keeper.  “The  excitations  in  the  unconscious 
...  to  begin  with,  remain  unconscious.  When 
they  have  pressed  forward  to  the  threshold  and 
been  turned  back  by  the  door-keeper,  they  are 
‘incapable  of  becoming  conscious’;  we  call 
them  then  repressed.  . . .  Being  repressed,  when 
applied  to  any  single  impulse,  means  being 
unable  to  pass  out  of  the  unconscious  system 
because  of  the  door-keeper’s  refusal  of  admit¬ 
tance  into  the  preconscious.” 

The  repressed  desire  is  made  to  operate  un¬ 
consciously  by  being  repressed,  which  does  not 
prevent  it  from  influencing  our  conduct  or 
thought,  but  only  from  intruding  its  driving 
force  and  its  goal  upon  our  attention.  In  con¬ 
trast,  the  desire  which  works  habitually  and 
therefore  to  some  extent  unconsciously,  is  not 
repressed,  but  merely  one  which  no  longer  de¬ 
mands  our  full  attention. 

Desire  and  emotion  are  often  identified  in  our 
description  of  the  behavior  of  animals  and  men. 
Sometimes,  however,  desire  along  with  aver¬ 
sion  is  treated  as  just  one  of  the  emotions,  and 
sometimes  all  the  emotions  are  treated  as  mani¬ 
festations  of  just  one  type  of  conscious  appetite, 
namely,  animal  as  opposed  to  rational  desire. 


328 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


The  appetitive  or  driving  aspect  of  emotions 
is  indicated  by  William  James  in  his  analysis  of 
instinctive  behavior.  The  functioning  of  an 
instinct  may  be  viewed,  according  to  James,  as 
a  train  of  psychological  events  of  “general  re¬ 
flex  type  .  .  .  called  forth  by  determinate  sen¬ 
sory  stimuli  in  contact  with  the  animal’s  body, 
or  at  a  distance  in  his  environment,”  arousing 
“emotional  excitements  which  go  with  them.” 
The  emotional  part  of  the  instinctive  behavior 
is  at  once  an  impulse  to  perform  certain  acts 
and  the  feeling  which  accompanies  the  acts 
performed.  The  sheep,  instinctively  recogniz¬ 
ing  the  wolf  as  dangerous,  fears  and  flees.  It 
runs  away  because  it  is  afraid  and  feels  fear  in 
the  act  of  flight.  When,  in  his  theory  of  the 
emotions,  James  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  the 
feeling  of  fear  results  from  running  away,  he 
does  not  mean  to  deny  that  the  emotion  of  fear 
involves  the  impulse  to  flee. 

In  its  aspect  as  impulse — or  tendency  to  act 
— an  emotion  is  a  desire,  consciously  aroused  by 
sense-perceptions  and  accompanied  by  conscious 
feelings.  This  conception  of  emotion  has  been 
variously  expressed  in  the  tradition  of  the  great 
books.  Aquinas,  for  example,  calls  all  the  emo¬ 
tions  or  passions  “movements  of  the  sensitive 
appetite.”  But  he  also  uses  the  words  “desire” 
and  “aversion”  along  with  “love”  and  “hate,” 
“anger”  and  “fear”  to  name  specific  emotions. 

Hobbes  recognizes  the  appetitive  tendency 
which  is  common  to  all  the  emotions  when  he 
finds  at  their  root  what  he  calls  “endeavor” — 
“those  small  beginnings  of  motion,  within  the 
body  of  man,  before  they  appear  in  walking, 
speaking,  striking,  and  other  visible  actions.  .  .  . 
This  endeavor,”  he  goes  on  to  say,  “when  it  is 
toward  something  which  causes  it,  is  called  ap¬ 
petite  or  desire.”  Spinoza  makes  the  same  point 
in  somewhat  different  terms.  “Desire,”  he 
writes,  “is  the  essence  itself  or  nature  of  a  per¬ 
son  in  so  far  as  this  nature  is  conceived  from  its 
given  constitution  as  determined  towards  any 
action.  ...  As  his  nature  is  constituted  in  this 
or  that  way,  so  must  his  desire  vary  and  the 
nature  of  one  desire  differ  from  another,  just 
as  the  affects  from  which  each  desire  arises  dif¬ 
fer.  There  are  as  many  kinds  of  desire,  there¬ 
fore,  as  there  are  kinds  of  joy,  sorrow,  love,  etc., 
and  in  consequence  ...  as  there  are  kinds  of 
objects  by  which  we  are  affected.” 


Those  psychologists  who  find  in  man  two 
distinct  faculties  of  knowledge — the  senses  and 
the  reason  or  intellect — also  find  in  him  two  dis¬ 
tinct  faculties  of  appetite  or  desire.  The  dis¬ 
tinction  is  perhaps  most  sharply  made  by  Aris¬ 
totle  and  Aquinas,  who  claim  that  “there  must 
be  one  appetite  tending  towards  the  universal 
good,  which  belongs  to  reason,  and  another 
with  a  tendency  towards  the  particular  good, 
which  appetite  belongs  to  sense.”  The  tradi¬ 
tional  name  for  the  intellectual  appetite,  or  the 
faculty  of  rational  desire,  is  “will.”  In  Spinoza’s 
vocabulary,  the  effort  of  desire,  “when  it  is  re¬ 
lated  to  the  mind  alone,  is  called  will,  but  when 
it  is  related  at  the  same  time  both  to  the  mind 
and  the  body,  is  called  appetite .” 

Psychologists  who  attribute  these  diverse 
modes  of  desire,  as  they  attribute  sensation  and 
thought,  to  a  single  faculty  called  “mind”  or 
“understanding,”  nevertheless  deal  with  the 
whole  range  of  appetitive  phenomena,  includ¬ 
ing  both  the  animal  passions  and  acts  of  will. 
James,  for  example,  treats  the  instinctive  acts 
associated  with  the  emotions  as  “automatic  and 
reflex”  movements,  and  separates  them  from 
“voluntary  movements  which,  being  desired 
and  intended  beforehand,  arc  done  with  full 
prevision  of  what  they  are  to  be.”  In  so  doing, 
he  draws  a  line  between  emotional  impulses  and 
acts  of  will,  even  though  he  does  not  distin¬ 
guish  two  appetitive  faculties. 

With  or  without  the  distinction  in  faculties, 
almost  all  observers  of  human  experience  and 
conduct  seem  to  agree  upon  a  distinction  in 
types  of  conscious  desire,  at  least  insofar  as  they 
recognize  the  ever-present  conflict  between  the 
passions  and  the  will.  These  matters  are  more 
fully  considered  in  the  chapters  on  Emotion 
and  Will. 

The  role  of  desire  in  human  life — especially 
emotional  desire — is  so  intimately  connected 
with  problems  of  good  and  evil,  virtue,  duty, 
and  happiness,  that  until  quite  recently  the 
subject  was  discussed  mainly  in  books  on  ethics, 
politics,  or  rhetoric  rather  than  psychology. 
Even  Freud,  who  tries  to  separate  psychological 
description  and  explanation  from  moral  princi¬ 
ples  or  conclusions,  cannot  avoid  treating  the 
effects  of  morality  upon  the  dynamics  of  desire 
and  the  life  of  the  passions.  Many  of  the  funda- 


Chapter  17:  DESIRE 


mental  terms  of  psychoanalysis — conflict,  re¬ 
pression,  rationalization,  sublimation,  to  name 
only  some — carry  the  connotation  of  moral 
issues,  even  though  they  imply  a  purely  psy¬ 
chological  resolution  of  them. 

Contrary  to  a  popular  misconception,  Freud 
expressly  declares  that  “it  is  out  of  the  question 
that  part  of  the  analytic  treatment  should  con¬ 
sist  of  advice  to  ‘live  freely/  ’’The  conflict  “be¬ 
tween  libidinal  desires  and  sexual  repression,” 
he  explains,  is  “not  resolved  by  helping  one 
side  to  win  a  victory  over  the  other.”  Although 
Freud  thinks  that  “what  the  world  calls  its 
code  of  morals  demands  more  sacrifices  than  it 
is  worth,”  he  also  declares  that  “we  must  be¬ 
ware  of  overestimating  the  importance  of  ab¬ 
stinence  in  effecting  neurosis.” 

What  Freud  calls  emotional  infantilism  re¬ 
sembles  to  some  degree  what  a  moralist  like 
Aristotle  calls  self-indulgence  or  incontinence. 
To  give  vent  to  all  the  promptings  of  desire, 
without  regard  to  the  demands  of  society  or 
reality  is  to  revert  to  infancy — a  state  charac¬ 
terized,  according  to  Freud,  by  “the  irrecon¬ 
cilability  of  its  wishes  with  reality.”  Because 
children  “live  at  the  beck  and  call  of  appetite, 
and  it  is  in  them  that  the  desire  for  what  is 
pleasant  is  strongest,”  Aristotle  thinks  it  fitting 
that  we  should  speak  of  self-indulgence  when 
it  occurs  in  an  adult  as  a  “childish  fault.” 

Aristotle  and  Freud  seem  to  be  looking  at 
the  same  facts  of  human  nature  and  seeing  them 
in  the  same  light.  What  Freud  describes  as  the 
conflict  between  the  “pleasure-principle”  and 
the  “reality-principle,”  Aristotle — and  with 
him  Spinoza — treats  as  a  conflict  between  the 
passions  and  the  reason,  and  Kant  conceives  in 
terms  of  the  opposition  between  desire  and 
duty.  What  Freud  says  of  the  reality-principle 
—that  it  “demands  and  enforces  the  postpone¬ 
ment  of  satisfaction,  the  renunciation  of  mani¬ 
fold  possibilities,  and  the  temporary  endurance 
of  pain” — parallels  traditional  statements  con¬ 
cerning  the  role  of  reason  or  of  duty  in  the 
moral  life.  Where  the  moralists  speak  of  the 
necessity  for  regulating  or  moderating  emo¬ 
tional  desires,  Freud  refers  to  the  need  of  “do¬ 


329 

mesticating”  them,  as  one  would  train  a  beast 
to  serve  the  ends  of  human  life. 

The  implication,  in  Aristotle  and  Spinoza  as 
well  as  in  Freud,  docs  not  seem  to  be  that  man’s 
animal  appetites  are  in  themselves  bad,  but 
that,  if  they  are  undisciplined  or  uncontrolled, 
they  cause  disorder  in  the  individual  life  and 
in  society.  Some  moralists,  however,  take  an 
opposite  view.  For  them  desire  is  intrinsically 
evil,  a  factor  of  discontent,  and  fraught  with 
pain. 

“While  what  we  crave  is  wanting,”  Lucretius 
writes,  “it  seems  to  transcend  all  the  rest;  then, 
when  it  has  been  gotten,  we  crave  something 
else”;  yet  as  often  as  a  man  gains  something 
new,  he  discovers  afresh  that  “he  is  not  better 
off.”  Either  our  desires  are  unsatisfied,  and  then 
we  suffer  the  agony  of  frustration;  or  they  are 
satiated  and  so  are  we — desperate  with  ennui. 
Hence,  freedom  from  all  desires,  not  just  their 
moderation,  seems  to  be  recommended  for 
peace  of  mind;  as  centuries  later  Schopenhauer 
recommended  the  negation  of  the  will  to  live  in 
order  to  avoid  frustration  or  boredom. 

Marcus  Aurelius  and  the  Stoics,  and  later 
Kant,  similarly  urge  us  “not  to  yield  to  the 
persuasions  of  the  body  .  .  .  and  never  to  be 
over-powered  either  by  the  motion  of  the  senses 
or  of  the  appetites.”  But  whereas  the  Stoics 
would  restrain  desire  “because  it  is  animal”  and 
in  order  to  avoid  pain,  Kant  argues  that  the  re¬ 
nunciation  of  desire  should  be  undertaken  “not 
merely  in  accordance  with  duty  ...  but  from 
duty,  which  must  be  the  true  end  of  all  moral 
cultivation.” 

The  opposition  between  these  two  views  of 
desire  in  the  moral  life  represents  one  of  the 
major  issues  in  ethical  theory,  further  discussed 
in  the  chapters  on  Duty  and  Virtue.  The  doc¬ 
trine  of  natural  appetite  is  crucially  relevant  to 
the  issue.  If  the  naturalist  in  ethics  is  right,  he 
is  so  by  virtue  of  the  truth  that  natural  tend¬ 
encies  are  everywhere  the  measure  of  good  and 
evil.  If,  however,  there  is  no  truth  in  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  natural  desire,  then  the  impulses  which 
spring  from  man’s  animal  passions  can  claim  no 
authority  in  the  court  of  reason. 


330 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGB 

1.  Desire  and  the  order  of  change:  eros  and  telos  331 

2.  The  analysis  of  desire  or  appetite  332 

2 a.  The  roots  of  desire  in  need,  privation,  or  potency:  the  instinctual  sources  of  the 
libido 

2 b.  The  objects  of  desire:  the  good  and  the  pleasant 

2 c.  Desire  as  a  cause  of  action:  motivation  or  purpose;  voluntariness  333 

2d.  The  satisfaction  of  desire:  possession  and  enjoyment  334 

3.  The  modes  of  desire  or  appetite 

30.  Natural  appetite:  desires  determined  by  nature  or  instinct 

$b.  Desires  determined  by  knowledge  or  judgment  333 

(1)  The  distinction  between  sensitive  and  rational  desire:  emotional  tendencies 

and  acts  of  the  will 

(2)  Conscious  and  unconscious  desires:  habitual  desire  336 

3 c.  Desire  and  love:  their  distinction  and  connection 

3 d.  Desire  and  aversion  as  emotional  opposites  337 

4.  The  economy  of  desire  in  human  life 

4 a.  The  conflict  of  desires  with  one  another 

4^.  The  attachment  of  desires:  fixations,  projections,  identifications,  transferences 

4c.  The  focusing  of  desires:  emotional  complexes  338 

4 d.  The  discharge  of  desires:  catharsis  and  sublimation 

5.  Desire  as  ruler 

5 a.  Desire  ruling  imagination:  daydreaming  and  fantasy 
5 b.  Desire  ruling  thought:  rationalization  and  wishful  thinking 

5 c.  Desire  ruling  action:  the  unchecked  expression  of  desires;  incontinence  339 

6.  Desire  as  subject  to  rule  340 

6a.  The  regulation  of  desire  by  reason:  the  discipline  of  moral  virtue  or  duty 

6b.  The  restraint  or  renunciation  of  desire:  abstention,  inhibition,  repression  341 

6c.  The  results  of  repression:  dreaming,  symbolic  over-reactions,  neuroses 

7.  Desire  and  infinity 

7 a.  The  infinite  tendency  of  desires 

(1)  The  pursuit  of  pleasure  342 

(2)  The  lust  for  power 

(3)  The  accumulation  of  wealth 

7 b.  The  restless  search  for  the  infinite:  the  desire  for  the  vision  of  God 


343 


Chapter  17:  DESIRE 


331 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James:  Psychology,  116a-119b,the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  163. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45— (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Desire  and  the  order  of  change:  eros  and  telos 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  103c-d  /  Symposium ,  165c- 
166b  /  Phaedo ,  241b-242b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [i92ai6— 24] 
268b-c;  bk  11,  ch  8-9  275d-278a,c;  bk  viii, 
ch  4  [255a30-b3i]  340a-c  /  Generation  and 
Corruption ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [333a35~334a9]  434b- 
435a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [984b8]-cH  4 
[985^8]  502d-503c;  ch  7  [988b6-i6]  506c-d; 
bk  ix,  ch  8  [io5oa3~b6]  575d-576b;  bk  xii, 
ch  5  [io7ob36-io7ia4]  600b-c;  ch  7  [io72a 
2°-bi3]  602b-d;  ch  10  [io75bi-io]  606b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  hi,  ch  6  202d- 
203a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [1-6  i]  la-d; 
[1022-1037]  13c-d;  [1052-1082]  14a-c;  bk  ii 
[167-183]  17a-b;  [1048-1066]  28b-c;  bk  iv 
[823-857]  55a-b;  bk  v  [156-194]  63a-c; 
[416-431]  66c-d;  [509-533]  67d-68a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  v  100c-106b  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  18-21  166d-168c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1,  la;  bk 
iv,  par  15-17  23a-c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch 

4- 5  344b-345b;  bk  xix,  ch  12-14  517b-520d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq 

5- 6  23b-30d  passim;  qq  19-20  108d-124a 
passim;  q  26,  a  2,  ans  150c-151a;  q  48,  a  i, 


ans  and  rep  4  259b-260c;  qq  59-60  306b- 
314c  passim;  q  62,  a  i,  ans  317d-318c;  q 
104,  a  3,  rep  i  537b-d;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  541c- 
542a;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  2  610b-611b:  a  8 
615a-c;  q  2,  a  5,  rep  3  618d-619c;  q  26,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  3  734a-d;  q  27,  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  3-4  738c-739c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvii 
[9i]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c;  paradise,  i  [94-142] 
107b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  50a;  61a-c;  part 

iv,  271d 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  ii,  38a-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  426d-427a 

30  Bacon:  Advancemetit  of  Learning,  73a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  pref  422b, d- 
424a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72,  184b;  75  185b-186a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  29-41  184d-188c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  293d  [fn  3];  304b-d; 
315b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385a- 
386d  /  Judgement,  465c-466c  esp  466b, d 
[fn  1];  483d-484b;  577c-578a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  161d- 
168b  esp  162a-163d,  164c,  165b-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  40c-42a;  96b-98a,c 

53  James:  Psychology,  4a-7a  esp  4b-5a 


332 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  Desire  and  the  order  of  change:  eros  and 
telos.) 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle  639a- 
663d  esp  651d-654c,  662c-663d  /  Ego  and  Id , 
703d-712a  esp  711c-712a  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents ,  790a-79id;  799a-8G0a  /  New 
Introductory  Lectures ,  849c-851d 

2.  The  analysis  of  desire  or  appetite 

2a.  The  roots  of  desire  in  need,  privation,  or 
potency:  the  instinctual  sources  of  the 
libido 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  24a-c  /  Symposium ,  162a-166b  / 
Republic ,  bk  iv,  352b-d  /  Philebus ,  621c-622b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [i92ai6-24] 
268b-c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  vii,  ch  i 
[581*21— b22]  107a-b  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk 

iii,  ch  14  [675^5-30]  205b  /  Ethics ,  bk  iii, 
ch  11  [1 1  i8b8— 18]  365a-b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch 
13  [i389b32-35l  637b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  iii,  ch  6  202d- 
203a;  ch  8  205a-207b;  ch  13,  211d-212d 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [858-876] 
55b-c;  bk  v  [156-173]  63a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  i  100c- 
101c;  ch  10  105d-106b  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr 

iv,  ch  18-21  166d-168c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  1-6  la-2c; 
bk  iii,  par  1  13b-c;  par  10  15b-d;  bk  iv,  par 
15-19  23a-24b;  bk  v,  par  1-2  27a-c;  bk  vii, 
par  16-23  48c-50c 

19  Aquinas:  Sumrna  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  3,  rep  3  25a-d;  q  19,  a  i,  rep  2  108d-109c; 
q  59,  a  2,  ans  307c-308b;  q  81,  a  2  429c- 
430c;  part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3-4 
738c-739c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvii 
[9i]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c;  xx  [i24]~xxi  [75] 
84c-85d  passim;  paradise,  i  [1 03-120]  107b-c 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61a-d 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear ,  act  ii,  sc  iv 
[263-274]  261c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  347c;  349a- 
350a;  402a-d 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  vi,  97d-98a;  99d- 
102d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  2-7  425a-426b 
33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  100  191a-192b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  6  177a-b;  ch  xxi,  sect  30-35  185a-186d 
esp  sect  31  185c-d 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  346b 
43  Mill:  Liberty ,  295 b-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par 
190-195  66a-67a 

51  Tolstoy:  JDzr  Peace ,  bk  xiii,  577a-578b 

esp  577d-578a;  bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c- 
631c;  epilogue  i,  665a-d 
53  James:  Psychology,  51a-b;  767a 


2  /o  2£ 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams ,  363c-d  / 
Narcissism ,  400c-402c  /  Instincts ,  412c-413a; 
414a-d  /  General  Introduction ,  574a;  580a-d; 
591d-592b;  615b-616b;  618d-619a  /  /%cW 
the  Pleasure  Principle ,  654a-c;  657d-659a  / 
Group  Psychology ,  673b-c  /  Ego  and  Id,  710c- 
711b  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  789c- 
791c  esp  791a  /  Introductory  Lectures , 

846a-851d  esp  846a-847b,  849b-851c 

2&.  The  objects  of  desire:  the  good  and  the 
pleasant 

7  Plato:  Euthy demus,  69a- 7 la  /  Phaedrus, 
120a-122a  /  Symposium ,  161d-166b  /  Meno, 
I77d-178b  /  Gorgias ,  262a-264b;  275b-280d  / 
Republic ,  bk  ii,  310c-d;  bk  iv,  351b-352d; 
BK  IX,  422c-425b  esp  423b-424d  /  Philebus , 
614a  /  Laws,  bk  v,  689c-690c;  bk  vi,  712b; 
bk  vm,  735c- 736c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [iiob38-ma6] 
155d;  bk  hi,  ch  1-4  162a-166b;  bk  vi,  ch  8 
[i46a37-bi9j  200b-c;  [i46b36— 147*1 1]  200d- 
201a  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [192*16-24]  268b-c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982bi2-27]  500d- 
501a;  [983*14-21]  501b-c;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1072* 
23-bi3]  602b-d  /  ,So«/,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [414*28^5] 
644c;  bk  111,  ch  7  [431*1^12]  663c-664b;  cn 
10  [433ai3“bl9]  665d-666c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  viii,  cii 

1  [589*3-10]  115b  /  0/  Animals ,  bk  ii, 

ch  17  [66ia6— 8]  188a  /  Motion  of  Animals, 
ch  6  [7oob23-3o]  236a  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[1094*1-3]  339a;  ch  2  [1094*17-22]  339b;  bk 

vi,  ch  2  387d-388b;  bk  vii,  ch  n-14  403c- 
406a, c;  bk  x,  ch  2  426c-427b;  ch  3  [1174* 
4— 1 1]  428b;  ch  4  [1175*10-22]  429c;  ch  5 
[1175^4-33]  430b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  6-7 
602d-607d;  ch  10  [1369*1-4]  612b;  ch  ii 
[1370*17-28]  613c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [1-61] 
15a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  4  108d- 
110a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  vi  21a-26a  pas¬ 
sim  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  v  100c-106b  /  Fourth 
Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  35,  177d-178a  /  Fifth  En¬ 
nead,  tr  v,  ch  12  234a-d  /  Ennead,  tr 

vii,  ch  30  336b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  9-18  lOd- 
13a;  bk  x,  par  29-33  78d-80b  /  City  of  God , 
bk  xii,  ch  6  345b-346c;  bk  xix,  ch  i  507a- 
509a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  3-4  625b-c; 
ch  22-30  629b-633b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq  5-6 
23b-30d  passim;  q  16,  a  i,  ans  94b-95c;  a  4 
97a-c;  qq  19-20  108d-124a  passim;  q  26,  a  2, 
ans  150c-151a;  q  48,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  4 
259b-260c;  qq  59-60  306b-314c  passim,  esp 
q  60,  aa  3-5  311d-314c;  q  62,  a  i,  ans  31 7d- 
318c;  q  63,  a  4  328b-329a;  qq  80-83  427a- 
440b  passim;  q  104,  a  3,  rep  i  537b-d;  q  105, 
a  4,  ans  541c-542a;  q  106,  a  2,  ans  546d-547c; 


2c 

part  i— ii,  qq  1-5  609a-643d  passim;  q  8  655a- 
657c;  q  22,  a  2,  ans  721c-722c;  a  3,  rep  2 
722d-723b;  q  23  723c-727a;  q  26,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  3  734a  d;  q  27  737a-740a;  q  30 
749a-752b  passim;  q  33,  a  2  766a-767a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i— ii,  q  93, 
a  2,  ans  221d-223a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  98, 
a  3  1074a-c 

21  Dante;  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvii 
[9i]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c;  paradise,  v  [1-12] 
112a  b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61a-62c;  76c-77b; 
96a;  part  iv,  272c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  381  d- 
382a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  73a-74a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iii,  50b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  4-13  398d- 
400d;  prop  39,  schol  408b-d;  prop  56 
414a-d;  the  affects,  def  1-3  416b-417a; 
part  iv,  def  1-2  424a;  prop  9-13  426d-428a; 
prop  19-28  429d-431c;  prop  63  443d-444a; 
prop  65-66  444b-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  81  186b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  3  104b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  vii,  sect  3  131d- 
132a;  ch  xx,  sect  6  177a-b;  ch  xxi,  sect 
29-48  184d-190d  passim,  esp  sect  31  185c-d, 
sect  42  188c;  sect  55-56  192c-193b;  sect 
61-62  194b-d;  sect  70  197a-b;  sect  73  198c- 
199c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
264d-265b  /  Practical  Reason ,  298a-300d; 
315c-317b;  330c-331a;  341c-342a  /  Judge¬ 
ment  y  605d-606b  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  448a-450b;  461c-464d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  123- 
124  44a-d  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv, 
319b-320a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [1194-1216]  29b-30a; 
part  ii  [11,559-586]  281b-282a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  308a-b;  316a-317a; 
592d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xi,  524c-527a; 
bk  xii,  560a-561c;  bk  xiii,  577a-578b  esp 
577d-578a;  bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c- 
631c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  198b-211a;  808b-814b  esp 
812b-813a 

54  Freud:  Instincts ,  414a-b;  418d-420b  esp 
420a-b  /  General  Introduction ,  592c-593a  /  Be¬ 
yond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  639a-640c  /  Civi¬ 
lization  and  Its  Discontents ,  772a-b 

2c.  Desire  as  a  cause  of  action:  motivation  or 
purpose;  voluntariness 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  95a-b  /  Symposium ,  163a- 
166b  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  352d-353b  /  Timaeus , 
474b-d  /  Laws,  bk  vi,  712b;  bk  ix,  751b-d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics^  bk  ii,  ch  2  [994^-16] 
512d-513a;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [i025b23-25]  547d; 
bk  ix,  ch  5  [i047b35-ic>48a24]  573b-c;  ch  7 


333 

[i049a5~i2]  574c  d  /  Soul,  bk  111,  cii  7 
[43 ia8— bi 2]  663c-664b;  cii  9-1 1  664 d  667a 
9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  An  mals,  cii  6-11 
235d  239d  esp  ch  6  235d-236b,  ch  10  238c- 
239a  /  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  355b,d-357b  esp 
[uua2i-h3]  357a  b;  cii  12  365d-366a,c;  iik 
vi,  ch  2  387d  388b  /  Politics ,  bk  11,  cii  7 
[i267n3-8]  462c-d  /  RJietoric ,  bk  1,  ch  10 
611c  613a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-293] 
18b  d;  bk  iv  [877-906]  55d-56a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  v,  cii  10  105d- 
106b  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  18-21  166d- 
168c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  cii  4  344b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  25  25c; 
bk  viii,  par  19-27  58b-60c  /  City  of  God ,  bk 
xii,  ch  6  345b-346c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  i'heologica,  part  i,  q  14,  a 
8,  ans  and  rep  i  82c-83b;  q  18,  a  3,  ans  106b- 
107c;  q  19,  a  4  lllc-112c;  q  41,  a  2  218c-219d; 
q  57,  a  4,  rep  3  298a-299a;  q  59,  a  i,  rep  3 
306c-307b;  q  75,  a  3,  rep  3  380c-381b;  q  78, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  4  407b-409a;  q  80,  a  2, 
rep  3  428a-d;  q  81,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2 
430c-431d;  part  i-ii,  q  i,  aa  1-6  609b-614c; 
Q  6  644a-651c;  qq  16-17  684a-693d;  q  22,  a  2, 
rep  2  721c-722c;  q  28,  a  6  744b-d 

21  Dante:  Divme  Comedy,  purgatory,  xviii 

[I9~75l  80a'C 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  53a;  61a-c;  64a-c; 
76c;  part  11,  112d-113c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  60b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  partiii,  the  affecis,  def  i 
416b-d;  part  iv,  def  7  424b;  prop  19  429d; 
prop  59  442b-d 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  24b- 2 6b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  3  104b-d;  sect  13  107d-108c;  bk  ii,  ch 
xx,  sect  6  177a-b;  ch  xxi,  sect  29-48  184d- 
190d  passim,  esp  sect  33  186a;  sect  73 
198c-199c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  338c-339b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
262a-c;  271c-d;  279b;  282d-283d  /  Practical 
Reason ,  293d  [fn  3];  298d-300a;  303b-304b; 
341c-342a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
385a-386d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  346c-348c  / 
Utilitarianism,  461c-464d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  11 
15a-b;  par  17  16c;  part  ii,  par  123  44a-b  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  162a  c;  164b- 
166b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  308a-314c  passim; 
316a-317a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  4a-7a;  8a-9a:  13a-15a; 
51a-b;  767a-768a;  788a-799b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  363b-364d; 
377c-378b  /  Instincts ,  412c-413a;  418d-419a  / 
General  Introduction,  453b-476a,c  passim,  esp 
469a-470c,  473 b-d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents,  768b-c 


Chapter  17:  DESIRE 


334 

(2.  The  analysis  of  desire  or  appetite.) 

2d.  The  satisfaction  of  desire:  possession  and 
enjoyment 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  162b-c  /  Gorgias,  275  b- 
276b  /  Republic ,  bk  ix,  421a-425b  /  Philebus , 
620a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  8  [i46bi3— 19] 
200c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  io-ii  364b- 
365d;  bk  x,  ch  4-5  428b-430d  esp  ch  4 
[ii75aio-22]  429c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iii  [1003- 
1010]  43a;  bk  iv  [1073-1120]  58a-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  2-4  9b-d; 
bk  iv,  par  15  23a-b;  bk  vi,  par  9-10  37c-38b; 
par  26  42d-43a;  bk  viii,  par  6-8  54c-55a  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  3-4  625b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  5,  a 
6,  ans  and  rep  2  27c-28b;  part  i-ii,  q  i,  aa 
7-8  614c-615c;  q  2,  a  6  619d-620d;  q  3,  a  4 
625a-626b;  q  4,  aa  1-2  629d-631a;  q  5,  a  8, 
rep  3  642d-643d;  q  ii  666b,d-669b;  q  27,  a  3, 
ans  738c-739c;  q  30,  a  4,  rep  3  751c-752b; 
qq  31-34  752b-772b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  qq 
28-29  527b-533a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  69,  a  4, 
ans  889c-890c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xviii 
tI9~39]  80a-b;  paradise,  iii  [34-90]  109d- 
110b;  xxxii  [52-72]  155b-c;  xxxm  [46-48] 
156c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  76c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  32  406b-c; 
prop  35-36 406d-407c;  prop  39,  scHOL408b-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  109  193b-194a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  346b 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  298a-300a;  341c- 
342a  /  Judgement ,  470a-471b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  347b-348b  / 
Utilitarianism ,  448d-449c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  45 
23c-d;  par  59  27a-b;  part  ii,  par  124  44b-d; 
part  iii,  par  154  57c;  par  182  64a  /  Philosophy 
of  History ,  intro,  165b-166a 

47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part  i  [2605-3216]  63b- 
79a,  part  11  [9192-9573]  223b-232a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  308a-309d  passim; 
312b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  725b-726a;  812a-813b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams ,  363c-d; 
377c-d  /  Instincts ,  412d-413a  /  Beyond  the 
Pleasure  Principle ,  663a  /  Ego  0/2^  Zrf,  71  ld- 
712a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  773b-d 

3.  The  modes  of  desire  or  appetite 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Soul ,  bk  iii,  ch  9  [432^-7]  665a 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [i37oai7-27] 
613c 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  4-5  108c- 
109d 


2d  to  2>a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  29-33 
78d-80b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  6, 
a  1,  rep  2  28b-d;  q  19,  a  i,  ans  108d-109c; 
q  59,  a  1,  ans  306c-307b;  q  78,  a  i,  rep  3 
407b-409a;  q  80  427a-428d;  part  i-ii,  q  5, 
a  8,  rep  3  642d-643d;  q  8,  a  1,  ans  655b- 
656a;  q  26,  a  i  734a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvii 
[9i]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c  esp  xvii  [91-96]  79b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61a-62a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  9  399b-c; 
prop  56-57  414a-415b;  the  affects,  def  i 
416b-d;  part  iv,  prop  59  442b-d;  appendix, 
i-iii  447a-b;  part  v,  prop  4,  schol  453b-d 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  119a-b  /  Descent 
of  Man ,  287d-289a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  8a-17b  esp  8a-9a,  13a-15a; 
47b-52b  esp  49b-50a,  51a-52a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  591d-593b  / 
War  and  Death,  757d-759d  esp  758d-759a 

3 a.  Natural  appetite:  desires  determined  by 
nature  or  instinct 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120b-c  /  Symposium,  165b-c 
/  Republic,  bk  ii,  311b-312b  /  Timaeus, 
474b-d  /  Philebus,  621c-622b  /  Laws,  bk  vi, 
712b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [192^6-24] 
268b-c;  bk  viii,  ch  4  [255^0^31]  340a-c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980^2-28]  499a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  v,  ch  8 
[542ai7-b4]  68d-69a;  bk  vi,  ch  i8-bk  vii, 
ch  2  97b-108c  passim,  esp  bk  vi,  ch  18  97b- 
99c,  bk  vii,  ch  1  106b,d-108a;  bk  viii,  ch 
1  [589^-9]  115b  /  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  11  [m8b 
8-18]  365a-b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [1370s1 
18-25]  613c;  bk  11,  ch  7  [1385*21-25]  631d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  iii,  ch  6  202d- 
203a;  ch  8  205a-207b;  ch  13,  211d-212d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1— 61] 
15a-d;  bk  iv  [858-876]  55b-c;  [1037-1057] 
57d 

15  Tacitus  :  Histories,  bk  ii,  224d-225a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  v  100c-106b  / 
Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  28, 157a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  6,  a 
1,  rep  2  28b-d;  q  12,  a  i,  ans  50c-51c;  a  8,  rep 
4  57b-58b;  q  19,  a  i,  ans  108d-109c;  a  4 
lllc-112c;  q  26,  a  2,  ans  150c-151a;  q  59,  a  i, 
ans  306c-307b;  q  60  310a-314c;  Q  62,  a  i, 
ans  317d-318c;  q  63,  a  3  327b-328b;  q  75,  a  6, 
ans  383c-384c;  q  78,  a  i,  rep  3  407b-409a; 
q  80,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  1,3  427b-428a;  q  82, 
a  1  431d-432c;  part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  8  642d-643d; 
q  8,  a  1,  ans  655b-656a;  q  10,  a  2  663d-664d; 
q  12,  a  5  672a-c;  q  13,  a  2  673c-674c;  q  26, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  734a-d;  a  2,  ans  734d- 
735c;  q  27,  a  2,  rep  3  737d-738c;  q  30, 
aa  3-4  750d-752b;  q  34,  a  i,  rep  2  768c- 
769d;  q  36,  aa  1-2  780c-782b;  q  40,  a  3  794c- 
795a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


3b  to  3b(  1)  Chapter  17:  DESIRE  335 


20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  221d  223a;  q  109,  a  3 
340c-341b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  93,  a  i,  ans 
1037d-1039a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvii 
[9i]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c;  xx  [124FXXI  [75] 
84c-85d  passim;  paradise,  i  [103-120]  107b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Manciple's  Tw/d’ [17,104-1 44  ]490a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  parti,  50a;  61ad;  76c-d; 
part  iv,  271d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  224d-225a; 489b-d 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  347c;  349a- 
350a;  402a-d;  405c-406a;  476c-477a 
31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  60b  /  Medi¬ 
tations,  vi,  97d-98a;  99d-103d  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  124b;  156a-d 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  395a-d;  prop  7 
399a;  part  iv,  prop  19  429d 
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  81  186b  /  Geometrical  Dem¬ 
onstration,  440b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  3  104b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
3  405b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  338c-339b;  346b 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  130b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  11 
15a-b;  additions,  121  136c-d 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  119a  /  Descent  of 
Man,  287d-289a:304a-313a  passim,  esp304b,d 
[fn  5],  307d-309d,  310c-311b;  371c-372c 

53  James:  Psychology,  49b-50a;  198b-199a;  204b- 
211a  esp  205b-206a,  209a-b;  700a-737a  esp 
700a-701a,  712b-737a;  799a-b;  890b-892a 
esp  891b  [fn  1] 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  15d-18a  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams , 
363c-d  /  Narcissism,  400c-402c  esp  401  b-c  / 
Instincts,  414b-421c  passim,  esp  414c-415d  / 
General  Introduction ,  569c-576d  esp  574a-d  / 
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  651d-654c; 
658b-659d  /  War  and  Death,  758a-759a; 
764d-765a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents , 
787a-788d  esp  787a-c;  789b-791d  /  Afow  /«- 
troductory  Lectures,  837b-d;  846a-851d  esp 
846a-847b;  883b-c 

3&.  Desires  determined  by  knowledge  or  judg¬ 
ment 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  59a-62d  /  Phaedrus,  120b-c 
/  Philebus,  621c-622b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  8  [i46b36- 
i47an]  200d-201a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii, 
ch  7  [1072^6-30]  602b  /  Sow/,  bk  11,  ch  2 
[4I3bl9_24l  643d;  ch  3  [4i4a28-bi6]  644c-d; 
bk  iii,  ch  3  [427^1-24]  660a;  ch  7  [43ia8— bi2] 
663c-664b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  3  [1113*3-13] 
359a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [1370*17-28]  613c 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  28, 
157a-b;  tr  iv,  ch  20,  168a-b  /  Sixth  Ennead, 
tr  viii,  ch  2-4  343c-344d 


18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  29  53 
78d  80b  /  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  6  380b  c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  78, 
a  1,  rep  3  407b-409a;  qq  80-83  427a-440b; 
part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  2  737d~738c;  q  40,  a  2 
793d-794c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvii 
[9i]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61c-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iii,  50b  /  Medi¬ 
tations,  iii,  82d-83a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  axiom  3  373d; 
part  iv,  prop  59  442b-d;  prop  61-62  443a-d; 
appendix,  iii  447b;  part  v,  prop  4,  sciiol 
453b-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  338c-339b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
264d-265b  esp  265b, d  [fn  1] 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310c-313a  passim, 
esp  312a-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  13a-15a;  51a-52a;  729b- 
730a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  501d-504b; 
593a  /  War  and  Death,  758a-759a 

3&(l)  The  distinction  between  sensitive  and 
rational  desire:  emotional  tendencies 
and  acts  of  the  will 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ix,  421a-425b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  ix,  ch  5  573a- 

c;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72a27~29]  602b  /  Soul, 
bk  iii,  ch  7  [43ia8-bi2]  663c-664b;  ch  9 
[432b5~7]  665a;  ch  10  [433b5— 13]  666b;  ch 
10  [433b27l_CH  11  [434a22l  666c-667a  / 

Memory  and  Reminiscence ,  ch  2  [453“  15-31] 
695b-d 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  10  [i368b28- 
1 3^9a4]  612a-b;  ch  ii  [i37oai7~28]  613c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi  21a-26a  pas¬ 
sim  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  i  IOOc-IOIc; 
tr  vi,  ch  4-5  108c-109d  /  Fourth  Ennead, 
tr  iv,  ch  28  172a-173b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr 
viii,  ch  2-4  343c-344d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  1,  ans  108d-109c;  q  59,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i 
306c-307b;  q  79,  a  i,  rep  2  414a-d;  q  80, 
a  2  428a-d;  q  82,  a  2,  rep  3  432d-433c;  a  5 
435c-436c;  q  106,  a  2,  rep  3  546d-547c;  part 
i-ii,  q  1,  a  2,  rep  3  610b-611b;  q  6,  a  2  646a-c; 
q  11,  a  2  667b-d;  q  12,  a  5  672a-c;  q  13,  a  2 
673c-674c;  q  15,  a  2  682a-c;  q  16,  a  2  684d- 
685b;  q  17,  a  2  687d-688b;  q  22,  a  3  722d- 
723b;  q  24,  a  2,  ans  727d-728c;  q  26,  a  i, 
ans  734a-d;  q  30,  a  1  749a-d;  a  3  750d-75lc; 
q  31,  aa  3-4  754a-755c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  18, 
a  2  811d-812b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xviii 
[r9— 75]  80a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  63a:  64a-c;  part 
ii,  162c 

31  Descartes  :  Discourse,  part  iii,  50b 


336 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3  b.  Desires  deterrniyied  by  knowledge  or  judg¬ 
ment .  3^(1)  The  distinction  between 

sensitive  and  rational  desire:  emotional 
tendencies  and  acts  of  the  will.) 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  48,  schol 
391b-c;  part  hi,  prop  9,  schol  399c;  prop 
58-59  415c-416b;  the  affects,  def  i,  expl 
416c-d;  part  v,  prop  32  460b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  11,  ch 
xxi,  sect  30  185a-c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
264d-265b  esp  265b, d  [fn  if;  271c-d;  279b; 
282d-2S3b;  284d-285a  /  Practical  Reason , 
301a-c;  303b-304b;  314d-317c;  330c-331a  / 
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  385c-386b  / 
judgement ,  483d-484b;  605d-606b  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  463c-464d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  19 
16d-17a;  par  25-26  18a-c;  part  ii,  par  139 
48d-49b;  part  hi,  par  194  66c-d;  additions, 
121  136c-d;  131  137d  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
intro,  163a-164a;  part  iv,  362b-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310c-314c;  592d- 
593a 

53  James:  Psychology,  8a-9a;  13a-15a;  767b-768a; 
790a-799b  passim,  esp  794a-798b 

54  Freud:  Hysteria,  110c  /  Interpretation  of 
Dreams,  377c-380d  esp  377c-378b,  379d- 
380b  /  General  Introduction,  501d'504b;  590a- 
593b;  607d-608c;  615b-616c  /  Ego  and  Id, 
702c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  837b-838d; 
843d-844b 

3^(2)  Conscious  and  unconscious  desires:  ha¬ 
bitual  desire 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ix,  416a-c 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  348b,d-349b; 
ch  5  351  b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  viii,  par  10-11 
55c-56b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  87, 
a  2  466c-467b;  part  i-ii,  q  i,  a  6,  rep  3 
614a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3  Sb-9a;  a  5  lOb-d;  q  56,  a  4  32b-33c;  a  6 
34b-35a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  9,  schol  399c; 
the  affects,  def  1,  expl  416c-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
262a-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385c- 
38ob 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  463d-464d 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  119a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  407c-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  8b-9a;  90b-93a  passim; 
788a-792a 

54  Freed:  Hysteria,  110 b-c  /  Interpretation  of 
Dreams,  357b-358c;  363b-365c  esp  364c; 
369a-b;  377b-387a,c  passim,  esp  386d-387a  / 
Unconscious ,  428a-443d  esp  428a,  429d-430b, 
432c-433d,  436b-437c  /  General  Introduction, 


3b( 2)  to  3c 

452a-c;  453b-476a,c  esp  468a-469c,  473c-d; 
501d-503d  esp  503b  c;  531d-532b;  599d  / 
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  643d-646a  / 
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  720a 

3 c.  Desire  and  love:  their  distinction  and  con¬ 
nection 

5  Euripides:  Iphigetiia  at  Aulis  [543-589]  429d- 
430a 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  20c-d;  23d-24d  /  Phaedrus, 
115a-129d  esp  120b-c,  123b-124a  /  Symposium , 
164c-165b  /  Laws,  bk  viii,  735c-736c 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  22 
[68a25~b7]  89d-90a  /  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  7 
[i46a9-i2]  199d;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [i52b6~9]  207c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  ii  [i  1  i8b8— 18] 
365a-b;  bk  viii,  ch  1-8  406b,d-411d  passim; 
ch  13-14  414d-416d;  bk  ix,  ch  i  416b,d-417c 
passim;  ch  5  420a-c;  ch  8  421d-423a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1037- 
1062]  57d-58a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  24  203c- 
210a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  7-TR  vi, 
ch  9  20a-26a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  i-bk  iii, 
par  1  9a-13c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  7 
380c-381c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch  10, 
661d-662a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  i,  rep  2  108d-109c;  a  2,  ans  109c-110b; 
q  20,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  120a-121b;  a  2, 
rep  3  121b-122a;  q  60,  a  3,  ans  311d-312b; 
part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  1,  rep  3  615d-616c;  q  23,  a  2 
724c-725c;  a  4  726a-727a;  q  25,  a  2  731b- 
732a;  a  3,  ans  732a-733a;  q  26  733d-737a; 
q  27,  aa  3-4  738c-740a;  q  28,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  1-2  740b-741a;  a  2,  ans  741a-742a;  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  2-3  742a-d;  a  4  742d-743c;  q 
30,  a  2  749d-750d;  q  32,  a  3,  rep  3  760d-761c; 
a  8,  ans  764c-765b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  parti-ii,  q  62, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  61c-62b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  xvii  [9i]-xvm  [75]  79b-80c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61c;  63a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  83d-84a;  398c-399d; 
424d-425a; 473a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i, 
sc  11  [308-321]  107d-108a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  79d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  the  affects,  def 
6  417b-c;  part  iv,  appendix,  i-ii  447a-b; 
xix-xx  449a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [500-617] 
243a-245b 

35  Locke:  Fluman  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  4-6  176d-177b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345c-346b 

53  James:  Psychology,  204b-209b  passim 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  404d-406b;  409b-411a,c  / 
Instincts,  420a-421a  /  General  hitroduction , 


3d  to  4  b 

581b;  617c-618a  /  Group  Psychology,  673b 
674a;  679a-b;  681c-683a;  693a  694b  /  Civili¬ 
zation  and  Its  Discontents ,  783b-c  /  A'tw  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures,  847d-848a 

3d,  Desire  and  aversion  as  emotional  opposites 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  352d-353a 

8  Aristotle:  Soul ,  bk  hi,  ch  7  [43 ia8— b9] 
663c-664a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vi,  ch  2  [1 139*21 -31] 
387d-388a;  bk  x,  cii  2  [1173*5-13]  427a  b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  6  380b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Sitmma  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
23,  a  2  724c-725c;  a  4  726a-727a;  q  25,  aa 
1-2  730b-732a;  a  3,  rep  3  732a-733a;  q  30 
749a-752b;  q  35,  a  6  777b-778c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii  395a-422a,c  esp 
trop  12-13  400b-d,  prop  15-48  401a-411a, 
prop  51  411c-412a,  the  affects,  def  2-3 
416d-417a,  def  6-7  417b-d;  part  iv,  def  5 
424b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  4-5  176d-177a 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385a-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  708a- 709a 

54  Freud:  Instincts ,  418c-421a,c  esp  418c  /  Be¬ 
yond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  659b-d  /  Group 
Psychology,  677c-678c  /  Ego  and  Id,  708d- 
710c  esp  709d-7l0c  /  War  and  Death,  766a-b 
/  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  790a- 79 lb 

4.  The  economy  of  desire  in  human  life 

4a.  The  conflict  of  desires  with  one  another 

Apocrypha:  Susanna,  22-24 — iP)  OT,  Daniel, 
13:22-24 

N ew  T estament :  Matthew ,  6: 24 ;  8 121-22 ;  26 :3 6- 
45^  /  Romans,  7:14-25  /  Philippians ,  1:21-26 
/  James,  4:1-10 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  128a-d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  ix,  ch  5  [1048*21- 
24]  573c  /  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  10  [433b5— 13]  666b; 
ch  11  [434*10-15]  666d-667a  /  Memory  and 
Reminiscence,  ch  2  [453ai5~ 31]  695b-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii  395a-406a,c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1073- 
1085]  58a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  [332-360]  176a-177a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  11-12  21d- 
22b;  bk  x,  par  39  81b-c;  par  41-64  81c-87d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  6, 
aa  6-7  649a-650d;  q  9,  a  2,  rep  3  658d- 
659c;  q  10,  a  3  664d-665c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  77, 
a  1  145a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  29,  a  i  530b-531a; 
part  iii,  q  18,  a  6  814d-815d;  part  iii  suppl, 
q  96,  aa  11-12  1063d-1065b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  iv  [1-27] 
llOd-llla 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  297b-d;  350d-354b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  m-iv395a-450d  passim. 


337 

esp  part  iii,  prop  31  405d  406a,  p\rt  iv, 
def  5  424b,  prop  7,  corol  426b.  prop  15-18 
428a-429d,  prop  60-61  442d-443b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  17 
16c;  additions,  13  118c 

47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  parti  [354  513]  lla-14b, 
[614-685]  17a-18a,  [1110-1117]  27b-28a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic!{,  394a-397a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  309c-3l3a;  318d- 
319a 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  293c-294a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iii, 
53d-54b 

53  James:  Psychology,  199b-204b;  705a-706b; 
717a-718a;  720br734b-735a;  791a-798b  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  794a-795a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  7a-8a  /  Hysteria ,  65c-66a;  82c-83a; 
117a  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  370  b  /  Nar¬ 
cissism,  407a-c  /  Unconscious,  433d-436c  esp 
436b-c/  General  Introduction ,  467b-476a,c  esp 
469c-470c,  474d-475a;  501d-504b;  589c-593b 
esp589c-591d;  599d-600d;615b-616c;624b  d; 
633 d- 63  5 d  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle, 
640c-d/  Ego  and  Id,  699a-c;  704d;  712a-7l7a,c 
passim  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety, 
720a-733c  passim,  esp  722b-d,  724a-725a, 
731c-d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  783d- 
784a;  789b-791d  passim  /  New  Introductory 
Lectures,  843d-845a 

4b.  The  attachment  of  desires:  fixations,  pro¬ 
jections,  identifications,  transferences 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1058- 
1072] 57d-58a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  15  155c-156b 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  66c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  10b-llb 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  iii,  sc  ii 
[123-195]  87c-88a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  13—17  400c- 
402a;  prop  46  410c;  part  iv,  prop  6  426a; 
prop  44,  schol  437d-438a 

33 ^Pascal:  Pensees,  81  186b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  196d- 
197c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1583-1606]  38b-39a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic!{  esp  135a-136b,  156b- 
158b 

53  James:  Psychology,  648b-650b;  707a-712b 
esp  707b-708a;  734b-735b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  16b-18a;  19a-c  /  Narcissism  399a- 
41!a,c  esp  404d-406c,  409d-410d  /  Instincts, 
414b  /  General  Introduction,  557b  558d  esp 
558a-b;  569c-589c  esp  574c-d,  580a-581c, 
585b-586d,  589a-c;  593d-597c;  599d-600d; 
616d-622b;  623c-631b  esp  628d-630d;  634b-d 
/  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  644d-645d; 
648c  /  Group  Psychology,  678d-684a  esp  678d- 
681a,  681  b.d  [fn  4]  /  Ego  and  Id,  703c-706c 
esp  704d-705c;  711b-c;  712b-c  /  New  Intro- 


Chapter  17:  DESIRE 


338 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  economy  of  desire  in  human  life.  4b.  The 
attachment  of  desires:  fixations,  projections, 
identifications,  transferences. ) 

duciory  Lectures ,  832b-834b  esp  832d-833b; 
847b-849b;  855d-856d;  852d-863c 

4c.  The  focusing  of  desires:  emotional  com¬ 
plexes 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  10c;  16b-17d  /  Interpretation  of 
Dreams ,  246a-248c  /  Instincts ,  415d-418c  / 
General  Introduction ,  529d-531d;  557b-558d; 
569c-585a  esp  574a-576d,  580a-584c;  593d- 
600d;  607b-623c  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Prin¬ 
ciple ,  644d-646a  /  Group  Psychology ,  680c- d  / 
Ego  and  Id,  704d-706d  /  Inhibitions,  Symp¬ 
toms,  and  Anxiety,  724a-742a  esp  724a-727c, 
733c-734d,  739a-740b  /  Civilization  and  Its 
Discontents,  774c-d;  792b-796c  esp  794c- 
796c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  833c-834a; 
847b-849b;  855d-863c  esp  856b-860a 

4d.  The  discharge  of  desires:  catharsis  and 
sublimation 

9  Aristotle:  Poetics,  ch  6  [i 449^*28]  684a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 
190a-c 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes,  337a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  509b-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  308b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  718a-719a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  2b-6c  esp  4c-5a;  8d-9a;  llc-17b; 
20a-d  /  Hysteria,  26c-31a  esp  27a-c;  62c-64a  / 
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  189b-193b;  356d- 
373a  esp  363c-d,  364d-365c,  369a-370a  /  Nar¬ 
cissism,  407c-408a  /  General  Introduction,  452c- 
d;  495a-499b  esp  496a-497b;  527c-539c  esp 
532d-535d;  587d-588b;  592c-593a  /  Beyond 
the  Pleasure  Principle,  641d-643c  /  Group  Psy¬ 
chology,  693b-694b  /  Ego  and  Id,  704b-c;  710c- 
712a  f  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety, 
739a-c;  745a;  751b-d/  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents,  773d-774c;  781a-c  /  New  Introductory 
Lectures,  847a-b 

5.  Desire  as  ruler 

5 a.  Desire  ruling  imagination:  daydreaming 
and  fantasy 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  361a 

8  Aristotle:  Dreams,  ch  2  [46oa33~b27]  704b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  42  82a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  77, 
a  1,  ans  145a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  52d-53a;  part  ii, 
138d-139a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  37a-b;  405d-406a 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  iii,  sc  ii 
[123-195]  87c-88a  /  Richard  II,  act  v,  sc  v 
[1-41]  349d-350a 


4c  to  5b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote  esp  part  i,  lb-2b, 
18d-19b,  50b-52d,  134b-135d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [95-128]  177b- 
178a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [599-605]  352b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  220c- 
221a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [7271-7312]  178b- 
179a;  [10,039-066]  245a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  82a-d;  bk 
hi,  125b-c;  146d-148c;  bk  vi,  254b-c;  bk  x, 
394d;  443c-444a;  bk  xi,  497c-499c;  bk  xii, 
542d-543a;  544a-b;  bk  xiv,  601c-602d;  bk 
xv,  615a-617a 

53  James:  Psychology,  374a-375a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  18c-d  /  Hysteria,  115a-116a  /  Inter¬ 
pretation  of  Dreams,  333c-336a  esp  333c-d; 
347d-349c  /  General  Introduction,  483 b-c; 
486b-489c  esp  486d-487a,  487d-488a;  597b- 
601b  esp  599b-600b,  600d-601b  /  Civilization 
and  Its  Discontents,  774a-c 

5b.  Desire  ruling  thought:  rationalization  and 
wishful  thinking 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  llb-d;  21d-22a 
6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi, 
427d-428a;  bk  iv,  474a-c;  bk  v,  506b;  507a-c 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  16  [i287a20-b5] 
485c-486a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1141- 
1 1 91]  59a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  18  161a- 
162b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  9, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  658d-659c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  74, 
aa  5-10  131d-137c;  q  77,  a  i,  ans  145a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  52d-53a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel*  bk  hi, 
148d-150d;  154a-156c;  159d-163c;  166a-168a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  210b-212a;  273b-276a; 
490d-491d 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  iii,  sc  ii 
[123-195]  87c-88a 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  v, 
sc  11  [106-114]  136a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  iii,  60d-61a 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  306a-c; 
309d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  49  111a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iv  89a-93a  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies,  215d-216a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  39,  schol 
408b-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  82-87  186b-189a;  99-100 
191a-192b  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,  439b- 
442a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxi,  sect  12  180d-181a;  sect  65-67  195b- 
196c;  bk  iv,  ch  xx,  sect  12  392c 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  29b-30a;  number 
31,  103c-104a;  number  50,  162a-b 


Chapter  17:  DESIRE 


339 


5  c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  269 d  270a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  103b  c;  106d 

51  T  olstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  15b  16a;  bk 

ii,  82d  83a;  bk  hi,  134a-c;  bk  iv,  170d  171c; 
bk  vi,  238a-c;  bk  ix,  366d  367b;  bk  x,  426b; 
bk  xi,  505a  511b  esp  509d~510a;  bk  xiii, 
585b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  314b;  381b-385b;  643a- 
646a;  652a-657b;  668a-67la 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams ,  363d-364b; 
379a-380d  /  Narcissism,  400a  /  Group  Psy¬ 
chology ,  682  b-d  /  Ego  and  Id,  716a  /  War  and 
Death ,  760d-761a;  765a-766b  /  Civilization 
and  Its  Discontents ,  774c-d  /  Afew  Introductory 
Lectures ,  873d-879c  passim,  esp  874a-d,  876d- 
877b,  878b-c 

5c.  Desire  ruling  action:  the  unchecked  expres¬ 
sion  of  desires;  incontinence 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  4:1-16;  25:29-34;  34; 
39:7-20  /  Exodus ,  16:1-3  /  Numbers ,  11:4-35; 
16:1-35 — (D)  Numbers ,  11:4-34;  16:1-35  / 
/  Samuel ,  18:5-12;  19:8-10— (£>)  /  Kings  % 
18:5-12;  19:8-10  /  //  Samuel ,  11;  13— (D) 
II  Kings ,  1 1 ;  1 3 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  2:6-9 — (^) 
OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  2:6-9 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  1  :i8~32  /  Philippiajis , 
3:18-19  /  /  Timothy ,  6:9-10  /  James,  4:1-4  / 
/  2:15-17 

5  Aeschylus:  Sctctz  Against  Thebes  [653-719] 
34b-35a 

5  Sophocles:  [1047-1090]  152a-b  /  Tra- 

chiniae  [431-492]  174a-c 

5  Euripides:  Medea  [623-641]  217c 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [882-1104]  499b-502a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  95d-98b;  bk 
vii,  222c-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
436d-438b 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120a-122a;  128a-129c  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  11,  311b-312b;  bk  iii,  326c-327b; 
bk  iv,  352b-354d;  bk  ix,  416a-418c;  425c- 
427b  /  Timaeus ,  474b-d  /  Seventh  Letter , 
801b-c 

8  Aristotle:  bk  iii,  ch  9  [433ai]-cH  11 

[435a2i]  665c-667a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  vii,  ch  i 
[58 ia2i— b22]  107a-b  /  Motion  of  Animals , 
ch  7  [7ois6]-ch  8  [702^2]  236b-237c  /  Eth¬ 
ics,  bk  1,  ch  13  [no2bi3-26]  348a-b;  bk  iii, 
ch  11  [iii 8b8— 19]  365a-b;  ch  12  [1119^4- 
bi9]  366a, c;  bk  vii,  ch  i-io  395a-403c;  ch  14 
[ii54b2— 15]  405d-406a  /  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  7 
[i267a3~8]  462c-d  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  10 
[1369^-22]  612b  c;  bk  11,  ch  12  [i389a3-bir] 
636b-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  18  161a- 
162b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  10  257d- 
258a 

14  Plutarch:  Antony  748a-779d 


15  T  acitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  57b  58d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  25  25c; 
bk  vi,  par  11 — 13  38b  39c;  bk  viii,  par  25  27 
60a-c;  bk  x,  par  40-70  81c  89a  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch  18-21  664d  666b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  81, 
a  3,  rep  1-2  430c  431d;  q  83,  a  i,  rep  i  436d- 
438a;  part  i— ii,  q  6,  a  7  650a-d;  q  9,  a  2 
658d-659c;  q  10,  a  3  664d-665c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i  ii,  q  75, 
aa  2-3  138c-139d;  q  77  144d  I52a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  v  [l)  Mil  [64I 
7a-llc;  xi  [67-90]  15d  16a;  purgatory,  xvii 
[91-139]  79b-d;  xix-xxvi  81c-94c 

22  Chaucer:  Manciple's  Tale  [17,104  144]  490a  b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  107a-112d;  159a-167a; 
232b-238d;  350d-354b;  413a-416c;  486b- 
495a;  527b-528a;  538a-543a,c 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  iii,  sc  ii 
[123-195]  87c-88a;  act  v,  sc  vi  [61-93]  103d- 
104a  /  Richard  III  105a-148a,c  /  Romeo  and 
Juliet,  act  ii,  sc  vi  [1-15]  300c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [61-79] 
49c-d;  sc  iv  [65-81]  55b-c  /  Troilus  and  Cres - 
sida,  act  i,  sc  iii  [101-124]  109b;  act  ii,  sc 
ii  113c-115d  /  Othello  205a-243a,c  esp  act 

iv,  sc  1  229d-233a,  act  v,  sc  ii  [291-356] 
242b-243a  /  King  Lear ,  act  iv,  sc  vi  [109-134] 
274c-d  /  Antony  and  Cleopatra  311a-350d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  1-18  424c- 
429d;  prop  44  437c-438a;  prop  60-61  442d- 
443b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [521-594] 
243b-245a;  bk  ix  [990-1066]  269a-270b;  bk 
xii  [79-90]  321a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [521-540] 
351a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  3  104b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  29-48 
184d-190d  passim;  sect  65-67  195b  l96c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  239b-243a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  109c:  122d-123a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  34d-39d  passim, 
esp  35a  b,  38a-b;  60a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  I74c-175a;  559a-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  586a-587a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  135c-136a;  301c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  162b  c; 
171c-172b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [2605-2677]  63b  65a; 
part  ii  [9695-9944]  235a-241b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  15b-16a;  bk 

v,  201a-c;  bk  vi,  248b-250a;  251d-252d;  bk 
viii,  321d-322d;  329c-333a;  334d-335a;  336b- 
337d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,  4a-d; 
bk  11,  39b-40a;  bk  vi,  164b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  718a-720a;  799a-807a 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  690b-c  /  Ego  and 
Id,  702c-d  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  837b- 
839b 


340 

6.  Desire  as  subject  to  rule 

6a.  The  regulation  of  desire  by  reason:  the 
discipline  of  moral  virtue  or  duty 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  20:14,17  /  Numbers , 
15:38-41  /  Deuteronomy ,  5:18,21  /  Psalms , 
37:1-13  esp  37:7-8 —(D)  Psalms ,  36:1-13  esp 
36:7-8  /  Proverbs ,  7;  23:1-8;  25:16;  30:7-9 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  18:30-31;  23:5-6; 
31:1-17 — (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  18:30-31; 
23:5-6;  31:1-17 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  8:1-13  /  J  Corin¬ 
thians ,  13:4-8/  Galatians,  5:16-24  /  Colossians , 
3:5-15  /  /  Thessalonians,  4:3-8  /  /  Timothy , 
6:3-12  /  Titus,  2:11-14;  3:3~7  /  James,  4:1-7 
/  /  Pd'ter,  2:1 1 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [490-565]  86b-87a 

5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [543-589]  429d- 
430a 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [882-1104]  499b-502a 
/  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  128a-d  /  Phaedo,  225d- 
226c  /  Gorgias ,  275b-280d  /  Republic ,  bk  iii, 
326c-327b;  bk  iv,  346a-356a;  bk  ix,  416a-c; 
425c-427b  /  Law;,  bk  vi,  712b;  bk  viii, 
735c-738c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  v,  ch  i  [i29aio-i6] 
179a  /  Soi//,  bk  iii,  ch  9  [433^5—8]  665c;  ch  ii 
[434aio-i5]  666d-667a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  13  [no2bi3-i  103* 
3]  348a-c:  bk  iii,  ch  10-12  364b-366a,c;  bk 
vi,  ch  2  387d-388b;  bk  vii,  ch  i-io  395a- 
403c  passim  /  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [i266b26- 
I267ai7]  462b-d 

11  Nicomackus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  1,  826d-827a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations  253a-310d  esp  bk  ii, 
sect  16  259a,  bk  iv,  sect  24  265c-d,  bk  vii, 
sect  55  283b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  iv  167a-186b 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  174b,d-175a  /  Cains 
Marius ,  353d-354a,c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  57b-58d 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  1-2  246c- 
247b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  2-4  9b-d; 
bk  iii,  par  1  13b-c;  bk  vi,  par  18-26  40d-43a; 
bk  vm,  par  1-2  52c-53b;  par  10-n  55c-56b; 
par  25-27  60a-c;  bk  x,  par  40-70  81c-89a  / 
C/Vy  0/  Go*/,  bk  ix,  ch  4-5  287a-289a; 
bk  xiv,  ch  8-9  381c-385b;  bk  xix,  ch  4, 
511d-512a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  24 
630c-631a:  ch  27  631d;  bk  iii,  ch  18-21  664d- 
666b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  81, 
a  3  430c-431d;  q  95,  a  2  507c-508a;  q  98,  a  2 
5l7d-519a;  part  i-ii,  q  10,  a  3  664d-665c;  q 
17,  a  7  690d-692a;  q  24  727a-730a;  q  45,  a 
4,  ans  812b-813a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3  8b-Qa;  q  56,  a  4  32b-33c;  a  5,  rep  i 
33c-34b;  qq  59-60  45d-54d;  part  iii,  q  15, 
a  4  790d-791c 


6  to  6a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory  53a-105d 
esp  xv  [4o]-xviii  [75]  75d-80c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
82  99a  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par  80  541b-542a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  95d-96b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  89b-90c;  159a-167a; 
184a-d;  200d-205b;  232b-238d;  431c-432d; 
486b-495a;  538a-543a,c 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  i  [24-69] 
533b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  iii  [5-51] 
34b-d;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [61—79]  49c-d  /  Troilus 
and  Cressida ,  act  i,  sc  iii  [101-124]  109b;  act 
ii,  sc  ii  113c-115d  /  Othello ,  act  i,  sc  iii 
[322-337]  212b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  26a-c;  78a-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iii,  49b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  i  396a-c; 
prop  9,  schol  399c:  part  iv,  pref  422b, d- 
424a;  prop  14-18  428a-429d;  prop  44-73 
437c-447a;  appendix,  i-iii  447a-b;  xxxii 
450c-d;  part  v,  pref  451a-452c;  prop  1-16 
452d-456c;  prop  42  463b-d 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  390b-391a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  104  193a;  502  260b-261a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  13  107a-108c;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  46-54 
189d-192c;  sect  71  197b-198a;  sect  73  198c- 
199c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Met  a  physic  of  Morals,  256b; 
258b-c;  259a-c;  264d-265b  /  Pref  Metaphysi¬ 
cal  Elements  of  Ethics,  378b-c  /  Judgement , 
586a-587a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  295a-d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  348a- b  /  Utilitarianism,  463d-464d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  135c-136a;  176d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  19 
16d-17a;  part  iii,  par  149  56b;  par  187  65a- 
c;  additions,  13-14  118c-d  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  intro,  162a-172b;  part  iii,  312d- 
313a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  304a-305a;  310c- 
319a  esp  310c-312c,  313d-314b,  318d-319a; 
592b-593b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  245 b-c; 
248b-250a;  epilogue  i.  655c-656b 

53  James:  Psychology,  80a-83b  passim;  202a- 
204b;  797b-798a;  807a-808a;  816a-819a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  9a;  16c  /  Hysteria,  llOb-c  /  Inter¬ 
pretation  of  Dreams,  386d-387a  /  Narcissism, 
407b-c  /  General  Introduction ,  452c-d;  501d- 
504b  esp  504b:  590a-593b;  624a-625b  esp 
625a-b  /  Ego  and  Id,  701d-702d;  704a-707d 
esp  706d-707c;  715a-716c  esp  715c-d  /  In¬ 
hibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety ,  721  d- 722c; 
744a  /  War  and  Death ,  75 7c- 759 d  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents,  7  73  b- 7  74a  esp  773c; 
780b-781d;  783c-785a;  785d-789a  esp  787b-c; 
792a-796c  esp  792a-b,  793a-b,  793d-794b; 
800c-801b  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  83 7  d- 
840a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


6b  tola 


Chapter  17:  DESIRE 


6b.  The  restraint  or  renunciation  of  desire: 
abstention,  inhibition,  repression 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysis/rata  583a  599a, c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses  105a-245a,c  esp  bk  i, 
ch  i  105a-106c,  on  3-4  108bll0a,  bk  ii,  ch 
2  140c~141c,  ch  17-18  158d-162b,  bk  iii,  ch 
24  203c-210a,  bk  iv,  ch  4  225a-228a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  5  257b-c; 
bk  vii,  sect  2  279b, d;  sect  55-57  283b-c; 
bk  ix,  sect  7  292b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  iv  [393-449]  178a  179b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  ix,  ch  4-5  287a- 
289a;  bk  xiv,  cii  8-9  381c-385b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1-11,  q  10, 
a  3  664d-665c;  q  24  727a-730a  esp  a  2 
727d-728c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii, 
q  186  650b-663b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  96  1049d- 
1066a 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5587-5743] 
256a-258b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
188d-191c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  89b-91b;  99b-c;  107a- 
112d;  166a-d;  200d-205b;  232b- 238d;  297d- 
300c;  353c-354b;  432b-d;  538a-543a,c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71d-72b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iii,  49b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  9-18  426d- 
429d;  part  v,  prop  2  452d-453a;  prop  6 
453d-454a;  prop  42  463b-d 

32  Milton:  Comus  [420-475]  42b-44a;  [716-765] 
49a-50a  /  Areopagitica ,  390b-391a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  64b-65b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  192a-193c;  596c-d 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  346a-d  /  Pref  Meta¬ 
physical  Elements  of  Ethics,  378d-379a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  283a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  224a- 
225a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [1544— 1571]  37b-38a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  iii,  122b-c;  bk 
v,  201a-c;  bk  vi,  248b-250a;  bk  ix,  373b-374a; 
bk  xiii,  577a-578b  esp  577d-578a;  bk  xiv, 
605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c-631a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
164d-165a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  80b-83b  esp  81a;  199b- 
202a  esp  200b-201a;  720a;  725a;  734b-735b; 
799a-800a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  6d-8b  esp  7a-c;  16c  /  Interpretation  of 
Dreams,  377d-378d  esp  378b-d  /  Repression 
422a-427a,c  esp  422c-d  /  Unconscious ,  432d- 
436b  /  General  Introduction,  566a-568a;  573c- 
d;  585b-586d  esp  586d  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure 
Principle,  640c  /  Ego  and  Id,  699a;  706b-c  / 
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  718a-722b 
esp  719b-c,  720a-d;  726a-728b; '741d  [fn  1]; 
747b-c;  750a-d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discon¬ 
tents,  773b-d;  781a-d;  782a-b,d  [fn  1];  793a- 


341 

795c  esp  793d-794b  /  New  Introductory  Lec¬ 
tures,  834d  835b;  842a  845b  esp  842b  d, 
843d  844c 

6c.  The  results  of  repression:  dreaming,  sym¬ 
bolic  over-reactions,  neuroses 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xiv,  cii  8  9 
381c-385b  esp  cii  9,  384b,  385b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [28-128]  176a- 

178a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  598a  b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  220b-c;  233b 
234a;  bk  vi,  238a-c;  248b-250a;  bk  vii, 
292b-296a;  bk  viii,  338b-339c  esp  338d 

53  James:  Psychology,  7 53b- 754b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 

Analysis  la-20d  esp  4c-5a,  6d-9a,  11c- 12b, 
13a-b,  14b-15a,  20c-d  /  Hysteria  25a-118a,c 
esp  27a-28c,  35b-c,  38a-b,  52c-53c,  65c-66a, 
75a-d,  82c-87a,  90d-96a,  97b-102a,  111a- 
115a,  116d-118a,c  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams, 
164d-168d  esp  167d-168a;  176a  b;  189b-205c 
passim;  216b-219a;  234d-235d;  240d-249b  esp 
240d-241a,  248c-249a;  294d-295b;  323b-c: 
328a-d;  331d-332a;  352d-382a  esp  356d-365c, 
375c-376a,  380d-382a;  386b-387a  /  Repres¬ 
sion,  423b-427a,c  esp  423b-424b,  425c-426a  / 
Unconscious ,  434c-436b  /  General  Introduc¬ 
tion,  469c-470b;  476a-544d  esp  489c-491b, 
495a-504d,  532d-539b;  557b-631b  esp  563a- 
569c,  586b-590a,  593b-600d,  614b  615a; 

633d-635d  /  Group  Psychology,  690a-c  /  Ego 
and  Id,  712c-7l5c  esp  713c-714b,  715a-b  / 
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety  718a- 
754a, c  esp  720a,  721c-d,  722c-723d,  728b- 
733c,  741d  [fn  1],  745d-747b  /  War  and  Death, 
759c-d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  781c- 
d;  793a-794a;  796a-c;  798c-799a;  800d-801c 
/  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  810d-813c  esp 
811b-812b;  817a-818b;  840a-846a 

7.  Desire  and  infinity 

la.  The  infinite  tendency  of  desires 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  27:20  /  Ecclesiastes, 
6:7  /  Habahfoi\,  2:5 —(D)  Habacuc,  2:5 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  14:9— (D)  OT,  Ec- 
clesiasticus,  14:9 

New  Testament:  John .  4:13-14 
7  Plato:  Gorgias,  275b-277c  /  Republic,  bk  v, 
370a-c;  bk  ix,  416a-418c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [1003- 
1010]  43a;  [1076-1094]  44a, c;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  cii  9,  185d; 
bk  iv,  cii  9,  237d-238a 

14  Plutarch:  Cains  Marius,  353d-354a.c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  19  5d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  i 
a  4  612a-613a;  q  2,  a  i,  rep  3  615d-616c;  q 
30,  a  4  751c-752b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  149b-d;  297d-299c; 

429a-b;  489b-d;  503 b-d 


342 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  7a(  1)  to  7 a(3) 


(7.  Desire  and  infinity,  la.  The  infinite  tendency 
of  desires .) 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  iii, 
sc  ii  [82-90]  121a  /  Macbeth,  act  iv,  sc  iii 
[57-99]  304a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  6-9  398d-399c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  109  193b-194a;  125-183 
195b-204b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  236b-238a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  584d-585c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
185  64b-d;  additions,  118  136a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part  i  [354-481]  lla-14a, 

[602-784]  16b-20b,  [1671-1706]  40a-41a, 

part  11  [11,433-466]  278a-279a,  [11,559-586] 
281b-282a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
164b-d 

la(l)  The  pursuit  of  pleasure 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  23:16-17— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiastkus,  23:21-24 

New  Testament:  John,  4:13-14 
7  Plato:  Gorgias,  275b-277c  /  Philebus,  628a-d 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  12  [ni9b6-i2] 
366c  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  9  [i257b38-i258ai4] 
452a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  hi  [1003- 
1010]  43a;  [1076-1094]  44a, c;  bk  iv  [1073- 
1120]  58a-d;  bk  v  [1405-1435]  79b-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  9,  237d- 
238a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  2-4  9b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  30, 
a  4  751c-752b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  v  [25-45]  7b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
58-66  8b~9b  /  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5953- 
5960]  262a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  429a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Antony  and  Cleopatra,  act  i, 
sc  1  [1-55]  311b-312a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxi,  sect  42-45  188c-189d 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  283a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  364a-b 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  584d-585b;  586d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  185 
64b-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3217-3250]  79a- b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iii, 
53b-54b 

7a(2)  The  lust  for  power 

Old  Testament:  Isaiah,  14:12-14 — ( D )  Isaias, 
14:12-14  /  Habal$u1{,  2:5 — (D)  Habacuc,  2:5 
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii,  215c-216b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v,  506b-c 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  275b-277c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [59-86] 
30d-31b;  [995-1002]  42d-43a 


12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  9,  237d- 
238a 

14  Plutarch:  Pyrrhus ,  319b-321a  /  Pompey, 
525a-b;  533a-c  /  Caesar,  599b-d  /  Cicero , 
706b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  13  387c- 
388c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  63, 
a  3  327b-328b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  76c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  350d-354b 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III  105a-148a,c  /  Jul¬ 
ius  Caesar,  act  ii,  sc  i  [10-34]  574c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [242-270]  98b- 
99a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xix,  sect  229 
78a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  364a-b 

7^(3)  The  accumulation  of  wealth 

Old  Testament:  Ecclesiastes ,  5:10;  6:7— (D) 
Ecclesiastes,  5:9;  6:7  /  Haba%u\,  2:5-11  —  (D) 
Habacuc,  2:5-11 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  11:10;  14:9— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus ,  11:10;  14:9  /  Baruch ,  3:16-19— 
( D )  OT,  Baruch ,  3:16-19 

New  Testament:  Lul^e,  12:16-21 
5  Aristophanes:  Plutus  [143— 197]  630d-631b 
7  Plato:  Gorgias,  215b-217c  /  Republic,  bk 
viii,  405c-408a;  412a  /  Laws ,  bk  viii,  733b-d; 
bk  ix,  751b-d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  9  [i257b38- 
1258^4]  452a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  7  [i266b27~i267b5] 
462b-463b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [59-93] 
30d-31b;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  9,  237d- 
238a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  19  5d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  2, 
a  1,  rep  3  615d-616c;  q  30,  a  4,  ans  751c- 
752b 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  84, 
a  1  174b-175a 

21  Dante  :  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [52-66]  lOa-b 

22  Chaucer:  TaleofMelibeus,  par  18,  408a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  122a-124c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  xxviii- 
xxix  450a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  237a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  364a-b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  71b-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  510b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  462c-463a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  125a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  185 
64b-d;  par  195  66d-67a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [5505-6172]  136a- 
151a;  [11,151-287]  27lb-274b  esp  [11,151-162] 
271b,  [11,239-258]  273b-274a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  60d-62d  esp  62a-b;  71d-72c 
esp  72a-c;  292c-295a  esp  293c-294a 


7b 

7 b.  The  restless  search  for  the  infinite:  the  de¬ 
sire  for  the  vision  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  33:11-23  /  Psalms ,  27 
esp  27:4,  27:8;  42-43;  63!  73=25-28;  84— (D) 
Psalms ,  26  esp  26:4,  26:8;  41-42;  62;  72:25-28; 
83  /  Isaiah ,  26:8-9 — (D)  Isaias,  26:8-9 

New  Testament:  John ,  4:13-14;  6:35  /  Philip - 
pians,  3:7-21  /  7  /o/w,  3:1-3 
7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163a- 167d 

17  Plotinus:  Firs/  Ennead ,  tr  vi  2 la- 2 6a  pas¬ 
sim  /  S/.r//r  Ennead,  tr  ix  353d-360d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions  la-125a,c  esp  bk  i, 
par  1-6  la-2c,  bk  11,  par  15  12b-c,  bk  iii, 
par  1  13b-c,  par  8  14d-15a,  bk  iv,  par  15- 
19  23a-24b,  bk  v,  par  1-2  27a-c,  bk  vii, 
par  16-23  48c-50c,  bk  viii,  par  17-18  57d- 
58a,  bk  ix,  par  3  62a-b,  bk  x,  par  1-40 
71c-81c,  bk  xi,  par  1-4  89b-90b,  bk  xii, 
par  10  101c,  par  23  104b-c,  bk  xiii  llOd- 
125a, c  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  38 
635c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  6,  a 
1,  rep  2  28b-d;  q  12,  a  i,  ans  50c-51c;  a  8, 
rep  4  57b-58b;  q  26,  a  2,  ans  150c-151a;  q 
54,  a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  q  60,  a  5  313b-314c; 
q  62,  a  1,  ans  317d-318c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  i, 
rep  3  615d-616c;  q  5,  a  i,  ans  636d-637c;  q  8 
655a-657c 


343 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  ' Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
109,  a  4  340c-341b;  part  ii-ii,  q  27,  a  6 
524c-525c;  q  28,  a  3  528d*529c;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  69,  a  4  889c-890c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xv 
[40-81]  75d-76a;  xvii  [9i]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c; 
paradise,  iv  [1 1 5]-v  [12]  1 1 1  d 112b;  xxii 
[52-72]  140b;  xxvi  [1-78]  145d  146c;  xxxm 
156b-157d  esp  [46—48]  156c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  80b  81a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  iii,  88c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  iv 
447b-c;  part  v,  prop  36  461a-c 

32  Milton:  Sonnets ,  xiv  66a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  72,  183a-b;  125-183  195b- 
204b;  463  255a;  468-492  255b-259b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii 
xxi,  sect  45-47  189b-190b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  224a- 
225a;  part  iii,  304c-306a 

47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part  i  [354-481]  lla- 
Ha,  [602-784]  16b-20b,  [1671-1706]]  40a-41a, 
part  11  [11,433-466]  278a-279a,  [11,559-586] 
281b-282a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  78a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xii,  560a-561d; 
bk  xiv,  608a-b;  bk  xv,  631a-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  iii, 
53b-54b 


Chapter  17:  DESIRE 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Matters  relevant  to  the  metaphysical  conception  of  desire,  see  Being  7c-jc(f);  Change  i; 
Matter  ia,  3b. 

Discussions  bearing  on  the  theory  of  natural  appetite  or  desire,  see  Habit  3a;  Happiness  i  ; 
Nature  ia,  2d,  3c( 3). 

Other  discussions  of  the  distinction  between  conscious  and  natural  desire,  and  of  animal 
appetite  in  contrast  to  the  human  will,  see  Animal  ia(3);  Man  4b;  Sense  3c;  Will  i, 
2b(2). 

The  consideration  of  voluntary  acts  or  movements,  see  Animal  4b;  Nature  3c(2);  Will 
33(0-33(2). 

Other  treatments  of  the  objects  of  desire  in  general,  see  Being  3b;  Good  and  Evil  ia,  3c; 
Happiness  i,  4-4^  Pleasure  and  Pain  6a-6b;  and  for  particular  objects  of  desire,  see 
Honor  2b;  Life  and  Death  8b;  Wealth  ioa-iob,  ioe(3). 

The  conception  of  pleasure  as  the  satisfaction  of  desire,  see  Pleasure  and  Pain  6d. 
Another  comparison  of  desire  and  love,  see  Love  ic,  2a— 2a (4). 

Further  psychological  analysis  of  emotional  desires  and  impulses,  see  Emotion  3-3^4); 
Love  2a(3)-2a(4);  Medicine  6c(2). 

Other  discussions  of  the  influence  of  emotional  desires  on  imagination  and  thought,  see 
Emotion  3b;  Memory  and  Imagination  8c,  8e;  Opinion  2a;  Will  3b(i). 

The  psychological  or  ethical  consideration  of  problems  arising  from  the  conflict  between  de¬ 
sire  and  reason  or  duty,  see  Duty  8;  Emotion  4-4^2);  Liberty  Mind  ie(3),  9b; 

Virtue  and  Vice  5a;  Will  2b(2),  9b. 

The  discussion  of  man’s  relation  to  the  infinite,  ^Infinity  6a;  Man  iod;  and  for  the  theo¬ 
logical  conception  of  man’s  ultimate  rest  in  the  vision  of  God,  see  God  5b,  60(4);  Happiness 
7c~7c(i);  Love  5a(2);  Will  7d. 


344 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Epictetus.  The  Manual 

Goethe.  Sorrows  of  Young  Werther 

Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind ,  iv  (3) 

Freud.  Three  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Sex, 
ch  1 

II. 

Epicurus.  Letter  to  Menoeceus 
Boccaccio.  Decameron 

Villon.  The  Debate  of  the  Heart  and  Body  of 
Villon 

Ebreo.  The  Philosophy  of  Love,  dialogue  i 
P.  Sidney.  Astrophel  and  Stella 
Marlowe.  Tamburlaine  the  Great 
Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae ,  x  (1),  xxiii- 
xxiv,  xxx  (16),  xlvii  (14) 

John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philo sophicus  Tho- 
misticus ,  Philosophia  Naturalis ,  part  iv,  q  12 
Moliere.  Harare  ( The  Miser) 

Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite,  bk 
iv 

Racine.  Phedre 
- .  Athalie 

Bossuet.  Traite  de  la  concupiscence 
Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  11,  ch  21 

J.  Butler.  Fifteen  Sermons  upon  Human  Nature, 
1— 11 

Hutcheson.  A  System  of  Moral  Philosophy,  bk  i, 
ch  2-3;  bk  11,  ch  2 

- .  An  Essay  on  the  Nature  and  Conduct  of  the 

Passions  and  Affections 
Helvetius.  Traite  de  V esprit,  in,  ch  9-1  i 
T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Active  Powers  of  the  Human 
Mind,  hi,  part  ii,  ch  1-2 
J.  G.  Ficiite.  The  Vocation  of  Man 
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea 
Brown.  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human 
Mind,  vol  11,  pp  1 53-1 79 


D.  Stewart.  Outlines  of  Moral  Philosophy,  part  ii, 
ch  1  (1-4) 

- .  Philosophy  of  the  Active  and  Moral  Powers  of 

Man,  bk  i,  ch  1-3 

J.  Mill.  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Human 
Mind,  ch  i 

Stendhal.  The  Red  and  the  Blac\ 

Bentham.  An  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals 
and  Legislation ,  ch  10 

- .  Deontology 

Pushkin.  The  Queen  of  Spades 

Whewell.  The  Elements  of  Morality ,  bk  i,  ch  2 

Balzac.  Cousin  Bette 

Spencer.  The  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol  i,  part  i, 
ch  6  (50) ;  part  iv,  ch  8 
Bain.  The  Emotions  and  the  Will 

E.  Hartmann.  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious 
H.  Sidgwick.  The  Methods  of  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  4 
Zola.  Nana 

France.  The  Crime  of  Sylvestre  Bonnard 

T.  H.  Green.  Prolegomena  to  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2 

L.  Stephen.  The  Science  of  Ethics,  ch  2 

Ibsen.  The  Master  Builder 

Chekhov.  The  Sea-Gull 

Ribot.  The  Psychology  of  the  Emotions 

Bradley.  Collected  Essays,  vol  i  (14) 

Moore.  Principia  Ethica ,  ch  2  (39-47) 

Scheler.  Der  Formalismus  in  der  Ethi\  und  die  ma- 
teriale  Wertethi\ 

B.  Russell.  The  Analysis  of  Mind,  lect  3 
Dewey.  Human  Nature  and  Conduct ,  part  iii  (8) 
Fitzgerald.  The  Great  Gatsby 
O’Neill.  Desire  Under  the  Elms 

F.  Alexander.  Psychoanalysis  of  the  Total  Person¬ 
ality 

Beebe-Center.  The  Psychology  of  Pleasantness  and 
Unpleasantness 
Nygren.  Agape  and  Eros 
Rougemont.  Love  in  the  Western  World 
Maritain.  Scholasticism  and  Politics ,  ch  vi 
D’Arcy.  The  Mind  and  Heart  of  Love 


Chapter  18:  DIALECTIC 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  words  “dialectical”  and  “dialectician” 
are  currently  used  more  often  in  a  deroga¬ 
tory  than  in  a  descriptive  sense.  The  person 
who  criticizes  an  argument  by  saying,  “It's  just 
a  matter  of  definition”  is  also  apt  to  say,  “That 
may  be  true  dialectically,  but  .  .  or  “You’re 
just  being  dialectical.”  Implied  in  such  remarks 
is  dispraise  of  reasoning  which,  however  excel¬ 
lent  or  skillful  it  may  be  as  reasoning,  stands 
condemned  for  being  out  of  touch  with  fact  or 
experience. 

Still  other  complaints  against  dialectic  are 
that  it  plays  with  words,  begs  the  question, 
makes  sport  of  contradictions.  When  the  theo¬ 
logian  Hippothadeus  almost  convinces  Panurge 
that  he  “should  rather  choose  to  marry  once, 
than  to  burn  still  in  fires  of  concupiscence,” 
Rabelais  has  Panurge  raise  one  last  doubt 
against  the  proposal.  “Shall  I  be  a  cuckold, 
father,”  he  asks,  “yea  or  no?”  Hippothadeus 
answers:  “By  no  means  .  .  .  will  you  be  a  cuck¬ 
old,  if  it  please  God.”  On  receiving  this  reply 
Panurge  cries  out,  “O  the  Lord  help  us  now; 
whither  are  we  driven  to,  good  folks?  To  the 
conditionals,  which,  according  to  the  rules  and 
precepts  of  the  dialectic  faculty,  admit  of  all 
contradictions  and  impossibilities.  If  my  Trans¬ 
alpine  mule  had  wings,  my  Transalpine  mule 
would  fly.  If  it  please  God,  I  shall  not  be  a 
cuckold,  but  I  shall  be  a  cuckold  if  it  please 
him.” 

As  a  term  of  disapproval,  “dialectical”  has 
been  used  by  scientists  against  philosophers, 
by  philosophers  against  theologians  and,  with 
equal  invective,  by  religious  men  against  those 
who  resort  to  argument  concerning  matters 
of  faith. 

The  early  Middle  Ages  witnessed  a  conflict 
between  the  mystical  and  the  rational  ap¬ 
proaches  to  the  truths  of  religion.  Those  for 
whom  religious  experience  and  revelation  were 


the  only  avenue  to  God  condemned  the  dia¬ 
lecticians — the  philosophers  or  theologians  who 
tried  to  use  reason  discursively  rather  than  pro¬ 
ceed  by  intuition  and  vision.  With  the  Refor¬ 
mation  and  with  the  Renaissance,  men  like  Mar¬ 
tin  Luther  and  Francis  Bacon  regarded  dialec¬ 
tic  as  the  bane  of  mediaeval  learning.  Because 
of  its  dialectical  character,  Luther  dismissed  all 
theological  speculation  as  sophistry.  Bacon,  for 
the  same  reason,  stigmatized  scholastic  philoso¬ 
phy  as  consisting  in  “no  great  quantity  of  mat¬ 
ter  and  infinite  agitation  of  wit.” 

On  grounds  which  were  common  as  well  as 
opposite,  both  mystics  and  experimentalists  at¬ 
tacked  dialectic  as  a  futile,  if  not  vicious,  use 
of  the  mind — as  “hair-splitting”  and  “logic¬ 
chopping.”  Even  when  they  admitted  that  it 
might  have  some  virtue,  they  approved  of  it  as 
a  method  of  argument  or  proof,  proper  enough 
perhaps  in  forensic  oratory  or  political  debate, 
but  entirely  out  of  place  in  the  pursuit  of  truth 
or  in  approaching  reality. 

A  certain  conception  of  dialectic  is  implicit 
in  all  such  criticisms.  The  dialectician  is  a  man 
who  argues  rather  than  observes,  who  appeals 
to  reason  rather  than  experience,  who  draws 
implications  from  whatever  is  said  or  can  be 
said,  pushing  a  premise  to  its  logical  conclusion 
or  reducing  it  to  absurdity.  This  aspect  of  dia¬ 
lectic  appears  to  be  the  object  of  Rabelais’  satire 
in  the  famous  dispute  between  Panurge  and 
Thaumast,  which  is  carried  on  “by  signs  only, 
without  speaking,  for  the  matters  are  so  ab¬ 
struse,  hard,  and  arduous,  that  words  proceed¬ 
ing  from  the  mouth  of  man  will  never  be  suffi¬ 
cient  for  the  unfolding  of  them.” 

In  view  of  those  who  think  that  truth  can  be 
learned  only  by  observation,  by  induction  from 
particulars,  or  generalization  from  experience, 
the  technique  of  dialectic,  far  from  being  a 
345 


346 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


method  of  inquiry,  seems  to  have  virtue  only 
for  the  purpose  of  disputation  or  criticism. 
“The  human  faculties,”  writes  Gibbon,  “are 
fortified  by  the  art  and  practice  of  dialectics.” 
It  is  “the  keenest  weapon  of  dispute,”  he  adds, 
but  “more  effectual  for  the  detection  of  error 
than  for  the  investigation  of  truth.” 

Mill  describes  “the  Socratic  dialectics,  so 
magnificently  exemplified  in  the  dialogues  of 
Plato,”  as  a  “contrivance  for  making  the  diffi¬ 
culties  of  the  question  .  .  .  present  to  the  learn¬ 
er’s  consciousness  .  .  .  They  were  essentially  a 
negative  discussion  of  the  great  questions  of 
philosophy  and  life,”  he  continues,  “directed 
with  consummate  skill  to  the  purpose  of  con¬ 
vincing  anyone  who  has  merely  adopted  the 
commonplaces  of  received  opinion  that  he  did 
not  understand  the  subject  .  .  .  The  school  dis¬ 
putations  of  the  Middle  Ages  had  a  somewhat 
similar  object.”  In  Mill’s  opinion,  “as  a  disci¬ 
pline  to  the  mind,  they  were  in  every  respect 
inferior  to  the  powerful  dialectics  which  formed 
the  intellects  of  the  ‘Socratic  viri’;  but  the 
modern  mind,”  he  says,  “owes  far  more  to  both 
than  it  is  generally  willing  to  admit,  and  the 
present  modes  of  education  contain  nothing 
which  in  the  smallest  degree  supplies  the  place 
either  of  the  one  or  of  the  other.” 

Disparaging  comment  on  dialectic  comes  not 
only  from  those  who  contrast  it  unfavorably 
with  the  methods  of  experiment  or  empirical 
research.  It  is  made  also  by  writers  who  trust 
reason’s  power  to  grasp  truths  intuitively  and 
to  develop  their  consequences  deductively. 
Sensitive  to  what  may  seem  to  be  a  paradox 
here,  Descartes  writes  in  his  Rules  for  the  Di¬ 
rection  of  the  Mind:  “It  may  perhaps  strike 
some  with  surprise  that  here,  where  we  are  dis¬ 
cussing  how  to  improve  our  power  of  deducing 
one  truth  from  another,  we  have  omitted  all 
the  precepts  of  the  dialecticians.”  The  dialec¬ 
tician  can  proceed  only  after  he  has  been  given 
premises  to  work  from.  Since,  in  Descartes’ 
view,  dialectic  provides  no  method  for  estab¬ 
lishing  premises  or  for  discovering  first  princi¬ 
ples,  it  can  “contribute  nothing  at  all  to  the 
discovery  of  the  truth  ...  Its  only  possible  use 
is  to  serve  to  explain  at  times  more  easily  to 
others  the  truths  we  have  already  ascertained; 
hence  it  should  be  transferred  from  Philosophy 
to  Rhetoric.” 


The  connection  of  dialectic  with  disputation 
and  rhetoric  has  some  foundation  in  the  his¬ 
torical  fact  that  many  of  the  techniques  of 
dialectic  originated  with  the  Greek  sophists  who 
had  primarily  a  rhetorical  or  forensic  aim. 
Comparable  to  the  Roman  rhetoricians  and  to 
the  law  teachers  of  a  later  age,  the  sophists 
taught  young  men  how  to  plead  a  case,  how  to 
defend  themselves  against  attack,  how  to  per¬ 
suade  an  audience.  Skill  in  argument  had  for 
them  a  practical,  not  a  theoretical,  purpose; 
not  truth  or  knowledge,  but  success  in  litiga¬ 
tion  or  in  political  controversy.  The  familiar 
charge  that  the  method  they  taught  enabled 
men  “to  make  the  worse  appear  the  better  rea¬ 
son,”  probably  exaggerates,  but  none  the  less 
reflects,  the  difference  between  the  standards 
of  probability  in  disputation  and  the  standards 
of  truth  in  scientific  inquiry.  This  has  some 
bearing  on  the  disrepute  of  sophistry  and  the 
derogatory  light  cast  on  the  dialectical  when  it 
is  identified  with  the  sophistical. 

But  there  is  another  historical  fact  which 
places  dialectic  in  a  different  light.  In  the  tra¬ 
dition  of  the  liberal  arts,  especially  in  their 
Roman  and  mediaeval  development,  “dialec¬ 
tic”  and  “logic”  are  interchangeable  names  for 
the  discipline  which,  together  with  grammar 
and  rhetoric,  comprises  the  three  liberal  arts 
known  as  the  “trivium.”  In  his  treatise  On 
Christian  Doctrine  Augustine  uses  the  word 
“dialectic”  in  this  way.  Whatever  else  it  means, 
the  identification  of  dialectic  with  logic  implies 
its  distinction  from  rhetoric,  and  certainly 
from  sophistry. 

Yet  Augustine  does  not  fail  to  observe  the 
misuse  of  dialectic  which  debases  it  to  the  level 
of  sophistry.  “In  the  use  of  it,”  he  declares,  “we 
must  guard  against  the  love  of  wrangling,  and 
the  childish  vanity  of  entrapping  an  adversary. 
For  there  are  many  of  what  are  called  sophisms,” 
he  continues,  “inferences  in  reasoning  that  are 
false,  and  yet  so  close  an  imitation  of  the  true, 
as  to  deceive  not  only  dull  people,  but  clever 
men  too,  when  they  are  not  on  their  guard.” 
He  gives  as  an  example  the  case  of  one  man  say¬ 
ing  to  another,  “What  I  am,  you  are  not.”  The 
other  man  may  assent  to  this,  thinking,  as 
Augustine  points  out,  that  “the  proposition  is 
in  part  true,  the  one  man  being  cunning,  the 
other  simple.”  But  when  “the  first  speaker 


Chapter  18:  DIALECTIC 


347 


adds:  ‘I  am  a  man’  ”  and  “the  other  has  given 
his  assent  to  this  also,  the  first  draws  his  con¬ 
clusion:  ‘Then  you  are  not  a  man.’  ’’ 

According  to  Augustine,  “this  sort  of  en¬ 
snaring  argument”  should  not  be  called  dia¬ 
lectical,  but  sophistical.  He  makes  the  same 
sort  of  observation  about  the  abuse  of  rhetoric 
in  speech  which  “only  aims  at  verbal  ornamen¬ 
tation  more  than  is  consistent  with  seriousness 
of  purpose.”  That,  too,  he  thinks,  should  be 
“called  sophistical”  in  order  to  avoid  attaching 
the  name  of  rhetoric  to  misapplications  of  the 
art. 

Dialectic  for  Augustine  is  the  art  which 
“deals  with  inferences,  and  definitions,  and 
divisions”  and  “is  of  the  greatest  assistance  in  the 
discovery  of  meaning.”  Rhetoric,  on  the  other 
hand,  “is  not  to  be  used  so  much  for  ascertain¬ 
ing  the  meaning  as  for  setting  forth  the  mean¬ 
ing  when  it  is  ascertained.”  Dialectic,  in  other 
words,  is  divorced  from  the  practical  purpose  of 
stating  and  winning  an  argument,  and  given 
theoretical  status  as  a  method  of  inquiry. 

This  conception  of  dialectic  originates  in  the 
dialogues  of  Plato.  Not  himself  a  sophist,  either 
by  profession  or  in  aim,  Socrates  found  other 
uses  for  the  analytical  and  argumentative  devices 
invented  by  the  sophists.  The  same  skills  of  mind 
which  were  practically  useful  in  the  public  as¬ 
sembly  and  in  the  law  courts  could  be  used  or 
adapted  for  clarification  and  precision  in  specu¬ 
lative  discussions.  They  could  also  be  used  to 
find  the  truth  implicit  in  the  commonly  ex¬ 
pressed  convictions  of  men  and  to  lay  bare 
errors  caused  by  lack  of  definition  in  discourse 
or  lack  of  rigor  in  reasoning. 

In  the  Sophist  Plato  separates  the  philosopher 
from  the  sophist,  not  by  any  distinction  in 
method,  but  by  the  difference  in  the  use  each 
makes  of  the  same  technique.  And  in  the 
Republic ,  one  of  the  reasons  Socrates  gives  for 
postponing  the  study  of  dialectic  until  the  age 
of  thirty  is  that  youngsters,  “when  they  first 
get  the  taste  in  their  mouths,  argue  for  amuse¬ 
ment”  and  “like  puppy-dogs,  they  rejoice  in 
pulling  and  tearing  at  all  who  come  near  them.” 
As  a  result  of  being  vainly  disputatious,  they 
“get  into  the  way  of  not  believing  anything 
which  they  believed  before,  and  hence,  not 
only  they,  but  philosophy  and  all  that  relates 


to  it  is  apt  to  have  a  bad  name  with  the  rest  of 
the  world  .  .  .  Hut  when  a  man  begins  to  get 
older,  he  will  no  longer  be  guilty  of  such  in¬ 
sanity;  he  will  imitate  the  dialectician  who  is 
seeking  for  truth,  and  not  the  sophist,  who  is 
contradicting  for  the  sake  of  amusement.” 

In  the  hands  of  the  philosopher  dialectic  is  an 
instrument  of  science.  “There  is,”  according  to 
Socrates,  “no  other  method  of  comprehending 
by  any  regular  process  all  true  existence  or  of 
ascertaining  what  each  thing  is  in  its  own  na¬ 
ture.”  It  passes  beyond  the  arts  at  the  lowest 
level,  “which  are  concerned  with  the  desires  or 
opinions  of  men,  or  are  cultivated  with  a  view 
to  production  and  constructions.”  It  likewise 
transcends  the  mathematical  sciences,  which, 
while  they  “have  some  apprehension  of  true 
being  .  .  .  leave  the  hypotheses  which  they  use 
unexamined,  and  are  unable  to  give  an  account 
of  them.”  Using  these  as  “handmaids  and 
helpers,”  dialectic  “goes  directly  to  the  first 
principle  and  is  the  only  science  which  does 
away  with  hypotheses  in  order  to  make  her 
ground  secure.” 

The  dialectic  of  Plato  has  an  upward  and  a 
downward  path  which  somewhat  resemble  the 
inductive  process  of  the  mind  from  facts  to 
principles,  and  the  deductive  process  from 
principles  to  the  conclusions  they  validate. 
Dialectic,  says  Socrates,  ascends  by  using  hy¬ 
potheses  “as  steps  and  points  of  departure  into 
a  world  which  is  above  hypotheses,  in  order 
that  she  may  soar  beyond  them  to  the  first 
principle  of  the  whole  .  .  .  By  successive  steps 
she  descends  again  without  the  aid  of  any  sensi¬ 
ble  object,  from  ideas,  through  ideas,  and  in 
ideas  she  ends.” 

As  the  disciplined  search  for  truth,  dialectic 
includes  all  of  logic.  It  is  concerned  with  every 
phase  of  thought:  with  the  establishment  of 
definitions;  the  examination  of  hypotheses  in 
the  light  of  their  presuppositions  or  conse¬ 
quences;  the  formulation  of  inferences  and 
proofs;  the  resolution  of  dilemmas  arising  from 
opposition  in  thought. 

Whereas  for  Plato  dialectic  is  more  than  the 
whole  of  logic,  for  Aristotle  it  is  less.  Dialectic 
is  more  than  the  process  by  which  the  mind 
goes  from  myth  and  fantasy,  perception  and 
opinion,  to  the  highest  truth.  For  Plato  it  is  the 


348 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ultimate  fruit  of  intellectual  labor — knowledge 
itself,  and  in  its  supreme  form  as  a  vision  of  be¬ 
ing  and  unity.  That  is  why  Socrates  makes  it 
the  ultimate  study  in  the  curriculum  proposed 
for  training  the  guardians  to  become  philoso¬ 
pher  kings.  “Dialectic,”  he  says,  “is  the  coping- 
stone  of  the  sciences,  and  is  set  over  them;  no 
other  science  can  be  placed  higher — the  nature 
of  knowledge  can  go  no  further.” 

For  Aristotle,  dialectic,  far  from  being  at  the 
summit  of  science  and  philosophy,  lies  at  their 
base,  and  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from 
sophistry,  which  it  resembles  in  method.  “Dia¬ 
lecticians  and  sophists  assume  the  same  guise  as 
the  philosopher,”  Aristotle  writes,  “for  sophis¬ 
tic  is  wisdom  which  exists  only  in  semblance, 
and  dialecticians  embrace  all  things  in  their 
dialectic,  and  being  is  common  to  all  things;  but 
evidently  their  dialectic  embraces  these  sub¬ 
jects  because  these  are  proper  to  philosophy. 
Sophistic  and  dialectic,”  he  continues,  “turn  on 
the  same  class  of  things  as  philosophy,  but 
philosophy  differs  from  dialectic  in  the  nature 
of  the  faculty  required  and  from  sophistic  in 
respect  of  the  purpose  of  the  philosophic  life. 
Dialectic  is  merely  critical  where  philosophy 
claims  to  know,  and  sophistic  is  what  appears  to 
be  philosophy  but  is  not.” 

According  to  Aristotle,  dialectic  is  neither 
itself  a  science  nor  the  method  of  science.  It  is 
that  part  of  logic  or  method  which  he  treats  in 
the  Topics ,  and  it  differs  from  the  scientific 
method  expounded  in  the  Posterior  Analytics 
as  argument  in  the  sphere  of  opinion  and  proba¬ 
bilities  differs  from  scientific  demonstration. 
Unlike  the  conclusions  of  science,  the  conclu¬ 
sions  of  dialectical  reasoning  are  only  probable, 
because  they  are  based  on  assumptions  rather 
than  self-evident  truths.  Since  other  and  oppo¬ 
site  assumptions  cannot  be  excluded,  one  dia¬ 
lectical  conclusion  is  usually  opposed  by  another 
in  an  issue  of  competing  probabilities. 

Intermediate  between  science  and  rhetoric, 
dialectic  can  serve  both.  In  addition  to  its  prac¬ 
tical  employment  in  forensics,  it  is  useful  in  the 
philosophical  sciences  because  it  develops  skill 
in  making  and  criticizing  definitions,  and  in 
asking  or  answering  questions.  “The  ability  to 
raise  searching  difficulties  on  both  sides  of  a 
subject,”  Aristotle  says,  “will  make  us  detect 


more  easily  the  truth  and  error  about  the  sever¬ 
al  points  that  arise.” 

Though  it  is  primarily  a  method  of  arguing 
from  assumptions  and  of  dealing  with  disputes 
arising  from  contrary  assumptions,  dialectic  is 
also  concerned  with  the  starting  points  of  argu¬ 
ment.  The  Topics  considers  how  assumptions 
are  chosen,  what  makes  them  acceptable,  what 
determines  their  probability.  Here  again  Aris¬ 
totle  shows  how  the  philosopher  can  make  use 
of  dialectic — as  that  “process  of  criticism  where¬ 
in  lies  the  path  to  the  principles  of  all  inquiries.” 

There  are  four  major  expositions  of  dialectic 
in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books.  It  is  as  pivot¬ 
al  a  conception  in  the  thought  of  Kant  and 
Hegel  as  it  is  in  the  philosophies  of  Plato  and 
Aristotle.  With  differences  which  may  be  more 
important  than  the  similarities,  the  Kantian 
treatment  resembles  the  Aristotelian,  the 
Hegelian  the  Platonic. 

Like  the  division  between  the  Posterior 
Analytics  and  the  Topics  in  Aristotle’s  Organon , 
the  transcendental  logic  of  Kant’s  Critique  oj 
Pure  Reason  falls  into  two  parts — the  analytic 
and  the  dialectic.  The  distinction  between  his 
transcendental  logic  and  what  Kant  calls  “gen¬ 
eral  logic”  is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Logic, 
but  here  it  must  be  observed  that  for  Kant 
“general  logic,  considered  as  an  organon,  must 
always  be  a  logic  of  illusion,  that  is,  be  dialecti¬ 
cal.”  He  thinks  that  the  ancients  used  the  word 
“dialectic”  in  this  sense,  to  signify  “a  sophisti¬ 
cal  art  for  giving  ignorance,  nay,  even  inten¬ 
tional  sophistries,  the  coloring  of  truth,  in  which 
the  thoroughness  of  procedure  which  logic  re¬ 
quires  was  imitated.”  For  his  own  purposes, 
however,  he  wishes  “dialectic”  to  be  under¬ 
stood  “in  the  sense  of  a  critique  of  dialectical 
illusion.” 

When  he  comes  to  his  own  transcendental 
logic,  therefore,  he  divides  it  into  two  parts. 
The  first  part  deals  with  “the  elements  of  pure 
cognition  of  the  understanding,  and  the  princi¬ 
ples  without  which  no  object  at  all  can  be 
thought.”  This  is  the  “Transcendental  Analyt¬ 
ic,  and  at  the  same  time  a  logic  of  truth” — 
a  logic  of  science.  Since  in  his  view  “it  ought 
properly  to  be  only  a  canon  for  judging  of  the 
empirical  use  of  the  understanding,  this  kind  of 
logic  is  misused  when  we  seek  to  employ  it  as 


Chapter  18:  DIALECTIC 


349 


an  organon  of  the  universal  and  unlimited  exer¬ 
cise  of  the  understanding.” 

When  it  is  thus  misused,  “the  exercise  ol  the 
pure  understanding  becomes  dialectical.  The 
second  part  of  our  transcendental  logic,”  Kant 
writes,  “must  therefore  be  a  critique  ol  dia¬ 
lectical  illusion,  and  this  critique  we  shall  term 
Transcendental  Dialectic — not  meaning  it  as 
an  art  of  producing  dogmatically  such  illusion 
(an  art  which  is  unfortunately  too  current 
among  the  practitioners  of  metaphysical  jug¬ 
gling),  but  as  a  critique  of  understanding  and 
reason  in  regard  to  their  hyperphvsical  use.” 

Kant  goes  further  than  Aristotle  in  separat¬ 
ing  dialectic  from  science.  With  regard  to  the 
sensible  or  phenomenal  world  of  experience, 
science  is  possible;  with  regard  to  the  mind’s 
own  structure,  the  supreme  sort  of  science  is 
possible.  But  when  reason  tries  to  use  its  ideas 
for  other  objects,  and  then  regards  them  “as 
conceptions  of  actual  things,  their  mode  of 
application  is  transcendent  and  delusive.”  Kant 
explains  that  “an  idea  is  employed  transcen- 
dentally,  when  it  is  applied  to  an  object  falsely 
believed  ...  to  correspond  to  it;  immanently, 
when  it  is  applied  solely  to  the  employment 
of  the  understanding  in  the  sphere  of  experi¬ 
ence”;  and  he  maintains  that  when  ideas  are 
used  transcendentally,  they  do  not  give  rise  to 
science,  but  “assume  a  fallacious  and  dialectical 
character.” 

A  conclusion  of  dialectical  reasoning,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Kant,  is  either  opposed  by  a  con¬ 
clusion  equally  acceptable  to  reason — “a  per¬ 
fectly  natural  antithetic” — as  in  the  antinomies 
of  pure  reason;  or,  as  in  the  paralogisms,  the 
reasoning  has  specious  cogency  which  can  be 
shown  to  “conclude  falsely,  while  the  form  is 
correct  and  unexceptionable.”  In  this  balance 
of  reason  against  itself  lies  the  illusory  character 
of  the  transcendental  dialectic. 

Where  Aristotle  recognizes  that  reason  can 
be  employed  on  both  sides  of  a  question  be¬ 
cause  it  involves  competing  probabilities,  Kant 
in  calling  dialectic  “a  logic  of  appearance”  ex¬ 
plicitly  remarks  that  “this  does  not  signify  a 
doctrine  of  probability.”  He  further  distin¬ 
guishes  what  he  calls  “transcendental  illusory 
appearance”  from  “empirical  illusory  appear¬ 
ance”  and  ordinary  “logical  illusion.”  The 
latter  two  can  be  corrected  and  totally  removed. 


But  “transcendental  illusion,  on  the  contrary,” 
he  writes,  “does  not  cease  to  exist  even  after  it 
has  been  exposed  and  its  nothingness  has  been 
clearly  perceived  by  means  of  transcendental 
criticism.” 

The  reason  for  this,  Kant  explains,  is  that 
“here  we  have  to  do  with  a  natural  and  unavoid¬ 
able  illusion,  which  rests  upon  subjective  prin¬ 
ciples,  and  imposes  these  upon  us  as  objective. 

.  .  .  There  is,  therefore,”  he  continues,  “a 
natural  and  unavoidable  dialectic  of  pure  rea¬ 
son”  which  arises  because  the  mind  seeks  to 
answer  questions  “well  nigh  impossible  to 
answer,”  such  as  “how  objects  exist  as  things  in 
themselves”  or  “how  the  nature  of  things  is  to 
be  subordinated  to  principles.”  In  its  effort  to 
transcend  experience — “in  disregard  of  all  the 
warnings  of  criticism” — the  mind  cannot  escape 
the  frustration,  the  dialectical  illusion,  “which 
is  an  inseparable  adjunct  of  human  reason.” 
It  is  not,  Kant  repeatedly  insists,  that  “the 
ideas  of  pure  reason”  are  “in  their  own  nature 
dialectical ;  it  is  from  their  misemployment  alone 
that  fallacies  and  illusions  arise.” 

For  Hegel  as  for  Plato  dialectic  moves  in  the 
realm  of  truth  and  ideas,  not  probabilities  and 
illusions.  But  for  Hegel  dialectic  is  always  the 
process  of  mind,  or  of  the  Idea,  in  interminable 
motion  toward  absolute  truth — never  resting  in 
the  intuition  of  that  truth.  The  Idea,  he  writes, 
“is  self-determined,  it  assumes  successive  forms 
which  it  successively  transcends;  and  by  this 
very  process  of  transcending  its  earlier  stages, 
gains  an  affirmative,  and,  in  fact,  a  richer  and 
more  concrete  shape.” 

The  dialectical  process  is  a  motion  in  which 
contrary  and  defective  truths  are  harmonized. 
The  synthesis  of  thesis  and  antithesis  results  in 
a  more  complete  truth.  To  illustrate  his  mean¬ 
ing,  Hegel  uses  the  example  of  building  a  house. 
For  such  a  purpose,  we  must  have  “in  the  first 
instance,  a  subjective  aim  and  design”  and  as 
means,  “the  several  substances  required  for 
the  work — iron,  wood,  stones.”  In  rendering 
these  materials  suitable  for  our  purpose,  we 
make  use  of  the  elements:  “fire  to  melt  the 
iron,  wind  to  blow  the  fire,  water  to  set  the 
wheels  in  motion,  in  order  to  cut  the  wood, 
etc.” 

Yet  the  house  that  we  build  is,  according  to 


350 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Hegel,  an  opposite  or  antithesis  of  these  ele¬ 
ments.  “The  wind,  which  has  helped  to  build 
the  house,  is  shut  out  by  the  house;  so  also  are 
the  violence  of  rains  and  floods,  and  the  de¬ 
structive  powers  of  fire,  so  far  as  the  house  is 
made  fire-proof.  The  stones  and  beams  obey 
the  law  of  gravity — press  downward — and  so 
high  walls  are  carried  up.”  The  result  is  that 
“the  elements  are  made  use  of  in  accordance 
with  their  nature,  and  yet  to  cooperate  for  a 
product,  by  which  their  operation  is  limited.” 
The  initial  opposition  between  the  idea  of  a 
house  and  the  elements  is  reconciled  in  the 
higher  synthesis,  which  is  the  house  itself. 

While  it  shows  the  opposing  theses  and  the 
resulting  synthesis,  this  example  does  not  fully 
exhibit  the  dynamic  character  of  the  Hegelian 
dialectic.  If  the  resulting  synthesis  is  not  the 
whole  truth,  it  too  must  be  defective  and  re¬ 
quire  supplementation  by  a  contrary  which  is 
defective  in  an  opposite  way.  These  two  to¬ 
gether  then  become  the  material  for  a  higher 
synthesis,  another  step  in  that  continuing  dia¬ 
lectical  process  which  is  the  life  of  mind — both 
the  subjective  dialectic  of  the  human  mind  and 
the  objective  dialectic  of  the  Absolute  Mind  or 
the  Idea. 

The  thread  of  common  meaning  which  runs 
through  these  four  conceptions  of  dialectic  is 
to  be  found  in  the  principle  of  opposition.  In 
each  of  them  dialectic  either  begins  or  ends 
with  some  sort  of  intellectual  conflict,  or  de¬ 
velops  and  then  resolves  such  oppositions. 

For  Kant  dialectical  opposition  takes  the  ex¬ 
treme  form  of  irreducible  contradictions  from 
which  the  mind  cannot  escape.  “It  is  a  melan¬ 
choly  reflection,”  he  declares,  “that  reason  in 
its  highest  exercise,  falls  into  an  antithetic.” 
This  comes  about  because  “all  statements  enun¬ 
ciated  by  pure  reason  transcend  the  conditions 
of  possible  experience,  beyond  the  sphere  of 
which  we  can  discover  no  criterion  of  truth, 
while  they  are  at  the  same  time  framed  in  ac¬ 
cordance  with  the  laws  of  the  understanding, 
which  are  applicable  only  to  experience;  and 
thus  it  is  the  fate  of  all  such  speculative  dis¬ 
cussions,  that  while  the  one  party  attacks  the 
weaker  side  of  his  opponent,  he  infallibly  lays 
open  his  own  weaknesses.” 


For  Hegel  the  opposition  takes  the  milder 
form  of  contrary  theses  and  antitheses.  They 
can  be  dialectically  overcome  by  a  synthesis 
which  remedies  the  incompleteness  of  each 
half  truth.  “It  is  one  of  the  most  important 
discoveries  of  logic,”  Hegel  says,  “that  a 
specific  moment  which,  by  standing  in  an 
opposition,  has  the  position  of  an  extreme, 
ceases  to  be  such  and  is  a  moment  in  an  organic 
whole  by  being  at  the  same  time  a  mean.” 
The  Hegelian  opposition  is  thus  also  “media¬ 
tion.” 

Dialectical  opposition  for  Aristotle  originates 
in  the  disagreements  which  occur  in  ordinary 
human  discourse.  But  just  as  disagreement  is 
reasonable  only  if  there  are  two  sides  to  the 
question  in  dispute,  so  reason  can  operate  dia¬ 
lectically  only  with  regard  to  genuinely  argu¬ 
able  matters.  The  familiar  topics  concerning 
which  men  disagree  represent  the  commonplace 
issues  of  dialectic,  since  for  the  most  part  they 
are  formed  from  debatable  propositions  or  ques¬ 
tions.  “Nobody  in  his  senses,”  Aristotle  be¬ 
lieves,  “would  make  a  proposition  of  what  no 
©ne  holds;  nor  would  he  make  a  problem  of 
what  is  obvious  to  everybody  or  to  most  peo¬ 
ple.”  Each  of  the  conflicting  opinions  will 
therefore  have  some  claim  to  probability.  Here 
the  dialectical  process  ends  neither  in  a  synthe¬ 
sis  of  incomplete  opposites  nor  in  a  rejection  of 
both  as  illusory;  but,  having  “an  eye  to  general 
opinion,”  it  seeks  to  ascertain  the  more  reason¬ 
able  view — the  more  tenable  or  probable  of  the 
two. 

In  the  Platonic  theory  of  dialectic,  the  ele¬ 
ment  of  opposition  appears  in  the  tension  be¬ 
tween  being  and  becoming,  the  one  and  many, 
or  the  intelligible  and  the  sensible,  which  is 
found  present  in  every  stage  of  the  mind’s  dia¬ 
lectical  ascent  to  the  contemplation  of  ideas. 
So  fundamental  is  this  tension  that  Socrates  uses 
it  to  define  the  dialectician  as  one  who  is  “able 
to  see  ‘a  One  and  Many’  in  Nature” — by  com¬ 
prehending  “scattered  particulars  in  one  idea” 
and  dividing  it  “into  species  according  to  their 
natural  formation.”  Here  as  in  the  Hegelian 
theory  the  oppositions — apparent  contradic¬ 
tions  in  discourse — can  be  resolved  by  dialectic, 
and  through  their  resolution  the  mind  then 
rises  to  a  higher  level. 


Chapter  18:  DIALECTIC 


351 


It  is  only  in  the  writings  of  Hegel  or  his  fol¬ 
lowers  that  the  meaning  of  dialectic  is  not 
limited  to  the  activity  of  human  thought. 
Hegel  expressly  warns  that  “the  loftier  dia¬ 
lectic  ...  is  not  an  activity  of  subjective  think¬ 
ing  applied  to  some  matter  externally,  but  is 
rather  the  matter’s  very  soul  putting  forth  its 
branches  and  fruit  organically.”  It  is  the  “de¬ 
velopment  of  the  Idea,”  which  is  “the  proper 
activity  of  its  rationality.”  If  the  whole  world 
in  its  existence  and  development  is  the  thought 
and  thinking  of  an  Absolute  Mind,  or  the  Idea, 
then  the  events  of  nature  and  of  history  are 
moments  in  a  dialectical  process  of  cosmic  pro¬ 
portions.  The  principles  of  dialectic  become 
the  principles  of  change,  and  change  itself  is 
conceived  as  a  progress  or  evolution  from  lower 
to  higher,  from  part  to  whole,  from  the  inde¬ 
terminate  to  the  determinate. 

The  dialectical  pattern  of  history,  conceived 
by  Hegel  as  the  progressive  objectification  of 
spirit,  is  reconstructed  by  Karl  Marx  in  terms 
of  the  conflict  of  material  forces.  Marx  himself 
explicitly  contrasts  his  dialectic  with  that  of 
Hegel.  “My  dialectic  method,”  he  writes,  “is 
not  only  different  from  the  Hegelian,  but  is 
its  direct  opposite.”  Hegel,  he  claims,  thinks 
that  “the  real  world  is  only  the  external, 
phenomenal  form  of  ‘the  Idea,’  ”  whereas 
his  own  view  is  that  “the  ideal  is  nothing 
else  than  the  material  world  reflected  by  the 
human  mind,  and  translated  into  forms  of 
thought.” 

Nevertheless,  with  respect  to  dialectic,  Marx 
praises  Hegel  for  being  “the  first  to  present  its 
general  form  of  working  in  a  comprehensive 
and  conscious  manner.”  The  only  trouble  is 
that  with  Hegel,  dialectic  “is  standing  on  its 
head.”  It  must  therefore  “be  turned  right  side 
up  again,”  a  revolution  which  Marx  thinks  he 
accomplishes  in  his  dialectical  materialism. 

Having  put  dialectic  on  its  proper  basis, 
Marx  constructs  the  whole  of  history  in  terms 
of  a  conflict  of  material  forces,  or  of  social 
classes  in  economic  strife,  according  to  a  dialec¬ 
tical  pattern  which  provides  “recognition  of 
the  existing  state  of  things,  at  the  same  time 
also  the  recognition  of  the  negation  of  that 
state,  of  its  inevitable  breaking  up.”  History  is 
thus  viewed  dialectically  “as  in  fluid  move¬ 


ment,”  yet  it  is  also  conceived  as  working 
towards  a  definite  end  —  the  revolution  which 
has  as  its  result  the  peace  of  the  classless  society. 
Bourgeois  industry,  by  bringing  about  the  con¬ 
centration  and  association  of  the  proletariat, 
produces  “its  own  grave  diggers;  its  fall  and  the 
victory  of  the  proletariat”  are  “equally  inevi¬ 
table.” 

In  Marx’s  vocabulary  the  phrases  “historical 
materialism”  and  “dialectical  materialism”  are 
strictly  synonymous.  But  Marx’s  protest  to 
the  contrary  notwithstanding,  a  comparison  of 
Marx  and  Hegel  seems  to  show  that  a  dialectic 
of  history  is  equally  capable  of  being  conceived 
in  terms  of  spirit  or  of  matter. 

The  question  whether  there  is  a  dialectic  of 
nature  as  well  as  a  dialectic  of  history  remains  a 
point  of  controversy  in  Marxist  thought,  de¬ 
spite  the  bearing  which  Hegel’s  Science  of  Logic 
and  Phenomenology  of  Mind  might  have  upon 
the  question.  Engels  tries  in  his  Dialectics  of 
Nature  to  give  a  fuller  rendering  of  the  Hege¬ 
lian  dialectic  in  strictly  materialistic  terms.  Its 
universal  scope,  including  all  of  nature  as  well 
as  all  of  history,  is  also  reflected  in  certain  post- 
Darwinian  doctrines  of  cosmic  evolution. 

Considerations  relevant  to  the  Hegelian  or 
Marxist  dialectic  will  be  found  in  the  chapters 
on  History  and  Progress.  Without  judging 
the  issues  which  Hegel  and  Marx  have  raised  in 
the  thought  of  the  last  century,  it  may  be  per¬ 
missible  to  report  the  almost  violent  intellectual 
aversion  they  have  produced  in  certain  quarters. 
Freud,  for  example,  is  as  unsympathetic  in  his 
criticism  of  Marx  and  as  uncompromising  in  his 
rejection  of  dialectical  materialism,  as  James  be¬ 
fore  him  is  extreme  in  the  expression  of  his  dis¬ 
taste  for  Hegel.  Mocking  “the  Hegelizers”  who 
think  that  “the  glory  and  beauty  of  the  psychic 
life  is  that  in  it  all  contradictions  find  their  re¬ 
conciliation,”  James  declares:  “With  this  intel¬ 
lectual  temper  I  confess  I  cannot  contend.” 

The  Hegelian  dialectic  and  what  James  calls 
“the  pantomime-state  of  mind”  are,  in  his  opin¬ 
ion,  “emotionally  considered,  one  and  the  same 
thing.  In  the  pantomime  all  common  things  are 
represented  to  happen  in  impossible  ways,  peo¬ 
ple  jump  down  each  other’s  throats,  houses  turn 
inside  out,  old  women  become  young  men, 


352 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


everything  ‘passes  into  its  opposite’  with  incon¬ 
ceivable  celerity  and  skill.  .  .  .  And  so  in  the 
Hegelian  logic,”  James  continues,  “relations 
elsewhere  recognized  under  the  insipid  name  of 
distinctions  (such  as  that  between  knower  and 


object,  many  and  one)  must  first  be  translated 
into  impossibilities  and  contradictions,  then 
‘transcended’  and  identified  by  miracle,  ere  the 
proper  temper  is  induced  for  thoroughly  enjoy¬ 
ing  the  spectacle  they  show.” 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 


i.  Definitions  of  dialectic 


PAGE 

353 


2.  Diverse  theories  of  dialectic 

2a.  Dialectic  as  the  pursuit  of  truth  and  the  contemplation  of  being 

(1)  The  ascent  from  appearance  to  reality,  or  from  opinion  to  knowledge:  the 

upward  and  downward  paths  of  dialectic 

(2)  Definition,  division,  hypothesis,  and  myth  in  the  service  of  dialectic  354 

2 b.  Dialectic  as  the  method  of  inquiry,  argument,  and  criticism  in  the  sphere  of 
opinion 

(1)  Divisions  of  dialectic:  the  theory  of  the  predicables 

(2)  The  technique  of  question  and  answer 

2 c.  Dialectic  as  the  logic  of  semblance  and  as  the  critique  of  the  illusory  employment 
of  reason  beyond  experience 

(1)  The  division  of  logic  into  analytic  and  dialectic:  the  distinction  between 

general  and  transcendental  dialectic 

(2)  The  natural  dialectic  of  human  reason 

2 d.  Dialectic  as  the  evolution  of  spirit  or  matter 

(1)  The  distinction  between  subjective  and  objective  dialectic:  the  realization 

of  the  moral  w  in  355 

(2)  The  dialectic  of  nature  and  of  history:  the  actualization  of  freedom 

3.  Types  of  dialectical  opposition 

3<7.  The  opposition  between  being  and  becoming,  the  one  and  the  many,  the  same 
and  the  other 

3 b.  The  opposed  premises  of  dialectical  argument:  dialectical  problems  and  theses; 
the  conflict  of  probabilities 

3 c.  The  opposed  conclusions  of  dialectical  reasoning:  the  antinomies  and  paralogisms 
of  a  transcendental  dialectic 

3 d.  Thesis  and  antithesis  as  moments  in  the  advance  toward  a  dialectical  synthesis 


4.  Dialectic  in  relation  to  philosophy  and  science 

5.  The  spheres  of  dialectic  and  rhetoric:  proof  and  persuasion 

6.  The  evaluation  of  dialectic:  the  line  between  dialectic  and  sophistry 


356 


Chapter  18:  DIALECTIC 


353 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James:  Psych  o  logy ,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  163. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Definitions  of  dialectic 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  88d-89a  /  Phaedrus,  139d- 
140a  /  Republic ,  bk  vi,  387c-d;  bk  vii,  396d- 
398c  /  Parmenides ,  491a-c  /  Sophist ,  557a-b; 
571a-c  /  Philebus ,  611d-612b;  634b-c  /  Seventh 
Letter ,  809c-810c 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [24s 
2i-bi5]  39a-c  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  ii 
[77^5-35]  106b  /  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [iooai8- 
b3i]  143a-c;  ch  2  [ioib3~4]  144a  /  Sophistical 
Refutations ,  ch  2  [i65b3~ 4]  228a;  ch  ii  [17115 
3-8]  236a-b;  [1 72^15— b4]  237a-c  /  Generation 
and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  2  [3 i6a5— 14]  411c-d  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  ch  2  [ioo4b  15-27]  523d; 
bk  xi,  ch  3  [io6ia29-bio]  589c-d  /  Soul,  bk  i, 
ch  1  [403a29~b8]  632c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1354“!— 5] 
593a;  [1355^—10]  594b;  ch  2  [1356^1-33] 
595d-596a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  4-6  11a- 
12b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  6,  rep  3  40a-41a 
31  Descartes:  Rules,  x,  16d-17a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  36d-37d;  59c-d;  108a- 
111c  esp  108a-d;  227a-235a  esp  229b-c,  231c- 
232a  /  Practical  Reason ,  337a-c  /  Judgement, 
562a-564c  esp  562d 


43  Mill:  Liberty,  287d-288a 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  31 
19c-20a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  179b-c; 
182d 

2.  Diverse  theories  of  dialectic 

2a.  Dialectic  as  the  pursuit  of  truth  and  the  con¬ 
templation  of  being 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  57a-c  /  Phaedrus ,  139b- 
140b  /  Phaedo ,  242b-c  /  Republic,  bk  vi, 
383d-388a;  bk  vii,  396d-398c  /  Parmenides, 
491a-d  /  Sophist,  556c-557b:  571a-c  /  States¬ 
man,  585c  /  Philebus,  611d-612b;  634b-635a  / 
Seventh  Letter ,  809c-810d 
17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii  10a-12b  esp 
ch  4-6  1  la-1 2b 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  337a-338c  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  551a-552c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  287c-288c 

2a(l)  The  ascent  from  appearance  to  reality, 
or  from  opinion  to  knowledge:  the  up¬ 
ward  and  downward  paths  of  dialectic 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,  385b-388a;  bk  vii, 
391b-401d  /  Sophist  551a-579d  esp  552b-c, 
561d-579d  /  Statesman  580a-608d  esp  585d, 
586c,  589c-d,  591a-c,  594d-596a,  599a-c, 
608d  /  Seventh  Letter ,  810a-d 


354  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2a(2)  to  2d 


(2  a.  Dialectic  as  the  pursuit  of  truth  and  the  con¬ 
templation  of  being .  2a(\)  The  ascent 
from  appearance  to  reality,  or  from  opinion 
to  knowledge:  the  upward  and  downward 
paths  of  dialectic .) 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  4-6  1  la-1 2b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113b-115c;  173b-174a  / 
Judgement ,  551a-552c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  288a 

2^(2)  Definition,  division,  hypothesis,  and 
myth  in  the  service  of  dialectic 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  4a-13d  esp  4b,  5a-b,  6d, 

7c,  10a  /  Laches ,  31c-37d  /  Protagoras ,  43  d- 
45a;  49a  /  Phaedrus ,  124b-129d;  134a-c;  139d- 
140b  /  Meno  174a-190a,c  esp  175d,  179d-180b, 
183b-c  /  Euthyphro ,  192c-199a,c  esp  193a, 
193d,  195b  /  Phaedo ,  242b-243c  /  Republic , 
bk  i— 11,  297b-316b;  bk  iv,  346a-356a;  bk 
vi-vn,386d-398c/  Timaeus ,  /  Parmeni¬ 
des  486a-511d  esp  491a-d  /  551a-579d 

esp  552b-c,  553d-554a,  561b,  570c-571d  / 
Statesman  580a-608d  esp  580d,  582d-583c, 
586c-589c,  591a-d,  594d-596a  /  Philebus 
609a-639a,c  esp  610d-613a,  615c-617d  / 

Seventh  Letter ,  809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  1, 

ch  2  [3 1 6a5— 14]  411c-d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch 
6  [9S7a29~b7]  505b-c;  [987b30— 33]  506a;  bk 
xiii,  ch  4  [io78bi8~32]  610b-c  /  bk  i, 

ch  1  [403a29~b8]  632c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  2-3 
165d-167d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  7  112b-113d 

17  Plotinus:  Fzr.tf  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  4  lla-c 

2&.  Dialectic  as  the  method  of  inquiry,  argu¬ 
ment,  and  criticism  in  the  sphere  of 
opinion 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [24s 
21-H5]  39a-c  /  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch 
11  [77^5—35]  106b;  ch  19  [8ibi7~22]  lllc-d  / 
Topics  143a-223a,c  /  Sophistical  Refutations 
227a-253d  esp  ch  1-2  227a-228a,  ch  9-1  i 
234b-237c,  ch  34  252c-253d  /  Generation  and 
Corruption ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [316^-14]  411c-d  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  ch  2  [1004^5-27]  523d 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  593a-598b; 
ch  4  [i359a30-bi9]  599c-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  6,  rep  3  40a-41a;  part  iii,  q  9,  a  3,  rep  2 
765b-766b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  60a-c;  65a-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11,  2c-3a;  iv,  5b-c;  x, 
16d-17a;  xiii,  25b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  299b 

42  Kant:  Pwrc  Reason ,  36d-37d;  109b-c  /  Judge¬ 
ment ,  600d-603d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  287c-288c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  31 
19c-20a;  part  ii,  par  140,  53a-b  /  Philosophy 
of  History ,  part  iv,  360c-d 


2&(1)  Divisions  of  dialectic:  the  theory  of  the 
predicables 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  i-vii  143a-211a,c  esp  2< 
bk  1,  ch  2  143d-144a,  ch  4-6  144b-146a,  ch 

12  148d  /  Sophistical  Refutatio?is ,  ch  ii  [17 ib 
3-8]  236a-b;  [i72a22-b4]  237b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1356^6- 
i358a33]  596a-598b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  parti-ii,  q  57, 
a  6,  rep  3  40a-41a 

2b(2)  The  technique  of  question  and  answer 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  50d-51b  /  Euthydemus , 

78a-d  /  Cratylus ,  88d-89a  /  Republic ,  bk  vi, 

375b-c  /  Sophist ,  551  d 

8  Aristotle:  Pr/or  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [24s 
21— bi 5]  39a-c  /  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch 
ii  [77a25~35]  106b;  bk  ii,  ch  5  [9ibi  1— 17] 

125b  /  Topics ,  bk  viii  211a-223a,c  /  Sophis¬ 
tical  Refutations ,  ch  10  [i7ia27]-CH  11  [i7ib6] 
235d-236a;  ch  ii  [172^5-21]  237a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  2,  178a-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  65a 

42  Kant:  Pwre  Reason ,  36a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  140, 

53a-b 

2c.  Dialectic  as  the  logic  of  semblance  and  as 
the  critique  of  the  illusory  employment 
of  reason  beyond  experience 

42  Kant:  P«rc  Reason,  la-4a,c  esp  la-b;  7a-8b; 
15c-16c;  20a;  36d-37b;  53b-54b;  59c-d;  93c- 
99a;  101b-107b;  108a-209d  esp  108a-112d, 
120c-121c,  129c-130b,  133d,  157d,  173b-174a, 

175c-d,  185b-c,  190a-209d;  217d-218a;  219a- 
223d;  227a-235a  esp  229b-c,  231c-232a  / 

Fimd.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261c; 
283d-284d  /  Practical  Reason,  291a-292a; 
296a-d;  309b;  310d-311d;  313b-314d;  320c- 
321b;  335c-337a,c  /  Judgement,  461a-c;  540a- 
542a;  543c-544c;  551a-552c;  562a-564c;  570b- 
572b;  606d-607c 

2c(l)  The  division  of  logic  into  analytic  and 
dialectic:  the  distinction  between  gen¬ 
eral  and  transcendental  dialectic 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  34a-37d  esp  36a -37d; 
108a-lllc 

2c(2)  The  natural  dialectic  of  human  reason 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-3b;  7a-8b;  20a;  120c- 
121c;  133d;  192c-193b;  217d-218a;  227a-235a 
esp  229b-c  /  Practical  Reason ,  335c-337d; 

352 b-c  /  Judgement,  570b-572b 

2d.  Dialectic  as  the  evolution  of  spirit  or  matter 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  32-33 
20a-d;  part  iii,  par  342-344  llOc-llla;  par 
353-36°  112b-114a,c  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
intro,  153a-206a,c  esp  178a-179c,  182d-183a, 
203a-206a,c;  part  i,  208b-d;  236a-c;  257a-c; 
part  11,  278a-c;  part  iv,  315a 


2d(\)  to  4 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  lOa-lld  esp  llb-d 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  882c 

2*/(l)  The  distinction  between  subjective  and 
objective  dialectic:  the  realization  of  the 
moral  will 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  26 
18b-c;  par  31  19c-20a;  part  ii,  par  105-114 
40a-42b  esp  par  109  41a-b;  par  140  49b*54a; 
additions,  67-72  126d-127c  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  part  iv,  360c-361a 

2d(2)  The  dialectic  of  nature  and  of  history: 
the  actualization  of  freedom 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  4  12d- 
13a;  part  hi,  par  194  66c-d;  par  340-344 
llOb-llla;  par  353-360  112b-114a,c  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History  153a-369a,c  esp  intro,  156c- 
190b,  203d-206a,c,  part  iv,  368d-369a,c 

3.  Types  of  dialectical  opposition 

3 a.  The  opposition  between  being  and  becom¬ 
ing,  the  one  and  the  many,  the  same  and 
the  other 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  126a-c;  134b-c  /  Symposium , 
167a-d  /  Republic ,  bk  iii,  333b-d;  bk  v,  370d- 
373c;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Parmenides 
486a-511d  /  Sophist ,  564d-574c  /  Statesman , 
594d-595a  /  Philebus ,  610d-613a;  615c-617d; 
633a-635a  esp  634b-635a  /  Seventh  Letter , 
809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  6  505b- 
506b;  bk  iii,  ch  1  [995b20-25]  514a-b;  bk  iv, 
ch  2  522b-524b  esp  [ioo4bi5-26]  523d 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  ii,  839d-840b 

17  Plotinus:  FFt/  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  4  lla-c  / 

Second  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  5  51b-d  /  Third  En¬ 
nead ,  tr  iii,  ch  1  93b-c;  tr  vii  119b-129a; 
tr  ix  136a-138a,c  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  ii, 
ch  1  139c-140c  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  4-7 
209d-212c;  tr  ii  214c-215c;  tr  vi  235b-237d 
/  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  1-3  310d-312b; 

tr  ix,  ch  1-2  353d-355a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  107a-b 

3 b.  The  opposed  premises  of  dialectical  argu¬ 
ment:  dialectical  problems  and  theses; 
the  conflict  of  probabilities 

8  Aristotle:  Pr/or  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [24s 
2i-bi5]  39a-c  /  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch 
ii  [77*25— 35]  106b  /  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  ii 
148a-c;  bk  viii,  ch  2  [i57a34~b33]  213d- 
214b  /  Sophistical  Refutations ,  ch  2  [i65b3~ 4] 
228a  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  10  [279^-12]  370d 

12  Epictetus  '.Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  ii,  150d-151a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  83, 

a  1,  ans  436d-438a. 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  47d-48d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  i,  43d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch 
xvi,  sect  9  369b-c 


355 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  x,  div 
86-91  488d  491c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  108ad 

3c.  The  opposed  conclusions  of  dialectical  rea¬ 
soning:  the  antinomies  and  paralogisms 
of  a  transcendental  dialectic 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  cii  i  [1355*28-40] 
594c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  la-4a,c;  7a  8b;  120c- 
173a  esp  129c~130b,  133c;  174b-177b;  187a- 
192d;  200c-209d;  219a-220b;  229b-c  /  Fund. 
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261b;  283d- 
284d  /  Practical  Reason,  291a-292a;  302a-d; 
331c-337a,c;  340a-342d;  348d-349a  /  Science 
of  Right,  407a-408b  /  Judgement,  540a* 546 d 
esp  543c-544c;  562a-578a  esp 562d*564c,  575b- 
578a;  584c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  135 
47b-d 

3 d.  Thesis  and  antithesis  as  moments  in  the 
advance  toward  a  dialectical  synthesis 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  7a-8b;  43d-44a;  133c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  17 
16c;  par  26  18b-c;  par  31-33  19c-20d;  part  i, 
par  104  39b-d;  part  ii,  par  105-114  40a-42b 
esp  par  109  41a-b;  part  iii,  par  256  79d-80a; 
par  302  lOla-c;  par  353-360  112b-114a,c  / 
Philosophy  of  History  153a-369a,c  esp  intro, 
153a-190b,  203a-206a,c,  part  i,  208b-d, 
235d-236c,  238b,  245b-d,  257a-c,  part  ii, 
279c-d,  part  iii,  286c-287a,  303c-311d,  part 
iv,  316a-b,  321d-322c,  326d-327a,  333d-334d 

53  James:  Psychology,  117b;  238b  [fn  2] 

4.  Dialectic  in  relation  to  philosophy  and  sci¬ 
ence 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  esp 
bk  vi,  386d-388a,  bk  vii,  396d-398c  /  Par¬ 
menides,  490d-491a  /  Sophist,  570a-574c  esp 
571a-c  /  Philebus,  610d-613a;  633a-635a  esp 
634b-635a  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [2411 
2i-bi5]  39a-c  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  6 
[74bi8— 25]  102c;  [75*18—28]  103a-b:  ch  ii 
[77*22—35]  106b;  ch  19  [8ibi7— 24]  lllc-d:  bk 
ii,  ch  5  [9 ibi  1— 1 7]  125b  /  Topics,  bk  i,  ch 
1-2  143a-144a;  ch  io-ii  147b-148c;  ch  14 
[i05b30— 3 1]  149c;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [159*2—14] 
215c-d  /  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  9-1  i  234b- 
237c  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  10  [279b4~ 12]  370d  / 
Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  2  [316s 
5-14]  411c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  (98oa 
20]— bk  11,  ch  i  [993bi8]  499a-512a  esp  bk  i, 
ch  3  [983*24— b7]  501c-d,  ch  7  506b-d,  bk  i, 
ch  10  [993an]-BK  11,  ch  1  [993bi8]  511c-512a; 
bk  iii  513b,d-522a,c  esp  ch  i  [995*23— b4] 
513b, d;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [ioo4bi5~27]  523d;  bk 
xi,  ch  3  [io6ia29~bi2]  589c-d;  bk  xiii,  ch  4 
[i078bi8~32]  610b-c  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  i  [403® 
2.5— b! 9]  632b-d 


Chapter  18:  DIALECTIC 


356 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


5  to  6 


(4.  Dialectic  in  relation  to  philosophy  and  science .) 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1358*3-33] 

597d-598b;  ch  4  [i359bi2— 18]  599d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii  10a-12b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  3-4, 

266b-267b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  6,  rep  3  40a-41a;  part  hi,  q  9,  a  3,  rep  2 
765b-766b 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11,  2c-3a;  iv,  5b-c;  x 
15d-17a;  xiii,  25b-26a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  37a-b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Meta- 
physic  of  Morals,  261c-d  /  Judgement,  551a-552c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  287c-288c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  31 

19c-20a 

54  Fretjd:  General  Introduction,  545d-546a 

5.  The  spheres  of  dialectic  and  rhetoric:  proof 

and  persuasion 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  39d-42c  /  Euthydemus, 

83a  b  /  Phaedrus,  131b-141a,c  /  Apology, 

200a-201b;  203a-205c  /  Gorgias  252a-294d 
esp  253b-256c,  258b-259a,  265a-267c,  280d- 
285a  /  Statesman,  595a-d  /  Philehus,  610d- 
613a;  634b-635a 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  593a-598b; 
ch  4  [i359a3o-bi9]  599c-d 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  11,  ch  37 
653d-654b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  83, 
a  1,  ans  436d-438a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  446d-450a;  453c-455a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  60a-c;  66c- 
67c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  x,  16d-17a 

6.  The  evaluation  of  dialectic:  the  line  between 

dialectic  and  sophistry 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d  esp  [889— 

1104]  499b-502a 

CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  consideration  of  dialectic  as  logic  or  a  part  of  logic,  and  of  its  relation  to  the  other  liberal 
arts,  see  Language  7;  Logic  1,  ib,  3-3 b;  Rhetoric  ia. 

Other  discussions  of  the  conception  of  dialectic  as  the  highest  science,  the  supreme  form  of 
knowledge  or  wisdom,  see  Metaphysics  i;  Philosophy  2b;  Science  ia(2);  Wisdom  1a. 
Other  discussions  of  dialectic  as  a  method  of  argument  in  the  sphere  of  opinion,  see  Opinion 
2c;  Reasoning  5c;  Rhetoric  4c— 40(3);  and  for  matters  relevant  to  the  use  of  dialectic  as 
a  method  of  inquiry,  see  Definition  4;  Hypothesis  i;  Principle  3c(2). 

The  role  of  dialectic  in  the  philosophy  of  history,  see  History  4a(2)~4a(3);  Progress  ia. 
The  discussion  of  the  types  of  opposition  which  have  significance  for  dialectic,  see  Opposi¬ 
tion  ie,  2b,  2e;  Reasoning  5c. 

Dialectic  in  relation  to  philosophy  and  theology,  see  Metaphysics  3c;  Philosophy  3c; 
Theology  5. 

Discussions  of  sophistry,  and  for  the  condemnation  of  dialectic  as  sophistry,  see  Logic  5; 
Metaphysics  4a;  Philosophy  6b;  Theology  5;  Truth  8e;  Wisdom  3. 


7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  52a- b  /  Euthydemus  65a- 
84a, c  esp  72b-73c  /  Meno,  176d-177a  /  Phaedo, 
243b-c  /  Republic,  bk  vii,  388a-39Sc  esp  396d- 
398c  /  Theaetetus ,  522a-523a;  525d-526b  / 
Sophist  551a-579d  esp  559c-562a,  577c-579d  / 
Philebus ,  61  ld-612 b;  633a-635a  esp  634b-635a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  143a-144a; 
ch  18  [108*17-37]  152b-d;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [i39b 
32-140*2]  192d-193a  /  Sophistical  Refutations, 
ch  2  227d-228a;  ch  8—1 1  233c-237c  /  Genera¬ 
tion  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  2  [316*5-14] 
411c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  2  [ioo4bi5~27] 
523d;  bk  xi,  ch  3  [io6i*29-bi2]  589c-d  / 
Soul,  BK  1,  ch  i  [402bi 5-403*2]  631d-632a 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  1,  cii  i  [i355bi4~22] 
595a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  1,  ch  8  113d-114c; 
bk  hi,  ch  2  177c-178d;  ch  21  193d-195a;  ch 
24,  207d-208a 

17  Plotinus  :  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  4-6  lla-12b 

18  A  ugustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  31 
651d-652b;  ch  37  653d-654b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
101b-106a;  bk  iii,  187b-c;  197b-200d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  75a-77a;  260a-261a; 
446d-450a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  60a-c;  66c- 
67c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  62-63  113b- 
114a;  aph  65  114b-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11,  2c-3a;  iv,  5b-c;  x,  16d- 
17a;  xiv,  28b-c  /  Discourse,  part  vi,  63d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandx,  227a-228a;  234b- 
236b;  329b-336a;  421b-422b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  299b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  36a-b;  36d-37d;  109b-c; 
120c-121c;  133d;  157d;  187c-188b;  221c-222b 
/  Judgement,  600d-601c;  607d-608c  esp  608b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  287c-288c  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  360c- 
361a 

53  James:  Psychology,  107a-b;  117b;  238b  [fn  2] 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  545d 


Chapter  18:  DIALECTIC 


357 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  ore  works  not  included  in  Great  Boohs  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  'The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Augustine.  Divine  Providence  and  the  Problem  of 
Evil ,  BK  II,  ch  1 1- 1 6 

- .  Concerning  the  Teacher 

Hobbes.  The  Art  of  Sophistry 
Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind 

- .  Science  of  Logic 

Engels.  Dialectics  of  Nature 

- .  Herr  Eugen  Duhring' s  Revolution  in  Science , 

part  i  (12-13) 

II. 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism ,  bk 
1— 11 

Philostratus.  Lives  of  the  Sophists 
Erigena.  De  Divisione  Naturae ,  bk  v  (4) 

Abailard.  Sic  et  Non 
- .  Dialectica 

John  of  Salisbury.  Metalogicon 
Nicolas  of  Cusa.  De  Docta  Ignorantia 
Melanchthon.  Dialectica 
Ramus.  Dialect icae  Institutiones 


J.  G.  Fichte.  The  Science  of  Knowledge ,  partiii, 
a-d 

Schlhiermaciier.  Dialehtik. 

Wi if. well.  On  the  Philosophy  of  Discovery ,  appen¬ 
dix  c 

Lotze.  Logic ,  bk  1,  ch  3  (c) 

C.  S.  Peirce,  Collected  Papers ,  vol  i,  par  2S4-572; 

vol  v,  par  41-119;  vol  vi,  par  7-34 
Brunetiere.  An  Apology  for  Rhetoric 
Bradley.  Appearance  and  Reality 
McTaggart.  Studies  in  the  Hegelian  Dialectic 
Plekhanov.  Fundamental  Problems  of  Marxism 
Troeltscii.  Gesammelte  Schriften ,  vol  iii,  ch  3  (4) 
Lenin.  Selected  Worfe,  vol  xi  (On  Dialectics) 
Bukharin.  Historical  Materialism 
Adler.  Dialectic 
Buchanan.  Possibility 
Santayana.  Reason  in  Science ,  ch  7 

- .  The  Realm  of  Essence,  ch  7 

Whitehead.  Process  and  Reality ,  part  i 
Jackson.  Dialectics 

B.  Russell.  An  Inquiry  into  Meaning  and  Truth , 
ch  24 


Chapter  19:  DUTY 


INTRODUCTION 


10CKE,  discussing  in  the  course  of  his  essay 
on  Human  Understanding  “why  a  man 
must  keep  his  word,”  notes  that  we  meet  with 
three  different  answers  to  this  question.  “If  a 
Christian  be  asked,  he  will  give  as  reason:  Be¬ 
cause  God,  who  has  the  power  of  eternal  life 
and  death,  requires  it  of  us.  But  if  a  Hobbist  be 
asked  why?  he  will  answer:  Because  the  public 
requires  it,  and  the  Leviathan  will  punish  you 
if  you  do  not.  And  if  one  of  the  old  philoso¬ 
phers  had  been  asked,  he  would  have  answered: 
Because  it  was  dishonest,  below  the  dignity  of 
a  man,  and  opposite  to  virtue,  the  highest  per¬ 
fection  of  human  nature,  to  do  otherwise.” 

With  these  three  answers  Locke  introduces 
us  to  some  of  the  alternative  views  on  what  is 
perhaps  the  central  problem  concerning  duty. 

All  three  acknowledge  the  existence  of  duty 
and  the  force  of  obligation.  By  accepting  the 
question  they  affirm  the  proposition  that  a  man 
must  or  ought  to  keep  his  word.  But  why  ?  What 
creates  the  ought  or  obligation  ? 

Two  of  the  answers  Locke  cites — that  of  the 
Christian  and  that  of  the  Hobbist — seem  to 
derive  duty  from  the  commands  of  law,  the  law 
of  God  or  of  the  state,  in  either  case  a  law  to  be 
enforced  by  the  sanctions  of  a  superior  power. 
Accordingly,  the  citizen  has  duties  to  the  state, 
the  religious  man  to  God.  Yet  it  does  not  seem 
to  be  entirely  the  case  that  such  duties  rest  ex¬ 
clusively  on  the  superior  power  of  God  or  the 
state.  Men  who  obey  either  divine  or  civil  law 
from  fear  of  punishment  alone,  are  said  to  act 
not  from  duty  but  from  expediency — in  terms 
of  a  calculation  of  risks  and  consequences. 

Obedience  to  law  would  appear  to  be  ac¬ 
knowledged  as  a  duty  only  by  those  who  recog¬ 
nize  the  authority  of  the  law  or  the  right  of  the 
lawmaker  to  command.  They  would  be  willing 
to  obey  the  law  even  if  no  external  sanction 
could  be  enforced  against  them  by  a  superior 

358 


power.  Those  whom  the  law  binds  in  conscience 
rather  than  by  its  coercive  force  obey  the  law 
because  it  is  morally  right  to  do  so.  The  sense 
of  the  law’s  moral  authority  is  for  them  the 
sense  of  duty  from  which  the  dictates  of  con¬ 
science  flow. 

Locke’s  third  answer— that  of  the  ancient 
philosophers — shows  that  duty  is  sometimes 
understood  without  reference  to  law,  divine  or 
human.  We  share  this  understanding  whenever, 
having  made  a  promise  or  contracted  a  debt, 
we  feel  an  obligation  to  discharge  it  even  if 
no  superior  commands  the  act.  Here,  further¬ 
more,  the  obligation  seems  to  be  to  another 
individual — to  a  person  who  may  be  our  equal 
— rather  than  to  the  state  or  God. 

As  indicated  by  Locke’s  statement  of  this 
ancient  view,  it  is  the  honest  or  just  man  who 
acknowledges  such  obligations  apart  from  the 
law  or  his  relation  to  any  superior.  Virtue  may, 
of  course,  also  direct  a  man  to  act  for  the  com¬ 
mon  welfare  and  to  obey  the  laws  of  the  state 
or  the  commandments  of  God.  But  the  imme¬ 
diate  source  of  the  obligation  to  act  in  a  certain 
way  toward  one’s  fellow  men  is  placed  by  the 
ancients,  according  to  Locke,  in  “virtue,  the 
highest  perfection  of  human  nature.”  On  this 
view,  virtue  alone  provides  the  motivation. 
Without  it  men  would  act  lawfully  only  be¬ 
cause  of  the  law’s  coercive  force.  Without  it 
men  would  recognize  no  obligations  to  their 
fellow  men  or  to  the  state. 

These  two  conceptions  of  duty — for  the  mo¬ 
ment  grouping  the  Christian  and  Hobbist  an¬ 
swers  together  against  the  ancient  view — may 
seem  at  first  to  be  only  verbally  different.  It 
seems  certain  that  dutiful  conduct  would  fre¬ 
quently  be  the  same  on  either  view.  Yet  they 
do  conflict  with  one  another,  and  each,  if 
examined  further,  presents  difficulties. 


Chapter  19:  DUTY 


359 


The  theory  that  duty  arises  from  a  man’s 
own  virtue  receives  its  classic  expression,  as 
Locke  intimates,  in  the  ancient  philosophers, 
particularly  Plato  and  Aristotle.  It  appears  in 
the  Republic ,  for  example,  when  Socrates  has  to 
meet  Glaucon’s  argument  that  men  abide  by 
moral  rules,  not  simply  because  they  ought  to, 
but  in  order  to  avoid  the  pain  of  censure  and 
punishment.  Glaucon  claims  that,  given  the 
possession  of  Gyges’  ring  which  can  render  a 
man  invisible  to  others,  “no  man  would  keep 
his  hands  off  what  was  not  his  own  when  he 
could  safely  take  what  he  liked.”  He  could  “in 
all  respects  be  like  a  God  among  men.” 

Against  this  Socrates  sets  his  conception  of 
the  “just  man”  who  does  what  he  ought  to  do 
because  it  is  just,  and  because  justice  is  essential 
to  the  very  life  and  health  of  the  soul.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  Socrates’  way  of  thinking,  it  is  ridiculous 
to  ask  “which  is  the  more  profitable,  to  be  just 
and  act  justly  and  practise  virtue,  whether  seen 
or  unseen  of  gods  and  men,  or  to  be  unjust.  .  .  . 
We  know  that,  when  the  bodily  constitution  is 
gone,  life  is  no  longer  endurable,  though  pam¬ 
pered  with  all  kinds  of  meat  and  drinks,  and 
having  all  wealth  and  all  power;  and  shall  we  be 
told  that  when  the  very  essence  of  the  vital 
principle  is  undermined  and  corrupted,  life  is 
still  worth  having  to  a  man,  if  only  he  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  do  whatever  he  likes  with  the  single 
exception  that  he  is  not  to  acquire  justice  and 
virtue,  or  to  escape  from  injustice  and  vice?” 

On  this  view,  it  seems  to  be  the  virtue  of 
justice  which  lies  at  the  root  of  duty  or  obliga¬ 
tion.  But  for  Plato  justice,  though  only  one  of 
the  virtues,  is  inseparable  from  the  other  three 
— temperance,  courage,  and  wisdom.  It  is  al¬ 
most  indifferent  therefore  whether  one  attrib¬ 
utes  moral  obligation  to  the  particular  virtue 
of  justice  or  to  virtue  in  general.  As  the  chap¬ 
ters  on  Justice  and  Virtue  indicate,  Aristotle 
differs  from  Plato,  both  with  respect  to  the 
virtues  in  general  and  to  justice  in  particular. 
For  Aristotle  it  is  justice  alone,  not  virtue  in 
general  or  any  other  particular  virtue,  which 
gives  rise  to  duty  or  obligation. 

Justice  differs  from  the  other  virtues,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Aristotle,  in  that  it  “alone  of  the  virtues 
is  thought  to  consider  ‘another’s  good’  because 
it  concerns  the  relation  of  a  man  to  his  neigh¬ 
bor.”  The  other  virtues,  such  as  temperance 


and  courage,  do  not  give  rise  to  obligations, 
unless  they  are  somehow  annexed  to  or  united 
with  justice.  Whenever  Aristotle  speaks  of 
duties  he  does  so  with  reference  to  the  obliga¬ 
tions  that  follow  from  justice — “the  duties  of 
parents  to  children  and  those  of  brothers  to 
each  other  .  .  .  those  of  comrades  and  those  of 
fellow-citizens.” 

Whereas  for  Aristotle  justice  always  refers  to 
the  good  of  another,  or  to  the  common  good  of 
all,  such  virtues  as  temperance  and  courage, 
when  they  are  isolated  from  justice,  concern 
the  well-being  of  the  individual  himself.  That 
is  why  only  justice  entails  duties,  which  are  ob¬ 
ligations  to  act  in  a  certain  way  for  the  welfare 
of  others.  If  the  good  of  no  other  individual  is 
involved,  it  seems  that  a  man  has  no  duty  to  be 
temperate  or  courageous,  even  when  he  possesses 
these  virtues. 

Precisely  because  of  the  essentially  social 
character  of  justice,  Aristotle  raises  the  ques¬ 
tion  “whether  a  man  can  treat  himself  unjustly 
or  not.”  He  is  willing  to  admit  that  a  man  can 
do  justice  or  injustice  to  himself  only  in  a  meta¬ 
phorical  sense.  What  he  calls  “metaphorical  jus¬ 
tice”  is  not  a  relation  between  a  man  and  him¬ 
self,  but  a  relation  between  one  part  of  himself 
and  another. 

Aquinas  seems  to  follow  Aristotle  in  connect¬ 
ing  duty  with  justice  and  with  no  other  virtue. 
“Justice  alone  of  all  the  virtues,”  he  writes, 
“implies  the  notion  of  duty.”  If  he  also  inti¬ 
mates  that  duty  may  somehow  enter  into  the 
acts  of  other  virtues — as  when  he  says  that  “it 
is  not  so  patent  in  the  other  virtues  as  it  is  in 
justice” — his  position  still  remains  fundamen¬ 
tally  Aristotelian.  Referring  to  that  “kind  of 
metaphorical  justice”  to  which  Aristotle  ap¬ 
peals  in  stating  the  sense  in  which  a  man  can 
treat  himself  unjustly,  Aquinas  explains  how 
“all  the  other  virtues”  can  be  said  to  “involve 
the  duty  of  the  lower  powers  to  reason.”  Apart 
from  this  metaphorical  duty  of  the  passions  to 
obey  reason,  duty  in  the  strict  sense  comes,  in 
the  opinion  of  Aquinas,  only  from  the  precepts 
of  justice,  which  concern  the  relation  of  one 
person  to  another. 

Ox  this  theory,  duty  is  not  co-extensive  with 
morality,  the  sense  of  duty  is  not  identical  with 
the  moral  sense,  and  specific  duties  obligate  a 


360 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


man  to  other  men  even  when  no  general  law 
exists  to  he  obeyed.  Difficulty  is  found  with 
this  theory  by  those  critics  who  think  that  the 
whole  of  morality,  not  simply  one  part  of  it, 
involves  duties.  Does  not  the  sense  of  duty 
operate,  they  ask,  in  matters  which  do  not  affect 
any  other  individual  or  even  the  common  good  ? 
Does  a  man,  for  example,  have  a  duty  to  tell  the 
truth  only  to  others,  but  not  to  seek  it  for  him¬ 
self?  Kant,  as  we  shall  see,  holds  that  there  are 
private  as  well  as  public  duties,  or,  in  his  lan¬ 
guage,  internal  duties  in  the  realm  of  ethics  as 
well  as  external  duties  in  the  realm  of  juris¬ 
prudence. 

The  Hobbist  theory  of  duty  seems  to  face* 
similar  difficulties.  The  specific  duties  which  are 
determined  by  the  precepts  of  justice  may,  as 
we  have  seen,  not  always  be  the  same  as  the 
specific  duties  imposed  by  civil  law,  though 
they  will  be  identical  whenever  the  law  of  the 
state  is  itself  an  expression  or  determination  of 
justice.  But  when  law  rather  than  justice  is  the 
principle,  duty  seems  to  consist  primarily  in 
obedience  to  the  law  or  rather  to  the  lawgiver 
who  has  superior  power  and  authority.  Only 
secondarily,  or  in  consequence,  does  it  involve 
obligations  to  other  men  who  are  one’s  equals. 

With  Hobbes,  for  example,  justice,  and  ob¬ 
ligation  as  well,  begin  only  with  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  a  constituted  authority  with  the  power 
of  making  laws.  “Where  there  is  no  Common¬ 
wealth,”  he  writes,  “there  is  nothing  unjust. 
So  that  the  nature  of  justice  consisteth  in  keep¬ 
ing  of  valid  covenants;  but  the  validity  of  cove¬ 
nants  begins  not  but  with  the  constitution  of  a 
civil  power,  sufficient  to  compel  men  to  keep 
them.”  Duty  and  justice  are  both  said  to  be 
“laws  of  nature,”  but,  Hobbes  adds,  they  “are 
not  properly  laws,  but  qualities  that  dispose 
men  to  peace,  and  to  obedience,”  until  “a  Com¬ 
monwealth  is  once  settled,”  and  then  they  be¬ 
come  “the  commands  of  the  Commonwealth.” 
In  other  words,  “it  is  the  Sovereign  power  that 
obliges  men  to  obey  them,”  and  obedience, 
which  is  said  to  be  “part  also  of  the  law  of 
nature,”  is  its  proper  expression. 

So  far  the  two  conceptions  conflict  or  at  least 
diverge.  But  if  the  legal  theory  of  duty  goes  no 
further  than  the  enactments  of  the  state,  the 
same  question  arises  here  as  before.  Does  a  man 
have  no  duties  apart  from  his  relation  to  the 


state?  Can  duty  be  co-extensive  with  morality 
if  the  only  rules  of  conduct  to  be  obeyed  are 
laws  imposed  from  without — regulations  which 
have  authority  simply  because  they  come  from 
one  who  has  the  right  to  command?  Again,  as 
we  shall  see,  Kant  would  say  No. 

We  have  now  stated  the  questions  about  duty 
which  raise  difficulties  for  Aristotle  and  Hobbes. 
Though  they  differ  in  their  theories  of  law  and 
justice,  as  well  as  in  their  conceptions  of  duty, 
they  seem  to  concur  in  thinking  that  doing 
one’s  duty  does  not  exhaustively  solve  all  moral 
problems. 

The  same  questions  do  not,  however,  seem  to 
present  difficulties  to  other  moralists — to  Kant 
and  to  the  Stoics  of  antiquity,  such  as  Marcus 
Aurelius  and  Epictetus.  On  the  contrary,  their 
moral  philosophy,  by  making  the  sphere  of  duty 
co-extensive  with  the  whole  of  the  moral  life, 
seems  to  prevent  such  questions  from  being 
raised. 

As  we  turn  to  examine  their  conception  of 
duty,  we  must  observe  that,  in  two  respects,  it 
alters  Locke’s  threefold  division  of  the  answers 
to  the  question,  Why  must  a  man  keep  his 
word  ?  In  the  first  place,  Locke’s  statement  of 
the  answer  given  by  “the  ancient  philosophers” 
seems  to  have  only  Plato  and  Aristotle  in  mind, 
certainly  not  the  Stoics.  In  the  second  place, 
Locke’s  statement  of  the  Christian  position 
seems  to  associate  it  with  the  Hobbist  answer, 
against  that  of  Plato  and  Aristotle.  That 
association  may  be  justified  on  the  ground  that 
duty  to  God,  like  duty  to  the  state,  involves 
obligation  to  a  superior.  But  Aquinas,  as  we 
have  seen,  seems  to  agree  with  Aristotle  about 
justice  as  a  source  of  duty;  and,  as  we  shall  see, 
he  also  seems  to  agree  with  Kant  and  the  Stoics 
about  the  pervasiveness  of  duty  in  the  realm  of 
morals.  Locke’s  statement  of  the  Christian  posi¬ 
tion,  which  selects  one  aspect  of  it  only,  may 
therefore  be  inadequate. 

The  point  which  unites  Kant,  the  Stoics,  and 
Aquinas  is  their  agreement  concerning  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  a  law  which  is  neither  enacted  by  the 
state  nor  proclaimed  by  God  in  his  revealed 
commandments.  This  law  the  Stoics  speak  of  as 
“the  law  of  reason,”  Aquinas  calls  “the  natural 
law,”  and  Kant  conceives  to  be  “the  moral  law 
within.”  The  common  conception  thus  vari- 


Chapter  19:  DUTY 


361 


ously  expressed  is  more  fully  treated  in  the 
chapter  on  Law;  but  that  ampler  discussion  is 
not  needed  to  perceive  that  the  law  of  reason 
or  of  nature  is  a  moral  law,  in  that  its  general 
principles  and  detailed  precepts  govern  the  en¬ 
tire  range  of  moral  acts. 

“Morality,”  according  to  Kant,  “consists  in 
the  reference  of  all  action  to  the  legislation 
which  alone  can  render  a  kingdom  of  ends  pos¬ 
sible.”  By  this  he  means  that  “the  will  is  never 
to  act  on  any  maxim  which  could  not  without 
contradiction  be  also  a  universal  law.”  This  law 
is  also  moral  in  the  sense  that  it  exercises  only 
moral  authority  and  should  prevail  even  with¬ 
out  the  support  of  the  external  sanctions  which 
accompany  the  positive  commands  of  a  supe¬ 
rior.  “The  idea  of  duty,”  Kant  declares,  “would 
alone  be  sufficient  as  a  spring  [of  action]  even  if 
the  spring  were  absent  which  is  connected  by 
forensic  legislation  .  .  .  namely  external  com¬ 
pulsion.” 

Making  the  natural  or  moral  law  the  princi¬ 
ple  of  duty  introduces  the  element  of  obligation 
into  every  moral  act.  Whatever  is  right  to  do 
we  are  obliged  to  do  in  conformity  to  the  law 
of  nature  or  in  obedience  to  the  commands  of 
the  moral  law.  We  need  no  external  promulga¬ 
tion  of  this  law — i.e.y  no  express  formulation  in 
words  by  a  lawgiver — for  this  law  is  inherent  in 
reason  itself.  Its  various  maxims  or  precepts  can 
be  deduced  from  what  Aquinas  calls  the  “first 
principle  ...  of  the  practical  reason”  and  Kant 
“the  categorical  imperative.”  Or,  as  the  Stoics 
say,  since  reason  is  the  “ruling  principle”  in 
man,  man’s  duty  consists  in  “holding  fast”  to  it 
and  “going  straight  on”  so  that  it  has  “what  is 
its  own.” 

On  this  theory,  we  are  obliged  in  conscience 
to  do  whatever  reason  declares  right,  whether 
or  not  others  are  directly  involved.  The  dis¬ 
tinction  between  public  and  private  morality — 
between  the  spheres  of  justice  and  the  other 
virtues — is  irrelevant  to  conscience.  Conscience, 
according  to  Kant,  functions  equally  in  the 
spheres  of  internal  and  external  duty.  In  both 
the  realm  of  ethics  and  the  realm  of  jurispru¬ 
dence,  conscience,  applying  the  moral  law,  dic¬ 
tates  our  duty  in  the  particular  case.  We  stand 
in  no  different  relation  to  ourselves  and  others, 
since  the  moral  law  is  universally  and  equally 
binding  on  all  persons.  The  obligation  is  in 


every  case  to  obey  the  law.  It  is  not  a  duty  to 
persons,  except  as  the  moral  law  commands  us 
to  respect  the  dignity  of  the  human  person, 
ourselves  and  others  alike. 

The  element  of  a  superior  commanding  an 
inferior  seems  to  be  present  in  this  conception 
of  duty  through  the  relation  of  reason  to  the 
will  and  appetites  of  man.  Acting  dutifully  con¬ 
sists  in  the  submission  of  the  will  to  reason, 
and  in  overcoming  all  contrary  inclinations  or 
desires.  But  though  Kant  sometimes  speaks  in 
these  terms,  he  also  conceives  duty  as  carrying 
with  it  an  obligation  to  God.  “The  subjective 
principle  of  a  responsibility  for  one’s  deeds  be¬ 
fore  God,”  he  says,  is  “contained,  though  it  be 
only  obscurely,  in  every  moral  self-conscious¬ 
ness.” 

Nevertheless,  Kant  insists  that  “the  Christian 
principle  of  morality  itself  is  not  theological.” 
It  rests,  in  his  opinion,  on  the  “autonomy  of 
pure  practical  reason,  since  it  does  not  make 
the  knowledge  of  God  and  his  will  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  these  laws,  but  only  of  the  attainment  of 
the  summum  bonum ,  on  the  condition  of  follow¬ 
ing  these  laws,  and  it  does  not  even  place  the 
proper  spring  of  this  obedience  in  the  desired 
results,  but  solely  in  the  conception  of  duty,  as 
that  of  which  the  faithful  observance  alone  con¬ 
stitutes  the  worthiness  to  obtain  those  happy 
consequences.” 

It  is  “through  the  summum  bonum  as  the 
object  and  final  end  of  pure  practical  reason” 
that,  in  Kant’s  view  of  Christian  morality,  we 
pass  from  moral  philosophy  to  “ religion ,  that  is, 
to  the  recognition  of  all  duties  as  divine  com¬ 
mands. ”  A  Christian  theologian  like  Aquinas, 
however,  seems  to  go  further  than  Kant  in 
equating  conformity  to  the  moral  law — or  the 
natural  law  of  reason — with  religious  obedience 
to  God.  Nor  does  he  explain  this  equivalence 
by  reference  to  the  fact  that  God  has  made 
man’s  attainment  of  the  summum  bonum — or 
eternal  happiness — depend  on  his  free  compli¬ 
ance  with  the  moral  law.  Rather,  for  Aquinas, 
the  natural  law  is  “nothing  else  than  the  ra¬ 
tional  creature’s  participation  in  the  eternal 
law”  of  God — the  “imprint  on  us  of  the  divine 
light.”  As  God  is  the  author  of  man’s  nature 
and  reason,  so  is  He  the  ultimate  authority  be¬ 
hind  the  commands  of  the  natural  law  which 
He  implanted  in  man’s  reason  at  creation. 


362 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


For  a  Christian  theologian  like  Aquinas,  duty 
to  God  involves  obedience  to  the  moral  law 
which  reason  can  discover  by  itself,  no  less  than 
obedience  to  those  positive  commandments 
which  God  has  revealed  to  man.  Aquinas  seems 
to  think  that  violation  of  the  natural  law  is  as 
much  a  sin  as  violation  of  the  divine  law.  Both 
involve  a  rupture  of  that  order  laid  down  by 
God,  the  one  “in  relation  to  the  rule  of  reason, 
in  so  far  as  all  our  actions  and  passions  should  be 
commensurate  with  the  rule  of  reason,”  the  other 
“in  relation  to  the  rule  of  the  divine  law.”  Thus, 
in  all  moral  matters,  it  would  appear  that  duty 
is,  in  Wordsworth’s  phrase,  “stern  daughter  of 
the  voice  of  God.”  If  the  natural  law  commands 
us  to  use  our  faculties  to  the  ends  for  which  they 
were  created,  then  the  possession  of  a  mind  im¬ 
poses  upon  us  what  Socrates  in  the  Apology 
calls  man’s  “duty  to  inquire.”  If  we  fail  to  seek 
the  truth,  we  sin  against  God  by  sinning  against 
our  nature,  even  though  “Thou  shalt  seek  the 
truth”  is  nowhere  explicitly  prescribed  in  Holy 
Writ. 

Ethical  doctrines  can  be  classified  according 
to  the  role  which  they  assign  to  duty  as  a  moral 
principle.  There  is  perhaps  no  more  fundamen¬ 
tal  issue  in  moral  philosophy  than  that  between 
the  ethics  of  duty  and  the  ethics  of  pleasure  or 
happiness.  This  issue  obviously  belongs  to  the 
chapters  on  Happiness  and  Pleasure  as  well 
as  the  present  one.  All  three  must  be  read  to¬ 
gether — and  perhaps  also  the  chapters  on  De¬ 
sire,  Law,  and  Virtue — to  complete  the  pic¬ 
ture. 

According  to  the  morality  of  duty,  every  act 
is  to  be  judged  for  its  obedience  or  disobedience 
to  law,  and  the  basic  moral  distinction  is  be¬ 
tween  right  and  wrong.  But  where  pleasure  or 
happiness  are  central,  the  basic  distinction  is 
between  good  and  evil,  and  desire  rather  than 
law  sets  the  standard  of  appraisal.  An  analysis 
of  means  and  ends  and  a  theory  of  the  virtues 
are  usually  found  in  the  ethics  of  happiness,  as 
a  theory  of  conscience  and  sanctions  is  usually 
prominent  in  the  ethics  of  duty. 

At  one  extreme,  there  is  the  position  which 
totally  excludes  the  concept  of  duty.  This  fact 
more  than  any  other  characterizes  the  Epicure¬ 
anism  of  Lucretius.  The  good  life  for  him  is  one 
where  “nature  craves  for  herself  no  more  than 


this,  that  pain  hold  aloof  from  the  body,  and 
she  in  mind  enjoy  a  feeling  of  pleasure  exempt 
from  care  and  fear.”  The  life  he  describes— so 
disciplined  and  moderated  that  all  but  the 
simplest  pleasures  are  relinquished  in  the  effort 
to  avoid  pain— seems  to  leave  no  place  for 
obligation  or  social  responsibility. 

In  the  much  more  elaborate  moral  philosophy 
of  Aristotle,  virtue  entails  moderation  in  the 
avoidance  of  pain  as  well  as  in  the  pursuit  of 
pleasure.  Though  he  admits  that  “most  pleas¬ 
ures  might  perhaps  be  bad  without  qualifica¬ 
tion,”  Aristotle  claims  that  “the  chief  good,” 
which  is  happiness,  “would  involve  some 
pleasure.”  But  even  as  a  good,  pleasure  is 
not  the  only  good,  for  there  are  other  objects 
of  desire. 

The  happy  man,  according  to  Aristotle,  is 
one  who  somehow  succeeds  in  satisfying  all  his 
desires  by  seeking  the  various  kinds  of  goods  in 
some  order  and  relation  to  one  another.  Happi¬ 
ness  itself  is  something  that  “we  choose  always 
for  itself  and  never  for  the  sake  of  something 
else.”  Although  we  may  also  choose  other  things 
in  some  sense  for  themselves,  such  as  “honor, 
pleasure,  reason,  and  every  virtue,”  still  they 
are  chosen  “for  the  sake  of  happiness,”  since  we 
judge  them  as  “the  means  by  which  we  shall  be 
happy.” 

In  Aristotle’s  ethics  of  happiness,  duty  is  not 
entirely  excluded,  but  neither  is  it  given  any 
independent  significance.  As  we  have  seen,  it  is 
merely  an  aspect  of  the  virtue  of  justice,  and 
amounts  to  no  more  than  the  just  man’s  ac¬ 
knowledgment  of  the  debt  he  owes  to  others; 
or  his  recognition  that  he  is  under  some  obliga¬ 
tion  to  avoid  injuring  other  men  and  to  serve 
the  common  good. 

At  the  other  extreme,  there  is  the  position 
which  identifies  the  sense  of  duty  with  the 
moral  sense.  In  the  Stoicism  of  Marcus  Aurelius 
and  Epictetus,  to  live  well  is  to  do  one’s  duty, 
and  to  set  aside  all  contrary  desires.  “It  is  thy 
duty,”  the  Emperor  writes,  “to  order  thy  life 
well  in  every  single  act;  and  if  every  act  does  its 
duty,  as  far  as  is  possible,  be  content;  and  no  one 
is  able  to  hinder  thee  so  that  each  act  shall  not 
do  its  duty.”  Man  is  not  destined  to  be  happy; 
his  happiness  consists  rather  in  doing  what  is 
required  of  him  at  his  post  of  duty  in  the  order 
of  the  universe.  The  only  good  is  a  good  will, 


Chapter  19:  DUTY 


a  dutiful  will,  a  will  which  conforms  itself  to  the 
law  of  nature. 

Kant’s  much  more  elaborate  moral  philos¬ 
ophy  presents  the  same  fundamental  teachings. 
This  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  he  associates 
what  he  calls  eudaemonism  {i.e.,  the  ethics  of 
happiness)  with  hedonism  (i.e.,  the  ethics  of 
pleasure).  Happiness,  he  writes,  is  “a  rational 
being’s  consciousness  of  the  pleasantness  of  life 
uninterruptedly  accompanying  his  whole  ex¬ 
istence,”  and  its  basis  is  “the  principle  of  self- 
love.”  Therefore,  according  to  Kant,  both  eu¬ 
daemonism  and  hedonism  commit  the  same 
error.  Both  “undermine  morality  and  destroy 
its  sublimity,  since  they  put  the  motives  to 
virtue  and  to  vice  in  the  same  class,  and  only 
teach  us  to  make  a  better  calculation.”  Both 
admit  desire  as  a  moral  criterion  of  good  and 
evil.  Both  are  utilitarian  in  that  they  are  con¬ 
cerned  with  consequences,  with  means  and  ends. 
Both  measure  the  moral  act  by  reference  to  the 
end  it  serves. 

For  Kant,  “an  action  done  from  duty  de¬ 
rives  its  moral  worth,  not  from  the  purpose 
which  is  to  be  attained  by  it,  but  from  the 
maxim  by  which  it  is  determined,  and  there¬ 
fore  does  not  depend  on  the  realization  of  the 
object  of  the  action,  but  merely  on  the  principle 
of  volition  by  which  the  action  has  taken  place, 
without  any  regard  to  any  object  of  desire.  .  .  . 
Duty,”  he  goes  on  to  say,  “is  the  necessity  of 
acting  from  respect  for  the  law.”  From  this  he 
argues  that  duty,  and  consequently  all  moral 
action,  must  be  done  because  it  is  right,  because 
the  law  commands  it,  and  for  no  other  reason. 
The  recommendation  of  any  action  solely  on 
the  ground  that  it  will  contribute  to  happiness 
as  satisfying  the  inclination  of  the  person  and 
achieving  the  object  of  the  will,  is  completely 
ruled  out.  That  would  be  a  judgment  of  pure 
expediency.  Worse  than  not  moral,  it  is,  in  the 
opinion  of  Kant,  immoral . 

“An  action  done  from  duty,”  Kant  writes, 
“must  wholly  exclude  the  influence  of  inclina¬ 
tion,  and  with  it  every  object  of  the  will,  so  that 
nothing  remains  which  can  determine  the  will 
except  objectively  the  law,  and  subjectively 
pure  respect  for  this  practical  law,  and  conse¬ 
quently  the  maxim  that  I  should  follow  this 
law  even  to  the  thwarting  of  all  my  inclina¬ 
tions.  .  .  .  The  pre-eminent  good  which  we  call 


363 

moral  can  therefore  consist  in  nothing  else  than 
the  conception  of  law  in  itself,  which  certainly 
is  only  possible  in  a  rational  being  in  so  far  as 
this  conception,  and  not  the  expected  effect, 
determines  the  will.” 

This  law,  which  is  the  source  of  duty  and  of 
all  moral  action,  is  Kant’s  famous  “categorical 
imperative”— or,  in  other  words,  reason’s  un¬ 
conditional  command.  According  to  its  decree, 
Kant  declares,  “1  am  never  to  act  otherwise 
than  so  that  I  could  also  will  that  my  maxim 
should  become  a  universal  law.”  By  obeying 
the  categorical  imperative,  we  can  know  and  do 
our  duty  and  rest  assured  that  our  will  is  mor¬ 
ally  good.  “I  do  not,  therefore,  need  any  far- 
reaching  penetration  to  discern  what  I  have  to 
do,”  Kant  writes,  “in  order  that  my  will  may 
be  morally  good.  Inexperienced  in  the  course 
of  the  world,  incapable  of  being  prepared  for 
all  its  contingencies,  I  only  ask  myself:  Canst 
thou  also  will  that  thy  maxim  should  be  a  uni¬ 
versal  law?  If  not,  then  it  must  be  rejected,  and 
that  not  because  of  a  disadvantage  accruing 
from  it  to  myself,  or  even  to  others,  but  because 
it  cannot  enter  as  a  principle  into  a  possible 
universal  legislation.” 

To  say  that  a  man  ought  to  do  this  or  refrain 
from  doing  that  in  order  to  achieve  happiness  is, 
for  Kant,  at  best  a  conditional  obligation,  ulti¬ 
mately  a  specious  one  since  he  is  not  uncon¬ 
ditionally  obliged  to  be  happy.  Kant  does  not 
totally  exclude  happiness  or  the  summum  bo - 
num.  In  fact  he  says  that  there  is  no  need  to 
maintain  “an  opposition”  between  them  and 
morality.  But  he  claims  that  “the  moment  duty 
is  in  question  we  should  take  no  account  of 
happiness.”  Just  as  Aristotle  treats  duty  only  in 
terms  of  justice,  so  Kant  considers  happiness  to 
have  a  moral  quality  only  insofar  as  to  be 
worthy  of  it  is  an  end  set  by  the  moral  law. 

Two  other  voices  join  in  this  great  argument 
concerning  duty  and  happiness.  One  is  that  of 
John  Stuart  Mill,  whose  Utilitarianism  recog¬ 
nizes  Kant  as  the  chief  opponent  of  an  ethics  of 
happiness.  Though  Mill  differs  from  Aristotle 
on  many  points,  particularly  in  regard  to  the 
virtues  as  means  to  happiness,  Mill’s  answer  to 
Kant  can  be  read  as  a  defense  of  Aristotle  as 
well  as  of  his  own  theory. 

From  Kant’s  point  of  view,  they  are  both 


364 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


utilitarians.  They  both  argue  in  terms  of  means 
and  ends.  They  both  make  purely  pragmatic, 
not  moral,  judgments — judgments  of  expedi¬ 
ency  instead  of  judgments  of  right  and  wrong. 

From  Mill’s  point  of  view,  Aristotle  like  him¬ 
self  needs  no  other  principle  of  morality  than 
happiness,  an  ultimate  end  which  justifies  every 
means  that  tends  towards  its  realization.  “The 
ultimate  sanction  of  all  morality,  external  mo¬ 
tives  apart,”  Mill  writes,  “is  a  subjective  feeling 
in  our  own  minds.”  He  asserts  that  “when  once 
the  general  happiness  is  recognized  as  the  ethical 
standard,”  it  will  appeal  to  “a  powerful  natural 
sentiment.”  Man’s  nature  as  a  social  being,  he 
holds,  “tends  to  make  him  feel  it  one  of  his 
natural  wants  that  there  should  be  harmony 
between  his  feelings  and  aims  and  those  of  his 
fellow-creatures.” 

This  conviction,  in  persons  who  have  it, 
“does  not  present  itself  to  their  minds  as  a 
superstition  of  education,  or  a  law  despotically 
imposed  by  the  power  of  society,  but  as  an 
attribute  which  it  would  not  be  well  for  them 
to  be  without.”  This  conviction,  rather  than 
an  internal  sense  of  obligation  or  fear  of  external 
sanctions  imposed  by  a  superior  power,  is  for 
Mill  “the  ultimate  sanction  of  the  greatest  hap¬ 
piness  morality” — which  aims  at  the  greatest 
happiness  for  the  greatest  number. 

Where  Mill  answers  Kant  by  excluding  duty 
— even  from  considerations  of  justice — Aquinas 
seems  to  develop  an  analysis  in  which  every 
moral  act  can  be  regarded  as  obeying  or  dis¬ 
obeying  the  natural  law  and  yet,  at  the  same 
time,  be  judged  as  a  means  which  serves  or  fails 
to  serve  the  ultimate  end  of  man’s  natural  de¬ 
sire.  “The  order  of  the  precepts  of  the  natural 
law  is,”  in  the  words  of  Aquinas,  “according  to 
the  order  of  natural  inclinations.”  The  dilemma 
set  up  by  the  opposition  between  duty  and 
happiness  seems  to  be  denied,  or  at  least  avoided, 
by  a  theory  which  finds  a  perfect  parallelism 
between  the  precepts  of  natural  law  and  the 
objects  of  natural  desire,  a  parallelism  resulting 
from  their  common  source  in  the  creation  of 
human  nature  by  God. 

The  tension  between  duty  and  desire — be¬ 
tween  obedience  to  rules  of  conduct  and  un¬ 
restrained  indulgence — is  one  of  the  burdens 
which  no  other  animal  except  man  must  bear.  It 


is  a  constant  theme  in  the  great  poems.  It  is 
pivotal  to  the  plot  of  most  of  the  great  love 
stories.  It  is  a  theme  of  tragedy,  for  in  which¬ 
ever  direction  the  tension  is  resolved — whether 
in  the  line  of  duty  (as  by  Aeneas  forsaking 
Dido)  or  in  disobedience  to  law  (as  by  Adam 
yielding  to  Eve  in  Paradise  Lost)— ruin  results. 

The  tragedy  of  being  both  rational  and  ani¬ 
mal  seems  to  consist  in  having  to  choose  between 
duty  and  desire  rather  than  in  making  any  par¬ 
ticular  choice.  It  may  be  significant,  however, 
that  the  tragic  heroes  of  poetry  more  frequently 
abandon  duty  than  desire  or  love,  though  sel¬ 
dom  without  mortal  punishment,  preceded  by 
a  deep  sense  of  their  transgression.  Sometimes, 
however,  they  are  self-deceived,  and  cloak  de¬ 
sire  in  the  guise  of  duty. 

There  is  another  source  of  tragic  conflict  in 
the  sphere  of  duty.  Men  are  torn  by  competing 
loyalties,  obligations  which  pull  them  in  oppo¬ 
site  directions.  In  the  basic  relationships  of  the 
family,  the  duty  a  man  owes  to  his  parents  often 
cannot  be  discharged  without  violating  or  ne¬ 
glecting  obligations  to  his  wife.  When  the  moral 
law  and  the  law  of  the  state  command  contrary 
actions,  duty  is  weighed  against  duty  in  an 
ordeal  of  conscience.  Sometimes,  however,  one 
obligation  seems  to  take  clear  precedence  over 
another,  as  in  the  mind  of  Sophocles’  Antigone, 
for  whom  the  king’s  edict  loses  its  authority 
when  it  runs  counter  to  the  law  of  God.  Creon 
the  king,  not  Antigone  his  subject,  may  be  the 
play’s  more  tragic  personage.  He  sacrifices  a 
dearly  beloved  son  to  uphold  the  authority  he 
considers  it  his  duty  as  a  ruler  to  maintain. 

If  man  is  not  a  rational  animal  or  if,  whatever 
his  nature,  reason  is  not  its  ruling  principle, 
then  the  sense  of  duty  would  appear  to  be  an 
imposture  that  draws  its  driving  force  from 
the  emotional  energies  with  which  certain  man¬ 
made  rules  of  conduct  are  invested.  Rather  than 
acting  as  a  counterweight  to  desire,  duty  is 
itself  the  shape  which  certain  desires  take  to 
combat  others. 

Conscience,  or  the  super-ego ,  according  to 
Freud,  is  born  of  the  struggle  between  the  ego 
and  the  id.  Translated  into  “popular  language,” 
Freud  tells  us,  “the  ego  stands  for  reason  and 
circumspection,  while  the  id  stands  for  the  un¬ 
tamed  passions.”  What  may  originally  have  had 
a  necessary  function  to  perform  in  the  psychic 


Chapter  19:  DUTY 


economy  can  grow  to  play  too  dominant  a  part. 
For  the  psychoanalyst,  not  tragedy  but  neurosis 
results  from  an  overdeveloped  sense  of  duty. 
When  “the  ego  [is]  forced  to  acknowledge  its 
weakness,”  Freud  explains,  it  “breaks  out  into 
anxiety:  reality  anxiety  in  face  of  the  external 
world,  normal  anxiety  in  face  of  the  super-ego, 
and  neurotic  anxiety  in  face  of  the  strength  of 
the  passions  in  the  id.” 

The  relation*  of  ruler  and  ruled  in  the  domes¬ 
tic  or  the  political  community  may  seem  at  first 
to  impose  duties  or  obligations  only  on  the 
ruled.  The  ruler  commands.  His  subjects  are 
obliged  to  obey.  Does  the  ruler  in  turn  have  no 
duties,  no  obligations  to  those  whom  he  governs  ? 
If  he  has  none,  then  neither  have  the  persons  he 
rules  rights  which  he  must  respect.  Such  abso¬ 
lute  rule— defined  by  a  correlative  absence  of 
duties  in  the  ruler  and  rights  in  the  ruled — has 
been  one  conception  of  the  relation  between 
master  and  slave. 

In  the  state  rulers  who  are  merely  office¬ 
holders  are  obligated  by  the  duties  of  their 


365 

office  as  well  as  vested  with  its  authority  and 
power.  The  office-holder,  duty-bound  by  the 
constitution,  is  not  an  absolute  ruler.  He  is,  in 
fact,  a  servant  of  the  state,  not  its  master.  The 
mediaeval  king  who  pledged  himself  in  his  coro¬ 
nation  oath  to  discharge  the  duties  of  his  office 
may  not  have  been  bound  by  human  law,  but 
so  long  as  his  conscience  kept  him  loyal  to  his 
pledge,  he  recognized  the  supremacy  of  the 
natural  law  or  of  the  law  of  God.  The  self- 
governing  citizen  of  a  republic  is  similarly  duty- 
bound  only  when  he  recognizes  the  supremacy 
of  the  common  good. 

According  to  the  theory  of  constitutional 
government,  rights  and  duties  are  correlative. 
The  acknowledgment  of  duties  signifies  that  the 
holder  of  rights  recognizes  their  limited  or  con¬ 
ditional  character.  To  consider  oneself  entirely 
exempt  from  duties  or  obligations  is  to  regard 
one’s  rights  as  absolute.  Can  anyone  have  abso¬ 
lute  rights  except  on  condition  of  being  with¬ 
out  a  superior  of  any  sort  ?  One  implied  answer 
to  this  question  is  that  neither  despot  nor  state, 
but  only  God,  is  autonomous  or  without  duty. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PACE 

1.  The  concept  of  duty  or  obligation:  its  moral  significance  366 

2.  Comparison  of  the  ethics  of  duty  with  the  ethics  of  happiness,  pleasure,  or  utility 

3.  The  divisions  of  duty:  internal  and  external  duty;  the  realms  of  ethics  and  jurisprudence  367 

4.  The  sense  of  duty 

477.  The  moral  and  social  development  of  conscience:  its  dictates 

4 b.  The  emotional  development  of  conscience:  its  morbid  manifestations  368 

5.  The  derivation  of  duty  from  divine,  natural,  and  civil  law,  and  from  the  categorical 

imperative  of  reason 

6.  Conflicts  between  duties  of  diverse  origins  369 

7.  The  relation  of  duty  to  justice  and  to  rights:  oaths  and  promises 

8.  The  tension  between  duty  and  instinct,  desire,  or  love  370 

9.  The  duties  of  command  and  obedience  in  family  life  37 1 

10.  Political  obligation:  cares,  functions,  loyalties 

11.  Duty  to  God:  piety  and  worship 


373 


366 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b, the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 — ( D )  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  concept  of  duty  or  obligation:  its  moral 
significance 

7  Plato:  Gorgias ,  269d-270c 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  5,  143d- 
144a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  hi,  sect  i  259b, d; 
sect  6  261a-c;  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a;  bk  v, 
sect  6  269b-d;  bk  vi,  sect  22-23  276a-b; 
sect  26  276b-c;  bk  vii,  sect  5  280a-b;  bk 
viii,  sect  26  287c;  sect  32  287d-288a 
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ix,  ch  4,  287d; 
bk  xix,  ch  14-16,  520c-522a;  ch  19  523b-d 
/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  22-30  629b- 
633b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  99, 
a  5  249a-250a;  part  ii-ii,  q  4,  a  7,  rep  3 
407d-409a;  qq  183-189  625a-700d  passim,  esp 
q  183,  a  1,  rep  3  625a-626a,  a  3  627a-d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  86c-87c;  part  ii, 
115a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  7a-d;  24c-25c;  233a-b; 

319b;  383c-385a;  467b-470a 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  74b-76a 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  388d-389a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  114d-115a;  149d-150a; 
190c-d;  236d-237a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic 
of  Morals ,  253d-254d;  256a-279d  esp  276b- 


277a;  282d-283d  /  Practical  Reason ,  305d- 
307d;  325a-d;  327d-329a  /  Pref  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics,  366d-367a;  368a-d;  373b-d 
/  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  383a-390a,c 
esp  383a-384d,  389a-390a,c;  391a-c;  392b- 
393a  /  Science  of  Right,  397c-398a;  416b- 
417b  /  Judgement ,  57lc-572a;  594c-596c  esp 
595a-d;  605d-606b  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  304c-306b  passim  /  Utilitarian¬ 
ism,  453c-454a;  468b-469b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  133- 
135  47a-d;  part  hi,  par  148-150  56a-57a; 
additions,  84  129b;  95  132b  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  170d-171c;  part  i,  224a; 
part  iv,  362c-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  304a;  310d-314c 
esp  313d-314a;  592b-c 

2.  Comparison  of  the  ethics  of  duty  with  the 
ethics  of  happiness,  pleasure,  or  utility 

12  Epictetus :  Discourses,  bkii,  ch  ii  150a-151b; 

ch  19  162c-164b;  bk  hi,  ch  24  203c-210a 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  n-12 
258a-c;  bk  viii,  sect  10  286b;  sect  28  287c; 
sect  39  288c;  bk  ix,  sect  i  291a-c;  sect  7 
292b  " 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ix,  ch  4-5  287a- 
289a;  bk  xiv,  ch  8-9  381c-385b 


3  to  4  a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  24, 
a  2  727d  728c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  69d-76a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  62b  68b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  336c-d 

42  Kant:  Pwre  Reason ,  235a  b;  236b  239a  / 
Fund.  Prin .  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  256a-257d; 
258d-264a;  265b;  267b‘d;  280d-281a;  282b 
283d;  286a-c  /  Practical  Reason ,  297a-319b 
esp  298a-300a,  304d-307d;  325a-331a;  338c- 
355d  esp  345d-347a  /  Pref.  Metaphysical  Ele¬ 
ments  of  Ethics,  365b-366d;  369c-373b  /  Zw/ro. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  387b-388a;  389a- 
390a, c  /  Science  of  Right,  446b-c  /  Judgement , 
478a-479c;  584d-587a;  588b  [fn  2];  591b-592a; 
594c-596c;  605d-606b  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  296a-297b  /  Utilitarianism 
445a-476a,c  esp  457c-461c,  464d-476a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  124 
44b-d;  par  134— 135  47b-d;  additions,  85-87 
129b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  813a-814a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  800c- 
801b 

3.  The  divisions  of  duty:  internal  and  external 

duty;  the  realms  of  ethics  and  jurispru¬ 
dence 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  269d-270c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  16, 
a  4,  rep  3  97a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
99,  a  5,  ans  249a-250a;  q  ioo,  a  2,  rep  2 
252b-253a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  95d-96a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  7a 

30  B acon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  74b-c 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [1334-1379)  368b- 
369b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  89d-91a;  96a-b 

42  Kant:  Fund .  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
268d-270c;  272b-273a  /  Pref  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics  365a-379d  esp  366d,  367b- 
368a,  370d-372a,  374a-c,  378a  /  Intro.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals ,  383a-384a,c;  386d-387a,c; 
389a-390a,c;  391a-394a,c  /  Science  of  Right , 
398a-399c;  400b,d-401b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  458a-d;  468b-469b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  79 
33a-c;  part  ii,  par  137-141  48a-54d  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History,  intro,  170d-171c;  186b-c; 
part  1,  207b-c;  211a-c;  214d-216b;  part  iii, 
290a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 
689b 

4.  The  sense  of  duty 

5  Aeschylus:  Choephoroe  70a-80d  esp  [1010- 
1047]  80a-c  /  Eumenides  &la-91d  esp  [43 6—666] 
86a-88a 


367 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [1-509]  114a- 
118d  /  Antigone  131a  142d  /  Electra  156a- 
169a, c  /  Philoctetes  182a- 195a, c 

5  Euripides:  Ilippolytus  225a-236d  esp  [$73- 
430]  228b  d  /  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  /  Heraclei - 
dae  248a-257a,c  esp  [748-783]  254d-255a  / 
Suppliants  258a-269a,c  esp  [87—597]  258d- 
263c/  Electra  327a  339a,c  /  Phoenician  Maid¬ 
ens  [1625-1766]  392b  393d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
397d-398c 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  70d-71b  /  Meno,  183a  b 
/  Apology,  206b-d  /  Crito  213a-219a,c  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  vii,  390b-391b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  5  110b  c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  viii,  sect  32 
287d-288a 

14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato  276b,d-290d  esp 
282a  /  Cato  the  Younger  620a-648a,c  esp 
626d-627b,  632b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [859-1004]  174a- 
176b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  301d-303c;  467d-468b 

26  Shakespeare:  As  You  Like  It,  act  ii,  sc  iii 
[56-65]  605a 

29  Cervantes:  Dow  Quixote,  part  i,  81b-88b 

32  Milton:  Comus  [170-229]  37a-38b  /  Paradise 
Lost,  bk  iii  [194— 1 97]  139b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
253d-254b  /  Practical  Reason,  325c-327d; 
333a-334a  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of 
Ethics,  375a-b  /  Judgement,  593a-d;  599b-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  458b-461c  esp  458b-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310a-314a  esp 

310c-d,  314a;  592b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vii,  275a;  bk  x, 
465c-467a;  bk  xi,  513d-514d;  527b-528b 

53  James:  Psychology,  807a-808a 

4a.  The  moral  and  social  development  of  con¬ 
science:  its  dictates 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  28:1  /  Ecclesiastes , 
7 :2 1-22 — (D)  Ecclesiastes,  7 :22-23 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  17:11  —  (D) 
OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  17:10  /  Ecclesiasticus, 
14:2 —(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  14:2 

New  Testament:  Romans,  2:14-15  /  I  Corin¬ 
thians,  8  /  I  Timothy,  4:1-2  /  Titus ,  1  :i5 

5  Aeschylus:  Choephoroe  70a-80d  esp  [1010- 
1076]  80a-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  5  257b-c; 
bk  iii,  sect  4  260b-261a;  bk  iv,  sect  18 
264d;  bk  viii,  sect  32  287d-288a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  9,  lOd; 
bk  iv,  par  14  22d-23a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  79, 
aa  12-13  425c-427a;  part  i-ii,  q  19,  aa  5-6 
705d-708a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  96, 
a  4  233a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxvii 
[124-142]  95d-96a 


Chapter  19:  DUTY 


368 


6 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  sense  of  duty .  4a.  The  moral  and  social 
development  of  conscience :  its  dictates .) 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  65a-66a;  part  ii, 
149b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  16a-d;  46b-d;  174d- 
176a;  306d-307a;  381a-395b  esp  384d-385a; 
467d-468b 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  ii 
[i— 66]  78d-79c  /  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  ii, 
sc  ii  [1-33]  412a-b  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  v, 
sc  v  501b-502c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  hi  [78-81] 
35a 

30  Bacon  :  Advancement  of  Learning,  74b-c;  96a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  the  affects,  def 
27,  expl  419a-b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  29b-33b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  7-9  105d-106d;  bk  ii,  ch  xxviii,  sect 
10-12  230b-231c  esp  sect  12  231b  c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  255a-266b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  57c-58a;  360d-361a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  330a-331c;  343d-345c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  306d-307d;  321b- 
329a  esp  326b-327d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Ele¬ 
ments  of  Ethics,  374c-379d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic 
of  Morals,  389a- b  /  Judgement ,  593a-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  295b-d  /  Utilitarianism ,  458b- 
461c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  219a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par 
136-138  47d-48d;  additions,  87-89  129c- 
130a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  353c-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  304a-305c;  310c- 
318c;  321b-323a;  592b-593b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
160b-163c 

53  James:  Psychology,  190a-191a;  661b;  886b- 
888a 

54  Freud:  Ego  and  Id,  707b-708b  /  War  and 
Death,  757c-759d  esp  758c-d,  759b  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents,  792b-d  /  New  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures,  876b-d 

4b.  The  emotional  development  of  conscience: 
its  morbid  manifestations 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  17 —(D)  OT, 
Bool{  of  Wisdom ,  17 

5  Sophocles:  Electra  [121-633]  157b-161a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [1014- 
1023]  43a-b;  bk  v  [1143-1160]  76a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  174d-176a 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  i,  sc  iv  [1-75] 
114d-115b;  act  v,  sc  iii  [119-206]  144d-145d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet  29a-72a,c  esp  act  ii, 
sc  11  [617-633]  46c-d,  act  iii,  sc  1  [36-90] 
47c-d,  sc  iii  [36-72]  53d-54a,  sc  iv  54b-56d, 
act  iv,  sc  iv  [32-66]  59a-c  /  King  Lear,  act 
iii,  sc  iv  [23-36]  264c  /  Macbeth,  act  iii,  sc 
iv  297c-299b;  act  v,  sc  i  306b-307a;  sc  in 
307c-308b 


4  b  to  5 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonisies  [390-605]  352b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  54d-55a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  306d-307d  /  Intro. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  389a-b  /  Judgement, 
593a-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  458b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3776-3834]  92a-93b; 
[4405-4612]  110a-114b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  312d-314b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  373b-374d; 
bk  x,  406c-410c;  416c-417b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
160b-163c;  bk  xi,  319b-c;  bk  xii,  367c-368a 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  407b-409a  /  General  In¬ 
troduction,  622c-d  /  Group  Psychology,  689 d- 
691c  /  Ego  and  Id,  703c-708c  esp  706b-707d; 
712b-717a,c  esp  715d-716c  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents,  792a-799a  esp  792b-794a,  797c- 
799a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  830a-840a 
esp  838d-839b;  851d-852d 

5.  The  derivation  of  duty  from  divine,  nat¬ 
ural,  and  civil  law,  and  from  the  cate¬ 
gorical  imperative  of  reason 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  22:1-19  esP  22:18  / 
Leviticus,  19  esp  19:2,  19:36-37  /  Deuteronomy, 
5:22-33  esp  5:32-33;  6:17-18,24-25;  11:26-28; 
12:28-32  esp  12:32  /  Psalms,  17:3-4;  78:1-11; 
119  esp  119:4-6,  119:33-40,  119:57-61  —  {D) 
Psalms,  16:3-4;  77:1-11;  1 18  esp  118:4-6, 
118:33-40,  118:57-61  /  Ecclesiastes,  12:13-14 
/  Jonah—  (D)  Jonas 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  7:21  /  John,  5:30 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  la-14a,c  / 
Seven  Against  Thebes  [1005-1078]  38b-39a,c  / 
Eumenides  [490-565]  86b-87a 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [863-910]  107b-c 
/  Antigone  131a-142d  /  Ajax  [1316-1345] 
154b-c 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  258a-269a,c  esp  [1— 41] 
258a-b  /  Phoenician  Maidens  [1625-1766] 
392b-393d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi,  201d-202c 

7  Plato:  Apology,  206b-d  /  Crito,  214d-219a,c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  cfi  16,  157c- 

158d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b; 
bk  iv,  sect  1  263a;  sect  4  264a:  sect  39 
267a;  bk  v,  sect  8  269d-270b;  bk  vii,  sect 
55  283b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  14-16, 
520c-522a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  cii  22-30 
629b-633b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  63, 
a  1,  ans  325c-326c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  96, 
a  4  233a-d;  q  99,  a  5  249a-250a;  part  ii-ii, 
q  4,  a  7,  rep  3  407d-409a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  86c-87c;  95d- 
96a;  part  ii,  110a;  113c;  131a-c;  137b-138b; 
159d-160d;  164a, c;  part  iii,  165a;  conclu¬ 
sion,  282a;  283c 


369 


Chapter  19:  DUTY 


6  to  7 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  46b  d;  233a  b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ix  [647-654]  261b 
35  Locke:  Or/7  Government ,  ch  11,  sect  4-6 

25d  26c;  ch  xvi,  sect  186  68d  69a;  sect 
195  70a-b  /  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  cii 
11,  sect  5-6  105a-c;  sect  12-13  107b  108c 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  La  tvs,  bk  i,  2a  b; 
bk  xxni,  187d-188a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  330a-331c;  356b  359a 
/  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  388d  389a;  392b-393c; 
bk  11,  397d-398a;  399b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  114d-115a;  236d-237a  / 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  253d-254d; 
260a-261d;  268c  270c;  2>2a-b;  273d  287d  esp 
275bd,  277d-279d,  281c-283d,/  Practical  Rea¬ 
son,  297a-314d  esp  307d-314d;  321b-329a  / 
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  366a- d; 
369a-c;  373d  /  7////0.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
386b-d;  388b-c;  390b,d-391c;  392b  393a  / 
Judgement,  571c-572a;  605d-606b  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445d-446d;  470a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  135 
47b-d;  additions,  86  129c  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  170d-171c;  186b-c;  part  iv, 
362b-d 

6.  Conflicts  between  duties  of  diverse  origins 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  2:18-25  esp  2:24  / 
Deuteronomy,  21:18-21 

New  Testament:. Matthew,  8:21-22;  12:46-50; 
22:17-21  /  Mar\,  12:14-17  /  Lube,  20:20-26 
5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [333-489]  5a- 
7a  /  Seven  Against  Thebes  27a-39a,c  /  Aga¬ 
memnon  [184-247]  54a-c  /  Chocphoroe  [885- 
930]  78d-79b  /  Eumenides  81a-91d 
5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [1-99] 
131a-132a  /  Philocletes  182a-195a,c  esp  [50- 
122]  182d-183b 

5  Euripides:  Electra  327a-339a,c  esp  [962-987] 
335d-336a  /  Phoenician  Maidens  378a-393d  / 
Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  71d-72a;  bk  v, 
171d-172a 

7  Plato:  Crito ,  213d-219a,c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  [331-361]  176a-177a 

14  Plutarch:  Fabius ,  152b-d  /  Coriolanus,  189d- 
191c  /  Timoleon ,  196b-198b  /  Agis,  654c-655a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  19  523b-d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  101c;  151a-c; 
part  iii,  198d-199a;  240a-246a,c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  381a-388c  esp  386a-d; 
467b-470a;  486b-488b 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1-43] 
322d-323a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [843-902]  358a- 
359a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  16c-17b;  18a-b 
38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  369c  /  Social 
Contract,  bic  iv,  435a-439c  passim 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  193c-194a;  225a-b 


41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  89b  c 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  392a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  304c  d  /  Utilitarianism,  456d- 
457b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  145b:  221d-224a;  542a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  150 

56c-57a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vii,  275a  276b; 
epilogue  1,  668a  669c;  670d-671a 

7.  The  relation  of  duty  to  justice  and  to  rights: 
oaths  and  promises 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  28:18-22;  29:15  30  / 
Ixviticus,  5:4-13;  27  /  Numbers,  6;  30  /  Deu¬ 
teronomy,  23:21  23  /  Joshua ,  2;  6:22-25; 
24:1-28 — (D)  Jostte,  2;  6:22-25;  24:1-28  / 
Judges,  1—2 ;  1 1 128-40  /  /  Samuel,  1  :i  1-28 — (D) 
I  Kings ,  1:11-28  /  Psalms,  50:14;  66:13-14 — 
(D)  Psalms,  49:14;  65:13-14  /  Ecclesiastes,  5:4 
—(D)  Ecclesiastes ,  5:3  /  Zechariah ,  8:17 —(D) 
Zacharias,  8:17 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiastic  us ,  29:3 —(D)  OT,  Ec- 
clesiasticus,  29:3 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:33-37  /  James , 
5  :j2 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  iv  [153-239]  25c-26b 

5  Aeschylus:  Choephoroe  70a-80d 

5  Sophocles:  Philoctetes  182a-195a,c  esp  [895— 
1292]  190a-193c 

5  Euripides:  Hecuba  [218-331]  354d-355c  / 
Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [16-140]  425b-426b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  90c-d;  bk  iv, 
151a-b;  159a-b;  bk  vi,  197a-b;  201d-202c; 
bk  ix,  311b-312d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  406a- 
407b;  bk  iii,  429c-434c;  bk  v,  490a-b 

7  Plato:  Apology,  209a-b  /  Crito,  216d-219a,c  / 
Gorgias,  284a-285a  /  Republic,  bk  i,  297a-300b 
/  Laws,  bk  xii,  787d-788c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  9  [ii59b25~ 
n6oa9]  411d-412b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  14 
[i375a8-u]  619c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  7  261c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  xii  [175-215]  358b-360a 

14  Plutarch:  Lysander,  357a-b  /  Agesilaus , 
484a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  16, 
a  4,  rep  3  97a-c;  q  21,  a  i,  rep  3  124b-125b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  60, 
a  3  51c-52b;  q  99,  a  5  249a-250a;  q  ioo, 
a  2,  rep  2  252b-253a;  a  3,  rep  3  253a-d; 
part  ii-ii,  q  4,  a  7,  rep  3  407d-409a;  q  23, 
a  3,  rep  1  485a-d 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [1128-1176]  178b- 
179a  /  Franklin's  Tale  [11,770-844]  363b-364b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  77b-c;  86c-92b; 
part  ii,  ll5a-116a;  127b;  138c;  142a-d;  145a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  13d-14c;  381a-388c  esp 
383c-d,  387b-c;  467b-470a 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  v,  sc  i 
[1 75-1 90]  66d-67a  /  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  i,  sc 
ii  [1-34]  72d-73b  /  Titus  Andronicus,  act  v, 


370 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  The  relation  of  duty  to  justice  and  to  rights: 
oaths  and  promises.) 

sc  i  [68-86]  193a  /  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona, 
act  ii,  sc  vi  239a-c  /  Merchant  of  Venice,  act 
iv,  sc  i  425c-430b  /  Julius  Caesar,  act  ii, 
sc  i  [i  12-140]  575d-576a 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  hi, 
sc  11  [165-212]  121d-122b;  act  v,  sc  111  [1-75] 
137a-d  /  Coriolanus,  act  v,  sc  hi  387a-389b  / 
Sonnets,  clii  609c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

35  Locke:  Toleration  la-22d  esp  5d-lla  /  Civil 
Government ,  ch  ii,  sect  4-6  25d-26c;  sect 
14  28b-c;  ch  xvi  65d-70c  passim,  esp  sect  186 
68d-69a,  sect  195  70a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  viii,  55c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  388c-391b; 
392b-393c;  bk  ii,  396d-398b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  89d-91c;  532d- 
533d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  267d- 
268a;  269a-c;  272c-d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Ele - 
jnents  of  Ethics,  371b-372a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic 
of  Morals ,  389c-390a,c  /  Science  of  Right , 
416b-417b;  429d-430a;  432c-433c 

43  Federalist:  number  7,  44a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  302d-312a  esp  305d-306b, 
309c-310c;  316b-319d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  392b-393c  /  Utilitarianism ,  464d-476a,c 
passim,  esp  468b-469b,  475a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  78-79 
32d-33c;  part  iii,  par  1 54—155  57c;  par  221 
73b;  par  261  83a-d;  par  293  98b;  additions, 
49  124b-c;  99  133a;  139  139b  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  i,  236a-c;  part  iv,  362c-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1716-1731]  41a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  505a-511b 
esp  509d-510a 

8.  The  tension  between  duty  and  instinct,  de¬ 
sire,  or  love 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  13:6-11;  21:18^ 
21  /  Judges,  11:28-40  /  Ruth,  1  /  Zechariah , 
I3:3“"(^)  Zacharias,  13:3 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  12:46-50  /  Acts , 
21:7-15 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  vi  [369-502]  43d-45a 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [184-247]  54a-c 

5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  225a-236d  esp  [373— 
430]  228b-d  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c  esp 
[706-780]  592b-593b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi,  201d-202c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v, 
506bc 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1121- 
1140]  58d-59a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  3  108b-c;  bk 
ii,  ch  ii  150a-151b;  bk  iii,  ch  2  177c-l78d; 
ch  24  203c-210a 


8 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vi,  sect  2  274a; 
bk  vii,  sect  55  283b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  32 
287d-288a;  sect  39  288c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  167ad86b 

14  Plutarch:  Poplicola,  77d-79c  /  Fabius, 
152b-d  /  Coriolanus,  189d-191c  /  Timoleon, 
196b-198b  /  Agis ,  654c-655a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  ix,  ch  4,  287d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
a  5,  rep  3  58b'59d;  part  ii-ii,  qq  25-26 
501a-520d;  q  31,  aa  2-3  537c-539c;  q  32, 
A  5-Q  33,  a  8  544a-558d;  q  44  592d-598c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  v  7a-8b;  pur¬ 
gatory,  x  [70-93]  68a-b;  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv  88b- 
120a  esp  stanza  76-79  98b-99a,  stanza  219 
117a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  conclusion,  279a-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
197b-198b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  83a-86c;  467b-470a; 
486b-488b 

26  Shakespeare:  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona 
229a-253a,c  esp  act  ii,  sc  iv  [192-214]  238b, 
sc  vi  239a-c,  act  iii,  sc  i  [1-50]  240b-d  /  Ro¬ 
meo  and  Juliet,  act  iii,  sc  v  [66-205]  307d- 
309b  /  Richard  II,  act  v,  sc  ii  [56]— sc  iii  [146] 
347a-349c  /  Much  Ado  About  Nothing,  act 

ii,  sc  1  [182-189]  509a-b  /  Julius  Caesar,  act 

iii,  sc  11  [11-44]  583d-584a 

27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth,  act  i,  sc  vii  [1-28] 
289b-c  /  Antony  and  Cleopatra  311a-350d 
esp  act  1,  sc  iv  [1-33]  315d-316b  /  Coriolanus , 
act  v,  sc  iii  387a-389b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  120b-137d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  24b 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [843-902]  358a- 
359a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  104  193a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  4-6 
25d-26c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  77c-78b;  79d-80b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
261c-d;  262a-d;  264a;  284d-285a  /  Practical 
Reason,  306a-b;  325a-327d;  342a-b  /  Pref. 
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  367a-b  / 
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385c-386b 

43  Federalist:  number  22,  83c-d;  number  72, 
217a-b;  number  73,  218d-219a;  number  75, 
223c-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  458d-459b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  222b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  149 
56b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3025-3072]  73b- 
74b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  311a-314b;  318d- 
319a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  77c-81b; 
89b-d;  bk  hi,  122b-c;  bk  vii,  275a-276b; 
301b-302b;  bk  ix,  365d-366a;  bk  xi,  520a- 
521b;  epilogue  1,  669b-c 


9  to  10 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  iv, 
95b-100c 

53  James:  Psychology,  807a  808a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  452cd;  573c; 
624a-625b  /  War  and  Death ,  758c-759d  csp 
759c  d;  764c-765a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents,  780b  802a,c  esp  781a-d,  783c-789b, 
791b  d,  793d-794a,  800c  801b  /  New  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures,  853a- b 

9.  The  duties  of  command  and  obedience  in 
family  life 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:18-25;  9:18-29  / 
Exodus,  20:12;  21:1-21,26-27  /  Leviticus,  19:3 
/  Deuteronomy ,  5:16;  15:12-18;  21:15-23; 
22:13-30;  24:1-4,14-15;  25:5-10;  27:16,20,22- 
23  /  /  Proverbs,  20:20;  30:17 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  3:1-18;  4:30;  7:19-28; 
30:1-13;  33:24-31  — (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus , 
3:1-20;  4:35;  7:21-30;  30:1-13;  33^5-33 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  15:3-6  /  //  Corin¬ 
thians,  12:14  /  Ephesians,  5:22-25;  6:1-9  / 
Colossians,  3:18-4:1  /  7  Timothy ,  5:8  /  Titus , 
2:9-11  /  Philemon  /  7  TWdr,  3:1-7 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  i-ii  183a-192d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [421-460] 
118a-b  /  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [631-680] 
136c-137a  /  Trachiniae  170a-181a,c  esp  [1157— 
1258]  180a-181a,c 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [791-885]  498b-499b; 
[1321-1451]  504c-506b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  56c;  bk  iii,  104c- 
105a;  bk  vm,  281c 

7  Plato:  bk  iv,  683b-c;  bk  xi,  779b- 

781c  /  Seventh  Letter ,  803d-804a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  ch  9  [ii59b25~ 
u6oa9]  411d-412b;  ch  10  [u6ob23)-CH  11 
[116^29]  413a-c  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  12-13 
453d-455a,c 

14  Plutarch:  Agis,  654c-655a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  3-8  9b- 
lOd;  bk  xiii,  par  47,  123d/  City  of  God,  bk 
xix,  ch  14-16,  520c-522a 

20  Aquinas:  Siimma  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  4  318b-321a 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Man  of  Law  [4701-4707] 
239a  /  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5583-6410] 
256a-269b  esp  [5893-5914]  261a-b,  [6385-6410] 
269a-b  /  Tale  of  Wife  of  Bath  [6619-6627] 
273a-b  /  Clerks  Tale  296a-318a  esp  [9053- 
9088]  317a-318a  /  Merchant's  Tale  319a-338a 
esp  [9249-9266]  321a  /  Franklin's  Tale  [11, 041- 
no]  351b-352b  /  Tale  of  Melibeus,  par 
13-16  404b-407b  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  79-80, 
541a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  109c-110b;  121a; 
155b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
219b-222b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  184a-191c;  410a-422b; 
427d-430a 

26  Shakespeare:  Comedy  of  Errors,  act  ii,  sc 


371 

1  [7—4  3]  152a  c  /  Taming  of  the  Shrew  199a- 
228a,c  esp  act  \\  sc  11  [  1  36  1 79]  227d  228a,c 
/  Romeo  and  Juliet,  act  iii,  sc  v  [1 27-1 97] 
308c-309b  /  Midsummer-Night' s  Dream ,  act 
1,  sc  1  [1-121]  352a-353c  /  Merchant  of  Venice, 
act  1,  sc  11  408b-409c  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  ii, 
sc  iii  443b-444b 

27  Shakespeare:  Othello,  act  i,  sc  iii  [175-189] 
210d-211a  /  King  Lear  244a-283a,c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  75c  /  New 
Atlantis,  207b-209d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [288-301]  158b- 
159a;  [440-502]  162a-163a;  [634-638]  166a; 
bk  vm  [452-594]  242a-245a;  bk  x  [144-156] 
277b;  [867-936]  293b-294b  /  Samson  Agonis- 
/e’.?  [87 1-902]  358b-359a;  [997-1060]  361b-362b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vi,  sect  52-cii 
vii,  sect  86  36a-44a;  ch  xv,  sect  169-170 
64c-65a;  sect  173-174  65c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  6b-c;  21a-22d;  100b- 

102a;  105a-107b;  108c-110c;  120c-121a,c; 

124a-125c;  126d-127b;  136b-c;  283c-d;  312c- 
313a;  321b-324b;  340c-341d;  359b-362c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  22d-23a; 
bk  xxiii,  187b,d-189d;  bk  xxvi,  216a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357a-b;  364d-365b  / 
Political  Economy,  367a-368c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  1,  387d-388a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  82b-84a;  86b  d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  404d;  419a-422d  esp 
419b-c,  420a-d;  445c-446a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  317c-318a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  174 
61b;  additions,  iii  134d-135a  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  part  i,  2 11c- 2 13a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  249b-d; 
267c-d;  bk  vi-vii,  271c-276b;  bk  vii,  291a- 
292b;  301b-302d;  bk  viii,  305b-307a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  244a-c  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures,  876c 

10.  Political  obligation:  cares,  functions,  loy¬ 
alties 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  20:13-17  /  Leviticus, 
19:9-20,32-37;  25:14-55  /  Numbers,  35  / 
Deuteronomy ,  5:17-21;  15;  17:8-20;  19;  22:1- 
4;  23:15-25;  24:10-13;  27:17-19,24-25  /  Prov¬ 
erbs,  3:27-28;  16:10-15;  28:15-18;  29:2,4,12, 
14  /  Jeremiah,  29:7 — ( D )  Jeremias,  29:7  / 
Zechariah,  8:16-17 — ( D )  Zacharias,  8:16-17 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:21-24;  22:17-21  / 
Mar\,  12:14-17  /  Lul^e,  20:20-26  /  Romans, 
13-1-7  /  Titus,  3:1/1  Peter,  2:13-19 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ix  [1-172]  57a-58d 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [1-77]  27a- 
28a 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [1-77]  99a-d  / 
Antigone  [631-680]  136c-137a  /  Philoctetes 
182a-195a,c 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [297-331]  261a-b  / 
Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [1368-1401]  437c-d 


Chapter  19:  DUTY 


372 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(10.  Political  obligation:  cares,  functions,  loyal¬ 
ties .) 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vii,  223c-d;  239a-c 

6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian  War ,  bk i, 355b-c; 
359b-360c;  370d;  378c-d;  bk  ii,  395d-399a; 
402b-c;  403b'C;  406a-407b;  bk  hi,  430c; 
432c-d;  bk  vi,  513a;  bk  vii,  555d-556a 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  206a-d  /  Crito  213a-219a,c 
esp  216d-219a,c  /  Republic ,  bk  iv,  342a-d; 
344a;  bk  vii,  390b-391b;  401a-b  /  Seventh 
Letter ,  802b-804b;  814b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  17  [1391*20-26] 
638c-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  23  128c-d; 
bk  iii,  ch  22  195a-201a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  hi,  sect  4  260b- 
261a;  bk  ix,  sect  42  295c-296a,c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  iii  [90-98]  149b;  bk  iv 
[189-278]  172a-174b;  bk  vi  [845-853]  233b- 
234a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  45a-c, 
48a-b  /  Numa  Pompilius,  51c-52b  /  Solon , 
7 Id  /  Marcus  Cato  276b,d-290d  esp  282a  / 
Crassus-Nicias,  455d-456d  /  Agesilaus,  480b, d- 
481a;  486d-487b  /  Cato  the  Younger  620a- 
648a, c  esp  626d-627b,  632b-c  /  Cleomenes, 
659d-660a  /  Galba,  859a- b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  ii,  32b-d  /  Histories , 
bk  1,  211c-212b;  bk  ii,  234b-235a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b/ 
City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  6  514b-515a 

19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  13, 
a  5,  rep  3  675c-676b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  6i, 
a  5,  rep  3  58b-59d;  q  96,  aa  4-6  233a- 
235d;  q  105,  aa  1-3  307d-318b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  vi  [76- 
151]  61c-62c 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  ix-x  14c-16d  pas¬ 
sim;  ch  xiv  21b-22a;  ch  xvii,  24a-b;  ch 
xviii,  25a-b;  ch  xxi,  32d-33a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  86c-96b;  part 
ii,  101a-104d;  110b-117b;  132b-136b;  138c-d; 
143c-d;  152d-160a;  164a, c;  part  iii,  165a; 
199b-204a;  245c-246a,c;  part  iv,  270c-d; 
273b-c;  conclusion  279a-283a,c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
127b,d-130a;  131b,d-133b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  7a-d;  24c-25c;  48a-51a 
passim;  67c-d;  303a-c;  381a-388c  esp  383c-d, 
386b-d;  486b-488b 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  77,  act  v,  sc  ii  [71]— 
sc  iii  [146]  347a-349c  /  1st  Henry  IV ,  act  i, 
sc  ii  [218-240]  437c-d;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [93-161] 
453d-454c  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  iv,  sc  v  494b- 
496d;  act  v,  sc  ii  [35-145]  498b-499b;  sc  v 
[60-75]  502a  /  Henry  V ,  act  iv,  sc  i  [123-301] 
552d-554c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus ,  act  ii,  sc  iii 
366a-369a:  act  v,  sc  iii  [93-209]  388a-389b  / 
Henry  VIII ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [18-102]  552d-553d 


10 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  331a- 
336a;  340b-343a;  ^345a-348c;  352b-356d; 
360d-364a;  366d-369b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  la-2c;  24b; 
74b-75a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  51,  schol 
439d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [430-456]  120b- 
121a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [843-902]  358a- 
359a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  3a:  16c-18c  /  Civil  Gov - 
ernment,  ch  ii,  sect  4-6  25d-26c;  ch  vi,  sect 
57-63  36d-38c;  ch  viii,  sect  96-98  47a-c; 
sect  1 13-122  51b-53c;  ch  ix,  sect  128- 
131  54b-d;  ch  xi,  sect  134-135  55b-56b;  ch 
xii,  sect  143  58c-d;  ch  xiii-xix  59b-81d 
passim 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  75b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  iii,  12d- 
13c;  bk  xi,  68b,d-75a;  bk  xii,  93c-95b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  356b-359a;  366c-d  / 
Political  Economy  367a-385a,c  passim,  esp 
369c,  370b-373b,  377b-c  /  Social  Contract , 
bk  1,  388c-391b;  392b-393c;  bk  ii,  396d- 
398b;  bk  iii,  414d;  419a;  421c-423a;  bk  iv, 
427b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  v,  303b- 
304c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  130b-d;  242c-246c 

passim;  288b-289a;  292  b-d;  338d-339c; 

342a-c;  577c-d;  630d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  102d-103a;  504c- 
505a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  433a-b;  438d-439a; 
457a-458a,c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  5a-9d  passim 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  lla-20d  passim 

43  Federalist:  number  40,  130c-132a;  num¬ 
ber  44,  147a-b;  number  62,  190a-b;  num¬ 
ber  65  198a-200c  passim;  number  70,  212c- 
213c;  number  75,  223c-d;  number  76,  225d- 
226b;  number  85,  256d-257a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  272b-c:  290d-291a;  302d-303a; 

317c-319d  /  Representative  Government ,  348c; 
350a;  355b-362c;  392b-393c;  401a-406a; 

410a-d;  436b-c;  439b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  145b:  247c-d;  355b-d; 
379b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par 
290-296  97d-99b;  par  299  99c-100b;  par  309- 
31 1  103b-104a;  par  324  107a-d  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  intro,  171b-c;  part  i,  211b-214d; 
part  iv,  342c-d;  365b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [10,252-259]  249b- 
250a;  [10,455-500]  254b  255b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ii,  89b-d;  bk  v, 
206d-207a;  232a-234a  esp  233b-234a;  bk  ix, 
365d-366a;  bk  xi,  475b  476c;  epilogue  i, 
668a-669c;  670d-671a 

54  Freud:  War  arul  Death ,  757b-c 


11 


Chapter  19:  DUTY 


1 1.  Duty  to  God:  piety  and  worship 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  4:2-5;  8:18-22;  12:7-8; 
13:1-4;  22:1-19  esP  22:18;  28:18-22  /  Exodus , 
12-13:  35-40  /  Leviticus  passim,  csp  1-7,  16, 
23  /  Numbers,  9:1-14;  19  /  Deuteronomy ,  6;  8; 
10-12;  23:21-23  /  Joshua ,  22:1-6;  24:14-28— 
(D)  /oyz/e,  22:1-6;  24:14-28  /  Judges ,  11:28- 
40  /  /  Samuel ,  15:10-35 — (D)  /  Kings,  15:10- 
35  /  //  Kings,  12:1-16— (D)  7 17  Kings,  12:1-16 
/  /  Chronicles ,  16:29 — (D)  /  Paralipome- 
non,  16:29  /  //  Chronicles,  1-7;  29-31  — (D) 
//  Paralipomenon ,  1-7;  29-31  /  Ezra—(D ) 
/  Esdras  /  Nehemiah—(D)  11  Esdras  /  Psalms 
passim  /  Ecclesiastes,  5:2-7;  12:13— (D) 
clesiastes,  5:1-6;  12:13  /  Isaiah,  1:11-20—  (/>) 
Isaias,  1:11-20  /  Daniel ,  9  /  Micah,  6:8  — (D) 
Micheas ,  6:8 

Apocrypha:  To  bit,  4:5-11,19;  12:8-10— (Z))  OT, 
Tobias ,  4:6-12,20;  12:8-10  /  Judith,  4;  8-9 — 
(D)  OT,  Judith,  4;  8-9  /  Ecclesiasticus,  18:22- 
24;  35:4-12— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  18:22- 
24;  35:6-15  /  Baruch,  1;  4:1-3— (D)  OT, 
Baruch,  1;  4:1-3  /  7?<f7  and  Dragon ,  2-28  — (D) 
OT,  Daniel,  14:1-27  /  /  Maccabees,  4:38-61  — 
(£))  OT,  I  Machabees,  4:38-61 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  4:1-11;  5:33-36; 
6:1-8,16-18;  7:21;  18:23-35;  22:21,34-40  / 
Mark,  12:28-34  /  Luke,  2:21-24;  4:1-13;  9:23- 
26,57-62;  10:25-42;  17:7-10;  18:1-14;  20:25 
/  /Zr/T,  5:17-32;  20:22-24  /  Romans,  12-13 
/  Ephesians,  4  esp  4:17-32  /  Colossians,  3  / 
I  Timothy,  2:1-8  /  7/  Timothy  /  James,  5:13- 
18  /  /  John  esp  2:3-11,  2:15,  3:23,  47-5:5  / 
77 John 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  i  [206-222]  5b;  bk  ix  [485— 
514]  62a-b;  bk  xxiv  [424-431]  175d  /  Odyssey, 
bk  xni  [125-184]  256b-257a 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  la-14a,c  esp 
[600-709]  8d-10b  /  Agamemnon  [369-398] 
56a- b  /  Eumenides  [490-565]  86b-87a 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [863-910] 
107b-c  /  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [461-509]  118b-d 
/  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [441-470]  134d- 

135a,  [i347"I353]  142d  /  4/**  [748~779] 
149c-d;  [1316-1421]  154b-155a,c  /  Electra 
[1058-1097]  164d-165a  /  Philoctetcs  [1440- 
1444] 195a, c 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  258a-269a,c  esp  [1—4 1  ] 
258a-b,  [513-563]  262d-263b  /  Electra  [167— 
212]  328c'd  /  Bacc/7^/^340a-352a,c  /  Hecuba 
[799-805]  359d 

5  Aristophanes:  542a-563d  esp  [1170- 

1266]  557b-558b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  rk  v,  171d-172a;  bk  vi, 
201d-202c;  bk  vm,  282b-c;  bk  ix,  308a-c 

7  Plato:  Euthyphro  191a-199a,c  /  Apology , 
206b-d  /  Timaeus,  447a  /  Law.?,  bk  iv,  682d- 
683b;  bk  x,  769c-771b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [io5a2-6]  148c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  yii,  cii  9  [1329*26-34] 
533d 


373 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  vi  [56-79] 
81a  b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  cii  16  121d  1 2 2 d ; 
cii  27,  132c-133a;  bk  ii,  ch  16,  158b  d;  bk 
iii,  cii  24  203c-210a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  224b  d;  cii 
12  242d  244a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  17  255d- 
256d;  bk  11,  sect  13  258c;  bk  v,  sect  7  269d; 
bk  ix,  sect  1  291a-c;  sect  40  295b 

13  Virgil:  Acneid,  bk  v  [42-103]  188a-190a 

14  Plutarch:  Aemilius  Paultis,  214b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  iv,  282d-283b 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1011a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  4  2a;  bk 
hi,  par  15  17a-b  /  City  of  God,  bk  vii,  ch 
27-31  259c-262a;  bk  x,  cii  1-7  298b,d-303a; 
cii  16  308b-309c;  cii  19  310d-311b;  bk  xix, 
cii  14-16,  520c-522a;  ch  19  523b-d  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  i,  cii  10  627b;  cii  22-30  629b- 
633b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  63, 
a  1,  ans  325c-326c;  part  i-ii,  q  19,  a  5,  rep 
1-2  705d-707a;  a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  707a-708a; 
Q  21,  a  4  719d-720a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
aa  4-5  210c-212c;  q  96,  a  4  233a-d;  qq  98- 
108  239b-337d;  part  ii-ii,  q  4,  a  7,  rep  3 
407d-409a;  q  16  454c-456d;  q  22  480d-482c; 
q  44  592d'598c;  qq  183-189  625a-700d;  part 
iii,  q  25  839c-845a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xiii 
[103-129]  73a-b;  xvn  [82]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c; 
xxx-xxxi  99b-102b;  paradise,  iii  [i ]— v  [87] 
109b-113a  passim;  vii  [25-33]  115c;  [64-102] 
115d-116a;  xxvi  [115-117]  147a 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,829-16,021] 
468a-471b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  80c;  part  ii, 
137b-138b;  part  ii-iii,  159d-167b;  part  iii, 
177c-180d;  198a-207b;  240a-246a,c;  part  iv, 
261d-262a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  152b-156d;  233a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1—4 1  ] 
322d-323a 

27  Shakespeare:  Henry  VIII,  act  iii,  sc  ii 
[435-457]  573c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  80b-81a; 
lOOd-lOla 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  69b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  prop  41  462d-463b 

32  Milton:  Sonnets,  xvi  66b-67a  /  Paradise  Lost 
93a-333a  esp  bk  i  [242-283]  98b-99b,  bk  iv 
[41 1-439]  161b-162a,  [720-739]  168a-b,  bk  v 
[136-210]  178a-179b,  [506-543]  186a-187a,  bk 
vii  [449-518]  227a-228b,  bk  vm  [31 1-333] 
239a-b,  [630-643]  246a,  bk  ix  [647-654]  261b, 
bk  xi  [133-161]  302a-b,  bk  xii  [386-410] 
327b-328a  /  Samson  Agonisies  [1334-1409] 
368b-370a  /  Areopagitica,  402a  b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  78b-80b  /  Pensees, 
476  256b-257a;  482  258a;  489,491  259a;  539 
265b 


374 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(11.  Duty  to  God:  piety  and  worship.) 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  2a-b;  3b-4a;  lOd-lla;  15d- 
16a;  16c-17b  /  Civil  Government ,  ch  ii,  sect 
6  26b-c;  ch  vi,  sect  56  36d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  255a-268a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  187d-188a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  435a-439c 
passim 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81d-82b;  180c- 
182c  esp  181b-c;  184d-185d;  191a-194a  passim; 
226a-b;  291d-292d;  350b-d;  533b-d;  593b, d- 
599a  passim,  esp  593b, d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  226c-227b;  232c- 
233c;  259b-260a 


11 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  325a-327d;  345c-d  / 
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  383b,d-384a,c  / 
Judgement ,  502d-503a;  504b-505a;  509a-c; 
593a-d;  611a-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  296b-d;  310d-311a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  84b-c;  262b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 
225b 

48  Melville  :  Moby  Dic\,  30a-36b;  39a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  50b-c;  bk  hi, 
122b-c;  bk  v,  218b-220a;  bk  vi,  271c-d;  273c- 
274a, c;  bk  xi,  476c-480a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iv,  83c- 
84a;  bk  v,  127b-137c;  bk  vi,  164a-165a;  167b- 
170b 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  discussions  of  the  issue  between  the  ethics  of  duty  and  the  ethics  of  happiness  or  pleas¬ 
ure,  see  Happiness  3;  Pleasure  and  Pain  6-6a,  8b. 

Matters  relevant  to  this  issue,  see  Desire  2b,  3a;  Good  and  Evil  33-36(2);  Justice  ie-if, 
4;  Law  3a(i),  4— 4a,  4C~4d;  Temperance  3;  Virtue  and  Vice  id,  6a;  Will  8b(2),  8c-8d. 
Other  treatments  of  conscience,  both  psychological  and  ethical,  see  Honor  2a;  Punishment 
5c;  Sin  5;  Temperance  3. 

The  consideration  of  duty  in  relation  to  law,  justice,  and  rights,  see  God  3d;  Justice  ie,  3, 
11b;  Law  2,  4a,  4c~4d,  6a;  Religion  2;  Will  8d. 

The  conflict  between  duty  and  desire  or  love,  see  Desire  6a-6b;  Love  3c. 

The  treatment  of  specific  duties,  domestic,  political,  and  religious,  ^Citizen  4;  Family  6d; 
God  3d;  Justice  11b;  Religion  2;  State  8a;  Truth  8e. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 


Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Epictetus.  The  Manual 

Hobbes.  Philosophical  Rudiments  Concerning  Govern¬ 
ment  and  Society,  ch  13 

Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  hi,  part  ii, 
sect  vii-x 
Fielding.  Amelia 

A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  part  iii 
Kant.  Lectures  on  Ethics,  pp  11-47,  116-253 

- .  Religion  Within  the  Limits  of  Reason  Alone 

Dostoevsky.  Crime  and  Punishment 

II. 

Cicero.  De  Finibus  (On  the  Supreme  Good) 

- .  De  Officii s  (On  Duties ) 


Seneca.  Moral  Essays 
Maimonides.  Eight  Chapters  on  Ethics 
Boccaccio.  Patient  Griselda 
Beaumont  and  Fletcher.  The  Maid's  Tragedy 
Sanderson.  De  Obligatione  Conscientiae  (On  the  Ob¬ 
ligations  of  Conscience) 

Corneille.  Le  Cid 

- .  Horace 

- .  Polyeucte 

J.  Taylor.  Of  Holy  Living 

- .  Ductor  Dubitantium 

Racine.  Andromaque 

Baxter.  Chapters  from  A  Christian  Directory 
Pufendorf.  De  Officio  Hominis  et  Civis  Juxta  Le¬ 
gem  Naturalem  (Of  the  Duties  of  Man  and  of  the 
Citizen  Accordmg  to  Natural  Law) 


Chapter  19:  DUTY 


375 


}.  Butler.  Fifteen  Sermons  upon  Human  Nature ,  iii, 

x,  XIII 

T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Active  Powers  of  the  Human 
Mindy  iii,  part  iii,  ch  5-8 
D.  Stewart.  Outlines  of  Moral  Philosophy ,  part  ii, 
ch  2 

J.  G.  Fichte.  The  Vocation  of  Man,  part  iii 
Wordsworth.  Ode  to  Duty 
Bentham.  Deontology 

Whewell.  The  Elements  of  Morality ,  bk  ii,  cii  5-12; 

BK  V,  CH  2,  IO-I7 

Mazzini.  The  Duties  of  Man 
Maurice.  The  Conscience 
P.  A.  Janet.  The  Theory  of  Morals ,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
H.  Sidgwick.  The  Methods  of  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  5; 
BK  III,  ch  2 

Bradley.  Ethical  Studies,  iv-v 
T.  H.  Green.  The  Principles  of  Political  Obliga¬ 
tion,  (a) 

Guyau.  Esquisse  dyune  morale  sans  obligation  ni 
sanction 


Nietzsche.  The  Genealogy  of  Morals ,  11 
Brentano.  The  Origin  of  the  Knowledge  of  Right  and 
Wrong ,  par  1-13 

Spencer.  The  Principles  of  Ethics ,  vol  ii,  part  iv, 
cii  9-29;  part  v-vi 

Dewey.  “The  Idea  of  Obligation,”  in  Outlines  of  a 
Critical  Theory  of  Ethics 

- .  The  Study  of  Ethics,  ch  7-8 

Bosanquet.  Science  and  Philosophy,  16 
Croce.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Practical ,  part  i,  sect 
ii;  part  ii,  sect  i  (iv);  sect  ii  (i);  part  iii  (iv) 
Royce.  The  Philosophy  of  Loyalty 
Moore.  Principia  Ethica ,  ch  4 

- .  Ethics ,  ch  4-5 

Prichard.  Duty  and  Interest 

N.  Hartmann.  Ethics ,  vol  i,  Moral  Phenomena , 
sect  4-6 

Kirk.  Conscience  and  Its  Problems 
Ross.  The  Right  and  the  Good ,  1-11,  vii 
Bergson.  Two  Sources  of  Morality  and  Religion ,  ch  i 
Muirhead.  Rule  and  End  in  Morals 


Chapter  2.0:  EDUCATION 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  great  books  assembled  in  this  set  are 
offered  as  means  to  a  liberal  or  general 
education.  The  authors  of  these  books  were 
educated  men;  more  than  that,  they  typified 
the  ideal  of  education  in  their  various  epochs. 

As  their  writings  reveal,  their  minds  were  large¬ 
ly  formed,  or  at  least  deeply  impressed,  by 
reading  the  works  of  their  predecessors.  Many 
of  them  were  related  as  teacher  and  student, 
sometimes  through  personal  contact,  sometimes 
only  through  the  written  word.  Many  of  them 
were  related  as  divergent  disciples  of  the  same 
master,  yet  they  often  differed  with  him  as 
well  as  with  one  another.  There  is  scarcely  one 
among  them — except  Homer — who  was  not 
acquainted  with  the  minds  of  the  others  who 
came  before  him  and,  more  often  than  not, 
profoundly  conversant  with  their  thought. 

Yet  not  one  of  the  writings  in  this  set  is 
specifically  a  treatise  on  education,  except  Mon¬ 
taigne’s  essay  Of  the  Education  of  Children. 
Some  of  these  authors  speak  more  or  less  fully 
of  their  own  education,  as  does  Marcus  Aurelius 
in  the  opening  book  of  his  Meditations,  Augus¬ 
tine  in  his  Confessions ,  Descartes  in  his  Dis¬ 
course,  and  Boswell.  Others  refer  to  their  edu¬ 
cational  experience  in  fictional  guise,  as  does 
Aristophanes  in  the  argument  in  the  Clouds 
between  the  Just  and  Unjust  Discourses;  or 
Rabelais  when  he  tells  of  Gargantua’s  school¬ 
ing  in  Gargantua’s  letter  to  Pantagruel.  Some¬ 
times  they  report  the  way  in  which  other  men 
were  trained  to  greatness,  as  does  Plutarch; 
or,  like  Gibbon,  Hegel,  and  Mill,  they  de¬ 
scribe  and  comment  on  the  historic  systems  of 
education. 

In  still  other  instances  the  great  books  con¬ 
tain  sections  or  chapters  devoted  to  the  ends 
and  means  of  education,  the  order  of  studies, 
the  nature  of  learning  and  teaching,  the  train¬ 
ing  of  statesmen  and  citizens;  as  for  example, 

376 


Plato’s  Republic,  Aristotle’s  Politics,  Augustine’s 
Christian  Doctrine,  Bacon’s  Advancement  of 
Learning,  Adam  Smith’s  Wealth  of  Nations, 
Hegel’s  Philosophy  of  Right,  and  the  psychologi¬ 
cal  writings  of  James  and  Freud.  But  in  no  case 
is  education  the  principal  theme  of  these  books, 
as  it  is  for  most  of  the  works  cited  in  the  list  of 
Additional  Readings,  among  which  will  be 
found  treatises  on  education  by  authors  in  this 
set. 

Education  is  not  itself  so  much  an  idea  or  a 
subject  matter  as  it  is  a  theme  to  which  the 
great  ideas  and  the  basic  subject  matters  are 
relevant.  It  is  one  of  the  perennial  practical 
problems  which  men  cannot  discuss  without 
engaging  in  the  deepest  speculative  considera¬ 
tions.  It  is  a  problem  which  carries  discussion 
into  and  across  a  great  many  subject  matters — 
the  liberal  arts  of  grammar,  rhetoric,  and  logic; 
psychology,  medicine,  metaphysics,  and  theol- 
ogy;.  ethics,  politics,  and  economics.  It  is  a 
problem  which  draws  into  focus  many  of  the 
great  ideas — virtue  and  truth,  knowledge  and 
opinion,  art  and  science;  desire,  will,  sense, 
memory,  mind,  habit;  change  and  progress; 
family  and  state;  man,  nature,  and  God. 

This  can  be  verified  by  noting  the  diverse 
contexts  in  which  education  is  discussed  in  the 
great  books.  In  each  connection  we  shall  find 
some  of  the  special  questions  which  together 
make  up  the  complex  problem  of  education. 
For  example,  the  nature  of  teaching  and  learn¬ 
ing  is  examined  in  the  wider  context  of  psy¬ 
chological  considerations  concerning  man’s 
abilities,  the  way  in  which  knowledge  is  ac¬ 
quired,  and  how  it  is  communicated  by  means 
of  language  or  other  symbols.  Different  con¬ 
ceptions  of  the  nature  of  man  and  of  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  his  several  capacities  surround  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  the  ends  of  education.  In  this  context 


Chapter  20:  EDUCATION 


377 


questions  also  arise  concerning  the  parts  of 
education — the  training  of  man’s  body,  the 
formation  of  his  character,  the  cultivation  of 
his  mind — and  how  these  are  related  to  one 
another. 

The  whole  theory  of  the  virtues  and  of  habit 
formation  is  involved  in  the  question  whether 
virtue  can  be  taught  or  must  be  acquired  in 
some  other  way,  and  in  related  questions  about 
the  influence  of  the  family  and  the  state  on 
the  growth  of  character.  These  questions  are 
also  asked  in  terms  of  general  political  theory. 
Different  views  of  the  state  are  involved  in 
questions  about  the  division  of  responsibility 
for  education  among  various  agencies.  Ques¬ 
tions  about  the  purpose  of  education,  and  what 
sort  of  education  shall  be  given  to  the  diverse 
classes  in  the  state,  are  differently  raised  and 
differently  answered  in  the  context  of  discus¬ 
sions  of  different  forms  of  government. 

Though  they  are  far  from  exhaustive,  these 
examples  should  nevertheless  suffice  to  make 
the  point  that  there  can  be  no  philosophy  of 
education  apart  from  philosophy  as  a  whole. 
It  may  therefore  not  be  a  disadvantage  to  find 
the  discussion  of  education  in  the  great  books 
almost  always  imbedded  in  the  context  of  some 
more  general  theory  or  problem. 

One  opinion  from  which  there  is  hardly  a 
dissenting  voice  in  the  great  books  is  that  edu¬ 
cation  should  aim  to  make  men  good  as  men 
and  as  citizens.  “If  you  ask  what  is  the  good  of 
education,”  Plato  writes,  “the  answer  is  easy — 
that  education  makes  good  men,  and  that  good 
men  act  nobly,  and  conquer  their  enemies  in 
battle,  because  they  are  good.”  Men  should 
enter  upon  learning,  Bacon  declares,  in  order 
“to  give  a  true  account  of  their  gift  of  reason, 
to  the  benefit  and  use  of  men”;  while  William 
James  stresses  the  need  for  “a  perfectly-rounded 
development.”  Thus  it  would  seem  to  be  a 
common  opinion  in  all  ages  that  education 
should  seek  to  develop  the  characteristic  ex¬ 
cellences  of  which  men  are  capable  and  that  its 
ultimate  ends  are  human  happiness  and  the 
welfare  of  society. 

Within  this  area  of  general  agreement  there 
are,  of  course,  differences  which  result  from  the 
different  views  that  are  taken  of  man’s  relation 
to  the  state  or  to  God.  If  the  good  of  the  state 


takes  precedence  over  individual  happiness, 
then  education  must  be  directed  to  training 
men  for  the  role  they  play  as  parts  of  a  larger 
organism.  Education  then  serves  the  purpose  of 
preserving  the  state.  Of  all  things,  Aristotle 
says,  “that  which  contributes  most  to  the  per¬ 
manence  of  constitutions  is  the  adaptation  of 
education  to  the  form  of  government.  .  .  .  The 
best  laws,”  he  continues,  “though  sanctioned 
by  every  citizen  of  the  state,  will  be  of  no  avail 
unless  the  young  are  trained  by  habit  and  edu¬ 
cation  in  the  spirit  of  the  constitution.” 

Rousseau  seems  to  take  a  similar  view  when 
he  calls  for  a  system  of  public  education  run 
by  the  state.  Its  object  is  to  assure  that  the 
citizens  are  “early  accustomed  to  regard  their 
individuality  only  in  its  relation  to  the  body 
of  the  state,  and  to  be  aware,  so  to  speak,  of 
their  own  existence  merely  as  a  part  of  that 
of  the  state.”  Taught  in  this  way,  the  citizens, 
Rousseau  flaims,  “might  at  length  come  to 
identify  themselves  in  some  degree  with  this 
greater  whole,  to  feel  themselves  members  of 
their  country,  and  to  love  it  with  that  ex¬ 
quisite  feeling  which  no  isolated  person  has 
save  for  himself.” 

If  happiness  cannot  be  fully  achieved  on 
earth,  then  whatever  temporal  ends  education 
serves  must  themselves  be  ordered  to  eternal 
salvation,  and  the  whole  process  of  human 
development  must  be  a  direction  of  the  soul 
to  God.  “What  did  it  profit  me,”  Augustine 
asks  in  his  Confessions ,  “that  all  the  books  I 
could  procure  of  the  so-called  liberal  arts,  I, 
the  vile  slave  of  vile  affections,  read  by  myself 
and  understood  ?  .  .  .  For  I  had  my  back  to  the 
light,  and  my  face  to  the  things  enlightened; 
whence  my  face,  with  which  I  discerned  the 
things  enlightened,  was  not  itself  enlightened. 
Whatever  was  written,  either  on  rhetoric,  or 
logic,  geometry,  music  and  arithmetic,  by  my¬ 
self  without  much  difficulty  or  any  instructor, 
I  understood,  Thou  knowest,  O  Lord  my  God; 
because  both  quickness  of  understanding  and 
acuteness  in  discerning,  is  Thy  gift;  yet  did  I 
not  thence  sacrifice  to  Thee.”  Wherefore,  Au¬ 
gustine  concludes  concerning  this  stage  of  his 
learning,  “it  served  not  to  my  use  but  to  my 
perdition.”  But  Augustine  does  not  therefore 
conclude  that,  under  no  circumstances,  can 
liberal  education  be  put  to  good  use.  In  his 


378 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


treatise  On  Christian  Doctrine ,  he  considers  in 
detail  how  the  liberal  arts,  which  serve  so  well 
in  the  study  of  Sacred  Scripture,  may  also  serve 
to  bring  the  soul  to  God. 

Such  differences  do  not,  however,  annul 
one  consequence  of  the  general  agreement, 
namely,  the  conception  that  education  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  vocation  of  man,  and  pre¬ 
pares  him  in  thought  and  action  for  his  purpose 
and  station  in  life.  In  these  terms  Adam  Smith 
argues  for  a  minimum  general  education.  He 
claims  that  “a  man  without  the  proper  use  of 
the  intellectual  faculties  of  a  man,  is,  if  pos¬ 
sible,  more  contemptible  than  even  a  coward, 
and  seems  to  be  mutilated  and  deformed  in  a 
still  more  essential  part  of  the  character  of 
human  nature.”  He  explicitly  points  out  that 
this  is  the  condition  of  “the  great  body  of  the 
people,”  who,  by  the  division  of  labor,  are  con¬ 
fined  in  their  employment  “to  a  few  very  sim¬ 
ple  operations,”  in  which  the  worker  “has  no 
occasion  to  exert  his  understanding,  or  to  exer¬ 
cise  his  invention  in  finding  out  expedients  for 
removing  difficulties  which  never  occur.”  The 
result,  according  to  Smith,  is  that  “the  torpor 
of  his  mind  renders  him,  not  only  incapable 
of  relishing  or  bearing  a  part  in  any  rational 
conversation,  but  of  conceiving  any  generous, 
noble,  or  tender  sentiment,  and  consequently 
of  forming  any  just  judgment  concerning 
many  even  of  the  ordinary  duties  of  private 
life.” 

When  the  vocation  of  man  is  thus  under¬ 
stood,  a  general  or  liberal  education  is  voca¬ 
tional  in  that  it  prepares  each  man  for  the  com¬ 
mon  conditions  and  callings  of  human  life.  In 
this  sense  specialized  training,  which  by  im¬ 
plication  at  least  seems  to  be  the  object  of 
Smith’s  criticism,  is  not  vocational.  It  fits  a 
man  only  for  some  specialized  function,  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  he  or  his  social  class  is  differ¬ 
entiated  from  some  other  man  or  class. 

In  our  day,  the  word  “vocational”  is  used 
in  the  opposite  sense  to  mean  specialized  train¬ 
ing,  whether  it  is  preparation  for  the  least 
skilled  of  trades  or  for  the  most  learned  of 
professions.  Since  all  men  are  not  called  to  the 
practice  of  law  or  medicine — any  more  than  all 
are  called  to  productive  work  in  the  various 
arts  and  crafts,  or  the  tasks  of  commerce  and 


industry— the  training  they  may  need  to  per¬ 
form  these  functions  does  not  fully  develop 
their  common  humanity.  It  is  not  adequate  to 
make  them  good  as  men,  as  citizens,  or  as 
children  of  God. 

The  traditional  meaning  of  the  word  “lib¬ 
eral”  as  applied  to  education  entails  a  distinc¬ 
tion  between  free  men  and  slaves.  Slaves,  like 
domesticated  animals,  are  trained  to  perform 
special  functions.  They  are  not  treated  as  ends, 
but  as  means,  and  so  they  are  not  educated  for 
their  own  good,  but  for  the  use  to  which  they 
are  put.  This  is  true  not  only  of  slaves  in  the 
strict  sense  of  household  chattel;  it  is  also  true 
of  all  the  servile  classes  in  any  society  which 
divides  its  human  beings  into  those  who  work 
in  order  to  live  and  those  who  live  off  the  work 
of  others  and  who  therefore  have  the  leisure  in 
which  to  strive  to  live  well. 

In  accordance  with  these  distinctions,  Aris¬ 
totle  divides  education  into  “liberal”  and  “il¬ 
liberal.”  Certain  subjects  are  illiberal  by  na¬ 
ture,  namely,  “any  occupation,  art,  or  science, 
which  makes  the  body  or  soul  of  the  freeman 
less  fit  for  the  practice  or  exercise  of  virtue.” 
In  this  category  Aristotle  includes  “those  arts 
which  tend  to  deform  the  body,  and  likewise 
all  paid  employments,  for  they  absorb  and 
degrade  the  mind.” 

It  is  not  only  the  nature  of  the  subject,  but 
also  the  end  which  education  serves,  that  de¬ 
termines  whether  its  character  is  liberal  or 
illiberal.  Even  a  liberal  art  becomes,  in  Aris¬ 
totle’s  opinion,  “menial  and  servile  .  .  .  if  done 
for  the  sake  of  others.”  A  man’s  education  “will 
not  appear  illiberal”  only  so  long  as  “he  does 
or  learns  anything  for  his  own  sake  or  for  the 
sake  of  his  friends,  or  with  a  view  to  excel¬ 
lence.”  In  other  words,  to  be  liberal,  education 
must  serve  the  use  of  leisure  in  the  pursuit  of 
excellence.  It  must  treat  man  as  an  end,  not  as 
a  means  to  be  used  by  other  men  or  by  the 
state. 

It  follows  that  any  society  which  abolishes 
the  distinction  of  social  classes  and  which  calls 
all  men  to  freedom,  should  conceive  education 
as  essentially  liberal  and  for  all  men.  It  should, 
furthermore,  direct  education,  in  all  its  parts 
and  phases,  to  the  end  of  each  man’s  living  well 
rather  than  to  the  end  of  his  earning  a  living 
for  himself  or  others. 


Chapter  20:  EDUCATION 


In  the  classification  of  the  kinds  of  educa¬ 
tion,  the  word  “liberal”  is  frequently  used  in  a 
more  restricted  sense  to  signify  not  all  education 
designed  for  free  men,  but  only  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  the  mind  through  the  acquisition  of 
knowledge  and  skill.  In  this  sense  liberal  educa¬ 
tion  is  set  apart  from  physical  education  which 
concerns  bodily  health  and  proficiency,  and 
moral  education  which  concerns  excellence  in 
action  rather  than  in  thought. 

These  divisions  are  clearly  made,  perhaps  for 
the  first  time,  in  Plato’s  Republic.  The  educa¬ 
tion  described  there  begins  in  the  early  years 
with  music  and  gymnastic.  Gymnastic  “pre¬ 
sides  over  the  growth  and  decay  of  the  body.” 
Music,  which  includes  literature  as  well  as  the 
arts  of  harmony  and  rhythm,  is  said  to  educate 
its  students  “by  the  influence  of  habit,  by 
harmony  making  them  harmonious,  by  rhythm 
rhythmical,”  and  its  function  is  to  develop 
moral  as  well  as  aesthetic  sensibilities. 

The  second  part  of  Plato’s  curriculum, 
“which  leads  naturally  to  reflection”  and  draws 
“the  soul  towards  being,”  consists  in  the  mathe¬ 
matical  arts  and  sciences  of  arithmetic,  geome¬ 
try,  music,  and  astronomy.  The  program  is 
capped  by  the  study  of  dialectic,  to  which  all 
the  rest  is  but  “a  prelude”;  for  “when  a  person 
starts  on  the  discovery  of  the  absolute  by  the 
light  of  reason  only,  and  without  any  assistance 
of  sense,  and  perseveres  until  by  pure  intelli¬ 
gence  he  arrives  at  the  perception  of  the  ab¬ 
solute  good,  he  at  last  finds  himself  at  the  end 
of  the  intellectual  world.” 

Up  to  this  point,  the  program  can  be  taken 
as  liberal  education  in  the  narrow  sense  of  learn¬ 
ing  how  and  what  to  think.  The  fifteen  years  of 
experience  in  civic  affairs  and  the  tasks  of  gov¬ 
ernment,  which  Plato  interposes  at  the  age  of 
thirty-five,  seem  to  function  as  another  phase 
of  moral  training.  This  period  provides  “an 
opportunity  of  trying  whether,  when  they  are 
drawn  all  manner  of  ways  by  temptation,  they 
will  stand  firm  or  flinch.” 

To  the  extent  that  physical  training  aims, 
beyond  health,  at  the  acquirement  of  skill  in 
a  coordinated  use  of  one’s  body,  it  can  be  an¬ 
nexed  to  liberal  rather  than  moral  education. 
Plato  notes,  for  example,  that  gymnastic  should 
not  be  too  sharply  distinguished  from  music 
as  “the  training  of  the  body”  from  the  “train¬ 


379 

ing  of  the  soul.”  Gymnastic  as  well  as  music,  he 
claims,  has  “in  view  chiefly  the  improvement 
of  the  soul,”  and  he  considers  the  two  as  bal¬ 
ancing  and  tempering  one  another. 

Whether  they  produce  competence  in  gym¬ 
nastic  or  athletic  feats,  or,  like  the  manual  arts, 
proficiency  in  productive  work,  all  bodily  skills, 
even  the  simplest,  involve  the  senses  and  the 
mind  as  well  as  bones  and  muscles.  They  are 
arts  no  less  than  music  or  logic.  Apart  from  their 
utility,  they  represent  a  certain  type  of  human 
excellence,  which  will  be  denied  only  by  those 
who  can  see  no  difference  between  the  quality 
of  a  racehorse  and  the  skill  of  his  rider.  Whether 
these  skills  as  well  as  other  useful  arts  are  part  of 
liberal  education  in  the  broader  sense  depends, 
as  we  have  seen,  on  the  end  for  which  they  are 
taught  or  learned.  Even  the  arts  which  are 
traditionally  called  liberal,  such  as  rhetoric  or 
logic,  can  be  degraded  to  servility  if  the  sole 
motive  for  becoming  skilled  in  them  is  wealth 
won  by  success  in  the  law  courts. 

In  the  two  traditional  distinctions  so  far  dis¬ 
cussed,  “liberal  education”  seems  to  have  a 
somewhat  different  meaning  when  it  signifies 
the  opposite  of  servile  training  and  when  it 
signifies  the  opposite  of  moral  cultivation.  In 
the  first  case,  the  distinction  is  based  upon  the 
purpose  of  the  education;  in  the  second,  it 
refers  to  the  faculties  or  functions  being  cul¬ 
tivated.  When  the  second  is  stated  in  terms  of 
the  distinction  between  the  intellectual  and 
the  moral  virtues,  liberal  (/>.,  intellectual) 
education  is  conceived  as  aiming  at  good  habits 
of  thinking  and  knowing,  and  moral  education 
is  thought  of  as  aiming  at  good  habits  of  will, 
desire,  or  emotion,  along  with  their  conse¬ 
quences  in  action. 

Although  he  does  not  use  these  terms,  Mon¬ 
taigne  seems  to  have  the  contrast  between 
moral  and  intellectual  training  in  mind  when 
he  criticizes  the  education  of  his  day  for  aiming 
“at  nothing  but  to  furnish  our  heads  with 
knowledge,  but  not  a  word  of  judgment  and 
virtue.”  It  is,  to  him,  a  “pedantic  education,” 
which  not  only  fails  to  achieve  the  highest  edu¬ 
cational  purpose,  but  also  results  in  a  great 
evil,  in  that  “all  knowledge  is  hurtful  to  him 
who  has  not  the  science  of  goodness.” 

A  too  sharp  separation  of  the  intellectual 


380 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


and  the  moral  may  be  questioned,  or  at  least 
qualified,  by  those  who,  like  Socrates,  tend  to 
identify  knowledge  and  virtue.  Yet  they  sel¬ 
dom  go  to  the  opposite  extreme  of  supposing 
that  no  distinction  can  be  made  between  the 
task  of  imparting  knowledge  to  the  mind  and 
that  of  forming  character.  Socrates,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  in  the  Menof  recognizes  that  a  man  cannot 
be  made  temperate,  courageous,  or  just  in  the 
same  way  that  he  can  be  taught  geometry. 

From  another  point  of  view,  the  notion  of 
moral  training  is  questioned  by  those  who,  like 
Freud,  think  that  the  patterns  of  human  desire 
or  emotion  can  be  beneficially  changed  apart 
from  moral  discipline.  It  is  the  object  of  psy¬ 
choanalysis,  he  writes,  “to  strengthen  the  ego, 
to  make  it  more  independent  of  the  super-ego, 
to  widen  its  field  of  vision,  and  so  to  extend  its 
organization  that  it  can  take  over  new  portions 
of  the  id.”  To  do  this  is  radically  to  alter  the 
individual’s  behavior-pattern.  “It  is  reclama¬ 
tion  work,”  Freud  says,  “like  the  draining  of 
the  Zuvder  Zee.”  Emotional  education,  so 
conceived,  is  therapeutic — more  like  preven¬ 
tive  and  remedial  medicine  than  moral  training. 

Religious  education  is  usually  regarded  as 
both  intellectual  and  moral,  even  as  the  science 
of  theology  is  said  to  be  both  speculative  and 
practical.  Citing  the  admonition  of  St.  James, 
“Be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers 
only,”  Aquinas  holds  that  religious  education 
is  concerned  with  the  knowledge  not  only  of 
“divine  things”  but  also  of  the  “human  acts” 
by  which  man  comes  to  God.  Since  man  is 
infinitely  removed  from  God,  he  needs  for  this 
purpose  the  grace  of  God,  which,  according  to 
Aquinas,  “is  nothing  short  of  a  partaking  of  the 
divine  nature.” 

Both  on  the  side  of  man’s  knowledge  of  God 
and  on  the  side  of  his  love  and  worship  of  God, 
religious  education  involves  the  operation  of 
supernatural  factors — revelation,  grace,  sacra¬ 
ments.  Hence  God  is  Himself  the  primary 
source  of  religious  education.  But  as  the  dis¬ 
penser  of  the  sacraments  whereby  “grace  is  in- 
strumentally  caused,”  the  church,  according  to 
Aquinas,  functions  instrumentally  in  the  serv¬ 
ice  of  the  divine  teacher. 

The  conception  of  the  means  and  ends  of 
moral  education  will  differ  with  different  ethi¬ 


cal  theories  of  the  good  man  and  the  good  life, 
and  according  to  differing  enumerations  and 
definitions  of  the  virtues.  It  will  differ  even 
more  fundamentally  according  to  whether  the 
primary  emphasis  is  placed  on  pleasure  and 
happiness  or  duty.  The  parties  to  this  basic 
issue  in  moral  philosophy,  which  is  discussed 
in  the  chapters  on  Duty  and  Happiness,  in¬ 
evitably  propose  different  ways  of  forming 
good  character— by  strengthening  the  will  in 
obedience  to  law,  or  by  habituating  the  ap¬ 
petites  to  be  moderate  or  reasonable  in  their 
inclinations. 

On  either  theory,  the  basic  problem  of  moral 
education  is  whether  morality  can  be  taught 
and  how.  The  Greeks  formulated  this  question 
in  terms  of  virtue,  by  asking  whether  such 
things  as  courage  and  temperance  are  at  all 
teachable,  as  geometry  and  horsemanship 
plainly  are.  The  problem  remains  essentially 
the  same  if  the  question  is  how  the  will  can  be 
trained.  Can  it  be  trained  by  the  same  methods 
as  those  which  work  in  the  improvement  of  the 
understanding? 

The  answer  to  the  question,  whichever  way 
it  is  formulated,  depends  on  the  view  that  is 
taken  of  the  relation  between  moral  knowl¬ 
edge  and  moral  conduct.  Do  those  who  under¬ 
stand  the  principles  of  ethics  or  who  know  the 
moral  law  necessarily  act  in  accordance  with 
their  knowledge  ?  Can  a  man  know  what  is  good 
or  right  to  do  in  a  particular  case,  and  yet  do 
the  opposite?  St.  Paul  seems  to  suggest  this 
when  he  says,  “For  the  good  that  I  would  I  do 
not:  but  the  evil  which  I  would  not,  that  I  do.” 
If  something  more  than  knowledge  or  straight 
thinking  is  needed  for  good  conduct,  how  is  it 
acquired  and  how  can  one  man  help  another  to 
acquire  it  ?  Certainly  not  by  learning  and  teach¬ 
ing  in  the  ordinary  sense  which  applies  to  the 
arts  and  sciences.  Then  how — by  practice,  by 
guidance  or  advice,  by  example,  by  rewards  and 
punishments;  or  if  by  none  of  these,  then  by  a 
gift  of  nature  or  by  the  grace  of  God? 

These  questions  are  necessarily  prior  to  any 
discussion  of  the  role  of  the  family,  the  state, 
and  the  church  in  the  process  of  moral  training. 
They  also  provide  the  general  background  for 
the  consideration  of  particular  influences  on 
character  formation  in  men  and  children,  such 
things  as  poetry  and  music,  or  laws  and  cus- 


381 


Chapter  20:  EDUCATION 


toms.  All  of  these  related  problems  of  moral 
education  have  a  political  aspect,  which  ap¬ 
pears  in  the  issue  concerning  the  state’s  right 
to  censor  or  regulate  the  arts  for  morality’s 

[sake;  in  the  question  of  the  primacy  of  the 
family  or  the  state  in  the  moral  guidance  of  the 
young;  in  the  distinction  between  the  good 
man  and  the  good  citizen  or  ruler,  and  the 
possible  difference  between  the  training  appro¬ 
priate  for  the  one  and  for  the  other. 

The  main  problem  of  intellectual  education 
seems  to  be  the  curriculum  or  course  of  study. 
The  traditional  attempts  to  construct  an  ideal 
curriculum  turn  on  such  questions  as  what 
studies  shall  be  included,  what  shall  be  their 
order,  and  how  shall  they  be  taught  or  learned. 
A  variety  of  answers  results  from  a  variety  of 
views  of  mail’s  faculties  or  capacities,  the  nature 
of  knowledge  itself,  the  classification  and  order 
pf  the  arts  and  sciences.  Especially  important 
are  the  various  conceptions  of  the  nature  and 
function  of  the  liberal  arts.  Subordinate  ques¬ 
tions  concern  the  place  of  the  fine  and  useful 
arts  in  liberal  education,  and  the  role  of  ex¬ 
perience  and  experiment — both  in  contrast  to 
and  in  cooperation  with  the  role  of  books  and 
teachers. 

In  addition  to  the  problem  of  the  curriculum 
and  its  materials,  the  theory  of  intellectual  edu¬ 
cation  necessarily  considers  methods  of  teach¬ 
ing  and  learning.  Here  the  various  proposals 
derive  from  different  views  of  the  learning 
process — of  the  causes  or  factors  at  work  in 
any  acquisition  of  skill  or  knowledge. 

The  contribution  of  the  teacher  cannot  be 
understood  apart  from  a  psychological  analysis 
of  learning,  for  the  teacher  is  obviously  only 
one  among  its  many  causes.  It  makes  the  great¬ 
est  difference  to  the  whole  enterprise  of  learn¬ 
ing  whether  the  teacher  is  regarded  as  the 
principal  cause  of  understanding  on  the  part 
of  the  student;  or  whether  the  teacher  is,  as 
Socrates  describes  himself,  merely  “a  midwife” 
assisting  the  labor  of  the  mind  in  bringing 
knowledge  and  wisdom  to  birth,  and  “thor¬ 
oughly  examining  whether  the  thought  which 
the  mind  .  .  .  brings  forth  is  a  false  idol  or  a 
noble  and  true  birth.” 

This  Socratic  insight  is  later  reformulated  in 
the  comparison  which  Aquinas  makes,  in  his 


tract  Concerning  the  Teacher ,  between  the  art 
of  teaching  and  the  art  of  healing.  Both  are  co¬ 
operative  arts,  arts  which  succeed  only  as  “min¬ 
isters  of  nature  which  is  the  principal  actor,” 
and  not  by  acting,  like  the  art  of  the  cobbler  or 
sculptor,  to  produce  a  result  by  shaping  plastic 
but  dead  materials. 

The  comparison  which  Hippocrates  makes  of 
instruction  in  medicine  with  “the  culture  of 
the  productions  of  the  earth”  exhibits  the  same 
conception  of  teaching.  “Our  natural  disposi¬ 
tion,”  he  writes,  “is,  as  it  were,  the  soil;  the 
tenets  of  our  teacher  are,  as  it  were,  the  seed; 
instruction  in  youth  is  like  the  planting  of  the 
seed  in  the  ground  at  the  proper  season;  the 
place  where  the  instruction  is  communicated 
is  like  the  food  imparted  to  vegetables  by  the 
atmosphere;  diligent  study  is  like  the  cultiva¬ 
tion  of  the  fields;  and  it  is  time  which  imparts 
strength  to  all  things  and  brings  them  to  ma¬ 
turity.” 

This  conception  of  teaching  as  a  cooperative 
art,  analogous  to  medicine  or  to  agriculture, 
underlies  the  principles  of  pedagogy  in  the 
Great  Didactic  of  Comenius.  It  gives  signifi¬ 
cance  to  the  distinction  that  Aquinas  makes  be¬ 
tween  learning  by  discovery,  or  from  experi¬ 
ence,  and  learning  by  instruction,  or  from  a 
teacher— even  as  a  person  is  healed  “in  one  way 
by  the  operation  of  nature  alone,  and  in 
another  by  nature  with  the  administration  of 
medicine.” 

In  addition  to  the  technical  considerations 
raised  by  the  nature  of  the  learning  process, 
the  discussion  of  teaching  deals  with  the  moral 
or  emotional  aspect  of  the  relation  between 
teacher  and  student.  Without  interest,  learn¬ 
ing  seldom  takes  place,  or  il  it  does,  it  cannot 
rise  above  the  level  of  rote  memory.  It  is  one 
thing  to  lay  down  a  course  of  study;  another  to 
motivate  the  student.  Though  he  does  not 
hesitate  to  prescribe  what  is  to  be  learned  by 
the  student,  Plato  adds  the  caution  that  there 
must  be  no  “notion  of  forcing  our  system  of 
education.” 

More  than  interest  is  required.  Teaching, 
Augustine  declares,  is  the  greatest  act  of  char¬ 
ity.  Learning  is  facilitated  by  love.  The  cour¬ 
tesies  between  Dante  and  Virgil  in  the  Divine 
Comedy  present  an  eloquent  picture  of  love 
between  student  and  teacher,  master  and  dis- 


382 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ciple.  Not  only  love,  but  docility,  is  required 
on  the  part  of  the  student;  and  respect  for  the 
student’s  mind  on  the  part  of  the  teacher.  In¬ 
tellectual  education  may  not  be  directly  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  formation  of  character,  yet  the 
moral  virtues  seem  to  be  factors  in  the  pursuit 
of  truth  and  in  the  discipline  of  the  learning 
process. 

We  have  already  noted  some  of  the  political 
problems  of  education.  Of  these  probably  the 
chief  question  is  whether  the  organization  and 
institution  of  education  shall  be  private  or  pub¬ 
lic.  Any  answer  which  assigns  the  control  of 
education  largely  or  wholly  to  the  state  must 
lead  to  a  number  of  other  determinations. 

Who  shall  be  educated,  all  or  only  some? 
Should  the  education  of  leaders  be  different 
from  the  education  of  others?  If  educational 
opportunity  is  to  be  equal  for  all,  must  the 
same  kind  as  well  as  the  same  quantity  of  edu¬ 
cation  be  offered  to  all?  And,  in  every  case,  to 
what  end  shall  the  state  direct  the  education 
of  its  members — to  its  own  welfare  and  secur¬ 
ity,  or  to  the  happiness  of  men  and  the  greater 
glory  of  God  ?  Should  education  always  serve 
the  status  quo  by  preserving  extant  customs 
and  perpetuating  existing  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment;  or  can  and  should  it  aim  at  a  better  so¬ 
ciety  and  a  higher  culture? 

These  are  some  of  the  questions  with  which 
statesmen  and  political  philosophers  have  dealt, 
answering  them  differently  according  to  the 
institutions  of  their  time  and  in  accordance 
with  one  or  another  theory  of  the  state  and  its 
government.  There  are  still  other  questions. 
Is  freedom  of  expression,  in  teaching  and  dis¬ 
cussion,  indispensable  to  the  pursuit  of  truth 
and  the  dissemination  of  knowledge  ?  To  what 
extent  shall  the  state  control  the  content  and 
methods  of  education  or  leave  such  determina¬ 
tion  to  the  teaching  profession  ?  How  shall  pub¬ 
lic  education  be  supported?  Should  it  be  car¬ 
ried  beyond  childhood  and  youth  to  all  the 
ages  of  adult  life;  and  if  so,  how  should  such 
education  be  organized  outside  of  schools? 

Mill,  for  example,  holds  it  to  be  “almost  a 
self-evident  axiom  that  the  State  should  re¬ 
quire  and  compel  the  education,  up  to  a  certain 
standard,  of  every  human  being  who  is  born 


its  citizen.”  Yet  he  deprecates  the  idea  of  a 
“general  state  education”  as  a  “mere  contriv¬ 
ance  for  moulding  people  to  be  exactly  like 
one  another.” 

Discussing  the  pro’s  and  con’s  of  this  issue, 
Mill  touches  upon  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  ques¬ 
tions  just  raised.  He  believes  that  the  difficul¬ 
ties  could  be  avoided  if  the  government  would 
leave  it  “to  parents  to  obtain  the  education 
where  and  how  they  pleased,  and  content  itself 
with  helping  to  pay  the  school  fees  of  the 
poorer  classes  of  children,  and  defraying  the 
entire  school  expenses  of  those  who  have  no 
one  else  to  pay  for  them.”  Schools  completely 
established  and  controlled  by  the  state,  he 
maintains,  “should  only  exist,  if  they  exist  at 
all,  as  one  among  many  competing  experiments, 
carried  on  for  the  purpose  of  example  and 
stimulus,  to  keep  the  others  up  to  a  certain 
standard  of  excellence.” 

So  far  as  the  problem  of  adult  education 
concerns  citizenship,  Mill’s  answer,  like  Mon¬ 
tesquieu’s  and  Plato’s  before  him,  is  that  noth¬ 
ing  can  take  the  place  of  active  participation 
in  political  life.  Men  become  citizens  by  living 
and  acting  as  citizens,  under  the  tutelage  of 
good  laws  and  in  an  atmosphere  of  civic  vir¬ 
tue.  So  far  as  the  problem  of  adult  education 
concerns  the  continued  growth  of  the  mind 
throughout  the  life  of  mature  men  and  women, 
the  answer  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  great  books 
in  the  words  of  their  authors.  Yet  the  great 
books  as  a  whole  may  constitute  a  solution  to 
that  problem. 

The  authors  of  these  books,  from  Homer  to 
Freud,  are  the  great  original  teachers  in  the 
tradition  of  our  culture.  They  taught  one 
another.  They  wrote  for  adults,  not  children, 
and  in  the  main  they  wrote  for  the  mass  of  men, 
not  for  scholars  in  this  or  that  specialized  field 
of  learning. 

The  books  exhibit  these  teachers  at  work  in 
the  process  of  teaching.  They  contain,  more¬ 
over,  expositions  or  exemplifications  of  the  lib¬ 
eral  arts  as  the  arts  of  teaching  and  learning  in 
every  field  of  subject  matter.  To  make  these 
books  and  their  authors  work  for  us  by  working 
with  them  is,  it  seems  to  the  editors  and  pub¬ 
lishers  of  this  set  of  books,  a  feasible  and  de¬ 
sirable  program  of  adult  education. 


Chapter  20:  EDUCATION  383 

OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PACE 

1.  The  ends  of  education  384 

1  a.  The  ideal  of  the  educated  man  385 

ib.  The  disadvantages  of  being  educated 

2.  The  kinds  of  education:  physical,  moral,  liberal,  professional,  religious  386 

3.  The  training  of  the  body  and  the  cultivation  of  bodily  skills:  gymnastics,  manual  work 

4.  The  formation  of  a  good  character,  virtue,  a  right  will 

4#.  The  possibility  and  limits  of  moral  education:  knowledge  and  virtue  387 

4 b.  The  influence  of  the  family  in  moral  training  388 

4 c.  The  role  of  the  state  in  moral  education:  law,  custom,  public  opinion 

4  d.  The  effect  upon  character  of  poetry,  music,  and  other  arts:  the  role  of  history  and 

examples  389 

5.  The  improvement  of  the  mind  by  teaching  and  learning  390 

5#.  The  profession  of  teaching:  the  relation  of  teacher  and  student 
5 b.  The  means  and  methods  of  teaching 

5 c.  The  nature  of  learning:  its  several  modes  391 

5 d.  The  order  of  learning:  the  organization  of  the  curriculum  392 

5^.  The  emotional  aspect  of  learning:  pleasure,  desire,  interest 

5/.  Learning  apart  from  teachers  and  books:  the  role  of  experience  393 

6.  The  acquisition  of  techniques:  preparation  for  the  vocations,  arts,  and  professions  394 

7.  Religious  education 

7 a.  God  as  teacher:  divine  revelation  and  inspiration 

7^.  The  teaching  function  of  the  church,  of  priests  and  prophets  395 

8.  Education  and  the  state  396 

Sa.  The  educational  responsibility  of  the  family  and  the  state 
8 b.  The  economic  support  of  educational  institutions 
Sc.  The  political  regulation  and  censorship  of  education 

Sd.  The  training  of  the  prince,  the  statesman,  the  citizen:  aristocratic  and  demo¬ 
cratic  theories  of  education 


9.  Historical  and  biographical  observations  concerning  the  institutions  and  practices  of 
education 


397 


384 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 


To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  S3  James  ’.Psychology,  116a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  Forexample,in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  cii, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehe?niah ,  7:45— (Z))  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Prelace. 


1.  The  ends  of  education 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ix  [430-441]  61c 

5  Aristophanes  :  Clouds  488a-506d  esp  [866— 
1 1 14]  499a-502b 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  45d-46d  /  Apology ,  201b-c 
/  Republic ,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-339a  passim,  esp  bk 
hi,  333b-c,  338a-339a;  341b-c;  bk  vi-vii, 
383d-398c  /  Timaeus ,  474b-d  /  Laws,  bk  i, 
648b-649d;  bk  ii,  653a-c;  656b-c;  bk  vii  713c- 
731d  passim;  bk  xii,  796b-799a,c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  2  143d-144a  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  499a-501c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[639ai— 15]  161a-b  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  2  339b-d; 
ch  13  [1102^-25]  347b-c  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  cii  5 
[i263b36-i264ai]  459a;  bk  vii,  ch  13-BK  vm, 
ch  7  536b-548a,c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1— 61] 
15a-d;  bk  iii  [1053-1075]  43c-d;  bk  v  [1—54] 
61a-d;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  22  127c-128c; 
bk  iii,  ch  15  190a-191a;  ch  21  193d-195a; 
ch  24  203c-21Ga  esp  208d-210a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  3  263b- 
264a;  sect  16  264d;  bk  x,  sect  11-12  298b-d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  viii  [508-519]  272b-273a 


14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa ,  63d-64a/  Corio - 
lanus,  174b, d-1 75a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii  10a-12b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  14  4c-d; 
par  16  5a-b;  par  19  5d;  par  24  7a 

19  Aquinas:  Sutnma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  i 
3b-4a;  q  94,  a  3,  ans  504a-505a 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  ii,  153a-156b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pant  a gruel,  bk  ii, 
81a-83b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  55d-62a  esp  60c-61c; 
64c-66b;  69d-72a 

26  Shakespeare:  Taming  of  the  Shrew,  act  i, 
sc  1  [1-40]  202c-203a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  145d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  la-28d  esp 
9c-d,  16d-17a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  1  la-2a;  iii,  3c-d  /  Dis¬ 
course,  part  1,  42d-43a;  44a- b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  iv  447b- 
c;  ix  448a 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  385b:  390b-391a; 

394b-395b;  397a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxiii,  sect  8  249c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  165a-167a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  417b-419b 


1  a  to  lb 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  hk  iv,  13b,  d- 
16a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  346d-347a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  340b  343d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  223a~d  /  Punt i.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  266a- b 

43  Mill:  Uberty ,  303b  d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  344b-c;  424b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  20  17a; 
part  111,  par  187  65a-c;  additions,  97  132c- 
133a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  238b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  1,  47b-c:  bk  yt, 
244d-245d 

53  James:  Psychology,  274b  275a;  711b-7l2b 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  868d  871a 
esp  870a-871a 

la.  The  ideal  of  the  educated  man 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  16c-18b  /  Laches ,  37c-d  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  11,  319c-320c;  bk  iii,  338a-339a; 
bk  vii  388a-401d  esp  390b-391b  /  Timaeus , 
454a  /  Laws,  bk  1,  649b-d;  bk  11,  653a-654a; 
bk  yt,  704a-b;  bk  xii,  796b-799a,c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  i,  eti  3  144a-b  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  1,  ch  1-2  499a-501c  esp  ch  2 
[982^-20]  500b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[639^1-15]  161a-b  /  Politics ,  bk  mi,  ch  13-BK 
viii,  ch  7  536b-548a,c  passim  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i, 
ch  8  [i365b32~39]  608a-b;  bk  ii,  cii  6 
[I3^4ti33~35]  630d;  ch  8  [i385b24 -28]  632c; 
ch  23  [1399*12-17]  647c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  27  132b-133b; 
bk  iii,  ch  10  185d-187a;  ch  15  190a-191a; 
ch  21  193d-195a;  bk  iv,  ch  6  230b-232c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i  253a-256d;  bk 
ii,  sect  17  259b-d;  bk  iv,  sect  3  263b-264a; 
sect  16  264d;  bk  x,  sect  11-12  298b-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
81a-83b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  59b-61c;  63d-80b  esp 
70d-72b,  74b-75a 

26  Shakespeare:  Taming  of  the  Shrew,  act  i, 
sc  1  [1-40]  202c-203a  /  Love's  Labour's  Lost , 
act  iv,  sc  11  [22-34]  266c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  la-28d  esp 
17b-27c;  86b-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  iii,  3c-d 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  397a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  34-37  177a-b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div  1-4 
451a-452c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  99d-100a:  274b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  346d-347b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  340b-343d 
esp  343c-d 

40  Giebon:  Decline  and  Fall,  88c-d;  644b-645d 
esp  644d-645a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  223a-d  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261d  /  Practical 
Reason,  337a-338c  /  Judgement,  508c-509a 


385 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  294b  296d  /  Utilitarianism , 
451c  452b 

44  P»os\v ei.l:  Johnson,  130b;  283c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  15 
118d;  68  126d  127a;  98  133a;  119  136b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1765  -1775]  42b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  !76d  178a;  238b  c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  epilogue, 
411b-412d 

53  James:  Psychology,  736b-737a 

lb.  The  disadvantages  of  being  educated 

5  Euripides:  Medea  [276-305]  214c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370a-c 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  47a-b  /  Gorgias,  272b 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  cii  21  [i394a29— 34] 
642a;  [i394b25-32l  642c:  cii  22  [  1 395b27-32] 
643d;  cii  23  [i399“i2-i7]  647c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  cii  21  193d- 
195a;  ch  24,  205c-206a;  207d  208a;  bk  iv, 
ch  1,  221b-c;  ch  8  235b-237d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  3 
257a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  1,  par  25-26  7a-c; 
bk  iv,  par  28-31  26a-27a 

22  Chaucer:  Miller's  Tale  [3448-3464]  217a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56d;  part  ii, 
150c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
77b-78b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  55d-62a;  75a-77d;  150d- 
151a;  232d-240a;  321a-c;  397a-398c;  448b- 
449a;  502c-504c;  508a-512a;  520b-d 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  ii 
[92-117]  58d-59a  /  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  act  i, 
sc  1  [55-94]  254d-255b;  [1 43-1 47]  255d;  act  v, 
sc  11  [69-72]  274d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  la  28d  esp 
2c-17b;  30b-c;  73d-74c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  11,  2a-b  /  Discourse,  part 
1,  42b-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  20  llOc-llla;  bk  ii,  ch  xxxiii,  sect  4 
248c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  58a-b:  part  iii, 
94b-95a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  99d-100a;  158a-161d 
esp  158c-159a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  344d-345c;  346d-348a; 
362a-d;  363a-366d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  337a-d; 
340b-c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  304d-305a;  358a  / 
Judgement,  608b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  201b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [354-417]  lla-12b; 
[614-807]  17a-21a;  [1583-1606] 38b-39a;  [1803- 
1815]  43a;  part  ii  [4917-4922]  122a;  [6228- 
6238] 152a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  19c-20b;  bk  v, 
215b-c 


Chapter  20:  EDUCATION 


386 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


2.  The  kinds  of  education:  physical,  moral, 

liberal,  professional,  religious 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  46b-d  /  Republic ,  bk  ii-iii, 
320c-339a  esp  bk  iii,  333b-339a;  bk  vi,  380d- 
381a;  bk  vii,  391b-401a  /  Sophist ,  555b-c  / 
Laws,  bk  i,  649b-d;  bk  ii,  653a-663b  esp 
662d-663b;  bk  vii,  717b-d;  728b-730d;  bk 
xii,  797b-798b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  15  [i334b7— 28] 
539b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  2-3  542b-543d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  15  190a- 
191a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  ix  [590-620]  295a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii  10a-12b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  7-9  14c- 
15b;  bk  iv,  par  28-31  26a-27a  /  Christian  Doc - 
/rk,  bk  11,  ch  8-42  639d-656d;  bk  iv  675a- 
698a, c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  4,  ans  318b-321a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  57b-61c  esp  60b-61c; 
63  d- 75a  passim 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  30b-c;  53d- 
54b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  42d-43a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  34-37  177a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  166b-167a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  15c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  197 
67a-b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  23 7 d- 238c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  47b-c;  bk  vi, 
244d-245d 

3.  The  training  of  the  body  and  the  cultivation 

of  bodily  skills:  gymnastics,  manual 
work 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [866-1114]  499a-502b 
esp  [1002-1024]  500d-501a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  46c  /  Gorgias,  261a-262a; 
289d-290a  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  310c-d;  320c- 
321a;  bk  iii,  334b-335b;  bk  vi,  380d-381a; 
bk  vii,  391c-d;  398c-399d  /  Timaeus ,  475b-d  / 
Statesman,  599d-600a  /  Laws,  bk  i,  644b-646a; 
bk  ii,  653b-654a;  663a-b;  bk  vii,  717b-d; 
721d-722c;  726a-727c;  bk  viii,  734a-735a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246aio-bi9] 
329c-330a  /  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [292ai4~bi8] 
383d-384b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [iio6a35~b8] 
352a/ Politics,  bkiv,  ch  i  [i288bio-2o]  487a-b; 
bk  vii,  ch  15  [i334b7-28]  539b-d;  ch  17 
[I33^a4— 39]  541a-c;  bk  viii,  ch  3-4  542d-544c 

10  Hippocrates:  Articulations,  par  52  109b-110a; 
par  55,  111c;  par  58  112b-113a  /  Aphorisms, 
sect  1,  par  3  131a-b;  sect  ii,  par  49-50  133d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  15,  190a-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ix  [590-620]  295a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  40c-42a  /  Coriolanus, 
175b  /  Philopoemen,  293d-294a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  8,  86d-87b 


2  to  4 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  1,  ans  6a-7b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
28a-29b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  43d;  66c-67a;  73b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  53d-54a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  166b-167a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  335a-b;  348d-349a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  42d-43c;  53a; 
bk  v,  337d-338a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  5a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  52, 
25c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  267b-268b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  269b-271a;  278c-d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  164b-166a;  170c-171b;  237d- 
240c 

53  James:  Psychology,  74a-75a;  332a;  774a 

4.  The  formation  of  a  good  character,  virtue, 
a  right  will 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [857-917]  266a-b  / 
Hecuba  [592-602]  357d-358a 
5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [866-1114]  499a-502b 
7  Plato:  Laches,  30a-b  /  Protagoras,  45d-46d  / 
Euthydemus,  66b-67b  /  Phaedrus,  128a-d  / 
Meno  174a-190a,c  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  314b-c; 
bk  ii-iii,  320c-339a  /  Timaeus,  474c-d  /  Laws 
640a-799a,c  esp  bk  i,  644b-645c,  649b-650b, 
651a-c,  bk  11,  653a-b,  656b-c,  bk  vi,  706c, 
bk  vii  713c-731d  /  Seventh  Letter ,  801b-c 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  13  [no2b28- 
1 103a3]  348c;  bk  ii,  ch  3  [no4b4~i4]  350a;  bk 
iii,  ch  12  [ui9a35-bi9]  366a, c  /  Politics,  bk  ii, 
ch  7  461d-463c;  bk  vii,  ch  13-BK  viii,  ch  7 
536b-548a,c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [1-30] 
30a-b;  bk  v  [1-54]  61a-d;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses  105a-245a,c  esp  bk  i, 
ch  1-5  105a-110c,  ch  18  124a-125a,  bk  i,  ch 
24-BK  11,  ch  2  129a-141c,  bk  11,  ch  21-24 
166c-174b,  bk  iii,  ch  3  178d-180a,  ch  8-1  i 
184b-187b,  ch  13  188b-189c,  ch  23-26  201a- 
213a, c,  bk  iv,  CH3-7  224b-235a,cH  9-13  237d- 
245a, c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations  253a-310d  esp  bk  i, 
sect  7-9  253b-254a,  sect  i  i  254b,  sect  14-16 
254b-255d,  bk  ii,  sect  17  259b-d,  bk  iv, 
sect  18  264d,  bk  v,  sect  14  271b,  sect  16 
271c-d,  BK  VI,  SECT  12  274c,  BK  VII,  SECT  69 
284d,  bk  viii,  sect  i  285a-b,  sect  13  286c, 
bk  ix,  sect  41  295c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ix  [590-620]  295a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa,  63d-64a  /  Peri¬ 
cles,  121a-122b  /  Coriolanus,  174b,d-175a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiii,  125d-126a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  2  lOd;  ch 
6  lld-12b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  13-31  4b-9a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  96, 

a  2,  ans  231c-232b;  q  99,  a  6,  ans  250a-251a; 
q  100,  a  9  261b-262b;  Q  105,  a  4,  ans  318b- 
321a;  q  108,  a  3  334a-336b 


4  a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Wife  of  Bath  [6691-6788] 
274b  276a  /  Clerks  Tale  [8031-80:57]  298a; 
[8269-8317]  302b  303a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
81a  83b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  16c;  43a-c;  55d-62a  esp 
60c  61c;  63d-75a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  76a-81c  esp 
78d  80b 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  394b-395b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  71  197b  l98a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  35a-49a,c;  380c-381a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv  13b, d- 
18d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  221 b-c  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261d;  263a- b; 
264b  [fn  1];  273d-275d;  278a-b  /  Practical 
Reason ,  305d-307d;  356a-360d  /  Pref.  Meta¬ 
physical  Elements  of  Ethics,  365b-d;  368d; 
376d-377b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  303b  d  /  Utilitarianism,  451c- 
452b:  453a-c;  457c-461c  passim,  esp  460d- 
461a;  463d-464d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  187 
65a-c;  additions,  15  118d;  97-98  132c-133a  / 
Philosophy  of  History ,  part  hi,  312d-313a; 
part  iv,  346a-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  304a-319a  esp 
304a-305a,  310c-317d,  318d-319a;  592d-593b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  47b-48d;  bk 
vi,  244d-245d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  epilogue, 

411b-412c 

53  James  :  Psychology,  78b-83b  esp  81b-83a;  199b- 
204b  esp  202a-203b;  661b;  711b-712a;  751b- 
752a:  827a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  573c  /  Ego  and 
Id,  706b-708c  esp  707a-d  /  War  and  Death , 
757d-759d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 
792a-796c  esp  794c-795a  /  New  Introductory 
Lectures,  844b-c 

4a,  The  possibility  and  limits  of  moral  educa¬ 
tion:  knowledge  and  virtue 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  1:20-2:22;  4:1-12; 
8;  14:16;  15:21 

5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  [373-430]  228b-d  / 
Suppliants  [857-917]  266a-b  /  Iphigenia  at 
Aulis  [543-572]  429d-430a 
5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d 
7  Plato:  Charmides ,  7b-c  /  Laches  26a-37d  / 
Protagoras  38a-64d  esp  42d-47c,  56b,  57 d, 
62a-b  /  Euthydemus,  66b-67b  /  Symposium , 
166c-167d  /  Meno  174a-190a,c  esp  174a-c, 
177d-178b,  183b-190a,c  /  Apology,  203c-204b 
/  Gorgias,  258d-259b;  262d-263c;  277d;  287c- 
291b  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  319d-320c;  bk  vii 
388a-401d  esp  389d-391b,  397a-401d:  bk  x, 
439b-441a,c  /  Timaeus,  474c-475c  /  Sophist , 
556c-558d  /  Statesman ,  607b-608d  /  Laws , 


387 

bk  i,  649b  d  /  Seventh  letter,  801b  802 d; 
806b  c;  809c  810d  esp  810c  d 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  cn  10  [1  ^“i 6-3 1  ]  18d  / 
Prior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  25  [69a2o-28]  91a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [io94b27- 1095* 
1 1  ]  340a;  cn  9  345a  c;  bk  ii,  ch  1-4  348b, d- 
351b;  bk  vi,  cn  1  2  387a-388b;  cn  12-13 
393b-394d;  bk  vii,  ch  2  3  395c-398a;  bk  x, 
ch  9  [ii79a33-b3o]  434a  c  /  Politics,  bk  v, 
ch  12  [i3i6ai-io]  518d-519a;  bk  vii,  ch  13 
[i  332a39-bi  1]  537a- b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [307-322] 

34ab 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  5  llOb-c;  ch 
17  122d-124a;  cn  28  133b  l34d;  bk  ii,  cii  22 
167d-170a;  ch  26  174c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  3  178d- 
180a;  ch  6  181d  l82b;  ch  8  184b  c;  ch  15 
190a-191a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a-223d  esp  216c- 
218c;  ch  4  225a-228a;  ch  9  237d-238d;  ch  12 
242d-244a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
bk  v,  sect  16  271c-d;  bk  vii,  sect  22  281b; 
sect  26  281c;  bk  ix,  sect  42  295c-296a,c; 
BK  XII,  SECT  12  308b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Dion ,  782c-788b 

17  Plotunus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii  10a-12b  esp 
ch  6  lld-12b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  3-6  72a- 
73a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  94, 
a  3,  rep  3  504a-505a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  65, 
aa  1-2  70b-72d;  q  95,  a  i,  ans  226c-227c; 
a  3,  ans  228c-229b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  43a-c;  65d-66a;  69d- 
72b;  232d-240a;  321a-c;  502c-504c;  509a-512a 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  i,  sc 
ii  [19-22]  408b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  ii, 
sc  11  [163-173]  115b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  26c-27a; 
69d-70a;  76d-78d 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  390b-391a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  88  189b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  8  105d-106a;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  71 
197b-198a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  i 
451a-b;  div  3  451d;  sect  viii,  div  66,  480b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  122d-123a;  313a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  344d-345c  /  Political 
Economy,  375d-377b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  34d;  435b-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
258b-c;  260d-261d;  265b;  282b-283d  /  Prac¬ 
tical  Reason,  357c-360d  /  Pref  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics,  365b-d;  368d  /  Judgement, 
513d-514b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  303 b-d;  306c-307a  /  Utilitar¬ 
ianism,  464b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  ii,  par  132 
46b-47a;  additions,  iii  134d-135a;  119  136b 


Chapter  20;  EDUCATION 


388 


4  b  to  4  c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  formation  of  a  good  character,  virtue,  a 
right  will.  4a.  The  possibility  and  limits  of 
moral  education :  knowledge  and  virtue .) 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  313d-314b;  317c- 
319a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bkvi,  244d-245d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  epilogue, 

411b-412d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  806a-808a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  573c  d;  592b-c; 
596b-c;  624d-625b  /  Civilization  and  Its 
Discontents ,  781a-d;  784a-789b;  796d  [fn  2] ; 
800c-801a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  870a  c 

4b.  The  influence  of  the  family  in  moral  training 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  20:12  /  Deuteronomy , 
5:16;  6:6-7;  11 ‘18-19;  27:i6  /  Proverbs ,  1:8-9; 
3:12;  6:20-24;  13:1,24;  15:5;  19:18;  22:6,15; 
23:13-2 6;  29:15,17 

Apocrypha:  Tobit ,  4— (D)  OT,  Tobias ,  4  / 
Ecclesiasticus ,  7:23-24;  30:1-13 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus ,  7:25-26;  30:1-13 
New  Testament:  Ephesians ,  6:1-4  /  Colossians , 
3:20-21 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  45d-47a  /  Meno ,  186a- 
187b  /  Republic ,  bk  v,  366a-c  /  bk  v, 

687d-688a;  bk  vii,  713c-716d 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  cii  9  [n8oa25-bi4] 
435a-c  /  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  ii  [1295b  14-18] 
495d;  bk  vii,  ch  17  [i336a23-b3]  541b-c 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i  253a-256d  esp 
sect  1-4  253a,  sect  14  254b-c,  sect  16  254d- 
255d 

14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato ,  286c-287b 
18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  14-15  4c- 
5a;  bk  ii,  par  2-8  9b-10d  esp  par  7  lOb-c; 
bk  iii,  par  19-20  18b-19a;  bk  ix,  par  19-22 
67a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  1,  ans  226c-227c;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  318b-321a 
22  Chaucer:  Physician's  Tale  [12,006-037]  367b- 
368a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
83a- b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  16c;  43a-c;  63d-64b; 
66c-67a;  184a-187d;  344a-c;  414a-d;  534c-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  251b 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  55,  schol, 
413d;  the  affects,  def  27  419a-b;  part  iv, 
appendix,  xx  449a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vi,  sect  55-69 
36c-40b;  ch  xv,  sect  170  64d-65a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  29b-30a;  part  iv, 
166b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  250b-251a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  108c-110c;  136a-c; 
217d-219c;  283c-d;  310b-313b;  359b-362c 

38  Montesquieu:  5/urtf  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  15c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  326c-327a;  327c-328a  / 
Political  Economy,  376b-377a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  337c-d 


42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  420b-421c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  372c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  173- 
175  61a-d;  par  239  76d;  additions,  iii  134d- 
135a;  147  140c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xii, 
395b-d 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  17d-18a  /  Sexual  Enlightenment  of 
Children  119a-122a,c  passim  /  Narcissism ,  408b 
/  £go  Id,  704 d  70 7 d  /  Civilization  and  Its 
Discontents,  794c- 795a  esp  795b  [fa  2]  /  AV/o 
Introductory  Lectures,  334b-c;  844b-c;  876b-c 

4c.  The  role  of  the  state  in  moral  education: 
law,  custom,  public  opinion 

5  Aristophanes  :  Clouds  488a -506d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  35c-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370a-c; 
bk  ii,  396d-397a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  45b-47c  /  Apology,  203c- 
204b  /  Gorgias ,  287c-291b  /  Republic,  bk  ii- 
iii,  320c-339a;  bk  vi,  377a-379c  /  Timaeus, 
474c-d  /  Statesman,  607a-608a  /  Ltfzp*  640a- 
799a, c  esp  bk  i,  643a-644a,  645c-646d,  bk  iii, 
676b-c,  bk  iv,  683d-685a,  bk  v-vi,  696c-697d, 
bk  vi,  704a-c,  710d-711c,  bk  vii  713c-731d, 
bk  viii,  735c-738c,  bk  ix,  757a,  bk  xii,  792c-d 
/  Seventh  Letter,  800 b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  9  [i099b29-32] 
345b;  ch  13  [no2a8-25]  347c;  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[no3b3-7]  349a;  bk  v,  ch  i  [112^12-2 377a; 
ch  2  [1130^0-30]  378b;  bk  x,  ch  9  [1  i79b3 1— 
n8ob28]  434c-435c  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  5 
[i263b36-i264ai]  459a;  ch  7  461d-463c;  bk 
vii,  ch  13-17  536b-542a,c;  bk  viii,  ch  1 
542a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  18  264d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [845-853]  233b-234a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  /  Lycurgus- 
Numa,  63d-64a  /  Solon  64b,d-77a,c  passim  / 
Marcus  Cato,  284b-286b  /  Lysander,  361b-d  / 
Agesilaus,  480b,d-481a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  14-16  4c- 
5b;  par  19-30  5d-8d;  bk  vi,  par  2  35a-c;  par 
n-13  38b-39c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch 
12-13  662c-663c;  ch  18-22  664d-666c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  92, 
a  1  213c-214c;  a  2,  rep  4  214d-215a,c;  q  95, 
a  1  226c-227c;  a  3  228c-229b;  q  96,  aa  2-3 
231c-233a;  q  98,  a  6,  ans  244c-245b;  q  ioo, 
a  9  261b-262b;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  318b-321a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi  [52— 
105]  77b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  149b-c;  154a- 
156b;  part  iv,  272c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  42b-43c;  46b-48b;  60c- 
61d;  63d- 64b;  13l'b-132a 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure,  act  ii, 
sc  1  [225-270]  181a-c;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [91-128] 
190c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  78d  80a 


0 


389 


4 d  Chapter  20: 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  the  affects,  def 
27  419a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [285-306]  325b- 
326a  /  Areopagitica ,  383a-395b  csp  394b  395a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  6  173a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  I5c-d  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  1,  ch  11,  sect  8  105d-106a;  sect 
20  llOc-llla:  bk  11,  ch  xxi,  sect  71,  197d; 
cn  xxvm,  sect  10-12  230b-231c  esp  sect  12 
231b  c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
66,  480b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  29b-31a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  v,  18b, d- 
25c;  bk  vi,  37d-43d;  bk  xii,  85c-86d;  87c- 
88a:  bk  xiv,  104a-108d;  bk  xvi,  118a-119d; 
bk  xix.  138c-142a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  359d  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  375d-377b  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv, 
434b-435a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  v,  340c-343d; 
346c-347d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  23c-d;  92c-94b 
passim;  lOOc-lOlb;  291d-292d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  93c-94a;  161c-162a; 
389c-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
263a- b  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 
368d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  383a-b; 
387b;  387d-388a 

43  Federalist:  number  12,  58b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  269c-270c;  294c-296b;  303b- 
306c  /  Representative  Government,  336c-340c 
passim,  csp  337a-b;  342b-344d  passim;  346c- 
350a;  381b-382b  /  Utilitarianism,  456a-d; 
457c-458b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  150- 
153  56c-57c;  par  239  76d;  par  270,  84d-85a; 
89a-b;  par  315  104c;  additions,  96-98  132c- 
133a;  131  137d;  162,  143b-144a;  183  148d- 
149a  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  365c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310c-317d  esp 
317a-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  244d-245d; 
bk  viii,  303a-305b  esp  303d-304b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  xii, 
398a-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  190a-191a 

54  Freud:  Sexual  Enlightenment  of  Children, 
122a,c  /  Narcissism ,  408b  /  War  and  Death , 
757b-759d  passim,  esp  757c  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents,  781a-c;  784a-d;  800 b-d  /  New 
Introductory  Lectures ,  834c 

Ad,  The  effect  upon  character  of  poetry,  music, 
and  other  arts:  the  role  of  history  and 
examples 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ix  [430-605]  61c-63b 

5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  [626-658]  462b-d 
/  Wasps  [1009-1070]  519d-520c  /  Frogs  [1008- 
1098]  576b-577c;  [1482-1533]  581d-582a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  35c-d 


ATION 

Plato:  Protagoras ,  46b  c  /  Phaedrus ,  136b  c  / 
Republic,  bk  11  iii,  320c  339a;  bk  iv,  344b  d; 
bk  vii  388a  401d  esp  391b  398c;  bk  x,  427c- 
434c  /  Timaeus,  455c  /  Laws,  bk  ii  653a  663d; 
bk  iii,  675c-676b;  bk  v,  696b  d;  bk  vii,  717b- 
721a:  724b-725d;  726d  728b 
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vii,  cii  17  [i^36a^o- 
b24]  541b-d;  bk  viii,  cii  3  542d-543d;  ch  5  7 
544c-548a,c 

Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i  253a-256d  csp 
sect  15-16  254c-255d 

\tirgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [441-493]  115a-116b:  bk 
vi  [845-853]  233b-234a;  bk  viii  [608-731] 
275a-278b 

Plut\rcii:  Lycurgus,  33d-34a;  43b-d  /  Solon , 
76a  /  Pericles,  121a-122b  /  Timoleon,  195a-b  / 
Demetrius,  726a-d 

Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiv,  146b-147a:  bk  xv, 
173a-b;  bk  xvi,  183c;  184a, c 
Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2  lOa-d 
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  20-27  ^a' 
7d;  bk  iii,  par  2-5  13c-14b;  bk  vi,  par  11-13 
38b-39c;  bk  x,  par  1-6  71c-73a;  par  49—53 
83c-85a;  bk  xi,  par  1  89b-c  /  City  of  God,  bk 
1,  ch  31—33  147d-149a;  bk  ii,  ch  8-14  153d- 
157c;  bk  iv,  ch  26-27  202a-203c  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  6  638a-d 
Aquinas:  Sutnma  Theologica,  part  1,  q  i, 
a  2,  rep  2  4a-c 

Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxii 
[55—93]  87a-c;  paradise,  i  [1-36]  106a-b; 
xvn  [100-142]  133a-c 

Chaucer:  Intro,  to  Man  of  Law's  Prologue 
[4465-4510]  234b-235b  /  Nun's  Priest's  Tale 
[15,444-452]  460a-b  /  L'Envoi  550a-b 
Montaigne:  Essays,  68b-69a;  197a-199c 
Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  v,  sc 
1  [66-88]  431  b-c 

Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  12b-16c; 
186d-187c;  part  iu  427c-429a 
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  4c-6c;  38c- 
39d  esp  38d-39a;  78a-d;  79c-80a;  85a-c 
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43a-b 
Spinoza:  Ethics ,  Px\rt  iii,  prop  55  413b- 
414a 

Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ix  [1-47]  247a-248a 

/  Areopagitica ,  385a-386b 

Pascal:  Pensees ,  11  173b-174a 

Hume:  Human  Utider standing,  sect  i,  div  i 

451a-b 

Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  250b-251a 
Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  254a-d 
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  17b- 
18d 

Rousseau:  Inequality,  365b-366b  /  Political 
Economy,  376c-377a 

Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  337d-338c; 
347d 

Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  94a-b;  284a-c; 
338d-339a;  449a-b 

Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  40d-41a;  225a-c; 
311a-312a 


EDUC 

7 

9 

! 

12 

13 

14 

15 

17 

18 

19 

21 

22 

25 

26 

29 

30 

31 

31 

32 

33 

35 

36 

37 

38 

38 

39 

40 

41 


390 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  formation  of  a  good  character,  virtue,  a 
right  will.  Ad.  The  effect  upon  character 
of  poetry,  music,  and  other  arts:  the  role  of 
history  and  examples .) 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
263a-b;  264b  [fn  i] ;  266d  [fn  2]  /  Practical 
Reason ,  325d-327d  esp  327b-d;  356a-360d  / 
Judgement ,  504a-b;  513d-514b;  521b-523c; 
586d-587a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  308b-d;  347c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  267a- 
268b;  276a-b;  part  iv,  347b-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  826b-827a 

5.  The  improvement  of  the  mind  by  teaching 
and  learning 

5 a.  The  profession  of  teaching:  the  relation  of 
teacher  and  student 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ix  [430-605]  61c-63b 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d 

7  Plato:  Laches ,  29d-31b  /  Protagoras ,  38a-47c 

esp  39d-41a,  42a-c  /  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  / 
Symposium ,  169c-170a  /  Meno  174a-190a,c  esp 
179b-183a  /  Apology ,  203a-204c;  206b-208c  / 
Cn/o,  215a-c  /  Gorgias ,  252a-259c;  290b-291b 
/  Theaetetus ,  515d-517b;  544a-c  /  Sophist , 
556b-559a  /  bk  vii,  723c-d  /  Seventh 

Letter ,  801c-802d;  808b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations ,  ch  i  [165s 
19-24]  227c;  ch  2  [i65a38-b3]  227d-228a;  ch 
ii  [i7ibi8~35]  236b-d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[98  ib7— 9]  499d;  ch  2  [982ai3~ 14]  500b;  [982s 
28-30]  500c;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [ioo4bi8-27]  523d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ix,  ch  i  [n64a22-b6] 
417a-b;  bk  x,  ch  9  [u8ob28-n8ibi9]  435d- 
436a, c 

10  Hippocrates:  The  Oath ,  xiiia 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [1-30] 
30a-b;  bk  v  [1-54]  61a-d;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  17  158d-161a 
esp  160b-161a;  ch  24  172d-174b;  bk  hi,  ch  2 
177c-178d;  ch  9,  185b-d;  ch  21-23  193d- 
203b;  bk  iv,  ch  8  235b-237d 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  122d-123d  /  Alcibiades , 
155b,d-158b  /  Alexander,  542d-544a  /  Gz/o 
the  Younger,  623a-b  /  Dion,  782c-788b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiii,  125d-126a;  bk  xiv, 
153d-155a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  22  6b-c; 
bk  iv,  par  2  19d;  bk  v,  par  22  33b-c;  bk  vi, 
par  1 1  38b-c  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  iv,  ch  4 
676d-677a;  ch  27  696a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, prologue  la-b; 
part  1,  q  76,  a  2,  rep  5  388c-391a;  q  106 
545c-549a;  q  107,  a  3,  ans  and  rbp  i  551a-c; 
q  hi,  a  1  568c-569b;  q  117,  aa  1-2  595d- 
598c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii— ii,  q  i, 
a  7,  rep  2  385c-387a;  q  2,  a  3,  ans  392d-393c; 
q  181,  a  3  618c-619b;  q  188,  a  6,  ans  681b- 


5  to  5b 

682c;  part  hi  suppl,  q  96,  a  7  1061b-1062a; 
a  11,  ans  and  rep  1,5  1063d-1064d;  a  12 
1064d-1065b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell  la-52d  passim, 
esp  1-11  la-4a,  vii  [64E1X  [105]  10b-13b,  xv 
21a-22c,  xxiv  [1-78]  34d-35b;  purgatory 
53a-105d  passim,  esp  v  [1-21]  59a,  xviii  [1-96] 
79d-80d,  xxvii  94c-96a,  xxx  [22-81]  99c- 
100b;  paradise,  iv  [115-142]  llld-112a 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
lb,d;  18b-25a  passim;  bk  ii,  101b-106a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  57b-60c;  64c-79c  passim, 
esp  70c-72a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  7d-lla; 
14c-15a;  16c;  29c-32c;  68b-69b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  42b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  ix  448a 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  398a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  423b-424b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  41a-43b;  45d-46a;  94d- 
95a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  326c-d  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  376d-377a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  57b-58b;  bk 
v,  331b,d-334c;  338c-340b;  354d-355d  esp 
355c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  669a-671b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  420b-d; 
424b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  23b-c;  191b-c;  199d-200b; 
300a-c 

47  Goethe  :  Faust,  part  ii  [6689-6818]  164a-166b 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  47b-48d;  bk 
viii,  306b 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  870b-c 


5  c 


5 h.  The  means  and  methods  of  teaching 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  50c-52d  /  Cratylus ,  85d- 
88a  esp  87c-d;  112d-113d  /  Phaedrus,  131b- 
141a, c  esp  139b-140b  /  Meno,  179b-183a  / 
Apology ,  206b-d  /  Republic,  bk  vii,  388a-398c 
esp  389d-390b;  399c  /  Theaetetus,  515d-517b; 
549c-550a,c  /  Sophist,  551d;  556b-559a  / 
Statesman,  590d-591c  /  Philebus,  610d-613a  / 
Laws,  bk  11,  656b-c;  bk  iv,  684c-685a  / 
Seventh  Letter ,  809a-811a  esp  809a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[7iai-io]  97a  /  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  2 
[i65a38-b3]  227d-228a;  ch  10  [i7ia27-b2] 
235d-236a;  ch  ii  [i72ai5~2i]  237a  /  Heavens, 
bk  1,  ch  10  [279b32-28oan]  371  b-c  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  ii,  ch  3  513c-d  /  Sense  and  the 
Sensible,  ch  i  [436^8-437^7]  673d-674a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[639ai— bi2]  161a-d  /  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  3  [ii39b 
18-34]  388b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [921-950] 
12b-c;  bk  iv  [1-25]  44a-b 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  24,  172d- 
173c;  bk  hi,  ch  9,  185b:  ch  23,  203a-b 


5c  Chapter  20: 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  1-3  10a- 
11a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  13  4b-c; 
par  19-20  5d~6a;  par  23  6d-7a  /  Christian 
Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  638a-d;  cn  36-37  653d- 
654b;  bk  iv  675a-698a,c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  prologue  la  b; 
part  1,  q  1,  a  5,  rep  2  5c-6a;  a  9  8d-9c;  q  79, 
a  10,  rep  3  423d-424d;  q  84,  a  3,  rep  3 
443d-444d;  q  106,  a  i,  ans  545d-546d;  q  iii, 
a  1,  ans  568c-569b;  q  117,  a  1  595d-597c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q  i, 
a  7,  rep  2  385c-387a;  q  181,  a  3,  ans  and  rep 
2  618c-619b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  55a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
18b-19a;  26d-30c  passim 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  57b-61c  passim;  63d-80b 
passim,  esp  73b-74a;  446d-450a;  453c-454d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Hearty  268c  /  On 
Animal  Generation ,  336d-337a,c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  16c;  31a-d; 
39b-d;  61d-62c;  64b-c;  65a-c;  68b-69c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  i,  42b;  42d-43a 

32  Milton:  Areopagiticay  384a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  9-10  173b;  40  177b-178a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  3c-4a;  7a-b;  15c  /  Human 
Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  x,  sect  34  299d- 
300a;  bk  iv,  ch  vii,  sect  ii,  340d-341a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  109b-110b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  417b-418a;  421b- 
422b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  42a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  339d-340a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  337c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  2d-4a,c  /  Practical  Reason , 
335b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  283c-288c  esp  284b-d  /  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government,  331a;  424b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  7d-8a;  144c;  191b-c;  199d- 
200b;  448a- b;  471d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  175, 
61c-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [522-601]  15a-16b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  48b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  290a-291a;  692a-b;  711b- 
712b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  449a-451b  passim 

5c.  The  nature  of  learning:  its  several  modes 

7  Plato:  Laches,  29d-30b  /  Euthydemus,  67b- 
68d  /  Cratylus,  llld-112d  /  Phaedrus,  124a- 
126c  esp  126a-c;  139b-140b/  Meno,  179b-183a; 
188d-189a  /  Phaedo ,  228a-230c  /  Republic ,  bk 
vi -vii,  383d-401d  /  Theaetetus ,  541d-543a  / 
Philebus,  610d-613a 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  21  [67s 
21-25]  88c  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  i 
97a-d;  bk  ii,  ch  19  136a-137a,c  /  Sophistical 
Refutations,  ch  2  [165^8— b3]  227d-228a  / 
Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [247bi-248a6]  330b-d; 
bk  viii,  ch  4  [255a30-b23]  340a-c  /  Meta - 


ALIGN  391 

physics ,  bk  1,  ch  1  [98oa28-98iHi  5]  499a-c;  ch 
9  [992b24-993a7]  511a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [994a25- 
30]  512c;  bk  ix,  ch  6  (io48bi8-^4)  574a-c; 
ch  8  [i049b29- i050a3]  575c-d  /  Soul ,  bk  ii, 
ch  5  [4 17“2 1—4 1 8a3]  647d-648c  /  Sense  and  the 
Sensible,  ch  i  [436bi8— 437^17]  673d  674a  / 
Memory  and  Reminiscence,  cn  2  [45 iai 9— b9] 
692b-d;  [452a4~7]  693c 

Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  cii  3  [1 1 47ai 8—23] 
397b-c  /  Poetics,  ch  4  [1448^*4-20]  682c-d 
Hippocrates:  The  Law,  par  2-3  144b-d 
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1—25] 
44a-b 

Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  26  131b- 
132b;  bk  iii,  ch  23,  202d-203a 
Plutarch:  Cato  the  Younger ,  620b-c 
Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii  10a-12b 
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  13  4b-c; 
par  23  6d-7a;  bk  iv,  par  28-31  26a-27a  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  2  624d-625a;  bk 
ii,  ch  36-37  653d-654b 
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  76,  a 
2,  rep  5  388c -391a;  q  84,  a  3,  rep  3  443d- 
444d;  q  117,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  4  595d-597c 
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  i, 
a  7,  rep  2  385c-387a;  q  2,  a  3,  ans  392d-393c; 
part  iii,  q  9,  a  4,  rep  i  766b-767b;  q  12 
776c-779d 

Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  55d-56a;  66c-d; 
68b 

Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
18b-19a;  26d-30c 

Montaigne:  Essays,  55d-62a  passim;  63d- 
75a  esp  64c-66b;  446a-450a;  453c -454d 
Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  268c  /  On 
Animal  Generation ,  332a-335c  esp  334d-335c 
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  16a;  57d- 
58b;  64b-c  /  Novum  Organum,  pref  105a- 
106d 

Descartes:  Rules ,  iii-iv  3b-7d;  xii-xm 
18b-27d  esp  xn,  23c,  24d-25a  /  Discourse, 
part  vi,  61d-62c;  63a-b  /  Meditations ,  1  75a- 
77c  /  Geometry,  bk  i,  297a-b;  bk  iii,  341b 
Pascal:  Pensees,  6  173a 

Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  sect  23  101b-102a;  ch  iii, 
sect  25  120c-d 

Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  221a-222a 

Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  99d-100a 

Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  528c 

Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-15c;  113b-114a;  244c- 

245c  /  Judgement ,  526a-527b 

Mill:  Liberty ,  283c-288c 

Boswell:  Johnson,  121d;  126d;  257c 

Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  lc- 2  b 

Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  69, 

30b-c 

Melville:  Moby  Dicl{ ,  245b 
James:  Psychology,  15b-17a;  49b-52b  esp  52a; 
71a-73b;  83a-b;  110b;  331b-336a  passim; 
362b-364a;  433a-438a;  443a-444a;  448b- 

450a;  664b-665a;  691a-b;  827a-835a 


EDUC 

9 

10 

12 

12 

14 

17 

18 

19  . 

20 

23 

1 

24 

25 

28 : 

30 

31 

33 

35 

36 

37 

41 

42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

48 

53 


5d  to  5e 


5/ 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


392 

(5.  The  improvement  of  the  mind  hy  teaching  and 
learning.) 

5d.  The  order  of  learning:  the  organization  of 
the  curriculum 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  46b-c  /  Meno,  179b-183a  / 
Gorgias,  272b-273b  /  Republic ,  bk  ii,  320c- 
321a;  bk  iii,  333b-334b;  bk  vi,  380d-381a; 
bk  vi-vii,  383d-401d  /  Timaeus ,  465d-466a  / 
Sophist ,  552b-c  /  Philebus,  610d-613a  /  Laws, 
bk  ii,  653a-654a;  bk  v,  696b-d;  bk  vii,  728b- 
730c;  bk  xn,  798a- 799a, c  /  Seventh  Letter , 
809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a-b;  ch  7 
[i89b30-33]  265b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
[995ai2-i4]  513c;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [ioo5b2~5]  524c; 
ch  4  [ioo6a5-i2]  525a-b;  bk  v,  ch  i  [1013^-3] 
533a;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [i029a35~bi2]  552a;  bk  ix, 
ch  8  [io49b29~io5oa3]  575c-d  /  Soul ,  bk  i, 
ch  1  [402bi5-4C>3a2]  631d-632a;  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[4I3aiI_I3]  643a 

9  Aristotle  :  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[639ai2-bi2]  161b-d  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[ic>94b28-io95a3]  340a;  bk  vi,  ch  3  [ii39b25~ 
29]  388c  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  15  [1334^0-28] 
539c-d;  bk  viii,  ch  3  542d-543d 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  812b-813d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  26  131b-132b; 
bk  11,  ch  25  174b-c 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  i,  5a-6b  passim 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  847b-848a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  1-4  lOa-llc 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  13-31  4b- 
9a;  bk  iv,  par  30  26b-c  /  Christian  Doctrine, 
bk  ii,  ch  8-42  639d-656d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  prologue  la-b; 
part  i,  q  i,  a  9  8d-9c;  q  2,  aa  1-2  10d-12c; 
q  10,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  1  40d-41d;  a  2,  rep  i 
41d-42c;  a  6,  ans  45c-46d;  q  ii,  a  2,  rep  4 
47d-48d;  q  14,  a  6,  rep  2  80a-81c;  q  18.  a  2, 
ans  105c-106b;  q  84,  a  3,  rep  3  443d-444d; 
a  6  447c-449a;  q  85,  a  1  451c-453c;  a  3  455b- 
457a;  a  8  460b-461b;  q  117,  a  1,  ans  595d- 
597c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  ioo, 
a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  257c-258c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  parti,  56b;  59b-c;  71c-d; 
72a-d;  part  iv,  268c-269b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
18b-19d;  25a-30c;  bk  ii,  75c-77a;  78b-80d; 
82c-83b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  63d-80b  passim,  esp  69d- 
70c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-336a 
esp  334c-d,  335c-336a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  4c-5b:  14c- 
15a;  30b-c;  31a-d;  44c;  56b-66a;  68c-69c; 
79c-80a;  85a-c  /  Novum  Organum ,  pref  105a- 
106d;  bk  1,  aph  19-36  108b-109b;  aph  90 
124d-125a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  iv-vi  5a-10a;  vm-x  12a- 
17a;  xiii  25b-27d  /  Discourse,  part  i,  42b- 


44a;  part  ii,  47a-b;  part  vi,  61d-62c  / 
Geometry ,  bk  i,  297a-b;  298b;  bk  iii,  341b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  ek  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  sect  20  lOOc-d;  sect  23 
101b-102a;  ch  iii,  sect  13  116a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  i, 
sect  6-8  122b-123a;  sect  22  127a;  ch  xi, 
sect  8-9  145b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  ii,  sect  7  254a-b; 
ch  iii,  sect  7-9  255d-256c;  ch  v,  sect  15 
267c-d;  ch  ix,  sect  9  286d-287b;  bk  iv,  ch 
vii,  sect  9  338d-339b;  sect  ii  340a-342d 
passim,  esp  340d-341a;  ch  xii,  sect  3  358d- 
359c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  78b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  421b-422b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  334c-337b; 
338c-d;  342b 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  294a- b  /  Judgement , 
551a-552c;  572a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  llb-d;  15a-c;  23d-24b; 
121d;  128c;  135b-c;  273a-b;  309c-d;  448a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  213c 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [1868-2045]  44b-48a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  x, 
291d-292b 

53  James:  Psychology,  317b-319a;  323a-b;  360a; 
406a-b;  453a-457a  esp  453b,  456b-457a;  503b; 
524b-525a;  7llb-712*b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  768b-c 

5e.  The  emotional  aspect  of  learning:  pleasure, 
desire,  interest 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,  374e-375a;  bk  vii, 
388a-389c;  399b-401a  esp  399c;  bk  ix,  421a- 
422b  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  660b  /  Seventh  Letter, 

808b-809a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [98oa22- 
27] 499a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  5  [644b 
22-645^7]  168c-169b  /  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  12 
[1153^2-24]  404c;  bk  x,  ch  i  [1 172^6-21] 
426a  /  Politics ,  bk  viii,  ch  5  [  1 33 9^5-3 1  ] 544 d; 
[i339bio-2°]  545a;  ch  6  [i340b25~3o]  546b  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  11  [1371*30-33]  614d;  bk 
iii,  ch  10  [i4iob9-i2]  662c  /  Poetics ,  ch  4 
[i448b4— 19]  682c-d 

10  Hippocrates:  The  Law,  par  2  144b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  iii,  ch  10,  207d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  i  [41-53] 
lc-d;  bk  11  [1023-1047]  28a-b;  bk  iii  [1—30] 
30a-b;  bk  iv  [1-25]  44a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  4  225a-228a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-3  lOa-lla 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  14-16  4c- 
5b;  par  19-27  5d-7d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12, 
a  1,  ans  50c-51c;  a  8,  rep  4  57b-58b;  part 
1— ii,  q  3,  a  8,  ans  628d-629c;  q  30,  a  i,  rep  i 
749a-d;  q  37,  a  i  783d-784c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxvi  [112-142] 
39b-c;  purgatory,  xx  [i24]-xxi  [75]84c-85d; 
paradise,  iv  [1 15-142]  llld-112a 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b 


5/ 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  52d-53b;  part  ii, 
154a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
190a-191a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  70d-74a;  244d  246a 

26  Shakespeare:  Taming  of  the  Shrew ,  act  i, 
sc  i  [1-40]  202C'203a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  331c-332a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  79b  c 

31  Descartes:  Geometry ,  bk  i,  297a- b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  55,  schol 
413b-d;  the  affects,  def  27  419a-b 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  440b- 
442a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxiii,  sect  15  250c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones .  7b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  326c-d;  338c-339a 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  551  d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  7d-8a;  llb-d;  14b;  15a  c; 
130b;  135b-136a;  151d;  199d-200b;  273a; 
309c-d;  360d;  423c;  448a-b 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  ld-2a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  175, 
61c-d;  par  197  67a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [354-736]  11a- 19b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  47b-48d;  bk 
viii,  306b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  271b-275a  esp  274b-275a; 
290a-291a;  433a-434a;  448b-449b;  524a-525a; 
711b-712b 

5/.  Learning  apart  from  teachers  and  books: 
the  role  of  experience 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  25:3-6 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  25 :5~8 

4  Homer:  Odyssey  183a-322d 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [160-257]  53d-54d 

7  Plato:  Laches ,  29d-30b;  37c-d  /  Gorgias , 
253a  /  Republic ,  bk  iii,  333b-d;  337b-d;  bk  v, 
366a-c;  bk  vi,  377a-379c;  bk  vii,  401a  / 
Theaetetus,  53 5 d 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  30  63d- 
64b  /  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  97a-d; 
bk  11,  ch  19  136a-137a,c  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
259a-b  /  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[3i6a5~r4]  411c-d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[98oa22-98iai3]  499a-c;  bk  ix,  ch  8  [1050^0- 
15]  575d  /  Sow/,  bk  1,  ch  i  [402bn-403a2] 
631d-632a;  bk  iii,  ch  8  [432^-9]  664c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [i094b28-i095a3] 
340a;  ch  4  [i095a30-bi3]  340c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  1 
[no3ai4— 17]  348b;  bk  vi,  ch  8  [1142^2-19] 
391b;  ch  11  [ii43a25-bi3]  392d-393a;  bk  x, 
ch  9  [n8obi3-23]  435b-c;  [n8iai8-b6]  436a  / 
Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  16  [i287a32~33]  485d;  bk 
viii,  ch  6  546b-547b 

10  Hippocrates:  Articulations ,  par  10  94d-95a  / 
The  Law ,  par  3-4  144c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [925-1457] 
73b-80a,c  passim,  esp  [1448-1457]  79d-80a,c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  viii  [508-519]  272b-273a 


393 

14  Plutarch:  Demosthenes,  691  b,d  692b;  692d- 
695d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  13  4b  c  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  iv,  cii  3  676a- d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  84, 
a  6  447c-449a;  q  85,  a  1  451c-453c;  q  87, 
a  a  1-3  465a-468a  passim;  q  94,  a  3,  rep  3 
504a-505a;  q  117,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  4  595d- 
597c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  9, 
a  4,  rep  1  766b-767b;  q  12,  a  i,  rep  i  776c- 
777b;  a  2  777b-778b;  a  3,  rep  2  778b-779a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxvi  [49-142] 
38c-39c 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  intro,  47b  d;  part  i, 
60a-61a;  66c-68b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
29d-30c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  24a-c;  66b-69d;  74d- 
75a;  395b-398c;  520d-522d 

26  Shakespeare:  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  act  iv, 
sc  iii  [296-365]  271c-272a  /  Henry  V,  act  i, 
sc  1  [22-66]  533b-c  /  As  You  Like  It,  act  iv, 
sc  1  [1-26]  617a-b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  pref,  la-b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  268c  /  On 
Animal  Generation,  331b-332a;  333b-d;411c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  16a;  16c; 
30d-31a;  82c-d  /  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph 
97-98  126c-127b 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  11,  2d-3b;  xii,  22c-23a  / 
Discourse,  part  i,  43a;  44a-c;  part  iii,  50b- 
51a;  part  vi,  61d-62c/  Geometry,  bk  i,  297a-b; 
bk  iii,  341b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2 
387b-388b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  6  173a  /  Vacuum,  355a-358b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
i-xii  121a-148d  passim;  ch  xxiii,  sect  3 
204c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect  7-8  255d-256a; 
bk  iv,  ch  xii,  sect  9-13  360d-362d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  30-31 
418c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
65,  479d-480a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  12d;  99d-100a;  142c-d; 
274c;  296b,d-297c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  15c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  334c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  337c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-15c;  146a-149d  esp 
148b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  287b-c;  288a-b;  294c-295a  / 
Representative  Government,  341d-343a  passim; 
418b-d  /  Utilitarianism,  456a-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  257c;  378b-c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  ld- 
2b;  part  iii,  87b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  197 
67a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  230c- 
231b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [522-601]  15a-16b 


Chapter  20:  IiDUCATION 


394 


6  to  la 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  improvement  of  the  mind  by  teaching  and 
learning.  5/.  Learning  apart  from  teachers 
and  books :  the  role  of  experience.) 

48  Melville:  Moby  Did \,  82a;  243a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  x,  424a-b;  bk 
xiii,  584c-585b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  362b-364a  passim;  453b- 
454a;  767b-768a;  852b-862a  esp  852b-853a, 
856b-857a,  859b-860a 

6.  The  acquisition  of  techniques:  preparation 
for  the  vocations,  arts,  and  professions 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d  esp  [461- 
509]  494b-d,  [723-812]  497b-498c 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  136a-b  /  Gorgias ,  258d-262a 
esp  260a-d  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  319a-c;  bk  iii, 
337b-338a;  bk  v,  366a-c;  bk  vi,  377d-378c  / 
Philebus,  633a-d  /  Laws,  bk  i,  649b-c;  bk  iv, 
684d-685a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  3  144a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [no2ai7~22] 
347c;  bk  ii,  ch  i  348b,d-349b;  ch  4  350d- 
351b;  bk  x,  ch  9  [n8obi3-n8ibi3]  435b- 
436a, c  passim  /  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [i288bio- 
20]  487a-b;  bk  viii,  ch  6  546b-547b  /  Atheni¬ 
an  Constitution,  ch  42,  par  3  572c 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  1-4 
la-2c;  par  9  3b-d  /  Epidemics,  bk  iii,  sect 
hi,  par  16  59b-c  /  Articulations ,  par  10,  94d  / 
The  Law,  par  2-5  144b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1091- 
1104]  75b-c;  [1241-1408]  77b-79b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  viii  [512-517]  272b 

14  Plutarch:  Demosthenes ,  692c-695d 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iv,  ch  3 
676a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q  i, 
a  7,  rep  2  385c-387a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
27d-30c;  bk  ii,  76b-77a;  85c-87c  esp  87a; 
bk  iv,  232a-233b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  82b-83c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  30b-c; 
53d-54b;  82c-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  66c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b-31a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  42d-43c; 
51c-58b  esp  51c-53b,  54c-55a;  bk  v,  301a- 
305c;  339b-c;  342d-343c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  5a-c;  245b-d; 
411d-412c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  75d-78b  passim; 
298a-300a  esp  299c-300a;  311d-312a;  355a-c; 
508d-509d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
253c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  415a-417c 
passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  197 
67a-b;  par  252  78d-79a;  par  296  99a-b; 
additions,  126  137a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1868-2050]  44b-48b 


49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  278c-d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  81d;  165c-166a;  170c-171c; 
237d-241a  esp  240c-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  774a 

54  Freud:  “ Wild ”  Psycho-Analysis,  130b-c  / 
General  Introduction,  449a-452a  passim 

7.  Religious  education 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  12:24-27;  18:19-20; 
24:12  /  Deuteronomy,  4:9-10,14;  5:31;  6:1,6- 
9;  11:18-21;  31:9-13  /  Joshua,  8:30-35— (D) 
Josue ,  8:30-35  /  II  Kings,  23:1-2— (D)  IV 
Kings ,  23:1-2  /  II  Chronicles,  34:29-30 —(D) 
II  Paralipomenon,  34:29-30  /  Nehemiah ,  8  — 
(D)  II  Esdras,  8  /  Psalms,  78:1-4 —(D)  Psalms, 
77*1-4 

New  Testament:  Ephesians ,  6:4 
7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  x  757d-771b;  bk  xii,  797b- 
798b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  22  195a- 
201a 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine  621a-698a,c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  prologue  la-b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  4,  ams  318b-321a;  q  iii,  a  i,  ans  351d- 
352d;  a  4  354c-355d;  part  ii-ii,  q  2,  a  6, 
ans  395b-396a;  q  16,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2 
455c-456d;  q  188,  a  5  679d-681a;  a  6,  ans 
681b-682c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  96,  a  7  1061b- 
1062a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  123a-b;  153a- 
156b  passim,  esp  154d-155a;  part  iii,  208d- 
209a;  211b-c;  241c-242a;  part  iv,  269a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
24c-d;  27a;  bk  ii,  82c-83b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  185-194  205a-209b;  285 
224a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  3c-4a;  7a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv, 
202b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  343b,d-356d 
passim;  357c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  82 d;  601  b-c 

42tKant:  Practical  Reason,  325a-327d  esp  326b- 

327a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  285b;  290a-292a  passim  /  Rep¬ 
resentative  Government,  437d-438b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  151b-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
150d-153d 

la.  God  as  teacher:  divine  revelation  and  in¬ 
spiration 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  9:1-17  /  Exodus, 
4:10-17;  20:1-20  /  Deuteronomy,  4:1-5,10-13; 
5:1-20  esp  5:4-11  /  I  Kings,  8:35-36— (D)  III 
Kings,  8:35-36  /  Job,  33:14-17;  34:3i-32; 
38-41  /  Psalms,  25:4-5,8-9,12;  32:8-9;  94:10- 
13;  143 —(D)  Psalms,  24:4-5,8-9,12;  31:8-9; 
93:10-13;  142  /  Proverbs,  6:23  /  Isaiah,  28:9- 
13 —(D)  Isaias,  28:9-13  /  Daniel ,  2:19-23 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  17:6-14 — ( D )  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  17:5-12 


la  to  lb 

New  Testament:  Matthew  passim,  esp  4:23, 
7:28-29,  10:1-20,  11:25  /  Mar\  passim,  esp 
4:1-2  /  Lube  passim,  esp  2:41-50  /  John  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  3:2,  15:15,  18:37  /  Romans ,  1:16-20  / 
1  Corinthians ,  2  /  Galatians,  1:11-12  /  Ephe¬ 
sians,  3:2-5  /  //  Timothy ,  3:15-16  /  /  John , 
2:24-27 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  7  lOb-c; 

bk  iv,  par  30-31  26b-27a;  bk  vi,  par  8  37b-c; 
bk  xi,  par  2-5  89c-90c;  bk  xiii,  par  16-18 
114d-115c  /  o/" Go*/,  bk  vii,  ch  30,  261b; 

bk  x,  ch  13  307b-c;  bk  xi,  ch  2-4  323a-324d; 
bk  xx,  ch  28  556c-557a  /  Christian  Doctrine , 
bk  11,  ch  15  643c-644a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i  3a- 
10c;  q  3,  a  1,  rep  1-5  14b-15b;  q  12,  a  13  61c- 
62b;  q  32  175d-180d  passim;  q  46,  a  2  253a- 
255a;  q  57,  a  3,  rep  i  297b-298a;  q  68,  a  i, 
ans  354a-355c;  q  89,  a  i,  rep  3  473b-475a; 
q  94,  a  3  504a-505a;  q  105,  a  3  540c-541b; 
q  106,  a  3,  ans  547c-548b;  q  113,  a  i,  rep  2 
576a-d;  q  117,  a  i,  rep  i  595d-597c;  a  2,  rep 
1-2  597c-598c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  63, 
a  3  65a-d;  q  68  87c-96c;  q  91,  aa  4-5  210c- 
212c;  qq  98-108  239b-337d  esp  q  98,  a  2 
240c-241b,  q  107,  a  1  325c-327b;  q  iii,  a  4 
354c-355d;  part  ii-ii,  q  1,  a  7,  rep  3  385c- 
387a;  q  4,  a  4,  rep  3  405a-406a;  part  iii,  q  i, 
a  3,  ans  704d-706a;  q  3,  a  8  729b-730b:  q  7, 
a  7  750a-d;  q  ii,  a  6,  rep  2  775d-776b;  q  12, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  1-2  778b-779a;  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  1  779a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xix  [i- 
99]  135a-136a;  xxiv-xxvi  142d-147b  passim, 
esp  xxiv  [52-147J  143b-144a,  xxv  [64-96] 
145a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,787-816] 
467a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  137b-138b; 
160b-c;  part  iii,  165a-167b;  176d-177b; 
181a-186c;  205b-d;  241c-242a;  conclusion, 
281d-282a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  239b-c;  267c-268a; 

273a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  19b-c;  38a; 
54b-c;  95b-101d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [2I9]-bk  viii 
[653]  180a-246b  esp  bk  viii  [283-451]  238b- 
242a;  bk  xi  [99]-bk  xii  [649]  301b-333a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  185  205a;  622  286a;  642-692 
290b-301a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch 
xvi,  sect  14  371b-c;  ch  xviii-xix  380d-388d 
passim,  esp  ch  xviii,  sect  2-5  381a-382d, 
sect  7  383b,  ch  xix,  sect  4  385a-b,  sect  14 
387d-388a,  sect  16  388c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  307d-308a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  231a-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  455a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  159b-d; 
part  iii,  306d-308a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  50b-c 


395 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
127b  137c;  bk  vi,  150d  153d 

lb.  The  teaching  function  of  the  church,  of 
priests  and  prophets 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  4:10-17;  24:12  /  Deu¬ 
teronomy,  4:1-5;  5:4-11;  17:9-13;  24:8;  31:9 
13;  33 :8-10  /  Joshua,  8:30-35— (D)  Josue, 
8:30-35  /  f  Samuel ,  12:20-25  —  (D)  I  Kings, 
12:20-25  /  /  Kings,  8:35-36— (D)  III  Kings , 
8:35-36  /  II  Kings,  17:26-28;  23:1-2— (D) 
IV  Kings,  17:26-28;  23:1-2  /  II  Chronicles, 
17:7-9;  18:7-24;  34:29-30— (D)  II  Para  IF 
fomenon ,  17:7-9;  18:7-24;  34:29-30  /  Ezra, 
7 ."9- 10 — (D)  I  Esdras,  7:9-10  /  Nehemiah,  8  — 
(D)  II  Esdras,  8  /  Isaiah  passim— (D)  Isaias 
passim  /  Jeremiah  passim—  (D)  Jeremias  pas¬ 
sim  /  Ezekiel  passim — (D)  Ezechiel  passim  / 
Daniel  passim— (D)  Daniel,  1:1-3:23  passim; 
3:91-12:13  passim  /  Hosea  passim — ( D )  Osee 
passim  /  Joel  passim  /  Amos  passim  /  Obadiah 
passim — (D)  Abdias  passim  /  Jonah  passim— 
(D)  Jonas  passim  /  Micah  passim,  esp  3:9-12 — 
(D)  Micheas  passim,  esp  3:9-12  /  Nahum  pas¬ 
sim  /  Habahjyu\  passim— {D)  Habacuc  pas¬ 
sim  /  Zephaniah  passim — (D)  Sophonias  pas¬ 
sim  /  Haggai  passim— (D)  Aggeus  passim  / 
Zechariah  passim — (D)  Zacharias  passim  / 
Malachi  passim — (D)  Malachias  passim 

Apocrypha:  Song  of  Three  Children  passim— (D) 
OT,  Daniel,  3  ^4-90  passim  /  Susanna  passim 
— ( D )  OT,  Daniel,  13  passim  /  Bel  and  Dragon 
passim— (D)  OT,  Daniel,  14  passim 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  7:28-29;  10;  23; 
28:18-20  /  Mar\,  1  :i— 1 1 ;  6:7-13;  13:9-13; 
16:14-20  /  Lube,  9:1-6;  10:1-20  /  John,  21:15- 
17  /  Romans,  10:14-18  /  I  Corinthians,  14  /II 
Corinthians,  3-4  /  Ephesians,  3:1-12;  4:11-15  / 
I  Timothy ,  3:2;  4  /  II  Timothy ,  2:24-26; 
4:1-5  /  Titus  passim 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xx,  ch  9,  538d- 
539a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  15  643c- 
644a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  prologue  la-b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  partii-ii,  q  i, 
a  1,  rep  3  385c-387a;  q  184,  a  5,  ans  633c- 
634c;  q  185,  a  3,  ans  643a-644a;  q  187,  a  1 
663c-665a;  q  188,  aa  4-6  678b-682c;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  96,  a  7  1061b-1062a;  aa  11-12  1063d- 
1065b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xii  [22- 
105]  123d-124d;  xxix  [67-126]  151a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [477-528]  167b-168a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  123a-b;  part 
iii,  166a-b;  182d-183a;  208d-211c;  224d-225c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  xi  [656-749]  313b- 
315b;  [802-834]  316b-317b;  bk  xii  [235-248] 
324b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  585-588  277a-b;  622  286a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  7d-8c;  lOd-lla;  18c  / 

Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xviii,  sect 
4  381d-382a;  sect  6  382d-383a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  343b,d-348a 


Chapter  20:  EDUCATION 


396 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  Religious  education,  lb.  The  teaching  Junc¬ 
tion  of  the  church,  of  priests  and  prophets.) 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  194d;  302d'304a 
passim,  esp  303d;  307d-308a;  355b-d;  601b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  230c-231d;  522d- 
523a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  285b  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment ,  341a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  313d-316d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi,  308b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  245a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
152a-153a;  164a-165a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  793c 

8.  Education  and  the  state 

8a.  The  educational  responsibility  of  the  fam¬ 
ily  and  the  state 

7  Plato:  Crito ,  217a-b  /  Laws,  bk  vii,  721d- 
722c;  bk  vm,  723c-d;  bk  xi,  778d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  9  [ii79b3i-n8ob 
13]  434c-435b  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [i26ob 
9-19]  455c;  bk  vm,  ch  1  542a-b 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  4  253a 
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  39a-45b  esp  40c-41a  / 
Lycurgus-Numa,  63d-64a,c 
20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  1,  ans  226c-227c;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  5 
318b-321a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  155b 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  344a-c 
30  Bacon;  New  Atlantis,  207c-d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vi,  sect  58-59 
37b-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b-31a;  part  iv, 
166b 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  376b-377a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  338c-339a; 
340c-343d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  86b-c;  92c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  420b-421c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  317d-319b  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  174 
61b;  par  239  76d;  additions,  111-112  134d- 
135a;  147  140c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  176d-178a;  195b-196d;  237d- 
241d;  245a-d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  427b-c 
54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  17d-18a 

8b.  The  economic  support  of  educational  in¬ 
stitutions 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  209b-d 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  30c-31a 
36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  29b-31a;  part  iii, 
106a-b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  56b-58b; 
bk  v,  331b,d-356d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  669d-670d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  298c 


8  to  8  d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  317d-319b  passim  /  Representa¬ 
tive  Government,  382c-383b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  300a-c 

46  PIegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  325d 

8c.  The  political  regulation  and  censorship  of 
education 

5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  [366-384]  459c-d; 
[497-508]  460d-461a 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-339a;  bk  iv, 
344b-d;  bk  v,  365d-366c;  bk  x,  427c-434c 
esp  432d-434c  /  Statesman,  601c-602c  /  Laws, 
bk  ii,  654c-655b;  bk  iii,  675c-676b;  bk  vii 
713c-731d;  bk  viii,  732c-d;  bk  xi,  782d-783b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [i26ob9-i9] 
455c;  bk  v,  ch  ii  [i3i3a38-b5]  516a;  bk  vii, 
ch  17  [i3?6a?o-b24]  541b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  i 
[i337aio-i9]  542a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa  61b,d-64a,c  pas¬ 
sim  /  Solon,  76a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  56d-57b;  bk  iv,  67c; 
72b-73a;  bk  xiv,  152d-153c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  9  154a-c; 
ch  12-14  155c-157c;  bk  viii,  ch  13  273b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  102d-103a;  114d- 
115a;  123a-b;  150c-151a;  part  iii,  224d-225d; 
conclusion,  282d-283a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  117d-119d; 
184a-187c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  7a  /  New 
Atlantis ,  210d-214d  esp  213d,  214b 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica  381a-412b  esp  384b- 
389a,  398a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b-31a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv  13b, d- 
18d;  bk  xii,  90b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  434b-435a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  347c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  148a-b;  355b-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  220b-221b;  223a-c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments,  i 
17a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  274b-293b  passim;  317d-319b 
passim  /  Representative  Government,  343b; 
344b-c;  368c-369a;  387b-c;  437d-438b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  222d-223b;  512c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  270, 
89a -b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  213b- 
214a;  217c-218a 

8d.  The  training  of  the  prince,  the  statesman, 
the  citizen:  aristocratic  and  democratic 
theories  of  education 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  38:24-34— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  38:25-39 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  470a-487a,c  /  Clouds 
488a-506d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370a-c; 
bk  11,  396d-397a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  43a-47c  /  Republic ,  bk 
ii-iii,  320c-339a;  bk  iii,  340b-341a;  bk  v, 
366a-c;  bk  vi-vii,  383b-401d  esp  bk  vii,  389d- 
401d  /  Timaeus,  442c-d  /  Statesman ,  607b- 


Sd  to  9 

608d  /  Laws  640a-799a,c  esp  bk  i,  640d  641a, 
644b-645c,  bk  iii,  672d  676b,  bk  iv,  683d- 
685a,  bk  v-vi,  696c-697d,  bk  vi,  704a-c, 
706c,  bk  vii-viii,  713c-735b,  bk  xii,  784d- 
785b,  796b' 799a  /  Seventh  Letter ,  801c~802d 
9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  cii  13  [i26ob9-i<)] 
455c;  bk  11,  ch  5  [1264*12-40]  459b-c;  ch  7 
[i266b26-i267a2]  462b  c;  bk  hi,  ch  4  [1277® 
14— bi3]  474a-c;  cii  18  [  1288^34— b3 ]  487a, c;  bk 
iv,  ch  9  [i294bi8-28]  494c-d;  cii  15  [1300*3-8] 
500d;  bk  v,  ch  9  [1310*12-36]  512b-c;  bk  vii, 
ch  14  537b  538d;  bk  viii  542a-548a,c  / 
Athenian  Constitution ,  cii  42  572b  d  /  Rhetoric , 
bk  1,  ch  8  [  i365b32— 39]  608a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  5  261a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  viii  [508-519]  272b-273a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  /  Lycurgus - 

Numa ,  63d-64a  /  64b,d-77a,c  passim, 

esp  64b,d-65c,  74b-75b  /  Pmrfo,  122d-123d  / 
AlcibiadeSy  156b  l58b  passim  /  Lysandery 
354b,d-355a  /  AgesilauSy  480b,d-481a  / 
andery  542d-544a  /  D/o;?,  781b,d-788b 

15  Tacitus:  Annahy  bk  xii,  llld;  bk  xiii,  125d- 
126a;  bk  xiv,  153d-155a  /  HistorieSy  bk  iv, 
267c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  viii  [115- 
148]  118b-c 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince  la-37d  esp  ch  vi,  8c-d, 
ch  xiv-xix  21b-30a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  intro,  47b-d;  part  r, 
94b-c;  part  ii,  114d-115a;  128c-130a;  150c- 
151a;  153a-156b;  158b-d;  164a, c;  part  iv, 
273a-c;  conclusion,  282d-283a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruely  bk  i, 
18b-19d;  24a-30c;  bk  ii,  75a-77a;  78b-83b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  60a-62a;  63d-64d;  71d- 
72b 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  IV ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [218— 
240]  437c-d  /  Henry  V ,  act  i,  sc  i  [22-66] 
533b-c  /  As  You  Life  It,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-28] 
597a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  332c-336a; 
362a-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  J^earningy  20b~28d; 
94b-95a 

32  Milton:  Areopagiticay  384b-389a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  29b-31a;  part  iv, 
166b-167a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  iv  13b, d- 
18d 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  372a-377b  esp 
375d-377b  /  Social  Contracty  bk  iii,  414b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  v,  303b-304c; 
337d-338c;  340c-343d;  346c-347d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  62a-c;  86c;  260a  b; 
275c-276b;  284a-c;  435b-c;  534a-c;  633b; 
669b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fully  15b-c;  298c;  508c- 
509d 

43  Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d;  number  35, 
113b-c;  number  53,  168b-169b;  number  56 
174d-176d  esp  175d-176a;  number  62, 
190b-d;  number  84,  253d-254b 


397 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  284d  285b;  298b  299a;  302a  c; 
317d-323a,c  /  Representative  Government ,  336c- 
341d:  344b  c;  349a  350a;  351b-c;  357c;  362c- 
366a;  375a  377a;  380c  389b  passim,  esp  382c- 
383b;  401a  406a  passim,  esp  405d  406a;  407d- 
408b;  415a  417c;  418b  d;  420b  d;  424b  c 

44  Boswell:  ]ohnsony  201b  c;  307d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par 
151-153  57a-c;  par  209  69d;  par  296  297 
99a  b;  additions,  98  133a;  169  145d;  171 
146b  c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  21 2d- 
214d;  243b  c;  part  ii,  281d;  part  iv,  368b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  237d-241d  esp  238b  c,  240c- 
241a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  427c; 

429b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  244d  245d 

54  Freud:  Sexual  Enlightenment  of  Children , 

122a, c 

9.  Historical  and  biographical  observations 
concerning  the  institutions  and  practices 
of  education 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  32a-b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bki,  370a  c; 
bk  ii,  396d-397a 

7  Plato:  GorgiaSy  290b-291b  /  LawSy  bk  i, 
644b-646b;  bk  iii,  672d-673d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iv,  cii  9  [1294b  18-28] 
494c-d;  bk  vii,  ch  14  [i333a4i-i334aio]538b-d; 
bk  viii,  ch  1  [1337*19-33]  542b;  ch  4  544a-c 

10  Hippocrates:  The  Oath ,  xiiia 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i  253a-256d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  38a-45b  passim  /  Aid- 
biades,  155b,d-158b  /  Marcus  Catoy  286c- 
287b  /  Alexander  542d-544a  /  DemosthencSy 
691b,d-692b  /  Diony  782c-788b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  14-31 
4c-9a;  bk  iii,  par  6-7  14b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  part  ii,  155d-156b;  part 
iv,  267c-269c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
18b-19d;  24a-30c;  bk  ii,  75c-83b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  57b-63d;  68b-69a;  77d- 
80b;  194c- 199c;  395b-401a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixotey  part  i,  xia-xvid 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning  la-lOld  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  8c-d,  29c-32c  /  Novum  Organum ,  bk 
1,  aph  78  119b-c;  aph  80-81  120a-c;  aph  90 
124d-125a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse  41a-67a,c  /  Medita¬ 
tions  y  i  75a-77c  /  Objections  and  Repliesy  278a- 
293a, c  passim 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  384b  389a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  626  286b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  cii  iii, 
sect  25  120c-d 

36  Swift:  Gullivery  part  i,  3a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  15c; 
16a-18d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  335a-b  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy ,  377a 


Chapter  20:  EDUCATION 


398 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(9.  Historical  and  biographical  observations  con¬ 
cerning  the  institutions  and  practices  of 
education .) 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  i,  57b-58b; 
bk  v,  303b'304c;  334c-340c;  354d-355d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  23d-24a;  245b-d; 
260a;  344c-347b  passim;  355b-d;  364a-c; 
543d;  644 b-c;  668d-671b 


9 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  40a-41a;  210c-d; 
298a-300c;  325d-328a,c;  452a-b;  522b-528a,c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  288ab 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  7b-9b;  llb-12c;  15a  17b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  98 
133a  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  213b-c; 
part  iv,  325d 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  1  [354-685]  lla-lSa 
passim 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Matters  relevant  to  physical  education  or  the  training  of  bodily  skills,  see  Art  9b;  Habit  5a; 
Labor  2b. 

Matters  relevant  to  moral  education,  see  Art  10a;  Custom  and  Convention  5b;  Good  and 
Evil  6a;  Habit  5b;  History  2;  Knowledge  8b(i);  Pleasure  and  Pain  10a;  Poetry  9a; 
Punishment  3a;  Virtue  and  Vice  ia,  4-4C,  4d(2),  4d(4),  8b;  and  for  the  training  of 
specific  virtues,  see  Courage  6;  Temperance  4. 

Matters  relevant  to  liberal  education  or  intellectual  training,  see  Art  6b;  Habit  4a~4b,  5d; 
History  2;  Knowledge  9a;  Man  6a;  Mind  43-40;  Pleasure  and  Pain  10a;  Poetry  5a, 
9a;  Truth  3d (3);  Virtue  and  Vice  4b~4c;  and  for  discussions  of  the  liberal  arts,  see 
Language  ia,  7-8;  Logic  3 — 3b;  Mathematics  ib;  Rhetoric  ib,  2c-2d,  6. 

Matters  relevant  to  professional  education  or  training  in  the  useful  arts  and  crafts,  see 
Law  9;  Medicine  1,2c;  Philosophy  5;  Rhetoric  6;  State  8c. 

Matters  relevant  to  religious  education,  see  God  6c(i)-6c(3);  Knowledge  6c(5);  Proph¬ 
ecy  ic-id;  Religion  ia-ib(3),  5c;  Theology  2,  43-40;  Virtue  and  Vice  8b,  8e; 
Wisdom  ic. 

The  consideration  of  factors  involved  in  learning  and  teaching,  see  Emotion  3d ;  Experience 
2~3b;  Habit  4a~4b;  Knowledge  4a~4b,  9a;  Language  8;  Logic  4;  Mind  4c;  Pleasure 
and  Pain  4c(2);  Truth  3d(3),  8e;  Virtue  and  Vice  4b~4c. 

The  role  of  the  family  in  education,  see  Family  2c,  6d;  Virtue  and  Vice  4d(i). 

The  role  of  the  state  in  education,  see  Law  6d;  Virtue  and  Vice  4d(3),  7a;  and  for  the 
problem  of  education  in  relation  to  different  forms  of  government,  see  Aristocracy  5; 
Citizen  6;  Democracy  6;  Monarchy  3a;  State  8c. 

The  discussion  of  freedom  in  the  communication  of  knowledge  and  art,  see  Art  10b;  Knowl¬ 
edge  9b;  Liberty  2a;  Opinion  5b;  Poetry  9b;  Truth  8d. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 


Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boofy  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Plutarch.  “A  Discourse  Touching  the  Training  of 
Children,’’  in  Moralia 
Augustine.  Concerning  the  Teacher 
Aquinas.  Concerning  the  Teacher 
- .  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  qq  166-167 


F.  Bacon.  “Of  Custom  and  Education,”  “Of  Stud¬ 
ies,”  in  Essays 
Milton.  Of  Education 

Locke.  Some  Thoughts  Concerning  Education 
Swift.  An  Essay  on  Modern  Education 
Rousseau.  Emile 
Goethe.  William  Meister 


399 


Chapter  20:  EDUCATION 


Kant.  Educational  Theory 

Faraday.  “Observations  on  Mental  Education,” 
in  Lectures  on  Education 

J.  S.  Mill.  “Professor  Sedgwick’s  Discourse  on  the 
Studies  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,”  in  vol  i, 
Dissertations  and  Discussions 

- .  Inaugural  Address 

- .  Autobiography 

II. 

Xenophon.  The  Education  of  Cyrus 
Cicero.  De  Oratore  ( On  Oratory) 

Quintilian.  Institutio  Oratoria  (Institutes  of  Ora¬ 
tory '),  BK  i;  BK  II,  CH  I-3;  BK  X,  CH  I 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism ,  bk  iii, 

CH  27-32 

Martianus  Capella.  De  Nuptiis  Philologiae  et 
Mercurii 

Cassiodorus.  Institutions  (An  Introduction  to  Di¬ 
vine  and  Human  Readings) 

Hugh  of  Saint  Victor.  Didascalicon:  De  Studio 
Legendi 

John  of  Salisbury.  Metalogicon 
T.  More.  Utopia ,  bk  i 

Luther.  To  the  Councilmen  of  All  Cities  in  Germany 
That  They  Establish  and  Maintain  Christian  Schools 
Castiglione.  The  Bool{  of  the  Courtier 
Erasmus.  The  Education  of  a  Christian  Prince 

- .  De  Pueris  Statim  ac  Liberaliter  Instituendis  (On 

Liberal  Education) 

Elyot.  The  Governour 
Vives.  On  Education 
Ignatius  of  Loyola.  Constitutions 
Lyly.  Euphues 

Comenius.  The  Great  Didactic 
- .  School  of  Infancy 

Fenelon.  A  Treatise  on  the  Education  of  Daughters 

- .  Adventures  of  Telemachus 

Chesterfield.  Letters  to  His  Son 
Voltaire.  “University,”  in  A  Philosophical  Die - 
tionary 

Helvetius.  A  Treatise  on  Man 
Franklin.  Autobiography 
Lessing.  The  Education  of  the  Human  Race 
Godwin.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  Political  Justice ,  bk 
v,  ch  2 

Schiller.  Letters  upon  the  Esthetic  Education  of  Man 
Pestalozzi.  How  Gertrude  Teaches  Her  Children 
Herbart.  The  Science  of  Education 
Jean  Paul.  Levana 

J.  G.  Fichte.  Addresses  to  the  German  Nation ,  ii-m, 

IX-XIV 

De  Quince y.  Letters  to  a  Young  Man  Whose  Edu¬ 
cation  Has  Been  Neglected 


Froebel.  The  Education  of  Man 
Emerson.  The  American  Scholar 
D 1  ck e n s .  Nicholas  Nickleby 
Whewell.  Of  a  Liberal  Education 

- .  The  Elements  of  Morality ,  bk  v,  ch  15 

Schopenhauer.  “On  Education,”  in  Studies  in  Pes¬ 
simism 

J.  H.  Newman.  The  Idea  of  a  University 
- .  University  Sketches 

Spencer.  Essays  on  Education  and  Kindred  Subjects , 
part  1 

Meredith.  The  Ordeal  of  Richard  Feverel 
Arnold.  Culture  and  Anarchy 
Nietzsche.  On  the  Future  of  Our  Educational  Insti¬ 
tutions 

S.  Butler.  The  Way  of  All  Flesh 
Bain.  Education  as  a  Science 

Clifford.  “Virchow  on  the  Teaching  of  Science,” 
in  vol  11,  Lectures  and  Essays 

T.  H.  Green.  The  Principles  of  Political  Obliga¬ 
tion,  (l) 

H.  Adams.  The  Education  of  Henry  Adams 
Montessori.  Method  of  Scientific  Pedagogy 
Bryce.  The  Functions  of  a  University 
Shaw.  Pygmalion 

T.  Veblen.  The  Higher  Learning  in  America 
Whitehead.  The  Organization  of  Thought ,  ch  1-5 

- .  The  Aims  of  Education 

Kelso.  The  Doctrine  of  the  English  Gentleman  in  the 
Sixteenth  Century 

Gorky.  Forty  Years — the  Life  of  Clim  Samghin ,  voli, 
Bystander 

B.  Russell.  Education  and  the  Good  Life 
- .  Sceptical  Essays ,  xiv 

Pius  XI.  Divini  Illius  Magistri  (Encyclical  on 
Christian  Education  of  Youth) 

Ortega  y  Gasset.  Mission  of  the  University 
Rank.  Modern  Education 
Jaeger.  Paideia 

T.  S.  Eliot.  “Modern  Education  and  the  Classics,” 
in  Essays ,  Ancient  and  Modern 
Dewey.  The  School  and  Society 

- .  Interest  and  Effort  in  Education 

- .  Democracy  and  Education 

- .  Experience  and  Education 

Richards.  Interpretation  in  Teaching 
Livingstone.  On  Education 
Meiklejohn.  Education  Between  Two  Worlds 
Hutchins.  The  Higher  Learning  in  America 

- .  Education  for  Freedom 

Maritain.  Education  at  the  Crossroads 
Van  Doren.  Liberal  Education 
Barzun.  Teacher  in  America 
Hook.  Education  for  Modern  Man 
Conant.  Education  in  a  Divided  World 


Chapter  'Ll:  ELEMENT 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  words  “atom”  and  “element”  express 
basic  notions  in  the  analysis  of  matter.  To 
some  extent  their  meaning  seems  to  be  the 
same.  Atoms  or  elements  are  usually  under¬ 
stood  to  be  ultimate  units,  the  parts  out  of 
which  other  things  are  formed  by  combination. 
But  as  soon  as  further  questions  are  asked — 
about  the  divisibility  or  indivisibility  of  these 
units,  or  about  their  number  and  variety — we 
are  confronted  with  differing  conceptions  of 
the  atom,  and  with  a  theory  of  the  elements 
which  is  opposed  to  the  atomic  analysis  of 
matter. 

Even  when  the  two  notions  are  not  opposed 
to  one  another,  they  are  not  interchangeable. 
“Atom”  has  a  much  narrower  meaning.  It 
usually  designates  a  small  particle  of  matter, 
whereas  “element”  signifies  the  least  part  into 
which  anything  at  all  can  be  divided.  It  is  this 
broader  meaning  of  “element”  which  permits 
Euclid  to  call  his  collection  of  the  theorems  in 
terms  of  which  all  geometric  problems  can  be 
solved,  the  “elements”  of  geometry.  According 
to  Aristotle,  this  is  true,  not  only  of  geometrical 
proofs,  but  also  “in  general  of  the  elements  of 
demonstration;  for  the  primary  demonstra¬ 
tions,  each  of  which  is  implied  in  many  demon¬ 
strations,”  he  says,  “are  called  elements  of 
demonstration.”  From  this  it  follows  that  ele¬ 
ments  will  be  found  in  any  subject  matter  or 
science  in  which  analysis  occurs,  and  not  only 
in  physics. 

“An  element,”  writes  Nicomachus  in  his  In¬ 
troduction  to  Arithmetic ,  “is  the  smallest  thing 
which  enters  into  the  composition  of  an  object, 
and  the  least  thing  into  which  it  can  be  ana¬ 
lyzed.  Letters,  for  example,  are  called  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  literate  speech,  for  out  of  them  all 
articulate  speech  is  composed  and  into  them 
finally  it  is  resolved.  Sounds  are  the  elements  of 
all  melody;  for  they  are  the  beginning  of  its 


composition  and  into  them  it  is  resolved.  The 
so-called  four  elements  of  the  universe  in  gen¬ 
eral  are  simple  bodies,  fire,  water,  air,  and  earth; 
for  out  of  them  in  the  first  instance  we  account 
for  the  constitution  of  the  universe,  and  into 
them  finally  we  conceive  of  it  as  being  re¬ 
solved.” 

This  explains  why  books  in  so  many  different 
fields  have  the  word  “element”  in  their  titles. 
There  are  the  elements  of  grammar  or  logic,  the 
elements  of  language  or  music,  the  elements  of 
psychology  or  economics.  Elements  in  one  sub¬ 
ject  matter  or  science  are  analogous  to  elements 
in  another  because  in  each  sphere  they  stand  to 
everything  else  as  the  simple  to  the  complex, 
the  pure  to  the  mixed,  the  parts  to  the  whole. 
Thus  the  factors  of  price  may  be  said  to  func¬ 
tion  in  economic  analysis  as  do  the  parts  of 
speech  in  grammatical  analysis. 

Another  illustration  comes  from  the  theory 
of  the  four  bodily  humors  in  ancient  physiol¬ 
ogy.  In  the  traditional  enumeration,  which 
goes  back  to  Hippocrates,  they  are  blood, 
phlegm,  yellow  bile,  and  black  bile,  and  they 
function  analytically  as  do  fire,  water,  air,  and 
earth  in  ancient  physics.  They  “make  up  the 
nature  of  the  body  of  man,”  according  to  a 
Hippocratic  treatise  on  the  nature  of  man, 
“and  through  them  he  feels  pain  or  enjoys 
health.”  Perfect  health  is  enjoyed  by  a  man 
“when  these  elements  are  duly  proportioned 
to  one  another  in  respect  of  compounding, 
power,  and  bulk,  and  when  they  are  perfectly 
mingled.”  Galen,  in  an  analysis  of  tempera¬ 
ments,  explains  all  varieties  of  temperament  and 
all  complexions  of  physique  in  terms  of  these 
humors,  either  by  their  mixture  or  by  die  pre¬ 
dominance  of  one  or  another.  Thus  the  san¬ 
guine,  phlegma-tic,  choleric,  or  melancholic 
temperament  is  accounted  for  by  the  excess  of 
one  and  a  deficiency  of  the  other  humors. 

400 


Chapter  21:  ELEMENT 


401 


Still  another  physiological  application  of  the 
notion  of  element  is  to  be  found  in  the  ancient 
division  of  tissue  into  flesh  and  bone,  or  in  the 
more  elaborate  modern  analysis  of  the  types  of 
cells  which  comprise  all  living  matter. 

These  illustrations  indicate  that  the  irre- 
ducibility  of  elements  to  anything  simpler  than 
themselves  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  they 
are  absolutely  indivisible.  Cells  can  be  further 
divided  into  nucleus,  protoplasm,  and  mem¬ 
brane  without  ceasing  to  be  the  elements  of 
tissue.  The  parts  of  speech — nouns,  verbs,  ad¬ 
jectives —  can  be  further  divided  into  syllables 
and  letters  without  ceasing  to  be  the  elements 
of  significant  utterance.  Letters,  treated  as  the 
elements  of  language,  can  be  physically  divided. 
The  fact  that  terms  are  sometimes  regarded  as 
the  logical  elements  out  of  which  propositions 
and  syllogisms  are  formed  does  not  prevent  a 
distinction  from  being  made  between  simple 
and  complex  terms.  Nicomachus  calls  the  tri¬ 
angle  elementary  among  all  plane  figures,  “for 
everything  else  is  resolved  into  it,  but  it  into 
nothing  else”;  yet  the  triangle  is  divisible  into 
the  lines  which  compose  it  and  these  lines  in 
turn  are  divisible  into  points. 

When  Nicomachus  says  that  the  triangle  is 
the  element  of  all  other  figures  “and  has  itself 
no  element,”  he  does  not  mean  that  the  tri¬ 
angle  is  absolutely  indivisible,  but  only  rela¬ 
tively  so.  Relative  to  the  analysis  of  plane  fig¬ 
ures,  there  is  no  simpler  figure  out  of  which  the 
triangle  can  be  formed.  Similarly,  relative  to 
the  analysis  of  significant  speech,  there  is  no 
simpler  part  than  the  word.  Relative  to  the 
analysis  of  melody,  there  is  no  simpler  part  than 
the  tone.  Musical  tones  may  be  physically,  but 
they  are  not  musically,  complex. 

The  definition  of  element  can  also  be  ap¬ 
proached  by  comparing  its  meaning  with  that 
of  principle  and  cause.  All  three  terms  are 
brought  together  by  Aristotle  in  the  beginning 
of  his  Physics ,  when  he  declares  that  we  attain 
“scientific  knowledge”  througli  acquaintance 
with  the  “principles,  causes,  and  elements”  of 
things. 

The  word  “principle”  occurs  almost  as  fre¬ 
quently  as  “element”  in  the  titles  of  books 
which  claim  to  be  basic  expositions  or  analyses. 


The  two  words  arc  often  used  as  synonyms. 
Lavoisier,  for  example,  says  that  we  can  use 
“the  term  elements ,  or  principles  of  bodies ,  to 
express  our  idea  of  the  last  point  which  analysis 
is  capable  of  reaching.” 

To  discover  any  difference  in  the  meaning  of 
“element”  and  “principle,”  it  is  necessary  to 
specify  their  correlatives  precisely.  Out  of  ele¬ 
ments,  compounds  or  mixtures  are  formed. 
From  principles,  consequences  are  derived.  In 
logic,  for  example,  we  say  that  terms  arc  the 
elements  of  propositions  (the  proposition  ‘Soc¬ 
rates  is  a  man’  comprising  the  terms  ‘Socrates’ 
and  ‘man*),  but  we  say  that  axioms  are  the 
principles  from  which  conclusions  are  derived. 
This  does  not  prevent  the  same  thing  from  be¬ 
ing  viewed  in  different  connections  as  both  cle¬ 
ment  and  principle — as  an  element  because  it 
is  the  simple  part  out  of  which  a  more  complex 
whole  is  composed,  and  as  a  principle  because  it 
is  the  source  from  which  something  else  is  de¬ 
rived.  The  parts  of  speech  in  grammar  are  the 
elementary  components  of  phrases  and  sen¬ 
tences;  they  are  also  the  principles  from  which 
the  rules  of  syntax  are  derived. 

The  third  notion  which  belongs  with  ele¬ 
ment  and  principle  is  cause.  Its  correlative  is 
effect .  Again  it  can  be  said  that  that  which  is  an 
element  in  one  connection  and  a  principle  in 
another  can  be  regarded  as  a  cause  from  still  a 
third  point  of  view.  In  Aristotle’s  physical  trea¬ 
tises,  for  example,  matter  is  regarded  in  all  three 
ways:  it  is  an  element  of  all  bodies,  for  they  are 
substances  composed  of  matter  and  form;  it  is  a 
principle  of  change,  since  from  matter,  form, 
and  privation  change  is  derived;  it  is  a  cause 
(i.e.,  the  material  cause)  of  certain  results. 

But  it  must  also  be  observed  that  everything 
which  is  any  one  of  these  three  is  not  necessar¬ 
ily  both  of  the  others  also.  Since  an  element, 
according  to  Aristotle,  is  a  “component  im¬ 
manent  in  a  thing,”  anything  that  is  an  extrin¬ 
sic  principle  or  cause  cannot  be  an  element. 
Thus  the  action  of  one  body  upon  another  is  a 
cause  and  a  principle,  but  not  an  element.  Re¬ 
ferring  to  these  distinctions,  Aquinas  declares 
that  “ principle  is  a  wider  term  than  cause ,  just 
as  cause  is  more  common  than  element .”  The 
chapters  on  Cause  and  Principle  tend  to  sub¬ 
stantiate  this  observation  about  the  scope  of 
these  ideas  in  the  tradition  of  western  thought. 


402 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


The  basic  issues  concerning  elements  occur 
in  the  analysis  of  matter.  Before  Plato  and 
Aristotle,  the  early  Greek  physicists  had  asked 
such  questions  as,  From  what  do  all  things 
come  ?  Of  what  are  all  things  made  ?  A  number 
of  answers  were  given,  ranging  from  one  kind  of 
ultimate,  such  as  earth  or  fire,  through  a  small 
set  of  ultimate  kinds,  to  an  infinite  variety. 
The  classical  theory  of  the  four  elements  is  the 
middle  answer,  avoiding  the  extremes  of  unity 
and  infinity. 

According  to  Galen,  it  was  Hippocrates  who 
“first  took  in  hand  to  demonstrate  that  there 
are,  in  all,  four  mutually  interacting  qualities” 
and  who  provided  “at  least  the  beginnings  of 
the  proofs  to  which  Aristotle  later  set  his  hand” 
in  developing  the  theory  of  the  four  elements. 
Galen  also  indicates  that  it  was  a  subject  of 
controversy  among  the  ancients  whether  the 
“substances  as  well  as  the  qualities”  of  the 
four  elements  “undergo  this  intimate  mingling” 
from  which  results  “the  genesis  and  destruc¬ 
tion  of  all  things  that  come  into  and  pass  out 
of  being.” 

Aristotle,  in  his  treatise  On  Generation  and 
Corruption ,  enumerates  the  various  senses  in 
which  the  physicist  considers  elements.  “We 
have  to  recognize  three  ‘originative  sources’ 
(or  elements),”  he  writes:  “firstly,  that  which 
is  potentially  perceptible  body;  secondly,  the 
contrarieties  ( e.g .,  heat  and  cold);  and  thirdly, 
Fire,  Water,  and  the  like.”  The  “potentially 
perceptible  body”  is  identified  with  prime  mat¬ 
ter,  and,  since  this  “has  no  separate  existence, 
but  is  always  bound  up  with  a  contrariety,” 
it  can  be  ruled  out  from  the  usual  notion 
of  element.  The  elementary  qualities,  the 
“contrarieties”  named  secondly,  are  the  hot 
and  cold  and  dry  and  moist.  The  so-called 
elements,  Fire,  Air,  Water,  and  Earth,  are  left 
to  the  last,  and  are  mentioned  “only  thirdly,” 
Aristotle  says,  because  they  “change  into  one 
another  .  .  .  whereas  the  contrarieties  do  not 
change.” 

The  elementary  qualities  “attach  them¬ 
selves”  by  couples  to  the  “apparently  ‘simple’ 
bodies.”  In  consequence,  Aristotle  writes,  “Fire 
is  hot  and  dry,  whereas  Air  is  hot  and  moist .  .  . 
and  Water  is  cold  and  moist,  while  Earth  is 
cold  and  dry.”  Each  of  them,  however,  “is 
characterized  par  excellence  by  a  single  quality.” 


In  terms  of  these  simple  bodies  and  the  ele¬ 
mentary  qualities  all  other  material  things  can 
be  explained. 

In  contrast  to  the  elements  stand  the  mixed, 
or  compound,  bodies,  in  the  constitution  of 
which  two  or  more  elements  combine.  There 
may  be  many  kinds  of  mixed  bodies,  but  none 
is  irreducible  in  kind,  as  are  the  four  elements; 
any  mixed  body  can  be  divided  into  the  differ¬ 
ent  kinds  of  elementary  bodies  which  compose 
it,  whereas  the  elementary  bodies  cannot  be 
divided  into  parts  which  are  different  in  kind 
from  themselves.  A  living  body,  for  example, 
may  contain  parts  of  earth  and  water,  but  the 
parts  of  earth  are  earth,  the  parts  of  water, 
water. 

It  is  precisely  the  mode  of  divisibility  that 
Aristotle  declares  is  “the  fundamental  ques¬ 
tion.”  In  answering  this  question  he  opposes  the 
theory  of  the  four  elements  to  another  Greek 
account  of  the  constitution  of  matter — the 
atomic  theory,  developed  by  Leucippus  and 
Democritus,  and  expounded  for  us  in  Lucretius’ 
poem  On  the  Nature  of  Things . 

According  to  the  Greek  atomists,  matter  is 
not  infinitely  divisible.  “If  nature  had  set  no 
limit  to  the  breaking  of  things,”  Lucretius 
writes,  “by  this  time  the  bodies  of  matter  could 
have  been  so  far  reduced  .  .  .  that  nothing 
could  within  a  fixed  time  be  conceived  out  of 
them  and  reach  its  utmost  growth  of  being.” 
There  must  then  be  “a  fixed  limit  to  their 
breaking” — a  limit  in  physical  division  which 
ultimately  reaches  units  of  matter  that  are  ab¬ 
solutely  indivisible.  Lucretius  calls  them  “first 
beginnings  ...  of  solid  singleness,  .  .  .  not  com¬ 
pounded  out  of  a  union  of  parts,  but,  rather, 
strong  in  everlasting  singleness” — the  “seeds  of 
things,”  or  atoms.  The  Greek  word  from  which 
“atom”  comes  literally  means  uncuttable. 

From  this  it  is  evident  that  Aristotle  can 
deny  the  existence  of  atoms  while  at  the  same 
time  he  affirms  the  existence  of  elementary 
bodies.  The  elements,  unlike  the  atoms,  are  not 
conceived  as  indivisible  in  quantity,  but  only 
as  incapable  of  division  into  diverse  kinds  of 
matter. 

In  the  Greek  conception  of  atom  and  ele¬ 
ment,  the  difference  between  them  lies  in  this 
distinction  between  quantitative  and  qualita- 


Chapter  21:  ELEMENT 


tive  indivisibility.  The  atom  is  the  least  quan¬ 
tity  of  matter.  It  cannot  he  broken  into  quan¬ 
titative  parts.  The  elementary  body  is  not 
atomic.  It  is  always  capable  of  division  into 
smaller  units,  but  all  of  these  units  must  be  of 
the  same  kind  as  the  elementary  body  under¬ 
going  division. 

The  element  is  indivisible  only  in  the  sense 
that  it  cannot  be  decomposed  into  other  kinds 
of  matter,  as  a  mixed  body  can  be  decom¬ 
posed  into  its  diverse  elements.  The  atom  can¬ 
not  be  divided  in  any  way.  Only  compound 
bodies  can  be  divided  into  their  constituent 
atoms,  all  of  which  are  alike  in  kind,  differing 
only  quantitatively — in  size,  shape,  or  weight. 
Different  kinds  of  matter  occur  only  on  the 
level  of  compounds  and  as  the  result  of  diverse 
combinations  of  atoms. 

This  last  point  indicates  another  contrast 
between  atoms  and  elements  in  ancient  physi¬ 
cal  theory.  The  elements  are  defined,  as  we  have 
seen,  by  their  qualitative  differences  from  one 
another;  or,  more  strictly,  according  to  combi¬ 
nations  of  elementary  sensible  qualities — hot 
and  cold,  moist  and  dry.  By  virtue  of  the  quali¬ 
ties  peculiar  to  them,  the  four  elements  stand 
in  a  certain  order  to  one  another.  Water  and 
air,  according  to  Plato,  are  “in  the  mean  be¬ 
tween  fire  and  earth”  and  have  “the  same  pro¬ 
portion  so  far  as  possible;  as  fire  is  to  air  so  is 
air  to  water,  and  as  air  is  to  water  so  is  water  to 
earth.”  The  quality  which  two  of  the  elements 
have  in  common  provides  the  mean.  Thus  fire 
and  air  are  joined  by  the  common  quality  of 
hot;  air  and  water  by  moist;  and  water  and 
earth  by  cold. 

When  their  analysis  reached  its  greatest  re¬ 
finement,  the  ancients  recognized  that  the 
earth,  air,  fire,  and  water  of  common  experience 
do  not  actually  have  the  purity  requisite  for 
elements.  They  are  “not  simple,  but  blended,” 
Aristotle  writes,  and  while  the  elements  “are 
indeed  similar  in  nature  to  them,  [they]  are 
not  identical  with  them.”  The  element  “corre¬ 
sponding  to  fire  is  ‘such-as-fire,’  not  fire;  that 
which  corresponds  to  air  is  ‘such-as-air,’  and  so 
on  with  the  rest  of  them.”  Thus  the  four  ele¬ 
ments  are  only  analogous  to,  for  they  are  purer 
than,  ordinary  earth,  air,  fire,  and  water;  yet 
their  names  continued  to  be  used  as  symbols 
for  the  true  elements,  a  connotation  which  is 


*403 

still  retained  when  we  speak  of  men  struggling 
against  or  battling  with  “the  elements.” 

“It  will  no  doubt  be  a  matter  of  surprise,” 
Lavoisier  writes  in  the  Preface  to  his  Elements 
of  Chemistry,  “that  in  a  treatise  upon  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  chemistry,  there  should  be  no  chapter 
on  the  constituent  and  elementary  parts  of 
matter;  but  I  shall  take  occasion,  in  this  place, 
to  remark  that  the  fondness  for  reducing  all  the 
bodies  in  nature  to  three  or  four  elements, 
proceeds  from  a  prejudice  which  has  descend¬ 
ed  to  us  from  the  Greek  philosophers.  The 
notion  of  four  elements,  which,  by  the  variety 
of  their  proportions,  compose  all  the  known 
substances  in  nature,  is  a  mere  hypothesis, 
assumed  long  before  the  first  principles  of  ex¬ 
perimental  philosophy  or  of  chemistry  had 
any  existence.” 

This  does  not  mean  that  Lavoisier  entirely 
rejects  the  notion  of  elements  in  chemical  anal¬ 
ysis.  On  the  contrary,  he  says  that  “we  must 
admit,  as  elements,  all  the  substances  into  which 
we  are  capable,  by  any  means,  to  reduce  bodies 
by  decomposition.”  His  quarrel  with  the  an¬ 
cients  chiefly  concerns  two  points.  The  first  is 
on  the  number  of  the  elements,  which  he  thinks 
experiment  has  shown  to  be  much  greater  than 
the  four  of  classical  theory.  The  second  is  on 
the  simplicity  of  the  experimentally  discovered 
elements.  They  can  be  called  atoms  or  simple 
bodies  only  if  we  do  not  thereby  imply  that  we 
know  them  to  be  absolutely  indivisible — either 
qualitatively  or  quantitatively.  We  are  not  en¬ 
titled  “to  affirm  that  these  substances  we  con¬ 
sider  as  simple  may  not  be  compounded  of  two, 
or  even  of  a  greater  number  of  principles” 
merely  because  we  have  not  yet  discovered 
“the  means  of  separating  them.” 

In  modern  physics  and  chemistry,  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  element  and  atom  seems  to 
be  abolished.  The  same  unit  of  matter  is  at  once 
both  an  atom  and  an  element.  The  table  of 
atomic  weights  is  also  a  chart  of  the  elements. 
The  classification  of  atoms  is  both  quantitative 
and  qualitative — qualitative  in  the  sense  that 
the  atoms  of  different  elementary  kinds  of  mat¬ 
ter  differ  in  their  active  properties. 

According  to  the  ancient  meaning  of  the 
terms,  the  molecule  would  seem  to  be  both  a 
mixture  and  a  compound — mixed,  in  that  it  can 


404 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


be  broken  up  into  other  \inds  of  matter;  com¬ 
pound ,  in  that  it  can  be  divided  into  smaller 
units  of  matter.  But  in  modern  theory  the 
meanings  of  “compound”  and  “mixture”  have 
also  changed,  the  molecule  being  classified  as  a 
compound  rather  than  a  mixture.  The  combi¬ 
nation  of  the  elements  to  form  molecular  com¬ 
pounds  is  determined  by  the  proportion  of 
their  weights  or  valences  rather  than  by  a  fu¬ 
sion  of  their  qualities. 

The  most  radical  change  in  theory  is  not 
this,  however;  nor  is  it  the  increase  in  the  num¬ 
ber  of  the  elements  from  four  to  more  than 
ninety-four;  nor  the  ordering  of  the  elements 
by  reference  to  their  atomic  weights  rather 
than  by  the  contrariety  of  their  qualities.  It 
results  from  the  discovery  that  an  atom  is  not 
uncut  table  and  that  new  elements  can  be  pro¬ 
duced  by  atomic  fission.  Faraday’s  experimen¬ 
tal  work  in  ionization  and  in  electro-chemical 
decomposition  lies  at  the  beginning  of  the 
physical  researches  which  have  penetrated  the 
interior  structure  of  the  atom  and  isolated 
smaller  units  of  matter.  Even  before  atoms 
were  experimentally  exploded,  analysis  had  pic¬ 
tured  them  as  constituted  by  positive  and  neg¬ 
ative  charges. 

As  the  result  of  his  researches,  Faraday,  for 
example,  conceives  of  atoms  as  “mere  centres 
of  forces  or  powers,  not  particles  of  matter,  in 
which  the  powers  themselves  reside.”  The  atom 
thus  ceases  to  be  “a  little  unchangeable,  im¬ 
penetrable  piece  of  matter,”  and  “consists  of 
the  powers”  it  exercises.  What  was  ordinarily 
referred  to  “under  the  term  shape  ’  becomes 
the  “disposition  and  relative  intensity  of  the 
forces”  that  are  observed. 

With  Faraday  it  is  evident  that  the  meaning 
of  “atom”  has  departed  far  from  the  sense  in 
which  Lucretius  speaks  of  “units  of  solid  single¬ 
ness”  or  Newton  of  “solid,  massy,  hard,  im¬ 
penetrable,  movable  particles  .  .  .  incompara¬ 
bly  harder  than  any  porous  bodies  compounded 
of  them;  even  so  very  hard  as  never  to  wear  or 
break  in  pieces;  no  ordinary  power  being  able 
to  divide  what  God  himself  made  one  in  the 
first  creation.”  With  the  conception  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  as  different  kinds  of  atoms;  then,  with 
the  discovery  of  radio-active  elements  under¬ 
going  slow  disintegration;  finally,  with  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  isotopes  and  new  elements  through 


atomic  change;  the  meaning  of  “element”  has 
moved  equally  far  from  its  original  sense. 

Do  these  altered  meanings  change  the  basic 
issues  in  the  philosophy  of  nature?  Are  these 
issues  resolved  or  rendered  meaningless  by  ex¬ 
perimental  science? 

The  central  point  in  the  theory  of  elements 
is  an  irreducible  qualitative  diversity  in  kinds 
of  matter.  The  elements  of  modern  chemistry 
may  no  longer  be  elementary  types  of  matter  in 
the  strict  sense  of  the  word;  but  the  kind  of  dif¬ 
ference  which  would  be  strictly  elemental  may 
be  found  in  the  distinction  of  the  positive,  the 
negative,  and  the  neutral  with  respect  to  the 
electrical  charge  of  sub-atomic  particles. 

Similarly,  the  central  point  in  atomism  as  a 
philosophy  of  nature  is  the  existence  of  ab¬ 
solutely  indivisible  units  or  quanta  of  matter; 
in  other  words,  the  denial  that  matter  is  in¬ 
finitely  divisible,  that  any  particle,  no  matter 
how  small,  is  capable  of  being  broken  into 
smaller  parts.  The  strict  conception  of  the 
atom  is,  therefore,  not  invalidated  by  the  ex¬ 
perimental  discovery  that  the  particles  called 
“atoms”  are  not  atomic ,  that  they  are  them¬ 
selves  complex  structures  of  moving  particles, 
and  that  they  can  be  physically  divided. 

It  makes  no  difference  to  the  philosophical 
atomist  whether  the  particles  which  constitute 
molecules  or  the  particles— the  electrons  and 
protons,  the  neutrons  and  mesons — which  con¬ 
stitute  “atoms,”  are  atomic.  Even  if  further  ex¬ 
perimental  work  should  succeed  in  dividing 
these  “sub-atomic”  particles,  the  question 
could  still  be  asked:  Is  matter  infinitely  divisi¬ 
ble,  regardless  of  our  actual  power  to  continue 
making  divisions  ad  infinitum ?  Since  the  ques¬ 
tion,  when  thus  formulated,  cannot  be  put  to 
experimental  test,  the  issue  concerning  atoms 
would  remain. 

That  issue  would  not  refer  to  any  particle  of 
matter  defined  at  a  certain  stage  of  physical 
analysis  or  experimental  discovery.  It  would 
consist  in  the  opposition  of  two  views  of  the 
nature  of  matter  and  the  constitution  of  the  ma¬ 
terial  universe:  the  affirmation,  on  the  one 
hand,  that  truly  atomic  particles  must  exist; 
and  the  denial,  on  the  other,  that  no  particle 
of  matter  can  be  atomic.  The  affirmative  argu¬ 
ments  of  Lucretius  and  Newton  make  the  con- 


Chapter  21:  ELEMENT 


•405 


stancy  of  nature  and  the  indestructibility  of 
matter  depend  on  the  absolute  solidity  and 
impenetrability  of  matter’s  ultimate  parts.  The 
negative  arguments  of  Aristotle  and  Descartes 
proceed  from  the  divisibility  of  whatever  is 
continuous  to  the  conclusion  that  any  unit  of 
matter  must  have  parts. 

The  philosophical  doctrine  of  atomism,  in  the 
form  in  which  Lucretius  adopts  it  from  Epicu¬ 
rus,  insists  upon  void  as  the  other  basic  princi¬ 
ple  of  the  universe.  “Nature,”  he  writes,  “is 
founded  on  two  things:  there  are  bodies  and 
there  is  void  in  which  these  bodies  are  placed 
and  through  which  they  move  about.”  Com¬ 
pound  bodies  are  divisible  because  the  atoms  of 
which  they  are  composed  are  not  absolutely 
continuous  with  one  another,  but  are  separated 
by  void  or  empty  space.  That  is  why  they  are 
not  solid  or  impenetrable,  as  are  the  atomic 
particles  which  are  composed  of  matter  en¬ 
tirely  without  void.  In  Newton’s  language 
hardness  must  be  “reckoned  the  property  of  all 
uncompounded  matter,”  for  if  “compound 
bodies  are  so  very  hard  as  we  find  some  of  them 
to  be,  and  yet  are  very  porous,”  how  much 
harder  must  be  “simple  particles  which  are 
void  of  pores.” 

The  opponents  of  atomism  tend  to  deny  the 
existence  not  only  of  atoms,  but  of  the  void  as 
well.  Descartes,  for  example,  denies  that  there 
can  be  “any  atoms  or  parts  of  matter  which  are 
indivisible  of  their  own  nature.  .  .  .  For  how¬ 
ever  small  the  parts  are  supposed  to  be,  yet 
because  they  are  necessarily  extended  we  are 
always  able  in  thought  to  divide  any  one  of 
them  into  two  or  more  parts.”  For  the  same 
reason,  he  maintains,  there  cannot  be  “a  space 
in  which  there  is  no  substance  .  .  .  because  the 
extension  of  space  or  internal  place  is  not  dif¬ 
ferent  from  that  of  body.”  The  physical  world, 
on  this  view,  is  conceived  as  what  the  ancients 
called  a  plenum,  continuously  filled  with  mat¬ 
ter.  This  controversy  over  void  and  plenum  is 
elaborated  in  the  chapter  on  Space. 

Although  he  uses  the  language  of  the  atom- 
ists,  Faraday  seems  to  agree  with  Descartes 
rather  than  with  Newton.  He  pictures  matter 
as  “continuous  throughout,”  with  no  distinc¬ 
tion  between  “its  atoms  and  any  intervening 
space.”  Atoms,  he  thinks,  instead  of  being  ab¬ 
solutely  hard,  are  “highly  elastic,”  and  they  are 


all  “mutually  penetrable.”  He  compares  the 
combination  and  separation  of  two  atoms  with 
“the  conjunction  of  two  sea  waves  of  different 
velocities  into  one,  their  perfect  union  for  a 
time,  and  final  separation  into  the  constituent 
waves.”  Such  a  view  of  the  constitution  of  mat¬ 
ter,  Faraday  writes,  leads  to  “the  conclusion 
that  matter  fills  all  space,  or  at  least  all  space  to 
which  gravitation  extends.” 

The  very  continuity — the  voidlessness  or 
lack  of  pores — which  the  opponents  of  atom¬ 
ism  insist  is  the  source  of  matter’s  infinite  divis¬ 
ibility,  the  atomists  seem  to  give  as  the  reason 
why  the  ultimate  particles  are  without  parts, 
hence  simple,  solid,  and  indivisible. 

Ox  STILL  OTHER  POINTS,  there  is  disagreement 
among  the  atomists  themselves.  Not  all  of 
them  go  to  the  extreme  of  denying  existence  or 
reality  to  anything  immaterial;  nor  do  all  insist 
that  whatever  exists  is  either  an  atom  or  made 
up  of  atoms  and  void.  In  the  tradition  of  the 
great  books,  the  extreme  doctrine  is  found  in 
Lucretius  alone.  Though  it  is  shared  by  Hobbes, 
and  is  reflected  in  the  Leviathan,  it  is  not  ex¬ 
pounded  there.  It  is  developed  in  his  treatise 
Concerning  Body. 

For  Lucretius,  the  atoms  are  eternal  as  well 
as  indestructible.  The  “first  beginnings”  of 
all  other  things  are  themselves  without  be¬ 
ginning.  “In  time  gone  by,”  Lucretius  writes, 
“they  moved  in  the  same  way  in  which  now 
they  move,  and  will  ever  hereafter  be  borne 
along  in  like  manner”  through  an  endless  suc¬ 
cession  of  worlds,  each  of  which  comes  to  be 
through  a  concourse  of  atoms,  each  in  turn 
perishing  as  with  decay  that  concourse  is  dis¬ 
solved.  Newton  writes  in  what  seems  to  be  a 
contrary  vein.  “It  seems  probable  to  me,”  he 
says,  “that  God  in  the  beginning  formed  mat¬ 
ter  in  solid,  massy,  hard,  impenetrable,  mova¬ 
ble  particles.”  “All  material  things,”  he  contin¬ 
ues,  “seem  to  have  been  composed  of  the  hard 
and  solid  particles  above  mentioned,  variously 
associated  in  the  first  Creation  by  the  counsel 
of  an  intelligent  Agent.” 

Nor  does  Newton  appeal  to  the  properties 
and  motions  of  the  ultimate  particles  except  to 
explain  the  characteristics  and  laws  of  the  phys¬ 
ical  world.  Unlike  Lucretius  and  Hobbes,  he 
does  not — and  there  seems  to  be  some  evidence 


406 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


in  the  Optics  that  he  would  not — reduce  the 
soul  of  man  to  a  flow  of  extremely  mobile 
atoms,  or  attempt  to  account  for  all  psycho¬ 
logical  phenomena  (thought  as  well  as  sen¬ 
sation  and  memory)  in  terms  of  atom  buffeting 
atom. 

The  atomic  theory  of  the  cause  of  sensation 
is  not  limited  to  the  materialists.  Writers  like 
Locke,  who  conceive  man  as  having  a  spiritual 
nature  as  well  as  a  body,  adopt  an  atomistic 
view  of  the  material  world.  “The  different  mo¬ 
tions  and  figures,  bulk  and  number  of  such  par¬ 
ticles,”  he  writes,  “affecting  the  several  organs 
of  our  senses,  produce  in  us  those  different  sen¬ 
sations  which  we  have  from  the  colours  and 


smells  of  bodies.”  Furthermore,  the  distinction 
which  is  here  implicit — between  primary  and 
secondary  sense  qualities — is  not  peculiar  to 
atomism.  It  can  also  be  found  in  a  critic  of 
atomism  like  Descartes. 

The  atomistic  account  of  sensation  is,  never¬ 
theless,  of  critical  significance  in  the  contro¬ 
versy  concerning  this  type  of  materialism.  Crit¬ 
ics  of  atomism  have  contended  that  the  truth 
of  atomism  as  a  materialistic  philosophy  can  be 
no  greater  than  the  measure  of  its  success  in  ex¬ 
plaining  sensation — the  source  upon  which  the 
atomist  himself  relies  for  his  knowledge  of  na¬ 
ture — in  terms  of  the  properties  and  motions  of 
particles  themselves  imperceptible. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  concept  of  element  407 

2.  The  comparison  of  element,  principle,  and  cause 

3.  The  theory  of  the  elements  in  natural  philosophy,  physics,  and  chemistry  408 

30.  Element  and  atom:  qualitative  and  quantitative  indivisibility 
3b.  The  enumeration  of  the  elements:  their  properties  and  order 
3c.  The  mutability  of  the  elements:  their  transmutation 

3 d.  Combinations  of  the  elements:  compounds  and  mixtures  409 

4.  The  discovery  of  elements  in  other  arts  and  sciences 

5.  The  theory  of  atomism:  critiques  of  atomism  410 

50.  The  conception  of  atomic  bodies:  imperceptible,  indestructible,  and  indivisible 

5 b.  Arguments  for  and  against  the  existence  of  atoms:  the  issue  concerning  the 
infinite  divisibility  of  matter 

5 c.  Atoms  and  the  void  as  the  ultimate  constituents  of  reality 

5 d.  The  number,  variety,  and  properties  of  atoms:  the  production  of  sensible  things 

by  their  collocation  41 1 

$e.  The  atomistic  account  of  sensation  and  thought:  the  idola 

5/.  The  atomic  constitution  of  mind  and  soul:  its  bearing  on  immortality 

5 g.  The  explanation  of  natural  phenomena  by  reference  to  the  properties  and  mo¬ 
tions  of  atoms 

5 h.  The  atomistic  account  of  the  origin  and  decay  of  the  world,  its  evolution  and 
order 


412 


Chapter  21:  ELEMENT 


407 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  1 1 6  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  low  er  halvesof  the  right-hand  sideof 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163bl64c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g .,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45— (D)  II  Esdras,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  w'hole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  concept  of  element 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  455d-456a  /  Theaetetus , 
544d-547c  esp  544d-545a,  547a  /  Laws ,  bk  x, 
761b-d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  13  204c-206a 
esp  [i50bi8-26]  205b-c  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
259a-b  /  Heavens ,  bk  hi,  ch  3  [302aio]-cH  4 
[302b2o]  393c-394a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[983a24]-cH  5  [986b8]  501c-504c;  ch  6  [987b 
I9]-ch  7  [988^1]  505d-506c;  ch  8  506d-508c; 
ch  9  [992ai— 9]  510b;  [992ai8~993aio]  510b- 
511c  esp  [992bi8-993aio]  511a-c;  bk  iii,  ch  1 
[995^7-29]  514b;  ch  3  [998a2o-bi4]  517a-b; 
bk  v,  ch  3  534c-d;  ch  4  [ioi4b27-34]  535a-b; 
ch  25  [i023bi7~25]  545b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  7  555a- 
556b;  ch  10  558a-559d;  ch  17  [104 ibi  1—33] 
565d-566a,c;  bk  x,  ch  i  [io52b8-i4]  579a; 
bk  xii,  ch  4-5  599d-601a;  bk  xiv,  ch  2 
[io88bi4-28]  620d-621a  /  Soul ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[4ioai2-23]  640a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1252^8-24] 
445b 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  ii,  829a;  833a  b 

17  Plotinus:  Third Enneady  tr  i,  ch  3  79b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  16,  522a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  66,  a  2 
345d-347b;  q  91,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  484a-485b 


20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  74,  a  1,  rep  3  925c-926c;  q  91,  a  5,  ans  and 
rep  4  1024a-1025b 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  vm,  14b-c;  xn,  22b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  lOOc-d;  103a;  105b-106a; 
137a-140c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  3b-4a 
esp  3d-4a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  327a-331b  passim 

2.  The  comparison  of  element,  principle,  and 
cause 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  455 d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a-b;  ch  4-9 
262a-268d  passim  /  Generation  and  Corruption , 
bk  11,  ch  i  [329a24~b2]  429a-b  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  1,  ch  6  [987bi9~23]  505d;  [988a7~i6] 
506a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  3  [998a20-bi3]  5l7a-b;  bk 
v,  ch  1-3  533a-534d;  ch  24  545a-b;  bk  vii, 
ch  16  [io4obi6-23]  564d;  ch  17  [i04ibi  1—33] 
565d-566a,c;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [io43b5~i4]  567d- 
568a;  bk  x,  ch  i  [i052b8-i4]  579a;  bk  xii,  ch 
1  598a-c;  ch  4-5  599d-601a  esp  ch  4  [107015 
22-35]  600b 

17  Plotinus:  Third Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3,  79c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  33,  a 
1,  rep  1  180d-181c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  3d-4a 


408 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


3.  The  theory  of  the  elements  in  natural  phi¬ 
losophy,  physics,  and  chemistry 

7  Plato:  Phaedo,  240d-242b  /  1'imaens,  448b-d; 
455c-462b  /  Philebus ,  618c-619a  /  Laws,  bk  x, 
760a-761d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [i84aio]-CH  2 
[i84b24]  259a-c;  ch  4-9  262a-268d  /  Heavens , 
bk  111-iv  389b,d-405a,c  /  Generation  and  Cor¬ 
ruption  409a-441a,c  esp  bk  ii,  ch  1-3  428b, d- 
431a  /  Meteorology  445a-494d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2-3  167b- 
169a;  ch  6  169c-170c;  bk  ii,  ch  4,  186d-187b 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [635-920] 
8d-12b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  i,  35a 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  4,  ans  5a-6a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  74  925b- 
935a, c  passim;  q  91,  a  4  1022d-1023d;  a  5, 
ans  and  rep  4  1024a-1025b 
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  iii,  60c-d 
45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry  la-159d 
passim 

45  Faraday  :  Researches  in  Electricity,  383b-386c 
53  James  :  Psychology,  876a 

3 a.  Element  and  atom:  qualitative  and  quanti¬ 
tative  indivisibility 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i84bi5~22] 
259b-c  /  Heavens,  bk  iii,  ch  4  [303a3]-CH  5 
[304^3]  394b-396a;  ch  7  [305b27~3o6b2] 
397a-d;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [3o8b29~3ioai3]  400b- 
401c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  1,  ch  4  [985b3~ 19] 
503c-d;  bk  v,  ch  3  [10 14^-6]  534d;  ch  25 
545b-c  /  Soul,  bk  1,  ch  2  [403b28-404a5l  633a-b 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [599-920] 
8b-12b  esp  [705-920]  9c-12b 
17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3  79b-c 
30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  45  110b; 

aph  66,  114d-115a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  161d-163a 
45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  3b- 
4a;  part  hi,  87c-d;  103b-c;  105d 

3 b.  The  enumeration  of  the  elements:  their 
properties  and  order 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  98d  /  Phaedo,  247b  248c  / 
Timaeus,  448b-d;  458b-460b  /  Philebus,  618c- 
619a  /  Laws,  bk  x,  760a-751d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iii,  ch  5  [204bio-205a 
6]  282c-283a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [2o8b8-22]  287b  / 
Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  1-8  359a-369a;  cii  9  [27815 
22-35]  370a;  bk  ii,  ch  3  377c-378a;  bk  iii, 
cii  1  389b,d-391c;  ch  3-5  393c-396a;  bk  iii, 
cii  7  [3o6ai]-BK  iv,  ch  6  [3i3b24]  397b-405a,c 
esp  bk  iv,  ch  3-5  401c-404d  /  Generation  and 
Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  i  409a-410c;  bk  ii,  ch 
1-3  428b.d-431a  /  Meteorology,  bk  i,  ch  2-3 
445b-447d;  bk  iv,  cii  i  [378bio-26]  482b, d- 
483a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [983a24]-cH  5 
[986^8]  501c-504c;  ch  7  [988*17-31]  506b-c; 
ch  8  506d-508c;  bk  v,  ch  4  [ioi4b27-35] 
535a  b  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  2  [404^-3 1]  633d- 


3  to  3  c 

634a;  ch  5  [409^ 8-411*7]  639c-641a;  bk  iii, 
ch  1  [424b2o-425ai3]  656b,d-657a  /  Sense  and 
the  Sensible ,  ch  2-5  674a-683b  passim 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[646*12 -b2o]  170a-d;  ch  2  [648a2o]-CH  3 
[649b22]  172c-174b  /  Generation  of  Animals , 
bk  iii,  ch  11  [76^7-24]  302c-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2-3,  167d- 
169a;  ch  6  169c-170c;  bk  ii,  ch  4,  186d-187a; 
ch  8,  193b-d 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  ii,  829a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [705-715] 
9d;  [763-788]  lOb-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  12,  188d- 
189a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [724-731]  230b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3  36b-d; 
ch  6-7  37d-39c  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  2 
192a-b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  9,  285d- 
286a;  tr  vii,  ch  ii  326d-327d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  2  265b- 
266a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  66, 

A  I,  CONTRARY  and  REP  tO  CONTRARY  343d- 

345c;  a  2  345d-347b;  q  71,  a  i,  rep  2  367a- 
368b;  q  91,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  484a-485b; 
q  1 15,  a  3,  rep  2  588c-589c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  74  925b-935a,c  passim,  esp  a  5  929d-931b; 
q  79,  a  1,  rep  4  951b-953b;  q  91,  a  4  1022d- 
1023d 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  i,  13b-d;  bk  iii, 
60c-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  491a-b; 
496a-c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  45  110b; 
aph  66,  114d-115a;  bk  ii,  aph  40,  171a-173a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [708-721]  150b- 
151a 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  3b-4a; 
part  1,  29d-33b;  part  ii,  53a-55a;  57c-65a,c 

45  Faraday  :  Researches  in  Electricity,  383b-386c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  248d-249a 

3 c.  The  mutability  of  the  elements:  their  trans¬ 
mutation 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  456b-c;  458d-460b 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  3  360d-362a; 
bk  iii,  ch  1  [298a24~299ai]  389b,d-390b;  ch 
2  [3oib33-302a9]  393b;  ch  6  [304b23]-cH  8 
[3o6b29]  396a-398a  /  Generation  and  Corrup¬ 
tion,  bk  1,  ch  1  409a-410c;  ch  6  [y22hi-2i] 
420b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  4-6  431b-435a  /  Meteorol¬ 
ogy,  bk  1,  ch  3  [339a36-b3]  445d  /  Metaphysics, 
bk  1,  cii  8  [989s!  8-29]  507b-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  2,  167d- 
168b;  bk  ii,  ch  3,  185c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [635-829] 
8d-lla;  bkv  [235-305 |64a-65a:  [380-415)663-0 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b; 
bk  iv,  sect  46  267c;  bk  v,  sect  13  271b; 
bk  vii,  sect  18  281a;  sect  23  281b:  sect  25 
281c;  sect  50  283a;  bk  x,  sect  7  297b-c 


3d  to  4 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica ,  part  i,  q  66, 
a  2,  an’s  345d-347b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  74,  aa  i-6  925c-932b  passim;  q  91,  a  5,  ans 
and  rep  4  1024a  1025b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  mi  [121- 
148]  116b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Canon  s  Yeoman's  Prologue  471b- 
474a  /  Canon  s  Yeoman's  Tale  474b  487a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  14b-c 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  531a  b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  148a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  299d-300a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  262c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  parti,  41bc 

3 d.  Combinations  of  the  elements:  compounds 
and  mixtures 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  448b  d;  449c-450a;  452d- 
454a;  460b-462c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  cii  14  [i5ia20-32] 
206a  /  Physics,  bk  iii,  ch  5  [204bio-22]  282c-d; 
bk  vii,  ch  3  [246b2-i9]  329c-330a  /  Heavens, 
bk  1,  ch  2  [268b2j- 269a3o]  360a-c;  ch  5 
[27ibi8-23]  362d-363a;  bk  iii,  ch  3  [302*10]- 
ch  4  [302b28]  393c-394a;  ch  8  [306^2-29 ] 
398a;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [31  ia30-bi4]  402d-403a  / 
Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  1  [3i4a25~ 
b2 ]  409c;  ch  2  [3 1 5a28— 33]  410d;  ch  10  426c- 
428d;  bk  ii,  ch  6-8  433d-436d  /  Meteorology, 
bk  iii,  ch  6  [378ai3]-BK  iv,  ch  12  [39ob2i] 
482c-494d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  vii,  ch  17  [104115 
12-33]  565d-566a,c  /  Soul ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [404b7~ 
29]  633d-634a;  [405b8— 3 1  ]  634d-635a;  ch  5 
[409bi8— 41  ia7]  639c-641a;  bk  iii,  ch  13 
[435au-b4]  668a-c  /  Sense  and  the  Sensible, 
ch  2-3  674a-678b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[640b5~i8]  163a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [646ai2-b2o] 
170a-d 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  15  5c-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  1,  ch  2-3  167b- 
169a;  ch  6  169c-170c;  bk  ii,  ch  8,  193b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [635-920] 

8d-12b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  13,  189a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  x,  sect  7,  297b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  929b-930a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  6-8  37d- 
39d;  tr  vii,  ch  1-2  62d-64b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  2  265b- 
266a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica,  part  i,  q  71, 
a  1  367a-368b;  q  76,  a  4,  rep  4  393a-394c; 
q  91,  a  1  484a-485b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  2, 
a  1,  ans  710a-711c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  74,  a  i, 
rep  3  925c-926c;  a  4.  ans  928d-929d;  a  5 
929d-931b:  Q  79,  a  i,  rep  4  951b-953b;  q  80, 
a  3,  rep  3  958b-959c;  q  82,  a  i,  ans  968a- 
970c;  Q  91,  a  5  1024a-1025b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  vii  [121- 
148]  116b-c 


409 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  i,  13b  14d;  bk  ii, 
29c  30a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  495c-496d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organtim ,  bk  i,  apii  66  114d 
115c;  bk  11,  aph  7  139c  140a;  apii  40,  171a- 
173a;  apii  48,  181a  184a 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  367a  b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  65 
425d-426a 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i,  22c- 
52a,c;  part  ii,  54b,d  55d:  57c  86a,c;  part 
iii,  87c-d;  I03b-c;  105d;  117a  128c  esp  117a- 
118a 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  309a-312a; 
312c-313d:  314a-b;  315a-b;  327a  422a, c  pas¬ 
sim;  541b,d-584a,c  passim 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  248d  249a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  104a-105a;  876a 

4.  The  discovery  of  elements  in  other  arts  and 
sciences 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  104c-110d  esp  106a-107b  / 
Republic,  bk  iii,  333c-d  /  Theaetetus,  544c- 
548c  /  Philcbus,  615c-617d;  618d-619b;  635b- 
639a, c 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  2  [iai 7  -19]  5b  /  In¬ 
terpretation,  ch  4  [i6b27— 35]  26a  /  Prior  Analyt¬ 
ics,  bk  1,  ch  1  [24bi7-22]  39c;  cii  24  [40bi8- 

22]  57b:  [4 ia4— 7]  57d  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk 
1,  ch  4  [73a33-b2]  lOOb-c;  ch  7  [75a38~b7! 
103c;  ch  23  [84bi9-85ai]  115c-116a;  ch  27 
119b  /  Topics,  bk  1,  ch  4-9  144b-147b  esp  cii 
4  [ioibn-25]  144b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [139^24-32] 
192a;  ch  13  204c-206a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i, 
ch  5  [985b22-986a2i]  503d-504b;  ch  6  [987° 
19-23]  505d;  [9S8a7-i6]  506a-b;  cii  9  [992b 
i8~993aio]  511a-c;  bk  iii,  cii  3  [998a2o-bn] 
517a-b;  ch  6  [ioo2bu-25]  521b-c;  bk  v,  ch  3 
534c-d;  bk  xii,  ch  4-5  599d-601a  /  Soul,  bk  i, 
ch  2  [404^-29]  633d-634a;  ch  5  [409b23-4iia 

23]  639d-641b;  bk  iii,  ch  5  [43oaio-i4]  662c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  cii  i 
[646aio]-cH  2  [647b3o]  170a-172a  /  Politics,  bk 
1,  ch  i  [i252ai8-24]  445b;  bk  iii,  cii  1  [1274^ 
3i-i275a2]  471b;  ch  3  [  1 276a34-bi 5]  473b-c  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  iii,  cii  13  667b-d  /  Poetics,  ch  6 
684a-685a;  ch  20  692b-693a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  6  169c- 
170c;  bk  ii,  ch  6  188c  191a;  bk  iii,  ch  15, 
215a-b 

11  Euclid:  Elements  la-396b 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  ii,  829b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  1  [823-829] 
11a;  bk  11  [688-699]  23d 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1016b-1017a 

IS  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  16,  522a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  119, 
a  1,  rep  3  604c-607b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
179,  a  2,  rep  2  607a-c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  80, 
a  3  958b-959c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
138a-d 


Chapter  21:  ELEMENT 


410 

(4.  The  discovery  of  elements  in  other  arts  and 
sciences .) 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  316d  /  On 
Animal  Generation ,  429c-438c  esp  432d-433b; 
488d-496d  esp  490d-491c,  494a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  52b-d; 
76d-77c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  vi,  8b-9a;  vm,  14b-c; 
xn,  21b-24c  /  Discourse ,  part  vi,  62a  /  0£- 
jections  and  Replies ,  128a-129a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii, 
sect  1-2  127d-128b;  ch  vii,  sect  io  133a-b; 
ch  xn,  sect  1-2  147b-d;  sect  8  148c-d;  ch 
xv,  sect  9  164b-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  i  165c-d; 
ch  xxi,  sect  75  200b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  iv,  sect 
15-16  263ac 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  20b-23b  esp 
20b-21c,  22b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  341 
110c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  6b-c;  19c-26d  passim,  esp 
20b-22a,  25d-26d;  62a;  85d-88d  esp  85d, 
88c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  469a-470c; 
bk  xiv,  589c-590c;  epilogue  ii,  694d-695c 

53  James:  Psychology,  xiiib;  18b-19b;  116b-117a; 
126a; 150a 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  758a 

5.  The  theory  of  atomism:  critiques  of  atom¬ 
ism 

7  Plato:  Sophist,  567a-568a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i84bi5-22] 
259b-c  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  7  [275^ 0-276^ 8] 
367a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [303^— b8]  394b-d;  bk 
iv,  ch  2  [3o8b29-3ioai4]  400b-401c  /  Genera¬ 
tion  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  2  410d-413c; 
ch  8  [325a23-bn]  423d-424b  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  1,  ch  4  [985b3— 1 9]  503c-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12-14 
172d-179d;  bk  ii,  ch  6  188c-191a 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things  la-97a,c 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  3,  263b-c; 

bk  ix,  sect  39  295a;  bk  x,  sect  6  297a-b 
17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  7,  52c  / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  2,  78d;  ch  3  79b-c  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  2-4  192a-193c 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  115, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  3,5  585d-587c 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  263a 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  355b-d; 
495c-496d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  8  140b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  rule  iii  270b- 
271a  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  531b-542a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  25-26  321a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  161d-163a 
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  850b, d- 
855a, c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xi, 

341d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  876a;  882a-884b 


5  to  5c 

5a.  The  conception  of  atomic  bodies:  imper¬ 
ceptible,  indestructible,  and  indivisible 

8  Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i, 
ch  1  [314^2-24]  409b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  vii, 
ch  13  [i039a2-n]  562d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12  172d- 
173c;  bk  11,  ch  6  188c-191a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [146-328] 
2d-5a;  [483-634]  7a-8d 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  7,  52c 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  i,  prop  73,  schol 
133b-134a;  bk  iii,  rule  iii  270b-271a  /  Op¬ 
tics,  bk  iii,  537a-b;  541b;  543a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  25  321a-b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  386c  d; 
850b,d-855a,c 

53  James:  Psychology,  68a 

5b.  Arguments  for  and  against  the  existence  of 
atoms:  the  issue  concerning  the  infinite 
divisibility  of  matter 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iii,  ch  6-7  284b-286c 
/  Heavens,  bk  iii,  ch  6  [3c>4b23-305aio] 
396a- b;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [3iia30-bi]  402d-403a  / 
Generation  a?id  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  2  (3i5b25— 
3i7ai7]  411b-413a;  ch8  423b-425d/  Sense  and 
the  Sensible ,  ch  6  [445b4~446a2o]  683b-684c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [146-328] 
2d-5a;  [483-920]  7a-12b;  bk  ii  [62-141]  15d- 
16d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  x,  sect  6  297a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  7 
52a-c  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3  79b-c  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  i,  139d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  7, 
a  3,  rep  3  32c-33c;  a  4,  ans  33d-34c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  139c- 
141  d ;  147d-148b;  151d-153a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  66,  115c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  15,  schol 
360b-361d 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  rule  iii  270b- 
271a  /  Optics,  bk  ii,  478b-485b;  bk  iii,  537a- 
541b  esp  541b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xvii,  sect  12  170d;  ch  xxix,  sect  16  237b- 
238a;  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  io,  351c-352a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  47 
421c-422a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  131c;  137a-140c;  152d; 
161d-163a 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103d 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i, 
9a-d 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  386c-d; 
850b,d-855a,c 

5c.  Atoms  and  the  void  as  the  ultimate  con¬ 
stituents  of  reality 

7  Plato:  Sophist,  567a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [1 88ai 8—23] 
263c;  bk  iv,  ch  6-9  292c-297c  /  Heavens,  bk 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


5d  to  5 g 

i,  ch  7  [275b3o-276ai8]  367a  b;  ch  9  [279*12- 
18]  370b-c;  bk  hi,  ch  6  [305*14-22]  396b  c; 
bk  iv,  ch  2  [3o8b29-3io*i4]  400b-401c;  ch  5 
[3i2b20-3i3*i4]  404b  d  /  Generation  and  Cor¬ 
ruption ,  bk  i,  cn  8  423b  425d  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  1,  ch  4  [985b3— 1 9]  503c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  5 
[1009*22-37]  528d;  bk  vii,  ch  13  [1039*2-11] 
562d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  12,  173a; 

bk  11,  ch  6  188c-191a  esp  189a-b 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [265-634] 
4b-8d  esp  [418-448]  6b  c 
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day, 
141c-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  8  140b 
34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  prop  6,  corol 
iii-iv  281b  /  Optics ,  bk  iii,  528b 
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  850b, d- 
855a, c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  106a;  882a-883a 

The  number,  variety,  and  properties  of 
atoms:  the  production  of  sensible  things 
by  their  collocation 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i84bi 5— 22] 
259b-c;  ch  5  [188*18-25]  263c;  bk  iii,  ch  4 
[203*33-b2]  281b  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [27515 
30-276*18]  367a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [303*3-b8] 
394b-d;  ch  7  [305b27-3o6*i]  397a-b;  bk  iv, 
ch  2  [3o8b29-3io*i4]  400b-401c  /  Generation 
and  Corruption ,  bk  1,  ch  1  [314*22-24]  409b-c; 
ch  2  [315*34-316*4]  410d-411c;  ch  10  [327b 
34-328*18]  427b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  4 
[9^5b3_I9]  503c-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  12, 
173a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  6, 189a-190a 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [62-141] 
15d-16d;  [184-250]  17b-18b;  [333-599]  19b- 
22c;  [730-1022]  24b'28a 
17  Plotinus:  Third Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3,  79b 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  495c-496a 
34  Newton:  Optics ,  bk  iii,  536b-537b;  539a-b 

34  Huygens  :  Light ,  ch  iii,  566b-569b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxvi,  sect  2  217b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  xx,  sect  15, 
393b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi,  div 
104,  498c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  parti,  13a-d 
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  850b, d- 
855a, c 

53  James:  Psychology,  104a-b;  876a 

5e.  The  atomistic  account  of  sensation  and 
thought:  the  idola 

7  Plato:  Meno ,  177b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [398-443] 
20a-c;  [865-990]  26a-27c;  bk  iii  [231-395] 
33a-35a;  bk  iv  [26-906]  44b-56a  esp  [26-268] 
44b-47d,  [722-817]  53d-54d 
17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  2,  78d;  ch 
3  79b-c  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  vii,  ch  6-8,  194b- 
196c 


411 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  84,  a 
6,  ans  447c-449a 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  518b  519b;  522a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch 
iv,  sect  10  261b  d;  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  5 
350a  b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  98a  117b  esp  98b  103b, 
115a 

5/.  The  atomic  constitution  of  mind  and  soul: 
its  bearing  on  immortality 

8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  2  [403^8-404* 
15]  633a-b;  [405*8-13]  634b;  ch  3  [4o6bi5- 
26]  636a-b;  ch  4  [409*10)^11  5  [409bi8] 
639a-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12  172d- 
173c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [94-869] 
31b-41a  esp  [161-322]  32b-34b;  bk  iv  [916— 
961]  56b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  7,  52c; 
tr  ix,  ch  5,  68b  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  3 
79b-c  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  2-4  192a- 
193c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  93  431b; 
sect  141  441a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  126c-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  95a-118b  esp  95b-98a, 
103a-106b,  117a-118b 

5 g.  The  explanation  of  natural  phenomena  by 
reference  to  the  properties  and  motions 
of  atoms 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  iv,  ch  2  [308^9- 
310*14]  400b-401c;  ch  4  [3ii*30-bi]  402d- 
403a;  ch  5  [3i2b2o]-CH  6  [3 i3b25]  404b- 
405a, c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  1,  ch 

2  410d-413c;  ch  8  423b-425d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  12,  172d- 
173b;  ch  14,  177a-178d;  bk  ii,  ch  6  188c- 
191a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [265-328] 
4b-5a;  bk  ii  [184-215]  17b-d;  [333-477]  19b- 
21a;  [522-540]  21c-d;  [757-771]  24c-d;  bk  iv 
[524-614]  51a-52b;  bk  vi  80a-97a,c 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  2,  78d;  ch 

3  79b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  115, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  3,5  585d-587c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  34c-35a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day,  139c- 
141d;  15ld-153a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  355b-d; 
495c-496d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  45b-c 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  lb- 2a  /  Optics,  bk  iii, 
531b-542a 

34  Huygens:  Light ,  ch  iii,  566b-569b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  25-26  321a-c 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  850b, d- 
855a, c 

53  J ames  :  Psychology,  882a-884b 


Chapter  21:  ELEMENT 


412  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5 h 


(5.  The  theory  of  atomism:  critiques  of  atomism?) 

5b.  The  atomistic  account  of  the  origin  and  de¬ 
cay  of  the  world,  its  evolution  and  order 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  i  [1008- 
1037]  13c-d;  bk  11  [1023-1174]  28a-30a,c;  bk 
v  [55— 5°8]  61d-67c 


12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  vi,  sect  10 
274b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Third Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  3  79b-c 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  47,  a 
1,  ans  256a-257b;  a  3,  ans  258c-259a 
34  Newton:  Optics ,  bk  iii,  541b 
53  James:  Psychology ,  95b 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  discussion  of  the  ideas  most  closely  associated  with  element,  see  Cause;  Principle. 

Matters  relevant  to  the  conception  of  elements  or  atoms  as  simple  parts  of  a  whole,  see 
One  and  Many  2b-2c;  and  for  another  discussion  of  the  distinction  between  elements 
or  atoms  and  compounds  or  mixtures,  see  Change  9a;  Matter  2. 

The  problem  of  the  transmutation  of  the  elements,  see  Change  10a. 

The  issue  concerning  the  divisibility  of  matter  and  the  existence  of  a  void,  see  Infinity 
4b;  One  and  Many  3a(3);  Space  2b(i)-2b(3);  and  for  the  question  of  the  number  of 
the  elements  or  of  the  atoms,  see  Infinity  5-5 b;  Quantity  7. 

Other  considerations  of  atomistic  materialism,  see  Matter  3a,  6;  Mechanics  4c;  Mind  2e; 
Soul  3d;  World  ib,  4c. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Augustine.  De  Genesi  ad  Litteram 
Aquinas.  De  Mixtione  Elementorum 
Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy,  part  ii,  20; 
part  iii,  48-102;  part  iv,  1-19,  31-48,  61-132, 
201-203 

Hobbes.  Concerning  Body 

Kant.  Metaphysical  Foundations  of  Natural  Sci¬ 
ence,  DIV  11 

Marx.  Uber  die  Differenz  der  demokritischen  und 
epifyireischen  Naturphilo  sophie 

II. 

Epicurus.  Fetter  to  Herodotus 
Sextus  Empiricus.  Against  the  Physicists 
Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed,  part  ii, 
ch  10 

John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philosophicus  Tho- 
misticus,  Philosophia  Naturalis,  part  iii,  q  10 
Boyle.  The  Sceptical  Chymist 
Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  appendix,  ch  3 
- .  Monadology,  par  1-9 

Voltaire.  “Atoms,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 
Dalton.  A  New  System  of  Chemical  Philosophy 
Whewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences, 

VOL  I,  BK  VI 


Maxwell.  Scientific  Papers,  lxxiii 

Herschel.  Familiar  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects , 

XI 

Lange.  The  History  of  Materialism 
Mendeleyev.  The  Principles  of  Chemistry 
Clifford.  “Atoms,”  in  vol  i,  Lectures  and  Essays 
Stallo.  Concepts  and  Theories  of  Modern  Physics, 
CH  7-8,  13 

Whitehead.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  the  Principles  of 
Natural  Knowledge ,  ch  5 

Planck.  The  Origin  and  Development  of  the  Quan¬ 
tum  Theory 

Eddington.  Stars  and  Atoms 

B.  Russell.  The  Analysis  of  Matter,  ch  3 

Bohr.  The  Theory  of  Spectra  and  Atomic  Constitution 

- .  On  the  Application  of  the  Quantum  Theory  to 

Atomic  Structure 

- .  Atomic  Theory  and  the  Description  of  Nature 

Jeans.  The  Universe  Around  Us,  ch  2 

C.  G.  Darwin.  The  New  Conceptions  of  Matter 
Soddy.  The  Interpretation  of  the  Atom 
Stranathan.  The  “ Particles ”  of  Modern  Physics 
Smyth.  Atomic  Energy  for  Military  Purposes 
Gamow.  Atomic  Energy  in  Cosmic  and  Human 

Life 

Andrade.  The  Atom  and  Its  Energy 
Hecht.  Explaining  the  Atom 
G.  Thomson.  The  Atom 


Chapter  2.2.:  EMOTION 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  emotions  claim  our  attention  in  two 
ways.  We  experience  them,  sometimes  in 
a  manner  which  overwhelms  us;  and  we  analyze 
them  by  defining  and  classifying  the  several 
passions,  and  by  studying  their  role  in  human 
life  and  society.  We  seldom  do  both  at  once, 
for  analysis  requires  emotional  detachment,  and 
moments  of  passion  do  not  permit  study  or 
reflection. 

With  regard  to  the  emotions  the  great  books 
are  similarly  divided  into  two  sorts — those 
which  are  theoretical  discussions  and  those 
which  concretely  describe  the  passions  of  par¬ 
ticular  men,  exhibit  their  vigor,  and  induce 
in  us  a  vicarious  experience.  Books  of  the 
first  sort  are  scientific,  philosophical,  or  theo¬ 
logical  treatises.  Books  of  the  second  sort  are 
the  great  epic  and  dramatic  poems,  the  novels 
and  plays,  the  literature  of  biography  and 
history. 

We  customarily  think  of  the  emotions  as 
belonging  to  the  subject  matter  of  psychology 
— proper  to  the  science  of  animal  and  human 
behavior.  It  is  worth  noting  therefore  that  this 
is  largely  a  recent  development,  which  appears 
in  the  works  of  Darwin,  James,  and  Freud.  In 
earlier  centuries,  the  analysis  of  the  passions 
occurs  in  other  contexts:  in  treatments  of  rhet¬ 
oric,  as  in  certain  dialogues  of  Plato  and  in 
Aristotle’s  Rhetoric ;  in  the  Greek  discussions  of 
virtue  and  vice;  in  the  moral  theology  of  Aqui¬ 
nas  and  in  Spinoza’s  Ethics ;  and  in  books  of  po¬ 
litical  theory,  such  as  Machiavelli’s  Prince  and 
Hobbes’  Leviathan . 

Descartes’  treatise  on  The  Passions  of  the  Soul 
is  probably  one  of  the  first  discourses  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  to  be  separated  from  the  practical  consider¬ 
ations  of  oratory,  morals,  and  politics.  Only 
subsequently  do  the  emotions  become  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  purely  theoretic  interest  in  psychology. 
But  even  then  the  interest  of  the  psychiatrist  or 


psychoanalyst— to  the  extent  that  it  is  medical 
or  therapeutic — has  a  strong  practical  bent. 

In  the  great  works  of  poetry  and  history  no 
similar  shift  takes  place  as  one  goes  from  I  Iomcr 
and  Virgil  to  Tolstoy  and  Dostoevsky,  from 
Greek  to  Shakespearean  tragedy,  from  Plu¬ 
tarch  and  Tacitus  to  Gibbon.  What  Words¬ 
worth  said  of  the  lyric  poem — that  it  is  “emo¬ 
tion  recollected  in  tranquillity” — may  not  ap¬ 
ply  to  the  narratives  in  an  identical  sense.  Yet 
they  too  re-enact  the  passions  in  all  their  vi¬ 
tality.  Their  pages  are  filled  with  the  emotions 
of  men  in  conflict  with  one  another  or  suffering 
conflict  within  themselves. 

This  is  no  less  true  of  historical  narrative  than 
of  fiction.  The  memorable  actions  of  men  on 
the  stage  of  history  did  not  occur  in  calm  and 
quiet.  We  would  certainly  not  remember  them 
as  well  if  the  historian  failed  to  re-create  for  us 
the  turbulence  of  crisis  and  catastrophe,  or  the 
biographer  the  storm  and  stress  which  accom¬ 
panies  the  inward  resolution  of  heroic  lives. 

It  is  impossible,  of  course,  to  cite  all  the  rele¬ 
vant  passages  of  poetry  and  history.  In  many 
instances,  nothing  less  than  a  whole  book  would 
suffice.  The  particular  references  given  in  this 
chapter,  which  are  far  from  exhaustive,  have 
been  selected  for  their  peculiar  exemplary  sig¬ 
nificance  in  relation  to  a  particular  topic;  but 
for  the  whole  range  of  topics  connected  with 
emotion,  the  reader  should  certainly  seek  fur¬ 
ther  in  the  realms  of  history  and  poetry  for  the 
raw  materials  which  the  scientists  and  philoso¬ 
phers  have  tried  to  analyze  and  understand. 

To  the  student  of  the  emotions,  Bacon  rec¬ 
ommends  “the  poets  and  writers  of  histories” 
as  “the  best  doctors  of  this  knowledge;  where 
we  may  find  painted  forth  with  great  life,  how 
affections  are  kindled  and  incited;  and  how 
pacified  and  refrained;  and  how  again  con¬ 
tained  from  act  and  further  degree;  how  they 
413 


414 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


disclose  themselves;  how  they  work;  how  they 
vary;  how  they  gather  and  fortify;  how  they 
are  enwrapped  one  within  another;  and  how 
they  do  fight  and  encounter  one  with  an¬ 
other;  and  other  like  particularities.” 

Four  words — “passion,”  “affection”  or  “af¬ 
fect,”  and  “emotion” — have  been  traditionally 
used  to  designate  the  same  psychological  fact. 
Of  these,  “affection”  and  “affect”  have  ceased 
to  be  generally  current,  although  we  do  find 
them  in  Freud;  and  “passion”  is  now  usually 
restricted  to  mean  one  of  the  emotions,  or  the 
more  violent  aspect  of  any  emotional  experi¬ 
ence.  But  if  we  are  to  connect  discussions  col¬ 
lected  from  widely  separated  centuries,  we 
must  be  able  to  use  all  these  words  inter¬ 
changeably. 

The  psychological  fact  to  which  they  all  refer 
is  one  every  human  being  has  experienced  in 
moments  of  great  excitement,  especially  during 
intense  seizure  by  rage  or  fear.  In  his  treatise  On 
the  Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  Harvey  calls  atten¬ 
tion  to  “the  fact  that  in  almost  every  affection, 
appetite,  hope,  or  fear,  our  body  suffers,  the 
countenance  changes,  and  the  blood  appears  to 
course  hither  and  thither.  In  anger  the  eyes  are 
fiery  and  the  pupils  contracted;  in  modesty  the 
cheeks  are  suffused  with  blushes;  in  fear,  and 
under  a  sense  of  infamy  and  of  shame,  the  face 
is  pale”  and  “in  lust  how  quickly  is  the  member 
distended  with  blood  and  erected!” 

Emotional  experience  seems  to  involve  an 
awareness  of  widespread  bodily  commotion, 
which  includes  changes  in  the  tension  of  the 
blood  vessels  and  the  muscles,  changes  in  heart¬ 
beat  and  breathing,  changes  in  the  condition 
of  the  skin  and  other  tissues.  Though  some  de¬ 
gree  of  bodily  disturbance  would  seem  to  be  an 
essential  ingredient  in  all  emotional  experience, 
the  intensity  and  extent  of  the  physiological 
reverberation,  or  bodily  commotion,  is  not  the 
same  or  equal  in  all  the  emotions.  Some  emo¬ 
tions  are  much  more  violent  than  others.  This 
leads  William  James  to  distinguish  what  he  calls 
the  “coarser  emotions  ...  in  which  every  one 
recognizes  a  strong  organic  reverberation”  from 
the  “subtler  emotions”  in  which  the  “organic 
reverberation  is  less  obvious  and  strong.” 

This  fact  is  sometimes  used  to  draw  the  line 
between  what  are  truly  emotions  and  what  are 


only  mild  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain  or  en¬ 
during  sentiments.  Nevertheless,  sentiments 
may  be  emotional  residues— stable  attitudes 
which  pervade  a  life  even  during  moments  of 
emotional  detachment  and  calm — and  pleasure 
and  pain  may  color  all  the  emotions.  “Pleasure 
and  pain,”  Locke  suggests,  are  “the  hinges  on 
which  our  passions  turn.”  Even  though  they 
may  not  be  passions  in  the  strict  sense,  they 
are  obviously  closely  connected  with  them. 

That  the  emotions  are  organic  disturbances, 
upsetting  the  normal  course  of  the  body's  func¬ 
tioning,  is  sometimes  thought  to  be  a  modern 
discovery,  connected  with  the  James-Lange 
theory  that  the  emotional  experience  is  nothing 
but  the  “feeling  of  .  .  .  the  bodily  changes” 
which  “follow  directly  the  perception  of  the 
exciting  fact.”  On  this  view,  the  explanation  of 
emotion  seems  to  be  the  very  opposite  of  “com¬ 
mon  sense,”  which  says,  “we  meet  a  bear,  are 
frightened,  and  run.”  According  to  James, 
“this  order  of  sequence  is  incorrect,”  and  “the 
more  rational  statement  is  that  we  feel  .  .  . 
afraid  because  we  tremble.”  In  other  words,  we 
do  not  run  away  because  we  are  afraid,  but  are 
afraid  because  we  run  away. 

This  fact  about  the  emotions  was  known  to 
antiquity  and  the  Middle  Ages.  Aristotle,  for 
example,  holds  that  mere  awareness  of  an  ob¬ 
ject  does  not  induce  flight  unless  “the  heart  is 
moved,”  and  Aquinas  declares  that  “passion  is 
properly  to  be  found  where  there  is  corporeal 
transmutation.”  He  describes  at  some  length 
the  bodily  changes  which  take  place  in  anger 
and  fear.  Only  very  recently,  however,  have 
apparatus  and  techniques  been  devised  for  re¬ 
cording  and,  in  some  cases,  measuring  the  phys¬ 
iological  changes  accompanying  experimentally 
produced  emotions — in  both  animals  and  men. 

Modern  theory  also  tries  to  throw  some  light 
on  these  organic  changes  by  pointing  out  their 
adaptive  utility  in  the  struggle  for  existence. 
This  type  of  explanation  is  advanced  by  Dar¬ 
win  in  The  Expression  of  Emotions  in  Man 
and  Animals ,  and  is  adopted  by  other  evolu¬ 
tionists.  “The  snarl  or  sneer,  the  one-sided  un¬ 
covering  of  the  upper  teeth,”  James  writes,  “is 
accounted  for  by  Darwin  as  a  survival  from  the 
time  when  our  ancestors  had  large  canines,  and 
unfleshed  them  (as  dogs  now  do)  for  attack.  .  .  . 


Chapter  22:  EMOTION 


415 


The  distention  of  the  nostrils  in  anger  is  inter¬ 
preted  by  Spencer  as  an  echo  of  the  way  in 
which  our  ancestors  had  to  breathe  when,  dur¬ 
ing  combat,  their  ‘mouth  was  filled  up  by  a  part 
of  the  antagonist’s  body  that  had  been  seized’ 
.  .  .  The  redding  of  the  face  and  neck  is  called 
by  Wundt  a  compensatory  arrangement  for 
relieving  the  brain  of  the  blood -pressure  which 
the  simultaneous  excitement  of  the  heart 
brings  with  it.  The  effusion  of  tears  is  explained 
both  by  this  author  and  by  Darwin  to  be  a 
blood- withd rawing  agency  of  a  similar  sort.” 

Reviewing  statements  of  this  sort,  James  is 
willing  to  concede  that  ‘‘some  movements  of 
expression  can  be  accounted  for  as  weakened 
repetitions  of  movements  which  formerly  (when 
they  were  stronger)  were  of  utility  to  the  sub¬ 
ject but  though  we  may  thus  “see  the  reason 
for  a  few  emotional  reactions,”  he  thinks 
“others  remain  for  which  no  plausible  reason 
can  even  be  conceived.”  The  latter,  James  sug¬ 
gests,  “may  be  reactions  which  are  purely  me¬ 
chanical  results  of  the  way  in  which  our  nervous 
centres  are  framed,  reactions  which,  although 
permanent  in  us  now,  may  be  called  accidental 
as  far  as  their  origin  goes.” 

Whether  or  not  all  the  bodily  changes  which 
occur  in  such  emotions  as  anger  or  fear  serve 
the  purpose  of  increasing  the  animal’s  efficiency 
in  combat  or  flight — as,  for  example,  the  in¬ 
crease  of  sugar  in  the  blood  and  the  greater  sup¬ 
ply  of  blood  to  arms  and  legs  seem  to  do — the 
basic  emotions  are  generally  thought  to  be  con¬ 
nected  with  the  instinctively  determined  pat¬ 
terns  of  behavior  by  which  animals  struggle  to 
survive.  “The  actions  we  call  instinctive,” 
James  writes,  “are  expressions  or  manifestations 
of  the  emotions”;  or,  as  other  writers  suggest, 
an  emotion,  whether  in  outward  expression  or 
in  inner  experience,  is  the  central  phase  of  an 
instinct  in  operation. 

The  observation  of  the  close  relation  between 
instinct  and  emotion  does  not  belong  exclu¬ 
sively  to  modern,  or  post-Darwinian,  thought. 
The  ancients  also  recognize  it,  though  in  differ¬ 
ent  terms.  Following  Aristotle’s  analysis  of  the 
various  “interior  senses,”  Aquinas,  for  example, 
speaks  of  the  “estimative  power”  by  which  ani¬ 
mals  seem  to  be  innately  prepared  to  react  to 
things  useful  or  harmful. 

“If  an  animal  were  moved  by  pleasing  and 


disagreeable  things  only  as  affecting  the  sense” 
—  that  is,  the  exterior  senses — “there  would  be 
no  need  to  suppose,”  Aquinas  writes,  “that  an 
animal  has  a  power  besides  the  apprehension  of 
those  forms  which  the  senses  perceive,  and  in 
which  the  animal  takes  pleasure,  or  from  which 
it  shrinks  with  horror.”  But  animals  need  to 
seek  or  avoid  certain  things  on  account  of  their 
advantages  or  disadvantages,  and  such  emo¬ 
tional  reactions  of  approach  or  avoidance  re¬ 
quire,  in  his  opinion,  a  sense  of  the  useful  and 
the  dangerous,  which  is  innate  rather  than 
learned.  The  estimative  power  thus  seems  to 
play  a  role  which  later  writers  assign  to  instinct. 
The  relation  of  instinct  to  the  emotions  and  to 
fundamental  biological  needs  is  further  con¬ 
sidered,  from  other  points  of  view,  in  the  chap¬ 
ters  on  Desire  and  Habit. 

Like  desire,  emotion  is  neither  knowledge 
nor  action,  but  something  intermediate  be¬ 
tween  the  one  and  the  other.  The  various  pas¬ 
sions  are  usually  aroused  by  objects  perceived, 
imagined,  or  remembered,  and  once  aroused 
they  in  turn  originate  impulses  to  act  in  certain 
ways.  For  example,  fear  arises  with  the  percep¬ 
tion  of  a  threatening  danger  or  with  the  imagi¬ 
nation  of  some  fancied  peril.  The  thing  feared 
is  somehow  recognized  as  capable  of  inflicting 
injury  with  consequent  pain.  The  thing  feared 
is  also  something  from  which  one  naturally 
tends  to  flee  in  order  to  avoid  harm.  Once  the 
danger  is  known  and  until  it  is  avoided  by 
flight  or  in  some  other  way,  the  characteristic 
feeling  of  fear  pervades  the  whole  experience. 
It  is  partly  a  result  of  what  is  known  and  what 
is  done,  and  partly  the  cause  of  how  things 
seem  and  how  one  behaves. 

Analytically  isolated  from  its  causes  and  ef¬ 
fects,  the  emotion  itself  seems  to  be  the  feeling 
rather  than  the  knowing  or  the  doing.  But  it 
is  not  simply  an  awareness  of  a  certain  bodily 
condition.  It  also  involves  the  felt  impulse  to 
do  something  about  the  object  of  the  passion. 

Those  writers  who,  like  Aquinas,  identify 
emotion  with  the  impulse  by  which  “the  soul 
is  drawn  to  a  thing,”  define  the  several  passions 
as  specifically  different  acts  of  appetite  or  de¬ 
sire — specific  tendencies  to  action.  Aquinas,  for 
instance,  adopts  the  definition  given  by  Dam¬ 
ascene:  “Passion  is  a  movement  of  the  sensi- 


416 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


tive  appetite  when  we  imagine  good  or  evil.” 

Other  writers  who,  like  Spinoza,  find  that 
“the  order  of  the  actions  and  passions  of  our 
body  is  coincident  in  nature  with  the  order  of 
the  actions  and  passions  of  the  mind,”  stress  the 
cognitive  rather  than  the  impulsive  aspect  of 
emotion.  They  accordingly  define  the  passions 
in  terms  of  the  characteristic  feelings,  pleasant 
and  unpleasant,  which  flow  from  the  estima¬ 
tion  of  certain  objects  as  beneficial  or  harmful. 
Spinoza  goes  furthest  in  this  direction  when  he 
says  that  “an  affect  or  passion  of  the  mind  is  a 
confused  idea  ...  by  which  the  mind  affirms  of 
its  body ,  or  any  part  of  it ,  a  greater  or  less  power 
of  existence  than  before .” 

There  seems  to  be  no  serious  issue  here,  for 
writers  of  both  sorts  acknowledge,  though  with 
different  emphasis,  the  two  sides  of  an  emotion 
—  the  cognitive  and  the  impulsive,  that  which 
faces  toward  the  object  and  that  which  leads 
into  action.  On  either  view,  the  human  pas¬ 
sions  are  regarded  as  part  of  man’s  animal  na¬ 
ture.  It  is  generally  admitted  that  disembodied 
spirits,  if  such  exist,  cannot  have  emotions.  The 
angels,  Augustine  writes,  “feel  no  anger  while 
they  punish  those  whom  the  eternal  law  of  God 
consigns  to  punishment,  no  fellow-feeling  with 
misery  while  they  relieve  the  miserable,  no  fear 
while  they  aid  those  who  are  in  danger.”  When 
we  do  ascribe  emotions  to  spirits,  it  is,  Augus¬ 
tine  claims,  because,  “though  they  have  none  of 
our  weakness,  their  acts  resemble  the  actions  to 
which  these  emotions  move  us.” 

In  connection  with  the  objects  which  arouse 
them,  the  emotions  necessarily  depend  upon 
the  senses  and  the  imagination;  and  their  per¬ 
turbations  and  impulses  require  bodily  organs 
for  expression.  That  is  why,  as  indicated  in  the 
chapter  on  Desire,  some  writers  separate  the 
passions  from  acts  of  the  will,  as  belonging  to 
the  sensitive  or  animal  appetite  rather  than  to 
the  rational  or  specifically  human  appetite. 
Even  those  writers  who  do  not  place  so  high  an 
estimate  on  the  role  of  reason,  refer  the  emo¬ 
tions  to  the  animal  aspect  of  human  behavior, 
or  to  what  is  sometimes  called  “man’s  lower 
nature.”  When  this  phrase  is  used,  it  usually 
signifies  the  passions  as  opposed  to  the  reason, 
not  the  purely  vegetative  functions  which  man 
shares  with  plants  as  well  as  animals. 

There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  emotions 


are  common  to  men  and  animals  and  that  they 
are  more  closely  related  to  instinct  than  to 
reason  or  intelligence.  Darwin  presents  many 
instances  which,  he  claims,  prove  that  “the 
senses  and  intuitions,  the  various  emotions  and 
faculties,  such  as  love,  memory,  attention,  cu¬ 
riosity,  imitation,  reason,  etc.,  of  which  man 
boasts,  may  be  found  in  an  incipient,  or  even 
sometimes  in  a  well-developed,  condition  in 
the  lower  animals.”  Where  Darwin  remarks 
upon  “the  fewness  and  the  comparative  sim¬ 
plicity  of  the  instincts  in  the  higher  animals .  .  . 
in  contrast  with  those  of  the  lower  animals,” 
James  takes  the  position  that  man  “is  the  ani¬ 
mal  richest  in  instinctive  impulses.”  However 
that  issue  is  decided,  the  emotions  seem  to  be 
more  elaborately  developed  in  the  higher  ani¬ 
mals,  and  man’s  emotional  life  would  seem  to 
be  the  most  complex  and  varied  of  all. 

The  question  then  arises  whether  particular 
passions  are  identical — or  are  only  analogous 
— when  they  occur  in  men  and  animals.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  is  human  anger,  no  matter  how  closely 
it  resembles  brute  rage  in  its  physiology  and 
impulses,  nevertheless  peculiarly  human?  Do 
men  alone  experience  righteous  indignation  be¬ 
cause  of  some  admixture  in  them  of  reason  and 
passion  ?  When  similar  questions  are  asked 
about  the  sexual  passions  of  men  and  animals, 
the  answers  will  determine  the  view  one  takes 
of  the  characteristically  human  aspects  of  love 
and  hate.  It  may  even  be  asked  whether  hate, 
as  men  suffer  it,  is  ever  experienced  by  brutes, 
or  whether  certain  passions,  such  as  hope  and 
despair,  are  known  to  brutes  at  all? 

Ix  the  traditional  theory  of  the  emotions, 
the  chief  problem,  after  the  definition  of  emo¬ 
tion,  is  the  classification  or  grouping  of  the  pas¬ 
sions,  and  the  ordering  of  particular  passions. 
The  vocabulary  of  common  speech  in  all  ages 
and  cultures  includes  a  large  number  of  words 
for  naming  emotions,  and  it  has  been  the  task  of 
analysts  to  decide  which  of  these  words  desig¬ 
nate  distinct  affects  or  affections.  The  precise 
character  of  the  object  and  the  direction  of  the 
impulse  have  been,  for  the  most  part,  the  cri¬ 
teria  of  definition.  As  previously  noted,  it  is 
but  recently  that  the  experimental  observation 
of  bodily  changes  has  contributed  to  the  differ¬ 
entiation  of  emotions  from  one  another. 


Chapter  22:  EMOTION 


417 


Spinoza  offers  the  longest  listing  of  the  pas¬ 
sions.  For  him,  the  emotions,  which  are  all 
“compounded  of  the  three  primary  affects,  de¬ 
sire,  joy,  and  sorrow,”  develop  into  the  follow¬ 
ing  forms:  astonishment,  contempt,  love,  ha¬ 
tred,  inclination,  aversion,  devotion,  derision, 
hope,  fear,  confidence,  despair,  gladness,  re¬ 
morse,  commiseration,  favor,  indignation,  over¬ 
estimation,  envy,  compassion,  self-satisfaction, 
humility,  repentance,  pride,  despondency,  self¬ 
exaltation,  shame,  regret,  emulation,  gratitude, 
benevolence,  anger,  vengeance,  ferocity,  au¬ 
dacity,  consternation,  courtesy,  ambition,  lux¬ 
uriousness,  drunkenness,  avarice,  lust. 

Many  of  the  foregoing  are,  for  Hobbes,  de¬ 
rived  from  what  he  calls  “the  simple  passions,” 
which  include  “appetite,  desire,  love,  aversion, 
hate,  joy,  and  grief.”  There  are  more  emotions 
in  Spinoza’s  list  than  either  Aristotle  or  Locke 
or  James  mentions,  but  none  which  they  in¬ 
clude  is  omitted.  Some  of  the  items  in  Spino¬ 
za’s  enumeration  are  treated  by  other  writers 
as  virtues  and  vices  rather  than  as  passions. 

The  passions  have  been  classified  by  reference 
to  various  criteria.  As  we  have  seen,  James  dis¬ 
tinguishes  emotions  as  “coarse”  or  “subtle”  in 
terms  of  the  violence  or  mildness  of  the  accom¬ 
panying  physiological  changes;  and  Spinoza 
distinguishes  them  according  as  “the  mind  pass¬ 
es  to  a  greater  perfection”  or  “to  a  less  perfec¬ 
tion.”  Spinoza’s  division  would  also  seem  to 
imply  a  distinction  between  the  beneficial  and 
the  harmful  in  the  objects  causing  these  two 
types  of  emotion,  or  at  least  to  involve  the 
opposite  components  of  pleasure  and  pain,  for 
in  his  view  the  emotions  which  correspond  to 
“a  greater  or  less  power  of  existence  than  be¬ 
fore”  are  attended  in  the  one  case  by  “pleasur¬ 
able  excitement”  and  in  the  other  by  “pain.” 

Hobbes  uses  another  principle  of  division. 
The  passions  differ  basically  according  to  the 
direction  of  their  impulses — according  as  each 
is  “a  motion  or  endeavor  ...  to  or  from  the 
object  moving.”  Aquinas  adds  still  another  cri¬ 
terion — “the  difficulty  or  struggle  ...  in  ac¬ 
quiring  certain  goods  or  in  avoiding  certain 
evils”  which,  in  contrast  to  those  we  “can 
easily  acquire  or  avoid,”  makes  them,  there¬ 
fore,  “of  an  arduous  or  difficult  nature.”  In 
these  terms,  he  divides  all  the  passions  into  the 
“concupiscible,”  which  regard  “good  or  evil 


simply”  (i.e.y  love,  hate,  desire,  aversion,  jov, 
sorrow), and  the  “irascible,”  which  “regard  g<xxl 
or  evil  as  arduous  through  being  difficult  to 
obtain  or  avoid”  (/.e.,  fear,  daring,  hope,  de¬ 
spair,  anger). 

Within  each  of  these  groups,  Aquinas  pairs 
particular  passions  as  opposites,  such  as  joy  and 
sorrow,  or  hope  and  despair,  either  according 
to  the  “contrariety  of  object,  />.,  of  good  and 
evil  ...  or  according  to  approach  and  with¬ 
drawal.”  Anger  seems  to  be  the  only  passion 
for  which  no  opposite  can  be  given,  other  than 
that  “cessation  from  its  movement”  which 
Aristotle  calls  “calmness”  and  which  Aquinas 
says  is  an  opposite  not  by  way  of  “contrariety 
but  of  negation  or  privation.” 

Using  these  distinctions,  Aquinas  also  de¬ 
scribes  the  order  in  which  one  passion  leads  to  or 
generates  another,  beginning  with  love  and 
hate,  passing  through  hope,  desire,  and  fear, 
with  their  opposites,  and,  after  anger,  ending 
in  joy  or  despair.  On  one  point,  all  observers 
and  theorists  from  Plato  to  Freud  seem  to 
agree,  namely,  that  love  and  hate  lie  at  the  root 
of  all  the  other  passions  and  generate  hope  or 
despair,  fear  and  anger,  according  as  the  aspira¬ 
tions  of  love  prosper  or  fail.  Nor  is  the  insight 
that  even  hate  derives  from  love  peculiarlv 
modern,  though  Freud’s  theory  of  what  he 
calls  the  “ambivalence”  of  love  and  hate  to¬ 
ward  the  same  object,  seems  to  be  part  of  Ins 
own  special  contribution  to  our  understanding 
of  the  passions. 

The  role  of  the  emotions  or  passions  in  hu¬ 
man  behavior  has  always  raised  two  questions, 
one  concerning  the  effect  of  conflict  between 
diverse  emotions,  the  other  concerning  the  con¬ 
flict  between  the  passions  and  the  reason  or  will. 
It  is  the  latter  question  which  has  been  of  the 
greatest  interest  to  moralists  and  statesmen. 

Even  though  human  emotions  may  have  in¬ 
stinctive  origin  and  be  innately  determined, 
man’s  emotional  responses  seem  to  be  subject 
to  voluntary  control,  so  that  men  are  able  to 
form  or  change  their  emotional  habits.  If  this 
were  not  so,  there  could  be  no  moral  problem 
of  the  regulation  of  the  passions;  nor,  for  that 
matter,  could  there  be  a  medical  problem  of 
therapy  for  emotional  disorders.  The  psycho¬ 
analytic  treatment  of  neuroses  seems,  more- 


418 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


over,  to  assume  the  possibility  of  a  voluntary, 
or  even  a  rational,  resolution  of  emotional  con¬ 
flicts — not  perhaps  without  the  aid  of  thera¬ 
peutic  efforts  to  uncover  the  sources  of  con¬ 
flict  and  to  remove  the  barriers  between  re¬ 
pressed  emotion  and  rational  decision. 

The  relation  of  the  passions  to  the  will,  es¬ 
pecially  their  antagonism,  is  relevant  to  the 
question  whether  the  actions  of  men  always 
conform  to  their  judgments  of  good  and  evil, 
or  right  and  wrong.  As  Socrates  discusses  the 
problem  of  knowledge  and  virtue,  it  would 
seem  to  be  his  view  that  a  man  who  knows 
what  is  good  for  him  will  act  accordingly.  Men 
may  “desire  things  which  they  imagine  to  be 
good,,,  he  says,  “but  which  in  reality  are  evil.” 
Hence  their  misconduct  will  be  due  to  a  mis¬ 
taken  judgment,  not  to  a  discrepancy  between 
action  and  thought.  Eliminating  the  case  of 
erroneous  judgment,  Socrates  gets  Meno  to 
admit  that  “no  man  wills  or  chooses  anything 
evil.” 

Aristotle  criticizes  the  Socratic  position  which 
he  summarizes  in  the  statement  that  “no  one 
.  .  .  when  he  judges  acts  against  what  he  judges 
best — people  act  badly  only  by  reason  of  igno¬ 
rance.”  According  to  Aristotle,  “this  view  plain¬ 
ly  contradicts  the  observed  facts.”  Yet  he  ad¬ 
mits  that  whatever  a  man  does  must  at  least 
seem  good  to  him  at  the  moment ;  and  to  that 
extent  the  judgment  that  something  is  good  or 
bad  would  seem  to  determine  action  accord¬ 
ingly.  In  his  analysis  of  incontinence,  Aristotle 
tries  to  explain  how  a  man  may  act  against  what 
is  his  better  judgment  and  yet,  at  the  moment 
of  action,  seek  what  he  holds  to  be  good. 

Action  may  be  caused  either  by  a  rational 
judgment  concerning  what  is  good  or  by  an 
emotional  estimate  of  the  desirable.  If  these 
two  factors  are  independent  of  one  another — 
more  than  that,  if  they  can  tend  in  opposite 
directions — then  a  man  may  act  under  emo¬ 
tional  persuasion  at  one  moment  in  a  manner 
contrary  to  his  rational  predilection  at  another. 
That  a  man  may  act  either  emotionally  or 
rationally,  Aristotle  thinks,  explains  how,  un¬ 
der  strong  emotional  influences,  a  man  can  do 
the  very  opposite  of  what  his  reason  would  tell 
him  is  right  or  good.  The  point  is  that,  while 
the  emotions  dominate  his  mind  and  action,  he 
does  not  listen  to  reason. 


These  matters  are  further  discussed  in  the 
chapter  on  Temperance.  But  it  should  be 
noted  here  that  the  passions  and  the  reason,  or 
the  “lower”  and  the  “higher”  natures  of  man, 
are  not  always  in  conflict.  Sometimes  emotions 
or  emotional  attitudes  serve  reason  by  support¬ 
ing  voluntary  decisions.  They  reinforce  and 
make  effective  moral  resolutions  which  might 
otherwise  be  too  difficult  to  execute. 

The  ancients  did  not  underestimate  the  force 
of  the  passions,  nor  were  they  too  confident  of 
the  strength  of  reason  in  its  struggle  to  control 
them,  or  to  be  free  of  them.  They  were  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  violence  of  emotional  excess 
which  they  called  “madness”  or  “frenzy.”  So, 
too,  were  the  theologians  of  the  Middle  Ages 
and  modern  philosophers  like  Spinoza  and 
Hobbes.  But  not  until  Freud — and  perhaps 
also  William  James,  though  to  a  lesser  extent — 
do  we  find  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books 
insight  into  the  pathology  of  the  passions,  the 
origin  of  emotional  disorders,  and  the  general 
theory  of  the  neuroses  and  neurotic  character  as 
the  consequence  of  emotional  repression. 

For  Freud,  the  primary  fact  is  not  the  con¬ 
flict  between  reason  and  emotion,  or,  in  his 
language,  between  the  ego  and  the  id.  It  is 
rather  the  repression  which  results  from  such 
conflict.  On  the  one  side  is  the  ego,  which 
“stands  for  reason  and  circumspection”  and  has 
“the  task  of  representing  the  external  world,” 
or  expressing  what  Freud  calls  “the  reality- 
principle.”  Associated  with  the  ego  is  the  super¬ 
ego — “the  vehicle  of  the  ego-ideal,  by  which 
the  ego  measures  itself,  towards  which  it 
strives,  and  whose  demands  for  ever-increasing 
perfection  it  is  always  striving  to  fulfill.”  On 
the  other  side  is  the  id,  which  “stands  for  the 
untamed  passions”  and  is  the  source  of  in¬ 
stinctual  life. 

The  ego,  according  to  Freud,  is  constantly 
attempting  “to  mediate  between  the  id  and 
reality”  and  to  measure  up  to  the  ideal  set  by 
the  super-ego,  so  as  to  dethrone  “the  pleasure- 
principle,  which  exerts  undisputed  sway  over 
the  processes  in  the  id,  and  substitute  for  it  the 
reality-principle,  which  promises  greater  se¬ 
curity  and  greater  success.”  But  sometimes  it 
fails  in  this  task.  Sometimes,  when  no  socially 
acceptable  channels  of  behavior  are  available 


Chapter  22:  EMOTION 


419 


for  expressing  emotional  drives  in  action,  the 
ego,  supported  by  the  super-ego,  represses  the 
emotional  or  instinctual  impulses,  that  is,  pre¬ 
vents  them  from  expressing  themselves  overtly. 

Freud’s  great  insight  is  that  emotions  re¬ 
pressed  do  not  atrophy  and  disappear.  On  the 
contrary,  their  dammed-up  energies  accumu¬ 
late  and,  like  a  sore,  they  fester  inwardly.  To¬ 
gether  with  related  ideas,  memories,  and  wishes, 
the  repressed  emotions  form  what  Freud  calls 
a  “complex,”  which  is  not  only  the  active  nu¬ 
cleus  of  emotional  disorder,  but  also  the  cause 
of  neurotic  symptoms  and  behavior — phobias 
and  anxieties,  obsessions  or  compulsions,  and 
the  various  physical  manifestations  of  hysteria, 
such  as  a  blindness  or  a  paralysis  that  has  no 
organic  basis. 

The  line  between  the  neurotic  and  the  nor¬ 
mal  is  shadowy,  for  repressed  emotional  com¬ 
plexes  are,  according  to  Freud,  also  responsible 
for  the  hidden  or  latent  psychological  signifi¬ 
cance  of  slips  of  speech,  forgetting,  the  content 
of  dreams,  occupational  or  marital  choices,  and 
a  wide  variety  of  other  phenomena  usually  re¬ 
garded  as  accidental  or  as  rationally  deter¬ 
mined.  In  fact,  Freud  sometimes  goes  to  the 
extreme  of  insisting  that  all  apparently  rational 
processes — both  of  thought  and  decision — are 
themselves  emotionally  determined;  and  that 
most,  or  all,  reasoning  is  nothing  but  the  ration¬ 
alization  of  emotionally  fixed  prejudices  or  be¬ 
liefs.  “The  ego,”  he  writes,  “is  after  all  only  a 
part  of  the  id,  a  part  purposively  modified  by 
its  proximity  to  the  dangers  of  reality.” 

The  ancient  distinction  between  knowledge 
and  opinion  seems  to  be  in  essential  agreement 
with  the  insight  that  emotions  can  control  the 
course  of  thinking.  But  at  the  same  time  it  de¬ 
nies  that  all  thinking  is  necessarily  dominated 
by  the  passions.  The  sort  of  thinking  which  is 
free  from  emotional  bias  or  domination  may 
result  in  knowledge,  if  reason  itself  is  not  de¬ 
fective  in  its  processes.  But  the  sort  of  thinking 
which  is  directed  and  determined  by  the  pas¬ 
sions  must  result  in  opinion.  The  former  is 
reasoning;  the  latter  what  Freud  calls  “ration¬ 
alization”  or  sometimes  “wishful  thinking.” 

Because  they  can  be  ordered  when  they  get 
out  of  order,  the  emotions  raise  problems  for 
both  medicine  and  morals.  Whether  or  not 


there  is  a  fundamental  opposition  between  the 
medical  and  the  moral  approaches  to  the  prob¬ 
lem,  whether  psychotherapy  is  needed  only 
when  morality  has  failed,  whether  morality  is 
itself  partly  responsible  for  the  disorders  which 
psychotherapy  must  cure,  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  medical  and  the  moral  approaches  is 
clear.  Medically,  emotional  disorders  call  for 
diagnosis  and  therapy.  Morally,  they  call  for 
criticism  and  correction. 

Human  bondage,  according  to  Spinoza,  con¬ 
sists  in  “the  impotence  of  man  to  govern  or 
restrain  the  affects  ...  for  a  man  who  is  under 
their  control  is  not  his  own  master.”  A  free  man 
he  describes  as  one  “who  lives  according  to  the 
dictates  of  reason  alone,”  and  he  tries  to  show 
“how  much  reason  itself  can  control  the  af¬ 
fects”  to  achieve  what  he  calls  “freedom  of 
mind  or  blessedness.”  While  moralists  tend  to 
agree  on  this  point,  they  do  not  all  offer  the 
same  prescription  for  establishing  the  right  re¬ 
lation  between  man’s  higher  and  lower  natures. 

The  issue  which  arises  here  is  also  discussed 
in  the  chapters  on  Desire  and  Duty.  It  exists 
between  those  who  think  that  the  passions  are 
intrinsically  evil,  the  natural  enemies  of  a  good 
will,  lawless  elements  always  in  rebellion  against 
duty;  and  those  who  think  that  the  passions 
represent  a  natural  desire  for  certain  goods 
which  belong  to  the  happy  life,  or  a  natural 
aversion  for  certain  evils. 

Those  who,  like  the  Stoics  and  Kant,  tend  to 
adopt  the  former  view  recommend  a  policy  of 
attrition  toward  the  passions.  Their  force  must 
be  attenuated  in  order  to  emancipate  reason 
from  their  influence  and  to  protect  the  will 
from  their  seductions.  Nothing  is  lost,  accord¬ 
ing  to  this  theory,  if  the  passions  atrophy  and 
die.  But  if,  according  to  the  opposite  doctrine, 
the  passions  have  a  natural  place  in  the  moral 
life,  then  the  aim  should  be,  not  to  dispossess 
them  entirely,  but  to  keep  them  in  their  place. 
Aristotle  therefore  recommends  a  policy  of 
moderation.  The  passions  can  be  made  to  serve 
reason’s  purposes  by  restraining  them  from  ex¬ 
cesses  and  by  directing  their  energies  to  ends 
which  reason  approves. 

As  Aristotle  conceives  them,  certain  of  the 
virtues — especially  temperance  and  courage — 
are  stable  emotional  attitudes,  or  habits  of  emo¬ 
tional  response,  which  conform  to  reason  and 


420 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


carry  out  its  rule.  The  moral  virtues  require 
more  than  a  momentary  control  or  moderation 
of  the  passions;  they  require  a  discipline  of  them 
which  has  become  habitual.  What  Aristotle 
calls  continence,  as  opposed  to  virtue,  consists 
in  reason's  effort  to  check  emotions  which  are 
still  unruly  because  they  have  not  yet  become 
habituated  to  reason’s  rule. 

The  fact  of  individual  differences  in  tempera¬ 
ment  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  moral¬ 
ist  who  is  willing  to  recognize  that  universal 
moral  rules  apply  to  individuals  differently  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  temperaments.  Both  psychol¬ 
ogists  and  moralists  have  classified  men  into 
temperamental  types  by  reference  to  the  dom¬ 
inance  or  deficiency  of  certain  emotional  pre¬ 
dispositions  in  their  inherited  makeup.  These 
temperamental  differences  also  have  a  medical 
or  physiological  aspect  insofar  as  certain  ele¬ 
ments  in  human  physique — the  four  bodily 
humors  of  the  ancients  or  the  hormones  of 
modern  endocrinology — seem  to  be  correlated 
with  types  of  personality. 

One  of  the  great  issues  in  political  theory 
concerns  the  role  of  the  passions  in  human  asso¬ 
ciation.  Elave  men  banded  together  to  form 
states  because  they  feared  the  insecurity  and 
the  hazards  of  natural  anarchy  and  universal 
war,  or  because  they  sought  the  benefits  which 
only  political  life  could  provide?  In  the  polit¬ 
ical  community,  once  it  is  formed,  do  love  and 
friendship  or  distrust  and  fear  determine  the 
relation  of  fellow  citizens,  or  of  rulers  and  ruled  ? 
Should  the  prince,  or  any  other  man  who 
wishes  to  get  and  hold  political  power,  try  to 
inspire  love  or  to  instill  fear  in  those  whom  he 
seeks  to  dominate?  Or  are  each  of  these  emo¬ 
tions  useful  for  different  political  purposes  and 
in  the  handling  of  different  kinds  of  men? 

Considering  whether  for  the  success  of  the 
prince  it  is  “better  to  be  loved  than  feared  or 
feared  than  loved,”  Machiavelli  says  that  “one 
should  wish  to  be  both,  but,  because  it  is  diffi¬ 
cult  to  unite  them  in  one  person,  it  is  much 
safer  to  be  feared  than  loved,  when,  of  the  two, 
either  must  be  dispensed  with.  .  .  .  Neverthe¬ 
less,”  he  continues,  “a  prince  ought  to  inspire 
fear  in  such  a  way  that,  if  he  does  not  win  love, 
he  avoids  hatred;  because  he  can  endure  very 
well  being  feared  whilst  he  is  not  hated.” 

According  to  Hobbes,  when  men  enter  into  a 


commonwealth  so  that  they  can  live  peacefully 
with  one  another,  they  are  moved  partly  by 
reason  and  partly  by  their  passions.  “The  pas¬ 
sions  that  incline  men  to  peace,”  he  writes, 
“are  fear  of  death;  desire  of  such  things  as  are 
necessary  to  commodious  living;  and  a  hope  by 
their  industry  to  obtain  them.”  But  once  a 
commonwealth  is  formed,  the  one  passion  which 
seems  to  be  the  mainspring  of  all  political  ac¬ 
tivity  is  “a  perpetual  and  restless  desire  of 
power  after  power,  that  ceaseth  only  in  death”; 
for  a  man  “cannot  assure  the  power  and  means 
to  live  well,  which  he  has  present,  without  the 
acquisition  of  more.” 

Not  all  political  thinkers  agree  with  the  an¬ 
swers  which  Machiavelli  and  Hobbes  give  on 
such  matters;  nor  do  all  make  such  questions 
the  pivots  of  their  political  theory.  But  there  is 
general  agreement  that  the  passions  are  a  force 
to  be  reckoned  with  in  the  government  of  men; 
that  the  ruler,  whether  he  is  despotic  prince  or 
constitutional  officeholder,  must  move  men 
through  their  emotions  as  well  as  by  appeals  to 
reason. 

The  two  political  instruments  through  which 
an  influence  over  the  emotions  is  exercised  are 
oratory  (now  sometimes  called  “propaganda”) 
and  law.  Both  may  work  persuasively.  Laws, 
like  other  discourses,  according  to  Plato,  may 
have  preludes  or  preambles,  intended  by  the 
legislator  “to  create  good-will  in  the  persons 
whom  he  addresses,  in  order  that,  by  reason  of 
this  good-will,  they  will  more  intelligently  re¬ 
ceive  his  command.”  But  the  law  also  carries 
with  it  the  threat  of  coercive  force.  The  threat 
of  punishment  for  disobedience  addresses  itself 
entirely  to  fear,  whereas  the  devices  of  the  ora¬ 
tor — or  even  of  the  legislator  in  his  preamble — 
are  not  so  restricted.  The  orator  can  play  upon 
the  whole  scale  of  the  emotions  to  obtain  the 
actions  or  decisions  at  which  he  aims. 

Finally,  there  is  the  problem  of  whether  the 
statesman  should  exercise  political  control  over 
other  influences  which  affect  the  emotional  life 
of  a  people,  especially  the  arts  and  public  spec¬ 
tacles.  The  earliest  and  perhaps  the  classic 
statement  of  this  problem  is  to  be  found  in 
Plato’s  Republic  and  in  his  Laws.  Considerations 
relevant  to  the  question  he  raises,  and  the  im¬ 
plications  of  diverse  solutions  of  the  problem, 
are  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Art,  Liberty, 
and  Poetry. 


Chapter  22:  EMOTION  42! 

OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PACE 

1.  The  nature  and  causes  of  the  emotions  or  passions  422 

1  (i.  Emotion  in  relation  to  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain  423 

1  b.  Bodily  changes  during  emotional  excitement 

1  c.  Instinctive  emotional  reactions  in  animals  and  men  424 

2.  The  classification  and  enumeration  of  the  emotions 

2 a.  Definitions  of  particular  passions 

2 b.  The  order  and  connection  of  the  passions  425 

2 c.  The  opposition  of  particular  emotions  to  one  another 

3.  The  disorder  or  pathology  of  the  passions 

3*7.  Madness  or  frenzy  due  to  emotional  excess:  excessively  emotional  or  emotionally 
over-determined  behavior 

3 b.  Rationalization  or  the  emotional  determination  of  thought  426 

3 c.  Particular  emotional  disorders:  psychoneuroses  due  to  repression 

(1)  Hysterias  427 

(2)  Obsessions  and  compulsions 

(3)  Phobias  and  anxieties 

(4)  Traumas  and  traumatic  neuroses 

3 d.  The  alleviation  and  cure  of  emotional  disorders 

4.  The  moral  consideration  of  the  passions  428 

4 a.  The  conflict  between  reason  and  emotion 

(1)  The  force  of  the  passions  429 

(2)  The  strength  of  reason  or  will  430 

4 b.  The  treatment  of  the  emotions  by  or  for  the  sake  of  reason 

(1)  Moderation  of  the  passions  by  reason:  virtue,  continence,  avoidance  of  sin 

(2)  Attenuation  and  atrophy  of  the  passions:  the  liberation  of  reason  431 

4 c.  The  moral  significance  of  temperamental  type  or  emotional  disposition  432 

5.  The  political  consideration  of  the  passions 

5*7.  The  causes  of  political  association:  fear  or  need  433 

5 b.  The  acquisition  and  retention  of  power:  love  or  fear 

5 c.  The  coercive  force  of  law:  fear  of  punishment  434 

5 d.  The  devices  of  oratory:  emotional  persuasion 
5 c.  The  regulation  of  art  for  the  sake  of  training  the  passions 


422 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  nature  and  causes  of  the  emotions  or 
passions 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  iv,  350c-353d;  bk  ix, 
416b-c;  421a-b  /  Timaeus,  466b-d  /  Philebus , 
621c-622b;  627c-628a;  628d-630c  /  Laws,  bk 
ix,  748a 

8  Aristotle:  Soul ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [403a2-b3] 
632a-c;  ch  4  [408^4— b3 1  ]  638b-d;  bk  iii,  ch 
3  [427^1-24]  660a;  ch  9  [432b26~433a2]  665c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  iv,  ch  ii 
[692^2-27]  224b-c  /  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  5 
[no5bi9-no6a6]  351b-c  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch 
7  [i327b40-i328ai8]  532a-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii, 
ch  1  [i378a2o]-CH  11  [i388b3o]  623b-636a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [136-160] 
31d-32a;  [231-322]  33a-34b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  vi  [724-734]  230b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  i  la-b;  ch  5 
2d-3c;  ch  9-1  i  4c-5c  /  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch 
3-4  108a-109b  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  18 
166d-167b;  ch  20-21  167d-168c;  ch  28  172a- 
173b  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  19-22  262a-264c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  ix,  ch  4-5  287a- 
289a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  81, 
aa  2-3  429c-431d;  part  i-ii,  qq  22-48  720b, d- 
826a, c 


20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  82,  a  1,  ans  968a-970c;  q  86,  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  3-4  994d-996a,c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  intro,  47c-d;  part  i, 
61a-65b  esp  61a-c;  68b-c;  77b-c;  part  ii,  162c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  55b-c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  82d-83a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  axiom  3  373d; 
part  iii  395a-422a,c  esp  395a-d,  def  1-3 
395d-396a,  prop  i  396a-c,  prop  3  398b-c, 
prop  56  414a-d,  the  affects  416b-422a,c; 
part  iv,  def  7  424b;  prop  1-4  424c-425d; 
prop  9-13  426d-428a;  appendix,  i-ii  447a-b; 
part  v,  axiom  2  452c;  prop  34  460c-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx 
176b-178a  esp  sect  3  176d;  ch  xxxiii,  sect 
5-15  248d-250c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  338c-d 

42  Kant:  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
378b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385a-d; 
386b-d  /  Judgement,  483d-484b;  508d  [fn  1] 

43  Federalist:  number  17,  69c 

53  James:  Psychology,  49b-50a;  87b;  209a-b; 
327b-328a;  738a-766a  esp  738a-b,  742a-746a, 
758a-759a,  761a-765b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  4d-5a  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams , 
363c-d  /  Repression,  424d-425b  /  Uncon - 


1  a  to  1  b 

scions ,  432c-433d  esp  433b  /  General  Introduc¬ 
tion 608d;  623b-c  /  Inhibitions ,  Symptoms , 
wwd  Anxiety ,  720c-721b;  736d-741c  / 
Introductory  Lectures ,  837b-d 

lrf.  Emotion  in  relation  to  feelings  of  pleasure 
and  pain 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120b  c  /  Phaedo ,  220b- 
221a  /  Republic ,  bk  iv,  352d  /  Timaeus ,  463d- 
464b  /  Philebus ,  628d-630c  /  Lww'r,  bk  ix, 
748a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [i25b28— 34] 
175a;  ch  6  [i27b26~32]  177b  /  Sow/,  bk  ii,  ch 
2  [4 i3bi7— 24]  643d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [ii04b29- 
ii05ai6]  350b-c;  ch  5  [1  io5bi9— 28]  351b;  bk 
vii,  ch  6  [ii49b2o-24]  400b  /  Politics ,  bk  v, 
ch  10  [i3i2b24-33]  515b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  ii 
[i370a28-i372ai]  613c-615c  passim;  bk  ii,  ch 
1  [i378a2o]-cH  11  [i388b3o]  623b-636a  pas¬ 
sim 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [1073- 
1085]  58a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus ,  184a-c 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  18-20 
166d-168b;  ch  28  172a-173b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  2-4  13c- 
14b;  bk  viii,  par  7-8  54c-55a;  bk  x,  par  39 
81b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
2,  a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  619d-620d;  q  22,  a  i, 
ans  720d-721c;  q  23  723c-727a;  qq  31-39 
752b-792d;  q  48,  a  1  822d-823b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61a-62c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  hi,  prop  4-57  398d- 
415b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xx 
176b-178a  passim,  esp  sect  3  176d;  ch  xxi, 
sect  40  187d-188b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  i 
413a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  338c-d 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  298d-300a;  341c- 
342a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385a- 
386b/  Judgement ,  477b-478a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  197a-b;  391b-392a;  739b- 
740a;  754b-758a  passim;  808a-812b  passim, 
esp  808b-809a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams ,  378b-d  /  In¬ 
stincts,  418d-420b  esp  420a  /  Repression  422a- 
427a, c  esp  422a-d,  424d-425c  /  General  Intro¬ 
duction,  608d  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle, 
639a-641a  esp  640 b-d;  641d-643c  /  Inhibitions , 
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  720a-721c;  736d- 
737b;  739b-c;  752c-754a,c  passim 

l£.  Bodily  changes  during  emotional  excite¬ 
ment 

7  Plato:  Ion,  145a-b  /  Symposium,  155c-157a  / 
Timaeus,  466c-d  /  Philebus ,  628c 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  8  [9b9~ 34]  I4c- 
15a  /  Sow/,  bk  i,  ch  i  [403^— b3]  632a-c;  ch  4 


423 

(4o8a34  b3 1  ]  638b  d;  bk  iii,  ch  9  (432b26- 
43 }ai]  665c  /  Memory  and  Reminiscence,  cii  2 
[45 3"1 5—3 1  ]  695b  d  /  Dreams,  cii  2  [460^2- 
bi8]  704b  c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  i 
(524bi7-i 9]  50c;  bk  v,  cii  18  [550*29-31]  77b; 
bk  vi,  ch  18  [572a8-b28]  97d-98c;  bk  ix,  cii 
37  [62  ib28— 622*1  o]  147c  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk 
ii,  ch  4  [63obi8-65iai5]  175c  176a;  bk  iv,  cii 
5  [679*5-31]  209a-c;  ch  11  [692*22-27]  224b  c 
/  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  7  [70ib3]-cn  8  [702* 
21]  236d-237c;  ch  ii  239a-d  /  Ethics ,  bk  iv, 
ch  9  [1  i28bio— 14]  375d-376a;  bk  vii,  ch  3 
[ii47ai4-i7]  397b 

10  Hippocrates:  Sacred  Disease,  158a;  159d- 
160a 

12  1  ^ucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1037- 
1057] 57d 

14  Plutarch:  Demetrius,  740d-741a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  3, 108a- b  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  23  153d-154b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  75, 
a  3,  rep  3  380c-381b;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a  7, 
rep  2  690d-692a;  q  22  720b,d-723b  passim, 
esp  a  2,  rep  3  721c-722c;  q  33,  a  8,  ans  779c- 
780c;  q  37,  a  2,  ans  784c-785b;  a  4  785d- 
786d;  q  41,  a  i,  ans  798b-d;  q  44,  a  1  807a- 
808b;  a  3  809a  c;  q  48,  a  2  823b-824c;  a  4 
825b-826a,c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  70,  a  2,  rep  2,5  896a-897d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
15a-b;  bk  iii,  192b-193a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  345b-c;  405b-d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  271a-b;  288b; 
292d-293a;  296d  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood, 
322c-d  /  On  Animal  Generation,  431d-432a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  49b-c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  vi,  99d-100a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  def  3-postulate  i 
395d-396a;  prop  2,  demonst  and  schol, 
396d;  part  iv,  prop  7-8  426a-c;  part  v, 
pref  451a-452c;  prop  34,  demonst  460c-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  17  177d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  234a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  234a-b;  253d 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  509c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  169d-170b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  274a;  546b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  48c;  bk  iv, 
178d-179a;  bk  vi,  247d-248a;  256b-c;  264c-d; 
bk  viii,  334a;  bk  ix,  350d-354a  passim,  esp 
35ld-352a,  353b-d;  bk  xiii,  567d-568c;  bk 
xv,  616a-618b 

53  James:  Psychology,  198a;  327b-328a;  694a- 
699a;  738a-766a  esp  738b-745b,  754b-759a 

54  Freud:  Hysteria,  59c  /  Interpretation  of 
Dreams,  323b  /  Unconscious ,  433d  [fn  2]  / 
General  Introduction,  608d-609a  /  Inhibi¬ 
tions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  736d-738a  esp 
737a-b 


Chapter  22:  EMOTION 


424 

(1.  The  nature  and  causes  of  the  emotions  or 
passions.) 

1  c.  Instinctive  emotional  reactions  in  animals 
and  men 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  hi,  llld-112c  esp 
112c;  bk  vii,  236c 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  157b-159b  esp  158a-159a; 
165b-166b  /  Republic ,  bk  ii,  320b-c  /  Laws , 
bk  vi,  712b 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  cii  27 
[7ob6~39]  92c-93a,c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  iv,  ch  i 
[524bi7-i9]  50c;  bk  v,  ch  8  [542s! 7— b4]  68d- 
69a;  ch  18  [550*29-31]  77b;  bk  vi,  ch  i8-bk 
vii,  ch  2  97b-108c  passim,  esp  bk  vi,  ch  18 
97b-99c,  bk  vii,  ch  1  106b,d-108a;  bk  ix, 
ch  1  [6o8a2i-b2o]  133b,d-134a;  ch  37  [62ib28- 
622aio]  147c  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  iv,  ch  5 
[679^-32]  209a-c;  ch  ii  [692*22-27]  224b-c  / 
Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  iii,  ch  2  [753*6-17] 
294a-b  /  Ethics ,  bk  hi,  ch  8  [m6b24-i  117*3] 
363a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  6  [1 149^4-1  i5oa8]  400b-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  cii  12, 
173a-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  23  128c-d: 
bk  iii,  ch  7,  183c-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ix,  sect  9  292b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  78, 
a  4,  ans  411d-413d;  q  82,  aa  2-3  429c-431c; 
q  96,  a  1,  rep  2  510b-511b;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a 
2,  rep  3  687d-688b;  q  40,  aa  2-3  793d-795a; 
q  41,  a  1,  rep  3  798b-d;  q  46,  a  4,  rep  2 
815b-d;  a  5,  rep  i  815d-816d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xviii 
[19-75]  80a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [15,282-287] 
457b  /  Manciple's  Tale  [17,104-144]  490a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  184a-b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  346a-347d; 
349a-350a;  361b-362a;  381b-c;  402a-d;  405c- 
406a;  476c-477a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  vi,  99d-100a;  102b- 
103a  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  156a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  57,  schol 

415b 

35  Hume:  Tinman  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
80  486c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  343d-346d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  469c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  124b;  174b;  347a-c;  386a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  144a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  287d-291a  esp 
289a-291a;  304b-313a  esp  305c-309a,  312b, d 
[fn  27];  371c-372c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  499c-500c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  49b-51a;  198a-199a;  204b- 
211a  passim,  esp  206a,  208a-209b;  700a-738b 
esp  717a-731b,  734b-735a,  738a-b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  591d-592c; 
607d-609b  esp  608d-609b;  613a;  615b-616c; 
623 b-c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety, 


1  c  to  2  a 

721a-b;  737c-739c;  752a-c  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents,  782a-b,d  [fn  1];  787a-b;  789b- 
791d  esp  789c-790b  /  New  Introductory  Lee - 
tnres,  840a-853b  esp  840b-c,  846b-849b, 
851a-c 

2.  The  classification  and  enumeration  of  the 
emotions 

7  Plato:  Philebus,  628d-630c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  5  351b-c  /  Rhet¬ 
oric ,  bk  1,  ch  11,  [i378a2o-3o]  623b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  81, 
a  2  429c-430c;  part  i-ii,  q  23  723c-727a;  q 
24,  a  4  729c-730a;  q  30,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i 
749d-750d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  62c-64a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  the  affects  416b- 
422a, c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  1-3  176b-d;  sect  18  178a 

53  James:  Psychology,  127b;  656a;  742a-743a; 
745b-746a; 766a 

2a.  Definitions  of  particular  passions 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  103b-d  /  Phaedrus ,  120a-c  / 
Symposium  149a-173a,c  esp  161d-168a  /  Eu- 
thyphro ,  193d-194b  /  Apology,  202a  /  Philebus, 
628d-630c/  Laws,  bk  i,  650a;  651a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [ii3a33~b3] 
158d-159a;  bk  iv,  ch  5  [i25b28~34]  175a;  ch 
6  [i27b26~32]  177b;  ch  13  [i5iai4— 19]  205d- 
206a;  bk  viii,  ch  1  [i56a26-b3]  212b-c  /  Soul, 
bk  1,  ch  1  [403*25-33]  632b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  ii 
[692*22-27]  224b-c  /  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  6 
[1115*7-14]  361a-b;  ch  8  [m6b24-i  117*3] 
363a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  9  [ii28bio-i4]  375d-376a; 
bk  viii,  ch  6  [1158*10-14]  409d-410a;  bk  ix, 
ch  10  [1171*11-13]  424d;  ch  12  [1  i7ib29— 33] 
425d  /  Politics ,  bk  v,  ch  10  [1312^4-33] 
515b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [1378*20]-^  11 
[i388b3o]  623b-636a 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  28  172a- 
173b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  13  lld- 
12a;  bk  iii,  par  2  13c-d;  bk  iv,  par  7-14  20d- 
23a  esp  par  11  21d-22a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  qq 
26-48  733d-826a,c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61a-65b  esp 
61a-62c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  5a-6c;  25c-26d;  344a- 
347c;  409d-434d  passim,  esp  424d-425a 

27  Shakespeare:  Othello,  act  iii,  sc  iii  [165— 
192]  223d-224a;  [322-357]  225c-226a;  sc  iv 
[155-162]  229a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  11-59  399d- 
416b;  the  affects  416b-422a,c;  part  iv, 
appendix,  xxi-xxv  449a-c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  262  221a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  3-18  176d-178a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


2b  to  J>  a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  453a  456a;  502a  b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  198dl99a;  237b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  345c  346d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  259a; 
259d-260b  [fn  2]  /  Judgement ,  502d-503d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  308d-309a;  312b, d 
[fn  27];  313a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xii,  561b 

53  James:  Psychology,  717a-736b  passim,  esp 
717a-721a,  733b-735a;  738b~741b 

54  Freud:  Instincts,  418c-421a,c  /  General  Intro¬ 

duction,  558d;  607d-609c;  612c-614b;  623b-c  / 
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  641b  c  /  Group 
Psychology,  673b-674a ;  681c-683a;  693a- 

694d  passim  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and 
Anxiety,  736d-739c;  751a-754a,c  esp  753d- 
754a,c  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  783c; 
795d-796b;  798a 

2£.  The  order  and  connection  of  the  passions 

7  Plato:  Philebus,  628d-630c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [1  i3a33~ b3 ] 
158d-159a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  2-4  13c- 
14b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  81,  a 
2  429c-430c;  part  i-ii,  q  25  730b-733d;  q  27, 
a  4  739c-740a;  q  29,  a  2  745c-746b;  q  30,  a 
2  749d-750c;  q  32,  aa  3-4  760d-762a;  q  33,  a 
2  766a-767a;  q  36,  a  2  781c-782b;  q  40,  a  7 
797a-c;  q  43,  a  1  805d-806b;  q  45,  a  2  810d- 
811b;  q  46,  aa  1-2  813b-814d;  q  48,  a  1  822d- 
823b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61a-65b  esp  61a- 
62c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  105c-107a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  395a-422a,c  esp 
prop  11-59  399d-416b,  the  affects  416b- 
422a, c;  part  iv,  def  5  424b;  prop  7  426a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  262  221a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  3-18  176d-178a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  237b-c 

53  James  :  Psychology,  742a-b 

54  Freud:  Instincts,  415d-421a,c  esp  420c- 
421a,c  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  659b-c  / 
Group  Psychology,  677c-678c  /  Ego  and  Id, 
709d-710c  /  War  and  Death,  758a-b;  766a-b 

2c.  The  opposition  of  particular  emotions  to 
one  another 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  153b-157a  /  Phaedo , 
220b-221a  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  350d-353d 

8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  7  [431*8-16] 
663c-d;  [43  ib2— 9]  664a 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [1378*20]-^ 
11  [i388b3o]  623b-636a  passim 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1072- 
1085]  58a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  7-1 1 
20d-22a  esp  par  11  21d-22a;  bk  x,  par  39 
81  b-c 


425 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  23, 
aa  2  4  724c-727a;  o  25,  a  4  733a-d:  q  29, 
aa  2-3  745c-747a;  o  32,  a  4  761c-762a;  q  35, 
a  6  777b-778c;  o  46,  \  1,  rep  2  813b-814a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61b-d;  62b  c; 
63b  d;  conclusion,  279a  c  passim 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  17  401d  402a; 
prop  51  411c-412a;  part  iv,  def  5  424b; 
axiom  424c;  prop  i,  sciiol-prop  7  424d 
426b;  prop  9-18  426d-429d  esp  prop  15-18 
428a-429d;  prop  60  442d  443a;  appendix, 
xxi-xxv  449a-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  cii  xx, 
sect  3-18  176d-178a  passim 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  127b-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  19a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  312b, d  [fn  27] 

53  James:  Psychology,  197b- 198a;  708a- 709a; 
720b;  729a-b;  734b-735a 

54  Freud:  Instincts,  415d-421a,c  passim,  esp 
419d-421a,c  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Princi¬ 
ple,  659b-c  /  Group  Psychology,  677c-678c  / 
Ego  and  Id,  709c- 710c  /  War  and  Death, 
758a-b 

3.  The  disorder  or  pathology  of  the  passions 

3 a.  Madness  or  frenzy  due  to  emotional  excess: 
excessively  emotional  or  emotionally 
over-determined  behavior 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  i  [1-445]  3a-7c;  bk  ix  [18 9 - 
429]  59a-61c 

5  Aeschylus:  Choephoroe  [1010-1063]  80a-c 

5  Sophocles:  Ajax  143a-155a,c  esp  [282-332] 
145c-146a  /  Electra  156a-169a,c 

5  Euripides:  Medea  212a-224a,c /  Electra  327a- 
339a, c  /  Bacchantes  [1024-1297]  348c-351a  / 
Heracles  Mad  [815-1015]  371d-373d  /  Orestes 
394a-410d  esp  [1-424]  394a-398b 

6  Herodotus: History,  bk  iii,  95d-98a;  103b-d: 
bk  vii,  222c-d 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  2b-c  /  Lysis,  14b-l5d  / 
Protagoras,  59b-61c  /  Phaedrus,  120a-129d  / 
Ion,  145a-c  /  Symposium,  168c  /  Phaedo,  220d- 
221a;  232d-233c  /  Tirnaeus,  474b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Dreams,  ch  2  [46ou32-bi8]  704b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [1147*14-17] 
397b  /  Politics ,  bk  viii,  ch  7  [i34ib33~i342b 
18]  547c-548a,c  esp  [1342*6-12]  547d  /  Poetics, 
ch  17  [1455*29-36]  690c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [31—93] 
30b-31b;  [1045-1075]  43c-d;  bk  iv  [1073- 
1120]  58a-d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  [296-303]  175a; 

[450-477]  179b-180b;  bk  vii  [323-474]  245a- 
249a;  bk  xii  [1-80]  354a-356a;  [593-611] 
370a 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  i,  206b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  10, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  664d-665c;  Q  28,  a  3,  ans 
742a-d;  q  37,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  784c-785b; 
a  4,  rep  3  785d-786d 


Chapter  22:  EMOTION 


426 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  The  disorder  or  pathology  of  the  passtoyis.  3 a. 
Madness  or  frenzy  due  to  emotional  excess: 
excessively  emotional  or  emotionally  over¬ 
determined  behavior.) 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida  la-155a  esp 
bk  iv,  stanza  32-49  92b-95a,  bk  v,  stanza 
33-39  124b-125b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  63b:  68b-71a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
192b-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  5a-6c;  lOb-llb;  25c- 
26d;  166a-167a;  275c-d;  289b-290a;  344a- 
347c;  418c-d;  420d-421d 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  iii,  sc  ii 
[104-195]  87b-88a;  act  v,  sc  vi  [61-93]  103d- 
104a  /  Richard  III  105a-148a,c  /  Romeo  and 
Juliet  285a-319a,c  esp  act  iii,  sc  iii  [1-115] 
304d-306a  /  Merchant  of  Venice ,  act  iv,  sc  i 
[40-62]  426a 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet  29a-72a,c  esp  act 
iv,  sc  v  59c-62a  /  Othello  205a-243a,c  esp 
act  iv,  sc  1  229d-233a  /  King  Lear  244a- 
283a, c  esp  act  i  244a-254c,  act  ii,  sc  iv  [274- 
289]  261c-d,  act  iii,  sc  iv  264a-266b,  act  iv, 
sc  vi  [80-207]  274b-275c  /  Macbeth,  act  v, 
sc  1  306b-307a;  sc  111  [37-46]  308a  /  Antony 
and  Cleopatra,  act  ii,  sc  v  322a-323d  /  Timon 
of  Athens,  act  iv,  sc  iii-act  v,  sc  iv  410c- 
420d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  83a-c; 
88c-89a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  7d-8c  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  12  180d-181a; 
sect  69  196d-197a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  231c-232b;  234a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  216a-c;  509d-510c 
esp  509d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  481d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 
323a-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3374-3413]  82b-83a; 
[4405-4612]  110a-114b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\  esp  135a-136b,  148b- 
150a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  51  d;  bk  iii, 
119a-120c;  159b-162b  esp  160d;  bk  iv,  178b- 
179a;  bk  v,  207b-208a;  233b-234a;  bk  vi, 
238a-c;  245d-246a;  266c-d;  271b-273c;  bk 
vii,  277a-278a;  292b-296a;  bk  viii,  305b- 
307d;  bk  ix,  350d-354a;  bk  xi,  505a-511b; 
531a-532a,c;  bk  xii,  549d-551c;  bk  xiii, 
567d-568c;  bk  xv,  616a-617a;  642d-643b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,  4a-d; 
bk  11,  17b-21b;  21d-22b;  41c-45d;  bk  iii  46a- 
82a, c  esp  50c-62a;  bk  viii,  200c-201c;  206a- 
207d;  228d-235d;  bk  ix,  259c-265a;  bk  xii, 
395a-396a;  397c-398d 

53  James:  Psychology,  204b;  653a-b;  716b;  718a- 
719a;  750a-b;  754a;  797a-b 

54  Freud:  Hysteria ,  27a-c  /  Interpretation  of 

Dreams,  210c-d;  328a-b  /  General  Introduc¬ 


ed  to  3c 

tion,  547b-549d  /  Group  Psychology,  670d- 
671c;  675b-676b  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and 
Anxiety,  743b-744a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents,  787a-b 

3 b.  Rationalization  or  the  emotional  determi¬ 
nation  of  thought 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
427d-428a;  bk  iv,  474a-c;  bk  v,  506b;  507a-c 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  118d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  16  [i287a2o-b5] 
485c-486a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1356^  1-1 8] 
595c;  bk  11,  ch  1  [i377b28-i378a5]  622d-623a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [1141- 
1191I  59a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  52d-53a;  58a; 
68c;  78a-b;  part  ii,  154a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
148d-150d;  154a-156c;  159d-163c;  166a-168a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  210b-212a;  273b-276a; 
447c-448c;  490d-491d 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  306a-c; 
309d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  38d-39a; 
66c-d  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  49  111a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  39,  schol 
408b-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  82-87  186b-189a;  99-100 
191a-192b  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,  439b- 
442a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  2d-3a  /  Civil  Government, 
ch  11,  sect  13  28a-b  /  Human  Understanding, 
bk  11,  ch  xxxiii,  sect  1-9  248b-249d;  bk  iv, 

'  ch  xx,  sect  12  392c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  6, 
453c 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  29c-30b;  number  31, 
103c-104a;  number  50, 162a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  270a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ii,  82d-83a;  bk 
iii,  134a-c;  bk  iv,  170d-171c;  bk  v,  233b-234a; 
bk  vi,  238a-b;  bk  x,  426b;  bk  xi,  497c-499c; 
505a-511b  esp  509c-510d;  bk  xiii,  585b, 
epilogue  11,  686c-687a 

53  James:  Psychology,  371b;  374a-377a  passim, 
esp  376b-377a;  439a;  643a-646a;  652a-657b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  13d-14a  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams, 
210c-d;  379a-380d  /  General  Introduction , 
486b-488b  esp  487d-488a  /  Group  Psychology , 
682b-c  /  War  and  Death ,  760d-761a  /  New 
Introductory  Lectures,  874a-879b  esp  874a-d, 
878b-879b 

3 c.  Particular  emotional  disorders:  psycho¬ 
neuroses  due  to  repression 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  347c-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  244b-253b  esp  248a;  645b- 
646a;  746b-748a;  749a-750b;  753b-754b; 
759b-760a;  799b-807a;  838a-839b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis  la-20d  esp  4d-5a,  7a-9a,  14b-i9a  / 


427 


Chapter  22:  EMOTION 


3c(  1)  to  3d 

Hysteria  25a~118a,c  esp  35b  c,  37d  38d,  52c- 
53c,  65a  72b,  81c-87a,  111b  115a  /  Interpreta¬ 
tion  of  Dreams ,  320b  c;  328c:  380d  382a  / 
Narcissism ,  402c-404d  /  Repression  422a- 
427a,c  /  Unconscious ,  432d-436b  /  General 
Introduction ,  545a-638a,c  esp  557b  569c, 

585b-600d,  604c-606a,  611a  615a,  632b- 

635d  /  Group  Psychology ,  690a  691c  esp 
690c-d;  695b-696a,c  /  £go  and  Id ,  712c- 
715c  /  Inhibitions ,  Symptoms ,  and  Anxiety 
718a-754a,c  esp  720a-723d,  728b  731d,  741d 
[fn  i],  745d-747b.  750a-d  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents ,  792b-799a  esp  797a-b,  798d- 
799a  /  Introductory  Lectures ,  840a-846a; 
851d-852d;  859c-860c  ' 

3c(l)  Hysterias 

10  Hippocrates:  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases ,  ap¬ 
pendix,  par  35  43d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  131b-137b  esp  135a,  137a; 
248a-252a;  747b  [fn 3];  768b-770a  esp  770b 
[fn  3];  789b-790b  [fn  2];  802b-803a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis, ,  la-5d  esp  4c-5d  /  Hysteria ,  25a-62b 
esp  35b-c,  37d-38d,  53b-c;  72d-73b;  76c-d; 
81d-83c;  97b-99c;  lllb-118a,c  /  Interpretation 
of  Dreams ,  200a-d  /  Repression ,  426b-c  /  Lfo- 
conscious ,  434c-436a  esp  435d-436a  /  General 
Introduction ,  572a-b;  586d-587b;  610d-612b 
passim  /  ££0  and  Id ,  713d-714a  /  Inhibitions , 
Symptoms ,  and  Anxiety,  718c-719c;  728b-729a; 
741c-742a;  747c-748a;  750b 

3r(2)  Obsessions  and  compulsions 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [59-93] 
30d-31b;  [1053-1075]  43c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth,  act  v,  sc  i  306b- 
307a;  sc  111  [37-46]  308a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  2b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  44,  schol 
437d-438a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  139  196b-199a;  142-143 
199b-200a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  138c-139a 

48  Melville:  esp  135a-136b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  513d-515a 

53  James:  Psychology,  733b  [fn  1];  801a-805b 

54  Freud:  Hysteria,  83d-86a;  90a-b;  99c-102a  / 

Repression,  426d-427a,c  /  Unconscious ,  436b  / 
General  Introduction,  550d-557b  esp  551b- 
552c;  561c-562c;  568a-569a;  572b-c;  587b-c; 
600d;  612a-b  /  £^0  and  Id,  713c-715c  pas¬ 
sim  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  718b- 
719b  passim;  721c;  723c-d;  729a-733c; 

735c-d;  747c-d;  750b-d  /  Introductory 
Lectures,  841  b-c 

3c(3)  Phobias  and  anxieties 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [102-158] 
2b-3a;  bk  iii  [59-93]  30d-31b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  35, 
a  8,  ans  779c-780c 


23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  68d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxiii,  sect  10  249d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  210b  211a; 
bk  xv,  618a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ix, 
260d  262a;  bk  xi,  318a  348d;  bk  xii,  376b  d 

53  James:  Psychology,  722a*725a  passim,  esp 
723a,  724b;  733b'(fn  1] 

54  Freud:  Hysteria,  83d~86a  passim,  esp  84d- 
85a;  87a-97b  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams, 
205a-c;  235b-d;  276c;  370b-373a  /  Repression, 
425d-426b  /  Unconscious,  434c-435d  /  General 
Introduction, 607b-615b  esp  610d-612d;  623b-c 
/  Ego  and  Id,  715d-717a,c  /  Inhibitions,  Symp¬ 
toms,  and  Anxiety,  720a-754a  esp  724a-728b, 
733c-742a,  744b-748b  /  New  Introductory 
Lectures,  840a-846a 

3 c(4)  Traumas  and  traumatic  neuroses 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  3a-5a  esp  4b-c;  14d-15a  /  Hysteria, 
25a-30a  esp  26a-c,  27c-d  /  Ge?ieral  Introduc¬ 
tion,  558a-d;  603a-b  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure 
Principle,  641a-d;  648d-650c  /  Inhibitions, 
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  73  5  d- 736c;  741a-b; 
744b-745d;  749b-c;  751b-752b  /  New  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures,  817c-818b;  845b-846a 

3 d.  The  alleviation  and  cure  of  emotional  dis¬ 
orders 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [31-93] 
30b-31b  esp  [87-93]  31b;  bk  vi  [1-42] 
80a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  38 
786d-789d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  37c-39a;  401b-406a 

27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth,  act  v,  sc  i  306b- 
307a;  sc  iii  [37-46]  308a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxiii,  sect  13  250a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  13b-c;  127a-b;  284c-d; 
297d-293a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  357b-358b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  271  b-c; 
bk  xii,  551c-554a;  bk  xv,  614a-d;  616a-618b 
esp  617a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  21d- 
23c 

53  James:  Psychology,  132b;  135a-b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  la-4d;  6c-7a;  10c-13d;  14d-15a;  18a- 
20d  /  Hysteria,  25a-81c  passim,  esp  30d-31a, 
59d-60a,  62c-72d,  75d-81c;  106c-lllb  /  Psycho- 
Analytic  Therapy  123a-127a  ,c  [“Wild"  Psycho- 
Analysis  128a-130d  /  General  Introduction, 
546b-c;  550a-c;  560b-561b;  603b-604c;  623c- 
638a, c  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  643d- 
644d;  651c-d  /  Ego  and  Id,  712c-713a  /  In¬ 
hibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  748b- d  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures,  840a;  851d-852d; 
864a-873d  esp  871a-873d 


428 


4 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


4.  The  moral  consideration  of  the  passions 

7  Plato:  Gorgias ,  275d-277c  /  Republic ,  bk  iv, 
350c-353d;  bk  x,  433d 

9  Aristotle  :  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  i-bk  iii,  ch  i 
348b,d-357b  passim;  bk  hi,  ch  6-bk  iv,  ch 
9  361a-376a,c;  bk  v,  ch  8 
383c-384a;  bk  vii  395a-406a,c;  bk  x,  ch 
8  [ii78a8-2i]  432d  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  15 
[i334b8-28]  539b-d  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  12-14 
636a-638a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [288-322] 
33d-34b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses  105a-245a,c  passim, 
esp  bk  1,  ch  3-5  108b-110c,  ch  22  127c-128c, 
ch  25,  129d-130a,  bk  ii,  ch  5,  142c-143b,  ch 
13  152c-153d,  ch  17-18  158d-162b,  bk  iii,  ch 
15,  190c-d,  bk  iv,  ch  4-6  225a-232c,  ch  9 
237d-238d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations  253a-310d  passim 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  ix,  ch  4-6  287a- 
289b;  bk  xiv,  ch  3-9  378a-385b  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  24  630c-631a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  24 
727a-730a;  q  34  768c-772b 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  56, 
a  4  32b-33c;  q  58,  a  2,  ans  42a-43a;  a  3,  rep 
2  43b-44a;  q  59  45d-49d;  Q  60,  a  2  50d-51b; 
aa  4-5  52b-54d;  q  62,  a  2,  rep  1,3  60d-61b; 
q  63,  a  4,  ans  65d-66c;  q  64,  a  1  66d-67c; 
q  66,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  77c-78b;  q  67,  a  1 
81c-82c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61d-62a;  79a-80a; 
85d;  95d-96b;  part  ii,  138d-139a;  part  iv, 
272c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  26a-27c; 
78a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  i-iii 
447a-b;  xxxn  450c-d;  part  v,  prop  1-4 
452d-453d  esp  prop  4,  schol  453b-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  203  211a;  262  221a;  412-413 
242a;  423  243b;  502  260b-261a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  330d-331a;  343b-346d; 
362a- d  /  Political  Economy ,  375d-376b 

42  Kant:  Fund .  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
253a-279d  esp  256a-c,  259b-c,  264d-265b, 
266d-267d,  268d-271d;  284d-285a  /  Practical 
Reason,  297a-307d  esp  298a-300a,  304a-307d; 
321b-329a  esp  321b-324b;  341c-342a;  356a- 
360d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385c-386d; 
389a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  295b- 297b  /  Utilitarianism, 
457c-461c;  464d-465c;  469b-471b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  150 
56c-57a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 
251b-c;  part  iv,  321b-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  310c-319a  esp 
311a-d,  313d-314b,  318d-319a;  592b-593b 

53  James:  Psychology,  81b-83a;  202a-203a;  798b- 
808a  esp  807a-808a;  816a-818a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  386c-387a  / 
General  Introduction,  501d-504b  esp  503d- 
504b;  624d-625b  /  War  and  Death,  757d-761c 


4  to  4  a 

4a.  The  conflict  between  reason  and  emotion 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [655-663] 

120b-c 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120b-c;  128a-129c  /  Repub¬ 
lic,  bk  iv,  350c-355a;  bk  ix,  416a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  ii  239a-d  / 
Ethics,  bk  1,  ch  13  [no2bi3-no3aio]  348a-d; 
bk  iii,  ch  1  [iiua35-b4]  357b;  bk  vii  395a- 
406a, c  /  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  15  [i286ai7~2o] 
484b-c;  [1286*33-37]  484d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [307-322] 
34a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  5  257b-c; 
sect  10  257d-258a;  sect  16-17  259a-d;  bk 
iii,  sect  4  260b-261a;  sect  12  262b-c;  bk  v, 
sect  8-9  269d-270c;  bk  vii,  sect  55  283b-c; 
sect  68-69  284c-d;  bk  viii,  sect  39  288c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  167a-186b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  81, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  430c-431d;  q  95,  a  2,  ans 
and  rep  i  507c-508a;  q  iii,  a  2,  ans  569c- 
570b;  part  i-ii,  q  9,  a  2  esp  rep  3  658d-659c; 
q  10,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  664d-665c;  q  17, 
a  7  690d-692a;  q  33,  a  3  767a-d;  q  34,  a  i, 
rep  1  768c-769d;  q  48,  a  3  824c-825b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
a  3,  ans  56b-57a;  q  77  144d-152a  esp  a  2 
145d-147c,  a  4  148b-149a,  a  7  150d-151c; 
q  80,  a  2  160d-161c;  q  91,  a  6  212c-213c;  q  93, 
a  6  219d-220d;  q  94,  a  6,  ans  225d-226b; 
part  11-11,  q  186,  a  4,  ans  655c-656b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  57d-58a;  58c-d; 
part  11, 105d-106a;  141a-b;  151b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  20d-22a;  159a-167a  esp 
161a-c,  165c-166a;  184b-d;  200d-205b;  273b- 
276a;  486b-495a 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  ii, 
sc  ii  113c-115d;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [74-81]  121a  / 
Othello,  act  1,  sc  iii  [306-337]  212b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advaitcement  of  Learning,  55b-d; 
66c-d;  67a-b;  78a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  1-18  424c- 
429d;  prop  59-73  442b-447a;  appendix,  i- 
iii  447a-b;  xxxii  450c-d;  part  v,  prop  1-20 
452d-458a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [500-643] 
243a-246a;  bk  xii  [80-110]  321a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  104  193a;  412-413  242a;  423 
243b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  13 
28a-b  /  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  54  192b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  xx,  sect  12  392c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div  3 

451d 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385c- 
386b  /  Judgement ,  586a-587a 

43  Federalist:  number  15,  65b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii, 
3l2d-313a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3217-3373]  79a-82a 
esp  [3217-3250]  79a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  411a-4l2a 


4«(1) 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  318d-319a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  799a-808a  esp  799a-b, 
807a-b;  81*6a-819a  esp  816a-817a 

54  Freud:  Unconscious ,  433b-c  /  General  Intro¬ 
duction,  501d-504b  esp  503b  c,  504b;  589c- 
593b  passim  /  a?ul  Id,  702c-d;  704a-c; 
708  b-c;  715a  716c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms, 
and  Anxiety,  721  d- 722c  /  AVjp  Introductory 
Lectures,  837b  839b  esp  838a-d;  843d-846a 
esp  845b 

4a(  1)  The  force  of  the  passions 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  4:1-16;  25:29-34;  34; 
39:7-20  /  Exodus,  32:15-20  /  /  Samuel,  18:6- 
12;  19:8-10— (D)  I  Kings,  18:6-12;  19:8-10  / 
II  Samuel,  n;  13— (D)  II  Kings,  ii;  13  /  Job , 
5:2  /  Proverbs,  15:13;  27:4 

New  Testament:  Romans,  1:18-32  /  II  Corin¬ 
thians,  7:8-16  /  I  Timothy,  6:9-10  /  I  John, 
2:15-17;  3:14-16 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  xii  [153-200]  251d-252b 

5  Euripides:  Medea  [627-641]  217c  /  Hippoly - 
tus  225a-236d 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  hi,  lOOb-lOlb;  bk 
vii,  218c;  222c-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi, 
438a-b 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  2 b-c  /  Protagoras,  59  b- 
61c  /  Phaedrus,  120a-122a  /  Symposium, 
168a  /  Phaedo,  232d-234c  /  Republic ,  bk  i, 
296b-c;  bk  ix,  416a-418c  /  Timaeus,  474b-d  / 
Laws,  bk  viii,  735a-738c  passim 

8  Aristotle:  Memory  and  Reminiscence ,  ch  2 
[455*15-31]  695b-d  /  Dreams,  ch  2  [460*32- 
bi8]  704b-c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  vii,  ch  i 
[58xbi  1—22]  107b  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [109415 
29-1095*12]  340a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [uo9b3o- 
mobi5]  355b,d-356b;  [  1 1 1 1  a2 1  — b3 ]  357a-b; 
bk  iv,  ch  9  [ii28bi5~2o]  376a;  bk  vi,  ch  5 
[1  i40b8— 19]  389b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  i-io  395a- 
403c  passim;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [  1 1 5 6a3 1  — b5 ]  408a; 
bk  ix,  ch  8  [u68bn-28]  422a-b;  bk  x,  ch  9 
[1  i79b4~ 1  i8oa24]  434b-435a  /  Politics,  bk  1, 
ch  2  [1253^1— 37]  446d;  bk  iii,  ch  15  [1286“ 
16-20]  484b-c;  [1286*33-37]  484d;  ch  16 
[1287*28-32]  485d;  bk  v,  ch  10  [i3i2b25— 33] 
515b;  ch  11  [1315*25-31]  518a-b;  bk  vii,  ch 
7  [i327b4o-i328ai8]  532a-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii, 
ch  12  [1389*3— bi  1  ]  636b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [307-322] 
34a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  10  257d- 
258a;  bk  vii,  sect  55  283b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  167a-186b;  bk  xii 
[1-80]  354a-356a;  [593-611]  370a 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  139a  c  /  Coriolanus 
174b,d-193a,c  /  Ly sander,  362b-365a  /  Pom - 
pey,  533a-c  /  Antony  748a-779d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  58a;  bk  xiii,  137b-c  / 
Histories ,  ek  iv,  267d 


429 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  fv,  par  9  14 
21b  23a;  bk  vi,  par  11  13  38b  39c;  bk  viii, 
par  10  11  55c-56b  /  City  of  God,  bk  iv,  ch  4 
190a-c;  bk  xix,  ch  15  521a  c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  TJieologica,  p\rt  i,  q  81, 
a  3,  rep  1  -2  430c-431d;  q  iii,  a  2,  ans  569c- 
570b;  part  1  11,  q  6,  aa  6-7  649a-650d:  q  9, 
a  2  658d-659c;  q  10,  a  4  664d-665c;  q  24, 
a  2,  ans  727d  728c;  q  37  783c  786d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i  ii,  q  72, 
a  2  112b  113a;  q  73,  a  5  123a-d;  q  74,  aa 
5-10  131d-137c;  q  77  144d  152a;  q  82,  a  3 
169c-170b;  q  83,  a  4  173c-174b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  v  7a-8b;  vii 
[97]-viii  [64)  lOc-llc 

22  Chaucer:  Manciple's  Tale  [1 7,104-1 44] 490a-b 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  65a;  89a;  part 

ii,  104d;  105c;  138d-139a;  141a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  5a-6c;  20d-22a;  25c- 
26d;36c-41a  passim,  esp39b-40a;  109a-c;  159a- 
167a;  184a-d;  200d-205b  esp  203c-205b; 
232b-238d  passim;  273b-276a;  346b-347c; 
350d-354b;  402c-404b;  418c-d;  420d-421d; 
435b-d;  491c-495a 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  i,  sc  iii 
73d-74b  /  Romeo  and  Juliet  285a-319a,c  / 
Merchant  of  Venice,  act  i-iv  406a-430c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida  103a- 
141a, c  /  Othello  205a-243a,c  /  Antony  and 
Cleopatra  311a-350d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  347c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  67a-b;  78a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  1-18  424c- 
429d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [561-594] 
244b-245a;  bk  ix  [990-1066]  269a-270b;  bk 
xii  [80-110]  321a-b  /  Samson  Agonistes  [521- 
576]  351a-352a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  360  235a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  39  187c-d;  sect  54  192b-c;  bk  iv,  ch 
xx,  sect  12  392c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  3 

451d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  239b-243a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  109c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  329b 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385c- 
386b  /  Judgement,  586a-587a 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  29d-30a;  number  6, 
40a-b;  number  50,  162a-b;  number  55,  173a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  174b-c;  176d;  214b-c; 
341c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  167c- 
168a;  part  iii,  300c-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1110-1117]  27b-28a; 
[3217-3373]  79a-82a;  part  ii  [6566-6569]  161a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  135a-136b;  41  la-41 2a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  311d-312b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  15b-16a;  bk 

iii,  122b-c;  bk  vi,  251d-252d;  epilogue  i, 
655c-656b 


Chapter  22:  EMOTION 


430 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4a(2)  to  4«1) 


(4a.  The  conflict  between  reason  and  emotion. 

4a(  1)  The  force  of  the  passions.) 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  i, 
4a-d;  bk  ii,  39b-40a;  bk  iii,  50c-62a;  bk  vii, 
177c;  bk  xn,  397c-398d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  799a-b 

54  Freud:  Hysteria ,  110c  /  General  Introduction , 

502a-504b  esp  503d-504a  /  Group  Psychology , 
690a-c  /  £go  and  Id ,  701d-702d;  715d-716a  / 
Inhibitions ,  Symptoms ,  Anxiety ,  745 d- 

747b  /  Death ,  760d-761a  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents ,  787b  c  /  7/2/ro- 

ductory  Lectures ,  837b-839b  esp  838c-839b 

4^(2)  The  strength  of  reason  or  will 

4  Homer:  Odyssey ,  bk  iv  [265-295]  201d-202a; 
bk  ix  [82-104]  230a;  bk  xix  [203-219]  291b 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  168a-173a,c  /  Apology , 
205d-206d  /  Cn/o,  214d-215d  /  Phaedoy  220b- 
221a;  225b-226c;  232b-234c;  250b-25ld  / 
bk  i,  649d-650b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  ix,  ch  8  [n68b28- 
1  i69ai  1  ]  422b-d  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [1254s 
18— b8]  447d-448a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  hi  [307- 
322]  34a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  3  108b-c; 
bk  11,  ch  23  170a-172d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vii,  sect  55 
283b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  39  288c;  bk  ix,  sect  7 
292b;  bk  xi,  sect  18  304b-305b 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  139a-140d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vi,  par  11-13 
38b-39c;  par  16  40a-c;  bk  viii,  par  10-11  55c- 
56b;  par  19-27  58b-60c  /  Cz/y  0/  bk  ix, 
ch  4-5  287a-289a;  bk  xiv,  ch  8-9  381c- 
385b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  81, 
a  3  430c-431d;  q  hi,  a  2,  ans  569c-570b; 
part  1— 11,  q  10,  a  3  664d-665c;  q  17,  a  7  690d- 
692a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  141a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  20d-22a;  36c-41a  esp 
39b-40a;  159a-167a;  184a-d;  200d-205b; 

273b-276a 

27  Shakespeare:  Othello,  act  i,  sc  iii  [322- 
337]  212b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  27a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  15-17  428a-d; 

prop  59-73  442b-447a;  appendix,  i-iii 

447a-b;  xxxii  450c-d;  part  v  451a-463d 

32  Milton:  Comus  [414-475]  42b-44a  /  Paradise 
Lost,  bk  viii  [500-617]  243a-245b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  350  234a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxi,  sect  54  192b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  344d-345c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  164a-165c;  235c-d  / 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  259a-c; 
264d-265b;  271c-d;  279b;  282d-283d;  284d- 
285a  /  Practical  Reason,  303b-304b;  314a-d; 


315b-c;  346b, d  [fn  1]  /  Pref  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics,  365b-366a  /  Intro.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals,  386b-d  /  Judgement,  483d- 
484b;  586a-587a;  605d-606b  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  332c-d  / 
Utilitarianism,  463d-464c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  312a-c;  313d-314a; 
318d-319a 

53  James:  Psychology,  798b-800a;  807a-808a 

54  Freud:  Hysteria,  110c  /  Interpretation  of 
Dreams,  384c-385c;  386d-387a  /  Uncon¬ 
scious,  433 b-c  /  Group  Psychology ,  690a-c  /  Ego 
and  Id,  702c-d;  715c-716c  /  Inhibitions ,  Symp¬ 
toms,  and  Anxiety,  721d-722c;  744a  /  War  and 
Death ,  760d-761a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents,  800d-801a  /  New  Introductory  Lec¬ 
tures,  837d-839b;  845b;  880a 

4b.  The  treatment  of  the  emotions  by  or  for 
the  sake  of  reason 

4b(l)  Moderation  of  the  passions  by  reason: 
virtue,  continence,  avoidance  of  sin 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:14,17;  23:4-5  / 
Leviticus,  19:17-18  /  Numbers,  15:37-41  /  Deu¬ 
teronomy,  5:18,21  /  Psalms,  32:8-10;  37:1-8— 
(D)  Psalms,  31:8-10;  36:1-8  /  Proverbs,  7; 
15:1;  23;  30:7-9  /  Ecclesiastes,  7:8-9  —(D) 
Ecclesiastes,  7:9-10 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  18:30-33;  31;  38:16- 
23— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  18:30-33;  31; 
38:16-24 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:21-26,43-48  / 
I  Corinthians,  13:4-8  /  Ephesians,  4:31-32  / 
Colossians,  3:5-15  /  I  Thessalonians,  4:3-8  / 
/  Timothy ,  6:3-12  /  Titus,  2:11-14;  3:1-7  / 
James,  4:1-7  /  I  Peter,  2:11-12 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [866-1114]  499a-502b 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  5a-b  /  Laches,  31d-37a  / 
Protagoras,  59b-64a  /  Phaedrus,  120b-c  /  Sym¬ 
posium,  153b-157a;  168a-173a,c  /  Phaedo, 
225b'226c;  233c-234c  /  Republic,  bk  iii, 
325b-326b;  bk  iv,  346a-356a;  bk  ix,  416a-c; 
bk  x,  431b-434a  /  Timaeus,  466a-467a  /  Laws, 
bk  1,  649d-650b;  bk  vii,  713c-716a  esp  715d- 
716a;  bk  viii,  735c-738c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [125^0-28] 
174d-175a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  13  347b-348d; 
bk  11,  ch  i— bk  iii,  ch  i  348b,d-357b;  bk  iii, 
ch  6-bk  iv,  ch  9  361a-376a,c;  bk  vii  395a- 
406a, c;  bk  ix,  ch  8  [ii68b28-n69an]  422b-d  / 
Politics ,  bk  1,  ch  5  [i254ai8-b8]  447d-448a  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  14  637d-638a 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  826d-827a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1-61] 
15a-d;  bk  iii  [307-322]  34a-b;  [1053-1094] 
43c-44a,c;  bk  v  [1-54]  61a-d;  [1117-1135]  75d; 
bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  i  105a-106c; 
ch  3  108b-c;  bk  11,  ch  2  140c-141c;  ch  ii, 
151a-b;  ch  18  161a-162b 


4£(1)  to  4/;(2)  Chapter  22: 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  rk  ii,  sect  5  257b-c; 
bk  iv,  sect  24  265cd;  bk  vii,  sect  55 
283b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  39  288c;  bk  ix,  sect  7 
292b 

14  Plutarch:  Dion ,  798b  d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  2-4  9b  d; 
bk  in,  par  1  13b  c;  bk  iv,  par  25  25c;  bk  vi, 
par  18-26  40d-43a;  bk  viii,  par  1-2  52c-53b; 
par  10-11  55c-56b;  par  25-27  60a-c  /  City  of 
God ,  bk  iv,  ch  3  190a-c;  bk  ix,  ch  5-6  288b 
289b;  bk  xiv,  ch  6-9  380b  385b;  bk  xix,  cii 
15  521a-c  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  24 
630c-631a 

19  Aquinas:  Snmma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  95, 
aa  2-3  507c-509b;  q  98,  a  2  esp  rep  3  517d- 
519a;  part  i-ii,  q  20,  a  4,  ans  714c-715b; 
q  24  727a- 730a 

20  Aquinas:  Snmma  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  56, 
a  4  32b-33c;  q  59  45d-49d;  q  60,  a  4-Q  61,  a  5 
52b-59d;  q  64,  aa  1-2  66d-68b;  q  65,  a  i 
70b-72a;  part  iii,  q  15,  aa  4-9  790d-795b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xviii 
I1 9-75]  80a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus ,  par  4-7  401b- 
402b  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par  12,  503b-504a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  93d-94a;  95d- 
96b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iv, 
234a-240a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  20d-22a;  89b-91b; 

159a-167a;  184a-df  200d-205b;  232b-238d; 
251a-c;  346b-347c;  353c-354b;  402c-404b; 
431c-432d;  486b-495a 

26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Juliet ,  act  ii,  sc 
vi  [1— 1 5]  300c  /  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  i  [24-69] 
533b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  iii  [5-51] 
34c-d;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [68-79]  49c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  27b-c; 
67a-b;  71d-72b;  78a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  1-18  424c- 
429d  esp  prop  18,  schol  429a-d;  prop  59-73 
442b-447a;  appendix  447a-450d;  part  v 
451a-463d  esp  prop  1-20  452d-458a,  prop 
38-42  461d-463d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [500-617] 
243a-245b;  bk  xi  [334-369]  306b-307a;  [527- 
551]  310b-311a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [541-576] 
351b-352a  /  Areopagitica ,  390a-391a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  104  193a;  203  211a;  413 
242a;  423  243b;  502-503  260b-261a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  46-54  189d-192c  esp  sect  54  192b-c; 
sect  69  196d-197a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  32a-b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
256b  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
368d-369a  /  Judgement ,  586d-587a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  92b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  105 
133d-134a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii, 
312d-313a;  part  iv,  365d-366a 


EMOTION  431 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  310c  319a  esp 
313d  314b, 318d  319a;  322c  d;592b  c;  593a  b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  1 22b-c ; 
bk  v,  201a  c;  bk  vi,  245b  c;  247d-250a;  epi¬ 
logue  1,  655c-656b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
I64a-167a 

53  James:  Psychology,  807a-808a;  816a-819a  esp 
817a-818a 

54  F  reud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  9a;  20a-c  /  Hysteria,  110c  /  Narcis¬ 
sism,  407b-408a  /  Ego  and  Id,  702c;  706d- 
707d;  715a-716a  /  War  and  Death ,  757d- 
759c  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  773b-c  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures,  838c-839b;  844 b-c 

4£(2)  Attenuation  and  atrophy  of  the  passions: 
the  liberation  of  reason 

7  Plato:  Phaedo,  233c-234c  /  Republic,  bk  i, 
295d-296c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  13  [i389bi2- 
1390^4]  637a-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [1-54] 
61a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  i  105a-106c; 
ch  4  108d-110a;  bk  ii,  ch  2  140c-141c;  ch 
17-18  158d-162b;  bk  iii,  ch  8  184b-c;  ch  22 
195a-201a;  bk  iv,  ch  4  225a-228a;  ch  12 
242d-244a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  2  257a; 
sect  5  257b-c;  sect  10  257d-258a;  sect  16- 
17  259a-d;  bk  iii,  sect  4  260b-261a;  sect  6 
261a-c;  sect  12  262b-c;  bk  iv,  sect  39 
267a;  bk  v,  sect  8  269d-270b;  sect  26  272c; 
bk  vi,  sect  40-46  277d-278d;  bk  vii,  sect 
55  283b-c;  sect  68-69  284c-d;  bk  ix,  sect  7 
292b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  4-5  108c- 
109d  esp  ch  5,  109c-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ix,  ch  4-5  287a- 
289a;  bk  xiv,  ch  8-10  381c-385d  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  1,  ch  24  630c-631a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  24, 
a  2  727b-728c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
152a-d;  188d-191c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  89b-91b;  99b-100a; 

107a-112d;  165d-167a;  200d-205b;  232b-238d 
esp  235c-236a;  251a-c;  402c-404b;  432b-d; 
486b-495a  esp  491d-495a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  26b-c;  71d- 
72b 

32  Milton:  Comus  [414-475]  42b-44a;  [706- 
755]  49a-50a  /  Areopagitica,  390a-391a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  413  242a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  19a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  344d-345c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  32a-b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
256b  /  Practical  Reason ,  346b, d  [fn  1]  /  Pref 
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  378d-379a  / 
Judgement,  586a-587a 


432 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4b.  The  treatment  of  the  emotions  by  or  for  the 
sake  of  reason .  4b( 2)  Attenuation  and 

atrophy  of  the  passions:  the  liberation  of 
reason.) 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  577a-578b; 
bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c-631a 

53  James:  Psychology,  751a-752a;  753b-754b; 
760a-b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  20b-c  /  Hysteria,  110c  /  Inhibitions, 
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  745  cF 746c  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents,  773b-c  /  New  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures,  839d-840a 

4c.  The  moral  significance  of  temperamental 
type  or  emotional  disposition 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  3b  d  /  Republic,  bk  i, 
296b-c;  bk  ii,  319c-320c;  bk  iii,  338a-339a  / 
Timaeus,  474b-d  /  Statesman ,  607a-608d 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  8  [^34-1  oa6] 

15a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iv,  ch  9  [ii28bio-2o] 
375d-376a;  bk  vi,  ch  13  [ii44bi-i7]  394b;  bk 
vii,  ch  4  [1 1 48ai8— 22]  398c;  ch  5  399a-d  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  10  [1369^-29]  612b-c;  bk 
ii,  ch  12-14  636a-638a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iii  [288- 
322]  33d-34b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  5  llOb-c; 
bk  11,  ch  15  155c-156b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  1-3  10a- 
11a  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  1-2  246c- 
247b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  46, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  815d-816d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  1,  ans  12b-13c;  q  63,  a  1  63a-64a;  q  65,  a  i, 
ans  70b-72a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxx 
[100-145]  lOOb-d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus and  Cressida,  bk  iii,  stanza 
129  71a-b  /  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [6191- 
6208]  266a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  68b-c;  77c-78a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  200d-205b  esp  203a- 
204a;  434d-435d;  491d-495a  csp  494d-495a 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  iii,  sc  ii 
335b-337d  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  iii,  sc  i  [146— 
189]  451c-452a  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  iv,  sc  v 
494b-496d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iv,  sc  iv  [32-66] 
59a-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  49b-50b; 
76d-77c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiv 

102b,d-108d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  435b-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin .  Meta  physic  of  Morals,  256a; 
258b  c  /  Practical  Reason,  356a-360d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  303d-304d  /  Representative 
Government,  346c-348c 


4  c  to  5 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  150 
56c-57a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 
323b-c;  357b-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  311c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  viii,  321d-322d; 
336b-337d;  bk  ix,  362d-363a;  bk  xi,  514c-d; 
519a-c;  527b-528b;  epilogue  i,  655c-656b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 
38a-40c;  bk  iii,  48b-50b;  53a-60a  esp  54a-b, 
57b-c;  69c-71c 

53  James:  Psychology,  799b-808a  passim,  esp 

802b-803a,  806b-807a 

5.  The  political  consideration  of  the  passions 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [162-210]  132c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  iii, 
436d-438b 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii-ix,  404a-418a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  bk  viii,  404d-405c,  407a-408a, 
409d-411a,  bk  ix,  416a-418a  /  Laws,  bk  i-ii, 
643c-663d  esp  bk  i,  651a-652d;  bk  iii, 
665a-c;  668a-670c;  671a-672c;  674c-675c;  bk 
iv,  681b-d;  682b;  bk  v,  686d-691b  esp  689c- 
690c;  bk  vi,  707c-708a;  bk  vii,  718c-719d; 
726d-728b;  bk  viii,  732d-738c  esp  735c- 
736c,  738a-c;  bk  ix,  747d-748d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [ii2ib28-3o] 
368c  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [127^9-17]  467b; 
bk  iii,  ch  15  [i286ai7-2o]  484b-c;  [i286a33~ 
37]  484d;  ch  16  [i287a28-39]  485d;  bk  v 
502a-519d  passim,  esp  ch  2-3  503b-505b,  ch 
io-ii  512d-518c;  bk  vii,  ch  7  [i327b40~i328a 
18]  532a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Cleomenes,  659d-660a  /  Dion , 
784d-785a 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  iii,  257c-d 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  3a-37d  passim 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  intro,  47b-d;  part  i, 
85c-d;  90b-d;  93d-94a;  95d-96b;  part  ii, 
104b-d;  105c-106b;  113b;  140c-142a;  151b-c; 
part  iv,  272c;  conclusion,  279a-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Timon  of  Athens,  act  iii,  sc  v 
406d-408a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  20c- d; 
78a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  46  410c;  part 
iv,  prop  35,  schol  433d-434a;  appendix, 
viii— xvii  447d-448d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  291-338  225a-233a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xi,  sect  136-137 
56c-57b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  28b-29a;  37a- b; 
part  iii,  112a-114b;  119b-121a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  6a-b; 
bk  iii,  9a;  10a;  lOc-lla;  12b-d;  bk  v,  18d- 
19d;  bk  vii,  47c-48a;  bk  xiii,  96a;  bk  xix, 
135d-139c  passim;  bk  xxviii,  259b;  bk  xxix, 
269a, c 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  368a-b;  375d- 
376b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  4d-5a 


5  a  to  5  b 

43  Fepervlist:  number  i  29a-31a  passim;  num¬ 
ber  5-6  37a-41c  passim,  esp  number  ft,  40a  b; 
number  10  49c-53a  esp  50a  d;  number  is, 
65b  d;  number  17  69a-70d;  number  27, 
95c-d;  number  31,  103d-104a;  number  44, 
llOc-d;  number  46,  150b  152a;  number  49, 
160b-161a:  number  50,  162a-b;  number  35, 
173a-b;  number  63,  192c-193a;  number  70, 
211d-212a;  number  76,  225d  226a 

43  Mill;  Representative  Government,  329b  c; 
336c -337a;  346c -348c 

46  Hecjel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  166b- 
167c;  tart  1,  241d-242a;  part  iii,  300c-d; 
part  iv,  323b-c 

53  James;  Psychology ,  201a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  780b- 
802a, c  esp  7S0c-d,  781c,  783c-784b,  785d- 
787c,  792a-b,  800c-802a,c 

5a.  The  causes  of  political  association;  fear 
or  need 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  23b-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  402b- 
404a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  44a-45b  /  Republic,  bk  ii, 
311b-c;  316c-319a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  6  [i278bi5-3o] 
475d-476a;  ch  9  [1280*32-1281*2]  477d-478c; 
bk  v,  cii  8  [1308*25-30]  510b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [ioii- 
1027]  74b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  51b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  i,  ch  30  147b-d 

23  PIobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  77a;  77c;  84c-87b 
esp  86b;  90b-91b;  part  ii,  99a-101a;  109b-c; 
116c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  sciiol  1-2 
434d-436a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  16a-c  /  Civil  Government , 
ch  11,  sect  13-15  28a-c;  ch  viii,  sect  95 
46c-d;  ch  ix  53c-54d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  354c-355a  /  Political 
Economy,  370b;  374a-b  /  Social  Contract ,  bk 
1,  393 b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  309a-c; 

311b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  91  b-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435c-d 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  50a  d;  number  15, 
65b-d;  number  17  69a-70d  passim;  number 
27,  95c-d;  number  29,  101a;  number  46, 
150b-152a;  number  51,  163b-c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  424c-425b  / 
Utilitarianism ,  47  la-  b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  183 
64a;  par  261,  83c- d  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
part  ii,  262a;  283b-c;  part  iii,  289b-d;  part 
iv,  328b-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  308a-310d;  321b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
133c-d  passim;  bk  vi.  158b-159a 


433 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology  664a  696a,c  esp 
665c,  672a  676b,  687b  c  /  Civilization  and  Its 
Discontents,  78ld  782d;  783b  c:  785c  788d; 
796a  b  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  884a 

5b.  The  acquisition  and  retention  of  power: 
love  or  fear 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  95d-96b;  103d- 
104a; 107c-d 

6  Thucydides :  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,368b  d; 
bk  ii,  402a-404a;  bk  hi,  425d-426d;  bk  vi, 
5l9a-520d;  523c-524c;  bk  viii,  580b-c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  311c  312b  /  Laws,  bk 
hi,  671a-c;  674c-d;  bk  iv,  682b  /  Seventh  Let 
ter,  806d-807a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  v,  ch  2  [i}02ai6]- 
cn  3  [1 302b34]  503b-504b;  ch  8  [1308*25-34] 
510b-c;  ch  10  512d-515d;  ch  ii  [i 313*34- 
1 3 1 5bi 1  ]  516a-518c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  cii  4,  225a- 
226c;  ch  9  237d-238d 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  180d-181b  /  Pyrrhus 
314b,d-332d  esp  319b-321a  /  Lysandcr.  362b- 
365a  /  Sulla ,  384a-c  /  Crassus  438b,d-455a,c  / 
Sertorius,  462a-c;  466d-467a  /  Agesilaus,  482d- 
484a  /  Pompey,  517d-518a;  533a-c  /  Caesar, 
577d-583a  /  Cleomenes,  659d-660a  /  Cicero, 
717a-b  /  Demetrius,  737b-d  /  Dion ,  784d- 
785a  /  Artaxerxes,  856b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  ii,  224d-225a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  vi,  9b-d;  ch  vii, 
llb-c;  12b-d;  cii  xvn  23d-24d;  ch  xix  26a- 
30a;  cii  xx,  31b-c 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  intro,  47b-d;  part  i, 
76d;  part  ii,  lOOd;  109b-c;  156c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
132a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  51a-55d  passim 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  v,  sc  iii 
[238-270]  146b-c  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  iii,  sc  ii 
[39-84]  453b-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth,  act  iv,  sc  iii  [37— 
1 14]  303d-304c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  40d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  78a-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  12b- 
13c;  bk  iv,  15a-c;  bk  v,  26d-27d;  bk  vi,  43c-d; 
bk  xii,  93d-94a;  94c-95a 

38  PvOusseau:  Inequality,  364a- b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  412d-413a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  348a-349c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  263a-b;  436a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  549a 

43  Federalist:  number  6,  39a-b;  number  15, 
65b-d;  number  17,  69a-d;  number  72, 
217a-c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  354b-355b  / 
Utilitarianism,  46 2d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii, 
287a-d;  part  iv,  365d-366b 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  669a-c;  686c-689b 
esp  687a-b 


Chapter  22:  EMCrnON 


434 

(5.  The  political  consideration  of  the  passions.) 

5c.  The  coercive  force  of  law:  fear  of  punish¬ 
ment 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [681-710]  88b-c 

5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [1047-1090]  152a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vii,  233a-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
396c-d;  400d-401a;  bk  hi,  426b;  426d;  427c- 
428d  esp  427d-428a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  45b-d  /  Gorgias,  293b-d  / 
Laws,  bk  hi,  674d-675c  /  Sei'enth  Letter,  807a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  8  [1 1  i6ai 5— ^3] 
362b-d;  bk  x,  ch  9  [ii79bi2-n8oa24]  434b- 
435a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [i  136— 
1160]  76a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Agesilaus,  494a-c  /  Cleomenes , 
659d-660a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  57b-58d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  92, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  4  214d-215a,c;  q  95,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  1  226c-227c;  q  99,  a  6  250a-251a; 
q  100,  a  7,  rep  4  258c-259c;  q  107,  a  i,  rep  2 
325c-327b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xii,  18a;  ch  xvii, 
24b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  87c;  89a-b; 
91a-b;  part  ii,  99a-b;  113b;  116c-d;  132a; 
141b;  part  iv,  273b  c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  69d-70a; 
78a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  109a;  116b-117a  / 
Pensees,  297-304  227a-228a;  878  345a-b 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  3a  /  Civil  Government,  ch 
ix,  sect  125-131  54a-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  28a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  37d- 
38b;  38d-39c;  bk  xxv,  212b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  345d;  359d-360b  / 
Political  Economy ,  370d-373a  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  11,  406c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  309a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92a- b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253d- 
254b  /  Practical  Reason,  321b-329a  esp  325d- 
326b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383a- b 

43  Federalist:  number  15,  65a-d;  number  16 
66c-68d  passim,  esp  67d-68a;  number  17, 
69d-70a;  number  27,  95b-96a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  295d-296a  /  Representative 
Government,  329c-330a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  328b- 
329c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  314a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 
30d-31a 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  757c 


5c  to  5e 

5 d.  The  devices  of  oratory:  emotional  per¬ 
suasion 

5  Euripides:  Orestes  [866-956]  402d-403d 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  470a-487  a, c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
425c-d;  426c;  bk  vii,  557a-b;  559d-560b 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  74d-75a  /  Apology,  208c- 
209b;  210b-d  /  Gorgias,  260c-262a;  280d- 
283c;  291b-d 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i  [i354ai3~ 
x355a3l  593b-594a;  ch  2  [1356^3-18]  595c; 
bk  11,  ch  i-ii  622b,d-636a;  bk  iii,  ch  7 
[i4o8a23-b2i]  659b-660a:  ch  14  [1415^5]-^ 
15  [1 41 6bi 4]  668c  670c;  ch  16  [141 7^7— ^7] 
671c-d;  ch  19  [i4i9bio-27]  674c-d 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  129b-130b  /  Sertorius , 
462a-c;  466d-467a  /  Caesar,  577d-583a  /  Caius 
Gracchus,  681b,d-685c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  i,  207d-208a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  99, 
a  6,  ans  250a-251a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  vi,  9c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  67c;  part  ii, 
105d-106b;  127d-129d;  conclusion,  279a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  147b-148a;  306a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  iii  580b- 
587a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  24d-25c; 
66b-67c;  78a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  303c-304a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  535b-c 

43  Federalist:  number  i  29a-31a  passim;  num¬ 
ber  24,  87b-88c  passim;  number  58,  181b-c; 
number  62,  190b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  292b-293b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  273d- 
274a;  279d-280b  ' 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [521-557]  15a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  570c-571b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xii,  533a-534d; 
bk  xv,  622a-c 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  450b 

5e.  The  regulation  of  art  for  the  sake  of  train¬ 
ing  the  passions 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-339a;  bk  iv, 
344b-d;  bk  x,  431b-434a  /  Laws,  bk  vii, 
717b-721a;  726d-728b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  17  [i336bi2- 
23]  541c-d;  bk  viii,  ch  5  [1339^  1-134(^19] 
545a-546a;  ch  7  547b-548a,c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2 
lOa-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  184a-187c 
passim 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  384b-386b;  387b- 

394b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  iv,  17b- 
18d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  308b-c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Chapter  22:  EMOTION 


435 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  general  theory  of  instinct,  see  Habit  3 — 3c ;  and  for  the  consideration  of  instinctual  drives, 
see  Desire  2a,  3a. 

The  relation  of  pleasure  and  pain  to  the  emotions,  see  Pleasure  and  Pain  4a. 

The  conception  of  the  emotions  as  forms  of  animal  appetite  or  sensitive  desire,  see  Desire 
3 b ( 1 ) ;  Will  2b(2). 

The  analysis  of  the  one  emotion  which  is  held  to  be  the  root  of  all  the  others,  see  Love 
23-23(3). 

Other  discussions  of  the  conflict  between  the  psssions  and  reason,  or  between  one  emotion 
and  another,  see  Desire  3d,  4a,  6c;  Duty  8;  Mind  9b~9c;  Opposition  4a-4b,  4d. 

Other  discussions  of  emotional  disorder  from  a  psychological  or  medical  point  of  view,  see 
Desire  4a~4d;  Medicine  6c(2);  Mind  8b;  One  and  Many  36(5);  Opposition  4c. 

The  influence  of  the  emotions  upon  imagination  or  thought,  see  Desire  5a~5b,  6c;  Memory 
and  Imagination  8c,  8d(i);  Opinion  2a;  Truth  3d (2). 

The  moral  problems  raised  by  the  conflict  between  reason  and  emotion,  see  Desire  6a-6b; 
Duty  4-4^  Liberty  3a~3b;  Mind  9c~9d;  Sin  5;  Slavery  7;  Tyranny  5d;  Virtue  and 
Vice  5a. 

The  significance  of  the  passions  in  relation  to  law,  government,  and  the  state,  see  Law  5,  6a; 
Punishment  ic-id;  State  3e— 3 f;  and  for  the  problem  of  political  censorship  or  regulation 
of  the  arts  because  of  their  emotional  influence,  see  Art  10b;  Liberty  2a;  Poetry  9b. 

The  consideration  of  emotion  by  the  orator,  see  Rhetoric  4b. 

Emotion  in  relation  to  artistic  inspiration  or  expression,  see  Art  8;  Poetry  3. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 


Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Plutarch.  “Whether  the  Passions  of  the  Soul  or 
Diseases  of  the  Body  Are  Worse,”  in  Moralia 
Epictetus.  The  Manual 
Augustine.  Of  Continence 

Aquinas.  Quaestiones  Disputatae ,  De  Veritate,  qq 
25-26 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Anger,”  in  Essays 
Descartes.  The  Passions  of  the  Soul 
Pascal.  Discours  sur  les  passions  de  V amour 
Hobbes.  The  Elements  of  Law ,  Natural  and  Politic , 
part  1,  ch  12 

- .  The  Whole  Art  of  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  1-13 

Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  ii,  part  hi 

- .  A  Dissertation  on  the  Passions 

A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments ,  part 
1,  sect  11 

Sterne.  A  Sentimental  Journey 


Goethe.  Sorrows  of  Young  Werther 
Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind ,  iv,  b  (3) 
Dostoevsky.  Notes  from  Underground 
C.  R.  Darwin.  The  Expression  of  Emotions  in  Man 
and  Animals 

W.  James.  Collected  Essays  and  Reviews ,  xv,  xxv 
Freud.  The  Predisposition  to  Obsessional  Neurosis 

II. 

Cicero.  Tusculan  Disputations ,  m-iv 
Ben  Jonson.  Every  Man  in  His  Humour 
Burton.  The  Anatomy  of  Melancholy 
Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite,  bk  v 
Shaftesbury.  Characteristics  of  Men,  Manners,  Opin¬ 
ions,  Times 

Hutcheson.  An  Essay  on  the  Nature  and  Conduct  of 
the  Passions  and  Affections 
Collins.  The  Passions 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


4  36 

Voltaire.  “Passions,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 

T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Active  Powers  of  the  Human 
Mind,  in,  part  ii,  cm  3-7 

Brown.  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human 
Mind,  vol  111,  pp  26-473 

D.  Stewart.  Philosophy  of  the  Active  and  Moral 
Powers  of  Man 

W.  Hamilton.  Lectures  on  'Metaphysics  and  Logic, 
vol  1  (-1 1-46) 

Comte.  System  of  Positive  Polity,  vol  iv,  Theory  of 
the  Future  of  Man,  ch  2 

Lotze.  Microcosmos,  iik  ii,  cii  5 

Bain.  The  Emotions  and  the  Will 

E.  Hartmann.  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious ,  (b) 
ii— hi 

Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough ,  part  vi,  ch  8 


Wundt.  Outlines  of  Psychology,  (12-13) 

Bradley.  Collected  Essays,  vol  ii  (23) 

Strindberg.  The  Dance  of  Death 
Titchener.  Lectures  on  the  Elementary  Psychology  of 
Feeling  and  Attention 

Cannon.  Bodily  Changes  in  Pain,  Hunger,  Fear  and 
Rage 

Crile.  The  Origin  and  Nature  of  the  Emotions 
Carlson.  The  Control  of  Hunger  in  Health  and 
Disease 

Pareto.  The  Mind  and  Society,  vol  iii,  ch  9 

Proust.  Remembrance  of  Things  Past 

Jung.  Psychological  Types 

McTaggart.  The  Nature  of  Existence,  ch  41,  57 

B.  Russell.  The  Analysis  of  Mind,  lect  3,  14 

- .  Sceptical  Essays ,  vi 


Chapter  uy.  ETERNITY 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  notion  of  eternity,  like  that  of  infinity, 
has  two  meanings.  One  meaning  may  refer 
to  something  positive,  yet  both  seem  to  be  for¬ 
mulated  by  the  human  mind  in  a  negative  way. 
We  grasp  one  meaning  of  eternity  by  saying 
that  there  is  no  beginning  or  end  to  time’s 
process.  The  other  sense  of  eternity  we  con¬ 
ceive  by  denying  time  itself  and,  with  it,  change 
or  mutability. 

Considering  eternity  as  infinite  duration, 
Locke  says  that  we  form  this  notion  “by  the 
same  means  and  from  the  same  original  that  we 
come  to  have  the  idea  of  time  .  .  .  viz. ,  having 
got  the  idea  of  succession  and  duration  .  .  .  we 
can  in  our  thoughts  add  such  lengths  of  dura¬ 
tion  to  one  another,  as  often  as  we  please,  and 
apply  them,  so  added,  to  durations  past  or  to 
come.  And  this  we  can  continue  to  do,  with¬ 
out  bounds  or  limits,  and  proceed  in  infinitum .” 

The  unimaginability  of  the  infinite  is  no 
different  in  the  sphere  of  time  than  in  that  of 
space  or  number.  The  difficulty,  Locke  points 
out,  is  the  same  in  all  three  cases.  “The  idea 
of  so  much  is  positive  and  clear.  The  idea  of 
greater  is  also  clear.”  But  these  do  not  yet  give 
us  the  idea  of  the  infinite.  That  only  comes  with 
“the  idea  of  so  much  greater  as  cannot  be  coni' 
prehended ,  and  this  is  plainly  negative,  not 
positive  .  .  .  What  lies  beyond  our  positive  idea 
towards  infinity,”  Locke  continues,  “lies  in  ob¬ 
scurity,  and  has  the  indeterminate  confusion 
of  a  negative  idea,  wherein  I  know  I  neither 
do  nor  can  comprehend  all  I  would,  it  being 
too  large  for  a  finite  and  narrow  capacity.” 

In  insisting  that  we  can  have  no  positive  idea 
of  infinity — whether  of  space,  time,  or  number 
— Locke’s  point  seems  to  be  that  it  is  beyond 
our  finite  capacity  to  form  an  image  of  an  in¬ 
finite  object.  But  though  our  imaginations  may 
be  limited  in  this  way,  we  do  seem  able  to  con¬ 
struct — in  a  negative  manner — conceptions 


that  go  beyond  experience,  and  have  some 
meaning  even  if  they  lack  imaginative  content. 
Locke  indicates  this  other  aspect  of  the  matter 
when  he  criticizes  those  who  assert  dogmatically 
that  “the  world  is  neither  eternal  nor  infinite.” 
It  seems  to  him  that  the  world’s  eternity  or  the 
world’s  infinity  is  “at  least  as  conceivable  as 
the  contrary.” 

It  may  not  be  inconsistent,  therefore,  to  say 
that  infinite  time,  while  unimaginable,  remains 
quite  conceivable;  for  to  say  that  eternity  is 
conceivable  is  simply  to  say  that  endless  time 
is  neither  more  nor  less  possible  than  time  with 
a  beginning  and  an  end.  The  first  conception 
is  as  meaningful  as  the  second.  It  is  in  fact 
formed  from  the  second  by  negation — bv  sub¬ 
stituting  the  word  “without”  for  “with”  with 
respect  to  “a  beginning  and  an  end.”  But  un¬ 
like  our  conceptions,  our  images  cannot  be 
formed  by  negation.  When  we  imagine,  as  when 
we  perceive,  the  object  before  us  is  positive 
and  definite.  We  cannot  imagine,  as  we  cannot 
experience,  a  duration,  or  a  span  of  time,  with¬ 
out  a  beginning  and  an  end. 

With  regard  to  the  other  traditional  mean¬ 
ing  of  “eternity,”  Locke  takes  a  different  posi¬ 
tion.  It  too  might  be  defended  as  a  negative 
conception,  so  far  as  human  comprehension  is 
concerned,  since  it  involves  the  denial  of  time 
itself,  7.c.,  of  a  duration  comprising  a  succession 
of  moments.  But  here  Locke  says  that  there  is 
“nothing  more  inconceivable  to  me  than  dura¬ 
tion  without  succession.  ...  If  our  weak  appre¬ 
hensions,”  he  continues,  “cannot  separate  suc¬ 
cession  from  any  duration  whatsoever,  our  idea 
of  eternity  can  be  nothing  but  ol  an  infinite 
succession  of  moments  of  duration,  wherein 
anything  does  exist.” 

Nevertheless,  Locke  affirms  that  “we  can 
easily  conceive  in  God  infinite  duration,  and 
437 


438 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


we  cannot  avoid  doing  so.”  Whether  he  means 
by  this  that  God’s  eternity  involves  temporal 
succession,  must  be  determined  by  an  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  passage  in  which  he  maintains 
that  ‘‘God’s  infinite  duration  being  accompa¬ 
nied  with  infinite  knowledge  and  infinite  pow¬ 
er,  he  sees  all  things  past  and  to  come;  and  they 
are  no  more  distant  from  his  knowledge,  no 
farther  removed  from  his  sight,  than  the  pres¬ 
ent;  they  all  lie  under  the  same  view.” 

If  this  passage  means  that  time  stands  still 
for  God  in  a  single  moment  in  which  all  things 
are  co-present,  then  Locke  may  not  be  as  reso¬ 
lute  as  Hobbes  in  rejecting  the  theologian’s 
conception  of  God’s  eternity.  Criticizing  the 
Scholastics,  Hobbes  says  that  ‘‘for  the  meaning 
of  Eternity ,  they  will  not  have  it  be  an  endless 
succession  of  time.”  Instead,  “they  will  teach 
us  that  eternity  is  the  standing  still  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  time,  a  Nunc-stans  (as  the  Schools  call  it).” 
This,  Hobbes  thinks,  “neither  they  nor  anyone 
else  understands,  no  more  than  they  would  a 
Hic'Stans  for  an  infinite  greatness  of  place.” 

A  theologian  like  Aquinas  tries  to  avoid  the 
difficulty  which  Hobbes  finds  in  this  conception 
by  distinguishing  between  the  now  of  eternity 
and  the  now  of  time.  “The  now  of  time  is  the 
same,”  he  writes,  “as  regards  its  subject  in  the 
whole  course  of  time,  but  it  differs  in  aspect.” 
Furthermore,  “the  flow  of  the  now ,  as  altering 
in  aspect,  is  time.  But  eternity  remains  the 
same  according  to  both  subject  and  aspect;  and 
hence  eternity  is  not  the  same  as  the  now  of 
time.” 

The  notion  of  the  eternal  as  the  timeless  and 
the  immutable  does  not  belong  exclusively  to 
Christian  theology.  In  the  tradition  of  the 
great  books  it  is  found,  for  example,  in  Plato 
and  Plotinus.  Eternity,  according  to  Plotinus, 
is  “a  Life  changelessly  motionless  and  ever 
holding  the  Universal  content  in  actual  pres¬ 
ence;  not  this  now  and  now  that  other,  but 
always  all;  not  existing  now  in  one  mode  and 
now  in  another,  but  a  consummation  without 
part  or  interval.  All  its  content  is  in  immediate 
concentration  as  at  one  point;  nothing  in  it 
ever  knows  development:  all  remains  identical 
within  itself,  knowing  nothing  of  change,  for 
ever  in  a  Now  since  nothing  of  it  has  passed 
away  or  will  come  into  being;  but  what  it  is 
now,  that  it  is  ever.” 


Eternity  so  conceived  is  perhaps  even  more 
unimaginable  than  the  eternity  which  is  in¬ 
finite  time.  We  may  feel  that  we  have  some 
sense  of  an  infinite  duration  when  we  talk,  as 
Ivan  does  in  the  Brothers  Karamazov ,  about  a 
billion  years  or  “a  quadrillion  of  a  quadrillion 
raised  to  the  quadrillionth  power.”  Infinite 
time  is  like  that,  only  longer.  But  because  all 
our  experience  is  temporal  through  and 
through,  it  is  more  difficult  to  get  any  sense  of 
that  which  is  both  absolutely  timeless  and 
endlessly  enduring. 

Poets,  and  sometimes  philosophers  turned 
poets,  have  struggled  to  give  this  concept  imag¬ 
inative  content  by  contrasting  “the  white  radi¬ 
ance  of  eternity”  with  a  “many-colored  glass,” 
or  by  speaking  of  time  itself  as  “the  moving 
image  of  eternity.”  When  Dimmler  in  War  and 
Peace  tells  Natasha  that  “it  is  hard  for  us  to 
imagine  eternity,”  she  replies  that  it  does  not 
seem  hard  to  her — that  eternity  “is  now  today, 
and  it  will  be  tomorrow,  and  always,  and  was 
there  yesterday  and  the  day  before.  ...” 

These  and  similar  attempts  may  not  succeed 
as  much  as  the  insight  that  if  we  could  hold  the 
present  moment  still,  or  fix  the  fleeting  instant, 
we  could  draw  an  experience  of  the  eternal  from 
the  heart  of  time.  “The  now  that  stands  still,” 
Aquinas  writes,  “is  said  to  make  eternity  ac¬ 
cording  to  our  apprehension.  For  just  as  the 
apprehension  of  time  is  caused  in  us  by  the 
fact  that  we  apprehend  the  flow  of  the  now , 
so  the  apprehension  of  eternity  is  caused  in  us 
by  our  apprehending  the  now  standing  still.” 

To  understand  the  opposed  views  that  con¬ 
stitute  the  major  issues  with  regard  to  eternity, 
it  is  necessary  to  hold  quite  separate  the  two 
meanings  of  the  word  which  have  run  side  by 
side  in  the  tradition  of  western  thought.  The 
first  of  these  two  senses,  signifying  interminable 
time,  is  the  meaning  of  “eternity”  which  has 
greatest  currency  in  popular  speech.  This  is  the 
meaning  which  appears  in  the  chapters  on 
Infinity  and  Time.  It  is  also  the  sense  in  which 
philosophers  and  theologians  debate  the  prob¬ 
lem  of  the  eternity  of  the  world— whether  the 
world  ever  began  or  will  ever  end. 

Since  that  which  exists  interminably  is  im¬ 
perishable,  the  word  “eternal”  is  also  applied 
to  substances  which  are  thought  to  be  ever- 


Chapter  23:  ETERNITY 


439 


lasting.  Thus  Ptolemy,  and  the  ancients  gen¬ 
erally,  think  of  the  heavenly  bodies  as  “beings 
which  are  sensible  and  both  moving  and  moved, 
but  eternal  and  impassible.”  Aristotle  calls  the 
heavenly  bodies  “eternal  and  incorruptible.” 
For  Lucretius  and  the  atomists,  the  atoms  and 
the  atoms  alone  are  eternal.  They  are,  he  says, 
“everlasting,  though  all  things  else  are  dis¬ 
solved.”  Unless  they  were  eternal,  “all  things 
before  this  would  have  utterly  returned  to 
nothing.”  If  the  atomic  particles  “were  to  wear 
away,  or  break  in  pieces,”  Newton  argues,  “the 
nature  of  things  depending  on  them,  would  be 
changed.  .  .  .  And  therefore,  that  nature  may 
be  lasting,  the  changes  of  corporeal  things  are 
to  be  placed  only  in  the  various  separations  and 
new  associations  and  motions  of  these  perma¬ 
nent  particles.” 

The  heavenly  bodies  and  the  atoms  may  be 
thought  everlasting,  but  they  are  not  immu¬ 
table  in  all  respects,  for  local  motion  is  of  their 
very  essence.  Imperishable  in  existence,  they 
are  also  endlessly  in  motion.  In  Aristotle’s  view, 
local  motion  can  be  perpetual  or  eternal  only 
if  it  is  circular.  Circular  motion  alone  has 
neither  beginning  nor  end. 

The  eternal  circular  motion  of  the  heavens, 
according  to  Aristotle,  in  turn  communicates 
an  eternal  cyclical  movement  to  the  rest  of 
reality.  “Since  the  sun  revolves  thus,  the  sea¬ 
sons  in  consequence  come-to-be  in  a  cycle  .... 
and  since  they  come-to-be  cyclically,  so  in  their 
turn  do  the  things  whose  coming-to-be  the 
seasons  initiate.”  Such  an  eternal  return,  it 
would  seem,  is  also  applied  by  Aristotle  to  hu¬ 
man  things,  for  he  writes  that  “probably  each 
art  and  each  science  has  often  been  developed 
as  far  as  possible  and  has  again  perished.” 

Since  the  heavens  and  the  atoms  are  in  mo¬ 
tion,  even  though  their  motion  is  everlasting 
or  eternal,  they  cannot  be  eternal  in  the  second 
meaning  of  “eternity,”  which  is  the  very  oppo¬ 
site  of  the  first,  not  a  variation  or  extension  of 
it.  In  this  meaning,  the  eternal  is  an  existence 
absolutely  immutable — a  being  which  neither 
comes  to  be  nor  passes  away,  nor  changes,  nor 
moves  in  any  respect  whatsoever.  Aquinas  uses 
the  word  in  this  sense  when  he  says  that  “the 
nature  of  eternity”  consists  in  “the  uniformity 
of  what  is  absolutely  outside  of  movement.” 


He  also  includes  in  this  meaning  of  “eter¬ 
nity”  the  notion  of  interminability ;  for,  he 
writes,  “as  whatever  is  wholly  immutable  can 
have  no  succession,  so  it  has  no  beginning,  and 
no  end.”  Yet  Aquinas  preserves  the  sharp  dis¬ 
tinction  between  the  two  meanings  when  lie 
differentiates  the  sense  in  which  the  world 
might  be  called  eternal  and  the  sense  in  which 
he  would  attribute  eternity  to  God  alone. 
“Even  supposing  that  the  world  always  was, 
it  would  not  be  equal  to  God  in  eternity,”  he 
writes;  for  “the  divine  being  is  all  being  simul¬ 
taneously  without  succession,  but  with  the 
world  it  is  otherwise.” 

The  conception  of  eternity  as  absolutely  im¬ 
mutable  existence  is  found  in  the  ancient  pagan 
writers.  Plotinus,  as  we  have  already  seen,  makes 
immutability  the  mark  of  eternity.  The  un¬ 
moved  prime  mover  of  Aristotle  and  the  Pla¬ 
tonic  Ideas  or  Forms  also  possess  this  charac¬ 
teristic.  But  it  is  the  Jewish  and  Christian 
theologians  who  make  eternity  in  this  sense  one 
of  the  prime  attributes  of  God. 

Augustine,  for  example,  invokes  God  as 
“that  everfixed  Eternity”  in  whom  “nothing 
passeth,  but  the  whole  is  present.”  Since  time 
is  for  him  inconceivable  apart  from  change  or 
motion,  that  which  exists  immutably  does  not 
exist  in  time.  Referring  to  God’s  eternity,  he 
says,  “Compare  it  with  the  times  which  are 
never  fixed,  and  see  that  it  cannot  be  com¬ 
pared.  .  .  .  Thy  years  neither  come  nor  go; 
whereas  ours  both  come  and  go,  that  they  all 
may  come.  .  .  .  Thy  years  are  one  day;  and  Thy 
day  is  not  daily,  but  To-day.  .  .  .  Thy  To-day 
is  Eternity.” 

Time  and  eternity  are  here  conceived  as  two 
distinct  orders  of  reality.  The  temporal  order 
is  the  order  of  things  in  change  or  motion,  the 
eternal  the  realm  of  the  fixed  or  permanent, 
the  immobile  and  immutable.  “As  eternity  is 
the  proper  measure  of  being,”  Aquinas  writes, 
“so  time  is  the  proper  measure  of  movement.” 

The  eternal  and  the  temporal  are  similarly 
distinguished  by  Plato  in  terms  of  the  realms 
of  being  and  becoming — “the  world  of  immu¬ 
table  being”  and  “the  world  of  generation.”  In 
the  one  we  find  “the  parts  of  time,  and  the  past 
and  the  future,”  which  do  not  apply  to  the 
other.  “We  unconsciously  but  wrongly  transfer 
them,”  Plato  declares,  “to  the  eternal  essence 


440 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


.  .  .  but  the  truth  is  that  ‘is’  alone  is  properly 
attributed  to  it,  and  ‘was’  and  ‘will  be’  are  only 
to  be  spoken  of  becoming  in  time,  for  they  are 
motions,  but  that  which  is  immovably  the  same 
cannot  become  older  or  younger  by  time  .  .  . 
nor  is  it  subject  at  all  to  any  of  those  states 
which  affect  moving  and  sensible  things  of 
which  generation  is  the  cause.” 

For  Spinoza,  the  distinction  consists  in  two 
ways  of  viewing  the  order  of  nature.  “Things 
are  conceived  by  us  as  actual  in  two  ways,”  he 
writes;  “either  in  so  far  as  we  conceive  them  to 
exist  with  relation  to  a  fixed  time  and  place, 
or  in  so  far  as  we  conceive  them  to  be  contained 
in  God,  and  to  follow  from  the  necessity  of  the 
divine  nature.”  Only  in  the  second  way  do  “we 
conceive  things  under  the  form  of  eternity.” 
We  can  view  things  under  the  aspect  of  eter¬ 
nity  only  insofar  as  we  know  God  and,  through 
knowing  God,  are  able  to  know  all  things  ac¬ 
cording  as  “their  ideas  involve  the  eternal  and 
infinite  essence  of  God.” 

The  separation  of  time  and  eternity  into  dis¬ 
tinct  spheres  of  reality,  or  even  into  distinct 
ways  of  conceiving  the  whole  of  being,  is  chal¬ 
lenged  by  thinkers  who  find  the  eternal  within 
the  process  of  time.  For  both  Jew  and  Christian, 
the  eternal  God  intervenes  directly  in  the 
temporal  order.  The  most  radical  form  which 
this  fusion  takes  is  perhaps  exemplified  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  Incarnation  of  Christ,  when 
“the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among 
us.” 

Whitehead  challenges  the  sharpness  of  the 
separation  from  another  point  of  view.  He  not 
only  makes  “eternal  objects”  ingredients  in 
actual  occasions  or  temporal  events;  but  since 
the  events  which  constitute  the  process  of 
change  are  themselves  unchangeable,  they  are 
for  him  eternal — even  though  they  have  their 
being  within  the  sphere  of  change. 

A  similar  point  seems  to  be  made  in  Aris¬ 
totle’s  theory  of  change.  When  change  is  con¬ 
ceived  as  consisting  in  a  transformation  of  mat¬ 
ter,  it  is  the  thing  composed  of  matter  and  form 
which  changes,  and  neither  the  matter  nor  the 
form.  Matter  as  matter,  Aristotle  writes,  “does 
not  cease  to  be  in  its  own  nature,  but  is  nec¬ 
essarily  outside  the  sphere  of  becoming  and 
ceasing  to  be.”  The  remark  would  seem  to  hold 
true  as  well  of  the  form  as  form. 


As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Change,  the 
Aristotelian  analysis  of  motion  finds  in  matter 
or  the  substratum  of  change,  and  in  the  con¬ 
trary  forms  from  which  and  to  which  a  motion 
takes  place,  the  elements  of  permanence  under¬ 
lying  change.  When  a  green  leaf  turns  red,  for 
instance,  green  has  not  changed  into  red;  the 
leaf  has  changed  from  one  color  to  another. 
The  changing  leaf  is  not  eternal,  but  red  and 
green  are,  since  they  are  incapable  of  change. 
This  is  the  sense  of  eternity  in  which  the  un¬ 
changing  instant  is  eternal,  or  the  past  is  eter¬ 
nal,  even  though  both  are  somehow  elements 
or  aspects  of  time  and  the  process  of  change. 

The  past  may  be  eternal  but  it  no  longer 
exists.  The  passing  moment  may  be  eternal, 
but  it  has  no  duration.  Lack  of  existence  and 
lack  of  duration  together  distinguish  that 
meaning  of  “eternal”  in  which  it  merely  sig¬ 
nifies  the  unchanging,  from  the  meaning  in 
which  it  signifies  that  which  exists  or  endures 
forever  without  changing.  It  is  only  in  the 
second  of  these  two  meanings  that  the  eternal 
can  be  conceived  as  that  which  exists  entirely 
outside  the  realm  of  time. 

As  we  have  already  observed,  the  basic  phil¬ 
osophical  and  theological  issues  concerning 
eternity  cannot  be  intelligibly  stated  unless 
these  meanings  of  “eternity”  and  “the  eternal” 
are  kept  distinct. 

The  traditional  problem  of  the  eternity  of 
the  world  asks,  for  example,  not  whether  the 
order  of  nature  is  free  from  change  or  succes¬ 
sion,  but  whether  the  changing  physical  uni¬ 
verse  ever  had  a  beginning  or  ever  will  end. 
As  indicated  in  the  chapters  on  Change,  Time, 
and  World,  it  is  a  question  of  the  infinity  of 
time;  or,  in  another  formulation,  a  question  of 
the  interminability  of  change  or  motion. 

Aristotle  appears  to  answer  these  questions 
affirmatively,  especially  in  the  last  book  of  his 
Physics  where  he  claims  to  demonstrate  the  im¬ 
possibility  of  there  having  been  a  beginning  to 
motion.  Aquinas,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not 
think  that  the  eternity  of  the  world  can  be 
demonstrated;  and  of  Aristotle’s  arguments  he 
says  that  they  are  not  “absolutely  demonstra¬ 
tive,  but  only  relatively  so — viz,,  as  against  the 
arguments  of  some  of  the  ancients  who  asserted 
that  the  world  began  to  be  in  some  actually 


Chapter  23:  ETERNITY 


441 


impossible  ways.”  In  support  of  this  conten¬ 
tion,  he  cites  a  remark  made  by  Aristotle  in 
the  Topics,  that  among  “dialectical  problems 
which  we  cannot  solve  demonstratively,”  one 
is  “whether  the  world  is  eternal .” 

For  Kant  the  problem  is  typically  dialectical. 
It  occurs  as  part  of  the  first  antinomy  in  the 
Transcendental  Dialectic,  the  thesis  of  which 
asserts  that  “the  world  has  a  beginning  in  time” 
and  the  antithesis  that  “the  world  has  no  be¬ 
ginning,  but  is  infinite  in  respect  both  to  time 
and  space.”  The  fact  that  apparently  cogent  ar¬ 
guments  can  be  marshalled  for  both  of  these 
contradictory  propositions  shows,  in  Kant’s 
opinion,  that  the  reasoning  on  either  side  is 
not  demonstrative,  but  only  dialectical  and, 
as  he  says,  “illusory.” 

The  Jewish  and  Christian  doctrine  of  the 
world’s  creation  by  God  might  seem  to  require 
the  denial  of  the  world’s  eternity.  But  in  fact 
the  theologians  find  either  alternative  com¬ 
patible  with  divine  creation,  which  they  con¬ 
ceive  as  the  cause  of  the  world’s  being ,  not 
necessarily  of  its  beginning.  Augustine,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  examines  the  sense  in  which  the  world 
is  held  by  some  to  be  co-eternal  with  God,  even 
though  made  or  created  by  God.  “It  is  as  if  a 
foot,”  he  interprets  them  to  say,  “had  been 
always  from  eternity  in  the  dust;  there  would 
always  have  been  a  print  underneath  it;  and 
yet  no  one  would  doubt  that  this  print  was 
made  by  the  pressure  of  the  foot,  nor  that, 
though  the  one  was  made  by  the  other,  neither 
was  prior  to  the  other.”  So.  he  goes  on,  it  might 
also  be  said  that  the  world  has  always  existed 
and  yet  is  always,  throughout  eternity,  created, 
i.e.,  caused  to  exist ,  by  God. 

Commenting  on  this  passage,  Aquinas  adds 
the  observation  that  if  an  “action  is  instanta¬ 
neous  and  not  successive,  it  is  not  necessary  for 
the  maker  to  be  prior  in  duration  to  the  thing 
made.”  Hence  it  does  not  follow  necessarily, 
he  writes,  “that  if  God  is  the  active  cause  of 
the  world,  He  must  be  prior  to  the  world  in 
duration;  because  creation,  by  which  He  pro¬ 
duced  the  world,  is  not  a  successive  change” 
— but  an  instantaneous  act. 

Writing  both  as  a  philosopher  and  as  a  theo¬ 
logian,  Maimonides — many  centuries  before 
Kant  stated  his  antinomy — thinks  he  is  able  to 
show  that  the  question  of  infinite  time  and 


endless  motion  “cannot  be  decided  by  proof, 
neither  in  the  affirmative  nor  in  the  negative.” 
Just  as  for  Augustine  and  Aquinas,  so  for  him 
it  is  indifferent— from  a  philosophical  point  of 
view — whether  the  created  world  and  its  Crea¬ 
tor  are  co-eternal  or  whether,  as  Genesis  says, 
“in  the  beginning  God  created  heaven  and 
earth.” 

But  both  alternatives  are  not  equally  ac¬ 
ceptable  to  the  theologian.  Since  there  is  no 
proof  on  either  side  “sufficient  to  convince  us,” 
Maimonides  writes,  “we  take  the  text  of  the 
Bible  literally,  and  say  that  it  teaches  us  a 
truth  which  we  cannot  prove” — namely,  that 
the  world  had  a  beginning  in  time.  Aquinas 
comes  to  the  same  conclusion.  “That  the 
world  did  not  always  exist,”  he  writes,  “we  hold 
by  faith  alone.”  It  is  not  “an  object .  .  .  of  dem¬ 
onstration  or  science.”  For  Christian  and  Jew 
alike,  the  religious  dogma  that  the  world  is  not 
only  created  by  God,  in  the  sense  of  depending 
for  its  existence  upon  God  as  cause,  but  was 
also  initiated  by  God,  or  caused  to  begin  to 
exist  and  move,  is  based  on  the  revealed  word 
of  God  in  Holy  Writ. 

Those  who,  on  philosophical  grounds,  deny 
creation  ex  nihilo  also  deny  the  world’s  begin¬ 
ning.  Pursuant  to  his  theory  of  the  world  as  a 
necessary  and  perpetual  emanation  from  the 
One,  Plotinus,  for  example,  declares  that  “the 
Kosmos  has  had  no  beginning  .  .  .  and  this  is 
warrant  for  its  continued  existence.  Why 
should  there  be  in  the  future  a  change  that  has 
not  yet  occurred?”  For  Spinoza  likewise,  “all 
things  which  follow  from  the  absolute  nature 
of  any  attribute  of  God  must  for  ever  exist”; 
and  to  this  extent  at  least,  the  world  is  eternal 
and  uncreated. 

The  man  of  faith,  however,  believes  in  a  God 
who  is  free  to  create  or  not  to  create,  not  one 
from  whom  the  world  emanates  as  a  necessary 
effect  from  its  source.  When,  therefore,  he  af¬ 
firms  that  God  freely  chose  to  produce  the  world 
out  of  nothing,  he  seems  to  meet  the  question, 
“What  was  God  doing  before  He  made  heaven 
and  earth  ?”  To  the  questioner  Augustine  does 
not  wish  to  give  “the  jesting  answer — said  to 
have  been  given  by  one  who  sought  to  evade 
the  force  of  the  question — ‘He  was  getting 
Hell  ready  for  people  who  pry  too  deep.’  ” 

Instead  he  points  out  that  the  question  itself 


442 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


is  illicit  for  it  assumes  a  time  before  time  be¬ 
gan.  “If  before  heaven  and  earth  were  made,” 
he  writes,  “there  was  no  time,  then  what  is 
meant  by  the  question  ‘What  were  You  doing 
then  ?’  If  there  was  not  any  time,  there  was  not 
any  ‘then.’  ”  In  the  phrase  “before  creation” 
the  word  “before”  has  no  temporal  significance. 
It  signifies  a  different  kind  of  priority — the 
sense  in  which  eternity  precedes  time,  the  sense 
in  which  Augustine  says  of  God  that  “it  is  not 
in  time  that  You  are  before  all  time.  .  .  .  You 
are  before  all  the  past  by  the  eminence  of  Your 
ever-present  eternity.” 

Turning  from  eternity  in  the  sense  of  infinite 
time  to  the  eternal  in  the  sense  of  the  timeless 
and  unchanging,  the  great  question  is  whether 
anything  eternal  exists.  The  atoms  of  Lucretius 
are  not  eternal  in  this  sense,  nor  are  the  sup¬ 
posedly  imperishable  heavenly  bodies.  Nor  is 
it  sufficient  to  point  out  that  change  itself  in¬ 
volves  aspects  or  elements  of  permanence;  for 
the  question,  strictly  interpreted,  asks  whether 
anything  exists  in  and  of  itself  which,  having  no 
beginning  or  end,  also  has  no  past,  present,  or 
future — no  temporal  phases  in  its  continued 
endurance.  Only  such  a  thing  would  be  utterly 
non- temporal  or  changeless. 

Since  nothing  made  of  matter  is  exempt  from 
motion,  it  is  generally  supposed  that  no  ma¬ 
terial  thing  is  eternal  in  this  sense.  Not  even 
God  is  eternal  unless  God  is  absolutely  immu¬ 
table  as  well  as  spiritual.  The  angels  are  spiritual 
beings,  yet,  according  to  Christian  theology, 
they  cannot  be  called  “eternal”  because,  in 
the  first  place,  they  are  creatures  and  had  an 
origin;  and,  in  the  second  place,  they  are  sub¬ 
ject  to  spiritual  change  even  if  they  are  not 
involved  in  the  sorts  of  motion  to  which  bodies 
are  susceptible.  The  theologians,  therefore,  use 
the  word  “aeviternal”  to  signify  the  mode  of 
angelic  existence  in  that  it  is  “a  mean  between 
eternity  and  time.”  Aeviternity,  Aquinas  ex¬ 
plains,  has  “a  beginning  but  no  end,”  while 
“eternity  has  neither  beginning  nor  end  .  .  . 
and  time  both  beginning  and  end.” 

The  question  about  the  eternal  as  timeless 
and  immutable  existence  has  two  parts:  Does 
an  immutable  God  exist?  Does  anything  else 
exist  which  is  immutable  ? 


To  the  first  question,  it  does  not  suffice  to 
reply  by  affirming  the  existence  of  God.  Some 
modern  theologians  deny  God’s  absolute  im¬ 
mutability,  and  so  deny  the  eternality  of  His 
being  in  the  precise  sense  under  consideration. 

With  regard  to  the  second  question,  we  must 
observe  that,  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books, 
eternality  has  been  claimed  for  two  things  other 
than  God,  namely,  for  truth  and  ideas.  What¬ 
ever  “is  produced  by  reasoning  aright,”  Hobbes 
says,  is  “general,  eternal,  and  immutable 
truth.”  On  somewhat  different  grounds  James 
declares,  “there  is  no  denying  the  fact  that 
the  mind  is  filled  with  necessary  and  eternal 
relations  which  it  finds  between  certain  of 
its  ideal  conceptions,  and  which  form  a  de¬ 
terminate  system,  independent  of  the  order  of 
frequency  in  which  experience  may  have  as¬ 
sociated  the  conception’s  originals  in  time  and 
space.”  He  quotes  Locke  to  the  effect  that 
“truths  belonging  to  the  essences  of  things  .  .  . 
are  eternal,  and  are  to  be  found  out  only  by  the 
contemplation  of  those  essences.” 

The  common  phrase— “the  eternal  verities” 
— which  James  uses  testifies  to  the  prevalence 
of  the  notion  that  truth  itself  cannot  change, 
and  that  when  men  speak  of  a  new  truth  or 
the  growth  of  truth,  the  change  they  refer  to 
is  only  a  change  of  mind  with  respect  to  what 
men  think  is  true  or  false,  not  a  change  in  the 
truth  itself.  Whatever  is  true  now,  always  was 
true  and  always  will  be.  Time  and  change  make 
no  difference  to  the  truth  of  two  plus  two  equals 
four . 

But  even  so  it  can  still  be  asked  how  the 
truth  exists,  for  the  attribution  of  eternity  to 
anything  also  requires  us  to  consider  its  mode 
of  being.  If,  for  example,  the  truth  exists  only 
in  the  mind,  then  it  exists  unchangingly  only 
in  the  mind  of  an  absolutely  infallible  knower, 
a  mind  which  neither  learns  nor  forgets,  nor 
changes  in  any  respect  with  regard  to  what  it 
knows.  If  God  is  such  a  knower,  eternal  truth 
can  have  existence  in  God’s  mind. 

The  theologians  sometimes  go  further  and 
identify  absolute  truth,  as  they  identify  ab¬ 
solute  goodness,  with  God.  Aquinas  writes,  for 
example,  that  “if  we  speak  of  truth  as  it  is  in 
things,  then  all  things  are  true  by  one  primary 
truth;  to  which  each  one  is  assimilated  accord¬ 
ing  to  its  entity,  and  thus,  although  the  es- 


Chapter  23:  ETERNITY 


443 


sences  or  forms  of  things  arc  many,  yet  the 
truth  of  the  divine  intellect  is  one,  in  con¬ 
formity  to  which  all  things  are  said  to  be  true.” 
On  this  view,  it  would  appear  that  there  are 
not  two  eternal  beings,  but  only  one. 

William  James  finds  immutability  not  only 
in  the  truth,  but  also  in  the  concepts  of  the 
human  mind.  “Each  conception,’'  he  writes, 
“eternally  remains  what  it  is,  and  never  can 
become  another.  The  mind  may  change  its 
states,  and  its  meanings,  at  different  times;  may 
drop  one  conception  and  take  up  another,  but 
the  dropped  conception  can  in  no  intelligible 
sense  be  said  to  change  into  its  successor.  .  .  . 
Thus,  amid  the  flux  of  opinions  and  of  physical 
things,  the  world  of  conceptions,  or  things  in¬ 
tended  to  be  thought  about,  stands  stiff  and 
immutable,  like  Plato’s  Realm  of  Ideas.” 

In  the  case  of  ideas,  however,  the  problem 
is  complicated  by  the  question  whether  ideas 
exist  in  and  by  themselves,  outside  the  mind 
of  God  or  man.  If,  according  to  a  doctrine  at¬ 
tributed  to  Plato  and  the  Platonists,  the  Ideas 
or  Forms  exist  separately,  then  they  constitute 
a  realm  of  eternal  beings,  for  their  immutability 
is  unquestionable.  If,  from  an  opposite  point  of 
view,  the  realm  of  unchanging  ideas  is  identical 
with  the  divine  intellect,  then  no  eternal  being 
or  beings  exist  apart  from  God. 

The  proposition  that  God  is  the  only  eternal 
being,  the  only  uncreated  and  immutable  exist¬ 
ence,  is  inextricably  connected  with  the  propo¬ 
sition  that  God  is  the  only  actually  infinite 
being,  the  ens  realissimum  having  all  perfec¬ 
tions.  “Eternity  is  the  very  essence  of  God,” 
Spinoza  writes,  “in  so  far  as  that  essence  in¬ 
volves  necessary  existence.”  In  saying  this  he 
appeals  to  his  definition  of  eternity,  by  which 
we  are  to  understand  “existence  itself,  so  far 
as  it  is  conceived  necessarily  to  follow  from  the 
definition  alone  of  the  eternal  thing.”  For 
Spinoza,  as  well  as  for  Aquinas,  the  same  fact 
which  makes  God  eternal — namely,  the  iden¬ 
tity  of  his  essence  and  existence — also  consti¬ 
tutes  his  infinity  and  uniqueness.  It  is  impossi¬ 
ble,  Spinoza  argues,  for  there  to  be  two  infinite 
substances.  For  the  same  reason,  there  cannot 
be  two  eternal  beings. 

As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Infinity, 
when  the  word  “infinite”  is  applied  to  God,  the 


theologians  give  it  a  positive  rather  than  a 
negative  significance.  They  mean  by  it  the  ac¬ 
tual  infinity  of  perfect  being  and  absolute  pow¬ 
er,  in  sharp  distinction  from  the  potential  in¬ 
finity  by  which  the  mathematicians  signify  the 
lacf{  of  a  limit  in  addition  or  division. 

These  two  meanings  of  “infinity”  seem  to  par¬ 
allel  the  two  meanings  of  “eternity”  which  we 
have  dealt  with  throughout  this  chapter — one 
the  negative  sense  in  which  it  means  the  lacl{ 
of  a  beginning  or  an  end  to  time,  the  other  the 
positive  sense  in  which  God’s  eternity  consists 
in  that  fullness  of  being  which  can  exist  apart 
from  time  and  change.  Because  our  intellects 
are  finite,  we  may  apprehend  eternal  being  in  a 
negative  manner  by  calling  it  “timeless”  or  by 
conceiving  it  as  infinite  duration,  but  Spinoza 
cautions  us  against  supposing  that  it  can  be 
“explained  by  duration  or  time,  even  if  the 
duration  be  conceived  without  beginning  or 
end.” 

One  other  theological  discussion  raises  issues 
which  involve  in  a  unique  way  the  two  mean¬ 
ings  of  eternity.  It  deals  with  the  revealed  doc¬ 
trine  of  perdition  and  salvation  as  eternal  death 
and  eternal  life.  Is  the  eternality  of  Hell  and 
Heaven  equivalent  to  a  period  of  endless  dura¬ 
tion  or  does  it  mean — more  fundamentally — 
the  unchanging  state  of  souls  after  the  Last  Judg¬ 
ment  ? 

According  to  Augustine  and  Aquinas,  the 
eternity  of  Heaven  and  Hell  means  the  moral 
immutability  of  the  immortal  soul  as  well  as  the 
interminability  of  the  beatitude  it  enjoys  or  the 
punishment  it  suffers.  Only  in  Purgatory  does  a 
change  of  moral  state  occur,  but  the  process  of 
purification  which  takes  place  there  is  always 
limited  in  period.  Purgatory  is,  therefore,  not 
eternal  in  either  sense. 

As  Kant  sees  it,  however,  the  after-life  must 
not  only  be  interminable,  or  of  infinite  duration, 
but  it  must  also  permit  a  progressive  moral  de¬ 
velopment  without  end.  Man  is  justified,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Kant,  “in  hoping  for  an  endless  du¬ 
ration  of  his  existence”  only  on  the  ground  that 
“the  holiness  which  the  Christian  law  requires 
.  .  .  leaves  the  creature  nothing  but  a  progress 
in  infinitum .”  From  still  another  point  of  view, 
Dr.  Johnson  questions  the  traditional  Christian 
dogma  that  the  souls  of  the  blessed  are  secure  in 
a  perpetual  state  of  rectitude — in  this  respect 


444 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


like  the  good  angels  who  are  confirmed  in  their 
goodness  from  the  first  instant  of  creation. 

Boswell  had  “ventured  to  ask  him  whether, 
although  the  words  of  some  texts  of  Scripture 
seemed  strong  in  support  of  the  dreadful  doc¬ 
trine  of  an  eternity  of  punishment,  we  might 
not  hope  that  the  denunciation  was  figurative, 
and  would  not  be  literally  executed.”  To  this, 
Dr.  Johnson  replied:  “Sir,  you  are  to  consider 
the  intention  of  punishment  in  a  future  state. 
We  have  no  reason  to  be  sure  that  we  shall  then 
be  no  longer  able  to  offend  against  God.  We  do 
not  know  that  even  the  angels  are  quite  in  a 
state  of  security.  ...  It  may,  therefore,  perhaps 
be  necessary,  in  order  to  preserve  both  men  and 
angels  in  a  state  of  rectitude,  that  they  should 
have  continually  before  them  the  punishment 
of  those  who  have  deviated  from  it.” 


On  Dr.  Johnson's  theory,  the  moral  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  damned  seems  to  be  immutable.  It 
is  irremediable  even  by  the  punishments  which, 
according  to  him,  may  exercise  some  deterrent 
effect  upon  the  blessed  who,  he  seems  to  think, 
are  not  as  unalterably  set  in  the  path  of  right¬ 
eousness  as  the  wicked  are  in  their  iniquity. 

On  any  of  these  conceptions  of  Heaven  and 
Hell,  and  of  the  state  of  the  soul  in  the  after¬ 
life,  the  meaning  of  “eternity”  is  somewhat 
altered;  for  eternal  life  or  eternal  death  is  con¬ 
ceived  as  having  a  beginning,  if  not  an  end,  for 
the  individual  soul.  As  in  the  case  of  all  funda¬ 
mental  religious  dogmas,  the  truth  asserted  re¬ 
mains  obscure  and  mysterious.  It  is  not  only 
beyond  imagination,  but  also  beyond  any  ade¬ 
quate  rational  conception,  analysis,  or  demon¬ 
stration. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  Eternity  as  timelessness  and  immutability  or  as  endless  and  infinite  time:  the  distinc¬ 

tion  between  eternity  and  time  445 

1  a.  The  priority  of  eternity  to  time  446 

ib.  Aeviternity  as  intermediate  between  eternity  and  time 

2.  The  issue  concerning  the  infinity  of  time  and  the  eternity  of  the  world  or  of  motion 

3.  The  eternity  of  God  447 

4.  The  things  which  partake  of  eternity 

4 a.  The  imperishability  of  angels,  spiritual  substances,  souls 

4 b.  The  imperishable  in  the  physical  order:  matter,  atoms,  celestial  bodies  448 

4 c.  The  immutability  of  truth  and  ideas 

4 d.  The  eternity  of  Heaven  and  Hell:  everlasting  life  and  death  449 

5.  The  knowledge  and  imagery  of  eternity 


Chapter  23:  ETERNITY 


445 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homkk:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upperand  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  J  amf.s:  Psychology  y  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  sideof  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  163. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  cii, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.y  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  ldea$y  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Eternity  as  timelessness  and  immutability  or 
as  endless  and  infinite  time:  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  eternity  and  time 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticnsy  18:10 — (D)  OT,  Ec¬ 
clesiastics  y  18:8 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  450b-451d 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  13  [23ai8-26] 
35b-e  /  Physics ,  bk  iv,  ch  12  [22iai9]-cH  13 
[222^9]  301a-302c;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [233ai3-bi6] 
315a-c;  ch  7  [2 3 7^3-23 8a  19]  321a-c;  ch  10 
[24 ib  1 1—20]  325d;  bk  vm,  ch  1-2  334a-337b; 
cii  6  344b-346b;  ch  8  348b-352a  /  Heavensy 
bk  1,  ch  12  372d-375d  esp  [282a22-283a2] 
373d-374c,  [283b7~22]  375c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  3 
[286a8— 13]  377c  /  Generation  and  Corruption , 
bk  11,  ch  9  [335a33-b2]  436d-437a  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  v,  ch  5  [ioi5b9-i6]  536a;  bk  ix, 
ch  8  [io5ob6-2o]  576b-c;  bk  xi,  ch  10  [1067* 
33—38]  596a;  bic  xii,  ch  6  [io7ib2-n]  601b; 
ch  7  [i072ai8-23]  602a-b;  [i073a3~n]  603a-b; 
bk  xiv,  ch  2  [io88bi4-28]  620d-621a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  vi,  sect  15 
275a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  7  20a-c  / 
Third  Ennead ,  tr  vii  119b-129a  /  Fourth 
Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  6-8  161b-162d;  cii  15-16 
165c-166b 


18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  21  49d- 
50a;  bk  xi  89b-99b  esp  par  8-17  91b-93c,  par 
39-41  98c-99b;  bk  xii,  par  13-20  102a-103d; 
par  40  109b-110a;  bk  xiii,  par  44  122d  /  City 
of  Gody  bk  xi,  ch  5-6  324d-325d;  ch  21 
333a-d;  bk  xii,  ch  12-19  349b-355a 

19  Aquinas:  Stimma  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  10, 
aa  1-5  40d-45c  esp  a  4  43b-44b;  q  14,  a  9, 
ans  83b-d;  a  13,  ans  and  rep  3  86d-88c;  q  42, 
a  2,  rep  2-4  225d-227a;  q  46,  a  2,  rep  5 
253a-255a;  q  79,  a  8,  rep  2  421c-422b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xi  [106- 
108]  69d;  paradise,  xxix  [10-45]  150b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  271b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  292d-294a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  366d-367a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  48,  llOd 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  216d-217c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  8  355c;  prop  20, 
corol  2  364a;  part  ii,  prop  44,  corol  2  and 
demonst  390a;  part  v,  prop  23  458b-d; 
prop  29,  demonst  459c;  prop  34,  schol  460d 

32  Milton:  On  Time  12a-b  /  Paradise  Lost ,  bk 

xii  [553-556]  33 la 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  12 1  195a;  205-206  211a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv, 
sect  26-27  160c-161a;  sect  30-31  161c-162a; 
ch  xv,  sect 3-8  162d-164b;sECTii-i2l65a-c; 


446 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  Eternity  as  timelessness  and  immutability  or 
as  endless  and  infinite  time :  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  eternity  and  time.) 

ch  xvii  167d-174a  passim,  esp  sect  5  168d- 
169a,  sect  10  170b-c,  sect  16  172a-b;  ch 
xxix,  sect  15  237a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  26d;  130b-133c;  135a- 
137a, c;  152c;  160b-161d;  185a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  206c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vii,  295 b-c; 
epilogue  11,  681a 

la.  The  priority  of  eternity  to  time 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  450c-451a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  ix,  ch  8  [io5ob 
2-28]  576b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vii,  ch  i  119b-c; 
ch  6,  122c-d;  ch  ii,  126a;  ch  13,  128c  / 
Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  15-16  165c-166b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  21  49d- 
50a;  bk  xi,  par  12-16  92b-93a;  bk  xii,  par  40 
109b-110a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xi,  ch  4-6  324a- 
325d;  bk  xii,  ch  12  349b-350a;  ch  15-17 
351b-354a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  22, 
a  1,  rep  2  127d-128d;  q  46  250a-255d;  q  61, 
a  2  315c-316a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xxix  [10- 
45]  150b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [577-599]  187b- 
188a;  bk  vii  [70-108]  218b-219b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  135a-137a,c;  160b-161d 
esp  161d 

lb.  Aeviternity  as  intermediate  between  eter¬ 

nity  and  time 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii,  par  9  lOlb-c; 
par  12-15  101d-102c;  par  18-22,  103b-104a  / 
City  of  God ,  bk  xii,  ch  15  351b-352d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  2,  rep  1-2  41d-42c;  a  3,  ans  42c-43b;  aa  5-6 
44b-46d 

2.  The  issue  concerning  the  infinity  of  time  and 
the  eternity  of  the  world  or  of  motion 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1:1-2  /  Nehemiah ,  9:6 
—(D)  11  Esdras,  9:6  /  Job ,  38:1-13  /  Psalms , 
90:2;  95:4-5;  102:25-26;  104:5-6;  119:90-91; 
136:5-9;  148:1-6—  (D)  Psalms,  89:2;  94:4-5; 
101:26-27;  103:5-6;  118:90-91;  135:5-9;  148:1- 
6  /  Proverbs,  3:19;  8:22-29  /  Isaiah ,  45:12,18; 
48:13;  65:17-25— (D)  Isaiasy  45:12,18;  48:13; 
65:17-25  /  Jeremiah,  51:15— (D)  JeremiaSy 
5i:i5 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomony  7:17-18— (D) 
OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom ,  7:17-18  /  Ecclesiasti- 
cuSy  23:19-20;  24:9 —(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticusy 
23:28-29;  24:14  /  11  Maccabees ,  7:2 3— (D) 
OT,  //  MachabeeSy  7:23 

New  Testament:  MattheWy  13:24-30,36-43,49- 
50;  24:3-35  /  Afar^  13:3-33  /  Luke,  21  ^-33  / 


ltf  /o  2 

1:1-3  /  ColossianSy  1:16-17  /  Hebrews, 

1  :io-i2  /  II  Peter ,  3  3-13  /  Revelation ,  10:5-6— 
(D)  Apocalypse ,  10:5-6 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  124b-c  /  Timaeus ,  447b-c; 
450b-451a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [i04bi3-i8] 
148a-b  /  Physics ,  bk  iv,  ch  13  [222a29-b8] 
302b;  bk  viii,  ch  1-2  334a-337b;  ch  6  344b- 
346b;  ch  8  348b-352a  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[269b2-io]  360c-d;  ch  3  [270^-26]  361c-362a; 
ch  9  [279ai2]-cH  12  [283b22]  370b-375d  / 
Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  ii,  ch  io-ii 
437d-441a,c  /  Meteorology ,  bk  i,  ch  14  [352s 
x6-353a27]  458b-459a,c;  bk  ii,  ch  3  [356b2- 
357a4]  462 b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  ix,  ch  8 
[1050^0— 28]  576c-d;  bk  xi,  ch  6  [1063^3-16] 
591b;  ch  10  [1067^3-38]  596a;  bk  xii,  ch  6-8 
601b-605a  esp  ch  7  [io72ai9-bi4]  602b-d, 
[i073a5-u]  603b 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  4  [699^4- 
7ooa6]  234d-235a;  ch  6  [7oob29-7oia7]  236a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [146-264] 
2d-4b;  [483-634]  7a-8d;  [951-1051]  12d-14a; 
bk  11  [89-141]  16a-d;  [294-307]  18d-19a;  [569- 
580]  22b;  [1048-1063]  28b-c;  [1105-1174]  29a- 
30a, c;  bk  v  [1-431]  61a-66d  esp  [55-70]  61d- 
62a,  [235-246]  64a-b,  [351-379]  65c-66a;  bk 
VI  [535—607]  87c-88b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  13  271b; 
bk  vi,  sect  15  275a-b;  bk  ix,  sect  28  293d- 
294a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  847b-848b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  i  35a-39d  esp 
ch  1-5  35a-37c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xi  89b-99b  esp 
par  12-17,  92b-93b,  par  40  98d-99a  /  City  of 
God ,  bk  xi,  ch  4-6  324a-325d;  bk  xii,  ch 
10-20  348b-357a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  12,  ans  85d-86d;  q  46  250a-255d  esp  a  i 
250a-252d;  q  61,  a  2  315c-316a;  q  66,  a  4 
348d-349d;  q  75,  a  i,  rep  i  378b-379c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  hi  suppl, 
q  91,  a  2  1017c-1020c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  50a;  part  ii,  162b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  48,  llOd 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiii,  27b-c  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  228a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [6-10]  93b;  bk  ii 
[850-1009]  129b-133a  esp  [890-969]  130b- 
132a;  bk  v  [577-599]  187b-188a;  bk  vii  [70- 
108]  218b-219b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  121  195a 

34  Newton:  Optics ,  bk  hi,  540a-541b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv, 
sect  26  160c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  20a;  26d;  130b-133c  esp 
130b-131c,  132d-133a;  135a-137a,c;  152a-d; 
160b-161d;  239b-c  /  Practical  Reason ,  334b- 
335c  esp  335a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  693c- 
694a  passim 


3  to  4  a 


Chapter  23:  ETERNITY  447 


3.  The  eternity  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  15:18  /  Deuteronomy , 
32 139-40  /  Psalms ,  9 : 5-8 ;  29 : 1  o  1 1 ;  33:10-11; 
48  esp  48:8,  48:14;  90  esp  90:1-6;  93;  102:12- 
28;  103:14-18;  136;  145:10-13;  146:5-10— (D) 
Psalms ,  9:6-9;  28:10;  32:10-11;  47  esp  47:9, 
47:15;  89  esp  89:1-6;  92;  101  :i3~29;  102:14-18; 
135;  144:10-13;  145:5-10  /  Isaiah ,  40:28-29; 
43:10-13;  57:15— (D)  Isaias,  40:28-29;  43:10- 
13;  57 :i 5  /  Jeremiah ,  10:10 — (D)  jeremias, 
10:10  /  Lamentations ,  5:19  /  Daniel ,  6:25-27  / 
Malachi ,  3:6— (D)  Malachias ,  3:6 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  39:20;  42:21 — (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  39:25;  42:21-22 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  24:35  /  Colossians, 
1:16-17  /  ^  Timothy,  1:17  /  Hebrews ,  1:10-12; 
13:7-8  /  Revelation,  1:17-18;  10:6— (D) 
alypse ,  1:17-18;  10:6 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [607-615] 
120a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  viii,  ch  6  [258^0- 
259b3I]  344b-345d  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
[286a3— 13]  377c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  5 
[ioi5b9~i6]  536a;  bk  ix,  ch  8  [io50b6-2o] 
576b-c;  bk  xii,  ch  i  [io69a3o-b2]  598b-c; 
ch  6-7  601b-603b;  ch  9  605a-d  esp  [1075*5- 
1 1]  605c-d:  bk  xiv,  ch  2  [io88bi4-28]  620d- 
621a  /  Sew/,  bk  11,  ch  4  [4i5a22-b8]  645c-d 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1071b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  5  121c- 
122a  /  M  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  ii  348b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  1-4  43b- 
44c;  par  6  44d-45a;  par  16-18  48c-49b;  par  21 
49d-50a;  par  23-24  50b-51a;  bk  xi,  par  12-16 
92b-93a;  bk  xii,  par  11  lOlc-d;  par  18  103a-c; 
par  40  109b-110a;  bk  xiii,  par  44  122d  /  C/Vy 
o/* Go*/,  bk  xi,  ch  21  333a-d;  bk  xii,  ch  14-17 
350d-354a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  5-6 
625d-626b;  ch  22  629b-630a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  10 
40d-46d;  q  14,  a  9,  ans  83b-d;  a  13,  ans  and 
rep  3  86d-88c;  q  18,  a  3  106b-107c;  q  22,  a  i, 
rep  2  127d-128d;  q  42,  a  2  225d-227a;  q  43, 
a  2  230d-231c;  q  61,  a  2,  ans  315c-316a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  vii  [64-72] 
115d;  xiii  [52-60]  126a;  xxiv  [130-141]  144a; 
xxix  [10-45]  150b-c;  xxxm  156b-157d  esp 
[124-141]  157c-d 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [2987-3040]  209a- 
210a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  293d-294a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  52b  c  /  Med¬ 
itations ,  hi,  84a-87a  esp  86a;  v,  94a-95a  esp 
95a  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  228a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  i  355a;  def  3,6 
355b;  def  8  355c;  prop  6-8  356b-357d;  prop 
io-ii  358a -359b;  prop  19-20  363c-364a; 
prop  33,  schol  2,  367d-368c;  part  ii,  prop 
44,  corol  2— prop  47  390a-391a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [1-12]  135b; 
[372-382]  143b 


34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
370a  371a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  3-4  162d  163b;  ch  xvii,  sect  16-17 
172a-c;  sect  20  172d  l73c;  bk  iv,  ch  x  349c- 
354c  passim,  esp  sect  3-5  349d  350b,  sect 
8-1 1  351a-352a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81b  c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  175d-176c;  190c;  201b  c  / 
Practical  Reason ,  334b-335c;  344b-c  /  Judge- 
merit , 592a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b;  206c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xv,  631a-c 

4.  The  things  which  partake  of  eternity 

4a.  The  imperishability  of  angels,  spiritual 
substances,  souls 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-c  /  Meno ,  179d-183a 
esp  180a  /  Phaedo ,  223c-246c  esp  226c-228b, 
230c-232c,  245d-246c  /  Republic ,  bk  x,  434d- 
436a  /  Timaeus,  452c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  13  [23^8-26] 
35b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  3  [1070^1-27] 
599c;  ch  8  603b-605a  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[4i3b24~29]  643d-644a;  bk  iii,  ch  5  [430^20- 
25]  662d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [417-869] 
35c-41a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  890b-891a 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  6  161b-c; 
tr  vii  191c-200c  esp  ch  8,  195d-196a,  ch  9-15 
198b-200c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xii,  par  9  101  b-c; 
par  12  101d-102a;  par  15-16  102b-103a;  par 
18-22,  103b-104a;  par  28,  105c  /  City  of  God, 
bk  x,  ch  31  319b-d;  bk  xii,  ch  15  351b-352d; 
bk  xiii,  ch  1  360a-b;  ch  16-17  367a-368d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  2,  rep  1-2  41d'42c;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i 
42c-43b;  aa  5-6  44b-46d;  q  50,  a  5  274b- 
275a;  q  61,  a  2  315c-316a;  q  75,  a  6  383c-384c; 
q  104,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  1,3  534c-536c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  vii  [64-75] 
115d-116a;  [121-148]  116b-c;  xiii  [52-72]  126a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  192c-193c;  part 
iv,  250c-251b;  253b-254a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  73b-c  /  Objections 
and  Replies,  127c-d;  216d-217a;  228b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  ii  377b-c; 
part  v,  prop  23  458b-d;  prop  25  458d-459a; 
prop  29-33  459b-460c;  prop  38-40  461d- 
462d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [116-159]  96a- 
97a;  bk  ii  [81-105]  113a-b;  bk  v  [889-892] 
194b;  bk  vi  [296-353]  202b-204a;  [430-436] 
205b;  [853-855]  215a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  194-195,  206b-210b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  141 
441a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  186a-b 


448 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  things  which  partake  of  eternity.  4a. 
The  imperishability  of  angels ,  spiritual 
substances ,  souls.) 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  121a-128b  esp  124d-126c; 
203d-204c  /  Practical  Reason ,  348d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  216d-218b; 
bk  vn,  295b-c;  bk  xiv,  608a-b 

4b.  The  imperishable  in  the  physical  order: 
matter,  atoms,  celestial  bodies 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  450c-451a;  457a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i93a9~28] 
269b-c  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  3  360d-362a;  bk  i, 
ch  9  [279ai2]-BK  11,  ch  i  [284b6]  370b-376a; 
bk  11,  ch  6  379c-380c;  bk  iii,  ch  6  396a-c  / 
Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  io-ii 
437d-441a,c  esp  ch  10  [336^*25—34]  438d  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [983*^7— 984ai  7]  501  d- 
502b;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [997a34-bi2]  516ab;  ch  4 
[999bi-i6]  518b-c;  [1000*5-1001*3]  518d-519d; 
bk  ix,  ch  8  [i050bi6-28]  576c-d;  bk  xi,  ch  2 
[io6oa3-36]  588a-c;  ch  6  [io63aio-i6]  591b; 
bk  xii,  ch  3  599a-d;  ch  6-8  601b-605a  /  Soul , 
bk  11,  ch  4  [4 1 5a23— b8]  645c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  4  [699H4- 
700*6]  234d-235a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Thmgs,  bk  i  [146-264] 
2d-4b;  [483-634]  7a-8d;  bk  ii  [294-307]  18d- 
19a;  bk  v  [1 10-143]  62c-63a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  13,  188d- 
189a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b; 
bk  iv,  sect  46  267c;  bk  vi,  sect  15  275a-b; 
bk  vii,  sect  18  281a;  sect  23  281b;  sect  25 
281c;  sect  50  283a;  bk  x,  sect  7  297b  c 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6a;  bk  xiii, 
429a-b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  888b-889b;  929b- 
930b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i  35a-39d  / 
Fourth  Efinead,  tr  iv,  ch  7-8  161d-162d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xii,  par  8-9 
lOla-c;  par  14-16  102b-103a;  par  22  104a-b; 
par  28,  105c;  par  40  109b-110a  /  City  of  God, 
bk  xiii,  ch  17,  367d-368b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  2,  rep  2  41d-42c;  a  3,  ans  42c-43b;  a  4,  ans 
43b-44b;  a  5,  ans  44b-45c;  q  46,  a  i,  rep  2-3 
250a-252d;  q  58,  a  3,  ans  301d-302d;  q  63, 
a  1,  rep  2  325c-326c;  Q  65,  a  i,  rep  i  339b- 
340b;  q  66,  a  2  345d-347b;  q  75,  a  6,  ans 
383c-384c;  q  84,  a  i,  rep  3  440d-442a;  q  104, 
a  1,  rep  1,3  534c-536c;  q  113,  a  i,  ans  576a-d; 
q  1 15,  a  3,  ans  588c-589c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  77,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1  945a-946b;  q  91 
1016a-1025b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  i  [64-81] 
106d-107a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  390b-d 


4  b  to  4 c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  48, 

186b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  15,  scnoL360b- 
361d 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  358a 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  541b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  x, 
sect  10-19  351b-354c  passim 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  346d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  226b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  18d  l9a;  74b-76c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i, 
41bc 

4c.  The  immutability  of  truth  and  ideas 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  100:5;  117:2;  119:160; 
146:5-6— (U)  Psalms,  99:5;  116:2;  118:160; 
145:5-6  /  Proverbs,  8:22-30 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  7:24-26 — (D) 
OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  7:24-26  /  Ecclesiasticus, 
24:9 —(D)  O  F,  Ecclesiasticus,  24:14 

New  Testament:  II  John ,  1-2 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  125a-b  /  Symposium,  167b-d 
/  Meno,  184d  /  Phaedo,  231b-232b  /  Timaeus, 
447b-d;  457b-458b 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  8 
104a-b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  cii  6  [g87a29-bi8] 
505b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [993^9-31]  512a-b;  bk 
iii,  ch  2  [997a34~bi2]  516a-b;  bk  ix,  ch  10 
[io5ib33-io52ai2]  578a, c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  6  [io96a29-b5] 
341c-d;  bk  vi,  cii  3  [1  i39bi8— 24]  388b-c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a-812a; 
813d-814a 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  ix,  cm  5-8  248a- 
250a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  9,  3a  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  8-10  626c-627b; 
bk  ii,  ch  38-39,  654b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  3,  rep  3  42c-43b;  q  14,  a  13,  ans  and  rep  3 
86d-88c;  a  15  89b-90b;  q  16,  aa  7-8  99a-100d; 
q  18,  a  4  107d-108c;  q  22,  a  i,  rep  2  127d- 
128d;  q  44,  a  3  240b-241a;  q  84,  a  i,  rep  3 
440d-442a;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  442b-443c;  a  5 
446c-447c;  q  86,  a  3  463b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  1  208b  d;  q  93  215b,d-220d;  q  94,  a  4,  ans 
223d-224d;  aa  5-6  224d-226b;  part  ii-ii,  q 
1,  a  1,  contrary  380b  381a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  267b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  276b-285c  passim,  esp 
279b-282a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  56  112a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  216d- 
217c;  228a  b;  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  8  355c;  prop  8, 
schol  2  356d-357d;  prop  17,  schol  362c- 
363c;  prop  19,  schol  363d;  prop  20,  corol  i 
364a;  prop  33,  schol  2  367d-369a;  part  ii, 
prop  44,  corol  2-prop  47  390a-391a 


4 d  to  5 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [142  151)  114b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  358b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  cii  iii, 
sect  31  323c  d;  cii  xi,  sect  14  358b  c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113c-118a  esp  113c- 114b, 
117b'118a;  173b  174a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  prep,  6a7a;  part 
iii,  par  270,  85c/  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
156d-157b;  168b  d;  part  hi,  310d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  301a;  879b  882a 

4^/.  The  eternity  of  Heaven  and  Hell:  everlast¬ 
ing  life  and  death 

Old  Testament:  Psalms ,  16  esp  16:10-11;  73 
esp  73:24-28;  145:10-13  — (D)  Psalms ,  15  esp 
15:10-1 1 ;  72  esp  72:24-28;  144:10-13  /  Daniel , 
7:13-18  esp  7:18 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  1-5  esp  3-5— 
(D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  1-5  esp  3-5 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  6:19-21;  18:8-9; 

25:31-46  /  9:43-5°;  10:17-31— (0) 

Mari^,  9:42-49;  10:17-31  /  Lube,  10:25-37  / 
John,  6:37-40;  8:51;  10:24-30;  11:23-27;  17:1— 
3  /  Romans,  6  esp  6:23  /  /  Corinthians,  15:34- 
5S  /  II  Corinthians,  4:12-5:10  /  Galatians ,  6:8  / 
/  1:3-7,22-25  /  I  John,  2:16-17;  5-n-i2  / 

5-8  /  Revelation,  2:7-11;  3:5;  20-22  esp 
20:10-15,  21:4-6,  22:1-5  — (D)  Apocalypse , 
2:7-11;  3:5;  20-22  esp  20:9-15,  21 :4~6,  22:1-5 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xiii,  par  50-53 
124c-125a,c  /  C/Vy  o/* God,  bk  xiii,  cii  2  360b- 
361a;  ch  12  365d-366a;  ch  14-20  366b-371a; 
bk  xm,  ch  22-BK  xiv,  ch  1  371c-377a;  bk 
xiv,  cii  15  388d-390a;  bk  xv,  ch  1-3  397b, d- 
399c;  ch  6  400c-401b;  bk  xix,  ch  4  511a- 
513c;  ch  io-ii  516c-517b;  ch  27-28  529a- 
530a, c;  bk  xxi-xxii  560a-618d  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  4  625b-c;  ch  21  629b;  ch 
24,  630d;  ch  38-39  635c-636a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  42c-43b;  q  18,  a  2,  rep  2 
105c-106b;  q  23,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  132c-133b; 
q  66,  a  3  347b-348d;  q  75,  a  7,  rep  i  384d- 
385c;  part  i-ii,  q  4,  a  7,  rep  3  635b-636a; 
q  5,  a  4  639a-640b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  67 
81b-87c;  q  68,  a  6  93c-94c;  q  87,  aa  3-5  187b- 
189c;  part  ii-ii,  q  18,  aa  2-3  462d-464c;  q  19, 
a  11  472d-473d;  q  26,  a  13  519d-520d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  i  [i  12-129]  2b- 
c;  iii  [1— 18]  4a-b;  [82-129]  5a-b;  iv  [13-45] 
5c-d;  vi  [1-57]  8b-9a;  vii  [16-59]  9d-10a  esp 
[55-59]  10a;  xii  [49-51]  16d-17a;  xiv  [28-42] 
19d-20a;  xv  [22-42]  21b-c;  paradise,  iii  [34- 
90]  109d-110b;  vii  [64-78]  115d-116a;  [121- 
148]  116b-c;  xiv  [1-66]  126d-127c;  xv  [1-12] 
128b-c;  xxx-xxxiii  151d-157d  esp  xxxi  [31- 
93]  153c-154a 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,787-800] 
467a 


449 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  191b  198a;  part 
iv,  250c  251b;  253b-255b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  265  b  c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III ,  act  i,  sc  iv  [42- 
6}]  115ab 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  366d  367a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  228b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [84-191]  95b  97b; 
[242  330]  98b  100b;  bk  ii  [85-92]  113a;  [142 
188]  114b  115a;  bk  iii  [274-343]  141b  143a; 
bk  x  [782  844]  291b-292b:  bk  xii  [537  556] 
331a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  194-195,  206b  210b;  2^3, 
214b215a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  5b  c;  15d-16a  /  Human 
Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  38  187b  c; 
sect  62  194c- d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  233d-234d 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  346b  347c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  363a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  315d 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  347a 

5.  The  knowledge  and  imagery  of  eternity 

7  Plato:  Apology,  211b-c  /  Timaeus,  450b-451a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i,  cii  ii  [i04bi3— 18] 
148a- b  /  Memory  and  Reminiscence ,  ch  i 
[449b3o-45oaio]  690c-d 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1048a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  7  20a-c  / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  cii  3  120a-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par  13-17 
92b-93c;  bk  xii,  par  40  109b-110a;  bk  xiii, 
par  44  122d  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  5-6 
324d-325d;  ch  21  333a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  1  40d-41d;  a  2,  rep  i  41d-42c:  q  13,  a  i, 
rep  3  62c-63c;  q  42,  a  2,  rep  1,4  225d-227a; 
q  46,  a  1,  ans  250a-252d;  a  2  253a-255a;  q  79, 
a  9,  ans  and  rep  3  422b-423d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xi  [ioo- 
108]  69d;  paradise,  xxx-xxxiii  151d-157d 
esp  xxxi  [31-93]  I53c-154a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  271b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organ  inn,  bk  i,  apii  48  llOd- 
111a 

32  Milton:  On  Time  12a-b  /  At  a  Solemn  Musicl{ 
13a  b  /  Sonnets,  xiv  66a  /  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  xii 
!537-556]  331a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv, 
sect  26-27  160c-161a;  sect  30-31  161c-162a; 
ch  xv,  sect  3-5  162d-163c;  sect  11-12 
165a-c;  ch  xvii  167d-174a  passim,  esp  sect  5 
168d-169a,  sect  10  170b-c,  sect  16  172a-b; 
ch  xxix,  sect  15  237a;  sect  16,  237d-238a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  185a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  154c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  156d;  bk  v, 
216d-218b  esp  217a-c;  bk  vii,  295b~c;  bk  ix, 
355d-356a 


Chapter  23:  ETKRNITV 


450 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  discussions  of  the  distinction  between  eternity  as  infinite  time  and  eternity  as  time¬ 
lessness,  see  Time  2;  and  for  the  relation  of  eternity  to  time,  seeTvssE  2c. 

Another  consideration  of  infinite  time,  see  Infinity  3e. 

The  controversy  concerning  the  infinity  of  time  and  the  eternity  of  the  world  or  motion, 
^Astronomy  8c(i),  8d;  Change  13;  Time  2b;  World  4a;  and  for  the  relation  of  creation 
to  eternity  and  time,  see  God  7a;  Time  2c;  World  4e(2). 

The  notion  of  permanent  elements  or  principles  of  change,  see  Change  2. 

Other  discussions  of  the  eternity  of  God,  see  Change  13c;  God  4d. 

The  conception  of  the  angels  as  aeviternal,  see  Angel  3c;  Time  2a. 

The  discussion  of  imperishable  or  incorruptible  bodies,  see  Astronomy  8a;  Being  7K3); 
Change  ioc;  Element  5a. 

The  consideration  of  the  eternality  of  truth  and  of  ideas,  see  Change  15a;  Form  2b;  Idea  ie; 
Immortality  6c;  Truth  5. 

The  conception  of  the  eternity  of  Heaven  and  Hell  or  of  eternal  salvation  and  damnation,  see 
Happiness  7c;  Immortality  5e~5f;  Punishment  5e(i);  Sin  6d. 

The  problem  of  the  knowability  of  the  infinite,  see  Infinity  6b;  Knowledge  53(4). 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Augustine.  On  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  ch  i 
Aquinas.  Summa  Contra  Gentiles ,  bk  ii,  ch  32-38 

- .  On  the  Power  of  God ,  q  8 

- .  De  Aeternitate  Mundi 

Spinoza.  Correspondence ,  xii 

II. 

Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology,  (f) 

Boethius.  The  Consolation  of  Philosophy ,  bk  v, 
pros a  6 

Anselm  of  Canterbury.  Monologium 
Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed ,  part  ii, 
ch  13-16,  18,  22-23 
Bonaventura.  Breviloquium,  part  vii 
Duns  Scotus.  Opus  Oxoniense ,  bk  ii,  dist  2, 
Q  2 

- .  Tractatus  de  Primo  Principio  ( A  Tract  Con¬ 
cerning  the  First  Principle) 

Eckhart.  Sermons  and  Collations ,  xxv 
Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae ,  xxx  (7-9), 
L  (3-6) 


Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing ,  bk  11,  ch  14 
- .  Monadology ,  par  6 

Voltaire.  “Eternity,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dic¬ 
tionary 

- .  The  Ignorant  Philosopher ,  ch  14,  16,  20 

Kierkegaard.  “The  Expectation  of  an  Eternal 
Happiness,”  in  vol  iii,  Edifying  Discourses 

- .  Philosophical  Fragments 

- .  Concluding  Unscientific  Postscript,  pp  345-385, 

468-492,  508-513 

Whewell.  On  the  Philosophy  of  Discovery ,  ch  26 
Bradley.  Appearance  and  Reality ,  bk  i,  ch  4-5;  bk 
ii,  ch  18,  26 

Royce.  The  World  and  the  Individual ,  series  ii  (3) 
Pohle.  Eschatology 

Hugel.  The  Mystical  Element  of  Religion 
Bergson.  The  Creative  Mind,  ch  1,  5 
A.  E.  Taylor.  The  Faith  of  a  Moralist ,  series  i  (3,  6) 
Dewey.  The  Quest  for  Certainty,  ch  2 
Whitehead.  Process  and  Reality,  part  1,  ch  2;  part 
ii,  ch  i;  part  iv,  ch  i  (5-6);  part  v,  ch  2 
- .  Adventures  of  Ideas,  ch  1 1-15 


Chapter 2.4:  EVOLUTION 


INTRODUCTION 


THIS  chapter  belongs  to  Darwin.  Not  that 
his  writings,  which  are  cited  under  almost 
all  headings,  stand  alone  in  the  various  places 
they  appear.  The  point  is  rather  that  many  of 
the  topics  are  dictated  by  and  draw  their  mean¬ 
ing  from  his  thought,  and  that  he  figures  in  all 
the  major  issues  connected  with  the  origin  of 
species,  the  theory  of  evolution,  and  the  place 
of  man  in  the  order  of  nature.  With  respect  to 
the  matters  under  consideration  in  this  chapter, 
the  other  writers  in  the  tradition  of  the  great 
books  cannot  escape  from  being  classified  as 
coming  before  or  after  Darwin,  or  as  being  with 
or  against  him. 

Darwin’s  influence  on  later  writers  may  be 
variously  estimated,  but  it  is  plainly  marked  by 
their  use  of  his  language  and  their  reference  to 
his  fundamental  notions.  James’  Principles  of 
Psychology ,  especially  in  its  chapters  on  instinct 
and  emotion,  views  the  behavior  of  men  and 
animals  and  the  phenomena  of  intelligence  or 
mind  in  evolutionary  terms.  The  writings  of 
Freud  are  similarly  dominated  by  the  genetic 
approach  and  by  an  appeal  to  man’s  animal 
ancestry  in  order  to  explain  the  inherited  con¬ 
stitution  of  his  psyche  in  conformity  with  the 
doctrine  of  evolution. 

Outside  psychology  the  concept  of  evolution 
is  reflected  in  theories  of  progress  or  of  a  dia¬ 
lectical  development  in  history;  as,  for  example, 
in  the  dialectical  or  historical  materialism  of 
Marx  and  Engels,  which  is  set  forth  in  the 
latter’s  Dialectics  of  Nature .  An  even  more 
general  re-orientation  of  philosophy,  which 
stems  from  an  evolutionary  way  of  thinking,  is 
to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Bergson  and 
Dewey,  such  as  Creative  Evolution  and  The  In¬ 
fluence  of  Darwin  on  Philosophy.  These,  along 
with  many  of  the  specifically  biological  works 
cited  in  the  list  of  Additional  Readings,  give 
some  measure  of  the  influence  of  Darwin  not 


only  on  philosophical  thought,  but  also  on  the 
direction  of  research  in  all  the  biological  sciences. 

With  regard  to  Darwin’s  predecessors  the 
question  is  not  so  much  one  of  their  influence 
upon  him  as  of  their  anticipation,  in  one  way  or 
another,  of  his  discoveries,  his  conceptions,  and 
his  theory. 

The  observation  made  in  antiquity  concern¬ 
ing  a  hillside  deposit  of  marine  fossils  is  some¬ 
times  taken  as  implying  an  early  recognition  of 
the  evolution  of  terrestrial  life.  More  apposite 
perhaps  is  the  statement  by  Lucretius  that  “the 
new  earth  first  put  forth  grass  and  bushes,  and 
next  gave  birth  to  the  races  of  mortal  creatures 
springing  up  many  in  number  in  many  ways 
after  divers  fashions.”  Lucretius  also  speaks  of 
strange  monsters  which  nature  did  not  permit 
to  survive.  “Nature  set  a  ban  on  their  increase 
and  they  could  not  reach  the  coveted  flower  of 
age  nor  find  food  nor  be  united  in  marriage  .  .  . 
And  many  races  of  living  things  must  then  have 
died  out  and  been  unable  to  beget  and  continue 
their  breed.”  Those  which  survived,  he  adds, 
had  qualities  which  “protected  and  preserved 
each  particular  race.” 

Apparently  susceptible  to  similar  interpreta¬ 
tion  are  Aristotle’s  statements  that  “nature 
proceeds  little  by  little  from  things  lifeless  to 
animal  life”;  that  “there  is  observed  in  plants 
a  continuous  scale  of  ascent  toward  the  animal”; 
and  that  “throughout  the  entire  animal  scale 
there  is  a  graduated  differentiation  in  amount 
of  vitality  and  in  capacity  for  motion.”  Augus¬ 
tine’s  commentary  on  the  first  chapter  of 
Genesis  seems  even  more  explicitly  to  contem¬ 
plate  the  successive  appearance  of  the  various 
forms  of  life.  Plants  and  animals  did  not  actually 
exist  when  the  world  began.  Though  their 
causes  were  created  by  God  and  existed  from 
the  beginning,  the  actual  production  of  plants 


452 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


and  animals  in  their  various  kinds  is,  as  Aquinas 
tells  us  while  summarizing  Augustine’s  view, 
“the  work  of  propagation”— not  of  creation. 

Like  Aristotle,  both  Aquinas  and  Locke  repre¬ 
sent  the  world  of  living  organisms  as  a  graduated 
scale  ascending  from  less  to  more  perfect  forms 
of  life.  But  where  Aquinas  tends  to  conceive 
that  graduated  scale  as  a  hierarchy  involving 
essential  differences,  Locke  sees  an  almost  per¬ 
fect  continuity  involving  only  differences  in 
degree.  “In  all  the  visible  world,”  he  writes, 
“we  see  no  chasms  or  gaps.”  To  illustrate  this, 
he  points  out  that  “there  are  fishes  that  have 
wings,  and  are  not  strangers  to  the  airy  region; 
and  there  are  some  birds  that  are  inhabitants 
of  the  water,  whose  blood  is  cold  as  fishes  .  .  . 
There  are  animals  so  near  of  kin  to  both  birds 
and  beasts  that  they  are  in  the  middle  between 
both:  amphibious  animals  link  the  terrestrial 
and  aquatic  together  .  .  .  and  the  animal  and 
vegetable  kingdoms  are  so  nearly  joined,  that, 
if  you  will  take  the  lowest  of  one  and  the  highest 
of  the  other,  there  will  scarce  be  perceived  any 
great  difference  between  them:  and  so  on,  till 
we  come  to  the  lowest  and  the  most  inorganical 
parts  of  matter,  we  shall  find  everywhere  that 
the  several  species  are  linked  together,  and 
differ  but  in  almost  insensible  degrees.” 

But  for  the  theory  of  evolution  the  observa¬ 
tion  of  a  hierarchy  in  nature,  or  even  of  a  con¬ 
tinuity  in  which  the  species  differ  by  “almost 
insensible  degrees,”  constitutes  only  back¬ 
ground.  What  the  theory  of  evolution  brings 
to  the  fore  is  the  notion  of  a  developmental  or 
genetic  relation  among  the  various  forms  of 
life.  Because  it  seems  to  contain  this  insight, 
the  anticipation  of  Darwin  to  be  found  in 
Kant’s  Critique  of  Judgement  is  perhaps  the 
most  remarkable;  even  though,  in  a  closely 
related  passage  in  which  Kant  discusses  epi¬ 
genesis,  he  uses  the  word  “evolution”  in  a  sense 
quite  contrary  to  Darwin’s  conception. 

“It  is  praiseworthy,”  Kant  writes,  “to  em¬ 
ploy  a  comparative  anatomy  and  go  through 
the  vast  creation  of  organized  beings  in  order 
to  see  if  there  is  not  discoverable  in  it  some 
trace  of  a  system,  and  indeed  of  a  system  follow¬ 
ing  a  genetic  principle  . . .  When  we  consider  the 
agreement  of  so  many  genera  of  animals  in  a 
certain  common  schema,  which  apparently  un¬ 
derlies  not  only  the  structure  of  their  bones, 


but  also  the  disposition  of  their  remaining  parts, 
and  when  we  find  here  the  wonderful  simplicity 
of  the  original  plan,  which  has  been  able  to 
produce  such  an  immense  variety  of  species  by 
the  shortening  of  one  member  and  the  length¬ 
ening  of  another,  by  the  involution  of  this  part 
and  the  evolution  of  that,  there  gleams  upon 
the  mind  a  ray  of  hope,  however  faint,  that  the 
principle  of  the  mechanism  of  nature,  apart 
from  which  there  can  be  no  natural  science  at 
all,  may  yet  enable  us  to  arrive  at  some  explana¬ 
tion  in  the  case  of  organic  life.  This  analogy  of 
forms,  which  in  all  their  differences  seem  to  be 
produced  in  accordance  with  a  common  type, 
strengthens  the  suspicion  that  they  have  an 
actual  kinship  due  to  descent  from  a  common 
parent.  This  we  might  trace  in  the  gradual 
approximation  of  one  animal  species  to  another, 
from  that  in  which  the  principle  of  ends  seems 
best  authenticated,  namely  from  man,  back  to 
the  polyp,  and  from  this  back  even  to  mosses 
and  lichens,  and  finally  to  the  lowest  perceiv¬ 
able  stage  of  nature.” 

Finding  anticipations  of  Darwin  involves 
judgments  much  more  subject  to  controversy 
than  tracing  his  influences.  It  is  questionable, 
for  example,  whether  the  suggestive  passages 
in  Lucretius  and  Locke  bear  more  than  a  super¬ 
ficial  resemblance  to  Darwin’s  thought.  The 
matter  is  further  complicated  by  Darwin’s  own 
sense  of  his  divergence  from  and  disagreement 
with  his  predecessors — both  immediate  precur¬ 
sors  like  Buffon  and  Linnaeus  and  earlier  phi¬ 
losophers  and  theologians. 

Darwin  tells  us  himself  of  his  quarrel  with 
the  theologians.  His  followers  elaborate  on  the 
opposition  between  his  conception  of  species 
and  that  of  Aristotle,  an  opposition  which  Dar¬ 
win  intimates  by  the  great  stress  he  lays  on  the 
difference  between  a  static  taxonomy  and  a 
dynamic  or  genealogical  classification  of  living 
things. 

We  must  therefore  try  to  locate  the  central 
points  of  Darwin’s  theory  in  order  to  judge 
comparable  views  for  their  agreement  or  dis¬ 
agreement. 

As  the  title  of  his  major  work  indicates,  it  is 
not  evolution  as  a  grand  scheme  of  biological, 
or  cosmic,  history,  but  the  origin  of  species  with 
which  Darwin  seems  to  be  principally  con- 


Chapter  24:  EVOLUTION 


453 


cerned.  He  is  concerned  with  establishing  the 
(act  that  new  species  do  originate  in  the  course 
of  time,  against  those  who  suppose  the  species 
of  living  things  to  be  fixed  in  number  and  im¬ 
mutable  in  type  throughout  the  ages.  He  is 
concerned  with  describing  the  circumstances 
under  which  new  species  arise  and  other  forms 
cease  to  have  the  status  of  species  or  become 
extinct.  He  is  concerned  with  formulating  the 
various  factors  in  the  differentiation  of  species, 
and  with  showing,  against  those  who  think  a 
new  species  requires  a  special  act  of  creation, 
that  the  origin  of  species,  like  their  extinction, 
is  entirely  a  natural  process  which  requires  no 
factors  other  than  those  at  work  every  day  in 
the  life,  death,  and  breeding  of  plants  and 
animals.  Only  as  a  consequence  of  these  pri¬ 
mary  considerations  does  he  engage  in  specula¬ 
tions  about  the  moving  panorama  of  life  on 
earth  from  its  beginnings  to  its  present  and  its 
future. 

Darwin  looks  upon  the  term  “species”  as 
“arbitrarily  given,”  and  for  that  reason  does 
not  attempt  any  strict  definition  of  it.  He  uses 
it,  moreover,  like  his  predecessors  in  systematic 
biological  classification,  to  signify  “a  set  of  in¬ 
dividuals  closely  resembling  each  other” — a 
class  of  plants  or  animals  having  certain  com¬ 
mon  characteristics.  Darwin  would  probably 
agree  with  Locke’s  criticism  of  those  who  sup¬ 
pose  that  our  definitions  of  species  grasp  the 
real  essences  or  relate  to  the  substantial  forms 
inherent  in  things.  As  indicated  in  the  chapter 
on  Definition’,  Locke  insists  that  our  notion 
of  a  species  expresses  only  what  he  calls  the 
“nominal  essence” — a  set  of  characteristics  we 
attach  to  the  name  we  give  things  of  a  sort 
when  we  group  them  and  separate  them  in  our 
classifications.  “The  boundaries  of  species, 
whereby  man  sorts  [things],  are  made  by  men,” 
he  writes;  “the  essences  of  the  species,  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  different  names,  are  ...  of  man’s 
making.” 

Species  is  not  the  only  term  of  classification. 
A  genus ,  for  example,  is  a  more  inclusive  group 
than  a  species.  Groups  which  differ  specifically 
belong  to  the  same  genus  if  their  difference  is 
accompanied  by  the  possession  of  common 
traits.  As  species  differ  from  one  another  within 
a  generic  group,  so  genera  are  in  turn  sub¬ 
classes  of  more  inclusive  groupings,  such  as 


phyla,  families,  and  orders.  Hut  there  are  also 
smaller  groupings  within  a  species.  There  arc 
races  or  varieties  and  sub-varieties,  t he  mem¬ 
bers  of  which  share  the  characteristics  of  the 
species  but  diller  from  one  another  in  other 
respects.  Ultimately,  of  course,  within  the 
smallest  class  the  systematist  bothers  to  define, 
each  individual  differs  from  every  other  in  the 
same  group  with  whom,  at  the  same  time,  it 
shares  certain  characteristics  of  the  race,  the 
species,  the  genus,  and  all  the  larger  classes  to 
which  they  belong. 

This  general  plan  of  botanical  or  zoological 
classification  does  not  seem  to  give  species  pe¬ 
culiar  status  in  the  hierarchy  of  classes  or  group¬ 
ings  or  to  distinguish  it  from  other  classes 
except  as  these  are  more  or  less  inclusive  than 
itself.  Why  then  should  attention  be  focused 
on  the  origin  of  species,  rather  than  of  varieties 
or  of  genera  ? 

One  part  of  the  answer  comes  from  the 
facts  of  generation  or  reproduction.  Offspring 
tend  to  differ  from  their  parents,  as  well  as 
from  each  other,  but  they  also  tend  to  re¬ 
semble  one  another.  “A  given  germ,”  Aristotle 
writes,  “does  not  give  rise  to  any  chance  living 
being,  nor  spring  from  any  chance  one;  but 
each  germ  springs  from  a  definite  parent  and 
gives  rise  to  a  definite  progeny.”  This  is  an 
early  formulation  of  the  insight  that  in  the 
process  of  reproduction,  the  law  of  like  generat¬ 
ing  like  always  holds  for  those  characteristics 
which  identify  the  species  of  ancestors  and 
progeny. 

In  other  words,  a  species  always  breeds  true; 
its  members  always  generate  organisms  which 
can  be  classified  as  belonging  to  the  same 
species,  however  much  they  vary  among  them¬ 
selves  as  individuals  within  the  group.  Further¬ 
more,  the  sub-groups— the  races  or  varieties — 
of  a  species  are  able  to  breed  with  one  another, 
but  diverse  species  cannot  interbreed.  Organ¬ 
isms  different  in  species  either  cannot  mate 
productively  at  all,  or  if  crossbred,  like  the 
horse  and  the  ass,  they  produce  a  sterile  hy¬ 
brid  like  the  mule. 

In  the  hierarchy  of  classes,  then,  species 
would  seem  to  be  distinguished  from  all  smaller 
groupings  by  their  stability  from  generation  to 
generation.  If  species  are  thus  self-perpetuating, 
they  in  turn  give  stability  to  all  the  larger 


454 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


groupings — the  genera,  phyla,  families — which 
remain  as  fixed  from  generation  to  generation 
as  the  species  which  constitute  them.  Hence 
the  question  of  origin  applies  peculiarly  to 
species  rather  than  to  varieties  or  to  genera. 

On  the  supposition  stated,  no  origin  of 
species  would  seem  to  be  possible  except  by  a 
special  act  of  creation.  Either  all  the  existing 
species  of  organisms  have  always  existed  from 
the  beginning  of  life  on  earth;  or,  if  in  the 
course  of  ages  new  species  have  arisen,  their 
appearance  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  natural 
generation.  By  the  law  of  natural  generation, 
offspring  will  always  be  of  the  same  species  as 
the  parent  organisms. 

Spontaneous  generation,  of  course,  remains  a 
possibility.  A  new  species  of  organism  might 
come  to  be  without  being  generated  by  other 
living  organisms.  But  apart  from  the  question 
of  fact  (/.<?.,  whether  spontaneous  generation 
ever  does  occur),  such  origin  of  a  form  of  fife 
seems  to  lie  outside  the  operation  of  natural 
causes  and  to  imply  the  intervention  of  super¬ 
natural  power. 

The  possibility  of  spontaneous  generation 
was  entertained  in  antiquity  and  the  Middle 
Ages,  and  was  even  thought  to  be  supported  by 
observation,  such  as  that  of  maggots  emerging 
from  putrefying  matter.  But  modern  science 
tends  to  affirm  the  biogenetic  law  that  living  or¬ 
ganisms  are  generated  only  by  living  organisms. 
To  Kant,  the  notion  that  “life  could  have 
sprung  up  from  the  nature  of  what  is  void  of 
life,”  seems  not  only  contrary  to  fact,  but 
absurd  or  unreasonable.  Yet,  while  affirming 
the  principle  that  like  produces  like  by  insisting 
upon  “the  generation  of  something  organic 
from  something  else  that  is  also  organic,” 
Kant  does  not  carry  that  principle  to  the  point 
where  it  would  make  the  generation  of  a  new 
species  impossible.  “Within  the  class  of  organic 
beings,”  he  writes,  it  is  possible  for  one  organ¬ 
ism  to  generate  another  “differing  specifically 
from  it.” 

Against  the  background  of  these  various 
suppositions,  Darwin  is  moved  to  a  new  in¬ 
sight  by  the  conjunction  of  certain  types  of 
fact:  the  results  of  breeding  under  domestica¬ 
tion  wdiich  exhibit  the  great  range  of  variation 
within  a  species  and  the  tendency  of  inbred 


varieties  to  breed  true;  his  own  observations 
of  the  geographical  distribution  of  species  of 
flora  and  fauna,  especially  those  separated  from 
one  another  by  impassable  barriers;  the  facts  of 
comparative  anatomy  and  embryology  which 
reveal  affinities  in  organic  structure  and  de¬ 
velopment  between  organisms  distinct  in 
species;  and  the  geological  record  which  in¬ 
dicates  the  great  antiquity  of  life  upon  the 
earth,  which  gives  evidence  of  the  cataclysmic 
changes  in  the  earth’s  surface  (writh  conse¬ 
quences  for  the  survival  of  life),  and  which 
above  all  contains  the  fossil  remains  of  forms  of 
life  now'  extinct  but  not  dissimilar  from  species 
alive  in  the  present  age. 

Briefly  stated,  Darwin’s  insight  is  that  new 
species  arise  when,  among  the  varieties  of  an  ex¬ 
isting  species,  certain  intermediate  forms  be¬ 
come  extinct,  and  the  other  circumstances  are 
such  that  the  surviving  varieties,  now  become 
more  sharply  separated  from  one  another  in 
type,  are  able  to  reproduce  their  kind,  and,  in 
the  course  of  many  generations  of  inbreeding, 
also  tend  to  breed  true.  They  thus  perpetuate 
their  type  until  each  in  turn  ceases  to  be  a  spe¬ 
cies  and  becomes  a  genus  wrhen  its  own  extreme 
varieties,  separated  by  the  extinction  of  inter¬ 
mediates,  become  new  species,  as  they  them¬ 
selves  did  at  an  earlier  stage  of  history.  For  the 
very  same  reason  that  Darwin  says  “a  well- 
marked  variety  may  be  called  an  incipient 
species,”  a  species  may  be  called  an  incipient 
genus. 

The  point  is  misunderstood  if  it  is  supposed 
that  w'hen  new  species  originate  from  old,  both 
the  new  and  the  old  continue  to  survive  as 
species.  On  the  contrary,  when  in  the  course 
of  thousands  of  generations  some  of  the  varie¬ 
ties  of  a  species  achieve  the  status  of  species, 
the  species  from  wrhich  they  originated  by 
variation  ceases  to  be  a  species  and  becomes 
a  genus. 

“The  only  distinction  between  species  and 
well-marked  varieties,”  Darwin  whites,  “is  that 
the  latter  are  known,  or  believed,  to  be  con¬ 
nected  at  the  present  day  with  intermediate 
gradations,  w'hereas  species  were  formerly  thus 
connected  ...  It  is  quite  possible  that  forms 
now  generally  acknowledged  to  be  merely 
varieties  may  hereafter  be  thought  worthy  of 
specific  names;  and  in  this  case  scientific  and 


Chapter  24:  EVOLUTION 


common  language  will  come  into  accordance. 
In  short,  we  shall  have  to  treat  species  in  the 
same  manner  as  those  naturalists  treat  genera 
who  admit  that  genera  are  merely  artificial 
combinations  made  for  convenience  .  .  .  Our 
classifications  will  come  to  be,  as  far  as  they 
can  be  so  made,  genealogies.” 

The  origin  of  species  thus  seems  to  be  identical 
with  the  extinction  of  intermediate  varieties,  com¬ 
bined  with  the  survival  of  one  or  more  of  the 
extreme  varieties.  These  seem  to  be  simply  two 
ways  of  looking  at  the  same  thing.  Still  another 
way  of  seeing  the  point  may  be  achieved  by 
supposing,  contrary  to  fact,  the  survival  of  all 
the  varieties  ever  produced  through  the  breed¬ 
ing  of  organisms. 

“If  my  theory  be  true,”  Darwin  writes, 
“numberless  intermediate  varieties,  linking 
closely  together  all  the  species  of  the  same 
group,  must  assuredly  have  existed;  but  the 
very  process  of  natural  selection  constantly 
tends,  as  has  been  so  often  remarked,  to  ex¬ 
terminate  the  parent-forms  and  the  inter¬ 
mediate  links.”  If  one  were  to  suppose  the 
simultaneous  co-existence  of  all  intermediate 
varieties  in  the  present  day,  the  groups  now 
called  “species”  would  be  continuously  con¬ 
nected  by  slight  differences  among  their  mem¬ 
bers  and  would  not,  therefore,  be  divided  into 
distinct  species,  as  they  now  are  because  certain 
links  are  missing. 

In  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason ,  Kant  states 
the  principle  of  continuity  in  the  following 
manner.  “This  principle,”  he  writes,  “in¬ 
dicates  that  all  differences  of  species  limit  each 
other,  and  do  not  admit  of  transition  from  one 
to  another  by  a  saltus ,  but  only  through  smaller 
degrees  of  the  difference  between  the  one 
species  and  the  other.  In  one  word,  there  are 
no  species  or  sub-species  which  .  .  .  are  the 
nearest  possible  to  each  other;  intermediate 
species  or  sub-species  being  always  possible,  the 
difference  of  which  from  each  of  the  former  is 
always  smaller  than  the  difference  existing 
between  these.”  But,  Kant  adds,  “it  is  plain 
that  this  continuity  of  forms  is  a  mere  idea,  to 
which  no  adequate  object  can  be  discovered  in 
experience,”  partly  because  “the  species  in 
nature  are  really  divided  .  .  .  and  if  the  gradual 
progression  through  their  affinity  were  con¬ 
tinuous,  the  intermediate  members  lying  be¬ 


455 

tween  two  given  species  must  be  infinite  in 
number,  which  is  impossible.” 

The  Russian  geneticist,  Theodore  Dobzhan- 
sky,  gives  an  interpretation  of  continuity  in 
nature  which  differs  from  Kant’s  in  that  it 
follows  and  applies  Darwin’s  conception  of 
species  and  their  origin.  According  to  him,  if 
we  suppose  the  extreme  case  of  all  possible 
genetic  variations  being  alive  on  earth  to¬ 
gether,  the  result  would  be  not  an  infinite 
number  of  species,  but  no  species  and  genera  at 
all.  The  array  of  plants  and  animals  would 
approach  a  perfectly  continuous  series  in  which 
there  would  only  be  individual  differences. 
There  would  be  no  specific  or  generic  group¬ 
ings  of  the  sort  now  made  in  our  classification 
of  the  forms  of  life. 

On  Darwin’s  conception  of  the  origin  of  spe¬ 
cies  its  causes  divide  into  two  sets  of  factors: 
first,  those  which  determine  the  extinction  or 
survival  of  organisms  and,  with  their  survival, 
their  opportunities  for  mating  and  reproduc¬ 
tion;  second,  those  which  determine  the  trans¬ 
mission  of  characteristics  from  one  generation 
to  another  and  the  variation  of  offspring  from 
their  ancestors  and  from  each  other.  Without 
genetic  variation  there  would  be  no  range  of 
differences  within  a  group  on  which  the  factors 
of  selection  could  operate.  Without  the  in¬ 
heritance  of  ancestral  traits  there  would  be  no 
perpetuation  of  group  characteristics  in  the 
organisms  which  manage  to  survive  and  re¬ 
produce. 

For  Darwin  the  operation  of  the  first  set  of 
factors  constitutes  the  process  of  natural  selec¬ 
tion.  This  may  take  place  in  many  ways: 
through  geological  catastrophes  which  make 
certain  areas  of  the  earth’s  surface  uninhabit¬ 
able  for  all  organisms,  or  for  those  types  which 
cannot  adapt  themselves  to  the  radically 
changed  environment;  through  the  competi¬ 
tion  among  organisms  for  the  limited  food 
supply  available  in  their  habitat;  through  the 
struggle  for  existence  in  which  organisms  not 
only  compete  for  food  but  also  prey  upon  one 
another;  through  the  sexual  selection  which 
operates  within  a  group  when  some  organisms 
are  prevented  by  others  from  mating  and 
reproducing;  and  through  all  the  obstacles 
which  isolate  groups  from  interbreeding,  in- 


456 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


eluding  geographical  and  physiological  in¬ 
accessibility. 

The  struggle  for  existence  is  not  only  a 
struggle  to  survive,  but  also  a  struggle  to  re¬ 
produce.  Natural  selection  operates  with  re¬ 
spect  to  reproduction  as  well  as  survival. 
Whether  the  survival  is  of  the  fittest  alone,  or 
whether  the  multiplication  of  inferior  organ¬ 
isms  also  gives  evolution  another  direction,  has 
been  disputed  since  Darwin’s  day;  but  ac¬ 
cording  to  his  theory,  “natural  selection  works 
solely  by  and  for  the  good  of  each  being;  all 
corporeal  and  mental  endowments  will  tend  to 
progress  toward  perfection  .  .  .  Thus,  from  the 
war  of  nature,  from  famine  and  death  .  .  .  the 
production  of  the  higher  animals  directly  fol¬ 
lows.” 

With  respect  to  the  factors  of  heredity  and 
variation,  tremendous  advances  since  Darwin 
in  the  experimental  science  of  genetics  require 
revisions  in  this  part  of  his  theory  of  evolution. 
This  is  particularly  true  of  the  researches  of 
Mendel,  Bateson,  and  Morgan  concerning  the 
ways  in  which  genetic  factors  operate.  But  on 
one  major  point  in  the  theory  of  heredity 
Darwin  holds  a  view  which  later  investigations 
have  tended  to  confirm.  Antedating  Weismann, 
he  nevertheless  opposes  Lamarck’s  theory  of 
the  inheritance  of  acquired  characteristics.  As 
William  James  expresses  it,  where  Lamarck  sup¬ 
poses  that  environmental  influences  cause 
changes  in  the  structure  or  functioning  of  the 
organism  which  then  become  hereditary,  Dar¬ 
win  regards  the  environment  merely  as  a  selec¬ 
tive  agency,  acting  upon  variations  produced 
entirely  by  causes  operating  in  the  breeding 
process.  James  thinks  “the  evidence  for  Mr. 
Darwin’s  view  .  .  .  [was] .  .  .  quite  convincing,” 
even  before  it  received  the  support  of  Weis- 
mann’s  theory,  according  to  which  it  is  “ a 
priori  impossible  that  any  peculiarity  acquired 
during  the  lifetime  by  the  parent  should  be 
transmitted  to  the  germ.” 

The  situation  is  not  the  same  with  regard  to 
Darwin’s  views  on  the  mechanism  of  heredity. 
Writing  before  Mendel’s  classic  experiments  in 
hybridization,  Darwin  seems  to  suppose  a 
blending  of  hereditary  factors;  whereas,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Mendel,  inheritance  is  particulate. 
Distinct  genetic  factors  combine  to  produce  a 
certain  somatic  result  without  losing  their 


separate  identities.  They  can  therefore  be  re¬ 
assorted  and  enter  into  new  genetic  combina¬ 
tions  in  the  next  generation.  Most  important  of 
all,  Darwin  thinks  that  new  forms  of  life  arise 
gradually  as  the  result  of  a  continuous  accumu¬ 
lation  of  slight  and  imperceptible  variations. 
The  opposite  view  is  now  taken.  The  discovery 
of  abrupt  mutations  in  a  single  generation  dis¬ 
countenances  Darwin’s  maxim  natnra  non  facit 
saltum — “nature  does  nothing  by  jumps.” 

These  advances  in  genetics  since  Darwin’s 
day  do  not  alter  the  main  outlines  of  his  theory. 
The  mechanisms  of  heredity  may  be  much 
more  complicated  than  Darwin  knew,  and 
involve  much  of  which  he  was  ignorant,  such 
as  mutation-rates,  or  the  various  types,  causes, 
and  effects  of  hybridization.  But  that  merely 
leads  to  a  more  elaborate  or  different  explana¬ 
tion  of  genetic  variation  in  offspring  and  the 
transmission  of  ancestral  traits.  No  matter  how 
these  are  explained,  their  occurrence  is  all  that 
is  needed  to  permit  new  species  to  originate 
through  natural  processes  of  heredity  and 
selection.  “If  Darwin  were  alive  today,”  Julian 
Huxley  writes,  “the  title  of  his  book  would 
have  to  be  not  the  ‘origin’  but  the  ‘Origins  of 
Species.’  For  perhaps  the  most  salient  single 
fact  that  has  emerged  from  recent  studies  is 
that  species  may  arise  in  a  number  of  quite 
distinct  ways.” 

The  reader  must  judge  for  himself  to  what 
extent  Darwin’s  theory  of  evolution  was  an¬ 
ticipated  by  those  who,  like  Augustine,  affirm 
the  appearance  of  new  species  of  life  on  earth  at 
various  stages  in  its  history,  or  even  by  a  writer 
like  Kant,  who  seems  to  possess  the  germ  of  its 
insight. 

The  critical  test  in  every  case  is  whether 
those  who  affirm  the  occurrence  of  new  species 
by  natural  processes  rather  than  by  special 
creation,  think  of  them  as  simply  added  to  the 
organic  forms  already  in  existence  without  any 
change  in  the  status  as  species  of  the  pre-exist¬ 
ing  forms.  Those  who  think  in  this  way  do  not 
have  Darwin’s  idea  of  the  origin  of  species;  for 
in  conceiving  an  increase  in  the  number  of 
species  as  merely  a  matter  of  addition,  they 
necessarily  attribute  stability  to  each  species, 
new  as  well  as  old.  By  this  test,  not  even  Kant 
seems  to  be  near  the  center  of  Darwin’s  hy- 


Chaptlr  24:  EVOLUTION 


457 


pothesis  of  the  origin  of  species  bv  the  extinc¬ 
tion  of  intermediate  varieties. 

In  comparing  Darwin  with  certain  of  his 
predecessors,  notably  Aristotle  and  Aquinas,  it 
seems  necessary  to  apply  another  kind  of  test. 
Here  the  problem  is  not  so  much  one  of  dis¬ 
covering  affinities  or  disagreements,  as  one  of 
determining  whether  they  arc  talking  about 
the  same  thing  and  therefore,  when  they  ap¬ 
pear  to  disagree,  whether  the  issue  between 
them  is  genuine.  They  do  not  seem  to  conceive 
a  species  in  the  same  way.  Certainly  they  use 
the  word  differently.  This  affects  the  way  in 
which  the  whole  problem  of  origins  is  under¬ 
stood.  The  controversies  concerning  the  fixity 
or  mutability  of  species,  concerning  evolution 
and  creation,  and  concerning  the  origin  of  man 
involve  genuine  issues  only  if  those  who  seem 
to  disagree  do  not  use  the  word  “species”  in 
widely  different  senses. 

It  is  possible  that  certain  forms  of  life  do  not 
originate  by  descent  from  a  common  ancestor 
and  do  not  derive  their  status  as  quite  distinct 
types  from  the  mere  absence  of  intermediate 
varieties — varieties  which  once  must  have  ex¬ 
isted  but  are  now  extinct.  If  such  forms  were 
to  be  called  “species,”  the  word  would  have  a 
different  meaning  from  the  meaning  it  has 
when  applied  to  types  of  pigeons,  beetles,  or 
rats. 

The  first  of  these  two  meanings  may  express 
the  philosophical  conception  of  a  living  species 
as  a  class  of  organisms  having  the  same  essential 
nature,  according  to  which  conception  there 
never  could  have  been  intermediate  varieties. 
The  second  meaning  may  be  that  of  the  scien¬ 
tific  taxonomist  in  botany  or  zoology  who  con¬ 
structs  a  system  of  classification,  genealogical 
or  otherwise.  On  this  meaning,  one  million 
and  a  half  would  be  a  conservative  estimate  of 
the  number  of  plant  and  animal  types  classi¬ 
fied  by  the  systematist  as  “species.”  In  contrast, 
the  number  of  species,  in  the  philosophical 
sense  of  distinct  essences,  would  be  extremely 
small. 

Danvin,  for  example,  says,  “I  cannot  doubt 
that  the  theory  of  descent  with  modification 
embraces  all  the  members  of  the  same  great 
class  or  kingdom.  I  believe  that  animals  are 
descended  from  at  most  only  four  or  five  pro¬ 
genitors,  and  plants  from  an  equal  or  lesser 


number.  Analogy  would  lead  me  one  step 
farther,  namely,  to  the  belief  that  all  animals 
and  plants  are  descended  from  some  one  proto¬ 
type.  But  analogy  may  be  a  deceitful  guide.” 
It  is  immaterial  to  the  theory  of  evolution,  he 
adds,  whether  this  inference,  “chiefly  grounded 
on  analogy  ...  be  accepted.” 

The  issue  between  Darwin  and  the  theo¬ 
logians  may  or  may  not  be  genuine  according 
to  the  interpretation  of  this  passage,  and  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  possibility  of  a  double  use  of  the 
word  “species” — for  both  the  small  number  of 
progenitors  from  which  all  the  extant  types  of 
plants  and  animals  have  evolved,  and  for  a  very 
large  number  of  those  extant  types.  If  the 
theologians  use  the  word  “species”  in  the  first 
sense,  and  Danvin  in  the  second,  they  need  not 
be  in  disagreement.  The  “view  of  life”  which 
Danvin  attributes  to  certain  eminent  authori¬ 
ties,  he  himself  does  not  flatly  reject,  namely, 
that  life,  “with  its  several  powers  [has]  been 
originally  breathed  by  the  Creator  into  a  few 
forms  or  into  one.” 

Is  there  common  ground  here  in  the  ad¬ 
mitted  possibility  that  life  may  have  been 
originally  created  in  a  small  number  of  distinct 
forms  and  that  these  are  to  be  regarded  as 
species  in  one  conception,  though  not  in 
another?  If  so,  the  affirmation  of  a  certain 
fixity  to  species  would  apply  only  to  a  few- 
primordial  forms.  Concerning  forms  which 
have  appeared  with  the  passage  of  time,  two 
questions  would  have  to  be  answered.  First, 
are  they  species  in  the  philosopher’s  sense  of 
distinct  and  immutable  essences,  or  species  in 
the  scheme  of  systematic  biological  classifica¬ 
tion?  Second,  is  their  first  appearance  at  an 
historical  moment  due  to  a  special  act  of 
creation,  to  spontaneous  generation,  or  to 
evolution  from  already  existing  organic  forms 
by  “descent  with  modification”? 

To  join  issue  with  Danvin,  it  would  seem  to 
be  necessary  for  the  person  answering  these 
questions  to  use  the  word  “species”  in  the 
biologist’s  sense  and  at  the  same  time  to  ac¬ 
count  for  the  historical  origin  of  the  new  species 
by  special  creation  or  spontaneous  generation. 
But  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books,  theo¬ 
logians  like  Augustine  and  Aquinas  do  not 
attribute  to  God  any  special  acts  of  creation 
after  the  original  production  of  the  world, 


458 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


except  to  explain  the  origin  of  individual 
human  souls. 

“Nothing  entirely  new  was  afterwards  made 
by  God,”  Aquinas  writes,  “but  all  things 
subsequently  made  had  in  a  sense  been  made 
before  in  the  work  of  the  six  days  .  .  .  Some  ex¬ 
isted  not  only  in  matter,  but  also  in  their 
causes,  as  those  individual  creatures  that  are 
now  generated  existed  in  the  first  of  their  kind. 
Species  also  that  are  new,  if  any  such  appear, 
existed  beforehand  in  various  active  powers;  so 
that  animals,  and  perhaps  even  new  species  of 
animals,  are  produced  by  putrefaction  by  the 
power  which  the  stars  and  elements  received  at 
the  beginning.  Again,  animals  of  new  kinds 
arise  occasionally  from  the  connection  of  in¬ 
dividuals  belonging  to  different  species,  as  the 
mule  is  the  offspring  of  an  ass  and  a  mare,  but 
even  these  existed  previously  in  their  causes,  in 
the  work  of  the  six  days.” 

Whether  or  not  the  theologian’s  conception 
of  an  historical  development  of  the  forms  of  life 
conforms  to  the  evolutionist’s  hypothesis,  even 
though  it  does  not  offer  the  same  type  of  ex¬ 
planation,  is  a  matter  which  the  reader  of  the 
texts  must  decide.  But  one  issue,  which  still 
remains  to  be  discussed,  can  leave  little  doubt 
of  a  basic  controversy  between  Darwin  and 
some  of  his  predecessors,  especially  the  theo¬ 
logians. 

It  concerns  the  origin  and  nature  of  man.  It 
can  be  stated  in  terms  of  two  views  of  human 
nature.  One  is  that  man  is  a  species  in  the 
philosophical  sense,  essentially  and  abruptly 
distinct  from  brute  animals;  the  other,  that 
man  is  a  species  in  the  biologist’s  sense,  and 
differs  from  other  animals  only  by  continuous 
variation. 

On  the  first  view,  either  man  would  have  to  be 
created,  in  body  as  well  as  soul;  or  if  the  human 
species  has  an  origin  which  in  part  or  whole  in¬ 
volves  the  operation  of  natural  causes,  it  must 
be  conceived  as  emerging  from  a  lower  form  of 
life.  The  rational  soul,  Aquinas  maintains,  “can¬ 
not  come  to  be  except  by  creation.”  But  it  is 
not  only  man’s  soul  which,  according  to  Aqui¬ 
nas,  “cannot  be  produced  save  immediately  by 
God.”  He  also  insists  that  “the  first  formation 
of  the  human  body  could  not  be  by  the  instru¬ 
mentality  of  any  created  power,  but  was  im¬ 


mediately  from  God.”  He  does  not  reject  the  o 
suggestion  of  Augustine  that  the  human  body  ( 
may  have  preexisted  in  other  creatures  as  an  - 
effect  preexists  in  its  causes.  But  he  adds  the 
qualification  that  it  preexists  in  its  causes  only 
in  the  manner  of  a  “passive  potentiality,”  so 
that  “it  can  be  produced  out  of  pre-existing 
matter  only  by  God.”  A  Christian  theologian 
like  Aquinas  might  entertain  the  hypothesis  of 
emergent  evolution  as  applied  to  the  human 
organism,  but  only  with  the  qualification  that 
natural  causes  by  themselves  do  not  suffice  for 
the  production  of  man. 

On  the  second  view,  which  is  Darwin’s,  man 
and  the  anthropoid  apes  have  descended  from  a 
common  ancestral  form  which  is  now  extinct, 
as  are  also  many  of  the  intermediate  varieties 
in  the  chain  of  development — unless,  as  it  is 
sometimes  thought,  certain  fossil  remains  sup¬ 
ply  some  of  the  missing  links.  “The  great  break 
in  the  organic  chain  between  man  and  his  near¬ 
est  allies,  which  cannot  be  bridged  over  by  any 
extinct  or  living  species,  has  often  been  ad¬ 
vanced,”  Darwin  admits,  “as  a  grave  objection 
to  the  belief  that  man  is  descended  from  some 
lower  form;  but  this  objection,”  he  continues, 
“will  not  appear  of  much  weight  to  those  who, 
from  general  reasons,  believe  in  the  general 
principle  of  evolution.  Breaks  often  occur  in  all 
parts  of  the  series,  some  being  wide,  sharp  and 
defined,  others  less  so  in  various  degrees,  as 
between  the  orang  and  its  nearest  allies — be¬ 
tween  the  Tarsius  and  the  other  Lemuridae — 
between  the  elephant,  and  in  a  more  striking 
manner  between  the  Ornithorhynchus  or 
Echidna,  and  all  other  mammals.”  Further¬ 
more,  Darwin  insists,  no  one  who  has  read 
Lyell’s  Antiquity  of  Man  “will  lay  much  stress 
.  .  .  on  the  absence  of  fossil  remains”;  for  Lyell 
has  shown  “that  in  all  the  vertebrate  classes  the 
discovery  of  fossil  remains  has  been  a  very  slow 
and  fortuitous  process.  Nor  should  it  be  forgot¬ 
ten  that  those  regions  which  are  the  most  likely 
to  afford  remains  connecting  man  with  some 
extinct  ape-like  creature,  have  not  as  yet  been 
searched  by  geologists.” 

On  either  of  these  two  conflicting  views,  the 
organic  affinities  between  man  and  the  most 
highly  developed  mammals  would  be  equally 
intelligible,  though  they  would  be  differently 
interpreted  by  Aquinas  and  Darwin.  But  ac- 


T 


Chapter  24:  EVOLUTION 


cording  to  the  doctrine  of  man’s  creation  by 
God,  or  even  on  the  hypothesis  of  emergent 
evolution,  there  need  not  be — strictly  speak¬ 
ing,  there  cannot  be — a  missing  link  between 
ape  and  man,  for  the  emergent  species  is  a 
whole  step  upward  in  the  scale  of  life.  Man  is 
thus  not  one  of  several  organic  types  which 
have  become  species  through  the  extinction  of 
intermediate  varieties,  and  hence  he  differs 
from  other  animals  not  in  an  accidental,  but 
rather  in  an  essential  manner — that  is,  he  dif¬ 
fers  in  kind  rather  than  degree. 

This  issue  concerning  human  nature  is  dis¬ 
cussed  from  other  points  of  view  in  the  chap¬ 
ters  on  Animal  and  Man.  Here  the  issue, 
stated  in  terms  of  man’s  origin,  seems  to  in¬ 
volve  three  possibilities:  special  creation,  evo¬ 
lution  by  descent  from  a  common  ancestor, 
and  emergent  evolution.  But  these  three 
possibilities  apply  not  only  to  man,  but  to  the 
origin  of  every  species  which  did  not  exist  at 
the  first  moment  of  life  on  earth. 

The  hypothesis  of  special  creation  does  not 
seem  to  be  held  by  the  theologians,  at  least  not 
in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books.  The  hy¬ 
pothesis  of  emergent  evolution  raises  questions 
concerning  the  factors — natural  or  super¬ 
natural — which  must  be  operative  to  cause  the 
emergence  of  higher  from  lower  forms  of  or¬ 
ganic  matter.  Whether  or  not  Aristotle  and 
Aquinas  can  supply  an  answer  to  these  ques¬ 
tions  in  terms  of  their  theory  of  matter’s 


459 

potentiality  for  a  variety  of  forms,  Darwin’s 
theory  of  descent  with  modification  seems  to 
be  definitely  opposed  to  the  hypothesis  of 
emergent  evolution.  Speaking  as  a  Darwinian, 
James  says  that  “the  point  which  as  evolution¬ 
ists  we  are  bound  to  hold  fast  to  is  that  all  the 
new  forms  of  being  that  make  their  appearance 
are  really  nothing  more  than  results  of  the 
redistribution  of  the  original  and  unchanging 
materials  .  .  .  No  new  natures ,  no  factors  not 
present  at  the  beginning,  are  introduced  at 
any  later  stage.” 

In  this  dispute  between  two  theories  of  evo¬ 
lution,  does  not  the  solution  depend  in  every 
case  upon  a  prior  question  concerning  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  the  species  under  consideration — 
whether  or  not  it  is  possible  for  them  to  be  or  to 
have  been  developmentally  connected  by  in¬ 
termediate  varieties?  If,  for  example,  the 
evidence  were  to  prove  that  man  and  ape,  as 
they  now  exist  in  the  world,  are  essentially 
distinct — different  in  kind — then  no  inter¬ 
mediate  varieties  could  ever  have  existed  to 
account  for  their  descent  from  a  common  an¬ 
cestor.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  evidence 
were  to  prove  that  they  differ  only  in  degree, 
then  no  difficulty  stands  in  the  way  of  the 
Darwinian  hypothesis.  The  ultimate  issue  con¬ 
cerning  the  origin  of  species  would  thus  seem  to 
reduce  to  the  problem  of  which  meaning  of 
“species”  applies  to  the  organic  types  in  ques¬ 
tion. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  classification  of  animals  461 

1  a.  Comparison  of  genealogical  classification  with  other  types  of  taxonomy:  the 
phylogenetic  series 

1  b.  The  criteria  for  distinguishing  races  or  varieties,  species,  genera,  and  all  higher 
taxonomic  groupings 

2.  Genetic  variation  in  the  course  of  generations 

2 a.  Comparison  of  variation  under  conditions  of  natural  and  artificial  breeding  462 

2.b.  Characteristics  which  are  more  and  less  variable  genetically:  their  bearing  on 
the  distinction  of  races,  species,  and  genera 

3.  The  process  of  heredity 

3a.  The  inheritance  of  acquired  characteristics:  the  use  and  disuse  of  parts 


460 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


3 b.  The  inheritance  and  variability  of  instincts 
y.  Interbreeding  and  crossbreeding:  hybridism  and  sterility 
id.  Atavisms  and  reversions  to  ancestral  type 

y.  Marked  and  abrupt  mutations  in  a  single  generation  as  opposed  to  the  continuous 
accumulation  of  slight  and  imperceptible  variations 


PAGE 

462 


463 


4.  The  problem  of  evolution:  the  origin  of  plant  and  animal  species 

4 a.  The  question  of  ultimate  origins:  the  creation  of  primordial  life  in  one  or  many 
forms;  the  original  generation  of  life  from  inorganic  matter 

4 b.  The  fixity  or  the  mutability  of  species 

4c.  The  origin  of  new  forms  of  life:  special  creation,  spontaneous  generation,  or 
descent  with  modification  from  older  forms 

4 d.  The  direction  of  evolution:  progress  and  recession 

5.  The  theory  of  evolution:  the  origin  of  new  species  from  a  common  ancestry 

5 a.  The  struggle  for  existence:  its  causes  and  consequences 

(1)  Natural  selection:  the  survival  of  the  fittest 

(2)  The  extinction  of  intermediate  varieties 

(3)  Difficulties  with  the  theory  of  natural  selection:  its  limitations 

5 b.  Competition  in  mating:  sexual  selection 

y.  The  geographical  and  physiological  factors  in  breeding:  accessibility,  fertility,  and 
sterility 


6.  The  facts  of  evolution:  evidences  bearing  on  the  history  of  life  on  earth 
6a.  The  geological  record:  the  significance  of  fossil  remains 

6b.  The  geographical  distribution  of  the  forms  of  life  in  relation  to  the  genealogy  of 
existing  species 

6c.  Comparative  anatomy  and  embryology:  the  meaning  of  rudimentary  or  vestigial 
organs  and  functions 


7.  The  origin  and  development  of  man  465 

7 a.  The  doctrine  of  man’s  special  creation:  in  body,  in  soul 

jb.  The  theory  of  the  evolutionary  origin  of  man  from  lower  forms  of  animal  life: 
descent  from  an  ancestor  common  to  man  and  the  anthropoids 

(1)  Anatomical,  physiological,  and  embryological  evidences  of  an  organic  af¬ 

finity  between  man  and  other  mammalian  forms  of  life 

(2)  Paleontological  evidences:  the  missing  link  in  man’s  ancestry 

(3)  Psychological  evidences:  the  human  mind  in  relation  to  animal  intelligence 

7 c.  Biological  evolution  in  the  course  of  human  generation:  from  prehistoric  to 
historic  man 


Chapter  24:  EVOLUTION 


461 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
thepage.  Forexample,in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (Z)),  follows;  e.g.>  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


l.The  classification  of  animals 

la.  Comparison  of  genealogical  classification 

with  other  types  of  taxonomy:  the  phylo¬ 
genetic  series 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  28  546b-c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[486ai5]-cH  6  [49^5]  7b-12c  esp  ch  i  [486*15- 
487®!]  7b-d;  bk  v,  ch  i  [539a4~ 15]  65b;  bk 
viii,  ch  1  [588b4]-cH  2  [590*19]  114d-116c  / 
Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  2-4  165d-168c  / 
Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [732*13- 
733bi7]  272c-274a;  bk  hi,  ch  ii  [76^14-24] 
302c-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  27, 
158b-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  23  274b-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  31  d;  63d-64d; 
207a-229a,c  esp  207a-212c,  215b-217b,  228c- 
229a, c;  238b-239a  /  Descent  of  Man ,  331a- 
341  d  esp  332b-c,  337a-338c,  340d-341d 

lb.  The  criteria  for  distinguishing  races  or 

varieties,  species,  genera,  and  all  higher 
taxonomic  groupings 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  13  [i4b32-i5*8] 
20c-d  /  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  6  [144*27-145*2] 
197d~198c  passim  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  28 
546b-c 


9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[486*i5]-ch  6  [49ia5]  7b-12c  esp  ch  i  [486*15- 
487*1]  7b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [497b4~ 18]  19b,d-20a; 
bk  iv,  ch  1  [523*30-b2o]  48b, d  /  Parts  of 
Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  4  [644*i2-bi5]  167d-168a; 
ch  5  [645b20-28]  169c-d  /  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[i290b25~36]  489d-490a 
11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  813a-b 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  50, 
a  4,  rep  1  273b-274b;  q  76,  a  5,  rep  3  394c- 
396a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  vi 
268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect  7  270b,  sect 
36-37  279a-b;  ch  x,  sect  21  297a-b;  ch  xi, 
sect  19-20  304b-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  193a-200c  esp  195d-200c 
/  Judgement ,  579b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  183c-d 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  12c-13a;  24a-b; 
25d-29a;  30d-31d;  55c-60a  passim;  64a;  136b- 
137a;  145c-151a  passim,  esp  146c-d,  147b- 
149a,  150c-d;  159c-160a;  207d-229a,c  passim, 
esp  207d-210b;  234d;  241d-242a  /  Descent  of 
Man ,  331b-333a  passim;  342a-350b  passim, 
esp  342a-b,  346d-347d  4 

2.  Genetic  variation  in  the  course  of  generations 
7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii,  403b-d 
9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  15  [i39ob24~3i] 
633a-b 


462 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2a  to  3c  V 


(2.  Genetic  variation  in  the  course  of  generations.} 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  29l59b'C 
36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  79b 
42  Kant:  Judgement,  579b-c 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  6d-7a;  9a-31d  esp 
9a-12a,  23c-d,  29a-31d;  53b-59d  passim;  65a- 
79d;  99a-103c  esp  lOOd;  149b-150c:  182d-183a; 
234a-c  /  Descent  of  Man ,  266a-271a  esp  266a- 
268a;  275c-d;  284c-285d  esp  285b-c;  347d- 
348c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  857b-858a 

2a.  Comparison  of  variation  under  conditions 
of  natural  and  artificial  breeding 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  29 
159b-c  /  New  Atlantis ,  211c-212a 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  7a-b;  9a-31d  esp 
9a-b,  12a-c,  24a-c;  40a-42d;  53b-55a;  65a- 
66a;  117a-c;  149b-d;  233b-d  /  Descent  of 
Man ,  377a;  486d 

2b.  Characteristics  which  are  more  and  less 
variable  genetically:  their  bearing  on  the 
distinction  of  races,  species,  and  genera 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  4  167d- 
168c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  14-17  272d-273a;  sect  23-27  274b-276a 
passim 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  24c-25b;  71d-75b; 
78c-79d;  236b-d  /  Descent  of  Man,  342a; 
372d-375a;  486d-488b 

3.  The  process  of  heredity 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  vii,  ch  6 
[585*^2  9-5  8  6*1 4]  llld-112b  /  Parts  of  Animals, 
bk  1,  ch  1  [640*15-28]  162c-d;  [64^27-42] 
164d-165a  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch 
17  [72ib6]-CH  18  [724*13]  261b-264b;  bk  iv , 
ch  3  [767*36]-^  4  [770^7]  308d-312c 
10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters ,  Places,  par  14 
15a-b  /  Sacred  Disease,  155d-156a 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [159-191] 
3a-c;  [592-59S]  8b;  bk  iv  [1209-1232]  60a-b 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  367b-368a 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  386d-387b; 
391c-393b;  395a-396a;  425b-d;  446b-c;  455d- 
456a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  191b-192b 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  578d-580a  esp  579b-c 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  10d-12c  esp  lla-b, 
lld-12a;  69c-71a  passim;  222a-224b  /  Descent 
of  Man,  375a-383a;  413d  [fn  61];  429d-430c; 
500a-525a  esp500a-502a,  511a-b;529d-531a,c; 
590c-d 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  653 b-c 

3 a.  The  inheritance  of  acquired  characteristics: 
the  use  and  disuse  of  parts 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  708d-709a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  vii,  ch  6 
[385^29—37]  llld-112a  /  Generation  of  Animals, 


bk  i,  ch  17  [72ibi8-722ai]  261c-d;  ch  18 
[724a3-7l  264a 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs ,  Waters,  Places,  par  14 
15a-b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  81, 
a  2  164d-165c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  367c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  455d-456a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  580a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  lc;  10d-12c;  66a- 
69c  esp  66a-c,  69c;  82d-85c;  103c-116d  passim, 
esp  115d;  119c-120a;  223c;  227c-228b  /  Descent 
of  Man,  258d-259a;  269b-271a;  283a-284b; 
299a-c;  318a-c;  319a;  320b-321b;  358d-359a;  3 

587d-588a 

53  James:  Psychology,  52a;  691a-b;  890b-897a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  594d-595a  / 

Ego  and  Id,  707d-708b 

3 b.  The  inheritance  and  variability  of  in¬ 
stincts 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [741-753] 
39c-d 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  580a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  111a;  119a-135a,c 
esp  121b-122d,  131c-134d;  236d-237a  /  De¬ 
scent  of  Man,  288a-d;  292c-d;  304b, d  [fn  5]; 
318a-319a  passim;  506d-507a 

53  James:  Psychology,  691a-b;  718a-720b  esp 
718b;  722b-725a  passim;  851b;  890b-897a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  591d-592b; 
594d-595b;  613a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Prin¬ 
ciple,  651d-654a  /  Ego  and  Id,  707c-708b  esp 
708b  /  War  and  Death,  758a- d  esp  758d 

3c.  Interbreeding  and  crossbreeding:  hybrid¬ 
ism  and  sterility 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  121d-122a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  vii,  ch  8  [io33b 
29-1034*1]  557a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  vi,  ch  ii 
[566a26-3o]  92c;  ch  23  [577b5]-cH  24  [577b29] 
103a-c;  bk  viii,  ch  28  [6o6b20-6o7*9]  132b-c; 
bk  ix,  ch  1  [608*31-34]  133d;  ch  32  [619*7-11] 
144c  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [64^27-39] 
164d-165a/  Generation  of  Animals,  bkii,  ch  4 
[738b26-35]  279c-d;  ch  7  [746*29^20]  287c- 
288a;  ch  8  288c-290a,c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [700-710] 
23d-24a;  [920-924]  26d;  bk  v  [878-924]  72c- 
73a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  73, 
a  1,  rep  3  370a-371a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  386d-387b; 
392b-c;  395b-d;  425c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  30  159c-d 
/  New  Atlantis,  211c-212a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  581d-582a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  426d-427a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  14a-c;  16b- d; 

23c-d;  47c-50c;  136a-151d;  230b-231b  /  De¬ 
scent  of  Man,  342a-b;  344b-345c  esp  345b, d 
[fn  14];  356a-b;  482b-483b 


Id  to  4 c 


Chapter  24:  EVOLUTION 


463 


3 d.  Atavisms  and  reversions  to  ancestral  type 
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  vii,  ch  6 
[5^5b32— 34]  H2a  /  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk 
1,  ch  18  [722a8-u]  262a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [768ft9-b4] 
309c-310a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1218- 
1225] 60a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  12a-c;  16a-d; 
73b-c;  75b-78c;  149d-150c;  236b  /  Descent  of 
Man,  271c-275c;  325c;  331b;  375c-d;  557a-c; 
587a; 590b-c 

3e.  Marked  and  abrupt  mutations  in  a  single 
generation  as  opposed  to  the  continuous 
accumulation  of  slight  and  imperceptible 
variations 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  29  159b-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  3a-b:  10c;  24b-c; 
92c-d;  117a-118d;  235b-c;  240d-241a /  Descent 
of  Man,  442a-b;  487a-488a  passim;  538b-539a; 
590d-591a  passim 

4.  The  problem  of  evolution:  the  origin  of 
plant  and  animal  species 

4a.  The  question  of  ultimate  origins:  the  crea¬ 
tion  of  primordial  life  in  one  or  many 
forms;  the  original  generation  of  life 
from  inorganic  matter 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1:11-12,20-28;  2:4- 
9>i9-23 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:14— (D) 
OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  1:14 
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  v,  ch  i 
[539ai6-bi3]65b-66a;  chii  [543bi8— 19] 70b;  ch 
15  [546bi7-35]  73c;  ch  15  [547bi2]-cH  16  [548b 
7]  74b-75b;  ch  19  [55ob3i-55iai3]  77d-78a; 
[55ibi9-552b27]  78c-79c;  ch  31  [556b25]-cH 
32  [557bi4]  83c-84b;  bk  vi,  ch  15-16  95a-96a 
/  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [7i5ai8- 
7i6ai]  255b-256a;  ch  16  [72ia3-n]  260d-261a; 
bk  ii,  ch  1  [732b8— 14]  272d-273a;  ch  3  [737s 
1-5]  277d;  bk  iii,  ch  9  299b-300a;  ch  ii  [76215 
28-763®! 9]  303d-304b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [783-836] 
71b-72a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xiii,  par  45  123a 
/  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  10,  348b-c;  ch  ii 
349a-b;  ch  21  357a-b;  ch  23-27  357d-360a,c; 
bk  xiii,  ch  24  373d-376a,c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  69, 
a  2  361c-362c;  qq  71-72  367a-369d 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  v,  105a-b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  299b  /  On 
Animal  Generation ,  338c-d;  400d-401a;  412c- 
413a;  428c-d;  449a-b;  454d-455a;  468b-469c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  vii  [131-640]  220a- 
231a 

34  Newton:  Optics ,  bk  iii,  542b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  167b 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  578d-580a  esp  579b-580a; 
582b-c 


47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [7851-7864]  191b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  2d-4a  passim,  csp 
3c  d;  240c-241d;  243d 

53  James:  Psychology,  95b-98a  esp  95b,  98a 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  65 2d 

4b.  The  fixity  or  the  mutability  of  species 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:11-12,20-28;  2:4- 
9> i9-23 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  cii  i 
[71 5b2-i7]  255c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [73 ib24~732ai  1  ] 
272a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [577— 
598]  8a-b;  bk  ii  [700-710]  23d-24a;  bk  v 
[916-924]  73a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  23, 
a  7,  ans  138d-140a;  Q  98,  a  i,  ans  516d- 
517c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  29-30 
159b-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch 
iii,  sect  17  258d-259b;  ch  vi,  sect  15-17 
272d-273a;  sect  23-27  274b-276a  passim; 
bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  13-16  326d-328d  pas¬ 
sim 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  579b-580b;  581b-582c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  la-5d  passim,  esp 
la-2a,  2d-3b,  5a-b;  7d;  160d-180d  passim, 
esp  160d,  165d,  167a-c;  239d-240b 

4c.  The  origin  of  new  forms  of  life:  special 
creation,  spontaneous  generation,  or 
descent  with  modification  from  older 
forms 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:11-12,20-28;  2:4- 
9,19-23 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  iii, 
ch  ii  [762b28~763ai9]  303d-304b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [783-836] 
71b-72a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  13,350b- 
c;  bk  xvi,  ch  7-8  427a-428c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  69, 
a  2,  ans  361c-362c;  q  71,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i 
367a-368b;  Q  72,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  5  368b- 
369d;  q  73,  a  i,  rep  3  370a-371a;  q  74,  a  2, 
ans  373d-375a;  q  115,  a  2  587c-588c;  q  118,  a 
3,  rep  1  603b-604b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  338d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  29 
159b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  167b 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  578d-580a  esp  579b- 
580a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  la-5d  passim,  esp 
la-d,  3a,  5c-d;  6d-7d  esp  7d;  31d;  60d-61a; 
64a;  74a-b;  78a-c;  85b-c;  92d;  182a-184d 
esp  183b-184b;  198b-204d  esp  198b-c,  204d; 
217d-219a;  228c-229a,c  esp  228c,  229c;  234d- 
243d  esp  239b-240d,  242d-243d  /  Descent  of 
Man,  253a-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689c- 
690a  esp  689d 


464 

(4.  The  problem  of  evolution:  the  origin  of  plant 
and  animal  species.) 

4d.  The  direction  of  evolution:  progress  and 
recession 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  79a-80a;  part  iii, 
121a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  178a-d 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  lc;  41c-42a;  60b- 
62a;  63b-64d;  96b-103c  esp  96b-98a,  99a-c, 
102d-103c;  176b-178a;  243b-d  /  Descent  of 
Man ,  340d-341d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  217c 

53  James:  Psychology,  95b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  65 Id- 
654c  esp  653d-654a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents,  768d-769a 

5.  The  theory  of  evolution:  the  origin  of  new 
species  from  a  common  ancestry 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  6a-243d  esp  6d-7d, 
23c-d,  32a-c,  116d-118d,  228c-243d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  95b-98a  esp  95b,  98a 

5 a.  The  struggle  for  existence:  its  causes  and 
consequences 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  112d-113a 
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  ix,  ch  i 
[6o8bi9]-CH  2  [6iob2o]  134a-136b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  58a-b;  79b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  334b,d-337d  passim; 
348d-349d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  33c-34a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  7b;  32a-64d  esp 
33a-b,  38b-39a,c,  63b-64d;  182d-183a;  243c-d 
/  Descent  of  Man,  275d-277c;320a-328c  passim, 
esp  320a-321b,  328b-c;  350d-351a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  573c;  592a-b  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  791c-d 

5a(l)  Natural  selection:  the  survival  of  the  fittest 
8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [198^6-33] 
275d-276a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [853-877] 
72b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  335a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  510a-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  2a-b;  7b-d;  32a-c; 
40a-64d  esp  40a-c,  44d-47c,  63b-64d;  95d- 
97a;  134d-135a,c;  214b-d;  233d-239c  esp  233d- 
234a,  234c,  235b  /  Descent  of  Man,  277c-286d 
passim,  esp  277c-278a,  284c-285c;  320a-328d 
esp  327c-328c;  424a-425d  passim;  430d-432c; 
442d-443b;  525b-527c;  554d-555b 

53  James:  Psychology,  90b-93a  esp  92a-b;  94a-b; 
208a-209b  esp  209b 

5^(2)  The  extinction  of  intermediate  varieties 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [837-877] 
72a-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  5a;  52c-53a;  58b- 
60a  esp  58b  59a;  63d-64d;  80b-82d;  84a-b; 


4 d  to  6c 

97a- b;  152a-153a;  168d-171a;  231d-232d  /  De¬ 
scent  of  Man,  341a;  350b-356a 
54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  768d- 
769a 

5#(3)  Difficulties  with  the  theory  of  natural  se¬ 
lection:  its  limitations 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  80a-118d  esp 
80a-b;  131c-134c;  152a-153a;  160d-166a,c  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  165d-166a,c;  230a-233b  /  Descent  of 
Man,  284d-285c 

5b.  Competition  in  mating:  sexual  selection 
7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  v,  361b-363b 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  454a-c;  477b 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  166a-b 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  346b-c 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  43d-44c  /  Descent 
of  Man,  359c-d;  364a-589d  esp  364a-368b, 
373b-375a,  381d-383a,  432c-434d,  486a-c, 
529a-530c,  561a-d,  582d-585d,  588d-589d; 
593d-596a;  598a-600a,c 
53  James:  Psychology,  14b 

5c.  The  geographical  and  physiological  fac¬ 
tors  in  breeding:  accessibility,  fertility, 
and  sterility 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [700-729] 
23d-24b;  bk  v  [837-854]  72a-b 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  229d 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  lOa-c;  47c-52b; 
68d-69c;  136a-151d  esp  136a-b,  141b-142c, 
143b-145c,  150d-151d;  230b-231c  /  Descent  of 
Man,  344b-345c;  351c-355d;  365b-c 

6.  The  facts  of  evolution:  evidences  bearing  on 
the  history  of  life  on  earth 

6a.  The  geological  record:  the  significance  of 
fossil  remains 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  partii,  79a-b 
42  Kant:  Judgement,  583d-584c 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  80c-81a;  152a-180d 
esp  179b-180d;  231d-233a;  237a-c;  242c-243a 

6b.  The  geographical  distribution  of  the  forms 
of  life  in  relation  to  the  genealogy  of 
existing  species 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  51a-52b  passim; 
80c-82d;  181a-206a,c  esp  204d-206a,c;  231b-c; 
237c-238b  /  Descent  of  Man,  343c-344a 

6c.  Comparative  anatomy  and  embryology:  the 
meaning  of  rudimentary  or  vestigial  or¬ 
gans  and  functions 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  9 
[49ib26-35]  13c;  bk  iv,  ch  8  [532b34-533ai4l 
59d-60a;  bk  vii,  ch  7  112b-c 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  375 b-c; 
451c-453a  passim 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  7,  139c 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  334b, d 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Chapter  24:  EVOLUTION 


465 


7  to  1c 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  579b  c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  82d  94c;  I77d- 
178a;  212a-229a,c;  238c-239a;  241b-d;  242c  / 
Descent  of  Man,  255c-265d;  271c-275c  passim, 
csp  274a-b,  275a-c;  278c-284b;  300a-b;  333b- 
334c;  338b  340c;  347d-348c 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  652a 

7.  The  origin  and  development  of  man 

la.  The  doctrine  of  man’s  special  creation:  in 
body,  in  soul 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1:26-27;  2:7,18,21-23; 
5:1-2  /  Job ,  10:8-12  /  Psalms ,  8  esp  8:4-6; 
100  esp  100:3;  119:73;  139:14-16— (D)  Psalms , 
8  esp  8:5-7;  99  esP  99:35  118:73;  138:14-16  / 
Isaiah ,  29:15-16;  43:7;  45:12— (Z))  Isaias, 
29:15-1 6;  43:7;  45:12  /  Jeremiah ,  27:5 —(D) 
Jeremias ,  27:5  /  Malachi ,  2:10— (D)  Mala¬ 
ccas,  2:10 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  1:14;  2:23; 
6:7;  10:1;  15:10-11 — (Z))  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom, 
1:14;  2:23;  6:8;  10:1;  15:10-11  /  Ecclesiasticus, 
17:1;  33:10— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  17:1; 
33:10  /  ZZ  Maccabees ,  7:23,28— (Z9)  OT,  7Z 
Machabees,  j  123,2$ 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  19:4  /  Mar\,  10:6  / 
17:24-26  /  Z  Corinthians ,  15:45  /  Colos- 
sians ,  3:10 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  3  108b-c; 
ch  6,  lila  c;  ch  13  120b-c 

18  Augustine:  C/ify  o/-  Go<Z,  bk  vii,  ch  29-30, 
261a-c;  bk  x,  ch  31  319b-d;  bk  xii,  ch  20-27 
355b-360a,c;  bk  xiii,  ch  24  373d-376a,c; 
bk  xxii,  ch  1,  586d-587b  /  Christian  Doctrine, 
bk  1,  ch  22,  629c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  72, 
a  1,  rep  1,3-4  368b-369d;  q  73,  a  i,  rep  3 
370a-371a;  q  75,  a  6,  rep  i  383c-384c;  qq 
90-92  480c-491d;  q  118  600a-604b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvi  [85— 
90]  77d;  xxv  [34-78]  91d-92a;  paradise,  vii 
[64-78]  115d-116a;  [121-148]  116b-c;  xiii 
[31-87]  125d-126b 

22  Chaucer:  Mon1(s  Tale  [14,013-020]  434b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  176d;  part  iv, 
251a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  41c;  54b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  56a-b  /  Medi¬ 
tations,  hi,  87b-88b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [650-659]  107b; 
bk  11  [345-353]  118b-119a;  bk  vii  [139-161] 
22Ca-b;  [499-550]  228a-229a;  bk  viii  [452-499] 
242a-243a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  6,  26b; 
ch  vi,  sect  56  36d 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  187d-188a 

41  Gibbon  :  Decline  and  Fall,  228a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689b-d 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  562d 


lb.  The  theory  of  the  evolutionary  origin  of 

man  from  lower  forms  of  animal  life: 
descent  from  an  ancestor  common  to 
man  and  the  anthropoids 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  334b, d 
42  Kant:  Judgement ,  578d'580a  esp  579b  c 
47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [8245-8264]  201a; 
[8321-8326]  202b-203a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  253a-341d  esp 
253a-254d,  255a-c,  265a-d,  285c-286d,  331a-b, 
337a-338c,  340d-341d;  590a-592a;596d-597a,c 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689c- 
690a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  509d-510a;  562d 

7£(1)  Anatomical,  physiological,  and  em- 
bryological  evidences  of  an  organic 
affinity  between  man  and  other  mam¬ 
malian  forms  of  life 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  8-9 
24c-25b  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  10 
[689b3i-35]  221d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  451c-453a 
passim;  482b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  334b, d 
42  Kant:  Judgement,  579b-c 
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  255a-265d;  271a- 
275c;  278c-284b;  300a-b;  333b-335a;  338d- 
340c;  563a-564a;  587b-c;  590b-591d 
53  James:  Psychology ,  8a-52b  passim 

7^(2)  Paleontological  evidences:  the  missing 
link  in  man’s  ancestry 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  336a-337a 

7^(3)  Psychological  evidences:  the  human 
mind  in  relation  to  animal  intelligence 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  602b, d  [fn  1] 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  287a-320c  esp 
287a-303d,  319b-d;  591d-592a 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689c- 
690a 

53  James:  Psychology,  8a-52b  passim,  esp  41b, 
49b,  51a-52b;  95b-98a 

lc.  Biological  evolution  in  the  course  of  human 

generation:  from  prehistoric  to  historic 
man 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [925-987] 
73b-74a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  79b 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  329a-330a;  334b, d- 
337d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  266a-275d  passim; 
323b-324d:  336c;  338d-339a;  342a-359d  esp 
342b-343c,  347b-348c,  356a-359b;  578a-589d 
esp  586a-589a;  590c-591c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  7S2a-b 
[fn  1] ;  785b  [fn  1] 


466 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  discussions  of  the  classification  of  animals,  see  Animal  2a~2c;  Life  and  Death  3-3^ 
and  for  the  distinction  between  species  and  genera  in  relation  to  definition  and  classifica¬ 
tion,  see  Definition  ia,  2b,  2d;  Relation  53(4);  Same  and  Other  3a(i). 

Other  considerations  of  the  problem  of  heredity,  see  Animal  10;  Family  6b;  Habit  3c. 

Matters  relevant  to  the  origin  of  life,  and  of  the  major  forms  of  life,  see  Animal  ib,  8a-8b; 
Life  and  Death  2,  3a. 

Another  treatment  of  the  conflict  of  organisms  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  see  Opposition 
3e- 

Matters  relevant  to  the  origin  of  man  and  to  his  affinity  with  other  animals,  see  Animal  ic- 
ic(2);  Man  ia-ic,  4b~4c,  8-8c;  Mind  3a~3b;  Soul  2c(2)-2c(3). 

Evolution  in  relation  to  the  idea  of  progress,  see  Progress  2;  and  for  matters  bearing  on  social 
and  mental  evolution  in  human  history,  see  History  4b;  Man  9c;  Mind  3c;  Progress  ib, 
6;  Time  8a. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Augustine.  De  Genesi  ad  Litteram 

Goethe.  Metamorphose  der  Pflanzen 

C.  R.  Darwin.  Foundations  of  the  Origin  of  Species 

- .  A  Posthumous  Essay  on  Instinct 

- .  The  Variation  of  Animals  and  Plants  Under 

Domestication 

Engels.  Dialectics  of  Nature 

II 

Linnaeus.  Sy sterna  Naturae 
E.  Darwin.  Zoonomia 

Buffon.  “Epochs  of  Nature,”  in  Natural  History 
Lamarck.  Zoological  Philosophy 
Cuvier.  The  Animal  Kingdom 
Chambers.  Vestiges  of  the  Natural  History  of  Crea¬ 
tion 

Tennyson.  Lochyley  Hall 

- .  In  Memoriam 

Spencer.  Progress:  Its  Law  and  Cause 
Wallace.  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Natural 
Selection 

Lyell.  Principles  of  Geology 

- .  The  Geological  Evidences  of  the  Antiquity  of 

Man 

Mendel.  Experiments  in  Plant  Hybridization 
Bagehot.  Physics  and  Politics 


E.  Hartmann.  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious ,  (c)  x 
Lewes.  Problems  of  Life  and  Mind 
Romanes.  Mental  Evolution  in  Animals 

S.  Butler.  Darwin  Among  the  Machines 
- .  Evolution ,  Old  and  New 

- .  Note-Boo^s 

C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers,  vol  vi,  par  13-17, 
287-317 

Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough ,  part  ii,  ch  7;  part  vii 
Weismann.  Studies  in  the  Theory  of  Descent 

- .  Essays  upon  Heredity  and  Kindred  Biological 

Problems 

- .  The  Germ-Plasm 

T.  H.  Huxley.  Man's  Place  in  Nature 
- .  Darwiniana 

- .  Evolution  and  Ethics 

Cope.  The  Primary  Factors  of  Organic  Evolution 
Fiske.  Essays:  Historical  and  Literary ,  vol  ii  (9) 
Vries.  The  Mutation  Theory 
Dewey.  The  Influence  of  Darwin  on  Philosophy , 
Title  Essay 

Hobhouse.  Mind  in  Evolution 

- .  Morals  in  Evolution 

Bergson.  Matter  and  Memory 
- .  Creative  Evolution 

Driesch.  The  Science  and  Philosophy  of  the  Organ¬ 
ism 

Poulton.  Essays  on  Evolution 


4  67 


Chapter  24:  EVOLUTION 


Galton.  Natural  Inheritance 

- .  Essays  in  Eugenics 

D.  H.  Scott.  The  Evolution  of  Plants 
Bateson.  Problems  of  Genetics 
Henderson.  The  Fitness  of  the  Environment 
D.  W.  Thompson.  On  Growth  and  Form 
Shaw.  Man  and  Superman 

- .  Bac\  to  Methuselah 

C.  L.  Morgan.  Emergent  Evolution 

L.  T.  More.  The  Dogma  of  Evolution 
Smuts.  Holism  and  Evolution 

McDougall.  Modern  Materialism  and  Emergent 
Evolution 

H.  G.  Wells,  J.  Huxley,  and  G.  P.  Wells.  Repro - 
duction ,  Genetics  and  the  Development  of  Sex 

M.  R.  Cohen.  Reason  and  Nature ,  bk  ii,  ch  3 


T.  H.  Morgan.  Evolution  and  Genetics 

- .  The  Physical  Basis  of  Heredity 

- .  The  Theory  of  the  Gene 

- .  The  Scientific  Basis  of  Evolution 

Marett.  Head,  Heart  and  Hands  in  Human  Evo¬ 
lution 

Dobzhansky.  Genetics  and  the  Origin  of  Species 
Adler.  Problems for  Thomists:  The  Problem  of  Species 
Mayr.  Systematics  and  the  Origin  of  Species  from  the 
Viewpoint  of  a  Zoologist 

J.  S.  Huxley.  Evolution,  the  Modern  Synthesis ,  ch  10 

- .  Evolutionary  Ethics 

B.  Russell.  Religion  and  Science ,  ch  3 

- .  Human  Knowledge ,  Its  Scope  and  Limits , 

part  1,  ch  4 

Keith.  A  New  Theory  of  Human  Evolution 


Chapter  2.5:  EXPERIENCE 


INTRODUCTION 


EXPERIENCE  is  regarded  as  a  source  of 
knowledge.  It  is  also  spoken  of  as  contain- 
ing  what  is  known. 

Sometimes  it  is  identified  with  sense-percep¬ 
tion;  sometimes  it  involves  more — memory  and 
the  activity  of  the  imagination.  Sometimes  it 
includes  thoughts,  feelings,  and  desires  as  well, 
all  the  contents  of  consciousness,  every  phase  of 
mental  or  psychic  life.  The  temporal  flow  of 
experience  is  then  identified  with  the  stream  of 
consciousness. 

Experience  may  connote  something  which  is 
private  or  public,  subjective  or  objective — 
something  which  no  man  can  share  with  an¬ 
other  or  something  which  is  common  to  all  men 
who  live  in  the  same  world  and  who  are  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  same  objects. 

There  are  still  other  divisions  of  experience: 
intuitive  or  aesthetic  experience,  religious  ex¬ 
perience,  and  mystical  experience. 

Experience  is  said  to  be  that  which  makes  a 
man  expert  in  an  art  or  in  a  sphere  of  practical 
activity.  A  man  is  better  able  to  do  or  make 
that  which  he  has  much  experience  in  doing  or 
making.  He  is  also  better  able  to  judge  what 
should  be  undertaken  or  what  has  been  ac¬ 
complished  by  others  as  well  as  by  himself.  In 
this  connection  experience  is  called  practical, 
both  because  it  is  the  result  of  practice  and  be¬ 
cause  it  is  a  means  to  be  used  in  directing  action. 
But  it  is  also  praised  for  the  opposite  reason — 
as  something  to  be  enjoyed  for  its  own  sake, 
serving  no  end  beyond  itself  unless  it  be  the 
enrichment  of  life  by  the  widest  variety  of 
experiences. 

These  are  some  of  the  myriad  meanings  of 
“experience” — not  all,  but  those  which  occur 
with  major  emphasis  in  the  tradition  of  the 
great  books.  No  author  uses  the  word  in  all 
these  senses.  Some  of  these  senses  are  contra¬ 


dictory.  According  to  the  context  of  the  dis¬ 
cussion  or  the  subject  matter  under  considera¬ 
tion,  the  same  author  will  shift  from  one  mean¬ 
ing  to  another. 

For  example,  in  his  account  of  the  origin  of 
science,  Aristotle  says  that  “out  of  sense-per¬ 
ception  comes  to  be  what  we  call  memory,  and 
out  of  frequently  repeated  memories  of  the 
same  thing  develops  experience;  for  a  number 
of  memories  constitute  a  single  experience.” 
The  further  product  of  experience — “the  uni¬ 
versal  stabilized  in  its  entirety  within  the  soul” 
—is  obtained  by  abstraction  and  the  related  act 
of  induction  or  generalization.  Art  or  science 
arises,  Aristotle  writes,  “when  from  many  no¬ 
tions  gained  by  experience,  one  universal  judg¬ 
ment  about  a  class  of  objects  is  produced.” 
Hence  it  can  be  said,  he  thinks,  that  from  ex¬ 
perience  “originate  the  skill  of  the  craftsman, 
the  knowledge  of  the  man  of  science,  skill  in  the 
sphere  of  coming  to  be  and  science  in  the  sphere 
of  being.” 

In  the  study  of  nature,  experience,  according 
to  Aristotle,  is  essential  for  “taking  a  compre¬ 
hensive  view  of  the  admitted  facts”  which  can 
come  only  from  dwelling  “in  intimate  associ¬ 
ation  with  nature  and  its  phenomena.”  In  the 
context  of  ethical  or  political  problems,  he 
treats  experience  as  the  basis  for  a  prudent 
judgment,  which  is  not  “concerned  with  uni¬ 
versal  only,”  but  “must  also  recognize  the  par¬ 
ticulars.”  This  fact,  Aristotle  writes,  explains 
“why  some  who  do  not  know,”  but  who  “have 
experience,  are  more  practical  than  others  who 
know.”  In  the  field  of  poetry,  as  in  moral  mat¬ 
ters,  it  is  the  man  of  experience,  according  to 
Aristotle,  who  can  best  judge  what  is  good  or 
bad;  he  can  “judge  rightly  the  works  pro¬ 
duced  .  .  .  and  understand  by  what  means  or 
how  they  are  achieved,  and  what  harmonizes 
with  what,”  whereas  “the  inexperienced  must 


469 


Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE 


be  content  if  they  do  not  fail  to  see  whether  the 
work  has  been  well  or  ill  made.” 

Hobbes  and  William  fames  also  use  the  word 
for  the  possession  of  expertness  or  sound  judg¬ 
ment  in  practical  affairs,  as  well  as  in  connection 
with  the  origin  or  nature  of  knowledge.  Hobbes, 
like  Aristotle,  says  that  “much  memory,  or 
memory  of  many  things,  is  called  Experience .” 
He  connects  it  with  prudence.  It  is  that  knowl¬ 
edge,  he  writes,  which  “is  not  attained  by  rea¬ 
soning,  but  found  as  well  in  brute  beasts  as  in 
man;  and  is  but  a  memory  of  successions  of 
events  in  times  past,  wherein  the  omission  of 
every  little  circumstance  altering  the  effect, 
frustrates  the  expectation  of  the  most  prudent.” 

For  James,  however,  experience  is  usually 
identified  with  the  stream  of  consciousness. 
“Experience  moulds  us  every  hour,”  he  writes, 
“and  makes  of  our  minds  a  mirror  of  the  time- 
and-space-connections  between  the  things  in 
the  world.”  He  distinguishes  it  from  concep¬ 
tion,  reasoning,  or  thought,  and  associates  it 
with  sensation  and  feeling.  “The  way  of ‘experi¬ 
ence’  proper  is  the  front  door,”  he  writes,  “the 
door  of  the  five  senses.” 

For  the  most  part,  experience  is  a  term  in 
psychological  analysis,  with  implications  for  the 
development  of  theoretic  knowledge  or  prac¬ 
tical  wisdom.  That  is  the  way  it  is  chiefly  used 
by  Aquinas,  Bacon,  Descartes,  Spinoza,  Locke, 
and  Hume,  as  well  as  the  authors  already  men¬ 
tioned.  It  is  still  a  term  in  the  dimension  of 
psychology  when  it  is  used  by  Plotinus  and  by 
the  theologians  to  discuss  the  mystical  union  of 
the  soul  with  God. 

But  with  Hume  experience  also  is  reality  or, 
in  his  phrase,  the  realm  of  “matters  of  fact  and 
existence,”  as  opposed  to  “relations  of  ideas.” 
He  tends  to  identify  the  order  of  nature  with 
the  succession  of  events  in  experience,  though 
he  also  seems  to  conceive  a  “pre-established 
harmony  between  the  course  of  nature  and  the 
succession  of  our  ideas.”  Nature,  he  goes  on  to 
say,  “has  implanted  in  us  an  instinct,  which 
carries  forward  the  thought  in  a  correspondent 
course  to  that  which  she  has  established  among 
external  objects.” 

Hume’s  difficulty  or  indecision  with  regard 
to  the  objectivity  of  experience  does  not  appear 
in  Kant,  for  whom  experience  ceases  to  be  psy¬ 
chological  in  any  subjective  sense  of  that  word. 


The  order  of  nature — the  object  of  the  theo¬ 
retic  sciences — is  the  order  of  experience.  In 
Kant’s  technical  sense  of  mogliche  erfahrung , 
nature  is  the  realm  of  all  possible  experience. 
His  distinction  between  judgments  of  percep¬ 
tion  and  judgments  of  experience  differentiates 
what  for  other  writers  is  subjective  sense-expe¬ 
rience,  from  knowledge  of  reality  or  of  objects 
shared  by  many  minds. 

Experience  is  the  domain  of  such  public  ob¬ 
jects  precisely  because  its  sense-materials  are 
formed  and  ordered  by  the  structure  of  the 
mind  itself — by  the  forms  of  intuition  and  the 
categories  of  the  understanding  in  a  synthesis 
which  Kant  calls  the  “transcendental  unity  of 
apperception.”  Without  this  synthesis,  experi¬ 
ence  “would  be  merely  a  rhapsody  of  percep¬ 
tions,  never  fitting  together  into  any  connected 
text,  according  to  rules  of  a  thoroughly  united 
(possible)  consciousness,  and  therefore  never 
subjected  to  the  transcendental  and  necessary 
unity  of  apperception.” 

Though  it  may  not  seem  possible,  William 
fames  goes  further  than  Kant  in  the  conception 
of  experience  as  a  realm  of  being.  Kant  does  not 
think  that  all  possible  experience  circumscribes 
reality.  “That  which  is  not  phenomenon,”  he 
writes,  “cannot  be  an  object  of  experience;  it 
can  never  overstep  the  limits  of  sensibility, 
within  which  alone  objects  are  presented  to  us.” 
In  contrast  to  this  phenomenal  reality  with 
which  he  identifies  experience,  Kant  posits  a 
noumenal  world — a  world  of  intelligible  or 
supra-sensible  beings.  To  this  realm,  Kant 
writes,  belong  those  “possible  things  which  are 
not  objects  of  our  senses,  but  are  cogitated  by 
the  understanding  alone.”  Since  the  things 
Kant  calls  ding-an-sich  are  unconditioned,  that 
is,  not  subject  as  they  are  in  themselves  to  the 
forms  of  intuition  or  the  categories  of  the  un¬ 
derstanding,  they  cannot  have  an  empirical  or 
sensible  reality,  but  only  an  intelligible  exist¬ 
ence. 

William  fames  goes  further  in  his  Essays  in 
Radical  Empiricism ,  when  he  takes  experience 
as  equivalent  to  the  whole  of  reality,  including 
the  actual  and  the  possible  or  imaginary,  the 
concrete  and  the  abstract,  the  objective  and 
the  subjective.  All  differentiations  must  be 
made  within  experience,  and  experience  itself 
is  neutral  with  respect  to  all  distinctions — re- 


470 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ceptive  of  all.  There  can  be  no  meaningful  dis¬ 
tinction  between  experience  and  some  other 
realm  of  existence.  It  is  in  this  all-inclusive  sense 
that  experience  is  said  to  be  the  central  term  in 
the  philosophy  of  John  Dewey  when  it  func¬ 
tions  as  mind  does  for  Hegel,  substance  for 
Spinoza,  or  being  for  Aquinas  and  Aristotle. 

We  have  gone  from  one  extreme  to  another 
in  passing  from  a  purely  psychological  to  some¬ 
thing  like  a  metaphysical  conception  of  expe¬ 
rience.  These  are  opposite  in  a  way  which  sug¬ 
gests  the  contrast  between  the  practical  and 
the  aesthetic  values  of  experience — the  actively 
useful  and  the  intrinsically  enjoyable.  At  least 
the  metaphysical  identification  of  experience 
with  all  existence  seems  analogous  to  the  aes¬ 
thetic  ideal  of  a  life  which  embraces  every  va¬ 
riety  of  experience. 

There  is  some  intimation  of  this  ideal  in  the 
lust  for  adventure  which  motivates  Odysseus 
and  his  men.  Dante,  in  fact,  finds  the  secret  of 
his  character  in  the  ardor  of  Odysseus  “to  be¬ 
come  experienced  of  the  world,  and  of  the  vices 
of  men,  and  of  their  virtue,”  which  leads  him 
“to  pursue  virtue  and  knowledge,”  even  to  the 
point  of  his  “mad  flight.” 

There  is  some  suggestion  of  this  ideal  of  ex¬ 
perience  in  the  unbounded  vitality  of  Gargan- 
tua  and  Pantagruel,  and  in  the  enterprise  of  the 
Wife  of  Bath,  in  Chaucer’s  tale.  But  the  great 
poetic  expression  of  this  ideal  is  written  in 
Faust— in  the  worlds  of  experience  Mephistoph- 
eles  opens  to  the  man  who  has  wagered  his  soul 
for  one  ultimately  satisfying  moment. 

Whatever  to  all  mankind  is  assured, 

I,  in  my  inmost  being,  will  enjoy  and  know, 

Seize  with  my  soul  the  highest  and  most  deep; 
Men’s  weal  and  woe  upon  my  bosom  heap; 

And  thus  this  self  of  mine  to  all  their  selves 

expanded, 

Like  them  I  too  at  last  be  stranded. 

The  basic  issue  concerning  the  role  of  experi¬ 
ence  in  the  origin  of  knowledge,  especially  the 
organized  knowledge  of  the  arts  and  sciences, 
turns  on  whether  it  is  /^source  or  only  a  source. 
It  is  rarely  if  ever  supposed  that  nothing  can  be 
learned  from  experience,  or  that  everything 
worth  learning  can  come  to  be  known  entirely 
apart  from  experience.  During  the  early  cen¬ 
turies  of  Christianity,  devoutly  religious  men 


preached  that  God  has  revealed  to  man  all  he 
needs  to  know  in  order  to  live  well  and  be  saved. 
But  this  extreme  position  rejects  the  construc¬ 
tions  of  reason  as  well  as  the  materials  of  ex¬ 
perience. 

Among  philosophers  and  scientists,  concerned 
with  what  man  can  learn  by  the  exercise  of  his 
own  powers,  the  controversy  over  experience 
usually  involves  a  distinction  between  the  senses 
and  the  reason  or  intellect.  As  indicated  in  the 
chapters  on  Idea,  Mind,  and  Sense,  whether 
this  distinction  can  be  validly  made  is  itself  a 
major  issue  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books. 
Those  who  make  it,  however,  tend  to  regard 
experience  as  something  which  results  from  the 
activity  of  the  senses.  For  them  the  problem  is 
whether  our  ideas — the  general  notions  or  con¬ 
cepts  that  enter  into  our  scientific  judgments 
and  reasoning — come  from  sense-experience, 
which  either  is  or  originates  from  the  percep¬ 
tion  of  particulars.  The  contrast  between  the 
particular  and  the  universal,  between  percept, 
sense-impression,  or  concrete  image  on  the  one 
hand,  and  concept  or  abstract  idea,  on  the 
other,  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  problem. 

One  possibility  is  that  the  mind,  by  processes 
of  abstraction  or  induction,  somehow  draws  all 
its  concepts  and  generalizations  from  experi¬ 
ence.  Aquinas  is  representative  of  this  view.  He 
adopts  Aristotle’s  notion  that  the  intellect  is 
“like  a  tablet  on  which  nothing  is  written.” 
This  tabula  rasa  depends  upon  the  senses  and 
the  imagination  for  the  materials  out  of  which 
concepts  are  formed.  “For  the  intellect  to  un¬ 
derstand  actually,”  Aquinas  writes,  “not  only 
when  it  acquires  new  knowledge,  but  also  when 
it  uses  knowledge  already  acquired,  there  is 
need  for  the  act  of  the  imagination  and  of  the 
other  powers.” 

Without  experience  the  mind  would  remain 
empty,  but  experience  itself  does  not  fill  the 
intellect  with  ideas.  The  activity  of  the  sensi¬ 
tive  faculty  is  not  by  itself  the  cause  of  knowl¬ 
edge.  The  perceptions  and  images  furnished  by 
sense-experience,  Aquinas  writes,  “need  to  be 
made  actually  intelligible,”  and  this  requires 
the  activity  of  the  intellect,  not  merely  its  pas¬ 
sivity  in  receiving  impressions  from  experience. 
For  this  reason,  he  concludes,  “it  cannot  be 
said  that  sensitive  knowledge  is  the  total  and 
perfect  cause  of  intellectual  knowledge,  but 


’ 


Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE 


rather  that  it  is  in  a  way  the  material  cause.” 

|  Although  experience  is  the  indispensable  source 
of  the  materials  on  which  the  intellect  actively 
works,  knowledge  worthy  of  the  name  of  sci¬ 
ence  or  of  art  does  not  come  from  experience 
alone. 

Thus  we  see  that  those  who,  like  Aquinas, 
affirm  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  intellect 
which  was  not  previously  in  the  senses  do  not 
mean  to  imply  that  the  materials  of  sense- 
experience  reach  the  intellect  un transformed. 
On  the  contrary,  the  primary  contribution  of 
the  intellect  is  the  translation  of  experienced 
particulars  into  universal  notions.  Nor  do  those 
who,  like  Bacon,  affirm  that  the  principles  of 
knowledge  are  obtained  by  induction  from 
experience  necessarily  imply  that  all  knowl¬ 
edge  is  directly  drawn  from  experience.  To  the 
extent  that  deductive  reasoning  is  a  way  of 
learning  new  truths,  the  truths  thus  learned 
derive  from  experience  only  indirectly.  Their 
direct  source  is  truths  already  known,  which 
must  in  turn  have  come  from  experience  by 
induction. 

Harvey  criticizes  those  who  misconceive  the 
part  which  reason  should  play  in  relation  to  the 
I  senses.  In  the  field  of  his  own  inquiries,  “some 
weak  and  inexperienced  persons,”  he  writes, 
“vainly  seek  by  dialectics  and  far-fetched  argu¬ 
ments,  either  to  upset  or  establish  things  that  are 
only  to  be  founded  on  anatomical  demonstra¬ 
tion,  and  believed  on  the  evidence  of  the  senses. 
.  .  .  How  difficult  it  is,”  he  continues,  “to  teach 
those  who  have  no  experience,  the  things  of 
which  they  have  not  any  knowledge  by  their 
senses!” 

As  in  geometry,  so  in  all  the  sciences,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Harvey,  it  is  the  business  of  reason 
“from  things  sensible  to  make  rational  demon¬ 
stration  of  the  things  that  are  not  sensible;  to 
render  credible  or  certain  things  abstruse  and 
beyond  sense  from  things  more  manifest  and  bet¬ 
ter  known.”  Science  depends  upon  both  reason 
and  sense;  but  sense,  not  reason,  is  the  ultimate 
arbiter  of  what  can  be  accepted  as  true.  “To 
test  whether  anything  has  been  well  or  ill  ad¬ 
vanced,  to  ascertain  whether  some  falsehood 
does  not  lurk  under  a  proposition,  it  is  impera¬ 
tive  on  us,”  Harvey  declares,  “to  bring  it  to  the 
proof  of  sense,  and  to  admit  or  reject  it  on  the 
decision  of  sense.” 


471 

The  foregoing  views  arc  not  a  necessary  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  distinction  between  the  facul¬ 
ties  of  sense  and  reason.  The  theory  of  innate 
ideas  presents  another  possibility.  As  expressed 
by  Descartes,  for  example,  this  theory  holds 
that  there  are  “purely  intellectual  [ideas]  which 
our  understanding  apprehends  by  means  of  a 
certain  inborn  light.”  Hence  it  would  seem  that 
experience  can  be  dispensed  with,  except  for 
its  value  in  dealing  with  particulars.  But  for 
most  of  the  writers  who  take  this  view,  experi¬ 
ence,  in  addition  to  providing  acquaintance 
with  particulars,  acts  as  the  stimulus  or  the 
occasion  for  the  development  of  the  seeds  of 
knowledge  implanted  in  the  mind  at  birth.  Al¬ 
though  he  rests  his  metaphysics  on  the  innate 
ideas  of  self  and  God,  Descartes  also  appeals  to 
experimental  knowledge  in  the  sphere  of  natural 
science.  To  answer  such  a  question  as,  “what  is 
the  nature  of  the  magnet?”  the  inquirer  must 
“first  collect  all  the  observations  with  which 
experience  can  supply  him  about  this  stone, 
and  from  these  he  will  next  try  to  deduce  its 
character.” 

The  extreme  position  which  denies  any  role 
to  experience  can  be  taken  only  by  those  who 
think  that  the  growth  of  actual  knowledge 
from  innate  ideas  requires  no  outside  impetus; 
and  perhaps  also  by  those  who  make  ideas  the 
objects  of  the  mind’s  intuitive  apprehension.  It 
is  questionable  whether  anyone  goes  to  this 
extreme  without  the  qualification  that,  for  par¬ 
ticulars  at  least,  sense-experience  is  knowledge. 

The  other  extreme — that  experience  is  the 
only  source  of  knowledge — is  approached  by 
those  who  deny  the  distinction  in  faculties, 
and  substitute  for  the  duality  of  sense  and 
reason,  each  with  its  characteristic  contribution 
to  human  knowledge,  a  distinction  between  the 
function  of  perceiving  and  that  of  reworking 
the  received  materials.  Though  in  different 
ways.  Hobbes,  Locke,  Berkeley,  and  Hume  all 
appear  to  take  this  position. 

They  represent,  according  to  James,  “the 
empirical  school  in  psychology.”  He  tries  to 
summarize  their  view  by  saying  that  “if  all  the 
connections  among  ideas  in  the  mind  could  be 
interpreted  as  so  many  combinations  of  sense- 
data  wrought  into  fixity  .  .  .  then  experience  in 
the  common  and  legitimate  sense  of  the  word 
would  be  the  sole  fashioner  of  the  mind.”  If, 


472 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


in  other  words,  all  that  is  done  with  the  sensa¬ 
tions,  impressions,  or  ideas — whatever  term  is 
used  for  the  original  data  of  experience — con¬ 
sists  in  their  reproduction  by  memory  and  im¬ 
agination,  and  their  comparison,  combination, 
and  connection  in  various  ways  to  produce 
complex  ideas,  judgments,  and  trains  of  reason¬ 
ing,  then  the  entire  content  of  human  knowl¬ 
edge  can  be  reduced  to  elements  derived  ex¬ 
clusively  from  experience. 

Whether  this  position  is  taken  with  or  without 
qualification  depends  on  the  disposition  that  is 
made  of  the  problem  of  universal  or  abstrac¬ 
tions,  which  is  more  fully  discussed  in  the  chap¬ 
ters  on  Idea,  Sense,  and  Universal.  Locke’s 
treatment  of  abstract  ideas  and  the  special  con¬ 
sideration  given  by  Hume  to  the  concepts  of 
mathematics  suggest  that  there  are  kinds  or 
aspects  of  knowledge  which  cannot  be  accounted 
for  by  reduction  to  experience.  Both  men  in¬ 
troduce  a  certain  qualification  upon  their  em¬ 
piricism.  However  slight  that  may  be,  it  does 
not  appear  in  Hobbes  and  Berkeley,  for  they 
completely  deny  the  existence  of  abstract  or 
universal  notions  in  the  mind.  If  “abstract,” 
“universal,”  or  “general”  applies  to  names 
alone,  then  the  mind  or  understanding  adds 
nothing  to,  and  does  not  radically  transform, 
the  materials  of  experience. 

The  controversy  concerning  experience  and 
knowledge  can  also  be  stated  in  terms  of  the 
opposition  between  the  a  priori  and  the  a  poste¬ 
riori.  These  terms  are  sometimes  used  to  signify 
what  is  possessed  before  and  what  comes  after 
or  from  experience,  and  sometimes  they  are 
used  to  indicate,  without  reference  to  the  time 
order,  what  is  independent  of  and  what  is  de¬ 
pendent  upon  experience. 

The  distinction  between  the  a  priori  and  the 
a  posteriori  is  not  made  in  the  same  way  with 
respect  to  propositions  or  judgments  and  with 
respect  to  reasoning  or  inference.  The  distinc¬ 
tion  and  its  significance  for  science  and  phi¬ 
losophy  are  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Judg¬ 
ment  and  Reasoning.  It  is  sufficient  here  to 
point  out  that  an  a  priori  judgment  is  not 
determined  by  experience  nor  does  it  need 
empirical  verification. 

It  might  at  first  be  supposed  that  those  who 
agree  in  thinking  that  experience  is  just  one — 


not  the  only — source  of  knowledge  would  also 
agree  that  some  judgments,  especially  the  basic 
propositions  of  science,  are  a  priori .  But  this 
does  not  appear  to  be  the  case.  Bacon,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  like  Aristotle,  holds  that  the  principles 
of  the  various  sciences  are  derived  by  induction 
from  experience.  “There  are  and  can  exist,”  he 
writes,  “but  two  ways  of  investigating  and  dis¬ 
covering  truth.  The  one  hurries  on  rapidly  from 
the  senses  and  particulars  to  the  most  general 
axioms,  and  from  them,  as  principles  and  their 
supposed  indisputable  truth,  derives  and  dis¬ 
covers  the  intermediate  axioms.  .  .  .  The  other 
constructs  its  axioms  from  the  senses  and  par¬ 
ticulars,  by  ascending  continually  and  gradu¬ 
ally,  till  it  finally  arrives  at  the  most  general 
axioms.”  All  axioms,  on  this  view,  ar t  a  posteriori 
propositions. 

Descartes  and  Kant,  while  differing  in  the 
terms  of  their  analysis,  think,  as  we  have  seen, 
that  the  mind  itself  provides  the  ground  for 
certain  judgments  which  are  therefore  a  priori. 
It  does  not  even  seem  to  be  the  case  that  those 
who  make  experience  the  only  source  of  knowl¬ 
edge  regard  all  propositions  as  a  posteriori. 
Hume’s  treatment  of  mathematical  proposi¬ 
tions  and  James’  treatment  of  axioms  or  nec¬ 
essary  truths  seem  to  be  the  exceptions  here. 

There  is  still  another  way  in  which  the  issue 
can  be  stated.  The  question  is  whether  human 
knowledge  extends  to  objects  beyond  experi¬ 
ence,  to  things  or  beings  which  are  not  sensible 
and  which  transcend  all  possible  experience. 

Again  it  might  be  supposed  that  those  who 
take  an  a  posteriori  view  of  the  origin  of  knowl¬ 
edge  would  also  limit  apprehension  to  things 
experienceable.  But  Aristotle  and  Aquinas  seem 
to  say  that  the  origin  of  knowledge  from  experi¬ 
ence  does  not  restrict  the  knowable  to  things 
capable  of  being  experienced.  Aquinas  cites 
Aristotle’s  work  on  the  heavens  to  show  that 
“we  may  have  a  scientific  knowledge”  of  things 
we  cannot  experience,  “by  way  of  negation  and 
by  their  relation  to  material  things.”  He  would 
hold  what  is  true  of  astronomy  to  be  even  more 
the  case  in  metaphysics  and  theology.  Even 
though  all  our  concepts  are  abstracted  from 
experience,  we  can  by  means  of  them  reach  be¬ 
yond  the  sensible  world  to  purely  intelligible 
realities — to  immaterial  and  non-sensible  beings 
or  aspects  of  being.  Locke,  who  may  be  thought 


* 


Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE 


even  more  emphatic  than  Aristotle  or  Aquinas 
in  his  insistence  on  the  empirical  origin  of 
knowledge,  goes  as  far  as  they  do  in  affirming 
man’s  knowledge  of  God  and  the  soul. 

Hume,  in  contrast,  holds  that  knowledge 
may  go  beyond  experience  only  if  it  is  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  relation  of  our  ideas,  as  exemplified 
in  the  science  of  mathematics.  Precisely  because 
mathematics  is  not  knowledge  of  matters  of 
fact  or  real  existence,  its  propositions  are,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Hume,  “discoverable  by  the  mere 
operation  of  thought,  without  dependence  on 
what  is  anywhere  existent  in  the  universe.” 
But  with  regard  to  “matters  of  fact,”  Hume 
thinks  that  “experience  is  our  only  guide.” 

Any  science  which  claims  to  be  knowledge  of 
reality  or  existence  rather  than  of  the  relations 
between  ideas,  is  thus  limited  to  the  realm  of 
experienceable  objects.  According  as  the  ob¬ 
jects  of  a  science  fall  within  experience,  so  also 
must  its  conclusions  be  verified  by  reference  to 
experience.  Experience  is  the  ultimate  test  of 
what  truth  there  is  in  the  propositions  of  natu¬ 
ral  science.  Only  the  propositions  of  mathe¬ 
matics  can  have  a  validity  which  does  not  re¬ 
quire  empirical  verification. 

By  these  criteria  Hume  challenges  the  valid¬ 
ity  of  metaphysics  or  natural  theology.  Such 
disciplines  claim  to  be  knowledge  of  real  exist¬ 
ences,  but  their  objects  are  not  experienceable 
and  their  conclusions  cannot  be  empirically 
verified.  The  existence  of  God  and  the  im¬ 
mortality  of  the  soul  may  be  objects  of  faith, 
but  they  are  not  verifiable  conclusions  of  sci¬ 
ence;  nor  for  that  matter  can  metaphysics  give 
us  scientific  knowledge  of  the  ultimate  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  physical  world  if  that  involves 
knowledge  of  substances  and  causes  which  lie 
behind  the  phenomena  and  outside  of  experi¬ 
ence.  “All  the  philosophy  in  the  world,”  Hume 
writes,  “and  all  the  religion  .  .  .  will  never  be 
able  to  carry  us  beyond  the  usual  course  of 
experience.” 

Kant,  like  Hume,  limits  theoretic  knowledge 
to  mathematics  and  the  study  of  nature.  A 
metaphysics  which  pretends  to  know  objects 
outside  the  phenomenal  order  cannot  be  de¬ 
fended.  “The  understanding  has  no  power  to 
decide,”  he  writes,  “whether  other  perceptions 
besides  those  which  belong  to  the  total  of  our 
possible  experience  [exist],  and  consequently 


473 

whether  some  other  sphere  of  matter  exists.” 
What  transcends  all  possible  experience,  in 
other  words,  cannot  be  known,  at  least  not  in 
the  manner  of  the  speculative  sciences;  only  the 
moral  sciences,  proceeding  in  a  different  fashion, 
have  access  to  the  realm  of  the  supra-scnsiblc. 

Kant’s  position  seems  to  resemble  Hume’s. 
But  it  involves  a  quite  different  conception  of 
mathematics  and  natural  science,  especially  the 
latter,  which  Kant  divides  into  pure  and  em¬ 
pirical  physics.  Kant  identifies  “pure  physic” 
with  the  “metaphysic  of  nature”  in  distinction 
from  the  “metaphysic  of  morals,”  the  one  a 
theoretic,  the  other  a  practical  science.  For 
Kant  the  principles  of  both  mathematics  and 
pure  physics  ar c  a  priori  rather  than  a  posteriori-, 
the  objects  of  both  are  objects  of  actual  or 
possible  experience. 

In  the  classification  of  sciences,  the  natural 
sciences  are  usually  set  apart  from  mathematics, 
as  well  as  from  metaphysics,  by  being  called 
“empirical”  or  “experimental.”  These  names 
signify  not  merely  the  inductive  method  by 
which  the  knowledge  is  obtained  from  experi¬ 
ence;  they  also  imply  that  hypotheses,  however 
formulated,  and  conclusions,  however  reached, 
must  be  verified  by  the  facts  of  experience. 
Newton  states  it  as  a  rule  of  reasoning  “in  ex¬ 
perimental  philosophy  [that]  we  are  to  look 
upon  propositions  inferred  by  general  induction 
from  phenomena  as  accurately  or  very  nearly 
true,  notwithstanding  any  contrary  hypotheses 
that  may  be  imagined,  till  such  time  as  other 
phenomena  occur,  by  which  they  may  either 
be  made  more  accurate,  or  liable  to  exceptions.” 
In  similar  tenor,  Lavoisier  says  that  “we  ought, 
in  every  instance,  to  submit  our  reasoning  to 
the  test  of  experiment,  and  never  to  search  for 
truth  but  by  the  natural  road  of  experiment 
and  observation.” 

The  two  words  “empirical”  and  “experi¬ 
mental”  should  not,  however,  be  used  inter¬ 
changeably.  No  science  can  be  experimental 
without  being  empirical,  but,  as  the  chapter  on 
Astronomy  indicates,  the  converse  does  not 
appear  to  be  true. 

There  seem  to  be  three  different  types  of 
experience  from  which  knowledge  can  be  de¬ 
rived:  (i)  the  ordinary  everyday  experiences 
which  men  accumulate  without  making  any 


474 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


special  effort  to  investigate,  explore,  or  test; 
(2)  the  special  data  of  experience  which  men 
collect  by  undertaking  methodical  research  and 
making  systematic  observations,  with  or  with¬ 
out  apparatus;  and  (3)  experiences  artificially 
produced  by  men  who  exercise  control  over  the 
phenomena  and  with  respect  to  which  the  ob¬ 
server  himself  determines  the  conditions  of  his 
experience.  “Those  experiences  which  are  used 
to  prove  a  scientific  truth,”  James  writes,  “are 
for  the  most  part  artificial  experiences  of  the 
laboratory,  gained  after  the  truth  itself  has  been 
conjectured.” 

Of  these  three  only  the  last  is  an  experimental 
experience.  The  first  type  of  experience  may  be 
employed  by  the  scientist,  but  it  is  seldom  suffi¬ 
cient  or  reliable  enough  for  his  purposes.  The 
distinction  between  the  empirical  sciences  which 
are  and  those  which  are  not  experimental  turns 
on  the  difference  between  the  second  and  third 
types. 

It  is  not  always  possible  for  the  scientist  to 
perform  experiments,  as,  for  example,  in  as¬ 
tronomy,  where  the  phenomena  can  be  me¬ 
thodically  observed  and  exactly  recorded,  but 
cannot  be  manipulated  or  controlled.  Among 
the  great  books  of  natural  science,  the  biological 
writings  of  Hippocrates,  Aristotle,  Galen,  and 
Darwin,  the  astronomical  works  of  Ptolemy, 
Copernicus,  Kepler,  and  Newton,  and  the  clin¬ 
ical  studies  of  Freud  are  examples  of  scientific 
works  which  are  more  or  less  empirical,  but  not 
experimental.  In  contrast,  Galileo’s  Two  New 
Sciences,  Newton’s  Optics ,  Harvey’s  Motion  of 
the  Heart  and  Blood ,  Lavoisier’s  Elements  of 
Chemistry ,  and  Faraday’s  Experimental  Researches 
in  Electricity  represent  empirical  science  which 
has  recourse  to  experimentation  at  crucial 
points. 

On  the  side  of  their  production,  experiments 
are  like  inventions.  They  do  not  happen  by 
chance  or  without  the  intervention  of  art.  They 
are  usually  performed  under  carefully  controlled 
conditions  and  by  means  of  apparatus  artfully 
contrived.  This  explains  the  interplay  between 
technology  and  experimental  science.  Progress 
in  each  occasions  progress  in  the  other. 

On  the  side  of  their  utility,  experiments  seem 
to  serve  three  different  though  related  purposes 
in  scientific  work.  In  those  branches  of  physics 


which  are  both  mathematical  and  experimental, 
the  experiment  enables  the  scientist  to  make 
exact  measurements  of  the  phenomena  and  so 
to  determine  whether  one  or  another  mathe¬ 
matical  formulation  fits  the  observable  facts  of 
nature.  Investigating  accelerated  motion,  Gali¬ 
leo  seeks  not  only  to  demonstrate  its  definition 
and  its  properties,  but  also  to  show  that  “ex¬ 
perimental  results  .  .  .  agree  with  and  exactly 
correspond  with  those  properties  which  have 
been,  one  after  another,  demonstrated  by  us.” 

The  experiment  of  the  inclined  plane  yields 
measurements  which  exemplify  those  ratios  be¬ 
tween  space  and  time  that  are  determined  by 
one  rather  than  by  another  mathematical  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  acceleration  of  a  freely  falling  body. 
The  experiment  is  thus  used  to  decide  between 
two  competing  mathematical  theories,  choosing 
that  one  “best  fitting  natural  phenomena.”  In 
those  sciences,  Galileo  writes,  “in  which  mathe¬ 
matical  demonstrations  are  applied  to  natural 
phenomena  .  .  .  the  principles,  once  established 
by  well-chosen  experiments,  become  the  foun¬ 
dation  of  the  entire  super-structure.” 

Concerned  with  the  phenomena  of  heat, 
Fourier  makes  the  same  point  concerning  the 
relation  of  mathematics  and  experiments. 
“Mathematical  analysis,”  he  says,  “can  deduce 
from  general  and  simple  phenomena  the  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  laws  of  nature;  but  the  special 
application  of  these  laws  to  very  complex  effects 
demands  a  long  series  of  exact  observations” 
for  which  experiments  are  needed. 

In  addition  to  testing  hypotheses  and  provid¬ 
ing  measurements  whereby  mathematical  for¬ 
mulations  can  be  applied  to  nature,  experiments 
function  as  the  source  of  inductions.  A  crucial 
experiment  constitutes  a  single  clear  case  from 
which  a  generalization  can  be  drawn  that  is 
applicable  to  all  cases.  Newton’s  optical  experi¬ 
ments  are  of  this  sort.  He  calls  this  use  of  ex¬ 
periments  “the  method  of  analysis.”  It  consists 
in  “making  experiments  and  observations,  and 
in  drawing  general  conclusions  from  them  by 
induction.  .  .  .  And  although  the  arguing  from 
experiments  and  observations  by  induction  be 
no  demonstration  of  general  conclusions,  yet  it 
is  the  best  way  of  arguing  which  the  nature  of 
things  admits  of.” 

A  third  use  for  experiments  is  in  the  explora¬ 
tion  of  new  fields  of  phenomena,  for  purposes 


Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE 


475 


of  discovery  rather  than  of  induction  or  veri¬ 
fication.  Hypotheses  may  result  from  such  ex¬ 
plorations,  but  in  the  first  instance,  the  experi¬ 
mentation  may  be  undertaken  without  the 
guidance  of  hypotheses.  This  employment  of 
experimental  technique  is  illustrated  by  Fara¬ 
day’s  remark  that  “the  science  of  electricity  is 
in  that  state  in  which  every  part  of  it  requires 
experimental  investigation,  not  merely  for  the 
discovery  of  new  effects,  but  what  is  just  now 
of  far  more  importance,  the  development  of  the 
means  by  which  the  old  effects  are  produced.’’ 


Experimental  exploration,  apart  from  the 
direction  of  hypotheses,  seems  to  be  a  procedure 
of  trial  and  error.  Experimentation  in  this  sense 
reflects  what  Hippocrates  had  in  mind  when  he 
spoke  of  “the  experiment  perilous.”  In  the 
work  of  Hippocrates  at  the  very  beginning  of 
empirical  science,  recourse  to  experiment,  far 
from  being  the  most  prized  technique,  signified 
a  lack  of  scientific  knowledge.  Only  the  physi¬ 
cian  who  could  not  cure  the  patient  by  art 
based  on  science  took  the  risk  of  experimenting 
— of  proceeding  by  trial  and  error. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  Various  conceptions  of  experience  476 

2.  Experience  in  relation  to  the  acts  of  the  mind 

2 a.  Memory  and  imagination  as  factors  in  or  products  of  experience  477 

2 b.  The  empirical  sources  of  induction,  abstraction,  generalization 
2 c.  The  transcendental  or  innate  structure  of  the  mind  as  a  condition  of  experience 
2 d.  The  a  priori  and  a  posteriori  in  judgment  and  reasoning  478 

3.  Experience  in  relation  to  organized  knowledge:  art  and  science 

3 a.  Particular  experiences  and  general  rules  as  conditions  of  expertness  or  skill:  the 
contrast  between  the  empiric  and  the  artist 

3 b.  The  issue  concerning  the  role  of  experience  in  science  479 

4.  Experience  as  measuring  the  scope  of  human  knowledge 

40.  The  knowability  of  that  which  is  outside  experience:  the  supra-sensible,  the 
noumenal  or  transcendent 

4 b.  Verification  by  experience:  experience  as  the  ultimate  test  of  truth  480 

5.  The  theory  of  experimentation  in  scientific  method 

5 a.  Experimental  exploration  and  discovery:  the  formulation  of  hypotheses  481 

5 b.  Experimental  verification:  the  testing  of  hypotheses 
5 c.  Experimental  measurement:  the  application  of  mathematics 

6.  The  man  of  experience  in  practical  affairs  482 

6a.  Experience  as  indispensable  to  sound  judgment  and  prudence 
6b.  The  role  of  experience  in  politics:  the  lessons  of  history 

7.  Mystical  or  religious  experience:  experience  of  the  supernatural 

8.  Variety  of  experience  as  an  ideal  of  human  life  483 


476 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-2831 12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  116a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
thepage.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions  :  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 —  (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Various  conceptions  of  experience 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  i  [i6a3~8]  25a  / 
Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  19  [99b34-iooa9] 
136b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980^5- 
98ib9]  499b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  54, 
a  5  288a-d;  q  58,  a  3,  rep  3  301d-302d;  q  64, 
a  1,  rep  5  334a-335c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
1 12,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  1,5  359c-360c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan y  part  i,  50d;  part  ii,128c; 
part  iv, 267b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  516b-524a 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  334a-335a 
31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  22c  /  Discourse,  part 
1,  44a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  axiom  5  373d 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  i, 
sect  1-8  121a-123a  esp  sect  2  121b-c 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  30  418c 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv,  div 
20-sect  viii,  div  74  458a-484c  passim,  esp 
sect  iv,  div  28-sect  v,  div  38  460d-466c, 
sect  vii,  div  58-61  476a-478a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  14a-15c;  45d-46a;  47d- 
48a;  53b-54b;  56d-57b;  58c-59b;  65d-66d; 
72c-73a;  176d-177a;  225c-226b  /  Practical 
Reason ,  308a-b 


53  James:  Psychology,  185b-187b;  232b-238b  esp 
235a-236a;  260a-261a;  317b-318a;  852b-858b 

2.  Experience  in  relation  to  the  acts  of  the  mind 

7  Plato:  Meno ,  179d-183a  /  Phaedo,  224a-225a; 
228a-230c  /  Republic ,  bk  vii,  392c-393c  / 
Theaetetus,  534d-536b 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  19 
136a-137a,c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  499a- 
500b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [379-521] 
49a-51a  esp  [469-521]  50b-51a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  12-36 
74b-80d  esp  par  14  74d-75a,  par  26  78a-b, 
par  31  79c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  54, 
a  5  288a-d;  q  58,  a  3,  rep  3  301d-302d;  q  64, 
a  1,  rep  5  334a-335c;  q  84,  aa  5-8  446c-451b; 
part  i— 11,  q  40,  a  5  795d-796c;  a  6,  ans  and 
rep  3  796c-797a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
1 12,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  1,5  359c-360c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  332a-335c 
esp  334c-d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  22c- 23a  /  Discourse, 
part  hi,  50b-d  /  Meditations,  1  75a-77c  esp 
75d-76c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  229d-230d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  40-42  387a- 
388c 


2 a  to  2c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cn  i, 
sect  2-5  121b  122b;  sect  20-25  126d-127d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  la  4a,c;  14a  c;  22a, c; 
23a-24a;  34a-c;  39a  c;  42a;  45d-46a;  47c  48a; 
53b-54b;  58a-59b;  61a64a;  66a-d;  72c  85d 
csp  72c-74b;  89c-91d;  93d  94b;  98c;  109d- 
110a;  115b  c;  153a-c;  199 b  e  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  253a  b;  282b-c  / 
Practical  Reason ,  308a- b;  329bc  /  Judgement , 
461a-462d;  472c-d;  482d  483d;  492c-d;  516b; 
551a-552c;  562d-563b;  570b  572b;  603d; 
604b-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  2b-3a;  149b-152b  csp 
152ab;  299b-300a;  314a;  317b~319a;  325a; 
369a;  767b  768a;  851a-897b  esp  851a-b, 
897a-b 

2a.  Memory  and  imagination  as  factors  in  or 
products  of  experience 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  228a-230c  /  Theaetetus ,  523d- 
524b  /  Philebus,  621a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  19 
[99b34“io°a6]  136b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  cii  i 
[980*28-98 iai]  499a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  12-36  74b- 
80d  esp  par  14  74d-75a,  par  26  78a-b,  par  31 
79c- d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  50d;  part  ii, 
128c;  part  iv, 267b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  332a-335c 
esp  334c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  59a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  i 
387b-388a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  bk  ii,  ch  i,  sect  2-8  121b- 
123a;  sect  20-25  126d-127d;  ch  xii,  sect  1-2 
147b-d;  ch  xviii,  sect  i  174a;  sect  6  174c-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  i  413a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  341d-342a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  41c-42b;  54b-56c;  58a- b; 
61a-64a;  66a-d;  76d-77a;  80c-d;  93d-94b; 
173b-174a  /  Practical  Reason ,  319c-320b  / 
Judgement ,  482d-483d;  492c-d;  493c-d;  506a- 
511a  esp  509d-510a;  528d-530b;  542b-543c 

53  James:  Psychology,  lb-3b;  282a-291a  esp 285b; 
327a-329a;  332b-336a;  385a-b;  424b;  433a- 
434a;  480a-b;  520a-b;  677b-678a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  363c-364b 

2b.  The  empirical  sources  of  induction,  ab¬ 
straction,  generalization 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  30  [46s 
18-28]  64a;  bk  ii,  ch  23  [68bi 5— 29]  90b-c  / 
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [71*1-8]  97a;  ch 
18  lllb-c;  ch  31  120a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [90*24-30] 
123b-c;  ch  7  [92a34-bi]  126b;  ch  19  136a- 
137a, c  /  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  12  148d;  ch  18 
[io8b7~i2]  152d;  bk  ii,  ch  7  [113^1-33]  158d; 
bk  viii,  ch  1  [i55b35— 1 56^7]  211d-212a;  [1 56b 
10-18]  212c-d  /  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a-b; 
bk  viii,  ch  1  [252*1 9— b7]  335d-336b  /  Heavens, 


477 

bk  hi,  ch  7  [306*6  =  18]  397b  c  /  Generation  and 
Corruption ,  bk  i,  cii  2  [316*5-14]  411c  d  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  i,  cii  i  [98ob25-98i*i2]  499b-c 
/  Soul,  bk  1,  cii  1  [402^1 1  403*2]  631d=632a 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  cii  4  [1095*30  h8] 
340c;  bk  vi,  ch  8  [1142*12-19]  391b;  ch  ii 
[1  i43*34-b6]  392d-393a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  cii  20 
l'393a25-b3l  641a 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  27 
650a 

19  Aquinas:  Sumtna  Theologica,  part  i,  q  79, 
aa  3-4  416a-418c;  q  84,  a  6  447c-449a;  q  85, 
a  1  45lc-453c;  a  3,  ans  455b  457a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  9, 
a  4  766b-767b;  q  12  776c-779d  passim 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-335c 
csp  334c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  43d-44c; 
57b-d;  59c/  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  19-26 
108b-d;  aph  51  111c;  aph  69-70  116a  ll7a; 
aph  100-106  127c-128c;  bk  ii,  aph  10-15 
140c-149a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  11,  2d-3a;  vii,  lOc-llc; 
xii,  24a-b;  xiv,  28a-b  /  Discourse,  part  vi, 
61d-62c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  167c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2 
387b-388b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  bk  ii,  ch  xi,  sect  8-9 
145b-c;  ch  xxxii,  sect  6  244b-c;  bk  iii,  ch 
iii,  sect  6-8  255c-256a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  107 
433d-434a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iii,  div 
19,  458a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341b-342b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-b;  45b-46a  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  562d-563b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  659a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  182d- 
183c;  part  iv,  361a-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  303a;  329a-331b;  674a- 
677a  passim;  858a-865b  esp  860b-862a,  864a- 
865a 

54  Freud:  Instincts,  412a 

2c.  The  transcendental  or  innate  structure  of 
the  mind  as  a  condition  of  experience 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-108a,c  esp  14a-15c, 
23a-33d,  41c-42b,  48d-51d,  53b-55a,  56d- 
59b,  66d-93c,  99a-101b;  112d-113a;  115d; 
128c-d;  166c-171a;  173b;  176d-177a;  192a-b; 
199b-c;  207c-d;  213d-215a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals,  282 b-c;  283b  /  Practical 
Reason,  308a- b;  309d-310a;  350b-c  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  47lb-c;  482d;  492c-d;  515d-516b;  520a; 
552b-c;  562d-563b;  570b-572d  esp  570c-d, 
572b-c;  573a-c;  603d;  604b-c;  612c-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  232b-238b  esp  232b-233b, 
235a-b;  260a-261a;  627a-635a  passim,  esp 
629a-631a;  851a-890a  esp  85lb-862a,  865a- 
868a,  881b  [fn  3],  889a 


Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE 


478 

(2.  Experience  in  relation  to  the  acts  of  the 
mind.) 

2d.  The  a  priori  and  a  posteriori  in  judgment 
and  reasoning 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[72b25~33]  99c;  bk  ii,  ch  19  136a-137a,c  / 
Physics ,  bk  1,  ch  1  259a-b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i, 
ch  1  499a-500b;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [io29a33-bi2] 
552a 

19  Aquinas:  Snmma  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, 
rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  2  lld-12c;  q  3,  a  5,  ans 
17c-18b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  parti-ii,  q  112, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  1,5  359c-360c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-335c 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11,  2d-3a  /  Meditations , 
hi  81d-89a  esp  88c-d  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
prop  1— 11  132b-c;  215b-c;  224b, d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  ii  358b-359b; 
part  11,  prop  40,  schol  2  388a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15-16  98d-99c;  sect  23  101b-102a;  bk 
iv,  ch  ix,  sect  :i  349a;  ch  xi,  sect  13-14 
357d-358c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv,  div 
20-sect  v,  div  38  458a-466c  esp  sect  iv,  div 
30,  462a;  sect  x,  div  89  490b-c;  sect  xi 
497b-503c  passim;  sect  xii,  div  131-132 
508d-509d  passim 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-108a,c  esp  14a-20c, 
23a-24a,  25b-26b,  27b-28b,  29d-33d,  35b- 
36a,  41c-42b,  46a-48d,  57d-59b,  64b-66d; 
108b-d;  110a-113b;  115d-120c;  123d-124b; 
134c-d;  141d-142c  [antithesis];  146a;  170d- 
171a;  172c-173a;  174a;  177d;  179c-182b;  190c- 
191a;  192a-b;  199a;  209b-d;  211c-218d;  224a- 
227a;  228b-d;  230c-231c;  236d-237a;  244d- 
245a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a- 
254d  esp  253b,  254c-d;  268b-d;  283b  /  Prac¬ 
tical  Reason,  307d-308b;  309b-d;  329d-330c  / 
Science  of  Right,  405b-d  /  judgement,  461a- 
475d  esp  465c-467d,  474b-475d;  570b-572b; 
600d-603d  esp  603a-b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445d-447a  passim; 
475b, d  [fn  1] 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  182d- 
183c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  851a-890a  esp  851a-b, 
859a-861b,  889a-890a 

3.  Experience  in  relation  to  organized  knowl¬ 
edge:  art  and  science 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  253a 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  30  [46s 
18-28]  64a  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  19 
136a-137a,c  /  Heavens,  bk  hi,  ch  7  [3o6a6-i8] 
397b-c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  1,  ch  2 
[3 1 6*5-1 4]  411c-d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
499a-500b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  9  [ii8obi3~ii8ib 
12]  435b-436a,c 


2d  to  3a  U/c 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine ,  par  1-8  la-  30 
3b  /  Aphorisms ,  sect  i,  par  1  131a 
21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii  [46-105] 
108b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60c-61a;  part  ii,  3 
128d-129b  3 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  322d-323d; 
324c-d  /  On  Animal  Generation,  331b-335c 
esp  334c- d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  16a  /  No¬ 
vum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  98  126d-127b 

31  Descartes:  Rides,  11,  2d-3a  /  Discourse,  part 
1,  44a-c;  part  vi,  61b-d  /  Meditations ,  1  75a- 
77c  esp  75d-76c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  2  3 

388a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  396  240b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  i, 
sect  1-8  121a-123a  esp  sect  2  121b-c;  ch  xi, 
sect  15  146d-147a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  30-32 
418c-419a;  sect  43  420d 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv,  div 
20-sect  v,  div  38  458a-466c  passim,  esp  sect 
v,  div  36,  465a-d  [fn  1],  465c;  sect  vii,  div 
60  477a-c;  sect  viii,  div  65  479b-480a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-15c;  72c-85d  esp 
72c-74b,  82a-b  /  judgement,  562d-563b 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  281b-c 
47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [522-601]  15a-16b 
54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  449c-451b 

3 a.  Particular  experiences  and  general  rules  as 
conditions  of  expertness  or  skill:  the 
contrast  between  the  empiric  and  the 
artist 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  6d-7b  /  Phaedrus,  136b-c  / 
Gorgias,  253a;  261a-262a;  280d-282b;  287d- 
288b  /  Republic ,  bk  i,  303a-304a  /  Theaetetus, 

516a  /  Philebus,  633a-c  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  684c- 
685a;  bk  ix,  745a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  30  [46s 
18-28]  64a  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  19 
[iooa3~9]  136c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[98ob25~982ai]  499b-500b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [1102^5-26] 
347c;  bk  11,  ch  1  348b,d-349b  passim;  bk  hi, 
ch  8  [1 1  i6b3~ 1 5]  362d-363a;  bk  vi,  ch  i 
[1138^5-34]  387b;  bk  x,  ch  9  [ii8obi3~ 

1 1 8 ib  1 2]  435b-436a,c  /  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  ii 
[i28ib40-i282a6]  479d 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  1-8  la- 
3b;  par  20  7b-d  /  Epidemics,  bk  hi,  sect  hi, 
par  16  59b-c  /  Surgery,  par  1  70b  /  Articula¬ 
tions,  par  10,  94d  /  The  Law  144a-d 
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  ii,  ch  9,  195c- 
196a 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iv,  ch  3 
676a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60c-d 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  66a-b;368a-377dpassim, 
esp  377a-d;  450d-451a;  523c-524a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Zb  to  4a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  5b-6a;  48d- 
49a;  53a  b;  56c-57b:  74b  d;  82c-d  /  Novum 
Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  64  114b;  bk  ii,  aph  44-52 
175d-195d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61b  c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  y,  div  3 6, 
465a-d  [fn  1  ] ;  465c;  sect  viii,  div  65,  479d- 
480a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  296b.d  297c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ix,  361d  365c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  666b-667a;  673a-674b; 
689b-690a 

54  Freud:  Psycho -Analytic  Therapy ,  125a 

3£.  The  issue  concerning  the  role  of  experience 
in  science 

7  Plato:  Phaedo,  224a-225a;  228a-230c  /  Re¬ 
public ,  bk  vi,  383d-388a;  bk  vii,  391b-398c  / 
Tinmens ,  455a-c  /  Theaetetus,  534d-536b  / 
Seventh  Letter ,  809c-8l0d 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  30  [46s 
18-28]  64a  /  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  13 
[78b3 1— 79ai 6]  108b-c;  ch  18  lllb-c;  ch  31 
120a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  19  136a-137a,c  /  Physics , 
bk  i,  ch  1  259a-b;  ch  8  [19^24-34]  267a-b  / 
Heavens,  bk  hi,  ch  7  [3o6a6-i8]  397b-c  / 
Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  1,  ch  2  [316^- 
14]  411c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980^*25- 
982ai]  499b-500b;  bk  xi,  ch  7  [1064^-9] 
592b  /  Sow/,  bk  1,  ch  1  [402bii~403a2]  631d- 
632a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  iii,  ch  2 
[5iibio-25]  35a-b  /  Rzrtt  o/*  Animals,  bk  iii, 
ch  4  [666a7~io]  193d  /  Generation  of  Animals, 
bk  iii,  ch  10  [76ob27~32]  301d-302a  /  Ethics, 
bk  x,  ch  9  [n8obi3-n8ibi2]  435b-436a,c 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  1-8  la-3b 
/  Aphorisms,  sect  i,  par  1  131a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  84, 
aa  6-8  447c-451b;  q  96,  a  i,  rep  3  510b- 
511b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  9, 
a  4  766b-767b;  q  12  776c-779d  passim 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  60a-d;  part  ii, 
129a;  part  iv,  267a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  260c-261c;  285c-288a; 
291b-292d 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  pref,  la-b;  bk  i,  6a-7a; 
bk  ii,  27b-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  131a- 
138b  passim 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  267b,d-268d; 
280c  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  322d-323d; 
324c-d  /  On  Anvnal  Generation,  331b-335c; 
411c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  5b-c;  16a; 
44c;  57b-d  /  Novum  Organum  105a-195d  esp 
bk  1,  aph  64  114b,  aph  95-103  126b- 128a 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11,  2d-3a;  vn,  10c-12a; 
xii,  24a-b  /  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61b-62c 

31  S  pinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2 
387b-388b 


479 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  rule  iii  iv  270b- 
271b  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  543a  b 

34  Huygens:  Light,  cn  1,  553a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxiii,  sect  3  204c-d;  sect  6-7  205b  206a; 
sect  28-29  211b-212a;  sect  32-37  212c-214b; 
bk  iii,  ch  xi,  sect  21-23  304d  305b;  bk  iv, 
ch  iii,  sect  14  316b  d;  sect  16  317a-c;  sect 
25-29  321a-323a  passim;  ch  vi,  sect  13 
335c-d;  ch  xii,  sect  9-13  360d-362d;  ch  xvi, 
sect  12  370b-371a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  30  418c; 
sect  58-59  424a-b;  sect  104  433a  b;  sect 
107  433d-434a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv,  div 

20- sect  v,  div  38  458a-466c  passim;  sect  vii, 
div  48,  47lb-c;  div  60  477a-c;  sect  viii,  div 
65,  479b-c;  sect  xi,  div  111-113  501b-502d 
esp  div  1 12  501c-502a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-13d;  14a-c;  15c-16c; 
31b-d;  46a- b;  58a-b;  66d-67b:  68a-69c;85a- 
b;  86d-87b;  94b-95a;  211c-218d/  Fund .  Prin . 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a-254d  esp  253b, 
254b-c;  263b-c;  273a-b  /  Practical  Reason, 
295b-d;  312c-d;  329d-330c;  331a-332d  /  In¬ 
tro .  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387a-b  /  Judgement, 
562d-563b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445b-447a  passim; 
475b, d  [fn  1] 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  1c- 
2b;  6d-7a,c;  part  iii,  87b-c 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  774 d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  3, 
lOa-lla  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156c- 
190b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 
684a 

53  James:  Psychology,  385a-b;  677b;  862a-884b 
esp  862a-865a,  867a,  884b 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  400d-401a  /  Instincts, 
412a-b  /  General  Introduction ,  545 b-d  /  New 
Introductory  Lectures,  815a 

4.  Experience  as  measuring  the  scope  of  human 
knowledge 

4a.  The  knowability  of  that  which  is  outside 
experience:  the  supra-sensible,  the  nou- 
menal  or  transcendent 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  94a;  113b-114a,c  /  Republic, 
bk  vi,  383d-388a  /  Timaeus,  447b-a  /  Critias, 
478b-d  /  Parmenides,  489d-490d  /  Theaetetus , 
534c-536b 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [298bi5~24] 
390a- b  /  Memory  and  Reminiscence,  ch  i 
[449b30-45oaio]  690c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  5  [644*^ 

21- 645a5]  168c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [265-328] 
4b-5a;  bk  ii  [308-332]  19a-b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  2-4,  323a- 
324a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  7  626b-c 


Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE 


480 

(4.  Experie?ice  as  measuring,  the  scope  of  human 
knowledge.  4a.  The  knowability  of  that 
tvhich  is  outside  experience:  the  supra - 
sensible ,  the  noumenal  or  transcendent .) 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  aa 
1-2  10d-12c;  qq  12-13  50b-75b;  q  32  175d- 
180d;  q  77,  a  1,  rep  7  399c-401b;  q  84,  a  5 
446c-447c;  a  6,  rep  3  447c-449a;  qq  87—88 
464d-473a;  q  89,  a  2  475a-d;  q  94,  aa  1-2 
501d-504a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  112, 
a  5  359c-360c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  75,  a  3,  rep  2 
938a-939c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  iv  [28-48] 

111a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54b-c;  78d-79a; 
part  11,  163a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  291b-294b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  39d-40a; 
41b-d;  96d-97b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  53b-54b  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  215b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  xii  [552-587]  331a- 
332a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  i, 
sect  2-10  121b-123d;  sect  19-24  126a-127c; 
ch  xii,  sect  1-2  147b-d;  ch  xxiii,  sect  2-3 
204b-d;  sect  6-7  205b-206a;  sect  29  211d- 
212a;  sect  32-37  212c-214b;  bk  iii,  ch  vi 
268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect  9-1  i  270d-271d; 
bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  14  316b-d;  sect  16  317a-c; 
sect  25-29  321a-323a  passim;  ch  xii,  sect 
9-12  360d-362c  passim;  ch  xvi,  sect  12  370b- 
371a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  27 
418a-b;  sect  135-142  440a-441c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ii  455b- 
457b;  sect  iv,  div  20-sect  v,  div  38  458a- 
466c  passim;  sect  viii,  div  81  487a;  sect  xi 
497b-503c  passim;  sect  xii,  div  119,  505a-b; 
div  127  507b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  308c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  la-4a,c;  15c-16c;  19a; 
19d-20c  esp  20a;  25b-26b;  27b-33d;  49c-59b 
esp  53b-54b;  86c-88c;  89c-91d;  93c-99a; 
101b-108a,c;  112b-d;  113c-115a;  117b-118a; 
119a-209d  esp  121a-128b,  130b-145c,  153a-c, 
164a-165c,  173b-192d,  200c-209d;  218d-223d; 
227a-235a  esp  231c-232b;  247a-b  /  Fund. 
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261b;  281c- 
282d;  283d-287d  /  Practical  Reason ,  291a- 
293b  esp  292a-c;  296a-d;  307d-314d  esp  307d- 
308b,  309b,  310d-311d;  320c-321b;  327d- 
329a;  335c-337a,c;  337a-c;  349b-353d  /  Intro. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  383c-d;  383b,d-384a,c 
/  Judgement ,  461a-c;  465a-c;  474b-475d; 
500c-d;  506d-507a;  510b-c;  543a;  543d-544a; 
547b-d;  551a-552c;  560c;  562a-564c;  570b- 
572b  esp  570c-57lc;  574b-577a;  579a;  581a- 
b;  584c-d;  588d-589c;  594d  [fn  1];  599d- 
600d;  603a-604b;  606d-607c; 609b-610a; 611c- 
613a,  c 


4  a  to  5 

4b.  Verification  by  experience:  experience  as 
the  ultimate  test  of  truth 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  vii,  395c-396d;  bk  ix, 
421a-422b 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [27obi-i3] 
361c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  7  [3o6a6-i8]  397b-c  /  Soul , 
bk  1,  ch  1  [402bi5-403a2]  631d-632a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  iii,  ch  4 
[666a7~io]  193d  /  Motion  of  Animals ,  ch  i 
[698aio-i5]  233a  /  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk 
iii,  ch  10  [760^7-35]  301d-302a  /  Ethics ,  bk 
ii,  ch  7  [1107^7-32]  352d-353a;  bk  x,  ch  i 
[ii72a34-b7]  426b;  ch  8  [ii79ai7-22]  433d- 
434a  /  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  5  [i264ai-n]  459a-b; 
bk  vii,  ch  1  [i323a33~b7]  527b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [418-426] 
6b;  [693-701]  9c;  bk  iv  [469-521]  50b-51a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  165a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  260c-261c;  285c-288a; 
291b-292d 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  third  day, 
200a-b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  268d  /  Circula¬ 
tion  of  the  Blood ,  322d-323d;  324c-d  /  On 
Animal  Generation,  331b-332a;  357b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  43d-44c  / 
Novum  Organum  105a-195d  esp  bk  ii  137a- 
195d 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11,  2d-3a;  xii,  22c-23a  / 
Discourse ,  part  vi,  66a-b  /  Meditations,  1  75a- 
77c  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  229d-230d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  9  173b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  rule  iii  270b- 
271a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ii,  div  14 
456b;  sect  x  488d-497b  passim,  esp  div  86-91 
488d-491c;  sect  xi,  div  no  501a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  36a-37a  esp36b-c;  77b-d; 
85b-d;  86b-87c;  91d-93b;  114d-115a;  146a- 
149d;  153a-c;  231b-c 

43  Federalist:  number  6,  40a-b;  number  20, 
78a-b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  450b-c;  461c-462a; 

463c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  129a 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  774d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  684a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  647b-648b;  863a-865a; 
879b-880b  [fn  2];  881a-b 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  819d-820a; 
879c 

5.  The  theory  of  experimentation  in  scientific 
method 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  iii,  ch  2  199d- 
200a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  377a-d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  267b,d-268d  / 
On  Animal  Generation ,  331b-337a,c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  34b;  42a-c  / 
Novum  Organum  105a-195d  /  New  Atlantis , 
210d-214d 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


5a  to  5c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61c-62c 

34  Newton:  Optics ,  bk  in,  543a  b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  5d  6c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  part  i,  22c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat ,  175b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  774d 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  6c-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  385a- b;  677b 

54  Freud:  AV/p  Introductory  Lectures ,  879c 

5<*.  Experimental  exploration  and  discovery: 
the  formulation  of  hypotheses 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  pref,  la  b:  bk  i,  6a-7a; 
bk  ii,  27c-d 

28  Galileo:  Two  AVip  Sciences ,  first  day,  131a- 
138b;  157b-171b  passim;  third  day,  203d- 
205b;  207d-208a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  273c-d;  280c-d; 
285c-d  /  Otz  Animal  Generation ,  331b  333d; 
336b-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  16a;  30d- 
31a;  34b;  42a-c/  Novum  Organum ,  pref  105a- 
106d;  bk  i  107a-136a,c  esp  aph  8  107c-d,  aph 
50  111b,  aph  64  114b,  aph  70  116b-117a,  aph 
82  120d-121b,  aph  99-100  127b-c,  apii  121 
132b-d;  bk  ii  137a-195d  passim  /  New  Atlan¬ 
tis  ,  214a-b 

31  Descartes  '.Discourse,  part  vi,  61  d-62c;66a-b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  359a-365b  /  Equilibrium  of 
Liquids  390a-403a  passim,  esp  390a-392a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  hi,  rule  iii-iv  270b- 
271b;  general  schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics , 
bk  1,  379a;  386b-455a;  bk  ii,  457a-470a;  bk 
ii— hi,  496a-516a;  bk  hi,  543a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  46-47  281d-282b;  bk  iv,  ch  xii,  sect 
9-13  360d-362d 

38  Rousseau:  biequality,  329d-330a 
42  Kant:  Intro.  Meta  physic  of  Morals,  387a-b 
45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  2a-b; 
part  1,  10d-12d;  17a-20desp  17a;  22c-24a  esp 
23c;  29d-33b 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat ,  169a;  172a;  175b; 
184a 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  440b, d; 
607a, c;  659a;  774d 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  136b-139a  passim 

53  James:  Psychology ,  126a-127a;  348a-357b  pas¬ 
sim;  385a-b;  677b 

54  Freud:  Instincts ,  412a-b 

5b,  Experimental  verification:  the  testing  of 
hypotheses 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  49a-c 
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  13  173d- 
177a  passim;  bk  iii,  ch  2  199d-200a;  ch  4 
201b-202c;  ch  8  205a-207b 
21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  ii  [46-105] 
108b-d 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day,  148c- 
149c;  166d-168a:  third  day,  203d-205b  esp 
205b;  207d-208c 


481 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  268d  273c  esp 
268d,  273c;  286b  304a, c  esp  286b  c,  295d- 
296a  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  3llc-312c; 
324c  d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  34b  /  No¬ 
vum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  apii  56  164a  168d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61d  62c; 
66a-b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  368b-370a  /  Great  Experi¬ 
ment  382a-389b  passim  /  Weight  of  Air ,  404a- 
405b;  425a-429a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  laws  of  motion,  sciiol, 
19b-22a;  bk  ii,  general  schol  211b  219a; 
prop  40,  schol  239a  246b  /  Optics ,  bk  i, 
392a-396b:  408a-410b;  412a-416b;  453a-455a; 
bk  iii,  543a-b 

34  Huygens:  Light ,  pref,  551b  552a 

35  Locke:  tinman  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  xii, 
sect  13  362c-d 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  2a-b; 
part  1,  32a-33a 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  181b 
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  385b-c; 
440b, d;  467a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  12b-c;  149d-150a 

53  James:  Psychology,  865a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  291d-292a  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures,  815a-b 

5c.  Experimental  measurement:  the  application 
of  mathematics 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vii,  396c-d 
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  24b-26a;  bk  ii,  38b- 
39b;  bk  v,  143a-144a;  166a-167b 
16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  ii,  558b-559b;  567b;  586b-589a; 
bk  iv,  705b-706a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  iv,  85c-89c;  bk  v, 
92a-93b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day, 
136d-137c;  148d-149c;  164a-166c;  third  day, 
207d-208c 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  286c-288c 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  46b-c  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  44-47  175d- 
179c 

34  Newton:  Principles,  laws  of  motion,  schol, 
20a-22a;  bk  i,  prop  69,  schol,  131a;  bk  ii, 
general  schol  211b-219a;  prop  40  and 
schol  237b-246b 

34  Huygens:  Light,  ch  i,  554b-557b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv,  div  27 
460c-d 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i, 
14b-c;  17a-20b;  22d-24a;  30a-32d;  33b-36a; 
41a-44d;  part  iii,  87d-90a;  91a-95a:96b-103b 
45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat ,  175b;  184b-185b 
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  277d-279a; 
316b-318c;  366d-371d;  444a-451a;  465d- 

467a, c;  768d-773d;  778b,d-793c 
53  James:  Psychology,  56a-66a  esp  61b-64a;  126a; 
265a-268b;  341a-344b;  348a-359a 


Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE 


482 

6.  The  man  of  experience  in  practical  affairs 

6a.  Experience  as  indispensable  to  sound  judg¬ 
ment  and  prudence 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  25:3-6;  34:9-11  —  (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  25:5-8;  34:9-12 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ix  [430-605]  61c-63b 

5  Sophocles:  Philoctetes  [50-122]  182d-183b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vii,  238b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  i,  383d 
384a;  bk  vii,  555b 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  hi,  337b-338a;  bk  v, 
366a-c;  bk  vii,  400d-401c;  bk  ix,  421a-422b  / 
Laws ,  bk  i,  645b-652d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [io94b29~io95a 
12]  340a-b;  ch  4  [i095a30-bi2]  340c-d;  bk  hi, 
ch  8  [m6b3-i5]  362d-363a;  bk  vi,  ch  7 
[ii4ibi4-23]  390c-d;  ch  8  [ii42ai2-i9]  391b; 
ch  11  392c-393b  passim;  bk  x,  ch  9  [n8ob 
i3-n8ibi2]  435b-436a,c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  ii, 
ch  12  [i389&3]-ch  14  [i39obn]  636b-638a 
passim 

10  Hippocrates:  Articulations ,  par  10,  94d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  8,  114a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Fabius -Pericles,  154a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  1,  rep  2  226c-227c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
90-93  12b-13a  /  Knight's  Tale  [2438-2452] 
200a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  53c-54a;  60c-d; 
66d-67b;  67d-68a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  24a-c;  55d-62a  esp  61a- 
62a;  63d-75a  esp  66b-69d;  176c-180b;  450d- 
451a;  520b-522d 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii, 
sc  11  [163-173]  115b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  PARTii,340b-343a; 
345a-348c;  352b-356d;  360d-364a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  5b-6a;  79c- 
80a;  86b-89b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  i,  43a;  44a-c; 
part  hi,  50b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  30-31 
418c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  v,  div  36, 
465a-d  [fn  1] ;  465c;  sect  viii,  div  65,  479d- 
480a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  99d-100a;  274c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  305d  /  Intro.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals ,  387b 

43  Federalist:  number  2,  32b-d;  number  72, 
217d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  287bc  /  Utilitarianism,  448d; 
450a-c;  456a-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  106d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  592d-593a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  211a-213a;  bk 
vii,  277a-278a;  bk  x,  424a-b;  bk  xii,  559d; 
bk  xiii,  584c-585b 

53  James:  Psychology,  13a-15a;  886b-888a 


6  to  7 

6b.  The  role  of  experience  in  politics:  the  les¬ 
sons  of  history 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  v,  178a-180a;  bk  vii, 
225cd 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  BKi,354b-c; 
bk  iv,  451a-b 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  288b-289b  /  Republic,  bk  vii, 
400d-401b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [1 094^7-1 095s 
11]  340a;  bk  vi,  ch  8  390d-391c;  bk  x,  ch  9 
[n8obi3-n8ib24]  435b-436a,c  /  Politics,  bk  ii, 
ch  5  [i264ai— 1 1]  459a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  10  [1329s 
4°-b35]  533d'534b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  4 
[I359bl9~I3^°a37]  599d-600d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [441-493]  115a-116b;  bk 
xi  [243-295]  334b-336a 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  121  a- 122b/  Fabius  141a- 
154a, c  /  Timoleon,  195a-b  /  Flamininus,  302d- 
303a  /  Alexander,  540b,d-549c  /  Demosthenes, 
69 2d- 695 d  /  Demetrius,  726a-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  71d-72b  /  Histories , 
bk  1,  189a-190b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince  la-37d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  67d-68a;  part  ii, 
112c-d;  128c-129b;  part  hi,  165a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  24a-25c;  68b-69d;  198c- 
200d;  450d-451a;  455d-456c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 4c-7c;85a-c; 
94b-d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  viii,  sect  107 
49b-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  v,  div  36, 
465a-d  [fn  1] ;  465c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  411c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  284a-c;  449a;  632a- 
634a, c  passim 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  13d;  194b;  326d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  266d 
[fn  2] 

43  Federalist:  number  6,  39a;  number  28, 
96c;  number  38,  121b-122b;  number  53, 
168b-169b;  number  72,  217d-218a;  number 
85,  258d-259a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  320a-323a,c  passim  /  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government,  357b  d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  155b-d; 
part  iv,  367d-368b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  7b 

7.  Mystical  or  religious  experience:  experience 
of  the  supernatural 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  15;  17:1-19:23;  22:1- 
18;  26:1-6;  28:10-22;  32:34-32;  46:1-4  / 
Exodus,  3-4;  7-1 1 ;  19;  24  /  Numbers,  12; 
22:22-35  /  Joshua,  3:7-8;  5:13-6:5— (D)  Josue, 
3:7-8;  5:13-6:5  /  Judges,  6:11-40;  13  f  I  Samuel, 
3;  16— (D)  I  Kings,  3;  16  /  /  Kings,  3:5-15; 
9:1-9;  19 —(D)  III  Kings,  3:5-15;  9:1-9;  19  / 
I  Chronicles,  17 — ( D )  I  Par alipomenon,  17  /Job, 
38:1-42:8  /  Isaiah,  6 — ( D )  Isaias ,  6  /  Jeremiah , 
1 —(D)  Jeremias,  1  /  Ezekiel,  1-4  esp  1;  8-12 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1  to  8 

esp  io ;  40-48  passim — (D)  Ezechiel,  1-4  esp 
1;  8-12  esp  10;  40-48  passim  /  Daniel ,  7-12  / 
Ho  sea,  1-3 — ( D )  Osee ,  1-3  /  Amos,  7-8  / 
Zechariah ,  1-6 — (D)  Zacharias ,  1-6 

New  Testament:  Matthew y  1:20-25;  3:16-17; 
17:1-9;  28  /  Lu^e,  1  :i— 38 ;  2:8-15,25-35  / 
2:2-4;  7 :55~ 56;  9:3-8;  10;  11:5-10;  12:7-11; 
16:9;  18:9-11;  22:6-11;  23:11;  26:13-18; 

27:21-25— (D)  2:2-4;  7:55;  9:3-8;  10; 

11:5-10;  12:7-11;  16:9;  18:9-11;  22:6-11; 

23:11;  26:13-18;  27:21-25  /  //  Corinthians , 
12:1-9  /  Revelation— (D)  Apocalypse 

4  Homer:  Odyssey ,  bk  xi  243a~249d 

5  Aeschylus  :  Prometheus  Bound  [640-886]  46d- 
49c 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [1500-1666] 
127d-129b 

5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [  1  —4 1  ] 
411a-b  /  Bacchantes  340a-352a,c 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [250-365]  490d-492c 
/  Frog.?  564a-582a,c  /  Plutus  [620-747]  636d- 
637d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vii,  218d-220a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  vi  211a-235a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  4  23a-b  / 
Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  17  226a-c;  tr  v,  ch 
10-12  233b-234d;  tr  viii,  ch  10-12  244c-246a 
/  S/jcM  Ennead ,  tr  vii,  ch  34-36  338b-339d; 
tr  ix,  ch  4  356a-b;  ch  8-1  i  358b-360d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  viii,  par  28-30 
60d-61c;  bk  ix,  par  23-25  68a-c;  bk  x,  par  65 
87d-88a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  ix,  ch  16  294a- 
295a;  bk  x,  ch  13  307b-c;  bk  xvi,  ch  6  426c- 
427a  esp  426d;  bk  xxii,  ch  29  614b-616d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  12, 
a  9  58b-59a;  a  ii,  rep  2  59d-60d;  part  i-ii, 
q  28,  a  3,  ans  742a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  112, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  1,5  359c-360c;  part  iii,  q  9, 
a  2  764c-765a;  q  io  767b-772a;  part  iii  suppl, 
q  92,  a  1  1025c-1032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy  esp  paradise,  xxx- 
xxxiii  151d-157d 

22  Chaucer:  Prioress's  Tale  [13,418-620]  392a- 
395b  esp  [13,577-592]  394b-395a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  160b;  part  iii, 
165d-166a;  174d-176d;  183d-185c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  i  29a-31c; 
sc  11  [160-258]  33b-34b;  sc  iv-v  35d-39a  / 
Macbeth ,  act  i,  sc  iii  [1-88]  285b-286b;  act 
iv,  sc  1  300b-302b  /  Tempest  524a-548d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  95d-96c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  277-288  222b-224b 


483 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81a;  189b  191a; 
294d  296b;  605b  d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  476b  477a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  320c  321b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [354-514]  1  la-1 4b ; 
[1238-1321]  30b  32b;  [2337-2604]  56b  63b; 
[3835-4398]  93b  108b;  part  ii  [7005-8487] 
171b  206b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  iii,  156d;  162b- 
164a, c;  bk  v,  219b  220a;  bk  xi,  525c-526b; 
bk  xv,  631a-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b- 
137c;  bk  vii,  189a-191a,c 

53  James:  Psychology,  847b-848a 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  688a-b 

8.  Variety  of  experience  as  an  ideal  of  human 
life 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  34:9-11  —  (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiastic  us ,  34:9-12 

4  Homer:  Odyssey  183a-322d  esp  bk  i  [i-io] 
183a 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii,  409b-411d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  6,  lllc-112a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  viii,  sect  i  285a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  54-57 
85a-86a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxvi  [49-142] 
38c-39c 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5583-6410] 
256a-269b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  66b-69d;  74b-75a;  107a- 
112d;  458b-462c;  471a-472a;  478c-479c 

26  Shakespeare:  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  act 
1,  sc  iii  [1-44]  232c-233a  /  1st  Henry  IV  434a- 
466d  /  2nd  Henry  IV  467a-502d  /  Henry  V, 
act  1,  sc  1  [22-66]  533b-c  /  As  You  Lil$e  It, 
act  iv,  sc  1  [21-41]  617b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43a;  44a-c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  34-38  177a-b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
65,  479d-480a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  164a-b;  274c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  88d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  293b-302c  passim,  esp  294c- 
295a;  320a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  302c-303b 

47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part  i  [1765-1775]  42b, 
[32i7-325°]  79a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  37c- 
38a 

53  James:  Psychology,  736b-737a 


Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE 


484 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  discussion  of  the  faculties  or  the  acts  of  the  mind  which  are  related  to  experience,  see 
Idea  ic,  2b,  2e-2g;  Induction  ia,  2;  Judgment  8c;  Knowledge  6b(i),  6c(4);  Memory 
and  Imagination  ia,  3c,  5a~5b,  6c(i)-6c(2);  Mind  ia(i)-ia(2),  ie(i);  Reasoning  ic,  4c, 
5b(3);  Sense  ia,  ic-id,  3c(5),  4b,  5a;  Universal  and  Particular  4c. 

The  consideration  of  the  empirical  foundations  or  sources  of  science  and  art,  see  Art  5; 
Dialectic  2a(i);  Medicine  2a;  Metaphysics  2c;  Philosophy  3a;  Physics  2;  Science 
ib,  ic,  5a;  Sense  5b~5c. 

The  discussion  of  experience  in  relation  to  the  conditions  or  limits  of  human  knowledge, 
see  Induction  2;  Knowledge  5a-5a(6);  Memory  and  Imagination  6d;  Metaphysics 
4b;  Mind  5b. 

Other  treatments  of  the  empirical  verification  of  hypotheses  or  theories,  ^Hypothesis  4d; 
Physics  4c;  Science  5e;  Sense  5c;  Truth  ia. 

Other  discussions  of  the  role  of  experimentation  in  scientific  inquiry,  see  Induction  5;  Logic 
4b;  Mechanics  2a;  Physics  4-^;  Science  5a. 

Experience  as  a  factor  in  education,  see  Education  5f. 

The  treatment  of  religious  or  mystical  experience  or  of  related  matters,  see  God  60(3); 
Prophecy  ib;  Religion  ib(2)-ib(3);  Sign  and  Symbol  5b. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boohs  of  the  Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Augustine.  De  Genesi  ad  Litter  am,  bk  xii 
Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy,  part  iii,  4 
Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature 
Kant.  Prolegomena  to  Any  Future  Metaphysic 
Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind 

- .  Science  of  Logic,  vol  i,  bk  ii,  sect  ii;  sect  iii, 

ch  1;  vol  11,  sect  iii,  ch  3 
J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic,  bk  iii,  ch  7-8 
W.  James.  Essays  in  Radical  Empiricism 

- .  The  Varieties  of  Religious  Experience 

- .  Pragmatism 

- .  The  Meaning  of  Truth 

II. 

R.  Bacon.  Opus  Majus ,  part  vi 

Duns  Scotus.  Oxford  Commentary ,  bk  i,  dist  3,  q  4 

(9) 

Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing 

Voltaire.  The  Ignorant  Philosopher ,  ch  7 
Wordsworth.  The  Prelude 


J.  Mill.  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Human 
Mind 

Whewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences , 
vol  1,  bk  1,  ch  5,  7 
Tennyson.  Ulysses 
Emerson.  “Experience,”  in  Essays ,  11 
Bernard.  Introduction  to  Experimental  Medicine 
Clifford.  “On  the  Nature  of  Things-In-Them- 
selves,”  in  vol  ii,  Lectures  and  Essays 
Avenarius.  Kriti\  der  reinen  Erfahrung 
Hodgson.  The  Metaphysic  of  Experience 
Royce.  The  World  and  the  Individual ,  series  i  (6) 
H.  James.  The  Beast  in  the  Jungle 
Mach.  The  Analysis  of  Sensations 

- .  Er\enntnis  und  Irrtum 

Peguy.  Basic  Verities  (Innocence  and  Experience) 

- .  Men  and  Saints  (The  Holy  Innocents) 

Hugel.  The  Mystical  Element  of  Religion 
Lenin.  Materialism  and  Empiriocriticism 
Bradley.  Appearance  and  Reality,  bk  i,  ch  ii 

- .  Essays  on  Truth  and  Reality,  ch  6 

Broad.  Perception,  Physics,  and  Reality,  ch  3 
Proust.  Remembrance  of  Things  Past 


Chapter  25:  EXPERIENCE 


I  Joyce.  Ulysses 

Santayana.  Scepticism  and  Animal  Faith ,  ch  i  5 
Bridgman.  The  Logic  of  Modern  Physics 
Hook.  The  Metaphysics  of  Pragmatism 
J.  S.  Haldane.  The  Sciences  and  Philosophy ,  lect  xvi 
C.  I.  Lewis.  Mind  and  the  World  Order 
Whitehead.  Science  and  the  Modern  World 

- - .  Process  and  Reality y  part  iii 

Husserl.  Ideas:  General  Introduction  to  Pure  Phe¬ 
nomenology 

- .  Meditations  Cartesiennes 

Bergson.  Time  and  Free  Will 

- .  Two  Sources  of  Morality  and  Religion ,  ch  4 

Gilby.  Poetic  Experience 
Fisher.  The  Design  of  Experiments 


485 

Dewey.  “Experienccand  Objective  Idealism,”  ‘‘The 
Postulate  of  Immediate  Empiricism,”  ‘“Con¬ 
sciousness*  and  Experience,”  in  The  Influence  of 
Darwin  on  Philosophy 

- .  Reconstruction  in  Philosophy ,  ch  4 

- .  Experience  and  Nature ,  ch  1,9 

- .  Experience  and  Education ,  cn  2-3,  8 

Blanshard.  The  Nature  of  Thought 
Maritain.  The  Degrees  of  Knowledge ,  cii  1,5 

- .  Ransoming  the  Time ,  ch  10 

B.  Russell.  The  Problems  of  Philosophy,  ch  i 

- .  An  Inquiry  into  Meaning  and  Truth ,  cm  8-1  i, 

16-18,  21-23 

- .  Human  Knowledge ,  Its  Scope  and  Limits , 

PART  III,  CII  1-5;  PART  VI,  CH  4,  10 


I 


Chapter  2.6:  FAMILY 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  human  family,  according  to  Rousseau, 
is  “the  most  ancient  of  all  societies  and  the 
only  one  that  is  natural.”  On  the  naturalness 
of  the  family  there  seems  to  be  general  agree¬ 
ment  in  the  great  books,  although  not  all  would 
claim,  like  Rousseau,  that  it  is  the  only  natural 
society.  The  state  is  sometimes  also  regarded  as 
a  natural  community,  but  its  naturalness  is  not 
as  obvious  and  has  often  been  disputed. 

The  word  “natural”  applied  to  a  community 
or  association  of  men  can  mean  either  that  men 
instinctively  associate  with  one  another  as  do  bees 
and  buffaloes;  or  that  the  association  in  ques¬ 
tion,  while  voluntary  and  to  that  extent  con¬ 
ventional,  is  also  necessary  for  human  welfare. 
It  is  in  this  sense  of  necessity  or  need  that  Rous¬ 
seau  speaks  of  family  ties  as  natural.  “The  chil¬ 
dren  remain  attached  to  the  father  only  so  long 
as  they  need  him  for  their  preservation,”  he 
writes.  “As  soon  as  this  need  ceases,  the  natural 
bond  is  dissolved.”  If  after  that  “they  remain 
united,  they  continue  so  no  longer  naturally, 
but  voluntarily;  and  the  family  itself  is  then 
maintained  only  by  convention.” 

Locke  appears  to  attribute  the  existence  of 
the  human  family  to  the  same  sort  of  instinc¬ 
tive  determination  which  establishes  familial 
ties  among  other  animals,  though  he  recognizes 
that  the  protracted  infancy  of  human  offspring 
make  “the  conjugal  bonds  .  .  .  more  firm  and 
lasting  in  man  than  the  other  species  of  ani¬ 
mals.”  Since  with  other  animals  as  well  as  in 
the  human  species,  “the  end  of  conjunction 
between  male  and  female  [is]  not  barely  pro¬ 
creation,  but  the  continuation  of  the  species,” 
it  ought  to  last,  in  Locke’s  opinion,  “even  after 
procreation,  so  long  as  is  necessary  to  the  nour¬ 
ishment  and  support  of  the  young  ones,  who 
are  to  be  sustained  by  those  who  got  them  till 
they  are  able  to  shift  and  support  for  them¬ 
selves.  This  rule,”  he  adds,  “which  the  infinite 


wise  Maker  hath  set  to  the  works  of  His  hands, 
we  find  the  inferior  creatures  steadily  obey.” 

Yet  Locke  does  not  reduce  the  association  of 
father,  mother,  and  children  entirely  to  a  di¬ 
vinely  implanted  instinct  for  the  perpetuation 
of  the  species.  “Conjugal  society,”  he  writes, 
“is  made  by  a  voluntary  compact  between  man 
and  woman,  and  though  it  consists  chiefly  in 
such  a  communion  and  right  in  one  another’s 
bodies  as  is  necessary  to  its  chief  end,  procrea¬ 
tion,  yet  it  draws  with  it  mutual  support  and 
assistance,  and  a  communion  of  interests,  too.” 

If  the  human  family  were  entirely  an  instinc¬ 
tively  formed  society,  we  should  expect  to  find 
the  pattern  or  structure  of  the  domestic  com¬ 
munity  the  same  at  all  times  and  everywhere. 
But  since  the  time  of  Herodotus,  historians  and, 
later,  anthropologists  have  observed  the  great 
diversity  in  the  institutions  of  the  family  in 
different  tribes  or  cultures,  or  even  at  different 
times  in  the  same  culture.  From  his  own  travels 
among  different  peoples,  Herodotus  reports  a 
wide  variety  of  customs  with  respect  to  mar¬ 
riage  and  the  family.  From  the  travels  of  other 
men,  Montaigne  culls  a  similar  collection  of 
stories  about  the  diversity  of  the  mores  with 
respect  to  sex,  especially  in  relation  to  the 
rules  or  customs  which  hedge  the  community 
of  man  and  wife. 

Such  facts  raise  the  question  whether  the 
pattern  of  monogamy  pictured  by  Locke  repre¬ 
sents  anything  more  than  one  type  of  human 
family— the  type  which  predominates  in  west¬ 
ern  civilization  or,  even  more  narrowly,  in 
Christendom.  Marx,  for  instance,  holds  that 
the  structure  of  the  family  depends  on  the 
character  of  its  “economical  foundation,”  and 
insists  that  “it  is  of  course  just  as  absurd  to  hold 
theTeutonic-Christian  form  of  the  family  to  be 
absolute  and  final  as  it  would  be  to  apply  that 
character  to  the  ancient  Roman,  the  ancient 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


487 


Greek,  or  the  Eastern  forms  which,  moreover, 
taken  together  form  a  series  in  historic  develop¬ 
ment. ” 

Though  the  observation  of  the  various  forms 
which  the  human  family  takes  has  led  some 
writers  to  deny  the  naturalness  of  the  family — 
at  least  so  far  as  its  “naturalness’’  would  mean 
a  purely  instinctive  formation — it  has  seldom 
been  disputed  that  the  family  fulfills  a  natural 
human  need.  Conventional  in  structure,  the 
family  remains  natural  as  a  means  indispensable 
to  an  end  which  all  men  naturally  desire.  “There 
must  be  a  union  of  those  who  cannot  exist  with¬ 
out  each  other,”  Aristotle  writes,  “namely,  of 
male  and  female,  that  the  race  may  continue”; 
and  he  goes  on  to  say  that  this  union  is  formed 
“not  of  deliberate  purpose,  but  because,  in 
common  with  other  animals  and  with  plants, 
mankind  have  a  natural  desire  to  leave  behind 
them  an  image  of  themselves.” 

The  human  infant,  as  Locke  observes,  re¬ 
quires  years  of  care  in  order  to  survive.  If  the 
family  did  not  exist  as  a  relatively  stable  organi¬ 
zation  to  serve  this  purpose,  some  other  social 
agency  would  have  to  provide  sustained  care 
for  children.  But  wherever  we  find  any  other 
social  units,  such  as  tribes  or  cities,  there  we 
also  find  some  form  of  the  family  in  existence, 
not  only  performing  the  function  of  rearing 
children,  but  also  being  the  primitive  social 
group  out  of  which  all  larger  groupings  seem  to 
grow  or  to  be  formed.  Aristotle,  for  example, 
describes  the  village  or  tribe  as  growing  out  of 
an  association  of  families,  just  as  later  the  city 
or  state  comes  from  a  union  of  villages. 

We  have  seen  that  the  naturalness  of  the 
family — as  answering  a  natural  need — is  not 
incompatible  with  its  also  being  a  product  of 
custom  or  convention.  The  facts  reported  by 
Herodotus,  Montaigne,  and  Darwin,  which 
show  the  variability  of  families  in  size  and 
membership,  in  form  and  government,  do  not 
exclude,  but  on  the  contrary  emphasize,  the 
further  fact  that  wherever  men  live  together 
at  all,  they  also  live  in  families. 

Whether  or  not  the  political  community  is 
also  a  natural  society,  and  if  so,  whether  it  is 
natural  in  the  same  way  as  the  family,  are  ques¬ 
tions  reserved  for  the  chapter  on  State.  But 
it  should  be  noted  here  that  for  some  writers, 
for  Aristotle  particularly  and  to  a  lesser  extent 


for  Locke,  the  naturalness  of  the  family  not 
only  points  to  a  natural  development  of  the 
state,  but  also  helps  to  explain  how,  in  the 
transition  from  the  family  to  the  state,  paternal 
government  gives  rise  to  royal  rule  or  absolute 
monarchy.  Even  Rousseau,  who  thinks  that  the 
family  is  the  only  natural  society,  finds,  in  the 
correspondence  between  a  political  ruler  and  a 
father,  reason  for  saying  that  “the  family  .  .  . 
may  be  called  the  first  model  of  political  so¬ 
cieties.” 

In  western  civilization,  a  family  normally 
consists  of  a  husband  and  wife  and  their  off¬ 
spring.  If  the  procreation  and  rearing  of  off¬ 
spring  is  the  function,  or  even  a  function,  which 
the  family  naturally  exists  to  perform,  then  a 
childless  family  cannot  be  considered  normal. 
Hegel  suggests  another  reason  for  offspring.  He 
sees  in  children  the  bond  of  union  which  makes 
the  family  a  community. 

“The  relation  of  love  between  husband  and 
wife,”  he  writes,  “is  in  itself  not  objective,  be¬ 
cause  even  if  their  feeling  is  their  substantial 
unity,  still  this  unity  has  no  objectivity.  Such 
an  objectivity  parents  first  acquire  in  their 
children,  in  whom  they  can  see  objectified  the 
entirety  of  their  union.  In  the  child,  a  mother 
loves  its  father  and  he  its  mother.  Both  have 
their  love  objectified  for  them  in  the  child. 
While  in  their  goods  their  unity  is  embodied 
only  in  an  external  thing,  in  their  children  it  is 
embodied  in  a  spiritual  one  in  which  the  par¬ 
ents  are  loved  and  which  they  love.” 

Until  recent  times  when  it  has  been  affected 
by  urban,  industrial  conditions,  the  family 
tended  to  be  a  much  larger  unit,  not  only  with 
regard  to  the  number  of  children,  but  also  with 
respect  to  other  members  and  relationships. 
The  household  included  servants,  if  not  slaves; 
it  included  blood-relatives  in  various  degrees  of 
consanguinity;  its  range  extended  over  three  or 
even  four  generations.  Sancho  Panza’s  wife,  for 
instance,  pictures  the  ideal  marriage  for  her 
daughter  as  one  in  which  “we  shall  have  her 
always  under  our  eyes,  and  be  all  one  family, 
parents  and  children,  grandchildren  and  sons- 
in-law,  and  the  peace  and  blessing  of  God  will 
dwell  among  us.”  Even  though  they  belong  to 
the  nineteenth  century,  the  families  in  War 
and  Peace  indicate  how  different  is  the  domestic 


488 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


establishment  under  agrarian  and  semi-feudal 
conditions. 

But  even  when  it  comprised  a  larger  and 
more  varied  membership,  the  family  differed 
from  other  social  units,  such  as  tribe  or  state, 
in  both  size  and  function.  Its  membership, 
determined  by  consanguinity,  was  usually  more 
restricted  than  that  of  other  groups,  although 
blood-relationships,  often  more  remote,  may 
also  operate  to  limit  the  membership  of  the 
tribe  or  the  state.  Its  function,  according  to 
Aristotle,  at  least  in  origin,  was  to  “supply 
men’s  everyday  wants,”  whereas  the  state  went 
beyond  this  in  aiming  at  other  conditions  “of 
a  good  life.” 

In  an  agricultural  society  of  the  sort  we  find 
among  the  ancients,  the  household  rather  than 
the  city  is  occupied  with  the  problems  of 
wealth.  In  addition  to  the  breeding  and  rear¬ 
ing  of  children,  and  probably  because  of  this  in 
part,  the  family  as  a  unit  seems  to  have  been 
concerned  with  the  means  of  subsistence,  on  the 
side  of  both  production  and  consumption.  Its 
members  shared  in  a  division  of  labor  and  in  a 
division  of  the  fruits  thereof. 

Apart  from  those  industries  manned  solely 
by  slave  labor  in  the  service  of  the  state,  the 
production  of  goods  largely  depended  on  the 
industry  of  the  family.  In  modern  times  this 
system  of  production  came  to  be  called  the 
“domestic”  as  opposed  to  the  “factory”  system. 
It  seems  to  persist  even  after  the  industrial 
revolution.  But,  according  to  Marx,  “this  mod¬ 
ern  so-called  domestic  industry  has  nothing, 
except  the  name,  in  common  with  the  old- 
fashioned  domestic  industry,  the  existence  of 
which  presupposes  independent  urban  handi¬ 
crafts,  independent  peasant  farming,  and  above 
all,  a  dwelling  house  for  the  laborer  and  his 
family.” 

In  effect,  the  industrial  revolution  produced 
an  economy  in  which  not  only  agriculture  but 
the  family  ceased  to  be  central.  The  problem 
shifts  from  the  wealth  of  families  to  the  wealth 
of  nations,  even  as  production  shifts  from  the 
family  to  the  factory.  “Modern  industry,”  ac¬ 
cording  to  Marx,  “by  assigning  an  important 
part  in  the  process  of  production,  outside  the 
domestic  sphere,  to  women,  to  young  persons, 
and  to  children  of  both  sexes,  creates  a  new 
economical  foundation.” 


The  family  was  for  centuries  what  the  fac- 
tory  and  the  storehouse  have  only  recently  be- 
come  in  an  era  of  industrialism.  For  the  an¬ 
cients,  the  problems  of  wealth — its  acquisition,  ^ 
accumulation,  and  use — were  domestic,  not  B' 
political.  “The  so-called  art  of  getting  wealth,”  an 
Aristotle  writes,  is  “according  to  some  ...  in 
identical  with  household  management,  accord-  b 
ing  to  others,  a  principal  part  of  it.”  In  his  own  * 
judgment,  “property  is  a  part  of  the  house¬ 
hold,  and  the  art  of  acquiring  property  is  a  p 
part  of  the  art  of  managing  the  household” —  fl 

but  a  part  only ,  because  the  household  includes  £ 
human  beings  as  well  as  property,  and  is  con-  < 
cerned  with  the  government  of  persons  as  well  '< 
as  the  management  of  things. 

The  foregoing  throws  light  on  the  extraor¬ 
dinary  shift  in  the  meaning  of  the  word  “eco¬ 
nomics”  from  ancient  to  modern  times.  In  the 
significance  of  their  Greek  roots,  the  word 
“polity”  signifies  a  state,  the  word  “economy” 
a  family;  and  as  “politics”  referred  to  the  art  of 
governing  the  political  community,  so  “eco¬ 
nomics”  referred  to  the  art  of  governing  the 
domestic  community.  Only  in  part  was  it  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  art  of  getting  wealth.  As  the 
chapter  on  Wealth  indicates,  Rousseau  tries  to 
preserve  the  broader  meaning  when  he  uses  the 
phrase  “political  economy”  for  the  general 
problems  of  government;  but  for  the  most  part 
in  modern  usage  “economics”  refers  to  a  science 
or  art  concerned  with  wealth,  and  it  is  “politi¬ 
cal”  in  the  sense  that  the  management  of 
wealth,  and  of  men  with  respect  to  wealth,  has 
become  the  problem  of  the  state  rather  than 
the  family.  Not  only  has  the  industrial  economy 
become  more  and  more  a  political  affair,  but 
the  character  of  the  family  as  a  social  institution 
has  also  changed  with  its  altered  economic 
status  and  function. 

The  chief  question  about  the  family  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  state  has  been,  in  ancient  as  well  as 
in  modern  times,  whether  the  family  has  natu¬ 
ral  rights  which  the  state  cannot  justly  invade 
or  transgress. 

The  proposal  in  Plato’s  Republic — “that  the 
wives  of  our  guardians  are  to  be  common,  and 
their  children  are  to  be  common,  and  no  parent 
is  to  know  his  own  child,  nor  any  child  his 
parent”— was  as  radical  in  the  fifth  century 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


489 


b.c.  as  its  counterpart  would  he  today.  When 
Socrates  proposes  this,  Glaucon  suggests  that 
“the  possibility  as  well  as  the  utility  of  such  a 
law”  may  be  subject  to  “a  good  many  doubts.” 
But  Socrates  does  not  think  that  “there  can  be 
any  dispute  about  the  very  great  utility  of  hav¬ 
ing  wives  and  children  in  common;  the  possi¬ 
bility,”  he  adds,  “is  quite  another  matter,  and 
will  be  very  much  disputed.” 

Aristotle  questions  both  the  desirability  and 
possibility.  “The  premise  from  which  the  argu¬ 
ment  of  Socrates  proceeds,”  he  says,  is  “‘the 
greater  the  unity  of  the  state  the  better.’  ”  He 
denies  this  premise.  “Is  it  not  obvious,”  he 
asks,  “that  a  state  may  at  length  attain  such  a 
degree  of  unity  as  to  be  no  longer  a  state? — 
since  the  nature  of  a  state  is  to  be  a  plurality, 
and  in  tending  to  a  greater  unity,  from  being  a 
state,  it  becomes  a  family,  and  from  being  a 
family,  an  individual.”  Hence  “we  ought  not 
to  attain  this  greatest  unity  even  if  we  could, 
for  it  would  be  the  destruction  of  the  state.” 
In  addition,  “the  scheme,  taken  literally,  is  im¬ 
practicable.” 

It  is  significant  that  Aristotle’s  main  argu¬ 
ment  against  Plato’s  “communism”  (which  in¬ 
cludes  the  community  of  property  as  well  as 
the  community  of  women  and  children)  is 
based  upon  the  nature  of  the  state  rather  than 
on  the  rights  of  the  family.  It  seems  to  have  been 
a  prevalent  view  in  antiquity,  at  least  among 
philosophers,  that  the  children  should  be  “re¬ 
garded  as  belonging  to  the  state  rather  than  to 
their  parents.”  Antigone’s  example  shows,  how¬ 
ever,  that  this  view  was  by  no  means  without 
exception.  Her  defiance  of  Creon,  based  on 
“the  unwritten  and  unfailing  statutes  of 
heaven,”  is  also  undertaken  for  “the  majesty  of 
kindred  blood.”  In  this  sense,  it  constitutes  an 
affirmation  of  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  fam- 

ily- 

In  the  Christian  tradition  the  rights  of  the 
family  as  against  the  state  are  also  defended  by 
reference  to  divine  law.  The  point  is  not  that 
the  state  is  less  a  natural  community  than  the 
family  in  the  eyes  of  a  theologian  like  Aquinas; 
but  in  addition  to  having  a  certain  priority  in 
the  order  of  nature,  the  family,  more  directly 
than  the  state,  is  of  divine  origin.  Not  only  is  it 
founded  on  the  sacrament  of  matrimony,  but 
the  express  commandments  of  God  dictate  the 


duties  of  care  and  obedience  which  bind  its 
members  together.  For  the  state  to  interfere  in 
those  relationships  between  parents  and  chil¬ 
dren  or  between  husband  and  wife  which  fall 
under  the  regulation  of  divine  law  would  be  to 
exceed  its  authority,  and  hence  to  act  without 
right  and  in  violation  of  rights  founded  upon  a 
higher  authority. 

In  the  Christian  tradition  philosophers  like 
Hobbes  and  Kant  state  the  rights  of  the  family 
in  terms  of  natural  law  or  defend  them  as  natu¬ 
ral  rights.  “Because  the  first  instruction  of  chil¬ 
dren,”  writes  Hobbes,  “depends  on  the  care  of 
their  parents,  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  be 
obedient  to  them  while  they  are  under  their 
tuition.  .  .  .  Originally  the  father  of  every  man 
was  also  his  sovereign  lord,  with  power  over 
him  of  life  and  death.”  When  the  fathers  of 
families  relinquished  such  absolute  power  in 
order  to  form  a  commonwealth  or  state,  they 
did  not  lose,  nor  did  they  have  to  give  up,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Hobbes,  all  control  of  their  children. 
“Nor  would  there  be  any  reason,”  he  goes  on, 
“why  any  man  should  desire  to  have  children, 
or  take  the  care  to  nourish  and  instruct  them, 
if  they  were  afterwards  to  have  no  other  benefit 
from  them  than  from  other  men.  And  this,”  he 
says,  “accords  with  the  Fifth  Commandment.” 

In  the  section  of  his  Science  of  Right  devoted 
to  the  “rights  of  the  family  as  a  domestic  so¬ 
ciety,”  Kant  argues  that  “from  the  fact  of  pro¬ 
creation  there  follows  the  duty  of  preserving 
and  rearing  children.”  From  this  duty  he  de¬ 
rives  “the  right  of  parents  to  the  management 
and  training  of  the  child,  so  long  as  it  is  itself 
incapable  of  making  proper  use  of  its  body  as  an 
organism,  and  of  its  mind  as  an  understanding. 
This  includes  its  nourishment  and  the  care  of 
its  education.”  It  also  “includes,  in  general,  the 
function  of  forming  and  developing  it  practi¬ 
cally,  that  it  may  be  able  in  the  future  to  main¬ 
tain  and  advance  itself,  and  also  its  moral  cul¬ 
ture  and  development,  the  guilt  of  neglecting 
it  falling  upon  the  parents.” 

As  is  evident  from  Hobbes  and  Kant,  the 
rights  of  the  family  can  be  vindicated  without 
denying  that  the  family,  like  the  individual, 
owes  obedience  to  the  state.  In  modern  terms, 
at  least,  the  problem  is  partly  stated  by  the 
question,  To  what  extent  can  parents  justly 
claim  exemption  from  political  interference  in 


490 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


the  control  of  their  own  children?  But  this  is 
only  part  of  the  problem.  It  must  also  be  asked 
whether,  in  addition  to  regulating  the  family 
for  the  general  welfare  of  the  whole  communi¬ 
ty,  the  state  is  also  entitled  to  interfere  in  the 
affairs  of  the  household  in  order  to  protect 
children  from  parental  mismanagement  or  neg¬ 
lect.  Both  questions  call  for  a  consideration  of 
the  form  and  principles  of  domestic  govern¬ 
ment. 

The  kinds  of  rule  and  the  relation  between 
ruler  and  ruled  in  the  domestic  community 
have  a  profound  bearing  on  the  theory  of 
government  in  the  larger  community  of  the 
state.  Many  of  the  chapters  on  the  forms  of 
government— especially  Constitution,  Mon¬ 
archy,  and  Tyranny — indicate  that  the  great 
books  of  political  theory,  from  Plato  and  Aris¬ 
totle  to  Locke  and  Rousseau,  derive  critical 
points  from  the  comparison  of  domestic  and 
political  government. 

We  shall  pass  over  the  master-slave  relation¬ 
ship,  both  because  that  is  considered  in  the 
chapter  on  Slavery,  and  because  not  all  house¬ 
holds  include  human  chattel.  Omitting  this, 
two  fundamental  relationships  which  domestic 
government  involves  remain  to  be  examined: 
the  relation  of  husband  and  wife,  and  of 
parents  and  children. 

With  regard  to  the  first,  there  are  questions  of 
equality  and  administrative  supremacy.  Even 
when  the  wife  is  regarded  as  the  complete 
equal  of  her  husband,  the  administrative  ques¬ 
tion  remains,  for  there  must  either  be  a  division 
of  authority,  or  unanimity  must  prevail,  or  one 
— either  the  husband  or  the  wife — must  have 
the  last  word  when  disagreement  must  be  over¬ 
come  to  get  any  practical  matter  decided.  So 
far  as  husband  and  wife  are  concerned,  should 
the  family  be  an  absolute  monarchy,  or  a  kind 
of  constitutional  government  ? 

Both  an  ancient  and  a  modern  writer  appear 
to  answer  this  question  in  the  same  way.  “A 
husband  and  father,”  Aristotle  says,  “rules  over 
wife  and  children,  both  free,  but  the  rule  dif¬ 
fers,  the  rule  over  his  children  being  a  royal, 
over  his  wife  a  constitutional  rule.”  Yet  the  re¬ 
lation  between  husband  and  wife,  in  Aristotle’s 
view,  is  not  perfectly  constitutional.  In  the 
state  “the  citizens  rule  and  are  ruled  in  turn” 


on  the  supposition  that  their  “natures  .  .  .  are 
equal  and  do  not  differ  at  all.”  In  the  family, 
however,  Aristotle  thinks  that  “although  there 
may  be  exceptions  to  the  order  of  nature,  the 
male  is  by  nature  fitter  for  command  than  the 
female.” 

According  to  Locke,  “the  husband  and  wife, 
though  they  have  but  one  common  concern, 
yet  having  different  understandings,  will  un¬ 
avoidably  sometimes  have  different  wills  too. 
It  therefore  being  necessary  that  the  last  deter¬ 
mination  (i.e.,  the  rule)  should  be  placed  some¬ 
where,  it  naturally  falls  to  the  man’s  share  as 
the  abler  and  the  stronger.”  But  this,  Locke 
thinks,  “leaves  the  wife  in  the  full  and  true 
possession  of  what  by  contract  is  her  peculiar 
right,  and  at  least  gives  the  husband  no  more 
power  over  her  than  she  has  over  his  life;  the 
power  of  the  husband  being  so  far  from  that  of 
an  absolute  monarch  that  the  wife  has,  in  many 
cases,  a  liberty  to  separate  from  him  where 
natural  right  or  their  contract  allows  it.” 

In  the  so-called  Marriage  Group  of  the  Can¬ 
terbury  Tales ,  Chaucer  gives  voice  to  all  of  the 
possible  positions  that  have  ever  been  taken 
concerning  the  relation  of  husband  and  wife. 
The  Wife  of  Bath,  for  example,  argues  for  the 
rule  of  the  wife.  She  claims  that  nothing  will 
satisfy  women  until  they  “have  the  sovereignty 
as  well  upon  their  husband  as  their  love,  and  to 
have  mastery  their  man  above.”  The  Clerk  of 
Oxford,  in  his  tale  of  patient  Griselda,  presents 
the  wife  who  freely  admits  to  her  husband, 
“When  first  I  came  to  you,  just  so  left  I  my  will 
and  all  my  liberty.”  The  Franklin  in  his  tale 
allows  the  mastery  to  neither  wife  nor  husband, 
“save  that  the  name  and  show  of  sovereignty” 
would  belong  to  the  latter.  He  dares  to  say 

That  friends  each  one  the  other  must  obey 
If  they’d  be  friends  and  long  keep  company. 
Love  will  not  be  constrained  by  mastery;  .  . . 
Women  by  nature  love  their  liberty, 

And  not  to  be  constrained  like  any  thrall, 

And  so  do  men,  if  say  the  truth  I  shall.  .  .  . 

Thus  did  she  take  her  servant  and  her  lord, 
Servant  in  love  and  lord  in  their  marriage; 

So  was  he  both  in  lordship  and  bondage. 

While  there  may  be  disagreement  regarding 
the  relation  between  husband  and  wife,  there 
is  none  regarding  the  inequality  between  par¬ 
ents  and  children  during  the  offspring’s  imma- 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


49  i 


turity.  Although  every  man  may  enjoy  “equal 
right  ...  to  his  natural  freedom,  without  being 
subjected  to  the  will  or  authority  of  any  other 
men,”  children,  according  to  Locke,  “arc  not 
born  in  this  full  state  of  equality,  though  they 
are  born  to  it.” 

Paternal  power,  even  absolute  rule,  over 
children  arises  from  this  fact.  So  long  as  the 
child  “is  in  an  estate  wherein  he  has  no  under¬ 
standing  of  his  own  to  direct  his  will,”  Locke 
thinks  he  “is  not  to  have  any  will  of  his  own  to 
follow.  He  that  understands  for  him  must  will 
for  him  too;  he  must  prescribe  to  his  will,  and 
regulate  his  actions.”  But  Locke  adds  the  im¬ 
portant  qualification  that  when  the  son  “comes 
to  the  estate  which  made  his  father  a  free  man, 
the  son  is  a  free  man  too.” 

Because  children  are  truly  inferior  in  com¬ 
petence,  there  would  seem  to  be  no  injustice  in 
their  being  ruled  by  their  parents;  or  in  the  rule 
being  absolute  in  the  sense  that  children  are 
precluded  from  exercising  a  decisive  voice  in 
the  conduct  of  their  own  or  their  family’s  af¬ 
fairs.  Those  who  think  that  kings  cannot  claim 
the  absolute  authority  of  parental  rule  fre¬ 
quently  use  the  word  “despotic”  to  signify  un¬ 
justified  paternalism — a  transference  to  the 
state  of  a  type  of  dominion  which  can  be  justi¬ 
fied  only  in  the  family. 

The  nature  of  despotism  as  absolute  rule  is 
discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Monarchy  and 
Tyranny,  but  its  relevance  here  makes  it 
worth  repeating  that  the  Greek  word  from 
which  “despot”  comes,  like  its  Latin  equivalent 
paterfamilias ,  signifies  the  ruler  of  a  household 
and  carries  the  connotation  of  absolute  rule — 
the  complete  mastery  of  the  father  over  the 
children  and  the  servants,  if  not  over  the  wife. 
Accordingly  there  would  seem  to  be  nothing 
invidious  in  referring  to  domestic  government 
as  despotic,  at  least  not  to  the  extent  that,  in 
the  case  of  the  children,  absolute  rule  is  justified 
by  their  immaturity.  The  problem  arises  only 
with  respect  to  despotism  in  the  state,  when 
one  man  rules  another  mature  man  as  absolutely 
as  a  parent  rules  a  child. 

The  great  defender  of  the  doctrine  that  the 
sovereign  must  be  absolute,  “or  else  there  is  no 
sovereignty  at  all,”  sees  no  difference  between 
the  rights  of  the  ruler  of  a  state — the  “sovereign 
by  institution” — and  those  of  a  father  as  the 


natural  master  of  his  family.  “The  rights  and 
consequences  of  both  paternal  and  dcspotical 
dominion,”  Hobbes  maintains,  “are  the  very 
same  with  those  of  a  sovereign  by  institution.” 
On  the  other  hand,  Rousseau,  an  equally 
staunch  opponent  of  absolute  rule,  uses  the 
word  “despotism”  only  in  an  invidious  sense 
for  what  he  regards  as  illegitimate  government 
— absolute  monarchy.  “Even  if  there  were  as 
close  an  analogy  as  many  authors  maintain  be¬ 
tween  the  State  and  the  family,”  he  writes,  “it 
would  not  follow  that  the  rules  of  conduct 
proper  for  one  of  these  societies  would  be  also 
proper  for  the  other.” 

Rousseau  even  goes  so  far  as  to  deny  that 
parental  rule  is  despotic  in  his  sense  of  that 
term.  “With  regard  to  paternal  authority,  from 
which  some  writers  have  derived  absolute  gov¬ 
ernment,”  he  remarks  that  “nothing  can  be 
further  from  the  ferocious  spirit  of  despotism 
than  the  mildness  of  that  authority  which  looks 
more  to  the  advantage  of  him  who  obeys  than 
to  that  of  him  who  commands.”  He  agrees  with 
Locke  in  the  observation  that,  unlike  the  politi¬ 
cal  despot,  “the  father  is  the  child’s  master  no 
longer  than  his  help  is  necessary.”  When  both 
are  equal,  the  son  is  perfectly  independent  of 
the  father,  and  owes  him  “only  respect  and  not 
obedience.” 

Misrule  in  the  family,  then,  would  seem  to 
occur  when  these  conditions  or  limits  are  vio¬ 
lated.  Parents  may  try  to  continue  their  abso¬ 
lute  control  past  the  point  at  which  the  children 
have  become  mature  and  are  competent  to 
take  care  of  their  own  affairs.  A  parent  who 
does  not  relinquish  his  absolutism  at  this  point 
can  be  called  “despotic”  in  the  derogatory 
sense  of  that  word. 

Applying  a  distinction  made  by  some  politi¬ 
cal  writers,  the  parent  is  tyrannical  rather  than 
despotic  when  he  uses  the  children  for  his  own 
good,  treats  them  as  property  to  exploit,  even 
at  a  time  when  his  absolute  direction  of  their 
affairs  would  be  justified  if  it  were  for  the 
children’s  welfare.  The  existence  of  parental 
tyranny  raises  in  its  sharpest  form  the  question 
of  the  state’s  right  to  intervene  in  the  family  for 
the  good  of  its  members. 

The  central  element  in  the  domestic  estab¬ 
lishment  is,  of  course,  the  institution  of  mar- 


492 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


riage.  The  discussion  of  marriage  in  the  great 
books  deals  with  most  of  the  moral  and  psycho¬ 
logical,  if  not  all  of  the  sociological  and  eco¬ 
nomic,  aspects  of  the  institution.  The  most  pro¬ 
found  question,  perhaps,  is  whether  marriage  is 
merely  a  human  institution  to  be  regulated 
solely  by  custom  and  civil  law,  or  a  contract 
under  the  sanctions  of  natural  law,  ora  religious 
sacrament  signifying  and  imparting  God’s 
grace.  The  last  two  of  these  alternatives  may 
not  exclude  one  another,  but  those  who  insist 
upon  the  first  usually  reject  the  other  two. 

Some,  like  the  Parson  in  the  Canterbury 
Tales ,  consider  marriage  not  only  a  natural  but 
also  a  divine  institution — a  “sacrament  .  .  . 
ordained  by  God  Himself  in  Paradise,  and  con¬ 
firmed  by  Jesus  Christ,  as  witness  St.  Matthew 
in  the  gospel:  Tor  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave 
father  and  mother,  and  shall  cleave  to  his  wife; 
and  they  twain  shall  be  one  flesh,’  which  be¬ 
tokens  the  knitting  together  of  Christ  and  of 
Holy  Church.” 

Others,  like  Kant,  seem  to  stress  the  charac¬ 
ter  of  marriage  as  an  institution  sanctioned  by 
natural  law.  The  “natural  union  of  the  sexes,” 
he  writes,  “proceeds  either  according  to  the 
mere  animal  nature  (yaga  libido,  venus vulgivaga, 
fornicatio ),  or  according  to  law.  The  latter  is 
marriage  ( matrimonium ),  which  is  the  union  of 
two  persons  of  different  sex  for  life-long  recip¬ 
rocal  possession  of  their  sexual  faculties.”  Kant 
considers  offspring  as  a  natural  end  of  marriage, 
but  not  the  exclusive  end,  for  then  “the  mar¬ 
riage  would  be  dissolved  of  itself  when  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  children  ceased.  .  .  .  Even  assum¬ 
ing,”  he  declares,  “that  enjoyment  in  the  recip¬ 
rocal  use  of  the  sexual  endowments  is  an  end  of 
marriage,  yet  the  contract  of  marriage  is  not  on 
that  account  a  matter  of  arbitrary  will,  but  is 
a  contract  necessary  in  its  nature  by  the  Law  of 
Humanity.  In  other  words,  if  a  man  and  a  wom¬ 
an  have  the  will  to  enter  on  reciprocal  enjoy¬ 
ment  in  accordance  with  their  sexual  natures, 
they  must  necessarily  marry  each  other.” 

Still  others  see  marriage  primarily  as  a  civil 
contract.  Freud,  for  example,  considers  the 
view  that  “sexual  relations  are  permitted  only 
on  the  basis  of  a  final,  indissoluble  bond  between 
a  man  and  woman”  as  purely  a  convention  of 
“present-day  civilization.”  Marriage,  as  a  set  of 
taboos  restricting  the  sexual  life,  varies  from 


culture  to  culture;  but  in  Freud’s  opinion  the 
“high-water  mark  in  this  type  of  development 
has  been  reached  in  our  Western  European 
civilization.” 

The  conception  of  marriage — whether  it  is 
merely  a  civil,  or  a  natural,  and  even  a  divine 
institution — obviously  affects  the  position  to  be 
taken  on  monogamy,  on  divorce,  on  chastity 
and  adultery,  and  on  the  comparative  merits  of 
the  married  and  the  celibate  condition.  The  pa¬ 
gans,  for  the  most  part,  regard  celibacy  as  a  mis¬ 
fortune,  especially  for  women,  as  witness  the 
tragedy  of  the  unwedded  Electra.  Christian¬ 
ity,  on  the  other  hand,  celebrates  the  heroism 
of  virginity  and  encourages  the  formation  of 
monastic  communities  for  celibates.  Within  the 
Judaeo-Christian  tradition  there  are  striking 
differences.  Not  only  were  the  patriarchs  of  the 
Old  Testament  polygamous,  but  orthodox 
Judaism  and  orthodox  Christianity  also  differ 
on  divorce. 

Augustine  explains  how  a  Christian  should 
interpret  those  passages  in  the  Old  Testament 
which  describe  the  polygamous  practices  of  the 
patriarchs.  “The  saints  of  ancient  times,”  he 
writes,  “were  under  the  form  of  an  earthly 
kingdom,  foreshadowing  and  foretelling  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  And  on  account  of  the 
necessity  for  a  numerous  offspring,  the  custom 
of  one  man  having  several  wives  was  at  that 
time  blameless;  and  for  the  same  reason  it  was 
not  proper  for  one  woman  to  have  several  hus¬ 
bands,  because  a  woman  does  not  in  that  way 
become  more  fruitful ...  In  regard  to  matters 
of  this  sort,”  he  concludes,  “whatever  the  holy 
men  of  those  times  did  without  lust,  Scripture 
passes  over  without  blame,  although  they  did 
things  which  could  not  be  done  at  the  present 
time  except  through  lust.” 

On  similar  grounds  Aquinas  holds  that  “it 
was  allowable  to  give  a  bill  of  divorce,”  under 
the  law  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  it  is  not  al¬ 
lowable  under  the  Christian  dispensation  be¬ 
cause  divorce  “is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  a 
sacrament.”  The  greatest  familiarity  between 
man  and  wife  requires  the  staunchest  fidelity 
which  “is  impossible  if  the  marriage  bond  can 
be  sundered.”  Within  the  Christian  tradition 
Locke  takes  an  opposite  view  of  divorce.  He 
can  see  good  reason  why  “the  society  of  man 
and  wife  should  be  more  lasting  than  that  of 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


493 


male  and  female  amongst  other  creatures,”  but 
he  does  not  see  “why  this  compact,  where  pro¬ 
creation  and  education  arc  secured,  and  inheri¬ 
tance  taken  care  for,  may  not  be  made  deter¬ 
minable  either  by  consent,  or  at  a  certain  time, 
or  upon  certain  conditions,  as  well  as  any  other 
voluntary  compact,  there  being  no  necessity  in 
the  nature  of  the  thing  .  .  .  that  it  should  always 
be  for  life.”  Against  Locke,  Dr.  Johnson  would 
argue  that  “to  the  contract  of  marriage,  be¬ 
sides  the  man  and  wife,  there  is  a  third  party — 
Society;  and  if  it  be  considered  as  a  vow — God; 
and  therefore  it  cannot  be  dissolved  by  their 
consent  alone.” 

Laws  and  customs,  however,  represent  only 
the  external  or  social  aspect  of  marriage.  The 
discussion  of  these  externals  cannot  give  any 
impression  of  the  inwardness  and  depth  of  the 
problem  which  marriage  is  for  the  individual 
person.  Only  the  great  poems,  the  great  novels 
and  plays,  the  great  books  of  history  and  biog¬ 
raphy  can  adequately  present  the  psychological 
and  emotional  aspects  of  marriage  in  the  life  of 
individuals.  Heightened  in  narration,  they  give 
more  eloquent  testimony  than  the  case  histories 
of  Freud  to  support  the  proposition  that  mar¬ 
riage  is  at  all  times — in  every  culture  and  under 
the  widest  variety  of  circumstances — one  of  the 
supreme  tests  of  human  character. 

The  relation  between  men  and  women  in  and 
out  of  marriage,  the  relation  of  husband  and 
wife  before  and  after  marriage,  the  relation  of 
parents  and  children — these  create  crises  and 
tensions,  conflicts  between  love  and  duty,  be¬ 
tween  reason  and  the  passions,  from  which  no 
individual  can  entirely  escape.  Marriage  is  not 
only  a  typically  human  problem,  but  it  is  the 
one  problem  which,  both  psychologically  and 
morally,  touches  every  man,  woman,  and  child. 
Sometimes  the  resolution  is  tragic,  sometimes 
the  outcome  seems  to  be  happy,  almost  blessed; 
but  whether  a  human  life  is  built  on  this  foun¬ 
dation  or  broken  against  these  rocks,  it  is  vio¬ 
lently  shaken  in  the  process  and  forever  shaped. 

To  some  degree  each  reader  of  the  great 
books  has,  in  imagination  if  not  in  action,  par¬ 
ticipated  in  the  trials  of  Odysseus,  Penelope, 
and  Telemachus;  in  the  affections  of  Hector 
and  Andromache,  Alcestis  and  Admetus,  Tom 
Jones  and  Sophia,  Natasha  and  Pierre  Bezukhov, 
in  the  jealousy  of  Othello,  the  anguish  of  Lear, 


the  decision  of  Aeneas  or  the  indecision  of 
Hamlet;  and  certainly  in  the  reasoning  of 
Panurge  about  whether  to  marry  or  not.  In 
each  of  these  cases,  everyone  finds  some  aspect 
of  love  in  relation  to  marriage,  some  phase  of 
parenthood  or  childhood  which  has  colored 
his  own  life  or  that  of  his  family;  and  he  can 
find  somewhere  in  his  own  experience  the 
grounds  for  sympathetic  understanding  of  the 
extraordinary  relation  between  Electra  and  her 
mother  Clytemnestra,  between  Augustine  and 
Monica  his  mother,  between  Oedipus  and  Jo- 
casta,  Prince  Hamlet  and  Queen  Gertrude, 
Pierre  Bezukhov  and  his  wife,  or  what  is  per¬ 
haps  the  most  extraordinary  case  of  all — Adam 
and  Eve  in  Paradise  Lost . 

On  one  point  the  universality  of  the  problem 
of  marriage  and  family  life  seems  to  require 
qualification.  The  conflict  between  conjugal 
and  illicit  love  exists  in  all  ages.  The  entangle¬ 
ment  of  the  bond  between  man  and  wife  with 
the  ties — of  both  love  and  blood — which  unite 
parents  and  children,  is  equally  universal.  But 
the  difficulties  which  arise  in  marriage  as  a  re¬ 
sult  of  the  ideals  or  the  illusions  of  romantic 
love  seem  to  constitute  a  peculiarly  modern 
problem.  The  ancients  distinguished  between 
sexual  love  and  the  love  of  friendship  and  they 
understood  the  necessity  for  both  in  the  con¬ 
jugal  relationship  if  marriage  is  to  prosper.  But 
not  until  the  later  Middle  Ages  did  men  think 
of  matrimony  as  a  way  to  perpetuate  through¬ 
out  all  the  years  the  ardor  of  that  moment  in  a 
romantic  attachment  when  the  lovers  find  each 
other  without  flaw  and  beyond  reproach. 

Matters  relevant  to  this  modern  problem  are 
discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Love.  As  is  there 
indicated,  romantic  love,  though  it  seems  to  be 
of  Christian  origin,  may  also  be  a  distortion — 
even  an  heretical  perversion — of  the  kind  of 
Christian  love  which  is  pledged  in  the  recipro¬ 
cal  vows  of  holy  matrimony. 

We  have  already  considered  some  of  the 
problems  of  the  family  which  relate  to  children 
and  youth — the  immature  members  of  the  hu¬ 
man  race — such  as  whether  the  child  belongs  to 
the  family  or  the  state,  and  whether  the  family 
is  solely  responsible  for  the  care  and  training  of 
children,  or  a  share  of  this  responsibility  falls  to 
the  state  or  the  church. 


494 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


There  are  other  problems.  Why  do  men  and 
women  want  offspring  and  what  satisfactions  do 
they  get  from  rearing  children?  For  the  most 
part  in  Christendom,  and  certainly  in  antiqui¬ 
ty,  the  lot  of  the  childless  is  looked  upon  as  a 
grievous  frustration.  To  be  childless  is  not 
merely  contrary  to  nature,  but  for  pagan  as  well 
as  Christian  it  constitutes  the  deprivation  of  a 
blessing  which  should  grace  the  declining  years 
of  married  life.  The  opposite  view,  so  rarely 
taken,  is  voiced  by  the  chorus  of  women  in  the 
Medea  of  Euripides. 

“Those  who  are  wholly  without  experience 
and  have  never  had  children  far  surpass  in  hap¬ 
piness  those  who  are  parents,”  the  women  chant 
in  response  to  Medea’s  tragic  leave-taking  from 
her  own  babes.  “The  childless,  because  they 
have  never  proved  whether  children  grow  up 
to  be  a  blessing  or  a  curse  to  men,  are  removed 
from  all  share  in  many  troubles;  whilst  those 
who  have  a  sweet  race  of  children  growing  up 
in  their  houses  do  wear  away  .  .  .  their  whole 
life  through;  first  with  the  thought  how  they 
may  train  them  up  in  virtue,  next  how  they 
shall  leave  their  sons  the  means  to  live;  and 
after  all  this  ’tis  far  from  clear  whether  on  good 
or  bad  children  they  bestow  their  toil.” 

Still  other  questions  arise  concerning  chil¬ 
dren,  quite  apart  from  the  attitude  of  parents 
toward  having  and  rearing  them.  What  is  the 
economic  position  of  the  child,  both  with  re¬ 
spect  to  ownership  of  property  and  with  respect 
to  a  part  in  the  division  of  labor?  How  has  the 
economic  status  of  children  been  affected  by 
industrialism  ?  What  are  the  mental  and  moral 
characteristics  of  the  immature  which  exclude 
them  from  participation  in  political  life,  and 
which  require  adult  regulation  of  their  affairs? 
What  are  the  criteria — emotional  and  mental 
as  well  as  chronological — which  determine  the 
classification  of  individuals  as  children  or  adults, 
and  how  is  the  transition  from  childhood  to 
manhood  effected  economically,  politically,  and 
above  all  emotionally? 

The  authors  of  the  great  books  discuss  most 
of  these  questions,  but  among  them  only  Freud 
sees  in  the  relation  of  children  to  their  parents 
the  basic  emotional  determination  of  human 
life.  The  fundamental  triangle  of  love  and  hate, 
devotion  and  rivalry,  consists  of  father,  mother, 
and  child.  For  Freud  all  the  intricacies  and  per¬ 


versions  of  love,  the  qualitative  distinctions  of 
romantic,  conjugal,  and  illicit  love,  the  factors 
which  determine  the  choice  of  a  mate  and 
success  or  failure  in  marriage,  and  the  condi¬ 
tions  which  determine  the  emergence  from 
emotional  infantilism — all  these  can  be  under¬ 
stood  only  by  reference  to  the  emotional  life  of 
the  child  in  the  vortex  of  the  family. 

The  child’s  “great  task,”  according  to  Freud, 
is  that  of  “freeing  himself  from  the  parents,” 
for  “only  after  this  detachment  is  accomplished 
can  he  cease  to  be  a  child  and  so  become  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  social  community.  .  .  .  These  tasks 
are  laid  down  for  every  man”  but,  Freud 
writes,  “it  is  noteworthy  how  seldom  they  are 
carried  through  ideally,  that  is,  how  seldom 
they  are  solved  in  a  manner  psychologically  as 
well  as  socially  satisfactory.  In  neurotics,  how¬ 
ever,”  he  adds,  “this  detachment  from  the  par¬ 
ents  is  not  accomplished  at  all.” 

In  one  sense,  it  is  never  fully  accomplished 
by  anyone.  What  Freud  calls  the  “ego-ideal” — 
which  represents  our  higher  nature  and  which, 
in  the  name  of  the  reality-principle,  resists  in¬ 
stinctual  compliance  with  the  pleasure-prin¬ 
ciple — is  said  to  have  its  origin  in  “the  identifi¬ 
cation  with  the  father,  which  takes  place  in  the 
prehistory  of  every  person.”  Even  after  an  in¬ 
dividual  has  achieved  detachment  from  the 
family,  this  ego-ideal  acts  as  “a  substitute  for 
the  longing  for  a  father”;  and  in  the  form  of 
conscience  it  “continues  ...  to  exercise  the 
censorship  of  morals.” 

One  other  group  of  questions  which  involve 
the  family — at  least  as  background — concerns 
the  position  or  role  of  women.  We  have  already 
considered  their  relation  to  their  husbands  in 
the  government  of  the  family  itself.  The  way 
in  which  that  relation  is  conceived  affects  the 
status  and  activity  of  women  in  the  larger  com¬ 
munity  of  the  state,  in  relation  to  citizenship 
and  the  opportunities  for  education,  to  the  pos¬ 
session  of  property  and  the  production  of 
wealth  (for  example,  the  role  of  female  labor 
in  an  industrial  economy). 

Again  it  is  Euripides  who  gives  voice  to  the 
plight  of  women  in  a  man’s  world,  in  two  of  his 
great  tragedies,  the  Trojan  Women  and  Medea. 
In  the  one,  they  cry  out  under  the  brunt  of  the 
suffering  which  men  leave  them  to  bear  in  the 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


495 


backwash  of  war.  In  the  other,  Medea  passion¬ 
ately  berates  the  ignominy  and  bondage  which 
women  must  accept  in  being  wives.  “Of  all 
things  that  have  life  and  sense,”  she  says,  “we 
women  are  the  most  hapless  creatures;  first  must 
we  buy  a  husband  at  great  price,  and  then  o’er 
ourselves  a  tyrant  set,  which  is  an  evil  worse 
than  the  first.” 

The  ancient  world  contains  another  feminist 
who  goes  further  than  Euripides  in  speaking 
for  the  right  of  women  to  be  educated  like  men, 
to  share  in  property  with  them,  and  to  enjoy 
the  privileges  as  well  as  to  discharge  the  tasks  of 
citizenship.  In  the  tradition  of  the  great  books, 
the  striking  fact  is  that  after  Plato  the  next 
great  declaration  of  the  rights  of  women  should 
be  written  by  one  who  is  as  far  removed  from 
him  in  time  and  temper  as  John  Stuart  Mill. 

In  Plato’s  Republic ,  Socrates  argues  that  if 
the  difference  between  men  and  women  “con¬ 
sists  only  in  women  bearing  and  men  begetting 
children,  this  does  not  amount  to  proof  that  a 
woman  differs  from  a  man  in  respect  to  the  sort 
of  education  she  should  receive.”  For  the  same 
reason,  he  says,  “the  guardians  and  their  wives 
ought  to  have  the  same  pursuits.”  Since  he 
thinks  that  “the  gifts  of  nature  are  alike  dif¬ 
fused  in  both,”  Socrates  insists  that  “there  is 
no  special  faculty  of  administration  in  a  state 
which  a  woman  has  because  she  is  a  woman,  or 
which  a  man  has  by  virtue  of  his  sex.  All  the 
pursuits  of  men  are  the  pursuits  of  women 
also.”  Yet  he  adds  that  “in  all  of  them  a  woman 
is  inferior  to  a  man.”  Therefore  when  he  pro¬ 
poses  to  let  women  “share  in  the  toils  of  war 
and  the  defence  of  their  country,”  Socrates 
suggests  that  “in  the  distribution  of  labors  the 
lighter  are  to  be  assigned  to  the  women,  who 
arc  the  weaker  natures.” 


Mill’s  tract  on  The  Subjection  of  Women  is  his 
fullest  statement  of  the  case  for  social,  eco¬ 
nomic,  and  political  equality  between  the  sexes. 
In  Representative  Government,  his  defense  of 
women’s  rights  deals  primarily  with  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  extending  the  franchise  to  them.  Differ¬ 
ence  of  sex,  he  contends,  is  “as  entirely  irrele¬ 
vant  to  political  rights,  as  difference  in  height, 
or  in  the  color  of  the  hair.  All  human  beings 
have  the  same  interest  in  good  government  .  .  . 
Mankind  have  long  since  abandoned  the  only 
premisses  which  will  support  the  conclusion 
that  women  ought  not  to  have  votes.  No  one 
now  holds  that  women  should  be  in  personal 
servitude;  that  they  should  have  no  thought, 
wish,  or  occupation,  but  to  be  the  domestic 
drudges  of  husbands,  fathers,  or  brothers.  It  is 
allowed  to  unmarried,  and  wants  but  little  of 
being  conceded  to  married  women  to  hold 
property,  and  have  pecuniary  and  business  in¬ 
terests,  in  the  same  manner  as  men.  It  is  consid¬ 
ered  suitable  and  proper  that  women  should 
think,  and  write,  and  be  teachers.  As  soon  as 
these  things  are  admitted,”  Mill  concludes, 
“the  political  disqualification  has  no  principle 
to  rest  on.” 

Though  no  other  of  the  great  books  speaks 
so  directly  for  the  emancipation  of  women  from 
domestic  and  political  subjection,  many  of 
them  do  consider  the  differences  between  men 
and  women  in  relation  to  war  and  love,  pleas¬ 
ure  and  pain,  virtue  and  vice,  duty  and  honor. 
Some  are  concerned  explicitly  with  the  pivotal 
question — whether  men  and  women  are  more 
alike  than  different,  whether  they  are  essential¬ 
ly  equal  in  their  humanity  or  unequal.  Since 
these  are  matters  pertinent  to  human  nature 
itself,  as  it  is  affected  by  gender,  the  relevant 
passages  are  collected  in  the  chapter  on  Man. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  nature  and  necessity  of  the  family  497 

2.  The  family  and  the  state 

2 a.  Comparison  of  the  domestic  and  political  community  in  origin,  structure,  and 
function 

2 b.  Comparison  of  the  domestic  and  political  community  in  manner  of  government  498 

2 c.  The  place  and  rights  of  the  family  in  the  state:  the  control  and  education  of 
children 


496 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


PAGE 

3.  The  economics  of  the  family  499 

3*7.  The  wealth  of  families:  the  maintenance  of  the  domestic  economy 
3^.  The  effects  of  political  economy:  the  family  in  the  industrial  system 

4.  The  institution  of  carriage:  its  nature  and  purpose 

4*7.  Monogamy  and  polygamy  500 

4 b.  The  religious  view  of  marriage:  the  sacrament  of  matrimony 

4*:.  Matrimony  and  celibacy  501 

4 d.  The  laws  and  customs  regulating  marriage:  adultery,  incest 

4c.  Divorce  502 

5.  The  position  of  women  503 

5*7.  The  role  of  women  in  the  family:  the  relation  of  husband  and  wife  in  domestic 
government 

5 b.  The  status  of  women  in  the  state:  the  right  to  citizenship,  property,  education  304 
5*:.  Women  in  relation  to  war 

6.  Parents  and  children:  fatherhood,  motherhood  305 

6*7.  The  desire  for  offspring 

6b.  Eugenics:  control  of  breeding;  birth  control  506 

6c.  The  condition  of  immaturity 

6d.  The  care  and  government  of  children:  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  child;  parental 

despotism  and  tyranny  507 

6c.  The  initiation  of  children  into  adult  life  508 

7.  The  life  of  the  family 

ya.  Marriage  and  love:  romantic,  conjugal,  and  illicit  love 

7 b.  The  continuity  of  the  family:  the  veneration  of  ancestors;  family  pride,  feuds, 

curses  509 

yc.  Patterns  of  friendship  in  the  family:  man  and  wife;  parents  and  children;  brothers 

and  sisters  510 

yd.  The  emotional  impact  of  family  life  upon  the  child:  the  domestic  triangle;  the 

symbolic  roles  of  father  and  mother  51 1 

8.  Historical  observations  on  the  institution  of  marriage  and  the  family  512 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


497 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283I 12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  1 16  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  1 19.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  cii, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  c.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.y  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiahy  7:45— (D)  II  Esdrasy  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  nature  and  necessity  of  the  family 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  2:18-25 
7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  v,  361b-365d  /  Laws , 
bk  iv,  685a-c;  bk  vi,  707c-709a 
9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i  445a-455a,c;  bk  ii, 
ch  1-4  455b,d-458a  passim 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [ioii- 
1027]  74b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discoursesy  bk  iii,  ch  22,  198c- 
199c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  39a-41a  /  Lycurgus- 
Numay  62d-64a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  14-17 
520a-523a 

19  Aquinas:  Stimma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, 
aa  1-2  488d-490c;  q  98  516d-519a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  2,  ans  221d-223a;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  318b- 
321a 

23  Hobbes:  I^eviathany  part  ii,  121a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  xx 
449a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Losty  bk  viii  [357-451]  240a- 
242a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Governmenty  ch  vi,  sect  56-63 
36d-38c;  ch  vii,  sect  77-86  42b-44a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  29b-30a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  410a-411a 


38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  LawSy  bk  xxiii, 
187d-188a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  350a-c  /  Social  Con - 
tracty  bk  i,  387d-388a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  418c-422d;  433c- 
434a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  158- 
181  58a-63d;  additions,  47  124a-b  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History ,  intro,  172b-d;  part  iv,  353a-b 

50  Marx:  Capitaly  241c-d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  ManifestOy  427b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peacey  epilogue  i,  659d- 
662a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  189a 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology ,  686c-687d  esp  687d 
/  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  781  d- 782c; 
788a-b 

2.  The  family  and  the  state 

2a.  Comparison  of  the  domestic  and  political 
community  in  origin,  structure,  and  func¬ 
tion 

7  Plato:  Critoy  216d-217d  /  Republic ,  bk  v, 
356b-365d  /  Laws ,  bk  i,  641a-642b;  bk  iii, 
664a-666c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  ch  12  [1162s  16-18] 
414c  /  PoliticSy  bk  1,  ch  1-2  445a-446d;  bk  ii, 
ch  2  455d-456c;  ch  5  [i263b30-35]  459a 


498 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  family  and  the  state.  2a.  Comparison  of 
the  dojnestic  and  political  community  in 
origin,  structure,  and  functio?i.) 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  v  [35-103]  188a-190a;  bk 
vi  [679-702]  229a-b;  [756-789]  231a-232a; 
bk  viii  [66-80]  260b-261a;  bk  x  [i— i  17]  302a- 
305a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  36a-b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  12, 
517c-d;  ch  13-17  519a-523a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  3,  rep  3  207a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  99b-c;  llla-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  34a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vi-vii  36a-46c; 
ch  xv  64c-65d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  214b-217b  esp 
216b;  410a-411a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  13b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  359b-c  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  367a-368c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  387d- 
388a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  75 
31d-32b;  part  hi,  par  157  57d;  par  181  63c-d; 
par  203  68a-c;  par  255-256  79d-80a;  par  303 
101c-102a;  par  349  llld-112a;  additions,  47 
124a-b;  115-116  135c-d;  157  142b-c  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History,  intro,  I72b-d;  180c-182c;  part 
1,  211a-212c;  246d-247a;  part  hi,  288c-289d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  308b-d;  310a-c; 
579b-581c  esp  581a-b 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  664b-d;  685b-687d 
esp  686c-687d;  692a-b  /  Civilization  and  Its 
Discontents,  781d-783d  esp  781d-782d;  796b-c 

2b.  Comparison  of  the  domestic  and  political 
community  in  manner  of  government 

Old  Testament:  Isaiah,  22:20-22— {D)  Isaias , 
22:20-22 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  35c-d 

7  Plato:  Statesman,  581a-b  /  Laws,  bk  i,  641a- 
642b;  bk  hi,  664a-666c  esp  666b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [1  i34b8— 17] 
382b-c;  ch  ii  [i i38b5~ i 4]  387a, c;  bk  vi,  ch  5 
[ii40b7-io]  389b;  ch  8  [ii4ib28-ii42an] 
390d-391a;  bk  viii,  ch  io-ii  412c-413d;  bk 
x,  ch  9  [n8ob3-7]  435b  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2 
445a-446d;  ch  5  447d-448c;  ch  7  [i255bi5-2o] 
449b;  ch  12  453d-454a;  ch  13  [i259b30- 
1260^3]  454b-455a;  bk  hi,  ch  6  [i278b30- 
1279^]  476a-b:  ch  14  [i285b29~33]  484a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  v  [35-103]  188a-190a;  bk 
vi  [756-789]  231a-232a;  bk  viii  [66-80]  260b- 
261a;  bk  x  [1— 1 17]  302a-305a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  12, 
517c  d;  ch  13-17  519a-523a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, 
a  1,  rep  2  488d-489d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  3,  rep  3  207a-c;  q  105,  a  4,  rep  5  318b- 
321a 


2b  to  2c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  67d-68a;  86a; 
PART  II,  109b-lllb;  121a;  155b;  part  hi, 
228b-c 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,  207b-209d 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [1010-1060]  361b- 
362b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  i,  sect  1-2 
25a-c;  ch  vi-vii  36a-46c  esp  ch  vi,  sect  66-75 
39b-42a;  ch  viii,  .sect  105-112  48c-51b;  ch 
xiv,  sect  162  63a;  ch  xv  64c-65d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  214b-217b  esp 
216b;  410a-411a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  21a-22d;  120c-121a,c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  3b;  bk 
iv,  13b;  bk  v,  28b-29a;  bk  xvi,  118b-c;  bk 
xix,  140a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357a-b  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  367a-368c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  387d- 
388a;  bk  hi,  411c-d;  414c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  412c-413b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  82b-83c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  421c-422d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  47 
124a-b;  in  134d-135a;  157  142 b-c  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History,  intro,  172b-d;  part  i,  21  la- 
2138 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  687a-d;  688d-689a 

2c.  The  place  and  rights  of  the  family  in  the 
state:  the  control  and  education  of  chil¬ 
dren 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  20:5-7;  24:5 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  27a-39a,c 
esp  [1011-1084]  38b-39a,c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d 

5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d  esp 
[1255-1275]  436c,  [1368-1401]  437c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Ecclesiazusae  [611-650]  622a-c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv,  139a-b;  bk  vii, 
223c-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  398c-d 

7  Plato:  Crito,  216d-217d  /  Republic ,  bk  v, 
360d-365d  /  Statesman,  606d-608d  /  Laws, 
bk  hi,  665d-666c;  bk  vi,  707b-708a;  bk  vii, 
721d-723d;  bk  xi,  775d-780c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  9  [n79b3i- 
n8obi3]  434c-435b  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  13 
[i26ob8-i9]  455c;  bk  ii,  ch  2-3  455d-457a; 
ch  6  [i265a38-bi7]  460d-461a;  ch  9  [i269bi3- 
I270b6]  465d-466c;  bk  hi,  ch  9  [i28ob3o- 
I28ia2]  478c;  bk  iv,  ch  15  [1300^-8]  500d; 
bk  vi,  ch  8  [i322b38-i323a6]  526d;  bk  vii, 
ch  16  [i334b28]-BK  viii,  ch  2  [i337a34]  539d- 
542b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  21a-26b  /  Lycurgus, 
36a-45c  /  Numa  Pompilius,  58d  /  Lycurgus- 
Numa,  62d-64a  /  Cato  the  Younger ,  629a-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  32b-d;  bk  iii,  51a; 
51d-52a;  bk  xv,  162b-c  /  Histories ,  bk  iii, 
248c-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  16  521d- 
522a 


3  to  4 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  3,  rep  3  207a-c;  q  95,  a  i,  ans  226c-227c;  q 

104,  a  4,  ans  306d-307c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  121a;  155b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  344a-c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vi  36a-42a;  ch 
vii,  sect  83  43b-c;  ch  xv  64c-65d;  cn  xvi, 
sect  180-183  67b  68b;  sect  188  192  69ad 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  29b-3la;  part  iv, 
166b-167a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  iv,  13b; 
bk  v,  22d-23a;  bk  xii,  95c-d;  bk  xix,  140a-c; 
bk  xxiii,  189b-c;  190b;  192d-199b;  bk  xxvi, 
216b-217b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  327c-d  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy ,  376b-377a;  377d-378a  /  Social  Contract , 
bk  iv,  439b, d  [fn  2] 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  v,  338c-339b; 
341c-342a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  66d-67b:  175c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  73c;  82b-83c; 
86b-d;  88d-89a;  92c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  404d;  421a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  317c-319d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  280c-281a;  304a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  166 
59d-60a;  par  180  62c-63c;  par  238-241  76c-77a; 
par  255-256  79d-80a;  additions,  146-147 
140b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  172b-d; 
part  1,  246d-247a;  part  ii,  277c;  part  iii, 
288c-289b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  193a-196d;  241a-d;  245a-d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  427b- 
428a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  783  b- 
784d  esp  783d- 784b  /  New  Introductory  Lec¬ 
tures,  868d-871a  passim 

3.  The  economics  of  the  family 

3 a.  The  wealth  of  families:  the  maintenance  of 
the  domestic  economy 

Old  Testament:  Numbers,  27:1-11  /  Deuterono¬ 
my,  21:15-17 

New  Testament:  I  Timothy ,  5:8 
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  360c-365d  /  Laws, 
bk  iii,  664a-666a;  bk  vi,  709a-710a;  bk  xi, 
775d-778b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  3-1  i  446d-453d 
esp  ch  3  [i253bi2-i4]  447a,  ch  4  447b-c,  ch 
8-1 1  449d-453d;  bk  ii,  ch  5  [i264bi— 7]  459d; 
BK  III,  ch  4  [l277b20-25]  474d 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  72b-c  /  Pericles,  130b-d  / 
Pelopidas,  233a-b  /  Marcus  Cato,  278b-279c; 
286b-287d  /  Aristide s-M arcus  Cato,  291b-292b 
/  Crassus,  439a-c  /  Crassus-Nicias,  455b, d  / 
Agis,  650d-651b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  32b-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  14 
520a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 

105,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-4  318b-321a 


499 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  122b  124c;  184a-191c; 
458c-462a;  472a-473a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  148b  149a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  cn  vi,  sect  72-73 
40d  41a;  cn  vii,  sect  79*80  42c-43a;  ch 
xvi,  sect  182-183  67c-68b;  sect  190-192 
69b  d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  376b  379a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vii,  50a  b; 
bk  xviii,  129d  l32b;  bk  xxiii,  190a-b;  bk 
xxvi,  216a-b;  bk  xxvii  225a-230d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  350a-b  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  367a-368c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  intro,  lb-c;  bk  iii, 
165b  l67a;  bk  v,  383d-384d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  16c-17d;  66d-67b; 
498b-501b  passim 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  83a;  86d-89d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  319b-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  147c-148b  [fn  3];  274b- 
278a;  280c-281a;  282a-b;  289c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
169-172  60c-61a;  par  178-180  62a-63c;  addi¬ 
tions,  109  134c;  1 14  135b-c  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  iii,  289a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  324a-c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  34c-d;  171d-172a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  211a-213a; 
bk  vii  275a-302d  passim,  esp  275a-278a,  291a- 
292b,  301b-302d;  bk  xv,  633a-d;  epilogue  i, 
650d-652a;654a-655c 

3 b.  The  effects  of  political  economy:  the  family 
in  the  industrial  system 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  367a-368c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  27b-37b  esp 
28d-29a,  29d-30d,  34b-c;  bk  iv,  243b, d;  bk 
v,  383d-384d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  319b-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  197d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  253 
79a-c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  117c-144a  passim;  192c-196d; 
226d-248c  esp  241a-d;  318a-319a;  375c-376c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  420d; 
423a;  424c;  427b-d 

4.  The  institution  of  marriage:  its  nature  and 
purpose 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:27-28;  2:18-25; 
30:1-24  /  Proverbs,  18:22 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  19:3-12  /  MarJ{, 
10:1-12  /  Luke,  16:18  /  /  Corinthians,  7  / 
Ephesians,  5:22-33  /  Colossians ,  3:18-19  / 
I  Peter,  3:1-7 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  361b-365d  /  States¬ 
man,  608a-c  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  685a-c ;  bk  vi,  707c- 
709a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i252a25~b9] 
445b-d;  bk  vii,  ch  16  539d-541a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  7,  183b-d; 
ch  22,  198c-199c 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


500 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  institution  of  marriage:  its  nature  and 
purpose.) 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  [1-172]  167a-171b;  bk 
vii  [81-106]  238a-239a;  [248-434]  242b-248a; 
bk  xi  [336-375]  337a-338a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  39a-40c  /  Lycurgus- 
Numa ,  62d-64a  /  Solony  71d-72a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  3  9b-c; 
bk  iv,  par  2  19d;  bk  vi,  par  22-25  41d-42d  / 
City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  21-26  392b-396c;  bk 
xv,  ch  16  410b-411d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk 
hi,  ch  12,  663a-c;  ch  18-20  664d-665d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, 
aa  1-2  488d-490c;  q  98  516d-519a 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath' s  Prologue  [5583-64 10] 
256a-269b  /  Merchant's  Tale  [9121-9562] 
319a-326a  /  Franklin's  Tale  351b-366a  esp 
[11,041-117]  351b-352b  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par 
77-80  540b-542a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  410d-413a 

26  Shakespeare:  As  You  Li\e  It,  act  v,  sc  iv 
[114-156]  625a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  261c-262a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  xx 
449a 

32  Milton  :  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [357-451]  240a- 
242a;  bk  ix  [952-959]  268a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  77-83 
42b-43c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiii,  187d- 
188a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  364d-365b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  418c-420b;  433d-434a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  316d-317c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  194a;  289d-290a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  75 
31d-32b;  part  iii,  par  161-169  58b-60c;  addi¬ 
tions,  47  124a-b;  103-108  133c-134c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  579b-581c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  14b-15a;  55c- 
59d;  bk  hi,  llla-128d;  bk  vi,  245d-274a,c; 
bk  vii,  301b-302d;  epilogue  i,  659d-662a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  784c  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures,  862d-863b 

4a.  Monogamy  and  polygamy 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  16;  29:1-30:24  /  Deu¬ 
teronomy,  17:16-17;  21:15-17  /  /  Samuel, 
25:39-44— (D)  I  Kings,  25:39-44  /  II  Samuel, 
3:1-5;  n-12 —(D)  II  Kings ,  3:1-5;  11-12  / 
I  Kings,  1 1  n-13— (D)  III  Kings,  11:1-13 

New  Testament:  /  Timothy,  3:2,12 

5  Sophocles:  Trachiniae  [307-489]  172d-174b 

5  Euripides:  Andromache  315a-326a,c  esp 
[147-244]  316c-317b  /  Electra  [1030-1040] 
336c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  32a;  48c;  bk  iv, 
155c-156a;  bk  v,  160d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  39d-40c  /  Demetrius, 
731a-b  /  Antony-Demetrius,  780d 


4a  to  4b 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,ch  12, 
663a-c;  ch  18-22  664d-666c 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath' s  Prologue  [5583-5640] 
256a-257a 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,  209b-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  162b-166b  esp  162b, 
166a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  28d; 
bk  xv,  112a-b;  bk  xvi,  116a-120a;  bk  xxiii 
188c-d;  bk  xxvi,  218d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  86a;  245b-246c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  419c-420a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  311a-312a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  167— 
168  60b-c;  additions,  105  133d-134a  /  Phi¬ 
losophy  of  History,  part  iii,  294c-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  579b-583a  esp 
581b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  660d- 
661b 

53  James:  Psychology,  735a-b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  784b-c 

4b.  The  religious  view  of  marriage:  the  sacra¬ 
ment  of  matrimony 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:23-24  /  Proverbs, 
18:22 

Apocrypha:  Tobit  passim,  esp  6:10-17,  8:1-17, 
9:6,  10:1-12— (D)  OT,  Tobias  passim,  esp 
6:10-22,  8:1-19,  9:i2>  10:1-13 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  19:3-12/  Mar\,  10:1- 
12  /  John ,  2:1-12  /  I  Corinthians,  7  /  Ephesians , 
5:22-33  /  /  Timothy,  4:1-5  /  Hebrews,  13:4 
5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [210-224]  83b 
5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  225a- 236d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vii  [81-106]  238a-239a; 
[248-434]  242b-248a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  3  9b-c; 
bk  iv,  par  2  19d  /  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  22 
392d-393b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch 
18-22  664d-666c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, 
aa  2-3  489d-491b;  q  98  516d-519a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
102,  a  5,  rep  3  283c-292c;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  6-9  318b-321a;  part  iii,  q  65,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  5  879c-881d;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i 
881d-882c;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  1,4  882d-883d; 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  883d-884a,c;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  95  1042c-1049d  passim 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath' s  Prologue  [5583-5749] 
256a-258b  /  Merchant's  Tale  [9193-9210] 
320a-b  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  75,  536a:  par  77-80 
540b-542a 

23  Leviathan,  part  iv,  250c;  272d-273a; 
276a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
219b-222b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  124b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [379-560] 
240b-244a 


501 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


4c  to  4 d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxvi,  217c- 
218a; 219b-d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  439b, d 
lfll2) 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  193a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  83d-85c;  177d-178b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  3 04a  b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  288c- 
289b;  294c-d;  part  iv,  333c;  353a  b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  50c;  bk  xi, 
476c-479d  passim 

4c.  Matrimony  and  celibacy 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  19:10-12  /  /  Corin¬ 
thians,  7 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iv,  685a-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  22,  198c- 
199c 

14  Plutarch:  Ntttna  Pompilius ,  54c-55a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  44c;  bk  iii,  51a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  3  9b-c; 
bk  vi,  par  21-25  41c-42d;  bk  viii,  par  26-27 
60b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q 
186,  a  4  655c-656b;  part  iii,  q  65,  a  4,  ans 
and  rep  3  883d-884a,c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  96, 
aa  3-5  1053c-1058a;  aa  11-12  1063d-1065b 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5633- 
5732]  257a-258b  /  Second  Nun's  Tale  463b- 
471b  esp  [15,588-706]  463b-465b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  272d-273a; 
276b;  278c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
60c-66b;  bk  iii,  219b-221b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  iii,  sc  i  [120-157] 
48b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [736-749]  168b 

36  SterxNe:  Tristram  Shandy,  522a-523b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiii,  189d; 
197a-c;  bk  xxv,  210a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  82a;  193a-c;  533c- d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  86a;  177d-178a; 
422c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  308c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  333c; 
353a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  315c-d;  327d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  305b  [fn  2] 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  695a-b 

4d.  The  laws  and  customs  regulating  marriage: 
adultery,  incest 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  19:30-38;  24;  29; 
35:22;  38;  39:7-20;  49:3-4  /  Exodus,  20:14,17; 
22:16-17;  34:15-16  /  Leviticus,  18;  19:29520:9- 
21  /  Numbers,  5:12-31;  36  /  Deuteronomy, 
5:18,21;  7:1-4;  21  no-14;  22:13-30;  24:5;  25:5- 
10;  27:20-23/  Ruth,  3-4  /  II  Samuel,  11-13; 
1 6  ^0-23 — (D)  II  Kings,  11-13516 :2o-23  /  Ezra, 
10— (D)  l  Esdras ,  10  /  Esther,  2:12-14  /  Job, 
24:15-25  /  Proverbs,  5;  6:20-7:27  /  Jeremiah, 
5:7-9— (D)  Jeremias ,  5:7-9 


Apocrypha:  Tobit,  4:12-13  —  (D)  OT,  Tobias, 
4:1^  /  Ecclesiasticus ,  9:1-9;  23:17-28— (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  9:1-13;  23:24-38  /  Susanna 
—  (D)  OT,  Daniel ,  1 3 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:27-32;  14:3-4; 
19:3-9  /  Marl{,  10:1-12  /  Lu/{c,  16:18  /  John, 
4:16-18;  8:1-1 1  /  Romans,  7:1-3  /  I  Corinthi¬ 
ans,  557/  Hebrews,  13:4 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  ii  188a-192d;  bk  xi 
[385-461]  247a-c;  bk  xviii  [250-312]  286d- 
287b 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [734-757] 
35b  c  /  Agamemnon  52a-69d  /  Choephoroe 
70a-80d  /  Eumenides  81a-91d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  / 
Oedipus  at  Colonus  [939-999]  123a-c 

5  Euripides:  Medea  212a-224a,c  /  Andromache 
315a-326a,c  esp  [147-244]  316c-317b  /  Electra 
[1008-1123]  336b-337b  /  Phoenician  Maidens 
[1—87]  378a-379a  /  Cyclops  [175-187]  441d-442a 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [1060-1104]  501c-502a 
/  Ecclesiazusae  615a-628d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2d-3d;  32a;  34a-b; 
39b-c;  44c-d;  48c;  bk  iii,  96a-b;  104d-105a; 
bk  iv,  144b;  bk  v,  160d-161a 

7  Plato:  Crito,  217a  /  Republic ,  bk  v,  360d- 
365d;  bk  viii,  403b-d  /  Timaeus,  442d-443a 
/  Statesman ,  605d-608d  esp  608a-c  /  Laws, 
bk  iv,  685a-c;  bk  vi,  707b-709a;  710d-711a; 
712b-713c;  bk  viii,  735b'738c;  bk  xi,  777b- 
778a;  780a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  1-4  455b, d- 
458a  esp  ch  4  457b-458a;  ch  9  [i269bi3- 
i27ob7)  465d-466c;  bk  v,  ch  4  [i303b40- 
I304ai7]  505c-d;  ch  6  [i3o6a33-b3]  508b;  bk 
vii,  ch  16  539d-541a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  18,  124b-c; 
bk  ii,  ch  4  142a-c;  ch  10, 149c-150a 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  21a-22a;  26a-b  /  Lycur- 
gus,  39a-40c  /  Lycurgus-Numa,  62d-63d  / 
Solon,  71d-72a;  72d-73a  /  Cato  the  Younger, 
629a-c  /  Artaxerxes ,  855b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  51a;  53a-d;  bk  xi, 
107b-110a;  bk  xii,  llla-c;  121d-122a;  bk  xiv, 
141c-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xv,  ch  16  410b- 
41  Id  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch  12,  663 a-c; 
ch  18-22  664d-666c  esp  ch  21  665d-666b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, 
a  2,  rep  3  489d-490c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  72, 
a  2,  rep  4  112b-113a;  q  94,  A  2,  ans  221d- 
223a;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  6-9  318b-321a; 
part  iii  suppl,  q  95  1042c-1049d  passim 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxx  [37-45] 
44d-45a;  purgatory,  xxv  [109— 139]  92c-d 

22  Chaucer:  Miller's  Prologue  [3150-3166]  212a 
/  Miller's  Tale  212b-223b  esp  [3221-3232] 
213a  /  Reeve's  Tale  [4136-4291]  228b-231b  / 
Merchant's  Tale  319a-338a  /  Franklin's  Tale 
[11,667-854]  361b-365a  /  Parson's  Tale,  par 
75-76  536a-540a 


502 


4 d  to  4e 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  institution  of  marriage:  its  nature  and 
purpose.  4d.  The  laws  and  customs  regulat¬ 
ing  marriage:  adultery,  incest .) 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  155b'C 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
5c-6b;  bk  hi,  140c-141c;  144d-146a;  148d- 
150d;  154a-156c;  159d-163c;  166a-169d;  173d- 
200d;  bk  iv,  248d-250a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  44c-46b  passim;  47a-c; 
89d-90c;  185d-186c;  409d-434d  passim 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  v,  sc  v  31b- 
32a, c  /  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-74]  33b, d- 
34c  /  Comedy  of  Errors,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [112-148] 
154c-d;  act  hi,  sc  11  [1-70]  157c-158b  /  Tam - 
ing  of  the  Shrew,  act  i,  sc  i  [48-101]  203a-c; 
act  11,  sc  1  [37-413]  208c-2l2c  /  Romeo  and 
Juliet,  act  11,  sc  11  [142-158]  295d-296a;  sc  hi 
[55-94]  297a-b;  sc  vi  300c-d;  act  iii,  sc  iv-v 
306d-309d  /  Much  Ado  About  Nothing  503a- 
531a, c  esp  act  iv,  sc  i  [1-256]  520b-523a 
/  As  You  Li\e  It,  act  hi,  sc  hi  613d-614d; 
act  iv,  sc  1  [127-180]  618b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  ii  [138-159] 
33a;  sc  v  [42-91]  37b-d;  act  hi,  sc  iv  [39- 
170]  55a-56b  /  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor  73a- 
102d  /  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [173— 
206]  115b-c  /  Othello,  act  i,  sc  iii  [52-209] 
209c-211a;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [60-108]  236c-237a  / 
King  Lear,  act  iv,  sc  vi  [i 09-135]  274c-d  / 
Pericles  421a-448a,c  esp  act  i,  prologue-sc 
ii  421b-425a  /  Cymbeline  449a-488d  esp  act 
ii,  sc  iv-v  461b-463c,  act  iii,  sc  iv  466d- 
468d  /  Winter's  Tale,  act  i,  sc  ii  [186-228] 
492a-c;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [1-117]  501b-502c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  124a-c; 
part  11,  270c-271a 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis ,  209a-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [708-721] 
314b-315a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [30-1060]  340a- 
362b  esp  [292-325]  346a-b,  [1010-1060]  361b- 
362b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  81-83 
43a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  98b-99a;  127b; 
part  iv,  166a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  210b-213a;  258b- 
261a; 374b-376a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  297d-298a;  375b-d; 
388c-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vii,  48a- 
50a;  bk  x,  67a-b;  bkxiv,  108a-b;  bk  xv-xvi, 
115c-122a,c;  bk  xviii,  132b-c;  bk  xix,  141c- 
142a;  bk  xxiii,  187d-189d;  193a-197c;  bk 
xxvi,  215b-c;  217c-218d;  219b-221c;  223a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  439b, d 

[fn  2] 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92c-d;  579a-b; 
650c-d;  742b  [n  93];  750d  [n  52] 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  83d-86a;  93c-94a; 
174b;  177d-178b;  245b-246a;  319b-d;  759b 
[1130] 


42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  419a-420b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  311b-312a;  316d-317c;  319b-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  160a-b;  304a-b;  411d; 
429d-430b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  163- 
164  58d-59d;  par  168  60b-c;  additions,  108 
134b-c;  1 13  135a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
part  iii,  288c-289a;  294c-d 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  289a-292a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  276c;  313c-d; 
315c-d;  565a-b;  578b-580c  passim;  581d-582c; 
584d-585d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  427d- 
428a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  119a-128d; 
bk  iv,  177a-179a;  bk  vi,  250a-25lc;  bk  vii, 
291a-292b;  bk  xi,  476c-479d;  bk  xii,  540d- 
541a; 545d 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  531c-d;  555a-b; 
583c-d/  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  784a-d 

4e .  Divorce 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  24:1-4  /  Mala - 
chi,  2:11-17 — (jD)  Malachias,  2:11-17 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  7:19 —(D)  OT,  Ec- 
clesiasticus,  7:21 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:31-32;  19:3-9  / 
Mar\,  10:2-12  /  Lube,  16:18  /  Romans,  7:1-3  / 
I  Corinthians,  7:10-16,39 
5  Euripides:  Medea  [131-268]  213b-214b 
7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  712c-713c;  bk  xi,  78Qa-c 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  26a-b  /  Lycurgus-Numa, 
62d-63c  /  Alcibiades,  158b-d  /  Aemilius 
Paulus,  215a-b  /  Pompey,  502d-503a  /  Cato  the 
Younger,  629a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
102,  a  5,  rep  3  283c-292c;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  8  318b-321a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  299c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  261c- 
262a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  84b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ix  [952-959] 
268a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  81-82 
43a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  127b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xvi,  120b- 
122a, c;  bk  xxvi,  215c;  217c-218d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  84c-85c;  759b 
[n  30] 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  419c-420a;  421c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  316d-3l7c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  220d-221a;  304a-b;  411d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  176 

61d-62a;  additions,  105  133d-134a;  113 

135a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  288c- 
289a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  584d-585c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  177a-179a; 
bk  v,  203a-d;  bk  xi,  476c-479d 


503 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


5  to  5  a 

5.  The  position  of  women 

5 a.  The  role  of  women  in  the  family:  the  re¬ 
lation  of  husband  and  wife  in  domestic 
government 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  2:18-25;  3:16/  Num¬ 
bers ,  30  /  Deuteronomy ,  22:13-30;  24:1-4; 
25:5-10  /  Esther ,  1  /  Proverbs ,  31  no-31 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  10:12 — (D)  OT,  Tobias , 
10:12-13  /  Ecclesiasticus,  25-26;  40:19,23 — 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  25-26;  40:19,23 

New  Testament:  /  Corinthians ,  11:1-16;  14:34- 
35  /  Ephesians,  5:22-33  /  Colossiansy  3:18-19 
/  /  Timothy ,  2  .*9-1 5  /  71r/wf,  2  ^-5  /  /  Peter,  3:1-7 

4  Homer:  Odyssey ,  bk  ii  [85-145]  189a-c; 
bk  xviii  [185-289]  286a-287a;  bk  xix  289a- 
295a, c;  bk  xx  [56-90]  296d-297a;  bk  xxiii 
[205-309]  314b-315b;  bk  xxiv  [191-202]  319a 

5  Aeschylus:  Against  Thebes  [181-202] 

29a-b 

5  Sophocles  :  [284-294]  145d 

5  Euripides:  Medea  [131-268]  213b-214b  / 
Andromache  [147-244]  316c-317b  /  Electra 
[1008-1123]  336b-337b  /  Iphigenia  at  Auks 
[1 146-1208]  435c-436a 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c/  Thes - 
mophoriazusae  600a-614d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bkii,  56c;  bk  iv,  143b- 
144b;  153a-b;  bk  v,  160d-161a;  167b-d 

7  Plato:  174d-175d  /  Republic ,  bk  v, 

356b-365d  /  bk  vii,  721d-722d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethicsy  bk  v,  ch  6  [1  i34b8— 17] 
382b-c;  ch  ii  [ii38b5-i4]  387a, c;  bk  viii,  ch  7 
[ii58bi2-28]  410c-d;  ch  10  [u6ob32-n6ia2] 
413a-b;  ch  ii  [1161*23-24]  413c;  ch  12  [1162s 
1:5—33]  414c-d  /  PoliticSy  bk  i,  ch  2  [1252*26- 
bi2]  445c-d;  ch  5  [i254bi2-i6]  448b;  ch  12 
453d-454a;  ch  13  [i259b30-i26o*3o]  454b-d; 
bk  ii,  ch  9  [i269bi2-i27oai4]  465d-466b; 
bk  hi,  ch  4  [i277b2o-25]  474d;  bk  v,  ch  ii 
[i3i3b33— 42]  516c;  bk  vi,  ch  8  [1323*2-6] 
526d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  39a-41a  /  Lycurgus- 
Numay  62d-63c  /  Themistocles ,  99a- b  /  Marcus 
CatOy  286b-c  /  Agisy  654c-655a  /  Marcus 
Brutus ,  807b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ix,  par  19-22 
67a-d;  bk  xiii,  par  47,  123d  /  Cz/y  0/  Gozf, 
bk  xix,  ch  14,  520c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  92, 
aa  1-3  488d-491b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  iii,  q  6, 
a  1,  rep  3  740b-741b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xv  [97- 
135]  129b-d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressiday  bk  ii,  stanza 
108  35b  /  Miller's  Prologue  [3150-3166]  212a  / 
Tale  of  Man  of  Law  236b-255b  esp  [4701-4707] 
239a  /  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5583-6410] 
256a-269b  esp  [5893-5914]  261a-b  /  Tale  of 
Wife  of  Bath  270a-277a  esp  [6619-6627]  273a-b 
/  Summoner's  Tale  [7571-7582]  290a  /  Clerks 


Pale  296a-318a  esp  (9053-9088]  317a-318a  / 
Merchant's  Tale  319a  338a  /  Franklin's  'Pale 
351b  366a  esp  [11,041-114]  351b-352b  /  Ship- 
man  s  Tale  383b  390b  esp  [13,093-1 07]  386a 
/  Tale  of  MelibeuSy  par  14-16  405a-407b  / 
Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [15,262-272]  457a  /  Man¬ 
ciple's  Tale  [17,088-103]  490a  /  Parson's  Taley 
par  79-80  541a-542a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  part  ii,  109c-110b 

25  Montaigne:  Essaysy  84a-b;  89d-90c;  188c- 
191c;  358b-362a;  409d-434d  esp  413a-416c, 
428a-d;  472a-473a 

26  Shakespeare:  Comedy  of  Errors,  act  ii,  sc  i 
[6-43]  152a-c;  sc  11  [112-148]  154c-d  /  Taming 
of  the  Shrew  199a-228a,c  esp  act  v,  sc  11 
[136-185]  227d-228a,c  /  Merchant  of  Venice , 
act  iii,  sc  11  [150-187]  421c-d  /  1st  Henry  IV , 
act  11,  sc  iii  [39-120]  443c-444b  /  Julius 
Caesar ,  act  ii,  sc  1  [234-309]  577a-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  ii, 
sc  11  [173-193]  115b-c  /  Othello,  act  i,  sc  iii 
[175-189]  210d-211a;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [60-108] 
236c-237a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  270c- 
271b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iv  [288-301]  158b- 
159a;  [440-502]  162a-163a;  [634-658]  166a-b; 
bk  viii  [452-594]  242a-245a;  bk  ix  [226-269] 
252a-253a;  bk  x  [144-156]  277b;  [182-196] 
278b;  [867-936]  293b-294b  /  Samson  Ago - 
nistes  [871-902]  358b-359a;  [997-1060]  361b- 
362b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vi,  sect  52-53 
36a-c;  sect  65  38d-39a;  ch  vii,  sect  77-86 
42b-44a  passim 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  98b-99a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  210b-213a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  100b-102a;  120c-121a,c; 
126d-127b;  219a-b;  229b-233d;  235b-238d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vii,  50d; 
bk  xvi,  118a-119c;  120a;  bk  xxiii,  187d-188c; 
bk  xxvi,  217d-218a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  327c-d;  345d-346a; 
350b-c  /  Political  Economy,  367d-368a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  92c-93b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  83d-86d  esp  83d- 
84a;  522d;  759b  [n  30-31] 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  404d;  418c-420a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  317c-d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  387d-389b  passim 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  160a-b;  165b-c;  274d- 
277d;  293d;  297a-b;  301d-302a;  304a-b;  411d; 
429d-430a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  165- 
166  59d-60a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii, 
288c-289a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Die 289a-292a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  579b-580c  passim; 
582c;  584c-585c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  13a-15a;  55c- 
59d;  bk  vi,  263b-264b;  bk  xi,  490a-493d; 
epilogue  1,  659d-662a 


504 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  position  of  women,  5a,  The  role  of  women 
in  the  family:  the  relation  of  husband  and 
wife  in  domestic  government ,) 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  iii, 
46a-48b;  bk  v,  112a-113b 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology ,  692b  /  Civilization 
and  Its  Discontents ,  783d-784a 

5b,  The  status  of  women  in  the  state:  the  right 
to  citizenship,  property,  education 

Old  Testament:  Numbers,  27:1-11 

4  Homer:  Odyssey ,  bk  xi  [385-461]  247a-c 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [181-202] 
29a-b 

5  Euripides:  Medea  [410-445]  215d 

5  Aristophanes:  Thesmophoriazusae  600a-614d 
/  Ecclesiazusae  615a-628d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  39bc;  bk  ii,  56c; 
bk  iv,  128c-d;  143b-144b;  154b 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  v,  356b-365d;  bk  vii, 
401b-c  /  Timaeus ,  442d  /  Laws ,  bk  vi,  710d- 
7lld;  bk  vii,  716b-717a;  721d-722c 

9  Aristotle :  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  i-4455b,d-458a; 
ch  9  [i269bi3~i27oa33]  465d-466c;  bk  iv, 
ch  15  [i300a4~8]  500d;  bk  v,  ch  ii  [i3i3b33~ 
42]  516c;  bk  vi,  ch  4  [1319*26-33]  523b; 
ch  8  [i322b38-i323a6]  526d;  bk  vii,  ch  16 
539d-541a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i36ia6-i2] 
601c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  v  [604-699]  202b-205b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  39a-41a  /  Numa  Pom- 
pilius ,  54a-55a  /  Lycurgus -Numa,  62d-63c  / 
Solon ,  72c  /  Pericles ,  133a- d  /  Coriolanus , 
189d-191c  /  Agis ,  650d-651b  /  Marcus  Brutus , 
811c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  44b-c;  bk  iii, 
53a-d;  bk  xii,  11 7d  /  Histories ,  bk  iv,  285d- 
286a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  105, 
a  2,  rep  2  309d-316a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  109c-110b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
60c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  59d-60a;  399c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  v,  sc  iii  387a- 
389b 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [871-902]  358b- 
359a 

35  Locke:  C/m7  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  82  43b; 
ch  xvi,  sect  183  67d-68b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  98b-99a;  part  iv, 
166b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  210b-213a 

37  Fielding:  Tom ]ones ,  7b-c;  283 b-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vii,  47c- 
50d;  bk  xii,  90c-d;  bk  xiv,  107d-108c;  bk 
xvi  116a-122a,c;  bk  xix,  137a;  137c-138c; 
145c;  bk  xxvi,  215b-216a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  327c-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iii,  165b-166a; 
bk  v,  340b-c 


5b  to  5c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  61b-c;  122c-125b 
esp  122c;  533b-535d  esp  533b-534a;  557c-d; 
649c-652a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  14d-16a;  84a- b; 
87d-88c  passim;  89c;  164a-b;  170b-171c;  174b- 
c;  182a-183b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  419c-420a;  436d-437c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments, 
xix  19d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  317c-d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  387d-389b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  25 7d;  259d-260a;  274d- 
277d;  289c;  312a;  391c-392a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  166 
59d-60a;  additions,  107  134a-b 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  423a; 
427c-428a 

5c,  Women  in  relation  to  war 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  21:10-14  / 
Judges ,  4-5 

Apocrypha:  Judith,  8-16— (D)  OT,  Judith,  8-16 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [155-162]  11c;  bk  iii 
[146-160]  20c;  bk  xxii  [405-515]  159c-160d; 
bk  xxiv  [707-804]  178d-179d  /  Odyssey,  bk  ii 
188a-192d 

5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [1-139]  15a-16d  /  Seven 
Against  Thebes  [79-263]  28a-30a  /  Agamem¬ 
non  [399-455]  56b-57a;  [855-922]  61b-d 

5  Euripides:  Medea  [247-268]  214b  /  Trojan 
Women  270a-281a,c  /  Helen  298a-314a,c  / 
Andromache  [91-116]  316a-b  /  Iphigenia  at 
Aulis  425a-439d 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2a;  bk  iii,  121c-d; 
123c;  bk  iv,  143b-144b;  153a-b;  bk  vii, 
232b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  356b-368c  /  Critias, 
479c-480a  /  Laws,  bk  vi,  713b-c;  bk  vii, 
721d-722c;  726a-c;  bk  viii,  734a-735a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i269bi3~ 
I270ai4]  465d-466b 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  17 

16a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [490-493]  116b;  bk  ii 
[567-623 1  140a-141b;  bk  v  [605-699]  202b- 
205b;  bk  xi  [486-915]  341b-353a 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  lOb-llc  /  Romulus,  21a- 
24d  /  Coriolanus,  189d-191c  /  Pyrrhus,  328c- 
330a  /  Antony,  756c-779c  esp  760c-d,  767c- 
774a  /  Marcus  Brutus,  811c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  12b-d;  20b-c;  bk  ii, 
26b-c;  bk  iii,  53a-d;  bk  xiv,  150a-b  /  His¬ 
tories,  bk  iv,  271c-d 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [859-1004]  174a- 
176b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
140c-141c;  144b-c 

26  Shakespeare:  King  John,  act  iii,  sc  i  [299- 
338]  389b-c  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  ii,  sc  iii 
[77-120]  444a-b  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  h,  sc  iii 
477d-478c 


505 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


6  to  6a 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Crcssida ,  act  ii, 
sc  ii  [163-206]  115b-c  /  Coriolanus,  act  v,  sc 
iii  387a  389b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xvi,  sect  182- 
183  67c-68b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  301  be 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  93a  b;  509d-510b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  437b-c;  551d-552c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  565a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  13a-14b;  55c- 
59d;  bk  11,  76a  b;  90c-91a;  bk  v,  222d-223a; 
bk  ix,  367c-369a;  bk  x,  392a-b;  397a-398c; 
410c-421c;  bk  xi,  485a-488c;  518b  c;  528b- 
531d;  bk  xii,  538a-539c;  bk  xiii,  580c-d 

6.  Parents  and  children:  fatherhood,  mother¬ 
hood 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  20:5-6,12  /  Proverbs , 
20:20  /  Jeremiah,  31:29-30— (D)  Jeremias, 
31:29-30  /  Ezekiel,  18— (D)  Ezcchiel,  18 

Apocrypha:  Tobit — (D)  OT,  Tobias /  Ecclesiasti- 
cus,  3:1—16 — (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  3:1-16 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xxii  [429-515]  159d-160d  / 
Odyssey,  bk  ii  188a-192d;  bk  xi  [458-540] 
247c-248b;  bk  xv-xvi  266a-276d 

5  Euripides:  Medea  [1081-1115]  221b-c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vi,  212c-213a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  398c-d 

7  Plato:  Laches,  29b  /  Symposium,  165b-167a 
/  Crito,  214c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  12  [u6ibi6~32] 
414a-b  /  Politics,  bk  1,  ch  12  453d-454a;  bk  ii, 
ch  3  [1262*14-24]  457a;  bk  vii,  ch  16-17 
539d-542a,c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i36ob9~ 
i36ian]  601a-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  1,  ch  12,  173b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  22,  198c- 
199c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [679-698]  229a-b;  bk 
viii  [508-519]  272b-273a;  bk  ix  [224-313] 
285a-287a 

13  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  15  31a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  27, 
a  2  154c-155b;  q  28,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  5  160c- 
161d;  q  30,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1-2  168a-169b; 
q  31,  a  2  172b-173c;  q  32,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2 
178a-179b;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  4-5  179b-180b; 
q  33  180d-185a;  q  39,  a  8  210a-213a;  qq  40- 
42  213a-230a  passim;  q  43,  a  4  232c-233a;  q 
93,  a  6,  rep  2  496b-498a;  Q  119,  a  2,  rep  2 
607b-608d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  81 
162d-167d  passim 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  184a-b:  191c-192d 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  v-vii 
23d-26a  /  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  v  [55-122] 
82b-d 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1-22] 
247d-248a 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,  207c-208d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [388-403]  183b- 
184a;  bk  x  [182-196]  278b 


35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vi  36a-42a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b  31a;  part  iv, 
165b  167a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  191b  192a;  210b 
213a;  352a  353b;  400a-402a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  44b  d;  305b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  364d-365b  /  Political 
Economy,  367a-368c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i, 
387d-388a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  420b-421c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  510b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  173 
61a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  579d-580a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xii, 
395a-398d 

53  James:  Psychology,  189a;  717b 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  406b-c  /  New  Introductory 
Lectures,  863a-c;  876a-d 

6a.  The  desire  for  offspring 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  15:1-6;  19:30-38; 
25:19-26;  30:1-24  /  I  Samuel,  1:1-2:11  —  ( D ) 
I  Kings,  1:1-2:11 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  8:4-8— (D)  OT,  Tobias, 
8:4-10 

New  Testament:  Lu/^e,  1  ^-25 

5  Euripides:  Medea  [1081-1115]  221b-c  /  Ion 
282a-297a,c  /  Andromache  315a-326a,c  esp 
[309-420]  318a-d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  32a-b 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  165b-167a  /  Laws,  bk  iv, 
685a-c;  bk  vi,  708a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1252^7-30] 
445c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  22,  198c- 
199c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [657-722]  121a-123a; 
bk  iv  [296-330]  175a-176a 

14  Plutarch:  Cato  the  Younger,  629a-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  51a;  bk  xv,  162b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  6  lOa-b; 
bk  iv,  par  2  19d  /  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch 
21-22  392b-393b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii, 
ch  12,  663a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  98, 
a  2  517d-519a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  84, 
a  4,  ans  176d-178a;  part  iii,  q  65,  a  i  879c- 
881  d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  155b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  484c 

27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets,  i-xvii  586a-588d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  72c-73a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  xx  449a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [720-775]  168a- 
169a;  bk  x  [966-1053]  295b-297a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  165b-166b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  522a-523a;  549a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  21c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  364d-365b 


506 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(6.  Parents  and  children:  fatherhood,  mother¬ 
hood.  6a.  The  desire  for  offspring.} 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  29d-30d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  293d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  161 
58b 

54  Freud:  Instincts,  415a-b  /  New  Introductory 
Lectures,  860d-861a;  863a-b 

6b.  Eugenics:  control  of  breeding;  birth  control 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv,  143b-c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  v,  361c-363b;  bk  viii, 
403a-d  /  Timaeus ,  443a  /  Statesman,  605d- 
608d  esp  608a-c  /  Laws,  bk  v,  693a-c;  bk  vi, 
707b'709a;  712b-713c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  vii,  ch  3 
[583^ 4-25]  108d  /  Politics,  bk  11,  ch  6  [1265s 
38— bi 8]  460d-461a;  ch  9  [i27oa39~b6]  466c; 
ch  10  [1272*^23-24]  468c;  bkvii,  ch  16  539d- 
541a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  39a-40c  /  Solon,  71d- 
72a  /  Cato  the  Younger,  629a-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  51a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  99, 
a  2,  rep  2  520a-d 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  35,  520b 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis ,  207b-209d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  166a-b;  168a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  193b-194b;  271b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiii,  187d; 
190a-b;  191c-d;  192a-b;  192d-199b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  335a-b;  364d-365a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  175c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  83c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  319b-d  j  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  426d-427a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  267  b-c;  275d-277c 
esp  276d-277a;  323b-328a;391d-394a,c;  578a- 
579a;  581c-d;  583a;  596b-d 

6c.  The  condition  of  immaturity 

New  Testament:  I  Corinthians,  13:10-11 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  16c-17c  /  Protagoras ,  46b-d  / 
Euthydemus,  67a  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  320c-321d; 
bk  iv,  353b-d;  bk  v,  366a-c;  bk  vii,  399c- 
401a  /  Philebus,  611c-d  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  653a-c; 
bk  vii,  723c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [247bi3~248a 
6]  330c-d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  viii,  ch 
1  [588a25-b5]  114b, d  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk 
iv,  ch  10  [686b5~3o]  218a-c  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch 
3  [io94b27-io95an]  340a;  ch  9  [1 099^2-1  iooa 
9]  345b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  12  [1 1 19^35— bi9]  366a, c; 
bk  iv,  ch  9  [ii28bi5-2o]  376a;  bk  v,  ch  6 
[ii34b8-i7]  382b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  8  [ii42ai2-i9] 
391b;  bk  vii,  ch  13  [1 153*^27-35]  404c-d;  bk 
viii,  ch  3  [ii56a22-b5]  407d-408a;  bk  x,  ch  3 
[1  i74ai— 4]  428b  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  12  453d- 
454a;  bk  iii,  ch  5  [1278^-6]  475a-b;  bk  vii, 
ch  9  [1329^-17]  533b-c;  ch  14  [i332b36-4i] 


6b  to  6c 

537c-d;  ch  15  [i334b8-28]  539b-d;  ch  17 
541a-542a,c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  12  636a-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [222-234] 
64a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  6,  182b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  17  255d- 
256d 

14  Plutarch:  Alexander,  540b,d-549c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  7-31  2c-9a; 
bk  11,  par  3-9  Qb-lla  /  City  of  God,  bk  xxi, 
ch  16  573b-574a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq 
ioo-ioi  520d-523d;  part  i-ii,  q  34,  a  i,  rep 
2  768c-769d;  q  40,  a  6  796c-797a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
A  I,  REP  to  CONTRARY  221a-d;  Q  95,  A  I  226c- 
227c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi  [85- 
96]  77d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60b;  78b;  part 
ii,  132b-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
9c-lld;  14c-18b;  24a-30c;  bk  ii,  74b-75c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  43a-c;  63d-79c  passim, 
esp  72b-75a; 414a-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii, 
sc  11  [163-173]  115b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vi,  sect  54-75 
36c-42a  passim ;  ch  vii,  s  ect  79-8 1  42c-43a ;  ch 
xv,  sect  170  64d-65a  !  Human  Understanding, 
bk  11,  ch  xxxiii,  sect  8-10  249c-d 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  36a-54c  esp  36a-38b, 
53b-54c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiii,  189b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  387d-388a; 

389c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  271d-272a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  159 
58a;  par  173-175  61a-d;  additions,  68  126d- 
127a; 111-112  134d-135a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  20c-26a;  35b- 
37d;  bk  iii,  132b-c;  bk  iv,  192d-193c;  bk  vi, 
252d-254c;  269c-270a;  bk  ix,  381b-c;  382a- 
384b;  bk  xii,  559d;  bk  xiv,  592d-604b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iv, 
90b-92b;  100c-109a,c;  bk  x  272a-297d;  epi¬ 
logue,  408a-412d 

53  James:  Psychology,  206b-207a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  15a-18a  /  Sexual  Enlightenment  of 
Children  119a-122a,c  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams, 
191b-193a;  238c-239a;  241b-243c/  Narcissism, 
400a  /  General  Introduction,  495a-496b  passim; 
526d-532a  esp  526d-527c,  530d-532a;  572d- 
576d;  579b-584d  esp  579b-580d;  591a-d;  592c; 
594d-599b;  612d-614b  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure 
Principle,  641d-643c;  644d-645a;  651b-c  / 
Group  Psychology,  685b-d;  693a-c  /  Inhibitions , 
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  724a-727c;  737c-740c; 
741b;  743a-d;  746c-747a;  751d-753c  /  Civili¬ 
zation  and  Its  Discontents,  768b-c  /  New  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures,  855b-861c  passim;  868d-870c 


507 


6d  Chapter  26: 

6d.  The  care  and  government  of  children:  the 
rights  and  duties  of  the  child;  parental 
despotism  and  tyranny 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  9:21-26  /  Exodus , 
12:26-27;  20:12;  21:15,17  /  Ixviticus ,  19:3  / 
Deuteronomy ,  5:16;  6:6-7;  21  :i 5-23  /  Proverbsy 
1:8-9;  3:12;  6:20-23;  13:1,24;  15:5;  19:18; 
20:20;  22:6,15;  23:13-24;  28:24;  29:15,17; 
30:17  /  Zechariahy  13:3— (£>)  Zacharias ,  13:3 

Apocrypha:  To  bit,  4:1-5  —  (D)  OT,  Tobias , 
4:1-6  /  Ecclesiasticus,  3:1-18;  4:30;  7:23-28; 
30:1-13;  42:9-11  — (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus , 
3:1-20;  4:35;  7:25-30;  30:1-13;  42:9-11 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  10:35-37;  15:3-6  / 
L//%,  2:51-52;  12:51-53  /  //  Corinthians ,  12:14 
/  Galatians ,  4:1-2  /  Ephesians ,  6:1-4  /  Colos- 
siansy  3:20-21  /  I  Timothy ,  5:8 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  81a-91d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [1458-1530] 
112c-113a,c  /  Oedipus  at  Colonus  114a-130a,c  / 
Antigone  [626-767]  136c-137d  /  Electra  156a- 
169a, c  /  Trachiniae  [1157-1278]  180a-181a,c 

5  Euripides  :Alcestis  [280-325]  239c-240a;  [611- 
738]  242c-243c  /  Heracles  Mad  [562-584] 
369d-370a;  [622-636]  370c  /  Phoenician 

Maidens  378a-393d  esp  [1485-1766]  391a- 
393d/  Orestes  394a-410d 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [791-888]  498b-499b; 
[1321-1451]  504c-506b  /  B/ttA  [1337-1371] 
558d-559b;  [1640-1675]  562b-c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  76a;  bk  iv,  155c- 
156a;  bk  v,  160d-161a;  bk  viii,  281c 

7  Plato:  Lysis  y  16c-17c  /  Laches ,  26a-27d  / 

Protagoras,  42d-43d;  45d-47c  /  Symposium , 
165c-166b  /  M<?rco,  186a-187b  /  Euthyphroy 
192a-c  /  O7/0,  214c;  216d-217d  /  RepubliCy 
bk  11,  321b-c;  bk  v,  360d-365d  /  TimaeuSy 
442d-443a  /  bk  iii,  672d-673d;  bk  iv, 

683b-c;  bk  v,  686d-688b  esp  687d-688a;  bk 

vii,  713c-716c;  723c-d;  bk  ix,  750d-751b; 
755a-757c;  bk  xi,  779b-781c  /  Seventh  Lettery 
804a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animahy  bk  vii,  ch  i 
[58ibi  1—22]  107b  /  Ethicsy  bk  hi,  ch  12  [1119s 
33— bi8]  366a, c;  bk  v,  ch  6  [n34b8-i7]  382b-c; 
bk  viii,  ch  10  [n6ob23-32]  413a;  bk  ix,  ch  2 
417c-418b;  bk  x,  ch  9  [n8oai4-bi4]  434d- 
435c  /  PoliticSy  bk  1,  ch  12-13  453d-455a,c 
passim;  bk  iii,  ch  6  [i278b3o-i279a2]  476a-b; 
bk  iv,  ch  11  [i295bi4-2o]  495d;  bk  vii,  ch  15 
[I334b8~28]  539b-d;  ch  17  541a-542a,c;  bk 

viii,  ch  3  [i338a30-b8]  543c-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  116d- 
118d;  ch  23  128c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  22,  198c-199c 

12  Aurelius:  MeditationSy  bk  i  253a-256d 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues ,  iv  [60-64]  15b  /  Aeneid ,  bk 
viii  [508-519]  272b-273a;  bk  ix  [224-313] 
285a-287a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  40c-41a  /  Fabius , 

152b-d  /  CoriolanuSy  174b,d-175a;  189d-191d 
/  Marcus  Catoy  286c-287b 


FAMILY 

18  Augustine:  ConfessionSy  bk  i,  par  18  5c-d; 
bk  ii,  par  3-8  9b  l0d  /  City  of  Gody  bk  xix, 
cii  14  520a  d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  2,  ans  221d-223a;  q  95,  a  i,  ans  226c-227c; 
q  105,  a  4,  ans  318b  321a;  part  ii  -ii  ,  q  26, 
aa  9-1 1  517a-519a 

22  Ciiaucer:  Physician's  Tale  [12,006-038]  367b- 
368a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  part  ii,  109c-110b;  121a; 
137d; 155b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruely  bk  i, 
14c-18b;  bk  11,  74b-75c;  81a-83b;  bk  iii,  219b- 
222b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  43a-c;  63d-79c  passim, 
esp  63d-64b,  66c-67a;  83a-c;  183c-192d  esp 
183d-185d;  344a-c;  534a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VIy  act  ii,  sc  ii 
[1:— 55]  78d-79b  /  Titus  AndronicuSy  act  v,  sc 
in  [35-64]  196d-197a  /  Romeo  and  Juliet  285a- 
319a, c  esp  act  iii,  sc  v  [127-215]  308c-309c  / 
Midsummer-Night' s  Dream ,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-121] 
352a-353c  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  iii,  sc  ii  45 2 d- 
454d 

27  Shakespeare:  Othelloy  act  i,  sc  iii  [175-189] 
210d-211a  /  King  Lear  244a-283a,c  esp  act  i 
244a-254c  /  Cymbeliney  act  i,  sc  i  [125-158] 
451a-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixotey  part  ii,  218c-220c; 
251b;  261c-262a 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis ,  207b-209d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  xx  449a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Governmenty  ch  vi,  sect  52-CH 
vii,  sect  81  36a-43a;  ch  xv,  sect  170  64d- 
65a;  sect  1 73-1 74  65c-d  /  Human  Understand - 
ingy  bk  1,  ch  ii,  sect  9,  106a-b;  sect  12 
107b-d;  bk  11,  ch  xxxm,  sect  7-10  249b-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  29b;  part  iv,  166a- 
167a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  191b-192a;  250b- 
251a;  400a-402a;  410a-411a;  423b-424b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jonesy  35a-49a,c;  65b-c; 
108c-110c;  120c-121a,c;  124a-126c;  136a-c; 
217d-219c;  283c-d;  310b-313b;  321b-324b; 
338d-345d;  359b-364d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  v,  22d-23a; 
bk  xxiii,  187d-188a;  189b-d;  bk  xxvi,  216a- 
217b; 220a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality y  326c-d;357a-b;  365a-b 
/  Political  Economy ,  367a-368c;  377a  /  Social 
Contracty  bk  i,  387d-388a;  389c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  i,  29d-30d; 
bk  v,  338c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fally  45b-c;  82b-83c 

42  Kant:  Science  ofRighty  404d;  420b-422d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  316d-319d  passim,  esp  31 7d 

44  Boswell:  Johnsony  199d-200d;  247c-d;  301  d- 
302a; 424d-425a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  ofRighty  part  iii,  par  159 
58a;  par  173-175  61a-d;  additions,  iii  134d- 
135a  /  Philosophy  of  History \  part  i,  211d- 
212c;  part  iii,  288c-289b 


508 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(6.  Parents  and  children :  fatherhood,  mother - 
hood .  6d.  The  care  and  government  of  chil¬ 
dren:  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  child; 
parental  despotism  and  tyranny.) 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  193a-194b;  241a-d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  427c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  2c-3a;  22b- 
23a;  34d-35b;  47b-48d;  bk  hi,  119a-128d;  bk 
iv,  192b-193d;  bk  v,  207b-208a;  210b-211a; 
bk  vi,  252d-254c;  27lc-274a,c;  bk  vii,  291a- 
292b;  bk  viii,  305b-307d;  324b-325c;  335d- 
336a;  bk  ix,  356b-358b;  381b-c;  382a-384b; 
bk  x,  406c-410c;  epilogue  i,  659d-674a,c 
passim 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  i,  2d- 
11a;  bk  xii,  370b-d;  395a-398d 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  17d-18a  /  Sexual  Enlightenment  of 
Children  119a-122a,c  passim  /  Interpretation  of 
Dreams ,  244a-c  /  Narcissism ,  406b-c  /  General 
Introduction ,  573b-d  /  Inhibitions ,  Symptoms , 
and  Anxiety ,  751  d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents ,  794c-795a  esp  795b  [fn  2]  /  New  In¬ 
troductory  Lectures ,  83 2  b-c;  834b-c;  868d- 
871a  esp  869b-c,  870a-c;  876c 

6e.  The  initiation  of  children  into  adult  life 

New  Testament:  Lu\e,  2:41-52 

4  Homer:  Odyssey ,  bk  i-ii  183a-192d;  bk  xi 
[487-540]  247d-248b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iv,  125c-126a;  155c- 
156a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  12  [1119*33- 
bi8]  366a, c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  1  253a-256d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  41b-42b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  3-8  9b-10d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  63d-79c  passim,  esp  72b- 
75a;  156d-158a,cfl84a-191c  esp  187a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Two  GefUlemen  of  Verona,  act 
1,  sc  iii  [1-42]  232c-d/  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  v, 
sc  11  497d-499b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  iii  [52-136] 
34d-35d  /  Cymbeline ,  act  iv,  sc  iv  478b-d 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis ,  207b-209a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vi,  sect  59-69 
37b-40b  passim 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xviii, 
133a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  376b-d  / 
Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  387d-388a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  82a;  91b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  86b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  159 
58a;  par  174  61b;  par  177  62a;  additions, 
111-112  134d-135a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  387b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  36d-37a;  bk 
iii,  128d-131c  esp  130d-131b;  bk  iv,  192d- 
193c;  bk  vi,  254c-260a;  267c-270a;  bk  ix, 
381b-c;  382a-384b;  bk  xiv,  592d-604b 


6e  to  la 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  17d-18a  /  Sexual  Enlightenment  of 
Children  119a-122a,c  passim  /  General  Intro¬ 
duction,  512a;  583c-d;  584 b-c  /  Group  Psy¬ 
chology,  682a- b  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discon¬ 
tents,  783d 

7.  The  life  of  the  family 

la.  Marriage  and  love:  romantic,  conjugal, 
and  illicit  love 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:23-24;  24:67;  29:16- 
30  /  Ruth  /  I  Samuel,  1:1-8— (D)  I  Kings, 
1:1-8  /  II  Samuel ,  11;  13:1-20 — {D)  II  Kings, 
11 ;  13:1-20  /  Proverbs,  5;  6:20-7:27  /  Ecclesias¬ 
tes,  9:9  /  Song  of  Solomon— (D)  Canticle  of 
Canticles 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  6:10-17— iP)  OT,  Tobias, 
6:11-22  /  Ecclesiasticus,  7:26;  25:1;  40:23 — 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  7:28;  25:1-2;  40:23 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  19:4-6  /  Mar\, 
10:6-9  /  f  Corinthians,  7:1-15,32-34  /  Ephe¬ 
sians,  5:22-33  /  Colossians ,  3:18-19  /  /  P<?/£r, 
3:1-7 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ix  [334-347]  60c-d;  bk  xiv 
[229-360]  lOOc-lOld  /  Odyssey,  bk  xxiii  [152— 
365]  313d-316a;  bk  xxiv  [191-202]  319a 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [681-781]  59b-60b 
/  Choephoroe  [385-651]  75d-76b;  [892-930] 
78d-79b 

5  Sophocles:  Trachiniae  170a-181a,c 

5  Euripides:  Medea  212a-224a,c  esp  [446-662] 
215d-217c  /  Hippclytus  225a.'236d  esp  [373— 
481]  228b'229b  /  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  esp 
[152-198]  238c-239a,  [329-368]  240a-b  /  Sz/p- 
pliants  [990-1071]  267a-c  /  Trojan  Women  [634— 
683]  275c-d  /  298a-314a,c  /  Andromache 

315a-326a,c  esp  [147-244]  316c-317b  /  Electra 
[988-1122]  336a-337b 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c  /  Thes- 
mophoriazusae  60Ga-614d  esp  [383-532]  604d- 
606a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vi,  197a-c;  bk  ix, 
311b-312d 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  152d-153a  /  Republic,  bk 
v,  361b-363b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  12  [n62ai5-34] 
414c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1192- 
1287]  59d'61a,c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ii  [730-794]  144b-146b;  bk 
iv  [1-361]  167a-177a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  39d'40b  /  Lycurgus - 
Numa,  62d'63c  /  Solon,  71d-72a  /  Demetrius, 
731a-b  /  Antony,  756c-779d  /  Marcus  Brutus, 
807b-d:  811c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  64b-c;  bk  xi,  107b- 
110a;  bk  xii,  121c 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  i  100c- 
101c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  2-8  9b- 
lOd;  bk  iv,  par  2  19d;  bk  vi,  par  21-25  41c- 


la  to  lb 

42d  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xiv,  ch  16-26  390a- 
396c;  bk  xv,  ch  16,  411bc  /  Christian  Doc - 
trine,  bk  hi,  ch  12,  663ac;  ch  18-22  664d- 
666c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, 
a  2,  ans  489d-490c;  q  98,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3 
517d-519a;  part  i-ii,  q  28,  a  4,  ans  742d- 
743c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  4,  ans  318b-321a;  part  ii-ii,  q  26,  a  ii 
518b-519a;  part  iii,  q  6,  a  i,  rep  3  740b- 
741b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  v  [25-142]  7b- 
8b;  purgatory,  viii  [67-84]  65a;  xxv  [109- 
139]  92c-d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida  la-1 55a  / 
Miller's  Tale  212b-223b  /  Wife  of  Bath's  Pro¬ 
logue  [5583-6410]  256a-269b  /  Tale  of  Wife  of 
Bath  270a-277a  esp  [6619-6623]  273a/  Clerks 
Tale  296a-318a  /  Merchant's  Tale  319a-338a 
/  Franklin's  Talek  351b-366a  esp  [11,041-125] 
351b-352b,  [11,754-7666]  363a  /  Manciple's 
Tale  [17,088-103]  490a  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par 
79-80  541a-542a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  155b-c;  part  iv, 
272d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 

8c-d;  bk  11,  73b-74b;  106a-108d;  109c- 

126d;  bk  iii,  144d-146a;  148d-150d;  154a- 
156c;  159d-163c;  166a-169d;  186d-188c; 

196b-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  37c-40a;  84a-b;  89d-90c; 
306d-307a;  358b-362a;  409d-434d  esp  410a- 
422b;  472a-473a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI ,  act  v,  sc  iii 
[80-195]  28a-29b;  sc  v  [48-78]  31d-32a  / 
Comedy  of  Errors,  act  ii,  sc  i  152a-153b;  sc  11 
[112-148]  154c-d;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [1-70]  157c- 
158b;  act  v,  sc  i  [38-122]  165c-166b  /  Taming 
of  the  Shrew  199a-228a,c  /  Two  Gentlemen  of 
Verona ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1-34]  230d-231b  /  Romeo 
and  Juliet  285a-319a,c  /  Richard  II,  act  v,  sc  i 
[71-102]  345d-346b  /  Much  Ado  About  Noth¬ 
ing  503a-531a,c  /  Henry  V ,  act  v,  sc  ii  [98- 
306]  564b-566a  /  Julius  Caesar ,  act  ii,  sc  i 
[261-309]  577b-c  /  As  You  Like  It ,  act  iv, 
sc  1  [127-180]  628b-c;  act  v,  sc  iv  [114-156] 
625a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [137— i 59J 
33a;  sc  iii  [5-51]  34c-d;  sc  v  [34-91]  37bd; 
act  iii,  sc  1  [120-157]  48b-c  /  Merry  Wives  of 
Windsor  73a-102d  /  Troilus  and  Cressida  103a- 
141a, c  /  Othello  205a-243a,c  /  Antony  and 
Cleopatra  311a-350d  /  Cymbeline  449a-488d 
esp  act  ii,  sc  v  463a-c,  act  iii,  sc  iv  466d- 
468d,  act  v,  sc  v  [25-68]  483c-484a,  [129-227] 
484d-485d  /  Tempest ,  act  iv,  sc  i  [1— 133] 
542b-543a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  120b-137d; 
part  ii,  261c-262a;  270c-271a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  xix-xx 
449a 


509 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [172-340]  156a- 
159b;  [440-504]  162a-163b;  [736-775]  168b- 
169a;  bk  v  [443-450]  185a;  bk  viii  [39-65] 
233a  b;  [491-520]  243a*b;  bk  ix  [226-269] 
252a  253a;  [952-959]  268a;  bk  x  [888-908] 
293b  294a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  193b  194a;  522a- 
523a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  2b  c;  14b-16b;  17a  b; 
30a-32d;  108c-lllc;  118d;  124a-125b;  130b  c; 
199b-200a;  230a-231c;  283b-c;  289b  291a; 
321b322a;  332a-333a;  349b-350b;  352d- 
353a;  360b-d;  400a-402d;  405a, c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  364d-365b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  92c-93a;  649c- 
652a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  419a-420b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  22a;  57a;  64a;  107a;  160b; 
194a; 294d-295a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  158 
58a;  par  161-168  58b-60c;  additions,  101-108 
133b-134c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [4243-4250]  104a; 

part  ii  [6479-9944]  158a-241b  esp  [6487- 
6500]  158b,  [7070-7079]  173a-b,  [9182-9272] 
223a-225a,  [9356-9573]  227a-232a,  [9695- 

9754]  235a-236b,  [9939-9944]  241b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace  esp  bk  i,  3a-c,  bk 
iii,  122b-c,  bk  iv,  173d-179a,  bk  vi,  245d- 
250a,  269c-d,  bk  vii,  291a-292b,  301b-302d, 
bk  viii,  311a-313a,  bk  xii,  539c-547a,  bk  xv, 
635a-644a,c,  epilogue  i,  650d-674a,c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,  4a- 
5b;  bk  ii,  21b-24d;  39a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  735a-b 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  404d-406b  /  Group  Psy¬ 
chology,  694b-695b  /  New  Introductory  Lec¬ 
tures,  862d-863c 

lb.  The  continuity  of  the  family:  the  veneration 
of  ancestors;  family  pride,  feuds,  curses 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  9:21-27;  12:1-3; 

13:14-17;  15:2-5;  17;  22:16-18;  25:20-34; 
26:24;  27:1-28:5;  28:13-15;  30:1-24;  48-49  / 
Exodus ,  3:15-16;  20:5-6  /  Numbers,  36:3-10  / 
Deuteronomy ,  5:9-10;  25:5-10  /  Ruth  / 
II  Sainuel,  21:1-9— iP)  H  Kings,  21:1-9  / 
I  Chronicles ,  28:1-8 — (D)  I  Paralipomenon, 
28:1-8  /  II  Chronicles,  25:3-4 —(D)  II  Para¬ 
lipomenon,  25:3-4  /  Proverbs,  17:6  /  Jeremiah , 
31:29-30 —(D)  Jeremias,  31:29-30  /  Ezekiel , 
1 8 — (Z))  Ezechiel,  18 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  3:1-16— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  3:1-16 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  xi  [458-540]  247c-248b 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  27a-39a,c 
esp  [720-791]  35a-d  /  Prometheus  Bound  [887— 
893]  49c  /  Agamemnon  52a-69d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  / 
Ajax  [1290-13 1 5]  154a-b  /  Electra  156a-169a,c 

5  Euripides:  Electra  327a-339a,c  /  Phoenician 
Maidens  378a-393d 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


510 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  The  life  of  the  family .  lb.  The  continuity  of 
the  family :  the  veneration  of  ancestors;  fam¬ 
ily  pride,  feuds,  curses.) 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  13bc;  bk  iii, 
96c-d;  bk  iv,  146a-b;  149b-c;  bk  v,  167b-168a 

7  Plato:  Charmides ,  3c-d  /  Laws ,  bk  iv,  683b-c; 
bk  ix,  752d-753a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  6  [i  149^4— 13] 
400a;  bk  viii,  ch  ii  [1161*15-21]  413b-c  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i36obi9-38]  601a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i  253a-256d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ii  [671-804]  143a-146b; 
bk  v  [42-103]  188a-190a;  bk  vi  [679-702] 
229a-b;  [756-901]  231a-235a;  bk  viii  [609-731] 
275a-278b;  bk  x  [276-286]  309b-310a 

14  Plutarch:  Aratus ,  826a-c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  ii,  227b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  6  lOa-b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xi  [46- 
72]  69b-c;  paradise,  xv-xvi  128b-132a 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Wife  of  Bath  [6691-6788] 
274b-276a  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  27,  514b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  121d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 
140c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  411a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  v-vii 
23d-26a  /  Romeo  and  Juliet  285a-319a,c  / 
Julius  Caesar,  act  i,  sc  ii  [132-161]  570d-571a 

27  Shakespeare:  All's  Well  That  Ends  Well, 
act  11,  sc  iii  [110-151]  152c-153a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  626  286b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  225b-227b;  307b- 
310a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  15c-17d;  106b-c;  125b; 
275a;  362c-364d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xix,  140a; 
bk  xxiii,  188b-c;  189b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  242a-b;  412c-413a 
passim;  497a-498a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81d;  389b-c;  453a- 
456a, c  esp  453a-b;  571a-572d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  274b-278a;  280c-281a; 
282a-b;  289c-d;  293d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  173 
61a-b;  par  180  62c-63c  /  Philosophy  of  Histo¬ 
ry,  intro,  197c-d;  part  1,  211d-212c;  part  iv, 
320c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  x,  399d-401d 

52  Dostoevsky  '.Brothers  Karamazov,  BKii,41a-b 

7c.  Patterns  of  friendship  in  the  family:  man 
and  wife;  parents  and  children;  brothers 
and  sisters 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  4:1-16;  9:18-29;  22:1- 
19;  24;  25:21-34;  27;  29:21-30;  32-34;  37; 
42-45;  50:15-23  /  Exodus ,  2:1-8  /  Judges, 
11:30-40  /  Ruth,  1:3-18  /  I  Samuel,  18:1-4;  20 
— (D)  I  Kings,  18:1-4;  20  /  II  Samuel,  13-14; 
i8:^3~(D)  II  Kings,  13-14;  18:33  /  Proverbs, 
10:1;  15:20/ Micah,  7:5-6— (D)  Micheas,  7:5-6 


1c 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  4:1-4— (D)  OT,  Tobias, 
4:1-5  /  Ecclesiasticus ,  25:1;  40:23-24— (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  25:1-2;  40:23-24 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  10:21,35-37;  12:46- 
50;  19:29  /  Mar\,  3:31-35;  13:12  /  Lufy,  8:19- 
21;  12:51-53;  14:26;  15:11-32;  18:29-30 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xxii  [1-98]  155a-156a;  [405- 
515]  159c-160d;  bk  xxiv  [159-804]  172d-179d 
/  Odyssey,  bk  ii  188a-192d;  bk  xi  [458-540] 
247c-248b;  bk  xiv-xv  260a-271d;  bk  xvi 
[167-225]  273d-274b;  bk  xvii  [31-60]  277b-c; 
bk  xxiii  [1-245]  312a-314d;  bk  xxiv  [290- 
361]  320a-d 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [956-1078] 
37d-39a,c  /  Choephoroe  70a-80d  esp  [212-305] 
72b- 73a,  [892-930]  78d-79b 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  114a-130a,c 
esp  [324-460]  117a-118b,  [1150-1446]  124d- 
127b  /  Antigone  131a-142d  /  Ajax  [1290-1315] 
154a-b  /  Electra  156a-169a,c  /  Trachiniae  170a- 
181a, c  * 

5  Euripides:  Medea  212a-224a,c  esp  [976-1270] 
220b-222d  /  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  esp  [614- 
740]  242c-243c  /  Suppliants  258a-269a,c  esp 
[990—1 1 13]  267a-268a  /  Trojan  Women  [740- 
798]  276c-d;  [1156-1255]  279d-280c  /  Androm¬ 
ache  [309-420]  318a-d  /  Electra  [988-1122] 
336a-337b  /  Hecuba  [383-443]  356a-d  / 
Heracles  Mad  [562-584]  369d-370a;  [622-645] 
370c  /  Phoenician  Maidens  378a-393d  /  Orestes 
394a-410d  esp  [211-315]  396a-397a,  [1012- 
1055]  404a-c  /  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  411a- 
424d  esp  [769-849]  417d-418c  /  Iphigenia  at 
Aulis  425a-439d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  7a-b;  8a-10a; 
32a-c;  bk  ii,  73b-74d;  76b-d;  bk  iii,  89d; 
95d-96c;  lOOb-lOlb;  114d-115a;  116a;  bk  iv, 
143b-144b;  bk  vi,  194d-195b;  212c-213a;  bk 
ix,  311b-312d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
398c-d 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  i,  296d-297a;  bk  v  360d- 
365d  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  683b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  iii, 
ch  2  [753a7— 15]  294a-b/  Ethics ,  bk  vii,  ch  4 
[ii48a26-b4]  398d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1155*16-21] 
406b, d;  ch  7  [1 158bi2— 24]  410c-d;  ch  8 
[1159*24-33]  411b-c;  ch  9  [ii59b25-n6o*9] 
411d-412b;  ch  10  [n6ob23]-cH  n  [1161*29] 
413a-c;  ch  12  413d-414d;  ch  14  [u63bi3-27] 
416c-d;  bk  ix,  ch  2  417c-418b;  ch  4  [n66* 
1-9]  419a-b;  ch  7  [1168*21-27]  421d  /  Politics , 
bk  1,  ch  12-13  453d-455a,c;  bk  ii,  ch  3-4 
456c-458a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [ioii- 
1018]  74b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  23  128c-d 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues,  iv  [60-64]  15b  /  Aeneid,  bk 
iii  [692-715]  166a-b;  bk  v  [42-103]  188a-190a; 
bk  vi  [679-702]  229a-b;  bk  viii  [554-584] 
273b-274b;  bk  ix  [280-302]  286b-287a;  bk  x 
[822-828]  324b-325a;  bk  xi  [29-71]  328b- 


1c  to  Id 

330a;  [139-181]  331b-333a;  bk  xii  [409-440] 
365a  b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa ,  62d  63c  /  Solon , 
66b-d;  71d-72a  /Pericles,  139a-140a  /  Coriola- 
nus  174b,d-193a,c  esp  175d-176b,  189d~191d 
/  Timoleon,  196b-198b  /  Marcus  Cato ,  286b- 
287b  /  Alexander,  542a-545b  /  CWo  the  Young¬ 
er,  623c-624a  /  Agis,  654c-655a  /  Demetrius , 
727a~b;  740d-741c  /  Marcus  Brutus ,  807b  d; 
811c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  10c-d;  bk  xi,  107b- 
110a;  bk  xii,  115a-c;  118d-119b;  bk  xiii,  128a- 
131b;  bk  xiv,  141b-143d;  bk  xvi,  183a-c  / 
Histories,  bk  iv,  282b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  19-21 
18b-19b;  bk  v,  par  15  31a-c;  bk  ix,  par  17-37 
66a-71b  /  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  14  520a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  60, 
a  4,  ans  312c-313b;  q  96,  a  3,  rep  2  512a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
26,  aa  8-1 1  516a-519a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxxii  [124]— 
xxxiii  [90]  49a-50c;  paradise,  xv-xvii  128b- 
133c  passim 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath.'  s  Prologue  [5893-5914] 
261a-b  /  Clerks  Tale  296a-318a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xvii,  24b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  155b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
8c-d;  bk  11,  81a-83b;  bk  iii,  144b-c;  196b-d; 
bk  iv,  242c-244d;  248d-250a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  66c-67a;  83a-84b;  184a- 
192d  esp  184a-d;  358b-362a;  409d-434d  esp 
410a-422b;  472a-473a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  v-vii 
23d-26a  /  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  v  [55-113] 
82b-d  /  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  ii  [  1  —4 1  ]  32 2 d- 
323a  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  ii,  sc  iii  477d-478c; 
act  iv,  sc  iv-v  492d-496d  /  Julius  Caesar, 
act  11,  sc  1  [234-309]  577a-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  iii  [5-51] 
34c-d;  [84-136]  35b-d;  act  iv,  sc  v  [115-216] 
60d-62a  /  King  Lear  244a-283a,c  /  Coriolanus, 
act  1,  sc  iii  355b-356b;  act  ii,  sc  i  [1 10-220] 
362a-363b;  act  v,  sc  iii  387a-389b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  84b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [720-775]  168a- 
169a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [1476-1507]  371b- 
372b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  165b-166a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  17d-19a,c;  22d-25a; 
44b-d;  65b-c;  126c-127b;  235b-238d;  304a-c; 
405a, c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xvi,  117c; 
bk  xix,  140a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  326c-d;  327c-d;  350b; 
364d-365b  /  Political  Economy,  368b-c  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  i,  387d-388a 

40  Gibbon;  Decline  and  Fall,  92d-93a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  419a-420b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  57a;  57d-58a;  90c;  305b; 
424d-425a;  510b-c 


511 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  158 
58a;  par  173  61a-b;  additions,  iio  134d;  112 
135a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  172b-d; 
part  1,  211d-212c;  part  iii,  288d-289b 

47  Goetiie:  Faust,  part  i  [3620-3775]  88b- 
92a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  387a-388b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  2c-3a;  7d  8d; 
13a-14b;  25a-31a;  37d-47b;  55c-59d;  bk  iii, 
119a-131c;  bk  iv,  165a-168d;  179b  180d; 
183d-184b;  192b-193d;  bk  v,  203a-d;  210b- 
211a;  bk  vi,  247a-248a;  251a-b;  252d-254c; 
270b-274a,c;  bk  vii,  276b  277a;  290b-291a; 
bk  viii,  305b-310d;  314a-316a;  326b  329c; 
bk  ix,  356b-358b;  bk  x,  406c-410c;  412d- 
414b;  416c-417b;  bk  xi,  485a-d;  bk  xii, 
553c-d;  bk  xv,  614a-618b;  epilogue  1,  650d- 
674a, c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iv, 
90b-92b;  100c-109a,c;  bk  v,  117c-121d;  137a- 
c;  bk  vi,  148d-150d;  bk  x,  285a-297d;  epi¬ 
logue,  408a-412d 

53  James:  Psychology,  189a;  190a;  717b;  735b- 
736b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  241b-246b  / 
Narcissism,  406b-c  /  General  Introduction, 
528d-529d;  583a-c  /  Group  Psychology,  685c  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  783 b-c  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures,  856d-859a;  862d- 
863c 

Id .  The  emotional  impact  of  family  life  upon 
the  child:  the  domestic  triangle;  the 
symbolic  roles  of  father  and  mother 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  ii  188a-192d;  bk  xv-xvi 
266a-276d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  esp 
[976-983]  108b  /  Electra  156a-169a,c  esp  [254- 
309]  158a-b,  [516-633]  160a-161a 

5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  225a-236d  /  Electra 
327a-339a,c  esp  [1008-1123]  336b-337b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  89d;  lOOb-lOlb; 
bk  iv,  151a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  6  [1  i49b4— 13] 
400a;  bk  viii,  ch  ior[n6ob23-33]  413a;  ch  12 
413d-414d  passim  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  12  [i259b 
10-16]  454a 

14  Plutarch  :  Artaxerxes,  855b-c 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  i,  sc  i  [21  i- 
263]  72b-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet  29aL-12a,c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  xiii 
448b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  165b-166a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  126c-127c 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  377a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  iio 
134d;  112  135a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  271c-273c; 
bk  viii,  305b-307d;  bk  ix,  356b-358b; 
epilogue  1,  658a-659d;  662a-664b;  667b-d; 
669a;  669c-d;  673d-674a,c 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


512 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7 .  The  life  of  the  family .  Id.  The  emotional  im¬ 
pact  of  family  life  upon  the  child:  the 
domestic  triangle;  the  symbolic  roles  of 
father  and  mother .) 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  34b- 
36c;  38b-39b;  bk  iii,  59d-62a;  69d-70c;  bk 
iv,  104b-109a,c;  bk  viii,  207a-d;  bk  ix,  244b- 
245b;  bk  xii,  365a-b;  395a-398d 

54  Freud:  Origin  a?id  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis ,  14b-19a  esp  17b-18a  /  Interpretation 
of  Dreams ,  240d-249a  /  General  Introduction , 
528d-531d;  573d-574d;  580d-585a;  591a-d; 
594d-599b  passim  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Prin¬ 
ciple ,  644d-645a  /  Group  Psychology ,  678d- 
681b;  685b-687d;  692a-694b  esp  693a-b  / 
Ego  and  Id,  703c-708c  esp  704d-707d  /  Inhi¬ 
bitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  724a-727c; 
738d-742a;  743a-b;  751d;  752c-753c  /  Civi¬ 
lization  and  Its  Discontents,  792b-796c  esp 
794c-795a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  832  b- 
834d;  855a-863b  esp  856b-860a;  876a-d 

8.  Historical  observations  on  the  institution  of 
marriage  and  the  family 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  ii  188a-192d;  bk  xiv- 
xv  260a-271d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  34a-b;  39b-c; 
44b-d;  48c;  bk  iii,  104d-105a;  bk  iv,  143b- 
144b;  155c-156a;  bk  v,  160d-161a;  167b-168a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i269bi3~ 
i270b7]  465d-466c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [953-965] 
73c;  [1011-1027]  74b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  26a-b  /  Lycurgus,  39a- 
41a  /  Numa  Pompilius,  54a-55a;  58d  /  Lycur - 


8 

gus-Numa,  62d-64a  /  Solon,  72b-73a  /  Themis - 
tocles,  99a- b  /  Alcibiades,  158b-d  /  Ly sunder, 
368a, c  /  Cato  the  Younger,  629a-c  /  Agis, 
650d-651b/  Antony -Demetrius,  780d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  44b-c;  bk  iii,  53a-d; 
bk  iv,  67d-68a;  73d-74c;  bk  xii,  llla-c;  121d- 
122a;  bk  xv,  162b-c 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch  12, 
663a-c;  ch  18-22  664d-666c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i— ii,  q 
105,  a  4  318b-321a 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis ,  207b-209d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vii,  47c- 
50d;  bk  xvi  116a-122a,c;  bk  xviii,  129d-134a; 
bk  xix,  141c-142a;  bk  xxiii,  192c-198a;  bk 
xxvi,  214b,d-221c;  223a-c;  bk  xxvii  225a- 
230d 

38  Rousseau:  /^^///y,340b-c;348b,d;350a-c; 
364d-365b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  29d-30d; 
bk  iii,  165b-166a;  bk  v,  338c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92c-93a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  39a;  39d:  82  b- 
89d  esp  82b-86b;  319b-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  197d;  289c-d;  301d- 
302a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  194c- 
195a;  part  i,  211a-212c;  246c-247b;  part  iii, 
288c-289b;  294c-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  579b-583b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  241a-d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  427b- 
428a 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  686c-687c;  692a-b; 
694d-695a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents , 
781d-782c 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  general  problem  of  the  naturalness  of  human  association  in  the  family  or  in  the  state,  see 
Nature  2b;  Necessity  and  Contingency  5b;  State  ia,  3b-3<d. 

The  political  significance  of  the  domestic  community,  and  for  comparisons  of  government  in 
the  family  and  in  the  state,  see  Education  8a;  Government  ib;  Monarchy  4a,  4e(i); 
Slavery  6b;  State  ib,  5b;  Tyranny  4b. 

The  economic  aspects  of  the  family,  see  Labor  5a,  5c;  Slavery  4a;  Wealth  2,  3d. 

Religious  considerations  relevant  to  matrimony  and  celibacy,  see  Religion  2c,  3d;  Virtue 
and  Vice  8f-8g. 

Other  discussions  of  women  in  relation  to  men,  and  of  the  difference  between  the  sexes,  see 
Happiness  4a;  Man  6b;  War  and  Peace  5a. 

Other  discussions  of  childhood  as  a  stage  of  human  life,  see  Life  and  Death  6c;  Man  6c;  and 
for  the  problem  of  the  care  and  training  of  the  young,  see  Duty  9;  Education  4b,  8a; 
Religion  5c. 

A  more  general  consideration  of  the  problems  of  heredity,  see  Evolution  2~3e. 

The  distinction  of  the  several  kinds  of  love  and  friendship  which  may  enter  into  marriage, 
see  Love  2— 2d;  and  for  matters  relevant  to  the  emotional  pattern  of  family  relationships, 
see  Desire  4a~4d;  Emotion  30-3^4);  Love  2b(4),  2d. 


Chapter  26:  FAMILY 


513 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  arc  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  arc  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Plutarcii.  “A  Discourse  Touching  the  Training  of 
Children,”  “Concerning  the  Virtues  of  Women,” 
“Conjugal  Precepts,”  “Of  Natural  Affection  To¬ 
wards  One’s  Offspring,”  in  Moralia 
Augustine.  On  the  Good  of  Marriage 

- .  On  the  Good  of  Widowhood 

- .  Of  Marriage  and  Concupiscence 

Aquinas.  Summa  Contra  Gentiles ,  bk  iii,  ch  122-126 
- .  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  qq  1 51-154; 

PART  III,  SUPPL,  QQ  41-68 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Parents  and  Children,”  “Of  Mar¬ 
riage  and  Single  Life,”  “Of  Youth  and  Age,”  in 
Essays 

Milton.  The  Doctrine  and  Discipline  of  Divorce 
Hobbes.  Philosophical  Rudiments  Concerning  Govern¬ 
ment  and  Society ,  ch  9 

- .  The  Elements  of  Law ,  Natural  and  Politic , 

part  11,  ch  4 

Swift.  A  Modest  Proposal 
Fielding.  Amelia 

J.  S.  Mill.  The  Subjection  of  Women 
Engels.  Tire  Origin  of  the  Family ,  Private  Property 
and  the  State 

Freud.  Three  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Sex, 
ch  2-3 

II. 

Xenophon.  The  Oeconomicus 
Cicero.  De  Dotno  Sua 
Volsung  Saga 
Njalssaga 

Boccaccio.  Patient  Griselda 
Alberti.  Della  Famiglia 

Bodin.  The  Six  Bootes  of  a  Commonweale ,  bk  i, 
ch  2-4 

Spenser.  The  Faerie  Oueene ,  bk  iii 
- .  Epithalamion 

Hey  wood.  A  Woman  Killed  with  Kindness 
Calderon.  Life  Is  a  Dream 

Moliere.  L'ecole  des  maris  (, School  for  Husbands) 

- .  L'ecole  des  femmes  ( School  for  Wives) 

Chesterfield.  Letters  to  His  Son 
Voltaire.  “Marriage,”  “Women,”  in  A  Philosoph¬ 
ical  Dictionary 

R.  Burns.  The  Cotter's  Saturday  Night 
Franklin.  On  Marriage 
Wollstonecraft.  The  Rights  of  Woman 


F.  Schlegel.  Lucinde 

Fourier.  Traite  de  V association  dome stique- agricole 
Lamb.  “A  Bachelor’s  Complaint,”  in  The  Essays  of 
Elia 

Balzac.  The  Physiology  of  Marriage 

- .  Eugenie  Grandet 

- .  Old  Goriot 

- .  The  Petty  Annoyances  of  Married  Life 

- .  Cousin  Bette 

Whewell.  The  Elements  of  Morality ,  bk  iv,  ch  5 
E.  J.  Bronte.  W inhering  Heights 
Thackeray.  Vanity  Fair 

Schopenhauer.  “On  Women,”  in  Studies  in  Pes¬ 
simism 

Comte.  The  Catechism  of  Positive  Religion  (Preface 
to  the  first  edition) 

- .  System  of  Positive  Polity ,  vol  i,  General  View  of 

Positivism,  ch  4;  vol  ii,  Social  Statics,  ch  3 
Flaubert.  Madame  Bovary 
Bachofen.  Das  Mutterrecht 
Maine.  Ancient  Law,  ch  5 
Turgenev.  Fathers  and  Sons 
Dickens.  Our  Mutual  Friend 
Fustel  de  Coulanges.  The  Ancient  City 
Tylor.  Primitive  Culture 
Zola.  Les  Rougon  Macquart 
L.  H.  Morgan.  Systems  of  Consanguinity  and  Affin¬ 
ity  of  the  Human  Family 
■ - .  Ancient  Society,  part  iii,  ch  i 

S.  Butler.  The  Way  of  All  Flesh 

T.  FI.  Green.  Principles  of  Political  Obligation,  (n) 
Ibsen.  A  Doll's  House 

- .  Ghosts 

Stevenson.  Virginibus  Puerisque 

Mark  Twain.  The  Adventures  of  Tom  Sawyer 

- .  The  Adventures  of  Huckleberry  Finn 

Nietzsche.  Human,  All-Too-Human,  vii 

- .  Beyond  Good  and  Evil,  ch  vii  (232-238) 

Strindberg.  The  Father 

Tonnies.  Fundamental  Concepts  of  Sociology,  part  i 
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough,  part  i,  ch  i  1-12;  part 
iii,  ch  6 

Westermarck.  The  History  of  Human  Marriage 
Mason.  Woman's  Share  in  Primitive  Culture 
Meredith.  The  Ordeal  of  Richard  Feverel 

- .  Modern  Love 

- .  Diana  of  the  Crossways 

- .  The  Amazing  Marriage 

Shaw.  Candida 


514 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Bryce.  Marriage  and  Divorce 
Mann.  Buddenbroo\s 
Synge.  Riders  to  the  Sea 
Weininger.  Sex  and  Character 
Santayana.  Reason  in  Society ,  ch  2 
Gosse.  Father  and  Son 

Sertillanges.  La  famille  et  Vetat  dans  V education 
Dewey  and  Tufts.  Ethics ,  part  hi,  ch  26 
Galton.  Natural  Inheritance 

- .  Essays  in  Eugenics 

Chesterton.  What's  Wrong  with  the  World 
Bateson.  Problems  of  Genetics 
Ellis.  Man  and  Woman 

- .  Studies  in  the  Psychology  of  Sex 

D.  H.  Lawrence.  Sons  and  Lovers 
H.  James.  A  Small  Boy  and  Others 

- .  Notes  of  a  Son  and  Brother 

Joyce.  A  Portrait  of  the  Artist  as  a  Young  Man 
Proust.  Remembrance  of  Things  Past 


Flugel.  The  Psycho -Analytic  Study  of  the  Family 
Hartland.  Primitive  Society ,  the  Beginnings  of  the 
Family  and  the  Reckoning  of  Descent 
Galsworthy.  The  Forsyte  Saga 
Martin  du  Gard.  The  Thibaults 
Undset.  Kristin  Lavransdatter 
J.  B.  S.  Haldane.  Daedalus 
Gorky.  Decadence 

Jung.  Marriage  as  a  Psychological  Relationship 
B riff ault.  The  Mothers 

Dawson.  “Christianity  and  Sex,”  in  Enquiries  into 
Religion  and  Culture 

Pius  XI.  Casti  Connubii  (Encyclical  on  Christian 
Marriage) 

O’Neill.  Desire  Under  the  Elms 

- .  Strange  Interlude 

- .  Mourning  Becomes  Electra 

L.  Sturzo.  The  Inner  Laws  of  Society ,  ch  ii 
T.  S.  Eliot.  The  Family  Reunion 


Chapter  2.7:  FATE 


INTRODUCTION 


FATE — sometimes  personified,  sometimes 
abstractly  conceived — is  the  antagonist  of 
freedom  in  the  drama  of  human  life  and  his¬ 
tory.  So  at  least  it  seems  to  the  poets  of  antiq¬ 
uity.  In  many  of  the  Greek  tragedies,  fate  sets 
the  stage.  Some  curse  must  be  fulfilled.  A  doom 
impends  and  is  inexorable.  But  the  actors  on 
the  stage  are  far  from  puppets.  Within  the 
framework  of  the  inevitable  the  tragic  hero 
works  out  his  own  destiny,  making  the  choices 
from  which  his  personal  catastrophe  ensues. 
Oedipus,  doomed  to  kill  his  father  and  marry 
his  mother,  is  not  fated  to  inquire  into  his  past 
and  to  discover  the  sins  which,  when  he  sees,  he 
wills  to  see  no  more.  The  curse  on  the  house  of 
Atreus  does  not  require  Agamemnon  to  bring 
Cassandra  back  from  Troy  or  to  step  on  the 
purple  carpet.  The  furies  which  pursue  Orestes 
he  has  himself  awakened  by  murdering  his 
mother,  Clytemnestra,  a  deed  not  fated  but 
freely  undertaken  to  avenge  his  father’s  death. 

The  ancients  did  not  doubt  that  men  could 
choose  and,  through  choice,  exercise  some  con¬ 
trol  over  the  disposition  of  their  lives.  Tacitus, 
for  example,  while  admitting  that  “most  men 
.  .  .  cannot  part  with  the  belief  that  each  per¬ 
son’s  future  is  fixed  from  his  very  birth,”  claims 
that  “the  wisest  of  the  ancients  .  .  .  leave  us  the 
capacity  of  choosing  our  life.”  At  the  same  time 
he  recognizes  an  order  of  events  beyond  man’s 
power  to  control,  although  he  finds  no  agree¬ 
ment  regarding  its  cause — whether  it  depends 
“on  wandering  stars”  or  “primary  elements, 
and  on  a  combination  of  natural  causes.”  For 
his  own  part,  Tacitus  declares,  “I  suspend  my 
judgment”  on  the  question  “whether  it  is  fate 
and  unchangeable  necessity  or  chance  which 
governs  the  revolutions  of  human  affairs.”  In 
so  doing,  he  grants  the  possibility  that  not 
everything  which  lies  beyond  man’s  control  is 
fated.  Some  of  the  things  which  happen  with¬ 


out  man’s  willing  them  may  happen  by  chance 
or  fortune. 

It  is  sometimes  supposed  that  “fate”  and 
“fortune”  are  synonyms,  or  that  one  has  a 
tragic  and  the  other  a  happy  connotation.  It  is 
as  if  fortune  were  always  good  and  fate  always 
malevolent.  But  either  may  be  good  or  evil 
from  the  point  of  view  of  man’s  desires.  Al¬ 
though  fate  and  fortune  are  hardly  the  same, 
there  is  some  reason  for  associating  them.  Each 
imposes  a  limitation  on  man’s  freedom.  A  man 
cannot  compel  fortune  to  smile  upon  him  any 
more  than  he  can  avoid  his  fate.  Though  alike 
in  this  respect,  fate  and  fortune  are  also  opposed 
to  one  another.  Fate  represents  the  inexorable 
march  of  events.  There  is  no  room  for  fortune 
unless  some  things  are  exempt  from  necessity. 
Only  that  which  can  happen  by  chance  is  in 
the  lap  of  fortune. 

It  would  seem  that  fate  stands  to  fortune  as 
the  necessary  to  the  contingent.  If  everything 
were  necessitated,  fate  alone  would  reign.  Con¬ 
tingency  would  be  excluded  from  nature. 
Chance  or  the  fortuitous  in  the  order  of  nature 
and  freedom  in  human  life  would  be  reduced 
to  illusions  men  cherish  only  through  ignorance 
of  the  inevitable. 

In  a  sense  fortune  is  the  ally  of  freedom  in  the 
struggle  against  fate.  Good  fortune  seems  to  aid 
and  abet  human  desires.  But  even  misfortune 
signifies  the  element  of  chance  which  is  more 
congenial  than  fate,  if  not  more  amenable,  to 
man’s  conceit  that  he  can  freely  plan  his  life. 

The  terms  necessity  and  contingency  cannot  be 
substituted  for  fate  and  fortune  without  loss  of 
significance.  As  the  chapter  on  Necessity  and 
Contingency  indicates,  they  are  terms  in  the 
philosophical  analysis  of  the  order  of  nature 
and  causality.  They  may  have,  but  they  need 
not  have,  theological  implications.  Necessity 


516 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


and  contingency  can  be  explained  without  any 
reference  to  the  supernatural,  as  is  evident  from 
the  discussion  of  these  matters  in  the  chapter 
on  Chance.  But  fate  and  fortune,  in  their  ori¬ 
gin  at  least,  are  theological  terms. 

In  ancient  poetry  and  mythology,  both  in¬ 
evitability  and  chance  were  personified  as  dei¬ 
ties  or  supernatural  forces.  There  were  the  god¬ 
dess  of  Fortune  and  the  three  Fates,  as  well  as 
their  three  evil  sisters  or  counterparts,  the 
Furies.  The  Latin  word  from  which  “fate” 
comes  means  an  oracle,  and  so  signifies  what  is 
divinely  ordained.  What  happens  by  fate  is 
fated — something  destined  and  decreed  in  the 
councils  of  the  gods  on  Olympus;  or  it  may  be 
the  decision  of  Zeus,  to  whose  rule  all  the  other 
divinities  are  subject;  or,  as  we  shall  see  pres¬ 
ently,  it  may  be  a  supernatural  destiny  which 
even  Zeus  cannot  set  aside. 

In  any  case,  the  notion  of  fate  implies  a  super¬ 
natural  will,  even  as  destiny  implies  predestina¬ 
tion  by  an  intelligence  able  not  only  to  plan 
the  future  but  also  to  carry  out  that  plan.  The 
inevitability  of  fate  and  destiny  is  thus  distin¬ 
guished  from  that  of  merely  natural  necessity 
which  determines  the  future  only  insofar  as  it 
may  be  the  inevitable  consequence  of  causes 
working  naturally. 

But  the  ancients  do  not  seem  to  be  fatalists 
in  the  extreme  sense  of  the  term.  To  the  extent 
that  men  can  propitiate  the  gods  or  provoke 
divine  jealousy  and  anger,  the  attitudes  and 
deeds  of  men  seem  to  be  a  determining  factor 
in  the  actions  of  the  gods.  To  the  extent  that 
the  gods  align  themselves  on  opposite  sides  of  a 
human  conflict  (as  in  the  Iliad),  or  oppose  each 
other  (as  in  the  Odyssey ),  it  may  be  thought 
that  what  happens  on  earth  merely  reflects  the 
shifting  balance  of  power  among  the  gods. 

But  human  planning  and  willing  do  not  seem 
to  be  excluded  by  the  divine  will  and  plan 
which  are  forged  out  of  the  quarrels  of  the 
gods.  On  the  contrary,  polytheism  seems  to 
make  fortune  itself  contingent  on  the  outcome 
of  the  Olympian  conflict,  and  so  permits  men 
a  certain  latitude  of  self-determination.  Men 
can  struggle  against  the  gods  precisely  because 
the  gods  may  be  with  them  as  well  as  against 
them. 

The  ultimate  power  of  Zeus  to  decide  the 
issue  may,  however,  place  the  accent  on  fate 


rather  than  on  freedom.  This  is  certainly  so  if 
Zeus  is  not  the  master  of  even  his  own  fate, 
much  less  the  omnipotent  ruler  among  the 
gods  or  the  arbiter  of  human  destiny.  In 
Prometheus  Bound ,  the  Chorus  asks,  “Who  is 
the  pilot  of  Necessity?”  Prometheus  answers, 
“The  Fates  triform  and  the  unforgetting 
Furies.”  The  Chorus  then  asks,  “Is  Zeus  of 
lesser  might  than  these  ?”  To  which  Prometheus 
replies,  “He  shall  not  shun  the  lot  appor¬ 
tioned.”  When  they  ask  what  this  doom  is, 
Prometheus  tells  them  to  inquire  no  more,  for 
they  verge  on  mysteries.  Later  Zeus  himself 
sends  Hermes  to  wrest  from  Prometheus  the 
secret  of  what  has  been  ordained  for  him  by 
“all  consummating  Fate”  or  “Fate’s  resistless 
law.”  Prometheus  refuses,  saying  that  “none 
shall  bend  my  will  or  force  me  to  disclose  by 
whom  ‘tis  fated  he  shall  fall  from  power.” 

The  question  Aeschylus  leaves  unanswered 
is  whether  Zeus  would  be  able  to  escape  his 
doom  if  he  could  foresee  what  Fate  holds  in 
store  for  him.  The  suggestion  seems  to  be  that 
without  omniscience  the  omnipotence  of  Zeus 
cannot  break  the  chains  of  Fate. 

In  the  tradition  of  Judaeo-Christian  theology 
the  problem  of  fate  is  in  part  verbal  and  in  part 
real.  The  verbal  aspect  of  the  problem  concerns 
the  meaning  of  the  word  “fate”  in  relation  to 
the  divine  will,  providence,  and  predestination. 
With  the  verbal  matter  settled,  there  remains 
the  real  problem  of  God’s  will  and  human  free¬ 
dom.  The  strictly  monotheistic  conception  of 
an  omnipotent  and  omniscient  God  deepens 
the  mystery,  and  makes  it  more  difficult  than 
the  problem  of  fate  and  freedom  in  pagan 
thought. 

If  anyone  “calls  the  will  or  the  power  of  God 
itself  by  the  name  of  fate,”  Augustine  says, 
“let  him  keep  his  opinion,  but  correct  his  lan¬ 
guage.  ...  For  when  men  hear  that  word,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  ordinary  use  of  language,  they 
simply  understand  by  it  the  virtue  of  that  par¬ 
ticular  position  of  the  stars  which  may  exist 
at  the  time  when  anyone  is  born  or  conceived, 
which  some  separate  altogether  from  the  will 
of  God,  whilst  others  affirm  that  this  also  is 
dependent  on  that  will.  But  those  who  are  of 
the  opinion  that,  apart  from  the  will  of  God, 
the  stars  determine  what  we  shall  do,  or  what 


Chapter  27:  FATE 


517 


good  things  we  shall  possess,  or  what  evils  we 
shall  suffer,  must  be  refused  a  hearing  by  all,  not 
only  by  those  who  hold  the  true  religion,  but 
by  those  who  wish  to  be  the  worshippers  of  any 
gods  whatsoever,  even  false  gods.  For  what  does 
this  opinion  really  amount  to  but  this,  that  no 
god  whatsoever  is  to  be  worshipped  or  prayed 
to?” 

Since  the  word  “fate”  has  been  used  for  those 
things  which  are  determined  apart  from  the 
will  of  God  or  man,  Augustine  thinks  it  would 
be  better  for  Christians  not  to  use  it,  but  to 
substitute  “providence”  or  “predestination” 
when  they  wish  to  refer  to  what  God  wills. 
Aquinas,  however,  retains  the  word  “fate” 
but  restricts  its  meaning  to  the  “ordering  ...  of 
mediate  causes”  by  which  God  wills  “the  pro¬ 
duction  of  certain  effects.” 

According  to  the  definition  given  by  Boe¬ 
thius  which  Aquinas  quotes,  “Fate  is  a  disposi¬ 
tion  inherent  to  changeable  things,  by  which 
providence  connects  each  one  with  its  proper 
order.”  Thus  fate  is  not  identified  with  provi¬ 
dence,  but  made  subordinate  to  it.  The  distinc¬ 
tion,  Aquinas  explains,  depends  on  the  way  we 
consider  “the  ordering  of  effects”  by  God.  “As 
being  in  God  Himself  .  .  .  the  ordering  of  the 
effects  is  called  Providence.”  But  “as  being  in 
the  mediate  causes  ordered  by  God,”  it  is  called 
fate.  While  admitting  that  “the  divine  power 
or  will  can  be  called  fate,  as  being  the  cause  of 
fate,”  he  declares  that  “essentially  fate  is  the 
very  disposition  or  series ,  /.<?.,  order,  of  second 
causes.” 

The  position  Lucretius  takes  seems  to  be 
exactly  opposite  to  that  of  Augustine  and  Aqui¬ 
nas.  Lucretius  condemns  the  fatalism  of  those 
who  believe  that  the  gods  control  the  order  of 
nature  and  who  therefore  attribute  whatever 
befalls  them  to  divine  ordination.  For  him, 
“nature  free  at  once  and  rid  of  her  haughty 
lords  is  seen  to  do  all  things  spontaneously  of 
herself  without  the  meddling  of  the  gods.”  He 
tries  to  teach  men  that  everything  happens  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  laws  of  nature,  other  than  which 
there  is  no  fate.  The  “decrees  of  fate”  lie  in  the 
laws  by  which  “all  motion  is  ever  linked  to¬ 
gether  and  a  new  motion  ever  springs  from 
another  in  a  fixed  order.”  If  man  by  his  “power 
of  free  action”  can  “make  some  commence¬ 
ment  of  motion  to  break  through  the  decrees 


of  fate,  in  order  that  cause  follow  not  cause  from 
everlasting,”  it  is  because  in  the  atoms  of  his 
makeup  “there  is  another  cause  of  motions  .  .  . 
caused  by  a  minute  swerving  of  first-begin¬ 
nings  at  no  fixed  part  of  space  and  no  fixed 
time.” 

Nevertheless,  according  to  Augustine,  Lu¬ 
cretius  is  a  fatalist  who  disbelieves  in  provi¬ 
dence,  other  than  which  there  is  no  fate.  Each 
of  them  uses  the  word  “fate,”  the  one  to  deny, 
the  other  to  affirm,  the  power  of  God. 

But  even  if  a  Christian  avoids  the  supersti¬ 
tions  of  astrology,  or  some  similar  belief  in  a 
natural  necessity  which  does  not  depend  on 
God,  he  may  still  commit  the  sin  of  fatalism 
which  follows  from  the  denial  of  man’s  free 
will.  Understanding  fate  as  identical  with  prov¬ 
idence,  the  Christian  is  a  fatalist  if,  in  the  be¬ 
lief  that  every  human  act  is  foreordained  by 
God,  he  resigns  himself  to  his  fate,  making  no 
moral  effort  and  taking  no  moral  responsibility 
for  his  soul’s  welfare.  To  do  that  is  to  argue  like 
Chaucer’s  Troilus: 

I  am,  he  said,  but  done  for,  so  to  say; 

For  all  that  comes,  comes  by  necessity, 

Thus  to  be  done  for  is  my  destiny. 

I  must  believe  and  cannot  other  choose, 

That  Providence,  in  its  divine  foresight, 

Hath  known  that  Cressida  I  once  must  lose, 

Since  God  sees  everything  from  heaven’s  height 
And  plans  things  as  he  thinks  both  best  and  right, 
As  was  arranged  for  by  predestination. 

Troilus  sees  no  way  of  avoiding  the  conclusion 
that  “free  choice  is  an  idle  dream.” 

The  theologians  recognize  the  difficulty  of 
reconciling  providence  and  free  will.  The  truth 
must  lie  somewhere  between  two  heresies.  If 
it  is  heresy  to  deny  God’s  omnipotence  and 
omniscience,  then  nothing  remains  outside  the 
all-encompassing  scope  of  divine  providence, 
nothing  happens  contrary  to  the  divine  will, 
no  future  contingency  is  or  can  be  unforeseen 
by  God.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  to  deny  that 
man  sins  freely  means  that  God  must  be  respon¬ 
sible  for  the  evil  that  man  does,  then  it  is  a 
heresy  to  deny  free  will,  for  that  imputes  evil 
to  God. 

This  is  the  problem  with  which  Milton  deals 
in  Paradise  Lost,  announcing  that  he  will  try 
“to  justify  the  w^ays  of  God  to  man.”  In  a 
conversation  in  heaven,  the  Father  tells  the 


518 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Son  that  though  He  knows  Adam  will  disobey 
his  rule,  Adam  remains  quite  free  to  sin  or  not 
to  sin,  and  the  fault  is  his  own,  just  as  the  re¬ 
bellious  angels  acted  on  their  own  free  will. 
The  angels,  God  says, 

So  were  created,  nor  can  justly  accuse 
Thir  maker,  or  thir  making,  or  thir  Fate; 

As  if  Predestination  over-rul’d 

Thir  will,  dispos’d  by  absolute  Decree 

Or  high  foreknowledge;  they  themselves  decreed 

Thir  own  revolt,  not  I:  if  I  foreknew, 

Foreknowledge  had  no  influence  on  their  fault, 

Which  had  no  less  prov’d  certain  unforeknown. 

So  without  least  impulse  or  shadow  of  Fate, 

Or  aught  by  me  immutablie  foreseen, 

They  trespass,  Authors  to  themselves  in  all, 

Both  what  they  judge  and  what  they  choose;  for  so 
I  formed  them  free,  and  free  they  must  remain, 
Till  they  enthrall  themselves:  I  else  must  change 
Thir  nature,  and  revoke  the  high  Decree 
Unchangeable,  Eternal,  which  ordain’d 
Thir  freedom,  they  themselves  ordain’d  their  fall. 

A  solution  of  the  problem  is  sometimes 
developed  from  the  distinction  between  God’s 
foreknowledge  and  God’s  foreordination.  God 
foreordained  the  freedom  of  man,  but  only 
foreknew  his  fall;  man  ordained  that  himself. 
Strictly  speaking,  however,  the  word  “fore¬ 
knowledge”  would  seem  to  carry  a  false  conno¬ 
tation,  since  nothing  is  future  to  God.  Every¬ 
thing  that  has  ever  happened  or  ever  will  is 
simultaneously  together  in  the  eternal  present 
of  the  divine  vision. 

During  his  ascent  through  Paradise,  Dante, 
wishing  to  learn  about  his  immediate  future, 
asks  his  ancestor  Cacciaguida  to  foretell  his 
fortune,  for  he,  “gazing  upon  the  Point  to 
which  all  times  are  present,  can  see  contingent 
things,  ere  in  themselves  they  are.”  Cacciaguida 
prefaces  his  prediction  of  Dante’s  exile  from 
Florence  by  telling  him  that  the  contingency  of 
material  things  “is  all  depicted  in  the  Eternal 
Vision;  yet  thence  it  does  not  take  necessity, 
more  than  does  a  ship  which  is  going  down  the 
stream  from  the  eye  in  which  it  is  mirrored.” 
The  difference  between  time  and  eternity  is 
conceived  as  permitting  the  temporal  future 
to  be  contingent  even  though  God  knows  its 
content  with  certitude. 

But,  it  may  still  be  asked,  does  not  God’s 
knowledge  imply  the  absolute  predestination 
of  future  events  by  providence,  since  what  God 
knows  with  certitude  cannot  happen  otherwise 


than  as  He  knows  it  ?  In  a  discussion  of  divine 
grace  and  man’s  free  will,  Dr.  Johnson  remarks, 
“I  can  judge  with  great  probability  how  a  man 
will  act  in  any  case,  without  his  being  restrained 
by  my  judging.  God  may  have  this  probability 
increased  to  certainty.”  To  which  Boswell  re¬ 
plies  that  “when  it  is  increased  to  certainty , 
freedom  ceases,  because  that  cannot  be  cer¬ 
tainly  foreknown,  which  is  not  certain  at  the 
time;  but  if  it  be  certain  at  the  time,  it  is  a 
contradiction  to  maintain  that  there  can  be 
afterwards  any  contingency  dependent  upon 
the  exercise  of  will  or  anything  else.” 

Against  such  difficulties  Aquinas  insists  that 
divine  providence  is  compatible,  not  only  with 
natural  necessity,  but  also  with  contingency  in 
nature  and  free  will  in  human  acts.  Providence, 
he  writes,  “has  prepared  for  some  things  neces¬ 
sary  causes  so  that  they  happen  of  necessity;  for 
others  contingent  causes,  that  they  may  happen 
by  contingency.”  Human  liberty  does  not 
imply  that  the  will’s  acts  are  not  caused  by 
God  who,  being  the  first  cause,  “moves  causes 
both  natural  and  voluntary.  Just  as  by  moving 
natural  causes,  He  does  not  prevent  their  acts 
being  natural,  so  by  moving  voluntary  causes, 
He  does  not  deprive  their  actions  of  being 
voluntary.”  God  causes  man  to  choose  freely 
and  freely  to  execute  his  choice. 

The  uncompromising  conception  of  fate  is 
that  which  leaves  no  place  for  chance  or  free¬ 
dom  anywhere  in  the  universe,  neither  in  the 
acts  of  God,  nor  in  the  order  of  nature,  nor  in 
the  course  of  history.  The  doctrine  of  absolute 
determinism,  whether  in  theology,  science,  or 
history,  is  thus  fatalism  unqualified. 

The  ancient  historians  are  not  fatalists  in  this 
sense.  Herodotus,  for  example,  finds  much  that 
can  be  explained  by  the  contingencies  of  for¬ 
tune  or  by  the  choices  of  men.  The  crucial  de¬ 
cision,  for  example,  in  the  defense  of  Athens 
is  presented  as  an  act  of  man’s  choice.  Upon 
receiving  the  prophecy  that  “safe  shall  the 
wooden  wall  continue  for  thee  and  thy  chil¬ 
dren,”  the  Athenians  exercise  their  freedom  by 
disagreeing  about  its  meaning.  “Certain  of  the 
old  men,”  Herodotus  writes,  “were  of  the 
opinion  that  the  god  meant  to  tell  them  the 
citadel  would  escape;  for  this  was  anciently 
defended  by  a  palisade.  .  .  .  Others  maintained 


Chapter  27:  FATE 


519 


that  the  fleet  was  what  the  god  pointed  at;  and 
their  advice  was  that  nothing  should  he  thought 
of  except  the  ships/’  The  eloquence  of  Themis- 
tocles  carried  the  latter  view.  To  stress  its  im¬ 
portance,  the  historian  observes  that  “the  sav¬ 
ing  of  Greece”  lay  in  the  decision  that  led 
Athens  to  “become  a  maritime  power.” 

In  presenting  a  comparable  decision  by  the 
Persians,  Herodotus  seems  to  be  contrasting 
their  fatalism  with  the  freedom  of  the  Greeks. 
At  first  Xerxes  accepts  the  council  of  Artabanus 
not  to  go  to  war  against  the  Greeks.  But  after 
a  series  of  visions,  which  appear  to  both  the 
king  and  his  councillor,  that  decision  is  re¬ 
versed,  for,  according  to  the  dream,  the  war 
“is  fated  to  happen.” 

The  conception  of  fate  and  freedom  in  the 
Aeneid  seems  closer  to  the  Greek  than  to  the 
Persian  view.  Even  though  the  consummation 
of  history,  which  will  come  with  the  founding 
of  the  Roman  empire,  is  projected  as  a  divinely 
appointed  destiny,  the  hero  who  brings  that 
great  event  to  pass  acts  as  if  he  were  free  to 
accept  or  evade  his  responsibilities. 

The  Christian  understanding  of  historical 
destiny  in  terms  of  providence  permits — more 
than  that,  requires — men  to  exercise  free  choice 
(  at  every  turn.  “The  cause  of  the  greatness  of 
the  Roman  empire,”  writes  Augustine,  “is  nei¬ 
ther  fortuitous  nor  fatal,  according  to  the  judg¬ 
ment  or  opinion  of  those  who  call  those  things 
fortuitous  which  either  have  no  causes  or  such 
causes  as  do  not  proceed  from  some  intelligible 
order,  and  those  things  fatal  which  happen  in¬ 
dependently  of  the  will  of  God  and  man,  by 
the  necessity  of  a  certain  order.  .  .  .  Human 
kingdoms  are  established  by  divine  provi¬ 
dence.”  The  fatalism  which  Augustine  here 
condemns  involves  independence  not  only  of 
the  will  of  God,  but  of  man’s  will  also. 

It  is  only  in  modern  times,  with  Hegel  and 
Marx,  that  necessity  reigns  supreme  in  the 
philosophy  of  history.  Hegel  spurns  the  notion 
that  history  is  “a  superficial  play  of  casual,  so- 
called  ‘merely  human’  strivings  and  passions.” 
He  also  condemns  those  who  “speak  of  Provi¬ 
dence  and  the  plan  of  Providence”  in  a  way 
that  is  “empty”  of  ideas  since  “for  them  the 
plan  of  Providence  is  inscrutable  and  incom¬ 
prehensible.”  For  Hegel,  history  is  “the  nec¬ 
essary  development,  out  of  the  concept  of  the 


mind’s  freedom  alone.”  But  this  development 
and  this  freedom  are  entirely  matters  of  neces¬ 
sity  as  far  as  individuals  and  their  works  are 
concerned.  “They  are  all  the  time  the  uncon¬ 
scious  tools  and  organs  of  the  world  mind  at 
work  within  them.” 

For  Marx,  history  seems  likewise  to  have  the 
same  necessity.  He  deals  with  individuals,  he 
writes  in  the  preface  to  Capital ,  “only  in  so  far 
as  they  are  the  personifications  of  economic 
categories,  embodiments  of  particular  class- 
relations  and  class-interests.  My  stand-point,” 
he  says,  is  one  from  which  “the  evolution  of 
the  economic  formation  of  society  is  viewed  as 
a  process  of  natural  history,”  and  within  which 
the  individual  cannot  be  “responsible  for  rela¬ 
tions  whose  creature  he  socially  remains,  how¬ 
ever  much  he  may  subjectively  raise  himself 
above  them.”  Here  it  is  a  question  only  “of 
these  laws  themselves,  of  these  tendencies 
working  with  iron  necessity  towards  inevitable 
results.” 

According  to  the  historical  determinism  of 
Hegel  and  Marx,  which  is  further  considered 
in  the  chapter  on  History,  men  play  a  part 
which  is  already  written  for  them  in  the  scroll 
of  history.  Human  liberty  apparently  depends 
on  man’s  knowledge  of  and  acquiescence  in  the 
unfolding  necessities. 

Historical  determinism  is  merely  a  part  of 
the  doctrine  of  a  causal  necessity  which  governs 
all  things.  Causality  seems  to  be  understood  by 
moderns  like  Spinoza,  Hume,  and  Freud  as  ex¬ 
cluding  the  possibility  of  chance  or  free  will. 
Among  the  ancients,  Plotinus  alone  seems  to 
go  as  far  as  Spinoza  in  affirming  the  universal 
reign  of  natural  necessity.  What  Spinoza  says 
of  God  or  Nature,  Plotinus  says  of  the  All-One, 
namely,  that  for  the  first  principle  which  is  the 
cause  of  everything  else,  freedom  consists  in 
being  causa  sui,  or  cause  of  itself— self-deter¬ 
mined  rather  than  determined  by  external 
causes. 

“God  does  not  act  from  freedom  of  the  will,” 
Spinoza  writes.  Yet  “God  alone  is  a  free  cause, 
for  God  alone  exists  .  .  .  and  acts  from  the 
necessity  of  his  own  nature.”  As  for  everything 
else  in  the  universe,  Spinoza  maintains  that 
“there  is  nothing  contingent,  but  all  things  are 
determined  from  the  necessity  of  the  divine 


520 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


nature  to  exist  and  act  in  a  certain  manner.” 
This  applies  to  man,  who,  according  to  Spinoza, 
does  4 ‘every thing  by  the  will  of  God  alone.” 

From  quite  different  premises,  Hume  seems 
to  reach  much  the  same  conclusion  concerning 
chance  and  liberty.  “Chance,”  he  writes, 
“when  strictly  examined,  is  a  mere  negative 
word,  and  means  not  any  real  power  which  has 
anywhere  a  being  in  nature.”  But  he  also  thinks 
that  liberty,  “when  opposed  to  necessity,  not 
to  constraint,  is  the  same  thing  with  chance.” 

Hume  embraces  the  consequences  of  such  a 
position.  “If  voluntary  action  be  subjected  to 
the  same  laws  of  necessity  with  the  operations 
of  matter,  there  is  a  continued  chain  of  neces¬ 
sary  causes,  pre-ordained  and  pre-determined, 
reaching  from  the  original  cause  of  all  to  every 
single  volition  of  every  human  creature.  No 
contingency  anywhere  in  the  universe;  no  in¬ 
difference;  no  liberty.” 

When  confronted  with  the  objection  that  it 
then  becomes  impossible  “to  explain  distinctly, 
how  the  Deity  can  be  the  mediate  cause  of  all 
the  actions  of  men,  without  being  the  author 
of  sin  and  moral  turpitude,”  Hume  replies  that 
“these  are  mysteries,  which  natural  and  unas¬ 
sisted  reason  is  very  unfit  to  handle.  .  .  .  To  de¬ 
fend  absolute  decrees,  and  yet  free  the  Deity 
from  being  the  author  of  sin,  has  been  found 
hitherto  to  exceed  all  the  power  of  philosophy.” 

Unlike  Spinoza  and  Hume,  Freud  does  not 
deal  with  the  theological  implications  or  pre¬ 
suppositions  of  determinism.  For  him,  determin¬ 
ism  is  an  essential  postulate  of  science  and 
even  to  some  extent  a  scientifically  discoverable 
fact.  The  “deeply  rooted  belief  in  psychic  free¬ 


dom  and  choice,”  he  writes,  is  “quite  unscien¬ 
tific,  and  it  must  give  ground  before  the  claims 
of  a  determinism  which  governs  even  mental 
life.”  He  thinks  it  can  be  shown  on  the  basis  of 
clinical  experience  that  every  psychic  associa¬ 
tion  “will  be  strictly  determined  by  important 
inner  attitudes  of  mind,  which  are  unknown 
to  us  at  the  moment  when  they  operate,  just  as 
much  unknown  as  are  the  disturbing  tendencies 
which  cause  errors,  and  those  tendencies  which 
bring  about  so-called  ‘chance’  actions.” 

The  fatalism  of  what  is  often  called  “scien¬ 
tific  determinism”  is  that  of  blind  necessity. 
It  not  only  eliminates  liberty  and  chance,  but 
also  purpose  and  the  operation  of  final  causes. 
Every  future  event,  in  nature,  history,  or  hu¬ 
man  behavior,  is  completely  predetermined  by 
efficient  causes — predetermined,  but  not  pre¬ 
destined,  for  there  is  no  guiding  intelligence 
at  work,  no  purpose  to  be  fulfilled.  “The  system 
of  fatality ,  of  which  Spinoza  is  the  accredited 
author,”  Kant  writes,  is  one  which  “eliminates 
all  trace  of  design ,  and  leaves  the  original  ground 
of  the  things  of  nature  divested  of  all  intelli¬ 
gence.” 

Whether  such  complete  fatalism  is  the  only 
doctrine  compatible  with  the  principles  and 
findings  of  natural  science  has  been  questioned 
by  philosophers  like  William  James.  It  is  cer¬ 
tainly  not  the  only  doctrine  compatible  with 
the  view  that  nothing  happens  without  a  cause. 
As  the  chapters  on  Chance  and  Will  show, 
ancient  and  mediaeval  thinkers  who  affirm 
contingency  in  nature  or  freedom  in  human 
acts  do  so  without  denying  the  universal  reign 
of  causation. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PACE 

1.  The  decrees  of  fate  and  the  decisions  of  the  gods  521 

2.  The  fated  or  inevitable  in  human  life 

3.  The  antitheses  of  fate:  fortune,  freedom,  natural  necessity,  chance  or  contingency  522 

4.  Fatalism  in  relation  to  the  will  of  God:  the  doctrine  of  predestination  523 

5.  The  secularization  of  fate:  scientific  or  philosophical  determinism 

6.  The  historian’s  recognition  of  fate:  the  destiny  of  cities,  nations,  empires  524 


Chapter  27:  FATE 


521 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Pace  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a- 119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  1 19.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
thepage.  Forexample,in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.y  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.y  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiahy  7:45 — (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  decrees  of  fate  and  the  decisions  of  the 
gods 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  i  [503-531]  8b-c;  bk  viii 
[66-77]  51d;  bk  xiii  [631-632]  94d;  bk  xiv 
[52-53]  98c;  bk  xvi  [431-461]  117a-b;  [657- 
658]  119b;  [843-861]  121c;  bk  xviii  [97-126] 
131a-c;  bk  xix  [74-94]  137d-138a;  bk  xxi 
[81-84]  149a;  bk  xxii  [131-223]  156c-157c  / 
Odyssey ,  bk  iii  [225-239]  195b-c;  bk  xx  [75] 
296d 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [1032-1073] 
14a, c  /  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d  esp  [507- 
521]  45a-b  /  Agamemnon  [1018-1034]  63a 

5  Euripides:  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  esp  [1-76] 
237a-238a,  [213-243]  239a-b,  [962-990]  245c 
/  Heracles  Mad  [13 13-1357]  376c-d  /  Iphigenia 
Among  the  Tauri  [1435-1499]  424a-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  20a-22a 

12  Epictetus:  Discoursesy  bk  i,  ch  12  118d-120b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b; 
sect  ii  258a-b;  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b;  bk  v, 
sect  8  269d-270b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneidy  bk  i  [1-33]  103a-104a;  [261- 
262]  110a;  bk  11  [428-433]  136a;  bk  iii  [1— 12] 
147a;  bk  iv  [440]  179a;  [651]  185a;  bk  vii 
[286-322]  243b-245a;  bk  x  [100-117]  304b- 
305a;  bk  xi  [108-119]  331a;  bk  xii  [725-842] 
373b-376b 


31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  216d-217a 

32  Milton:  Arcades  [54-83]  26b-27a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  271b 

47  Goethe:  Faust y  part  ii  [5305-5344]  131b-132a 

2.  The  fated  or  inevitable  in  human  life 

4  Homer:  Iliad  3a-179d  esp  bk  xv  [47-77] 
104c-d,  bk  xvi  [843-861]  121c,  bk  xviii  [52- 
137]  130c-131c,  bk  xxii  [355-366]  159a,  bk 
xxiv  [522-532]  176d-177a  /  Odyssey ,  bk  xviii 
[124-150]  285b-c;  bk  xxii  [412]  310a 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [1032-1073] 
14a, c  /  Seven  Against  Thebes  27a-39a,c  esp 
[63 1 -95 6]  34a-37d  /  Prometheus  Bound  [640- 
886]  46d-49c  /  Agamemnon  52a-69d  /  Cho- 
ephoroe  70a-80d  /  Eumenides  81a-91d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  / 
Oedipus  at  Colonus  114a-130a,c  esp  [939-999] 
123a-c  /  Antigone  [944-987]  139a-c  /  Ajax 
[736-783]  149b-d;  [925-935]  151a  /  Electra 
156a-169a,c  /  Philoctetes  [1316-1347]  193-d 
194a 

5  Euripides:  Rhesus  [595-641]  208b-c  /  Alcestis 
237a-247a,c  esp  [1-76]  237a-238a,  [213-243] 
239a-b,  [962-990]  245c  /  Trojan  Women  [686- 
705]  275d-276a  /  Electra  327a-339a,c  /  Bac¬ 
chantes  [1327-1392]  351b-352a,c  /  Heracles 
Mad  [1311-1358]  376c-d  /  Phoenician  Maidens 
378a-393d  esp  [1-87]  378a-379a,  [867-928] 


522 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  fated  or  inevitable  in  human  life.) 

385d-386b,  [1595-1614]  392a,  [1758-1766] 

393d  /  Orestes  [1-70]  394a-d;  [807-843]  402c-d 
/  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [482-489]  414d- 
415a;  [1435-1499]  424a-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  8a-10a;  20a-22a; 
46c;  bk  11,  65b;  77a-b;  bk  hi,  98b-99a;  102d- 
104b;  bk  iv,  153b-d;  155b-c;  bk  ix,  291b-c 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  210d  /  Republic ,  bk  x,  437b- 
441a, c  esp  439a-441a,c  /  Statesman ,  587a-589c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations  253a-310d  esp  bk  ii, 
sect  3  257a-b,  sect  7  257c,  bk  iii,  sect  ii 
262a-b,  bk  iv,  sect  33-35  266c-d,  sect  44 
267b,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d-270b,  sect  19-20 
272a,  sect  36  273d,  bk  vi,  sect  8  274b,  sect 
ii  274c,  sect  20  276a,  sect  39-40  277d,  sect 
50  279a-b,  sect  58  279d,  bk  vii,  sect  8  280b, 
sect  46  282c,  sect  54  283b,  sect  58  283c-d, 
bk  viii,  sect  17  286d,  sect  32  287d-288a, 
SECT35  288b,  sect  45-47  289a-c,  sect  51  289d- 
290a,  bk  ix,  sect  41  295c,  bk  x,  sect  3  296d, 
sect  5-6  296d-297b,  sect  25  299c,  sect  33 
300c-301a,  sect  35  301b,  bk  xii,  sect  3 
307b-d,  sect  n-14  30Sb-c 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues ,  iv  14a-l5b  /  Aeneid ,  bk  i 
[1-33]  103a-104a;  [204-207]  108b;  [223-304] 
109a-llla;  bk  iii  [356-462]  157a-160a;  bk 
iv  [218-396]  173a-178a;  bk  vi  [752-901] 
231a-235a;  bk  viii  [520-540]  273a-b;  bk  ix 
[77-122]  281a-282a;  bk  x  [100-117]  304b- 
305a;  [621-632]  319a-b;  bk  xi  [108-119]  331a; 
bk  xii  [133-150]  357b-358a 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  20b-c  /  Camillus,  107b-d 
/  Aemilius  Paulus,  225a-c;  228c-229c  /  Sulla, 
370c-371b  /  Caesar ,  600a-604d  /  Marcus  Bru¬ 
tus ,  814d-815c;  822a-b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  49c;  bk  vi,  91b-d  / 
Histories ,  bk  i,  191d;  194b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  i  78a-82b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iii,  stanza 
89  66a;  bk  iv,  stanza  137-155  106b-108b  / 
Knight's  Tale  174a-211a  esp  [1081-mi]  177b- 
178a,  [1251-1267]  180b,  [1663-1672]  187b, 
[3027-30 66]  209b-210a  /  Tale  of  Man  of  Law 
[4610-4623]  237b;  [4701-4735]  239a-240a  / 
Mon1(s  Prologue  432a-434a  /  MonJ(s  Tale 
434a-448b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv, 
258c-259d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  214a-c;  342a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Juliet ,  prologue 
285a-b;  act  i,  sc  iv  [106-113]  291d  /  Julius 
Caesary  act  ii,  sc  ii  [1-107]  578a-579b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  v,  sc  ii  [4-48] 
68a-b  /  King  Lear ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [112-166] 
249a-c;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [34-37]  272a  /  Macbeth 
284a-310d  esp  act  i,  sc  iii  285b-287b  /  Cym- 
beliney  act  v,  sc  iv  [30-122]  481c-482b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  194b-195a;  202b- 
208b;  502b-503a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jonesy  275d-276a;  310b 


2  to  3 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  347b-c 

47  Goethe:  Fausty  part  ii  [9695-9944]  235a- 
241b  esp  [9908-9938]  241a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  4a-b;  120a-b;  396b- 
397a;  398a;  409b-410b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  viii,  303d-304b; 
bk  xii,  542d;  547a-549d;  553c-d;  bk  xiii, 
578b-582a  esp  578d-579a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  246b-247c  / 
General  Introduction ,  581d-582a  /  Civilization 
and  Its  Discontents ,  796a-c 

3.  The  antitheses  of  fate:  fortune,  freedom,  nat¬ 
ural  necessity,  chance  or  contingency 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  x,  437b-441a,c  esp  439a- 
441a, c  /  Statesman ,  586c-589c 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  9  28a-29d  / 
Physics ,  bk  11,  ch  4-6  272c-275a  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  vi,  ch  3  549c-d;  bk  ix,  ch  5  573a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  345a-c;  bk  iii, 
ch  3  [ni2ai8-33]  358a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-293] 
18b-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  3-4 
257a-b;  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b;  bk  v,  sect  8 
269d-270b;  sect  36  273d;  bk  vi,  sect  40 
277d;  bk  xii,  sect  14  308c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iv,  68a;  bk  vi,  91b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i  78a-82b  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  16  150c-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  i  207d- 
208c;  ch  8-10  212c-216c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  116 
592d-595c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi 
[52-84]  77b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  163d- 164a 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  i,  sc  ii 
[135-141]  570d;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [215-224]  590d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [220- 
223]  51b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iii,  49b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  49,  schol, 
394c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  vii  [170-173]  220b- 
221a 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  542b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  la-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  45b-c;  133a;  140b,d-143a; 
146a-c;  147b;  164a-171a;  205b-209b  /  Fund. 
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  264d-265a;  275b; 
279b,d-287d  esp  281c-283d  /  Practical  Reason, 
291a-293b;  296a-d;  301d-302d;  304a-d;  307d- 
314d;  319c-321b;  331c-337a,c  /  Intro.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals,  386d-387a,c;  390b  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  463a-467a;  571c-572a;  587a-588a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  549c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  340 
llOb-c;  par  342-344  llOc-llla  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  160c- 165b;  166b- 168a;  part 
iv,  368d-369a,c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  158b-159a 


4  to  5 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  x,  389a-391c;  bk  xi,  469a-472b;  bk  xiii- 
xiv,  563a-590c;  bk  xiv,  609a  613d;  bk  xv, 
618b-621b;  626d-630a;  epilogue  i,  645a- 
650c;  epilogue  ii  675a'696d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  291a-295b;  657a-b;  820b- 
824a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  486c-487a 

4.  Fatalism  in  relation  to  the  will  of  God:  the 
doctrine  of  predestination 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  45  esp  45:4-8  /  Exodus, 
4:21;  7-14  esp  7:3,  9:12,  10:1,  10:20,  10:27, 
1 1:10,  14:4,  14:8,  14:17;  33:19  /  Deuteronomy , 
7:6-8;  14:2  /  Psalms ,  147:12-20  esp  147:20— 
(D)  Psalms ,  147  esp  147:20  /  Proverbs ,  16:33  / 
Ecclesiastes ,  9:11-12  /  Isaiah ,  41:8-14 — (D) 
Isaias,  41:8-14 

Apocrypha:  Z&s/  <?/'  Esther ,  13:8-18  —  (D)  OT, 
Esther ,  13:8-18  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  19:4-5— 
(D)  OT,  0/  Wisdom ,  19:4-5  /  Eccle- 

siasticus ,  33:10-13— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus , 
33:I0_I3 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  22:1-14  /  John , 
6:22-71  esp  6:40,  6:44-45,  6:64-65— (D) 
John ,  6:22-72  esp  6:40,  6:44-45,  6:65-66  / 
/Zctt,  17:24-27  /  Romans ,  8:28-11:36  /  7/  Co- 
rinthians ,  3-4  /  Galatians ,  4:4-6  /  Ephesians , 
1:4-2:10;  4:1-16  esp  4:7,  4:11  /  Philippians , 
2:12-15  /  James,  4:13-15  /  /  Peter,  1:1-5 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  12  118d- 
120b;  ch  17  122d-124a;  bk  ii,  ch  16  156b- 
158d;  bk  hi,  ch  22  195a-201a;  bk  iv,  ch  i 
213a-223d;  ch  3  224b-d;  ch  7  232c-235a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect  ii  262a-b; 
bk  vi,  sect  44  278b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  16  150c-d 

18  Augustine:  C/Vy  0/  Go<Z,  bk  v,  ch  i  207d- 
208c;  ch  8-10  212c-216c;  ch  15-16  220d- 
221b;  bk  xv,  ch  i  397b,d-398c;  bk  xxi,  ch  12 
571a-c;  bk  xxii,  ch  1-2  586b,d-588a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq  23- 
24  132b-143c;  q  116  592d-595c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [61-96] 
lOb-c;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-84]  77b-c;  para¬ 
dise,  1  [94-142]  107b-d;  iv  [49-63]  111b; 
viii  [91-148]  117d-118c;  xvii  [13-45]  132b-c; 
xx  [31-141]  137a-138a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
I37~I54  106b-108b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  113b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  254b-d;  342a-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  408b'C 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  93  125d- 
126a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  141b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost  93a-333a  esp  bk  i 
[1-26]  93b-94a,  bk  iii  [80-134]  137a-138a,  bk 
v  [224-245]  180a-b,  [506-543]  186a-187a,  bk 
vii  [139-173]  220a-221a  /  Samson  Agonistes 
[373-4 1 9]  347b-348b;  [667-709]  354a-355a  / 
Areopagitica,  394b-395b 


523 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
78-81  485c487a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  32c-33b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xiv,  107a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  437d-438b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Pall,  230b;  239c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  334a-335b  /  Judge¬ 
ment ,  594d  [fn  1  ] 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  13b;  173c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  343 
llOd-11  la  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
153a-190b  esp  158c-162a;  part  iii,  305c-d; 
part  iv,  368d-369a,c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [5305-5344]  131b-132a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  396b-397a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  272a-b;  bk 
ix,  357b-358b;  bk  xv,  631a-c;  epilogue  ii, 
675b-677b;  680b-c;  684b-d 

52  Dostoevsky  \  Brothers  Karamazov,  bkv,  127b- 
137c  passim 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  246c-247d  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  776b;  793c 

5.  The  secularization  of  fate:  scientific  or  philo¬ 
sophical  determinism 

7  Plato:  bk  x,  437b-441a,c  esp  439a-441a,c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [184-307] 
17b-19a  esp  [251-293]  18b-d;  bk  v  [55—58]  61d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 
270b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i  78a-82b  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  16  150c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  6-7  355b;  axiom 
3  355d;  prop  17,  schol  362c-363c;  prop  25- 
29  365b-366c;  prop  32-appendix  367a-372d; 
part  11,  prop  48  391a-c;  prop  49,  schol, 
394b-c 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  542b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  93 

431b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii  478b- 
487a  passim 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  140b,d-143a;  164a-171a  / 
Judgement,  463a-467a;  575b-578a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  342- 
348  llOc-llld  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
156d-190b  esp  156d-158a,  161d-162a;  203a- 
206a, c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  6d;  7c;  lOb-lld;  35b-c;  36c-d 
[fn  2];  378b-d  esp  378d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  416c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii  675a- 
696d 

53  James:  Psychology,  291a-295b;  820b-825a  esp 
823a-825a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  13c  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  246b- 
247c  /  Generallntroduction,  454b-c;486d-487a; 
581d-582a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle, 
645b-646a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 
772b-c;  796a-c;  801c-802a,c  /  New  Introduc¬ 
tory  Lectures,  882c-883d 


Chapter  27:  FATE 


524 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


6.  The  historian’s  recognition  of  fate:  the  des¬ 
tiny  of  cities,  nations,  empires 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vii,  214d-220b  esp 
218b'220b;  239a-240d;  bk  viii,  262b-c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii,  403a-d 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues,  iv  14a-15b  /  Aeneid ,  bk  i 
[441-493]  115a-116b;  bk  vi  [752-901]  231a- 
235a;  bk  viii  [608-731]  275a-278b;  bk  x 
[100-117]  304b-305a;  bk  xii  [725-842]  373b- 
376b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  18d;  20b-c  /  Camillus, 
107b-d;  109c-110a  /  Philopoemen,  300b  / 
Alexander,  555c  /  Demosthenes ,  698b-c  / 
Marcus  Brutus,  815c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  58b-d;  bk  vi,  91b-d 
/  Histories,  bk  i,  189b-190a;  bk  ii,  232d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v  207b,d-230a,c 
esp  ch  1  207d-208c,  ch  12  216d-219b,  ch  15 
220d-221a 


6 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  214a-d;  462c-465c  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Federalist:  number  2,  31c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  340- 
360  110b-114a,c  esp  par  342-343  llOc-llla, 
par  347  lllb-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
156d-190b  esp  158c-162a;  203a-206a,c;  part  i, 
241d-242b;  258b-d;  part  ii,  278a-c;  280b- 
281b;  283d-284a,c;  part  iii,  285b-d;  300a- 
301c;  303c-306a;  part  iv,  315a;  368d-369a,c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  6c-7d  passim;  377c-378d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 416c-d; 
421d-422c;  424d-425b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  x,  389a-391c;  bk  xi,  469a-472b;  bk  xiii- 
xiv,  563a-590c;  bk  xiv,  609a-613d;  bk  xv, 
618b-621b;  626d-630a;  epilogue  i,  645a- 
650c;  epilogue  ii  675a-696d 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  882c- 
883c 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  basic  opposites  of  fate,  see  Chance  ia-ib,  2a;  History  4a(i);  Will  5~5a(4),  5c;  and 
for  other  terms  in  which  the  opposition  between  fate  and  chance  is  expressed,  see  Neces¬ 
sity  and  Contingency  3. 

The  problem  of  human  liberty  in  relation  to  fate,  see  Liberty  4b;  Necessity  and 
Contingency  5a(3);  Will  5c. 

The  implications  of  fate  in  theology,  or  for  the  relation  of  human  liberty  to  divine  provi¬ 
dence,  see  Cause  yc;  God  ic,  7b;  History  5a;  Liberty  53-50;  Will  yc. 

The  foretelling  of  fate  or  providence,  see  Prophecy  ia-ib;  and  for  the  condemnation  of 
astrology  and  divination,  see  Prophecy  5. 

Fatalism  or  determinism  in  the  philosophy  of  nature,  see  Chance  2a;  Nature  3c~3c(3); 
Will  5c;  World  ib. 

The  same  doctrine  in  the  philosophy  of  history,  see  History  4a(i)~4a(4);  Necessity  and 
Contingency  5P,  Will  7b. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 


Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boobs  of  the  Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Plutarch.  “Of  Fate,”  in  Moralia 
Augustine.  On  the  Predestination  of  the  Saints 
Aquinas.  Summa  Contra  Gentiles,  bk  iii,  ch  64-83, 
88—98,  163 

Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy,  part  i, 
40-4 1 

Hobbes.  A  Treatise  of  Liberty  and  Necessity 


J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic,  bk  vi,  ch  2 
W.  James.  “The  Dilemma  of  Determinism,”  in  The 
Will  to  Believe 

II. 

Cicero.  De  Fato  (On  Fate) 

- .  De  Divinatione  (On  Divination) 

Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed ,  part  iii, 
ch  17-19 


I 


Chapter  27:  FATE 


Gersonides.  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Job 
Calvin.  Institutes  of  the  Christian  Religion,  bk  iii, 
ch  14-25 

Knox.  An  Answer  to  the  Cavillations  of  an  Adversarie 
Respecting  the  Doctrine  of  Predestination 
Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xix  (10-11) 
Cudworth.  A  Treatise  of  Freewill 
J.  Butler.  The  Analogy  of  Religion ,  part  i,  cii  7 
J.  Edwards.  A  Careful .  .  .  Enquiry  into  the  Modern 
.  .  .  Notions  of  Freedom  of  Will 
Voltaire.  Zadig 
- .  Candide 

Goldsmith.  The  Vicar  of  Wakefield 
J.  Priestley  and  Price.  A  Free  Discussion  of  the 
Doctrine  of  Materialism  and  Philosophical  Necessity 


525 

De  Quincey.  On  the  Knocking  at  the  Gate  in 
Macbeth 

Schopenhauer.  Die  beiden  Grundproblcme  der 
Ethik,  1 

- .  Transcendent  Speculations  on  Apparent  Design 

in  the  Fate  of  the  Individual 
Emerson.  “Fate,”  in  The  Conduct  of  Life 
T.  Hardy.  The  Return  of  the  Native 

- .  Tess  of  the  IT  Urbervilles 

- .  Jude  the  Obscure 

Synge.  Riders  to  the  Sea 
Lagerlof.  The  Ring  of  the  Lowenskplds 
Wilder.  The  Bridge  of  San  Luis  Rey 
B.  Russell.  Religion  and  Science ,  ch  6 
T.  S.  Eliot.  The  Family  Reunion 


Chapter  18:  FORM 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  great  philosophical  issues  concerning 
form  and  matter  have  never  been  resolved. 
But  the  terms  in  which  these  issues  were  stated, 
from  their  first  formulation  in  antiquity  to  the 
17th  or  1 8th  centuries,  have  disappeared  or  at 
least  do  not  have  general  currency  in  contem¬ 
porary  discourse.  Kant  is  perhaps  the  last  great 
philosopher  to  include  these  terms  in  his  basic 
vocabulary.  The  conceptions  of  matter  and 
form,  he  writes,  “lie  at  the  foundation  of  all 
other  reflection,  so  inseparably  are  they  con¬ 
nected  with  every  mode  of  exercising  the  un¬ 
derstanding.  The  former  denotes  the  determin¬ 
able  in  general,  the  second  its  determination.” 

The  word  “form”  is  no  longer  a  pivotal  term 
in  the  analysis  of  change  or  motion,  nor  in  the 
distinction  between  being  and  becoming,  nor 
in  the  consideration  of  the  modes  of  being  and 
the  conditions  of  knowledge.  The  word  “mat¬ 
ter”  is  now  used  without  reference  to  form, 
where  earlier  in  the  tradition  all  of  its  principal 
meanings  involved  “form”  as  a  correlative  or  an 
opposite.  Other  words,  such  as  “participation” 
and  “imitation,”  have  also  fallen  into  disuse 
or  lost  the  meanings  which  derived  from  their 
relation  to  form  and  matter. 

The  problems  which  these  words  were  used 
to  state  and  discuss  remain  active  in  contem¬ 
porary  thought.  There  is,  for  instance,  the 
problem  of  the  universal  and  the  particular,  the 
problem  of  the  immutable  and  the  mutable,  the 
problem  of  the  one  and  the  many,  or  of  same¬ 
ness  and  diversity.  These  problems  appear  in 
the  writings  of  William  James  and  Bergson, 
Dewey  and  Santayana,  Whitehead  and  Russell. 
Sometimes  there  is  even  a  verbal  approximation 
to  the  traditional  formulation,  as  in  White¬ 
head’s  doctrine  of  “eternal  objects”  or  in  San¬ 
tayana’s  consideration  of  the  “realm  of  essence” 
and  the  “realm  of  matter.”  Whatever  expres¬ 
sions  they  use,  these  thinkers  find  themselves 


opposed  on  issues  which  represent  part,  if  not 
the  whole,  of  the  great  traditional  controversy 
between  Plato  and  Aristotle  concerning  form. 

There  is  a  tendency  among  the  historians  of 
thought  to  use  the  names  of  Plato  and  Aristotle 
to  symbolize  a  basic  opposition  in  philosophical 
perspectives  and  methods,  or  even  in  what  Wil¬ 
liam  James  calls  “intellectual  temperaments.” 
Later  writers  are  called  “Platonists”  or  “Aris¬ 
totelians”  and  doctrines  or  theories  are  classified 
as  Platonic  or  Aristotelian.  It  almost  seems  to 
be  assumed  at  times  that  these  names  exhaust 
the  typical  possibilities:  that  minds  or  theories 
must  be  one  or  the  other,  or  some  sort  of  mix¬ 
ture  or  confusion  of  the  two. 

If  this  tendency  is  ever  justified,  it  seems  to 
be  warranted  with  regard  to  the  problems  of 
form.  Here,  if  anywhere,  there  may  be  poetic 
truth  in  Whitehead’s  remark  that  the  history 
of  western  thought  can  be  read  as  a  series  of 
footnotes  to  Plato;  though  perhaps  the  observa¬ 
tion  should  be  added  that  Aristotle,  the  first 
to  comment  on  Plato,  wrote  many  of  the 
principal  footnotes.  In  Plotinus  the  two  strains 
seem  to  be  intermingled.  The  issue  between 
Plato  and  Aristotle  concerning  form  dominates 
the  great  metaphysical  and  theological  contro¬ 
versies  of  the  later  Middle  Ages,  and,  with  some 
alterations  in  language  and  thought,  it  appears 
in  the  writings  of  Hobbes,  Bacon,  Descartes, 
Spinoza,  and  Locke,  where  it  is  partly  a  con¬ 
tinuation  of,  and  partly  a  reaction  against,  the 
mediaeval  versions  of  Platonic  and  Aristotelian 
doctrine. 

The  most  extreme  reaction  is,  of  course,  to 
be  found  in  those  who  completely  reject  the 
term  form  or  its  equivalents  as  being  without 
significance  for  the  problems  of  motion,  exist¬ 
ence,  or  knowledge.  Bacon  retains  the  term, 
but  radically  changes  its  meaning.  “None  should 
526 


' 


Chapter  28:  FORM 


suppose  from  the  great  part  assigned  by  us  to 
forms,”  Bacon  writes,  “that  we  mean  such 
forms  as  the  meditations  and  thoughts  of  men 
have  hitherto  been  accustomed  to.”  He  does 
not  mean  either  “the  concrete  forms”  or  “any 
abstract  forms  of  ideas,”  but  rather  “the  laws 
and  regulations  of  simple  action.  .  .  .  The  form 
of  heat  or  form  of  light,  therefore,  means  no 
more  than  the  law  of  heat  or  the  law  of  light.” 
But  Hobbes  and  Locke  tend  to  reject  the  term 
itself— especially  when  it  occurs  in  the  notion 
of  substantial  form — as  meaningless  or  mis¬ 
leading. 

“We  are  told,”  says  Hobbes,  “there  be  in  the 
world  certain  essences,  separated  from  bodies, 
which  they  call  abstract  essences,  and  substantial 
forms.  .  .  .  Being  once  fallen  into  this  error  of 
separated  essences ,  [men]  are  thereby  necessarily 
involved  in  many  other  absurdities  that  follow 
it.  For  seeing  they  will  have  these  forms  to  be 
real,  they  are  obliged  to  assign  them  some 
place which  they  cannot  succeed  in  doing, 
according  to  Hobbes,  “because  they  hold  them 
incorporeal,  without  all  dimension  of  quantity, 
and  all  men  know  that  place  is  dimension,  and 
not  to  be  filled  but  by  that  which  is  corporeal.” 

With  regard  to  substantial  form,  Locke  de¬ 
clares,  “I  confess  I  have  no  idea  at  all,  but  only 
of  the  sound  ‘form.’”  Those  “who  have  been 
taught  .  .  .  that  it  was  those  forms  which  made 
the  distinction  of  substances  into  their  true 
species  and  genera,  were  led  yet  further  out  of 
the  way  by  having  their  minds  set  upon  fruit¬ 
less  inquiries  after  ‘substantial  forms’  ” — a  sub¬ 
ject  which  Locke  regards  as  “wholly  unintelli¬ 
gible.”  The  general  skepticism  about  this  no¬ 
tion  (or  the  distrust  of  its  hollowness)  in  the 
17th  and  1 8th  centuries  is  reflected  in  a  banter¬ 
ing  remark  by  Tristram  Shandy’s  father.  In  a 
discussion  of  infant  prodigies,  he  refers  to  some 
boy-wonders  who  “left  off  their  substantial 
forms  at  nine  years  old,  or  sooner,  and  went  on 
reasoning  without  them.” 

Since  form  and  matter  are  supposed  to  be 
correlative,  the  denial  to  form  of  meaning  or 
reality  leads  to  materialism,  as  in  the  case  of 
Hobbes — the  affirmation  of  matter  alone  as  a 
principle  or  cause.  Materialists  of  one  sort  or 
another  are  the  opponents  of  both  Plato  and 
Aristotle,  and  of  Platonists  and  Aristotelians. 
That  part  of  the  controversy  is  discussed  in  the 


527 

chapter  on  Matter.  Here  we  are  concerned 
with  tiie  issues  arising  from  different  views  of 
form  and  its  relation  to  matter. 

The  popular  meaning  of  “form”  afTords  an  ap¬ 
proach  to  the  subtleties  of  the  subject.  As  ordi¬ 
narily  used,  “form”  connotes  figure  or  shape. 
That  connotation  expresses  one  aspect  of  the 
technical  significance  of  “form.”  A  great  variety 
of  things,  differing  materially  and  in  other  re¬ 
spects,  can  have  the  same  figure  or  shape.  The 
same  form  can  be  embodied  in  an  indefinite 
number  of  otherwise  different  individuals.  But 
figures  or  shapes  are  sensible  forms,  forms  per¬ 
ceptible  to  vision  and  touch.  To  identify  form 
with  figure  or  shape  would  put  an  improper 
limitation  on  the  meaning  of  form.  This  is  pop¬ 
ularly  recognized  in  the  consideration  of  the 
form  of  a  work  of  art — the  structure  of  an  epic 
poem  or  a  symphony — which  seems  to  be  more 
a  matter  of  understanding  than  of  direct  sense- 
perception. 

Bertrand  Russell’s  definition  of  the  form  of 
a  proposition  effectively  illustrates  the  point 
involved.  The  form  of  a  proposition,  he  says, 
is  that  which  remains  the  same  in  a  statement 
when  everything  else  is  changed.  For  example, 
these  two  statements  have  the  same  grammat¬ 
ical  and  logical  form:  (1)  John  followed  James, 
and  (2)  Paul  accompanied  Peter.  What  might  be 
called  the  matter  or  subject  matter  of  the  two 
statements  is  completely  different,  but  both 
have  the  same  form,  as  may  an  indefinite  num¬ 
ber  of  other  statements. 

This  illustration  helps  us  to  grasp  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  form,  and  the  distinction  between  form 
and  matter,  or  the  formal  and  the  material 
aspects  of  anything.  It  is  thus  that  we  under¬ 
stand  the  phrase  “formal  logic”  to  signify  a 
study  of  the  forms  of  thought  or  discourse,  sep¬ 
arated  from  the  subject  matter  being  thought 
about  or  discussed.  Similarly,  abstractionism  or 
surrealism  is  a  kind  of  formalism  in  painting 
which  tries  to  separate  visible  patterns  or  struc¬ 
tures  from  their  representative  significance  or 
their  reference  to  familiar  objects. 

Kant’s  doctrine  of  space  and  time  as  tran¬ 
scendental  forms  of  intuition  exemplifies  the 
meaning  of  form  as  pure  order  or  structure  di¬ 
vorced  from  sensuous  content.  “That  which  in 
the  phenomenon  corresponds  to  the  sensation, 


528 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


I  term  its  matter ,”  he  writes;  ‘‘that  which  effects 
that  the  content  of  the  phenomenon  can  be 
arranged  under  certain  relations,  I  call  its 
form."  Sometimes  the  consideration  of  form 
emphasizes  not  its  separation  from,  but  its 
union  with  matter.  The  form  dwells  in  the 
thing,  constituting  its  nature.  The  sensible  or 
intelligible  characteristics  of  a  thing  result  from 
the  various  ways  in  which  its  matter  has  been 
formed. 

It  is  impossible  to  say  more  about  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  form  without  facing  at  once  the  great 
controversy  between  Plato  and  Aristotle  and 
the  difficulties  which  their  theories  confront. 

Plato  does  not  deny  that  things — the  sensi¬ 
ble,  material,  changing  things  of  experience — 
have  something  like  form.  Nor  does  he  deny 
that  the  ideas  by  which  we  understand  the  na¬ 
tures  of  things  are  like  forms.  Rather  he  asks  us 
to  consider  that  which  they  are  li\e . 

In  the  Phaedo — only  one  of  the  many  dia¬ 
logues  in  which  the  doctrine  of  forms  is  dis¬ 
cussed — Socrates  argues  that  “there  is  such  a 
thing  as  equality,  not  of  one  piece  of  wood  or 
stone  with  another,  but  that,  over  and  above 
this,  there  is  absolute  equality.”  Socrates  gets 
Simmias  to  admit  that  “we  know  the  nature  of 
this  absolute  essence,”  and  then  asks,  “Whence 
did  we  obtain  our  knowledge?”  It  could  not 
have  been  obtained  from  the  pieces  of  wood  or 
stone,  Socrates  tries  to  show,  because  they  “ap¬ 
pear  at  one  time  equal,  and  at  another  time 
unequal,”  whereas  the  idea  of  equality  is  never 
the  same  as  that  of  inequality.  Hence  he  thinks 
“we  must  have  known  equality  previously  to 
the  time  when  we  first  saw  the  material 
equals.  .  .  .  Before  we  began  to  see  or  hear  or 
perceive  in  any  way,  we  must  have  had  a 
knowledge  of  absolute  equality,  or  we  could 
not  have  referred  to  that  standard  the  equals 
which  are  derived  from  the  senses.”  The  equal¬ 
ity  which  supplies  the  “standard”  by  which 
material  equals  are  measured  is  the  Form  or 
Idea  of  equality. 

What  is  true  in  this  one  case  Socrates  thinks 
is  true  in  every  other.  Whether  we  consider 
the  “essence  of  equality,  beauty,  or  anything 
else,”  Socrates  holds,  the  “Ideas  or  essences, 
which  in  the  dialectical  process  we  define  as  .  .  . 
true  existences  .  .  .  are  each  of  them  always 


what  they  are,  having  the  same  simple  self- 
existent  and  unchanging  forms,  not  admitting 
of  variation  at  all,  or  in  any  way  or  at  any  time.” 
Apart  from  the  perishable  things  of  the  sensible 
world,  and  apart  from  the  ideas  which  are  in¬ 
volved  in  our  process  of  learning  and  thinking, 
there  exist  the  Forms  or  the  Ideas  themselves — 
the  immutable  objects  of  our  highest  knowl¬ 
edge. 

Because  the  same  English  words  are  em¬ 
ployed  in  these  quite  distinct  senses,  it  is  useful 
to  follow  the  convention  of  translators  who 
capitalize  the  initial  letter  when  “Form”  or 
“Idea”  refers  to  that  which  is  separate  from  the 
characteristics  of  material  things  and  from  the 
ideas  in  our  mind.The  words  “Form”  and  “Idea” 
are  interchangeable,  but  the  words  “Idea”  and 
“idea”  are  not.  The  latter  refers  to  a  notion  in 
the  human  mind,  by  which  it  knows;  whereas 
“Idea” — as  Plato  uses  the  word — signifies  the 
object  of  knowledge,  i.e .  that  which  is  known. 
These  differences  are  further  discussed  in  the 
chapter  on  Idea. 

By  imitating  the  Forms,  sensible  things,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Plato,  have  the  characteristics  we 
apprehend  in  them.  The  ideas  we  have  when 
we  apprehend  the  resemblance  between  sensi¬ 
ble  things  and  their  Forms  (which  sensible 
things  exhibit),  would  seem  to  be  indirect  ap¬ 
prehensions  of  the  Forms  themselves.  When  in 
the  Republic  Socrates  discusses  knowledge  and 
opinion,  he  distinguishes  them  from  one  an¬ 
other  according  to  a  division  of  their  objects — 
the  realm  of  intelligible  being  on  the  one  hand, 
and  the  realm  of  sensible  becoming  on  the 
other.  The  latter  stands  to  the  former  as  image 
or  copy  to  reality,  and  Socrates  finds  this  rela¬ 
tionship  repeating  itself  when  he  further  di¬ 
vides  each  of  the  two  parts.  The  realm  of  be¬ 
coming  divides  into  images  or  shadows  and  into 
that  “of  which  this  is  only  the  resemblance,” 
namely,  “the  animals  which  we  see,  and  every¬ 
thing  that  grows  or  is  made.”  The  realm  of  in¬ 
telligible  being  he  also  subdivides  into  two 
parts,  of  which  the  first  is  as  an  image  or  reflec¬ 
tion  of  the  second,  namely,  the  hypotheses  we 
form  in  our  minds  and  the  Ideas  or  Forms  them¬ 
selves. 

From  this  it  appears  that  just  as  we  should 
regard  the  form  of  the  thing  as  an  imitation  of, 
or  participation  in,  the  separate  Form,  so  should 


Chapter  28:  FORM 


529 


we  regard  the  idea  we  have  (that  is,  our  under¬ 
standing  of  the  thing)  as  an  approximation  of 
the  Idea.  The  Ideas  are  outside  the  human  mind 
even  as  the  Forms  are  separate  from  their  sen¬ 
sible,  material  imitations.  When  we  apprehend 
things  by  reason  we  know  the  Forms  they  imi¬ 
tate;  when  we  apprehend  them  by  our  senses 
we  know  them  as  imitations,  or  as  images  of  the 
Ideas. 

The  Platonic  theory  changes  the  ordinary 
meaning  of  the  word  “imitation.”  We  ordi¬ 
narily  think  of  imitation  as  involving  a  relation 
of  resemblance  between  two  sensible  things, 
both  of  which  we  are  able  to  perceive;  for  ex¬ 
ample,  we  say  that  a  child  imitates  his  father’s 
manner,  or  that  a  portrait  resembles  the  person 
who  posed  for  it.  The  painter,  according  to 
Socrates  in  the  Republic ,  is  not  the  only  “crea¬ 
tor  of  appearances.”  He  compares  the  painter 
who  pictures  a  bed  with  the  carpenter  who 
makes  one. 

Like  the  bed  in  the  painting,  the  bed  made 
by  the  carpenter  is  not  the  real  bed.  It  is  not, 
says  Socrates,  the  Idea  “which,  according  to 
our  view,  is  the  essence  of  the  bed.”  The  car¬ 
penter  “cannot  make  true  existence,  but  only 
some  semblance  of  existence.”  As  the  bed  in 
the  picture  is  an  imitation  of  the  particular  bed 
made  by  the  carpenter,  so  the  latter  is  an  imita¬ 
tion  of  the  Idea — the  essential  bed-ness  which  is 
the  model  or  archetype  of  all  particular  beds. 

Shifting  to  another  example,  we  can  say  that 
a  statue,  which  resembles  a  particular  man,  is 
the  imitation  of  an  imitation,  for  the  primary 
imitation  lies  in  the  resemblance  between  the 
particular  man  portrayed  and  the  Form  or  Idea, 
Man.  Just  as  the  statue  derives  its  distinctive 
character  from  the  particular  man  it  imitates, 
so  that  particular  man,  or  any  other,  derives 
his  manhood  or  humanity  from  Man.  Just  as 
the  particular  man  imitates  Man,  so  our  idea 
of  Man  is  also  an  imitation  of  that  Idea.  Knowl¬ 
edge,  according  to  Plato,  consists  in  the  imita¬ 
tion  of  Ideas,  even  as  sensible,  material  things 
have  whatever  being  they  have  by  imitation  of 
the  true  beings,  the  Forms. 

Another  name  for  the  primary  type  of  imita¬ 
tion  is  “participation.”  To  participate  in  is  to 
partake  of.  In  the  dialogue  in  which  Plato  has 
the  young  Socrates  inquiring  into  the  relation 


between  sensible  particulars  and  the  Ideas  or 
Forms,  Parmenides  tells  him  that  “there  are 
certain  ideas  of  which  all  other  things  partake, 
and  from  which  they  derive  their  names;  that 
similars,  for  example,  become  similar,  because 
they  partake  of  similarity;  and  great  things  be¬ 
come  great,  because  they  partake  of  greatness; 
and  that  just  and  beautiful  things  become  just 
and  beautiful,  because  they  partake  of  justice 
and  beauty.”  The  Forms  or  Ideas  are,  Parmeni* 
des  suggests,  “patterns  fixed  in  nature,  and 
other  things  are  like  them,  and  resemblances  of 
them— what  is  meant  by  the  participation  of 
other  things  in  the  ideas,  is  really  assimilation 
to  them.” 

The  fact  of  particularity  and  multiplicity 
seems  to  be  inseparable  from  the  fact  of  partic¬ 
ipation.  That  in  which  the  many  particulars 
participate  must,  on  the  other  hand,  have  uni¬ 
versality  and  unity.  The  Forms  or  Ideas  are 
universals  in  the  sense  that  each  is  a  one  which 
is  somehow  capable  of  being  in  a  many— by 
resemblance  or  participation.  Parmenides  asks 
Socrates  whether  he  thinks  that  “the  whole 
idea  is  one,  and  yet,  being  one,  is  in  each  one  of 
the  many.”  When  Socrates  unhesitatingly  says 
Yes,  Parmenides  points  out  to  him  that  we  then 
confront  the  difficulty  that  “one  and  the  same 
thing  will  exist  as  a  whole  at  the  same  time  in 
many  separate  individuals”  and  that  “the  ideas 
themselves  will  be  divisible,  and  things  which 
participate  in  them  will  have  a  part  of  them 
only  and  not  the  whole  idea  existing  in  each  of 
them.”  Nor  can  we  say,  Socrates  is  made  to 
realize,  that  “the  one  idea  is  really  divisible 
and  yet  remains  one.” 

This  difficulty  concerning  the  relation  of  par¬ 
ticulars  to  the  Ideas  they  participate  in,  is  dis¬ 
cussed  in  the  chapter  on  Universal  and  Par¬ 
ticular.  It  is  not  the  only  difficulty  which 
Plato  himself  finds  in  the  theory  of  Ideas.  An¬ 
other  concerns  the  individuality  of  each  of  the 
indefinite  number  of  particulars  which  copy  a 
single  model  or  archetype.  What  makes  the 
various  copies  of  the  same  model  different  from 
one  another  ? 

Plato  meets  this  problem  by  adding  a  third 
principle.  To  the  intelligible  patterns  or  arche¬ 
types  and  their  sensible  imitations,  he  adds,  in 
the  Timaeus ,  the  principle  which  is  variously 


530 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


named,  sometimes  “the  receptacle,”  sometimes 
“space,”  sometimes  “matter.”  However  named, 
it  is  the  absolutely  formless,  for  “that  which  is 
to  receive  all  Forms  should  have  no  form.  .  .  . 
The  mother  and  receptacle  of  all  visible  and  in 
any  way  sensible  things  ...  is  an  invisible  and 
formless  being  which  receives  all  things  and  in 
some  mysterious  way  partakes  of  the  intelli¬ 
gible,  and  is  most  incomprehensible.” 

It  is  this  material  or  receiving  principle  which 
somehow  accounts  for  the  numerical  plurality 
and  the  particularization  of  the  many  copies 
of  the  one  absolute  model.  When  a  number  of 
replicas  of  the  same  pattern  are  produced  by 
impressing  a  die  on  a  sheet  of  plastic  material 
at  different  places,  it  is  the  difference  in  the 
material  at  the  several  places  which  accounts 
for  the  plurality  and  particularity  of  the  rep¬ 
licas.  Yet  the  one  die  is  responsible  for  the 
character  common  to  them  all. 

The  sensible  things  of  any  one  sort  are  not 
only  particular  because  the  Form  they  imitate 
is  somehow  received  in  matter;  they  are  also 
perishable  because  of  that  fact.  The  receptacle 
is  the  principle  of  generation  or  of  change.  It  is, 
Timaeus  says,  “the  natural  recipient  of  all  im¬ 
pressions,”  which  is  “stirred  and  informed  by 
them,  and  appears  different  from  time  to  time 
by  reason  of  them,  but  the  forms  which  enter 
into  and  go  out  of  her  are  the  likenesses  of  real 
existences  modelled  after  their  patterns  in  a 
wonderful  and  inexplicable  manner.” 

Matter,  as  Plato  here  suggests,  is  the  mother 
of  changing  things,  things  which,  between  com¬ 
ing  to  be  and  passing  away,  are  what  they  are 
because  of  the  unchanging  Forms.  The  Form 
which  is  received  in  matter  for  a  time  makes 
the  changing  thing  an  imitation,  as  the  matter 
in  which  the  Form  is  received  makes  the  chang¬ 
ing  thing  a  participation. 

The  admittedly  mysterious  partaking  of  the 
Forms  by  the  formless  receptacle  constitutes 
the  realm  of  becoming,  in  which  being  and 
non-being  are  mixed.  But  the  Forms  or  Ideas 
themselves,  existing  apart  from  their  sensible 
imitations,  are  “uncreated  and  indestructible, 
never  receiving  anything  from  without,  nor 
going  out  to  any  other,  but  invisible  and  im¬ 
perceptible  by  any  sense.”  They  constitute  the 
realm  of  pure  being.  They  are  the  intelligible 
reality. 


The  criticism  of  the  Forms  or  Ideas  which 
we  find  in  the  writings  of  Aristotle  is  primarily 
directed  against  their  separate  existence.  “Plato 
was  not  far  wrong,”  Aristotle  says,  “when  he 
said  that  there  are  as  many  Forms  as  there  are 
kinds  of  natural  object”;  but  he  immediately 
adds  the  qualification:  “if  there  are  Forms  dis¬ 
tinct  from  the  things  of  this  earth.”  It  is  pre¬ 
cisely  that  supposition  which  Aristotle  chal¬ 
lenges. 

Aristotle’s  criticism  of  Plato  stems  from  his 
own  notion  of  substance,  and  especially  from 
his  conception  of  sensible  substances  as  com¬ 
posed  of  matter  and  form.  He  uses  the  word 
“substance”  to  signify  that  which  exists  in  and 
of  itself;  or,  in  other  words,  that  which  exists 
separately  from  other  things.  Hence,  when  he 
says  that,  in  addition  to  sensible  substances, 
“Plato  posited  two  kinds  of  substances — the 
Forms  and  the  objects  of  mathematics,”  he  is 
translating  the  affirmation  that  the  Forms  have 
being  separately  from  the  sensible  world  of 
changing  things,  into  an  assertion  that  they  are 
substances. 

“Socrates  did  not  make  the  universals  or  the 
definitions  exist  apart,”  Aristotle  writes;  but 
referring  to  the  Platonists,  he  says,  “they,  how¬ 
ever,  gave  them  separate  existence,  and  this 
was  the  kind  of  thing  they  called  Ideas.”  What 
proof  is  there,  he  repeatedly  asks,  for  the  sepa¬ 
rate  existence  of  the  Forms,  or  universals,  or 
the  objects  of  mathematics?  “Of  the  various 
ways  in  which  it  is  proved  that  the  Forms 
exist,”  he  declares,  “none  is  convincing.”  Fur¬ 
thermore,  he  objects  to  the  statement  that  “all 
other  things  come  from  the  Forms”;  for  “to 
say  that  they  are  patterns  and  the  other  things 
share  in  them  is  to  use  empty  words  and  poeti¬ 
cal  metaphors.”  There  is  the  additional  diffi¬ 
culty,  he  thinks,  that  “there  will  be  several  pat¬ 
terns  of  the  same  thing,  and  therefore  several 
Forms;  e.g.,  ‘animal’  and  ‘two-footed’  and  also 
‘man  himself’  will  be  Forms  of  man.” 

Aristotle’s  denial  of  separate  existence,  or 
substantiality,  to  the  Ideas  or  universals  stands 
side  by  side  with  his  affirmation  of  the  place  of 
forms  in  the  being  of  substances  and  the  role  of 
universals  in  the  order  of  knowledge.  Further¬ 
more,  he  limits  his  denial  of  the  substantiality 
of  Ideas  to  those  Forms  which  seem  to  be  the 
archetypes  or  models  of  sensible  things.  Par- 


Chapter  28:  FORM 


ticular  physical  things— familiar  sensible  sub¬ 
stances,  such  as  the  stone,  the  tree,  or  the  man 
— are  not,  in  his  opinion,  imitations  of  or  par¬ 
ticipations  in  universal  models  which  exist  apart 
from  these  things.  He  leaves  it  an  open  question 
whether  there  are  self-subsistent  Forms  or  Ideas 
— that  is,  purely  intelligible  substances — which 
do  not  function  as  the  models  for  sensible  things 
to  imitate. 

Stated  positively,  the  Aristotelian  theory 
consists  in  two  affirmations.  The  first  is  that  the 
characteristics  of  things  are  determined  by  “in¬ 
dwelling  forms,”  which  have  their  being  not 
apart  from  but  in  the  things  themselves.  To 
illustrate  his  meaning  he  turns  to  the  realm  of 
art.  When  we  make  a  brass  sphere,  he  writes, 
“we  bring  the  form,”  which  is  a  sphere,  “into 
this  particular  matter,”  the  brass,  and  “the  re¬ 
sult  is  a  brazen  sphere.”  There  is  no  “sphere 
apart  from  the  individual  spheres,”  and  no 
brass  apart  from  the  particular  lumps  of  metal 
that  are  brass.  “The  ‘form*  means  the  ‘such,’ 
and  is  not  a  ‘this' — a  definite  thing,”  such  as 
this  individual  brazen  sphere. 

Aristotle  analyzes  natural  things  in  the  same 
manner.  It  is  from  “the  indwelling  form  and 
the  matter,”  he  says,  that  “the  concrete  sub¬ 
stance  is  derived.”  Men  such  as  Callias  or  Soc¬ 
rates,  for  example,  consist  of  “such  and  such 
a  form  in  this  flesh  and  in  these  bones,”  and 
“they  are  different  in  virtue  of  their  matter 
(for  that  is  different)  but  the  same  in  form.” 
The  flesh  and  bones  of  Callias  are  not  the  flesh 
and  bones  of  Socrates;  but  though  different  as 
individual  men,  they  are  the  same  as  men  be¬ 
cause  they  have  the  same  form. 

The  second  point  is  that  our  understanding 
of  things  involves  the  forms  of  things,  but  now 
somehow  in  the  intellect  rather  than  in  the 
things  themselves.  In  order  to  know  things, 
Aristotle  says,  we  must  have  within  us  “either 
the  things  themselves  or  their  forms.  The 
former  alternative  is  of  course  impossible:  it  is 
not  the  stone  which  is  present  in  the  soul,”  he 
maintains,  “but  its  form.” 

The  form  in  the  thing  is  as  individual  as  the 
thing  itself.  But  in  the  mind,  as  the  result  of  the 
intellect’s  power  to  abstract  this  form  from  its 
matter,  the  form  becomes  a  universal;  it  is  then 
called  by  Aristotle  an  “idea,”  “abstraction,”  or 
“concept.”  Forms  are  universal  in  the  mind 


531 

alone.  If  there  were  a  form  existing  apart  from 
both  matter  and  mind,  it  would  be  neither  an 
individual  form  nor  an  abstract  universal. 

The  indwelling  forms,  according  to  Aristotle, 
are  not  universal.  Except  for  the  possibility  of 
Forms  which  dwell  apart  and  bear  no  resem¬ 
blance  at  all  to  sensible  things,  all  forms  are 
either  in  matter  or,  abstracted  from  matter,  in 
the  human  mind.  These  are  often  called  “ma¬ 
terial  forms”  because  they  are  the  forms  which 
matter  takes  or  can  take,  and  which  the  mind 
abstracts  from  matter.  Their  being  consists  in 
informing  or  determining  matter,  just  as  the 
being  of  matter  consists  in  the  capacity  to  re¬ 
ceive  these  forms  and  to  be  determined  by 
them. 

The  foregoing  helps  to  explain  Aristotle’s  use 
of  the  word  “composite”  as  a  synonym  for  “sub¬ 
stance”  when  he  is  considering  particular  sensi¬ 
ble  things.  The  independently  existing,  indi¬ 
vidual  physical  things  which  Aristotle  calls 
“substances”  are  all  composite  of  form  and  mat¬ 
ter.  He  sometimes  also  calls  form  and  matter 
“substances,”  but  when  he  uses  the  word  “sub¬ 
stance”  strictly  and  in  its  primary  sense,  he 
applies  it  only  to  the  concrete  individual.  Form 
and  matter  are  only  principles  or  constituents 
of  the  concrete  thing — the  composite  substance. 

The  union  of  form  and  matter  to  constitute 
physical  substances  also  explains  the  Aristo¬ 
telian  identification  of  form  with  actuality  and 
of  matter  with  potentiality;  and  the  relation  of 
form  and  matter  to  a  third  term  in  the  analysis 
of  change,  namely,  privation.  As  a  physical  thing 
changes,  its  matter  gives  up  one  form  to  take  on 
another.  Its  matter  thus  represents  its  capacity 
or  potentiality  for  form.  Matter  is  the  fomiable 
aspect  of  changing  things.  What  things  are 
actually  at  any  moment  is  due  to  the  forms  they 
possess.  But  they  may  have  the  potentiality  for 
acquiring  other  forms,  with  respect  to  which 
they  are  in  privation . 

“The  mutability  of  mutable  things,”  Augus¬ 
tine  writes,  “is  simply  their  capacity  for  all  the 
forms  into  which  mutable  things  can  be 
changed.”  Change  consists  in  a  transformation 
of  matter ,  which  is  another  way  of  saying  that  it 
consists  in  the  actualization  of  a  thing’s  poten¬ 
tialities.  The  Aristotelian  theory  of  form  and 
matter  is  a  theory  of  becoming  as  well  as  an 


532 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


analysis  of  the  being  of  changing  things.  Illus¬ 
trative  applications  of  this  theory  will  be  found 
in  the  chapters  on  Art,  Cause,  and  Change. 

Some  forms  are  sensible.  Some  are  shapes, 
some  are  qualities,  some  are  quantities.  But  not 
all  forms  are  perceptible  by  the  senses;  as,  for 
example,  the  form  which  matter  takes  when  a 
plant  or  animal  is  generated  and  which  gives 
the  generated  thing  its  specific  nature.  This 
type  of  form  came  to  be  called  a  “substantial 
form”  because  it  determines  the  kind  of  sub¬ 
stance  which  the  thing  is.  In  contrast,  the  forms 
which  determine  the  properties  or  attributes  of 
a  thing  are  called  its  “accidents”  or  “accidental 
forms.”  For  example,  size  and  shape,  color  and 
weight,  are  accidental  forms  of  a  man;  whereas 
that  by  virtue  of  which  this  thing  ( having  a 
certain  size,  shape,  and  color)  is  a  man>  is  its 
substantial  form. 

Aristotle's  distinction  between  substantial 
and  accidental  form  affects  his  analysis  of 
change  and  his  conception  of  matter.  Genera¬ 
tion  and  corruption  are  for  him  substantial 
change,  change  in  which  matter  undergoes 
transformation  with  respect  to  its  substantial 
form.  The  various  types  of  motion— alteration, 
increase  or  decrease,  and  local  motion — are 
changes  which  take  place  in  enduring  sub¬ 
stances,  and  with  respect  to  their  accidental 
forms. 

The  substratum  of  accidental  change  is  not 
formless  matter,  but  matter  having  a  certain 
substantial  form;  whereas  in  the  coming  to  be 
or  passing  away  of  substances,  the  substratum 
would  seem  to  be  a  primary  sort  of  matter, 
devoid  of  all  form.  As  indicated  in  the  chapter 
on  Matter,  this,  according  to  Aristotle,  is  “the 
primary  substratum  of  each  thing,  from  which 
it  comes  to  be  without  qualification,  and  which 
persists  in  the  result.”  He  tries  to  help  us  grasp 
prime  matter  by  using  an  analogy.  “As  the 
bronze  is  to  the  statue,  the  wood  to  the  bed,” 
he  writes,  “so  is  the  underlying  nature  to  sub¬ 
stance” — matter  absolutely  formless  to  sub¬ 
stantial  form. 

Aristotle  sometimes  speaks  of  the  substantial 
form  as  a  first  act  or  actuality,  and  of  accidental 
forms  as  second  actualities.  Accordingly  he  also 
distinguishes  between  a  primary  and  secondary 
kind  of  matter — the  one  absolutely  potential, 
and  underlying  substantial  change;  the  other 


partly  actualized  and  partly  potential,  and  in¬ 
volved  in  accidental  change.  “Primary  mat¬ 
ter,”  Aquinas  explains,  “has  substantial  being 
through  its  form.  .  .  .  But  when  once  it  exists 
under  one  form  it  is  in  potentiality  to  others.” 

Perhaps  one  more  distinction  should  be  men¬ 
tioned  because  of  its  significance  for  later  dis¬ 
cussions  of  form.  Regarding  living  and  non¬ 
living  things  as  essentially  distinct,  Aristotle 
differentiates  between  the  forms  constituting 
these  two  kinds  of  substances.  As  appears  in  the 
chapter  on  Soul,  he  uses  the  word  “soul”  to 
name  the  substantial  form  of  plants,  animals, 
and  men. 

Both  the  Platonic  theory  of  the  separate 
Forms  and  the  Aristotelian  theory  of  the  com¬ 
position  of  form  and  matter  raise  difficulties 
which  their  authors  consider  and  which  become 
the  subject  of  intense  controversy  among  Pla- 
tonists  and  Aristotelians  in  the  Hellenistic  and 
mediaeval  periods. 

The  Platonic  theory  faces  a  question  which 
arises  from  supposing  the  existence  of  an  eternal 
and  immutable  Form  for  every  appearance  in 
the  sensible  world  of  becoming.  If  the  Idea  and 
the  individual  are  alike,  then  “some  further 
idea  of  likeness  will  always  be  coming  to  light,” 
Parmenides  says  to  Socrates;  “and  if  that  be 
like  anything  else,  then  another;  and  new 
ideas  will  be  always  arising,  if  the  idea  resembles 
that  which  partakes  of  it.”  Because  of  this  dif¬ 
ficulty  with  the  doctrine  of  participation, 
Parmenides  suggests  that  it  may  be  necessary 
to  conclude  that  “the  Idea  cannot  be  like  the 
individual  or  the  individual  like  the  Idea.”  In 
addition,  the  relationships  of  the  Forms  to  one 
another  presents  a  difficulty.  Is  the  relation  of 
one  Form  to  another,  Parmenides  asks,  de¬ 
termined  by  the  essence  of  each  Form,  or  by 
the  relationships  among  the  sensible  particulars 
that  imitate  the  Forms  in  question?  Either 
solution  seems  to  be  unsatisfactory  because  of 
the  further  difficulties  which  both  raise. 

Yet,  after  propounding  questions  of  this  sort, 
and  multiplying  difficulties,  Parmenides  con¬ 
cludes  by  telling  Socrates  why  the  theory  of 
Ideas  cannot  be  given  up.  “If  a  man,  fixing  his 
attention  on  these  and  like  difficulties,”  he 
says,  “does  away  with  the  Forms  of  things  and 
will  not  admit  that  every  individual  thing  has 


Chapter  28:  FORM 


533 


its  own  determinate  Idea  which  is  always  one 
and  the  same,  he  will  have  nothing  on  which 
his  mind  can  rest;  and  so  he  will  utterly  destroy 
the  power  of  reasoning.” 

The  Aristotelian  theory  has  difficult ies  of  its 
own  with  respect  to  the  ultimate  character  of 

(matter  apart  from  all  forms.  Completely  form¬ 
less  matter  would  be  pure  potentiality  and 
would  therefore  have  no  actual  being.  It  would 
be  completely  unintelligible,  since  form  is  the 
principle  of  anything’s  intelligibility.  Never¬ 
theless,  something  like  formless  matter  seems  to 
be  involved  in  substantial  change,  in  contrast 
to  the  substantially  formed  matter  which  is  the 
substratum  of  accidental  change. 

The  problem  of  prime  matter  is  related  in 
later  speculations  to  the  problem  of  the  number 
and  order  of  the  various  forms  which  matter 
can  take.  The  question  is  whether  matter  must 
have  a  substantial  form  before  it  can  have  any 
accidental  form;  and  whether  it  can  have  a 
second  substantial  form  in  addition  to  a  first,  or 
is  limited  to  having  a  single  substantial  form, 
all  subsequent  forms  necessarily  being  acci¬ 
dental. 

Aquinas  plainly  argues  in  favor  of  the  unity 
of  substantial  form.  “Nothing  is  absolutely 
1  one,”  he  maintains,  “except  by  one  form,  by 
which  a  thing  has  being;  because  a  thing  has 
both  being  and  unity  from  the  same  source, 
and  therefore  things  which  are  denominated  by 
various  forms  are  not  absolutely  one;  as,  for 
instance,  a  white  man.  If,  therefore,”  Aquinas 
continues,  “man  were  living  by  one  form,  the 
vegetative  soul,  and  animal  by  another  form, 
the  sensitive  soul,  and  man  by  another  form, 
the  intellectual  soul,  it  would  follow  that  man 
is  not  absolutely  one.  .  .  .  We  must,  therefore, 
conclude,”  he  says,  “that  the  intellectual  soul, 
the  sensitive  soul,  and  the  nutritive  soul  are  in 
man  numerically  one  and  the  same  soul.”  In 
other  words,  “of  one  thing  there  is  but  one  sub¬ 
stantial  form.”  It  is  not  only  “impossible  that 
there  be  in  man  another  substantial  form  be¬ 
sides  the  intellectual  soul,”  but  there  is  also  no 
need  of  any  other,  because  “the  intellectual 
soul  contains  virtually  whatever  belongs  to  the 
sensitive  soul  of  brute  animals  and  the  nutritive 
soul  of  plants.” 

The  Aristotelian  theory  also  has  difficulties 
with  respect  to  substantial  forms  as  objects  of 


knowledge  and  definition.  The  definition  which 
the  mind  formulates  attempts  to  stale  the  es¬ 
sence  of  the  thing  defined.  The  formidable  es¬ 
sence  of  a  thing  would  seem  to  Ik*  identical  with 
its  form.  But  Aristotle  raises  the  question  and 
his  followers  debate  at  length  whether  the  es¬ 
sence  of  a  composite  substance  is  identical  with 
its  substantial  form  or  includes  its  matter  as 
well. 

Among  his  followers  Aquinas  maintains  that, 
in  defining  the  essence  or  species  of  a  composite 
substance,  the  genus  is  used  to  signify  the  mat¬ 
ter  and  the  differentia  the  form.  “Some  held,” 
he  writes,  “that  the  form  alone  belongs  to  the 
species,  while  the  matter  is  part  of  the  individ¬ 
ual,  and  not  of  the  species.  This  cannot  be 
true,  for  to  the  nature  of  the  species  belongs 
what  the  definition  signifies,  and  in  natural 
things  the  definition  does  not  signify  the  form 
only,  but  the  form  and  the  matter.  Hence  in 
natural  things  the  matter  is  part  of  the  species; 
not,  indeed,  signate  matter,  which  is  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  individuation,  but  common  matter.” 
He  explains  in  another  place  that  “matter  is 
twofold;  common  and  signate ,  or  individual: 
common,  such  as  flesh  and  bone;  individual, 
such  as  this  flesh  and  these  bones.”  In  forming 
the  universal  concept  man ,  for  example,  the 
intellect  abstracts  the  notion  of  the  species 
“from  this  flesh  and  these  hones ,  which  do  not 
belong  to  the  species  as  such,  but  to  the  indi¬ 
vidual.  . . .  But  the  species  of  man  cannot  be  ab¬ 
stracted  by  the  intellect  from  flesh  and  bones" 

As  will  be  seen  in  the  chapters  on  One 
and  Many  and  Universal  and  Particular, 
the  Platonic  and  the  Aristotelian  theories  of 
form  are  equally  involved  in  the  great  prob¬ 
lem  of  the  universal  and  the  individual.  Even 
though  they  seem  to  be  diametrically  opposed 
on  the  existence  of  universal — whether  apart 
from  or  only  in  minds — both  Plato  and  Aris¬ 
totle  face  the  necessity  of  explaining  individu¬ 
ality.  What  makes  the  particular  that  imitates 
a  universal  Form  the  unique  individual  it  is? 
What  makes  the  indwelling  form  of  a  composite 
substance  an  individual  form,  as  unique  as  the 
individual  substance  of  which  it  is  the  form? 

We  have  already  noted  that  both  Platonists 
and  Aristotelians  appeal  to  matter  as  somehow 
responsible  for  individuation  or  individuality, 
but  that  only  raises  further  questions.  The 


534 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Platonists  conceive  matter  as  the  receptacle  of 
all  Forms,  and  so  in  itself  absolutely  formless. 
How,  then,  can  it  cause  the  particularizations 
which  must  be  accounted  for?  Since  prime 
matter,  like  the  receptacle,  is  formless,  the 
Aristotelians  resort  to  what  they  call  “signate 
matter”  or  “individual  matter”  to  explain  the 
individuality  of  forms  and  substances;  but  it 
has  been  argued  that  this  only  begs  the  ques¬ 
tion  rather  than  solves  it. 

The  correlative  terms  form  and  matter  seem 
to  occur  in  modern  thought  under  the  guise  of 
certain  equivalents;  as,  for  example,  the  distinct 
substances  which  Descartes  calls  “thought”  and 
“extension” — res  cogitans  and  res  extensa — or 
the  infinite  attributes  of  substance  which 
Spinoza  calls  “mind”  and  “body.”  They  ap¬ 
pear  more  explicitly  in  Kant’s  analysis  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  related  as  the  a  priori  and  the  a  posteriori 
elements  of  experience.  But  it  is  in  the  great 
theological  speculations  of  the  Middle  Ages 
that  the  most  explicit  and  extended  use  of 
these  terms  is  made,  often  with  new  interpreta¬ 
tions  placed  on  ancient  theories. 

The  doctrine  of  spiritual  substances,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  has  a  bearing  on  the  theory  of  self- 
subsistent  Forms.  The  angels  are  sometimes 
called  “separate  forms”  by  the  theologians. 
They  are  conceived  as  immaterial  substances, 
and  hence  as  simple  rather  than  composite.  But 
though  Plotinus  identifies  the  order  of  purely 
intelligible  beings  with  the  pure  intelligences, 
the  Christian  theologian  does  noPfidentify  the 
Platonic  Ideas  with  the  angels.  He  regards  the 
angels  as  intelligences.  They  exist  as  pure  forms, 
and  therefore  are  intelligible  as  well  as  intellec¬ 
tual  substances.  But  they  are  in  no  sense  the 
archetypes  or  models  which  sensible  things  re¬ 
semble. 

Nevertheless,  Christian  theology  does  in¬ 
clude  that  aspect  of  the  Platonic  theory  which 
looks  upon  the  Ideas  as  the  eternal  models  or 
patterns.  But,  as  Aquinas  points  out,  the  sepa¬ 
rately  existing  Forms  are  replaced  by  what 
Augustine  calls  “the  exemplars  existing  in  the 
divine  mind.” 

Aquinas  remarks  on  the  fact  that  “whenever 
Augustine,  who  was  imbued  with  the  doctrines 
of  the  Platonists,  found  in  their  teaching  any¬ 
thing  consistent  with  faith,  he  adopted  it;  and 


those  things  which  he  found  contrary  to  faith 
he  amended.”  He  then  goes  on  to  say  that 
Augustine  could  not  adopt,  but  had  to  amend, 
the  teaching  of  the  Platonists  that  “the  forms 
of  things  subsist  of  themselves  apart  from  mat¬ 
ter.”  He  did  this,  not  by  denying  the  ideas, 
“according  to  which  all  things  are  formed,”  but 
by  denying  that  they  could  exist  outside  the 
divine  mind.  The  divine  ideas  are  the  eternal 
exemplars  and  the  eternal  types — types ,  Aqui¬ 
nas  explains,  insofar  as  they  are  the  likenesses  of 
things  and  so  the  principles  of  God’s  knowl¬ 
edge;  exemplars  insofar  as  they  are  “the  princi¬ 
ples  of  the  making  of  things”  in  God’s  act  of 
creation. 

The  profound  mystery  of  the  creative  act 
which  projects  the  divine  ideas  into  substantial 
or  material  being  replaces  the  older  problem  of 
how  physical  things  derive  their  natures  by 
participation  in  the  Forms.  According  to  the 
Aristotelian  theory,  both  natural  generation 
and  artistic  production  involve  the  transforma¬ 
tion  of  a  pre-existent  matter.  According  to  the 
Platonic  myth  of  the  world’s  origin,  only 
changing  things  are  created,  neither  the  recep¬ 
tacle  nor  the  Ideas.  But  the  Christian  dogma  of 
creation  excludes  everything  from  eternity  ex¬ 
cept  God. 

Ideas  are  eternal  only  as  inseparable  from 
the  divine  mind.  Being  spiritual  creatures ,  the 
angels,  or  self-subsistent  forms,  are  not  eternal. 
And  in  the  world  of  corporeal  creatures,  mat¬ 
ter  as  well  as  its  forms  must  begin  to  be  with 
the  creation  of  things.  Since  matter  and  its 
forms  cannot  exist  in  separation  from  one  an¬ 
other,  the  theologians  hold  that  God  cannot 
create  them  separately.  God  cannot  be  sup¬ 
posed,  Augustine  says,  “first  to  have  made 
formless  matter,  and  after  an  interval  of  time, 
formed  what  He  had  first  made  formless;  but,” 
he  goes  on,  “as  intelligible  sounds  are  made  by 
a  speaker,  wherein  the  sound  issues  not  formless 
at  first  and  afterwards  receives  a  form,  but  is 
uttered  already  formed;  so  must  God  be  under¬ 
stood  to  have  made  the  world  of  formless  mat¬ 
ter,  but  contemporaneously  to  have  created 
the  world  ”  God  “concreates”  form  and  matter, 
Augustine  holds,  “giving  form  to  matter’s 
formlessness  without  any  interval  of  time.” 

Defending  Augustine’s  interpretation  of  the 
passage  in  Genesis  which  says  that  the  earth, 


535 


Chapter  28:  FORM 


which  God  in  the  beginning  created,  “was  un¬ 
formed  and  void/’  Aquinas  argues  that  “if 
formless  matter  preceded  in  duration,  it  already 
existed;  for  this  is  implied  by  duration.  ...  To 
say,  then,  that  matter  preceded,  but  without 
form,  is  to  say  that  being  existed  actually,  yet 
without  actuality,  which  is  a  contradiction  in 
terms.  .  .  .  Hence  we  must  assert  that  primary 
matter  was  not  created  altogether  formless.” 
But  neither,  according  to  Aquinas,  can  the 
form  of  any  material  thing  be  created  apart 
from  its  matter.  “Forms  and  other  non-sub¬ 
sisting  things,  which  are  said  to  co-exist  rather 
than  to  exist,”  he  declares,  “ought  to  be  called 
concreated  rather  than  created  things.” 

Aristotle’s  theory  of  physical  substances  as 
composite  of  form  and  matter  raises  certain 
special  difficulties  for  Christian  theology.  Those 


who,  like  Aquinas,  adopt  his  theory  must  also 
adapt  it  to  supernatural  conditions  when  they 
deal  with  the  problems  of  substance  involved  in 
the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  second 
person  of  the  Trinity  and  the  mystery  of  tran- 
substantiation  in  the  Eucharist. 

Furthermore,  Aristotle’s  identification  of 
soul  with  the  substantial  form  of  a  living  thing 
makes  it  difficult  to  conceive  the  separate  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  individual  human  soul.  Again  an 
adaptation  is  required.  As  indicated  in  the 
chapters  on  Immortality  and  Soul,  the  Chris¬ 
tian  doctrine  of  personal  survival  is  given  an 
Aristotelian  rendering  by  regarding  the  human 
soul  as  a  form  which  is  not  completely  material. 
Hence  it  is  conceived  as  capable  of  self-subsist¬ 
ence  when,  with  death  and  the  dissolution  of  the 
composite  nature,  it  is  separated  from  the  body. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  Form  in  relation  to  becoming  or  change  536 

1  a.  Forms  as  immutable  models  or  archetypes:  the  exemplar  ideas 
ib.  Forms  as  indwelling  causes  or  principles 

1  c.  The  transcendental  or  a  priori  forms  as  constitutive  of  order  in  experience  537 

id.  The  realization  of  forms  in  the  sensible  order 

(1)  Imitation  or  participation:  the  role  of  the  receptacle 

(2)  Creation,  generation,  production:  embodiment  in  matter  or  substratum 

2.  The  being  of  forms  53^ 

2 a.  The  existence  of  forms:  separately,  in  matter,  in  mind 

ib.  The  eternity  of  forms,  the  perpetuity  of  species:  the  divine  ideas 

2 c.  Form  in  the  composite  being  of  the  individual  thing  539 

(1)  The  union  of  matter  and  form:  potentiality  and  actuality 

(2)  The  distinction  between  substantial  and  accidental  forms 

(3)  The  unity  of  substantial  form:  prime  matter  in  relation  to  substantial  form 

2 d.  Angels  and  human  souls  as  self-subsistent  forms:  the  substantiality  of  thought 

or  mind  in  separation  from  extension  or  body  540 

3.  Form  in  relation  to  knowledge 

3 a.  Sensible  forms,  intelligible  forms:  the  forms  of  intuition  and  understanding 
3 b.  The  problem  of  the  universal:  knowledge  of  the  individual  541 

3 c.  Form  and  definition:  the  formulable  essence;  the  problem  of  matter  in  relation 
to  definition 

4.  The  denial  of  form  as  a  principle  of  being,  becoming,  or  knowledge 


536 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James:  Psych o logy,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 — (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Form  in  relation  to  becoming  or  change 

la.  Forms  as  immutable  models  or  archetypes: 
the  exemplar  ideas 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  88a-89a;  113c-114a,c  /  Phae- 
drus ,  125a-b  /  Symposium,  167b-d  /  Phaedo , 
231b-232b;  247c-248c  /  Republic,  bk  hi,  333b- 
334b;  bk  v,  368c-369c;  bk  vi,  382a-c;  bk  vi- 
vn,386c-389c;  bkix-x,  426d-429b  /  Timaeusy 
447a-458b  passim,  esp  447b-448b  /  ParmetJ- 
idcs,  487c-491a  /  Philebus,  610d-613a  /  Seventh 
Letter ,  809c-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [1 13*24-33] 
158d;  bk  vi,  ch  8  [147*5-11]  201a/  Generation 
and  Corruption ,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [335b8-24]  437a-b  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  6  [98 7*29^1 3]  505 b  e; 
ch  7  [988*34— b5]  506c;  ch  9  [991*19-32]  509c; 
bk  vii,  ch  8  [io33bi9-i034a7]  556d-557b;  bk 
xiii,  ch  4-5  610a-611d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  6  [i096b32-i097a 
14]  342b-c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  811a-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [181-194] 
63b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  ii  46b-c; 
tr  iii,  ch  17-TR  iv,  ch  5  49b-51d;  tr  iv,  ch 
15  56c-57a  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  i  136a-d 
/  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  i  139c-140c;  tr  ix 
205a-2Q7a,c  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  i  214c- 


215a;  tr  v,  ch  4-TR  ix,  ch  14  230b-251d  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  20-22  278d-280d;  tr 
vii,  ch  4-17  323c-331a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  9,  3a;  bk 
xii,  par  38  108d-109a  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii, 
ch  3,  266a-b;  ch  6,  269b-c;  bk  ix,  ch  22 
296d-297a;  bk  xi,  ch  7  326a-c;  ch  10,  328c-d; 
ch  29  339a-b  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  9- 
10  627a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  38  654b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  15 
91b-94a  passim;  q  18,  a  4,  rep  2  107d-108c; 
q  44,  a  3  240b-241a;  q  47,  a  i,  rep  2  256a- 
257b;  q  50,  a  3,  ans  272a-273b;  q  65,  a  4,  ans 
342b-343c;  q  108,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2  552c- 
553c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43d-44c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  iii, 
sect  17  258d-259b;  sect  19  259c-260a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113b-115a;  173b-174a  / 
Practical  Reason ,  352c-353a  /  Judgement,  551a- 
552c 

lb.  Forms  as  indwelling  causes  or  principles 
8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i  259a-268d;  bk  ii, 
ch  1  [i93a30-bi9]  269c-270a;  ch2  [i94*i2-bi5] 
270c-271a;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [202*9-11]  279c  / 
Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  8  [277*12-27]  368b-c;  bk  iv, 
ch  4  [312*3-22]  403c-d  /  Generation  and  Cor¬ 
ruption,  bk  1,  ch  3  [3 1 8bi3— 18]  415b-c  /  Meta - 


1  c  to  \d{2)  Chapter  28:  FORM  537 


physics ,  bk  v,  cu  4  534d  535c;  bk  vii,  cii  7-9 
555a-558a  esp  cu  8  556b-557b;  bk  xii,  ch  2-5 
598c-601a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [640“ 
12-642*24]  162  b' 165b  /  Generation  of  Animals , 
bk  1,  ch  20  (729a6]-CH  22  (73ob33)  269b  271a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  7,  a  i, 
ans  31a-d;  q  9,  a  2,  rep  3  39c-40d;  q  14,  a  8, 
ans  82c-83b;  q  15,  a  i,  ans  91b-92a;  q  18,  a  3, 
ans  106b'107c;  q  19,  a  i,  ans  108d-109c;  q 
42,  a  1,  rep  1  224b-225d;  q  51,  a  i,  rep  3 
275b-276b;  q  65,  a  4,  ans  342b  343c;  q  85,  a 
2,  ans  453d-455b;  q  104,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1-2 
534c-536c;  q  105,  a  2,  ans  539c-540c;  q  115, 
aa  1-2  585d-588c;  part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  6,  rep  2 
641a-642a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  1  5a-6a;  q  52,  a  i,  ans  15d- 
18a;  Q  109,  a  1,  ans  338b-339c;  part  ii-ii, 
q  23,  a  2,  rep  3  483d-484d;  q  24,  a  11,  ans 
498b-499c;  part  iii,  q  13,  a  i,  ans  780a-781b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xviii 
[19-33]  80a;  paradise,  11  [46-148]  108b-109b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  ii,  36d-37a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  386d-387a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  43d-44c  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  31  111c;  bk  ii,  aph 
1-2  137a-c;  aph  17  149b-d 

35  Locke  :  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxxi, 
sect  6  240d-241d;  sect  13  243a  b;  ch  xxxii, 
sect  24  247c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect  15-18 
258b-259c;  ch  vi,  sect  2-3  268c-d;  ch  ix, 
sect  12  287d-288a 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  550a-551a,c;  553c-562a,c; 
565b-569a;  581c;  584c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
160b 

1  c.  The  transcendental  or  a  priori  forms  as  con¬ 
stitutive  of  order  in  experience 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  14a-108a,c  esp  14a-15c, 
23a-33d,  41c-42b,  48d-51d,  53b-55a,  56d- 
59b,  63d-64a,  66d-93c,  94d-96d,  lOOd-lOlb; 
112d'113a;  115d;  129c-137a,c;  153c-155a; 

162b-163a;  173b;  176d-177a;  186d-187a; 

207c-d;  213d-215a  /  Fund.  Prin .  Metaphysic  of 
Morals ,  253a-c;  282b-c;  283b/  Practical  Rea¬ 
son,  308a-b;  319 d;  335c-336a;  350b-c  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  461a-c;  471b-c;  482d;  492c-d;  515d- 
516b;  517b-c;  542c-d;  551a-553c;  562a- 

563b;  570b-572d;  612c-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  627a-631a;  852a;  859a-882a 

Id.  The  realization  of  forms  in  the  sensible 
order 

ld(l)  Imitation  or  participation:  the  role  of 
the  receptacle 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus ,  81a-b  /  Phaedrus,  126b-c 
/  Symposium ,  167b-d  /  Phaedo,  242c-243c  / 
Republic,  bk  iii,  333b-334b;  bk  v,  368c-371b; 
bk  vi,  382ac;  bk  x,  427c-429b  /  Timaeus, 


455c-477a,c  csp455c*458b  /  Parmenides ,  487c- 
491a  /  Seventh  Letter ,  809c  810b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  cii  2  [209^  17] 
288b  c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  cii 
9  h35b8-24]  437a  b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  cii 
6  505b  506b;  ch  9  [990^2-99 ia8]  509a  b;  bk 
vhi,  ch  6  [  1 045*1 4-19]  569d-570a;  bk  xii, 
cii  10  [io75bi6-2o]  606c;  bk  xiii,  cii  4  [1079* 

1 9 - b3 ]  610d'611a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  2-3  21d 
23a;  tr  vii,  ch  2  26c-d;  tr  viii,  cii  8  30d  31c; 
cii  10-11  32a-33d  /  Second  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch 
ii  46b-c;  ch  18  49c-50a;  tr  iv,  ch  5  51b  d; 
tr  ix,  ch  8  70a-d;  ch  10-12  72a-73d;  cu  16, 
76a- b  /  Third  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  1-3  82c-84c; 
ch  14  89b  d;  tr  v,  ch  i,  lOOd-lOlb;  cu  6, 
104a;  tr  vi,  ch  8-19  lllc-119a;  tr  vii,  ch  ii 
126a-d;  tr  viii  129a-136a  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr 
ii,  ch  1,  140a-c;  tr  iii,  ch  4-5  143d-144c;  ch 
15, 150a-b;  tr  iv,  ch  13  164d-165b;  tr  viii,  cii 
3-tr  ix,  ch  5  202a-207a,c  esp  tr  ix,  ch  2 
205c-206a  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  4-13  230b- 
235b;  tr  vii,  ch  i  238a-b;  tr  viii,  ch  1-3 
239b-241a;  ch  7,  243a-b;  tr  ix,  ch  3  247b-d; 
ch  11-14  250c-251d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch 

20- 22  278d-280d;  tr  iv,  ch  9-10  301c-302c; 
tr  v,  ch  6  307b-c;  tr  vi  310d-321b;  tr  vii, 
ch  4-9  323c-326c;  ch  18-23  331b-333c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  65, 
a  4,  ans  342b-343c;  q  115,  a  3,  rep  2  588c- 
589c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  52, 
a  1,  ans  15d-18a;  a  2  18a-19a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43d-44c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113c-115a 

ld(2)  Creation,  generation,  production:  em¬ 
bodiment  in  matter  or  substratum 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  88a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  6-9  264c-268d; 
bk  11,  ch  1  [i93a9-bi9]  269b-270a;  bk  iii,  ch  6 
[2o6b33]-CH  7  [2o8a4]  285b-286c;  bk  iv,  ch  2 
288b-289a;  ch  9  [2i7a20-b26]  297a-c  /  Heav¬ 
ens,  bk  1,  ch  9  [277b26-278b9]  369a-d;  bk  iv, 
ch  3  401c-402c;  ch  4  [312*3-22]  403c-d  / 
Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  7 
[324^-24]  422d-423b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  1, 
ch  6  [987b3o-988a8]  506a;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [999* 
24^24]  518a-c;  bk  v,  ch  4  534d-535c;  bk  xii, 
ch  10  [io75b34— 37]  606d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[640ai2-64ib39]  162b-165a  /  Generation  of 
Animals,  bk  i,  ch  20  [729a6]-CH  22  (73ob33) 
269b-271a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  13  271b; 
bk  vii,  sect  23  281b;  bk  xii,  sect  30  310a  b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  6-9  51d- 
53b;  tr  v  57d-60c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par  7  90d-91a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3, 
a  2,  rep  3  15c-16a;  q  7,  a  1,  ans  31a-d;  q  46, 
a  1,  rep  6  250a-252d;  q  65,  a  4,  ans  342b- 


538 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


( 1  d.  The  realization  of  forms  in  the  sensible  order. 
\d (2)  Creation,  generation,  production: 
embodiment  in  matter  or  substratum .) 

343c;  q  66,  a  i,  ans  343d-345c;  q  84,  a  3,  rep 
2  443d-444d;  q  90,  a  2  481d-482c;  q  104,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  1-2  534c-536c;  q  105,  a  i  538d- 
539c;  q  no,  a  2  565d-566d;  part  i-ii,  q  20, 
a  1,  rep  3  712a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  52, 
a  1,  ans  15d-18a;  part  ii-ii,  q  24,  a  ii,  ans 
498b-499c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii  [46-148] 
108b-109b;  vii  [121-148]  116b-c;  xm  [52-84] 
126a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  lOOd-lOlb;  186b-d  / 
Judgement,  556d-558a;  559b-d;  561c-562a; 
565b-d;  566d-567a;  575c-576a;  577c-d 

2.  The  being  of  forms 

2 a.  The  existence  of  forms:  separately,  in  mat¬ 
ter,  in  mind 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  113c-114a,c  /  Symposium , 
167a-d  /  Republic ,  bk  v,  368c-373c;  bk  vi, 
385c-386c;  bk  ix-x,  426d-429b  /  Timaeus , 
457b-458a  /  Parmenides ,  487c-491a  /  Sophist , 
570a-574c  /  Philebus ,  610d-613a  /  Seventh 
Letter,  809c-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  ii 
[77*5-9]  105d-106a;  ch  13  [79*6-10]  108c;  ch 
18  [8ia40-b5]  lllb-c;  ch  22  [83*23-35]  113c-d; 
ch  24  [85bi7~22]  117a  /  Topics,  bk  ii,  ch  7 
[113*24-33]  158d;  bk  vi,  ch  6  [i43bi  1—33] 
197b-c;  ch  10  [148*13-22]  202b  /  Physics,  bk 

ii,  ch  1  [i93b2-5]  269d;  ch  2  [i93b23-i94*6] 
270a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [2o8bi9~24]  287 b-c  / Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  1,  ch  6  505b-506b;  ch  9  508c- 
511c;  bk  hi,  ch  2  [997*34-998*19]  516ad; 
ch  4  [999*24~b24]  518a-c;  ch  4  [iooi*4]-ch  6 
[ioo2b3i]  519d-521d;  bk  vii,  ch  2  [io28bi8-28] 
551a-b;  ch  8  [io33bi9-io34*8]  556d-557b;  ch 
13-14  562a-563c;  ch  15  [i040*8-b4]  564a-c;  ch 
16  [i040b28-i04i*4]  564d-565a;  bk  viii,  ch  6 
[1045*14-19]  569d-570a;  bk  ix,  ch  8  [io5ob 
35-1051*2]  576d-577a;  bk  x,  ch  10  586c-d; 
bk  xi,  ch  1  [1059*39^21]  587b-c;  ch  2  588a- 
589a;  ch  3  [io6i*29-b4]  589c;  bk  xii,  ch  i 
[1069*27-37]  598b;  ch  3  [1070*4-30]  599b-d; 
ch  6  [io7ibi2-23]  601b-c;  ch  10 

606c-d;  bk  xiii-xiv  607a-626d  /  Soul,  bk  iii, 
ch  4  [429*10-29]  661b-c;  ch  7  [43ibi3-i9]  664b 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a-d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  1-2  26a-d; 
tr  viii,  ch  2-3  27c-28c  /  Third  Ennead,  tr 
viii,  ch  8-10  132d-136a  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr 

iii,  ch  4-5  143d-144c;  ch  17  150d-151b  /  Fifth 
Ennead,  tr  iv  226d-228b;  tr  vii,  ch  i-tr 
viii,  ch  3  238a-241a;  tr  ix,  ch  4-14  247d- 
251d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  20-22  278d- 
280d;  tr  v,  ch  8  307d-308c;  tr  vi  310d-321b 
esp  ch  4-10  312b-315d,  ch  15-17  318b-320c; 
tr  vii,  ch  8-17  325b-331a 


2  to  2b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  9,  3a;  bk 

x,  par  19  76a-b;  bk  xi,  par  7, 90d  /  City  of  God, 
bk  viii,  ch  6,  269b-c;  bk  xi,  ch  27, 337d-338a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
4,  ans  16d-17c;  q  4,  a  1,  rep  3  20d-21b;  q  5, 
a  3,  rep  4  25a-d;  q  9,  a  2,  rep  3  39c-40d;  q 
13,  a  1,  rep  2  62c-63c;  q  14,  a  i,  ans  75d-76c; 
a  2,  ans  76d-77d;  q  15,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i 
91b-92a;  q  18,  a  4,  rep  3  107d-108c;  q  44,  a  i, 
rep  3  238b-239a;  a  3  240b-241a;  q  65,  a  4 
342b-343c;  q  84,  aa  1-4  440d-446b;  q  85,  a  i, 
rep  2  451c-453c;  q  no,  a  2,  ans  565d-566d; 
q  115,  a  1,  ans  585d-587c;  A3,  rep  2  588c- 
589c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  52, 
a  1,  ans  15d-18a;  part  iii,  q  4,  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  2  733a-734a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  269d-271b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43d-44a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  v,  93b-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  iii, 
sect  11-20  257a-260a;  ch  v-vi  263d-283a 
passim,  esp  ch  v,  sect  9  266a-b,  sect  12  266d- 
267a,  ch  vi,  sect  2-3  268c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  iv, 
sect  6  325a-b;  ch  vi,  sect  4  331d-332b; 
ch  ix,  sect  1  349a 

35  Berkeley  '.Human  Knowledge,  sect  i2  415b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  23b-d;  34a-b;  36b-c; 
45d-46a;  48d-49a;  lOOd-lOlb;  176d-177a; 
186b-187a;  211c-213a  /  Judgement,  461a-c; 
551a-553c;  556d-558a;  559b-d;  575c-576a; 
577c-d;  580b-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d- 
157b 

53  James:  Psychology,  881b 

2b.  The  eternity  of  forms,  the  perpetuity  of 
species:  the  divine  ideas 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113a-114a,c  /  Phaedrus, 
125a-b  /  Symposium,  167b-d  /  Phaedo,  231c- 
232b  /  Timaeus,  447a-d;  457c-d  /  Laws,  bk 
iv,  685b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  ii, 
ch  10  [336^5-34]  438d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch 
6  [987*29-bi8]  505b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [997a34— 
bi2]  516a-b;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [1026*7-18]  548a-b; 
bk  vii,  ch  8  [i033bi9-i034*8]  556d-557b;  bk 

xi,  ch  2  588a-589a;  bk  xii,  ch  6  [io7ibi2-23] 
601b-c;  bk  xm,  ch  4  [i078b7-i079*4]  610a-c 
/  Soul,  bk  11,  ch  4  [4i5*23-b8]  645c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  6  [1096*33^5] 
341c-d 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  841a-d 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  2-17 
322b-331a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  9,  3a;  bk 

xii,  par  38  108d-109a  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii, 
ch  3,  266a-b;  ch  6,  269b-c;  bk  ix,  ch  22 
296d-297a;  bk  xi,  ch  7  326a-c;  ch  10,  328c-d; 
ch  29  339a-b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch 
38  654b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  8  82c-83b;  q  15  91b-94a;  q  16,  a  7,  rep  2 


2 c  to  2 c(3)  Chapter  28:  FORM  539 


99a-d;  q  i8,  a  4,  rep  3  107d  108c;  q  44,  a  3 
240b-241a;  q  47,  a  i,  rep  2  256a  257b;  q  57, 
a  I,  ANS  295a-d;  q  58,  aa  6-7  304c~306b;  o  65, 
a  4  342b-343c;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  442b 
443c;  a  4,  rep  1  444d-446b;  a  5  446c-447c;  q 
87,  a  1,  ans  465a-466c;  q  98,  a  i  516d~517d; 
q  108,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  552c-553c 

20  Aquinas:  Sumina  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  92,  a  1,  ans  1025c-1032b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  v,  93b  d  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  216d-217c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  17,  schol  362c- 
363c;  prop  21-23  364a-365a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113c-115a;  173b  174a  / 
judgement ,  551a-552c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b 

2c.  Form  in  the  composite  being  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  thing 

2c(l)  The  union  of  matter  and  form:  poten¬ 
tiality  and  actuality 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i93a9~ bi9] 
269b-270a/  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  4  [ioi4b26- 
ioi5an]  535a-b;  ch  6  [ioi6bi2— 1 8]  537a-b; 
ch  8  538b-c;  ch  24  [i023a32-bi]  545a;  bk 
vii,  ch  17  565a-566a,c;  bk  viii,  ch  6  569d- 
570d;  bk  ix,  ch  6-9  573c-577c;  bk  xii,  ch 
4-5  599d-601a;  ch  10  [io75b34~ 37]  606d  / 
Soul ,  bk  ii,  ch  1-2  642a-644c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [640s 
i2-64ib39]  162b-165a  /  Generation  of  Animals , 
bk  1,  ch  20  [729s9]-ch  21  [729^1]  269b-270a; 
ch  21  [73oa24]-CH  22  [73ob32]  270c-271a;  bk 
ii,  ch  3  [737a6-27]  277d-278a;  ch  4  [738bi— 
28]  279b-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  13 
271b 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1078a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  8  30d- 
31c;  ch  io-ii  32a-33d/  Second  Ennead ,  tr  iv, 
ch  6  51d-52a;  ch  8-9  52c-53b;  tr  v  57d-60c 
/  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  8-19  1  llc-1 19a  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  8  307d-308c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xi,  par  7  90d- 
91a;  bk  xii,  par  3-6  99d-100c;  par  8,  101b; 
par  9,  101c;  par  14-16  102b-103a;  par  24-26 
104c-105b;  par  28-31  105c-107a;  par  38-40 
108d-110a;  bk  xiii,  par  48  124a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
2,  ans  and  rep  3  15c-16a;  a  8  19d-20c;  q  7, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  31a-d;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3 
31d-32c;  q  9,  a  2,  rep  3  39c-40d;  q  14,  a  1 
75d-76c;  a  2,  rep  1,3  76d-77d;  q  18,  a  4,  rep 
2-3  107d-108c;  q  29,  a  i,  rep  4  162a-163b;  a 
2,  ans  and  rep  4-5  163b-164b;  Q  50,  a  2  270a- 
272a;  a  5,  ans  274b-275a;  Q  55,  a  2,  ans  289d- 
290d;  q  62,  a  7,  rep  i  322d-323b;  Q  66,  a  i 
343d-345c;  a  2,  ans  345d-347b;  Q  70,  a  3, 
rep  2  365b-367a;  q  76  385c-399b;  q  86,  a  3 
463b-d;  q  104,  a  i,  ans  534c-536c;  part  i-ii, 
q  10,  a  1,  rep  2  662d-663d 


20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i  ii,  q  49, 
a  4,  ans  and  iif.p  i  5a  6a;  part  ii  ii,  q  24, 
aii,  ans  498b  499c;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  2  710a  711c;  a  2,  ans  71  Id  7 1 2d ; 
part  m  suppl,  q  82,  a  1,  rep  2  968a  970c; 
q  92,  a  1,  ans  1025c-1032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [127  142] 
107c  d;  n  [46  148)  108b  109b;  vn  [121  148] 
116b-c;  xiii  [52-84]  126a  b;  xxix  [13-36] 
150b-c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  30b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  512  262a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  23b;  34ab;  36b  c;  45d- 
46a;  48d-49a;  lOOd-lOlb;  186b  187a;  188d- 
189a 

2c(2)  The  distinction  between  substantial  and 
accidental  forms 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  7,  a  2, 
ans  31d-32c;  q  8,  a  2,  rep  3  35c-36b;  q  29, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  4-5  163b-164b;  q  45,  a  4, 
ans  244d-245c;  q  54,  aa  1-3  285a-287b;  q 
66,  a  1,  rep  3  343d-345c;  q  67,  a  3  351b-352a; 
Q  76,  a  4  393a-394c;  a  6  396a-d;  q  77,  a  1 
399c-401b;  a  6,  ans  404c-405c;  part  i-ii,  q  7, 
a  4,  rep  3  654b-655a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2,  ans  2b-4a;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i  5a-6a; 
Q  50,  a  2  7c-8a;  q  52,  a  i,  ans  15d-18a;  q  85, 
a  1,  rep  4  178b-179b;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  i,  ans 
710a-711c;  a  2,  ans  711d-712d;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  70,  a  1,  ans  893d-895d;  q  79,  a  1, 
rep  4  951b-953b 

31  Descartes  :  Discourse ,  part  i,  41  d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xii, 
sect  3-6  147d-148c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  3  204c-d; 
ch  xxxi,  sect  6-13  240d-243b;  ch  xxxii, 
sect  24  247c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect  15-19 
258b-260a;  ch  vi  268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect 
i-io  268b-271b,  sect  21,  273c,  sect  24  274c; 
ch  ix,  sect  12-13  287d-288d;  ch  x,  sect  20 
296d-297a 

42  Kant  :  Pure  Reason ,  131c-d  /  Judgement ,  580c-d 

2c(3)  The  unity  of  substantial  form:  prime 
matter  in  relation  to  substantial  form 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  1,  ch  9  [i92a3~ 33] 
268a-c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[3i9a29-b4]  416b-c  /  Meteorology \  bk  iv,  ch 
12  [389b22~390a7]  493d-494a  /  Metaphysics, 
bk  1,  ch  9  [99ia26~32]  509c;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [994s 
1-6]  512b;  bk  v,  ch  4  [101 5a5~ 1 1  ]  535b;  bk  vii, 
ch  3  [io29au-26]  551c-d;  ch  8  [io33bi— 5] 
556c;  ch  13  [1039^-23]  562d-563a;  ch  16 
[i040b5-i6]  564c;  [104^5]  565a;  bk  viii,  ch  4 
[1044^5-32]  568d-569a;  bk  ix,  ch  7  [1049s 
24-bi]  575a;  bk  xii,  ch  3  [io69b35-io70a 
4]  599a-b:  [1070^-11]  599b;  bk  xiii,  ch  5 
II079b3I— 34]  611c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  7-9  52a- 
53b;  tr  v  57d-60c  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch 
7-19  110d-119a  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  ix  205a- 
207a, c 


2d  to  3a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


540 

(2  c.  Form  in  the  composite  being  of  the  mdividual 
thing.  2c(3)  The  unity  of  substantial  form: 
prime  matter  in  relation  to  substantial 
form.) 

19  Aquinas:  Summci  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
8,  rep  3  19d-20c;  q  5,  a  3,  rep  3  25a-d;  q  7, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  31d-32c;  q  8,  a  4,  rep  i 
37c-38c:  q  14,  a  2,  rep  3  76d-77d;  q  15,  a  3, 
rep  3  93b-94a;  q  16,  a  7,  rep  2  99a-d;  q  47, 
a  1,  ans  256a-257b;  q  66,  aa  1-2  343d-347b; 
q  76,  aa  3-4  391a-394c;  q  77,  a  1,  rep  2  399c- 
401b;  a  2,  rep  3  401b-d;  q  84,  a  3,  rep  2  443d' 
444d;  q  115,  a  1,  rep  1-2,4  585d-587c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  hi  suppl, 
q  79,  a  1,  rep  4  951b-953b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  ii 
415a-b 

2d.  Angels  and  human  souls  as  self-subsistent 
forms:  the  substantiality  of  thought  or 
mind  in  separation  from  extension  or 
body 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  2  27c-d  / 
Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  i,  139b;  tr  hi,  ch 
9-12  146d-149b;  ch  18  151b-c;  tr  ix  205a- 
207a, c  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  5,  356d- 
357a 

18  Augustine  :  City  of  God,  bkxxii,  ch  i  586b, d- 
587b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  7,  a 
2,  ans  and  rep  2  31d-32c;  q  8,  a  2,  rep  2-3 
35c-36b;  q  50  269a-275a  esp  a  2  270a-272a; 
q  75  378a-385c  esp  a  5  382a-383b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  vii  [121- 
148]  116b-c;  xxix  [13—36]  150b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  80a-b;  part  hi, 
174b-176d;  part  iv,  250c-251c;  258b-261a; 
270c-271b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  51d-52a; 
part  v,  60b-c  /  Meditations,  11  77d-81d; 
vi  96b-103d  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  def  x 
130d;  prop  iv  133c;  152b,d-156a;  224d-225b; 
225d-226a;231a-232d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  10  358a-b;  prop 
14,  corol  2  360a;  part  ii,  prop  1-2  373d- 
374a;  prop  7  375a-c;  prop  13  377d-378c; 
part  hi,  prop  2  396c-398b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [423-431]  102b; 
bk  v  [388-443]  183b-185a;  [469-505]  185b- 
186a;  bk  vi  [320-353]  203a-204a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxiii, 
sect  5  205a-b;  sect  15-37  208c-214b  pas¬ 
sim 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  2  413b; 
sect  26-27  418a-b;  sect  89  430b-c;  sect 
135-142  440a-441c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  186b 

41  Gibbon  :  Decline  and  Fall,  136b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  121a-128b;  201b-c;  203d- 
204c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  257c- 
258a;  part  iv,  360c-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  221a-226a 


3.  Form  in  relation  to  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus , 
125a-c  /  Republic,  bk  v,  368c-373c;  bk  vi, 
385c-388a  /  Timaeus ,  457b-458a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  ii 
[77a5-9]  105d-106a;  ch  22  [83*23-35]  113c-d  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  6  505b- 506b;  ch  9  [990* 
33— 99iarS]  508c-509c;  bk  xiii,  ch  4  [io78b6]- 
ch  5  [1079^4]  610a-611c  /  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  4 
[429*13-28]  661b-c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  7  326a-c; 
ch  29  339a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  7,  a  2, 
rep  2  31d-32c;  q  13,  a  i,  rep  2  62c-63c;  q  14, 
a  1,  ans  75d-76c;  a  2  76d-77d;  q  15,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  1,3  91b-92a;  q  19,  a  i,  ans  108d-109c; 
q  34,  a  1,  rep  3  185b-187b:  q  86,  a  3  463b-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xviii 
[49-60]  80b-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxxi, 
sect  6-13  240d-243b;  bk  iii,  ch  vi  268b- 
283a  passim;  ch  ix,  sect  12  287d-288a:  bk  iv, 
ch  iv,  sect  5-8  324d-325c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-108a,c;  173b  /  Fund. 
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  282b-c  /  Practical 
Reason ,  308a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  7a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  693d- 
694c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  859a-860b 

3 a.  Sensible  forms,  intelligible  forms:  the 
forms  of  intuition  and  understanding 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus,  125a- 
126c  /  Symposium,  167a-d/  Phaedo,  228a-232b 
/  Republic,  bk  iii,  333b-334b;  bk  v,  370d- 
373c;  bk  vi,  383d-388a  /  Timaeus ,  447a-d; 
455c-458a  /  Theaetetus,  534c-536a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  13 
[79*6-10]  108c/  Topics ,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [113*23-33] 
158d  /  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  2  [425bi7~26]  657d- 
658a;  ch  4  661b-662c;  ch  8  664b-d  /  Memory 
and  Reminiscence,  ch  1  [450*26-451*19]  691a- 
692b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  19  76a-b; 
bk  xii,  par  5  lOOa-b  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii, 
ch  6,  269b-c;  bk  xi,  ch  27,  337d-338a;  bkxii, 
ch  7  346c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  7,  a  2, 
REP2  31d-32c;  q  13,  a  9,  ans  71b-72c;  q  14,  a  i, 
ans  75d-76c;  a  8,  ans  82c-83b;  q  15,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  i,391b-92a;  q  17,  a  3,  ans  102d-103c;Q 
18,  a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  19,  a  i,  ans  108d- 
109c;  q  34,  a  1,  rep  3  185b-187b:  q  50,  a  2, 
rep  2  270a-272a;  q  84  440b-451b;  q  85,  aa 
1-2  451c-455b;  a  5  457d-458d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  62, 
a  3,  rep  1  61c-62b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i, 
ans  1025c-1032b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  49d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  9-10  270d-271b 


3b  to  4  Chapter  28:  FORM  541 


42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a  108a, c  esp  14a  15c, 
23a-33d,  41c-42b,  48d-55a,  56d  59b.  61a  64a, 
65d-66d,  68a  93c,  94d  96d,  lOOd  101b:  1 12d 
113a;  115d;  135a  137a, c;  153c  155a;  173b; 
207c  d;  213d-215a  /  Fund.  Priri.  Met  a  physic 
of  Morals ,  282 b  e;  283b  /  Practical  Reason , 
308a-b;  319d;  335c-336a;  350b-c  /  Judge - 
ment,  461a-c;  471b-c;  517b-c;  542c-d;  552b  c; 
562a  b;603d-604c;  612c-d 
53  James:  Psychology,  420a  b;  628b-631a 

3 h.  The  problem  of  the  universal:  knowledge 
of  the  individual 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedo,  228a- 
232b  /  Republic,  bkv,  370d-373c  /  Parmenides, 
487c-491a  /  Philebus,  610d-613a 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  5  [2b6- 37]  6c-7a  / 
Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [77a5— 9]  105d- 
106a;  ch  24  [85a3i-b22]  116c-117a  /  Topics,  bk 
ii,  ch  7  [113*23-33]  158d  /  Sophistical  Refuta¬ 
tions,  ch  22  [i7Sb37— i79aio]  246c  /  Physics,  bk 
vii,  ch  3  [247bi— 7]  330b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  1, 
ch  6  505b-506b;  ch  9  508c-511c;  bk  iii,  ch  3 
[999^-14]  51 7d;  cii  4  [999a24-b24]  518a-c;  bk 
vii,  ch  8  [i033bi9-i034a8]  556d-557b;  ch  10 
[i035b28~32]  559b;  ch  ii  [1037*5—9]  560c;  ch 
13-15  562a-564c;  bk  xiii,  ch  4-5  610a-611d; 
ch  10  618c-619a,c  /  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  4  [429*18- 
29] 661c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  6  341b-342c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a  2, 
rep  3  15c-16a;  a  3,  ans  16a-d;  q  4,  a  3,  ans 
22b-23b;  q  ii,  a  3,  ans  49a-c;  q  13,  a  9,  ans 
and  rep  2  71b-72c;  q  14,  a  ii  84c-85c;  q  16,  a 
7,  rep  2  99a-d;  q  39,  a  3,  ans  204c-205c;  q  50, 
a  2,  ans  270a-272a;  a  4,  ans  273b-274b;  q 
57,  a  2  295d-297a;  Q  76,  a  2,  ans  388c-391a;  q 
85,  a  7,  rep  3  459c-460b;  q  86,  a  1  461c-462a; 
a  3  463b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  2, 
a  2,  ans  711d-712d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-333b 
esp  333a- b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  iii, 
sect  6-20  255c-260a;  ch  v-vi  263d-283a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  ch  v,  sect  9  266a-b,  ch  vi,  sect  32 
277c-278b,  sect  36-37  279a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  iv, 
sect  5-8  324d-325c;  ch  vi,  sect  4  331d-332b; 
ch  vii,  sect  9  338d-339b 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
6-19  405d-410c  esp  sect  15-16  409a-d 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341b-342b 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  211c-218d  /  Judgement, 
573a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  158b-c; 

part  iv,  360c-361a 
53  James:  Psychology,  308a-312a 

3c.  Form  and  definition:  the  formulable  es¬ 
sence;  the  problem  of  matter  in  relation 
to  definition 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  134b-c  /  Meno,  174b-179b  / 
Seventh  Letter ,  809c-810b 


8  \rlstotlk:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  4  10 
123c  I28d;  cii  14  131b  133c  /  Physics,  bk  ii, 
cm  1  [  1 9 3“ 30  *‘19]  269c  270a  /  Generation  and 
Corruption,  bk  i,  cii  2  [3 17*17  27]  413b  / 
Meteorology ,  bk  iv,  ch  12  493d  494d  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  1,  ch  6  505b  506b:  ch  7  [988^4- 
b5)  506c;  bk  11,  cii  2  [99-|bi 6-27]  513a  b: 
bk  v,  cii  2  [101 4*27-28]  533b;  bk  vi,  ch  i 
[io25b28-i026R6]  547d  548a;  bk  vii,  cii  4  6 
552b  555a;  ch  10-15  558a  564c;  bk  viii, 
cii  1-3  566a-568d;  cii  6  569d-570d;  bk  xii, 
ch  9  [io74b37-io75a2j  605c;  bk  xiii,  ch  4-5 
610a'611d  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  i  631a-632d; 
bk  11,  ch  1-3  642a  645b  passim;  bk  111,  ch 
4  [429bio-23]  661d  662a;  ch  6  [4 30b26  31] 
663b  c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [641° 
14-41]  163d  l64a;  ch  2-4  165d-168c  esp  ch  3 
166a~167d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  3, 
ans  16a-d;  a  5,  ans  17c  l8b;  q  13,  a  12,  rep 
2  74c-75b;  q  17,  a  3,  ans  102d-103c;  Q  18, 
a  4,  rep  3  107d-108c;  q  29,  a  i,  rep  4  162a- 
163b;  q  50,  a  4  273b-274b;  q  75,  a  4,  ans 
381b-382a;  q  85,  a  i,  rep  2  451c-453c;  part 
1— ii,  Q  1,  a  3,  ans  611b-612a 

20  Aquinas;  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  55, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-2  28c-29d;  part  ii-ii,  q  4, 
a  i,  ans  402a-403d;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  5,  ans 
715a-716b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  4  355b;  prop  8, 
schol  2,  357a-d;  part  ii,  prop  37  386b-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxiii 
204a-214b;  ch  xxxi,  sect  6-13  240d-243b;  ch 
xxxii,  sect  24  247c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect  12- 
20  257b-260a;  cii  v-vi  263d-283a  passim;  ch 
ix,  sect  11-17  287d-290a;  ch  x,  sect  17-21 
295d-297b;  ch  xi,  sect  19-20  304b  d;  bk  iv, 
ch  iv,  sect  5-8  324d-325c;  ch  vi,  sect  4-16 
331d-336d  passim 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  i 
413a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  342a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  176c; 
184d-185a 

4.  The  denial  of  form  as  a  principle  of  being, 
becoming,  or  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-114a,c  /  Sophist,  567a- 
568a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [ioo7®20- 
bi8]  526c-527a;  ch  5  528c-530c  passim;  bk  xi, 
ch  6  590d-592b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  49d;  part  iv, 
269b-271a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  1,  aph  51  111c; 
bk  11,  aph  1-2  137a-c;  aph  17  149b-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  viii, 
sect  2  133c;  ch  xxxi,  sect  6-13  240d-243b 
passim,  esp  sect  6  240d-241d;  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  10  271b;  sect  24  274c;  ch  x,  sect  20 
296d-297a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  422a-b 


542 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  discussions  of  the  Forms  or  Ideas  as  immutable  models  or  archetypes,  see  Change  15a; 
Eternity  4c;  Idea  ia,  6b. 

Other  discussions  of  forms  as  indwelling  causes  or  principles  in  mutable  things,  see  Cause  ia; 
Change  2a;  Matter  ia;  and  for  the  consideration  of  form  and  matter  as  co-principles  of 
composite  substances,  see  Being  7b (2). 

Discussions  of  matter  or  the  receptacle  in  relation  to  form,  see  Change  2-2b;  Matter  i-ib; 

Space  ia;  World  4b;  and  for  the  consideration  of  matter  apart  from  form,  ^Matter  2, 3a. 
The  controversy  over  the  separate  existence  of  the  Forms,  the  objects  of  mathematics,  and 
universal,  see  Being  7d(2)— 7d(3);  Mathematics  2b;  Same  and  Other  2a;  Universal 
and  Particular  2a-2c;  and  for  the  problem  of  the  cause  of  individuality,  see  Matter  ic; 
Universal  and  Particular  3. 

The  existence  of  forms  in  the  mind  as  concepts  abstracted  from  matter,  see  Idea  2g;  Matter 
4d;  Memory  and  Imagination  6c(i);  Sense  5a;  Universal  and  Particular  4c. 
Other  considerations  of  the  a  priori  or  transcendental  forms  of  intuition,  see  Sense  ic; 
Space  4a;  Time  6c. 

Comparisons  of  creation,  generation,  and  production  as  each  relates  to  form  and  matter, 
see  Art  2b-2c;  Matter  3d;  World  4e(i). 

Other  terms  related  to  the  distinction  of  form  and  matter  or  to  the  kinds  of  form,  see  Being 
7b,  7c(i)~7 c(3);  Nature  ia(2);  Universal  and  Particular  6a. 

The  theological  doctrine  of  the  angels  as  self-subsistent  forms  or  simple  substances,  see 
Angel  2,  3I3-3C;  Being  7b(2);  for  the  theological  doctrine  of  the  forms  as  eternal  ex¬ 
emplars  or  types  in  the  mind  of  God,  see  God  5f;  Idea  ie;  and  for  the  theory  of  the  soul 
as  the  substantial  form  of  a  living  thing,  see  Life  and  Death  i;  Man  3a;  Soul  ib. 
Form  and  matter  in  relation  to  definition,  see  Being  8c;  Definition  6a;  Matter  4b; 
Nature  ia(2). 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 


Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings,  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Aquinas.  On  Being  and  Essence 

- .  Quaestiones  Disputatae ,  De  Anima 

- .  On  Spiritual  Creatures 

Kant.  De  Mundi  Sensibilis  ( Inaugural  Dissertation ), 

SECT  IV 

II. 

Duns  Scotus.  Opus  Oxoniense,  bk  i,  dist  7  (24) 
Crescas.  Or  Adonai,  propositions  io-ii,  16 
Bruno.  De  la  causa ,  principio ,  e  ano 
Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  v  (4),  xn  (3), 
xiii  (1-9),  xiv-xvi,  xviii  (2-6),  xxvi  (2), 
xxvii,  xxx  (4),  xxxi  (8,  10,  13),  xxxiv  (5-6), 

XXXV-XXXVI,  XLII  (2-3),  XLV  (4),  XLVI 


Iohn  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philo sophicus  Tho - 
misticusy  Philo sophia  Naturally  part  i,  qq  3-4, 
6,  9,  1 1 

Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite 
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Ideay  vol  i, 
bk  1— III 

Lotze.  Metaphysics 

C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers ,  vol  vi,  par  353-363 
Bradley.  Appearance  and  Reality 
Descoqs.  Essai  critique  sur  V hylemorphisme 
Santayana.  The  Realm  of  Essence 
Whitehead.  Process  and  Reality ,  part  ii,  ch  i 
Forest.  La  structure  metaphysique  du  concret 
A.  E.  Taylor.  Philosophical  StudieSy  ch  3 
Koninck.  Le  probleme  de  V indetermini sme 
Blanshard.  The  Nature  of  Thought 


Chapter  2.9:  GOD 


INTRODUCTION 


WITH  the  exception  of  certain  mathema¬ 
ticians  and  physicists,  all  the  authors  of 
the  great  books  are  represented  in  this  chapter. 
In  sheer  quantity  of  references,  as  well  as  in 
variety,  it  is  the  largest  chapter.  The  reason  is 
obvious.  More  consequences  for  thought  and 
action  follow  from  the  affirmation  or  denial  of 
God  than  from  answering  any  other  basic  ques¬ 
tion.  They  follow  for  those  who  regard  the 
question  as  answerable  only  by  faith  or  only  by 
reason,  and  even  for  those  who  insist  upon 
suspending  judgment  entirely. 

In  addition  to  the  primary  question  of  God’s 
existence,  there  are  all  the  problems  of  the 
divine  nature  and  of  the  relation  of  the  world 
and  man  to  the  gods  or  God.  The  solutions  of 
these  problems  cannot  help  influencing  man’s 
conception  of  the  world  in  which  he  lives,  the 
position  that  he  occupies  in  it,  and  the  life  to 
which  he  is  called. 

The  whole  tenor  of  human  life  is  certainly 
affected  by  whether  men  regard  themselves  as 
the  supreme  beings  in  the  universe  or  acknowl¬ 
edge  a  superior — a  superhuman  being  whom 
they  conceive  as  an  object  of  fear  or  love,  a 
force  to  be  defied  or  a  Lord  to  be  obeyed. 
Among  those  who  acknowledge  a  divinity,  it 
matters  greatly  whether  the  divine  is  repre¬ 
sented  merely  by  the  concept  of  God — the 
object  of  philosophical  speculation — or  by 
the  living  God  whom  men  worship  in  all  the 
acts  of  piety  which  comprise  the  rituals  of  re¬ 
ligion. 

The  most  radical  differences  in  man’s  concep¬ 
tion  of  his  own  nature  follow  from  the  exclusion 
of  divinity  as  its  source  or  model  on  the  one 
hand,  and  from  the  various  ways  in  which  man 
is  seen  as  participating  in  divinity  on  the  other. 
Many  fundamental  themes  and  issues  are  there¬ 
fore  common  to  this  chapter  and  to  the  chapter 
on  Man. 


Some  of  the  topics  in  this  chapter  arc  pri¬ 
marily  philosophical.  They  belong  to  the  sub¬ 
ject  matter  of  rational  speculation  or  poetic 
imagination  in  all  the  great  epochs  of  our  cul¬ 
ture,  regardless  of  differences  in  religious  be¬ 
lief.  Other  topics,  however,  are  peculiarly  re¬ 
stricted  to  matters  of  faith  or  religion.  With 
respect  to  such  matters,  dogmatic  differences, 
or  differences  in  articles  of  faith,  must  be  ex¬ 
plicitly  recognized. 

The  materials  here  assembled  must  therefore, 
in  some  instances,  be  divided  according  to  their 
origin  from  pagan  or  from  Jewish  and  Christian 
sources.  Though  no  great  books  from  the  Mo¬ 
hammedan  tradition  are  included  in  this  set, 
the  fact  that  Gibbon  discusses  the  Moslem 
faith  and  compares  its  teachings  with  those  of 
Judaism  and  Christianity  explains  the  inclusion 
of  Mohammedanism  in  one  group  of  topics. 
That  is  the  group  which  deals  with  the  doc¬ 
trines  common  to  these  three  religions,  as  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  the  tenets  on  which  Judaism 
and  Christianity  differ  dogmatically.  The  ex¬ 
istence  of  certain  common  beliefs  in  the  west¬ 
ern  tradition  enables  us  to  begin,  as  it  seems 
advisable  to  do,  with  the  conception  of  God 
that  is  shared  by  the  living  religions  of  western 
culture  today. 

In  our  civilization,  what  is  denied  by  an 
atheist  who  says  there  is  no  God  ?  Not  idols  or 
images  which  men  may  seek  to  placate.  Not 
philosophical  constructions  or  mythological  fig¬ 
ures.  Certainly  not  the  universe  itself,  either  as 
an  infinite  and  everlasting  whole,  or  as  finite 
and  temporal,  but  equally  mysterious  in  its  ul¬ 
timate  incomprehensibility  to  the  human  mind. 
In  our  civilization,  the  atheist  denies  the  ex¬ 
istence  of  a  supernatural  being,  the  object  of 
religious  belief  and  worship  among  Jews,  Chris¬ 
tians,  and  Mohammedans.  He  denies  the  single, 
personal  God  Who  created  the  world  out  of 
543 


544 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


nothing,  Who  transcends  this  created  universe 
and  sustains  it  by  His  immanent  power,  Who 
has  made  laws  for  the  government  of  all  things 
and  cares  for  each  particular  by  His  providence, 
and  Who  created  man  in  His  own  image,  re¬ 
vealed  Himself  and  His  will  to  men,  and  metes 
out  eternal  rewards  and  punishments  to  the 
children  of  Adam,  whom  He  also  helps  by  His 
grace. 

In  this  religious  conception  of  God,  one  term 
must  be  saved  from  misinterpretation.  The 
word  “personal”  should  not  be  read  with  an¬ 
thropomorphic  imagery,  though  its  meaning 
does  entitle  man  as  well  as  God  to  be  called  a 
person  rather  than  a  thing.  “Although  the  term 
person  is  not  found  applied  to  God  in  Scripture, 
either  in  the  Old  or  New  Testament,”  Aquinas 
writes,  “nevertheless  what  the  term  signifies  is 
found  to  be  affirmed  of  God  in  many  places  of 
Scripture;  as  that  He  is  the  supreme  self-sub¬ 
sisting  being,  and  the  most  perfectly  intelligent 
being.” 

Boethius  had  defined  a  person  as  “an  individ¬ 
ual  substance  of  a  rational  nature,”  or,  as  Locke 
later  said,  “a  thinking  intelligent  being.” 
In  applying  the  term  person  to  God,  in  the 
meaning  which  Boethius  had  given  it,  Aquinas 
comments  on  the  difference  in  its  meaning  when 
it  is  applied  to  men.  God  can  be  said  to  have  a 
rational  nature ,  he  writes,  only  “if  reason  be 
taken  to  mean,  not  discursive  thought,  but, 
in  a  general  sense,  an  intelligent  nature  .  .  . 
God  cannot  be  called  an  individual  ”  in  the  sense 
in  which  physical  things  are,  but  only  in  the 
sense  of  uniqueness.  “ Substance  can  be  applied 
to  God  [only]  in  the  sense  of  signifying  self¬ 
subsistence.”  Aquinas  does  not  conclude  from 
this  that  “person”  is  said  improperly  of  God, 
but  rather  that  when  God  is  called  “personal” 
the  meaning  is  applied  “in  a  more  excellent 
way,”  for  God  does  not  possess ,  God  is ,  an  in¬ 
telligence. 

We  shall  use  this  idea  of  a  personal  God,  the 
reality  of  which  the  contemporary  atheist 
denies,  in  order  to  distinguish  divergent  con¬ 
ceptions  in  other  doctrines.  Then  we  shall  ex¬ 
amine  more  closely  what  is  involved  in  this 
idea  itself. 

In  the  western  tradition,  the  various  pagan 
religions — reflected  especially  in  the  poems  and 


histories  of  Greek  and  Roman  antiquity — were 
all  polytheistic.  The  number  of  their  gods, 
Montaigne  estimates,  “amounts  to  six-and- 
thirtv  thousand.”  Augustine  offers  one  explana¬ 
tion  of  why  there  were  so  many.  “The  an¬ 
cients,”  he  writes,  “being  deceived  either  by 
their  own  conjectures  or  by  demons,  supposed 
that  many  gods  must  be  invited  to  take  an  in¬ 
terest  in  human  affairs,  and  assigned  to  each  a 
separate  function  and  a  separate  department — 
to  one  the  body,  to  another  the  soul;  and  in  the 
body  itself,  to  one  the  head,  to  another  the 
neck,  and  each  of  the  other  members  to  one  of 
the  gods;  and  in  like  manner,  in  the  soul,  to  one 
god  the  natural  capacity  was  assigned,  to  an¬ 
other  education,  to  another  anger,  to  another 
lust;  and  so  the  various  affairs  of  life  were  as¬ 
signed — cattle  to  one,  corn  to  another,  wine  to 
another,  oil  to  another,  the  woods  to  another, 
money  to  another,  navigation  to  another,  wars 
and  victories  to  another,  marriages  to  another, 
births  and  fecundity  to  another,  and  other 
things  to  other  gods.” 

That  polytheism,  no  less  than  monotheism, 
conceives  the  divine  as  personal,  appears  in 
Plato's  Apology.  When  Socrates  is  accused  of 
atheism,  he  asks  whether  the  indictment  means 
that  he  does  not  “acknowledge  the  gods  which 
the  state  acknowledges,  but  some  other  new 
divinities  or  spiritual  agencies  in  their  stead.” 
Meletus  answers  that  he  thinks  Socrates  is  a 
complete  atheist  who  recognizes  no  gods  at  all. 
To  this  Socrates  replies  by  suggesting  that  his 
enemies  must  be  confusing  him  with  Anaxag¬ 
oras,  who  had  blasphemed  against  Apollo  by 
calling  the  sun  “a  red  hot  stone.”  As  for  him¬ 
self,  he  offers  evidence  to  show  that  he  believes 
in  divine  or  spiritual  agencies  “new  or  old,  no 
matter”;  and  “if  I  believe  in  divine  beings,”  he 
asks,  “how  can  I  help  believing  in  spirits  or 
demigods?” 

Like  the  one  God  of  Judaism  and  Chris¬ 
tianity,  the  many  gods  of  pagan  antiquity  have 
immortal  life,  but  they  are  not  without  origin. 
Zeus  is  the  son  of  Kronos,  and  he  has  many 
offspring,  both  gods  and  demigods,  who  per¬ 
form  different  functions  and  are  not  of  equal 
station  in  the  Olympian  hierarchy.  The  realm 
of  the  divine  includes  such  figures  as  the  Titans 
and  the  Cyclops,  who  are  neither  gods  nor  men; 
and  demigods,  like  Heracles,  who  are  offspring 


Chapter 

of  divine  and  human  mating.  These  deities  ex¬ 
ercise  superhuman  powers,  but  none  is  com¬ 
pletely  omnipotent  or  omniscient,  not  even 
Kronos  or  Zeus  who  cannot  escape  the  decrees 
of  Fate.  Moreover,  with  the  exception,  perhaps, 
of  that  of  Zeus,  the  power  of  one  divinity  is 
often  challenged  and  thwarted  by  another.  This 
aspect  of  polytheism  and  its  bearing  on  the  in¬ 
tervention  of  the  gods  in  the  affairs  of  men  arc 
discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Fate. 

The  extent  to  which  we  think  of  the  pagans 
as  idolatrous  because  they  made  graven  images 
of  their  gods  in  human  form,  or  regard  the 
pagan  conceptions  of  the  gods  as  anthropomor¬ 
phic,  depends  on  our  interpretation  of  religious 
symbolism.  Plato  for  one  thinks  that  many  of 
the  poets’  descriptions  of  the  gods  and  their 
activities  should  be  dismissed  as  unworthy, 
precisely  because  they  debase  the  gods  to  the 
human  level. 

According  to  Gibbon,  a  Greek  or  Roman 
philosopher  “who  considered  the  system  of 
polytheism  as  a  composition  of  human  fraud 
and  error,  could  disguise  a  smile  of  contempt 
under  the  mask  of  devotion,  without  appre¬ 
hending  that  either  the  mockery  or  the  com¬ 
pliance  would  expose  him  to  the  resentment  of 
any  invisible,  or,  as  he  conceived  them,  imagi¬ 
nary  powers.”  But  the  early  Christians,  he 
points  out,  saw  the  many  gods  of  antiquity  “in 
a  much  more  odious  and  formidable  light”  and 
held  them  to  be  “the  authors,  the  patrons,  and 
the  objects  of  idolatry.” 

Those  who  take  symbols  with  flat  literalism 
might  also  attack  Christianity  as  anthropomor¬ 
phic  and  idolatrous;  in  fact  they  have.  The 
defense  of  Christianity  against  this  charge  does 
not  avail  in  the  case  of  Roman  emperor-wor¬ 
ship,  which  consisted  not  in  the  humanization 
of  the  divine  for  the  sake  of  symbolic  represen¬ 
tation,  but  in  the  deification  of  the  merely 
human  for  political  purposes. 

Although  there  are  radical  differences,  there 
are  also  certain  fundamental  agreements  be¬ 
tween  paganism  and  Judaeo-Christianity  re¬ 
garding  the  nature  of  the  divine.  As  we  have 
already  noted,  the  deities  are  conceived  per¬ 
sonally,  not  in  terms  of  impersonal,  brute 
forces.  Conceived  as  beings  with  intelligence 
and  will,  the  gods  concern  themselves  with 
earthly  society;  they  aid  or  oppose  man’s  plans 


29:  GOD  545 

and  efforts;  they  reward  men  for  fidelity  and 
virtue  or  punish  them  for  impiety  and  sin. 

Despite  all  other  differences  between  pagan¬ 
ism  and  Christianity,  these  agreements  arc  sub¬ 
stantial  enough  to  provide  many  common 
threads  of  theological  speculation  throughout 
our  tradition,  especially  with  regard  to  the 
abiding  practical  problems  of  how  man  shall 
view  himself  and  his  destiny  in  relation  to  the 
divine  or  the  supernatural.  We  have  therefore 
attempted  to  place  passages  from  the  great 
books  of  pagan  antiquity  under  every  heading 
except  those  which  are  specifically  restricted  to 
the  dogmas  of  Judaism  and  Christianity — even 
under  headings  which  are  worded  monotheis- 
tically,  since  even  here  there  is  continuity  of 
thought  and  expression  from  Homer  and  Virgil 
to  Dante  and  Milton;  from  Plato,  Aristotle, 
and  Plotinus  to  Augustine,  Aquinas,  Descartes, 
and  Kant;  from  Lucretius  to  Newton  and  Dar¬ 
win. 

The  doctrines  known  as  deism  and  pantheism, 
like  unqualified  atheism,  are  as  much  opposed 
to  the  religious  beliefs  of  polytheism  as  to  the 
faith  of  Judaism  and  Christianity. 

Of  these  two,  pantheism  is  much  nearer 
atheism,  for  it  denies  the  existence  of  a  tran¬ 
scendent  supernatural  being  or  beings.  God  is 
Nature.  God  is  immanent  in  the  world  and, 
in  the  extreme  form  of  pantheism,  not  tran¬ 
scendent  in  any  way.  Certain  historic  doctrines 
which  are  often  regarded  as  forms  or  kinds  of 
pantheism  seem  to  be  less  extreme  than  this, 
for  they  do  not  conceive  the  physical  universe 
as  exhausting  the  infinite  being  of  God.  The 
world,  for  all  its  vastness  and  variety,  may  only 
represent  an  aspect  of  the  divine  nature. 

According  to  Spinoza,  the  attributes  of  ex¬ 
tension  and  thought,  in  terms  of  which  we  un¬ 
derstand  the  world  or  nature  as  being  of  the 
divine  substance,  are  merely  those  aspects  of 
God  which  are  known  to  us,  for  the  divine  sub¬ 
stance  consists  “of  infinite  attributes,  each  one 
of  which  expresses  eternal  and  infinite  essence.” 
In  the  conception  of  Plotinus,  the  whole  world 
represents  only  a  partial  emanation  from  the 
divine  source.  Yet  thinkers  like  Plotinus  and 
Spinoza  so  conceive  the  relation  of  the  world  to 
God  that — as  in  the  strictest  pantheism — the 
religious  doctrines  of  creation,  providence,  and 


546 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


salvation  are  either  rejected  or  profoundly  al¬ 
tered. 

In  the  ancient  world,  the  teaching  of  the 
Stoic  philosophers  expresses  a  kind  of  panthe¬ 
ism.  “There  is  one  universe  made  up  of  all 
things,”  Marcus  Aurelius  writes,  “and  one  God 
who  pervades  all  things,  and  one  substance,  and 
one  law,  one  common  reason  in  all  intelligent 
animals,  and  one  truth.”  He  speaks  of  the 
“common  nature,”  which  is  apparently  divine, 
and  of  which  “every  particular  nature  is  a  part, 
as  the  nature  of  the  leaf  is  a  part  of  the  nature 
of  the  plant.”  But,  although  he  stresses  the  one¬ 
ness  and  divinity  of  all  things,  Aurelius  also 
at  times  uses  language  which  seems  to  refer  to 
a  god  who  dwells  apart  from  as  well  as  in  the 
world,  as,  for  example,  when  he  debates 
whether  the  gods  have  any  concern  with  human 
affairs. 

Another  type  of  ancient  pantheism  appears 
in  the  thought  of  Plotinus,  for  whom  all  things 
have  being  only  insofar  as  they  participate  in, 
even  as  they  emanate  from,  the  power  of  The 
One,  or  Primal  Source.  “God  is  sovranly  pres¬ 
ent  through  all,”  he  writes.  “We  cannot  think 
of  something  of  God  here  and  something  else 
there,  nor  of  all  of  God  gathered  at  some  one 
spot:  there  is  an  instantaneous  presence  every¬ 
where,  nothing  containing  and  nothing  left 
void,  everything  therefore  fully  held  by  the 
divine.”  The  relation  between  The  One  and 
every  other  thing  is  compared  to  the  number 
series.  “Just  as  there  is,  primarily  or  secondarily, 
some  form  or  idea  from  the  monad  in  each  of 
the  successive  numbers — the  latter  still  partici¬ 
pating,  though  unequally,  in  the  unit — so  the 
series  of  beings  following  upon  The  First  bear, 
each,  some  form  or  idea  derived  from  that 
source.  In  Number  the  participation  establishes 
Quantity;  in  the  realm  of  Being,  the  trace  of 
The  One  establishes  reality:  existence  is  a  trace 
of  The  One.” 

But  although  The  One  is  in  all  things,  and 
all  things  depend  upon  it  for  their  very  exist¬ 
ence,  The  One  itself  has  no  need  of  them.  It  is  in 
this  sense  that  Plotinus  says  that  “The  One  is 
all  things  and  no  one  of  them  .  .  .  Holding  all — 
though  itself  nowhere  held — it  is  omnipresent, 
for  where  its  presence  failed  something  would 
elude  its  hold.  At  the  same  time,  in  the  sense 
that  it  is  nowhere  held,  it  is  not  present:  thus 


it  is  both  present  and  not  present;  not  present 
as  not  being  circumscribed  by  anything;  yet  as 
being  utterly  unattached,  not  inhibited  from 
presence  at  any  point.”  Thus  all  things  partake 
of  The  One  in  absolute  dependence.  But  The 
One,  considered  in  itself,  is  absolutely  tran¬ 
scendent.  Plotinus  even  denies  it  the  name  of 
God  or  Good  or  Being,  saying  it  is  beyond 
these. 

Whether  or  not  Spinoza  is  a  pantheist,  has 
long  been  debated  by  his  commentators.  An 
explicit,  even  an  extreme  form  of  pantheism 
would  seem  to  be  expressed  in  the  proposition 
that  “whatever  is,  is  in  God,  and  nothing  can 
be  or  be  conceived  without  God.”  But  while 
the  one  and  only  substance  which  exists  is  at 
once  nature  and  God,  Spinoza  identifies  God 
only  with  the  nature  he  calls  “ natura  natnrans .” 
God  is  not  reduced  to  the  nature  that  falls  with¬ 
in  man’s  limited  experience  or  understanding — 
the  nature  he  calls  “natura  naturata .” 

“By  natura  naturansf  he  explains,  “we  are 
to  understand  that  which  is  in  itself  and  is  con¬ 
ceived  through  itself,  or  those  attributes  of  sub¬ 
stance  which  express  eternal  and  infinite  es¬ 
sence,  that  is  to  say,  God  in  so  far  as  He  is  con¬ 
sidered  as  a  free  cause.  But  by  natura  naturata 
I  understand  everything  which  follows  from 
the  necessity  of  the  nature  of  God,  or  of  any 
one  of  God’s  attributes,  that  is  to  say,  all  the 
modes  of  God’s  attributes  in  so  far  as  they  are 
considered  as  things  which  are  in  God  and 
which  without  God  can  neither  be  nor  can  be 
conceived.” 

God  is  the  infinite  and  eternal  substance  of 
all  finite  existences,  an  absolute  and  unchang¬ 
ing  one  underlying  the  finite  modes  in  which  it 
variably  manifests  itself.  Though  God  for  Spi¬ 
noza  is  transcendent  in  the  sense  of  vastly  ex¬ 
ceeding  the  world  known  to  man,  in  no  sense 
does  God  exist  apart  from  the  whole  of  nature. 
Spinoza’s  view  thus  sharply  departs  from  that 
of  an  orthodox  Jewish  or  Christian  theologian. 
When  the  latter  says  that  God  is  transcendent, 
he  means  that  God  exists  apart,  infinitely  re¬ 
moved  from  the  whole  created  universe.  When 
the  latte."  speaks  of  God  as  being  immanent  in 
that  universe,  he  carefully  specifies  that  it  is  not 
by  His  substance,  but  by  the  power  of  His  ac¬ 
tion  and  knowledge.  But  Spinoza  calls  God 
“the  immanent,  and  not  the  transitive,  cause  of 


Chapter 

all  things,”  for  the  reason  that  “outside  God 
there  can  be  no  substance,  that  is  to  say,  out¬ 
side  Him  nothing  can  exist  which  is  in  itself.” 

These  divergent  conceptions  of  God’s  im¬ 
manence  and  transcendence— so  relevant  to 
the  question  of  who  is  or  is  not  a  pantheist — 
are  further  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Nature 
and  World. 

Unlike  pantheism,  deism  affirms  gods  or  a 
God,  personal  intelligences  existing  apart  from 
this  world;  but,  as  in  the  teaching  of  Lucretius, 
deism  sometimes  goes  to  the  extreme  of  believ¬ 
ing  in  absentee  gods  who  neither  intervene  in 
the  order  of  nature  nor  concern  themselves 
with  human  affairs. 

“The  nature  of  the  gods,”  Lucretius  writes, 
“must  ever  in  itself  of  necessity  enjoy  immor¬ 
tality  together  with  supreme  repose,  far  re¬ 
moved  and  withdrawn  from  our  concerns;  since 
exempt  from  every  pain,  exempt  from  all 
dangers,  strong  in  its  own  resources,  not  want¬ 
ing  aught  of  us,  ft  is  neither  gained  by  favors 
nor  moved  by  anger.” 

Such  gods  neither  create  the  world  nor 
govern  it;  above  all  they  do  not  reward  or 
j  punish  man,  and  so  they  do  not  have  to  be 
feared  or  propitiated.  “To  say  that  for  the  sake 
of  men  they  have  willed  to  set  in  order  the 
glorious  nature  of  the  world  and  therefore  it  is 
meet  to  praise  the  work  of  the  gods  immortal, 
and  that  it  is  an  unholy  thing  ever  to  shake  by 
any  force  from  its  fixed  seats  that  which  by  the 
forethought  of  the  gods  in  ancient  days  has 
been  established  on  everlasting  foundations  for 
mankind,  or  to  assail  it  by  speech  and  utterly 
overturn  it  from  top  to  bottom;  and  to  invent 
and  add  other  figments  of  the  kind  ...  is  all 
sheer  folly.  For  what  advantage  can  our  grati¬ 
tude  bestow  on  immortal  and  blessed  beings 
that  for  our  sakes  they  should  take  in  hand  to 
administer  aught?” 

Divinity  seems  to  have  moral  significance  to 
Lucretius  only  insofar  as  the  gods  exemplify  the 
happy  life;  and  religion  is  immoral  because  its 
superstitions  concerning  divine  motives  and 
meddling  make  men  servile  and  miserable. 

When  the  deism  of  Lucretius  is  contrasted 
with  the  more  familiar  modern  forms  of  that 
doctrine,  the  influence  of  Christianity  is  seen. 
The  modern  deist  affirms  the  supremacy  of  one 


29:  GOD  547 

Gcxl,  the  infinite  and  eternal  Creator  of  this 
world,  Whose  laws  arc  the  laws  of  nature 
which  are  laid  down  from  the  beginning  and 
which  govern  all  created  things.  Rousseau 
speaks  ol  this  as  “the  religion  of  man”  and  even 
identifies  it  with  Christianity— “not  the  Chris¬ 
tianity  of  today,  but  that  of  the  Gospel,  which 
is  entirely  different.”  He  describes  this  religion 
as  that  “which  has  neither  temples,  nor  altars, 
nor  rites,  and  is  confined  to  the  purely  internal 
cult  of  the  supreme  God  and  the  eternal  obliga¬ 
tions  of  morality.” 

Not  all  deists,  certainly  not  those  of  the  17th 
and  early  1 8th  centuries,  go  to  the  Lucretian 
extreme  of  picturing  an  uninterested  and  mor¬ 
ally  neutral  God.  Many  of  them  believe  in  an 
after-life.  But  modern  deism  did  tend  toward 
this  extreme.  By  Kant’s  time  it  had  even  ceased 
to  look  upon  God  as  a  personal  intelligence. 
Kant  therefore  takes  great  pains  to  distinguish 
deism  from  theism. 

The  deist,  according  to  Kant,  “admits  that 
we  can  cognize  by  pure  reason  alone  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  supreme  being,  but  at  the  same  time 
maintains  that  our  conception  of  this  being  is 
purely  transcendental,  and  that  all  we  can  say 
of  it  is,  that  it  possesses  all  reality,  without  be¬ 
ing  able  to  define  it  more  closely.”  The  theist, 
on  the  other  hand,  “asserts  that  reason  is  ca¬ 
pable  of  presenting  us,  from  the  analogy  with 
nature,  with  a  more  definite  conception  of  this 
being,  and  that  its  operations,  as  the  cause  of  all 
things,  are  the  results  of  intelligence  and  free 
will.” 

Kant  even  maintains  that  “we  might,  in 
strict  rigor,  deny  to  the  deist  any  belief  in 
God  at  all,  and  regard  him  merely  as  a  main- 
tainer  of  the  existence  of  a  primal  being  or  thing 
— the  supreme  cause  of  all  other  things.”  In  any 
case,  deism  seems  to  be  an  essentially  un-Jewish 
and  un-Christian  or  anti-Jewish  and  anti-Chris¬ 
tian  doctrine,  for  it  denies  God’s  supernatural 
revelation  of  Himself;  it  denies  miracles  and 
every  other  manifestation  of  supernatural  agen¬ 
cy  in  the  course  of  nature  or  the  life  of  man; 
it  denies  the  efficacy  of  prayer  and  sacrament. 
In  short,  it  rejects  the  institutions  and  practices, 
as  well  as  the  faith  and  hope,  of  any  religion 
which  claims  supernatural  foundation  and  su¬ 
pernatural  warrant  for  its  dogmas  and  rituals. 
Deism,  which  “consists  simply  in  the  worship 


548 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


of  a  God  considered  as  great,  powerful,  and 
eternal,”  is,  in  Pascal’s  opinion,  “almost  as  far 
removed  from  the  Christian  religion  as  atheism, 
which  is  its  exact  opposite.” 

What  Pascal  and  Kant  call  “deism”  and 
Rousseau  “the  religion  of  man,”  others  like 
Hume  call  “natural  religion.”  His  Dialogues 
Concerning  Natural  Religion  provide  a  classic 
statement  of  rationalism,  which  is  the  same  as 
naturalism,  in  religion;  though,  as  the  chapter 
on  Religion  indicates,  it  may  be  questioned 
whether  the  word  “religion”  can  be  meaning¬ 
fully  used  for  a  doctrine  which  claims  no  knowl¬ 
edge  beyond  that  of  the  philosopher,  and  no 
guidance  for  human  life  beyond  the  precepts  of 
the  moralist. 

The  systematic  exposition  of  man’s  knowl¬ 
edge  of  God  is  the  science  of  theology.  In  addi¬ 
tion  to  considering  all  things — the  whole  world 
and  human  life — in  relation  to  God,  theology 
treats  especially  of  God’s  existence,  essence,  and 
attributes.  Throughout  the  range  of  its  subject 
matter  and  problems,  theology  may  be  of  two 
sorts:  it  may  be  either  natural  knowledge,  ob¬ 
tained  by  ordinary  processes  of  observation  and 
reasoning;  or  knowledge  which  is  supernatural 
in  the  sense  of  being  based  on  divine  revelation. 
This  is  the  traditional  distinction  between  nat¬ 
ural  and  sacred  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called, 
dogmatic  theology.  The  one  belongs  to  the  do¬ 
main  of  reason;  it  is  the  work  of  the  philosopher. 
The  other  belongs  to  the  domain  of  faith,  and 
is  the  work  of  the  theologian  who  seeks  to  un¬ 
derstand  his  faith. 

These  distinctions  are  discussed  in  the  chap¬ 
ters  on  Theology,  Metaphysics,  and  Wis¬ 
dom.  Here  we  are  concerned  with  different  at¬ 
titudes  toward  the  problem  of  man’s  knowledge 
of  God.  The  deist,  as  we  have  seen,  rejects  su¬ 
pernatural  revelation  and  faith;  theology,  like 
religion,  is  held  to  be  entirely  natural,  a  work  of 
reason.  The  agnostic  makes  the  opposite  denial. 
He  denies  that  anything  supernatural  can  be 
known  by  reason.  It  cannot  be  proved  or,  for 
that  master,  disproved.  The  evidences  of  nature 
and  the  light  of  reason  do  not  permit  valid  in¬ 
ferences  or  arguments  concerning  God  or  crea¬ 
tion,  providence  or  immortality. 

It  is  usually  with  respect  to  God’s  existence 
that  the  agnostic  most  emphatically  declares 


reason’s  incompetence  to  demonstrate.  He 
often  accompanies  the  declaration  with  elabo¬ 
rate  criticisms  of  the  arguments  which  may  be 
offered  by  others.  This  is  not  always  the  case, 
however.  For  example,  the  great  Jewish  theolo¬ 
gian,  Moses  Maimonides,  thinks  that  God’s  ex¬ 
istence  can  be  proved  by  reason  entirely  apart 
from  faith;  but  with  regard  to  the  essence  or 
attributes  of  God,  his  position  seems  to  be  one 
which  might  be  called  agnostic. 

When  men  “ascribe  essential  attributes  to 
God,”  Maimonides  declares,  “these  so-called 
essential  attributes  should  not  have  any  similar¬ 
ity  to  the  attributes  of  other  things,  just  as 
there  is  no  similarity  between  the  essence  of 
God  and  that  of  other  beings.”  Since  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  such  positive  attributes  as  good  or  wise  is 
derived  from  our  knowledge  of  things,  they  do 
not  provide  us  with  any  knowledge  of  God’s 
essence,  for  no  comparison  obtains  between 
things  and  God.  Hence  Maimonides  asserts  that 
“the  negative  attributes  of  God  are  the  true 
attributes.”  They  tell  us  not  what  God  is,  but 
what  God  is  not. 

Even  though  Maimonides  holds  that  “exist¬ 
ence  and  essence  are  perfectly  identical”  in 
God,  he  also  insists  that  “we  comprehend  only 
the  fact  that  He  exists,  not  His  essence. ...  All 
we  understand,”  he  goes  on  to  say,  in  addition 
to  “the  fact  that  He  exists,”  is  the  fact  that 
“He  is  a  Being  to  whom  none  of  his  creatures  is 
similar.”  This  fact  is  confirmed  in  all  the  nega¬ 
tive  attributes  such  as  eternal  (meaning  non¬ 
temporal),  infinite,  or  incorporeal;  even  as  it  is 
falsified  by  all  the  positive  attributes,  expressed 
by  such  names  as  “good”  or  “living”  or  “know¬ 
ing,”  insofar  as  they  imply  a  comparison  be¬ 
tween  God  and  creatures.  When  they  cannot 
be  interpreted  negatively,  they  can  be  tolerated 
as  metaphors,  but  they  must  not  be  taken  as 
expressing  an  understanding  “of  the  true  es¬ 
sence  of  God,”  concerning  which  Maimonides 
maintains,  “there  is  no  possibility  of  obtaining 
a  knowledge.” 

Aquinas  takes  issue  with  such  agnosticism 
about  the  divine  nature  in  his  discussion  of  the 
names  of  God.  Although  he  says  that  “we  can¬ 
not  know  what  God  is,  but  rather  what  He  is 
not,”  Aquinas  disagrees  with  Maimonides  that 
all  names  which  express  some  knowledge  of 
God’s  essence  must  be  interpreted  negatively 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


or  treated  as  metaphors.  He  denies  that  “when 
we  say  God  lives,  we  mean  merely  that  God 
is  not  like  an  inanimate  thing’’  as  “was  taught 
by  Rabbi  Moses.”  On  the  contrary,  he  holds 
that  “these  names  signify  the  divine  substance 
.  .  .  although  they  fall  short  of  representing 
Him.  .  .  .  For  these  names  express  God,  so  far 
as  our  intellects  know  Him.  Now  since  our 
intellect  knows  God  from  creatures,  it  knows 
Him  as  far  as  creatures  represent  Him.”  There¬ 
fore,  Aquinas  concludes,  “when  we  say,  God  is 
good ,  the  meaning  is  not,  God  is  the  cause  of 
goodness ,  or,  God  is  not  evil :  but  the  meaning 
is,  Whatever  good  we  attribute  to  creatures  pre¬ 
exists  in  God ,  and  in  a  higher  way.” 

If  Maimonides  were  right  that  the  names 
which  are  said  positively  of  both  God  and 
creatures  are  “applied  ...  in  a  purely  equivocal 
sense”  ( e.g .,  having  literal  meaning  when  said 
of  creatures  but  being  only  metaphorical  when 
said  of  God),  then,  according  to  Aquinas,  it 
would  follow  that  “from  creatures  nothing  at 
all  could  be  known  or  demonstrated  about 
God.”  Those  who  say,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
“the  things  attributed  to  God  and  creatures 
are  univocal”  (/.<?.,  are  said  in  exactly  the  same 
sense),  claim  to  comprehend  more  than  man 
can  know  of  the  divine  essence.  When  the  term 
wise  “is  applied  to  God,”  Aquinas  writes,  “it 
leaves  the  thing  signified  as  uncomprehended 
and  as  exceeding  the  signification  of  the  name. 
Hence  it  is  evident  that  this  term  wise  is  not 
applied  in  the  same  way  to  God  and  to  man. 
The  same  applies  to  other  terms.  Hence  no 
name  is  predicated  univocally  of  God  and  crea¬ 
tures”  but  rather  all  positives  names  “are  said 
of  God  and  creatures  in  an  analogous  sense.” 

A  further  discussion  of  the  names  of  God 
will  be  found  in  the  chapter  on  Sign  and 
Symbol;  and  the  consideration  of  the  analogi¬ 
cal,  the  univocal,  and  the  equivocal  will  also 
be  found  there  as  well  as  in  the  chapter  on 
Same  and  Other.  We  have  dealt  with  these 
matters  here  only  for  the  sake  of  describing  that 
degree  of  agnosticism,  according  to  which 
Maimonides,  by  contrast  with  Aquinas,  is  an 
agnostic.  But  agnosticism  usually  goes  further 
and  denies  that  man  can  have  any  natural 
knowledge  of  God — either  of  His  existence  or  of 
His  essence. 


549 

So  understood,  agnosticism  need  not  be  in¬ 
compatible  with  religion,  unless  a  given  reli¬ 
gion  holds,  as  an  article  of  faith  itself,  that  the 
existence  of  God  can  be  proved  by  reason.  In 
fact,  the  agnostic  may  be  a  religious  man  who 
accepts  divine  revelation  and  regards  faith  as 
divinely  inspired. 

Montaigne’s  Apology  for  Raimond  de  Sebonde 
illustrates  this  position.  Sebonde  had  written  a 
treatise  on  natural  theology,  which  to  Mon¬ 
taigne  seems  “hardy  and  bold;  for  he  under¬ 
takes,  by  human  and  natural  reasons  to  estab¬ 
lish  and  make  good  against  the  atheists  all  the 
articles  of  the  Christian  religion.”  Though 
Montaigne  says  of  his  work,  “I  do  not  think  it 
possible  to  do  better  upon  that  subject,”  and 
though  he  entertains  the  conjecture  that  it  may 
have  been  “drawn  from  St.  Thomas  Aquinas, 
for,  in  truth,  that  mind  full  of  infinite  learning 
and  admirable  subtlety,  was  alone  capable  of 
such  imaginations”;  nevertheless,  Montaigne 
does  “not  believe  that  means  purely  human  are, 
in  any  sort,  capable  of  doing  it.” 

According  to  Montaigne,  “it  is  faith  alone 
that  vividly  and  certainly  comprehends  the 
deep  mysteries  of  our  religion.”  In  his  view, 
reason  by  itself  is  incapable  of  proving  anything , 
much  less  anything  about  God.  “Our  human 
reasons,”  he  writes,  “are  but  sterile  and  un¬ 
digested  matter;  the  grace  of  God  is  its  form; 
it  is  that  which  gives  it  fashion  and  value.”  The 
light  and  value  in  Sebonde’s  arguments  come 
from  the  fact  that  faith  supervenes  “to  tint  and 
illustrate”  them,  and  “renders  them  firm  and 
solid.” 

Such  arguments,  Montaigne  says,  may  serve 
as  “direction  and  first  guide  to  a  learner”  and 
may  even  “render  him  capable  of  the  grace  of 
God”;  but  for  himself,  skeptical  of  all  argu¬ 
ments,  the  way  of  faith  alone  can  provide  “a 
certain  constancy  of  opinion.  .  .  .  Thus  have  I, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  preserved  myself  entire, 
without  anxiety  or  trouble  of  conscience,  in 
the  ancient  belief  of  our  religion,  amidst  so 
many  sects  and  divisions  as  our  age  has  pro¬ 
duced.” 

Far  from  being  religious  as  Montaigne  was, 
the  agnostic  may  be  a  skeptic  about  faith  as 
well  as  reason.  He  may  look  upon  faith  either 
as  superstition  or  as  the  exercise  of  the  will  to 
believe  with  regard  to  the  unknowable  and  the 


550 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


unintelligible — almost  wishful  thinking.  He 
may  even  go  so  far  as  to  treat  religion  as  if  it 
were  pathological. 

Freud,  for  example,  regards  religion  as  an  il¬ 
lusion  to  be  explained  in  terms  of  man’s  need 
to  create  gods  in  his  own  image — to  find  a  sur¬ 
rogate  for  the  father,  on  whom  his  infantile 
dependence  can  be  projected.  Freud  finds  con¬ 
firmation  for  this  in  the  fact  that  in  the  reli¬ 
gions  of  the  west,  God  “is  openly  called  Father. 
Psychoanalysis,”  he  goes  on,  “concludes  that  he 
really  is  the  father,  clothed  in  the  grandeur  in 
which  he  once  appeared  to  the  small  child.” 

Though  the  grown  man  “has  long  ago  real¬ 
ized  that  his  father  is  a  being  with  strictly  lim¬ 
ited  powers  and  by  no  means  endowed  with 
every  desirable  attribute,”  Freud  thinks  that 
he  nevertheless  “looks  back  to  the  memory- 
image  of  the  overrated  father  of  his  childhood, 
exalts  it  into  a  Deity,  and  brings  it  into  the 
present  and  into  reality.  The  emotional  strength 
of  this  memory-image  and  the  lasting  nature 
of  his  need  for  protection” — for,  as  Freud  ex¬ 
plains,  “in  relation  to  the  external  world  he  is 
still  a  child” — “are  the  two  supports  of  his 
belief  in  God.” 

At  the  other  extreme  from  agnosticism  is,  as 
the  name  implies,  gnosticism.  Like  deism,  it 
dispenses  with  faith,  but  it  exceeds  traditional 
deism  in  the  claims  it  makes  for  reason’s  power 
to  penetrate  the  divine  mysteries.  Between  ex¬ 
clusive  reliance  on  faith  and  an  exaltation  of 
reason  to  the  point  where  there  is  no  need  for 
God  to  reveal  anything,  a  middle  ground  is  held 
by  those  who  acknowledge  the  contributions 
of  both  faith  and  reason.  Those  who  try  to 
harmonize  the  two  usually  distinguish  between 
the  spheres  proper  to  each,  and  formulate  some 
principle  according  to  which  they  are  related 
to  each  other  in  an  orderly  fashion. 

Whatever  is  purely  a  matter  of  faith,  Aquinas 
says,  is  assented  to  solely  because  “it  is  revealed 
by  God.”  The  articles  of  Christian  faith  are 
typified  by  “the  Trinity  of  Persons  in  Almighty 
God,  the  mystery  of  Christ’s  Incarnation,  and 
the  like.”  With  regard  to  such  matters,  which 
Aquinas  thinks  belong  primarily  to  faith,  some 
auxiliary  use  can  be  made  of  reason,  “not,  in¬ 
deed,  to  prove  faith,”  he  explains,  but  to  make 
clear  the  things  that  follow  from  it.  Certain 


matters,  such  as  God’s  existence  and  attributes, 
he  classifies  as  belonging  to  “the  preambles  to 
faith”  because  they  fall,  in  his  view,  within 
reason’s  power  to  demonstrate,  unaided  by 
faith.  Yet  even  here  he  does  not  assign  the 
affirmation  of  the  truth  to  reason  alone. 

Just  as  “it  was  necessary  for  the  salvation  of 
man  that  certain  truths  which  exceed  human 
reason  should  be  made  known  to  him  by  divine 
revelation,”  so  even  with  regard  to  “those 
truths  about  God  which  human  reason  can 
investigate,”  Aquinas  thinks  it  was  also  nec¬ 
essary  that  “man  be  taught  by  a  divine  reve¬ 
lation.  For  the  truth  about  God,  such  as  reason 
can  know  it,  would  only  be  known  by  a  few, 
and  that  after  a  long  time,  and  with  the  admix¬ 
ture  of  many  errors.”  Because  “human  reason 
is  very  deficient  in  things  concerning  God” — 
“a  sign  of  which  is  that  philosophers  .  .  .  have 
fallen  into  many  errors  and  have  disagreed 
among  themselves” — men  would  have  no 
knowledge  of  God  “free  from  doubt  and  un¬ 
certainty”  unless  all  divine  truths  were  “de¬ 
livered  to  them  by  the  way  of  faith,  being  told 
to  them,  as  it  were,  by  God  Himself  Who  can¬ 
not  lie.” 

In  different  ways  faith  supports  reason  and 
reason  helps  faith.  On  matters  which  belong  to 
both  reason  and  faith,  faith  provides  a  greater 
certitude.  On  matters  strictly  of  faith,  reason 
provides  some  understanding,  however  remote 
and  inadequate,  of  the  mysteries  of  religion. 
“The  use  of  human  reason  in  religion,”  Bacon 
writes,  “is  of  two  sorts:  the  former,  in  the  con¬ 
ception  and  apprehension  of  the  mysteries  of 
God  to  us  revealed;  the  other,  in  the  inferring 
and  deriving  of  doctrine  and  direction  there¬ 
upon.  ...  In  the  former  we  see  God  vouch¬ 
safed  to  descend  to  our  capacity,  in  the  ex¬ 
pressing  of  his  mysteries  in  sort  as  may  be  sensi¬ 
ble  unto  us;  and  doth  grift  his  revelations  and 
holy  doctrine  upon  the  notions  of  our  reason 
and  applieth  his  inspiration  to  open  our  under¬ 
standing,  as  the  form  of  the  key  to  the  ward 
of  the  lock.  For  the  latter,  there  is  allowed  us 
an  use  of  reason  and  argument,  secondary  and 
respective,  although  not  original  and  absolute. 
For  after  the  articles  and  principles  of  religion 
are  placed  and  exempted  from  examination 
of  reason,  it  is  then  permitted  unto  us  to 
make  derivations  and  inferences  from  and  ac- 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


551 


cording  to  the  analogy  of  them,  for  our  better 
direction.” 

In  addition  to  all  discursive  knowledge  of 
God,  whether  it  be  by  faith  or  by  reason,  there 
is  the  totally  incommunicable  and  intimate  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  the  supernatural  which  the 
mystic  claims  for  his  vision  in  moments  of  re¬ 
ligious  ecstasy  or  which  is  promised  to  the 
blessed  as  their  heavenly  beatitude.  When,  at 
the  culmination  of  Paradise ,  Dante  sees  God, 
“my  vision,”  he  declares,  “was  greater  than  our 
speech.” 

Knowing  that  his  “speech  will  fall  more 
short .  .  .  than  that  of  an  infant  who  still  bathes 
his  tongue  at  the  breast,”  he  tries  nevertheless 
to  communicate  in  words  “one  single  spark  of 
Thy  glory  for  the  folk  to  come.”  In  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  God,  he  writes,  his  mind,  “wholly  rapt, 
was  gazing  fixed,  motionless,  and  intent,  and 
ever  with  gazing  grew  enkindled.  In  that  Light 
one  becomes  such  that  it  is  impossible  he  should 
ever  consent  to  turn  himself  from  it  for  other 
sight;  because  the  Good  which  is  the  object 
of  the  will  is  all  collected  in  it,  and  outside  of 
it  that  is  defective  which  is  perfect  there.” 

The  arguments  for  the  existence  of  the  gods 
or  of  one  God  constitute  one  of  the  greatest 
attempts  of  the  human  mind  to  go  beyond  the 
sensible  or  phenomenal  world  of  experience. 
The  attempt  has  been  made  in  every  age  and 
by  minds  of  quite  different  persuasions  in  re¬ 
ligious  belief  or  philosophical  outlook.  It  is 
possible,  nevertheless,  to  classify  the  arguments 
into  two  or  three  main  types. 

Within  the  domain  of  pure  or  speculative 
reason  there  seem  to  be  two  ways  of  approach¬ 
ing  the  problem  of  God’s  existence. 

One  is  in  terms  of  the  conception  of  God 
as  an  infinite,  perfect,  and  necessary  being, 
whose  non-existence  is  therefore  inconceivable. 
According  to  Anselm,  God  cannot  be  conceived 
in  any  other  way  than  as  “a  being  than  which 
nothing  greater  can  be  conceived.”  But  since 
“the  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  there  is  no 
God,”  how  shall  he  be  made  to  know  that  the 
God,  which  exists  in  his  understanding  at  the 
moment  when  he  denies  His  real  existence,  also 
really  exists  outside  his  understanding?  “For 
it  is  one  thing  for  an  object  to  be  in  the  under¬ 
standing,  and  another  to  understand  that  the 


object  exists.”  Hence  Anselm  considers  the 
consequence  of  supposing  that  God  exists  in 
the  understanding  alone. 

“If  that,  than  which  nothing  greater  can  be 
conceived,”  he  argues,  “exists  in  the  under¬ 
standing  alone,  the  very  being,  than  which 
nothing  greater  can  be  conceived,  is  one  than 
which  a  greater  can  be  conceived” — for  to 
exist  in  reality  as  well  as  in  the  understanding 
is  to  have  more  being.  But  this  leads  to  “an 
irreconcilable  contradiction,”  since  “if  that, 
than  which  nothing  greater  can  be  conceived, 
can  be  conceived  not  to  exist,  it  is  not  that  than 
which  nothing  greater  can  be  conceived.” 
Therefore  Anselm  concludes  that  a  being  “than 
which  nothing  greater  can  be  conceived”  must 
exist  “both  in  the  understanding  and  reality.” 

Anselm  summarizes  his  argument  by  saying 
that  “no  one  who  understands  what  God  is, 
can  conceive  that  God  does  not  exist.”  Since 
the  non-existence  of  God  is  inconceivable,  God 
must  exist.  Descartes  gives  the  same  argument 
a  slightly  different  statement  in  terms  of  the 
inseparability  of  God’s  essence  from  God’s 
existence. 

“Being  accustomed,”  he  writes,  “in  all  other 
things  to  make  a  distinction  between  existence 
and  essence,  I  easily  persuade  myself  that  the 
existence  can  be  separated  from  the  essence  of 
God,  and  that  we  can  thus  conceive  God  as  not 
actually  existing.  But,  nevertheless,  when  I 
think  of  it  with  more  attention,  I  clearly  see 
that  existence  can  no  more  be  separated  from 
the  essence  of  God  than  can  its  having  its  three 
angles  equal  to  two  right  angles  be  separated 
from  the  essence  of  a  rectilinear  triangle,  or 
the  idea  of  a  mountain  from  the  idea  of  a 
valley;  and  so  there  is  not  any  less  repugnance 
to  our  conceiving  a  God  (that  is,  a  Being  su¬ 
premely  perfect)  to  whom  existence  is  lacking 
(that  is  to  say,  to  whom  a  certain  perfection  is 
lacking),  than  to  conceive  of  a  mountain  which 
has  no  valley.” 

Spinoza  defines  a  “cause  of  itself’  as  “that 
whose  essence  involves  existence;  or  that  whose 
nature  cannot  be  conceived  unless  existing.” 
Since  in  his  conception  of  substance,  substance 
is  necessarily  infinite,  it  is  also  cause  of  itself. 
Hence  he  concludes  that  “God  or  substance 
.  .  .  necessarily  exists”;  for  “if  this  be  denied, 
conceive  if  it  be  possible  that  God  does  not 


552 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


exist.  Then  it  follows  that  His  essence  does  not 
involve  existence.  But  this  is  absurd.  Therefore 
God  necessarily  exists.” 

This  mode  of  argument,  which  takes  still 
other  forms,  is  traditionally  called  the  “onto¬ 
logical  argument”  or  the  “ a  priori  proof”  of 
God’s  existence.  Its  critics  sometimes  deny  that 
it  is  an  argument  or  proof  in  any  sense  at  all. 
Aquinas,  for  example,  interprets  Anselm  not  as 
proving  God’s  existence,  but  rather  as  asserting 
that  God’s  existence  is  self-evident.  Those  who 
say  that  the  proposition  “God  does  not  exist” 
is  self-contradictory,  are  saying  that  the  oppo¬ 
site  proposition  “God  exists”  must  be  self- 
evident. 

Aquinas  does  not  deny  that  the  proposition 
“God  exists”  is  intrinsically  self-evident.  On 
this  point  he  goes  further  than  Anselm,  Des¬ 
cartes,  and  Spinoza.  Where  they  say  God’s 
essence  involves  His  existence,  Aquinas  asserts 
that  in  God  essence  and  existence  are  identical . 
When  Moses  asks  God,  “If  they  should  say  to 
me,  What  is  His  name?  what  shall  I  say  to 
them?”  the  Lord  says  unto  Moses,  “I  AM 
THAT  I  AM,”  and  adds,  “Say  to  the  children 
of  Israel:  HE  WHO  IS  hath  sent  me  to  you.” 
This  name — HE  WHO  IS — Aquinas  holds  to 
be  “the  most  proper  name  of  God”  because  it 
signifies  that  “the  being  of  God  is  His  very 
essence.” 

For  this  reason  he  thinks  that  the  proposition 
“God  exists”  is  self-evident  in  itself.  Its  subject 
and  predicate  are  immediately  related.  Never¬ 
theless,  Aquinas  holds  that  the  proposition  is 
not  self-evident  to  us  “because  we  do  not  know 
the  essence  of  God.”  Even  supposing,  he 
writes,  “that  everyone  understands  this  name 
God  as  signifying  something  than  which  noth¬ 
ing  greater  can  be  thought,  nevertheless,  it 
does  not  therefore  follow  that  he  understands 
that  what  the  name  signifies  exists  actually,  but 
only  that  it  exists  mentally.  Nor  can  it  be  ar¬ 
gued  that  it  actually  exists,  unless  it  be  ad¬ 
mitted  that  there  actually  exists  something 
than  which  nothing  greater  can  be  thought;  and 
this  precisely  is  not  admitted  by  those  who 
hold  that  God  does  not  exist.” 

The  writer  of  the  First  Set  of  Objections 
to  Descartes’  Meditations  maintains  that  the 
criticism  advanced  by  Aquinas  applies  to  Des¬ 
cartes  as  well  as  to  Anselm.  Whether  stated  in 


terms  of  the  conception  of  an  absolutely  perfect 
being  or  in  terms  of  essence  and  existence,  the 
argument  is  invalid,  he  thinks,  which  asserts 
that  God  actually  exists  because  His  non-exist¬ 
ence  is  inconceivable.  Kant’s  later  criticism  of 
the  ontological  argument  takes  a  similar  course. 
A  proposition  may  be  logically  necessary  with¬ 
out  being  true  in  fact. 

“The  conception  of  an  absolutely  necessary 
being,”  he  writes,  “is  a  mere  idea,  the  objective 
reality  of  which  is  far  from  being  established 
by  the  mere  fact  that  it  is  a  need  of  reason.  .  .  . 
The  unconditioned  necessity  of  a  judgment 
does  not  form  the  absolute  necessity  of  a 
thing.”  From  the  fact  that  “existence  belongs 
necessarily  to  the  object  of  the  conception,” 
we  cannot  conclude  that  “the  existence  of  the 
thing  ...  is  therefore  absolutely  necessary — 
merely,”  Kant  says,  “because  its  existence  has 
been  cogitated  in  the  conception.  .  .  .  What¬ 
ever  be  the  content  of  our  conception  of  an 
object,  it  is  necessary  to  go  beyond  it,  if  we 
wish  to  predicate  existence  of  the  object.  .  .  . 
The  celebrated  ontological  or  Cartesian  argu¬ 
ment  for  the  existence  of  a  supreme  being  is 
therefore  insufficient.” 

The  second  main  approach  to  the  problem 
of  God’s  existence  lies  in  the  sort  of  proof 
which,  Locke  thinks,  “our  own  existence  and 
the  sensible  parts  of  the  universe  offer  so  clearly 
and  cogently  to  our  thoughts.”  He  refrains 
from  criticizing  the  argument  from  “the  idea 
of  a  most  perfect  being,”  but  he  does  insist  that 
we  should  not  “take  some  men’s  having  that 
idea  of  God  in  their  minds  .  .  .  for  the  only 
proof  of  a  Deity.”  He  for  one  prefers  to  follow 
the  counsel  of  St.  Paul,  that  “the  invisible 
things  of  God  are  clearly  seen  from  the  creation 
of  the  world,  being  understood  by  the  things 
that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  God¬ 
head.” 

We  have,  according  to  Locke,  an  intuitive 
knowledge  of  our  own  existence.  We  know,  he 
says,  that  “nonentity  cannot  produce  any  real 
being”;  and  so  “from  the  consideration  of  our¬ 
selves,  and  what  we  infallibly  find  in  our  con¬ 
stitution,  our  reason  leads  us  to  the  knowledge 
of  this  certain  and  evident  truth — That  there 
is  an  eternal,  most  powerful,  a?id  most  knowing 
Being.” 


Chapter 

Without  labelling  it  a  proof  of  God’s  exist¬ 
ence,  Augustine  in  his  Confessions  presents  a 
similar  argument— from  the  visible  creation. 
“Behold,”  he  says,  “the  heavens  and  the  earth 
are;  they  proclaim  that  they  were  created;  for 
they  change  and  vary.  .  .  .  They  proclaim  also 
that  they  made  not  themselves:  ‘therefore  we 
are,  because  we  have  been  made;  we  were  not 
therefore,  before  we  were,  so  as  to  make  our¬ 
selves’ - Thou  therefore,  Lord,  madest  them.” 

This  second  approach  to  the  existence  of  God 
by  reasoning  from  the  facts  of  experience  or 
the  evidences  of  nature  is  called  the  “ a  posteriori 
proof.”  In  the  tradition  of  the  great  books,  it 
has  been  formulated  in  many  different  ways. 
What  is  common  to  all  of  them  is  the  principle 
of  causality,  in  terms  of  which  the  known  exist¬ 
ence  of  certain  effects  is  made  the  basis  for  in¬ 
ferring  the  existence  of  a  unique  cause — a  first 
cause,  a  highest  cause,  an  uncaused  cause. 

Aristotle,  for  example,  in  the  last  book  of  his 
Physics ,  argues  from  the  fact  of  motion  or 
change  to  the  existence  of  an  unmoved  mover. 
He  sums  up  his  elaborate  reasoning  on  this 
point  in  the  following  statement.  “We  estab¬ 
lished  the  fact  that  everything  that  is  in  mo¬ 
tion  is  moved  by  something,  and  that  the 
movent  is  either  unmoved  or  in  motion,  and 
that,  if  it  is  in  motion,  it  is  moved  either  by 
itself  or  by  something  else  and  so  on  through¬ 
out  the  series:  and  so  we  proceeded  to  the  posi¬ 
tion  that  the  first  principle  that  directly  causes 
things  that  are  in  motion  to  be  moved  is  that 
which  moves  itself,  and  the  first  principle  of  the 
whole  series  is  the  unmoved.” 

Aristotle’s  argument,  unlike  that  of  Augus¬ 
tine  or  Locke,  does  not  presuppose  the  creation 
of  the  world,  at  least  not  in  the  sense  of  the 
world’s  having  a  beginning.  On  the  contrary, 
he  holds  the  world  and  its  motions  to  be  as 
eternal  as  their  unmoved  mover.  “It  is  im¬ 
possible,”  he  writes  in  the  Metaphysics ,  “that 
movement  should  either  have  come  into  being 
or  cease  to  be.”  Precisely  because  he  thinks  the 
world’s  motions  are  eternal,  Aristotle  holds 
that  the  prime  mover,  in  addition  to  being 
everlasting,  must  be  immutable.  This  for  him 
means  “a  principle  whose  very  essence  is  ac¬ 
tuality.”  Only  a  substance  without  any  poten¬ 
cy,  only  one  which  is  purely  actual ,  can  be  an 
absolutely  immutable,  eternal  being. 


29:  GOD  553 

Whatever  has  any  potentiality  in  its  nature 
is  capable  of  not  existing.  If  everything  were 
of  this  sort,  nothing  that  now  is  “need  he, 
for  it  is  possible  for  all  things  to  be  capable  of 
existing,  but  not  yet  to  exist.”  Hence,  in  still 
another  way,  Aristotle  seems  to  reach  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  a  purely  actual  being  must  exist; 
and,  furthermore,  he  seems  to  identify  this 
being  with  a  living  and  thinking  God.  “Life 
also  belongs  to  God,”  he  writes;  “for  the  ac¬ 
tuality  of  thought  is  life,  and  God  is  that  ac¬ 
tuality;  and  God’s  self-dependent  actuality  is 
life  most  good  and  eternal.” 

Where  Aristotle  argues  from  motion  and 
potentiality  to  a  prime  mover  and  a  pure  ac¬ 
tuality,  Newton  gives  the  a  posteriori  proof 
another  statement  by  arguing  from  the  design 
of  the  universe  to  God  as  its  designer  or  archi¬ 
tect.  “The  most  wise  and  excellent  contrivances 
of  things,  and  final  causes”  seem  to  him  the  best 
way  of  knowing  God.  “Blind  metaphysical 
necessity,  which  is  certainly  the  same  always 
and  everywhere,  could  produce  no  variety  in 
things.  All  that  diversity  of  natural  things 
which  we  find  suited  to  different  times  and 
places  could  arise  from  nothing  but  the  ideas 
and  will  of  a  Being  necessarily  existing.” 

In  similar  fashion  Berkeley  maintains  that 
“if  we  attentively  consider  the  constant  regu¬ 
larity,  order,  and  concatenation  of  natural 
things,  the  surprising  magnificence,  beauty, 
and  pcrfection«of  the  larger,  and  the  exquisite 
contrivance  of  the  smaller  parts  of  the  creation, 
together  with  the  exact  harmony  and  corre¬ 
spondence  of  the  whole,  but,  above  all,  the 
never  enough  admired  laws  of  pain  and  pleas¬ 
ure,  and  the  instincts  or  natural  inclinations, 
appetites,  and  passions  of  animals;  I  say  if  we 
consider  all  these  things,  and  at  the  same  time 
attend  to  the  meaning  and  import  of  the  at¬ 
tributes,  one,  eternal,  infinitely  wise,  good, 
and  perfect,  we  shall  clearly  perceive  that  they 
belong  to  the  .  .  .  Spirit,  who  ‘works  all  in  all,’ 
and  ‘by  whom  all  things  consist.’”  This  seems 
to  him  so  certain  that  he  adds,  “we  may  even 
assert  that  the  existence  of  God  is  far  more 
evidently  perceived  than  the  existence  of  men.” 

But,  according  to  Berkeley,  all  the  visible 
things  of  nature  exist  only  as  ideas  in  our  minds, 
ideas  which,  unlike  our  own  memories  or  imagi¬ 
nations,  we  do  not  ourselves  produce.  “Every- 


554 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


thing  we  see,  hear,  feel,  or  anywise  perceive  by 
sense,”  he  writes,  must  have  some  other  cause 
than  our  own  will,  and  is  therefore  “a  sign  or 
effect  of  the  power  of  God.”  To  the  “unthink¬ 
ing  herd”  who  claim  that  “they  cannot  see 
God,”  Berkeley  replies  that  “God  ...  is  in¬ 
timately  present  to  our  minds,  producing  in 
them  all  that  variety  of  ideas  or  sensations 
which  continually  affect  us.” 

The  existence  of  any  idea  in  us  is  for  Berkeley 
ground  for  asserting  God’s  existence  and  power 
as  its  cause.  But  for  Descartes  one  idea  alone 
becomes  the  basis  of  such  an  inference.  He 
supplements  his  a  priori  or  ontological  argu¬ 
ment  with  what  he  calls  an  posteriori  dem¬ 
onstration  of  God’s  existence  from  the  mere 
fact  that  the  idea  of  God  exists  in  us.” 

That  he  is  himself  imperfect,  Descartes 
knows  from  the  fact  that  he  doubts.  Even 
when  doubting  leads  to  knowledge,  his  knowl¬ 
edge  is  imperfect,  “an  infallible  token”  of 
which,  he  says,  is  the  fact  that  “my  knowledge 
increases  little  by  little.”  But  the  idea  which 
he  has  of  God,  he  declares,  is  that  of  an  abso¬ 
lutely  perfect  being,  “in  whom  there  is  nothing 
merely  potential,  but  in  whom  all  is  present 
really  and  actually.”  On  the  principle  that 
there  cannot  be  more  reality  or  perfection  in 
the  effect  than  in  the  cause,  Descartes  con¬ 
cludes  that  his  own  imperfect  mind  cannot  be 
the  cause  of  the  idea  of  a  perfect  being.  “The 
idea  that  I  possess  of  a  being  more  perfect  than 
I,”  he  writes,  “must  necessarily  have  been 
placed  in  me  by  a  being  which  is  really  more 
perfect.” 

The  radical  imperfection  of  man,  and  indeed 
of  all  creation,  offers  Augustine  still  another 
proof  for  God’s  existence,  which  he  attributes 
to  the  “Platonists.”  “They  have  seen,”  he 
writes,  “that  whatever  is  changeable  is  not  the 
most  high  God,  and  therefore  they  have  tran¬ 
scended  every  soul  and  all  changeable  spirits 
in  seeking  the  supreme.  They  have  seen  also 
that,  in  every  changeable  thing,  the  form  which 
makes  it  that  which  it  is,  whatever  be  its  mode 
or  nature,  can  only  be  through  Him  who  truly 
is,  because  He  is  unchangeable.  And  therefore, 
whether  we  consider  the  whole  body  of  the 
world,  its  figure,  qualities,  and  orderly  move¬ 
ment,  and  also  all  the  bodies  which  are  in  it; 
or  whether  we  consider  all  life,  either  that 


which  nourishes  and  maintains,  as  the  life  of 
trees;  or  that  which,  besides  this,  has  also  sensa¬ 
tion,  as  the  life  of  beasts;  or  that  which  adds 
to  all  these  intelligence,  as  the  life  of  man;  or 
that  which  does  not  need  the  support  of  nutri¬ 
ment,  but  only  maintains,  feels,  understands, 
as  the  life  of  angels — all  can  only  be  through 
Him  who  absolutely  is.  For  to  Him  it  is  not 
one  thing  to  be,  and  another  to  live,  as  though 
He  could  be,  not  living;  nor  is  it  to  Him  one 
thing  to  live,  and  another  to  understand,  as 
though  He  could  live,  not  understanding;  nor 
is  it  to  Him  one  thing  to  understand,  another 
to  be  blessed,  as  though  He  could  understand 
and  not  be  blessed.  But  to  Him  to  live,  to 
understand,  to  be  blessed,  are  to  be.  They  have 
understood,  from  this  unchangeableness  and 
this  simplicity,  that  all  things  must  have  been 
made  by  Him,  and  that  He  could  Himself 
have  been  made  by  none.” 

The  variety  of  arguments  we  have  so  far 
examined  seems  to  fit  the  “five  ways”  in  which, 
according  to  Aquinas,  the  existence  of  God  can 
be  proved  a  posteriori.  “The  first  and  most  man¬ 
ifest  way  is  the  argument  from  motion,”  which 
Aquinas  attributes  to  Aristotle.  “The  second 
way  is  from  the  nature  of  an  efficient  cause.” 
Berkeley’s  argument  or  Locke’s  would  seem, 
in  some  respects,  to  offer  a  version  of  this  mode 
of  reasoning.  “The  third  way  is  taken  from 
possibility  and  necessity,”  and  seems  to  develop 
the  argument  from  potentiality  in  Aristotle’s 
Metaphysics,  and  to  contain  the  inference  from 
mutability  and  contingency  which  is  implicit 
in  the  argument  attributed  to  the  Platonists 
by  Augustine.  “The  fourth  way  is  taken  from 
the  gradation  to  be  found  in  things.”  Proceed¬ 
ing  from  the  existence  of  the  imperfect  to  ab¬ 
solute  perfection,  it  resembles  in  principle  the 
reasoning  of  Descartes  concerning  the  perfec¬ 
tion  in  the  cause  relative  to  the  perfection  in 
the  effect.  “The  fifth  way  is  taken  from  the 
governance  of  the  world” — from  the  fact  that 
everything  acts  for  an  end — and  so  is  like  the 
argument  which  Newton  offers  from  final 
causes  and  the  existence  of  order  in  the  uni¬ 
verse. 

These  “five  ways”  may  or  may  not  be  re¬ 
garded  as  an  exhaustive  list  of  the  a  posteriori 
proofs.  It  may  even  be  questioned  whether  the 
five  ways  are  logically  distinct  and  independ- 


555 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


ent.  Aquinas  himself  says  that  “in  speculative 
matters  the  medium  of  demonstration,  which 
demonstrates  the  conclusion  perfectly,  is  only 
one;  whereas  probable  means  of  proof  are 
many.”  Since  he  considers  the  argument  for 
God’s  existence  to  be  a  certain,  not  a  probable 
proof,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that,  in  strict 
logic,  only  one  principle  can  be  involved  in 
that  proof. 

As  already  suggested,  the  principle— com¬ 
mon  to  all  the  various  ways  in  which  such  a 
posteriori  reasoning  is  expressed — seems  to  be 
the  principal  of  causality.  This  appears  in  the 
argument  from  the  existence  of  contingent 
beings,  which  cannot  cause  their  own  being, 
to  the  existence  of  a  being  which  needs  no  cause 
of  its  being,  because  its  very  essence  is  to  exist. 
This  may  be  the  one  argument  for  God’s  exist¬ 
ence  or,  if  one  among  many,  it  may  be  the  core 
of  all  the  others.  It  has  the  distinction  at  least 
of  conceiving  God  as  the  cause  of  being,  rather 
than  of  motion  or  of  hierarchy  and  order  in 
the  world. 

According  to  the  statement  of  Aquinas  that 
“being  is  the  proper  effect  of  God,”  it  estab¬ 
lishes  God  as  the  unique  and  direct  cause  of  the 
being  possessed  by  every  finite  thing.  This  for¬ 
mulation  of  the  proof  is  more  fully  examined  in 
the  chapter  on  Necessity  and  Contingency; 
and  its  relation  to  the  question  of  vdiether  the 
world  had  a  beginning  or  is  eternal,  and  if 
eternal,  whether  it  is  created  or  uncreated,  will 
be  seen  in  the  chapters  on  Cause,  Eternity, 
and  World. 

The  validity  of  the  a  posteriori  argument  for 
God’s  existence — in  one  form  or  another — is 
questioned  by  those  who  think  that  the  causal 
principle  cannot  be  applied  beyond  experience, 
or  who  think  that  our  knowledge  of  cause  and 
effect  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  such  infer¬ 
ences. 

“The  existence  of  any  being  can  only  be 
proved  by  arguments  from  its  cause  or  its  ef¬ 
fect,”  Hume  writes;  “and  these  arguments 
are  founded  entirely  on  experience.  ...  It  is 
only  experience  which  teaches  us  the  nature 
and  bounds  of  cause  and  effect,  and  enables  us 
to  infer  the  existence  of  one  object  from  that 
of  another.”  But  Hume  doubts  “whether  it  be 
possible  for  a  cause  to  be  known  only  by  its 


cflccl  ...  or  to  be  of  so  singular  and  particu¬ 
lar  a  nature  as  to  have  no  parallel  and  no  sim¬ 
ilarity  with  any  other  cause  or  object,  that  has 
ever  fallen  under  our  observation.  ...  If  ex¬ 
perience  and  observation  and  analogy  be,  in¬ 
deed,  the  only  guides  which  we  can  reasonably 
follow  in  inferences  of  this  nature,”  as  Hume 
thinks  is  the  case,  then  it  follows  that  “both 
the  effect  and  the  cause  must  bear  a  similarity 
and  resemblance  to  other  effects  and  causes 
which  we  know. 

“I  leave  it  to  your  own  reflection,”  he  adds, 
“to  pursue  the  consequences  of  this  principle.” 
One  seems  obvious  enough;  namely,  that  God 
— a  unique  and  unparalleled  cause — cannot  be 
proved  by  reasoning  from  our  experience  of 
effects  and  their  causes.  Hume  himself  draws 
this  conclusion  when  he  declares  that  theology, 
insofar  as  it  is  concerned  with  the  existence  of 
a  Deity,  has  “its  best  and  most  solid  founda¬ 
tion,”  not  in  reason  or  experience,  but  in  “faith 
and  divine  revelation.” 

Like  Hume,  Kant  thinks  that  our  notions 
of  cause  and  effect  cannot  be  applied  outside 
experience  or  to  anything  beyond  the  realm 
of  sensible  nature.  But  he  offers  an  additional 
reason  for  denying  validity  to  all  a  posteriori 
reasoning  concerning  God’s  existence.  “It  im¬ 
poses  upon  us,”  he  says,  “an  old  argument  in  a 
new  dress,  and  appeals  to  the  agreement  of  two 
witnesses,  the  one  with  the  credentials  of  pure 
reason,  and  the  other  with  those  of  empiricism; 
while,  in  fact,  it  is  only  the  former  who  has 
changed  his  dress  and  voice.” 

The  principle  of  the  argument  from  the  con¬ 
tingency  of  the  world  or  its  parts  Kant  states 
as  follows:  “If  something  exists,  an  absolutely 
necessary  being  must  likewise  exist.”  One 
premise  in  the  argument,  namely,  that  con¬ 
tingent  things  exist,  has  its  foundation  in  ex¬ 
perience  and  therefore  Kant  admits  that  the 
reasoning  “is  not  completely  a  priori  or  onto¬ 
logical.”  But  in  order  to  complete  the  proof,  he 
thinks  it  must  be  shown  that  an  ensrealissimum, 
or  most  perfect  being,  is  the  same  as  an  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary  being,  in  order  for  the  obtained 
conclusion  (a  necessary  being  exists)  to  be  trans¬ 
lated  into  the  conclusion  desired  ( God  exists). 

That  “anens  realissimum  must  possess  the  ad¬ 
ditional  attribute  of  absolute  necessity” — or, 
in  other  words,  that  a  perfect  being  is  identical 


556 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


with  one  which  necessarily  exists — is,  according 
to  Kant,  “exactly  what  was  maintained  in  the 
ontological  argument.”  Hence  he  maintains 
that  the  argument  from  contingency  is  invalid 
because  it  cannot  avoid  including  what  is  for 
Kant  the  invalid  premise  of  the  ontological 
argument  as  “the  real  ground  of  its  disguised 
and  illusory  reasoning.” 

The  controversy  concerning  the  proof  of 
God’s  existence  raises  issues  in  logic,  in  meta¬ 
physics  and  physics,  and  in  the  theory  of  knowl¬ 
edge.  Philosophers  are  opposed  on  the  ques¬ 
tion  whether  a  valid  demonstration  is  possible. 
Those  who  think  it  possible  differ  from  one 
another  on  the  way  in  which  the  proof  should 
be  constructed.  Those  who  think  it  impossi¬ 
ble  do  not  always  go  to  the  opposite  extreme 
of  making  the  affirmation  of  God’s  existence 
a  matter  of  faith;  or  of  denying  with  the  skep¬ 
tic  that  we  can  have  any  light  on  the  ques¬ 
tion  at  all.  Pascal  and  Kant,  for  example,  reject 
the  theoretic  arguments  as  inconclusive  or 
untenable,  but  they  do  not  think  the  problem 
is  totally  insoluble.  They  offer  instead  practical 
grounds  or  reasons  for  accepting  God’s  exist¬ 
ence. 

“The  metaphysical  proofs  of  God  are  so  re¬ 
mote  from  the  reasoning  of  men,”  Pascal  as¬ 
serts,  “and  so  complicated,  that  they  make 
little  impression.”  He  will  “not  undertake,”  he 
tells  us  in  his  Pensees ,  “to  prove  by  natural 
reasons  .  .  .  the  existence  of  God.”  In  his  view 
“there  are  only  three  kinds  of  persons:  those 
who  serve  God,  having  found  Him;  others  who 
are  occupied  in  seeking  Him,  not  having  found 
Him;  while  the  remainder  live  without  seeking 
Him,  and  without  having  found  Him.”  Since 
he  regards  the  first  as  “reasonable  and  happy,” 
the  last  as  “foolish  and  unhappy,”  he  addresses 
himself  to  the  middle  group  whom  he  regards 
as  “unhappy  and  reasonable.” 

He  asks  them  to  consider  whether  God  is  or 
is  not.  “Reason  can  decide  nothing  here,”  he 
says.  If  a  choice  is  to  be  made  by  reason,  it  must 
be  in  the  form  of  a  wager.  “Which  will  you 
choose  then?  Let  us  see.  Since  you  must  choose, 
let  us  see  which  interests  you  least.  You  have 
two  things  to  lose,  the  true  and  the  good;  and 
two  things  to  stake,  your  reason  and  your  will, 
your  knowledge  and  your  happiness;  and  your 


nature  has  two  things  to  shun,  error  and  misery. 
Your  reason  is  no  more  shocked  in  choosing  one 
rather  than  another,  since  you  must  of  necessity 
choose.  This  is  one  point  settled.  But  your 
happiness  ?  Let  us  weigh  the  gain  and  the  loss 
in  wagering  that  God  is.  Let  us  estimate  these 
two  chances.  If  you  gain,  you  gain  all,  if  you 
lose,  you  lose  nothing.  Wager  then,  without 
hesitation,  that  He  is.” 

We  are  incapable  of  knowing  either  that 
God  is  or  what  God  is,  according  to  Pascal,  be¬ 
cause  “if  there  is  a  God,  He  is  infinitely  incom¬ 
prehensible”  and  “has  no  affinity  to  us.”  Never¬ 
theless,  proceeding  on  the  practical  level  of  the 
wager,  reason  may  lead  to  Christian  faith,  yet 
not  in  such  a  way  as  to  give  adequate  reasons 
for  that  belief,  since  Christians  “profess  a  re¬ 
ligion  for  which  they  cannot  give  a  reason.” 

Kant  also  makes  the  affirmation  of  God  a 
matter  of  faith,  but  for  him  it  is  a  “purely 
rational  faith,  since  pure  reason  ...  is  the  sole 
source  from  which  it  springs.”  He  defines  a 
matter  of faith  as  any  object  which  cannot  be 
known  through  the  speculative  use  of  reason, 
but  which  “must  be  thought  a  priori ,  either  as 
consequences  or  as  grounds,  if  pure  practical 
reason  is  to  be  used  as  duty  commands  .  .  . 
Such  is  the  summum  bonumf  he  says,  “which 
has  to  be  realized  in  the  world  through  free¬ 
dom  .  .  .  This  effect  which  is  commanded, 
together  with  the  only  conditions  on  which  its 
possibility  is  conceivable  by  us ,  namely,  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  God  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul, 
are  matters  of  faith  and  are  of  all  objects  the  only 
ones  that  can  be  so  called.” 

For  Kant,  then,  the  existence  of  God  is  a 
“postulate  of  pure  practical  reason  ...  as  the 
necessary  condition  of  the  possibility  of  the 
summum  bonum .”  The  moral  law  commands 
us  to  seek  the  highest  good,  with  perfect  happi¬ 
ness  as  its  concomitant;  but  Kant  thinks  that 
“there  is  not  the  slightest  ground  in  the  moral 
law  for  a  necessary  connexion  between  morality 
and  proportionate  happiness  in  a  being  that 
belongs  to  the  world  as  a  part  of  it.”  Since  man  is 
a  part  of  the  world  or  nature,  and  dependent 
on  it,  “he  cannot  by  his  will  be  a  cause  of  this 
nature,  nor  by  his  own  power  make  it  thorough¬ 
ly  harmonize,  as  far  as  his  happiness  is  con¬ 
cerned,  with  his  practical  principles.”  The  only 
possible  solution  lies  in  “the  existence  of  a 


557 


Chapter  29:  GOI) 


cause  of  all  nature,  distinct  from  nature  itself, 
and  containing  the  principle  of  this  connexion, 
namely,  of  the  exact  harmony  of  happiness 
with  morality.”  That  is  why,  Kant  explains, 
“it  is  morally  necessary  to  assume  the  existence 
of  God.” 

In  the  tradition  of  the  great  books,  the  com¬ 
mon  ground  shared  by  reason  and  faith  is 
marked  by  the  convergence  of  the  contribu¬ 
tions  made  by  pagan,  Jew,  and  Christian — and 
by  poets,  philosophers,  and  theologians — to  the 
problem  of  God’s  existence  and  the  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  divine  nature,  the  essence  of  God 
and  His  attributes. 

Certain  attributes  of  God,  such  as  simplicity, 
immateriality,  eternity,  infinity,  perfection, 
and  glory,  are  usually  regarded  as  so  many  dif¬ 
ferent  ways  in  which  the  human  understanding 
apprehends  the  divine  nature  in  itself.  Other 
attributes,  such  as  the  divine  causality,  omni¬ 
potence,  omnipresence,  omniscience,  love,  jus¬ 
tice,  and  mercy,  are  usually  taken  as  ways  of 
considering  God’s  nature  in  relation  to  the 
world  or  to  creatures.  But  to  divide  the  at¬ 
tributes  in  this  way,  as  is  done  in  the  Outline 
of  Topics,  is  to  make  a  division  which  cannot 
be  fully  justified  except  in  terms  of  convenience 
for  our  understanding.  God’s  will,  for  example, 
no  less  than  God’s  intellect,  can  be  considered 
in  relation  to  Himself.  God’s  intellect,  no  less 
than  God’s  will,  can  have  the  world  for  its 
object.  So,  too,  the  divine  goodness  can  be  con¬ 
sidered  with  reference  to  things,  even  as  God’s 
love  can  be  considered  with  reference  to  Him¬ 
self. 

The  difficulties  we  meet  in  classifying  or 
ordering  the  attributes  of  God  confirm  the 
opinion  of  almost  all  theologians,  that  our 
understanding  is  inadequate  to  comprehend  the 
essence  of  God.  The  fact  that  we  employ  a 
multiplicity  of  attributes  to  represent  to  our¬ 
selves  what  in  itself  is  an  absolute  unity  is 
another  indication  of  the  same  point.  The  one 
attribute  of  simplicity  would  seem  to  deny  us 
the  right  to  name  others,  unless  we  take  the 
plurality  of  attributes  to  signify  something 
about  man’s  understanding  of  God  rather  than 
a  real  complexity  in  the  divine  nature. 

“He  that  will  attribute  to  God,”  Hobbes 
writes,  “nothing  but  what  is  warranted  by 


natural  reason,  must  cither  use  such  negative 
attributes,  as  infinite ,  eternal ,  incomprehensible ; 
or  superlatives,  as  most  high,  most  great ,  and  the 
like;  or  indefinite,  as  good,  just,  holy,  creator', 
and  in  such  sense,  as  if  he  meant  not  to  declare 
what  He  is  (for  that  were  to  circumscribe  Him 
within  the  limits  of  our  fancy),  but  how  much 
we  admire  Him,  and  how  ready  we  would  be 
to  obey  Him;  which  is  a  sign  of  humility  and  of 
a  will  to  honor  Him  as  much  as  we  can:  for 
there  is  but  one  name  to  signify  our  conception 
of  His  nature,  and  that  is,  I  AM:  and  but  one 
name  of  His  relation  to  us,  and  that  is  GOD;  in 
which  is  contained  Father,  King,  and  Lord.” 

Even  when  they  are  discussed  by  the  philos¬ 
ophers  and  reflected  on  by  the  poets,  certain 
matters  belong  especially  to  theology  because 
they  constitute  the  dogmas  of  religion — articles 
of  religious  faith  based  solely  on  divine  revela¬ 
tion,  not  discovered  by  human  inquiry  or 
speculation.  That  God  created  the  world  out 
of  nothing  and  of  His  free  will;  that  the  world 
had  a  beginning  and  will  have  an  end  are,  for 
example,  dogmas  of  traditional  Judaism  and 
Christianity.  Philosophers  may  argue  about 
the  freedom  or  necessity  of  the  creative  act,  or 
about  the  possibility  of  a  beginning  or  an  end 
to  time  and  the  world,  but  Jewish  and  Christian 
theologians  find  in  Sacred  Scripture  the  war¬ 
rant  for  believing  that  which  may  not  be  thor¬ 
oughly  intelligible  to  reason,  much  less  demon¬ 
strable  by  it.  What  is  true  of  creation  applies 
generally  to  the  religious  belief  in  divine  provi¬ 
dence  and  the  positive  commandments  of  God, 
to  the  gift  of  grace  which  God  bestows  upon 
men,  and  to  the  performance  of  miracles. 

Judaism  and  Christianity  share  certain 
dogmas,  though  the  degree  to  which  Jewish 
and  Christian  theologians  commonly  under¬ 
stand  what  is  apparently  the  same  dogma  varies 
from  great  similarity  of  interpretation  (as  in 
the  case  of  creation  and  providence)  to  differ¬ 
ences  so  great  (as,  for  example,  with  regard  to 
grace)  that  there  may  be  some  doubt  whether 
the  dogma  in  question  is  really  the  same.  The 
line  of  demarcation  between  these  faiths  would 
seem  to  be  more  easily  determined  than  their 
common  ground;  yet  even  here  such  matters 
as  the  resurrection  of  the  body — even  when  we 
take  differences  of  interpretation  into  account 
— may  be  regarded  as  a  dogma  shared  by  both. 


558 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


The  basic  differences  between  Jewish  and 
Christian  theology  center,  of  course,  on  the 
issue  between  a  Unitarian  and  a  trinitarian  con¬ 
ception  of  the  Godhead,  with  immediate  con¬ 
sequences  for  disbelief  or  belief  in  Christ  as  the 
incarnate  second  person  of  the  Trinity— the 
Word  become  flesh.  This  in  turn  has  conse¬ 
quences  for  doctrines  of  salvation,  and  of  the 
nature  and  mission  of  the  church,  its  rituals 
and  its  sacraments.  Even  within  Christianity, 
however,  there  have  been  and  still  are  serious 
doctrinal  differences  on  all  these  matters.  The 
most  fundamental  heresies  and  schisms  of  early 
Christianity  concerned  the  understanding  of 
the  Trinity  and  the  Incarnation.  The  great 
modern  schism  which  divided  Christendom 
arose  from  issues  about  the  sacraments,  the 
organization  and  practices  of  the  church,  and 
the  conditions  of  salvation. 

It  would  seem  to  be  just  as  easy  to  say  what 
beliefs  are  common  to  religious  Jews  and 
Christians,  as  to  articulate  the  faith  common 
to  all  sects  of  Christianity.  If  all  varieties  of 
Protestant  doctrine  are  included,  little  remains 
in  common  except  belief  in  the  God  of  Abra¬ 
ham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob — creator  and  provider, 
governor  and  judge,  dispenser  of  rewards  and 
punishments. 

One  book  stands  out  from  all  the  rest  be¬ 
cause,  in  our  tradition,  it  is — as  the  use  of 
“Bible”  for  its  proper  name  implies — the 
book  about  God  and  man.  For  those  who 
have  faith,  Holy  Writ  or  Sacred  Scripture  is 
the  revealed  Word  of  God.  Its  division  into 
Old  and  New  Testaments  represents  the  his¬ 
toric  relation  of  the  Jewish  and  Christian 
religions. 

Without  prejudice  to  the  issue  between  be¬ 
lief  and  unbelief,  or  between  Jewish  and  Chris¬ 


tian  faith,  we  have  attempted  to  organize  the 
references  to  specifically  religious  doctrines 
concerning  God  and  His  creatures  according 
to  their  origin  and  foundation  in  either  the 
Old  or  in  the  New  Testament,  or  in  both.  On 
certain  points,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  line 
of  distinction  can  be  clearly  drawn.  For  exam¬ 
ple,  the  doctrines  of  God’s  covenant  with  Is¬ 
rael,  of  the  Chosen  People,  of  the  Temple  and 
the  Torah,  are  indisputably  drawn  from  the 
Old  Testament;  and  from  the  New  Testament 
come  such  dogmas  as  those  concerning  Christ’s 
divinity  and  humanity,  the  Virgin  Birth,  the 
Church  as  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,  and  the 
seven  sacraments. 

Under  all  these  topics  we  have  assembled 
passages  from  the  Bible,  interpretations  of  them 
by  the  theologians,  and  materials  from  the 
great  books  of  poetry  and  history,  philosophy 
and  science.  Since  the  criterion  of  relevance 
here  is  the  reflection  of  sacred  or  religious 
doctrine  in  secular  literature,  the  writings  of 
pagan  antiquity  are  necessarily  excluded, 
though  they  are  included  in  the  more  philo¬ 
sophical  topics  of  theology,  such  as  the  existence 
and  nature  of  one  God. 

Despite  its  length,  this  chapter  by  no  means 
exhausts  the  discussion  of  God  in  the  great 
books.  The  long  list  of  Cross-References,  which 
follows  the  seventy- three  topics  comprising  the 
Reference  section  of  this  chapter,  indicates  the 
various  ways  in  which  the  idea  of  God  occurs 
in  the  topics  of  other  chapters.  The  reader  will 
find  that  list  useful  not  only  as  an  indication 
of  the  topics  in  other  chapters  which  elaborate 
on  or  extend  the  discussion  of  matters  treated 
here,  but  also  as  a  guide  to  other  Introductions 
in  which  he  is  likely  to  find  the  conception  of 
God  a  relevant  part  of  the  examination  of  some 
other  great  idea. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

i.  The  polytheistic  conception  of  the  supernatural  order  561 

1  a.  The  nature  and  existence  of  the  gods 

ib.  The  hierarchy  of  the  gods:  their  relation  to  one  another  562 

ic.  The  intervention  of  the  gods  in  the  affairs  of  men:  their  judgment  of  the  deserts 

of  men 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


559 


Page 

2.  The  existence  of  one  God 

2a.  The  revelation  of  one  God 

2 b.  The  evidences  and  proofs  of  God’s  existence  ^5^ 

2 c.  Criticisms  of  the  proofs  of  God’s  existence:  agnosticism 

2d.  The  postulation  of  God:  practical  grounds  for  belief  ^6^ 

3.  Man’s  relation  to  God  or  the  gods 

3a.  The  fear  of  God  or  the  gods 

lb.  The  reproach  or  defiance  of  God  or  the  gods 

y.  The  love  of  God  or  the  gods  ^55 

id.  Obedience  to  God  or  the  gods  ^7 

y.  The  worship  of  God  or  the  gods:  prayer,  propitiation,  sacrifice  568 

if.  The  imitation  of  God  or  the  gods:  the  divine  element  in  human  nature;  the 

deification  of  men;  man  as  the  image  of  God  569 

4.  The  divine  nature  in  itself:  the  divine  attributes  y0 

40.  The  identity  of  essence  and  existence  in  God:  the  necessity  of  a  being  whose 

essence  involves  its  existence  57  j 

4 b.  The  unity  and  simplicity  of  the  divine  nature 

y.  The  immateriality  of  God  ^y2 

4 d.  The  eternity  and  immutability  of  God 

y.  The  infinity  of  God:  the  freedom  of  an  infinite  being  573 

4 f  The  perfection  or  goodness  of  God 

4g.  The  intellect  of  God  574 

4 h.  The  happiness  and  glory  of  God 

5.  The  divine  nature  in  relation  to  the  world  or  creatures  575 

y.  God  as  first  and  as  exemplar  cause:  the  relation  of  divine  to  natural  causation 
5 b.  God  as  final  cause:  the  motion  of  all  things  toward  God  576 

y.  The  power  of  God:  the  divine  omnipotence  577 

5 d.  The  immanence  of  God:  the  divine  omnipresence  578 

y.  The  transcendence  of  God:  the  divine  aseity 

if.  God’s  knowledge:  the  divine  omniscience;  the  divine  ideas  379 

5 g.  God’s  will:  divine  choice  580 

5 h.  God’s  love:  the  diffusion  of  the  divine  goodness 

l i.  Divine  justice  and  mercy:  divine  rewards  and  punishments  581 

6.  Man’s  knowledge  of  God  583 

6a.  The  names  of  God:  the  metaphorical  and  symbolic  representations  of  God;  the 

anthropomorphic  conception  of  God  384 

6b.  Natural  knowledge:  the  use  of  analogies;  theevidencesofnature;  the  light  of  reason 


560 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


PAGE 

6c.  Supernatural  knowledge  585 

(1)  God  as  teacher:  inspiration  and  revelation 

(2)  The  light  of  faith  586 

(3)  Mystical  experience  587 

(4)  The  beatific  vision 

7.  Doctrines  common  to  the  Jewish,  Mohammedan,  and  Christian  conceptions  of  God 

and  His  relation  to  the  world  and  man  588 

ja.  Creation 

jb.  Providence 

7 c.  Divine  government  and  law  589 

7 d.  Grace  590 

7c.  Miracles  591 

2 f  The  Book  of  Life  592 

7 g.  The  resurrection  of  the  body 
7 h.  The  Last  Judgment  and  the  end  of  the  world 

8.  Specifically  Jewish  doctrines  concerning  God  and  His  people  593 

8 a.  The  Chosen  People:  Jew  and  gentile 

8 b.  God’s  Covenant  with  Israel:  circumcision  as  sign  of  the  Covenant 

8c.  The  Law:  its  observance  as  a  condition  of  righteousness  and  blessedness  594 

8 d.  The  Temple:  the  Ark  of  the  Torah 

8c.  The  messianic  hope  595 

9.  Specifically  Christian  dogmas  concerning  the  divine  nature  and  human  destiny 

9 a.  The  Trinity 

9 b.  The  Incarnation:  the  God-man  59 6 

(1)  The  divinity  of  Christ 

(2)  The  humanity  of  Christ  597 

(3)  Mary,  the  Mother  of  God 

9c.  Christ  the  Saviour  and  Redeemer:  the  doctrines  of  original  sin  and  salvation 
9 d.  The  Church:  the  mystical  body  of  Christ;  the  Apostolate  598 

9c.  The  sacraments  599 

9/  The  second  coming  of  Christ 

10.  The  denial  of  God  or  the  gods,  or  of  a  supernatural  order:  the  position  of  the  atheist 

11.  The  denial  of  God  as  completely  transcending  the  world  or  nature:  the  position  of 

the  pantheist  600 

12.  The  denial  of  a  revealed  and  providential  God:  the  position  of  the  deist 

13.  God  as  a  conception  invented  by  man:  its  emotional  basis 

14.  The  worship  of  false  gods:  deification  and  idolatry 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


561 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad,  hk  ii  [265  283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  Jam  Psychology  y  116a 119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  sideof  thepage,  theletters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163  b  164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  cii, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.y  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  arc  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g .,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiahy  7:45— (D)  II  Esdrasy  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Stvle;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  IdeaSy  consult  the  Preface. 


X.  The  polytheistic  conception  of  the  super¬ 
natural  order 

la.  The  nature  and  existence  of  the  gods 

4  Homer:  lliady  bk  v  [330-351]  33c-d;  [8 1 4— 
909]  38b-39a,c  /  Odyssey\  bk  viii  [266-366] 
224d-225d 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d  / 
Agamemnon  [158-183]  53d-54a 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [607-61 4]  120a 
/  Antigone  [780-792]  138a 

5  Euripides:  Helen  [1 137-1 150]  309a  /  Bacchan¬ 
tes  340a-352a,c  esp  [272-327]  342b-c  /  Heracles 
Mad  [815-874]  371d-372c;  [1302-1353]  376c-d 
/  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [354-391]  414a-b; 

[570-575] 416a 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d  esp  [263- 
428]  491a-493d,  [813-833]  498c-d,  [1462-1477] 
506c  /  Birds  542a-563d  esp  [684-736]  551b- 
552a,  [1492-1765]  560c-563d  /  Plutus  [87-93] 
630a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  lOa-lld;  31a-b; 
48c;  bk  ii,  58b-60d;  75a-b;  79d-80c;  86c; 
bk  hi,  95a-c;  bk  iv,  134a;  140c-d 

7  Plato:  CratyluSy  91c-d  /  PhaedruSy  124c-125b/ 
Symposiuniy  152b;  153b-c;  159d-161a;  163a- 
164c  /  EuthyphrOy  193a-c  /  Apology ,  204c- 
205c;  209a-b  /  Republic ,  bk  ii,  313d-314d; 


bk  11— hi,  320c-328a  /  Timaeus}  451d-452b; 
465d  /  Statesmany  587a-589c  /  LawSy  bk  vti, 
730a-d;  bk  x,  757d-769d;  bk  xii,  787d-788a 

8  Aristotle:  Heavensy  bk  i,  ch  3  [27obi-26] 
361c-362a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  375b,d-376a  /  Meta- 
physicSy  bk  iii,  ch  4  [ioooa8-i8]  518d-519a; 
bk  xii,  ch  8  [io74bi— 14]  604d-605a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethicsy  bk  x,  ch  8  [1  i78b8— 23] 
433b-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  23  [1397^2-14] 
645d;  [i398ai 5— 17]  646c;  [i398b27~28]  647b; 
tI399b5“ 8]  648a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  18  [1419*6—13] 
673d-674a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [646-651] 
23b;  [1090-1104]  29a;  bk  iii  [14-24]  30b;  bk 
v  [146-173]  63a-b;  [306-310]  65a;  [1 161-1193] 
76b-c;  bk  vi  [56-78]  81a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discoursesy  bk  i,  ch  3  108b-c; 
ch  12,  118d-119b;  bk  iii,  ch  13,  188b-189a; 
bk  iv,  ch  4,  227d-228a;  ch  ii,  240d-241a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditationsy  bk  ii,  sect  ii  258a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  140d  /  CoriolamiSy  191d- 
192b  /  Pelopidasy  239d-240c 

15  Tacitus:  Annalsy  bk  iii,  59d-60a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Enneady  tr  v,  ch  2-3  101c- 
102c;  ch  6  103b-104a;  ch  8-10  105a-106b  / 
Fifth  Enneady  tr  i,  ch  7,  212b-c;  tr  viii, 
ch  3,  241a;  ch  10  244c-245a  /  Sixth  Enneady 
tr  viii,  ch  1  342d-343c;  ch  3  344a-b 


562 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


( 1 .  The  polytheistic  conception  of  the  supernatural 
order .  la.  The  nature  and  existence  of  the 
gods.) 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  i-x  129a-322a,c 
passim,  esp  bk  vi,  ch  5-9  234d-241b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  ii, 
a  3,  rep  1  49a-c;  q  63,  a  7,  ans  331c-332b; 
q  115,  a  3,  rep  1  588c-589c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  79a-b;  79d-80a; 
81a-b 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  la-7b  /  Lycidas  27b- 
32a  /  Comus  33a-56b  /  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i 
[331-621]  100b-107a/  Samson  Agonistes  [896- 
902]  359a  /  Areopagitica ,  384b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  15  116c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xi,  div 
103-110,  498b-501b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  152a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  12b-c;  98a-c;345b- 
347a;  461b-c;  584a;  600d-601a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  226a-227a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  224a-b; 
237a-239c;  244c-245a;  251b-257c;  part  ii, 
263d-265c;  268b-271c;  part  iii,  290b-292a 

lb.  The  hierarchy  of  the  gods:  their  relation  to 
one  another 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  i  [493-611]  8a-9a,c;  bk  viii 
[1-52]  51a-c;  bk  xv  [184-217]  105d-106b;  bk 
xviii  [356-367]  133d;  bk  xix  [74-144]  137d- 
138c;  bk  xx  [1-160]  142a-143d  /  Odyssey ,  bk  i 
[1 1—79]  183a-d;  bk  v  [1—147]  208a-209c;  bk 
xiii  [125-158]  256b-d 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [22-28]  lb; 
[524-600]  7c-8d;  [882-894]  12b;  [1008-1073] 
13d-14a,c  /  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d  / 
Agamemnon  [158-183]  53d-54a  /  Eumenides 
81a-91d 

5  Euripides:  Heracles  Mad  [1302-1353]  376c-d 
/  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [1234-1283] 
422b-c 

5  Aristophanes:  Peace  [403-426]  530d  /  Birds 
542a-563d  esp  [684-736]  551b-552a,  [1195- 
1266]  557c-558b,  [1494-1693]  560c-562d  / 
Plutus  [111-146]  630b-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  21d-22a;  bk  ii, 
58a-60d;  79d-80c;  82d-83b;  bk  iv,  134a;  155c- 
156a;  bk  viii,  269a 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  91c-d  /  Phaedrus ,  124d-125a 
/  Symposium ,  152b;  153b-c;  159d-161a;  163a- 
164c  /  Euthyphro ,  193a-c  /  Timaeus ,  452b  / 

bk  iv,  683b;  bk  viii,  731d-732a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  iii,  ch  4  [iooo3#- 
18]  518d-519a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i252bi9~27] 
446a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  3,  108b;  ch 
14, 121a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [1-156]  103a-107a;  bk  x 
[1-117]  302a-305a;  [606-632]  318b-319b 


1£  /o  lc 

14  Plutarch:  Pelopidas ,  239d-240b  /  Pompey , 
525b 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  iv,  293b-294a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  9,  71b-c 
/  Third  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  6  103b- 104a  /  Fifth 
Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  7,  212b-c 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  17 
645d-646a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  22, 
a  3,  ans  130d-131c;  q  63,  a  7,  ans  331c-332b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxxi  46a-47c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  iii,  stanza 
1-7  54b-55b 

27  Shakespeare:  Tempest ,  act  iv,  sc  i  [60-133] 
542b-543a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  20b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [331-621]  100b- 
107a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  435b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  12b-d;  59c-60a* 
346b-d;  461b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  224a-b; 
228a-b;  252a-253c;  part  ii,  262b-c 

lc.  The  intervention  of  the  gods  in  the  affairs 
of  men:  their  judgment  of  the  deserts  of 
men 

4  Homer:  Iliad  3a-179d  esp  bk  i  [33-317]  3b- 
6b,  [493-611]  8a-9a,c,  bk  iv  [1-140]  24a-25b, 
bk  v  [3 1 1— 519]  33b-35c,  [71 1-909]  37b-39a,c, 
bk  viii  51a-56d,  bk  xiv-xv  98a-llld,  bk  xvi 
[431-461]  117a-b,  [843-867]  121c-d,  bk  xviii 
[356-367]  133d,  bk  xix  [74-144]  137d-138c,  bk 
xx-xxi  142a-154d,  bk  xxiv  [507-551]  176c- 
177a  /  Odyssey  183a-322d  esp  bk  ii  188a-192d, 
bk  ix  [16-38]  229a-b,  [67—81]  229d-230a,  bk 
xviii  [124-150]  285b-c,  bk  xx  296a-300a,c, 
bk  xxiv  [438-548]  321c-322d 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [79-175]  2a- 
3a;  [1008-1073]  13d-14a,c  /  Persians  [535-547] 
20d;  [738-842]  23a-24b  /  Seven  Against  Thebes 
27a-39a,c  esp  [790-801]  35d-36a  /  Prometheus 
Bound  40a-51d  esp  [227-243]  42c,  [436-502] 
44c-45a,  [564-891]  45d-49c  /  Agamemnon  52a- 
69d  esp  [355-475]  55d-57b,  [1200-1222]  64d- 
65a,  [1485-1488]  67d,  [1559-1570]  68c/  Cho - 
ephoroe  70a-80d  esp  [269-314]  72d-73a,  [1021- 
1076]  80a-d  /  Eumenides  81a-91d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  esp 
[1297-1415]  lllb-112b  /  Oedipus  at  Colonus 
114a-130a,c  esp  [229-253]  116b-c,  [939-1015] 
123a-d,[i448-i666]127b-129b/^/^owl31a- 
142d  esp  [100-162]  132a-c,  [1348-1353]  142d  / 
Ajax  143a-155a,c  esp  [394-459]  146c-147a, 
[733-783]  149b-d/£7^ra  156a-169a,cesp  [516— 
576]  160a-c  /  Trachiniae  170a-181a,c  esp  [94- 
140]  171a-b,  [247-306]  172b-d,  [1275-1278]  181c 
/  Philoctetes  182a-195a,c  esp  [169-200]  183d- 
184a,  [446-452]  186a,  [1408-1471]  194d-195a,c 

5  Euripides:  Rhesus  203a-211d  esp  [594-674] 
208b  209a,  [890-996]  210d-211d  /  Medea 
[1415— 1419]  224c  /  Hippolytus  225a-236d  esp 


1  c  to  2  a 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


[1-55]  225a-c,  [520-568]  229c  d,  [1202  1466] 
234d-236d  /  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  csp  [1-76] 
237a-238a,  [1159-1163]  247c  /  Heracleidae 
[750-1055]  254d  257a, c  /  Suppliants  258a- 
269a, c  esp  [113-283]  259a-260d,  [1183-1234] 
268c-269a,c  /  Trojan  Women  270a-281a,c  csp 
[1-97]  270a-271a,  [914-1032]  277d-278d  /  Ion 
282a-297d  esp  [1— 8 1  ]  282ad,[  429-451]  286b-c, 
[1470-1622]  296a  297d  /  Helen  298a  314a, c 
esp  [1-67]  298a-d,  [711-715]  304d-305a,  [1644- 
1692]  313d-314a,c  /  Andromache  [1225-1288] 
325c-326a,c  /  Electra  327a-339a,c  esp  [1233- 
1359]  338b-339a,c  /  Bacchantes  340a-352a,c  / 
Hecuba  [488-500]  357a  /  Heracles  Mad  365a- 
377d  esp  [1260-1390]  376a-377b  /  Phoenician 
Maidens  378a-393d  esp  [1-87]  378a-379a, 
[930-959]  386c,  [1758-1763]  393d  /  Orestes 
394a-410d  esp  [317-357]  397a  b,  [1625-1693] 
410b-d  /  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  411a-424d 
esp  [1-41]  411a-b,  [939-986]  419b-d,  [1435- 
1499]  424a-d  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d 
esp  [1185-1194]  435d-436a,  [1526-1629]  439a-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Peace  526a-541d  esp  [195-220] 
528b-c  /  Thesmophoriazusae  [655-687]  607c- 
608a  /  Plutus  629a-642d  esp  [86-92]  630a, 
[489-498]  634c-d,  [653-747]  637a-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  7b-10a  esp  9d-10a; 
20b-22a;  bk  ii,  54d-55a;  77a-b;  78d-79c;  bk 
hi,  98b-c;  bk  iv,  124d-125a;  144c-d;  150b- 
d;  151b-153d;  155b-c;  158d-159d  esp  159d; 
bk  vi,  190c-d;  198b-d;  199d-200a;  200c- 
201a;  201d-202c;  205c-d;  211b-d;  bk  vii, 
216d-217c  esp  217c;  218b-220a;  224d-225a; 
226d-227a;  239c-240d;  246b-247a;  250a-d; 
bk  viii,  262b-c;  266a-d;  269c-270a;  270c- 
271a;  274b-c;  276b-d;  279d-280a;  283d; 
284d-285a;  bk  ix,  302c;  308a-c;  309d-310a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,355b-c; 
378a-b;  bk  ii,  407a-b;  415d-416c;  bk  v, 
506b-c;  bk  vii,  559d-560a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  44a-45a  /  Symposium , 
152d-153b  /  Apology ,  211d  /  Republic ,  bk  ii, 
313b-314d;  322a-324c;  bk  vi,  378a-b;  bk  x, 
436c-437a;  437c-438c  /  Critias  478a-485d  / 
Statesman ,  587a-589c  /  Laws ,  bk  iv,  679a-b; 
681b-683b;  bk  ix,  757a;  bk  x,  765d-768d; 
bk  xii,  787d-788a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [io99b9-i8] 
345a;  bk  x,  ch  8  [1179*23-33]  434a  /  Rhetoric, 
bk  ii,  ch  5  [i383b3-8]  629d;  ch  17  [1391*30- 
b3]638d 

10  Hippocrates:  Sacred  Disease ,  154a-155d 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [1090- 
1104]  29a;  bk  v  [1194-1240]  76d-77b;  bk  vi 
[43-79]  80d-81b;  [379-422]  85b-d 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  12  118d-120b; 

ch  22,  128a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  8  146a-147c 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  17  255d- 
256d;  bk  11,  sect  3  257a-b;  bk  hi,  sect  ii 
262a-b;  bk  v,  sect  8  269d-270b;  bk  vi,  sect 
40-46  277d-278d;  bk  x,  sect  5  296d;  bk  xii, 
sect  5  307d-308a 


563 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid  103n  379a  csp  bk  i  [22  V  417] 
109a  114b,  [657  722]  121a  123a,  iik  ii  [162- 
200]  128b  129b,  [588-644]  140b  142a,  bk  hi 
[84-120]  149b  150b,  bk  iv  [90-128]  169b  170b, 
[174-278]  171b  174b,  bk  v  [604  699]  202b 
205b,  [779-871]  207b-210a,  bk  vi  [42  101] 
212a  213b,  bk  vii  [286-600]  243b  252b,  bk 
viii  [369-453]  269a-271a,  [608-741]  275a-278b. 
bk  ix  [1-24]  279a  b,  [77-122]  281a  282a, 
[648-664]  296a-297a,  bk  x  [1— i  i 7]  302a 
305a,  [606-688]  318b~321a,  bk  xi  [532-596] 
342b  344b,  [762-867]  349a=351b,  bk  xii  [i  44- 
160]  357b  358a,  [405-440]  365a-b,  [766-886] 
374b-377b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  27d-29c  /  Numa  Pom- 
piliuSy  50d-51c;  57b-58a /Solon,  68a/  Camillas, 
I04b-d;  107b-d  /  Fabius ,  142d-143b  /  Corio- 
lanus ,  185b-186a;  188d  191b  /  Aristides ,  268a- 
273c  /  Lysander ,  365a-366a  /  Sulla,  370c- 
371b  /  Lucullus,  404d-405a/  Alexander,  553b 
554b  /  Caesar ,  602c-604d  esp  604b-d  /  Pho¬ 
non ,  615b-d  /  Cato  the  Younger ,  639d  /  De¬ 
mosthenes,  698a-699a  /  Dion ,  781  d- 782a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  59d-60a;  bk  vi, 
91b-d;  bk  xvi,  179d;  183d  /  Histories,  bk  i, 
189d-190a;  bk  ii,  235a-c;  bk  iv,  284b;  292c- 
294a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  9,  71a  / 
Third  Ennead ,  tr  ii-iii  82c-97b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  22, 
a  3,  ans  130d-131c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xiv  [43-72] 
20a-b;  paradise,  iv  [49-63]  111b;  viii  [1— 12] 
116d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  i,  stanza 
30-35  5a-b;  bk  iii,  stanza  89  66a  /  Knight's 
Tale  174a-211a  esp  [1303-1333]  181b-182a, 
[2663-2699]  203b-204a,  [3099-3108]  211a  / 
Merchant's  Tale  [10,093-230]  335a-337a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  81b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear ,  act  iv,  sc  i  [33-39] 
269d;  [69-74]  270b;  sc  11  [38-50]  270d-271a; 
sc  vi  [35-40]  273d;  act  v,  sc  iii  [166-174] 
281a  /  Antony  and  Cleopatra ,  act  ii,  sc  i  [1-8] 
317d  /  Cymbeline ,  act  v,  sc  iv  [1-151]  481a- 
482c;  sc  v  [425-485]  488b-d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  435a-436a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [8582-8590]  209a; 
[8610-8637]  209b-210a 

2.  The  existence  of  one  God 

2 a.  The  revelation  of  one  God 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  17:1-14  /  Exodus ,  3 
esp  3:6,  3:14-16;  6:1-8;  19:9-20:6  esp  20:1-6; 
20:18-22  /  Deuteronomy ,  4:39;  5:1-10;  6  esp 
6:4-5;  32:i-47  esP  32:3^~43  /  J  Kings ,  8:22-62 
esp  8:23,  8:60— (D)  III  Kings,  8:22-62  esp 
8:23,  8:6o/I  Chronicles,  16:7-36— (D)  I  Para - 
lipomenon ,  16:7-36  /  Psalms ,  18  esp  18:30-32 
—(D)  Psalms,  17  esp  17:31-33  /  Isaiah ,  37:15- 
20;  43-45  passim,  esp  43:3,  43:10-13,  44:6, 


564 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  existence  of  one  God.  2a.  The  revelation 
of  one  God.) 

44:8,  44:24,  45:5-7,  45:i8>  45:21-22;  48:12 
—(D)  Isaias,  37:15-20;  43-45  passim,  esp  43:3, 

43:I0-I3>  44:6>  44:8>  44:,24-  45:5~7>  45:l8- 
45:21-22;  48:12  /  Jeremiah ,  10  esp  10:6, 
10:10— (D)  Jeremias,  10  esp  10:6,  10:10  / 
Daniel ,  6  esp  6:20,  6:26-27  /  Hosea,  13:4— 
( D )  Osee,  13:4  /  Joel ,  2:27  /  Zechariah ,  14:9 
—  (£))  Zacharias,  14:9  /  Mala  chi,  2:10 —(D) 
Malachias,  2:10 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  12:13  —  (D) 
OT,  Z?oo/(  0/  Wisdom,  12:13  /  Ecclesiasticus , 
1:8— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  1:8  /II  Macca¬ 
bees ,  1:24-29— (Z>)  OT,  II  Machabees,  1:24-29 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  23:9  /  Mar\,  12:28- 
34  /  John ,  1:1-2;  10:30;  17:3  / 

17:22-29  /  Romans ,  1:14-32  /  /  Corinthians , 
8:4-6;  12:4-6  /  Ephesians ,  4:5-6  /  /  Timothy , 
2:5-6;  4:10;  6:14-16  /  /  5:5-9 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  16  48c- 
49a  /  Cz>y  o/*  God,  bk  viii,  ch  ii,  272c  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  12  627c-d;  ch  32 
633c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  2,  rep  1  lld-12c;  q  11,  A3,  contrary  and 
rep  i  49a-c;  q  13,  a  ii,  contrary  73c-74b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  74, 
a  10,  rep  3  136c-137c;  q  102,  a  5,  rep  i  283c- 
292c;  part  11— 11,  q  1,  a  5,  rep  3  383b-384b; 
a  8,  ans  and  rep  i  387a-388c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xxiv  [115- 
147]  143d-144a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  38a;  41b-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [267-318] 
238a-239a;  bk  xii  [106-151]  321b-322b; 
[223-248]  324a-b  /  Samson  Agonistes  [472  -478] 
350a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  242-290  217b-225a;  428 
244b;  557  272b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  245d- 
247b  passim 

2&.  The  evidences  and  proofs  of  God’s  exist¬ 
ence 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  1:14-32  esp  1:18-21 

7  Plato:  bk  x,  758b-765c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  i  326a-327b; 
bk  viii,  ch  1-6  334a-346b;  ch  10  [267a2i-b27] 
354d-355d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  512b- 
513b;  bk  ix,  ch  8  575b-577a;  bk  xii,  ch  6-7 
601b-603b;  ch  8  [1074^3— bi]  604d;  ch  10 
[ 1 °75b35— 1 °76a5 ]  606d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  6  110c-112b; 
ch  12  118d-120b;  ch  16  121d-122d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  10  3b-c; 
bk  v,  par  1  27a-b;  bk  vii,  par  16-23  48c-50c; 
bk  x,  par  8-38  73b-81a;  bk  xi,  par  6  90c-d  / 
Cz>y  0/ bk  viii,  ch  6  268d-269c;  bk  x, 
ch  14  307c-308a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i, 
ch  8  626c-627a 


2£  to  2c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  2 
10c-14a  esp  a  3  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  4,  rep  2  16d- 
17c;  q  8  34c-38c;  q  11,  a  3  49a-c;  q  19,  a  5, 
rep  3  112d-113c;  q  44,  a  1,  rep  1  238b-239a; 
q  65  339a-343c  esp  a  i,  rep  3  339b-340b;  q 
75,  a  1,  rep  1  378b-379c;  q  79,  a  4,  ans  417a- 
418c;  q  104,  aa  1-2  534c-537b;  part  i-ii,  q  i, 
a  2  610b-611b 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [3003-3016]  209a- b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  78d-79a;  79d-80a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  38a;  41b-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv  51b-54b  / 
Meditations ,  7 Id- 7 2a;  111  81d-89a;  v  93a-96a  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  108a-115a,c  passim; 
120c-123a;  126b-127c;  def  viii  130d;  postu¬ 
late  v  131b-c;  axiom  i  131  d;  axiom  ix-x 
132b;  prop  i-iii  132b-133a;  137d-138a;  158b- 
162a;  168d-169a;  211c-212a;  213a-d;  217d- 
218a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  i  355a;  def 
3,6  355b;  prop  7  356c;  prop  ii  358b-359b; 
prop  14,  demonst  and  corol  1  359d-360a; 
prop  20,  demonst  and  corol  i  363d-364a 

32  Milton:  Psalm  136  8a-10a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  242-244  217b-218a;  469 
256a;  557  272b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi,  general  schol, 
369b-370a  /  Optics,  bk  hi,  528b-529a;  542a- 
543a  passim 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xvii, 
sect  17  172b-c;  sect  20,  173a;  bk  iv,  ch  x, 
sect  i-ii  349c -352a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  pref,  404a; 
sect  6-7  414b-c;  sect  25-33  417d-419a  esp 
sect  29-33  418c-419a;  sect  146-156  442a- 
444d  passim 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi  497b- 
503c  passim 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  187d-188a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  143a-b  [thesis];  177b- 
192d;  236b-240b  esp  239a-240b  /  Practical 
Reason,  353a-354d  /  Judgement,  593c-d;  607d- 
609b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  401a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  280 
94d-95a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3431-3468]  84a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  196b-d; 
217c-d 

2c.  Criticisms  of  the  proofs  of  God’s  existence: 
agnosticism 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, 
rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  2  lld-12c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  llOa-llla; 
112d-114c;  137d-138a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  242  217b-218a;  428  244b; 
543  L66a;  547-549  266b-267a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi  497b- 
503c  passim,  esp  div  115  503b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  33a-d;  143a-145c;  152a- 
153c;  177b-192d  esp  177b-179c,  190a-192d; 


Id  to  lb 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


200c  203d  esp  202a  203b:  205a  208d  csp 
208a- b;  218d-223d;  234c  240b  csp  239a  c; 
241d  242c  /  Practical  Reason ,  291a  292c;  348b 
349b;  351b  352c/  Intro.  M eta physic  of  Morals , 
384a, c  /  Judgement,  567b;  568c-570a;  588a 
613a, c  esp  588a-593d,  596c-599b,  600d  603d, 
607d-613a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  hi,  par  2S0 
94d-95a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man.  593c 
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
120d-121c;  bk  x,  292d  293a;  bk  xi,  337a- 

1  346a  esp  341c-342c 

2d.  The  postulation  of  God:  practical  grounds 
for  belief 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  184-241  205a-217b  esp  243, 
214b-216a;  425-427  243b-244b;  430  245a- 
247b:  436-438  251a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  236b -243c  esp  239a-240b, 
241d-242c  /  Practical  Reason ,  291a-292a; 
314c-d;  344c -349b  esp  345a-c;  351b-352c; 
353a-354d  /  Science  of  Right ,  432c-433a  / 
Judgement ,  588a- 60 7c  esp  593d-596c,  606d- 
607c;  608c-611d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
120b-121c;  bk  xi,  313c-314a 
53  James:  Psychology ,  653a 

3.  Man’s  relation  to  God  or  the  gods 

3 a.  The  fear  of  God  or  the  gods 

I  Old  Testament:  Leviticus ,  19:14,32;  25:17  / 
Deuteronomy ,  6:1-2,12-15;  8:6;  10:12-13,20- 
22;  31:10-13  /  Joshua ,  24:14-16— (D)  Josue, 
24:14-1 6  /  II  Samuel ,  23:3— (D)  //  Kings, 
23:3  /  Nehemiah ,  5:7-13  — (Z))  II  Esdras, 
5:7-13  /  Job ,  28:12-28  /  Psalms ,  2:10-12;  19:9; 
25:12-14;  34  esp  34:9-11;  hi  15,10;  1 12;  128  — 
(D)  Psalms ,  2:10-13;  *8:10;  24:12-14;  33  esp 
33:10-12;  110:5,10;  iii;  127  /  Proverbs ,  1:7, 
22-33*>  2:3”5i  8:13;  9:10;  10:27;  14:26-27; 
15:16,33;  16:6;  19:23;  22:4;  23:17-18;  24:21  / 
Ecclesiastes ,  5:2-7;  8:10-13;  12:13-14  /  Isaiah , 
8:11-14;  11:1-5;  33:6— (D)  Isaias,  8:11-14; 
11:1-5;  33:6  /  Jeremiah ,  2:19;  5:19-31  —  (D) 
Jeremias ,  2:19;  5:19-31  /  Jonah ,  1:1-16 — (D) 
Jonas,  1 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  1-2;  10:19-24;  15:1, 
13;  19:20-24;  23:18-28;  25:10-12;  34:13-17; 
40:26-27 — (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  1-2;  10:23- 
27;  i5:M3;  i9;i8-2i;  23:25-38;  25:13-16; 
34:14-20;  40:26-28 

New  Testament:  10:34-35  /  Colossians , 

3:22  /  /  /V&r,  2:17  /  Revelation ,  14:6-7— (D) 
Apocalypse ,  14:6-7 

4  Homer:  Odyssey ,  bk  v  [282-312]  210d-211a; 

bk  xvm  [124-150]  285b-c 
5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [419-500]  6a- 
7b  /  Agamemnon  [901-954]  61c-62b  /  Cho - 
ephoroe  [269-301]  72d-73a;  [885-1076]  78d- 
80d  /  Eumenides  [490-565]  86b-87a 


565 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [86  3  ^10]  107bc 
/  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [258  291]  116c  d;  [1448- 
1485]  127b  c/  Electra  [221-250]  157d  158a 

5  Euripides:  Orestes  [251-316]  396c  397a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  78d;  BKVi,211b-c; 
bk  vii,  216d  218a;  218c  220a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  400d 
401a 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  ix,  757a 

12  Lucretius:  Mature  of  Things,  bk  i  [62  158] 
ld-3a;  bk  iii  [1-93]  30a  31b;  [978-1023]  42d- 
43b;  bk  v  [1161-1240]  76b  77b;  bk  vi  [43-95] 
80d  81c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  iv  [259-282]  174a  b;  bk 
vii  [445-459]  248b-249a 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  123c-124a  /  Nicias, 

435b  d  /  Crassus,  445d-446b  /  Alexander , 
575a-576a  /  Phocion,  615b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  iv,  292c-294a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  2  27b-c  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  15  628b-c;  bk  ii, 
ch  7  638 d- 639c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica,  part  i-ii,  q  42, 
a  1,  ans  801c-802a;  a  3,  rep  i  802d-803c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  67, 
a  4,  rep  2  84d-85d;  q  68,  a  4,  rep  4  91b-92c; 
q  69,  a  3,  rep  3  98c-100c;  q  99,  a  6  250a-251a; 
part  11— 11,  q  7,  a  i  415c-416b;  q  19  465a-474d ; 
Q  22,  a  2  481d-482c;  q  25,  a  i,  rep  i  501b-502a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  iii  [100-136] 
5a-b;  purgatory,  xiii  [103-129]  73a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  79d-80a;  82b-c; 
90b-d 

29  Cervantes:  Dow  Quixote ,  part  ii,  267b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  xii  [561-566]  331b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  262  221a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  155-156 
444b-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
278b-c  /  Science  of  Right,  432c-433a  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  502d-503a;  504b-505a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  458a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  264c; 
part  iii,  304b 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  688a-b 

3&.  The  reproach  or  defiance  of  God  or  the 
gods 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  4:4-9;  1 1  :i- 9  /  Exodus, 
5;  7-12;  14:10-15;  16:1-30  /  Numbers ,  11;  14; 
20:1-13;  21:4-9  /  Deuteronomy,  1:26-46;  9  / 
Joshua,  22 —(D)  Josue,  22  /  /  Samuel,  12:14- 
15;  15:22-2 3— (D)  /  Kings,  12:14-15;  15:22- 
23  /  II  Kings,  19:22-23 —(D)  IV  Kings,  19:22- 
23  /  /oZ  /  Psalms,  2;  5:8-10;  22:1-2;  44;  74; 
79:12;  107:10-12 —(D)  Psalms,  2;  5:9-11; 
21:2-3;  43;  73;  78:12;  106:10-12  /  Proverbs, 
14:31;  17:5  /  Isaiah,  1:2-4;  3:8-9;  30-31;  36- 
37;  45:9;  48:1-9;  59:1-15;  63:10;  65:2-7— 
(D)  toai,  1:2-4;  3:8-9:  30-31;  36-37;  45:9; 
48:1-9;  59:1-15;  63:10;  65:2-7  /  Jeremiah  pas¬ 
sim— (D)  Jeremias  passim  /  Lamentations, 


566 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  Man's  relation  to  God  or  the  gods .  3b.  The 
reproach  or  defiance  of  God  or  the  gods.) 

1:18;  3:42  /  Eze\iel,  2:3;  5:5-8;  12-15;  J7J 
20;  22-23;  28  —  (D)  Ezechiel ,  2:3;  5:5-8; 
12-15;  17;  20;  22-23;  /  Hosea—(D)  Osee 

/  Jonah— (D)  Jonas 

Apocrypha:  Judith ,  5;  7:20-8:27 — (£>)  OT, 
Judith ,  5;  7:11-8:27  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon , 
12:12— (D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  12:12 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  27:46  /  Mar\,  15:34 
/  9:1-6;  11:17  /  Romans,  8:7;  9:19-21  / 

James,  4 :4 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  i  [1-120]  3a-4b;  [428-487] 
7c-8a;  bk  v  [431-549]  34c-35d;  bk  xxi  [114- 
148]  149b-c;  [200-382]  150b-152a  /  Odyssey, 
bk  ix  [475-535]  234a-d 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [151-175]  2d- 
3a;  [882-894]  12b  /  Persians  [679-842]  22a- 
24b  /  Agamemnon  [901-954]  61c-62b;  [1200- 
1222]  64d-65a 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [864-910]  107b-c 
/  Antigone  [988-1090]  139c-140b  /  ^70*  143a- 
155a, c  esp  [1— 133]  143a-144c,  [430-459]  146d- 
147a,  [748-783]  149c-d  /  Electra  [516-576] 
160a-c  /  Trachiniae  [1264-1278]  181c  /  Philoc - 
/*/«“  [446-452]  186a 

5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  225a-236d  esp  [1-55] 
225a-c  /  Heracleidae  248a-257a,c  /  Suppliants 
258a-269a,c  esp  [113-283]  259b-260d  /  Tro¬ 
yan  Women  [1-98]  270a-271a  /  /o/z  282a-297d 
esp  [429-451]  286b-c  /  Helen  [255-305] 
300c-d  /  Andromache  [994-1045]  323c-324a 
/  Bacchantes  340a-352a,c  /  Heracles  Mad 
365a-377d  esp  [339-347]  368a,  [750-760]  371c, 
[1258-1347]  376a-d  /  Iphigenia  Among  the 
Tauri  [570-575]  416a 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [263-428]  491a-493d; 
[813-833]  498c-d;  [1462-1477]  506c  /  Birds 
542a-563d  /  Thesmophoriazusae  [655-687] 
607c-608a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  20d-22a;  39a-b; 
bk  11,  77a-b;  bk  m,95a-c;  bkiv,  140c-d;  151b- 
152a;  bk  vii,  222c-d;  226d-227a;  bk  viii, 
283d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  400d- 
401a 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  ix,  757a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  6  110c-112b; 
ch  12  118d-120b;  ch  27,  132c-133a;  bk  iii,  ch 
22, 195c-d; 198a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [i-ii]  103a;  bk  xii  [500- 
508]  367b 

14  Plutarch:  Agesilaus ,  483a-b  /  Dion,  801  b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  iv,  292c-294a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  78, 
a  1,  contrary  152b-153b;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  2  175b-176a;  part  ii-ii,  qq  13-14  444b- 
452a;  part  iii,  q  64,  a  6,  ans  874d-875d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  iii  [100-136] 
5a-b;  xi  [16-90]  15b-16a;  xiv  [1-72]  19c-20b; 
xxv  [1-15]  36b-c;  xxxi  [82-96]  46d-47a 


3b  to  3c 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [1303-1333]  181b- 
182a  /  Monies  Tale  [14,149-188]  437a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  lOb-llb 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear,  act  iv,  sc  i  [30-37] 
269d 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [667-709]  354a- 
355a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  30a-34a;  123a-b; 
370b-371b;  380a-381a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
121d-127b  passim 

3 c.  The  love  of  God  or  the  gods 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:5-6  /  Deuteronomy, 
6:4-9;  7:9-11;  10:12-11:1;  11:13-25;  13:1-3; 
19:9;  30:6,15-20  /  Joshua ,  22:5;  23:11  —  (D) 
Josue,  22:5;  23:11  /  Psalms,  5:11-12;  18:1-2; 
31:23;  42:1-2;  63;  97:10;  116:1;  119:132; 
122:6;  145:20 —(D)  Psalms,  5:12-13;  17:2-3; 
30:24;  41:2-3;  62;  96:10;  114:1;  118:132; 
121:6;  144:20  /  Isaiah,  26:8-9;  56:6-7— (D) 
Isaias ,  26:8-9;  56:6-7  /  Jeremiah,  2:1-3— 
(D)  Jeremias,  2:1-3 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  13:12-18— (D)  OT,  Tobias, 
13:1 4-23  /  Ecclesiasticus ,  2 : 1 5-1 6 ;  1 3 : 1 4 ;  25 : 1 1- 
12 —(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  2:18-19;  13:18; 
25:14-16 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  10:37-38;  22:35-38 
/  Mar\,  12:28-33  /  Lube,  7137-4T’  10:25-27; 
11:42  /  John,  5:40-42;  8:42;  14:15-31;  16:26- 
27;  17:23-2 6;  21:15-17  /  Acts,  20:22-24;  21:7- 
15  /  Romans,  5:5;  8:28-39  /  I  Corinthians,  2:9; 
8:1-3;  13:1-14:1;  16:14,22  /  II  Corinthians, 
5:14-15  /  Ephesians,  1:3-6;  3:14-21;  6:24  /  II 
Thessalonians,  y.3/ 1  Timothy,  1:5  /  //  Timothy, 
1:13-14;  3:1-5  /  Jaines,  1:1252:5/  I  Peter,  1:7-8 
/  I  John,  2:5,15-17;  3:17;  47-5:3  /  //  John,  6  / 
/Wd3,  20-21 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  xiii  [217-351]  257b- 
258c  *  - 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  16,  158b-d; 
ch  22, 168d;  bk  iv,  ch  i,  219a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  13  258c 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  bk  i,  510a-b 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1050b; 
1080a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  5-6  2b-c; 
par  28  7d-8a;  bk  ii,  par  15  12b-c;  bk  iii,  par  15 
17a-b;  bk  iv,  par  15-19  23a-24b;  bk  v,  par  1-2 
27a-c;  bk  vii,  par  6  44d-45a;  par  23  50b-c;  bk 
viii,  par  9  55a-c;  bk  ix,  par  3  62a-b;  bk  x, 
par  8-40  73b-81c;  bk  xi,  par  1-4  89b-90b;  bk 
xii,  par  10  101c;  par  23  104b-c  /  City  of  God , 
bk  x,  ch  1  298b,d-299d;  ch  3  300b-301a;  bk 
xiv,  ch  28  397a-d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i, 
ch  3-5  625b-626a;  ch  10  627b;  ch  15  628b-c; 
ch  22-23  629b-630c;  ch  26-27  631b-d;  ch  29- 
30  632a-633b;  ch  33  633d-634b;  CH35  634c-d; 
ch  37-40  635b-636a,c;  bk  ii,  ch  7  638d-639c; 
ch  38,  654c;  ch  41  656a-c;  bk  iii,  ch  10-24 
661c-666d  passim 


3c  to  3d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a  i, 
rep  5  14b  l5b;  q  8,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  4  36b 
37c;  q  60,  a  5  313b-3I4c;  q  82,  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  3  433c-434c;  q  95,  a  4,  ans  509b  510a; 
part  i— 11,  Q  1,  a  8  615a-c;  q2,ai,  rep  3  615d 
616c;  q  26,  a  3,  rep  4  735c-736b;  q  28,  a  2, 
contrary  741a-742a;  a  4,  ans  742d  743c; 
q  35,  A  5,  REP  i  775d-777a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  65, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  74c-75a;  q  66,  a  6  80c  81b; 
q  68,  a  2,  ans  89c-90c;  a  8,  rep  2  95c-96c;  q 
69,  a  4,  ans  IOOc-IOIc;  q  70,  a  3,  ans  103b- 
104d;  q  73,  a  4,  rep  3  122b-123a;  a  5,  ans 
123a-d;  q  77,  a  4,  contrary  and  rep  i  148b- 
149a;  Q  78,  a  2,  rep  i  153b-154a;  q  84,  a  i, 
rep  i  174b-175a;  q  88,  a  2,  rep  i  194b-195b; 
a  6,  rep  2  198a-d;  q  89,  a  i,  rep  3  199a-c;  a  2, 
ans  199c-200d;  q  99,  a  1,  rep  2  245c-246b;  q 
100,  a  6,  rep  1  257c-258c;  a  10  262b-263b;  a 
11,  rep  1  263c-264d;  q  102,  a  i,  rep  i  270c- 
271b;  q  109,  A3  340c-341b;  partii-ii,  q  i,  a  i, 
rep  3  380b-381a;  a  3,  rep  i  381d-382c;  q  3, 
a  2,  rep  i  401a-d;  Q  7,  a  2  416b-d;  q  19,  a  4, 
rep  3  467c-468b;  a  12,  ans  473d-474d;  q  22, 
a  2,  ans  481d-482c;  qq  23-27  482c-527b;  q 
180,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  607d-608c;  a  2,  rep  i 
608c-609c;  a  7,  ans  614d-616a;  q  182,  a  2,  ans 
621d-623a;  a  4,  rep  i  623d-624d;  q  184,  a  2, 
ans  629d-630d;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  630d- 
632c;  a  7,  rep  2  636a-637a;  q  185,  a  2,  rep  i 
641c-643a;  a  4,  ans  644a-645c;  q  186,  a  2,  rep 
2  651d-652d;  a  7,  rep  2  658d-660a;  q  187,  a  2, 
ans  665a-666a;  q  188,  a  2,  ans  675d-677a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
81J  75d-76a;  xvn  [9i]-xvm  [75]  79b-80c; 
paradise,  1  [94-142]  107b-d;  in  109b-110c;  v 
[1-12]  112a-b;  vi  [112-126]  114d-115a;  xx  [94- 
138]  137d-138a;  xxi  [52-102]  138d-139b;  xxvi 
[1—8 1  ]  145d-146c;  xxxii  [i39]-xxxm  [145] 
156a-157d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  v,  stanza 
263-267  154b-155a  /  Second  Nun's  Tale  463b- 
471b  /  Parsons  Tale,  par  6,  497a;  par  21 
509a-b;  par  31  517b-518b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  240d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  210d-211a 

27  Shakespeare:  Henry  VIII ,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [435- 
457] 573c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  80b-81a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  iii,  88d-89a  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  227b-228a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  v,  prop  14-16  456b-c; 
prop  18-20  456d-458a;  prop  32-34  460b-d; 
prop  36-37  461a-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  xii  [561-566]  331b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  78b-80b  /  Pensees , 
430  245a-247b;  463  255a;  468  255b-256a; 
471  256a-b;  476  256b-257a;  479  237b;  482- 
483  258a-b;  485  258b;  487-489  258b-259a; 
491  259a;  544  266a;  821  331b-332a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  vii, 
sect  5-6  132c-d 


567 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  278b- 
279d  /  Practical  Reason ,  321b  329a  csp  326b- 
327a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  458a- b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1178  1185)  29b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  318b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xv,  631a-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  iii, 
54a  b;  bk  v,  127b  137c  passim;  bk  vi,  164d- 
165a;  bk  xi,  313c-314d 

3 d.  Obedience  to  God  or  the  gods 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:15-17;  3;  22:1-18  csp 
22:18;  26:4-5  /  Exodus ,  3:4-4:17;  24:1-8  / 
Deuteronomy ,  4-1 1  passim;  27-30  passim  / 
Joshua,  22;  24:1-28  — (D)  Josue,  22;  24:1-28  / 
/  Samuel,  12:14-15;  15  csp  15:22-23  — (D) 
/  Kings,  12:14-15;  15  esp  15:22-23  /  I  Kings, 
8:54-62 —(D)  ///  Kings,  8:54-62  /  I  Chronicles, 
28:9 —(D)  /  Paralipomenon,  28:9  /  Ezra ,  7:23 
—  (D)  I  Esdras,  7:23  /  Job  /  Ecclesiastes,  =>:i ; 
12:13— (D)  Ecclesiastes,  4:17;  12:13  /  Isaiah, 
1  .-19-20 —(D)  Isaias,  1 : 19-20  /  Jeremiah  passim, 
esp  3,  7,  11,  35,  42-44— (Dj  Jeremias  passim, 
esp  3,  7.  11,  35,  42-44  /  Daniel,  7:27  /  Micah , 
6:8— (D)  Micheas,  6:8 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:10;  7:21;  12:46-50; 
26:36-39  /  Mar\,  14:32-36  /  Lube,  22:40-45  / 
/oArc,  5:30;  18:10-11  /  /to;,  5:29-32;  21 :8-i 5  / 
Romans,  5:19/11  Corinthians,  10:5-6  /  Philip - 
pians,  2:1-18  esp  2:7-8  /  //  Thessalonians, 
1:7-9  /  Hebrews,  5:8-9;  11:8 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  i  [188-222]  5a-b 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [410-434]  6a-b 
/  Choephoroe  [269-301]  72d-73a;  [885-1076] 
78d-80d  /  Eumenides  [490-565]  86b-87a 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [863-910]  107b-c 
/  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [374-378]  134b,  [443- 
465]  134d-135a,  [1351— 1353]  142d/y4ytf*  [666- 
676]  148d  /  Electra  156a-169a,c  esp  [23-37] 
156b 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [513-563]  262d-263b  / 
Helen  [1644-1692]  313d-314a,c  /  Iphigenia 
Among  the  Tauri  [67-122]  41  ld-41 2  b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  39c-d;  bk  ii,  55a; 
bk  iv,  124d-125a;  126d-127a;  150b-d;  151b- 
152a;  bk  vi,  201d-202c;  bk  vii,  2l8c-220a; 
bk  ix,  308a-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bki,  355b-c; 
382c-d 

7  Plato:  Apology,  206b-d  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  681b- 
683b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  16-17, 158a- 
161a;  bk  iii,  ch  24,  204c-d;  208d-210a;  bk  iv, 
ch  1  213a-223d  passim,  esp  218b-219a;  ch  3 
224b-d;  ch  7,  234b;  ch  12,  242d-243c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  13  262c; 
bk  v,  sect  27  272d;  bk  vi,  sect  10  274b-c; 
bk  ix,  sect  1  291a-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iii  [84-120]  149b-150b;  bk 
iv  [259-282]  174a-b;  [356—361]  176b-177a 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  iv,  292c-294a 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


568 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  Man’s  relation  to  God  or  the  gods.  3 d.  Obedi¬ 
ence  to  God  or  the  gods.) 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b 
/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  15  628b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  19, 
a  5,  rep  2  705d-707a;  a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  707a- 
708a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  88, 
a  1,  rep  2  193a-194b;  q  96,  a  4  233a-d;  q  97, 
a  3,  rep  1  237b-238b;  part  ii-ii,  q  2,  a  9, 
ans  398c-399b;  q  4,  a  7,  rep  3  407d-409a;  q 
33,  a  7,  rep  5  556a-557d;  Q  186,  a  7,  rep  3 
658d-660a;  part  iii,  q  7,  a  3,  rep  2  747b-748a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  iii  [i]-v 
[87]  109b-113a;  vn  [19-120]  115b-116b 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Man  of  Law  [5240-5253] 
249b  /  Clerks  Tale  296a-318a  esp  [9018-9038] 
316b-317a  /  Tale  of  Melibeus ,  par  17  407b- 
408a  /  Parson’s  Tale ,  par  24  511a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  82b-d;  part  ii, 
137b-138b;  154b-155c;  159d-160a;  162a;  part 
iii,  199b-204a;  240a-241a;  244d-246a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  213a-215a;  233a-234a; 
238c-239c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [77- 
95]  120b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost  93a-333a  esp  bk  iv 
[41 1-439]  161b-162a,  [720-749]  168a-b,  bk  v 
[506-543]  186a-187a,  bk  vi  [164-188]  199b- 
200a,  bk  vii  [449-518]  227a-228b,  bk  viii 
[3“-333]  239a-b,  [630-643]  246a,  bk  ix  [366- 
375]  255b,  [647-654]  261b,  bk  x  [ioi3]-bk  xi 
[44]  296b-300a,  bk  xi  [133-161]  302a-b,  bk 
xii  [386-410]  327b-328a,  [561-566]  331b  / 
Samson  Agonistes  [373-419]  347b-348b  /  Are - 
opagitica ,  394b-395b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  460  254b;  476  256b-257a; 
482  258a;  489,491  259a;  531  264b;  539  265b 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  15d-16a;  16c  /  Civil  Gov¬ 
ernment,  ch  11,  sect  6  26b-c  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  1,  ch  11,  sect  5-6  105a-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2a-b; 
bk  xii,  85d-86a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  259b-260a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  321b-329a;  345c-d  / 
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383b,d-384a,c  / 
Judgement,  504b-505a;  509a-c;  593a-d;  611a-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  296b-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  394a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  30a-36b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iii,  64c- 
67a;  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim;  bk  vii,  177b-180a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  582a  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents ,  776b 

3e.  The  worship  of  God  or  the  gods:  prayer, 
propitiation,  sacrifice 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  4:3-7;  15:7-21;  22:1- 
18  /  Exodus  passim,  esp  12,  13:11-16,  15:1-21, 
23:18-19  /  Leviticus  passim,  esp  2,  4-7,  16-17, 
22:1-24:9,  27:1-34  /  Numbers,  5-8;  15;  18-19; 


3e 

28-30  /  Deuteronomy,  10-12;  14:22-17:1  / 
Joshua,  22:10-34— (D)  Josue,  22:10-34  /  I 
Samuel,  15  esp  15:22-23  — (D)  I  Kings,  15  esp 
15 :22-23  /  I  Kings,  8 ;  18 :2i~39— (D)  III  Kings, 
8;  18:21-39  /  II  Chronicles,  5-8;  29-31  — (D)  11 
Paralipomenon,  5-8;  29-31  /  Nehemiah,  10:29- 
39 —(D)  II  Esdras,  10:29-39  /  Psalms  /  Prov¬ 
erbs,  15:8;  21:3  /  Isaiah,  1:11-20;  58 —(D) 
Isaias ,  1:11-20;  58  /  Lamentations ,  5  /  Ezekiel, 
43:18-27;  45:13-46:24— (D)  Ezechiel,  43:18- 
27;  45:13-46:24  /  6  esp  6:6;  8— (D) 

6  esp  6:6;  8  /  Joel,  2:12-18  /  Amos,  4  / 
Micah,  6:6-8— (D)  Micheas,  6:6-8  /  Malachi, 
1:6-14— (D)  Malachias,  1:6-14 
Apocrypha:  Tobit,  13 —(D)  OT,  Tobias,  13  / 
Rest  of  Esther ,  13:12-14— (D)  OT,  Esther, 
13:12-14  /  Ecclesiasticus,  18:22-23;  35— (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  18:22-23;  35 
New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:1—18;  9:9-13; 
26:36-44  /  Mar\,  9:14-29  esp  9:29;  12:32-33 
—(D)  Mar\,  9:13-28  esp  9:28;  12:32-33  / 
Lufye,  11:1-13;  18:1-14  /  J°hn,  17  /  Colossians, 
4:2-4  /  /  Thessalonians,  5:17  /  Hebrews,  10:1- 
22;  13:15-16  /  Revelation ,  5 —(D)  Apocalypse,  5 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  i  [428-487]  7c-8a;  bk  ii 
[394—431]  14a-b;  bk  ix  [485-526]  62a-b  / 
Odyssey,  bk  iii  [1-68]  193a-d 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [1-175]  la-3a; 
[525-600]  7c-8d;  [1018-1073]  13d-14a,c  / 

Against  Thebes  [80-320]  28a-30d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [151-215]  100c- 
101a;  [863-910]  107 b-c  /  Oedipus  at  Colonus 
[465-509]  118b-d  /  Electra  [516-576]  160a-c  / 
Philoctetes  [1440-1444]  195a, c 

5  Euripides:  Trojan  Women  [1277-1283]  280d 
/  Bacchantes  340a-352a,c  esp  [200-209]  341c, 
[337-433]  342c-343b  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a- 
439d 

5  Aristophanes:  Peace  [173-195]  528a;  [922- 
1126]  536c-539a  /  Birds  542a-563d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  6a;  lOa-lld;  20d- 
22a;  31a-c;  40d-41b;  48c;  bk  ii,  57b-60a; 
79a-c;  86c;  bk  iii,  95a-c;  bk  iv,  126d-127a; 
134a;  140c-d;  142b-c;  155c-156a;  156d-157a; 
bk  v,  175d-176a;  bk  vi,  196d-197a;  199d- 
200a;  200d;  205c-d;  bk  vii,  226c;  235a; 
248b-c;  250b-d;  bk  viii,  267a;  270b-c;  282b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
407a-b;  bk  vi,  517d-518a 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  127c- 128a  /  Symposium, 
156d-157a  /  Euthyphro ,  197d-198c  /  Phaedo, 
251  d  /  Republic,  bk  i,  295a-d;  297a-b;  bk 
ii,  313d-314d;  bk  iv,  345d-346a  /  Timaeus, 
447a  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  683a-b;  bk  vii,  721a-c; 
bk  viii,  731d-732d;  bk  x,  768d-769c;  bk 
xii,  791d-792a 

8  Aristotle:  .Topics,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [io5a2-6]  148c 
/  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  1  [268ai2-i5]  359a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  12  347a-b;  bk  iv, 
ch  2  [1122^18—23]  369c;  bk  viii,  ch  9  [n6oai9- 
29]  41 2 b-c  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  9  [1329^6-34] 
533d 


3e  to  3/ 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  i  [1-43) 
la  d;  [80-101]  2a  b;  bk  ii  [589-660]  22c  23b; 
bk  hi  [41-58]  30c  d;  bk  v  [1194- 1240]  76d- 
77b;  bk  vi  [68-79]  81a  b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  cii  16  I21d- 
122d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  7  269d; 
bk  ix,  sect  40  295b;  bk  xii,  sect  14  308c 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues ,  v  [62-80]  18a  b  /  Aeneid 
103a-379a  passim,  esp  bk  ii  [108-125]  127a  b, 
bk  iii  [84-120]  149bl50b,  [543-550]  162a,  bk 
iv  [54-67]  168b-169a,  [198-221]  172bl73a, 
bk  vi  [42-76]  212a-213a,  bk  viii  [558-584] 
274ab,  bk  ix  [621-631]  295b-296a,  bk  xi 
[7S3-798]  349b 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus  lal5a,c  passim  /  Numa 
Pompilius  49a-61d  esp  56d-57b  /  Cainillus, 
104b-d;  107b-d  /  Fahius ,  142d-143b  /  Corio - 
lanusy  185bl86a  /  Aemilius  Paulus ,  214b  d  / 
Pelopidasy  239d-240c  /  Marcellus,  247c-249d  / 
LuculluSy  404d-405a  /  Agesilaus,  483a-b  / 
Alexander ,  541a-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  59d-60c;  bk  xii, 
112d-113a  /  Histories ,  bk  ii,  214d-215a;  bk  iv, 
282d-283b;  292c-294a;  bk  v,  296a 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1009a; 
1011a;  1050b;  1080a-b;  1085b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1  la-b; 
bk  xiii,  par  1  llOd'll la  /  City  of  God,  bk  vii, 
ch  27-31  259c-262a;  bk  x  298b,d-322a,c  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  6  626a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  Q30, 
a  1,  rep  1  749a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  TJieologicay  part  i-ii,  q  99, 
a  3  247a-248a;  a  4,  rep  2  248a-d;  qq  101-103 
265d-304a;  part  ii-ii,  q  30,  a  4,  rep  i  536a-d; 
q  32,  a  2,  ans  541a-542c;  qq  179-189  606a- 
700d  esp  q  18 1 ,  a  3,  rep  3  618c-619b,  q  182, 
a  2,  rep  3  621d-623a,  Q  186,  a  4,  ans  655c- 
656b,  a  5,  rep  5  656c-657d,  a  6,  rep  2  657d- 
658d,  q  188,  a  1,  rep  1  674d'675d;  part  iii, 
qq  21-22  823d-833a;  q  25  839c-845a;  q  60,  a 
5,  ans  850b-851b;  q  62,  a  5,  ans  862b-863a; 
q  63,  a  2,  ans  865c'866c;  a  4,  rep  1,3  867d- 
868b;  a  5,  ans  868c-869b;  a  6,  ans  869b- 
870b;  part  iii  suppl,  qq  71-72  900d-922b; 
q  99,  a  3,  rep  2  1081d-1083a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  iii  [133— 
145]  57b-c;  iv  [127-135]  58d;  vi  [25-48]  61a-b; 
xi  [1-36]  68d-69a;  paradise,  v  [13-84]  112b- 
113a;  xiv  [67-108]  127c-128a;  xx  [31—138] 
137a-138a  passim;  xxxm  [1-45]  156b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressiday  bk  v,  stanza 
263-267  154b-155a  /  Knight's  Tale  [2209-2437] 
196b-200a  /  Summoner's  Tale  [7455-7529] 
288a-289a/  Franklin's  Tale  [11,176-206]  353b- 
354a;  [11,340-398]  356b-357a  /  Prioress's  Tale 
391a-395b  /  Parson's  Taley  par  93-94  547b- 
548a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  80c;  81c-d;  part 
ii,  154d-155a;  161b-163d;  part  iii,  182d-183b; 
part  iv,  261a-c 


569 

24  Rabelais:  Cargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
117c  ll8a;  bk  iv,  265b  c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  91b  c;  152b  156d; 

246b  d;  300c  d 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  iv,  sc  viii  [96- 
1 }i]  561c  d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hcmlety  act  iii,  sc  iii  [36-96] 
53d  54b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix,  369b  371d 
passim 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [185-197]  139b; 
bk  iv  [720-735] 168a-b;  bk  v  [136-208]  178a- 
179b;  bk  vii  [550-640)  229a-231a;  bk  x  [1086]— 
bk  xi  [71]  298a-300b  /  Areopagiticay  402a  b 

33  Pascal:  Penseesy  431  247b;  476  256b-257a; 
487-489  258b-259a;  491  259a;  499  260b;  504 
261a;  513-514  262a-263a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  3b-5c;  10c-15a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div  41, 
468ab 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  187d-188a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xxv, 
209a  b;  209d-210a;  211a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  437a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  59c-60a;  81d-82a; 
93b  c;  98a;  121a  b;  180d-182c  esp  181b-c; 
184d-185d;  208a-211a  passim,  esp  209a;  327d- 
328b;  349c-350b;  356d-358a;  457b,d-467d 
passim;  547a-b;  583d-584b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  llOb-c;  195a-198d; 
207a-208c;  226a-228a;  232c-233c 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  504b-505a;  509a-c 

43  Mill:  IJbertyy  307d-309a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  52c-53a;  394a;  481d-482d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  224a- 

225a;  227c-228a';  234d-235c;  245b-247b; 

253c-254b;  part  iii,  291d-292b;  part  iv, 
322a-c 

47  Goethe:  Fausty  part  i  [3587-3619]  87b-88a; 
part  ii  [8568-8603]  208b'209b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\y  30a-36b;  39a-b; 
130b-131a;  370b-371b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  iii,  122b-c;  bk 
vii,  281d-282a;  bk  viii,  323b;  bk  ix,  373b- 
377b;  bk  x,  435c-436c;  bk  xii,  544b-545a; 
553c-554a;  bk  xiii,  585b-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
127b-137c  passim;  bk  vi,  164d-165a;  167b-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  203a-204b 

3/.  The  imitation  of  God  or  the  gods:  the  divine 
element  in  human  nature;  the  deification 
of  men;  man  as  the  image  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1:26-27;  3  esP  3:4-5> 
3:22;  5:1-2;  9:6  /  Exodus ,  7:1  /  I^eviticuSy 
11:44-45;  19:2;  20:7-8  /  Psalms ,  82:6  7 — ( D ) 
Psalms,  81:6-7  /  Isaiah,  40:10-31;  42:8;  46— 
(D)  Isaias,  40:10-31;  42:8;  46  /  Ezekiel,  16:17— 
19;  28:1-19— (D)  Ezechiel ,  16:17-19;  28:1-19 
/  Daniel ,  6:7-9 

Apocrypha:  Judith ,  3:8;  5:23-6:4— (D)  OT,  Ju¬ 
dith ,  3:12-13;  5:27-6:4  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon, 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


570 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  Man's  relation  to  God  or  the  gods .  3/.  The 
imitation  of  God  or  the  gods:  the  divine 
element  in  human  nature;  the  deification 
of  men;  man  as  the  image  of  God.) 

2:23;  13-15 — (D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  2:23; 
13-15  /  Ecclesiasticus ,  17*1-3 — (D)  OT,  Eccle - 
siasticus ,  17:1-3 

New  Testament:  John ,  10:34-35  /  Acts,  12:21- 
23;  14:7-18;  17:27-29;  28:3-6  /  Romans,  1:14- 
32  /  /  Corinthians ,  11:7;  15:49  /  II  Corinthians, 
3:18  /  Colossians,  3:8-10  /  II  Thessalonians , 
2:3-4  /  James>  3:9  /  /  fear,  1:15-16  /  II  Peter, 
1 13-4 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  7a-b;  12d-13b; 
14a-d;  bk  ii,  79d-80a;  bk  iv,  140c-141a;  bk  v, 
168d-169a;  183d-184a;  bk  vii,  217c;  235b-c 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  127c-128a  /  Ion,  144b-145c 
/  Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320c-328a  /  Timaeus, 
452c-d;466a-b;476a-b/  Theaetetus,  530b-531a 
/  haws,  bk  iv,  681b-683b:  bk  v,  686d-687c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982^8- 
983an]  501a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72bi4~29] 
602d-603a;  ch  9  605a-d  /  Sow/,  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[4i5a22-b8]  645c- d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  9  [1099^-18] 
345a;  ch  12  347a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [ii45ai5-33] 
395a-b;  bk  x,  ch  8  [1  i78b8— 27]  433b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1-54] 
61a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  3  108b-c;  ch 
6  110c-112b;  ch  9  114c-116b;  ch  13-14  120b- 
121c;  ch  17  122d-124a  esp  123d;  bk  ii,  ch  7-8 
145b-147c;  ch  14,  153d-154c;  bk  hi,  ch  13, 
188b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  240d-241a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
sect  13  258c;  bk  iii,  sect  12-13  262b-c;  bk 
v,  sect  27  272d;  bk  xii,  sect  2-3  307b-d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [283-290]  llOb-llla; 
[586-593]  119a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  27d-29c  /  Numa  Pom - 
pilius,  50d-51c;  52b-53c  /  Alexander,  541a- 
542a;  553b-554b  /  Dion,  7S4d-785a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  4c-d;  bk  iv,  73b-d; 
80c-d  /  Histories,  bk  iv,  285d-286a;  287b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  849a-b  /  Harmonies 
of  the  World,  1038a;  1048a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  ii  6b-10a  /  Second 
Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  15  74d-75b  /  Fourth  Ennead, 
TR  III,  ch  12,  148d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  14  12a-b; 
bk  iv,  par  26  25c-d;  par  31  26c-27a;  bk  vi, 
par  4  36a-b;  bk  xiii,  par  32  119a-b  /  City  of 
God ,  bk  viii,  ch  8  270a-d;  bk  xi,  ch  26-28 
336d-338d;  bk  xii,  ch  23  357d-358a  /  Chris¬ 
tian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  22  629b-630a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
1,  rep  2  14b-15b;  q  14,  a  2,  rep  3  76d-77d; 
q  26,  a  4  I51c-152a,c;  q  27,  a  i,  ans  153b- 
154b;  q  59,  a  1,  contrary  306c-307b;  q  72, 
a  1,  rep  3  368b-369d;  q  77,  a  2,  ans  and  rep 
1  401b-d;  Q  88,  a  3,  rep  3  472c-473a;  q  91,  a 


3/  to  4 

4,  rep  1-2  487d-488c;  q  92,  a  2,  ans  489d- 
490c;  q  93  492a-501c;  q  106,  a  i,  rep  3  545d- 
546d;  part  1— 11,  q  1,  a  8,  615a-c;  q  2,  a  4,  rep 
1  618a-d;  q  3,  a  5,  rep  i  626b-627a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  55, 
a  2,  rep  3  27a-d;  q  87,  a  8,  rep  2  191d-192d; 
Q  93,  a  3  217b-218a;  a  6,  ans  219d-220d;  q 
no,  a  4,  ans  350d-351d;  part  ii-ii,  q  2,  a  9, 
rep  3  398c-399b;  q  10,  a  ii,  ans  435d-436b; 
q  19,  a  3,  rep  1  466d-467c;  q  31,  a  3,  rep  2 
538b-539c;  part  iii,  q  4,  a  i,  rep  2  730d- 
731d;  PART  III  SUPPL,  Q  71,  A  12,  CONTRARY 
914c-915c;  q  75,  a  i,  rep  4  935b-937a;  q  91, 
A  2,  CONTRARY  1017c-1020c;  Q  92,  A  3,  REP  9 
1034b-1037c;  q  93,  a  i,  rep  i  1037d-1039a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi  [85- 
90]  77d;  xxv  [58-78]  92a;  paradise,  v  [19— 
24]  112b;  vii  [64-84]  115d-116a;  xiii  [52-78] 
126a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Franklin's  Tale  [11,189-192]  353b- 
354a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  82b-c;  part  iv, 
263a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  215a;  233b-234a;  248a-c; 
256c-d;  294a-b:  541d-543a,c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [314-322] 
43d;  act  iv,  sc  iv  [33-66]  59a-c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  428b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  41b-d;  80b- 
81a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  214a-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [345-353]  118b- 
119a;  bk  vii  [150-173]  220b-221a;  [519-528] 
228b;  bk  xi  [466-522]  309b-310b  /  Areopa - 
gitica,  384a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  430-431  245a-247b;  434-435 
248a-251a;  485  258b;  537  265b;  555  270a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  6  26b-c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  187d-188a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  12b-c;  28b-d; 
547a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  136b;  379b-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  90, 
130d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  168b-d; 
part  1,  224a-228a;  234d-235c;  245a;  part  ii, 
266d-267a;  268b-271c  esp  270c-271c;  part  iii, 
306a-d;  308a-b;  part  iv,  339b-d;  349c-350c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [614-736]  17a-19b; 
[1566-1569]  38a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  84b-85a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  525c-526b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
121d-122c;  bk  xi,  313c-314d;  345a-c 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  692a-693a  esp  693a 
/  Civilization  and.  Its  Discontents,  7 78 d- 7  79a; 
790d 

4.  The  divine  nature  in  itself:  the  divine  attri¬ 
butes 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  126a  /  Symposium,  167b-d 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  ch  8  [ii78b8-23] 
433b-c 


4a  to  4 b  Chapter  29:  GOD 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  uk  ii,  ch  8,  146a;  hk 


iii,  ch  13,  188b  c 

17  Plotinus :  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  i-vi  208a  237d  pas¬ 
sim  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii-ix  321b  360d  passim 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  4  2a;  bk 

iv,  par  29  26b;  bk  vii,  par  1-8,  43b  45d  /  City 
of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  6  268d-269c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  qq  3-1  i 
14a-50b;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  442b-443c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xxxiii 
[76-145]  157a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  162a-163b;  part 
iv,  271b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  52b-d  / 
Meditations ,  in  81d-89a  /  Objections  and  Re¬ 
plies,  prop  hi  132d-133a;  211c-212a;  232b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i  355a-372d  esp  def  4,6 
355b,  prop  5  356b,  prop  8-13  356d-359d, 
prop  14,  corol  2— prop  15  360a-361d,  prop 
19-20  363c-364a;  part  ii,  prop  1-2  373d-374a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
369b-371a  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  542a-543a 

35  Locke:  Human  Utiderstandmg,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  15  116c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  xvii,  sect  i  167d- 
168a;  ch  xxiii,  sect  33-35  212d-213c;  bk  iii, 
ch  vi,  sect  11-12  271b-272b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  146 
442a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  229c-230b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  187a-c;  190c;  236b-240b 
esp  239a-c  /  Practical  Reason,  303b-304a; 
325d-326a;  344b-c;  345a-c;  347d-348b;  350c- 
351a;  352a-c  /  Judgement,  592a-c;  608c-611d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  161 
143a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  196b-d 

4a.  The  identity  of  essence  and  existence  in 
God:  the  necessity  of  a  being  whose 
essence  involves  its  existence 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  3:13-14 
8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72b 
4-14]  602c-d 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  E?mead,  tr  viii,  ch  14  349d- 
350c;  ch  18-21  351d-353d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  23,  50c  / 
City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  ii,  272c  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  32  633 c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
ans  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  4  16d-17c;  a  7,  ans  and 
rep  i  19a-c;  q  4,  a  1,  rep  3  20d-21b;  a  2,  ans 
and  rep  3  21b-22b;  a  3,  rep  3  22b-23b;  q  6, 
a  3  29c-30b;  q  8,  a  1,  ans  34d-35c;  q  10,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  3  41d-42c;  q  ii,  a  4,  ans  49d- 
50b;  q  13,  a  11,  ans  73c-74b;  q  14,  a  13,  rep 
1  86d-88c;  q  19,  a  3,  rep  6  llOb-lllc;  Q  44, 
a  1,  ans  238b-239a;  q  50,  a  2,  rep  3  270a- 
272a;  q  54,  a  i,  ans  285a-d;  a  3,  rep  2  286c- 
287b;  q  75,  a  5,  rep  4  382a-383b;  part  i-ii, 
q  3,  a  7,  ans  628a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  3, 
a  2,  rep  3  724a-c 


571 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii  81d  89a;  v  93a 
96a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  110a  112a;  11 2d 
114c;  126b-127c;  postulate  v  131b  c;  axiom 
1  13 1  d ;  axiom  x  132b;  prop  i  132b  c;  158b- 
162a;  217d  218a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  i  355a;  def  6-8 
355b  c;  prop  6-8  356b  357d;  prop  ii  358b- 
359b;  prop  20  363d  364a;  prop  24  365a; 
prop  34  369a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  469  256a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  143a-145c;  153a;  177b 
192d  esp  177b  179c,  187a-c,  192c  d;  205a  b; 
239a-c  /  Practical  Reason,  344c-355d  esp  353a- 
354d  /  Judgement,  570b-571c;  606d  609b  esp 
608b-609a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  280, 
95a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  305c- 
306c 

4b.  The  unity  and  simplicity  of  the  divine  nature 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  viii,  ch  10  353b~355d 
/  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1073*2-11]  603a-b; 
ch  8  [1074*32-39]  604d;  ch  9  [1075*5-11] 
605c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  14  [1 154^*20—3 1  ] 
406c 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ix  353d-360d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  10  3b-c; 
par  12  4a;  bk  iv,  par  24  25b-c;  par  29  26b;  bk 
vii,  par  2  43c-44a;  par  16  48c-49a;  par  21  49d- 
50a;  bk  xiii,  par  4  111c;  par  19  115c-d  /  City 
of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  6  268d-269c;  ch  ii,  272c; 
bk  xi,  ch  10  327d-328d  /  Christian  Doctrine, 
bk  1,  ch  5  625d-626a;  ch  32  633c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3 
14a-20c;  q  4,  a  2,  rep  1-2  21b-22b;  a  3  22b- 
23b;  q  6,  a  3  29c-30b;  q  7,  a  2  31d-32c;  q  8, 
a  2,  rep  2-3  35c-36b;  a  4  37c-38c;  q  ii  46d- 
50b;  q  13,  a  1,  rep  2-3  62c-63c;  a  4,  rep  3 
65c-66b;  q  14,  a  i,  rep  2  75d-76c;  a  4  78b- 
79a;  q  26,  a  i,  rep  i  150b-c;  q  27,  a  i,  rep  2 
153b-154b;  q  28,  a  2,  rep  i  158d-160a;  q  30, 
a  1,  rep  3-4  167a-168a;  a  3  169b-170c;  q  40, 
a  1,  rep  1  213b-214b;  q  44,  a  i,  ans  238b- 
239a;  q  47,  a  1  256a-257b;  q  50,  a  2,  rep  3 
270a-272a;  a  3,  rep  2  272a-273b;  q  54,  a  i, 
ans  285a-d;  a  3,  rep  2  286c-287b;  q  57,  a  i, 
ans  295a-d;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  442b- 
443c;  q  88,  a  2,  rep  4  471c-472c;  part  i-ii, 
q  18,  a  i,  ans  694a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  4,  ans  5a-6a;  q  50,  a  6,  ans  lla-12a;  q  73,  a 
1,  rep  3  119c-120c;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  1  711d-712d;  q  3,  a  2,  rep  3  724a-c; 
a  3  724c-725b;  q  6,  a  5,  rep  2  744a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xiii  [52- 
66]  126a;  xxiv  [1 15—154]  143d-144b;  xxix 
[127-145]  151c-d;  xxxiii  [76-145]  157a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  151  d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52a-d  / 
Meditations,  iii,  86a-88b  esp  88b  /  Objections 
and  Replies,  122 b-c;  232b 


572 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  divine  nature  in  itself:  the  divine  at¬ 
tributes.  4b.  The  unity  and  simplicity  of  the 
divine  nature .) 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  2-8  355d- 
357d;  prop  12-14  359b-360a;  part  ii,  prop 
4  374c;  prop  7,  schol,  375b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  hi, 

SECT  15  116c-d;  BK  II,  CH  XXIII,  SECT  35 

213b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  307b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  229c-230b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  176b-c;  192c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  224a-b; 
227d-228a;  part  hi,  306a;  part  iv,  322a-c 

4c.  The  immateriality  of  God 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  6  [107115 
2-23]  601b'C;  ch  8  [1074^1-39]  604d 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [146-155] 
63a 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  53b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  v,  296a 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  26,  266a; 
ch  27,  266c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  29  26b; 
par  31  26c-27a;  bk  v,  par  19-20  32b-33a; 
bk  vi,  par  4  36a-b;  bk  vii,  par  1-2  43b-44a  / 
City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  5-6  267d-269c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 

2  15c-16a;  a  3,  ans  16a-d;  a  8,  ans  and  rep 

3  19d-20c;  q  7,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  31a-d;  q  14, 
a  1,  ans  75d-76c;  a  ii  84c-85c;  q  40,  a  i,  rep 
1  213b-214b;  q  50,  a  i,  rep  i  269b-270a;  a  2, 
rep  3  270a-272a;  q  54,  a  i,  ans  285a-d;  a  3, 
rep  2  286c-287b;  q  75,  a  5,  rep  1,4  382a-383b; 
q  84,  a  2,  ans  442b-443c;  a  4,  rep  i  444d- 
446b;  q  86,  a  2,  rep  i  462a-463a;  q  91,  a  2, 
ans  485b-486b;  Q  105,  a  3,  ans  540c-541b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  2, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  710a-711c;  a  2,  ans  711d- 
712d;  q  25,  a  3,  rep  i  841c-842d;  part  iii 
SUPPL,  Q  92,  A  I,  REP  12  1025c-1032b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  172d-173a 
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  v,  105a 
31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  122bc 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  12-15  359  b- 
361d;  part  11,  def  i  373a;  prop  1-2  373d- 
374a;  prop  5-7  374c-375c 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  529a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  17  117a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  xxiii,  sect  28  211b- 
d;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  11,  271b-c;  bk  iv,  ch 
x,  sect  8-17  351a-353c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  334b-335b 

4d.  The  eternity  and  immutability  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  15:18  /  Deuteronomy, 
32:39-4°  /  I  Chronicles,  16:34-36—  (D)  IPara- 
lipomenon,  16:34-36  /  Psalms,  9:6-7;  10:16; 
29:10-11;  33:10-11;  45:6;  48  csp  48:8,  48:14; 
66:7;  90  esp  90:1-4;  93:1-2;  102  esp  102:11-12, 


4c  to  4 d 

102:26-27;  103:13-18;  136;  145:10-13;  146:5- 
10—  (D)  Psalms,  9:7-8;  9:16;  28:10;  32:10-11; 
447;  47  esp  47:9,  47:15;  65:7;  89  esp  89:1-4; 
92:1-2;  101  esp  101:12-13,  101:27-28;  102:13- 
18;  135;  144:10-13;  145:5-10  /  Isaiah,  40:8,28; 
43:10-13;  57:15— (D)  Isaias ,  40:8,28;  43  no- 
13;  57 :i5  /  Jeremiah,  10:10—  (D)  Jeremias, 
10:10  /  Lamentations,  5:19  /  Daniel,  6:26  / 
Micah,  5:2 —(D)  Micheas,  5:2  /  Malachi,  3:6 
—(D)  Malachias,  3:6 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  36:17;  39:20;  42:21  — 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  36:19;  39:25;  42:21-22 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  24:35  /  Romans, 
1 :2o-25  /  Colossians,  1 : 16-17  /  7  Timothy,  1:17; 
6:15-16  /  Hebrews,  1:8-12;  7:23-25;  13:7-8  / 
James,  1:17  /  Revelation,  1:17-18;  10:6;  11:15- 
17 —(D)  Apocalypse,  1:17-18;  10:6;  11:15-17 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  322d-323c;  324a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  viii,  ch  6  [258bio- 
259b3Il  344b-345d  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  9 
[279a23-b4]  370c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  3  [286^-13] 377c 
/  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  10 
[337aj 5— 23]  439a-b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii, 
ch  i  [io69a3o-b2]  598b-c;  ch  6-7  601b-603b; 
ch  9  605a-d  esp  [1075^-11]  605c-d  /  Soul, 
bk  ii,  ch  4  [4  i5a22— b8]  645c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  14  [1  i54b2o— 31] 
406c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  v,  296a 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1071b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  2-6  119c- 
122d  esp  ch  5  121c-122a  /  Sixth  Ennead , 
tr  viii,  ch  11  348b-c;  ch  18-21  351d-353d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  10  3b-c; 
bk  iv,  par  26  25c-d;  par  29  26b;  bk  vii,  par 
1-7  43b-45d;  par  16-18  48c-49b;  par  21  49d- 
50a;  par  23  50b-c;  par  26,  51c;  bk  xi,  par  12- 
16  92b-93a;  bk  xii,  par  ii  lOld;  par  18, 103a-b; 
par  40  109b-110a;  bk  xiii,  par  44  122d  /  City 
of  God,  bk  vii,  ch  30  261b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  ii, 
272c;  bk  xi,  ch  10  327d-328d;  ch  21-22  333a- 
334c  esp  ch  22,  334c;  bk  xii,  ch  1-3  342b, d- 
344b;  ch  14-17  350d-354a  esp  ch  14  350d- 
351b,  ch  17  353a-354a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk 
1,  ch  5-6  625d-626b;  ch  8  626c-627a;  ch  10 
627b;  ch  22-23  629b-630c;  ch  32  633c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  i, 
rep  4  14b-15b;  qq  9-10  38c-46d;  q  14,  a  9, 
ans  83b-d;  a  13,  ans  and  rep  3  86d-88c;  a  15 
89b-90b;  q  18,  a  3  106b-107c;  q  19,  a  7  114d- 
115d;  q  22,  a  1,  rep  2  127d-128d;  q  26,  a  i, 
rep  2  150b-c;  q  42,  a  2  225d-227a;  q  43,  a  2 
230d-231c;  q  51,  a  3,  rep  3  277a-278c;  q  61, 
a  2,  ans  315c-316a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
a  5,  ans  58b-59d;  q  91,  a  1  208b-d;  part  iii, 
q  1,  a  1,  rep  3  701d-703a;  a  5,  rep  3  707a- 
708c;  q  2,  a  1,  ans  710a-711c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  vii  [64- 
72]  H5d;  xiii  [52-66]  126a;  xxiv  [130-141] 
144a;  xxix  [13-36]  150b-c;  xxxiii  156b- 
157d 


4<f  to  4 f  Chapter 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  79d  80a;  part  iii, 
173a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  293d  294a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  428c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52b-c /  Medi¬ 
tations  y  in,  84a-b;  86a;  v,  94d-95a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  6  355b;  def  8 
355c;  prop  6  356b  c;  prop  11-13  358b  359d; 
prop  17  362b-363c;  prop  19-20  363c-364a; 
prop  33,  schol  2,  367d-368c  esp  368b-c; 
part  11,  prop  44,  corol  2~prop  47  390a-391a; 
part  v,  prop  17  456c-d 

32  Milton;  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [1-12]  135b; 
[372-382]  143b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  469  256a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  sciiol, 
370a-371a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  xv, 
sect  3-4  162d-163b;  ch  xvii,  sect  16-17 
172a-c;  sect  20  172d-173c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  21 
209c;  bk  iv,  ch  x  349c-354c  esp  sect  3-5 
349d-350b,  sect  8-1  i  351a-352a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  117  436a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  176b-c;  190c;  192c-d  / 
Practical  Reason ,  334b-335b;  344b-c;  352a-b 
/  Judgement ,  592a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b;  part  iii,  306a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xiv,  608a- b; 
epilogue  ii,  684c-d 

4^.  The  infinity  of  God:  the  freedom  of  an 
infinite  being 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1073s 
3-10]  603a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  19-20  32b- 
33a;  bk  vii,  par  7  45a-d;  par  20-21  49d-50a; 
bk  xiii,  par  12  113b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Surnma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
rep  1  12c-14a;  q  7  31a-34c;  q  14,  a  i,  ans  75d- 
76c;  a  3  77d-78b;  q  25,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i 
144c-145b;  q  54,  a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  q  75,  a 
5,  rep  1,4  382a-383b;  q  79,  a  2,  ans  414d- 
416a;  q  86,  a  2,  rep  i  462a-463a;  part  i-ii, 
q  1,  a  4,  rep  i  612a-613a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  64, 
a  4,  rep  3  69b-70a;  q  87,  a  4,  rep  2  188b-d; 
part  11— 11,  q  20,  a  2,  rep  2  475d-476c;  q  24, 
a  8,  ans  495b-496a;  part  iii,  q  i,  a  2,  rep  2 
703a-704d;  q  2,  a  1,  ans  710a-711c;  q  3,  a  1, 
rep  1  723b-724a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i, 
rep  6,12  1025c-1032b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  162b-c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  iii,  86a-88d  /  Ob¬ 
jections  and  Replies,  112a-d;  123c-d;  prop  iii 
132d-133a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  2  355a;  def  6-7 
355b;  prop  8-14  356d-360a;  prop  15,  schol- 
prop  17  360b-363c;  prop  21,  demonst 364a-c; 
prop  29  366b-c;  prop  32-35  367a-369a;  part 
ii,  prop  1-4  373d-374c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Losty  bk  viii  [411-421]  241a 


29:  GOD  573 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  2^1  2^  213b  216a;  469256a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
370a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  2  4  162c  163b;  sect  12  165b-c;  cii  xvii, 
sect  1  167d  168a;  sect  16  -17  172a  c;  sect  20 
172d  173c;  cii  xxiii,  sect  33-36  2l2d  213d; 
bk  111,  cn  vi,  sect  11  271b  d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  117  436a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  188c;  192c  d;  201b  c; 
205a  b  /  Practical  Reason ,  325d  326a;  344b  c 
/  Judgement ,  590  b  d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  237d- 
238a; 246b-c 

4/.  The  perfection  or  goodness  of  God 

New  Testament:  Matthewy  5:48  /  Luke ,  18:19 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  321d-323a  /  Timaeus , 
447d-448a  /  Theaetetus ,  530b-531a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysicsy  bk  xii,  cii  7  602a- 
603  b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  cii  12  347a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  cii  8  146a-147c 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1009a 

18  Augustine:  Confessionsy  bk  i,  par  12  4a;  bk 
iii,  par  12  16b;  bk  iv,  par  24  25b-c;  bk  v,  par 
19-20  32b-33a;  bk  vii,  par  1-7  43b-45d  esp 
par  4-7  44b-45d;  par  16-23  48c-50c;  bk  x, 
par  38  81a;  bk  xi,  par  6  90c-d;  bk  xii,  par 
18,  103b;  bk  xiii,  par  1-5  llOd-llld;  par  53 
124d-125a,c  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xi,  cii  10 
327d-328d;  bk  xii,  ch  1-3  342b,d-344b;  ch 
8-9  346d-348b  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i, 
ch  5-7  625d-626c;  ch  31-32  633b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  1,  rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  1  12c- 
14a;  q  3,  a  1,  ans  14b-15b;  a  2,  ans  15c-16a; 
a  7,  rep  2  19a-c;  q  4  20c-23b;  q  6  28b-30d;  q 
13,  a  2,  ans  63c-64d;  a  ii,  rep  2  73c-74b;  q 
18,  a  3  106b-107c;  Q  19,  a  i,  rep  1-3  108d- 
109c;  q  21,  a  1,  rep  4  124b-125b;  q  51,  a  i, 
rep  3  275b-276b;  q  61,  a  3,  rep  2  316a-d;  q 
62,  a  8,  ans  and  rep  1-2  323c-324a;  q  66,  a  i, 
contrary  343d-345c;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  and  rep 
3  442b-443c;  q  91,  a  i,  ans  484a-485b;  q  ioo, 
a  2,  ans  521c-522b;  q  103  528a-534b  passim; 
q  104,  a  3,  rep  2  537b-d;  a  4,  ans  538a-c;  q 
105,  a  4,  ans  541c-542a;  a  5,  ans  542a-543b; 
part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  1  612a-613a;  q  2,  a  4, 
rep  1  618a-d;  q  9,  a  6  662a-d;  q  18,  a  i,  ans 
694a-d;  q  19,  a  4  705b-c;  q  22,  a  2,  rep  i  721c- 
722c;  q  24,  a  3,  rep  2  728c-729c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
a  5,  ans  58b-59d;  q  64,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3 
69b-70a;  part  ii-ii,  q  9,  a  4,  rep  i  425d-426c; 
q  13,  a  1,  ans  444b-445a;  q  17,  a  i,  ans 
457a-d;  q  23,  a  4,  ans  485d-486b;  q  34,  a  i, 
ans  559a-c;  q  39,  a  2,  rep  3  575b-576b;  q 
184,  a  2,  ans  629d-630d;  part  iii,  q  i,  a  i, 
ans  701d-703a;  q  23,  a  i,  ans  833a-d;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  91,  a  2,  rep  4,10  1017c-1020c;  q  99, 
a  2,  rep  3  1081a-d 


574 


5 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  divine  nature  in  itself:  the  divine  at¬ 
tributes.  4/.  The  perfection  or  goodness  of 
God.) 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxviii 
[91-93]  97a;  paradise,  vii  [64-66]  115d;  xix 
[40-90]  135c-136a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  300c-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  52a-d;  53d  / 
Meditations ,  1,  76d-77c;  iii-iv,  86a-93a  /  Ob¬ 
jections  and  Replies ,  123dT24c;  def  viii  130d; 
142c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  33,  schol  2 
367d-369a;  part  v,  prop  17,  demonst  456c-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  580  276b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
370a-371a  passim 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  hi,  ch  vi, 
sect  11-12  271b'272b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
78-81  485c-487a;  sect  xi,  div  106-107  499b- 
500b  passim;  div  113,  502a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  205a-b  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  263a-b  /  Practical  Rea¬ 
son ,  307a-d;  325d-326a;  342c;  345a-c;  351b- 
352c  /  Judgement ,  592a-c 

4g.  The  intellect  of  God 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72b 
14-29]  602d-603a;  ch  9  605a-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  ch  8  [ii78b8-23] 
433b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  14  120d-121c; 
bk  11,  ch  8, 146a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  i  65d-66d 
/  Fifth  Ennead  208a-251d  esp  tr  v-vi  228b- 
237d,  tr  ix  246c-251d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  6  268d- 
269c;  bk  xi,  ch  21  333a-d;  bk  xii,  ch  17  353a- 
354a;  bk  xxii,  ch  29,  614b  /  Christian  Doc¬ 
trine,  bk  1,  ch  13  627d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a  i, 
rep  2-3  14b-15b;  q  14,  aa  1-4  75d-79a;  q  18, 
a  3  106b-107c;  q  19,  a  i,  ans  108d-109c;  a  2, 
rep  4  109c-110b;  a  3,  rep  6  llOb-lllc;  a  4, 
ans  and  rep  4  lllc-112c;  q  26,  a  2  150c-151a; 
q  27,  a  3,  rep  3  155c-156a;  q  46,  a  2,  rep  3 
253a-255a;  q  50,  a  i,  ans  269b-270a;  q  54, 
a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  q  55,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3 
289a-d;  a  3,  ans  291a-d;  q  57,  a  i,  ans  295a-d; 
a  2,  ans  295d-297a;  q  59,  a  2,  ans  307c-308b; 
q  79,  a  1,  ans  414a-d;  a  2,  ans  414d-416a;  a  4, 
ans  417a-418c;  a  10,  rep  2  423d-424d;  q  84, 
a  2,  ans  442b-443c;  q  85,  a  5,  ans  457d- 
458d;  q  87,  a  1,  ans  465a-466c;  a  3,  ans  467b- 
468a;  q  89,  a  i,  ans  473b-475a;  q  105,  a  i, 
rep  2  538d-539c;  a  3,  ans  540c-541b;  q  116, 
a  1,  ans  592d-593d;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  i 
612a-613a;  q  19,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  705b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 


4 g  to  4  h 

a  1,  rep  2  12b-13c;  q  61,  a  5,  ans  58b-59d; 
q  93,  a  1  215b,d-216c;  part  hi,  q  6,  a  2,  ans 
741c-742a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  15  149a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  228a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  17,  schol  362c- 

363c;  prop  21  364a-c;  prop  32,  corol  2  367b; 
prop  33,  schol  2,  368b-c;  part  ii,  prop  i 
373d-374a;  prop  3-6  374a-375a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  i, 
sect  10,  123b;  ch  x,  sect  9  143a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,.  33a-d;  52c-53b  /  Practi¬ 
cal  Reason,  303b-304a;  344b-c;  350c-351b  / 
Judgement,  590b-d;  592a-c;  600d-601c;  610b- 
613a, c 

4h.  The  happiness  and  glory  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  15:1-21;  33:13-23  / 
I  Chronicles ,  16:23-27;  29:11-13 — (D)  /  P^r- 
alipomenon,  16:23-27;  29:11-13  /  Psalms, 
8;  19;  24;  57:5-11;  96:3-6;  104:1;  113:4; 
138:5;  145:11-12— (D)  Psalms,  8;  18;  23; 
56:5-11;  95:3-6;  103:1;  112:4;  137:5;  144:11- 
12  /  Isaiah ,  6:1-4;  42:8 —(D)  Isaias ,  6:1—4; 
42:8 

Apocrypha:  Judith,  16:13— (D)  OT, 

16:16  /  Tfetf  of  Esther ,  13:12-14— (D)  OT, 
Esther,  13:12-14  /  Song  of  Three  Children ,  28- 
31  — (D)  OT,  Daniel,  3:51-53 

New  Testament:  Mar\,  8:38  /  John ,  5:44;  8:54 
/  Hebrews ,  2:10  /  /  Peter,  4:7-11  /  77  Tter, 
1:16-18  /  Revelation ,  5:9-14;  7:9-12;  21 — (7)) 
Apocalypse,  5:9-14;  7:9-12;  21 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72b 
13-29] 602d-603a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vii,  ch  14  [ii54b20-3i] 
406c;  bk  x,  ch  8  [n78b8-23]  433b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xiii,  par  4  111c  / 

CzTy  of  bk  v,  ch  14  220a-d;  bk  viii, 

ch  6  268d-269c;  bk  xii,  ch  17  353a-354a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  26 
150a-152a,c;  q  62,  a  3,  rep  3  319c-320b;  a  4, 
ans  320b-321b;  q  63,  a  3  327b-328b;  q  65,  a 
2,  ans  340b-341b;  q  70,  a  2,  ans  364b-365a; 
q  73,  a  2,  rep  3  371b-d;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  2, 
rep  2  616d-617b;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i  617b- 
618a;  q  3,  a  1,  rep  i  622c-623a;  a  2,  rep  1,4 
623a-624b;  a  8,  rep  2  628d-629c;  q  5,  a  3, 
rep  2  638b-639a;  a  7,  ans  642a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  8, 
a  4,  ans  759b'd;  q  16,  a  4,  rep  2  799b-800b; 
q  26,  a  i,  rep  2  845b-846a;  part  iii  suppl, 
q  71,  a  8,  rep  i  909d-910d;  q  92,  a  i,  rep  5 
1025c-1032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  i  [1-9] 
106a;  xxxiii  [46-145]  156c-157d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  v,  prop  17  456c-d; 
prop  35-36  460d-461c 

32  Milton:  Upon  the  Circumcision  12b-13a  / 
Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [56-415]  136b-144b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  233,  216a 


575 


5  to  5a  Chapter  29:  GOD 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  347d  348b  /  Judge- 
merit,  594d  [fn  i] 


5.  The  divine  nature  in  relation  to  the  world  or 
creatures 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  321d-322d/  Tim ae its, 
447b-458b;  465d-466a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  i  326a-327b; 
bk  viii,  ch  i-6  334a-346b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  14  [1  i54b20— 31] 
406c;  bk  x,  ch  8  [1 1 78b8-27]  433b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  cii  22,  195a  b; 
bk  iv,  ch  11,  240d-241a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  4  257b; 
bk  v,  sect  8  269d-270b;  bk  vi,  sect  40-46 
277d-278d 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1017b- 
1018a; 1071b 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  13 
149b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  4  2a;  par 
10  3b-c;  bk  iv,  par  25  25c;  bk  iv,  par  31-BK  v, 
par  1  26c-27b;  bk  vii,  par  1-8,  43b-45d;  par 
16-23  48c-50c;  bk  x,  par  38  81a;  bk  xi,  par  6 
90c-d;  bk  xiii,  par  19  115c-d  /  City  of  God, 
bk  vii,  ch  29-31  261a-262a;  bk  viii,  ch  i-io 
264b,d-271d;  bk  x,  ch  1-2  298b,d-300a;  bk 
xi,  ch  24  335c-336a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, 
ch  9-10  627a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq  14- 
25  75c-150a;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  442b-443c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  i  [1-3] 
106a;  [97-142]  107b-d;  11  [112-148]  109a-b;  x 
[1-27]  120b-c;  xiii  [52-87]  126a-b;  xix  [40-90] 
135c-136a;  xxvii  [100-120]  148b-c;  xxvm 
148d-150b;  xxxm  [76-145]  157a-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  428c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  38a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52a-d  /  Ob' 
jections  and  Replies ,  123c-d;  214a-d;  229c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [412-436] 
241a-b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
369b-371a  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  542a-543a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xvii, 
sect  1  167d-168a;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  11-12 
271b-272b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  57  423d- 
424a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xi,  div 
106  499b-c;  div  113  502a-d 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  186c-d;  187d-188a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  439a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81b-c;  183c;307b-c; 
346b-347a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  303b-304a;  321b-c; 
325d-326a;  327d-328b;  342c;  344b-c;  345a-c; 
347d-348b;  350c-351a;  352a-c  /  Judgement , 
592a-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
120d-121c 


5 a.  God  as  first  and  as  exemplar  cause:  the  re¬ 
lation  of  divine  to  natural  causation 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1-2;  7:4  /  Nehemiah , 
9:6 —(D)  II  Esdras,  9:6  /  Job,  9:1-9;  12; 
26:7-14;  28:24  -27;  46:24  42:2  /  Psalms,  8:3; 
33:6-9;  65:5-13;  74:16-17;  89:11-12;  95:4-5; 
96:5;  102:25-27;  104;  107:23-30;  115:3; 

119:73;  121:2;  136:5-9;  146:5-6;  147-148^(79) 
Psalms,  8:4;  32:6-9;  64:6-14;  73:16-17;  88:12- 
13;  94:4-5;  95:5;  101:26-28;  103;  106:2}  }o ; 
"3:3;  ii8:735  120:2;  1 35:5-9;  145:5-6;  146- 
148  /  Proverbs,  3:19  /  Isaiah,  40:26-28;  42:5; 
44:24;  45:7-12,18;  48:13;  51:13;  65:17  —  (/>)) 
Isaias ,  40:26-28;  42:5;  44:24;  45:7-12,18; 
48:13;  51:13;  65:17  /  Jeremiah ,  10:12;  27:5; 
31:35;  51:15-16— (D)  Jeremias,  10:12;  27:5; 
31:35;  51:15-16  /  Amos,  5:8  /  Zechariah,  12:1 
— (D)  Zacharias ,  12:1  /  Malachi,  2:10— (D) 
Malachias,  2:10 

Apocrypha: Judith,  16:14 —(D)  OT,  Judith,  16:17 
/  Rest  of  Esther,  13:10— (D)  OT,  Esther,  13:10 
/  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:14;  2:23;  9:1-2;  11:17 
—  ( D )  OT,  Boo \of  Wisdom,  1  :i 4 ;  2:23;  9:1-2; 
1 1  :i8  /  Ecclesiasticus,  18:1;  24:8-9;  33:10-13; 
39 :1 6-35 ;  43  —  ( D )  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  18:1; 
24:12-14;  33:10-14;  39:21-41;  43  /  Bel  and 
Dragon,  5 — (D)  OT,  Daniel,  14:4  /  II  Macca¬ 
bees,  7:23,28— (D)  OT,  II  Machabees,  7:23,28 
New  Testament:  John,  1:1-3  /  Acts,  7:49-50; 
14:14-17;  17:22-28  /  Colossians,  1:16-17  / 
Hebrews,  1:10-11;  2:10;  3:4;  11:3  /  II  Peter, 
3:5-7  /  Revelation ,  4:11;  10:6;  14:7— (79) 
Apocalypse,  4:11;  10:6;  14:7 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  x,  427c-429c  /  Timaeus, 
447a-448b  /  Sophist,  577d-578b  /  Statesman, 
587a-589c  /  Laws,  bk  x,  758b-765c  esp  762b- 
765c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  viii,  ch  1-6  334a- 
346b  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  10 
[336b25~34]  438d;  [337*15-23]  439a-b  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  1,  ch  2  [983^-9]  501b;  bk  xii,  ch  4 
[i070b22-35]  600b;  ch  5  [io7ia3o-36]  601a 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  3  [699*1 1  ]— 
ch  4  [700a5]  234a-235a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [146-194] 
63ac 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  14  120d-121c 
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-b 
16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  853b-854a  /  Har¬ 
monies  of  the  World,  1017b-1018a;  1025a-b; 
1049b-1050a; 1061a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  10  3b-c; 
par  12  4a;  bk  vii,  par  16-23  48c-50c;  bk  xi, 
par  4-1 1  90a-92b;  bk  xii,  par  2-9  99c-101c; 
par  14-40  102b-110a  esp  par  38  108d-109a;  bk 
xiii,  par  6-48  112a-124a  /  City  of  God,  bk  vii, 
ch  29-31  261a-262a;  bk  viii,  ch  i  264b, d- 
265b;  ch  4-6  266d-269c;  ch  9  270d-271a;  bk 
xi,  ch  4-24  324a-336a;  bk  xii  342b,d-360a,c; 
bk  xix,  ch  13  519a-520a;  bk  xxi,  ch  4  562a- 


57  6 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  divine  nature  in  relation  to  the  world  or 
creatures.  5a.  God  as  first  and  as  exemplar 
cause:  the  relation  of  divine  to  natural 
causation .) 

563c;  ch  7-8  565d'568d;  bk  xxii,  ch  2  587b- 
588a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  32  633c-d; 
ch  34  634b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  2  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  1,  ans  14b-15b; 
a  2,  ans  15c-16a;  a  4,  ans  16d-17c;  a  5,  rep  2 
17c-18b;  a  6,  ans  18c-19a;  a  7,  ans  and  rep  i 
19a-c;  a  8,  ans  and  rep  1-2  19d-20c;  q  4  20c- 
23b  esp  a  3  22b-23b;  q  18,  aa  3-4  106b- 
108c;  q  26,  a  4  151c-152a,c;  q  51,  a  i,  rep  3 
275b-276b;  q  52,  a  2  279b-280a;  q  56,  a  2, 
ans  292d-294a;  q  60,  a  i,  rep  2-3  310b- 
311a;  q  65  339a-343c;  q  74,  a  3,  rep  i  375a- 
377a, c;  q  75,  a  i,  rep  i  378b-379c;  q  76,  a  5, 
rep  1  394c-396a;  q  83,  a  i,  rep  3  436d-438a; 
q  84,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  442b-443c;  a  4,  rep  i 
444d-446b;  q  88,  a  3,  rep  2  472c-473a;  q  89, 
a  1,  rep  3  473b-475a;  q  92,  a  i,  rep  i  483d- 
489d;  a  2,  rep  2  489d-490c;  a  4,  ans  491b-d; 
q  93  492a-501c;  q  94,  a  3,  ans  504a-505a;  qq 
103-105  528a-545b;  q  116  592d-595c;  part 
1— 11,  q  1,  a  2  610b-611b;  q  2,  a  3,  ans  617b- 
618a;  q  6,  a  1,  rep  3  644d-646a;  q  9,  a  6 
662a-d;  q  10,  a  4  665d-666a,c;  q  12,  a  5,  ans 
672a-c;  q  17,  a  8,  rep  2  692a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  65, 
a  3,  ans  72d-73d;  q  66,  a  i,  rep  3  75b-76b; 
q  68,  a  1,  ans  87c-89c;  q  79,  a  i,  rep  3  156b- 
157b;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  157b-158a;  q  80,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  2-3  159d-160c;  q  85,  a  6  182d- 
184a;  q  93,  a  1  215b,d-216c;  q  ioo,  a  6,  rep  2 
257c-258c;  q  102,  a  3,  ans  272b-276c;  q  109, 
a  1,  ans  338b-339c;  q  no,  a  i,  rep  2  347d- 
349a;  q  iii,  a  2,  ans  352d-353d;  part  ii-ii, 
q  18,  a  4,  ans  464c-465a;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  5, 
rep  3  715a-716b;  q  5,  a  3,  rep  2  737d-739a; 
q  13,  a  3,  contrary  782b-783b;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  74,  a  2,  rep  3  926c-927c;  q  75,  a  3 
938a-939d;  q  88,  a  i,  ans  lOOOd-lOOld 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [103-108] 
107b;  11  [112-148]  109a-b;  xxvii  [100-120] 
148b-c;  xxix  [10-36]  150b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [2987-3040]  209a- 
210a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78d-79a;  79d-80a; 
part  11,  113b-c;  149d;  part  iii,  185d;  241c- 
242a;  part  iv,  272b-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  fourth  day, 
245b-c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  390d-391a; 
406b-407b;  415b-417a  esp  416b-c;  426a-429b; 
443a-c;  490d-493a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  2c-d;  4b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  55d-56a  / 
Meditations ,  iii  81d-89a  esp  84b-85a,  87b- 
88c  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  110b- 112a;  158b- 
161  d ;  213b-214d;  229c-d 


5 a  to  5b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  16-18  362a- 
363c;  prop  24-29  365a-366c;  prop  33,  schol 
2  367d-369a;  part  ii,  prop  7  375a-c;  prop  10, 
schol  376d-377a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [80-134]  137a- 
138a;  [630-735]  149a-151b;  bk  v  [468-474] 
185b;  bk  vii  217a-231a  esp  [162-169]  220b, 
[601-640]  230a-231a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  77  186a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
369b-370a  /  Optics ,  bk  iii,  528b-529a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  2  178c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  28  211b-d;  bk  iv, 
ch  iii,  sect  28-29  322a-323a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  25-33 
417d-419a  esp  sect  32  418d-419a;  sect  36 
419c-d;  sect  51-53  422d-423a;  sect  57  423d- 
424a;  sect  60-75  424b-427d;  sect  105-109 
433b-434b;  sect  141  441a-b;  sect  146-153 
442a-444a  esp  sect  150  442d-443b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vii,  div 
54-57  474b-475d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  140b,d-145c;  177b-179b; 
187a-191d;  205a-209a;  236b-240b  esp  239a-c 
/  Practical  Reason ,  332d-337a,c  esp  334b- 
335c  /  Judgeme?it,  569a-570a;  581b-582c; 
592c-596c;  597d-599d;  600d-601c;  608b-609a; 
610b-613a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b;  part  i,  245d-246c;  part  iv,  368d-369a,c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  239d;  243c-d 

5b.  God  as  final  cause:  the  motion  of  all  things 
toward  God 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  33:13-23  /  Deuteron¬ 
omy,  4 :29  / 1  Chronicles,  28  :g — (D)  I Paralipom- 
enon,  28:9  /  II  Chronicles,  15  :2-4, 12-15 — (£>) 
II  Paralipomenon,  15:2-4,12-15  /  Psalms,  24:6; 
27:4-9;  42;  63;  70:4;  73:25-28;  84;  119:10— 
(Z))  Psalms,  23:6;  26:4-9;  41;  62;  69:5;  72:25- 
28;  83;  118:10  /  Proverbs,  16:4  /  Isaiah,  2 6:8- 
9'»  4375  58:2 —(D)  Isaias,  26:8-9;  437J  5$:2 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:1;  13:1-7— 
( D )  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  1:1;  13:1-7 

New  Testament:  Romans,  3:10-11  /  Colossians, 
1:16-17  /  Hebrews,  2:10  /  Revelation,  4:11  — 
(D)  Apocalypse,  4:11 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1072® 
23— b4]  602b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  2  41a-c  / 
Fifth  Ennead,  tr  vm,  ch  7,  243 b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1,  la;  par  5, 
2b;  bk  iv,  par  15-19  23a-24b;  bk  v,  par  1-2 
27a-c;  bk  x,  par  29-33  78d-80b;  bk  xiii,  par  3 
lllb-c  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  4  266d-267c; 
ch  8-9  270a-271a;  bk  x,  ch  1-3  298b,d-301a; 
bk  xii,  ch  1  342b,d-343c;  bk  xix,  ch  13  519a- 
520a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i  624a-636a,c  esp 
ch  3-5  625b-626a,  ch  9-1  i  627a-c,  ch  22-23 
629b-630c,  ch  34  634b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  4, 
ans  5a-b;  q  2,  a  1,  rep  i  lOd-lld;  a  3,  ans 


5c  Chapter  29:  GOD  577 


12c-14a;  q  6,  a  ans  29c  30b;  a  4  30b  d; 
q  12,  a  i,  ans  50c-51c;  o  13,  a  11,  rep  2  73c- 
74b;  q  19,  a  1,  rep  1  108d-109c;  q  26,  a  3 
151a  c;  q  44,  a  4  241a-d;  q  60,  a  5  313b  314c; 
q  62,  A  1,  ANS  317d-318c;  q  65,  a  2  340b-341b; 
q  103,  a  2  529a-530a;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  8 
615a-c;  q  2,  a  4,  rep  i  618a  d;  a  5,  rep  $  618d 
619c;  q  9,  a  6  662a-d;  q  ii,  a  3,  rep  3  667d 
668d;  Q  12,  a  3,  rep  1  670d-67lb;  q  16,  a  5, 
contrary  and  rep  3  685b  686a;  q  34,  a  3, 
ans  770c-771c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  55, 
a  2,  rep  3  27a-d;  q  70,  a  i,  rep  2  lOld  102d; 
q  72,  a  4,  ans  114a-115a;  a  5,  ans  115a-116b; 
q  73,  a  3,  ans  121c-122b;  a  9,  ans  126d  128a; 
q  79,  a  1,  ans  156b-157b;  q  91,  a  i,  rep  3 
208b-d;  q  99,  a  3,  ans  247a-248a;  a  4,  ans 
248a-d;  q  ioo,  a  6,  ans  257c-258c;  qq  101-103 
265d-304a  passim;  part  ii— ii,  q  5,  a  i,  ans 
410a-411b;  q  19,  a  2,  rep  2  465d-466d;  q  20, 
a  1,  rep  1  474d-475d;  q  24,  a  4,  ans  491d- 
492b;  q  26,  a  13,  rep  3  519d-520d;  Q  34,  a  i, 
rep  3  559a-c;  q  44,  a  2,  rep  2,4  593d-594c; 
part  iii,  Q  2,  a  11,  ans  721c-722b;  q  6,  a  1, 
rep  1  740b-741b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  91,  a  3, 
rep  6  1020d-1022c;  q  96,  a  i,  rep  4  1050a- 
1052a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [94-142] 
107b-d;  ^[124-132]  112a;  xxvi  [16-51]  146a-b; 
xxvm  148d-150b;  xxxii  [i39]-xxxm  [145] 
156a-157d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  428c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [468-474]  185b; 
bk  xii  [451-465]  329a;  [537-551]  331a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  314  229a;  425-426  243b- 
244b;  430  245a-247b;  438  251a;  487-489 
258b-259a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  107-109 
433d-434b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  236b-240b  /  Practical 
Reason ,  337a-348b  esp  340c-341a,  344a-347d 
/  Judgement ,  584c-d;  587a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  306a-c 

5c.  The  power  of  God:  the  divine  omnipotence 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  18:13-14  /  Exodus , 
15:1-21;  19:5  /  Deuteronomy ,  10:14;  32:39  /  J 
Samuel ,  2:6-8— (D)  I  Kings,  2 :6-8  /  //  Samuel, 
22  —  (D)  II  Kings ,  22  /  /  Chronicles,  29:10-19— 
(D)  /  Paralipomenon,  29:10-19  /  //  Chronicles, 
20:6;  25:8 —(D)  II  Paralipomenon,  20:6;  25:8  / 
esp  9,  12,  26,  34,  36:1-42:3  /  Psalms,  29; 
335  475  5o:7"I25  625  65:5-13;  66:1-7;  76;  78; 
89:8-13;  95-96;  104;  107:23-41;  135;  147:1-11 
—  (D)  Psalms,  28;  32;  46;  49:7-12;  61;  64:6- 
14;  65:1-7;  75;  77;  88:9-14;  94-95;  103; 
106:23-41;  134;  146  /  Proverbs,  16:33  /  Isaiah, 
2:10-22;  26:4-6;  40:9-31;  43:13;  44:24-28; 
55:10-11  — (D)  Isaias,  2:10-22;  26:4-6;  40:9- 
31;  43:13;  44:24-28;  55:10-11  /  Jeremiah, 
10:12-13;  18:1-10;  27:5;  32:27— (D)  Jeremias, 
10:12-13;  18:1-10;  27:5;  32:27  /  Ezekiel,  18:4 


—  (D)  Ezechiel ,  18:4  /  Daniel ,  2  esp  2:19  25, 
2:36  47;  4-5  — (D)  Daniel,  2  esp  2:19  23, 
2:^6  47;  3:98  5:31  /  Hosca,yq  14  — (D)  Of«\ 
5:7-14  /  Amos,  9 

Apocrypha:  Judith,  16:13-17  —  (D)  OT,  Judith, 
16:15  21  /  /\Vtf  0/  Esther,  13:9  11  — (D)  OT, 
Esther,  13:9  11  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  7:16; 
11:17-22;  12:8-18  — (D)  OT,  Boo{of  Wisdom, 
7:16;  11:18-23;  12:8  18  /  Ecclesia sticus,  10:12- 
17;  15:18;  16:18-19;  18:1-7 — (D)  OT,  Ecclcsi- 
a  Stic  us,  10:15-21;  15:19;  16:18-19;  18:1  6  / 
7ic/  tf/7*/  Dragon,  5  —  (D)  OT,  Daniel,  14:4  /  // 
Maccabees ,  8:18— (D)  OT,  II  Machabees,  8:18 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  3:9;  19:16-26  esp 
19:26  /  Mar!^,  10:17-27  esp  10:27  /  1 :26- 

38  esp  1:37;  18:18-27  esp  18:27  /  17:15- 

34  /  Romans,  9:19-23  /  Ephesians,  1:15-23; 
6:10-11  /  Revelation,  19:6— (D)  Apocalypse , 
19:6 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  465d  /  bk  iv,  682 d- 

683a;  bk  x,  766d-767c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1073*3- 
10]  603a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  191d-192b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  12  4a;  bk  v, 
par  20  32d-33a;  bk  vii,  par  6-7  44d-45d  / 
C/V)'  o/" bk  v,  ch  10  215c-216c;  bk  vii,  ch 
30  261b-d;  bk  xii,  ch  25  358b-359a;  bk  xiv, 
ch  27  396c-397a;  bk  xxi,  ch  5-8  563d-568d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
rep  1  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  i,  rep  1,4  14b-15b;  q  25 
143c*150a;  q  26,  a  4,  ans  151c-152a,c;  q  45, 
a  2  242d-244a;  a  5  245c-247a;  q  52,  a  2  279b- 
280a;  q  63,  a  3  327b-328b;  q  65,  a  3,  rep  3 
341c-342b;  q  75,  a  5,  rep  i  382a-383b;  a  6, 
rep  2  383c-384c;  q  76,  a  5,  rep  i  394c-396a; 
Q  77,  a  1,  ans  399c-401b;  a  2,  ans  401b-d; 
Q  91,  a  1,  rep  i  484a-485b;  a  2  485b-486b; 
q  92,  a  1,  rep  3  488d-489d;  a  2,  rep  2  489d- 
490c;  q  104,  a  3  537b-d;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-2 
538a-c;  q  iio,  a  2,  ans  565d-566d;  q  112,  a  i, 
ans  571d-573a;  part  i-ii,  q  i,  a  4,  rep  i 
612a-613a;  q  2,  a  4,  rep  i  618a-d;  q  5,  a  7, 
ans  and  rep  i  642a-d;  q  6,  a  4,  rep  i  647b- 
648a;  q  17,  a  8,  rep  2  692a-c;  q  19,  a  5,  rep  2 
705d-707a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  64, 
a  4,  ans  69b-70a;  q  68,  a  4,  ans  91b-92c;  q 
80,  a  3,  rep  1  161d-162b;  q  88,  a  i,  ans  193a- 
194b;  q  1 13,  a  9  368d-369c;  part  ii-ii,  q  i, 
a  8,  rep  2  387a-388c;  q  23,  a  2,  rep  3  483d- 
484d;  part  iii,  q  1,  a  3,  rep  2  704d-706a;  Q  3, 
a  7,  ans  728a-729a;  q  7,  a  7,  rep  2  750a-d; 
a  12,  rep  2  754c-755c;  q  13  779d-784a;  q  15, 
a  8,  rep  3  794a-c;  a  9,  rep  3  794c-795b;  q  20, 
a  1,  ans  821b-822c;  q  60,  a  5,  ans  850b-851b; 
part  iii  suppl,  q  71,  a  13,  rep  3  915d-916c; 
q  72,  a  2,  rep  i  919a-920c;  q  74,  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  2-3  927c-928d;  a  8,  rep  3  933b-934a;  q 
76,  a  1,  rep  1-2  939d-941a;  q  82,  a  i,  ans 
968a-970c;  q  83,  a  2,  rep  3  976c-978c;  a  3, 
ans  978c-980d;  q  87,  a  2,  rep  2  998d-999d 


578 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  divine  nature  in  relation  to  the  world  or 
creatures.  5  c.  The  power  of  God:  the  divine 
omnipotence.) 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  160c-161a;  162c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  428c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  17c;  81a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  110b-112a; 
158b-159a; 229a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  17  362b-363c; 
prop  33,  schol  2— prop  35  367d-369a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [106-225]  113b- 
116a;  bk  hi  [372-415]  143b-144b;  bk  vii  [139— 
173]  220a-221a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  654  292b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  12  165b  c;  ch  xxi,  sect  2  178c;  ch 
xxiii,  sect  28  211b-d;  bk  hi,  ch  vi,  sect 
n-12  271b-272b;  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  4  350a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  33  419a; 
sect  36  419c-d;  sect  152  443c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 
56  475a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  334a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  186c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  180b-c;  181b;  192c-d  / 
Practical  Reason,  351b-352c  /  Judgement, 
504b-d;  592a-c;  594d  [fn  1];  600d-601c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  790d 

5 d.  The  immanence  of  God:  the  divine  omni¬ 
presence 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  28:15  /  Exodus,  20:24; 
25:8;  29:45-46  /  Leviticus,  26:11-12  /  Num¬ 
bers,  5:1-3  /  Joshua,  3:10-11  —  (D)  Josue,  3:10- 
11  /  II  Samuel,  7:1-13— (D)  II  Kings,  7:1-13  / 

I  Kings,  6 : 1 1-1 3 ;  8 : 1 2-1 3 ,26-30 — ( D )  III  Kings, 
6:11-13;  8:12-13,26-30  /  7  Chronicles,  17:1-12 
—(D)  I  Paralipomenon,  17:1-12  /  Psalms,  6%  7- 
8,16-18;  119:151;  139  esp  139:7-12;  145:18-19 
—(D)  Psalms,  67:8-9,17-19;  118:151;  138  esp 
138:7-12;  144:18-19  /  Proverbs ,  15:3  /  Isaiah, 
50:7-9 —(D)  Isaias,  50:7-9  /  Jeremiah,  23:24— 
(D)  Jeremias,  23:24  /  Amos,  9:1-4  /  Zechariah, 
8 :3 —(D)  Zachariah,  8 :3 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:7;  12:1  —  (D) 
OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  1:7;  12:1 

New  Testament:  John,  1  :io  /  Acts,  7:49;  17:22- 
29  /  Romans,  11:36  /  I  Corinthians,  6:15-20  / 

II  Corinthians ,  6:14-18  /  Ephesians,  4:6  / 
Colo>sians,  1 U6-19;  2 :8— 13  /  II  Timothy,  1  :i4  / 
Hebrews,  13:5  /  7  John,  4:4-16 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  14  120d-121c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
bk  vii,  sect  9  280b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  16,  75c-d 
/  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  7  242d-243c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  2-3  lb- 2a; 
bk  hi,  par  10  15b-d;  par  18  18b;  bk  iv,  par  26 
25c-d;  par  31  26c-27a;  bk  vi,  par  4  36a-b;  bk 


5  d  to  5e 

vii,  par  1-2  43b-44a;  par  7  45a-d;  par  21  49d- 
50a;  bk  x,  par  8-10  73b-74a;  bk  xii,  par  7 
lOOd-lOla;  par  21  103d-104a  /  City  of  God,  bk 
vii,  ch  6,  248a;  ch  30  261b-d;  bk  x,  ch  14 
307c-308a;  bk  xii,  ch  25  358b-359a  /  Chris¬ 
tian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  12  627c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  8  34c- 
38c;  q  51,  a  3,  rep  3  277a-278c;  q  52,  a  2 
279b-280a;  Q  90,  a  1  480d-481d;  part  i-ii, 
q  17,  a  8,  rep  2  692a-c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  26, 
a  2,  rep  3  511a-d;  part  iii  suppl,  q  84,  a  2 
rep  1  984c-985d 

21  Dante :  Divine  Comedy,  paradise, xxxm  [76- 
93] 157a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  428c-d 
31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  vi,  99c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i  355a-372d  esp  def  3-5 
355b,  axiom  1-2  355c'd,  prop  2-8  355d-357d, 
prop  10,  schol  358a'b,  prop  13,  corol-prop 
18  359d-363c,  prop  22-23  364d-365a,  prop  25 
365b,  prop  28-31  365c-367a,  prop  33  367b- 
369a;  part  ii,  prop  i-ii  373d-377c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [334-346]  306b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
370a-371a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 

xiii,  sect  18  152a-c;  ch  xv,  sect  2-4  162c- 
163b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  149-150 
442d-443b;  sect  155  444b-c 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  192c-d  /  Practical  Reason, 
334b-335b;  351b-352c  /  Judgement,  580c-d; 
592a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
157b;  part  1,  224a-b;  227d-228a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  217c-218a;  bk 

xiv,  608a-b;  bk  xv,  631a-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
153bd 

5e.  The  transcendence  of  God:  the  divine  aseity 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  15:11  /  7  Samuel,  2 \2 — 
(D)  I  Kings ,  2:2/7  Chronicles,  17:20 —(D) 
I  Paralipomenon,  17:20  /  Job,  11:7-9;  33:12; 
35:6-7;  36:22-42:3  /  Psalms,  89:6-8;  97:9; 
99:2;  113:4-5— (D)  Psalms,  88:7-9;  96:9;  98:2; 
112:4-5  /  Isaiah,  29:16;  40:12-26;  45:9;  46:5,9; 
55:8-9— (D)  Isaias,  29:16;  40:12-26;  45:9; 
46:5,9;  55:8-9  /  Daniel,  4:35 —(D)  Daniel , 
4:32 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  11:22;  12:12— 
(D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  11:23;  12:12  / 
Ecclesiasticus,  16:20-21;  18:4-7 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  16:20-21;  18:2-6 
New  Testament:  John,  3:31  /  Acts,  7:47-50  / 
Romans,  9:19-21  /  Ephesians,  1:19-23;  4:6  / 
7  Timothy,  6:15-16 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  10  [io75a 
12-16]  605d 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  3  [699^1]- 
ch  4  [700*5]  234a-235a 


5f  Chapter  29:  GOD  579 


18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  dk  i,  par  2-3  lb  2a; 
bk  iii,  par  10,  15c-d;  bk  vi,  par  4  36a-b;  bk 
vii,  par  17  49a;  bk  x,  par  8-10  73b  74a  /  City 
of  God ,  BK  VII,  CH  30  261b  d;  bk  xii,  cii  17 
353a-354a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  i, 
rep  1  14b-15b;  a  8  19d  20c;  q  8,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  1,3  34d-35c;  q  18,  a  4  107d  108c;  q  51, 
a  3,  rep  3  277a-278c;  q  61,  a  3,  rep  2  316a-d; 
q  90,  a  1,  ans  480d-481d;  q  103,  a  2  529a- 
530a;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a  8,  rep  2  692a-c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  ii  [112- 
148]  109a-b;  xm  [52-66]  126a;  xix  [40-66] 
135c-d;  xxviii  148d-150b;  xxix  [127-145] 
151c-d 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  110b-112a; 
123c-d;  158b-159a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  n-12  271b-272b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vii,  div 
56  475a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  192c-d  /  Practical  Reason , 
334b-335b;  342c  /  Judgement ,  566c-d;  580c-d 

5 f.  God's  knowledge:  the  divine  omniscience; 
the  divine  ideas 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy ,  31  :i9~2i  /  / Sam¬ 
uel,  2:3;  16:7— (Z))  I  Kings ,  2:3;  16:7  / 
I  Chronicles ,  28:9 —(D)  /  Paralipomenon ,  28:9 
/  J0by  12:12-25;  2i:22;  22:12-14;  24:i; 

28:3,10-28;  34:21-25;  42:2-3  /  Psalms ,  33:3- 
15;  44:20-21;  69:5;  73:11;  94:7-12;  113:4-6; 
139;  147:4-5,15-18— (£>)  32:3-15; 

43:21-22;  68:6;  72:11;  93:7-12;  112:4-6;  138; 
146:4-5;  147:15-18  /  Proverbs ,  3:19-20;  5:21; 
15:3,11;  16:2;  24:12  /  Isaiah,  29:15-16;  40:13- 
14,27-28;  46:9-10;  47:10-11  — (D)  Isaias, 

29:15-16;  40:13-14,27-28;  46:9-10;  47:10-11 
/  Jeremiahy  1:5;  16:14-17;  17:9-10;  20:12; 
23:23-24— (D)  JeremiaSy  1:5;  16:14-17;  17:9- 
10;  20:12;  23:23-24 

Apocrypha  \  Rest  of  Esther  y  13:12;  14:14-19— (D) 
OT,  Esther ,  13:12;  14:14-19  /  Wisdom  of 
Solomony  i:6-n—(D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom, 
1:6-1 1  /  Ecclesiasticusy  15:18-19;  16:17-19; 
17:15,17-20;  23:18-20;  39:19-20;  42:18-21  — 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticusy  15:19-20;  16:16-20; 
17:13-17;  23:25-29;  39:24-25;  42:18-22  / 
Susanna,  42-44— (D)  OT,  Daniel,  13:42-44 

New  Testament:  John,  1  n-3;  6:64,70-71 ;  14:6/ 
Romans,  8:27;  11:33-36  /  I  Corinthians,  1:25; 
2:6-16;  3:18-20  /  Colossians,  2:2-3  /  Hebrews , 
4:12-13  /  I  John,  3:18-20 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  140d  /  Timaeus ,  465d  / 

Parmenides,  489d-490d  /  bk  x,  766d- 

767c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982b28- 
983ax  1]  501a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72bi4~29] 
602d-603a;  ch  9  605a-d;  ch  10  [i075bi9-24] 
606c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  14  120d-121c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  vi,  sect  44,  278b 


17  Plotinus:  'Third  Ennead ,  tr  ix  136a  138a, c  / 
Fifth  Ennead,  tr  i,  cii  4  209d  210c;  ch  6  7 
211a  212c;  tr  hi,  cii  8  i$  219d  224b;  tr  iv, 
cii  2-  tr  ix,  cii  14  227b  251d 

18  Aug u s ri n e :  Confessions,  bkxii,  par  18, 103a  b; 
bk  xm,  par  19  1 15cd  /  CY/y  of  God,  bk  v,  ch 
9-10  213b-216c;  bk  vii,  ch  30  261b  d;  bk  xi, 
ch  10  327d-328d;  ch  21  333a  d;  bk  xii,  ch 
17-18  353a  354d;  bk  xx,  cii  15  543d-544b; 
bk  xxii,  cii  2  587b  588a  /  Christian  Doctrine , 
bk  1,  cii  9-10  627a-b;  cii  13  627d;  cii  34 
634b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  i, 
rep  1  14b-15b;  a  6,  rep  i  18c-19a;  q  4,  a  2, 
rep  3  21b-22b;  qq  14-15  75c-94a;  q  18,  a  4 
107d-108c;  q  19,  a  3,  rep  6  110b  111c;  q  34, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  3-4  188b-189a;  q  44,  a  3 
240b-241a;  q  55,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  289a-d; 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  289d-290d;  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  1  291a-d;  q  56,  a  2,  ans  292d-294a;  Q  57, 
a  1,  ans  295a-d;  a  2,  ans  295d  297a;  a  3,  ans 
297b-298a;  a  4,  ans  298a-299a;  q  62,  a  9,  ans 
324a-325b;  q  63,  a  7,  rep  2  331c-332b;  q  79, 
a  10,  rep  2  423d-424d;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  442b- 
443c;  a  4,  rep  i  444d-446b;  a  5  446c-447c; 
q  85,  a  4,  ans  457a-d;  q  86,  a  4,  ans  463d- 
464d;  q  87,  a  1,  ans  465a-466c;  a  3,  ans  467b- 
468a;  q  89,  a  i,  ans  473b-475a;  Q  93,  a  4, 
ans  494c-495b;  a  8,  ans  499b-500c;  q  105, 
a  3  540c-541b;  q  107,  aa  2-3  550b-551c;  part 
1— ii,  Q  1,  a  4,  rep  i  612a-613a;  q  2,  a  3,  ans 
617b-618a;  q  3,  a  5,  rep  i  626b-627a;  q  14, 
a  1,  rep  2  677b-678a;  q  40,  a  3,  rep  i  794c- 
795a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  1,  rep  2  12b-13c;  q  61,  a  5,  ans  58b-59d; 
q  79,  a  1,  ans  156b-157b;  q  91,  a  3,  rep  i 
209d-210c;  q  93,  a  1  215b,d-216c;  q  ioo,  a  9, 
ans  261b-262b;  q  102,  a  i,  ans  270c-27lb; 
q  no,  a  2,  rep  2  349a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  2,  a  6, 
rep  3  395b-396a;  q  9,  a  1,  rep  i  423c-424b; 
q  11,  a  4,  rep  1  441b-442b;  q  33,  a  7,  rep  i 
556a-557d;  part  iii,  q  3,  a  8,  ans  729b-730b; 
q  5,  a  4,  ans  739a-740b;  q  7,  a  12,  ans  754c- 
755c;  q  13,  a  1,  rep  2  780a-781b;  q  18,  a  4, 
rep  1  813a-d;  q  21,  a  i,  rep  2  823d-824d;  q 
60,  a  4,  ans  849c-850b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  72, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  5  917c-919a;  a  2,  rep  4  919a- 
920c;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  984c-985d;  q  88,  a  3,  ans 
1002d-1004b;  q  91,  a  3,  ans  1020d-1022c;  q 
92,  a  1,  rep  2  1025c-1032b;  q  94,  a  i,  rep  2 
1040d-1041b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  viii  [94- 
1 12]  118a;  xv  [49-63]  128d-129a;  xvn  [13-45] 
132b-c;  xxvi  [103-108]  146d-147a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
138-154 106b-108b/ Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [15, 2.36- 
256]  456b-457a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  162c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  17b-c  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  23  108c;  aph  124 
133c-d;  bk  ii,  aph  15  149a 


580 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5^  to  5 h 


(5.  The  divine  nature  in  relation  to  the  world  or 
creatures.  5 f.  God's  knowledge:  the  divine 
omniscience;  the  divine  ideas.) 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  hi,  86a  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  122a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  17  362b-363c; 
prop  21,  demonst  364a-c;  prop  33,  schol  2 
367d-369a;  part  ii,  prop  i  373d-374a;  prop 
3-4  374ac;  prop  7,  schol-prop  8  375b-376a; 
prop  32  385c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [188-193]  115b; 
bk  hi  [56-134]  136b-138a;  bk  x  [1— 16]  274b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  x, 
sect  9  143a-c;  ch  xv,  sect  12  165b-c;  bk  iii, 
ch  vi,  sect  3  268d;  sect  ii  271b-d;  bk  iv, 
ch  x,  sect  5-6  350a-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
78,  485d-486a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  344a-c;  351b-352c  / 
Judgement ,  592a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  173c;  392d-393a 

5 g.  God’s  will:  divine  choice 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1-2  /  Psalms ,  135:6— 
(D)  Psalms ,  134:6  /  Isaiah ,  14:24-27;  46:9-11 
—  (D)  Isaias,  14:24-27;  46:9-11  /  Jeremiah , 
4:28;  51:29— (D)  Jeremias ,  4:28;  51:29 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  18:14;  20:1-16  / 
/o/fo,  5:21;  6:38-40  /  Romans ,  8:27-29;  9:11- 
19;  12:1-2  /  I  Corinthians ,  12  /  Ephesians ,  1:8- 
12;  3:10-11  /  /  Thessalonians ,  4:3-6;  5:18  / 
//  Timothy ,  1:8-10  /  James,  1:18 
5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [86-103]  2a-b 
5  Euripides:  Bacchantes  [1388-1391]  352a, c 
7  Plato:  Timaeus,  452c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iv,  ch  3,  224d; 
ch  7,  232d-233a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect  ii  262a-b 

17  Plotinus:  S/rz/i  Ennead,  tr  viii  342d-353d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  6-7  44d- 
45d;  bk  xi,  par  12  92b;  bk  xii,  par  18, 103a'b; 
bk  xiii,  par  5  llld;  par  19  115c-d  /  City  of 
God ,  bk  v,  ch  9-10  213b-216c;  bk  x,  ch  7 
302d-303a;  bk  xii,  ch  14  350d'351b;  ch  17 
353a-354a;  bk  xxi,  ch  7-8  565d-568d; 
bk  xxii,  ch  2  587b'588a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14,  a 
8,  ans  82c-83b;  q  19  108d-119d;  Q  20,  a  i,  rep 
3  120a-121b;  a  4,  ans  122c-124a;  q  23,  a  4 
135a-d;  q  25,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  147d-149a; 
q  26.  a  2,  rep  2  150c-151a;  q  50,  a  i,  ans  269b- 
270a;  q  54,  a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  q  57,  a  5,  ans 
299b-300b;  q  59,  a  2,  ans  307c-308b;  q  60, 
a  1,  rep  2  310b-311a;  q  61,  a  2,  rep  1,3  315c- 
316a ;  q  62,  a  6,  rep  1  322a-d;  q  63,  a  i,  ans 
325c-326c;  Q  104,  aa  3-4  537b-538c;  q  105, 
a  1,  rep  2  538d-539c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  2,  rep  3 
610b-611b;  q  10,  a  i,  rep  2  662d-663d;  q  19, 
aa  9-10  709d-711d;  q  39,  a  2,  rep  3  790d-791b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  93, 
a  4,  rep  1  218b-d;  q  97,  a  3,  rep  i  237b-238b; 


part  hi,  q  18,  a  1,  rep  1,4  810a-811c;  q  21, 
a  1,  ans  823d-824d;  a  4,  ans  826b-827c;  q  61, 
a  4,  rep  3  857c-858b;  q  64,  a  7,  ans  875d- 
876c;  part  hi  suppl,  q  72,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  5 
920c-922b;  q  74,  a  4,  ans  928d-929d;  q  91, 
a  1,  rep  2  1016b-1017c;  a  2,  ans  1017c-1020c; 
q  92,  a  3,  rep  6  1034b-1037c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  iii  [64-90] 
llOa-b;  xix  [85-90]  135d-136a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  113b-c;  162c; 
part  iv,  271b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv, 
265b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  38a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  228a-c; 
229c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  17  362b-363c; 
prop  32  367a-b;  prop  33,  schol  2  367d-369a; 
appendix,  370c-371a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [80-134]  137a- 
138a;  bk  vii  [139-173]  220a-221a  /  Samson 
Agonistes  [300-329]  346a- b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  50-51  191b-c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  25-33 
417d-419a  esp  sect  29-30  418c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  150c-151b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
265b  c  esp  265b, d  [fn  1];  276b-277a;  278b-c  / 
Practical  Reason,  303b-304a;  321b-c;  324b- 
325a;  325d-326a;  328b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals ,  393c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  272a-b;  bk 
xii,  553b;  bk  xiii,  563a-b;  bk  xv,  631c; 
epilogue  ii,  675a-677b;  680b-c;  684b-d 

5 h.  God’s  love:  the  diffusion  of  the  divine  good¬ 
ness 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  33:19;  34:6  /  Deu¬ 
teronomy,  4:37-38;  7:7-8;  10:15,18;  32:4  / 
I  Chrotiicles,  16:7-34 —(D)  I  Paralipomenon, 
16:7-34  /  Job  passim,  esp  2:10  /  Psalms  / 
Proverbs,  3:12  /  Song  of  Solomon—  (D)  Can¬ 
ticle  of  Canticles  /  Isaiah ,  43;  45:7;  63:7-9— 
(D)  Isaias,  43;  45:7;  63:7-9  /  Jeremiah,  31:1-6; 
32:17-44;  33:1-16 — (D)  Jeremias,  31:1-6; 
32:17-44;  33:1-16  /  Lamentations ,  3:25,38  / 
Ezekiel,  16:1-15— (D)  Ezechiel,  16:1-15  /  Ho- 
sea,  1-3;  11  —  (D)  Osee,  1-3;  11  /  Joel,  2:12- 
3:21  /  Micah,  1:12 —(D)  Micheas,  1:12  /  Zech- 
ariah,  9:17  —(D)  Zacharias,  9:17  /  Malachi , 
1:1-3— (D)  Malachias ,  1:1-3 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  13:10 — ( D )  OT,  Tobias, 
13:12  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  7:28;  11:22-26; 
12:13-16;  16:20-29 — (D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wis¬ 
dom,  7:28;  11:23-27;  12:13-16;  16:20-29  / 
Ecclesiasticus ,  4:14;  11:14-17;  16:29-30;  17:8- 
18,29;  33:10-15;  39:16,25-34— (D)  OT,  Eccle¬ 
siasticus,  4:15;  11:14-17;  16:30-31;  17:8-18,28; 
33:10-15;  39:21,30-40 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:25-34;  7:7-11; 
10:29-31  /  Luke ,  11:1-13;  12:6-7,16-33  /  John, 


581 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


5//  to  5/ 

3:16-21;  13:31-35;  14:21;  15:9  16;  17:21-26/ 
Romans ,  2:4;  5:5;  8:28-39  /  II  Corinthians , 
13:11  /  Galatians ,  2:20  /  Ephesians ,  3:14-21; 
5:1-2  /  /  Timothy ,  1:14  /  3:3-7  /  //c- 

12:6  /  /  John,  3-4  /  Revelation,  3:19-21 
— (D)  Apocalypse,  3 : 1 9-2 1 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  321d322d  /  Timaeus , 
447c-448a 

8  Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii, 
ch  10  [336^25— 34]  438d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  cii  8  146a  147c 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  50d-51c 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1049b- 
1050b;  1071b 

17  Plotinus:  S/rz/i  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  9  358d- 
359c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  7  2c-d;  par 
31  8d-9a;  bk  v,  par  2  27b-c;  bk  vii,  par  16-23 
48c-50c;  bk  xi,  par  6  90c-d;  bk  xii,  par  18, 
103a-b;  bk  xiii,  par  1-5  llOd-llld  /  C//y  of 
God,  bk  vii,  cii  31  261d-262a;  bk  xi,  ch  21-24 
333a-336a;  bk  xii,  ch  i,  343b-c;  ch  9  347b- 
348b;  bk  xix,  ch  13  519a-520a;  bk  xxi,  ch 
15-16  572c-574a;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b,d-587b; 
ch  24  609a-612a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, 
ch  31-32  633 b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
rep  i  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  1,  rep  i  14b-15b;  q  6, 
a  4  30b-d;  q  13,  a  2,  ans  63c-64d;  q  19,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  2-4  109c-110b;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i 
lllc-112c;  q  20  119d-124a;  q  21,  a  3,  ans 
126a-c;  q  27,  aa  3-4  155c-156d;  Q  37  197c- 
200c;  q  44,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i  241a-d;  q  49 
264d-268a,c;  q  50,  a  i,  ans  269b-270a;  a  3, 
ans  272a-273b;  q  51,  a  i,  rep  3  275b-276b; 
q  59,  a  1,  ans  306c-307b;  a  2,  ans  307c-308b; 
q  60,  a  5  313b-314c;  q  74,  a  3,  rep  3-4  375a- 
377a, c;  q  75,  a  5,  rep  i  382a-383b;  Q  82,  a  5, 
rep  1  435c-436c;  q  89,  a  i,  rep  3  473b-475a; 
q  91,  a  1,  ans  484a-485b;  q  93,  a  4,  ans  494c- 
495b;  a  8,  ans  499b-500c;  Q  103  528a-534b 
passim;  q  104,  a  3,  rep  2  537b-d;  a  4,  ans 
538a-c;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  541c-542a;  q  106,  a  4, 
ans  548b-549a;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  i 
612a-613a;  q  2,  a  4,  rep  i  618a-d;  a  5,  rep  3 
618d-619c;  q  22,  a  3,  rep  3  722d-723b;  q  28, 
a  3,  contrary  742a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  64, 
a  4,  ans  69b-70a;  q  65,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  3 
74c-75a;  q  73,  a  10,  ans  128a-d;  q  75,  a  3, 
ans  139b-d;  q  79,  a  1  156b-157b;  a  3,  rep  i 
158a-d;  a  4,  rep  i  158d-159c;  q  90,  preamble, 
205a;  q  92,  a  i,  rep  i  213c-214c;  q  93,  a  6, 
rep  1  219d-220d;  Q  96,  a  5,  rep  2  233d-234d; 
q  no,  a  1  347d-349a;  a  4,  ans  350d-351d; 
q  in,  a  3,  rep  1  353d-354b;  part  ii-ii,  q  6, 
a  2,  rep  2  414c-415c;  q  19,  a  i,  rep  3  465a-d; 
a  5,  rep  3  468b-469a;  Q  23,  a  2,  rep  1-2 
483d-484d:  q  24,  a  2,  ans  490b-d;  a  3,  ans 
491a-d;  a  8,  ans  495b-496a;  a  ii,  rep  i  498b- 
499c;  a  12,  ans  499c-500d;  q  26,  a  3,  ans 
511d-512c;  q  30,  a  2,  rep  i  534b-535a;  q  189, 


a  10,  rep  1  699a  700d;  part  hi,  q  i,  a  3,  rei»  3 
704d  706a;  q  4,  a  5,  rep  2  734b  d;  q  23,  a  i, 
rep  2  833a  d;  q  62,  a  2,  contrary  859d  860c; 
part  in  suppl,  q  71,  a  3,  rep  i  903c-904d; 
q  80,  A  3,  rep  3  958b  959c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  1  [37-40]  lb  c; 
purgatory,  hi  [103  145]  57a-c;  xi  [1  30]  68d 
69a;  xv  [40-81]  75d  76a;  xxvm  [91-96]  97a; 
paradise,  ii  [112-148]  109a  b;  vii  [64  75] 
115d-116a;  x  [1—27]  120b-c;x.m  [52-87]  126a  b; 
xix  [86-90]  135d-136a;  xxvi  [1— 8 1  ]  145d  146c; 
xxvii  [97-120]  148b  c;  xxix  [13—36]  150b  c; 
[127—145]  151c-d;  xxxii  [i39]-xxxm  [145] 
156a-157d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iii,  stanza 
1-7  54b-55b;  stanza  250-253  87a  b;  bk  v, 
stanza  263-267  154b-155a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  80b-81a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  229c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  prop  i7,corol 456d; 
prop  19  457a;  prop  35—36  460d-461c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [80-343]  137a- 
143a  esp  [135-166]  138b-139a;  bk  iv  [41 1-439] 
161b-162a;  bk  vii  [499-518]  228a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  12  115b-116a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  3 
405b-c;  sect  154  444a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  186c-d 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  345a-c  /  Judgement, 
592a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  539d-540a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dick,  318b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  272a- b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 
24a-c;  bk  v,  120d-137c;  bk  vi,  153a-d;  bk  vii, 
189a-191a,c;  bk  xi,  313c-314d 

5 /.  Divine  justice  and  mercy:  divine  rewards 
and  punishments 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3:1-4:16;  6-9;  nn-9; 
18:17-19:29;  22:1-19  esP  22:15-18  /  Exodus, 
7-12;  20:3-7;  32  esp  32:9 “Mi  33:i9’>  34o-i<>  / 
Leviticus,  26  /  Numbers,  11-14;  16;  21 5-9;  25  / 
Deuteronomy,  1-11  passim;  28-32  passim  /  I 
Samuel,  15— (D)  I  Kings,  15  /  //  Samuel,  6:6- 
8;  24— (D)  II  Kings,  6:6-8;  24  /  /  Kings,  8; 
13;  14:2-16— (D)  III  Kings ,  8;  13;  14:2-16  / 
II  Kings,  9:1-10:11  —  (D)  IV  Kings,  9:1-10:11  / 
I  Chronicles,  10:13-14;  21  —  (D)  I  Paralipome - 
non,  10:13-14;  21  /  II  Chronicles ,  6;  12;  19:6-7; 
21:12-20;  26:16-21 — (D)  II  Paralipomenon,  6; 
12;  19:6-7;  21:12-20;  26:16-21  /  Nehemiah, 
9:5-38— (D)  II  Esdras,  9:5-38  /  Job  /  Psalms  / 
Proverbs,  11  :i, 20-21;  20:22;  22:22-23  /  Ecclesi¬ 
astes,  12:14  /  Isaiah  passim,  esp  1,  3-4,  10,  13- 

27.  3°.  34-35.  4°.  42>  47-  52-53>  59.  65-66— 
(j D )  Isaias  passim,  esp  1,  3-4,  10,  13-27,  30, 
34-35,  40,  42,  47,  52-53,  59,  65-66  /  Jeremiah 
passim,  esp  3-8,  15,  19,  24-25,  29-31,  33,  46-52 
—  (D)  Jeremias  passim,  esp  3-8,  15,  19,  24-25, 
29-3 !,  33,  46-52  /  Lamentations  /  Ezekiel 


582 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  divine  nature  in  relatien  to  the  world  or 
creatures.  5 i.  Divine  justice  and  mercy: 
divine  rewards  and  punishments .) 

passim,  esp  4-9,  11,  14-18,  25-33,  35-39 — 
(D)  Ezechiel  passim,  esp  4-9,  11,  14-18,  25- 
33-  35“39/  Daniel,  4:4-5:31 — (D)  Daniel,  4-5 
/  Joel  /  Amos  /  Obadiah — ( D )  Abdias  /  Jonah 
—(D)  Jonas  /  Micah—(D )  Micheas  /  Nahum 
/  Habakju\—(D)  Habacuc  /  Zephaniah—(D) 
Sophonias  /  Zechariah—(D)  Zacharias  /  ALz/- 
achi—(D)  Malachias 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  2-3;  13 — ( D )  OT,  Tobias , 
2-3;  13  /  Judith,  5 — (Z))  OT,  Judith,  5  /  fT/V- 
dom  of  Solomon,  1-5;  11:23;  12— (79)  OT, 
Boo\of  Wisdom,  1-5;  11:24;  12  /  Ecclesiasticus, 
16;  17:19-29;  18:1-14;  23:18-21;  35;  39:25-31 
— (£>)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  16;  17:16-28;  18:1- 
14;  23:25-31;  35;  39:30-37  /  Susanna— (D) 
OT,  Daniel,  13  /  Zfe/  Dragon,  23-42— (D) 
OT,  Daniel,  14:22-42  /  II  Maccabees,  6:12-17 
—  (7))  OT,  II  Machabees,  6:12-17 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:1-22,29-30,45; 
9:9-13;  11:20-24;  12:36-37;  13:24-30,36-43; 
18:7-14;  19:16-20:16;  23  /  A/ar^,  9:37-47; 
10:17-31;  16:16 /  Lube,  1:46-55; 6 .-36-38;  7:36- 
50;  10:25-28;  14:7-14;  15;  16:19-31;  18:1-8; 
19:1-10;  23:34,39-43  /  John,  5:30;  8:1-1 1  / 
12:18-23;  13:1-12  /  Romans,  1:16-2:16; 
6:23;  9:14-18  /  7/  Corinthians,  4  /  Galatians , 
6:7-8  /  Ephesians,  2  /  II  Thessalonians,  1 :3~io; 
2:10-12  /  77  Timothy,  4:8  /  Titus,  3:4-6  / 
Hebrews,  10:26-31  /  I  Peter,  3:18  /  77  / 

7  John,  1:5-10  /  /zm/?  /  Revelation  passim,  esp 
17-20 — (L>)  Apocalypse  passim,  esp  17-20 

5  Aeschylus  :  Suppliant  Maidens  [1— 175]  la-3a  / 
Agamemnon  [636-781]  58d-60b;  [1560-1566] 
68c  /  Eumenides  81a-91d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  esp 
[1-275]  99a-101c,  [703-738]  105d-106a,  [863- 
910]  107b-c,  [1187-1285]  llOb-11  la  /  Antigone 
[279-289]  133c  /  Oedipus  at  Colonus  114a- 
130a, c  esp  [521-545]  119a-b,  [939-ioi4]123a-d, 
[1254-1396]  125d-126d  /  143a-155a,c  esp 

[430-459]  146d-147a,  [748-783]  149c-d  /  Elec - 
taz  [173— 179]  157c  /  Trachiniae  [1264-1278] 
181c  /  Philoctetes  [446-452]  186a 

5  Euripides  :  Suppliants  [598-617]  263c-d  /  Hec¬ 
uba  [1023-1033]  361c-d  /Heracles  Mad  [772- 
780]  371c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  20b-22a;  bk  ii, 
77a  b;  bk  iv,  158d-159d  esp  159d;  bk  vi, 
199c-d;  201d-202c;  203a-b;  bk  viii,  278d- 
279a;  283d;  bk  ix,  308a-c 

6  Thucydides  '.Peloponnesian  War,  BKv,506b-c; 
bk  vii,  560a 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  x,  437c-441a,c  /  Laws, 
bk  iv,  682d-683a;  bk  ix,  757a;  bk  x,  765d- 
769d  esp  767c-768c  /  Seventh  Letter,  806a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [978- 
1023]  42d-43b;  bk  vi  [43-79]  80d-81b;  [379- 
422]  85b-d 


5/ 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  26b-27a  /  Camillus, 
107b-d  /  Aristides,  265c-d  /  Cato  the  Younger , 
639d 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  i,  189d-190a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  15  12b-c; 
bk  v,  par  2  27b-c;  bk  vii,  par  5  44c-d;  bk  ix, 
par  34-36  70c-71a  /  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  10- 
11  215c-216d;  ch  14-26  220a-230a,c;  bk  ix, 
ch  10  291a;  bk  xi,  ch  23  334c-335c;  bk  xiii, 
ch  1-8  360a-363c;  ch  12-16  365d-367d; 
bk  xiii,  ch  21-BK  xiv,  ch  28  37la-397d  esp 
bk  xiv,  ch  15  388d-390a,  ch  26  395d-396c; 
bk  xv,  ch  24-25  418d-419b;  bk  xvi,  ch  4 
425b-426a;  bk  xix,  ch  10-13  516c-520a;  ch  15 
521a-c;  bk  xx  530a-560a,c;  bk  xxi  560a- 
586a, c  esp  ch  11-12  570b-571c,  ch  18  574c- 
575b,  ch  24  577b-579d;  bk  xxii  586b,d-618d 
/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  15  628b-c; 
ch  32  633c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  23  648a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  6  113c-114d;  a  9,  ans  116d-117d;  q  21  124b- 
127c;  Q  23,  a  5  135d-137d;  q  62  317c-325b; 
q  63,  a  8,  ans  332c-333b;  q  64,  a  2,  rep  2 
335d-336d;  q  65,  a  2,  rep  3  340b-341b;  q  66, 
a  3,  ans  347b-348d;  q  95,  a  4  509b-510a;  q  96, 
a  3,  rep  3  512a-c;  q  103,  a  5,  rep  2  531b-532b; 
q  105,  a  6,  rep  2  543b-544a;  q  113,  a  7,  ans 
580b-581a;  q  114,  a  i,  rep  i  581d-582c;  part 
1— ii,  q  5,  a  1  636d-637c;  a  4,  ans  639a-640b; 
a  7  642a-d;  q  17,  a  9,  rep  3  692d-693d;  q  21, 
a  4  719d-720a,c;  q  39,  a  2,  rep  3  790d-791b; 
q  47,  a  1,  rep  1  819c-820b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
a  5,  ans  58b-59d;  q  62,  a  1  60a-d;  q  63,  a  3 
65a-d;  q  68,  a  2  89c-90c;  q  72,  a  5  115a-116b; 
q  73,  a  9,  rep  3  126d-128a;  a  10,  rep  2  128a-d; 
q  79,  aa  3-4  158a-159c;  q  81,  a  2,  rep  i  164d- 
165c;  q  85,  a  5,  ans  181d-182d;  a  6  182d-184a; 
qq  87-88  185c-198d;  q  91,  a  6  212c-213c;  q  94, 
a  5,  rep  2  224d-225d;  q  98,  a  2,  rep  3  240c- 
241b;  a  4  242b-243c;  q  ioo,  a  7,  rep  3  258c- 
259c;  a  8,  rep  2-3  259d-261a;  a  12  264d-265d; 
q  103,  a  2  299b-300d;  q  106,  a  2  322b-323a; 
q  112,  a  4,  rep  1  358d-359c;  qq  113-114  360d- 
378a, c;  part  ii-ii,  q  13,  a  4,  ans  446c-447a; 
q  14,  a  2,  ans  448d-449d;  Q  18,  a  4,  rep  2 
464c-465a;  q  19,  a  1,  rep  2  465a-d;  q  20,  a  1, 
ans  474d-475d;  q  21,  a  2,  ans  479a-c;  q  24, 
a  10,  ans  496d-498a;  q  28,  a  3  528d-529c;  q 
182,  a  2  621d-623a;  q  184,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i 
632c-633c;  part  hi,  q  2,  a  ii  721c-722b;  q  9, 
a  2  764c-765a;  q  64  870b-879c;  part  hi 
suppl,  q  69,  a  2  886c-887d;  q  70,  a  3  897d- 
900d;  q  71  900d-917b  passim;  q  72,  a  3,  rep 
4  920c-922b;  qq  73-74  922b-935a,c  passim; 
q  75,  a  1  935b-937a;  Q  78,  a  i,  ans  947d- 
949b;  a  3,  rep  3  950b-951a;  qq  82-99  968a- 
1085a, c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy  esp  hell,  iii  [1-18] 
4a-b,  xi  15a-16b,  purgatory,  iii  [103-145] 
57a-c,  vi  [25-48]  61a-b,  xix  [97-126]  82c-d, 
paradise,  iii  [i]-v  [87]  109b-113a,  vii  [19-120] 


5/  to  6 


Chapter  29:  GOD  5  $3 


115b-116b,  xix  [22-99]  135b  136a,  xxxn  [37- 
84] 155a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [653-662]  170b  /  Friar's 
Tale  278a-284a  esp  [7056-7085]  281a-b,  [7227- 
7246]  284a  /  Physician's  Tale  366a  371a  esp 
[12,212-220]  370b-371a  /  Pardoner's  Tale 
[12,397-852]  374a-381b  /  Tale  of  Mel  ileus, 
par  42-45,  419b-420a;  par  77-78,  431a-432a  / 
Monl(s  Tale  434a-448b  /  Parson's  Tale  495a- 
550a  esp  par  10  498b-502a,  par  56  527b  528b, 
par  68  533b-534a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  88c-89a;  part  ii, 
160c-161a;  163d-164a;  part  hi,  191b-198a; 
245b-c;  part  iv,  250c-251c;  253b-258b; 
260b-c;  272b-c;  276d-277a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  98c-99a;  152d-153a; 
250a-251c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  i,  sc  iv  [42- 
63]  115a-b;  [186-225]  116c-117a  /  Richard  II, 
act  i,  sc  ii  [1-44]  322d-323a  /  Merchant  of 
Venice ,  act  iv,  sc  i  [184-202]  427c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  v  [9-22]  37a; 
act  hi,  sc  hi  [36-98]  53d-54b  /  Measure  for 
Measure ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [73-79]  182d  /  Cymbe - 
line,  act  v,  sc  iv  [9-28]  481a- b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  71c-d 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  69b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix,  369b-371a 
esp  370b 

32  Milton:  Sonnets ,  xv  66b  /  Paradise  Lost ,  bk 
iii  [80-216]  137a-140a  esp  [131-134)1383; [274— 
415]  141b-144b  esp  [397-41 1]  144a-b;  bk  v 
[224-247]  180a-b;  bk  x  274a-298b  esp  [1— 16] 
274b,  [162-223]  278a-279a,  [1046-1104]  297a- 
298b;  bk  xi  [46-83]  300a-301a;  bk  xii  [285- 
465]  325b-329a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [293-299] 
346a;  [667-709]  354a-355a;  [1156-1177]  364b- 
365a;  [1669-1707]  376a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  430  245a-247b;  497  259b- 
260a;  513  262a-263a;  562  273a;  584  276b- 
277a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  17a-b  /  Civil  Government , 
ch  hi,  sect  20  29c-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  176  66a-b 
/  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect  5-6 
105a-c;  sect  12-13  107b-108c;  ch  iii,  sect  5 
113c;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  54,  192b;  sect  62 
194c-d;  sect  72  198a-c;  ch  xxviii,  sect  8 
230a;  bk  iv,  ch  xiv,  sect  2  364c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi,  div 
108-109  500b-501a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  20b-21a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii,  85d- 
86a;  bk  xxvi,  219a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  237b-238b  /  Intro.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals,  383b,d-384a,c  /  Science  of 
Right,  432c-433a  /  Judgement,  592a-c;  594d 

[fm] 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  458a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  345b-c;  394a-c;  482a-d; 
539d-540a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  234d- 
235a 


47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part  ii  [11,676-12,111] 
284a-294b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  30a  36b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiv,  606a  607a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iii, 64c- 
67a;  bk  v,  125d  127d;  bk  vi,  151a  152a;  163b 
164a;  169c-170b;  bk  vii,  I77d-178b;  185a-c; 
189a-191a,c;  bk  viii,  217c  218c;  bk  xi,  313c- 
314d;  341C-342 c 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  lectures,  878a  b 

6.  Man’s  knowledge  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  43:12  -23  /  Job,  11 7-9; 
26:14;  34:29i  36:23-33  /  Proverbs,  2:1-5  / 
Ecclesiastes,  3:11 ;  8:16-17;  11 :5  /  Isaiah,  40:12  - 
14;  45:15;  55:8-9;  60:16— (D)  Isaias,  40:12-14; 
45 :1 5 5  55:8-9;  60:16  /  Jeremiah,  24:7;  31:34  — 
(D)  Jeremias,  24:7;  31:34 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  9:13-16;  15:3 
— ( D )  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  9:13-16;  15:3 

New  Testament:  Acts,  17:22-30  /  Romans,  1:18- 
21;  11:33-34  /  I  Corinthians,  2:16;  15:34 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  93d-94a;  106b  /  Republic, 
bk  11,  314c-d/  Timaeus,  447c/  Critias,  478b- d 
/  Laws,  bk  vii,  730a-c;  bk  x,  757d-761c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982b 
28-983^  1]  501a-b;  bk  xi,  ch  7  [io64a28-b5] 
592d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  6,  llOc-lllc; 
ch  12,  118d-119a;  ch  16  121d-122d 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  53b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vi,  par  8  37b-c; 
bk  x  71c-89a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xx,  ch  2-3 
531a-532b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  6 
626a-b;  ch  8-11  626c-627c;  bk  ii,  ch  7  638d- 
639c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  i 
lOd-lld;  Q  12  50b-62b;  q  13,  aa  1-2  62c-64d; 
a  5,  ans  66b-67d;  a  12  74c-75b;  q  86,  a  2, 
rep  1  462a-463a;  Q  87,  a  3  472c-473a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  iii  [34— 
45]  56b;  paradise,  iv  [28-48]  111a;  [124-132] 
112a;  v  [1— 12]  112a-b;  xiii  [112-142]  126c-d; 
xix  [1-99]  135a-136a;  xx  [79-93]  137c;  [130- 
138]  138a;  xxi  [73-102]  139a-b;  xxvi  [13-69] 
146a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  160b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  98b-99a;209a-d;212a-d; 
238c-239c;  267c-268a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c;  17b- 
20a;  38a;  55b-d;  95d-101d  esp  95d-97c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43c;  part  iv 
51b-54b  passim  /  Meditations,  69a-71a,c  pas¬ 
sim;  74a, c;  iii-iv,  81d-89b  esp  iii,  88d-89a;  v 
93a-96a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  108a-114c; 
120c-123a;  127b-c;  postulate  iv-v  131a-c; 
prop  i-m  132b-133a;  140b;  158b-161d;  168d- 
169a;  211c-212a;  212c-213a;  213d-214a;215b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  1,  prop  ii,  schol 
358d-359b;  part  ii,  prop  5  374c-d;  prop  21- 
42  382d-388c  esp  prop  24-25  383c-384a,  prop 
30-33  385a-d,  prop  36  386b;  prop  45-47 


584 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6a  to  6b 


(6.  Man's  knowledge  of  God.) 

390a-391a;  part  iv,  prop  28  431c;  prop  36-37 
434a-436a;  appendix,  iv  447b-c;  part  v, 
prop  24-32  458d-460b 

32  Milton  :  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [1 14-130]  234b- 
235a;  [412-416]  241a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  194,  205d-206a;  229-230 
213a-b;  233,  214a-b;  242-290  217b-225a; 
566-567  273b;  586  277a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  hi, 
sect  7-18  113d-117c;  bk  ii,  ch  xvii,  sect  i 
167d-168a;  sect  17  172b-c;  ch  xxiii,  sect 
33-35  212d-213c;  bk  iii,chvi,sectii  271bd; 
bk  iv,  ch  xviii-xix  380d'388d 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  146-149 
442a-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  200c-201a;  308b- 
309d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  la-b;  173b-248d  esp  177b- 
192d,  218d-223d,  234c-240b,  241d-242c  / 
Practical  Reason ,  292a-c;  320c-321b;  349b- 
352c  esp  350c-351a;  354d-355d  /  Judgement , 
575b-577a;  5S9b-590b;  598b-599b;  600d- 
601c;  603a-d;  606d-608c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  159b- 
160a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  196a-197c 

6a.  The  names  of  God:  the  metaphorical  and 
symbolic  representations  of  God;  the 
anthropomorphic  conception  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  3:13-15;  6:2-3;  15:3; 
20:7;  33:20-23;  34:5-7,14  /  Leviticus ,  19:12; 
21:6;  22:32  /  Deuteronomy ,  5:11;  28:58  / 
II  Samuel ,  22 —(D)  II  Kings ,  22  /  Psalms  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  18,  23,  28:7;  29:1-11,  31:2-3,  61:1-8, 
68:4,  71:3,  78:35,  78:65,  83:18,  95:1-11— (D) 
Psalms  passim,  esp  17,  22,  27:7,  28:2-10,  30:3- 
4, 60:2-9,  67:5, 70:3,-  77:35, 77:65,  82:19, 
94:1-11  /  Proverbs,  18:10;  30:4  /  Isaiah, 

17:10;  30:27-30;  40:11;  41:4;  42:8;  44:6;  47:4; 
48:2,12;  51:15;  54:5;  55:13;  63:16—  (D)  Isaias , 
17:10;  30:27-30;  40:11;  41:4;  42:8;  44:6; 
47:4;  48:2,12;  51:15;  54:5;  55:13;  63:16  / 
Jeremiah ,  10:16;  16:21;  23:6;  31:35;  32:18; 
33:2;  50:34;  51:19 — ( D )  Jeremias,  10:16; 

16:21;  23:6;  31:35;  32:18;  33:2;  50:34;  51:19 
/  Daniel,  7:9,13  /  Amos,  4:13;  5:8;  9:6 
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  14:12-21  —  (D) 
OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  14:12-21 
New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:9  /  Luke,  11:2  / 
John ,  10:1-18  /  /  Corinthians,  10:4  /  Revelation, 
1:8;  21:6;  22:13 —(D)  Apocalypse,  1:8;  21:6; 
22:13 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [160-175]  53d-54a 

5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [376— 
391]  414b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  49d-50a;  60a-d; 
80a-c 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  91c-92b;  93d-97d  /  Philebus, 
609d-610a  /  Laws,  bk  x,  759d-760c 


8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  8  [i074bi- 
7]  604d-605a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i252bi9~27] 
446a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  853b-854a;  860a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  194c- 
195b;  ch  24-25  201c-202a;  bk  vii,  ch  10-12 
250b-251c  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  6-7 
626a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  aa 
9-10  8d-10c;  q  3,  a  1,  rep  1-5  14b-15b;  a  2, 
rep  1-2  15c-16a;  a  3,  rep  i  16a-d;  q  4,  a  1, 
rep  1  20d-21b;  q  13  62b-75b;  q  14,  a  i,  rep 
1-2  75d-76c;  qq  27-43  153a-237a,c  passim; 
q  102,  a  1,  rep  4  523d-525a;  q  113,  a  7,  rep  i 
580b-581a;  part  i-ii,  q  47,  a  i,  rep  i  819c- 
820b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  99, 
a  3,  rep  3  247a-248a;  q  102,  a  2,  ans  271b- 
272a;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  5,  ans  715a-716b;  q  16, 
a  3,  ans  798c-799b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  96,  a  2, 
ans  1052a-1053b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  iv  [28-48] 
111a;  xxvi  [124-138]  147a-b;  xxx  [34—99] 
152a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54b;  79d-80a; 
part  11,  162c-d;  part  iii,  172d-173a;  181a- 
182c;  183d-184a;  part  iv,  271c;  272b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  238d-239b;  256c-d 

28  Harvey  :  On  Animal  Generation ,  428c-d;  443c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  60c-61b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  17,  schol  362c- 
363c;  part  11,  prop  3,  schol  374b-c 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
370a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  17  117a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  xiii,  sect  18  152a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  176a-b;  192c-d  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  547b-d;  593c-d;  598b-599b;  599d-600a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  248d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xi, 
345a-c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  771a-b 
/  Hew  Introductory  Lectures,  875d-876b 

6b.  Natural  knowledge:  the  use  of  analogies; 
the  evidences  of  nature;  the  light  of 
reason 

Old  Testament:  Job ,  12:7-9;  26:7-14;  36:24- 
42:2  /  Psalms,  8;  19:1—6;  65;  75:1;  95:1-6; 
104;  107;  147:12-20— (D)  Psalms,  8;  18:1-7; 
64;  74:2;  94:1-6;  103;  106;  147  /  Ecclesiastes , 
3:11;  8:17;  11:5  /  Isaiah,  45:5-8— (D)  Isaias , 
45:5-8 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  13:1-5— (D) 
OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  13:1-5  /  Ecclesiasticus, 
16:26-30;  18:4-7;  42:15-43:33— (£>)  OT, 

Ecclesiasticus,  16:26-31;  18:2-6;  42:15-43:37  / 
II  Maccabees ,  7:28 —(D)  OT,  II  Machabees , 
7:28 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:26-30  /  Luke, 
12:24-28  /  Romans ,  1:18-24 


585 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


6b  to  6c(  1) 

7  Plato:  Tiinaeus ,  465d  466a  /  hk  vii, 

728b-730c;  bk  x,  758b  759a 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  cii  i  375b, d  376a 
/  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982b28  983*1 1  ] 
501ab;  bk  vi,  ch  i  547b,d-548c  esp  [1026*23- 
33]  548b-c;  bk  xi,  cii  7  [1064^6-1 3]  592d  593a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  cii  6  1 10c  l  12b; 
ch  9,  114c'115a;  ch  16-17  121d-124a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  xii,  sect  28  310a 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  123c-124a  /  Coriolanus , 
191d-192b  /  435b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  1  27ab; 
bk  vi,  par  8  37b-c;  bk  vii,  par  16-23  48c-50c; 
bk  x,  par  8-10  73b-74a;  bk  xi,  par  6  90cd  / 
CzVy  oy* God ,  bk  viii,  ch  3  266a-d;  bk  x,  cii  14 
307c-308a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  4 
625b'C 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i,  q  2,  aa 
1-2  10d'12c;  q  3,  a  1,  rep  1-5  14b-15b;  a  3, 
rep  1  16a-d;  a  4,  rep  2  16d-17c;  a  6,  rep  i 
18c-19a;  q  12,  a  4  53b-54c;  aa  12-13  60d-62b; 
q  32,  a  1  175d-178a;  q  50,  a  2,  ans  270a-272a; 
q  65,  a  1,  rep  3  339b-340b;  q  79,  a  9,  ans 
422b-423d;  q  86,  a  2,  rep  i  462a-463a;  q  88, 
a  2,  rep  4  471c-472c;  a  3  472c-473a;  q  94,  a  1 
501d-503a;  q  103,  a  i,  ans  528b-529a;  part 
1— ii,  q  5,  a  5,  ans  640b-641a;  q  14,  a  i,  rep  2 
677b-678a;  q  17,  a  8,  rep  2  692a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i— ii,  q  61, 
a  5,  ans  58b-59d;  q  66,  a  5  79b-80c;  q  68,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  2  87c-89c;  q  90,  a  4,  rep  i  207d- 
208b;  q  93,  a  2  216C'217b;  q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d- 
223a;  q  99,  a  3,  rep  3  247a-248a;  q  ioo,  a  i 
251b-252a;  q  109,  a  i,  rep  i  338b-339c;  part 
ii— ii,  q  1,  a  5,  rep  4  383b-384b;  q  4,  a  7,  ans 
407d-409a;  q  10,  a  12,  rep  4  436b-437d;  q  27, 
a  3,  rep  2  522c-523b;  a  4,  rep  3  523c-524a; 
a  6,  rep  3  524c-525c;  part  iii,  q  3,  a  3, 
ans  724c-725b;  q  12,  a  3,  rep  2  778b-779a; 
PART  III  SUPPL,  Q  91,  A  I,  ANS  1016b-1017c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  iii  [34- 
45]  56b;  paradise,  iv  [28-48]  111a;  x  [1-27] 
120b-c 

23  Hobbes  :  Leviathan,  part  i,  54b-c;  66a-c;  78d- 
79a;  79d-80b;  83a-b;  part  ii,  137b-c;  149c-d; 
160b;  163a-b;  part  iii,  165a-167b;  172d- 
173a;  183d-184a;  241a-242a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  98b-99a;209a--d;212a-d; 
238c-239c;  246a-d;  251c-252b;  267c-268a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  42 Id;  429b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c;  17b- 
20a;  38a;  39d-40a;  41b-d;  55b-c;  96c-97c  esp 
96d-97a  /  New  Atlantis ,  203a- b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  i,  43c;  part  iv, 

52a-d  /  Meditations ,  69a-71a,c  passim;  71d- 
72b;  iii— iv,  81d-89b;  v  93a-96a  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  110c-114c;  120c-122b;  127a-c; 
prop  i-iii  132b-133a;  140b;  158b-161d; 

168d-169a;  211c-212a;  212c-213a;  213d-214a; 
215b-c;  232b;  283d-284a;  284d 

31  SpixXoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  def  i  373a;  prop 
45-47  390a-391a;  part  iv,  prop  28  431c;  prop 


36-37,  DKMONST434a  d;  appendix,  iv447b-c; 
part  v,  prop  21-42  458a  463d  esp  prop  24  25 
458d  459a,  prop  30-33  459d  460c,  prop  36 
461a  c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  vii  [109  130]  219b- 
220a;  bk  viii  [114  130]  234b  235a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  163a-164b  /  Pen- 
sees,  229  213a-b;  242-253  217b  220a;  265  290 
221b  225a;  557-567  272b  273b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi,  general  sciiol, 
371a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  12,  107c-d;  ch  in,  sect  7-18  113d- 
117c;  bk  11,  cii  vii,  sect  6  132d;  cii  xvn, 
sect  1  167d  168a;  sect  17  172b  c;  sect  20, 
173a;  ch  xxiii,  sect  33-37  212d  214b;  bk 
iii,  ch  vi,  sect  ii  271b  d;  bk  iv,  cii  x  349c- 
354c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  29-33 
418c-419a;  sect  146-156  442a-444d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ii,  div  14 
456b;  sect  xi  497b-503c  passim;  sect  xii, 
div  132,  509c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  186c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  437a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  12d-13a;  200d; 
308b-309c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  33a-d;  173b-192d  /  Prac¬ 
tical  Reason,  320c-321b;  346b-347a;  349b- 
352c;  354d-355d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  384a, c  /  Judgement,  547b-d;  598b- 
599b;  602b-603a;  603b-d;  607d-609b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  159b- 
160a;  part  iii,  304d-305b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3432-3468]  84a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  217c-d;  bk  vi, 
248d-249a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v,  120d- 
121c 

6c.  Supernatural  knowledge 

6c(l)  God  as  teacher:  inspiration  and  revela¬ 
tion 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:15-17;  3:8-24;  9:1- 
17;  17:1;  26:24;  35:11;  46:2-3  /  Exodus ,  3:4- 
6,13-15;  4:10-12;  6:2-8;  20:1-7;  24:i2J  29:45“ 
46;  33:11-34:8  /  Leviticus,  11:44-45;  18:1-2 
/  Numbers,  12:1-8;  15:41  /  Deuteronomy , 
4:1-5,10-13,32-36;  5:4-11;  18:18-22;  29:29  / 
I  Kings,  3:5-15;  8:35-36— (D)  III  Kings,  3:5- 
15:8:35-36  /Job,  33;  34:31-32;  35:10-11:38- 
42  /  Psalms ,  25:3-5,8-12;  32:8-9;  94:10-13; 
1 19;  143  esp  143:8-10— (D)  Psalms,  24:4-5,8- 
12;  31:8-9;  93:10-13;  1 18 ;  142  esp  142:8-10  / 
31:8-9;  93:10-13;  1 1 8 ;  142  esp  142:8-10  / 
Proverbs,  2:5-6;  6:23  /  Isaiah ,  6:1-9;  1 1  :r~3i 
28:9-13;  48:3-8  —  (D)  Isaias,  6:1-9;  11:1-3; 
28:9-13;  48:3-8  /  Daniel,  2;  4 —(D)  Daniel ,  2; 
3:98-4:34  /  Joel,  2:28-29 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  17:5-14 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  1 7 :5-i  2 


586 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6c(l)  to  6c(2) 


(6c.  Supernatural  knowledge.  6c(  l)  God  as 
teacher:  inspiration  and  revelation.) 

New  Testament:  Matthew  passim,  esp  4:23, 
7:28-29,  10:1-20,  11:25-27,  13:1-23,  17:5, 
28:18-20  /  Mark  passim,  esp  1:1-11,  4:1-2  / 
Luke  passim,  esp  2:41-50,  3:21-22,  8:4-15, 
9:34-35,  10:21-22  /  John  passim,  esp  3:2, 
5:31-47,  10:26-27,  12:23-30,  15:15,  16:25-29, 
17:6-8  /  Acts,  22:6-14  /  Romans,  1:16-20;  10:17 
/  I  Corinthians ,  2;  12:1-8  /  Galatians ,  1  :n-i2  / 
Ephesians ,  1 :9,i7;  3  :i-5  /  //  Timothy ,  3 : 15-16  / 
Hebrews ,  1  :i~3;  2:3-4  /  I  Peter,  1 : 10-12,22-25  / 
//  Pc/cr,  1:19-21  /  /  /o/w,  2:20-27 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  7  lOb-c; 
bk  iv,  par  30-31  26b-27a;  bk  vi,  par  8  37b-c; 
bk  ix,  par  23-25  68a-c;  bk  xi,  par  2-5  89c- 
90c;  bk  xiii,  par  16-18  114a-115c  /  CzVy  o/* 
Go^,  bk  vii,  ch  30  261b-d;  bk  x,CHi3307b-c; 
bk  xi,  ch  2-4  323a-324d;  bk  xix,  ch  18 
523ab;  ch  22  525b-c;  bk  xx,  ch  28  556c- 
557a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  15  643c- 
644a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i  3a- 
10c;  q  3,  a  1,  rep  1-5  14b-15b;  q  8,  a  3,  rep  4 
36b-37c;  q  12,  a  13  61c-62b;  q  32  175d-180d; 
q  46,  a  2  253a-255a;  q  57,  a  3,  rep  i  297b- 
298a;  q  68,  a  i,  ans  354a-355c;  q  89,  a  i,  rep  3 
473b-475a;  a  2,  rep  3  475a-d;  q  94,  a  3  504a- 
505a;  q  104,  a  4,  ans  538a-c;  q  105,  a  3  540c- 
541b;  q  106,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  547c-548b; 
q  113,  a  1,  rep  2  576a-d;  q  117,  a  i,  rep  i 
595d-597c;  a  2,  rep  2  597c-598c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  63, 
a  3  65a-d;  q  68  87c-96c;  q  91,  aa  4-5  210c- 
212c;  q  98,  aa  2-6  240c-245b;  q  ioo,  a  3,  ans 
253a-d;  q  ioi,  a  2,  rep  i  267a-268a;  qq  106- 
107  321a-330d;  q  iii,  a  4  354c-355d;  q  112, 
a  5,  ans  359c-360c;  part  ii-ii,  q  1,  a  7,  rep  3 
385c-387a;  q  2,  a  10,  ans  399b-400b;  q  4,  a  4, 
rep  3  405a-406a;  q  6,  a  1,  ans  413d-414c; 
part  iii,  q  1,  a  3,  ans  704d-706a;  q  3,  a  8 
729b-730b;  q  7,  a  7  750a-d;  q  ii,  a  6,  rep  2 
775d-776b;  q  12,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  1-2  778b- 
779a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xxx- 
xxxiii  99b-105d  passim;  paradise,  xix  [1-99] 
135a-136a;  xxiv  [52-147]  143b-144a;  xxv  [64— 
96]  145a-b;  xxvi  [25-45]  146a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,787-816] 
467a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  83a-b;  part  ii, 
137b-138b;  160b;  part  iii,  165a-167b;  176d- 
177c;  181a-186c;  205b-d;  conclusion,  281d- 
282a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  212a;  238c-239c;  267c- 
268a;  273a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  19b-c;  38a; 
54b-c;  95d-101d  esp  95d-96c  /  New  Atlantis , 
203a-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [3o8]-bk  viii 


[653]  182a-246a  esp  bk  viii  [283-477]  238b- 
242a;  bk  xi  [99]-bk  xii  [649]  301b-333a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  185  205a;  585-588  277a-b; 
642-692  290b-301a;  881  345b  /  Vacuum , 
355b  /  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  440a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  ix, 
sect  23  291b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  vii,  SECTii,340b-c; 
ch  xvi,  sect  14  371b-c;  ch  xviii-xix  380d- 
388d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
132,  509c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  333d;  366c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  201a;  307d-308a; 
346b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  227d-228a;  231a-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  455a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  394a-b;  481d-482a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  157c-d; 
159b-160a;  part  iii,  306c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  50b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v,  127b- 
137c;  bk  vi,  150d-153d 

6c(2)  The  light  of  faith 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  44-50  esp  44:20,  45:4, 
46:15,  49:10,  50:28-29— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasti¬ 
cus,  44-50  esp  44:21,  45:4,  46:17-18,  49:12, 
50:30-31 

New  Testament:  Luke,  8:4-17  /  John ,  6:28- 
40;  10:37-38;  12:44-46;  14:1,7-11;  16:27-31; 
20:24-29  /  Romans ,  3:21-5:2;  10:14-17  / 
II  Corinthians ,  4:3-6  /  I  Thessalonians ,  2:13  / 
Hebrews ,  4:2;  11  /  I  Peter ,  1 7-9,21-23  /  I  John , 
2:20-29;  5:4-10 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  1  la-b;  bk 
iv,  par  25  25c;  bk  vi,  par  6-8  36c-37c;  bk  vii, 
par  16  48c-49a;  bk  xiii,  par  19  115c-d  /  City  of 
God,  bk  x,  ch  1-2  298b,d-300a;  bk  xi,  ch  2 
323a-c;  bk  xix,  ch  18  523a-b;  bk  xxi,  ch  5 
563d-564d;  bk  xxii,  ch  4-5  588b-590a;  ch  7 
591c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  1,  ch  15  628b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  2,  rep  1  lld-12c;  q  32,  a  1,  ans  175d-178a; 
q  46,  a  2,  ans  253a-255a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  62, 
aa  3-4  61c-63a;  q  65,  aa  4-5  73d-75a;  q  66, 
a  6  80c-81b;  q  67,  a  3  83b-84d;  a  5  85d-86d; 
q  100,  a  4,  rep  1  253d-255a;  q  108,  a  2,  rep  i 
332b-333d;  q  iio,  a  3,  rep  i  350a-d;  a  4,  ans 
350d-351d;  part  ii-ii,  qq  1-16  380a-456d; 
q  45,  a  1,  rep  2  598d-599d;  part  iii,  q  14,  a  i, 
ans  784b-785c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  ii  [34-45] 
108a;  xxiv  142d-144b 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  463b-471b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  66a-c;  part  ii, 
137b-d;  149c-d;  160b;  part  iii,  165b'C;  172d- 
173a;  209b;  209d;  241a-242a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  98b-99a;  209a-d;  212a-d; 
238c-239c;  267c-268a;  294a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  19b-c;  95d- 
96c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  65  114b-c 


>c(3)  to  6c(A)  Chapter 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  hi,  4d  5a  /  Discourse , 
part  i,  43c  /  Meditations ,  69a-71a,c  passim; 
hi,  88d-89a  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  125c- 
126b;  168c-169a;  232b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [552-587]  331a- 
332a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  147b;  163a-164b  / 
Pensees ,  229  213a-b;  242-290  217b-225a;  425 
243b-244b;  523  264a;  561-567  272b-273b: 
794-796  327b;  880-881  345b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  xvi, 
sect  14  371b-c;  ch  xvii,  sect  24  380c  d; 
ch  xviii-xix  380d-388d  passim 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect x,  div  ioi 
497a-b;  sect  xii,  div  132,  509c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  379c-380a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  190c-191a;  309a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  242a-243a  /  Practical 
Reason ,  320c-321b;  345c-d;  353a-354d  / 
Judgement ,  599d-600a;  604d-609b  esp  606a-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  395a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  306b- 
307b;  part  iv,  349b-350a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [10,111-121]  246b- 
247a 

51  Tolstoy:  IKzr  and  Peace,  bk  v,  196a-198b; 
bk  xv,  631a-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  BKi,lla-b; 
bk  11,  26b-27d;  bk  iii,  64c-67a;  bk  v,  127b- 
137c  passim;  bk  vii,  177b-180a;  bk  xi,  338a-b 

6c(3)  Mystical  experience 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  15;  18;  22:9-18;  26:1- 
I  6,24-25;  28:10-22;  31:11-13;  32:23-32;  46:1-4 
/  Exodus,  3:1-4:17;  19-20;  24  /  Numbers,  12; 
22:21-35;  24:12-24  /  Joshua ,  3:7-8;  5:13-15— 

( D )  Josue,  3:7-8;  5:13-16  /  Judges,  6:11-26;  13 
/  /  Samuel,  3 —(D)  I  Kings,  3  /  /  Kings,  3  0-15 ; 
9:1-9;  19— (D)  III  Kings,  3:5-15;  9:1-9;  19  / 

I  Chronicles,  17:1-15— (D)  I  Paralipomenon, 
17:1-15  /.M,  4:12-21;  33:14-17;  38:i"42:8  / 
Isaiah,  6—(D)  Isaias,  6  /  Jeremiah,  1  —  (D) 
Jeremias,  1  /  Ezekiel  esp  1-4,  8-12,  40-48— (D) 
Ezechiel  esp  1-4,  8-12,  40-48  /  Daniel,  7-12  / 
Amos,  7-8  /  Zechariah,  1-6— (D)  Zacharias , 
1-6 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  1:20-25;  3:16-17; 
17:1-8;  28  /  Luke,  1:1-38;  2:8-15,25-35; 
9:28-36;  24  /  2:2-11;  7;  9:1-20;  10  esp 

10:9-20;  11:5-10;  18:9-11;  22:1-21;  23:11; 
26:13-18  /  //  Corinthians ,  12:1-9  /  II  Peter, 
1:17-18  /  Revelation— (D)  Apocalypse 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  16  48c- 
49a;  bk  viii,  par  25-30  60a-61c;  bk  ix,  par 
23-25  68a-c;  bk  x,  par  65  87d-88a  /  City  of 
God,  bk  ix,  ch  16  294a-295a;  bk  xvi,  ch  6 
426c-427a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12, 
a  11,  rep  2  59d-60d;  q  84,  a  5  446c-447c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  98, 
a  3,  rep  2  241c-242b;  part  ii-ii,  q  180,  a  5, 
ans  611d-613a 


29:  GOD  587 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  i  [1-81J 
106a-107a;  xxi  138b  139c  passim;  xxm  [1-69] 
141b  142a;  xxx  [34-99]  152a  d;  xxxn  [159]- 
xxxiii  [145]  156a  157d 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  52a  b;  68d  69b; 
part  11,  137b  138a;  149e-d;  160b;  part  iii, 
165d  166a;  174b  176d;  183d  185c;  conclu¬ 
sion,  281d-282a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  277-288  222b  224b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  476b  477a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  320d  321b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vii, 
189a-191ajC 

6c(4)  The  beatific  vision 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  28:10-22;  32:24-30  / 
Exodus,  24  esp  24:9-11;  33:11-23;  34:5-7  / 
Numbers,  12:6-8  /  Deuteronomy,  34:10  /  Job, 
19:26-27;  42:5 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiastic  us ,  43:30-31  —  ( D )  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  43  ’.32-3 5 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:8  /  John,  1:18  / 
Acts,  7:55-57  /  /  Corinthians,  13:12  /  II  Corin¬ 
thians,  5:6-7;  12:1-4  /  I  Timothy,  6:13-16  / 
/  John,  3:2-3 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ix,  par  25  68c  / 
Ci/y  o/-  6W,  bk  xii,  ch  20,  355b;  bk  xxii, 
ch  29  614b-616d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12 
50b-62b;  q  26,  a  3  151a-c;  q  60,  a  5,  rep  5 
313b-314c;  q  62,  a  i,  ans  317d-318c;  a  2, 
ans  318d-319c;  q  84,  a  5  446c-447c;  q  89,  a  2, 
rep  3  475a-d;  q  93,  a  8,  rep  4  499b-500c; 
Q  94,  a  1  501d-503a;  q  ioo,  a  2,  ans  521c-522b; 
part  1— 11,  q  3,  a  8  628d-629c;  q  4,  aa  2-3 
630b-631d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  67, 
a  3,  contrary  83b-84d;  a  4  84d-85d;  a  6, 
rep  3  87a-c;  q  69,  a  2,  rep  3  97b-98c;  a  4, 
ans  and  rep  3  lOOc-lOlc;  q  98,  a  3,  rep  2 
241c-242b;  part  ii-ii,  q  1,  a  8,  ans  387a-388c; 
q  8,  a  7,  ans  421d-422c;  q  9,  a  4,  rep  3  425d- 
426c;  q  180,  a  5  611d-613a;  part  iii,  q  1,  a  3, 
rep  1  704d-706a;  q  9,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  764c- 
765a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  72,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i 
917c-919a;  q  82,  a  3,  rep  4  971a-972d;  q  84, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  4  984c-985d;  Q  87,  a  3,  ans 
999d-1000c;  q  90,  a  3  1014d-1016a;  q  92 
1025b-1037c;  q  98,  a  5,  ans  1075b-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [1— 12] 
106a;  11  [37-45]  108a;  v  [1-12]  112a  b;  vi  [id- 
21]  113d;  xiv  [28-51]  127b;  xv  [28-84]  128c- 
129b;  xxi  [52-102]  138d-139b;  xxvi  [103-108] 
146d-147a;  xxvm  [106-114]  150a;  xxxn  [139]- 
xxxiii  [145]  156a-157d 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  10,  499b-500a; 
par  103  549b-550a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  65a- b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  iii,  88d-89a 

32  Milton:  On  Time  [9-22]  12a-b  /  Paradise 
Lost ,  bk  iii  [256-265]  141a 


588  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  1  to  lb  . 


7.  Doctrines  common  to  the  Jewish,  Moham¬ 
medan, andChristian  conceptions  of  God 
and  His  relation  to  the  world  and  man 

la,  Creation 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1-2;  5:1-2  /  Exodus , 
20:11  /  I  Samuel ,  2:8— (D)  I  Kings ,  2:8  / 
Nehemiah,  9:6 — (D)  7/  Esdras ,  9:6  /  9:1- 

13;  10:8-13;  12:7-10;  26:7-14;  28:24-27; 
37:14-38:41  esp  38:4-11  /  Psalms ,  8  esp  8:5; 
19:1-6;  24:1-2;  33;  74:16-17;  89:11-12;  90:2; 
95:1-7;  96:5 ;  102:25-28;  104;  11973,90; 

121:2;  136:5-9;  139:14-16;  146:5-6;  148— 
(D)  Psalms ,  8  esp  8:6-7;  18:1  —7 ;  23:1-2;  32; 
73:16-17588:12-13;  89:2;  94:1-7;  95:5;  101:26- 
29;  103;  118:73,90;  120:2;  135:5-9;  138:14-16; 
145:5-6;  148  /  Proverbs ,  3:19-20;  8:22-31  / 
Ecclesiastes ,  3:11  /  Isaiah ,  40:26-28;  42:5-8; 
44:24-28;  45:5-13;  48:12-16;  51:12-16;  64:8; 
65:17— (79)  40:26-28;  42:5-8;  44:24- 

28;  45:5-13;  48:12-16;  51:12-16;  64:8;  65:17 
/  Jeremiah ,  10:11-13;  27:5;  31:35;  51:15-16— 
(Z9)  Jeremias,  10:11-13;  27:5>  3i:355  51:15-16 
/  Amos,  4:13;  5:8  /  Jonah ,  1:9 —(79)  Jonas, 
1:9  /  Zechariah,  12:1 — (79)  Zacharias,  12:1 

Apocrypha:  Judith,  16:14— (79)  OT,  Judith, 
16:17  /  o/* Esther,  13:10— (79)  OT,  Esther, 

13:10  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:14;  2:23;  6:7; 
9:1,9;  11:17,24— (79)  OT,  £00^  o/*  Wisdom, 
1:14;  2:23;  6:8;  9:1,9;  11:18,25  /  Eccfc- 
siasticus,  17:1-9;  18:1-5;  23:19-20;  24:8-9; 

33:9-i.3;  .39:i6~35;  42:i5-43:33 — (D)  OT 
Ecclesiasticus ,  17:1-8;  18:1-5;  23:27-29; 
24:12-14;  33:10-14;  39:21-41;  42:15-43:37  / 
So/zg  0/  TAra?  Children ,  34-60— (79)  OT, 
Daniel,  3:56-82  /  Tte/  Dragon ,  5— (79) 

OT,  Daniel,  14:4  /  77  Maccabees,  7:23,28— 
(D)  OT,  II  Machabees ,  7:23,28 

New  Testament:  John,  1:1-10  /  14:14-15; 

17:23-27  /  Romans,  1  :i9-2o  /  Colossians,  1  :i2- 
17  /  Hebrews,  1:10;  3:4;  11:3  /  II  Peter,  3:5  / 
Revelation,  4:11;  10:6;  14:7— (D)  Apocalypse, 
4:11;  10:6;  14:7 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  7  45a-d; 
bk  xi,  par  5-1 1  90b-92b;  bk  xii-xiii  99b- 
125a, c  /  GVy  0/ Go*/,  bk  vii,  ch  29  261a-b;  bk 
viii,  ch  9-12  270d-273a;  bk  x,  ch  31  319b-d; 
bk  xi,  ch  4-34  324a-342a,c;  bk  xii  342b, d- 
360a, c  esp  ch  1-2  342b,d-343d,  ch  4-5  344b- 
345b,  ch  9-27  347b-360a,c;  bk  xiii,  ch  24 
373d-376a,c;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b,d-587b; 
ch  24,  609c-610a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  7, 
a  2,  rep  3  31d-32c;  q  8,  a  1  34d-35c;  a  2,  ans 
35c-36b;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i  36b-37c;  q  9,  a  2, 
ans  39c-40d;  q  21,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  4  126c- 
127c;  qq  44-46  238a-255d;  q  50,  a  i,ans  269b- 
27ua;  a  3,  ans  272a-273b;  q  56,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  4  292d-294a;  q  57,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2 
295d-297a;  q  61  314d-317c;  qq  65-74  339a' 
377a, c;  q  75,  a  6,  rep  1-2  383c-384c;  q  84, 
a  3,  rep  2  443d-444d;  qq  90-93  480c-501c; 


q  94,  a  3,  ans  504a-505a;  q  104,  a  i  esp  rep  4 
534c-536c;  aa  3-4  537b-538c;  q  118,  aa  2-3 
601c-604b;  q  119,  a  i,  ans  604c-607b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  24, 
a  5,  ans  492b-493d;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  7  718b-d; 
q  3,  a  8,  rep  2  729b-730b;  q  6,  a  3,  rep  2 
742a-743a 

21  Dante  :  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxv  [58- 
78]  92a;  xxvm  [91—96]  97a;  paradise,  vii 
[64—75]  115d-116a;  [121-148]  116b-c;  x  [1-271 
120b-c;  xiii  [52-87]  126a-b;  xix  [40-51]  135c: 
xxix  [1-48]  150b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  162b;  part  hi, 
188d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  17b-d  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  15  149a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  54d-56a  / 
Meditations ,  iii-iv,  87a-90b  /  Objections  and 
Replies,  prop  hi  132d-133a;  137d-138a; 

140 b-c;  214a-c;  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  17,  schol362c- 
363c;  appendix,  370c-372d  passim;  part  iv, 
prop  68,  schol  445a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [6-10]  93b;  [650- 
659]  107b;  bk  11  [345-353]  118b-119a;  bk  iii 
[56-134]  136b-138a;  [708-735]  150b-15lb;  bk 
iv  [720-735]  168a-b;  bk  v  [468-505]  185b- 
186a;  [577-599]  187b-188a;  [800-863]  192b- 
194a;  bk  vii  [59-640]  218b-231a  esp  [139-161]  J 
220a-b,  [216-550]  221b-229a;  bk  viii  [452— 
499]  242a-243a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  482  258a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vi,  sect  56-57 
36d-37b  /  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, 
ch  xv,  sect  12,  165c;  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  15 
352d-353a;  sect  18-19  353c-354c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  46 
421b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div 
132,  509d  [fn  1] 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  la-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  228a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  81d-82a  /  Judgement,  594d 
[fn  1] 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  245d- 
246a;  part  iv,  361a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  [243-270]  7a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  239c-243d 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  875d-876a 

lb .  Providence 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1-3;  6-9  esp  8:21-22; 
12-13  esp  12:1-3,  12:7,  13:14-18;  15  esp  15:13- 
21;  17-18;  21-22  esp  22:15-18;  26:1-6,22-25; 
28:10-22;  35:9-15;  37-50  esp  45:7-8  /  Exodus, 

3;  12;  13:21-17:7;  19-20;  40:34-38— (D) 

Exodus,  3;  12;  13:21-17:7;  19-20;  40:32-36  / 
Numbers,  9:15-23;  12;  22-24  /  Deuteronomy, 

4:1  -40;  6-1 1 ;  29-33/  Joshua,  1— 1 1 ;  23-24 — (D) 
Josue ,  1— 11 ;  23-24  /  Judges,  1— 16  /  /  Samuel, 
8-10;  15-16— (D)  I  Kings,  8-10;  15-16  /  II 
Samuel,  7 —(D)  II  Kings,  7  /  I  Kings,  1 1 ;  13-22 


589 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


lb  to  1c 

passim— (£))  III  Kings ,  1 1 ;  13-22  passim  /  II 
Kings  passim— (D)  IV  Kings  passim  /  I  Chron¬ 
icles,  17:3-15— (D)  I  Paralipomenon ,  17:3-15  / 
II  Chronicles ,  11-36  passim— (D)  II  Paralipo¬ 
menon,  11-36  passim  /  Esther  csp  4:13-13  — 
(D)  Esther,  1:1-10:3  esp  4:13-14  /  Job  esp 
1-2,  24,  27,  38-41  /  Psalms  passim,  esp  3-4, 
9-1 1,  13,  17-18,  65,  77,  104— (D)  Faz/ms  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  3-4,  9-10,  12,  16-17,  64,  76,  103  / 
Proverbs,  16:33  /  Ecclesiastes,  3;  7:13-15;  8-9; 
n-12  /  /wwA,  36-37;  46;  51  — (D)  36- 

37;  46;  51  /  Jeremiah ,  17:5-8;  18-19;  31;  45  — 
(D)  Jeremias,  17:5-8;  18-19;  31;  45  /  Daniel 
passim,  esp  3  :i— 4 :3,  6:1-28— (D)  Daniel,  1:1- 
3:23  passim,  esp  3:1-23;  3:91-12:13  passim,  esp 
3:91-100,  6:1-28  /  Jonah  esp  1,  4 —(D)  Jonas 
esp  1,4/  Malachi,  1 :2-3~ (D)  Malachias,  1 :2-3 

Apocrypha:  Tobit—(D)  OT,  Tobias  /  Judith  esp 
5-6,  8-16— (D)  OT,  Judith  esp  5-6,  8-16  / 
Rest  of  Esther—  (D)  OT,  Esther ,  10:4-16:24  / 
Wisdom  of  Solomon,  14:1-3— (D)  OT,  Boo\of 
Wisdom ,  14:1-3/  Ecclesiasticus,  15:11-20— (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  15:11-22  /  Song  of  Three 
Children— (D)  OT,  Daniel ,  3:24-90  /  Susanna 
—(D)  OT,  Daniel,  13:1-64  /  Bel  and  Dragon 
—  (D)  OT,  Daniel,  13:65-14:42  /  I  Maccabees, 
3:13-26— (D)  OT,  I  Machabees,  3:13-26  / 
II  Maccabees,  6:1-16— (D)  OT,  II  Machabees , 
6:1-16 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:25-34;  7:7-11;  10 
esp  10:17-20,  10:29-33;  23:37  /  Lube,  11:1-13; 
12:1-34;  21:12-19  /  John,  6:22-71  esp  6:40, 
6:44-45,  6:64-65 — (D)  John,  6:22-72  esp 
6:40,  6:44-45,  6:65-66  /  Acts ,  1:15-26;  6:8- 
7:60;  13:48— (D)  Acts,  1:15-26;  6:8-7:59; 
13:48  /  Romans ,  8:28-11:36;  13:1-2  /  Ephe¬ 
sians,  1:4-2:10;  4:1-7  /  Philippians,  2:12-13  / 
//  Timothy ,  1:9  /  Hebrews,  1:1-3;  I3:5”^  / 
I  Peter,  1:1-5 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ix,  par  1  61c-d  / 
C//y  of  God,  bk  1,  ch  8-9  133a-135a;  bk  iv,  ch 
33  206c-d;  bk  v,  ch  i  207d-208c;  ch  8-1  i 
212c-216d;  ch  19  224b-225b;  ch  21-22  226a- 
227a;  bk  x,  ch  14-17  307c-310b;  bk  xi,  ch  22 
333d-334c;  bk  xii,  ch  27  359c-360a,c;  bk  xiv, 
ch  27  396c-397a;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b,d-587b  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  27  650a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  i, 
rep  1  14b-15b;  q  8,  a  3,  ans  36b-37c;  q  13, 
a  8,  ans  and  rep  i  70d-71b;  q  15,  a  3,  rep  4 
93b-94a;  qq  22-24  127c-143c;  q  96,  a  1,  ans 
and  rep  2  510b-511b;  part  i-ii,  q  9,  a  6,  rep  3 
662a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  93, 
a  5,  rep  3  219ad;  part  ihi,  q  1,  a  7,  ans 
385c-387a;  q  25,  a  ii,  rep  3  508d-509c;  part 
iii,  q  61,  a  1,  ans  855a-d;  part  iii  suppl,  q  69, 
a  3,  ans  887d-889c;  q  71,  a  5,  ans  905c-908b; 
q  77,  a  1,  ans  943a-944d;  q  78,  a  3,  ans  950b- 
951a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [61-96] 
lOb-c;  paradise,  i  [94-142]  107b-d;  vi  [1-111] 


113c  114d;  viii  [85  148]  117c*118c;  xi  xn 
122a  125a  csp  xi  [28  49]  122b.  xii  [37  45) 
124a;  xx  [41  1 3S]  137a  138a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Crcssida,  i.k  iv,  stanza 
1  $8  154  106b  108b  /  Knight's  Tale  [1251  1267] 
180b;  [1663  1672]  187b/  Tale  of  Man  ofluiw 
236b  255b  csp  [4869-4924]  242b  243b,  [5247- 
5254]  249b  /  Friar's  ' Talc  [7064-7085]  281a  b 
/  Franklin's  Tale  [11,177  206]  353b  354a  / 
Monl(s  I 'ale  [14,021-052]  434b  435a;  [14,149- 
252]  437a-438b 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  53d;  part  ii, 
113b  c;  160a;  162b;  part  iv,  254b:  271b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  98b  99a 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [77- 
95]  12Qb-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  v,  sc  ii  [i-ii] 
67d  68a;  [47-53]  68b-c;  [230-235]  70a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  408c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  19d;  38a  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  apii  93  125d  l26a 

32  Milton:  Sonnets ,  xvi  66b-67a  /  Paradise  Lost , 
bk  iii  [80-134]  137a-138a  /  Samson  Agonistes 
[2 1 0-2 1 4]  344a;  [373-380]  347b-348a;  [667— 
709]  354a-355a  /  Areopagitica,  394b-395b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  619-641  284b- 290a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  3 
405b-c;  sect  60-66  424b-426a;  sect  93-94 
431b-c;  sect  105-107  433b-434a;  sect  146- 
155  442a-444c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 
54-57  474b-475d;  sect  xi,  div  108  500b-d 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  75c-d;  377c-378a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  331  c-d  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  414d;  bk  iv,  437d-438b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  292d-294a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  542 a- b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  95c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  158c- 
160b;  168d-170b;  part  iv,  321b-c;  368d- 
369a, c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  85a;  237a;  396b 
397a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  272a-b;  bk 
ix,  342a-344b;  357b-358b;  bk  x,  447c-448a; 
465c-467c  passim;  bk  xii,  553b;  bk  xiii, 
563a- b;  bk  xv,  619d-620a;  631a-c;  epilogue 
1,  650b-c;  epilogue  ii,  675a-677b;  680b-c; 
684  b-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v,  127b- 
137c  passim;  bk  xi,  343 b-c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  771a- b 

7c.  Divine  government  and  law 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  9:1-7  /  Exodus ,  12-13; 
15:18;  19-31  esp  20:1-17;  34—35  /  I^eviticus 
passim  /  Numbers  passim,  esp  5-10,  15,  18-19, 
27-30,  35-36  /  Deuteronomy  passim,  esp  5 :6-2i 
/  I  Chronicles ,  29:11-12  —  (D),/  Paralipomenon, 
29:11-12  /  Job ,  9:1-13;  34:12-18;  37-41  / 
Psalms,  1;  10:16;  19:7-14;  37:30-31;  40:8; 
47;  59:13;  66:7;  72:8;  78:1-8:  89:30-32;  93; 


590 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  Doctrines  common  to  the  Jewish ,  Mohamme¬ 
dan,  and  Christian  conceptions  of  God  and 
His  relation  to  the  world  and  man .  7c. 
Divine  government  and  law.) 

96:10-13;  97:1-2;  99:1;  103:19-22;  119  pas¬ 
sim;  145:11-13— (£>)  Psalms ,  1;  9:16;  18:8- 

15;  36:30-31;  39:8-9;  46;  58:i4;  657;  7i:8; 

77:1-8;  88:31-33;  92;  95:10-13;  96:1-2; 

98:1;  102:19-22;  118  passim;  144:11-13  / 
Ecclesiastes ,  12:13-14  /  Isaiah ,  51:4-8;  52:7— 

( D )  Isaias,  51 :4-8 ;  52  7  /  Jeremiah ,  31-34—  (D) 
Jeremias,  31-34  /  Ezekiel,  18 — (D)  Ezechiel ,  18 
/  Daniel ,  4;  7:27— (D)  Daniel ,  3:98-4:34; 
7:27  /  Amos,  2:1-8  /  Malachi ,  1:14— (£)) 
Malachias,  1:14 

Apocrypha:  Bel  and  Dragon,  5 — (Z))  OT,  Daniel, 
14:4 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:17-20  / 

16:17  /  Romans  passim,  esp  2:11-16,  7:21-25, 
8:7  /  /  Timothy,  1:17  /  Hebrews,  1:8;  8:10; 
10:16  /  James,  2:8-12  /  Revelation,  11:15-18; 
19:6— (D)  Apocalypse,  11:15-18;  19:6 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  9,  lOd;  par 
14  12a-b;  bk  iii,  par  13-17  16c-18a  /  GVy  o/* 
Go<Z  bk  v,  ch  11  216c-d;  bk  vii,ch  30  261b-d; 
bk  ix,  ch  22  296d-297a;  bk  x,  ch  13-15  307b- 
308b;  ch  17  309c-310b;  bk  xi,  ch  18  331d- 
332a;  ch  22  333d-334c;  bk  xii,  ch  5  345a-b; 
bk  xix,  ch  12-15  517b-521c;  ch  21  524a-525a; 
ch  23-25  525c-528d;  ch  27  529a-d;  bk  xxii, 
ch  1-3  586b,d-588b;  ch  24  609a-612a  pas¬ 
sim 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
ans  12c-14a;  q  21,  a  i,  ans  124b-125b;  a  2, 
ans  125c-d;  q  26,  a  4,  ans  15lc-152a,c;  q  47, 
a  3,  rep  i  258c-259a;  q  63,  a  7,  ans  331c- 
332b;  q  65,  a  3,  rep  1  341c-342b;  q  83,  a  i, 
rep  3  436d-438a;  qq  103-119  528a-608d; 
part  i-ii,  q  10,  a  4,  ans  665d-666a,c;  q  17, 
a  8,  rep  2  692a-c;  q  19,  a  4  705b-c;  a  6,  ans 
and  rep  2  707a-708a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  71, 
a  2,  rep  4  106d-107c;  a  6  HOb-lllb;  q  72,  a  2, 
ans  112b-113a;  a  4,  ans  114a-115a;  q  74,  a  8, 
rep  1  134b-136a;  q  91,  aa  1-2  208b-209d;  aa 
4-5  210c-212c;  q  93  215b,d-220d;  q  97,  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  1  237b-238b;  a  4,  rep  3  238b- 
239b;  qq  98-108  239b-337d;  part  ii-ii,  q  23, 
a  6,  ans  487a-d;  q  187,  a  5,  rep  3  671d-673b; 
part  iii,  q  60,  a  4,  rep  2  849c-850b;  part  hi 
suppl,  q  69,  a  i,  ans  885c-886c;  q  72,  a  2, 
ans  919a-920c 

21  Dante  :  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [70-76]  10b; 
xi  15a-16b;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-105]  77b-d; 
paradise,  i  [94-142]  107b-d;  11  [112-148] 
109a-b;  iii  [34-90]  109d-110b;  x  [1-27]  120b-c; 
xxvii  [100]— xxviii  [139]  148b-150b;  xxxn 
[37-84]  155a.-c 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [1663-1672]  187b  / 
Monies  Tale  [14,221-228]  438a-b  /  Canon's 
Yeoman's  Tale  [16,935-949]  487a 


1c  to  Id 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  95d-96b;  part  ii, 
136d-138b;  159d-164a,c;  part  iii,  167b-c; 
171a-172a;  177c-180a;  199b-204a;  216b-219d; 
240a-241a;  245c-246a,c;  part  iv,  247a-249b; 
272b-c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  491d-492a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  71a-b; 
94b-c;  lOOd 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  54c;  55b  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  PROP3,scHOL374b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [237-249]  116b; 
[310-328]  118a;  bk  iii  [274-343]  141b-143a  esp 
[31:7—333]  142b;  bk  v  [600-615]  188b;  bk  vi 
[169-188]  200a;  bk  vii  [139-173]  220a-221a; 
[550-609]  229a-230b;  bk  xii  [223-248]  324a-b 
/  Samson  Agonistes  [667-673]  354a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  876  345a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  5-6  105a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  xxviii,  sect  8 
230a;  bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  28-29  322a-323a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  29-33 
418c-419a;  sect  51-53  422d-423a;  sect  57 
423d-424a;  sect  60-66  424b-426a;  sect  93- 
94  431b-c;  sect  105-107  433b-434a;  sect 
146-155  442a-444c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 
54—57  474b-475d;  sect  viii,  div  78-81  485c- 
487a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  261b-266b  esp 
261b-262a,  266b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  20a-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  la-2b; 
bk  xii,  85d-86a;  bk  xxvi,  214b,d-215a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  252c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  237b;  238b-240b  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  594 d  [fn  1] 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  158c- 
160b;  168d-170b;  part  iii,  309d-310a;  part 
iv,  368d-369a,c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
127b-137c  passim 

Id.  Grace 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  84:11  —  (D)  Psalms, 
83:12  /  Proverbs,  3:1-4,21-26  /  Jeremiah,  31:18 
—  (D)  Jeremias,  31:18  /  Lamentations,  5:21  / 
Zechariah ,  12:10— (D)  Zacharias,  12:10 

New  Testament:  John,  1:11-18  /  Acts,  4:33  / 
Romans  passim,  esp  1:3-5,  3:1-6:23,  Ii:5~7  / 

I  Corinthians,  2:11-3:10;  15:9-10  /  II  Corin¬ 
thians,  1;  4-6;  8:7-9;  9:5-15;  12  /  Galatians 
/  Ephesians  /  Philippians,  2:12-13;  4:13  / 

II  Thessalonians,  2:15-16  /  II  Timothy  esp 
1 :8~9  /  Titus,  2  ^-3 .7  /  Hebrews,  2  :g;  12 ^4-29 
/  James,  4:6/1  Peter  passim,  esp  1,  5:5 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  5-6  2b-c; 
bk  11,  par  15  12b-c;  bk  vi,  par  4  36a-b  /  City 
of  God,  bk  xiii,  ch  3-5  361a-362c;  ch  7  362d- 
363b;  ch  14-15  366b-d;  ch  20  370c-371a;  bk 
xiii,  ch  23-BK  xiv,  ch  1  372a-377a;  bk  xiv, 
ch  26  395d-396c;  ch  27,  397a;  bk  xv,  ch  1-3 


Id  to  le  Chapter 

397b,d-399c;  bk  xvi,  ch  26-27  438c  439d; 
BK  XXI,  CH  15-16  572c-574a;  bk  xxii,  ch  22 
606d-608b  esp  608a- b  /  Christian  Doctrine , 
bk  1,  ch  1  624b,d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  2, 
rep  1  lld-12c;  q  8,  a  3,  ans  and REP4  36b  37c; 
q  12,  A  2,  ANS  51c-52c;  a  4,  ans  53b-54c;  a  5, 
ans  54c-55b;  a  13  61c-62b;  q  38  200c-202b; 
q  43  230a-237a,c;  q  62  317c-325b;  q  89,  a  i, 
rep  3  473b-475a;  a  2,  rep  3  475a-d;  q  95 
506b-510a;  q  104,  a  4,  ans  538a-c;  q  108,  a  8, 
ans  and  rep  1-2  561a-562a;  q  113,  a  i,  rep  2 
576a-d;  part  i-ii,  q  5,  aa  5-7  640b-642d  csp 
a  7,  rep  3  642a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  2  7c-8a;  q  51,  a  4  15a-d;  q  55,  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  6  28c-29d;  q  58,  a  3,  rep  3  43b-44a;  q  62 
59d-63a;  q  63,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1-2  64b-65a; 
aa  3-4  65a-66c;  q  65,  aa  2-5  72a-75a;  q  66, 
a  2,  rep  1  76c-77c;  q  68  87c-96c;  q  76,  a  2, 
rep  2  141d-142c;  q  79,  aa  3-4  158a-159c;  q  81, 
a  3,  rep  3  165d-166b;  q  83,  a  i,  rep  4-5  171a- 
172b;  a  2,  rep  2  172b-173a;  q  85,  a  6,  ans 
182d-184a;  q  95,  a  i,  ans  226c-227c;  q  98,  a  i 
239b-240c;  q  ioo,  a  5,  rep  2  255a-257c;  a  10, 
rep  3  262b-263b;  a  12,  ans  264d-265d;  q  106, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  1,3  321a~322a;  qq  109-114 
338a-378a,c;  part  ii-ii,  q  2,  aa  9-10  398c- 
400b;  q  24,  a  3,  rep  i  491a-d;  a  ii,  ans  498b- 
499c;  part  hi,  q  6,  a  3,  rep  3  742a-743a;  qq 
7-8  745c-763b;  q  10,  a  4,  rep  3  771b-772a; 
q  14,  a  4,  rep  2  786d-787c;  q  15,  a  2,  ans 
789a-d;  q  22,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  827c-828c; 
q  23,  a  1,  rep  1  833a-d;  a  4,  rep  2  835b-836a; 
q  26,  a  2,  rep  1  846b-d;Q6i,  a  1,  rep  2  855a-d; 
q  62  858b-864c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  75,  a  2, 
rep  5  937a-938a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  i-ii  la-4a;  pur¬ 
gatory,  vii  [40-60]  62d-63a;  [1 12-123]  63d- 
64a;  ix  [13—69]  66a-c;  xi  [1-24]  68d-69a;  xm 
[10-21]  72a;  paradise,  vii  [16-120]  115b-116b; 
xx  [31-138]  137a-138a;  xxiv  142d-144b  esp 
[58-60]  143b,  [118-123]  143d-144a;  xxix  [58- 
66]  150d-151a;  xxx  [34-99]  152a-d;  xxxn 
[40-84]  155a-c;  xxxn  [i39]-xxxiii  [145]  156a- 
157d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
144  19b-20a  /  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,788-822] 
467a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  88c-89a;  part  ii, 
137c-d;  149c-d;  part  iii,  176d-177c;  186a-b; 
191b-193c  esp  193a;  241c-242a;  part  iv,  250c- 
251b;  253b-254b;  255b;  264a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  209a-d;  212a-d;  238c- 
239c;  267c-268a;  273a-b;  294a-b 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  125d- 
126a 

32  Milton  -.Paradise  Lost,  bkii  [1024-1033]  133b; 
bk  iii  [56-415]  136b-144b  esp  [130-134]  138a, 
[167-184]  139a-b,  [227-238]  140b;  bk  xi  [1-31] 
299a-b;  [251-262]  304b-305a  /  Samson  Agonis- 
tes  [356-372]  347b;  [652-666]  353b-354a 


29:  GOD  591 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  letters,  la  14a;  19a  26b; 
29b;  154b  159a  /  PensSes ,  202  211a;  4 30- 435 
245a-251a;  505  261a  b;  507-511  261b;  51  \  517 
262a  263b;  520-524  263b  264a;  643  290b- 
291a; 881  345b 
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  38d 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  238b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iii,  310d 
311a;  part  iv,  354a  c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v,  127b 
137c  passim 

le.  Miracles 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  17:18-18:16;  19:9- 
11,24-26;  21  :i-8  /  Exodus,  3-4;  7-12;  14-17/ 
Numbers ,  9:15-23;  11-12;  16-17;  20:1-13; 
21:5-9;  22:21-34;  26:9-10  /  Joshua ,  3-4; 
6:1-20;  10:12-14;  24:6-7— (D)  Jo  sue,  3-4; 
6:1-20;  10:12-14;  24:6-7  /  Judges ,  6:36-40  / 
/  Samuel ,  12:16-19— (D)  /  Kings ,  12:16-19  / 
/  Kings ,  17;  18:30-39— (D)  111  Kings ,  17; 
*3°-39  /  ll  Kings ,  1-6;  13:20-21;  20:1-11 

—  (D)  IV  Kings ,  1-6;  13:20-21;  20:1-11  / 
Nehemiah ,  9:9-21  —  (D)  //  Esdras ,  9:9-21  / 
Psalms ,  78;  105;  106:7-11;  1 1 4— (D)  Psalms , 
77;  104;  105:7-11;  113:1-8  /  Isaiah,  38:1-9— 
(D)  /wmi,  38:1-9  /  Daniel ,  3:1-4 13;  5-6— (D) 
Daniel,  3:1-23,91-100;  5-6  /  Joel ,  2:30-31  / 
Jonah— (D)  Jonas 

Apocrypha:  of  Three  Children ,  1-27 — (D) 

OT,  Daniel,  3:24-50  /  Zte/  and  Dragon,  28-42 

—  (D)  OT,  Daniel,  14:27-42  /  II  Maccabees, 
1:18-22;  2:10— (D)  OT,  //  Machabees ,  1:18- 
22;  2:10 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  1:18-25;  8-9;  12:9- 
13,22-29;  14:13-36;  15:22-39;  17;  20:29-34 
/  Marl(,  1:29-34,40-44;  2:3-12;  3:1-5;  4:34- 
40;  5;  6:34-56;  7:24-8:26;  9:i-IO,l6-29; 
10:46-52;  13:24-26  /  Lul^e,  1:5-66;  4:31- 
5:26;  6:6-10;  7:1-16;  8:22-56;  9:12-17,28-43; 
11:14-26;  13:11-17;  14:1-6;  17:11-19;  18:35- 
43  /  John,  2:1-11;  3:2;  4:46-54;  5:1-16;  6:5- 
26;  7:31;  9:1-33;  11:1-45;  12:37-38;  21:1-11  / 
yfer,  2:1-22;  3:2-11;  5:12-16;  8:6;  9:36-43; 
14:7-10;  15:12;  19:11-12;  20:7-12;  28:1-10 
/  /  Corinthians,  12:8-10  /  Galatians,  3:5-7  / 
Hebrews,  2:3-4 

18  Augustine:  C//y  0/ Go*/,  bk  x,  ch  8-13  303a- 
307c;  ch  16-18  308b-310d;  bk  xxi,  ch  5-8 
563d-568d;  bk  xxii,  ch  5-10  589a-599b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  89, 
a  8,  rep  2  479c-480c;  q  92,  a  4,  ans  491b-d; 
q  104,  a  4,  ans  538a-c;  q  105,  aa  6-8  543b- 
545b;  q  106,  a  3,  ans  547c-548b;  q  iio,  a  4 
567c-568b;  q  114,  a  4  584a-585a;  part  i-ii, 
q  10,  a  4,  rep  2  665d-666a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  63, 
a  4,  rep  3  65d-66c;  q  81,  a  4,  ans  166b-167a; 
Q  1 13,  a  10  369c-370b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  75, 
A  3,  ANS  938a-939d;  Q  83,  a  3  978c-980d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xxiv  [88- 
1 1 1  ]  143c-d 


592 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  If  to  7h 


(7.  Doctrines  co?nmon  to  the  Jewish,  Aiohamme- 
dan,  and  Christian  conceptions  of  God  and 
His  relation  to  the  world  and  man.  7e. 
Miracles.) 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Man  of  Law  236b-255b 
esp  [4869-4924]  242b-243b  /  Prioress's  Tale 
[13,418-620]  392a-395b  /  Second  Nun's  Tale 
[16,001-021]  471a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  83c;  part  ii, 
137b-c;  160b;  part  hi,  166a-167b;  188a-191a; 
part  iv,  249b'250a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  19b-c; 
33c-d;  41b-d  /  New  Atlantis ,  201d-203c  esp 
203a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  xii  [173-222]  323a- 
324a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  643-644  290b-291b;  803-856 
328b-341b;  876  345a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  xvi, 
sect  13  371a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  62-63 
425a-c;  sect  84  429b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vii,  div 
54  474b-c;  sect  x  488d-497b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  180b-c;  189b-191a; 
206bd;  295c-296b;  465d-466c;  605b-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  227d-228a;  232a-c; 
398b'399b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  126b-c;  359a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  247a; 
part  iii,  307a-b;  part  iv,  338b-c;  348d- 
349a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [762-770]  20a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  219b-220a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  i, 
lla-b;  bk  11,  21d-22b;  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim; 
bk  vii,  171a-177b;  189d-190a 

If.  The  Book  of  Life 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  32:31-33;  33:19  / 
Psalms ,  69:28— (Z>)  Psalms ,  68:29  /  Isaiah, 

4:3— (D)  haias<  4:3. 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  33:10-13— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus ,  33:10-14 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  20:1-16;  22:1-14  / 
10:20  /  John ,  5:21 ;  6:44;  10:26-29  / 

13:48  /  Romans ,  8:28-9:23  /  Ephesians ,  1-3  / 
//  Thessalonians ,  2:12-14  /  //  Timothy ,  1:8-9; 
2:19-20  /  Hebrews ,  12:22-23  /  /  Peter,  1:1-5; 
2:1-9  /II  Peter » 1 : 1 0  /  Revelation,  3  ^-5 ;  1 3  -.4^-8 ; 
17:7-8;  20:11-21:27  esp  20:15,  21:27;  22:18- 
19 —(D)  Apocalypse,  3:4-5;  13:4-8;  17:7-8; 
20:11-21:27  esP  20:15,  21:27;  22:18-19 

18  Augustine:  C/V4/  o/* bk  xv,  ch  i  397b, d- 
398c;  bk  xx,  ch  8  536d-538c;  ch  14-16  542d- 
544d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  24 

141b-143c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  63, 
a  1,  rep  1  864c-865b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  87,  a  i 
997b  998c 


21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xix  [103- 
148]  136a  c;  xx  [94-138]  137dd38a;  xxi  [52- 
102]  138d-139b;  xxxn  [40-84]  155a-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [356-363]  101a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  884  346a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  238c;  334b-c 

7£.  The  resurrection  of  the  body 

Old  Testament:  Job,  14:13—15;  19:25-27  / 
Isaiah,  26:19;  66:14— (D)  Laias,  26:19;  66:14 
/  Ezekiel,  37:1-14— (D)  Ezechiel,  37:1-14  / 
Daniel,  12:1-3 

Apocrypha:  //  Maccabees,  12:41-45— (D)  OT, 
//  Machabees,  12:42-46 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  22:23-33;  27:52-53; 
28  /  12:18-27;  16:1-9  /  Tube,  20:27-38; 

24:1-12  /  John,  2:18-22  /  23:1-10;  24:15; 

26:8  /  Romans,  4:17;  6:3-11;  8:10-11  /  /  Co- 
rinthians,  6:14;  15  /  //  Corinthians,  1:9-10; 
4:14//  Thessalonians,  4:13-17  /Hebrews,  6:1-2 
18  Augustine:  C/>y  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  29,  317b- 
318a;  bk  xiii,  ch  1-2  360a-361a;  ch  16-20 
367a-371a;  ch  22-24  371c-376a,c;  bk  xx,  ch 
6-7  534a-536d;  ch  9-10  538c-541a;  ch  12-17 
541c-545c;  ch  20-23  547c-552c;  ch  26,  555d- 
556a;  bk  xx,  ch  30-BK  xxi,  ch  10,  559d- 
570b;  bk  xxii  586b,d-618d  esp  ch  4-5  588b- 
590a,  ch  7  591c-d,  ch  11-21  599c-606d,  ch 
25-3°  612a-618d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, 
ch  19-21  629a-b;  ch  23-24  630a-631a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
QQ  75-86  935a-996a,c;  q  93,  a  i  1037d-1039a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vi  [94-1 11] 
9b-c;  x  [1-15]  13d;  xiii  [85-108]  18d-19a; 
paradise,  vii  [121-148]  116b-c;  xiv  [1  -66] 
126d-127c;  xxv  [64-129]  145a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leinathan ,  part  iii,  191b-193c; 

195b-d;  part  iv,  253b-255b;  259b-c 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  248c-249c;  311a 
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [227-343]  140b- 
143a  esp  [294-329]  141b-142b;  bk  xii  [386- 
445]  327b-329a  esp  [41 1-429]  328a-b 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  95  431c 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv,  205d- 
206a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  233d;  234d 
44  Boswell:  Jolmson ,  472a-b 

Ih.  The  Last  Judgment  and  the  end  of  the  world 

Old  Testament:  Job,  19:25-27;  21:27-34  / 
Psalms,  50;  96:10-13— (D)  Psalms,  49;  95 no- 

13  /  Ecclesiastes,  3:16-17;  11:9-10;  12:14  / 
Isaiah,  2-4;  11:11-16;  13:6-22;  24;  26-27; 
3°;  34-35;  65:17-25;  66— (D)  Isaias,  2-4; 
11:11-16;  13:6-22;  24;  26-27;  30;  34-35; 
65:17-25;  66  /  Daniel,  7:21-27;  12  /  Joel  / 
Micah,  4— (D)  Micheas,  4  /  Zephaniah—(D) 
Sophonias  /  Zechariah,  14— (D)  Zacharias, 

14  /  Malachi,  3-4— (D)  Malachias,  3-4 
Apocrypha:  Judith,  16:17— (D)  OT,  Judith , 

16:20-21  /  Rest  of  Esther,  10:4-11 : 12— (D) 
OT,  Esther,  10:4-11:12 


8  to  8b  Chapter 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  7:1-2;  10:14  15; 
11:20-24;  12:36;  13:36-43,47-50;  24  25  / 
Marl^  13:4-37  /  17:20-37;  21:5  $6  / 

/o/;//,  12:48  /  2:17-21;  17:31  /  Romans, 

2:5-11  /  /  Corinthians ,  4:15-5:4;  15:23  28  / 

/  Thessalonians ,  1:9-10;  2:19;  4:14-5:4  / 
//  Thessalonians ,  1-2  /  II  Timothy ,  3:1-419  / 
Hebrews ,  9:26-27  /  James ,  5:7-9  /  /  Peter ,  4 :5~6 
/  //  Peter ,  2:9;  3:7-13  /  /  John ,  2:18-29;  4:17 
/  Jtide  /  Revelation  passim,  esp  14:15-16:21, 
20:1-22:21— (D)  Apocalypse  passim,  csp  14:15- 
16:21,  20:1-22:21 

18  Augustine:  C/Vy  0/  6W,  bk  xviii,  ch  53 
504d-505c;  bk  xx  530a-560a,c;  bk  xxi,  ch 
11-27  570b-586a,c  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  iii, 
cii  37,  673d-674a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
QQ  73-74  922b-935a,c;  q  77,  a  2  945a-946b; 
qq  87-99  997a-1085a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vi  [94-115] 
9b-c;  x  [1-15]  13d;  paradise,  xix  [100-148] 
136a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale ,  par  10  498b-502a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  230a;  244bc 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  [133-172]  4b-5b  / 

Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [274-343]  141b  l43a  esp 
[326-341]  142b;  bk  vii  [139— 173]  220a-221a; 
bk  xi  [45-83]  300a-301a;  bk  xii  [451-465] 
329a;  [537-551]  331a  /  Areopagitica ,  410ab 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  17a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  187c-189a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  233c-234d 

1  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 

127b-137c  passim,  esp  134d-135a;  bk  xi, 
337a-346a  passim 

8.  Specifically  Jewish  doctrines  concerning 
God  and  His  people 

8<*.  The  Chosen  People:  Jew  and  gentile 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  12:1-4;  13:14-17;  15; 
17:1-18:19;  22:1-18  esp  22:15-17;  26:1-6,23- 
25;  27-28;  35:9-13;  46:1-7;  48-49  /  Exodus , 
3-17;  19-20;  33:1-34:18  /  Leviticus ,  26  / 
teronomy ,  1;  4-12  passim,  esp  4:37-38,  7:6-8, 
10:15;  14:1-2;  15:6;  23:1-8;  26-32  passim,  esp 
26:17-19,  28:1-68,  31:16-21,  32:9-14  /  Joshua , 
10:12-14;  23:1-13— (79)  10:12-14;  23:1- 

13  /  /  Samuel ,  12— (79)  /  Kings,  12  /  /  Kings, 

8 :5r~ 53 — (79)  III  Kings,  8:51-53  /  II  Kings, 
11:17— (79)  IV  Kings,  11:17/  /  Chronicles,  17— 
(79)  /  Paralipomenon,  17  J  Nehemiah ,  9  —(D) 
77  Esdras,  9  /  Psalms  passim,  esp  33:12,  50:7, 
78:1-72,  81:1-16,  89:1-52,  105:1-106:48, 

132:1-18,  135:4-14,  136:1-26— (79)  Psalms 
passim,  esp  32:12,  49:7,  77:1-72,  80:2-17, 
88:2-53,  104:1-105:48,  131:1-18,  134:4-14, 
135:1-27  /  Isaiah  passim,  esp  40:1;  42:1-6, 

43;i-7>  44;1_5>  46;3-4-  49:i~26>  63:7-8— (D) 
passim,  esp  40:1,  42:1-6,  43:1-7,  44 :i* 
5,  46:3-4,  49:1-26,  63:7-8  /  Jeremiah  passim, 
esp  3,  7:23,  11:4,  24:7,  30:22,  31:1,  31:33, 


29:  GOD  593 

3238  —  (D)  Jeretnias  passim,  esp  3,  7:23,  11:4, 
24:7,  30:22,  31:1,  31:33,  32:38  /  Ezekiel, 
11:15  20;  14 ;i  1 ;  16-17;  20;  34;  36-37 —(D) 
Ezechiel,  11:15  20;  14:11;  16  17;  20;  34; 
36-37  /  Amos,  3:1  2  /  Obadiah-(I))  Abdias 
/  Micah,  5:7-15  — (79)  Micheas,  5:7- 11  /  Zrc/;- 
ariah ,  1:12-2:13;  8-10  csp  8:8  — (79)  ’Aacharias, 
1:12-2:13;  8-10  csp  8:8  /  Malachi,  1:1  3  — 
(79)  Malachias,  1:1-3 

Apocrypha:  Tfo/  of  Esther ,  14:5  — (79)  03',  LV- 
//ier,  14:5  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  16:20  26  — 
(D)  OT,  Bool(  of  Wisdom,  16:20  -26  /  Ecclesi- 
asticus,  17:17-21;  47:22— (79)  OT,  Ecclesiastic 
t  17:14-17;  47:24~25 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  10:5-6  /  Acts,  15:1- 
29;  21 : 19-25  /  Romans,  1  :i  3-16:  2-4 ;  9;  10:1 1- 
13;  11  /  /  Corinthians,  12:13  /  Galatians,  2:6- 
16;  3:13-29;  4:21-31;  5:6;  6:15  /  Ephesians, 
2 : 1 1  — 3 :8  /  Colossians,  3 :9~i  1 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  v,  295d 

18  Augustine:  C/Vy  o/* Go<7,  bk  iv,  ch  34  206d- 
207a, c;  bk  xvi,  ch  16  433c-434a;  ch  18  434c; 
ch  21-28  435a-440b;  ch  32  441c-442c;  bk 
xvii,  ch  7  458c-459d;  bk  xix,  cii  22  525b  c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  21, 
a  4,  rep  2  126c-127c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  98, 
aa  4-5  242b-244b;  qq  102-105  270b-321a 
passim,  esp  q  102,  a  6  292c-298a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  82 d  83a:  part  ii, 
160b-c;  part  iii,  177c-180d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [101-269]  321b- 
325a  /  Samson  Agonistes  339a-378a  csp  [210- 
292]  344a-346a,  [420-471]  348b-350a,  [843- 
902]  358a-359a,  [1156-1223]  364b-366a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  603  279b;  610-612  280b- 
282b;  619-641  284b-290a;  713-718  304b-308b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  435bc 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  179d-183a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  245d- 
247b;  part  iii,  305bc;  part  iv,  322a  b 

8£.  God’s  Covenant  with  Israel:  circumcision 
as  sign  of  the  Covenant 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  12:1-3,7;  15*17-21; 
17;  22:16-18;  26:2-3  /  Exodus,  2:23-4:31  esp 
2:24;  6:1-9;  19:3-8;  24:7-8;  31:16-17;  32:11- 
13;  34  esP  34:i0>  34:27-28  /  Leviticus,  2:1 3; 
26  /  Deuteronomy,  1:8;  4-1 1  passim,  esp  4:23, 
5:2-3,  7:12-13,  8:18-20,  10:16;  29-31;  34:4 
/  Joshua,  5:1-9;  7:10-12;  23:16-24:28— (79) 
Josue,  5:1-9;  7:10-12;  23:16-24:28  /  Judges, 
2:1-5  /  J  Lings,  8:56;  19:9-18— (D)  ///  Kings, 
8:56;  19:9-18  /  //  Kings,  11:17;  13:22-23;  17 
esp  17:14-16,  17:34-40;  22-23  23:2~3  — 

(79)  7P  Kings,  11:17;  13:22-23:  r7  esP  I7:i4~ 
16,  17:34-40;  22-23  esp  23:2-3  /  /  Chronicles, 
16:13-22 —(D)  I  Paralipomenon,  16:13-22  / 
7/  Chronicles,  6:14-15— (D)  II  Paralipomenon, 
6:14-15  /  Nehemiah,  1:5;  9— (D)  II  Esdras,  1:5; 
9  /  Psalms,  25:14;  44:17;  74:19-20;  78;  105 
esp  105:7-8;  iii— (D)  Psalms,  24:14;  43:18; 


594 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(8.  Specifically  Jewish  doctrines  concerning  God 
and  His  people.  8b.  God’s  Covenant  with 
Israel :  circumcision  as  sign  of  the  Covenant .) 

73:19-20;  77;  104  esp  104:7-8;  no  /  Isaiah , 
24:1-5;  33:i-8;  54  esp  54:10;  56  esp  56:4-6; 
59:20-21;  6 1  esp  61:8 —(D)  Isaias ,  24:1-5; 
33:1-8;  54  esp  54:10;  56  esp  56:4-6;  59:20- 
21;  6 1  esp  61:8  /  Jeremiah ,  4:4;  n;  14:19-22; 
22:5-9;  3I-33  «p  31:31-33,  32:40.  33:20-26; 
34:13-20;  50:4-5— (D)  Jeremias,  4:4;  n; 

14:19-22;  22:5-9;  3i-33  esp  3i:3i-33>  32:40» 
33:20-26;  34:13-20;  50:4-5  /  Ezehiel,  16-17; 
20:33-38;  37:21-28;  44:6-9— (Z))  Ezechiely 
16-17;  20:33-38;  37:21-28;  44:6-9  /  Hoseay 
2:16-20;  6  esp  6:7;  8 — (D)  Oire,  2:16-20; 
6  esp  6:7;  8  /  Haggaiy  2:4-5— (Z))  Aggeus> 
2:5-6 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticusy  44:19-45:5— (D)  OT, 
EcclesiasticuSy  44:20-45:6  /  Z  Maccabees ,  1:44- 
63;  2:19-6:8  esp  4  7-14— (Z))  OT,  I MachabeeSy 
1:46-66;  2:19-6:8  esp  4:7-14 
New  Testament:  Lu\e,  1:70-75;  2:21  /  John, 
7:22-23  /  3:25;  7:1-8,51-53;  15:1-29; 

21:20-21  /  RomanSy  2:25-4:16;  11:25-27  / 
Z  Corinthians ,  7:18-19  /  Galatians ,  3:13-5:11; 
6:12-15  /  Ephesians,  2:11-13  /  Colossians , 
2:10-14;  3:9-11  /  HebrewSy  8:6-10:17 
18  Augustine:  Cz/jy  o/* Goz/,  bk  xvi,  ch  16  433c- 
434a;  ch  18  434c;  ch  21-28  435a-440b;  ch  32 
441c-442c;  ch  36-38  443d-446a;  bk  xix,  ch 
22  525b-c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  98, 
aa  4-6  242b-245b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  part  i,  82d-83a;  part  iii, 
177c-180a;  199b-201b;  206c 

32  Milton:  Upon  the  Circumcision  12b-13a 

33  Pascal:  Pen  see Sy  610-612  280b-282b;  637-639 
289b-290a;  675  296b-297a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  322a-b 

8c.  The  Law:  its  observance  as  a  condition  of 
righteousness  and  blessedness 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  26:4-5  /  Exodus ,  12- 
13;  19-40  esp  20:1-17  /  Leviticus  passim,  esp  26 
/  Numbers  passim  /  Deuteronomy  passim,  esp 
4:1-15,  5:6-21,  6:1-9,  6:17-25,  7:9-26,  10:12- 
13,  11:1-32,  12:32,  28:1-68,  30:11-20  /  Joshuay 
1:7-8;  8:30-35;  22:1-6— (D)  Josuey  1:7-8; 
8:30-35;  22:1-6  /  Z  KingSy  8:54-62 —  (D)  ZZZ 
Kings y  8:54-62  /  ZZ  KingSy  17;  21:8— (D)  ZK 
Kings,  17;  21:8  /  Z  Chronicles ,  22:12-13— (D) 
Z  Paralipomenony  22:12-13  /  ZZ  ChronicleSy  31; 
33:8;  35:1-19— (D)  ZZ  Paralipomenony  31; 
33:8;  35:1-19  /  Ezra,  9-10 —(E)  Z  EsdraSy  9-10 
/  Nehemiah,  1:5-9;  9:16-38— (D)  ZZ  Esdras, 
1:5-9;  9:16-38  /  Psalms y  1;  19:7-14;  37:30-31; 
40:8;  78;  89:20-36  esp  89:30-32;  94:12; 
105:43-45;  1 1 9— (D)  Psalms ,  1;  18:8-15; 
36:30-3!;  39:9;  77;  88:21-37  esp  88:31-33; 
93:12;  104:43-45;  1 18  /  Proverbs  passim,  esp 
6:20-23,  28:7,  29:18  /  Isaiah  passim,  esp 


8c  /o  8z/ 

5:24-25,  30:9,  42:21-25,  51:7-8— (D)  Isaias 
passim,  esp  5:24-25,  30:9,  42:21-25,  51:7-8 
/  Jeremiah  passim,  esp  2:5-8,  6:19,  9:13-16, 
16:10-13,  26:4-6,  31:33,  44:10-14,  44:23— 
(Z2)  Jeremias  passim,  esp  2:5-8,  6:19,  9:13-16, 
16:10-13,  26:4-6,  31:33,  44:10-14,  44:23  / 
Ezefyely  5:5-9;  11:17-20;  18;  22:26;  36:25- 
27;  43-48  —  {D)  Ezechiely  5:5-9;  11:17-20; 
18;  22:26;  36:25-27;  43-48  /  Daniely  9:1-15  / 
Hoseay  4:6;  8:1— (D)  4:6;  8:1  /  yZraor 

2:4-6  /  Zephaniahy  3:1-7— (D)  Sophonias 
3:1-7  /  Zechariahy  7:12-14— (D)  Zacharias 
7:12-14  /  Malachiy  2:1-10;  3:7;  4:4— (Z)) 
MalachiaSy  2:1-10;  3:7;  4:4 

Apocrypha:  Tobity  14:8-9— (D)  OT,  Tobias , 
14:10-11  /  Ecclesiasticus  passim,  esp  2:16, 
9:15,  10:19,  ii:i5*  i9:i7"20»  J9:24» 

24:23»  32:i5*  33:2>  34:8>  39:i7iL  4i:8>  42:i- 
2,  45:1-5— (Z))  OT,  Ecclesiasticus  passim, 
esp  2:19,  9:22-23,  10:23,  11:15,  I7:9_I2> 
19:17-18,  19:21,  24:32-33,  32:19,  33:2,  34:8, 
39:1-15,  41:11,  42:1-2,  45:1-6  /  Baruch — 
(Z))  OT,  Baruch  /  Z  Maccabees ,  1:38-63; 
2:19-68 — (Z9)  OT,  Z  MachabeeSy  1:40-66; 
2:19-68  /  II  Maccabees ,  2:2-3;  6-7;  11:22-26 
—  (D)  OT,  ZZ  MachabeeSy  2:2-3;  6-75 11:22-26 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  5:17-20;  12:1-13; 
15:1-20;  19:3-9  /  Mar\y  7:1-23;  10:2-12  / 
Lu\ey  6:1-9;  ii:37~4i;  i4-2~5;  16:16-17  / 
/c^ztz,  1:17;  5:1-18,45-47;  7:19-23  / 
10:9-15,25-28;  13:38-39;  15:1-10;  21:20-21  / 
Romans  passim  /  Galatians  passim  /  EphesianSy 
2:14-15  /  Z  Timothy ,  1:5-11  /  HebrewSy  7-10 

18  Augustine:  C/>y  0/  Go</,  bk  x,  ch  17  309c- 
310b;  bk  xx,  ch  28  556c-557a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
aa  4-5  210c-212c;  qq  98-105  239b-321a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  v  [13-84] 
112  b- 113a  passim 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  part  iii,  177d-178a; 
180a-d;  206c-207a;  216b-218a;  223a-c;  part 
iv,  269a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  18b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [223-260]  324a- 
325a;  [285-314]  325b-326a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  610  280b-282a;  619-620 
284b-286a;  628-634  287a-289a;  678  297a-b; 
680  298a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  14b-15a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  179d-182c  esp  181a- 
182a;  208a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  246c-d 

8 d.  The  Temple:  the  Ark  of  the  Torah 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  25-27;  30:1-6;  35:10- 
38:3G  39:32_4o:3^  /  Leviticus ,  26:11  /  Nz/ra- 
berSy  9:15-22  /  Deuteronomy ,  10:1-5;  12:5-6; 
16:5-6;  31:24-26  /  Joshua ,  3-4;  6:1-16— (D) 
Josue,  3-4;  6:1-16  /  Z  Samuel ,  413-7:2— (D) 
Z  Kings,  413-7:2  /  ZZ  Samuel,  6:1-17;  7:I~J3 
—(D)  ZZ  6:1-17;  7:I_I3  /  J  Lings,  5-8 

—(D)  ZZZ  5-8  /  ZZ  Kings,  12:4-16; 


i  3e  to  9 a  Chapter 

!!  25:1-17 — (D)  IV  Kings,  12:4-16;  25:1  17  / 

I  Chronicles ,  13;  15:1-17:12;  22:1 -29:10— (D) 

>,  /  Paralipomenon ,  13;  15:1-17:12;  22:1-29:10 

/  //  Chronicles ,  2-7  esp  7:12-16;  8:11; 
24:4_I45  29 i  345  36  —  (£>)  //  Paralipomenon , 
2-7  esp  7:12-16;  8:11;  24:4-14;  29;  34;  36  / 
Ezra,  3-6— (D)  /  Eft/raj,  3-6  /  Psalms,  5:7; 
11:4;  27:4-6;  65:4;  68:29;  138:2— (D)  Psalms, 
5:8;  10:5;  26:4-6;  64:5;  67:30;  137:2  /  /rara/z, 
2:2-3;  5 6:6-7— (D)  Dai  as,  2:2-3;  56:6-7  / 
Jeremiah ,  7:1-4,29-30;  26:1-7— (D)  Jeremias , 
7:1-4,29-30;  26:1-7  /  Eze{iel,  40-42— (D) 
Ezechiel ,  40-42  /  Jonah ,  2:4 —(D)  /otz*z.?,  2:5  / 
Micah,  4:1-2  — (D)  Micheas,  4:1-2  /  Habal [- 
l{ul{,  2:20 —(E))  Habacuc ,  2:20  /  Haggai— 
(D)  Aggeus  /  Zechariah,  8:9 —(D)  Zacharias , 
8:9  /  Malachi,  3:1 —(E)  Malachias ,  3:1 
Apocrypha:  7o/>zV,  14:4-7— (D)  OT,  Tobias , 
14:6-9  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  9:8 —(D)  OT, 
Poo^  0/  Wisdomy  9:8  /  Baruch ,  2:26— (D) 
OT,  Baruchy  2:26 

New  Testament;  /o^/z,  2:13-17  /  Hebrews , 
9:1-10 

15  Tacitus:  HistorieSy  bk  v,  296a;  297d-298a 
18  Augustine:  Cz/y  o/* Go*/,  bk  x,  ch  17  309c- 
310b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  ioi, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  1,4  269a-270b;  q  102,  a  4 
276d-283c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  178c;  180a-c; 
184c; 198a-b 

32  Milton  :  Paradise  Losty  bk  xii  [244-256]  324b; 

I  [284-371]  325b-327a  esp  [331-343]  326b 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Felly  180a;  180d-181a; 
352c-354d  esp  354a-b 

8e.  The  messianic  hope 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  49:10-12  /  NumberSy 
24:15-25  /  Deuteronomy ,  30:1-10  /  Psalmsy 
22:27-31;  44;  46-48;  60;  67-69  passim;  74; 
102;  106:40-48;  126;  132;  147:1-11  — (D) 

Psalms,  21:28-32;  43;  45-47;  59;  66-68  pas¬ 
sim;  73;  101;  105:40-48;  125;  131;  146  / 
Isaiahy  2-4;  7:10-16;  9:1-7;  11-12;  25-27; 
30:18-33;  32;  40-46  esp  41:25-42:4;  49; 
51-56  esp  52:13-53:12;  59:20-62:12;  65:17- 
66:24— (D)  IsaiaSy  2-4;  7:10-16;  9:1-7;  n-12; 
25-27;  30:18-33;  32;  40-46  esp  41:25-42:4; 
49;  51-56  esp  52:13-53:12;  59:20-62:12; 

65:17-66:24  /  Jeremiahy  23:3-6;  3°~33—(D) 
JeremiaSy  23:3-6;  30-33  /  Ezekiel,  17:22- 
24;  34;  36-37— (£>)  Ezechiel,  17:22-24;  34; 
36-37  /  Daniel ,  9:20-27  /  Hosea,  1:10-11; 
2:16-23;  3:3~55  I3-I4— C^)  1:10-11; 

2:16-24;  3:3-5;  13-14  /  2-3  / 

9:9-15— (D)  AmoSy  9:9-14  /  Micah ,  2:12-13; 
4-5;  7:7-20— (D)  Micheas ,  2:12-13;  4-5;  7:7- 
20  /  Zephaniahy  3— (D)  Sophonias ,  3  /  Z*r/ra- 
riahy  2;  8-10;  12-14— iP)  Zacharias ,  2;  8-10; 
12-14  /  Malachi,  3-4— (£>)  Malachias ,  3-4 
New  Testament:  MattheWy  1  esp  1:20-23;  3:1- 
3,13-17;  12:14-21;  16:13-16;  17:1-13;  26:63- 


29:  COD  595 

64  /  Ah/r^,  8:27-29;  9:2-13;  1 4 :6i -/S2  / 

1:30  35;  3:1  6,15  16;  7:24-28;  9:18  20,28- 

36;  22:66  70  /  John,  1:15  41  esp  1:41;  4:4  30 
esp  4:25  26:7:26-53;  10:24-38 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  in,  q  i, 
a  6  708c  709c 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  iii,  229c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [235-244] 
324b;  [284-330]  325b  326b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  607  280a;  609  280b;  613 
282b  283a;  616-619  283b  285a;  642  290b; 
662  293b;  673  296a;  675  296b  297a;  692 
300b  301a;  719  308b  309a;  727  315b  316b; 
729-730  316b  317a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  181b;  207d-208a; 
308a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  134b-  135a 

9-  Specifically  Christian  dogmas  concerning 
the  divine  nature  and  human  destiny 

9<z.  The  Trinity 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1:26 
New  Testament:  Matthew ,  1:18-20;  3:11,16- 
17;  10:19-20;  12:31-32;  28:19  /  MarJ^y  1:8-12; 
3:28-30;  13:11  /  Lul^e,  1:15,26-35;  2:25-27; 
3:16,21-22;  11:13;  12:10-12  /  John ,  1:1-8,14, 
18,32-34;  3  esp  3:16-17,  3:35-36;  14-16; 
20:22-23  /  1:2, 5-8;  2:1-41  esp  2:32-39; 

4:23-31;  5:32;  8:17-22;  9:31;  10:38,44-48; 
11:15-17;  13:2-4;  157-9;  19:1-6;  20:28; 

28:25-27  /  Romans ,  5  esp  5:5-10;  8: 1-9:1; 
14:17;  15:13,16  /  /  CorinthianSy  2:9-14; 

3:16-23;  6:19;  12:2-13  /  //  CorinthianSy 

1:18-22;  4:4;  13:14 — (E>)  II  CorinthianSy 

1:18-22;  4:4;  13:13  /  Ephesians ,  1-3  passim 
/  ColossianSy  1:13-15  /  /  Thessalonians , 

1:5-6  /  //  Timothy ,  1:14  /  Titus,  3:4-7  / 
Hebrews y  1:2-3;  6:4-6;  10:14-17  /  /  Peter , 
1:1-12  /  //  Peftr,  1:21  /  /  John ,  4-5  esp 
4:9-10,  4:14-15,5:1-2,  5:5-7,  5:10-12  / /«*&, 
17-21 

18  Augustine:  Confessionsy  bk  xiii,  par  6-12 
112a-113d;  par  32,  119b  /  Cz/y  o/"  Go*/,  bk  x, 
ch  23-24  312c-313c;  bk  xi,  ch  10  327d-328d; 
ch  23-29  334c-339b;  ch  32  340b-d;  bk  xiii, 
ch  24  373d-376a,c;  bk  xvi,  ch  6,  426c  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  5  625d-626a; 
ch  34  634b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  2,  657b-658a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  qq  27-43 
153a-237a,c;  q  59,  a  i,  contrary  306c-307b; 
q  61,  a  2,  ans  315c-316a;  q  88,  a  3,  rep  3  472c- 
473a;  q  91,  a  4,  rep  2  487d-488c;  q  93,  a  i, 
rep  2  492a-d;  aa  5-8  495b-500c;  q  108,  a  i, 
ans  552c-553c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  93, 
a  1,  rep  2  215b,d-216c;  q  106,  a  4,  rep  3  324a- 
325c;  part  11— 11,  q  1,  a  8,  rep  3  387a-388c;  q  2, 
a  8  397d-398b;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  3,  rep  3  713a- 
714c;  q  8,  a  1,  rep  1  756d-757c;  q  16,  a  1,  rep  2 
796b-797d;  a  2,  rep  2  797dT98b;  a  5,  rep  i 
800c-801b;  q  17,  a  i,  rep  5  807a-808d;  a  2, 


596 


0 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(9.  Specifically  Christian  dogmas  concerning  the 
divine  nature  and  human  destiny,  9a.  The 
Trinity.) 

rep  3  808d-809d;  q  19,  a  i,  rep  i  816a-818b; 
qq  20-24  821a-839c;  q  25,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1,3 
839d-840d;  q  26,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  846b-d; 
q  63,  a  3,  rep  1  866c-867c;  a  4,  contrary 
867d-868b;  part  hi  suppl,  q  95,  a  i,  rep  2 
1042c-1044c;  a  3,  ans  1045b-1046d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  hi  [34- 
45]  56b;  paradise,  x  [1-6]  120b;  xiv  [28-33] 
127b;  xxiv  [124-147]  144a;  xxxm  [76—145] 
157a-d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  v,  stanza 
267  155a  /  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,794-808] 
467a-b 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  97c;  part  iii, 
182a-c;  207b;  207d-208c;  227b;  part  iv,  259d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  100c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  159a; 

232b 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  [1— 14]  la-b  /  Paradise 
Lost ,  bk  hi  [56-415]  136b-144b  esp  [167-172] 
139a,  [372-389]  143b-144a;  bk  v  [600-615] 
188b;  bk  vi  [719-733]  212a;  bk  xii  [469-551] 
329b-331a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  307a-314a  esp  310b- 
311a;  438b-441d  esp  438b-c,  441a-b;  605a-b; 
607a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  422a-c;  520b-521c 
esp  521c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  hi,  303d- 
304a;  306a-c 

9b.  The  Incarnation:  the  God-man 

New  Testament:  John ,  1:1-14 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  20  32d-33a; 
bx  vii,  par  13-14  47c-48b;  par  24-25  50d-51c; 
bk  x,  par  67-70  88b-89a;  bk  xi,  par  4  90a-b  / 
City  of  God ,  bk  ix,  ch  15  293a-294a;  ch  17 
295a-c;  ch  21  296b-d;  bk  x,  ch  20  311b-c;  ch 
22  312a-b;  ch  24  312d-313c;  ch  27-29  315b- 
318b;  bk  xi,  ch  2  323a-c;  bk  xxi,  ch  15-16 
572c-574a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  11-14 
627b-628b;  ch  34  634b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  62,  a  9, 
rep  3  324a-325b;  q  64,  a  i,  rep  4  334a- 
335c;  q  73,  a  1,  rep  1  370a-371a;  q  95,  a  i, 
rep  1  506b-507c;  part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  7,  rep  2 
642a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  qq  1-26 
70ib,d-846d  esp  q  26,  a  1,  rep  3  845b-846a; 
part  iii  suppl,  q  76,  a  1  939d-941a;  q  95,  a  3, 
ans  1045b-1046d;  a  4  1046d-1047d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xxix 
[106-120]  98d-99a;  xxxi  [76-126]  101c-102a; 
xxxii  [19-63]  102c-103a;  paradise,  ii  [31-45] 
108a;  vi  [10-21]  113d;  vii  [16-120]  115b-116b; 
xiii  [37-87]  125d-126b;  xxxii  [i39]-xxxm 
[145]  156a-157d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  182a-c 


9b  to  9b(\) 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  la- 7b  /  The  Passion 
10b-12a  /  Upon  the  Circumcision  12b-13a  / 
Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [56-415]  136b-144b  esp 
[315— 34i ]  142a-b,  [383-389]  143b-144a;  bk  xii 
[307-385]  326a-327b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  512  262a;  763-765  322a;  785 
325b;  862  342b-343a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  307d-308b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  134a-161a,c  esp  134a- 
138a,  150c-151b;  230d-231a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  306b-c; 
308a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b- 
137c 

9b(l)  The  divinity  of  Christ 

Old  Testament:  Isaiah ,  9:6-7 — (D)  Isaias, 
9:6-7 

New  Testament:  Matthew  passim,  esp  1:18-25, 
3:16-4:11,  7:21,  8:29-32,  10:32-33,  11:25-30, 
14:22-33,  16:13-20,  17:1-8,  26:63-68,  27:38-54 
/  Mar\  passim,  esp  1:1,  1:10-11,  1:21-28,  2:3- 
12,  3:11-12,  5:2-7,  9:1-8,  14:60-65,  15:39,  16:19 
/  Lul{e  passim,  esp  2:49,  4:41,  9:28-36,  10:21- 
22,  22:29,  24:49  /  J°hn  passim,  esp  1  n-14, 1:49, 
5:17-27,  8:16,  10:30,  10:38,  11:27,  14:10-11, 
14:20,  14:28,  17:1-3,  20:17  /  Acts,  8:37  /  Rom¬ 
ans,  1:3-4;  8:3,29-33  /  I  Corinthians,  1:24; 
15:28  /  II  Corinthians,  1:19;  5:18-21  /  Philip- 
pians,  2:5-6  /  Colossians ,  1:15-17;  2:8-9  / 
I  Timothy,  3:16/  Hebrews,  1:1-8;  4:14;  5:5,8; 
13:8  /  I  John ,  2:22-24;  3:8;  4:9-10,13-15; 
5:1-13,20  /  II  John,  7-1 1  /  Jude 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  25  51a-c 
/  City  of  God,  bk  ix,  ch  15  293a-294a;  ch  17 
295a-c;  bk  x,  ch  20  311b-c;  ch  22  312a-b; 
ch  24  312d-313c;  ch  27-29  315b-318b;  bkxi, 
ch  2  323a-c;  bk  xxi,  ch  15-16  572c-574a; 
bk  xxii,  ch  6  590a-591c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  3 
723a-730b;  qq  16-24  796a-839c;  q  25,  a  i 
839d-840d;  part  iii  suppl,  q  95,  a  3,  ans 
1045b-1046d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  vii  [16-120] 
115b-116b 

22  Chaucer:  Prioress's  Tale  391a-395b 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  la-7b  /  The  Passion 
10b-12a  /  Upon  the  Circumcision  12b-13a  / 
Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [56-415]  136b-144b  esp 
[135-142]  138b,  [167-172]  139a,  [281-314]  141b- 
142a,  [383-389]  143b-144a;  bk  v  [600-615] 
188b;  bk  vi  [719-733]  212a;  bk  xii  [307-385] 
326a-327b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  734  317a;  763-765  322a;  785 
325b;  841-842  336a-337a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  308a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  134b-138a  esp  135b- 
136b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  270d- 
271c;  part  iii,  306d-307b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b- 
137c  passim;  bk  vii,  189c-190c 


9b{2)  to  9c 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


597 


9^(2)  The  humanity  of  Christ 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  1:18-25;  2:11;  11:19; 
I3:54"56^  25:37~45;  26:1-28:8  /  Mar{,  6:2-3; 
i5:37"i6:6  /  1-2;  7:33-34;  11:27-28;  22- 

23;  24:2-7,36-43  /  JoJmf  1 : 1  — 1 8  esp  1:14; 
5:27;  6:42;  19:28-20:29  /  Romans ,  1:3-4;  8:3  / 
II  Corinthians ,  5:16  /  Galatians ,  4:4  /  Ephesians , 
2:14-16  /  PhilippianSy  2:5-8  /  Colossians ,  1:20- 
22/I  Timothy ,  3:16  /  Hebrews ,  2:14-18;  4:15; 
5:757 120-24  /  /  John,  4 12-3 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  25  51a-c  / 
C//y  0/  Goz/,  bk  ix,  ch  15  293a-294a;  ch  17 
295a-c;  bk  x,  ch  20  311b-c;  cii  22  312a  b; 
ch  24  312d-313c;  ch  27-29  315b-318b;  bk  xi, 
ch  2  323a-c;  bk  xxi,  ch  15-16  572c-574a  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  1,  ch  14  627d-628b 

19  Aquinas:  Swnma  Theologica ,  part  i,q  51,  a 2, 
rep  1  276b-277a;  a  3,  rep  5  277a-278c;  q  113, 
a  4,  rep  1  578b-579a;  q  119,  a  2,  rep  4  607b- 
608d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q  i, 
a  1,  rt.p  1  380b-381a;  q  18,  a  2,  rep  i  462d- 
463d;  part  hi,  qq  4-24  730c-839c;  q  25,  aa  1-2 
839d-841c;  part  hi  suppl,  q  76,  a  i  939d-941a; 
q  90,  aa  1-2  1012b-1014d;  q  92,  a  3,  rep  12 
1034b-1037c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  vii  [16-120] 
115b-116b;  xiii  [37-45]  125d;  [73-87]  126b 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale ,  par  12  503b-504b 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  la-7b  /  The  Passion 
10b-12a  esp  [15-21]  lOb-lla  /  Upon  the  Circum¬ 
cision  12b- 13a  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  hi  [56-415] 
136b-144b  esp  [238-241]  140b,  [281-294]  141b; 
bk  xi  [22-44]  299b-300a;  bk  xii  [307-385] 
326a-327b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  553  268a-270a;  763-765 
322a;  785  325b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  308a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  134b-138a  esp 
134b-135b,  137a-d;  330a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  270d- 
271c;  part  iii,  306b-307a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
127b-137c  passim;  bk  vii,  189c-190c 

9£(3)  Mary,  the  Mother  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Isaiah ,  7:14 —(D)  Isaiasy  7:14 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  1:18-25;  12:46-50  / 
Mar\y  3:31-35  /  Luke,  1-2;  8:19-21;  11:27-28 
/  /o^72,  2:1-12;  19:25-27 

18  Augustine:  Cz/y  o/" Go^,  bk  xvii,  ch  16  465c- 
466d  esp  466c-d;  ch  24  471d-472a,c;  bk  xviii, 
ch  35,  49 Id  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  14 
627d-628b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  7, 
a  10,  rep  1  752c-753c;  q  25,  a  5  843d-844b; 
PART  III  SUPPL,  Q  83,  A  3,  CONTRARY  978c- 
980d;  q  96,  a  5,  rep  2  1055c-1058a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  ii  [43-126] 
3a-4a  esp  [94-99]  3c;  purgatory,  x  [34-45] 
67d;  paradise,  xiii  [79-87]  126b;  xxm  141b- 


142c;  xxx  xxxi  1 5 1  d  154c  esp  xxxi  [04- 
142]  154b  c;  xxxi  1  [85)  xxxm  [45]  155c  156c 

22  Ciiaucer:  Prioress's  ’Tale  391a-395b 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  la-7b  /  Paradise  Lost , 
bk  in  [274-285]  141b;  bk  xii  [307-385)  326a- 
327b  esp  [375-382]  327b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  62b  64b  /  Penscesy 
742  319a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  134d  137c  passim; 
140a; 154d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  338b  c 

47  Goethe:  Fausty  part  i  [3587-3619]  87b  88a; 
part  11  [11,989-12,111]  291b  294b 

9c.  Christ  the  Saviour  and  Redeemer:  the  doc¬ 
trines  of  original  sin  and  salvation 

Old  Testament:  /  Samuel ,  2  :i-io— (D)  I  Kings , 
2:1-10  /  lsaiahy  53— (D)  lsaiasy  53  /  Lamenta¬ 
tions,  4:20 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  1:21;  9:2-8;  10:32- 
33;  16:24-27;  18:11-14;  26:26-28  /  Marl^y  2:1- 
12;  8:34-38;  14:22-24  /  1:67-79;  2:11; 

5:17-26;  7:37-50;  9:23-26,56;  15;  19:1-10; 
22:19-20;  24:46-47  /  John  esp  1:29,  3:16-18, 
4:42,  6:31-59,  10:9-18,  14:6-7,  14:18-19,  15:1- 
4  /  /to,  3:12-26;  4:10-12;  5:30-31;  13:15-50 
esp  13:38-39;  16:30-31  /  Romans  esp  3:20-26, 
5:1-6:23,  8:1-4  /  /  Corinthians ,  15:3,12-23  / 
//  Corinthians  esp  2:10,  4:13-14,  5:14-21,  8:9, 
I3:4-5  /  Galatians  passim,  esp  2:20-3:14,  4:1-5 
/  Ephesians  esp  1:5-7,  1  *12-14,  2:1-22  /  Colos¬ 
sians  esp  1  :i2-i4,  1 : 1 9—22 ,  2  :i3~i4  /  /  Timothy , 
1:12-17;  2:5-6  /  Titus  esp  2:11-3:7  /  Hebrews 
esp  2:1-18,  5:9,  7:25-27,  9:1-10:39/  7/V/*resp 

1  :3-ii,  3:17-4:6  /  / /oAzz  esp  3:16,  4:9-10,  4:14 
/  Revelation  passim,  esp  5-7 —(D)  Apocalypse 
passim,  esp  5-7 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  15  12b-c; 
bk  iv,  par  18-19  23d-24b;  bk  vii,  par  24-27 
50d-52c;  bk  x,  par  67-70  88b-89a  /  C/Vy  of 
Gody  bk  vii,  ch  31-32  261d-262b;  bk  ix,  ch 
15  293a-294a;  ch  17  295a-c;  bk  x,  ch  4-6 
301a-302d;  ch  19-20  310d-311c;  ch  22-25 
312a-314c;  ch  27-32  315b-322a,c;  bk  xi,  ch 

2  323a-c;  bk  xiii,  ch  2-4  360b-362a;  ch  12- 
15  365d-366d;  ch  23-24  372a-376a,c;  bk 
xvii  449a-472a,c  passim;  bk  xviii,  ch  23 
483d-485a;  ch  31-35  488a-493a;  bk  xx,  ch 
26  555a-556b;  ch  30  557c-560a,c;  bk  xxi,  ch 
15-16  572c-574a;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b,d-587b; 
ch  3  588a-b;  ch  22-24  606d-612a;  ch  29-30 
614b-618d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  11-12 
627b-d;  ch  14-18  627d-629a;  ch  34  634b-c; 
bk  11,  ch  41  656a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  par»t  i,  q  97, 
a  1,  rep  3  513c-514c;  part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  7,  rep 
2  642a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  85, 
a  5,  rep  2  181d-182d;  q  87,  a  7,  rep  3  190c- 
191d;  q  89,  a  5,  rep  1  202c-203b;  q  91,  a  5, 
rep  2  211c-212c;  q  98,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3 
239b-240c;  a  2  240c-241b;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i 


598 

(9.  Specifically  Christian  dogmas  concerning  the 
divine  nature  and  human  destiny.  9c. 
Christ  the  Saviour  and  Redeemer:  the  doc¬ 
trines  of  original  sin  and  salvation.) 
242b-243c;  a  6,  rep  2  244c-245b;  q  ioo,  a 
12  264d-265d;  q  ioi,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i  268a- 
269a;  q  102,  a  2,  ans  271b-272a;  a  4,  rep  2,5- 
6  esp  rep  6  276d-283c;  a  5,  rep  5  283c-292c; 
q  103,  a  1,  ans  298b-299b;  a  2  299b-300d;  a  3, 
rep  2  300d-302a;  q  104,  a  3,  ans  305d-306d; 
qq  106-108  321a-337d;  part  11-11,  q  1,  a  7,  rep 
1,4  385c-387a;  a  8,  rep  4  387a-388c;  q  2,  a  7 
396a-397c;  q  14,  a  2,  rep  3  448d-449d;  part 
hi,  Q  1  701b,d-709c;  q  26  845a-846d;  q  60,  a 
3,  ans  848d-849c;  a  5,  rep  3  850b-851b;  q  61, 
a  1,  rep  3  855a-d;  a  3  856c-857c;  q  62,  a  5, 
rep  2  862b-863a;  a  6,  ans  and  rep  1-2  863a- 
864c;  part  hi  suppl,  q  69,  a  4  889c-890c;  q 
71,  a  14,  rep  2  916c-917b;  q  75,  a  2,  rep  3-4 
937a-938a;  q  76,  a  1  939d-941a;  q  78,  a  i, 
rep  3  947d-949b;  q  89,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  4 
1006b-1007c;  a  5,  ans  1009b-d;  q  90  1012a- 
1016a;  q  95  1042c-1049d;  q  99,  a  3,  rep  i 
1081d-1083a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  iv  [46-63]  5d- 

6a;  purgatory,  xxxii  [28-63]  102c-103a; 
xxxiii  [52-72]  104d-105a;  paradise,  vii 

[16-120]  115b-116b;  xm  [37-87]  125d-126b; 
xix  [103-111]  136a;  xxm  141b-142c;  xxxii 
[1-138]  154d-156a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  v,  stanza 
263-267  154b-155a  /  Second  Nun's  Tale 
[15,788-822]  467a-b  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par  8 
497b-498a;  par  13  504b-505a;  par  68-69 
533b-534b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  191b-192c; 

195d-196a;  197c-198a;  204a-207b;  240c; 

242b-245a;  part  iv,  260b-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iv, 
269c-270b 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure ,  act  ii, 
sc  ii  [71-79]  182d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  68,  schol 
445a-b 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  la-7b  passim  /  The 
Passion  10b-12a  /  Upon  the  Circumcision  12  b- 
13a  /  Lycidas  [165-185]  31b  /  Paradise  Lost 
93a-333a  esp  bk  i  [1-26]  93b-94a,  bk  iii 
[56—41:5]  136b-144b,  bkx  [615-640]  287b-288b, 
bk  xi  [22-44]  299b-300a,  bk  xii  [285-484] 
325b-329b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  425-856  243b-341b  passim, 
esp  556-588  270b-277b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  181b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  334b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  482a-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iii, 
306b-c;  part  iv,  331d-332a;  354a-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Did {,  318b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
127b-137c  passim 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  763b-c 


9c  to  9d 

9 d.  The  Church:  the  mystical  body  of  Christ; 
the  Apostolate 

Old  Testament:  Song  of  Solomon — (D)  Canticle 
of  Canticles 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  3;  4:18-22;  8:18-23; 
9:35-io:42;  11:1-15;  i3:i“53i  16:17-24;  18:15- 
20;  20:25-28;  24:14;  25;  28:16-20  /  Mar\, 
1:1-9,16-20;  3:13-19;  10:42-45;  13:10;  16:14- 
20  /  Lube,  3:1-20;  4:43-44;  5:1-11;  6:13-16; 
8:16-17;  9:i-6;  11:48-50;  12:11-12;  22:24-30; 
24:47/ John,  1:6-8,15-42;  4:34-38;  10;  13:31- 
17:26;  20:19-21:24  esp  20:20-23,  21:15-17  / 
Acts  esp  1:8,  1:13-26,  2:1-47,  5:i-42>  x3:47> 
16:1-40,  22:14-15  /  Romans  /  I  Corinthians 
passim,  esp  3:1-23,  4:9-13,  6:1-20,  10:16-17, 
12:12-31,  15:1-11  /  II  Corinthians  esp  1:12-21, 
2:10-11,  3:1-4:18,  5:20-21,  7:8-13,  10:1-13:10 
/  Galatians  passim,  esp  1-2,  3:28,  4:1-31  / 
Ephesians  esp  1:22-23,  3:8-12,  4:1-12,  5:23-33 
/  Philippians,  1  .*27-2 : 4  /  Colossians  passim,  esp 
1:15-29,  2:13-19,  3:6-11  /  Hebrews ,  3:5-6  / 
I  Peter ,  2:4-10  /  I  John 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vi,  par  4  36a-b  / 
City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  35  149b-c;  bk  x,  ch  20 
311b-c;  bk  xm,  ch  21  371a-c;  bk  xvii,  ch  9 
461b-d;  ch  ii  462c-463a;  ch  15-16  465b- 
466d;  ch  20  469a-470c;  bk  xviii,  ch  48-52 
501b-504d;  bk  xix,  ch  22  525b-c;  bk  xx,  ch 
7-12  535b-541d;  bk  xxii,  ch  17-18  603a-604b 
/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  16  628c-d;  ch  18 
628d-629a;  bk  iii,  ch  31-32  669c-670a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  95, 
a  1,  rep  1  506b-507c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  i, 
a  9,  contrary  and  rep  3,5  388d-389d;  a  io, 
ans  389d-390d;  q  2,  aa  6-8  395b-398b;  q  5 
410a-413c;  qq  183-189  625a-700d;  part  iii,  q 
8  756c-763b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  71,  a  9  910d- 
912b;  q  95,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  4  1045b-1046d; 
a  4,  rep  1,5  1046d-1047d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  ix  [73- 
145]  66c-67b;  xix  [127-141]  82d-83a;  xxix 
[i]-xxx  [21]  97d-99c;  xxxii  [i]-xxxiii  [78] 
102b-105a;  paradise,  xi  122a-123c  esp  [28- 
39]  122b;  xii  123c-125a;  xxm  [i]-xxvi  [81] 
141b-146c  passim;  xxvn  [1-66]  147b-148a; 
xxix  [109-114]  151b;  xxx-xxxii  151d-156a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  151a-c;  part  iii, 
198a-199a;  207b-224c;  part  iv,  247a-249b; 
275a-278d 

32  Milton  :  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [436-514]  328b- 
330b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  473-484  256b-258b;  646 
291b;  801-802  328b;  832  334a;  849  339b- 
340a;  852  341a-b;  857-861  342a;  867-905 
343b-349a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  4b-5d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  307b- 
310c;  part  iv,  315d;  331d-332c;  338a-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
127b-137c  passim 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  674c-d;  691d-692a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


599 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


9e  to  10 

9*.  The  sacraments 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  3;  18:18;  19:4-6,10- 
12;  20:20-23;  26:26-29;  28:19  /  Mar{,  1:4,8- 
10;  10:2-12,35-40;  14:22-24;  16:16  /  Lz/fc, 
3:3,16;  22:14-20  /  John,  1:25-27,3 3;  3:1-8;  6 
esp  6:32-35,  6:47-59;  19*33-34;  20:21-23  / 
2:40-42;  8:12-17,26-40;  1 1:16;  19:1-7; 
22:16  /  Romans,  6:3-4  /  f  Corinthians,  1 : 12-17; 
6:ir;  7:8-14,34-39;  10:16-17;  11:23-30;  12:13; 
15:28-29  /  Galatians ,  3:27  /  Ephesians ,  4:5; 
5:21-33  esp  5:31-32  /  Colossians,  2:11-12  / 
Hebrews,  5:1-6  /  James,  5:14-16  /  /  Peter, 
3 :20-22 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ix,  par  12  64d- 
65a;  bk  xiii,  par  26-29  117c-118c  /  City  0/ 
Goz/,  bk  x,  ch  5-6  301b-302d;  ch  19-20  310d- 
311c;  bk  xiii,  ch  3-4  361a-362a;  ch  7  362d- 
363b;  bk  xx,  ch  26  555a-556b;  bk  xxi,  ch  16 
573b-574a;  ch  20  575c-d;  ch  25  579d-581a  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  3  637c-d;  ch  41 
656a-c;  bk  iii,  ch  9  661a-c;  bk  iv,  ch  21, 
690d-691b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, 
a  3,  ans  490c-491b;  q  113,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  3 
579a-d 

20  Aquunas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i— ii, 
q  102,  a  5  283c-292c;  q  103,  a  4,  ans  302a- 
304a;  q  108,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  332b-333d; 
part  ii-ii,  q  1,  a  1,  REP  i  380b-381a;  a  3, 
rep  4  381d-382c;  a  8,  rep  6  387a-388c; 
q  3,  a  1,  rep  1  400c-401a;  q  10,  a  12, 
rep  5  436b-437d;  part  iii,  qq  60-65 
847a-884a,c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  83,  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  4  978c-980d;  q  99,  a  4  1083a- 
1084a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxvii  [67-132] 
40c-41a 

22  Chaucer:  Pardoner's  Tale  [12,829-849]  381b 
/  Parson  s  Tale ,  par  12-22,  504b-510b  esp 
par  22,  510b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  71b;  part  iii, 
180c-d;  206c-207a;  208b;  211c-212c;  part  iv, 
249b-250c;  263d-264a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  101a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  162d-165d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [436-445]  328b- 
329a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  71b-80b;  128b- 
137b  /  Pensees ,  554  270a;  862,  343a;  870 
344a-b;  904-905  348b-349a;  923  351b 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  12a  /  Human  Understand¬ 
ing,  bk  ii,  ch  xxiii,  sect  17  250d-251a;  bk 
iv,  ch  xx,  sect  10  391c-392a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  221a-224a;  260b- 
261a;  373b-376a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  193a-b;  297c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  329d;  334b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  173d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  331d- 
332c;  338a-d; 349d-350a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iii, 
80c-81a 


9/.  The  second  coming  of  Christ 
New  Testament:  Matthew,  10:14  15;  11:20-24; 
12:36-37;  M:36“43.37  5°;  24  25  /  Mar{, 
!3:4  37  /  Cu{e,  10:1 1  15;  17:20-37;  19:11  28; 
21:5-36  /John,  14:1-4  /Acts,  1:9-11;  2:17  21; 
17:31  /  Romans,  2:5  11  /  /  Corinthians ,  15:23- 
28  /  Philippians ,  3:20-21  /  I  Thessalonians, 
1:9-10;  2:19;  4:14-5:4  /ll  Thessalonians,  1-2  / 
//  Timothy ,  3:1  4:8  /  James,  5:7-9  /  II  Peter, 
2:9;  37-13  /  I  John,  2:18  29  /  Jude,  17  25  / 
Revelation  esp  1:4-20—  (D)  Apocalypse  esp 
1 :4~2o 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xiii,  ch  2  360b 
361a;  ch  6  362c  d;  cm  23-24  372a-376a,c; 
bk  xviii,  CH53  504d  505c;  bk  xx  530a  560a, c; 
bk  xxi,  ch  1 1-27  570b-586a,c  /  Christian 
Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  15  628 b  e 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  73,  a  1  922b-923c;  a  3  924b-925b;  q  77,  a  2, 
ans  945a-946b;  qq  87-90  997a-1016a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  179d;  191b- 
192c;  197c;  229c-230a;  244b-c;  part  iv, 
248a-b;  251c-252b;  254b-255b 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  la-7b  esp  [133-172] 
4b-5b  /  At  a  Solemn  Music\  13a-b  /  Paradise 
Lost,  bk  iii  [274-343]  141b-143a;  bk  vii  [139- 
173]  220a-221a;  bk  xi  [72-83]  300b-301a  / 
Areopagitica,  404a- b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  757  321a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  187b-188a 
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i, 
13c-d;  bk  v,  127a-137c 

10.  The  denial  of  God  or  the  gods,  or  of  a  super¬ 
natural  order:  the  position  of  the  atheist 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  14:1-3;  53:1-3  —  (D) 
Psalms,  13:1-3;  52:1-4 

5  Aristophanes:  Thesmophoriazusae  [443-458] 
605b 

7  Plato:  Apology,  204c-205c  /  Laws,  bk  x, 
758b-765d  esp  758b-759a,  759d-760c,  761b-c 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  3,  263c; 
bk  ix,  sect  39  295a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  9,  213c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
rep  1-2  12c-14a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  160a 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  211b-212a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  4b-c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  72a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [569-723]  31  lb- 
3153  esp  [617-623]  312b  /  Samson  Agonistes 
[293-299]  346a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  184-241  205a-217b 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  18b  /  Human  Understand¬ 
ing,  bk  1,  CH  iii,  sect  8  114a-c 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  92-96 
431a-d;  sect  133,  439d-440a;  sect  i 54—155 
444a-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div 
1 16,  503c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  1,  29a 


600 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  II  to  14  „ 


(10.  The  denial  of  God  or  the  gods,  or  of  a  super¬ 
natural  order:  the  position  of  the  atheist.) 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  379c-380c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv,  200b- 
201a;  bk  xxv,  208a 

40  Gpbbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  13a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  llb-c;  192c-d  /  Judge - 
pient,  595d-596c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  280d-281c 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  31c-d;  35b-c;  305d  [fn  2] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  196b-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  BKi,lla-c; 
bk  v,  135bl36b;  bk  xi,  312b-314d;  345a-c 

11.  The  denial  of  God  as  completely  tran¬ 

scending  the  world  or  nature:  the  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  pantheist 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  14  120d-121c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
sect  13  258c;  bk  vii,  sect  9  280b-c;  bk  xii, 
sect  30  310a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  16,  75c- 
76a  /  Third  Ennead ,  tr  viii  129a-136a  / 
Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  ix  205a-207a,c  /  Fifth 
Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  1-2  208a-209b;  tr  ii  214c- 
215c;  tr  iii,  ch  15-17  224c-226c;  tr  viii, 
ch  7-10,  242d-244d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  2-3  lb-2a; 
bk  hi,  par  10  15b-d;  par  18  18b;  bk  iv,  par  26 
25c-d;  par  31  26c-27a;  bk  vii,  par  1-3  43b- 
44b;  bk  x,  par  8-10  73b-74a;  bk  xii,  par  7 
lOOd-lOla;  par  21  103d-104a  /  City  of  God ,  bk 
iv,  ch  12-13  195d-196b;  bk  vii,  ch  6  248a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
8  19d-20c;  q  6,  a  4  30b-d;  q  8,  a  i,  ans  34d- 
35c;  a  3,  rep  1  36b-37c;  q  16,  a  6  98b-d;  q 
90,  a  1  480d-481d;  q  105,  a  5  542a-543b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  162b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  vi,  99c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i  355a-372d  esp  def  3-6 
355b,  prop  1-15  355d-361d,  prop  18  363c, 
prop  25  365b,  prop  28-29  365c-366c;  part  ii, 
prop  i-ii  373d-377c;  part  iv,  pref,  422b, d- 
423b;  prop  4  425b-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  18  152a-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  564c-565d  esp  565c-d; 
566c-d;  580c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  176b-c; 
part  i,  220c-221a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  115b-117a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  216d-218b; 
bk  xiii,  581c-582a;  bk  xiv,  608a-b;  bk  xv, 
631a-c 

12.  The  denial  of  a  revealed  and  providential 

God:  the  position  of  the  deist 

7  Plato:  Parmenides ,  489d-490d  /  Laws,  bk  x, 
765d-768c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [62-158] 
ld-3a;  bk  ii  [167-183]  17a-b;  [589-660]  22c- 


23b;  [1090-1104]  29a;  bk  v  [55-90]  61d-62b; 
[146-234]  63a-64a;  [306-310]  65a;  [1161-1240] 
76b-77b;  bk  vi  [43-95]  80d-81c 
15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  vi,  91b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  16,  75c- 
76a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  19  32b-c 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  162a-b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  137a-b  /  Pensees , 
242-290  217b-225a  passim;  430-434  245a- 
250a;  543-549  266a-267a;  556-588  270b-277b 
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  38c-39c;  53c;  75c-76a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  190a-c  /  Judgement ,  547d 
52  Dostoevsky  :  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  120d- 
121c;  127b-137c  passim;  bk  x,  292d-294a 

13.  God  as  a  conception  invented  by  man:  its 

emotional  basis 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  14:12-21 — (JD) 
OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  14:12-21 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  79a-b;  79d-80a 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  256c-d 
42  Kant:  Judgement ,  593c-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  302b-303d;  593b-c 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  31c-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  hi, 
67d-68c;  bk  v,  120d-121a;  bk  x,  293a 
54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  692a-693a  /  War 
and  Death,  763b-c  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents,  771a-b;  778d  /  New  Introductory 
Lectures,  875d-878c 

14.  The  worship  of  false  gods:  deification  and 

idolatry 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  31:19-35  /  Exodus, 
20:1-6,22-23;  22:20;  23:13;  32;  34:11-17  / 
Leviticus,  17:7;  19:4;  20:1-6;  26:1,28-30  / 
Numbers,  25:2-5;  33:51-52  /  Deuteronomy 
passim,  esp  4:1-3,  4:15-19,  4:23-28,  5:7-9, 
6:14-16,  7:1-6,  7:25-26,  8:19-20,  9:15-21, 
11:16-17,  11:28,  12:2-3,  12:29-13:18,  16:21- 
22,  17:2-7,  18:9-14,  20:16-18,  27:15,  28:14- 
68,  29:16-29,  30:15-20,  31:16-21,  32:15-39  / 
Joshua,  22-23;  24:14-25 —(D)  Josue,  22-23; 
24:14-25  /  Judges,  2:10-23;  3:5-8;  6:24-32; 
8:33-34;  10;  17-18  /  /  Samuel,  7:3-4;  15:22- 
23~(d)  1  Kings,  7:3-4;  15:22-23  /  /  Kings, 

3:i-4;  9:6-9;  II-l6;  l8:i7-29;  20:22-28; 

21:25-29;  22:51-53— (D)  III  Kings,  3:1-4; 
9:6-9;  i 1— 16 ;  18:17-29;  20:22-28;  21:25-29; 
22:51-54  /  II  Kings  passim,  esp  1:1-18,  8:16- 
9:10,  10:1-36,  11:17-18,  14:1-18:37,  19:16-19, 
21:1-23:37 — ( D )  IV  Kings  passim,  esp  1:1- 
18,  8:16-9:10,  10:1-36,  11:17-18,  14:1-18:37, 
19:16-19,  21:1-23:37  /  II  Chronicles,  13:8-9; 
28;  33— (D)  II  Paralipomenon,  13:8-9;  28; 
33  /  Psalms,  81:8-16;  97:7;  106;  115:1-8; 
x35 :1 5— J8  —  (D)  Psalms,  80:9-17;  96:7;  105; 
113:1-8;  134:15-18  /  Isaiah,  1-2  esp  1:29, 
2:8-9,  2:18-21;  10:10-11;  19  esp  19:1-3; 

30-31  esp  30:22,  31:7;  36  esp  36:18-20; 
40:18-20;  41  esp  41:29;  42:8,17;  44  esp 


14 

4.4:9-20;  45:2°-2i;  46:5-9;  57:3  8;  65:3  5; 
66:3  —  (D)  Isaias ,  1-2  csp  1:29,  2:8-9, 

2:18-21;  10:10-11;  19  esp  19:1-3;  30  31  csp 
30:22,  31:7;  36  csp  36:18-20;  40:18-20;  41 
esp  41:29;  42:8,  17;  44  esp  44:9-20;  45:20-21; 
46:5-9;  57:3-8;  65:3-5;  66:3  /  Jeremiah, 
1-13  passim,  csp  5:19,  7:9-10,  7:17-19,  8:1-2, 
8:12,  8:19,  9:13-14,  10:2-15,  11:10-17,  13:10; 
16  esp  16:10-13,  16:17-20;  23:20-27;  25:3-7; 
32:30-35;  44;  50:38;  51  esp  51:17-18,  51:47, 
51:52 —  (D)  Jeremias ,  1-13  passim,  esp  5:19, 
7:9-10,  7:17-19,  8:1-2,  8:12,  8:19,  9:13-14, 
10:2-15,  11:10-17,  13:10;  16  esp  16:10-13, 
16:17-20;  23:20-27;  25:3-7;  32:30-35;  44; 
50:38;  51  esp  51:17-18,  51:47,  51:52  /  Ezekiel , 
5  esp  5:11;  6;  14;  16;  20;  22-23;  36:17-19; 
37:23 —  (D)  Ezechiel,  5  esp  5:11;  6;  14;  16; 
20;  22-23;  36:17-19;  37:23  /  Daniel,  3;  6— 
(D)  Daniely  3:1-23,91-97;  6  /  Hosea  passim, 
esp  2:8-13,  4:I2-I3»  8:3-6,  10:1-2,  13:2— 

( D )  Osee  passim,  esp  2:8-13,  4:12-13,  8:3-6, 
10:1-2,  13:2  /  AmoSy  5  esp  5:25-27  /  Nahum 
passim,  esp  1:14  /  Habahjyuk*  2:18-19— (D) 
Habacuc,  2:18-19  /  Zephaniah  passim,  esp 
1:4-6 — (D)  Sophonias  passim,  esp  1:4-6  / 
Zechariahy  10:1-3;  13:2— (D)  Zachariasy 

10:1-3;  13:2 

Apocrypha:  Judithy  3:8;  5:23-6:4— (D)  OT ,Jud- 
ithy  3:12-13;  5:27-6:4  /  Rest  of  Esther ,  14:6- 
10— (D)  OT,  Esther ,  14:6-10  /  Wisdom  of 
Solomoriy  12-15— (D)  OT,  Book  °f  Wisdom, 
12-15  /  Ecclesiasticus,  34:1-7 —  (D)  OT,  Ec- 
clesiasticus,  34:1-7  /  Baruch ,  6— (D)  OT, 
Baruch ,  6  /  Bel  and  Dragon— (D)  OT,  Daniel , 
14:2-41  /  /  Maccabees ,  1  .*41-2:28— (D)  OT, 
/  Machabees,  1:43-2:28  /  II  Maccabees ,  6-7— 
(D)  OT,  II  Machabees,  6-7 

New  Testament:  7:39-44;  14:7-18; 

15:20,28-29;  17:16-31  /  Romans ,  2:22  /  I 
Corinthians ,  5:9-11;  6:9;  8;  10:7,14-21;  12:2/ 
//  Corinthians ,  6:14-17  /  Galatians ,  5:19-20  / 
Ephesians,  5:5  /  Philippians ,  3:18-19  /  Co/oi-- 
3:5  /  /  Thessalonians,  1:9  /  /  Pe/er,  4:3  / 
/  John ,  5:21  /  Revelation ,  2:20;  9:20;  21:8; 
22:14-15— (Z))  Apocalypsey  2:20;  9:20;  21:8; 
22:14-15 

6  Herodotus:  Historyy  bk  i,  12d-I3b;  31a-b; 
bk  11,  79d-80a;  bk  iii,  95a-c;  bk  iv,  140c-141a 

7  Plato:  bk  x,  769c-771b 

14  Plutarch  :  Numa  Pompilius ,  53b-c/  CamilluSy 
104d-105a  /  Pericles,  123cT24a  /  Pelopidas , 
239d-240c  /  Alexander ,  575d-576a  /  Demetri¬ 
us ,  729d-731a 


601 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  1,  4b  d  /  Histories,  bk  v, 
296a 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1081a- 
1083  b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  i  x  129a  322a, c; 
bk  xviii,  cm  5-6  474d-475c;  cii  8-10  475d 
477c;  cii  12  19  477d  482c;  cii  21  482d-483b; 
cm  24  485a  b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  17, 
a  4,  rep  3  103c-104b;  q  67,  a  4,  ans  352a 
354a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  ioo, 
a  4,  ans  253d  255a;  q  ioi,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3 
268a-269a;  q  102  270b  298a  passim 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xix  [88  117] 
27d-23a;  xx  28b-29d;  paradise,  iv  [49-63] 
111b;  viii  [1-12]  116d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  v,  stanza 
265  154b-155a  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  35-38, 
521a-522b;  par  63-64  530a-531a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  51d-52a;  78d- 
79b;  79d-80a;  80d-82d;  part  iv,  261a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  18d-20d;  238d-239b; 
246a-257d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  100b; 
lOla-b 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  la-7b  esp  [165-228] 
5b-7a  /  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [331-621]  100b- 
107a;  bk  xii  [101-120]  321b  / 
ww/w  [433-471]  349a-350a;  [871-902]  358b- 
359a;  [1139-1243]  364b-366b 

34  Newton:  Optics ,  bk  iii,  543b-544a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  13b-15a  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  1,  ch  11,  sect  26  112a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  94 
431  b-c 

37  Fielding:  20a-c;  152a-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv,  200b- 
201a;  bk  xxv,  208a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81d;  184b-185d; 
457b,d-467d;  600d-601a;  775c-776a.c  [n  173- 
'74l 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  154d;  195a-202a 
esp  195b,  197a-199c;  207a-208c;  229c-230a; 
252b-c;  329c-330b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  179a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  173d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  270, 
85 b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  196d- 
197c;  part  i,  244c-245b;  246a-b;  253b- 
254b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Die k,  17a-b;  36b  37a:  38b- 
39b;  367a-372a  * 


Chapter  29:  GOD 


602 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  treatments  of  polytheism,  and  for  discussions  of  the  gods  in  relation  to  fate  and  human 
life,  see  Angel  i;  Fate  i;  Man  ioa. 

Man’s  duty  and  piety  toward  God  or  the  gods,  and  for  man’s  worship  of  God  or  the  gods, 
see  Duty  5,  n;  Justice  11b;  Religion  2-2 g. 

Man’s  love  of  God  and  desire  to  be  with  God,  see  Desire  7b;  Love  53-56(2);  Virtue  and 
Vice  8d(3). 

Matters  relevant  to  proving  God’s  existence  and  to  other  ways  of  affirming  God’s  existence, 
see  Being  7a,  8f;  Change  14;  Metaphysics  2d;  Necessity  and  Contingency  2a-2b; 
Reasoning  56(3),  5b(5);  Theology  4c. 

The  problem  of  God’s  immanence  and  transcendence,  and  for  the  doctrine  of  pantheism, 
see  Nature  ib;  One  and  Many  ib;  World  3-3K 

Matters  relevant  to  the  consideration  of  God  as  a  necessary  being,  see  Being  7a;  Necessity 
and  Contingency  2a-2b. 

The  consideration  of  the  unity  and  simplicity  of  God,  see  One  and  Many  6a. 

The  consideration  of  God’s  eternity  and  immutability,  see  Change  15c;  Eternity  3. 

The  consideration  of  God’s  infinity  and  omnipresence,  see  Infinity  7— 7d. 

The  consideration  of  God’s  perfection  and  goodness,  see  Good  and  Evil  2— 2a;  and  for  the 
discussion  of  God  in  relation  to  Satan  and  to  the  problem  of  evil,  see  Angel  7 — 7b;  Good 
and  Evil  id,  2b;  Opposition  2d. 

The  consideration  of  God’s  intellect,  his  knowledge  and  wisdom,  the  divine  ideas  and  the 
divine  truth,  see  Idea  ie;  Infinity  7d;  Knowledge  7a;  Mind  ioe-iof;  Truth  2d;  Wisdom 
id. 

The  consideration  of  God’s  will  and  love,  see  Love  5c;  Will  4~4a. 

The  consideration  of  God’s  beauty,  happiness,  and  glory,  see  Beauty  7a;  Happiness  7d; 
Honor  6-6 b. 

The  consideration  of  the  divine  independence  and  God’s  free  will,  ^Liberty  5d;  Will  4b. 

The  consideration  of  divine  causality  in  relation  to  nature,  the  origin  of  the  universe  by 
creation  or  emanation,  and  the  eternity  of  the  world,  see  Art  2c;  Cause  7~7a;  Change  14; 
Matter  3d;  Nature  3c (4);  Time  2c;  World  4-46(3);  and  for  the  special  problem  of  the 
creation  of  life  and  of  man,  see  Evolution  4a,  7a;  Man  8b;  Soul  4c. 

The  consideration  of  God’s  foreknowledge  and  providence  in  relation  to  man’s  freedom  and 
to  the  course  of  history,  see  Cause  7 c;  Chance  2b;  Fate  4;  History  5a;  Liberty  5a~5c; 
Prophecy  ib-ic;  Sin  6a;  Will  7c. 

The  consideration  of  divine  causality  as  expressed  in  divine  law  and  in  the  government  of  the 
universe,  see  Astronomy  6;  Cause  7c;  Law  3-36(2);  Monarchy  2b;  Sin  i;  Virtue  and 
Vice  8c;  World  ic. 

The  consideration  of  divine  causality  in  the  dispensation  of  grace  and  the  performance  of 
miracles,  see  Cause  7d;  Liberty  5c;  Nature  3c(4),  6b;  Religion  ib(2);  Sin  7;  Virtue 
and  Vice  8b,  8e;  Will  7e(2). 

The  consideration  of  God’s  justice  and  mercy,  and  of  divine  rewards  and  punishments, 
see  Happiness  yc-jc^)-,  Immortality  5e— 5f;  Justice  11-na;  Punishment  5e;  Sin 
6c-6e. 

Other  discussions  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Messiah,  the  Trinity,  the  Incarnation,  and  the  second 
coming  of  Christ,  see  Man  iic;  One  and  Many  6b -6c;  Prophecy  4c~4d;  Relation  2. 

Other  discussions  of  the  doctrine  of  original  sin  and  man’s  redemption  and  salvation,  see 
Happiness  7a;  Sin  3~3e,  7;  Virtue  and  Vice  8a;  Will  7e(i). 

Other  discussions  of  the  Last  Judgment  and  the  end  of  the  world,  see  Immortality  5c; 
Prophecy  4d;  World  8. 


Chapter  29:  GOD  603 

For:  Other  discussions  of  the  church  as  the  Mystical  Body  of  Christ,  and  of  the  theory  of  the 
sacraments,  see  Religion  2c,  33-3!);  Sign  and  Symbol  5c. 

The  general  theory  of  the  relation  of  reason  and  faith  in  man’s  knowledge  of  God,  see 
Knowledge  6c(5);  Logic  4f;  Metaphysics  3a;  Religion  ib-ib(3);  Theology  2,  ^b  ^c; 
Virtue  and  Vice  8d(i);  Wisdom  ic. 

The  distinction  between  man’s  natural  and  supernatural  knowledge  of  God,  and  for  the 
discussion  of  mystical  experience  and  the  beatific  vision,  see  Experience  7;  Happi¬ 
ness  yc(i);  Knowledge  6c(5);  Religion  6f;  Will  7d;  Wisdom  ic. 

Other  discussions  of  God’s  revelation  of  Himself,  of  Sacred  Scripture,  and  of  man’s  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  Word  of  God,  ^Education  7a;  Language  12;  Prophecy  3d;  Sign  and 
Symbol  5e. 

Other  discussions  of  the  relation  of  creatures  to  God,  and  especially  of  the  problem  of  the 
resemblance  between  creatures  and  God,  see  Man  10a,  na;  Relation  3;  Same  and 
Other  6. 

Other  discussions  of  the  names  of  God,  and  for  the  bearing  thereon  of  the  distinction  between 
the  univocal,  the  equivocal,  and  the  analogical,  see  Idea  4^4);  Same  and  Other  33(3)- 
3b,  6;  Sign  and  Symbol  3d,  5L 

Sciences  peculiarly  concerned  with  God,  see  Astronomy  6;  Metaphysics  2a,  2d,  3a; 
Theology. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Plutarch.  “Of  Isis  and  Osiris,  or  the  Ancient  Re¬ 
ligion  and  Philosophy  of  Egypt,”  in  Moralia 
Epictetus.  The  Manual 
Augustine.  Answer  to  Skeptics 

- .  De  Genesi  ad  Litter am ,  bk  xii 

- .  On  the  Trinity 

- .  On  Grace  and  Free  Will 

- .  The  Enchiridion  on  Faith ,  Hope  and  Love 

Aquinas.  On  the  Trinity  of  Boethius ,  qq  1-3 

- .  Summa  Contra  Gentiles ,  bk  1;  bk  ii,  ch  1-28; 

bk  hi,  ch  64-83,  146-162;  bk  iv,  ch  1-49,  53-55 

- .  Quaestiones  Disputatae,  De  Veritate,  QQ2,  5-7, 

14,  23,  27-29;  De  Unione  Verbi  Incarnati 

- .  On  the  Power  of  God ,  qq  1-3,  5-7,  9-10 

- .  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  qq  27-59 

- .  Compendium  of  Theology 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Atheism,”  in  Essays 
Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy ,  part  i, 
13-^5,  29-31,  40,  51,  54;  part  iii,  1-3 
Hobbes.  Philosophical  Rudiments  Concerning  Govern¬ 
ment  and  Society ,  ch  15-18 
Hume.  Dialogues  Concerning  Natural  Religion 
- .  The  Natural  History  of  Religion 


Kant.  Prolegomena  to  Any  Future  Metaphysics  par  55 

- .  Religion  Within  the  Limits  of  Reason  Alone 

Hegel.  Science  of  Logic ,  vol  i,  bk  ii,  sect  iii,  ch  i; 
vol  11,  sect  iii,  ch  3 

- .  On  the  Proofs  of  the  Existence  of  God 

J.  S.  Mill.  “Theism,”  in  Three  Essays  on  Religion 
W.  James.  The  Will  to  Believe 

- .  Pragmatisms  lect  iii,  viii 

- .  A  Pluralistic  Universe 

II. 

Hesiod.  Theogony 
Cleanthes.  Hymn  to  Zeus 

Cicero.  De  Natura  Deorum  (On  the  Nature  of  the 
Gods ) 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Against  the  Physicists,  bk  i  (Con¬ 
cerning  Gods,  Do  Gods  Exist?) 

Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology ,  (e,l) 
“Dionysius”.  On  Mystical  Theology 
- .  On  the  Divine  Names 

Boethius.  Contra  Eutychen  (A  Treatise  Against 
Eutyches  and  Nestorius) 

- .  De  Trinit  ate  (On  the  Trinity) 

- .  The  Consolation  of  Philosophy ,  bk  iv-v 

Erigena.  De  Divisione  Naturae ,  bk  i 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


604 

Saadia  Gaon.  The  Boo\  of  Beliefs  and  Opinions , 

TREATISE  I— II,  IV,  VII 

Anselm  of  Canterbury.  Monologium 

- .  Proslogium 

- .  Cur  Deus  Homo? 

Gaunilon.  In  Behalf  of  the  Fool 
Bernard  of  Clairvaux.  On  the  Love  of  God 
Hugh  of  Saint  Victor.  De  Sacramentis 
Judah  ha-Levi.  Kitab  al  Khazari 
Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed ,  part  i, 
CH  46-47,  50-60,  73-76;  PART  II,  CH  I,  13-16,  22- 
23,  25-30,  48;  PART  III,  CH  13-16,  20-21 
Volsung  Saga 
Nibelungenlied 

Bonaventura.  On  the  Reduction  of  the  Arts  to 
Theology 

- .  Breviloquium ,  part  i,  iv-v 

- .  Itinerarium  Mentis  in  Deum  ( The  Itinerary  of 

the  Mind  to  God) 

R.  Bacon.  Opus  Majus ,  part  vii 
Albertus  Magnus.  On  Union  with  God 
Duns  Scotus.  Tractatus  de  Primo  Principio  (A 
Tract  Concerning  the  First  Principle ),  ch  iii-iv 
Eckhart.  Sermons  and  Collations,  xv 
The  Cloud  of  Unknowing 

Albo.  BooJ^  of  Principles  (Sefer  ha-Ihfarim),  bk  ii 
Thomas  a  Kempis.  The  Imitation  of  Christy  bk  iii 
Nicolas  of  Cusa.  The  Vision  of  God 
Luther.  Trinity  Sunday 

Calvin.  Institutes  of  the  Christian  Religiony  bk  i,  ch 
1-14,  16-18;  bk  11,  ch  4,  7-17 
Knox.  An  Answer  to  the  Cavillations  of  an  Adversarie 
Respecting  the  Doctrine  of  Predestination 
Teresa  of  Jesus.  The  Way  of  Perfection 

- .  Bool{  of  the  Foundations 

- .  Interior  Castle 

John  of  the  Cross.  Spiritual  Canticle 

- .  Dar\  Night  of  the  Soul 

- .  The  Living  Flame  of  Love 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  x  (3),  xi  (3- 
4),  xii  (1),  xv  (9),  xix  (3),  xx-xxn,  xxiii  (9), 
xxiv,  xxviii-xxx,  xxxi  (14),  XLVii  (15) 
Boehme.  The  Aurora 

- .  De  Electione  Gratiae  (On  the  Election  of  Grace) 

Herbert.  The  Temple 
Browne.  Religio  Medici 

Bossuet.  De  la  connaissance  de  Dieu  et  de  soi-meme 
Cudworth.  The  True  Intellectual  System  of  the  Uni¬ 
verse  ,  vol  1,  ch  4-5 

Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite 

- .  Dialogues  on  Metaphysics  and  Religion,  11,  vii- 

xiv 

Fenelon.  A  Demonstration  of  the  Existence  and  At¬ 
tributes  of  God 

Leibnitz.  Discourse  on  Metaphysicsy  i-vii,  xiv, 

XXXVI-XXXVII 

- .  Philosophical  Works,  ch  34  ( The  Principles  of 

Nature  and  of  Grace) 

- .  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under standing, 

BK  IV,  CH  IO,  18;  APPENDIX,  CH  IO 

- .  Theodicy 

- .  Monadology ,  par  38-55 

J.  Butler.  The  Analogy  of  Religion ,  part  i,  ch  2-8 


Voltaire.  “Faith,”  “Final  Causes,”  “God-Gods,’ 
“Grace,”  “Power-Omnipotence,”  “Providence,’ 
“Theism,”  “Theist,”  “Polytheism,”  in  A  Philo 
sophical  Dictionary 

- .  The  Ignorant  Philosopher ,  ch  26 

- .  The  Sage  and  the  Atheist 

Lessing.  Nathan  the  Wise 
Herder.  God,  Some  Conversations 
Paley.  Natural  Theology ,  ch  23-26 
Brown.  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human 
Mind,  vol  11,  pp  1 34-1 52 
Schleiermacher.  The  Christian  Faith ,  par  50-56, 
79-112,157-172 

Comte.  System  of  Positive  Polity ,  vol  iv,  Theory  of  the 
Future  of  Man ,  ch  i 
Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  ix,  ch  2,  4-5 
Whewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences , 

VOL  I,  BK  X,  CH  5 

- .  On  the  Philosophy  of  Discovery ,  ch  31 

J.  H.  Newman.  An  Essay  in  Aid  of  a  Grammar  of 
Assent 

L.  Stephen.  An  Agnostic's  Apology 
Romanes.  A  Candid  Examination  of  Theism 
T.  H.  Green.  Prolegomena  to  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-2 
C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers ,  vol  vi,  par  452-547 
F.  Thompson.  The  Hound  of  Heaven 
Bosanquet.  Science  and  Philosophy ,  8 
Ward.  The  Realm  of  Ends 
Royce.  The  Conception  of  God 

- .  The  World  and  the  Individual ,  series  ii  (10) 

- .  The  Problem  of  Christianity ,  vol  ii 

Bradley.  Appearance  and  Reality ,  bk  ii,  ch  26 

- .  Essays  on  Truth  and  Reality ,  ch  15 

Cook.  Zeus 

Garrigou-Lagrange.  God,  His  Existence  and  Na¬ 
ture ,  part  i;  part  ii,  ch  1-3 
Otto.  The  Idea  of  the  Holy 
Buber.  Hasidism 

McTaggart.  Some  Dogmas  of  Religion ,  ch  6-8 

- .  The  Nature  of  Existence ,  ch  43 

Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough 

- .  Man ,  God,  and  Immortality ,  part  iii 

Eddington.  Science  and  the  Unseen  World 
Tennant.  Philosophical  Theology ,  vol  ii,  ch  5-6 
Whitehead.  Science  and  the  Modern  World ,  ch  i  i 

- .  Process  and  Reality ,  part  v,  ch  2 

Penido.  Le  role  de  V analogic  en  theologie  dogmatique 
Bergson.  Two  Sources  of  Morality  and  Religion ,  ch  4 
Maritain.  An  Introduction  to  Philosophy ,  part  ii  (8) 

- .  The  Degrees  of  Knowledge ,  ch  4;  conclusion 

Weyl.  The  Open  World ,  lect  i 

Lovejoy.  The  Great  Chain  of  Being 

Mann.  Joseph  and  His  Brothers 

B.  Russell.  Religion  and  Science ,  ch  8 

Gilson.  Reason  and  Revelation  in  the  Middle  Ages 

- .  God  and  Philosophy 

Hartshorne.  Man's  Vision  of  God 
Asch.  The  Nazarene 

- .  The  Apostle 

A.  E.  Taylor.  Does  God  Exist? 

Santayana.  The  Genteel  Tradition  at  Bay ,  ch  2-3 

- .  The  Idea  of  Christ  in  the  Gospels 

E.  T.  Whittaker.  Space  and  Spirit 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVII. 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  theory  of  good  and  evil  crosses  the 
boundaries  of  many  sciences  or  subject 
matters.  It  occupies  a  place  in  metaphysics.  It 
is  of  fundamental  importance  in  all  the  moral 
sciences — ethics,  economics,  politics,  jurispru¬ 
dence.  It  appears  in  all  the  descriptive  sciences 
of  human  behavior,  such  as  psychology  and  so¬ 
ciology,  though  there  it  is  of  less  importance 
and  is  differently  treated. 

The  relation  of  good  and  evil  to  truth  and 
falsity,  beauty  and  ugliness,  carries  the  discus¬ 
sion  into  logic,  aesthetics,  and  the  philosophy 
of  art.  The  true,  it  has  been  said,  is  the  good  in 
the  sphere  of  our  thinking.  So  it  may  be  said  of 
the  beautiful  that  it  is  a  quality  which  things 
have  when  they  are  good  as  objects  of  contem¬ 
plation  and  love,  or  good  as  productions.  It  is 
no  less  possible  to  understand  goodness  and 
beauty  in  terms  of  truth,  or  truth  and  goodness 
in  terms  of  beauty. 

One  aim  of  analysis,  with  respect  to  the  true, 
the  good,  and  the  beautiful,  is  to  preserve  their 
distinctness  without  rendering  each  less  univer¬ 
sal.  This  has  been  attempted  by  writers  who 
treat  these  three  terms  as  having  a  kind  of  par¬ 
allelism  in  their  application  to  everything,  but 
who  also  insist  that  each  of  the  three  notions 
conceives  things  under  a  different  aspect  or  in  a 
different  relation.  “As  good  adds  to  being  the 
notion  of  the  desirable,”  Aquinas  writes,  “so 
the  true  adds  a  relation  to  the  intellect”;  and  it 
is  also  said  that  the  end  “of  the  appetite,  name¬ 
ly  good,  is  in  the  desirable  thing,”  whereas  the 
end  “of  the  intellect,  namely  the  true,  is  in  the 
intellect  itself.” 

In  that  part  of  theology  which  goes  beyond 
metaphysics  and  moral  philosophy,  we  meet 
with  the  concept  of  infinite  goodness — the 
goodness  of  an  infinite  being — and  we  then  face 
the  problem  of  how  God’s  goodness  is  to  be 
understood  by  man.  The  basic  terms  of  moral 


theology — righteousness  and  sin,  salvation  and 
damnation — are,  like  virtue  and  vice,  happi¬ 
ness  and  misery,  conceptions  of  good  and  evil 
in  the  condition  of  man.  (Their  special  theo¬ 
logical  significance  comes  from  the  fact  that 
they  consider  the  goodness  or  evil  of  man  in 
terms  of  his  relation  to  God.)  But  the  theologi¬ 
cal  problem  which  is  traditionally  called  “the 
problem  of  evil”  concerns  the  whole  universe  in 
its  relation  to  the  divine  perfection. 

That  problem,  which  is  further  discussed  in 
the  chapter  on  World,  can  be  formulated  in  a 
number  of  ways.  How  are  we  to  understand  the 
existence  of  evil  in  a  world  created  by  a  God 
who  is  omnipotent  and  perfectly  good?  Since 
God  is  good  and  since  everything  which  hap¬ 
pens  is  within  God’s  power,  how  can  we  ac¬ 
count  for  the  sin  of  Satan  or  the  fall  of  man, 
with  all  the  evil  consequent  thereupon,  with¬ 
out  limiting  God’s  power  or  absolving  the  err¬ 
ing  creature  from  responsibility?  Can  it  be  said 
that  this  is  the  best  of  all  possible  worlds,  if  it  is 
also  true  that  this  world  is  far  from  perfectly 
good,  and  if,  as  certain  theologians  hold,  “God 
could  make  other  things,  or  add  something  to 
the  present  creation,  and  then  there  would  be 
another  and  a  better  universe”? 

The  contemporary  discussion  of  good  and  evil 
draws  its  terminology  from  economics  rather 
than  theology.  The  word  “value”  has  almost  re¬ 
placed  “good”  and  “evil.”  What  in  other  cen¬ 
turies  were  the  various  moral  sciences  are  now 
treated  as  parts  of  the  general  theory  of  value. 
The  substitution  of  “value”  for  “good”  or  of 
“value  judgment”  for  “moral  judgment”  re¬ 
flects  the  influence  of  economics. 

According  to  Marx,  Aristotle  “was  the  first 
to  analyse  .  .  .  the  form  of  value.”  As  indicated 
in  the  chapter  on  Wealth,  economics  at  its 
origin  was  treated  by  Aristotle,  along  with  eth- 


605 


606 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ics  and  politics,  as  a  moral  discipline.  But  he 
made  it  subordinate  to  them  because  it  dealt 
not  with  the  whole  of  human  welfare,  but  only 
with  wealth— one  of  the  goods. 

In  the  modern  development  of  economics, 
the  word  “goods”  comes  to  have  a  special  sig¬ 
nificance.  It  refers  to  commodities  or  utilities, 
as  in  the  phrase  “goods  and  services.”  More 
generally,  anything  which  is  useful  or  exchange¬ 
able  has  the  character  of  an  economic  good.  This 
general  sense  is  usually  conveyed  by  the  econo¬ 
mist's  use  of  the  word  “value.”  According  to 
Adam  Smith,  “the  word  value  .  .  .  has  two  dif¬ 
ferent  meanings,  and  sometimes  expresses  the 
utility  of  some  particular  object,  and  sometimes 
the  power  of  purchasing  other  goods  which  the 
possessor  of  that  object  conveys.”  These  two 
meanings  are  distinguished  as  “value  in  use” 
and  “value  in  exchange.”  Marx  accepts  this 
distinction,  but  thinks  that  there  is  a  more 
fundamental  notion  of  value.  He  thinks  it  is 
possible  to  abstract  from  both  use-value  and 
exchange-value,  and  to  discover  the  underlying 
property  which  gives  value  to  all  exchangeable 
things,  namely,  that  they  are  products  of  labor. 

With  Smith  and  Marx,  as  with  Aristotle,  the 
theory  of  value  does  not  deal  with  every  type 
of  good,  but  only  with  that  type  which  earlier 
moralists  called  “external  goods”  or  “goods  of 
fortune.”  But  more  recently  the  concept  of 
value  has  been  extended,  by  economists  and 
others,  to  the  evaluation  of  everything  which 
men  think  of  as  desirable  in  any  way.  In  con¬ 
sequence,  the  age-old  controversy  about  the 
objectivity  or  subjectivity  of  good  and  evil  is 
now  stated  in  terms  of  the  difference  between 
facts  and  values,  or  between  judgments  of  fact 
and  judgments  of  value. 

The  issue,  as  currently  stated,  is  whether 
questions  of  value  can  be  answered  in  the  same 
way  as  questions  of  fact.  One  position  main¬ 
tains  that,  unlike  questions  of  fact  which  can  be 
answered  by  scientific  investigation  and  can  be 
objectively  solved,  questions  of  value  elicit  no 
more  than  expressions  of  opinion,  relative  to 
the  individual’s  subjective  response  or  to  the 
conventions  of  his  society  at  a  given  time.  The 
other  side  of  the  issue  is  held  by  those  who  in¬ 
sist  that  the  norms  of  value  are  as  objective  and 
as  scientifically  determinable  as  the  criteria  of 
fact  or  existence. 


The  word  “value”  does  not  change  the  prob¬ 
lem  in  any  way;  for  what  does  evaluating  any¬ 
thing  mean  except  judging  it  as  good  or  bad, 
better  or  worse?  The  problem,  which  has  a  his¬ 
tory  as  long  as  the  tradition  of  the  great  books, 
is  the  problem  of  how  we  can  defend  such  judg¬ 
ments  and  what  they  signify  about  the  things 
judged.  Are  good  and  evil  determined  by  na¬ 
ture  or  convention?  Are  they  objects  of  knowl¬ 
edge  or  opinion  ? 

The  title  of  an  essay  by  Montaigne — “that 
the  taste  for  good  and  evil  depends  in  good 
part  upon  the  opinion  we  have  of  them” —  in¬ 
dicates  one  set  of  answers  to  these  questions. 
“If  evils  have  no  admission  into  us,”  he  writes, 
“but  by  the  judgment  we  ourselves  make  of 
them,  it  should  seem  that  it  is,  then,  in  our 
power  to  despise  them  or  to  turn  them  to  good. 
...  If  what  we  call  evil  and  torment  is  neither 
evil  nor  torment  of  itself,  but  only  that  our 
fancy  gives  it  that  quality,  it  is  in  us  to  change 
it.”  Echoing  Montaigne,  Hamlet  remarks  that 
“there  is  nothing  either  good  or  bad  but  think¬ 
ing  makes  it  so.”  The  Greek  sophists,  centuries 
earlier,  appear  to  take  the  same  view.  The  state¬ 
ment  of  Protagoras  that  “man  is  the  measure 
of  all  things,”  Plato  thinks,  does  not  significant¬ 
ly  apply  to  all  things,  but  only  to  such  things 
as  the  good  or  the  right,  the  true  or  the  beauti¬ 
ful.  In  the  Theaetetus ,  Protagoras  is  made  to  say 
that  as  “to  the  sick  man  his  food  appears  to  be 
bitter,  and  to  the  healthy  man  the  opposite  of 
bitter,”  so  in  general  men  estimate  or  judge  all 
things  according  to  their  own  condition  and 
the  way  things  affect  them.  This  theory  of  good 
and  evil  necessarily  denies  the  possibility  of 
moral  science.  Socrates  calls  it  “a  high  argu¬ 
ment  in  which  all  things  are  said  to  be 
relative.” 

Plato  and  Aristotle  respond  to  the  sophists  by 
arguing  in  the  opposite  vein.  For  Plato,  the 
good  is  not  a  matter  of  opinion,  but  an  object 
of  knowledge.  Knowledge  of  good  and  evil  is 
the  best  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge.  “Let 
each  one  of  us  leave  every  other  kind  of  knowl¬ 
edge,”  Socrates  says  at  the  end  of  the  Republic , 
“and  seek  and  follow  one  thing  only,”  that  is, 
“to  learn  and  discern  between  good  and  evil.” 

Aristotle  does  not  think  that  ethics,  or  any 
science  which  deals  with  good  and  evil,  can  have 
as  much  precision  as  mathematics.  “Our  discus- 


607 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL 


sion  will  be  adequate,”  he  writes,  “if  it  has  as 
much  clearness  as  the  subject  matter  admits  of, 
for  precision  is  not  to  be  sought  for  alike  in  all 
discussions.”  This,  however,  does  not  exclude 
the  possibility  of  our  knowing  with  great  ex¬ 
actitude  the  first  principles  of  moral  science, 
such  as  the  nature  of  happiness  and  virtue.  In¬ 
definiteness  and  even  a  certain  kind  of  relativi¬ 
ty  occur  only  when  these  principles  are  applied 
to  particular  cases.  Hence,  in  Aristotle’s  view, 
the  moral  sciences,  such  as  ethics  and  politics, 
can  have  objective  and  universal  validity  no 
less  than  physics  or  mathematics,  at  least  on  the 
level  of  principles. 

In  modern  times,  Locke  and  Kant  also  affirm 
the  scientific  character  of  ethics,  but  without 
the  qualification  which  Aristotle  insists  upon 
when  we  go  from  principles  to  practice.  Locke 
explains  the  grounds  on  which  he  is  “bold  to 
think  that  morality  is  capable  of  demonstra¬ 
tion,  as  well  as  mathematics”;  for,  he  says,  “the 
precise  real  essence  of  the  things  moral  words 
stand  for  may  be  perfectly  known,  and  so  the 
congruity  and  incongruity  of  the  things  them¬ 
selves  may  be  certainly  discovered;  in  which 
consists  perfect  knowledge.”  He  is  confident 
that  “from  self-evident  propositions,  by  neces¬ 
sary  consequences,  as  incontestible  as  those  in 
mathematics,  the  measures  of  right  and  wrong 
might  be  made  out,  to  any  one  that  will  apply 
himself  with  the  same  indifferency  and  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  one  as  he  does  to  the  other  of  these 
sciences.”  But  Locke  adds,  “this  is  not  to  be 
expected,  whilst  the  desire  of  esteem,  riches,  or 
power  makes  men  espouse  the  well-endowed 
opinions  in  fashion.”  He  himself  seems  to  tend 
in  the  opposite  direction  when  he  identifies  the 
good  with  the  pleasant  and  makes  it  relative  to 
individual  desires. 

For  Kant  the  two  major  parts  of  philosophy 
— physics  and  ethics — are  on  equal  footing,  the 
one  concerned  with  the  “laws  of  nature ,”  the 
other  with  the  “laws  of freedom."  In  each  case 
there  is  both  empirical  and  a  priori  knowledge. 
Kant  calls  the  latter  in  each  case  “metaphysics” 
and  speaks  of  “a  metaphysic  of  nature  and  a 
metaphysic  of  morals' 9  The  nature  of  science, 
he  thinks,  requires  us  to  “separate  the  empirical 
from  the  rational  part,  and  prefix  to  physics 
proper  (or  empirical  physics)  a  metaphysic  of 
nature,  and  to  practical  anthropology  a  meta¬ 


physic  of  morals,  which  must  be  carefully 
cleared  of  everything  empirical.” 

This  partial  inventory  of  thinkers  who  stand 
against  skepticism  or  relativism  in  the  field  of 
morals  indicates  that  agreement  on  this  point  is 
accompanied  by  some  disagreement  about  the 
reasons  for  holding  what  appears  to  be  the  same 
view.  The  opposite  view  seems  also  to  be  shared 
by  thinkers  of  quite  different  cast,  such  as 
Spinoza  and  Mill,  who  differ  from  each  other  as 
well  as  from  Montaigne  and  the  ancient  sophists. 

The  terms  “good  and  evil,”  Spinoza  writes, 
“indicate  nothing  positive  in  things  considered 
in  themselves,  nor  are  they  anything  else  than 
modes  of  thought  .  .  .  One  and  the  same  thing 
may  at  the  same  time  be  both  good  and  evil  or 
indifferent” — according  to  the  person  who 
makes  the  judgment  of  it.  Spinoza  therefore 
defines  “good”  as  “that  which  we  certainly 
know  is  useful  to  us.”  Apart  from  society,  he 
says,  “there  is  nothing  which  by  universal  con¬ 
sent  is  good  or  evil,  since  everyone  in  a  natural 
state  consults  only  his  own  profit.”  Only  when 
men  live  together  in  a  civil  society  under  law 
can  it  be  “decided  by  universal  consent  what  is 
good  and  what  is  evil.” 

Holding  that  all  men  seek  happiness  and  that 
they  determine  what  is  good  and  evil  in  par¬ 
ticular  cases  by  reference  to  this  end,  Mill  seems 
to  offer  the  standard  of  utility  as  an  objective 
principle  of  morality.  But  insofar  as  he  identi¬ 
fies  happiness  with  a  sum  total  of  pleasures  or 
satisfactions,  it  tends  to  become  relative  to  the 
individual  or  the  group.  If  competent  judges 
disagree  concerning  which  of  two  pleasures  is 
the  greater  or  higher,  there  can  be  no  appeal, 
Mill  says,  except  to  the  verdict  of  the  majority. 
To  this  extent  at  least,  judgments  of  value  are 
expressions  of  opinion,  not  determinations  of 
science.  Nor  does  Mill  hesitate  to  say  that  “the 
ultimate  sanction  of  all  morality”  is  “a  subjec¬ 
tive  feeling  in  our  minds.” 

Int  order  to  clarify  this  basic  issue  it  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  take  note  of  other  terms  which  are 
usually  involved  in  the  discussion  of  good 
and  evil — such  terms  as  pleasure  and  pain, 
desire  and  aversion,  being,  nature,  and  reason. 
In  the  course  of  doing  this,  we  will  perceive 
the  relevance  of  the  chapters  which  deal  with 
those  ideas. 


608 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


It  has  been  said,  for  example,  that  the  good  is 
identical  with  the  pleasant;  that  the  good  is 
what  men  desire;  that  the  good  is  a  property  of 
being  or  existence;  that  the  good  is  that  which 
conforms  to  the  nature  of  a  thing;  that  the  good 
is  that  which  is  approved  by  reason.  It  is  pos¬ 
sible  to  see  some  truth  in  each  of  these  state¬ 
ments.  But  each,  taken  by  itself,  may  be  too 
great  a  simplification.  Searching  questions  can 
be  asked  by  those  who  refuse  to  equate  the  good 
with  the  pleasant  or  the  desirable,  the  real,  the 
natural,  or  the  reasonable.  Are  there  no  pleas¬ 
ures  in  any  way  bad,  no  pains  in  any  way  good  ? 
Are  all  desires  themselves  good,  or  are  all 
equally  good  ?  How  does  calling  a  thing  “good” 
add  anything  to  its  being  or  existence?  Does 
not  evil  exist  or  qualify  existence?  By  what 
standards  can  the  natural  and  the  rational  be 
judged  good,  if  the  good  is  that  which  con¬ 
forms  to  nature  and  reason? 

These  questions  call  for  more  analysis  of  each 
of  these  factors  in  the  discussion  of  good  and 
evil  and  suggest  that  no  one  of  these  factors  by 
itself  is  sufficient  to  solve  the  problem  of  defin¬ 
ing  good  and  evil  or  formulating  their  criteria. 
Of  the  five  things  mentioned,  two  particularly 
— pleasure  and  desire — seem  to  leave  open  the 
question  whether  good  and  evil  are  objective  or 
subjective.  They  require  us  to  decide  whether 
things  please  us  because  they  are  good  or  are 
good  because  they  please  us ;  whether  we  desire 
things  because  they  are  good  or  simply  call 
them  “good”  when  we  desire  them.  On  this  is¬ 
sue  Spinoza  flatly  declares  that  “we  do  not 
desire  a  thing  because  we  adjudge  it  good,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  we  call  it  good  because  we 
desire  it.”  In  saying  that  “a  thing  is  good  so  far 
as  it  is  desirable,”  Aquinas  takes  the  opposite 
position,  for  according  to  him  “a  thing  is  desir¬ 
able  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  perfect.”  It  can  be 
desirable,  therefore,  without  being  actually  de¬ 
sired  by  this  or  that  individual. 

The  other  three  terms — unlike  pleasure  and 
desire — seem  to  favor  the  objectivity  of  good 
and  evil,  at  least  for  those  who  regard  the  order 
of  existence,  the  nature  of  things,  and  the  laws 
of  reason  as  independent  of  our  desires  or  pref¬ 
erences.  Thus  for  Spinoza  the  nature  of  man 
and  his  reason  seem  to  provide  an  objective 
standard  for  determining  what  is  good  alike  for 
all  men.  Nothing,  he  writes,  “can  be  good  ex¬ 


cept  in  so  far  as  it  agrees  with  our  nature,  and 
therefore  the  more  an  object  agrees  with  our 
nature  the  more  profitable  it  will  be.”  And  in 
another  place  he  says,  “By  good  I  understand 
.  .  .  everything  which  we  are  certain  is  a  means 
by  which  we  may  approach  nearer  and  nearer 
to  the  model  of  human  nature  we  set  before 
us.”  That  model,  he  tells  us,  is  the  man  of  rea¬ 
son,  the  man  who  always  acts  “according  to  the 
dictates  of  reason,”  for  “those  desires  which  are 
determined  by  man’s  power  or  reason  are  al¬ 
ways  good.” 

Nevertheless,  if  desire  and  pleasure  cannot 
be  eliminated  from  the  consideration  of  good 
and  evil — at  least  not  the  good  and  evil  which 
enter  into  human  life — then  the  problem  of 
finding  a  purely  objective  foundation  for  our 
moral  judgments  is  not  solved  simply  by  an 
appeal  to  being,  nature,  and  reason. 

Some  help  toward  a  solution  may  be  found  in 
one  often  reiterated  fact  about  the  relation  be¬ 
tween  the  good  and  human  desire.  The  an¬ 
cients  insist  that  no  man  desires  anything  but 
what  at  the  time  seems  good  to  him  in  some 
way.  “No  man,”  Socrates  observes,  “volun¬ 
tarily  pursues  evil,  or  that  which  he  thinks  to 
be  evil.  To  prefer  evil  to  good  is  not  in  human 
nature;  and  when  a  man  is  compelled  to  choose 
one  of  two  evils,  no  one  will  choose  the  greater 
when  he  may  have  the  less.”  This,  however, 
does  not  prevent  men  from  desiring  “what  they 
suppose  to  be  goods  although  they  are  really 
evils.”  Since  they  are  mistaken  in  their  judg¬ 
ment  “and  suppose  the  evils  to  be  goods,  they 
really  desire  goods.” 

The  object  consciously  desired  is  always  at 
least  apparently  good.  When  men  are  mistaken 
in  their  estimate  of  things  as  beneficial  or  in¬ 
jurious  to  themselves,  the  apparent  good — the 
good  actually  desired — will  be  really  an  evil, 
that  is,  something  actually  undesirable.  An  ob¬ 
ject  which  is  really  good  may  not  appear  to  be 
so,  and  so  it  will  not  be  desired  although  it  is  de¬ 
sirable.  The  deception  of  appearances,  Socrates 
says,  tricks  us  into  taking  “at  one  time  the 
things  of  which  we  repent  at  another,  both  in 
our  actions  and  in  our  choice  of  things  great 
and  small.” 

The  distinction  between  the  mz/and  the  ap¬ 
parent  good  is,  of  course,  connected  with  the 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL  609 


problem  of  the  objective  and  the  subjective 
good.  The  apparent  good  varies  from  individual 
to  individual  and  from  time  to  time.  If  there 
were  a  real  good,  it  would  be  free  from  such 
relativity  and  variability.  Unless  there  are 
real,  as  distinct  from  merely  apparent,  goods, 
moralists  cannot  distinguish  between  what 
men  should  desire  and  what  in  fact  they  do 
desire. 

Since  moral  science  deals  with  human  be¬ 
havior,  its  province  can  be  separated  from  that 
of  other  sciences  which  treat  the  same  subject 
matter — such  as  psychology  and  sociology — 
only  in  terms  of  a  different  treatment  of  that 
subject  matter.  Moral  science  must  be  norma¬ 
tive  or  prescriptive  rather  than  descriptive.  It 
must  determine  what  men  should  seek,  not  what 
they  do  seek.  The  very  existence  of  normative 
sciences,  as  well  as  their  validity,  would  thus 
seem  to  depend  on  the  establishment  of  a  real, 
as  opposed  to  a  merely  apparent,  good. 

This  creates  no  special  difficulty  for  moralists 
who  think  that  man  knows  what  is  really  good 
for  him,  both  in  general  and  in  particular,  by 
intuition  or  rational  deduction,  through  the 
commandments  of  the  divine  law,  or  through 
I  the  precepts  of  the  law  of  reason.  But  for  those 
who  insist  that  the  good  is  always  somehow 
relative  to  desire  and  always  involves  pleasure, 
the  distinction  between  the  real  and  the  ap¬ 
parent  good  raises  an  extremely  difficult  prob¬ 
lem. 

To  say  that  an  apparent  good  is  not  really 
good  suggests,  as  we  have  seen,  that  what  is 
called  “good”  may  not  be  in  itself  desirable. 
That  something  which  is  really  good  may  not  in 
fact  appear  to  be  so,  seems  to  imply  that  the 
word  “good”  can  be  significantly  applied  to 
something  which  is  not  actually  desired — at 
least  not  consciously.  How,  then,  is  the  good 
always  relative  to  desire?  The  traditional  an¬ 
swer  to  this  question  must  appeal  to  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  natural  and  conscious  desire, 
which  is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Desire.  It 
is  by  reference  to  natural  desire  that  the  good 
is  said  to  be  in  itself  always  desirable — even 
when  the  really  good  thing  is  not  consciously 
desired. 

The  relation  of  good  and  evil  to  pleasure  and 
pain  can  also  be  clarified  by  a  basic  distinction 
between  the  pleasure  which  is  an  object  of  de¬ 


sire  and  pleasure  conceived  as  the  satisfaction  of 
desire.  This  is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on 
Pleasure  and  Pain.  If  obtaining  a  desired 
go<xl  is  satisfying,  then  there  is  certainly  a  sense 
in  which  the  gtxxl  and  the  pleasant  (or  the 
satisfying)  arc  always  associated;  but  it  may 
also  be  true  that  pleasure  is  only  one  kind  of 
good  among  various  objects  of  desire  and  that 
certain  pleasures  which  men  desire  appear  to  be, 
but  are  not  really  good. 

The  foregoing  considerations  apply  to  the 
good  in  the  sphere  of  human  conduct.  But  the 
human  good,  the  practicable  good,  the  good  for 
man,  does  not  exhaust  the  meaning  of  the  term 
good.  The  idea  of  the  good  is,  for  Plato,  the 
measure  of  perfection  in  all  things;  it  is  “not 
only  the  author  of  knowledge  to  all  things 
known,  but  of  their  being  and  essence,  and  yet 
the  good  is  not  essence,  but  far  exceeds  essence 
in  dignity  and  power.” 

The  absolute  good  is  also,  as  in  the  Divine 
Comedy ,  the  final  cause  or  ultimate  end  of  the 
motions  of  the  universe.  It  is  “the  Alpha  and 
Omega,”  Dante  says,  “of  every  scripture  that 
Love  reads  to  me  .  .  .  the  Essence  wherein  is 
such  supremacy  that  every  good  which  is  found 
outside  of  It  is  naught  else  than  a  beam  of  Its 
own  radiance  .  .  .  the  Love  which  moves  the 
sun  and  the  other  stars.” 

So  too,  in  Aristotle’s  cosmology,  the  circular 
motions  of  the  celestial  spheres,  and  through 
them  all  other  cycles  of  natural  change,  are 
sustained  eternally  by  the  prime  mover,  which 
moves  all  things  by  the  attraction  of  its  perfect 
being.  It  therefore  “moves  without  being 
moved,”  for  it  “produces  motion  through  being 
loved.” 

Though  desire  and  love  enter  into  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  good  as  a  cosmic  final  cause,  they 
are  not  human  desire  or  love.  Though  the  good¬ 
ness  which  inheres  in  things  according  to  the 
degree  of  their  perfection  may  make  them 
desirable,  it  is  not  dependent  on  their  being 
consciously  desired  by  men. 

In  Jewish  and  Christian  theology,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  the  goodness  of  God  is  in  no  way  meas¬ 
ured  by  human  desires,  purposes,  or  pleasures; 
nor  is  the  goodness  of  created  things  which,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Genesis,  God  surveyed  and  found 
“very  good.”  The  order  of  creation,  moreover, 


610 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


involves  a  hierarchy  of  inequalities  in  being  and 
goodness.  Even  when  each  thing  is  perfect  in 
its  kind,  all  things  are  not  equally  good,  for  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  differences  in  their  natures, 
diverse  kinds  are  capable  of  greater  or  less 
perfection. 

In  the  metaphysical  conception  of  goodness, 
that  which  has  more  actuality  either  in  exist¬ 
ence  or  power  has  more  perfection.  God’s  in¬ 
finite  goodness  is  therefore  said  to  follow  from 
the  fact  that  he  is  completely  actual — infinite 
in  being  and  power.  Things  “which  have  life,” 
Augustine  writes,  “are  ranked  above  those 
which  have  none  .  .  .  And  among  those  that 
have  life,  the  sentient  are  higher  than  those 
which  have  no  sensation  .  .  .  and  among  the 
sentient,  the  intelligent  above  those  that  have 
no  intelligence.” 

Augustine  contrasts  these  gradations  of  per¬ 
fection  which  are  “according  to  the  order  of 
nature”  with  the  “standards  of  value”  which 
are  “according  to  the  utility  each  man  finds  in  a 
thing.”  That  which  is  less  good  in  a  metaphys¬ 
ical  sense  may  be  preferred  on  moral  grounds  as 
being  better  for  man.  “Who,”  he  asks,  “would 
not  rather  have  bread  in  his  house  than  mice, 
gold  than  fleas?”  Is  it  not  true  that  “more  is 
often  given  for  a  horse  than  for  a  slave,  for  a 
jewel  than  for  a  maid”? 

According  to  Augustine,  as  well  as  to  Aquinas 
later,  metaphysical  goodness  consists  in  “the 
value  a  thing  has  in  itself  in  the  scale  of  crea¬ 
tion,”  while  moral  goodness  depends  upon  the 
relation  in  which  a  thing  stands  to  human  need 
or  desire,  and  according  to  the  estimation 
placed  upon  it  by  human  reason.  It  is  in  the 
moral,  not  the  metaphysical  sense  that  we 
speak  of  a  good  man,  a  good  will,  a  good  life, 
and  a  good  society;  or  of  all  the  things,  such  as 
health,  wealth,  pleasure,  virtue,  or  knowledge, 
which  it  may  be  good  for  man  to  seek  and  pos¬ 
sess.  Only  in  the  metaphysical  sense  can  things 
be  thought  of  as  good  entirely  apart  from  man; 
only  then  can  we  find  a  hierarchy  of  perfections 
in  the  world  which  accords  with  a  hierarchy  of 
beings.  Thus  Spinoza  declares  that  “the  per¬ 
fection  of  things  is  to  be  judged  by  their  nature 
and  power  alone;  nor  arejthey  more  or  less  per¬ 
fect  because  they  delight  or  offend  the  human 
senses,  or  because  they  are  beneficial  or  pre¬ 
judicial  to  human  nature.” 


The  metaphysical  conception  of  goodness 
raises  peculiarly  difficult  problems.  Are  there 
as  many  meanings  of  “good”  as  there  are  of 
“being”?  When  we  say  God  is  good,  are  we 
making  a  moral  or  a  metaphysical  judgement? 
Are  we  attributing  perfection  of  being  or  good¬ 
ness  of  will  to  God  ?  If  goodness  is  a  property  of 
being,  then  must  not  all  evil  become  a  priva¬ 
tion  of  being?  Conceiving  evil  in  this  way, 
Augustine  points  out  that  if  things  “be  de¬ 
prived  of  all  good,  they  shall  cease  to  be,”  so 
that  there  is  “nothing  whatsoever  evil”  in  it¬ 
self;  and  Aquinas  maintains  that  “no  being  is 
said  to  be  evil,  considered  as  being,  but  only  so 
far  as  it  lacks  being.” 

If  to  understand  what  the  notion  of  good¬ 
ness  adds  to  the  notion  of  being  it  is  necessary 
to  say  that  being  has  goodness  in  relation  to 
appetite,  the  question  inevitably  arises,  “Whose 
appetite?”  Not  man’s  certainly,  for  then  the 
moral  and  the  metaphysical  good  become  iden¬ 
tical.  If  God’s,  then  not  appetite  in  the  form 
of  desire,  but  in  the  form  of  love,  for  the  divine 
perfection  is  usually  thought  to  preclude  desire. 

Problems  of  this  sort  confront  those  who, 
conceiving  the  good  both  apart  from  and  also 
relative  to  man,  are  obligated  to  connect  the 
metaphysical  and  the  moral  meanings  of  good 
and  to  say  whether  they  have  a  common  thread. 
Some  writers,  however,  limit  their  considera¬ 
tion  to  the  strictly  moral  good,  and  deny,  as  do 
the  Stoics,  goodness  or  evil  to  anything  but 
man’s  free  acts  of  will. 

We  should,  says  Marcus  Aurelius,  “judge 
only  those  things  which  are  in  our  power,  to  be 
good  or  bad.”  In  this  we  are  entirely  free,  for 
“things  themselves  have  no  natural  power  to 
form  our  judgments  ...  If  thou  art  pained  by 
any  external  thing,  it  is  not  this  thing  which 
disturbs  thee,  but  thy  own  judgment  about  it. 
And  it  is  in  thy  power  to  wipe  out  this  judg¬ 
ment  now  .  .  .  Suppose  that  men  kill  thee,  cut 
thee  in  pieces,  curse  thee.  What  then  can  these 
things  do  to  prevent  thy  mind  from  remaining 
pure,  wise,  sober,  just?” 

Though  Kant  develops  what  he  calls  a  “meta¬ 
physic  of  ethics,”  he  does  not  seem  to  have  a 
metaphysical  as  opposed  to  a  moral  conception 
of  the  good;  unless  in  some  analogous  form  it 
lies  in  his  distinction  between  “value”  and 
“dignity,”  according  to  which  “whatever  has 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL  61 1 


$s  reference  to  the  general  inclinations  and  wants 
■c  jof  mankind  has  a  market  value,"  whereas  “what- 
if  :ever  ...  is  above  all  value,  and  therefore  admits 
c  of  no  equivalent,  has  a  dignity” — “not  a  merely 
}\\ relative  worth,  but  an  intrinsic  worth.” 

But  since  Kant  thinks  that  only  men,  or  ra- 
f  tional  beings,  can  have  intrinsic  worth,  he  finds 
•  goodness  only  in  the  moral  order.  He  agrees 
J  with  the  Stoics  that  good  and  evil  occur  only  in 
the  realm  of  freedom,  not  at  all  in  the  realm  of 
i  existence  or  nature.  “Good  or  evil,”  he  writes, 
“always  implies  a  reference  to  the  will,  as  de¬ 
termined  by  the  law  of  reason ”  which  is  the  law 
of  freedom.  According  to  Kant,  “nothing  can 
possibly  be  conceived  in  the  world,  or  even  out 
of  it,  which  can  be  called  good  without  quali¬ 
fication,  except  a  Good  Will”;  and  in  another 
place  he  says,  “If  anything  is  to  be  good  or  evil 
absolutely  ...  it  can  only  be  the  manner  of 
acting,  the  maxim  of  the  will.”  In  this  sense,  the 
free  will  complying  with  or  resisting  the  im¬ 
peratives  of  duty  is  either  the  seat  or  the  source 
of  all  the  goodness  or  evil  that  there  is.  “Men 
may  laugh,”  Kant  says,  “at  the  Stoic,  who  in 
the  severest  paroxysms  of  gout  cried  out:  Pain, 
however  thou  tormentest  me,  I  will  never  ad- 
i  mit  that  thou  art  an  evil:  he  was  right  ...  for 
pain  did  not  in  the  least  diminish  the  worth  of 
his  person,  but  only  that  of  his  condition.” 

In  the  sphere  of  moral  conduct,  and  especially 
for  those  who  make  desire  or  pleasure  rather 
than  duty  the  principle,  there  seems  to  be  a 
plurality  of  goods  which  require  classification 
and  order. 

Some  things,  it  would  appear,  are  not  de¬ 
sired  for  themselves,  but  for  the  sake  of  some¬ 
thing  else.  They  are  good  only  as  means  to  be 
used.  Some  things  are  desired  for  their  own 
sake,  and  are  good  as  ends,  to  be  possessed  or 
enjoyed.  This  division  of  goods  into  means  and 
ends — the  useful  and  the  enjoyable  or  pleasant 
— permits  a  third  type  of  good  which  is  an  end 
in  one  respect,  and  a  means  in  another.  Analysis 
of  this  sort  leads  to  the  concept  of  a  summum 
bonum — that  good  which  is  not  a  means  in  any 
respect,  but  entirely  an  end,  the  supreme  or 
highest  good  for  which  all  else  is  sought. 

The  chief  question  with  respect  to  the  sum - 
mum  bonum  is  whether  it  is  a  good  or  the  good 
— whether  it  is  merely  one  type  of  good,  more 


desirable  than  any  other,  or  the  sum  of  all 
good  things  which,  when  possessed,  leaves  noth¬ 
ing  to  be  desired.  Aristotle  and  Mill  seem  to 
take  the  latter  view  in  their  conception  of  hap¬ 
piness  as  the  summum  bonum.  “Human  na¬ 
ture,”  Mill  says,  “is  so  constituted  as  to  desire 
nothing  which  is  not  cither  a  part  of  happiness 
or  a  means  of  happiness.”  Happiness,  he  in¬ 
sists,  is  “not  an  abstract  idea,  but  a  concrete 
whole”  including  all  other  goods  within  itself. 
It  is  the  only  good  which  is  desired  entirely  for 
its  own  sake.  Aristotle  treats  virtue  and  knowl¬ 
edge  as  intrinsic  goods,  but  he  also  regards  them 
as  means  to  happiness.  In  Mill’s  terms,  their 
goodness  remains  subject  to  the  criterion  of 
utility,  from  which  happiness  alone  is  exempt 
since  it  measures  the  utility  of  all  other  goods. 

If  the  evaluation  of  all  things  by  reference  to 
their  contribution  to  happiness  as  the  ultimate 
good  constitutes  utilitarianism  in  ethics,  then 
Aristotle  no  less  than  Mill  is  a  utilitarian,  even 
though  Aristotle  does  not  refer  to  the  principle 
of  utility,  does  not  identify  the  good  with  pleas¬ 
ure,  and  conceives  the  virtues  as  intrinsically 
good,  not  merely  as  means.  Kant  ^vould  regard 
them  as  in  fundamental  agreement  despite  all 
their  differences — or  at  least  he  would  regard 
them  as  committing  the  same  fundamental 
error. 

To  Kant  any  discussion  of  human  conduct 
which  involves  the  calculation  of  means  to  ends 
is  pragmatic  or  utilitarian,  even  when  the  con¬ 
trolling  end  is  the  summum  bonum  or  happi¬ 
ness.  Kant  makes  a  sharp  distinction  between 
what  he  calls  “pragmatical  rules”  of  conduct 
which  consider  what  should  be  done  by  one  who 
wishes  to  be  happy,  and  what  he  regards  as  the 
strictly  “moral  or  ethical  law”  which  “has  no 
other  motive  than  the  worthiness  of  being 
happy."  Morality,  he  says  in  another  place,  “is 
not  properly  the  doctrine  of  how  we  should 
make  ourselves  happy,  but  how  we  should  be¬ 
come  worthy  of  happiness”— through  doing  our 
duty. 

Kant’s  criticism  of  Aristotle’s  ethics  of  hap¬ 
piness  is  therefore  applicable  to  the  utilitarian¬ 
ism  of  Mill;  and  Mill’s  rejoinder  to  Kant  serves 
as  a  defense  of  Aristotle.  This  basic  issue  con¬ 
cerning  the  primacy  of  happiness  or  duty — of 
desire  or  law — is  discussed  in  the  chapters  on 
Duty  and  Happiness,  where  it  is  suggested 


612 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


that  in  an  ethics  of  duty,  right  and  wrong  sup¬ 
plant  good  and  evil  as  the  fundamental  terms, 
and  the  summum  bonum  becomes  a  derivative 
notion  rather  than  the  first  principle  of  morality. 

At  the  other  extreme  are  those  who  deny 
duty  entirely,  and  with  it  any  meaning  to  right 
and  wrong  as  distinct  from  good  and  evil.  A 
middle  ground  is  held  by  those  who  employ 
right  and  wrong  as  subordinate  terms  in  the 
analysis  of  good  and  evil,  finding  their  special 
significance  in  the  consideration  of  the  good  of 
others  or  the  social  good.  To  do  right  is  to  do 
good  to  others;  to  do  wrong  is  to  injure  them. 
The  question  which  Plato  so  insistently  raises, 
whether  it  is  better  to  do  injustice  or  to  suffer 
it,  can  also  be  stated  in  terms  of  good  and  evil, 
or  right  and  wrong.  Is  it  better  to  suffer  evil  or 
to  do  it?  Is  it  better  to  be  wronged  by  others 
or  to  wrong  them?  As  justice  for  Aristotle  is 
that  one  among  the  virtues  which  concerns  the 
good  of  others  and  the  common  good,  and  as  it 
is  the  one  virtue  which  is  thought  to  involve 
duty  or  obligation,  so  the  criteria  of  right  and 
wrong  measure  the  goodness  or  evil  of  human 
acts  by  reference  to  law  and  society. 

The  division  of  goods  into  means  and  ends  is 
not  the  only  distinction  made  by  moralists  who 
recognize  the  plurality  and  inequality  of  goods. 

Goods  have  been  divided  into  the  limited 
and  the  unlimited  with  respect  to  quantity; 
the  pure  and  the  mixed  with  respect  to  quality; 
sensible  and  intelligible  goods  or  particular 
goods  and  the  good  in  general;  external  goods, 
goods  of  the  body,  and  goods  of  the  soul;  the 
pleasant,  the  useful,  and  the  virtuous.  More 
specific  enumerations  of  the  variety  of  goods 
list  wealth,  health,  strength,  beauty,  longevity, 
pleasure,  honor  (or  fame),  virtue,  knowledge, 
friendship. 

All  of  the  foregoing  classifications  can  be  com¬ 
bined  with  one  another,  but  there  is  one  distinc¬ 
tion  which  stands  by  itself,  although  it  affects 
all  the  others.  That  is  the  distinction  between 
the  individual  and  the  common  good,  or  be¬ 
tween  private  and  public  good,  the  good  for 
rhis  one  man  and  the  good  of  all  others  and  of 
the  whole  community.  In  the  language  of  mod¬ 
ern  utilitarianism,  it  is  the  distinction  between 
individual  happiness  and  what  Bentham  called 
“the  greatest  good  for  the  greatest  number.” 


The  phrase  “common  good”  has  several  kc 
meanings  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books. 

One  sense,  which  some  think  is  the  least  signifi-  ^ 
cant,  refers  to  that  which  can  be  shared  or  used  6° 
by  many,  as,  for  example,  land  held  in  common 
and  worked  by  a  number  of  persons  or  families.  0 
Thus  we  speak  of  the  “commons”  of  a  town  or  co 
village.  This  meaning  applies  particularly  to  re 
economic  goods  which  may  either  belong  to  the  or 
community  as  a  whole  or  be  divided  into  parcels  er 
of  private  property.  lx 

Another  sense  of  common  good  is  that  in  it 

which  the  welfare  of  a  community  is  a  common  v 

good  participated  in  by  its  members.  The  wel-  b 
fare  of  the  family  or  the  state  is  a  good  which 
belongs  to  a  multitude  organized  for  some  com-  b 
mon  purpose.  If  the  individual  members  of  the 
group  derive  some  benefit  from  their  association  $ 

with  one  another,  then  the  prosperity  of  the 
community  is  not  only  a  common  good  viewed  ( 
collectively,  but  also  a  common  good  viewed 
distributively,  for  it  is  the  good  of  each  mem-  < 
ber  of  the  group  as  well  as  of  the  whole. 

With  this  in  mind,  perhaps,  Mill  speaks  of 
“an  indissoluble  association  between  [the  in¬ 
dividual’s]  happiness  and  the  practice  of  such 
mode  of  conduct,  negative  and  positive,  as  re¬ 
gard  for  the  universal  happiness  prescribes;  so 
that  not  only  he  may  be  unable  to  conceive  the 
possibility  of  happiness  to  himself,  consistently 
with  conduct  opposed  to  the  general  good,  but 
also  that  a  direct  impulse  to  promote  the  gen¬ 
eral  good  may  be  in  every  individual  one  of  the 
habitual  modes  of  action.”  If  this  statement  by 
Mill  is  used  to  interpret  Bentham’s  phrase — 
“the  greatest  good  for  the  greatest  number” — 
then  the  greatest  number  cannot  be  taken  to 
mean  a  majority,  for  the  good  of  nothing  less 
than  the  whole  collectively  or  of  all  distribu¬ 
tively  can  be  taken  as  the  common  or  general 
good. 

Still  another  conception  of  the  common  good 
is  possible.  A  good  may  be  common  in  the  sense 
in  which  a  specific  nature  is  common  to  the 
members  of  the  species — not  as  organized  social¬ 
ly  in  any  way,  but  simply  as  so  many  li^e  in¬ 
dividuals.  If  all  men  seek  happiness,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  then  happiness  is  a  common  good,  even 
though  each  individual  seeks  his  own  happi¬ 
ness.  In  a  deeper  sense  it  is  a  common  good  if 
the  happiness  each  seeks  is  the  same  for  all  men 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL  613 


because  they  are  all  of  the  same  nature;  but, 
most  strictly,  it  is  a  common  good  if  the  happi¬ 
ness  of  each  individual  cannot  be  separated 
from  the  happiness  of  all. 

Aquinas  seems  to  be  using  this  meaning  of 
common  good  when,  in  defining  law  as  a  rule  of 
conduct  “directed  to  the  common  good,”  he 
refers  not  merely  to  the  good  of  the  community 
or  body  politic,  but  beyond  that  to  “the  last 
end  of  human  life,”  which  is  “happiness  or 
beatitude.”  Law,  he  says,  “must  needs  concern 
itself  properly  with  the  order  directed  to  uni¬ 
versal  happiness.”  Mill  also  seems  to  conceive 
happiness  as  a  common  good  in  this  sense. 
“What  the  assailants  of  utilitarianism  seldom 
have  the  justice  to  acknowledge,”  he  writes,  is 
“that  the  happiness  which  forms  the  utilitarian 
standard  of  what  is  right  in  conduct,  is  not  the 
agent’s  own  happiness,  but  that  of  all  con- 
cerned. 

IThe  several  meanings  of  the  common  good 
create  a  fundamental  issue.  Some  writers  use  it 
in  one  sense  only,  rejecting  the  others.  Some 
not  only  use  the  term  in  all  its  meanings,  but 
also  develop  a  hierarchy  of  common  goods. 
They  regard  universal  happiness,  for  example, 
as  a  common  good  of  a  higher  order  than  the 
welfare  of  the  political  community.  Yet  in 
every  order  they  insist  upon  the  primacy  of  the 
common  over  the  individual  good.  In  the  po¬ 
litical  order,  for  example,  they  think  the  wel¬ 
fare  of  the  community  takes  precedence  over 
individual  happiness.  They  would  regard  Adam 
Smith’s  statement  of  the  way  in  which  in¬ 
dividuals  accidentally  serve  the  common  good 
while  seeking  their  private  interests,  as  a  per¬ 
version  of  the  relationship.  To  say  that  an  in¬ 
dividual  considering  only  his  own  gain  is  “led 


by  an  invisible  hand  to  promote  an  end  which 
was  no  part  of  his  intention”  (/’.<?.,  the  general 
prosperity  of  society)  docs  not  excuse  the  in¬ 
dividual's  failure  to  aim  at  the  common  good. 

The  several  meanings  of  the  common  gcxxJ 
also  complicate  the  statement  of  the  issue  be¬ 
tween  those  who  seem  to  say  that  the  welfare 
of  the  community  always  takes  precedence 
over  individual  well-being  or  happiness — that 
the  good  of  the  whole  is  always  greater  than 
the  good  of  its  parts — and  those  who  seem  to 
say  that  the  state  is  made  for  man,  not  man 
for  the  state,  or  that  the  prosperity  of  the  so¬ 
ciety  in  which  men  live  is  good  primarily  be¬ 
cause  it  enables  each  of  them  to  live  well.  This 
issue,  which  runs  through  all  the  great  books 
of  political  theory  from  Plato  and  Aristotle 
to  Hegel  and  Mill,  is  discussed  in  the  chapters 
on  Citizen  and  State. 

The  opposition  between  collectivism  and 
individualism  in  economics  and  politics  does 
not  exhaust  the  issue  which,  stated  in  its  broad¬ 
est  moral  terms,  is  a  conflict  between  self- 
interest  and  altruism.  The  primary  problem 
to  consider  here  is  whether  the  issue  is  itself 
genuine,  or  only  an  opposition  between  false 
extremes  which  needlessly  exclude  the  half- 
truth  that  each  contains. 

The  collective  aspect  of  the  common  good 
may  not  need  to  be  emphasized  at  the  expense 
of  its  distributive  aspect.  The  good  of  each 
man  and  the  good  of  mankind  may  be  insep¬ 
arable.  It  may  be  the  same  good  which,  in  dif¬ 
ferent  respects,  is  individual  and  common.  It 
may  be  that  no  good  can  be  supreme  which  is 
not  both  immanent  and  transcendent — at  once 
the  highest  perfection  of  the  individual  and  a 
good  greater  than  his  whole  being  and  his  life. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

x.  The  general  theory  of  good  and  evil  615 

1  a.  The  idea  of  the  good:  the  notion  of  finality 

ib .  Goodness  in  proportion  to  being:  the  grades  of  perfection  and  the  goodness  of 

order  616 

1  c.  The  good,  the  true,  and  the  beautiful  617 

id.  The  origin,  nature,  and  existence  of  evil 


614 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


PAGE 

2.  The  goodness  or  perfection  of  God:  the  plenitude  of  the  divine  being  618 

2 a.  God’s  goodness  as  diffusive,  causing  the  goodness  of  things:  God’s  love  619 

2b.  The  divine  goodness  and  the  problem  of  evil 

3.  The  moral  theory  of  the  good:  the  distinction  between  the  moral  and  the  metaphysical 

good  620 

$a.  Human  nature  and  the  determination  of  the  good  for  man:  the  real  and  the 

apparent  good;  particular  goods  and  the  good  in  general  621 

3 b.  Goodness  in  the  order  of  freedom  and  will  622 

(1)  The  prescriptions  of  duty 

(2)  The  good  will:  its  conditions  and  consequences  623 

3c.  The  good  and  desire:  goodness  causing  movements  of  desire  and  desire  causing 
estimations  of  goodness 

3  d.  Pleasure  as  the  good,  a  good,  or  feeling  good  624 

$e.  Right  and  wrong:  the  social  incidence  of  the  good;  doing  or  suffering  good  and 
evil 

$f.  The  sources  of  evil  in  human  life  625 

4.  Divisions  of  the  human  good  626 

4 a.  Sensible  and  intelligible  goods 

4 b.  Useful  and  enjoyable  goods:  good  for  an  end  and  good  in  itself 

4 c.  Goods  of  the  body  and  goods  of  the  soul  627 

4 d.  Intrinsic  and  external  goods:  intrinsic  worth  and  extrinsic  value 

4^.  Individual  and  common  goods  628 

5.  The  order  of  human  goods 

5 a.  The  supreme  good  or  summum  bonum :  its  existence  and  nature 

5 b.  The  judgment  of  diverse  types  of  good:  their  subordination  to  one  another  629 

5 c.  The  dialectic  of  means  and  ends:  mere  means  and  ultimate  ends  630 

5 d.  The  supremacy  of  the  individual  or  the  common  good:  the  relation  of  the  good 
of  the  individual  person  to  the  good  of  other  persons  and  to  the  good  of  the 
state  631 

6.  Knowledge  and  the  good  632 

6a.  Knowledge,  wisdom,  and  virtue:  the  relation  of  being  good  and  knowing  what 
is  good 

6b.  The  need  for  experience  of  evil  633 

6c.  The  goodness  of  knowledge  or  wisdom :  the  use  of  knowledge 

6d.  The  possibility  of  moral  knowledge:  the  subjectivity  or  conventionality  of 

judgments  of  good  and  evil  634 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL 


615 


REFERENCES 


To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  arc  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  kk  u  [265  283)  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right  hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b  164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  low'er  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.y  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References  :  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D)y  follows;  e.g.y  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45— (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  general  theory  of  good  and  evil 

Old  Testament:  Isaiah ,  45:7 — (D)  Isaias ,  45:7 
/  Lamentations ,  3:38 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  33:14-15;  39:25 —(D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  33:15;  39:30 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus ,  83b-84a  /  Gorgias ,  282c- 
284b  /  Republic ,  bk  ii,  322d-323a;  bk  vii, 
389b-c  /  Theaetetus ,  518a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  12  383b-384c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [988a8-i6]  506a-b;  ch 
7  [988^6-16]  506c-d;  bk  v,  ch  1  [ioi3a20-24] 
533b;  bk  xii,  ch  7  602a-603b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  339a- b;  ch  6-7 
341b-344a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  29,  134d- 
135b;  bk  11,  ch  8  146a-147c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 
270b;  bk  vi,  sect  40-45  277d-278c;  bk  viii, 
sect  19  286d-287a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  viii  27b-34a  / 
Third  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  3,  138a, c  /  Fifth 
Ennead ,  tr  i-vi  208a-237d  passim;  tr  ix,  ch 
10,  250c  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  10  309a-d; 
tr  vii,  ch  24-26  333d-334d;  ch  28  335b-d; 
tr  ix  353d-360d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  20  32d- 
33a  /  City  of  Gody  bk  xii,  ch  1-5  342b,d-345b 


19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  qq  4-6 
20c-30d;  q  21,  a  i,  rep  4  124b-125b;  a  3,  ans 
126a-c;  qq  48-49  259b-268a,c;  part  i-ii,  q  i, 
a  4,  rep  1  612a-613a;  a  8  615a-c;  q  2,  a  5 
618d-619c;  q  18,  a  i,  ans  694a-d;  a  2,  ans 
694d-695c;  a  3,  ans  695d-696b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61d-62a 

26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Juliet ,  act  ii, 
sc  hi  [1-30]  296b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d; 
part  hi,  prop  9,  schol  399c;  prop  39,  schol 
408b-d;  part  iv,  pref-def  2  422b,d-424a; 
prop  8  426b-c;  prop  27-28  431b-c 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  390b-391a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin .  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
256a-b  /  Practical  Reason ,  314d-321b  esp  316a- 
317d,  318c-321b;  338c-355d 

la.  The  idea  of  the  good:  the  notion  of  finality 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  50c-d  /  Symposium ,  164c- 
165b  /  Phaedo ,  240d-242b  /  Gorgias ,  282c- 
284b  /  Republic ,  bk  i,  309b-310a;  bk  vi-vii, 
384a-401d/  Timaeus,  447d-448a  /  Theaetetus , 
535b-d  /  Philebus  609a-639a,c  esp  609a-c, 
614a,  635b-639a,c 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii 
[94b8~95a9]  129b-d  /  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  15 
[i07a3-n]  151a;  bk  vi,  ch  5  [i43s9-i2]  196c; 


616 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  The  general  theory  of  good  and  evil.  la.  The 
idea  of  the  good:  the  notion  of  finality.) 

ch  6  [i45ai9-27]  198d-199a;  ch  8  [i46b9- 
1 47ai i ]  200c-201a;  ch  12  [149^31—39]  204b-c  / 
Physics ,  bk  1,  ch  9  [1 92^-24]  268a-c;  bk  ii,  ch 
2  [i94a27-b8]  270d-271a;  ch  3  [i94b33~i95a2] 
271b-c;  [195^2-26]  271d;  ch  8  275d-277b; 
bk  vii,  cri  3  [246aio-248a8]  329c-330d  / 
Fleavens,  bk  ii,  ch  12  383b-384c  /  Generation 
and  Corruptiony  bk  ii,  ch  6  [333a35-b2o]  434b-c 
/  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982b4~io]  500d; 
ch  3  [984b8]-CH  4  [985^8]  502d-503c;  ch  6 
[988a8— 1 6]  506a-b;  ch  7  [988b6-i6]  506c-d; 
ch  9  [992^9-34]  510c;  bk  11,  ch  2  [994b9~ 16] 
512d-513a;  bk  hi,  ch  2  [996a2i— bi3]  514d- 
515a;  bk  v,  ch  2  [ioi3a32-b3]  533c;  [ioi3b25- 
28]  533d-534a;  ch  14  [io2obi4~25]  541d-542a; 
bk  ix,  ch  8  [io5oa3~bi]  575d-576b;  bk  xii, 
ch  7  [io72ai8-b4]  602a-c;  ch  10  [ic>75a25-b7] 
606a-b;  bk  xiv,  ch  4  [1 09^29-1092^]  624a-d; 
ch  6  625d-626d  /  Soul ,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [415s 
22— b8]  645c-d;  [4i5bi5~22]  645d-646a;  bk  iii, 
ch  9  [432b2i-26]  665b-c  /  Sleepy  ch  2  [455b 
13-28]  698b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Anunals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [63 9b 
8-640ai2]  161d-162b;  [64 ibi 0-642^]  164c- 
165d;  ch  5  [645a23~26]  169a  /  Gait  of  Animals , 
ch  2  [704bi2-i8]  243c  /  Generation  of  Animals , 
bk  1,  ch  1  [7i5ai— 1 1]  255a;  bk  v,  ch  i  [778^5- 
bi 9]  320a-321a  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  339a-b;  ch 
6  341b-342c  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i252b3o- 
i253ai]  446a-b;  ch  8  [i256b8-26]  450b-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  F acuities ,  bk  1,  ch  6,  170b-c; 
ch  12  172d-173c;  bk  ii,  ch  4,  187c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things  y  bk  i  [1022-1037] 
13c-d;  bk  11  [1052-1063]  28b-c;  bk  iv  [823- 
857]  55a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditationsy  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 
270b;  sect  16  271c-d;  bk  vi,  sect  40  277d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Enneady  tr  vii,  ch  1-2  26a-d; 
tr  vm,  ch  2  27c-d  /  Third  Enneady  tr  ix,  ch 
3,  138a, c  /  Fifth  Enneady  tr  v-vi  228b-237d  / 
Sixth  Enneady  tr  v,  ch  1  305c-306a;  ch  10 
309a-d;  tr  vii,  ch  15-42  329c-342d;  tr  ix 
353d-360d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  10  lla-b; 
bk  xiii,  par  53  124d-125a,c  /  City  of  Gody  bk 
xi,  ch  22  333d-334c;  bk  xii,  ch  i  342b, d- 
343c;  ch  4-5  344b-345b;  bk  xiv,  ch  13  387c- 
388c;  bk  xxii,  ch  24,  610c-611c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a 
3,  ans  12c-14a;  qq  5-6  23b-30d  esp  q  5,  a  4 
25d-26c;  q  16,  a  i,  ans  94b-95c;  a  3,  ans 
96b-d;  q  18,  a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  19,  a  i, 
ans  108d-109c;  a  4,  ans  111c-112c;  q  22,  a,  2 
ans  128d-130d;  Q  23,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1-2 
132c-133b;  q  36,  a  3,  ans  194c-195d;  q  44, 
a  4  241a-d;  q  48,  a  i,  rep  4  259b-260c;  q  59, 
a  1,  ans  306c-307b;  a  3,  ans  308b-309a;  q 
60,  a  5,  ans  313b-314c;  q  63,  a  4,  ans  328b- 
329a;  q  65,  a  i,  rep  3  339b-340b;  a  2  340b- 


1  a  to  1  b 

341b;  q  70,  a  3,  ans  365b-367a;  q  78,  a  i,  rep 
3  407b-409a;  q  82,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i  434c- 
435c;  q  91,  a  3  486b-487d;  q  92,  a  i,  rep  i 
488d-489d;  q  98,  a  i,  ans  516d-517c;  q  103 
528a-534b  passim;  q  105,  a  5,  ans  542a-543b; 
part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  2  610b-611b;  a  6,  ans  614a-c; 
a  8  615a-c;  q  2,  a  4,  rep  i  618a-d;  a  5,  rep  3 
618d-619c;  q  8,  a  1,  ans  655b-656a;  q  9,  a  1, 
ans  657d-658d;  q  12,  a  5,  ans  672a-c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  2b-4a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvii 
[125-136]  79d;  xviii  [19-39]  80a-b;  para¬ 
dise,  1  [94-142]  107b-d;  iii  [82-90]  llOa-b;  iv 
[n5]-v  [12]  llld-112b;  xxvi  [1-69]  145d- 
146c;  xxxii  [i39]-xxxiii  [145]  156a-157d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  part  i,  50a;  part  iv,  271d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generationy  355c-d; 
442d-443c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learningy  45a-46a  / 
Novum  Organuniy  bk  i,  aph  48  llOd-llla 

31  Descartes:  Meditationsy  iv,  90a-b  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  215a-b 

31  Spinoza :  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d; 
part  iv,  pref  422b,d-424a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  425-426  243b-244b;  430 
245a-247b;  438  251a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  107 
433d-434a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div  44, 
469b-c;  sectxi,  div  iii  501b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  187a-190a;  205a-209b 
/  Judgement ,  467d-470b;  473a-474b;  478a; 
550a-613a,c  esp  550a-562a,c,  568c-570b, 

575b-578a,  587a-588a,  592a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  157b-c; 
160b-178a  esp  168d-169d 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  40c-d;  41c-42a; 
95d-97a  esp  96b-c;  217d-218a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  i,  646c- 
647b;  650b-c 

53  James  :  Psychology,  4a-6b;  671b  [fn  1] 

lb.  Goodness  in  proportion  to  being:  the  grades 
of  perfection  and  the  goodness  of  order 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124c-126a  /  Symposium , 
167a-d  /  Gorgias,  282c-284b  /  Timaeus ,  447a- 
455c  /  Philebus,  635b-639a,c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [192^6-24] 
268b-c  /  Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  2  359d-360d;  bic 
ii,  ch  12  383b-384c  /  Generation  and  Corrup¬ 
tion,  bk  11,  ch  10  [336b25-34]  438d  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  ix,  ch  9  [1051^-21]  577a-b;  bk 
xii,  ch  7  602a-603b;  ch  10  [io75an-24]  605d- 
606a;  bk  xiv,  ch  4  624a-d 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  ii, 
ch  1  [73ib24~33]  272a-b  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  6 
[i096ai7~b7]  341b-d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  1-2  26a-d; 
tr  vm  27b-34a  /  Second  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  3 
67b-c/  Third  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  8-10  132d- 


017 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL 


1  c  to  Id 

136a  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  i  2  246c-247b; 
ch  io,  250c  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  vii,  ch  25 
334a-c;  ch  28-29  335b-336b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  16-23 
48c'50c  /  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  6  268d 
269c;  bk  xi,  ch  16  331a-c;  cn  22  333d  334c; 
bk  xii,  ch  1-5  342b,d-345b;  bk  xiv,  ch  13 
387c-388c  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  1,  cii  8  626c- 
627a;  ch  32  633c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, 
rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  3  12c-14a;  q  3,  a  1,  ans  14b- 
15b;  a  2,  ans  15c-16a;  a  7,  rep  2  19a-c;  qq  4-6 
20c-30d  passim;  q  16,  a  3,  ans  96b-d;  q  18, 
a  3  106b-107c;  q  19,  a  i,  ans  108d-109c;  a  8, 
ans  116a-d;  q  22,  a  4,  ans  131c  l32b;  q  23, 
a  5,  rep  3  135d-137d;  q  25,  a  i,  rep  2  143d- 
144c;  a  6  149a-150a;  q  42,  a  i,  rep  1-2  224b- 
225d;  q  44,  a  1,  ans  238b-239a;  q  47,  aa  2-3 
257b-259a;  qq  48-49  259b-268a,c  passim;  q 
50,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  i  269b-270a;  a  3,  ans 
and  rep  2  272a-273b;  q  57,  a  i,  ans  295a-d; 
q  65,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  340b-341b;  q  70, 
a  3,  rep  2  365b-367a;  q  73,  a  i,  ans  370a- 
371a;  q  75,  a  7  384d-385c;  q  76,  a  3,  ans 
391a-393a;  a  4,  rep  3  393a-394c;  q  77,  a  2 
401b-d;  a  4,  rep  1  403a-d;  q  82,  a  3,  ans 
433c-434c;  Q  103  528a-534b  passim,  esp  a  3 
530a-c,  aa  6-8  532b-534b;  q  106,  a  4,  ans 
548b-549a;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  i  612a- 
613a;  a  8  615a-c;  q  2,  a  5,  rep  2  618d-619c;  q 
18  693b,d-703a  passim,  esp  aa  1-4  694a-696d; 
q  22,  a  2,  rep  1  721c-722c;  q  29,  a  i,  rep  i 
745a-c;  a  5,  ans  747c-748b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  52, 
a  1,  ans  15d-18a; q 54,  A3,  rep 2  24c-25b;Q55, 
a  4,  rep  1-2  28c-29d;  q  85,  a  4  181b-d;  part 
11— 11,  q  2,  a  3,  ans  392d-393c;  q  23,  a  3,  rep  3 
485a-d;  part  iii,  q  7,  a  9,  ans  751d-752c; 
part  iii  suppl,  q  74,  a  1,  rep  3  925c-926c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [i 03-1 42] 
107b-d;  11  [112-148]  109a-b;  vii  [64-75]  H5d- 
116a;  [121-148]  116b-c;  xm  [52-87]  126a-b; 
xxvm  [i]-xxix  [66]  148d-151a  esp  xxvm 
[64-72]  149b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  52d  /  Medi¬ 
tations,  iii,  84a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix,  372c-d; 
part  11,  def  6  373c;  part  iv,  pref  422b, d- 
424a;  part  v,  prop  40,  demonst  462c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [468-490]  185b- 
186a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understandings  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  12  271d-272b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  187c-188c;  206d-207c  / 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  278b-d  / 
Practical  Reason ,  307a-d 

1  c.  The  good,  the  true,  and  the  beautiful 

7  Plato:  Lysis ,  21b-c  /  Phaedrus ,  124c-129d  / 
Symposiums  162d-163a;  167a-d  /  Republics 
bk  v,  357d-358a;  bk  vi,  383d-388a  /  Philebus , 
637c-638a 


8  \ristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  i  [1013*20- 
24]  533b;  bk  xii,  cii  7  [1072*23-36]  602b  c; 
bk  xm,  ch  3  [1078*33  b6)  609d  610a  /  Soulf 
bk  in,  ch  7  [43ibio-i  3]  664b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  cii  2,  141a;  bk 
iii,  cii  1  175a  177c;  bk  iv,  ch  ii  240d  242d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
bk  iv,  sect  20  265a  b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2  10a  d; 
tr  vi,  ch  3-9  22b  26a;  tr  viii,  ch  2,  27c  / 
Fifth  Enneady  tr  i  208a  214c  passim;  tr  v,  cii 
12  234a  d  /  Sixth  Enneady  tr  vii,  cii  22  332d- 
333b;  cii  31-33  336d  338b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par  6  90c-d; 
bk  xm,  par  53  124d-125a,c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  5,  a  4, 
rep  1  25d-26c;  q  16,  a  i,  ans  94b-95c;  a  3, 
ans  96b-d;  a  4  97a-c;  q  17,  a  4,  rep  2  103c- 
104b;  q  54,  a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  q  79,  a  ii, 
rep  2  424d-425b;  q  82,  a  3,  rep  i  433c-434c; 
a  4,  rep  1  434c-435c;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  5,  rep 
2  626b-627a;  q  9,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2-3  657d- 
658d;  q  19,  a  3,  rep  1  704c-705a;  q  22,  a  2, 
ans  721c-722c;  q  26,  a  i,  rep  3  734a-d;  q  27, 
a  1,  rep  3  737b-d;  a  2,  ans  737d-738c;  q  29, 
a  5,  ANS  747c-748b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii  -ii, 
q  180,  a  2,  rep  3  608c-609c;  part  iii  suppl, 
q  94,  a  1,  rep  2  1040d-1041b 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  62a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  26c-27a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  478a-479d;  480a-482b; 
488a-489a;  521b-523c  esp  522b-c;  546d-548c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  266a- 
267a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
153a-d 

1  d.  The  origin,  nature,  and  existence  of  evil 

Old  Testament:  Isaiah,  45:7 — (D)  Isaias ,  45:7 
/  Lamentations ,  3:38 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  33 114-15;  39:25 — ( D ) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  33:15;  39*30 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  282c-284b  /  Republic,  bk  x, 
434d-435a  /  Theaetetus,  518a-b;  530b-d  / 
Statesman ,  587a-589c  /  Laws,  bk  x,  763b 
765a 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  ii  [1 3b36— i4a6]  19c 
/  Physics ,  bk  1,  ch  9  [i92a2-24]  268a-c  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  1,  ch  4  [984b23-985b3]  502d  503c; 
ch  6  [988*8-16]  506a  b;  bk  v,  ch  5  [101 5b9  -16] 
536a;  bk  ix,  ch  9  [1051*17-22]  577a  b;  bk  xii, 
ch  io  [1075*25-1076*4]  606a  d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [1  io6b28— 35] 
352b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  20,  126c-d; 
ch  29  134d-138a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  6,  24b:  tr 
viii  27b-34a  /  Second  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  16, 
48d-49a;  ch  18,  49c-d;  tr  iv,  ch  16,  57c; 
tr  ix,  ch  13  73d-74b  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii, 
ch  5-7  85b-86c;  ch  10-14  88a  89d;  tr  iii 


618 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  The  general  theory  of  good  and  evil.  id.  The 
origin ,  nature ,  and  existence  oj  evil.) 

ch  5,  95d-96a;  ch  7,  96d-97a;  tr  vi,  ch  ii, 
113b-c/  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  hi,  ch  16  150c-d 
/  Fifth  Enneady  tr  ix,  ch  10,  250c  /  Sixth  En - 
neady  tr  vii,  ch  28  335b-d 

18  Augustine:  ConfessionSy  bk  iii,  par  11-12 
15d-16b;  bk  iv,  par  24  25b-c;  bk  v,  par  20 
32d-33a;  bk  vii,  par  3-7  44a-45d;  par  11-23 
47a-50d;  bk  xiii,  par  45  123a  /  City  of  Gody 
bk  xi,  ch  9,  327c-d;  ch  22  333d-334c;  bk  xii, 
ch  1-9  342b,d-348b;  bk  xix,  ch  13  519a- 
520a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i,  q  5,  a 
3,  rep  2  25a-d;  a  5,  rep  3-4  26c-27c;  qq  48-49 
259b-268a,c;  q  65,  a  i,  rep  2-3  339b-340b; 
part  i-ii,  q  18  693b,d-703a  passim,  esp  aa 
1-4  694a-696d;  q  29,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1,3 
745a-c;  a  5,  ans  747c-748b 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica}  part  i-ii,  q  79, 
aa  1-2  156b-158a;  q  80  159d-162d;  q  81,  aa  1-2 
163a-165c;  a  5  167a-d;  part  iii  suppl,  q  69, 
a  7,  rep  9  891d-893c;  q  74,  a  i,  rep  i  925c- 
926c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [103-142] 
107b-d;  vii  [19-148]  115b-116c;  xiii  [52—87] 
126a-b;  xix  [40-66]  135c-d;  xxix  [49-66] 
150d-151a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathany  part  iii,  191b-d;  195d- 
196a 

26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  ]uliety  act  ii, 
sc  iii  [15-30]  296c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethicsy  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Losty  bk  ix  [494-1189]  258a- 
273a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  116a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  152-154 
443d-444b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
76-81  485a-487a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fally  330a-b 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  316a-317d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  ii,  par  139 
48d-49b;  additions,  90-91  130b-131d  /  Phi¬ 
losophy  of  History ,  intro,  160a;  162a-163a; 
168d;  part  1,  237d-238c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\  esp  30a-36b,  117a- 
124b,  131a-145a,  171b,  317a-321a,  411a-419b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazovy  bk  xi, 
3^4a-d 

2.  The  goodness  or  perfection  of  God:  the 
plenitude  of  the  divine  being 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  5:48  /  Lufey  18:18- 
19  /  I ]ohny  1:5  /  Revelationy  15:4 —(D)  Apoc¬ 
alypse  y 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  321d-323a  /  Timaeusy 
447a-448b  /  TheaetetuSy  530 b-d 

8  Aristotle:  MetaphysicSy  bk  xii,  ch  7  602a- 
603b 


2 

9  Aristotle:  EthicSy  bk  vii,  ch  i  [1145*15-27] 
395a;  ch  14  [ii54b2o-3i]  406c;  bk  x,  ch  8 
[1178^-23]  433 b-c  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  i 
[1323^22—25]  527c 

12  Epictetus:  Discoursesy  bk  ii,  ch  8  146a- 
147c 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1009a; 
1049b-1050b 

18  Augustine:  ConfessionSy  bk  i,  par  12  4a;  bk 
ii,  par  10  lla-b;  bk  vii,  par  1-7  43b-45d;  par 
16-23  48c-50c;  bk  x,  par  38  81a;  bk  xi,  par  6 
90c-d;  bk  xiii,  par  1-5  llOd-llld;  par  53 
124d-125a,c  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xi,  ch  10  327d- 
328d;  bk  xii,  ch  1-3  342b,d-344b;  ch  8  346d- 
347b  /  Christian  Doctriney  bk  i,  ch  5-7  625d- 
626c;  ch  31-32  633b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, 
rep  2  lOd-lld;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i  12c-14a;  q 
3,  a  1,  ans  14b-15b;  a  2,  ans  15c-16a;  a  7,  rep 
2  19a-c;  q  4  20c-23b;  q  6  28b-30d;  q  13,  a  2, 
ans  63c-64d;  a  ii,  rep  2  73c-74b;  q  18,  a  3 
106b-107c;  q  19,  a  i,  rep  1-3  108d-109c;  q  21, 
a  1,  rep  4  124b-125b;  q  26  150a-152a,c;  q  51, 
a  1,  rep  3  275b-276b;  q  54,  a  2,  ans  285d- 
286c;  q  60,  a  5  313b-314c;  q  61,  a  3,  rep  2 
316a-d;  q  62,  a  8,  ans  and  rep  1-2  323c-324a; 
q  66,  a  1,  contrary  343d-345c;  q  84,  a  2,  ans 
and  rep  3  442b-443c;  q  91,  a  i,  ans  484a- 
485b;  q  100,  a  2,  ans  521c-522b;  q  103  528a- 
534b  passim;  q  104,  a  3,  rep  2  537b-d;  a  4, 
ans  538a-c;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  541c-542a;  a  5, 
ans  542a-543b;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  4,  rep  i 
618a-d;  a  5,  rep  2  618d-619c;  q  9,  a  6,  ans 
662a-d;  q  18,  a  i,  ans  694a-d;  q  22,  a  2,  rep  i 
721c-722c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  4,  ans  5a-6a;  q  61,  a  5,  ans  58b-59d;  q  64, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  69b-70a;  part  ii-ii,  q  9, 
a  4,  rep  1  425d-426c;  q  13,  a  i,  ans  444b- 
445a;  q  17,  a  i,  ans  457a-d;  q  23,  a  4,  ans 
485d-486b;  q  34,  a  i,  ans  559a-c;  q  39,  a  2, 
rep  3  575b-576b;  q  184,  a  2,  ans  629d-630d; 
part  iii,  q  1,  a  1,  ans  701d-703a;  q  23,  a  i, 
ans  833a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  xxvm  [91-96]  97a;  paradise, 
vii  [64-148]  115d-116c  esp  [64—66]  115d;  xiii 
[52-87]  126a-b;  xix  [40-90  j  135c-136a 

22  Chaucer:  Merchant's  Tale  [10,160-164]  336a 

25  Montaigne:  EssaySy  300c-d 

31  Descartes:  Discoursey  part  iv,  52a-d;  53d  / 
Meditations ,  1,  77b-c;  iii,  86a-88d;  iv  89a- 
93a  passim  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  123d- 
124c;  def  viii  130d;  228a-c;  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  EthicSy  part  i,  def  6  355b; 
pfop  8-9  356d-357d;  prop  10,  schol  358a-b; 
prop  14  359d-360a;  prop  16  362a;  prop  33, 
schol  2  367d-369a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Losty  bk  iii  [135-166]  138b- 
139a;  bk  vii  [170— 173]  220b-221a 

33  Pascal:  Penseesf*  425-426  243b-244b;  430 
245a-247b 


2a  to  2b 


619 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL 


34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  sciiol, 
370a-371a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cm 
xxiii,  sect  34-35  213a-c;  bk  iii,  cii  vi,  sect 
n-12  271b-272b  passim 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xi,  div 
106-107,  499o500a  passim;  div  113,  502a  b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  230a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  205a  b;  237d  239a  / 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  263a  b; 
278b-d  /  Practical  Reason ,  307a-d;  325d- 
326a;  342c;  345a-c;  351b-352c  /  Judgement , 
592a-c 

2<*.  God's  goodness  as  diffusive,  causing  the 
goodness  of  things:  God's  love 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1  /  Exodus ,  20:4-6 
esp  20:6;  33:19;  34:5-10  /  Deuteronomy ,  4:1- 
40  esp  4:6-8,  4:31,  4:37;  57-10  esp  5:10;  7:6- 
11  /  Job ,  33:13-33  /  Psalms  passim,  esp  8-10, 
16-18,  20,  22-23,  25>  68,  97:10,  114:1-115:18, 
118:1-119:176— (D)  Psalms  passim,  esp  8-9, 15- 
17,  19,  21-22,  24,  67,  96:10,  113:1-18,  117:1— 
118:176/  Proverbs,  3:11-12  /  Song  of  Solomon — 
(Z))  Canticle  of  Canticles  /  Isaiah ,  40-66  passim, 
esp  42-44,  46:3-4,  49:1-26,  52:1-15,  56:1-8, 
63:8-9— (D)  Isaias,  40-66  passim,  esp  42-44, 
46:3-4,  49:1-26,  52:1-15,  56:1-8,  6 3:8-9/  Jere¬ 
miah,  31-33 — (D)  Jeremias ,  31-33  /  Lamenta¬ 
tions,  3:22-39  esp  3:25,  3:38  /  Ezekiel,  16  esp 
16:6-14,  16:59-63 — (D)  Ezechiel ,  16  esp  16:6- 
14,  16:59-63  /  esp  2:14-23,  3:1,  3:5, 

6:1-3,  ii:i-4>  J3 :i6— 14 :9 — (Z3>)  esp  2:14- 

23,  3:1,  3:5,  6:1-3,  11 :1_4»  14:1-10  / /o*5/,  2 
esp  2:18-32  /  Zechariah ,  9:17— (£>)  Zacharias , 
9:17  /  Malachi ,  1:1-3— (D)  Malachias ,  1:1-3 

Apocrypha:  Tobit ,  13:10— (D)  OT,  Tobias , 
13:12  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  11:22-26;  16:20- 
29 —(b)  OT,  0/  Wisdom,  11:23-27; 

16:20-29  /  Ecclesiasticus,  11:14-17;  16:26- 
18:14  esp  16:29-30;  39:16,25-34— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  11:14-17;  16:26-18:14  esp  16:30- 
31;  39:21,30-40 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  6:25-34;  7:7-11  / 
Luke,  11:1-13;  12:6-7,16-33  /  John,  1:1-5; 
3:16-21;  13:31-35;  14:21;  15:9-16;  17:21-26  / 
Romans ,  2:4;  8:31-39  /  Galatians,  2:20  / 
Ephesians,  3:14-21;  5:1-2  /  I  John,  3-4  esp 
3:1,  3:16,  4:7-12  /  Revelation,  3:19— (D) 
Apocalypse,  3:19 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  321d-322d;  bk  vi-vii, 
384a-389c  /  Timaeus ,  447a-448a 

8  Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii, 
ch  10  [336^5-34]  438d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii, 
ch  7  602a-603b;  ch  10  [1075^1-24]  605d- 
606a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  8  146a-147c 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1049b- 
1050b;  1071b 

17  Plotinus:  F/rtf  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  1-2  26a-d 
/  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v  228b-235b  f  Sixth  Ennead, 
tr  ix,  ch  9  358d-359c 


18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  7  2c  d;  bk 
ii,  par  10  I  la  b;  bk  vii,  par  4  44b  c;  par  16- 
2$  48c  50c;  bk  xi,  par  6  90c  d;  bk  xm,  par 
1-5  llOd-llld  /  C/Vy  of  God ,  bk  vii,  cii 
261d*262a;  bk  xi,  cii  21-24  333a-336a;  bk  xii, 
ch  1  342b, d  343c;  cii  9  347b  348b:  bk  xiv, 
ch  13  387c  388c;  bk  xxii,  ch  24  609a  612a  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  31-32  633b  d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  1  12c  14a;  q  3,  a  i,  rep  i 
14b  15b;  a  2,  ans  15c-16a;  q  6  28b30d; 
q  13,  a  2,  ans  63c-64d;  q  19,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  2-4  109c  110b;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i  111c- 
112c;  q  20  119d-124a;  q  21,  a  3,  ans  126a-c; 
q  25,  a  6  149a-150a;  q  50,  a  i,  ans  269b-270a; 
a  3,  ans  272a-273b;  q  51,  a  i,  rep  3  275b 
276b;  q  59,  a  1,  ans  306c-307b;  a  2,  ans  307c- 
308b;  q  60,  a  5  313b-314c;  q  91,  a  i,  ans  484a- 
485b;  q  103  528a-534b;  q  104,  a  3,  rep  2 
537b-d;  a  4,  ans  538a-c;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  541c- 
542a;  q  106,  a  4,  ans  548b-549a;  part  i-ii,  q 
1,  a  4,  rep  i  612a-613a;  q  2,  a  5,  rep  3  618d- 
619c;  q  9,  a  6,  ans  662a-d;  q  19,  a  4,  ans 
705b-c;  q  28,  a  3,  contrary  742a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  paradise,  ii  [112-148]  109a-b; 
vii  [16-148]  115b-116c  esp  [64—75]  115d-116a; 
xm  [52-87]  126a-b;  xix  [40-90]  135c-136a; 
xxvi  [1-69]  145d-146c;  xxvm  148d-150b; 
xxix  [13-36]  150b-c;  [127-145]  151c-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  185d 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  229c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [135— 143]  138b; 
bk  v  [153-208]  178b-179b;  bk  vii  [170-173] 
220b-221a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
3  405b-c;  sect  154  444a-b 

37  Fieldinc:  Tom  Jones,  186c-d 

46  Hecel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  169d- 
170a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
127b-137c;  bk  vi,  167b-168c;  bk  vii,  189a- 
191a, c 

2b.  The  divine  goodness  and  the  problem  of 
evil 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy ,  30:15-20  esp 
30:15  /  I  Samuel,  16:14-23— (D)  I  Kings , 
16:14-23  /  Job  /  Psalms,  5  esp  5:4-6;  9-10; 
13;  22  esp  22:7-8;  37;  39  esp  39:8-12;  44; 

•  73;  88  — (D)  Psalms ,  5  esp  5:5-7;  9;  12;  21 

esp  21:8-9;  36;  38  esP  38:9-i3;  43^  72;  87 
/  Proverbs,  8:13  /  Ecclesiastes,  8:1-9:12  esp 
8:10-14,  9:1-3  /  Isaiah,  45:7 —(D)  Isaias, 
457  /  Jeremiah,  12  esp  12:1-2 — (D)  Jeremias, 
12  esp  12:1-2  /  Lamentations,  3:38  /  Amos, 
3:6  /  Micah,  1:12 — (D)  Micheas,  1:12 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:13-16;  2:23- 
24;  11:24— (D)  OT,  Bookof  Wisdom,  1:13-16; 
2:23-25;  11:25  /  Ecclesiasticus ,  11:14-16;  15:11— 
20;  33:10-15;  39:25-31 — (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasti¬ 
cus,  11:14-16;  15:11-22;  33:10-15;  39:30-37 


620 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  goodness  or  perfection  of  God:  the  pleni¬ 
tude  of  the  divine  being.  2b.  The  divine 
goodness  and  the  problem  of  evil.) 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  13:24-30,36-43  esp 
1 3:38-3 9  /  John ,  3:16-21  /  Romans ,  3:1-10; 
5  /  James,  1  .*12-15  /  /  John ,  1  esp  1 :5-6 

5  Aeschylus:  Etimenides  Sla-91d 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  321d-322d  /  Timaeus , 
452c-453b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  ix,  ch  9  [1051s 
17-22]  577a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  12  118d-120b 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  140d 

17  Plotinus:  Ffrrt  Ennead ,  tr  viii  27b-34a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  11  15d- 
16a;  bk  iv,  par  24  25b-c;  bk  v,  par  20  32d- 
33a;  bk  vii,  par  3-7  44a-45d;  par  11-23  47a- 
50d;  bk  xiii,  par  45  123a  /  C/Vy  q/*  bk 
viii,  ch  24,  283a-b;  bk  x,  ch  21  311c-312a; 
bk  xi,  ch  9  326d-327d;  ch  13-15  329c-331a; 
ch  22  333d-334c;  bk  xii,  ch  1-9  342b,d-348b; 
ch  21-22  357a-c;  ch  27  359c-360a,c;  bk  xiii, 
ch  13-15  366a-d;  bk  xiv,  ch  10-15  385b- 
390a;  bk  xix,  ch  13  519a-520a;  bk  xxii, 
ch  1  586b,d-587b  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii, 
ch  23  648a-c;  bk  hi,  ch  37,  673d-674a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a 
3,  rep  1  12c-14a;  q  8,  a  1,  rep  4  34d-35c;  a 
3,  ans  36b-37c;  q  14,  a  10  83d-84c;  q  15,  a  3, 
rep  1  93b-94a;  q  17,  a  i  lOOd-lOld;  q  18,  a  4, 
rep  4  107d-108c;  q  19,  a  9  116d-117d;  a  12, 
ans  and  rep  4  118d-119d;  q  20,  a  2,  rep  4 
121b-122a;  q  22,  a  2,  rep  2  128d-130d;  a  3, 
rep  3  130d-131c;  q  23,  a  5,  rep  3  135d-137d; 
a  7,  rep  3  138d-140a;  q  25,  a  3,  rep  2  145b- 
147a;  q  48,  a  2,  rep  3  260c-261b;  q  49,  aa  2-3 
266a-268a,c;  q  63,  a  4  328b-329a;  a  5,  ans 
329a-330c;  a  7,  rep  2  331c-332b;  q  64,  a  4 
337d-338d;  q  65,  a  i,  rep  2-3  339b-340b;  q 
66,  a  3,  ans  347b-348d;  q  72,  a  1,  rep  6  368b- 
369d;  q  92,  a  1,  rep  3  488d-489d;  q  103,  a  3, 
rep  2  530a-c;  a  7,  rep  i  533b-d;  a  8  533d- 
534b;  q  114,  a  1,  ans  581d-582c;  part  i-ii,  q 
39,  a  2,  rep  3  790d-791b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  79 
156a-159c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  74,  a  i,  rep  i 
925c-926c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxxiv  [28-36] 
51c;  paradise,  1  [103-142]  107b-d;  vii  [19- 
148]  115b-116c;  viii  [91-148]  117d-118c;  xiii 
[52-87]  126a-b;  xix  [40-90]  135c-136a;  xxix 
[49-66]  150d-151a 

22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale  [7056-7085]  281a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  160d-161a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  17d-18a: 
80b-81a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  iv  89a-93a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  33,  schol  2 
367d-369a;  appendix  369b-372d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost  93a-333a  esp  bk  1  [128- 
168]  96a-97a,  [209-220]  98a,  bk  iii  [56-343] 


2b  to  l 

136b-143a,  bk  iv  [32-113]  153a-155a,  bk  vi 
[262-295]  202a-b,  bk  vii  [519-549]  228b-229a, 
bk  viii  [316-337]  239a-b,  bk  ix  [679-779] 
262a-264a,  bk  x  [585-640]  287a-288b,  bk  xi 
[84-98]  301a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [1156-1177] 
364b-365a  /  Areopagitica,  394b-395b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  116a-b  /  Pensees , 
735-736  317b;  820  331b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  154 
444a- b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
78-81  485c-487a;  sect  xi,  div  106-107,  499c- 
500a  passim 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  230b;  330a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  401a-b;  482a-d;  539d- 
540a; 549c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  90 
130b-d  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  160a; 
part  iii,  304d-306a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  prologue  7a-9b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl 381a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  272a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
120d-121c;  122c-123b;  132a-135d;  bk  xi, 
337a-346a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  790d  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures ,  877d-878b 

3.  The  moral  theory  of  the  good:  the  distinction 
between  the  moral  and  the  metaphysical 
good 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  58b-62d  /  Gorgias ,  262a- 
263c;  280d-285a  /  Theaetetus ,  530b-531a  / 
Philebus  609a-639a,c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i  339a-348d  esp  ch  6 
341b-342c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [i362b2-6] 
603b;  ch  9  [i366a23~i367b27]  608c-610c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses  105a-245a,c  esp  bk  i, 
ch  1  105a-106c,  ch  6  110c-112b,  ch  ii  116d- 
118d,  ch  15  121c-d,  ch  18  124a-125a,  ch  22 
127c-128c,  ch  25  129d-131b,  ch  27-29  132b- 
138a,  bk  ii,  ch  5  142c-144a,  ch  io-ii  148c- 
151b,  bk  iii,  ch  1  I75a-177c,  ch  3  178d-180a, 
ch  10  185d-187a,  ch  24  203c-210a,  bk  iv,  ch 
1  213a-223d,  ch  6  230b-232c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations  253a-310d  esp  bk  ii, 
sect  i  256b, d,  sect  9  257d,  sect  11-12 
258a-c,  bk  iv,  sect  10  264c,  sect  24  265c-d, 
sect  32  266b-c,  sect  37  266d-267a,  sect  39 
267a,  bk  v,  sect  2  269a,  sect  6  269b-d,  sect 
10  270c-d,  sect  12  271a,  sect  15-16  271b-d, 
bk  vi,  sect  2  274a,  sect  51  279b-c,  bk  vii, 
sect  36  282b,  sect  44  282b-c,  sect  55  283b-c, 
bk  viii,  sect  i  285a-b,  sect  10  286b,  sect 
19  286d-287a,  sect  32  287d-288a,  sect  39 
288c,  sect  41  288d,  sect  51  289d-290a, 
bk  ix,  sect  1  291a-c,  sect  16  293a,  sect  42 
295c-296a,c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xi,  ch  16  331a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  qq 
1-5  609a-643d;  qq  18-21  693b.d-720a,c 


3a 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL  621 


21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvi  [52- 
1 14]  77b-78a;  xvn  [SaJ-xvm  [75]  79b  80c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  69d  76a; 
30a-81a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii 
xxviii,  sect  4*17  229b-232d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  114d  ll5a;  149d  150a; 
169b  [in  1] ;  1 73 b  l  74a  /  Lund.  Priti.  Metaphys¬ 
ic  of  Morals  253a-287d  esp  256a-261d,  263d 
264a,  282d-287d  /  Practical  Reason  291a-361d 
esp  297a-307d,  314d-321b,  325c,  337a-353a  / 
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics  365a- 
379d  esp  366d-373d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals ,  387b  /  Judgement ,  594d  [fn  1];  '595a-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism  445a-476a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  ii,  par 
129-140  45d-54a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  304a-319a  esp  304a- 
305a,  310a-3l9a 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death ,  757b-760a  esp  757d- 
758c,  759d-760a 

3<z.  Human  nature  and  the  determination  of  the 
good  for  man:  the  real  and  the  apparent 
good;  particular  goods  and  the  good  in 
general 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  7:15-25 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [587-631]  136b-c  / 
Philoctetes  [895-903]  190a 

7  Plato:  Charm  ides ,  2d-3b  esp  3a  /  Protagoras , 
57d-62d  /  Euthydemus ,  69a-71a;  74b-76b  / 

177d-178b  /  Gorgias ,  261a-270c;  282b- 
284b  /  Republic ,  bk  i-iv  295a-356a;  bk  viii, 
410a-c;  bk  ix,  421a-425b;  bk  x,  439b-441a,c 
/  Timaeus ,  474b-476b  /  Theaetetusy  528c- 
531a  /  Sophist ,  557b-d  /  Philebus ,  619d-620b  / 
Seventh  Letter ,  805d-806a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246aio-248a 
6]  329c-330d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980s4 
22-28]  499a;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1072^6-29]  602b 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals ,  ch  6  [700^5- 
29]  235d-236a  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  6  341b-342c; 
ch  7  [io97b22-io98ai9]  343a-c;  bk  i,  ch  13- 
bk  ii,  ch  6  347b-352d;  bk  iii,  ch  4  359a-c; 
ch  5  [iii4a22-ni5a3]  360b-361a;  bk  v,  ch  i 
[ii29bi-io]  376d-377a;  bk  vi,  ch  5  389a-c; 
bk  x,  ch  6-8  430d-434a  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[i253a2~38]  446b-d;  ch  5-6  447d-449b;  bk 
hi,  ch  6  [1278^5-29]  475d-476a;  bk  vii,  ch 
13  [t332a39-bi°]  537a-b;  ch  14  [i333ai7-37l 
538a-b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  6-7  602d-607d; 
ch  10  [i369bi9-27]  613a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [1— 61] 
15a-d;  bk  v  [1113-1135]  75c-d;  [1412-1435] 
79b-d;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  6  llOc-l  12b; 
ch  11  116d-118d;  ch  15  121c-d;  ch  27  132b- 
133b;  bk  iii,  ch  1  175a-177c;  ch  3  178d-180a; 
bk  iv,  ch  6  230b-232c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  9  257d; 
sect  ii  258a-b;  bk  iv,  sect  24  265c-d;  sect 
32  266b-c;  sect  39  267a;  bk  v,  sect  15-16 


271b  d;  bk  vi,  sect  15  274d;  bk  vii,  sect  20 
281b;  sect  55  283b  c;  bk  viii,  sect  i  285a  b; 
bk  ix,  sect  1  291a-c;  sect  42  295c  296a, c 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  121a  122b 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  iv,  267c 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  cii  43-44 
181b  182b  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  vii,  cii  26  334c  d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  29  34  78d 
80c  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xii,  cii  3  343d  344b; 
bk  xix,  cii  1-9  507a-516c  /  Christian  Doctrine , 
bk  1,  ch  38  635c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica ,  part  i,  q  12, 
a  1,  ans  50c  51c;  q  26,  a  2,  ans  150c  151a;  a 
4,  ans  and  rep  i  151c-152a,c;  q  59,  a  i,  ans 
306c-307b;  a  3,  ans  308b  309a;  a  4,  ans  309a- 
310a;  q  60,  a  5  313b-314c;  q  62,  a  i,  ans  317d- 
318c;  q  80,  a  2,  rep  2  428a-d;  q  82,  a  4,  rep  i 
434c-435c;  a  5,  ans  435c-436c;  q  92,  a  i,  ans 
488d-489d;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  541c-542a;  part 
i— ii,  QQ  1-5  609a-643d;  q  9,  a  6,  rep  3 
662a-d;  q  18  693b,d-703a;  q  19,  a  i,  rep  i 
703b-d;  q  22,  a  3,  rep  2  722d-723b;  q  34,  a  4 
771c-772b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  54, 
a  3  24c-25b;  qq  55-56  26a-35a;  q  63,  a  i  63a- 
64a;  q  71,  a  2  106d-107c;  q  91,  a  2  208d-209d; 
Q  94  220d-226b;  part  ii-ii,  q  29,  a  2,  rep  3 
531a-d;  a  3,  rep  i  531d-532c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvi  [85— 
1 14]  77d-78a;  xvii  [82]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61a-62c;  65a; 
96a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
65c-d 

25  Montaigne  '.Essays,  1 49b- d;  23 Id- 233a; 489b- 
490c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  iii,  sc  i  [103-134] 
48a-b  /  Measure  for  Measure ,  act  ii,  sc  iv 
[1-17]  184c-d/  Othello ,  act  ii,  sc  iii  [342-368] 
220c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  70d-71b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  pref,  423c-d;  prop 
18-28  428d-431c;  prop  31  432a-b;  prop  35, 
corol  1-2  433c-d;  appendix,  v  447c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  425-426  243b-244b;  430 
245a-247b;  438  251a;  463-468  255a-256a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  90a-d;  bk  i, 
ch  11,  sect  5-6  105a-c;  sect  13,  108b-c;  bk 
ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  52-53  191d-192b;  sect  55-56 
192c-193b;  sect  60-70  194a-197b  passim;  ch 
xxviii,  sect  ii  230c-231a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  257a-268a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  38c-40a;  41a-43b;  53b- 
54d;  82c-83b;  88b-89c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  343a-346d;  351c-352a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  169b  [fn  1]  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  253d-254d;  263d-264a; 
270c-d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  387d- 
388a  /  Judgement ,  584d-587a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  295d-296d  /  Representative 
Government ,  367a-369a  /  Utilitarianism ,  448a- 
455a;  456d-457b;  458b-464d 


622 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  lb  to  3b(  1) 


(3-  The  moral  theory  of  the  good:  the  distinction 
between  the  moral  and  the  metaphysical 
good.  3  a.  Human  nature  and  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  the  good  for  man:  the  real  and 
the  apparent  good;  particular  goods  and 
the  good  in  general .) 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  130b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  78 
128c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  166b; 
182d-184d;  part  i,  236a-c;  part  ii,  280b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Die 36a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  310a-317d  passim, 
esp  311d-313a;  592d 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  301d  [fn  3] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  689b 

52  Dostoevsky  :  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v,  127b- 
137c;  bk  vi,  164b-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  198b-209b  esp  198b-200a, 
202a-204b,  208b-209b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis, ,  20c-d  /  General  Introduction ,  624a- 
625b  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents , 
767a;  785c-802a,c  esp  786d-787a,  788d-789b, 
792b-c,  800c-801b 

3 b.  Goodness  in  the  order  of  freedom  and  will 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  7:15-25 
9  Aristotle: Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  1-5  355b,d-361a; 
bk  iv,  ch  9  [ii28b20~3o]  376a, c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses  105a-245a,c  esp  bk  i, 
ch  i  105a-106c,  ch  ii  116d-118d,  ch  18  124a- 
125a,  ch  22  127c-128c,  ch  25  129d-131b, 
ch  29  134d-138a,  bk  ii,  ch  5  142c-144a,  bk 
iii,  ch  2  177c-178d,  ch  10  185d-187a,  ch  18 
192a-c,  ch  26  210d-213a,c,  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a- 
223d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations  253a-310d  esp  bk  iv, 
sect  37  266d-267a,  sect  39  267a,  bk  v,  sect 
2  269a,  sect  10  270c-d,  bk  vi,  sect  2  274a, 
bk  vii,  sect  44  282b-c,  bk  viii,  sect  32  287d- 
288a,  sect  41  288d,  sect  51  289d-290a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  viii,  par  19-24 
58b-60a  /  City  of  God,  bkxii,  ch  1-9  342b, d- 
348b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  48, 
a  6,  ans  264a-d;  q  49,  a  i,  rep  i  264d-265d; 
q  82,  aa  1-2  431d-433c;  q  83,  a  1  436d-438a; 
q  87,  a  4,  rep  2  468b-d;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  541c- 
542a;  part  i-ii,  q  10,  aa  2-4  663d-666a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  79, 
aa  i-2  156b-158a;  q  80,  aa  1-3  159d-162b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvi 
[58-129]  77c-78a;  xvm  [19-75]  80a-c;  xxi  [40- 
72]  85b-d;  paradise,  iv  [64-114]  lllb-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  87c;  93c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  69d-81c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iii,  50b  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  axiom  vii  132a;  228a-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [80-134]  137a- 


138a;  bk  v  [224-245]  180a-b;  [506-543]  186a- 
187a;  bk  ix  [342-375]  254b-255b  /  Areop - 
agitica,  390b-391a:  394b-395b 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  337d-338a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  164a-171a;  236d-237a  / 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  253d-254d; 
256a-261d;  265b;  271d-287d  /  Practical  Rea¬ 
son,  298a-300a;  304a-d;  310b-311d;  315b-c; 
318c-d;  331c-337a,c  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Ele¬ 
ments  of  Ethics,  378a-b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  391a-c;  393d  /  Science  of  Right ,  397b- 
398a;  400b,d-402a;  403b-404a  /  Judgement, 
571c-572a;  605d-606b  [fn  2] 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  112a-b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  8  14c; 
part  11,  par  1 14  42a-b;  part  iii,  par  142-157 
55a-57d;  additions,  68  126d-127a;  82-86 
129a-c;  92-100  131d-133a 
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  311a-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
127b-137c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  794a-808a  esp  797b-798a, 
799a-b,  807a-808a;  816a-819a  esp  817a-818a; 
825a-827a  esp  827a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams ,  164d-168d; 
386c-387a 

3^(1)  The  prescriptions  of  duty 

5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  [373-430]  228b-d 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  10  185d- 
187a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vi,  sect  2  274a; 
bk  vii,  sect  44  282b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  32  287d- 
288a 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  121a-122b 
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  14-16 
520a-522a;  ch  19  523b-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71a-76a  esp 
74b-76a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iii,  48b-49d; 
part  vi,  62d-63a 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  372b-373b  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393 b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114d-115a;  149d-150a; 
190c-d;  236d-237a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  253d-254d;  256a-b;  260a-261d;  265c- 
266d;  268c-270c;  272a-b;  273d-287d  esp277d- 
279d,  281c-282d  /  Practical  Reason,  297a- 
314d  esp  307d-314d;  321b-329a  esp  325c; 
330d-331a;  338c-355d  /  Pref  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics,  366d-367a;  368b-369a; 
373d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383a- 
390a, c  esp  383a-384d,  388b-c,  389a-390a,c; 
391a-c;  392b-393a  /  Science  of  Right,  397c- 
398a;  416b-417b  /  Judgement,  571c-572a; 
593a-d;  595a-d;  599b-d;  605d-606b  [fn  2] 

43  Mii  l:  Liberty,  296b-c/  Utilitarianism,  446a-d; 
453c-d;  458b-459b;  468b-469b;  469d-470b; 
475a-476a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  36 
21b-c;  par  79  33a-c;  part  ii,  par  129-135  45d- 
47d  esp  par  133  47a;  part  iii,  par  148-149 


3b(2)  to  3c  Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  KYIL  623 


56a  b:  additions,  84  129b;  86  129c  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History,  part  iv,  362c  d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  304a;  310d;  313d- 
314a;  592b-c 

3^(2)  The  good  will:  its  conditions  and  conse¬ 
quences 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  262a-263c  /  Timaeus ,  474b  d 

/  bk  v,  688d-689a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [126*30-37] 
175c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  CH1-5  355b, d  361a; 
bk  iv,  ch  9  [ii28b2o-3o]  376a, c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  i  105a-106c; 
ch  ii  116d-118d;  ch  18  124a-125a;  ch  22 
127c-128c;  ch  25  129d-131b;  ch  29  134d- 
138a;  bk  ii,  ch  5  142c-144a;  ch  13  152c-153d; 
ch  16  156b-158d;  ch  23  170a-172d;  bk  iii, 
ch  10  185d-187a;  bk  iv,  ch  10  238d-240d 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  35,  177d- 
178a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  3-9  343d* 
348b;  bk  xiv,  ch  ii  385d-387a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  4,  rep  3  25d-26c;  q  48,  aa  5-6  263a-264d; 
q  49,  a  1,  rep  1  264d-265d;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  4, 
rep  5  625a-626b;  q  4,  a  4  631d-632c;  q  9,  a  6, 
rep  5  662a-d;  qq  18-21  693b,d-720a,c  esp  q 
19  703a-711d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xv  [1— 12] 
128b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  62d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  13d-14c;  115b-119d; 
124c-125a;  146b-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  72a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ix  [342-375]  254b- 
255b  /  Samson  Agonistes  [1334-1379]  368b- 
369b 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  372a-373b  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  396b-d;  400a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  169b  [fn  1]  /  Fund.  Pnn. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253d-254d;  256a-257d 
esp  256a-b,  257c-d;  260a-261d;  265c;  268c- 
270c;  272a-b;  279b,d-287d  esp  281c-282d  / 
Practical  Reason ,  297a-319b  esp  307d-314d, 
316a-3l7d;  321b-329a;  330c-331a  /  Intro. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386b-387a,c;  388b-c; 
392b-393a  /  Judgement,  595a-d;  605d-606b 
[fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  453c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  112a-b;  145c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  ii,  par  105 
40a;  par  114  42a-b;  additions,  90  130b-d 

M 

3 c.  The  good  and  desire:  goodness  causing 
movements  of  desire  and  desire  causing 
estimations  of  goodness 

New  Testament:  Romans,  7:15-25 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  105c-d 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  21b-25a  /  Phaedrus,  120b-c; 
128a-d  /  Symposium,  164c-165c  /  Meno,  177d- 
178b  /  Philebus ,  614a  /  Laws,  bk  v,  689b 


8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [1072* 
26-29]  602b  /  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  io-ii  665d  667a 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  6  23 5d- 
236b  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  cii  i  [1094*1  5]  339a; 
ch  2  [1094*17  *22]  339b;  bk  iii,  cii  4  359a  c; 
bk  v,  cii  1  [ii29bi-io]  376d  377a;  bk  vi,  cii 
2  387d  388b;  bk  ix,  cii  9  [1170*15-25]  423d- 
424a;  bk  x,  cii  2  426c  427b  esp  [1 172^35- 
1173*4]  427a;  ch  6  [ii76*3o-b8]  430d  431a  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  6-7  602d  607d;  cn  10 
[1569*3-4]  612b;  [i569b7~i2]  612d;  [1 369bi 9 - 
27] 613a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d  170a 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  12 la- 122b 

17  Plotinus;  Third  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  3  102a  c; 
cii  10  105d-106b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch 
19  332a-b;  tr  viii,  ch  7,  345d;  ch  13,  349b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5,  a  i, 
ans  23c-24a;  a  2,  rep  4  24b-25a;  a  4,  ans  25d- 
26c;  a  6,  ans  27c-28b;  q6,  a  1,  rep  2  28b  d; 
q  20,  a  2,  ans  121b-122a;  part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  8 
642d-643d;  q  8  655a-657c;  q  ii,  a  3  667d- 
668d;  q  12,  aa  2-4  670b-672a;  q  22,  a  3, 
rep  2  722d-723b;  q  23  723c-727a;  q  27,  a  i 
737b-d;  q  41,  a  3  799c-800b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  58, 
a  4  esp  rep  3  44a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  xvi  [85-114]  77d-78a;  xvii  [82]- 
xviii  [75]  79b-80c  esp  xvm  [19-39]  80a-b; 
paradise,  1  [103-142]  107b-d;  iv  [ii5]-v  [12] 
llld-112b;  vii  [139-144]  116c;  xxvi  [1-69] 
145d-146c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61d-62a;  96a-b; 
part  iv,  272c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  149b-d;  297d-300c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  67a-b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iii,  50b  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies,  axiom  vii  132a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d: 
part  iii,  prop  6-9  398d-399c  esp  prop  9, 
schol  399c;  prop  12-13  400b-d;  prop  39, 
schol  408b-d;  prop  54  413a-b;  part  iv, 
pref-def  2  422b,d-424a;  prop  8-13  426b- 
428a;  prop  19  429d;  prop  27-28  431b-c;  prop 
63  443d-444a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  6  177a-b:  ch  xxi,  sect  29-54  184d  192c 
passim;  sect  61-62  194b-d;  sect  70  197a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  338c-339a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
259a-c;  264d-265b  /  Practical  Reason ,  293c-d 
[fn  3];  298a-300a;  301a;  304a-d;  330c-331a; 
341c-342a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
385a-c  /  Judgement,  605d-606b  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  461c-464d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  123 
44a-b;  additions,  78  128c-d  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  166b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  810b-811a 

54  Freud;  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  792b-c; 
801d 


624 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  The  moral  theory  of  the  good:  the  distinction 
between  the  moral  and  the  metaphysical 
good.) 

3 d.  Pleasure  as  the  good,  a  good,  or  feeling 
good 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  59a-62d  /  Gorgias ,  275b- 
230d  /  Republic ,  bk  vi,  384b-d;  bk  ix,  421a- 
425b  /  Philebus  609a-639a,c  /  Laws ,  bk  ii, 
656d-658b;  660a-d;  bk  v,  689c-690c 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  40  68b  / 
Topics,  bk  hi,  ch  2  [117^3-25]  163d;  ch  3 
[n8b27~36]  165d-166a;  ch  6  [ii9a37~bi]  166d; 
bk  iv,  ch  4  [124^5-20]  172d;  [i24b7~i4]  173b; 
bk  vi,  ch  8  [i46bi3— 19]  200c;  bk  viii,  ch  9 
[i6obi6-23]  218a-b  /  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3 
[246b2o-247ai9]  330a-b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii, 
ch  7  [ic>72bi3-29]  6$2d-603a  /  Sow/,  bk  iii, 
ch  7  [43ia8-b9]  663c-664a 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals ,  ch  6  [700b23~ 
29]  236a  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i095bi4~22]  340d; 
ch  8  [1099^-30]  344c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  3  350a-c; 
bk  iii,  ch  4  359a-c;  bk  vii,  ch  4  398a-399a 
esp  [ii48a22-b4]398c-d;  ch  11-14  403c-406a,c; 
bk  x,  ch  1-5  426a-430d  /  Politics ,  bk  viii,  ch 
5  [I339blI~3^1  545a-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  6 
[i362b5-9]  603b;  ch  7  [i364b23~27]  606c; 
[i365bi  1— 13]  607d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [14-21] 
15a-b;  bk  v  [1412-1436]  79b-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii  150a- 
151b;  bk  iii,  ch  24  203c-210a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  11-12 
258a-c;  bk  vi,  sect  51  279b-c;  bk  vii,  sect  27 
281d;  sect  64  284a-b;  bk  viii,  sect  10  286b; 
sect  19  286d-287a;  sect  39  288c;  sect  47 
289b-c;  bk  ix,  sect  i  291a-c;  bk  x,  sect  34- 
35  301a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  12  17d  / 
Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  15,  74d-75a  /  Sixth 
Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  26  334c-d;  ch  29-30  335d- 
336d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  20  225b- 
226a;  bk  x,  ch  18  310b-d;  bk  xix,  ch  1-3 
507a-511a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5,  a  6, 
ans  and  rep  2  27c-28b;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  6, 
rep  1  614a-c;  a  7,  ans  614c-615a;  q  2,  a  6 
619d-620d;  q  3,  a  4  625a-626b;  q  4,  aa  1-2 
629d-631a;  q  ii  666b,d-669b;  q  27,  a  3,  ans 
738c-739c;  q  30,  a  4,  rep  3  751c-752b;  qq  31- 
34  752b-772b;  Q  39  790a-792d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  qq 
28-29  527b-533a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvii 
[127-139]  79d;  xviii  [19-39]  80a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61d-62c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  28a-d;  70d-72a;  235d- 
237d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71a-74a 


3  d  to  3e 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  39,  schol 
408b-d;  part  iv,  prop  8  426b-c;  prop  41-43 
437a-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [877-945]  171b- 
173a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  1-2  176b-c;  ch  xxi,  sect  43  188d;  sect 
55-56  192c-193b;  sect  63  194d-195a;  ch 
xxviii,  sect  5  229c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  173b-174a  /  Fund .  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  259a- b;  265  b  /  Practical 
Reason,  298a-300a;  304a-307d;  314d-319b 
esp  315c;  330c-331a;  338c-355d  esp  341c- 
342a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387b-388a 
/  Judgement ,  478a-479d;  584d-587a;  588b 
[fn  2];  591b-592a;  594c-596c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism  445a-476a,c  passim,  esp 
447b-457b,  461c-464d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  216c;  378a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  316b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iv, 
88d;  bk  xi,  343d-344a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  94a-b;  808b-814b  esp 
810a,  812b-814b 

54  Freud:  Instincts,  418d-420b  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents,  772a-c;  792b-c 

3e.  Right  and  wrong:  the  social  incidence  of 
the  good;  doing  or  suffering  good  and 
evil 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  18:17-33  /  Exodus, 
20:12-17;  22:21-28;  23:1-9  /  Leviticus,  19:9- 
1  8  >33-3 6  /  Numbers,  15:15/  Deuteronomy,  5:16- 
21;  10:17-19  /  I  Samuel,  24;  26— (Z))  /  Kings, 
24 ;  26  /  Proverbs,  3  ^7-35 ;  12 :2i ;  15  :i ;  17 .*13  / 
Isaiah,  3:13-15;  10:1-3  — (D)  Isaias,  3:13-15; 
10:1-3  /  Ezekiel,  18:5-22— (D)  Ezechiel,  18:5- 
22  /  Hosea,  4:1-3;  7:1-7— (D)  Osee,  4:1-3; 
7:1-7  /  Amos,  2:6-8;  4:1-2;  8:4-7  /  Micah , 
6:8 — (D)  Micheas,  6:8  /  Zechariah ,  7:9-10— 
( D )  Zacharias ,  7:9-10 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  1  .*1-2:9;  4:1-20— (D)  OT, 
Tobias,  1:1-2:95  4:1-20  /  Ecclesiasticus,  7-8; 
12-14  esP  I2:3»  i4:5-7;  28;  34:21-22 —(D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  7-8;  12-14  esp  12:3,  14:5-7; 
28;  34:25-27  /  Susanna— (D)  OT,  Daniel ,  13 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  5-7  passim,  esp  7:12 
/  Luke,  6:27-38  /  Romans,  12:17-21  /  I  Corin¬ 
thians,  6:1-1 1  /  7  Peter ,  2:13-21;  3:8-18 
5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d  esp 
[941-1093]  50b-51d  /  Agamemnon  52a-69d  esp 
[1331-1673]  66b-69d  /  Choephoroe  70a-80d 
esp  [235-651]  72c-76b  /  Eumenides  81a-91d 
5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  / 
Oedipus  at  Colonus  [255-291]  116c-d;  [1152- 
1207]  124d-125b  /  Antigone  131a-142d  /  Ajax 
143a-155a-c  esp  [1045-1421]  152a-l55a,c  / 
Electra  156a-169a,c  /  Philoctetes  182a-195a,c 
5  Euripides:  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  /  Suppliants 
I1 95-250]  260a-c  /  Electra  327a-339a,c  esp 
[880-1359]  335a-339a,c  /  Phoenician  Maidens 
378a-393d  esp  [260-645]  380b'383d,  [1628- 


r,25 


3<?  to  3/  Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  FA  IL 


1684]  392b-d  /  Orestes  [491  715]  399a-401a  / 
Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a -439d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  iik  iii,  93c-d;  nk  vi, 
201d  202c;  bk  vii,  217d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  v,  505b  c 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  203c  204c;  206d  /  Cr/ito, 

2l3d-214a;  215d-216c  /  Gorgias ,  262a  267c  / 
Republic  295a-441a,c  csp  bk  i  ii,  300b  315a, 
bk  x,  43 6c -43 7c  /  kk  ii,  656d  658b; 

bk  v,  687c-689a;  bk  ix,  747b  d  /  Seventh  Let¬ 
ter,  805  d -806a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v  376a-387a,c  /  Poetics , 
cii  25  [1461^4-9]  697b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  28  133b 
134d;  bk  11,  ch  10  148c-150a;  bk  iii,  ch  3 
178d-180a;  ch  18  192a-c;  cii  24  203c-210a; 
bk  iv,  ch  1  213a-223d;  ch  5  228a-230b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
sect  16  259a;  bk  iv,  sect  10  264c;  bk  v,  sect 
6  269b-d;  bk  vii,  sect  36  282b;  bk  viii,  sect 
55  290b;  bk  ix,  sect  4  292a;  sect  16  293a; 
sect  38  295a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  19  5d  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  36  634d-635b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  21, 
a  1  124b-125b;  part  i— ii,  q  21,  aa  3-4  718d- 
720a, c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  59, 
aa  4-5  48c-49d;  q  60,  a  2  50d-51b;  q  97,  a  i, 
rep  3  236a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xi  15a-16b; 
purgatory,  xvi  [58-129]  77c-78a;  xvii  [91- 
139]  79b-d 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus,  par  30-31,  413b- 
414a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  78b-c;  86b;  part 
ii,  149b-c;  part  iv,  272c 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  v  12d- 
14a  /  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iii,  sc  i  [223-281]  49c- 
50a  /  Richard  11,  act  ii,  sc  iii  [140-147]  334b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  arid  Cressida,  act  ii, 
sc  11  [163-188]  115b-c;  act  v,  sc  iii  [16-24] 
137b  /  King  Lear ,  act  iv,  sc  ii  [2-68]  270b- 
271b  /  Henry  VIII ,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [428-450] 
573c-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  68b-73a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  74b-c;  81d- 
82a;  93c-94a 

32  Milton:  Co/ww/33a-56b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  5-6  105a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  xxviii,  sect  9-13 
230b-231c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  llc-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  351b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  149d-l50a  /  Practical 
Reason,  306b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
391d-392a  /  Science  of  Right ,  397a-399c; 
400b,d-401b 

43  Federalist:  number  4 r ,  132b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  302d-323a,c  passim  /  Utilitari¬ 
anism,  448a;  452b-455a;  455c-456a;  465c- 
471b  passim 


44  Boswell:  Johnson,  315b  c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  81 
34c  d;  par  89  35c  d;  par  92  35d  36a;  pari  ii, 
par  1 1 2  41c  d;  par  129  132  45d  47a;  par  i$8 
48c  d;  par  140  49b  54a;  part  iii,  par  218 
72c  d;  par  223  73c  d;  par  23 3  75d;  additions, 
59  I25c-d;  71  127b  c;  89  129d  130a;  92-100 
131d  133a;  138  139a  b  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
intro,  165c-166b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Did \,  292a  297a;  375a- 
376b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  3l0a-316a;  317c-d; 
3l9d;  322c;  592d  593a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  194a- 195a; 
214c  216d;  bk  viii,  304b-305a;  bk  xiv,  611a-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  33c 
34b;  bk  iii,  73a-b;  bk  v,  123b  127b;  bk  vi, 
153d  157b;  165c;  I68c-169c;  bk  xii,  398a-d 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  792a- 
793a 

3/.  The  sources  of  evil  in  human  life 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3  /  Exodus ,  23:8  / 
Deuteronomy ,  16:19;  30:15-20  esp  30:15  /  Job 
J  Ecclesiastes,  9:3  /  Isaiah,  45:7 —(D)  Isaias, 
45  7  /  Lamentations,  3  38  /  Amos,  3 :6 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:12-16;  2  esp 
2:23-24;  14:27— (D)  OT,  Bool{  of  Wisdom , 
1:12-16;  2  esp  2:23-25;  14:27  /  Ecclesiasticus , 
8:2;  10:9;  11  :i 6 ;  14:1-10;  15:10-20;  20:29; 
27  :i-2 ;  3 1 :5 -1 1  —  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  8  a-3 ; 
10:9-10;  11  :i6;  14:1-10;  15:10-21;  20:31; 

27:1-2;  31:5-11 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:13,19-24;  13:24- 
30,36—43,47—51 ;  15:10-20;  16:26;  19:16-30  / 
Marl{,  1:13;  4:1-20;  7:14-23;  8:36;  10:21-30  / 
Lube,  4:1—13;  8:1-15;  9:255  12:13-21;  16:1—13; 
18:22-30  /  Romans,  5:12-19;  7:15-25  /  /  Co¬ 
rinthians,  6:10  /  Ephesians ,  5:5/  //  Thessaloni- 
ans,  2:1-12— (D)  II  Thessalonians,  2:1-11  / 
I  Timothy,  6:9-10  /  James,  1:12-15  /  I  Peter , 
5:8-9  /  /  John,  2:7-23  esp  2:15-17  /  Revelation, 
12 —(D)  Apocalypse,  12 
5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [284-308]  133c-d 
5  Aristophanes:  Plutus  [77-185]  630a~63la 
7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a- 7 la  /  Republic,  bk  ii, 
318c-319a;  bk  iv,  354d-355c;  bk  vi,  377a- 
379c;  bk  vii,  389d-390b;  bk  x,  431b-434a  / 
Timacus,  466a  b  /  Theaetetus,  530b-531a  / 
Laws,  bk  iii,  669a-670c;  bk  viii,  733a-734a; 
bk  ix,  751b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [31—93] 
30b-31b;  bk  v  [1412-1435]  79b  d;  bk  vi  [1—42] 
80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  25  129d- 
131b;  bk  11,  ch  22  167d-170a;  cii  26  174c-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
bk  vii,  sect  22  281b;  bk  ix,  sect  42  295c- 
296a, c;  bk  xii,  sect  12  308b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  51b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  5,  29a-c/ 
Second  Ennead,  tr  tx,  ch  13  73d  74b  /  Third 


626 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  If  to  4  b 


(3.  The  moral  theory  of  the  good:  the  distinction 
between  the  moral  and  the  metaphysical 
good.  3 f.  The  sources  of  evil  in  human  life.) 
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  4-10  84c-88b;  ch  14-18 
89b-93a  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  hi,  ch  16  150c-d; 
tr  iv,  ch  18, 167b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  9-18  lOd- 
13a;  bk  vii,  par  4  44b-c;  bk  viii,  par  22-24 
59a-60a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  24,  283a-b; 
bk  x,  ch  21  311c-312a;  bk  xii,  ch  21-22 
357a-c;  bk  xiii,  ch  13-15  366a-d;  bk  xiv, 
ch  10-15  385b-390a;  bk  xix,  ch  13  519a-520a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  17, 
a  1,  ans  lOOd-lOld;  q  48,  a  6,  ans  264a-d;  q 
49,  a  1,  rep  3  264d-265d;  q  63,  a  9,  rep  i 
333b-d;  q  114,  a  3  583b-d;  part  i-ii,  q  20, 
a  1  712a-d;  q  21,  a  2  718a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  qq 

75- 84  137c-178a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  viii  [65T1X 
[103]  llc-13b;  xxiii  [139-144]  34c;  xxvii  [55- 
136]  40a-41b;  xxxiv  [28-36]  51c;  purgatory, 
v  [85-129]  59d-60c;  viii  [1-108]  64a-65b;  xvi 
[58-129]  77c-78a;  xvn  [82]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c; 
xxviii  [91-96]  97a;  paradise,  vii  115a-116c; 
viii  [91-148]  117d-118c;  ix  [127-142]  120a; 
xiii  [52-87]  126a-b;  xvm  [115-136]  134d- 
135a;  xxix  [49-66]  150d-151a 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [2453-2469]  200a-b 
/  Prologue  of  Pardoner's  Tale  [12,263-268] 
372a  /  Pardoner's  Tale  [12,778-828]  380b-381b 
/  Tale  of  Melibeus ,  par  18,  408a;  par  76-77, 
430b-431a  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par  20  508b-509a; 
par  57-59  528b-529a;  par  62-64  530a-531a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  153b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  218c-219a;  231d-238d; 
326b-327b;  381b-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Juliet ,  act  ii, 
sc  hi  [15-30]  296c 

27  Shakespeare:  Timon  of  Athens ,  act  iv, 
sc  hi  [1-44]  410c-411a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  17d-18a; 
80b-81a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d; 
PART  IV,  APPENDIX,  VI  447c-d 

32  Milton:  Comus  33a-56b  esp  [331-489]  40b- 
44a  /  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [157-168]  97a;  [209- 
220]  98a;  bk  ii  [496-505]  122a;  [629-870] 
125a-130a;  [890-1009]  130b-133a;  bk  hi  [56- 
134]  136b-138a;  bk  iv  [505-535]  163b-164a; 
bk  Vii  [519-549]  228b-229a;  bk  viii  [316-337] 
239a-b;  bk  ix  [679-784]  262a-264b;  bk  xi  [84- 
98]  301a;  bk  xi  [334EBK  xii  [649]  306b-333a 
/  Samson  Agonistes  [38-59]  340b;  [521-540] 
351a  b  /  Areopagitica ,  394b-395b;  409b-410a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  116a-b;  140a;  162a 
/  Pen  sees,  850  340a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  58-70  193d-197b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 

76- 81  485a-487a 


38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  338b-c;  347d-348a; 
350c;  351c-352a;  360c-361c;  363a-366d 

40  Gibbon  :  Decline  and  Fall ,  81b-c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  451b-452b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  18 
16c-d;  part  ii,  par  139-140  48d-54a;  addi¬ 
tions,  14  118c-d;  90  130b-d  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  part  i,  237d-238c;  part  iv,  346a-c; 
354a-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dickj  3b-4a;  204a-205a; 
209b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  214c-215a  esp 
215a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  iii, 
53b-54b;  bk  v,  122c-123b;  130b-135d;  bk  vi, 
164b-166a;  bk  xi,  307c-310c;  344a-d 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  531d-532a  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents  767a-802a,c 
esp  787a-788b 

4.  Divisions  of  the  human  good 

4a.  Sensible  and  intelligible  goods 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a  /  Phaedrus,  120a- 
122a  /  Symposium ,  162d-167d  /  Phaedo , 
224a-c;  230c;  242c-243a  /  Republic ,  bk  vi, 
386b-d;  bk  vii,  397c-398b;  bk  ix,  423b- 
424d  /  Laws,  bk  v,  689c-690c;  bk  viii,  735c- 
736c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  6-9  24a- 
26a  passim;  tr  viii,  ch  2  27c-d  /  Second  En¬ 
nead,  tr  ix,  ch  15-18  74d-77d  /  Third  Ennead, 
tr  v,  ch  7  104a-105a  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch 
12-13  234a-235b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  20  24b-c; 
par  24  25b-c;  bk  vi,  par  26  42d-43a;  bk  vii, 
par  23  50b-c;  bk  x,  par  43-66  82a-88b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  63, 
a  4,  ans  328b-329a;  q  80,  a  2,  rep  2  428a-d; 
q  82,  a  5,  ans  435c-436c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a 
6,  ans  619d-620d;  q  3,  a  4,  ans  625a-626b; 
q  4,  a  2,  rep  2  630b-631a;  q  ii,  a  2,  ans 
667b-d;.  q  13,  a  2,  ans  673c-674c;  q  30, 
a  1,  ans  749a-d;  q  31,  a  5  755c-756c;  a  6, 
ans  756d-757c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  362b-c 

4b.  Useful  and  enjoyable  goods:  good  for  an 
end  and  good  in  itself 

5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [153-171]  16d-17a 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  22c-24a  /  Protagoras,  60d-62d  / 
Euthydemus,  69a-71a;  74b-76b  /  Meno,  183d- 
184b  /  Gorgias,  262a-264b;  266d-267a  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  i,  298a-299a;  bk  ii,  310c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  15  [io6ai— 9]  149d; 
bk  iii,  ch  1  [n6a28-b7]  162d-163a;  [n6b37- 
ii7aa]  163c;  ch  2  [1 1 8a6— 1 6]  164d-165a;  ch  3 
[n8b27-36]  165d-166a;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [124^5-20] 
172d;  bk  vi,  ch  9  [i47a33~bi]  201b-c;  ch  12 
[i49b3 1—39]  204b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [i53b36-i54a 
2]  209b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  2  [ioi3a32-b3] 
533c;  [ioi3b25-28]  533d-534a 


4c  to  4 d 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL  627 


9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  cii  i  2  339a  d;  cii 
5  [1096*5-10]  341a-b;  ch  6  [1096^-26]  341d 
342a;  ch  7  [i097ai5~b22]  342c-343a;  ch  9 
[i099b25~32]  345b;  bk  viii,  ch  2  [ii55bi6-22] 
407a-b;  bk  x,  ch  6  [ii76*3o-b8]  430d-431a  / 
Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  1  [  1 3 2 3 **2 3  — b  1 3 ]  527a-c; 
ch  13  [1332*10-25]  536d;  cii  15  [1334*12  >7] 
539a-b;  bk  viii,  ch  2-3  542b  543d  passim  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [i355a39~b8]  594d;  ch  5 
[1361*12-24]  601c-d;  ch  6-7  602d-607d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  14,  189c  d; 
ch  24  203c-210a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  3-4  7c-8c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  9-18  lOd- 
13a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  4  266d  267c; 
ch  8-9  270a-27la;  bk  xix,  ch  1-5  507a-514b; 
ch  17-20  522b-524a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i, 
ch  35  634c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  5,  a  6 
27c-28b;  q  62,  a  9,  rep  2  324a-325b;  part  i-ii, 
q  2,  a  1  615d-616c;  q  3,  a  1,  ans  622c-623a; 
q  7»  a  2,  rep  i  652d-653c;  q  8,  aa  2-3  656a- 
657c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  62a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  27c-d; 
71a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  v  447c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  63  194d-195a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  538a-539a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  236d-237a  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  256a-b;  257c-d;  266a- 
267d;  268b;  271c-279d  esp  273d-277b  / 
Practical  Reason ,  314d-315c;  327d-329a  / 
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  367c  / 
/fl/ro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  387b-388a  / 
Judgement ,  477b-c;  478a-479d;  586a-b;  591b- 
592d;  595a-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  446d-448a;  461c-464d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  183 

64a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  267a-268b 

53  James: Psychology,  725b-726a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  779d- 
780b 

4c.  Goods  of  the  body  and  goods  of  the  soul 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  40b-41a  /  Symposium , 

162d-167d  /  Mctzo,  178c-d  /  Apology,  205d- 
206d;  209b-212a,c  /  Cr//o,  215a-d  /  Phaedo, 
224a-c  /  Gorgias,  260a-270c  /  Republic ,  bk  i, 
295d-296c;  309b-310b;  bk  iii,  334b-339a;  bk 
ix,  421a-425b  /  Timaeus,  474b-476b  /  Sophist, 
556d-558d  /  bk  i,  643c-d;  bk  ii,  656d- 

658b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246*10- 
248*6]  329c-330d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  7  [i097b23~i098* 
17]  343a-c  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  i  [i323*22-b2i] 
527a-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i36obi9-i36i*i2] 
601a-c;  [i36ib3~27]  602a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1-61] 
15a-d 


12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  20  126c- 127b; 
bk  iv,  cn  1  213a  223d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iv  12b  19b  csp 
cn  2  7  12d  16a,  cn  14-16  18a  19b;  tr  vii,  ch 
3  26d  27a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  43  66  82a- 
88b  /  City  of  God ,  bk  i,  cii  ii  19  136d  142a; 
bk  viii,  cii  8  270a  d;  bk  xv,  cii  22  416a  c;  bk 
xix,  cn  1-3  507a-511a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i  ii,  q  2, 
aa  5  7  618d  621c;  q  3,  a  3  624b  625a;  q  31, 
a  5  755c-756c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi  [85- 
1 1 4]  77d-78a;  xxx  [55)-xxxi  [90]  100a  lOld 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  62c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iv, 
234a-235a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  538a- d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  41d-42a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  263c- d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  338c-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  448a-450a;  471a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  378a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  BKv,130b- 
132b;  bk  vi,  164b-165a 

53  James:  Psychology,  198b-199b 

4d.  Intrinsic  and  external  goods:  intrinsic 
worth  and  extrinsic  value 

7  Plato:  Apology,  206a-d 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  8  [i098bi2— 19] 
344a;  bk  vii,  ch  13  [1  i53bi3~24]  405a;  bk  ix, 
ch  1  [ii63b3i-ii64*i3]416b,d;cH  9423a-424b; 
bk  x,  ch  8  432d-434a  esp  [ii78b33~i  179*16] 
433c-d  /  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  ii  [1295^-34] 
495c-496a;  bk  vii,  ch  i  527a-d;  ch  13  [1332* 
18-27]  536d-537a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5  600d- 
602d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1-61] 
15a-d;  bk  v  [1113-1135]  75c-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  16  156b- 
158d;  bk  iii,  ch  20  192d-193d;  ch  24  203c- 
210a;  bk  iv,  ch  4  225a-228a;  ch  10  238d-240d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vi,  sect  51  279b-c; 
bk  vii,  sect  3  279d-280a 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  74c-75c  /  Pericles,  121a- 
122b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  10  lla-b  / 
City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  10  135b-136c;  bk  viii, 
ch  8  270a-d;  bk  xv,  ch  22  416a-c;  bk  xix,  ch 
3,  510c;  ch  20  523d-524a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  103, 
a  2,  rep  1-2  529a-530a;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  aa  1-4 
615d-618d  esp  a  4,  ans  618a-d;  q  4,  aa  5-7 
632c-636a  esp  a  7,  ans  635b-636a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [1-66]  9c- 
10b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  73b-c;  93b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  107a-112d  esp  108c-109c; 
126b-128c;  300c-306a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  74b-c;  81d- 
82a 


628 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  Divisions  of  the  human  good.  Ad.  Intrinsic  and 
external  goods:  intrinsic  worth  and  ex¬ 
trinsic  value.') 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  462  255a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  v,  sect  37  33a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  538a-539a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  263c-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256b; 
274d-275b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 387d- 
388a  /  Judgement,  591b-592a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  462c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  349a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  45 
23c-d;  par  49  24c-25a;  par  63-65  28b-29a;  par 
67-69  29c-31a;  additions,  29  121c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  194d 

53  James  :  Psychology,  826a 

4e.  Individual  and  common  goods 

7  Plato:  Crito  213a-219a,c  /  Republic ,  bk  iv, 
342a- d;  bk  v,  364c-365d  /  Critias,  480a  / 
Statesman,  588a- b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  10  [1075s 
11-24]  605d-606a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  8  [ii4ib28-ii42a 
1 1]  390d-391a  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1252*1-6] 
445a;  bk  ii,  ch  1-5  455b,d-460a;  bk  hi,  ch  6-7 
475d-477a;  bk  iv,  ch  ii  [i295a25-bi]  495b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  1,  ch  19  125b-126c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  4  260b- 
261a;  bk  vii,  sect  5  280a  b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  60, 
a  5,  ans  313b-314c;  Q  65,  a  2,  ans  340b-341b; 
q  92,  a  1,  rep  1,3  488d-489d;  q  96,  a  4  512d- 
513c;  part  1— 11,  q  1,  a  5,  ans  613a-614a; 
aa  7-8  614c-615c;  Q  19,  a  10,  ans  710b-711d; 
q  21,  aa  3-4  718d-720a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  2  206b-207a;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  207a-c; 
a  4,  ans  207d-208b;  q  91,  a  5,  ans  211c-212c; 
a  6,  rep  3  212c-213c;  q  93,  a  i,  rep  i  215b, d- 
216c;  q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d-223a;  a  3,  rep  i 
223a-c;  q  95,  a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  96,  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  3  232b-233a;  a  4,  ans  233a-d;  q 
97,  a  4  238b-239b;  q  ioo,  a  2,  ans  252b-253a; 
a  8,  ans  and  rep  3  259d-261a;  q  hi,  a  5,  rep 
1  355d-356c;  part  ii-ii,  q  39,  a  2,  rep  3  575b- 
576b;  q  187,  a  3,  rep  1,3  666a-669b;  part  hi 
suppl,  q  96,  a  6,  rep  ii  1058a-1061b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  87c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  36  434a-b 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  15d  /  Civil  Government , 
ch  v  30b-36a  passim 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  partiii,  112a  ll3a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114a-d  /  Pref.  Metaphysi¬ 
cal  Elements  of  Ethics,  369c-373b  /  Science  of 
Right,  438d-439a 

43  Federalist:  number  64,  197d 


Ae  to  5 a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  297a  /  Utilitarianism ,  461d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  393a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  1,  par  46 
23d-24a;  part  hi,  par  170  60d;  par  199  67c; 
par  249  78c;  par  287  97a;  additions,  27  121b; 
127  137b;  145  140b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [11,559-572]  281b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  316c-317a;  592d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 

158b-159a 

5.  The  order  of  human  goods 

5a.  The  supreme  good  or  summum  bonumx  its 
existence  and  nature 

7  Plato  '.Symposium,  164c-167d  /  Gorgias,2S4&- 
255c  /  Republic,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-401d  esp  bk 
vi,  383d-386c  /  Philebus,  635b-639a,c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  16  543a-b; 
bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72bi3-29]  602d-603a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  1-12  339a-347b 
esp  ch  7  342c-344a;  bk  vii,  ch  11-13  403c- 
405b  passim,  esp  ch  13  404d-405b;  bk  x,  ch 
1-8  426a-434a  esp  ch  6-8  430d-434a  /  Politics, 
bk  1,  ch  1  [i252ai-6]  445a;  bk  hi,  ch  12  [i282b 
15-18]  480c;  bk  vii,  ch  1-3  527a-530a  passim 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1-61] 
15a-d;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  3  108b-c;  bk 
ii,  ch  11  150a-151b;  cii  19  162c-164b;  bk  iii, 
ch  2  177c-178d;  ch  10  185d-187a;  ch  24  203c- 
210a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  34  273c; 
bk  vi,  sect  14  274d-275a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  4,  8a-b;  tr 
viii,  ch  2  27c-d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ix  353d- 
360d  esp  ch  6-1 1  357a-360d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  24  25b-c; 
bk  vii,  par  7  45a-d;  bk  x,  par  29-34  78d-80c 
/  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  8-10  270a-271d;  bk 
x,  ch  1-3  298b,d-301a;  ch  18  310b-d;  bk  xii, 
ch  1  342b,d-343c;  bk  xix  507a-530a,c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12,  a 
1,  ans  50c-51c;  q  26  150a-152a,c;  q  62,  a  i, 
ans  317d-318c;  part  i-ii,  qq  1-5  609a-643d; 
q  34,  a  3  770c-771c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvii 
[127-139]  79d;  paradise,  1  [103-142]  107b-d; 
iii  [82-90]  llOa-b;  xxvi  [1-69]  145d-146c; 
xxxii  [i39]-xxxiii  [145]  I56a-157d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus and  Cressida,  bk  iii,  stanza 
1-7  54b-55b;  stanza  250-253  87a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  76c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  28a-d;  149b  d;  279c- 
281a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  70b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  28  431c; 
prop  36  434a-b;  appendix,  iv  447b-c;  xxxii 
450c-d;  part  v,  prop  42  463b-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  73  185a-b;  462  255a 


5b  Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVJL  629 


35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  uk  ii,  cn  xxi, 
sect  55-56  192c-193b;  sect  62  194c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  236b-240b  csp  23 7d 

238a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals  253a 
287d  esp  256a-257d,  258d-259a,  263a~b, 
266a-c,  267b-d,  273d-277b,  282b-283d, 

286a-c  /  Practical  Reason,  297a  3 14d  csp 
298a-300a,  304d-307d;  338c-355d  esp  344c 
348b  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 
365b-366d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
387b-388a  /  Judgement,  584d-588a;  591b 
592c;  594c-597d  esp  595a-c;  604d  605c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism  445a-476a,c  esp  448a, 
450b-c,  461c-464d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  238c-d; 
part  in,  307b-308a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  771  d- 
772c 

5 h.  The  judgment  of  diverse  types  of  good: 
their  subordination  to  one  another 

Old  Testament:  I  Kings ,  3:5-14 —(D)  III  Kings , 
3:5-14  /  II  Chronicles,  1:7-12— (D)  II  Parali- 
pomenon,  1:7-12  /  Psalms,  49;  52;  119:72 — 
(Z>)  Psalms,  48;  51;  118:72  /  Proverbs,  10:2; 
11:4,23-31;  22:1-5  /  Ecclesiastes ,  5:10-19;  6:2- 
7  —(D)  Ecclesiastes,  5:9-18;  6:2-7  /  Jeremiah, 
9:23-24;  17:11  — (D)  Jeremias ,  9:23-24;  17:11 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  13:24-26—  (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus ,  13:30-32 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  8:21-22;  10:34-39; 
13:22,44-46;  16:24-28  /  Mar\,  8:34-38;  10:17- 
31  /  Lufe,  9:23-27,59-62;  12:51-53;  18:18-30 
/  John ,  6:63 —(D)  John ,  6:64  /  Romans ,  8:1-27 
/  Galatians,  5:16-26  /  Philippians ,  3:7-21  / 
/  Timothy,  6:9-12  /  James,  4:1-10  /  /  /0A/7, 
2:15-17  /  /ade 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6c-8a 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a  /  Symposium , 

165b-167d  /  A/*7zg,  183b-184c  /  Gorgias,  254d- 
255c;  262a-264b  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  310c-311a; 
bk  vii,  401b;  bk  ix,  421a-427b  /  Philebus , 
635b-639a,c  /  bk  i,  643b-644a;  bk  ii, 

656d-658d;  660b-662a;  bk  hi,  674b;  bk  v, 
686d-688c;  689c-690c;  694d-695a;  bk  ix, 
751b-d 

8  Aristotle:  Pr/or  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  22  [68a 
25-b8]  89d-90a  /  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i02bi4~2i] 
145c;  bk  hi.  ch  1-4  162a-166b;  bk  viii,  cii  2 
[i57bi7-24]  214a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  7 
[i072bi3-29]  602d-603a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  339a  d;  ch 
4  [i°95aM“29]  340b-c;  ch  5  340d-341b;  ch  6 
[io96b8-26]  341d-342a;  ch  7  342c-344a;  bk  v, 
ch  1  [ii29bi-io]  376d-377a;  bk  x,  ch  6-7 
430d-432c  /  Politics,  bk  1,  ch  i  [i252ai-6] 
445a;  ch  9  [1258^-18]  452a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  9 
[i27ibi~9]  467d;  bk  iii,  ch  12  480c-481b;  bk 
vii,  ch  1  [1323*22— b2 1  ]  527a-c;  ch  13  [i332a8— 
27]  536d-537a;  ch  14  [i333ai7“37]  538a-b;  ch 
15  [i334bi4-28]  539c-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[i359ai7— 25]  599b;  ch  7  604c-607d 


12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i\  [1058- 
1078]  57d  58b;  bk  v  [1x13-1135]  75c  d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  9  147c  148c; 
cii  19  162cd64b;  bk  hi,  ch  14  189c  190a;  i»k 
iv,  cn  5  228a  230b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a  b: 
bk  v,  sect  16  271c  d 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  74c-75c  /  Pericles,  121a 
122b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iv  12b  19b  csp 
cii  2-7  12d  16a,  cn  14-16  18a  19b  /  Second 
Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  15  74d  75b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  9  18  lOd 
13a;  bk  x,  par  43-66  82a  88b  /  City  of  God, 
bk  1,  ch  8-10  133a-136c;  bk  iv,  cii  33  ^4 
206c-207a,c;  bk  xi,  ch  16  331a-c;  bk  xii,  ch 
8  346d-347b;  bk  xv,  ch  22  416a-c;  bk  xix, 
ch  1-3  507a  511a;  ch  13-17  519a-523a;  cn  20 
523d-524a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  3-4 
625b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  5,  a  6, 
rep  3  27c-28b;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  5,  rep  i  613a- 
614a;  a  6,  rep  1-2  614a-c;  a  7,  ans  614c-615a; 
qq  2-4  615c-636c;  q  20,  aa  1-4  712a-715b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvii  [82] 
-xviii  [75]  79b-80c;  xxx  [55)-xxxi  [90]  100a 
lOld;  paradise,  vi  [112-126]  114d-115a;  xi 
[1—12]  122a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus and  Cressida,  bk  iii,  stanza 
1 97-1 99  80a-b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xvii,  24b-c;  ch  xix, 
26a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  62a;  part  ii, 
155b-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv, 
234a-235a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  28a-d;  69d-75a  esp  70d- 
72a;  107a-112d  passim;  125a-c;  126b-131a  pas¬ 
sim;  216c-219a;  231d-238d;  279c-281a;  300c- 
306a  esp  300c-d;  368d;  489b-490c;  538a- 
543a, c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  iii,  sc  iv  [96- 
103] 128a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii, 
sc  ii  [51-96]  114a-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  70b-76a; 
86b-c;  91d-92b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  65-66  444b-d 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  94a-97a  /  Pensees, 

233  213b-216a;  793  326b-327a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  55-56  192c-193b;  sect  62  194c-d;  sect 
72  198a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  373c-374a  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  396b-d;  400a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  32a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphvsic  of  Morals , 
256a-b;  257c-d;  266a-b;  271c-272b;  273d- 
277b  esp  274d-275b  /  Practical  Reason,  316a- 
31 7d;  337a-355d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements 
of  Ethics,  377d  /  Judgement,  478a-b;  584d- 
587a:  588b  [fn  2];  591b-592a;  594c-596c 


630 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  order  of  human  goods.  5b.  The  judgment 
of  diverse  types  of  good:  their  subordination 
to  one  another .) 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  448a-450c;  455c-456a; 
461c-464d;  471a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  378a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi,  307b- 
308a;  part  iv,  365b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bkv,  194d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
164b-165a 

53  James:  Psychology,  198b-204b  esp  199b-203a 

5c.  The  dialectic  of  means  and  ends:  mere 
means  and  ultimate  ends 

5  Sophocles:  Philoctetes  182a-195a,c  esp  [50- 
127]  182d-183c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v,  504c- 
507c 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  22c-24a  /  Laches,  29c  /  Euthy - 
demus,  69a-71a  /  Crito  213a-219a,c  /  Gorgias , 
262a-264b;  280b-d  /  Republic,  bk  i-ii,  300d- 
315d  esp  bk  11,  310c-d  /  Philebus,  632a-d  / 
Laws,  bk  v,  694d-695a;  bk  ix,  751c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [n6h22-^6] 
163b-c  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [292ai4~b26] 
383d-384b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  11,  ch  2  [994b8- 
16]  512d-513a;  bk  v,  ch  2  [ioi3a32-b3]  533c; 
[ioi3b25~28]  533d-534a  /  Soul,  bk  hi,  ch  10 
[433ai2-i  7l  665d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  1,  ch  1-2  339a-d;  ch  5 
340d-341b  esp  [1096^-10]  341a-b;  ch  6  [i096b 
8-26]  341d-342a;  ch  7  [io97ai5-b22]  342c- 
343a;  ch  9  [io99b25~32]  345b;  bk  iii,  ch  3 
[1 1 12bi2— 1 1 13*2]  358c-359a;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [1139s 
1:7— b5]  387d-388a;  ch  5  389a-c  passim;  ch  9 
[ii42bi7~35]  391d-392b  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch 
1  [i323a22-b2i]  527a-c;  ch  13  [i33ib26-i332a 
27]  536b-537a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  1,  ch  6-7  602d- 
607d;  ch  8  [1366^-16]  608b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  10  185d- 
187a;  ch  13-14  188b-190a;  ch  24  203c-210a; 
bk  iv,  ch  4  225a-228a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  16  271c-d; 
bk  vi,  sect  40-45  277d-278c;  bk  vii,  sect  44 
282b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  19-20  286d-287a 

14  Plutarch:  Alcibiades,  160b-161b  /  Lysander, 
357a-b  /  Crassus-Nicias,  456d-457c  /  Agesilaus , 
491a-b  /  Cleomenes,  660b-661a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  3-4  7c-8c; 
tr  iv,  ch  6  15a-b  /  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch 
15  74d-75b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  4  266d- 
267c;  ch  8-9  270a-271a;  bk  xix,  ch  1-3  507a- 
511a;  ch  11-17  516d-523a;  ch  20  523d-524a  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  3-4  625b-c;  ch 
22  629b-630a;  ch  31-33  633b-634b;  ch  35 
634c- d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18,  A3, 
ans  106b-107c;  q  19,  a  2,  rep  2  109c-110b;  a 
5,  ans  and  rep  1,3  112d-113c;  q  22,  a  i,  rep  3 
127d-128d;  q  23,  a  7,  ans  138d-140a;  q  65, 


5  c 

a  2,  ans  and  rep  1-2  340b-341b;  q  82,  aa  1-4 
431d-435c;  q  83,  a  4,  ans  439c-440b;  part 
i-ii,  q  1  609a-615c;  q  4  629c-636c;  q  5,  a  6, 
rep  1  641a-642a;  q  8,  aa  2-3  656a-657c;  q  ii, 
a  3  667d-668d;  q  12,  aa  2-4  670b-672a;  q  13, 
a  3  674c-675a;  q  14,  a  2  678b-c;  q  15,  a  3 
682c-683b;  q  16,  a  3  685b-686a;  q  20,  aa  1-4 
712a-715b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  54, 
a  2,  rep  3  23d-24c;  q  107,  a  i,  ans  325c-327b; 
q  114,  a  4,  rep  i  373a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  27,  a  6, 
ans  524c-525c 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus  401a-432a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xviii,  25d-26a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  53a-b;  76c-d; 
90a;  part  iii,  237d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  28a-d;  52c-53c;  330b- 
332a;  368d;  381a-388c  passim,  esp  381c-d, 
388a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  ii,  sc  iii  [140- 
147]  334b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  75d-76a; 
91d-92a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix,  371b-c; 
part  iv,  pref  422b,d-424a  passim;  def  7 
424b;  prop  65-66  444b-d;  appendix,  v  447c 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  94a-97a  /  Pensees , 
98  190b;  505  261a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  52-53  191d-192b;  sect  62  194c-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  538a-539a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  245a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  234c-240b  esp  235a-b, 
236c-d,  238c-239a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  256a-b;  257c-d;  260a-c;  265c-267d; 
268b;  271c-279d  esp  273d-277b;  282b-283d  / 
Practical  Reason ,  307a-d;  315b-317b;  318c- 
321b  esp  320c-321b;  327d-329a;  337a-355d; 
357c-360d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of 
Ethics,  367c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
387d-388a  /  Science  of  Right ,  397b-398a  / 
Judgement,  477b-c;  478a-b;  55 7d  [fn  2]; 
586a-b;  588b  [fn2];  591b-592d;  594b-595d; 
605d-606b  [fn  2] 

43  Federalist:  number  23  85a-87a  passim,  esp 
85b-c;  number  31,  103c-d;  104b-c;  number 
40,  129a-b;  number  41,  132b-c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445c- d;  446d-44 7a; 461c- 
464 d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  45 
23c-d;  par  61  27b-c;  part  ii,  par  119-128  43b- 
45d  esp  par  122  44a;  par  140  49b-54a;  part  iii, 
par  182  64a;  par  191  66b;  par  223  73c-d;  par 
328  108b-c;  par  340  llOb-c;  par  348  llld; 
additions,  38-39  122c-d;  j6-8i  128a-129a; 

1 16  135c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
162a-164c;  166b-168d;  partii,  267a-268b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  586d- 
587d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
127b-137c 

53  James:  Psychology,  4a-6b  passim;  14b-15a; 
199b-201b;  203a;  381b-382a;  788a-789a 


631 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL 


5  d 

5 d.  The  supremacy  of  the  individual  or  the 
common  good:  the  relation  of  the  good 
of  the  individual  person  to  the  good  of 
other  persons  and  to  the  good  of  the 
state 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs ,  11:10-11 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  27a  39a, c 
esp  [1048-1084]  38d-39a,c 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a  113a, c  esp 
[1-76]  99a-d  /  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [158- 
210]  132c-d  /  Ajax  143a-155a,c  esp  [1045-1421] 
152a-155a,c  /  Philoctetes  182a-195a,c 

5  Euripides:  Phoenician  Maidens  [834-1018] 
385c-387b;  [1582-1684]  391d-392d  /  Iphigenia 
at  Aulis  425a-439d 

5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  455a-469a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  99a;  bk  vii, 
253b-257c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  397d- 
398c;  402b-c;  bk  vi,  511c-d;  520c  d 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus ,  75c-76b  /  Apology  200a- 
212a, c  esp  207a-208a  /  Crito  213a-219a,c  esp 
216d-219a,c  /  Gorgias,  262a-270c  /  Republic , 
bk  i,  302c-306a;  bk  iv,  342a-d;  bk  v,  364c- 
365d;  bk  vi,  379d-380b;  bk  vii,  390b-391b; 
401a-b  /  Laws ,  bk  v,  692d-693a;  bk  vi,  707c- 
708a;  bk  vii,  721d;  bk  ix,  754a-b;  754d- 
755c;  bk  xi,  775d-778a  /  Seventh  Letter ,  814b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  1,  ch  2  [i094b7~9] 
339c-d;  bk  v,  ch  i  [ii29bn-ii3oai3]  377a-c; 
bk  vi,  ch  8  [ii4ib28-ii42an]  390d-391a;  bk 
ix,  ch  6  [1 1 67b5~ 15]  420d-421a;  ch  8  [n68b28- 
n69an]  422b-d;  ch  9  423a-424b;  ch  ii  425a-d 
/  Politics ,  bk  1,  ch  1  [i252ai-6]  445a;  ch  2 
[i253ai8— 38]  446c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  1-5  455b, d- 
460a;  bk  hi,  ch  4  473c-475a;  ch  7  476c-477a; 
ch  12  [i282bi5-i8]  480c;  ch  13  481b-483a;  ch 
17  [1288^15—32]  486d-487a;  bk  vii,  ch  1-3 
527a-530a  esp  ch  2  [i324a5~24]  528a-b;  ch 
13  [i332*32-38]  537a;  ch  14  [*333b29-37] 
538c-d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1337*28-30]  542b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  19, 125d;  bk 
ii,  ch  5,  143d-144a;  ch  10,  148c-149a;  bk  iii, 
ch  7  182b-184a;  ch  22  198c-199d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  4  260b- 
261a;  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a;  bk  v,  sect  6  269b-d; 
sect  16  271c-d;  sect  22  272b;  bk  vi,  sect  14 
274d-275a;  sect  45  278c;  sect  54  279c;  bk 
viii,  sect  12  286b-c;  sect  23  287b;  bk  ix, 
sect  1  291a-c;  sect  23  293c;  sect  42  295c- 
296a, c;  bk  x,  sect  6  297a-b;  bk  xi,  sect  21 
305d-306a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  44d-45c  / 
Solon,  71b;  71d  /  Cato  the  Younger,  626d-627b; 
632b-c;  646b  /  Demosthenes ,  699c-700a 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  ii,  226d-228a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  5  513d- 
514b;  ch  8  515c-516a;  ch  12-14  5l7b-520d; 
ch  16-17  521d-523a;  ch  19  523b-d;  ch  26 
528d-529a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  60, 
a  5  313b-314c;  q  65,  a  2  340b-341b;  q  92,  a  i, 


REP  }  488d  489d;  q  96,  a  4  51 2d  513c;  part 
1  11,  q  4,  a  8  636a-c;  q  19,  a  10,  ans  710b 
71 1  d ;  o  21,  a  $  7l8d  719c;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  $ 
719d  720a, c;  q  32,  aa  5  6  762a  763c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i  ii,  q  90, 
a  2  206b  207a;  a  ans  and  rep  3  207a  c;  q 
91,  a  5,  ans  211c  212c;  a  6,  rei*  3  212c  213c; 
q  92,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  13-4  213c  214c;  q  9^, 
a  i,  ri:p  i  215b, d  216c;  q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d 
223a;  q  95,  a  4,  ans  229b  230c;  q  96,  a  ans 
and  rep  3  232b  233a;  a  4,  ans  233a  d;  a  6, 
ans  235a  d;  q  97,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  236a  d; 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  236d-237b;  a  4  238b  239b; 
Q  98,  a  1,  ans  239b  240c;  q  99,  a  3,  ans  247a- 
248a;  q  ioo,  a  2,  ans  252b  253a;  a  8,  ans  and 
rep  3  259d-261a;  a  ii,  rep  3  263c-264d;  q 
105,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1,4  309d-316a;  a  3,  ans 
and  rep  5  316a  318b;  q  iii,  a  5,  rep  i  355d- 
356c;  part  ii-ii,  q  17,  a  3  458c-459a;  q  26 
510b-520d  passim;  q  39,  a  2,  rep  3  575b  576b; 
q  187,  a  3,  rep  1,3  666a-669b;  part  iii  suppl, 
q  71  900d-917b;  q  94  1040d-1042c;  q  96,  a  6, 
rep  11  1058a-1061b;  a  7,  rep  3  1061b  1062a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  91b-92b;  93d-94a; 
part  ii,  105c-d;  157b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  381a-388c  esp  381c-d, 
388a-c;  480b-482b;  487b-488b 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iii,  sc  i 
[223-281]  49c-50a  /  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  ii  [183- 
213]  535d-536a 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida  103a- 
141a, c  esp  act  i,  sc  iii  [78-134]  109a-c  /  Corio - 
lanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [67-167]  352a-353a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71a-75a  esp 
74b-d;  81d-82a;  94b-95b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  35,  corol  1-2 
433c-d;  prop  37,  schol  2  435b-436a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [843-902]  358a- 
359a  esp  [843-870]  358a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  456  254a;  474-481  256b- 
257b 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  15d-16a;  16d-17b  /  Civil 
Government,  ch  vii,  sect  87-89  44a-d;  ch 
viii,  sect  95-99  46c-47c;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch 
xi  55b-58b  passim;  ch  xiv  62b-64c;  ch  xv, 
sect  1 71  65a- b  /  Human  Understanding,  bk  1, 
ch  ii,  sect  2  104a-b;  sect  6  105b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b;  part  iii,  112a- 
115b  esp  112a-113a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  291d-292a;  330b-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  21a;  bk 
xiii,  96a-b;  bk  xxiv,  203a;  bk  xxvi,  221c- 
222a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323a-328a,c  esp  323b- 
325b;  343d-345c;  363a-366d  esp  363b-364a  / 
Political  Economy,  368d-377b  /  Social  Contract, 
bk  1— 11,  391b-400c;  bk  ii,  405a-c;  bk  iii,  417c- 
418a;  bk  iv,  425a-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  109d-110d; 
bk  11, 140b;  bk  iv,  193a-194b  esp  194a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  193c-194a 


632 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  order  of  human  goods,  5 d.  The  supremacy 
of  the  individual  or  the  common  good:  the 
relation  of  the  good  of  the  individual  person 
to  the  good  of  other  persons  and  to  the  good 
of  the  state.) 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  114b-d  /  Fund .  Prin.  Meta- 
physic  of  Morals,  2 72  d- 2 73a  /  Practical  Reason , 
304b-305c  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of 
Ethics ,  369c-373b;  373d;  375d-376b  /  Science 
of  Right,  438d-439b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments, 

i-x  17a-d 

43  Federalist:  number  45, 147c-148a;  number 
64,  197d;  number  85,  256d-257a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267b,d-274a;  293b-323a,c  esp 
322d-323a,c  /  Representative  Government ,  392b- 
396d  /  Utilitarianism ,  450b-455a;  455c-456a; 
460a-461c;  463a-b;  469b-470c;  473c-476a,c 
passim 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  221d-224a;  261c-d;  304c; 
393a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  46 
23d-24a;  part  ii,  par  125-126  44d-45b;  par 
134  47b;  part  hi,  par  155  57c;  par  170  60d; 
par  183  64a;  par  192  66b-c;  par  199  67c;  par 
240  76d;  par  249  78c;  par  254  79c;  par  261 
83a-d;  par  277  92b-c;  par  294  98b-d;  par 
308  102c-103a;  par  323  107a;  additions,  27 
121b;  47  124a-b;  117  135d-136a;  127  137b; 
141  139c;  145  140b;  148  140c-d;  151  141b-c; 
158  142d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  164b; 
192d-193a;  part  i,  236a-c;  part  ii,  271c-d; 
276a;  part  hi,  298c-299a;  part  iv,  320c-321a; 
363c-d;  365b-c;  367d-368a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [11,559-572]  281b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  310a-319a  esp  312a- 
313a,  314b-315d,  316c-317c;  321b-322d  esp 
322c-d;  592d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  237a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  429b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  67d-68c;  72d- 
74a;  bk  v,  214c-216d;  bk  vi,  260a-262a;  bk 
xi,  475b-476c;  505a-511b  passim,  esp  509d- 
510a;  514b-515a;  bk  xii,  537b-538a;  bk  xiii, 
577b-c;  bk  xv,  634a-635a;  epilogue  i,  670d- 
671c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
158b-159a;  164a-167b;  bk  xii,  370b-d 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  452c-d;  573b-c  / 
War  and  Death,  757b-759d  esp  759c-d  /  Civil¬ 
ization  and  Its  Discontents ,  780b-781d;  799a- 
800a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  853 a- b 

6.  Knowledge  and  the  good 

6a.  Knowledge,  wisdom,  and  virtue:  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  being  good  and  knowing  what 
is  good 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3  /  Proverbs,  1-2;  7-8; 
9:9;  10:8,31;  11:12;  14:16-18,22,29;  15:21; 
28:7;  29:8 


6  to  6a 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:1-7  esp  1:4; 
6;  8-10 — ( D )  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  1:1-7  esP 
1:4;  6;  8-10  /  Ecclesiasticus,  19:22-24;  39:1- 
n;  43:33;  50:28-29  —(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus , 
19:19-21;  39:1-15;  43:37;  50:30-31 

New  Testament:  John,  3:17-21  /  Romans,  7:15- 

25  /  James,  4:17 

5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  [375-430]  228b-d 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  7b-c;  12a-13c  /  Laches  26a- 
37d  /  Protagoras  38a-64d  /  Euthydemus,  69a- 
71a  /  Cratylus,  86c-d  /  Meno  174a-190a,c  esp 
183b-190a,c  /  Phaedo,  225d-226c;  230d-234c 
/  Republic,  bk  i,  306c-308a;  bk  ii,  314d-315a; 
bk  hi,  333b-334b;  337b-d;  bk  iv,  354d-355a; 
bk  vi-vii,  383d-401d  esp  bk  vii,  389d- 
398c;  bk  x,  439b-441a,c  /  Critias,  485b-c  / 
Laws,  bk  1,  643c-d;  bk  iii,  669a-670c;  bk  ix, 
754a-b;  bk  xii,  788d-789a  /  Seventh  Letter , 
806a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  iii,  ch  6  [120^26-^1] 
168a;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [i2ib24~i22a2]  169d-170a; 
ch  3  [124^0-14]  172d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  339d-340b;  bk 
ii,  ch  4  350d-351b;  bk  vi,  ch  8  390d-391c; 
ch  12-13  393b-394d;  bk  vii,  ch  2-3  395c- 
398a;  ch  10  [1  i52a7~ 24]  403a-b;  bk  x,  ch  5 
[ii76ai5-29]  430c-d;  ch  8  [ii78ai6-i8]  432d; 
ch  9  [ii79b4-n8oai3]  434b-d  /  Politics,  bk  vii, 
ch  1  [1323^1-36]  527c-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  5  llOb-c;  ch 
17  122d-124a;  ch  26  131b-132b;  ch  28  133b- 
134d;  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d-170a;  ch  26  I74c-d; 
bk  iv,  ch  1  213a-223d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
sect  17  259b-d;  bk  vii,  sect  22  281b;  sect 

26  281c;  sect  62-63  283d-284a;  bk  viii,  sect 
14  286c;  bk  ix,  sect  42  295c-296a,c;  bk  xii, 
sect  12  308b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  121a-122b  /  Aristides , 
265c-d  /  Agesilaus,  490d-491b  /  Demetrius, 
726a-d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  6-7  9a-10a; 
tr  iii,  ch  6  lld-12b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  27  51d- 
52c;  bk  viii,  par  10-11  55c-56b  /  City  of  God, 
bk  viii,  ch  3  266a-d;  ch  8  270a-d;  bk  ix,  ch 
20  296a-b;  bk  xi,  ch  28  338a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  6, 
rep  3  6b-7a;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  i,  rep  i  615d- 
616c;  a  2,  rep  3  616d-617b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  4,  ans  38a-39a;  a  5,  ans  39a-40a;  q  58,  a  2 
42a-43a;  aa  4-5  44a-45d;  q  65,  a  i,  rep  3-4 
70b-72a;  part  ii-ii,  q  18,  a  4,  ans  464c-465a; 
q  24,  a  11,  ans  498b-499c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xix  [40- 
66]  135c-d;  xxvi  [1-69]  145d-146c;  xxvm 
[106-114]  !50a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  59c-60a;  69d-75a  esp 
70d-72a;  208a;  478c-480c;  514a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  i, 
sc  11  [13-23]  408b-c 


6b  to  6c 


633 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL 


27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure ,  \cr 
sc  1  174d;  act  ir,  sc  iv  [2  -17] 

184d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  26c  27a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  r,  43c;  part  in, 
49d-50b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  pari  iv,  prop  14-17  428a  d; 
prop  18,  schol  429a-d;  prop  24  24  430c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  vii  [519-5^9]  228b 
229a;  bk  viii  [316-337]  239a  b;  bk  ix  [679- 
779]  262a-264a;  bk  xi  [84-98]  301a  /  Samson 
Agonistes  [38-59]  340b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  cii  iii, 
sect  16,  117a;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  35  186b  d; 
sect  64  195a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  ioo 
432b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  28b-29a;  part  iv, 
159b-160a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  182a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  343b-345c  esp  345a-c  / 
Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  434c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  149d  /  Fund.  Prin.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals,  265b;  282b-283d  /  Practical 
Reason ,  326b-327a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  458b-459b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  139- 
140  48d-54a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
168b-d;  part  ii,  280b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  82a-b;  806a-808a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  560c-d;  625a-b 

6b .  The  need  for  experience  of  evil 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii,  337b-d  /  Laws ,  bk 
vii,  727c-d 

14  Plutarch:  Demetrius ,  726a-d 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  7, 
204b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  54-57  85a- 
86a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  22,  a 
3,  rep  3  130d-131c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell  la-52d  esp  1 
[112-136]  2b-c,  xxviii  [43-51]  41  d ;  purga¬ 
tory,  1  53a-54c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  167a-169a  passim;  200d- 
203b;  235c-236a;  509b-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  75b-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [505-535]  163b- 
164a;  bk  vii  [519-549]  228b-229a;  bk  viii 
[3r6— 33 7]  239a-b;  bk  ix  [679-779]  262a-264a; 
BK  XI  [84—98]  301a  /  Areopagitica,  389a  396a 
esp  390b-391a,  394b-395a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  1,  237d- 
238c;  part  iv,  354a-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  [340-343]  9a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  4b-5a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  481a- 
482a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  iii, 
53b-54b;  bk  v,  122c-125a;  132a-135a;  bk  xi, 
344a-d 


6c.  The  goodness  of  knowledge  or  wisdom:  chc 
use  of  knowledge 

Old  Testament:  I  Kings,  5:5  15;  10  — (/))  III 
Kings,  3:5-15;  10  /  II  Chronicles,  1:7  12;  9:1- 
7  (D)  II  Paralipomenon,  1:7-12;  9:1  7  /  job, 

28:12  20  /  Proverbs,  1-4;  8;  9:10-12;  10:1; 
12:8;  14:24;  15:24;  16:16;  17:16;  19:2,8; 

20:15;  23:15-16,23-25;  24:1-14;  27:11;  28:2 
/  Ecclesiastes,  1:17-18;  2:12-26;  6:8;  7:11- 
12,16-19;  9:1 1,13-18  —  (D)  Ecclesiastes ,  1:17- 
18;  2:12-26;  6:8;  7:12-13,17-20;  9:11,  13-18 
/  Ezefqel,  28:2-7 —(D)  Ezechiel,  28:2-7 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  6-10  —  (D)  OT, 
Boo of  Wisdom,  6-10  /  Fcclesiasticus ,  1:16-19; 
4:11  19;  6:18-37;  n:i;  14:20-15:8;  21:12- 
13,21;  24:1-22;  25:10;  34:8;  37:24,26;  40:25; 
41:14-15;  51:13-28  —  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 
1:20-24;  4:12-22;  6:18-37;  ii:iJ  14:22-15:8; 
21:14-16,24;  24:1-30;  25:13;  34:8;  37:27,29; 
40:25;  41:17-18;  51:18-36 

New  Testament:  I  Corinthians,  1 U7-31 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [300-462]  102a- 
103c  /  Antigone  [632-765]  136c-137d;  [1348- 
1 353]  142d 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  8b  /  Lysis,  16c- 18b  / 
Laches,  28a-b  /  Protagoras,  40a-41a;  61d-62b 
/  Euthydemus,  69a-71a;  74b-76b  /  Meno, 
183d- 184c  /  Phaedo,  226a-b  /  Gorgias,  272b- 
273b;  291c-292b  /  Republic,  bk  vii  388a- 
401d  esp  389d-398c;  bk  ix,  421a-425b  / 
Timaeus,  476a-b  /  Theaetetus,  525c-526a; 
528c-531a  /  Philebus  609a-639a,c  esp  635c- 
639a, c  /  Laws,  bk  i,  643c;  bk  iii,  669d-670c; 
bk  xii,  792c-d;  794c-799a,c  /  Seventh  Letter, 
801b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [116*13-23] 
162b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980*22-28] 
499a;  ch  2  500b-501c  esp  [982^-983*1 1]  500d- 
501b;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [i072bi3~29]  602d-603a  / 
Soul,  bk  1,  ch  1  [402*1-7]  631a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  12  [1143^17— 
1144*6]  393b-c;  bk  x,  ch  2  [ii72b28-32]  426d- 
427a;  ch  7-8  431d-434a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  cii  6 
[i362bio-26]  603b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [62-79]  ld- 
2a;  bk  11  [48-61]  15c-d;  bk  v  [1-54]  61a-d;  bk 
vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  20,  192d- 
193a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  9  270b-c; 
bk  x,  sect  12  298c-d 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  121  a- 122b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  54-57  85a- 
86a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  8  270a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5,  a 
4,  rep  3  25d-26c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  6,  rep  1-2 
614a-c;  q  2,  a  1,  rep  2  6l5d-616c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  45, 
a  3,  rep  3  600c-601a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  96, 
a  7  1061b-1062a;  a  ii,  ans  and  rep  5  1063d- 
1064d;  a  12  1064d-1065b 


634 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(6.  Knowledge  and  the  good .  6c.  The  goodness  of 
knowledge  or  wisdom:  the  use  of  knowl¬ 
edge.) 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  iv  5c-7a;  pur¬ 
gatory,  hi  [16-45]  56a-b 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  55d-62a;  69d-75a  esp 
70d-72a;  231d-242d;  502c-504c;  509a-512a 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  ii 
[83-117]  58c-59a;  sc  vii  [26-81]  61c-62a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  6c-d;  16d- 
17a,  26a-27d;  30b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  41d-42a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  iv 
447b-c;  part  v,  prop  25-27  458d-459b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [505-535]  163b- 
164a;  bk  vii  [519-549]  228b-229a;  bk  viii 
[3 1 6-337]  239a-b;  bk  ix  [679-779]  262a-264a; 
bk  xi  [84—98]  301a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  intro,  sect 
5-6  94b-95a;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  44  188d- 
189b;  bk  iv,  ch  xi,  sect  8  356b-d  passim 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
2-3  405b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i  451a- 
455  b  passim 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  236b-238a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  284a-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  591b-592a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  274b-293b  passim  /  Utilitarian¬ 
ism,  455c-456a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  118a;  256c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  280b- 
281b;  part  hi,  304d-305b 

47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part  i  [354-373]  lla-b, 
[1022-1067]  26a-b,  [1224-1237]  30b,  [1851- 
2046]  44a-48a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  78a-b;  255a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  777a- 
779a  esp  777a-b 

6d.  The  possibility  of  moral  knowledge:  the 
subjectivity  or  conventionality  of  judg¬ 
ments  of  good  and  evil 

5  Euripides:  Hecuba  [798-805]  359d  /  Phoeni¬ 
cian  Maidens  [499-522]  382  b-c 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [882-1114]  499b-502b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  97d-98a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  58a-62d  /  Meno,  183b- 
184c;  187d-190a,c  /  Euthyphro,  193d-194b  / 
Gorgias,  271b-277c  passim  /  Republic,  bk  v, 
357d-358a;  bk  vi,  383d-386c  /  Theaetetus, 
525c-526a;  527b-532a  /  Statesman,  594a-595a 
/  Laws,  bk  x,  759d-760c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c- 
810d  esp  810c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  339d-340b; 
ch  7  [io98a25-b8]  343d-344a;  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[ii04ai-9]  349b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  4  359a-c;  bk  v, 
ch  7  [1  i34bi 8— 1  i35a4]  382c-d;  bk  vi,  ch  8 
390d-391c;  ch  9  [n42bi7-35]  391d-392b; 
ch  ii  392c-393b;  bk  x,  ch  5  [1176^-29] 
430c-d 


6d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  7  145b-146a; 
ch  ii  150a-151b;  bk  hi,  ch  3  178d-180a;  bk 
iv,  ch  5  228a-230b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a; 
sect  18  264d 

14  Plutarch:  Themistocles,  99b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  58b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  43-44 
181b-182b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  13  16c-d 
/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  39-40  654c- 
656a;  bk  iii,  ch  10,  661d-662a;  ch  14  663c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  59,  a 
3,  ans  308b-309a;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  7,  ans 
614c-615a;  q  2,  a  1,  rep  i  615d-616c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  4  223d-224d;  part  ii-ii,  q  24,  a  ii,  ans 
498b-499c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  57d-58a;  61d-62a; 
65a;  75a-b;  78b-c;  91a-b;  96a-b;  part  ii, 
140b;  149b-c;  part  iv,  272c 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  46b-47c;  93b-c;  102a- 
103a;  115b-d;  122a;  124c-d;  146b-c;  149b-d; 
279c-284c;  307b;  424d-426b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [248-272] 
43a-b  /  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [51- 
96]  114a-c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  v,  105c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  46b-c;  part 

iii,  48b-50b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix,  371b-c; 

PART  III,  THE  AFFECTS,  DEF  27  419a-b;  PART 

iv,  pref,  423c-d;  prop  8  426b-c;  prop  64 
444b 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  390b-391a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  29b-44a  /  Pensees , 
309  228b;  312  229a;  325  230b-231a;  385  238b- 
239a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  90a-d;  bk  i, 
ch  11,  sect  8-12  105d-107d;  sect  20-27  110c- 
112c  passim,  esp  sect  22-23  Hla-c;  bk  ii,  ch 
xxviii,  sect  10-13  230b-231c;  bk  iii,  ch  xi, 
sect  15-18  303b-304b  esp  sect  16  303c-d; 
bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  18-20  317d-319c;  ch  iv, 
sect  7-9  325b-326b;  ch  xii,  sect  8  360c 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  ioo 
43 2  b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div 
131-132  508d-509d  passim,  esp  div  132,  509c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  165a-166a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  257a-266b  esp 
261a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  362a-d  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iv,  434c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  41a;  bk  v, 
346c-347a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  149d-150a;  236d-237a; 
239a-b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
253d-254b;  260d-261d;  263a;  264b-d;  265c- 
266d;  270d-271a;  271c-272b;  278a-279d; 

282d-283d  /  Practical  Reason,  301a;  304d- 
305a;  307d-310d;  317a-b;  319c-d;  330d-331a 
/  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  368d; 


6d 

377c-d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  387a- 
388a  /  Science  of  Right ,  397b-398a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  269b-271c  /  Utilitarianism , 
445a-447b;  448a-450a;  456d-462a;  463c-d; 
471b-476a,c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  197ab;  198b-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  pref,  2b-c; 
intro,  par  18  16c-d;  part  ii,  par  131-132 
46a-47a;  par  138  48c-d:  par  140  49b-54a; 
part  hi,  par  150-152  56c-57b;  par  339  110b; 
additions,  1  115a-d;  86  129c;  89  129dl30a; 
91  131a-d;  96-97  132c-133a  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  intro,  166a-b;  part  ii,  280b-28ib 


635 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  305a;  313b  d; 314c- 
31 5d ;  317a  d;  592d-593b  passim 

50  Marx-Engels  :  Communist  Manifesto ,  427a-b; 
428b  d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  15d  16a;  bk 
v,  194a  195a;  214c-d;  bk  viii,  304b  305a;  bk 
xi,  514c-d;  bk  xii,  542d;  bk  xiv,  611a-c; 
epilogue  1,  645a-646c;  epilogue  ii,  689b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  33c 
34b;  bk  xi,  314b-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  190a-191a;  886b  888a 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death ,  758a  c;  759a  /  C/W- 
lization  and  Its  Discontents ,  792  b-c 


Chapter  30:  GOOD  AND  EVIL 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  statements  of  the  metaphysical  theory  of  good  and  evil,  see  Being  3 — 3b;  Cause  6; 
Change  14;  Desire  i  ;  God  5b;  World  6b,  6d;  for  the  relation  of  the  good  to  the  true  and 
the  beautiful,  see  Beauty  ia;  Truth  ic;  and  for  the  theological  consideration  of  the 
divine  goodness  and  of  the  problem  of  evil,  see  God  4f,  5h ;  Justice  11a;  Love  5a,  5c; 
Punishment  5e~5e(2);  Sin  3~3e,  6-6e;  Will  7d;  World  6d. 

The  consideration  of  the  factors  which  enter  into  the  moral  theory  of  good  and  evil,  see 
Desire  2b-2d;  Duty  i  ;  Mind  9c;  Nature  5a;  Pleasure  and  Pain  6-6e;  Will  8b-8b(2). 

Other  discussions  of  right  and  wrong,  see  Duty  3;  Justice  1-2,  4. 

The  theory  of  the  summum  bonum  or  of  happiness,  see  Duty  2;  Happiness  i,  3. 

Particular  human  goods  in  themselves  and  in  relation  to  the  summum  bonum  or  happiness, 
see  Happiness  2b-2b(7);  Honor  2b;  Knowledge  8b(4);  Love  3a;  Pleasure  and  Pain 
6a-6b,  7;  Virtue  and  Vice  id;  Wealth  i,  10a;  Wisdom  2c. 

The  discussion  of  evil  and  its  sources  in  human  life,  see  Labor  ia;  Sin  3~3e;  Wealth  ioe(3). 

The  general  problem  of  the  individual  and  the  common  good,  or  the  good  of  the  person  and 
the  good  of  the  state,  see  Citizen  i  ;  Happiness  5 — 5b;  State  2f. 

General  discussions  of  means  and  ends,  see  Cause  4;  Relation  5a (2). 

The  controversy  over  the  objectivity  or  subjectivity  of  judgments  of  good  and  evil,  see  Cus¬ 
tom  and  Convention  5a;  Opinion  6a-6b;  Relation  6c;  Universal  and  Particular  7b. 

The  consideration  of  our  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  and  of  the  nature  and  method  of  the 
moral  sciences,  see  Knowledge  8b(i);  Philosophy  2c;  Science  3a;  Wisdom  2b. 

A  fuller  treatment  of  the  goodness  and  use  of  knowledge,  see  Art  6c;  Knowledge  8a-8c; 
Philosophy  4b~4c;  Science  ib(i). 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  BooJ^s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 

Aquinas.  Summa  Contra  Gentiles ,  bk  iii,  ch  1-16 

L  - .  Quaestiones  Disputatae ,  De  Veritate,  q  21 ;  De 

Epictetus.  The  Manual  Malo ,  q  i 

Augustine.  Divine  Providence  and  the  Problem  of  F.  Bacon.  “Of  Goodness,  and  Goodness  of  Na- 
Evil  ture,”  in  Essays 

- .  Concerning  the  Nature  of  Good  Hobbes.  The  Whole  Art  of  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  7 


636 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Hume.  An  Inquiry  Concerning  the  Principles  of  Morals 
A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments ,  part 
vii 

Kant.  Lectures  on  Ethics 

Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind,  vi 

- .  Science  of  Logic,  vol  ii,  sect  ii,  ch  3;  sect  iii, 

ch  2(b) 

- .  The  Philosophy  of  Mind,  sect  ii,  sub-sect  b 

Melville.  Pierre 

Dostoevsky.  Crime  and  Punishment 
Tolstoy.  Resurrection 

II. 

Epicurus.  Letter  to  Menoeceus 

Cicero.  De  Finibus  (On  the  Supreme  Good) 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Against  the  Ethicists 

- .  Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism,  bk  iii,  ch  21-32 

Boethius.  Quomodo  Substantiae  ( How  Substances 
Can  Be  Good  in  Virtue  of  Their  Existence  Without 
Being  Absolute  Goods ) 

- .  The  Consolation  of  Philosophy,  bk  iii-iv 

Maimonides.  Eight  Chapters  on  Ethics 

- .  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed,  part  iii,  ch  10-12 

Bon  a  ventura.  Breviloquium ,  part  iii  (i) 

Duns  Scotus.  Tractatus  de  Primo  Principio  (A 
Tract  Concerning  the  First  Principle) 

Albo  .The  Boo  ^  of  Principles  (Sefer  ha-lbfarim),  vol 
iv,  ch  12-15 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  iii,  x-xi, 
xxiii-xxiv 

Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite ,  bk  iv, 
ch  1-4 

Leibnitz.  Theodicy 

Hutcheson.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Original  of  Our 
Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Virtue ,  11 
Voltaire.  Candide 

- .  “Good — The  Sovereign  Good — A  Chimera,” 

“Good,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 

- .  The  Ignorant  Philosopher ,  ch  31,  38 

T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Active  Powers  of  the  Human 
Mind ,  iii,  part  iii,  ch  1-4;  v 
Bentham.  An  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals 
and  Legislation 

J.  G.  Fichte.  The  Vocation  of  Man 
T.  Carlyle.  Sartor  Resartus 
Dickens.  Oliver  Twist 
Whewell.  The  Elements  of  Morality,  bk  i 
Baudelaire.  Flowers  of  Evil 
H.  Sidgwick.  The  Methods  of  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  9 
Clifford.  “On  the  Scientific  Basis  of  Morals,” 
“Right  and  Wrong:  The  Scientific  Ground  of 
Their  Distinction,”  in  vol  ii,  Lectures  and  Es¬ 
says 

T.  H.  Green.  Prolegomena  to  Ethics ,  bk  iii-iv 


Nietzsche.  Beyond  Good  and  Evil 

- .  The  Genealogy  of  Morals,  1 

C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers,  vol  i,  par  573-677; 
vol  v,  par  126-150 

Brentano.  The  Origin  of  the  Knowledge  of  Right  and 
Wrong,  par  14-36 

Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough,  part  vi;  part  vii,  ch 
f~7 

Wilde.  The  Picture  of  Dorian  Gray 
Bradley.  Ethical  Studies 

- .  Appearance  and  Reality,  bk  ii,  ch  17,  25 

H.  James.  The  Turn  of  the  Screw 
Royce.  Studies  of  Good  and  Evil 

- .  The  World  and  the  Individual ,  series  ii  (8-9) 

Santayana.  Reason  in  Science,  ch  8-10 
Croce.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Practical 
Scheler.  Der  Formalismus  in  der  Ethil{  und  die 
materiale  Wertethi\ 

Wassermann.  The  World's  Illusion 
McTaggart.  The  Nature  of  Existence,  ch  64-67 
Moore.  Principia  Ethica,  ch  4,  6 

- .  Ethics,  ch  3-4,  7 

- .  Philosophical  Studies,  ch  8,  10 

Gide.  The  Counterfeiters 
N.  Hartmann.  Ethics 

Dewey.  “The  Good,”  “The  Ethical  World,”  “The 
Formation  and  Growth  of  Ideals,”  “The  Moral 
Struggle,”  in  Outlines  of  a  Critical  Theory  of 
Ethics 

- .  “Nature  and  Its  Good,  A  Conversation,”  in 

The  Influence  of  Darwin  on  Philosophy 

- .  Reconstruction  in  Philosophy ,  ch  5,  7 

- .  Human  Nature  and  Conduct,  part  iii-iv 

- .  Experience  and  Nature,  ch  3-4,  10 

- .  The  Quest  for  Certainty ,  ch  10 

J.  S.  Haldane.  The  Sciences  and  Philosophy,  lect  xv 
Ross.  The  Right  and  the  Good,  iii-vn 
Bergson.  Two  Sources  of  Morality  and  Religion 
Westermarck.  Ethical  Relativity 
Malraux.  Man's  Fate 

A.  E.  Taylor.  The  Faith  of  a  Moralist,  series  i 

(2. 4-5.) 

- .  Philosophical  Studies,  ch  i  i 

Laird.  An  Enquiry  into  Moral  Notions 

B.  Russell.  Philosophical  Essays,  ch  i 

- .  The  Scientific  Outloo\,  ch  17 

- .  Religion  and  Science ,  ch  8 

Adler.  A  Dialectic  of  Morals 

A.  Huxley.  The  Perennial  Philosophy 

C.  I.  Lewis.  An  Analysis  of  Knowledge  and  Valu¬ 
ation 

Ewing.  The  Definition  of  Good 

Maritain.  Saint  Thomas  and  the  Problem  of  Evil 

- .  The  Person  and  the  Common  Good 


Chapter  31:  GOVERNMENT 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  usual  connotation  of  “government”  is 
political.  The  word  is  often  used  inter¬ 
changeably  with  “state.”  But  there  is  govern¬ 
ment  in  a  university,  in  an  economic  corpora¬ 
tion,  in  the  church,  in  any  organization  of  men 
associated  for  a  common  purpose.  The  theo¬ 
logian  speaks  of  the  divine  government  of  the 
universe,  and  the  moralist  speaks  of  reason  as 
the  ruling  power  in  the  soul  which  governs  the 
appetites  or  passions. 

In  all  these  contexts,  the  notion  of  govern¬ 
ment  involves  the  fundamental  relations  of 
ruling  and  being  ruled,  of  command  and  obe¬ 
dience.  Though  the  character  of  these  relation¬ 
ships  varies  somewhat  with  the  terms  related, 
there  is  enough  common  meaning  throughout 
I1  to  permit  a  general  consideration  of  the  nature 
of  government.  But  that  is  not  the  way  in 
which  government  is  discussed  in  the  great 
books.  For  the  most  part,  government  is  con¬ 
sidered  in  one  or  another  of  its  special  settings 
— as  it  functions  in  the  family  or  the  state,  in 
the  soul  or  the  universe.  The  common  thread 
of  meaning  is  noted  only  indirectly,  by  the  way 
in  which  comparisons  are  made  or  analogies 
are  drawn  between  the  various  modes  of  gov¬ 
ernment. 

In  view  of  this,  we  have  found  it  convenient 
to  restrict  this  chapter  to  government  in  the 
political  sense,  treating  domestic  and  ecclesias¬ 
tical  government  under  Family  and  Religion, 
economic  government  under  Wealth,  divine 
government  in  the  chapters  on  Gon  and 
World,  and  government  in  the  soul  in  the 
several  chapters  which  consider  the  relation  of 
reason  to  the  passions,  such  as  Desire  and 
Emotion. 

Government  and  state  are  often  used  as  if  they 
were  interchangeable  terms.  Some  writers  dif¬ 
ferentiate  their  meanings  by  using  “state”  to 
signify  the  political  community  itself,  and 


“government”  to  refer  to  the  way  in  which  it  is 
politically  organized.  Yet  the  two  concepts 
tend  to  fuse  in  traditional  political  theory.  The 
kinds  of  states,  for  example,  are  usually  named 
according  to  their  forms  of  government.  The 
great  books  speak  of  monarchical  and  repub¬ 
lican  states,  as  we  today  speak  of  the  fascist  or 
the  democratic  state. 

Nevertheless,  we  recognize  the  distinction 
between  a  state  and  its  government  when  we 
observe  that  the  state  can  maintain  its  his¬ 
toric  identity  while  it  undergoes  fundamental 
changes  in  its  form  of  government.  The  state 
is  not  dissolved  by  a  revolution  which  replaces 
a  monarchy  by  a  republic,  or  conversely. 
There  is  a  sense  in  which  Rome  is  the  same 
state  under  the  Tarquins,  under  the  Republic, 
and  under  the  Caesars.  In  contrast,  some  rebel¬ 
lions,  such  as  the  War  of  Secession  in  American 
history,  threaten  to  dissolve  the  state  itself. 

Despite  the  fact  that  government  involves  a 
relation  between  rulers  and  ruled,  the  word  is 
often  used  to  designate  one  term  in  that  rela¬ 
tionship,  namely,  the  rulers.  When  the  citizens 
of  a  republic  speak  of  “the  government,”  they 
usually  refer  to  the  officialdom — not  the  body 
of  citizens  as  a  whole,  but  only  those  who  for  a 
time  hold  public  office.  But  government  can¬ 
not  consist  of  governors  alone,  any  more  than 
education  can  consist  of  teachers  alone.  The 
different  forms  of  government  can  be  distin¬ 
guished  as  readily  by  looking  to  the  condition 
of  the  ruled  as  to  the  powers  of  the  rulers.  Fur¬ 
thermore,  the  same  individuals  may  both  “rule 
and  be  ruled  by  turns,”  as  Aristotle  observes 
of  constitutional  government. 

Though  the  notion  of  government  includes 
both  rulers  and  ruled,  the  word  usually  appears 
in  political  literature  with  the  more  restricted 
meaning.  When  writers  refer  to  the  branches  or 
departments  of  government,  or  when  they 


638 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


speak  of  the  sovereignty  of  a  government,  they 
direct  attention  to  the  ruling  power,  and  to  the 
division  of  that  power  into  related  parts. 

The  great  books  of  political  theory  ask  a 
number  of  basic  questions  about  government. 
What  is  the  origin  of  government,  its  nature 
and  necessity?  What  ends  does  government 
serve  and  how  do  these  ends  define  its  scope 
and  limits?  What  is  the  distinction  between 
good  and  bad  government,  between  legitimate 
and  illegitimate,  or  just  and  unjust,  govern¬ 
ment  ?  What  are  the  forms  of  government,  of 
good  government,  of  bad  government  ?  What 
are  the  various  departments  or  branches  of 
government,  and  how  should  they  function 
with  respect  to  one  another? 

These  questions  are  related.  The  origin,  na¬ 
ture,  and  necessity  of  government  have  a  bear¬ 
ing  on  its  ends  and  limits.  These  same  consider¬ 
ations  enter  into  the  discussion  of  the  legiti¬ 
macy  and  justice  of  governments.  They  also 
have  a  bearing  on  the  classification  of  the  forms 
of  government,  and  on  the  evaluation  of  di¬ 
verse  forms.  The  way  in  which  the  several 
branches  of  government  should  be  related  is 
affected  by  the  way  in  which  the  various  forms 
of  government  differ. 

These  questions  are  not  always  approached 
in  the  same  order.  Some  of  the  great  political 
theorists — for  example,  Hobbes,  Locke,  and 
Rousseau — find  their  fundamental  principles  in 
the  consideration  of  the  origin  of  government. 
They  start  with  such  questions  as,  What  makes 
it  legitimate  for  one  man  to  govern  another?  Is 
the  exercise  of  political  power  both  justified 
and  limited  by  the  end  it  serves  ?  In  answering 
these  questions,  they  imply  or  make  a  distinc¬ 
tion  between  good  and  bad  government  and 
indicate  the  abuses  or  corruptions  to  which 
government  is  subject.  Though  they  enumerate 
the  various  forms  of  government  in  a  manner 
which  reflects  the  traditional  classifications, 
they  do  not  seem  to  regard  that  problem  as  of 
central  importance. 

Other  eminent  political  thinkers  make  the 
classification  and  comparison  of  diverse  forms 
the  central  problem  in  the  theory  of  govern¬ 
ment.  Plato  and  Aristotle,  Montesquieu  and 
Mill,  are  primarily  concerned  with  the  criteria 
by  which  the  justice  or  goodness  of  a  govern¬ 


ment  shall  be  judged.  They  compare  various 
forms  of  government  as  more  or  less  desirable, 
nearer  to  the  ideal  or  nearer  to  the  opposite 
extreme  of  corruption.  In  the  course  of  these 
considerations  they  answer  questions  about 
the  necessity,  the  legitimacy,  and  the  ends  of 
government  in  general. 

There  seems  to  be  considerable  agreement  on 
one  point,  namely,  that  government  is  necessary 
for  the  life  of  the  state.  It  is  generally  held  by  the 
authors  of  the  great  books  that  no  community 
can  dispense  with  government,  for  without 
government  men  cannot  live  together  in  peace. 
None  is  an  anarchist,  like  Thoreau  or  Kropot¬ 
kin,  although  Kropotkin  claims  that  War  and 
Peace  and  even  Mill’s  Essay  on  Liberty  contain 
“anarchist  ideas.”  Marx  and  Engels  may  be  the 
other  possible  exception  to  the  rule. 

If  Marx  and  Engels  take  the  opposite  view, 
they  do  so  simply  on  the  ground  that  with  the 
advent  of  a  classless  society  after  the  com¬ 
munist  revolution,  the  class  war  will  come  to 
an  end  and  there  will  no  longer  be  any  need 
for  government.  The  state  can  quietly  wither 
away.  But,  according  to  Aquinas,  even  if 
society  were  free  from  all  injustice  and  iniquity, 
even  if  men  lived  together  in  a  state  of  inno¬ 
cence  and  with  the  moral  perfection  they  would 
possess  if  Adam  had  not  sinned,  even  then  gov¬ 
ernment  would  be  necessary.  “A  social  life,”  he 
thinks,  “cannot  exist  among  a  number  of 
people  unless  government  is  set  up  to  look  after 
the  common  good.” 

The  great  books  do  not  agree  about  the 
naturalness  of  the  state.  They  do  not  agree 
about  the  way  in  which  government  originates 
historically  or  about  the  functions  it  should 
and  should  not  perform.  They  do  not  all  reflect 
in  the  same  way  on  the  good  and  evil  in  govern¬ 
ment.  Nor  do  they  all  give  the  same  reasons  for 
the  necessity  of  government.  In  consequence 
they  set  different  limits  to  the  scope  of  govern¬ 
ment  and  assign  it  different  functions,  which 
range  from  the  merely  negative  function  of 
preventing  violence  to  the  duty  to  provide  pos¬ 
itively  for  human  welfare  in  a  variety  of  ways. 

On  all  these  things  they  differ,  but  with  the 
exceptions  noted  they  do  concur  in  thinking 
that  anarchy — the  total  absence  of  government 
— is  unsuitable  to  the  nature  of  man.  Man  be- 


639 


Chapter  31:  GOVERNMENT 


ing  what  he  is,  “any  form  of  government 
in  Darwin’s  opinion,  “is  better  than  none.” 
Some,  like  Hobbes  and  Kant,  identify  anarchv 
with  the  state  of  nature  which  is  for  them  a 
state  of  war.  Some,  like  Locke,  think  that  the 
state  of  nature  is  not  a  state  of  war,  yet  find 
great  advantages  to  living  in  civil  society  pre¬ 
cisely  because  government  remedies  the  incon¬ 
veniences  and  ills  which  anarchy  breeds.  But 
though  they  often  write  as  if  men  could  choose 
between  living  in  a  state  of  nature  or  in  a  civil 
society,  they  do  not  think  man  has  any  option 
with  respect  to  government  if  he  wishes  the 
benefits  of  the  civilized  life.  They  cannot  con¬ 
ceive  civil  society  as  existing  for  a  moment 
without  government. 

The  general  agreement  about  the  necessity 
of  government  tends  to  include  an  agreement 
about  the  two  basic  elements  of  government — 
authority  and  power.  No  government  at  all  is 
possible,  not  even  the  most  attenuated,  unless 
men  obey  its  directions  or  regulations.  But  one 
man  may  obey  another  either  voluntarily  or 
involuntarily — either  because  he  recognizes  the 
right  vested  in  that  other  to  give  him  commands 
1  or  because  he  fears  the  consequences  which  he 
may  suffer  if  he  disobeys. 

These  two  modes  of  obedience  correspond  to 
the  authority  and  power  of  government. 
Authority  elicits  voluntary  compliance.  Power 
either  actually  coerces  or,  by  threatening  coer¬ 
cion,  compels  involuntary  obedience.  Author¬ 
ity  and  power  are  the  right  and  might  of  gov¬ 
ernment.  Either  can  exist  and  may  operate 
apart  from  the  other;  but,  as  Rousseau  points 
out,  when  right  is  lacking,  government  is  ille¬ 
gitimate;  and  as  Hamilton  points  out,  when 
might  is  lacking,  it  is  ineffective. 

In  a  famous  passage,  the  Federalists  explain 
that  rule  by  authority  alone  might  work  in  a 
society  of  angels.  But  since  men  are  men,  not 
angels,  their  obedience  must  be  assured  by  the 
threat  of  force.  In  any  society  in  which  some 
men  are  good,  some  bad,  and  all  may  be  either 
at  one  time  or  another,  force  is  the  only  expe¬ 
dient  to  get  the  unwilling  to  do  what  they 
should  do  for  the  common  good.  Even  when 
the  institutions  of  government  have  their 
authority  from  the  consent  of  the  governed, 
they  cannot  function  effectively  without  the 


use  of  power  or  force.  For  this  reason  I  lamilton 
dismisses  “the  idea  of  governing  at  all  times 
by  the  simple  force  of  law”  as  having  “no  place 
but  in  the  reveries  of  those  political  doctors 
whose  sagacity  disdains  the  admonitions  of 
experimental  instruction.” 

If  authority  without  force  is  ineffective  for 
the  purposes  of  government,  might  without 
right  is  tyrannical.  “Wherever  law  ends, 
tyranny  begins,”  Locke  writes,  “and  whoso¬ 
ever  in  authority  exceeds  the  power  given  him 
by  the  law,  and  makes  use  of  the  force  he  has 
under  his  command  to  compass  that  upon  the 
subject  which  the  law  allows  not,  ceases  in  that 
to  be  a  magistrate.”  The  use  of  unauthorized 
force  may  take  the  form  of  either  usurpation 
or  tyranny.  If  it  is  “the  exercise  of  power 
which  another  hath  a  right  to,”  Locke  declares 
it  is  usurpation;  if  it  is  “the  exercise  of  power 
beyond  right,  which  nobody  can  have  a  right 
to,”  it  is  tyranny. 

The  distinction  between  legitimate  rule  and 
all  dominations  by  force  rests  not  on  the  use  of 
power,  but  on  whether  the  power  which  must 
be  employed  is  or  is  not  legally  authorized. 

The  notion  of  sovereignty  involves  consider¬ 
ations  of  authority  and  power.  The  word  itself 
is  mediaeval  and  feudal  in  origin.  It  signifies  the 
supremacy  of  an  overlord  who  owes  allegiance 
to  no  one  and  to  whom  fealty  is  due  from  all 
who  hold  fiefdoms  under  him.  Since  the  su¬ 
premacy  of  the  sovereign  lord  is  clothed  with 
legal  rights,  according  to  the  customs  of  feudal 
tenure,  sovereignty  seems  to  imply  the  union 
of  power  with  authority,  not  the  use  of  naked 
force. 

The  political  philosophers  of  antiquity  do 
not  use  the  term  sovereignty.  But  their  discus¬ 
sion  of  the  distribution  of  political  power  is 
certainly  concerned  with  the  possession  of 
authority  as  well  as  the  control  of  force.  Aris¬ 
totle’s  question,  for  example,  about  “what  is  to 
be  the  supreme  power  in  the  state — the  multi¬ 
tude  ?  or  the  wealthy  ?  or  the  good  ?  or  the  one 
best  man  ?”  deals  with  the  same  problem  which 
modern  writers  express  by  asking  where  sover¬ 
eignty  resides.  As  Aristotle  sees  the  conflict 
between  the  oligarchical  and  the  democratic 
constitutions,  the  issue  concerns  the  legal  defi¬ 
nition  of  the  ruling  class:  whether  the  constitu- 


640 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


tion  puts  all  the  political  power  in  the  hands 
of  the  rich  or  in  the  hands  of  the  freeborn,  rich 
and  poor  alike.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  too 
violent  an  interpretation  for  modern  transla¬ 
tors  to  use  the  word  “sovereignty”  here,  for 
sovereignty  can  be  said  to  belong  to  whatever 
person  or  class  holds  the  supreme  power  by  law. 

Within  this  meaning  of  sovereignty  the 
basic  difference  between  absolute  and  limited 
government,  or  between  the  despotic  and  the 
constitutional  regime,  leads  to  a  distinction 
between  the  sovereign  man  and  the  sovereign 
office. 

The  ruler  who  holds  sovereignty  in  his  per¬ 
son  is  an  absolute  sovereign  if  his  power  and 
authority  are  in  no  way  limited  by  positive  law. 
According  to  some  political  philosophers,  sov¬ 
ereignty  must  be  absolute.  In  the  opinion  of 
Hobbes,  for  example,  the  notion  of  a  limited 
sovereignty  seems  to  be  as  self-contradictory  as 
that  of  a  supremacy  which  is  not  supreme. 

After  discussing  the  absolute  rights  which 
constitute  sovereignty,  Hobbes  goes  on  to  say 
that  “this  great  authority  being  indivisible  .  .  . 
there  is  little  ground  for  the  opinion  of  them 
that  say  of  sovereign  kings,  though  they  be 
singulis  majores,  of  ^greater  power  than  every 
one  of  their  subjects,  yet  they  be  universis 
minores ,  of  less  power  than  them  all  together. 
For  if  by  all  together  they  mean  not  the  collec¬ 
tive  body  as  one  person,  then  all  together  and 
every  one  signify  the  same,  and  the  speech  is 
absurd.  But  if  by  all  together  they  understand 
them  as  one  person  (which  person  the  sovereign 
bears),  then  the  power  of  all  together  is  the 
same  as  the  sovereign’s  power,  and  so  again  the 
speech  is  absurd.” 

It  makes  no  difference,  Hobbes  argues, 
whether  the  sovereignty  is  held  by  one  man  or 
by  an  assembly.  In  either  case  “the  sovereign 
of  a  commonwealth  ...  is  not  subject  to  the 
civil  laws.  For  having  the  power  to  make  and 
repeal  laws,  he  may  when  he  pleases,  free  him¬ 
self  from  that  subjection  by  repealing  those 
laws  that  trouble  him.”  The  sovereign  there¬ 
fore  has  absolute  power,  which  consists  in  the 
absolute  right  or  liberty  to  do  as  he  pleases,  for 
“he  that  is  bound  to  himself  only  is  not  bound” 
at  all. 

Aquinas  seems  to  be  taking  the  same  view 
when  he  admits  that  “the  sovereign  is  .  .  . 


exempt  from  the  law  as  to  its  coercive  power, 
since,  properly  speaking,  no  man  is  coerced  by 
himself,  and  law  has  no  coercive  power  save 
from  the  authority  of  the  sovereign.”  But 
Aquinas  differs  from  Hobbes  in  thinking  that 
the  authority,  if  not  the  power,  of  the  prince 
is  limited  by  the  constitutional  character  of  the 
kingly  office.  In  the  mediaeval  conception  of 
monarchy,  the  king  is  bound  not  to  himself 
alone,  as  Hobbes  insists,  but  to  his  subjects. 
Their  oath  of  allegiance  to  him  is  reciprocated 
by  his  coronation  oath,  in  which  he  assumes 
the  obligation  to  uphold  the  customs  of  the 
realm. 

Where  Aquinas  conceives  the  sovereign 
prince  as  one  element — the  other  being  estab¬ 
lished  law — in  a  government  which  is  therefore 
both  absolute  and  constitutional,  Hobbes  con¬ 
ceives  the  sovereign  as  identical  with  a  govern¬ 
ment  which  is  wholly  absolute.  The  distinction 
here  implied — between  a  mixed  regime  and  one 
that  is  purely  absolute — is  more  fully  discussed 
in  the  chapters  on  Constitution  and  Mon¬ 
archy.  In  contrast  to  both,  a  republic,  or 
purely  constitutional  government,  substitutes 
the  sovereign  office  for  the  sovereign  man.  It 
denies  the  possession  of  sovereignty  to  men 
except  in  their  capacity  as  office-holders. 

According  to  the  republican  notions  of  Rous¬ 
seau,  not  even  government  itself  has  sover¬ 
eignty  except  as  representing  the  political 
community  as  a  whole,  which  is  the  sovereign. 
Sovereignty,  he  writes,  is  vested  in  the  govern¬ 
ment  “simply  and  solely  as  a  commission,  an 
employment  in  which  the  rulers,  mere  officials 
of  the  Sovereign,  exercise  in  their  own  name  the 
power  of  which  it  makes  them  depositaries.” 
Since  this  power  is  not  theirs  except  by  delega¬ 
tion,  it  can  be  limited,  modified,  or  recovered 
at  pleasure,  “for  the  alienation  of  such  a  right 
is  incompatible  with  the  nature  of  the  social 
body,  and  contrary  to  the  end  of  association.” 

The  unity  of  sovereignty  is  not  impaired  by 
the  fact  that  a  number  of  men  may  share  in  the 
exercise  of  sovereign  power,  any  more  than  the 
unity  of  government  is  destroyed  by  its  divi¬ 
sion  into  separate  departments  or  branches, 
such  as  the  legislative,  executive,  and  judicial. 
Since  in  a  republic  the  government  (in  all  its 
branches  or  offices)  derives  its  power  and 


641 


Chapter  31 :  GOVERNMENT 


authority  from  the  constitution  (or  what 
Rousseau  calls  “the  fundamental  law”),  and 
since  it  is  the  people  as  a  whole,  not  the  officials 
of  government,  who  have  the  constitutive 
power,  the  people  are  in  a  sense  supreme  or 
sovereign. 

Popular  sovereignty  may  mean  that  the  peo¬ 
ple  as  a  whole  govern  themselves  without  the 
services  of  magistrates  of  any  sort;  but  this 
would  be  passible  only  in  a  very  small  commu¬ 
nity.  It  is  questionable  whether  a  people  has 
ever  exercised  sovereignty  in  this  way  in  any 
state  of  historic  importance.  Popular  sovereign¬ 
ty  more  usually  means  what  is  implied  by 
Aquinas  when  he  conceives  the  magistrate  or 
ruler  as  merely  the  vicegerent  of  the  people. 
“To  order  anything  to  the  common  good,” 
he  writes,  “belongs  either  to  the  whole  people, 
or  to  someone  who  is  the  vicegerent  of  the 
whole  people.  Hence  the  making  of  a  law  be¬ 
longs  either  to  the  whole  people  or  to  a  public 
personage  who  has  the  care  of  the  whole  peo¬ 
ple.”  Similarly,  the  exercise  of  coercive  force 
“is  vested  in  the  whole  people  or  in  some  public 
personage,  to  whom  it  belongs  to  inflict  penal¬ 
ties.” 

The  notion  of  a  public  personage ,  as  Aquinas 
uses  it  in  these  passages,  is  clearly  that  of  a  sur¬ 
rogate  for  or  representative  of  the  whole  people. 
The  people  as  a  whole  have,  in  the  first  in¬ 
stance,  the  authority  and  power  to  perform  all 
the  functions  of  government.  Only  if  for  con¬ 
venience  or  some  other  reason  they  constitute 
one  or  more  public  personages  to  act  in  their 
stead,  do  individual  men  exercise  sovereignty, 
and  then  only  as  representatives. 

Locke’s  fundamental  principle — that  “men 
being ...  by  nature  all  free,  equal,  and  independ¬ 
ent,  no  one  can  be  put  out  of  this  estate  and 
subjected  to  the  political  power  of  another  with¬ 
out  his  own  consent” — is  another  expression  of 
the  idea  of  popular  sovereignty.  It  reappears  in 
the  Declaration  of  Independence  in  the  state¬ 
ment  that  since  governments  are  instituted  by 
men  to  secure  their  fundamental  rights,  they 
must  derive  “their  just  powers  from  the  con¬ 
sent  of  the  governed.” 

Hegel  objects  to  the  sense  “in  which  men 
have  recently  begun  to  speak  of  the  ‘sovereign¬ 
ty  of  the  people’  ”  as  “something  opposed  to 
the  sovereignty  existent  in  the  monarch.  So  op¬ 


posed  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  monarch,”  he 
writes,  “the  sovereignty  of  the  people  is  one  ol 
the  confused  notions  based  on  the  wild  idea  of 
the  ‘people.’  ”  11  the  sovereignty  of  the  people 
means  nothing  more  than  the  sovereignty  of 
the  whole  stale,  then,  he  says,  the  sovereignty 
which  “is  there  as  the  personality  of  the  whole 
...  is  there,  in  the  real  existence  adequate  to  its 
concept,  as  the  person  of  the  monarch.” 

But  republican  writers  would  reply  that  the 
sense  in  which  they  speak  of  the  sovereignty  of 
the  people  cannot  be  opposed  to  the  sovereign¬ 
ty  ol  government,  so  long  as  that  government 
is  constitutional,  not  absolute.  When  the  sover¬ 
eignty  of  the  people  is  conceived  as  the  source 
or  basis,  not  as  the  actual  exercise,  of  the  legiti¬ 
mate  powers  of  government,  there  is  no  conflict 
between  these  two  locations  of  sovereignty  in 
the  state.  Yet  the  supremacy  of  the  government 
always  remains  limited  by  the  fact  that  all  its 
powers  are  delegated  and  can  be  withdrawn  or 
changed  at  the  people’s  will. 

The  question  of  absolute  or  limited  sover¬ 
eignty  and  the  connected  question  of  unified  or 
divided  sovereignty  have  a  different  meaning 
in  the  case  of  the  relation  of  governments  to 
one  another. 

The  theory  of  federal  government,  discussed 
in  The  Federalist  and  in  Mill’s  Representative 
Government ,  contemplates  a  division  of  sover¬ 
eignty,  not  as  between  the  people  and  their 
government,  but  as  between  two  distinct  gov¬ 
ernments,  to  each  of  which  the  people  grant 
certain  powers.  Distinguishing  between  the 
government  of  a  national  state  and  the 
government  of  a  federal  union,  Madison  writes: 
“Among  a  people  consolidated  into  one  nation 
.  .  .  supremacy  is  completely  vested  in  the  na¬ 
tional  legislature.  Among  communities  united 
for  particular  purposes,  it  is  vested  partly  in  the 
general  and  partly  in  the  municipal  legislatures. 
In  the  former  case,  all  local  authorities  are  sub¬ 
ordinate  to  the  supreme;  and  may  be  con¬ 
trolled,  directed,  or  abolished  by  it  at  pleasure. 
In  the  latter,  the  local  or  municipal  authorities 
form  distinct  and  independent  portions  of  the 
supremacy,  no  more  subject,  within  their  re¬ 
spective  spheres,  to  the  general  authority  than 
the  general  authority  is  subject  to  them  within 
its  own  sphere.”  The  federal  or  general  and  the 


642 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


state  or  local  governments  draw  on  the  same 
reservoir  of  popular  sovereignty,  but  the  sov¬ 
ereignty  which  each  derives  from  that  source  is 
limited  by  the  definition  of  matters  reserved  to 
the  jurisdiction  of  the  other. 

The  fundamental  difference  between  the  con¬ 
dition  of  states  in  a  federation  and  the  condition 
of  colonial  dependencies  or  subject  peoples  is 
that  imperial  government,  unlike  federal  gov¬ 
ernment,  claims  an  unlimited  sovereignty.  The 
issues  of  imperialism  which  arise  from  the  exer¬ 
cise  of  such  power  are  discussed  in  the  chapters 
on  Tyranny  and  Slavery. 

The  one  remaining  situation  is  that  of  inde¬ 
pendent  governments,  the  governments  of  sep¬ 
arate  states  associated  with  one  another  only  by 
treaties  or  alliances,  or  at  most  in  the  kind  of 
loose  hegemony  or  league  represented  by  the 
Greek  confederacies  or  the  American  Articles 
of  Confederation.  In  this  situation,  the  word 
“sovereignty”  applied  to  independent  govern¬ 
ments  signifies  supremacy,  not  in  the  sense  of 
their  having  the  authority  and  power  to  com¬ 
mand,  but  in  the  opposite  sense  of  not  being 
subject  to  any  political  superior. 

This  radical  difference  in  meaning  is  explic¬ 
itly  formulated  in  Hegel’s  distinction  between 
internal  and  external  sovereignty. 

After  stating  the  conditions  of  the  sovereign¬ 
ty  of  the  state  in  relation  to  its  own  people, 
Hegel  says,  “This  is  the  sovereignty  of  the  state 
at  home.  Sovereignty  has  another  side,  i.e.,  sov¬ 
ereignty  vis-a-vis  foreign  states.”  The  state’s  in¬ 
dividuality  resides  in  its  awareness  of  its  own 
existence  “as  a  unit  in  sharp  distinction  from 
others”;  and  in  this  individuality  Hegel  finds 
the  state’s  autonomy,  which  he  thinks  is  “the 
most  fundamental  freedom  which  a  people  pos¬ 
sesses  as  well  as  its  highest  dignity.” 

But  from  the  fact  that  “every  state  is  sover¬ 
eign  and  autonomous  against  its  neighbors,”  it 
also  follows,  according  to  Hegel,  that  such  sov¬ 
ereigns  “are  in  a  state  of  nature  in  relation  to 
each  other.”  It  is  this  state  of  nature  which 
Hobbes  had  earlier  described  as  a  state  of  war. 
Precisely  because  independent  states  have  ab¬ 
solute  sovereignty  in  relation  to  one  another, 
“they  live  in  the  condition  of  perpetual  war, 
and  upon  the  confines  of  battle,  with  their 
frontiers  armed,  and  cannons  planted  against 
their  neighbors  round  about.” 


In  their  relation  to  one  another  they  are, 
writes  Kant,  like  “lawless  savages.”  Following 
Rousseau,  he  thinks  it  is  fitting  that  the  state 
“viewed  in  relation  to  other  peoples”  should  be 
called  “a  power.”  Unlike  sovereign  govern¬ 
ments  which  unite  authority  with  power  in 
their  domestic  jurisdiction,  sovereign  states  in 
their  external  relations  can  exert  force  alone  up¬ 
on  each  other.  When  their  interests  conflict, 
each  yields  only  to  superior  force  or  to  the 
threat  of  it.  A  fuller  discussion  of  these  matters 
will  be  found  in  the  chapters  on  Law,  State, 
and  War  and  Peace. 

As  already  indicated  in  several  places,  the 
materials  covered  in  this  chapter  necessarily  de¬ 
mand  a  study  of  many  related  chapters  dealing 
with  political  topics.  This  is  peculiarly  true  of 
the  problems  concerning  the  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment.  Separate  chapters  are  devoted  to  each  of 
the  traditionally  recognized  forms,  m.,  Aristoc¬ 
racy,  Democracy,  Monarchy,  Oligarchy, 
Tyranny.  Each  of  these  chapters  defines  a  par¬ 
ticular  form,  distinguishes  it  from  others,  and 
compares  their  merits.  In  addition,  the  chapter 
on  Constitution  deals  with  what  is  perhaps 
the  most  fundamental  of  all  distinctions  in 
forms  of  government,  that  between  a  republic 
and  a  despotism,  or  between  government  by 
laws  and  government  by  men. 

Here,  then,  it  is  necessary  only  to  treat  gen¬ 
erally  of  the  issues  raised  by  the  classification 
and  comparison  of  diverse  forms  of  government. 
They  can  be  summarized  in  the  following  ques¬ 
tions. 

What  are  the  criteria  or  marks  of  good  gov¬ 
ernment  ?  Is  the  goodness  of  government  deter¬ 
mined  by  the  end  it  serves,  by  the  way  in  which 
it  is  instituted,  by  its  efficiency  in  promoting 
whatever  end  it  serves?  Are  such  criteria  of 
good  government  as  justice,  legitimacy,  and 
efficiency,  independent  or  interchangeable? 

What  is  the  nature  of  bad  government? 
Can  a  distinction  be  made  between  the  abuses 
or  weakness  to  which  good  government  is  sub¬ 
ject  in  actual  operation,  and  government  which 
is  essentially  bad  because  perverse  or  corrupt  in 
principle  as  well  as  practice  ? 

Are  there  several  forms  of  good  government? 
Of  bad  government?  How  are  they  differenti¬ 
ated  from  one  another?  Are  all  good  forms 


Chapter  31 :  GOVERNMENT  643 


equally  good,  all  bad  forms  equally  bad  ?  If  not, 
what  is  the  principle  in  terms  of  which  some 
order  of  desirability  or  undesirability  is  estab¬ 
lished  ?  For  example,  is  one  good  form  of  gov¬ 
ernment  better  than  another,  one  bad  form 
worse  than  another,  in  terms  of  degrees  of  jus¬ 
tice  and  injustice,  or  in  terms  of  efficiency  and 
inefliciency  ?  To  put  this  question  in  another 
way,  is  one  form  of  good  government  better 
than  another  because  it  achieves  a  better  result 
or  merely  because  it  achieves  the  same  result 
more  completely  ? 

If  there  are  several  distinct  forms  of  good 
government,  are  there  one  or  more  ways  in 
which  these  can  be  combined  to  effect  a  com¬ 
posite  or  mixed  form?  If  a  mixed  form  is  com¬ 
parable  with  the  pure  forms  it  unites,  is  it  su¬ 
perior  to  all,  to  some,  to  none  of  them?  On 
what  grounds?  In  what  circumstances? 

While  proposing  what  they  consider  to  be 
the  ideal  form  of  government,  some  political 
philosophers  admit  that  the  ideal  may  not  be 
realizable  under  existing  circumstances  or  with 
men  as  they  are.  Plato,  for  example,  recognizes 
that  the  state  he  outlines  in  the  Republic  may 
not  be  practicable;  and  in  the  Laws  he  proposes 
1  institutions  of  government  which  represent  for 
him  something  less  than  the  ideal  but  which 
may  be  more  achievable.  The;: Athenian  Stran¬ 
ger  says  of  the  state  described  in  the  Republic 
that,  “whether  it  is  possible  or  not,  no  man, 
acting  upon  any  other  principle,  will  ever  con¬ 
stitute  a  state  which  will  be  truer  or  better  or 
more  exalted  in  virtue.”  The  state  which  he  is 
discussing  in  the  Laws  “takes  the  second  place.” 
He  refers  to  “a  third  best”  which,  far  from  be¬ 
ing  even  the  practicable  ideal,  may  be  merely 
the  best  form  of  government  which  now  actu¬ 
ally  exists. 

Aristotle  also  sets  down  the  various  ways  in 
which  forms  of  government  can  be  judged  and 
compared.  We  may  consider,  he  writes,  “of 
what  sort  a  government  must  be  to  be  most  in 
accordance  with  our  aspirations,  if  there  were 
no  external  impediment,”  but  we  must  also 
consider  “what  kind  of  government  is  adapted 
to  particular  states.”  In  addition,  Aristotle 
thinks  it  is  necessary  “to  know  the  form  of  gov¬ 
ernment  which  is  best  suited  to  states  in  gen¬ 
eral”  as  well  as  “to  say  how  a  state  may  be  con¬ 
stituted  under  any  given  conditions.” 


Most  important  of  all,  it  is  necessary  to  know 
“not  only  what  form  of  government  is  lx*st,  but 
also  what  is  possible.”  T  hough  “political  writers 
have  excellent  ideas,”  Aristotle  thinks  they  “arc 
often  impractical.”  Since  “the  best  is  often  un¬ 
attainable,”  the  true  legislator  “ought  to  be  ac¬ 
quainted  not  only  with  what  is  best  in  t he  ab¬ 
stract,  but  also  with  what  is  best  relative  to 
circumstances.” 

Both  Montesquieu  and  Mill  later  apply  this 
basic  distinction  between  the  best  form  of  gov¬ 
ernment  considered  absolutely  or  in  the  ab¬ 
stract,  and  the  best  form  relative  to  particular 
historic  circumstances.  Among  these  are  a  peo¬ 
ple’s  economic  condition,  level  of  culture,  po¬ 
litical  experience,  geography,  climate,  and  ra¬ 
cial  characteristics.  Montesquieu,  for  example, 
thinks  that  government  by  law,  absolutely  con¬ 
sidered,  is  better  than  despotic  government,  yet 
he  also  holds  that  despotic  government  is  bet¬ 
ter  for  certain  peoples.  Mill  thinks  that  the  in¬ 
stitutions  of  a  representative  democracy  repre¬ 
sent  the  ideal  form  of  government,  but  he  ac¬ 
knowledges  that  absolute  monarchy  may  be 
better  fora  rude  or  uncivilized  people  who  have 
not  yet  advanced  far  from  barbarism. 

The  great  question  here  is  whether  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  themselves  can  be  improved  so  that 
a  people  may  become  fit  or  ready  for  a  better 
form  of  government,  and  ultimately  for  the 
best  that  is  attainable,  that  is,  the  form  relative 
to  the  best  possible  conditions.  Since  Montes¬ 
quieu  emphasizes  what  he  considers  to  be  fixed 
racial  characteristics,  such  as  the  servility  of  the 
Asiatics,  whereas  Mill  stresses  conditions  which 
are  remediable  by  education,  economic  prog¬ 
ress,  and  social  reforms,  these  two  writers  tend 
to  give  opposite  answers.  The  issue  is  more  fully 
discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Democracy, 
Monarchy,  and  Progress. 

Still  other  questions  remain  and  should  be 
mentioned  here.  Are  the  ideal  state  and  the 
ideal  form  of  government  inseparable,  or  can 
one  be  conceived  apart  from  the  other?  How 
shall  the  ideal  government  be  conceived — in 
terms  of  the  best  that  is  practicably  attainable, 
given  man  as  he  is  or  can  be;  or  in  terms  of  a 
perfection  which  exceeds  human  attainment 
and  which  men  can  imitate  only  remotely  or 
imperfectly,  if  at  all?  Does  divine  government, 
for  example,  set  a  model  which  human  govern- 


644 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ment  should  aim  to  approximate?  Is  that  hu¬ 
man  government  ideal  which  is  most  like  the 
divine;  or,  on  the  contrary,  is  the  perfection  of 
human  government  measured  by  standards 
drawn  from  the  nature  of  man  and  the  diffi¬ 
culties  involved  in  the  rule  of  men  over  men? 

The  traditional  enumeration  of  the  functions 
of  government  is  threefold:  the  legislative,  the 
judicial,  and  the  executive.  Locke  adds  what  he 
calls  “the  federative  power,”  the  power  of 
making  treaties  or  alliances,  and  in  general  of 
conducting  foreign  affairs.  It  may  be  questioned 
whether  this  function  is  strictly  coordinate 
with  the  other  three,  since  foreign,  like  domes¬ 
tic,  affairs  may  fall  within  the  province  of  the 
executive  or  the  legislature,  or  both,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States. 

In  our  own  day,  the  multiplication  of  admin¬ 
istrative  agencies  and  the  development  of  plan¬ 
ning  boards  have  been  thought  to  add  a  new 
dimension  to  the  activities  of  government,  but 
again  it  may  be  questioned  whether  these  are 
not  merely  supplemental  to  the  functions  of 
making  law,  applying  law  to  particular  cases, 
and  regulating  by  administrative  decree  those 
matters  which  fall  outside  the  domain  of  en¬ 
forceable  law.  The  executive  branch  of  gov¬ 
ernment  seems  the  most  difficult  to  define,  be¬ 
cause  it  involves  both  law  enforcement  and  the 
administration  of  matters  not  covered  by  legis¬ 
lative  enactment  or  judicial  decision. 

If  the  threefold  division  of  the  functions  of 
government  is  exhaustive,  the  question  re¬ 
mains  how  these  distinct  activities  shall  be  re¬ 
lated  to  one  another,  and  by  whom  they  shall 
be  performed.  In  an  absolute  monarchy,  in 


which  the  king  is  the  government,  all  powers 
are  in  the  hands  of  one  man.  Though  he  mav 
delegate  his  powers  to  others,  they  act  only  as 
his  deputies  or  agents,  not  as  independent  offi¬ 
cials.  This  does  not  obliterate  the  theoretical 
distinction  between  legislation,  adjudication, 
and  execution,  but  in  this  situation  there  can 
be  no  practical  separation  of  the  three  powers, 
certainly  no  legal  system  of  checks  and  balances. 

It  is  the  separation  of  powers,  according  to 
Montesquieu,  that  is  the  basis  of  political  lib¬ 
erty.  “Power  should  be  a  check  to  power,”  he 
writes.  In  a  system  of  separated  powers,  “the 
legislative  body  being  composed  of  two  parts, 
they  check  one  another  by  the  mutual  privilege 
of  rejecting.  They  are  both  restrained  by  the 
executive  power,  as  the  executive  is  by  the 
legislative.” 

Whether  or  not  Montesquieu  is  right  in  at¬ 
tributing  this  aspect  of  constitutionalism  to  the 
limited  monarchy  of  England  in  his  own  day, 
his  argument  can  be  examined  apart  from  his¬ 
tory,  for  it  raises  the  general  question  whether 
government  by  law  can  be  preserved  from  de¬ 
generating  into  despotic  government  except  by 
the  separation  of  powers. 

For  the  American  Federalists,  the  system  of 
checks  and  balances,  written  into  the  Constitu¬ 
tion,  so  contrives  “the  interior  structure  of  the 
government  that  its  several  constituent  parts 
may,  by  their  mutual  relations,  be  the  means 
of  keeping  each  other  in  their  proper  places.” 
This  they  consider  the  prime  advantage  to  be 
gained  from  Montesquieu’s  principle  of  the 
separation  of  powers.  The  principle  itself  they 
hold  to  be  “the  sacred  maxim  of  free  govern¬ 
ment.” 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 


i.  The  general  theory  of  government  646 

1  a.  The  origin  and  necessity  of  government:  the  issue  concerning  anarchy 

\b.  Comparison  of  political  or  civil  government  with  ecclesiastical  government  and 

with  paternal  or  despotic  rule  647 

1  c.  The  ends  and  limits  of  government:  the  criteria  of  legitimacy  and  justice  648 

id.  The  elements  of  government:  authority  and  power,  or  coercive  force;  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  de  jure  and  de  facto  government 

le.  The  attributes  of  good  government  649 

if  The  abuses  and  corruptions  to  which  government  is  subject  650 


Chatter  31 :  GOVERNMENT  645 

PACK 

lg-  The  sovereignty  of  government:  the  unity  and  disposition  of  sovereignty  650 

(1)  The  sovereign  person:  sovereignty  vested  in  the  individual  ruler 

(2)  The  sovereign  office:  the  partition  of  sovereignty  among  the  offices  created 

by  a  constitution 

(3)  The  sovereign  people:  the  community  as  the  source  of  governmental 

sovereignty 

1  h.  Self-government:  expressions  of  the  popular  will;  elections;  voting  652 

2.  The  forms  of  government:  their  evaluation  and  order 

2tf.  The  distinction  and  comparison  of  good  and  bad  forms  of  government 

2 b.  The  combination  of  different  forms  of  government:  the  mixed  constitution,  the 

mixed  regime  653 

2 c.  The  absolute  and  relative  evaluation  of  forms  of  government:  by  reference  to 
the  nature  of  man  or  to  historic  circumstances 

2 d.  The  influence  of  different  forms  of  government  on  the  formation  of  human 

character  654 

2 e.  The  ideal  form  of  government:  the  distinction  between  practicable  and  utopian 
ideals 

3.  The  powers,  branches,  or  departments  of  government:  enumerations,  definitions,  and 

orderings  of  these  several  powers 

30.  The  separation  and  coordination  of  the  several  powers:  usurpations  and  infringe¬ 
ments  by  one  branch  of  government  upon  another  635 

3 b.  The  relation  of  the  civil  to  the  military  power 

3r.  The  legislative  department  of  government:  the  making  of  law  656 

(1)  The  powers  and  duties  of  the  legislature 

(2)  Legislative  institutions  and  procedures 

3 d.  The  judicial  department  of  government:  the  application  of  law  657 

(1)  The  powers  and  duties  of  the  judiciary 

(2)  Judicial  institutions  and  procedures 

3<?.  The  executive  department  of  government:  the  enforcement  of  law;  administra¬ 
tive  decrees  658 

(1)  The  powers  and  duties  of  the  executive 

(2)  Administrative  institutions  and  procedures 

4.  The  support  and  the  expenditures  of  government:  taxation  and  budget  659 

5.  The  relation  of  governments  to  one  another:  sovereign  princes  or  states  as  in  a  condition 

of  anarchy 

5 a.  Foreign  policy:  the  making  of  treaties;  the  conduct  of  war  and  peace  660 

5 b.  The  government  of  dependencies:  colonial  government;  the  government  of 
conquered  peoples 

5  c.  The  relation  of  local  to  national  government:  the  centralization  and  decentraliza¬ 
tion  of  governmental  functions  661 

5 d.  Confederation  and  federal  union:  the  division  of  jurisdiction  between  state  and 
federal  governments 

6.  Historical  developments  in  government:  revolution  and  progress  662 


646 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ',  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions  :  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g .,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 — (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  general  theory  of  government 

7  Plato:  Republic  295a-441a,c  esp  bk  ii-viii 
310c-416a  /  Statesman ,  598b-604b  /  Laws , 
bk  iii  663d-677a;  bk  iv,  679a-c 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vi,  ch  8  [ii4ib24-ii42a 
12]  390d-391a  /  Politics  445a-548a,c  esp  bk  i, 
ch  5  447d-448c,  bk  iii,  ch  i  471b,d-472c, 
ch  6-13  475d-483a,  bk  iv,  ch  14-16  498b- 
502a, c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [i  136— 
1160]  76a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b- 
162d;  bk  iv,  ch  4  190d;  bk  xix,  ch  13-17 
519a-523a;  ch  21  524a-525a;  ch  23-24, 
528a-c;  ch  26  528d-529a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  96, 
a  4  512d-513c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i-ii,  84c-104d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94b-95a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  291-338  225a-233a  passim 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  16a-c  /  Civil  Government 
25a-81d  esp  ch  vii,  sect  87-89  44a-d,  ch 
viii-ix  46c-54d,  ch  xi,  sect  136  56c-d,  ch 
xv,  sect  171  65a-b,  ch  xix,  sect  211  73d-74a 


36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  78a-b;  part  iii,  112a- 
115b;  part  iv,  157a-158a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i  la-3d 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy  367a-385a,c  / 
Social  Contract ,  bk  iii,  406b,d-410a;  423a- 
424d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  309a-311c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-437c;  450a-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-25]  la-b 
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble 

11a, c 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  104b;  number  45, 
147d-148a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  327b,d-341d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  364d- 
365a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  780b- 
781a 

la.  The  origin  and  necessity  of  government: 
the  issue  concerning  anarchy 

New  Testament:  Romans,  13:1-8  /  I  Peter , 
2:13-15 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [681-710]  88b-c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-372]  134a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  23b-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii,  436d- 
438b 


1*  to  lb  Chapter  31 :  GOVERNMENT 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  44c-d  /  C/7/0,  216b  217d  / 

Gorgias ,  271b-272b  /  Republic ,  bk  ii,  316c- 


319a  /  bk  iii,  663d-667b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[4^7b32-4^^ai5]  8d-9a  /  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  12 
[1162*16-25]  414c;  bk  ix,  ch  9  [u69bi8-22] 
423b  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  445b-446d  csp 
[1253^9-39]  446d;  bk  iii,  ch  6  [i278bi5~29] 
475d-476a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [ioii- 
1027]  74b-c;  [1136-1160]  76a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  23  128c  d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a 

14  Plutarch:  Cato  the  Younger ,  638b  d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  51b-c  /  Histories, 
bk  1,  211c-212d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  iv,  ch  4  190d; 
bk  xii,  ch  27  359c-360a,c;  bk  xix,  ch  14-17 
520a-523a;  ch  21  524a-525a;  ch  23-24,  528a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  96, 
a  4  512d-513c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  i  226c-227c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  vi  [76— 
15 1  ]  61c-62c;  xvi  [85-105]  77d;  paradise,  viii 
[115-117]  118a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  58c-d;  77a;  77c; 
84c-87b;  91a-b;  96a-b;  part  ii,  99a-102a; 
104b-d;  109b;  112b-d;  113c;  124c-125a; 

131a-c;  159d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  462c-465c 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  ii  [183-220] 
535d-536b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i, 
scfm  [78-134]  109a-c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  454a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  vi  [169-188]  200a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  304  227b-228a;  306  228a; 
330  231b-232a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  4c-d;  16a-c  /  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment,  ch  1,  sect  1  25a-c;  ch  ii,  sect  13-cH 
iii,  sect  20  28a-29d;  ch  vi,  sect  57  36d-37b; 
sect  74-76  41b-42a;  ch  vii,  sect  87-CH  x, 
sect  132  44a-55b;  ch  xi,  sect  136  56c-d;  ch 
xv,  sect  171  65a-b;  ch  xvi,  sect  175  65d; 
ch  xix,  sect  212  74a-b;  sect  219  75b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv  13 5a- 184a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 214b-217b  esp  216b; 
261b-262a;  410a-411a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i  la-3d; 
bk  viii,  52a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  333b-d  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  370b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  391b  393c; 
bk  iii,  406b,d-407a;  419b;  423a-424a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  309a-311c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  91b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  87a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  222 b-c  /  Science  of  Right, 
433c-434d;  435c-436b;  437c-d;  450d-451c 


64  7 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7  *25]  la  b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  lla,c 

43  Federalist:  number  2,  31a  b;  number  4, 
36a;  number  15,  63a  d;  65b  c;  number  16 
66c  68d  passim;  number  18  20  71a  78b  pas¬ 
sim;  number  38,  121b  122a ;  number  51, 
163b  c;  164c-d;  number  85,  258d  259a,c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d  268a;  269c;  302d  303a  / 
Utilitarianism,  472 b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  172d  173a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  47 
124a  b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  173a- 
175c;  part  11,  262a  c;  part  iv,  342c-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310a-c;  321b  c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  680b- 
684a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  780b-d 

lb .  Comparison  of  political  or  civil  govern¬ 
ment  with  ecclesiastical  government  and 
with  paternal  or  despotic  rule 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [631-680]  136c-137a 

5  Euripides:  Andromache  [464-492]  319b-c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108d;  bk  v, 
178a-180a 

7  Plato:  Crito,  217a-c  /  Statesman,  581a-c  / 
Laws,  bk  iii  663d-677a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  10  [n6ob 
23—1 1 6 ia9]  413a-b  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2 
445a-446d;  ch  3  [i253bi 5— 22]  447a;  ch  5 
447d-448c;  ch  7  [i255bi6-22]  449b-c;  ch 
12-13  453d-455a,c;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [1277*33- 
b24)  474c-d;  ch  6  [i278b30-i279a22]  476a-c; 
bk  vii,  ch  2  [i324b23-4i]  528d-529a;  ch  3 
[1325*1 8— bi3]  529b-d;  ch  14  537b-538d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  la-2a;  3a-b;  bk  iii, 
51b-c;  61c-62a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  13-17 
519a-523a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92,  a 
1,  rep  2  488d-489d;  q  96,  a  4  512d-513c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  109c-lllb;  121a; 
155b;  part  iii,  198a-199a;  part  iv,  249a; 
266a-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  34a;  101a 

32  Milton:  New  Forcers  of  Conscience  68a-b 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  3a-5d;  14b-15a  /  Civil  Gov¬ 
ernment,  ch  1,  sect  2  25c;  ch  ii,  sect  13 
28a-b;  ch  iv  29d-30b;  ch  vi-vii  36a-46c;  ch 
xiv-xviii  62b-73c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  214b-217b;  410a- 
411a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  3b;  bk 
ii,  4a;  7c-9a,c;  bk  iii,  12a-13c;  bk  iv,  15a-c; 
bk  v,  25d  31b;  bk  vi,  33a-35a;  36a-37a;  bk 
vii,  50d;  bk  viii,  54a-b;  bk  xix,  137c-d;  bk 
xxiv,  202b-c;  bk  xxvi,  214b,d-215a;  218a-b; 
218d-219a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357a-c  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  367a-368c;  370a-379b  /  Social  Contract, 
bk  1,  387d-388a;  391a;  bk  iii,  415d;  418a- 
419c;  bk  iv,  436d  [fn  1] 


648 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  The  general  theory  of  government*  lb.  Com¬ 
parison  of  political  or  civil  government  with 
ecclesiastical  government  and  with  paternal 
or  despotic  rule.) 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  348a-351a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  194a-197a  passim; 
299b-304d  passim;  412c-d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267d-269c;  271c-272a  /  Rep¬ 
resentative  Government ,  339a-341a;  341d-355b; 
436b-437a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  349 
llld-112a;  par  355  112d-113a;  additions,  iii 
134d-135a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 
211b-213a;  part  hi,  310a-c;  part  iv,  330b- 
331d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  BKv,127b- 
137c  passim 

1  c.  The  ends  and  limits  of  government:  the  cri¬ 
teria  of  legitimacy  and  justice 

Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther,  13:1-2— (D)  OT, 
Esther ,  13:1-2 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  22:15-22 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  44c-d  /  Republic ,  bk  i, 
300b-310c;  bk  viii  401d-416a  /  Statesman , 
598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  670c-672c;  673d- 
674c;  bk  iv,  681d-682c;  bk  vi,  707d-708a; 
710d-711a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1253^9-39] 
446d;  bk  iii,  ch  3  [i2y6a7-i6]  473a;  ch  6-7 
475d-477a;  ch  9-10  477c-479a;  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[1292^0-34]  491d;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [i325ai8-bi3] 
529b-d;  ch  14  [i332bi7-4i]  537b-d  /  Rhetoric, 
bk  1,  ch  8  [i366a3~i6]  608b-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c; 
bk  vi,  sect  30  276d-277a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [851-853]  234a 

14  Plutarch:  Tiberius  Gracchus ,  678bd 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b- 
162d;  bk  xix,  ch  13-17  519a-523a;  ch  21 
524a-525a;  ch  23-24,  528a-c;  ch  26  528d- 
529a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  92, 
a  1,  rep  2  488d-489d;  q  96,  a  4  512d-513c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i— ii,  q  90, 
a  1,  rep  3  205b-206b;  q  105,  a  i  307d-309d; 
part  11— 11,  Q  10,  a  10  434c-435c;  q  12,  a  2 
443b-444b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  86c-87d;  90a-b; 
91a-96b;  part  ii,  99a;  100c-104d;  lllb-117b; 
125b-c;  131a-c;  137c-138b;  140a;  142b-c; 
149d-150b;  I53a-159c;  163b-d;  part  iii, 
167b-c;  171a-172a;  177c-180a;  187b-188a; 
191b;  198a-246a,c  esp  198a-199a;  part  iv, 
248a-249b;  273c-d;  274c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i, 
sc  iii  [78-134]  I09a-c 


1  c  to  Id 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  193a-b; 
part  11,  352d-353a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [769-799]  192a-b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  109a  /  Pensees,  332 
232a-b 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  3a-4b;  8c-10d;  lla-21c 
passim  /  Civil  Government,  ch  i,  sect  3  25d; 
ch  vi,  sect  57  36d-37b;  ch  vii,  sect  87-94 
44a-46c;  ch  viii,  sect  99  47c;  sect  107-112 
49b-51b;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch  xi,  sect  136-139 
56c-58a;  ch  xiii,  sect  149  59b-d;  sect  158 
61d-62b;  ch  xiv,  sect  163  63a-b;  ch  xv, 
sect  171  65a-b;  ch  xvii-xviii  70c-73c;  ch 
xix,  sect  221-222  75d-76c;  sect  229  78a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  72b-80b;  part  iv, 
149b-159b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  268c-269b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  16a-17a; 
bk  xi,  69c-d;  bk  xix,  138c;  bk  xxiii,  199b-d; 
bk  xxvi,  214b,d-215a;  218a-b;  218d-2l9a; 
221c-222a;  223c 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  368d-370b; 
374a-375b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  388d-389a; 
391b-393c;  bk  ii,  396d-398b;  400a;  405a-c; 
bk  iii,  406b,d-409a;  419b-c;  423c-424a;  424d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  ii,  149d-150a; 
bk  v,  348c-d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-439a;  445a-c; 
450d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  ii-iii  5a-b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  11a, c; 

article  1,  sect  8  [i92]-sect  io  [303]  13a-14a; 

ARTICLE  III,  SECT  3  [507— 51 1]  16a;  ARTICLE  IV, 
SECT  4  16b-c;  amendments,  i-x  17a-d;  XIII, 
SECT  I  18c;  XIV,  SECT  i  18c 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  30a-b;  number  3, 
33b-c;  number  6,  40a-b;  number  8,  45a-b; 
number  23,  85a-c;  number  25,  91b-d;  num¬ 
ber  30,  102c-d;  number  31,  104b-105c;  num¬ 
ber  33,  107b-109a;  number  34,  llOa-b;  num¬ 
ber  41,  132b  c;  133a;  number  43,  143b  c; 
number  44,  144a-145c;  number  45,  147d- 
148a;  number  51,  164a-165a  passim;  number 
53,  167d-168b;  number  54,  171b-c;  number 
57,  176d-177a 

43  Mill:  Liberty  267a-323a,c  passim,  esp  271c- 
273d  /  Representative  Government ,  332d-350a; 
362c-363a;  380c-382c;  422b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  220b;  221d-224a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  780c-d 

Id.  The  elements  of  government:  authority  and 
power,  or  coercive  force;  the  distinction 
between  de  jure  and  de facto  government 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [681-710]  88b-c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [631-680]  136c-137a  / 
Ajax  [666-676]  148d;  [1052-1090]  152a-b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
432bc 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  285a-287b  /  Laws,  bk  iii, 
670c-671c;  bk  iv,  679c-681a 


Id  to  le  Chapter  31 :  GOVERNMENT  GY) 


9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  cii  2  [1253*29-39] 
446d;  ch  6  [1255*7-25]  448c-d;  bk  iii,  cm  3 
[1276*7-16]  473a;  cii  15  |[  1 286b28-4o|  485b; 
bk  v,  ch  11  [13 1 4^35—13 1 5b!  1]  517a-518c;  bk 
VI,  CH  8  [132 1 b40~i 322*28 j  525d  526a;  bk  vii, 
ch  2  [132^24-39]  528d 

13  V'ircil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [851—853]  234a 

14  Plutarch:  Cleomenes,  659d-660a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b' 
162d;  bk  iv,  ch  4  190d;  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a- 
525a;  cii  23-24,  528a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Siimma  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  1,  rep  3  205b-206b;  a  3  207a-c;  q  95,  a  5 
233d-234d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  7 Id- 73a;  89b; 
91a-b;  part  i-ii,  96c-105c  esp  part  ii,  99a-b; 
109b-c;  112  b-d ;  117d;  122b-124b;  131d-132a; 
145a-b;  148d-149b;  159d;  part  iii,  191b; 
225c-d;  part  iv,  273a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  ii  [183-220] 
535d-536b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  i, 
sc  iii  [78-134]  109a-c  /  Measure  for  Measure , 
act  1,  sc  11  [120-127]  176b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a;  prop  51,  schol  439d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  294-308  225b-228b;  31 1 
228b;  878  345a-b 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  3a-4a;  16a-c  /  Civil  Gov¬ 
ernment^  ch  1,  sect  2-3  25c-d;  ch  ii  25d-28c 
passim;  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d;  ch  vi,  sect  69-71 
40a-c;  ch  vii,  sect  87-89  44a-d;  ch  viii,  sect 
95-99  46c-47c;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch  xii,  sect 
143-CH  xiii,  sect  149  58c-59d;  ch  xiv  62b- 
64c  passim;  ch  xv,  sect  171  65a-b;  ch  xvi- 
xix  65d-81d  passim,  esp  ch  xix,  sect  219 
75b-c  /  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xx vii  1,  sect  4-17  229b-232d  passim,  esp  sect 
6  229d, sect  9  230b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  261b-262a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii,  84b 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  367b;  370b- 
372b  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  389a-393b;  bk 
ii,  396d-397a;  bk  iii,  406b,d-409a;  418a-419c; 
bk  iv,  433a-434b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  v,  309c-311c; 
349a-c 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  389a- b; 
392  b;  393c 

43  Federalist:  number  2,  31a-b;  number  15, 
64b-65d;  number  16  66c-68d  passim,  esp  67d- 
68c;  number  20-21,  78a-d;  number  23,  85d- 
87a  passim;  number  27-28,  94d-96c;  number 
29,  98c-99b;  number  31,  104b;  number  33, 
108d-109a;  number  37,  118d-119a;  number 
39,  127a-d;  number  41,  132b-c;  number  43, 
141a-142d;  number  44,  145c-147a;  number 
59,  182a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-269c  /  Representative 
Government,  327b,d-332d;  333c-334a;  350b- 
355b;  362c-363a;  429a-c  /  Utilitarianism, 
472b-c 


46  1 1  eg  el:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  209 
2 13  09d  71a;  par  2p  237  75c  76c;  par  278 
92c  93a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  11,  680b 
688a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v,  127b 
137c  passim 

le.  The  attributes  of  good  government 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-456]  261d  262b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108d 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  342a-350a  /  States¬ 
man,  598b  604b  /  Imws,  bk  iv,  681b  682c; 
bk  viii,  733b-734a  esp  733d  734a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i io}b2-6] 349a; 
bk  vm,  ch  io-ii  412c-413d  /  Politics,  bk  ii, 
ch  2  [i26ia23~b6]  456a  b;  cii  9  [1269*29-33] 
465b-c;  bk  iii,  cii  6  [1279*17)^11  7  [i279bio] 
476c-477a;  bk  vi,  ch  4  [13 i8b2 1 — 1 3 1 9*3] 
522b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  2  [1324*24-25]  528b; 
ch  14  [i332bi2~4i]  537b  d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b- 
162d;  bk  iv,  ch  3-4  190a-d;  bk  xix,  ch  24 
528b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d- 
309d 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xii,  18a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  101a-104d; 
112  b-d;  153a-159c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  193a;  part 
ii,  331a-336a;  352d-353a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ix,  sect  131 
54d;  ch  xi,  sect  134-cH  xii,  sect  143  55b- 
58d;  ch  xiii,  sect  158-CH  xiv,  sect  168  61d- 
64c;  cii  xviii,  sect  205  72a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  74a-76b;  78a- b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  216b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  268c-269b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  3b-d;  bk 
vi,  39b;  bk  xi,  69a-75a;  bk  xii,  84b,d-85c; 
bk  xiii,  96a-b;  bk  xix,  135d-136a;  138a-c; 
bk  xxiii,  199b-c;  bk  xxvi,  214b, d;  bk  xxix, 
262a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323a-328a,c;  360b-c  / 
Political  Economy ,  368c-372b;  375b-c  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  iii,  411c-412c;  417c-418a;  424a-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Pall,  50a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114  b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 
408c-409c;  438d-439a;  450b-452a  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  586a-587a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7—23]  la-b 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  30a-b;  number  22, 

84c-d;  number  23  85a-87a;  number  30, 
lOlb-c;  number  31,  104b;  number  37, 
118d-119b;  number  39,  125a-126b;  number 
41,  132b-c;  number  45,  147d-148a;  number 
47  153c-156d;  number  57,  176d-177a;  177d- 
178a;  number  62,  190c;  number  68,  206b-c; 
number  70,  210c-d;  number  71,  215b;  num¬ 
ber  78,  232d-233c;  number  83,  250d-251a 


650 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  If  to  lg(l) 


(1.  The  general  theory  of  government .  le.  The 
attributes  of  good  government .) 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  272d-273d;  322a-323a,c  / 
Representative  Government ,  332d-350a;  356d- 
357a;  362c-370a;  380c-382c;  387c-d;  436b- 
437a;  439b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  182c-d;  204b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  165 
145a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  174a- 
175c;  part  1,  208b-c;  part  ii,  275a-b;  276a; 
part  iv,  342a-343a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [10,252-259]  249b- 
250a 

1/.  The  abuses  and  corruptions  to  which  gov¬ 
ernment  is  subject 

Old  Testament:  1  Samuel,  8:3-20— (D)  I  Kings, 
8:3-20 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  iii, 
436d-437d 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii-ix  401d-427b  / 

bk  iv,  681d-682c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [1266^6- 
i267bio]  462c-463b;  bk  iii,  ch  15  [i286a3i- 
b8]  484c-d;  ch  16  [i287ai-b8]  485b-486a;  bk 
v,  ch  2-3  503b-505b;  ch  8  [i3o8b3i-i309a32] 
511a-c  passim;  ch  12  [i3i6ai-b27]  518d-5l9d  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  4  [i36oai7~29]  600c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  ii,  224d-225a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  6  514b- 
515a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vi  [58-75]  9a; 
xxvii  [19-54]  39d-40a;  purgatory,  vi  [76- 
151]  61c-62c;  xvi  [58-126]  77c-78a;  paradise, 
xvi  130a-132a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  78b-d;  part  ii, 
lOOa-c;  104b-d;  116c-d;  148c-153a;  164a, c; 
part  iv,  273a-b;  conclusion,  279a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  381b-d;  384b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure  174a- 
204d 

32  Milton:  Lord  Gen .  Fairfax  68b-69a  /  Samson 
Agonistes  [237-276]  344b-345b  /  Areopagitica , 

412b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xi,  sect  138 
57b-c;  ch  xiii,  sect  149  59b-d;  ch  xviii, 
sect  199-201  71a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  lib;  15b-16b;  28b- 
29a;  part  ii,  74a-76b;  part  iii,  120a;  part 
iv,  152b-154a;  157a-158a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  lOOd-lOla;  268c-269b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  39c;  bk 
viii,  51a-55c;  bk  xi,  69a-c;  bk  xxviii,  259b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  360b-361c  /  Political 
Economy ,  372b-373a  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  iii, 
433a-434b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  ii,  148b-c;  149d- 
150a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  35a;  521d;  622d- 
623a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  307a-c;  586c-587b 


42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-441d  esp  435c- 
436b,  437c-d,  438d-441d;  450a-c 

43  Federalist:  number  10  49c-53a  passim; 
number  15,  65c-66a;  number  16,  68c-d;  num¬ 
ber  22,  82c-83d;  number  28  96c-98b  passim; 
number  37,  120d-121a;  number  41,  132b-c; 
number  51  162d-165a  passim;  number  62, 
190a-b;  number  66,  201d-202a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-269c  /  Representative 
Government,  328d-330c;  350d-351a;  362c- 
370a;  376a-c;  387c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  120a-c;  178b-c;  195c-d; 
261c-d;  374b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [4772-4811]  118b- 
119b;  [10,242-284]  249b-250b 
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  BKv,127b- 
137c  passim 

1  g.  The  sovereignty  of  government:  the  unity 
and  disposition  of  sovereignty 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  6  [i278b9~i4] 
475d;  ch  7  476c-477a;  ch  10  478d-479a  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  8  [i365b27~i366a2]  608a-b 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  3  207a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  97c-98a,c;  part 
ii,  100c-105c;  112b-c;  114b-c;  116c-d;  117b-d; 
122b-124b;  130d;  131d-132a;  148b;  150b; 
151a-152a;  153b;  159c;  part  iii,  228b 
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [769-799]  192a-b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ix,  58b, d- 
60a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323d  /  Political  Econ - 
*  omy,  368c-369a  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  392a- 
393b;  bk  11,  395a-398b;  bk  iii,  406b,d-409a; 
420d;  bk  iv,  423a-424b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b,d-28b  passim, 
esp  28a-b;  521b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-b;  437c-d; 
438b-c;  439a-441d;  450d-451b;  452a-d 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  ii  5a-b 

43  Federalist:  number  9,  48b-49c  esp  49b; 
number  15,  63d-66b;  number  16-20  66c-78b 
esp  number  20,  78a-b;  number  32  105c-107b 
passim,  esp  105d;  number  33,  108d-109a; 
number  39,  126b-128b;  number  42,  138c; 
number  44,  146d-147a;  number  62,  189c-d; 
number  81,  240d-241a;  number  82,  242b-c 
43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  331c-332d; 
355b-356b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  276 
92b;  par  279  93a-94d;  par  285  96b;  par  321- 
322  106c-107a;  additions,  168  145c-d;  178 
147d-148a;  187  149b  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
part  iv,  355c-d;  365a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  680b- 
684a 

lg(l)  The  sovereign  person:  sovereignty  vested 
in  the  individual  ruler 

Old  Testament:  I  Samuel,  8:4-20 — ( D )  I  Kings, 
8 :4~2o 


651 


\g(2)  t0  k(3)  Chapter  31 :  GOVERNMENT 


4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ii  [188-206]  12a 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [631-765)  136c~137d 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [429-456]  262a  b  / 
Andromache  [464-492]  319bc 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  23b  24b;  bk  iii, 
107c-108c 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iv,  679c-681a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  10  [1281*29-38] 
479a;  ch  14  [i285b29]-cn  17  [1288*34]  484a- 
487a;  bk  iv,  ch  10  495a-b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  la-2a;  3a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  96, 
a  4  512d-513c;  q  103,  a  3  530a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  1,  rep  3  205b-206b;  a  3  207a-c;  q  96,  a  5, 
ans  and  rep  3  233d'234d;  q  105,  a  i  307d- 
309d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  71d-73a;  74b-c; 
97c-d;  part  ii,  100c-106d;  113d-114b;  130b-d; 
131d-132a;  149d-150a;  I53a-158a 

30  Bacon  :  New  Atlantis ,  208a-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [587-612]  106a-b; 
bk  11  [1-42]  llla-112a;  bk  vi  [169-188]  200a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  14b-d  /  Civil  Government , 
ch  1,  sect  1  25a-c;  ch  ii  25d-28c;  ch  vi,  sect 
53  36b-c;  ch  vii,  sect  90-94  44d-46c;  ch  xix, 
sect  232-239  78c-81b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  268c-269b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  3b;  bk 
11,  4a;  7c-d;  8d-9a,c;  bk  iii,  12b-13c;  bk  v, 
26d-27b;  30a-c;  bk  vi,  36a-b;  bk  xii,  94c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  323d  /  Social  Contract , 
bk  iii,  406b,d-407a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  24b,d-28b  passim, 
esp  26b-27d;  51a-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  74c-d;  320d-321a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  437c-d;  439a-441d; 
445a-c;  450a-b;  450d-452a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267d-268a  /  Representative 
Government ,  341d-344a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  120a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  275 
92a-b;  par  279  93a-94d;  par  320  106c;  addi¬ 
tions,  167  145c  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part 
iii,  300a-301c;  part  iv,  325a-b;  342a-343a; 
355c-d;  365c-366b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  680b- 
684a 

lg(2)  The  sovereign  office:  the  partition  of 
sovereignty  among  the  offices  created  by 
a  constitution 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  vi,  697a-705c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [i26ia23-b6] 
456a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [i275a22-b2i]  472a-c;  ch 
ii  [i282a25-bi4]  480a-c;  ch  16  [1287*1  i-b7] 
485c-486a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [1290*3-13]  489a;  ch  4 
[1292*30-37]  491d;  ch  15  499c-501c;  bk  vi,  ch 
8  525b-526d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  34d-35d  /  Tiberius 
Gracchus ,  678b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  153a-159c 


35  Locke:  GW/ Government ,  ch  ix,  sect  127  1 
54a  d;  ch  xi,  sect  134  55b  d;  cm  xiii  59b- 
62b  passim;  ch  xiv,  sect  165-166  63a  64a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  71a  76b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xi,  69d* 
75a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  395a*d;  bk 
iii,  419b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  la  b;  25a- 28a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  28a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  564a- b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436b  c;  444c-445a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  i  hi 
lla-16a 

43  Federalist:  number  22,  84c-d;  number  59, 
125c-d;  number  47-51  153c-165a;  number 
53,  167d-168b;  number  64,  197a  b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  355b  356b; 
362c-363a;  401d-402b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  269 
84d;  par  271  89c;  additions,  161  143a-b  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  342b-d;  368c  d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  238c-243d 

lg(3)  The  sovereign  people:  the  community  as 
the  source  of  governmental  sovereignty 

Old  Testament:  Judges,  8 :22-23  /  I  Samuel,  8— 
(D)  I  Kings,  8  /II  Samuel,  2:4 —(D)  1 1  Kings , 
2:4/1  Kings,  12:1-20 —(D)  III  Kings,  12:1-20 

Apocrypha:  I  Maccabees,  14:25-47— (D)  OT, 
I  Machabees ,  14:25-47 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [429-456]  262a-b 

5  Aristophanes:  Kwg/i^470a-487a,cesp  [1316— 
1408]  486a-487a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [1270^0-22] 
466d;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [i275*22-b2i]  472a-c;  ch  3 
[i276*40-bi]  473b;  ch  7  476c-477a;  ch  ii 
479b-480c;  ch  17  486c-487a;  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[i29ib30-i292*37]  491a-d;  ch  9  [1294^4-39] 
494d;  ch  12  496d-497b;  ch  14  498b-499c 

14  Plutarch:  Tiberius  Gracchus ,  678b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  3  207a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  100c-102c;  part 
iii,  200a  b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d; 
ch  vii,  sect  87-94  44a-46c;  ch  viii  46c-53c 
passim;  ch  ix,  sect  127-cH  x,  sect  132  54a- 
55b;  ch  xi,  sect  141  58a  b;  ch  xiii,  sect  149 
59b  d;  ch  xiv,  sect  163-168  63a-64c;  ch  xv, 
sect  171  65a-b;  ch  xvi,  sect  179-184  66d- 
68d;  sect  190-192  69b-d;  ch  xvii,  sect  198 
70d-71a;  ch  xix  73d-81d  passim,  esp  sect 
240-243  81b  d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-6b; 
bk  xv,  109c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323d  /  Social  Contract, 
bk  1,  391b-393b;  bk  ii,  395b-c;  396d-398a; 
400a;  401a-c;  bk  iii,  406b,d-410a;  420a-421c; 
423a-424b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  lOOd;  241b 


652 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(lg.  The  sovereignty  of  go  vernment:  the  uyiity  and 
disposition  of  sovereignty .  lg(3)  The  sov¬ 
ereign  people:  the  community  as  the  source 
of  governmental  sovereignty .) 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  436c;  437c-d;  439a- 
441  d;  450a-b;  450d-452a  esp  451c-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence  :  [1-25]  la-b; 
[43-47]  2a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  11a, c; 
AMENDMENTS,  IX-X  17d 

43  Federalist:  number  22,  84d-85a;  number 
33,  108b-c;  number  39  125a-128b;  number 
46,  150b-c;  number  49,  159c;  number  53, 
167d-168b;  number  84,  252b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267d-269c  /  Representative  Gov¬ 
ernment,  341d-350a  passim,  esp  344d;  355b- 
356b;  380c-382c;  386d-393a  esp  387c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  279 
93a-94d;  par  308  102c-103a  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  part  ii,  272b-273a;  part  iii,  300a- 
301c;  part  iv,  365c-366b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  680b- 
684a 

lh.  Self-government:  expressions  of  the  popu¬ 
lar  will;  elections;  voting 

Old  Testament:  ]udges,  21:24 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [1266*5-30] 
461c-d;  ch  9  [i27ob7~34]  466d-467a;  [1271*9- 
17]  467b;  ch  12  [1273^36-1274*22]  470c-d;  bk 
iii,  ch  11  479b-480c;  bk  iv,  ch  14  498b-499c; 
bk  vi,  ch  2-3  520d-522a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  1,  ch 
8  [i365b32-33]  608a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d-35c  /  Coriolanus , 
180b-d  /  Tiberius  Gracchus,  676b-681a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  3,  ans  207a-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c  esp 
act  ii,  sc  11— iii  36 4a-369a 

32  Milton:  Sonnets,  xii  65a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  viii,  sect  95-99 
46c -47c;  ch  xiii,  sect  154  60c-d;  ch  xix, 
sect  216  74d;  sect  222  75d-76c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  73b-74b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-6b; 
bk  xi,  71a-c;  bk  xix,  142a-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  324c-325b  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  i,  393a-b;  bk  ii,  396b-d;  bk  iv, 
425a-432b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  241b-c;  521a-523a,c 
passim 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73b;  562c-564b; 
587a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d-437c;  451c- 
452a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble 
11a, c;  article  1,  sect  2  [5— i o]  lib;  sect  2 
[17]— sect  3  [66]  llb-12a;  sect  4  [96-102], 
SECT  5  [107-109]  12b;  ARTICLE  II,  SECT  I 
[321-374]  14b-d;  amendments,  xii  18a-c; 
XVII  19b-c;  xxiii  20d 


lh  to  2a 

43  Federalist:  number  39,  125a-b;  number 
49-50  159b-162c;  number  51,  164d-165a; 
number  52-61  165a-188d  passim;  number  68 
205b-207a;  number  84,  252b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  268d-269a  /  Representative 
Government,  370a-406a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  308- 
31 1  102c-104a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
172d-173a 

2.  The  forms  of  government:  their  evaluation 
and  order 

2a .  The  distinction  and  comparison  of  good 
and  bad  forms  of  government 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-456]  261d-262b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides:  PeloponnesianWar,  BKii,396c-d; 
bk  hi,  432b-c;  bk  vi,  520b-c;  bk  viii, 
587a-b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  i,  301c-d;  bk  viii-ix, 
401d-421a  /  Statesman,  598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk 
iii  663d-677a  esp  669d-672a,  672c;  bk  iv, 
679c-682c;  bk  v,  692c-693a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  io-ii  412c- 
413d  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [i275*35-b2]  472b; 
ch  6-7  475d-477a;  ch  ii  [1282^-14]  480c;  ch 
15  [i286b5— 7]  484d;  bk  iv,  ch  i-io  487a-495b 
/  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8  608a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa  61b,d-64a,c  / 
Dion,  800c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  51b;  bk  iv,  72a-b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 

a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d- 
309d 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  i  3a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  104b-109a  esp 
104d-105a;  114b-115a;  129b-130a;  150c-151a; 
154b-c;  158b-c;  part  iii,  228b;  part  iv, 
273a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  90-91 
44d-45c;  ch  x,  sect  132  55a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  78a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  216b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  268c-269b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii-iii  4a- 
13d;  bk  iv,  15a-c;  bk  v,  25d-31b;  bic  vi,  33a- 
35a;  37d-38b;  bk  viii,  54a-b;  bk  xi,  69a-c; 
bk  xv,  109a-b;  bk  xix,  145d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  359a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  410b-415b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113b-115a  /  Science  of 
Right ,  439c-440a;  441  b-c;  450a-452a  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  586a-587a 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  51c-52d;  number 
14,  60b-61a;  number  22,  83b-d;  number  39, 
125a-126b;  number  48,  157 c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  332d-355b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  195c-d;  260b;  390a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273 
90c-92a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  203b- 
206a, c 


2b  to  2c 


653 


Chapter  31 :  GOVERNMENT 


2b.  The  combination  of  different  forms  of  gov¬ 
ernment:  the  mixed  constitution,  the 
mixed  regime 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [359  322)  5b 
6b;  [600-624]  8d-9a 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [339-358]  261b  c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iv,  152d  153b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  viii, 
590a-b 

7  Plato:  Statesman ,  598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  hi, 
667a-676b;  bk  iv,680d-681a;  bk  vi,  699d-700b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [126^26- 
i266a4]  461  b  e;  ch  ii  [i272b23]-cn  12  [1274" 
13]  469b-470d;  bk  iii,  ch  15-16  484b  486c 
esp  ch  15  [i286b3i]-cn  16  [1287^]  485b-c;  bk 
iv,  ch  8-9  493c-494d;  ch  11-12  495b-497b; 
bk  v,  ch  7  [i307a5-28]  509a-b;  ch  8  [i3o8bio- 
I3°9a32I  510d-511c;  ch  ii  [1313*18-33]  515d- 
516a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8  [i365b39— 1366*2] 
608b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  34b-35d  /  Dion ,  800c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  59d;  bk  iv,  72a;  bk 
vi,  97b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  i,  ans  307d-309d 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  iv  7a-8a;  ch  xix, 
27a-b;  29c-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  partii,  103d-104b;  106d- 
107c;  151c-152a;  part  iii,  228a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  94 
46a-c;  ch  x,  sect  132  55a-b;  ch  xi  55b-58b; 
ch  xiii-xiv  59b-64c  passim;  ch  xviii,  sect 
199-206  71a-72c;  ch  xix  73d-81d  passim,  esp 
sect  213  74b-c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  216b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  266d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  7c-8c; 
bk  iii,  llc-12b;  13c;  bk  vi,  36a-b;  bk  ix, 
58b,d-60a;  bk  xi  68b,d-84d;  bk  xix,  142a- 
146a, c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357b-c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  410c;  414d-415b;  bk  iv,  427a- 
428a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b;  26d-28b; 
622d-623a;  630b,d-631a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71d;  81c-d;  218c 
219a;  403b-d  esp  403c;  404c-d;  428a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  439c-440a;  441  b-c; 
450a-452a 

43  Federalist:  number  39,  125c;  number  43, 
141a-d;  number  47, 154a-c;  number  69  207a- 
210c  passim;  number  70,  213b-c;  number  71, 
216a-b;  number  84,  252b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268c  /  Representative 
Government,  343c-344a;  351a-c;  353d-354b; 
355b-356b;  401d-402b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  178a-b;  255a-d;  390a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273 

90c-92a;  par  275-286  92a-97a;  additions, 
170-172  145d-146d  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
part  iv,  368c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  238c-243d 


2c.  The  absolute  and  relative  evaluation  of 
forms  of  government:  by  reference  to 
the  nature  of  man  or  to  historic  circum¬ 
stances 

Oi  d  Testament:  I  Samuel,  8 —(D)  l  Rings,  8 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c  108d; 
120b  c;  bk  v,  178a  180a;  bk  vii,  233a-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  viii, 
587a  b;  590a  b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii  iv,  339b  356a;  bk 
viii  ix  401d  427b  /  l^aws,  bk  iii  663d-677a; 
bk  ix,  754a  b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  12  453d-454a; 
bk  iii,  cii  15  [i286b8-22]  484d-485a;  ch  17 
486c-487a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  487a-488b;  cii  2  (1289^ 
13-20]  488c-d;  cii  12  496d-497b 

14  Plutarch:  Phocion,  605a-d 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i,  193c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  104b  d;  105c- 
106b;  129b-130a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  46d 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  i,  sc  i  -ii 
568b,d-572c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  iii,  sc  i  [131- 
161]  370d-371a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [241-276]  344b- 
345b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  13 
28a-b;  ch  vii,  sect  90-94  44d-46c;  ch  viii, 
sect  105-112  48c-51b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  partiii,  112a-113a;  118a-121b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  3b-c;  bk 

iv,  15c;  bk  v,  29a-b;  bk  xiv,  107a-d;  bk  xvi, 
118b-c;  bk  xvii,  122a-124d;  bk  xviii,  125a  c; 
126b-c;  bk  xix,  135a-b;  135d;  140d-141a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  359a-b  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  371c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  405c-d;  bk 
iii,  407c;  409a;  410c;  415b-417c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  32b-34a,c  esp  33c; 
68b,d-69a;  90d-91d;  513b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  222d-224a;  320d- 
321b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  /  Scierice  of  Right , 
438d-439a;  450b-d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-23]  la-b 

43  Federalist:  number  6,  40a-41a;  number  10, 

51c-52d;  number  15,  65b-66b;  number  55, 
174c-d;  number  85,  257a-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  272a  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  327b,d-355b  passim;  366a-369b;  436b- 
437a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  195c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273- 
274  90c-92a;  additions,  165-166  145a-c  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  173c-175c;  203b- 
206a, c;  part  i,  207d-209a;  243b-c;  part  ii, 
271c-d;  273d-274a;  part  iii,  285b-d;  300a- 
301c;  part  iv,  344a-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  107a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b- 
137c  passim 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  883d-884c 


2d  to  3 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


654 

(2.  The  forms  of  government:  their  evaluation  a?id 
order.) 

2 d.  The  influence  of  different  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment  on  the  formation  of  human  charac¬ 
ter 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  v,  175b;  bk  vii, 
232d'233d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii, 
396c-d;  bk  vhi,  564a-c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii  401d-416a  / 
bk  viii,  733b-734a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  ch  io-ii  412c- 
413d;  bk  x,  ch  9  434a-436a,c  /  Politics ,  bk 
iii,  ch  4-5  473c-475d;  bk  iv,  ch  7  [i293b5~6] 
493a-b;  bk  v,  ch  9  [1310^2-35]  512b-c;  bk 
vii,  ch  2  [1324^^23]  528a-d;  ch  14  [i333ai  1— 
15]  537d-538a 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters ,  Places ,  par  16 
15d-16a;  par  23  18a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  34b-37c  / 
Numa  Pompilius,  59c-60b  /  Lycurgus-Numa 
61b,d-64a,c  /  Cleomenes ,  659d-660a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  60c-61d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [246-257]  116b  / 
Samson  Agonistes  [241-276]  344b-345b  / 
opagitica ,  384b-385b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii-v,  8d- 
19d;  bk  v,  26c-27a;  bk  xix,  138c-140d;  142a- 
146a,  c 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  372a-b  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  ii,  400d-401a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  23c-24a,c;  79c-d; 
91c-92b;  523d-524a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  161c-162b;  202b-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  586b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  298d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  341d-350a  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  273 
90c-92a  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  174a- 
175c;  part  iii,  285b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  JFar  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  668a- 
669d 

2e.  The  ideal  form  of  government:  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  practicable  and  utopian 
ideals 

5  Aristophanes  :  Birds  542a-563d  /  Ecclesiazu- 
sae  615a-628d  esp  [553-729]  621b-623c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

7  Plato:  Republic  295a-441a,c  esp  bk  ii-vii 
310c-401d  /  Timaeus,  442b-443b  /  Statesman , 
598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  681b-d;  bk  v,  692c- 
693a;  696a-b;  bk  vii,  722d-723c;  bk  ix, 
754a-b  /  Seventh  Letter,  806b-807b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  7  [1135^-4]  382d 
/  Politics ,  bk  11,  ch  1  [i26ob28]-cH  9  [1269^7] 
455b,d-465c;  bk  iv,  ch  i  487a-488b;  ch  2 
[i289a30~35]  488b;  ch  7  [i293br-2i]  493a-b; 
ch  11  495b-496d;  bk  v,  ch  12  [i3i6ai-2o] 
518d-519a;  bk  vii,  ch  4-15  530a-539d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ix,  sect  29  294a-b 


14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d 
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a- 
525a;  ch  23-24,  528a-c 
23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xv,  22b 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  112b-d;  164a, c 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  318c-319b;  462c-465c 
27  Shakespeare:  Tempest,  act  ii,  sc  i  [143-168] 
532d-533a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95a  / 
New  Atlantis  199a-214d 
32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  393a-b 
36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  28a-31a;  part  ii,  76b- 
80b;  part  iii,  112a-115b;  part  iv  135a-184a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  216b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  268c-269b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  68b, d- 
75a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323a-328a,c  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  ii,  400c-403a;  405a-c;  bk  iii, 
410d-411c;  417c-418a;  bk  iv,  427d 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  68b,d-69a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 
438d-439a;  450b-452a  /  Judgement,  586a-587a 

43  Federalist:  number  6,  40a-41a;  number  16, 
68d;  number  38,  122b-124a;  number  41, 
132b-c;  number  43,  141d-142d;  number  49, 
159d-160a;  number  65,  200b-c;  number  68, 
206b-c;  number  85,  257a-c;  258d-259a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  327b,d-355b 
esp  341c-d;  368c-370a;  380c-381a;  387c-d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  6c-d;  part 
iii,  par  185  64b-d;  par  273  90c-92a  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History,  intro,  173c-175c;  part  i, 
243b-c;  251b;  part  ii,  279c-d;  part  iii, 
300c-d;  part  iv,  365c-d 

50  Marx-Engels  :  Communist  Manifesto,  428d- 
429c;  432d-433c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  245a-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
131c-d 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  883d-884c 

3.  The  powers,  branches,  or  departments  of 
government:  enumerations,  definitions, 
and  orderings  of  these  several  powers 
7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iii,  665d-666c 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  14-16  498b- 
502a, c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i  [i354ai3~i355a3] 
593b-594a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  122b-124b 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  88-89 
44c-d;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch  xi-xiv  55b-64c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  69d- 
75a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  301a-357c 
passim 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436b-439a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i-iii 
1  la-1 6a  passim 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  119b-d;  number 
47-82  153c-244a  esp  number  48,  157c-d, 
number  64,  197a-b;  number  78,  230b-d 


3a  to  3b  Chapter  31 :  GOVERNMENT  655 


43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  355b  424c 
passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  hi,  par 
272-273  89d  92a;  additions,  164  144c-145a  / 
Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  364d  365a; 
365c  d 

3 a.  The  separation  and  coordination  of  the 
several  powers:  usurpations  and  infringe¬ 
ments  by  one  branch  of  government 
upon  another 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  hi,  671a-672a;  bk  ix,  754c-d 
9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  14-16  498b- 
502a, c  /  Athenian  Constitution ,  ch  45,  par  1 
573d 

14  Plutarch:  Solon ,  70d-7lc  /  Poplicola-Solon , 
86d-87a  /  Agesilaus ,  482a-c  /  Agis ,  650b-656d 
/  Cleomenes,  660b-661a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  la-2a;  3a-b;  bk  iv, 
65a-c;  bk  xi,  101c;  bk  xiii,  126c-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  1,  rep  2-3  226c-227c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  103d-104a;  150b; 
151c-152a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii-iii  25d-29d 
passim;  ch  vii,  sect  90-94  44d-46c;  ch  viii, 
sect  107  49b-d;  ch  xii-xiv  58c-64c;  ch  xvii- 
xviii  70c-73c;  ch  xix,  sect  212-219  74a- 
75c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  6b-8c; 
bk  v,  29a;  bk  vi,  36a-37b;  bk  xi  68b,d-84d 
esp  69d-75a;  bk  xix,  142b-143a;  bk  xxviii, 
259b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  397b-c;  bk 
hi,  406d-407a;  410d-411a;  415a-b;  422b-c; 
423a;  423d;  bk  iv,  432b-433a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  311c-315a,c 
esp  314d-315a,c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b,d-28b  esp  25a- 
26a,  27a-b;  154a-b;  343c 

41  GibbOxN:  Decline  and  Fall,  74b-75a;  75d-78b 
esp  76a;  586c-587a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  436b;  437d-439a; 
440a-441b;  450d-452a  esp  451d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-79]  la- 
2  b  passim 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  ix  [192-197] 
7b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
2  [45-47]  lid;  sect  3  [81-95]  12a-b;  sect  7 
[156-191]  12d-13a;  article  ii,  sect  i  [335- 
374]  14b-d;  [383-393]  14d-15a;  sect  2  [421]- 
sect  4  [458]  15b-c 

43  Federalist:  number  16,  68b-c;  number  22, 
83d-84b;  number  27,  96a-b;  number  47-49 
153c-161b;  number  51  162d-165a;  number 
52,  165c-167b;  number  62,  189d-191c  passim; 
number  64-67  195b-205b  esp  number  65-66 
198a-203a;  number  71,  215a-216b;  number 
73  218d-221c;  number  75-77  222d-229d; 
number  78,  230a-232a;  number  81,  237d- 
239c;  number  82,  242d-243a 


43  Mill:  Liberty ,  322a  d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  350d  351a;  353b  d;  355b  363a;  365b- 
366a;  401d-402b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  178b  c;  255d;  411a  b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  272- 
273  89d  92a;  par  297  99b;  par  300  100b;  par 
302  lOla-c;  par  312-313  104a-b;  additions, 
163-164  144c-145a;  174  146d-147b;  178  179 
147d  148a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 
365c- d 

3 b.  The  relation  of  the  civil  to  the  military 
power 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  79a-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vii, 
551b-d;  bk  viii,  582a-583c;  585d-586b;  587a- 
589a;  590a-c  passim 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii-v,  340b-368d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  7  {1 279*37— b 3 ] 
476d;  bk  iv,  ch  13  [i297bio-28]  497d-498a; 
bk  vi,  ch  8  [i322a29— b6]  526a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  9 
[1329*2-17]  533b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  6b-15a;  bk  iv,  64a  b 
/  Histories,  bk  i,  190b-c;  194a-c;  195c-197d  esp 
197c-d;  210d-212d;  bk  ii,  239c-240a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xii,  18a;  ch  xiv 
21b-22a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  103b;  159a-c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xii,  sect  145- 
148  58d-59b;  ch  xvi  65d-70c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  80a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  v,  30b; 
31c-32b;  bk  xi,  74b-d;  bk  xix,  143c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  361a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  424b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  301a-309a,c 
esp  307d-308c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  25d-26d;  30a- b; 
42b,d-43b;  50b-51a;  63a-64d;  68c;  76b-77b; 
245d-246d  esp  246c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [60-61]  2a; 
[65-67]  2b;  [80-94]  2b-3a 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  vi  [107-123] 
6b-c;  vii  6d;  ix  [290-298]  8a;  [318-365]  8b  d 
passim 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
8  [226-242]  13b-c;  ARTICLE  II,  SECT  2  [4O9- 
413]  15a;  amendments,  iii  17b 

43  Federalist:  number  8, 45b-c;  46a-47a;  num¬ 
ber  24-29  87b-101a  passim;  number  46, 
152b-153a;  number  74,  221c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  409d;  425c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  281d-282a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  326 
107d-108a;  par  329  108c;  additions,  163  144c 
/  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  325a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  138d;  144c; 
146d;  153d-155a;  bk  v,  209a-c;  bk  ix,  346a- 
365c  passim,  esp  353a,  355b,  361b-d;  bk  x, 
404c-405a;  bk  xii,  533a-537b  esp  535d-53  7b; 
bk  xiii,  565c-566d;  bk  xiv,  610d-611a;  bk  xv, 
627d-630a 


656  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3c  to  3c(2) 


(3.  The  powers,  branches,  or  departments  of  gov¬ 
ernment:  enumerations,  definitions,  and 
orderings  of  these  several  powers .) 

3 c.  The  legislative  department  of  government: 
the  making  of  law 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  iv,  344a-346a  /  Theaete- 
tus .  531a-b  /  Statesman ,  599c-600d  /  Laws, 
bk  iii,  666b-c;  bk  iv,  679c-680d;  684b-686c; 
bk  vi,  705d-706c;  bk  ix,  745c-746a;  754a-d; 
bk  xi,  782a-b  /  Seventh  Letter ,  807a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  ch  9  434a-436a,c  / 
Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  14  498b-499c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  51b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90 
205a-208b;  q  91,  a  3  209d-210c;  q  92  213c- 
215a, c;  qq  95-97  226b-239b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  103a;  130d-131a; 
131d-132a;  133d-134a;  151c-152a;  part  iv, 
273d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  363d-364a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  294  225b-226b 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  lib;  16a-c  /  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment ,  ch  vii,  sect  88-89  44c-d;  ch  ix,  sect 
127-cH  x,  sect  132  54a-55b;  ch  xi,  sect  134- 
ch  xii,  sect  143  55b-58d;  ch  xiii,  sect  150 
59d;  ch  xix,  sect  212-217  74a-75a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  73a-74b;  78b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  6b;  bk 
xi,  69d;  71a-72b  passim;  bk  xxix  262a-269a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  324c-d  /  Political Econ- 
omy ,  368c-369a;  372a-b  /  Social  Contract ,  bk 
ii,  399b-402a;  bk  iii,  419d-420a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  151b-156a;  616d- 
617b;  624b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  79d-80b;  96a-d; 
108a-c 

42  Kant:  Itttro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  393c  / 
Science  of  Right ,  397a-b;  436b-c;  438b-c; 
450d-452a  esp  451c-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [29-47]  lb- 
2a;  [62-64]  [72-79]  2  b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
1-9  lla-14a 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  50d-51b;  number 
15,  64b;  number  33,  107d-109b;  number  44, 
145c-146d;  number  51,  163c-d;  number  52- 
66  165a-203a  esp  number  53,  167d-168b, 
number  64,  197a-b;  number  70,  212b;  num¬ 
ber  75,  223a-c;  number  81,  239a-b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  355b-409c 
passim 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  255d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  21 1 
70a-c;  par  298-314  99c-104b  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  part  ii,  271d-272a;  part  iv,  364d- 
365a;  365c-d 

3c(l)  The  powers  and  duties  of  the  legislature 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  iv,  344a-346a  /  Theaete - 
tus ,  531 a- b 


9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  14  [1298^—^1 1  ] 
498b-499a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  16a  c  /  GW/  Government , 
ch  iv,  sect  21  29d;  ch  xi,  sect  134-CH  xii, 
sect  143  55b-58d;  ch  xiii  sect  150-153  59d- 
60c;  ch  xix,  sect  2 12-2 17  74a-75a;  sect  221- 
222  75d-76c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  167a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  6b;  bk 
v,  21d-22c;  bk  xi,  69d-75a 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  25 d;  27d-28a; 
130c-131a 

42  KaxNt:  Science  of  Right,  451c-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [29-47]  *b- 
2a 

43  x\rticles  of  Confederation:  ix  7a-9a  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
1-9  lla-14a;  article  ii,  sect  2  [421-435]  15b; 

ARTICLE  III,  SECT  3  [507J-ARTICLE  IV,  SECT  I 

[518]  16a;  article  iv,  sect  3— article  V 
16b-c;  article  vi  [591-599]  16d;  amend¬ 
ments,  1  17a;  xii-xx  18a-20d  passim 
43  Federalist:  number  23-36  85a-117d  passim; 
number  41-46  132a-153b  passim;  number  52- 
66  165a-203a  passim,  esp  number  53,  167d- 
168b;  number  75,  223a-224a;  number  77, 
227b-229b;  number  78,  230d-231c;  number 
81,  237d-240b;  number  82  242b-244a  passim; 
number  83,  244c-245c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  355b-363a; 

365c-366a;  401a-409c  passim;  417c-424c; 

431a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  255d;  364c-365a;  370a 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  298 

99c;  par  309-31 1  103b-104a 

3c(2)  Legislative  institutions  and  procedures 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  14  [i298bi2- 
1299^]  499a-c  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  43- 
44  572d-573d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  34d-35c;  45c-46a  / 
Solon,  71b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  iv,  267d-268c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xi,  sect  138 
57b-c;  ch  xii,  sect  147  59a-b;  ch  xiii,  sect 
r53— 1 58  60b-62b;  ch  xiv,  sect  167-168  64a-c; 
CH  XIX,  SECT  215  74d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  73a-74b;  part  iv, 
167a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  435b-436a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  4a-6b; 

bk  v,  22a-c;  bk  xi,  71a-d;  72b-d 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  423d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  27d-28a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71d-74b  passim, 
esp  71d-72a,  73a-b;  587a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [29-47]  lb- 
23;  [62-64]  [72~ 79]  2b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
1-9  lla-14a;  article  iv,  sect  i  16a;  article 
v  16c;  article  vi  [591-599]  16d;  amend- 


3d  to  3d( 2) 

MENTS,  XIV,  SECT  2  18d;  XVII  19b-CJ  XX,  SECT 
1-2  19d 

43  Federalist:  number  15,  66a;  number  22, 
82a-83a;  84c-d;  number  37,  120d  121a;  num¬ 
ber  51,  163c-d;  number  52-66  165a-203a  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  355b-362c; 
370a-409c  passim;  417c-424c;  431c  d 

44  Boswell ‘.Johnson,  176a  b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  312- 
314  104a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  238c  243d; 
260a-262a 

3 d.  The  judicial  department  of  government: 
the  application  of  law 

5  Aristophanes:  Wasps  507a-525d 

7  Plato:  Statesman ,  605b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  hi,  ch  16  485b-486c; 
bk  iv,  ch  16  501c-502a,c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch 
15  619d-622d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  2,  rep  7  309d-316a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  103a  b;  123b-d; 
132a-136b;  148a 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure  174a- 
204d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  33  2  d- 
333b;  340d-343a;  353b-356d;  361a-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  13  28a-b; 
ch  hi,  sect  19-20  29b-d;  ch  vii,  sect  87-94 
44a-46c;  ch  ix,  sect  125  54a;  ch  xi,  sect  136 
56c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  73b-75a;  part  iv, 
152b-154a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  266a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  8b-c; 
bk  vi,  33a-35c;  bk  xi,  69d-70a;  80c-83c;  bk 
xx,  151d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  309a-315a,c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  27d-28a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  438c-d 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  iii  15c- 
16a 

43  Federalist:  number  17,  69d-70a;  number 
22,  83d-84b;  number  78—83  229d-251a  esp 
number  82,  243b,  number  83,  244c-245d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  474d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  209- 
228  69d-75b;  additions,  141-142  139c-d  / 
Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  250d-251a 

3</(l)  The  powers  and  duties  of  the  judiciary 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  18:13-26  /  Deuteron¬ 
omy,  1:16-17;  16:18-20  /  Ezra,  7:25-26 — (D) 
I  Esdras,  7:25-26 

7  Plato:  Apology,  200a-c;  208c-209b  /  States¬ 
man,  605  b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i  [i354ai3“I355a 
3]  593b-594a;  ch  15  619d-622d 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  70d-71b 


657 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xjx,  ch  6  514b- 
515a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  run  1  n, 
q  105,  a  2,  rep  7  309d  316a;  pari  hi  sum., 
q  89,  a  2  csp  rep  $  1006b  1007c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  cn  i\,  sec  i  125 
54a;  cn  xi,  sect  1^6  56c  d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  73b  75a;  imrt  iv, 
152b  154a 

37  I:i elding:  Tom  Jones,  65c-66a,  135c  d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  8b  c;  bk 
xi,  73b  d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  91  d;  243b;  343a  c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  94c  95c;  403c  d 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  ix  [192  197] 

7b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  iii,  sect 
2  15c-d;  article  vi  [583-590]  16d;  amend¬ 
ments,  iv-viii  17b-d;  xi  18a 

43  Federalist:  number  17,  69d  70a;  number 
22,  83d-84b;  number  51,  162d-163a;  number 
65,  199a-d;  number  73,  221b  c;  number  78- 
83  229d-251a  esp  number  78,  231b,  number 
83,  245b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  413d-414d; 
421d-422c;  430a-431a  /  Utilitarianism,  466d- 
467a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  251d-252b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  219 
72d-73a;  par  221  73b;  par  225-226  73d-74b; 
additions,  139  139b;  141-142  139c-d 

3d(2)  Judicial  institutions  and  procedures 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  18:13-26;  23:1-3,6-9 
/  Numbers,  35:9-34  /  Deuteronomy,  1:12-17; 
17:2-13;  19;  25:1-3  /  /  Samuel,  8:5-6,19-22; 
9:15-17 —(D)  I  Kings,  8:5-6,19-22;  9:15-17 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  26:46-27:26  /  Acts, 
5:16-40;  21:26-23:24 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  81a-91d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  95d-96b 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  209b-210b  /  Imws,  bk  vi, 
704c-705c;  bk  xii,  786b-788c;  792a-793a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch8  [i267b36-i268a 
6]  463d;  [i268b5— 23]  464c;  ch  12  [1273^36— 
i274a2i]  470c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  16  501c-502a,c  / 
Athenian  Constitution,  ch  45  573d-574a;  ch 
48  574d-575b;  ch  52-53  576b-577b;  cm  57-59 
579b-580c;  ch  63-69  581d-584a,c  /  Rhetoric, 
bk  1,  ch  15  619d-622d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  30b-c;  bk  xii,  123b-c; 
bk  xiii,  132c-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  2,  rep  7  309d-316a 

22  Chaucer:  Physician's  Tale  [12,055-146]  368a- 
369b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  123b-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
204c-2l5c 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice ,  act  iv, 
sc  1  425c-430b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d  95  b 


Chapter  31 :  GOVERNMENT 


658 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3 d.  The  judicial  department  of  government:  the 
application  of  law.  3d (2)  Judicial  institu¬ 
tions  and  procedures.) 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  37a-b;  part  ii,  73b- 
75a;  part  iv,  152b-154a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  266a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tow  Jones ,  8c-10c;  65c-66a;  135c-d; 
176d-177d;  217a-c;  267d-268b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  8b-c; 
bk  vi,  33a-37d;  bk  xi,  70c-71a;  73b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  311c-315a,c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  243a-245d  passim, 
esp  244d-245b;  251b-d;  617a-618d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73d-74b;  94c-95c; 
403c-404d;  458c-d;  586c-d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [52-55]  2a; 
[70-71]  2b 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  ix  [198-274] 
7b-8a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  iii, 
sect  1 15c;  sect  2  [485-499]  15d;  article  iii, 
sect  3  [507EARTICLE  iv,  sect  1  [518]  16a; 
article  iv,  sect  2  [522-528]  16a-b;  amend¬ 
ments,  iv-viii  17b-d 

43  Federalist:  number  22,  83d-84b;  number 
51,  162d-163a;  number  65,  199a-c;  number 
78-83  229d-251a  passim 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  336c-d; 
337b-c;  413d-414d;  421d-422c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  255a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  223 
73c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  326b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xii,  547b-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ix 
235b,d-271d  passim;  bk  xii  348b,d-401d 


3e  to  3e(2) 

297  97a-99b;  additions,  174  146d-147b  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  325c-d;  364d- 
365a 

3^(1)  The  powers  and  duties  of  the  executive 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  101a-104d;  122b- 
124b;  130d;  153a-159c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  193a;  part 
ii,  331a-336a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  ii,  sect  io-ii 
27b-d;  ch  xii,  sect  144-148  58d-59b;  ch  xiii, 
sect  154-cH  xiv,  sect  168  60c-64c;  ch  xix, 
sect  218-219  75a-c;  sect  221-222  75d-76c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  157b-158a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  36a-37a; 
43c-d;  bk  xi,  72b- 73b;  73d-74c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  433a-434b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  319b-320a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  25d-26a;  26d-27c; 
243b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  586d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  448a- b 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [28-61]  lb- 
23 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  ix  [299-310] 
8b;  x  9a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
7  [156-191]  12d-13a;  article  ii  14b-15c 

43  Federalist:  number  8,  45b-c;  number  48, 
157c;  number  51,  163d;  number  66,  201a- 
203a;  number  67-77  203b-229d  passim 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  319d-323a,c  /  Representative 
Government ,  356b-359a;  409d-417c;  421c-422c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  290- 
296  97d-99b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 
365c-d 


\to 

i 

4 

4/ 

( 


I 


3e.  The  executive  department  of  government: 
the  enforcement  of  law;  administrative 
decrees 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  15  499c-501c 

35  Locke  :  Toleration,  3a  /  Civil  Government,  ch  ii, 
sect  7-13  26c-28b;  ch  vii,  sect  88-89  44c-d; 
ch  ix,  sect  126-131  54a-d;  ch  xii,  sect 
144-CH  xiv,  sect  168  58d-64c;  ch  xviii,  sect 
203-210  72a-73c;  ch  xix,  sect  218-219  75a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  157b-158a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  69d- 
70a;  72b;  80a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iii,  414d-415a; 
423a;  424a-b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  438a-b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  ii  14b- 
15c 

43  Federalist:  number  15,  64b-66b;  number 
16  66c-68d  passim;  number  21,  78b-d;  num¬ 
ber  27-29,  94d-99b;  number  48,  157c;  num¬ 
ber  67-77  203b-229d  passim 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  350d-351a; 
356b-359a;  409d-417c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  178b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  287- 


3e(2)  Administrative  institutions  and  proce¬ 
dures 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  700d-704c 
9  Aristotle:  jpolitics,  bk  iv,  ch  15  [1299*31- 
i300b4]  500a-501b;  bk  vi,  ch  8  525b-526d  / 
Athenian  Constitution,  ch  43-52  572d-576d; 
ch  54-61  577c-581b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  22b;  bk  vi,  88d-89a 
23  Machiavelli  :  Prince,  ch  xxii-xxiii  33a-34b 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  122b-123a;  123d 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  v,  31b- 
33a, c;  bk  xxvi,  224d-225a 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  403a-404a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  25d-27c  passim; 
240b-246d;  248d-251a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  317d-318b;  563d- 
564b;  586c-587a 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  iv  [37-44]  5d; 

ix  [299-310]  8b;  ix  [368]-x  [395]  8d-9a 
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  ii  14b- 
15c;  amendments,  xii  18a-c;xx  19d-20b;xxn- 
xxiii  20c-d 

43  Federalist:  number  13,  59b-c;  number  66, 
201a-203a;  number  67-77  203b-229d  passim; 
number  84,  255a-b 


4  t0  5  Chapter  31 :  GOVERNMENT  659 


43  Mill:  Liberty ,  3l9d-323a,c  /  Representative 
Government ,  337d-338a;  356b  359a;  364b 
366a;  409d-424c  passim;  439b  442d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  290 
97d;  additions,  174  146d  147b  /  Philosophy 
of  History,  part  i,  213b-214d 

4.  The  support  and  the  expenditures  of  govern¬ 
ment:  taxation  and  budget 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  41:33-36 
Apocrypha:  /  Maccabees,  1035-31  ~(D)  OT, 
I  M achabees,  1  o  \i  5-3 1 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [790-835]  479c-480b 
/  Wasps  [655-724]  515c-516d  /  Birds  [27-48] 
542c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  43c;  bk  iii,  109d- 

111b 

6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  373b-c; 
bk  iii,  420d-421b 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  xii,  791  d 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [1259^2—36] 

453d;  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i27ibio-i7]  467d;  bk  vi,  ch 
5  [i320ai7-bi6]523d-524b;  bk  vii,  ch  8  [1 328b 
n-12]  532d/  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  47-48 
574b-575b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  4  [i359b23~33] 
600a 

14  Plutarch:  Aristides ,  274c-d  /  Marcus  Cato, 
285c-d  /  Lucullus,  409b-d  /  Cato  the  Younger, 
625b-626d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  82d-83a;  bk  xiii, 
139a-c  /  Histories,  bk  i,  194d-195a;  bk  ii, 
236d'237a;  bk  iv,  268c-d 

•  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xvi,  22d-23b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78c-d;  part  ii, 
152a-b;  156c-157a 

27  Shakespeare:  Cymbeline,  act  iii,  sc  i  463c- 
464c  /  Henry  VIII,  act  i,  sc  ii  [18-101]  552d- 
553d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  129  134d- 
135d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xi,  sect  140  58a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  1  lb-1 2a;  part  ii, 
75a-b;  part  iii,  113b-114a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  485a-487a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  23c-24b; 
bk  xiii  96a-102a,c;  bk  xix,  143b-c;  bk  xxii, 
183b-184b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  365c-366a  /  Political 
Economy,  368d;  377b-385a,c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  11,  403a-b;  bk  iii,  415b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v  301a-421d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  41b-c;  65a-68a; 
86a;  155d-156a;  162b-c;  249d-250c;  251d- 
255c;  368a-b;  413a;  577d-578c;  658c-660c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  177a-b;  315b-317a; 
417b-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  441d-444c;  451d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [62-69]  2b 
43  Articles  of  Confederation:  viii  6d-7a;  ix 

[286-290]  8a;  [311-318]  8b;  [350-367]  8c-d 
passim;  xii  9b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 


2  [17-29]  lib;  sect  6  [132-135]  12c;  [143  148] 
12c  d;  sect  7  [152-155]  1 2d ;  sect  8  [192  212] 
13a  b;  [226-229)  13b  c;  sect  9  [260-266]  [273 
277]  13d;  [283  288]  13d  14a;  sect  10  [304- 
315]  14a  b;  article  11,  sect  i  [394-400]  15a; 

ARTICLE  111,  SECT  I  [463-468]  15c,‘  ARTICLE  V! 

[578-582]  16d;  amendments,  xiv,  sect  4  19a; 
xvi  19b 

43  Federalist:  number  7,  43c  44a;  number  12 
13,  56d  60a;  number  21,  79b  80c;  number 
30-36  101a-117d;  number  41,  135b  c;  num¬ 
ber  43,  142d  143a;  number  44,  145b  c;  num¬ 
ber  45,  149b  150b;  number  73,  2l8d  219b; 
number  79,  233c~234a;  number  83,  246b-c; 
number  84,  253b  [fn  1  ];  254c  256a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  315c  d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  335a  b;  356c-d;  366d  367a;  383b  d  / 
Utilitarianism,  473a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  281d-282a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  299 
99c-100b;  additions,  177  147d  /  Philosophy 
of  History,  part  i,  226d-227b;  243b;  part  iii, 
299a-c;  310c;  part  iv,  324b;  325b-c;  335a- 
336c;  364d;  365c-d 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  65c-66a;  375a-b 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  429a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  384c-388a,c 

5.  The  relation  of  governments  to  one  another: 
sovereign  princes  or  states  as  in  a  con¬ 
dition  of  anarchy 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  xii,  788d-790d 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  9  [i28o°35-bi2] 
478a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  86a;  part  ii, 
114b-c;  159c 

27  Shakespeare:  Cymbeline,  act  iii,  sc  v  [1-27] 
468d-469b 

35  Locke  :  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  14  28b-c; 
ch  xii,  sect  145  58d-59a  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  1,  ch  11,  sect  10  106d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  23a-25b;  part  iv, 
149b-150b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  x,  61b,d- 
62b;  bk  xxvi,  223c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  355b-c  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  369a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  433d-435a,c;  520c- 
521c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  427b-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-b;  449c-458a,c 
esp  452a-455a,  455c-456a,  457a-458a,c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [1-6]  la; 
[109-119]  3a  b 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  5a-9d  passim 

43  Federalist:  29a-259a,c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  417c-442d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  279, 
93d;  par  321-360  106c-114a,c;  additions, 

1 91  150b-c;  194  150c-d  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  part  ii,  282d-283b;  part  iv,  357a- 
358b 


660 

(5.  The  relation  of  governments  to  one  another: 
sovereign  princes  or  states  as  in  a  condition 
of  anarchy.) 

5a.  Foreign  policy:  the  making  of  treaties;  the 
conduct  of  war  and  peace 

Old  Testament:  Numbers ,  31  /  Deuteronomy, 
2:26-37;  9 : 1  —4 ;  20  /  Joshua ,  9 — ( D )  Josue,  9 
/  II  Samuel,  3:12-21  —  (D)  II  Kings,  3:12-21  / 
I  Kings ,  5:1-12 —(D)  III  Kings,  5:1-12 

Apocrypha:  I  Maccabees,  8;  10;  12:1-23; 

13:34-4';  14:16-24;  15:1-9.15-27— (P)  OT, 
I  Machabees,  8;  10;  12:1-23;  13:34-41; 

14:16-24;  15:1-9,15-27  /  II  Maccabees, 

11:16-38 —(D)  OT,  II  Machabees,  11:16-38 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  258a-269a,c  esp  [399- 
598]  261d-263c 

5  Aristophanes  :  Acharnians  [61-173]  455d- 
457b;  [497-556]  460d-461c  /  Peace  [601-692] 
532d-534a  /  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c  esp  [486- 
613]  589a-591a,  [1072-1321]  596d-599a,c  / 
Ecclesiazusae  [193-203]  617  b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6a-b;  15d-16a; 
bk  iv,  144b-d;  bk  v,  175b-c;  bk  vi,  193b; 
206b-d;  bk  vii,  239a-247c  passim;  bk  viii, 
286b-287d;  bk  ix,  289a-290b;  310d-311a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  353d; 

360c-d;  368c-d;  371b-372d;  378a-380d; 

bk  hi,  418d-420c;  425a-428d;  430c;  432b-c; 
bk  iv,  450d-452d;  457c-d;  461b-463a;  468a- 
469b;  476a-477a;  bk  v,  486c-500c;  502d- 
508a, c  esp  504c-508a,c;  bk  vi,  529b-533a; 
bk  vm,  568a-c;  572c-573a;  578b-579a 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  318c-319a  /  Critias, 
485a-b  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  667c-668d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [i265ai8-27] 
460c;  ch  7  [i267ai8-2i]  462d-463a;  bk  hi,  ch 
9  [i28oa35-bi2]  478a-b;  ch  13  [i284a38-b3] 
482c;  bk  vii,  ch  2  [1324^5— 1325®! 5]  528b- 
529a;  ch  6  531b-d;  ch  14  [i333bio-i334aio] 
538c-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  4  [i359b33-i36oa 
18]  600a-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  xii  [172-21  i]  358b-359b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  21a-27c  /  Numa  Pom - 
pilius,  55c-56a  /  Pericles  121a-141a,c  /  Nicias, 
427a-428c  /  Aratus,  834d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  34d-35c  /  Histories, 
bk  iv,  286c-287c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  7  515a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  3  316a-318b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxi,  32a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  121b-c;  159c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
36d-38a;  bk  iv,  276a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  v,  sc  iv  [94- 
175]  30c-31b  /  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-74] 
33b,d-34c  /  King  John,  act  ii,  sc  i  [416-560] 
384a-385c  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  iv,  sc  ii  489d- 
491b  /  Henry  V,  act  v,  sc  ii  563b-567a,c 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,  204d-205a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v,  sect  45  34d- 


5  a  to  5  b 

35a:  ch  xii,  sect  145-148  58d-59b;  ch  xvi 
65d-70c  passim;  ch  xix,  sect  21  i  73d-74a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  21b-25b;  part  ii, 
75a-b;  77b-78b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  354a-355a;  449b- 
453a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2d-3b, 
bk  ix-x,  58b,d-62b;  bk  x,  63d-64a;  bk  xxvi, 
223c-224a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  325c-d;  355c  /  Political 
Economy,  380a-b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i, 
390a-c;  bk  ii,  403c-404a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  319b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  4a-b;  83b-85a  esp 
84d-85a;  95b-96a;  103c-d;  119a-c;  150d-152c; 
174d-175b;  378b-d;  402b-404b;  431d-432d; 
433d-435a,c;  491d-492b;  495d-496b;  503d- 
507c  esp  504d-506a;  535d-537a,c;  543a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Declme  and  Fall,  48d-49c;  283d- 
284a;  428a-d;  503a-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  452c-d;  454a-455b 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  5a-9d 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
8  [201-203]  [223-225]  13b;  sect  10  [296-298] 
14a;  [314-320]  14b;  article  ii,  sect  2  [421- 
435]  15b 

43  Federalist:  number  4-8  35a-47a;  number 
9,  47c-49c;  number  ii  53b-56b;  number  15, 
64c-65a;  number  16,  66c-68a;  number  22, 
80d-81c;  83b-d;  number  24,  88d-89b;  num¬ 
ber  25,  89c-91b;  number  34,  llOa-lllb;  num¬ 
ber  41,  132d-133b;  number  42,  136b-138c; 
number  43,  142d;  143b-d;  number  44,  144a- 
145c;  number  62,  190d-191a;  number  63, 
191d-192a;  number  64  195b-198a;  number 
75  222d-225a  passim;  number  80,  235b-236c; 
number  81,  240b-c;  number  83,  248b-c; 
number  84,  254b-c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  428b-433b 
passim;  434a-436b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  321- 
329  106c-108c;  par  332-337  109a-110a;  addi¬ 
tions,  153  141d;  188  149b-c  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  ii,  278c-279b;  part  iii,  297a-d; 
299a-c;  part  iv,  343b-c;  357c-358b;  359c- 
360a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-295a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  83d-86a;  bk 
v,  204a-206c;  208d-209a;  232a-234a,c;  bk 
viii,  307d-309c;  bk  ix,  344b-355c;  bk  xiii, 
565a-b;  572b;  573d-574a;  582a;  bk  xv,  629b- 
630a;  epilogue  i,  645a-646c;  649c-650b 

5b.  The  government  of  dependencies:  colonial 
government;  the  government  of  con¬ 
quered  peoples 

Old  Testament:  Joshua ,  9  esp  9:18-27— (D) 
Josue,  9  esp  9:18-27  /  /  Kings,  9:20-23— 
(D)  III  Kings,  9:20-23  /  II  Kings,  23:30-35; 
24:12-16;  25:5-30 —(D)  IV  Kings,  23:30-35; 
24:12-16;  25:5-30  /  II  Chronicles,  8:7-8  — 
(D)  II  Paralipomenon,  8  7-8 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


661 


Chapter  31:  GOVERNMENT 


5b  to  5 d 

Apocrypha:  /  Maccabees ,  8:1-13— (D)  OT, 
/  Machabees ,  8:1-13  /  Maccabees,  5:11  7:32 
—  (D)  OT,  //  Machabees,  5:11-7:32 

New  Testament:  16:19-30;  21-28  passim 

5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [852-908]  24b-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  [565-586]  590b  d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  dk  i,  31d-32a;  35c-36a; 
bk  hi,  109d-lllb 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  353d; 
368b-369a;  bk  ii,  403c-404a;  bk  hi,  425a- 
428d;  bk  v,  504c-507c;  bk  viii,  579d  580b 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  698c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  13  [i283a^6-b3] 
482c;  bk  v,  ch  7  [i307bi9-23]  509d;  bk  vii, 
ch  2  [i323a35-i325ai5]  528b-529a;  ch  14 
[I333bl0~I334ai0]  538c  d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [253-296]  llOa-llla;  bk 
vi  [845-853]  233b-234a;  bk  viii  [7 1 4—73 1  ] 
278a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  47d-48c  /  Lucullus, 
409b-410d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  39d-40c;  bk  xi, 
104a-c;  106a-d;  bk  xii,  122a-c;  bk  xiii, 
139c-140d;  bk  xv,  162c-163a  /  Histories ,  bk  i, 
191d-192a;  bk  iv,  290a-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  i,  pref  129a-d; 
bk  iv,  ch  14-15  196b-197a;  bk  v,  ch  12  216d- 
219b;  ch  17  221b-222a;  bk  xix,  ch  21,  524c-d 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  iii-viii  3c-14c;  ch 
xx  30a-31c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  106d-107c;  108d- 
109c;  llOb-llla;  119a-c;  126d-127a;  131c; 
conclusion,  280b-281a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
131b,d-133b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  40d 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [231-276]  344b- 
345b 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  13c-d;  14c-15a  /  Civil  Gov - 
ernment,  ch  iv,  sect  22-23  30a-b;  ch  vii, 
sect  85  43c-d;  ch  xv,  sect  172  65b-c;  ch  xvi 
65d-70c  passim;  ch  xix,  sect  21  i  73d-74a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  24b-25a;  part  iv, 
182b-183a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  x  61b,d- 
68d;  bk  xi,  83c- 84c;  bk  xv,  109b-c;  llOa-d; 
bk  xxi,  170c-171d 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  380a-b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  239a-279b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  14d-15c;  18a; 

26a-c;  134a-b;  245d-246d;  420b-d;  518b- 
519a;  522c-523a,c;  550b-551b;  608b, d; 

624b-c;  632d-633a;  638a-639a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  65a-c;  216c-d; 
285a-c;  505b-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  413d;  454a-455a;  456c- 
457a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  iv,  sect 
3  [544-550]  16b 

43  Federalist:  number  43,  140d-141a 


43  Mill:  Liberty ,  272a;  281  d  282b  [In  3]  /  Rep¬ 
resentative  Got  ernment,  339a  341a;  353c;  411b 
412a;  427a  428a  passim;  433b  442d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  179c;  364c  365a;  370a; 
511c  d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  242d 
243d;  part  iii,  299a-c 

5c.  The  relation  of  local  to  national  govern¬ 
ment:  the  centralization  and  decentral¬ 
ization  of  governmental  functions 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  391c- 
392a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  15  [1299^5-1 8] 
500b 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  9a  d 
23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  ii,  I20d-121a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  30a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  403a-c;  bk 
iii,  412a-b;  420d-421a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  318d-319a; 
420b-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  14c;  578b-c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
4  12b;  article  iv,  sect  1-2  16a-b 
43  Federalist:  number  i,  30d-31a;  number  3, 
33d-35a;  number  14,  61b  d;  number  17  69a- 
70d;  number  28  96c-98b  passim;  number  31, 
105b-c;  number  32  105c-107b  passim;  num¬ 
ber  34  109b-llld  passim;  number  36  114c- 
11 7d  passim;  number  39,  126b-128b;  number 
43,  141a-d;  number  44,  144a-145c  passim; 
number  45,  148b-150b;  number  46  150b 
153b  passim;  number  84,  253d-254b 
43  Mill:  Liberty,  322a-d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  4l7c-424c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  290 
97d;  additions,  174  146d-147b 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  421c-d 

5 d.  Confederation  and  federal  union:  the  di¬ 
vision  of  jurisdiction  between  state  and 
federal  governments 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  365a- 
371b 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iii,  667c-670a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  cii  9  (i28o*34~b32] 
478ac 

14  Plutarch:  Philopoemen,  296a-b  /  Aratus , 
834c-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ix,  58b, d- 
60a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  420bd 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  103c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  218c-219a;  577b-c 
43  Articles  of  Confederation:  5a-9d 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  lla-20d  esp 
article  vi  [583-599]  16d 
43  Federalist:  number  1-30  29a-103c  passim, 
esp  number  10,  52b-c,  number  14,  61b-c, 
number  15,  65c-d;  number  31-34,  104c-llld; 
number  36,  115a-117b;  number  37,  119b- 


662 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  relation  of  governments  to  one  another: 
sovereign  princes  or  states  as  in  a  condition 
of  anarchy,  5d.  Confederation  and  federal 
union:  the  division  of  jurisdiction  between 
state  and  federal  governments .) 

120d;  number  39,  126b-128b;  number  41-46 
132a-153b  esp  number  46,  150b-c;  number 
51,  164a-165a  passim;  number  52,  167a-b; 
number  59-61  182a-188d  passim;  number  62, 
189b-d;  number  80,  235a;  number  81,  239c- 
241a;  number  82  242b-244a;  number  84, 
253d-254b;  number  85,  258d-259a,c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  427d-433b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  278c- 
279b 

6.  Historical  developments  in  government:  rev¬ 
olution  and  progress 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  18:13-26  /  1  Samuel, 
8 —(D)  I  Kings ,  8/7  Kings ,  12:1-25— (D) 
III  Kings ,  12:1-25  /  II  Chronicles ,  io—(D) 
II  Paralipomenon ,  10 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  12b-14c;  23b-24b; 
bk  hi,  107c-108d;  bk  v,  164d-165a 

6  Thucydides  '.Peloponnesian  War ,  BKi,352c-d; 
353c-d;  366d-367a;  bk  ii,  391b-392a;  bk  iii, 
434c-438b  passim;  bk  iv,  458d-459c;  463a- 
465c;  bk  vi,  523b-525d;  bk  viii,  568d-569a; 
575c-576c;  577b-d;  579c-583c;  585d-586b; 
587a-589a;  590b-c 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iii  663d-677a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  ch  9  [n8ibi2-24] 
436c  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i268b23]-cH  12 
[i274b28]  464d-471d;  bk  iii,  ch  i4483a-484a; 
ch  15  [i286b8-22]  484d-485a;  bk  v  502a-519d 
passim;  bk  vii,  ch  10  [i329a40-b36]  533d-534b 
/  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  1-4  i  553a-572a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [851-853]  234a 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  9a-10a;  13a-14c  /  Lycur - 
gus  32a-48d  /  Lycurgus-Numa ,  63d-64a,c  / 
Solon  64b,d-77a,c  /  Poplicola,  80d-82a  / 
Poplicola- Solon ,  86d-87b  /  Agis,  650b-656d 
/  Cleomenes ,  659b-660d  /  Tiberius  Gracchus 
671b,d-681a,c  /  Caius  Gracchus  681b, d- 
689a, c  /  Caius  and  Tiberius  Gracchus -Agis  and 
Cleomenes  689b,d-691a,c  /  Dion  781b, d- 
802a, c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  la-2a;  3a-b;  bk  iii, 
51b-c;  bk  iv,  72a-b;  bk  xii,  123b-c;  bk  xiii, 
126c-d;  132c-133a  /  Histories ,  bk  i,  190b-c; 
bk  11,  224d-225a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b- 


6 

162d;  bk  v,  ch  12  216d-219b;  ch  21-26  226a- 
230a, c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, 
q  104,  a  3  305d-306d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  vi  [28-111] 
113d-114d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  275a-278d 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar  568a-596a,c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c  / 
Henry  VIII  549a-585a,c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 

32  Milton:  New  Forcers  of  Conscience  68a-b  / 
Lord  Gen.  Cromwell  69a- b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  viii,  sect  ioo- 
112  47c-51b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  5, 
453a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  117b-121b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  9b-d; 
bk  iv,  15c;  bk  xi  68b,d-84d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  359a-362a  passim  / 
Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  402b-403a;  bk  hi, 
418c-d  [fn  2] 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iii,  165b-181a,c; 
bk  v,  348a-352a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b,d-34a,c  esp 
24b,d-28b;  50b-51d  esp  51c-d;  153c-156a; 
240b-255d;  521a-523a,c;  622d-623c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71d-79d;  199c-202d 
esp  202a-c;  215c-220a,c  esp  217a-b,  218c-219a; 
403b-404d;  427b-428a  esp  428a;  452d-453a,c; 
562b-566c;  574b-582b;  586c-589a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  450d-451a;  451d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  lla-20d 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  29a-b;  number 
9  47a-49c  passim;  number  14,  62a-d; 

number  18-20  71a-78b;  number  25,  91b-d; 
number  37,  120d-121b;  number  41,  133a-d; 
number  52,  165d-167b;  number  70,  211b-d; 
number  84,  252b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-272a  /  Representative 
Government ,  367b-c;  434a-436b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  176 
147c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  174a- 
175c;  198b-199c;  203b-206a,c;  part  i,  207d- 
208c;  part  11,  263a-d;  275b-276a;  part  iii, 
295d-296c;  part  iv,  316c-d;  328b-331d;  342a- 
343a;  355d-357a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  355d-364a  esp  356a-357a, 
359a-c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  420b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  lOa-b;  bk  vi, 
238c-243d 


Chapter  31 :  GOVILRNMKNT 


C63 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  basic  context  of  the  problems  discussed  in  this  chapter,  see  State;  for  the  discussion  of 
domestic  government,  see  Family  2b,  5a;  for  the  discussion  of  ecclesiastical  government, 
see  Religion  3c(2);  for  the  discussion  of  divine  government,  see  God  7c;  World  ic;  and 
for  the  discussion  of  government  in  relation  to  economic  affairs,  see  Wealth  pd. 

Other  considerations  of  the  issues  concerning  anarchy,  see  Liberty  ib;  Tyranny  3; 
War  and  Peace  i. 

Other  discussions  of  the  notion  of  sovereignty  in  its  various  forms  or  meanings,  see  Democ¬ 
racy  4b;  Law  6b;  Liberty  ib,  6c;  State  2c,  9d;  Tyranny  5c;  and  for  the  problems  of 
foreign  policy  as  between  sovereign  states,  see  Justice  9f;  State  9e(i)“9e(2);  War  and 
Peace  iic. 

Sovereignty  in  relation  to  federal  government,  and  for  the  idea  of  world  government,  see 
State  ioe-iof;  War  and  Peace  nd. 

Justice,  liberty,  and  property  in  relation  to  government,  see  Justice  ia,  6-6e,  9~9e,  io-ioe; 
Liberty  id,  if,  ih;  Wealth  7a. 

The  relation  of  the  ideal  form  of  government  to  the  ideal  state,  see  State  2e,  6- 6b. 

The  abuses  or  corruption  of  government,  see  Law  7d;  Monarchy  4e(3)~4e(4);  Tyranny 
i-ic. 

The  issues  of  imperialism  in  the  government  of  colonies  or  subject  peoples,  see  Democracy 
7b;  Liberty  6c;  Monarchy  5-56;  Revolution  7;  Slavery  6d;  State  10b;  Tyranny  6. 

The  analysis  of  particular  forms  of  government,  see  Aristocracy  i-2e;  Constitution  1-3K 
5— 5b ;  Democracy  1-4C;  Monarchy  i-iafe),  4~4e(i),  4e(3)~4e(4);  Oligarchy  1-2,  4-5; 
Tyranny  i~5d;  and  for  the  discussion  of  mixed  forms  of  government,  see  Constitu¬ 
tion  3a~3b;  Monarchy  ib-ib(2). 

The  condition  of  the  ruled  under  diverse  forms  of  government,  see  Citizen  2b;  Liberty  if; 
Slavery  6a-6b. 

The  institutions  of  self-government,  such  as  representation,  elections,  voting,  see  Aristoc¬ 
racy  6;  Constitution  g-gb;  Democracy  53-56(4). 

The  problem  of  the  relativity  of  the  forms  of  government  to  the  character  and  circumstances 
of  particular  peoples,  see  Democracy  4d;  Monarchy  4e(2);  Tyranny  4b. 

The  general  discussion  of  political  revolution  and  progress,  see  Liberty  6b;  Progress 
4a~4c;  Revolution  2a-2c,  3a,  30-3^3);  and  for  the  consideration  of  revolution  with 
respect  to  particular  forms  of  government,  see  Aristocracy  3;  Constitution  8— 8b; 
Democracy  7a;  Oligarchy  3— 3b;  Tyranny  8. 

Matters  relevant  to  the  legislative  branch  of  government,  see  Law  5d. 

Matters  relevant  to  the  judicial  branch  of  government,  see  Justice  iod;  Law  5 g;  Prudence 
6b. 

Matters  relevant  to  the  executive  branch  of  government,  especially  problems  of  law  enforce¬ 
ment  and  administration,  see  Law  5a,  6a,  7e;  Monarchy  ib(3). 

Other  discussions  of  the  separation  of  powers  and  the  system  of  checks  and  balances,  see 
Constitution  7b;  Democracy  5c;  Liberty  ig. 

Other  discussions  of  the  relation  between  the  civil  and  military  powers,  see  State  8d(i), 
9e(i);  War  and  Peace  10-ioa. 

The  problem  of  the  economic  support  of  government,  see  Wealth  9e~9e(2). 

The  consideration  of  the  art  and  science  of  government,  see  Education  8d;  Knowledge  8c; 
Prudence  6a;  Rhetoric  ic;  State  8c-8d(3);  and  for  the  relation  of  politics  to  ethics  and 
economics,  see  Philosophy  2c;  Science  3a;  State  8d;  Wealth  9. 


664 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Plutarch.  “Political  Precepts,”  “Of  the  Three 
Sorts  of  Government — Monarchy,  Democracy 
and  Oligarchy,”  in  Moralia 
Aquinas.  On  the  Governance  of  Rulers 
Dante.  Convivio  (The Banquet) ,  fourth  treatise, 
ch  4-5 

- .  On  World-Government  or  De  Monarchia 

Machiavelli.  The  Discourses 

- .  Florentine  History 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Faction,”  in  Essays 
Milton.  Defence  of  the  People  of  England 
Hobbes.  Philosophical  Rudiments  Concerning  Govern¬ 
ment  and  Society ,  ch  6-7,  10-1 1 

- .  The  Elements  of  Law,  Natural  and  Politic ,  part 

1,  ch  19;  part  11,  ch  1 

- .  A  Dialogue  Between  a  Philosopher  and  a  Stu¬ 
dent  of  the  Common  Laws  of  England 
Spinoza.  Tractatus  Theologico-Politicus (Theological- 
Political  Treatise ),  ch  16-19 

- .  Tractatus  Politicus  (Political  Treatise ),  ch  3-5 

Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  hi,  part  ii, 
sect  vii-x 

A.  Smith.  Lectures  on  Justice ,  Police ,  Revenue  and 
Arms 

Marx.  A  Criticism  of  the  Hegelian  Philosophy  of 
Right 

Dostoevsky.  The  Possessed 

II. 

Polybius.  Histories ,  vol  i,  bk  vi 
Cicero.  De  Repuhlica  (The  Republic) 

John  of  Salisbury.  The  Statesman's  Bool{ 
Marsilius  of  Padua.  Defensor  Pads 
Fortescue.  Governance  of  England 
Erasmus.  The  Education  of  a  Christian  Prince 
T.  More.  Utopia 

Calvin.  Institutes  of  the  Christian  Religion ,  bk  iv, 
ch  20 

Bodin.  The  Six  Bootes  of  a  Commonweale 
Bellarmine.  The  Treatise  on  Civil  Government  (De 
Laicis ) 

Hooker.  Of  the  Laws  of  Ecclesiastical  Polity 
A.  Sidney.  Discourses  Concerning  Government 
Burlamaqui.  Principles  of  Natural  and  Politic  Law 
Vattel.  The  Law  of  Nations,  bk  i,  ch  1-13 
Voltaire.  letters  on  the  English ,  viii-ix 

- .  “Government,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 

J.  Wilson.  Wor^s,  part  i,  ch  ii,  v,  x 
Bentham.  A  Fragment  on  Government ,  ch  2,  4-5 


J.  Adams.  A  Defense  of  the  Constitutions  of  Govern¬ 
ment  of  the  United  States  of  America 
Jefferson.  The  Commonplace  Bool [ 

- .  Notes  on  the  State  of  Virginia 

Burke.  An  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs 
W.  PIumboldt.  The  Sphere  and  Duties  of  Government 
Paine.  Rights  of  Man 
- .  The  Age  of  Reason 

- .  Dissertation  on  First  Principles  of  Government 

J.  Mill.  An  Essay  on  Government 
Gogol.  The  Government  Inspector 
- .  The  Nose 

Whewell.  The  Elements  of  Morality ,  bk  iv,  ch  6; 
bk  v,  ch  7-9 

Calhoun.  A  Disquisition  on  Government 
- .  A  Discourse  on  the  Constitution  and  Govern¬ 
ment  of  the  United  States 
Dickens.  Little  Dorritt 
Lotze.  Microcosmos ,  bk  viii,  ch  5 
J.  H.  Newman.  A  Letter  to  the  Dul$e  of  Norfolk 
Turgenev.  Fathers  and  Sons 
- .  Virgin  Soil 

T.  H.  Huxley.  Methods  and  Results ,  ix 
T.  H.  Green.  The  Principles  of  Political  Obligation , 
(a,f,g) 

Spencer.  The  Man  Versus  the  State 
Maine.  Popular  Government 
Maitland.  Justice  and  Police 
W.  Wilson.  Congressional  Government 
Kropotkin.  Anarchism 

Bosanquet.  The  Philosophical  Theory  of  the  State 
Bryce.  “The  Nature  of  Sovereignty,”  in  Studies  in 
History  and  Jurisprudence 
Santayana.  Reason  in  Society ,  ch  3 
Chesterton.  The  Napoleon  of  Notting  Hill 

- .  The  Man  Who  Was  Thursday 

France.  Penguin  Island 

Morley.  Notes  on  Politics  and  History 

Pareto.  The  Mind  and  Society ,  vol  iv,  ch  12 

Laski.  Authority  in  the  Modern  State 

Steffens.  Autobiography 

Sturzo.  The  Inner  Laws  of  Society 

F.  G.  Wilson.  The  Elements  of  Modern  Politics 

B.  Russell.  Proposed  Roads  to  Freedom ,  ch  5 

- .  Power 

Maritain.  Scholasticism  and  Politics ,  ch  iii-iv 
Simon.  Nature  and  Functions  of  Authority 
A.  J.  Carlyle.  Political  Liberty 
Barker.  Reflections  on  Government 
Ferrero.  The  Principles  of  Power 
MacIver.  The  Web  of  Government 


Chapter  32.:  HABIT 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  familiar  word  “habit”  has  a  tremendous 
range  of  meaning.  Some  of  its  meanings  in 
technical  discourse  are  so  divergent  from  one 
another — as  well  as  from  the  popular  under¬ 
standing  of  the  term— that  it  is  difficult  to  find 
a  common  thread  of  derivation  whereby  to 
pass  from  one  meaning  to  another. 

We  can  eliminate  at  once  the  use  of  the  word 
to  designate  apparel,  as  when  we  speak  of  a 
“riding  habit.”  Yet  even  this  sense  contains  a 
root  of  meaning  which  cannot  be  dismissed. 
Augustine  points  out  that  “the  term  ‘habit’  is 
derived  from  the  verb  ‘to  have’  ”  and  Aris¬ 
totle,  considering  the  meanings  of ‘to  have,’  in¬ 
cludes  the  sense  in  which  a  man  may  be  said  “to 
have  a  coat  or  tunic”  along  with  the  sense  in 
i  which  a  man  may  be  said  to  have  a  habit— “a 
piece  of  knowledge  or  a  virtue.”  Just  as  clothes 
are  something  a  person  has  or  possesses  in  a  man¬ 
ner  more  or  less  fitting  to  the  body,  so  habits  in 
the  psychological  sense  are  qualities  which  a 
person  has  or  possesses,  and  they  too  can  be 
judged  for  their  fitness. 

This  understanding  of  habit  is  conveyed  in 
the  ancient  remark  which  has  become  a  com¬ 
mon  expression — that  “habit  is  second  nature.” 
Habit  is  not  original  nature,  but  something 
added  thereto  as  clothes  are  added  to  the  body. 
But  unlike  clothes,  which  are  added  externally 
and  merely  by  contact,  habits  as  second  nature 
are  nature  itself  transformed  or  developed.  In 
the  words  of  an  ancient  poet,  whom  Aristotle 
quotes  with  approval,  “habit’s  but  long  prac¬ 
tice,  and  this  becomes  men’s  nature  in  the  end.” 

Not  all,  as  we  shall  see,  would  grant  that  prac¬ 
tice  is  essential  to  habit,  Nevertheless  the  word 
“practice”  suggests  one  notion  that  is  common 
to  all  theories  of  acquired  habit,  namely,  that 
habit  is  a  retained  effect — the  result  of  something 
done  or  experienced.  Within  this  common  un¬ 
derstanding,  there  are  opposite  views.  Accord¬ 


ing  to  one  view,  the  acquisition  of  habits  de¬ 
pends  on  activity.  According  to  another,  habits 
arc  modifications,  passively,  not  actively,  ac¬ 
quired. 

The  word  “habit”  is  also  used  in  a  sense  dia¬ 
metrically  opposite  to  the  meanings  so  far  con¬ 
sidered.  It  is  the  sense  in  which  Aristotle,  in  the 
History  of  Animals,  discusses  the  habits  of  ani¬ 
mals,  and  differentiates  species  according  to  the 
differences  in  theirhabits.  Here  the  word  “habit” 
is  used  to  signify  not  an  acquired  pattern  of 
behavior,  but  an  innate  predisposition  to  act  or 
react  in  a  certain  way.  The  difference  between 
acquired  habits  and  “the  habits  to  which  there 
is  an  innate  tendency,”  James  tells  us,  is  marked 
by  the  fact  that  the  latter  generally  “are  called 
instincts.” 

The  opposition  between  these  two  meanings 
of  “habit”  is  clear.  On  the  one  hand,  habits  rep¬ 
resent  what,  in  the  case  of  living  things  at  least, 
is  added  by  nurture  to  nature — the  results  of 
experience,  training,  or  activity.  On  the  other 
hand,  habits  which  are  identical  with  instincts 
belong  to  original  nature  itself — part  of  the  na¬ 
tive  endowment  of  the  animal.  Is  there  any  com¬ 
mon  thread  of  meaning  in  the  notions  of  ac¬ 
quired  and  innate  habit  which  may  explain  the 
use  of  the  word  in  such  opposite  senses? 

The  familiar  statement  that  a  person  does 
what  he  is  in  the  habit  of  doing  indicates  that  a 
habit  is  a  tendency  to  a  particular  sort  of  be¬ 
havior.  Knowledge  of  a  person’s  habits  enables 
us  to  predict  what  he  is  likely  to  do  in  any  situa¬ 
tion  which  elicits  habitual  conduct  on  his  part. 
So,  too,  an  animal’s  behavior  in  a  particular  sit¬ 
uation  may  be  predicted  from  a  knowledge  of 
its  instincts.  Instinct  and  habit — or  innate  and 
acquired  habits — seem  to  have  this  common 
character,  that  they  are  tendencies  to  behavior 
of  a  specific  or  determinate  sort.  They  are  defi¬ 
nitely  not  random  behavior.  In  the  one  case,  the 


665 


666 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


tendency  is  preformed,  a  part  of  the  inherited 
nature  of  the  organism.  In  the  other,  the  tend¬ 
ency  is  somehow  a  product  of  experience  and 
learning.  In  neither  case  does  “habit”  refer  to 
mere  capacity  for  action,  unformed  and  inde¬ 
terminate,  nor  does  it  refer  to  the  action,  but 
rather  to  the  tendency  to  act. 

The  modifiability  of  instincts  by  experience 
indicates  another  and  more  dynamic  connection 
between  innate  and  acquired  habits.  William 
James  conceives  innately  determined  behavior 
as  if  it  were  a  plastic  material  out  of  which  new 
patterns  of  conduct  can  be  formed.  The  process 
of  animal  learning  he  thinks  can  be  generally  de¬ 
scribed  as  the  replacement  of  instincts  by  hab¬ 
its.  “Most  instincts,”  he  writes,  “are  implanted 
for  the  sake  of  giving  rise  to  habits,  and  this 
purpose  once  accomplished,  the  instincts  them¬ 
selves,  as  such,  have  no  raison  cT etre  in  the  psy¬ 
chical  economy,  and  consequently  fade  away.” 

Some  years  before  the  Russian  physiologists 
Bechterev  and  Pavlov  experimentally  studied 
the  conditioning  of  reflexes,  James  described  ani¬ 
mal  learning  in  terms  of  the  substitution  of  new 
for  old  responses  to  stimuli  which  had  previously 
called  forth  an  instinctive  reaction,  or  in  terms 
of  the  attachment  of  instinctive  responses  to 
new  stimuli.  “The  actions  we  call  instinctive,” 
James  writes,  “all  conform  to  the  general  reflex 
type”  and  “are  called  forth  by  determinate  sen¬ 
sory  stimuli.”  For  example,  a  predatory  animal, 
instinctively  responsive  to  various  perceptible 
signs  of  the  whereabouts  of  its  prey,  may  learn 
to  hunt  for  its  food  in  a  particular  locality,  at  a 
particular  time,  and  in  a  particular  way.  Or,  to 
take  the  example  James  gives,  “if  a  child,  in  his 
first  attempts  to  pat  a  dog,  gets  snapped  at  or 
bitten,  so  that  the  impulse  of  fear  is  strongly 
aroused,  it  may  be  that  for  years  to  come  no  dog 
will  excite  in  him  the  impulse  to  fondle  again.” 
Similarly,  an  animal  wThich  has  no  instinctive 
fear  of  man  may  acquire  an  habitual  tendency 
to  flee  at  man’s  approach,  as  the  result  of  expe¬ 
riences  in  which  the  appearance  of  man  is  asso¬ 
ciated  with  instinctively  recognized  signs  of 
danger. 

In  the  classification  of  animals,  from  Aristotle 
on,  the  instincts  peculiar  to  each  species  have 
been  used  in  their  differentiation.  In  addition, 
the  degree  to  which  the  instincts  of  an  animal 


are  either  relatively  inflexible  at  one  extreme  or  c( 
easily  modifiable  at  the  other  has  been  thought  c 
to  indicate  that  animal’s  rank  in  the  scale  of  in¬ 
telligence.  The  higher  animals  seem  to  have  a 
greater  capacity  to  form  habits  and  to  be  capa¬ 
ble,  therefore,  of  modifying  their  instinctive 
patterns  of  behavior  as  the  result  of  experience. 

In  consequence,  their  behavior  is  both  more 
adaptive  and  more  variable  than  that  of  animals 
which  always  follow  the  lines  of  action  laid 
down  by  instinct. 

Species  whose  instincts  are  largely  unmodifi- 
able  are  at  a  disadvantage  in  a  changing  environ¬ 
ment  or  in  one  to  which  they  are  not  innately 
adapted.  In  the  struggle  for  existence,  Darwin 
observes,  it  is  the  organism  that  “varies  ever  so 
little,  either  in  habits  or  structure”  which  “gains 
an  advantage  over  some  other  inhabitant  of  the 
same  country.”  Though  for  the  most  part  in¬ 
stincts  seem  to  be  directed  toward  the  animal’s 
survival,  intelligence,  or  the  power  of  modify¬ 
ing  instincts  by  learning,  may  sometimes  be 
needed  to  save  the  animal  from  his  own  instincts. 

If  the  lower  animals  are  most  dependent  on 
their  instincts  and  least  able  to  modify  them, 
that  wrould  seem  to  indicate  a  kind  of  opposi-  I 
tion  between  instinct  and  intelligence.  Darwin 
quotes  Cuvier  to  the  effect  that  “instinct  and 
intelligence  stand  in  an  inverse  ratio  to  each 
other,”  but  he  himself  does  not  wholly  accept 
this  view.  He  thinks  that  the  behavior  of  bea¬ 
vers,  for  example,  or  of  certain  classes  of  insects, 
shows  that  “a  high  degree  of  intelligence  is  cer¬ 
tainly  compatible  with  complex  instincts.”  Yet 
he  admits  that  “it  is  not  improbable  that  there 
is  a  certain  amount  of  interference  between  the 
development  of  free  intelligence  and  of  in¬ 
stinct.” 

On  this  subject  of  instinct  in  relation  to  in¬ 
telligence  or  reason,  James  seems  to  take  a  less 
equivocal  position.  According  to  him,  “man  pos¬ 
sesses  all  the  impulses  that  [animals]  have,  and  a 
great  many  more  besides.”  After  enumerating 
what  he  considers  to  be  the  instinctive  tenden¬ 
cies  of  the  human  species,  he  concludes  by  say¬ 
ing  that  “no  other  mammal,  not  even  the  mon¬ 
key,  shows  so  large  an  array.”  But  since  James 
also  thinks  that  man  has  the  keenest  intelligence 
and  may  even  be  the  only  reasoning  animal,  he 
cannot  believe  that  there  is  any  “material  an¬ 
tagonism  between  instinct  and  reason.”  On  the 


Chapter  32:  HABIT  667 


contrary,  a  high  development  of  the  faculties  of 
memory,  of  associating  ideas,  and  of  making  in¬ 
ferences  implies  not  the  absence  of  instinct,  but 
the  modifiability  of  instinct  by  experience  and 
learning.  “Though  the  animal  richest  in  reason 
might  be  also  the  animal  richest  in  instinctive 
impulses  too,’’  James  writes,  “he  would  never 
seem  the  fatal  automaton  which  a  merely  in¬ 
stinctive  animal  would  be.” 

The  opposite  position  is  taken  by  those  who, 
like  Cuvier,  hold  that  the  more  adequate  an  ani¬ 
mal’s  instinctive  equipment  is  for  its  survival, 
the  less  it  needs  free  intelligence  for  adaptive 
purposes,  and  the  less  important  is  the  role  of 
learning  and  habit  formation.  Some  writers,  like 
Aquinas,  go  further  than  this  and  maintain  that 
in  the  case  of  man,  the  power  of  reason  as  an  in¬ 
strument  of  learning  and  of  solving  life’s  prob¬ 
lems  supplants  instinct  almost  entirely,  or  needs 
to  be  supplemented  by  instinctive  impulses  of 
an  extremely  rudimentary  sort — hardly  more 
complex  than  simple  reflexes. 

What  other  animals  do  by  instinct  man  does 
by  reason.  “Brute  animals,”  Aquinas  writes,  “do 
not  act  at  the  command  of  reason,”  but  “if  they 
are  left  to  themselves,  such  animals  act  from 
natural  instinct.”  Since  in  his  opinion  habits 
can  be  formed  only  by  acts  which  involve  reason 
as  a  factor,  he  does  not  think  that,  strictly  speak¬ 
ing,  habits  are  to  be  found  in  brutes.  But,  he 
adds,  to  the  extent  that  man’s  reason  may  influ¬ 
ence  brutes  “by  a  sort  of  conditioning  to  do 
things  in  this  or  that  way,  so  in  this  sense  to  a 
certain  extent  we  can  admit  the  existence  of 
habits  in  brute  animals.” 

The  modification  of  instincts  in  the  course  of 
individual  life  raises  a  question  about  their  modi¬ 
fiability  from  generation  to  generation.  The 
question  has  obvious  significance  for  the  theory 
of  evolution. 

It  is  thought  by  some  that  an  animal’s  in¬ 
stincts  represent  the  past  experience  of  the  race. 
In  a  passage  quoted  by  James,  Herbert  Spencer, 
for  example,  maintains  that  “reflex  actions  and 
instincts  ....  result  from  the  registration  of  ex¬ 
perience  continued  for  numberless  generations.” 
Freud  appears  to  hold  much  the  same  opinion. 
“All  organic  instincts  are  conservative,”  he 
writes.  They  are  “historically  acquired,  and  are 
directed  towards  regressions,  towards  reinstate¬ 


ment  of  something  earlier.”  Indeed,  he  claims 
that  the  instincts  of  living  things  revert  back 
beyond  ancestral  history  to  the  inorganic.  They 
go  back  to  “an  ancient  starting  point,  which  the 
living  being  left  long  ago.”  They  arc  an  “im¬ 
print' ’  left  upon  the  development  of  the  organ¬ 
ism  by  “the  evolution  of  our  earth  and  its 
relation  to  the  sun.” 

James,  on  the  other  hand,  claims  that  there  is 
“perhaps  not  one  single  unequivocal  item  of 
positive  proof”  in  favor  of  the  view  that  “adap¬ 
tive  changes  are  inherited.”  He  thinks  the  vari¬ 
ability  of  instincts  from  generation  to  genera¬ 
tion  must  be  accounted  for  by  some  other  means 
than  the  inheritance  of  acquired  characteristics, 
according  to  which  the  habits  acquired  by  earlier 
generations  gradually  become,  through  heredi¬ 
tary  transmission,  the  innate  habits  of  later  gen¬ 
erations. 

The  question  of  their  origin  aside,  what  is  the 
structure  of  instincts?  In  the  chapter  on  Emo¬ 
tion,  where  this  matter  is  considered,  instinc¬ 
tive  behavior  is  described  as  having  three  com¬ 
ponents.  It  involves,  first,  an  innate  ability  to 
recognize  certain  objects;  second,  an  emotional 
reaction  to  them  which  includes  an  impulse  to 
act  in  a  certain  way;  and,  third,  the  ability  to 
execute  that  impulse  without  benefit  of  learning. 

James  covers  two  of  these  three  points  when 
he  defines  an  instinct  as  “the  faculty  of  acting 
in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  certain  ends,  with¬ 
out  foresight  of  the  ends,  and  without  previous 
education  in  the  performance”;  and  he  touches 
on  the  remaining  one  when  he  declares  that  “in¬ 
stinctive  reactions  and  emotional  expressions 
shade  imperceptibly  into  each  other.  Every  ob¬ 
ject  that  excites  an  instinct,”  he  goes  on  to  say, 
“excites  an  emotion  as  well,”  but  emotions  “fall 
short  of  instincts  in  that  the  emotional  reaction 
usually  terminates  in  the  subject’s  own  body, 
whilst  the  instinctive  reaction  is  apt  to  go  fur¬ 
ther  and  enter  into  practical  relations  with  the 
exciting  object.” 

In  the  discussion  of  instincts  from  Aristotle  to 
Freud,  the  emphasis  on  one  or  another  of  these 
components  has  varied  from  time  to  time.  Me¬ 
diaeval  psychologists,  if  we  take  Aquinas  as  an 
example,  seem  to  stress  the  cognitive  aspect.  He 
speaks  of  the  sheep  running  away  “when  it  sees 
the  wolf,  not  because  of  its  color  or  shape,  but 
as  a  natural  enemy.”  The  point  which  he  thinks 


668 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


notable  here  is  not  the  fact  that  the  sheep  runs 
away,  but  rather  the  fact  that  without  any  pre¬ 
vious  experience  of  wolves,  the  sheep  recognizes 
the  wolf  as  dangerous.  “The  sheep,  seeing  the 
wolf,  judges  it  a  thing  to  be  shunned  .  .  .  not 
from  deliberation,  but  from  natural  instinct. ” 
This  instinctive  power  of  recognizing  what  is  to 
the  animal’s  advantage  or  peril  Aquinas  calls 
“the  estimative  power’’  and  assigns  it,  along 
with  memory  and  imagination,  to  the  sensitive 
faculty. 

Later  writers  stress  the  emotional  and  cona¬ 
tive  aspects  of  instinct — feeling  and  impulse. 
James,  for  example,  indicates  this  emphasis  when 
he  says  that  “every  instinct  is  an  impulse”;  and 
Freud  makes  desire  central  rather  than  percep¬ 
tion  or  action.  An  instinct,  he  says,  may  be  de¬ 
scribed  as  a  stimulus,  but  it  would  be  more  exact 
to  speak  of  “a  stimulus  of  instinctual  origin”  as 
a  “need.”  The  instincts  are  the  basic  cravings 
or  needs,  and  these  instinctual  needs  are  the  pri¬ 
mary  unconscious  determinants  of  behavior  and 
thought. 

What  Freud  calls  “instinctual  needs”  seem  to 
be  the  counterpart  of  what,  in  an  earlier  phase 
of  the  tradition,  are  called  “natural  desires.” 
These  two  notions  are  far  from  being  strictly  in¬ 
terchangeable,  but  they  do  have  a  certain  simi¬ 
larity  in  their  reference  to  desires  which  are  not 
conscious  or  acquired  through  experience.  This 
matter  is  further  discussed  in  the  chapter  on 
Desire. 

If  we  turn  now  to  the  consideration  of  habit 
as  something  acquired  by  the  individual,  we  find 
two  major  issues.  The  first  of  these  has  already 
been  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  habit  as  a  retained  effect. 

According  to  William  James,  the  capacity  for 
habit  formation  is  a  general  property  of  nature, 
found  in  inanimate  matter  as  well  as  in  living 
things.  “The  moment  one  tries  to  define  what 
habit  is,”  he  writes,  “one  is  led  to  the  funda¬ 
mental  properties  of  matter.”  He  regards  the 
laws  of  nature,  for  example,  as  “nothing  but  the 
immutable  habits  which  the  different  elemen¬ 
tary  sorts  of  matter  follow  in  their  actions  and 
reactions  upon  each  other.  In  the  organic  world, 
however,  the  habits  are  more  variable  than  this.” 

James  attributes  this  universal  capacity  for 
habit  formation  to  what  he  calls  the  “plasticity” 


of  matter,  which  consists  in  “the  possession  of  a 
structure  weak  enough  to  yield  to  an  influence, 
but  strong  enough  not  to  yield  all  at  once.  Each 
relatively  stable  phase  of  equilibrium  in  such  a 
structure  is  marked  by  what  we  may  call  a  new 
set  of  habits.”  He  cites  as  examples  of  habit  for¬ 
mation  in  inorganic  matter  such  things  as  the 
magnetizing  of  an  iron  bar,  the  setting  of  plaster, 
scratches  on  a  polished  surface  or  creases  in  a 
piece  of  cloth.  The  matter  in  each  of  these  cases 
is  not  only  plastic  and  yielding,  but  retentive 
through  its  inertia.  “When  the  structure  has 
yielded,”  he  writes,  “the  same  inertia  becomes 
the  condition  of  its  comparative  permanence  in 
the  new  form,  and  of  the  new  habits  the  body 
then  manifests.” 

The  habits  of  living  things  or  of  the  human 
mind  are  to  be  regarded  only  as  special  cases  of 
nature’s  general  plasticity  and  retentiveness. 
James  does  not  fail  to  observe  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  magnetized  bar,  the  scratched  surface, 
or  the  creased  cloth,  and  the  habits  of  a  trained 
animal  or  a  skilled  workman.  The  latter  are  ac¬ 
quired  by  activity — by  practicing  the  same  act 
repeatedly.  Furthermore,  they  are  not  merely 
passive  relics  of  a  past  impression,  but  are  them¬ 
selves  tendencies  to  action.  They  erupt  into  ac¬ 
tion  almost  spontaneously  when  the  occasion  for 
performance  arises. 

It  may  be  questioned  whether  the  word  “hab¬ 
it”  should  be  used  so  broadly.  Unlike  James,  most 
writers  restrict  its  application  to  living  things, 
and  even  there  they  limit  habit  formation  to  the 
sphere  of  learning.  If  the  capacity  to  learn  from 
experience  is  not  a  property  of  plant  life,  then 
plants  cannot  form  habits.  The  same  may  be  said 
of  certain  species  of  animals  whose  activity  is  en¬ 
tirely  and  inflexibly  instinctive.  Habits  are  pos¬ 
sessed  only  by  those  organisms — animals  or  men 
— whose  future  conduct  can  be  determined  by 
their  own  past  behavior.  Aquinas,  as  we  have 
seen,  goes  further  than  this,  and  limits  habit  for¬ 
mation  in  a  strict  sense  to  man  alone. 

This  leads  at  once  to  the  second  issue.  For 
those  who  believe  that  man  is  not  specifi¬ 
cally  different  from  all  other  animals,  man’s 
habits  and  his  habit  formation  require  no  spe¬ 
cial  distinction  or  analysis.  They  hold  that  hu¬ 
man  intelligence  differs  from  animal  intelli¬ 
gence  only  in  degree,  not  in  kind.  No  other 
factors,  they  think,  are  present  in  human  learn- 


669 


Chapter  32:  HABIT 


ing  than  those  which  operate  when  animals 
somehow  profit  from  experience  or  acquire  new 
modes  of  behavior.  In  the  great  books  there  is 
to  be  found,  however,  a  very  special  theory  of 
habit  which  is  part  of  the  doctrine  that  man  is 
specifically  different  from  all  other  animals  in 
that  he  alone  is  rational  and  has  free  will. 

The  issue  about  man’s  nature  is  discussed  in 
other  chapters  (Animal,  Evolution,  Man, 
Mind).  Here  we  must  examine  the  consequent 
t  ces  for  the  theory  of  habit  of  these  opposing 
views.  Do  animals  and  men  form  habits  in  the 
same  sense  of  that  term  ?  The  use  of  the  word  is 
not  at  stake,  for  “habit”  may  be  used  in  a  dif¬ 
ferent  sense  for  the  acquired  dispositions  of  ani¬ 
mals.  Those  who  hold  that  brute  animals  and 
men  do  not  have  habits  in  the  same  sense  ac¬ 
knowledge  that  men  may  have,  in  addition  to 
their  specifically  human  habits,  the  sort  of  mod¬ 
ified  instincts  or  conditioned  reflexes  which  are 
typical  of  animal  habit  formation.  Further¬ 
more,  it  is  recognized  that  human  and  animal 
habits  are  alike  in  certain  respects.  Both  are  ac¬ 
quired  by  activity  and  both  are  tendencies  to 
activity  of  a  determinate  sort. 

The  question,  therefore,  is  simply  this:  Does 
f  one  conception  of  habit  apply  to  men  and  ani¬ 
mals,  or  does  human  nature  require  a  special 
conception  applicable  to  man  alone?  To  clarify 
i  this  issue,  it  is  necessary  to  summarize  the 
analysis  of  human  habits  which  Aristotle  and 
Aquinas  develop  more  fully  than  other  writers, 
even  than  those  who  share  their  view  of  the 
rationality  and  freedom  of  man. 

That  Aristotle  and  Aquinas  should  be  the 
authors  of  an  elaborate  theory  of  human  habits 
becomes  intelligible  in  terms  of  two  facts. 

In  the  first  place,  they  consider  habit  in  the 
context  of  moral  theory.  For  them  the  virtues, 
moral  or  intellectual,  are  habits,  and  so  neces¬ 
sarily  are  the  opposite  vices.  Virtues  are  good 
habits,  vices  bad  habits;  hence,  good  or  bad, 
human  habits  must  be  so  formed  and  consti¬ 
tuted  that  they  can  have  the  moral  quality 
connoted  by  virtue  or  vice.  Since  virtue  is 
praiseworthy  and  vice  blameworthy  only  if 
their  possessor  is  responsible,  human  habit 
is  conceived  as  arising  from  freely  chosen  acts. 

In  the  second  place,  their  understanding  of 
habit  is  affected  by  their  psychological  doctrine 


of  faculties,  and  especially  by  their  analysis  of 
the  powers  and  activities  which  they  think  be¬ 
long  peculiarly  to  man.  This  in  turn  gives  a 
metaphysical  meaning  to  habit,  for  they  treat 
human  powers  and  human  acts  as  special  cases 
of  potentiality  and  actualization. 

Aquinas  bases  much  of  his  discussion  of  habit 
on  Aristotle’s  definition  of  it  as  “a  disposition 
whereby  that  which  is  disposed  is  disposed  well 
or  ill,  and  this,  either  in  regard  to  itself  or  in 
regard  to  another.”  In  calling  a  habit  a  disposi¬ 
tion,  Aristotle  goes  on  to  say  that  all  “disposi¬ 
tions  are  not  necessarily  habits,”  for  while  dis¬ 
positions  are  unstable  or  ephemeral,  habits  “are 
permanent”  or  at  least  “difficult  to  alter.” 

For  a  disposition  to  be  a  habit,  certain  other 
conditions  must  be  present,  according  to  Aqui¬ 
nas.  “That  which  is  disposed  should  be  distinct 
from  that  to  which  it  is  disposed,”  he  writes, 
and  hence  “should  be  related  to  it  as  poten¬ 
tiality  is  to  act.”  If  there  is  a  being  which  lacks 
all  potentiality,  he  points  out,  “we  can  find  no 
room  in  such  a  thing  for  habit  ...  as  is  clearly 
the  case  in  God.” 

It  is  also  necessary  that  “that  which  is  in  a 
state  of  potentiality  in  regard  to  something  else 
be  capable  of  determination  in  several  ways  and 
to  various  things.”  If  there  were  a  potentiality 
which  could  be  actualized  in  one  way  and  one 
way  only,  then  such  a  power  of  operation  could 
not  be  determined  by  habits.  Some  of  man’s 
powers  seem  to  be  of  this  sort.  His  faculty  of 
sensation,  for  example,  functions  perfectly 
when  the  sense  organs  have  normally  matured. 
A  man  does  not  learn  to  see  colors  or  to  hear 
tones,  and  so  the  simple  use  of  his  senses — apart 
from  aesthetic  perceptions  and  trained  dis¬ 
criminations — does  not  lead  to  sensory  habits. 
“The  exterior  apprehensive  powers,  as  sight, 
hearing,  and  the  like,”  Aquinas  maintains,  “are 
not  susceptive  of  habits  but  are  ordained  to 
their  fixed  acts,  according  to  the  disposition 
of  their  nature.” 

In  contrast,  man’s  faculty  of  thinking  and 
knowing  can  be  improved  or  perfected  by 
activity  and  exercise.  The  words  “improved” 
and  “perfected”  are  misleading  if  they  are 
thought  to  exclude  bad  habits,  for  a  bad  habit 
is  no  less  a  habit  than  a  good  one.  The  defini¬ 
tion  of  habit,  Aquinas  points  out,  includes  dis¬ 
positions  which  “dispose  the  subject  well  or 


670 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ill  to  its  form  or  to  its  operation.”  Hence  when 
we  say  that  a  power  of  operation  is  “improved” 
or  “perfected”  by  being  exercised,  we  must 
mean  only  that  after  a  number  of  particular 
acts,  the  individual  has  a  more  determinate  ca¬ 
pacity  for  definite  operation  than  he  had  before. 

A  man  may  have  at  birth  the  mere  capacity 
for  knowing  grammar  or  geometry,  but  after 
he  has  learned  these  subjects  he  has  the  habit 
of  such  knowledge.  This,  according  to  Aristotle 
and  Aquinas,  means  that  his  original  capacity 
has  been  rendered  more  determinate  in  its 
activity.  It  would  be  so  even  if  he  had  learned 
errors,  that  is,  even  if  the  intellectual  habits  he 
had  formed  disposed  his  mind  in  a  manner 
which  would  be  called  “ill”  rather  than  “well.” 

The  difference  between  a  man  who  has 
learned  grammar  and  one  who  has  not  is  a  dif¬ 
ference  in  their  capacity  for  a  certain  intellec¬ 
tual  performance,  a  difference  resulting  from 
the  intellectual  work  which  has  been  done  by 
the  man  who  has  learned  grammar.  That  differ¬ 
ence  is  an  intellectual  habit.  The  man  who  has 
not  learned  grammar  has  the  same  undeveloped 
capacity  for  knowing  grammar  with  which  he 
was  born.  The  man  who  has  learned  grammar 
has  had  his  native  capacity  for  grammatical 
knowledge  developed.  That  developed  capacity 
is  a  habit  of  knowledge  or  skill  which  manifests 
itself  in  the  way  in  which  he  writes  and  speaks. 
But  even  when  he  is  not  actually  exercising  his 
grammatical  skill,  the  fact  that  he  has  formed 
this  particular  habit  means  that  he  will  be  able, 
whenever  the  occasion  arises,  to  do  correctly 
with  speed  and  facility  what  the  man  who  does 
not  have  the  habit  cannot  do  readily  or  easily 
if  he  can  do  it  at  all. 

It  may  be  helpful  to  illustrate  the  same  points 
by  reference  to  a  bodily  habit,  such  as  a  gym¬ 
nastic  or  athletic  skill  which,  being  an  art,  is 
a  habit  not  of  body  alone,  but  of  mind  as  well. 
If  two  men  are  born  with  normal  bodies  equally 
capable  of  certain  muscular  coordinations,  they 
stand  in  the  same  relation  to  performing  on  the 
tennis  court.  Both  are  equally  able  to  learn  the 
game.  But  when  one  of  them  has  learned  to 
play,  his  acquired  skill  consists  in  the  trained 
capacity  for  the  required  acts  or  motions.  The 
other  man  may  be  able  to  perform  all  these  acts 
or  go  through  all  these  motions,  but  not  with 
the  same  facility  and  grace,  or  as  pleasantly,  as 


the  man  whose  mastery  of  the  game  lies  in  a 
habit  formed  by  much  practice  in  doing  what 
is  required.  As  the  habit  gradually  grows,  awk¬ 
wardness  is  overcome,  speed  increases,  and 
pleasure  in  performance  replaces  pain  or  diffi¬ 
culty. 

Clearly,  then,  the  habit  exists  even  when  it  is 
not  in  operation.  It  may  even  develop  during 
periods  of  inactivity.  As  William  James  re¬ 
marks,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  “we  learn  to 
swim  during  the  winter  and  to  skate  during  the 
summer”  when  we  are  not  actually  engaging  in 
these  sports.  This  would  seem  to  be  inconsistent 
with  the  general  insight,  common  to  all  ob¬ 
servers,  that  habits  are  strengthened  by  exercise 
and  weakened  or  broken  by  disuse  or  by  the 
performance  of  contrary  acts.  But  James  ex¬ 
plains  that  his  point,  stated  less  paradoxically, 
means  only  that  during  periods  of  rest  the 
effects  of  prior  activity  seem  to  consolidate  and 
build  up  a  habit. 

The  dynamism  of  habit  formation  and  ha¬ 
bitual  activity  is  summarized,  in  the  language 
of  Aristotle  and  Aquinas,  by  the  statement  that 
“habit  is  a  kind  of  medium  between  mere  power 
and  mere  act.”  On  the  one  hand,  a  habit  is  like 
a  power  or  capacity,  for  though  it  is  an  im¬ 
provement  on  native  ability,  it  is  still  only  an 
ability  to  perform  certain  acts;  it  is  not  the  ac¬ 
tual  performance  of  them.  On  the  other  hand, 
habit  is  like  operation  or  activity,  for  it  repre¬ 
sents  an  actualization  or  development  of  capac¬ 
ity,  even  as  a  particular  operation  is  an  actual¬ 
ization  of  the  power  to  act.  That  is  why  habit 
is  sometimes  called  a  second  grade  of  poten¬ 
tiality  (compared  to  natural  capacity  as  first  po¬ 
tentiality)  and  also  “a  first  grade  of  actuality” 
(compared  to  operation  as  complete  act). 

According  to  the  theory  of  specifically  hu¬ 
man  habits,  habits  are  situated  only  in  man’s 
powers  of  reason  and  will.  Habits  are  formed 
in  the  other  powers  only  to  the  extent  that  they 
are  subject  to  direction  by  his  reason  and  will. 
Specifically  human  habits  can  be  formed  only 
in  that  area  of  activity  in  which  men  are  free 
to  act  or  not  to  act;  and,  when  they  act,  free  to 
act  this  way  or  that.  Habit,  the  product  of 
freedom,  is  not  thought  of  as  abolishing  free¬ 
dom.  However  difficult  it  may  be  to  exert  a  free 
choice  against  a  strong  habit,  even  the  strongest 


671 


Chapter  32:  HABIT 


habit  is  not  conceived  as  unbreakable;  and  if  it 
is  breakable,  it  must  permit  action  contrary  to 
itself.  Habitual  behavior  only  seems  to  lack 
freedom  because  a  man  does  habitually,  without 
conscious  attention  to  details,  what  he  would  be 
forced  to  do  by  conscious  choice  at  every  step 
if  he  lacked  the  habit. 

In  the  theory  under  consideration  habits  are 
classified  according  to  the  faculty  which  they 
determine  or  perfect,  on  the  ground  that  “every 
power  which  may  be  variously  directed  to  act 
needs  a  habit  whereby  it  is  well  disposed  to  its 
act.”  Consequently  there  are  intellectual  hab¬ 
its,  or  habits  of  thinking  and  knowing;  and  ap¬ 
petitive  habits,  or  habits  of  desire  which  involve 
the  emotions  and  the  will,  and  usually  entail 
specific  types  of  conduct.  Within  a  single  fac¬ 
ulty,  such  as  the  intellect,  habits  are  further 
differentiated  by  reference  to  their  objects  or 
to  the  end  to  which  their  characteristic  oper¬ 
ation  is  directed.  For  example,  the  habit  of 
knowing  which  consists  in  a  science  like  geom¬ 
etry  and  the  habit  of  artistic  performance  such 
as  skill  in  grammar  both  belong  to  the  intellect, 
but  they  are  distinct  habits  according  to  their 
objects  or  ends. 

All  of  these  distinctions  have  moral  as  well  as 
psychological  significance.  They  are  used  in 
formulating  the  criteria  of  good  and  bad  habits 
which  are  more  appropriately  discussed  in  the 
chapter  on  Virtue  and  Vice.  But  here  one 
further  psychological  distinction  deserves  com¬ 
ment.  Some  of  man’s  acquired  habits  are  re¬ 
garded  as  natural  in  a  special  sense — not  in  the 
sense  in  which  instincts  are  called  “natural”  or 
“innate”  habits.  The  distinction  is  drawn  from 
the  supposition  that  certain  habits  develop  in  all 

I  men  because,  since  human  nature  is  the  same 
for  all,  men  will  inevitably  form  these  habits  if 
they  act  at  all.  This  word  “natural”  here  ap¬ 
plied  to  a  habit  simply  means  that  it  is  common 
to  all  having  the  same  nature. 

For  example,  the  understanding  of  the  law 
of  contradiction — that  the  same  thing  cannot  be 
affirmed  and  denied  at  the  same  time — and  other 
simple  axioms  of  theoretic  knowledge  are  said 
to  be  possessed  by  the  human  mind  as  a  matter 
of  natural  habit.  If  a  man  thinks  at  all  he  will 
come  to  know  these  truths.  “It  is  owing  to  the 
very  nature  of  the  intellectual  soul,”  Aquinas 
writes,  “that  man,  having  once  grasped  what  is 


a  whole  and  what  is  a  part,  should  at  once  per¬ 
ceive  that  every  whole  is  larger  than  its  part.” 

Hie  sense  in  which  Aquinas  says  that  “ the 
understanding  of  first  principles  is  called  a  natural 
habit”  applies  to  the  first  principles  of  the 
practical  reason  as  well  as  to  the  axioms  of 
theoretic  knowledge.  Just  as  no  man  who 
makes  theoretic  judgments  about  the  true  and 
the  false  can  be,  in  his  opinion,  without  habit¬ 
ual  knowledge  of  the  principle  of  contradic¬ 
tion,  so  he  thinks  no  man  who  makes  practical 
judgments  about  good  and  evil  can  be  without 
habitual  knowledge  of  the  natural  moral  law, 
the  first  principle  of  which  is  that  the  good  is  to 
be  sought  and  evil  avoided.  “Since  the  precepts 
of  the  natural  law  are  sometimes  considered  by 
reason  actually,”  Aquinas  writes,  “while  some¬ 
times  they  are  in  the  reason  only  habitually, 
in  this  way  the  natural  law  may  be  called  a  hab¬ 
it.” 

In  a  different  phase  of  the  tradition  Hume 
regards  it  as  an  inevitable  tendency  of  the  hu¬ 
man  mind  to  interpret  any  repeated  sequence 
of  events  in  terms  of  cause  and  effect.  If  one 
thing  has  preceded  another  a  certain  number  of 
times  in  our  experience,  we  are  likely  to  infer 
that  if  the  first  occurs,  the  second  will  follow. 
The  principle  which  determines  us  “to  form 
such  a  conclusion”  is,  Hume  says,  “Custom  or 
Habit.”  All  our  inferences  from  experience  are 
“effects  of  custom,  not  of  reasoning”;  and  since 
the  habit  of  inferring  a  future  connection  be¬ 
tween  things  which  have  been  customarily  con¬ 
joined  in  the  past  is,  in  his  opinion,  universally 
present  in  human  nature,  Hume  refers  to  it  as 
“a  species  of  natural  instinct  which  no  reason¬ 
ing  or  process  of  thought  and  understanding  is 
able  either  to  produce  or  prevent.” 

Even  Kant’s  synthetic  judgments  a  priori 
have  a  certain  similarity  to  the  thing  called 
“natural  habit.”  They  comprise  judgments  the 
mind  will  make  because  of  its  own  nature  or, 
in  Kant’s  terms,  its  transcendental  structure. 
Though  a  priori,  the  judgment  itself  is  not  in¬ 
nate,  for  it  arises  only  when  actual  experience 
provides  its  subject  matter.  So,  too,  the  natural 
habit  of  first  principles,  of  which  Aquinas 
speaks,  is  not  innate,  but  a  result  of  experience. 

There  is  still  one  other  traditional  meaning 
of  the  phrase  “natural  habit.”  It  occurs  in 


672 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Christian  theology.  Habits  are  there  distin¬ 
guished  according  as  they  are  acquired  by  man’s 
own  efforts  or  are  a  gift  of  God’s  grace,  which 
adds  to  or  elevates  human  nature.  The  former 
are  natural,  the  latter  supernatural. 

In  the  sphere  of  supernatural  habits  the  theo¬ 
logian  makes  a  distinction  between  grace  it¬ 
self  and  the  special  habits  which  accompany 
grace.  Aquinas,  for  example,  writes  that  “just 
as  the  natural  light  of  reason  is  something  dif¬ 
ferent  from  the  acquired  virtues,  which  are 
ordained  to  this  natural  light,  so  also  the  light 
of  grace,  which  is  a  participation  of  the  divine 
nature,  is  something  different  from  the  infused 
virtues  which  are  derived  from  and  are  ordained 
to  this  light.”  These  “infused  virtues,”  like  the 
natural  virtues,  are  good  habits — principles  of 
operation,  determining  acts  of  thought  or  de¬ 
sire.  They  are  either  the  specifically  theological 
virtues  of  faith,  hope,  and  charity,  or  the  super¬ 
natural  counterparts  of  the  acquired  intellec¬ 
tual  and  moral  virtues — the  habits  which  are 
called  “the  infused  virtues”  and  “the  moral 
and  intellectual  gifts.” 

Grace,  taken  in  itself  rather  than  in  its  con¬ 
sequences,  is  not  an  operative  habit,  that  is,  it 
is  not  a  habit  of  performing  certain  acts.  Never¬ 
theless,  regarded  as  something  added  to  and 
perfecting  nature,  it  is  considered  under  the 
aspect  of  habit.  But  rather  than  “a  habit  where¬ 
by  power  is  inclined  to  an  act,”  Aquinas  in¬ 
cludes  it  among  those  habits  by  which  “the 
nature  is  well  or  ill  disposed  to  something,  and 
chiefly  when  such  a  disposition  has  become  a 
sort  of  nature.”  Through  the  habit  of  grace, 
man’s  nature  is  elevated  by  becoming  “a  par¬ 
taker  ...  of  the  divine  nature.” 

To  distinguish  this  kind  of  habit  from  those 
in  the  operative  order,  it  is  sometimes  called  an 
“entitative  habit” — a  habit  of  the  very  being 
of  man’s  personality.  On  the  purely  natural 
plane,  health  may  be  thought  of  in  the  same 
way  as  a  habit  which  is  entitative  rather  than 
operative.  It  is  a  habit  not  of  thought,  desire, 
or  conduct,  but  of  man’s  physical  being. 

The  word  “custom”  is  sometimes  a  synonym 
for  “habit”  and  sometimes  a  variant  with  spe¬ 
cial  connotations.  What  a  man  does  habitually 
is  customary  for  him  to  do.  So  far  as  the  single 
individual  is  concerned,  there  seems  to  be  no 


difference  between  habit  and  custom.  But  we 
usually  think  of  customs  in  terms  of  the  group 
or  community  rather  than  the  individual.  As 
indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Custom  and  Con¬ 
vention,  the  prevailing  modes  of  behavior  in 
a  society  and  its  widely  shared  beliefs  repre¬ 
sent  common  habits  of  thought  and  action 
on  the  part  of  its  members.  Apart  from  the 
habits  of  individuals  social  customs  have  no  ex¬ 
istence  whatsoever.  But  social  customs  and  in¬ 
dividual  habits  cannot  be  equated  because,  with 
respect  to  any  customary  practice  or  opinion, 
there  may  be  non-conforming  individuals 
— men  of  divergent  habit.  The  prevalent  or 
predominant  customs  are  the  habits  of  the 
majority. 

No  society  endures  for  long  or  functions 
peacefully  unless  common  habits  generate  the 
ties  of  custom.  To  perpetuate  itself,  the  state 
necessarily  attempts  to  mould  the  habits  of 
each  growing  generation — by  every  means  of 
education,  by  tradition,  by  law.  So  important 
is  the  stability  of  custom  in  the  life  of  society, 
according  to  Montaigne,  that  it  is  “very  un¬ 
just  ...  to  subject  public  and  established  cus¬ 
toms  and  institutions  to  the  weakness  and  in¬ 
stability  of  a  private  and  particular  fancy.” 
He  doubts  “whether  any  so  manifest  benefit 
can  accrue  from  the  alteration  of  a  law  re¬ 
ceived,  let  it  be  what  it  will,  as  there  is  danger 
and  inconvenience  in  altering  it.”  His  extreme 
caution  with  regard  to  changing  the  law  comes 
from  a  preference  for  the  stability  of  settled 
customs  and  from  the  recognition  that  “govern¬ 
ment  is  a  structure  composed  of  diverse  parts 
and  members  joined  and  united  together,  with 
so  strict  connection,  that  it  is  impossible  to  stir 
so  much  as  one  brick  or  stone,  but  the  whole 
body  will  be  sensible  of  it.” 

Without  habits  of  action,  at  least,  neither 
the  individual  nor  society  can  avoid  chaos. 
Habits  bind  day  to  day  in  a  continuity  which 
would  be  lost  if  the  recurring  problems  of  con¬ 
duct  or  thought  had  to  be  solved  anew  each 
time  they  arose.  Without  habits  life  would 
become  unbearably  burdensome;  it  would  bog 
down  under  the  weight  of  making  decisions. 
Without  habits  men  could  not  live  with  them¬ 
selves,  much  less  with  one  another.  Habits  are, 
as  William  James  remarks,  “the  fly-wheel  of 
society.” 


Chapter  32:  HABIT 


673 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

1.  Diverse  conceptions  ol  habit:  as  second  nature,  perfection  of  power,  retained  modifica¬ 

tion  of  matter 

i a.  Habit  in  relation  to  potency  and  act 

ib.  Habit  in  relation  to  the  plasticity  of  matter 

2.  The  kinds  of  habit:  the  distinction  of  habit  from  disposition  and  other  qualities 

2 a.  Differentiation  of  habits  according  to  origin  and  function:  innate  and  acquired, 
entitative  and  operative  habits 

2 b.  Differentiation  of  habits  according  to  the  capacity  habituated  or  to  the  object 
ot  the  habit’s  activity 

3.  The  instincts  or  innate  habits  of  animals  and  men 

3 a.  Instinctual  needs  or  drives 

3 b.  The  innate  sense  of  the  beneficial  and  harmful:  the  estimative  power 
y.  Instinct  in  relation  to  reason 

3 d.  The  instinctive  basis  of  habit-formation:  the  modification  of  instincts  and  re¬ 
flexes  through  experience  or  learning 

y.  The  genesis,  transmission,  and  modification  of  instincts  in  the  course  of  genera¬ 
tions 

4.  Habit  formation 

40.  The  causes  of  habit:  practice,  repetition,  teaching,  and  the  law 
4 b.  The  growth  and  decay  of  habits:  ways  of  strengthening  and  breaking  habits 

5.  The  analysis  of  specifically  human  habits 

y.  Habits  of  body:  manual  arts  and  the  skills  of  play 
5 b.  Habits  of  appetite  and  will:  the  moral  virtues  as  good  habits 
y.  The  natural  habits  of  reason:  innate  predispositions  of  the  mind 
5 d.  The  acquired  habits  of  mind:  the  intellectual  virtues 
y.  Supernatural  habits 

(1)  Grace  as  an  entitative  habit  of  the  person 

(2)  The  infused  virtues  and  the  supernatural  gifts 

(3)  The  theological  virtues 

6.  The  force  of  habit  in  human  life 

6a.  The  automatic  or  unconscious  functioning  of  habits 

6b.  The  contribution  of  habit  to  the  perfection  of  character  and  mind 

6c.  Habit  and  freedom 

7.  The  social  significance  of  habit:  habit  in  relation  to  law 


tagb 

674 


676 

677 

678 

679 

680 

681 


674 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 


To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g..  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 — (D)  II  EsdraSy  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Diverse  conceptions  of  habit:  as  second  na¬ 
ture,  perfection  of  power,  retained  modi¬ 
fication  of  matter 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  iii,  330a 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  8  [8b26-9ai3] 

13d-14a  /  Physics,  bk  vh,  ch  3  [246aio-248a 
6]  329c-330d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  20 
544a  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  5  [4 1 7a2 1  —4 1 8a6]  647d- 
648d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [no3ai4-b2] 
348b,d-349a;  bk  vii,  ch  10  [ii52a28-33] 
403b  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  13  [i332a39-bio] 
537a-b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [1370^-8] 
613b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  viii,  par  10  55c-d 
/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  24,  630d-631a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  2,  rep  2  105c-106b;  q  87,  a  2  466c-467b 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49 
la-6a;  q  94,  a  1  221a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  489c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iii,  sc  iv  [160- 
170]  56b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  93  190a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxiii,  sect  6  249a-b 


35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  v,  div  36, 
464d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  269c- d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  151 
57a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  119b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  68a-83b  esp  68a-69b,  73b- 
74a,  78b-79a 

la,  Habit  in  relation  to  potency  and  act 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246^0- 
248a8]  329c-330d;  bk  viii,  ch  4  [255^0- 
b23]  340a-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ix,  ch  1-2 
570b,d-572a;  ch  5  573a-c  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[4i2a22— 28]  642b;  ch  5  [4i7a2i-4i8a6]  647d- 
648d;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [429^-23]  661d-662a  / 
Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  4  [44ibi6-24]  679b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [no3ai4-b2] 
348b,d-349a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14,  a 
1,  rep  1  75d-76c;  q  18,  a  2,  rep  2  105c-106b; 
q  79,  aa  6-7  419b-421c;  a  10,  ans  423d-424d; 
a  12  425c-426b;  q  87,  a  2,  ans  466c-467b; 
q  89,  a  6,  rep  3  478b-d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  qq 
49-56  la-35a  passim;  q  71,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3 
108b-109a;  q  94,  a  i,  rep  i  221a-d 


1  b  to  3 a  Chapter  32:  HABIT  675 


lb.  Habit  in  relation  to  the  plasticity  of  matter 

20  Aquinas:  Sttmma  Theologica ,  part  i  ii,  q  50, 
a  i,  ans  6a-7b;  a  6,  ans  and  rep  i  11a  12a 

53  James:  Psychology,  68a-71a; 423a  424a  passim; 
429a-430a 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  65 ld- 
652c 

2.  The  kinds  of  habit:  the  distinction  of  habit 
from  disposition  and  other  qualities 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  8  [8b26-9*i3]  13d- 
14a;  ch  15  21c-d  /  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246® 
io-248a6]  329c-330d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i, 
ch  1  [98ib2— 5]  499d:  bk  v,  ch  19-20  543d- 
544a;  bk  ix,  ch  1-2  570b, d  572a;  ch  5  573a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [uo3ai4-b2] 
348b,d-349a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1— ii,  q  49, 
aa  1-3  lb-5a;  q  54  22d-25d;  q  71,  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  3  108b-109a;  q  74,  a  4,  rep  3  131a-d; 
part  hi,  q  7,  a  13,  rep  2  755c-756c;  q  9,  a  3, 
rep  2  765b-766b 

2^.  Differentiation  of  habits  according  to  ori¬ 
gin  and  function:  innate  and  acquired, 
entitative  and  operative  habits 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  ix,  ch  5  [i047b3i- 
34]  573a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2,  ans  2b-4a;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  4b-5a;  q 
50,  aa  1-2  6a-8a;  a  6  lla-12a;  q  51  12a-15d; 
q  54,  a  1,  ans  22d-23d;  a  2,  ans  23d-24c;  a  3 
24c-25b;  q  55,  a  2  27a-d;  q  82,  a  1  168a-d; 
q  no,  aa  3-4  350a-351d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54a;  66c-d;  68b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  428a-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ix,  div 
83-85  487c-488c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  303d-304a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  459b-461c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  68b- 69c  esp 
69a;  119a-d  /  Descent  of  Man ,  304b, d  [fn  5]; 
310b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  68a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  591d-592b; 
594d-595b  /  JTar  W  Death ,  758a-759c 

2£.  Differentiation  of  habits  according  to  the 
capacity  habituated  or  to  the  object  of  the 
habit's  activity 

7  Plato:  Theaetetus,  518a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246*10- 
248a6]  329c-330d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  1,  ch  13  [1102*26- 
no3aio]  347d-348d;  bk  vi,  ch  12  [ii44ai-u] 
393c-d  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  14  [i333ai 6—36] 
538a-b;  ch  15  [i334b8— 28]  539b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50 
6a-12a;  q  54,  aa  1-2  22d-24c;  a  3,  rep  1,3 
24c-25b;  a  4,  ans  25b-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  24, 
a  5,  ans  492b-493d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  333a-b 


3.  The  instincts  or  innate  habits  of  animals  and 
men 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  320b  c 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  8  [9*14  28)  14b  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  ix,  cm  5  [1047*31  34]  573a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  cm  i 
[487*11  4SSb29)  7d  9d;  BK  VIII,  CH  I  114b,d 
115b  esp  [588b23-589aio|  115b;  cn  12  (5i/jb2o- 
28]  122d  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  13  [1332*39  bio) 
537a  b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  cii  12,  1 73a  c 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [741  747) 
39cd 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  3,  ans  106b  107c;  q  59,  a  3,  ans  308b  309a; 
q  83,  a  1,  ans  436d-438a;  part  i-ii,  q  40,  a  3 
794c  795a;  q  46,  a  4,  rep  2  815b  d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3  8b-9a 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [187-204] 
535d-536a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  428a-c 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ix,  div 
85  488c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b-d 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  334d-336a 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  409d-410a 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  119a-135a,c  esp 
119a-121a,  134d  l35a,c  /  Descent  of  Man , 
287d-291c  esp  287d~288d;  308a*312d‘ 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vii,  278a-287a 
passim;  bk  xi,  499c-500c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  8a-17b  esp  12b;  47b- 
52a  esp  49b-50a;  68a;  700a-737a  esp  700a- 
703a 

54  Freud:  Instincts  412a-421a,c  esp  412b-415b  / 

Unconscious ,  439d  /  General  Introduction , 
615b'616c  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle 
639a-663d  esp  ’651d-653a  /  £^0  W  /^, 
708d  709b  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents , 
789b-791d  esp  790a-d,  791b-d  /  7/j/ro- 

ductory  Lectures ,  846a-853b  esp  846a-847b, 
85la-d 

Instinctual  needs  or  drives 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  62d-63a;  67b  c; 
bk  iii,  llld-112c 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  157b-159b;  165c-166b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980*22- 
28] 499a 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  v,  ch  8 
[542ai 7— bi ]  68d-69a;  bk  vi,  ch  18  [57ib6- 
573*30]  97b-99a;  bk  vii,  ch  1  [58ia2i-b22] 
107a-b;  bk  viii,  ch  12  [596b2o-28]  122d  / 
Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  (749bi- 
750*11]  290d-291b;  ch  2  [753*7— 1 7]  294a  b  / 
Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  11  [m8b8-i8]  365a-b;  bk 
vii,  ch  6  [ii49b24-n50a8]  400b-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  12,  173a-c 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [1037— 
1057] 57d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  cii  23  128c-d 


676 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  The  instincts  or  innate  habits  of  animals  and 
men .  3 a.  Instinctual  needs  or  drives .) 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  12, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  3  672a-c;  q  13,  a  2,  rep  2-3 
673c-674c;  q  16,  a  2,  rep  2  684d-685b;  q  17, 
a  2,  rep  3  687d-688b;  q  41,  a  i,  rep  3  798b-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xviii 
139-75]  80a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Manciple' sT ale  [17,104-144]  490a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61a-d;  84c-86b; 
part  11,  141a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  184a-b;  424d-425c; 

512a-b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  339b;  346a- 
347d;  349a-350a;  361c-362a;  402a-d;  460d- 
461a;  476b-477b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  72c-73a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  vi,  99d-103a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  4-9  398d-399c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vii,  sect  78-80 
42b-43a  /  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  3  104b-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div  38, 
466b;  div  45  469c;  sect  ix,  div  85  488c;  sect 
xii,  div  1 18  504c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  342c-346d  passim 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  469b-470c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  164b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  286b-288a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  122  d- 131b  /  De¬ 

scent  of  Man,  298a-c;  304a-314b  esp  304b- 
305a,  308a-310a,  311a-312d;  371c-372c; 

456b-457c;  583a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  665a-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  198b-199a;  700a-704a; 
712b-737a  esp  736b- 737a  [fn  1] 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  400c-402c  esp  401a-c  / 
General  Introduction,  569c-593b  esp  574a-d, 
590a-593b;  615b-616c;  618d-619a  /  Beyond 
the  Pleasure  Principle  639a-663d  esp  651d-663c 
/  Group  Psychology,  669a-b;  673b-c;  684d- 
686c  esp  685a-b  /  Ego  and  Id,  708c-712c  esp 
708d-709b,  711c-712a;  714c-717a,c  esp  717c  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  787a-788d  esp 
787a-c;  789b-791d  /  New  Introductory  Lec¬ 
tures,  837b-d;  846b-852c  esp  85la-d;  883b-c 

3 b.  The  innate  sense  of  the  beneficial  and 
harmful:  the  estimative  power 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  63b-c 
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  viii,  ch  12 
[596b20-28]  122d;  bk  ix,  ch  5-6  136d-138b 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  20  167d- 
168b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19,  a 
10,  ans  117d-118b;  q  59,  a  3,  ans  308b-309a; 
q  76,  a  5,  rep  4  394c-396a;  q  78,  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  4-5  411d-413d;  q  81,  a  2,  rep  2  429c- 
430c;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  430c-431d;  q  83,  a 
1,  ans  436d-438a;  q  96,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  4 
510b  511b 


3b  to  3c 

22  Chaucer:  Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [15,279-287] 
457b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  286d-287b 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  456d-457a 
31  Descartes:  Meditations,  vi,  100a 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  79-80 
42c-43a  /  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  3  104b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  x,  sect  3  141c-d;  ch 

xi,  sect  5  144d-145a;  sect  ii  145d-146a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d-338a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  144a-b;  146b-148a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  121a;  122c  /  De¬ 
scent  of  Man,  287d-288a;  290c-291a;  292b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  llla-c;  129a-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  8a;  13a;  708a-709a;  720b- 
725a  passim;  729b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  607d-609c;  612c- 
614a  esp  613d-614a;  623b-c  /  Beyond  the 
Pleasure  Principle ,  640d-641a  /  Inhibitions, 
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  720a-721c  esp  721a; 
737b-738a;  751a-752b  /  New  Introductory 
Lectures,  845a-846a 

3 c.  Instinct  in  relation  to  reason 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [199*20-33] 
276c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  ix,  ch  7 
[6i2bi8-6i3ai6]  138b-d  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch 
13  [i332a39-bio]  537a-b;  ch  15  [i334b7-28] 
539b-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  16  262d- 
263a,  c 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  20-21 
167d-168c 

19  A.quinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18,  a 
3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  59,  a  3,  ans  308b-309a; 
q  76,  a  5,  rep  4  394c-396a;  q  78,  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  4-5  411d-413d;  q  83,  a  i,  ans  436d-438a; 
q  96,  a  i,  rep  4  510b-511b;  part  i-ii,  q  12,  a 
5,  ans  and  rep  3  672a-c;  q  17,  a  2,  rep  3  687d- 
688b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3  8b-9a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  216b-219b 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  428a-c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  108  128d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  59d-60b  / 
Objections  and  Replies,  156a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  9,  schol  399c 
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  339-344  233a-b  /  Vacuum, 
357a-b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div  38, 
466b;  div  45  469c;  sect  ix,  div  85  488c;  sect 

xii,  div  118-119  504c-505b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393b-c 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  409d-410a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256d- 
257a  /  Practical  Reason,  316c-317a  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  602b, d  [fn  1] 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  465a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  164b-c; 
171b-c;  part  iv,  361c-d 


677 


3d  to  4 b  Chapter  32:  HABIT 


49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  287d  289a  csp 
288c  d;  292c-d;  317b-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  676b  677a;  691a  b;  704a 
706b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  377c  380b  / 

Unconscious ,  433  b  d  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure 
Principle ,  651a  /  Eg-o  702c  d;  715a  716b 

csp  71 5  d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents , 
800d-801a  /  A7e/^  Introductory  Lectures ,  837b 
839b  esp  838a-c;  843d-845b 

3*/.  The  instinctive  basis  of  habit-formation: 
the  modification  of  instincts  and  reflexes 
through  experience  or  learning 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  iv,  ch  9 
[536bi4~2o]  63b;  bk  ix,  ch  49  156d  157a  / 
Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  13  [i332a39-bio]  537a~b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [307-322] 
34a-b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3,  rep  2  8b-9a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div  38, 
466b;  div  45  469c;  sect  ix,  div  83-85  487c- 
488c  esp  div  85  488c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  97 
132c-133a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  288b;  290c-291c; 
293d-295c;  298a-c;  317c-319a;  569c-57lb  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  570a;  592d-593b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  8b-9a;  13a-17b  esp  17a; 

44a-52b  esp  49b-50a;  705a-712b;  718a; 

720a-b;  725a;  732b-735b;  827a-835a  esp 

♦  834a-835a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis, ,  15d-18a  /  Narcissism ,  407c-408a  / 
Instincts ,  415b-421a,c  esp  415d-418a  /  Repres¬ 
sion ,  422a-423b  /  General  Introduction ,  574d- 
575d;  587d-588b;  590c-593b  esp  592b-c  / 
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  640c  /  Group 
Psychology ,  693b-695c  esp  693d-694b  /  IFtfr 
and  Death ,  757d-759d  /  Civilization  and  Its 
Discontents ,  781a-d  /  iVe#/  Introductory  Lec¬ 
tures ,  847a-b;  870a-b 

3e.  The  genesis,  transmission,  and  modifica¬ 
tion  of  instincts  in  the  course  of  genera¬ 
tions 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [661-668] 
23b-c;  bk  iii  [741-753]  39c-d 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  580a- b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  82d-85c;  111a; 
119a-135a,c  esp  121b-122d,  131c-134d;  236d- 
237a  /  Descent  of  Man,  288b-c;  292c;  304b, d 
[fn  5];  318a-319a  passim;  504c-507a  esp  506c- 
507a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  691a-b;  717a-725a  passim, 
esp  718b,  724a,  724b-725a;  851b;  853a-858a; 
890b-897a 

54  Freud:  Instincts ,  413b-c  /  General  Introduc¬ 
tion,  591d-592b;  594d-595b;  613a  / 

Me  Pleasure  Principle ,  651d-654c;  660c  /  £go 
Id,  707c-708b  /  and  Death,  758d 


4.  Habit  formation 

4<*.  The  causes  of  habit:  practice,  repetition, 
teaching,  and  the  law 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii,  330a;  333b  d  / 
Theactetus,  518ab 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  (246*10- 
248*6]  329c-330d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ix,  ch  5 
[i047b3 1— 34]  573a;  ch  8  [1049^9-1050*3] 
575c  d  /  5o//Z,  bk  ii,  cii  5  [417*21-418*6] 
647d-648d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  vii,  cm  i 
[581^1 1—22]  107b;  bk  viii,  cii  29  (607*9  i}] 
132c  /  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  1-4  348b, d  351b 
passim;  bk  iii,  cii  5  [1114*3-10]  360a;  ch  12 
[ui9a22-34]  365d  366a  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  S 
[1269*14-23]  465b;  bk  vii,  cii  15  [i334b8-28] 
539b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1337*19-27]  542b; 
ch  5  [1339*21-25]  544c-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i, 
cii  10  [i369b6-8]  612d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  18  161a- 
162b;  bk  iii,  ch  3,  179d;  ch  8  184b-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  16  271c  d 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  121a-122b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  viii,  par  10  55c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  86,  a 
2,  ans  462a-463a;  q  89,  a  6,  rep  3  478b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  51 
12a-15d;  q  54,  a  4,  rep  1,3  25b-d;  q  92,  a  i 
213c-214c;  a  2,  rep  4  214d-2l5a,c;  q  95,  a  3 
228c-229b;  q  96,  aa  2-3  231c-233a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvi  [85- 
114]  77d-78a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  154d-155a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  16c-d;  42b-44c;  64a  b; 
534a-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  iii,  sc  iv  [160- 
170]  56b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  78d-79c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  prop  10,  sciiol  455a- 
456a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  71  197b-198a;  ch  xxxiii,  sect  5-1S 
248d-251c  passim 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  v,  div  35- 
36,  464c-d;  div  38,  466b 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  357c-360d 

43  Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  329d-330a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  97 
132c-133a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 
251b 

53  James:  Psychology,  70a-73b:  332a;  571a  b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  573d 

4b.  The  growth  and  decay  of  habits:  ways  of 
strengthening  and  breaking  habits 

7  Plato:  Theaetetus,  518a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  cii  8  [iob26-u*4]  15d- 
16a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  1-4  348b,d-35lb 
passim;  bk  vii,  ch  10  [1152*28-33]  403b 


678 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  Habit  formation .  4b.  The  growth  and  decay 
of  habits:  ways  of  strengthening  and  break¬ 
ing  habits.') 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  27  132b- 
133b;  bk  11,  ch  18  161a-162b;  bk  hi,  ch  12 
187b-188b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  16  271c-d 
17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  20,  293a 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  qq 
52-53  15d-22d;  q  54,  a  4,  rep  1,3  25b-d 
25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  64a-b;  390b-c;  391c- 
393b;  395b-396d;  525d-527a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learningy  69a;  69d- 
70a;  79b-c;  80a  b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iii,  48b-49d 
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  6  173a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  71  197b-198a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  464a-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnsony  259a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Many  309c 
53  James:  Psychology ,  79b-83b;  332a 

5.  The  analysis  of  specifically  human  habits 

8  Aristotle:  Physicsy  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246^0-248® 
6]  329c-330d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethicsy  bk  ii,  ch  1-6  348b,d-352d 
passim 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  qq 
49-54  la-25d 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  1  la-2a 
53  James:  Psychology ,  73b-83b 

5a.  Habits  of  body:  manual  arts  and  the  skills 
of  play 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  46c  /  Republic ,  bk  iii, 

334d-335b;  bk  vii,  391d  /  Theaetetus ,  518a-b 
/  bk  vii,  717b-d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246aio-bi9] 
329c-330a  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [292ai4-bi8] 
383d-384b  /  Metaphysicsy  bk  v,  ch  20  [i022b 
10-13]  544a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [1103^3-35] 
348d;  [1  io3b6— 13]  349a  /  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  i 
[i288bio-2o]  487a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  15  [i334b7~ 
28]  539b-d;  ch  17  [1336^-22]  541a-b;  bk 
viii,  ch  4  544a-c 

10  Hippocrates:  Articulations ,  par  52  109b- 
110a;  par  55,  111c;  par  58  112b-113a  /  Apho¬ 
risms,  sect  11,  par  49-50  133d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  15,  190a-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  ix  [590-620]  295a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  40d-42a  /  Coriolanus , 
175b  /  Philopoemen ,  293d-294a  /  Demos¬ 
thenes ,  693c;  695b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  8,  87a-b 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2,  rep  1,3  2b-4a;  a  3,  rep  3  4b-5a;  a  4,  ans 
5a-6a;  q  50,  a  1  6a-7b;  a  3,  rep  2  8b-9a;  q  52, 
a  1,  ans  15d-18a;  a  2,  ans  18a-19a;  q  54,  a  i, 
ans  22d-23d 


5  to  5c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel \  bk  i, 
28a-29b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  43d;  66c-67a;  73c; 
316b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  53d-54a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  166b-167a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  335a-b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  i,  53a;  bk  v, 
337d-338a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  5a-b 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  586a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  52, 
25c  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  267b- 
268b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  269b-271a;  278c-d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  164b-167a;  170c-171a;  237d- 
240c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  73b-78b  esp  75a;  332a; 
774a 

5&.  Habits  of  appetite  and  will:  the  moral  vir¬ 
tues  as  good  habits 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246b2o- 
247ai9]  330a-b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  vii,  ch  i 
[58ibn-22]  107b  /  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  ch  1-6 
348b,d-352d;  bk  vii,  ch  5  [1  i48bi 5— 1  i49a4] 
399a-c;  ch  10  [1152^8-33]  403b  /  Politics , 
bk  vii,  ch  15  [i334b8-28]  539b-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  hi,  ch  3  178d- 
180a;  ch  8  184b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a-223d 

14  Plutarch:  Cato  the  Younger ,  637b-c 

18  Augustine  :  Confessions ,  bk  viii,  par  10  55c-d; 
par  20-21  58c-59a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  1,  rep  3  lb-2b;  a  2,  rep  3  2b-4a;  q  50,  a  3 
8b-9a;  a  5  lOb-d;  q  56,  a  4  32b-33c;  a  6  34b- 
35a;  qq  58—61  41a-59d;  q  94,  a  i,  rep  i  221a-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  iii,  sc  iv  [160- 
170]  56b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  69d-70a; 
78d-81c  esp  79a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  71  197b-198a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  357c-360d  /  Pref 
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  368d;  378a-b 
/  Judgement,  521b-523c;  604d-606d  esp  606a-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445d-446a;  463d-465b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  386a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  171b-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  304a-305c  esp 
304b, d  [fn  5];  310c-319a  esp  311c-d,  318a- 
319a;  321b-322d;  593a-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  80a-83b;  798b-808a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  799a-b 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death ,  757c-759d 

5c,  The  natural  habits  of  reason:  innate  pre¬ 
dispositions  of  the  mind 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980^2- 
28]  499a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [ioo5bi5~34]  524d-525a; 
bk  xi,  ch  5  [io6ib34-io62a5]  590a-b 


679 


5d  to  5e( 2)  Chapter  32:  HABIT 


9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  ii  [i  14^25^1 
392d-393a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1355*14-17] 
594b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  22  127c  128c; 
bk  11,  ch  11  150a-15lb 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  cii  1-3  10a- 
11a;  tr  viii,  ch  9,  31c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i6,  a 
6,  rep  1  98b-d;  q  18,  a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  79, 
aa  12-13  425c-427a;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  2 
612a-613a;  a  5,  ans  613a-614a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  1-2  12b-13c;  q  53,  a  i,  ans 
19d-21a;  q  94,  a  i  221a-d;  part  iii,  q  9,  a  i, 
ans  763b-764c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvi  [73- 
Si]  77c-d;  xviii  [19-21]  80a;  [49-66]  80b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54a;  60a-b;  86b-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  59c-d;  60c- 
61c  /  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  48  llOdllla 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  1,  la-b;  iv,  5c-d;  viii, 
13c-d  /  Discourse ,  part  1,  41b;  part  v,  54c  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  224b,d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  19  429d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  i,171a;8il86b  /  Geometrical 
Demonstration ,  440b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  ii,  sect  5-8  26a- 
27a/  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i  95b,d-121a,c 
passim 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div  38, 
466b;  div  45  469c;  sect  xii,  div  118  504c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  20a;  48a-c;  58c-59b;  66d- 
72c  esp  67c-69c;  109b-c;  157d;  229b-c;  234c  / 
Judgement ,  562a-564c;  604d-606d  esp  606a-d 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  445d-446a;  465a-b; 
469b-470c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  851a-890a  esp  851a-852a, 
879b-882a,  889a-b 

5 d.  The  acquired  habits  of  mind:  the  intellec¬ 
tual  virtues 

7  Plato:  Theaetetus ,  518b;  542a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [247bi-248a 
9]  330b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  4  [2^f^o-h2^]  340a-c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  ix,  ch  5  [i047b3i— 34]  573a; 
ch  8  [i049b32-i050a3]  575c-d  /  5oz//,  bk  ii, 
ch  5  [4 1 7^  1  -4 1 8a6]  647d-648d  /  Memory  and 
Reminiscence ,  ch  2  [45ibio-452b6]  693a-694b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vi  387a-394d  /  Politics , 
bk  vii,  ch  15  [i334b8— 28]  539b-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  3  178d- 
180a;  ch  8  184b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  i,  2!6c-223d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  4  260b- 
261a;  bk  v,  sect  16  271c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  1,  rep  1-2  75d-76c;  q  79,  aa  6-7  419b-421c; 
a  10,  ans  423d-424d;  q  86,  a  2,  ans  462a- 
463a;  q  87,  a  2,  rep  2-3  466c-467b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  1,  rep  3  lb-2b;  a  2,  rep  3  2b-4a;  q  50,  a  3, 


rep  }  8b  9a;  a  4  9a  l0b;  q  51,  a  3  14b  15a; 

Q  52,  a  1,  ans  15d  18a;  a  2,  ans  18a  19a; 

Q  53,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2-3  19d  21a;  a  3, 

ans  and  rep  3  21d  22d;  q  54,  a  4,  rf.p  3 

25b  d;  qq  57-58  35a-45c;  q  64,  a  3  68b- 
69b 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  54a;  60a  b;  66c- 
68c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  26a  27a 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  1  la-2a  /  Discourse ,  part 
1,  41b, d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics f  part  iv,  prop  25-28  430d- 
431c;  part  v,  prop  10,  sciiol  455a  456a 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  8-10  139b-140b;  ch  xxxiii,  sect  5-18 
248d-251c passim;  bk  iv,  ch  i,  sect  8-9 308b 
309b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div  35- 
38  464c -466c;  div  40,  467c;  div  44  468d-469c; 
sect  vii,  div  59-61  476b-478a  passim;  sect 
ix,  div  83-84  487c-488b 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  347a- b 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  223a-d 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  13 5c- 13 6a 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  97 
132c-133a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  320b-321a  passim; 
593a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  83b;  295b-298a  esp  296b; 
331b-336a;  361a-380a  passim;  427b-430a; 
433a-434a  esp  434a;  502a-507a  esp  504a; 
520a-526b  esp  520b,  524a-525a;  555a-557b 
passim;  852b-853a;  860b-862a 

5e.  Supernatural  habits 

5^(1)  Grace  as  an  entitative  habit  of  the  person 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  2,  ans  7c-8a;  q  51,  a  4  15a-d;  q  82,  a  1 
168a-d;  qiio  347d-351d 

5^(2)  The  infused  virtues  and  the  supernatural 
gifts 

Old  Testament:  I  Kings ,  3:5-15;  4:29-34— (D) 
III  Kings ,  3:5-15;  4:29-34  /  I  Chronicles ,  22:12 
—  (D)  I  Paralipomenon,  22:12  /  II  Chronicles , 
1:7-12— (JD)  II  Paralipomenon ,  1:7-12  /  Job , 
32:8  /  Psalms ,  119:34-40,73,125,130,144,169 — 
(D)  Psalms ,  118:34-40,73,125,130,144,169  / 
Proverbs ,  2  esp  2 :6  /  Ecclesiastes ,  2:26  /  Isaiah , 
11 :2~5 — (D)  Isaias,  11:2-5  /  Daniel,  1  esp  1:17; 
2  .*20-23 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  3:9;  7:7,22; 
8:7,21;  9 —(D)  OT,  o/*  Wisdom ,  3:9; 

7:7,22;  8:7,21;  9  /  Ecclesiasticus ,  1:1,5,10; 
11:15;  15:5;  24:24-28;  43:33;  50:29;  51:17— 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  1:1,5,10;  11:15;  15:5; 
24:34-38;  43:37;  50.31;  51:22-23 
New  Testament:  Matthew ,  6:33  /  2:1-21 

/  /  Corinthians ,  1:30;  2;  12:4-11  /  Ephesians , 
1:16-18;  4:17-5:21  /  Philippians ,  3:9  /  James , 
1 :5— 7,!7;  3:13-18  /  //  1:1-10 


680 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5<?(3)  to  6b 


(5e.  Supernatural  habits.  5e(2)  The  znjused  vir¬ 
tues  and  the  supernatural  gifts.) 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  4  15a-d;  q  55,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  6  28c-29d; 
Q  63,  aa  3-4  65a-66c;  q  68  87c-96c  esp  a  3  90d- 
91b;  q  ioo,  a  12,  ans  and  rep  3  264d-265d;  q 
no,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  350a-d;  a  4,  rep  i 
350d-351d;  part  ii-ii,  qq  8-9  416d-426c;  q 
19  465a-474d;  q  45  598c-603c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  57c;  part  hi, 
176d-177b;  part  iv,  270c-d 

5*(3)  The  theological  virtues 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  22525;  71  —  (D)  Psalms , 
21;  24;  70  /  Proverbs ,  3:1-26  /  Isaiah,  40:31  — 
(D)  Isaias,  40:31  /  Jeremiah ,  39:18 — (D)  /dvr- 
mias,  39:18 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  3:9— (D)  OT, 
£00^  0/  Wisdom,  3:9  /  Ecclesiasticus,  2:6-9; 
13:14— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  2:6-10;  13:18 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  9:20-22,27-30; 

15:22-28;  17:14-21  esp  17:19-21;  19:16-23  esp 
19:21  — (D)  Matthew ,  9:20-22,27-30;  15:22- 
28;  17:14-20  esp  17:18-20;  19:16-23  esp  19:21 
/  Marl{,  9:17-27  esp  9:23-24— (D)  M^, 
9:16-26  esp  9:22-23  /  Lz/^,  17:5-6  /  John , 
14:21520  ^6-29  /  Romans,  1:5,1 6-17 ;  3 :2o-5 :9 ; 
8  ^4-25 ;  10  /  /  Corinthians,  13  /  Galatians,  5 :5-6 
/  Ephesians,  2:1-10/  Colossians,  1:1-8//  Thes- 
salonians,  5:8  /  Hebrews ,  6;  11  /  James,  2:14-26 
/  //  /V/dr,  1 :5-8  /  /  John  /  //  /oDz  /  ///  /o^zz 

18  Augustine:  Cz/jv  o/*  G0*/,  bk  x,  ch  3  300b- 
301a;  bk  xxi,  ch  16  573b-574a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  4  15a-d;  q  58,  a  3,  rep  3  43b-44a;  q  62  59d- 
63a;  q  63,  a  3  65a-d;  q  64,  a  4  69b-70a;  Q  67, 
aa  3-6  83b-87c;  q  iio,  a  3,  rep  i  350a-d;  a  4, 
ans  350d-351d;  part  ii-ii,  q  23  482c-489c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xxiv  [i]- 
xxvi  [81]  142d-146c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  149c-d;  part  iii, 
241c-242a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [576-605]  331b- 
332a 

6.  The  force  of  habit  in  human  life 

Old  Testament:  Job,  20:11-13  /  Proverbs,  22:6  / 
Jeremiah,  13:23 —(D)  Jeremias,  13:23 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  35c-d;  bk  hi,  97d- 
98a;  bk  iv,  137a-138c 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vii,  716a-b;  7l7d-718d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [994b3i- 
995a6]  513c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  1-6  348b,d-352d 
passim,  esp  ch  i  [no3b22-25]  349b;  bk  vii, 
ch  5  [ii48bi5-ii49a4]  399a-c;  ch  10  [1152*28- 
33]  403b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  10  [i368b28- 
I369b27]  612a-613a  esp  [i369ai— 7]  612a-b, 
[i369b6-8]  612d,  [i369bi6— 19]  612d  613a 

12  Lucretius  :  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [307-322] 
34a-b 


18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c; 
bk  viii,  par  18  57d-58a;  par  25-26  60a-b  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  24  630c-631a 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
aa  3-4  4b-6a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xxv,  35d 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  16c-d;  42b-43d;  63d- 
64b;  307c-308a;  316b-c;  390b-c;  391c-393b; 
395b-396d;  489b-490c;  524b-527a 
28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  285b-c 
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iii,  48b-49d 
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  6  173a 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  v,  div  35- 
36  464c-465c;  div  44-45,  469b-c 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  347a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  464d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  125a 
43  Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  370c-d  / 
Utilitarianism,  464a- d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  259a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  308b;  317b-d 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  150c;  bk  vi, 
244a-b;  bk  viii,  303a-305b;  bk  xi,  486a;  bk 
xii,  556d-557a;  bk  xiv,  609d;  bk  xv,  639c 

53  James:  Psychology,  73b-83b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  643d- 
646a  esp  645b-646a 

6a.  The  automatic  or  unconscious  functioning 
of  habits 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  8  [8b26-9ai3]  13d- 
14a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  10  [1152*28- 
33]  403b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [1370*5-8] 
613b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2  2b-4a;  q  109,  a  8,  ans  344d-346a 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  307c-308a;  316b-c 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  8-10  139b-140b  passim 
43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  464a-b 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  119b 

53  James:  Psychology,  3b;  73b-78b;  93a;  295b- 
298a  esp  296b;  774a;  788a-789a  esp  788b- 
789a;  790b-791a;  810a-b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  455b 

6b.  The  contribution  of  habit  to  the  perfection 
of  character  and  mind 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  22:6  /  Jeremiah,  13:23 
—  (D)  Jeremias,  13:23 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  30:8— (D)  OT,  Ec¬ 
clesiasticus,  30:8 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [857-917]  266a-b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d- 
397a 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii,  330a-331c;  333b-d; 
bk  vii,  389d-390b;  391c-d  /  Timaeus,  474d- 
475d  /  Theaetetus ,  518b  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  653a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  10  [13^6-31]  18d 
/  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246*^1 0-248*6]  329c- 
330d 


681 


6c  to  /  Chapter  32:  HABIT 


9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  vii,  cm  i 
[581^1 1— 22]  107b  /  Ethics ,  bk  r,  cii  4  (ioc)5b4~ 
13]  340c-d;  cii  9  345ac;  bk  ii,  cii  1-6  348b,d 
352d  passim,  csp  cii  1  [no3b22  25)  349b:  bk 
iii,  ch  5  [1 1 14*3-10] 360a;  bk  x,  ch  o  [i  179*}}- 
1180*32]  434a-435a  /  Politics ,  bk  iv,  cii  11 
[1295^14-18]  495d;  bk  vii,  cii  13  [i332*39  bio] 
537a  b;  ch  15  [1334^-28]  539b  d;  ch  17 
[1336*40-^8]  541c-542a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  cii  4  108d  110a; 
bk  ii,  ch  18  161a-162b;  bk  iii,  ch  3  178d 
180a;  ch  12  187b  188b;  bk  iv,  cii  i  213a- 
223d;  ch  9  237d-238d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  4  260b- 
261a;  bk  v,  sect  16  271c-d;  bk  xi,  sect  26 
306b 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  cii  9-10 
627a  b;  ch  24,  630d-631a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
aa  4-5  9a-10d;  q  63,  a  2  64b-65a;  q  92,  a  i, 
rep  i  213c-214c;  a  2,  rep  4  214d-215a,c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  42b-43d;  63d-64b;  176c- 
177a;  202d-203af  390b-c;  391c-393b;  525d- 
527a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  69a-70a; 
78d-81c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  i,  41b;  part  ii, 
45b-46c;  part  iii,  48b-49d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  71  197b-198a;  ch  xxxiii,  sect  8  249c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div  44- 
45,  469b-c;  sect  ix,  div  83-84  487c-488b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  347a- b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  7d-8b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  223a-d  /  Pref  Metaphysi¬ 
cal  Elements  of  Ethics ,  368d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  464a-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  259a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  96-97 
132c-133a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  305a;  310d-314a 
passim,  esp  313d-314a;  322a;  322d;  592b-593b 
esp  593a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  47b-48d;  bk 
ix,  369c-d;  bk  xiv,  605b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  78b-83b  esp  81b-83b; 
331b-332b;  433a-434a;  711b-712a; 751b-752a; 
760a-b 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  757d-759d  /  New 
Introductory  Lectures,  844b-c;  870a-b 

6c.  Habit  and  freedom 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  viii,  par  10  55c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  83, 
a  1,  rep  5  436d-438a;  a  2,  ans  438a  d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xix,  142a 

42  Kant:  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 
378a-b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  464a-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  97 
132c-133a  /Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  171b- 
172b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  288b-d 


51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  221b  d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vj, 
164b  d 

53  James:  Psychology,  74a  78b;  80a 

7.  The  social  significance  of  habit:  habit  in  re¬ 
lation  to  law 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  35c  d;  bk  hi,  97d 
98a;  bk  iv,  137a  138c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396d 
397a 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  344b  345d;  bk  vii, 
401c  d  /  Laws,  bk  vii,  713c  714c;  716a  b; 
717d-718d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [994^ 3 1 
995*14]  513c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  cii  i  [1  i03b3~6] 349a; 
bk  v,  ch  1  [ii29bi9~24]  377a;  bk  x,  ch  9 
[1 1 791V3 1 80*32]  434a-435a  /  Politics,  bk  ii, 
ch  8  [1269*14  23]  465b;  bk  v,  ch  9  [1310*15- 
18]  512b  c;  bk  vii,  cii  13  [i3}2*27~bio]  537a  b: 
bk  viii,  ch  1  [1337*1  S>~27l  542b;  ch  5  [1339* 
21-25]  544c-d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  38c;  48a-c  /  Lycurgus- 
Numa,  63d-64a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  57d-58b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  92, 
a  1  213c-214c;  a  2,  rep  4  214d-215a,c;  q  94, 
a  1  221a*d;  q  95,  a  3  228c-229b;  q  96,  aa  2-3 
231c-233a;  q  97,  a  2  236d-237b;  q  ioo,  a  12 
264d-265d;  q  106,  a  2  322b-323a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi  [85- 
114]  77d-78a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  42b-51a;  131b-132a; 
463b-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  apii  41-43 
109c-110a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  45b-46c;  part 
iii,  48b-49d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  380a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  39a: 
bk  x,  65c;  bk  xiv,  106b;  bk  xix,  135a-142a; 
bk  xxiii,  197c-198a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  324d;  347a  b  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  ii,  402b  c;  406c  d;  bk  iv,  434b- 
435a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  7d-8b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  464d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  125a;  227b 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383a  b 

43  Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  305b-312a  passim  /  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government,  329d-330a;  330d-33la  / 
Utilitarianism,  464c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  1 5 1  — 
152  57a  b;  additions,  97  I32c-133a  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History ,  part  ii,  271d  272d;  part  iv, 
365b  c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  305a;  3l7b-d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  235a-236c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  viii,  303a  305b; 
bk  xi,  499c-500c 

53  James:  Psychology,  79b-80a 


i 


682 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For :  Terms  of  fundamental  relevance  to  the  conception  of  habit,  see  Being  70-70(3);  Matter  2a; 
Mind  2b;  Nature  2c. 

The  psychological  analysis  of  the  faculties  or  powers  in  which  habits  are  situated,  see  Animal 
ia-ia(3);  Life  3;  Man  4~4d;  Soul  2c-2c(3);  Virtue  and  Vice  2a. 

Other  discussions  of  instinct,  see  Animal  id;  Desire  3a;  Emotion  ic;  Evolution  3b; 
Sense  3d(3). 

Consideration  of  the  factors  involved  in  the  formation  or  breaking  of  habits,  see  Education 
3-6;  Law  6d;  Virtue  and  Vice  4~4d(4). 

The  role  of  habit  in  the  theory  of  virtue,  see  Virtue  and  Vice  ie;  for  other  discussions  of  the 
intellectual  virtues,  see  Art  i;  Mind  4c,  4e~4f;  Prudence  i-2c;  Science  ia(i);  Virtue  and 
Vice  2a,  2a(2);  Wisdom  2a;  for  other  discussions  of  the  moral  virtues,  see  Courage  i,  4; 
Justice  ic-id;  Temperance  i-ib;  Virtue  and  Vice  2a-2a(i),  3b;  for  other  discussions 
of  the  theological  virtues,  ^Knowledge  6c(5);  Love  5b~5b(2);  Mind  5c;  Religion  ia; 
Virtue  and  Vice  2b,  8d-8d(3);  and  for  other  discussions  of  the  infused  virtues  and  the 
supernatural  gifts,  see  Mind  4f,  5c;  Virtue  and  Vice  8e. 

Matters  relevant  to  grace  as  an  entitative  habit,  see  God  7d;  Man  9b(2);  Nature  6b;  Sin 
3c,  4d,  7;  Virtue  and  Vice  8b;  Will  7e(2). 

Other  considerations  of  the  natural  habits  of  the  mind,  see  Judgment  8a;  Knowledge  60(2)- 
6c(4);  Law  4a;  Mind  4d(2)~4d(3);  Principle  2b(2),  3a(i),  4;  Virtue  and  Vice  4a. 
The  relation  of  habit  to  freedom,  see  Will  3a (2). 

The  relation  of  habit  to  custom  and  law,  see  Custom  and  Convention  2,  6b;  Law  5f,  6d. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 


Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Aquinas.  Quaestiones  Disputatae ,  De  Veritate,  q  16 
Descartes.  The  Passions  of  the  Soul ,  xvi,  xliv,  l 
Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  i,  part  iii, 

SECT  VIII'IX,  Xiv;  BK  II,  PART  III,  SECT  V 

C.  R.  Darwin.  A  Posthumous  Essay  on  Instinct 

- .  The  Expression  of  Emotions  in  Man  and 

Animals 

II. 

Seneca.  “On  the  Diseases  of  the  Soul,”  in  Moral 
Letters 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xxxix,  xlii 
(2-5),  xliii-xliv,  XL vi  (3),  liii 
Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite,  bk  ii  (i), 
ch  5 

Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  11,  ch  22  (10) 


Hartley.  Observations  on  Man ,  His  Frame ,  His 
Duty  and  His  Expectations ,  vol  i,  proposition  21 

Condillac.  Traite  des  animaux,  part  11,  ch  5 

Voltaire.  “Instinct,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 

T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Active  Powers  of  the  Human 
Mind ,  iii,  part  1,  ch  2-3 

Bentham.  An  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals 
and  Legislation ,  ch  i  i 

Maine  de  Biran.  The  Influence  of  Habit  on  the 
Faculty  of  Thinking 

D.  Stewart.  Outlines  of  Moral  Philosophy ,  part  i, 
ch  10 

- .  Elements  of  the  Philosophy  of the  Human  Mind , 

part  ii,  ch  5 

Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea,  vol  iii, 
sup,  ch  27 

J.  Mill.  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Human 
Mind,  ch  iii 

RavaissoN'Mollien.  De  Vhabitude 


683 


Chapter  32:  HABIT 


E.  Hartmann.  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious ,  (a) 
iii;  (b)  i 

Hering.  Memory 
S.  Butler.  Life  and  Habit 

Radestock.  Habit  and  Its  Importance  in  Education 
Romanes.  Mental  Evolution  in  Animals ,  ch  11-18 
C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers ,  vol  iii,  par  154-164, 
359-403;  vol  vi,  par  259-263 
H.  R.  Marshall.  Instinct  and  Reason 
Bergson.  Creative  Evolution ,  ch  2 


Woodworth.  Psychological  Issues ,  ch  9 
C.  L.  Morgan.  Habit  and  Instinct 

- .  Instinct  and  Experience 

Jung.  Instinct  and  the  Unconscious 

Rivers.  Instinct  and  the  Unconscious 

B.  Russell.  The  Analysis  of  Mind ,  lect  2 

Dewey.  Human  Mature  and  Conduct ,  part  i-ii 

Pavlov.  Conditioned  Rejlexes 

Vann.  Morals  Makjth  Man 

Thorndike.  Man  on  His  tVor{s 


Chapter  33:  HAPPINESS 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  great  questions  about  happiness  are 
concerned  with  its  definition  and  its  attain¬ 
ability.  In  what  does  happiness  consist  ?  Is  it  the 
same  for  all  men,  or  do  different  men  seek  dif¬ 
ferent  things  in  the  name  of  happiness?  Can 
happiness  be  achieved  on  earth,  or  only  here¬ 
after?  And  if  the  pursuit  of  happiness  is  not  a 
futile  quest,  by  what  means  or  steps  should  it 
be  undertaken  ? 

On  all  these  questions,  the  great  books  set 
forth  the  fundamental  inquiries  and  specula¬ 
tions,  as  well  as  the  controversies  to  which  they 
have  given  rise,  in  the  tradition  of  western 
thought.  There  seems  to  be  no  question  that 
men  want  happiness.  “Man  wishes  to  be  happy,” 
Pascal  writes,  “and  only  wishes  to  be  happy, 
and  cannot  wish  not  to  be  so.”  To  the  ques¬ 
tion,  what  moves  desire?  Locke  thinks  only 
one  answer  is  possible:  “happiness,  and  that 
alone.” 

But  this  fact,  even  if  it  goes  undisputed,  does 
not  settle  the  issue  whether  men  are  right  in 
governing  their  lives  with  a  view  to  being  or 
becoming  happy.  There  is  therefore  one  further 
question.  Should  men  make  happiness  their 
goal  and  direct  their  acts  accordingly  ? 

According  to  Kant,  “the  principle  of  private 
happiness”  is  “the  direct  opposite  of  the  prin¬ 
ciple  of  morality.”  He  understands  happiness 
to  consist  in  “the  satisfaction  of  all  our  desires: 
extensive ,  in  regard  to  their  multiplicity;  inten¬ 
sive ,  in  regard  to  their  degree;  protensive ,  in 
regard  to  their  duration.”  What  Kant  calls  the 
“pragmatic”  rule  of  life,  which  aims  at  happi¬ 
ness,  “tells  us  what  we  have  to  do,  if  we  wish  to 
become  possessed  of  happiness.” 

Unlike  the  moral  law,  it  is  a  hypothetical, 
not  a  categorical,  imperative.  Furthermore, 
Kant  points  out  that  such  a  pragmatic  or  utili¬ 
tarian  ethics  (which  is  for  him  the  same  as  an 
“ethics  of  happiness”)  cannot  help  being  em¬ 


pirical,  “for  it  is  only  by  experience,”  he  says, 
“that  I  can  learn  either  what  inclinations  exist 
which  desire  satisfaction,  or  what  are  the  natu¬ 
ral  means  of  satisfying  them.”  Such  empirical 
knowledge  “is  available  for  each  individual  in 
his  own  way.”  Hence  there  can  be  no  universal 
solution  in  terms  of  desire  of  the  problem  of 
how  to  be  happy.  To  reduce  moral  philosophy 
to  “a  theory  of  happiness”  must  result,  there¬ 
fore,  in  giving  up  the  search  for  ethical  prin¬ 
ciples  which  are  both  universal  and  a  priori. 

In  sharp  opposition  to  the  pragmatic  rule, 
Kant  sets  the  “moral  or  ethical  law,”  the  mo¬ 
tive  of  which  is  not  simply  to  be  happy,  but 
rather  to  be  worthy  of  happiness.  In  addition  to 
being  a  categorical  imperative  which  imposes 
an  absolute  obligation  upon  us,  this  law,  he  says, 
“takes  no  account  of  our  desires  or  the  means  of 
satisfying  them.”  Rather  it  “dictates  how  we 
ought  to  act  in  order  to  deserve  happiness.”  It 
is  drawn  from  pure  reason,  not  from  experience, 
and  therefore  has  the  universality  of  an  a  priori 
principle,  without  which,  in  Kant’s  opinion,  a 
genuine  science  of  ethics — or  metaphysic  of 
morals — is  impossible. 

With  the  idea  of  moral  worth — that  which 
alone  deserves  happiness — taken  away,  “happi¬ 
ness  alone  is,”  according  to  Kant,  “far  from 
being  the  complete  good.  Reason  does  not  ap¬ 
prove  of  it  (however  much  inclination  may 
desire  it)  except  as  united  with  desert.  On  the 
other  hand,”  Kant  admits,  “morality  alone, 
and,  with  it,  mere  desert ,  is  likewise  far  from 
being  the  complete  good.”  These  two  things 
must  be  united  to  constitute  the  true  summum 
bonum  which,  according  to  Kant,  means  both 
the  supreme  and  the  complete  good.  The  man 
“who  conducts  himself  in  a  manner  not  un¬ 
worthy  of  happiness,  must  be  able  to  hope  for 
the  possession  of  happiness.” 

But  even  if  happiness  combined  with  moral 


684 


CiiAi'Ti  R  33:  HAPPINESS 


worth  docs  constitute  the  supreme  good,  Kant 
still  refuses  to  admit  that  happiness,  as  a  prac¬ 
tical  objective,  can  function  as  a  moral  prin¬ 
ciple.  Though  a  man  can  hope  to  he  happy  only 
if  under  the  moral  law  he  does  his  duty,  he 
should  not  do  his  duty  with  the  hope  of  thereby 
becoming  happy.  “A  disposition,”  he  writes, 
“which  should  require  the  prospect  of  happi¬ 
ness  as  its  necessary  condition,  would  not  be 
moral,  and  hence  also  would  not  be  worthy  of 
complete  happiness.”  The  moral  law  commands 
the  performance  of  duty  unconditionally .  Hap¬ 
piness  should  be  a  consequence,  but  it  cannot 
be  a  condition,  of  moral  action. 

In  other  words,  happiness  fails  for  Kant  to 
impose  any  moral  obligation  or  to  provide  a 
standard  of  right  and  wrong  in  human  conduct. 
No  more  than  pleasure  can  happiness  be  used 
as  a  first  principle  in  ethics,  if  morality  must 
avoid  all  calculations  of  utility  or  expediency 
whereby  things  are  done  or  left  undone  for  the 
sake  of  happiness,  or  any  other  end  to  be 
enjoyed. 

This  issue  between  an  ethics  of  duty  and  an 
ethics  of  happiness,  as  well  as  the  conflict  it 
l  involves  between  law  and  desire  as  sources  of 
morality,  are  considered,  from  other  points  of 
view,  in  the  chapters  on  Desire  and  Duty,  and 
again  in  Good  and  Evil  where  the  problem  of 
the  summum  bonnm  is  raised.  In  this  chapter, 
we  shall  be  concerned  with  happiness  as  an 
ethical  principle,  and  therefore  with  the  prob¬ 
lems  to  be  faced  by  those  who,  in  one  way  or 
another,  accept  happiness  as  the  supreme  good 
and  the  end  of  life.  They  may  see  no  reason  to 
reject  moral  principles  which  work  through 
desire  rather  than  duty.  They  may  find  nothing 
repugnant  in  appealing  to  happiness  as  the  ul¬ 
timate  end  which  justifies  the  means  and  de¬ 
termines  the  order  of  all  other  goods.  But  they 
cannot  make  happiness  the  first  principle  of 
ethics  without  having  to  face  many  questions 
concerning  the  nature  of  happiness  and  its 
relation  to  virtue. 

Discussion  begins  rather  than  ends  with  the 
fact  that  happiness  is  what  all  men  desire.  Once 
they  have  asserted  that  fact,  once  they  have 
made  happiness  the  most  fundamental  of  all 
ethical  terms,  writers  like  Aristotle  or  Locke, 
Aquinas  or  Mill,  cannot  escape  the  question 


685 

whether  all  who  seek  happiness  look  for  it  or 
find  it  in  the  same  things. 

Holding  that  a  definite  conception  of  happi¬ 
ness  cannot  be  formulated,  Kant  thinks  that 
happiness  fails  even  as  a  pragmatic  principle  of 
conduct.  “The  notion  ol  happiness  is  so  in¬ 
definite,”  he  writes,  “that  although  every  man 
wishes  to  attain  it,  yet  he  never  can  say  defi¬ 
nitely  and  consistently  what  it  is  that  he  really 
wishes.”  He  cannot  “determine  with  certainty 
what  would  make  him  truly  happy;  localise  to 
do  so  he  would  need  to  be  omniscient.”  If  this 
is  true  of  the  individual,  how  various  must  be 
the  notions  of  happiness  which  prevail  among 
men  in  general. 

Locke  plainly  asserts  what  is  here  implied, 
namely,  the  fact  that  “everyone  does  not  place 
his  happiness  in  the  same  thing,  or  choose  the 
same  way  to  it.”  But  admitting  this  fact  does 
not  prevent  Locke  from  inquiring  how  “in 
matters  of  happiness  and  misery  .  .  .  men  come 
often  to  prefer  the  worse  to  the  better;  and  to 
choose  that  which,  by  their  own  confession,  has 
made  them  miserable.”  Even  though  he  de¬ 
clares  that  “the  same  thing  is  not  good  to  every 
man  alike,”  Locke  thinks  it  is  possible  to  ac¬ 
count  “for  the  misery  that  men  often  bring  on 
themselves”  by  explaining  how  the  individual 
may  make  errors  in  judgment — “how  things 
come  to  be  represented  to  our  desires  under 
deceitful  appearances  ...  by  the  judgment  pro¬ 
nouncing  wrongly  concerning  them.” 

But  this  applies  to  the  individual  only.  Locke 
does  not  think  it  is  possible  to  show  that  when 
two  men  differ  in  their  notions  of  happiness, 
one  is  right  and  the  other  wrong.  “Though  all 
men’s  desires  tend  to  happiness,  yet  they  are 
not  moved  by  the  same  object.  Men  may  choose 
different  things,  and  yet  all  choose  right.”  He 
does  not  quarrel  with  the  theologians  who,  on 
the  basis  of  divine  revelation,  describe  the  eter¬ 
nal  happiness  in  the  life  hereafter  which  is  to  be 
enjoyed  alike  by  all  who  are  saved.  But  revela¬ 
tion  is  one  thing,  and  reason  another. 

With  respect  to  temporal  happiness  on  earth, 
reason  cannot  achieve  a  definition  of  the  end 
that  has  the  certainty  of  faith  concerning  sal¬ 
vation.  Hence  lx>cke  quarrels  with  “the  philos¬ 
ophers  of  old”  who,  in  his  opinion,  vainly  sought 
to  define  the  summum  bonnm  or  happiness  in 
such  a  way  that  all  men  would  agree  on  what 


686 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


happiness  is;  or,  if  they  failed  to,  some  would  be 
in  error  and  misled  in  their  pursuit  of  happiness. 

It  may  be  wondered,  therefore,  what  Locke 
means  by  saying  that  there  is  a  science  of  what 
man  ought  to  do  “as  a  rational  and  voluntary 
agent  for  the  attainment  of .  .  .  happiness.”  He 
describes  ethics  as  the  science  of  the  “rules  and 
measures  of  human  actions,  which  lead  to  hap¬ 
piness”  and  he  places  “morality  amongst  the 
sciences  capable  of  demonstration,  wherein  .  .  . 
from  self-evident  propositions,  by  necessary 
consequences,  as  incontestable  as  those  in  mathe¬ 
matics,  the  measures  of  right  and  wrong  might 
be  made  out,  to  any  one  that  will  apply  him¬ 
self  with  the  same  indifferency  and  attention 
to  the  one,  as  he  does  to  the  other  of  these 
sciences.” 

The  ancient  philosophers  with  whom  Locke 
disagrees  insist  that  a  science  of  ethics  depends 
on  a  first  principle  which  is  self-evident  in  the 
same  way  to  all  men.  Happiness  is  not  that 
principle  if  the  content  of  happiness  is  what 
each  man  thinks  it  to  be;  for  if  no  universally 
applicable  definition  of  happiness  can  be  given 
— if  when  men  differ  in  their  conception  of 
what  constitutes  happiness,  one  man  may  be  as 
right  as  another — then  the  fact  that  all  men 
agree  upon  giving  the  name  “happiness”  to 
what  they  ultimately  want  amounts  to  no 
more  than  a  nominal  agreement.  Such  nominal 
agreement,  in  the  opinion  of  Aristotle  and 
Aquinas,  does  not  suffice  to  establish  a  science 
of  ethics,  with  rules  for  the  pursuit  of  happiness 
which  shall  apply  universally  to  all  men. 

On  their  view,  what  is  truly  human  happi¬ 
ness  must  be  the  same  for  all  men.  The  reason, 
in  the  words  of  Aquinas,  is  that  “all  men  agree 
in  their  specific  nature.”  It  is  in  terms  of  their 
specific  or  common  nature  that  happiness  can 
be  objectively  defined.  Happiness  so  conceived 
is  a  common  end  for  all,  “since  nature  tends  to 
one  thing  only.” 

It  may  be  granted  that  there  are  in  fact  many 
different  opinions  about  what  constitutes  hap¬ 
piness,  but  it  cannot  be  admitted  that  all  are 
equally  sound  without  admitting  a  complete 
relativism  in  moral  matters.  That  men  do  in  fact 
seek  different  things  under  the  name  of  happi¬ 
ness  does  not,  according  to  Aristotle  and  Aqui¬ 
nas,  alter  the  truth  that  the  happiness  they 


should  seek  must  be  something  appropriate  to 
the  humanity  which  is  common  to  them  all, 
rather  than  something  determined  by  their 
individually  differing  needs  or  temperaments. 
If  it  were  the  latter,  then  Aristotle  and  Aquinas 
would  admit  that  questions  about  what  men 
should  do  to  achieve  happiness  would  be  an¬ 
swerable  only  by  individual  opinion  or  personal 
preference,  not  by  scientific  analysis  or  demon¬ 
stration. 

With  the  exception  of  Locke  and  perhaps  to 
a  less  extent  Mill,  those  who  think  that  a  science 
of  ethics  can  be  founded  on  happiness  as  the 
first  principle  tend  to  maintain  that  there  can 
be  only  one  right  conception  of  human  happi¬ 
ness.  They  regard  other  notions  as  misconcep¬ 
tions  which  may  appear  to  be,  but  are  not  really 
the  summum  honum.  The  various  definitions  of 
happiness  which  men  have  given  thus  present 
the  problem  of  the  real  and  the  apparent  good, 
the  significance  of  which  is  considered  in  the 
chapter  on  Good  and  Evil. 

In  the  everyday  discourse  of  men  there  seems 
to  be  a  core  of  agreement  about  the  meaning  of 
the  words  “happy”  and  “happiness.”  This  com¬ 
mon  understanding  has  been  used  by  philoso¬ 
phers  like  Aristotle  and  Mill  to  test  the  ade¬ 
quacy  of  any  definition  of  happiness. 

When  a  man  says  “I  feel  happy”  he  is  saying 
that  he  feels  pleased  or  satisfied — that  he  has 
what  he  wants.  When  men  contrast  tragedy 
and  happiness,  they  have  in  mind  the  quality  a 
life  takes  from  its  end.  A  tragedy  on  the  stage, 
in  fiction,  or  in  life  is  popularly  characterized 
as  “a  story  without  a  happy  ending.”  This  ex¬ 
presses  the  general  sense  that  happiness  is  the 
quality  of  a  life  which  comes  out  well  on  the 
whole  despite  difficulties  and  vicissitudes  along 
the  way.  Only  ultimate  defeat  or  frustration 
is  tragic. 

There  appears  to  be  some  conflict  here  be¬ 
tween  feeling  happy  at  a  given  moment  and 
being  happy  for  a  lifetime,  that  is,  living  hap¬ 
pily.  It  may  be  necessary  to  choose  between 
having  a  good  time  and  leading  a  good  life. 
Nevertheless,  in  both  uses  of  the  word  “happy” 
there  is  the  connotation  of  satisfaction.  When 
men  say  that  what  they  want  is  happiness,  they 
imply  that,  having  it,  they  would  ask  for  noth¬ 
ing  more.  If  they  are  asked  why  they  want  to  be 


Chapter  33: 

happy,  they  find  it  difficult  to  give  any  reason 
except  “for  its  own  sake.”  They  can  think  of 
nothing  beyond  happiness  for  which  happiness 
serves  as  a  means  or  a  preparation.  T  his  aspect 
of  ultimacy  or  finality  appears  without  quali¬ 
fication  in  the  sense  of  happiness  as  belonging 
to  a  whole  life.  There  is  quiescence,  too,  in  the 
momentary  feeling  of  happiness,  but  precisely 
because  it  does  not  last,  it  leaves  another  and 
another  such  moment  to  be  desired. 

Observing  these  facts,  Aristotle  takes  the 
word  “happiness”  from  popular  discourse  and 
gives  it  the  technical  significance  of  ultimate 
good,  last  end,  or  sutnmum  bonum .  “The  chief 
i  good,”  he  writes,  “is  evidently  something  fi¬ 
nal.  .  .  .  Now  we  call  that  which  is  in  itself 
worthy  of  pursuit  more  final  than  that  which  is 
worthy  of  pursuit  for  the  sake  of  something 
else,  and  that  which  is  never  desirable  for  the 
sake  of  something  else  more  final  than  the  things 
that  are  desirable  both  in  themselves  and  for 
the  sake  of  that  other  thing.  Therefore,  we  call 
final  without  qualification  that  which  is  always 
desirable  in  itself  and  never  for  the  sake  of 
something  else.  Such  a  thing  happiness,  above 
all  else,  is  held  to  be ;  for  this  we  choose  always 
for  itself  and  never  for  the  sake  of  something 
else.” 

The  ultimacy  of  happiness  can  also  be  ex¬ 
pressed  in  terms  of  its  completeness  or  suffi¬ 
ciency.  It  would  not  be  true  that  happiness  is 
desired  for  its  own  sake  and  everything  else  for 
the  sake  of  happiness,  if  the  happy  man  wanted 
something  more.  The  most  obvious  mark  of  the 
happy  man,  according  to  Aristotle,  is  that  he 
wants  for  nothing.  The  happy  life  leaves  noth¬ 
ing  to  be  desired.  It  is  this  insight  which  Boe¬ 
thius  later  expresses  in  an  oft-repeated  char¬ 
acterization  of  happiness  as  “a  life  made  perfect 
by  the  possession  in  aggregateofallgood  things.” 
So  conceived,  happiness  is  not  a  particular  good 
itself,  but  the  sum  of  goods.  “If  happiness  were 
to  be  counted  as  one  good  among  others,” 
Aristotle  argues,  “it  would  clearly  be  made 
more  desirable  by  the  addition  of  even  the 
least  of  goods.”  But  then  there  would  be  some¬ 
thing  left  for  the  happy  man  to  desire,  and 
happiness  would  not  be  “something  final  and 
self-sufficient  and  the  end  of  action.” 

Like  Aristotle,  Mill  appeals  to  the  common 
sense  of  mankind  for  the  ultimacy  of  happiness. 


HAPPINESS  687 

“The  utilitarian  doctrine,”  he  writes,  “is  that 
happiness  is  desirable,  and  the  only  thing  de¬ 
sirable  as  an  end;  all  other  things  being  only 
desirable  as  means.”  No  reason  can  or  need  be 
given  why  this  is  so,  “except  that  each  person, 
so  far  as  he  believes  it  to  be  attainable,  desires 
his  own  happiness.”  This  is  enough  to  prove 
that  happiness  is  a  good.  To  show  that  it  is  the 
good,  it  is  “necessary  to  show,  not  only  that 
people  desire  happiness,  but  that  they  never 
desire  anything  else.” 

Here  Mill’s  answer,  like  Aristotle’s,  pre¬ 
supposes  the  rightness  of  the  prevailing  sense 
that  when  a  man  is  happy,  he  has  everything 
he  desires.  Many  things,  Mill  admits,  may  be 
desired  for  their  own  sake,  but  if  the  possession 
of  any  one  of  these  leaves  something  else  to  be 
desired,  then  it  is  desired  only  as  a  part  of  hap¬ 
piness.  Happiness  is  “a  concrete  whole,  and 
these  are  some  of  its  parts.  .  .  .  Whatever  is 
desired  otherwise  than  as  a  means  to  some  end 
beyond  itself,  and  ultimately  to  happiness,  is 
desired  as  itself  a  part  of  happiness,  and  is  not 
desired  for  itself  until  it  has  become  so.” 

There  are  other  conceptions  of  happiness. 
It  is  not  always  approached  in  terms  of  means 
and  ends,  utility  and  enjoyment  or  satisfaction. 
Plato,  for  example,  identifies  happiness  with 
spiritual  well-being — a  harmony  in  the  soul, 
an  inner  peace  which  results  from  the  proper 
order  of  all  the  soul’s  parts. 

Early  in  the  Republic ,  Socrates  is  challenged 
to  show  that  the  just  man  will  be  happier  than 
the  unjust  man,  even  if  in  all  externals  he  seems 
to  be  at  a  disadvantage.  He  cannot  answer  this 
question  until  he  prepares  Glaucon  for  the  in¬ 
sight  that  justice  is  “concerned  not  with  the 
outward  man,  but  with  the  inward.”  He  can 
then  explain  that  “the  just  man  does  not  permit 
the  several  elements  within  him  to  interfere 
with  one  another.  .  .  .  He  sets  in  order  his  own 
inner  life,  and  is  his  own  master  and  his  own 
law,  and  is  at  peace  with  himself.” 

In  the  same  spirit  Plotinus  asks  us  to  think 
of  “two  wise  men,  one  of  them  possessing  all 
that  is  supposed  to  be  naturally  welcome,  while 
the  other  meets  only  with  the  very  reverse.” 
He  wants  to  know  whether  we  would  “assert 
that  they  have  an  equal  happiness.”  His  own 
answer  is  that  we  should,  “if  they  are  equally 


688 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


wise  .  .  .  [even]  though  the  one  be  favored  in 
body  and  in  all  else  that  does  not  help  towards 
wisdom.”  We  are  likely  to  misconceive  happi¬ 
ness,  Plotinus  thinks,  if  we  consider  the  happy 
man  in  terms  of  our  own  feebleness.  “We  count 
alarming  and  grave  what  his  felicity  takes 
lightly;  he  would  be  neither  wise  nor  in  the 
state  of  happiness  if  he  had  not  quitted  all 
trifling  with  such  things.” 

According  to  Plotinus,  “Plato  rightly  taught 
that  he  who  is  to  be  wise  and  to  possess  happi¬ 
ness  draws  his  good  from  the  Supreme,  fixing 
his  gaze  on  That,  becoming  like  to  That,  living 
by  That .  .  .  All  else  he  will  attend  to  only  as 
he  might  change  his  residence,  not  in  expecta¬ 
tion  of  any  increase  in  his  settled  felicity,  but 
simply  in  a  reasonable  attention  to  the  differing 
conditions  surrounding  him  as  he  lives  here  or 
there.”  If  he  “meets  some  turn  of  fortune  that 
he  would  not  have  chosen,  there  is  not  the 
slightest  lessening  of  his  happiness  for  that.” 
Like  Plato,  Plotinus  holds  that  nothing  ex¬ 
ternal  can  separate  a  virtuous  man  from  happi¬ 
ness — that  no  one  can  injure  a  man  except 
himself. 

The  opposite  view  is  more  frequently  held. 
In  his  argument  with  Callicles  in  the  Gorgias, 
Socrates  meets  with  the  proposition  that  it  is 
better  to  injure  others  than  to  be  injured  by 
them.  This  can  be  refuted,  he  thinks,  only  if 
Callicles  can  be  made  to  understand  that  the 
unjust  or  vicious  man  is  miserable  in  himself, 
regardless  of  his  external  gains.  The  funda¬ 
mental  principle,  he  says,  is  that  “the  happy 
are  made  happy  by  the  possession  of  justice  and 
temperance  and  the  miserable  miserable  by  the 
possession  of  vice.”  Happiness  is  one  with 
justice  because  justice  or  virtue  in  general  is 
“the  health  and  beauty  and  well-being  of  the 
soul.” 

This  association  of  happiness  with  health — 
the  one  a  harmony  in  the  soul  as  the  other  is  a 
harmony  in  the  body — appears  also  in  Freud’s 
consideration  of  human  well-being.  For  Freud, 
the  ideal  of  health,  not  merely  bodily  health 
but  the  health  of  the  whole  man,  seems  to  iden¬ 
tify  happiness  with  peace  of  mind.  “Anyone 
who  is  born  with  a  specially  unfavorable  in¬ 
stinctual  constitution,”  he  writes,  “and  whose 
libido-components  do  not  go  through  the  trans¬ 
formation  and  modification  necessary  for  suc¬ 


cessful  achievement  in  later  life,  will  find  it 
hard  to  obtain  happiness.”  The  opposite  of 
happiness  is  not  tragedy  but  neurosis.  In  con¬ 
trast  to  the  neurotic,  the  happy  man  has  found 
a  way  to  master  his  inner  conflicts  and  to  be¬ 
come  well-adjusted  to  his  environment. 

The  theory  of  happiness  as  mental  health  or 
spiritual  peace  may  be  another  way  of  seeing 
the  self-sufficiency  of  happiness,  in  which  all 
striving  comes  to  rest  because  all  desires  are 
fulfilled  or  quieted.  The  suggestion  of  this  point 
is  found  in  the  fact  that  the  theologians  con¬ 
ceive  beatitude,  or  supernatural  happiness,  in 
both  ways.  For  them  it  is  both  an  ultimate  end 
which  satisfies  all  desires  and  also  a  state  of 
peace  or  heavenly  rest. 

“The  ultimate  good,”  Augustine  writes,  “is 
that  for  the  sake  of  which  other  things  are  to 
be  desired,  while  it  is  to  be  desired  for  its  own 
sake” ;  and,  he  adds,  it  is  that  by  which  the  good 
“is  finished,  so  that  it  becomes  complete” — all- 
satisfying.  But  what  is  this  “final  blessedness, 
the  ultimate  consummation,  the  unending 
end”?  It  is  peace.  “Indeed,”  Augustine  says, 
“we  are  said  to  be  blessed  when  we  have  such 
peace  as  can  be  enjoyed  in  this  life;  but  such 
blessedness  is  mere  misery  compared  to  that 
final  felicity,”  which  can  be  described  as  “either 
peace  in  eternal  life  or  eternal  life  in  peace.” 

There  may  be  differences  of  another  kind 
among  those  who  regard  happiness  as  their  ul¬ 
timate  end.  Some  men  identify  happiness  with 
the  possession  of  one  particular  type  of  good — 
wealth  or  health,  pleasure  or  power,  knowledge 
or  virtue,  honor  or  friendship — or,  if  they  do 
not  make  one  or  another  of  these  things  the 
only  component  of  happiness,  they  make  it 
supreme.  The  question  of  which  is  chief  among 
the  various  goods  that  constitute  the  happy  life 
is  the  problem  of  the  order  of  goods,  to  which 
we  shall  return  presently.  But  the  identification 
of  happiness  with  some  one  good,  to  the  exclu¬ 
sion  or  neglect  of  the  others,  seems  to  violate 
the  meaning  of  happiness  on  which  there  is  such 
general  agreement.  Happiness  cannot  be  that 
which  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired  if  any  good 
— anything  which  is  in  any  way  desirable — is 
overlooked. 

But  it  may  be  said  that  the  miser  desires 
nothing  but  gold,  and  considers  himself  happy 


Chapter  33: 

when  he  possesses  a  hoard.  That  he  may  con¬ 
sider  himself  happy  cannot  be  denied.  Yet  this 
does  not  prevent  the  moralist  from  considering 
him  deluded  and  in  reality  among  the  unhappi- 
est  of  men.  The  diflerencc  between  such  illusory 
happiness  and  the  reality  seems  to  depend  on 
the  distinction  between  conscious  and  natural 
desire.  According  to  that  distinction,  considered 
in  the  chapter  on  Desire,  the  miser  may  have 
all  that  he  consciously  desires,  but  lack  many 
of  the  things  toward  which  his  nature  tends  and 
which  are  therefore  objects  of  natural  desire. 
He  may  be  the  unhappiest  of  men  if,  with  all 
the  wealth  in  the  world,  yet  self-deprived  of 
friends  or  knowledge,  virtue  or  even  health, 
his  exclusive  interest  in  one  type  of  good  leads 
to  the  frustration  of  many  other  desires.  He 
may  not  consciously  recognize  these,  but  they 
nevertheless  represent  needs  of  his  nature 
demanding  fulfillment. 

As  suggested  in  the  chapter  on  Desire,  the 
relation  of  natural  law  to  natural  desire  may 
provide  the  beginning,  at  least,  of  an  answer  to 
Kant’s  objection  to  the  ethics  of  happiness  on 
the  ground  that  its  principles  lack  universality 
or  the  element  of  obligation.  The  natural  moral 
law  may  command  obedience  at  the  same  time 
that  it  directs  men  to  happiness  as  the  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  all  desires  which  represent  the  innate 
tendencies  of  man’s  nature.  The  theory  of  natu¬ 
ral  desire  thus  also  has  a  bearing  on  the  issue 
whether  the  content  of  happiness  must  really 
be  the  same  for  all  men,  regardless  of  how  it 
may  appear  to  them. 

Even  if  men  do  not  identify  happiness  with 
one  type  of  good,  but  see  it  as  the  possession  of 
every  sort  of  good,  can  there  be  a  reasonable 
difference  of  opinion  concerning  the  types  of 
good  which  must  be  included  or  the  order  in 
which  these  several  goods  should  be  sought? 
A  negative  answer  seems  to  be  required  by  the 
view  that  real  as  opposed  to  apparent  goods 
are  the  objects  of  natural  desire. 

Aquinas,  for  example,  admits  that  “ happy  is 
the  man  who  has  all  he  desires ,  or  whose  every 
wish  is  fulfilled ,  is  a  good  and  adequate  defi¬ 
nition”  only  “if  it  be  understood  in  a  certain 
way.”  It  is  “an  inadequate  definition  if  under¬ 
stood  in  another.  For  if  we  understand  it  simply 
of  all  that  man  desires  by  his  natural  appetite, 
then  it  is  true  that  he  who  has  all  that  he  desires 


HAPPINESS  689 

is  happy;  since  nothing  satisfies  man’s  natural 
desire,  except  the  perfect  good  which  is  Happi¬ 
ness.  But  if  we  understand  it  of  those  things 
that  man  desires  according  to  the  apprehension 
of  reason,”  Aquinas  continues,  then  “it  docs 
not  belong  to  I  Iappincss  to  have  certain  things 
that  man  desires;  rather  does  it  belong  to  un¬ 
happiness,  in  so  far  as  the  possession  of  such 
things  hinders  a  man  from  having  all  that  lie 
desires  naturally.”  For  this  reason,  Aquinas 
points  out,  when  Augustine  approved  the  state¬ 
ment  that  “ happy  is  he  who  has  all  he  desires 
he  added  the  words  “provided  he  desires  nothing 
amiss." 

As  men  have  the  same  complex  nature,  so 
they  have  the  same  set  of  natural  desires.  As 
they  have  the  same  natural  desires,  so  the  real 
goods  which  can  fulfill  their  needs  comprise  the 
same  variety  for  all.  As  different  natural  de¬ 
sires  represent  different  parts  of  human  nature 
— lower  and  higher — so  the  several  kinds  of 
good  are  not  equally  good.  And,  according  to 
Aquinas,  if  the  natural  object  of  the  human 
will  “is  the  universal  good,”  it  follows  that 
“naught  can  satisfy  man’s  will  save  the  univer¬ 
sal  good.”  This,  he  holds,  “is  to  be  found,  not 
in  any  created  thing,  but  in  God  alone.” 

We  shall  return  later  to  the  theologian’s  con¬ 
ception  of  perfect  happiness  as  consisting  in  the 
vision  of  God  in  the  life  hereafter.  The  happi¬ 
ness  of  this  earthly  life  (which  the  philosopher 
considers)  may  be  imperfect  by  comparison, 
but  such  temporal  felicity  as  men  can  attain  is 
no  less  determined  by  natural  desire.  If  a  man’s 
undue  craving  for  one  type  of  good  can  inter¬ 
fere  with  his  possession  of  another  sort  of  good, 
then  the  various  goods  must  be  ordered  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  worth;  and  this  order,  since  it  re¬ 
flects  natural  desire,  must  be  the  same  for  all 
men.  In  such  terms  Aristotle  seems  to  think  it 
possible  to  argue  that  the  reality  of  happiness 
can  be  defined  by  reference  to  human  nature 
and  that  the  rules  for  achieving  happiness  can 
have  a  certain  universality — despite  the  fact 
that  the  rules  must  be  applied  by  individuals 
differently  to  the  circumstances  of  their  own 
lives.  No  particular  good  should  be  sought  ex¬ 
cessively  or  out  of  proportion  to  others,  for  the 
penalty  of  having  too  much  of  one  good  thing 
is  deprivation  or  disorder  with  respect  to  other 
goods. 


690 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


The  relation  of  happiness  to  particular  goods 
raises  a  whole  series  of  questions,  each  peculiar 
to  the  type  of  good  under  consideration.  Of 
these,  the  most  insistent  problems  concern  pleas¬ 
ure,  knowledge,  virtue,  and  the  goods  of 
fortune. 

With  regard  to  pleasure,  the  difficulty  seems 
to  arise  from  two  meanings  of  the  term  which 
are  more  fully  discussed  in  the  chapter  on 
Pleasure  and  Pain.  In  one  of  these  meanings 
pleasure  is  an  object  of  desire,  and  in  the  other 
it  is  the  feeling  of  satisfaction  which  accom¬ 
panies  the  possession  of  objects  desired.  It  is  in 
the  latter  meaning  that  pleasure  can  be  identi¬ 
fied  with  happiness  or,  at  least,  be  regarded  as 
its  correlate,  for  if  happiness  consists  in  the  pos¬ 
session  of  all  good  things  it  is  also  the  sum  total 
of  attainable  satisfactions  or  pleasures.  Where 
pleasure  means  satisfaction,  pain  means  frus¬ 
tration,  not  the  sensed  pain  of  injured  flesh. 
Happiness,  Locke  can  therefore  say,  “is  the 
utmost  pleasure  we  are  capable  of”;  and  Mill 
can  define  it  as  “an  existence  exempt  as  far 
as  possible  from  pain,  and  as  rich  as  possible 
in  enjoyments.”  Nor  does  Aristotle  object 
to  saying  that  the  happy  life  “is  also  in  itself 
pleasant.” 

But  unlike  Locke  and  Mill,  Aristotle  raises 
the  question  whether  all  pleasures  are  good,  and 
all  pains  evil.  Sensuous  pleasure  as  an  object 
often  conflicts  with  other  objects  of  desire.  And 
if  “pleasure”  means  satisfaction,  there  can  be 
conflict  among  pleasures,  for  the  satisfaction  of 
one  desire  may  lead  to  the  frustration  of  another. 
At  this  point  Aristotle  finds  it  necessary  to  in¬ 
troduce  the  principle  of  virtue.  The  virtuous 
man  is  one  who  finds  pleasure  “in  the  things 
that  are  by  nature  pleasant.”  The  virtuous  man 
takes  pleasure  only  in  the  right  things,  and  is 
willing  to  suffer  pain  for  the  right  end.  If  pleas¬ 
ures,  or  desires  and  their  satisfaction,  can  be 
better  or  worse,  there  must  be  a  choice  among 
them  for  the  sake  of  happiness.  Mill  makes  this 
choice  depend  on  a  discrimination  between 
lower  and  higher  pleasures,  not  on  virtue.  He 
regards  virtue  merely  as  one  of  the  parts  of 
happiness,  in  no  way  different  from  the  others. 
But  Aristotle  seems  to  think  that  virtue  is  the 
principal  means  to  happiness  because  it  regu¬ 
lates  the  choices  which  must  be  rightly  made  in 
order  to  obtain  all  good  things;  hence  his  defi¬ 


nition  of  happiness  as  “activity  in  accordance 
with  virtue.” 

This  definition  raises  difficulties  of  still  an¬ 
other  order.  As  the  chapter  on  Virtue  and 
Vice  indicates,  there  are  for  Aristotle  two  kinds 
of  virtue,  moral  and  intellectual,  the  one  con¬ 
cerned  with  desire  and  social  conduct,  the  other 
with  thought  and  knowledge.  There  are  also 
two  modes  of  life,  sometimes  called  the  active 
and  the  contemplative,  differing  as  a  life  de¬ 
voted  to  political  activity  or  practical  tasks 
differs  from  a  life  occupied  largely  with  theo¬ 
retic  problems  in  the  pursuit  of  truth  or  in  the 
consideration  of  what  is  known.  Are  there  two 
kinds  of  happiness  then,  belonging  respectively 
to  the  political  and  the  speculative  life  ?  Is  one 
a  better  kind  of  happiness  than  another  ?  Does 
the  practical  sort  of  happiness  require  intellec¬ 
tual  as  well  as  moral  virtue?  Does  the  specu¬ 
lative  sort  require  both  also? 

In  trying  to  answer  these  questions,  and  gen¬ 
erally  in  shaping  his  definition  of  happiness, 
Aristotle  considers  the  role  of  the  goods  of  for¬ 
tune,  such  things  as  health,  wealth,  auspicious 
birth,  native  endowments  of  body  or  mind,  and 
length  of  life.  These  gifts  condition  virtuous 
activity  or  may  present  problems  which  virtue 
is  needed  to  solve.  But  to  the  extent  that  hav¬ 
ing  or  not  having  them  is  a  matter  of  fortune, 
they  are  not  within  a  man’s  control — to  get, 
keep,  or  give  up.  If  they  are  indispensable, 
happiness  is  precarious,  or  even  unattainable 
by  those  who  are  unfortunate.  In  addition,  if 
the  goods  of  fortune  are  indispensable,  the  defi¬ 
nition  of  happiness  must  itself  be  qualified. 
More  is  required  for  happiness  than  activity  in 
accordance  with  virtue. 

“Should  we  not  say,”  Aristotle  asks,  “that  he 
is  happy  who  is  active  in  accordance  with  com¬ 
plete  virtue  and  is  sufficiently  equipped  with 
external  goods,  not  for  some  chance  period  but 
throughout  a  complete  life?  Or  must  we  add 
‘and  who  is  destined  to  live  thus  and  die  as 
befits  his  life’  ?  .  .  .  If  so,  we  shall  call  happy 
those  among  living  men  in  whom  these  condi¬ 
tions  are,  and  are  to  be,  fulfilled— but  happy 
men.” 

The  consideration  of  the  goods  of  fortune  has 
led  to  diverse  views  about  the  attainability  of 
happiness  in  this  life.  For  one  thing,  they  may 


691 


Chapter  33: 

act  as  an  obstacle  to  happiness.  Pierre  Bezukhov 
in  War  and  Peace  learned,  during  his  period  of 
captivity,  that  “man  is  created  for  happiness; 
that  happiness  lies  in  himself,  in  the  satisfaction 
of  his  natural  human  cravings;  that  all  unhappi¬ 
ness  arises  not  from  privation  but  from  super¬ 
fluity.” 

The  vicissitudes  of  fortune  seem  to  be  what 
Solon  has  in  mind  when,  as  reported  by  Herod¬ 
otus,  he  tells  Croesus,  the  king  of  Lydia,  that 
he  will  not  call  him  happy  “until  I  hear  that 
thou  has  closed  thy  life  happily  .  .  .  for  often¬ 
times  God  gives  men  a  gleam  of  happiness,  and 
then  plunges  them  into  ruin.”  For  this  reason, 
in  judging  of  happiness,  as  “in  every  matter, 
it  behoves  us  to  mark  well  the  end.” 

Even  if  it  is  possible  to  call  a  man  happy  while 
he  is  alive — on  the  ground  that  virtue,  which 
is  within  his  power,  may  be  able  to  withstand 
anything  but  the  most  outrageous  fortune — it 
is  still  necessary  to  define  happiness  by  refer¬ 
ence  to  a  complete  life.  Children  cannot  be 
called  happy,  Aristotle  holds,  because  their 
characters  have  not  yet  matured  and  their  lives 
are  still  too  far  from  completion.  To  call  them 
happy,  or  to  call  happy  men  of  any  age  who 
1  still  may  suffer  great  misfortune,  is  merely  to 
voice  the  hopes  we  have  for  them.  “The  most 
prosperous,”  Aristotle  writes,  “may  fall  into 
great  misfortunes  in  old  age,  as  is  told  of  Priam 
in  the  Trojan  cycle;  and  one  who  has  experi¬ 
enced  such  chances  and  has  ended  wretchedly 
no  one  calls  happy.” 

Among  the  goods  of  fortune  which  seem  to 
have  a  bearing  on  the  attainment  of  happiness, 
those  which  constitute  the  individual  nature  of 
a  human  being  at  birth — physical  traits,  tem¬ 
perament,  degree  of  intelligence — may  be  un¬ 
alterable  in  the  course  of  life.  If  certain  in¬ 
herited  conditions  either  limit  the  capacity  for 
happiness  or  make  it  completely  unattainable, 
then  happiness,  which  is  defined  as  the  end  of 
man,  is  not  the  summum  bonum  for  all,  or  not 
for  all  in  the  same  way. 

In  the  Aristotelian  view,  for  example,  women 
cannot  be  happy  to  the  same  degree  or  in  the 
same  manner  as  men;  and  natural  slaves,  like 
beasts,  have  no  capacity  for  happiness  at  all, 
though  they  may  participate  in  the  happiness 
of  the  masters  they  serve.  The  theory  is  that 
through  serving  him,  the  slave  gives  the  master 


HAPPINESS 

the  leisure  necessary  for  the  political  or  specu¬ 
lative  life  open  to  those  of  auspicious  birth. 
Even  as  the  man  who  is  a  slave  Ix-longs  wholly 
to  another  man,  so  the  highest  good  of  his  life 
lies  in  his  contribution  to  the  happiness  of  that 
other. 

The  question  whether  happiness  can  be 
achieved  by  all  normal  human  beings  or  only  by 
those  gifted  with  very  special  talents,  depends 
for  its  answer  in  part  on  the  conception  of 
happiness  itscll.  Like  Aristotle,  Spinoza  places 
happiness  in  intellectual  activity  of  so  high  an 
order  that  the  happy  man  is  almost  godlike; 
and,  at  the  very  end  of  his  Ethics,  he  finds  it 
necessary  to  say  that  the  way  to  happiness 
“must  indeed  be  difficult  since  it  is  so  seldom 
discovered.”  Nevertheless,  “true  peace  of  soul” 
can  be  found  by  the  rare  individual.  “All  noble 
things  are  as  difficult  as  they  are  rare.”  In  con¬ 
trast,  a  statement  like  Tawney’s — that  “if  a 
man  has  important  work  to  do,  and  enough 
leisure  and  income  to  enable  him  to  do  it  prop¬ 
erly,  he  is  in  possession  of  as  much  happiness  as 
is  good  for  any  of  the  children  of  Adam” — 
seems  to  make  happiness  available  to  more  than 
the  gifted  few. 

Whether  happiness  is  attainable  by  all  men, 
even  on  Tawney’s  definition,  may  also  depend 
on  the  economic  system  and  the  political  con¬ 
stitution,  to  the  extent  that  they  determine 
whether  all  men  will  be  granted  the  opportunity 
and  the  leisure  to  use  whatever  talents  they 
have  for  leading  a  decent  human  life.  There 
seems  to  be  a  profound  connection  between 
conceiving  happiness  in  such  a  way  that  all 
normal  men  are  capable  of  it  and  insisting  that 
all  normal  men  deserve  political  status  and  eco¬ 
nomic  liberty.  Mill,  for  example,  differs  from 
Aristotle  on  both  scores. 

Differing  from  the  position  of  both  Aristotle 
and  Mill  is  the  view  that  happiness  is  an  illusory 
goal — that  the  besetting  ills  of  human  life  as 
well  as  the  frailty  of  men  lead  inevitably  to 
tragedy.  The  great  tragic  poems  and  the  great 
tragedies  of  history  may,  of  course,  be  read  as  if 
they  dealt  with  the  exceptional  case,  but  an¬ 
other  interpretation  is  possible.  Here  writ  large 
in  the  life  of  the  hero,  the  great  or  famous  man, 
is  the  tragic  pattern  of  human  life  which  is  the 
lot  of  all  men. 


692 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Sophocles  seems  to  be  saying  this,  when  he 
writes  in  Oedipus  at  Colonus:  “Not  to  be  born 
is,  past  all  prizing,  best;  but,  when  a  man  hath 
seen  the  light,  this  is  next  best  by  far,  that  with 
all  speed  he  should  go  thither,  whence  he  hath 
come.  For  when  he  hath  seen  youth  go  by,  with 
its  light  follies,  what  troublous  affliction  is 
strange  to  his  lot,  what  suffering  is  not  therein  ? 
— envy,  factions,  strife,  battles,  and  slaughters; 
and,  last  of  all,  age  claims  him  for  her  own — 
age,  dispraised,  infirm,  unsociable,  unfriended, 
with  whom  all  woe  of  woe  abides.” 

Death  is  sometimes  regarded  as  the  symbol 
of  tragic  frustration.  Sometimes  it  is  not  death, 
but  the  fear  of  death  which  overshadows  life, 
so  that  for  Montaigne,  learning  how  to  face 
death  well  seems  indispensable  to  living  well. 
“The  very  felicity  of  life  itself,”  he  writes, 
“which  depends  upon  the  tranquility  and  con¬ 
tentment  of  a  well-descended  spirit,  and  the 
resolution  and  assurance  of  a  well-ordered  soul, 
ought  never  to  be  attributed  to  any  man  till  he 
has  first  been  seen  to  play  the  last,  and,  doubt¬ 
less,  the  hardest  act  of  his  part.  There  may  be 
disguise  and  dissimulation  in  all  the  rest  .  .  . 
but,  in  this  scene  of  death,  there  is  no  more 
counterfeiting:  we  must  speak  out  plain  and 
discover  what  there  is  of  good  and  clean  in  the 
bottom  of  the  pot.” 

So,  too,  for  Lucretius,  what  happiness  men 
can  have  depends  on  their  being  rid  of  the  fear 
of  death  through  knowing  the  causes  of  things. 
But  neither  death  nor  the  fear  of  death  may  be 
the  crucial  flaw.  It  may  be  the  temporal  char¬ 
acter  of  life  itself. 

It  is  said  that  happiness  consists  in  the  pos¬ 
session  of  all  good  things.  It  is  said  that  happi¬ 
ness  is  the  quality  of  a  whole  life,  not  the  feeling 
of  satisfaction  for  a  moment.  If  this  is  so,  then 
Solon’s  remark  to  Croesus  can  be  given  another 
meaning,  namely,  that  happiness  is  not  some¬ 
thing  actually  enjoyed  by  a  man  at  any  mo¬ 
ment  of  his  life.  Man  can  come  to  possess  all 
good  things  only  in  the  succession  of  his  days, 
not  simultaneously;  and  so  happiness  is  never 
actually  achieved  but  is  always  in  the  process 
of  being  achieved.  When  that  process  is  com¬ 
pleted,  the  man  is  dead,  his  life  is  done. 

It  may  still  be  true  that  to  live  well  or  vir¬ 
tuously— with  the  help  of  fortune— is  to  live 
happily,  but  so  long  as  life  goes  on,  happiness  is 


pursued  rather  than  enjoyed.  On  earth  and  in 
time,  man  does  not  seem  able  to  come  to  rest  in 
any  final  satisfaction,  with  all  his  desires  quieted 
at  once  and  forever  by  that  vision  of  perfection 
which  would  deserve  Faust’s  “Stay,  thou  art  so 
fair!” 

As  already  intimated,  the  problem  of  human 
happiness  takes  on  another  dimension  when  it 
is  treated  by  the  Christian  theologians.  Any 
happiness  which  men  can  have  on  earth  and  in 
time  is,  according  to  Augustine,  “rather  the 
solace  of  our  misery  than  the  positive  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  felicity. 

“Our  very  righteousness,”  he  goes  on  to  say, 
“though  true  in  so  far  as  it  has  respect  to  the 
true  good,  is  yet  in  this  life  of  such  a  kind  that 
it  consists  rather  in  the  remission  of  sins  than 
in  the  perfecting  of  virtues.  .  .  .  For  as  reason, 
though  subjected  to  God,  is  yet  ‘pressed  down 
by  the  corruptible  body,’  so  long  as  it  is  in  this 
mortal  condition,  it  has  not  perfect  authority 
over  vice.  .  .  .  For  though  it  exercises  authority, 
the  vices  do  not  submit  without  a  struggle.  For 
however  well  one  maintains  the  conflict,  and 
however  thoroughly  he  has  subdued  these  ene¬ 
mies,  there  steals  in  some  evil  thing,  which,  if 
it  do  not  find  ready  expression  in  act,  slips  out 
by  the  lips,  or  insinuates  itself  into  the  thought; 
and  therefore  his  peace  is  not  full  so  long  as  he 
is  at  war  with  his  vices.” 

Accepting  the  definition  of  happiness  as  the 
possession  of  all  good  things  and  the  satisfaction 
of  all  desires,  the  theologians  compare  the  suc¬ 
cessive  accumulation  of  finite  goods  with  the 
unchanging  enjoyment  of  an  infinite  good.  An 
endless  prolongation  of  the  days  of  our  mortal 
life  would  not  increase  the  chances  of  becoming 
perfectly  happy,  because  time  and  change  per¬ 
mit  no  rest,  no  finality.  Earthly  happiness  is 
therefore  intrinsically  imperfect. 

Perfect  happiness  belongs  to  the  eternal  life 
of  the  immortal  soul,  completely  at  rest  in  the 
beatific  vision,  for  in  the  vision  of  God  the  soul 
is  united  to  the  infinite  good  by  knowledge  and 
love.  In  the  divine  presence  and  glory  all  the 
natural  desires  of  the  human  spirit  are  simul¬ 
taneously  satisfied — the  intellect’s  search  for 
truth  and  the  will’s  yearning  for  the  good. 
“That  final  peace  to  which  all  our  righteousness 
has  reference,  and  for  the  sake  of  which  it  is 


Chapter  33 : 

maintained,”  Augustine  describes  as  “the  feli¬ 
city  of  a  life  which  is  done  with  bondage”  — to 
vice  or  conflict,  to  time  and  change.  In  contrast, 
the  best  human  life  on  earth  is  miserable  with 
frustrations  and  an  ennui  that  human  nature 
cannot  escape. 

The  doctrine  of  immortality  is  obviously  pre¬ 
supposed  in  the  theological  consideration  of 
happiness.  For  Kant  immortality  is  a  necessary 
condition  of  the  soul’s  infinite  progress  toward 
the  moral  perfection,  the  holiness,  which  alone 
deserves  perfect  happiness.  But  for  theologians 
like  Augustine  and  Aquinas,  neither  change  nor 
progress  play  any  part  in  immortal  life.  On  the 
contrary,  the  immortal  soul  finds  its  salvation 
in  eternal  rest.  The  difference  between  motion 
and  rest,  between  time  and  eternity,  belongs  to 
the  very  essence  of  the  theologian’s  distinction 
between  imperfect  happiness  on  earth  and 
perfect  happiness  hereafter. 

These  matters,  of  relevance  to  the  theory  of 
happiness,  are  discussed  in  the  chapters  on 
Eterxity  and  Immortality;  and  in  the  chap¬ 
ter  on  Six  we  find  another  religious  dogma,  that 
of  original  sin,  which  has  an  obvious  bearing  on 
earthly  happiness  as  well  as  on  eternal  salvation. 
Fallen  human  nature,  according  to  Christian 
teaching,  is  incompetent  to  achieve  even  the 
natural  end  of  imperfect  temporal  happiness 
without  God’s  help.  Milton  expounds  this  doc¬ 
trine  of  indispensable  grace  in  Paradise  Lost ,  in 
words  which  God  the  Father  addresses  to  His 
Son: 

Man  shall  not  quite  be  lost,  but  sav’d  who  will, 
Yet  not  of  will  in  him,  but  grace  in  me 
Freely  voutsaft;  once  more  I  will  renew 
His  lapsed  powers,  though  forfeit  and  enthrall’d 
By  sin  to  foul  exorbitant  desires; 

Upheld  by  me,  yet  once  more  he  shall  stand 
On  even  ground  against  his  mortal  foe, 

By  me  upheld,  that  he  may  know  how  frail 
His  fali’n  condition  is,  and  to  me  owe 
All  his  deliv’rance,  and  to  none  but  me. 

God’s  grace  is  needed  for  men  to  lead  a  good 
life  on  earth  as  well  as  for  eternal  blessedness. 
On  earth,  man’s  efforts  to  be  virtuous  require 
the  reinforcement  of  supernatural  gifts— faith, 
hope,  and  charity,  and  the  infused  moral  vir¬ 
tues.  The  beatific  vision  in  Heaven  totally  ex¬ 
ceeds  the  natural  powers  of  the  soul  and  comes 
with  the  gift  of  added  supernatural  light.  It 
seems,  in  short,  that  there  is  no  purely  natural 


HAPPINESS  693 

happiness  according  to  the  strict  tenets  of 
Christian  doctrine. 

Aquinas  employs  the  conception  of  eternal 
beatitude  not  only  to  measure  the  imperfection 
of  earthly  life,  but  also  to  insist  that  temporal 
happiness  is  happiness  at  all  only  to  the  extent 
that  it  is  a  remote  participation  of  true  and 
perfect  happiness.  It  cannot  be  said  of  temporal 
happiness  that  it  “excludes  every  evil  and  ful¬ 
fills  every  desire.  In  this  life  every  evil  cannot 
be  excluded.  For  this  present  life  is  subject  to 
many  unavoidable  evils:  to  ignorance  on  the 
part  of  the  intellect;  to  inordinate  affection  on 
the  part  of  the  appetite;  and  to  many  penalties 
on  the  part  of  the  body.  .  .  .  Likewise,”  Aquinas 
continues,  “neither  can  the  desire  for  good  be 
satiated  in  this  life.  For  man  naturally  desires 
the  good  which  he  has  to  be  abiding.  Now  the 
goods  of  the  present  life  pass  away,  since  life 
itself  passes  away.  .  .  .  Wherefore  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  have  true  happiness  in  this  life.” 

If  perfect  happiness  consists  in  “the  vision  of 
the  Divine  Essence,  which  men  cannot  obtain 
in  this  life,”  then,  according  to  Aquinas,  only 
the  earthly  life  which  somehow  partakes  of  God 
has  a  measure  of  happiness  in  it.  Earthly  happi¬ 
ness,  imperfect  because  of  its  temporal  and 
bodily  conditions,  consists  in  a  life  devoted  to 
God — a  kind  of  inchoate  participation  here  and 
now  of  the  beatific  vision  hereafter.  On  earth 
there  can  be  only  a  beginning  “in  respect  of 
that  operation  whereby  man  is  united  to  God. 
...  In  the  present  life,  in  as  far  as  we  fall  short 
of  the  unity  and  continuity  of  that  operation, 
so  do  we  fall  short  of  perfect  happiness.  Never¬ 
theless  it  is  a  participation  of  happiness;  and  so 
much  the  greater,  as  the  operation  can  be  more 
continuous  and  more  one.  Consequently  the 
active  life  which  is  busy  with  many  things,  has 
less  of  happiness  than  the  contemplative  life, 
which  is  busied  with  one  thing,  /.<?.,  the  con¬ 
templation  of  truth.” 

When  the  theologians  consider  the  modes  of 
life  on  earth  in  terms  of  the  fundamental  dis¬ 
tinction  between  the  secular  and  the  religious, 
or  the  active  and  the  contemplative,  they  seem 
to  admit  the  possibility  of  imperfect  happiness 
in  either  mode.  In  either,  a  devout  Christian 
dedicates  every  act  to  the  glory  of  God,  and 
through  such  dedication  embraces  the  divine  in 
the  passing  moments  of  his  earthly  pilgrimage. 


694 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGB 

1.  The  desire  for  happiness:  its  naturalness  and  universality  695 

2.  The  understanding  of  happiness:  definitions  and  myths  696 

2 a.  The  marks  of  a  happy  man,  the  quality  of  a  happy  life 

2 b.  The  content  of  a  happy  life:  the  parts  or  constituents  of  happiness  697 

(1)  The  contribution  of  the  goods  of  fortune  to  happiness:  wealth,  health, 

longevity 

(2)  Pleasure  and  happiness  698 

(3)  Virtue  in  relation  to  happiness  699 

(4)  The  role  of  honor  in  happiness 

(5)  The  importance  of  friendship  and  love  for  happiness  700 

(6)  The  effect  of  political  power  or  status  on  happiness  701 

(7)  The  function  of  knowledge  and  wisdom  in  the  happy  life:  the  place  of 

speculative  activity  and  contemplation 

3.  The  argument  concerning  happiness  as  a  first  principle  of  morality:  the  conflicting 

claims  of  duty  and  happiness  702 

4.  The  pursuit  of  happiness 

4 a.  Man’s  capacity  for  happiness:  differences  in  human  nature  with  respect  to 

happiness  703 

4  b.  The  attainability  of  happiness:  the  fear  of  death  and  the  tragic  view  of  human  life 

5.  The  social  aspects  of  happiness:  the  doctrine  of  the  common  good  704 

5 a.  The  happiness  of  the  individual  in  relation  to  the  happiness  or  good  of  other  men  705 

5 b.  The  happiness  of  the  individual  in  relation  to  the  welfare  of  the  state:  happiness 
in  relation  to  government  and  diverse  forms  of  government 

6.  The  happiness  of  men  in  relation  to  the  gods  or  the  after-life  706 

7.  The  distinction  between  temporal  and  eternal  happiness 

7  a.  The  effects  of  original  sin:  the  indispensability  of  divine  grace  for  the  attainment 

of  natural  happiness  707 

7 b.  The  imperfection  of  temporal  happiness:  its  failure  to  satisfy  natural  desire 

jc.  Eternal  beatitude:  the  perfection  of  human  happiness 

(1)  The  beatific  vision  708 

(2)  The  joy  of  the  blessed:  the  communion  of  saints 

(3)  The  misery  of  the  damned  709 

7 d.  The  beatitude  of  God 


Chapter  33:  HAPPINESS 


695 


REFERENCES 


To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  arc  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  u  [265  28^  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a- 1 19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  sideof  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right  hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b  164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References  :  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g .,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 — (JD)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  desire  for  happiness:  its  naturalness  and 
universality 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus ,  69a  /  Symposium ,  164c-d 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  4  [1095*13-29] 
340b-c;  ch  7  [io97*24-b22]  342c-343a;  bk  x, 
ch  6  [ii76a30-b8]  430d-431a  /  Politics ,  bk  vii, 
ch  13  [i33ib39-i332a4]  536c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i, 
ch  5  [i36ob4~i3]  600d-601a;  ch  6  [i362bio-i2] 
603  b 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  81  Id 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  24,  203c- 
204c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  31-34  79c- 
80c  /  City  of  Gody  bk  x,  ch  i,  298b, d;  bk  xix, 
ch  12  517b-519a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, 
rep  1  lOd-lld;  q  12,  a  1,  ans  50c-51c;  a  8, 
rep  4  57b-58b;  q  19,  a  3,  ans  llOb-lllc;  q  26, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  150c-151a;  q  62,  a  i,  ans 
317d-318c;  q  63,  a  3  327b-328b;  Q  82,  a  1 
431d-432c;  q  83,  a  i,  rep  5  436d-438a;  a  2, 
ans  438a-d;  part  i-ii,  q  i,  aa  4-8  612a-615c; 
q  2,  a  2,  rep  3  616d-617b;  q  3,  a  6,  rep  2 
627b-628a;  q  5,  a  i,  ans  636d-637c;  a  4,  ans 
and  rep  2  639a-640b;  a  8  642d-643d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  63, 
a  1  63a-64a;  Q  84,  a  4,  ans  176d-178a;  part 
ii— ii,  q  29,  a  2  531a-d 


21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvii 
[127-129]  79d;  xviii  [19-33]  80a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  76c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  6d-7a;  149b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  partiv,  prop  19-21 429d-430b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  169  203a;  425  243b-244b; 
437  251a  /  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  440b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  3,  104c;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  42-73  188c- 
199c  passim,  esp  sect  42  188c,  sect  51  191  b-c, 
sect  55-56  192c-193b,  sect  64  195a-b,  sect 
70  197a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  235a-b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals ,  258d-259a;  261c;  266b-c; 
267b-d  /  Practical  Reason ,  300a-d;  306a  /  Pref 
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics ,  369c-370d  / 
Judgement ,  478a-479a;  584d-585c;  588b  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  461c-464d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  ii,  par  123 
44a-b;  additions,  78  128c-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [1544-1706]  37b-41a; 
part  11  [11,559-594]  281b-282a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  123a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  316d-317a;  592d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  577a-578b; 
bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c-631c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bkv,  127b- 
137c  passim 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  772a 


696 

2.  The  understanding  of  happiness:  definitions 
and  myths 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6c-8a;  48c;  bk  hi, 
98b-99a 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  124a-129d  /  Symposium , 
164c-165a  /  Republic ,  bk  ii,  311c-312b;  bk  x, 
437c-441a,c  /  Timaeus,  444c-446b  /  Critias, 
479b-485d  /  Statesman ,  586c-589c  /  Philebus , 
609a-c  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  656d-658d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i  339a-348d  esp  ch  7 
[ic>97b22-i098si9]  343a-c;  bk  ix,  ch  9  [u69b 
28-30]  423c;  bk  x,  ch  6-8  430d-434a  / 
Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  11  [i295a35~38]  495c;  bk 
vii,  ch  13  [i33ib24-i332a27]  536b-537a  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i36ob4~i8]  600d-601a  / 
Poetics ,  ch  6  [1450s!  7-20]  684c 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [1-61] 
I5a-d;  [646-651]  23b;  bk  hi  [14-24]  30b;  bk 
v  [1-54]  61a-d;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  4  108d- 
110a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iv,  sect  3  263b- 
264a 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues ,  iv  14a-15b  /  Aeneid ,  bk  viii 
[306-336]  267a-268a 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  74c-75c  /  Pyrrhus ,  320c- 
321a 

17  Plotinus:  F/rrt  Ennead,  tr  iv-v  12b-21a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  29-34  78d- 
80c  /  C/Vy  o/*  Goi,  bk  xii,  ch  i  342b,d-343c 
/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  4  625b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a 
1,  rep  1  lOd-lld;  part  1— 11,  qq  2-4  615c- 
636c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  65a-b;  73d; 
76c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
18a-b;  60c-66b  esp  65c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  26d-28a:  538a-543a,c 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  i8,  schol- 

prop  28  429a-431c;  appendix,  iv  447b-c; 
PART  V,  PROP  39,  SCHOL  462b-C 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  vii, 
sect  2  131c-d;  ch  xxi,  sect  42-43  188c-d; 
sect  55-56  192c-193b;  sect  64  195a-b 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  100 
432b-c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  283a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  325 b-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  236b-d  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b;  256d-257d; 
267b-d  /  Practical  Reason,  298c-d;  339b-d; 
345a-c  /  Judgement,  584d-587a;  594c-596c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  448a-452b  esp  448a; 
456a-d;  461c-464d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  144d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  123 
44a-b;  additions,  78  128c-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [9695-9902]  235a- 
240b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  772a-b; 
777c-778a;  782d 


2  to  2  a 

2 a.  The  marks  of  a  happy  man,  the  quality  of  a 
happy  life 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [351-474]  55d-57b 

5  Sophocles  :  Antigone  [582-624]  136b-c;  [1155— 
1171]  140d-141a 

5  Euripides:  Bacchantes  [878-911]  347b-c  / 
Hecuba  [619-628]  358a 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  284a-2S5a  /  Philebus,  614b-d; 
617d-618a;  635b-639a,c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  7  [io97ai5-io98a 
19]  342c-343c;  ch  8  [1098^0-29]  344a-b;  ch 
9  tI099b33]-CH  10  [noia2o]  345b-346c;  bk  x, 
ch  7-8  431d-434a  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  8  [1328s 
37-b2]  532d;  ch  13  [i33ib24~i332a27]  536b- 
537a  /  Poetics,  ch  6  [1450s! 5-20]  684c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1-61] 
15a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch  24  203c- 
210a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 
270b;  sect  34  273c;  sect  36  273d;  bk  ix, 
sect  2  291c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  91c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  pref  207b; 
bk  viii,  ch  8  270a-d;  bk  x,  ch  1-3  298b, d- 
301a;  bk  xii,  ch  i  342b,d-343c;  bk  xix,  ch 
13-14  519a-520d;  ch  20  523d-524a;  ch  26 
528d-529a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  qq 
2-5  615c-643d  passim,  esp  q  2,  a  4,  ans 
618a-d,  q  5,  a  8  642d-643d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  84, 
a  4,  ans  176d-178a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  26d-28a:  107d-108c; 
146b-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  iii  [275- 
303]  326c-d  /  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  i,  sc  ii 
[1— 10]  408b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  hi,  49d-50b 

32  Milton:  U Allegro  17b-21a/  Il  Penseroso  21a- 
25a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  169-170  203a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  351c-352a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  236b-237c  /  Practical 
Reason,  298c-d;  345a-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  293d-297b  /  Representative 
Government,  347d-348b/  Utilitarianism,  448a; 
450b-c;  451a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  144d-145a;  164d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  20  17a; 
additions,  15  118d  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
intro, 165a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [3431-3458]  84a- b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Die 4  204b-205a;  287b- 
288a;  360a-361a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  259b-260a; 
bk  xi,  480a-482b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bkv,  130a- 
136b;  bk  vi,  148d-150d;  I53d-157b;  bk  vii, 
190c-191a,c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


2b  to  2b{\) 


697 


Chapter  33:  HAPPINESS 


2b.  The  content  of  a  happy  life:  the  parts  or 
constituents  of  happiness 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [351-474]  55d  57b 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [1155-1171]  HOd  141a 

5  Euripides:  Ion  [585-647]  287d  288b  /  Bac¬ 
chantes  [878-911]  347b  c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6c-8a 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus ,  69a-71a;  74b- 76b  /  Gor - 

gias,  267c-270a;  275b-276b  /  Republic ,  bk  i, 
295d-297b;  bk  v,  364c-365d  /  Timaeus ,  475d- 
476b  /  bk  1,  643c;  bk  ii,  656d-658d; 

bk  v,  688c-690c;  694ad;  bk  viii,  737c  d;  bk 
ix,  751c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  4  [io95ai3~27] 
340b;  ch  5  340d-341b;  ch  8  [i099a3i]-cn  9 
[1100*9]  344d-345c  esp  ch  9  [io99b25~3i] 
345b;  bk  ix,  ch  9  423a-424b  passim  /  Politics , 
bk  hi,  ch  9  [i28oa3i-34]  477d-478a;  bk  vii, 
ch  13  [i33ib24-i332a27]  536b-537a  /  Rhetoric , 
bk  1,  ch  5  600d-602d;  ch  9  [1 367b3  ^3— 35]  610d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [  1  —6 1  ] 
15a-d;  bk  v  [1-54]  61ad;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  4  225a-228a; 
ch  6-7  230b-235a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  12 
262b-c;  bk  v,  sect  8  269d-270b;  bk  viii, 
sect  1  285a-b;  bk  ix,  sect  2  291c  d;  bk  x, 
sect  6  297a-b;  bk  xii,  sect  3  307bd 

14  Plutarch:  Solon ,  66bd;  74c-75c  /  Poplicola- 
Solon  86a-87d  /  Demosthenes ,  691b, d 

17  Plotinus  :  First  Ennead ,  tr  v  19b-21a  /  Second 
Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  9,  70d-71a;  ch  15  74d-75b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vi,  par  9-10  37c- 
38b;  par  18-20  40d-41c;  bk  x,  par  33-34  79d- 
80c  /  City  of  God ,  bk  iv,  ch  21  198d-199d;  bk 
viii,  ch  8  270a-d;  bk  xix,  ch  1-4  507a-513c; 
bk  xxii,  ch  24  609a-612a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  2,  rep  2  105c-106b;  q  26,  a  4  151c-152a,c; 
part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  5,  rep  1  613a-614a;  a  7  614c- 
615a;  Q  2  615c-622b;  q  4  629c-636c 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [1251-1267]  180b  / 
Wife  of  Bath' s  Prologue  [5583-6410]  256a-269b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  76c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
60c-66b  esp  65c-66b;  bk  iii,  133b-140b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  70d-72a;  107a-112d; 
126b-131a;  231d-238d;  279d-281a;  312c-314b; 
459c-462a;  471a-472a;  478c-479c;  486b-497b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  379d-380a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71d-72c 

31  Spinor:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  18,  schol- 
prop  28  429a-431c;  appendix,  iv  447b-c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  164-172  202b-203b;  174  204a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  xxi, 
sect  55-56  192c-193b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  31  lb-31 2a;  403a-405d 
esp  403c-d,  404b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xiv,  104c- 
105a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,336c-d;  343b-c 


40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  572a  c;  644 d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  297c -298a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  236b  237c  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a  257c;  258d  259a; 
266a  c;  267b  d  /  Practical  Reason,  345a-c  / 
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  370b  d 
/  Judgement,  584 d  586a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  448a-453a  passim;  461c- 
464d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  123b;  203b  c;  214b;  350d- 
351b;  505c 

46  H  eg  el  :  Philosophy  of  Right,  1  ntro,  par  20  1 7a ; 
additions,  15  118d 

47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part  i  [354  -52 1  ]  11a- 
15a,  [602-784]  16b  20b,  [1064  1125]  26b-28a, 
[1 544-157 1  ]  37b  38a,  [1660-1706]  40a-41a, 
[1765-1775]  42b,  [3217-3281]  79a  80a,  part 
11  [9356-9573]  227a  232a,  [9695-9943]  235a- 
241b,  [11,441-452]  278b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Did {,  308a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  194a-198b 
passim;  215b-218b;  bk  vi,  235a-238a;  bk  vii, 
275a;  bk  xiii,  577a-578b;  bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk 
xv,  630c-634a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  25d- 
27d;  37c-38a;  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim,  esp 
135d-136b 

53  James:  Psychology,  199b-204b  passim,  esp 
199b-202a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  771a- 
779a  esp  772a-776b,  777a-b 

2^(1)  The  contribution  of  the  goods  of  for¬ 
tune  to  happiness:  wealth,  health,  lon¬ 
gevity 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:17  /  Deuteronomy, 
11:13-17  /  Psalms,  34:9-10;  91;  112:1-3;  128; 
144:11-15— (D)  Psalms,  33:10-11;  90;  111:1-3; 
127;  143:11-15  /  Proverbs,  10:27;  15*16-17; 
16:8  /  Ecclesiastes,  2:4-11;  4:5-8;  5-6  esp  5:9- 
17 — ( D )  Ecclesiastes,  2:4-11;  4:5-8;  5-6  esp 
5:8-16 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  30:14-17— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  30:14-17 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  19:16-30  /  Philip- 
pians,  4:10-23  /  I  Timothy,  6  /  Hebrews ,  13:5 

5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [  1 55—172]  16d  l7a 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [1211-1248] 
125b-c 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [1080-1113]  267d-268a 
/  Trojan  Women  [466-510]  274a  b  /  Electra 
[420-431]  331a  /  Phoenician  Maidens  [552-558] 
382d  /  Cyclops  [316-346]  443b 

5  Aristophanes:  Birds  [592-6 10]  550a-c/  Plutus 
629a-642d  esp  [415-618]  633d-636d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  7b  8a;  bk  vii, 
224d-225a 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a;  74b-76b  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  1,  295d-297b;  bk  hi,  325b-c;  bk 
iii-iv,  341c-343b;  bk  v,  364c -365d  /  Critias> 
485b-c  /  Laws,  bk  v,  690a-c;  694a-d;  bk  ix, 
751c  /  Seventh  Letter ,  805d-806a 


693 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2b.  The  content  of  a  happy  life:  the  parts  or  con¬ 
stituents  of  happiness.  2b (1)  The  contri¬ 
bution  of  the  goods  of  fortune  to  happiness: 
wealth ,  health ,  longevity.) 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  4  [1095*13-27] 
340b;  ch  5  [i096a5-io]  341a-b;  ch  7  [1098*18- 
19]  343c;  ch  8  [1099*3  i-b8]  344d-345a;  ch  10- 
11  345c-347a;  bk  vii,  ch  13  [n53bi4~24]  405a; 
bk  x,  ch  8  [ii78b33-ii79ai6]  433c-d  /  Politics , 
bk  vii,  ch  1  527a-d  esp  [i323b22-29]  527c-d; 
ch  13  [i33ib39-i332a27]  536c-537a  /  Rhetoric, 
bk  1,  ch  5  [i36obi4-3o]  601a-b;  [i36ib27~35] 
602b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [1-61] 
15a-d;  bk  iii  [59—78]  30d-31a;  [1076-1094] 
44a, c;  bk  v  [1113—1135]  75c-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iv,  ch  6  230b-232c 

14  Plutarch:  Solon ,  74c-75c  /  Aemilius  Paulus , 
224d-225c;  229a-c  /  Marcus  Cato ,  285c-d  / 
Pyrrhus,  320c-321a  /  Caius  Marius,  353d- 
354a, c  /  Demosthenes ,  691  b,d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  91c;  bk  xiv,  154a-c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  v  19b-21a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  8, 
270a-b;  bkxix,  ch  3?  510a-c;  ch  13-14  519a- 
520d 

19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  26, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  151c-152a,c;  part  i-ii,  q 
1,  a  7,  ans  614c-615a;  q  2,  aa  1-5  615d-619c 
esp  a  4,  ans  618a-d;  q  4,  aa  5-7  632c-636a; 
q  5,  a  4,  ans  639a-640b;  q  12,  a  3,  rep  i  670d- 
671b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [25-96]  9d- 
10c;  purgatory,  xv  [40-81]  75d-76a 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  of  Man  of  Law's  Tale 
[4519-4546]  235b-236a  /  T ale  of  Melibeus ,  par 
49-50  422a-423a  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  28,  515a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 
133b-140b;  bk  iv,  234a-235a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  33b-36a;  108c-110c; 
122a-124d;  126b-129d;  368d 

26  Shakespeare:  As  You  Like  It,  act  ii,  sc  i 
[1-20]  603c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [68-79] 
49c-d  /  Othello,  act  i,  sc  iii  [199-220]  211a-b 
/  Sonnets ,  cxlvi  608c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  86b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  61a-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  124a-129a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  2b;  263c-d;  283a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  350c;  363a-366d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
256a-b  /  Practical  Reason ,  330d-331a  /  Pref. 
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  370b-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  451d-452b;  462c-463b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  102d-103a;  124d-125d; 
349a-c;  403a;  491b;  492b-c;  494b;  498d- 
499a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  194c-d;  bk  x, 
430a-b;  bk  xi,  514b-d;  bk  xiii,  577a-578b; 
bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c-631a 


2b(\)  to  2b (2) 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
164b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  189a-b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  777a- 
779a 

2b(2)  Pleasure  and  happiness 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs ,  13:19;  21:17;  23:20- 
21,29-35  /  Ecclesiastes,  2:1-2;  3:12-13,22; 
5:18-20;  8:15 —(D)  Ecclesiastes ,  2:1-2;  3:12- 
13,22;  5:18—19;  8:15  /  Isaiah,  22:12-13— 
(D)  Isaias,  22:12-13 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  2:1-9— (P) 
OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  2:1-9 
New  Testament:  Luke,  12:16-21  /  II  Peter, 
2:12-14 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [1155-1171]  140d-141a 
5  Euripides:  Alcestis  [773-802]  243d-244a  / 
Cyclops  [163-174]  441d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  57d-62d  /  Gorgias ,  275b- 
284d  /  Republic,  bk  ix,  421a-427b  /  Philebus 
609a-639a,c  esp  635c-639a,c  /  Laws,  bk  i, 
646a;  bk  v,  689c-690c;  bk  vii,  715c-716a  / 
Seventh  Letter,  801  b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72b 
14-24]  602d-603a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [io95bi3~22] 
340d;  ch  8  [1099*7-30]  344c-d;  bk  vii,  ch  ii- 

14  403c-406a,c  esp  ch  13  [ii53b8-i  154*6]  404d- 
405b;  bk  ix,  ch  9  423a-424b;  bk  x,  ch  1-5 
426a-430d  passim;  ch  6  [ii76b8]-CH  7  [1178*8] 
431a-432c  esp  ch  7  [1177*24-28]  431d-432a  /  j 
Politics,  bk  viii,  ch  3  [1337^7-1338*9]  543a-b; 
ch  5  [i339b32~4o]  545b-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch 

5  [i36obi4~i8]  601a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1-36]  I 
15a-c;  bk  iii  [1003-1010]  43a;  bk  v  [1412- 
1435] 79b-d 

14  Plutarch:  Demetrius,  747b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  1-2  12b- 
13c;  ch  6-7  15a-16a;  ch  12  17d;  tr  v,  ch  4 
19c;  ch  8-9  20c-d  /  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch 

15  74d-75b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  8 
270a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  26,  a 
4,  ans  and  rep  2  151c-152a,c;  part  i-ii,  q  i, 
a  6,  rep  1  614a-c;  a  7,  ans  614c-615a;  Q  2,  a 

6  619d-620d;  q  3,  a  4,  ans  625a-626b;  q  4,  aa 
1-2  629d-631a;  q  5,  a  8  642d-643d;  Q  34,  a  3 
770c-771c;  q  35,  a  5  775d-777a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  84, 
a  4,  ans  176d-178a;  part  ii-ii,  q  28  527b- 
530a;  Q  180,  a  7  614d-616a;  part  iii  suppl, 
q  81,  a  4,  rep  4  966d-967d;  q  90,  a  3  1014d- 
1016a;  q  95,  a  5,  ans  1048a-1049d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvii 
[127-139]  79d;  xix  [1-69]  81c-82a;  xxx-xxxi 
99b-102b 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [331-360]  165a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
60c-66b  esp  65c-66b 


i  2b{3>)  to  2£(4) 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  28a  d;  70d  72a;  110c- 

112a;  235c-236a;  394a-395b;  406a  408b; 

431c-432d;  527b-528a;  538a-543a,c 

26  Shakespeare:  Loves  Labour' s  Lost ,  act  i, 
sc  i  [1-162]  254a-256a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  193b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71  d  72a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  139— 143  196b-200a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  vii, 
sect  2  131c-d;  sect  5  132c;  ch  xxi,  sect  42- 
47  188c-190b  passim,  esp  sect  42-43  188c  d; 
sect  55-56  192c-193b  passim 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  192b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  234c-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256c- 
257c;  258d-259a  /  Practical  Reason ,  298c  300d 
esp  298c-d  /  Judgement ,  478b-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  447b-455a  esp  448a; 
461c-464d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  378a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  15 

118d 

47  Goethe:  part  i  [1741— 1775]  41b-42b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  94a 

51  Tolstoy:  IFar  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  259d-260a; 
bk  viii,  334d-335a;  bk  xiii,  577a-578b;  bk 
xiv,  605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c-631c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  hi  46a- 
82a, c  esp  54b-58a;  bk  iv,  88d;  bk  xii,  370b-d 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  599b-d  /  Civili¬ 
zation  and  Its  Discontents,  772a-774c  esp  772a-c 

•  2£(3)  Virtue  in  relation  to  happiness 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  15:26;  20:12  /  Psalms , 
1;  34:11-22;  106:3;  1 12;  1 19;  128— (D)  Psalms , 
1;  33:12-23;  105:3;  11 1 ;  1 18;  127  /  Proverbs, 
3:13-26,33;  10:6-7;  10:27-11:11;  16:8,20,32; 
28:14,16,20;  29:18;  31:10-31  /  Ecclesiastes, 
7:16-17— (D)  Ecclesiastes,  7:17-18  /  Ezekiel, 
18:5-9— (D)  Ezechiel,  18:5-9 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  14:1-10;  25:1-12— 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  14:1-10;  25:1-16 

New  Testament:  Romans,  4:6-8  /  /  Timothy ,  6 
7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a;  74b-76b  / 
drus,  128d-129c  /  Gorgias,  262a-270a;  275b- 
284d  /  Republic,  bk  i,  295d-297b;  304a-c;  bk 
1— ii,  306b-315c;  bk  ix,  418d-421a;  bk  x,  436c- 
437c;  439b-d  /  Timaeus,  475d-476b  /  Critias, 
485b-c  /  Theaetetus,  528c-531a  /  bk  ii, 

656d-658c;  bk  v,  688c-690c  esp  690b-c  / 
Seventh  Letter,  806 b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i095b26-i096a 
4]  341a;  ch  7-13  342c-348d  passim,  esp  ch  8 
344a-345a;  bk  vi,  ch  12  393b-394a  passim,  esp 
[1  i44ai— 6]  393c;  bk  x,  ch  6  [ii76a3o-b8]  430d- 
431a;  ch  6  [ii77ai]-CH  8  [1 179^2]  431c-434a 
/  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  11  [i^95a35— 38]  495c;  bk 
vii,  ch  1  527a-d  esp  [i323b2i-i324a4]  527c-d; 
ch  8  [i328a37~b2]  532d;  ch  9  [i328b33-i329a2] 
533b;  [i329ai8-24]  533c;  ch  13  [i332a8-27] 
536d-537a;  ch  15  [1334*1 2-b7]  539a-b  /  Rhet¬ 
oric,  bk  1,  ch  5  [i36obi4~27]  601a 


699 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  cii  3  108 be;  bk 
m,  cii  24  203c  210a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a  223d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  hi,  sect  12  262b  c; 
bk  v,  sect  34  273c  d;  bk  vi,  sect  16 

275b  d;  bk  vii,  sect  28  281  d ;  sect  68 
284c  d 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  60a  b  /  Aris¬ 
tides,  265c  d  /  Demosthenes,  691  b,d 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  cii  15  74d- 
75b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  8  270a  d; 
bk  ix,  ch  4  287a-288b;  bk  xix,  cii  i  4  507a- 
513c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  26,  a 
1,  rep  2  150b-c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  2,  rep  i  616d- 
617b;  a  4,  ans  618a-d;  a  7  620d-621c;  q  4,  a 
4  631d-632c;  q  5,  a  4,  ans  639a  640b;  a  7, 
ans  642a-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  28a-d;  70d-72a;  146b-c; 
389d-390a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  222b  c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  71d-72a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  18,  schol- 
prop  28  429a-431c;  part  v,  prop  42  463b-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  72  198a-c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  538a-539a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  316a-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  336c-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  282d- 
283d  /  Practical  Reason,  306d-307a;  338c-348b 
esp339a-b,  340c-342a,  344c -347d  /  Pref  Meta¬ 
physical  Elements  of  Ethics,  366a-b;  374a-c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  452b-455a;  461d-464d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  214c-216d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  26a- 
27d;  bk  vi  146b,d-170d  esp  164a-165a,  167b- 
168c;  epilogue,  411b-412d 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  793a- 
794a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  878a-b 

2 b(4)  The  role  of  honor  in  happiness 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ix  [307-429]  60b-61c;  bk 
xii  [290-328]  85b-c 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [683-684] 
34c 

5  Euripides:  Andromache  [768-789]  32 Id  / 
Hecuba  [299-331]  355b-c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  6c-7b;  bk  ix, 
304a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  397d- 
398d 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-b  /  Republic,  bk  ii, 
310c-315c  passim;  bk  ix,  421a-422b  /  Seventh 
Letter,  805d-806a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i095b22~3i] 
340d-341a  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  13  [1332*8—27] 
536d-537a;  cii  14  [1333*30— b25]  538a-c;  ch 
15  [I334“I;2“b^]  539a-b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[i36obi9-27]  601a 


Chapter  33:  HAPPINESS 


700 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2£(4)  to  2b(5) 


(2  b.  The  content  of  a  happy  life:  the  parts  or  con¬ 
stituents  of  happiness.  2  b(4)  The  role  of 
honor  in  happiness .) 

12  Lucretius:  'Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [59-78] 
30d-31a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  21  127b-c; 
bk  iv,  ch  6  230b-232c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  ii  258a-b; 
bk  vi,  sect  51  279b-c;  bic  viii,  sect  i  285a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [441-493]  115a-116b;  bk 
vi  [886-892]  234b-235a;  bk  viii  [608-731] 
275a-278b;  bk  x  [276-286]  309b-310a;  [656- 
688]  320a-321a;  bk  xi  [376-444]  338b-340a 

14  Plutarch:  Poplicola-Solon ,  86a-c  /  Pelopidas , 
245c-d  /  Lysander,  354b, d  /  Agis,  648b, d- 
649a  /  Cicero ,  717a-b 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  iv,  267c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  59-64  86b- 
87d  /  City  of  God ,  bk  v,  ch  12-20  216d-226a; 
bk  viii,  ch  8  270a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  26,  a 
4,  ans  I51c-152a,c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  aa  2-3  616d- 
618a;  q  4,  a  8,  rep  i  636a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q 
185,  a  1  639c-641c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  96,  a  7, 
rep  3  1061b-1062a 

21  Dante  :  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  hi  [22-69]  4b-d; 
paradise,  vi  [112-126]  114d-115a 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [3041-3056]  210a  / 
Parson's  Tale ,  par  10,  500a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  161c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  112a-d;  125a-c;  300c- 
306a  passim 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  i  [175— 
185]  322b-c  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  i,  sc  iii  [160- 
208]  439b-d;  act  v,  sc  i  [127-144]  462a-b  / 
Henry  V ,  act  iv,  sc  iii  [16-67]  555d-556b  / 
Julius  Caesar,  act  i,  sc  ii  [84-96]  570b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii, 
sc  11  113c-115d;  act  v,  sc  iii  [23-28]  137b  / 
Othello,  act  11,  sc  iii  [262-270]  219d;  act  iii, 
sc  iii  [155-161]  223d  /  Coriolanus ,  act  i,  sc 
iii  [1-28]  355b-c  /  Sonnets,  xxv  590a 

29  Cervantes  :  Don  Quixote  esp  part  i,  32c-33a, 
57d-58a,  145b-147d,  part  ii,  222b-c,  227c- 
228d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  65c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  53,  corol 
413a;  prop  55,  schol  413b-d 

32  Milton:  Lycidas  27b-32a  esp  [64-84]  29a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  147-155  200b-201b;  158-164 
2u2a-b;  400-401  240b-241a;  404  241a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  360c-361a;  362 b-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  176c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
256a-b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  449a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  124d-125d;  128b:  163d 
[fn  4];  498c-499a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  ii,  par  124 
44b-d;  part  iii,  par  253  79a-c 


49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310c-d;  312a-314b 
passim,  esp  312c;  322a-c;  592d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  82a-83c;  bk 
iii,  146d-147c;  bk  v,  214c-215a 

53  James:  Psychology,  189b-191a;  198b-199b 

2b(5)  The  importance  of  friendship  and  love 
for  happiness 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xviii  [1—137]  130a-131c 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  18d  /  Phaedrus,  126c-129d  / 
Symposium,  155d-157a;  164c-167d  /  Republic, 
bk  iii,  325b-c;  bk  ix,  417b-418a  /  Critias, 
485  b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  346c-347a;  bk 
viii,  ch  1  [ii55ai-32]406b,d;  CH3  [1  i56b6— 32] 
408a-c;  ch  5  [ii57b25— 38]  409c-d;  ch  6  [1158* 
22-28]  410a-b;  bk  ix,  ch  9  423a-424b;  ch  ii 
425a-d  /  Politics ,  bki,  ch2  [i253a25~29]  446c-d 
/  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i36obi9~27]  601a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  off'  Things ,  bk  iv  [1058- 
1191]  57d-59d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d- 
170a;  bk  iii,  ch  16  191a-d;  bk  iv,  ch  2  223d- 
224b 

14  Plutarch:  Poplicola-Solon,  86a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  7-14  20d- 
23a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  3,  510d;  ch  5-9 
513d-516c;  ch  13-14  519a-520d;  ch  17  522b 
523a;  ch  26  528d-529a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  4, 
a  8  636a-c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  v  [70-138]  7d- 
8b;  purgatory,  xv  [40-81]  75d-76a;  xvii  [82]- 
xvm  [75]  79b-80c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 
in-112  36a;  stanza  119-128  37a-38a;  bk  iii, 
stanza  1-7  54b-55b;  stanza  1 17-120  69b- 
70a;  stanza  241-242  86a;  stanza  250-253 
87a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  87d-88a 

26  Shakespeare:  Love's  Labotir's  Lost,  act  iv, 
sciii2 68b- 272c  /  Midsummer -Night' s  Dream , 
act  1,  sc  1  {67-78]  353a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Othello,  act  iv,  sc  11  [47-64] 
233c-d  /  King  Lear,  act  v,  sc  iii  [1-26]  279a-b 
/  Timon  of  Athens,  act  i,  sc  ii  397a-400a; 
act  iii,  sc  11  [71-94]  404c-d;  act  iv,  sc  i 
409c-d;  sc  iii  [249-305]  413c-414a  /  Sonnets, 
xxv  590a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  demonst 
and  schol  1,  434b-435a;  appendix,  ix  448a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  100  191a-192b;  155  201b; 
211  211b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiv,  103c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  367d-368a  / 
Utilitarianism,  451  b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  83b-c;  107a;  423c-d;  490a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [3125-3136]  76a-b; 

f3374-34I3l  82b-83a;  part  ii  [9356-9573] 
227a-232a 


2b(6)  to  2b(7)  Chapter  33: 

48  Melville:  Moby  DicI^,  36b  39b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  rk  hi,  I  16c  117a; 
122b  c;  bk  v,  214c  215b;  rk  xi,  525c-526b; 
bk  xv,  642c-643b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii, 
27c*d;  bk  vi,  158b  159a;  167b  168c;  169c- 
170b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  774d 
775a;  782d-783b;  792a-d 

2 b{6)  The  effect  of  political  power  or  status 
on  happiness 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6c-8a 

7  Plato:  Euthy demits,  75c-76b  /  Gorgias ,  262a- 
270a  esp  262a-265c  /  Republic ,  bk  i,  304a-c; 
bk  ii,  311a-313a;  bk  ix,  416a-42Ia  esp  418d 
421a;  bk  x,  439b-440c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  cii  7-8  431d  434a 
passim,  e$pcH7  [ii77b4-25]432a-c,cH8  [1 178^ 
33—1 179ai 5]  433c-d  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  cii  2-3 
528a-530a;  ch  14  [i  333ai7]-CH  15  [13 ^b8] 
538a-539b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [37-61] 
15c-d;  bk  hi  [59-78]  30d-31a;  [995-1002]  42d- 
43a;  bk  v  [1117-1135]  75d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iv,  ch  4-6  225a- 
232c;  ch  9-10  237d-240d 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius ,  51c-52b  /  Solon , 
74c-75c  /  Pyrrhus ,  320c-321a  /  Nicias ,  425b-c 
/  Crassus  438b,d-455a,c  /  Demosthenes ,  701a- 
702a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  xiv,  154a-c 

17  Plotinus:  Firs/  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  10  20d-21a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  24-26  227d- 
230a, c;  bk  xix,  ch  5-7  513d-515c;  ch  19 
523b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  26, 
a  4,  ans  151c-152a,c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  4 
618a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  66, 
a  5,  rep  1-2  79b-80c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xii  [100-139] 
17b-d;  purgatory,  xi  [73-117]  69c-70a; 
paradise,  vi  113c-115a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  76c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  107a-112d;  126b-131a; 
382b-383d;  400b-d;  443d-446a;  486b-489b; 
538d-540b 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  v 
[1-54]  81d-82a  /  Richard  II,  act  iv,  sc  i  [162- 
334]  343b-345a  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  iii,  sc  i 
[4-31]  482d-483a  /  Henry  V,  act  iv,  sc  i  [247- 
301]  554a-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  193a-b; 
part  11,  368c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  326b-327a;  362b-d; 
364a- b  /  Political  Economy ,  372b-377b  esp 
373c-374a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  157b-d;  572a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  194a-d;  297c-298a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  382b  /  Utili¬ 
tarianism,  462c-463b  passim 


HAPPINESS  701 

46  1 1 1  gel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  167b  c 

51  'Pols toy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  215d  216d 

54  !;ri.ud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  799c 

2b(7)  I  hc  function  of  knowledge  and  wisdom 
in  the  happy  life:  the  place  of  speculative 
activity  and  contemplation 

Old  Testament:  I  Kings ,  10:1  io—(D)  III 
Kings,  10:1  10  /  II  Chronicles,  9:1-9— (D)  II 
Paralipomcnon ,  9:1-9  /  Proverbs ,  14;  8-9; 
16:16;  17:16;  19:8;  20:15;  22:17  18;  24:13-14 
/  Ecclesiastes,  1:13-18;  2:12-26;  6:8,11;  7:11- 
12,16-19;  9:13— 18 — (D)  Ecclesiastes ,  1:13-18; 
2:12-26;  6:8,11;  7:12  13.17-20;  9:13-18 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  6-1 1  —(D)  OT, 
Boo/{  of  Wisdom,  6-11/  Ecclesiasticus ,  4:11  19; 
6:18-37;  14:19-15:8;  24:13-21;  37:24— (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  4:12  -22;  6:18-37;  14:20- 
15:8;  24:17-29;  37:27 
5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [1348  -1353]  142d 
5  Euripides:  Medea  [292-305]  214c  d 
5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a  506d 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  12a-13c  /  Lysis ,  16c  18a  / 
Eitthydemus,  69a-71a;  74b-76b  /  Symposium, 
167a-d  /  Meno,  183d-184c  /  Apology  200a- 
212a,c  /  Phaedo  220a-251d  /  Republic ,  bk  vi, 
380d-381a;  bk  vii  388a-401d  /  Timaeus,  475d- 
476b  /  Theaetetus,  5 2 8c -53 la  /  Statesman, 
58 7d  588c  /  Philebus  609a-639a,c  esp  635c- 
639a, c  /  Laws,  bk  v,  688c  /  Seventh  Letter, 
806b-c;  808c-809a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  cii  1-2  499a- 
501c;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72bi4-29]  602d-603a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  7  [iogyh22- 
I098ai9]  343a-c;  bk  vi,  ch  12  393b-394a  esp 
[1 1 43bi 7— 1 1 44a6]  393b-c;  bk  x,  ch  7-8  43ld- 
434a  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  2  [i324'123— 35] 
528b 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  81  Id 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1-61] 
15a-d;  bk  v  [1-54]  61a-d;  [1113-1135]  75c-d; 
bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  29  134d* 
138a;  bk  iii,  ch  10  185d-187a;  ch  15  190a- 
191a;  ch  22  195a-201a;  bk  iv,  ch  4  225a- 
228a:  ch  6  230b-232c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  6  261a-c; 
sect  9  261  d ;  sect  12  262b-c;  bk  iv,  sect  16 
264d;  bk  v,  sect  9  270b-c;  bk  vi,  sect  12 
274c;  bk  x,  sect  12  298c-d 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  11  [490-493]  65b 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  121a-122b  /  Cains  Marius, 
353d-354a,c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiv,  154a-c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iv  12b-19b  esp 
ch  3-4  13c-14c,  ch  9-10  16c-17c;  tr  v,  ch  10 
20d-21a  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  34-35  338b 
339c;  tr  ix,  ch  9-1  i  358d-360d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  7-9  28c- 
29b  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  8  270a-d;  bk  x, 
ch  2  299d-300a;  bk  xix,  cii  1-3  507a-511a; 
cii  14  520a-d;  ch  19  523b  d 


702 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2b.  The  content  of  a  happy  life:  the  parts  or  con¬ 
stituents  of  happiness.  2  b (7)  The  function 
of  knowledge  and  wisdom  in  the  happy 
life:  the  place  of  speculative  activity  and 
contemplation. ) 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  26 
150a-152a,c  passim,  esp  a  2  150c-15la;  part 
i-ii,  q  1,  a  6,  rep  1-2  614a-c;  Q  3,  aa  3-8  624b- 
629c;  q  5,  a  4,  ans  639a-640b;  q  35,  a  5  775d- 
777a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  66, 
a  5  esp  rep  2  79b-80c;  part  ii-ii,  q  180  607d- 
616d;  Q  182  620b-624d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  iv  [106-147] 
6c-7a;  purgatory,  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  63a;  65a-b;  76c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  6d-7a;  28a-29c;  70d- 
72a;  231d-238d;  399d-401a;  502c-504c;  508a- 
512a;  541d-543a,c 

26  Shakespeare:  Love's  Labour's  Lost ,  act  i, 
sc  1  [1-162]  254a-256a 

27  Shakespeare:  Pericles ,  act  iii,  sc  11  [26-42] 
434d-435a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  145d-146a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  18a-b; 
27c-d;  71a-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  1,  Id  /  Discourse ,  part  i, 
41d-42a;  part  iii,  49d-50b  /  Meditations ,  111, 
88d-89a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  26-28  431a-c; 
appendix,  iv  447b-c;  xxxii  450c-d;  part  v, 
prop  31-33  459d-460c;  prop  37  461c 

32  Milton:  II  Penseroso  2 la-2 5a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  73-74  185a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  44  188d-189b;  sect  55-56  192c-193b 
passim 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  345a  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy ,  373c-374a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  645c-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  256c- 
257d;  267b-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  448d-449c;  451c-452a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  118a;  299b-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  20 
17a;  additions,  15  118d 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [354-521]  1  la-1 5a; 
[32i7-32461  79a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  255a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  773b- 
774c 

3.  The  argument  concerning  happiness  as  a 
first  principle  of  morality:  the  conflicting 
claims  of  duty  and  happiness 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i  339a-348d  passim, 
esp  ch  4  340b-d,  ch  7  342c-344a,  ch  12 
347a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  22  127c-128c; 
bk  ii,  ch  11  150a-151b;  ch  19  162c-164b;  bk 


3  to  4 

iii,  ch  2  177c-178d;  ch  10  185d-187a;  ch  14 
189c-190a;  ch  24  203c-210a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  11-12 
258a-c;  bk  iii,  sect  6  261a-c;  bk  vii,  sect 
55  283b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  i  285a-b;  sect  32 
287d-288a;  sect  39  288c;  bk  ix,  sect  i 
291a-c;  sect  7  292b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ix,  ch  4-5  287a- 
289a;  bk  xiv,  ch  8-9  381c-385b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  i 
609a-615c  passim;  q  5,  a  8  642d-643d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  2,  ans  206b-207a;  q  91,  a  4,  ans  210c-211c; 
q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d-223a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  76c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71d-72b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  62b-68b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  3,  104c;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  42-73  188c- 
199c  passim 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  336c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  235a-b;  236b-239a  f  Fund. 
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals  253a-287d  esp 
256a-257d,  258d-259a,  261c-264a,  266a-b, 
267b-d,  274d-275b,  282b-283d,  286a-c  / 
Practical  Reason  291a-361d  esp  304d-307d, 
325a-327d,  330c-331a,  338c-355d  /  Pref  Meta¬ 
physical  Elements  of  Ethics,  365b-366d;  367c; 
369c-373b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387b- 
388c;  389a-390a,c  /  Judgement,  478a-479a; 
584d-587a;  588b  [fn  2];  591b-592c;  595a-c; 
596c-597d;  604d-606d  esp  604d-605c,  605d- 
606b  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism  445a-476a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  124 
44b-d;  par  134-135  47b-d;  part  iii,  par  155 
57c;  par  261  83a-d;  additions,  76-81  128a- 
129a;  85-87  129b-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  316a-317a;  592d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bkv,  127b- 
137c  passim 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  20c-d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discon¬ 
tents,  772a-b;  800c-801b 

4.  The  pursuit  of  happiness 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  6c-8a;  bk  ii,  77a-b; 
bk  iii,  98b-99a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  10  345c-346c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [1076- 
1094]  44a, c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  24  203c- 
210a 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  66b-d;  74c-75b  /  Caius 
Marius,  353d-354a,c 

17  Plotinus  :  First  Ennead,  tr  iv  12b-19b  /  Third 
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  4-5  84c-85c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  29-34  78d- 
80c 


4  a  to  4  b 

19  Aquinas:  Sumrna  Theologies ,  part  1,02^  a 
1,  ans  and  rep  2-3  132c  133b;  part  i-ii,  q  5 
636d-643d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy  esp  purgatory, 
xxvii-xxxiii  94c-105d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  76c  d:  part  iv, 
247c  d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  6d-7a;  149b  d;  541b  c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  xxi, 

sect  44  188d-189b;  sect  52  191d;  sect  63-64 
194d-195b  passim 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  300a  d:  304d  307d; 
345a-347a  /  Judgement ,  584d  587a  esp  584d- 
586a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-15]  la  b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  448a-453a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  ii,  par  123 
44a-b;  par  124,  44c;  par  134  47b;  part  iii,  par 
207  69 b  e;  additions,  78  128c-d 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic^ ,  267a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  235a-238a; 
bk  xiv,  605b-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  25d- 
27d 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  771d- 
776b  esp  772a-d,  775c;  799c 

4a.  Man's  capacity  for  happiness:  differences  in 
human  nature  with  respect  to  happiness 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [i099b3 3-1 100*9] 
345b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  14  [n54b20-3o]  406c;  bk  x, 
ch  6  [1177*1-11]  431c;  ch  7  [1  i77b26-i  178*8] 
1  432c;  ch  8  432d-434a  passim,  esp  [ii78b23-32] 

433c  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  8  [i328*37-b2]  532d; 
ch  13  [i33ib24-i332*32]  536b-537a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  24  203c- 
210a 

14  Plutarch:  Caius  Marius ,  353d-354a,c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iv  12b-19b  /  Third 
Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  4-5  84c-85c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  23,  a 
1,  ans  and  rep  2-3  132c-133b;  q  62,  a  2,  ans 
and  rep  2  318d-319c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  7  614c- 
615a;  q  5,  aa  1-2  636d-638a;  a  5  640b-641a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xxviii 
[91-148]  97a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath' s  Prologue  [  5583-6410] 
256a-269b 

26  Shakespeare:  As  You  Like  It ,  act  iv,  sc  i 
[1-41]  617a-c;  act  v,  sc  iv  [176-202]  625c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  70b-d;  73d- 
74a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  v,  prop  42  463b-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  42  188c;  sect  55-56  192c-193b;  sect  61 
194b-c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  283a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  338b-c;  342c-343b; 
363a-366d  passim 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256d- 
257d;  267b-d  /  Practical  Reason ,  300a-c;  304d- 
305d  /  Judgement,  584d-586a 


70$ 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  293b  302c  esp  299b  c  /  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government,  367d  368a  /  Utilitarian¬ 
ism,  448d  450a;  450c  453a;  461c  464d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  144d  145a;  214b;  391d- 
392a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  166 
59d  60a  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  166b- 
168a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  54b  55a;  122b  123a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  117d;  bk  v, 
215b  d;  bk  vi,  235a  238a;  262d  263a;  bk  viii, 
303a  305b;  bk  xi,  480a  482b;  bk  xiii,  577a 
578b;  bk  xiv,  605b  d;  bk  xv,  630c  631c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b- 
137c  passim;  bk  xi,  307c-3I0c 

53  James:  Psychology,  201a-202a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  633d  634a;  635c 
/  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  772b-c;775c- 
776c 

4b.  The  attainability  of  happiness:  the  fear  of 
death  and  the  tragic  view  of  human  life 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  vi  [144-151]  41c;  [440-493] 
44c-45a;  bk  xii  [290-328]  85b-c;  bk  xvii  [420- 
455]  126b  d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [1186-1221] 
llOb-c;  [1524-1530]  113c  /  Oedipus  at  Colo - 
nus  [1211-1248]  125b-c  /  Antigone  [582-624] 
136b-c;  [1155-1171]  140d-141a  /  Trachiniae 
[1-48]  170a-c;  [121-140]  171b 

5  Euripides:  Alcestis  [773-802]  243d~244a  / 
Trojan  Women  [466-510]  274a-b  /  Andromache 
[91-102]  316a  /  Hecuba  [619-628]  358a;  [952- 
961]  360d-361a  /  Heracles  Mad  [497—5 13] 
369a-b  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [16—33]  425b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  2b;  6c-10a  esp  6c- 
8a,  9c-10a;  20b-21a;  bk  ii,  64d-65a;  bk  iii, 
98b-99a;  bk  v,  160c-d;  bk  vii,  224c-225a 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  205d-206d;  211b-212a,c  / 
Crito  213a-219a,c  /  Phaedo  220a-251d  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  i,  295d-297c;  bk  vi,  374a-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  9-1  i  345a -34 7a; 
bk  vii,  ch  14  [ii54b2o-3o]  406c;  bk  x,  ch  7 
[1  i77b26— 1 178*8]  432c;  cH8  432d-434a  passim, 
esp  [1 1 78b23~ 32]  433c  /  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  ii 
[i295*25-bi]  495b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  13  [i3yb24- 
1332*32]  536b-537a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [r— 61  ] 
15a-d;  bk  iii  [31-93]  30b-31b;  [830-1094]  40c- 
44a, c;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  4  108d-110a; 
ch  24  129a-d;  bk  ii,  ch  16  156b-158d;  bk  iii, 
ch  24  203c-210a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  11-12 
258a-c;  bk  iv,  sect  50  268c;  bk  v,  sect  16-18 
271c-d;  sect  34  273c;  bk  vii,  sect  35  282a; 
sect  44-45  282b-c;  bk  ix,  sect  3  291d-292a 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  66b-d;  74c-75c  /  Aemilius 
Paulus ,  224d-225c;  229a-c  /  Pelopidas,  245c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  91b-d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  4  14a-c  / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  4-5  84c -85c 


Chapter  33:  HAPPINESS 


704 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  pursuit  of  happmess.  4b.  The  attainabil¬ 
ity  of  happiness:  the  fear  of  death  and  the 
tragic  view  of  human  life.) 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  8  270a-d; 
bk  xix,  ch  4-8  511a-516a;  bk  xxii,  ch  22-24 
606d-612a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  5 
636d-643d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xi  [1-12] 
122a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cress  ida,  bk  i,  stanza 
31-35  5a-b;  bk  iii,  stanza  1 17-120  69b-70a; 
bk  iv,  stanza  72-74  98a;  bk  v,  stanza  262- 
263  154b  /  Knight's  Tale  [1303-1324]  181b; 
[2837-2852]  206b-207a  /  Merchant's  Tale 
[9927-9954]  332a-b  /  Motifs  Tale  434a-448b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  65a-b;  76c-d; 
79b-d;  part  ii,  163d-164a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  6d-10a;  26d-36b;  70d- 

72a;  115b-119d;  124c-125a;  149b-d;  231d- 
233c;  312c-314b;  326b-327b;  339a-d;  402c- 
403c;  478c-479c;  509b-5l2a;  528c-529b; 

541  b-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [144— 
185]  337a-b;  act  iv,  sc  i  [162-318]  343b-344d; 
act  v,  sc  v  [1-41]  349d-350a 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [129-137] 
32d-33a;  sc  iv  [13-38]  36a-b;  act  ii,  sc  ii 
[303-322]  43d;  act  iii,  sc  i  [56-157]  47c-48c 
/  Measure  for  Measure ,  act  iii,  sc  i  [1-43] 
186d-187a  /  Timon  of  Athens ,  act  iv,  sc  i 
409c-d;  act  iv,  sc  iii-act  v,  sc  i  410c-419b  / 
Henry  VIII ,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [350-372]  572c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  26a-c; 
70b-d;  73d-74a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  67  444d-445a; 
part  v,  prop  42  463  b-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  11  [496-505]  122a; 
bk  x  [782-844]  291b-292b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  109-110  193b-194a;  126-147 
195b-201a;  156-157  201b-202a;  164-183  202b- 
204b;  199  210b;  386  239a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  vii, 
sect  5  132c;  ch  xxi,  sect  45  189b-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  383a-384a;  388a- 
399b;  459a-460a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  283a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  338b-c;  363a-366d  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  363a-b,  366b-d 

42  Kant:  Fund .  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
256d-257d;  258b;  267b-d  /  Practical  Reason , 
345a-347a  /  Judgement ,  584d-586a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  450c-453a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  95c-d;  102d-103b;  104b; 
254b-c;  312b;  350d-351b;  362c-363a;  376c- 
377a;  540b-542a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  162a- 
170b;  part  1,  245b-d;  part  iii,  285a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part  i  [354-517]  11a- 
14b,  [614-736]  17a-19b.  [1064-1125]  26b-28a, 
[1544-1571]  37b-38a,  [1583-1638]  38b-39b, 


4b  to  5 

[1699-170 6]  41a,  [1765-1815]  42b-43a,  [3217- 
3250]  79a-b,  part  ii  [9695-9944]  235a-241b, 
[11,433-452]  278a-b,  [1 1,559—586]  281b-282a, 
[11,934-12,111]  290b-294b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\  esp  175b-176a,  313b- 
314a,  316a-b,  319a-b,  341b-342a,  357a,  360b- 
361a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ii,  80d-81a;  bk 

iii,  117d;  bk  vi,  235a-238a;  262d-263a;  bk 
vii,  294b-296a;  bk  viii,  303a-305b;  bk  ix, 
357d-358b;  373b-374d;  bk  xii,  560a-562a; 
bk  xiii,  577a-578b;  bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk  xv, 
630c-631c;  epilogue  i,  659c-d;  671c-672a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  25d- 
27d;  bk  iii,  53b-54b;  bk  v,  121d-127b;  127b- 
137c  passim;  bk  xi,  345a-c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  771a- 
802a, c  esp  772b-c,  776b-777c,  778d-779a, 
788d-789b,  793d-794a,  796b-c,  799c-800a 

5.  The  social  aspects  of  happiness:  the  doctrine 
of  the  common  good 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  75c-76b  /  Republic ,  bk 

iv,  342a-d;  bk  v,  365c;  bk  vii,  390b-391b  / 
Statesman ,  599c-603d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  339a-d;  bk  v, 
ch  1  [ii29bn-ii3oai3]  377a-c  /  Politics ,  bk  iii, 
ch  9  [1280^1-34]  477d-478a;  bk  iv,  ch  ii 
[i295a25~bi]  495b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  1-3  527a- 
530a;  ch  13—15  536b-539d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  BKi,cHi9l25b-126c; 
bk  11,  ch  10  148c-150a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  3  257a-b; 
bk  iii,  sect  4  260b-261a;  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a; 
bk  v,  sect  i  268b, d;  sect  6  269b-d;  sect  16 
271c-d;  sect  22  272b;  bk  vi,  sect  14  274d- 
275a;  sect  45  278c;  sect  54  279c;  bk  vii, 
sect  44-46  282b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  12  286b-c; 
sect  23  287b;  bk  ix,  sect  i  291a-c;  sect  23 
293c;  sect  42  295c-296a,c;  bk  x,  sect  6-7 
297a-c;  sect  20  299b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  1-8 
507a-516a;  ch  12-17  517b-523a;  ch  26  528d- 
529a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  21,  a 
1,  an’s  and  rep  1,3  124b-125b;  q  60,  a  5,  ans 
313b-314c;  q  92,  a  i,  rep  3  488d-489d;  q  96, 
a  4  512d-513c;  part  i-ii,  q  i,  a  5,  ans  613a- 
614a;  a  7  614c-615a;  q  19,  a  10,  ans  710b- 
711d;  q  21,  a  3  718d-719c:  a  4,  rep  3  719d- 
720a, c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  59, 
aa  4-5  48c-49d;  q  60,  a  2  50d-51b;  q  90,  a  2 
206b-207a;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  207a-c;  a  4, 
ans  207d-208b;  q  91,  a  6,  rep  3  212c-213c; 
q  92,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  1,3-4  213c-214c;  q  93, 
a  1,  rep  1  2l5b,d-216c;  q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d- 
223a;  a  3,  rep  i  223a  c;  q  95,  a  4,  ans  229b- 
230c;  q  96,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  232b-233a;  a  4, 
ans  233a-d;  a  6,  ans  235a-d;  q  97,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  3  236a-d;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  236d- 
237b;  a  4  238b-239b;  q  98,  a  i,  ans  239b- 


5a  to  5b 


Chapter  33:  HAPPINESS 


240c;  q  99,  a  3,  ans  247a-248a;  q  100,  \  2, 
an's  252b  253a;  a  8,  ans  and  rep  \  259d  261a; 
a  11,  rep  3  263c-264d;  q  105,  a  1,  rep  3  307d 
309d;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1,4  309d  316a;  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  5  316a  318b;  part  ii  ii,  g  $9,  a 
2,  rep  3  575b-576b;  q  187,  a  3,  rep  1,3  666a- 
669b;  part  hi  suppl,  g  96,  a  6,  rep  i  i  1058a 
1061b:  a  7,  rep  3  1061b  1062a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  84c  86b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  69d  76a  csp 
71b-c,  72b  c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  18,  sciiol 
429a  d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  b k  i,  cm  ii, 
sect  6  105b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  180b  184a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  323a-328a,c;  333b  c; 
342c-343b;  351c-352a;  363a-366d  /  Political 
Economy ,  372b-377b  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii, 
400c-401a;  401d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  114b-d  /  Pref  Metaphysi¬ 
cal  Elements  of  Ethics ,  369c-373b  /  Science  of 
Right ,  438d-439a 

43  Federalist:  number  45,  147c-148a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  453a-454a:  460a-461c; 
461  d;  475a-476a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  211b-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  316a-317a;  592d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bkv,  127b- 
137c  passim 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  799a- 
802a, c  esp  799c-800a 

5a.  The  happiness  of  the  individual  in  relation 
to  the  happiness  or  good  of  other  men 

5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [263-281]  145c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  99a 

7  Plato:  Gorgias ,  262a-270c;  284a-285a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  ix,  ch  6  [1  i67b5— 1 5] 
420d-421a;  ch  8  [n68b28-i  169*11]  422b  d; 
ch  9  423a-424b;  ch  ii  425a-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [1— 13] 
15a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  19  125b-126c; 
bk  ii,  ch  5  142c-144a;  ch  10  148c-l50a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  hi,  sect  4  260b- 
261a;  bk  v,  sect  6  269b-d;  bk  vi,  sect  14 
274d-275a;  bk  viii,  sect  12  286b-c;  sect  56 
290c;  bk  ix,  sect  i  291a-c;  sect  23  293c; 
sect  42  295c-296a,c;  bk  x,  sect  6  297a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  7-14  20d- 
23a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  8  515c-516a;  ch 
12-14  517b-520d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i  ii,  q  i, 
a  5,  ans  613a-614a;  a  7  614c-615a;  q  4,  a  8 
636a-c;  q  32,  aa  5-6  762a-763c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i  n,  q  94, 
a  2,  ans  221d-223a;  part  ii-ii,  q  17,  a  3  458c- 
459a;  Q26  510b-520d  passim;  q  39,  a  2,  rep  3 
575b-576b;  part  hi  suppl,  q  71  900d-917b; 
q  94  1040d-1042c;  q  96,  a  7,  rep  3  1061b- 
1062a 


705 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  x\  [40- 
81]  75d  76a;  xvi  [91  1 38]  77d  78b 
35  Locke:  Toleration ,  15d  16a 

37  Fielding :  Tom  Jones ,  291d  292a;  305d; 
330b  c 

38  MoNTESQt  ieu:  Spirit  of  lot  tvs ,  bk  xxiv, 
203a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  343d  345c;  363a  366d 
csp  363b  364a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Pnn.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  272d 
273a  /  Practical  Reason,  304  b  305c  /  Pref 
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  369c  373  b  csp 
372a  b;  373d:  375d  376b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  450b;  452b  454a;  460a 
461c;  461d;  463a  b;  469b  470c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  221d  224a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  125- 

126  44d-45b;  par  134  47b;  part  hi,  par  155 
57c;  par  182-183  64a;  par  189  65d  66a;  par  192 
66b-c;  par  249  78c;  additions,  116  135c-d; 

127  137b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [11,559-572]  281b 
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310a-3l9a  esp  312a- 

313a,  314b-315d,  316c-317c;  592d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  hi,  116c  117a; 
127d-128d;  bk  v,  197b-c;  214c-216d:  bk  x 
430a-b;  epilogue  i,  670d-671c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  25d 
27d;  37c-38a;  bk  v,  121d-127b;  bk  vi,  154d 
159a;  165b-167b 

5b.  The  happiness  of  the  individual  in  relation 
to  the  welfare  of  the  state:  happiness  in 
relation  to  government  and  diverse  forms 
of  government 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  11:10-11 
5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  27a-39a,c 
esp  [1011-1084]  38b-39a,c 
5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [162-210] 
132c-d  /  Philoctetes  182a-l,£l5a,c 

5  Euripides:  Phoenician  Maidens  [834-1018] 
385c-387b:  [1582-1684]  391d-392d  /  Iphige- 
nia  at  Aulis  425a-439d  esp  [1255-1275]  436c. 
[1368-1401]  437c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6c-7a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  11,  397d- 
398c;  402b-c;  bk  vi,  511c-d 

7  Plato:  Crito  213a-219a,c  esp  216d-219a,c  / 
Republic ,  bk  i,  302c-306a;  bk  ii,  311b-c;  bk 
iv,  342a-d;  bk  v,  364c-365d;  bk  vi,  379d- 
380b;  bk  vii,  390b-391b;  401a-b;  bk  ix,  416a- 
421a  esp  418d-421a  /  Laws,  bk  v,  692c-693a; 
bk  vi,  707c-708a;  bk  ix,  754a  b  /  Seventh 
Letter,  814b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i094b8-io] 
339c-d  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1252*1-6]  445a; 
bk  ii,  ch  5  [i264bi6-25]  459d-460a;  bk  hi,  ch 
6  [i278bi5-29]  475d-476a;  bk  vii,  cii  1-3 
527a-530a;  ch  8  [i328*35~b2]  532c-d;  ch  9 
[i328b33-i329*2]  533b;  [1329*21-24]  533c;  ch 
13-14  536b-538d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1337*28-30] 
542b 


706 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  social  aspects  of  happiness:  the  doctrine 
of  the  common  good.  5  b.  The  happiness  of 
the  individual  in  relation  to  the  welfare  of 
the  state:  happiness  in  relation  to  govern - 
merit  and  diverse  forms  of  government.) 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  19  125b- 
126c;  bk  11,  ch  10  148c-150a;  bk  hi,  ch  22 
195a-201a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  4  260b- 
261a;  bk  v,  sect  16  271c-d;  sect  22  272b; 
bk  vi,  sect  54  279c;  bk  vii,  sect  5  280a-b; 
bk  xi,  sect  21  305d-306a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  44d-45c, 
48b-c  /  Numa  Pompilius ,  51c-52b;  59d-60b  / 
Poplicola- Solon  86a-87d  esp  87a-b  /  Nicias , 
425b-c  /  Demosthenes,  691b, d;  699c-700a 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  ii,  226d-228a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  17  522b- 
523a;  ch  26  528d-529a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  60,  a 
5,  ans  313b-314c;  q  96,  a  4  512d-513c;  part 
1— ii,  q  19,  a  10,  ans  710b-711d;  q  21,  a  3  7l8d- 
719c;  a  4,  rep  3  719d-720a,c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  2  206b-207a;  a  3,  rep  3  207a-c;  q  92,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  1,3-4  213c-214c;  q  94,  a  2,  ans 
221d-223a;  q  95,  a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  96,  a 
3,  ans  and  rep  3  232b-233a;  a  4,  ans  233a-d; 
a  6,  ans  235a-d;  q  97,  a  4  238b-239b;  q  98,  a 
1,  ans  239b-240c;  q  99,  a  3,  ans  247a-248a; 
q  ioo,  a  2,  ans  252b-253a;  a  8,  ans  and  rep  3 
259d-261a;  a  ii,  rep  3  263c-264d;  q  105,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  1,4  309d-316a;  a  3,  ans  and  rep 
5  316a-318b;  q  hi,  a  5,  rep  i  355d-356c; 
part  hi  suppl,  q  96,  a  6,  rep  ii  1058a-1061b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  84c-86b;  part  ii, 
99a;  104b-d;  105c-d;  112b-c;  153a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  381a-388c;  480b-482b; 
486b-489b;  490c-491d 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  acti,  sc  i  [67-167] 
352a-353a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  74b-76a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [843-902]  358a- 
359a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  16d-17b  /  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment ,  ch  vi,  sect  57  36d-37b;  ch  ix  53c-54d; 
ch  xi  55b-58b  passim;  ch  xv,  sect  171  65a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  hi,  112a-115b  esp  112a- 
113a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  16c;  bk 
v,  19a-c;  26c;  bk  vi,  38a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  323a-328a,c;  359a-b 
/  Political  Economy ,  368c;  372b-377b  esp 
374a-d  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  393 b-c;  bk 
iii,  415d;  417c-418a;  421d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  350d-351a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  31d-34a,c  passim, 
esp  32c-33a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  176c;  320d-321a 


5  b  tol 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Rights 
438d-439a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-15]  la  b 
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  11a, c 
43  Federalist:  number  14,  62a-d;  number  45, 

147c-148a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  337b; 
338b-c  /  Utilitarianism ,  460a-461c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  221d-224a;  304c;  393a-c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  205 

68d;  par  261  83a-d;  par  294  98b-d;  par  325 
107d;  par  337  109d-110a;  additions,  116-117 
135c-136a;  127  137b;  154-156  142a-b;  158 
142d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  164b; 
192c-193a;  part  i,  213b;  part  iii,  285a-b 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  238c-243d; 
260a-262a;  bk  xi,  475b-476c;  480a-482b; 
505a-511b  esp  509d-510a;  514b-515a;  bk  xii, 
537b-538a;  bk  xiii,  577b-c;  bk  xv,  634a-635a 
54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  799c- 
801a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  852d-853b 

6.  The  happiness  of  men  in  relation  to  the  gods 

or  the  after-life 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  xv  [47-77]  104c-d;  bk  xvi 
[843-861]  121c-d 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [351-474]  55d-57b  / 
Eumenides  81a-91d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [1186-1221] 
llOb-c;  [1524-1530]  113c  /  Antigone  [582-624] 
136b-c;  [1348-1353]  142d  /  Trachiniae  [12 1- 
140]  171b  /  Philoctetes  [1314— 1347]  193d-194a 

5  Euripides:  Helen  [1687-1692]  314c  /  Androm¬ 
ache  [91-102]  316a;  [1284-1288]  326c  /  Bac¬ 
chantes  [878-911]  347b-c  /  Hecuba  [952-961] 
360d-361a  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [16-33]  425b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  6c-10a  esp  6c-8a, 
9c-10a;  20b-21a;  bk  ii,  77a-b;  bk  iii,  98b-99a 

7  Plato:  Apology,  211c-d  /  Phaedo,  223a-225c; 
249c-250b  /  Republic,  bk  vii,  401a-b;  bk  x, 
437c-438c  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  658c-d;  bk  v,  689c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  io-ii  345c-347a; 
bk  vii,  ch  14  [ii54b20-3o]  406c;  bk  x,  ch  7 
431d-432c  esp  [ii77bi6-ii78a8]  432b-c;  ch  8 
[ii78b8~32]  433b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  1  [62-135] 
ld-2d;  bk  iii  [1-93]  30a-31b;  [978-1023]  42d- 
43b;  bk  v  [1161-1240]  76b-77b;  bk  vi  [43-79] 
80d-81b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a-223d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  ii  258a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [264-678]  218a-229a; 
[724-751]  230b-231a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  91b-d  /  Histories , 
bk  1,  190a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vi,  par  26  42d- 
43a 

7.  The  distinction  between  temporal  and  eter¬ 

nal  happiness 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  18  310b-d; 
bk  xix,  ch  4-11  511a-517b 


la  to  1c 


707 


Chapter  33:  HAPPINESS 


19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  qq 
2-5  615c-643d  passim 

22  Chaucer:  Merchant's  Tale  [9511-9558]  325b- 
326a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  65a  b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  437d  438b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  336c-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v,  127b- 
137c  passim 

la .  The  effects  of  original  sin:  the  indispensa¬ 
bility  of  divine  grace  for  the  attainment 
of  natural  happiness 

Old  TestaxMent:  Genesis ,  3:14-24 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  5:14-21  /  I  Corin¬ 
thians ,  15:21-22 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  33-34  79d- 
80c  /  C/Vy  0/ Go*/,  bk  ix,  cii  14-17  293a-295c; 
bk  x,  ch  2-3  299d-301a;  ch  22-32  312a- 
322a, c;  bk  xiv,  ch  i  376b,d-377a;  bk  xxi, 
ch  15-16  572c-574a;  bk  xxii,  ch  22-24  606d- 
612a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  1,  ch  15  628b-c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  85 
178b-184a;  q  91,  a  6  212c-213c;  q  109,  a  2 
339c-340b;  aa  7-8  344a-346a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xxviii 
[9i]-xxix  [36]  97a-98a;  paradise,  vii  115a- 
116c 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,788-822] 
467a-b  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par  1-15  495a-506b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  195d-196a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  hi  [56-415]  136b- 
144b  esp  [130-134]  138a,  [227-238]  140b;  bk 
xi  [1-44]  299a-300a;  bk  xi  [334PBK  xn  [649] 
306b-333a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  425-430  243b-247b;  447  253a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  38d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v,  121d- 
127b  esp  125d-126b;  bk  vi,  168a-c 

7£.  The  imperfection  of  temporal  happiness:  its 
failure  to  satisfy  natural  desire 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  7-19  20d- 
24b;  bk  viii,  par  17  57d;  bk  ix,  par  23-26 
68a-d  /  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  8  270a-d;  bk 
ix,  ch  14-15  293a-294a;  bk  xii,  ch  i  342b, d- 
343c;  bk  xix,  ch  4-10  511a-516d;  ch  20  523d- 
524a;  ch  27  529a-d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i, 
ch  4  625b-c;  ch  38  635c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  2, 
a  1,  rep  3  615d-616c;  a  3  617b-618a;  a  8  621c- 
622b;  q  3,  a  2,  rep  4  623a-624b;  aa  6-8  627b- 
629c;  q  5,  a  1,  rep  2  636d-637c;  a  3  638b- 
639a;  a  4,  ans  639a-640b;  a  5  esp  rep  3  640b- 
641a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  66, 
a  5,  rep  2  79b-80c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xi  [1— 12] 
122a 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [1303-1324]  181b  / 
Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [15,210-215]  456b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  65a-b;  76c-d 


25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  99b  100a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  366d  367a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [496-505]  122a 

33  Pascal:  PcnsScs ,  106  193b;  109-110  193b- 
194a;  126-147  195b  201a;  156-157  201b  202a; 
164-183  202b  204b;  184-241  205a  217b;  389 
239b;  425-555  243b  270a  passim 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  vii, 
sect  5  132c;  cii  xxi,  sect  45  189b  d;  sect 
61-62  194b  d;  sect  72  198a-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi,  uiv 
107,  499d  500a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  366c-d 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  346b  347b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  256d;  401a  b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1 544-1 57 1  ]  37b  38a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  216d-218b; 
bk  vi,  273c-274a,c;  bk  xi,  525c-526b;  bk  xii, 
560a-562a;  epilogue  i,  650b;  659c-d;  671c- 
672a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b- 
137c  passim;  bk  vi,  153d-167b 

7c.  Eternal  beatitude:  the  perfection  of  human 
happiness 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  31  8d-9a; 
bk  ix,  par  23-26  68a-d;  bk  xiii,  par  50-52 
124c-d  /  City  of  God,  bk  vii,  ch  31  261d-262a; 
bk  ix,  ch  15  293a-294a;  bk  x,  ch  1-3  298b, d- 
301a;  ch  18  310b-d;  ch  22  312a-b;  ch  32 
319d-322a,c;  bk  xi,  ch  12  329b-c;  bk  xii,  ch  i 
342b,d-343c;  bk  xiii,  ch  20  370c-371a;  bk 
xix,  ch  4  511a-513c;  ch  io-ii  516c-517b;  ch 
13  519a-520a;  ch  20  523d-524a;  ch  27  529a-d; 
bk  xxi,  ch  15  572c-573b;  bk  xxii  586b, d- 
618d  esp  ch  i  586b,d-587b,  ch  3  588a-b,  ch 
29-30  614b-618d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, 
ch  4  625b-c;  ch  15  628b-c;  ch  32-33  633c- 
634b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12,  a 
1,  ans  50c-51c;  q  18,  a  2,  rep  2  105c-106b;  q 
26  150a-152a,c;  q  62  317c-325b;  q  66,  a  3, 
ans  347b-348d;  q  73,  a  2,  rep  3  371b-d;  q  75, 
a  7,  rep  1  384d-385c;  q  82,  a  2,  ans  432d- 
433c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  8  621c-622b;  q  3,  a  8 
628d-629c;  qq  4-5  629c-643d;  q  19,  a  10,  rep 
1  710b-711d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  55, 
a  2,  rep  3  27a-d;  q  62  59d-63a;  q  63,  a  3,  ans 
and  rep  2  65a-d;  q  67  81b-87c;  q  68,  aa  2-6 
89c-94c;  q  69  96c-101c;  q  109  338a-347d; 
part  11— 11,  q  2,  aa  3-8  392d-398b;  q  17,  aa 
2-3  457d-459a;  q  26,  a  13  519d-520d;  part 
iii  suppl,  q  75,  a  1  935b-937a;  qq  82-85 
968a-992a;  qq  92-96  1025b-1066a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  paradise,  iii  [43-90]  109d-110b; 
xiv  [1-66]  126d-127c;  xxi  [1-102]  138b-139b; 
xxii  [1-75]  139d-140c;  xxvi  [1-69]  145d-146c; 
xxviii  [1-114]  148d-150a 

22  Chaucer:  Merchant's  Tale  [9511-9558]  325b- 
326a 


708 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  7c(l)  to  7c( 2) 


(7.  The  distinction  between  temporal  and  eternal 
happiness .  7c.  Eternal  beatitude:  the  per¬ 
fection  of  human  happiness.) 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  65a-b 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  99b-100a 
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  366d-367a 
31  Descartes:  Meditations,  m,  88d-89a 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  prop  42  463b-d 
33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  184-241  205a-217b;  425-555 
243b-270a  passim 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  15d-16a  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  11,  ch  vii,  sect  5  132c;  CH  XXI, 
sect  38  187b-c;  sect  45,  189c-d;  sect  62 
194c-d;  sect  72  198a-c 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  366c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  233c-234d 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  346b-347c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  216d-218b; 
bk  vi,  273c-274a,c;  bk  xi,  525c-526b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bkv,  120d- 
121c;  125d-126d;  127b-137c  passim 

7c(l)  The  beatific  vision 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  32:24-30  /  Exodus , 
24  esp  24:9-11;  33:11-23  /  Numbers ,  12:6-8  / 
Deuteronomy,  34:10  /  Job,  19:26-27  /  Isaiah , 
26:10— (D)  Isaias ,  26:10 
New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:8  /  John,  1:18; 
14:19-21  /  7  Corinthians,  13:12  /  II  Corinthians, 
12:1-4  /  I  Timothy,  6:15-16  /  I  John,  3:1-2  / 
Revelation  esp  4-5,  7-8,  11,  14:1-5,  16:1-19:21, 
21:1-22:21 —(D)  Apocalypse  esp  4-5,  7-8,  11, 
14:1-5,  16:1-19:21,  21:1-22:21 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ix,  par  25  68c; 
bk  xiii,  par  18  115b-c  /  City  of  God,  bk  ix,  ch 
15  293a-294a;  bk  x,  ch  2  299d-300a;  bk  xii, 
ch  20,  355b;  bk  xxii,  ch  29-30  614b-618d  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  io-ii  627b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12, 
aa  i-ii  50c-60d;  q  26,  a  3  151a-c;  q  60,  a  5, 
rep  5  313b-314c;  q  62,  a  i,  ans  317d-318c;  a 
2,  ans  318d-319c;  q  64,  a  i,  rep  i  334a-335c; 
q  82,  a  2,  ans  432d-433c;  q  84,  a  5  446c-447c; 
q  89,  a  2,  rep  3  475a-d;  q  93,  a  8,  rep  4  499b- 
500c;  q  94,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  i  501d-503a;  q 
100,  a  2,  ans  521c-522b;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  8 
628d-629c;  q  4,  aa  1-2  629d-631a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  67, 
a  3  83b-84d;  a  6,  rep  3  87a-c;  q  69,  a  2,  rep  3 
97b-98c;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  lOOc-lOlc;  part 
ii  11,  q  1,  a  8,  ans  387a-388c;  q  8,  a  7  421d- 
422c;  q  9,  a  4,  rep  3  425d-426c;  q  180,  a  5 
611d-613a;  part  hi,  q  9,  a  2  764c-765a;  q  15, 
a  10  795b-796a;  part  hi  suppl,  q  90,  a  3 
1014d-1016a;  q  92  1025b-1037c;  q  94,  a  1 
1040d-1041b;  Q  98,  a  5,  ans  1075b-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  v  [1-12] 
112a-b;  xiv  [1-66]  126d'-127c;  xv  [28-84] 128c- 
129b;  xxi  [1-102]  138b-139b;  xxvm  [94-114] 
149d-150a;  xxxn  [i39]-xxxm  [145]  156a-157d 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  10,  499b-500a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  65a-b 


31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  hi,  88d-89a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  346b-347a 

7c{2)  The  joy  of  the  blessed:  the  communion 
of  saints 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  16  esp  16:10;  36  esp 
36:8-9;  37;  84;  149— (D)  Psalms,  15  esp 
15:10;  35  esp  35:9-10;  36;  83;  149  /  Isaiah, 
65:8-25— (D)  Isaias ,  65:8-25  /  Daniel,  7:18 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  3:1-9,13-15; 
47-5:5;  5:15-16— (D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom, 
3:,_9>I3_I5i  47-5:5;  5:16-17 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:1-12,19-20;  6:19- 
2I>33;  J3:43;  i9:i6-3°  esP  19:21;  25:31-46  esp 
25:34,  25:46  /  Mar\,  10:17-31  /  Lu%e,  16:19- 
26;  18:18-30  /  John,  6:38-40;  8:51;  10:24-30; 
11:23-27;  16:20-24;  17:1-3  /  Romans ,  8:18; 
14:17  /  I  Corinthians,  15:40-55  /  II  Corinthians, 
4:17-5:10  /  Galatians ,  6:8  /  Ephesians,  2:18-22 
/  Hebrews,  10:34  /  James,  1:12  /  I  Peter ,  1 :3~io 
/  I  John,  2:15-17;  3:1-3  /  Revelation  passim, 
esp  4-5,  7,  14-15,  19,  21-22— (D)  Apocalypse 
passim,  esp  4-5,  7,  14-15,  19,  21-22 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  16  23b-c; 
bk  ix,  par  6  63a-b;  par  23-25  68a-c;  bk  x, 
par  38-39  81a-c;  par  65  87d-88a;  bk  xii,  par 
23  104b-c;  bk  xiii,  par  50-53  124c-125a,c  / 
City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  n-13  328d-330b;  ch 
29-33  339a-341d;  bk  xii,  ch  20  355b-357a; 
bk  xviii,  ch  48  501b-d;  bk  xix,  ch  io-ii 
516c-517b;  ch  13  519a-520a;  ch  17  522b-523a; 
ch  20  523d-524a;  ch  27  529a-d;  bk  xx,  ch  17 
544d-545c;  bk  xxii,  ch  30  616d-618d  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  19-22  629a-630a; 
ch  38  635c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  95,  a 
4,  ans  509b-510a;  q  113,  a  7  580b-581a;  part 
i-ii,  q  2,  a  3,  rep  1  617b-618a;  q  4,  aa  1-2 
629d-631a;  q  34,  a  3  770c-771c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  67, 
a  4  84d-85d;  part  ii-ii,  q  18,  a  2  462d-463d; 
q  19,  a  11  472d-473d;  q  26,  a  13  519d-520d; 
q  28,  a  3  528d-529c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  90,  a  3 
1014d-1016a;  q  93  1037c-1040c;  q  94,  a  3 
1041d-1042c;  q  96  1049d-1066a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  xxviii-xxxm  96a-105d;  para¬ 
dise  106a-157d  esp  111  [43-90]  109d-110b,  vi 
[112-126]  114d-115a,  xiv  [1-66]  126d-127c, 
xx  [130-138]  138a,  xxi  [1-102]  138b-139b, 
xxii  [52-72]  140b,  xxvm  [94-114]  149d-150a, 
xxx-xxxiii  151d-157d 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  103  549b-550a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  195d 

32  Milton:  On  Time  12a-b  /  At  a  Solemn  Music\ 
13a-b  /  Lycidas  [165-185]  31b  /  Sonnets,  xiv 
66a  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [135—143]  138b; 
[344-415]  143a-144b;  bk  vii  [150-161]  220b; 
bk  viii  [618-630]  245a-246a;  bk  xi  [57-66] 
300b;  [696-707]  314b;  bk  xii  [411-465]  328a- 
329a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  643  290b-291a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  234b-d 


709 


M3)  to  Id  Chapter  33:  HAPPINESS 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  192d-193a 


52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  22b 
23c;  bk  xi,  341d-342c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  199b 

7r(3)  The  misery  of  the  damned 

Old  Testament:  Job,  20:4-29  /  Psalms ,  9:16  17; 
21:8-12;  116:3  — (D)  Psalms ,  9:17-18;  20:9- 
13;  1 1 4 :3  /  /-wwA,  5:1415;  144-23;  26:10; 
66:24—  (D)  Isaias ,  5:14-1 5 ;  14:4-23;  26:10; 
66:24  /  Ezekiel,  31:10-18— (D)  Ezechiel, 
31:10-18  /  Daniel ,  12:2 

Apocrypha:  Judith ,  16:17— (D)  OT,  Judith , 
16:20-21  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  4:16-5:23 
passim— (D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  4:16-5:24 
passim  /  Ecclesiastic  us ,  7:17;  21:9-10  — (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  7:19;  21:10-11 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  8:12;  13:41  42,49- 
50;  18:6-9;  25:41-46  /  Mar\,  9:42-48— (£>) 
Mar\,  9:41-47  /  Lube,  16:19-26  /  Romans , 
2:5-9  /  H  Thessalonians,  1:7-9  /  5-7  / 

Revelation  passim,  esp  14:9-11,  17:1-20:15  — 
(D)  Apocalypse  passim,  esp  14:9-11, 17:1-20:15 

18  Augustine:  C//y  of  God ,  bk  xi,  ch  33  341ad; 
bk  xm,  ch  2  360b-361a;  ch  12  365d-366a; 
ch  14-16  366b-367d;  bk  xiii,  ch  24-BK  xiv, 
ch  1,  376a,c-377a;  bk  xiv,  ch  15  388d-390a; 
bk  xv,  ch  1  397b,d-398c;  bk  xix,  ch  13  519a- 
520a;  ch  28  529d-530a,c;  bk  xx,  ch  6  534a- 
535a;  ch  14-15  542d-544b;  bk  xxi  560a- 
586a, c  esp  ch  1-3  560a-562a,  ch  9-10  568d- 
570b,  ch  13  571c-572a,  cii  17  574a-b,  ch  23 
576c-577b  f  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  20-21 
629b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  10,  a 
3,  rep  2  42c-43b;  q  21,  a  4,  rep  i  126c-127c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  87, 
aa  3-5  187b-189c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  70,  a  3 
897d-900d;  q  86  992b-996a,c;  q  87,  a  i,  rep  4 
997b-998c;  q  90,  a  3  1014d-1016a;  q  94  1040d- 
1042c;  qq  97-99  1066a-1085a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell  la-52d  esp  111 
[1— 1 8]  4a-b,  [82-129]  5a-b,  vi  [100-115]  9c,  vii 
[100-130]  lOc-d,  xi  15a-16b,  xiv  [16-72]  19c- 
20b,  xxvii  [55-136]  40a-41b,  xxxm  [91-148] 
50c-51a;  paradise,  vii  [64-93]  115d-116a;  xv 
[10-12]  128c 

22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale  [7216-7234]  283b-284a 
/  Summoned s  Prologue  284b-285a  /  Parson's 
Tale ,  par  10  498b-502a 


23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  iii,  195b  d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagrucl,  bk  ii, 
119b  122a 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  i,  sc  iv  [42 
65]  115a  b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  418c 
419a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  226d  227a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  ii  93a  134a;  bk 
vi  [867-877]  215a  b 

35  Locke:  Hitman  Understanding,  bk  ii,  cii  xxi, 
sect  62  194c-d;  sect  72  198a  c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  188d  189a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  234a  c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
127c-d;  bk  vi,  169c  170b:  bk  vii,  185a  c 

Id.  The  beatitude  of  God 

Old  T estament:  Exodus ,  33 : 1 8-20  /  /  Chronicles, 
29:11-13 — (D)  I  Paralipomenon,  29:11  13  / 
Psalms,  8;  19;  24;  104:1 ;  1 13:4;  138;  145  —  (D) 
Psalms,  8;  18;  23;  103:1;  112:4;  137;  144  / 
Isaiah,  6:1-4  — (D)  Isaias,  6:1-4 

New  Testament:  MarJ{,  8:38  /  John,  8:54  / 
/  Peter ,  4:11  /  II  Peter ,  1:16-18  /  Revelation, 
5:9-14 —(D)  Apocalypse,  5:9-14 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xiii,  par  4  111c; 
par  53  124d-125a,c  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii, 
ch  6  268d-269c;  bk  xii,  ch  17  353a-354a; 
bk  xxii,  ch  29  614b-616d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  26 
150a-152a,c;  q  62,  a  4,  ans  320b-321b;  q  63, 
a  3  327b-328b;  q  65,  a  2,  ans  340b-341b;  q 
73,  a  2,  rep  3  371b  d;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  2,  rep 
2  616d-617b;  q  3,  a  i,  rep  i  622c-623a;  a  2, 
rep  1,4  623a-624b;  a  8,  rep  2  628d*629c;  q  5, 
a  3,  rep  2  638b-639a;  a  7,  ans  and  rep  2 
642a~d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  19, 
a  3  819c-820c;  q  26,  a  i,  rep  2  845b-846a; 
part  iii  suppl,  q  71,  a  8,  rep  i  909d-910d; 
q  92,  a  1,  rep  5  1025c  l032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [1-9] 
106a;  xxxm  [46-145]  156d-157d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  v,  prop  17  456c- d: 
prop  35—36  460d-461c 

32  Milton:  Upon  the  Circumcision  12b  13a  / 
Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [56-415]  13 6b -144b 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  347d-348b  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  594d  [fn  1] 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Matters  most  relevant  to  the  general  theory  of  happiness,  see  Good  and  Evil  3a,  5a;  Pleas¬ 
ure  and  Pain  6-6 b,  6d. 

Particular  goods  or  virtues  which  are  related  to  happiness,  see  Courage  5;  Honor  2b; 
Knowledge  8b(4);  Love  3a;  Prudence  2a;  Temperance  3;  Virtue  and  Vice  id; 
Wealth  10a;  Wisdom  2c;  and  for  the  discussion  of  means  and  ends  in  the  order  of  goods, 
see  Good  and  Evil  4b,  5b~5c. 

Other  treatments  of  the  conflict  between  an  ethics  of  happiness  and  an  ethics  of  duty,  see 
Duty  2;  Pleasure  and  Pain  8b;  Principle  4-4^ 


710  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 

For:  The  bearing  of  natural  desire  on  the  pursuit  of  happiness,  see  Desire  2a,  3a,  7b;  Love 
5a~5a(i);  Will  7d. 

The  relation  of  happiness  to  death  and  the  fear  of  death,  see  Immortality  1 ;  Life  and 
Death  8a-8c. 

Other  considerations  of  individual  happiness  in  relation  to  the  state  or  the  common  good, 
see  Good  and  Evil  5d;  State  2f. 

Basic  notions  involved  in  the  Christian  doctrine  of  supernatural  happiness  or  eternal  beati¬ 
tude,  see  Eternity  4d;  God  6c(4),  7d,  7 g;  Immortality  5e~5g;  Love  5a(2);  Punish¬ 
ment  5d,  5e(i);  Sin  3c~3d,  4d,  6d,  7;  Virtue  and  Vice  8b,  8e;  Will  7e~7e(2). 

Another  discussion  of  the  beatitude  of  God,  see  God  4I1. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Plutarch.  “Of  the  Tranquillity  of  the  Mind,” 
“Whether  Vice  is  Sufficient  to  Render  a  Man  Un¬ 
happy,”  in  Moralia 
Augustine.  The  Happy  Life 

Aquinas.  Summa  Contra  Gentiles ,  bki,ch  1 00- 102; 
bk  hi,  ch  17-63 

Dante.  Convivio  {The Banquet),  fourth  treatise, 
ch  12 

- .  On  World-Government  or  De  Monarchia ,  bk 

iii,  ch  16 

Hume.  An  Inquiry  Concerning  the  Principles  of  Morals 
A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments ,  part  vi 
Kant.  Lectures  on  Ethics 
Dostoevsky.  Notes  from  Underground 
- .  The  Idiot 

II. 

Cicero.  De  Finibus  {On  the  Supreme  Good) 

- .  Tusculan  Disputations ,  v 

Seneca.  De  Beata  Vita  {On  the  Happy  Life) 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Against  the  Ethicists 

- .  Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism,  bk  iii,  ch  21-32 

Pomertus.  The  Contemplative  Life 
Boethius.  The  Consolation  of  Philosophy,  bk  iii 
Abailard.  Ethics  {Scito  Teipsum) 

Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed,  part  iii, 
ch  8-9 

Nicolas  of  Cusa.  The  Vision  of  God 

Teresa  of  Iesus.  The  Way  of  Perfection 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xxx  (11,  14) 

Iohn  of  the  Cross.  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel 

S.  Iohnson.  History  ofRasselas 

Hutcheson.  A  System  of  Moral  Philosophy 

Voltaire.  Candide 

Paley.  Moral  Philosophy ,  bk  i,  ch  6 


T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Active  Powers  of  the  Human 
Mind,  iii,  part  iii,  ch  1-4 
Bentham.  An  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals 
and  Legislation,  ch  i 
Wordsworth.  The  Prelude 

Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea,  vol  i, 
bk  iv;  vol  iii,  sup,  ch  45-50 
Leopardi.  Essays,  Dialogues,  and  Thoughts 
Whewell.  The  Elements  of  Morality,  bk  ii,  ch 
25 

Kierkegaard.  Philosophical  Fragments 

- .  Concluding  Unscientific  Postscript 

Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  viii,  ch  2 

Flaubert.  Madame  Bovary 

Emerson.  The  Conduct  of  Life 

H.  Sidgwick.  The  Methods  of  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  1-6; 

bk  iii,  ch  14;  bk  iv 
Ibsen.  A  Doll's  House 
Nietzsche.  Beyond  Good  and  Evil 

- .  The  Will  to  Power 

Hauptmann.  The  Weavers 
Chekhov.  Three  Sisters 
Mann.  Buddenbroohs 

Dewey  and  Tufts.  Ethics,  part  ii,  ch  14-15 
Moore.  Principia  Ethica,  ch  2-3 

- .  Ethics,  ch  1-2 

Unamuno.  The  Tragic  Sense  of  Life 
B.  Russell.  What  I  Believe,  ch  4-5 
- .  Skeptical  Essays,  viii 

A.  E.  Taylor.  The  Faith  of  a  Moralist,  series  i  (9) 
Kirk.  The  Vision  of  God 

Santayana.  Some  Turns  of  Thought  in  Modern 
Philosophy,  ch  4 

Maritain.  Scholasticism  and  Politics,  ch  vii 
Adler.  A  Dialectic  of  Morals 
Lubac.  Surnaturel 
O’Connor.  The  Eternal  Quest 


Chapter  34:  HISTORY 


INTRODUCTION 


IN  our  language  the  term  History ,”  Hegel  ob¬ 
serves,  “unites  the  objective  with  the  sub¬ 
jective  side.  ...  It  comprehends  not  less  what 
has  happened  than  the  narration  of  what  has  hap¬ 
pened.  This  union  of  the  two  meanings  we  must 
regard  as  of  a  higher  order  than  mere  outward 
accident;  we  must  suppose  historical  narrations 
to  have  appeared  contemporaneously  with  his¬ 
torical  deeds  and  events.” 

Our  daily  speech  confirms  Hegel’s  observa¬ 
tion  that  “history”  refers  to  that  which  has  hap¬ 
pened  as  well  as  to  the  record  of  it.  We  speak  of 
the  history  of  a  people  or  a  nation,  or  of  the 
great  events  and  epochs  of  history;  and  we  also 
call  a  history  the  book  which  gives  a  narrative 
account  of  these  matters. 

*  It  is  as  if  we  used  the  word  “physics”  to  name 
both  the  object  of  study  and  the  science  of  that 
object;  whereas  normally  we  tend  to  use 
“physics”  for  the  science  and  refer  to  its  sub¬ 
ject  matter  as  the  physical  world.  We  do  not 
say  that  matter  in  motion  is  physics,  but  that 
it  is  the  object  of  physics,  one  of  the  things  a 
physicist  studies.  We  might  similarly  have 
adopted  the  convention  of  using  “history”  in  a 
restricted  sense  to  signify  a  kind  of  knowledge 
or  a  kind  of  writing,  and  then  called  the  phe¬ 
nomena  written  about  or  studied  “historical” 
but  not  “history.” 

That,  however,  is  not  the  prevailing  usage. 
The  word  “history”  seems  to  have  at  least  four 
distinct  meanings.  It  refers  to  a  kind  of  knowl¬ 
edge.  It  refers  to  a  type  of  literature.  It  means 
an  actual  sequence  of  events  in  time,  which 
constitutes  a  process  of  irreversible  change. 
This  can  be  either  change  in  the  structure  of  tho 
world  or  any  part  of  nature,  or  change  in  human 
affairs,  in  society  or  civilization. 

Historical  knowledge  and  historical  writing 
can  be  about  natural  history  or  human  history. 
In  his  classification  of  the  kinds  of  knowledge, 


Francis  Bacon  makes  this  distinction  when  he 
divides  history  into  “natural,  civil,  ecclesiasti¬ 
cal,  and  literary.”  Whereas  the  last  three  deal 
with  human  things,  the  first  is  concerned  with 
the  non-human  part  of  the  natural  world.  At 
the  same  time,  this  natural  history  is  not,  in 
Bacon’s  judgment,  the  same  thing  as  “natural 
philosophy,”  or  what  we  would  now  call  “na¬ 
tural  science.” 

In  this  set  of  great  books,  natural  history, 
even  cosmic  history,  makes  its  appearance  in 
works  which  we  ordinarily  classify  as  science  or 
philosophy;  for  example,  Darwin’s  Origin  of 
Species ,  Lucretius’  On  the  Nature  of  Things,  or 
Plato’s  Timaeus .  The  great  books  of  history 
deal  with  man  and  society,  not  nature  or  the 
universe.  For  the  most  part  this  is  true  also  of 
the  great  philosophies  of  history.  They,  too,  are 
primarily  concerned  with  human  civilization, 
not  the  physical  world. 

In  its  original  Greek  root,  the  word  “history” 
means  research,  and  implies  the  act  of  judging 
the  evidences  in  order  to  separate  fact  from  fic¬ 
tion.  The  opening  line  of  Herodotus  is  some¬ 
times  translated  not  “these  are  the  histories  of 
Herodotus  of  Halicarnassus,”  but  “these  are 
the  researches  .  .  .” 

The  word  “research”  can,  of  course,  mean 
any  sort  of  inquiry — into  what  is  the  case  as 
well  as  into  what  has  happened.  The  title  of  one 
of  Aristotle’s  biological  works,  the  History  of 
Animals ,  suggests  that  it  is  concerned  with  re¬ 
searches  about  animals.  The  book  does  not  deal 
with  natural  history;  it  is  not  a  history  of  ani¬ 
mals  in  the  sense  of  giving  the  stages  of  their 
development  in  the  course  of  time.  The  redun¬ 
dancy  of  “historical  research”  can  therefore  be 
excused  on  the  ground  that  it  is  necessary  to 
distinguish  between  two  kinds  of  inquiry  or  re¬ 
search — scientific  and  historical. 


711 


712 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Originally,  research  set  the  historian  apart 
from  the  poet  and  the  maker  of  myths  or  leg¬ 
ends.  They  told  stories,  too;  but  only  the  his¬ 
torian  restricted  himself  to  telling  a  story  based 
on  the  facts  ascertained  by  inquiry  or  research. 
Herodotus  deserves  the  title  “father  of  history” 
for  having  originated  a  style  of  writing  which 
differs  from  poetry  in  this  extraordinary  re¬ 
spect.  He  tries  to  win  the  reader’s  belief  not  by 
the  plausibility  of  his  narrative,  but  rather  by 
giving  the  reader  some  indication  of  the  sources 
of  information  and  the  reliability  of  the  evi¬ 
dence  on  which  the  narrative  is  based. 

The  poet  tries  to  tell  a  likely  story,  but  the 
historian  tries  to  make  credible  statements 
about  particular  past  events.  He  makes  an  ex¬ 
plicit  effort  to  weigh  the  evidence  himself  or,  as 
Herodotus  so  frequently  does,  to  submit  con¬ 
flicting  testimony  to  the  reader’s  own  judg¬ 
ment.  “Such  is  the  account  which  the  Persians 
give  of  these  matters,”  he  writes,  “but  the 
Phoenicians  vary  from  the  Persian  statements” ; 
or  “this  much  I  know  from  information  given 
me  by  the  Delphians;  the  remainder  of  the 
story  the  Milesians  add”;  or  “that  these  were 
the  real  facts  I  learnt  at  Memphis  from  the 
priests  of  Vulcan”;  or  “such  is  the  truth  of  this 
matter;  I  have  also  heard  another  account 
which  I  do  not  at  all  believe”;  or  again,  “thus 
far  I  have  spoken  of  Egypt  from  my  own  obser¬ 
vation,  relating  what  I  myself  saw,  the  ideas 
that  I  formed,  and  the  results  of  my  own  re¬ 
searches.  What  follows  rests  on  accounts  given 
me  by  the  Egyptians,  which  I  shall  now  repeat, 
adding  thereto  some  particulars  which  fell  un¬ 
der  my  own  notice.” 

Herodotus  seems  quite  conscious  of  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  himself  and  Homer,  especially 
on  those  matters  treated  by  the  poet  which  fall 
within  his  purview  as  an  historian.  The  Trojan 
War  lies  in  the  background  of  the  conflict  with 
which  Herodotus  is  directly  concerned — the 
Persian  invasion  of  Greece — for  the  Persians 
“trace  to  the  attack  upon  Troy  their  ancient 
enmity  towards  the  Greeks.” 

Herodotus  does  not  doubt  that  the  siege  of 
Troy  took  place  as  Homer  relates,  but  he  learns 
from  the  Egyptians  a  legend  about  the  landing 
of  Paris  and  Helen  on  Egyptian  soil  and  the  de¬ 
tention  of  Helen  by  Proteus,  king  of  Memphis. 
“Such  is  the  tale  told  me  by  the  priests  con¬ 


cerning  the  arrival  of  Helen  at  the  court  of  Pro¬ 
teus.  It  seems  to  me  that  Homer  was  acquainted 
with  this  story,  and  while  discarding  it,  be¬ 
cause  he  thought  it  less  adapted  for  epic  poetry 
than  the  version  which  he  followed,  showed 
that  it  was  not  unknown  to  him.” 

Herodotus  cites  passages  in  the  Iliad  and  the 
Odyssey  to  corroborate  this  point.  He  is  willing 
to  use  the  Homeric  poems  as  one  source  of  in¬ 
formation,  but  not  without  checking  them 
against  conflicting  accounts.  “I  made  inquiry,” 
he  writes,  “whether  the  story  which  the  Greeks 
tell  about  Troy  is  a  fable  or  not.”  When  he 
comes  to  the  conclusion  that  Helen  was  never 
within  the  walls  of  the  city  to  which  the  Greeks 
laid  siege  for  ten  years,  he  tells  the  reader  his 
reasons  for  thinking  so.  Homer,  however,  when 
he  narrates  Helen’s  actions  during  the  siege, 
does  not  bother  to  establish  the  facts  of  the 
matter  or  to  give  the  reader  contrary  versions 
of  what  took  place.  That  is  not  the  poet’s  task, 
as  Herodotus  recognizes.  It  belongs  to  the  his¬ 
torian,  not  the  poet.  The  story  which  may  have 
greater  probability  in  fact  may  not  be  the  bet¬ 
ter  story  for  the  poet. 

Since  he  is  both  an  investigator  and  a  story¬ 
teller,  the  historian  stands  comparison  with  the 
scientist  in  one  respect  and  with  the  poet  in 
another.  The  special  character  of  history  as  a 
kind  of  knowledge  distinct  from  science  or 
philosophy  seems  clear  from  its  object — the 
singular  or  unique  events  of  the  past.  The  scien¬ 
tist  or  philosopher  is  not  concerned  with  what 
has  happened,  but  with  the  nature  of  things. 
Particular  events  may  serve  as  evidences  for 
him,  but  his  conclusions  go  beyond  statements 
of  particular  fact  to  generalizations  about  the 
way  things  are  or  happen  at  any  time  and  place. 
In  contrast,  the  historian’s  research  begins  and 
ends  with  particulars.  He  uses  particulars  di¬ 
rectly  observed  by  himself  or  testified  to  by 
others  as  the  basis  for  circumstantial  inference 
to  matters  which  cannot  be  established  by  di¬ 
rect  evidence.  The  method  of  investigation  de¬ 
veloped  by  the  early  historians  may  be  the  pre¬ 
cursor  of  scientific  method,  but  the  kind  of 
evidence  and  the  mode  of  argument  which  we 
find  in  Hippocrates  or  Plato  indicate  the  diver¬ 
gence  of  the  scientist  and  philosopher  from  the 
procedure  of  the  historian. 


713 


Chapter  34:  HISTORY 


The  contrast  between  history  and  science — 
or  what  for  the  purpose  of  comparison  may  be 
the  same,  philosophy— is  formirlated  in  Aris¬ 
totle’s  statement  concerning  poetry,  that  it  is 
“more  philosophical  than  history,  because 
poetry  tends  to  express  the  universal,  history 
the  particular.”  History  deals  with  what  has 
actually  happened,  whereas  poetry,  like  philos¬ 
ophy,  may  be  concerned  with  whatever  is  or 
can  be. 

One  comparison  leads  to  another.  Unlike 
poetry,  history  and  science  are  alike  in  that 
they  both  attempt  to  prove  what  they  say.  But 
in  distinction  from  science  or  philosophy,  his¬ 
tory  resembles  poetry,  especially  the  great  epic 
and  dramatic  poems,  in  being  narrative  litera¬ 
ture.  The  historian  and  the  poet  both  tell  stories. 

If  the  poet  and  the  historian — including,  of 
course,  a  biographer  like  Plutarch— are  also 
moralists,  they  are  moralists  in  the  same  way. 
Their  works  do  not  contain  expositions  of  eth¬ 
ical  or  political  doctrine,  but  rather  concrete 
exemplifications  of  theories  concerning  the  con¬ 
duct  of  human  life  and  social  practices.  That 
fact  explains  why  much  of  the  content  of  the 
great  historical  books  is  cited  in  other  chapters 
1  dealing  with  moral  and  political,  even  psycho¬ 
logical,  topics.  But  in  this  chapter  we  are  con¬ 
cerned  with  history  itself  rather  than  with  the 
particulars  of  history.  We  are  concerned  with 
the  methods  and  aims  of  history  as  a  kind  of 
knowledge  and  literature;  and  we  are  concerned 
with  the  historical  process  as  a  whole,  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  which  belongs  to  the  philosophy 
of  history. 

The  aims  and  methods  of  writing  history  are 
discussed  by  the  historian  himself,  as  well  as  by 
the  philosopher.  Philosophers  like  Hobbes,  Ba¬ 
con,  or  Descartes  consider  history  largely  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  kind  of  knowledge  it  is 
and  the  contribution  it  makes  to  the  whole  of 
human  learning.  Historians  like  Herodotus, 
Thucydides,  Tacitus,  and  Gibbon  state  more 
specifically  the  objectives  of  their  work,  the 
standards  of  reliability  or  authenticity  by  which 
they  determine  what  is  fact,  and  the  principles 
of  interpretation  by  which  they  select  the  most 
important  facts,  ordering  them  according  to 
some  hypothesis  concerning  the  meaning  of  the 
events  reported. 


Herodotus  writes,  he  tells  us,  “in  the  hope  of 
preserving  from  decay  the  remembrance  of 
what  men  have  done,  and  of  preventing  the 
great  and  wonderful  actions  of  the  Greeks  and 
the  barbarians  from  losing  their  due  meed  of 
glory.”  Thucydides  proceeds  in  the  belief  that 
the  war  between  the  Peloponnesians  and  the 
Athenians  “was  the  greatest  movement  yet 
known  in  history,  not  only  of  the  I  lellenes,  but 
of  a  large  part  of  the  barbarian  world  — 1  had 
almost  said  of  mankind.”  Not  very  different  is 
the  declaration  of  Tacitus:  “My  purpose  is  not 
to  relate  at  length  every  motion,  but  only  such 
as  were  conspicuous  for  excellence  or  notorious 
for  infamy.  This  I  regard  as  history’s  highest 
function,  to  let  no  worthy  action  be  uncom¬ 
memorated,  and  to  hold  out  the  reprobation  of 
posterity  as  a  terror  to  evil  words  and  deeds.” 

But  though  there  seems  to  be  a  striking  simi¬ 
larity  in  the  purpose  of  these  historians,  Tacitus 
alone  of  the  three  avows  a  moral  purpose.  Fur¬ 
thermore,  each  of  the  three  is  conscious  of  the 
individual  way  in  which  he  has  put  his  inten¬ 
tion  into  effect.  Thucydides,  for  example,  seems 
to  have  Herodotus  in  mind  when  he  fears  that 
“the  absence  of  romance  in  my  history  will 
detract  somewhat  from  its  interest;  but  if  it  be 
judged  useful  by  those  inquirers  who  desire  an 
exact  knowledge  of  the  past.  ...  I  shall  be  con¬ 
tent.”  Like  Thucydides,  Tacitus  is  an  historian 
of  contemporary  events  and  he  fears  comparison 
with  the  historian  of  antiquity  who  can  “en¬ 
chain  and  refresh  a  reader’s  mind”  with  “de¬ 
scriptions  of  countries,  the  various  incidents  of 
battle,  glorious  deaths  of  great  generals.”  His 
own  work  may  be  instructive,  he  thinks,  but 
it  may  also  give  very  little  pleasure  because  he 
has  “to  present  in  succession  the  merciless  bid¬ 
dings  of  a  tyrant,  incessant  prosecutions,  faith¬ 
less  friendships,  the  ruin  of  innocence,  the  same 
causes  issuing  in  the  same  results,  and  [he  is] 
everywhere  confronted  with  a  wearisome  mo¬ 
notony  in  [his]  subject-matter.” 

As  we  have  already  noted,  Herodotus  seems 
satisfied  to  let  the  reader  decide  between  con¬ 
flicting  accounts.  Only  occasionally  does  he  in¬ 
dicate  which  is  more  likely  in  his  own  judgment. 
Thucydides  claims  that  he  has  made  a  greater 
effort  to  determine  the  facts.  “I  did  not  even 
trust  my  own  impressions,”  he  writes;  the  nar¬ 
rative  “rests  partly  on  what  I  saw  myself,  partly 


714 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


on  what  others  saw  for  me,  the  accuracy  of  the 
report  being  always  tried  by  the  most  severe 
and  detailed  tests  possible.  My  conclusions 
have  cost  me  some  labor  from  the  want  of 
coincidence  between  the  accounts  of  the  same 
occurrences  by  different  eye-witnesses.”  But  he 
thinks  that  his  conclusions  “may  safely  be  re¬ 
lied  on,”  undisturbed  “either  by  the  lays  of  a 
poet  displaying  the  exaggeration  of  his  craft,  or 
by  the  compositions  of  the  chroniclers  which 
are  attractive  at  truth’s  expense.” 

The  historians  are  aware  of  the  difficulty  of 
combining  truth-telling  with  storytelling.  Most 
men,  Thucydides  remarks,  are  unwilling  to 
take  enough  pains  “in  the  investigation  of 
truth,  accepting  readily  the  first  story  that 
comes  to  hand.”  The  difficulty,  according  to 
Tacitus,  is  the  obscurity  of  the  greatest  events, 
“so  that  some  take  for  granted  any  hearsay, 
whatever  its  source,  others  turn  truth  into 
falsehood,  and  both  errors  find  encouragement 
with  posterity.” 

Reviewing  the  enormous  scope  of  his  work, 
Gibbon  at  the  very  end  concludes  that  “the 
historian  may  applaud  the  importance  and 
variety  of  his  subject;  but,  while  he  is  con¬ 
scious  of  his  own  imperfections,  he  must  often 
accuse  the  deficiency  of  his  materials.”  Because 
of  the  scarcity  of  authentic  memorials,  he  tells 
us  in  another  place,  the  historian  finds  it  hard 
“to  preserve  a  clear  and  unbroken  thread  of 
narration.  Surrounded  with  imperfect  frag¬ 
ments,  always  concise,  often  obscure,  and  some¬ 
times  contradictory,  he  is  reduced  to  collect, 
to  compare,  and  to  conjecture;  and  though  he 
ought  never  to  place  his  conjectures  in  the  rank 
of  facts,  yet  the  knowledge  of  human  nature, 
and  of  the  sure  operation  of  its  fierce  and  un¬ 
restrained  passions,  might,  on  some  occasions, 
supply  the  want  of  historical  materials.” 

Clearly,  the  historians  have  different  criteria 
of  relevance  in  determining  the  selection  and 
rejection  of  materials  and  different  principles 
of  interpretation  in  assigning  the  causes  which 
explain  what  happened.  These  differences  are 
reflected  in  the  way  each  historian  constructs 
from  the  facts  a  grand  story,  conceives  the  line 
of  its  plot  and  the  characterization  of  its  chief 
actors.  Herodotus,  for  example,  has  been  com¬ 
pared  with  Homer  as  writing  in  an  epic  man¬ 
ner;  Thucydides,  with  the  dramatic  writers  of 


tragedy.  Even  if  they  all  agreed  on  the  ascer¬ 
tainment  of  fact,  the  great  historians  would  dif¬ 
fer  from  one  another  as  the  great  poets  do;  each 
has  a  style  and  a  vision  as  personal  and  poetic 
as  Homer  or  Virgil,  Melville  or  Tolstoy. 

Only  one  of  the  great  books  is,  by  title  and 
design,  devoted  entirely  to  the  philosophy  of 
history — to  the  formulation  of  a  theory  which 
embraces  the  whole  of  man’s  career  on  earth. 
This  is  Hegel’s  "Philosophy  of  History .  Augus¬ 
tine’s  City  of  God  presents  an  equally  compre¬ 
hensive  vision,  but  a  comparison  of  the  two 
suggests  that  they  differ  from  one  another  as 
philosophy  from  theology. 

The  point  of  this  comparison  is  not  that  God 
and  His  providence  are  omitted  from  the  phil¬ 
osopher’s  view.  On  the  contrary,  Hegel  regards 
the  history  of  the  world  as  a  “process  of  devel¬ 
opment  and  the  realization  of  Spirit — this  is 
the  true  theodicy,  the  justification  of  God  in 
History.  Only  this  insight  can  reconcile  Spirit 
with  the  History  of  the  World — viz.,  that  what 
has  happened  and  is  happening  every  day  is 
not  only  not  ‘without  God’  but  is  essentially 
His  Work.” 

The  difference  is  rather  to  be  found  in  the 
ultimate  source  of  insight  concerning  human 
development  and  destiny.  Augustine  sees 
everything  in  the  light  of  God’s  revelation  of 
His  plan  in  Holy  Writ;  Hegel  and  other  phi¬ 
losophers  of  history  from  Vico  to  Toynbee  seek 
and  sometimes  claim  to  find  in  the  records  of 
history  itself  the  laws  which  govern  and  the 
pattern  which  inheres  in  the  procession  of 
events  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  human 
time. 

For  Augustine,  the  great  epochs  of  history 
are  defined  religiously.  They  are  stages  in  the 
development  of  the  city  of  God  on  earth,  not 
the  city  of  man.  Man  is  viewed  as  dwelling  on 
earth  under  four  distinct  dispensations  from 
God:  (i)  in  Paradise  before  the  Fall;  (2)  in  the 
world  after  expulsion  from  Eden  and  before 
the  Promise  and  the  Law  were  given  to  the 
Jews;  (3)  under  the  Law  and  before  the  coming 
of  Christ;  (4)  between  the  first  and  second 
coming  under  the  dispensation  of  grace. 

Augustine  sometimes  makes  other  divisions 
of  history,  but  they  are  always  primarily  reli¬ 
gious.  For  example,  he  divides  all  of  time  into 


Chapter  34:  HISTORY 


715 


seven  ages,  corresponding  to  the  seven  days  of 
creation.  “The  first  age,  as  the  first  day,  ex¬ 
tends  from  Adam  to  the  deluge;  the  second 
from  the  deluge  to  Abraham.  .  .  .  From  Abra¬ 
ham  to  the  advent  of  Christ  there  are,  as  the 
evangelist  Matthew  calculates,  three  periods, 
in  each  of  which  are  fourteen  generations — 
one  period  from  Abraham  to  David,  a  second 
from  David  to  the  captivity,  a  third  from  the 
captivity  to  the  birth  of  Christ  in  the  flesh. 
There  are  thus  five  ages  in  all.  The  sixth  is  now 
passing,  and  cannot  be  measured  by  any  num¬ 
ber  of  generations.  .  .  .  After  this  period  God 
shall  rest  as  on  the  seventh  day,  when  He  shall 
give  us  (who  shall  be  the  seventh  day)  rest  in 
Himself.  .  .  .  The  seventh  shall  be  our  Sabbath, 
which  shall  be  brought  to  a  close,  not  by  an 
evening,  but  by  the  Lord’s  day,  as  an  eighth 
and  eternal  day,  consecrated  by  the  resurrec¬ 
tion  of  Christ,  and  prefiguring  the  eternal  re¬ 
pose  not  only  of  the  spirit,  but  also  of  the  body 
.  .  .  This  is  what  shall  be  in  the  end  without 


end.” 

This  same  projection  of  history — in  all  es¬ 
sentials.  at  least — is  laid  before  Adam  by 
i  the  archangel  Alichael  in  Milton's  Paradise 
Lost ,  just  before  Adam  leaves  the  Garden  of 
Eden. 

Unlike  the  four  major  dispensations  of  which 
Augustine  and  Milton  speak,  Hegel’s  four 
stages  of  the  world  are  epochs  in  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  Spirit  as  manifested  in  the  State.  They 
are  secularly  defined  as  the  Oriental,  the  Greek, 
the  Roman,  and  the  German  world  and  are 
seen  as  a  “progress  of  the  consciousness  of  Free¬ 
dom. M  The  “various  grades  in  the  consciousness 
of  Freedom,”  Hegel  writes,  “supply  us  with 
the  natural  division  of  universal  History.  .  .  . 
The  Orientals  have  not  attained  the  knowledge 
that  Spirit — Man  as  such — is  free;  and  because 
they  do  not  know  this,  they  are  not  free.  They 
only  know  that  one  is  free  .  .  .  that  one  is  there¬ 
fore  only  a  Despot;  not  a  free  man .  The  con¬ 
sciousness  of  Freedom  first  arose  among  the 
Greeks,  and  therefore  they  were  free;  but  they, 
and  the  Romans  likewise,  knew  only  that  some 


are  free — not  man  as  such.  .  .  .  The  Greeks, 
therefore,  had  slaves  and  their  whole  life  and 
the  maintenance  of  their  splendid  liberty,  was 
implicated  with  the  institution  of  slavery.  . 
The  German  nations,  under  the  influence  of 


Christianity,  were  the  first  to  attain  the  con¬ 
sciousness  that  man,  as  man,  is  free.” 

With  the  complete  emancipation  of  man  in 
the  Gcrman-Christian  world,  history  is  con¬ 
summated  for  Hegel.  “The  grand  principle  of 
being  is  realized,”  he  declares;  “consequently 
the  end  of  days  is  fully  come.”  Another  sign 
oi  the  finality  of  the  Gcrman-Christian  world 
seems  to  be  its  reconciliation  of  Church  and 
State:  “European  history  is  the  exhibition  of 
the  growth  of  each  of  these  principles  severally 
.  .  .  then  of  an  antithesis  on  the  part  of  both  .  .  . 
lastly,  of  the  harmonizing  of  the  antithesis.” 
In  the  German-Christian  world,  the  secular 
and  the  religious  modes  of  life  are  ultimately 
harmonized,  fused  in  a  single  order  of  “rational 
Freedom.” 

Apart  from  the  opposition  between  the  phil¬ 
osophical  and  theological  approaches,  here  rep¬ 
resented  by  Hegel  and  Augustine,  there  seem 
to  be  two  main  issues  in  the  general  theory  of 
human  history.  The  first  concerns  the  pattern 
of  change;  the  second,  the  character  of  the 
causes  at  work. 

The  pattern  most  familiar  because  of  its 
prevalence  in  modern  speculations  is  that  of 
progress  or  evolution.  The  progress  may  be 
conceived  as  a  dialectical  motion  in  the  realm 
of  Spirit,  contrasted  by  Hegel  with  the  realm 
of  Matter  or  Nature,  according  as  “the  essence 
of  Matter  is  Gravity  .  .  .  and  the  essence  of 
Spirit  is  Freedom.”  But  it  may  also  be  thought 
to  occur,  as  in  the  dialectical  materialism  of 
Marx  and  Engels,  through  the  resolution  of 
conflicting  material  or  economic  forces. 

“The  whole  history  of  mankind,”  Engels 
writes  in  his  preface  to  the  Communist  Mani¬ 
festo ■,  “since  the  dissolution  of  primitive  tribal 
society,  holding  land  in  common  ownership, 
has  been  a  history  of  class  struggles,  contests 
between  exploiting  and  exploited,  ruling  and 
oppressed  classes;  the  history  of  these  class 
struggles  forms  a  series  of  evolutions  in  which, 
now-a-days,  a  stage  has  been  reached  where  the 
exploited  and  oppressed  class,  the  proletariat, 
cannot  attain  its  emancipation  from  the  sway 
of  the  exploiting  and  ruling  class,  the  bour¬ 
geoisie,  without,  at  the  same  time,  and  once  for 
all,  emancipating  society  at  large  from  all 
exploitation,  oppression,  class-distinction  and 


716 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


class-struggle.”  The  four  great  economic  sys¬ 
tems — the  systems  of  slave  labor,  feudal  serf¬ 
dom,  industrial  capitalism,  and  the  communis¬ 
tic  or  classless  society — are  thus  seen  as  the 
stages  of  progress  toward  an  ultimate  perfection 
in  which  history  comes  to  rest  because  it  has 
at  last  fully  realized  its  controlling  tendency. 

The  pattern  of  progress  may  be  conceived 
not  as  a  dialectical  motion  involving  conflict 
and  synthesis,  but  rather,  as  by  Kant,  in  terms 
of  an  increasing  actualization  of  the  potentiali¬ 
ties  for  good  in  human  life.  Giving  the  name  of 
culture  to  “the  production  in  a  rational  being 
of  an  aptitude  for  any  ends  whatever  of  his  own 
choosing,”  Kant  declares,  “it  is  only  culture 
that  can  be  the  ultimate  end  which  we  have 
cause  to  attribute  to  nature  in  respect  of  the 
human  race.”  The  progressive  realization  of 
culture  consists  in  “the  liberation  of  the  will 
from  the  despotism  of  desires  whereby,  in  our 
attachment  to  certain  natural  things,  we  are 
rendered  incapable  of  exercising  a  choice  of 
our  own.”  In  these  terms  history  moves  toward 
a  perfection  which  can  never  be  fully  achieved 
on  earth,  for  man’s  “own  nature  is  not  so  con¬ 
stituted  as  to  rest  or  be  satisfied  in  any  posses¬ 
sion  or  enjoyment  whatever.” 

As  conceived  by  the  evolutionist,  progress 
may  or  may  not  attain  its  limit,  but  in  either 
case  its  manifestation  in  human  history  appears 
to  be  analogous  to  as  well  as  an  extension  of  the 
line  of  development  along  which  the  world  or 
all  of  living  nature  has  gradually  advanced. 

These  views  are  given  further  discussion  in 
the  chapters  on  Evolution,  Progress,  and 
World.  Whether  or  not  the  same  pattern  of 
change  obtains  in  the  historical  order  of  nature 
as  in  the  history  of  man  and  society,  is  a  ques¬ 
tion  to  be  answered  by  those  who  deny  as  well 
as  by  those  who  affirm  progress.  There  is  cyclical 
change  in  nature,  the  same  pattern  of  birth, 
growth,  decay,  and  death  repeating  itself  gen¬ 
eration  after  generation.  That  history  too  re¬ 
peats  itself  with  the  rise  and  decline  of  cities 
and  civilizations,  seems  to  be  the  ancient  view. 
It  reappears  in  our  day  with  Spengler  and, 
somewhat  qualified  by  the  possibility  of  prog¬ 
ress,  with  Toynbee. 

“The  cities  which  were  formerly  great,” 
Herodotus  observes,  “have  most  of  them  be¬ 


come  insignificant;  and  such  as  are  at  present 
powerful  were  weak  in  olden  time.  I  shall, 
therefore,  discourse  equally  of  both,  convinced 
that  prosperity  never  continues  long  in  one 
stay.”  Lucretius  finds  the  cyclical  pattern  both 
in  the  succession  of  worlds  and  in  the  succession 
of  civilizations.  The  myth  of  the  golden  age  of 
Kronos  and  the  earth-bound  age  of  Zeus,  which 
Plato  tells  in  the  Statesman ,  also  applies  both 
to  nature  and  society. 

According  to  the  myth,  “there  is  a  time 
when  God  himself  guides  and  helps  to  roll  the 
world  in  its  course;  and  there  is  a  time,  on  the 
completion  of  a  certain  cycle,  when  he  lets  go, 
and  the  world  being  a  living  creature,  and  hav¬ 
ing  originally  received  intelligence  from  its 
author  and  creator,  turns  about  and  by  an  in¬ 
herent  necessity  revolves  in  the  opposite  di¬ 
rection.”  Thus  the  history  of  the  world  runs 
through  “infinite  cycles  of  years,”  and  one  age 
succeeds  another  in  an  endless  round. 

There  is  still  a  third  view  which  sees  history 
as  neither  cyclical  nor  simply  progressive.  Vir¬ 
gil  reverses  the  order  of  the  Platonic  myth  by 
placing  the  golden  age  in  the  future.  It  dawns 
with  Rome,  where,  in  the  words  of  the  4th 
Eclogue ,  “the  majestic  roll  of  circling  centuries 
begins  anew:  Justice  returns,  returns  old  Sat¬ 
urn’s  reign,  with  a  new  breed  of  men  sent  down 
from  heaven  .  .  .  and  the  iron  shall  cease,  the 
golden  race  arise.” 

Rome  for  Virgil  is  not  only  the  beginning 
of  the  golden  age;  it  is  also  the  consummation 
of  history.  In  the  Aeneid  Jupiter  himself  de¬ 
clares  that  he  has  given  the  Romans  “domin¬ 
ion  without  end” — that  he  has  ordained  for 
them  “neither  period  nor  boundary  of  em¬ 
pire.”  The  “gowned  race  of  Rome”  shall  be 
“the  lords  of  the  world”;  then  “war  shall  cease, 
and  the  iron  ages  soften.”  Thus,  Jupiter  says, 
“is  it  willed,”  and  so  “a  day  will  come  in  the 
lapse  of  cycles.”  The  perpetuity  of  Rome  seems 
to  leave  little  room  for  any  further  essential 
progress  and  no  chance  for  another  cycle  of 
decay  and  regeneration. 

The  Christian  dogma  of  the  fall  of  man  from 
grace  and  his  return  through  divine  mediation 
to  grace  and  salvation  seems  to  give  history  a 
pattern  that  is  partly  Platonic  in  the  sequence 
which  makes  the  loss  of  a  golden  age  the  occa¬ 
sion  for  striving  to  regain  it.  But  it  also  seems 


Chapter  34: 

to  be  Virgilian  in  part.  The  epochal  transitions 
of  history  happen  only  once.  The  coming  of 
Christ  is  an  absolutely  singular  event,  after 
which  there  is  no  essential  progress  in  man’s 
condition  until  the  Last  Judgment  at  the  end 
of  the  world. 

Common  to  these  diverse  conceptions  of  the 
pattern  of  history  is  the  problem  concerning 
the  causes  which  are  at  work  as  history  unfolds. 
Whatever  the  factors,  they  will  operate  in  the 
future  as  they  have  in  past,  unless  the  milleni- 
um  is  already  upon  us  or  about  to  dawn.  From 
the  knowledge  of  their  own  past  or  from  their 
dim  perception  of  divine  providence,  men  de¬ 
rive  a  sense  of  the  future;  but  they  look  forward 
to  that  future  differently  according  as  some 
part  of  it  will  stem  from  choices  freely  made,  or 
according  as  all  of  it  is  inexorably  determined 
by  causes  beyond  their  control. 

The  basic  alternatives  of  fate  and  freedom, 
of  necessity  and  contingency,  God’s  will  and 
man’s  choice,  are  considered  in  the  chapters  on 
Chance,  Fate,  and  Necessity  and  Con¬ 
tingency.  Sometimes  the  issue  is  resolved  in 
the  same  way  for  the  course  of  nature  and  the 
course  of  history:  necessity  reigns  in  both;  as 
there  is  contingency  in  the  events  of  nature,  so 
there  is  freedom  in  the  acts  of  history.  Some¬ 
times  the  processes  of  nature  and  history  are 
distinguished:  the  motions  of  matter  are  gov¬ 
erned  by  inviolable  laws;  whereas  the  motions 
of  men  are  directed  by  laws  which  leave  them 
free  to  work  out  a  destiny  which  is  determined 
by,  rather  than  determines,  the  human  spirit. 

Those  who  do  not  deny  freedom  entirely  in 
the  realm  of  history  seldom  give  it  unlimited 
scope.  What  men  can  do  is  conditioned  from 
below  by  the  operation  of  material  forces,  and 

Iirom  above  by  what  Hegel  calls  “God’s  pur¬ 
pose  with  the  world.”  The  vast  “arras-web  of 
Universal  History”  is  woven  by  the  interaction 
between  God’s  will  (the  Absolute  Idea)  and 
human  purposes  or  interests,  which  Hegel  calls 
“the  complex  of  human  passions.” 

History  for  him  is  “the  union  of  Freedom 
and  Necessity,”  where  “the  latent  abstract 
process  of  Spirit  is  regarded  as  Necessity,  while 
that  which  exhibits  itself  in  the  conscious  will 
of  men,  as  their  interest,  belongs  to  the  domain 
of  freedom.”  But  this  freedom  which  coheres 


HISTORY  717 

with  necessity  seems  to  belong  more  to  the 
human  race  as  a  whole  than  to  individual  men. 
The  individual  man  is  tossed  aside  if  he  tries 
to  obstruct  the  path  of  history.  1 1c  is  powerless 
to  change  its  course. 

Not  even  great  men  can  make  or  determine 
history.  They  arc  great  only  because,  sensing 
the  next  phase  of  the  historical  process,  they 
identify  themselves  with  the  wave  of  the  future 
and  conform  their  purposes  to  the  march  of 
events— the  dialectical  development  of  the  Ab¬ 
solute  Idea.  A  few  men  thus  become  “world- 
historical  individuals”  because  their  own  “par¬ 
ticular  aims  involve  those  large  issues  which 
are  the  will  of  the  World -Spirit.”  They  have 
“an  insight  into  the  requirements  of  the  time 
— what  was  ripe  for  development  .  .  .  the  very 
Truth  for  their  age,  for  their  world;  the  species 
next  in  order,  so  to  speak,  and  which  was  al¬ 
ready  formed  in  the  womb  of  time.” 

Like  Hegel  and  unlike  the  ancient  historians, 
Tolstoy  also  regards  the  leadership  of  great 
men  as  illusory.  To  believe  in  the  efficacy  of 
heroes  or  great  men,  he  thinks,  is  to  commit  the 
fallacy  of  the  man  “who,  watching  the  move¬ 
ments  of  a  herd  of  cattle  and  paying  no  atten¬ 
tion  to  the  varying  quality  of  the  pasturage  in 
different  parts  of  the  field,  or  to  the  driving 
of  the  herdsman,  attributes  the  direction  the 
herd  takes  to  the  animal  which  happens  to  be 
at  its  head.” 

Great  men  are  only  celebrated  puppets, 
pushed  ahead  on  the  moving  front  of  history. 
The  motion  of  history  derives  its  force  and 
direction  from  the  individual  acts  of  the  in¬ 
numerable  nameless  men  who  comprise  the 
human  mass.  The  act  of  the  individual  counts 
little.  The  mass  motion  is  a  complex  resultant 
of  slight  impulses  tending  in  many  directions. 
But  however  slight  the  impulse  each  man  gives, 
his  contribution  to  history  is  a  free  act,  con¬ 
ditioned  only  by  the  circumstances  under 
which  he  makes  a  choice  and  by  the  divine 
providence  which  grants  him  the  freedom  to 
choose.  Like  “every  human  action,”  history, 
according  to  Tolstoy,  thus  “appears  to  us  as  a 
certain  combination  of  freedom  and  inevita¬ 
bility.” 

Different  from  speculations  on  a  grand  scale 
concerning  the  whole  historical  process  is  that 


718 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


type  of  philosophizing  about  history  which 
considers  its  place  in  education — the  light  it 
affords  to  the  mind,  and  the  lessons  it  teaches 
for  the  guidance  of  conduct. 

Montaigne,  for  example,  makes  the  reading 
of  history  and  biography  the  window  through 
which  a  man  looks  out  upon  the  world.  “This 
great  world,”  he  writes,  “is  the  mirror  wherein 
we  are  to  behold  ourselves,  to  be  able  to  know 
ourselves  as  we  ought  to  do  in  the  true  bias.” 
Only  against  the  large  scene  history  reveals 
and  amidst  the  variety  of  human  nature  it 
exhibits  can  a  man  truly  know  himself  and  his 
own  time.  In  a  similar  vein,  Gibbon  declares 
that  “the  experience  of  history  exalts  and  en¬ 
larges  the  horizon  of  our  intellectual  view.” 
Hegel,  on  the  other  hand,  insists  that  “what  ex¬ 
perience  and  history  teach  is  that  peoples  and 
governments  never  have  learned  anything  from 
history,  or  acted  on  principles  deduced  from  it. 


On  the  practical  side,  political  writers  like 
Machiavelli,  Montesquieu,  and  the  Federalists 
use  history  to  exemplify  or  confirm  their  gen¬ 
eralizations.  They  agree  with  Thucydides  that 
“an  exact  knowledge  of  the  past  is  an  aid  to  the 
interpretation  of  the  future,  which  in  the 
course  of  human  things  must  resemble  if  it  does 
not  reflect  it.”  Most  men,  adds  Tacitus,  “learn 
wisdom  from  the  fortunes  of  others.” 

It  is  on  these  grounds  that  the  great  books 
of  history  belong  with  treatises  on  morals  and 
politics  and  in  the  company  of  philosophical 
and  theological  speculations  concerning  the 
nature  and  destiny  of  man.  Liberal  education 
needs  the  particular  as  well  as  the  universal, 
and  these  are  combined  in  the  great  historical 
narratives.  Apart  from  their  utility,  they  have 
the  originality  of  conception,  the  poetic  qual¬ 
ity,  the  imaginative  scope  which  rank  them 
with  the  great  creations  of  the  human  mind. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  History  as  knowledge  and  as  literature:  its  kinds  and  divisions;  its  distinction  from 

poetry,  myth,  philosophy,  and  science  719 

2.  The  light  and  lesson  of  history :  its  role  in  the  education  of  the  mind  and  in  the  guidance 

of  human  conduct  720 

3.  The  writing  of  history:  research  and  narration 

3<2.  The  determination  and  choice  of  fact:  the  classification  of  historical  data  721 

3 b.  The  explanation  or  interpretation  of  historic  fact:  the  historian’s  treatment  of 
causes 

4.  The  philosophy  of  history  722 

4 a.  Theories  of  causation  in  the  historical  process 

(1)  The  alternatives  of  fate  or  freedom,  necessity  or  chance 

(2)  Material  forces  in  history:  economic,  physical,  and  geographic  factors  723 

(3)  World  history  as  the  development  of  Spirit:  the  stages  of  the  dialectic  of 

history 

(4)  The  role  of  the  individual  in  history:  the  great  man,  hero,  or  leader 
4 b.  The  laws  and  patterns  of  historical  change:  cycles,  progress,  evolution 

4 c.  The  spirit  of  the  time  as  conditioning  the  politics  and  culture  of  a  period  724 

5.  The  theology  of  history 

5  a.  The  relation  of  the  gods  or  God  to  human  history:  the  dispensations  of  providence 
5 b.  The  city  of  God  and  the  city  of  man;  church  and  state  72 3 4 55 


Chapter  34:  HISTORY 


719 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283)  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  Jam  es  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  t  he  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  163. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  cii, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g .,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —  (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


X.  History  as  knowledge  and  as  literature:  its 
kinds  and  divisions;  its  distinction  from 
poetry,  myth,  philosophy,  and  science 

6  Herodotus  :  History,  bk  ii,  71a-73b  esp  72a-b; 
75b;  bk  iv,  127a-b;  bk  vii,  242c-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  354a-d 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  112b  /  Republic ,  bk  ii,  323  d- 
324a  /  Timaeus,  447a  /  Critias ,  479d  /  Laws , 
bk  hi  663d-677a 

9  Aristotle:  Poetics,  ch  9  [1 45 1*36— b32]  686a-c; 
ch  23  695a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus ,  la-c  /  Romulus  15a-30a,c 
passim,  esp  15a-18d  /  Themistocles ,  102a, c 
/  Pericles ,  128d-129a  /  Timoleon ,  195a-b  / 
Cimon ,  390b-d  /  Alexander ,  540b,d-541a  / 
Dion,  794c-795a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  60d;  bk  iv,  71d-72b; 
bk  xi,  107c;  bk  xiii,  133b  /  Histories,  bk  ii, 
228a-b 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  27- 
28  650a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  67b-c;  71c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  24a-c;  41c-42a;  199a- 
200d;  305d-306a;  347c-350d;  457a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  iii,  sc  1  [72- 
88]  123c-d  /  Henry  V,  prologue  532 b,d 


28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  473b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  213b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  32d-39a  esp 
32d-33a,  38c-39a  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, 
aph  87,  123b 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  iii,  3b-d  /  Discourse,  part 
1,  43a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  628  287a  /  Vacuum,  355a- 
356a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xvi, 
sect  7-1 1  368d-370a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
65,  479b-c;  sect  xii,  div  132,  509c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  19a-20a;  49b-50c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  88a-d;  97c-98d 
passim;  211a;  398b;  471c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  337c 

44  Boswell  '.Johnson,  203a-b;  258d-259a:353b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  3,  10a- 
11c;  part  iii,  par  355,  11 2d  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  153a-158a;  182d-183d;  193d- 
194a;  part  i,  230c-231b;  248c;  part  iii,  285d- 
286a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  430d-431a; 
bk  xi,  469a-470c;  bk  xiii,  563a-b;  epilogue 
ii  675a-696d  passim 

53  James:  Psychology ,  863b  [fn  2] 


720 


2  to  3 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


2.  The  light  and  lesson  of  history:  its  role  in  the 
education  of  the  mind  and  in  the  guid¬ 
ance  of  human  conduct 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy ,  6:20-25;  7:6- 
11,17-19;  8;  16:1-12;  29  /  Joshua ,  24:1-27— 
{D)  Jo  sue,  24:1-27  /  7  Samuel ,  12:6-25— 
(D)  I  Kings,  12:6-25  /  Ezra,  4:7-23— (D) 
7  Esdras,  4:7-23  /  Nehemiah ,  9— (D)  7/  Esdras , 
9  /  Psalms ,  44:1-3;  78;  81;  105-106;  136  esp 
136:10-24 — (D)  Psalms,  43:1-4;  77;  80;  104- 
105;  135  esp  135:10-24  /  Ecclesiastes,  1:11; 
2:16  /  Isaiah,  46:8-11  — (7))  Isaias,  46:8-11 
/  Jei'emiah,  2:1-9— (7))  Jeremias,  2:1-9  / 
Ezekiel,  20:1-44 — (7))  Ezechiel,  20:1-44 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  2:2-4 — (7)) 
OT,  o/*  Wisdom,  2:2-4 

New  Testament:  77  2  / 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ix  [485-605]  62a-63b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  2b;  bk  v,  175b; 
bk  viii,  273b  c;  bk  ix,  309d-310a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i, 
354b-c;  379c-d 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  452b  /  Statesman,  587d  / 
Philebus,  612a  /  Laws,  bk  iii  663d-677a  esp 
667a-b;  bk  xii,  788a 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  34 
[i83bi6-i84b8]  253a-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i, 
ch  3-10  501c-511d  esp  ch  3  [983^1—7]  501cd, 
ch  10  511c-d;  bk  11,  ch  1  [993a3o-bi9]  511b, d- 
512a;  bk  iii  513b,d-522a,c  passim,  esp  ch  1 
[995a23-b4)  513b, d;  bk  xii,  ch  i[io69a25~29] 
598b;  ch  8  [io74bi-i4]  604d-605a/  Soul,  bk  i 
631a-641d  passim,  esp  ch  2  [403^0-23]  633a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  9  [1  i8ibi2— 24] 
436c  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  10  [i329a40-b35] 
533d-534b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  4  [1360*30-37] 
600d;  bk  11,  ch  20  [i393a25~b3]  641a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vi,  sect 46  278c-d; 
bk  vii,  sect  1  279b;  sect  49  282d;  bk  ix, 
sect  28  293d-294a;  bk  x,  sect  27  299d; 
bk  xi,  sect  26  306b 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  121a-122b  /  Timoleon, 
195a-b;  201b-202c  /  Nicias ,  423a-c  j  Alexan¬ 
der,  540b,d-541a  /  Cato  the  Younger,  634a-c  / 
Demetrius ,  726a-d 

15  Tacitus \  Annals,  BKin,58b-d;60d;BKiv,71d- 
72b  /  Histories,  bk  i,  189d-190a;  bk  iii,  255b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  1  9a;  bk  x, 
par  3-6  72a-73a;  bk  xi,  par  1  89b-c  /  City  of 
God ,  bk  1,  ch  8-9  133a-135a;  ek  iv,  ch  33-34 
206c'207a,c;  bk  v,  ch  25  228b-c;  bk  xi,  ch  18 
331d-332a;  bk  xv,  ch  21  415b  416a;  bk  xvii 
449a-472a,c  esp  ch  3  450c-451c;  bk  xxii,  ch 
30,  618a-b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  28 
650a-d;  ch  39  654c-655b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  97, 
a  1,  ans  236a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  vi  [31-111] 
113d-114d;  xi  [43-139]  122c-123c;  xii  [22-126] 
123d-125a;  xv  [88]-xvi  [154]  129b-132a;  xvii 
[103  142]  133b-c 


22  Chaucer:  Mon1(s  Tale  434a-448b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  vi,  8c-d;  ch  xiv- 
xv,  22a-b;  ch  xviii  25a-26a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  53c-54a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
58a-59d 

25  Montaigne  :  Essays,  24a-c ;  41  b-42a ;  68b-69d ; 
198c-200d;  455d-456b 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  iii,  sc  i 
[45-96]  483 b-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  23c-d;  32c- 
33a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  4c-6c;  32d- 
34b;  85a-c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  98 
126d-127b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43a-b 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  384b-386b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  619-641  284b-290a  /  Vac¬ 
uum,  355a-358b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  viii,  sect  ioo- 
112  47c-51b  passim,  esp  sect  103  48b-c  / 
Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xvi,  sect  ii 
369d-370a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
65,  479b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  420a-c;  bk 
iv,  428a-435a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  334c-343d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  33c;  211a;  632a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  13d;  194a-d;  311a- 
312b;  326d-328a,c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-8d;  248d-250a,c  / 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  266d  [fn  2] 
/  Practical  Reason ,  357c-d 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  30b:  number  5, 
37b-c;  number  6,  39a;  number  17,  70a-d; 
number  18-20  71a-78b;  number  30,  102b; 
number  70,  211b-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  456a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  xiia-c;  3c-4c;  116b;  258d- 
259a;  314c-315b;  347c-d;  458d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  155b- 
156a;  157b-c;  168d-169d;  174d-175d;  178a- 
184b;  part  1,  230c-231b;  part  iv,  368d-369a,c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [570-585]  16a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  7b-d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  415a- 
425b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  x, 

291b-d 

3.  The  writing  of  history:  research  and  narra¬ 
tion 

Apocrypha:  77  Maccabees,  2:22-31 — ( D )  OT, 
77  Machabees,  2  .'23-32 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i  la-48a,c  passim,  esp 
la,c,  2b,  4d-5a,  23a-b;  bk  ii,  68b-d;  75b;  bk 
vii,  242c-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  349a- 
355a  passim;  373c;  bk  v,  489a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  iii,  ch  9  [r409a23~34] 
660d;  ch  16  670c-672a 


3a  to  3b  Chapter  34: 

14  Plutarch:  Themi stocks ,  102a, c  /  Pericles , 
128d  129a  /  hmoleon,  195a-b  /  Cimon , 
390b  d  /  Nicias,  423a-c  /  Demosthenes , 
691b,d-692b  /  D/o;;,  794c-795a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  la  b;  bk  ii,  44d  45a; 
bk  in,  48c:  49c-d;  60d  61a;  bk  iv,  66b  d;  71d 
72b;  bk  xii,  118d;  bk  xvi,  179d  /  Histories , 
bk  i,  189a-b;  190a;  bk  iii,  255b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  67b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  24a-c;  41b  42a;  68b- 
69a;  198c  200d;  347c-350d;  455d  457b 

29  Cervantes:  Do/i  Quixote ,  part  i,  23c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  32d-38c  esp 
34b  35a  /  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  97-98 
126c  127b;  aph  101-103  127c-128a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  622-628  286a-287a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  209b  210b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  19a-20a;  49a-50c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  lb;  87a;  96c-d; 
213a-214b;  234b;  240b-c;  648d-649c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  112a-b;  161a-163d; 
186a-b;  255b-c;  598a, c;  635d  [n  57];  639a  d 
[n  1];  755d-756a  [n  41];  756d-757a  [n  61];  790d- 
791a, c  [n  98] 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  xia-xiiia;  la-4c;  5c-d; 
99a;  120c;  217a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  153a- 
158a;  181b-182c;  part  i,  230c-231b;  part  iii, 
285d-286a 

48  Melville:  D/c^,  195a-201a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  iii,  134a-c;  bk 
ix,  366d-367b;  bk  x,  405a-406c 

3 a.  The  determination  and  choice  of  fact:  the 
classification  of  historical  data 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  1,  2b;  17c;  23a-b;  bk 
ii,  49a-56b  passim;  59a;  60a;  60c-61b;  69b-d; 
71a-73b;  76a-b;  76d;  77b-c;  80b-c;  bk  iii, 
89c-d;  97d-98a;  99b-c;  114a-b;  115b-d;  bk  iv, 
127a-b;  142c-d;  150b-151c;  158a-b;  bk  v, 
161b;  168b-c;  bk  vii,  221b-c;  242c-d;  254c-d; 
bk  viii,  261b-c;  281d-282b;  bk  ix,  305d; 
306b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  349a- 
355a;  373c;  bk  ii,  391c-d;  399c;  bk  iii,  439b; 
442c-443a;  bk  v,  487d;  500d-501a;  bk  vi, 
523c-524d  passim 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus  la-15a,c  passim,  esp  la-c 
/  Romulus  15a-30a,c  passim,  esp  15a-18d  / 
Lycurgus ,  32a-b  /  Numa  Pompilius ,  49a-b  / 
Themistocles ,  102a, c  /  Camillas,  llla-b;  116a- 
117a  passim  /  Pericles,  128d-129a  /  Coriolanus , 
191d-192b  /  Aristides ,  262b,d-263c  /  Cimon, 
390b-d  /  Nicias ,  423a-c  /  Pompey,  502d  / 
Alexander,  540b,d-541a  /  Cato  the  Younger, 
634a-c  /  Demosthenes,  691b,d-692b;  698b- 
699a  /  Galba,  859d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  48c;  49c;  60d-61a; 
bk  iv,  66b-d;  7ld-72b;  bk  vi,  87d;  bk  xi, 
107c;  bk  xiii,  133b;  bk  xiv,  157c;  bk  xvi, 
179d  /  Histories,  bk  i,  189a-b;  190a-b:,  bk  ii, 
228a-b;  bk  iii,  255b-c 


HISTORY  721 

18  \ugi  stink:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  1  9a;  i:k 
x,  par  5  72a  c  /  City  of  Cod ,  bk  x,  cm  i  ; 
307c  308a;  bk  xv,  01 1  15  397b, d  400c;  me 
xvn,  cii  1  2  449a  450c;  bk  win,  (.11 
495a  b;  bk  xxii,  cii  ^o,  618c  d 
23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  pari  i,  67b  c 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  41b  42a;  68b  69a;  81a  c; 
199a  c;  305b  306a;  347c-350d;  457a  b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  13d  14b; 
32d  39c  esp  32d-33d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  64a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  626  286b;  628  287a;  786-787 
325b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  209b  210b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  19a  20a;  49b  50c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  428a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  88a-d;  96b, d;  97c- 
98d  passim;  103c;  201b-204d  passim,  esp 
203a  b;  212b  214b  esp  729b-c  [n  31],  213a  d; 
232b  234a,c  esp  232c,  736d  [n  182];  295c- 
296c;  354c-d;  413b  d;  428b-c;  471c-d;  648d 
649b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  311a-312b;  337c; 
501c-503a;  639a-d  [n  1];  660d  [11  149];  710a-b 
[n  1  ] ;  756d  [n  60] 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  lb-c;  2d-4b;  5c- d;  27c-d; 
119a;  139a;  177d-178a;210d;254b;  286b;  311d 
312a;  347c-d;  359d-360a;  425a;  458d;  575b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  I53a- 
154c;  155b;  180c-182c;  196d-199d  esp  199d; 
203b-206a,c;  part  i,  209b-210c;  230c-231b; 
247d-248a;  pajit  iv,  319a-b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  86d  [fn  4] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xiii,  582b-d; 
584a-b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  450d-451a 

3 b.  The  explanation  or  interpretation  of  his¬ 
toric  fact:  the  historian’s  treatment  of 
causes 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  5la-54b;  bk  iii, 
96c;  97d-98a;  bk  vi,  201b-c;  204b-c;  bk  vii, 
221a-b;  226c;  237a-b;  238d-239c;  250b-d;  bk 
viii,  265b;  bk  ix,  289c;  292a;  309d-310a 
6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  349a- 
355c;  371  b-c;  384b-386d  passim;  bk  v, 
489a-b;  bk  viii,  586b-d 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  17b-18d  /  Camillus, 
107b-d;  109c-110a  /  Coriolanus,  191d-192b  / 
Timoleon,  201c-d  /  Flamininus,  307d-308a  / 
Cimon,  390b-d  /  Demosthenes,  698a-699a  / 
Dion,  794d-795a  /  Marcus  Brutus,  815b-c; 
822a-b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  58b-d;  bk  vi,  91b-d; 
bk  xvi,  179d  /  Histories,  bk  i,  189b-190b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  1,  pref  129a-d; 
ch  36  149c  d;  bk  v,  ch  1  207d-208c;  cii  11-26 
216c-230a,c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  200b 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  34c;  37a 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  viii,  sect  i do- 
112  47c-51b 


722 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4  to  4a(l) 


(3.  The  writing  of  history:  research  and  narra¬ 
tion,  3  b.  The  explanation  or  interpreta¬ 
tion  of  historic  fact:  the  historian’s  treat- 
me7it  of  causes .) 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  428a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  ii,  148d-149a; 
bk  v,  305b-309a,c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  179a-d;  190a-d; 
200a-201b;  207b;  211a-c;  232b-233c;  294a- 
296d;  409b-410a;  456c-457a,c;  630b,d-634a,c 
esp  631a-632a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  244b-245a;  386a-b; 
451c-453a,c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  166c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  3, 10a- 
11b;  part  11,  par  124  44b-d  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  154c-158a;  165a-166d;  182d- 
184b;  part  iv,  368d-369a,c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Co?nmunist  Manifesto ,  430b- 
433d  passim 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  x,  389d-390a;  405a-b;  430b-432c;  447c- 
448c;  bk  xi,  469a-470c;  bk  xiii,  563a-564a; 
582b-d;  bk  xiv,  588a-589a;  610d-611c;  bk 
xv,  619c-620a;  epilogue  ii  675a-696d 

4.  The  philosophy  of  history 

4a.  Theories  of  causation  in  the  historical 
process 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  v  502a-519d  passim 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [449-482] 
6c-7a;  bk  ii  [1105-1174]  29a-30a,c;  bk  v  [65- 
109]  62a-c;  [170-194]  63b-c;  [772-1457]  71a- 
80a,  c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 
270b;  bk  ix,  sect  28  293d-294a 
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  i,  pref  129a-d; 
ch  36  149c-d;  bk  11,  ch  2-3  150c-151c;  bk  iv, 
ch  33  206c-d;  bk  v,  ch  i  207d-208c;  ch  11-26 
216c-230a,c;  bk  xi,  ch  18  331d-332a;  bk  xii, 
ch  21  357a-b;  bk  xiv,  ch  28-BK  xv,  ch  i 
397a-398c;  bk  xv,  ch  21-22  415b-416c;  bk 
xviii,  ch  1-2  472b,d-473d 
21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [61-96] 
lOb-c;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-114]  77b-78a 
23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xiv,  21b 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  348a, c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  456d-457a,c; 
63Gb,d-634a,c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  451c-453a,c 
43  Federalist:  number  3,  33c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  327b,d-332d 
passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  115 
42b-c;  part  hi,  par  340-360  110b-114a,c  esp 
par  342  llOc-d,  par  347  lllb-c;  additions, 
153  141  d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d- 
170b;  190b-201a,c  esp  190b-d,  194b-196a; 
part  i,  258b-d;  part  ii,  262c-263d;  274a- 
275a 


49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  323a-328d  ' 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  6d-7d;  8a-lld  passim;  35b-c; 
36c-d  [fn  2];  181d  [fn  3];  377c-378d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  416c- 
417a, c;  419b,d-425b  passim;  428b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b; 
bk  xi,  469a-472b;  bk  xiii,  563a-575a;  bk  xiv, 
588a-590c;  609d-613d;  bk  xv,  618b-621b; 
epilogue  1,  645a-650c;  epilogue  ii  675a- 
696d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xi, 
345a-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  361b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  781a- 
789b  esp  787a-788d;  791b-d;  799a-802a,c  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures ,  834b-c;  882  b- 
884c 

4^(1)  The  alternatives  of  fate  or  freedom,  ne¬ 
cessity  or  chance 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  21d-22a;  bk  ix, 
291  b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  BKiv,462a-b 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iv,  679a-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 
270b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [254-296]  llOa-llla 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  18d;  20b-c  /  Camillus, 
109c-110a  /  Coriolanus ,  188d-192b  /  Timoleon 
195a-213d  esp  201a-203b  /  Philopoemen, 
300b-c  /  Demosthenes,  698b-699a  /  Marcus 
Brutus,  814d-815c;  822a-b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  49c;  bk  iv,  69a-b; 
bk  vi,  91b-d  /  Histories,  bk  i,  194b;  bk  ii, 
232d-233a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  i  207d- 
208c;  ch  11-26  216c-230a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [61-96] 
lOb-c;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-129]  77b-78a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  vi,  8d-9b;  ch  xxv 
35a-36b 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar ,  act  iv,  sc  iii 
[215-224]  590d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  609 b-c;  630b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  590a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  340 
llOb-c;  par  342-345  llOc-lllb;  par  348  llld  / 
Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  153a-190b  esp 
156d-158a,  158c-160b,  161d-162a,  166b-168b, 
170d-172b,  178a-179c;  203a-206a,c;  part  i, 
258b-d;  part  ii,  283d-284a,c;  part  iii, 
285a-b;  300a-301c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [10,849-872]  264a-b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  6d;  7b-c;  lOb-llb;  174a-c; 

378b-d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  421d- 
422c  passim 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  143a-c;  bk 
ix,  342a-344b;  bk  x,  389a-391c;  bk  xiii, 
563a-b;  bk  xv,  618b-621b;  626d-630a;  epi¬ 
logue  1,  645a-650c;  epilogue  ii  675a- 
696d 


4a(2)  to  4 b 


Chapter  34:  HISTORY 


723 


54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  801  d- 
802a, c 

4a(2)  Material  forces  in  history:  economic, 
physical,  and  geographic  factors 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  50a-56c  esp  51b  d; 
bk  iii,  114b-c;  bk  vii,  237b-c;  bk  ix,  314a, c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  i, 
349b-d;  350d;  352a  d;  372c-d 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  444d-445b  /  Statesman , 
587b-589c  /  Laws ,  bk  iii,  663d-666d;  bk  iv, 
677a-678c 

38  Montesquieu:  S/wt/  of  Laws,  bk  i,  3c-d:  bk 
viii,  56b-57c;  bk  xiv  102b,d-108d;  bk  xvii- 
xviii,  122a-129c;  bk  xxi  153a-173d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  i,  3a-6d:  8b 
10b;  34a-b;  71a-d;  bk  iii,  173b-d;  177c-l79a; 
bk  iv,  189c-191a;  243b,d-246d;  bk  v,  305b 
309a, c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  89b-d;  90c-d;  236c- 
237a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  220b-225a  passim, 
csp  224b;  338b-c;  355c-d;  427b-428a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  327b,d-332d 
passim,  csp  331b-332d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  hi,  par 
34 6  111b  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro, 
190b-201a,c  esp  190b-d,  194a-195c,  199d- 
201a, c;  203a-b;  part  i,  236d-237a;  243d- 
244c;  248c-d;  part  ii,  259d-260a;  part  iii, 
286b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  323a-328c  passim, 
esp  323a-b 

50  Marx:  Capital  6d-7d;  lOb-lld;  25c-d;  35b- 
36c;  86c;  181d  [fn  3];  187a-c;  239b-241a;  377c- 
378d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto  415a- 
434d  esp  416c-d,  419b, d,  421d-422a,  427a-b, 
428b-d 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  834c;  882c- 
883  b;  884c 

4a(3)  World  history  as  the  development  of 
Spirit:  the  stages  of  the  dialectic  of  his¬ 
tory 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  279, 
94b-d;  par  340-360  ll0b-114a,c;  additions, 
153  141d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156c- 
162a;  163a-165b;  166b-c;  169d-17lb;  176b-c; 
177d-190b;  203a-206a,c;  part  iv,  368d-369a,c 

4a(4)  The  role  of  the  individual  in  history:  the 
great  man,  hero,  or  leader 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1 253*29-31] 
446d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [756-892]  231a-235a; 
bk  vm  [608-731]  275a-278b 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus  la-15a,c  esp  9a-d  /  Romu¬ 
lus  15a-30a,c  /  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  47a-48c 
/  Numa  Pompilius  49a-61d  esp  59c-60b  / 
Solon  64b,d-77a,c  /  Pericles  121a-141a,c  esp 
129c-130b,  140c-141a,c  /  Timoleon  195a-213d 


esp  212c  213d  /  Flamininus,  307d  308a  / 
Lysander,  358b  d  /  Pompey  499a  538a, c  / 
Caesar  577a  604d  /  Antony  748a  779d  csp 
750a  b  /  Marcus  Brutus  802b, d  824a, c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  44d  45a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  vi  8c  10a;  ch  xx, 
30d;  cn  xxv-xxvi,  35c  37d 

24  Rabelais:  Garpantua  and  Pantavrucl,  bk  iv, 
267c-270b 

32  Milton:  Lord  Gen.  Cromwell  69a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  x,  65d 
68a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  362a  b  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  373c  374a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  400c- 
402a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  633d  634a, c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  220b;  251d-253a,c; 
327d  328a, c;  492a 

43  Federalist:  number  72,  217d-218a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  332a  c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  93 
36a  b;  par  102  39a  b:  part  ii,  par  124  44b  d; 
part  iii,  par  167  60b;  par  318  105b;  par  344 
111a;  par  348  llld;  par  350  112a;  additions, 
58  125c;  186  149b  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
intro,  162a-170b;  184b  d;  part  i,  241d-242b; 
part  ii,  259b-c;  273a;  275d-276a;  280b-281a; 
281d-282d;  283c-d;  part  iii,  298a-b:  300a- 
301c;  part  iv,  360b  c;  361d-362a;  366b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [570-580]  16a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  107a  b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace  passim,  esp  bk  i, 
8d-10d,  bk  iii,  143a-c,  162b-164a,c,  bk  ix, 
342a-344b,  bk  x,  389a-391c,  405a-b,  430b- 
432c,  447c-448c,  465c-467a,  bk  xi,  469a-470c, 
497c-499c,  507a,  bk  xiii,  563a-575a,  bk  xiv, 
610d-611c,  bk  xv,  619c-621b,  epilogue  i, 
645a-650c,  epilogue  ii  675a-696d  passim 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  800a- b 
/  New  Introductory  Lectures,  834 b-c 

4b,  The  laws  and  patterns  of  historical  change: 
cycles,  progress,  evolution 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  2b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  349a- 
352a 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  403a-d  /  Timaeus , 
444d-445b  /  Statesman,  587b-589c  /  Laws, 
bk  iii,  663d-666d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  14  [223b24~3o] 
303c- d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  8  [io74bi  1-13] 
605a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [1105- 
1174]  29a-30a,c;  bk  v  [65-109]  62a-c;  [170- 
194]  63b-c;  [772-1457]  71a-80a,c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  14  258d; 
bk  vi,  sect  46  278c-d;  bk  vii,  sect  i  279b; 
sect  49  282d;  bk  ix,  sect  28  293d-294a;  bk 
x,  sect  27  299d 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues,  iv  14a-15b  /  Aeneid,  bk  viii 
[306-336]  267b-268a 

14  Plutarch:  Sulla,  372a-c 


4 c  to  5a 


724  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  philosophy  of  history.  Ah.  The  laws  ajid 
patterns  of  historical  change:  cycles ,  prog¬ 
ress,  evolution.) 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  51b-52b;  58b-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  x,  ch  14 
307c-308a;  bk  xi,  ch  18  331d-332a;  bk 
xv-xviii  397b,d-507a,c;  bk  xxii,  ch  30, 
618c-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  97, 
a  1,  ans  236a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [67-96] 
lOb-c;  xiv  [94-120]  20c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  439c-440b;  443a-b; 

465a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  iii,  sc  i 
[45-91]  483b-c  /  Julius  Caesar ,  act  iv,  sc  iii 
[218-224]  590d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  79a-80a;  part  iii, 
121a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  544d  545d;  632a- 
634a, c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  62c-d;  349a 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  584d-587a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  300d-301c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par 
340  llOb-c;  par  344  111a;  par  347  lllb-c;  par 
354-360  112c'114a,c  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
intro,  161a-c;  174d-175c;  178a-l79c;  187a-c; 
203b-206a,c;  part  i,  235d-236a;  258b-d; 
part  11,  259c-d;  282d-284a,c;  part  iii, 
286c-287a;  308a-b;  part  iv,  315b-317d;  342d- 
343a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  323a;  327a-330a,c 
esp  327b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  lOb-lld;  377c-378d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  416c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xi,  469a-472b; 
epilogue  1,  645a-650c;  epilogue  ii  675a- 
696d 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  65  ld- 
65 2d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  781a- 
789b  esp  785c;  799a-802a,c  /  Introductory 
Lectures ,  834c;  882c-883a;  883c 

4c.  The  spirit  of  the  time  as  conditioning  the 
politics  and  culture  of  a  period 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  354  234b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  362a-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  pref,  6c-7a; 
intro,  par  3  10a-12c;  part  iii,  par  218  72c-d 
/  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  I73a-175c; 
177c-178a;  182d-183a;  185a-186d;  187d-189a; 
part  1,  211a-219d  esp  219c-d;  219d-235c  esp 
220b-221a,  222a-223a,  233b-235c;  247b-257c; 
part  11,  259d-260c;  263d-281b;  part  iii,  286c- 
298a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [570-580]  16a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  i,  645a- 
646c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  xi, 
345a-c 


5.  The  theology  of  history 

5 a.  The  relation  of  the  gods  or  God  to 
human  history:  the  dispensations  of 
providence 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  3;  6-9  passim;  16-17; 
21:1-24;  22:1-18  esp  22:15-18;  28:11-16; 
35:9_I3i  45:i_I35  46:i~4  /  Exodus ,  3-20 
passim;  23:20-33  /  Deuteronomy ,  4:1-40; 
7-1 1  passim;  29  /  Joshua ,  6:1-20;  10; 

24:1-25— (D)  Josue,  6:1-20;  10;  24:1-25  / 
/  Samuel ,  12:6-25 —(D)  /  ^z/7gj,  12:6-25  / 
Nehemiah ,  9:1-10:29 — (D)  II  Esdras ,  9:1- 
10:29/  Psalms ,  44:1-3;  78;  81;  105-106;  136 
esp  136:10-24  —(D)  Psalms ,  43:1-4;  77; 
80;  104-105;  135  esp  135:10-24  /  Jeremiah , 
43:8~i3;  44:3°5  46“ (-D)  Jeremias ,  43:8-13; 
44:30;  46 

Apocrypha:  Judith  passim,  esp  5-6,  8-16— (D) 
OT,  Judith  passim,  esp  5-6,  8-16 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  1-11  /  /  Corinthians , 
1 5 : 1 9—5  5  /  Galatians ,  3-4  /  //  Thessalonians , 
1:7-2:14  /  Hebrews  passim  /  II  Peter ,  3:3-13  / 
Revelation — (D)  Apocalypse 

5  Aeschylus:  Persians  15a-26d  esp  [737-908] 
23a-24d  /  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d  esp  [436— 
502]  44c-45a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  21d-22a;  bk  vi, 
204b-c;  bk  vii,  214d-220b  esp  218b-220b; 
237a-b;  238d-239a;  250b-d;  bk  viii,  273b-c; 
bk  ix,  309d-310a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  44a-45a  /  Symposium , 
157b-159b  /  Republic ,  bk  vi,  378a-b  /  Critias 
478a-485d  /  Statesman ,  587a-589c  / 

bk  iv,  679a  b;  682d-683d;  bk  x,  765d- 
768d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  22  195a- 
201a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a-223d;  ch  3  224b-d;  ch 
7  232c-235a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  ii  258a-b; 
bk  iii,  sect  11  262a-b;  bk  vi,  sect  44 
278b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid  103a-379a 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  18d;  28b-29c  /  Numa 
Pompilius ,  50d-51c  /  Camillus ,  107b-d  / 
Coriolanus ,  188d-192b  /  5zz/D  372a-c  / 
Demosthenes ,  698a-699a  /  Marcus  Brutus , 
822a-b 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  i,  189b-190a 

18  x\ugustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xiii,  par  49-51 
124a-d  /  CzVy  o/ Goz/,  bk  i,  pref  129a-d;  ch 
36  149c-d;  bk  11,  ch  2-3  150c-l51c;  bk  iv,  ch 
33-34  206c-207a,c;  bk  v,  ch  11-26  216c- 
230a, c;  bk  x,  ch  14  307c-308a;  bk  xi,  ch  i 
322b,d-323a;  ch  18  331d-332a;  bk  xii,  ch  21 
357a-b;  bk  xv,  ch  i  397b,d-398c;  ch  21-22 
4l5b-416c;  bk  xvii,  ch  1-3  449a-451c;  bk 
xviii,  ch  1-2  472b,d-473d;  bk  xxii,  ch  30, 
618c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  73, 
a  1,  rep  1  370a-371a 


5£  Chapter  34: 

20  Aquinas:  Sutnma  Thcologica ,  part  i  ii,  q  98, 
a  6  244c-245b;  q  106,  aa  3-4  323a~325c;  part 
ii— 1 1,  Q  iT  a  7  385c-387a;  part  hi,  q  i,  aa  5-6 
707a-709c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  ii  [13-271  2d; 

VII  [61-96]  lOb'C;  PURGATORY,  XVI  [52  129) 

77b-78a;  xxix  97d  99b;  xxxii  [37]-xxxm 
[78]  102d  105a;  paradise,  vi  [i  iii]  113c- 
114d;  viii  [91  14S] 117d  118c;  xi  [28  39]  122b; 
xii  [37-45]  124a;  xvm  [52]-xx  [148]  134a- 
138b  passim;  xxx  [i24]-xxxn  [138]  1 53a  156a 
23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  on  xxvi,  36b  37a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  306ad 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III  105a-148a,c  csp 
act  v,  sc  hi  143b  l47d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  19bd:  35b; 
37c-38a  /  Novum  Organtim ,  bk  i,  aph  93  125d- 
126a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost  93a-333a  esp  bk  i  [i- 
26]  93b-94a,  bk  iii  [80-134]  137al38a,  bk  v 
[224-245]  180ab,  [519-543]  186b  187a,  bk  vi 
[169-188]  200a,  bk  vii  [139-173]  220a-221a, 
bk  x  [  1  —2 1  ]  274b-275a,  [616-640]  288ab,  [720- 
844]  290a-292b,  bk  xi  [334]-bk  xii  [605]  306b- 
332a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [60-67]  340b-341a; 
[300-325]  346a-b;  [373-419]  347b-348b;  [667— 
709]  354a-355a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  611-613  282b-283a;  619-736 
284b-317b  esp  655  292b.  699  302b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  292d-293b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  343 
llOd'll  la  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156c- 
160b;  part  iii,  303c-309d;  part  iv,  321bd; 
368d-369a,c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  85a 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  343b  c; 
epilogue  ii,  675a-677b;  680b-c;  684bd 

5 b.  The  city  of  God  and  the  city  of  man;  church 
and  state 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  2;  46:4;  48:1,8;  72:8- 
11 ;  87:3;  101:8;  127:1  — (D)  Psalms,  2;  45:5; 
47 : 1 ,9 ;  71:8-11;  86:3;  100:8;  126:1  /  Isaiah, 
60:14— (D)  lsaias ,  60:14  /  Daniel,  2:44; 
4:3*34;  7:14 —(D)  Daniel ,  2:44;  3:100;  4:31; 

7:i4 


HISTORY  725 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  6:2  \  —  (D) 
O  F,  Boof^  of  Wisdom,  6:3  5 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:33;  17:2.3  27; 

22:15  22-  (V)  Matthew,  6:33;  !7:2  5  26:22:15- 
22/  Marl(,  12:13-17//.//^,  12:31;  20:21  26/ 
John,  18:33-37  /  'lets,  5:29  /  Romans,  13:1  8 
/  /  Corinthians,  15:24-25  /  Ephesians,  2:19  / 
Colossians,  1:12-13  /  /  Timothy,  2:1-3  /  Titus , 
3:1  /  /  Peter,  2:13-17 

12  Kpictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  cii  5,  143d 
144a;  cii  14,  155a  b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  m,  sl  ct  i  i  262a  b; 
bk  iv,  sect  23  265c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  i,  prei  129a  d; 
cii  35  149b  c;  bk  iv,  ch  33  34  206c  207a, c; 
bk  v,  cii  15-16  220d  221b:  cii  25  228b  c;  bk 
xi,  cii  1  322b,d-323a;  bk  xiv,  cii  28 -bk  xv, 
cii  5  397a  400c;  bk  xv,  cii  21-22  415b  416c; 
bk  xvii,  ch  1  3  449a-451c;  bk  xvm,  cn  1-2 
472b,d-473d;  bk  xix,  ch  5  513d  514b;  ch  ii 
516d-517b;  cii  14  520a  d;  ch  17  522b  523a; 
ch  19-26  523b-529a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, 
ch  10  627b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  ii  [20-30]  2d' 
3a;  xiv  [94-120]  20c-d;  xxxiv  [61-68]  51d- 
52a;  purgatory,  vi  [91-96]  61  d;  >:m  [91-96] 
72d;  xvi  [52-132]  77b  78b;  xxix  97d  99b; 
xxxii  [37J-XXXIII  [78]  102d-105a;  paradise, 
vi  [i-iii]  113c  ll4d;  xvm  (52]-xx  [148] 

134a-138b  passim;  xxx  [124]  xxxii  [138] 
153a-156a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  15la  c;  160a  c; 
part  iii,  177c  l80a;  191b-204a;  240a-c;  part 
iii— iv,  245c-249b;  part  iv,  266ac;  275a- 
278d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [485-551]  329b- 
331a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  435a-439c 
esp  437c-438c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  442c  d:  444a  c  / 
Judgement,  509d-510a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  175c- 
177d;  205d-206a,c;  part  i,  245d-247b:  part 
iii,  308b-c;  311b-d;  part  iv,  315d:  316a-d; 
331b-342a;  348a  369a,c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  28d- 
32c 


726 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  general  consideration  of  history  as  a  kind  of  knowledge,  see  Knowledge  5a(5);  Memory 
and  Imagination  3d;  Time  6e;  and  for  other  comparisons  of  history  with  poetry,  science, 
and  philosophy,  see  Nature  4c;  Philosophy  id;  Poetry  5b;  Science  2b. 

The  educational  significance  of  history  or  of  historical  examples,  see  Education  4d ;  Virtue 
and  Vice 

Other  discussions  of  the  logic  or  method  of  historical  research,  see  Logic  4c;  Reasoning  6d. 

The  theory  of  historical  causation,  see  Cause  8;  and  for  the  factors  of  chance  and  fate,  free¬ 
dom  and  necessity,  see  Chance  6b;  Fate  6;  Liberty  6a;  Necessity  and  Contingency 
5f;  Progress  ia;  Will  7b. 

The  idea  of  progress  in  the  philosophy  of  history,  see  Evolution  7c;  Progress  i-ic;  and  for 
a  cyclical  theory  of  history,  see  Labor  ia;  Man  9a;  Progress  ic. 

Other  discussions  of  a  materialist  philosophy  of  history,  see  Dialectic  2d;  Labor  jc-jc( 3); 
Matter  6;  Opposition  5b;  Progress  ia;  War  and  Peace  2c;  Wealth  ii. 

Other  considerations  of  history  as  a  dialectical  process  in  the  development  of  Spirit,  see 
Dialectic  2d-2d(2);  Liberty  6a;  Mind  iof-iof(2);  Progress  4b. 

The  role  of  the  great  man  or  hero  in  history,  see  Honor  5d. 

The  historian  or  philosopher  of  history  as  a  prophet,  see  Fate  6. 

Other  expressions  of  historical  relativism,  see  Custom  and  Convention  9— 9b;  Relation 
6-6c;  Universal  and  Particular  7-7C. 

Divine  providence  in  relation  to  the  events  of  history  and  to  the  issue  of  necessity  and  free¬ 
dom  in  history,  see  Fate  4;  God  7b;  Liberty  5a~5b;  Will  7b. 

Other  discussions  of  the  city  of  God  and  the  city  of  man,  or  of  the  issue  of  church  and  state, 
see  Religion  4;  State  2g. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booty;  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 


the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings 

I. 

Montesquieu.  Considerations  on  the  Causes  of  the 
Grandeur  and  Decadence  of  the  Romans 
Gibbon.  An  Essay  on  the  Study  of  Literature,  lxxviii- 

LXXXII 

Kant.  The  Idea  of  a  Universal  History  on  a  Cosmo- 
Political  Plan 

Hegel.  The  Philosophy  of  Mind ,  sect  ii,  sub-sect  c 
(cc,  y) 

J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic,  bk  vi,  ch  io-ii 
W.  James.  “Great  Men  and  Their  Environment,” 
in  The  Will  to  Believe 

II. 

Polybius.  Histories ,  vol  ii,  bk  xii  (xvii-xxviii) 
Lucian.  The  Way  to  Write  History 


follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 

Bodin.  Method  for  the  Easy  Comprehension  of 
History 

Bossuet.  Discours  sur  Vhistoire  universelle 
Vico.  The  New  Science 

Voltaire.  “History,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 

- .  The  Philosophy  of  History 

Herder.  Outlines  of  a  Philosophy  of  the  History  of 
Man 

Condorcet.  Outlines  of  an  Historical  View  of  the 
Progress  of  the  Human  Mind 
Schelling.  The  Ages  of  the  World 
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea ,  vol  iii, 
sup,  ch  38 

Guizot.  General  History  of  Civilization  in  Europe , 
lect  1— 11 

Macaulay.  “History,”  in  Miscellaneous  Essays 
F.  Schlegel.  The  Philosophy  of  History 


727 


Chapter  34:  HISTORY 


Michelet.  Introduction  it  /’ histoire  umverselle 
Buchez.  Introduction  d  la  science  de  V histoire 
T.  Carlyle.  On  History 

- .  On  Heroes ,  Hero-Worship  ami  the  Heroic  in 

History 

Emerson.  “History,”  in  Essays ,  i 
Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy ,  bk  vi 
- .  System  of  Positive  Polity ,  vol  iii,  Social  Dy¬ 
namics  " 

Ranke.  LJber  die  Epochen  der  neueren  Geschichte 
Lotze.  Microcosmos ,  bk  vii 
Buckle.  History  of  Civilization  in  England 
Froude.  The  Science  of  History 
Burckhardt.  Force  and  Freedom ,  ch  4-6 
Nietzsche.  The  Use  and  Abuse  of  History 
Renouvier.  Essais  de  critique  gener ale,  iv 
- .  Uchronie 

Bernheim.  Lehrbuch  der  historischen  Methode 
B.  Adams.  The  Law  of  Civilization  and  Decay 
Acton.  Essays  on  Freedom  and  Power ,  ch  i 
Langlois  and  Seignobos.  Introduction  to  the  Study 
of  History 

Bradley.  Collected  Essays ,  vol  i(i) 

Fiske.  Essays:  Historical  and  Literary ,  vol  ii(i) 

H.  Adams.  The  Degradation  of  the  Democratic 
Dogma 

Bury.  The  Science  of  History 


Lamprecht.  What  Is  History? 

T.  Hardy.  The  Dynasts 

Petrie.  Revolutions  of  Civilization 

Pareto.  The  Mind  and  Society ,  vol  iv,  ch  i  \ 

See  Nci  .  hr.  The  Decline  of  the  West 

Penty.  A  Guild  swan  s  Interpretation  of  History 

Bukharin.  Historical  Materialism 

Beard.  The  Economic  Basis  of  Politics 

Shotwei.l.  The  History  of  History 

Berdyayev.  The  Meaning  of  History 

Troeltsch.  Der  Historismus  und  seine  Uberwindung 

Teggart.  ' Theory  of  History 

Dawson.  Progress  and  Religion 

Becker.  Everyman  His  Own  Historian 

Sturzo.  The  Inner  Laws  of  Society,  intro 

Colling  wood.  The  Idea  of  History 

Croce.  History,  Its  Theory  and  Practice 

- .  History  as  the  Story  of  Liberty 

Kent.  Writing  History 

Ortega  y  Gasset.  Toward  a  Philosophy  of  History 
Cassirer.  The  Myth  of  the  State,  part  iii  (15-17) 
M.  R.  Cohen.  The  Meaning  of  Human  History 
Neff.  The  Poetry  of  History 
Schrecker.  W or\  and  History 
A.  J.  Toynbee.  A  Study  of  History 

- .  Civilization  on  Trial,  ch  1-3,  13 

Lowith.  Meaning  in  History 


) 


Chapter  3  5 :  HONOR 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  notions  of  honor  and  fame  are  some¬ 
times  used  as  if  their  meanings  were  in¬ 
terchangeable,  and  sometimes  as  if  each  had  a 
distinct  connotation.  In  the  tradition  of  the 
great  books,  both  usages  will  be  found.  It  is 
seldom  just  a  matter  of  words.  The  authors  who 
see  no  difference  between  a  man’s  honor  and 
his  fame  are  opposed  on  fundamental  issues  of 
morality  to  those  who  think  the  standards  of 
honor  are  independent  of  the  causes  of  fame. 
This  opposition  will  usually  extend  to  psy¬ 
chological  issues  concerning  human  motivation 
and  to  political  issues  concerning  power  and 
justice.  It  entails  contrary  views  of  the  role  of 
rewards  and  punishments  in  the  life  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  and  of  society. 

Praise  and  blame  seem  to  be  common  ele¬ 
ments  in  the  significance  of  fame  and  honor. 
The  meaning  of  honor  seems  to  involve  in 
addition  the  notion  of  worth  or  dignity.  But 
whether  a  man  is  virtuous  or  not,  whether  he 
deserves  the  good  opinion  of  his  fellow  men,  does 
not  seem  to  be  the  indispensable  condition  on 
which  his  fame  or  infamy  rests.  Nor  does  his 
good  or  ill  repute  in  the  community  necessarily 
signify  that  he  is  a  man  of  honor  or  an  honor¬ 
able  man. 

The  connection  and  distinction  of  these 
terms  would  therefore  appear  to  be  the  initial 
problem  of  this  chapter.  Any  solution  of  the 
problem  must  consider  the  relation  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  to  the  community,  and  the  standards 
by  which  the  individual  is  appraised — by  him¬ 
self  and  his  fellow  men.  Honor  and  fame  both 
seem  to  imply  public  approval,  but  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  whether  both  presuppose  the  same 
causes  or  the  same  occasions  for  social  esteem. 

“The  manifestation  of  the  value  we  set  on 
one  another,”  writes  Hobbes,  “is  that  which  is 
commonly  called  Honoring  and  Dishonoring. 
To  value  a  man  at  a  high  rate,  is  to  honor  him; 


at  a  low  rate,  is  to  dishonor  him.  But  high  and 
low,  in  this  case,  is  to  be  understood  by  com¬ 
parison  to  the  rate  that  each  man  setteth  on 
himself.”  Does  Hobbes  mean  that  the  value  a 
man  sets  on  himself  is  the  true  standard  of  his 
worth  ?  Apparently  not.  Let  men,  he  says,  “rate 
themselves  at  the  highest  value  they  can;  yet 
their  true  value  is  no  more  than  it  is  esteemed 
by  others.”  What,  then,  is  the  measure  of  such 
esteem?  “The  value ,  or  worth  of  a  man,”  an¬ 
swers  Hobbes,  “is  as  of  all  other  things,  his  price; 
that  is  to  say,  so  much  as  would  be  given  for  the 
use  of  his  power;  and  therefore,  is  not  absolute 
but  a  thing  dependent  on  the  need  and  judg¬ 
ment  of  another.” 

Here,  then,  honor  is  not  what  a  man  has  in 
himself,  but  what  he  receives  from  others. 
Honor  is  paid  him.  He  may  think  himself  dis¬ 
honored  if  others  do  not  pay  him  the  respect 
which  accords  with  his  self-respect,  but  their 
evaluation  of  him  is  somehow  independent  of 
the  standard  by  which  he  measures  himself.  It 
depends  on  the  relation  in  which  he  stands  to 
them,  in  terms  of  his  power  and  their  need. 
Virtue  and  duty — considerations  of  good  and 
evil,  right  and  wrong — do  not  enter  into  this 
conception  of  honor.  The  distinction  between 
honor  and  fame  tends  to  disappear  when  honor 
reflects  the  opinion  of  the  community,  based  on 
the  political  utility  rather  than  the  moral  worth 
of  a  man. 

There  is  another  conception  of  honor  which 
not  only  separates  it  from  fame,  but  also  makes 
it  independent  of  public  approbation.  This  is 
not  an  unfamiliar  meaning  of  the  term.  The 
man  who  says  “on  my  honor”  or  “my  word  of 
honor”  may  not  be  an  honest  man,  but  if  he 
is,  he  pledges  himself  by  these  expressions  to 
fulfill  a  promise  or  to  live  up  to  certain  ex¬ 
pectations.  He  is  saying  that  he  needs  no  ex- 


728 


Chapter  35 

ternal  check  or  sanction.  A  man  who  had  to  be 
compelled  by  threat  or  force  to  honor  his 
obligations  would  not  be  acting  from  a  sense 
of  honor. 

“It  is  not  for  outward  show  that  the  soul  is 
to  play  its  part,”  Montaigne  writes,  “but  for 
ourselves  within,  where  no  eyes  can  pierce  but 
our  own;  there  she  defends  us  from  the  fear  of 
death,  of  pain,  of  shame  itself;  there  she  arms 
us  against  the  loss  of  our  children,  friends,  and 
fortunes;  and  when  opportunity  presents  itself, 
she  leads  us  on  to  the  hazards  of  war:  ‘Not  for 
any  profit,  but  for  the  honor  of  honesty  it¬ 
self.’  ” 

A  sense  of  honor  thus  seems  to  function  like 
a  sense  of  duty.  Both  reflect  the  light  of  con¬ 
science.  Both  operate  through  an  inner  de¬ 
termination  of  the  will  to  do  what  reason  judges 
to  be  right  in  the  particular  case.  If  there  is  a 
difference  between  them,  it  is  not  so  much  in 
their  effects  as  in  their  causes. 

Duty  usually  involves  obligations  to  others, 
but  a  man’s  sense  of  honor  may  lead  him  to  act 
in  a  certain  way  though  the  good  of  no  other 
is  involved.  To  maintain  his  self-respect  he 
must  respect  a  standard  of  conduct  which  he 
»  has  set  for  himself.  Accordingly,  a  man  can  be 
ashamed  of  himself  for  doing  or  thinking  what 
neither  injures  anyone  else  nor  ever  comes  to 
the  notice  of  others.  A  sense  of  shame — the 
reflex  of  his  sense  of  honor — torments  him  for 
having  fallen  short  of  his  own  ideal,  for 
being  disloyal  to  his  own  conceptions  of  what 
is  good  or  right;  and  his  shame  may  be  even 
more  intense  in  proportion  as  the  standard  he 
has  violated  is  not  one  shared  by  others,  but 
is  his  own  measure  of  what  a  man  should  be 
or  do. 

Dmitri  Karamazov  exhibits  these  mixed 
feelings  of  honor  and  shame  when  he  declares 
at  the  preliminary  legal  investigation:  “You 
have  to  deal  with  a  man  of  honor,  a  man  of  the 
highest  honor;  above  all — don’t  lose  sight  of 
it — a  man  who’s  done  a  lot  of  nasty  things,  but 
has  always  been,  and  still  is,  honorable  at  bot¬ 
tom,  in  his  inner  being.  .  .  .  That’s  just  what’s 
made  me  wretched  all  my  life,  that  I  yearned 
to  be  honorable,  that  I  was,  so  to  say,  a  martyr 
to  a  sense  of  honor,  seeking  for  it  with  a  lantern, 
with  the  lantern  of  Diogenes,  and  yet  all  my 
life  I’ve  been  doing  filthy  things.” 


1 IONOR  729 

I  hc  sense  of  honor  and  the  sense  of  duty  dif¬ 
fer  in  still  another  respect.  Duty  presupposes 
law.  The  essence  of  law  is  its  universality.  A 
sense  of  duty,  therefore,  leads  a  man  to  do  what 
is  expected  of  him,  but  not  of  him  alone,  for 
he  is  no  different  from  others  in  relation  to 
what  the  law  commands.  In  contrast,  a  sense 
of  honor  presupposes  self- consciousness  of  virtue 
in  the  individual.  It  binds  him  in  conscience 
to  live  up  to  the  image  of  his  own  character, 
insofar  as  it  has  lineaments  which  seem  ad¬ 
mirable  to  him. 

Without  some  self-respect,  a  man  can  have 
no  sense  of  honor.  In  the  great  tragic  poems, 
the  hero  who  dishonors  himself  in  his  own  eyes 
dies  spiritually  with  the  loss  of  his  self-respect. 
To  live  on  in  the  flesh  thereafter  would  be 
almost  a  worse  fate  than  the  physical  demise 
which  usually  symbolizes  the  tragic  ending. 

The  sense  in  which  a  man  can  honor  or  dis¬ 
honor  himself  is  closely  akin  to  the  sense  in 
which  he  can  be  honored  or  dishonored  by 
others.  Both  involve  a  recognition  of  virtue  or 
its  violation.  But  they  differ  in  this:  that  a 
man’s  personal  honor  is  an  internal  consequence 
of  virtue  and  inseparable  from  it,  whereas  pub¬ 
lic  honor  bestowed  upon  a  man  is  an  external 
reward  of  virtue.  It  is  not  always  won  by  those 
who  deserve  it.  When  it  is,  “it  is  given  to  a 
man,”  as  Aquinas  points  out,  “on  account  of 
some  excellence  in  him,  and  is  a  sign  and  testi¬ 
mony  of  the  excellence  that  is  in  the  person 
honored.” 

There  can  be  no  separation  between  what  a 
community  considers  honorable  and  what  it 
considers  virtuous  or  excellent  in  mind  or  char¬ 
acter.  But  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that 
the  man  who  is  actually  virtuous  will  always 
receive  the  honor  which  is  due  him.  Public 
honor  can  be  misplaced - either  undeserv¬ 

edly  given  or  unjustly  withheld.  The  virtuous 
should  be  prepared  for  this,  in  the  judgment  of 
Aquinas,  since  honor  is  not  “the  reward  for 
which  the  virtuous  work,  but  they  receive 
honor  from  men  by  way  of  reward,  as  from 
those  who  have  nothing  greater  to  offer."  Happi¬ 
ness,  he  goes  on  to  say,  is  the  “true  reward  .  .  . 
for  which  the  virtuous  work;  for  if  they  worked 
for  honor,  it  would  no  longer  be  virtue,  but 
ambition.” 


730 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Tolstoy,  however,  deplores  the  injustice  of 
the  honor  given  Napoleon  and  the  dishonor 
in  which  Kutuzov  was  held.  “Napoleon,”  he 
writes,  “that  most  insignificant  tool  of  history 
who  never  anywhere,  even  in  exile,  showed 
human  dignity— Napoleon  is  the  object  of 
adulation  and  enthusiasm;  he  is  grand.  But 
Kutuzov — the  man  who  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end  of  his  activity  in  1812,  never  once 
swerving  by  word  or  deed  from  Borodino  to 
Vilna,  presented  an  example  exceptional  in 
history  of  self-sacrifice  and  a  present  conscious¬ 
ness  of  the  future  importance  of  what  was  hap¬ 
pening — Kutuzov  seems  to  them  something 
indefinite  and  pitiful,  and  when  speaking  of 
him  and  of  the  year  1812  they  always  seem  a 
little  ashamed.” 

Kutuzov  later  received  some  measure  of 
honor  when  he  was  presented  with  the  rarely 
awarded  Order  of  St.  George.  But  what  is  per¬ 
haps  a  much  higher  honor  came  to  him  after 
his  death  when  Tolstoy  enshrined  him  as  one 
of  the  heroes  of  War  and  Peace.  Sometimes  the 
virtuous  or  truly  honorable  man,  living  in  a 
bad  society,  goes  without  honor  in  his  own  time 
to  be  honored  only  by  posterity.  He  may  even 
be  dishonored  by  a  society  which  has  contempt 
for  virtue.  Sometimes  a  man  of  indifferent  char¬ 
acter  and  achievement,  or  even  one  who  is 
actually  base  and  ignoble,  wins  honor  through 
cleverly  simulating  the  possession  of  admirable 
traits. 

It  seems  appropriate  to  consider  the  propor¬ 
tion  between  a  man’s  intrinsic  worth  and  the 
honor  he  receives.  The  distribution  of  honors 
raises  questions  of  justice — in  fact,  it  is  thought 
to  be  one  of  the  chief  problems  of  distributive 
justice.  For  those  who  hold  that  honor  and 
fame  are  utterly  distinct  in  principle,  this  is 
the  clear  mark  of  their  difference.  Justice  does 
not  require  that  fame  be  proportionate  to  vir¬ 
tue.  Though  there  is  a  sense  in  which  fame  may 
not  be  deserved,  the  qualities  in  a  person  which 
justify  fame  are  of  a  different  order  from  those 
which  honor  should  reward.  Fame  belongs  to 
the  great,  the  outstanding,  the  exceptional, 
without  regard  to  virtue  or  vice.  Infamy  is 
fame  no  less  than  good  repute.  The  great  scoun¬ 
drel  can  be  as  famous  as  the  great  hero.  Existing 
in  the  reputation  a  man  has  regardless  of  his 
character  or  accomplishments,  fame  does  not 


tarnish,  as  honor  does,  when  it  is  unmerited. 
But  for  the  same  reason,  fame  is  often  lost  as 
fortuitously  as  it  is  acquired.  “Fame  has  no 
stability,”  Aquinas  observes;  “it  is  easily  ruined 
by  false  report.  And  if  it  sometimes  endures, 
this  is  by  accident.” 

The  distinction  between  honor  and  fame  is 
not  acknowledged  by  those  who  ignore  merit 
as  a  condition  of  praise.  Machiavelli,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  places  fame — or,  as  he  sometimes  calls 
it,  glory — in  that  triad  of  worldly  goods  which 
men  want  without  limit  and  without  relation 
to  justice.  If  the  aim  of  life  is  to  get  ahead  in 
the  world,  money,  fame,  and  power  are  the 
chief  marks  of  success.  A  man  is  deemed  no  less 
successful  if  he  acquires  power  by  usurping  it, 
or  gains  it  by  foul  means  rather  than  fair;  so, 
too,  if  he  becomes  famous  through  chicanery  or 
deception  and  counterfeits  whatever  form  of 
greatness  men  are  prone  to  praise. 

Along  with  riches,  fame,  says  Machiavelli,  is 
“the  end  which  every  man  has  before  him.” 
This  men  seek  to  obtain  by  various  methods: 
“one  with  caution,  another  with  haste;  one 
by  force,  another  by  skill;  one  by  patience, 
another  by  its  opposite;  and  each  one  succeeds 
in  reaching  the  goal  by  a  different  method.” 
Some  methods,  he  admits  in  another  place, 
“may  gain  empire,  but  not  glory,”  such  as  “to 
slay  fellow-citizens,  to  deceive  friends,  to  be 
without  faith,  without  mercy,  without  reli¬ 
gion.”  Nevertheless,  he  declares:  “Let  a  prince 
have  the  credit  of  conquering  and  holding  a 
state,  the  means  will  always  be  considered  hon¬ 
est,  and  he  will  be  praised  by  everybody.” 

Because  fame  seems  to  be  morally  neutral, 
it  replaces  honor  in  the  discussions  of  those  who 
measure  men  in  terms  of  success  instead  of  vir¬ 
tue,  duty,  or  happiness.  Because  it  is  morally 
neutral,  it  is  the  term  used  by  those  who  wish 
to  judge,  not  men,  but  the  impression  they 
make.  What  counts  is  the  magnitude  of  that 
impression,  not  its  correspondence  with  reality. 

To  be  famous  is  to  be  widely,  not  necessarily 
well,  spoken  of  by  one’s  fellow  men,  now  or 
hereafter.  The  man  who  stands  above  the  herd, 
whose  outlines  are  clear  and  whose  deeds  are 
memorable,  takes  his  place  among  the  famous 
of  his  time  or  of  all  times.  Plutarch  the  moralist 
certainly  does  not  regard  the  men  whose  lives 


Chapter  35:  I IONOK  731 


he  writes  as  paragons  of  virtue.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  he  plainly  indicates  that  many  of  them 
are  examples  of  extraordinary  depravity.  But 
Plutarch  the  biographer  treats  them  all  as 
famous.  He  takes  that  as  a  matter  of  historic 
fact,  not  of  moral  judgment.  Good  or  bad,  they 
were  acknowledged  to  be  great  men,  leaders, 
figures  of  eminent  proportions,  engaged  in 
momentous  exploits.  They  were  not  all  vic¬ 
torious.  Few  if  any  were  successful  in  all  that 
they  attempted  or  were  able  to  preserve  what 
successes  they  achieved.  But  each  ventured  be¬ 
yond  the  pale  of  ordinary  men;  and  each  suc¬ 
ceeded  at  least  in  becoming  a  symbol  of  great 
deeds,  a  monument  in  human  memory. 

The  opposite  of  fame  is  anonymity.  In  Dan¬ 
te’s  moral  universe,  only  the  Trimmers  on  the 
rim  of  Hell  are  totally  anonymous;  neither  good 
nor  bad,  they  lack  name  and  fame.  Because 
they  “lived  without  infamy  and  without 
praise,”  Hell  will  not  receive  them,  “for  the 
damned  would  have  some  boast  of  them.”  To 
them  alone  no  fame  can  be  allowed.  Honor  and 
glory  belong  only  to  the  blessed,  but  the 
damned  in  the  pits  of  Hell,  by  the  record  they 
I  left  for  men  to  revile,  are  as  well  remembered, 
and  hence  as  famous,  as  the  saints  in  Heaven. 

That  men  normally  desire  the  esteem  of  their 
fellow  men  seems  to  be  undisputed.  “He  must 
be  of  a  strange  and  unusual  constitution,” 
Locke  writes,  “who  can  content  himself  to  live 
in  constant  disgrace  and  disrepute  with  his  own 
particular  society.  Solitude  many  men  have 
sought,  and  been  reconciled  to;  but  nobody 
that  has  the  least  thought  or  sense  of  a  man 
about  him,  can  live  in  society  under  the  con¬ 
stant  dislike  and  ill  opinion  of  his  familiars, 
and  those  he  converses  with.  This  is  a  burden 
too  heavy  for  human  sufferance.” 

A  society  of  misanthropes,  despising  each 
other,  is  as  unthinkable  as  an  economy  of 
misers.  The  social  nature  of  man  requires  sym¬ 
pathy  and  fellow  feeling,  love  and  friendship, 
and  all  of  these  involve  some  measure  of  ap¬ 
proval  based  on  knowledge  or  understanding. 
According  to  one  theory,  the  highest  type  of 
friendship  springs  from  mutual  admiration,  the 
respect  which  men  have  for  one  another.  The 
old  saying  that  “there  is  honor  among  thieves” 
suggests  that  even  among  bad  men  there  is  a 


desire  to  hold  the  approbation  of  those  who 
share  a  common  life.  With  this  in  mind  ap¬ 
parently,  William  James  describes  fame  and 
honor  as  a  man’s  “image  in  the  eyes  of  his  own 
‘set,’  which  exalts  or  condemns  him  as  he  con¬ 
forms  or  not  to  certain  requirements  that  may 
not  be  made  of  one  in  another  walk  of  life.” 

Though  Pascal  regards  “the  pursuit  of  glory” 
as  “the  greatest  baseness  of  man,”  he  must  ad¬ 
mit  that  “it  is  also  the  greatest  mark  of  his  ex¬ 
cellence;  for  whatever  possessions  he  may  have 
on  earth,  whatever  health  and  essential  com¬ 
fort,  he  is  not  satisfied  if  he  has  not  the  esteem 
of  men.  I  le  values  human  reason  so  highly  that, 
whatever  advantages  he  may  have  on  earth,  he 
is  not  content  if  he  is  not  also  ranked  highly 
in  the  judgment  of  man.  .  .  .  Those  who  most 
despise  men,  and  put  them  on  a  level  with 
brutes,  yet  wish  to  be  admired  and  believed 
by  men,  and  contradict  themselves  by  their 
own  feelings.” 

But  is  this  universal  wish  for  the  esteem  of 
others  a  desire  for  honor  or  a  desire  for  fame? 
Does  it  make  any  difference  to  our  conception 
of  happiness  whether  we  say  that  men  cannot 
be  happy  without  honor  or  that  they  cannot  be 
happy  unless  they  are  famous? 

Even  those  who  do  not  distinguish  be¬ 
tween  honor  and  fame  are  led  by  these  ques¬ 
tions  to  discriminate  between  fame  and  in¬ 
famy.  As  we  have  already  noted,  fame  and 
infamy  are  alike,  since  both  involve  the  noto¬ 
riety  enjoyed  by  the  outstanding,  the  excep¬ 
tional,  the  great,  whether  good  or  bad.  If  what 
men  desire  is  simply  to  be  known  by  others, 
and  to  have  a  kind  of  immortality  through 
living  on  in  the  memory  of  later  generations, 
then  evil  will  serve  as  well  as  good  repute. 
All  that  matters  is  the  size  of  the  reputation, 
and  its  vitality.  But  if  the  desire  is  for  appro¬ 
bation  or  praise,  good  opinion  alone  will  satisfy, 
and  then  the  question  becomes  whether  the 
object  is  fame  or  honor.  Which  does  Iago  have 
in  mind  when  he  says,  “Good  name  in  man  and 
woman,  dear  my  Lord,  is  the  immediate  jewel 
of  their  souls”  ? 

Opposite  answers  seem  to  be  determined  by 
opposite  views  of  human  nature  and  human 
happiness.  Those  who,  like  Plato,  think  that 
virtue  is  an  indispensable  ingredient  of  happi¬ 
ness,  include  honor  among  the  “good  things” 


732 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


which  the  virtuous  man  will  seek  in  the  right 
way.  Possession  of  good  things  by  itself  is  not 
sufficient,  Socrates  says  in  the  Euthydemus.  A 
man  must  also  use  them  and  use  them  well,  for 
“the  wrong  use  of  a  thing  is  far  worse  than 
the  non-use.”  Applied  to  honor,  this  would 
seem  to  mean  that  the  virtuous  man  will  not 
seek  praise  for  the  wrong  reasons — either  for 
that  which  is  not  praiseworthy  in  himself  or 
from  others  whose  lack  of  virtue  disqualifies 
them  from  giving  praise  with  honesty.  The 
virtuous  man  will  not  seek  fame  or  be  unhappy 
lacking  it,  for  fame,  like  pleasure  or  wealth, 
can  be  enjoyed  by  bad  men  as  well  as  good  and 
be  sought  for  wrong  as  well  as  right  reasons  or 
in  the  wrong  as  well  as  the  right  way.  Virtue, 
according  to  the  moralists,  protects  a  man  from 
the  seductions  of  money,  fame,  and  power — 
the  things  for  which  men  undisciplined  by  vir¬ 
tue  seem  to  have  an  inordinate  desire. 

In  the  theory  of  virtue,  honor,  unlike  fame, 
belongs  only  to  the  good  and  is  always  a  good 
object,  worthy  of  pursuit.  Honor  is,  in  fact, 
the  object  of  two  virtues  which  Aristotle  de¬ 
fines  in  the  Ethics.  One  of  these  virtues  he  calls 
“ambition,”  and  the  Greek  name  for  the  other, 
which  is  literally  rendered  by  “high-minded¬ 
ness,”  is  sometimes  translated  by  the  English 
word  “magnanimity”  and  sometimes  by 
“pride.”  The  Christian  connotation  of  “pride” 
makes  it  a  difficult  word  to  use  as  the  name  for 
a  virtue,  but  it  can  nevertheless  be  so  used 
when  it  is  understood  to  mean  a  justifiable  de¬ 
gree  of  self-respect — not  conceit  but  a  middle- 
ground  between  undue  self-esteem  and  in¬ 
ordinate  self-deprecation.  When  the  Aristo¬ 
telian  names  for  these  two  vices  are  translated 
in  English  by  “vanity”  and  “humility,”  it  is 
again  necessary  to  point  out  that  “humility” 
must  be  understood,  not  in  its  Christian  sig¬ 
nificance  as  meaning  the  virtue  of  the  truly  re¬ 
ligious  man,  but  rather  as  signifying  an  exag¬ 
gerated  meekness  or  pusillanimity. 

The  difference  between  pride  and  ambition 
lies  in  the  magnitude  of  the  other  virtues  they 
accompany  and  the  scale  of  honor  with  which 
they  are  concerned.  Both  are  concerned  with 
honor,  which  Aristotle  calls  “the  greatest  of 
external  goods.”  In  both  cases,  “honor  is  the 
prize  of  virtue,  and  it  is  to  the  good  that  it  is 
rendered.”  The  proud  man  is  one  “who,  being 


truly  worthy  of  great  things,  also  thinks  himself 
worthy  of  them;  for  he  who  does  so  beyond  his 
deserts  is  a  fool,  but  no  virtuous  man  is  foolish 
or  silly.”  The  proud  man  will  be  pleased  “only 
by  honors  that  are  great  and  that  are  conferred 
by  good  men  .  .  .  Honor  from  casual  people  and 
on  trifling  grounds,  he  will  utterly  despise, 
since  it  is  not  this  that  he  deserves.” 

Humility  and  vanity  are,  according  to  Aris¬ 
totle,  the  vices  of  defect  and  excess  which  occur 
when  a  man  fails  to  be  proud.  The  unduly 
humble  man,  underestimating  his  worth,  does 
not  seek  the  honor  he  deserves.  The  vain  man, 
at  the  other  extreme,  overestimates  himself  and 
wants  honor  out  of  proportion  to  his  qualities. 
Honor,  like  any  other  external  good,  “may  be 
desired  more  than  is  right,  or  less,  or  from  the 
right  sources  and  in  the  right  way.  We  blame 
both  the  over-ambitious  man  as  aiming  at  honor 
more  than  is  right  and  from  the  wrong  sources, 
and  the  unambitious  man  as  not  willing  to  be 
honored  even  for  noble  reasons.” 

However  words  are  used,  the  point  seems  to 
be  clear.  It  is  possible  for  men  to  desire  honor 
more  than  they  should  and  less.  It  is  also  pos¬ 
sible  for  honor  to  be  rightly  desired.  Honor  de¬ 
sired  to  excess  or  in  the  wrong  way  may  be 
called  “fame,”  even  as  the  excessive  desire  for 
honor  is  sometimes  regarded  as  the  vice  of 
ambition  or  an  aspect  of  the  sin  of  pride.  The 
word  “pride”  seems  to  have  both  a  good  and 
a  bad  connotation.  But  the  point  remains  that 
the  difference  between  these  two  meanings  of 
“pride,”  like  the  difference  between  honor  and 
fame,  is  understood  by  moralists  in  terms  of  vir¬ 
tue,  and  it  is  discounted  by  those  who  reject  the 
relevance  of  virtue. 

Though  honor  may  be  regarded  as  inseparable 
from  virtue  in  moral  theory,  certain  political 
philosophers  make  its  separation  from  virtue 
the  principle  of  a  type  of  government. 

In  Plato’s  Republic ,  monarchy  and  aristoc¬ 
racy  are  defined  in  terms  of  the  virtue  of  the 
rulers — either  of  the  one  wise  man  or  of  the 
excellent  few.  Government  by  the  few  is  oli¬ 
garchy  rather  than  aristocracy  when  wealth 
rather  than  virtue  is  the  principle  of  their  se¬ 
lection.  Plato  sees  the  possibility  of  an  inter¬ 
mediate  between  these  two  which  occurs  as 
a  kind  of  transitional  form  when  aristocracy 


tei 

th 

it 

ic 

cl 

A 

i c 

a 

c 

$ 

i  i 
i 


Chapter  35:  HONOR 


tends  to  degenerate  into  oligarchy.  He  calls 
that  intermediate  “timocracy”  and  describes 
it  as  “a  mixture  of  good  and  evil”  in  which  the 
ruler  is  “a  lover  of  power  and  a  lover  of  honor, 
claiming  to  be  a  ruler,  not  because  he  is  elo¬ 
quent,  or  on  any  ground  of  that  sort,  but  be¬ 
cause  he  is  a  soldier  and  has  performed  feats  of 
arms.”  In  such  a  state,  he  claims, “one  thing,  and 
one  thing  only,  is  predominantly  seen— the 
spirit  of  contention  and  ambition;  and  these  are 
due  to  the  prevalence  of  the  passionate  or  spir¬ 
ited  element.”  In  a  timocracy,  in  other  words, 
honor  is  divorced  from  virtue  and  wisdom  and 
becomes  the  only  qualification  for  public  of¬ 
fice. 

With  Montesquieu,  the  situation  is  quite  re¬ 
versed.  For  him,  virtue  is  absolutely  requisite 
in  popular  government  or  democracy,  and  to  a 
less  extent  in  that  other  form  of  republic  which 
he  calls  “aristocracy.”  As  virtue  is  necessary  in 
1  a  republic,  so  is  honor  in  a  monarchy.  “Honor 
—  that  is,  the  prejudice  of  every  person  and 
rank — supplies  the  place  of  political  virtue.  A 
monarchical  government  supposes  pre-eminen¬ 
ces  and  ranks,  as  likewise  a  noble  descent.  Since 
I  it  is  the  nature  of  honor  to  aspire  to  preferments 
and  titles,  it  properly  placed  in  this  govern¬ 
ment.” 

Though  Montesquieu  and  Plato  differ  in 
their  classification  of  the  forms  of  government, 
they  seem  to  agree  that  honor  divorced  from 
virtue  is  a  counterfeit.  Honor  identified  with 
ranks  and  titles,  honor  which  moves  individuals 
to  serve  the  public  good  in  order  to  promote 
their  own  interests,  Montesquieu  admits  is  a 
false  honor,  “but  even  this  false  honor  is  as  use¬ 
ful  to  the  public  as  true  honor  could  possibly  be 
to  private  persons.”  Considering  the  laws  of 
education  characteristic  of  monarchical  govern¬ 
ments,  Montesquieu  points  out  that  it  is  not  in 
colleges  or  academies,  but  in  the  world  itself, 
which  is  the  school  of  honor,  that  the  subjects 
of  monarchy  are  chiefly  trained.  “Here  the 
actions  of  men  are  judged,  not  as  virtuous,  but 
as  shining;  not  as  just,  but  as  great;  not  as  rea¬ 
sonable,  but  extraordinary.” 

Heroism  is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Cour¬ 
age,  and  the  role  of  the  hero — the  leader  or 
great  man — in  the  chapter  on  History.  Here 
we  are  concerned  with  the  hero  in  the  esteem  of 


733 

his  fellow  men,  the  symbol  of  human  greatness 
and  the  object  of  human  admiration. 

Honor,  fame,  and  glory  combine  in  various 
proportions  to  constitute  the  heroic  figures  of 
classical  antiquity:  honor,  to  the  extent  that 
none  is  without  some  virtue  and  each  possesses 
certain  virtues  at  least  to  a  remarkable  degree; 
fame,  because  they  are  the  great  among  men, 
outstanding  and  well-known,  godlike  in  their 
pre-eminence;  and  glory,  almost  in  the  theo¬ 
logical  sense,  inasmuch  as  the  heroes  celebrated 
by  Homer  and  Virgil  are  beloved  by  the  gods. 

It  is  not  accidental  that  the  central  figure  in 
the  Greek  tragedies  is  called  a  “hero,”  since  in 
the  ancient  view  the  tragic  character  must  nec¬ 
essarily  belong  to  a  great  man,  a  man  of  noble 
proportions,  one  who  is  “better  than  the  ordi¬ 
nary  man,”  says  Aristotle.  If  he  also  has  some 
fault  or  flaw,  it  is  a  consequence  of  strength 
misused,  not  a  mark  of  individual  weakness. 
Such  weakness  as  he  has  is  the  common  frailty 
of  man. 

In  the  modern  world  heroism  and  the  heroic 
are  more  difficult  to  identify  or  define.  We  tend 
to  substitute  the  notion  of  genius  in  considering 
the  exceptionally  gifted  among  men.  Glory  is 
dimly  recognized  and  honor  takes  second  place 
to  fame.  That  portion  of  modern  poetry  which 
deals  in  heroes — as,  for  example,  the  tragedies 
and  historical  plays  of  Shakespeare — borrows 
them  from,  or  models  them  on,  legendary  fig¬ 
ures.  The  great  modern  novels,  counterparts  of 
the  epic  poems  of  antiquity,  portray  excep¬ 
tional  men  and  women  without  idealizing  them 
to  heroic  stature.  One  of  these  novels,  Tolstoy’s 
War  and  Peace ,  seeks  to  deflate  the  fame  of 
great  men.  They  do  not  deserve  even  their 
reputation  for  great  deeds,  much  less  the  honor 
owed  the  truly  great. 

“If  we  assume  as  historians  do  that  great  men 
lead  humanity  to  the  attainment  of  certain 
ends  . .  .  then  it  is  impossible,”  Tolstoy  declares, 
“to  explain  the  facts  of  history  without  intro¬ 
ducing  the  conceptions  of  chance  and  genius .” 
But  in  Tolstoy’s  opinion  “the  words  chance  and 
genius  do  not  denote  any  really  existing  thing 
and  therefore  cannot  be  defined.”  We  can  dis¬ 
pense  with  these  meaningless  words,  he  thinks, 
if  we  are  willing  to  renounce  “our  claim  to  dis¬ 
cern  a  purpose  immediately  intelligible  to  us” 
and  admit  “the  ultimate  purpose  to  be  beyond 


734 


TIIE  GREAT  IDEAS 


our  ken.”  Then  “not  only  shall  we  have  no 
need  to  see  exceptional  abilit  y  in  Napoleon  and 
Alexander,  but  we  shall  be  unable  to  consider 
them  to  be  anything  blit  like  ordinary  men, 
and  we  shall  not  be  obliged  to  have  recourse  to 
chance  for  an  explanation  of  those  small  events 
which  made  these  people  what  they  were,  but 
it  will  be  clear  that  all  those  small  events  were 
inevitable.” 

This  view  of  history,  with  its  emphasis  on 
impersonal  forces,  finds  another  expression  in 
Marxist  theory.  The  machine  and  the  proletari¬ 
at  mass  are  the  heroes  of  history,  or  of  the  revo¬ 
lution.  Yet  the  modern  period  is  not  without 
an  opposite  strain  of  thought.  Machiavelli  calls 
for  a  great  man,  a  hero,  to  become  the  “libera¬ 
tor”  of  Italy,  “who  shall  yet  heal  her  wounds 
and  put  an  end  to  the  ravaging  and  plundering 
of  Lombardy,  to  the  swindling  and  taxing  of  the 
kingdom  and  of  Tuscany,  and  cleanse  those 
sores  that  for  long  have  festered.”  1  lis  maxims 
for  the  prince  may  be  read,  not  merely  as  ad¬ 
vice  for  getting  and  holding  power,  but  as  pre¬ 
paring  for  an  heroic  effort  in  which  the  prince’s 
power  and  fame  will  be  used  lor  liberty.  The 
great  man  has  the  historic  mission  of  a  pioneer, 
not  the  role  of  a  puppet. 

Even  in  the  Renaissance,  however,  Machia- 
vclli  is  answered  by  Montaigne,  who  prizes 
moderation  too  much  to  praise  heroism  more 
than  a  little.  Comparing  Socrates  and  Alex¬ 
ander,  Montaigne  places  all  of  the  latter’s  ac¬ 
tions  under  the  maxim,  “Subdue  the  world,” 
whereas  Socrates,  he  says,  acts  on  the  principle 
that  it  is  wise  “to  carry  on  human  life  conform¬ 
ably  with  its  natural  condition.”  To  Montaigne, 
“the  virtue  of  the  soul  does  not  consist  in  (lying 
high,  but  in  walking  orderly;  its  grandeur  docs 
not  exercise  itself  in  grandeur,  but  in  medi¬ 
ocrity.” 

The  mediaeval  Christian  conception  of  hero¬ 
ism  centers  on  the  practice  of  heroic  virtue,  by 
which  the  theologian  defines  sanctity.  In  the 
calendar  of  saints,  there  is  every  type  of  spirit¬ 
ual  excellence,  but  all  alike — martyrs,  virgins, 
confessors,  doctors— arc  regarded  as  having, 
with  God’s  grace,  superhuman  strength.  The 
saints  not  only  perform  acts  of  exemplary  per¬ 
fection;  they  are  godlike  men  in  their  exemp¬ 
tion  from  the  frailties  of  human  flesh. 

The  heroes  of  antiquity  also  wear  an  aspect 


of  divinity,  but,  like  Achilles,  each  has  a  weak¬ 
ness  in  his  armor.  Moreover,  the  heroes  of  the 
Iliad ,  the  Odyssey ,  and  the  Aeneid  arc  men  of 
overweening  pride.  They  are  relentlessly  jeal¬ 
ous  of  their  honor.  They  strive  not  so  much  for 
victory  as  for  the  due  meed  of  honor  which  is 
its  fruit.  Nothing  grieves  them  so  much  as  to 
have  their  deeds  go  unrequited  by  abundant 
praise.  In  the  contribution  made  by  this  love  of 
praise  to  the  growth  of  the  Roman  empire, 
Augustine  secs  the  providential  working  of 
God.  In  order  that  that  empire  “might  over¬ 
come  the  grievous  evils  which  existed  among 
other  nations,”  he  writes,  God  “purposely 
granted  it  to  such  men  as,  for  the  sake  of  honor, 
and  praise,  and  glory,  consulted  well  for  their 
country,  in  whose  glory  they  sought  their  own, 
and  whose  safety  they  did  not  hesitate  to  prefer 
to  their  own,  suppressing  the  desire  of  wealth 
and  many  other  vices  for  this  one  vice,  namely, 
the  love  of  praise.” 

To  Augustine,  however,  this  glory  found  in 
human  praise  is  far  removed  from  the  true 
glory.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  sin.  “So  hostile  is  this  vice 
to  pious  faith,”  he  writes,  “if  the  love  of  glory 
be  greater  in  the  heart  than  the  fear  or  love  of 
God,  that  the  Lord  said,  ‘How  can  ye  believe, 
who  look  for  glory  from  one  another,  and  do  not 
seek  the  glory  which  is  from  God  alone  P’  ” 

The  Christian  hero,  consequently,  seeks  not 
his  own  glory,  but  the  glory  of  God,  and  in 
contrast  to  the  pagan  hero,  he  is  great,  not  in 
pride,  but  in  humility.  I  lis  model  is  seen  in  the 
Apostles,  who,  according  to  Augustine,  “amidst 
maledictions  and  reproaches,  and  most  grievous 
persecutions  and  cruel  punishments,  were  not 
deterred  from  the  preaching  of  human  salva¬ 
tion.  And  when  .  .  .  great  glory  followed  them 
in  the  church  of  Christ,  they  did  not  rest  in 
that  as  in  the  end  of  their  virtue,  but  referred 
that  glory  itsell  to  the  glory  of  God  .  .  .  For 
their  Master  had  taught  them  not  to  seek  to 
be  good  for  the  sake  of  human  glory,  saying, 

‘  bake  heed  that  ye  do  not  your  righteousness 
before  men  to  be  seen  of  them’  .  .  .  but  ‘Let 
your  works  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see 
your  g(x>d  deeds,  and  glorify  your  Father  who 
is  in  heaven.’  ” 

The  word  “glory”  in  its  theological  connota¬ 
tion  thus  has  a  meaning  distinct  from,  and  even 
opposed  to,  the  sense  in  which  it  is  sometimes 


0 

oft 

k 

b 

G( 

DC 

VI 

* 

G 

l 

d 

o 

t 

1 


735 


Ciiapttr  35:  HONOR 


used  as  a  synonym  tor  “fame."  In  the  liturgv 
ot  the  church,  the  psalms  and  hymns  (especial!) 
those  ot  the  doxologx  which  sing  the  glorij 
Petri  and  the  gloria  in  ex  crisis  Deo)  render  unto 
God  the  homage  which  is  due  1  bs  infinite  gtxxl- 
ncss,  the  reflexive  splendor  of  which  is  the  di¬ 
vine  glory.  As  in  the  strict  moral  sense  honor  on 
the  human  plane  is  due  to  virtue  alone,  so  in  a 
strict  theological  sense  glorv  belongs  only  to 
God. 

Strictly.  God’s  glory  cannot  be  increased  b\ 
human  recognition.  Yet  every  act  ot  religious 
devotion  is  said  to  redound  to  the  greater  glory 
of  God  and  to  diffuse  l  lis  glory  among  creatures 
through  the  divinity  they  acquire  when  they 
love  God  and  arc  beloved  bv  Him.  God  is  “all 


tullncss  in  1  limsclf  and  the  height  of  all  [>er- 
fection“;  nevertheless.  Montaigne  writes,  “Ho 
name  ma\  be  augmented  and  increased  bv  the 
blessing  and  praise  we  attribute  to  1 1  is  exterior 
works.” 

\ccording  to  Dante,  “the  glorv  of  I  bm  w  ho 
moves  everything  penetrates  through  the  uni 
verse,  and  is  resplendent  in  one  part  more  and 
m  another  levs.”  In  his  journey  through  Para¬ 
dise.  he  beholds  the  saints  whom  Gixl  loves  es 
pcciallv,  each  with  a  distinct  degree  of  glory 
according  to  the  proximity  with  which  he  ap¬ 
proaches  the  presence  of  God.  Their  halos  and 
aureoles,  in  the  imagery  of  Christian  art,  are 
the  symbols  of  the  glory  in  which  they  aic 
bathed  as  in  reflected  light. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 


1.  The  relation  of  honor  and  fame:  praise  and  reputation  736 

2.  Honor  and  fame  in  the  lite  of  the  individual  737 

2.;,  The  sense  of  honor  and  of  shame:  loyalty  to  the  good 

2/’.  Honor  as  an  object  of  desire  and  as  a  factor  in  virtue  and  happiness 

2r.  Honor  as  due  self-esteem:  magnanimity  or  proper  pride  739 

2</.  Honor  or  fame  as  a  mode  of  immortality 

ie.  Honor  as  the  pledge  of  friendship:  the  codes  ot  honor  among  social  equals  730 

3.  The  social  realization  of  honor  and  fame 

3*7.  The  reaction  of  the  community  to  its  good  or  great  men 

3/).  The  conditions  of  honor  or  fame  and  the  causes  of  dishonor  or  infamy  741 

4.  Honor  in  the  political  community  and  in  government  742 


4.;.  Honor  as  a  principle  in  the  organization  of  the  state:  timocracy  and  monarchy 

4^.  The  scale  of  honor  in  the  organization  ot  the  state:  the  just  distribution  of 

honors  743 

4 c.  Honor  as  a  political  technique:  the  uses  of  praise,  prestige,  public  opinion 

5.  Honor,  tame,  and  the  heroic  744 

5<7.  Honor  as  a  motivation  of  heroism 
5/*.  Hero-worship:  the  exaltation  of  leaders 

5c.  The  occasions  of  heroism  in  war  and  peace  745 

5</,  The  estimation  of  the  role  of  the  hero  in  history 

6.  The  idea  of  glory:  its  distinction  from  honor  and  fame  746 

6j.  The  glory  of  God:  the  signs  and  the  praise  ot  the  divine  glory 
6b,  The  reflected  glory  of  the  angels  and  saints 


736 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  {D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 — (D)  II  Esdrasy  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  relation  of  honor  and  fame:  praise  and 
reputation 

4  Homer:  Iliady  bk  i  3a-9a,c 

5  Euripides:  Andromache  [319-332]  318a;  [693- 
705]  321a-b  /  Hecuba  [251-257]  355a;  [623- 
628]  358a  /  Heracles  Mad  [140-205]  366b-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  Wary  bk  ii,  395d- 
396a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  52a-b  /  Lawsy  bk  xii, 
788d-789a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii  [i  15^29—35] 
162a, c;  bk  vi,  ch  8  [i46b20-24]  200c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethicsy  bk  i,  ch  5  [io95b22~3o] 
340d-341a;  bk  iv,  ch  3-4  370b-372d;  bk  viii, 
ch  8  [1 159ai3— 26]  411b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  9 
608c-611c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vi,  sect  16  275b-d; 
sect 51  279b-c;  bk  ix,  sect 30  294b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [441-493]  115a-116b 

14  Plutarch:  Marcellus-Pelopidas ,  262d  /  Aris¬ 
tides ,  265c-d  /  Marcus  Cato ,  282a  /  Agisy 
648b,d-649a  /  Demetrius ,  737b  d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iv,  73b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  21-23  24c- 
25a  /  City  of  Gody  bk  v,  ch  12-20  216d-226a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  2, 
aa  2-3  616d-618a 


22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  ii,  stanza 
25-27  24b-25a;  stanza  53-55  28b;  stanza 
100-115  34b-36b;  stanza  162-163  42b-43a; 
bk  iii,  stanza  22-25  ^7b;  stanza  36-50  59a- 
61a  /  Knight's  Tale  [3041-3056]  210a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  viii,  13b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  71d-76b  esp 
73b-c,  76b;  part  ii,  146d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  126b-127c;  300c-307a; 
390a-391c;  411a-d;  445c-446a;  450c-453c; 
462b-c;  494b-d;  496c-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Love's  Labour's  Lost ,  act  iv, 
sc  1  [1-40]  264b-d  /  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  i 
[165-185]  322b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  iii, 
sc  iii  [38-241]  122d-125a  /  Othello ,  act  ii,  sc 
iii  [262-277]  219d;  act  iii,  sc  iii  [155-161] 
223d  /  Cymbeline ,  act  iii,  sc  iv  466d-468d  / 
Henry  VIIIy  act  iii,  sc  ii  [350-458]  572c-573d 
/  Sonnets ,  lxix-lxx  596d-597a;  cxxi  604d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  203a-b; 
222b-c;  227d-228d^ 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  91d-92b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  29  405b; 
prop  53,  corol  413a;  part  iv,  prop  58,  schol 
441d-442a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [960-996]  360b- 
361a 


2  to  2b  Chapter  35 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  147-159  200b  202a;  333 
232b;  400-401  240b  241a;  404  241a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  119a  121b 

37  Fieldinc:  Tom  Jones ,  223d  224b 

38  Montesquieu  '.Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  111,  lie- 12a; 
hk  iv,  13b, d  15a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  360a  362d  passim, 
esp  362b  d  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  iv,  434b- 
435a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  4I2b  d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310c  d;  312a  313a 
passim 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  hi,  146d  147c; 
bk  iv,  170d  171c;  bk  v,  204a  b;  214d-215a; 
bk  vi,  241c-242b;  247a-c;  250c;  bk  viii,  304c; 
bk  xv,  619c-62lb 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  x, 
273a-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  189b  191a 

2.  Honor  and  fame  in  the  life  of  the  individual 

2a.  The  sense  of  honor  and  of  shame:  loyalty 
to  the  good 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  i  [1—5 10]  3a-8b;  bk  iii  19a- 
23d;  bk  iv  [326-418]  27b-28a;  bk  v  [520-532] 
35c;  bk  vi  [312-358]  43b  d:  [440-465]  44c-d; 
bk  ix  57a-64a,c  esp  [96-114]  58a  b,  [307-429] 
60b-61c,  [606-619]  63b;  bk  xii  [290-328] 
85b-c;  bk  xxii  [99-130]  156b-c;  [289-305] 
158b 

*  5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [430-480]  146d-147b  /  Phil- 

octetes  182a-195a,c  esp  [50-122]  182d-183b 

5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  [373-430]  228b-d  / 
Heracleidae  [1-11]  248a;  [484-596]  252c-253b 
/  Suppliants  [857-917]  266a-b  /  Helen  [838- 
854]  306b-c  /  Hecuba  [342-383]  355d-356a  / 
Heracles  Mad  [275-3 n]  367c-d  /  Phoenician 

I  Maidens  [991-1018]  387a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vi,  187b-188d;  bk 
vii,  225d-226b;  238a-c;  255b-259a;  bk  ix, 
304d-305c 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  152b-d;  154d-155a  / 
Apology ,  205d-206a  /  Laws ,  bk  i,  651a-652a; 
bk  v,  686d-688a;  bk  vii,  730d-731d;  bk  xii, 
788d-789a  /  Seventh  Letter ,  802c-803a 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iv,  ch  3-4  370b-372d; 
ch  9  375d-376a,c;  bk  x,  ch  9  f  1  i79b4— 1  i8oai  1  ] 
434b-d  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  11,  ch  6  629d-631c 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  5  llOb-c 
13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  iv  [1-30]  167a-b;  bk  x 
[656-688]  320a-321a 
14  Plutarch:  Aristides ,  264a-d 
15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  lla-b;  bk  iii,  58a; 
bk  vi,  92c;  bk  xvi,  180d-183a;  183d-184a  / 
Histories ,  bk  iv,  266d;  267b-268a;  289d- 
290a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  9  lOd-lla; 
par  16-17  12c-13a;  bk  viii,  par  18-30  57d-61c 
/  City  of  God ,  bk  v,  ch  12  216d-219b 
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  ii,  stanza 
53-59  28b-29a;  stanza  100-115  34b-36b; 


HONOR  737 

stanza  162  163  42b  43a;  bk  iii,  stanza  22 
25  57b:  stanza  36  50  59a  6 la  /  Prologue 
[43  78]  159b  160a  /  Knight's  Tale  [859  1004] 
174a  176b;  [3041  3056]  210a  /  Ft  anglin' s  Tale 
[11,667-928]  361b  366a  /  Physician's  Pale 
366a  371a  esp  [12,1  37  191)  369b  370b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
65c  d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  13d  14c;  16a  d;  174d 
176a;  300c  307a;  386a  388c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard II,  act i,  sc  i  [165-185] 
322b  c  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  iv,  sc  v  [21  47) 
494c- d  /  Much  Ado  About  Nothing,  act  iv, 
sc  1  520b  523d  /  Henry  V,  act  iv,  sc  vii  [124]  - 
sc  viii  [77]  560a  561b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iv,  sc  iv  [53  66] 
59b  c  /  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  ii 
113c-115d  /  Measure  for  Measure,  act  ii, 
sc  iv  [87-187]  185c-186c;  act  iii,  sc  1  [1 33  176] 
188b-c  /  Antony  and  Cleopatra,  act  ii,  sc  vii, 
[61-90]  326a-c  /  Cymbeline,  act  i,  sc  1  [55- 
169]  450a-451c  /  Winter's  Tale ,  act  iii,  sc  11 
[92-117]  502b-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i  32c-34d; 
57d-58a;  81b-84c;  123a  b;  147b-d;  part  ii, 
203a  b;  222c;  227d  228d:  254d-255a;  290a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  58,  schol 
441d-442a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  630  287b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  36a~38b  esp  38a  b; 
146b-147a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  69, 
30c-d;  part  iii,  par  207  69b-c;  par  244  77c; 
par  253  79a-c;  additions,  130  137c-d:  149 
140d-141a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 
214d-215a;  part  iv,  320c;  334b  c  * 

49  Da  rwi  n  :  Descent  of  Man,  310d-314b  esp  3 1 0  d , 
312a-313a;  322b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  102b  d;  bk 
iv,  173d-179a  esp  177d  l78a;  bk  vii,  281a-d; 
291a-292b;  301b'302d;  bk  viii,  321d-323b: 
333b-334c;  336b-337d;  bk  ix,  365d-366a;  bk 
xi,  527b-528b:  epilogue  i,  650d-652a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii, 
41a-b;  bk  iii,  54b-58a;  bk  vi,  153d  157b;  bk 
ix,  245a-b;  260a  263a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  190a- 191a;  207a  208a 

2b.  Honor  as  an  object  of  desire  and  as  a  factor 
in  virtue  and  happiness 

Old  Testament:  Esther,  5:9-14  /  Proverbs,  25 :6- 7 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  7:4  —  (D)  OT,  Ec- 
clesiasticus,  7:4/1  Maccabees,  3:14;  9:10  — (D) 
OT,  I  Machabees,  3:14;  9:10 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  i  [1-510]  3a  8b;  bk  ix  57a- 
64a, c  esp  [96-114]  58a-b,  [307-429]  60b-61c, 
[606-619]  63b;  bk  xii  [290-328]  85b  c  /  Odys¬ 
sey,  bk  1  [267-305]  185d-186a 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [683-684] 
34c 

5  Sophocles:  Philoctetes  [50-122]  182d  l83b; 
[13 14— 1347]  193d-194a 


738 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


2b 


(2.  Honor  and  fame  in  the  life  of  the  individual. 

2b.  Honor  as  an  object  of  desire  and  as  a 
factor  in  virtue  and  happiness.) 

5  Euripides:  Rhesus  [756-761]  209d  /  Hippoly- 
tus  [373-430]  228b-d  /  Andromache  [768-801] 
321d-322a  /  Hecuba  [299-331]  355b-c  /  Hera¬ 
cles  Mad  [275-31 1]  367c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6c-7b;  bk  iii, 
118a-c;  122a-d;  123c-d;  bk  vi,  205a-b;  bk 
vii,  215c-216b;  243d-245a;  255c-d;  bk  viii, 
264c;  282c-283a;  bk  ix,  304a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War , BKi,370a-c; 
bk  11,  397d-398d;  bk  v,  486a-d 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-b  /  Symposium , 
154d-155a  /  Apology ,  205d-206a  /  Republic , 
bk  11,  310c-315c;  bk  v,  370b-c;  bk  viii,  404d- 
405a;  bk  ix,  421a-422b  /  Laws ,  bk  i,  651a- 
652a;  bk  v,  686d-688a;  bk  xii,  788d-789a  / 
Seventh  Letter ,  805c-806a;  807d-808a;  81 Od- 
811a;  814b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  8  [146^0-24] 
200c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [io95b22-3o] 
340d-341a;  ch  10  [nooaio-3i]  345c-d;  bk  ii, 
ch  7  [nc>7b22-iio8ai]  353b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  10 
[ni7b24-36]  364b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  3-4  370b- 
372d;  ch  7  [ii27b9~22]  374d-375a;  bk  vii,  ch 
4  398a-399a;  bk  viii,  ch  8  [ii59ai3-26]  411b; 
bk  ix,  ch  8  [1  i68a28— 34]  421d-422a;  bk  x, 
ch  9  [ii79b4-u8oaii]  434b-d  /  Politics ,  bk 
vii,  ch  13  [i332a9~29]  536d-537a;  ch  14 
[i333a3°-bi°]  538a-b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[i36ob4~i36ib2]  600d-602a  esp  [i36ia25-b2] 
601d-602a;  ch  6  [i362bio-28]  603b-c  esp 
[i362b20-23]  603c;  ch  ii  [1371^-17]  614c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [59-86] 
30d-31b;  bk  v  [1105-1135]  75c-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  21  127b-c; 
bk  iv,  ch  6,  230b-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  11-12 
258a-c;  bk  iv,  sect  33  266c-d;  bk  vi,  sect 
51  279b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  i  285a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [441-493]  115a-116b;  bk 
vi  [886-892]  234b-235a;  bk  viii  [608-731] 
275a-278b;  bk  x  [276-286]  309b-310a;  [656- 
688]  320a-321a;  bk  xi  [376-444]  338b-340a 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus ,  2c-3b  /  Themistocles , 

89a-90b;  95d-96a  /  Alcibiades  155b,d-174d  / 
A Icibiades- Coriolanus,  194b-195a,c  /  Aristides , 
264a-b;  265c-d  /  Marcus  Cato ,  282a  /  Fla - 
mininus  302b,d-313a,c  /  Lysander ,  354b, d  / 
Sulla,  369a-d  /  Lysander -Sulla,  387d-388a  / 
Pompey  499a-538a,c  /  Alexander  540b, d- 
576d  esp  542a-d  /  Caesar,  599b-d  /  Agis, 
648b,d-649b  /  704a-723d  esp  706b-c, 

717a-b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  73b-d;  bk  vi,  92c-d; 
bk  xi,  101c-102a;  bk  xiv,  154a-b;  bk  xv, 
162c-163a  /  Histories,  bk  i,  195a-b;  bk  ii, 
226d-228a;  bk  iv,  267b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  13,  lid; 


bk  x,  par  59-64  86b-87d  /  City  of  God,  bk  v, 
ch  12-16  216d-221b;  bk  viii,  ch  8,  270a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  26,  a 
4,  ans  151c-152a,c;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  aa  2-3 
616d-618a;  q  4,  a  8,  rep  i  636a-c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  60, 
a  5,  ans  53a-54d;  part  ii-ii,  q  25,  a  i,  rep  2 
501b-502a;  q  185,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1-2  639c- 
641c;  PART  III  suppl,  q  96,  a  i,  rep  2  1061b- 
1062a 

21  Dante  :  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  iii  [22-69]  4b- d; 
iv  5c-7a;  vi  [76-93]  9a-b;  xiii  [31-78]  18b-c; 
xvi  [1-90]  22c-23b;  xxiv  [43-60]  35a-b;  xxxn 
[i]-xxxiii  [9]  47c-49c;  purgatory,  xi  [73- 
1 17]  69c-70a;  paradise,  i  [13-36]  106a-b;  vi 
[112-126]  114d-115a;  ix  [37-63]  119a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 
53—55  28b;  stanza  100-115  34b-36b;  stanza 
162-163  42b-43a;  bk  iii,  stanza  22-25  5?b; 
stanza  36-50  59a-61a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
65c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  llOd-llla;  112a-d; 
125a-c;  300c-307a;  462b-c;  495d-496d 

26  Shakespeare:  Titus  Andronicus,  act  v,  sc  iii 
[35-64]  196d-197a  /  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  act 
iv,  sc  1  [1-40]  264b-d  /  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  i 
[165-185]  322b-c;  act  iv,  sc  i  [162-334]  343b- 
345a  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  i,  sc  i  [78-90]  435b; 
sc  iii  [160-208]  439b-d;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [129- 
161]  454b-c;  act  v,  sc  i  [127-144]  462a-b;  sc 
IV  [59— I01]  464d-465b  /  Henry  V,  act  iv,  sc  i 
[261-301]  554a-c;  sc  iii  [18-67]  555d-556b; 
sc  v  558a-b  /  Julius  Caesar,  act  i,  sc  ii  [84- 
96]  570b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii, 
sc  11  113c-115d;  act  v,  sc  iii  [23-28]  137b  / 
Othello,  act  11,  sc  iii  [262-270]  219d;  act  iii, 
sc  iii  [154-161]  223d  /  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc 
iii  [1-50]  355b-d  /  Sonnets,  xxv  590a 

29  Cervantes  :  Don  Quixote  esp  part  i,  32c-33a, 
57d-58a,  147b-d,  part  ii,  222b-c,  227c-228d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  65c-d;  66d- 
67a, c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  53  413a;  prop 
55,  scHOL413b-d;  part  iv,  prop  52  439d-440a 

32  Milton:  Lycidas  [64-84]  29a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  100  191a-192b;  158-164 
202a-b;  400-401  240b-241a;  404  241a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  90c-d;  bk  ii, 
ch  xxviii,  sect  10-12  230b-231c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  146c-147a;  223d-224b; 
273b;  313d-314d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  360a-362d  esp  360c- 
361a,  362b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  44d-45c;  bk 
iv,  269d-271a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  3a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  176c;  194c;  494b, d- 
495a 

42  Kant:  Fund:  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
256a-b;  258b-c 


739 


2c  to  2d  Chapter  35:  HONOR 


43  Federalist:  number  57, 177b  c;  number  72, 
217a-c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  448 d  449c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  128b;  163d  [fn  4];  479a-d; 
498c-499a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  ii,  par  124 
44b-d;  part  iii,  par  207  69b  c;  par  253  79a*c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\ ,  45b  46a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  310cd;  312a*317b 
esp  312c-313b;  322a-c;  592d 

51  Tolstoy:  IFar  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  15d  16a;  bk 
iii,  146d~147c;  bk  iv,  177d-178a;  bk  v,  214c- 
215a;  bk  ix,  365d-366a;  370c-372a;  bk  xiv, 
590d-604b 

53  James:  Psychology,  189b  191a;  198b  l99b; 
203a*204b;  207a-b:  208b 

2c.  Honor  as  due  self-esteem:  magnanimity  or 
proper  pride 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  xii  [290-328]  85b-c 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [914-957]  61d-62b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  vi, 
513a-d 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  208c-209b  /  Laws ,  bk  v, 
686d-689c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [no7b22- 
uo8ai]  353b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  2-4  368d-372d  esp 
ch  2  [1  i22bi 9—24]  369c;  ch  7  [1  i27b9~ 33]  374d- 
375a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  19,  125c-d 

12  Aurelius  :  Meditations ,  bk  vi,  sect  16  275bd 

14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato ,  283 b-d  /  Cicero , 
706b-c;  713b  c  /  Demosthenes- Cicero,  724c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iv,  73c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  b**x,  par  59-65  86b- 
88b  /  C/>y  o/* bk  xiv,  ch  13  387c-388c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1— ii,  q  60, 
a  5,  ans  53a-54d;  q  66,  a  4,  rep  3  78c-79b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xi  [46— 
120]  69b-70a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  180c-181d;  307a-320b 
passim,  esp  307a-c;  322b-323b;  408b-409c; 
456c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  ii, 
sc  11— iii  113c-118c  /  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c 
esp  act  1,  sc  ix  359c-360c,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [71- 
164]  364d-366a,  sc  iii  [44-162]  366b-367d, 
act  iii,  sc  11  [39-145]  374a-375a,  act  iv,  sc 
vn  [28-59]  384c-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  40b-c;  57d- 
58a;  123a-b;  177a-b;  part  ii,  203a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [561-594] 
244b-245a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  100  191a-192b;  1 47—159 

200b-202a  /  Vacuum ,  361a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  13b, d- 
15a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  362b-d 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  321b-329a  esp  325a- 
32 7d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
376b-c 

43  Federalist:  number  70,  212a 


43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  448d  449c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson, \  iid  xiiia;16d  17a;73a  b; 
116b  117c;  383c  d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  267c* 
268b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ii,  72d  74a; 
102b  d;  bk  iii,  133b-c;  bk  iv,  173d  179a  esp 
177d  178a;  bk  vn,  291a  292b;  301b  302d; 
bk  viii,  321d  322d:  335b  337d;  338b  339c 
esp  339b-c;  bk  ix,  365d  366a;  bk  x,  442c* 
443b;  bk  xi,  498b  d;  527b  528b;  bk  xiii, 
569d  570a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  iv, 
104b  109a, c;  bk  v,  llOc  lllc 

53  James:  Psychology ,  211a-212a 

54  Freud:  Narcissism ,  407b  409c  passim  /  Ego 
and  Id,  707c 

2d.  Honor  or  fame  as  a  mode  of  immortality 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  72:17— (D)  Psalms, 
71:17  /  Proverbs,  10:7  /  Ecclesiastes,  2:16 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  4:1-2;  8:9  13 
—  (D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  4:1-2;  8:9-13  / 
Ecclesiasticus ,  37:26;  39:9-11;  44:8-15;  46:11- 
12— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  37:29;  39:12-15; 
44:8-15;  46:13-15  /  /  Maccabees,  3:1-7— (D) 
OT,  /  Machabees,  3:1-7  /  //  Maccabees,  6:21- 
31  — (D)  OT,  //  Machabees,  6:21-31 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ix  [307-429]  OOb^c;  bk 
xii  [290-328]  85b-c;  bk  xxii  [289-305]  158b  / 
Odyssey,  bk  xxiv  [191-202]  319a 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [683-684] 
34c 

5  Sophocles:  Philoctetes  [1408-1444]  194d- 
195a, c 

6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  398a  c 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  166b*167a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  10  [1100*10-31] 
345c-d  /  Politics,  bk  v,  ch  10  [1312*23-39]  514d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  19,  126b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  10  261  d- 
262a;  bk  iv,  sect  3,  263d:  sect  19  265a; 
sect  33  266c*d;  sect  35  266d;  sect  48  267d- 
268a;  bk  vi,  sect  18  275d;  bk  vii,  sect  6 
280b;  sect  34  282a;  bk  viii,  sect  21  287a; 
sect  44  289a;  bk  ix,  sect  30  294b  c;  bk  x, 
sect  34  301a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [450-465]  115b 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  125b 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i,  195b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  iii  [22-69] 
4b-d;  iv  5c-7a;  vi  [76-93]  9a-b;  xiii  [31-78] 
18b-c;  xvi  [1-90]  22c-23b;  xxxii  [i]-xxxiii 
[9]  47c-49c;  purgatory,  xi  [73-117]  69c-70a; 
paradise,  ix  [37-63]  119a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  1,  77a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
81a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  112d-113a;  267a  b; 

301  b-c;  304d-306a 

27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets,  lv  594c  d;  lxv 
596a-b;  lxxxi  598c*d 


740 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  Honor  and  fame  in  the  life  of  the  individual . 
2 d.  Honor  or  fame  as  a  mode  of  immor¬ 
tality.) 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  312c-d 

29  Cervantes  :  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  226d-228d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  27d-28c; 
29a-b;  36a-c;  72c-73a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  148  201a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  535a-536a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  273b;  274d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  94a-b;  219d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  494b,d-495a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  428b-429a 

44  Boswell:  ]oh?ison ,  57d-58a;  163d  [fn  4] 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  348 
llld  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  211d- 
212c;  255b-d;  part  ii,  274a-275a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [9981-9982]  243a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  epilogue, 
408a-c 

2e.  Honor  as  the  pledge  of  friendship:  the 
codes  of  honor  among  social  equals 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  i  3a-9a,c;  bk  ix  57a-64a,c 

5  Euripides:  Alcestis  [509-604]  241c-242b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  31d-32a;  bk  iii, 
91d-92b;  bk  v,  183b-c;  bk  vi,  191a-b 

6  Thucydides  -.Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396c-d 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  152b-d;  154d-155a  / 
Apology,  205d-206a  /  Crito,  213a-214b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iv,  ch  6  373d-374b; 
bk  viii,  ch  8  [1159^3-26]  411b;  ch  14  415d- 
416d;  bk  ix,  ch  2  [1  i65ai5— 35]  418a-b;  ch  8 
[1168^8-34]  421d'422a;  [n69ai2-b2]  422d- 
423a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  22,  169b- 
170a;  bk  iv,  ch  2  223d-224b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  25, 
a  1,  rep  2  501b-502a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
63-64  96b-97a;  stanza  206  115b;  stanza  21  i- 
212  116a;  stanza  231-239  118b-119b;  bk  v, 
stanza  235-244  15la-152a  /  Knight's  Tale 
174a-211a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xvii,  24a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  125b-126b;  181d-183c 

26  Shakespeare:  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,  act 
iv,  sc  1  245b-246b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  hi, 
sc  11  [165-212]  121d-122b  /  Timon  of  Athens, 
act  hi,  sc  11  [71-94]  404c-d;  sc  hi  [27-42] 
405b;  act  iv,  sc  1  409c-d;  sc  hi  [249-305] 
413c-414a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  8c-10b; 
71c-73a;  120b-134b'' 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  cii 
xxviii,  sect  10-13  230b-231c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  70b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  313d-314d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  90b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  389b-d 


2e  to  3a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 
207  69b-c;  par  253  79a-c;  additions,  130 
137c-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  317a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  15bl6a;  bk 
ii,  72d-74a;  bk  iv,  173d-179a;  bk  vi,  241c- 
242d;  bk  viii,  328a-c;  bk  x,  442c-443b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
153d-157b 

53  James:  Psychology,  189b-191a 

3.  The  social  realization  of  honor  and  fame 

3 a.  The  reaction  of  the  community  to  its  good 
or  great  men 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  41:14-45  /  Joshua , 
9:8-11 — ( D )  Josue,  9:8-11  /  Judges,  8:35-9:20 
/  I  Samuel,  18:6-8— (D)  I  Kings,  18:6-8  / 
II  Samuel,  1:17-27 — (Z))  II  Kings,  1:17-27  / 
I  Kings,  4:30-34;  10— (D)  III  Kings,  4:30-34; 
10  /  I  Chronicles ,  14:17 — ( D )  I  Paralipomenon, 
14:17  /  II  Chronicles,  9:1-28 — (D)  II  Parali¬ 
pomenon,  9:1-28  /  Esther,  6  /  Job,  16:20-17:6; 
19:9-21;  29-30  /  Proverbs ,  10:7;  20:7;  22:1; 
31:10-31  esp  31:23,  31:28,  31:31  /  Ecclesiastes, 
I0:5~7  /  Isaiah,  9:15 —(D)  Isaias,  9:15 

Apocrypha:  Judith,  8;  15 7-16:25— (D)  OT, 
Judith ,  8;  15:8-16:31  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon, 
4:1-2— (D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom ,  4:1-2  / 
Ecclesiasticus,  10:19-20,24;  37:26;  39:1-11;  44- 
50  esp  44:1-15 — ( D )  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  10:23- 
24,27;  37:29;  39:1-15;  44-50  esp  44:1-15  / 
Susanna,  4 — ( D )  OT,  Daniel,  13:4  /  I  Mac¬ 
cabees,  3:1-9;  5:63-64;  9:19-21;  10:59-65; 
I3:25_3°j  r4:4~49 —(D)  OT,  I  Machabees , 
3:1-9;  5:63-64;  9:19-21;  10:59-65;  13:25-30; 
1 4:4-49 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  4:23-25;  9:30-31; 
I3 :53~ 58  /  Mar\,  1:27-28;  6:1-6  /  Lu\e,  4:14- 
30,36-37;  5:15  /  John,  4:44 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  x  [203-217]  67a-b;  bk  xxiii- 
xxiv  161a-179d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  esp 
[311—57]  99b-d,  [463-511]  103c-d,  [1187-1221] 
llOb-c  /  Antigone  [683-704]  137a-b  /  Ajax 
143a-155a,c  esp  [430-480]  146d-147b,  [1047- 
1421]  152a-155a,c 

5  Euripides:  Hecuba  [299-331]  355b-c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  14a-d;  bk  ii,  85d- 
86b;  bk  hi,  lOlc-d;  122a-d;  123c-d;  bk  iv, 
134d-135b;  136a-c;  bk  vi,  192c;  195d-196c; 
198a-199a;  211a;  bk  vii,  233d-234b;  248d; 
bk  viii,  282c-283a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  383d- 
384a;  bk  ii,  395c-399a  esp  395c-d,  399a;  bk 
v,  484c-485c;  bk  vi,  513b-d 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  362a-b;  366c-367b; 
bk  vii,  401b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iv,  ch  3-4  370b-372d; 
bk  viii,  ch  14  [1  i63b5— 13]  416a-c  /  Politics , 
bk  ii,  ch  7  [1267^2-17]  462d  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i, 
ch  5  [i36ia25-b3]  6Cld-602a 


3a  to  3b  Cii  m>ti:r  35:  HONOR  731 


12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iv,  sect  3,  263d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [142-156]  107a;  [450  465] 

115b 

14  Plutarch:  Themistocles ,  95b-c;97b  d  /  Ca - 

117a-c  /  Fabius  141a-154a,c  csp  149b  c 
/  Alcibiades  155b,d-174d  csp  161d  162b, 
165c  d  /  Coriolanus ,  177b  179c  /  Timolcon , 
212c-213d  /  Aemilius  Paulas,  226c  229c  / 
Pelopidas,  245a  d  /  Marcellas,  256b  d  / 
tides,  265c-266b  /  FlamininuSy  309a  b;  310b  / 
Sertorius,  464a-c  /  Pompeyy  499a- b  /  Caesar , 
598d-601a  /  Gz/o  the  Younger ,  624a-625b; 
637a-c  /  CicerOy  7l2d-7l3b  /  DcmetriuSy 
737b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annalsy  bk  ii,  33c;  41c-d;  43c-44a; 
bk  hi,  45a-46b;  60d;  bk  iv,  73b-d;  bk  xiv, 
153d  155a 

18  Augustine:  C/7y  0/ Go*/,  bk  v,  ch  12,  218b-c; 
ch  15  220d-221a;  ch  17-18  221b  224b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i— ii,  q  2, 
a  2  616d-617b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  iv  [64-147]  6a- 
7a;  purgatory,  viii  [121-139]  65c-d;  xi  [73- 
1 17]  69c-70a;  paradise,  xvi  [16-154]  130a- 
132a;  xvii  [46-142]  132c-133c 

23  Machiavelli:  Princey  ch  xviii,  25d-26a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  73b-c;  75a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  181d-183a;  445c-446a 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar ,  act  i,  sc  i  [37- 
65]  568d-569a;  act  v,  sc  v  595a-596a,c  csp 
[68-81]  596a, c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  iii, 
sc  iii  [175-233]  124b-125a  /  Coriolanus  351a- 
392a, c  esp  act  i,  sc  ix  359c-360c,  act  ii,  sc  i 
[134-247]  362b-363c,  sc  ii-m  364a-369a  / 
Timon  of  Athens ,  act  iii,  sc  v  406d-408a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  65c-68b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  20b-c 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  383a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  337  232b-233a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  28b;  part  iii,  119a- 
121b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  54d-55a;  313d-314d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  360a-362d  passim,  esp 
360b-c  /  Political  Economy,  374d-375b  /  Soc/zz/ 
Contract,  bk  iv,  434a 

40  Decline  and  Fall,  28b-29b;92a;  219d- 
220a;  298b;  381b-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  318b-319b 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  504a- b 

43  Federalist:  number  57,  177a-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  278c-279a;  298b-299a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  xia;  8a-c;  383c;  479a  d; 
498c-499a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  348 
llld  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  167a- 
168a;  part  ii,  262a-c;  272c-273a;  280b-281a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1011-1021]  25b-26a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  79a-82b;  84b-85a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  171c-173d; 
bk  viii,  338c-d;  bk  xiii,  578b;  582a  584b;  bk 
xv,  619c-621b;  629b-c 


3 b.  The  conditions  of  honor  or  fame  and  the 
causes  of  dishonor  or  infamy 

Old  Testament:  Joshua ,  6:27  —  (D)  Josue,  6:27 
/  Judges,  5  /  /  Samuel,  18:6-8  —  (D)  /  Kings, 
18:6-8  /  l  Kings,  10  —  (D)  III  Kings,  10  /  / 
Chronicles ,  29:12— (D)  I  Paralipomenon,  29:12 
/II  Chronicles ,  9:1  28  —  (D)  II  Paralipomenon , 
9:1-28  /  Proverbs,  3:16;  4:8,18;  8:18;  14:28; 
31:2^,25,28-31  /  Ecclesiastes ,  1:11;  2:16;  7:1 

—  (D)  Ecclesiastes,  1:11;  2:16;  7:2  /  Isaiah, 
14:20 — (D)  Isaias,  14:20  /  Jeremiah,  9:23-24 

—  (D)  Jeremias,  9:23-24 

Apocrypha:  Judith ,  8:8  —  (D)  OT,  Judith,  8:8  / 
Wisdom  of  Solomon,  3:16-17;  4:1-8;  8:9  10— 
(D)  OT,  Bool{  of  Wisdom ,  3:16-17;  4:1-8; 
8:9-10  /  Ecclesiasticus,  1:19;  10:5;  10:19  11:2; 
37:26;  44:1-15— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  1:24; 
10:5;  10:23-11:2;  37:29;  44:1-15  /  /  Macca¬ 
bees,  2:50-51  — (D)  OT,  /  Machabces ,  2:50-51 

New  Testament:  21:26-40  /  Romans , 

14:15-18  /  //  Corinthians ,  10:8-18;  11:16-30  / 
/  Thessalonians,  1:6-10 

4  Homer:  7//W,  bk  i  3a-9a,c;  bk  iii  19a-23d; 
bk  vi  [312-358]  43b  d;  [503-529]  45b  d;  bk 
ix  57a-64a,c  csp  [307-429]  60b  61c;  bk  x  (102- 
130]  66a-b;  bk  xii  [290-328]  85b-c;  bk  xxii 
[99-130]  156b-c;  [289-305]  158b 

5  Aeschylus:  Against  Thebes  [1011-1084] 

38b-39a,c 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  csp 
[31— 57]  99b-d,  [463-511]  103c-d,  [1187-1221] 
ilOb-c  /  Antigone  [163-210]  132c-d;  [441-525] 
134d-135c  /  Ajax  143a-155a,c  esp  [430-480] 
146d-147b,  [1047-1421]  152a-155a,c 

5  Euripides:  Rhesus  [149-203]  204c-205a  /  Sup¬ 
pliants  [857-917]  266a-b  /  Hecuba  [251-257] 
355a;  [299-331]  355b-c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  70c-d;  76a  b; 
85d-86b;  bk  iii,  93c;  bk  iv,  134d-135b;  bk  v, 
160d'161a;  168d-169a;  bk  vi,  206d-207a; 
bk  vii,  231d;  233d-234b;  248d;  257a;  257c; 
bk  ix,  303c-304a;  305a-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  i,  350b; 
bk  ii,  395d-396a;  398d-399a;  402c-d;  403c- 
404a;  bk  iii,  427a-c;  bk  vi,  513a-d 

7  Plato:  Laches,  27b-d;  31a-c  /  Symposium, 
152d-153b;  154d-155a  /  Apology ,  205d-206a  / 
Republic ,  bk  i,  296c-d;  bk  v,  366c-367b; 
370b-c;  bk  viii,  405d-406a;  bk  ix,  422a  / 
Laws,  bk  in,  673d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  ii,  ch  ii  [1  i5b22— 35] 
161d-162a,c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iv,  cii  3-4  370b  372d 
/  Politics,  bk  v,  cii  10  [1 3 1 2a23— 39]  514d  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i36ia27— 34]  601d;  ch  9 
608c-611c;  bk  ii,  cii  ii  [  1 388*28— b2S]  635b 
636a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1105- 
1135]  75c-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  3,  263d; 
bk  vii,  sect  34  282a 


742 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  The  social  realization  oj  honor  and  fame.  3  h. 
The  conditions  oj  honor  or  fame  and  the 
causes  of  dishonor  or  infamy .) 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  i  [441-493]  115a-116b; 
[561-568]  118b;  bk  ix  [590-620]  295a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Camillus ,  117a-c  /  Fabius  141a- 

154a, c  esp  149b-c  /  Alcibiades  155b,d-174d 
esp  172b  /  Alcibiades-Coriolanus ,  194a-195a,c 
/  Aemilius  Paulas,  224d-229c  /  Pelopidas , 
243c-244b  /  Marcellus-Pelopidas ,  262 d  /  ^r/>- 
tides ,  264a-d;  265c-d  /  392d-393b  / 

Nicias ,  425c-d  /  Agesilaus ,  497a-b  /  Pompey , 
509d-510a  /  Caesar ,  598d-601a  /  Phocion, 
604b,d-605d  /  Ctf/o  Younger ,  637a-c  /  Agis, 

648b,d-649b  /  Cleomenes ,  659d-660a  /  C/rrro, 
712d-713b  /  Demetrius ,  737b-d  /  D/o/z,  784a-b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  16d-17a;  bk  ii,  33c; 
41c-d;  bk  hi,  60d-61a;  bk  iv,  72d-73d;  bk  xi, 
101c-102a;  bk  xv,  169a  /  Histories ,  bk  ii,  226d- 
228a;  bk  iii,  248b-c;  259c-260a;  bk  iv,  289d- 
290a 

18  Augustine:  Ci/y  0/ bk  v,  ch  12-20  216d- 
226a  passim 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  2, 
aa  2-3  616d-618a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
73,  a  10,  ans  128a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  25,  a  i, 
rep  2  501b-502a;  q  43  585a-592d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  hi  [22-69] 
4b'd;  vi  [76-93]  9a-b;  vn  [1-66]  9c-10b;  xm 
[31— 78]  18b-c;  xvi  [1-90]  22c-23b;  xxiv  [43- 
60]  35a-b;  xxxn  [i]-xxxiii  [9]  47c-49c;  pur¬ 
gatory,  viii  [121-139]  65c-d;  xi  [73-117]  69c- 
70a;  paradise,  xvi  [16-154]  130a-132a;  xvii 
[46-142]  132c-133c 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale ,  par  10,  500a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  viii  12d-14c  esp 
13b-c;  ch  xiv-xix  21b-30a;  ch  xx,  30d;  ch 
xxi  31d-33a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  74c-75b;  part  ii, 
146d;  part  iv,  261c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  7a-d;  103c-104d;  112d- 
113d;  126b-127c;  130b-d;  302b-306a;  314c- 
316a;  390c-391c;  445a-446a;  450c-453c;  495d- 
496d 

26  Shakespeare:  2W Henry  VI,  act  i,  sc  ii  36b- 
37c  /  Richard  II,  act  v,  sc  ii  [1-40]  346b-d  / 
Henry  V ,  act  iv,  sc  i  [247-301]  554a-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iv,  sc  iv  [46-66] 
59b-c  /  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  ii 
ll3c-115d;  act  iii,  sc  in  [74-233]  123b-125a  / 
Coriolanus,  act  ii,  sc  i  [220-275]  363b-364a; 
act  iii,  sc  11— iii  373c-377a;  act  iv,  sc  vii  [27- 
57]  384c-d  /  Henry  VIII,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [350- 
458]  572c-573d  /  Sonnets,  xxv  590a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  227a- 
228d;  303a-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  83c;  92a-b 

32  Milton:  Lycidas  [64-84]  29a-b  /  Paradise  Lost , 

bk  ii  [430-456]  120b-121a  /  Samson  Agonistes 
[960-996]  360b-361a 


33  /o 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  319-324  229b-230b;  337 
232b-233a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  15b-16b;  part  iii, 
119a-121b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  9a-d;  38b;  146c-147a; 
223d-224b;  308a-310a;  3l3d-314d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  360a-362d  esp  362b-d 
/  Political  Economy,  372d;  374d-375b  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  iv,  434b-435a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  354c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  2a;  3a;  92a;  435a- 
436b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  27c-29a;  31b, d- 
32c;  68a-b;  71b, d;  176c-d;  209d;  494b, d- 
495  d;  504c- 505c 

43  Federalist:  number  68,  206b-c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  452c-453a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  62b-c;  124d-125d;  140b- 
141a;  160b;  189d-190b;  194c-195a;  197c; 
198b-d;  250d-251a;  256d;  299a-b;  412b-d; 
479a-d;  498c-499a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  244 
77c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3734-3763]  91a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  79a-82b;  84b-85a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  170d-171c; 
173d-179a  esp  177d-178a;  bk  v,  204a-205b; 
228b-234a;  bk  vi,  247a-c;  250c;  bk  viii,  304c; 
338c-d;  bk  xiii,  582a-584b;  bk  xiv,  610c- 
611c;  bk  xv,  619c-621b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  767a 

4.  Honor  in  the  political  community  and  in 
government 

4a.  Honor  as  a  principle  in  the  organization  of 
the  state:  timocracy  and  monarchy 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xii  [290-328]  85b-c 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  152b-d  /  Republic,  bk 
viii,  402b-405c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  v,  ch  10  [1310^40- 
i3iia7]  513b;  bk  vii,  ch  2  [1^2^2-17,2^] 
528c-529a 

14  Plutarch:  Themistocles ,  99b-c  /  Lysander- 
Sulla,  387d-388a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  v,  ch  12,  218d- 
219b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  74b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  181d-182c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  iv,  sc  i  [162- 
334]  343b-345a;  act  v.  sc  ii  [1-40]  346b-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  iii,  sc  i  [142- 
161]  370d-371a 

36  Swift:  Gulliier ,  part  iii,  120a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  11c- 
12b;  bk  iv,  13b,d-15a;  bk  v,  32d;  bk  viii, 
53b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  326b-327a;  360a-362d 
passim,  esp  3 60a -3 61  a  /  Political  Economy , 
375a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  630b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81c-d;  317b-318b 


4b  to  4c  Chapter  35:  HONOR  743 


46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  273, 
91cd  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  262a-c; 
part  iv,  334b-c 

51  T  olstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  241c  242b 

4b.  The  scale  of  honor  in  the  organization  of 
the  state:  the  just  distribution  of  honors 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  13:7 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  i  [  1  —5 1  o j  3a  8b;  bk  ix  57a- 
64a, c;  bk  xii  [290-328]  85b-c 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [ion  1084] 
38b  39a, c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [162-210]  132c-d  /  Ajax 
143a-155a,c  esp  [430-480]  146d  147b,  [1047- 
1421]  I52a-155a,c 

5  Euripides:  Hecuba  [299-331]  355b-c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  85a;  bk  vi,  194d- 
195b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a;  bk  iii,  427a-c;  bk  viii,  587a  b 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  i,  305d-306b;  bk  v,  366d- 
367a  /  Laws ,  bk  iii,  673d-674b;  bk  iv, 
683b-c:  bk  v,  686d-688a;  bk  vi,  699d-700b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  2  [ii30b30-34] 
378b;  ch  3  [ii3ia24~29]  378d;  ch  6  [1  i34bi— 7] 
382b;  bk  viii,  ch  14  [1  i63b5~  13]  416a, c  / 
Politics ,  bk  1,  ch  12  [i259b5-8]  454a;  bk  ii,  ch 
7  [i266b36-i267a2]462c;  [1267^37—41]  463b; ch 
9  [i27obi8-25]  466d-467a;  ch  ii  [i273a32-b7] 
469d-470a;  bk  iii,  ch  5  [i278a35— 39]  475c; 
ch  10  [1281*29-34]  479a;  ch  13  481b-483a; 
bk  v,  ch  2  [i302*i6]-ch  3  [i302b2o]  503b- 
504a;  ch  4  [1304*17-38]  505d-506a;  ch  8 
[1308*8-11]  510a;  [i3o8bio-i7]  510d;  [1309*13- 
15]  511b;  ch  12  [i3i6b2i-24]  519d;  bk  vii,  ch 
14  [i332b42-i333*i6]  537d-538a  /  Athenian 
Constitution ,  ch  12,  par  1  557b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Pompey ,  505a-c  /  Cato  the  Young¬ 
er ,  636d-637c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  xi,  105d-107b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  v,  ch  12, 
218b-c 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xxi,  32d-33a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  73b-c;  74b-c;  75b- 
76b;  part  11,  103c-d;  104b;  146d;  156c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  181d-183a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [430-456]  120b- 
121a  /  Areopagitica ,  383a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  305  228a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  15b-16b;  28a-b;  part 
iii,  119a-121b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  iii,  11c- 
12b;  bk  v,  23c-25c;  31a-b;  bk  xi,  71d-72a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  326b-327a;  358b-c; 
360a-362d  passim,  esp  360b, d  [fn  1]  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  iii,  408c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  17a-b;  240c-244c 
esp  240c-241b,  244b-c;  245d-247a  passim; 
501c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  39d;  81c-d;  317b- 
318b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  444c-445a 


43  Articles  op  Confederation:  vi  [87-93]  6b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.;  article  i,  sect 
9  (289  295]  14a 

43  Federalist:  number  84,  252a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  141a;  197c 

46  1  Iegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  206 
68d  69b;  par  319,  106b  c  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  part  i,  222a  224a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [10,849-976]  264a 
267a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  108a  112a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  131c-135c; 
bk  v,  206b  c;  228b  234a;  bk  vi,  241c-242b; 
250c 

4c.  Honor  as  a  political  technique:  the  uses  of 
praise,  prestige,  public  opinion 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  x  [60-71]  65d 

5  Euripides:  Hecuba  [251-257]  355a;  [299-331] 
355b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a;  bk  iii,  427a-c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  i,  305d-306b;  bk  vi, 
377a-379c  /  Laws,  bk  vii,  730d-731d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  cii  12  [i259b5~8] 
454a;  bk  ii,  ch  ii  [i273a32-b7]  469d-470a;  bk 
iii,  ch  5  [1278*35-39]  475c;  bk  v,  cii  8 
[i3o8bio-2o]  510d;  ch  ii  [1315*4-24]  517d- 
518a;  bk  vii,  ch  2  [i324bio-23]  528c-d  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  9  608c-611c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  1  [142-156]  107a;  [450- 
465]  115b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  45c-46b  /  Alcibiades, 
165c-d/  Caesar,  598d-599b/  Cleomenes,  659d- 
660a 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i,  209d-210b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xxi,  32d-33a;  ch 
xxii,  33c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  146d;  156c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  181d-183a;  306a-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  iii, 
sc  iii  [38-241]  122d-125a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  15b-16b;  part  iii, 
119a-121b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  iii,  11c- 
12b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  358b-c;  360a-362d  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  360a- b  /  Political  Economy,  375a-b 

29  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  269d- 
270d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  4d;  644d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81c-d;  317b-318b 

43  Federalist:  number  57, 177b-c;  number  68, 
206b-c;  number  72,  217a-c 

44  Hoswell:  Johnson,  124d;  127b-c;  141a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  318 
105b;  additions,  186  149b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [10,849-976]  264a- 
267a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  170d-173d; 
bk  v,  204c-205b;  228c-d;  230b;  232a-233b; 
bk  vi,  241c-242b;  bk  ix,  366d-367b 


744 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


5.  Honor,  fame,  and  the  heroic 

4  Homer:  Iliad  3a-179d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  70c-d;  bk  ix, 
293c-294c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  92c-93a  /  Republic ,  bk  v, 
366d-367a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iv,  ch  3-4  370b-372d 
14  Plutarch:  Theseus  la-1 5a, c  esp  2c-3b 
21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  hi  [22-69] 
4b-d;  iv  5c-7a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  77c-d 
25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  181d-183a 
32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes 339a-378a  esp  [23- 
67]  340a-341a,  [164-175]  343a-b,  [340-372] 
347a-b,  [521-540]  351a-b,  [667-709]  354a- 
355a,  [1065-1300]  362b-368a,  [1334-1362] 

368b-369a 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  373c-374a 
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  31b,d-32c 
51  T  olstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  89b-d;  bk  iii, 
131c-135c;  146d-147c;  150a-164a,c;  bk  vi, 
250c;  bk  ix,  344b-346a;  366d-367b;  bk  x, 
442c-443b;  bk  xv,  619c-621b 
53  James:  Psychology,  826a-827a 

5 a.  Honor  as  a  motivation  of  heroism 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  i  3a-9a,c;  bk  iii  [139-160] 
20c;  bk  v  [520-532]  35c;  bk  vi  [440-465] 
44c-d;  bk  viii  [130-156]  52c;  bk  ix  57a-64a,c; 
bk  xii  [290-328]  85b-c;  bk  xxii  [99-130] 
156b-c;  [289-305]  158b 

5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [430-480]  146d-147b 

5  Euripides:  Heracleidae  [1-11]  248a;  [484-596] 
252c-253b  /  Suppliants  [857-917]  266a-b  / 
Hecuba  [343-383]  355d-356a;  [482-603]  357a- 
358a  /  Heracles  Mad  [275-31 1]  367c-d  /  Phoe¬ 
nician  Maidens  [991-1030]  387a-b 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [565-598]  477a-c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii,  226b-c;  234a-b; 
255c-d;  bk  ix,  291c-292a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a  esp  397d-398c;  402c-404a;  bk  v,  484a-c; 
bk  vii,  556b-d 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  152b-d;  166b-167a  / 
Apology,  205d-206a  /  Republic,  bk  v,  366c- 
367b  /  Laws,  bk  i,  651a-652a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  6-9  361a-364b; 
bk  iv,  ch  3  370b-372b  passim,  esp  [1 123^1- 
33]  370d,  [ii24b7-9]  37lb-c  /  Politics,  bk  v, 
ch  10  [i3i2a24~39]  514d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [441-493]  115a-116b;  bk 
x  [276-286]  309b-310a;  bk  xi  [376-444]  338b- 
340a;  bk  xii  [650-696]  37lb-372b 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  2c-9a  esp  3a-b,  3d  / 
Romulus-Theseus,  30a-b  /  Poplicola,  83b-84a 
/  Coriolanus,  175d-176b  /  Pelopidas,  238b- 
239c  /  Flamininus,  302b  /  Alexander  540b, d- 
576d  esp  542a-d,  553b-c  /  Caesar,  583b-585d; 
599b- d  /  Cato  the  Younger  620a-648a,c 


5  to  5b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  49d;  bk  xvi,  180d- 
183a;  183d-184a  /  Histories ,  bk  i,  195a-b;  bk 
ii,  226d-228a;  bk  iii,  248b-c;  256b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  12  216d- 
219b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
68-70  10a  /  Knight's  Tale  [859-1029]  I74a-177a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  IV,  acti,  sc  iii  [194— 
208]  439d  /  Henry  V,  act  iv,  sc  iii  [16-67] 
555d-556b  /  Julius  Caesar ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [84—96] 
570b;  act  v,  sc  v  [68-81]  596a, c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  ii, 
sc  11  113c-115d 

29  Cervantes  :  Don  Quixote  esp  part  i,  82c-d, 
122d-123a,  147b-c,  190d-191d,  part  ii,  203a-b, 
227b-d,  256a-d,  280b-c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  800  328a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  437d-438c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  3a-b;  92a-b;  93d- 
94b;  217d-220d  esp  219c-220d;  370b-d; 
376a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  324c-325a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  326b-327d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  452c-453a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  189 
149d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  166b- 
168a;  184b-d;  part  iv,  341a-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  45b-46a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  322c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  21d-22b;  bk 
ii,  77c-81b;  89b-d;  97c-106d;  bk  iii,  146d- 
147c;  150a-164a,c;  bk  ix,  366d-367b;  369a- 
372a;  bk  xi,  527b-528b;  bk  xiii,  569d-570a; 
bk  xiv,  590d-604b  passim,  esp  603a-604b;  bk 
xv,  618b-619d;  epilogue  i,  673d-674a,c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  x, 
273a-d;  epilogue,  408a-c 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  765a-b 

5b.  Hero-worship:  the  exaltation  of  leaders 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xii  [290-328]  85b-c 

5  Aristophanes:  Frogs  [1008-1098]  576b-577c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  v,  168d-169a;  183d- 
184a;  bk  vi,  192c;  bk  vii,  235b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d- 
398a;  bk  v,  485b-c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii,  340a-b;  bk  v,  366c- 
367b;  bk  vii,  401b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  14  [i^2hiy- 
2 7]  537b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [267-290]  llOa-llla; 
bk  vi  [756-892]  231a-235a;  bk  viii  [608- 
731]  275a-278b 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  14c-15a,c/  Romulus,  28a- 
30a, c  /  Themistocles,  99b-c  /  Pericles,  140c- 
141a, c  /  Aemilius  Paulus,  226c-230d  /  Ly San¬ 
der,  361  d-362a  /  Demetrius,  729d-731a;  734b- 
735a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  73b-d  /  Histories, 
bk  1,  198c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv 
267c-270b 


5c  to  5a  Chapter  35:  HONOR  745 


25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  103c  104d;  126b  128d; 
145d-146d;  362a-365a;  390c-391c;  452d  453b 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  v,  sc  ii  [i  40] 
346b-d  /  King  John,  act  i  376a-379c  /  Julius 
Caesar ,  act  i,  sc  i  [37-65]  568d  569a;  sc  n 
[90-161]  570b-571a;  act  v,  sc  v  [68-75]  596a, c 

27  Shakespeare:  Antony  and  Cleopatra ,  act  v, 
sc  11  [82-100]  347a  b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  la-8c;  32c- 
33a;  41a-c;  82c-d;  part  ii,  254d  255a 

32  Milton:  Lord  Gen.  Fairfax  68b-69a  /  Lord 
Gen.  Cromwell  69a- b 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  373c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  12b-c;  28b  d;  92a; 
263a;  298b;  471c-d;  627a-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  131b;  209d;  415d- 
416c;  536c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  298d-299a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  107a  b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  9c-10d;  bk  ii, 
97c-101c;  bk  hi,  135c-137c;  140c-142d;  159b- 
161b;  162b-164a,c;  bk  iv,  170d-173d;  bk  v, 
230b-234a;  bk  vi,  238c-243d  esp  242c-243c; 
260a-262a;  bk  ix,  344b-346a;  354a-355c; 
366d-367b;  382a-388a,c;  bk  x,  405a-406c; 
444a-445d;  bk  xi,  518c-d;  bkxiii,  578b;  582a- 
584b;  bk  xiv,  600d;  610c-611c;  bk  xv,  619c- 
621b;  epilogue  1,  647b-649d;  673d-674a,c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  826b-827a 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology ,  669a-c;  674b- 
675b;  676b-c;  683c-684a;  686b-689d;  691d- 
693a  /  War  and  Death ,  762c 

5c.  The  occasions  of  heroism  in  war  and  peace 

4  Homer:  7/;W3a-179d  esp  bk  iv  [220-418]  26b- 
28a,  bk  v  [520-532)350,  bk  x  [203-253]  67a-c, 
bk  xii  [290-328]  85b-c  /  Odyssey ,  bk  i  [267- 
305]  135d-186a 

5  Euripides:  Rhesus  [149-263]  204c-205c  / 
Heracles  Mad  [140-205]  366b-d  /  Phoenician 
Maidens  [991-1018]  387a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  69a-b;  bk  iii, 
lOlc-d:  122a-123d;  bk  iv,  134d-135b;  bk  vi, 
187b-188d;  bk  vii,  233d-234b;  238a-c;  248d; 
255a-257d;  bk  ix,  291c-292a;  303c-304a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a;  bk  iv,  457b-c;  bk  v,  484c-485c;  502b-c 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  205d-206a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  6-9  361a-364b; 
bk  iv,  ch  3  370b-372b  passim  /  Politics ,  bk 
vii,  ch  2  [i324bio-23]  528c-d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  ix  [168-449]  283b-291a 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus  la-15a,c  /  Poplicola ,  83b- 
84a  /  Coriolanus ,  174b,d-179c  /  Aemilius 
Paulus ,  219d-229c  /  Marcellus  246b,d-261a,c 
/  Alexander  540b,d-576d  /  Cato  the  Younger 
620a-648a,c  /  Demosthenes ,  695d-703b  / 
Cicero ,  712d-713b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  lla-b;  bk  iii,  49d; 
bk  vi,  92c;  bk  xvi,  180d-183a;  183d-184a  / 
Histories ,  bk  i,  200b-c;  bk  ii,  226d-228a; 
bk  iii,  246b-c;  248b-c;  249b:  256a-c 


20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  pari  hi  m  ppl, 
q  96,  aa  5-7  1055c  1062a;  aa  ii  12  1063d 
1065b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxvi  38a  39c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Crcssida ,  bk  ii,  stanza 
25  29  24b  25b;  stanza  88-92  33a  b;  bk  v, 
stanza  258  154a  /  Prologue  [4^  78]  159b  160a 
/  Knight's  Tale  174a  211a  esp  [859-1004]  174a- 
176b 

23  Maciiiavelli:  Prince ,  cn  xxvi  36b  37d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  73b-76b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
32c-35a;  42a-44a;  50c-52d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  302b  303a;  340a  343b 
passim;  362a-365a;  390c-391c 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  iii,  sc  i  543d 
544b;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [16-67]  555d-556b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Crcssida,  act  ii, 
sc  ii  113c-115d  /  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [256- 
280]  354b-c;  act  ii,  sc  i  [130-178]  362b-c; 
sc  in  [86-128]  366d-367b  /  Timon  of  Athens, 
act  iii,  sc  v  406d-408a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote  esp  part  i,  147b-d, 
part  n,  203a  b,  280b-c 

32  Milton:  Lord  Gen.  Fairfax  68b-69a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  437d-438c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  217d-220d  esp 
219c-220d;  240b-247a  passim;  369d-376c  esp 
370a-c,  375b-c;  644d-645c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  19d-20a;  357c- 
359c;  415d-416c;  534b-536d  passim;  549c- 
550c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  241  d- 
242b;  247a;  part  ii,  262c-363a;  274a-275a; 
281d-282d;  part  iii,  298a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  77c-81b; 
89b-d;  97c-106d;  bk  iii,  146d-147c;  150a- 
164a, c;  bk  vi,  250c;  bk  ix,  366d-367b;  369a- 
372a;  bk  xiv,  590d-604b 

5 d.  The  estimation  of  the  role  of  the  hero  in 
history 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [756-892]  23 la- 235a; 
bk  viii  [608-731]  275a-278b 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus  la-15a,c  esp  9a-d  /  Romu¬ 
lus  15a-30a,c  /  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  47a-48c 
/  Numa  Pompilius  49a-61d  esp  59c-60b  /  Peri¬ 
cles  121a-141a,c  esp  129c-130b,  140c-141a,c  / 
Timoleon  195a-213d  esp  212c-213d  /  Fla- 
mininus,  307d-308a  /  Pompey  499a-538a,c  / 
Caesar  577a-604d  /  Antony  748a- 7 79d  esp 
750a-b  /  Marcus  Brutus  802b,d-824a,c 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  vi,  9a- b;  ch  xx, 
30d;  ch  xxv-xxvi,  35a-37a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iv, 
267c-268a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  362a-365a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  x,  65d-68a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  362a-b;  364a-b /  Politi¬ 
cal  Economy ,  373c-374a  /  Social  Contract ,  bk 
ii,  400c-402a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  633d-634a,c 


746 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  Honor,  fame,  and  the  heroic .  5d.  The  estima¬ 
tion  of  the  role  of  the  hero  hi  history .) 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  220b;  251d-252a 

43  Federalist:  number  72,  217d-218a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  298d-299a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  93 

36a-b;  part  ii,  par  124  44b-d;  part  iii,  par 
318  105b;  par  344  111a;  par  348  llld;  par  350 
112a;  additions,  58  125c;  186  149b  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History ,  intro,  162a-170b;  184b-d; 
part  1,  241d-242b;  part  ii,  259b-c;  273a; 
274a-275a;  275d-276a;  280b-281a;  281d- 

282d;  283c-d;  part  iii,  298a-b;  300a-301c; 
part  iv,  360b-c;  361d-362a;  366b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [570-580]  16a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl [,  107a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace  passim,  esp  bk  i,  8d- 
lOd,  bk  iii,  143a-c,  162b-164a,c,  bk  ix,  342a- 
344b,  350d-355c,  bk  x,  389a-391c,  405a-b, 
430b-432c,  447c-448c,  465c-467a,  bk  xi,  469a- 
470c,  497c-499c,  507a,  bk  xiii,  563a-575a,  bk 
xiv,  610d-611c,  bk  xv,  619d-621b,  epilogue 
1,  645a-650c,  epilogue  ii  675a-696d  passim 

53  James:  Psychology ,  826b-827a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  800a- b 
/  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  884 b-c 

6.  The  idea  of  glory:  its  distinction  from  honor 
and  fame 

New  Testament:  John ,  5:44 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  v,  ch  12,  218b-c; 
ch  14  220a-d;  ch  17-19  221b-225b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  2, 
a  2,  rep  2  616d-617b;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  1-2 
617b-618a;  q  4,  a  8,  rep  i  636a-c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  90,  a  2  1013d-1014d;  q  96,  a  7,  rep  3  1061b- 
1062a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [1-9] 
106a;  vii  [1-9]  115a-b;  xiv  [1-66]  126d-127c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  300c-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  227d-228d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  793  326b-327a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  437d-438c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  347d-348b 

53  James  :  Psychology,  203a-204b 

6a.  The  glory  of  God:  the  signs  and  the  praise 
of  the  divine  glory 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  15:1-21  /  II  Samuel, 
6;  22 —(D)  II  Kings,  6;  22  /  /  Kings,  8 —(D) 
III  Kings,  8/1  Chronicles,  16:7-36;  17:16-27; 
29:10-19— (D)  I  Paralipomenon,  16:7-36; 
17:16-27;  29:10-19  /  Psalms  passim,  esp  8,  18- 
19,  24,  29-30,  33-34,  47,  57,  66,  68,  81,  92-93, 
95-96,  iii,  117,  134-136,  138,  145-150— (P) 
Psalms  passim,  esp  8,  17-18,  23,  28-29,  32~ 
33,  46,  56,  65,  67,  80,  91-92,  94-95,  no,  1 16, 
i33~i35,  137,  144-150  /  Isaiah,  6:1-6  esp  6:3; 
12:1-6;  25-26;  42  esp  42:8-12— (D)  Isaias, 
6:1-6  esp  6:3;  12:1-6;  25-26;  42  esp  42:8-12 


6  to  6b 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  8:15-17;  12:6-7;  13 — ( D ) 
OT,  Tobias ,  8:16-19;  12:6-7;  I3  /  Judith , 
16:1-18— (D)  OT,  Judith ,  16:1-22  /  Rest  of 
Esther,  13:8-18— (D)  OT,  Esther ,  13:8-18  / 
Ecclesiasticus,  18;  39:12-35;  42:15-43:33; 

51:1-12— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  18;  39:16-41; 
42:15-43:37;  51:1-17  /  Song  of  Three  Children, 
28-68— (D)  OT,  Daniel,  3:51-90  /  I  Macca¬ 
bees,  4:24—  (D)  OT,  I  Machabees,  4:24 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:13-16  /  Luke, 
1:46-55,68-79;  2:8-14  /  John,  8:54  /  I  Peter, 
4:11  /  II  Peter ,  1:16-19  /  Revelation,  5:9-14; 
7:9-17;  1 1 :i6— 18;  21-22— (D)  Apocalypse , 
5:9-14;  7:9-17;  11:16-18;  21-22 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1  la-b;  par 
4  2a;  par  31  8d-9a;  bk  ii,  par  13,  lid;  bk  v, 
par  1  27a-b;  bk  vii,  par  19  49c-d;  par  23 
50b-c;  bk  ix,  par  1  61c-d;  par  34  70c-d;  bk  x, 
par  38  81a  /  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  14  220a-d; 
ch  17  221b-222a;  bk  viii,  ch  6  268d-269c;  bk 
xi,  ch  29  339a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  4-5  344b-345b; 
bk  xxii,  ch  29  614b-616d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  26,  a 
4,  ans  151c-152a,c;  q  44,  a  4  241a-d;  q  65,  a  2 
340b-341b;  q  70,  a  2,  ans  364b-365a;  part 
1— ii,  Q  2,  A  2,  REP  2  616d-617b;  a  3,  rep  i 
617b-618a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  25, 
a  1,  rep  2  501b-502a;  q  31,  a  i,  rep  i  536d- 
537c;  part  iii,  q  19,  a  3  819c-820c;  q  25  839c- 
845a;  part  iii  suppl,  qq  90-92  1012a-1037c 
passim 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xi  [1-30] 
68d-69a;  paradise,  i  [1-9]  106a;  vii  [1-9] 
115a-b;  xiii  [1-30]  125b-c;  xxvn  [1-9]  147b; 
xxxiii  [49-145]  156d-157d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  161b-163d;  part 
iv,  261c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  300c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  prop  36,  schol 
461b-c 

32  Milton:  On  Time  12a-b  /  Upon  the  Circum¬ 
cision  12b-13a  /  At  a  Solemn  Music\  13a-b  / 
Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [56-415]  136b-144b 
esp  [80-134]  137a-138a;  bk  v  [136-208]  178a- 
179b;  bk  vii  [565-640]  229b-231a  /  Samson 
Agonistes  339a-378a  esp  [23-67]  340a-341a, 
[164-175]  343a-b,  [340-375]  347a-b,  [667-709] 
354a-355a,  [1130-1155]  364a-b,  [1262-1286] 
367a-b,  [1570-1758]  374a-378a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  233,  216a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  347d-348b  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  594d  [fn  1] 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  [243-270]  7a-b 

6b.  The  reflected  glory  of  the  angels  and 
saints 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  34:29-35  /  Psalms , 
84:11;  85:8-9— (D)  Psalms,  83:12;  84:9-10  / 
Isaiah,  60 —(D)  Isaias,  60 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  44-50 — (D)  OT,  Ec¬ 
clesiasticus,  44-50 


6b  Chapter  35: 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  5:1 3-16/  Mar ty  8:^8 
/  Luty,  2:9  /  John ,  5:44;  8:54;  17:22  /  Romans , 
8:18  /  II  Corinthians ,  3:18  /  //  Thessalonians , 

1 7-10  /II  Peter ,  1:17/  Revelation ,  21  -22-(D) 
Apocalypse ,  21-22 

18  Augustine:  C//y  0/ Go*/,  bk  v,  ch  16-18  221a 
224b  passim;  bk  xviii,  ch  48  501b  d;  bk  xix, 
ch  13  519a-520a;  bk  xx,  ch  17  544d-545c;  bk 
xxii,  ch  29-30  614b-618d 

19  Aquinas:  Stimma  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  62 
317c-325b;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i 
617b-618a;  q  4,  a  8,  rep  i  636a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  19, 
a  3,  rep  3-4  819c-820c;  part  iii  suppl,  q 
69,  a  2,  rep  3-4  886c-887d;  qq  82-85  968a- 


HONOR  747 

992a;  q  90,  a  2,  ans  1013d  1 0 1 4 d ;  q  96  1049d- 
1066a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  i  [19] 
106a;  vn  [1  9]  115a  b;  x  xiv  120b  128b  csp 
xiv  [1  66]  126d  127c;  xviii  [52]  xix  [18]  134a- 
135b;  xxm  141b  142c;  xxvin  [1  129]  148d- 
150a;  xxix  [136  145]  151c  d;  xxx  xxxn  151  d~ 
156a  csp  xxx  [97-f  32]  152d  153a 
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  228b  d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  v,  prop  46,  schol 
461b  c 

32  Milton  :  On  Time  12a  b  /  At  a  Solemn  Music{ 
13a-b  /  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [809-845]  193a- b 
esp  [833-835]  193b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  643  290b-291a;  793,  326b 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Honor  or  fame  in  relation  to  virtue,  duty,  and  happiness,  see  Duty  4-4^  Happiness  26(4); 
Virtue  and  Vice  4d(2),  6d. 

The  sense  in  which  pride  is  a  vice  and  humility  a  virtue,  see  Sin  4c;  Virtue  and  Vice  8f. 
Fame  as  a  mode  of  immortality,  see  Immortality  6b. 

Mutual  respect  or  honor  as  a  condition  of  friendship,  see  Love  2b(f);  Virtue  and  Vice  6e. 
The  political  significance  of  honor,  see  Government  2a;  Justice  9e;  State  9c. 

The  rhetorical  uses  of  praise  or  honor,  see  Rhetoric  4a. 

Other  discussions  of  heroism  and  the  heroic,  ^Courage  5;  Temperance  6a;  and  for  the  con¬ 
ception  of  the  tragic  or  epic  hero,  see  Poetry  7b. 

Various  estimations  of  the  role  of  heroes,  leaders,  and  great  men  in  history,  see  History  43(4). 
The  theological  significance  of  glory,  see  God  4I1;  Happiness  70(2),  7d;  Immortality  5 f. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 


Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Chaucer.  The  House  of  Fame 

- .  The  Legend  of  Good  Women 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Praise,”  “Of  Vainglory,”  “Of  Hon¬ 
or  and  Reputation,”  in  Essays 
Hobbes.  The  Elements  of  Law ,  Natural  and  Politic , 
part  1,  ch  8 

Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  ii,  part  i 
A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments ,  part 
1,  sect  iii,  ch  2-3 

II. 

Theophrastus.  The  Characters 
Benedict  of  Nursia.  The  Rule 


Boethius.  The  Consolation  of  Philosophy \  bk  ii 

Beowulf 

Song  of  Roland 

Chretien  de  Troyes.  Arthurian  Romances 
Volsung  Saga 

Francis  of  Assisi.  The  Rules 

Jacobus  de  Voragine.  The  Golden  Legend 

Njalssaga 

Lull.  The  BooJ{  of  the  Ordre  of  Chyvalry 

Froissart.  Chronicles 

Diaz  de  Gamez.  The  Unconquered  Knight 

Malory.  Le  morte  (T Arthur 

Ariosto.  Orlando  Furioso 

Castiglione.  The  Bool {  of  the  Courtier 

Elyot.  The  Governour 


748 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


P.  Sidney.  The  Countess  of  Pembroke's  Arcadia 
Tasso.  Jerusalem  Delivered 
Spenser.  The  Faerie  Queene ,  bk  vi 
Aleman.  The  Rogue  (The  Life  of  Guzman  de  Alfa- 
rache) 

Brooke.  An  Inquisitio?i  upon  Fame  and  Honour 
Beaumont  and  Fletcher.  The  Maid's  Tragedy 
Calderon.  The  Physician  of  His  Own  Honour 
Carew.  A  Rapture 
Corneille.  Le  Cid 

- .  Horace 

Racine.  Andromaque 

Moliere.  Le  bourgeois  gentilhomme  {The  Cit  Turned 
Gentleman) 

Dryden.  All  for  Love 

Shaftesbury.  Characteristics  of  Men, Manners,  Opin¬ 
ions,  Times 

Mandeville.  An  Enquiry  into  the  Origin  of  Honor, 
and  the  Usefulness  of  Christianity  in  War 
Saint-Simon.  Memoirs 
Hurd.  Letters  on  Chivalry  and  Romance 
Voltaire.  “Honor,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 
Millar.  Observations  Concerning  the  Distinction  of 
Ran\s  in  Society 

Sheridan.  The  Rivals,  act  4,  sc  1 


Schiller.  Don  Carlos 

- .  Wallenstein 

W.  Scott.  Ivanhoe 

Tocqueville.  Democracy  in  America,  part  ii,  bk 
iii,  ch  18 

Vigny.  Military  Servitude  and  Grandeur 
Ware.  The  Law  of  Honor 
Stendhal.  The  Red  and  the  Blac\ 

- .  The  Charterhouse  of  Parma 

T.  Carlyle.  On  Heroes,  Hero-  Worship  and  the  Heroic 
in  History 

Emerson.  Representative  Men 
G  alton.  Hereditary  Genius 
Meredith.  The  Egoist 
Howells.  The  Rise  of  Silas  Lapham 
Nietzsche.  Beyond  Good  and  Evil,  ch  ix 
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough ,  part  vii,  ch  3 
T.  Veblen.  The  Theory  of  the  Leisure  Class 
Rostand.  L'Aiglon 
T.  Hardy.  The  Dynasts 

Farnell.  Gree\  Hero  Cults  and  Ideas  of  Immor¬ 
tality 

T.  S.  Eliot.  Murder  in  the  Cathedral 
Raglan.  The  Hero 

Cassirer.  The  Myth  of  the  State,  part  hi  (15-17) 


Chapter  36:  HYPOTHESIS 


INTRODUCTION 


COMPARISON  of  their  Greek  and  I^at in 
roots  shows  that  the  English  words  “hy¬ 
pothesis”  and  “supposition”  are  synonymous. 
To  hypothesize  or  to  suppose  is  to  place  under — 
to  make  one  thing  the  basis  of  another  in  the 
process  of  thought. 

The  word  “hypothesis”  is  today  often  popu¬ 
larly  misapplied  to  mean  a  guess  or  hunch.  The 
sleuth  in  a  detective  story  speaks  of  having  an 
hypothesis  about  who  committed  the  crime. 
The  popular  notion  of  what  it  means  to  suppose 
something,  or  to  entertain  a  supposition,  more 
accurately  reflects  the  meaning  of  hypothesis  in 
logic,  mathematics,  and  scientific  or  philosoph¬ 
ical  method. 

A  supposition  is  generally  understood  to  be 
something  taken  for  granted,  something  as¬ 
sumed  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  implications 
or  making  inferences.  What  is  supposed  is  not 
known  to  be  true;  it  may  be  true  or  false.  When 
we  make  a  supposition,  our  first  concern  is  to 
see  what  follows  from  it,  and  only  then  to 
consider  its  truth  in  the  light  of  its  conse¬ 
quences.  We  cannot  reverse  this  order,  when 
we  employ  suppositions,  and  ask  first  about 
their  truth. 

The  word  “if”  expresses  the  essence  of  sup¬ 
posing.  The  word  “then”  or  the  phrase  “it  fol¬ 
lows  that”  introduces  the  consequences  for  the 
consideration  of  which  we  make  the  supposi¬ 
tion.  We  are  not  interested  in  the  “if”  for  its 
own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  what  it  may  lead 
to.  In  any  statement  of  the  “if  .  .  .  then  .  .  .” 
sort,  it  is  the  if-clause  which  formulates  the  sup¬ 
position  or  the  hypothesis;  the  other  part  of  the 
statement,  the  then-clause,  formulates  the  con¬ 
sequences  or  implications.  The  whole  complex 
statement,  which  makes  an  if  the  logical  basis 
for  a  then ,  is  not  an  hypothesis.  Rather  it  is 
what  is  traditionally  called  in  logic  a  hypothet¬ 
ical  proposition. 


There  is  one  use  of  the  word  “hypothesis”  in 
mathematics  which  seems  at  odds  with  the 
foregoing  summary.  In  Euclid’s  Elements , 
for  example,  an  hypothesis  is  that  which  is 
given,  not  as  the  basis  from  which  the  conclu¬ 
sion  is  drawn  or  proved,  but  as  a  condition  of 
solving  the  geometric  problem  under  consider¬ 
ation.  Let  us  take  Proposition  6  of  Book  I.  It 
reads:  “//* in  a  triangle  two  angles  be  equal  to 
one  another,  then  the  sides  which  subtend  the 
equal  angles  will  also  be  equal  to  one  another.” 
In  the  demonstration  of  this  theorem,  a  tri¬ 
angle  having  two  equal  angles  is  regarded  as 
given  or  granted.  That  figure  or  geometrical  con¬ 
dition  is  a  fact  obtained  by  hypothesis.  It  is  the 
fact  stated  in  the  hypothesis,  or  the  if-clause,  of 
the  theorem. 

If  the  geometrical  reality  of  that  fact  itself  is 
questioned,  the  answer  would  have  to  be  ob¬ 
tained  by  a  prior  proof  that  such  a  figure,  con¬ 
forming  to  the  definition  of  an  isosceles  tri¬ 
angle,  can  be  constructed  by  the  use  of  no  other 
instruments  than  a  straight  edge  and  a  compass. 
The  construction  is  not  made,  however,  as  part 
of  the  proof  of  Theorem  6,  any  more  than  is  the 
demonstration  of  an  antecedent  theorem,  which 
may  have  to  be  used  in  the  proof  of  Theorem 
6.  In  the  proof  of  Theorem  6,  the  first  line,  be¬ 
ginning  with  the  word  “let,”  declares  that  the 
constructibility  of  the  figure  is  to  be  taken  for 
granted  as  a  matter  of  hypothesis. 

The  whole  problem  of  Theorem  6  is  to  prove 
that  the  then-clause  follows  from  the  if-clause. 
Euclid  appears  to  accomplish  this  by  introduc¬ 
ing  other  propositions — drawn  from  his  axioms, 
definitions,  postulates,  or  theorems  previously 
demonstrated — which  establish  this  connection 
and  so  certify  the  conclusion  as  following  from 
the  hypothesis.  Two  points  about  this  proce¬ 
dure  should  be  noted. 

First,  the  conclusion  does  not  follow  from 


749 


750 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


the  hypothesis  directly,  for  if  that  were  so,  the 
“if-then”  proposition  would  be  self-evident  and 
would  need  no  proof.  The  mind  which  sees  im¬ 
mediately  that  the  sides  opposite  to  the  equal 
angles  in  an  isosceles  triangle  are  necessarily 
equal  does  not  need  any  demonstration  of  the 
connection  between  equal  angles  and  equal 
sides.  The  Euclidean  demonstration  consists  in 
making  this  connection,  which  is  not  immediate - 
ly  evident,  mediately  evident;  that  is,  evident 
through  the  mediation  of  other  propositions.  It 
is  not  the  hypothesis  alone  which  proves  the 
conclusion,  but  the  hypothesis  in  the  company 
of  other  propositions  which  serve  to  take  the 
mind  step  by  step  from  the  hypothesis  granted 
to  the  conclusion  implied. 

Second,  the  proposition  with  the  truth  of 
which  the  reasoning  seems  to  end  is  not  the 
proposition  to  be  proved.  The  Q.E.D.  at  the 
end  of  a  Euclidean  demonstration  does  not  ap¬ 
ply  to  the  last  proposition  in  the  line  of  proof, 
but  to  the  theorem  itself,  for  that  is  the  propo¬ 
sition  to  be  proved.  The  last  proposition  in  the 
reasoning  is  merely  the  consequent  which,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  theorem,  is  proposed  as  follow¬ 
ing  from  the  hypothesis.  When  he  is  able  to 
verify  the  proposed  connection  between  the 
hypothesis  and  its  conclusion  or  consequent, 
Euclid  says  Q.E.D.  to  the  theorem  as  a  whole — 
the  whole  if 'then  statement . 

The  process  of  proof  seems  to  be  the  same 
when  the  theorem  is  stated  categorically  rather 
than  hypothetically.  For  example,  Theorem  6 
might  have  been  stated,  as  other  Euclidean 
theorems  are,  in  the  following  manner:  “The 
sides  subtended  by  equal  angles  in  a  triangle 
are  also  equal  to  one  another.”  This  variation 
in  mode  of  statement  raises  a  question,  not 
about  the  meaning  of  “by  hypothesis”  in  Eu¬ 
clidean  proof,  but  about  the  difference  between 
hypothetical  and  categorical  propositions, 
which  we  will  consider  later. 

The  Euclidean  use  of  a  given  (that  is,  a  con- 
structible)  figure  as  an  hypothesis  does  not 
seem  to  be  a  method  of  making  a  supposition  in 
order  to  discover  its  implications.  Nor  does  it 
seem  to  be  a  way  of  testing  the  truth  of  an 
hypothesis  by  reference  to  its  consequences. 
Both  of  these  aspects  of  hypothetical  reasoning 
do  appear,  however,  in  Plato’s  dialogues. 


In  the  Meno,  for  example,  Socrates  proposes, 
at  a  certain  turn  in  the  conversation  about  vir¬ 
tue  and  knowledge,  that  he  and  Meno  enter¬ 
tain  the  hypothesis  that  virtue  is  knowledge. 
Socrates  immediately  inquires  about  the  conse¬ 
quences.  “If  virtue  is  knowledge,”  he  asks, 
“will  it  be  taught?”  Since  Meno  already  under¬ 
stands  that  knowledge  is  teachable,  he  answers 
the  question  affirmatively.  The  utility  of  ad¬ 
vancing  the  hypothesis  that  virtue  is  knowledge 
gradually  appears  in  the  next  phase  of  the  dia¬ 
logue,  wherein  it  is  discovered  that  virtue  is  not 
teachable  at  all,  or  at  least  not  in  the  way  in 
which  the  arts  and  sciences  are  teachable.  The 
discovery  throws  some  doubt  on  the  truth  of 
the  hypothesis  that  virtue  is  knowledge;  at 
least  it  does  not  seem  to  be  knowledge  in  the 
same  sense  as  science  or  art. 

This  mode  of  reasoning  exemplifies  the  use  of 
an  hypothesis  to  test  its  truth  in  terms  of  its 
consequences.  The  underlying  logical  principle 
is  that  the  denial  of  the  consequences  requires  a 
denial  of  the  antecedent  hypothesis,  just  as  an 
affirmation  of  the  antecedent  would  require  an 
affirmation  of  the  consequent.  Nothing  follows 
logically  from  a  denial  of  the  hypothesis,  or 
from  an  affirmation  of  its  consequences. 

This  example  from  the  Meno  also  illustrates 
the  difference  between  Euclid’s  and  Plato’s  use 
of  hypotheses.  Socrates  is  not  here  trying  to 
prove  that  if  virtue  is  knowledge,  then  virtue  is 
teachable.  The  validity  of  the  foregoing  if-then 
statement  is  already  understood  in  terms  of  the 
fact  that  knowledge  is  teachable.  With  the  if- 
then  statement  accepted  as  valid,  Socrates  uses 
it  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  or  in 
what  sense  virtue  is  knowledge.  It  is  not  the  hy¬ 
pothetical  or  if-then  statement  which  is  proved, 
but  the  hypothesis — the  antecedent  in  that 
statement — which  is  tested. 

The  same  general  method  of  employing  hy¬ 
potheses  and  testing  them  is  found  in  the  em¬ 
pirical  sciences.  In  medical  practice,  the  physi¬ 
cian,  according  to  Hippocrates,  “must  be  able 
to  form  a  judgment  from  having  made  himself 
acquainted  with  all  the  symptoms,  and  estimat¬ 
ing  their  powers  in  comparison  with  one  an¬ 
other”;  he  should  then  “cultivate  prognosis,” 
since  “he  will  manage  the  cure  best  who  has 
foreseen  what  is  to  happen  from  the  present 
state  of  matters.” 


Chapter  36:  I 

The  preliminary  diagnosis  states  an  hypothe¬ 
sis  (what  the  disease  may  be)  and  the  prognosis 
foresees  a  set  of  consequences  (what  is  likely  to 
happen  if  the  diagnosis  is  correct).  Observation 
of  the  course  of  the  symptoms  and  the  patient’s 
changing  condition  will  either  confirm  or  in- 
|  validate  the  prognosis.  Confirmation  leaves  the 
diagnosis  a  lucky  guess,  but  fails  to  prove  it.  If 
the  disease  does  not  run  the  predicted  course, 
however,  the  diagnosis  on  which  the  prognosis 
was  based  can  be  dismissed  as  a  false  hypothesis. 

When  an  hypothesis  takes  the  form  of  a  pre¬ 
diction  of  what  should  happen  if  the  hypothe¬ 
sis  is  true,  the  failure  of  the  consequences  to  oc¬ 
cur  refutes  the  hypothesis.  Though  discussions 
of  scientific  method  frequently  speak  of  “pre¬ 
diction  and  verification,’’  it  would  seem  as 
though  prediction  can  only  lead  to  the  refuta¬ 
tion  of  an  hypothesis  rather  than  to  its  verifica¬ 
tion.  An  hypothesis  is  overthrown  when  its  pre¬ 
diction  fails,  but  it  is  not  verified  when  its  pre¬ 
diction  comes  true.  To  think  that  it  can  be  veri¬ 
fied  in  this  way  is  to  commit  the  logical  fallacy 
of  arguing  from  the  truth  of  a  conclusion  to  the 
truth  of  its  premises.  How,  then,  do  empirical 
*  scientists  prove  an  hypothesis  to  be  true  ?  What 
do  they  mean  by  prediction  and  verification  in 
relation  to  the  use  of  hypothesis? 

There  seem  to  be  two  possible  ways  in  which 
an  hypothesis  can  be  proved  by  empirical  or 
experimental  research.  One  way  can  be  used 
when  we  know  that  the  consequences  implied 
follow  only  from  the  truth  of  the  hypothesis. 
Should  the  consequences  implied  be  impossible 
unless  the  supposed  condition  exists,  then  the 
confirmation  of  the  prediction  verifies  the  hy¬ 
pothesis. 

The  other  possible  method  of  verification  has 
come  to  be  called  “the  method  of  multiple 
working  hypotheses.’’  The  validity  of  this 
method  depends  on  our  knowing  that  the  sev¬ 
eral  hypotheses  being  entertained  exhaust  all 
the  relevant  possibilities.  Each  hypothesis  gen¬ 
erates  a  prediction;  and  if  upon  investigation 
the  observed  facts  negate  every  prediction  ex¬ 
cept  one,  then  that  one  remaining  hypothesis  is 
verified.  If  negative  instances  have  eliminated 
the  false  hypotheses,  the  hypothesis  remaining 
must  be  true,  on  the  condition,  of  course,  that 
it  is  the  only  possibility  which  is  left. 


IYPOTHESIS  751 

Both  of  these  methods  seem  to  Ik*  valid  only 
if  a  prerequisite  condition  is  fulfilled.  To  verify 
one  of  a  series  of  multiple  hypotheses  through 
the  elimination  of  the  others,  the  scientist  must 
know  that  the  hypotheses  enumerated  arc  truly 
exhaustive.  In  the  verification  of  a  single  hy¬ 
pothesis  by  the  confirmation  of  its  prediction, 
the  scientist  must  know  that  the  observed  con¬ 
sequences  can  follow  from  no  other  supposi¬ 
tion.  Since  such  knowledge  is  often  unavailable, 
probability  rather  than  complete  proof  results 
from  the  testing  of  hypotheses  by  observation 
or  experiment. 

In  his  Treatise  on  the  Vacuum ,  Pascal  offers  a 
summary  of  the  logical  situation  by  distinguish¬ 
ing  the  true,  the  false,  and  the  doubtful  or 
probable  hypothesis.  “Sometimes  its  negation 
brings  a  conclusion  of  obvious  absurdity,  and 
then  the  hypothesis  is  true  and  invariable.  Or 
else  one  deduces  an  obvious  error  from  its  affir¬ 
mation,  and  then  the  hypothesis  is  held  to  be 
false.  And  when  one  has  not  been  able  to  find 
any  mistake  either  in  its  negation  or  its  affir¬ 
mation,  then  the  hypothesis  remains  doubtful, 
so  that,  in  order  that  the  hypothesis  may  be 
demonstrable,  it  is  not  enough  that  all  the  phe¬ 
nomena  result  from  it,  but  rather  it  is  necessary, 
if  there  ensues  something  contrary  to  a  single 
one  of  the  expected  phenomena,  that  this  suffice 
to  establish  its  falsity.” 

Both  the  use  of  hypotheses  and  the  method  of 
verifying  them  vary  from  science  to  science,  ac¬ 
cording  as  the  character  of  the  science  happens 
to  be  purely  empirical  ( e.g .,  the  work  of  Hip¬ 
pocrates,  Darwin,  Freud),  or  experimental 
(e.g.,  the  work  of  Harvey  and  Faraday),  or  a 
combination  of  experimentation  with  mathe¬ 
matical  reasoning  (e.g.,  the  work  of  Galileo, 
Newton,  Fourier).  Not  all  scientific  work  is 
directed  or  controlled  by  hypotheses,  but  in 
the  absence  of  well-formulated  hypotheses,  the 
research  can  hardly  be  better  than  exploration. 

A  well-constructed  experiment,  especially 
what  Bacon  calls  an  experimentum  crucis,  derives 
its  demonstrative  character  from  the  hypothet¬ 
ical  reasoning  which  formulates  the  problem  to 
be  solved.  The  value  of  such  a  crucial  experi¬ 
ment  appears  in  Bacon’s  reasoning  about  the 
rise  and  fall  of  the  tides.  “If  it  be  found,”  he 
writes,  “that  during  the  ebb  the  surface  of  the 


752 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


waters  at  sea  is  more  curved  and  round,  from 
the  waters  rising  in  the  middle,  and  sinking  at 
the  sides  or  coast,  and  if,  during  a  flood,  it  be 
more  even  and  level,  from  the  waters  returning 
to  their  former  position,  then  assuredly,  by  this 
decisive  instance,  the  raising  of  them  by  a  mag¬ 
netic  force  can  be  admitted;  if  othenvise,  it 
must  be  entirely  rejected.” 

In  the  field  of  mathematical  physics,  and  par¬ 
ticularly  in  astronomy,  the  meaning  of  hypoth¬ 
esis  is  both  enlarged  and  altered.  So  far  we  have 
considered  hypotheses  which  are  single  propo¬ 
sitions  implying  certain  consequences.  But  in 
mathematical  physics,  a  whole  theory — a  com¬ 
plex  system  of  propositions — comes  to  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  single  hypothesis. 

In  his  preface  to  the  work  of  Copernicus, 
Osiander  says  that  the  task  of  the  astronomer  is 
“to  use  painstaking  and  skilled  observation  in 
gathering  together  the  history  of  the  celestial 
movements;  and  then — since  he  cannot  by  any 
line  of  reasoning  reach  the  true  causes  of  these 
movements — to  think  up  or  construct  whatever 
causes  or  hypotheses  he  pleases,  such  that,  by 
the  assumption  of  these  causes,  those  same 
movements  can  be  calculated  from  the  princi¬ 
ples  of  geometry,  for  the  past  and  for  the  future 
too.”  The  elaborate  system  constructed  by 
Copernicus  and  the  system  constructed  by 
Ptolemy  which  Copernicus  hopes  to  replace 
are  sometimes  called  “the  Copernican  hypothe¬ 
sis”  and  “the  Ptolemaic  hypothesis”;  and  some¬ 
times  these  two  theories  are  referred  to  as  “the 
heliocentric  hypothesis”  and  “the  geocentric 
hypothesis.” 

A  whole  theory,  regarded  as  an  hypothesis, 
must  be  tested  in  a  different  way  from  a  single 
proposition  whose  implication  generates  a  pre¬ 
diction.  As  rival  hypotheses,  one  theory  may  be 
superior  to  another  in  internal  consistency  or  in 
mathematical  simplicity  and  elegance.  Kepler 
is  thus  able  to  argue  against  Ptolemy  by  appeal¬ 
ing  to  criteria  which  Ptolemy  accepts,  pointing 
out  that  Ptolemy  himself  wishes  “to  construct 
hypotheses  which  are  as  simple  as  possible,  if 
that  can  be  done.  And  so  if  anyone  constructs 
simpler  hypotheses  than  he — understanding 
simplicity  geometrically — he,  on  the  contrary, 
will  not  defend  his  composite  hypotheses.” 

But  even  if  the  Copernican  hypothesis  is  su¬ 
perior  on  the  grounds  of  being  geometrically 


simpler,  it  must  meet  another  test.  As  indicated 
in  the  chapter  on  Astronomy,  mathematical  , 
theories  about  physical  phenomena  must  be 
more  than  ideal  constructions  of  possible  uni¬ 
verses.  They  must  try  to  account  for  this  one 
real  world  and  are  therefore  subject  to  the  test 
of  their  applicability  to  reality.  However  ele-  ; 
gant  it  may  be  mathematically,  an  hypothesis 
— when  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of 
physics — is  satisfactory  only  if  it  accounts  for 
the  phenomena  it  was  invented  to  explain.  In 
the  words  of  Simplicius,  it  must  “save  the 
appearances.” 

An  hypothesis  can  therefore  be  tested  for  its 
application  to  reality  by  the  way  in  which  it 
fits  the  observed  facts.  “In  those  sciences  where 
mathematical  demonstrations  are  applied  to 
natural  phenomena,”  Galileo  writes,  “the  prin¬ 
ciples”  which  are  “the  foundations  of  the  entire 
superstructure”  must  be  “established  by  well- 
chosen  experiments.”  By  such  means  Galileo 
chooses  between  the  hypothesis  that  the  uni¬ 
form  acceleration  of  a  freely  falling  body  is 
proportional  to  the  units  of  space  traversed  and 
the  hypothesis  that  it  is  proportional  to  the 
units  of  time  elapsed. 

To  borrow  Plato’s  expression  in  the  Timaeus , 
the  mathematical  consistency  of  a  theory  makes 
it  “a  likely  story.”  The  theoretical  integrity  of 
the  hypothesis  makes  it  credible.  But  when 
competing  credible  hypotheses  exist,  each  sav¬ 
ing  the  relevant  appearances  equally  well, 
which  is  to  be  believed?  The  fact  that  one  of 
them,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Copernican-Ptole- 
maic  controversy,  is  mathematically  superior 
cannot  decide  the  question,  since  the  question 
is,  Which  is  true  of  reality  ? 

Sometimes  a  single  fact,  such  as  the  phenom¬ 
enon  of  the  Foucault  pendulum,  may  exercise  a 
decisive  influence,  if  one  of  the  two  competing 
theories  finds  that  fact  congenial  and  the  other 
leaves  it  inexplicable.  Sometimes,  as  appears  in 
the  discussion  of  the  Copernican  hypothesis  in 
the  chapter  on  Astronomy,  of  two  hypotheses 
which  are  equally  satisfactory  so  far  as  purely 
astronomical  phenomena  are  concerned,  one 
may  have  the  additional  virtue  of  covering 
other  fields  of  phenomena  which  that  hypothe¬ 
sis  was  not  originally  designed  to  explain. 

As  interpreted  by  Kepler  and  as  developed 
in  Newton’s  theory  of  universal  gravitation, 


Chapter  36:  HYPOTHESIS  753 


the  Copernican  hypothesis  brings  the  terrestrial 
phenomena  of  the  tides  and  of  falling  bodies 
under  the  same  set  of  laws  which  applies  to  the 
celestial  motions.  The  hypothesis  then  has  the 
amazing  quality  of  consilience— a  bringing  to¬ 
gether  under  one  formulation  of  phenomena 
not  previously  thought  to  be  related.  This 
seems  to  be  what  Huygens  has  in  mind  when  he 
considers  the  degree  of  probability  that  is  at¬ 
tainable  through  experimental  research.”  We 
have  “scarcely  less  than  complete  proof,”  he 
writes,  when  “things  which  have  been  demon¬ 
strated  by  the  principles  assumed,  correspond 
perfectly  to  the  phenomena  which  experiment 
has  brought  under  observation;  and  further, 
principally,  when  one  can  imagine  and  foresee 
new  phenomena  which  ought  .to  follow  from 
the  hypotheses  which  one  employs,  and  when 
one  finds  that  therein  the  fact  corresponds  to 
our  prevision.” 

Then,  in  common  parlance,  we  say  that  it  is 
no  longer  a  theory,  but  has  become  a  fact.  Yet 
the  question  remains  whether  the  empirical 
tests  which  eliminate  the  less  satisfactory  hy¬ 
pothesis  can  ever  make  the  more  satisfactory 
hypothesis  more  than  a  likely  story. 

In  the  Mathematical  Principles  of  Natural 
Philosophy ,  Newton  says,  “I  have  not  been  able 
to  discover  the  cause  of  those  properties  of 
gravity  from  phenomena,  and  I  frame  no  hy¬ 
potheses;  for  whatever  is  not  deduced  from 
the  phenomena  is  to  be  called  an  hypothesis; 
and  hypotheses,  whether  metaphysical  or  phys¬ 
ical,  whether  of  occult  qualities  or  mechanical, 
have  no  place  in  experimental  philosophy.”  The 
context  of  this  passage,  and  of  a  similar  state¬ 
ment  at  the  end  of  the  Optics ,  as  well  as  the 
association  in  Newton’s  mind  of  hypotheses 
with  occult  qualities,  substantial  forms,  and 
hidden  causes,  seems  to  indicate  a  special  mean¬ 
ing  of  “hypothesis.” 

Newton  criticizes  the  vortices  in  the  physics 
of  Descartes  on  the  ground  that  it  is  unneces¬ 
sary  to  appeal  to  occult  or  unobservable  entities 
in  order  to  explain  natural  phenomena.  The 
Cartesian  vortices,  like  the  substantial  forms  of 
Aristotle,  are,  forNewton,  hypotheses  in  a  very 
special  sense.  They  are  hypothetical  entities . 
They  are  not  inferred  from  the  phenomena.  Al¬ 
though  treated  as  if  they  were  realities  under¬ 


lying  the  phenomena,  they  are,  as  Gilbert  says 
of  the  prim um  mobile ,  a  “fiction,  something  not 
comprehensible  by  any  reasoning  and  evi¬ 
denced  by  no  visible  star,  but  purely  a  product 
of  imagination  and  mathematical  hypothesis.” 

There  is  almost  a  play  on  words  in  this  iden¬ 
tification  of  hypotheses  with  imaginary  en¬ 
tities  to  which  reality  is  attributed;  for  in  their 
Greek  and  I^atin  roots,  the  words  “hypothesis” 
and  “hypostasis,”  “supposition”  and  “sub¬ 
stance,”  are  closely  related.  The  first  word  in 
each  of  these  pairs  refers  to  a  proposition  which 
underlies  reasoning,  the  second  to  a  reality 
which  underlies  observable  qualities  or  phe¬ 
nomena.  To  make  hypotheses,  in  the  sense  in 
which  Newton  excludes  them  from  experi¬ 
mental  philosophy,  is  to  hypostatize  or  to  reify , 
that  is,  to  make  a  thing  out  of,  or  to  give  reality 
to,  a  fiction  or  construction  of  the  mind. 

It  has  seemed  to  some  critics  that,  no  less 
than  the  Cartesian  vortices,  the  ether  in  New¬ 
ton’s  theory  of  light  is  an  hypothesis  in  pre¬ 
cisely  this  sense — an  imaginary  entity.  For 
many  centuries,  the  atoms  and  molecules  pos¬ 
tulated  to  explain  chemical  combinations  and 
changes  were  attacked  as  fictions  and  defended 
as  useful  hypotheses.  On  the  one  hand,  there 
is  an  issue  concerning  the  theoretic  usefulness 
of  such  constructions;  on  the  other,  a  question 
concerning  their  counterparts  in  reality. 

It  is  sometimes  thought  that  fictions  are  use¬ 
ful  for  purposes  of  explanation  even  when  their 
unreality  is  admitted.  Rousseau,  for  example, 
explicitly  denies  any  historical  reality  to  the 
idea  of  man  living  in  a  state  of  nature  prior  to 
the  formation  of  society  by  the  social  contract. 
In  this  matter,  he  says,  we  can  lay  “facts  aside, 
as  they  do  not  affect  the  question.”  These  re¬ 
lated  notions— the  state  of  nature  and  the  so¬ 
cial  contract — are  “rather  calculated  to  explain 
the  nature  of  things,  than  to  ascertain  their 
actual  origin;  just  like  the  hypotheses  which 
our  physicists  daily  form  respecting  the  for¬ 
mation  of  the  world.” 

Similarly  Lavoisier  posits  the  existence  of 
“caloric”  for  its  explanatory  value.  “It  is  dif¬ 
ficult,”  he  writes,  “to  comprehend  these  phe¬ 
nomena,  without  admitting  them  as  the  effects 
of  a  real  and  material  substance,  or  very  subtile 
fluid,  which,  insinuating  itself  between  the 
particles  of  bodies,  separates  them  from  each 


754 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


other;  and,  even  allowing  the  existence  of  this 
fluid  to  be  hypothetical,  we  shall  see  in  the 
sequel,  that  it  explains  the  phenomena  of  na¬ 
ture  in  a  very  satisfactory  manner.” 

One  other  meaning  of  hypothesis  remains  to 
be  considered.  It  is  the  sense  in  which  postu¬ 
lates  or  assumptions  are  distinguished  from 
axioms  in  the  foundations  of  a  science.  In  Eu¬ 
clid’s  geometry,  as  in  Descartes’,  both  sorts  of 
principles  appear.  The  axioms  or  common  no¬ 
tions  are  those  propositions  which  are  imme¬ 
diately  seen  to  be  true  without  proof.  The 
postulates  or  assumptions  are  hypotheses  in 
the  sense  that  their  truth  is  taken  for  granted 
without  proof. 

Both  sorts  of  propositions  serve  as  principles 
or  starting  points  for  the  demonstration  of 
theorems,  or  the  conclusions  of  the  science. 
Both  are  principles  of  demonstration  in  that 
they  are  used  to  demonstrate  other  propositions 
without  themselves  being  demonstrated.  But 
axioms  are  traditionally  regarded  as  intrinsi¬ 
cally  indemonstrable,  whereas  hypotheses — 
postulates  or  assumptions — may  not  be  inde¬ 
monstrable.  They  are  simply  asserted  without 
demonstration. 

The  possibility  of  demonstrating  an  hypoth¬ 
esis  gives  it  the  character  of  a  provisional  as¬ 
sumption.  In  the  Discourse  on  Method ,  Des¬ 
cartes  refers  to  certain  matters  assumed  in  his 
Dioptrics  and  Meteors ,  and  expresses  his  con¬ 
cern  lest  the  reader  should  take  “offence  be¬ 
cause  I  call  them  hypotheses  and  do  not  appear 
to  care  about  their  proof.”  He  goes  on  to  say: 
“I  have  not  named  them  hypotheses  with  any 
other  object  than  that  it  may  be  known  that 
while  I  consider  myself  able  to  deduce  them 
from  the  primary  truths  which  I  explained 
above,  yet  I  particularly  desired  not  to  do  so, 
in  order  that  certain  persons  may  not  for  this 
reason  take  occasion  to  build  up  some  extrava¬ 
gant  philosophical  system  on  what  they  take 
to  be  my  principles.” 

The  distinction  between  axioms  and  postu¬ 
lates  or  hypotheses  raises  two  issues.  The  first 
concerns  the  genuineness  of  the  distinction  it¬ 
self.  Axioms,  self-evident  propositions,  or  what 
William  James  calls  “necessary  truths,”  have 
been  denied  entirely  or  dismissed  as  tautologies. 
The  only  principles  of  science  must  then  be 


hypotheses — assumptions  voluntarily  made  or 
conventionally  agreed  upon.  This  issue  is  more 
fully  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Principle. 
The  other  issue  presupposes  the  reality  of  the 
distinction,  but  is  concerned  with  different  ap¬ 
plications  of  it  in  the  analysis  of  science. 

Aristotle,  for  example,  defines  scientific 
knowledge  in  terms  of  three  elements,  one  of 
which  consists  of  the  primary  premises  upon 
which  demonstrations  rest.  The  principles  of  a 
particular  science  may  be  axioms  in  the  strict 
sense  of  being  self-evident  truths  and  hence 
absolutely  indemonstrable;  or  they  may  be 
provisional  assumptions  which,  though  not 
proved  in  this  science,  can  nevertheless  be 
proved  by  a  higher  science,  as  in  “the  applica¬ 
tion  of  geometrical  demonstrations  to  theorems 
in  mechanics  or  optics,  or  of  arithmetical  dem¬ 
onstrations  to  those  of  harmonics.”  The  latter 
are  not  axioms  because  they  are  demonstrable; 
yet  in  a  particular  science  they  may  play  the 
role  of  axioms  insofar  as  they  are  used,  without 
being  demonstrated,  to  demonstrate  other 
propositions. 

Reasoning  which  rests  either  on  axioms  or  on 
demonstrable  principles  Aristotle  calls  scien¬ 
tific,  but  reasoning  which  rests  only  on  hy¬ 
potheses  he  regards  as  dialectical.  Reasoning  re¬ 
sults  in  scientific  demonstration,  according  to 
Aristotle,  “when  the  premises  from  which  the 
reasoning  starts  are  true  and  primary,  or  are 
such  that  our  knowledge  of  them  has  originally 
come  through  premises  which  are  primary  and 
true.”  In  contrast,  reasoning  is  dialectical  “if  it 
reasons  from  opinions  that  are  generally  accept¬ 
ed,”  and,  Aristotle  explains,  “those  opinions 
are  ‘generally  accepted’  which  are  accepted  by 
everyone  or  by  the  majority  or  by  the  philoso¬ 
phers — /.<?.,  by  all,  or  by  a  majority,  or  by  the 
most  notable  and  illustrious  of  them.”  In  an¬ 
other  place,  he  adds  one  important  qualification. 
In  defining  a  dialectical  proposition  as  one  that 
is  “held  by  all  men  or  by  most  men  or  by  the 
philosophers,”  he  adds:  “provided  it  be  not  con¬ 
trary  to  the  general  opinion;  for  a  man  would 
assent  to  the  view  of  the  philosophers,  only  if  it 
were  not  contrary  to  the  opinions  of  most  men.” 

For  Aristotle,  dialectical  reasoning  or  argu¬ 
ment  moves  entirely  within  the  sphere  of 
opinion.  Even  an  opinion  generally  accepted, 
not  only  by  the  philosophers  but  also  by  most 


Chapter  36:  HYPOTHESIS 


men,  remains  an  opinion.  I  he  best  opinions  are 
probabilities — propositions  which  are  not  self- 
evident  and  which  cannot  be  proved.  They  are 
not  merely  provisional  assumptions.  Resting  on 
assumptions  which  cannot  ever  be  more  than 
probable,  the  conclusions  of  dialectical  reason¬ 
ing  are  also  never  more  than  probable.  Since 
they  lack  the  certain  foundation  which  axioms 
give,  they  cannot  have  the  certitude  of  science. 

Plato,  on  the  other  hand,  seems  to  think  that 
the  mathematical  sciences  are  hypothetical  in 
their  foundation,  and  that  only  in  the  science  of 
dialectic,  which  he  considers  the  highest  sci¬ 
ence,  does  the  mind  rise  from  mere  hypotheses 
to  the  ultimate  principles  of  knowledge.  “The 
students  of  geometry,  arithmetic,  and  the  kin¬ 
dred  sciences,”  Socrates  says  in  the  Republic , 
“assume  the  odd  and  the  even,  and  the  figures 
and  the  three  kinds  of  angle  and  the  like  in 
their  several  branches  of  science;  these  are  their 
hypotheses,  which  they  and  everybody  are  sup¬ 
posed  to  know,  and  therefore  they  do  not  deign 
to  give  an  account  of  them  either  to  themselves 
or  others.”  There  is  a  higher  sort  of  knowledge, 
he  goes  on,  “which  reason  herself  attains  by 
the  power  of  dialectic,  using  the  hypotheses 
not  as  first  principles,  but  only  as  hypotheses — 
that  is  to  say,  as  steps  and  points  of  departure 
into  a  world  which  is  above  hypotheses,  in 
order  that  she  may  soar  beyond  them  to  first 
principles.” 

The  issue  between  Plato  and  Aristotle  may 
be  only  verbal — a  difference  in  the  use  of  such 
words  as  “science”  and  “dialectic.”  Whether 
it  is  verbal  or  real  is  considered  in  the  chapters 
on  Dialectic  and  Metaphysics.  In  any  case, 
the  issue  throws  light  on  the  difference  between 
an  hypothesis  as  a  merely  provisional  assump¬ 
tion,  susceptible  to  proof  by  higher  principles, 
and  an  hypothesis  as  a  probability  taken  for 
granted  for  the  purposes  of  argument,  which  is 
itself  incapable  of  being  proved. 

Finally  we  come  to  the  meaning  of  “hypo¬ 
thetical”  in  the  analysis  of  propositions  and 
syllogisms.  The  distinction  between  the  cate¬ 
gorical  and  the  hypothetical  proposition  or 
syllogism,  briefly  touched  on  in  Aristotle’s 
Organon,  is  developed  in  the  tradition  of  logic 
which  begins  with  that  book. 

In  his  work  on  Interpretation  he  distin¬ 


755 

guishes  between  simple  and  compound  propo¬ 
sitions.  The  compound  proposition  consists  of 
several  simple  propositions  in  some  logical  re¬ 
lation  to  one  another.  In  the  tradition  of  logical 
analysis,  three  basic  types  of  relation  have  been 
defined  as  constituting  three  different  kinds  of 
compound  proposition.  One  type  of  relation  is 
the  conjunctive ;  it  is  signified  by  the  word 
“and.”  Another  is  the  disjunctive ;  it  is  signified 
by  the  words  “either  .  .  .  or  .  .  .”  The  third 
type  is  the  hypothetical  and  is  signified  by  the 
words  “if .  .  .  then  ...” 

To  take  an  example  we  have  already  used, 
“virtue  is  knowledge”  and  “virtue  is  teach¬ 
able”  are  simple  propositions.  In  contrast,  the 
statement,  “if  virtue  is  knowledge,  then  virtue 
is  teachable,”  is  a  compound  proposition,  hy¬ 
pothetical  in  form.  If  the  proposition  were 
stated  in  the  sentence,  “ either  virtue  is  knowl¬ 
edge  or  it  is  not  teachable,”  it  would  be  dis¬ 
junctive  in  form;  if  stated  in  the  sentence  “vir¬ 
tue  is  knowledge  and  virtue  is  teachable,”  it 
would  be  conjunctive  in  form.  In  each  of  these 
three  cases,  the  compound  proposition  consists 
of  the  two  simple  propositions  with  which  we 
began,  though  in  each  case  they  appear  to  be 
differently  related. 

Whereas  Aristotle  divides  propositions  into 
simple  and  compound,  Kant  divides  all  judg¬ 
ments  into  the  categorical,  the  hypothetical, 
and  the  disjunctive.  In  the  categorical  judg¬ 
ment,  he  says,  “we  consider  two  concepts”;  in 
the  hypothetical,  “two  judgements”;  in  the  dis¬ 
junctive,  “several  judgements  in  their  relation 
to  one  another.”  As  an  example  of  the  hypo¬ 
thetical  proposition,  he  offers  the  statement, 
“If  perfect  justice  exists,  the  obstinately  wicked 
are  punished.”  As  an  example  of  the  disjunc¬ 
tive  judgment,  “we  may  say  .  .  .  [that]  the 
world  exists  either  by  blind  chance,  or  by  in¬ 
ternal  necessity,  or  by  an  external  cause.”  Each 
of  these  three  alternatives,  Kant  points  out, 
“occupies  a  part  of  the  sphere  of  all  possible 
knowledge  with  regard  to  the  existence  of  the 
world,  while  all  together  occupy  the  whole 
sphere.”  The  hypothetical  judgment  does  no 
more  than  state  “the  relation  of  two  proposi¬ 
tions  .  .  .  Whether  both  these  propositions  are 
true  remains  unsettled.  It  is  only  the  conse¬ 
quence,”  Kant  says,  “which  is  laid  down  by 
this  judgement.” 


756 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


In  the  Prior  Analytics,  Aristotle  distinguishes 
between  the  categorical  and  the  hypothetical 
syllogism.  The  following  reasoning  is  categori¬ 
cal  in  form:  “Knowledge  is  teachable,  virtue 
is  knowledge;  therefore,  virtue  is  teachable.” 
The  following  reasoning  is  hypothetical  in 
form :“If  virtue  is  knowledge,  it  is  teachable; 
but  virtue  is  knowledge;  therefore  it  is  teach¬ 
able”;  or  virtue  is  knowledge,  it  is  teach¬ 
able;  but  virtue  is  not  teachable;  therefore  it  is 
not  knowledge.” 

The  basic  issue  with  respect  to  the  distinction 
between  categorical  and  hypothetical  syllo¬ 
gisms  is  whether  the  latter  are  always  reducible 
to  the  former.  One  thing  seems  to  be  clear.  The 
rules  for  the  hypothetical  syllogism  formally 
parallel  the  rules  for  the  categorical  syllogism. 
In  hypothetical  reasoning,  the  consequent  must 
be  affirmed  if  the  antecedent  is  affirmed;  the 
antecedent  must  be  denied  if  the  consequent 
is  denied.  In  categorical  reasoning,  the  affirma¬ 
tion  of  the  premises  requires  an  affirmation  of 
the  conclusion,  and  a  denial  of  the  conclusion 
requires  a  denial  of  the  premises. 

With  respect  to  the  distinction  between  the 
categorical  and  hypothetical  proposition,  there 
is  also  an  issue  whether  propositions  stated  in 
one  form  can  always  be  converted  into  propo¬ 
sitions  having  the  other  form  of  statement.  In 
modern  mathematical  logic,  for  example,  gen¬ 
eral  propositions,  such  as  “All  men  are  mortal,” 
are  sometimes  expressed  in  hypothetical  form: 


“If  anything  is  a  man,  it  is  mortal.”  Logicians 
like  Bertrand  Russell  think  that  the  hypothet¬ 
ical  form  is  more  exact  because  it  explicitly  re¬ 
frains  from  suggesting  that  men  exist;  it  merely 
states  that  if  the  class  ‘man’  should  have  any 
existent  members,  they  will  also  belong  to  the 
class  ‘mortal.’ 

Apart  from  the  question  whether  a  universal 
proposition  should  or  should  not  be  interpreted 
as  asserting  the  existence  of  anything,  there 
seems  to  be  a  formal  difference  between  the 
categorical  and  hypothetical  proposition.  This 
is  manifest  only  when  the  hypothetical  is  truly 
a  compound  proposition,  not  when  it  is  the 
statement  of  a  simple  proposition  in  hypo¬ 
thetical  form,  as,  for  example,  the  simple  prop¬ 
osition  “All  men  are  mortal,”  is  stated  in  hypo¬ 
thetical  form  by  “If  anything  is  a  man,  it  is 
mortal.”  Because  it  is  truly  a  compound  propo¬ 
sition,  and  not  merely  the  hypothetical  state¬ 
ment  of  a  general  proposition,  the  proposition, 
“If  virtue  is  knowledge,  then  virtue  is  teach¬ 
able,”  cannot  be  restated  in  the  form  of  a 
simple  categorical  proposition. 

A  simple  proposition,  whether  stated  cate¬ 
gorically  or  hypothetically,  may  be  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  either  a  categorical  or  a  hypothetical 
syllogism.  But  the  hypothetical  statement 
which  is  really  a  compound  proposition  can 
never  be  the  conclusion  of  any  sort  of  syllogism, 
though  it  may  be  one  of  the  premises  in  hy¬ 
pothetical  reasoning. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  use  of  hypotheses  in  the  process  of  dialectic  757 

2.  Hypothetical  reasoning  and  hypothetical  constructions  in  philosophy 

3.  The  foundations  of  mathematics:  postulates,  assumptions 

4.  The  role  of  hypotheses  in  science  75^ 

4<7.  Theories,  provisional  assumptions,  fictions,  reifications 

4 b.  The  purpose  of  hypotheses:  saving  the  appearances;  the  formulation  of  predic¬ 
tions  759 

4 c.  Consistency,  simplicity,  and  beauty  as  standards  in  the  construction  of  hy¬ 
potheses 

4 d.  The  task  of  verification:  the  plurality  of  hypotheses 

5.  Hypothetical  propositions  and  syllogisms:  the  distinction  between  the  hypothetical 

and  the  categorical  7^° 


Chapter  36:  HYPOTHESIS 


757 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  arc  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265  283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James:  Psychology,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  F'or  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
fames  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (JD),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  use  of  hypotheses  in  the  process  of  dia¬ 

lectic 

7  Plato:  Charmides ,  9d-10a  /  Protagoras ,  49a  / 
Meno,  I83b-190a,c  /  Phaedo ,  242b-243c  / 
Republic ,  bk  iv,  350d-351b;  bk  vi,  383d-388a 
esp  386d-388a;  bk  vii,  397a-398c  /  Timaeus , 
462b-c  /  Parmenides ,  491a-511d  /  Sophist , 
570a-d 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [24*21- 
bi6]  39a-c  /  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  6 
[75aiS-28]  103a-b  /  Topics  143a-223a,c  esp 
bk  1,  ch  1-3  143a-144b,  ch  io-ii  147b-148c, 
ch  14  149a-d,  bk  vm  211a-223a,c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  cfi  7  112b-113d 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  227a-230c  esp  227d-228b 
/  Science  of  Right,  457a-b  /  Judgement,  603  b-c 

2.  Hypothetical  reasoning  and  hypothetical 

constructions  in  philosophy 

7  Plato:  Meno,  183b-190a,c  /  Phaedo,  242b- 
243c  /  Republic,  bk  vi,  386d-388a;  bk  vii, 
397a-398c  /  Parmenides,  491a-511d 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[72^9-21]  98d;  bk  11,  ch  6  125d-126b  / 
Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  12  [28 ib3~ 25]  373a-b  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  ch  3  [ioo5b5-i7]  524c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  14, 
a  6,  ans  680c-681a 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  258d-259a 


31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  23a-c  /  Discourse, 
part  11— hi,  44c-50b  passim;  part  vi,  66a-b  / 
Meditations ,  72b, d;  1-11,  75a-78a  /  Objections 
and  Replies,  123d- 124c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  i,  sect  i  25a-c  / 
Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  i,  sect  10 
123b-d;  ch  xiii,  sect  19-20  152c-d;  ch  xxiii, 
sect  1-2  204a-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xi,  div 
107  499c-500b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  329a-331d  passim,  esp 
329d-330b;  333d-334a;  348a, c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  7a-d;  176d-177b:  186d- 
187a;  194b-200c;  227a-230c;  232c-233d  / 
Science  of  Right,  457a- b  /  Judgement ,  603  b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
158a 

53  James:  Psychology,  84a-119b  passim;  221a- 
238b;  820b-827a;  880b-886a  esp  884b-886a 

3.  The  foundations  of  mathematics:  postulates, 
assumptions 

7  Plato:  Meno,  183b-c  /  Republic,  bk  vi,  386d- 
388a;  bk  vii,  397c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[7iai-i6]  97a-b;  ch  2  [72*19-24]  98d;  cn  10 
104d-105d;  ch  12  [77a3f>— bi 5]  106c-d;  bk  ii, 
ch  9  [93b2 1—25]  128a  b  /  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[185*1-3]  259c-d  /  Heavens,  bk  iii,  ch  4 
[302b27-3i]  394a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xi,  ch  3 


758 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  The  foundations  of  mathematics:  postulates, 
assumptions .) 

[io6ia29~b4]  589c;  bk  xiii,  ch  2  [ic>77bii]- 
ch  3  [1078^1]  609a-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  8  [i  15 iai5— 19] 
402a 

11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  i,  postulates-commoN 
notions  2a 

11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk  i,  as¬ 
sumptions  404b  /  Spirals,  484b  /  Quadrature 
of  the  Parabola,  527a-b 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  11,  2d-3b  /  Meditations , 
73a  /  Geometry,  bk  ii,  304a-305a;  3l6a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  1-5  171a-173a  /  Vacuum, 
365b-366a  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,  430b- 
439b  passim;  442a-443b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  la-b 

34  Huygens:  Light ,  pref,  551b-552a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xii, 
sect  1-7  358c-360c  passim 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  17d-18d;  24c-25b;  46a-c; 
110a;  211c-218d  esp  217a-c  /  Practical  Reason , 
302d-303b;  312c-d;  330d-331a  /  Pref  Meta¬ 
physical  Elements  of  Ethics,  376c-d  /  Judgement, 
551a-553c 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445  b-c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  175b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bkv,  120d- 
121b 

53  James:  Psychology,  869a-870a;  874a-878a 

4.  The  role  of  hypotheses  in  science 

7  Plato:  Meno,  183  b-c  /  Republic,  bk  vi,  386d- 
388a  /  Timaeus,  447a-d 

8  Aristotle:  Meteorology,  bk  i,  ch  7  [344*5-9] 
450b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  6  [ic>7ibi2]-CH 
7  [1072^2]  601b-602b;  ch  8  603b-605a 

10  Hippocrates:  Prognostics,  par  1  19a-b;  par  25 
26a, c 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  505a-506a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32,  a 
1,  rep  2  175d-178a;  part  i-ii,  q  14,  a  6,  ans 
680c-681a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  105-106 
128b-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  23a-c  /  Discourse, 
part  vi,  66a-b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  368b-370a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  rule  i  270a;  rule 
iv  271b;  general  schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics, 
bk  iii,  543a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  16  317a-c;  ch  xii,  sect  12-13  362a-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  118a'119a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  7a-d  /  Judgement,  603b-c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  2a-b; 
6d-7a;  part  i,  23b-c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  184a 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  467a-b; 
607a, c;  851a-c 


4  to  4  a 

49  Darwin  :  Origin  of  Species,  239c  /  Descent  of 
Man,  590a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xiii,  563a-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  324b;  862a-866a;  882a- 
884b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  351c  /  Nar¬ 
cissism,  400d-401a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Princi¬ 
ple,  661c-662b 

4a.  Theories,  provisional  assumptions,  fictions, 
reifications 

7  Plato:  Meno,  183b-c  /  Republic,  bk  vi,  386d- 
388a;  bk  vii,  397c-d  /  Timaeus,  447d-450c  / 
Laws,  bk  vii,  730a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  10 
[76b22~77a4]  105c-d  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  12 
[28ib3~25]  373a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  5  379b-c  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  vi,  ch  1  [i025bi-i3]  547b;  bk  xi, 
ch  7  [1064^-9]  592b;  bk  xii,  ch  6  [io7ibi2]- 
ch  7  [1072^2]  601b-602b;  ch  8  603b-605a 

11  Archimedes:  Equilibrium  of  Planes,  bk  i, 
postulates  502a-b  /  Floating  Bodies,  bk  i, 
postulate  i  538a;  postulate  2  541b 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  iii,  83a;  86b-87a;  bk 
ix,  270b-273a;  291a-292a;  bk  xiii,  429a-b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  bk  i,  513b-514b;  bk  iii,  628b-629a; 
bk  iv,  675b-678a;  bk  v,  740a-b;  784b-785b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  863b-872b;  890b- 
892a;  929a-b;  932a-933a;  bk  v,  964b;  966a- 
967a;  984b-985b;  991a-994b  /  Harmonies  o 
the  World,  1023b-1080b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32,  a 
1,  rep  2  175d-178a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  258d-259a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi,  108b-110b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  second  day, 
179c-d;  third  day,  200a-d;  203d-205b; 
fourth  day,  240d-241c 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  316a-318b 
passim,  esp  316a-b  /  On  Animal  Generation, 
383  d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  66  114d- 
115c;  bk  11,  aph  36,  165d-166b;  aph  46,  178c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  23a-c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees, 72, 182b/  Vacuum, Z 67a-370a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  ii,  hypothesis  259a; 
bk  iii,  hypothesis  i  285a;  hypothesis  ii 
331b;  general  schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics, 
bk  1,  379a;  bk  iii,  516a-544a  esp  520a-522b, 
525b-530b 

34  Huygens:  Light,  ch  i,  557b-560b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  16  317a-c;  ch  xii,  sect  13  362c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  118a-119a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  227d-228b  /  Science  of 
Right ,  457a-b  /  Judgement,  603 b-c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445b-c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i,  9a- 
10b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  273a-277a; 
758a-759c;  777d-778c;  830b-832c;  850b, d- 
855a, c  esp  850b,d-851c 


4b  to  4  d 


Chapter  36:  HYPOTHESIS 


49  Darwin  :  Origin  of  Species ,  42a 

53  James:  Psychology,  xiiib  xiva;  95a;  231b  [fn  3) 

54  Freud:  Narcissism ,  400d-401d  /  Instincts , 
412a-b  /  General  Introduction ,  483d-485a  / 

Introductory  Lectures ,  818c  819b 

4£.  The  purpose  of  hypotheses:  saving  the  ap¬ 
pearances;  the  formulation  of  predic¬ 
tions 

7  Plato:  Meno,  183b-c  /  Republic ,  bk  vi,  386d- 
388a;  bk  vii,  397a-398c  /  Timaeus ,  447a  d 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  5  379b  c; 
bk  hi,  ch  7  [306*1-18]  397b-c  /  Meteorology , 
bk  1,  ch  7  [344*5-9)  450b 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine ,  par  1  la  b  / 
Prognostics ,  par  1  19a  b;  par  25  26a, c 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  iii,  83a;  bk  ix,  270b- 
273a;  bk  xiii,  429a-b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  505a-506a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  852a-b;  888b-890b; 
911a-b;  929a;  bk  v,  964b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  4  27d-28a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  32,  a 
1,  rep  2  175d-178a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  vi,  119a-b 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  316a-b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  18, 149d; 
aph  36,  165d-166a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  66a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [66-84]  233b- 
234a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  hi,  general  schol, 
371b-372a  /  Optics ,  bk  i,  379a 

34  Huygens:  Light,  pref,  551b-552a;  ch  i, 
553a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  16  317a-c;  ch  xii,  sect  13  362c-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  105 
433b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv,  div*26 
460b-c;  sect  ix,  div  82  487b-c;  sect  xi,  div 
107,  499d-500a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  272b-273b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  329d-330a;  333d-334a 

42  Kant:  P«r<?  Reason,  228b-c  /  Science  of  Right , 
457a-b 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i,  9d- 
10a;  PAJtT  11,  62a-63a 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  850b, d- 
851c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  42a;  239c 

53  James:  Psychology,  357b;  367b  [fn  5];  655a; 
862a-863a;  883a-884b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  483d-484a  / 
Group  Psychology,  686c-d  /  Introductory 
Lectures,  840a- b 

4c.  Consistency,  simplicity,  and  beauty  as  stand¬ 
ards  in  the  construction  of  hypotheses 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  iii,  93a;  bk  xiii, 
429a-b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 


759 

Spheres,  505a  506a;  507a  508a;  bk  iv,  675b 
678a  csp  677b  678a;  bk  v,  740a  b;  784b  785b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  888b  890a;  bk  v, 
984  b  985  b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  22 7d  228d  /  Judgement, 
551a  553c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  part  11, 
62a-63a 

53  James:  Psychology,  655a  659a  csp  655a,  657b- 
658b 

54  Freud:  Narcissism ,  400 d  40 1  a 

4d.  The  task  of  verification:  the  plurality  of 
hypotheses 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  49a-c 
8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  14  387d  389d; 
bk  iii,  ch  7  [306*6-18]  397b  c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  14,  177a- 
I78d 

11  Archimedes:  Sand- Reckoner,  520a  b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  vi  [703-71  i] 
89c- d 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  9a-12b;  bk  iii,  86b- 
93a;  bk  iv,  120a-122b 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  505a-506a;  bk  i,  514b-515b;  bk  iii, 
653b-656b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  852a-b:  857b  860b: 
907b-916a  /  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1014  b- 
1016a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c- 28c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32,  a 
1,  rep  2  175d-178a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day, 
203d-205b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  268d-273c  esp 
268d,  273c;  286b-304a,c  esp  286b-c,  295d- 
296a  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  311c-312c; 
324c-d 

30  3acon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  36  164a- 
168d 

31  Descaktes:  Discourse,  PARTVi,61d-62c;66a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [66-178]  233b- 
236a 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  368b-370a  /  Weight  of  Air, 
404a-405b;  425a-429a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  ii,  prop  52,  schol, 
265a-b;  prop  53,  schol  266a-267a;  bk  iii, 
general  schol,  369a  /  Optics,  bk  i,  453a- 
455a;  bk  iii,  525b- 530b;  543a-b 

34  Huygens:  Light,  pref,  551b-552a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xii, 
sect  13  362c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  118b  i  19a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  8d  [fn  2] 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  283d-284b 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  2a-b 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  181b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  385 b-c; 
440b, d;  830b-832c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  42a-b:  239c 

53  James:  Psychology,  655a-659a  esp  655a- b; 
863a-865a;  882a-884b 


760 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  role  of  hypotheses  in  science .  Ad.  The  task 
of  verification:  the  plurality  of  hypotheses .) 

54  Freud:  Narcissism ,  401a  /  General  Introduc- 
tion ,  502d-503c  /  Afcw  Introductory  Lectures , 
815a-b;  818c-819b 

5.  Hypothetical  propositions  and  syllogisms: 
the  distinction  between  the  hypothetical 
and  the  categorical 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [24a2i- 
bi6]  39a-c;  ch  23  [40b23~29]  57b-c;  [41*21-41] 

CROSS-REFERENCES 


5 

58a-b;  ch  29  62d-63d;  ch  44  68d-69b;  bk  ii, 
ch  n-14  81b-84b  /  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii, 
ch  6  125d-126b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  13,  rep  2  86d-88c;  q  19,  a  8,  rep  1,3 
116a-d 

42  Kant:  Pare  Reason ,  39c-41c  esp  40d-41c; 
51d-52a;  llOd-lllc  esp  111b;  129c-d; 

179c-180c;  193a-200c  esp  194b-d;  232c-233c 
/  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  265c- 
267a  esp  266a-c  /  Practical  Reason ,  297a- 
298a 


For;  The  distinction  between  axioms  and  postulates,  assumptions,  and  hypotheses,  see  Judgment 
8a;  Principle  2b(2),  30-30(3);  Truth  4c,  7a. 

Other  discussions  of  the  use  of  hypotheses  in  dialectic  and  philosophy,  see  Dialectic  2a(2); 
Logic  4d;  Philosophy  3b~3c;  and  for  the  distinction  between  scientific  and  dialectical 
reasoning,  see  Principle  3c(2);  Reasoning  56-50. 

Other  discussions  of  postulates  in  mathematics,  see  Logic  4a;  Mathematics  3a;  and  for 
other  treatments  of  hypothetical  judgments  and  hypothetical  reasoning,  see  Judgment  6d; 
Reasoning  2b. 

The  employment  and  verification  of  hypotheses  in  empirical  science,  see  Astronomy  2b; 
Experience  5a~5c;  Logic  4b;  Mechanics  2b;  Physics  4b~4d;  Science  4c,  5e. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy ,  part  hi, 
43*47 

Hobbes.  Concerning  Body ,  part  iv,  ch  26 
Spinoza.  Correspondence ,  vi,  xm 
Kant.  Introduction  to  Logic ,  x 
J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic ,  bk  iii,  ch  14 

II. 

Arnauld.  Logic  or  the  Art  of  Thinking,  part  ii 
Boyle.  Reflections  upon  the  Hypothesis  of  Alkali  and 
Acidum 

T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man ,  1, 
ch  3 

Brown.  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human 
Mind ,  vol  1,  pp  220-241 

Herschel.  A  Preliminary  Discourse  on  the  Study  of 
Natural  Philosophy ,  par  202,  208,  210,  216 
Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy ,  bk  iii,  ch  i 
Whewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences , 

VOL  II,  BK  XIII 

- .  On  the  Philosophy  of  Discovery ,  appendix  h 


Bernard.  Introduction  to  Experimental  Medicine , 
part  1,  ch  2 

Tyndall.  Scientific  Use  of  the  Imagination 
Jevons.  The  Principles  of  Science ,  ch  23 
Bradley.  The  Principles  of  Logic ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
Bosanquet.  Logic ,  vol  ii,  ch  5 
C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers ,  vol  ii,  par  619-644, 
669-693,  755-791;  vol  vi,  par  7-34 
Venn.  Principles  of  Empirical  or  Inductive  Logic , 
ch  16 

Poincare.  Science  and  Hypothesis ,  part  iv,  ch 
9-10 

Mach.  Erkenntnis  und  Irrtum  (Die  Hypothese) 
Duhem.  La  theorie  physique ,  son  objet — sa  struc¬ 
ture 

Pareto.  The  Mind  and  Society ,  vol  i,  ch  4-5 
N.  R.  Campbell.  Physics;  the  Elements ,  ch  6 

- .  What  Is  Science ?,  gh  5 

Bohr.  Atomic  Theory  and  the  Description  of  Nature 
Northrop.  Science  and  First  Principles 
Einstein.  On  the  Method  of  Theoretical  Physics 
Fisher.  The  Design  of  Experiments 
Dewey.  Logic ,  the  Theory  of  Inquiry,  ch  7 


Chapter  37:  IDE  A 


INTRODUCTION 


AS  the  topical  analysis  or  outline  in  each 
A  chapter  indicates,  the  great  ideas  are  not 
simple  objects  of  thought.  Each  of  the  great 
ideas  seems  to  have  a  complex  interior  structure 
— an  order  of  parts  involving  related  meanings 
and  diverse  positions  which,  when  they  are 
opposed  to  one  another,  determine  the  basic 
issues  in  that  area  of  thought. 

The  great  ideas  are  also  the  conceptions  by 
which  we  think  about  things.  They  are  the 
terms  in  which  we  state  fundamental  problems; 
they  are  the  notions  we  employ  in  defining 
issues  and  discussing  them.  They  represent  the 
principal  content  of  our  thought.  They  are 
what  we  think  as  well  as  what  we  think  about . 

'  If,  in  addition  to  its  objects  and  content, 
we  wish  to  think  about  thought  itself — its  acts 
or  processes — we  shall  find  in  the  tradition  of 
the  great  books  a  number  of  related  terms 
which  indicate  the  scope  of  such  inquiry.  Some 
of  them  are:  idea,  judgment,  understanding, 
and  reasoning;  perception,  memory,  and  imag¬ 
ination;  sense  and  mind.  Here  we  are  concerned 
with  one  of  these— the  idea  Idea.  It  is  probably 
the  most  elementary  of  all  these  related  terms, 
for  according  to  different  conceptions  of  the 
nature  and  origin  of  ideas,  the  analysis  of 
thought  and  knowledge  will  vary.  Different 
positions  will  be  taken  concerning  the  faculties 
by  w'hich  men  knows  the  acts  and  processes  of 
thinking,  and  the  limits  of  human  understand¬ 
ing. 

Does  the  wtord  “idea,”  wdien  it  is  used  in  the 
technical  discourse  of  metaphysics  or  psychol- 
ogy,  signify  that  which  is  knowm  or  under¬ 
stood  ?  Does  it  signify,  not  the  object  of  thought, 
but  the  thought  itself?  Or  both?  Certainly  in 
popular  speech  the  word  is  used  both  ways,  for 
men  speak  of  understanding  an  idea  and  note 
differences  in  their  understanding  of  the  same 


idea;  and  they  also  say  that  they  have  different 
ideas  about  the  same  thing,  meaning  that  they 
understand  the  same  thing  differently. 

The  word  “idea”  has  many  other  oppositions 
of  meaning  in  its  tremendous  range  of  ambigu¬ 
ity.  It  is  sometimes  used  exclusively  for  the 
eternal  types  in  the  divine  mind  or  the  intel¬ 
ligible  forms  that  exist  apart  from  material 
things  which  are  their  copies;  sometimes  for 
concepts  in  the  human  mind,  abstracted  from 
sense-experience;  sometimes  for  the  seeds  of 
understanding  wdiich  belong  innately  to  the 
intellect  and  so  do  not  need  to  be  derived  from 
sense.  Sometimes  “idea”  means  a  sensation  or  a 
perception  as  well  as  an  abstract  thought,  and 
then  its  connotation  extends  to  almost  every 
type  of  mental  content;  sometimes  it  is  denied 
that  there  are  any  abstract  or  general  ideas;  and 
sometimes  “idea”  has  the  extremely  restricted 
meaning  of  an  image  which  is  the  memory  of  a 
sense-impression. 

Kant  vigorously  protests  against  what  he 
thinks  is  a  needless  abuse  of  the  term  idea .  “I 
beg  those  who  really  have  philosophy  at  heart,” 
he  writes,  “to  exert  themselves  to  preserve  to 
the  expression  idea  its  original  signification.” 
There  is,  he  insists,  “no  want  of  words  to  de¬ 
nominate  adequately  every  mode  of  representa¬ 
tion  without  encroaching  upon  terms  which  are 
proper  to  others.” 

Kant  proposes  a  “graduated  list”  of  such 
terms.  He  begins  with  perception ,  which  he  di¬ 
vides  into  sensation  and  cognition ,  according  as 
it  is  subjective  or  objective.  A  cognition,  he 
then  goes  on,  “is  either  an  intuition  or  a  con¬ 
ception ,”  according  as  it  has  cither  an  imme¬ 
diate  or  a  mediate  relation  to  its  object.  Di¬ 
viding  conceptions  into  the  empirical  and  the 
purey  Kant  finally  reaches  the  term  idea  as  one 
sub-division  of  pure  conceptions.  If  the  pure 
conception  “has  its  origin  in  the  understanding 


761 


762 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


alone,  and  is  not  the  conception  of  a  pure  sen¬ 
suous  image,”  it  is  a  notio  or  notion;  and  “a 
conception  formed  from  notions,  which  trans¬ 
cends  the  possibility  of  experience,  is  an  idea,  or 
a  conception  of  reason.” 

According  to  Kant,  anyone  “who  has  ac¬ 
customed  himself  to  these  distinctions,”  will 
find  it  “quite  intolerable  to  hear  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  the  color  red  called  an  idea.”  Tolerable 
or  intolerable,  the  word  “idea”  has  been  used 
quite  persistently  with  the  very  meaning  that 
Kant  abominates,  as  well  as  with  a  variety  of 
others.  The  reader  of  the  great  books  must  be 
prepared  for  all  these  shifts  in  meaning  and, 
with  them,  shifts  in  doctrine;  for  according  to 
these  differences  in  meaning,  there  are  dif¬ 
ferent  analyses  of  the  nature  or  being  of  ideas, 
different  accounts  of  their  origin  or  their  com¬ 
ing  to  be  in  the  human  mind,  and  different 
classifications  of  ideas.  These  three  questions — 
what  ideas  are,  how  ideas  are  obtained,  and  of 
what  sorts  they  are — are  so  connected  that  the 
answer  given  to  one  of  them  tends  to  circum¬ 
scribe  the  answers  which  can  be  given  to  the 
other  two. 

The  unity  of  each  chapter  in  this  guide  to  the 
great  books  depends  on  some  continuity  of 
meaning  in  its  central  term,  some  common 
thread  of  meaning,  however  thin  or  tenuous, 
which  unites  and  makes  intelligible  the  dis¬ 
cussions  of  various  authors  about  the  same 
thing.  Without  this,  they  would  not  move  in 
the  same  universe  of  discourse  at  all.  Nor  could 
they  even  disagree  with  one  another,  if  the 
words  they  used  were  utterly  equivocal,  as  for 
example  the  word  “pen”  is  equivocal  when  it 
designates  a  wri  ting  instrument  and  an  enclosure 
for  pigs. 

The  extraordinary  ambiguity  of  the  word 
“idea”  as  it  is  used  in  the  great  books  puts  this 
principle  to  the  test.  Are  Plato  and  Hume  talk¬ 
ing  about  the  same  thing  at  all ,  when  the  one 
discusses  ideas  as  the  only  intelligible  reality 
and  the  other  treats  ideas  as  the  images  derived 
through  memory  from  the  original  impressions 
of  sense-experience?  Is  there  any  common 
ground  between  Aristotle  and  Berkeley — be¬ 
tween  the  identification  of  human  ideas  with 
abstract  or  general  conceptions,  quite  distinct 
from  the  perceptions  or  images  of  sense,  and  the 


identification  of  ideas  with  particular  percep¬ 
tions,  accompanied  by  a  denial  of  abstract  or 
general  notions  ? 

Do  writers  like  Locke  or  William  James,  for 
whom  ideas  of  sensation  and  abstract  ideas  (or 
percepts  and  concepts)  belong  to  the  one  facul¬ 
ty  of  understanding  or  to  the  single  stream  of 
consciousness,  communicate  with  writers  like 
Plotinus,  Descartes,  and  Spinoza,  for  whom 
ideas  belong  to  the  intellect  or  to  the  thinking 
being,  separate  from  matter  and  from  sensa¬ 
tions  which  are  only  bodily  reactions?  Or  with 
writers  like  Aristotle  and  Aquinas,  for  whom 
there  is  a  sharp  distinction  between  the  faculties 
of  sense  and  intellect  ?  Can  Aristotle  and  Aqui¬ 
nas  in  turn  explain  the  origin  of  concepts  or  in¬ 
telligible  species  by  reference  to  the  intellect’s 
power  of  abstracting  them  from  experience  or 
sensible  species,  and  still  carry  on  discussion 
with  Plato,  Augustine,  and  Descartes,  who  re¬ 
gard  the  intellect  as  in  some  way  innately  en¬ 
dowed  with  ideas,  with  the  principles  or  seeds 
of  understanding  ? 

The  foregoing  is  by  no  means  an  exhaustive 
inventory.  It  fails,  for  example,  to  ask  about 
the  sense  in  which  the  theologians  speak  of 
ideas  in  the  mind  of  God  and  of  the  illumina¬ 
tion  of  the  angelic  or  the  human  intellect  by 
ideas  divinely  infused.  (What  is  the  common 
thread  of  meaning  between  such  discourse  and 
that  concerned  with  the  formation  of  abstract 
concepts  or  with  the  revival  of  sense-impres¬ 
sions  in  images?)  It  fails  also  to  question  the 
meaning  of  idea  in  Kant’s  tripartite  analysis  of 
the  faculties  of  intuition,  judgment,  and  reason¬ 
ing;  or  in  Hegel’s  ultimate  synthesis  of  all  na¬ 
ture  and  history  in  the  dialectical  life  of  the 
Absolute  Idea.  (What  do  these  meanings  of 
“idea”  have  in  common  with  the  sense  in  which 
Freud  distinguishes  between  conscious  and  un¬ 
conscious  ideas?) 

The  inventory  is  also  incomplete  in  that  it 
does  not  indicate  the  many  divergent  routes 
taken  by  authors  who  seem  to  share  a  common 
starting  point.  Even  those  who,  on  certain 
points,  seem  to  talk  the  same  language,  appear 
to  have  no  basis  for  communication  on  other 
points  in  the  theory  of  ideas.  But  the  questions 
which  have  been  asked  suffice  for  the  purpose 
at  hand.  However  great  the  ambiguity  of 
“idea,”  it  does  not  reach  that  limit  of  equivoca- 


Chapter  37:  IDEA  763 


tion  which  would  destroy  the  universe  of  dis¬ 
course.  There  is  a  slender  thread  of  meaning 
which  ties  all  the  elements  of  the  tradition  to¬ 
gether — not  in  a  unity  of  truth  or  agreement, 
but  in  an  intelligible  joining  of  issues. 

This  unity  can  be  seen  in  two  ways.  It  ap¬ 
pears  first  in  the  fact  that  any  consideration  of 
ideas — whether  as  objects  or  contents  of  the 
mind — involves  a  theory  of  knowledge.  This 
much  is  common  to  all  meanings  of  “idea.” 

Those,  like  Plato  and  Berkeley,  for  whom 
ideas  constitute  a  realm  of  intelligible  or  sensi¬ 
ble  being,  make  knowledge  of  reality  consist  in 
the  apprehension  or  understanding  of  ideas. 
Those,  like  Aristotle  and  James,  for  whom  ideas 
have  no  being  except  as  perceptions  or  thoughts, 
make  them  the  instruments  whereby  reality  is 
known.  On  either  view,  knowledge  involves  a 
relationship  between  a  knower  and  a  known,  or 
between  a  knowing  faculty  and  a  knowable 
entity;  but  on  one  view  ideas  are  the  reality 
which  is  known,  and  on  the  other  they  are  the 
representations  by  which  is  known  a  reality 
that  does  not  include  ideas  among  its  consti¬ 
tuents.  These  two  views  do  not  exhaust  the 
possibilities. 

Ideas  are  sometimes  regarded  both  as  objects 
of  knowledge  and  as  representations  of  reality. 
Some  writers  (as,  for  example,  Plato)  distin¬ 
guish  two  orders  of  reality — the  sensible  and 
the  intelligible — and  two  modes  of  apprehen¬ 
sion — sensing  and  understanding;  and  they  use 
the  word  “idea”  for  both  the  intelligible  ob¬ 
ject  and  the  understanding  of  it.  Locke,  beg¬ 
ging  the  reader’s  pardon  for  his  frequent  use  of 
the  word  “idea,”  says  that  it  is  the  term  “which 
serves  best  to  stand  for  whatsoever  is  the  object 
of  the  understanding  when  a  man  thinks.”  But 
Locke  also  distinguishes  between  knowledge  of 
real  existences  through  ideas  “that  the  mind 
has  of  things  as  they  are  in  themselves,”  and 
knowledge  of  the  relations  among  our  own 
ideas,  which  the  mind  “gets  from  their  com¬ 
parison  with  one  another.”  For  Hume,  too, 
ideas  as  well  as  impressions  are  involved  in  our 
knowledge  of  matters  of  fact,  but  relations  be¬ 
tween  ideas  may  also  be  objects  of  knowledge, 
as  in  “the  sciences  of  geometry,  algebra,  and 
arithmetic.” 

This  double  use  of  “idea”  is  sometimes  ac¬ 
companied,  as  in  Aquinas,  by  an  explicit  ac¬ 


knowledgement  and  ordering  of  the  two  senses. 
For  Aquinas,  concepts  are  primarily  the  means 
of  knowledge,  not  the  objects  of  knowledge. 
A  concept,  Aquinas  writes,  “is  not  what  is 
actually  understood,  but  that  by  which  the 
intellect  understands” — that  by  which  some¬ 
thing  else  is  known.  Secondarily,  however, 
concepts  become  that  which  we  know  when 
we  reflexively  turn  our  attention  to  the  con¬ 
tents  of  our  own  mind.  Using  the  phrase  “in¬ 
telligible  species”  to  signify  concepts,  Aqui¬ 
nas  explains  that  “since  the  intellect  reflects 
upon  itself,  by  such  reflection  it  understands 
not  only  its  own  act  of  intelligence  but  also  the 
species  by  which  it  understands.  Thus  the  in¬ 
telligible  species  is  that  which  is  understood 
secondarily;  but  that  which  is  primarily  under¬ 
stood  is  the  object,  of  which  the  species  is  the 
likeness.” 

It  is  possible,  therefore,  to  have  ideas  about 
things  or  ideas  about  ideas.  In  the  vocabulary 
of  this  analysis  by  Aquinas,  the  ideas  or  con¬ 
cepts  whereby  real  things  are  understood  arc 
sometimes  called  the  “first  intentions”  of  the 
mind.  The  ideas  whereby  we  understand  these 
ideas  or  first  intentions  are  called  the  mind’s 
“second  intentions.”  An  idea  is  always  a  men¬ 
tal  intention,  an  awareness  or  representation, 
never  an  independent  reality  for  the  mind  to 
know. 

Locke’s  differentiation  between  ideas  of  sen¬ 
sation  and  ideas  of  reflection  seems  to  parallel 
the  mediaeval  distinction  between  first  and 
second  intentions;  but  whereas  second  inten¬ 
tions  are  ideas  engaged  in  a  reflexive  under¬ 
standing  of  ideas  as  objects  to  be  understood, 
Locke’s  ideas  of  reflection  comprise  “the  per¬ 
ception  of  the  operations  of  our  own  mind  with¬ 
in  us,  as  it  is  employed  about  the  ideas  it  has 
got.”  A  closer  parallel,  perhaps,  is  to  be  found 
in  Locke’s  distinction  between  our  knowledge 
of  reality  or  of  real  existences  and  our  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  relations  existing  between  our  own 
ideas. 

The  second  way  of  seeing  a  connection  among 
meanings  of  “idea”  depends  on  recognizing 
what  is  common  to  contrary  views. 

The  word  “pen”  is  utterly  equivocal,  as  we 
have  noted,  when  it  names  a  writing  instru¬ 
ment  and  an  animal  enclosure.  Hence  men 


764 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


cannot  contradict  one  another  no  matter  what 
opposite  things  they  may  say  about  pens  in  one 
sense  and  pens  in  the  other.  The  two  meanings 
of  “pen”  are  not  even  connected  by  being  op¬ 
posed  to  one  another.  But  all  the  meanings  of 
“idea”  do  seem  to  be  connected  by  opposition 
at  least,  so  that  writers  who  use  the  word  in  its 
different  senses  and  have  different  theories  of 
idea  cannot  avoid  facing  the  issues  raised  by 
their  conflicting  analyses. 

The  root  of  this  opposition  lies  in  the  positive 
and  negative  views  of  the  relation  of  ideas  to 
sensations — or,  more  generally,  to  sense  and  the 
sensible.  Though  there  are  different  analyses  of 
sensation,  one  or  both  of  two  points  seems  to  be 
agreed  upon:  that  sensations  are  particular  per¬ 
ceptions  and  that  sensations  result  from  the  im¬ 
pingement  of  physical  stimuli  upon  the  sense 
organs  of  a  living  body. 

Berkeley  insists  upon  the  first  point  while 
emphatically  denying  the  second.  Ideas  or  sen¬ 
sations  are  always  particulars;  but,  he  says,  “the 
various  sensations  or  ideas  imprinted  on  the 
sense,  however  blended  or  combined  together 
(that  is,  whatever  objects  they  compose),  can¬ 
not  exist  otherwise  than  in  a  mind  perceiving 
them,”  and  their  cause  is  neither  physical  mat¬ 
ter  nor  the  perceiving  mind,  but  “some  other 
will  or  spirit  that  produces  them.”  Others,  like 
Lucretius  and  Hobbes,  who  regard  sensations  as 
particular  perceptions,  do  not  use  the  word 
“idea,”  as  Berkeley  does,  for  perceptions  of  ex¬ 
ternal  origin,  but  restrict  it  to  inner  productions 
of  the  mind  itself  in  its  acts  of  memory  or  imag¬ 
ination. 

The  various  theories  of  idea  thus  range  from 
those  which  identify  an  idea  with  a  sensation  or 
perception  or  with  the  derivatives  of  sensation, 
to  those  which  deny  the  identity  or  even  any 
relationship  between  ideas  and  sensations  or 
images  of  sense. 

The  first  position  is  taken  by  writers  who 
conceive  mind  or  understanding,  in  men  or 
animals,  as  the  only  faculty  of  knowledge.  It 
performs  all  the  functions  of  knowing  and 
thinking.  It  is  sensitive  as  well  as  reflective.  It 
perceives  and  remembers  as  well  as  imagines 
and  reasons. 

Within  this  group  of  writers  there  are  differ¬ 
ences.  Berkeley,  for  example,  thinks  “the  ob ¬ 


jects  of  human  knowledge”  include  “either 
ideas  actually  imprinted  on  the  senses;  or  else 
such  as  are  perceived  by  attending  to  the  pas¬ 
sions  and  operations  of  the  mind;  or  lastly  ideas 
formed  by  the  help  of  memory  and  imagina¬ 
tion — either  compounding,  dividing,  or  barely 
representing  those  originally  perceived  in  the 
aforesaid  ways.”  Hume,  on  the  other  hand, 
divides  “all  the  perceptions  of  the  mind  into 
two  classes  or  species,  which  are  distinguished 
by  their  different  degrees  of  force  or  vivacity. 
The  less  forcible  and  lively  are  commonly  de¬ 
nominated  Thoughts  or  Ideas .  The  other  species 
want  a  name  in  our  language  and  in  most  others 
.  .  .  Let  us,  therefore,  use  a  little  freedom  and 
call  them  Impressions .”  By  this  term,  Hume 
explains,  “I  mean  all  our  more  lively  percep¬ 
tions,  when  we  hear,  or  see,  or  feel,  or  love,  or 
hate,  or  desire,  or  will.” 

Another  use  of  terms  is  represented  by  Locke, 
who  distinguishes  between  ideas  of  sensation 
and  reflection,  simple  and  complex  ideas,  par¬ 
ticular  and  general  ideas,  and  uses  the  word 
“idea”  both  for  the  original  elements  of  sense- 
experience  and  for  all  the  derivatives  produced 
by  the  mind’s  activity  in  reworking  these  given 
materials,  whether  by  acts  of  memory,  imagina¬ 
tive  construction,  or  abstraction.  Still  another 
variation  is  to  be  found  in  William  James.  De¬ 
spite  the  authority  of  Locke,  he  thinks  that  the 
word  “  ‘idea’  has  not  domesticated  itself  in  the 
language  so  as  to  cover  bodily  sensations.”  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  he  restricts  the  word  “idea”  to  con¬ 
cepts,  and  never  uses  it  for  sensations  or  per¬ 
ceptions.  Nevertheless,  like  Locke,  he  does  not 
think  that  the  development  of  concept  from 
percept  needs  the  activity  of  a  special  faculty. 
Both  concept  and  percept  belong  to  the  single 
“stream  of  thought”  and  are  “states  of  con¬ 
sciousness.” 

The  second  position  is  taken  by  writers  who 
in  one  way  or  another  distinguish  between 
sense  and  intellect  and  regard  them  as  quite 
separate  faculties  of  knowing.  The  one  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  perform  the  functions  of  perception, 
imagination,  and  memory;  the  other,  the  func¬ 
tions  of  thought — conception,  judgment,  and 
reasoning,  or  if  not  these,  then  acts  of  intellec¬ 
tual  vision  or  intuition.  Here,  too,  there  are 
differences  within  the  group. 


765 


Chaptkr  37:  IDKA 


Just  as  the  extreme  version  of  t lie  first  posi¬ 
tion  is  taken  by  those  who  identify  ideas  with 
perceptions,  so  here  the  opposite  extreme  con¬ 
sists  in  the  denial  of  any  connection  between 
ideas  and  all  the  elements  of  sense-experience. 
The  ideas  in  the  divine  mind,  or  the  ideas  in¬ 
fused  by  God  into  the  angelic  intellects,  have 
no  origin  in  experience,  nor  any  need  for  the 
perceptions,  memories,  or  images  of  sense.  They 
are  not  abstract  ideas,  that  is,  they  are  not  con¬ 
cepts  abstracted  from  sense-materials. 

“Our  intellect,’’  Aquinas  writes,  “abstracts 
the  intelligible  species  from  the  individuating 
principles’’— the  material  conditions  of  sense 
and  imagination.  “But  the  intelligible  species 
in  the  divine  intellect,’’  he  continues,  “is  im¬ 
material,  not  by  abstraction,  but  of  itself.’’ The 
divine  ideas,  Aquinas  quotes  Augustine  as  say¬ 
ing,  “are  certain  original  forms  or  permanent 
and  immutable  models  of  things  which  are  con¬ 
tained  in  the  divine  intelligence.”  Following 
Augustine’s  statement  that  “each  thing  was 
created  by  God  according  to  the  idea  proper  to 
it,”  Aquinas  restricts  the  word  “idea”  to  the 
“exemplars  existing  in  the  divine  mind”  and 
to  the  species  of  things  with  which  God  informs 
the  angelic  intellects.  He  uses  the  word  “con¬ 
cept”  where  others  speak  of  “ideas”  in  the 
human  mind. 

Descartes,  on  the  other  hand,  endows  the 
human  mind  with  ideas — not  concepts  ab¬ 
stracted  from  and  dependent  on  sense,  but  in¬ 
tuitive  apprehensions  which,  since  they  cannot 
be  drawn  in  any  way  from  sense-experience, 
must  be  an  innate  property  of  the  human  mind. 
He  does  not,  however,  always  use  the  word 
“idea”  in  this  strict  sense.  Some  ideas,  he  says, 
“appear  to  be  innate,  some  adventitious,  and 
others  to  be  formed  or  invented  by  myself.” 
The  ideas  called  “adventitious”  are  those  which 
seem  to  come  from  the  outside,  as  when  “I  hear 
some  sound,  or  see  the  sun,  or  feel  heat.”  Those 
which  we  form  or  invent  ourselves  are  “con¬ 
structions  of  the  imagination.”  Only  innate 
ideas,  in  Descartes’  view,  are  truly  ideas  in  the 
sense  of  being  the  elements  of  certain  knowl¬ 
edge  and  the  sources  of  intellectual  intuition. 
“By  intuition,”  he  says,  “I  understand,  not  the 
fluctuating  testimony  of  the  senses,  nor  the 
misleading  judgment  that  proceeds  from  the 
blundering  constructions  of  the  imagination,” 


but  “the  undoubting  conception  of  an  un¬ 
clouded  and  attentive  inind”  which  “springs 
from  the  light  of  reason  alone.” 

As  mind  and  body  are  separate  substances 
for  Descartes— mind  being  conceived  by  him 
as  a  res  cogitiins  or  thinking  substance,  quite 
separate  from  a  res  extensa  or  the  extended  mat¬ 
ter  of  a  bodily  substance — so  ideas  and  sensa¬ 
tions  arc  independent  in  origin  and  function. 
Like  infused  ideas  in  the  angelic  intellect,  in¬ 
nate  ideas  in  the  human  mind  are  not  abstract, 
for  they  are  not  abstracted.  But  unlike  the 
angelic  intellect,  the  human  mind,  even  when 
it  employs  innate  ideas,  is  discursive  or  cogita¬ 
tive.  It  is  never  conceived  as  entirely  free  from 
the  activities  of  judgment  and  reasoning,  even 
when  its  power  is  also  supposed  to  be  intuitive 
—  that  is,  able  to  apprehend  intelligible  objects 
without  analysis  or  without  recourse  to  the 
representations  of  sense. 

The  doctrine  of  innate  ideas  does  not  always 
go  as  far  as  this  in  separating  intellectual  knowl¬ 
edge— or  knowledge  by  means  of  ideas— from 
sense-experience.  In  the  theories  of  Plato  and 
Augustine,  for  example,  sense-experience  serves 
to  awaken  the  understanding  to  apprehend  the 
intelligible  objects  for  the  intuition  of  which  it 
is  innately  equipped. 

“To  learn  those  things  which  do  not  come 
into  us  as  images  by  the  senses,”  Augustine 
writes,  “but  which  we  know  within  ourselves 
without  images  ...  is  in  reality  only  to  take 
things  that  the  memory  already  contains  scat¬ 
tered  and  unarranged  .  .  .  and  by  thinking 
bring  them  together.”  Moreover,  the  memory 
contains,  not  only  “images  impressed  upon  it 
by  the  senses  of  the  body,  but  also  the  notions 
of  the  very  things  themselves,  which  notions 
we  never  received  by  any  avenue  of  the  body.” 

This  process  of  learning  by  remembering  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  similar  to  the  process  which  Plato 
also  calls  “recollection”  or  “reminiscence.”  In 
the  Meno  Socrates  demonstrates  that  a  slave- 
boy,  who  thinks  he  knows  no  geometry,  can  be 
led  simply  by  questioning  to  discover  that  he 
knew  all  the  while  the  solution  of  a  geometric 
problem.  “There  have  always  been  true  thoughts 
in  him,”  Socrates  tells  Meno,  thoughts  “which 
only  needed  to  be  awakened  into  knowledge  by 
putting  questions  to  him.”  Hence  “his  soul 
must  always  have  possessed  this  knowledge.” 


766 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Learning,  according  to  this  doctrine  of  innate 
ideas,  must  therefore  be  described  as  an  at¬ 
tempt  “to  recollect,”  not  “what  you  do  not 
know,”  but  “rather  what  you  do  not  remem¬ 
ber.” 

Learning  by  recollection  or  reminiscence 
seems  to  be  a  process  in  which  latent  ideas 
(whether  they  are  retained  by  the  soul  from 
a  previous  life  or  are  part  of  the  soul’s  endow¬ 
ment  at  its  creation)  become  active  either 
through  the  questioning  of  a  teacher  or  through 
being  awakened  by  the  perceptions  of  the 
bodily  senses.  Though  such  bodily  stimulation 
of  thought  implies  a  functional  connection  be¬ 
tween  body  and  soul,  nevertheless  both  Plato 
and  Augustine  hold  that  ideas  are  independent 
in  origin.  They  are  not  derived  from  sense, 
though  their  appearance  may  be  occasioned  by 
events  in  the  world  of  sense. 

One  other  view  still  remains  to  be  considered. 
It  denies  that  ideas  are  innate  in  the  human 
mind  at  the  same  time  that  it  distinguishes  be¬ 
tween  the  intellect  and  the  senses  as  separate 
faculties  of  knowing.  Having  to  explain  whence 
the  intellect  gets  its  ideas,  writers  like  Aristotle 
and  Aquinas  attribute  to  the  human  intellect 
an  abstractive  power  by  which  it  draws  “the 
intelligible  species”  from  sensory  images,  which 
Aquinas  calls  “phantasms.” 

The  concepts  by  which  “our  intellect  under¬ 
stands  material  things,”  we  obtain  “by  ab¬ 
stracting  the  form  from  the  individual  mat¬ 
ter  which  is  represented  by  the  phantasms.” 
Through  the  universal  concept  thus  abstracted, 
we  are  able,  Aquinas  holds,  “to  consider  the 
nature  of  the  species  apart  from  its  individual 
principles.”  It  should  be  added  here  that  ab¬ 
stractions  are  not  vehicles  of  intuitive  appre¬ 
hension.  Conception,  which  is  the  first  act  of 
the  mind,  yields  knowledge  only  when  concepts 
are  used  in  subsequent  acts  of  judgment  and 
reasoning. 

Abstract  or  universal  concepts  are  as  different 
from  the  ideas  which  belong  to  intellects  sepa¬ 
rate  from  bodies — the  divine  or  angelic  intel¬ 
lects — as  they  are  different  from  the  particular 
perceptions  or  images  of  sense.  They  occupy  an 
intermediate  position  between  the  two,  just  as, 
according  to  Aquinas,  “the  human  intellect 
holds  a  middle  place”  between  angelic  intelli¬ 


gence  and  corporeal  sense.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
human  intellect  is  for  Aquinas  an  incorporeal 
power;  on  the  other  hand,  it  functions  only  in 
cooperation  with  the  corporeal  powers  of  sense 
and  imagination.  So  the  concepts  which  the 
human  intellect  forms,  being  universal,  are  im¬ 
material;  but  they  are  also  dependent,  in  origin 
and  function,  on  the  materials  of  sense.  Not 
only  are  universal  concepts  abstracted  from  the 
phantasms,  but  for  the  intellect  to  understand 
physical  things,  “it  must  of  necessity,”  Aquinas 
writes,  “turn  to  the  phantasms  in  order  to  per¬ 
ceive  the  universal  nature  existing  in  the  in¬ 
dividual.” 

This  theory  of  abstract  ideas  seems  not  far 
removed  from  the  position  of  Locke,  who  dis¬ 
tinguishes  between  particular  and  general  ideas 
(which  he  calls  “abstract”)  or  that  of  William 
James,  who  distinguishes  between  universal 
concepts  and  sense-perceptions.  Yet  on  one 
question  the  difference  between  them  is  radical, 
namely,  whether  particular  sensations  and  uni¬ 
versal  ideas  belong  to  the  same  faculty  of  mind 
or  to  the  quite  distinct  faculties  of  sense  and 
intellect. 

This  difference  seems  to  have  considerable 
bearing  on  the  way  in  which  these  writers  ex¬ 
plain  the  process  of  abstraction  or  generaliza¬ 
tion,  with  consequences  for  certain  subtleties, 
acknowledged  or  ignored,  in  the  analysis  of 
the  grades  of  abstraction.  Nevertheless,  the 
resemblance  between  the  positions  of  Locke 
and  Aquinas,  or  those  of  William  James  and 
Aristotle,  each  affirming  in  his  own  way  that 
the  mind  contains  nothing  not  rooted  in  the 
senses,  serves  to  mediate  between  the  more 
extreme  positions. 

The  dispute  about  innate  ideas  and  the  con¬ 
troversy  over  abstract  ideas  are  issues  in  psy¬ 
chology  inseparable  from  fundamental  differ¬ 
ences  concerning  the  nature  and  operation  of 
the  faculty  or  faculties  of  knowing.  There  are 
other  issues  which  concern  the  being  or  the 
truth  of  ideas.  Here  the  first  question  is  not 
whether  ideas  are  objects  of  knowledge,  but 
whether  the  existence  of  ideas  is  real  or  mental 
— outside  the  mind  or  in  it. 

One  aspect  of  this  controversy  is  considered 
in  the  chapter  on  Form,  viz.,  the  argument  be¬ 
tween  Aristotle  and  Plato  about  the  being  of 


Chapter 

the  Ideas  or  Forms  apart  from  both  matter  and 
imind.  It  is  in  the  context  of  this  argument  that 
the  traditional  epithet  “realism”  gets  one  of  its 
meanings,  when  it  signifies  the  view  that  ideas 
or  universal  have  an  independent  reality  of 
their  own.  The  various  opponents  of  this  view 
are  not  called  “idealists.”  If  they  deny  any  exist¬ 
ence  to  universal  ideas  outside  the  mind,  they  are 
usually  called  “conceptualists”;  if  they  deny  the 
presence  of  universal  even  in  the  mind,  they  are 
called  “nominalists.”  These  doctrines  are  more 

(fully  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Same  and 
Other,  Universal  and  Particular. 

The  controversy  about  the  being  of  ideas  has 
another  phase  that  has  already  been  noted  in 
this  chapter;  and  it  is  in  this  connection  that 
the  epithet  “idealism”  gets  one  of  its  traditional 
meanings.  The  doctrine  is  not  that  ideas  have 
real  existence  outside  the  mind.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  it  is  that  the  only  realities  are  mental — 
jeither  minds  or  the  ideas  in  them. 

Berkeley’s  famous  proposition — esse  est  per - 
cipiy  to  be  is  to  be  perceived — seems  intended 
to  permit  only  one  exception.  The  perceiv¬ 
ing  mind  has  being  without  being  perceived, 
but  nothing  else  has.  Everything  else  which 
‘exists  is  an  idea,  a  being  of  and  in  the  mind. 
According  to  this  doctrine  (which  takes  differ¬ 
ent  forms  in  Berkeley  and  in  Hegel,  for  ex¬ 
ample),  the  phrase  “idea  of’  is  meaningless. 
Nothing  exists  of  which  an  idea  can  be  a  repre¬ 
sentation.  There  is  no  meaning  to  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  thing  and  idea.  The  real  and  the 
ideal  are  identical. 

Plato  is  sometimes  called  an  “idealist”  but 
not  in  this  sense.  He  has  never  been  interpreted 
as  completely  denying  reality  to  the  changing 
material  things  which  imitate  or  copy  the  eter¬ 
nal  ideas,  the  immutable  archetypes  or  Forms. 
Applied  to  Plato  or  to  Plotinus,  “idealism” 
seems  to  signify  the  superior  reality  of  ideal  (as 
opposed  to  material  or  physical)  existence.  Just 
as  “idealism”  has  these  widely  divergent  mean¬ 
ings,  so  does  “realism”  when  it  designates,  on 
the  one  hand,  those  who  attribute  independent 
reality  to  ideas  and,  on  the  other  hand,  those 
who  affirm  the  existence  of  an  order  of  real 
existences  independent  of  the  ideas  which 
represent  them  in  the  mind. 

Writers  who  distinguish  between  things  and 
ideas,  or  between  the  order  of  reality  and  the 


37:  IDEA  767 

mind’s  conception  of  it,  face  the  problem  of 
differentiating  between  these  two  modes  of  Ix:- 
ing.  To  say  that  ideas  or  concepts  exist  only  in 
the  mind  is  not  to  say  that  they  do  not  exist  at 
all,  but  only  that  they  do  not  exist  in  the  same 
way  as  things  outside  the  mind. 

Does  an  entity  in  its  real  existence  apart 
from  knowledge  have  the  same  character  that 
it  has  when,  as  an  object  known,  it  somehow 
belongs  to  the  knowing  mind?  Is  there  a  kind 
of  neutral  essence  which  can  assume  both  modes 
of  existence-real  existence,  independent  of 
mind,  and  ideal  existence,  or  existence  in  the 
mind,  as  an  object  conceived  or  known?  Is  an 
idea  or  concept  in  the  mind  nothing  but  the 
real  thing  objectified,  or  transformed  into  an 
object  of  knowledge;  or  is  the  real  thing,  the 
thing  in  itself,  utterly  different  from  the  objects 
of  experience  or  knowledge— neither  knowable 
nor  capable  of  representation  by  concepts? 

These  questions,  relevant  to  the  consider¬ 
ation  of  ideas  as  representations  of  reality,  are, 
of  course,  also  relevant  to  problems  considered 
in  the  chapters  on  Being,  Experience,  and 
Knowledge.  The  issues  indicated  are  there 
discussed. 

Intimately  connected  with  them  are  ques¬ 
tions  about  the  truth  of  ideas.  Can  ideas  or 
concepts  be  true  or  false  in  the  sense  in  which 
truth  and  falsity  are  attributed  to  propositions 
or  judgments?  Under  what  conditions  is  an 
idea  true?  In  what  does  its  truth  consist,  and 
what  are  the  signs  or  marks  of  its  truth?  These 
matters  are  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Truth. 
Here  it  is  sufficient  to  point  out  that  the  tradi¬ 
tional  distinction  between  adequate  and  in¬ 
adequate  ideas,  and  the  comparison  of  clear  and 
distinct  with  obscure  and  confused  ideas,  are 
used  to  determine  the  criteria  of  truth.  It  may 
be  the  truth  of  a  concept  taken  by  itself  or  of 
the  judgment  into  which  several  concepts  enter. 
To  the  extent  that  ideas  are  regarded  as  repre¬ 
sentative,  their  truth  (or  the  truth  of  the  judg¬ 
ments  they  form)  seems  to  consist  in  some 
mode  of  agreement  or  correspondence  with  the 
reality  they  represent,  or,  as  Spinoza  says,  its 
ideatum. 

Within  the  conceptual  or  mental  order  it¬ 
self,  there  is  a  further  distinction  between  ideas 
which  do  not  perform  a  representative  function 
and  those  which  do.  The  former  are  treated  as 


768 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


fantasies,  fictions,  or  chimeras;  the  latter  are 
called,  by  contrast,  “real  ideas,”  or  ideas  having 
some  reference  to  reality.  The  question  of  the 
reality  of  ideas  takes  precedence  over  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  their  truth,  at  least  for  those  who  regard 
the  division  into  true  and  false  as  applicable 
only  to  representations.  Yet  the  criteria  of  the 
distinction  between  the  real  and  the  imaginary 
are  difficult  to  separate  from  the  criteria  of  true 
and  false.  The  separation  is  made  most  readily 
by  those  who  use  “idea”  to  mean  memory 
image.  They  can  test  the  reality  of  an  idea  by 
tracing  it  back  to  the  impression  from  which  it 
originated. 

Another  sort  of  test  is  applied  by  those  who 
measure  the  reality  of  abstract  ideas  by  their  fi¬ 
delity  to  the  sense-perceptions  from  which  they 
were  abstracted.  Still  another  criterion,  pro¬ 
posed  by  William  James,  is  that  of  freedom 
from  contradiction.  An  idea  has  truth  and 
its  object  has  reality  if  it  “remains  uncontra¬ 
dicted.”  The  idea  of  a  winged  horse  illustrates 
the  point. 

“If  I  merely  dream  of  a  horse  with  wings,” 
James  writes,  “my  horse  interferes  with  nothing 
else  and  has  not  to  be  contradicted.  ...  But  if 
with  this  horse  I  make  an  inroad  into  the  world 
otherwise  known,  and  say,  for  example,  ‘That 
is  my  old  mare  Maggie,  having  grown  a  pair  of 
wings  where  she  stands  in  her  stall,’  the  whole 
case  is  altered;  for  now  the  horse  and  place  are 
identified  with  a  horse  and  place  otherwise 
known,  and  what  is  known  of  the  latter  objects 
is  incompatible  with  what  is  perceived  with  the 
former.” 

The  consideration  of  ideas  or  concepts  be¬ 
longs  to  logic  as  well  as  to  psychology  and  meta¬ 
physics.  The  logician  sometimes  deals  with  con¬ 
cepts  directly  and  with  the  judgments  into 
which  they  enter;  sometimes  he  deals  with 
them  only  as  they  find  verbal  expression  in 
terms  and  propositions. 

The  distinction  between  concepts  and  judg¬ 
ments  (or  between  terms  and  propositions)  is 
discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Judgment.  There 
also  we  see  that  the  classification  of  judgments 
or  propositions  depends  in  part  on  the  accept¬ 
ance  or  rejection  of  the  notions  of  subject  and 
predicate  in  the  analysis  of  concepts  or  terms; 
and,  if  they  are  accepted,  on  the  way  in  which 


terms  are  distinguished  both  as  subjects  and  as 
predicates. 

This  in  turn  depends  upon  certain  traditional 
divisions  which  are  applicable  to  terms,  if  not 
always  to  concepts,  such  as  the  familiar  distinc¬ 
tions  between  concrete  and  abstract,  and  par¬ 
ticular  and  universal,  terms.  When  the  concept, 
which  is  sometimes  called  the  “mental  word,” 
is  regarded  as  by  its  very  nature  abstract  and 
universal,  these  distinctions  are  applicable  only 
to  the  physical  words  which  are  terms.  Con¬ 
crete  and  particular  terms  are  then  treated  as 
verbal  expressions  of  sense-perceptions  or  im¬ 
ages;  abstract  and  universal  terms,  as  verbal 
expressions  of  ideas  or  concepts.  But  when  ideas 
are  identified  with  sense-perceptions  or  images, 
and  abstract  concepts  are  denied,  the  existence 
of  general  names  in  ordinary  discourse  suffices 
for  the  distinction  between  particular  and  uni¬ 
versal  terms,  even  though  the  latter  do  not 
express  any  actual  content  of  the  mind. 

Unlike  the  foregoing,  other  divisions  of  terms, 
as,  for  example,  the  distinction  between  the 
univocal  and  the  analogical,  or  between  species 
and  genera,  do  not  occur  throughout  the  tradi¬ 
tion  of  logic.  They  tend  to  be  characteristic  of 
the  logic  of  Aristotle  and  its  mediaeval  develop¬ 
ment.  Of  these  two  distinctions,  that  between 
univocal  and  analogical  terms  or  concepts  ap¬ 
pears  explicitly,  so  far  as  this  set  of  great  books 
is  concerned,  only  in  the  Summa  Theologica . 
Nevertheless,  Aquinas  does  have  some  back¬ 
ground  for  his  special  theory  of  analogical  terms 
in  Aristotle’s  treatment  of  univocal  and  equiv¬ 
ocal  names,  and  in  his  separation  of  terms 
which  predicate  a  sameness  in  species  or  genus 
from  those  which  predicate  a  sameness  by  anal¬ 
ogy.  The  analysis  of  these  distinctions  is  under¬ 
taken  in  the  chapters  on  Same  and  Other  and 
Sign  and  Symbol. 

Other  writers,  in  dealing  with  universal 
terms,  recognize  that  they  have  different  de¬ 
grees  of  generality.  They  sometimes  formulate 
this  as  an  order  of  more  and  less  inclusive  classes. 
Sometimes  they  refer  to  the  intension  and  ex¬ 
tension,  or  connotation  and  denotation,  of 
terms.  The  more  general  terms  have  a  less  re¬ 
stricted  connotation  and  hence  represent  more 
extensive  or  inclusive  classes.  The  more  specific 
terms  have  a  more  determinate  meaning  and  so 
also  have  a  narrower  denotation  and  represent 


769 


Chapter  37:  IDF. A 


less  inclusive  classes.  What  seems  to  he  peculiar 
to  Aristotle’s  analysis  of  species  and  genera  is 
the  setting  of  upper  and  lower  limits  to  the 
hierarchy  of  universal  terms,  with  a  small  num¬ 
ber  of  irreducible  categories  (or  sttmma  genera) 
under  which  all  species  fall,  and,  at  the  other 
extreme,  with  a  finite  number  of  lowest  (or 
infimae)  species  w  hich  arc  incapable  of  subsum¬ 
ing  other  species. 

The  terms  which  fall  under  the  low  est  species 
must  either  be  particulars  or  accidental  classes. 
Those  which  seem  to  be  predicable  of  the  cate¬ 
gories  themselves,  such  as  being  or  one ,  cannot 
be  genera.  These  are  the  terms  w  hich  Aristotle’s 
mediaeval  followers  call  “transcendental”  and 
“analogical.”  Using  the  word  “transcendental” 
in  a  different  sense,  Kant  enumerates  a  set  of 
concepts  which  bear  some  resemblance  to  Aris¬ 
totle’s  summa  genera ,  but  which  he  treats  as 
transcendental  categories. 

The  difference  among  concepts  with  respect 
to  generality  is  of  interest  to  the  psychologist 
as  well  as  the  logician,  for  it  raises  the  problem 


of  whether  the  more  or  the  less  general  takes 
precedence  in  the  order  of  learning.  The  order 
and  relation  of  ideas  is  even  more  the  common 
ground  of  both  logic  and  psychology.  Both,  for 
example,  deal  with  the  position  and  sequence 
of  terms  or  concepts  in  reasoning,  though  the 
logician  aims  to  prescribe  the  forms  w  hich  rea¬ 
soning  must  take  in  order  to  be  valid,  whereas 
the  psychologist  tries  to  describe  the  steps  by 
which  thinking  actually  goes  on. 

Only  the  logician,  however,  is  concerned 
with  the  way  in  which  terms  arc  ordered  to 
one  another  as  positive  and  negative,  or  as  con¬ 
traries;  just  as  from  Aristotle  to  Freud,  only 
the  psychologist  deals  w'ith  the  association  of 
ideas  in  the  stream  of  thought  by  relationships 
of  contiguity  and  succession,  similarity  and 
difference.  According  as  the  logical  connec¬ 
tion  of  ideas  or  their  psychological  association 
is  made  the  primary  fact,  radically  divergent 
interpretations  are  given  of  the  nature  of 
mind,  the  life  of  reason,  and  the  process  of 
thought. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PACE 

1.  Doctrines  of  idea  771 

la.  Ideas,  or  relations  between  ideas,  as  objects  of  thought  or  knowledge:  the  ideas 
as  eternal  forms 

ib.  Ideas  or  conceptions  as  that  by  which  the  mind  thinks  or  knows  772 

ic.  Ideas  as  the  data  of  sense-experience  or  their  residues 

id.  Ideas  as  the  pure  concepts  of  reason:  regulative  principles 

ic.  Ideas  in  the  order  of  supra-human  intelligence  or  spirit:  the  eternal  exemplars 
and  archetypes;  the  modes  of  the  divine  mind 

if.  Idea  as  the  unity  of  determinate  existence  and  concept:  the  Absolute  Idea  773 

2.  The  origin  or  derivation  of  ideas  in  the  human  mind 

2 a.  The  infusion  of  ideas:  divine  illumination 

2 b.  The  innate  endowment  or  retention  of  ideas:  the  activation  of  the  mind’s  native 
content  or  structure  by  sense,  by  memory,  or  by  experience 

2 c.  The  acquirement  of  ideas  by  perception  or  intuition:  simple  ideas  or  forms  as  di¬ 
rect  objects  of  the  understanding 

2 d.  Reflection  as  a  source  of  ideas:  the  mind’s  consideration  of  its  ow  n  acts  or  content  774 

2£.  The  genesis  of  ideas  by  the  recollection  of  sense-impressions:  the  images  of  sense 

2 f.  The  production  of  ideas  by  the  reworking  of  the  materials  of  sense:  the  imagina¬ 
tive  construction  of  concepts  or  the  formation  of  complex  from  simple  ideas 


770 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


2 g.  The  abstraction  of  ideas  from  sense-experience:  the  concept  as  the  first  act  of 
the  mind;  the  grades  of  abstraction 

2 h.  The  derivation  of  transcendental  ideas  from  the  three  syllogisms  of  reason 

3.  The  division  of  ideas  according  to  their  objective  reference 

3 a.  Ideas  about  things  distinguished  from  ideas  about  ideas:  the  distinction  between 
first  and  second  intentions 

3 b.  Adequate  and  inadequate  ideas:  clear  and  distinct  ideas  as  compared  with 
obscure  and  confused  ideas 

3c.  Real  and  fantastic  or  fictional  ideas:  negations  and  chimeras 

4.  The  logic  of  ideas 

4 a.  The  verbal  expression  of  ideas  or  concepts:  terms 

4 b.  The  classification  of  terms:  problems  in  the  use  of  different  kinds  of  terms 

(1)  Concrete  and  abstract  terms 

(2)  Particular  and  universal  terms 

(3)  Specific  and  generic  terms:  infonae  species  and  summa  genera 

(4)  Univocal  and  analogical  terms 

4 c.  The  correlation,  opposition,  and  order  of  terms 

5.  Ideas  or  concepts  in  the  process  of  thought 

5  a.  Concept  and  judgment:  the  division  of  terms  as  subjects  and  predicates;  kinds  of 
subjects  and  predicates 

5 b.  The  position  and  sequence  of  terms  in  reasoning 

5 c.  The  dialectical  employment  of  the  ideas  of  reason 

5 d.  The  order  of  concepts  in  the  stages  of  learning:  the  more  and  the  less  general 

5?.  The  association,  comparison,  and  discrimination  of  ideas:  the  stream  of  thought 
or  consciousness 

6.  The  being  and  truth  of  ideas 

6a.  The  distinction  between  real  and  intentional  existence,  between  thing  and  idea: 
ideas  as  symbols,  or  intentions  of  the  mind 

6b.  The  nature  and  being  of  ideas  in  relation  to  the  nature  and  being  of  the  mind 

6c.  The  agreement  between  an  idea  and  its  object:  the  criterion  of  adequacy  in 
correspondence 

6d.  Clarity  and  distinctness  in  ideas  as  criteria  of  their  truth 

6e.  The  criterion  of  genesis:  the  test  of  an  idea’s  truth  or  meaning  by  reference  to 
its  origin 

6f.  The  truth  and  falsity  of  simple  apprehensions,  sensations,  or  conceptions:  con¬ 
trasted  with  the  truth  and  falsity  of  judgments  or  assertions 


PAGB 

775 


776 

777 

778 

779 


780 

781 


Chapter  37:  IDEA 


771 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  arc  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  I  Iomek:  Iliad,  iik  n  [265  285)  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a  1 19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  1 16  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  sideof  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right  hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b  164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  cm, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.>  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 — ( D )  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Doctrines  of  idea 

la.  Ideas,  or  relations  between  ideas,  as  ob¬ 
jects  of  thought  or  knowledge:  the  ideas 
as  eternal  forms 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus ,  125a- 
126d  /  Symposium ,  167a-d  /  Euthyphro, 
193a-c  /  Phaedo ,  224a-c;  228d-230c;  231c- 
232a;  242b-243c  /  Republic ,  bk  m,333b-334b; 
bk  v,  368c-373c;  bk  vi,  383d-388a;  bk  vii, 
392b-393b;  397a-398c/  Timaeus ,  455c-458b  / 
Parmenides  486a-511d  /  Theaetetus ,  534d-536a 
/  Sophist ,  571a-574c  /  Statesman ,  595a-c  / 
Philehus ,  610d-613a  /  Seventh  Letter ,  809c- 
810d 

17  Plotinus:  Third Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  i  136a-d  / 
Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  1-2  228b-229d;  tr  ix, 
ch  6-9  249a-250b  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  21 
279b-280a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  16-38  75b- 
81a  passim  /  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  6-7  268d- 
269d;  bk  xii,  ch  7  346c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  84, 
aa  1-2  440d-443c;  a  4,  ans  444d-446b;  aa  5-7 
446c-450b;  Q  85,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1-2  451c- 
453c;  a  2,  ans  453d-455b;  a  3,  rep  1,4  455b- 
457a;  a  8,  ans  460b-461b;  q  86,  a  4,  rep  2 
463d-464d;  q  87,  a  i,  ans  465a-466c;  Q  88,  a 
1,  ans  469a-471c;  a  2,  ans  471c-472c 


30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43d-44c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  71d-72a;  111,  82d- 
83a;  vi,  96d-97a  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
121a-c;  def  11— hi  130a-b;  axiom  v-vi  131d- 
132a;  137d;  157b-158a;  212c-213a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  intro,  sect  8 
95c-d;  bk  11,  ch  viii,  sect  8  134b-c;  ch  ix, 
sect  1  138b-c;  ch  xxi,  sect  5  179c-d;  bk  hi, 
ch  v,  sect  12  266d-267a;  sect  14  267b-c;  bk 
iv,  ch  1,  sect  1— ch  iv,  sect  12  307a-326d  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  ch  ii,  sect  1-7  309b-311a,  sect  15 
312d-313a,  ch  in,  sect  31  323c-d;  ch  iv,  sect 
18  328d-329a;  ch  vi,  sect  13  335c-d;  sect  16 
336d;  ch  vii,  sect  1-7  337a-338c  esp  sect  2 
337a;  ch  xi,  sect  13-14  357d-358c;  ch  xvii, 
sect  2  371d-372b;  sect  8  377b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge 404a-444d  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  intro,  sect  21-25  411b-412a,c,  sect 
1  413a-b,  sect  18  416b-c,  sect  23  417b-c, 
sect  86-91  429c-431a,  sect  135-142  440a- 
441c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv,  div  20 
458b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  16a-c  esp  16b;  113b  115c 
esp  113c-d;  173b-174a  esp  173b-d  /  Practical 
Reason ,  352c-353a  /  Judgement,  551a-552c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  140, 
53a  b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  300a-301a;  307a 


772  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  lb  to  le 

(1.  Doctrines  of  idea.)  281d-282b;  ch  xi,  sect  21-23  304d-305b;  bk 


lb.  Ideas  or  conceptions  as  that  by  which  the 
mind  thinks  or  knows 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  i  [16*4-8]  25a  / 
Soul ,  bk  in,  ch  4  661b-662c 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  12,  a 
2  51c-52c;  aa  9-10  58b-59d;  q  13,  a  i,  ans 
62c-63c;  a  5,  ans  66b-67d;  q  14,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  3  75d-76c;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2-3  76d-77d; 
a  4,  ans  78b-79a;  a  5  esp  rep  2-3  79a-80a; 
a  6,  rep  1  80a-81c;  a  8,  ans  82c-83b;  a  12,  ans 
85d-86d;  q  16,  a  2  95c-96b;  q  17,  a  3,  ans 
102d-103c;  q  27,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2-3  153b- 
154b;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  154c-155b;  q  32,  aa 
2-3  178a-180b;  q  34,  a  i  185b-187b;  qq  55-58 
288d-306b;  q  82,  a  3,  ans  433c-434c;  q  84 
440b-451b;  q  85,  a  2  453d-455b;  a  4  457a-d; 
a  8,  rep  3  460b-461b;  q  86,  a  i,  ans  461c- 
462a;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2-4  462a-463a;  q  87, 
a  1  465a-466c;  q  88,  a  i,  rep  2  469a-471c;  q 
89,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  475a-d;  a  6,  ans  and 
rep  2  478b-d 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  71d-72a;  hi,  82d- 
83a  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  108b-109d; 
121a-c;  def  11— iii  130a-b;  axiom  v-vi  131d- 
132a;  137d;  157b-158a;  212c-213a 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  def  3  373b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  iv, 
sect  3  324b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  15b-c;  22a, c;  30b-c; 
31a-d;  38a-39c;  41c-42a;  53b-54b;  58c-59b; 
85d-93c;  109d-113b  esp  112d-113b;  ll5b-c; 
130b-c;  197a-b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  300a-314b  esp  300a-301b, 
302b-303a,  307a,  313a-314a 

1  c.  Ideas  as  the  data  of  sense-experience  or 
their  residues 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [722-817] 
53d-54d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  7  269c-d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  49a;  52c;  54b-c; 

part  iv,  261a;  262a-b 
31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  137d 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  48,  schol 
391  b-c;  prop  49,  schol,  392a-c 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  bk  ii,  ch  i,  sect  1-8  121a- 
123a;  sect  17  125c-d;  ch  i,  sect  20-CH  iv, 
sect  1  126d-129c;  ch  iv,  sect  6-ch  v  131a-b; 
ch  vii-ix  131c-141a  passim,  esp  ch  ix,  sect  i- 
7  138b-139b,  sect  15  141a;  ch  xii,  sect  1-2 
147b-d  passim;  sect  8  148c-d;  ch  xiii,  sect  2 
149a;  ch  xiv,  sect  31  161d-162a;  ch  xx,  sect 
1-2  176b-c;  sect  15  177d;  ch  xxiii,  sect  i 
204a-b;  sect  3  204c-d;  sect  7  205d-206a; 
sect  9  206b-c;  sect  15  208c-d;  sect  29-30 
211d-212b;  sect  32-37  212c-214b  passim;  ch 
xxxii,  sect  14-16  245c-246b;  bk  iii,  ch  i, 
sect  5  252b-c;  ch  iv,  sect  7-15  260d-263b 
esp  sect  11-15  261d-263b;  ch  vi,  sect  46-47 


iv,  ch  11,  sect  11-13  311c-312b;  ch  iii,  sect 
23  320a-c;  ch  iv,  sect  4  324c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  i 
413a-b;  sect  18  416b-c;  sect  29-33  418c- 
419a;  sect  36  419c-d;  sect  88-91  430a-431a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ii  455b- 
457b;  sect  vii,  div  49  471c-d;  div  61  477c- 
478a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  234b-236b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  45b-46a  esp  45d-46a; 
48b-c;  54b-55a;  101b-102a  esp  102a;  115b-c/ 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  282  b-c 

54  Freud:  Unconscious ,  442b-443a  /  Ego  and  Id, 
700a-70la;  701d 

ld.  Ideas  as  the  pure  concepts  of  reason:  regu¬ 

lative  principles 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  I5c-16a;  37b-39c;  108a- 
209d  esp  108a-109c,  113b-115c,  117b-119a, 
129c-131c,  158a-159d,  166c-171a,  173b-174a, 
187a-c,  193b-d,  200d-202a,  203b-d,  209b-d; 
237b;  239a-240b  /  Practical  Reason,  310d- 
311d;  329a-d;  343a;  349b-355d  esp  349b-350c 
/  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  390b  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  461a-462d;  464c-467a;  489b-c;  504d- 
505a;  506a-511a  esp  509d-510a;  528c-530c; 
542b-544c;  570b-572c;  581a-582c;  596c-598b; 
604a- b 

le.  Ideas  in  the  order  of  supra-human  intelli¬ 

gence  or  spirit:  the  eternal  exemplars 
and  archetypes;  the  modes  of  the  divine 
mind 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [181-200] 
63b-c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-2  lOa-d; 
tr  vi,  ch  2-3  21d-23a;  ch  9,  26a  /  Third 
Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  i,  136a-c  /  Fourth  Ennead, 
tr  iv,  ch  13  164d-165b  /  Ffth  Ennead  208a- 
251d  passim,  esp  tr  iii  215d-226c,  tr  v-vii 
228b-239b,  tr  viii,  ch  7  242d-243c,  tr  ix 
246c-251d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  21  279b- 
280a;  tr  vii,  ch  2-17  322b-331a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  9,  3a;  bic 
xii,  par  38  108d-109a  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii, 
ch  3-4  266a-267c;  bk  xi,  ch  10,  328c-d;  bk 
xii,  ch  17-18  353a-354d  /  Christian  Doctrine , 
bk  11,  ch  38  654b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
preamble  75c-d;  a  4,  ans  78b-79a;  a  5  79a- 
80a;  a  6  esp  rep  3  80a-81c;  a  8,  ans  82c-83b; 
a  11,  rep  1-2  84c-85c;  a  14,  ans  and  rep  2 
88d-89b;  q  15  91b-94a;  q  16,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 
2  94b-95c;  q  18,  a  4  107d-108c;  qq  22-24  127c- 
143c  passim;  q  34,  a  3,  rep  4  188b-189a;  q  44, 
a  3  240b-241a;  q  47,  a  i,  rep  2  256a-257b;  qq 
55-56  288d-294d;  q  58  300b-306b  passim;  q 
74,  a  3,  rep  5  375a-377a,c;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  3  442b-443c;  a  3,  rep  i  443d-444d;  aa 
4-5  444d-447c;  q  85,  a  4,  ans  457a-d;  q  87,  a 
1,  ans  and  rep  2-3  465a-466c;  q  89,  a  3,  ans 


773 


V'olc  Chapter  37:  IDEA 


and  rep  1,3  475d  476c;  o  105,  a  3,  ans  540c 
541b;  q  106,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  i  545d  546d;  q 
107  549b  552b;  q  108,  a  i,  ans  and  ri  p  2 
552c-553c;  q  115,  a  2,  ans  587c  588c 

20  Aquinas;  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
a  5,  ans  58b  59d;  part  hi,  q  9,  a  3,  ans  765b- 
766b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xiii  [52- 
87] 126a-b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  apii  2}  108c; 
aph  124  133c  d;  bk  11,  aph  15  149a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  137d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  17,  sciiol  362c- 
363c  passim;  part  ii,  prop  demonst 
374a-b;  prop  4-5  374c-d;  prop  9  376a  c;  prop 
19-20  382b  d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [146-151]  114b; 
bk  v  [469-505]  185b  186a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  cii  vi, 
sect  3  268d;  ch  xi,  sect  23  305a  b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  29-33 
418c-419a  esp  sect  33  419a;  sect  70-71  426d- 
427a;  sect  75-76  427d-428a;  sect  81  428c  d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113c-118a;  173b-174a  esp 
I73b-c  /  Judgement ,  551a-552c;  575b-577a; 
580c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  169d- 
170b 

1/.  Idea  as  the  unity  of  determinate  existence 
and  concept:  the  Absolute  Idea 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  pref,  6a-7a; 
intro,  par  1-2  9a-10a;  par  31-32  19c-20b; 
part  iii,  par  279,  93b-c;  par  345  111b;  par 
352-353  112b-c;  par  360  113d-114a,c;  addi¬ 
tions,  2  115d;  19  119c-d  /  Philosophy  of  His¬ 
tory ,  intro,  156c-162a  esp  156d-157b,  158c, 
160b-162a;  163a-165b  esp  165a  b;  166b-c; 
169d-171b;  176b  c;  182d 

2.  The  origin  or  derivation  of  ideas  in  the 
human  mind 

2a.  The  infusion  of  ideas:  divine  illumination 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  25  25c; 
bk  vii,  par  8,  45d;  par  16  48c-49a;  par  23 
50b  c;  bk  xiii,  par  19  115c-d  /  City  of  God , 
bk  viii,  ch  7  269c-d;  ch  9  270d-271a;  bk  x, 
ch  2  299d-300a;  bk  xi,  ch  24-25  335c-336d; 
ch  27,  337d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  84,  a 
4  444d-446b;  q  89,  a  i,  rep  3  473b-475a;  a  2, 
rep  2  475a-d;  a  4,  ans  476c-477a;  a  7,  ans 
478d-479c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  9,  a 
3  765b-766b;  a  4,  rep  2-3  766b  767b;  part 
iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  1,  ans  1025c-1032b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  vi,  99a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  26- 
33  418a-419a;  sect  57  423d-424a;  sect  67 
426a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113 b  e 


2b.  The  innate  endowment  or  retention  of 
ideas;  the  activation  of  the  mind’s  native 
content  or  structure  by  sense,  by  memory, 
or  by  experience 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  124a  126c  esp  126a-c  / 
Meno ,  179d  183a;  188d  189a  /  Phaedo ,  228a- 
230d  /  I'heaetetus ,  515d*517b 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
97a  d;  bk  ii,  cii  19  [99^20-^ 3 1  136a  b  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  1,  ch  9  [992^4  993*11]  511a  c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  22  127c  128c; 
bk  11,  cii  11  150a  151b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Enncad,  tr  ii,  ch  4,  8b  c  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  cii  25,  155b;  tr  iv,  cii 
5  160d-161b  /  Fifth  Enncad,  tr  iii,  ch  2,  216b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  15  19  75a- 
76b;  par  26-38  78a  81a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  viii, 
cii  6,  269b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  55,  a 

2  289d-290d:  a  3,  rep  i  291a-d;  q  57,  a  i,  rep 

3  295a-d;  q  84,  a  3  443d-444d:  a  4,  ans  444d- 
446b;  a  6,  ans  447c-449a;  q  89,  a  i,  rep  3 
473b  475a;  q  117,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  4  595d- 
597c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  333d  335a 
esp  334c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  Ib-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  iv,  5c-d;  6d;  viii,  13c-d  / 
Discourse,  part  iv,  53b:  part  v,  54c  /  Medita¬ 
tions,  11  77d*81d;  iii,  83b;  88c-d;  vi,  96d  97a; 
99a-c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  120c-d;  140c; 
215b-c;  224b, d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  90d-91b;  bk  1, 
ch  1,  sect  1  95b,d-96a;  sect  15  98d  99a; 
sect  23-24  101b-102b;  ch  ii,  sect  12  107b  d; 
ch  iii  112c-121a,c  passim,  esp  sect  21  118b- 
119a;  bk  ii,  ch  i,  sect  i  121a  b;  sect  6 
122b-c;  sect  9  123a;  sect  17  125c-d;  cii  ix, 
sect  6  139a;  ch  xi,  sect  16  147a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ii,  div  17, 
457b, d  [fn  1] 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-108a,c  esp  14a  b, 
22a, c,  23a-34c,  41c-42b,  48d-51d,  53b  55a, 
58d-59a,  61a-62c,  66d-93c;  113b  115a  /  Practi¬ 
cal  Reason,  352c-353a  /  Judgement,  551a-589c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  851a  890a  esp  851b  852a, 
856a  b,  859a  860b.  867a-868b,  879b,  889a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  512b-513b  esp 
512b;  526c-d;  532b;  599a  b  /  Group  Psy¬ 
chology,  688d-689a;  689b  [fn  1]  /  Ego  and  id, 
707c-708b  esp  708b 

2c.  The  acquirement  of  ideas  by  perception  or 
intuition:  simple  ideas  or  forms  as  direct 
objects  of  the  understanding 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  224a-c  /  Republic,  bk  vi, 
383d  388a:  bk  vii,  392b  393c  /  Timaeus,  457c- 
458a  /  Parmenides ,  487 d  488a  /  Theaetetus, 
535b  d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  6, 
269b  c;  bk  xii,  ch  7  346c  d 


774 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  origin  or  derivation  of  ideas  in  the  human 
mind.  2  c.  The  acquirement  of  ideas  hy 
perception  or  intuition:  simple  ideas  or forms 
as  direct  objects  of  the  understanding f 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  84,  a 
1,  ans  and  rep  1  440d-442a;  a  2,  ans  442  b- 
443c;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-2  444d-446b;  aa  5-7 
446c-450b 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  ur,  4a-b  /  Meditations ,  vi, 
99a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  14-22  380c- 
383c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  ch  iii,  sect  21  118b-119a; 
bk  11,  ch  i-ix  121a-141b  passim,  esp  ch  i, 
sect  1-8  121a-123a,  sect  17  125c-d,  ch  i, 
SECT  20-CH  IV,  sect  i  126d-129c,  CH  IV,  SECT 
6-ch  v  131a-b,  ch  ix,  sect  1-7  138b-139b, 
sect  15  141a;  ch  xi,  sect  17-cH  xii,  sect  2 
147a-d;  ch  xii,  sect  8  148c-d;  ch  xiii,  sect 
2  149a;  ch  xiv,  sect  2  155b-c;  sect  31  161d- 
162a;  ch  xv,  sect  9  164b-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  i 
165c-d;  ch  xvii,  sect  22-cH  xvm,  sect  i 
173d-174a;  ch  xviii,  sect  6  174c-d;  ch  xx, 
sect  1-2  176b-c;  sect  15  177d;  ch  xxi,  sect 
75  200b-d;  ch  xxiii,  sect  i  204a-b;  sect  3 
204c-d;  sect  5  205a-b;  sect  7  205d-206a; 
sect  9  206b-c;  sect  15  208c-d;  sect  29-30 
211d-212b;  sect  32-37  212c-214b  passim;  ch 
xxv,  sect  9  216d;  sect  ii  217a;  ch  xxx, 
sect  2  238b-c;  ch  xxxi,  sect  2  239b-d;  ch 
xxxii,  sect  14-16  245c-246b;  bk  iii,  ch  i, 
sect  5  252b-c;  ch  iv  260a-263c  passim,  esp 
sect  1 1— 1 5  261d-263b;  ch  v,  sect  2  263d- 
264a;  ch  vi,  sect  46-47  281d-282b;  ch  xi, 
sect  21-23  304d-305b;  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  sect  ii- 
13  311c-312b;  ch  iii,  sect  23  320a-c;  ch  iv, 
sect  4  324c;  ch  xviii,  sect  3  381b-c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  i 
413a-b;  sect  18  416b-c;  sect  25-33  417d- 
419a  passim;  SECT36419c-d;  sect  88—91  430a- 
431a  passim 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ii  455b- 
457b;  sect  vii, DIV49  47lc-d;Div6i  477c-478a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  318b-319a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  14a-b;  23a-33d  esp  25b-c, 
27c,  28d-29d,  32a-c;  34a-c;  41c-42a;  45b-46a; 
53b-55a;  66d-72c  esp  69c-72c;  85d-93c;  99a- 
107b;  131a-c;  186d-187a  /  Judgement,  465a-c; 
528c-530c;  570c-572b 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  lc-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  502a-505b  esp  502a 

2d.  Reflection  as  a  source  of  ideas:  the  mind’s 
consideration  of  its  own  acts  or  content 

8  Aristotle:  Soul ,  bk  iii,  ch  4  [429b26~430a9] 
662b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  i  105a-106c; 
ch  17  122d-124a;  ch  20  126c-127b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  12-31  74b- 
79d 


2d  to  If 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12,  a 
9,  rep  2  58b-59a;  q  28,  a  4,  rep  2  160c-161d; 
q  85,  a  2  453d-455b;  q  87,  a  3  467b-468a 
31  Descartes:  Meditations,  vi,  96d-97a 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  i, 
sect  1-8  121a-123a;  sect  17  125c-d;  sect  24 
127b-c;  ch  iii,  sect  1,  128d;  ch  vi-vii  131b- 
133b;  ch  ix,  sect  1-2  138b-c;  ch  xi,  sect  14, 
146d;  ch  xii,  sect  1-2  147b-d;  sect  8  148c-d; 
ch  xiv,  sect  2-6  155b-156c;  sect  31  161d- 
162a;  ch  xvii,  sect  22  173d-174a;  ch  xviii, 
sect  6  174c-d;  ch  xx,  sect  1-2  176b-c;  sect 
15  177d;  ch  xxi,  sect  4  I78d-179c;  sect  75 
200b-d;  ch  xxiii,  sect  i  204a-b;  sect  5 
205a-b;  sect  15  208c-d;  sect  29-30  211d- 
212b;  sect  32-37  212c-214b  passim;  ch  xxv, 
sect  9  216d;  sect  ii  217a;  bk  iii,  ch  i, 
sect  5  252b-c;  ch  v,  sect  2  263d-264a;  bk 
iv,  ch  iii,  sect  23  320a-c 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  i  413a-b 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ii,  div  14 
456b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15c-16c;  55a-56c;  99a- 
107b;  121a-123b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  138 
48c-d;  additions,  89  129d-130a 
53  James:  Psychology,  121a-b;  122b-126a  passim, 
esp  122b-124b 

2e.  The  genesis  of  ideas  by  the  recollection  of 
sense-impressions:  the  images  of  sense 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  8-18  73b- 
76a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  49a-d;  part  iv, 
258b-c;  262a-b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  26  156a- 
157a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  19a-20d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  17-18  380d- 
382b;  prop  40,  schol  2  388a-b;  prop  49, 
schol,  391d-392c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  21  118b-119a;  bk  ii,  ch  x  141b-143d 
passim,  esp  sect  2  141b-c,  sect  7  142c-d;  bk 
iv,  ch  11,  sect  14  312b-d 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ii  455b- 
457b;  sect  vii,  div  49  471c-d;  div  61  477c- 
478a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  341d-342a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  54b-55a 

53  James:  Psychology,  480a-501b  esp  480a-b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  351c-352d 
esp  351d-352a;  363c-364b;  367b-c;  384c-385c 
esp  385 b-c  /  Unconscious ,  442d-443a  /  General 
Introduction ,  518c-d  /  Ego  and  Id,  700a-701d 

2 f.  The  production  of  ideas  by  the  reworking  of 
the  materials  of  sense:  the  imaginative 
construction  of  concepts  or  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  complex  from  simple  ideas 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [722-748] 
53d-54a 


2 g  to  3a  Chapter 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  rk  x,  par  14  74d  75a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  12,  a 
9,  rep  2  58b  59a 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  50d 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  1,  76a  b;  iii,  83b  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  210d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [95-128]  177b- 
178a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  rk  ii,  ch  i, 
sect  5  122a-b;  sect  24  127b  c;  ch  ii,  sect  i- 
2  127d-128b;  ch  vii,  sect  10  133a  b;  cii  xi, 
sect  6-7  145a~b;  ch  xii-xxvm  147b  233d 
passim,  esp  ch  xiii,  sect  i  148d-149a,  sect 
4-6  149b-d,  sect  27  154c-d,  ch  xiv,  sect  27- 
31  160d-162a,  ch  xv,  sect  2-3  162c-d,  sect 
9  164b-d,  ch  xvi,  sect  1-2  165c-d,  sect  5 
166b-c,  sect  8  167c,  ch  xvii,  sect  3  168b, 
sect  5  168d-169a,  sect  22  173d  174a,  ch  xxi, 
sect  75  200b-d,  ch  xxii,  sect  2  201a  b.  sect 

9  202c-203a,  ch  xxv,  sect  9  216d,  sect  ii 
217a,  ch  xxviii,  sect  14  231d-232a,  sect  18 
232d-233b;  ch  xxx,  sect  3-5  238c-239b; 
ch  xxxi,  sect  3-14  240a-243c  passim;  ch 
xxxii,  sect  12  245b-c;  sect  17-18  246b-247a; 
sect  22-25  247c-248a  passim;  bk  hi,  ch  ii, 
sect  3  253c;  ch  iv,  sect  12-14  262b-263a;  ch 
iv,  sect  17-CH  v,  sect  16  263c-268b;  ch  vi, 
sect  ii  27lb-d;  sect 26-51  274d-283a  passim; 
ch  xi,  sect  15  303b-c;  sect  18  304a-b;  bk 
iv,  ch  iv,  sect  5-8  324d-325c;  sect  11-12 
326b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 

10  406d-407b;  sect  i  413a-b;  sect  28  418b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ii,  div 

13-14  455d-456b;  sect  hi,  div  18  457c-d; 
sect  v,  div  39,  466c-d;  div  40,  467b;  sect 
vii,  div  49,  471d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  338a;  341d-342a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  5d-6b;  31c-d;  45d-46a; 
65d  l08a,c  esp  66d-91d,  101b-107b;  193a- 
195a;  211d-216c  /  Judgement ,  493c-495a,c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  104a-106b;  149b-153b  esp 
150a,  153a-b;  179b-181a  esp  181b  [fn  1];  362a- 
363b;  480a-481a 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  270c-271a 

2 g.  The  abstraction  of  ideas  from  sense- 
experience:  the  concept  as  the  first  act 
of  the  mind;  the  grades  of  abstraction 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  19 
[99b20-ioob4]  136a-d  /  Physics ,  bk  ii,  cii  2 
[i93b22-i94an]  270a-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i, 
ch  1  [980*28-98 ibi3)  499a-500a;  bk  iv,  cii  4 
[ioo6ai2-bi2]  525b-d;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [i025b28- 
1026*6]  547d-548a;  bk  vii,  ch  10  [i035b35- 
1036*12]  559b-c;  bk  xi,  ch  3  [io6i*29-bi2] 
589c-d;  bk  xiii,  ch  2  [io77bi]-CH  3  [io78b5] 
608d-610a  /  Soul ,  bk  1,  ch  1  [403*2-16] 
632a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [429^0-23]  661d~662a; 
ch  7  [431*14-^19]  663d-664b;  ch  8  664b-d  / 
Memory  and  Reminiscence ,  ch  i  [449^0- 
450*25]  690c-691a 


37:  IDEA  775 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i,  a  i, 
rep  2  3b  4a;  q  12,  a  14,  ans  61c  62b;  q  14,  a 
ii,  rep  1  84c  85c;  q  40,  a  3,  ans  215c  216d; 
q  54,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  287b  288a;  q  55,  a  2 
289d  290d;  q  57,  a  i,  rep  4  295a  d;  q  75,  a  2, 
rep  4  379c  380c;  a  4,  rep  2  380c  381b;  a  5, 
ans  382a  383b;  q  76,  a  2,  rep  4  388c  391a; 
q  79,  aa  4  4  416a  418c;  a  5,  ri:p  2  418c  419b; 
q  84,  a  2,  ans  442b  443c;  a  6  447c  449a;  q  85, 
aa  1  4  451c-457a;  aa  5  6  457d-459c;  a  8  460b- 
461b;  q  89,  a  1,  rep  3  473b-475a;  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  i  476c -477a,  a  7,  ans  478d  479c;  q  117, 
a  1  595d-597c;  part  i  ii,  q  29,  a  6,  ans  and 
rep  1,4  748b  749a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  9, 
a  4  766b  767b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i,  ans 
1025c-1032b 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  305a  /  On 
Animal  Generation ,  332a-335c 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  xiv,  29b-30d  /  Discourse , 
part  iv,  53b  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  215b  c; 
216d  217d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  2 
388ab 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  cii  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  bk  ii,  ch  xi,  sect  9-1  i  145b- 
146a;  ch  xii,  sect  i,  147b-c;  ch  xxxii,  sect 
6-8  244b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect  6-9  255c- 
256c;  ch  vi,  sect  32-33  277c-278c;  bk  iv,  ch 
vii,  sect  9  338d-339b;  cii  ix,  sect  i  349a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro  405a- 
412a, c  esp  sect  6-19  405d-410c;  sect  5 
414a-b;  sect  97-100  431d-432c;  sect  118- 
120  436b-d;  sect  143  441c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
122  505c-d;  div  124-125  506a-507a  esp  div 
125,  507b  [fn  1] 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  341b-342b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  23a-24a;  45d-46a;  115b  c; 
193a-195a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  296c-297b  passim 

53  James:  Psychology ,  305a-312a  passim;  329a- 
331b  esp  331b 

54  Freud:  Unconscious ,  442b-443d 

2  h.  The  derivation  of  transcendental  ideas  from 
the  three  syllogisms  of  reason 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  109d-120c  esp  llOd  111c 

3.  The  division  of  ideas  according  to  their 
objective  reference 

3 a.  Ideas  about  things  distinguished  from 
ideas  about  ideas:  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  first  and  second  intentions 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  12,  a 
9,  rep  2  58b-59a;  q  14,  a  6,  rep  i  80a  81c;  a 
13,  rep  2-3  86d-88c;  q  15,  a  2,  ans  and  rep 
2  92a-93b;  q  29,  a  i,  rep  3  162a  163b;  q  40, 
a  4,  ans  170c~171b;  q  66,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2 
345d-347b;  q  84,  a  i,  rep  i  440d-442a;  q  85, 
a  2  453d-455b 


776 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  The  division  of  ideas  according  to  their  objec¬ 
tive  reference .  3  a.  Ideas  about  things  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  ideas  about  ideas:  the  dis¬ 
tinction  betiveen first  ayid second  intentions.') 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  270a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
79c;  bk  in,  150a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  hi,  ch  ii 
252d-254c  passim;  ch  iv,  sect  2  260b;  ch  v, 
sect  12  266d-267a;  sect  14  267b-c;  ch  vi, 
sect  19,  273b;  sect  48-50  282b-d;  ch  xi, 
sect  10  302b;  sect  24  305b-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  15d-16c  esp  16c;  55a-56c; 
99a-101b;  121a-123b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156d- 
158a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  300b 

3 b.  Adequate  and  inadequate  ideas:  clear  and 
distinct  ideas  as  compared  with  obscure 
and  confused  ideas 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12,  a 
6,  ans  and  rep  3  55b-56a;  q  13  62b-75b;  q  14, 
a  6  80a-81c;  a  12,  rep  2  85d-86d;  q  55,  a  3 
291a-d;  q  85,  a  3  455b-457a;  a  4,  rep  3 
457a-d;  a  8,  ans  460b-461b;  q  89,  a  i,  ans 
473b-475a;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  475a-d;  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  2,4  475d-476c;  a  4,  ans  and  rep 
2  476c-477a;  q  94,  a  i,  rep  3  501d-503a; 
q  117,  a  1,  rep  4  595d-597c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  hi,  q  10, 
a  2,  rep  3  768b-769c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a 
1,  rep  2  1025c-1032b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  332a-333d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  14-17 
107d-108a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  51b-52a  / 
Meditations ,  73d-74a;  in,  82a-d;  85b-86b;  vi, 
99a-c  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  postulate  v- 
vi  131b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  def  4  373b;  prop 
34-36  385d-386b;  prop  38  386c-d;  prop  40- 
43  387a-389b;  part  iii,  def  1-3  395d-396a; 
prop  1  396a-c;  prop  3  398b-c;  part  iv,  ap¬ 
pendix,  ii  447b;  part  v,  prop  3-4  453a-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  91d-92c;  bk  i, 
ch  iii,  sect  19  117c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  xiii,  sect  17- 
20  152a-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  3-4  165d-166b;  ch 
xvii,  sect  7-8  169b-170a;  sect  12-21  170d- 
173d  passim,  esp  sect  15  171b-172a;  ch  xxv, 
sect  8  216b-c;  ch  xxviii,  sect  19  233 b-c;  ch 
xxix  233d-238a;  ch  xxxi  239b-243c  passim; 
ch  xxxii,  sect  18,  246d-247a;  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  37  279b;  sect  40  280a-b;  sect  43-51 
280c-283a;  ch  x,  sect  2-4  291d-292c;  ch  xi, 
sect  24  305b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  sect  15  312d- 
313a;  ch  iii,  sect  26  321b-c;  ch  xii,  sect  14 
362d-363a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knotvledge ,  sect  30  418c; 
sect  33  419a;  sect  36  419c-d 


3b  to  4 a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vii,  div 
48-49  470d-471d;  sect  xii,  div  125  506d- 
507a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  la-4a,c;  30b-3!a;  125b 
[fn  1];  193a-b  /  Judgement ,  603c-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  311b-312b  [fn  1];  480b- 
484a 

3 c.  Real  and  fantastic  or  fictional  ideas:  nega¬ 
tions  and  chimeras 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [722-748] 
53d-54a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  12,  a 
9,  rep  2  58b-59a;  q  17,  a  2,  rep  2  102a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  50d;  57b-c;  part 
iv,  258b-d;  261a;  262a-c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  60  112c- 
113a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  1,  76 a-77c;  iii,  83b 
/  Objections  and  Replies ,  21  Od 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  viii, 
sect  1-6 133b-134a;  chxvii,  sect  12-21 170d- 
173d  esp  sect  15  171b-172a;  ch  xxx  238a- 
239b;  bk  iii,  ch  i,  sect  4  252a;  bk  iv,  ch  iv, 
sect  1-12  323d-326d  passim;  ch  v,  sect  7-8 
330b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  29-30 
418c;  sect  33-34  419a-c;  sect  36  419c-d; 
sect  82-84  428d-429c;  sect  86-91  429c- 
431a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  62d-63a;  174d-175b; 
193a-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  300b;  639a-644a  esp  640a- 
641b,  642b  [fn  2],  643b  [fn  1];  646b-655a; 
659a-660b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  158a-d;  270c- 
271a  /  General  Introduction ,  597b-598a 

4.  The  logic  of  ideas 

4a.  The  verbal  expression  of  ideas  or  concepts: 
terms 

7  Plato:  Cratylus  85a-114a,c  /  Phaedrus ,  138c- 
140c  /  Sophist ,  575 d- 577b  /  Seventh  Letter , 
809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Categories  5a-21d  /  Prior  Analytics, 
bk  1,  ch  1  [24bi6-i8]  39c;  ch  35  66c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xiii,  par  36 
120c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  34,  a 
1,  ans  185b-187b;  q  85,  a  2,  rep  3  453d-455b; 
q  107,  a  1,  ans  549b-550b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54c-58a;  part  iv, 
270a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  57d-58a; 
60b-c;  61  b-c;  62c-d  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, 
aph  14  107d-108a;  aph  59  112b-c 

31  Descartes:  Rides,  xiii,  26b-c  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  137a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  49,  schol, 
392a-c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  392  239b- 240a 


4 b  to  4 b(3)  Chapter 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  cm  wii 
200d-204a  passim,  esp  sect  \  io  201b  203c; 
ch  xxxii,  sect  7-8  244c  d;  bk  hi  251b.d 
306d  passim,  csp  cn  i  -vm  251b,d  285a,  cii  xi 
300a-306d;  bk  iv,  ch  v,  sect  4  329b  d;  cn 
vi,  sect  1-3  331b  d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
n-12  407b-408b;  sect  15  409a  b;  sect  18  19 
410a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  340a  342c 
45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  lb  c 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  40c-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  12 7b- 128a;  153b  154a; 
158a-159b;  181b  183a;  332b  334a 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  662a  b 

4b.  The  classification  of  terms:  problems  in  the 
use  of  different  kinds  of  terms 

4b{  1)  Concrete  and  abstract  terms 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  cii  34  66b  c 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
3,  rep  i  16a-d;  q  13,  a  i,  rep  2  62c-63c;  a  9, 
ans  71b-72c;  q  32,  a  2  178a-179b;  q  39,  aa 
4-5  205c-208c;  q  54,  a  i,  rep  2  285a  d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  57a 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  viii 
284b-285a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  341  b-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  305a-308b  esp  308b  309b 
[fn  1—3] ;  689a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  516b-c 

4b(2)  Particular  and  universal  terms 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  2  [ia20-b9]  5b-c; 
ch  5  [2an~3b23]  6a-8a  /  Interpretation ,  ch  7 
f1 7*37—40]  26d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  vii,  cii  io 
[io35b28-32]  559b;  ch  ii  [1037*5—9]  560c 
17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  12  251a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica ,  part  i,  q  13,  a 
9  71b-72c;  q  29,  a  1  162a-163b;  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  4  165c-167a;  q  30,  a  4  170c-l7lb;  q  33,  a 
3,  rep  1  182c-183c;  q  36,  a  i,  ans  191a-192a; 
q  40,  a  3,  ans  215c-216d;  Q  55,  a  3,  rep  3 
29Ia-d;  q  57,  a  2,  rep  3  295d-297a;  q  76, 
a  2,  rep  3  388c-391a;  q  85,  a  2,  rep  2  453d- 
455b;  a  3,  rep  1,4  455b-457a;  q  86,  a  2,  rep  4 
462a-463a;  part  i-ii,  q  30,  a  4,  rep  2  751c- 
752b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica ,  part  iii,  q  7,  a 
13,  rep  3  755c-756c;  q  io,  a  3,  rep  2  769d- 
771b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  55b-c 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  i 
387b-388a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  cii  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  bk  ii,  ch  xi,  sect  8-11  145b- 
146a;  ch  xvi,  sect  i  165c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  i, 
sect  3  251d-252a;  ch  iii  254d-260a;  cn  vi, 
sect  1  268b-c;  sect  32-33  277c-278c;  bk  iv, 
ch  iii,  sect  31  323c-d;  ch  vii,  sect  9  338d- 
339b 


37:  IDEA  777 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sk  r 
11  12  407b -408b;  sect  13  16  409a  d;  sect  18- 
19  410a  c;  sect  122  437b  c 

38  Roussrsu:  Inequality ,  341b  342b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  307a  312a 

4£(3)  Specific  and  generic  terms:  infimae  species 
and  summa  genera 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  3  9  5d  16d  /  Prior 
Analytics ,  bk  i,  cii  27  [43*25  44)  60c  d  / 
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  19  22  111c  115b  / 
Topics ,  bk  1,  cn  9  147a  b;  cii  15  [107*3  1 1 1 
151a;  bk  iv,  ch  1  [i2ob36-i2i*c)|  168d  169a; 
cn  2  [122*3-19]  170a  b;  cn  4  [124^5  22|  173c; 
ch  4  [i25*5]-ch  5  [1 2 5bi 9]  173d  174d;  cn  6 
[128*13-29]  177d  178a;  bk  v,  cii  3  [132*10  23] 
182d  183a;  cn  4  [13 2b 3 5  133*11]  184a;  bk  vi, 
cii  5  196b  d;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [152*38-39]  207b  / 
Sophistical  Refutations ,  cn  22  245a  246c  / 
Physics ,  bk  i,  cii  2  [i85*2o-b4]  260a  b;  bk  iii, 
ch  1  [200^32—201*3]  278b;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [210* 
17-19]  289a;  bk  vii,  cii  4  330d-333a  csp 
[249a8-b26]  332a-333a  /  Heavens,  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[312*12-17]  403d  /  Generation  and  Corruption , 
bk  1,  ch  3  413c-416c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iii,  ch 
1  [995b^7— 3 1  ]  514b;  ch  3  517a-518a;  bk  v, 
cii  3  [ioi4b3— 1 3]  534d;  cn  7  [1017*24-31! 
537d-538a;  ch  8  538b-c;  cn  13-15  541b  543a; 
cii  19-21  543d'544b;  ch  25  [1023^2-25) 
545c;  ch  28  [i024bio-i6]  546c;  bk  vii,  ch  3 
[1029*11-26]  551c-d;  ch  12-13  561b  563a;  bk 
viii,  ch  6  569d  570d;  bk  ix,  cii  i  [i045b27~ 
33]  570b;  bk  xi,  ch  i  [io59b2i-io6o*i ]  587d- 
588a;  bk  xiv,  ch  1  [io8S*23-b4]  620c  d;  ch  2 
[1089*6-1090*3]  621b-622c  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[402*23-25]  631  b-c;  ch  5  [410*12-23]  640a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  ek  i,  ch  3  [642b 
20-643*28]  166a-d 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  iii,  ch  34, 
670c-671a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
4,  rep  1  16d-17c;  a  5  17c-18b;  a  6,  rep  2  18c- 
19a;  q  5,  a  3,  rep  i  25a-d;  a  6,  rep  i  27c-28b; 
q  11,  a  1,  rep  1  46d-47d;  q  12,  a  9,  rep  2  58b- 
59a;  q  13,  a  7,  ans  68d-70d;  q  15,  a  3,  rep  4 
93b-94a;  q  28,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1-2  157c- 
158d;  a  2  158d~160a;  q  29,  a  2,  rep  4  163b- 
164b;  q  30,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  I70c-I71b;  q 
50,  a  2,  rep  1  270a-272a;  q  66,  a  2,  rep  2 
345d-347b;  q  76,  a  3,  rep  4  391a-393a;  a  6, 
rep  1-2  396a  d;  q  77,  a  4,  rep  i  403a  d;  q  85, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  4  455b-457a;  a  4,  ans 
457a-d;  a  5,  rep  3  457d~458d;  q  88,  a  2, 
rep  4  471c-472c;  part  i-ii,  q  18,  a  7,  rep  3 
698c-699c;  q  35,  a  8,  ans  and  rep  3  779c- 
780c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  parti  11,  q  49, 
a  1  lb-2b;  q  61,  a  1,  rep  1  54d-55c;  part  iii 
SUPPL,  Q  92,  A  I,  ANS  1025c-1032b 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  55b-c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  28  158d- 
159a 


778 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4b(4)  to  5 a 


(4  b.  The  classification  of  terms:  problems  in  the  use 
of  differeyit  kinds  of  terms .  4b ( 3)  Specific 
and  generic  terms:  infimae  species  and 
summa  genera.) 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  hi, 
sect  8-9  256a-c;  ch  iv,  sect  16  263b-c;  ch 
vi,  sect  11-12  271b-272b;  sect  32-33  277c- 
278c;  sect  36-41  279a-280b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341b-342b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  42b-43b;  193a-200c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  30d-31b;  64a; 
207a-208a esp  207d;  210b-211b;  238b-c;  241d- 
242a  /  Descent  of  Man,  332b-c;  347a-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  345a-b;  870b-871a 

4b(4)  Univocal  and  analogical  terms 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  i  5a-b  /  Topics ,  bk 
1,  ch  15  [107^-18]  151a-b;  bk  vi,  ch  10  [148s 
23-25]  202b;  [i48a38-b4]  202c;  bk  viii,  ch  3 
[i58b8-i59a2]  215b-c  /  Sophistical  Refutations, 
ch  1  [i65a6— 12]  227b-c;  ch  33  [i82bi3-2i] 
251d  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i85&2o]-ch  3  [187** 
10]  260a-262a;  bk  vii,  ch  4  [249^-24]  331d- 
332b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  2  [ioo3a33-bi5] 
522b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  4  [ic>3oa32-b3]  553a-b;  bk 
xi,  ch  3  [io6ob34~io6iaio]  589a-b;  bk  xii,  ch 
4-5  599d-601a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
6,  rep  1  18c-19a;  q  13,  aa  5-6  66b-68c;  a  10 
72c-73c;  q  16,  a  6,  ans  98b-d;  q  29,  a  4,  rep  4 
165c-167a;  q  32,  a  i,  rep  2  175d-178a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  61, 
a  1,  rep  1  54d-55c;  part  iii,  q  60,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  3  847b-848a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  57d-58a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  60b-c  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  43  109d-110a;  aph 
59-60  112b-113a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2 
387b-388b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  iv, 
sect  5,  131a;  ch  xiii,  sect  18  152a-c;  ch 
xxix,  sect  6-12  234d-236c;  bk  iii,  ch  vi, 
sect  28  276a-b;  sect  47-51  282a-283a;  ch  ix 
285a-291c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
62-63  478b-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  307b-308b 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  547b-548c;  602b-603a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  549b-550a;  689a-b 

4c.  The  correlation,  opposition,  and  order  of 
terms 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  49a-50b  /  Phaedo,  226d- 
227a;  242d-245c  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  350c-353d 
esp  351b-352b;  bk  vii,  392b-393b  /  Sophist , 
573b-574a 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  5  [3^4-31]  8a;  ch 
6  [5bn-6ai8]  10a-c;  ch  7  lla-13d;  ch  8  [iobu- 
25]  15d;  ch  10-15  16d-21d  /  Prior  Analytics , 
bk  1,  ch  46  70b-71d  /  Topics,  bk  ii,  ch  7-8 


158b-160a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [i23bi-i24aio]  171d- 
172c;  ch  4  [i24a35-b34]  173a-d;  [i25a5~bi4] 
173d-174c;  bk  v,  ch  6  187a-188c;  bk  vi,  ch  8 
200b-201a;  ch  9  [i47a23~- 148^]  201b-202a; 
ch  12  [i49b4~23]  203d-204a  /  Physics,  bk  iii, 
ch  1  [20ia4~8]  278c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  2 
[1004^-17]  523a-b;  [ioo4b27-ioo5a2]  523d- 
524a;  bk  v,  ch  10  539a-c;  ch  15  542a-543a; 
bk  ix,  ck  1  [1046^9-36]  571b;  ch  2  [104615 
7-15]  571c-d;  bk  x,  ch  3  [i054b23]-cH  10 
[io59ai5]  581c-586d;  bk  xi,  ch  3  [io6iai8-28] 
589b-c;  bk  xii,  ch  10  [i075b20-24]  606c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  13,  a 
7  68d-70d;  q  16,  aa  3-4  96b-97c;  q  17,  a  1, 
ans  lOOd-lOld;  a  4,  ans  103c-104b;  q  28  157c- 
161d  passim;  q  32,  a  2,  ans  178a-179b;  q  33, 
a  4,  rep  1-3  183c-185a;  qq  40-41  213a-224a 
passim;  q  48,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i  259b-260c; 
a  3,  rep  3  261b-262a;  Q  49,  a  3,  ans  and  rep 
1  266d-268a,c;  q  103,  a  3,  rep  2  530a-c;  a  8, 
rep  3  533d-534b;  part  i-ii,  q  18,  a  8,  rep  i 
699d-700b;  q  29,  a  2,  rep  i  745c-746b;  q  35, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  774d-775d;  q  36,  a  i,  ans 
780c-781b;  Q  46,  a  i,  rep  2  813b-814a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  64, 
a  3,  rep  3  68b-69b;  q  67,  a  3,  ans  83b-84d; 
q  71,  a  6,  rep  1  llOb-lllb;  q  72,  a  6  116b- 
117a;  part  ii-ii,  Q  21,  a  3,  rep  2-3  479c-480b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  57b-c;  58a-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
12d-13b 

53  James:  Psychology,  869a-872b;  878a-879b 
5.  Ideas  or  concepts  in  the  process  of  thought 

5a.  Concept  and  judgment:  the  division  of 
terms  as  subjects  and  predicates;  kinds 
of  subjects  and  predicates 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  2-3  5b-d;  ch  5 
[2an-3b24]  6a-8a  /  Interpretation  25a-36d  / 
Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  27  [43^5-44]  60c-d  / 
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  4  lOOa-lOlb;  ch 
19  [8^23-30]  llld  /  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  4-9  144b- 
147b  /  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [i86a22-i87aio]  261b- 
262a;  ch  6  [189^8-33]  264d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  28-29 
26a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, 
ans  lOd-lld;  q  3,  a  4,  rep  2  16d-17c;  q  13,  a 
12  74c-75b;  q  16,  a  2  95c-96b;  q  58,  a  2 
301b-d;  a  4  302d-303c;  q  76,  a  3,  ans  391a- 
393a;  q  85,  a  2,  rep  3  453d-455b;  aa  5-6 
457d-459c;  a  8,  ans  460b-461b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  270a-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  22a-b  /  Meditations , 
iii,  83a  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  def  ix 
130d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  39a-44c;  51d-52b;  59c- 
66d  esp  63d-64a;  180c-182b  /  Judgement,  480d- 
482b;  562a-d;  572b-575b 

53  James  :  Psychology,  144a-b;  178a-179a;  313a-b; 
638b;  861b;  870b-873a 


5b  to  6a 


Chapter  37:  IDF. A  779 


5b.  The  position  and  sequence  of  terms  in 
reasoning 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  cii  4  [25b3i- 
26a2]  40d-41a;  cn  5  [26b34  27*2]  42a;  cn  6 
[28*10-16]  43b  c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  58a  c 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  59c  60a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  cii 
xvii,  sect  4,  373a  375a;  sect  8,  377c  d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  318b  319a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  HOd  111c;  118a  c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  667b  668a;  672b  673b; 
868b  879b  esp  869b-873a,  878a-879b;  889b 

5c.  The  dialectical  employment  of  the  ideas  of 
reason 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  la-4a,c  esp  la  b;  7a -8b; 
15c-16c;  20a:  53b-54b;  59c-d;  93c-99a;  101b- 
107b;  108a-209d  esp  108a-112d,  120c-121a, 
129c-130b,  133d,  173b-174a,  175c-d,  185b-c, 
190a-209d;  217d-218a;  219a-223d;  227a-235a 
esp  229b-c,  231c-232a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals ,  260d-261c;  283d~284d  / 
Practical  Reason ,  291a-292a;  296a  d;  309b; 
310d-311d;  313b-314d;  320c-321b;  335c- 

337a, c;  337a-355d  esp  337a-338c,  343b-c, 
347d-348a,  348d-355d  /  Judgement ,  461  a-c; 
540a-542a;  551a-552c;  562a-564c;  570b-572b; 
606d-607c 

5 d.  The  order  of  concepts  in  the  stages  of learn- 
*  ing:  the  more  and  the  less  general 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1 8qa2 1— bi 4] 
259b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [639s 
12— bi  2]  161b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  5,  a  2 
24b-25a;  q  10,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1,5  40d-41d; 
q  14,  a  6,  ans  80a-81c;  q  33,  a  3,  rep  i  182c- 
183c;  q  55,  a  3,  rep  2  291a-d;  q  85,  a  3  455b- 
457a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  332a-334d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  68d-69c  / 
Novum  Organum,  pref  105a-106d 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  167c-d 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  i, 

sect  15  98d-99a;  sect  20,  lOOd;  sect  23 
101b-102a;  ch  iii,  sect  13  116a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  i, 
sect  6-8  122b-123a;  sect  20-24  126d-127c; 
ch  xi,  sect  8-9  145b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect 
7-9  255d-256c;  bk  iv,  ch  vii,  sect  9  338d- 
339b;  sect  11,  342c-d;  ch  xii,  sect  3  358d- 
359c  esp  359a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  338a-342b  passim,  esp 
341b-342b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  193a-200c  esp  195d  197c 
/  Practical  Reason,  294a-b  /  Judgement,  572a- b; 
601d-602b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  315a-319a  esp  317b-319a; 
327a-329a;  360a;  522b-525a  esp  524a-b 

54  Freud:  Instincts,  412a-b  /  Unconscious,  442b- 
443a  /  Ego  and  Id,  700d-701a 


5e.  The  association,  comparison,  and  discrimi¬ 
nation  of  ideas:  the  stream  of  thought  or 
consciousness 

8  Aristotli  :  Memory  and  Reminiscence ,  ch  2 
[45  <b7  453*31)  692d  695d 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  52b  53b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  apii  26  156a- 
157a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  18  381d 
382b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  11,  cn  vn, 
sect  9  133a;  cn  xi,  sect  2  144a  c;  cii  xiv, 
sect  1-16  155b  158a;  cn  xxxm  248b  251d: 
bk  iv,  cii  11  309b  313a  passim,  esp  sect  i  7 
309b  311a;  cii  in,  sect  2  4  313a  c;  cn  vi, 
sect  13  335c  d;  cn  vn,  sect  i  7  337a-338c 
esp  sect  2  337a;  cii  xi,  sect  i  3  14  357d  358c; 
ch  xvii,  sect  2-3  371d  372b;  sect  4,  373a- 
375a  passim;  sect  8  377b  d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  26  418a; 
sect  30  418c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  hi  457c- 
458a;  sect  v,  div  41-45  467d  469c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  194a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  51c-d/  Judgement,  493c  d; 
528c-529b 

53  James:  Psychology,  15b  19b  esp  15b  17a, 

19a-b;  35b  37a  esp  36b;  146a  187b;  291a- 
295a  passim,  esp  293a-294a;  315a-395a  esp 
315a-331b,  344b-348a,  360a-395a;  427b- 

431a;  502a-507a  passim;  525a-526b:  664a- 
665a;  677a-678b:  827a-835a  esp  828b.  831b 
834a;  867a-873a  esp  867a-b:  878a  879a 

54  Freud:  Hysteria,  65d-67b;  74a  75a;  76c  d  / 
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  180a-181b;  347b- 
350a  passim;  352b-c;  373a-385c  esp  375b- 
378b,  382a-384c  /  General  Introduction,  486b- 
489c  passim 

6.  The  being  and  truth  of  ideas 

6a.  The  distinction  between  real  and  intention¬ 
al  existence,  between  thing  and  idea: 
ideas  as  symbols,  or  intentions  of  the 
mind 

7  Plato:  Parmenides,  489a- b 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  cn  1  [16*4-9]  25a/ 
Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  36  (48a40-b9|  66d  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  v,  cii  7  [1017*31-34]  538a;  bk 
vi,  ch  4  550a, c;  bk  ix,  ch  3  [i047*$o-b2]  572c; 
ch  10  577c-578a,c;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72biS  24] 
602d-603a;  ch  9  [io74b35-io75*i  1]  605c-d  / 
Soul,  bk  hi,  ch  2  [425bi 7— 26]  657d-658a;  cii 
3  [427*i6-b6]  659c-d;  ch  4  661b-662c;  cn 
8  664b  d  /  Memory  and  Reminiscence,  cn  1 
[450*25-451*19]  691a  692b 

11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk  i, 
403  b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  8  132d- 
133c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  16-26,  75b- 
78a 


780 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(6.  The  being  and  truth  of  ideas.  6a.  The  distinc¬ 
tion  between  real  and  intentional  existence, 
between  thing  and  idea:  ideas  as  symbols,  or 
intentions  of  the  mind .) 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, 
rep  2  lOd-lld;  q  3,  a  4,  rep  2  16d-17c;  q  5, 
a  2,  ans  24b-25a;  qii,ai  esp  rep  3  46d-47d; 
a  3,  rep  2  49a-c;  q  12,. a  2  51c-52c;  q  13,  a  i, 
ans  62c-63c;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  64d-65c;  a 

4  65c-66b;  a  7,  ans  and  rep  2,4-6  68d-70d; 
a  9,  ans  and  rep  2  71b-72c;  a  11,  ans  73c- 
74b;  a  12  74c-75b;  q  14,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3 
75d-76c;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2-3  76d-77d;  a  6, 
rep  1  80a-81c;  a  8,  ans  82c-83b;  a  9,  ans 
83b-d;  a  13,  rep  2-3  86d-88c;  q  15,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  1,3  91b-92a;  a  3,  rep  4  93b-94a;  q 
16,  a  2  95c-96b;  a  7,  rep  2  99a-d;  q  17,  a  3, 
ans  102d-103c;  q  18,  a  4  107d-108c;  q  19,  a  3, 
rep  6  llOb-lllc;  q  27,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2 
153b-154b;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  154c-155b;  a 

3,  ans  155c-156a;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  156b-d; 
q  28  157c-161d  passim;  q  29,  a  i,  rep  3  162a- 
163b;  q  30,  a  1,  rep  4  167a-168a;  a  4  170c- 
171b;  q  32,  aa  2-3  178a-180b;  q  34,  a  1  185b- 
187b;  a  3,  ans  188b-189a;  q  37,  a  i,  ans  197c- 
199a;  q  50,  a  2,  ans  270a-272a;  qq  55-58 
288d-306b  passim;  q  66,  a  2,  rep  2  345d- 
347b;  q  67,  a  3,  ans  351b-352a;  q  74,  a  3,  rep 

5  375a-377a,c;  q  76,  a  3,  rep  4  391a-393a;  a 
6,  rep  2  396a-d;  q  78,  a  3,  ans  410a-411d;  a 

4,  ans  and  rep  2  411d-413d;  q  79,  a  4,  rep  4 
417a-418c;  q  82,  a  3,  ans  433c-434c;  q  84 
440b-451b;  q  85,  a  2  453d-455b;  a  3,  rep  1,4 
455b-457a;  a  4  457a-d;  a  5,  rep  3  457d-458d; 
a  8,  rep  3  460b-461b;  q  86,  a  i,  ans  461c- 
462a;  q  87,  a  1  465a-466c;  q  88,  a  i,  rep  2 
469a-471c;  a  2,  rep  4  471c-472c;  q  89,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  2  475a-d;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  1,3 
475d-476c;  a  5,  ans  477a-478b;  part  i-ii,  q 

5,  a  6,  rep  2  641a-642a;  q  6,  a  6,  ans  and  rep 
2  649a-650a;  q  8,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  655b- 
656a;  q  12,  a  3,  rep  2-3  670d-671b;  q  17,  a  4, 
ans  688d-689c;  q  22,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  721c- 
722c;  q  28,  a  1,  rep  3  740b-741a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  93, 
a  1,  rep  2  215b,d-216c;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  5, 
rep  2  715a-716b;  part  hi  suppl,  q  82,  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  2  971a-972d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  53c;  part  iii, 
I72a-d;  part  iv,  262a-d;  270a-c 
26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  v,  sc  v  [1— 41] 
349d-350a 

29  Cervantes:  Dot?  Quixote  esp  part  i,  la-8c, 
18d-22a,  part  11,  285a-288c 
31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  71d-72a;  iii,  83b- 
86a;  v,  93a-94a  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  108b- 
109d;  121a-c;  def  i-iv  130a-b;  axiom  v-vi 
131d-132a;  157b-158a;  212c-213a 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d 
esp  371c-372c;  part  ii,  prop  5-9  374c-376c 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  viii 
133b-138b  passim,  esp  sect  8  134b-c;  ch 


6a  to  6b 

xxii,  sect  2  201a-b;  ch  xxx,  sect  2  238b-c; 
ch  xxxi,  sect  2  239b-d;  ch  xxxii,  sect  8 
244d;  sect  14-18  245c-247a;  bk  iii,  ch  iii, 
sect  12-20  257b-260a;  ch  iv,  sect  2  260b; 
ch  v,  sect  12  266d-267a;  ch  vi  268b-283a 
passim;  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  sect  14  312b-d;  ch  ix, 
sect  1  349a;  ch  xi,  sect  4-9  355b-357a 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  1-96 
413a-431d  esp  sect  1-24  413a-417d,  sect  29- 
44  418c-421a,  sect  48-49  422a-b,  sect  82-84 
428d-429c,  sect  86-91  429c-431a 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div 
44  468d-469c;  sect  xii,  div  1 17-123  504a- 
506a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  23a-33d;  85d-93c;  95a-d; 
97a-b;  117b-118a;  200c-209d;  211c-2l2a  / 
Practical  Reason ,  295b-d  /  Judgement ,  528c-d; 
551a-553c;  604a-b 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  134c-d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  pref,  6a- 7a  / 
Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  153a-c;  158a- 
160b;  188d-189a;  part  i,  219d-220a;  236a-c; 
257c-d;  part  iv,  354b;  364b-c 
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  385b 
50  Marx:  Capital ,  llb-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  128a-b;  142a-b;  176a-184a 
passim,  esp  176a-b,  178a-181a;  191b-192a; 
299a-302a  esp  302b  [fn  1];  307a-311a  esp  311b- 
312b  [fn  1];  639a-645b  esp  640a;  659a-b;  852a; 
865b-866a;  868b;  878a-882a  esp  880b-882a; 
889a-890a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  467d;  597d-598a 

6b.  The  nature  and  being  of  ideas  in  relation  to 
the  nature  and  being  of  the  mind 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus , 
125a-b  /  Republic ,  bk  v,  369a-373c;  bk  vi, 
383d-388a  /  Timaeus ,  457b-458a  /  Parmenides, 
486a-491d  /  Sophist,  567a-569a 

8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  4  661b-662c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [722-817] 
53d-54d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  16-38  75b- 
81a  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  6,  269b-c  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bkii,  CH38,  654c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  15,  a 
1  esp  rep  1  91b-92a;  q  16,  a  7,  rep  2  99a-d; 
q  29,  a  2,  rep  4  163b-164b;  q  76,  a  2,  rep  3 
388c-391a;  q  79,  a  3,  ans  416a-417a;  q  84,  a 
1,  ans  440d-442a;  qq  85-89  451b-480c  passim; 
q  no,  a  1,  rep  3  564c-565d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  49a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43d-44c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  162b; 
212c-213a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  def  3  373b;  prop  ii, 
demonst  377 b;  prop  49,  schol,  392a-c 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  bk  ii,  ch  viii  133b-138b 
passim;  ch  xxii,  sect  2  201a-b;  ch  xxx  238a- 
239b  passim,  esp  sect  2-3  238b-d;  ch  xxxi, 
sect  2  239b-d;  ch  xxxii,  sect  14-16  245c- 
246b;  bk  iii,  ch  v  263d-268a;  ch  vi,  sect  26- 


6c  to  6f  Chapter 

51  274d  283a  passim;  bk  iv,  cm  iv,  sect  4  5 
324c-d;  sect  11-12  326b  d;  cii  xi,  sect  4-9 
355b-357a 

35  Berkeley:  Unman  Knowledge  404a  444d  esp 
sect  2  4  413b  414a,  sect  25-3^  417d  419a, 
sect  48-49  422ab,  sect  86-91  429c  431a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  14c-15c;  34a  35b;  113c- 
118a;  173b  174a;  179c-182b  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  281c  282d;  285a-287d 
/  Judgement,  461a-462d;  542b  544c;  551a- 
552c;  604a  b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  pref,  6a  7a  / 
Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  165a  b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  lib  c 

53  James :  Psychology,  104a  ll5a  passim,  esp  105b- 
106b,  110a  b,  113a-115a;  149b-154a  esp  151b- 
153b;  325a-327a  esp  326a-b  [In  1];  394a  b 

54  Freud:  Unconscious,  430d-432c  esp  431c- 
432c;  442b-443a 

6c.  The  agreement  between  an  idea  and  its  ob¬ 
ject:  the  criterion  of  adequacy  in  cor¬ 
respondence 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  hi,  83a;  84a-85a; 
vi,  99a-c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  108b-109d; 
121a-c;  def  1— in  130a-b;  axiom  v-vi  131d- 
132a;  153a-c;  157b-158a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  axiom  6  355d;  part 
11,  def  1-4  373a-b;  prop  24-40  383c-388b; 
prop  43  388c-389b;  part  iv,  prop  i  424c- 
425a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  viii 
133b-138b  passim,  esp  sect  2  133c,  sect  7 
134b,  sect  15  135c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  8-1  i  206a- 
207a  passim;  sect  37,  214a-b;  ch  xxx-xxxi 
238a-243c;  ch  xxxii,  sect  8  244d;  sect  13-18 
245c-247a  passim;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  9  270d- 
271a;  sect  28-31  276a-277c  passim;  sect  37 
279b;  sect  40  280a-b;  sect 46-47  281d-282b; 
ch  xi,  sect  24  305b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  i- 
12  323d-326d  esp  sect  3  324b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  v,  div  44 
468d-469c  esp  469b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  36b-37a;  77b-d;  85d-88a 
esp  86b-87c;  91d-93c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  lb-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  231a 

53  James:  Psychology,  141a-142a;  301b-302a; 
307a-b;  480b-484a 

54  Freud:  Unconscious,  430b-c 

6d.  Clarity  and  distinctness  in  ideas  as  cri¬ 
teria  of  their  truth 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  73d-74a;  iii,  82a-d; 
85b  86d;  iv,  89a-b;  v  93a-96a  esp  93a-94a; 
vi,  99a-c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  120a-c; 
postulate  vi-vii  131c;  210b  c;  237c-238b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  def  4  373b;  prop  24- 
40  383c-388b;  part  v,  prop  4,  corol  and 
schol  453b-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  91d-92c;  bk 
ii,  ch  xiir,  sect  ii  150d-151b;  ch  xxiii,  sect 
32,  212d;  ch  xxix  233d-238a 


37:  IDEA  781 

35  Berk  1  ley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sn  r  $0  418c; 

sect  } \  419a;  sect  56  419c  d 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  si  r  mi,  div 
125  506d  507a 

6e.  The  criterion  of  genesis:  the  test  of  an  idea’s 
truth  or  meaning  by  reference  to  its  ori¬ 
gin 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [690  700] 
9c;  bk  iv  [469  521 1  50b  51a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  49a;  54b  c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  16a,  43d- 
44c;  57d  58b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  vi,  99a-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxx, 
sect  2  238b  c;  bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  4  324c 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  29  30 
418c;  sect  33  419a;  sect  36  419c  d;  sect  82- 
84  428d  429c;  sect  86-91  429c-431a 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ii  455b- 
457b;  sect  vii,  div  49  471c-d 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 427a  b; 
428b-d 

6/.  The  truth  and  falsity  of  simple  apprehen¬ 
sions,  sensations,  or  conceptions:  con¬ 
trasted  with  the  truth  and  falsity  of 
judgments  or  assertions 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  85a-86b;  107c-108b  /  Repub¬ 
lic,  bk  vii,  392b-393b  /  Sophist,  575d>577b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  cii  4  [2*410]  6a  / 
Interpretation,  ch  i  [16*9-18]  25a-b  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [ioiobi4~29]  530b  c;  bk 
v,  ch  29  [i024b27~38]  546d-547a;  bk  vi,  cii  4 
[io27bi8-28]  550a, c;  bk  ix,  ch  10  577c- 
578a, c;  bk  xiii,  ch  3  [1078*14-32]  609c  d  / 
Soul,  bk  11,  ch  6  [418*6-18]  648d-649a;  bk  iii, 
ch  3  [427b6— 15]  659d-660a:  [428*5-429*2] 
660b-661a;  ch  6  662d-663c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [324-521] 
48c-51a  esp  [469-521]  50b-51a 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  16,  a 
2  95c-96b;  q  17,  aa  2-3  102a-103c;  q  58,  a  4, 
ans  302d-303c;  q  85,  a  i,  rep  i  451c-453c;  a 
6  458d-459c;  q  89,  a  5,  ans  477a-478b:  q  94, 
a  4  505a-506a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  1,  56b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  57d  58b  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  apii  14  107d  108a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn  18b-25a  passim  /  Dis¬ 
course,  part  iv,  52a  /  Meditations ,  iii,  83a;  iv 
89a-93a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  123d  l25c; 
157b-158a:  215d-216c;  229d  230d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  32-35  335c- 
386b;  prop  49,  schol,  392a-d 
35  Locvle:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxxii 
243c  248b;  bk  iii,  ch  vii,  sect  i  283a  b;  bk 
iv,  ch  v  329a-331b;  ch  vi,  sect  16  336d 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  36b-37d;  64d  65c; 
108a  d;  179c-180c;  193a-b;  211c-218d  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  570b-571c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  299a-314b  passim:  638b; 
640b;  668a-671a 


782 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For ;  The  theory  of  Ideas  as  eternal  forms  existing  apart  from  mind  and  matter,  see  Change  15a; 
Eternity  4c;  Form  ia,  2a-2b;  Universal  and  Particular  2a. 

The  theory  of  ideas  as  universal  conceptions  abstracted  from  the  materials  of  sense,  see  Form 
3a~3b;  Memory  and  Imagination  5b,  6c(i);  Sense  5a;  Universal  and  Particular  2b, 
4c~4d;  and  for  abstraction  in  relation  to  generalization  and  induction,  ^Experience  2b; 
Induction  ia,  3. 

The  theory  of  ideas  as  sense  impressions  or  sense  images,  see  Memory  and  Imagination  1a, 
5a;  Sense  id,  5a. 

The  doctrine  of  innate  ideas  and  the  related  theory  of  reminiscence  and  intuitive  knowledge, 
see  Knowledge  6c( 3);  Memory  and  Imagination  3a;  Mind  ^d(2). 

The  theory  of  the  transcendental  concepts  or  ideas  as  constitutive  or  regulative  principles, 
see  Form  ic,  3a;  Knowledge  6b(4),  6c(4);  Mind  ^d(^);  Principle  2^3);  and  for  the 
dialectical  employment  of  the  ideas  of  pure  reason,  see  Dialectic  20(2). 

The  theory  of  the  Absolute  Idea,  see  History  43(3);  Mind  iof-iof(2). 

The  theory  of  the  divine  ideas  as  eternal  exemplars,  or  of  the  ideas  infused  into  angelic  intel¬ 
lects,  see  Angel  3d;  Form  2b;  God  5f;  Knowledge  7a-yb;  Mind  ioe,  iog;  Universal 
and  Particular  4b. 

The  issue  concerning  the  distinction  of,  and  the  relation  between,  sense  and  intellect,  see 
Being  8a-8b;  Knowledge  6a(i),  6b-6b(4);  Memory  and  Imagination  5b,  6b,  6d; 
Mind  i~ig(3);  Sense  ia-ib,  4a,  5c. 

Another  discussion  of  the  distinction  between  first  and  second  intentions,  and  of  the  related 
distinction  between  first  and  second  impositions,  see  Sign  and  Symbol  2a-2b. 

Other  discussions  of  adequate  and  inadequate,  or  clear  and  distinct  ideas,  see  Knowledge 
6d(3);  Opinion  3b;  Truth  ia;  and  for  other  considerations  of  mental  fictions  or  chimeras, 
see  Being  7d(5);  Memory  and  Imagination  5a. 

The  consideration  of  the  expression  of  ideas  in  words  or  terms,  see  Language  ia,  7;  Sign 
and  Symbol  if;  for  the  distinction  of  concrete  and  abstract  terms,  see  Sign  and  Symbol 
2e;  for  the  distinction  of  particular  and  universal  terms,  see  Sign  and  Symbol  2d;  Uni¬ 
versal  and  Particular  5c;  for  the  distinction  of  species  and  genera,  see  Relation  53(4) ; 
Same  and  Other  3a(i);  Universal  and  Particular  5b;  and  for  the  distinction  between 
univocal,  equivocal,  and  analogical  terms,  see  Relation  id;  Same  and  Other  3b,  4c; 
Sign  and  Symbol  3d. 

The  treatment  of  the  definition  of  terms  as  the  expression  or  analysis  of  concepts,  see  Defi¬ 
nition  1,  ib. 

The  correlation  and  opposition  of  concepts  or  terms,  see  Opposition  ia-ib;  Relation  ic, 
4e* 

The  role  played  by  concepts  in  the  acts  of  judgment  and  reasoning,  or  for  terms  in  relation 
to  propositions  and  syllogisms,  see  Judgment  5b~5c;  Reasoning  2afi). 

Other  discussions  of  the  association  of  ideas,  see  Memory  and  Imagination  2c;  Mind 
ig(i);  Relation  4f. 

The  metaphysical  problem  of  the  being  of  ideas,  and  for  the  theory  of  intentional  existence, 
see  Being  yd-yd(^);  Sign  and  Symbol  ib;  Universal  and  Particular  2c. 

Another  consideration  of  the  truth  or  reality  of  ideas,  see  Truth  3b(i). 


Chapter  37:  IDKA 


783 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  arc  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Aquinas.  On  the  Trinity  of  Boethius ,  qq  5-6 

- .  Quaestiones  Disputatae ,  Dc  Veritate,  q  3 

- .  De  Natura  Verbi  Intellectus 

Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy,  part  i, 
9-10,  45-47 

Spinoza.  Of  the  Improvement  of  the  Understanding 
Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  bk  i,  part  i 
Berkeley.  Siris 

Kant.  Prolegomena  to  Any  Future  Metaphysic,  par 

39-  56 

Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind 

- .  Science  of  Logic,  vol  ii,  sect  i,  ch  i  ;  sect  iii, 

ch  i(c),  3 
- .  Logic,  ch  9 

I  J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic ,  bk  iv,  ch  2 
W.  James.  Some  Problems  of  Philosophy,  ch  4-6 

II. 

Cicero.  Academics 

Philo  Judaeus.  On  the  Creation  of  the  World  (De 
Opificio  Mundi),  par  16 

Porphyry.  Introduction  to  Aristotle's  Predicaments 
Boethius.  In  Isagogem  Porphyri  Commenta 
Erigena.  De  Divisione  Naturae,  bk  iii 
John  of  Salisbury.  Metalogicon,  bk  ii,  ch  17 
Bona ventura.  On  the  Reduction  of  the  Arts  to 
Theology 

Duns  Scotus.  Opus  Oxoniense ,  bk  i,  dist  35  (1) 
Cajetan.  De  Nominum  Ana  log  ia 

- .  De  Conceptu  Ends 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xxv 
John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philosophicus  Tho- 
misdcus,  Ars  Logica,  part  ii,  qq  3-5,  23 
Arnauld.  Logic  or  the  Art  of  Thinking,  part  i 
Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite,  bk  iii  (ii), 
ch  1-8 

- .  Dialogues  on  Metaphysics  and  Religion,  iii 

Leibnitz.  What  Is  “Idea”? 

- .  Discourse  on  Metaphysics,  xxiv-xxix 

- .  Philosophical  Worlds,  ch  3  ( Thoughts  on  Knowl¬ 
edge,  Truth  and  Ideas ) 


Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  i;  bk  ii,  ch  1-8,  12,  30-^3 
Voltaire.  “Idea,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 
T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man, 
iv-v 

J.  G.  Fichte.  The  Science  of  Knowledge 
Coleridge.  Biographia  Literaria,  ch  5-8 
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea,  vol  i, 
bk  1,  iii;  vol  ii,  sup,  ch  14;  vol  iii,  sup,  ch  29 
J.  Mill.  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Human 
Mind ,  ch  2-3,  6,  9 

W.  Hamilton.  Lectures  on  Metaphysics  and  Logic, 

VOL  I  (34-36);  VOL  II  (7-12) 

Whewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences, 

VOL  I,  BK  I,  CH  7 

SlGWART.  Logic,  PART  I,  CH  I  J  PART  II,  CH  I  ;  PART  III, 
CH  1-2 

Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
- .  Logic,  BK  I,  CH  I 

C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers,  vol  v,  par  388-410 
Venn.  Principles  of  Empirical  or  Inductive  Logic, 
ch  7 

Ribot.  The  Evolution  of  General  Ideas 
Royce.  The  World  and  the  Individual,  series  1(7) 
Croce.  Logic  as  the  Science  of  Pure  Concept 
Titchener.  Lectures  on  the  Experimental  Psychology 
of  the  Thought-Processes 

Cassirer.  Substance  and  Function,  part  i,  ch  i 
Husserl.  Logische  Untersuchungen 
- .  Ideas:  General  Introduction  to  Pure  Phenom¬ 
enology 

Bradley.  The  Principles  of  Logic,  bk  ii,  part  ii,  ch  i 

- .  Collected  Essays,  vol  1(12) 

- .  Essays  on  Truth  and  Reality,  ch  3 

Dewey.  Essays  in  Experimental  Logic,  vii-vm 

- .  The  Quest  for  Certainty,  ch  5-6 

Whitehead.  Science  and  the  Modern  World,  ch  10 

- .  Process  and  Reality,  part  i 

Maritain.  Reflexions  sur  V intelligence  et  sur  la  vie 
propre,  ch  i 

- .  An  Introduction  to  I^ogic.  ch  1 

- .  The  Degrees  of  Knowledge,  ch  2 

B lon del.  La  petisee 


Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  mortality  of  man  defines  by  contrast 
the  immortality  which  some  men  hope 
for,  some  men  fear,  some  men  scoff  at,  but  no 
man  ever  fails  sooner  or  later  to  consider.  The 
life  of  man,  like  that  of  other  animals,  moves 
through  a  normal  span  of  years  between  birth 
and  death.  Legend  tells  of  certain  heroes  upon 
whom  the  immortal  gods  bestowed  immortal 
life,  gracing  them  with  an  aspect  of  their 
own  divinity.  Jewish  and  Christian  faith  holds 
that  Adam,  with  all  his  posterity,  would  never 
have  suffered  disease  or  death  if  he  had  refrained 
from  sin.  But  according  to  the  theologians,  the 
imperishability  of  the  bodily  frame  of  man  in  a 
state  of  grace  is  a  preternatural  condition.  Ex¬ 
cept,  then,  for  the  miraculous  or  the  super¬ 
natural,  death  follows  birth  and  life,  that  which 
comes  to  be  passes  away,  all  things  of  flesh  and 
blood  perish. 

The  proposition  “All  men  are  mortal”  has 
been  repeated  during  centuries  of  lessons  in 
logic.  Its  truth  has  never  been  seriously  chal¬ 
lenged  even  by  those  who  have  criticized  the 
syllogism  which  reaches  the  conclusion  that 
since  he  is  a  man,  Socrates  is  mortal.  But 
throughout  the  same  period,  the  great  books  of 
poetry  and  religion,  of  philosophy  and  theology, 
have  recorded  the  qualifications  which  men 
have  placed  upon  this  truth. 

Man  dies  in  the  flesh  to  be  reborn  in  the  spir¬ 
it.  Man,  composite  of  soul  and  body,  perishes 
as  do  all  things  which  are  subject  to  dissolution; 
but  the  soul  itself,  a  simple  spiritual  substance, 
is  immortal,  living  on  after  its  union  with  the 
body  is  dissolved.  7Te  immortal  soul  is  some¬ 
times  conceived  as  having  many  incarnations, 
inhabiting  now  this  body,  now  that,  in  an  end¬ 
less  pilgrimage  through  endless  time;  and  some¬ 
times,  as  in  the  Christian  faith,  each  soul  has 
only  one  embodiment  on  earth.  It  is  specially 
created  by  God  to  inform  the  body  of  a  human 


being.  It  is  destined  to  be  his  immortal  spirit 
in  a  future  which  belongs  to  eternity  rather 
than  to  time. 

Except  for  the  form  it  takes  in  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  reincarnation,  or  the  transmigration  of 
souls,  the  idea  of  immortality  is  usually  at¬ 
tended  by  conceptions  of  an  after-life  in  another 
world — the  life  of  the  shades  in  the  Elysian 
Fields  or  in  Hades,  the  life  of  the  blessed  in 
Heaven  or  of  the  damned  in  Hell.  The  after¬ 
life  is  never  merely  a  continuation  of  the  life 
begun  on  earth.  The  other  world  is  not  just  an 
abode  for  the  disembodied  soul.  It  is  a  place  of 
judgment,  of  rewards  and  punishments,  in 
which  the  soul  realizes  the  good,  or  pays  the 
penalty  for  the  evil,  toward  which  its  earthly 
career  inclined.  The  connection  of  immortality 
with  rewards  and  punishments  appears  even  in 
the  theory  of  reincarnation,  for  as  the  soul 
passes  from  one  embodiment  to  another,  it  en¬ 
joys  or  suffers  the  consequences  befitting  its 
previous  existence. 

Stated  as  a  speculative  problem,  the  question 
of  immortality  is  traditionally  formulated  as  a 
question  about  the  soul  or  the  spirit  of  man: 
whether  it  exists  by  itself  either  before  or  after 
its  conjunction  with  a  human  body;  and  if  so, 
in  what  manner  it  subsists.  For  those  who  affirm 
the  soul’s  separate  existence,  there  seems  to  be 
no  question  about  its  everlasting  endurance, 
either  without  beginning  at  all  or  from  the 
moment  of  its  creation.  But  the  manner  of  the 
soul’s  subsistence  leads  to  speculation  concern¬ 
ing  an  after-life  or  an  other-life  in  a  world  of 
spirits,  or  in  realms  as  far  apart  as  Heaven  and 
Hell. 

We  shall  presently  consider  to  what  extent 
such  speculations  have  been  submitted  to  argu¬ 
ment  and  to  what  extent  they  have  been  mat¬ 
ters  of  religious  belief.  But  in  both  these  modes 


784 


Chapt £R  38:  IMMORTALITY  785 


of  consideration,  the  theme  of  immortality  is 
never  merely  a  matter  of  speculative  interest, 
never  merely  a  question  of  spiritual  substances 
and  their  subsistence.  It  is  always  a  problem  for 
the  moralist. 

Is  this  arthly  life  and  its  brief  temporal  span 
enough  for  the  aspirations  of  the  human  spirit, 
and  for  its  striving  toward  a  perfection  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  of  love,  and  of  repose?  If  external  sanc¬ 
tions  are  needed  to  support  the  voice  of  con¬ 
science,  are  earthly  rewards  and  punishments — 
either  humanly  dispensed,  or  capriciously  dis¬ 
tributed  by  chance  or  fortune — sufficient  sanc¬ 
tion  for  the  moral  law?  Can  perfect  justice  be 
done  unless  there  is  a  divine  law  and  a  divine 
judge,  a  judge  who  can  see  beyond  the  acts  of 
men  into  their  hearts,  from  whose  judgment 
no  one  escapes,  and  whose  rewards  and  punish¬ 
ments  are  supernaturally  established  states  of 
blessedness  and  misery  for  the  soul? 

Whether  or  not  God,  freedom,  and  immor¬ 
tality  are,  as  Kant  suggests,  the  three  great  ob¬ 
jects  of  speculative  thought,  they  do  seem  to 
form  the  basic  triad  of  religious  beliefs.  In  the 
I  religions  of  the  west,  these  beliefs  take  various 
forms,  but  the  belief  in  immortality  is  seldom 
if  ever  found  separate  from  belief  in  a  super¬ 
natural  order,  in  gods  or  a  God  to  whom  man 
owes  certain  duties  and  before  whom  man 
stands  to  be  judged  as  a  responsible  moral  agent 
who  was  free  to  obey  or  disobey  the  divine  com¬ 
mands.  But,  this  fact  admitted,  the  question  re¬ 
mains  whether  the  principles  of  morality  can  be 
adequately  stated,  or  made  effective  in  the  reg¬ 
ulation  of  human  conduct,  without  a  religious 
foundation,  or  at  least  without  reference  to 
God  and  immortality. 

On  this  the  moralists  disagree.  The  argument 
in  Plato’s  Gorgias ,  for  example,  about  whether 
it  is  better  to  do  or  suffer  injustice,  ends  with  a 
myth  which  tells  of  the  soul  standing  naked 
before  its  divine  judge  after  a  man’s  death, 
showing  no  marks  of  the  evil  the  individual  has 
suffered  during  his  life,  but  only  of  the  evil  he 
has  done.  The  reader  who  thinks  the  myth  is 
necessary  to  complete  the  argument  concerning 
justice  and  punishment,  takes  one  position  on 
the  question.  He  adopts  the  view  that  without 
the  judgment  of  souls  in  an  after-life  justice 
cannot  be  done. 

The  preoccupation  with  immortality  in  a 


great  many  of  Plato’s  dialogues  is  not  always 
based  upon  moral  considerations.  It  appears  as 
frequently  in  discussions  of  the  relation  1k- 
tween  the  soul  and  the  objects  of  its  knowledge. 
If,  to  be  proper  objects  of  know  ledge,  the  Ideas 
must  be  eternal,  the  soul  which  knows  them 
must  also  be  immortal.  But  when  the  discussion 
of  immortality  involves  a  comparison  of  this  life 
and  the  life  to  come,  it  usually  turns  on  con¬ 
siderations  of  goodness  rather  than  of  knowl¬ 
edge  and  truth.  For  Kant,  if  not  for  Plato, 
immortality  is  almost  entirely  a  moral  matter; 
and  where  the  Platonic  myth  deals  with  just 
rewards  and  punishments  in  an  after-life,  the 
Kantian  argument  is  concerned  with  the 
achievement  of  moral  perfection. 

In  his  Critique  of  Practical  Reason ,  Kant  af¬ 
firms  immortality,  along  with  the  existence  of 
God  and  the  freedom  of  the  will,  as  necessary 
practical  postulates — indispensable  conditions 
of  the  moral  life.  “The  perfect  accordance  of 
the  will  w'ith  the  moral  law',”  Kant  w  rites,  “is 
holiness ,  a  perfection  of  w  hich  no  rational  being 
of  the  sensible  w  orld  is  capable  at  any  moment 
of  his  existence  ...  It  can  only  be  found  in  a 
progress  in  infinitum  towards  that  perfect  ac¬ 
cordance  ...  It  is  necessary  to  assume  such  a 
practical  progress  as  the  real  object  of  our 
will.”  The  realization  of  happiness,  or  the  sum - 
?num  bonumy  Kant  concludes,  “is  only  possible 
practically  on  the  supposition  of  the  immor¬ 
tality  of  the  soul.” 

The  opposite  view  appears  to  be  taken  in 
Aristotle’s  Ethics  and  Mill’s  Utilitarianism.  The 
summam  bonum  is  a  temporal  happiness,  a  per¬ 
fection  attainable  on  earth  and  by  purely  nat¬ 
ural  means.  In  those  passages  in  which  Aris¬ 
totle  defines  happiness  in  terms  of  contempla¬ 
tive  activity,  he  also  speaks  of  it  as  a  godlike 
life  and  therefore  one  w  hich  has  a  touch  of  im¬ 
mortality.  Man  is  able  to  lead  such  a  life,  he 
writes,  only  “in  so  far  as  something  divine  is 
present  in  him.”  To  lead  the  life  of  reason, 
which  is  divine  in  comparison  with  any  other 
mode  of  human  life,  we  must,  he  says,  “so  far 
as  we  can,  make  ourselves  immortal,  and  strain 
every  nerve  to  live  in  accordance  with  the  best 
thing  in  us.” 

But  to  be  immortal  in  this  way  seems  to 
mean  the  possession  of  a  godlike  quality  in  this 
life  rather  than  the  promise  of  a  life  hereafter. 


786 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Aristotle  demands  only  “a  complete  term  of 
life”  as  a  necessary  condition  for  “the  complete 
happiness  of  man.”  He  passes  lightly  over  the 
question  whether  “the  dead  share  in  any  good 
or  evil.”  So  far  as  he  considers  a  blessedness 
which  the  gods  can  add  to  human  happiness, 
it  does  not  belong  to  an  after-life,  but  consists 
rather  in  the  good  fortune  which  the  gods  grant 
to  some  men  and  which  increases  and  secures 
their  happiness  beyond  that  which  is  attainable 
by  virtue  alone. 

The  moral  issue  concerning  immortality  is 
more  explicitly  faced  by  Mill  in  his  examination 
of  the  need  for  religious  or  supernatural  sanc¬ 
tions.  While  he  does  not  admit  their  indispensa¬ 
bility,  neither  does  he  deny  their  utility. 
“There  is  evidently  no  reason,”  he  declares, 
“why  all  these  motives  for  observance  should 
not  attach  themselves  to  the  utilitarian  morali¬ 
ty,  as  completely  and  as  powerfully  as  to  any 
other.”  Yet  he  himself  stresses  “the  possibility 
of  giving  to  the  service  of  humanity,  even  with¬ 
out  the  aid  of  belief  in  a  Providence,  both  the 
psychological  power  and  the  social  efficacy  of 
a  religion.” 

Mill  does  not  go  as  far  as  Lucretius  in  regard¬ 
ing  the  belief  in  immortality,  with  the  attend¬ 
ant  possibility  of  everlasting  torment  for  the 
soul,  as  itself  an  immoral  doctrine.  For  Lu¬ 
cretius  it  is  a  nightmare  which  haunts  the  wak¬ 
ing  hours  of  men,  filling  them  with  false  fears 
and  putting  future  pains  in  the  way  of  present 
pleasures.  He  dedicates  his  poem  to  “driving 
headlong  forth  that  dread  of  Acheron,  trou¬ 
bling  as  it  does  the  life  of  man  from  its  inmost 
depths  and  overspreading  all  things  with  the 
blackness  of  death,  allowing  no  pleasure  to  be 
pure  and  unalloyed.” 

Where  others  see  in  man's  fear  of  death  his 
natural  desire  for  immortality,  Lucretius 
thinks  it  is  the  dread  of  immortality  which 
causes  man’s  fear  of  death.  “We  have  nothing  to 
fear  after  death,”  he  says,  if  death  is  the  end. 
“He  who  exists  not,  cannot  become  miserable.” 

In  the  great  poems  of  antiquity  we  find  the 
imagery  and  detail  of  the  pagan  conception  of 
the  life  hereafter.  Both  Odysseus  and  Aeneas 
visit  the  underworld.  They  see  the  shades  of  the 
departed  heroes;  all  that  is  visible  to  the  bodily 
eye  are  shimmering  wraiths.  They  talk  with  the 


departed,  listen  to  their  memories,  or  hear  them 
speak  prophetically  of  the  future.  From  An- 
chises,  his  dead  father,  Aeneas  learns  his  des¬ 
tiny;  and  Odysseus  hears  in  Hades  what  has 
befallen  his  companions  at  Troy  and  his  family 
at  home  during  his  years  of  wandering. 

Yet  there  is  a  striking  difference  between 
Virgil’s  poem  and  Homer’s  with  respect  to  the 
after-life.  The  division  which  Virgil  makes  be¬ 
tween  Elysium  and  Tartarus  corresponds  much 
more  closely  than  anything  in  Homer— or  for 
that  matter  in  the  other  Greek  poets— to  the 
Christian  distinction  between  Heaven  and  Hell. 
Though  Elysium  and  Tartarus  both  belong  to 
the  underworld,  one  is  the  abode  of  the  blessed, 
the  other  a  place  of  torment  for  sinners. 

In  the  sixth  book  of  the  Aeneid,  the  Sibyl  ex¬ 
plains  the  topography  of  the  underworld  to 
Aeneas.  There  is  a  place  “where  splits  the  road 
in  twain,”  she  says: 

The  right  leads  to  the  giant  walls  of  Dis, 

Our  way  to  Elysium;  but  the  left  wreaks  doom 
On  sinners,  and  to  guilty  Tartarus  sends. 

Tartarus,  the  abode  of  the  condemned,  is  sur¬ 
rounded  by  “a  fierce  torrent  of  billowy  fire,” 
and  is  filled  with  the  noise  of  punishment. 
Elysium,  on  the  other  hand,  is 

The  happy  region  and  green  pleasaunces 

Of  the  blest  woodlands,  the  abode  of  joy. 

An  ampler  ether  with  purpureal  light 

Clothes  here  the  plain;  another  sun  than  ours, 

And  other  stars  they  know. 

Its  inhabitants,  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  un¬ 
fortunates  in  Tartarus,  seem  to  pass  their  time 
in  peace  and  pleasure. 

Homer  makes  no  such  sharp  division  between 
the  realm  of  the  blessed  and  the  realm  of  the 
condemned.  Plutarch  speaks  of  “the  isles  of  the 
blessed  celebrated  by  Homer,”  but  the  refer¬ 
ence  cannot  be  substantiated.  In  one  passage  in 
the  Iliad  Menelaus  is  promised  that  he  will  be 
taken  “to  the  Elysian  plain,  which  is  at  the  end 
of  the  world.  There  fair-haired  Rhadamanthus 
reigns,  and  men  lead  an  easier  life  than  any¬ 
where  else  in  the  world,  for  in  Elysium  there 
falls  not  rain,  nor  hail,  nor  snow.”  But  even 
this  seems  to  describe  a  different  life  rather  than 
an  after-life. 

So  far  as  the  underworld  is  described  on  the 
occasion  of  Odysseus’  descent  “into  the  house 


Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY  787 


of  Hades  and  dread  Prospcrine,”  \vc  arc  told 
that  the  Theban  prophet  Tcircsias  alone  has  his 
“reason  still  unshaken.”  All  “the  other  ghosts 
flit  about  aimlessly.”  The  shades  of  good  men 
and  bad  alike  languish  in  the  domain  of  dark¬ 
ness.  Tityus,  Tantalus,  and  Sisyphus  are  sub¬ 
jected  to  special  punishments  for  their  grievous 
sins  and  transgressions,  but  all  the  shades— even 
of  those  men  whom  the  gods  loved  and  honored 
— seem  to  be  in  a  state  of  misery.  Though  they 
are  not  all  beset  with  torments  and  agonies, 
none  seems  to  be  overcome  with  joy  or  to  have 
reached  contentment. 

Those  whom  the  gods  love  do  not  join  the 
deities  on  Mount  Olympus.  When  they  enter 
the  somber  realm  of  Pluto — the  deity  of  the 
underworld — they,  like  all  the  other  shades 
whom  Charon  ferries  across  the  river  Styx,  are 
more  remote  from  the  gods  than  are  mortal 
men  on  earth.  The  only  exception  perhaps  is 
Heracles,  whom  Odysseus  meets  in  Hades,  or 
rather  “his  phantom  only,  for  he  is  feasting 
ever  with  the  immortal  gods,  and  has  lovely 
Hebe  to  wife.” 

The  general  attitude  of  all  who  dwell  in  the 
underworld  is  summed  up  by  Achilles  when  he 
tells  Odysseus:  “Say  not  a  word  in  death’s 
favor;  I  would  rather  be  a  paid  servant  in  a 
poor  man’s  house  and  be  above  ground  than 
king  of  kings  among  the  dead.”  And  the  mother 
of  Odysseus  describes  the  condition  of  the  dead 
“in  the  abode  of  darkness”  as  one  in  which  “the 
sinews  no  longer  hold  the  flesh  and  bones  to¬ 
gether;  these  perish  in  the  fierceness  of  con¬ 
suming  fire  as  soon  as  life  has  left  the  body,  and 
the  soul  flits  away  as  though  it  were  a  dream.” 

Among  other  ancient  peoples  such  as  the 
Egyptians,  the  Babylonians,  and  the  Persians, 
Herodotus  found  other  views  of  immortality 
than  those  which  prevailed  in  Greece.  He  re¬ 
ports,  for  example,  the  doctrine  of  transmigra¬ 
tion  or  reincarnation — a  doctrine  which  also 
appears  in  the  myth  of  Er  at  the  end  of  Plato’s 
Republic  and  is  alluded  to  elsewhere  in  the 
Platonic  dialogues.  “The  Egyptians,”  Herodo¬ 
tus  writes,  “were  the  first  to  broach  the  opinion 
that  the  soul  of  man  is  immortal,  and  that, 
when  the  body  dies,  it  enters  into  the  form  of 
an  animal  which  is  born  at  the  moment,  thence 
passing  on  from  one  animal  into  another,  until 
it  has  circled  through  the  forms  of  all  creatures 


which  tenant  the  earth,  the  water,  and  the  air, 
after  which  it  enters  again  into  a  human  frame 
and  is  born  anew.” 

Herodotus,  however,  seems  more  interested 
in  the  effect  of  such  beliefs  on  the  practices  of 
the  living,  especially  their  funeral  rites  and 
other  devotions,  than  he  is  with  the  truth  of 
conflicting  theories  of  immortality. 

“The  doctrine  of  a  future  state,”  according 
to  Gibbon,  “was  scarcely  considered  among  the 
devout  polytheists  of  Greece  and  Rome  as  a 
fundamental  article  of  faith.”  Before  the  time 
of  Christ,  “the  description  of  the  infernal  re¬ 
gions  had  been  abandoned  to  the  fancy  of 
painters  and  of  poets,  who  peopled  them  with 
so  many  phantoms  and  monsters  who  dispensed 
their  rewards  and  punishments  with  so  little 
equity,  that  a  solemn  truth,  the  most  congenial 
to  the  human  heart,  was  oppressed  and  dis¬ 
graced  by  the  absurd  mixture  of  the  wildest 
fictions.”  Lacking  an  acceptable  or  satisfying 
belief,  yet  inclined  to  believe  in,  as  men  are 
inclined  to  hope  for,  a  better  life,  the  pagan 
world,  Gibbon  thinks,  could  not  long  resist  the 
appeal  of  Christian  teaching.  “When  the  prom¬ 
ise  of  eternal  happiness  was  proposed  to  man¬ 
kind  on  condition  of  adopting  the  faith,  and  of 
observing  the  precepts  of  the  Gospel,  it  is  no 
wonder,”  he  declares,  “that  so  advantageous  an 
offer  should  have  been  accepted  by  great  num¬ 
bers  of  every  religion,  of  every  rank,  and  of 
every  province  in  the  Roman  empire.” 

The  arguments  for  personal  immortality 
which  Christian  theologians  draw  from  the 
nature  of  the  human  soul  do  not  differ  essen¬ 
tially  from  the  proofs  offered  by  philosophers 
without  recourse  to  religious  faith.  This  applies 
to  arguments  advanced  before  Christianity  bv 
Plato  and  Plotinus  as  well  as  to  those  developed 
by  philosophers  like  Descartes  and  Locke  who 
belong  to  the  Christian  community.  The  ex¬ 
clusively  theological  aspects  of  the  Christian 
doctrine  of  immortality  are  those  matters 
which,  since  they  are  beyond  the  reach  of 
reason,  belong  to  faith  alone. 

The  doctrine  that  the  individual  soul  is  cre¬ 
ated  and  that  it  has  a  unique  affiliation  with 
one  human  body,  is  not  capable  of  being  proved 
or  defended  by  reason  against  the  quite  oppo¬ 
site  theory  that  the  soul  has  always  existed  and 


788 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


inhabits  any  number  of  bodies  in  the  course  of 
many  reincarnations.  The  existence  of  Hell, 
Purgatory,  and  Heaven  as  supernatural  states 
of  the  soul;  the  time,  place,  and  manner  of  the 
Last  Judgment;  the  resurrection  of  the  body 
and  the  difference  between  the  bodies  reunited 
with  the  souls  of  the  blessed  and  the  damned; 
the  joy  of  eternal  happiness  and  the  misery  of 
eternal  damnation — these  dogmas  of  Christian 
orthodoxy  go  far  beyond  all  merely  philosophi¬ 
cal  attempts  to  prove  the  soul’s  immortality  or 
to  consider  its  life  apart  from  the  body. 

The  great  theologians  undertake  to  do  more 
than  expound  these  articles  of  faith.  Reason 
asks  questions  which  the  man  of  faith  must  try 
to  answer,  defending  his  faith,  not  by  proof, 
but  by  overcoming  doubts,  by  answering  ob¬ 
jections,  by  making  dogmas  intelligible.  Yet 
the  great  theologians  admit  an  irreducible  core 
of  mystery.  The  joy  of  the  soul  united  to  God 
in  the  beatific  vision  surpasses  temporal  under¬ 
standing.  The  mysteries  of  Hell  are  perhaps 
even  greater. 

The  deprivation  of  God’s  love  and  exclusion 
from  His  presence  constitute  a  spiritual  misery 
comparable  to  the  beatitude  of  beholding  God 
and  being  within  the  circle  of  the  divine  light. 
One  is  an  infinite  anguish  of  frustration  and 
loss;  the  other,  an  infinite  rest  of  peace  and 
fulfillment.  But  the  theologians  also  teach  that 
the  damned  suffer  the  pains  of  sense  in  Hell,  as 
well  as  the  pains  of  deprivation.  “That  hell, 
which  also  is  called  a  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,” 
Augustine  says,  “will  be  material  fire  and  will 
torment  the  bodies  of  the  damned.”  When  hell- 
fire  and  the  expiatory  punishments  of  Purga¬ 
tory  are  not  merely  symbols  for  the  imagina¬ 
tion,  they  raise  extraordinarily  difficult  ques¬ 
tions,  as  both  Augustine  and  Aquinas  admit. 

Dante  asks  us  to  read  the  descriptions  he 
gives  of  Hell,  Purgatory,  and  Paradise  in  the 
Divine  Comedy  in  a  strictly  literal  sense  as  well 
as  in  several  symbolic  meanings,  such  as  the 
moral  and  the  allegorical.  But  he  explains  in 
his  own  commentary  on  the  poem  that  the 
literal  meaning  also  involves  symbolism,  insofar 
as  the  things  that  the  words  refer  to  when  taken 
in  their  literal  sense  are  themselves  the  symbols 
of  other  things.  In  any  case  the  poet  may  be 
more  successful  than  the  theologian  in  making 
intelligible  through  symbol  and  metaphor  what 


in  its  literal  significance  is  strictly  unimaginable. 
The  imagery  of  darkness,  sultriness,  noise,  and 
heaviness,  which  grows  more  intense  as  the  de¬ 
scent  proceeds  in  the  Inferno ,  does  more  than 
the  anguished  outcries  of  the  damned  to  convey 
the  reality  of  Hell. 

The  metaphors  of  music  and  agility  express 
the  harmony  of  Heaven.  But  it  is  especially  the 
symbolism  of  light  which  captures  the  invisible 
in  terms  of  vision,  except  perhaps  when  it 
reaches  a  climax  in  the  blinding  effulgence  at 
the  end  of  the  Paradiso.  As  Dante  moves  up¬ 
ward  in  the  realm  of  love,  where  courtesy  pre¬ 
vails  in  every  speech  and  charity  suffuses  every 
will,  he  sees  the  mystic  rose  of  Heaven  entirely 
through  reflected  light.  The  saints,  and  espe¬ 
cially  those  glorious  spirits  who  instruct  his 
progress,  become  pale  mirrors  of  the  ineffable 
vision  which  they  themselves  behold. 

Milton  too  pictures  Heaven  and  Hell,  but  in 
Paradise  Lost  the  destiny  of  the  immortal  soul 
remains  a  prophecy,  a  consequence  of  the  earth¬ 
ly  immortality  which  Adam  lost.  Except  for 
the  Prologue,  Hell  and  Heaven  are  offstage  in 
Goethe’s  Faust ,  though  they  are  the  main  im¬ 
plications  of  the  wager  Faust  makes  with  Meph- 
istopheles,  which  puts  his  immortal  soul  in 
the  balance. 

The  philosophical  issue  concerning  immor¬ 
tality  cannot  be  separated  from  issues  concern¬ 
ing  the  existence  and  nature  of  man’s  soul. 
The  various  arguments  for  immortality  seem 
to  rest  not  merely  on  the  reality  of  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  soul  and  body,  but  more  pre¬ 
cisely  on  the  immateriality  of  the  soul.  Lucre¬ 
tius,  for  example,  does  not  deny  the  existence 
of  soul,  nor  does  he  fail  to  differentiate  the 
soul  from  the  body  wherein  it  is  located.  The 
soul,  according  to  Lucretius,  like  everything 
else  in  the  universe,  consists  of  atoms.  They 
differ  from  those  of  the  body  by  their  round¬ 
ness,  smoothness,  and  mobility.  They  are  “much 
smaller  than  those  of  which  our  body  and  flesh 
are  formed ;  they  are  also  much  fewer  in  number 
and  are  disseminated  merely  in  scanty  number 
through  the  frame.” 

On  this  view  of  the  soul  as  material  in  nature 
and  as  constituted  of  many  quite  separable 
parts,  the  soul  is  necessarily  as  perishable  as  the 
rest  of  the  body.  “When  the  body  has  been 


789 


Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY 


shattered  by  the  mastering  might  of  time,” 
Lucretius  writes,  “and  the  frame  has  drooped 
with  its  forces  dulled  ...  it  naturally  follows 
then  that  the  whole  nature  of  the  soul  is  dis¬ 
solved,  like  smoke,  into  the  high  air;  since  we 
see  it  is  begotten  along  with  the  body  and  grows 
up  along  with  it  and  .  .  .  breaks  down  at  the 
same  time  worn  out  with  age.” 

It  should  be  observed,  however,  that  it  is  not 
the  materiality  of  the  soul,  but  rather  its  divisi¬ 
bility  into  parts,  which  accounts  for  its  mor¬ 
tality.  The  atoms  after  all  are  material,  but 
since  as  the  ultimate  units  of  matter  they  are 
simple  bodies  and  so  are  absolutely  indivisible, 
they  cannot  perish.  Only  the  simple  is  imperish¬ 
able. 

The  imperishability  of  the  simple  (/>.,  of  that 
which  has  no  parts)  occurs  as  a  premise  in  one 
of  the  great  arguments  for  the  immortality  of 
the  soul.  In  Plato’s  Phaedo ,  which  formulates 
this  argument  as  immortality  is  discussed  in  the 
prison  cell  where  Socrates  awaits  his  execution, 
two  assumptions  seem  to  be  made:  first,  that 
the  soul  is  the  principle  of  life  in  animate  bodies, 
for,  as  Socrates  says,  “whatever  the  soul  pos¬ 
sesses,  to  that  she  comes  bearing  life”;  and  sec¬ 
ond,  that  as  an  immaterial  being,  the  soul  must 
be  simple,  for  only  bodies  are  “composite”  and 
“changing.” 

From  the  first  of  these  assumptions,  the  argu¬ 
ment  proceeds  in  terms  of  what  it  means  for 
bodies  to  be  alive  or  dead.  Socrates  argues  from 
examples.  “If  any  one  asks  you,”  he  says,  “what 
that  is,  of  which  the  inherence  makes  the  body 
hot,  you  will  reply  not  heat .  .  .  but  fire.  ...  Or 
if  any  one  asks  you  why  a  body  is  diseased,  you 
will  not  say  from  disease,  but  from  fever.”  So 
if  any  one  asks,  “what  is  that  of  which  the  in¬ 
herence  will  render  the  body  alive  ?”  the  answer 
is  not  life  but  “the  soul.”  As  the  principle  of 
life  itself,  the  soul  “will  never  receive  the  oppo¬ 
site  of  what  she  brings,”  namely,  death.  There¬ 
fore  the  soul  is  immortal. 

On  the  second  assumption,  the  endless  du¬ 
ration  of  the  soul  follows  from  its  simplicity  as 
an  immaterial  and  immutable  being.  “The 
compound  or  composite,”  Socrates  says,  “may 
be  supposed  to  be  naturally  capable,  as  of  being 
compounded,  so  also  of  being  dissolved;  but 
that  which  is  uncompounded,  and  that  only, 
must  be,  if  anything  is,  indissoluble.”  When  the 


soul  leaves  the  body,  for  which  it  has  lxrcn  both 
motor  and  pilot,  the  body  ceases  to  be  alive 
and  perishes  in  the  manner  of  material  things; 
the  soul  lives  on,  freed  from  tcmj>orary  bondage 
to  the  body,  its  prison  house.  It  “departs  to  the 
invisible  world  —  to  the  divine  and  immortal 
and  rational.” 

The  argument  from  simplicity,  as  repeated  in 
Moses  Mendelssohn’s  Phddon ,  is  criticized  by 
Kant.  Admitting  that  a  truly  “simple  being 
cannot  cease  to  exist,”  Kant  contends  that  the 
hpowable  soul— which  is  for  him  the  empirical 
ego  or  consciousness— may  have  intensive, 
though  it  lacks  extensive,  quantity.  It  would 
therefore  be  capable  of  diminution  in  reality; 
and  so  it  “can  become  less  and  less  through  an 
infinite  series  of  smaller  degrees.” 

With  regard  to  the  soul  as  an  immaterial  and 
simple  substance  (/.<?.,  the  transcendental  ego), 
Kant  is  willing  to  affirm  that  immortality  neces¬ 
sarily  belongs  to  such  a  nature.  But  he  denies 
that  we  can  have  any  knowledge  of  the  soul  ex¬ 
cept  as  a  phenomenon  of  experience.  There  can 
be  no  valid  theoretic  argument  for  immortality 
precisely  because  there  can  be  no  scientific 
knowledge  of  the  nature  of  transcendental  ob¬ 
jects —  beings  beyond  all  possible  experience. 
What  Kant  calls  “the  paralogisms  of  rational 
psychology”  are  offered  to  show  the  dialectical 
futility  of  proofs  or  disproofs  of  immortality,  in 
the  same  way  that  “the  cosmological  antino¬ 
mies”  attempt  to  expose  the  untenability  of  ar¬ 
guments  for  or  against  the  infinity  of  time  and 
space,  the  infinite  divisibility  of  matter,  the 
existence  of  a  free  will  and  of  God. 

Without  deciding  whether  Kant’s  theory  of 
experience  and  knowledge  is  true,  this  much  we 
can  learn  from  him  about  the  issue  of  immor¬ 
tality.  Those  philosophers  who,  like  Descartes 
and  Locke,  think  they  have  grounds  for  affirm¬ 
ing  the  existence  of  the  soul  (or  mind  or  spirit) 
as  an  immaterial  substance,  also  have  grounds 
for  affirming  its  immortality.  Those  who,  like 
Lucretius  and  Hobbes,  think  they  have  grounds 
for  denying  the  existence  of  anything  except 
material  particles,  also  have  grounds  for  deny¬ 
ing  either  the  existence  of  the  soul  or  its  having 
a  permanence  not  possessed  by  other  material 
wholes.  And  those  who,  like  Hume,  think  there 
are  no  grounds  for  affirming  the  existence  ol 
any  kind  of  enduring  substance,  material  or 


790 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


spiritual — even  to  the  point  of  doubting  per¬ 
sonal  identity  from  moment  to  moment — can 
admit  no  grounds  for  affirming  a  substantial, 
much  less  an  immortal,  soul. 

One  other  position  remains  to  be  considered. 
Though  it  does  not  fall  outside  the  foregoing 
alternatives,  Aristotle’s  theory  represents  an 
important  variation  on  one  of  them.  As 
against  Hume  or  Kant,  Aristotle  holds  that  sub¬ 
stances  exist  and  are  knowable.  The  sensible, 
material  things  of  experience  are  such  sub¬ 
stances.  But,  according  to  Aristotle,  these  sub¬ 
stances  are  not  exclusively  material.  They  are 
composed  of  two  principles,  matter  and  form, 
neither  of  which  is  a  substance  capable  of  exist¬ 
ing  by  itself.  As  the  exposition  of  this  theory 
(in  the  chapters  on  Form  and  Matter)  tries  to 
make  plain,  form  and  matter  exist  only  in  union 
with  one  another.  It  is  the  composite  substance 
resulting  from  their  union  which  exists  in  and  of 
itself. 

The  form  which  enters  into  the  composition 
of  a  substance  can  be  called  its  “substantial 
form.”  In  relation  to  the  matter  with  which  it 
is  united,  the  substantial  form  is  the  actual¬ 
ization  of  the  potentiality  in  matter  to  exist  as 
a  substance  of  a  certain  kind.  Not  all  substances 
are  of  the  same  kind.  Some  are  alive;  some  in¬ 
animate  and  inert.  In  the  case  of  living  sub¬ 
stances,  the  substantial  form,  according  to  Aris¬ 
totle,  confers  upon  matter  not  only  the  act  of 
existing  as  a  substance,  but  also  the  act  of  being 
alive.  Because  it  thus  differs  from  the  form  of 
an  inanimate  substance,  Aristotle  gives  a  special 
name  to  the  substantial  form  of  a  living  thing. 
Because  the  word  “soul”  has  long  been  used  to 
designate  “the  principle  of  life  in  living  things,” 
Aristotle  feels  justified  in  using  it  as  the  name 
for  the  substantial  forms  of  plants  and  animals 
as  well  as  men. 

This  theory  and  its  principal  opposite  (which 
regards  the  human  soul  as  a  complete  substance, 
not  a  substantial  form)  are  more  fully  discussed 
in  the  chapter  on  Soul.  Here  we  are  concerned 
only  with  the  consequences  of  Aristotle’s  theory 
for  human  immortality.  If,  as  he  seems  to  hold, 
substantial  forms  exist  only  insofar  as  they  exist 
in  the  substances  of  which  they  are  the  forms, 
then  when  a  composite  substance  perishes 
through  the  decomposition  of  its  matter  and 


form,  the  form  perishes  also.  Souls— the  sub¬ 
stantial  forms  of  living  things— would  seem  to 
be  no  exception.  “The  soul,”  Aristotle  writes, 
“is  inseparable  from  its  body,  or  at  any  rate 
certain  parts  of  it  are  (if  it  has  parts)— for  the 
actuality  of  some  of  them  is  nothing  but  the 
actualities  of  their  bodily  parts.  Yet  some  may 
be  separable  because  they  are  not  the  actualities 
of  any  body  at  all.” 

The  exception  which  Aristotle  seems  to  have 
in  mind  is  that  part  of  the  human  soul  which  is 
the  intellect.  It  differs  from  other  powers  of  the 
soul,  he  suggests,  as  the  eternal  from  the  perish¬ 
able.  “It  alone,”  he  says,  “is  capable  of  existence 
in  isolation  from  all  other  psychic  powers.”  He 
argues  that  “in  so  far  as  the  realities  it  knows” 
— or  at  least  some  of  them — “are  capable  of 
being  separated  from  their  matter,  so  is  it  also 
with  the  power  of  the  mind.” 

What  is  the  significance,  for  the  immortality 
of  the  human  soul,  of  the  supposed  ability  of 
the  intellect  to  act  independently  of  the  body? 
Aristotle  answers  in  terms  of  the  principle  that 
“if  there  is  any  way  of  acting  or  being  acted 
upon  proper  to  soul,  soul  will  be  capable  of 
separate  existence;  if  there  is  none,  its  separate 
existence  is  impossible.”  If  we  consider  nutri¬ 
tion,  sensation,  and  emotion,  there  seems  to  be, 
he  admits,  “no  case  in  which  the  soul  can  act 
or  be  acted  upon  without  involving  the  body.” 
The  one  possible  exception  may  be  thinking, 
but  Aristotle  adds  at  once  that  “if  this  too 
proves  to  be  a  form  of  imagination  or  to  be 
impossible  without  imagination,  it  too  requires 
a  body  as  a  condition  of  its  existence.” 

Later,  when  he  is  discussing  the  power  of 
thought,  Aristotle  flatly  insists  that  “the  soul 
never  thinks  without  an  image”  and  that  “no 
one  can  learn  or  understand  anything  in  the 
absence  of  sense,”  for  “when  the  mind  is  active¬ 
ly  aware  of  anything  it  is  necessarily  aware  of  it 
along  with  an  image.”  According  to  his  own 
principles  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  since 
thinking  proves  “to  be  impossible  without  im¬ 
agination,  it  too  requires  a  body  as  a  condition 
of  its  existence.”  Hence  the  intellect  is  not 
separable  from  matter,  nor  is  the  human  soul, 
of  which  the  intellect  is  the  highest  power. 

Nevertheless,  Aristotle  declares,  in  a  passage 
which  has  become  famous,  that  mind  as  the 
active  power  of  thinking  “is  separable,  im- 


791 


Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY 


passible,  unmixed”;  and  with  this  declaration 
of  the  intellect’s  separability  from  matter,  he 
seems  to  affirm  immortality,  at  least  for  the 
intellectual  part  of  the  soul.  “When  mind  is  set 
free  from  its  present  conditions,”  he  writes,  “it 
appears  as  just  what  it  is  and  nothing  more:  this 
alone  is  immortal  and  eternal.” 

The  passages  quoted  have  been  subject  to 
conflicting  interpretations.  The  Arabic  com¬ 
mentators  on  Aristotle,  notably  Averroes,  find 
in  them  no  basis  for  the  immortality  of  the 
individual  human  soul.  The  texts,  according  to 
their  view,  support  the  theory  of  a  single  active 
intellect  which  exists  apart  from  the  minds  of 
individual  men — almost  a  divine  principle  in 
the  universe  which,  acting  on  the  rational  souls 
of  individual  men,  enables  them  to  think  and 
understand.  Aquinas  argues  against  them  to  the 
opposite  conclusion. 

Against  the  Averroists  Aquinas  contends  that 
if  the  individual  man,  Socrates,  can  be  said  to 
think,  then  whatever  powers  are  required  for 
thinking  must  belong  to  his  individual  nature. 
The  powers  required  for  thinking  are,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Aquinas,  twofold:  an  active  intellect, 
able  to  abstract  the  intelligible  forms  of  things 
from  their  material  representation  in  sensory 
images;  and  a  possible  or  potential  intellect, 
capable  of  receiving  these  forms  when  separated 
from  matter  by  the  act  of  abstraction. 

The  theory  of  knowledge  and  thought  which 
this  involves  is  discussed  in  the  chapters  on 
Form,  Idea,  Mind,  and  Universal  and  Par¬ 
ticular.  Here  we  are  concerned  only  with  the 
point  which  Aquinas  makes,  that  since  thinking 
involves  universal  notions,  and  since  forms  can 
be  universal  only  apart  from  matter,  the  in¬ 
tellect  which  abstracts  and  receives  abstractions 
must  itself  be  immaterial.  The  intellectual  pow¬ 
ers  do  not  operate  through  a  bodily  organ,  as 
the  power  of  nutrition  operates  through  the 
alimentary  system  or  the  power  of  vision 
through  the  eye.  The  brain,  in  other  words,  is 
not  the  organ  of  understanding  or  thought, 
but  rather,  along  with  the  external  sense-organs, 
it  is  the  material  organ  of  perception,  memory, 
and  imagination. 

The  argument  for  the  immortality  of  the 
human  soul  then  proceeds  on  the  premise  that 
that  which  can  act  apart  from  matter  can  also 


exist  apart  from  matter.  “The  intellectual  prin¬ 
ciple  which  we  call  the  mind  or  the  intellect  has 
an  operation  per  se  apart  from  the  body.  Now 
only  that  which  subsists  can  have  an  operation 
per  sc,  for  nothing  can  operate  but  what  is  ac¬ 
tual;  wherefore  a  thing  operates  according  as 
it  is.”  Hence  Aquinas  concludes  that  “the  hu¬ 
man  soul,  which  is  called  the  intellect  or  mind, 
is  something  incorporeal  and  subsistent.”  The 
attribution  of  subsistence  to  the  human  soul 
means  that  although  it  is  the  substantial  form 
of  the  human  body,  it  is  also  capable  of  existing 
in  and  of  itself  as  if  it  were  a  simple  substance. 

Unlike  angels,  which  as  spiritual  substances 
are  by  their  very  nature  separate  forms,  not 
forms  of  matter,  human  souls  are  substantial 
forms  which,  having  a  certain  degree  of  im¬ 
materiality,  are  also  to  that  degree  separable 
from  matter.  But  the  reverse  is  also  true.  To 
the  extent  that  the  soul’s  powers,  such  as  sen¬ 
sation  and  imagination,  require  corporeal  or¬ 
gans,  the  soul  is  inseparable  from  the  body. 
Since,  furthermore,  Aquinas  agrees  with  Aris¬ 
totle  that  every  act  of  understanding  or  thought 
involves  imagination,  he  faces  the  difficulty  of 
explaining  how  the  soul  can  function  in  any 
way  when  separated  from  the  body  after  death. 

“To  solve  this  difficulty,”  he  says,  “we  must 
consider  that  as  nothing  acts  except  as  it  is  ac¬ 
tual,  the  mode  of  action  in  every  agent  follows 
from  its  mode  of  existence.  Now  the  soul  has 
one  mode  of  being  when  in  the  body,  and  an¬ 
other  when  apart  from  it.  .  .  .  The  soul,  there¬ 
fore,  when  united  to  the  body,  has  consistently 
with  that  mode  of  existence,  a  mode  of  under¬ 
standing  by  turning  to  corporeal  images,  which 
are  in  corporeal  organs;  but  when  it  is  separated 
from  the  body,  it  has  a  mode  of  understanding 
by  turning  to  simply  intelligible  objects,  as  is 
proper  to  other  separate  substances.”  Never¬ 
theless,  Aquinas  adds,  it  is  not  natural  for  the 
soul  to  understand  in  the  latter  way,  for  it  is 
not  by  nature  a  separate  substance.  Therefore, 
“to  be  separated  from  the  body  is  not  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  its  nature.” 

This  last  point  has  both  philosophical  and 
theological  significance.  Philosophically,  it  may 
be  easier  to  prove  the  immortality  of  the  soul 
if  one  starts,  as  the  Platonists  do,  with  the  prop¬ 
osition  that  the  soul  is  a  purely  spiritual  prin- 


792 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ciple  or  substance  which  does  not  depend  upon 
the  body.  But  then,  according  to  Aquinas,  you 
prove  the  immortality  of  the  soul  at  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  destroying  the  unity  of  man,  for  if  the 
soul  is  a  substance  rather  than  a  form,  the  indi¬ 
vidual  man,  composed  of  body  and  soul,  consists 
of  two  distinct  substances. 

Theologically,  Christian  faith  believes  in  the 
resurrection  of  the  body  after  the  Last  Judg¬ 
ment  and  the  end  of  the  world,  as  well  as  in  the 
soul’s  separate  existence  immediately  after 
death.  From  the  point  of  view  of  a  theologian 
like  Aquinas,  a  philosophical  proof  of  immor¬ 
tality  must  corroborate  both  of  these  dogmas. 
In  his  judgment  a  proof  which  rests  upon  the 
proposition  that  the  soul  has  a  nature  akin  to 
that  of  an  angel  (/.<?.,  a  purely  spiritual  sub¬ 
stance),  makes  the  Christian  dogma  of  the  resur¬ 
rected  body  unintelligible  or  even  abhorrent. 

If  the  immortal  soul  were  a  complete  and 
separate  substance,  it  would  have  no  need  for 
its  body  in  the  life  hereafter.  It  has  that  need 
only  if  its  nature  is  that  of  a  substantial  form, 
partly  immersed  in  matter  and  partly  separate 
therefrom.  Then,  because  of  these  two  aspects 
of  its  nature,  it  can  be  said,  not  only  that  “the 
human  soul  retains  its  proper  existence  when 
separated  from  the  body,”  but  also  that  it  has 
“an  aptitude  and  a  natural  inclination  to  be 
united  to  the  body.” 

The  incompleteness  of  the  soul  without  the 
body  and,  even  more,  the  dependence  of  man’s 
mind  upon  his  bodily  senses  and  imagination 
raise,  as  we  have  seen,  the  difficult  problem  of 
how  the  soul  exists  and  operates  when  separated 
from  the  body  by  death  and  before  it  is  re¬ 
united  to  a  resurrected  body.  It  may  even  raise 
the  question  whether  the  reasoning  of  Aquinas 
constitutes  a  valid  philosophical  argument  for 
the  actual  existence  of  the  soul  in  separation 
from  the  body,  or  merely  suggests  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  such  existence.  But  the  facts  which 
create  these  difficulties  are  the  very  facts  to 
which  Aquinas  appeals  in  his  Treatise  on  the 
Resurrection,  in  order  to  explain  the  basis  in 
nature  for  the  miraculous  re-union  of  the  body 
with  the  soul. 

The  arguments  for  and  against  immortality 
so  far  considered  are  couched  in  the  form  of 
proofs  or  disproofs  which  aim  at  certainty.  All 


except  one  are,  moreover,  theoretical  or  specu¬ 
lative  in  the  sense  that  they  proceed  in  terms 
of  observations,  assumptions,  and  inferences 
about  the  nature  of  things — about  atoms  and 
substances,  matter  and  form,  extension  and 
thought,  inert  bodies  and  living  organisms.  The 
one  exception,  already  mentioned,  is  Kant’s 
practical  argument  based  on  the  moral  necessity 
of  an  immortal  life. 

There  is  still  another  argument,  both  specu¬ 
lative  and  practical  in  character,  which  does 
not  aim  at  certainty  nor  take  the  form  of  a 
proof.  It  is  the  proposal  of  a  wager  concerning 
the  equally  unknown  alternatives  of  oblivion 
after  death  and  eternal  life.  Supposing  no  ra¬ 
tional  evidence  to  favor  the  truth  of  either 
alternative,  Pascal  weighs  the  probability  of 
gain  and  loss  which  is  consequent  upon  living 
according  to  each  hypothesis.  The  probability, 
he  thinks,  vastly  preponderates  on  the  side  of 
those  who  choose  to  forego  the  worldly  life  be¬ 
cause,  to  take  the  chance  of  gaining  the  whole 
world  during  the  short  term  of  earthly  life, 
they  would  risk  the  loss  of  eternal  happiness  for 
their  immortal  souls. 

Locke  engages  in  the  same  type  of  calcula¬ 
tion.  “When  infinite  happiness  is  put  into  one 
scale,  against  infinite  misery  in  the  other;  if  the 
worst  that  comes  to  the  pious  man,  if  he  mis¬ 
takes,  be  the  best  that  the  wicked  can  attain  to, 
if  he  be  right,  who,”  Locke  asks,  “can  without 
madness  run  the  venture?  Who  in  his  wits 
would  choose  to  come  within  the  possibility  of 
infinite  misery;  which  if  he  miss,  there  is  yet 
nothing  to  be  got  by  that  hazard?  Whereas,  on 
the  other  side,  the  sober  man  ventures  nothing 
against  infinite  happiness  to  be  got,  if  his  ex¬ 
pectation  comes  to  pass.”  If,  wagering  on  im¬ 
mortal  life,  “the  good  man  be  right,  he  is 
eternally  happy”;  but  “if  he  mistakes” — if 
death  ends  all — “he  is  not  miserable,  he  feels 
nothing.” 

All  these  theories,  including  Kant’s  postu¬ 
late  and  the  wager  proposed  by  Pascal  and 
Locke,  are  clearly  concerned  with  arguing  for 
personal  immortality  or  individual  survival. 
Among  those  who  deny  the  survival  of  the 
individual  human  spirit,  some — Hegel  and 
Spinoza,  for  example — conceive  an  impersonal 
type  of  immortality. 


Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY  793 


For  Hegel  it  is  Spirit  itself  which  is  immortal. 
“The  successive  phases  of  Spirit  that  animate 
the  Nations  in  a  necessitated  gradation,"  he 
writes,  “are  themselves  only  steps  in  the  devel¬ 
opment  of  the  one  Universal  Spirit,  which 
through  them  elevates  and  completes  itself  to  a 
self-comprehending  totality."  In  considering 
the  history  of  the  world,  he  regards  everything 
as  the  manifestation  of  Spirit;  and  because  of 
this,  even  when  we  traverse  the  past,  we  have, 
he  says,  “only  to  do  with  what  is  present ;  for 
philosophy,  as  occupying  itself  with  the  True, 
has  to  do  with  the  eternally  present.  Nothing  in 
the  past  is  lost  for  it,  for  the  Idea  is  ever  pres¬ 
ent;  Spirit  is  immortal;  with  it  there  is  no  past, 
no  future,  but  an  essential  now.  This  necessar¬ 
ily  implies  that  the  present  form  of  Spirit  com¬ 
prehends  within  it  all  earlier  steps.  .  .  .  The 
grades  which  Spirit  seems  to  have  left  behind  it, 
it  still  possesses  in  the  depths  of  its  present." 

What  Spirit  is  for  Hegel,  Nature  is  for  Spi¬ 
noza.  Spinoza,  however,  conceives  a  kind  of  im¬ 
mortality  for  the  individual  man,  which  is 
achieved  through  his  participation  in  the 
eternity  of  Nature.  The  body  of  the  individual 
man,  according  to  Spinoza,  belongs  to  the  in¬ 
finite  matter  of  Nature.  It  is  “a  certain  mode  of 
extension  actually  existing."  The  individual 
human  mind  is  similarly  “a  part  of  the  infinite 
intellect  of  God."  In  one  sense,  both  the  body 
and  the  mind  are  temporal  things  which,  like  all 
other  finite  modes  of  God  or  Nature,  have  a 
fixed  and  limited  duration.  Furthermore,  the 
personal  memories  and  thoughts  of  the  indivi¬ 
dual  man  depend  on  the  co-existence  of  his 
mind  and  body.  “The  mind  can  imagine  noth¬ 
ing,  nor  can  it  recollect  anything  that  is  past," 
Spinoza  writes,  “except  while  the  body  exists." 

But  Spinoza  also  maintains  that  “only  in  so 
far  as  it  involves  the  actual  existence  of  the 
body,  can  the  mind  be  said  to  possess  duration, 
and  its  existence  be  limited  by  a  fixed  time."  Of 
every  individual  thing — whether  it  is  a  finite 
mind  or  a  finite  body— there  exists  in  the  in¬ 
finite  and  eternal  essence  of  God  a  conception 
or  idea.  “To  conceive  things  under  the  form  of 
eternity,”  Spinoza  writes,  “is  to  conceive  them 
in  so  far  as  they  are  conceived  through  the 
essence  of  God."  Because  he  holds  that  the 
human  mind  can  have  adequate  knowledge  of 
God,  he  holds  that  the  mind  can  conceive  “it¬ 


self  and  its  body  under  the  form  of  eternity." 
Hence  through  knowing  God,  or  the  eternal 
truth  about  temporal  things,  the  mind  partici¬ 
pates  in  eternity. 

Imagination  and  memory  may  belong  to 
time,  but  not  the  intellect,  which  is  capable  of 
knowing  God.  To  explain  why  we  feel  “that 
we  arc  eternal,"  Spinoza  points  out  that  “the 
mind  is  no  less  sensible  of  those  things  which  it 
conceives  through  intelligence  than  of  those 
which  it  remembers."  Although  we  cannot  im¬ 
agine  or  remember  that  “we  existed  before  the 
body,"  we  can  know  intellectually  something 
about  mind  and  body  which  belongs  to  eter¬ 
nity;  because,  in  addition  to  conceiving  them 
as  “existing  with  relation  to  a  fixed  time  and 
place,"  we  can  conceive  them  as  “contained  in 
God"  and  as  following  “from  the  necessity  of 
the  divine  nature."  Since  it  “pertains  to  the 
nature  of  the  mind  to  conceive  the  essence  of 
the  body  under  the  form  of  eternity,"  Spinoza 
concludes  that  “the  human  mind  cannot  be 
absolutely  destroyed  with  the  body,  but  some¬ 
thing  of  it  remains  which  is  eternal." 

Such  immortality  is,  in  a  way,  enjoyed  in 
this  life,  for  it  is  a  present  participation  in  eter¬ 
nity  through  the  mind's  knowledge  of  God. 
There  is  also  the  impersonal  immortality  which 
men  enjoy  through  contemplating  the  perpet¬ 
uation  of  the  species,  or  more  particularly  the 
persistence  of  an  image  of  themselves  in  their 
offspring.  In  the  Symposium ,  Socrates  reports 
a  conversation  with  Diotima  in  which  she  ex¬ 
plains  to  him  that  in  procreation  “the  mortal 
nature  is  seeking  as  far  as  is  possible  to  be 
everlasting  and  immortal."  Men  hope  that  off¬ 
spring  “will  preserve  their  memory  and  give 
them  the  blessedness  and  immortality  which 
they  desire  in  the  future."  But  if  procrea¬ 
tion  through  the  pregnancy  of  the  body  is  a 
way  of  achieving  immortality,  artistic  crea¬ 
tion  through  a  kind  of  pregnancy  in  the  soul, 
Diotima  argues,  is  even  more  so.  “Who,  when 
he  thinks  of  Homer  and  Hesiod  and  other  great 
poets,"  she  asks,  “would  not  rather  have  their 
children  than  ordinary  ones?  Who  would  not 
emulate  them  in  the  creation  of  children  such 
as  theirs,  which  have  preserved  their  memory 
and  given  them  everlasting  glory?" 

One  need  think  “only  of  the  ambition  of 
men"  and  what  they  will  do  “for  the  sake  of 


794 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


leaving  behind  them  a  name  which  shall  be 
eternal,”  to  realize  how  deeply  “they  are  stirred 
by  the  love  of  an  immortality  of  fame.”  Even 
deeper,  according  to  Diotima,  is  their  love  of 
the  good,  or  more  precisely,  their  desire  for 
“the  everlasting  possession  of  the  good”  which 
leads  all  men  necessarily  to  “desire  immortality 
together  with  the  good.” 

Whether  it  is  to  be  attained  through  the  per¬ 
petuation  of  the  species,  through  survival  in 
the  memory  of  mankind,  through  knowledge 
of  God,  or  through  the  subsistence  of  the  soul, 
the  desire  for  immortality  seems  to  express 


man’s  dread  of  disappearance  into  utter  noth¬ 
ingness.  Yet,  facing  death,  Socrates  faces  the 
alternatives  with  equanimity.  “Either  death,” 
he  declares,  “is  a  state  of  nothingness  and  utter 
unconsciousness,  or,  as  men  say,  there  is  a 
change  and  migration  of  the  soul  from  this 
world  to  another.”  Either  it  is  like  a  dreamless 
and  undisturbed  sleep  or  it  opens  a  new  world 
to  which  the  good  man  can  look  forward  with 
hope.  On  either  alternative  we  can  be  of  good 
cheer,  he  tells  his  friends,  if  we  believe  that  “no 
evil  can  happen  to  a  good  man,  either  in  life  or 
after  death.” 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGB 

1.  The  desire  for  immortality:  the  fear  of  death  795 

2.  The  knowledge  of  immortality:  arguments  for  and  against  personal  survival  796 

3.  Belief  in  immortality 

30.  The  postulation  of  immortality:  practical  grounds  for  belief  in  immortality  797 

3b.  The  revelation  of  immortality:  immortality  as  an  article  of  religious  faith 

4.  The  moral  significance  of  immortality:  rewards  and  sanctions 


5.  Conceptions  of  the  after-life  798 

5 a.  The  transmigration  of  souls:  reincarnation 

5 b.  The  state  of  the  soul  apart  from  the  body  799 

5 c.  The  judgment  of  souls 

5 d.  The  process  of  purification:  the  state  of  Purgatory 

5?.  The  state  of  the  damned:  Hell  800 

5 f  The  state  of  the  blessed :  Heaven 

5 g.  The  resurrection  of  the  body  801 

6.  Doctrines  of  impersonal  survival 


6a .  Immortality  through  offspring:  the  perpetuation  of  the  species 

6b.  Enduring  fame:  survival  in  the  memory  802 

6c.  Participation  in  the  eternity  of  truth,  ideas,  or  love 


Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY 


795 


REFERENCES 


To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  arc  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  I  Jomf.r:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265  28 ^ |  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halvesof  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology,  116a  119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halvesof  the  right-hand  sidcof 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b  164c,  the  passage  begins  in  thelowcrhalf 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  163. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.y  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.y  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 — (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  desire  for  immortality:  the  fear  of  death 

Old  Testament:  II  Samuel ,  22:5-7 —(D)  II 
Kings ,  22:5-7  /  J°b>  14;  30:23-24  /  Psalms ,  6 
esp  6:4-5;  13  esp  13:3;  16  esp  16:10;  18:4-6; 
49:6-12;  55  esp  55:4-8;  89:47-48;  116:1-9— 
(£>)  Psalms ,  6  esp  6:5-6;  12  esp  12:4;  15  esp 
15:10;  17:5-7;  487 -»3;  54  esp  54:5-9;  88:48- 
49;  1 14  /  Ecclesiastes ,  8:8  /  Isaiah ,  38:10-19 — 
(JD)  Isaias,  38:10-19 

Apocrypha:  II  Maccabees ,  6:18-7:42  esp  7:9 — 
( D )  OT,  II  Machabees ,  6:18-7:42  esp  7:9 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  10:28;  19:16-30  / 
Marl{,  10:17-31  /  Luke ,  10:25-37  /  Acts , 
7:54-60 — ( D )  Acts ,  7:54-59  /  Romans ,  2:5-8 
esp  2:7//  Corinthians ,  15///  Corinthians ,  1 .9- 
10;  4:9-18;  5:1-9  /  I  Thessalonians,  4:13-17— 
(D)  /  Thessalonians ,  4:12-17  /  I  Timothy ,  6:11— 
19  esp  6:12,  6:19  /  II  Timothy ,  4:6-8  /  Hebrews , 
2:1 4  1 5 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  xii  [309-32S]  85b-c  /  Odys¬ 
sey ,  bk  v  [203-224]  210a-b 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [1579-1779] 
128c-130a,c 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  165b- 167a  /  Apology , 
211b-212a^c  /  Phaedo ,  230d-235a  /  Republic , 
bk  1,  297a-b;  bk  iii,  324c-325b;  bk  vi,  374a-d 
/  LawSy  bk  v,  687a-b 


9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  ch  7  [ii77b26- 
1 178*1  ]  432c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [102  126] 
2b-c;  bk  iii  [31-93]  30b-31b;  [830-1094]  40c- 
44a, c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  9,  115b  d; 
bk  11,  ch  1,  139b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  11-12 
258a-c;  bk  iii,  sect  3  260b;  bk  iv,  sect  48 
267d-268a;  sect  50  268c;  bk  viii,  sect  25 
287b-c;  sect  58  290d;  bk  ix,  sect  3  291d 
292a 

14  Plutarch:  Aristides ,  265d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  16,  19a; 
tr  vi,  ch  6,  24a  b:  tr  vii,  ch  3  26d  27a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  11  21d- 
22a;  par  14  22d  23a;  bk  vi,  par  18-19  40d- 
41b;  bk  ix,  par  23-29  68a-69c  /  City  of  God , 
bk  1,  ch  22,  143b;  bk  ix,  ch  14-15  293a- 
294a;  bk  xiii,  ch  4  361d-362a;  bk  xix,  ch  4- 
10  511a-516d;  bk  xxii,  ch  23  608c-609a 

19  Aquinas:  Siimma  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  75, 
a  6,  ans  383c-384c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  85, 
a  6  182d-184a 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun’s  Tale  [15,788-801)467  a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  33d  36b;  99b-100a; 

211a-b;  267a-c;  402c-403c 


796 


T 

THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2  to  3 


(1.  The  desire  for  immortality :  the  fear  of  death  f 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  iii,  sc  i  [56-88] 
47c-d  /  Measure  for  Measure ,  act  iii,  sc  i 
[116-136]  188a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  366d- 
367a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  28a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  v,  prop  23  458b-d; 
prop  32  460b;  prop  38-39  461d-462c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  x  [770-844]  291a- 
292b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  166,168-169  203a;  210  211b; 
239  217a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  124a-129a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  86c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  186a;  219c-220d; 
327d-328a;  376a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  238c 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  600c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  174b;  238b;  347a-c; 

394a-c;  399d-400a;  573a-574a 

51  Tolstoy:  JKzr  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  200c-d;  217c- 
218b;  bk  xii,  560a-562d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  26a- 
27d  passim;  bk  vi,  148d-150d 

53  James:  Psychology,  224a-225a;  653a 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  763c-764b 

2.  The  knowledge  of  immortality:  arguments 
for  and  against  personal  survival 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-c  /  Meno ,  179d-183a 
/  Apology ,  211b-212a,c  /  Phaedo  220a-251d  / 
Republic ,  bk  x,  434d-436a  /  Laws,  bk  xii, 
793c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  3  [1070s 
24-30]  599c  /  Sow/,  bk  1,  ch  1  [403^-15] 
632a-b;  ch  2  [405^9-34]  634d;  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[4r3a3~ 9]  643a;  ch  2  [4i3b24~29]  643d-644a; 
bk  iii,  ch  4  [429ai9~b4]  661c-d;  ch  5  662c-d; 
ch  7  [43iai5]  663d;  ch  8  [432a5-io]  664c 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
(736bl5— 737&I2]  277b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iii  [323- 
1023]  34b-43b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  24,  203d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  14  258d; 
sect  17  259b-d;  bk  iv,  sect  21  265b-c;  bk  v, 
sect  13  271b;  bk  vii,  sect  50  283a;  bk  viii, 
sect  37  288c;  bk  x,  sect  7  297b-c;  bk  xii, 
sect  5  307d-308a;  sect  14  308c 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  i  139a-b;  tr  iv, 
ch  15  165c-d;  tr  vii  191c-200c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  31  319b-d; 
bk  xiii,  ch  2  360b-361a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  61, 
a  2,  rep  3  315c-316a;  q  75,  a  2  379c-380c;  a  6 
383c-384c;  q  76,  a  i  385d-388c;  a  3,  rep  1-2 
391a-393a;  part  i-ii,  q  22,  a  i,  rep  3  720d- 
721c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  85, 
a  6  182d-184a 


21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxv 
[1-108]  91b-92c;  paradise,  vii  [64-84]  115d- 
116a;  [121-148]  116b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  192c-193c;  part 
iv,  250c-251b;  253b-254a;  269d-270d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  250a;  264b-269b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  27d-28c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  51d-52a; 
part  v,  60b-c  /  Meditations ,  69a-7la,c  passim; 
73a-c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  127c-d;  def  x 
130a;  prop  iv  133c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  prop  21-40  458a- 
462d  esp  prop  21-23  458a-d,  prop  38  461d- 
462a,  prop  40  462c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  x  [782-844]  291b- 
292b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  55 6,  271b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  141 
441 a- b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  186a-187b  passim 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  120c-129c  esp  124d-128a; 
203d-204c;  218d-223d  esp  219b-d;  234c-240b 
esp  234c-235c,  237d-238a  /  Practical  Reason, 
2  91a- 2 9 2a  /  Judgement,  600c- d;  610a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  57d-58a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  77d-78b; 
97a-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  224b-225a 

3.  Belief  in  immortality 

5  Euripides:  Helen  [1009-1016]  307d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  75b;  bk  iv,  140c- 
141a 

7  Plato:  Apology,  21  lb-21 2a, c  /  Seventh  Letter, 
806a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  3  260b 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  iv  [219-227]  89b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  29a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  15  200c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vi,  par  26  42d- 
43a 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,787-800] 
467a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iv, 
269a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Juliet,  act  v,  sc  i 
[17-21]  314d  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  ii,  sc  ii 
[109-114]  477a 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  iv  [60-68] 
36c  /  Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  iv  [152-194] 
482d-483a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  366d-367a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  69d 

32  Milton:  On  Time  12a-b  /  Lycidas  [165-181] 
31b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  556  270b-272a 

35  Locke:  Hutnan  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  6,  314c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv,  205c- 
206c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  186c-187b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  135a 


3“  t0  4  Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY  797 


42  Kant:  Pitre  Reason ,  242a  d  /  Judgement ,  604d 
606d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  256d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  255c- 
256b 

48  Melville:  A/o/»v  77/c^,  27a  28a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  593c 

51  Tolstoy:  IFtfr  and  Peace ,  hk  v,  200c  d; 
217c-218b;  bk  vii,  295b  c;  bk  xii,  560a  562d; 
bk  xv,  615a-616a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  33c- 
34b;  40b-c;  bk  in,  68b-c;  bk  xi,  312b-d 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams ,  296d  [fn  2) 
/  IFtfr  jtk/  Death ,  763c- 764c 

3*.  The  postulation  of  immortality:  practical 
grounds  for  belief  in  immortality 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  vii,  ch  15  200c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  210d-212a;  267a-268a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  184-241  205a-217b  passim; 
556,  271b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understandings  bk  ii,  cii  xxi, 
sect  72  198a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Falls  186a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  15c-16c;  120b  [fn  1  ];  127a- 
128a;  234c-236a;  240 b- 243c  /  Practical  Reasons 
291a-292a;  338c-352c  esp  344a-c,  348b-349b 
/  Judgements  599d-600d;  603b-607c  csp  606d- 
607c 

44  Boswell:  Johnsons  394c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\y  347a 

53  James:  Psychology's  224a-225a;  653a 

3 b.  The  revelation  of  immortality:  immortality 
as  an  article  of  religious  faith 

Old  Testament:  ll  Samuels  14:14— (D)  II  Kings, 
14:14  /  Job,  14:14;  19:25-29;  21;  30:23-24  / 
Psalms,  16  csp  16:10;  37  esp  37:26-40;  49  esp 
49:15;  116:1-9— (D)  Psalms,  15  esp  15:10;  36 
esp  36:26-40;  48:2-21  esp  48:16;  1 14  /  Proverbs , 
10:2;  11:4,19;  12:28;  13:14;  14:27;  18:21  / 
Ecclesiastes ,  12:7  /  Isaiah ,  25:8;  38:10-19—  (77) 
Isaias,  25:8;  38:10-19  /  Ezekiel,  37:1-14— (77) 
Ezechiel ,  37:1-14  /  Daniel ,  12:1-3  /  Hosea, 
iy-H—{D)  Osee,  \y.n 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  4:10— (D)  OT,  Tobias ,  4:11 
/  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  2:23;  3:1-10;  5:15-16— 
(77)  OT,  Boob  of  Wisdom,  2:23;  3:1-10;  5:16- 

17  /  Baruch ,  2:17— (77)  OT,  Baruch,  2:17  / 
11  Maccabees,  6:18-7:42  esp  6:23,  6:26,  7:9-10, 
7:14,  7:36;  12:39-45  esp  12:43-45— (D)  OT, 
II  Machabees,  6:18-7:42  esp  6:23,  6:26,  7:9-10, 
7:14,  7:36;  12:39-46  esp  12:43-46 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:1-12;  10:28;  25 
esp  25:31-46/  Marias  9:42-48;  10:28-30— (77) 
9:41-47;  10:28-30  /  Lube,  10:25-37; 
16:19-31  /  John ,  3:14-17;  4:9-14  esp  4:13-14; 
T35-36;  5:2I"29;  6:34-59;  8:51;  10:25-30  esp 
10:28;  11:1-44;  12:24-25;  17:2-3  /  //cat,  13:48 
/  Romans,  2:5-8  esp  2:7;  6:1-1 1;  8:9-11  / 
/  Corinthians ,  15  /  //  Corinthians,  1:9-10;  4:9- 

18  /  Galatians ,  6:7-8  /  Ephesians ,  2:1-10  / 


/  Fhessalotiians,  4:14  18  —  (79)  /  1  hnsalontans, 
4:12  17  /  /  Timothy ,  6:11  19  csp  6:12,  6:19  / 
//  Timothy ,  1:10/  Hebrews,  2  :y,  14  i<>  /  /  /V/rr, 
i:?-5  esp  i-4  /  I  John,  2:15  25  csp  2:17,  2:25 
/  Revelation  passim,  csp  21 -  (77)  Apocalypse 
passim,  csp  21 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vi.  par  18-19 
40d  41b;  bk  ix,  par  11  64c  d;  par  29  69b  c; 
bk  xm,  par  50  5}  124c  125a, c  /  C7/y  of  God, 
bk  xm,  cii  4  361d  362a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologua,  pari-  i,  q  75, 
a  6,  rep  1  383c  384c;  q  97,  a  i  513c  514c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Thcologica ,  pari  i  ii,  q  85, 
aa  5  6  181d  184a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xxv  [40- 
96)  144c-145b 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nuns  Idle  [15,788-800] 
467a 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  iii,  191b  193c;  part 
iv,  250c  251b:  253b  254a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  248c  250b:  267a  268a 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis ,  203a-c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  69b-d 

32  Milton:  Lycidas  [165-181]  31b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  556  270b  272a;  560  272b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  cii  iii, 

sect  6,  314c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  379c-380a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  186c- 187b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii, 
26a-27d  passim 

4.  The  moral  significance  of  immortality:  re¬ 
wards  and  sanctions 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  49 —(D)  Psalms,  48  / 
Proverbs,  10:2;  11:4,19;  14:32;  21:16 

Apocrypha:  Tobit ,  4:8-11  — (77)  OT,  Tobias , 
4:9-12  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:12-6:20 — (77) 
OT,  Boob  of  Wisdom,  1:12-6:21  /  11  Mac¬ 
cabees,  7  passim,  esp  7:17-18,  7:30-37— (77) 
OT,  II  Machabees,  7  passim,  esp  7:17-18, 
7:3°~37 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:1-12,22,29-40; 
18:7-9;  19:16-30;  25:31-46  /  Mar\,  9:43  48; 
io:i7-3r;  16:16 — (77)  Marl{,  9:42-47;  10:17- 
31;  16:16  /  Lul{e,  10:25-37;  14:7  14;  16:19-31; 
18:18-30  /  Romans,  2:1-11  /  Galatians,  6:7-8 
/  //  Thessalonians,  2:10-12  — (77)  //  Thessa- 
lonians,  2:10-11  /  //  ' Timothy ,  4:8  /  Hebrews , 
10:26-31  /II  Peter,  2 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  xi  [568-600]  248d  249a 

5  Euripides:  Helen  [1009-1016]  307d 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  74c  /  Phaedrus,  124a- 
126c  /  Meno,  179d  180b  /  Apology ,  21  la- 
2123, c  /  230d-234c;  246d250b  / 

Gorgias,  292b  294d  /  Republic,  bk  i,  297ab; 
bk  ii,  313b-314d;  bk  x,  436c  441a, c  /  7Y- 
maeus,  452d  453b  /  Ltfrc/,  bk  ix,  757a;  bk 
x,  768b  d;  bk  xii,  793c-d  /  Seventh  Letter , 
806a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  cii  io-ii  345c-347a; 
bk  x,  cii  7  [1  i77b26— 1 1 78*1]  432c 


4  to  5  a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


798 

(4.  The  moral  significance  of  immortality:  rewards 
and  sanctions .) 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iii  [31-93] 
30b-31b;  [830-1094]  40c-44a,c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [637-678]  228a-229a; 
[724-751]  230b-231a 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  29ab 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  13  88d- 
89b;  tr  iii,  ch  4  94c-95c  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr 
iii,  ch  24  154b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vi,  par  26  42d- 
43a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  97, 
a  1  513c-514c;  a  4  515d-516d;  part  i-ii, 
qq  1-5  609a-643d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy  esp  hell,  iii  [i— i 8] 
4a-b,  [82-129]  5a-b,  vii  [100-130]  10c-d,  xi 
15a-16b,  xxvii  [55-136]  40a-41b,  xxvm  [139— 
142]  43a,  purgatory,  iii  [118-145]  57a-c,  v 
[85-129]  59d-60c,  ix  65d-67b,  xvn  [82-139] 
79b-d,  xxx-xxxi  99b  l02b,  paradise,  vii 
[19-120]  115b-116b,  xix  [22-148]  135b-136c 

22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale  278a-284a  /  Sum¬ 
moned  s  Prologue  284b-285a  /  Monies  Tale 
434a-448b  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par  10  498b-502a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  206d-207a;  210d-212a; 
248c-250b  csp  250a;  264b-269b;  311a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III ,  act  i,  sc  iv  [42- 
63] 115a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  v  [9-22] 
37a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  60b-c  /  Medi¬ 
tations ,  69b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  v,  prop  41,  schol 
463a-b 

32  Milton:  Comus  [1— 17]  33a-b  /  Paradise  Lost , 
bk  x  [782-844]  291b-292b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  184-241  205a-217b  passim 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  15d-16a  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  11,  ch  xxi,  sect  62  194c-d; 
sect  72  198a-c 

35  Hume:  Hitman  Understanding ,  sect  xi,  div 
108-109  500b-501a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv,  205c- 
206c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  366c-d  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iv,  437d-438c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  336c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  187b-c;  198d-199a; 
219c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  233c-234c  passim 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
264b  [fn  1]  /  Practical  Reason ,  306b-307a; 
344a-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  290c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  256d;  363a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  341b-342b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  200c-d;  bk  vi, 
273c-274a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  33c- 
34b;  40b-c;  bk  xi,  312b-d;  345a-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  225a 


5.  Conceptions  of  the  after-life 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  xx  [54-74]  142d-143a;  bk 
xxiii  [54-107]  161d-162b/  Odyssey,  bk  x  [487- 
574]  241a-242a,c;  bk  xi  243a-249d;  bk  xxiv 
[1-202]  317a-319a 

5  Euripides:  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  /  Helen 
[1009-1016]  307d 

5  Aristophanes:  Frogs  564a-582a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  75b;  bk  iv,  140c- 
141a 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  124b-126a  /  Apology,  211a- 
212a, c  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  313b-314d;  bk  iii, 
324c-325b;  bk  x,  437c-441a,c  /  Laws,  bk  v, 
687a;  bk  x,  767c-768c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  10  [nooaio-3i] 
345c-d;  ch  ii  346c-347a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  13  188b- 
189c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vii,  sect  50  283a 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  iv  [219-227]  89b;  [467-485] 
96a-b  /  Aeneid,  bk  vi  211a-235a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix-xxii  507a- 
618d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
qq  69-99  885a-1085a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,788-822] 
467a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  191b-198a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  248c-250b;  264b-269b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  366d-367a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  88d-89a  /  Ob¬ 
jections  and  Replies,  226d-227a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  x  [782-844]  291b- 
292b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv,  205c- 
206c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  94a;  186c-d;  187b- 
188a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  233c-234d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  363a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  134b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xii,  560a-562d; 
bk  xv,  615a-616a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xi, 
341c-345c  passim 

5a.  The  transmigration  of  souls:  reincarnation 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  xi  [298-304]  246a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  75b 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  125b-126a  /  Meno,  179d- 
183a  /  Phaedo,  226c-234c;  246d-250b  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  x,  437c-441a,c  /  Timaeus,  452d- 
453b;  476a-477a,c  /  Laws,  bk  x,  767c-768c 

8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  3  [4o6a30-b5] 
635d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [670-783] 
38d-40a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect 21  265b-c 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  iv  [219-227]  89b  /  Aeneid, 
bk  vi  [710-751]  230a-231a 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  28a-29b 


5t>  to  5d  Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY  799 


17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  ii  5b  c  / 
Third  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  cii  13  88d  89b;  tr  m, 
CH  4,  95b-c;  tr  iv,  ch  2  3  97d  98c;  cn  6  99b 
100b  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  cii  8,  145d;  cii  9, 
146d;  cn  13-15  149b  150c;  cn  24  154b  d;  cn 
27, 156d;  tr  vii,  cn  14  200b  c;  tr  vm,  cn  3-5 
202a-203d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  1^  16 
304a*305c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  30  318b 
319b;  bk  xii,  ch  20  355b  357a;  bk  xxii,  cii 
27-28  613b  614a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  tart  hi  suppl, 
q  77,  a  1,  ans  943a*944d;  q  79,  a  i,  ans  951b 
953b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  iv  [49-63] 

111b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  206d  207a;  249b  250a; 
264b-265c;  268a-269a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxvii,  sect  6  220c-d;  sect  14  223d  224b; 
sect  27  227d-228a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xxiv, 
207a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  135a;  226b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  187a-b; 
part  1,  255c-256b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [737-807]  19b-21a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  316b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vii,  295b-c 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  764b 

5 b.  The  state  of  the  soul  apart  from  the  body 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xxii  [361-366]  159a;  bk 
xxiii  [54-107]  161d-162b  /  Odyssey,  bk  xi 
243a-249d;  bk  xxiv  [1-203]  317a-319a 

5  Euripides:  Helen  [1009-1016]  307d 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124c-126c  /  Phaedo,  223a* 
226c;  230d*234c;  246d-247b  /  Gorgias,  292b- 
294d  /  Republic ,  bk  x,  437c*441a,c  /  Laws , 
bk  xii,  793c*d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bkiv,  sect 21  265b-c; 
bk  vii,  sect  50  283a 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  iv  [471-477]  96b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  29a*b 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  i  139a-b:  tr  iii, 
ch  13  149b-d;  ch  18  151b-c;  ch  24-25  154b* 
155c;  ch  27  156c-d;  tr  iv,  ch  i  159a*d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  23  334c* 
335c;  bk  xiii,  ch  2  360b*361a;  ch  16  367a  d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  29, 
a  1,  rep  5  162a-163b;  q  77,  a  8  406b*407a; 
q  89  473a-480c;  q  117,  a  4  599b-d;  q  118,  a  3 
603b-604b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  67, 
aa  1-2  81c*83b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  70  893c- 
900d;  q  93,  a  i  1037d*1039a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxv 
[67-108]  92a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  270c-271b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
150d*151c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  248c*250a 


31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  v,  prop  38  30  461d- 
462d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  233d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  192d  193c;  224b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dit\,  28a 

5r.  The  judgment  of  souls 

Old  Testament:  Job,  19:29;  21  /  Psalms,  49:6  9; 
50  esp  50:3,  50:6,  50:21  22;  96:10-13  —  (D) 
Psalms,  48:7-11;  49  esp  49:4,  49:6,  4</:2t  22; 
95:10-13  /  Proi  erbs,  22:2223  /  Exclesia  stes , 
3:16-17;  11:9-10;  12:14  /  Etiiah,  11:1-9  CSP 
11:3-5;  24:21-22;  34;  66— (D)  Isaias,  11:1-9 
esp  11:3-5;  24:21  22;  34;  66  /  Daniel ,  12  /  Joel 

Apocrypha:  Judith ,  16:17  —  (/->)  OT,  Judith, 
16:20-21  /II  Maccabees,  7:31-36—  (D)  OT, 
II  Machabees,  7:31-36 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  3:7-12  esp  3:10, 
3:12;  7:1-2;  10:14-15;  11:20-24;  *2:34-37; 
13:18-50  esp  13:30,  13:39-45,  13:49-50;  24- 
25  /  John,  12:48  /  Acts,  17:31  /  Romans ,  2  / 
II  Timothy,  4:1/  Hebrews,  9:27  /  /  Peter ,  4 15-6 
/  II  Peter,  2:9;  3:7-13  /  /  John ,  4:17  /  Jude, 
14-15  /  Revelation,  20:9-15  —  (D)  Apocalypse , 
20:8-15 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  xi  [568-571]  248d 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [228-231]  3d 

5  Euripides:  Helen  [1013-1016]  307d 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  12 5b*  126a  /  Phaedo,  249c- 
250a  /  Gorgias,  292b  294d  /  Republic,  bk  x, 
437c*438c  /  Laws,  bk  xii,  793c*d  /  Seventh 
Letter,  806a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  vi  [426-439]  222b;  [548— 
569]  225b*226a 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  24  154b  d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xx  530a-560a,c; 
bk  xxi,  ch  11-27  570b*586a,c  passim 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
qq  87-90  997a*1016a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  iii  [70—136]  4d- 
5b;  v  [1-24]  7a-b;  vi  [94-115]  9b  c;  xiii  [85— 
108]  18d  19a;  xx  [1—39]  28b  d:  xxvii  [55-136] 
40a-41b;  xxix  [103-120]  44a-b;  purgatory, 
ix  65d*67b;  paradise,  xix  [ioo  148]  136a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  10  498b  502a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  250a;  265b  c 

27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth,  act  ii,  sc  hi  [1-23] 
292b 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  [149-164]  5a  b  /  Para¬ 
dise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [315-338]  142a  b;  bk  xi  [45- 
83]  300a*301a;  bk  xii  [451-465]  329a;  [537— 
551]  331a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  17b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  187c;  188d  189a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  233c  234b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  514d*515a;  573c*574a 

5 d.  The  process  of  purification:  the  state  of 
Purgatory 

Old  Testament:  Isaiah,  4:4  — (D)  Isaias ,  4:4 

Apocrypha:  II  Maccabees,  12:43-4 6— (D)  OT, 
II  Machabees,  12:43-46 


800 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5e  to  5/ 


(5.  Conceptions  oj  the  after-life.  5d.  The  process 
of  purification :  the  state  of  Purgatory.) 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  12:32  /  I  Corinthians, 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  95a-c  /  Phaedo ,  2 24a- 2 2 5c; 
232d-234c;  246d-250b  /  Gorgias ,  292b-294d 
/  Republic,  bk  x,  437c-438c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [264-751]  218a-231a 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  28a-29b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  ii  5b-c  / 
Third  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  6  99b-100b  /  Fourth 
Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  27,  156d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  30  318b- 
319b;  bk  xx,  ch  25  554c-555a;  bkxxi,  ch  13 
571c-572a;  ch  24  577b-579d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  69,  a  2,  an s  and  rep  2  886c-887d;  a  7,  ans 
and  rep  6  891d-893c;  q  71,  a  6  908b-909c; 
q  97,  a  1,  rep  2  1066b-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory  53a-105d 
esp  1— 11  53a-55d,  ix  65d-67b,  x  [106-139] 
68c-d,  xm  [34-93]  72b-d,  xvii  [82-139]  79bd, 
xix  [97-126]  82c-d,  xxi  [34-72]  85b-d,  xxm 
[1-75]  88b-89a,  xxvn  94c-96a,  xxx-xxxi 
99b-102b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  244b-c;  part  iv, 
251b-c;  255b-258b;  271a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  v  [9-22] 
37a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  234b;  520c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  173d;  193a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xi, 
341c-345c  passim 

5e.  The  state  of  the  damned:  Hell 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  32 :22  /  Job,  26 :6 
/  Psalms,  9:16-17;  116:3— (D)  Psalms ,  9:17-18; 
114:3  /  Proverbs,  7:27;  15:11,24;  27:20  / 
Ecclesiastes,  6:6  /  Isaiah ,  5:14-15;  14:4-23; 
26:10;  33:10-14;  66:24— (JD)  Isaias,  5:14-15; 
14:4-23;  26:10;  33:10-14;  66:24  /  Ezekiel, 
31:10-1 8— (D)  Ezechiel,  31:10-18 

Apocrypha:  Judith,  16:17 — ( D )  OT,  Judith, 
16:20-21  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  4:16-5:14  esp 
4:19 —(D)  OT,  Book  of  Wisdom,  4:16-5:15 
esp  4:19  /  Ecclesiasticus,  7:17;  18:24;  21 :9~io— 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  7:19;  18:24;  21:10-11 
/  Baruch ,  2:17— (D)  OT,  Baruch,  2:17 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  3:7-12;  5:22,29; 
8:12;  10:28;  11:20-24;  13:41-42,49-50;  18:7- 
9;  25:31-46  esp  25:41,  25:46  /  Mark,  3:29; 
9:43-50—  (JD)  Mar\,  3:29;  9:42-49  /  Lube, 
12:5;  16:19-26  /  John,  15:6  /  //  Thessalonians, 
1:7-9  /  Hebrews,  10:26-31  /  /»</*,  6-7  / 
Revelation  passim,  esp  9,  12,  17,  19-20— (D) 
Apocalypse  passim,  esp  9,  12,  17,  19-20 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  xi  243a-249d  esp  [487— 
489]  247d,  [568-600]  248d-249a 

5  Aristophanes:  Frogs  [1 43-1 59]  565d-566a 

7  Plato:  Phaedo,  249c-250a  /  Republic,  bk  x, 
437c-438c/L^i,  bkix,  757a;  bk  x,  767c-768c 


12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [978- 
1023]  42d-43b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [548-627]  225b-227b; 
[735-747]  230b-231a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  33  341a-d; 
bk  xm,  ch  2  360b-361a;  ch  12  365d-366a; 
ch  14-15  366b-d;  bk  xiii,  ch  23-BK  xiv,  ch  i 
372a-377a;  bk  xiv,  ch  15  388d-390a;  bk  xv, 
ch  1  397b,d-398c;  bk  xix,  ch  13  519a-520a; 
ch  28  529d-530a,c;  bk  xx,  ch  15  543d-544b; 
bk  xxi,  560a-586a,c/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i, 
ch  20-21  629b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  3,  rep  2  42c-43b 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  69  885a-893c;  q  70,  a  3  897d-900d;  q  86 
992b-996a,c;  q  87,  a  i,  rep  4  997b-998c;  q  90, 
a  3  1014d-1016a;  qq  97-99  1066a-1085a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell  la-52d  esp  iii 
[1-18]  4a-b,  [82-129]  5a-b,  vi  [100-111]  9c, 
vii  [100-130]  lOc-d,  xi  15a-16b,  xiv  [16-72] 
19c-20b,  xxvii  [55-136]  40a-41b,  xxvm  [139- 
142]  43a,  xxxiii  [91-150]  50c-51a;  paradise, 
vii  [64-84]  115d-116a;  xv  [10-12]  128c 

22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale  278a-284a  /  Sum- 
moner's  Prologue  284b-285a  /  Parson's  Tale, 
par  10,  499b-502a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  193d-195d; 
part  iv,  250c'251b;  254a-255b;  27la-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
119b-122a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  266c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  i,  sc  iv  [42- 
63] 115a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  418c-419a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  227a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i-ii  93a-134a  esp 
bk  1  [44-270]  94b-99a,  bk  ii  [521-628]  122b- 
125a;  bk  vi  [867-877]  2l5a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  62  194c-d;  sect  72  198a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  183d-189a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  149c-150c  passim; 
234a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  363a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  347a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  i, 
lOc-d;  bk  v,  127c-d;  bk  vi,  169c-170b;  bk  xi, 
341c-345c 

5 f.  The  state  of  the  blessed:  Heaven 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  16  esp  16:10;  36  esp 
36:8-9;  37;  84;  149  —(D)  Psalms,  15  esp 
15:10;  35  esp  35:9-10;  36;  83;  149  /  Isaiah, 
65:8-25— (D)  Isaias,  65:8-25  /  Daniel,  7:18 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:15;  3:1- 
9,13-15.'  47-5:5;  5:15-16 — (D)  OT,  Boo\  of 
Wisdom ,  1:15;  3:1-9,13-15;  47-5:5;  5;,6-i7 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  5:1-12,19-20;  6:19- 
21,33;  7:2I~23»*  J3;43;  i9:21;  25:3!-46  esP 
25:34,  25:46  /  Luke ,  16:19-26  /  John,  6:38- 
40;  8:51;  10:24-30;  11:23-27;  16:20-24;  17:1-3 


6a  Chapter  3S:  IMMORTALITY  801 


/  Romans ,  S : i S ;  14:17  /  /  Corinthians ,  15:40- 
57  /  //  Corinthians ,  4:17-5:10  /  Galatians ,  6:8 
/  Ephesians ,  2:18-22  /  Hebrews ,  10:34  /  Janies , 
1  :i2  /  /  Peter ,  1  csp  1 13-5,  1:9//  John,  2:15-17; 
3:1-3  /  Revelation  esp  7,  14,  21— (D)  Apoca¬ 
lypse  esp  7,  14,  21 

4  Homer:  bk  iv  [554-569]  204d 

5  Aristophanes:  Prag/  [1 43-159]  565d  566a 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  211b  212a,c  /  Phaedo ,  249d~ 
250a  /  Republic ,  bk  x,  437c440d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  vi  [638-678]  228a  229a 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  140d  /  Sertorius ,  460d- 
461b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  16  23b  c; 
bk  ix,  par  6  63a-b;  bk  xii,  par  23  104b  c; 
bk  xiii,  par  50-53  124c-125a,c  /  C/Vy  0/ (7o<7, 
bk  ix,  ch  14-15  293a-294a;  cn  17  295a-c; 
bk  xi,  ch  1 1— 13  328d  330b;  bk  xii,  cii  20 
355b-357a;  bk  xiii,  ch  20-24  370c-376a,c; 
bk  xix,  ch  4  511a-513c;  ch  10-13  516c*520a; 
ch  27  529a-d;  bk  xx,  cii  17  544d-545c;  bk 
xxii  586b,d-618d  esp  ch  1-5  586b.d  590a, 
ch  12-21  600d-606d,  ch  29-30  614b  618d  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  4  625b  c;  ch  19-22 
629a-630a 

19  Aquinas:  Sumtna  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  509b-510a;  part  i-ii,  q  4,  aa  1-2 
629d631a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  67 
81b-87c;  q  68,  a  6  93c-94c;  part  ii-ii,  q  18, 
a  2  462d-463d;  q  19,  a  ii  472d-473d;  q  26, 
a  13  519d-520d;  q  28,  a  3  528d-529c;  qq 
92-96  1025b-1066a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
81]  75d-76a;  xxviii-xxxin  96a-105d;  para¬ 
dise  106a-157d  esp  in  [43-90]  109d-110b,  vi 
[112-126]  114d-115a,  xiv  [1-66]  126d-127c,  xxi 
[1-102]  138b-139b,  xxii  [1-75]  139d-140c, 
xxviii  [94-114]  149d-150a,  xxx-xxxiii  I5ld- 
157d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  v,  stanza 
259-261  154a-b  l  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,788- 
822] 467a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  65a-b;  part  iii, 
191d-193d;  195d-197c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  99b-100a;  248c-250b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  111,  88d-89a 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  [7]  la;  [13]  lb;  [52] 
2b;  [133-148]  4b-5a  /  On  Time  12a  b  J  At  a 
Solemn  Musicl { 13a-b  /  Lycidas  [165-185]  31b  / 
Comus  [986-1023]  55b-56b  /  Sonnets ,  xiv  66a 
/  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii-xii  135a-333a  esp  bk  iii 
[56-64]  136b,  [135-143]  138b.  [344-415]  143a- 
144b,  bk  v  [246-261]  180b-181a,  [461-651] 
185a-189b,  bk  vii  [150-161]  220b,  bk  viii 
[595-630]  245a-246a,  bk  xi  [696-707]  314b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  643  290b-291a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  vii, 
sect  5  132c;  ch  xxi,  sect  38  187b-c;  sect  45 
189b-d;  sect  62  194c-d;  sect  72  198a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fally  234b-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  192d-193a;  391d-392a 


46  Ilr.ui.:  Philosophy  of  History ,  p\rt  i.  227c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Prothers  Karamazov,  bk  m,  22d* 
23c;  bk  xi,  342c 

53  James:  Psychology,  199b 

5£.  The  resurrection  of  the  body 

Old  Testament:  Job ,  14:13  15;  19:25  27  / 
Isaiah,  26:19  —  (D)  Isaias ,  26:19  /  Ezc\tel, 
57:1-4  —  (D)  Ezechiel ,  37:1  14  /  Daniel , 

12:1-2 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  27:52  53;  28  csp 
28:6  /  Marl(,  12:18-27  /  24  csp  24:6, 

24:34,  24:46  /  /o/;/7,  2:18-22;  5:21-29;  iii 
44  /  24:15;  26:8  /  Romans ,  6:5-11  / 

/  Corinthians ,  6:14;  15  /  //  Corinthians,  4:14 
/  /  Thessalonians ,  4:13-18  — (D)  /  Thessalo- 
nians,  4:12-17  /  Hebrews,  11:35 

18  Augustine:  C/Vy  of  God ,  bk  x,  ch  29,  317b 
318b;  bk  xiii,  ch  16-20  367a  371a;  cii  22  24 
371c-376a,c;  bk  xx,  ch  6-7  534a  536d;  cii  9- 
10,  540b-541a;  ch  14-21  542d-551a;  bk  xxi, 
ch  1-10  560a  570b;  bk  xxii,  ch  4-5  588b 
590a;  ch  11-21  599c  606d;  ch  25 -28  612a- 
614a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  cii  19-21 
629a  b;  ch  24  630c-631a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i  ii,  q  67, 
a  1,  rep  3  81b  82c;  part  iii  suppl,  qq  75-86 
935a-996a,c;  q  93,  a  1  1037d  l039a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vi  [94-1  ii] 
9b-c;  x  [1— 1 5]  13d;  xiii  [85-108]  18d-19a; 
paradise,  vii  [121-148]  116b-c;  xiv  [1-66] 
126d-127c;  xxv  [97-129]  145b  c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  192c  193c; 
195b  d;  part  iv,  254b-255b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  311a  b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [227-343]  140b- 
143a;  bk  xii  [402-427]  328a  b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  95  431c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv,  205d- 
206a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  233d:  234d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  472ab 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [737-807]  19b-21a 

6.  Doctrines  of  impersonal  survival 

6a,  Immortality  through  offspring:  the  perpetu¬ 
ation  of  the  species 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiastic  us ,  30:3-6;  40:19;  44:11— 
13 —(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  30:3-6;  40:19; 
44:iI_I3 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  165b  166b  /  Laws,  bk  iv, 
685b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [415*22  bS] 
645c  d 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  ii, 
ch  1  [73 ib  1 8—732*4]  272a  b  /  Politics ,  bk  i, 
ch  2  [1252*26-32]  445c 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  iv.  254c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
81a-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets,  i-xvii  586a  588d 


802 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(6.  Doctrines  of  impersonal  survival.  6a.  Immor¬ 
tality  through  offspring:  the  perpetuation  of 
the  species.) 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  364a;  384b; 
390c-391c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  29a-b;  72c- 
73a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  173 
61a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  189b-c; 
part  1,  212b-c;  246d-247a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  340b-341a 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  401b;  406c  /  General  Intro¬ 
duction,  616a-b  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle, 
653b-c;  655b-656a 

6b.  Enduring  fame:  survival  in  the  memory 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  10:7  /  Ecclesiastes,  9:5 

Apocrypha:  Judith ,  16:20-25— (D)  OT,  Judith , 
16:24-31  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  4:1-6;  8:9-13 
—(D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  4:1-6;  8:9-13  / 
Ecclesiasticus,  37:26;  39:1-11;  40:19;  44:8-15; 
46:11-12 — (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  37:29; 
39:1-15;  40:19;  44:8-15;  46:13-15  /  I  Macca¬ 
bees,  3:1-7— (D)  OT,  /  Machabees ,  3:1-7  / 
II  Maccabees,  6:21-31  —  (D)  OT,  II  Mach¬ 
abees,  6:21-31 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ix  [410-429]  61b-c;  bk  xii 
[309-328]  85b-c;  bk  xxii  [299-305]  158b  / 
Odyssey,  bk  xxiv  [191-202]  319a 

5  Sophocles:  Philoctetes  [1408-1444]  194d- 

195a, c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  la-b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  398a-c 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  165b-167a  /  Laws,  bk  iv, 
685b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  v,  ch  10  [1312^3-39] 
514d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [121-124] 
2c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  10  261d- 
262a;  bk  iv,  sect  19  265a;  sect  33  266c-d; 
bk  vi,  sect  18  275d;  bk  vii,  sect  6  280b; 
bk  viii,  sect  44  289a;  bk  ix,  sect  30  294b-c 


6b  to  6c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [453-463]  115b;  [606- 
610]  119b;  bk  iv  [321-322]  175b 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  125b 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i,  195a-b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  iv  5c-7a;  xvi 
[1-90]  22c-23b;  purgatory,  xi  [73-117]  69c- 
70a;  paradise,  ix  [37-63]  119a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  77a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
81a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  112d-113a;  267a-c;301b- 
c;  304d-306a 

27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets,  lv  594c-d;  lxv  596a- 
b;  lxxxi  598c-d 

28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  312c-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  226d- 
228d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  27d-28c; 
29a-b;  36a-c;  72c-73a 

32  Milton:  On  Shahespear.  1630  16a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  148  201a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  535a-536a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  273b;  274d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  94a-b;  219d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  494b,d-495a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  428b-429a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  57d-58a;  163d  [fn  4] 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 
348  llld  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
153b-c;  part  i,  212b-c;  254d-255d;  part 
ii,  262c-263a;  274a-275a;  278d-279a;  281d- 
282d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  prelude  [59-74]  2b-3a;  part 
ii  [9981-9982]  243a 

6c.  Participation  in  the  eternity  of  truth,  ideas, 
or  love 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  34-36 
338b-339d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  v,  prop  21-42  458a- 
463d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d- 
168c  esp  156d-157b,  168b-c;  190a-b;  203c- 
206a, c 


Chapter  38:  IMMORTALITY 


803 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  discussions  of  man’s  attitude  toward  mutability  and  death,  see  Change  12b;  Happi¬ 
ness  4b;  Life  and  Death  8c;  Time  7. 

The  basic  terms  and  propositions  involved  in  arguments  for  or  against  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  see  Being  7b(i)~7b(4);  Eternity  4a;  Form  2d;  Man  33-33(2),  3c;  Matter  2d;  Mind 
ib,  2a,  2d-2e;  Soul  3a~3d,  4b;  and  for  the  contrast  between  souls  and  angels  with  respect 
to  their  mode  of  being,  see  Angel  4;  Eternity  4a;  Form  2d;  Man  3b;  Soul  4d(2). 

Other  discussions  of  immortality  as  a  postulate  of  the  practical  reason,  see  Metaphysics  2d; 
Necessity  and  Contingency  4b. 

Another  statement  of  the  doctrine  of  reincarnation  or  the  transmigration  of  souls,  see  Soul 
4d(l)* 

Articles  of  religious  belief  bearing  on  immortality,  such  as  predestination,  the  I>ast  Judg¬ 
ment,  and  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  see  God  y(-yh;  Happiness  7c;  Soul  4d(3). 

The  relevance  of  the  doctrine  of  innate  ideas  to  immortality,  see  Idea  2b;  Knowledge  6c(3); 
Memory  and  Imagination  3a;  Mind  4d(2). 

The  relevance  to  immortality  of  the  theory  of  mind  or  intellect  as  an  incorporeal  power,  see 
Man  33(2);  Matter  4d;  Mind  2a;  Soul  3b. 

The  state  of  the  soul  separated  from  the  body,  see  Knowledge  7c;  Soul  4d. 

The  moral  significance  of  immortality  in  relation  to  divine  rewards  and  punishments,  see 
God  5i;  Punishment  5d. 

Other  discussions  of  the  underworld,  or  of  Hell,  Purgatory,  and  Heaven,  see  Eternity  4d; 
Happiness  70-70(3);  Punishment  5e~5e(2);  Sin  6d-6e. 

The  immortality  of  enduring  fame,  see  Honor  2d. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Augustine.  On  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul 
Aquinas.  Summa  Contra  Gentiles ,  bk  iv,  ch  79-95 

- .  Quaestiones  Disputatae ,  De  Anima,  a  14 

Dante.  Convivio  (The  Banquet ),  second  treatise, 
CH  9  (4-6) 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Death,”  in  Essays 
Hume.  Of  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul 
- .  Of  Suicide 

J.  S.  Mill.  “Theism,”  part  iii,  in  Three  Essays  on 
Religion 

W.  James.  Human  Immortality 

II. 

Epicurus.  Letter  to  Menoeceus 
Cicero.  De  Republica  ( The  Republic ),  vi 

- .  Tusculan  Disputations ,  1 

- .  De  Senectute  (Of  Old  Age) 


Ovid.  Metamorphoses 

Seneca.  De  Consolatione  ad  Marciam  (On  Consola¬ 
tion  to  Marcia) 

Gregory  of  Nyssa.  On  the  Soul  and  the  Resurrec¬ 
tion 

Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology ,  propositions 
104-105,  208-210 

Saadia  G  aon.  The  BooJ{  of  Beliefs  and  Opinions , 
treatise  VI,  VIII 

Bonaventura.  Breviloquium ,  part  vii 
R.  Bacon.  Opus  Majus ,  part  vii 
Albo.  The  Bo o\of  Principles  (Sefer  ha-If^arim ),  bk 
iv,  ch  29-41 

Nicolas  of  Cusa.  The  Vision  of  God 

Pomponazzi.  On  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul 

Vaughan.  The  Retreate 

King.  The  Exequy 

Browne.  Hydriotaphia 

H.  More.  The  Immortality  of  the  Soul 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


804 

Leibnitz.  Discourse  on  Metaphysics ,  xxxii-xxxvi 

- .  Monadology ,  par  19-28 

J.  Butler.  The  Analogy  of  Religion ,  part  i,  ch  i 
Law.  An  Appeal  to  All  That  Doubt . . .  the  Truths  of 
the  Gospel ,  ch  i 

Swedenborg.  Heaven  and  Its  Wonders  and  Hell 
Voltaire.  “Heaven,”  “Hell,”  “Hell  (Descent  into),” 
“Purgatory,”  “Resurrection,”  in  A  Philosophical 
Dictionary 

Mendelssohn.  Phadon;oder  Ueberdie  Unsterblich^eit 
der  Seele 

Lessing.  How  the  Ancients  Represented  Death 
Wordsworth.  Intimations  of  Immortality 
Cousin.  Lectures  on  the  True ,  the  Beautiful  and  the 
Good ,  part  hi  (16) 

Hazlitt.  On  the  Feeling  of  Immortality  in  Youth 
Feuerbach.  Gedan\en  iiber  Tod  und  Unsterblichkeit 

I.  H.  Fichte.  Die  Idee  der  Personlichheit  und  der 
individuellen  Fortdauer 

J.  H.  Newman.  “The  Immortality  of  the  Soul,”  in 
Parochial  and  Plain  Sermons 

Kierkegaard.  Concluding  Unscientific  Postscript , 
pp  152-158 

Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea ,  vol 
iii,  sup,  ch  41 

- .  “Immortality:  A  Dialogue,”  in  Studies  in  Pes¬ 
simism 

Fechner.  Life  After  Death 
- .  Religion  of  a  Scientist 


Clifford.  “The  Unseen  Universe,”  in  vol  i,  Lec¬ 
tures  and  Essays 

Royce.  The  Conception  of  Immortality 
Fiske.  Life  Everlasting 
Pohle.  Eschatology 

Santayana.  Reason  in  Religion ,  ch  13-14 
Hugel.  Eternal  Life 

Bosanquet.  The  Value  and  Destiny  of  the  Indi¬ 
vidual 

Vonier.  The  Human  Soul  and  Its  Relations  with  Other 
Spirits 

Bradley.  Essays  on  Truth  and  Reality ,  ch  15(B) 
Farnell.  GreeJ^  Hero  Cults  and  Ideas  of  Immortality 
McTaggart.  The  Nature  of  Existence,  ch  43,  62 
Scheler.  Vom  Ewigen  im  Menschen 
Lake.  Immortality  and  the  Modern  Mind 
Broad.  The  Mind  and  Its  Place  in  Nature ,  ch  11-12 
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough ,  part  ii,  ch  2;  part  hi; 

PART  IV,  BK  I,  CH  5-6;  PART  V,  CH  l6j  PART  VII, 
CH  IO-II 

- .  Man,  God ,  and  Immortality ,  part  iv 

J.  S.  Haldane.  The  Sciences  and  Philosophy ,  lect 
xviii 

Whitehead.  Process  and  Reality ,  part  v 
Kirk.  The  Vision  of  God 
Hocking.  Thoughts  on  Death  and  Life 
A.  E.  Taylor.  The  Christian  Hope  of  Immor¬ 
tality 

Perry.  The  Hope  for  Immortality 


Chapter  39:  INDUCTION 


INTRODUCTION 


AS  the  list  of  Additional  Readings  indicates, 
Ji  \  the  theory  of  induction  falls  within  the 
province  of  logic  and  is  part  of  the  logician’s 
concern  with  the  methods  of  inference  or  rea¬ 
soning  employed  in  the  sciences.  The  great 
controversies  about  induction  seem  to  be  of 
relatively  recent  origin  in  the  history  of  logic, 
beginning  perhaps  with  the  argument  between 
William  Whewell  and  J.  S.  Mill  over  the  con¬ 
tributions  of  reason  and  experience  to  the 
inductive  process.  Later  in  the  nineteenth 
century  and  in  our  own  time,  writers  like  John¬ 
son  and  Keynes,  Russell  and  Nicod,  who  pre¬ 
sent  different  formulations  of  inductive  infer¬ 
ence,  call  attention  to  the  unsolved  problems 
with  which  any  theory  is  left.  They  underline 
the  assumptions  that  seem  to  be  unavoidable  in 
any  statement  of  the  formal  conditions  which 
validate  the  so-called  “inductive  leap” — the 
jump  from  observed  particulars  to  general 
truths,  truths  having  a  wider  generality  than 
the  particular  evidences  from  which  they  are 
drawn  or  on  which  they  are  based. 

The  problem  of  induction,  in  anyone’s  ver¬ 
sion  of  it,  is  the  problem  of  generalization.  This 
may  involve  psychological  questions  about  how 
the  mind  generalizes  from  experience.  But 
however  they  are  answered,  the  basic  logical 
questions  remain  substantially  unaltered.  By 
what  criteria  is  valid  distinguished  from  fal¬ 
lacious  induction?  Can  induction  be  secured 
from  error  by  rules  of  inference?  Is  induction 
indispensable  in  the  development  of  scientific 
knowledge,  or  is  there,  as  Whewell,  for  exam¬ 
ple,  suggests,  a  sharp  distinction  between  the 
inductive  and  the  deductive  sciences? 

What  is  the  relation  of  induction  to  deduc¬ 
tion?  Is  it  the  relation  of  a  method  of  discovery 
to  a  method  of  demonstration  or  proof?  Is  it  a 
relation  between  two  modes  of  reasoning,  both 
of  which  can  be  formulated  as  processes  of 


proof?  Is  there  both  an  inductive  and  a  deduc¬ 
tive  type  of  syllogism,  or  is  induction  the  very 
opposite  of  all  forms  of  reasoning  and  proof? 

It  is  with  these  last  questions  that  the  dis¬ 
cussion  of  induction  begins  in  the  great  books, 
especially  in  Aristotle’s  Organon  and  Bacon’s 
Novum  Organ  urn ,  but  also  in  the  writings  of 
Descartes  and  Locke,  and  in  observations  on 
scientific  method  by  Newton,  Harvey,  and 
Pascal.  Though  many  of  the  controversies  and 
problems  which  become  central  in  the  nine¬ 
teenth  century  do  not  appear  explicitly  in  the 
earlier  tradition,  they  are  anticipated  by  the 
fundamental  distinctions  and  issues  which  can 
be  found  in  the  earlier  writers. 

Bacon’s  dissatisfaction  with  Aristotle,  for 
example,  leads  him  to  formulate  specific  rules 
for  induction.  Going  further  in  the  same  gen¬ 
eral  direction,  Mill  later  develops  his  elaborate 
theory  of  inductive  inference.  We  move  in  the 
opposite  direction  if  we  are  guided  by  Aristotle’s 
distinction  between  scientific  and  dialectical  in¬ 
duction  and  by  his  way  of  setting  induction  off 
as  the  very  opposite  of  reasoning.  The  question 
then  arises  whether  Bacon  and  Mill  arc  treating 
induction  in  all  or  in  only  one  of  several  quite 
distinct  senses. 

As  the  chapter  on  Logic  indicates,  the  names 
of  Aristotle  and  Bacon  are  sometimes  used  as 
the  symbols  of  opposed  tendencies  in  logic. 
The  one  is  supposed  to  represent  an  almost  ex¬ 
clusive  emphasis  on  deduction,  the  other  the 
primacy  and  importance  of  induction.  An  op¬ 
position  between  Aristotle  and  Bacon  is  also 
implied  in  the  current  use  of  such  phrases  as 
“inductive  logic’’  and  “deductive  logic.”  These 
phrases  are  sometimes  used  to  suggest  that  the 
inductive  or  the  deductive  process  can  be 
favored  to  the  exclusion,  or  at  least  the  subor¬ 
dination,  of  the  other.  Such  understanding  of 


805 


806 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


the  matter  usually  includes  the  popular  notion 
that  induction  is  always  reasoning  from  par¬ 
ticulars  to  universal  and  deduction  always 
reasoning  from  universal  to  particulars. 

But  none  of  these  things  seems  to  be  true,  or 
at  least  not  without  serious  qualification.  Nei¬ 
ther  Aristotle  nor  Bacon  emphasizes  deduction 
or  induction  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other.  On 
the  contrary,  both  appear  to  insist  on  the  ab¬ 
solute  priority  of  induction,  since,  according  to 
them,  it  provides  deductive  reasoning  with  its 
ultimate  premises.  Far  from  conflicting,  induc¬ 
tion  and  deduction  complement  each  other. 
“The  consilience  of  the  results  of  both  these 
processes/’  Mill  writes,  “each  corroborating 
and  verifying  the  other,  is  requisite  to  give  to 
any  general  proposition  the  kind  and  degree 
of  evidence  which  constitutes  scientific  proof.” 

Until  principles  are  established,  the  deduc¬ 
tion  of  their  implications  or  consequences  can¬ 
not  begin.  Unless  principles,  once  they  are  ob¬ 
tained,  are  then  used  in  the  proof  of  other 
truths,  or  are  otherwise  rationally  employed, 
the  purpose  of  inductive  generalization  is  not 
fully  realized.  In  this  understanding  of  the  re¬ 
lationship  between  induction  and  reasoning, 
Aristotle  and  Bacon  do  not  seem  to  disagree, 
nor  does  either  of  them  conceive  induction  as  a 
process  of  reasoning  from  particulars  to  uni¬ 
versal. 

There  is  no  question  that  the  direction  of 
induction  is  from  particulars;  but  in  the  precise 
sense  in  which  induction  precedes  deduction — 
the  sense  in  which  both  Bacon  and  Aristotle 
regard  it  as  the  source  of  axioms — they  do  not 
think  it  is  a  process  of  reasoning  or  a  form  of 
proof.  As  for  deduction,  it  is  questionable,  at 
least  for  Aristotle,  whether  its  direction  can  be 
described  as  from  the  universal  to  the  particu¬ 
lar. 

Aristotle  seldom  uses  the  word  “deduction” 
as  the  name  for  that  phase  of  thought  which  is 
complementary  to  induction.  He  speaks  rather 
of  demonstration.  Demonstration  takes  place 
through  the  various  forms  of  reasoning  which 
he  calls  “syllogisms.”  As  the  chapter  on  Rea¬ 
soning  explains,  these  are  collections  of  premises 
each  of  which  yields  a  conclusion  by  valid  in¬ 
ference.  In  the  most  perfect  forms  of  reasoning, 
the  conclusion  is  as  universal  as  its  premises, 
and  though  there  are  syllogisms  in  which  a  par¬ 


ticular  proposition  can  be  demonstrated  from  a 
universal  and  a  particular  premise,  it  is  seldom 
the  case  that  from  exclusively  universal  premises 
a  particular  conclusion  can  be  validly  drawn.The 
statement  that  deduction  is  reasoning  from  uni¬ 
versal  to  particulars  certainly  does  not  seem  to 
fit  Aristotle’s  theory  of  the  syllogism,  and  even 
less  his  conception  of  scientific  demonstration, 
the  aim  of  which  is  to  prove  universal,  not 
particular,  propositions. 

“We  learn  either  by  induction  or  by  demon¬ 
stration,”  Aristotle  writes  in  the  Prior  Analytics. 
“Demonstration  develops  from  universals,  in¬ 
duction  from  particulars.”  In  the  Posterior  Ana¬ 
lytics  he  says  that  the  ultimate  premises  of  dem¬ 
onstration  must  be  primary  or  basic  truths.  A 
basic  truth  is  an  immediate  proposition — what 
is  sometimes  called  a  “first  principle”  or  an 
“axiom.”  Since  in  his  view  “an  immediate  prop¬ 
osition  is  one  which  has  no  other  proposition 
prior  to  it,”  the  basic  premises  cannot  be 
demonstrated. 

Whence  come  these  primary  premises  which 
are  indispensable  to  demonstration  but  which 
demonstration  cannot  establish  ?  Aristotle’s 
answer  is  that  “we  know  the  primary  prem¬ 
ises  by  induction.”  In  another  place  he  says, 
“it  is  by  intuition  that  we  obtain  the  primary 
premises.” 

The  word  “intuition”  indicates  an  essential 
characteristic  of  the  sort  of  induction  which, 
because  it  is  not  itself  a  form  of  reasoning,  can 
be  prior  to  all  reasoning  and  must  be ,  in  order  to 
supply  the  premises  from  which  reasoning  pro¬ 
ceeds.  Reasoning  is  discursive.  It  is  a  process  in¬ 
volving  steps.  One  proposition  is  drawn  from 
another  by  the  mediation  of  a  third.  Intuition, 
in  contrast,  is  immediate.  Like  an  act  of  seeing, 
it  apprehends  its  object  at  once  and  directly. 
When  Aristotle  speaks  of  induction  as  a  kind  of 
intuition,  he  implies,  therefore,  that  it  consists 
in  the  immediate  grasp  of  a  universal  truth.  The 
proposition  thus  held  he  calls  “immediate”  pre¬ 
cisely  because  it  can  be  known  intuitively  and 
in  no  other  way.  Intuitive  induction,  as  op¬ 
posed  to  what  may  be  called  “inductive  reason¬ 
ing,”  consists  in  seeing  the  universal  in  the  par¬ 
ticular.  When  what  is  seen  is  expressed  in  the 
form  of  a  proposition,  the  universal  implicit  in 
the  known  particulars  is  made  explicit. 


807 


Chapter  39:  INDUCTION 


Induction  and  intuition  arc,  however,  not 
identical  for  Aristotle.  In  one  passage  in  the 
Prior  Analytics  he  considers  syllogistic  induc¬ 
tion,  which  can  hardly  be  called  “intuitive.” 
And  in  the  Ethics ,  where  he  discusses  intuitive 
reason,  he  distinguishes  between  two  sorts  of 
primary  truth  that  can  be  known  by  intuition. 

“Intuitive  reason,”  he  writes,  “is  concerned 
with  the  ultimates  in  both  directions;  for  both 
the  first  terms  and  the  last  are  objects  of  intui¬ 
tive  reason  and  not  of  argument,  and  the  intui¬ 
tive  reason  which  is  presupposed  by  demon¬ 
strations  grasps  the  unchangeable  and  first 
terms,  while  the  intuitive  reason  involved  in 
practical  reasoning  grasps  the  last  and  variable 
fact,  i.e.,  the  minor  premise.  For  these  variable 
facts  are  the  starting-points  for  the  apprehen¬ 
sion  of  the  end,  since  the  universal  are  reached 
from  the  particulars;  of  these  therefore  we  must 
have  perception,  and  this  perception  is  intuitive 
reason.” 

This  applies  to  theoretic  as  well  as  practical 
knowledge.  By  intuitive  reason,  it  seems,  we 
grasp  both  the  universal  principles  or  axioms  and 
the  particular  facts  of  sense-perception.  As  per¬ 
ception  is  intuition  on  the  part  of  the  sensitive 
faculty,  so  induction  is  an  intuitive  use  of  the 
intellect  (though  Aristotle  attributes  both  to 
“intuitive  reason”). 

These  two  forms  of  intuition  are  functionally 
related.  The  induction  of  universal  truths  from 
particulars  is  impossible  without  sense-percep¬ 
tion,  “for  it  is  sense-perception  alone  which  is 
able  to  grasp  the  particulars.”  But,  according 
to  Aristotle,  a  single  isolated  perception  does 
not  give  rise  to  an  intuitive  induction.  Re¬ 
peated  perceptions  of  things  of  a  certain  sort — 
particulars  of  a  certain  class — are  formed  by 
memory  into  what  he  calls  “an  experience.” 
Because  the  experience  refers,  not  to  a  single 
individual,  but  to  a  class  of  similar  individuals, 
it  provides  the  material  for  the  mind’s  intuitive 
act  of  induction. 

This  theory  of  the  role  of  experience  in  in¬ 
duction  is  more  fully  discussed  in  the  chapter 
on  Experience.  For  our  present  purposes,  the 
main  point  is  that  the  universal,  lying  implicitly 
in  the  experience,  is  ready,  as  it  were,  to  be  ex¬ 
tracted  therefrom  and  made  explicit.  “Though 
the  act  of  sense-perception  is  of  the  particular, 
its  content  is  universal,”  Aristotle  writes.  With 


the  help  of  memory  and  experience,  induction 
makes  the  latent  universal  manifest. 

Bacon’s  criticism  of  the  logic  of  Aristotle 
seems  to  rest  on  two  counts:  first,  he  com¬ 
plains  of  Aristotle’s  over-emphasis  on  syllogisms, 
whether  they  arc  used  dialectically  or  demon¬ 
stratively;  and  second,  he  charges  Aristotle  with 
a  superficial  understanding  of  induction.  One 
of  the  chief  efforts  of  the  Novum  Organum  is  to 
correct  the  latter  mistake. 

“There  are  and  can  exist,”  says  Bacon,  “but 
two  ways  of  investigating  and  discovering 
truth.  The  one  hurries  on  rapidly  from  the 
senses  and  particulars  to  the  most  general  ax¬ 
ioms,  and  from  them,  as  principles,  and  from 
their  supposed  indisputable  truth,  deduces  the 
intermediate  axioms.  This  is  the  way  now  in 
use.  The  other  constructs  its  axioms  from  the 
senses  and  particulars,  by  ascending  continually 
and  gradually,  until  it  finally  arrives  at  the 
most  general  axioms,  which  is  the  true  but  un¬ 
attempted  way.” 

Where  Aristotle  proposes  that  only  the  pri¬ 
mary  truths  or  first  principles  be  established  by 
induction,  while  all  the  others  (which  Bacon 
calls  “intermediate  axioms”)  are  to  be  derived 
from  them  by  demonstration,  Bacon  urges  a 
method  of  induction  which  shall  mount  grad¬ 
ually  from  the  least  general  to  the  most  uni¬ 
versal  propositions.  We  should  not  “suffer  the 
understanding  to  jump  and  fly  from  particulars 
to  remote  and  most  general  axioms.”  We  should 
“proceed  by  a  true  scale  and  successive  steps, 
without  interruption  or  breach,  from  particu¬ 
lars  to  the  lesser  axioms,  thence  to  the  inter¬ 
mediate  (rising  one  above  the  other),  and  lastly, 
to  the  most  general.” 

According  to  this  theory,  induction  can  in¬ 
tuitively  draw  more  general  from  less  general 
truths,  as  well  as  the  least  general  truths  from 
the  particulars  of  perception.  It  might  seem  at 
first  as  if  there  were  no  place  for  deduction  in 
the  development  of  science.  But  Bacon  divides 
the  study  of  nature  into  two  phases:  “the  first 
regards  the  eliciting  or  creating  of  axioms  from 
experiments,  the  second  the  deducing  or  deriv¬ 
ing  of  new  experiments  from  axioms.”  Here  too 
there  seems  to  be  a  crucial  difference  between 
Bacon  and  Aristotle.  This  difference  is  indicated 
by  Bacon’s  emphasis  upon  experiments  both  as 


808 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


the  source  of  inductive  generalization  and  also 
as  that  which  is  ultimately  derived  by  deduc¬ 
tion  from  axioms. 

The  difference  between  experience  (which 
Aristotle  makes  the  source  of  induction)  and 
experiment  is  more  than  verbal.  “The  axioms 
now  in  use,”  Bacon  contends,  “are  derived  from 
a  scanty  handful,  as  it  were,  of  experience,  and 
a  few  particulars  of  frequent  occurrence.” 
There  has  been  too  little  attention  given  to  neg¬ 
ative  instances,  that  is,  of  cases  which  seem  to 
run  counter  to  the  generalization  being  formed. 
“In  establishing  any  true  axiom,”  Bacon  in¬ 
sists,  “the  negative  instance  is  the  most  power¬ 
ful.” 

The  chapter  on  Experience,  dwells  on  the 
difference  between  ordinary  experience  and 
planned  experiments.  Where  Aristotle  seems  to 
be  satisfied  with  the  ordinary  experience  which 
arises  from  the  perceptions  of  men  in  the  course 
of  daily  life,  Bacon  thinks  it  does  not  suffice. 
Because  it  is  haphazard,  it  fails  to  collect  the 
variety  of  instances,  both  positive  and  nega¬ 
tive,  upon  which  genuine  and  solid  inductions 
can  be  founded.  Unusual  and  special  experiences 
must  be  sought  out,  and  the  effort  must  be 
made  to  invent  experiences  which  do  not  arise 
spontaneously.  For  this,  experiment— or  the 
production  of  experiences — is  necessary.  Bacon 
thinks  we  must,  “by  every  kind  of  experiment, 
elicit  the  discovery  of  causes  and  true  axioms.” 

Two  consequences  follow  from  the  several 
differences  we  have  noted  between  Aristotle’s 
and  Bacon’s  theories  of  induction. 

In  the  first  place,  Aristotle  does  not  seem  to 
think  that  induction  can  be  methodically  pre¬ 
scribed  by  logical  rules.  It  is  a  natural  act  of 
intelligence  to  draw  universals  from  experi¬ 
ence.  Though  men  may  differ  in  the  readiness 
of  their  native  wit,  the  induction  of  the  pri¬ 
mary  truths,  which  are  the  axioms  or  first 
principles  of  science,  does  not  require  special 
genius  nor  can  it  be  improved  or  rendered 
more  certain  by  following  rules.  Precisely  be¬ 
cause  it  is  intuitive  rather  than  discursive, 
induction,  unlike  reasoning,  cannot  be  regu¬ 
lated  by  rules  of  inference  such  as  those  which 
govern  the  syllogism. 

Without  disagreeing  that  it  is  intuitive  rath¬ 
er  than  argumentative,  Bacon  seems  to  think 


that  induction  requires  the  practice  of  the  most 
detailed  and  precise  method.  Not  only  must  the 
various  ascending  stages  of  induction  be  regu¬ 
lated  by  observance  of  an  order  of  generality, 
but  the  making  of  experiments  and  the  collec¬ 
tion  and  arrangement  of  particulars,  “forming 
tables  and  coordinations  of  instances,”  must  be 
governed  by  a  complex  set  of  rules.  The  twenty- 
seven  tables  of  instances,  set  forth  in  the  second 
book  of  the  Novum  Organum,  constitute  the 
heart  of  Bacon’s  method  of  induction.  This  new 
method  “of  discovering  the  sciences,”  he  ob¬ 
serves,  “levels  men’s  wits  and  leaves  but  little 
of  their  superiority,  since  it  achieves  everything 
by  the  most  certain  rules.” 

In  the  second  place,  since  genuine  induction 
depends  for  Bacon  upon  ample  experiments,  it 
belongs  primarily  to  the  method  of  the  experi¬ 
mental  sciences — the  physical  or  natural  sci¬ 
ences  in  which  experimentation  is  possible. 
Though  the  first  principles  or  axioms  of  arith¬ 
metic  and  geometry  may  be  learned  by  induc¬ 
tion,  the  method  of  gradual  ascent  from  experi¬ 
ments  through  intermediate  generalizations 
does  not  apply  to  mathematics.  Here  we  may 
have  the  beginning  of  the  notion  that  only 
the  experimental  sciences  are  primarily  induc¬ 
tive,  whereas  other  sciences,  like  mathematics, 
are  primarily  deductive. 

But  such  a  division  of  the  sciences  does  not 
accord  with  Aristotle’s  theory  of  induction. 
He  thinks  mathematics  and  metaphysics  re¬ 
quire  induction  for  their  foundation  no  less 
than  physics  and  in  no  different  way;  if  any¬ 
thing,  induction  is  of  the  greatest  importance 
for  metaphysics,  because  all  its  principles  are 
indemonstrable,  whereas  some  of  the  principles 
needed  in  mathematics  and  physics  can  be  dem¬ 
onstrated  in  metaphysics.  Yet  no  science  is  pe¬ 
culiarly  inductive,  just  as  none  stands  in  a 
special  relation  to  experience.  All  depend  equal¬ 
ly  upon  experience  for  the  induction  of  the 
primary  truths  on  which  their  demonstrations 
rest. 

Descartes  seems  to  fall  somewhere  between 
Aristotle  and  Bacon.  He  regards  arithmetic  and 
geometry  as  more  certain  than  the  physical 
sciences,  because  mathematics  is  largely  devel¬ 
oped  by  deduction,  whereas  the  study  of  nature 
depends  upon  induction  from  experiments.  In 
this  lies  the  superiority  of  mathematics.  “While 


809 


Chapter  39:  INDUCTION 


our  inferences  from  experience  arc  frequently 
fallacious,”  Descartes  writes,  “deduction,  or  the 
pure  illation  of  one  thing  from  another  .  .  .  can¬ 
not  be  erroneous  when  performed  by  an  under¬ 
standing  that  is  in  the  least  degree  rational.” 

Nevertheless,  Descartes  does  not  exclude  in¬ 
duction  as  the  source  of  the  axioms  of  mathe¬ 
matics  or,  for  that  matter,  of  metaphysics;  he 
only  excludes  the  kind  of  induction  which  de¬ 
pends  upon  experiments.  Such  axioms  as  when 
equals  are  taken  from  equals  the  remainders  are 
equal  or  the  whole  is  greater  than  any  of  its  parts 
are  products  of  induction,  as  may  be  seen,  he 
points  out,  from  the  fact  that  a  child  can  be 
taught  these  general  truths  only  “by  showing 
him  examples  in  particular  cases.”  Similarly, 
the  metaphysical  truth  in  the  proposition  / 
think;  therefore ,  I  exist  cannot  be  learned  by  de¬ 
duction  or  syllogistic  reasoning.  The  axiom  that 
to  think  is  to  exist  has  to  be  learned  by  induction 
“from  the  experience  of  the  individual — that 
unless  he  exists  he  cannot  think.  For  our  mind 
is  so  constituted  by  nature  that  general  propo¬ 
sitions  are  formed  out  of  the  knowledge  of  par¬ 
ticulars.” 

From  the  foregoing  we  can  gather  that  dif¬ 
ferent  theories  of  induction  may  be,  in  large 
part,  theories  about  different  kinds  of  induc¬ 
tion.  Common  to  induction  of  every  sort  is  the 
motion  of  the  mind  from  particulars,  appre¬ 
hended  by  sense,  to  general  propositions  or  uni¬ 
versal  notions.  But  the  character  of  the  induc¬ 
tion,  or  its  conditions  and  method,  may  differ 
according  to  the  precise  character  of  its  source: 
(i)  whether  it  arises  from  ordinary  sense-expe¬ 
rience  or  from  planned  experiments;  and  (2) 
whether  it  is  based  upon  a  single  experiment  or 
upon  an  enumeration  of  instances.  There  re¬ 
mains  the  most  radical  distinction  in  type  of 
induction:  (3)  whether  it  is  intuitive  or  discur¬ 
sive — accomplished  by  an  act  of  immediate  in¬ 
sight  or  by  a  process  of  reasoning  from  premises 
to  a  conclusion. 

These  three  divisions  cross  one  another  to 
some  extent.  Descartes,  for  example,  seems  to 
regard  the  complete  enumeration  of  a  series  of 
connected  facts  as  a  way  of  drawing  a  general 
conclusion  about  their  connection.  That  he  has 
inductive  reasoning  rather  than  intuitive  in¬ 
duction  in  mind,  we  learn  from  his  statement 


that  “by  adequate  enumeration  or  induction  is 
meant  that  method  by  which  \vc  attain  surer 
conclusions  than  by  any  other  tyjx*  of  proof, 
with  the  exception  of  simple  intuition.” 

Pascal  seems  to  be  making  the  same  point 
when  he  says  that  “in  all  matters  whose  prtxjf 
is  by  experiment  and  not  by  demonstration,  no 
universal  assertion  can  lx*  made  except  by  the 
general  enumeration  of  all  the  parts  and  all  the 
different  cases.”  Bacon,  on  the  other  hand,  al¬ 
ways  thinks  of  induction  as  intuitive  gcnerali- 
zation,  and  therefore  maintains  that  “induction 
which  proceeds  by  simple  enumeration  is  puer¬ 
ile,  leads  to  uncertain  conclusions,  and  is  ex¬ 
posed  to  danger  from  one  contradictory  in¬ 
stance.” 

The  elaborate  procedure  which  Bacon  pro¬ 
poses  for  collating  instances  stresses,  not  com¬ 
pleteness  of  enumeration,  but  an  examination 
of  their  relation  to  one  another  and,  in  the  light 
thereof,  an  interpretation  of  their  significance. 
Mill’s  four  or  five  methods  of  induction  bear  a 
close  resemblance  to  Bacon’s  more  numerous 
tables  of  instances;  but  Mill’s  methods  are  at¬ 
tempts  to  formulate  the  rules  of  inference  for 
inductive  reasoning,  whereas  Bacon’s  rules  are 
rules,  not  of  reasoning,  but  of  tabulating  the 
particulars  from  which  intuitive  generalizations 
can  be  formed. 

On  Mill’s  view  of  induction,  it  may  be  ques¬ 
tioned  whether  induction  from  an  exhaustive 
enumeration  is  induction  at  all,  for  it  seems  to 
result  in  a  summary  of  the  facts  enumerated 
rather  than  a  generalization  from  particulars. 
Where  there  is  no  inductive  leap,  there  is  no 
induction.  Where  the  inductive  leap  does  occur, 
however,  it  seems  easier  to  understand  it  as  an 
intuitive  act — a  seeing  of  the  universal  in  the 
particular — rather  than  as  a  process  of  reason¬ 
ing.  Each  of  Mill’s  methods  requires  a  rule  of 
inference  which  is  itself  a  universal  proposition. 
His  critics  have  asked,  Whence  come  these  uni¬ 
versal  propositions  about  the  relations  of  cause 
and  effect  or  about  the  order  and  uniformity  of 
nature?  They  point  out  that  he  cannot  answer 
that  these  propositions  are  themselves  conclu¬ 
sions  of  inductive  reasoning  without  begging 
the  question. 

Such  criticism  of  inductive  reasoning  does 
not  seem  to  apply  to  Aristotle’s  conception  of 


810 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


it,  for  with  him  it  is  not,  as  with  Mill,  distinct 
in  form  from  the  syllogism.  It  is  simply  a  dis¬ 
tinct  type  of  syllogism,  which  consists  in  reason¬ 
ing  from  effect  to  cause  rather  than  from  cause 
to  effect.  Nor  does  the  observation  that  an  in¬ 
ductive  inference  cannot  be  more  than  proba¬ 
ble  apply  to  what  Aristotle  means  by  an  induc¬ 
tive  syllogism. 

The  certainty  or  probability  of  non-syllo- 
gistic  induction  depends  on  the  source  of  the 
inference — whether  it  derives  from  a  single 
specially  constructed  experiment  or  from  an 
enumeration  of  particular  instances,  with  or 
without  a  statistical  calculation  based  on  their 
frequency.  The  conception  of  a  perfect  experi¬ 
ment  implies  that  the  operation  of  a  universal 
law  can  be  exhibited  in  a  single  case.  It  is  almost 
as  if  the  controlling  aim  of  the  experiment  were 
to  make  the  universal  manifest  in  the  particular. 

Newton’s  experiments  on  reflection  and  re¬ 
fraction  seem  to  be  of  this  sort.  From  them 
certain  laws  of  optics  are  directly  induced,  even 
as,  according  to  Aristotle  and  Descartes,  the 
axioms  of  mathematics  or  metaphysics  can  be 
directly  induced  from  simple  experiences,  avail¬ 
able  to  a  child  or  familiar  to  all  men.  Yet  New¬ 
ton  does  not  think  that  the  inductive  establish¬ 
ment  of  such  laws  is  as  certain  as  demonstration. 

The  analytic  method,  he  writes,  “consists  in 
making  experiments  and  observations  and  in 
drawing  general  conclusions  from  them  by  in¬ 
duction.  And  although  the  arguing  from  exper¬ 
iments  and  observations  by  induction  be  no 
demonstration  of  general  conclusions;  yet  it  is 
the  best  way  of  arguing  which  the  nature  of 
things  admits  of,  and  may  be  looked  upon  as  so 
much  stronger,  by  how  much  the  induction  is 
more  general.  If  no  exception  occur  from  phe¬ 
nomena,  the  conclusion  may  be  pronounced 
generally;  but  if  at  any  time  afterwards  any  ex¬ 
ception  shall  occur  from  experiments,  it  may 
then  begin  to  be  pronounced  with  such  excep¬ 
tions  as  occur.” 

Because  it  must  depend  on  inductive  gener¬ 
alizations  from  experience  which,  in  his  view, 
can  never  be  certain,  Locke  doubts  that  physics 
can  ever  become  a  science.  “I  deny  not,”  he 
writes,  “that  a  man,  accustomed  to  rational  and 
regular  experiments,  shall  be  able  to  see  further 
into  the  nature  of  bodies  and  guess  righter  at 
their  yet  unknown  properties,  than  one  that  is  a 


stranger  to  them;  but  yet,  as  I  have  said,  this 
is  but  judgment  and  opinion,  not  knowledge 
and  certainty.  This  way  of  getting  and  improving 
our  knowledge  in  substances  only  by  experience 
and  history ,  which  is  all  that  the  weakness  of  our 
faculties  in  this  state  of  mediocrity  .  .  .  can  at¬ 
tain  to,  makes  me  suspect,”  Locke  concludes, 
“that  natural  philosophy  is  not  capable  of  being 
made  a  science .” 

Hume  offers  two  reasons  for  the  inconclusive¬ 
ness  and  uncertainty  which  he  thinks  qualify 
all  our  generalizations  or  inductions  from  ex¬ 
perience.  The  first  calls  attention  to  the  fact 
that,  unlike  mathematical  reasoning,  inferences 
from  experience  in  the  realm  of  physical  mat¬ 
ters  depend  on  the  number  of  cases  observed. 
“The  conclusions  which  [reason]  draws  from 
considering  one  circle,”  he  says,  “are  the  same  it 
would  form  upon  surveying  all  the  circles  in  the 
universe.  But  no  man,  having  seen  only  one 
body  move,  after  being  impelled  by  another, 
could  infer  that  every  other  body  will  move 
after  a  like  impulse.” 

The  principle  “which  determines  him  to 
form  such  a  conclusion”  is,  according  to  Hume, 
“Custom  or  Habit”;  and  precisely  because  in¬ 
ductive  generalization  is  an  effect  of  custom 
rather  than  of  reasoning  in  the  strict  sense,  the 
strength  of  the  induction — or  the  force  of  cus¬ 
tom — varies  with  the  number  of  cases  from 
which  it  arises.  “After  the  constant  conjunction 
of  two  objects — heat  and  flame,  for  instance, 
weight  and  solidity — we  are  determined  by  cus¬ 
tom  alone  to  expect  the  one  from  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  other.  This  hypothesis,”  Hume 
maintains,  “seems  .  .  .  the  only  one  which  ex¬ 
plains  the  difficulty,  why  we  draw,  from  a 
thousand  instances,  an  inference  which  we  are 
not  able  to  draw  from  one  instance,  that  is  in  no 
respect  different  from  them.  Reason  is  in¬ 
capable  of  any  such  variation.” 

Since  all  the  relevant  cases  can  never  be  ex¬ 
haustively  observed,  the  inference  from  a  cus¬ 
tomary  conjunction  must  always  remain  un¬ 
certain,  no  matter  how  high  a  probability  it 
derives  from  the  multiplication  of  like  in¬ 
stances.  To  this  first  point,  concerning  the  de¬ 
pendence  of  the  probability  of  generalizations 
from  experience  upon  the  frequency  of  the  ob¬ 
served  instances,  Hume  adds  a  second  point 
about  the  similarity  of  the  cases  under  obser- 


811 


Chapti  r  39:  INDUCTION 


vation.  Analogy,  he  says,  “leads  us  to  expect 
from  any  cause  the  same  events,  which  we  have 
observed  to  result  from  similar  causes.  Where 
the  causes  are  entirely  similar,  the  analogy  is 
perfect,  and  the  inference  drawn  from  it  is 
regarded  as  certain  and  conclusive.  .  .  .  Hut 
where  the  objects  have  not  so  exact  a  similarity, 
the  analogy  is  less  perfect,  and  the  inference  is 
less  conclusive;  though  still  it  has  some  force,  in 
proportion  to  the  degree  of  similarity  and  re¬ 
semblance.”  The  absence  of  perfect  similarity 
is  Hume’s  second  reason  for  the  inconclusive¬ 
ness  or  uncertainty  of  inductive  generalizations. 

The  contrary  supposition — that  one  case  can 
be  perfectly  representative  of  an  infinite  num¬ 
ber  of  similar  cases — may  explain  why  Aristotle 
seems  to  think  that  induction  is  able  to  produce 
the  primary  truths  or  principles  of  science  with 
a  certitude  which  gives  certainty  to  all  the  dem¬ 
onstrations  founded  on  these  axioms.  Another 
explanation  of  Aristotle’s  view  may  be  found 
in  his  distinction  between  scientific  and  dialec¬ 
tical  induction.  He  regards  the  former  as  based 
on  the  kind  of  common  experience  which,  un¬ 
like  even  the  best  experiment,  admits  of  no  ex¬ 
ceptions.  In  contrast,  dialectical  induction,  or 
the  still  weaker  form  of  induction  which  he 
calls  “rhetorical,”  is  based  on  an  enumeration 
of  cases  (which  may  not  be  complete)  or  upon  a 
single  example  (which  provides  no  safeguard 
against  possible  exceptions). 

In  its  dialectical  form,  the  inductive  argu¬ 
ment  proceeds  from  a  number  of  particulars 


taken  for  granted.  Aristotle  offers  this  example 
of  dialectical  induction;  “Supposing  the  skilled 
pilot  is  the  most  effective,  and  likewise  the 
skilled  charioteer,  then,  in  general,  the  skilled 
man  is  the  best  at  his  particular  task.”  In  its 
rhetorical  form,  no  more  than  a  single  example 
may  be  used,  as  when  the  orator  generalizes 
that  honesty  is  the  best  policy  from  the  story 
of  a  particular  individual  who  was  finally  re¬ 
warded  for  his  virtue. 

In  both  forms,  the  inductive  generalization 
is  at  best  probable;  and  it  is  more  or  less  proba¬ 
ble  according  to  the  soundness  of  the  supposi¬ 
tions  or  the  examples  from  which  it  originates 
—  to  be  tested  only  by  extending  the  enumera¬ 
tion  of  particulars.  But  if  an  induction  is  merely 
probable  in  the  first  place,  it  can  only  be  made 
more  probable,  it  can  never  be  made  certain, 
by  multiplying  cases  or  by  increasing  their  vari¬ 
ety. 

Aristotle’s  theory  of  dialectical  induction 
thus  seems  to  have  a  bearing  on  the  probability 
of  induction  from  limited  experiments  (or  from 
a  single  experiment  whose  perfection  is  not  as¬ 
sured)  and  of  induction  from  the  frequency  or 
variety  of  observed  instances.  The  other  point 
to  be  noted  is  that  Bacon’s  basic  rule  of  gradual 
ascent  from  particular  cases  through  less  gen¬ 
eral  to  more  general  propositions  seems  to  be 
relevant  to  dialectical  induction,  but  not,  on 
Aristotle’s  view,  to  that  kind  of  induction 
which  produces  the  axioms  or  principles  of 
science. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PACB 

1.  The  theory  of  induction:  generalization  from  particulars  812 

1  a.  Induction  and  intuition:  their  relation  to  reasoning  or  demonstration 
ib.  Inductive  reasoning:  the  issue  concerning  inductive  and  deductive  proof 

2.  The  conditions  or  sources  of  induction:  memory,  experience,  experiment  813 

3.  The  products  of  induction:  definitions,  axioms,  principles,  laws 

4.  The  use  of  induction  in  argument 

4 a.  Dialectical  induction:  securing  assumptions  for  disputation 

4^.  Rhetorical  induction:  inference  from  example  in  the  process  of  persuasion  814 

5.  The  role  of  induction  in  the  development  of  science:  the  methods  of  experimental  and 

enumerative  induction 


812 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras,  7:4 6. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  theory  of  induction:  generalization  from 
particulars 

la.  Induction  and  intuition:  their  relation  to 
reasoning  or  demonstration 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[72bi8-24]  99b-c;  ch  23  [84b3i-85ai]  115d- 
116a;  CH31  [87b39— 88ai 7]  120a-c;  ch  33  [88b 
30-8^1]  121b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [90^4-30] 
123b-c;  ch  19  136a-137a,c  /  Topics ,  bk  i, 
ch  12  148d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [i55b35~i56a7] 
211d-212a;  [i56bio-i8]  212c-d  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  1,  ch  9  [992b24~993ai]  511a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [io98a34~b3] 
343d;  bk  vi,  ch  3  388b-c;  ch  6  389d;  ch  8 
[1 142^3-31]  391b-c;  ch  11  392c-393b  esp 
[ii43a32 -b6]  392d-393a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  20 
[i393a25~26]  641a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  332a-335c 
esp  333d-334d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  43d-44c; 
59c;  61d;  96d-97a  /  Novum  Organum ,  105a- 
195d  esp  bk  1,  aph  11-26  107d-108d,  aph  69 
116a-b,  aph  105  128b-c,  bk  ii,  aph  i-io  137a- 
140d,  aph  15-16  149a-b,  aph  20-22  150d- 
153c,  aph  52  194c-195d 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  in  3b-5a  esp  4a-b;  vii, 
10c-12a;  ix  14d-15d;  xi,  17b-d  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  123 a- b;  167c- d 


31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  2 
388a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  1-5  171a-173a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div  2 
451b-c;  div  9  454c-455a;  sect  iv,  div  26 
460b-c 

lb.  Inductive  reasoning:  the  issue  concerning 
inductive  and  deductive  proof 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  23  90a-c 
/  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [7iai— i i]  97a; 
ch  3  [72b25~ 33]  99c;  ch  18  lllb-c;  bk  ii,  ch  7 
[92a34~bi]  126b/  Topics,  bki,  ch  18  [io8b7~i2] 
152d  /  Physics,  bk  viii,  ch  i  [252^3-25]  336a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  4  [i095a30-b8] 
340c;  ch  7  [i098a35~b3]  343d;  bk  vi,  ch  3 
388b-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i356b5~i8] 
596a-b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  fourth  day, 
252a-b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  280c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  42a-c; 
57b-58b;  61  d;  96d-97a  /  Novum  Organum 
105a-195d  esp  bk  1,  aph  11-26  107d-108d, 
aph  69  116a-b,  aph  103-106  127d-128c,  bk  ii, 
aph  10-52  140c-195d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  11,  2d-3a;  vii,  10c-12a;  xi 
17b-18b;  xn,  24a-b  /  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61d- 
62c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  167c-d 


2  to  4  a 


Chapter  39:  INDUCTION  813 


34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  hi,  rule  iv  271b  / 
Optics ,  bk  hi,  543a  b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  xii, 
sect  io  361  b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv,  mv 
26  460b-c;  sect  ix,  div  82  487b  c;  sect  xii, 
div  131-132  508d-509d  passim 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  45b  46a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  445a-447b  passim; 

475b,d  [fn  1]  passim 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  659a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  690b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  674a-675b  esp  675b 

2.  The  conditions  or  sources  of  induction: 
memory,  experience,  experiment 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  30  [46* 
18-28]  64a;  bk  ii,  cii  23  [68bi 5— 29]  90b  c  / 
Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [7iai— 8]  97a; 
ch  3  [72b25~33]  99c;  ch  18  111  b-c;  ch  31 
[87b39~ 88ar 7]  120a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [90*24-30] 
123b-c;  ch  7  [92^34^1  ]  126b;  cii  19  [99b2o- 
ioob5]  136a-d  /  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  12  148d;  ch 
18  [io8b7~i2]  152d;  bk  ii,  ch  7  [113*31-33] 
158d;  bk  viii,  ch  1  [i55b35-i56*7]  211d-212a; 
[i56bio— 18]  212c  d  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a-b; 
ch  8  [191*24-34]  267a-b  /  Heavens ,  bk  iii,  cii 
7  [306*6-18]  397b-c  /  Generation  and  Corrup¬ 
tion ,  bk  1,  ch  2  [316*5-8]  411c  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  1,  ch  1  499a-500b;  ch  9  [992^4-993*1  ] 
511a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  4  [i095*30-b8] 
340c;  ch  7  [i098*34-b8]  343d-344a;  bk  vi, 
ch  8  [1142*12-19]  391b;  cii  11  [ii43*32-b6] 
392d-393a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  cii  20  [1393*22- 
1394*8]  640d-641d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  1,  ans  12b-13c 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  pref,  la-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  third  day, 
200a-b;  207d-208a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  267b,d-268d; 
285c-d  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  322d-323d; 
324c-d  /  Otf  Animal  Generation ,  331b-335c; 
383d;  473a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  16a;  34b; 
57b-d;  59c  /  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  17 
108a;  aph  19  108b;  aph  22  108c;  aph  25  108d; 
aph  69  116a-b;  aph  104-105  128a-c;  bk  ii, 
aph  11-15  140d-149a 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11,  2d-3a;  vn,  10c-12a  / 
Discourse ,  part  vi,  61d-62c  /  Objections  and 
Replies ,  167c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethicsy  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  1-2 
387b-388b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  358a-b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  rule  hi— iv  270  b- 
271b  /  Optics ,  bk  iii,  543a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  107 
433d -43 4a 

35  Hume:  Human  Under standingy  sect  iii,  div 
19,  458a 


42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a  13d;  45b  46a;  66d  93c 
/  Judgement,  562  d  563  b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  659a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 
361a  b 

54  Freud:  Instincts ,  412a 

3.  The  products  of  induction:  definitions,  ax¬ 

ioms,  principles,  laws 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  24  90a  c 
/  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  4  [72b25~4o]  99c; 
cii  18  lllb-c;  cii  41  [87b 49-88*17]  120a-c;  bk 
ii,  ch  2  [90*24-30]  123b  c;  ch  7  [92*44-bi] 
126b;  cii  19  136a~137a,c  /  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  12 
148d;  ch  18  [  1  o8b7— 1 2 ]  152d;  bk  viii,  ch  i 
[I55b35~1 56“7l  211d  212a;  [1 56bio- 18]  2l2c-d 
/  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [316* 
5-8]  411c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  4  [1095*40  ^8] 
340c;  ch  7  [1098*44— b3]  343d;  bk  vi,  cii  3 
[1  i39b25— 34]  388c;  ch  6  389d;  ch  ii  [1143*25- 
bi 3]  392d  393a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  79, 
a  12,  ans  425c-426b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  pref,  la-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day, 
200a~b;  207d-208a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  333d-335a 
esp  334c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  34b;  57b-d; 
96d  97a  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  17-25 
108a-d;  aph  103-106  127d-128c;  bk  ii,  aph 
1— 10  137a-140d 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  123a  b; 
167c-d 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  rule  iii-iv  270b- 
271b  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  543a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  25  120c-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  107 
433d-434a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  2 
451b-c;  div  9  454c-455a;  sect  iv,  div  26 
460bc 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-13d;  66d  93c;  110a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  475b, d  [fn  1] 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 
361a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  690b 

54  Freud:  Instincts ,  412a-b 

4.  The  use  of  induction  in  argument 

4a.  Dialectical  induction:  securing  assump¬ 
tions  for  disputation 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  12  148d:  ch  18 
[io8b7-i2]  152d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1 55bi6-i 56*7] 
211b-212a;  [1 56bio— 1 8]  212c-d;  ch  2  [157*19- 
38]  213b-d;  ch  8  [i6o*35-bi]  217d;  ch  14  [164“ 
12-17]  222d 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1356*36^26] 
596a  b 


4b  to  5 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


814 

(4.  The  use  of  induction  in  argument.) 

4b,  Rhetorical  induction:  inference  from  exam¬ 
ple  in  the  process  of  persuasion 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  24  90c- 
91a  /  Topics ,  bk  viii,  ch  1  [i56bio-i8]  212c-d; 
ch  8  [i6oa35-bi]  21 7d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  ii, 
ch  3  [995a6-8]  513c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1356^6- 
J35^a3]  596a-597d;  ch  9  [i368a29— 3 1 J  611b-c; 
bk  ii,  ch  20  640d-641d;  ch  23  [i398a32-bi8] 
646d-647a;  ch  25  [1403^-9]  652d;  bk  hi, 
ch  17  [I4i7b35-i4i8a3]  672b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  58c-59a 

42  Kant:  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
376c-d 

5.  The  role  of  induction  in  the  development  of 
science:  the  methods  of  experimental 
and  enumerative  induction 

8  Aristotle  :  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  23  90a-c 
/  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [72^5-33]  99c; 
ch  18  lllb-c;  bk  11,  ch  19  136a-137a,c  / 
Physics,  bk  1,  ch  2  [185^3-14]  259d;  bk  v, 
ch  1  [224b28-30]  304d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [252^3- 
b5]  336a- b  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  1, 
ch  2  [3 1 6a5~ 14]  411c-d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i, 
ch  9  [992b30~993ai]  511b;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [i025b 
1— 16]  547b;  bk  xi,  ch  7  [1064^-9]  592b; 
bk  xiii,  ch  4  [io78b28-3o]  610b 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  v, 
ch  8  [788bio-2i]  330c  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  4 
[io95a3°— b8]  340c;  ch  7  [io98a34-b3]  343d; 
bk  vi,  ch  3  388b-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  hi,  ch  1-2 
199a-200a  esp  199c-d 


28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  pref,  la-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  third  day, 
200a-b;  207d-208a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  280c;  285c-d 
/  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  324c-d  /  On  Ani¬ 
mal  Generation,  332a-335c  esp  334c-d;  383d; 
473a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  16a;  34b; 
42a-c;  56b-58c;  96d-97a  /  Novum  Organum 
105a-195d  esp  bk  i,  aph  11-26  107d-108d, 
aph  69  116a-b,  aph  104-106  128a-c,  bk  ii, 
aph  1-10  137a-140d,  aph  15-16  149a-b,  aph 
20-21  150d-153b,  aph  52  194c-195d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  11,  2d-3a;  vn  10b-12a  / 
Discourse,  part  vi,  61d-62c  /  Objections  and 
Replies,  167c-d 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  358a-b  /  Arithmetical  Tri¬ 
angle,  451b-452a;  458b-459b;  464a-466a 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  rule  iii-iv  270b- 
271b;  general  schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics, 
bk  iii,  543a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  107 
433d-434a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  9 
454c-455a;  sect  iii,  div  19,  458a;  sect  iv, 
div  26  460b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-13d;  45b-46a;  72c- 
85d  esp  72c-74b,  82a-b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  387a-b  /  Judgement ,  562d-563b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445d-446b;  475b, d 
[fm] 

45  Faraday  :  Researches  in  Electricity,  659a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 
690b 

53  Iames:  Psychology ,  385a-b;  677b;  862a-865a 

54  Freud:  Instincts ,  412a-b 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  discussions  of  induction  as  an  intuitive  act  of  generalization,  see  Judgment  8a;  Knowl¬ 
edge  6c(2);  Principle  3a(i),  3a(3)~3b;  Reasoning  5b(i);  Science  5d. 

Other  treatments  of  inductive  reasoning  and  its  relation  to  deductive  reasoning,  see  Reason¬ 
ing  4c,  6c;  Science  5d;  and  for  parallel  distinctions  in  modes  of  argument,  see  Experi¬ 
ence  2d;  Reasoning  5^3),  5^5). 

Discussions  dealing  with  the  sources  or  conditions  of  induction,  generalization,  or  abstrac¬ 
tion,  see  Experience  2b;  Idea  2g;  Memory  and  Imagination  3c,  6c(i);  Sense  5b; 
Universal  and  Particular  4c. 

Induction  as  the  source  of  principles,  axioms,  or  scientific  laws,  see  Principle  3b;  Science 
4d;  Universal  and  Particular  4f. 

Other  treatments  of  dialectical  and  rhetorical  induction,  see  Dialectic  2b,  3b;  Rhetoric 
4c(i);  and  for  their  contrast  with  dialectical  and  rhetorical  reasoning,  see  Dialectic  3c; 
Reasoning  5c~5d;  Rhetoric  4c(2). 

The  role  of  induction  in  the  experimental  sciences,  see  Experience  5a;  Reasoning  6c; 
Science  4d,  5d. 


Chapter  39:  INDUCTION 


815 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo^s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  arc  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic ,  bk  iii-iv 

II. 

Philodemus.  On  Methods  of  Inference 
John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philo sophicus  Tho - 
misticus ,  Ars  Logica ,  part  i,  bk  iii,  ch  2;  q  8 

(2);  PART  II,  Q  5 

Whately.  Elements  of  Logic ,  bk  iv,  ch  i 
Gratry.  Logic ,  PART  IV 

Whewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences , 

VOL  II,  BK  XI,  CH  1-6;  BK  XIII 

- .  On  the  Philosophy  of  Discovery 

SlGWART.  Logic ,  PART  III,  CH  5 

Jevons.  The  Principles  of  Science ,  ch  7,  1 1 ;  bk  iv,  esp 
ch  22 

Lotze.  Logic ,  bk  1,  ch  3  (a) 

Bradley.  The  Principles  of  Logic,  bk  ii,  part  11,  ch  3 
C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers ,  vol  11,  par  619-644, 
669-693,  755-791 

Venn.  Principles  of  Empirical  or  Inductive  Logic , 
ch  5-15,  17,  24 


Pearson.  The  Grammar  of  Science ,  ch  3 
Bosanquet.  Logic ,  vol  ii,  ch  3-5 

- .  Science  and  Philosophy ,  4 

J.  C.  Wilson.  Statement  and  Inference ,  part  iv 
Poincare.  Science  and  Method ,  bk  ii,  ch  ^-4 
Cassirer.  Substance  and  Function ,  part  ii,  ch  5 
N.  R.  Campbell.  Physics;  the  Elements ,  ch  4 
W.  E.  Johnson.  Logic ,  part  ii,  ch  8—1 1 ;  part  iii, 
ch  2 

J.  M.  Keynes.  A  Treatise  on  Probability ,  part 
iii 

Nicod.  “The  Logical  Problem  of  Induction,”  in 
Foundations  of  Geometry  and  Induction 
Mises.  Probability ,  Statistics ,  and  Truth 
M.  R.  Cohen.  Reason  and  Nature ,  bk  i,  ch  3(3) 
Jeffreys.  Scientific  Inference 
Meyerson.  Du  cheminement  de  la  pensee 
Dewey.  Logic ,  the  Theory  of  Inquiry ,  ch  21 
B.  Russell.  The  Problems  of  Philosophy,  ch  6 
- .  Introduction  to  Mathematical  Philosophy, 

CH  3 

- .  Human  Knowledge ,  Its  Scope  and  Limits , 

PART  V,  CH  7;  PART  VI,  CH  2~3 


Chapter  40:  INFINITY 


1 

c 

I 


INTRODUCTION 


ONE  of  the  persistent  questions  concerning 
infinity  is  whether  we  can  know  or  com¬ 
prehend  it.  Another  is  whether  the  infinite 
exists,  and  if  so,  to  what  kind  of  thing  infinity 
belongs.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the 
discussion  of  infinity  often  borders  on  the  un¬ 
intelligible. 

The  idea  of  infinity,  like  the  idea  of  eternity, 
lacks  the  support  of  the  imagination  or  of  sense- 
experience.  The  fact  that  the  infinite  cannot  be 
perceived  or  imagined  seems  sufficient  to  lead 
Hobbes  and  Berkeley  to  deny  its  reality.  “What¬ 
soever  we  imagine  is  finite ,”  writes  Hobbes. 
“Therefore  there  is  no  idea,  or  conception  of 
anything  we  call  infinite.  .  .  .  When  we  say  any¬ 
thing  is  infinite,  we  signify  only  that  we  are  not 
able  to  conceive  the  ends  and  bounds  of  the 
thing  named,  having  no  conception  of  the 
thing,  but  of  our  own  inability.” 

On  similar  grounds  Berkeley  rejects  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  infinite  division.  “If  I  cannot  per¬ 
ceive  innumerable  parts  in  any  infinite  ex¬ 
tension,”  he  writes,  “it  is  certain  that  they  are 
not  contained  in  it:  but  it  is  evident,  that  I 
cannot  distinguish  innumerable  parts  in  any 
particular  line,  surface,  or  solid,  which  I  either 
perceive  by  sense,  or  figure  to  myself  in  my 
mind;  wherefore  I  conclude  that  they  are  not 
contained  in  it.” 

But  for  most  of  the  great  writers  on  the  sub¬ 
ject,  the  impossibility  of  representing  infinity 
and  eternity  to  the  imagination  does  not  render 
them  inconceivable  or  meaningless.  Yet  it  does 
account  for  the  difficulty  of  grasping  their 
meaning,  a  difficulty  further  increased  by  the 
fact  that,  whatever  their  meaning,  infinity  and 
eternity  are  indefinable.  To  define  the  infinite 
would  be  to  limit— even  in  thought— the  un¬ 
limited. 

The  notion  of  infinity  involves  greater  per¬ 
plexities  than  that  of  eternity.  The  meaning  of 


eternity  is  weighted  with  the  mystery  of  God, 
the  world,  and  time.  All  these  affect  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  infinity;  but  for  the  infinite  there  are 
also  the  mysteries  of  number  and  of  space,  of 
matter  and  motion.  In  the  sphere  of  quantity, 
or  of  things  subject  to  quantity,  infinity  is  itself 
the  source  of  mystery,  or  at  least  the  root  of 
difficulty  in  analysis.  It  is  the  central  term  in 
the  discussion  of  the  continuous  and  the  indi¬ 
visible,  the  nature  of  series  and  of  limits. 

As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Eternity, 
that  idea  in  each  of  its  applications  seems  to 
have  one  or  the  other  of  two  meanings — (i) 
the  meaning  in  which  it  signifies  infinite  time, 
time  without  beginning  or  end,  and  (2)  the 
meaning  in  which  it  signifies  the  timelessness 
or  immutability  of  being.  Both  meanings  are 
negative,  so  far  as  our  understanding  is  con¬ 
cerned.  Yet  what  is  signified  by  the  second  is 
in  itself  something  positive,  at  least  in  the 
opinion  of  those  who  think  that  to  be  exempt 
from  change  entails  having  every  perfection 
or  being  lacking  in  nothing. 

This  split  in  meaning  also  occurs  in  the  idea 
of  infinity.  As  applied  to  being,  the  term  in- 
finite  signifies  something  positive,  even  though 
our  understanding  of  what  is  signified  remains 
negative  or,  at  best,  analogical.  An  infinite  be¬ 
ing  is  one  which  lacks  no  attribute  that  can 
belong  to  a  being.  This  is  the  positive  condition 
of  absolute  perfection.  The  infinite  here  still 
means  the  unlimited,  but  that  which  is  un¬ 
limited  in  being  has  no  defect.  To  lack  defi¬ 
ciencies  is  to  be  perfect. 

It  is  in  this  sense  that  Spinoza  defines  God 
as  “Being  absolutely  infinite,  that  is  to  say, 
substance  consisting  of  infinite  attributes,  each 
one  of  which  expresses  eternal  and  infinite  es¬ 
sence.”  Like  Spinoza,  Aquinas  maintains  that 
“besides  God  nothing  can  be  infinite.”  But  he 


Chapter  40:  INFINITY  817 


distinguishes  the  absolute  or  positive  sense  in 
which  God  alone  is  infinite  from  the  sense  of 
the  word  in  which  it  can  be  said  that  “tilings 
other  than  God  can  be  relatively  infinite,  but 
not  absolutely  infinite.”  I  his  other  meaning, 
according  to  Aquinas,  is  not  only  relative  but 
negative,  for  it  connotes  “something  imper¬ 
fect.”  It  signifies  indeterminacy  or  lack  of  per¬ 
fection  in  being. 

What  Aquinas  calls  the  relative  or  potential 
infinite,  he  attributes  to  matter  and  to  quan¬ 
tities —  to  bodies,  to  the  magnitudes  of  space 
and  time,  and  to  number.  This  sense  of  “in¬ 
finite”  corresponds  to  that  meaning  of  “eter¬ 
nal,”  according  to  which  time  consists  of  an 
endless  series  of  moments,  each  having  a  pre¬ 
decessor,  each  a  successor,  no  matter  how  far 
one  counts  them  back  into  the  past  or  ahead 
into  the  future. 

But  in  the  field  of  quantities  other  than  time, 
the  meanings  of  infinite  and  eternal  part  com¬ 
pany.  There  is,  of  course,  some  parallelism  be¬ 
tween  infinite  space  and  infinite  time,  insofar 
as  an  infinite  extension  is  one  which  does  not 
begin  at  any  point  or  end  at  any;  but  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  space  and  number  leads  to  an  as¬ 
pect  of  infinity  which  has  no  parallel  in  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  eternity. 

“In  sizes  or  numbers,”  Pascal  writes,  “nature 
has  set  before  man  two  marvelous  infinities.  .  .  . 
For,  from  the  fact  that  they  can  always  be  in¬ 
creased,  it  follows  absolutely  that  they  can  al¬ 
ways  be  decreased.  ...  If  we  can  multiply  a 
number  up  to  1 00,000  times,  say,  we  can  also 
take  a  hundred  thousandth  part  of  it  by  di¬ 
viding  it  by  the  same  number  we  multiply  it 
with,  and  thus  every  term  of  increase  will  be¬ 
come  a  term  of  division  by  changing  the  in¬ 
teger  into  a  fraction.  So  that  infinite  increase 
includes  necessarily  infinite  division.”  As  end¬ 
less  addition  produces  the  infinitely  large,  so 
endless  division  produces  the  infinitesimal  or 
the  infinitely  small. 

A  trillion  trillion  is  a  finite  number,  because 
the  addition  of  a  single  unit  creates  a  larger 
number.  The  fact  that  the  addition  of  another 
unit  produces  a  different  number  indicates  that 
a  trillion  trillion  has  a  determinate  size,  which 
is  the  same  as  saying  that  it  is  a  finite  number. 
An  infinite  number  cannot  be  increased  by  ad¬ 
dition,  for  it  is  constituted — in  thought  at 


least — as  a  number  larger  than  the  sum  of 
any  two  finite  numbers;  which  is  another 
way  of  saying  that  it  is  approached  by  carrying 
on  the  process  of  addition  endlessly.  The  size 
of  an  infinite  number  is  therefore  indetermi¬ 
nate. 

What  Galileo  points  out  about  two  infinite 
quantities  seems  to  hold  for  an  infinite  and  a 
finite  quantity.  He  asks  us  to  consider  the 
totality  of  all  integers  (which  is  infinite)  and 
the  totality  of  their  squares  (which  is  also  in¬ 
finite).  On  the  one  hand,  there  appear  to  Ik-  as 
many  squares  as  there  are  integers;  on  the 
other  hand,  the  totality  of  integers  includes  all 
the  squares.  Precisely  because  “the  number  of 
squares  is  not  less  than  the  totality  of  all  num¬ 
bers,  nor  the  latter  greater  than  the  former,” 
Galileo  insists  that  “the  attributes  ‘equal,’ 
‘greater,’  and  ‘less’  are  not  applicable  to  in¬ 
finite,  but  only  to  finite  quantities.”  Nor  docs 
the  sense  in  which  one  finite  quantity  can  be 
greater  or  less  than  another— that  is,  by  a  de¬ 
terminate  difference  between  them — apply  in 
the  comparison  of  a  finite  and  an  infinite  quan¬ 
tity.  The  latter,  being  indeterminately  large, 
is  indeterminately  larger  than  any  finite  quan¬ 
tity. 

These  remarks  apply  to  the  infinitely  small 
as  well.  The  infinitesimal  is  immeasurably  small 
or  indeterminately  less  than  any  finite  fraction, 
no  matter  how  small,  because  its  own  size  is 
indeterminate.  The  finite  fraction,  itself  a 
product  of  division,  can  be  divided  again,  but 
if  an  infinitesimal  quantity  were  capable  of 
further  division,  it  would  permit  a  smaller, 
and  since  that  smaller  quantity  would  be  a 
determinate  fraction  of  itself,  the  infinitesimal 
would  have  to  be  determinate  in  size.  Since  that 
is  not  so,  the  infinitesimal  must  be  conceived 
as  the  indivisible  or  as  the  limit  approached  by 
carrying  on  division  endlessly. 

“Because  the  hypothesis  of  indivisibles  seems 
somewhat  harsh,”  Newton  proposes  an  analysis 
in  terms  of  what  he  calls  “nascent  and  evanes¬ 
cent  quantities,”  or  quantities  just  beginning 
to  be  more  than  nothing  or  just  at  the  point 
at  which  they  vanish  into  nothing.  “As  there 
is  a  limit  which  the  velocity  at  the  end  of  a 
motion  may  attain,  but  not  exceed  .  .  .  there 
is  a  like  limit  in  all  quantities  and  proportions 
that  begin  or  cease  to  be.”  Newton  warns  his 


818 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


reader,  therefore,  that  if  he  “should  happen  to 
mention  quantities  as  least,  or  evanescent,  or 
ultimate, ”  the  reader  is  “not  to  suppose  that 
quantities  of  any  determinate  magnitude  are 
meant,  but  such  as  are  conceived  to  be  always 
diminished  without  end.” 

Later,  speaking  of  quantities  which  are  “var¬ 
iable  and  indetermined,  and  increasing  or  de¬ 
creasing,  as  it  were,  by  a  continual  motion  or 
flux,”  he  adds:  “Take  care  not  to  look  upon  fi¬ 
nite  quantities  as  such.”  The  method  of  fluxions 
provides  an  infinitesimal  calculus  on  the  hy¬ 
pothesis  of  limits  rather  than  of  indivisibles. 

Through  all  these  conceptions  of  infinity- 
metaphysical,  mathematical,  and  physical — 
run  the  paired  notions  of  the  unlimited  and  of 
limits  approached  but  not  attained.  The  finite 
is  neither  unlimited  nor  does  it  insensibly  ap¬ 
proach  a  limit.  There  are  also  the  opposite  no¬ 
tions  of  the  perfect  and  the  indeterminate. 
The  finite  is  neither,  for  it  is  determinate  with¬ 
out  being  a  totality  or  complete. 

Though  they  have  a  common  thread  of 
meaning,  and  though  each  raises  similar  dif¬ 
ficulties  for  the  understanding,  the  conception 
of  infinity  in  being  or  power,  and  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  infinite  (or  infinitesimal)  quantity  re¬ 
quire  separate  consideration.  The  same  ques¬ 
tions  may  be  asked  of  each,  questions  about  the 
existence  of  the  infinite  and  about  our  knowl¬ 
edge  of  it,  but  the  same  answers  will  not  be  giv¬ 
en  in  each  case.  There  are  those  who  deny  the 
existence  of  an  actually  infinite  body  or  an 
actually  infinite  number,  yet  affirm  the  infinite 
existence  of  God.  There  are  those  who  declare 
the  infinity  of  matter  to  be  intrinsically  unin¬ 
telligible,  but  maintain  that  God,  Who  is  in¬ 
finite,  is  intrinsically  the  most  intelligible  ob¬ 
ject.  They  add,  of  course,  that  the  infinite  being 
of  God  cannot  be  comprehended  by  our  finite 
intellects. 

On  each  of  these  points,  an  opposite  view 
has  been  taken,  but  the  dispute  concerning  the 
infinity  of  God  involves  issues  other  than  those 
which  occur  in  the  controversy  over  the  infinite 
divisibility  of  matter  or  the  infinity  of  space 
and  time.  It  seems  advisable,  therefore,  to  deal 
separately  with  the  problems  of  infinity  as  they 
arise  with  respect  to  different  objects  or  occur 
in  different  subject  matters. 


The  conception  of  God,  in  the  words  of 
Anselm,  as  a  being  “than  which  a  greater  can¬ 
not  be  conceived” — or,  in  the  words  of  Kant, 
as  an  ens  realissimum *  a  most  real  being — ex¬ 
presses  the  plenitude  of  the  divine  nature  and 
existence.  The  mediaeval  thesis,  defended  by 
Descartes,  that  God’s  essence  and  existence 
are  identical,  implies  that  neither  is  contracted 
or  determined  by  the  other.  The  still  earlier 
notion  of  Aristotle,  repeated  by  Aquinas,  that 
God  is  pure  actuality,  carries  with  it  the  at¬ 
tributes  of  completeness  or  perfection,  which 
are  the  positive  aspects  of  immutability  or  in¬ 
capacity  for  change.  Spinoza’s  definition  of  sub¬ 
stance  as  that  which  exists,  not  only  in  itself, 
but  through  itself  and  by  its  very  nature,  en¬ 
tails  the  autonomy  or  utter  independence  of 
the  divine  being. 

These  are  so  many  different  ways  of  stating 
that  God  is  an  infinite  being.  Both  Aquinas 
and  Spinoza  make  infinity  the  basis  for  proving 
that  there  can  be  only  one  God.  When  Spinoza 
argues  that  “a  plurality  of  substances  possessing 
the  same  nature  is  absurd,”  he  has  in  mind  the 
identification  of  infinite  substance  with  God. 
“If  many  gods  existed,”  Aquinas  writes,  “they 
would  necessarily  differ  from  each  other.  Some¬ 
thing  would  therefore  belong  to  one,  which  did 
not  belong  to  another.  And  if  this  were  a  priva¬ 
tion,  one  of  them  would  not  be  absolutely  per¬ 
fect;  but  if  it  were  a  perfection,  one  of  them 
would  be  without  it.  So  it  is  impossible  for 
many  gods  to  exist” — that  is,  of  course,  if 
infinity  is  a  property  of  the  divine  nature. 
Aquinas  makes  this  condition  clear  when  he 
goes  on  to  say  that  “the  ancient  philosophers, 
constrained  as  it  were  by  the  truth,  when  they 
asserted  an  infinite  principle,  asserted  likewise 
that  there  was  only  one  such  principle.” 

But  while  it  is  impossible  for  there  to  be  two 
infinities  of  being,  it  is  not  impossible  for  there 
to  be  two,  or  more,  infinite  quantities.  One 
explanation  of  this  difference  seems  to  be  the 
actuality  or  existence  of  an  infinite  being,  in 
contrast  to  the  conceptual  character  of  the  in¬ 
finite  objects  of  mathematics,  which  are  some¬ 
times  called  “potential  infinites”  because  they 
are  conceived  as  in  an  endless  process  of  be¬ 
coming,  or  as  approaching  a  limit  that  is  never 
reached. 

When  the  physical  existence  of  infinite  quan- 


Chapter  40: 

tides  is  asserted,  as,  for  example,  a  universe  of 
infinite  extent  or  an  infinite  number  of  atoms, 
the  uniqueness  of  these  actual  totalities  seems 
to  follow.  Two  infinite  worlds  cannot  co-exist, 
though  the  one  world  can  be  infinite  in  several 
distinct  respects— in  space  or  duration,  or  in 
the  number  of  its  constituents— even  as  the 
infinity  of  God,  according  to  Spinoza,  involves 
“infinite  attributes,  each  one  of  which  expresses 
eternal  and  infinite  essence.” 

Spinoza’s  argument  against  two  actual  in¬ 
finities  seems  to  find  confirmation  in  the  posi¬ 
tion  taken  by  Aquinas  that  God’s  omnipotence 
does  not  include  the  power  to  create  an  infinite 
world.  God’s  infinity,  as  we  have  already  noted, 
follows  from  the  identity  of  God’s  essence  and 
existence.  Since  a  created  being  has  existence 
added  to  its  essence,  Aquinas  asserts  that  “it  is 

I  against  the  nature  of  a  created  thing  to  be  ab¬ 
solutely  infinite.  Therefore,”  he  continues,  “as 
God,  although  He  has  infinite  power,  cannot 
make  a  thing  to  be  not  made  (for  this  would 
imply  that  two  contradictories  are  true  at  the 
same  time),  so  likewise  He  cannot  make  any- 
,  thing  to  be  absolutely  infinite.” 

On  this  view,  an  infinite  world  cannot  co¬ 
exist  with  an  infinite  God,  if,  in  their  separate 
existence,  one  is  dependent  on  the  other,  as 
creature  upon  creator.  The  infinity  of  the 
world  or  of  nature,  in  Spinoza’s  conception, 
is  not  separate  from  the  infinity  of  God,  but 
consists  in  the  infinity  of  two  of  God’s  attri¬ 
butes — extension  and  thought. 

In  our  time  there  has  arisen  the  conception 
of  a  finite  God — a  God  who,  while  the  most 
perfect  being,  yet  is  not  without  capacity  for 
growth  or  change,  a  God  who  is  eternal  without 
being  immutable.  This  conception,  which  in 
the  light  of  traditional  theology  appears  to  be 
as  self-contradictory  as  round  square ,  has  arisen 
in  response  to  the  difficulties  certain  critics 
have  found  in  the  traditional  doctrine  of  an 
infinite  being.  They  point  to  the  difficulty  of 
understanding  how  finite  beings  can  exist  sep¬ 
arate  from,  yet  in  addition  to,  an  infinite  being; 
they  also  cite  difficulties  in  the  notions  of  in¬ 
finite  knowledge,  infinite  power,  and  infinite 
goodness. 

The  infinity  of  the  divine  omniscience  ex¬ 
tends  to  the  possible  as  well  as  to  the  actual. 
But  the  possible  includes  things  which  are  in- 


IN  FI  NT  IT  819 

compatible  with  one  another,  things  which,  in 
the  language  of  Leibnitz,  are  not  compossiblc. 
The  incompossible  would  thus  seem  to  be  em¬ 
braced  in  the  infinite  scope  of  divine  thought 
or  knowledge.  In  the  view  of  one  theologian, 
Nicolas  of  Cusa,  the  mystery  of  God’s  infinity 
is  best  expressed  by  affirming  that  in  God  all 
contradictions  arc  somehow  reconciled. 

The  infinity  of  God’s  power,  or  the  divine 
omnipotence,  also  raises  questions  about  the 
possible  and  the  impossible.  Is  nothing  im¬ 
possible  to  God  or  must  it  be  said  that  there  are 
certain  things  which  not  even  God  can  do,  such 
as  reverse  the  order  of  time  or  create  a  world 
which  shall  be  as  infinite  and  perfect  as  himself? 
In  the  assertion  that  God  cannot  do  the  im¬ 
possible,  Aquinas  sees  no  limitation  on  God’s 
power.  The  impossible,  he  writes,  does  not 
“come  under  the  divine  omnipotence,  not  be¬ 
cause  of  any  defect  in  the  power  of  God,  but 
because  it  has  not  the  nature  of  a  feasible  or 
possible  thing.”  For  this  reason,  he  claims,  “it 
is  better  to  say  that  such  things  cannot  be  done, 
than  that  God  cannot  do  them.”  The  inability 
to  do  the  undoable  constitutes  no  violation  of 
infinite  powder,  even  as  the  lack  of  nothing  docs 
not  deprive  infinite  being  of  anything. 

The  infinite  goodness  of  God  is  sometimes 
set  against  the  fact  of  evil,  or  the  existence  of 
imperfections,  in  the  created  world.  This  aspect 
of  the  problem  of  evil,  like  that  which  con¬ 
cerns  man’s  freedom  to  obey  or  disobey  the 
divine  will,  cannot  be  separated  from  the  fun¬ 
damental  mystery  of  God’s  infinity — in  power 
and  know  ledge  as  well  as  in  goodness.  The  prob¬ 
lem  is  considered  in  the  chapter  on  Good  and 
Evil.  The  point  there  mentioned,  that  evil  is 
essentially  non-being  or  deprivation  of  being, 
leads  to  one  solution  of  the  problem.  It  accepts 
the  finitude,  and  consequently  the  imperfec¬ 
tion,  of  creatures  as  a  necessary  consequence  of 
God’s  infinity.  The  best  of  all  possible  worlds 
cannot  be  infinitely  good. 

To  man  alone,  among  all  admittedly  finite 
things,  has  infinity  been  attributed  and  even 
made  a  distinctive  mark  of  his  nature.  Docs 
this  introduce  a  new  meaning  of  infinity,  nei¬ 
ther  quantitative  nor  divine? 

It  has  seldom  if  ever  been  questioned  that 
man  is  finite  in  being  and  power.  The  limits  of 


820 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


human  capacity  for  knowledge  or  achievement 
are  a  perennial  theme  in  man’s  study  of  man. 
Yet  it  is  precisely  with  regard  to  capacity  that 
certain  writers  have  intimated  man’s  infinity. 

Pascal,  for  example,  finds  the  apparent  con¬ 
tradictions  in  human  nature  intelligible  only 
when  man  is  understood  as  yearning  for  or  im¬ 
pelled  toward  the  infinite.  “We  burn  with  de¬ 
sire,”  he  says,  “to  find  solid  ground  and  an  ul¬ 
timate  sure  foundation  whereon  to  build  a 
tower  reaching  to  the  Infinite.  But  our  whole 
groundwork  cracks  and  the  earth  opens  to 
abysses.”  In  this  fact  lies  both  the  grandeur 
and  the  misery  of  man.  He  aspires  to  the  in¬ 
finite,  yet  he  is  a  finite  being  dissatisfied  with 
his  own  finitude  and  frustrated  by  it. 

It  is  sometimes  said  that  the  touch  of  infinity 
in  man — with  the  suggestion  that  it  is  a  touch 
of  madness — consists  in  his  wanting  to  be  God. 
Those  who  regard  such  desire  as  abnormal  or 
perverse  interpret  it  as  a  misdirection  of  man’s 
natural  desire  to  know  God  face  to  face  and  to 
be  filled  with  the  love  of  God  in  the  divine 
presence.  But,  according  to  the  theory  of  nat¬ 
ural  desire,  the  tendency  of  each  nature  is 
somehow  proportionate  to  its  capacity.  If  man’s 
restless  search  for  knowledge  and  happiness  can 
be  quieted  only  by  the  possession  of  the  infinite 
truth  and  goodness  which  is  God,  then  man’s 
intellect  and  will  must  somehow  be  as  infinite  in 
nature  as  they  are  in  tendency.  Yet  that  is  not 
an  unqualified  infinity,  for  the  same  theologians 
who  teach  that  man  naturally  seeks  God  also 
hold  that  man’s  finite  intellect  cannot  compre¬ 
hend  the  infinite  being  of  God  as  God  knows 
Himself.  Nor  do  they  think  that  man’s  capacity 
for  knowing  and  loving  God  can  be  fulfilled 
except  in  the  beatific  vision,  which  is  a  super¬ 
natural  gift  rather  than  a  natural  achievement. 

These  and  related  matters  are  discussed  in 
the  chapters  on  Desire  and  Knowledge.  The 
great  books  speak  of  other  objects  than  God  as 
objects  of  man’s  infinite  desire.  The  appetite 
for  money,  for  pleasure,  or  for  power  seems  to 
be  an  infinite  craving  which  no  finite  quantity 
of  these  goods  ever  satisfies.  Two  comments  are 
made  upon  this  fact,  which  is  so  amply  evi¬ 
denced  in  the  human  record.  One  is  that  man’s 
infinite  lust  for  worldly  goods  expresses  even  as 
it  conceals  his  natural  desire  for  a  truly  infinite 
good.  The  other  is  that  these  worldly  goods  are 


seductive  objects  precisely  because  they  are 
infinite. 

Here  the  word  “infinite”  is  used,  not  in  the 
sense  which  signifies  perfection,  but  in  the 
quantitative  sense  which  has  the  meaning  of  in¬ 
determination.  Plato’s  division,  in  the  Philebus , 
of  goods  into  the  finite  and  the  infinite  sep¬ 
arates  measured  and  definite  goods  from  those 
which  need  some  limitation  in  quantity.  Socra¬ 
tes  exemplifies  the  distinction  by  reference  to 
the  fact  that  “into  the  hotter  and  the  colder 
there  enters  a  more  and  a  less”  and  since  “there 
is  never  any  end  of  them  .  .  .  they  must  also  be 
infinite.”  In  contrast,  “when  definite  quantity 
is  once  admitted,  there  can  be  no  longer  a 
‘hotter’  or  a  ‘colder.’  ”  Such  things,  he  says, 
“which  do  not  admit  of  more  or  less”  belong 
“in  the  class  of  the  limited  or  finite.” 

Following  the  line  of  this  example,  Socrates 
later  distinguishes  between  infinite  and  finite 
pleasures,  or  pleasures  without  limit  and  those 
which  have  some  intrinsic  measure.  “Pleasures 
which  are  in  excess,”  he  says,  “have  no  measure, 
but  those  which  are  not  in  excess  have  measure; 
the  great,  the  excessive  .  .  .  we  shall  be  right  in 
referring  to  the  class  of  the  infinite,  and  of  the 
more  and  less,”  and  “the  others  we  shall  refer 
to  the  class  which  has  measure.”  The  fact  that 
the  goodness  of  wealth  or  of  certain  pleasures  is 
indeterminate  or  indefinite  makes  it  necessary 
to  determine  or  measure  the  amount  of  wealth 
it  is  good  to  possess,  or  the  quantity  of  such 
pleasure  it  is  good  to  enjoy. 

As  in  the  case  of  desire,  so  the  human  intel¬ 
lect  is  also  said  to  be  infinite  in  the  sense  of 
reaching  to  an  indefinite  quantity.  On  the  the¬ 
ory  which  he  holds  that  the  intellect  knows  by 
means  of  universal  concepts,  Aquinas  attributes 
to  the  human  mind  “an  infinite  power;  for  it 
apprehends  the  universal,  which  can  extend 
itself  to  an  infinitude  of  singular  things.”  Each 
universal  signifies  what  is  common  to  an  in¬ 
definitely  large  class  of  particular  instances. 

There  is  still  another  sense  in  which  the  intel¬ 
lect  is  said  to  be  infinite,  namely,  by  reason  of 
its  having  the  potentiality  to  apprehend  all 
knowable  things.  But  this  is  a  relative  infinity, 
as  is  the  corresponding  infinity  of  prime  matter, 
which  is  conceived  as  the  potentiality  for  taking 
on  all  forms.  In  both  cases,  the  infinite  is  quali¬ 
fied  by  a  restriction — on  the  kind  of  things 


821 


Chapter  40:  INFINITY 


knowable  to  the  intellect  and  the  type  of  forms 
!  receivable  in  matter.  The  infinity  of  prime 
matter— matter  totally  devoid  of  form—  is  also 
*  comparable  to  the  infinity  of  God  in  a  con¬ 
trast  of  extreme  opposites:  the  absolute  in¬ 
determinacy  of  pure  potentiality  on  the  one 
hand,  the  absolute  perfection  of  pure  actuality 
on  the  other. 

The  infinity  of  matter  involves  different  con¬ 
siderations  when  the  problem  concerns,  not 
prime  matter,  but  material  things— bodies. 
The  question  is  twofold.  Can  there  be  a  bodv  of 
infinite  magnitude?  Is  there  an  infinite  number 
of  bodies  ?  To  both  questions  Aristotle  gives  the 

I  negative  answer,  while  Spinoza  seems  to  answer 
the  first,  and  Lucretius  the  second,  affirma¬ 
tively. 

Spinoza’s  affirmation  may  be  qualified,  of 
course,  by  his  conception  of  infinite  body  as  an 
attribute  of  God.  But  there  is  no  qualification 
on  Lucretius’  assertion  that  “the  first-begin¬ 
nings  of  things  are  infinite,”  unless  it  is  his 
statement  that  “the  first-beginnings  of  things 
,  have  different  shapes,  but  the  number  of  shapes 

I  is  finite.”  It  is  only  the  number  of  atoms  which 
is  infinite,  not  their  variety. 

Aristotle  presents  many  arguments  against 
the  existence  of  an  infinite  body  or  an  infinite 
number  of  things,  all  of  which  ultimately  rest 
on  his  distinction  between  an  actual  and  a  po¬ 
tential  infinite.  It  is  not  that  infinity  in  magni¬ 
tude  or  multitude  is  impossible— for  he  affirms 
the  infinity  of  time  and  he  insists  upon  the  in¬ 
finite  divisibility  of  matter— but  rather  that  if 
an  infinite  body  existed  its  infinity  would  have 
to  be  actual.  Its  actuality  would  necessarily 
involve  certain  determinations,  especially  those 
of  dimension  and  place,  which  would  be  in¬ 
consistent  with  the  indeterminacy  of  the  in¬ 
finite.  Similarly,  a  multitude  of  co-existing 
things— unlike  the  moments  of  time  which  do 
not  co-exist— cannot  be  infinite,  because  their 
co-existence  implies  that  they  can  be  actually 
numbered,  whereas  their  infinity  implies  that 
they  are  numberless. 

The  potential  infinite,  Aristotle  writes,  “ex¬ 
hibits  itself  in  different  ways— in  time,  in  the 
generations  of  man,  and  in  the  division  of  mag¬ 
nitudes.  For  generally,”  he  says,  “the  infinite 
has  this  mode  of  existence:  one  thing  is  always 


being  taken  after  another,  and  each  thing  that 
is  taken  is  always  finite,  but  always  different.” 
When  this  takes  place  in  the  division  of  spatial 
magnitudes,  ‘‘what  is  taken  jxrrsists,  while  in 
the  succession  of  times  and  of  men,  it  takes 
place  by  the  passing  away  of  these  in  such  a 
way  that  the  source  of  supply  never  gives  out.” 

The  opposition  lx* tween  Lucretius  and  Aris¬ 
totle  with  regard  to  the  divisibility  of  matter 
is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Element.  The 
notions  of  infinity  and  continuity  arc  different¬ 
ly  employed  on  the  two  sides  of  the  argument. 
Where  Aristotle  makes  the  continuity  of  matter 
the  condition  of  its  infinite  divisibility,  Lu¬ 
cretius  makes  theatom’seontinuity — itssolidity 
or  lack  of  void — the  cause  of  its  indivisibility. 
Where  Aristotle  asserts  that  at  any  moment 
there  can  be  only  a  finite  number  of  particles 
in  the  world  because  the  partition  of  matter 
cannot  be  infinitely  carried  out  short  of  infinite 
time,  Lucretius,  on  the  contrary,  thinks  that 
the  division  of  matter  into  smaller  and  smaller 
parts  finds  an  end  in  the  atomic  particles;  and 
yet  he  also  asserts  an  infinite  number  of  atoms. 

To  contain  an  infinite  number  of  atoms,  an 
infinite  space  is  required,  according  to  Lucre¬ 
tius.  This  presents  no  greater  difficulty  for  him 
than  an  infinite  time.  Aristotle,  on  the  other 
hand,  differentiates  between  space  and  time 
with  respect  to  infinity.  Time  can  be  poten¬ 
tially  infinite  by  way  of  addition  because  “each 
part  that  is  taken  passes  in  succession  out  of 
existence.”  But  though  space  may  be  infinitely 
divisible,  it  cannot  be  infinitely  extended,  for 
all  its  parts,  unlike  those  of  time,  must  co-exist. 
It  would  therefore  have  to  lx  an  actually , 
rather  than  a  potentially ,  infinite  quantity,  and 
this  Aristotle  thinks  is  impossible. 

These  and  other  conflicting  views  concerning 
the  infinity  of  space  and  time  appear  in  Kant’s 
statement  of  the  first  cosmological  antinomy. 
His  intention  is  not  to  resolve  the  issues,  but 
to  show  that  they  cannot  be  resolved  by  proof 
or  argument.  To  do  this,  Kant  sets  up  what 
seems  to  him  to  be  equally  strong— or  equally 
inconclusive — arguments  for  and  against  the 
infinity  of  space  and  time. 

Suppose  it  be  granted,  Kant  argues  on  the 
one  hand,  that  “the  world  has  no  beginning  in 
time.”  Then  it  would  follow  that  “up  to  every 
given  moment  in  time,  an  eternity  must  have 


822 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


elapsed,  and  therewith  passed  away  an  infinite 
series  of  successive  conditions  or  states  of  things 
in  the  world.”  But  since  “the  infinity  of  a  series 
consists  in  the  fact  that  it  can  never  be  com¬ 
pleted  by  means  of  a  successive  synthesis,”  it 
also  “follows  that  an  infinite  series  already 
elapsed  is  impossible,  and  that  consequently  a 
beginning  of  the  world  is  a  necessary  condition 
of  its  existence.” 

On  the  other  hand,  Kant  argues  with  what 
he  thinks  is  equal  force,  “let  it  be  granted  that 
[the  world]  has  a  beginning.  A  beginning,”  he 
explains,  “is  an  existence  which  is  preceded  by 
a  time  in  which  the  thing  does  not  exist.”  Then, 
Kant  continues,  “on  the  above  supposition,  it 
follows  that  there  must  have  been  a  time  in 
which  the  world  did  not  exist,  that  is,  a  void 
time.  But  in  a  void  time,  the  origination  of  a 
thing  is  impossible;  because  no  part  of  any  such 
time  contains  a  distinctive  condition  of  being 
in  preference  to  that  of  non-being.  .  .  .  Con¬ 
sequently,  many  series  of  things  may  have  a 
beginning  in  the  world,  but  the  world  itself 
cannot  have  a  beginning,  and  is,  therefore,  in 
relation  to  past  time,  infinite.” 

With  regard  to  the  infinity  or  finitude  of 
space,  Kant  proceeds  similarly.  If  we  suppose 
space  to  be  infinite,  then  “theworld  must  be  an 
infinite  given  total  of  co-existent  things.”  But 
in  order  to  “cogitate  the  world,  which  fills  all 
spaces,  as  a  whole,  the  successive  synthesis  of 
the  parts  of  an  infinite  world  must  be  looked 
upon  as  completed;  that  is  to  say,  an  infinite 
time  must  be  regarded  as  having  elapsed  in  the 
enumeration  of  all  co-existing  things.”  This, 
Kant  argues,  “is  impossible,”  and  therefore 
“an  infinite  aggregate  of  actual  things  cannot 
be  considered  as  a  given  whole.”  Hence  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  “the  world  is,  as  regards  extension  in 
space,  not  infinite ,  but  enclosed  in  limits.” 

If,  however,  we  suppose  “that  the  world  is 
finite  and  limited  in  space,  it  follows,”  according 
to  Kant,  “that  it  must  exist  in  a  void  space, 
which  is  not  limited.  We  should,  therefore, 
meet  not  only  with  a  relation  of  things  in  space , 
but  also  a  relation  of  things  to  space.”  But  the 
“relation  of  the  world  to  a  void  space  is  merely 
a  relation  to  no  object ”  and  “such  a  relation, 
and  consequently  the  limitation  of  the  world  by 
void  space,  is  nothing.”  It  follows,  therefore, 
Kant  concludes,  that  “the  world,  as  regards 


space,  is  not  limited;  that  is,  it  is  infinite  in  re 
gard  to  extension.” 

The  way  in  which  these  opposite  arguments 
nullify  each  other  reveals  more  than  our  in¬ 
ability  to  prove  or  disprove  the  infinity  of  space 
and  time.  It  shows,  in  Kant’s  theory  of  human 
knowledge,  that  we  are  “not  entitled  to  make 
any  assertion  at  all  respecting  the  whole  ob¬ 
ject  of  experience — the  world  of  sense.” 

One  other  problem  of  infinity  in  the  sphere  of 
physics  receives  its  initial  formulation  in  one  of 
the  great  books— in  the  part  of  the  Dialogues 
Concerning  the  Two  New  Sciences  where  Galileo 
discusses  the  uniform  acceleration  of  a  freely 
falling  body.  The  body  which  is  said  to  ac¬ 
cumulate  equal  increments  of  velocity  in  equal 
intervals  of  time  is  also  said  to  start  “from  in¬ 
finite  slowness,  i.e from  rest.”  One  of  the  per¬ 
sons  in  the  dialogue  challenges  this,  saying  that 
“as  the  instant  of  starting  is  more  and  more 
nearly  approached,  the  body  moves  so  slowly 
that,  if  it  kept  on  moving  at  this  rate,  it  would 
not  traverse  a  mile  in  an  hour,  or  in  a  day,  or  in 
a  year,  or  in  a  thousand  years;  indeed,  it  would 
not  traverse  a  span  in  an  even  greater  time;  a 
phenomenon  which  baffles  the  imagination, 
while  our  senses  show  us  that  a  heavy  falling 
body  suddenly  acquires  great  speed.” 

What  our  senses  seem  to  show  us  is  corrected 
by  an  experiment  which  refines  the  observa¬ 
tion.  But  this  still  leaves  a  purely  analytical 
question.  Against  the  statement  that  the  “ve¬ 
locity  can  be  increased  or  diminished  without 
limit,”  Simplicio  points  out  in  the  dialogue 
that  “if  the  number  of  degrees  of  greater  and 
greater  slowness  is  limitless,  they  will  never  be 
all  exhausted,”  and  therefore  the  body  will 
never  come  to  rest  when  it  is  slowing  down  or 
be  able  to  start  to  move  when  it  is  at  rest. 

“This  would  happen,”  Salviati  answers,  “if 
the  moving  body  were  to  maintain  its  speed  for 
any  length  of  time  at  each  degree  of  velocity, 
but  it  merely  passes  each  point  without  delay¬ 
ing  more  than  an  instant,  and  since  each  time 
interval,  however  small,  may  be  divided  into 
an  infinite  number  of  instants,  these  will  always 
be  sufficient  to  correspond  to  the  infinite  de¬ 
grees  of  diminished  velocity.” 

The  problem  of  the  infinitesimal  velocity 
provides  another  illustration  of  the  difference 


Chapter  40 

between  infinity  in  the  physical  and  the  mathe¬ 
matical  orders.  Unlike  parallel  lines  in  Euclid¬ 
ean  geometry,  which  are  lines  that  remain 
equidistant  from  one  another  when  both  arc 
prolonged  to  infinity,  an  asymptote  is  a  straight 
line  which  a  curved  line  continuously  approach¬ 
es  but  never  meets,  even  when  both  arc  in¬ 
finitely  extended.  The  distance  between  the 
curve  and  its  asymptote  diminishes  to  smaller 
and  smaller  intervals,  but  no  matter  how  small 
they  become,  the  two  lines  never  coincide. 
The  diminishing  intervals  between  the  curve 
and  its  asymptote  are  like  the  diminishing  de¬ 
grees  of  velocity  in  a  body  starting  from  or 
coming  to  rest.  But  we  know  that  the  body 
does  begin  or  cease  to  move,  and  so  there  is  the 
mysterious  jumping  of  the  gap  between  rest 
and  motion  in  the  physical  order,  whereas  in 
the  mathematical  order  the  limiting  point  can 
be  forever  approached  and  never  reached. 

There  is  one  other  context  in  which  infinity 
is  discussed  in  the  great  books. 

The  logicians  treat  certain  terms  and  judg¬ 
ments  as  infinite.  Aristotle,  for  example,  re¬ 
gards  the  negative  term — such  as  not-man  or 
not-white — as  indefinite.  The  indefiniteness  of 
its  signification  may  be  seen  when  such  terms 
are  used  as  subjects  of  discourse.  What  is  being 
talked  about?  The  answer  must  be  given,  in 
part  at  least,  in  positive  terms:  not-man  repre¬ 
sents  the  whole  universe  leaving  man  out,  or  the 
totality  of  everything  except  man.  Thus,  in  its 
positive  signification,  the  negative  term  has  a 
kind  of  infinity — the  infinite  totality  of  sub¬ 
jects  diminished  by  one,  the  one  that  is  negated. 

In  his  classification  of  judgments,  Kant 
makes  a  threefold  division  of  judgments  ac¬ 
cording  to  quality:  the  affirmative,  the  nega¬ 
tive,  and  the  infinite.  The  infinite  judgment 
involves  a  negative  in  its  construction,  but 
when  that  negative  is  given  an  affirmative  in¬ 
terpretation,  the  infinite  significance  of  the 
proposition  becomes  apparent.  An  example 
will  make  this  clear. 

The  proposition  this  animal  is-not  white  is 
negative;  it  simply  denies  a  certain  quality  of 
a  certain  thing.  But  the  proposition  this  animal 
is  not-white  is  infinite,  for  it  affirms  the  negated 
term,  and  so  places  the  subject  in  the  infinite 
class  or  totality  which  includes  everything 


INFINITY  823 

except  white  things.  (The  position  of  the  hy¬ 
phen  serves  to  indicate  whether  the  statement 
shall  be  construed  negatively  or  affirmatively 
and  infinitely.) 

I  he  problems  of  definition  and  demonstra¬ 
tion  are  differently  solved  by  logicians  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  way  in  which  they  propose  to  avoid 
infinite  regressions  in  analysis  or  reasoning. 
I  here  would  be  no  end  to  the  process  of  de¬ 
fining  if  every  term  had  to  be  defined  before  it 
could  be  used  in  the  definition  of  another 
term.  There  would  be  no  beginning  to  the 
process  of  proof  if,  before  a  proposition  could 
be  used  as  a  premise  to  demonstrate  some  con¬ 
clusion,  it  had  itself  to  be  demonstrated  as  a 
conclusion  from  prior  premises. 

In  his  essay  On  Geometrical  Demonstration , 
Pascal  refers  to  the  proposal  of  a  plan  for  defining 
and  proving  everything.  “Certainly  this  meth¬ 
od  would  be  beautiful,”  he  says,  “but  it  is  ab¬ 
solutely  impossible;  for  it  is  evident  that  the 
first  terms  we  wished  to  define  would  presup¬ 
pose  others  for  their  explication,  and  that  sim¬ 
ilarly  the  first  propositions  we  wished  to  prove 
would  suppose  others  that  preceded  them,  and 
it  is  thus  clear  we  should  never  arrive  at  the 
first  propositions.” 

The  chapter  on  Definition  considers  the 
character  and  choice  of  the  indefinable  terms  by 
which  an  infinite  regression  is  avoided  in  the 
elucidation  of  meanings.  The  chapters  on  In¬ 
duction  and  Principle  consider  the  various 
sorts  of  primary  propositions — axioms,  postu- 
la tes,  assumptions— by  which  a  similar  regression 
is  avoided  in  the  process  of  proof.  The  chapter 
on  Cause  deals  with  the  problem  of  an  infinite 
regression  in  causes  and  effects.  Here  it  is  ap¬ 
propriate  to  consider  the  difference  between  an 
infinite  series  of  reasons  and  an  infinite  series  of 
causes. 

To  the  extent  that  both  are  truly  series— the 
succession  of  one  thing  after  another — neither 
seems  to  be  impossible,  given  infinite  time.  Those 
who  deny  the  possibility  of  an  infinite  number 
of  causes  distinguish  between  essential  and 
accidental  causes,  that  is,  between  causes  which 
must  co-exist  with  their  effects  and  causes  which 
can  precede  their  effects,  and  cease  to  be  before 
their  effects  occur.  If  there  were  an  infinite 
time,  there  could  be  an  infinite  series  of  acci¬ 
dental  causes.  But  it  may  be  questioned  whether, 


824 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


even  granted  an  infinite  time,  the  relation  be¬ 
tween  the  premises  and  conclusion  of  reasoning 
permits  an  infinite  regression.  If  the  truth  of  a 


conclusion  cannot  be  known  until  the  truth  of 
its  premises  is  known,  then  the  pursuit  of  truth 
may  be  vitiated  by  a  search  ad  infinitum . 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

i.  The  general  theory  of  infinity  825 

1  a.  The  definite  and  indefinite:  the  measured  and  the  indeterminate 

ib.  The  infinite  in  being  and  quantity:  the  actual  and  potential  infinite;  the  formal 

and  the  material  infinite  826 


2.  Infinity  in  the  logical  order 

2 a.  The  infinity  of  negative  and  indefinite  terms 
2 b.  The  distinction  between  negative  and  infinite  judgments 
2 c.  Infinite  regression  in  analysis  and  reasoning 

3.  The  infinite  in  quantity  827 

3 a.  Number:  the  infinite  of  division  and  addition 

3 b.  The  infinite  divisibility  of  continuous  quantities:  the  infinitesimal;  the  method 
of  exhaustion  and  the  theory  of  limits 

3c.  The  infinity  of  asymptotes  and  parallels 

3 d.  The  infinite  extent  of  space  828 

$e.  The  infinite  duration  of  time  and  motion 

4.  The  infinity  of  matter 

4 a.  The  infinite  quantity  or  extent  of  matter:  the  problem  of  an  actually  infinite 
body 

4 b.  The  infinite  divisibility  of  matter:  the  issue  concerning  atoms  829 

4 c.  The  infinite  potentiality  of  matter:  the  conception  of  prime  or  formless  matter 

5.  Infinity  in  the  world 

i 

5 a.  The  infinite  number  of  things  and  the  infinite  number  of  kinds 
5 b.  The  number  of  causes 

6.  The  finite  and  the  infinite  in  the  nature  of  man  830 

6a.  The  infinity  of  desire  and  will:  the  limits  of  human  capacity 
6b.  The  infinity  of  the  intellect:  man’s  knowledge  of  the  infinite 

7.  The  infinity  of  God  831 

7 a.  The  infinite  being  or  essence  of  God 

7 b.  The  infinite  power  of  God  832 

7 c.  God’s  infinite  goodness  and  love 
yd.  God’s  infinite  knowledge 


Chapter  40:  INFINITY 


825 


REFERENCES 


To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  arc  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad,  hk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  '.Psychology,  II  6a 119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  1 19.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right  hand  side  of 
the  page.  Forexample,in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b  164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  cii, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  arc  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (£>),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehejniah ,  7:45 — ( D )  II  Esdras,  7:4 6. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  general  theory  of  infinity 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  iii,  ch  4-8  280c-286d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [95 i— i  1 13] 
12d-14d 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  2  311b-c; 
ch  17-18,  319d-320d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  7  31a- 
34c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  92,  a  1,  rep  6,12  1025c-1032b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  139c- 
153a  passim,  esp  144b-145a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  48  llOd- 
111a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  86b  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  112a-c;  123c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  2  355a;  def  6 
355b;  def  8  355c;  prop  7-8  356c-357d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  72  181a-184b;  231-233, 

213b-214a  /  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  434b- 
439b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  i,  lemma  i-ii  and 
schol  25a-32a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xvi, 
sect  8-ch  xvii,  sect  22  167c-174a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  123-132 
437c-439c 


35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div 
124-125  506a-507a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  24d;  26d;  130b-149d  esp 
130b-133c,  136a-137a  [thesis];  156b-157d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  17 
119a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  693c- 
694  d 

la.  The  definite  and  indefinite:  the  measured 
and  the  indeterminate 

7  Plato:  Parmenides ,  505c-506d:  5l0c-5Ila  / 
Philebus  609a-639a,c  esp  615c-617d 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [}2b4~ 
23]  48b-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [986“ 
i2-b2]  504b-c;  ch  6  [987b  19-988*1 6]  505d- 
506b;  ch  8  [989a3o-b2i]  507c-d;  bk  v,  ch  30 
547a  d;  bk  vii,  cii  10  [1036*2-9]  559b-c; 
bk  ix,  ch  7  [1049*19— bi ]  574d  575a;  bk  xiii, 
ch  10  [1087*10-25]  619c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  ii,  cii  6  [no6b28-35] 
352b-c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  81  ld-81 2a; 
826d-827a 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1078a-b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  viii,  cii  3  28a  c  / 
Second  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  13-16  55b-57c  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  18,  320c-d 


826 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


( 1 .  The  general  theory  of  infinity .  1  a.  The  definite 
and  indefinite :  the  measured  and  the  in¬ 
determinate .) 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  20  32d-33a 
/  City  of  God ,  bk  xii,  ch  18  354b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  48, 
a  1,  rep  4  259b-260c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4  612a- 
613a;  q  7,  a  2,  rep  2  652d-653c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  112a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  158a-159d;  196c-197a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  6 
117a-b 

lb.  The  infinite  in  being  and  quantity:  the 
actual  and  potential  infinite;  the  formal 
and  the  material  infinite 

7  Plato:  Parmenides,  495c-497c  /  Sophist ,  57ld- 
573b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i85a28-b4] 
260a-b;  [i85bi7~i9]  260c;  bk  iii,  ch  4-8  280c- 
286d  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[318^3-24]  414c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[9^7&I3— T9l  505b;  bk  ix,  ch  6  [i048b9— 17] 
574a;  bk  xi,  ch  10  [io66a35~b22]  594d-595b; 
bk  xii,  ch  7  [1073^— 13]  603a-b 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  812a 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  17,  319d- 
320a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  20-21 
49d-50a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  7 
31a-34c;  q  12,  a  i,  rep  2  50c-51c;  q  14,  a  i, 
ans  75d-76c;  q  50,  a  2,  rep  4  270a-272a;  q  54, 
a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep 
2  612a-613a;  q  2,  a  6,  ans  619d-620d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  hi,  q  7, 
a  12,  rep  1  754c-755c;  q  10,  a  3,  rep  1-2 
769d-771b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i,  rep  12 
1025c-1032b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day, 
145b-146c;  150d-151c 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  86a-88d  /  Ob¬ 
jections  and  Replies,  112b;  def  viii  130d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  3,6  355b;  prop  8, 
demonst  and  schol  1  356d;  prop  9  357d; 
prop  10,  schol  358a-b;  prop  13-14  359c- 
360a;  prop  15,  schol-prop  16  360b-362a; 
prop  21-23  364a-365a;  prop  28,  demonst 
365d-366a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  12 1  195a  /  Geometrical 

Demonstration,  434b-439b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
370a-371a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  4-6  149b-d;  ch  xiv,  sect  26-27  160°' 
161a;  sect  30  161c-d;  ch  xv,  sect  2-4  162c- 
163b;  ch  xvi,  sect  8  167c;  ch  xvii  167d-174a 
passim,  esp  sect  7  169b-c;  ch  xxix,  sect  16 
237b-238a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  1 23-1 32 
437c-439c 


lb  to  2c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div 
124,  506b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  124d-125b;  130b-133c; 
135a-137a,c;  160b-163a  /  Judgement,  498b- 
501b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  22 
17c-d;  part  1,  par  104— part  ii,  par  105  39b- 
40a;  additions,  17  119a  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  156d-160b;  165a-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  668a-669a 

2.  Infinity  in  the  logical  order 

2a,  The  infinity  of  negative  and  indefinite  terms 

7  Plato:  Sophist,  57ld-573c  /  Philebus ,  615c- 
616c 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  CH2  [1 6^0-33]  25c; 
ch  3  [i6bi  1— 16]  25d;  ch  10  [i9b5-n]  29d  / 
Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  46  70b-71d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  158a-159d 

2b,  The  distinction  between  negative  and  in¬ 
finite  judgments 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  10  [i2b6— 15]  17d- 
18a  /  Interpretation,  ch  5  [17^8—9]  26b;  ch  6 
26c-d;  ch  10  29d-31c  /  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i, 
ch  3  [25bi9-26]  40c;  ch  46  70b-71d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  vii, 
sect  1  283a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  40a-c;  210c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  53 
25c-d 

2c.  Infinite  regression  in  analysis  and  reason¬ 
ing 

7  Plato:  Parmenides,  489a-d  /  Theaetetus,  542a- 
544a  esp  543d-544a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  3 
99b-100a;  ch  19-23  lllc-1 16a  /  Physics,  bk  i, 
ch  4  [i87b7— 14]  262d;  ch  6  [i89ai  1— 19]  264c  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  3  [ioo5bi5~34]  524d- 
525a;  ch  4  [ioo6a5-i2]  525a-b;  ch  6  [101  ia3— 
14]  530d;  bk  xi,  ch  6  [io63b7-i2]  591d  / 
Soul,  bk  1,  ch  3  [407^2-30]  636d-637a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1094^8-22] 
339b;  bk  iii,  ch  3  [iii2b33-ni3a3]  358d- 
359a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  17,  122d- 
123a;  bk  ii,  ch  20,  164c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  36,  a 
3,  rep  4  194c-195d;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  2 
612a-613a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  2,  ans  221d-223a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  292c-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  48  llOd- 
111a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  llla-d; 
213c-d;  224b, d 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  431b- 
434a  /  Arithmetical  Triangle,  45 lb-45 2a;  458b- 
459b;  464a-466a 


3  to  3c 


Chapter  40: 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii ,  cii  xxi, 
sect  23  183b  d;  sect  25  184a  b;  bk  hi,  ch  iv, 
sect  5  260c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  llld  112d;  115d  119a; 
135a-173a  esp  158a  159d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  321b  [fn  1];  525a  526b 

3.  The  infinite  in  quantity 

3 a.  Number:  the  infinite  of  division  and  addi¬ 
tion 

7  Plato:  Parmenides ,  495d-497b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  hi,  ch  4  [20^22  24] 
281c;  [204*7-8]  282a;  ch  5  [204b6~9]  282c; 
cii  6  [206*1 5]  284b;  [206^-207*14]  284d  285c; 
ch  7  [207*32-bi4]  285d  286a  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  xi,  ch  10  [io66b23~26]  595b 

11  Euclid:  Elements ,  bk  ix,  prop  20  183b- 
184a 

11  Archimedes:  Sand-Reckoner  520a-526b  pas¬ 
sim 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  812a;  bk  ii, 
829b 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  2  311b-c; 
ch  17,  319d-320a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  Gody  bk  xii,  ch  18 
354b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  7,  a  3, 
rep  3  32c-33c;  a  4  33d-34c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4, 
rep  2  612a-613a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  7, 
a  12,  rep  1  754c-755c;  q  10,  a  3,  rep  2  769d- 
771b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day, 
144b-145a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  112b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  121  195a;  233,  213b-214a  / 
Geometrical  Demonstration ,  434b -439b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv, 
sect  30  161c-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  8  167c;  ch  xvii 
167d-174a  passim,  esp  sect  9  170a-b;  ch 
xxix,  sect  16,  237b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  127 
438c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  136a- b  /  Judgement , 
498b-d;  499d-500a 

3 b.  The  infinite  divisibility  of  continuous 
quantities:  the  infinitesimal;  the  method 
of  exhaustion  and  the  theory  of  limits 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [200bi5~i9] 
278a;  ch  4  [203bi5~i8]  281c;  ch  6  [2o6a8-b33] 
284b-285b;  ch  7  285d-286c  passim;  bk  v, 
ch  3  [227*21-34]  308a-b;  bk  vi,  ch  1-2  312b. d- 
315d;  ch  10  [240^-241*26]  324c-325b  / 
Heavens ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [268*6-11]  359a;  cii  5 
[27ib8-i2]  362d  /  Generation  and  Corruption , 
bk  1,  ch  2  [317*3-13]  412d-413a  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  iii,  ch  4  [1001^7-19]  520b-c;  bk  v,  ch  13 
[1020*9-14]  541b;  [1020*26-33]  541c 

11  Euclid:  Elements ,  bk  v,  definitions,  4  81a; 
bk  x,  prop  i  191b-192a;  bk  xii,  prop  2 


INFINITY  827 

339a  340b;  prop  5  345b  346b;  prop  10-12 
351b  359a;  prop  iS  367a  368b 
11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder ,  bk  i, 
assumptions,  5  404b;  prop  13  14  411a  414a; 
prop  33  34  424b  427a;  prop  42  431b  432b; 
prop  44  433a  b  /  Measurement  of  a  Circle 
447a -45 lb  passim  /  Conoids  and  Spheroids , 
prop  4  459a  460b;  prop  21-22  470a  471b; 
prop  25-30  473a  479b  /  Spirals ,  484b;  prop 
18-20  492b  495b;  prop  24  27  496b  500a  / 
Equilibrium  of  Planes ,  bk  i,  prop  6-7  503b- 
504b;  prop  9  505a  b;  prop  13  507a  508b; 
bk  11,  prop  4  51 2b  513a  /  Quadrature  of  the 
Parabola  527a-537b  esp  527a  b.  prop  16 
533b  534a,  prop  24  537a  b  /  Method  569a- 
592a 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  811d  8I2a 
16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  v,  973a  975a;  979b- 
983b  passim 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  7, 
a  3,  rep  3  32c-33c;  q  53,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i 
280d-282a;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  282a  283b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  84,  a  3,  contrary  985d-989b 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day, 
139c-153a  passim;  second  day,  193b-194d; 
THIRD  DAY,  201a-202a;  205b  d;  224b-c 
31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  112b 
31  Spinoza:  Ethicsy  part  i,  prop  15,  schol, 
361b-c 

33  Pascal:  Equilibrium  of  Liquids ,  395a  b  / 
Geometrical  Demonstration ,  434b-439b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  i,  lemma  i-ii  and 
schol  25a-32a  esp  lemma  i  25a,  lemma  ii, 
schol  30b-32a;  prop  73,  schol  133b~134a; 
bk  11,  lemma  2  and  schol  168a-170a  /  Opticsy 
bk  in,  542b-543a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  9  164b-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  4  166a  b;  ch 
xvii,  sect  12  170d;  sect  18  172c-d;  ch  xxix, 
sect  16  237b-238a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  98  432a; 
sect  123-132  437c-439c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
124  506a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  70c-d;  161d-163a 
45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat  169a-251b  passim, 
esp  172b,  177a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peacey  bk  xi,  469a  d; 
epilogue  ii,  695b-c 

3 c.  The  infinity  of  asymptotes  and  parallels 

11  Euclid:  Elements ,  bk  i,  definitions,  23  2a; 
postulates,  5  2a 

11  Apollonius:  Conics ,  bk  ii,  prop  14-15  691b- 
692b;  prop  17  693b  694a 
31  Descartes:  Geometry ,  bk  ii,  306b-307a 
34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  i,  lemma  18,  schol 
57a-b;  lemma  22,  65b;  prop  27,  schol, 
69b-70a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
120d-121c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


828 

(3.  T 'be  infinite  in  quantity .) 

3 d.  The  infinite  extent  of  space 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  hi,  ch  5  [205*10- 
206*8]  283b-284b;  bk  iv,  ch  5  [2i2bn-2i] 
292a  /  Heavens ,  bk  1,  ch  5-7  362c-367b  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  xi,  ch  10  [io66b22-io67a38] 
595b-596a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [951-1113] 
12d-14d  esp  [951-1007]  12d-13b;  bk  ii  [89—94] 
16a-b;  [294-307]  18d-19a;  [1048-1066]  28b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  5  324d- 
325c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  23, 
a  7,  ans  138d-140a;  q  46,  a  i,  rep  8  250a- 
252d;  q  66,  a  4,  rep  5  348d-349d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54b-c;  part  ii, 
162b-c;  part  iv,  271b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  1,  aph  48  llOd- 
111a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  112b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  12 1  195a;  205-206  211a  / 
Geometrical  Demonstration,  434b-439b  passim 

34  Newton:  Principles,  definitions,  schol,  8b- 
11a  /  Optics,  bk  hi,  542b-543a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bkii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  4  149b;  sect  21  152d-153b;  ch  xiv, 
sect  26  160c-d;  ch  xv  162b-165c  passim; 
ch  xvi,  sect  8  167c;  ch  xvii  167d-174a 
passim,  esp  sect  3-4  168b-d,  sect  ii  170c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  117  436a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  24c-d;  28d-29c;  135a- 
137a, c;  152a-d;  160b-163a  /  Judgement,  501a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  693c- 
694a 

53  James:  Psychology,  631a 

3e.  The  infinite  duration  of  time  and  motion 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-c  /  Timaeus,  450c- 
451a;  460c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [i04bi3~i8] 
148a-b  /  Physics,  bk  hi,  ch  7  [207b2i-27]  286b; 
ch  8  [208*20-23]  286d;  bk  iv,  ch  13  [222*29- 
32]  302b;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [233*i3~bi6]  315a-c;  ch 
10  [241*26— b2o]  325b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  1-2  334a- 
337b;  ch  6  344b-346b  passim;  ch  8-9  348b- 
353b  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  2  [269b2-io]  360c-d; 
ch  3  [27obi— 24]  361c-362a;  bk  i,  ch  9  [279*12]- 
bk  ii,  ch  1  [284b6]  370b-376a  passim;  bk  ii, 
ch  6  379c-380c  /  Generation  and  Corruption, 
bk  11,  ch  10-11  437d-441a,c  /  Meteorology, 
bk  1,  ch  14  [353ai5~ 19]  459c  /  Metaphysics, 
bk  ix,  ch  8  [i050b20-28]  576c-d;  bk  xi,  ch 
10  [1067*33-38]  596a;  bk  xii,  ch  6  [io7ib3]- 
ch  7  [i072bi4]  601b-602d;  ch  7  [1073*5-11] 
603b;  ch  8  [1073*24-34]  603c 

9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  6  [700b29~ 
701*7]  236a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [215-264] 
3d-4b;  [483-634]  7a-8d;  [988-1051]  13b-14a; 
bk  ii  [80-141]  16a-d;  [294-307]  18d-19a; 
[569-580]  22b;  [1048-1066]  28b-c;  [1105-1147] 


?>d  to  4 a 

29a-c;  bk  v  [170-194]  63b-c;  [376-379]  66a; 
[416-431]  66c-d;  [1204-1217]  76d-77a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  13  271b; 
sect  23  272b;  bk  vi,  sect  15  275a-b;  bk  ix, 
sect  28  293d-294a;  bk  x,  sect  7  297b-c; 
sect  27  299d 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  xiii,  429a-b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  888b-891a 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  1-5  35a- 
37c  /  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vii  119b-129a  passim 
/  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  8  161d-162d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  21  49d- 
50a;  bk  xi,  par  12-17  92b-93c;  par  40  98d- 
99a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  4-6  324a-325d; 
bk  xii,  ch  12-20  349b-357a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  10, 
a  2,  rep  2  41d-42c;  a  4,  ans  43b-44b;  a  5, 
ans  44b-45c;  q  14,  a  12,  ans  85d-86d;  q  46 
250a-255d;  q  61,  a  2  315c-316a;  q  66,  a  4 
348d-349d;  q  75,  a  i,  rep  i  378b-379c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  77,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  945a-946b;  q  91,  a  2 
1017c-1020c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  i  [73-81] 
107a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  50a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  293d-294a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  fourth  day, 
245bd 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  48  llOd- 
111a;  bk  11,  aph  35,  163a-b;  apii  48,  186b-d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiii,  27b-c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  121  195a;  205-206  211a;  231- 
232  213b  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,  434b- 
439b  passim 

34  Newton:  Principles,  def  hi  5b;  definitions, 
schol,  8b;  law  1  14a/  Optics,  bk  iii,  540a- 
541b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv, 
sect  26-31  160c-162a;  ch  xv,  sect  3-5  162d- 
163c;  sect  11-12  165a-c;  ch  xvi,  sect  8 
167c;  ch  xvii  167d-174a  passim,  esp  sect  5 
168d-169a,  sect  10  170b-c,  sect  16  172a- 
b;  ch  xxix,  sect  15  237a;  sect  16,  237d- 
238a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  292a-293b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  26d;  27b-c;  130b-133c; 
135a-137a,c;  152c;  160b-161d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  693c- 
694a 

53  James:  Psychology,  882a 
4.  The  infinity  of  matter 

4a.  The  infinite  quantity  or  extent  of  mat¬ 
ter:  the  problem  of  an  actually  infinite 
body 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  4  [187^4-22] 
262d;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [203bi5-29]  281c-d;  ch  5 
[204*35-206*8]  282b-284b  /  Heavens,  bk  i, 
ch  5-7  362c-367b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  7 
[1073*3-13]  603a-b 


\b  to  5b 


Chapter  40:  I N  FI  Ni  l  V 


12  Lucretius  :  Nature  of  Things,  «k  i  (1008  1051] 
13c-14a;  [1094—1 1 13]  14c  d;  bk  11  [478  56S] 
21a  22b;  [1048-1089)  28b  d 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  cii  7,  52b  c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  7,  a  3 
32c-33c;  q  47,  a  3,  rep  2  258c-259a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  13  359c-d; 
prop  14,  corol  2  360a;  prop  15,  scnoL360b 
361  d:  part  11,  prop  2  374a 

35  Locke:  Hitman  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  xiii, 
sect  21-22  152d  153c;  cn  xxm,  sect  27 
211ab 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  47  421c- 
422a 

4b .  The  infinite  divisibility  of  matter:  the  issue 
concerning  atoms 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  iii,  cii  6-7  284  b- 
286c;  bk  vi,  ch  4  316d-318a  /  Heavens ,  bk  iii, 
ch  6  [304^3-305*9]  396a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  6 
[31 3b6— 23]  405a, c  /  Generation  and  Corruption , 
bk  i,  ch  2  [3 1 5b:25— 3 1 7ai 7]  411b-413a;  ch  8 
423b  425d;  ch  9  [327®!  —23]  426a-c;  ch  10 
[32?b34— 328s1 8]  427b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  vii, 
ch  13  [io39s2— 1 1  ]  562d;  bk  x,  ch  i  [1053*21- 
24]  579d  /  Sense  and  the  Sensible ,  ch  6  [445b4- 
446*20]  683b-684c;  cii  7  [449*21-30]  688d- 
689a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [483-634] 
7a-8d 

I  16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  bk  i,  517a  b 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  7  52a-c 
/  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  i,  139d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
1,  ans  14b-15b;  Q  7,  a  3,  rep  3  32c-33c;  a  4, 
ans  and  rep  i  33d-34c;  q  50,  a  2,  ans  270a- 
272a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day, 
147d-148b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  8  140b 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  112b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  rule  iii  270b- 
271a  /  Optics ,  bk  iii,  541b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xvii, 
sect  12  170d;  ch  xxiii,  sect  31  212b-c;  ch 
xxix,  sect  16,  237b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  10, 
351d-352a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  47  421c- 
422a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  lOOc-d;  131c;  137a-140c; 
152a-d;  161d-163a 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103d 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  850b, d- 
855a, c 

4c.  The  infinite  potentiality  of  matter:  the  con¬ 
ception  of  prime  or  formless  matter 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  455c-458b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [191*7-12] 
266d;  ch  9  [192*25-33]  268c  /  Generation 
and  Corruption ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [328b32-329* 


829 

24]  428b, d  429a;  ch  5  [332*19  26]  432c  d 
/  Soul,  bk  m,  cii  5  [430*10-  7]  662c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  iv,  <  n  1  3 
50a  d;  cii  6  51  d  52a  /  Third  Ennead ,  ih  vi, 
(  ii  7  19  llOd  119a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xn,  par  3  6  99d 
100c;  par  9,  101c;  par  14  16  102b  103a;  par  22 
104a  b;  par  24  26  104c  105b;  par  28  31  105c* 
107a;  par  40  109b  110a;  bk  xiii,  par  48  124a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  ’l'hcologica,  part  i,  q  7,  a  i, 
ans  and  ri  p  2  31a  d;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3 
31d  32c;  a  3,  ri  p  4  32c-33c;  a  4,  ans  33d  34c; 
q  66,  aa  1  2  343d  347b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  494a  b 

5.  Infinity  in  the  world 

5 a.  The  infinite  number  of  things  and  the  in¬ 
finite  number  of  kinds 

7  Plato:  Sophist,  573a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  i  [165*5- 
13]  227b-c/  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i84bi 5-24 ] 
259b-c;  ch  4  [187*25-188*18]  262b*263c;  cii  6 
[189*11-20]  264c;  bk  iii,  cii  4  [203bi5~29] 
281c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [984*11-17] 
502b;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [999*24-29]  518a 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[7 1 5b2— 1 7]  255c-d  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[i356b28*35]  596b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [1008- 
1051]  13c-14a;  bk  ii  [478-568]  21a-22b;  [1048- 
1089]  28b  d 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  cii  i  252a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  7,  a  4 
33d-34c;  q  23,  a  7  138d-140a;  q  46,  a  2,  rep  8 
253a-255a;  q  50,  a  3  272a-273b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  16  362a;  prop 
21-23  364a-365a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  121  195a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  193a -2 00c  esp  197b- 198a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  873a-b 

5b.  The  number  of  causes 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  i  326a-327b  / 
Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  i  i  [337b26- 
29]  440a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  512b- 
513b;  bk  vii,  ch  6  [io3ib28-io32*4]  554d; 
ch  8  [io33b2~5]  556c  /  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  2  [42515 
11 -1 7]  65 7d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, 
ans  12c-14a;  q  75,  a  i,  rep  i  378b  379c; 
part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2-3  612a  613a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  43a  d  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  48  llOd  111a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  87c  88a  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies,  llla-d;  213c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix,  370c-371b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  130b-133c;  140b,d-143a; 
152a-153a;  164a  171a  /  Judgement,  556b-c; 
577c~578a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  693c- 
694a 


830 

6.  The  finite  and  the  infinite  in  the  nature  of 
man 

6a.  The  infinity  of  desire  and  will:  the  limits 
of  human  capacity 

Old  Testament:  Psalms ,  42;  63— (D)  Psalms, 
41;  62  /  Proverbs ,  27:20  /  Ecclesiastes ,  4:7-8; 
5:10-12;  6:7— (D)  Ecclesiastes ,  4:7-8;  5:9-11; 
6:7  /  Isaiah ,  14:12-14 — (D)  Isaias,  14:12-14  / 
HabaFfcu\,  2:5 — (D)  Habacuc ,  2:5 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  10:9;  11:10;  14:9; 
23:16-17;  31:1-11  —  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiaticus , 
10:10;  11:10;  14:9;  23:21-24;  31:1-11  /  Zfor- 
uch,  3:16-19 — (£>)  OT,  Baruch ,  3:16-19 

New  Testament:  John ,  4:13-14  /  I  Timothy ,  6:10 

5  Euripides:  Phoenician  Maidens  [499-525] 
382b-c 

5  Aristophanes:  Plutus  [143-197]  630d-631b 

7  Plato:  Gorgias ,  275d-277b  /  Republic , 

bk  viii,  412a  /  Philebus  609a-639a,c  /  Laws, 
bk  viii,  733b-d;  bk  ix,  751b-d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [994^- 
16]  512d-513a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1094*18-22] 
339b;  bk  hi,  ch  12  [1 1 1 9b6— 12]  366c /  Politics, 
bk  1,  ch  8  [i256b26]-cH  9  [i258ai8]  450c- 
452b;  bk  11,  ch  7  [i267*42-b5]  463b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [59-93] 
30d-31b;  [931-977]  42a-c;  [1003-1010]  43a; 
[1076-1084]  44a;  bk  iv  [1097-1120]  58c-d; 
bk  v  [1405-1435]  79b-d;  bk  vi  [1-34]  80a-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  9  184c- 
185d;  bk  iv,  ch  4-5  225a-230b;  ch  9  237d- 
238d 

14  Plutarch:  Pyrrhus,  319b-321a  /  Caius  Ma¬ 
rius,  353d-354a,c  /  Pompey,  525a-b;  533a-c  / 
Caesar,  599b-c  /  Cicero,  706b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1-6  la-2c; 
par  19  5d;  bk  ii,  par  2-4  9b-d;  bk  iv,  par 
15-19  23a-24b;  bk  vi,  par  26  42d-43a;  bk  xi, 
par  1-4  89b-90b;  bk  xii,  par  10  101c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  63, 
a  3  327b-328b;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4  612a-613a; 
q  2,  a  1,  rep  3  615d-616c;  q  30,  a  4  751c- 
752b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 

27,  a  6  524c-525c;  q  28,  a  3  528d-529c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
58-66  8b-9b  /  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5953- 
5960]  262a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  76c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  123d;  149b-d;  224d- 
225a;  350d-354b;  429a-b;  489b-c;  503b-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  ii,  sc  i 
[10-34]  574c-d;  act  iii,  sc  ii  583c-586c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i,  sc 
iii  [109-124]  109b;  act  iii,  sc  11  [65-107]  120d- 
121b  /  Macbeth ,  acti,  sc  v  288a-d;  sc  vn 
289b-290b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  iv  89a-93a  passim, 
esp  90b-91b 


6  to  6b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  109  193b- 194a;  125-183 
195b-204b;  425  243b-244b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  45  189b-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  236b-238a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  1,  7lb-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin .  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
256c-257c  /  Practical  Reason,  298d-300a  / 
Judgement,  584d-585c;  586d-587a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  462c-463a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  5-10 
13a-15a;  par  13-14  15c-16a;  par  22-27  17c-18d; 
part  1,  par  35  21a-b;  part  ii,  par  105  40a; 
additions,  6  117a-b;  11  118a;  17  119a;  22 
120c-d;  26  121a-b;  118  136a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part  i  [3217-3250]  79a-b, 
part  11  [11,239-258]  273b-274a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  62a-b;  71d-72c;  292c-295a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  671d- 
672a;  epilogue  ii,  692c-694d 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  800d- 
801a 

6b.  The  infinity  of  the  intellect:  man’s  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  infinite 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  33:12-33  /  Job,  11:7- 
9;  26:14;  2^;  36:26;  38-41  /  Proverbs,  20:24; 
25 :3  /  Ecclesiastes,  3:11;  8:17;  1 1 15 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  9:13-16—  (D) 
OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  9:13-16  /  Ecclesiasti¬ 
cus,  1:2;  18:4-7— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  1:2; 
18:2-6 

New  Testament:  John,  1:18  /  Romans,  11:33-34 
/  I  Corinthians,  2:16  /  I  Timothy,  6:15-16 

7  Plato:  Philebus,  610d-613a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  4  [187^7—1 4] 
262d;  ch  6  [i89ai  1— 19]  264c;  bk  iii,  ch  6 
[207*21-31]  285c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[994bi7-3o]  513a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [999*24-29] 
518a;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72bi4~29]  602d-603a; 
bk  xiii,  ch  10  [io87aio-25]  619c  /  Soul,  bk  i, 
ch  3  [407^2-30]  636d-637a;  bk  iii,  ch  4 
[429*19-28]  661c;  ch  5  [430*10-17]  662c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i356b28— 35] 
596b-c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  812a 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1080a 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  3, 
312a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  20  32d- 
33a;  bk  vii,  par  20-21  49d-50a;  bk  xii,  par 
3-6  99d-100c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  i 
3b-4a;  q  7,  a  2,  rep  2  31d-32c;  qq  12-13  50b- 
75b;  q  14,  a  1,  ans  75d-76c;  a  12  85d-86d; 
q  28,  a  4,  rep  2  160c-161d;  q  32,  a  1  175d- 
178a;  q  54,  a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  q  79,  a  2, 
ans  414d-416a;  q  86,  a  2  462a-463a;  Q  87,  a  3, 
rep  2  467b-468a;  q  88,  a  1,  ans  469a-471c; 
a  3  472c-473a;  q  91,  a  3,  rep  2  486b-487d; 
q  94,  a  1,  ans  501d-503a;  part  i-ii,  q  2,  a  6, 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


7  to  la 


Chapter  40:  INFINITY 


ans  619d  620d;  q  30,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2 
751c-752b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i  ii,  q  68, 
a  2,  ans  89c  90c;  part  iii,  q  10,  a  3  769d 
771b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92  1025b  1037c  csp 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  6,12  1025c  l032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  iii  [37- 
45]  56b;  paradise,  iv  [1 15)- v  [12]  1  lid  U2b; 
xix  [22-99]  135b  136a:  xxi  [73-102]  139a  b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54b  c;  part  11, 
162c-d;  part  iv,  262b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  238c  239b;  251c-257d 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  494a  b 
31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  72a-b;  iii,  86b-87a; 
iv  89a -93a  passim  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
112a-d;  121d-122b;  169a;  211c-d;  212c  213a; 
213d-214a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  30  366c-d 
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72  181a  184b;  231-233  213b- 
216a  /  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  435a  b 
35  Locke:  Hitman  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  4  149b;  ch  xiv,  sect  26-31  160c-162a; 
ch  xv,  sect  2-3  162c-d;  sect  12  165b  c;  ch 
xvi,  sect  8  167c;  ch  xvii  167d-174a  esp  sect 
15  171b-172a;  ch  xxii,  sect  9  202c-203a; 
ch  xxiii,  sect  31  212b-c;  sect  33-37  212d- 
214b  passim;  ch  xxix,  sect  15-16  237a-238a; 
bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  19,  354b-c 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
2  405b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  308d 
42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  291a-292a  /  Judge¬ 
ment ,  495a-498b;  501a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  13-14 
15c-16a;  part  iii,  par  185  64b-d;  par  358  113c 
/  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  186a;  part  ii, 
270d-271c;  278a-c;  part  iii,  304c-306b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [1810-1815]  43a;  part 
ii  [11,441-452]  278b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  50b-c;  bk  iii, 
156d;  162b-164a,c;  bk  xv,  631a-c;  epilogue 
ii,  693c-694d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  392a;  631a 
7.  The  infinity  of  God 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  8,  146b-c; 
tr  iv,  ch  9  162d-163a  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  v, 
ch  io-ii  233b-234a  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  4 
306d-307a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  1-6  la  2c; 
bk  vi,  par  4  36a-b;  bk  vii,  par  1  43b-c;  par  7 
45a-d;  bk  xiii,  par  12  113b-d  /  City  of  God , 
bk  v,  ch  9-10  213b-216c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  7 
31a-34c;  q  54,  a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  part  i-ii, 
q  1,  a  4,  rep  1  612a-613a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  iii  [37- 
45]  56b;  paradise,  xxxiii  156b-157d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54b-c;  part  ii, 
162a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  251c-257d 


831 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  52b  d  / 
Meditations ,  in,  86a  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
122a  b;  123c  d;  dee  vi i i  130d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  1,  df.f  6  355b,  prop  io- 
ii  358a  359b;  prop  13  359c  d;  prop  16  362a; 
part  ii,  prop  7  375a  c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  hk  iii  [ 372  415)  143b 
144b;  bk  vm  [411  421)  241a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  2^1  244  213b  216a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
370a  371a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  xvii, 
sect  1  167d  168a;  ch  x xiii,  sect  44 -35  213a  c; 
BK  III,  CII  VI,  SECT  II  12  27lb  272b  passim 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81b 

41  G  ibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  230a  b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  188c;  192c  d  /  Practical 
Reason,  344b-c  /  Judgement,  590b  d;  592a-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xv,  631a-c 

la.  The  infinite  being  or  essence  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  3:14  /  /  Kings ,  8:27— 
(D)  III  Kings,  8:27  /  Job ,  11:7-9  /  Psalms , 
9:7;  45:6;  48:8-14;  102:12;  136;  139:7-10— 
(D)  Psalms,  9:8;  44:7;  47:9-15;  101:15;  *351 
138:7-10  /  Isaiah ,  41:4;  43:10-11;  44:6;  48:12 
—  (D)  Isaias,  41:4;  43:10-11;  44:6;  48:12  / 
Daniel,  4:34  —  (D)  Daniel,  4:51 
New  Testament:  John,  8:58 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  10  3b  c; 
bk  vii,  par  20-21  49d-50a;  bk  xiii,  par  4 
111c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  2  343c-d  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  32  633c  d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  7,  aa 
1-2  31a-32c;  q  14,  a  i,  ans  75d-76c;  a  3  77d- 
78b;  q  54,  a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  q  75,  a  5,  rep 
4  382a-383b;  q  79,  a  2,  ans  414d-416a;  q  86, 
a  2,  rep  1  462a-463a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  2, 
a  1,  ans  710a'711c;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i, 
rep  6,12  1025c  l032b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  293d-294a 
31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  52a  d  / 
Meditations,  72a-b;  iii,  86a  /  Objections  and 
Replies,  108b- 114c  passim 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i  355a-372d  csp  def  i 
355a,  def  3,6  355b,  axiom  1-2  355c  d,  prop 
1— 1 7  355d-363c,  prop  20-21  363d  364c,  prop 
23  364d-365a,  prop  25  365b,  prop  29-31 
366b-367a;  part  ii,  prop  i  373d-374a 
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  469  256a 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  2-4  162c-163b;  sect  12  165b  c;  ch  xvii, 
sect  1  167d-168a;  sect  16-17  172a  c;  sect  20 
172d-173c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  33-35  212d~213c; 
bk  iii,  cii  vi,  sect  11-12  271b  272b 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  117 
436a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  201  b  e;  205a  b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d- 
160b;  165a  b;  part  iii,  305c-306c 


832 

(7.  The  infinity  of  God.) 

lb.  The  infinite  power  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  18:14  /  Exodus ,  15:18 
/  Deuteronomy ,  10:14;  32:39  /  J  Samuel,  2:6-8 
— (77)  7  Kings,  2:6-8  /  /o£,  12:14-15;  38-41  / 
Psalms,  62:11;  1 14;  148 — (77)  Psalms,  61:12; 
113:1-8;  148  /  Isaiah,  40:22-31;  44:24-46:13 
—  (D)  Isaias,  40:22-31;  44:24-46:12  /  Jeremiah, 
32:27 — (77)  Jeremias ,  32:27  /  Daniel ,  4:34-33 
—(77)  Daniel ,  4:31-32 

Apocrypha:  Judith,  16:13-17— (77)  OT,  Judith, 
16:15-21  /  0/  Esther,  13:9-11  — (77)  OT, 

Esther,  13:9-11  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  n  :  17-26; 
12:12-18 — (77)  OT,  Book  of  Wisdom,  1 1  :i 8— 
27;  12:12-18  /  Ecclesiasticus,  18:1-7— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  18:1-6  /  77  Maccabees,  8:18 — 
(77)  OT,  77  Machabees,  8:18 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  3:9;  19:26  /  Mark, 
10:27  /  Luke,  1:37  /  Revelation,  19 :6— (77) 
Apocalypse,  19:6 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk xii,  ch  7  [1073*3- 
n]  603a-b 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  10  233b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  12  4a;  bk 
v,  par  20  32d-33a;  bk  vii,  par  6-7  44d-45d  / 
C&y  o/*  Go*/,  bk  v,  ch  10  215c-216c;  bk  vii, 
ch  30  261b-d;  bk  xiv,  ch  27  396c-397a;  bk 
xxi,  ch  5-8  563d-568d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  25, 
aa  2-3  144c-147a;  Q  45,  a  5,  rep  3  245c-247a; 
q  65,  a  3,  rep  3  341c-342b;  Q  92,  a  2,  rep 
2  489d-490c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  i  612a- 
613a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
1 13,  a  9  368d-369c;  part  ii-ii,  q  23,  a  2, 
rep  3  483d-484d;  part  iii,  q  10,  a  3,  rep  3 
769d-771b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  in,  86a  /  Objections 
and  Replies,  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  3-6  355b;  def  8 
355c;  prop  1-8  355d-357d;  prop  11-17  358b- 
363c;  prop  20-25  363d-365b;  prop  32-35 
367a-369a;  appendix  369b-372d;  part  ii, 
prop  3  374a-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [1 19-225]  113b- 
116a;  bk  hi  [372-415]  143b-144b  /  Samson 
Agonistes  [300-329]  346a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  654  292b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
370a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  12  165b-c;  ch  xvii,  sect  i  167d-168a; 
ch  xxiii,  sect  34-35  213a-c  passim;  bk  iii, 
ch  vi,  sect  1 1— 12  271b-272b  passim 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  152 
443c-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  334a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  186c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  180b-c;  181b;  192c-d; 
201  b-c  /  Practical  Reason,  352a-c  /  Judgement, 
502d-503a;  504b-d;  592a-c;  600d-601c 


lb  to  Id 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d- 
160b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  684b-d 

7c.  God’s  infinite  goodness  and  love 

Old  Testament:  Isaiah ,  43:1-4;  46:3-4;  49:14- 
15;  63:8-9— (D)  Isaias ,  43:1-4;  46:3-4; 

49:14-15;  63:8-9  /  Jeremiah,  31  esp  31:3  — 
(77)  Jeremias,  3 1  esp  3 1 :3 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  11:23-26; 
16:20-29— (77)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  11:24- 
27;  16:20-29 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  19:16-17  /  John, 
3:16;  13:31-17:26  /  Romans,  8:35-39  /  Gala¬ 
tians,  2:20  /  Ephesians ,  3:14-21  /  7  John,  3:1 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  io-ii  233b- 
234a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  20  32d- 
33a;  bk  xiii,  par  2-5  llla-d  /  City  of  God, 
bk  xi,  ch  10  327d-328d;  bk  xii,  ch  1-3 
342b,d-344b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2, 
a  3,  rep  1  12c-14a;  q  4,  a  1  20d-21b;  q  6,  aa 

I- 3  28b-30b;  q  ii,  a  3,  ans  49a-c;  q  54,  a  2, 
ans  285d-286c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  i 
612a-613a;  q  5,  a  2,  rep  3  637c-638a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  64, 
a  4,  rep  3  69b-70a;  part  ii-ii,  q  23,  a  2,  rep 
3  483d-484d;  part  iii,  q  i,  a  i  701d-703a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv 
[40-81]  75d-76a;  paradise,  xxix  [127-145] 
151c-d 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  229c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  prop  35-36  460d- 
461c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  vii  [139— 173]  220a- 
221a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  580  276b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xvii,  sect  1  167d-168a;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect 

II- 12  271b-272b  passim 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  186c-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Meta  physic  of  Morals, 
263a-b  /  Practical  Reason,  325d-326a;  345a-c; 
351b-352c  /  Judgement,  592a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  539d-540a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  24a-c 

Id.  God’s  infinite  knowledge 

Old  Testament:  7  Samuel,  2:3 — (77)  7  Kings , 
2:3  /  Job,  11:5-11;  34:21-25;  36:4;  37:16  / 
Psalms,  94:7-12;  100:5;  117:2;  119:142,160; 
139;  146:6;  147:5— (77)  Psalms,  93:7-12;  99:5; 
116:2;  118:142,160;  138;  145:6-7;  146:5  / 
Proverbs,  15:3,11  /  Isaiah ,  29:15-16;  40:28  — 
(77)  Isaias ,  29:15-16;  40:28 

Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther,  13:12— (D)  OT, 
Esther,  13:12  /  Ecclesiasticus,  15:18-19;  16:17- 
20;  17:15,17,19-20;  23:18-20;  39:19-21;  42:18- 
21 —(77)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  15:19-20;  16:16- 
20;  17:13-17;  23:25-29;  39:24-25;  42:18-22  / 
Susanna,  42-43— (77)  OT,  Daniel,  13:42-43 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Id 


Chapter  40:  INFINITY 


New  Testament:  Romans ,  11:33-36  /  I  Corin¬ 
thians ,  1:17-2:16  /  Ephesians ,  3:10  /  Colossians , 
2:2-3  /  Hebrews,  4:13  /  /  /o/i;/,  3:20 

17  Plotinus:  S/27//  Ennead ,  tr  n,  cn  21  279b 
280a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  hi,  par  10  15b  d; 
bk  v,  par  5  28b  c  /  G'/y  of  God ,  bk  v,  ch  9-10 
213b  216c;  bkxi,  cm  10, 328c  d;  cn  21  333a  d; 
bk  xii,  cn  17-18  353a354d  /  Christian  Doc¬ 
trine ,  bk  i,  cn  8  626c  627a 

19  Aquinas:  Sutnnia  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  13, 
a  1,  ans  75d  76c;  a  3  77d78b;  a  12  85d  86d; 
Q  16,  A  5,  ans  97c  98b;  q  18,  a  4  I07d  108c; 
q  54,  a  2,  ans  285d  286c;  q  79,  a  2,  ans  414d- 
416a;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  i  612a  613a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  iv  [i i 5]— v 


833 

(12)  11  Id  112b;  xix  (22-99)  135b  136a;  xxi 
[73  105)  139a  b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  98d  99b 

31  Descartes :  Objections  and  Replies ,  122a  b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  21  364ac; 
part  11,  prop  1  373d  374a;  prop  3  4  374a-c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Isist,  bk  ii  [188  193)  115b; 
bk  111  [56-134)  136b  138a;  iik  vii  (109  130] 
219b  220a;  bk  viii  [412  436)  241a  b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  12  165b  c;  cn  xvn,  sect  i  167d  168a; 
ci  1  XXIII,  sect  34  35  213a  c  passim;  bk  iii, 
cn  vi,  sect  ii  12  271b  272b  passim 
42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  303b  304a;  325d- 
326a;  344a  348a;  351b  352c  /  JudgemenI , 
590b  d;  592a-c 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  distinction  between  the  potential  and  actual  infinite,  and  the  infinite  of  division  and 
addition,  see  Quantity  7. 

Other  discussions  of  the  infinity  of  space,  time,  and  motion,  see  Astronomy  8c(i);  Change 
13;  Eternity  2;  Space  3a;  Time  2b;  World  4a;  and  for  the  conception  of  eternity  as 
infinite  time,  see  Eternity  i;  Time  2. 

The  issue  concerning  the  existence  of  atoms  or  the  infinite  divisibility  of  matter,  see  Ele¬ 
ment  5b;  One  and  Many  33(3). 

The  problem  of  an  infinite  regression  in  causes,  see  Cause  ib,  7b;  Change  14;  Principle  ib; 
and  for  the  related  problem  of  infinite  regression  in  definition  and  reasoning,  see  Defini¬ 
tion  ic;  Principle  33(3);  Reasoning  5b(i). 

The  treatment  of  the  infinite  and  the  infinitesimal  in  mathematics,^  Mathematics  4d; 
Quantity  2,  3a,  3c,  4c,  7. 

The  special  logical  sense  in  which  judgments  are  called  “infinite,”  see  Judgment  6b. 

The  conception  of  the  human  intellect  and  of  prime  matter  as  having  comparable  types  of 
infinity,  see  Mind  2b. 

Another  discussion  of  the  finite  and  the  infinite  in  relation  to  human  nature,  see  Man  iod, 
I3* 

The  special  consideration  of  infinity  in  relation  to  human  desire,  see  Desire  7-73(3);  and  for 
the  special  consideration  of  the  limits  of  human  knowledge,  see  Knowledge  5a~5a(6). 

The  problem  of  our  knowledge  of  the  infinite,  see  Knowledge  53(4). 

The  infinity  of  God,  and  of  God’s  knowledge,  power,  and  goodness,  see  Being  7K4);  God 
4e~4f,  5c,  5f;  Good  and  Evil  2;  Knowledge  7a;  Liberty  3d;  Mind  iof;  Nature  ib; 
Truth  2d;  Will  4b;  World  3a. 


834 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy ,  part  i, 
26-27 

Spinoza.  Correspondence ,  xn 
Newton.  The  Method  of  Fluxions  and  Infinite 
Series 

Berkeley.  The  Analyst 

- .  A  Defence  of  Free  Thinking  in  Mathematics 

Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  i,  part  ii, 
sect  1-11 

Kant.  De  Mundi  Sensihilis  {Inaugural  Dissertation ) 

- .  Prolegomena  to  Any  Future  Metaphysic ,  par 

50-54 

Hegel.  Science  of  Logic ,  vol  i,  bk  i,  sect  i,  ch  2 
(b,c)  ;  sect  11,  ch  2  (c) 

W.  James.  Some  Problems  of  Philosophy,  ch  io-ii 

II. 

Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology,  (j) 

Anselm  of  Canterbury.  Monologium 
- .  Proslogium 

Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed ,  part  i, 
ch  73 

Duns  Scotus.  Opus  Oxomense,  bk  i,  dist  13 

- .  Reportata  Parisiensia 

Crescas.  Or  Adonai ,  propositions  1-3 
Nicolas  of  Cusa.  De  Docta  Ignorantia 
Bruno.  De  Vinfinito,  universo  e  mondi 

- .  De  Immenso  et  Innumerabilibus 

Donne.  Lovers  Infinitenesse 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xxvm,  xxx 
(2),  xxxv  (3),  xli  (5) 


Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  11,  ch  17 

- .  Correspondence  with  Clarke 

Voltaire.  “Infinity,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 

- .  The  Ignorant  Philosopher,  ch  18 

Bolzano.  Paradoxien  des  Unendlichen 
Whewell.  On  the  Philosophy  of  Discovery,  ch  26 
Stallo.  Concepts  and  Theories  of  Modern  Physics, 
ch  13 

Bradley.  The  Principles  of  Logic,  Terminal  Essays, 

VI 

Fullerton.  The  Conception  of  the  Infinite,  and  the 
Solution  of  the  Mathematical  Antinomies 
Bosanquet.  Logic,  vol  i,  ch  4 
C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers,  vol  vi,  par  112-126 
Couturat.  De  Vinfini  mathematique 
Cantor.  Contributions  to  the  Founding  of  the  Theory 
of  Transfinite  Numbers 

Royce.  The  World  and  the  Individual,  series  i;  Sup¬ 
plementary  Essay  (4) 

Peano.  Formulaire  de  mathematique 
E.  W.  Hobson.  The  Theory  of  Functions  of  a  Real 
Variable  and  the  Theory  of  Fourier's  Series 
Poincare.  Science  and  Method,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
Whitehead  and  Russell.  Principia  Mathematica , 
part  hi,  sect  c;  part  v,  sect  e 
B.  Russell.  Principles  of  Mathematics,  ch  13,  17,  23, 
37-43 

- .  Our  Knowledge  of  the  External  World,  v-vn 

- .  Introduction  to  Mathematical  Philosophy,  ch  3, 

9^3 

Sitter.  Kosmos  (The  Expanding  Universe) 

Weyl.  The  Open  World,  lect  iii 


Chapter  41:  JUDGMENT 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  word  “judgment”  has  a  range  of  mean¬ 
ings  which  includes  three  principal  vari¬ 
ants  referring  to  (i)  a  quality  of  the  mind , 
(2)  a  faculty  of  the  mind ,  and  (3)  an  act  of  the 
mind.  Of  these  three  meanings,  it  is  the  third 
;  which  is  extensively  considered  in  this  chapter; 

I  and  it  is  this  meaning  of  “judgment”  which 
many  writers  use  the  word  “proposition”  to  ex¬ 
press.  They  sometimes  substitute  the  one  word 
entirely  for  the  other;  sometimes  they  use  both 
words,  not  as  strict  synonyms,  but  to  express 
distinct  yet  closely  related  aspects  of  the  same 
fundamental  phenomenon. 

The  sense  in  which  judgment  is  a  quality  of 
the  mind  is  the  sense  in  which  we  ordinarily 
speak  of  a  person  as  having  sound  judgment  or 
poor  judgment.  “We  credit  the  same  people,” 
Aristotle  says,  “with  possessing  judgment  and 
having  reached  years  of  reason  and  with  having 
practical  wisdom  and  understanding.”  To  be 
“a  man  of  understanding  and  of  good  or  sympa¬ 
thetic  judgment,”  he  continues,  is  to  be  “able 
I  to  judge  about  the  things  with  which  practical 
wisdom  is  concerned.” 

The  capacity  to  judge  well  concerning  what 
is  to  be  done  is  often  connected  with  the  capac¬ 
ity  to  deliberate  about  the  advantages  and  dis¬ 
advantages  or  other  circumstances  relevant  to 
the  action  in  question.  It  may  or  may  not  be 
accompanied  by  a  capacity  to  resolve  thought 
into  action,  to  carry  into  execution  the  decision 
which  judgment  has  formed.  These  three  qual¬ 
ities  of  mind — deliberateness,  judgment,  and 
decisiveness — are  conceived  by  Aristotle  and 
Aquinas  as  belonging  together  as  parts  of  the  in¬ 
tellectual  virtue  they  call  “prudence”  or  “prac¬ 
tical  wisdom.”  The  qualities  may  occur  sepa¬ 
rately,  but  the  prudent  man  will  possess  all  three. 

This  meaning  of  “judgment”  is  reserved  for 
discussion  in  the  chapter  on  Prudence;  and  in 
the  chapter  on  Law  will  be  found  the  consider¬ 


ation  of  the  judgment  which  a  court  renders— 
the  judgment  which  is  the  decision  of  a  judge 
when  he  applies  the  law  to  the  particular  case. 
In  the  legal  sense  of  a  judicial  decision,  judg¬ 
ment  reflects  not  so  much  the  quality  of  the 
judge’s  mind  as  his  duty  and  authority  to  dis¬ 
pose  of  the  case  and  to  have  his  decision  exe¬ 
cuted  by  the  appropriate  officers  of  the  law. 
The  legal  significance  of  judgment  is  not  pri¬ 
marily  psychological  or  logical;  and,  just  as  the 
moral  consideration  of  judgment  falls  under 
prudence,  the  legal  consideration  is  also  more 
appropriately  developed  in  the  context  of  other 
ideas. 

We  are  left  with  the  meanings  which  belong 
to  psychology,  logic,  and  the  theory  of  knowl¬ 
edge.  The  sense  in  which  “judgment”  desig¬ 
nates  a  faculty  or  function  of  the  mind — a  dis¬ 
tinct  sphere  of  mental  operation — is  much 
more  special  than  the  sense  in  which  “judg¬ 
ment”  or  “proposition”  signifies  a  particular  act 
of  the  mind  in  the  process  of  knowing  or  in  the 
verbal  expression  of  that  process.  Many  au¬ 
thors  discuss  the  kinds  of  judgment  which  the 
mind  makes,  and  the  kinds  of  propositions  it 
forms  and  asserts  or  denies,  but  only  a  few — 
notably  Locke  and  Kant — use  the  word  “judg¬ 
ment”  to  name  a  mental  faculty. 

Locke,  for  example,  says  that  “the  mind  has 
two  faculties  conversant  about  truth  and  false¬ 
hood.”  One  is  the  faculty  of  knowing;  the 
other  of  judging.  “The  faculty  which  God  has 
given  man  to  supply  the  want  of  clear  and  cer¬ 
tain  knowledge,  in  cases  where  that  cannot  be 
had,  is  judgment :  whereby  the  mind  takes  its 
ideas  to  agree  and  disagree,  or,  which  is  the 
same,  any  proposition  to  be  true  or  false,  with¬ 
out  perceiving  a  demonstrative  evidence  in  the 
proofs.”  The  way  in  which  Locke  distinguishes 
between  knowing  and  judging  and  the  fact  that 
he  relates  this  distinction  to  the  difference  be- 


835 


836 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


tween  certainty  and  probability  suggest  the 
parallel  distinction  between  knowledge  and 
opinion.  The  faculty  of  judgment  for  Locke  is 
the  equivalent  of  what  other  writers  treat  as 
the  forming  of  opinions. 

Kant  also  makes  judgment  a  faculty.  Along 
with  understanding  and  reason,  judgment  is  one 
of  the  three  faculties  of  cognition.  It  has  a  dis¬ 
tinct  function  of  its  own  and  is  coordinate  with 
the  other  two.  As  the  laws  of  nature  are  the 
work  of  the  understanding  in  the  sphere  of 
speculative  reason;  as  the  rules  of  the  moral  law 
are  the  work  of  the  reason  in  the  practical 
sphere,  wherein  it  is  related  to  the  faculty  of 
desire;  so  the  purposiveness  of  nature  comes 
under  the  faculty  of  judgment  which  operates 
in  relation  to  the  faculty  of  pleasure  and  pain. 

Kant  divides  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul  into 
“three  which  cannot  be  any  further  derived 
from  one  common  ground :  the  faculty  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  the  feeling  of  pleasure  and  pain  and  the 
facidty  of  desire .”  He  sees  each  of  the  three  cog¬ 
nitive  functions  (of  understanding,  judgment, 
and  reason)  as  standing  in  a  peculiar  relation  to 
these  three  primary  faculties.  The  faculty  of 
judgment  functions  with  respect  to  pleasure 
and  pain,  which  is  connected  with  the  faculty  of 
desire.  Yet  the  aesthetic  judgment  of  beauty 
and  the  theological  judgment  of  purposiveness 
in  nature  are  of  a  speculative  rather  than  a 
practical  character.  Because  of  these  two  re¬ 
lated  facts,  Kant  holds  that  “the  judgement 
in  the  order  of  our  cognitive  faculties,  forms  a 
mediating  link  between  Understanding  and 
Reason.” 

Kant,  perhaps  more  than  any  other  thinker, 
makes  judgment — both  as  a  faculty  and  as  an 
act — one  of  the  central  terms  in  his  philosophy. 
It  is  pivotal  in  each  of  the  three  critiques,  but 
it  is  the  Critique  of  judgement  which  serves  to 
connect  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason  and  the 
Critique  of  Practical  Reason.  “The  Understand¬ 
ing  legislates  a  priori  for  nature  as  an  object  of 
sense — for  theoretical  knowledge  of  it  in  a  pos¬ 
sible  experience.  Reason  legislates  a  priori  for 
freedom  and  its  peculiar  causality;  as  the  super¬ 
sensible  in  the  subject,  for  an  unconditioned 
practical  knowledge.  The  realm  of  the  natural 
concept  under  one  legislation,  and  that  of  the 
concept  of  freedom  under  the  other,  are  entire¬ 
ly  removed  from  all  mutual  influence  which 


they  might  have  upon  one  another  (each  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  fundamental  laws)  by  the  great 
gulf  that  separates  the  supersensible  from  phe¬ 
nomena.”  It  is  the  judgment,  according  to 
Kant,  which  “furnishes  the  mediating  concept 
between  the  concept  of  nature  and  that  of 
freedom.” 

Kant’s  theory  of  the  faculties  of  understand¬ 
ing,  judgment,  and  reason  is  so  complex  a  doc¬ 
trine  that  it  cannot  be  readily  compared  with 
other  analyses  of  the  capacities  or  functions  of 
mind.  His  threefold  division  bears  a  superficial 
— perhaps  only  a  verbal — resemblance  to  Aqui¬ 
nas’  division  of  mental  acts  into  conception, 
judgment,  and  reasoning. 

According  to  Aquinas,  judgment  is  the  sec¬ 
ond  of  the  three  acts  of  a  single  cognitive  facul¬ 
ty  variously  called  “mind”  or  “intellect”  or 
“reason.”  This  faculty,  he  writes,  “first  appre¬ 
hends  something  about  a  thing,  such  as  its  es¬ 
sence,  and  this  is  its  first  and  proper  object;  and 
then  it  understands  the  properties,  accidents, 
and  various  dispositions  affecting  the  essence. 
Thus  it  necessarily  relates  one  thing  with  an¬ 
other  by  composition  or  division;  and  from  one 
composition  and  division  it  necessarily  proceeds 
to  another,  and  this  is  reasoning .” 

The  first  act  of  the  mind  is  conception,  i.e., 
the  simple  apprehension  of  the  essence  and 
properties  of  a  thing.  Judgment,  the  second  act, 
unites  or  separates  concepts  by  affirming  or 
denying  one  of  another.  As  in  the  Kantian  anal¬ 
ysis,  judgment  is  a  kind  of  mediating  link;  for 
after  the  judgment  is  formed  by  what  Aquinas 
calls  the  “composition  or  division”  of  concepts, 
it  in  turn  serves  as  the  unit  of  the  mind’s  third 
act,  which  is  reasoning.  Reasoning  is  the  process 
of  going  from  judgment  to  judgment. 

The  act  of  judgment  is  that  act  of  the 
mind,  and  the  only  act,  which  can  have  the 
quality  of  truth  or  falsity.  “Truth,”  Aquinas 
writes,  “resides  in  the  intellect  composing  and 
dividing”;  for  when  the  intellect  “judges  that 
a  thing  corresponds  to  the  form  which  it  ap¬ 
prehends  about  that  thing,  then  it  first  knows 
and  expresses  truth.  ...  In  every  proposition,” 
the  mind  “either  applies  to,  or  removes  from, 
the  thing  signified  by  the  subject  some  form 
signified  by  the  predicate.”  Moreover,  the 
judgment  involves  assertion  or  denial  as  the 


Chapter  A 1 : 

concept  does  not.  Whatever  truth  there  is 
implicitly  in  concepts  must  be  explicated  in 
judgments  and  the  truth  of  the  conclusion  in 
reasoning  depends  upon  the  truth  of  the  judg¬ 
ments  which  are  the  premises.  The  judgment, 
therefore,  is  the  basic  unit  of  knowledge. 

On  this  last  point  Kant  seems  to  be  in  agree¬ 
ment  with  earlier  writers.  It  is  possible,  there¬ 
fore,  to  compare  Kant’s  classification  of  judg¬ 
ments  or  propositions  with  the  classifications  of 
Aristotle,  Descartes,  or  Locke.  But  it  is  neces¬ 
sary,  first,  to  consider  the  relation  between 
I  judgment  and  proposition.  After  that  we  can 
,  examine  the  difference  between  theoretic  and 
practical  judgments.  With  respect  to  the  theo¬ 
retic  judgment  (or  proposition),  we  shall  be 
able  to  state  opposite  views  of  the  nature  of  the 
judgment  and  diverse  views  of  the  formal  struc¬ 
ture  of  judgments,  their  material  content,  their 
relation  to  one  another  and  to  the  whole  proc¬ 
ess  of  knowing. 

The  sentence  “all  men  are  mortal”  can  be 
interpreted  as  expressing  a  judgment  or  a  prop¬ 
osition.  From  certain  points  of  view,  the  choice 
of  interpretation  makes  no  difference;  for  ex¬ 
ample,  it  does  not  matter  whether,  in  a  consid¬ 
eration  of  “all  men  are  mortal”  and  “some  men 
are  not  mortal,”  the  comparison  is  expressed  in 
terms  of  universal  and  particular,  affirmative 
and  negative,  judgments  or  propositions,  or 

I  whether  it  is  said  that  these  are  contradictory 
judgments  or  contradictory  propositions.  The 
basic  problems  of  logic  seem  to  be  conceived  in 
the  same  way  by  writers  like  Aristotle  and 
Locke,  who  tend  to  use  “proposition”  in  place 

Iof  “judgment,”  and  by  writers  like  Aquinas, 
Descartes,  and  Kant,  who  tend  to  use  both 
words  with  some  difference  in  meaning. 

What  is  the  difference?  It  is  sometimes  un¬ 
derstood  as  a  difference  between  an  act  of  the 
mind, asserting ordenying,  and  thesubject  mat¬ 
ter  being  asserted  or  denied.  The  proposition  is 
that  which  may  be  either  asserted  or  denied;  or 
in  the  third  alternative  stressed  by  Descartes, 
the  mind  may  suspend  judgment  and  merely 
entertain  the  proposition.  It  may  decline  to 
judge  it  true  or  false,  and  so  refuse  to  assert  or 
deny  it.  The  fact  that  the  proposition  is  itself 
either  affirmative  or  negative  docs  not  signify 
its  assertion  or  denial  by  a  judgment  of  the 


JUDGMENT  837 

mind,  for  an  affirmative  proposition  can  be  de¬ 
nied  and  a  negative  can  be  affirmed. 

Judgment  adds  to  the  projxjsition  in  ques¬ 
tion  the  mind’s  decision  with  respect  to  its 
truth  or  falsity.  That  decision  may  Ik*  right 
or  wrong.  A  projxisition  which  is  in  fact  true 
may  be  denied.  The  truth  of  the  proposition 
is  unaffected  by  the  falsity  of  the  judgment, 
or  if  the  mind  suspends  judgment  on  a  projx)- 
sition  which  is  true,  the  truth  of  the  proposi¬ 
tion  has  failed  to  elicit  a  judgment.  'This  seems 
to  confirm  the  separation  between  the  proposi¬ 
tion  and  the  judgment. 

Sometimes  the  difference  between  the  judg¬ 
ment  and  the  proposition  is  found  in  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  mind’s  act  of  “composing”  or 
“dividing”  concepts  and  the  formulation  of 
that  act  in  words.  On  this  view,  the  proposi¬ 
tion  is  related  to  the  judgment  as  the  term  to 
the  concept,  as  the  physical  to  the  mental 
word,  as  language  to  thought.  In  consequence, 
there  is  no  separation  for  either  the  judgment 
or  the  proposition  between  that  which  can  be 
asserted  or  denied  and  the  assertion  or  denial  of 
it.  The  affirmative  judgment  is  an  assertion, 
the  negative  a  denial;  and  the  same  holds  for 
the  affirmative  and  the  negative  proposition. 

But  on  either  theory  of  the  difference,  it  is 
thought  necessary  to  distinguish  between  the 
sentence  and  the  proposition,  especially  when 
the  proposition  is  also  regarded  as  a  verbal  for¬ 
mulation — a  statement  of  thought  in  words. 
This  is  particularly  important  in  a  logical  trea¬ 
tise  like  Aristotle’s,  which  analyzes  terms ,  prop - 
o  sit  ions,  and  syllogisms  rather  than  concepts , 
judgments ,  and  reasonings. 

In  both  the  Categories ,  which  deals  with 
terms,  and  the  treatise  On  Interpretation ,  which 
deals  with  propositions,  Aristotle  differentiates 
between  a  grammatical  and  a  logical  handling 
of  the  units  of  language.  His  distinction,  for  ex¬ 
ample,  between  simple  and  composite  expres¬ 
sions  (words  and  phrases  on  the  one  hand,  and 
sentences  on  the  other)  is  related  to,  but  it  is 
not  identical  with,  his  distinction  between  terms 
and  propositions.  Not  every  simple  expression 
can  be  used  as  a  term.  For  example,  preposi¬ 
tions  and  conjunctions  cannot  be  used  as  terms, 
as  nouns  and  verbs  can  be.  Nor  can  every  sen¬ 
tence  be  used  as  a  proposition. 

“A  sentence  is  a  significant  portion  of  speech,” 


838 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Aristotle  writes,  “some  parts  of  which  have  an 
independent  meaning,  that  is  to  say,  as  an  ut¬ 
terance,  though  not  as  the  expression  of  any 
positive  judgment.  .  .  .  Every  sentence  has 
meaning,”  he  goes  on,  “by  convention.  Yet 
every  sentence  is  not  a  proposition;  only  such 
are  propositions  as  have  in  them  truth  or  falsity. 
Thus  a  prayer  is  a  sentence,  but  is  neither  true 
nor  false.  Let  us  therefore  dismiss  all  other 
types  of  sentence  but  the  proposition,  for  this 
last  concerns  our  present  inquiry,  whereas  the 
investigation  of  the  others  belongs  rather  to  the 
study  of  rhetoric  or  of  poetry.” 

It  seems  possible  to  relate  the  two  separate 
distinctions  we  have  been  considering — that 
between  sentence  and  proposition  and  that  be¬ 
tween  proposition  and  judgment.  As  the  prop¬ 
osition  can  be  regarded  as  a  sentence  logically 
(rather  than  grammatically)  construed,  so  it 
can  also  be  regarded  as  the  linguistic  expression 
of  a  judgment  of  the  mind.  The  proposition 
thus  appears  to  be  a  kind  of  middle  ground  be¬ 
tween  language  and  thought,  for  when  a  sen¬ 
tence  is  used  for  the  purpose  of  stating  a  prop¬ 
osition  it  can  also  express  a  judgment.  When  a 
judgment  is  expressed  in  words,  the  verbal 
statement  is  also  a  proposition.  The  proposition 
is  thus  the  logical  aspect  of  a  sentence  and  the 
verbal  aspect  of  a  judgment.  A  similar  consider¬ 
ation  of  terms  in  relation  to  words  and  concepts 
occurs  in  the  chapter  on  Idea. 

What  is  perhaps  the  most  fundamental  divi¬ 
sion  in  the  sphere  of  judgments — the  separation 
of  the  practical  from  the  theoretic  or  specula¬ 
tive — can  be  initially  explained  by  reference  to 
the  forms  of  language.  Aristotle’s  remark  about 
sentences  and  propositions  tends  to  identify 
propositions  with  declarative  sentences.  Sen¬ 
tences  in  the  subjunctive  mood  state  prayers  or 
wishes,  not  propositions.  An  interrogative  sen¬ 
tence  asks  a  question  to  which  the  answers  may 
be  propositions,  or  they  may  be  hopes  and  de¬ 
sires.  The  imperative  sentence  issues  a  com¬ 
mand  to  act  in  a  certain  way,  whether  the  com¬ 
mand  is  a  direction  for  others  or  a  decision  for 
one’s  self.  This  last  type  of  sentence  represents 
the  practical  mood  of  thought  as  well  as  speech 
— thought  concerned  with  actions  to  be  done 
or  not  done,  rather  than  with  what  does  or  does 
not  exist. 


The  imperative  sentence  is  not  the  only  kind 
of  practical  statement.  It  is  merely  the  most 
terse  and  emphatic.  It  is  also  the  expression  of 
that  type  of  practical  judgment  which  most 
immediately  precedes  action  itself,  or  the  exe¬ 
cution  of  a  command.  There  are  other  sen¬ 
tences  which,  because  they  are  apparently  de¬ 
clarative  in  form,  conceal  their  imperative 
mood.  Yet  upon  examination  their  essentially 
practical  rather  than  theoretic  significance  can 
be  discovered. 

Sentences  which  contain  the  words  “ought” 
or  “should”  are  of  this  sort,  e.g .,  “Men  ought  to 
seek  the  truth,”  “You  should  work  for  peace,” 
“I  ought  to  make  this  clear.”  By  omitting 
“should”  or  “ought,”  these  sentences  can  be 
changed  into  the  strictly  declarative  mood  of 
theoretic  propositions,  e.g .,  “Men  do  seek  the 
truth,”  “You  will  work  for  peace,”  “I  shall 
make  this  clear.”  They  can  also  be  made  plainly 
imperative,  e.g.,  “Seek  the  truth,”  etc.  The 
chief  difference  between  the  blunt  form  of  the 
imperative  and  its  indicative  expression  using 
“ought”  or  “should”  is  that  the  latter  indicates 
the  person  to  whom  the  command  is  addressed. 

The  contrast  in  significance  between  a  de¬ 
clarative  and  an  imperative  statement  does, 
therefore,  convey  the  distinction  between  a 
theoretic  and  a  practical  proposition  or  judg¬ 
ment.  Kant’s  further  division  of  practical  judg¬ 
ments  into  the  hypothetical  and  the  categorical 
simply  differentiates  commands  or  “oughts” 
which  involve  no  preamble  from  those  which 
propose  that  action  be  taken  to  achieve  a  cer¬ 
tain  end,  or  which  base  a  direction  to  employ 
this  or  that  means  on  the  supposition  that  a 
certain  end  is  desired  or  sought.  Examples  of 
hypothetical  or  conditional  imperatives  would 
be  such  judgments  as  “If  you  want  to  be  happy, 
seek  the  truth”  or  “Seek  the  truth  in  order  to 
be  happy.” 

The  distinction  between  theoretic  and  prac¬ 
tical  judgments  is  currently  made  in  terms  of 
the  contrast  between  statements  of  fact  and 
statements  of  value  or,  as  in  judicial  procedure, 
between  statements  of  fact  and  rules  of  law.  A 
rule  of  law  has  the  form  of  a  general  practical 
statement,  usually  a  conditional  rather  than  a 
categorical  imperative;  whereas  the  decision  of 
a  court  applying  the  rule  to  a  case  is  a  particular 
practical  judgment. 


839 


Chapter  41:  JUDGMENT 


Beginning  with  Francis  Bacon,  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  the  theoretic  and  the  practical 
is  also  made  in  terms  of  the  difference  between 
the  pure  sciences  and  their  applications  in  tech¬ 
nology.  Technical  judgments,  prescribing  the 

Sway  to  make  something  or  produce  a  certain 
effect,  are  traditionally  associated,  under  the 
head  of  the  practical,  with  moral  judgments 
concerning  the  good  to  be  sought  and  the  ways 
of  seeking  it.  Both  are  prescriptive  of  conduct 
rather  than  descriptive  ot  existence  or  nature 
in  the  manner  of  theoretical  Statements. 

Thinkers  like  Aristotle,  Aquinas,  and  Kant, 
who  divide  science  or  philosophy  into  the  the¬ 
oretical  disciplines  (e.g.,  physics,  mathematics, 
metaphysics)  and  the  practical  or  moral  dis- 
:iplines  (e.g.,  ethics,  economics,  politics),  place 
the  discussion  of  the  difference  between  theo¬ 
retical  and  practical  judgments  in  the  context 
of  other  distinctions;  as,  for  example,  between 

I  the  speculative  and  the  practical  reason,  or  be¬ 
tween  theoretic  and  practical  knowledge;  or 
n  the  context  of  considering  the  kinds  of 
truth  appropriate  to  each,  and  the  modes  of 
inference  or  demonstration  in  each.  These 
related  distinctions  and  considerations  are 
treated  in  the  chapters  on  Knowledge, 
Mind,  Reasoning,  and  Truth. 

For  the  most  part,  however,  the  great  books 
n  the  tradition  of  logic  itself  do  not  give  an 
inalysis  of  practical  judgments  or  reasoning  in 
iny  way  comparable  to  their  treatment  of  the 
theoretic  forms  of  thought  and  statement.  The 
ogical  problems  concerning  propositions  or 
udgments,  now  to  be  considered,  apply  only 
to  the  theoretic  forms. 

Two  basic  issues  in  the  theory  of  propositions 
t>r  judgments  have  their  origin  in  the  tradition 
if  the  great  books,  but  for  their  explicit  and 
full  development  other  works  must  be  con- 
ulted  —  the  special  treatises  on  logic,  of  relative- 
y  recent  date,  listed  in  the  Additional  Read- 
ngs.  One  of  these  two  issues  has  already  been 
iriefly  commented  on,  but  for  the  full  implica- 
ions  of  the  distinction  between  propositions 
ind  judgments  one  must  go  to  such  writers  as 
iegel,  Bradley,  Bosanquet,  Cook  Wilson,  W.  E. 
ohnson,  and  John  Dewey,  who  make  this  dis- 
inction  the  crux  of  a  controversy  over  the 
cope  of  formal  logic. 


1  he  other  basic  issue  lies  in  the  opposition 
between  what  has  come  to  l>c  called  “subject- 
predicate  logic”  and  “relational  logic."  Here 
one  side  is  fully  represented  by  the  Organon  of 
Aristotle  and  by  the  later  lx>ok.s  which  adopt 
the  Aristotelian  logic  of  predication.  The  other 
logical  theory  is  intimated  but  not  fully  de¬ 
veloped  by  such  writers  as  Locke,  I  lumc,  Kant, 
and  William  James  who,  though  they  some¬ 
times  employ  the  subject -predicate  form  illation, 
tend  to  construct  the  unit  of  knowledge — the 
proposition  or  judgment — as  a  relation  be¬ 
tween  ideas  or  concepts. 

The  fact  that  Kant  places  substance  and  ac¬ 
cident  under  the  category  of  relation  can  be 
taken  as  exemplifying  this  tendency,  as  can 
Locke's  emphasis  on  the  connection  of,  and 
agreement  or  disagreement  between,  our  ideas. 
Nevertheless,  these  are  at  most  intimations  of 
the  theory  that  the  proposition  is  a  relation  of 
two  or  more  terms,  not  the  application  of  a 
predicate  to  a  subject.  As  indicated  in  the  chap¬ 
ter  on  Logic,  the  relational  theory  does  not  re¬ 
ceive  an  adequate  exposition  until  the  modern 
development  of  symbolic  or  mathematical  logic, 
beginning  with  the  writings  of  Boole,  Jevons, 
and  Venn,  and  culminating  in  such  works  as  the 
Principia  Mathematic  a  of  Russell  and  White- 
head. 

In  the  Aristotelian  logic,  simple  propositions 
consist  of  a  subject  and  a  predicate — what  is  be¬ 
ing  talked  about  and  what  is  said  of  it.  The  cop¬ 
ula  “is”  is  the  sign  of  predication;  it  also  signi¬ 
fies  an  affirmation  of  the  unity  of  subject  and 
predicate.  For  example,  in  “Socrates  is  a  man” 
the  predicate  man  is  applied  to  the  subject 
Socrates ,  and  the  unity  of  being  Socrates  and 
being  a  man  is  affirmed.  All  the  terms  of  dis¬ 
course  can  be  classified  according  to  their  char¬ 
acter  as  subjects  and  predicates;  so,  too,  can 
propositions  be  classified  by  reference  to  the 
type  of  subject-term  and  the  type  of  predicate- 
term  which  comprise  them.  The  formal  struc¬ 
ture  not  only  of  the  proposition,  but  also  of  the 
syllogism,  is  determined  by  the  order  of  sub¬ 
jects  and  predicates.  “When  one  term  is  predi¬ 
cated  of  another,”  Aristotle  writes,  “any  term 
which  is  predicable  of  the  predicate  will  also  be 
predicable  of  its  subject.” 

According  to  the  theory  of  the  proposition 
as  a  relation  of  terms  or  of  classes,  predication 


840 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


represents  merely  one  type  of  relationship— the 
membership  of  an  individual  in  a  class,  or  the 
inclusion  of  one  class  in  another.  There  are 
many  other  types  of  relation  which,  it  is  held, 
cannot  be  reduced  to  class-membership  or 
class-inclusion;  as,  for  example,  the  relationship 
stated  by  the  proposition  “John  hit  James,”  or 
the  proposition  “January  comes  before  Febru¬ 
ary.”  Propositions  can  be  classified  according  to 
the  number  of  terms  involved  in  a  single  rela¬ 
tionship,  or  by  reference  to  the  type  of  relation 
which  organizes  them,  whether  it  is  symmetri¬ 
cal  or  asymmetrical,  transitive  or  intransitive, 
reflexive  or  irreflexive.  In  this  theory  it  is  the 
character  of  the  relationship,  not  the  character 
of  the  terms,  which  is  the  fundamental  element 
in  logical  analysis,  and  this  determines  the  for¬ 
mal  structure  of  inference  as  well  as  of  proposi¬ 
tions. 

It  has  been  claimed  for  each  of  these  logical 
theories  that  it  is  the  more  general  analysis  and 
that  it  is  able  to  reduce  the  formulations  of  the 
opposite  theory  to  its  own  terms  or  subsume 
them  as  a  special  case.  Certainly  it  is  verbally 
possible  to  convert  all  predications  into  state¬ 
ments  of  relationship,  or  all  relational  state¬ 
ments  into  subject-predicate  propositions.  But 
this  by  itself  does  not  seem  to  resolve  the  issue 
to  the  satisfaction  of  either  theory;  each  side 
contends  that  such  reductions  violate  its  funda¬ 
mental  principles.  Stated  in  its  most  drastic 
form,  the  unresolved  question  is  whether  there 
is  one  logic  or  two— or  perhaps  more. 

Within  the  tradition  of  Aristotelian  logic, 
there  are  divergent  schemes  for  classifying 
propositions  or  judgments.  So  far  as  the  great 
books  are  concerned,  this  can  be  best  illustrated 
by  mentioning  Kant’s  departures  in  analysis. 

Aristotle  distinguishes  between  simple  and 
composite  propositions,  the  former  consisting 
of  a  single  subject  and  predicate,  the  latter 
“compounded  of  several  propositions.”  For  ex¬ 
ample,  since  the  two  predicates  in  the  proposi¬ 
tion  “This  man  is  good  and  a  shoemaker”  do 
not  form  a  unity,  the  sentence  expresses  a  con¬ 
junction  of  two  simple  propositions:  “This  man 
is  good”  and  “This  man  is  a  shoemaker.”  Other 
types  of  compound  propositions  are  the  hypo¬ 
thetical  and  the  disjunctive,  e.g .,  “If  Socrates  is 
a  man,  Socrates  is  mortal,”  and  “Either  all  men 


are  mortal  or  no  men  are  mortal.”  Kant  treats 
these  distinctions  under  the  head  of  relation .  He 
calls  the  proposition  which  is  a  “relation  of  the 
predicate  to  the  subject,  categorical”  and  he 
regards  the  hypothetical  or  disjunctive  judg¬ 
ment  (based  on  relations  of  cause  and  effect  or 
of  the  parts  of  a  whole)  as  concerned  with  prop¬ 
ositions  “in  relation  to  each  other.” 

Aristotle  classifies  simple  propositions  by  ref¬ 
erence  to  their  quantity  and  quality.  In  regard 
to  quantity  he  distinguishes  between  the  uni¬ 
versal  (e.g.,  “All  men  are  mortal”)  and  the  par¬ 
ticular  (e.g.,  “Some  men  are  mortal”).  To  these 
he  adds  the  indefinite  proposition  which  leaves 
the  quantity  (all or  some)  undetermined.  Under 
the  head  of  quantity,  Kant  makes  a  threefold 
division  according  to  unity,  plurality,  and  total¬ 
ity.  He  adds  the  singular  proposition  “Socrates 
is  mortal”  to  Aristotle’s  particular  and  univer¬ 
sal.  The  difference  between  the  singular  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  particular  and  the  universal 
on  the  other,  seems  to  be  represented  in  Aristo¬ 
tle’s  thought  by  the  distinction  between  prop¬ 
ositions  about  an  individual  subject  and  prop¬ 
ositions  about  a  universal  subject. 

The  quality  of  categorical  propositions,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Aristotle,  is  either  affirmative  (i.e., 
positive)  or  negative,  e.g .,  “All  men  are  mortal” 
and  “Some  men  are  not  mortal.”  To  these  two 
Kant  adds  a  third  type  of  judgment  under  the 
head  of  quality — the  infinite  judgment  which 
affirms  a  negative  predicate  of  a  subject,  e.g ., 
“The  soul  is  non-mortal.”  Though  Aristotle 
recognizes  the  special  character  of  a  term  like 
“non-mortal,”  since  it  is  both  negative  and 
indefinite,  he  does  not  seem  to  think  that  the 
use  of  such  terms  affects  the  quality  of  a  prop¬ 
osition. 

Finally,  Aristotle  divides  propositions  ac¬ 
cording  to  whether  they  are  simple  assertions  of 
fact  or  are  assertions  qualified  by  the  notions  of 
necessity  or  contingency  (i.e.,  possibility).  Ev¬ 
ery  proposition,  he  says,  “states  that  something 
either  is  or  must  be  or  may  be  the  attribute  of 
something  else.”  The  distinction  between  the 
necessary  and  contingent  modes  of  statement 
has  come  to  be  called  a  difference  in  “modal¬ 
ity,”  and  statements  which  have  one  or  another 
modality  are  called  “modal  propositions.” 

It  is  sometimes  thought  that  the  Aristotelian 
classification  treats  only  necessary  and  contin- 


841 


Chapter  41:  1UDGM1  XT 


gent  propositions,  with  their  several  opposites, 
as  modal  propositions,  and  separates  the  simple 
or  pure  assertion  from  them  as  non-modal.  In 
contrast  to  this,  Kant  makes  a  threefold  divi¬ 
sion  of  judgments  under  the  head  of  modality: 
the  “problematical”  {i.e.,  the  possible,  what 
may  be),  the  “assertoric”  (i.e.,  the  existent, 
what  is),  and  the  “apodictic”  (i.e.,  the  neces¬ 
sary,  what  must  be). 


The  classification  of  the  types  of  judgment 
or  proposition  is  usually  preliminary  in  logical 
analysis  to  a  consideration  of  their  order  and 
connection. 

The  formal  pattern  of  what  is  traditionally 
called  “the  square  of  opposition”  is  determined 
by  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the  simple 
propositions  which  are  therein  related  as  con¬ 
tradictory,  contrary,  and  sub-contrary.  Two 
propositions  are  contradictory  if  they  are  op¬ 
posite  in  both  quality  and  quantity  ( e.g .,  “All 
men  are  mortal”  is  contradicted  by  “Some 
men  are  not  mortal”).  Two  universal  proposi¬ 
tions  are  contrary  if  one  is  affirmative  and  the 
other  negative  {e.g.,  “All  men  are  mortal”  is 
^contrary  to  “No  men  are  mortal”);  and  an  af¬ 
firmative  and  a  negative  particular  proposition 
are  related  as  sub-contraries  {e.g.,  “Some  men 
are  mortal”  and  “Some  men  are  not  mortal”). 
The  significance  of  these  three  basic  relation¬ 


ships  for  the  truth  and  falsity  of  the  opposed 
propositions  is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on 
Opposition;  and  in  the  chapter  on  Necessity 
and  Contingency  the  special  problems  of  op¬ 
position  among  modal  propositions  are  ex¬ 
amined. 

Other  than  their  opposition,  the  only  formal 
relationship  of  propositions  or  judgments  oc- 
:urs  in  the  structure  of  inference  or  reasoning. 
According  to  the  traditional  analysis,  the  impli- 
ration  of  one  proposition  by  another — insofar 
is  that  is  determined  by  the  form  of  each — is 
mmediate  inference.  In  contrast,  the  pattern 
)f  mediated  inference  or  reasoning  always  in- 
/olves  at  least  three  propositions,  ordered  not 
only  with  respect  to  the  sequence  from  premis¬ 
es  to  conclusion,  but  also  by  the  relation  of  the 
premises  to  one  another.  These  matters  are  dis¬ 


missed  in  the  chapter  on  Reasoning. 

With  respect  to  their  origin,  status,  or  im¬ 
port,  judgments  or  propositions  are  subject  to 


further  distinctions  in  t\|x*.  The  certainty  or 
probability  with  which  propositions  arc  as¬ 
serted  or  judgments  arc  made  is  connected  by 
some  writers  with  the  distinction  Ixtween 
knowledge  and  opinion,  by  others  with  t he 
difference  l>c tween  science  and  dialectic,  and 
by  others  with  the  difference  between  knowing 
the  relation  of  ideas  and  knowing  matters  of 
fact  or  real  existence.  Propositions  which  ex¬ 
press  certain  knowledge  are,  furthermore,  di¬ 
vided  by  some  analysts  into  those  which  arc 
axiomatic,  self-evident,  or  immediate  and  those 
which  are  known  only  by  mediated  inference, 
reasoning,  or  demonstration,  not  by  intuition 
or  induction.  The  former  are  also  sometimes 
called  “principles,”  the  latter  “conclusions.” 

Locke’s  distinction  between  “trilling”  and 
“instructive”propositions,  like  Kant’s  dis¬ 
tinction  between  “analytic”  and  “synthetic” 
judgments,  is  made  in  the  general  context  of  an 
examination  of  how  we  learn  or  know. 

Trifling  propositions,  according  to  Locke, 
“are  universal  propositions  which,  though  they 
be  certainly  true,  yet  they  add  no  light  to  our 
understanding;  bring  no  increase  to  our  knowl¬ 
edge.”  All  “purely  identical  propositions”  are 
of  this  sort — propositions  such  as  “body  is 
body”  or  “a  vacuum  is  a  vacuum.”  Such  propo¬ 
sitions  “teach  nothing  but  what  every  one  who 
is  capable  of  discourse  knows  without  being 
told,  viz.,  that  the  same  term  is  the  same  term, 
and  the  same  idea  the  same  idea.”  They  are  all 
instances  of  the  law  of  identity;  or,  as  Locke  ex¬ 
presses  it,  they  are  all  “equivalent  to  this  propo¬ 
sition,  viz.,  what  is,  is .”  If  the  trifling  proposi¬ 
tion,  the  analytical  judgment,  or  what  in  our 
day  is  called  a  “tautology,”  goes  beyond  the 
statement  of  an  identity  between  subject  and 
predicate,  it  goes  no  further  than  the  explica¬ 
tion  of  a  definition.  It  predicates,  Locke  says, 
“a  part  of  the  definition  of  the  word  defined,” 
as,  for  example,  in  the  proposition  “Lead  is  a 
metal.” 

Analytical  or  explicative  judgments,  Kant 
says  in  the  Prolegomena,  “express  nothing  in  the 
predicate  but  what  has  already  been  actually 
thought  in  the  concept  of  the  subject  .  . .  When 
I  say,  ‘all  bodies  are  extended,’  I  have  not  am¬ 
plified  in  the  least  my  concept  of  body,  but 
have  only  analyzed  it  .  .  .  On  the  contrary,  this 
judgment,  ‘All  bodies  have  weight,’  contains  in 


842 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


its  predicate  something  not  actually  thought 
in  the  general  concept  of  body;  it  amplifies 
my  knowledge,  by  adding  something  to  my 
concept,  and  must  therefore  be  called  syn- 
thetical.,, 

For  Locke  not  all  axioms  or  self-evident 
propositions  are  trifling  or  tautological,  for 
some  go  beyond  statements  of  identity  or  the 
explication  of  definitions,  as,  for  example,  that 
the  whole  is  greater  than  the  part.  Nor  are  they 
all  useless.  Some  which  Locke  distinguishes 
from  the  rest  by  calling  them  “maxims,”  are  of 
use,  he  maintains,  “in  the  ordinary  methods  of 
teaching  sciences  as  far  as  they  are  advanced, 
but  of  little  or  none  in  advancing  them  further. 
They  are  of  use  in  disputes,  for  the  silencing  of 
obstinate  wranglers,  and  bringing  those  con¬ 
tests  to  some  conclusion.” 

For  Kant  there  is  a  further  division  of  judg¬ 
ments  into  the  a  posteriori  and  the  a  priori ,  ac¬ 
cording  as  their  truth  is  or  is  not  grounded  in 
the  data  of  experience.  The  former  are  empiri¬ 
cal  in  origin,  the  latter  transcendental,  that  is, 
they  have  a  foundation  which  transcends  ex¬ 
perience.  These  two  types  of  judgment  express 
two  corresponding  types  of  knowledge — a 
priori  knowledge  by  which  Kant  understands 
“not  such  as  is  independent  of  this  or  that  kind 
of  experience,  but  such  as  is  absolutely  so  of  all 
experience.  Opposed  to  this  is  empirical  knowl¬ 
edge,  or  that  which  is  possible  only  a  posteriorly 
that  is,  through  experience.” 

In  Kant’s  view,  there  is  no  problem  about 
the  truth  of  analytic  judgments,  for  these  have 
an  a  priori  foundation  in  the  principle  of  con¬ 
tradiction.  (The  contradictory  of  an  analytic 
judgment  is  always  self-contradictory.)  Nor  do 
synthetic  judgments  which  are  empirical  or  a 
posteriori  raise  any  special  difficulties.  The  cen¬ 
tral  question  in  the  theory  of  knowledge  con¬ 
cerns  the  possibility  and  validity  of  synthetic 
judgments  a  priori. 

“If  I  go  out  of  and  beyond  the  conception  A, 
in  order  to  recognize  another,  B,  as  connected 
with  it,  what  foundation  have  I  to  rest  on,” 
Kant  asks,  “whereby  to  render  the  synthesis 
possible?  I  have  here  no  longer  the  advantage 
of  looking  out  in  the  sphere  of  experience  for 
what  I  want.  Let  us  take,  for  example,  the 
proposition,  ‘everything  that  happens  has  a 
cause.’  In  the  conception  of  something  that  hap ¬ 


pens,  I  indeed  think  an  existence  which  a  cer¬ 
tain  time  antecedes,  and  from  this  I  can  de¬ 
rive  analytical  judgments.  But  the  conception 
of  a  cause  lies  quite  outside  the  above  concep¬ 
tion,  and  indicates  something  entirely  different 
from  ‘that  which  happens,’  and  is  consequent¬ 
ly  not  contained  in  that  conception.  How  then 
am  I  able  to  assert  concerning  the  general  con¬ 
ception — ‘that  which  happens’ — something  en¬ 
tirely  different  from  that  conception,  and  to 
recognize  the  conception  of  cause  although  not 
contained  in  it,  yet  as  belonging  to  it,  and  even 
necessarily  ?  What  is  here  the  unknown  X,  upon 
which  the  understanding  rests  when  it  believes 
it  has  found,  outside  the  conception  A,  a  foreign 
predicate  B,  which  it  nevertheless  considers  to 
be  connected  with  it?”  It  is  the  discovery  and 
solution  of  this  problem  which  Kant  believes  to 
be  the  signal  contribution  of  his  transcendental 
logic  of  the  judgment. 

It  may  be  wondered  whether  this  problem 
can  be  stated  in  terms  other  than  those  peculiar 
to  Kant’s  analytical  vocabulary.  Other  writers 
admit  that  propositions  which  are  particular 
and  contingent  have  “existential  import.” 
Their  truth  concerns  real  existences,  and  so 
whether  they  are  true  or  not  can  and  must  be 
learned  from  experience.  These  are  like  Kant’s 
synthetic  judgments  a  posteriori.  Universal 
and  necessary  propositions,  on  the  other  hand, 
are  sometimes  interpreted  as  having  no  exis¬ 
tential  significance.  Instead  of  being  read  as 
asserting  that  anything  exists,  they  are  taken 
simply  as  statements  of  the  relation  between 
our  own  ideas.  These,  for  Locke  and  Hume, 
are  like  Kant’s  a  priori  analytic  judgments. 

What  remains  is  to  discover  a  parallel  for 
Kant’s  synthetic  judgments  a  priori.  In  terms 
other  than  Kant’s,  the  most  likely  parallel 
seems  to  be  the  universal  and  necessary  propo¬ 
sition  conceived  as  a  statement  about  reality 
rather  than  about  relations  in  the  realm  of  our 
own  concepts.  When  universal  propositions  are 
so  interpreted,  two  questions  arise.  How  do  we 
establish  that  the  subjects  of  such  propositions 
really  exist?  What  is  the  ultimate  ground  for 
the  truth  of  such  propositions,  the  unlimited 
universality  of  which  outruns  experience?  In 
these  two  questions  we  find  a  problem  which  is 
at  least  analogous  to  Kant’s  problem  of  the 
possibility  of  synthetic  judgments  a  priori. 


Chapter  41:  JUDGMENT 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

i*  Judgment  as  an  act  or  faculty  of  the  mind:  its  contrast  with  the  act  of  conception  or 
with  the  faculties  of  understanding  and  reason 

2.  The  division  of  judgments  in  terms  of  the  distinction  between  the  theoretic  and  the 

practical 

3.  The  analysis  of  practical  or  moral  judgments:  judgments  of  good  and  evil,  means  and 

ends;  categorical  and  hypothetical  imperatives 

4.  The  distinction  between  the  aesthetic  and  the  teleological  judgment 

5.  The  nature  of  theoretic  judgments 

5 a-  The  linguistic  expression  of  judgments:  sentences  and  propositions 
5 b.  The  judgment  as  a  predication:  the  classification  of  subjects  and  predicates 
5 c.  The  judgment  as  relational:  types  of  relation 

6.  The  division  of  theoretic  judgments  according  to  formal  criteria 

6a.  The  division  of  judgments  according  to  quantity:  universal,  particular,  singular, 
and  indefinite  propositions 

6b.  The  division  of  judgments  according  to  quality:  positive,  negative,  and  infinite 
propositions 

6c.  The  division  of  judgments  according  to  modality:  necessary  and  contingent 
propositions;  problematic,  assertoric,  and  apodictic  judgments 

6d.  The  classification  of  judgments  by  reference  to  relation:  simple  and  composite 
propositions;  categorical,  hypothetical,  and  disjunctive  judgments 

7.  The  order  and  connection  of  judgments 

7 a.  The  formal  opposition  of  judgments:  the  square  of  opposition 
7 b.  The  conversion  of  propositions:  the  problem  of  immediate  inference 
7 c.  Reasoning  as  a  sequence  of  judgments:  the  chain  of  reasoning 

8.  The  differentiation  of  judgments  according  to  origin,  ground,  or  import 

8a.  Self-evident  and  demonstrable  propositions:  immediate  and  mediated,  intuitive 
and  reasoned  judgments 

8b.  Analytic  and  synthetic  judgments:  trifling  and  instructive  propositions 

8c.  A  priori  and  a  posteriori,  non-existential  and  existential  judgments:  the  problem 
of  a  priori  synthetic  judgments 

8d.  The  division  of  judgments  into  the  determinant  and  the  reflective:  judgments 
as  constitutive  or  as  regulative 

9.  Degrees  of  assent:  certainty  and  probability 

10.  The  truth  and  falsity  of  judgments 


844 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :Psychology,ll6a.-\  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halvesofthe  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (£>),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1;  Judgment  as  an  act  or  faculty  of  the  mind: 
its  contrast  with  the  act  of  conception  or 
with  the  faculties  of  understanding  and 
reason 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  4  [2a4-io]  6a  / 
Interpretation,  ch  i  [i6a9~i8]  25a-b  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  vi,  ch  4  [i027bi8-28]  550a, c; 
bk  ix,  ch  10  577c-578a,c  /  Soul,  bk  hi,  ch  6 
662d-663c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c; 
bk  x,  par  10  73d-74a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  viii, 
ch  6,  269b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  3,  a  4, 
rep  2  16d-17c;  q  13,  a  12,  ans  74c-75b;  q  14, 
a  14  88d-89b;  q  16,  a  2  95c-96b;  q  17,  a  3 
102d-103c;  q  58,  a  2,  ans  301b-d;  a  4,  ans 
302d-303c;  q  85,  a  5,  ans  and  rep  3  457d- 
458d;  a  6  458d-459c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  i, 
a  2  381a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  66c-67a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  59c-61d  esp 
59c-60a;  64a-b 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  21d-22a  /  Meditations, 
11,  81a;  iv  89a-93a  esp  89c-90a  /  Objections 
and  Replies,  124b-c;  141a;  215d-216c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  48-49  391a- 
394d 


35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xx-, 
sect  5  179c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  v,  sect  5-6  329di 
330b;  ch  xiv  364b-365a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  16d-19a;  34a-45b  esp 
39a-c,  41c-42c;  51d-52b;  59c-64a  esp  60a-c; 
64d-66d;  99a-101b;  108a-112d  esp  llOd-lllc; 
166c-171a;  193a-200c;  240b-243c  /  Fund . 
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  282b-c  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  461a-475d  esp  465c-467d,  474b-475d; 
550a-551a,c;  558a;  572b-575b 
53  James:  Psychology,  178a-179a;  213b-214a; 
313b;  638a- b;  859a;  861b 

2.  The  division  of  judgments  in  terms  of  the 
distinction  between  the  theoretic  and 
the  practical 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  hi,  ch  7  [306^4-18] 
397b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  499a-500b; 
bk  iv,  ch  4  [ioo8b2-32]  527d-528b  /  Soul , 
bk  hi,  ch  7  [43ib2-i2]  664a-b;  ch  9  [432b26- 
433a9l  665c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  339d-340b;  ch 
7  [1098^5-35]  343d;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [uo3b26- 
1104^]  349b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [ii39a2i-3i]  387d- 
388a;  ch 5  [ii40bn-i9]  389b-c;  ch  8  [1142^3- 
19]  391b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  16  90b-91b;  q  79,  aa  n-13  424d-427a; 
part  i— 11,  q  13,  a  6,  rep  2  676c-677b 


3  to  5b 


Chapter  41:  JUDGMENT 


20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  5,  rep  3  39a-40a;  q  90,  a  i,  rep  2  205b 
206b:  a  2,  rep  3  206b-207a;  q  94,  a  4,  ans 
223d-224d;  part  iii,  q  ii,  a  i,  rep  3  772b- 
773a;  q  13,  a  i,  rep  3  780a  781b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  i,  44a  c  /  Objec¬ 
tions  and  Replies ,  126a-b;  237b  c;  243c  d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  1  103d  104a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  190c-191a  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  260d-261b;  271a  c  / 
Practical  Reason ,  297a-c;  300d  [fn  1];  310a  b; 
3l9c-321b;  329a-330c  csp  329a-d;  343a  d  / 
Judgement ,  461a-475d  esp  463a-467a,  474b- 
475d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445c-d 

46  Hecel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  pref,  5c-6a; 
part  iii,  par  227  74b-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  186a 

3.  The  analysis  of  practical  or  moral  judgments: 
judgments  of  good  and  evil,  means  and 
ends;  categorical  and  hypothetical  im¬ 
peratives 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  iii,  ch  1-4  162a-166b 
/  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  499a- 500b;  bk  iv, 
ch  4  [ioo8b2— 32]  527d-528b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  339d-340b;  bk 
ii,  ch  2  [ii03b27-ii04a9]  349b-c  passim;  bk 
vi,  ch  2  [1139*21-31]  387d-388a;  ch  5  [1 14015 
11-19]  389b-c;  ch  8  [1  i42ai3~ 19]  391b;  ch 
io-ii  392b-393b;  bk  vii,  ch  3  396c-398a  / 
Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  11  [i28ib39-i282a23]  479d- 
480a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  7  604c-607d 

17  Plotinus  :  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  i  106b-107a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  13  16c-d; 
bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c  /  Ctfy  of  God ,  bk  viii, 
ch  8  270a-d;  bk  xix,  ch  1-14  507a-520d  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  iii,  ch  10,  661d-662a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  59, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  i  308b-309a;  q  79,  aa  n-13 
424d-427a;  q  83,  a  i,  ans  436d-438a;  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  i  438a-d;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2 
438d-439c;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a  i  686d-687c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  6,  ans  and  rep  2-3  40a-41a 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus  401a-432a  esp 
par  7-13  402b-405a,  par  17-36  407b-417b, 
par  59-78  427a-432a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  53a-54a;  60d; 
61d-62a;  65b-c;  66c-67d;  68b-c;  96a;  part 
ii,  149b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  51a-55d  esp  52c-53c; 
136b-139b;  520b-522a 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii, 
sc  ii  113c-115d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  86c-95b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iii,  49a-b  /  Ob¬ 
jections  and  Replies,  126a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  4  172b;  98  190b;  375-385 
237b-239a;  456-457  254a;  505  261a  b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  59-70  193d-197b  passim 


8-15 

35  Hi  mi  :  Human  Understanding ,  mxt  v,  iu\  >6, 
465a  d  (fn  i| 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114d  115n;  190c  d;  236d 
237a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  200a 
261  d:  266a  267d;  268c  271a;  272a  b  /  Prac 
tical  Reason,  318c  321b  csp  320c  321b.  327d 
329a;  357c  360d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements 
of  Ethics,  367c;  368d  :  369b  c;  373d;  377 c  d  / 
intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386b  d:  387b: 
387d  388a;  390b, d  391c;  392b  393a  /  Scieme 
of  Right,  397b  398a;  416b  417b  /  Judgement, 
477b  c;  557d  [fn  2];  586a  b;  595a  d;  596c 
598b;  605d  606b  [fn  2] 

43  Federalist:  number  1,  29d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  275a  278c  passim,  csp  276b 
277b;  287b  c  /  Utilitarianism,  446d  447a; 
455c-457b  passim;  461c  462a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  140 
49b-54a;  part  iii,  par  191-192  66b  c  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  165a  166b; 
part  iv,  362d 

53  James:  Psychology,  202b;  794a-798b;  886b 
888a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  792b  c; 
801  d 

4.  The  distinction  between  the  aesthetic  and 

the  teleological  judgment 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  471b-473a;  476a-483d. 
485  b -489a:  492b~493b;  513b-516b;  516d- 
517c;  528b-c;  548c-549d;  550c-551a,c;  558a  b; 
559c-560c;  562a-564c;  567c-570a;  572b  578a 

5.  The  nature  of  theoretic  judgments 

5a.  The  linguistic  expression  of  judgments: 
sentences  and  propositions 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  85d-86b;  109a  b  /  Sophist, 
574d-577b 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  4-  5  26a  c  / 
Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  cii  i  [24*16— bi 5]  39a-c  / 
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [72*7-14]  98c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  13, 
a  12  74c-75b;  q  85,  a  2,  rep  3  453d-455b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  i, 
a  2  381a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56b;  60a;  part  iv, 
270a-c 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  433a  b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxiii,  sect  19  251c-d;  bk  iii,  cii  vii,  sect  i 
283a  b;  bk  iv,  ch  v  329a-33lb  passim;  cii  vi, 
sect  1-3  331b  d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341b  342c 

53  James:  Psychology,  144a  b 

5b.  The  judgment  as  a  predication:  the  classi¬ 
fication  of  subjects  and  predicates 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  cii  2-3  5b-d:  cii  5 
[2*1 1  — 3b24]  6a-8a  /  Interpretation ,  ch  4  8  26a- 
28a;  cii  11  31c-32c  /  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  cii 
27  [43*25-44]  60c-d  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i, 
ch  4  100a  101b;  ch  18  22  111 b  l  15t>  /  Topics 


846 


8 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5r  to  7c 


(5.  The  nature  of  theoretic  judgments.  5b.  The 
judgment  as  a  predication:  the  classifica¬ 
tion  of  subjects  and  predicates.) 

bk  i,  ch  4-9  144b-147b  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[i86a22-i87aio]  261b-262a;  ch  6  [189^8-33] 
264d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, 
ans  lOd-lld;  q  3,  a  4,  rep  2  16d-17c;  q  13,  a  5 
66b-67d;  a  12,  ans  74c-75b;  q  16,  a  2  95c- 
96b;  a  6,  ans  98b-d;  q  58,  a  2  301b-d;  a  4 
302d-303c;  q  76,  a  3,  ans  391a-393a;  q  85, 
a  5,  rep  3  457d-458d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  270a-c 
31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  def  ix 
130d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  51d-52b;  180c-182b 
53  James:  Psychology ,  144a-b;  313a-b;  638b; 
861b;  870b-873a 

5c.  The  judgment  as  relational:  types  of  rela¬ 
tion 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  i, 
sect  1-7  307a-308a;  ch  xii,  sect  6-8  360a-c 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv,  div  20 
458a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  39c-41c  esp  40c-d;  51d- 
52b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  174b-176a;  302b-304b; 
638b;  869a-873a  esp  870b-871a,  872b;  878a- 
879b;  889a-b 

6.  The  division  of  theoretic  judgments  accord¬ 
ing  to  formal  criteria 

6a.  The  division  of  judgments  according  to 
quantity:  universal,  particular,  singular, 
and  indefinite  propositions 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  2  5b-c  /  Interpreta¬ 
tion ,  ch  7  [i7a37~bi6]  26d-27a  /  Prior  Analytics , 
bk  1,  ch  1  [24ai6-2i]  39a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  1,  55b-56a 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  v, 
sect  10  331a;  ch  vi  331b-336d  passim;  ch  ix, 
sect  1  349a;  ch  xi,  sect  13-14  357d-358c 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  39c-41c  esp  39d-40a 

6b.  The  division  of  judgments  according  to 
quality:  positive,  negative,  and  infinite 
propositions 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  10  [12^6—15]  17d- 
18a  /  Interpretation ,  ch  5  [17^-9]  26b;  ch  6 
26c-d;  ch  10  29d-31c  /  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i, 
ch  3  [23bi9~26]  40c;  ch  46  70b-71d  /  Posterior 
Analytics ,  bk  1,  ch  25  [86b3o— 38]  118d 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  13, 
a  12,  ans  74c-75b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  33 

161b-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  hi,  ch  vii, 
sect  1  283a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  v,  sect  5-6  329d- 
330b  passim 


42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  39c-41c  esp  40a-c; 
210c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  53 
25c-d 

6c.  The  division  of  judgments  according  to 
modality:  necessary  and  contingent 
propositions;  problematic,  assertoric, 
and  apodictic  judgments 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  12-13  32d-35c 
/  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  3  40a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  13,  rep  2  86d-88c;  q  19,  a  3,  ans  llOb-lllc; 
a  8,  rep  1,3  116a-d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  22a-b;  23a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14c-15c;  39c-41c  esp  40d- 
41c;  179c-180c;  193a-200c  esp  194b-d;  217c-d 
/  Judgement ,  491c-495a,c 

53  James:  Psychology,  851a 

6d.  The  classification  of  judgments  by  refer¬ 
ence  to  relation:  simple  and  composite 
propositions;  categorical,  hypothetical, 
and  disjunctive  judgments 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  5  [i7a2o-24] 
26c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  13,  rep  2  86d-88c;  q  19,  a  8,  rep  1,3  116a-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  39c-41c  esp  40c-d;  44a-b; 
llOd-lllc  esp  111b;  194b-c /Fund.  Prin.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals,  265c-266d  /  Practical  Reason, 
297a-298a  /  Judgement,  483d-491c 

53  James:  Psychology,  859b 

7.  The  order  and  connection  of  judgments 

la.  The  formal  opposition  of  judgments:  the 
square  of  opposition 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  10  [i3bi— 35]  19a-c 
/  Interpretation,  ch  6-7  26c-27d;  ch  10  29d- 
31c;  ch  12-14  32d-36d  /  Posterior  Analytics , 
bk  1,  ch  2  [72ai3]  98c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  64, 
a  3,  rep  3  68b-69b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  64d-65c;  156d-157b; 
174b-d 

7b.  The  conversion  of  propositions:  the  prob¬ 
lem  of  immediate  inference 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  7  [1 7^3-37] 
27b-c;  ch  10  [2oai6~37]  30d-31b/  Prior  Ana¬ 
lytics,  bk  1,  ch  2-3  39d-40c;  bk  ii,  ch  8-10 
79b-81b;  ch  22  [67b26-68a24]  89b-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  17d-18a;  109d-lllc  esp 
109d-110a,  llOd-lllc 

7c.  Reasoning  as  a  sequence  of  judgments:  the 
chain  of  reasoning 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  3  [ibio— 16]  5c-d  / 
Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  1-3  39a-40c;  ch  23 
[40b30-4ia7]  57c-d  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i, 
ch  1-2  97a-99a 


847 


8  to  9  Chapter  41: 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  7,  ans  81d  82b;  g  58,  a  3  301d  302d;  a  4, 
ans  302d-303c;  q  79,  aa  8-9  421c-423d;  q  85, 
a  5,  ans  457d-458d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  58a -c;  60a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  59c  60a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiv,  28b  c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  cii  ii, 
sect  2-8  309d-311a;  cn  xv,  sect  i  365a-c; 
ch  xvii,  sect  4,  373a-375a  passim;  sect  15- 
17  378d-379c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  110d-112d;  115d  119a  / 
Practical  Reasony  329a-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  313b;  666b-674b  esp  667b- 
668a,  672b;  868b-879b  esp  870b  873a,  878a 

8.  The  differentiation  of  judgments  according 
to  origin,  ground,  or  import 

8a.  Self-evident  and  demonstrable  proposi¬ 
tions:  immediate  and  mediated,  intuitive 
and  reasoned  judgments 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
97a-d;  ch  3  99b-100a:  ch  15  109a-b;  ch  19-22 
lllc-115b;  ch  23  [84bi9-85ai]  115c-116a;  ch 
31  [88*5-17]  120b-c;  bk  11,  ch  9  128a-b;  ch  19 
136a-137a,c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vi,  ch  3  [1  i39b25— 34] 
388c;  ch  6  389d;  ch  8  [1142*25-29]  39!b-c; 
ch  ii  [ii43*32-b5]  392d-393a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i, 
ch  2  [i356b26— 27]  596b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  2,  a 
1  lOd-lld;  q  14,  a  1,  rep  2  75d-76c;  a  7, 
ans  81d-82b;  q  17,  a  3,  rep  2  102d-103c; 
q  79,  a  12,  ans  425c-426b;  q  84,  a  3,  rep  3 
443d-444d;  q  85,  a  6,  ans  458d-459c;  q  117, 
a  1  595d-597c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  2  612a- 
613a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  2  36a-37b;  q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d-223a;  a  4, 
ans  223d-224d;  part  ii-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  ans  382c- 
383b;  q  8,  a  1,  rep  2  417a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  259d-261a;  272a-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  59c-d; 
97a 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  hi,  4a-d;  xii,  20d-25a  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  123a-b;  125a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  1  171a-172a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15-16  98d-99c;  sect  18  99d-100b;  sect 
23  101b-102a;  ch  ii,  sect  i  103d-104a;  sect  4 
104d-105a;  ch  iii,  sect  23  119b-120a;  bk  iv, 
ch  1,  sect  9  308c-309b  passim,  esp  309b;  ch 
ii  309b-313a;  ch  iii,  sect  2-4  313a-c;  ch  vti, 
sect  1-11  337a-342d  passim;  ch  ix,  sect  2-3 
349a-c;  ch  xv,  sect  i  365a-c;  ch  xvii,  sect 
2-3  371d-372b;  sect  14-17  378c-379c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  39a-c;  99a-c;  llOd  111c; 
211C'218d  /  Judgement ,  542d-543a 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-d;  number 
83,  244b  c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  446a-447a 


JUDGMHN'r 

8b.  Analytic  and  synthetic  judgments:  trifling 
and  instructive  propositions 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  cii  v, 
sect  6,  330b;  cii  vm  345a  348d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason  ,  16d  19a;  31a- d;  64d  66d; 
179c  182  b  /  Practical  Reason ,  339a;  351c  / 
Science  of  Right,  405b  c  /  Judgement ,  516b  d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  879b  880b  [fn  2] 

8c.  A  priori  and  a  posteriori ,  non-existential  and 
existential  judgments:  the  problem  of 
a  priori  synthetic  judgments 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  1, 
sect  15-16  98d-99c;  sect  23  101b  102a;  bk 
iv,  ch  1,  sect  1-7  307a  308a;  ch  hi,  sect 
7-21  315b  319c;  ch  ix,  sect  i  349a;  cii 
xi,  sect  13-14  357d  358c;  cii  xvii,  sect  2, 
371d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv  458a- 
463d  passim,  esp  div  20-21  458a  c,  div  30, 
462a;  sect  v,  div  34-38,  464b-466c;  sect  x, 
div  89  490b-c;  sect  xii,  div  131-132  508d- 
509d  passim 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-8b;  14a  l08a,c  esp  14a- 
20c,  23a-24a,  25b-26b,  27b-28b,  29d  33d, 
35b-36a,  41c-42b,  46a-48d,  57d  59b,  64b- 
66d,  85d-88a;  108b-d;  110a-113b;  134c  d; 
146a;  179c-182b;  192a-b;  211c-218d;  224a- 
227a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Met  a  physic  of  Morals, 
268b-d;  280a- b;  283b  /  Practical  Reason, 
309b-d;  329d-330c;  351c  /  Pref  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics,  367d-368a  /  Science  of 
Right,  405b-407a  esp  405 b-d  /  Judgement, 
467a-475d;  570b-572d;  603a-b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445d-446d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d- 
158a;  182d-183c 

53  James:  Psychology,  639a-641a  esp  640b; 
659a-660a;  851a-890a  esp  851a-852a,  859a- 
861b,  867a-869a,  879b,  880b-881a,  884b- 
885a,  889b-890a;  897a-b 

8d.  The  division  of  judgments  into  the  deter¬ 
minant  and  the  reflective:  judgments  as 
constitutive  or  as  regulative 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  72c-74b;  193a-200c  esp 
193c-d,  194b-c;  201d-202a;  206a-207b  / 

Judgement,  461a-475d  esp  471b-474b;  550a- 
551a, c;  558a;  559a-560c;  562a-d;  564a-c; 
567b-568c;  570b-572c;  577b;  584d  585a; 

588c;  597b-599b;  601d 

9.  Degrees  of  assent:  certainty  and  probability 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  9  28a-29d  / 
Topics,  bk  v,  cii  3  [13 ibi9— 30]  182b-c  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  cii  8  [1074*14-16]  604c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [io94bu-2S] 
339d-340a;  cii  7  [1098*25-35]  343d;  bk  ii, 
ch  2  [uo3b27-no4*9]  349b-c  /  RJietoric ,  bk  1, 
ch  2  [i357*23-b24]  596d-597c;  bk  ii,  ch  25 
[i402bi3-i403*i]  652b-d 


848 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(9.  Degrees  of  assent:  certainty  and  probability .) 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres ,  505a-506a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  13  86d-88c ;  q  57,  a  3,  ans  297b-298a; 
q  58,  a  7,  rep  3  305c-306b;  q  86,  a  4, 
ans  463d-464d;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a  6,  ans 
690b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  'Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  3  14b-15a;  q  67,  a  3,  ans  83b-84d;  part 
ii-ii,  Q  1,  aa  4-5  382c-384b;  q  4,  a  8  409a- 
d;  q  9,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  i  423c-424b;  a  2, 
ans  424b-425a;  q  18,  a  4  464c-465a;  part 
hi,  q  7,  a  3,  rep  3  747b-748a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  65b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  240c-242a;  272a-d; 

292a-d;  499c-d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  1-11  la-3b;  xn,  23a-c  / 
Discourse ,  part  iv,  53c-d;  part  vi,  63c-64d 
/  Meditations ,  74a, c;  iv,  92c-93a  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  125b-126b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  intro,  sect 
2-6  93b-95a;  bk  iv,  ch  vi  331b-336d  passim, 
esp  sect  13  335c-d;  ch  xi,  sect  3  355a-b; 
sect  8-12  356b-357d;  ch  xiv-xvi  364b- 
371c;  ch  xvn,  sect  2  371d-372b;  sect  14-17 
378c-379c;  ch  xix,  sect  i  384c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vi  469d- 
470d;  sect  x,  div  86-91  488d-491c  passim, 
esp  div  87  489b-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  348a, c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  194b-c;  228c-d;  240b- 
243c  /  judgement ,  600d-604b  passim 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  275a-277b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  636a-638b;  659a-660b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  463d  /  Beyond 
the  Pleasure  Principle ,  661c-662a  /  New  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures ,  818c-819b 

10.  The  truth  and  falsity  of  judgments 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus ,  71c-74a  /  Cratylus ,  85d- 
86d;  109a-b  /  Theaetetus ,  541a-544a  /  Sophist , 
561d-577b  esp  575a-577b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  4  [2*4-10]  6a;  ch  5 
[4aio-bi9]  8b-9a  /  Interpretation ,  ch  i  [16*9- 


10 

18]  25a-b;  ch  4-14  26a-36d  passim,  esp  ch  4 
[17*1-4]  26b,  ch  7  26d-27d,  ch  9  28a-29d, 
ch  14  35c-36d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  ch  7 
[ioub25— 29]  531c;  [1012*1-17]  531d-532a; 

ch  8  [1012*29— b2 2]  532b-d;  bk  vi,  ch  4 
550a, c;  bk  ix,  ch  10  [io5i*34-bi8]  577c-d 
/  5o«/,  bk  hi,  ch  3  [427^5-25]  660a;  ch  6 
662d-663c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [1107*27-32] 
352d-353a;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [1139*21-31]  387d- 
388a;  ch  3  [1 139bi4~ 18]  388b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [353-521] 
48d-51a  esp  [469-521]  50b-51a 

18  Augustine:  Cz/y  0/  bk  viii,  ch  6, 

269b-c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  31-34 
651d-653b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
4,  rep  2  16d-17c;  q  13,  a  12  74c-75b;  q  14, 
a  15,  rep  3  89b-90b;  q  16,  a  2  95c-96b;  a  7, 
ans  and  rep  4  99a-d;  a  8,  rep  3-4  99d-100d; 
q  17,  aa  3-4  102d-104b;  q  58,  a  4,  rep  2 
302d-303c;  a  5  303c-304c;  q  85,  a  1,  rep  i 
451c-453c;  a  5,  rep  3  457d-458d;  a  6  458d- 
459c;  q  94,  a  4  505a-506a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  5,  rep  3  39a-40a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  56b;  57c;  59a- 
60a;  65b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  240c-242a;  259d-261a; 
271b-272c;  292a-d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii  18b-25a  passim  / 
Discourse,  part  iv,  52a  /  Meditations,  hi,  83a; 
85c;  iv  89a-93a  esp  90b-91b  /  Objections  and 
Replies,  124b-c;  125b-126b;  def  ix  130d; 
141a;  156d-158a;  168b-d;  215d-216c;  229d- 
230d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  49  391c-394d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxxii 
243c-248b  passim,  esp  sect  1-3  243c-244a, 
sect  19-26  247a-248b;  bk  iii,  ch  vii,  sect  i 
283a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  v  329a-331b;  ch  vi,  sect  3 
331c-d;  sect  16  336d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  99a-100a;  108a-d;  193a-c; 
240b-243c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  460a-469b  esp  462b-465a, 
468b-469a;  508a;  638a-b;  879a-881a 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  comparison  of  judgment  with  other  acts  of  the  mind,  see  Idea  2 g,  5a;  Knowledge  6b(4); 
Reasoning  i;  and  for  the  relation  of  judgment  to  other  faculties  of  the  mind,  see  Mind 
le_ie(3)* 

Discussions  relevant  to  the  distinction  between  theoretic  and  practical  judgments,  see 
Knowledge  6e(i);  Philosophy  2a;  Prudence  2a;  Reasoning  5e~5e(i);  Theology  4d; 
Truth  2c;  Wisdom  ib. 

Other  considerations  of  practical  or  moral  judgments,  and  of  judgment  in  relation  to  pru¬ 
dence,  see  Good  and  Evil  5b— 5c ;  Knowledge  6e(2);  Prudence  5a;  and  for  the  theory  of 
the  categorical  imperative,  see  Duty  5;  Necessity  and  Contingency  5a(2). 

Other  treatments  of  language  in  relation  to  thought,  see  Idea  4a;  Language  7. 


Chapter  *41 :  JUDGMENT  8*49 

For:  I  lie  theory  of  predication  and  the  analysis  of  subjects  and  predicates,  see  Idea  5a;  Unin  eusal 
and  Particular  5c. 

The  relational  theory  of  propositions,  see  Relation  4b. 

Other  discussions  bearing  on  the  quantity,  quality,  and  modality  of  propositions,  see  Ini  in 
ity  2b;  Necessity  and  Contingency  qe(i);  Universal  and  Particular  5c~5d;  and  for 
other  considerations  of  the  distinction  between  the  categorical  and  the  hypothetical  in 
judgment  and  reasoning,  see  Hypothesis  5;  Reasoning  2b. 

Another  treatment  of  the  square  of  opposition,  see  Opposition  id(i)-id(2). 

The  relation  of  judgments  to  one  another  in  immediate  inference  or  in  reasoning,  see  Ri  win¬ 
ing  4a;  Relation  4b. 

The  distinction  between  self-evident  and  demonstrable  judgments,  see  Induction  3;  Knowl¬ 
edge  6c(2);  Principle  2b(2);  and  for  other  treatments  of  the  a  priori  and  the  a  posteriori , 
see  Experience  2d;  Knowledge  6c(4);  Reasoning  5^3). 

A  discussion  relevant  to  the  distinction  between  existential  and  non-existential  judgments, 
see  Knowledge  6a (3). 

The  problem  of  the  truth  and  falsity  of  judgments,  or  their  certainty  and  probability,  see 
Knowledge  6d(i)-6d(2);  Opinion  3a~3b;  Truth  2e,  3bf2)~3c,  7a. 

Another  consideration  of  the  aesthetic  judgment,  see  Beauty  5;  Universal  and  Particular 
7C* 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  BooJ^s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Aquinas.  De  Propositionibus  Modalibus 
Hobbes.  Concerning  Body ,  part  i,  ch  3 
Kant.  Prolegomena  to  Any  Future  Meta  physic ,  par 
2_3 

Hegel.  Science  of  Logic,  vol  ii,  sect  i,  ch  2 
J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic ,  bk  i,  ch  4-6 

II. 

Cicero.  Academics ,  11  (xlvii) 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Against  the  Logicians 
John  of  Salisbury.  Metalogicon 
Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae ,  viii-ix 
John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philo sophicus  Tho - 
misticus ,  Ars  Logicay  part  i,  qq  5-7 
Arnauld.  Logic  or  the  Art  of  Thinking,  part  ii 
Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing ,  bk  iv,  ch  5 

T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man ,  vi 
W.  Hamilton.  Lectures  on  Metaphysics  and  Logic , 
VOL  11  (13-14) 

Boole.  An  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought,  ch 
21 

J.  H.  Newman.  An  Essay  in  Aid  of  a  Grammar  of 
Assent 


Sigvvart.  Logic ,  part  i-ii 
Jevons.  Pure  Logic ,  ch  2,  7,  10,  12 

- .  Studies  in  Deductive  Logic ,  ch  3-6 

Lotze.  Logic ,  bk  1,  ch  2 

- .  Outlines  of  lj)gic ,  1,  ch  2 

Bradley.  The  Principles  of  Logic ,  bk  i;  Terminal 
Essays,  11-111,  vi 

J.  N.  Keynes.  Studies  and  Exercises  in  Formal  Logic , 
part  ii 

Bosanquet.  Logic ,  vol  i,  ch  1-9 
Venn.  Symbolic  Logic ,  cn  6-8 

- .  Principles  of  Empirical  or  Inductive  Logic , 

ch  8-10 

J.  C.  Wilson.  Statement  and  Inference ,  part  ii 
Whitehead  and  Russell.  Principia  Mathematical 
part  1,  sect  c,  d;  part  ii,  sect  b,  c,  d,  e;  part 
iv-v 

Royce.  The  Principles  of  Logic 
W.  E.  Johnson.  Logic,  part  i,  ch  1-5,  9-10 
Maritain.  An  Introduction  to  Logic,  ch  2 
Whitehead.  Process  and  Reality,  part  ii,  ch  9 
Dewey  et  al.  Studies  in  Logical  Theory ,  mv 
Dewey.  Essays  in  Experimental  I^ogic,  ii-vi,  xii  xiv 

- .  Reconstruction  in  Philosophy,  ch  6 

- .  Logic,  the  Theory  of  Inquiry ,  ch  6-14 

M.  R.  Cohen.  A  Preface  to  Logic,  11  -11 1 


Chapter  42.:  JUSTICE 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  discussion  of  justice  is  the  central 
theme  in  two  dialogues  of  Plato— the 
Republic  and  the  Gorgias.  The  dispute  between 
Socrates  and  Thrasymachus  in  the  one  and  be¬ 
tween  Socrates  and  Callicles  in  the  other  is  of 
such  universal  scope  and  fundamental  character 
that  it  recurs  again  and  again  in  the  great 
books  with  little  change  except  in  the  person¬ 
alities  and  vocabularies  of  the  disputants. 

It  is  a  conflict  of  such  polar  opposites  that  all 
other  differences  of  opinion  about  justice  be¬ 
came  arguable  only  after  one  or  the  other  of  the 
two  extreme  positions  is  abandoned.  It  is  the 
conflict  between  the  exponents  of  might  and 
the  exponents  of  right — between  those  who 
think  that  might  makes  right  and  that  justice 
is  expediency,  and  those  who  think  that  power 
can  be  wrongly  as  well  as  rightly  exercised  and 
that  justice,  the  measure  of  men  and  states, 
cannot  be  measured  by  utility. 

Though  Plato  gives  us  the  first  full-fashioned 
statement  of  this  issue,  he  does  not  fashion  it 
out  of  whole  cloth.  The  issue  runs  through  the 
fabric  of  Greek  life  and  thought  in  the  age  of 
the  imperialistic  city-states  which  played  the 
game  of  power  politics  culminating  in  the  Pel¬ 
oponnesian  War.  In  his  history  of  that  war, 
Thucydides  highlights  the  Melian  episode  by 
dramatically  constructing  a  conversation  be¬ 
tween  the  Athenian  envoys  and  the  representa¬ 
tives  of  Melos,  a  little  island  colony  of  Sparta 
which  had  refused  to  knuckle  under  to  Athe¬ 
nian  aggression. 

Recognizing  the  superior  force  of  the  aggres¬ 
sors,  the  Melians  enter  the  conference  with  a 
sense  of  its  futility,  for,  as  they  point  out,  if 
they  insist  upon  their  rights  and  refuse  to  sub¬ 
mit,  they  can  expect  nothing  from  these  nego¬ 
tiations  except  war  and,  in  the  end,  slavery.  The 
Athenians  reply  with  a  frankness  that  is  seldom 
found  in  the  diplomatic  exchanges  of  our  own 


day,  though  in  their  real  contentions  the  con¬ 
ferences  which  have  preceded  or  followed  the 
world  wars  of  our  century  repeat  what  hap¬ 
pened,  if  not  what  was  said,  at  Melos. 

The  Athenians  tell  the  Melians  that  they  will 
not  waste  time  with  specious  pretences  “either 
of  how  we  have  a  right  to  our  empire  ...  or  are 
now  attacking  you  because  of  a  wrong  you  have 
done  us.”  Why  make  a  long  speech,  they  say, 
which  would  not  be  believed?  Instead  they 
come  directly  to  the  point  and  put  the  matter 
simply  or,  as  we  now  say,  realistically.  “You 
know  as  well  as  we  do,”  they  tell  the  Melians, 
“that  right,  as  the  world  goes,  is  only  in  ques¬ 
tion  between  equals  in  power,  whereas  the 
stronger  do  whatever  they  can  and  the  weaker 
suffer  whatever  they  must.”  There  is  nothing 
left  for  the  Melians  except  an  appeal  to  expe¬ 
diency.  “You  debar  us  from  talking  about  jus¬ 
tice  and  invite  us  to  obey  your  interest,”  they 
reply  to  the  Athenians,  before  trying  to  per¬ 
suade  them  that  their  policy  will  end  in  disaster 
for  Athens. 

The  language  of  Thrasymachus  in  the  Repub¬ 
lic  resembles  that  of  the  Athenian  envoys.  “I 
proclaim,”  he  says,  “that  justice  is  nothing  else 
than  the  interest  of  the  stronger. .  .  .  The  differ¬ 
ent  forms  of  government  make  laws  democrati- 
cal,  aristocratical,  tyrannical,  with  a  view  to 
their  several  interests;  and  these  laws,  which 
are  made  by  them  for  their  own  interests,  are 
the  justice  which  they  deliver  to  their  subjects, 
and  him  who  transgresses  them  they  punish  as 
a  breaker  of  the  law,  and  unjust.  And  this  is 
what  I  mean  when  I  say  that  in  all  states  there 
is  the  same  principle  of  justice  which  is  the  in¬ 
terest  of  the  government;  and  as  the  govern¬ 
ment  must  be  supposed  to  have  power,  the  only 
reasonable  conclusion  is  that  everywhere  there 
is  one  principle  of  justice  which  is  the  interest 
of  the  stronger.” 


850 


851 


Chapter  42:  JUSTICE 


The  thesis  seems  to  have  two  applications. 
For  the  stronger,  it  means  that  they  have  the 
right,  as  far  as  they  have  the  might,  to  exact 
from  the  weaker  whatever  serves  their  interests. 
Their  laws  or  demands  cannot  be  unjust.  They 
cannot  do  injustice.  They  can  only  fail  to  exert 
sufficient  might  to  hold  on  to  the  power  which 
can  secure  them,  not  from  the  charge  of  in¬ 
justice,  but  from  reprisals  by  those  whom  they 
have  oppressed  or  injured. 

The  thesis  also  means,  for  the  weaker,  that 
they  can  only  do  injustice  but  not  suffer  it.  In¬ 
justice  on  their  part  consists  in  disobeying  the 
law  of  their  rulers.  Hence  for  them,  too,  justice 
is  expediency,  only  now  in  the  sense  that  they 
are  likely  to  suffer  if  they  try  to  follow  their 
own  interests  rather  than  the  interests  of  the 
stronger. 

This  thesis  appears  to  be  repeated  in  some¬ 
what  different  language  by  Hobbes  and  Spi¬ 
noza.  To  men  living  in  a  purely  natural  condi¬ 
tion,  the  notions  of  justice  and  injustice  do  not 
apply.  They  apply  only  to  men  living  in  civil 
society.  “Where  there  is  no  Commonwealth,” 
Hobbes  writes,  “there  is  nothing  unjust.  So  that 
the  nature  of  justice  consists  in  the  keeping  of 
valid  covenants;  but  the  validity  of  covenants 
begins  not  but  with  the  constitution  of  a  civil 
power  sufficient  to  compel  men  to  keep  them.” 
The  breach  of  civil  laws  or  covenants  “may  be 
called  injustice,  and  the  observance  of  them 
justice.” 

It  is  Spinoza’s  opinion  that  “everything  has 
by  nature  as  much  right  as  it  has  power  to  exist 
and  operate.”  It  follows,  therefore,  that  “in  a 
natural  state  there  is  nothing  which  can  be 
called  just  or  unjust,  but  only  in  a  civil  state.” 
Here  as  before  justice  consists  in  obedience,  in¬ 
justice  in  disobedience,  to  whatever  laws  the 
state  has  the  power  to  enforce,  the  laws  them¬ 
selves  being  formulated  not  by  reference  to 
justice,  but  to  the  interests  of  the  state  which 
must  seek  its  own  preservation  and  has  the  right 
to  do  so,  so  long  as  it  has  the  power. 

Those  who  take  the  opposite  view  agree  that 
justice  is  political  in  the  sense  that  the  state,  in 
organization  and  operation,  is  a  work  of  justice. 
Wisdom  is  the  virtue  of  the  rulers  in  the 
Republic ,  but  justice  is  the  organizing  principle 
of  Plato’s  ideal  state. 


Aristotle  maintains  that  man  is  a  political 
animal,  whereas  other  animals  are  merely  gre¬ 
garious.  He  cites  the  fact  that  man  alone  has  a 
power  of  speech  able  to  communicate  opinions 
about  the  expedient  and  the  just.  “Justice  is  the 
bond  of  men  In  states,  for  the  administration  of 
justice,  which  is  the  determination  of  what  is 
just,  is  the  principle  of  order  in  political  so¬ 
ciety.”  Aristotle  describes  man  “when  sepa¬ 
rated  from  law  and  justice”  as  the  worst  of  ani¬ 
mals.  Augustine  describes  the  state  without  jus¬ 
tice  as  “no  better  than  a  band  of  robber  thieves.” 

Those  who  agree  that  political  institutions 
involve  justice  are  confronted  by  these  alterna¬ 
tives  :  either  the  principle  of  j  ustice  is  antecedent 
to  the  state,  its  constitution,  covenants,  and 
laws,  or  the  determination  of  what  is  just  and 
unjust  is  entirely  relative  to  the  constitution  of 
a  state,  dependent  upon  its  power,  and  conse¬ 
quent  to  its  laws. 

When  the  second  alternative  is  chosen,  the 
proposition  that  justice  is  political  is  seriously 
qualified.  It  is  merely  political.  There  is  no  natu¬ 
ral  justice,  no  justice  apart  from  man-made 
laws,  nothing  that  is  just  or  unjust  in  the  very 
nature  of  the  case  and  without  reference  to  civil 
institutions.  On  this  theory,  only  the  individual 
who  is  subject  to  government  can  be  judged 
just  or  unjust.  The  government  itself  cannot  be 
so  judged,  nor  can  its  constitution,  its  laws,  or 
its  acts;  for,  since  these  determine  what  is  just 
and  unjust,  they  cannot  themselves  be  judged 
for  their  justice. 

The  opposite  answer  conceives  political  jus¬ 
tice  as  a  determination  of  natural  justice.  “Po¬ 
litical  justice,”  Aristotle  remarks,  “is  partly 
natural  and  partly  conventional  or  legal.”  The 
fact  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  just  action  on 
the  part  of  a  citizen  consists  in  law-abiding  con¬ 
duct,  does  not  exclude  another  sense  in  which 
the  laws  themselves  can  be  called  just  or  unjust, 
not  only  the  laws,  but  the  constitution  of  the 
state  itself.  Though  the  justice  of  civil  laws  is 
partly  relative  to  the  constitution  under  which 
they  are  made  and  administered,  there  are  some 
enactments  which,  since  they  violate  natural 
justice,  cannot  be  justified  under  any  constitu¬ 
tion.  The  constitution,  moreover,  cannot  be 
regarded  as  the  ultimate  standard  of  justice  by 
those  who  compare  the  justice  of  different  forms 
of  government  or  diverse  constitutions.  On 


852 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


their  view,  the  ultimate  measure  of  justice  in 
all  human  institutions  and  acts,  as  well  as  in  the 
characters  of  men,  is  not  itself  a  man-made 
standard,  but  rather  a  natural  principle  of  jus¬ 
tice,  holding  for  all  men  at  all  times  everywhere. 

The  issue  joined  by  these  two  theories  of 
justice  extends  by  implication  into  many  re¬ 
lated  matters.  The  opposition,  for  example,  be¬ 
tween  those  who  affirm  the  reality  of  natural 
law  as  the  source  of  legality  in  all  civil  regula¬ 
tions  and  those  who  derive  the  legality  of 
positive  laws  from  the  will  of  the  sovereign 
alone,  is  considered  in  the  chapter  on  Law,  but 
its  parallelism  with  the  issue  of  natural  and 
conventional  justice  should  be  noted  here. 

Those  who  deny  natural  justice  and  natural 
law  also  tend  to  deny  natural  rights,  which,  un¬ 
like  civil  rights,  are  not  conferred  on  the  indi¬ 
vidual  by  the  state,  but  are  inherent  in  his  hu¬ 
man  personality.  They  are,  according  to  the 
Declaration  of  Independence,  “unalienable”  in 
the  sense  that  the  state  cannot  rescind  them. 
What  the  state  does  not  create,  it  cannot  de¬ 
stroy.  If  a  government  transgresses  natural 
rights,  it  negates  its  own  reason  for  being, 
since  it  is  “to  secure  these  rights  [that]  govern¬ 
ments  are  instituted  among  men.” 

Those  who  deny  natural  rights,  among  which 
the  right  to  liberty  is  usually  included,  do  not 
have  a  standard  for  judging  when  governments 
violate  the  rights  and  invade  the  liberties  of 
men.  When  men  are  thought  to  have  no  rights 
except  those  granted  by  their  rulers,  the  abso¬ 
lute  power  which  the  rulers  exercise  cannot  be 
criticized  as  tyrannical  or  despotic. 

Considering  the  situation  of  men  in  what  he 
calls  “a  state  of  perfect  freedom” — apart  from 
government  and  civil  institutions — Locke  says 
of  this  state  of  nature  that  it  “has  a  law  of  na¬ 
ture  to  govern  it,  which  obliges  everyone;  and 
reason,  which  is  that  law,  teaches  all  mankind 
who  will  but  consult  it,  that,  being  all  equal 
and  independent,  no  one  ought  to  harm  another 
in  his  life,  health,  liberty,  or  possessions - Ev¬ 

eryone,  as  he  is  bound  to  preserve  himself,  and 
not  quit  his  station  willfully,  so,  by  the  like  rea¬ 
son,  when  his  own  preservation  comes  not  in 
competition,  ought  he,  as  much  as  he  can,  to 
preserve  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  not,  unless  it 
be  to  do  justice  on  an  offender,  take  away  or 


impair  the  life,  or  what  tends  to  the  preserva¬ 
tion  of  the  life,  the  liberty,  health,  limb,  or 
goods  of  another.”  Since  this  law  of  nature,  and 
its  implied  principle  of  just  dealing  between 
men,  is  not  abolished  when  men  associate  in  the 
common  life  of  a  civil  society,  natural  justice 
and  natural  rights  remain,  according  to  Locke 
and  others,  to  limit  the  powers  of  government 
and  to  measure  the  justice  of  its  laws. 

The  principle  of  natural  justice  is  sometimes 
not  accompanied  by  a  doctrine  of  natural  law 
and  natural  rights,  as  for  example  in  Greek 
thought.  Their  connection  first  seems  to  occur 
in  Roman  jurisprudence  and  mediaeval  theory. 
Not  all  the  opponents  of  natural  justice  avoid 
the  use  of  the  words  “natural  law”  and  “natu¬ 
ral  rights.”  Using  these  words  in  a  different 
sense,  Hobbes,  for  example,  speaks  of  men  liv¬ 
ing  under  natural  law  in  a  state  of  nature,  which 
is  “a  condition  of  war  of  every  one  against 
every  one,”  and  “in  such  condition  every  man 
has  a  right  to  everything,  even  to  another’s 
body.”  Only  when  men  abandon  this  unlimited 
right  in  order  to  form  a  commonwealth,  do 
they  acquire  in  recompense  certain  civil  rights 
or,  as  Hobbes  says,  “proprieties.”  Then,  and 
only  then,  can  there  be  any  meaning  to  justice, 
conceived  according  to  the  ancient  maxim  which 
Hobbes  accepts,  that  justice  is  “the  constant 
will  to  render  to  each  man  what  is  his  due.” 

Both  Spinoza  and  Hume  make  the  same 
point.  Where  there  is  no  recognized  title  to 
property,  or  legally  established  right,  there  can 
be  no  justice — no  respecting  of  what  is  a  man’s 
own  or  giving  him  what  belongs  to  him.  The 
difference  between  Locke  and  these  others  seems 
to  lie  in  his  conception  of  property  as  the  natural 
right  which  a  man  has  to  the  preservation  of  his 
life,  liberty,  and  estate.  There  can  be  justice, 
therefore,  between  men  in  a  state  of  nature,  for 
even  then  each  has  some  property  that  the 
others  are  bound  to  respect. 

The  meaning  of  natural  justice  can  be  ex¬ 
amined  apart  from  these  different  interpreta¬ 
tions  of  the  so-called  “state  of  nature.”  Those 
who,  like1  Aristotle  and  Aquinas,  do  not  con¬ 
ceive  the  origin  of  political  society  as  a  transi¬ 
tion  from  the  “state  of  nature”  do,  neverthe¬ 
less,  appeal  to  a  principle  of  natural  justice.  For 
Aquinas,  this  principle  seems  to  be  an  integral 


853 


Chapter  42:  JUSTICE 


part  of  the  natural  law.  Sometimes  the  state¬ 
ment  of  the  first  precept  of  the  natural  law  is 
“Seek  the  good;  avoid  evil.”  Sometimes  it  is 
“Do  good  to  others,  injure  no  one,  and  render 
to  every  man  his  own.”  In  this  second  formula¬ 
tion,  the  natural  law  seems  to  be  identical  with 
the  precept  of  justice.  The  essential  content  of 
this  precept  seems  to  be  present — separate  from 
any  doctrine  of  natural  law— in  Aristotle’s 
analysis  of  the  nature  of  justice  both  as  a  virtue 
and  as  a  quality  of  human  acts. 

“The  just,”  Aristotle  says,  “is  the  lawful  and 
the  fair.”  What  he  means  by  the  word  “lawful” 
in  this  context  does  not  seem  to  be  simply  the 
law-abiding,  in  the  sense  of  conforming  to  the 
actual  laws  of  a  particular  society.  He  thinks  of 
law  as  aiming  “at  the  common  advantage.  .  .  . 
We  call  those  acts  just,”  he  writes,  “that  tend 
to  produce  and  preserve  happiness  and  its  com¬ 
ponents  for  the  political  society.”  Lawful  (or 
just)  actions  thus  are  those  which  are  for  the 
common  good  or  the  good  of  others;  unlawful 
(or  unjust)  actions,  those  which  do  injury  to 
others  or  despoil  the  society. 

It  is  in  this  sense  of  justice  that  both  Plato 
and  Aristotle  lay  down  the  primary  criterion 
for  differentiating  between  good  and  bad  gov¬ 
ernments.  Those  which  are  lawful  and  serve 
the  common  good  are  just;  those  which  are 
lawless  and  serve  the  private  interests  of  the 
rulers  are  unjust.  This  meaning  of  justice  ap¬ 
plies  as  readily  to  all  citizens — to  all  members 
of  a  society — as  it  does  to  those  who  have  the 
special  duties  or  occupy  the  special  offices  of 
government. 

Whether  it  is  stated  in  terms  of  the  good  of 
other  individuals  or  in  terms  of  the  common 
good  of  a  community  (domestic  or  political), 
this  understanding  of  justice  seems  to  consider 
the  actions  of  a  man  as  they  affect  the  well¬ 
being,  not  of  himself,  but  of  others.  “Justice, 
alone  of  the  virtues,”  says  Aristotle,  “is  thought 
to  be  ‘another’s  good,’  because  it  is  related  to 
our  neighbor.”  Concerned  with  what  is  due 
another,  justice  involves  the  element  of  duty 
or  obligation.  “To  each  one,”  Aquinas  writes, 
“is  due  what  is  his  own,”  and  “it  evidently  per¬ 
tains  to  justice,”  he  adds,  “that  a  man  give 
another  his  due.”  That  is  why  “justice  alone,  of 
all  the  virtues,  implies  the  notion  of  duty.”  Do¬ 
ing  good  to  others  or  not  injuring  them,  when 


undertaken  as  a  matter  of  strict  justice,  goes  no 
further  than  to  discharge  the  debt  which  each 
man  owes  every  other. 

In  consequence,  a  difference  of  opinion  arises 
concerning  the  adequacy  of  justice  to  establish 
the  peace  and  harmony  of  a  society.  Some  writ¬ 
ers,  like  Kant,  seem  to  think  that  if  perfect  jus¬ 
tice  obtained,  a  multitude  of  individual  wills 
would  be  perfectly  harmonized  in  free  action. 
Others,  like  Aquinas,  think  justice  necessary 
but  insufficient  precisely  because  it  is  a  matter 
of  duty  and  debt.  “Peace,”  he  writes,  “is  the 
ivor\  of  justice  indirectly,  in  so  far  as  justice  re¬ 
moves  the  obstacles  to  peace;  but  it  is  the  wor\ 
of  charity  directly,  since  charity,  according  to 
its  very  nature,  causes  peace;  for  love  is  a  unitive 
force."  The  bonds  of  love  and  friendship  unite 
men  where  justice  merely  governs  their  inter¬ 
action.  What  men  do  for  one  another  out  of  the 
generosity  of  love  far  exceeds  the  commands  of 
justice.  That  is  why  mercy  and  charity  are 
called  upon  to  qualify  justice  or  even  to  set  it 
aside.  “Earthly  power,”  Portia  declares  in  the 
Merchant  of  Venice ,  “doth  then  show  likest 
God’s  when  mercy  seasons  justice.” 

The  precept  “to  render  unto  others  what  is 
their  due”  is  read  in  a  different  light  when  the 
other  aspect  of  justice  is  considered.  When  the 
just  is  conceived  as  the  fair,  the  fairness  which 
is  due  ourselves  or  others  applies,  not  to  benefit 
and  injury  generally,  but  to  the  exchange  and 
distribution  of  goods  or  burdens.  What  is  the 
principle  of  a  fair  exchange  or  a  fair  distribu¬ 
tion?  Aristotle’s  answer  to  this  question  is  in 
terms  of  equality. 

In  the  transactions  of  commerce,  fairness 
seems  to  require  the  exchange  of  things  equiva¬ 
lent  in  value.  The  rule  of  an  eye  for  an  eye,  a 
tooth  for  a  tooth,  is  another  expression  of  the 
principle  of  equality  as  the  criterion  of  a  fair 
penalty  or  a  just  compensation.  If  honors  or  re¬ 
wards  are  to  be  distributed,  equals  should  in 
fairness  be  treated  equally,  and  those  who  are 
unequal  in  merit  should  receive  unequal  shares. 
For  all  to  share  alike  is  not  a  just  distribution  of 
deserts  if  all  do  not  deserve  alike.  “Awards 
should  be  ‘according  to  merit,’  ”  Aristotle 
writes.  He  claims  that  “all  men  agree”  with 
this,  “though  they  do  not  all  specify  the  same 
sort  of  merit,  but  democrats  identify  it  with 


854 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


the  status  of  freeman,  supporters  of  oligarchy 
with  wealth  or  with  noble  birth,  and  supporters 
of  aristocracy  with  excellence.”  The  unequal 
treatment  of  unequals,  however,  still  derives 
its  fairness  from  the  principle  of  equality,  for 
there  is  an  equivalence  of  ratios  in  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  giving  more  to  the  more  deserving  and 
less  to  the  less. 

Aristotle  employs  the  distinction  between 
these  modes  of  equality — arithmetic  and  geo¬ 
metric,  or  simple  and  proportional,  equality — 
to  define  the  difference  between  fairness  in  ex¬ 
change  and  fairness  in  distribution.  The  one  is 
the  type  of  justice  which  is  traditionally  called 
“commutative,”  “corrective,”  or  “remedial,” 
the  other  “distributive.” 

The  type  of  justice  “which  plays  a  rectifying 
part  in  transactions  between  man  and  man,” 
Aristotle  further  divides  into  two  kinds.  “Of 
transactions,”  he  writes,  “(i)  some  are  volun¬ 
tary  and  (2)  others  involuntary— voluntary  such 
transactions  as  sale,  purchase,  loan  for  consump¬ 
tion,  pledging,  loan  for  use,  depositing,  letting 
.  .  .  while  of  the  involuntary  (a)  some  are  clan¬ 
destine,  such  as  theft,  adultery,  poisoning,  pro¬ 
curing,  enticement  of  slaves,  assassination,  false 
witness,  and  (b)  others  are  violent,  such  as  as¬ 
sault,  imprisonment,  murder,  robbery  with  vio¬ 
lence,  mutilation,  abuse,  insult.”  The  sphere 
which  Aristotle  assigns  to  commutative  or  cor¬ 
rective  justice  thus  appears  to  cover  both  crim¬ 
inal  acts  and  civil  injuries.  But,  as  applied  to 
civil  injuries,  the  principle  of  fairness  in  ex¬ 
change  usually  involves  a  payment  for  dam¬ 
ages,  restitution,  or  compensation  in  kind; 
whereas  the  principle  of  commutative  justice 
as  applied  to  criminal  wrongdoing  usually  calls 
for  a  punishment  somehow  equalized  in  se¬ 
verity  to  the  gravity  of  the  offense.  This  last  is 
the  principle  of  the  lex  talionis — an  eye  for  an 
eye,  a  life  for  a  life.  The  problems  of  justice 
which  it  raises  are  considered  in  the  chapter  on 
Punishment. 

Justice  is  sometimes  divided  into  economic 
and  political  according  as,  on  the  one  hand,  fair¬ 
ness  or  equalization  concerns  the  kind  of  goods 
which  originate  with  the  expenditure  of  labor, 
or  as,  on  the  other  hand,  it  involves  the  status 
of  men  in  the  state.  The  difference  between 
these  two  modes  of  justice  seems  to  be  largely 


dependent  upon  the  kind  of  transaction  to  v 
which  the  principle  of  justice  is  applied.  The  : 
forms  of  justice — the  two  modes  of  equality  ° 
or  fairness— appear  to  remain  the  same.  The  { 
special  problems  of  economic  justice  are  more  f 
fully  examined  in  the  chapters  on  Labor  and 
Wealth,  as  the  special  problems  of  political 
justice  are  treated  in  greater  detail  in  all  the 
chapters  dealing  with  the  state,  government, 
and  the  several  forms  of  government.  Here  we 
shall  consider  only  the  generalities,  and  es¬ 
pecially  those  which  touch  the  main  issues  in 
the  theory  of  justice. 

Though  Karl  Marx  does  not  engage  in  the 
controversy  over  natural  justice,  he  seems  to 
take  the  side  which  looks  upon  justice  as  a  uni¬ 
versal  standard  that  does  not  derive  from,  but 
rather  measures,  human  institutions.  Some¬ 
thing  like  ‘from  each  according  to  his  ability, 
to  each  according  to  his  needs’ — or,  in  another 
variant  of  the  maxim,  ‘to  each  according  to  his 
deserts’ — seems  to  be  for  Marx  the  maxim  of  a 
just  economy,  stated  without  argument  as  if  a 
principle  self-evident  in  the  very  nature  of  the 
case.  So,  too,  in  his  consideration  of  the  exploi¬ 
tation  of  labor  in  its  various  historic  forms — 
chattel  slavery,  feudal  serfdom  or  agrarian  pe¬ 
onage,  and  what  he  calls  “wage  slavery”  under 
industrial  capitalism — Marx  assumes  that  a 
clear  and  unquestionable  principle  of  justice  is 
being  violated  when  the  goods  produced  by  the 
labor  of  one  man  enrich  another  dispropor¬ 
tionately  to  that  other’s  contribution  or  desert. 
Such  basic  words  in  Capital  as  “expropriation,’ 
“exploitation,”  and  “unearned  increment” 
seem  never  to  be  simply  terms  of  description, 
but  of  evaluation.  Each  implies  a  specific  in¬ 
justice. 

The  labor  theory  of  value,  the  origin  of  which 
he  attributes  to  Adam  Smith,  Marx  conceives 
as  solving  a  problem  in  justice  which  Aristotle 
stated  but  did  not  solve.  He  refers  to  the  chap¬ 
ter  in  the  book  on  justice  in  Aristotle’s  Ethics, 
in  which  Aristotle  discusses  money  as  a  medium 
to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  commodities. 
Money  permits  so  many  units  of  one  commod¬ 
ity  to  be  equated  with  so  many  units  of  another. 

But  the  problem  is  how  to  determine  equiva¬ 
lents  in  the  exchange  of  unlike  things,  appar¬ 
ently  incommensurable  in  value.  How  can  the 
value  of  a  house  be  commensurated  with  the 


855 


Chapter  42:  JUSTICE 


value  of  a  bed,  so  that  an  equality  in  value  can 
be  set  up  between  a  house  and  a  certain  number 
of  beds?  Abstracting  entirely  from  considera¬ 
tions  of  supply  and  demand,  the  determination 
©f  a  just  exchange  or  a  fair  price  requires  an 
equation  of  comparable  quantities. 

Aristotle  tells  us,  Marx  points  out,  why  he 
found  the  problem  insoluble.  “It  was  the  ab¬ 
sence  of  any  concept  of  value.  What  is  that 
equal  something,  that  common  substance,  which 
admits  of  the  value  of  beds  being  expressed  by 
a  house?  Such  a  thing,  in  truth,  cannot  exist, 
says  Aristotle.  And  why  not?  Compared  with 
beds,  the  house  does  represent  something  equal 
to  them,  in  so  far  as  it  represents  what  is  really 
equal,  both  in  the  beds  and  the  house.  And  that 
is — human  labor.  .  .  .  The  brilliancy  of  Aris¬ 
totle’s  genius  is  shown  by  this  alone,  that  he 
discovered,  in  the  expression  of  the  value  of 
commodities,  a  relation  of  equality.  The  pecu¬ 
liar  conditions  of  the  society  in  which  he  lived 
alone  prevented  him  from  discovering  what, 
‘in  truth,’  was  at  the  bottom  of  this  equality.” 

We  cannot  help  noting  the  character  of  the 
labor  theory  of  value  as  an  analysis  not  only  of 
'  justice  in  exchange,  but  also  of  just  compensa¬ 
tion  to  labor  for  its  productivity.  The  principle 
of  justice  here  employed  seems  to  be  the  same 
as  that  underlying  the  mediaeval  condemnation 
of  interest  as  unjust  or  usurious,  or  the  later 
effort  to  discriminate  between  just  and  unjust 
interest  rates.  The  principle  even  seems  to  be 
implicitly  involved  in  Adam  Smith’s  distinction 
between  real  or  natural  price  and  the  market 
price  which  fluctuates  with  variations  in  supply 
and  demand. 

When  the  economic  problem  is  one  of  dis¬ 
tribution  rather  than  exchange,  another  stand¬ 
ard  of  fairness — the  proportional  equality  of 
distributive  justice — becomes  relevant. 

The  assumption  of  a  primitive  possession  of 
all  things  in  common,  especially  land  and  its  re¬ 
sources,  is  the  background  against  which  such 
thinkers  as  Aquinas  and  Hobbes,  Locke  and 
Rousseau,  Montesquieu  and  Hegel,  Adam  Smith 
and  Karl  Marx  consider  the  origin  or  justifica¬ 
tion  of  private  property.  Insofar  as  the  question 
is  one  of  justification,  rather  than  of  actual  his¬ 
toric  origin,  the  division  of  common  holdings 
into  privately  held  shares  is  a  matter  of  justice 
in  distribution.  In  the  opinion  of  many,  a  just 


distribution  would  recognize  that  labor  alone 
entitles  a  man  to  claim  possession  of  the  raw 
materials  improved  by  his  work  and  of  the  fin¬ 
ished  products  of  that  work. 

The  other  face  of  the  problem  assumes  an  ex¬ 
isting  inequitable  distribution.  It  is  then  asked 
how  this  can  be  rectified  by  some  method  of  re¬ 
distributing  wealth  more  justly;  or  it  is  pro¬ 
posed  that  the  whole  system  of  private  property 
be  reformed  in  the  direction  of  public  owner¬ 
ship  of  the  means  of  production,  as  the  basis  for 
a  just  distribution  of  the  fruits  of  human  pro¬ 
ductivity. 

The  connection  which  has  become  evident 
between  justice  and  both  liberty  and  equality 
does  not  imply  that  these  three  basic  notions 
are  simply  coordinate  with  one  another.  On  the 
contrary,  equality  seems  to  be  the  root  of  jus¬ 
tice,  at  least  insofar  as  it  is  identified  with  fair¬ 
ness  in  exchange  or  distribution;  and  justice  in 
turn  seems  to  be  the  foundation,  not  the  conse¬ 
quence  of  liberty. 

The  condemnation  of  slavery  confirms  this 
observation.  If  slavery  were  not  unjust,  the 
slave  would  have  no  right  to  be  free.  The  injus¬ 
tice  of  treating  a  man  as  a  chattel  ultimately 
rests  on  the  equality  between  him  and  his  mas¬ 
ter  as  human  beings.  His  right  to  the  same  lib¬ 
erty  which  his  master  enjoys  stems  from  that 
equality.  The  justice  of  equal  treatment  for 
equals  recognizes  that  right  and  sets  him  free. 
Aristotle’s  theory  of  natural  slavery  is  based  on 
a  supposition  of  natural  inequality  which  is 
thought  to  justify  the  enslavement  of  some 
men  and  the  freedom  of  others.  Whenever 
slavery  is  justified  or  a  criminal  is  justly  im¬ 
prisoned,  neither  the  slave  nor  the  criminal  is 
regarded  as  deprived  of  any  liberty  to  which  he 
has  a  right. 

It  would  seem  to  follow  that  if  a  man  is  justly 
treated,  he  has  all  the  liberty  which  he  de¬ 
serves.  From  the  opposite  angle,  Mill  argues 
that  a  man  is  entitled  to  all  the  liberty  that  he 
can  use  justly,  that  is,  use  without  injuring  his 
fellow  man  or  the  common  good.  More  liberty 
than  this  would  be  license.  When  one  man  en¬ 
croaches  on  the  rights  of  others,  or  inflicts  on 
them  “any  loss  or  damage  not  justified  by  his 
own  rights,”  he  is  overstepping  the  bounds  of 
liberty  and  is,  according  to  Mill,  a  fit  object  “of 


856 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


moral  reprobation,  and,  in  grave  cases,  of  moral 
retribution  and  punishment.” 

The  various  relations  of  liberty  to  justice, 
and  of  both  to  law,  are  considered  in  the  chap¬ 
ters  on  Liberty  and  Law.  All  the  writers  who 
make  the  distinction  between  government  by 
law  and  government  by  men  fundamental  in 
their  political  theory  also  plainly  express  a 
preference  for  the  former  on  grounds  both  of 
justice  and  liberty. 

Absolute  government,  which  violates  the 
equality  of  men,  unjustly  subjects  them,  even 
when  it  does  not  through  tyranny  enslave  them. 
The  benevolence  of  the  despot  ruling  for  the 
common  good  has  one  aspect  of  justice,  but 
there  are  other  aspects  of  political  justice  which 
can  be  achieved,  as  Mill  points  out,  only  if  “des¬ 
potism  consents  not  to  be  despotism  .  .  .  and 
allows  the  general  business  of  government  to  go 
on  as  if  the  people  really  governed  themselves.” 
The  greater  justice  of  constitutional  govern¬ 
ment  consists  in  its  granting  to  men  who  de¬ 
serve  the  equal  freedom  of  equals,  the  equality 
of  citizenship — an  equality  under  the  law  which 
levels  those  citizens  who  happen  to  hold  public 
office  with  those  in  private  life. 

The  major  controversy  over  the  several  forms 
of  constitutional  government  turns  on  a  third 
point  of  justice.  The  defenders  of  democracy 
and  oligarchy  each  contend  that  equalities  or 
inequalities  in  birth  or  wealth  justify  a  broader 
or  a  narrower  franchise.  It  is  Mill  again  who  in¬ 
sists  that  nothing  less  than  universal  suffrage 
provides  a  just  distribution  of  the  political  sta¬ 
tus  of  citizenship,  and  that  “it  is  a  personal  in¬ 
justice  to  withhold  from  anyone,  unless  for  the 
prevention  of  greater  evils,  the  ordinary  privi¬ 
lege  of  having  his  voice  reckoned  in  the  dispos¬ 
al  of  affairs  in  which  he  has  the  same  interest 
as  other  people.” 

Of  the  three  points  of  justice  which  seem  to 
be  involved  in  the  comparison  of  forms  of  gov¬ 
ernment,  only  the  first  (concerned  with  whether 
political  power  is  exercised  for  the  common 
good  or  the  ruler’s  private  interests)  is  not  rec¬ 
ognizable  as  a  matter  of  distributive  justice. 
Yet  even  here  the  requirement  that  the  ruler 
should  treat  the  ruled  as  ends  rather  than  as 
means  derives  from  a  fundamental  equality  be¬ 
tween  ruler  and  ruled.  The  injustice  of  tyr¬ 
anny  lies  in  a  violation  of  this  equality. 


One  meaning  of  justice  remains  to  be  con¬ 
sidered.  It  is  related  to  all  the  foregoing  consid¬ 
erations  of  economic  and  political  justice,  of 
just  constitutions,  just  laws,  and  just  acts.  It  is 
that  meaning  of  justice  in  which  a  man  is  said 
to  be  just — to  possess  a  just  will,  to  be  just  in 
character,  to  have  the  virtue  of  justice.  Here 
difference  in  theory  reflects  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  those  moralists  for  whom  virtue  is  the 
basic  conception,  and  those  who,  like  Kant, 
emphasize  duty  or  who,  like  Mill,  reduce  the 
propensity  for  justice  to  a  moral  sentiment. 
But  even  among  those  who  treat  justice  as  a 
virtue,  there  seems  to  be  a  profound  difference 
in  analysis. 

For  Aristotle,  the  virtue  of  justice,  like  other 
moral  virtues,  is  a  habit  of  conduct.  It  differs 
from  courage  and  temperance  in  that  it  is  a 
habit  of  action,  not  of  the  passions.  It  is  not  a 
rationally  moderated  tendency  of  the  emotions 
with  regard  to  things  pleasant  and  painful.  It  is 
that  settled  inclination  of  the  will  “in  virtue  of 
which  the  just  man  is  said  to  be  a  doer,  by 
choice,  of  that  which  is  just,  and  one  who  will 
distribute  either  between  himself  and  another 
or  between  two  others  not  so  as  to  give  more  of 
what  is  desirable  to  himself  and  less  to  his  neigh¬ 
bor  (and  conversely  with  what  is  harmful),  but 
so  as  to  give  what  is  equal  in  accordance  with 
proportion.” 

Another  difference  between  justice  and  the 
other  moral  virtues  is  that  courageous  and  tem¬ 
perate  acts  are  performed  only  by  courageous 
and  temperate  men,  whereas  an  act  which  is 
outwardly  just  can  be  done  by  an  unjust  man 
as  well  as  by  a  just  one. 

Fair  dealing  in  the  exchange  or  distribution 
of  goods,  determined  by  objective  relations  of 
equality,  is  the  substance  of  justice  as  a  special 
virtue;  but  there  is  in  addition  what  Aristotle 
calls  “general”  as  opposed  to  “special”  justice. 
Aristotle  calls  the  general  virtue  of  justice 
“complete  virtue,”  because  “he  who  possesses  it 
can  exercise  his  virtue  not  only  in  himself  but 
towards  his  neighbor  also.”  It  embraces  all  the 
moral  virtues  insofar  as  their  acts  are  directed 
to  the  good  of  others. 

“justice  in  this  sense,”  he  goes  on  to  say,  “is 
not  a  part  of  virtue,  but  virtue  entire”;  whereas 
special  justice — the  justice  of  distributions  and 
exchanges — is  merely  a  part  of  moral  virtue, 


857 


Chapter  42:  JUSTICE 


merely  one  particular  virtue.  Yet  special  jus¬ 
tice,  no  less  than  general  justice,  is  a  social  vir¬ 
tue.  The  difference  between  the  way  each  di¬ 
rects  actions  toward  the  good  of  others  seems  to 
be  like  the  difference  between  the  lawful  and 
the  fair,  or  the  difference  between  the  common 
good  of  society  as  a  whole  and  the  good  of  other 
individuals. 

The  thoroughly  social  conception  of  justice 
in  Aristotle  may  have  some  parallel  in  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  justice  in  Plato’s  Gorgias  (where  the 
question  is  whether  it  is  better  to  suffer  than  to 
do  injustice),  but  the  definition  of  justice  as  a 
virtue  in  the  Republic  does  not  express  or  de¬ 
velop  the  social  reference.  In  the  state  as  in  the 
soul,  justice  is  a  fitting  disposition  or  harmoni¬ 
ous  order — of  the  several  classes  of  men  in  the 
state,  of  the  several  virtues  in  the  soul.  The 
just  state  is  not  described  as  acting  justly  to¬ 
ward  other  states,  nor  is  the  just  man  pictured 
as  a  doer  of  good  deeds.  Rather  the  picture  of 
the  soul  in  which  justice  resides  is  one  of  in¬ 
terior  peace  or  spiritual  health — the  well-being 
of  happiness. 

“Justice,”  Socrates  declares,  is  concerned 
“not  with  the  outward  man,  but  with  the  in¬ 
ward,  which  is  the  true  self  and  concernment  of 
man:  for  the  just  man  does  not  permit  the  sev¬ 
eral  elements  within  him  to  interfere  with  one 


another,  or  any  of  them  to  do  the  work  of  oth¬ 
ers — he  sets  in  order  his  own  inner  life,  and  is 
his  own  master  and  his  own  law,  and  at  peace 
with  himself.”  His  is  “one  entirely  temperate 
and  perfectly  adjusted  nature.” 

This  conception  of  justice  bears  a  certain  re¬ 
semblance  to  what  the  Christian  theologians 
mean  by  “original  justice.”  The  perfect  dis¬ 
position  of  Adam’s  soul  in  a  state  of  supernatu¬ 
ral  grace  consisted,  according  to  Aquinas,  in 
“his  reason  being  subject  to  God,  the  lower 
powers  to  reason,  and  the  body  to  the  soul — 
the  first  subjection  being  the  cause  of  both  the 
second  and  the  third,  since  while  reason  was 
subject  to  God,  the  lower  powers  remained  sub¬ 
ject  to  reason.”  The  justice  of  man’s  obedience 
to  God  seems  to  be  inseparable  from  the  injus¬ 
tice  internal  to  his  own  members. 

The  way  in  which  justice  is  discussed  in  the 
Gorgias  may  similarly  be  inseparable  from  the 
way  it  is  defined  in  the  Republic .  Certainly  Cal- 
licles  will  never  understand  why  it  is  always 
better  to  suffer  injustice  than  to  do  it,  unless 
Socrates  succeeds  in  explaining  to  him  that  the 
man  who  is  wronged  suffers  injury  in  body  or  in 
external  things,  while  the  man  who  does  wrong 
injures  his  own  soul  by  destroying  what,  to  Soc¬ 
rates,  is  its  greatest  good — that  equable  temper 
from  which  all  fitting  actions  flow. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  Diverse  conceptions  of  justice  859 

1  a.  Justice  as  the  interest  of  the  stronger  or  conformity  to  the  will  of  the  sovereign 

ib.  Justice  as  harmony  or  right  order  in  the  soul:  original  justice 

1  c.  Justice  as  a  moral  virtue  directing  activity  in  relation  to  others  and  to  the  com¬ 
munity:  the  distinction  between  the  just  man  and  the  just  act  860 

id.  Justice  as  the  whole  of  virtue  and  as  a  particular  virtue:  the  distinction  between 
the  lawful  and  the  fair 

le.  Justice  as  an  act  of  will  or  duty  fulfilling  obligations  to  the  common  good:  the 
harmonious  action  of  individual  wills  under  a  universal  law  of  freedom 

1 f  Justice  as  a  custom  or  moral  sentiment  based  on  considerations  of  utility 

2.  The  precepts  of  justice:  doing  good,  harming  no  one,  rendering  to  each  his  owfi, 

treating  equals  equally 

3.  The  duties  of  justice  compared  with  the  generosity  of  love  and  friendship  861 

4.  The  comparison  of  justice  and  expediency:  the  choice  between  doing  and  suffering 

injustice;  the  relation  of  justice  to  happiness  862 


858 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


PAGE 

5.  Justice  and  equality:  the  kinds  of  justice  in  relation  to  the  measure  and  modes  of 

equality  and  inequality  862 

6.  Justice  and  liberty:  the  theory  of  human  rights  863 

6a.  The  relation  of  natural  rights  to  natural  law  and  natural  justice 

6b.  The  relation  between  natural  and  positive  rights,  innate  and  acquired  rights,  pri¬ 
vate  and  public  rights:  their  correlative  duties 

6c.  The  inalienability  of  natural  rights:  their  violation  by  tyranny  and  despotism  864 

6d.  Justice  as  the  basis  for  the  distinction  between  liberty  and  license 

6c.  Justice  and  natural  rights  as  the  source  of  civil  liberty 

7.  Domestic  justice:  the  problems  of  right  and  duty  in  the  family  865 

8.  Economic  justice:  justice  in  production,  distribution,  and  exchange  866 

8a.  Private  and  public  property:  the  just  distribution  of  economic  goods 

8b.  Fair  wages  and  prices:  the  just  exchange  of  goods  and  services  867 

8c.  Justice  in  the  organization  of  production  868 

(1)  Economic  exploitation:  chattel  slavery  and  wage  slavery 

(2)  Profit  and  unearned  increment 

8d.  Justice  and  the  use  of  money:  usury  and  interest  rates 

9.  Political  justice:  justice  in  government  869 

90.  The  natural  and  the  conventional  in  political  justice:  natural  law  and  the 
general  will 

9 b.  Justice  as  the  moral  principle  of  political  organization:  the  bond  of  men  in  states 

9 c.  The  criteria  of  justice  in  various  forms  of  government  and  diverse  constitutions  870 

yd.  The  relation  of  ruler  and  ruled:  the  justice  of  the  prince  or  statesman  and  of  the 
subject  or  citizen 

<)e.  The  just  distribution  of  honors,  ranks,  offices,  suffrage  871 

g f.  Justice  between  states:  the  problem  of  right  and  might  in  the  making  of  war 

and  peace  872 

9 g.  The  tempering  of  political  justice  by  clemency:  amnesty,  asylum,  and  pardon  873 

10.  Justice  and  law 

10#.  The  measure  of  justice  in  laws  made  by  the  state:  natural  and  constitutional 
standards 

10b.  The  legality  of  unjust  laws:  the  extent  of  obedience  required  of  the  just  man 

in  the  unjust  society  874 

ioc.  The  justice  of  punishment  for  unjust  acts:  the  distinction  between  retribution 
and  vengeance 

10^.  The  correction  of  legal  justice:  equity  in  the  application  of  human  law  875 

11.  Divine  justice:  the  relation  of  God  or  the  gods  to  man  876 

11  a.  The  divine  government  of  man:  the  justice  and  mercy  of  God  or  the  gods 

11b.  Man’s  debt  to  God  or  the  gods:  the  religious  acts  of  piety  and  worship  877 


Chapter  42:  JUSTICE 


859 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  relerrcd  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upperandlowerhalvesofthc  page.  Forexample,  in53  James '.Psychology,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  sideof  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
thepage.  Forexample,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehetniah ,  7:45  —  (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Diverse  conceptions  of  justice 

la.  Justice  as  the  interest  of  the  stronger  or 
conformity  to  the  will  of  the  sovereign 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [631-765]  136c-137d  / 
Ajax  [1047-1393]  152a-155a,c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  v,  504c- 
508a, c 

7  Plato:  Gorgias ,  2 71  b- 2 75 d  /  Republic ,  bk 
1— ii,  300b-3l5c  /  Laws ,  bk  iv,  681d-682c; 
bk  x,  760c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [1255*3-20] 
448c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  13  [i283b23~26]  481d;  bk 
vi,  ch  3  [13 i8bi— 5]  521d-522a;  bk  vii,  ch  2 
[i324b22-4i]  528d-529a 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus ,  2c-d  /  Camillus ,  108b-c 
/  Alexander ,  566a- b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a- 
525a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  86b;  91a-b;  part 
ii,  99b;  101a-102c;  103a;  124d-125a;  130c; 
132a;  140b;  149b-c;  157b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  281a-282a;  519c-520b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  291-338  225a-233a;  878 
345a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  ii,  sect  13 


28a-b;  ch  iii  28d-29d;  ch  vii,  sect  90-94 
44d-46c;  ch  xvi  65d-70c  passim  /  Human 
Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect  5  105a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  333c-d;  347b-d;  353c- 
355d  passim;  361c-362a  /  Political  Economy , 
368d-369b  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  388d-389a; 
393b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  219 
72d-73a;  par  258,  81c-82d  [fn  1  ] ;  additions, 
155  142a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro, 
171c-172b;  part  i,  207b-c;  part  ii,  277d- 
278a;  part  iii,  299a-c;  part  iv,  327d-330b 
esp  328c-d,  330b;  344a-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [11,171-188]  272a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-297a 

50  Marx-Engels  :  Communist  Manifesto ,  428b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xii,  547a-549d 
esp  547c;  epilogue  i,  647b-649d 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents , 
780b-d 

lb.  Justice  as  harmony  or  right  order  in  the 
soul:  original  justice 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  99d-100c  /  Gorgias ,  282c- 
285a  esp  282c-283a  /  Republic ,  bk  i,  309b- 
310b;  bk  iv,  346a-355a;  bk  ix,  425c-427b  / 
Statesman ,  586d-589c  /  Laws ,  bk  iv,  681  b-d; 
bk  ix,  748b-c 


860 

(1.  Diverse  conceptions  of  justice,  lb.  Justice  as 
harmony  or  right  order  in  the  soul:  original 
justice .) 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  ii  [i i38b5— 13] 
387a, c 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues ,  iv  14a-15b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  2, 
107a-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xiv,  ch  io-ii 
385b-387a;  ch  19  391c-392a;  ch  26,  395d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  qq  95- 
96  506b-513c;  q  ioo  520d-522b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i— ii,  qq 
81-83  162d-174b;  q  85,  a  i,  ans  178b-179b; 
q  91,  a  6,  ans  212c-213c;  q  ioo,  a  2,  rep  2 
252b-253a;  q  113,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i  360d- 
361d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iv  [288-294]  158b; 
bk  xii  [63-110]  320b-321b 

1  c.  Justice  as  a  moral  virtue  directing  activity 
in  relation  to  others  and  to  the  com¬ 
munity:  the  distinction  between  the  just 
man  and  the  just  act 

7  Plato:  Crito,  216d-219a,c  /  Republic ,  bk  iv 
342a-356a  esp  348d-350a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  15  [io6a2-8] 
149d;  bk  hi,  ch  1  [1  i6bi  1— 13]  163a;  bk  iv, 
ch  2  [i2ib24~3o]  169d;  bk  vi,  ch  5  [143*15-19] 
196c-d;  ch  7  [i45b34— 146^]  199d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  i  [ii29b25- 
ii3oai3]  377b-c;  ch  5  [ii33bi6-23]  381b-c; 
[ii33b3°-li34ai5]  381c-d;  ch  8-9  383a-385c; 
bk  vi,  ch  12  [ii44an-2o]  393d;  bk  x,  ch  8 
[1178*8-22]  432d  /  Politics ,  bk  hi,  ch  12 
[i282bi5-22]  480c;  ch  13  [1283*37-40]  481c; 
bk  vii,  ch  2  [i324b32~4o]  528d-529a  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [i362bio-28]  603 b-c;  ch 
9  [1366*33-1367*22]  608d-609d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  hi,  sect  4  260b- 
261a;  sect  6  261a-c;  bk  iv,  sect  10  264c; 
bk  v,  sect  6  269b-d;  sect  34  273c;  bk  vi, 
sect  2  274a;  sect  22-23  276a-b;  sect  26 
276b-c;  bk  vii,  sect 44  282bc;  bk  viii,  sect 
32  287d-288a;  bk  ix,  sect  i  291a-c;  bk  x, 
sect  11  298b'C;  bk  xi,  sect  10  303b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Aristides ,  265c-d  /  Agesilaus, 

491a-b  /  Cato  the  Younger ,  636d-637c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  13-15 
16c-17b  /  City  of  God ,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b-162d; 
bk  xix,  ch  21  524a-525a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  21, 
a  i  124b-125b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  59, 
aa  4-5  48c-49d;  q  60,  aa  2-3  50d-52b;  q  99, 
a  5,  rep  1  249a-250a;  q  ioo,  a  2,  rep  2  252b- 
253a;  a  3,  rep  3  253a-d;  a  12  264d-265d;  q 
113,  a  1  360d-361d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  92c-93c;  96a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  272a- b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  214c-216d 


1  c  to  2 

ld.  Justice  as  the  whole  of  virtue  and  as  a  par¬ 

ticular  virtue:  the  distinction  between  the 
lawful  and  the  fair 

7  Plato:  Meno ,  178c-179a  /  Republic ,  bk  iv, 
349a-350a  /  Laws ,  bk  i,  642d-643b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  13  [150*1-15] 
204c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  i  [ii29a3i]-cH  2 
[ii3ia9]  376d-378c  /  Politics ,  bk  hi,  ch  13 
[1283*37-40]  481c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  9 
[1366*33-1367*22]  608d-609d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  xi,  sect  10  303b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  55, 
a  4,  rep  4  28c-29d;  q  57,  a  3,  rep  2  37b-38a; 
Q  60,  a  3  51c-52b;  q  66,  a  4  78c-79b;  q  99, 
a  5,  rep  i  249a-250a;  q  ioo,  a  2,  rep  2  252b- 
253a;  a  12,  ans  264d-265d;  q  113,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  2  360d-361d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  301d-302b 

42  Kant:  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
368c-d;  377a-d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  468b-469b 

le.  Justice  as  an  act  of  will  or  duty  fulfilling 

obligations  to  the  common  good:  the 
harmonious  action  of  individual  wills 
under  a  universal  law  of  freedom 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114d-115a  /  Pref  Meta¬ 
physical  Elements  of  Ethics,  366d-367a;  368b- 
369a;  371b-372a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals 
383a-394a,c  esp  383a-d,  386b-387a,c,  389a- 
390a, c,  391a-c,  392d-393c  /  Science  of  Right, 
397a-402a,c  esp397c-399c;  435a-b;  438d-439a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  29 
19a-b;  part  iii,  par  219  72d-73a;  par  261 
83a-d;  par  278  92c-93a;  additions,  177 
147 d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  199b-c; 
part  1,  207b-c;  part  ii,  272a-d;  part  iv, 
333c-d;  363c-d;  365b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  886b-888a 

l f.  Justice  as  a  custom  or  moral  sentiment  based 

on  considerations  of  utility 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  310c-315c  /  Theaete - 
tus,  528b-c;  531a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  46b-47c;  281a-283c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  309  228b;  312  229a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  2  104a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  300d-301a  /  Utilitarianism, 
464d-476a,c  esp  476a, c 

2.  The  precepts  of  justice:  doing  good,  harm¬ 
ing  no  one,  rendering  to  each  his  own, 
treating  equals  equally 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:1-17;  21:1-23:9  / 
Leviticus,  19:9-18,32-37  /  Deuteronomy,  5:6- 
21;  15:7-18;  16:18-20;  19:11-21;  20:10- 

12;  21:15-17;  22:1-4,13-29;  23:15-16,24-25; 
24:6,10-22;  25:1-3,13-16  /  /  Kings,  3:16-28 
—(D)  111  Kings,  3:16-28  /  Proverbs,  3:27-30; 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


2  to  3 

20:22;  24:23-25,29;  25:21  /  Isaiah ,  1:10-20 
esp  1:16-17;  56:1-2— (D)  Isaias,  1:10-20 

esp  1:16-17;  56:1-2  /  Jeremiah,  5:21-29  esp 
5:26-28— (D)  Jeremias ,  5:21-29  esp  5:26-28 
/  Ezekiel,  45:9-11  —  (D)  Ezechiel,  45:9-11  / 
Hosea ,  4:1-3— (D)  Cte\  4:1-3  /  5:7-27 

/  Micah,  6:8— (D)  Micheas,  6:8  /  Zechariah, 
7:8-14  — (D)  Zacharias ,  7:8-14  /  Malachi, 
2:9— (D)  Malachias,  2:9 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:38-48;  19:16-24 
/  Luke,  6:27-38;  18:18-27/  Romans,  12:17-21; 
15:1-2  /  //  Corinthians,  8:9-15 

5  Aeschylus  :  Suppliant  Maidens  [338-394]  5a-d 
/  Eumenides  [544-565]  87a 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [863-910]  107b-c 
/  Ajax  [1047— 1421  ]  152a-155a,c 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [286-380]  260d-261c; 
[5I3“5^4l  262d-263c  /  Helen  [865-1031]  306c- 
308a  /  Hecuba  [239-331]  354d-355c  /  Phoeni¬ 
cian  Maidens  [528-585]  382c-383a 

5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  [676-718]  463a-c 
/  Wasps  [725-726]  516d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi,  201d-202c 

7  Plato:  Cn/o,  216a-d  /  Republic ,  bk  i,  297  b- 
300b;  bk  iv,  349a-350a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  i  [ii29bi9-24] 
377a;  ch  5  [1 133b30-H34ai4]  381c-d;  cii  11 
[1138*4-13]  386b-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  9 
[1366*33-^11]  608d-609a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  16,  158c-d; 
ch  22  167d-170a;  bk  iv,  ch  i,  220c-223d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
bk  iv,  sect  10  264c;  bk  v,  sect  6  269b-d; 
bk  vii,  sect  44  282b-c 

20  Aqulnas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  92, 
a  2  214d-215a,c;  q  94,  a  2  221d-223a;  q  99, 
a  4  248a-d;  qq  104-105  304a-321a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii, 
stanza  50  28a  /  Reeve's  Tale  225a-232a  esp 
[4311-4322]  231b-232a  /  Tale  of  Melibeus, 
par  30-31,  413b-414a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  86d-87b;  91b; 
part  11,  155b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [552-558] 
46a  /  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [163— 
188]  115b-c  /  Macbeth,  act  i,  sc  vii  [1-28] 
289b-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  145d; 
part  11,  332d-333b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  878-879  345a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  5-6 
26a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  165b-166a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  257a-263a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  lc-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  264b 
[fn  1]  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 
375d-376b  /  Science  of  Right,  400b,d-401b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  302d-303a  /  Representative 
Government,  414a-b  /  Utilitarianism,  464d- 
476a, c  passim 


861 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  1,  par  36 
21b-c;  par  49  24c-25a;  par  85  35a-b;  addi¬ 
tions,  29  121c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  202 d;  214c- 
216d;  bk  vm,  304c-305a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iii, 
73a;  bk  v,  123c-127b;  bk  vi,  166c-167a; 
168c-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  211a-b;  886b-888a 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  686a- b 

3.  The  duties  of  justice  compared  with  the 
generosity  of  love  and  friendship 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  23:4-5  /  Leviticus, 
19:17-18  /  Deuteronomy,  13:6-11;  21:18-21  / 
Judges,  11:28-40  /  Proverbs ,  20:22;  24:29; 
25:21  /  Zechariah ,  13:3— (D)  Zacharias,  13:3 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  5:38-48  /  Luke, 
6:27-38  /  Romans,  12:17-21  /  /  Pete?-,  3:8-18 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  83d-84a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  hi,  ch  i  [116*31-39] 
162d;  ch  2  [118*1-7]  164d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iv,  ch  6  373d-374b 
passim;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1155*22-28]  406d;  ch  7 
[ii58bi2-ii59*i3]  410c-411a;  ch  9  411d-412c; 
ch  11  413b-d;  ch  12  [1162*29-33]  414d;cH  13 
[u62bi7-u63*23]  415b-d;  bk  ix,  ch  2  417c- 
418b;  ch  6  420c-421a  esp  [n67b5-i5]  420d- 
421a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  ii 
262a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  [333-387]  176a-177b 

14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato,  278d-279c  /  Agesi- 
laus,  482b-c;  486c  /  Marcus  Brutus,  816c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  23, 
a  5,  rep  3  135d-137d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  66, 
a  4,  rep  i  78c-79b;  q  114,  a  4  373a-d;  part 
ii— ii,  Q  23,  a  3,  rep  i  485a-d;  q  29,  a  3  53ld- 
532c;  q  31,  a  1,  rep  3  536d-537c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [85- 
1 14]  76b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Franklin's  Tale  [11,830-928]  364b- 
366a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  86a-d;  467b-470a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  71b-c; 
108c-109b;  177a-b;  part  ii,  332d-333b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  24b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  27b-30a 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  373a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  233c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  259a 
/  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  368c- d; 
371b-372a;  375d-376b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  466c-467a;  468b-469b; 
474b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  392b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  23 
120d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  2 71  d ;  bk 
xii,  548d-549c;  epilogue  i,  655b-c 


Chapter  42:  JUSTICE 


862 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


4.  The  comparison  of  justice  and  expediency: 
the  choice  between  doing  and  suffering 
injustice;  the  relation  of  justice  to  hap¬ 
piness 

Old  Testament:  Leviticus ,  19:17-18  /  Proverbs , 
20:22;  24:29;  25:21 

Apocrypha:  Susanna— (D)  OT,  Daniel,  13 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:38-48  /  Lube, 
6:27-38  /  Romans ,  12:17-21  /  I  Corinthians , 
4:10-14;  6:1-1 1  /  I  Peter,  2:19-21;  3:8-18 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [944-1093] 
50b-51d  /  Eumenides  [490-565]  86b-87a 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [631-765]  136c-137d 

5  EuRiprDEs:  Medea  212a-224a, c /  Alcestis  237a- 
247a, c  /  Ffe/dTi  [998-1031]  307d-308a  /  Hecuba 
[239-331]  354d-355c  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a- 
439d 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [886-1104]  499b- 

502a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  105c-d;  bk  vii, 
218a-b;  238c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v,  504d- 
508a  passim 

7  Plato:  Apology,  206d  /  Crito  213a-219a,c  / 
Gorgias ,  263d-267c  /  Republic  295a-441a,c 
esp  bk  1-11,  300b-315a,  bk  x,  436c-437c  / 
Laws,  bk  11,  656d-658b;  bk  ix,  746a-747c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  3  [141*15-18] 
194b  /  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  25  [i8ob2i- 
32] 249a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  8-9  383a-385c 
esp  ch  9  [ii36aio-bi4]  384a-d;  ch  ii  386b- 
387a, c  esp  [1138*28^4]  386d-387a  /  Politics, 
bk  1,  ch  2  [1253*14-15]  446c;  bk  v,  ch  8 
[1308*2-17]  510a-b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  7 
[1364^1-24]  606c;  bk  ii,  ch  23  [1397*19-22] 
645b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  22  127c-128c; 
bk  11,  ch  10,  149c-150a;  bk  iii,  ch  18  192a-c; 
bk  iv,  ch  1,  222c-223d;  ch  5  228a-230b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  10  264c; 
bk  vii,  sect  36  282b 

14  Plutarch:  Themistocles,  96c-d  /  Camillus , 
106b-107a  /  Aristides,  265c-d;  274d-275a  / 
Pyrrhus,  319b-d  /  Lysander,  357a-b  /  Sertorius, 
468b-469a  /  Agesilaus,  490d-491b  /  Cato  the 
Younger,  636d-637c  /  Dion,  784d-785a  / 
Marcus  Brutus ,  816c-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  3  343d- 
344b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  36  634d- 
635b 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus,  par  30-31,  413b- 
414a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  86b;  91b-92b; 
95d;  part  11,  140b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  301d-302b;  519a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iii,  sc  I 
[223-237]  49c  /  King  John,  act  ii,  sc  i  [561- 
598]  385c-386a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  37a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  387b 


4  to  5 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  464d-476a,c  esp  473c- 
476a, c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  261c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  9c-10d;  40b- 
41a;  bk  iii,  123d-124a;  bk  v,  216b-d;  bk  viii, 
304d-305a;  bk  xiv,  598d-599a;  epilogue  i, 
656d-657a 

5.  Justice  and  equality:  the  kinds  of  justice  in 
relation  to  the  measure  and  modes  of 
equality  and  inequality 

5  Euripides:  Phoenician  Maidens  [528-558] 
382c-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v,  505b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  411d-413a  /  Laws, 
bk  vi,  699d-700b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  5  [143*15-19] 
196c-d;  ch  7  [i45b33-i46*3]  199d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  2  [1130^0-34] 
378b;  CH3-5  378c-381d;  ch  6  [ii34*25-bi7] 
382a-c;  ch  9  [ii36bi5-ii37*4]  384d-385a;  bk 
viii,  ch  7  [ii58bi2-33]  410c-d;  ch  ii  413b-d  / 
Politics,  bk  1,  ch  12-13  453d-455a,c;  bk  ii,  ch 

2  [i26i*23-b6]  456a-b;  ch  7  461d-463c;  bk  iii, 
ch  9  477c-478d  esp  [1280*8-31]  477c-d;  ch 
12-13  480c-483a;  ch  16  [1287*10-23]  485c;  bk 
iv,  ch  4  [1 29^3  0-1292*7]  491a-b;  bk  v,  ch  i 
[i3oi*25-b4]  502b-c;  [i30ib29-i302*8]  503a-b; 
ch  8  [1308*2-17]  510a-b;  ch  9  [1310*25-36] 
512c;  bk  vi,  ch  2  520d-521b  esp  [i3i7*4o-bi6] 
520d,  [1318*4-10]  521b;  ch  3  521c-522a;  bk 
vii,  ch  14  537b-538d  esp  [133^13—41]  537b-d 
/  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  12  557b-558a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Poplicola- Solon,  87a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  21, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  124b-125b;  q  65,  a  2,  rep 

3  340b-341b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  60, 
a  3,  ans  51c-52b;  q  64,  a  2  67d-68b;  q  114, 
a  1,  ans  370c-371c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  93b-c;  94b-95c; 
part  11,  156b-157a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
134b-c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii  25d-28c;  ch 
vi,  sect  54  36c;  ch  vii,  sect  90-94  44d-46c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  viii,  52a-b; 
bk  xi,  71d;  bk  xiii,  96a-b 

38  Rousseau :  Inequality,  333a-d ;  359c-d ;  360b, d 
[fm];  361c-362a;  362d-363a,c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  11,  397a-398a;  405b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  284d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  6l7c-d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  401  b-c;  419c-420a; 
431a-432c;  433c-d;  435c-437c  esp  436d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-15]  la-b 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  iv  [17-36]  5b-c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  iv,  sect 

2  [5I9~52I1  l^a;  amendments,  xiii,  sect  i- 
xiv,  sect  1  18c;  xv  19b;  xix  19d 

43  Federalist:  number  80,  236a-b 


5  to  6b  Chapter  42: 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  370a-389b 
passim  /  Utilitarianism ,  460a-461a;  467a  b; 
472d-473a;  474d-476a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  49 
24c-25a;  part  iii,  par  200  67c-68a;  par  209 
69d;  additions,  29  121c;  177  147d  /  Philos¬ 
ophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  362d-363a 
50  Marx:  Capital ,  25a-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  iv, 
104bl07a 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology ,  685d-686c  /  Civili¬ 
zation  and  Its  Discontents ,  787d  788b  [fn  3] 

6.  Justice  and  liberty:  the  theory  of  human 
rights 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  la-14a,c 
5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [441-525]  134d-135c; 
[891-943]  138d-139a  /  Ajax  [1047— 1421]  152a- 
155a, c 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [513-565]  262d-263b 
/  Bacchantes  [878-911]  347b-c  /  Phoenician 
Maidens  [1625-1682]  392b-d  /  Orestes  [491— 
604]  399a-400a 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii,  411d-413a  /  Laws, 
bk  iv,  682a-683d 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations ,  ch  12 
[ 1 7  3a7— 3 1 1  238b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  6  [1 134^4— bi 7] 
382a-c  /  Politics ,  bk  v,  ch  9  [1310*25-36]  512c; 
bk  vi,  ch  2  520d-521b  esp  [13 1 7a4o— bi6J 
520d/  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  10  [i368b7-io]  611d; 
ch  13  [i373bi— 17]  617c-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c; 

bk  iv,  sect  4  264a;  bk  vii,  sect  55  283b-c 
15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  iv,  271b 
18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b/ 
City  of  God ,  bk  iv,  ch  4  190d;  bk  xix,  ch  21 
524a-525a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  2,  ans  221d-223a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  112d-117b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  71b-c; 
108c-109b;  177a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  viii 
447d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government  25a-81d 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  la-3a; 
bk  vi,  34b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  356b-358d;  361c-362a 
/  Political  Economy,  370b-d  /  Social  Contract , 
bk  1  387b,d-394d  esp  388d-390d,  393b-394d; 
bk  ii,  398b-399a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  61b;  bk  ii, 
140b;  bk  iv,  228a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  237c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113b-115a;  222b-c  / 
Science  of  Right ,  400b,d-402a;  421c-422d  / 
Judgement,  586a-587a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-28]  la-b 
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments, 

i-ix  17a-d;  xm,  sect  i-xiv,  sect  i  18c-d 


JUSTICE  863 

43  Federalist:  number  51,  164a-165a;  number 
84,  251a-253d 

43  Mill:  Liberty  267a-323a,c  esp  271c-273b  / 
Utilitarianism,  464d-476a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  44 
23c;  part  iii,  par  230  75c;  par  261  83a-d; 
additions,  81  128d-129a  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  199b  c;  part  iv,  345a  b; 
362d-363a;  364a-365c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  292a-297a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  83d-84a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  780c- 
781a 

6a.  The  relation  of  natural  rights  to  natural 
law  and  natural  justice 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [441-525]  134d-135c 
9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  13  [i373bi— 17] 
617c-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a; 
bk  vii,  sect  55  283b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a- 
525a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  96, 
a  1  510b-511b;  a  4  512d-5!3c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  2  208d-209d;  q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d-223a; 
q  95,  a  2  227c-228c;  a  4  229b-230c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  1,  86c-87d;  part  ii, 
131a-c;  138c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii, 
sc  11  [163-188]  115b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a;  appendix,  viii  447d 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [888-902]  359a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii-ix  25d-54d 

passim;  ch  xi,  sect  135-137  55d-57b;  ch  xv, 
sect  171-172  65a-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  lc-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  330a-331b;  333c-d; 
342c-347d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  61b;  bk  ii, 
140b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  86d-87a 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  392b  / 
Science  of  Right ,  397a-b;  400b,d-402a;  421c- 
422d;  429a-c;  430a-432c;  434a;  435a-457b  esp 
436c,  437c-d,  447b-450b,  451c-d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [1-28]  la-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  2 72 d- 2  73b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  171c- 
172b 

6b.  The  relation  between  natural  and  positive 
rights,  innate  and  acquired  rights,  pri¬ 
vate  and  public  rights:  their  correlative 
duties 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  la-14a,c 
5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [441-525]  134d-135c; 
[891-943]  138d-139a  /  Ajax  [1047-1421]  152a- 
155a, c 


864 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(6.  Justice  and  liberty:  the  theory  of  hutnan  rights. 
6b.  The  relation  between  natural  and  posi¬ 
tive  rights ,  innate  and  acquired  rights, 
private  and  public  rights:  their  correlative 
duties.) 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [513-565]  262d-263b 
/  Bacchantes  [878-911]  347b-c  /  Phoenician 
Maidens  [1625-1682]  392b-d  /  Orestes  [491- 
604]  399a-400a 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iv,  682a-683d 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations ,  ch  12 
[i73a7— 3i]  238b'C 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  10  [1368^-10] 

611d;  ch  13  [i373bi-i7]  617c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  13-15 
16c-17b;  par  i7  17d-18a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xix, 
ch  i7  522b-523a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
100,  a  1  251b-252a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  partii,  113c-116c;  131a-c; 
136d-137b;  138c;  151a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  281a-283c;  519a-520b 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1-22] 
247d-248a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  lOOd 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  ii  25d-28c 
passim;  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d;  ch  v,  sect  45 
34d-35a;  ch  vi,  sect  56-63  36d-38c;  ch  vii, 
sect  87-89  44a-d;  sect  91  45a-c;  ch  viii, 
sect  95-99  46c-47c;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch  xi 
55b-58b  /  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  13  107d-108c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  la-3a; 
bk  viii,  52a-b;  bk  xxvi,  215b-216c;  217b; 
221c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  333a-d;  342c-347d; 
362d-363a,c  /  Political  Economy ,  370b-d  / 
Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  393b-c;  bk  ii,  396d- 
398b;  399b  c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  82b-83c;  86d-89b 
passim;  404a 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  392b  / 
Science  of  Right  397a-458a,c  esp  401b-402a,c, 
410d-415d,  418c-422d,  429a-433c,  435c-436b, 
436d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [1-28] 
la-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  221d-224a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  38 
21d;  par  40  21d-22c;  part  iii,  par  155  57c; 
par  210-228  69d-75b  esp  par  210-21 1  69d-70c, 
par  217  72b-c;  additions,  i  115a-d 

6c.  The  inalienability  of  natural  rights:  their 
violation  by  tyranny  and  despotism 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  iv,  271b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
aa  5-6  224d-226b;  q  96,  a  6  235a-d;  q  97 
235d-239b 


6c  to  6e 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  87c-d;  90a-b; 

94b-d;  part  ii,  115a-116a;  142b-c 
35  Locke:  Toleration ,  20d-21a  /  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment ,  ch  11,  sect  io-ii  27b-d;  ch  iii,  sect 
16-19  28d-29c;  ch  iv  29d-30b;  ch  vii,  sect 
87-94  44a-46c;  ch  ix,  sect  131  54d;  ch  xi, 
sect  135-140  55d-58a;  ch  xiv,  sect  168 
64b-c;  ch  xv,  sect  171-172  65a-c;  ch  xvi- 
xix  65d-81d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xv,  109a- 
110a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  388a-c;  389a- 
390d;  bk  11,  396d-398b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  61b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  33c-34a,c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  401b-402a;  421c-422d; 
445c-446a;  451d-452a;  454d-455c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments,  ix 
17d 

43  Federalist:  number  28,  97c;  number  84, 
251d-252a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  270d;  316b-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  363c-364a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  57 
26b-27a;  par  66  29a-c  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
part  iii,  310d-311a 

6d.  Justice  as  the  basis  for  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  liberty  and  license 

6  Thucydides: PeloponnesianWar,  BKii,396c-d 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iii,  674d-676c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  v,  ch  9  [13 1 0^5-36] 
512c;  bk  vi,  ch  4  [1 3 i8b33— 1 3 1 9a4]  522b-c; 
[i3i9b27-32]  523b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  12,  119a-b 
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  57b-58d 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q 
183,  a  4,  ans  627d-628d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  114c-115b 
27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure,  act  i, 
sc  iii  177b-d 

32  Milton:  Sonnets,  xn  65a-b  /  Areopagitica 
381a-412b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  4-6 
25d-26c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  10a; 

bk  viii,  51a-52c;  bk  xi,  69a-c 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  1,  393  b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  622d-623c;  653a 
43  Mill:  Liberty ,  271c-273b;  302d-323a,c  pas¬ 
sim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  319 
105b-106c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 
342b-d 

6e.  Justice  and  natural  rights  as  the  source  of 
civil  liberty 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  96, 
a  4  512d-513c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  138c 


7  Chapter  42: 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  381a-382a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  cn  iv,  sect  21  29d; 
ch  vi,  sect  57-63  36d-38c  passim;  ch  ix 
53c-54d;  ch  xi,  sect  135-138  55d-57c;  cii 
xv,  sect  171  65a  b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  96a- d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 
398c-399c;  400b,d-402a,c;  450d-452a  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  586a-587a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [1-28]  la  b 

43  Federalist:  number  44,  144d-145a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  270 
84d-89c  passim  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part 
iv,  345a-b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  780c- 
781a 

7.  Domestic  justice:  the  problems  of  right  and 
duty  in  the  family 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:12;  21:1-11,26- 
27,32  /  Leviticus,  19:20-22;  25:39-55  /  Deuter¬ 
onomy,  5:16;  15:12-18;  21:15-21  /  Proverbs, 
28:24;  3o:i7  /  Zechariah,  13:3 — (D)  Zacha- 
rias,  13:3 

Apocrypha  :  Ecclesiasticus,  3 :2-i  8 ;  4 :30 ;  7 :20-2 1 ; 

33 :30-3 1 — (P)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  3  :2-i8  ;  4:35; 
7:22-23;  33:31-33 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:4  /  Mar\,  7:10  / 

I  Corinthians,  7  /  II  Corinthians,  12:14  / 
Ephesians,  6:1-9  /  Colossians,  3:18-4:1  / 

/  Timothy,  5:8  /  7z/wj,  2:9-11  /  I  Peter,  3:1-7 
5  Aeschylus:  &£'<?/?  Against  Thebes  [1011-1084] 
38b-39a,c  /  Agamemnon  [1372-1673]  66d-69d 
5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  114a-130a,c 
esp  [311-460]  117a-118b,  [1181-1447]  125a- 
127b  /  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [1-99]  131a- 
132a,  [631-765]  136c-137d  /  Electra  [516-633] 
160a-161a 

5  Euripides:  Medea  212a-224a,c  /  Alcestis 
237a-247a,c  esp  [614-733]  242c-243c  /  to 
tes  [356-724]  397b-401b 
5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [1321-1452]  504c-506b 
/  Birds  [1337-1371]  558d-559b 
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  356b-368c  / 
bk  iv,  683b-d;  bk  vii,  722b-723d;  bk  viii, 
736d-737a;  bk  xi,  779b-781c 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [1  i34b7~ 17] 
382b-c;  ch  ii  [1  i3Sb5— 13]  387a, c;  bk  viii, 
ch  9  [ii59b35-n6oa6]  412a-b;  ch  10  [n6ob 
23]  ch  11  [n6ibn]  413a-d;  bk  ix,  ch  2 
417c-418b  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  12-13  453d- 
455a, c;  bk  iii,  ch  6  [i278b37-i279H8]  476b; 
bkvii,  ch  14  [1332^6-41]  537c-d 

14  Plutarch:  Fabius,  152b-d  /  Coriolanus, 
189d-191d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  17  5b-c; 
bk  ii,  par  3-8  9b-10d  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xix, 
ch  14-16,  520c-522a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, 
a  1,  rep  2  488d-489d;  a  2  489d-490c;  q  96, 
a  4  512d-513c 


JUSTICE  865 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i  ii,  q 
105,  a  4  318b  321a 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Man  of  Law  [4694-4707] 

239a  /  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5697-6404] 
258a-269b  /  Tale  of  Wife  of  Bath  270a  277a 
esp  [6619-6627]  273a-b,  [6839-6846]  277a  / 
Summoner's  Tale  [7563-7582]  289b-290a  / 
Clerks  Tale  296a-318a  /  Franklin's  Tale 
[11,041-117]  351b-352b  /  Physician's  Tale 

[12,006-036]  367b-368a  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par 
79-80  541a-542a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  109c-lllb;  121a; 
155b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  83a-84b;  183c-192d; 
410a-422b 

26  Shakespeare:  Comedy  of  Errors,  act  ii,  sc  i 
[6-43]  152a-c;  sc  11  [112-148]  154c-d  /  Titus 
Andronicus,  act  v,  sc  iii  [35-64]  196d-197a 
/  Taming  of  the  Shrew  199a-228a,c  esp  act  v, 
sc  11  [136-180]  227d-228a,c  /  Romeo  and 
Juliet ,  act  iii,  sc  v  [127-215]  308c-309c  / 
Midsummer- Night' s  Dream,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-121] 
352a-353c  /  Merchant  of  Venice ,  act  i,  sc  ii 
[24-36]  408c  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  ii,  sc  iii 
443b-444b;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [1-161]  452d-454c 
/  Julius  Caesar,  act  ii,  sc  i  [234-309] 
577a-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  v  [22-91] 
37a-d;  act  iii,  sc  iv  [106-135]  55d-56a  /  Troi- 
lus  and  Cressida ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [163-188]  115b-c 
/  Othello ,  act  1,  sc  iii  [175-189]  210d  211a; 
act  iv,  sc  iii  [63-108]  236c-237a  /  King  Lear 
244a-283a,c  /  Cymbeline,  act  i,  sc  i  [125-158] 
451a-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  251b; 
261c-262a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  75c  /  New 
Atlantis ,  20 7c- 209 d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [452-594] 
242a-245a;  bk  x  [144-156]  277b;  [182-196] 
278b;  [867-936]  293b-294b  /  Samson  Ago - 
nistes  [871-902]  358b-359a;  [1010-1060]  361b- 
362b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vi  36a-42a; 
ch  vii,  sect  82-83  43b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  1,  29b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  410a-411a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Joties,  100b-102a;  108c-110c; 
126d-127b;  136a-c;  217d-219c;  235b-238d; 
283c-d;  310b-313b;  359b-362c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiii, 
187d-188c;  bk  xxvi,  216a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  357a-b;  365a-b  / 
Political  Economy,  367a-368c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  82b-86d  passim 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  404d;  418c-422d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  305d-306b;  316d-319d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  160a-b;  247c-d;  301d- 
302a;  429d-430a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  171 
60d-61a;  par  174-180  61b-63c  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  iii,  2 88c -2 89b 


866 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  Domestic  justice:  the  problems  of  right  and 
duty  in  the  family .) 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  241a-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  38d-41a;  45b- 
47b;  epilogue  i,  654a-662a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  i,  la- 
11a;  bk  ii,  34d-36b;  bk  xii,  370b-371c;  395a- 
398a 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  876c 

8.  Economic  justice:  justice  in  production,  dis¬ 
tribution,  and  exchange 

Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  20:15,17  /  Leviticus , 
19:11,35-36;  25 :35~37  /  Deuteronomy ,  5:19,21 ; 
24:10-15;  25:13-16;  27:17///  Samuel ,  12:1- 
6— (D)  II  Kings ,  12:1-6  /  /  Kings,  21  — 
(D)  ///  Kings,  21  /  //  Kings,  5:20-27 —(D) 
/F  Kings,  5:20-27  /  Nehemiah,  5:1-12— (D) 
//  Esdras,  5:1-12  /  Job,  24  /  Proverbs,  1:10- 
19;  6:30-31;  11  :i ;  14:31;  16:11;  20:10;  21:6- 
7;  22:16,22-23;  23:10-11;  28:8,24;  30:8-9  / 
Isaiah ,  3:14-15;  10:1-2— (D)  Isaias,  3:14-15; 
10:1-2  /  Jeremiah ,  17:11  — (D)  Jeremias,  17:11 
/  Ezehiel,  22:12-13,25-29;  45:9-12— (Z)) 

Ezechiel,  22:12-13,25-29;  45:9-12  /  Amos, 
2:6-7;  5:11-12;  8:1-7  esP  8:4-6  /  Micah , 
6:9-12— (D)  Micheas,  6:9-12  /  Zechariah ,  5:3 
—  (D)  Zacharias ,  5:3 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  5:8,14;  20:25;  26:29; 
27:2;  29:19;  34:18-22 — (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasti¬ 
cus,  5:10,16-17;  20:27;  26:28;  27:2;  29:25; 
34:21-27 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  19:18  /  Mar\,  10:19 
/  Lube,  3:12-13;  18:20  /  2:44-47;  4:31- 

5:11  /  Romans ,  13:9  /  /  Corinthians,  6:10  / 
Ephesians,  4:28  /  //  Thessalonians,  3:10 

5  Euripides:  Helen  [903-908]  306d-307a  / 
Phoenician  Maidens  [528-567]  382c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Plutus  629a-642d  esp  [76-111] 
630a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  87a-b;  bk  vi, 
201d-202c;  bk  vii,  245b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  i,  297a-c;  bk  ii,  316a- 

319b;  bk  iii-iv,  340c-343a;  bk  v,  364c-365d 
/  bk  v  686d-697a  passim;  bk  viii, 

738c-743a  /  Seventh  Letter ,  814b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  2  [ii3oai3-bi7] 
377c-378a;  bk  viii,  ch  13-14  414d-416d  pas¬ 
sim  /  Politics ,  bk  1,  ch  3-1 1  446d-453d  passim; 
bk  ii,  ch  5  458a-460a;  ch  7  461d-463c;  bk  v, 
ch  1  [i30ia25-b2]  502b-c  /  Athenian  Constitu¬ 
tion,  ch  12  557b-558a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  viii,  sect  33  288a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-37b  /  Solon,  68d- 
70c  /  Poplicola- Solon,  87a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  21, 
a  1  124b-125b;  q  98,  a  i,  rep  3  516d-517c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi  15a-16b 
passim 

22  Chaucer:  TtfZ’  of  Melibeus,  par  49-51  422a- 
424a 


8  /o  80  v 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  93b-c;  part  ii, 
124d-126a;  156c-157a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
133b-134d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  42a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  351a- 
354d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  86b-c 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  91a-94a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v  30b-36a  pas¬ 
sim 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  154b-155b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  19a-d; 
23a-25a;  29c;  bk  xiii  96a-102a,c;  bk  xviii, 
128b;  bk  xx,  146b-d;  bk  xxiii,  199b-200a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  348b;  354a-355b; 
360b-361a;  365b-366a  /  Political  Economy , 
377b-385a,c  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  hi,  415b- 
417c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  20b-23b 
passim,  esp  21a-c;  27b-37b  esp  33c;  bk  v, 
309a-311c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  22c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  86d-87c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  443b-d;  446a-b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  i,  sect  2 
[17-29]  lib;  sect  9  [273-275]  13d;  article 
VI  [578-582]  16d;  AMENDMENTS,  V  [645-648] 
17c;  vii  I7d;  xiv,  sect  i  [748-750]  18c; 
sect  4 19a;  xvi 19b 

43  Federalist:  number  73,  218d-219b;  num¬ 
ber  79,  233c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  322c-d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  335a-b;  366c-367a  /  Utilitarianism, 
470c-471b  passim;  472d-473c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  125b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  49 
24c-25a;  partiii,  par  241  76d-77a;  additions, 

29  121c;  148  140c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
part  iv,  353 b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-297a 

50  Marx:  Capital  la-383d  esp  19c-25d,  37d- 
38b  [fn  5],  42b-47a,  79a-84a,c,  89a-94a,  112c- 
113c,  150a-151a,c,  161b-162d,  261d-262a, 

264a-275c,  280c-286a,  327b,  354b-c,  377c- 
378d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto  415a- 
434d  esp  420b-423a,  425d-426d,  428d-429c, 
434c- d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  197b-c; 
211a-213a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
165b-166a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  787d- 
788a 

8a.  Private  and  public  property:  the  just  dis¬ 
tribution  of  economic  goods 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:15,17  /  Leviticus , 
19:11  /  Deuteronomy,  5:19,21;  27:17  /  II  Sam¬ 
uel,  12:1-6— (D)  II  Kings,  12:1-6  /  I  Kings,  21 
—(D)  III  Kings,  21  /  Job,  24  /  Proverbs,  6:30- 


$a  to  8b  Chapter  42: 

31;  21:6-7;  23:10;  24;  30:8-9  /  Jeremiah, 
17:11  —(D)  Jeremias,  17:11 
New  Testament:  Matthew ,  19:18/  Mar 10:19 
/  Lz^,  3:12-13;  18:20  /  2:44-47;  4:31- 

5:11  /  Romans ,  13:9  /  Ephesians ,  4:28 
5  Euripides:  Phoenician  Maidens  [528-567] 
382c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Ecclesiazusae  615a-628d  esp 
[554-1  hi]  621b-628a  /  Plutus  629a-642d 
7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  iii,  341c-d;  bk  v,  364c- 
365d  /  bk  v  686d-697a  passim;  bk  viii, 

738c-742a  /  Seventh  Letter ,  814b-c 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  4  [1 13 ib27~ 33] 
379b-c;  ch  9  [ii36bi5-ii37a4]  384d-385a; 
bk  viii,  cn  9  411d-412c;  ch  13-14  414d- 
416d  passim  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i26ob36- 
i26ia7]  455b, d;  ch  3  [i26ibi6-38]  456c-d;  ch 
5  458a-460a;  ch  6  [i265a28-bi7]  460c-461a; 
ch  7  461d-463c;  bk  iii,  ch  10  [1281s!  1—28] 
478d-479a;  bk  v,  ch  8  [i3o8bi 0-1309^2] 
510d-511c;  ch  9  [i309bi8-i3ioai2]  511d-512b; 
bk  vi,  ch  4  [13 i9a6— 1 9]  522c-d;  bk  vii,  ch  9 
[i329ai8-26]  533c;  ch  10  [i329b35-i33oa3] 
534b-c  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  12  557b- 
558a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-b  /  Solon ,  68d-70c 
/  Poplicola-Solon ,  87a  /  Agis  648b,d-656d  / 
Tiberius  Gracchus ,  674c-681a,c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  31a-b;  32bd  / 
Histories,  bk  ii,  236d-237a;  bk  iv,  286c- 
287a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  98, 
a  1,  rep  3  516d-517c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  5,  rep  3  224d-225d;  q  105,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  1-6  309d-316a;  part  ii-ii,  q  32,  aa  5-6 
544a-546b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  94d-95a;  part  ii, 
124d-125d;  156b-157a 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear,  act  iii,  sc  iv  [26- 
36]  264c;  act  iv,  sc  i  [66-73]  270a-b 
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  391bd 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  xvii 
448d 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  91a-94a;  97b-98b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v  30b-36a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  154b-155b 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  310a-311b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  19a-21d 
passim;  23a-25a;  29c;  bk  xxvi,  221c-222b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  353a;  360b-361a;  362d- 
363a, c  /  Political  Economy ,  375b-d;  377b- 
385a, c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  4l5b-417c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  27b-37b  esp 
33c;  52b-62a  esp  52b-c;  bk  iv,  225d-228a; 
239c-240a;  bk  v,  309a-311c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  22b-c;  127a-c; 
251d-255d  passim;  501b-502b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  86d-89d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  403a-410d;  411c- 
415d;  422b,d-425b;  426b-428a;  431a-432c; 
441d-443d;  446a-b 


JUSTICE  867 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments,  v 
17b  c;  xiv,  sect  1  18c 

43  Federalist:  number  35-36  112a  ll7d  pas¬ 
sim;  number  73,  218d-2l9b;  number  79, 
233c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  309a-c;  322c-d  /  Representative 
Government,  335a-b;  366c-367a  /  Utilitarian¬ 
ism,  467b;  472d-473a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  125b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  46 
23d-24a;  par  49  24c-25a;  par  64  28c-d;  par  68 
29d-30a;  part  iii,  par  237  76c;  par  241 
76d-77a;  par  244-245  77c-d;  additions,  27 
121b;  29  121c;  145  140b;  148-149  140c-141a 
/  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  275b-276a; 
277b-c;  part  iii,  287d-288b;  289a-b;  part 
iv,  353b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-297a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  34d-35c;  61c-62b;  89a-b; 
174d-175c;  218d-219a;  286a-296a  esp  288b-d, 
292d-295d;  302d-383d  esp  303b-305a,  308d- 
309b,  317c-321b,  325d-326a,  354a-355d, 

369c-371c,  377c-378d,  383d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  425c- 
427b;  428d-429a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  197b-c;  bk  x, 
414c-416c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  787d- 
788b 

8b.  Fair  wages  and  prices:  the  just  exchange  of 
goods  and  services 

Old  T  estament  :  Leviticus ,  19:11,13 ,35-36 ;  25 :35~ 
37  /  Deuteronomy,  24:10-15;  25:13-16  / 

I  Kings ,  21— (D)  III  Kings,  21  /  II  Kings , 
5:20-27 —(D)  IV  Kings,  5:20-27  /  Nehemiah , 
5:1-12 — (D)  II  Esdras,  5:1-12  /  Proverbs , 
6:30-31;  1 1:1;  16 :i  1 ;  20:10;  22:22-23;  28-8  / 
Jeremiah,  22:13— (D)  J Hernias,  22:13  /  Ezekiel, 
22:12-13;  45:9-12— (D)  Ezechiel ,  22:12-13; 
45:9-12  /  Amos ,  8:4-6  /  Micah ,  6:9-12— (D) 
Micheas,  6:9-12 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  4:14 —(D)  OT,  Tobias,  4:15 
/  Ecclesiasticus,  26:29;  27:25  34. ’ 20-22 — (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  26:28;  27:2;  34:24-27 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  10:10  /  Luhp,  10:7 
/  I  Timothy,  5:18  /  II  Timothy ,  2:6 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv,  158b-c 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  viii,  740d-743a;  bk  xi, 
772d-775d  esp  775a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  4  [ii32bn]-CH  5 
[ii33b29]  380b-381c;  bk  viii,  ch  9  411d-412c; 
ch  13-14  414d-416d  passim;  bk  ix,  ch  i 
416b,d-4l7c  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  9-10  450d-452d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  22  33b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  105,  a  2,  ans  and  rep 
3-6  309d-316a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi  15a-16b 
passim 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  126a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  42a-b 


868 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(8.  Economic  justice:  justice  in  production,  distri¬ 
bution,  and  exchange.  8b.  Fair  wages  and 
prices:  the  just  exchange  of  goods  and  serv¬ 
ices .) 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-167] 
351a-353a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  30c-d 
36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  154b-155b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xviii, 
128b;  bk  xx,  146b-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  353b;  365d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  i,  13a-16a; 
20b-23b  esp  20c,  21c;  27b-37b  esp  33c;  42a- 
62a  passim,  esp  52b-c,  56b-57a,  61c-d;  106c- 
107a;  bk  iv,  225d-228a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  22c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  424b-425a;  446a-b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments,  vii 
17d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  309a-c;  322c-d  /  Representative 
Government ,  366d-367a  /  Utilitarianism ,  467b; 
470c-d;  472d-473a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  236 
76a-c;  additions,  145  140b  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  part  iv,  353b-c 
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\ ,  292a-297a 
50  Marx:  Capital,  13a-50a  esp  13d-18a,  19d-20b, 
24c-25d,  27a-c,  31b-33b,  37c-39c,  42b-44c; 
69a-84a.c  esp  74c-78a,  79c-84a;  89d-102b 
passim,  esp  93b-96a,  lOOa-lOla;  171a-c;  256b- 
260c  esp  258b-c;  264a-275c;  296c-298a;  305c- 
307c;  324a-327b  esp  327b;  366a-368a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  423c-d; 
425d-427b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  572d-573b 

8c.  Justice  in  the  organization  of  production 
50  Marx:  Capital, 33d-36c  esp  34d-35a;  37d-38b 
[fn  5];  85a-263d  esp  lllc-115c,  160d-164a, 
171d-180d,  192d-209a,  215a-217b,  226d-227d, 
261c-262a;  279d-286a  esp  285c-286a;  311c- 
321b;  354a-355d;  377c-378d 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  419d- 
425b  esp  421a-422c;  426a-427b 

8c(l)  Economic  exploitation:  chattel  slavery 
and  wage  slavery 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [1  i34b7— 1 7] 
382b-c;  bk  viii,  ch  11  [u6ia30-bio]  413c-d 
/  Politics,  bk  1,  ch  3-7  446d-449c;  ch  ii 
[i259si8]-ch  13  [i26ob7]  453c-455a;  bk  hi, 
ch  6  [1 278^2-37]  476a-b  /  Athenian  Consti¬ 
tution,  ch  2  553a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  46c-47a  /  Marcus  Cato, 
278d-279c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-4  318b-321a 
32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [1— 5 1]  339b-340b 
36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  154b-155a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  352a;  353c-355b; 

365b-366a 


Sc  to  8  d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  28a-d;  61c-d; 
109d-110d;  bk  hi,  165b-170c;  bk  iv,  253c- 
254a;  287c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  144b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  45b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  421c-422d;  445c- 
446a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect  9 
[260-266]  13d;  article  iv,  sect  2  [529-535] 
16b;  amendments,  xiii  18c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  339d-340c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  363c-364a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  335b- 
336c 

50  Marx:  Capital  la-383d  esp  102b-105c,  112c- 
115c,  127c-131a,  150a-c,  176a-178d,  193a-209a, 
264a-275c,  282d-286a,  296c-301b,  354a-355d, 
366a-368b,  376c-377a,  379a-383d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  420c-d; 
422c-423a;  424b-425a;  426b-428a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  211a-213a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
165b-c 

8c(2)  Profit  and  unearned  increment 

14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato,  287c-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  20b-23b  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  21a-c;  27b-28a;  109d-110d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  243 
77b-c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  71d-72c;  85a-263d  esp  92c- 
94a,  lOOa-lOlb,  104b-105c,  112c,  154d-156d, 
198c-199b,  254c-255a,  263c-d;  267b;  267d- 
275c  passim,  esp  271b-c;  286a-301b  passim, 
esp  288b-289c,  295a-d,  301a-b;  327b 

8d.  Justice  and  the  use  of  money:  usury  and  in¬ 
terest  rates 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  22:25  /  Leviticus, 
25 :35~37 / Deuteronomy,  23:19-20;  24:10-13/ 
Nehemiah,  5 —(D)  II  Esdras,  5  /  Psalms,  15:5 
—  (D)  Psalms,  1 4 :5  /  Proverbs,  28 :8  /  Jeremiah , 
15:10 —(D)  Jeremias,  15:10  /  Ezekiel,  18:4-21 
esp  18:8,  18:13,  18:17;  22:12— (D)  Ezechiel , 
18:4-21  esp  18:8,  18:13,  18:17;  22:12 
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  408c-d  /  Laws, 
bk  v,  694c-d;  bk  xi,  775c-d 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  2  [ii30ai3~b8] 
377c-378a;  ch  5  [n33a5-b29]  380d-381c; 

bk  ix,  ch  2  [ii64b30-n65an]  417d-418a  / 
Politics,  bk  1,  ch  9-10  450d-452d  esp  ch  10 
[i258a38-b8]  452d  /  Athenian  Constitution, 
ch  12,  par  4  557d-558a 

14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato ,  287c-d  /  Lucullus, 
409b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  90a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  2,  rep  4  309d-316a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi  [91-111] 
16a-b;  xvn  [31—75]  24a-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 
133b-140b 


869 


)  to  9b  Chapter  42:  JUSTICE 


26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  i, 
sc  in  409c-411b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  5 5a  5  7a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  29c;  bk 
xii,  92d-93c;  bk  xxi,  169a-170b;  rk  xxii, 
175d-176a;  184b-187a,c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  'Nations,  bk  i,  37b  41d; 
bk  ii,  140b;  154c-155a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  498c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  90d-91a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  424a-425b 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  304b-c;  409a- b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  353b-c 
50  Marx:  Capital ,  77c-78b;  252b;  293a-d  [fn  i]; 
371c-372c 

9.  Political  justice:  justice  in  government 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  23b-d 

6  Thucydides  '.Peloponnesian  War,  bkii,  396c-d 

7  Plato:  Crito  213a-219a,c  /  Republic  295a- 
441a, c  esp  bk  iii-iv,  340c-343a,  bk  iv,  348d- 
350a  /  Laws,  bk  hi,  670c-671a;  672c-676c; 
bk  vi,  699d-700b;  bk  xii,  795a-797c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  i  [i i29bi4— 19] 
377a;  ch  2  [ii30bi7-29]  378a-b;  ch  6 

[ii34a24]-cH  7  [ii35ai4]  382a-383a  /  Politics, 
bk  1,  ch  2  [i253a8— 18]  446b-c;  [i253a29~39] 
446d;  bk  iii,  ch  6  475d-476c  esp  [i279ai7~22] 
476c;  ch  9  477c-478d;  ch  12-13  480c-483a  / 
Athenian  Constitution,  ch  12  557b-558a 
1  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  46c-47a 
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  21  142d- 
143a;  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b-162d;  bk  iv,  ch  4 
190d;  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a-525a;  ch  24 
528b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  96, 
a  4  233a-d;  q  ioo,  a  2,  ans  252b-253a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  86b;  91a-b;  part 
ii,  132a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ix  53c-54d; 
ch  xi  55b-58b;  ch  xiii-xiv  59b-64c;  ch  xv, 
sect  171  65a-b;  ch  xvi-xix  65d-81d  passim 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  28a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  353b-362b  passim  / 
Political  Economy  367a-385a,c  passim  /  Social 
Contract  387a-439d  passim 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  309a-311c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  433c-434d;  435c-437c; 
438d-439a 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  50d-51a;  number 
51,  164c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  3 69 d -3  70a 
/  Utilitarianism,  464d-476a,c  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 
210-228  69d-75b  ' 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [4772-4811]  118b- 
119b 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  428d- 
429c 


9 a.  The  natural  and  the  conventional  in  polit¬ 
ical  justice:  natural  law  and  the  general 
will 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  27lb-275d  /  Republic  295a- 
441a, c  esp  bk  ii-iv  310c-356a  /  Theaetetus, 
528b-c;  531a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  7  382c-383a  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  13  [i373bi-i8]  617c-d; 
ch  15  [i375a25-b25]  619d-620b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  13-15 
16c-17b;  par  17  17d-18a  /  City  of  God,  bk  ii, 
ch  21  161b-162d;  bk  xix,  cii  21  524a-525a; 
ch  24  528b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  3,  ans  209d-210c;  q  95,  aa  2-4  227c-230c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  86b;  91a-b;  part 
ii,  131a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  281a-283c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  291-338  225a-233a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  7-13 
26c-28b;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch  xi  55b-58b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  lc-d;3b-c 

38  Rousseau:  biequality ,  333a-d;  362d-363a,c 
/  Political  Economy,  368d-369b;  370b-d  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393 b-c;  bk  ii,  396d- 
398b;  399b-400c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  397a-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  430a-431a;  435a-b; 
448b-d;  450a-b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  465d-466b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  210- 
228  69d-75b  esp  par  217  72b-c  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  ii,  272a-d 

9b.  Justice  as  the  moral  principle  of  political 
organization:  the  bond  of  men  in  states 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-372]  134a-b 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [304-313]  261a  /  Phoe¬ 
nician  Maidens  [528-558]  382c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii,  225d-226b 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  43d-45b  /  Crito  213a- 
219a, c  /  Republic,  bk  i,  308b-309b;  bk  iv, 
346a-350a  /  Statesman,  598b-604b  /  Laws, 
bk  xii,  786b-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [1  i34a24~ bi 5] 
382a-c;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1155^2-28]  406d;  ch  9 
411d-412c;  ch  ii  413b-d;  bk  ix,  ch  6  420c- 
421a  esp  [1 167^-15]  420d-421a  /  Politics, 
bk  1,  ch  2  [1253^-18]  446b-c;  [i253a29~39] 
446d;  bk  iii,  ch  9  477c-478d  esp  [1 28oa8— 3 1  ] 
477c-d;  ch  12  [i282bi5-2o]  480c;  [1283* 
18-20]  481b;  ch  13  [1283^7-40]  481c;  bk  vii, 
ch  14  [i332b27~32]  537c 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  59d-60b  / 
Lycurgus -Numa,  61b,d-62c  /  Dion,  784d- 
785a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  2r  161b- 
162d;  bk  iv,  ch  4  190d;  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a- 
525a;  ch  23-24,  528a-c 


870 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  9c  to  9d 


(9.  Political  justice:  justice  in  government.  9b.  Jus¬ 
tice  as  the  moral  principle  oj political  organ¬ 
ization:  the  bond  oj  men  in  states .) 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q 
ioo,  a  2,  ans  252b-253a;  q  105,  a  2,  ans  309d- 
316a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xviii  [52]- 
xx  [148]  134a-138b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  91a-92b 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i, 
sc  hi  [98-124]  109a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  xv-xvi 
448c- d 

35  Locke:  Toleration .  3a  /  Civil  Government , 
ch  11,  sect  13  28a-b;  ch  vii,  sect  90-94 
44d-46c;  ch  xi,  sect  135-139  55d-58a;  ch 
xix,  sect  219  75b-c  /  Human  Understandings 
bk  1,  ch  11,  sect  2  104a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy’s  369a-b  / 
Social  Contracts  bk  ii,  396d-398b 

43  Federalist:  number  51,  164c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  302d-303a  /  Representative 
Governments  422b  /  Utilitarianisms  460a-461c; 
464d-476a,c  passim,  esp  470a-471b,  473d- 
474b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Rights  additions,  141 
139c;  155  142a-b;  160  142d-143a  /  Philosophy 
of  History s  part  ii,  272a-d;  part  iv,  321a; 
334b-c 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology ,  685c-686c  /  Civili¬ 
zation  and  Its  Discontents ,  780b- 781a 

9c.  The  criteria  of  justice  in  various  forms  of 
government  and  diverse  constitutions 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  Wars  bk  iii, 
396c-d 

7  Plato:  Republics  bk  viii  401d-416a  /  States¬ 
mans  598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  670c-67la; 
672c-676c;  bk  iv,  681d-682c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  3  [1 13 1^4-29] 
378d;  ch  7  [1 134^6-1  i35b4]  382d-383c;  bk 
viii,  ch  11  413b-d  /  PoliticSs  bk  hi,  ch  6  475d- 
476c  esp  [i279ai7~22]  476c;  ch  9-13  477c- 
483a;  ch  15-17  484b-487a;  bk  iv,  ch  i 
[1289^3-20]  488a;  bk  v,  ch  i  [1301^5-39] 
502b-c;  ch  9  [i3ioa25~36]  512c;  bk  vi,  ch  2 
520d-521b  esp  [i3i7a40-bi6]  520d,  [131^4-10] 
521b;  ch  3  521c-522a;  bk  vii,  ch  14  537b- 
538d  esp  [i333b5~I334ai°]  538b-d 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  46c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicas  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  ioo,  a  2,  ans  252b-253a; 
q  105,  a  1  307d-309d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  iii,  12b- 
13c;  bk  vi,  33a-35a 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  369a-d  /  Social 
Contracts  bk  ii,  405a-406a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Falls  616d-617d  passim 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Falls  94c-95c;  403b; 
575d-577b 


42  Kant:  Science  of  Rights  450a-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Governments  343b-344d; 
350b-355b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  271d- 
272d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifestos  428d- 
429c 

9 d.  The  relation  of  ruler  and  ruled:  the  justice 
of  the  prince  or  statesman  and  of  the 
subject  or  citizen 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  22:28  /  I  Samuel , 
8:10-20—  (D)  I  KingSs  8:10-20  /  II  Samuels 
23:3—  (D)  II  Kings ,  23:3  /  II  Chronicles ,  1:7 - 
12 — (D)  II  Paralipomenons  1:7-12  /  Proverbs , 
16:12;  17:7;  20:28;  24:21;  28:15-16;  29:14  / 
Ecclesiastes ,  10:20  /  Isaiahs  3:14— {D)  Isaiasy 
3:i4 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  22:16-22  /  Actsy 
23:5  /  Romans ,  13:1-7  /  TituSs  3:1 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [365-401]  5c- 
6a 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [162-210]  132c-d;  [631- 
765]  136c-137d 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [342-358]  261  b-c  / 
Helen  [1627-1641]  313c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  84b-c;  bk  iii, 
107c-d;  120b-c;  bk  vii,  223c-d;  245b 

7  Plato:  Republics  bk  i,  301b-306b;  bk  iv, 
346a-350a  /  Laws,  bk  i,  642d-643b;  bk  iii, 
670c-671a;  672c-676c;  bk  iv,  681b-682c;  bk 
viii,  733d-734a  /  Seventh  Letters  806d-807b; 
814b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethicsy  bk  v,  ch  i  [ii3oai-5]  377b; 
ch  6  [n34a25-bi7]  382a-c;  ch  ii  [i i38a4~ 13] 
386b-c;  [1  i38b5— 13]  387a, c;  bk  viii,  ch  ii 
413b-d  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  12-13  453d-455a,c;  ; 
bk  iii,  ch  4  [i277bi6-2o]  474d;  ch  6  475d- 
476c  esp  [i278b30-i279a22]  476a-c;  ch  10 
478d-479a;  ch  13  481b-483a;  bk  vii,  ch  14 
[i332bi3-i333ai6]  537b-538a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  7  182b- 
184a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  vi,  sect  30  276d- 
277a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  vi  [847-853]  233b-234a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  48a  /  Numa  PompiliuSs 
59d-60b  /  Lycurgus -Numa,  61b,d-62c  /  Aris¬ 
tides  262b,d-276a,c  esp  263d-266b,  273d-275c 
/  Agesilaus ,  490d-491b;  494a-c  /  Agesilaus - 
Pompey ,  539a  /  Alexander ,  566a-b  /  Phocion , 
604b,d-605d  /  Cato  the  Younger  620a-648a,c 
esp  636d-637c  /  Demetrius ,  742c-743b  /  Dz'0/2, 
784d-785a;  798b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  iv,  290a-d 

18  Augustine:  Cz/y  0/  Goz/,  bk  xiv,  ch  28 
397a-d;  bk  xix,  ch  15-16  521a-522a;  ch  21 
524a-525a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  96 
510a-513c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  p^rt  i-ii,  q 
105,  aa  1-3  307d-318b 


9e  Chapter  42: 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xviii  [52]- 
xx  [148]  134a-138b  passim 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xv-xix  22b  30a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  11,  101a-102c; 

104b-d;  112d'117b;  147b-c;  154b-158a;  con¬ 
clusion,  279d-282c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  7a-d;  50b-51a;  382b- 
383d;  386bd;  437b-438a 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  v,  sc  hi  [237- 
270]  146b  c  /  Richard  II,  act  iv,  sc  i  [1 14-157] 
342c-343a  /  Henry  V,  act  iv,  sc  i  [95-297] 
552c-554c 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure  174a- 
204d  esp  act  11,  sc  11  181d  184a  /  Coriolanus 
351a-392a,c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  94b-95b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [445-456]  121a; 
bk  v  [800-845]  192b-193b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vii,  sect  90-94 
44  d '46c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  6b-7c; 
bk  hi,  lOc-lla;  12b-13c;  bk  iv,  14d-15c; 
16ab;  bk  v,  18d-19d;  23a-25a;  bk  viii, 
51a-56a;  bk  xii,  93d-94a;  94c-96a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  361c-362a;  366c-d  / 
Political  Economy,  370d-372b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  284d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  50a;  61d-62d;  127d; 
284b-c;  288b-289a;  339d-343c  esp  343b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  39b-40a;  173b-d; 
575d-577b  passim 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  434a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  334b-c; 
366a-370a;  413d-414d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  215 
71c-d;  par  293  98b;  par  302  lOla-c;  par  304 
102a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  242 d- 
243b;  part  11,  271d-272d;  part  iii,  301c-303c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  9c-10d; 
epilogue  11,  680b  684a 

9e.  The  just  distribution  of  honors,  ranks, 
offices,  suffrage 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  i  3a-9a,c;  bk  ix  [89-655] 
58a-63c 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [1011-1084] 
38b-39a,c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [162-210]  132c-d  /  Ajax 
143a-155a,c  esp  [430-480]  146d-147b,  [1047- 
1421]  152a-155a,c 

5  Euripides:  Hecuba  [239-331]  354d-355c 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [1333-1383]  486c- 
487a  /  Lysistrata  [572-586]  590c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  70c-d;  83d-84a; 
bk  viii,  275c-d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
396c-d 

7  Plato:  Apology,  209b-d  /  Republic ,  bk  iii, 
340c-341a;  bk  iv,  349c-350a  /  Laws,  bk  iii, 
672c-676c;  bk  vi,  699d-700b 


JUSTICE  871 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  i  [i i29bi9— 24] 
377a;  cii  2  [ii30b30-34]  378b;  ch  3  378c- 
379b  esp  [1 13 1^24-29]  378d;  cii  6  [i i34bi— 7] 
382b;  cii  9  [1 13^15-1  i37a4]  384d-385a;  bk 
viii,  cii  14  [n63b5-i3]  416a-c;  bk  ix,  ch  6 
[1  i67b5— 1 5]  420d  421a  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  12 
[i259b5~8]  454a;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [i26ia23~b6] 
456ab;  ch  7  [i266b36-i267a2]  462c;  [1267s 
37-41]  463b;  ch  9  [i270bi8-25]  466d-467a; 
ch  11  [1273^2— b7]  469d-470a;  bk  iii,  ch  5 
475a-d;  ch  6  [1 279a8— 1 7]  476b-c;  ch  10-13 
478d-483a;  ch  16  [1287^0-23]  485c;  bk  v, 
ch  2  [i302si6]-ch  3  [i302b2o]  503b-504a; 
ch  8  [i3o8bio-i309ai5]  510d-511b;  ch  12 
[131 6b2i— 24]  519d;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [i3i7a4o]-CH  4 
[1 3 1 9a6]  520d-522c;  bk  vii,  ch  13  [i332ai3- 
41]  536d-537a  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  12, 
par  1  557b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  45c-46a  /  Numa  Pom- 
pilius,  50a  /  Pompey ,  505a-c  /  Cato  the  Younger, 
636d-637c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  105d-107b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxi,  32d-33a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  74b-c;  part  ii, 
103c-d;  104b;  146d;  147d-148b;  156c;  158a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  181d-183c;  519d-520a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [445-456]  121a  / 
Areopagitica,  383a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  305  228a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  15b-16b;  28b-29a; 
part  iii,  114a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a-6b; 
7c-8c  passim;  bk  iii,  llc-12b;  bk  v,  23a-25c; 
31a-32c;  bk  xi,  71d-72a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  358c;  360a-361a  esp 
360b, d  [fni]  /  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  408d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  17a-b;  240c-244c 
esp  240c-d,  242a-c;  245d-247a  passim;  501c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  39d;  73b;  317b- 
318b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d-437c;  444c- 
446a 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  iv  [17-36]  5b- 
c;  vi  [87-93]  6b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
2  [11-40]  llb-d;  sect  3  [67-72]  12a;  [88-95] 
12b;  sect  6  [1 43—151  ]  12c-d;  sect  9  [289]- 
sect  10  [303]  14a;  article  ii,  sect  i  [327- 
382]  14b-d;  article  iv,  sect  2  [519-521] 
16a;  amendments,  xii  18a-c;  xiv,  sect  i 
18c;  xv  19b;  XIX  19d;  xxiii  20d 

43  Federalist:  number  68,  206b-c;  number  80, 
236a-b;  number  84,  252a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  302d-303a  /  Representative 
Government,  380c-389b  passim  /  Utilitarianism, 
466c-467b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  124d-125d;  127b-c;  141a; 
197c;  479a-d;  498c-499a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  206 
68d-69b;  par  291-293  97d-98b  /  Philosophy 
of  History,  part  i,  222a-224a;  part  iii,  295d- 
296c;  part  iv,  356c-357a 


872  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  9/ 


(9.  Political  justice :  justice  in  government.  9e.  The 
just  distribution  of  honors ,  ranks ,  offices, 
suffrage.) 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [10,849-976]  264a- 
267a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  iii,  131c-135c; 
bk  v,  205a-b;  228c-229a;  232a-234a;  bk  vi, 
241c-242b 

9f.  Justice  between  states:  the  problem  of  right 
and  might  in  the  making  of  war  and 
peace 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy ,  20  esp  20:10-14 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [897-959] 
122d-123b 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  258a-269a,c 

5  Aristophanes:  Peace  [601-692]  532d-534a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  la-2b;  bk  iii, 
93c-d;  bk  iv,  144c-d;  bk  vi,  202c-203c; 
212a-c;  bk  vii,  218a-b;  237d-239a;  241c-246c; 
bk  vm,  287a-c;  bk  ix,  289a-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  i  349a- 
386d  esp  358b-360c,  368b-d,  378a-380a, 
384b-386d;  bk  ii,  402c-d;  404d-405b;  bk  iii, 
418d-420c;  424d-428d;  429b-434c;  bk  iv, 
461  b-463a ;  469d-470b;  bk  v,  504c-508a,c; 
bk  vi,  511c-516b;  529b-533a  esp  531b-c;  bk 
vii,  542b-c;  556d-557a 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  274a  /  Republic ,  bk  1,  308b- 
309b;  bk  v,  367b-368c  /  Laws ,  bk  i,  640a- 
643  b 

9  Aristotle  :  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  7  [ii77b8-n]  432b 
/  Politics ,  bk  1,  ch  8  [i256b20-26]  450c;  bk 
iii,  ch  9  [i28oa34~bi2]  478a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  2 
[i324b2-i325ai3]  528c-529a;  ch  14  [1333*18- 
1334*11]  538a-d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  vi  [847-853]  233b-234a; 
bk  xi  [243-444]  334b-340a;  bk  xii  [175-213] 
358b-359b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  26b-27a  /  Numa  Pom - 
pilius ,  55c-56a/  Themistocles ,  96c-d  /  Camillus , 
106b-107a;  108b-109a  /  Marcellus ,  254c-255d 
/  Aristides ,  273b-275a  /  Pyrrhus ,  319b-d  / 
Lysander ,  357a-b  /  Cimon ,  398a-d  /  Nicias , 
426a  /  Crassus-Nicias ,  456d-457c  /  Ser tonus, 
468b-469a/  Agesilaus,  484a-b;  491a-b;  497c- 
498a  /  Pompey,  503a-d;  518a-b  /  Alexander, 
549d-550c;  569a-b  /  Gz/o  //z?  Younger ,  639d- 
640a  /  Demetrius,  727d-728b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  15b;  bk  xi,  106b-d  / 
Histories ,  bk  iv,  272b-c;  290a-d 

18  Augustine:  GVy  0/ God ,  bk  i,  ch  1-7  129d- 
133a;  ch  21  142d-143a;  bk  iv,  ch  14-15 
196b-197a;  bk  xix,  ch  7  515a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  3  316a-318b;  part  ii-ii,  q  10,  a  8  432b- 
433b;  q  29,  a  1  530b-531a;  q  40  577d- 
581d 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus,  par  12-13  404a- 
405a;  par  30-38  413b-418a;  par  53-60  425b- 
427b 


23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxi,  32a  d;  ch 
xxvi,  36b-37a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  95a;  part  ii,  147c; 
159c;  conclusion,  279d-282c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargahtua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
36a-38a;  54a-55a;  58a-59d;  bk  iii,  131b, d- 
133b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  llb-13c;  95a-97b;  381a- 
b;  387c-388c;  440b-442d 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  v,  sc  iii 
[237-270]  146b-c  /  King  John,  act  ii,  sc  i 
[561:— 598]  385c-386a;  act  iii,  sc  i  [255-347] 
388d-389d  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  iv,  sc  i  487b- 
489d;  sc  11  [52-123]  490b-491b  /  Henry  V, 
act  1,  sc  11  [1-233]  534a-536b;  act  iv,  sc  vii 
[1-68]  558d-559b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  290c-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  129 134d- 
135d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [638-714]  313a- 
314b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  291-294  225a-226b;  296  226b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ix,  sect  131  54d; 
ch  xi,  sect  139  57c-58a;  ch  xv,  sect  172 
65b-c;  ch  xvi  65d-70c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  23a-25b;  part  ii, 
75a-b;  76b-78b;  part  iv,  149b-151a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  3a-b; 
bk  x,  61b,d-64a;  bk  xv,  109b-c;  bk  xxiv, 
201b-c;  bk  xxvi,  223c-224a;  bk  xxix,  265d- 
266a 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  369a-b  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  i,  389d-390d;  bk  ii,  395d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  4a-b;  84d-85a; 
402b-404b;  504d-507c;  509b-c;  535d-536c; 
543b-c;  549d-550b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  5d-6a;  7d-8a; 
17d-18c;  27b  esp  604c  [n  107];  130b-c;  373d- 
374d;  383c-384b;  445a;  532d-533a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  413d;  452b-458a,c 
esp  454a-b,  454d-455b,  457a-458a,c  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  504a-b;  586c-d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  5a-9d  passim 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
8  [220-225]  13b;  sect  10  [314-320]  14b; 
ARTICLE  III,  SECT  2  [469-492]  15c-d;  AMEND¬ 
MENTS,  xi  18a 

43  Federalist:  number  3-7  33b-44c  passim; 
number  11,  54c;  number  43,  140d-144a;  num¬ 
ber  80,  235b-236c;  number  83,  248b-c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  434c-435c 
passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  326 
107d-108a;  par  330-340  108d-110c  esp  par  333 
109b-c,  par  336  109d,  par  338  llOa-b;  par  351 
112a-b;  additions,  193-194  150c-d  /  Phi¬ 
losophy  of  History,  part  iii,  299a-c;  part  iv, 
357c-358b 

48  Melvtlle:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-295a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  428a-b 


,9g  to  \0a  Chapter  42 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ix,  346a-355c; 
bk  x,  442c-443b;  bk  xii,  547a-55lc;  bk  xiv, 
589a-c 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death ,  755a-757desp  757b-c; 
761a-c 

9g.  The  tempering  of  political  justice  by  clem¬ 
ency:  amnesty,  asylum,  and  pardon 

Old  Testament:  Numbers ,  35:6,11-15,28-33  / 
Deuteronomy ,  4:41-43;  19:1-13  /  Joshua ,  21  — 
(D)  Josue,  21 

5  Aristophanes:  Frog*  [686-705]  572a  b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  20b-d;  36b-c; 
bk  11,  71b-72a;  bk  vi,  212a-c;  bk  vii,  251a-b 

6  Thucydides  '.Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  iii,  424d- 
429a;  433d-434a;  bk  iv,  451d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iv,  ch  5  228a- 
230b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  xi  [100-111]  330b-331a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  37b-c  /  Solon,  68a  / 
Aristides ,  275c  /  Agesilaus ,  494a-c  /  Pompey , 
503a-d  /  Caesar ,  599a-b  /  D/0/2,  798b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  ii,  39b-c;  bk  iii,  59d; 
bk  xii,  113d-114a;  bk  xiv,  151d-152c  /  ///*- 
/or/d’*,  bk  1,  208b-c 

18  Augustine:  C/Vy  0/* Go*/,  bk  i,  ch  1-7  129d- 
133a;  bk  ix,  ch  5  288b-289a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  x  [70- 
93]  68a-b;  xv  [85-114]  76b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus,  par  77-78,  431a- 
432a  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par  68  533b-534a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  94a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  3a-5a;  51a-53c 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice ,  act  iv, 
sc  1  [182-205]  427c-d  /  7*/  Henry  IV,  act  v, 
sc  v  466a-d  /  7/d72rj  F,  act  ii,  sc  11  [39-83] 
539c-540a 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure,  act  ii, 
sc  11  [25-162]  182b-183d  /  Cymbeline ,  act  v, 
sc  v  [286-422]  486c-488d 

29  Cervantes:  D0/2  Quixote,  part  i,  71b-d; 
108c-109b;  177a-b;  part  ii,  332d-333b 

30  Bacon:  Ar/o  Atlantis ,  205a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xiv,  sect  159 
62b-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  36a-b; 
43c-d;  bk  xxv,  209b-d;  bk  xxix,  264b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  176a;  302d;  449d- 
451a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  449c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  ii, 
sect  2  [417-420]  15a 

43  Federalist:  number  69,  208c-d;  number 
74,  221d-222d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  335c;  344a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
282  95d-96a;  additions,  74  127d-128a;  173 
146d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  230b-232a; 
bk  xii,  548d-549b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xii, 
398a-d 


JUSTICE  873 

10.  Justice  and  law 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xviii  [497-508]  135b 

7  Plato :  Gorgias,  261  b-d  /  Republic ,  bk  ii, 
311b-c  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  681b-683d;  bk  ix  743a- 
757d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  cii  i  [ii29bi2-24] 
377a;  ch  6  [1 134^25— b8]  382a-b;  ch  7  382c- 
383a  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  16  [i287aio-b25] 
485c-486b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1354®! 6— 
I355a3l  593b-594a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [507-508]  117a;  bk  vi 
[847-853]  233b-234a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa  61b,d-64a,c  / 
Solon,  66a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  13-17 
16c-18a  /  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b- 
162d;  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a-525a;  ch  24  528b- 
c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iv,  ch  18  686d- 
687d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  21, 
a  2  125c-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  5,  ans  211c-212c;  q  94,  a  4  223d-224d;  q  95, 
aa  1-3  226b-229b  esp  a  i,  rep  2-3  226c-227c; 
q  100,  a  2,  ans  252b-253a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  86b;  part  ii, 
131a-c;  157b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  291-338  225a-233a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch 
xviii  71a-73c  passim 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  lc-d; 
bk  xxvi  214b,d-225a,c  passijn 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  370b-371c  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  399b-400c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  96a-d 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  392a  / 
Science  of  Right,  400b-d;  432c-433a 

43  Federalist:  number  io,  50d-5lb 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  465c-466b;  467c-468a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
212-213  70d-71a;  par  215  71c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xii,  553a 

10 a.  The  measure  of  justice  in  laws  made 
by  the  state:  natural  and  constitutional 
standards 

5  Euripides:  Bacchantes  [878-911]  347b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
396c-d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  52b  /  Gorgias ,  271b-274c 
/  Republic,  bk  ii,  316a-319b  esp  318a;  bk 
iv,  349a-350a  /  Statesman,  598b-604b  / 
Laws,  bk  iv,  680c-683b;  bk  ix,  747c;  bk  x, 
760c 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations ,  ch  12 
[I73a7~I9]  238b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  i  [ii29bi2-24] 
377a;  ch  7  382c-383a;  ch  9  [n^6h^2-^] 
385a;  ch  ii  [1138*4-13]  386b-c  /  Politics,  bk  i, 
ch  6  [i255a3-b4]  448c-449a;  bk  iii,  ch  ii 
[i282bi-i4]  480b-c;  ch  16  [i287a28-’°5]  485d- 


874 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


10  a  to  10  c 


(10.  Justice  and  law.  10  a.  The  measure  of  justice 
in  laws  made  by  the  state:  natural  and  con¬ 
stitutional  standards .) 

486a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  [1289*13-20]  488a  /  Rhetoric , 
bk  i,  ch  io  [i368b7~io]  611d;  ch  13  [i373bi- 
17]  617c-d;  ch  15  [1375^5—^25]  619d-620b; 
[l376a33-b3i]  621a-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b; 
par  17  I7d-18a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  ii,  ch  21 
161b-162d;  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a-525a;  ch  24 
528b-c  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  iv,  ch  18  686d- 
687d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  3  209d-210c;  q  93,  a  3  217b-218a;  q  94,  a  4 
223d-224d;  q  95,  a  2  227c-228c;  q  96,  a  4, 
ans  233a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  91a-b;  part  ii, 
113d;  116a-b;  131a-c;  132a-b;  134b-135b; 
156b-c;  157b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  47c-48a;  281a-283c; 
384b-c;  519a-520b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  94d-95b 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [888-902]  359a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  291-338  225a-233a;  878-879 
345a-b 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  llb-12c  /  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment ,  ch  11,  sect  12  27d-28a;  ch  ix  53c-54d; 
ch  xi  55b-58b;  ch  xviii  71a-73c  passim; 
ch  xix,  sect  221-222  75d-76c;  sect  240-242 
81b-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  lc-d; 
3c-d;  bk  vi,  39b;  bk  viii,  54b;  bk  xii,  85c- 
86d;  bk  xix,  136a;  138a-c;  bk  xxvi  214b, d- 
225a, c  passim,  esp  214b, d;  bk  xxix,  262a; 
265d 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  369c-d;  370b-d 
/  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  397b-c;  399b-400c; 
405a-406a;  bk  iv,  426b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  61b;  bk  ii, 
140b;  bk  iv,  228a;  232b;  284d;  bk  v, 
397a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  525d-526c;  617a-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  76d-77b;  89d-94b 
passim;  403b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 
429a-c;  434a;  435a-436a;  450d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  11a, c; 
article  1,  sect  8-10  13a-14b;  article  vi 
[583-590]  16d;  amendments,  i-x  17a-d 

43  Federalist:  number  33, 108b-c;  number  44, 
145c-147a;  number  78,  230d-232d;  number 
81,  237d-238b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  302d-323a,c  passim  /  Utilitar¬ 
ianism,  465d-466b;  467c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  203d-204a;  205b;  363c- 
364a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
212-213  70d-71a;  additions,  134  138b-c  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  364b 


10b.  The  legality  of  unjust  laws:  the  extent  of 
obedience  required  of  the  just  man  in 
the  unjust  society 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [43-99] 
131c-132a,  [441-496]  134d-135b,  [631-765] 
136c-137d,  [891-943]  138d-139a 
5  Euripides:  Phoenician  Maidens  [1625-1670] 
392b-d 

7  Plato:  Apology  200a-212a,c  /  Crito  213a- 
219a, c  /  Republic ,  bk  vi,  379d-380b  /  Laws, 
bk  vi,  706b-c  /  Seventh  Letter ,  800c-d 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  ii  [i282bi- 
14]  480b-c;  ch  13  [1284^-37]  482a-c  /  Rhet¬ 
oric,  bk  1,  ch  13  [i373bi-i2]  617c-d;  ch  15 
[i375a25-b25]  619d-620b;  [i376b5-28]  621b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xv,  172c-173c;  bk  xvi, 
180d-184a,c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  17  17d- 
18a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  17  522b-523a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  92, 
a  1,  rep  4  213c-214c;  q  93,  a  3,  rep  2  217b- 
218a;  q  94,  a  6,  rep  3  225d-226b;  q  95,  a  2 
227c-228c;  a  4  229b-230c;  q  96,  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  2-3  233a-d;  q  97,  a  2  236d-237b;  part 
ii— ii,  Q  42,  a  2,  rep  3  584b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  102b-c;  104b-d; 
112b-d;  113d-114b;  H5a-116a;  134b-135b; 
157b;  part  iii,  238b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  7a-d;  47a-51a;  319a-b; 
381a-388c  esp  383c-d,  384d-385a,  388a-c; 
463a-465c;  480b-482b;  504c-506a;  519a-520b 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [888-902]  359a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  114b  /  Pensees,  326 
231a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  16d-17b  /  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment,  ch  xiii,  sect  155  60d-61a;  ch  xiv, 
sect  168  64b-c;  ch  xvi-xix  65d-81d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  366b-d  /  Political 
Economy,  369c-d  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i, 
388d-389a;  bk  iv,  426b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  397a-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  439a-441d;  451d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Federalist:  number  16,  68b-c;  number  28, 
97c-d;  number  33,  108b-109a;  number  78, 
230d-232d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  465d-466b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  244d-245d; 
epilogue  1,  668a-669c;  670d-671a 

10c.  The  justice  of  punishment  for  unjust  acts: 
the  distinction  between  retribution  and 
vengeance 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  9:6  /  Exodus,  21 : 12-29 
esp  21:23-25  /  Leviticus,  24:16-21  /  Deuteron¬ 
omy,  19:11-13,21 

New  Testament:  Romans,  13:2-4 
5  Aeschylus:  Choephoroe  70a-80d  esp  [306- 
314]  73a-b,  [400-404]  74a  /  Eumenides  81a 
91  d  esp  [490-565]  86b-87a 


lOr/olOr/  Chapter  42:  JUSTICE  S75 


5  Sophocles:  Electra  156a-169a,c 

5  Euripides:  Medea  212a-224a,c  esp  [764-819] 
218d-219b  /  Electra  327a-339a,c  esp  [907- 
1 100]  335b-337a  /  Orestes  [470-629]  398d  400b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  99c-100a;  bk  vii, 
237d~239a;  bk  viii,  278c-279a;  bk  ix,  306c- 
307a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  iii,  424d- 
429a;  429c-434c;  bk  vii,  556d-557a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  45b-d  /  Euthyphro,  194c-d 

/  Republic ,  bk  ix,  426d  /  bk  ix,  743a-d; 

746a-748d;  bk  x,  769d-770c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  5  [  1 1 1 3b2 1 — 
ni4a2]  359d-360a;  bk  v,  ch  4  379b-380b  esp 
[1132*3-30]  379c-380a;  ch  5  [ii32b2i-29] 
380b-c;  cii  11  [1138*7-10]  386b;  [1138*20-23] 
386c;  bk  x,  ch  9  [1180*5-13]  434d  /  Rhetoric , 
bk  1,  ch  10  [i369bi2— 14]  6l2d 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus ,  4a  b  /  Solon ,  70d;  71b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  3,  344b; 
bk  xiv,  ch  15  388d-390a;  bk  xix,  ch  13 
519a-520a;  ch  15  521a-c;  bk  xxi,  ch  11-12 
570b-571c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  19,  a 
9,  ans  116d-117d;  q  21,  a  4,  rep  3  126c-127c; 
q  49,  a  2,  ans  266a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  87 
185c-192d;  q  95,  a  1  226c-227c;  q  105,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  9-12  309d-316a;  q  108,  a  3,  rep 
2  334a-336b;  part  ii-ii,  q  25,  a  6,  rep  2 
504d-505d;  part  iii  suppl,  q  89,  a  6,  ans 
and  rep  1  1009d-1010c;  a  7  lOlOd-lOUb;  a  8, 
ans  10llb-1012a;  q  99  1078b-1085a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xix  [70- 
145]  82b-83a 

22  Chaucer:  TaleofMelibeus  401a-432a  esp  par 
55,  426b,  par  63-65  428a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  94a;  part  ii, 
145a-d;  147b-c;  157d-158a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  23b-24a 

26  Shakespeare:  Titus  Andronicus ,  act  iv,  sc 
iii-iv  189d-192b  /  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  iv, 
sc  1  425c-430b  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  v,  sc  ii 
[73— J45]  498d-499b  /  Henry  V ,  act  ii,  sc  ii 
539a-541a 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure  174a- 
204d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  68b-73a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  51,  schol 
439d;  prop  63,  schol  444a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  ii,  sect  7-12 
26c-28a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  28a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  27b-30a;  399c-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  37d- 
43c;  bk  xii,  85c-86d;  bk  xix,  338c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  35lb-d;  360b,d  [fm] 
/  Political  Economy,  371a-c  /  Social  Contract , 
bk  ii,  398b-399a;  406c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  175d-176a;  617b-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  91a-93c  passim 


42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  306b  c  /  Intro. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  391d-394a,c  /  Science 
of  Right,  400b  d;  446a-449c  esp  446b  447c, 
448b  d;  450a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  iii, 
sect  2  [493]-sect  3  [51 1]  15d-16a;  article 
iv,  sect  2  [522-528]  16a-b;  amendments,  v- 
vi  17b-c;  viii  17d;  xm  18c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  272b-d;  302d-312a  passim,  esp 
304c-305b;  312a-323a,c  passim  / Utilitarianism, 
467d-468c;  469c-470d;  471d-472d;  474b-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  96 
36c-37a;  par  99-100  37b-38a;  par  103  39b; 
part  iii,  par  218  72c-d;  par  220  73a-b;  par 
319,  106a;  additions,  60  125d;  62-65  126a-c; 
74  127d-128a;  138  139a-b;  173  146d  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History ,  part  i,  214d-216a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  30b- 
32a;  bk  v,  123c-124a;  bk  xii,  384c-d;  398b-d 

10 d.  The  correction  of  legal  justice:  equity  in 
the  application  of  human  law 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  32b-c;  bk  vi,  211d- 
212a 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  ix,  754a-d;  bk  xi,  777d- 
778b;  bk  xii,  785c-786a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bkvi,  CH3  [141*15-18]  194b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  10  385c-386b  / 
Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  15  [1286*10-37]  484b-d;  ch 
16  [1287*23-28]  485d;  [i287bi5~25]  486a-b  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  13  [i374*i7~b24]  618c-619a; 
CH  J5  [1375&25-l>25]  619d-620b;  [i376bi9-2i] 
621b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Fabius ,  150c-151a  /  Agesilaus, 
494a-c  /  Agesilaus-Pompey,  539a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  96, 
a  6  235a-d;  q  97,  a  4  238b-239b;  q  ioo,  a  8, 
ans  and  rep  1  259d-261a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  94d;  part  ii, 
132d;  134b-135d;  136b;  142a-144d;  156b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  50b-51a;  519a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice ,  act  iv, 
sc  1  425c-430b 

27  Shakespeare:  Timon  of  Athens,  act  iii,  sc 
v  406d-408a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  68b-73a; 
PARTii,333a-b;340d-343a;353b-356d;361a-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xiv  62b-64c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  152b-154a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  8c-10c;  12b-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  35d-36a; 
39b;  40a-b;  42a-c;  bk  xii,  85c-86d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  397a-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  73d-74b;  77d-78a; 
91b-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  399c-400a 

43  Federalist:  number  78,  232c-d;  number  80, 
237a-b;  number  83,  248d-249a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  223- 
229  73c-75b 


876  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  II  to  11a  I11' 


11.  Divine  justice:  the  relation  of  God  or  the 
gods  to  man 

1  la.  The  divine  government  of  man:  the  justice 
and  mercy  of  God  or  the  gods 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  3;  6:5-8:22  esp  8:20- 
22;  18:20-19:29  /  Exodus,  20  /  Leviticus ,  26 
/  Numbers,  13-14  esp  14:11-20;  25  /  Deuter¬ 
onomy ,  32  /  II  Samuel,  24— (D)  II  Kings,  24  / 
II  Chronicles ,  6;  12 —(D)  II  Paralipomenon , 
6;  12  /  Nehemiah,  9:5-38— (D)  //  Esdras, 
9:5~38  /  /  Psalms,  5-7;  28;  37;  59-60; 

73;  76;  81;  83;  89:14;  146 — (D)  Psalms, 
5-7;  27;  36;  58-59;  72;  75;  80;  82;  88:15; 
145  /  Proverbs,  14:32  /  Ecclesiastes,  12:14  / 
Isaiah,  1;  30-31;  42  esp  42:1-7;  45:21-25; 
59 —(D)  Isaias,  1;  30-31;  42  esp  42:1-7; 
45:21-26;  59  /  Jeremiah,  15;  24;  29-31;  34 
— (D)  Jeremias,  15;  24;  29-31;  34  /  Lamen¬ 
tations  /  Ezekiel,  n;  14;  18;  33-34— (D) 
Ezechiel,  11;  14;  18;  33-34  /  Daniel,  4:4-37 
—  (£))  Daniel,  4  /  Joel,  3  /  /too/  /  Obadiah 
—(D)  Abdias  /  Jonah— (D)  Jonas  /  Micah, 
1-3 —(D)  Micheas,  1-3  /  Nahum  /  Malachi, 
3-4 —(D)  Malachias,  3-4 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  3— (D)  OT,  Tobias,  3  / 
Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1-6  passim;  12— (D) 
OT,  £004  g/*  Wisdom,  1-6  passim;  12  /  Ec- 
clesiasticus,  16;  35 —(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus , 
16;  35  /  //  Maccabees,  6:12-17— (D)  OT, 
//  Machabees ,  6:12-17 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:22,29-30;  11:20- 
24;  12:36-37;  13:24-30,36-43;  18:7-9,11-14; 
19:16-20:16;  23  /  9:43-48;  10:17-31; 

16:16— (D)  9:42-47;  10:17-31;  16:16  / 

Luke ,  1:46-55;  6:36-38;  7:36-50;  10:25-28; 
14:7-14;  15;  16:19-26;  18:1-8;  23:34,39-43  / 
/o/w,  5:30;  8:1-1 1  /  Romans,  1:16-2:16;  6:28 
/  Galatians ,  6  7-8  /  Ephesians,  2  /  II  Thessalo - 
/z/tfraj-,  2:10-12— (D)  //  Thessalonians,  2:10-11 
/  II  Timothy,  4:8-9— (D)  //  Timothy,  4:8  / 
Hebrews ,  10:26-31  /  /  3:18  /  7/  2 

/  /  John,  1 :9  /  /  Revelation  passim,  esp 

17-20— (D)  Apocalypse  passim,  esp  17-20 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xxiv  [513— 551]  176d-177a 
/  Odyssey,  bk  i  [11-95]  183a-184a 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [1— 175]  la-3a 
/  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d  /  Agamemnon 
[636-781]  58d-60b;  [1560-1566]  68c  /  CAo- 
ephoroe  [772-780]  77c  /  Eumenides  81a-91d 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [279-289]  133c  /  Ajax 
143a-155a,c  esp  [430-459]  146d-147a,  [748— 
783]  149c-d  /  Electra  [173— 179]  157c  /  Tra- 
chiniae  [1264-1278]  181c  /  Philoctetes  [446-452] 
186a 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [598-617]  263c-d  / 
Helen  [191-305]  300a-d;  [71 1-72 1]  304d-305a 
/  Hecuba  [1023-1033]  361c-d  /  Heracles  Mad 
[772-816]  371c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Plutus  [86-92]  630a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  20b-22a;  bk  ii, 
77a-b;  bk  iv,  159d;  bk  vi,  199c-d;  201d-202c; 


203a-b;  2l2c-213a;  bk  vii,  237d-239a;  bk 
viii,  278d-279a;  283d;  bk  ix,  308a-c 

6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v,  506b-c; 
bk  vii,  560a-b 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  x,  437c-441a,c  /  Theaete - 

530b-531a  /  bk  iv,  682d-683b; 

bk  ix,  757a;  bk  x  757d-771b  /  Seventh  Letter, 
806a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [8-33]  103a-104a;  [223- 
296]  109a-llla;  bk  xii  [791-843]  375a-376b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  26b-27a  /  Camillus , 
108b-c  /  Aristides,  265c-d  /  Phocion,  605b-d 
/  Ctf/o  Younger,  639d-640a  /  Dion,  784d- 
785a 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  iv,  284b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  13  88d-89b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  4  2a;  bk  ii, 
par  15  12b-c;  bk  iii,  par  13-15  16c-17b;  par  17 
17d-18a;  bk  v,  par  1-2  27a-c;  bk  vii,  par  5 
44c-d;  bk  ix,  par  34-36  70c-71a  /  C//y  0/ Go<7, 
bk  1,  ch  21  142d-143a;  bk  v,  ch  9-11  213b- 
216d;  ch  15-16  220d-22lb;  ch  21  226a-c;  bk 
xi,  ch  23  334c-335c;  bk  xii,  ch  3  343d-344b; 
bk  xiii,  ch  1-8  360a-363c;  ch  12-16  365d- 
367d;  ch  21  371a-c;  bk  xiv,  ch  i  376b, d-  1 
377a;  ch  15  388d-390a;  bk  xv,  ch  24-25 
418d-419b;  bk  xvi,  ch  4  425b-426a;  bk  xix, 
ch  11-17  516d-523a;  ch  21  524a-525a;  bk  xx, 
ch  1  530a-531a;  bk  xxi,  ch  11-12  570b-571c 

/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  15  628b-c;  ch  32 
633c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  23  648a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  6,  ans  and  rep  i  113c-114d;  a  9,  ans  116d- 
117d;  q  21  124b-127c;  q  22,  a  2,  rep  4  128d- 
130d;  q  65,  a  2,  rep  3  340b-341b;  q  96,  a  3, 
rep  3  512a-c;  q  103,  a  5,  rep  2-3  531b-532b; 
a  8,  rep  1  533d  534b;  q  105,  a  6,  rep  2  543b- 
544a;  part  i-ii,  q  5,  a  7  642a-d;  q  21,  a  4 
719d-720a,c;  q  39,  a  2,  rep  3  790d-791b;  q 
47,  a  1,  rep  1  819c-820b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  72, 
a  5  115a-116b;  q  73,  a  9,  rep  3  126d-128a;  a 
10,  rep  2  128a-d;  q  79,  aa  3-4  158a-159c;  q 
81,  a  2,  rep  1  164d-165c;  q  87  185c-192d;  q  91, 
aa  4-6  210c-213c;  q  94,  a  5,  rep  2  224d-225d; 
qq  98-108  239b-337d;  part  ii-ii,  q  19,  a  i, 
rep  2  465a-d;  q  24,  a  12  499c-500d;  part  iii 
suppl,  qq  97-99  1066a-1085a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy  esp  hell,  ii  [i]-iii 
[18]  2c-4b,  xi  15a-16b,  purgatory,  iii  [103- 
145]  57a-c,  vi  [25-48]  61a-b,  xvi  [52-81] 
77b-c,  xviii  [40-75]  80b-c,  xix  [115-126]  82d, 
xxx-xxxi  99b-102b,  paradise,  iii  [i]-v  [87] 
109b-113a,  vii  [19-120]  ll5b-116b,  xviii  [52]-- 
xx  [148]  134a-138b,  xxxn  [37-84]  155a-c 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus,  par  77-78,  431a- 
432a  /  Parson's  Tale  495a-550a  esp  par  10 
498b-502a,  par  56  527b-528b,  par  68  533b- 
534a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  88c-89a;  part  ii, 
160c-161a;  163d-164a;  part  iii,  197d-198a; 
240c-d;  245b-c;  part  iv,  254a-b;  276d-277a 


11  b  Chapter  42: 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  152d-153a;  250a  251c 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  iv, 
sc  i  [184-202]  427c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  v  [9-22] 
37a  /  Measure  for  Measure,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [73— 

79]  182d  /  Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  iv  [9-28] 
481a  b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  71c-d 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  69b 

32  Milton:  Christs  Nativity  la- 7b  /  The  Passion 

10b  12a  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  i  [1-26]  93b-94a; 
bk  hi  [80-166]  137a-139a  esp  [131-134]  138a; 
[372-415]  143b-144b  esp  [397-41 1]  144a-b; 
bk  x  274a-298b  esp  [1-16]  274b,  [162-223] 
278a-279a,  [1046-1104]  297a-298b;  bk  xi 
[22-44]  299b-300a;  bk  xii  [223-248]  324a-b; 
[285-484]  325b-329b  /  Samson  Agonistes 
339a-378a  esp  [293-299]  346a,  [667-709]  354a- 
355a.  [1156-1177]  364b-365a,  [1669-1707] 

376ab 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  430  245a-247b;  497  259b- 
260a;  584  276b-277a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  5-6  105a-c;  sect  12-13  107b-108c;  ch 
III,  SECT  5  113c;  BK  II,  CH  XXI,  SECT  62 
194c-d;  ch  xxvm,  sect  8  230a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi,  div 
108-109  500b-501a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  20a-21a;  75c-d 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  592a-c 
1  44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  482a-d;  539d-540a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  30a-36b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  272a-b;  bk 
xiv,  606a-607a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
127c-d;  bk  vi,  151a-152a;  bk  xi,  341c-342c 

11 6.  Man’s  debt  to  God  or  the  gods:  the  reli¬ 
gious  acts  of  piety  and  worship 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  22;  28:18-22  /  Exo¬ 
dus ,  20;  32-34  /  Leviticus ,  18:1-5;  26  /  Deuter¬ 
onomy,  4:1-40;  5-6;  8;  10-12;  23:21-23  / 
Joshua,  22:1-6 — ( D )  Jo  sue,  22:1-6  /  Job, 
9:2-21  /  Psalms  passim,  esp  5:7-8,  22:22-31, 
27:1-14,  29:2,  40:8,  78:5-8,  89:1-52,  95:6, 
96:8-9,  99:1-9,  132:7,  138:1-2— (D)  Psalms 
passim,  esp  5:8-9,  21:23-32,  26:1-14,  2^:2» 
39:9, 77:5-8, 88:1-53, 94:6, 95:8-9. 98:1-9. 
r3 1 :7,  137:1-2  /  Proverbs,  21:3  /  Ecclesiastes, 
5:4-5;  12:13 — (D)  Ecclesiastes,  5:3-4;  12:13 
/  Micah,  6:8  — (D)  Micheas,  6:8 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiastic  us,  2:15-18;  18:22-24; 

35 —(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  2:18-23;  18:22- 
24;  35  /  I  Maccabees,  2:20-28;  4:36-61  —  (D) 
OT,  /  Machabees,  2:20-28;  4:36-61 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  18:23-35;  22:21  / 
Mar\,  12:17  /  Lube,  10:25-27;  17:7-10;  20:25 
/  John ,  4:21-24  /  Romans ,  3:19-28;  4:1-8; 
5:8-21;  8:1-17  /  Galatians,  3:10-13;  5:1-5 
4  HoxMer:  Iliad ,  bk  i  3a-9a,c;  bk  ii  [394-431] 
14a-b;  bk  ix  [485-526]  62a-b  /  Odyssey,  bk  iii 
[1-68]  193a-d 


JUSTICE  877 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  la-14a,c  / 
Persians  [800-842]  23d-24b  /  Seven  Against 
Thebes  [1011-1084]  38b-39a,c  /  Agamemnon 
[351-402]  55d-56b 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King\  863-910]  107bc 
/  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [461-509]  118b-d  /  An¬ 
tigone  131a-142d  esp  [1-99]  131a-132a,  [446- 
470]  134d-135a  /  Ajax  143a-155a,c  esp  [666- 
677]  148d,  [748-783]  149c-d,  [1316—1421]  154b- 
155a, c  /  Electra  [1060-1097]  164d-165a  / 
Philoctetes  [1440-1444]  195a, c 

5  Euripides:  Ion  282a-297d  esp  [82-183]  282d- 
283c,  [585-647]  287d  288b  /  Helen  [865-1031] 
306c-308a  /  Bacchantes  340a-352a,c  esp  [977- 
1023]  348b-c  /  Hecuba  [786-805]  359C'd  / 
Phoenician  Maidens  [1625-1670]  392b-d 

7  Plato:  Euthyphro,  196c-198a  /  Apology  200a- 
212a,c  passim  /  Republic,  bk  1,  297a-b  /  Laws, 
bk  iv,  682d-683b;  bk  x,  768d-771b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [i05a2-6] 
148c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  i2  347a-b;  bk  iv, 
ch  2  [1 1 22bi 8— 23]  369c;  bk  vm,  ch  9  [n6oai9~ 
29]  412b-c  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  9  [1329^6- 
34]  533d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  16,  122c-d; 
bk  ii,  ch  16,  158b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  24,  208d-210a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  17  255d- 
256d;  bk  11,  sect  13  258c;  bk  iii,  sect  13 
262c;  bk  ix,  sect  i  291a~c;  sect  40  295b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ii  [687-720]  143b-144b; 
bk  iv  [331-361]  176a-177a;  bk  v  [42-60] 
188a-b;  bk  xii  [176-211]  358b-359b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  2  27b-c; 
bk  ix,  par  36  71a  /  City  of  God,  bk  i  ch  15 
138c-139c;  bk  vii,  ch  27-31  259c-262a;  bk  x, 
ch  1-7  298b,d-303a;  ch  16  308b-309c;  ch  19 
310d-311b;  bk  xix,  ch  19  523b-d  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  10  627b;  ch  22-23  629b- 
630c;  ch  26-27  631b-d;  ch  29-30  632a-633b; 
ch  35  634c-d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  60, 
a  3,  ans  51c-52b;  q  99,  a  3  247a-248a;  q  ioo, 
a  8  259d-261a;  qq  101-103  265d-304a;  part 
iii,  q  25  839c-845a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  99,  a  4 
1083a-1084a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxx- 
xxxi  99b-102b;  paradise,  iii  [i]-v  [87]  109b- 
113a;  vii  [19-120]  115b-116b;  xx  [16-148] 
136d-138b;  xxvi  [1-81]  145d-146c 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  463b-471b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  161b-163d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  152b-156d;  233a-b;  242d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  i 
434d-435b 

32  Milton:  Sonnets,  xiv  66a  /  Paradise  Lost ,  bk 
iv  [720-735]  168a-b;  bk  v  [153-208]  I78b-179b 
/  Samson  Agonistes  [1334-1379]  368b-369b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  78b-80b  /  Pensees, 
470  256a;  476  256b-257a;  482  258a;  489,491 
259a;  531  264b;  539  265b 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  lb;  16c 


878 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(11.  Divine  justice:  the  relation  oj  God  or  the  gods 
to  man.  11b.  Man's  debt  to  God  or  the  gods: 
the  religious  acts  of  piety  and  worship .) 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  155-156 
444b-d 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  187d-188a 
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  259b-260a 


II  b 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  325a-327d;  344c -348b 
/  Judgement ,  611a-c 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  84b-c;  262b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  225b; 

part  hi,  290d-291c;  311b-d 
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  30a-36b 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  iii,  122b-c; 
bk  vi,  271c-d 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Matters  relevant  to  the  conception  of  justice  as  a  virtue  and  as  it  relates  to  the  other 
virtues  and  to  happiness,  see  Courage  4;  Good  and  Evil  3e;  Happiness  5-5^  Temper¬ 
ance  ia;  Virtue  and  Vice  2a(i),  3b;  Will  8c;  and  for  the  theological  doctrine  of  original 
justice,  see  Sin  3a. 

The  relation  of  justice  and  duty,  see  Duty  7;  Will  8e. 

The  comparison  of  justice  with  love  and  friendship,  see  Love  3c,  4b. 

Other  considerations  of  natural  rights  and  civil  liberties,  see  Law  4c,  7c;  Liberty  ie-ig; 
Slavery  3d;  Tyranny  5a. 

Problems  of  economic  justice,  see  Democracy  4a(2);  Labor  7a~7b,  7c(2),  7d— yf;  Liberty 
2d;  Slavery  4a~4c,  5a~5b;  Wealth  5e,  60(2),  lod. 

Problems  of  justice  in  government  and  law,  see  Aristocracy  ia-ib;  Constitution  5a; 
Democracy  4a~4a(i),  4b;  Honor  4b;  Law  5c,  6c;  Liberty  if;  Monarchy  ia(2),  4e(3), 
5a~5b;  Oligarchy  4,  5a;  Slavery  5a~5b,  6d;  State  3e;  Tyranny  ia-ib,  4b,  6;  and  for 
the  special  problem  of  the  distinction  between  justice  and  equity,  see  Law  5I1;  Univer¬ 
sal  and  Particular  6c. 

Justice  in  the  relation  of  states  to  one  another  and  in  the  issues  of  war  and  peace,  see  Law 
4g;  State  9c;  War  and  Peace  3a~3b,  11b. 

The  issue  concerning  the  justice  of  punishment  as  a  political  instrument,  see  Law6c(3); 
Punishment  ib,  2,  4c~4d. 

The  justice  of  divine  punishment  and  the  relation  of  God’s  mercy  to  God’s  justice,  see  God 
5i;  Punishment  5e;  Sin  6a-6b. 

The  justice  involved  in  man’s  debt  to  God,  see  Duty  i  i  ;  God  3d;  Religion  2. 


Chapter  42:  JUSTICE 


879 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings,  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Plutarch.  “Delays  in  Divine  Justice,”  in  Moralia 
Aquinas.  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  qq  57-80, 
108-1 13,  120-122 

Dante.  On  World-Government  or  De  Monarchia, 

BK  I,  CH  I  I  ;  BK  II,  CH  6 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Usury,”  in  Essays 
Spinoza.  Tractatus  Politicus  {Political  Treatise ),  ch  2 
Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  hi,  part  ii, 
sect  i-vi 
Fielding.  Amelia 

A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments ,  part  ii 

- .  Lectures  on  Justice ,  Police ,  Revenue  and  Arms 

Kant.  Lectures  on  Ethics ,  pp  1 91-253 
Hegel.  The  Philosophy  of  Mind,  sect  ii,  sub-sect  c, 
(bb,  b,  c) 

Dostoevsky.  The  House  of  the  Dead 
Tolstoy.  Resurrection 

II. 

Cicero.  De  Finihus  {On  the  Supreme  Good) 

- .  De  Officiis  {On  Duties ),  11  (ix) 

Seneca.  De  Beneficiis  {On  Benefits) 

Saadia  Gaon.  The  Book  °f  Beliefs  and  Opinions , 
treatise  iv-v,  ix 
Njalssaga 

Langland.  Piers  Plowman 
Soto.  Lihri  Decern  de  Justitia  et  Jure 
Spenser.  The  Faerie  Queene ,  bk  v 
Hooker.  Of  the  Laws  of  Ecclesiastical  Polity 
Grotius.  The  Rights  of  War  and  Peace 
H.  More.  An  Account  of  Virtue  ( Enchiridion  Ethi- 
cum ),  bk  ii 

Leibnitz.  Philosophical  Works ,  ch  8  {On  the  Notions 
of  Right  and  Justice) 

Voltaire.  Essay  on  Toleration 
- .  “Equality,”  “Justice,”  “Rights,”  “Tolera¬ 
tion,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 


Voltaire.  The  Ignorant  Philosopher ,  ch  32 
Bentham.  Defence  of  Usury 
Paine.  Rights  of  Man 

Godwin.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  Political  Justice 
Lieber.  Manual  of  Political  Ethics 
Whevvell.  The  Elements  of  Morality ,  bk  ii,  ch  21- 
22;  BK  IV 

Proudhon.  De  la  justice  dans  la  revolution  et  dans 
Veglise 

Bakunin.  God  and  the  State 
H.  Sidgwick.  The  Methods  of  Ethics ,  bk  iii, 
ch  5 

George.  Progress  and  Poverty 
T.  H.  Huxley.  Methods  and  Results ,  viii 
T.  H.  Green.  The  Principles  of  Political  Obligation , 
(h,i,o) 

O.  W.  Holmes  Jr.  The  Common  Law 
Ritchie.  Natural  Rights 
Zola.  Letter  to  M.  Felix  Faure  {]' accuse) 
Willoughby.  Social  Justice 
Vecchio.  The  Formal  Bases  of  Law 
Croce.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Practical 
G.  Dickinson.  Justice  and  Liberty 
Stammler.  The  Theory  of  Justice 
Kafka.  The  Trial 

Hobhouse.  The  Elements  of  Social  Justice 
Hocking.  Present  Status  of  the  Philosophy  of  Law  and 
of  Rights 

J.  Dickinson.  Administrative  Justice  and  the  Suprem¬ 
acy  of  Law  in  the  United  States 
Berdyayev.  Christianity  and  the  Class  War 
M.  R.  Cohen.  Reason  and  Nature ,  bk  iii,  ch  4 
Tawney.  The  Acquisitive  Society 
- .  Equality 

Mounier.  A  Personalist  Manifesto 
Michel.  Christian  Social  Reconstruction 
Maritain.  Ransoming  the  Time ,  ch  i 

- .  The  Rights  of  Man  and  Natural  Law 

Kelsen.  Society  and  Nature 


Chapter  43 :  KNOWLEDGE 


INTRODUCTION 


KNOWLEDGE,  like  being,  is  a  term  of 
comprehensive  scope.  Its  comprehensive¬ 
ness  is,  in  a  way,  correlative  with  that  of  being. 
The  only  thing  which  cannot  be  an  object  of 
knowledge  or  opinion,  which  cannot  be 
thought  about  in  any  way  except  negatively,  is 
that  which  has  no  being  of  any  sort — in  short, 
nothing .  Not  all  things  may  be  knowable  to 
us,  but  even  the  skeptic  who  severely  limits  or 
completely  doubts  man’s  power  to  know  is  usu¬ 
ally  willing  to  admit  that  things  beyond 
man’s  knowledge  are  in  themselves  know- 
able.  Everyone  except  Berkeley  would  agree 
that  the  surfaces  of  bodies  which  we  cannot 
see  are  not,  for  that  reason,  in  themselves  in¬ 
visible. 

The  consideration  of  knowledge  extends, 
therefore,  to  all  things  knowable,  to  all  kinds  of 
knowers,  to  all  the  modes  of  knowledge,  and  all 
the  methods  of  knowing.  So  extensive  an  array 
of  topics  exceeds  the  possibility  of  treatment  in 
a  single  chapter  and  requires  this  chapter  to  be 
related  to  many  others. 

The  Cross-References  which  follow  the  Ref¬ 
erences  indicate  the  other  chapters  which  deal 
with  particulars  we  cannot  consider  here.  For 
example,  the  nature  of  history,  science,  philos¬ 
ophy,  and  theology,  and  their  distinction  from 
one  another,  are  treated  in  the  chapters  de¬ 
voted  to  those  subjects.  So,  too,  the  chapters  on 
metaphysics,  mathematics,  physics,  mechanics, 
and  medicine  deal  with  the  characteristics  and 
relations  of  these  special  sciences.  The  psycho¬ 
logical  factors  in  knowing — the  faculties  of 
sense  and  mind,  of  memory  and  imagination, 
the  nature  of  experience  and  reasoning — also 
have  their  own  chapters.  Still  other  chapters 
deal  with  the  logical  elements  of  knowledge, 
such  as  idea  and  judgment,  definition,  hypoth¬ 
esis,  principle,  induction,  and  reasoning,  logic 
and  dialectic. 


The  program  which  Locke  sets  himself  in  his 
Essay  Concerning  Human  Understanding  is  often 
taken  to  include  the  basic  questions  about 
knowledge.  His  purpose,  he  tells  us,  is  “to  in¬ 
quire  into  the  original,  certainty,  and  extent  of 
human  knowledge,  together  with  the  grounds 
and  degrees  of  belief,  opinion,  and  assent.”  Two 
other  matters,  not  explicitly  mentioned  by 
Locke  in  his  opening  pages,  assume  central  im¬ 
portance  in  the  fourth  book  of  his  essay.  One  is 
the  question  about  the  nature  of  knowledge  it¬ 
self.  The  other  concerns  the  kinds  of  knowledge. 

It  may  be  thought  that  certain  questions  are 
prior  to  these  and  all  others.  Is  knowledge  pos¬ 
sible?  Can  we  know  anything?  The  man  the 
skeptic  challenges  is  one  who  thinks  that  knowl¬ 
edge  is  attainable  and  who  may  even  claim  to 
possess  knowledge  of  some  sort.  But  the  issue 
between  the  skeptic  and  his  adversaries  cannot 
be  simply  formulated.  Its  formulation  depends 
in  part  upon  the  meaning  given  knowledge  and 
the  various  things  with  which  it  is  sometimes 
contrasted,  such  as  belief  and  opinion,  or  igno¬ 
rance  and  error.  It  also  depends  in  part  on  the 
meaning  of  truth  and  pro  bability.lt  would  seem, 
therefore,  that  some  consideration  of  the  nature 
of  knowledge  should  precede  the  examination 
of  the  claims  concerning  knowledge  which  pro¬ 
voke  skeptical  denials. 

The  theory  of  knowledge  is  a  field  of  many 
disputes.  Most  of  the  major  varieties  of  doc¬ 
trine  or  analysis  are  represented  in  the  tradition 
of  the  great  books.  But  the  fact  that  knowledge 
involves  a  relationship  between  a  knower  and  a 
known  seems  to  go  unquestioned.  William  James 
expresses  this  insight,  perhaps  more  dogmatic¬ 
ally  than  some  would  allow,  in  the  statement 
that  knowledge  “is  a  thoroughgoing  dualism. 
It  supposes  two  elements,  mind  knowing  and 
thing  known  .  .  .  Neither  gets  out  of  itself  or 
into  the  other,  neither  in  any  way  is  the  other, 


880 


Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


881 


neither  maizes  the  other.  They  just  stand  face  to 
face  in  a  common  world,  and  one  simply  knows, 
or  is  known  unto,  its  counterpart.”  This  re¬ 
mains  true  even  when  attention  is  turned  to  the 
special  case  of  knowledge  about  knowledge  or 
the  knower  knowing  himself.  The  mind’s  ex¬ 
amination  of  itself  simply  makes  the  mind  an 
object  to  be  known  as  well  as  a  knower. 

This  suggests  a  second  point  about  the  na¬ 
ture  of  knowledge  which  seems  to  be  undis¬ 
puted.  Ifknowledge  relates  a  knower  toa  known, 
then  what  is  somehow  possessed  when  a  person 
claims  to  have  knowledge,  is  the  object  known. 
It  does  not  seem  possible  for  anyone  to  say  that 
he  knows  something  without  meaning  that  he 
has  that  thing  in  mind.  “Some  sort  of  signal,” 
James  wrrites,  “must  be  given  by  the  thing  to 
the  mind’s  brain,  or  the  knowing  will  not  oc¬ 
cur — we  find  as  a  matter  of  fact  that  the  mere 
existence  of  a  thing  outside  the  brain  is  not  a 
sufficient  cause  for  our  knowing  it :  it  must  strike 
the  brain  in  some  w'ay,  as  well  as  be  there,  to  be 
known.”  What  is  not  in  any  w'ay  present  to  or 
represented  in  the  mind  is  not  known  in  any  of 
the  various  senses  of  the  word  “know.”  What 
the  mind  cannot  reach  to  and  somehow  grasp 
cannot  be  known.  The  w'ords  which  are  com¬ 
mon  synonyms  for  knowing — “apprehending” 
and  “comprehending” — convey  this  sense  that 
knowledge  somehow-  takes  hold  of  and  surrounds 
its  object. 

That  knowledge  is  a  kind  of  possession  occa¬ 
sions  the  comparisons  which  have  been  made 
between  knowledge  and  love.  The  ancients  ob¬ 
served  that  likeness  and  union  are  involved  in 
both.  Plato,  for  example,  suggests  in  the  Sym¬ 
posium  that  both  the  know'er  and  the  lover 
strive  to  become  one  with  their  object.  “Love 
is  also  a  philosopher,”  Diotima  tells  Socrates, 
and,  as  “a  lover  of  wisdom,”  the  philosopher 
is  also  a  lover. 

With  regard  to  some  objects,  love  and  know  l¬ 
edge  are  almost  inseparable.  To  know'  them  is  to 
love  them.  But  this  does  not  hold  for  all  ob¬ 
jects,  nor  does  the  inseparability  of  knowledge 
and  love  in  certain  cases  prevent  their  analyti¬ 
cal  distinction  in  all.  Like  is  knowm  by  like,  but 
unlikes  attract  each  other.  Furthermore,  ac¬ 
cording  to  one  theory  of  knowledge,  expounded 
by  Aquinas,  the  knower  is  satisfied  to  possess 
an  image  of  the  thing  to  be  known.  This  image 


provides  the  likeness  through  which  knowledge 
occurs;  and  thus,  Aquinas  writes,  “the  idea  of 
the  thing  understood  is  in  the  one  who  under¬ 
stands.”  The  lover,  on  the  other  hand,  is  “in¬ 
clined  to  the  thing  itself,  as  existing  in  itself.” 
He  seeks  to  be  united  with  it  directly.  The  no¬ 
bility  or  baseness  of  the  object  known  does  not 
affect  the  knower  as  the  character  of  the  object 
loved  affects  the  lover.  This  understanding  of 
the  difference  between  knowledge  and  love  leads 
Aquinas  to  say  that  “to  love  God  is  better  than 
to  know  God;  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  know 
corporeal  things  is  better  than  to  love  them.” 

The  principle  of  likeness  between  knower  and 
known  does  not  go  undisputed.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  the  opposite  views  here  form  one  of  the 
basic  issues  about  the  nature  of  knowledge.  The 
issue  is  whether  the  thing  known  is  actually 
present  to  the  knower,  existing  in  the  mind  or 
consciousness  exactly  as  it  exists  in  itself;  or 
whether  the  thing  is  represented  in  the  mind 
by  a  likeness  of  itself,  through  which  the  mind 
knows  it.  In  this  view,  the  mode  of  existence  of 
the  thing  outside  the  mind  is  different  from  the 
way  in  which  its  representative  exists  in  the 
mind. 

Berkeley,  at  one  extreme,  identifies  being  and 
being  known.  “As  to  w'hat  is  said  of  the  absolute 
existence  of  unthinking  things  without  any  re¬ 
lation  to  their  being  perceived,  that  seems  per¬ 
fectly  unintelligible,”  he  writes.  “Their  esse  is 
percipi,  nor  is  it  possible  they  should  have  any 
existence,  out  of  the  minds  or  thinking  things 
which  perceive  them.” 

At  the  other  extreme  are  those  like  Kant  for 
w'hom  the  thing  in  itself  is  unknowable  pre¬ 
cisely  because  there  can  be  no  resemblance  be¬ 
tween  the  phenomenal  order  of  objects  repre¬ 
sented  under  the  conditions  of  experience  and 
the  noumenal  order  of  the  unconditioned.  “All 
conceptions  of  things  in  themselves,”  he  writes, 
“must  be  referred  to  intuitions,  and  with  us 
men  these  can  never  be  other  than  sensible,  and 
hence  can  never  enable  us  to  know  objects  as 
things  in  themselves  but  only  as  appearances. 
.  .  .  The  unconditioned,”  he  adds,  “can  never 
be  found  in  this  chain  of  appearances.” 

In  between  these  extremes  there  are  those 
w7ho  agree  that  things  exist  apart  from  being 
known  without  ceasing  to  be  knowable,  but 
who  nevertheless  differ  with  respect  to  whether 


882 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


the  thing  exists  in  reality  in  the  same  way  that 
it  exists  in  the  mind.  The  several  forms  of  ideal¬ 
ism  and  realism,  distinguished  in  the  chapter  on 
Idea,  mark  the  range  of  traditional  differences 
in  the  discussion  of  this  difficult  problem. 

For  any  theory  of  what  knowledge  is  there  is 
a  distinction  between  knowledge  and  ignorance 
— between  having  or  not  having  something  in 
mind.  Nor  does  anyone  confuse  ignorance  and 
error.  The  mind  in  error  claims  to  know  that  of 
which,  in  fact,  it  is  ignorant.  This,  as  Socrates 
points  out  in  the  Meno,  makes  it  easier  to  teach 
a  person  aware  of  his  ignorance  than  a  person  in 
error;  for  the  latter,  supposing  himself  to  know, 
resists  the  teacher.  Hence  getting  a  person  to 
acknowledge  ignorance  is  often  the  indispens¬ 
able  first  step  in  teaching. 

But  though  the  difference  between  knowl¬ 
edge  and  ignorance  and  that  between  ignorance 
and  error  seems  to  be  commonly  understood, 
it  does  not  follow  that  everybody  similarly  agrees 
upon  the  difference  between  knowledge  and  er¬ 
ror.  This  much  is  agreed,  that  to  know  is  to 
possess  the  truth  about  something,  whereas  to 
err  is  to  be  deceived  by  falsity  mistaken  for 
truth.  The  disagreement  of  the  philosophers  be¬ 
gins,  however,  when  the  meaning  of  truth  and 
falsity  is  examined. 

Truth  is  one  thing  for  those  who  insist  upon 
some  similarity  between  the  thing  known  and 
that  by  which  it  is  known  or  represented  in  the 
mind.  It  is  another  for  those  who  think  that 
knowledge  can  be  gained  without  the  mediation 
of  images  or  representations.  In  the  first  case, 
truth  will  consist  in  some  kind  of  correspond¬ 
ence  between  what  the  mind  thinks  or  under¬ 
stands  and  the  reality  it  tries  to  know.  In  the 
other,  truth  will  be  equivalent  to  consistency 
among  the  mind’s  own  ideas. 

The  examination  of  this  fundamental  dis¬ 
agreement  is  reserved  for  the  chapter  on  Truth. 
Here  the  identification  of  knowing  with  having 
the  truth  calls  for  the  consideration  of  another 
distinction,  first  made  by  Plato.  In  his  language, 
as  in  that  of  Aristotle  and  others,  it  is  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  knowledge  and  opinion.  Some¬ 
times,  as  with  Locke,  a  similar  distinction  is 
made  in  terms  of  knowledge  and  judgment; 
sometimes  it  is  made  in  terms  of  knowledge  and 
belief;  sometimes  in  terms  of  adequate  and 


inadequate,  or  certain  and  probable,  knowl¬ 
edge. 

The  difference  between  these  opposites,  un¬ 
like  that  between  knowledge  and  error,  is  not  a 
matter  of  truth  and  falsity.  There  is  such  a  thing 
as  “right  opinion,”  according  to  Socrates,  and 
it  is  “not  less  useful  than  knowledge.”  Con¬ 
sidering  the  truth  so  far  as  it  affects  action, 
Socrates  claims  that  the  man  with  right  opinion 
“will  be  just  as  good  a  guide  if  he  thinks  the 
truth,  as  he  who  knows  the  truth.”  The  differ¬ 
ence  between  right  opinion  and  knowledge  is 
here  expressed  by  the  contrast  between  the  words 
“thinks”  and  “knows.”  It  does  not  consist  in 
the  truth  of  the  conclusion,  but  in  the  way  that 
conclusion  has  been  reached  or  is  held  by  the 
mind. 

The  trouble  with  right  opinion  as  compared 
with  knowledge,  Socrates  explains,  is  that  it 
lacks  stability  and  permanence.  Right  opinions 
are  useful  “while  they  abide  with  us  .  .  .  but 
they  run  away  out  of  the  human  soul  and 
do  not  remain  long,  and  therefore  they  are 
not  of  much  value  until  they  are  fastened  by 
the  tie  of  the  cause” — or,  in  other  words,  un¬ 
til  they  are  fixed  in  the  mind  by  the  reasons 
on  which  they  are  grounded.  “When  they 
are  bound,”  Socrates  declares,  “they  have  the 
nature  of  knowledge  and  .  .  .  they  are  abid¬ 
ing.” 

At  this  point  in  his  conversation  with  Meno, 
Socrates  makes  the  unusual  confession  that  “there 
are  not  many  things  which  I  profess  to  know, 
but  this  is  most  certainly  one  of  them,”  namely, 
that  “knowledge  differs  from  true  opinion.”  It 
may  be  that  Socrates  claims  to  know  so  little 
because  he  regards  knowledge  as  involving  so 
much  more  than  simply  having  the  truth,  as 
the  man  of  right  opinion  has  it.  In  addition  to 
having  the  truth,  knowledge  consists  in  seeing 
the  reason  why  it  is  true. 

This  criterion  can  be  interpreted  to  mean  that 
a  proposition  which  is  neither  self-evident  nor 
demonstrated  expresses  opinion  rather  than 
knowledge.  Even  when  it  happens  to  be  true, 
the  opinion  is  qualified  by  some  degree  of  doubt 
or  some  estimate  of  probability  and  counter¬ 
probability.  In  contrast,  when  the  mind  has  ade¬ 
quate  grounds  for  its  judgment,  when  it  knows 
that  it  knows  and  why,  it  has  the  certainty  of 
knowledge. 


883 


Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


For  some  writers,  such  as  Plato,  certitude  is 
as  inseparable  from  knowledge  as  truth  is.  To 
speak  of  “a  false  knowledge  as  well  as  a  true” 
seems  to  him  impossible;  and  “uncertain  knowl¬ 
edge’’  is  as  self-contradictory  a  phrase  as  “false 
knowledge.” 

Others  use  the  word  “knowledge”  more  loose¬ 
ly  to  cover  both  adequate  and  inadequate 
knowledge,  the  probable  as  well  as  the  certain. 
They  make  a  distinction  within  the  sphere  of 
knowledge  that  is  equivalent  to  the  distinction 
between  knowledge  and  opinion. 

Spinoza,  for  example,  distinguishes  three 
kinds  of  knowledge.  He  groups  the  perception 
of  individual  things  through  the  bodily  senses, 
which  he  calls  “knowledge  from  vague  experi¬ 
ence,”  with  knowledge  “from  signs”  which  de¬ 
pends  on  ideas  formed  by  the  memory  and  im¬ 
agination.  “These  two  ways  of  looking  at 
things,”  he  writes,  “I  shall  hereafter  call  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  first  kind — opinion  or  imagination.” 
In  contrast,  that  which  is  derived  “from  our 
possessing  common  notions  and  adequate  ideas 
of  the  properties  of  things,  ’  he  calls  “reason 
and  knowledge  of  the  second  kind.” 

1  The  third  kind,  which  he  calls  “intuitive  sci¬ 
ence,”  is  that  sort  of  knowing  which  “advances 
from  an  adequate  idea  of  certain  attributes  of 
God  to  the  adequate  knowledge  of  the  essence 
of  things.”  Knowledge  of  the  second  and  third 
kinds,  he  maintains,  “is  necessarily  true.”  That 
there  can  be  falsity  in  the  first  kind,  and  only 
there,  indicates  that  it  is  not  genuinely  knowl¬ 
edge  at  all,  but  what  other  writers  would  insist 
upon  calling  “opinion.” 

The  several  meanings  of  the  word  “belief” 
are  determined  by  these  distinctions.  Sometimes 
belief  is  associated  with  opinion,  sometimes  with 
knowledge,  and  sometimes  it  is  regarded  as  an 
intermediate  state  of  mind.  But  in  any  of  these 
meanings  belief  stands  in  contrast  to  make-be¬ 
lieve,  and  this  contrast  has  a  bearing  on  knowl¬ 
edge  and  opinion  as  well.  To  know  or  to  opine 
puts  the  mind  in  some  relation  to  the  real  or 
actual  rather  than  the  merely  possible,  and  sub¬ 
jects  it  to  the  criteria  of  truth  and  falsity.  The 
fanciful  or  imaginary  belongs  to  the  realm  of 
the  possible  (or  even  the  impossible)  and  the 
mind  in  imagining  is  fancy-free — free  from 
the  restraints  and  restrictions  of  truth  and 
reality. 


Skepticism  in  its  most  extreme  form  takes 
the  position  that  there  is  nothing  true  or  false. 
But  even  those  who,  like  Montaigne,  deny  cer¬ 
titude  with  respect  to  everything  except  mat¬ 
ters  of  religious  faith,  do  not  go  this  far. 

In  his  Apology  for  Raimond  de  Sebonde  he 
concedes  that  if  opinions  are  weighed  as  more 
or  less  probable,  their  truth  or  falsity  is  implied 
— at  least  as  being  the  limit  which  an  increasing 
probability  or  improbability  approaches.  Refer¬ 
ring  to  ancient  skeptics  of  the  Academic  school, 
he  comments  on  the  fact  that  they  acknowl¬ 
edged  “some  things  to  be  more  likely  than  oth¬ 
ers” — as,  for  example,  that  snow  is  white  rather 
than  black.  The  more  extreme  skeptics,  the 
Pyrrhonians,  he  points  out,  were  bolder  and 
also  more  consistent.  They  refused  to  incline 
toward  one  proposition  more  than  toward  an¬ 
other,  for  to  do  so,  Montaigne  declares,  is  to 
recognize  “some  more  apparent  truth  in  this 
than  in  that.”  How  can  men  “suffer  themselves,” 
he  asks,  “to  incline  to  and  be  swayed  by  proba¬ 
bility,  if  they  know  not  the  truth  itself?  How 
should  they  know  the  similitude  of  that  whereof 
they  do  not  know  the  essence?” 

In  this  respect  Montaigne’s  own  skepticism 
tends  to  be  of  the  more  moderate  variety,  since, 
in  the  realm  of  action  at  least,  he  would  admit 
the  need  for  judgments  of  probability.  But  in 
all  other  respects,  he  takes  a  firm  skeptical  stand 
that  nothing  is  self-evident,  nothing  has  been 
proved.  The  contradictory  of  everything  has 
been  asserted  or  argued  by  someone.  “Men  can 
have  no  principles,”  he  writes,  “if  not  revealed 
to  them  by  the  Divinity;  of  all  the  rest,  the  be¬ 
ginning,  the  middle,  and  the  end  are  nothing 
but  dream  and  vapor - Every  human  presup¬ 

position  and  every  declaration  has  as  much  au¬ 
thority,  one  as  another.  .  .  .  The  persuasion  of 
certainty  is  a  certain  testimony  of  folly  and  ex¬ 
treme  uncertainty.” 

The  skeptical  extreme  is  represented  in  the 
great  books  only  through  references  to  it  for 
the  purpose  of  refutation.  Aristotle  in  the  Meta¬ 
physics,  for  example,  reports  the  position  of  those 
who  say  that  all  propositions  are  true  or  that  all 
propositions  are  false,  and  who  therefore  deny 
the  principle  of  contradiction  and  with  it  the 
distinction  between  true  and  false.  But  if  all 
propositions  are  true,  then  the  proposition 
“Some  propositions  are  false”  is  also  true;  if 


884 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


all  propositions  are  false,  the  proposition  “All 
propositions  are  false”  is  also  false.  The  skeptic 
may  reply,  of  course,  that  he  is  not  checked  by 
arguments  which  try  to  make  him  contradict 
himself,  for  he  does  not  mind  contradicting  him¬ 
self.  To  this  there  is  only  one  answer,  which  is 
not  to  argue  with  the  skeptic  any  further. 

From  the  skeptic’s  point  of  view  his  position 
is  irrefutable  so  long  as  he  does  not  allow  him¬ 
self  to  accept  any  of  the  standards  by  which 
refutation  can  be  effected.  From  his  opponent’s 
point  of  view  complete  skepticism  is  self-refut¬ 
ing  because  if  the  skeptic  says  anything  definite 
at  all,  he  appears  to  have  some  knowledge  or  at 
least  to  hold  one  opinion  in  preference  to  an¬ 
other.  His  only  choice  is  to  remain  silent.  If  he 
insists  upon  making  statements  in  defiance  of 
self-contradiction,  his  opponent  can  do  nothing 
but  walk  away. 

“It  may  seem  a  very  extravagant  attempt  of 
the  skeptics  to  destroy  reason  by  argument  and 
ratiocination,”  Hume  writes,  “yet  this  is  the 
grand  scope  of  all  their  enquiries  and  disputes.” 
He  has  in  mind  the  excessive  skepticism,  or  Pyr- 
rhonism ,  from  which  he  tries  to  distinguish  a 
mitigated  and  beneficial  form  of  skepticism.  Re¬ 
ferring  to  Berkeley’s  arguments  against  the  in¬ 
dependent  reality  of  matter  or  bodies,  Hume 
says  their  effect  is  skeptical,  despite  Berkeley’s 
professed  intention  to  the  contrary.  That  his 
arguments  are  skeptical  “appears  from  this, 
that  they  admit  of  no  answer  and  produce  no  con¬ 
viction .  Their  only  effect  is  to  cause  that  momen¬ 
tary  amazement  and  irresolution  and  confu¬ 
sion,  which  is  the  result  of  skepticism.” 

Here  and  elsewhere,  as  in  his  comment  on 
Descartes’  skeptical  method  of  doubting  every¬ 
thing  which  can  be  doubted,  Hume  does  not 
seem  to  think  that  excessive  skepticism  is  refut¬ 
able  or  even  false.  But  it  is  impractical.  “The 
great  subverter  of  Pyrrhonism  or  the  excessive 
principles  of  skepticism,”  he  says,  “is  action, 
and  employment,  and  the  occupations  of  life.” 
Extreme  skepticism  becomes  untenable  in 
thought  the  moment  thought  must  face  the 
choices  of  life  and  take  some  responsibility  for 
action. 

There  is,  however,  “a  more  mitigated  skepti¬ 
cism  or  academical  philosophy  which  may  be 
both  durable  and  useful.”  This,  according  to 
Hume,  consists  in  becoming  “sensible  of  the 


strange  infirmities  of  human  understanding,” 
and  consequently  in  “the  limitation  of  our  en¬ 
quiries  to  such  subjects  as  are  best  adapted  to 
the  narrow  capacity  of  human  understanding.” 

His  own  view  of  the  extent  and  certainty  of 
human  knowledge  seems  to  him  to  exemplify 
such  mitigated  skepticism  in  operation.  The 
only  objects  with  respect  to  which  demonstra¬ 
tion  is  possible  are  quantity  and  number.  Math¬ 
ematics  has  the  certitude  of  knowledge,  but  it 
deals  only  with  relations  between  ideas,  not 
with  what  Hume  calls  “matters  of  fact  and  ex¬ 
istence.”  Such  matters  “are  evidently  incapa¬ 
ble  of  demonstration.”  This  is  the  sphere  of 
“moral  certainty,”  which  is  not  a  genuine  cer¬ 
tainty,  but  only  a  degree  of  probability  suf¬ 
ficient  for  action.  Probabilities  are  the  best  that 
experimental  reasoning  or  inquiry  about  mat¬ 
ters  of  fact  can  achieve.  If  probability  is  char¬ 
acteristic  of  opinion  rather  than  knowledge, 
then  we  can  have  nothing  better  than  opinion 
concerning  real  existences. 

The  diametrical  opposite  to  the  extreme  of 
skepticism  would  have  to  be  a  dogmatism  which 
placed  no  objects  beyond  the  reach  of  human 
knowledge,  which  made  no  distinction  between 
degrees  of  knowability  and  admitted  equal  cer¬ 
titude  in  all  matters.  Like  excessive  skepticism 
this  extreme  is  not  a  position  actually  held  in 
the  great  books.  All  the  great  thinkers  who  have 
considered  the  problem  of  human  knowledge 
have  set  limits  to  man’s  capacity  for  knowledge. 
They  have  placed  certain  objects  beyond  man’s 
power  to  apprehend  at  all,  or  have  distinguished 
between  those  which  he  can  apprehend  in  some 
inadequate  fashion,  but  cannot  comprehend. 
They  have  indicated  other  objects  concerning 
which  his  grasp  is  adequate  and  certain. 

They  all  adopt  a  “mitigated  skepticism” — to 
use  Hume’s  phrase — if  this  can  be  taken  to  mean 
avoiding  the  extremes  of  saying  that  nothing  is 
knowable  at  all  and  that  everything  is  equally 
knowable.  But  they  differ  in  the  criteria  they 
employ  to  set  the  limits  of  knowledge  and  to 
distinguish  between  the  areas  of  certainty  and 
probability.  Consequently  they  differ  in  their 
determination  of  the  knowability  of  certain 
types  of  objects,  such  as  God  or  the  infinite, 
substance  or  cause,  matter  or  spirit,  the  real  or 
the  ideal,  the  self  or  the  thing  in  itself. 


Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


885 


For  example,  Plato  and  Aristotle  agree  that 
knowledge  must  be  separated  from  opinion  and 
even  appeal  to  certain  common  principles  in 
making  that  separation;  but  they  do  not  define 
the  scope  of  knowledge  in  the  same  way,  as  is 
indicated  by  their  disagreement  about  the  know- 
ability  of  sensible  things.  Nor  do  Descartes 
and  Locke,  Bacon  and  Spinoza,  Hume  and 
Kant  agree  about  the  knowability  of  God  or  of 
the  soul  or  about  the  conditions  any  object 
must  meet  in  order  to  be  knowable.  All  alike 
proceed  from  a  desire  to  be  critical.  Each  criti¬ 
cizes  what  other  men  have  proposed  as  knowl¬ 
edge  and  each  proposes  a  new  method  by  which 
the  pursuit  of  knowledge  will  be  safeguarded 
from  illusory  hopes  or  endless  controversy. 

In  this  last  respect  the  moderns  depart  most 
radically  from  their  mediaeval  and  ancient  pred¬ 
ecessors.  At  all  times  men  have  been  interested 
in  examining  knowledge  itself  as  well  as  in  ex¬ 
ercising  their  powers  to  know.  But  in  the  earlier 
phase  of  the  tradition  knowledge  about  knowl¬ 
edge  does  not  seem  to  take  precedence  over  all 
other  inquiries  or  to  be  prerequisite  to  them. 
On  the  contrary,  the  ancients  proceed  as  if  the 
study  of  knowledge  necessarily  presupposed  the 
existence  of  knowledge.  With  them  the  exam¬ 
ination  takes  place  because  the  mind  is  essen¬ 
tially  reflexive  rather  than  for  reasons  of  self- 
criticism.  But  beginning  with  Descartes’  Dis¬ 
course  on  the  Method ,  in  which  a  method  of  uni¬ 
versal  doubt  is  proposed  to  clear  the  ground  be¬ 
fore  the  foundations  of  the  sciences  can  be  laid, 
the  consideration  of  knowing  is  put  before  any 
attempt  to  know. 

Sometimes,  as  with  Descartes  and  Bacon,  the 
emphasis  is  upon  a  new  method  which  will  at 
last  establish  knowledge  on  a  firm  footing  or  ad¬ 
vance  learning.  Sometimes,  as  with  Locke  and 
Hume,  attention  is  given  first  of  all  to  the  facul¬ 
ty  of  understanding  itself. 

“If  we  can  find  out,”  says  Locke,  “how  far 
the  understanding  can  extend  its  views,  how 
far  it  has  faculties  to  attain  certainty,  and  in 
what  cases  it  can  only  judge  and  guess,  we  may 
learn  to  content  ourselves  with  what  is  attain¬ 
able  by  us  in  this  state.  .  .  .  When  we  know  our 
own  strength,  we  shall  the  better  know  what  to 
undertake  with  hopes  of  success;  and  when  we 
have  well  surveyed  the  powers  of  our  own  minds, 
and  made  some  estimate  of  what  we  may  expect 


from  them,  we  shall  not  be  inclined  either  to  sit 
still,  and  not  set  our  thoughts  to  work  at  all,  in 
despair  of  knowing  anything;  nor,  on  the  oth¬ 
er  side,  question  everything,  and  disclaim  all 
knowledge,  because  some  things  are  not  to  be 
understood.” 

Hume  also  proposes  that  a  study  of  human  un¬ 
derstanding  precede  everything  else,  to  “show 
from  an  exact  analysis  of  its  powers  and  capac¬ 
ity”  what  subjects  it  is  or  is  not  fitted  to  in¬ 
vestigate.  “There  is  a  truth  and  falsehood  in  all 
propositions  on  this  subject  which  lie  not  be¬ 
yond  the  compass  of  human  understanding.” 
No  one  can  doubt  that  a  science  of  the  mind — 
or  knowledge  about  knowing — is  possible  un¬ 
less  he  entertains  “such  a  skepticism  as  is  entirely 
subversive  of  all  speculations,  and  even  action.” 

Disagreeing  with  the  principles  of  Locke  and 
Hume,  as  well  as  with  their  conclusions,  Kant 
does  approve  the  priority  they  give  to  the  ques¬ 
tion  of  the  possibility  of  knowing  certain  ob¬ 
jects.  To  proceed  otherwise,  as  Kant  charges 
most  other  philosophers  with  doing,  is  dogma¬ 
tism.  The  use  of  the  word  “critique”  in  the  title 
of  Kant’s  three  major  works  signifies  his  inten¬ 
tion  to  construct  a  critical  philosophy  which 
does  not  presume  that  “it  is  possible  to  achieve 
anything  in  metaphysic  without  a  previous  crit¬ 
icism  of  pure  reason.”  He  does  not  object  to 
what  he  calls  “the  dogmatical  procedure  of  rea¬ 
son”  in  the  development  of  science,  but  only 
after  reason’s  self-criticism  has  determined  just 
how  far  reason  can  go.  For  Kant,  as  for  Bacon, 
dogmatism  and  skepticism  are  the  opposite  ex¬ 
cesses  which  only  a  critical  method  can  avoid. 

These  two  different  approaches  to  the  theory 
of  knowledge  seem  to  result  in  different  con¬ 
clusions  concerning  the  nature  and  scope  of  hu¬ 
man  knowledge.  Those  who  begin  with  the  es¬ 
tablished  sciences  and  merely  inquire  into  their 
foundations  and  methods,  appear  to  end  with 
unqualified  confidence  in  man’s  ability  to  know. 
Those  who  make  the  inquiry  into  the  founda¬ 
tions  and  methods  of  science  a  necessary  prepa¬ 
ration  for  the  development  of  the  sciences,  tend 
for  the  most  part  to  set  narrower  boundaries  to 
the  area  of  valid  knowledge.  The  two  approaches 
also  affect  the  way  in  which  the  various  kinds  of 
knowledge  are  distinguished  and  compared. 

There  are  two  sorts  of  comparison  involved 


886 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


in  the  classification  of  kinds  of  knowledge.  One 
is  a  comparison  of  human  knowledge  with  divine, 
or  with  angelic  knowledge  and  the  knowledge 
of  brute  animals.  The  other  is  a  comparison  of 
the  parts  or  modes  of  human  knowledge  accord¬ 
ing  to  such  criteria  as  the  objects  to  be  known, 
the  faculties  engaged  in  the  process  of  knowing, 
and  the  manner  of  their  operation.  Though 
made  separately,  those  two  comparisons  are  sel¬ 
dom  independent  of  one  another.  As  the  nature 
of  man  is  conceived  in  relation  to  other  beings, 
superior  or  inferior  to  himself,  his  faculties  will 
be  rated  accordingly,  and  his  power  as  a  knower 
will  suggest  the  methods  or  means  available  to 
him  for  knowing. 

Aquinas,  for  example,  attributes  to  man  the 
kind  of  knowledge  appropriate  to  his  station  in 
the  hierarchy  of  beings.  Man  is  superior  to  the 
brutes  because  he  has  a  faculty  of  reason  in  ad¬ 
dition  to  the  faculties  of  sense  and  imagination 
which  he  shares  with  them.  Man  is  inferior  to 
purely  spiritual  beings — the  angels  and  God — 
because,  since  he  is  corporeal,  his  intellect  can¬ 
not  function  independently  of  his  bodily  senses 
and  imagination.  Unlike  the  angels  and  God,  he 
is  not  a ‘purely  intellectual  being. 

Accordingly,  the  essential  characteristics  of 
human  knowledge  are,  first,  that  it  is  always 
both  sensitive  and  intellectual,  never  merely 
sense-perception  as  with  the  brutes  or  pure  in¬ 
tellectual  intuition  as  with  the  angels;  second, 
that  its  appropriate  object  is  the  physical  world 
of  sensible,  material  things,  with  respect  to  which 
the  senses  enable  man  to  know  the  existence  of 
individuals,  while  the  intellect  apprehends  their 
universal  natures;  and,  finally,  that  the  way  in 
which  the  human  mind  knows  the  natures  of 
things  is  abstractive  and  discursive,  for  the  in¬ 
tellect  draws  its  concepts  from  sense  and  imagi¬ 
nation  and  proceeds  therefrom  by  means  of  j  udg- 
ment  and  reasoning. 

This  analysis  denies  innate  ideas.  It  denies 
man’s  power  to  apprehend  ideas  intuitively  or 
to  use  them  intuitively  in  the  apprehension  of 
things.  It  can  find  no  place  for  a  distinction  be¬ 
tween  a  priori  and  a  posteriori  knowledge,  since 
sense-perception  and  rational  activity  contrib¬ 
ute  elements  to  every  act  of  knowing.  It  affirms 
that  knowledge  is  primarily  of  real  existence, 
not  of  the  relations  between  ideas;  but  it  does 
not  limit  human  knowledge  to  the  changing 


temporal  things  of  the  material  universe.  Though 
these  are  the  objects  man  is  able  to  know  with 
greatest  adequacy,  he  can  also  know  something 
of  the  existence  and  nature  of  immaterial  and 
eternal  beings. 

Yet,  according  to  Aquinas,  even  when  man’s 
knowledge  rises  above  the  realm  of  experience- 
able  things,  it  is  obtained  by  the  same  natural 
processes  and  involves  the  cooperation  of  the 
senses  with  reason.  The  theologian  does,  how¬ 
ever,  distinguish  sharply  between  knowledge 
gained  through  man’s  own  efforts  and  knowl¬ 
edge  received  through  divine  revelation.  In  ad¬ 
dition  to  all  knowledge  acquired  by  the  natural 
exercise  of  his  faculties,  man  may  be  elevated 
by  the  supernatural  gift  of  knowledge— the  wis¬ 
dom  of  a  faith  surpassing  reason. 

The  foregoing  summary  illustrates,  in  the  case 
of  one  great  doctrine,  the  connection  between 
an  analysis  of  the  kinds  of  knowledge  and  a 
theory  of  the  nature  and  faculties  of  man  in  re¬ 
lation  to  all  other  things.  There  is  no  point  in 
this  analysis  which  is  not  disputed  by  someone 
— by  Plato  or  Augustine,  Descartes,  Spinoza, 
or  Locke,  by  Hume,  Kant,  or  William  James. 
There  are  many  points  on  which  others  agree — 
not  only  Aristotle  and  Bacon,  but  even  Augus¬ 
tine,  Descartes,  and  Locke. 

These  agreements  or  disagreements  about  the 
kinds  of  knowledge,  or  the  scope  of  human  knowl¬ 
edge,  its  faculties,  and  its  methods,  seldom  oc¬ 
cur  or  are  intelligible  except  in  the  wider  con¬ 
text  of  agreements  and  disagreements  in  theol¬ 
ogy  and  metaphysics,  psychology  and  logic. 
Hence  most  of  the  matters  considered  under  the 
heading  “kinds  of  knowledge”  receive  special 
consideration  in  other  chapters.  The  Cross- 
References  should  enable  the  reader  to  examine 
the  presuppositions  or  context  of  the  materials 
assembled  here. 

The  cult  of  ignorance  receives  little  or  no  at¬ 
tention  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books.  Even 
those  who,  like  Rousseau,  glorify  the  innocence 
of  the  primitives,  or  who  satirize  the  folly  so 
often  admixed  with  human  wisdom  and  the  foi¬ 
bles  attending  the  advance  of  learning,  do  not 
seriously  question  the  ancient  saying  that  all 
men  by  nature  desire  to  know.  Nor  is  it  gener¬ 
ally  doubted  that  knowledge  is  good;  that  its 
possession  contributes  to  the  happiness  of  men 


Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


887 


and  the  welfare  of  the  state;  that  its  pursuit  by 
the  individual  and  its  dissemination  in  a  soci¬ 
ety  should  be  facilitated  by  education,  by  the 
support  and  freedom  of  scholars  and  scientists, 
and  by  every  device  which  can  assist  men  in 
communicating  what  they  know  to  one  an¬ 
other. 

But  knowledge  is  not  valued  by  all  for  the 
same  reason.  That  knowledge  is  useful  to  the 
productive  artist,  to  the  statesman,  to  the  legis¬ 
lator,  and  to  the  individual  in  the  conduct  of 
his  life,  seems  to  be  assumed  in  discussions  of 
the  applications  of  science  in  the  various  arts, 
in  the  consideration  of  statecraft,  and  in  the 
analysis  of  virtue.  In  this  last  connection,  the 
problem  is  not  whether  knowledge  is  morally 
useful,  but  whether  knowledge  of  good  and  evil 
is  identical  with  virtue  so  that  sin  and  vice  re¬ 
sult  from  error  or  ignorance. 

If  there  is  a  negative  opinion  here,  it  consists 
in  saying  that  knowledge  is  not  enough.  To 
know  is  not  to  do.  Something  more  than  knowl¬ 
edge  is  required  for  acting  well. 

The  more  radical  dispute  about  the  value  of 
t  knowledge  concerns  the  goodness  of  knowledge 
for  its  own  sake,  without  any  regard  to  its  tech¬ 
nical  or  moral  utility.  Is  the  contemplation  of 
the  truth  an  ultimate  end,  or  does  the  goodness 
of  knowledge  always  consist  in  its  power  to  ef¬ 
fect  results  in  the  mastery  of  nature  and  the 
guidance  of  conduct  ?  The  utility  of  knowledge 
is  seldom  denied  by  those  who  make  speculative 
wisdom  and  theoretic  science  good  in  them¬ 
selves,  even  the  highest  goods,  quite  apart  from 
any  use  to  which  they  may  be  put.  The  con¬ 


trary  position,  however,  does  not  admit  the 
special  value  of  contemplation  or  the  separation 
of  truth  from  utility.  To  those  who  say  that 
“the  contemplation  of  truth  is  more  dignified 
and  exalted  than  any  utility  or  extent  of  ef¬ 
fects,  ”  Francis  Bacon  replies  that  “truth  and 
utility  are  perfectly  identical,  and  the  effects 
are  more  of  value  as  pledges  of  truth  than  from 
the  benefit  they  confer  on  men.” 

How  knowledge  and  action  are  related  is  one 
question;  how  knowledge  itself  is  divided  into 
the  speculative  and  practical  is  quite  another. 
Bacon,  for  example,  insists  upon  the  necessity 
of  distinguishing  the  speculative  and  practical 
branchesofnatural  philosophy — concerned  with 
“the  search  after  causes  and  the  production  of 
effects.”  Unlike  Aristotle  and  Kant  he  does  not 
use  the  word  “practical”  for  the  kind  of  knowl¬ 
edge  which  is  contained  in  such  sciences  as  ethics 
or  politics,  but  only  for  the  applied  sciences  or 
technology.  Ethics  and  politics  fall  under  what 
he  calls  “civil  philosophy.” 

Despite  these  differences  in  language,  the  way 
in  which  Bacon  divides  the  whole  sphere  of 
knowledge  closely  resembles  Aristotle’s  tripar¬ 
tite  classification  of  the  sciences  as  theoretic, 
productive  (or  technical),  and  practical  (or 
moral);  and,  no  less,  a  similar  threefold  division 
by  Kant.  But  Kant  and  Aristotle  (and,  it  should 
be  added,  Aquinas)  give  a  more  elaborate  analy¬ 
sis  of  these  three  types  of  knowledge,  especially 
with  regard  to  the  principles  appropriate  to 
each,  the  nature  of  the  judgments  and  reasoning 
by  which  they  are  developed,  and  the  character 
and  criteria  of  their  truth. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  nature  of  knowledge:  the  relation  between  knower  and  known;  the  issue  concerning 

the  representative  or  intentional  character  of  knowledge  890 

2.  Man’s  natural  desire  and  power  to  know  891 

3.  Principles  of  knowledge  892 

4.  Knowledge  in  relation  to  other  states  of  mind 

4<7.  Knowledge  and  truth:  the  differentiation  of  knowledge,  error,  and  ignorance 
4 b.  Knowledge,  belief,  and  opinion:  their  relation  or  distinction  893 

4 c.  The  distinction  between  knowledge  and  fancy  or  imagination  894 

4 d.  Knowledge  and  love 


888 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


5.  The  extent  or  limits  of  human  knowledge 

5 a.  The  knowable,  the  unknowable,  and  the  unknown:  the  knowability  of  certain 
objects 

(1)  God  as  an  object  of  knowledge 

(2)  Matter  and  the  immaterial  as  objects  of  knowledge 

(3)  Cause  and  substance  as  objects  of  knowledge 

(4)  The  infinite  and  the  individual  as  objects  of  knowledge 
(3)  The  past  and  the  future  as  objects  of  knowledge 

(6)  The  self  and  the  thing  in  itself  as  objects  of  knowledge 

5 b.  The  distinction  between  what  is  more  knowable  in  itself  and  what  is  more 
knowable  to  us 

5 c.  Dogmatism,  skepticism,  and  the  critical  attitude  with  respect  to  the  extent, 
certainty,  and  finality  of  human  knowledge 

5 d.  The  method  of  universal  doubt  as  prerequisite  to  knowledge:  God’s  goodness 
as  the  assurance  of  the  veracity  of  our  faculties 

$e.  Knowledge  about  knowledge  as  the  source  of  criteria  for  evaluating  claims  to 
knowledge 

6.  The  kinds  of  knowledge 

6a.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according  to  diversity  of  objects 

(1)  Being  and  becoming,  the  intelligible  and  the  sensible,  the  necessary  and 

the  contingent,  the  eternal  and  the  temporal,  the  immaterial  and  the 
material  as  objects  of  knowledge 

(2)  Knowledge  of  natures  or  kinds  distinguished  from  knowledge  of  individuals 

(3)  Knowledge  of  matters  of  fact  or  real  existence  distinguished  from  knowl¬ 

edge  of  our  ideas  or  of  the  relations  between  them 

(4)  Knowledge  in  relation  to  the  distinction  between  the  phenomenal  and  the 

noumenal,  the  sensible  and  supra-sensible 

6b.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according  to  the  faculties  involved  in  knowing 

(1)  Sensitive  knowledge:  sense-perception  as  knowledge;  judgments  of  percep¬ 

tion  and  judgments  of  experience 

(2)  Memory  as  knowledge 

(3)  Rational  or  intellectual  knowledge 

(4)  Knowledge  in  relation  to  the  faculties  of  understanding,  judgment,  and 

reason;  and  to  the  work  of  intuition,  imagination,  and  understanding 

6c.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according  to  the  methods  or  means  of  knowing 

(1)  Vision,  contemplation,  or  intuitive  knowledge  distinguished  from  discursive 

knowledge 

(2)  The  distinction  between  immediate  and  mediated  judgments:  induction  and 

reasoning,  principles  and  conclusions 

(3)  The  doctrine  of  knowledge  as  reminiscence:  the  distinction  between  innate 

and  acquired  knowledge 

(4)  The  distinction  between  a  priori  and  a  posteriori  knowledge:  the  tran¬ 

scendental,  or  speculative,  and  the  empirical 

(5)  The  distinction  between  natural  and  supernatural  knowledge:  knowledge 

based  on  sense  or  reason  distinguished  from  knowledge  by  faith  or 
through  grace  and  inspiration 


PAGE 

895 

896 

897 

898 

899 

900 


901 

902 

9°3 

9°4 


9°5 

906 


Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


889 


6d .  The  classification  of  knowledge  according  to  the  degrees  of  assent 

(1)  The  distinction  between  certain  and  probable  knowledge 

(2)  The  types  of  certainty  and  the  degrees  of  probability 

(3)  The  distinction  between  adequate  and  inadequate,  or  perfect  and  im¬ 

perfect  knowledge 

6e.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according  to  the  end  or  aim  of  the  knowing 

(1)  The  distinction  between  theoretic  and  practical  knowledge:  knowing  for 

the  sake  of  knowledge  and  for  the  sake  of  action  or  production 

(2)  The  types  of  practical  knowledge:  the  use  of  knowledge  in  production  and 

in  the  direction  of  conduct;  technical  and  moral  knowledge 

7.  Comparison  of  human  with  other  kinds  of  knowledge 

ja.  Human  and  divine  knowledge 
7 b.  Human  and  angelic  knowledge 

jc.  Knowledge  in  this  life  compared  with  knowledge  in  the  state  of  innocence  and 
knowledge  hereafter 

7 d.  The  knowledge  of  men  and  brutes 

8.  The  use  and  value  of  knowledge 

Sa.  The  technical  use  of  knowledge  in  the  sphere  of  production:  the  applications  of 
science  in  art 

8 b.  The  moral  use  of  knowledge  and  the  moral  value  of  knowledge 

(1)  The  knowledge  of  good  and  evil:  the  relation  of  knowledge  to  virtue  and  sin 

(2)  Knowledge  as  a  condition  of  voluntariness  in  conduct 

(3)  Knowledge  in  relation  to  prudence  and  continence 

(4)  The  possession  or  pursuit  of  knowledge  as  a  good  or  satisfaction:  its  relation 

to  pleasure  and  pain;  its  contribution  to  happiness 

Sc.  The  political  use  of  knowledge:  the  knowledge  requisite  for  the  statesman, 
legislator,  or  citizen 

9.  The  communication  of  knowledge 

9 a.  The  means  and  methods  of  communicating  knowledge 

gb.  The  value  of  the  dissemination  of  knowledge:  freedom  of  discussion 

io.  The  growth  of  human  knowledge:  the  history  of  man’s  progress  and  failures  in  the 
pursuit  of  knowledge 


PAGE 

907 

908 

909 

910 

911 

912 

91 3 

914 

915 

916 

917 


890 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  I2d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  116a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  sideof  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.y  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.y  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiahy  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdrasy  7:4 6. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  nature  of  knowledge:  the  relation  be¬ 
tween  knower  and  known;  the  issue  con¬ 
cerning  the  representative  or  intentional 
character  of  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedrusy  124c- 
126c  esp  126a-c  /  Menoy  179d-183a  esp  180a-b, 
182c-183a;  188d-189b  /  Phaedo,  228a-230d; 
231b-232b  /  Republic ,  bk  hi,  333b-d;  bk  v, 
371b-373c;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  esp  bk  vii, 
397a-398c  /  Timaeus ,  476b  /  Theaetetusy  515d- 
517b;  521d-522b;  538d-541a  /  Seventh  Letter , 
809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  7  [6bi— 6]  11a;  [7b 
22-8ai2]  12c-13a;  ch  8  [11*20-39]  16b-c  / 
Interpretation ,  ch  i  [16*4-9]  25a  /  Topics ,  bk 
iv,  ch  1  [121*1-6]  168d;  ch  4  [124^5-19]  173c; 
[i24b27~34]  I73c-d;  bk  vi,  ch  5  [143*9-12] 
196c;  ch  6  [145*12-18]  198d;  ch  8  [1 46*37^9] 
200b-c;  ch  12  [i49b3-23]  203d-204a  /  Physics , 
bk  vii,  ch  3  [247bi-248*6]  330b-d  /  Meta¬ 
physics, ,  bk  v,  ch  15  [i02i*27-b3]  542c-d;  bk  ix, 
ch  6  [i048bi8-34]  574a-c;  ch  9  [1051*22-34] 
577b-c;  bk  x,  ch  i  [io53*32-b3]  580a;  bk  xii, 
ch  7  [i072bi4-29]  602d-603a;  ch  9  605a-d; 
BK  XIII,  CH  10  [1087*10-25]  619c  /  Souly  BK  I, 
ch  5  [409bi8-4ii*7]  639c-641a;  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[414*4-14]  644a- b;  ch  5  [41 6^2-4 17*2]  647b; 


[417*17-21]  647d;  [418*2-6]  648c-d;  bk  hi, 
ch  2  [425bi7~26]  657d-658a;  ch  3  [427*16-^] 
659c-d;  ch  4  661b-662c;  ch  5  [430*14-16]  662c; 
[430*20-22]  662d;  ch  7  [431*1-8]  663c;  ch  8 
664b-d  /  Memory  and  Reminiscence ,  ch  i 
[450*25-451*19]  691a-692b 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vi,  ch  i  [1139*6-11] 
387c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [26-109] 
44b-45c;  [722-817]  53d-54d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  7  3d-4a  / 
Third  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  6, 132a;  ch  8,  132d- 
133b;  ch  9,  134a-b  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  4, 
210b-c;  tr  iii,  ch  4-5  217b-218c;  ch  10-13 
221b-224b;  tr  v,  ch  1-2  228b-229d;  tr  ix, 
ch  7  249b-c  /  Sixth  Ennead ,  tr  vii,  ch  36-41 
339c-342c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  11-38 
74a-81a  esp  par  17  75c-d,  par  19  76a-b, 
par  22-24  76d-77c,  par  27-28  78b-d  /  City  of 
Gody  bk  viii,  ch  6,  269b  /  Christian  Doctrine , 
bk  11,  ch  38,  654c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a  3, 
rep  1  16a-d;  q  5,  a  4,  rep  i  25d-26c;  q  8,  a  3, 
rep  3  36b-37c;  q  12,  a  i,  rep  4  50c-5lc;  a  2 
51c-52c;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i  53b-54c;  aa  9-10 
58b-59d;  q  13,  a  7,  ans  and  rep  6  68d-70d; 
q  14,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  75d-76c;  a  2  76d-77d; 


891 


to  2  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


aa  5-6  79a  81c  csp  a  5,  rep  2-3  79a  80a,  a  6, 
rep  1,3  80a-81c;  a  8  82c-83b;  a  9,  rep  2 
83b-d;  a  12,  ans  85d  86d;  a  15,  rep  i  89b- 
90b;  q  15,  a  1,  ans  91b-92a;  q  16,  a  2  95c- 
96b;  q  17,  a  3,  ans  102d  103c;  q  18,  a  4,  ans 
and  rep  2  107d  108c;  q  19,  a  3,  rep  6  110b- 
111c;  Q  27,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2  153b-154b;  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  2  154c-155b;  a  3,  ans  155c-156a; 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  156bd;  q  28,  a  4,  rep  i 
160c-161d;  q  34,  a  1,  rep  2-3  185b-187b;  a  2, 
rep  1  187b-188a;  a  3,  ans  I88b-189a;  q  54, 
a  1,  rep  3  285a-d;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  285d- 
286c;  qq  55-57  288d-300b;  Q  58,  a  2  301b-d; 
q  59,  a  2  307c-308b;  o  60,  a  2,  ans  311a-d;  q 
75,  a  1,  rep  2  378b  379c;  q  78,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  3  407b-409a;  a  3,  ans  410a-411d;  a  4, 
ans  and  rep  2  411d-413d;  q  82,  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  1  433c-434c;  Q  84  440b-45lb;  q  85,  a  i, 
rep  3  451c-453c;  a  2  453d-455b;  a  3,  rep  1,4 
455b-457a;  a  4  457a-d;  a  5,  rep  3  457d-458d; 
a  8,  rep  3  460b-461b;  q  86,  a  i,  ans  461c- 
462a;  q  87,  a  i  465a-466c;  q  88,  a  i,  rep  2 
469a-471c;  q  89,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  475a-d; 
a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  478b-d;  part  i-ii,  q  28, 
a  1,  rep  3  740b-741a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  5,  rep  1  lOb-d;  q  51,  a  i,  rep  2  12b-13c; 
part  hi  suppl,  q  82,  a  3  971a-972d;  q  92,  a  i 
1025c-1032b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  1,  49a-d;  part  ii, 
162c;  part  iv,  261a;  262a-b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  332b-333c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn  18b-25a  passim,  esp 
24a-c;  xiv,  29b-c;  30c- d  /  Meditations ,  in, 
82b-87a  passim;  vi,  99a- b  /  Objections  and 
Replies ,  108b-109d;  axiom  v  131d-132a;  137a; 
219b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  axiom  4,6  355d; 
prop  30-31  366c-367a;  part  ii,  prop  7 
375a-c;  prop  11-13  377b-378c;  prop  17, 
schol  381b-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxx, 
sect  2  238b-c;  ch  xxxi,  sect  2  239b-d;  ch 
xxxii,  sect  8  244d;  sect  14-16  245c-246b; 
bk  iv,  ch  1  307a-309b;  ch  iv,  sect  1-12 
323d-326d;  sect  18  328d-329a;  ch  xiii  363c- 
364b;  ch  xvii,  sect  2  371d-372b;  sect  8 
377b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  1-91 
413a-431a  esp  sect  2-4  413b-414a,  sect  8-9 
414c-d,  sect  25-33  417d-419a,  sect  48-49 
422a-b,  sect  56  423c-d,  sect  86-91  429c- 
431a;  sect  135-142  440a-441c;  sect  147-148 
442b-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
118,  504d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  7b-d;  12c-d  [fn  1];  14a-b; 
15d-16c;  22a, c;  23a-24a;  34a-35b;  55a-56c; 
88b-91d;  99a-101b;  101d-102a;  109d-110d; 
115b-c;  121a-123b;  125b  [fn  1]  /  Practical  Rea¬ 
son ,  292d  [fn  1];  307d-310c  /  Judgement ,  550a- 
551a, c;  604b-c;  612c-d 


46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
146-147  55c-56a;  par  343  llOd  111a  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History ,  intro,  160c-161a 

53  James:  Psychology,  128a-129a;  140b-143b; 
153b- 154a;  176a-i84a  esp  176a-178a,  179b- 
180a;  194b-196b  esp  196a  b;  213a-239a  passim, 
esp  213b-214a,  219a-b,  223a  b,  228a-b,  232b- 
238b;  258b  259b;  307a-311a  esp  307a-308a, 
309a;  325a-327a  esp  326a-b  [fn  ij;  450a-451b; 
454a-455a;  469a-b:  851b-852a 

2.  Man’s  natural  desire  and  power  to  know 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  125b-c  /  Theaetetus,  535b-c 
/  Sophist,  557c-d  /  Seventh  Letter,  810b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [247bi-248a 
9]  330b-d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980*22- 
28]  499a  /  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  4  [429*18-20]  661c; 
ch  5  [430*14-15]  662c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1355*14-17] 
594b 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  811a-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [921-934] 
12b-c;  bk  iv  [1-9]  44a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  2,  106d 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  121a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  10  73d-74a 
/  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  27,  337d-338a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12, 
a  1,  ans  50c-51c;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  51c-52c; 
aa  3-6  52c-56a;  a  8,  rep  4  57b-58b;  a  ii, 
ans  and  rep  3  59d-60d;  a  12  60d-61c;  q  14, 
a  2,  rep  3  76d-77d;  a  10,  rep  i  83d-84c;  q  18, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  105c-106b;  q  26,  a  2,  ans 
150c-151a;  q  54,  a  4  287b-288a;  q  60,  a  2, 
ans  311a-d;  q  61,  a  2,  rep  3  315c-316a;  q  62, 
a  1,  ans  317d-318c;  q  75,  a  2,  ans  379c-380c; 
q  78,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  407b-409a;  q  79  413d- 
427a;  q  84,  aa  1-3  440d-444d;  q  88,  a  i,  rep  2 
469a-471c;  q  117,  a  1  595d-597c;  part  i-ii, 
q  3,  a  8,  ans  628d-629c;  q  22,  a  i,  rep  i  720d- 
721c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3,  rep  3  8b-9a;  part  iii,  q  10,  a  4,  rep  i 
771b-772a;  q  ii,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i  772b- 
773a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 
2,15  1025c-1032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxvi  [1 12-120] 
39b;  purgatory,  xviii  [49-60]  80b-c;  xx 
[i24]-xxi  [75]  84c-85d;  paradise,  iv  [115]- 
v  [12]  llld-112b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  63a;  77a;  78d-80a 

25  Montaigne :  Essays,  244d-246a;  503b-d;517b- 
519a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  124b-125b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  def  3  373b;  axiom  2 
373d;  part  iv,  prop  26-28  431a-c;  part  v, 
prop  25-26  458d-459a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  7  139a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect  3 
405b-c;  sect  105  433b-c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  236b-238a 


892 


ii 

THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3  to  4 a 


(2.  Alan’s  natural  desire  and  power  to  know.) 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  335b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  130b;  151d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  157b- 
158a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [354-517]  lla-14b; 
[522-601]  15a-16b;  [1765-1784]  42b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  4b-5a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  522b-525a  esp  524b-525a; 
711b-712b;  729a-730a;  851b-852a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysts, ,  16b 

3.  Principles  of  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  228a-230c  /  Republic ,  bk  hi, 
333b-d;  bk  iv,  350d-351b;  bk  vi-vii,  383d- 
398c  /  Theaetetus ,  544d-547c  /  Seventh  Letter , 
809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  19 
136a-137a,c  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a-b;  ch  5 
[i88b26-i89a9]  264b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch 
1  499a-500b;  bk  v,  ch  i  [ioi3ai4-23]  533b; 
ch  6  [ioi6bi8-25]  537b  /  So#/,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[4i3an-i3]  643a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vi,  ch  3  [ii39b25-34] 
388c;  ch  6  389d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [690-700] 
9c;  bk  iv  [469-521]  50b-51a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1  la-b;  bk 
iv,  par  25  25c;  bk  v,  par  4  27d-28a;  bk  x,  par 
65  87d-88a;  bk  xiii,  par  46  123a-c  /  City  of 
God,  bk  viii,  ch  4-7  266d'269d;  ch  9-10 
270d-271d;  bk  x,  ch  2  299d-300a;  bk  xi, 
ch  7  326a-c;  ch  24-25  335c-336d;  ch  27-29 
337b-339b;  bk  xix,  ch  18  523a-b  /  Christian 
Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  37-40  635b-636a,c;  bk  ii, 
ch  7  638d-639c;  bk  iii,  ch  37,  674a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  1,3  lOd-lld;  q  15  91b-94a  passim, 
esp  a  3,  ans  93b-94a;  q  18,  a  2,  ans  105c-106b; 
q  84,  aa  4-6  444d-449a;  q  85,  a  3  455b-457a; 
q  88,  a  3,  rep  1  472c-473a;  q  105,  a  3  540c- 
541b;  part  1-11,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  2  612a-613a; 
a  5,  ans  613a-614a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3,  rep  3  8b-9a;  q  51,  a  i,  ans  12b-13c; 
part  iii,  q  11,  a  6,  rep  3  775d-776b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xviii 
[49-60]  80b-c;  paradise,  iv  [28-48]  111a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  285c-286a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-335c 
esp  333d-334d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  39d-40a; 
58b  /  Novum  Organurn ,  bk  i,  aph  14  107d- 
108a;  aph  39-40  109c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  1  la-2a;  iv,  5c-d;  6d;  vi, 
8d-9a;  viii,  13c-d  /  Discourse ,  part  iv  51b- 
54b  /  Meditations,  11  77d-81d/  Objections  and 
Replies,  224b,d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  37-40  386b- 
388b 


35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  23,  120a;  bk  ii,  ch  i  121a-127d  passim, 
esp  sect  1-8  121a-123a,  sect  22-25  127a-d; 
ch  vii,  sect  10  133a-b;  ch  ix,  sect  15-CH  x, 
SECT  2  141a-c;  ch  x,  sect  8  142d-143a;  ch 
xii  147b-148d;  ch  xiv,  sect  2  155b-c;  ch 
xvii,  sect  22-cH  xviii,  sect  i  173d-174a; 
ch  xviii,  sect  6  174c-d;  ch  xxii,  sect  9 
202c-203a;  ch  xxv,  sect  9  216d;  sect  ii 
217a;  bk  iii,  ch  i,  sect  5  252b-c;  ch  xi,  sect 
23  305a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  i,  sect  9-CH  11,  sect  i 
308c-309d;  ch  ii,  sect  7-8  310d-311a;  ch  iii, 
sect  1-2  313a;  ch  vii  337a-344d  esp  sect  i 
337a,  sect  io-ii,  339b-340a;  ch  xii,  sect  1-6 
358c-360a;  sect  15  363a-b 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
4  405c-d;  sect  25  412a, c;  sect  1-2  413a-b; 
sect  25-33  417d-419a;  sect  89  430b-c 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ii  455b- 
457b  esp  div  13-14  455d-456b;  sect  vii,  div 
49  471c-d;  div  61,  477c 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  338c-339b 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  34a-35b;  66d-72c  esp 
67d-68a  /  Practical  Reason,  343a  /  Judgement, 
492c-d;  517d  [fn2];  550a-551a,c;  562a-d; 
570b-572b;  577b;  578a-d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  2  9b- 
10a 

53  James:  Psychology,  213b-214a;  299a-300a; 
315a-319a  esp  3l’7b-318a;  360a;  453a-459b 
esp  453b-454a,  455a-457a;  859a-860b 

54  Freud:  Ego  and  Id,  700a-701d 

4.  Knowledge  in  relation  to  other  states  of 
mind 

4a.  Knowledge  and  truth:  the  differentiation 
of  knowledge,  error,  and  ignorance 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  163b  /  Meno,  179b-183a 
esp  180d,  181d,  182c-d;  188c-189b  /  Apology , 
201d-202d  /  Gorgias,  256b  /  Republic ,  bk  v, 
368c-373c;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Timaeus, 
447b-d;  450b-c;  457c-d  /  Parmenides,  490b-d 
/  Theaetetus,  535c-536a;  542a-544a  /  Sophist, 
557c-558b  /  Laws,  bk  ix,  748a 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  21  87d- 
89b  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  6  (75ai2- 
18]  103a;  ch  16-18  109b-lllc  /  Topics,  bk  vi, 
ch  9  [i47ai6-2i]  201a-b;  [i47b26-i48a9]  201d- 
202a;  ch  14  [1 5 ia3^— b3]  206b-c  /  Metaphysics , 
bk  ii,  ch  1  511b,d-512b;  bk  iv,  ch  7  [ionb 
25-29]  531c;  [ioi2ai-i7]  531d-532a;  bk  v, 
ch  29  [io24b27~38]  546d-547a;  bk  vi,  ch  4 
550a, c;  bk  ix,  ch  10  577c-578a,c;  bk  xii, 
ch  10  [i075b20-24]  606c  /  Soul ,  bk  iii,  ch  3 
[427ai6-b6]  659c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  9  [ii42b7-i2] 
391d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1355*21-39] 
594c-d 

11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk  i,  403b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [469-521] 
50b-51a 


4  b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  cii  5  llOb  c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  10  73d- 
74a;  par  19  76ab;  bk  xii,  par  5  lOOa-b  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  cii  36  634d-635b; 
bk  11,  cii  38,  654c 

19  Aquinas:  Sttrnma  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i,  a  i, 
rep  1-2  3b-4a;  q  2,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  1,3  lOd 
lid:  q  13,  a  12,  rep  3  74c-75b;  q  14,  a  8, 
rep  3  82c-83b;  a  9,  rep  i  83b  d;  a  12,  ans 
and  rep  3  85d-86d;  a  15,  rep  3  89b-90b; 
qq  16-17  94b-104b;  q  54,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2 
285d-286c;  a  5  288a-d;  q  57,  a  i,  rep  2 
295a-d;  q  38,  a  5  303c-304c;  q  59,  a  2,  rep  3 
307c-308b;  q  60,  a  i,  rep  3  310b-311a;  q  79, 
a  9,  rep  3-4  422b-423d;  q  84,  a  6,  rep  i 
447c-449a:  a  7,  rep  3  449b-450b;  q  85,  a  i, 
rep  1  451c-453c;  a  2,  ans  453d-455b;  a  6 
458d-459c;  a  7,  ans  459c-460b;  q  88,  a  3, 
rep  1  472c-473a;  q  89,  a  5,  ans  477a-478b; 
q  94,  a  4  505a-506a;  q  ioi,  a  i,  rep  2  522c- 
523a;  q  117,  a  i,  ans  595d-597c;  part  i-ii, 
q  22,  a  2,  ans  721c-722c 

20  Aquinas:  Sutnma  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  93, 
a  2,  ans  216c-217b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  3, 
rep  8  1034b-1037c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  iv  [115]- 
v  [12]  llld-112b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  56bd;  58d-60a; 
78a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  150d-151a;  238c-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  39-45 
109c-110b 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  1-11  la-3b;  xii,  24a-c  / 
Discourse ,  part  iv,  52a  /  Meditations ,  1  75a- 
77c;  iv  89a-93a  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
126a-b;  168b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  43,  schol 
388d-389b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  263  221a-b;  327  231a-b  / 
Vacuum ,  358  b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  v 
329a-331b  esp  sect  8-9  330d-331a;  ch  vi, 
sect  16  336d;  ch  xx,  sect  i,  388d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  224a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  7a;  intro, 
par  1  9a:  part  ii,  par  140,  52c-54a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  141a-142a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  560c-561a  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures ,  879c  d 

4b.  Knowledge,  belief,  and  opinion:  their  re¬ 
lation  or  distinction 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  i,  353d- 
354b 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus ,  125a- 
126c  /  Symposium ,  163b  /  Menoy  188b-189a  / 
Gorgias ,  256b-257a  /  Republic ,  bk  iv,  354d- 
355a;  bk  v,  370c-373c;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c; 
bk  x,  430d-431d  /  Timaeus ,  447b-d;  450b-c; 
457c-d  /  Theaetetus ,  531a-532a;  534a;  536b- 
549d  /  Sophist ,  559c-561d  /  Philebus ,  632d- 
635a 


893 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  cii  7  [Ba35~bi 4 ]  13b-c 
/  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [32b4-2^j  48b-d/ 
Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [7ib8-i6]  97d 
98a;  cii  33  121b-122a,c  /  Topics ,  bk  iv,  ch  i 
[1 2 ia20— 26]  169a-b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  cii 
4  [ioo8b27-32]  528b;  bk  vii,  ch  15  [i039b3 1— 
io4ou8]  563d-564a;  bk  ix,  ch  10  577c-578a,c 
/  5o«/,  bk  iii,  ch  3  [427ai6-428b9]  659c-660d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [i094bi2-28] 
339d-340a;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [1 112*7-8]  357d;  bk 
vi,  ch  3  [1  i39bi4— 18]  388b;  cii  5  [1 140*^33— b4) 
389b;  [ii40b25-28]  389c;  ch  9  [1 1 42a32— bi 6] 
391c-d  passim;  cii  10  392b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  3 
[ii46b23-34]  396d-397a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  cii 
25  [i402bi3-i403ai7]  652b-653a 

10  Hippocrates:  The  Law,  par  4  144d 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a-d 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  cii  7  249b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1  la-b;  bk 
vi,  par  5-8  36b-37c  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xxii, 
ch  4-5  588b-590a;  ch  7  591c-d  /  Christian 
Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  40  636a, c;  bk  ii,  ch  7 
638d-639c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i,  a  8, 
rep  2  7c-8d;  q  12,  a  7,  ans  and  rep  2-3  56a- 
57b;  a  13,  rep  3  61c-62b;  q  14,  a  15,  rep  3 
89b-90b;  q  16,  a  8  99d-100d;  q  57,  a  3,  ans 
297b-298a;  q  79,  a  9,  rep  3-4  422b-423d; 
q  108,  a  7,  rep  2  560b-561a;  part  i-ii,  q  17, 
a  6,  ans  690b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  3  14b-15a;  q  53,  a  i,  ans  19d-21a;  q  57,  a  2, 
rep  3  36a-37b;  q  67,  a  3  83b-84d;  q  77,  a  2, 
rep  3  145d-147c;  part  ii-ii,  q  i,  aa  4-5  382c- 
384b;  q  2  390d-400b;  q  4,  a  1  402a-403d; 
part  iii,  q  9,  a  3,  rep  2  765b-766b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xx  [67- 
148]  137b-138b  esp  [88-93]  13?c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus and  Cressida ,  bk  iv,  stanza 
29  92b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  58d-59a;  65b- 
66c;  part  iii,  241c-242a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  80b-82b;  98b-99a;  150c- 
151a;  238c- 239c;  240c-246a;  258c-261c;  267c- 
268a;  271b-273b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  333c-d; 
335a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  16a-b;  95d- 
96a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  ii-m  2a-5a  /  Discourse 
part  vi,  64a-d  /  Meditations,  72b, d;  1  75a 
77c;  v,  95b-96a  /  Objections  and  Replies 
123a-d;  167a-d;  218c-d;  226d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix  369b- 
372d;  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  2  388a-b; 
prop  49,  schol  391d-394d 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  406a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  99  191a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  intro,  sect 
2-5  93b-94d;  bk  i,  ch  iii,  sect  23-25  119b- 
120d;  bk  iv,  ch  1,  sect  2  307a;  ch  ii,  sect  14, 
312b;  ch  vi,  sect  13  335c-d;  ch  xiv-xv 


Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


894 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4 c  to  4 d 


(4.  Knowledge  in  relation  to  other  states  of  mind . 
4b.  Knowledge,  belief,  and  opinion:  their 
relation  or  distinction .) 

364b-366c  esp  ch  xv,  sect  1-3  365a-d;  ch  xvi, 
sect  14  371b-c;  ch  xvii,  sect  2  371d-372b; 
sect  14-24  378c-380d  passim;  ch  xviii-xix 
380d-388d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv  458a- 
463d  passim,  esp  div  20-21  458a-c,  div  30 
461d-462b;  sect  vi,  469d  [fn  1] 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  165a-b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  335d-336a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  2a-4a,c;  228c-d;  240b- 
243c  /  judgement ,  601d-607c  esp  601d-602a, 
603a-b,  603d-604b,  604d-606d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  274b-293b  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref  la-7d  pas¬ 
sim;  intro,  par  1  9a;  part  ii,  par  132,  46b-c; 
part  hi,  par  147  55d-56a;  par  316  104c;  addi¬ 
tions,  1  115a-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,  lla-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  636a-638b  passim 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  661c- 
662a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  881d-882b 

4c.  The  distinction  between  knowledge  and 
fancy  or  imagination 

7  Plato:  Ion,  142a-148a,c  /  Republic,  bk  vi- 
vii,  383d-389c;  bk  x,  427c-431d  esp  430b- 
431b  /  Sophist ,  577a-b  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  684b-c 
/  Seventh  Letter ,  809b-810b 

8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  3  659c-661b 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  191d-192b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  10-11  15b- 
16a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  52c-53b;  a  ii,  rep  i  59d- 
60d;  a  13,  ans  and  rep  2  61c-62b;  q  17,  a  2, 
rep  2  102a-d;  q  54,  a  5  288a-d;  q  57,  a  i, 
rep  2  295a-d;  q  78,  a  4,  ans  411d-413d;  q  84, 
a  2,  rep  i  442b-443c;  a  6,  rep  1-2  447c-449a; 
a  7,  rep  2  449b-450b;  a  8,  rep  2  450b-451b; 
q  93,  a  6,  rep  4  496b-498a;  part  i-ii,  q  17, 
a  7,  rep  3  690d-692a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  70,  a  2,  rep  3  896a-897d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvii 
[13-45]  78c-79a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  335a-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  189d- 
193c;  part  11,  205a-209d;  273c-278a;  326c- 
331a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  32d;  33c-d; 
38d-39b;  55a-d  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph 
15  108a;  aph  60  112c-113a  /  New  Atlantis ,  203a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  iii,  4a-b;  vm,  13a;  14b; 
xiv,  29b-31c  /  Discourse,  part  iv,  53b;  54a-b 
/  Meditations ,  1,  75d-76c;  11,  79a-81d;  iii, 
82d-86a;  vi  96b-103d  passim,  esp  96b-d  / 
Objections  and  Replies,  122c-d;  136d-137a; 
212a;  218c-d;  219b-c 


31  Spinoza :  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  17,  coROL381a; 
prop  17,  schol-prop  18  381b-382b;  prop  26 
384a-b;  prop  40,  schol  i  387b-388a;  prop  44 
389b-390a;  prop  49,  schol  391d-394d  passim; 
part  v,  prop  34  460c-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [95-128]  177b- 
178a;  bk  viii  [179— 197]  236a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  82-86  186b-189a 

35  Locke  :  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxx 
238a-239b;  bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  1-12  323d- 
326d  passim,  esp  sect  1-3  3 23d-324c;  sect  18 
328d-329a;  ch  v,  sect  7-8  330b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  29-30 
418c;  sect  33  419a;  sect  36  419c-d;  sect  82 
428d-429a;  sect  84  429b-c;  sect  86  429c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  v,  div 
39-40  466c-467c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  345c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  173b-174a  /  Judgement, 
528c-529c;  532b-d;  575b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  220c- 
221a 

53  James:  Psychology,  639a-641a;  646b-655a; 
659a-660b 

4d.  Knowledge  and  love 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  126a-129d  /  Symposium, 
164d-165b;  167a-d 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  2  lOd  / 
Third  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  3, 102a-b;  ch  7, 104a-c 
/  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  34-35  338b-339c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1-6  la-2c; 
bk  x,  par  33-35  79d-80c;  par  38  81a;  bk  xi, 
par  3  89d-90a  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  4-5, 
267c-268b;  ch  8-10  270a-271d;  bk  x,  ch  3 
300b-301a;  bk  xi,  ch  7  326a-c;  ch  25-29 
336b-339b;  bk  xiv,  ch  28  397a-d  /  Christian 
Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  36-40  634d-636a,c;  bk  ii, 
ch  7  638d-639c;  ch  38,  654c;  ch  41-42 
656a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  1,  a  6, 
rep  3  6b-7a;  a  8,  rep  2  7c-8d;  q  8,  a  3,  rep  3 
36b-37c;  q  12,  a  6,  ans  55b-56a;  a  7,  rep  i 
56a-57b;  q  14,  a  15,  rep  i  89b-90b;  q  16,  a  i, 
ans  94b-95c;  a  4  esp  ans  and  rep  1-2  97a-c; 
q  23,  a  4  135a-d;  q  27,  aa  3-5  155c-157c;  q  28, 
a  4,  ans  160c-161d;  q  30,  a  2,  rep  2  168a- 
169b;  q  35,  a  2,  ans  189d-190d;  q  36,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  4-5  192a-194c;  q  37  197c-200c; 
q  59,  a  2  307c-308b;  q  60,  a  i,  rep  3  310b- 
311a;  a  2  311a-d;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  311d- 
312b;  a  5,  rep  5  313b-314c;  q  64,  a  i,  ans 
334a-335c;  q  78,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  407b- 
409a;  q  82,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  433c-434c;  q 
87,  a  1,  rep  1  465a-466c;  q  93,  aa  7-8  498a- 
500c;  part  1-11,  q  1,  a  8  615a-c;  q  3,  a  4  625a- 
626b;  q  22,  a  2,  ans  721c-722c;  q  27,  a  2 
737d-738c;  q  28,  a  1  esp  rep  3  740b-741a; 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  741a-742a;  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  1  742a-d;  a  4,  rep  2  742d-743c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  5,  rep  1  lOb-d;  q  66,  a  6,  rep  i  80c-81b; 


5  to  5a(\)  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE  895 


q  86,  a  i,  rep  2  184a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  23,  a  6, 
rep  i  487a-d;  q  27,  a  4  523c  524a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvii 
[1-75]  78c-79b;  paradise,  iv  [i i 5]— v  (12] 
llld-1 12b;  xxvi  [25-36]  146a;  xxvm  [88- 
1 14]  149c-150a 

26  Shakespeare:  Love's  Labour's  Lost ,  act  iv, 
sc  hi  [289-365]  271c-272a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  227b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  axiom  3  373d; 
prop  48-49  391a-394d;  part  v,  prop  24-33 
458d-460c;  prop  34,  corol  460d;  prop  35-37 
460d-461c;  prop  42  463bd 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  440a 

5.  The  extent  or  limits  of  human  knowledge 

5 a.  The  knowable,  the  unknowable,  and  the 
unknown:  the  knowability  of  certain 
objects 

7  Plato:  Meno ,  179d-183a  esp  180a  /  Parmen¬ 
ides ,  489d-491a;  492a-504c  esp  495b-c,  504c; 
507c-d;  509d-510b  esp  510b;  511c-d  /  Theaete- 
tus ,  544c-547c  /  Sophist,  560a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  3  [1 6bi 9— 26] 
25d-26a  /  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [197*5-7]  273a 
/  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982a30-b3]  500c-d; 
bk  vi,  ch  2  548c-549c;  bk  vii,  ch  10  [1036s 
9-12]  559c;  ch  15  563c-564c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [644b 
21-645*5]  168c-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  20  164c- 
166c 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  hi  215d-226c 
esp  ch  13  223d-224b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  1-6  la-2c 
/  City  of  God ,  bk  xi,  ch  2  323a-c;  bk  xii,  ch  7 
346c-d;  bk  xxi,  ch  5  563d-564d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a  4, 
rep  2  16d-17c;  q  5,  a  2,  ans  24b-25a;  q  12, 
a  1  50c-51c;  q  14,  a  3,  ans  77d-78b;  a  10, 
ans  and  rep  4  83d-84c;  q  16,  a  3  96b-d;  q  50, 
a  2,  ans  270a-272a;  q  55,  a  i,  rep  2  289a-d; 
q  57,  a  3,  ans  297b-298a;  q  79,  a  3  416a- 
417a;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  442b-443c;  q  87  464d- 
468d  passim 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  10, 
a  3  769d-771b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i 
1025c-1032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [61-96] 
lOb-c;  purgatory,  iii  [16-45]  56a-b;  para¬ 
dise,  xix  [22-99]  135b-136a;  xxi  [73-102] 
139a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  80b-82b;  98b-99a;  238c- 
239c;  246a  261c  passim;  271b-273a;  291b- 
294b;  439c-440a 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  iii,  sc  i  [56-88] 
47c-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  363d-364a; 
389b;  492c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  2c-4c; 
96d-97b  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  i  107a 


31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11  2a-3b;  vm,  12a-14a; 
xii,  22b  c  /  Meditations ,  iv,  90a  b  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  112a-d;  215a  b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  30  366c  d; 
appendix  369b  372d;  part  ii,  axiom  5  373d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [544-576] 
187a-b;  bk  vii  [109-130]  219b-220a;  bk  viii 
[1 14-130]  234b-235a;  [179-214]  236a-b  /  Stfm- 

Agonistes  [60-67]  340b-341a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  72  181a-184b;  263  221a-b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  intro,  sect 

3-7  93d-95c;  bk  ii,  ch  i,  sect  1-8  121a-123a; 
sect  24  127b-c;  ch  ii,  sect  3  128b-c;  ch  vii, 
sect  10  133a-b;  ch  xiv,  SECT26  160c-d;  ch  xv, 
sect  11  165a-b;  ch  xxii,  sect  9  202c-203a; 
ch  xxiii  204a-214b  passim;  ch  xxxi,  sect 

6- 13  240d-243b;  ch  xxxii,  sect  24  247c-d; 
bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect  15-18  258b-259c;  ch  vi 
268b-283a  passim;  bk  iv,  ch  iii  313a-323d; 
ch  vi,  sect  4-16  331d-336d  passim;  ch  viii, 
sect  9  347d-348a;  ch  x,  sect  19  354a-c; 
ch  xii,  sect  7-13  360b-362d;  ch  xvi,  sect 
12  370b-371a;  ch  xvii,  sect  9-10  377d-378a; 
sect  23  380b-c;  ch  xviii,  sect  7  383b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
2-3  405b-c;  sect  81  428c-d;  sect  89  430b-c 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div 

7- 10  453c-455b;  sect  iv,  div  26  460b-c; 
sect  viii,  div  62,  478c;  sect  ix,  div  84, 
488b  [fn  1] ;  sect  xii  503c-509d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  159a-c;  308c-d 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  la-4a,c;  19d-20c;  117b- 
118a;  120c-121a;  175b  [fn  1];  215d-216c; 

224a-c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
281c-282d;  285a-287d  /  Practical  Reason , 
292a-c;  296a-d;  309b;  337a-c;  354d-355d 
/  Judgement ,  465a-c;  564a-c;  599d-600d; 
604a- b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [672-675]  18a;  part  ii 
[11,441-452]  278b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  366a-b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  116a-119b  esp  117b,  119b; 
122b;  2 23b- 2 2 4a;  656b-657a;  822b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  383  b-c 

5<z(l)  God  as  an  object  of  knowledge 
Old  Testament:  Exodus ,  33:12-23  /  Deuteron¬ 
omy,  34:10  /  /  Chronicles ,  28:9 —(D)  I  Parali- 
pomenon,  28:9  /  Job,  11:7-9;  26:14;  36:26; 
38:1-42:6/  Psalms,  19:1-4;  46:10;  83:18;  100:3 
—(D)  Psalms,  18:1-5;  45:11;  82:19;  99:3  / 
Proverbs,  2:5  /  Ecclesiastes,  3:11;  8:16-17;  11:5 
/  Isaiah,  11:9;  49:22-26;  60:16 — (D)  Isaias , 
11:9;  49:22-26;  60:16  /  Jeremiah,  24:7;  31:34 
— (D)  Jeremias,  24:7;  31:34  /  Ezekiel,  6:9- 
10,13-14;  28:22-26— (D)  Ezechiel,  6:9-10,13- 
14;  28:22-26  /  Ho  sea,  2:20;  612-3,6 — (D) 
Osee,  2:20;  6:3,6 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  8:1-4;  9:i3~ 
16;  13:1-9—  (D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  8:1-4; 
9:13-16;  13:1-9  /  II  Maccabees ,  7:28— (D) 
OT,  II  Machabees,  7 128 


896 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5*(1)  to  5«(2) 


(5 a.  The  knowable,  the  unknowable ;  and  the  un¬ 
known:  the  knowability  of  certahi  objects. 
5a(l)  God  as  an  object  of  knowledge?) 

New  Testament:  John ,  1:1-5,18;  14:7-11;  17:25- 
26  /  Acts,  17:22-31  /  Romans ,  1:18-21;  11:33- 
3 6/1  Corinthians ,  2:16;  8:1-7;  J5:34  /  H 
Corinthians ,  4:6  /  Ephesians ,  1:17;  3:2-5  / 
Colossians ,  1:9-15  /  /  Timothy ,  6:14-16  / 
Hebrews ,  8:11;  11:3  /  7  John ,  4:7-21 
5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [86-103]  2a-b 
5  Euripides:  Helen  [1137-1150]  309a 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  447c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982b28- 
983*11]  501a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  8  [io74bi-i4]  604d- 
605a 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius ,  53b-c  /  Coriola- 
nus ,  191d-192b 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  9,  133d- 
134b  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  i  208a-c;  tr  iii, 
ch  13-14,  224a-c;  tr  v,  ch  6  231b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  7-38 
73a-81a;  par  65  87d-88a;  bk  xiii,  par  17-19 
115a-d  /  CzVy  0/  Go<7,  bk  viii,  ch  10  271a-d; 
bk  xi,  ch  2  323a-c;  bk  xxii,  ch  29  614b-616d 

19  Aquinas:  Siimma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  i 
3b-4a;  a  7,  rep  i  7a-c;  q  2,  aa  1-2  10d-12c; 
q  3,  a  3,  rep  i  16a-d;  a  4,  rep  2  16d-17c;  a  5 
17c-18b;  qq  12-13  50b-75b;  q  32  175d-180d; 
q  42,  a  2,  rep  1,4  225d-227a;  q  50,  a  2,  ans 
270a-272a;  q  56,  a  3  294a-d;  q  57,  a  5  299b- 
300b;  q  84,  a  5  446c-447c;  a  7,  rep  3  449b- 
450b;  q  86,  a  2,  rep  i  462a-463a;  q  88,  a  2, 
rep  4  471c-472c;  a  3  472c-473a;  q  89,  a  2, 
rep  3  475a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  93, 
a  2  216c-217b;  part  iii,  q  9,  a  3,  rep  3  765b- 
766b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i  1025c-1032b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  iii  [16- 
45]  56a-b;  paradise,  ii  [37-45]  108a;  iv  [28- 
48]  111a;  xix  [22-99]  135b-136a;  xx  [130-148] 
138a-b;  xxi  [73-102]  139a-b;  xxxm  [46-145] 
156c-157d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54b-c;  78d-79a; 
79d-80b;  part  ii,  162a-163b;  part  iv,  271b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  98b-99a;  208c-209c; 

212a-d;  238c-239c;  246a-257d  passim 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c;  17b- 
20a;  38a;  45a-46a;  95d-101d  esp  96d-97b, 
99c-100a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv  51b-54b  pas¬ 
sim  /  Meditations ,  69b-d;  74a, c;  iii  81d-89a; 
iv,  89b;  v  93a-96a  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
108a-114c;  120c-d;  12la-123a;  127b-c;  postu¬ 
late  v  131b-c;  prop  i-iii  132b-133a;  211c- 
212a;  213a;  213d-214a;  215b-c;  227b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  ii,  schol  358d- 
359b;  part  11,  prop  1-2  373d-374a;  prop  47 
390c-391a;  part  v,  prop  24-32  458d-460b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  vii  [109-130]  219b- 
220a;  bk  viii  [i  14-130]  234b-235a  /  Samson 
Agonistes  [60-62]  340b-341a;  [293-325]  346a-b 


33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  184-241  205a-217b  passim, 
esp  233-241  213b-217b 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
370b-371a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  12,  107c-d;  ch  iii,  sect  7-18  113d-117c; 
bk  ii,  ch  xvii,  sect  1  167d-168a;  sect  17 
172b-c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  33-37  212d-214b 
passim;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  ii  271b-d;  bk  iv, 
ch  x  349c-354c  passim 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  pref,  404a; 
sect  146-156  442a-444d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ii,  div  14 
456b;  sect  xi  497b-503c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  308b-309a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  33a-d;  143a-145c;  152a- 
153c;  177b-179c;  186d-187a;  190a-192d;  218d- 
223d;  239a-c;  241d-242c  /  Practical  Reason , 
291a-292c;  348b-352c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals ,  384a, c  /  Judgement.  575b-577a;  588d- 
589c;  603b-607c  esp  606d-607c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  158c- 
160b;  part  iv,  349b-350a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  196b-197b; 
bk  xv,  630d-631c 

5a{2)  Matter  and  the  immaterial  as  objects  of 
knowledge 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  456a-458a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [i9ia8-i2]  266d 
/  Meteorology ,  bk  iv,  ch  12  493d-494d  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [99ia8-n]  509b;  bk 
vii,  ch  10  [1036^-12]  559b-c;  bk  ix,  ch  2 
[i046b7-i5]  571c-d  /  Soul ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [403s4 
25_bl9]  632b-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [265-328] 
4b-5a;  [418-448]  6b-c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  9  31c-32a 
/  Second  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  10  53b-d;  ch  12 
54c-55b;  tr  v,  ch  4-5  59c-60c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xi-xii  89b-110d 
/  City  of  God ,  bk  xi,  ch  3  323d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  1,  a  9 
8d-9c;  q  12,  a  1,  rep  2  50c-51c;  a  2,  ans 
51c-52c;  q  13,  a  12,  rep  3  74c-75b;  q  14, 
a  11  84c-85c;  q  15,  a  3,  rep  3-4  93b-94a;  q  16, 
a  5,  rep  3  97c-98b;  q  29,  a  2,  rep  3  163b-164b; 
q  54,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  287b-288a;  q  56 
291d-294d;  q  57,  aa  1-2  295a-297a;  q  76,  a  2, 
rep  3  388c-391a;  q  84,  a  7,  ans  and  rep  3 
449b-450b;  q  85,  a  1  451c-453c;  q  86,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  3-4  461c-462a;  a  2,  rep  i  462a- 
463a;  a  3  463b-d;  q  87,  a  i,  ans  465a-466c; 
q  88  468d-473a;  q  89,  a  2  475a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  ii, 
a  1,  rep  2  772b-773a;  q  12,  a  i,  rep  3  776c- 
777b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 
12  1025c-1032b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  172a-d:  part  iv, 
269c-270c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  41d-42a; 
43d-44c 


5 a(3)  to  5a( 4)  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE  897 


31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  74a, c:  i-ii  75a~81d 
esp  ii,  Sib  c  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  120b-c; 
122c;  postulate  ii  131a;  152b, d  155d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  72,  184a  b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  xv, 
sect  11  165a-b;  ch  xxm  204a-214b  passim, 
esp  sect  5  205a-b,  sect  15  208c-d,  sect  29 
211d-212a;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  ii  -12  271b 
272b;  ch  xi,  sect  23  305a  b;  bk  iv,  cii  iii, 
sect  6  313c-315b;  sect  9-17  315c-317c  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  sect  17  317c;  sect  23-27  320a-322a; 
ch  vi,  sect  14  335d-336b;  ch  x,  sect  19 
354a-c;  ch  xi,  sect  12  357c-d;  ch  xvi,  sect 
12  370b-37la 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  16-20 
416a-4l7a;  sect  25-27  417d-418b;  sect  86-89 
429c-430c  esp  sect  89  430b-c;  sect  135-148 
440a-442d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
123  506a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  336b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  186b- d  /  Practical  Reason , 
319c-321b  /  Judgement,  603a-d 

5^(3)  Cause  and  substance  as  objects  of  knowl¬ 
edge 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [i96b5— 7] 
273a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [983^-10]  501b; 
bk  iii,  ch  2  [996ai8-b26]  514d-515b;  ch  4 
[999*24-29]  518a;  ch  6  [ioo3a5— 17]  521d- 
522a, c;  bk  vii,  ch  15  563c-564c;  bk  xi,  ch  2 
[1060^0-23]  588d;  bk  xii,  ch  10  618c-619a,c 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch 
6  [742bi7~35]  283d-284a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [526- 
533]  67d-68a;  bk  vi  [703— 71  i]  89c-d 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  505a-506a 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  ii  348b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12, 
a  8,  ans  57b-58b;  q  19,  a  5,  rep  2  112d-113c; 
q  29,  a  1,  rep  1,3  162a-163b;  Q  56,  a  i,  rep  2 
292a-d;  q  57,  a  3,  ans  297b-298a;  q  77,  a  i, 
rep  7  399c-401b;  q  84,  a  7,  ans  449b-450b; 
q  86,  a  1,  ans  461c-462a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2,  rep  3  2b-4a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  iii  [24- 
45]  56a-b;  xvm  [49-60]  80b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78a-80c;  part  iv, 
271c-272c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  271b-272c;  497d-498a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  45a-46a  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  2  137b-c  /  New 
Atlantis ,  21  Od 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iv,  90a-b  /  Objec- 
tions  and  Replies,  1 08a-l  1 2  a ;  209c- 2 10b ;  211b-c; 
215a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  def  3-4  355b;  axiom 
4  355d;  prop  8,  schol  2  356d-357d;  prop  10 
358a-b;  appendix  369b-372d;  part  iv,  pref, 
422b,d-423b 


33  Pascal:  Pensees,  184  241  205a  217b  passim, 
esp  233-241  213b  217b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
371b  372a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  cii  iii, 
sect  19  ll7c-d;  bk  ii,  cii  xiii,  sect  17-20 
152a-d;  ch  xxi,  sect  1-6  178b-180a;  ch  xxiii 
204a-2l4b  passim,  esp  sect  2  204b  c,  sect  5 
205a  b,  sect  15  208c-d,  sect  28-29  211b- 
212a;  ch  xxv,  sect  ii-ch  xxvi,  sect  2 
217a-d;  ch  xxxi,  sect  6-13  240d-243b;  cii 
xxxii,  sect  24  247c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect 
15-18  258b-259c;  ch  vi  268b-283a  passim, 
esp  sect  7-10  270b-271b;  ch  ix,  sect  11-17 
287d-290a;  ch  xi,  sect  19-25  304b-306c  esp 
sect  22  305a;  bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  9-17  315c- 
317c;  sect  24-29  320c-323a  esp  sect  29  322c- 
323a;  ch  iv,  sect  12  326c-d;  ch  vi,  sect  4-16 
331d-336d;  ch  viii,  sect  9  347d-348a;  ch  xii, 
sect  9-12  360d-362c;  ch  xvi,  sect  12,  370b-c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  101-102 
432c-433a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iii,  div 
i8-sect  viii,  div  74  457c-484c  passim; 
sect  xi,  div  105  498d-499a;  div  115  503b-c; 
sect  xii,  div  127  507b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15a-b;  17c-d;  46d-47c; 
57c-d;  58d-59b;  63d-64a;  76c-83b  esp  81b- 
83b;  86c-d;  95a-d;  99a-100d  esp  lOOc-d;  110b; 
133a;  140b,d-145c;  171a-172c;  214b, d  [fn  1]  / 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  267d-268a; 
285c-286a  /  Practical  Reason,  294c-295d; 
302a-d;  313b-314d  /  Judgement,  550a-551a,c; 
556b-c;  557c-558b;  564a-c;  574a-b;  584c-d; 
611d-613a,c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  169a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xiii,  563a-b; 
epilogue  1,  646c-647b  passim;  650b-c;  epi¬ 
logue  ii,  693c;  694d-695c 

53  James:  Psychology,  89b-90a;  885b-886a 

5a(4)  The  infinite  and  the  individual  as  objects 
of  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Philebus,  610d-617d 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  5  [2b6~37]  6c-7a  / 
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  31  120a-c  / 
Physics,  bk  1,  ch  4  [1 87^-1 4]  262d;  ch  5 
[I^9a5_7l  264b-c;  ch  6  [1 89ai  1— 1 9]  264c;  bk 
iii,  ch  6  [207*21-31]  285c-d;  bk  vii,  ch  3 
[247b3~7]  330b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[994bl7_3°]  513a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [999^4-29] 
518a;  ch  6  [1  oo3a5~ 1 7]  521d-522a,c;  bk  vii, 
ch  10  [1036^-7]  559b-c;  ch  15  563c-564c; 
bk  xi,  cii  2  [io6ob2o— 23]  588d;  bk  xiii,  ch 
10  618c-619a,c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i356b28— 35] 
596b-c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  812a 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  3  311c- 
312b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  20-21 
49d-50a;  bk  xii,  par  3-6  99d-100c 


898  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5 a (5)  to  5 a(6) 


(5a.  The  ktiowable,  the  unknowable ,  and  the  un¬ 
known:  the  knowability  of  certain  objects . 
5 a  (4)  The  infinite  and  the  individual  as 
objects  of  knowledge .) 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3, 
a  3,  ans  16a-d;  q  12,  a  i,  rep  2  50c-51c;  a  7, 
ans  56a-57b;  a  8,  rep  4  57b-58b;  q  14,  aa 
11-12  84c-86d;  q  15,  a  3,  rep  4  93b-94a;  Q  22, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  1  128d-130d;  q  29,  a  i,  rep  i 
162a-163b;  a  2,  rep  3  163b-164b;  q  30,  a  4 
170c-171b;  q  32  175d-180d;  q  56,  a  i,  rep  2 
292a-d;  q  57,  a  2  295d-297a;  q  84,  a  7,  ans 
and  rep  1  449b-450b;  q  86,  aa  1-3  461c-463d; 
q  89,  a  4,  ans  476c-477a;  part  i-ii,  q  14,  a  6, 
rep  3  680c-681a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  hi,  q  10, 
a  3  769d-771b;  q  ii,  a  i,  rep  3  772b-773a; 
q  12,  a  1,  rep  3  776c-777b;  part  hi  suppl, 
q  92,  a  1,  rep  12  1025c-1032b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54b-c;  part  iv, 
262b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  332a-333b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  111,  86a-d;  88c-89a 
/  Objections  and  Replies ,  112a-d;  121d-122b; 
169a;  211c-d;  212c-213a;  213d-214a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  10,  schol 
376d-377a;  prop  30-31  385a-c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72  181a-184b;  233  213b- 
216a  /  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  435a- b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  4  149b;  ch  xiv,  sect  26-31  160c-162a 
passim;  ch  xv,  sect  2-3  162c-d;  sect  12 
165b-c;  ch  xvi,  sect  8  167c;  ch  xvii  167d- 
174a  esp  sect  15  171b-172a;  ch  xxiii,  sect 
31  212b-c;  sect  33-34  212d-213b;  ch  xxix, 
sect  15-16  237a-238a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect  2 
405b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  278a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1810-1815]  43a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xv,  631a-c; 
epilogue  ii,  693c-694d 

53  James:  Psychology,  312a;  631a 

5a(5)  The  past  and  the  future  as  objects  of 
knowledge 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  27:1  /  Ecclesiastes, 
6:12;  8:6-7;  9:11-12;  11:2,6— (D)  Ecclesiastes, 
7:1;  8:6-7;  9:11-12;  11:2,6 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  8:8 — ( D )  OT, 
Boo\  of  Wisdom,  8 :8 

New  Testament:  James,  4:13-14 — ( D )  James, 
4:i3-x5 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [86-103]  2a-b 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [463-512] 
103c-d;  [1524-1530]  113c  /  Ajax  [1419-1421] 
155c 

5  Euripides:  Medea  [1415-1419]  224c  /  Alcestis 
[1159-1163]  247c  /  Helen  [1688-1692]  314c  / 
Andromache  [1284-1288]  326c  /  Bacchantes 
[1388-1392]  352a, c 


6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  349b; 
354a-c 

7  Plato:  Critias,  479d  /  Theaetetus,  531a-532a 

8  Aristotle  :  Interpretation,  ch  9  28a-29d  / Mem¬ 
ory  and  Reminiscence,  ch  i  [449^-29]  690a-c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  19  [i392bi4~ 
r393a8]  640b-c 

10  Hippocrates:  Prognostics,  par  1  19a-b  / 
Epidemics,  bk  hi,  sect  hi,  par  16  59b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi  [713-755]  230a-231a 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  la-b  /  Pericles,  129a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  79b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  23-24 
77a-c;  bk  xi,  par  17-41  93b-99b  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  30  651c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  13  86d-88c;  a  15,  rep  3  89b-90b;  q  57,  a  3 
297b-298a;  q  78,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  5  411d- 
413d;  q  79,  a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  419b-420d;  q 
86,  a  4  463d-464d;  q  89,  a  3,  rep  3  475d-476c; 
a  7,  rep  3  478d-479c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  12, 
a  1,  rep  3  776c-777b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
56  95b-96a;  stanza  136-154  106a-108b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  53c-54a;  65b-c 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  41c-d;  439c-440a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  13d-14a; 
54c-55a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  259a-b 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  62,  schol 

443c-d;  prop  66,  demonst  444c 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, 
sect  12  165b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  xi,  sect  ii  357b-c 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  44 
420d-421a;  sect  105  433b-c 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vi  469d- 
470d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  348a, c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iv,  428a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  88a-c;  96b, d; 
413b-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  234 d  /  Judgement,  579d- 
580a;  583d-584c 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  277c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  155b-c; 
181b-d;  190a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [570-585]  16a;  part  ii 
[8591^8603]  209b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  366b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  42a;  59d-60a; 
166a, c;  231d-233b  esp  233a-b;  242b-243c  / 
Descent  of  Man,  28 7 d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  584d-585b; 
epilogue  ii,  685a 

53  James:  Psychology,  852b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  387a,c 

5^(6)  The  self  and  the  thing  in  itself  as  ob¬ 
jects  of  knowledge 

8  Aristotle :  Soul,  bk  hi,  ch  6  [430b2i-26]  663b 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  27,  133a-b 


899 


Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


5 b  to  5c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  xi,  sect  i,  302a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  3,  137c-d 
/  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  2  159dl60b  / 
Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  1-8  215d  220d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  7  73a;  par 
21-25  76c-77d;  par  41  81c-d  /  C/>y  0/  GW, 
bk  xi,  ch  26  336d-337b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  2,  rep  1,3  76d-77d;  q  56,  a  i  292a-d;  q  78, 
a  4,  rep  2  411d-4I3d;  q  87  464d-468d;  q  88, 
a  1,  rep  1  469a-471c;  a  2,  rep  3  471c-472c; 
q  89,  a  2,  ans  475a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  intro,  47bd 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  332b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  88c-89b 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  11  77d-81d  esp 

81b-c  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  postulate  ii 
131a;  209d-210a;  215b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  19-30  382b- 
383c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  ix, 
sect  2-3  349a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  362c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c  esp  lb-d;  7d-8b; 
9a-10b;  12c-d  [fni];  32a-c;  49c-50c;  51b-c; 
55a-56c;  120c-129c;  200c-204c  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  281c-282d;  285a-287d 
esp  285c-286a  /  Practical  Reason ,  292a-293b; 
307d-310c;  311d-314d;  327d-329a;  331c- 

337a, c;  337a-c  /  Judgement,  465a-c;  497a- 
498b;  574b-577a:  594d  [fn  1];  599d-600d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  35 
21a-b;  par  44  23c;  additions,  22  120c-d  / 
Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  257d-258a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  370b-371b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  ii,  688b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  121a-125b;  177b-178a; 

191a-197a  esp  196a-197a;  213a-238b  esp 

213b-217a,  223b-224a,  227b-228b,  232b- 

233b;  471b-472b 

54  Freud:  Unconscious ,  428a-430c  esp  429c-430c 
/  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  76 7 d- 768 d 

5b.  The  distinction  between  what  is  more 
knowable  in  itself  and  what  is  more 
knowable  to  us 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  23 
[68b30~36]  90c  /  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[7ib28~72a6]  98b-c  /  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  4 
[i4ia26-i42a22]  194c-195c;  bk  viii,  ch  i 
[I55b35~I5^a7l  211d-212a  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
259a-b;  ch  5  [i88b26-i 89*^9]  264b-c;  ch  7 
[i89b30~33]  265b-c  /  Generation  and  Corrup¬ 
tion,  bk  1,  ch  3  [3i8bi3— 319^]  415b-d  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  ii,  ch  i  [993a30-bn]  511b,d; 
bk  vii,  ch  3  [i029a35~bi2]  552a  /  Soul ,  bk  ii, 
ch  2  [4 13ai  1— 1 9]  643a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  1,  ch  4  [i095bi— 4]  340c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  1,  a  5, 

rep  1-2  5c-6a;  a  9  8d-9c;  q  2,  a  i,  ans  lOd- 
lld;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2-3  lld-12c;  q  3,  a  3, 


q  12,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  50c-51c;  aa  7-8  56a- 
58b;  q  1 }  62b  75b  passim;  q  50,  a  2,  ans  270a- 
272a;  q  85,  a  3  455b-457a;  a  8  460b-461b; 
q  88,  a  1,  rep  4-4  469a-471c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv  51b-54b  / 
Meditations ,  69b-d;  11  77d-81d  passim;  iv, 
89b;  v  93a  96a  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
postulate  ii  131a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  47,  390c-d 

42  Kant:  Judgetnent,  601d 

5c.  Dogmatism,  skepticism,  and  the  critical 
attitude  with  respect  to  the  extent,  cer¬ 
tainty,  and  finality  of  human  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  /  Cratylus , 
86b  d  /  Meno,  179b-180b  /  Apology ,  203a  / 
Phaedo,  236c-238a  /  Timaeus ,  447b-d  / 
Theaetetus,  521d-526b 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  13 
[32b4~23]  48b-d  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i, 
ch  1  [7is26]-ch  2  [72b4]  97c-99a;  ch  6  102b- 
103c;  ch  33  121b-122a,c  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii, 
ch  5  [287b29-288a3]  379b-c  /  Generation  and 
Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  2  [316^-14]  411c-d  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  ch  5-6  528c-531c;  bk  x, 
ch  1  [1053^  1— b3]  580a;  ch  6  [1057^-11]  584b; 
bk  xi,  ch  6  [io62bi2-io63bi4]  590d-592a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  1,  ch  3  [io94bn-27] 
339d-340a;  ch  7  [io98a2o-b2]  343c-d;  bk  ii, 
ch  2  [no3b26-nc>4a9]  349b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  3 
388b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [469-521] 
50b-51a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  17  158d- 
161a;  ch  20  164c-166c;  bk  iii,  ch  2, 177c-178b; 
ch  21  193d-195a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  19  32b-c  / 
City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  18  523a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i,  a  i 
3b-4a;  a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  5c-6a;  q  84,  a  i, 
ans  440d-442a;  q  85,  a  2,  ans  453d-455b; 
q  86,  aa  1-3  461c-463d;  q  87,  a  1  465a-466c; 
q  88,  a  1  469a-471c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  64, 
aa  3-4  68b-70a;  part  ii-ii,  q  4,  a  8  409a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  65c;  part  iv, 
267a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
197b-200a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  80b-82b;  208a-294b  esp 
240c-246a,  253c-254a,  257d-264a,  269d-279c, 
285c-294b;  308c-d;  318a-319b;  439c-440a; 
497b-502c;  516b-524a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  pref,  lc-2a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  267b,d-268d  / 
On  Animal  Generation ,  411c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  13a-c;  15a- 
17b  esp  15d-16b;  47d-48d;  57d-58b  /  Novum 
Organum ,  pref  105a-106d;  bk  i,  aph  37 
109b-c;  aph  67  115d-116a;  aph  75  118b-d; 


900  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5c  to  6a (l) 


(5.  The  extent  or  limits  of  human  knowledge.  5 c. 
Dogmatism,  skepticism,  and  the  critical 
attitude  with  respect  to  the  extent,  cer¬ 
tainty,  and  finality  of  human  knowledge.) 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  iv,  5a-d  /  Discourse ,  part 
ii  44c-48b  /  Meditations ,  72b, d;  i  75a-77c; 
hi,  83b-84a  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  168b-d; 
272a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  def  4  373b;  prop  37- 
47  386b-391a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  381-385  238b-239a;  432 
248a;  434-435  248a-251a  /  Vacuum,  355a- 
358b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  intro  93a- 
95d  esp  sect  4-7  94a-95c;  bk  i,  ch  iii,  sect 
24  120a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  ii,  sect  3  128b-c;  ch  xv, 
sect  11  165a-b;  ch  xxiii,  sect  12-13  207a- 
208b;  sect  36  213c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  1-9 
268b-271a  esp  sect  9  270d-271a;  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  22-30  319c-323c  esp  sect  22  319c-320a; 
ch  vi,  sect  4-16  331d-336d  passim;  chx,  sect 
19  354a-c;  ch  xii,  sect  9-13  360d-362d;  ch 
xiv,  sect  1-2  364b-c;  ch  xvii,  sect  9-10 
377d-378a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
3-4  405b-d;  sect  17  409d-410a;  sect  86-88 
429c-430b;  sect  101-102  432c-433a;  sect  133 
439c-440a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div 
7-10  453c-455b;  sect  iv,  div  20-21  458a-c; 
div  26  460b-c;  sect  iv,  div  28-sect  v,  div  38 
460d-466c  passim;  sect  vii,  div  60,  477a; 
sect  xii  503c-509d  esp  div  129-130  508a-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c;  15c-16c;  19a- 

22a,  c;  101d-102a;  129c-130a;  133c-l34d; 

146a-149d;  I57d;  187c-188b;  193a-b;  196b- 
197c;  218d-227a  esp  221c-222b;  248d-250a,c 
/  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253c-d; 
277d-279d  /  Practical  Reason,  292d-293b; 
295b-d;  311d-313d;  320c-321b;  331a-332d; 
335b-c;  336d-337a,c  /  Judgement,  492c-d; 
567c-568a 

43  Federalist:  number  31, 103d-104a;  number 
37,  119b-120b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  274b-293b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  121c-d;  126a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  7a;  intro, 
par  31  19c-20a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [656— 675]  17b-18a; 
[1064-1067]  26b;  [1810-1815]  43a:  [1868-2050] 
44b-48b  esp  [1948-1963]  46a-b,  [1968-1979] 
46b-47a,  [2011-2022]  47b-48a;  [4343-4362] 
107a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  78a-b;  250b;  257a; 
276a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  253d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  195a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  881b 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  828b-c; 
873d-884d  passim,  esp  874d-875a,  878d-880b, 
883d-884a 


5 d.  The  method  of  universal  doubt  as  prereq¬ 
uisite  to  knowledge:  God*s  goodness  as 
the  assurance  of  the  veracity  of  our  facul¬ 
ties 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11  2a-3b  /  Discourse  41a- 
67a, c  esp  part  ii  44c-48b,  part  iv  51b-54b  / 
Meditations,  72b, d;  1  75a-77c;  iii,  82b-d; 
iv,  89b-c;  v,  95b-96a  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
119c;  123a-d;  124b-125b;  postulate  vii  131c; 
134b-c;  142c;  143c;  162a;  167a-c;  206a-c; 
207b;  215c-d;  226d-227a;  229c-d;  237b- 
238b;  239a-240a;  242c-244c;  245c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxvii,  sect  13  223b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  ix,  sect 
3  349b-c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  3 
405b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  xii,  div 
1 16,  503d-504a;  div  120  505b;  div  129-130 
508a-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  881b 

5e.  Knowledge  about  knowledge  as  the  source 
of  criteria  for  evaluating  claims  to 
knowledge 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  87d;  intro 
93a-95d  esp  sect  4-7  94a-95c;  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  22  319c-320a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  4 
405c-d;  sect  17  409d-410a 

35  Hume:  Human  Utider standing,  sect  i,  div  7- 
10  453c-455b;  sect  ii,  div  17  457a-b;  sect 
vii,  div  49-53  471c-474b  esp  div  49  47lc-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-1 2d  esp  lb-d,  8c-9a; 
55a-56c;  99a-101b;  121a-123b  /  Practical 
Reason,  292d-293b;  294a-b;  307d-310c;  331a- 
332d 

6.  The  kinds  of  knowledge 

6a.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according 
to  diversity  of  objects 

6^(1)  Being  and  becoming,  the  intelligible  and 
the  sensible,  the  necessary  and  the  con¬ 
tingent,  the  eternal  and  the  temporal,  the 
immaterial  and  the  material  as  objects 
of  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  86b-d;  113c-114a,c  /  Phae - 
drus ,  125a-126c  /  Symposium ,  167a-d  /  Phaedo, 
223d-232d  esp  223d-225a,  228b-232d  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  iii,  333b-334b;  bk  v,  368c-373c  esp 
372a-373b;  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Timaeus, 
447b-d;  457b-458a  /  Theaetetus ,  521d-522b; 
534d-536b  /  Sophist,  565a-569a  esp  568a-  569a 
/  Statesman,  595a-c  /  Philebus,  610d-613a; 
633a-635a  esp  634b-635a  /  Seventh  Letter, 
809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  5  [4aio-bi9]  8b-9a 
/  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [32b4~23]  48b-d 
/  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [7ib8— 16] 
97d-98a;  ch  4  [73a2i-b3o]  lOOa-lOla;  ch  6-8 


901 


6a(  1)  to  6a( 2)  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


102b  l04b;  cii  30  119d;  ch  33  121bl22a,c  / 
Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  270a  271a;  cii  7  [198*22- 
31)  275b-c  /  Heavens,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [298bi3« 
24]  390a  b;  ch  7  [3o6aio-i2]  397b  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  1,  ch  5  [986b25— 987^1  ]  504d'505a; 
ch  6  [987ft29-bi8]  505b-d;  cii  8  [989b2i~99oa 
8J  507d  508a:  bk  ii,  ch  i  511b,d-512b;  cii  3 
[995*15-2°]  513d;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [999a24~b4] 
518ab;  bk  iv,  cii  5-6  528c-531c;  bk  vi,  ch  i 
547b,d-548c;  bk  vii,  ch  15  [i°39b3 i-i°4°a8] 
563d-564a;  bk  ix,  ch  10  577c-578a,c;  bk  x, 
ch  1  [i053*3i-b3]  580a;  cii  6  [1057*7-11] 
584b;  bk  xi,  ch  2  588a-589a;  ch  6  [i°62bi2- 
i°63bi4]  590d-592a;  ch  7  [i°63b36]-cn  8 
[1065*6]  592b-593b;  bk  xii,  ch  1  [io69*30-b2j 
598b-c  /  Soul,  bk  1,  ch  1  [403a25~bi9]  632b-d 
/  Memory  and  Reminiscence ,  ch  i  [449b3°- 
450*10]  690c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  cii  5  [64415 
21-645*5]  168c-d  /  Ethics ,  bk  vi,  ch  i  [1139* 
3-13]  387b-d;  cii  3  [ii39bi9-25]  388b-c  / 
Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  cii  2  [1357*14^21]  596d-597c 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  811a-812a 

14  Plutarch:  Marcellas ,  252 b  e 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  i,  228c- 
229c;  tr  ix,  cii  7  249b-c  /  Sixth  Ennead , 
tr  vii,  ch  36  339c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  3-5  27c- 
28c;  bk  vi,  par  6  36c-d;  bk  vii,  par  23  50b-c; 
bk  x,  par  8-1 1  73b-74b;  bk  xii,  par  5  lOOa-b 
/  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  6  268d-269c; 
ch  10  271a-d;  bk  xix,  ch  18  523a-b  /  Chris¬ 
tian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  8  626c-627a;  bk  ii, 
ch  27-39  650a-655b  esp  ch  27  650a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  i, 
rep  2  3b-4a;  a  9  8d-9c;  q  2,  aa  1-2  10d-12c; 
q  5,  a  2,  ans  24b-25a;  q  10,  a  i,  ans  40d-41d; 
q  12,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  53b-54c;  aa  8-10  57b- 
59d;  q  13,  a  12,  rep  3  74c-75b;  q  14,  a  13, 
ans  and  rep  3  86d-88c;  q  16,  a  i,  rep  2 
94b-95c;  Q  54,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  287b-288a; 
qq  56-57  291d-300b;  q  79,  a  9  422b-423d; 
qq  84-88  440b-473a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  66, 
a  5  79b-80c;  q  84,  a  i,  rep  3  174b-175a;  q  93, 
a  2  216c-217b;  q  94,  a  4,  ans  223d-224d; 
part  11— 11,  q  9,  a  2  424b-425a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  49d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  291b-294b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  40a-c;  41  fa- 
423 ;  43d-44c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  11  2a-3b;  xii,  21b-c  /  Dis¬ 
course,  part  iv,  53b  /  Meditations ,  11  77d-81d 
esp  81b-c;  v  93a-96a  passim  /  Objections  and 
Replies ,  122b  c;  postulate  ii  131a;  218c-d; 
219b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  8  355c;  prop  7 
356c;  prop  8,  schol  2  356d-357d;  part  ii, 
prop  10,  schol  376d-377a;  prop  24-45 
383c-390b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72,  184a-b 


35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxiii,  sect  5  205a-b;  sect  15-37  208c-214b; 
bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  9-17  315c-317c  passim, 
esp  sect  17  317c;  sect  23-27  320a-322a  pas¬ 
sim;  ch  vi,  sect  5-16  332b-336d  passim;  ch 
xi,  sect  1-12  354c-357d  passim,  esp  sect  12 
357c-d;  ch  xvi,  sect  12  370b-371a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  25-27 
417d-418b;  sect  135-142  440a-441c;  sect  148 
442b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  336b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  16a-b;  113c-ll5a  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  551a-552c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  120a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ix,  365a-b 

6a( 2)  Knowledge  of  natures  or  kinds  distin¬ 
guished  from  knowledge  of  individuals 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  cii  24 
116b-118a;  ch  31  120a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  19  [100*14- 
b3]  136d  /  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i88b26-i89*9] 
264 b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980^5-98 ib 
13]  499b-500a;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [999*24^4] 
518a-b;  ch  6  [1003*5-17]  521d-522a,c;  bk  vii, 
ch  10  [io35b35-io36*8]  559b-c;  ch  15  563c- 
564c;  bk  xi,  ch  2  [io6ob20-23]  588d;  bk  xiii, 
ch  10  618c-619a,c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  6  389d;  ch  7 
[1141*20-34]  390a-b;  [1 14^14-20]  390c-d;  ch 
ii  [ii43*32-b5]  392d-393a;  bk  x,  ch  9  [ii8ob 
13-23]  ^35b-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  1,  ch  2  [1356b 
28-35]  596b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  2, 
rep  2  4a-c;  q  12,  a  8,  rep  4  57b-58b;  q  14, 
a  11  84c-85c;  a  12,  ans  85d-86d;  q  15,  a  3, 
rep  4  93b-94a;  q  22,  a  2,  ans  128d-130d;  q 
29,  a  1,  rep  1  162a-163b;  a  2,  rep  3  163b- 
164b;  q  30,  a  4  170c-171b;  q  55,  a  i,  rep  3 
289a-d;  a  3,  rep  2  291a-d;  q  56,  a  i,  rep  2 
292a-d;  q  57,  a  2  295d-297a;  q  59,  a  i,  rep  i 
306c-307b;  q  75,  a  5,  ans  382a-383b;  q  76, 
a  2,  rep  4  388c-391a;  q  79,  a  5,  rep  2  418c- 
419b;  a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  419b-420d;  q  84, 
a  7,  ans  and  rep  i  449b-450b;  q  85,  a  1 
451c-453c;  a  2,  rep  2  453d-455b;  a  3  455b- 
457a;  q  86,  a  1  461c-462a;  aa  3-4  463b-464d; 
q  89,  a  4  476c-477a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  ii, 
a  1,  rep  3  772b-773a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  1-9 
137a-140c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  167c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  37-39  386b- 

387a;  prop  44,  corol  2-prop  46  390a-c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxii,  sect  6-8  244b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect 
7-9  255d-256c;  ch  vi,  sect  32-33  277c-278c; 
bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  5-8  324d-325c;  ch  vii, 
sect  9  338d-339b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div 
132  509a-d 


902  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6a(3)  to  6b(  1) 


(6a.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according  to 
diversity  of  objects.  6 a (2)  Knowledge  of 
natures  or  kinds  distinguished  from  knowl¬ 
edge  of  individuals .) 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  211c-218d  /  Judgement , 
572a-b;  572d-574b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  305a-312a  esp  309a-312a 

6a ( 3)  Knowledge  of  matters  of  fact  or  real  ex¬ 
istence  distinguished  from  knowledge 
of  our  ideas  or  of  the  relations  between 
them 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  84, 
a  1,  rep  1  440d-442a;  q  85,  a  2  453d-455b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  60a-b;  65c;  71c-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15-16  98d-99c;  sect  23  101b-102a;  bk  hi, 
ch  v,  sect  12  266d-267a;  sect  14  267b-c; 
ch  vi,  sect  43-51  280c'283a  esp  sect  43 
280c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  i,  sect  1-7  307a-308a;  ch 
11  309b-313a  passim,  esp  sect  14  312b-d;  ch 
hi,  313a-323d  esp  sect  29  322c-323a;  ch  iv, 
sect  1-12  323d-326d  passim;  sect  18  328d- 
329a;  ch  v,  sect  6-8  330a-d;  ch  vi,  sect 
13  335c-d;  sect  16  336d;  ch  ix  349a-c;  ch 
xi  354c-358c  esp  sect  13-14  357d-358c;  ch 
xii,  sect  6-13  360a-362d;  ch  xvii,  sect  8 
377b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  sect  18-20 
416b-417a;  sect  23  4X7b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv  458a- 
463d  esp  div  20-21  458a-c,  div  30  461d-462b; 
sect  v,  div  34-38,  464b-466c;  sect  ix  487b- 
488c  esp  div  82  487b-c;  sect  xii,  div  131-132 
508d-509d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  pref,  5c-6a  / 
Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  354b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  157b-161a  esp  158b-159b; 
301b-304b  passim;  453a-b;  867a-890a  esp 
868b-869a,  879b-882a,  886a,  889a-b 

6a(4)  Knowledge  in  relation  to  the  distinction 
between  the  phenomenal  and  the  noum- 
enal,  the  sensible  and  supra-sensible 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  25c-26a;  27b-33d;  37b-d; 
53b-59b;  93c-99a  esp  94b-95a,  96a-97b,  97d- 
98c;  101b-108a,c  esp  106b-107b;  117b-118a; 
120c-121d;  153a-157d;  164a-165c;  I72c-173a; 
193a-b;  224a-230c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals ,  253a-d;  264d;  281c-282d;  285a-287d 
/  Practical  Reason ,  291a-296d  esp  292a-293b; 
307d-314d  esp  307d-308b,  310d-311d;  319c- 
321b;  328a-329a;  331a-332d;  337a-c;  340a- 
342d  esp  340c-341c;  349b-355d  /  Intro.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals ,  383c-d;  390b  /  Judgement , 
465a-c;  474b-475d  esp  474d  [fn  1];  497a-498b; 
500c-d;  501d-502a;  506d-507a;  510b-c;  530a; 
541a-542a;  543a;  543c-544c;  564a-c;  570b- 
572b;  574b-577a;  578d-579a;  581a-b;  584c-d; 
587d-588a;  596c-598b;  599d-600d;  603a-b; 
603d-606d  esp  603d-604b,  606a-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  233a-234b 


6b.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according 
to  the  faculties  involved  in  knowing 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  224a-232d  esp  224a-225a, 
228b-232d  /  Republic ,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c; 
bk  x,  431c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  19 
[99b34-ioob3]  136b-d  /  Topics ,  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[125^5-33]  174b  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i88b 
26-1 89a9]  264b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  1 
[98oa28-982ai]  499a-500b;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [999s 
24-b5]  518a-b  /  Soul ,  bk  ii,  ch  5  [4i7bi7-28] 
648b-c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  7  3d-4a  / 
Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  13  164d-165b;  tr 
vi,  ch  2  189d-190b  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  iii, 
ch  2-3  216b-217b;  tr  v,  ch  i,  228c-229c; 
ch  7  231d-232b;  tr  ix,  ch  7  249b-c  /  Sixth 
Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  18,  291a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  10-11 
15b-16a;  bk  x,  par  8-38  73b-81a  /  City  of  God , 
bk  viii,  ch  6-7  268d-269d;  bk  xi,  ch  2-3 
323a-d;  bk  xix,  ch  18  523a-b  /  Christian 
Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  12  627c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  27-39 
650a-655b  esp  ch  27  650a;  bk  iv,  ch  5,  677b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  12, 
a  3  52c-53b;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  53b-54c;  q  14, 
a  1,  ans  75d-76c;  a  2,  rep  i  76d-77d;  q  18, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  105c-106b;  a  3,  ans  106b- 
107c;  q  85,  a  1,  ans  451c-453c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3,  rep  3  8b-9a;  part  ii-ii,  q  8,  a  i,  ans 
417a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  60a-b;  71c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  32d;  55b-d 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  xiv,  29b-31c  /  Meditations , 

vi  96b-103d  passim  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
119d-120c;  124d-125a;  postulate  i-ii  130d- 
131a;  axiom  v  131d-132a;  136d-137a;  157c-d; 
162d-165d;  211d-212a;  217c-d;  218c-d; 

219b-c;  228c-229c;  229d-230c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  10  376c-377a; 
prop  40,  schol  2— prop  44  388a-390a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  ii 
309b-313a  passim,  esp  sect  14  312b-d;  ch 
iii,  sect  2-5  313a-c;  ch  ix,  sect  2  349a; 
ch  xi,  sect  13-14  357d-358c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect  i 
405a-b;  sect  18  416b-c;  sect  27  418a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  227 
74b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  144b-145a;  157b-167b  esp 
157b-161a,  167b;  450a-451b;  453a-457a  esp 
453b,  455a 

6b(  1)  Sensitive  knowledge:  sense-perception 
as  knowledge;  judgments  of  perception 
and  judgments  of  experience 

7  Plato:  Phaedo ,  224a-225a;  231c-232a  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  esp  bk  vi,  386d- 
387a,  387d-388a,  bk  vii,  389b,  392c-393a  / 
Timaeus,  447b  /  Theaetetus ,  517b-536a  esp 
521d-526d,  533a-536a 


903 


6b(  1)  to  6b (2)  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  cm  19 
[99b20-ioob5]  136a-d  /  Topics ,  bk  ii,  cii  8 
[114*18-26]  159d-160a  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  cii  5 
[i88b26-i89a9]  264b-c  /  Heavens ,  bk  iii, 
ch  7  [3o6ai-i8]  397b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i, 
ch  1  [980*20^24]  499a;  [98ibio-i3]  499d- 
500a;  bk  iv,  ch  5  [1009^-17]  528d-529a; 
[ioiobi-iona2]  530a-c;  bk  xi,  ch  6  [io62b34- 
1063*9]  591a-b;  ch  7  [1064*4-9]  592b  / 

bk  11,  ch  5  647b-648d;  bk  iii,  ch  2  657d- 
659c 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch 
23  [73ia30-b5]  271c-d  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  7 
[i098*35-b8]  343d-344a;  bk  ii,  ch  9  [no9b20- 
23]  355c;  bk  vi,  ch  8  [1142*12-31]  391b-c;  bk 
vii,  ch  3  [1147*25-^9]  397c-398a 

10  Hippocrates:  Surgery ,  par  1  70b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [379- 
521]  49a-51a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  6,  llOc-lllc 

14  Plutarch:  Marcellus,  252  b-c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  6-7  3c-4a  / 
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  23  153d-154b;  ch 
26,  155c;  tr  iv,  ch  23-25  169c-17lb;  tr  vi, 
ch  1-2  189b-190b  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  v,  ch  i, 
228c-229c;  tr  ix,  ch  7  249b-c  /  Sixth  En¬ 
nead ,  tr  iii,  ch  18,  291a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  10-11 
15b-16a;  bk  iv,  par  15-17  23a-c;  bk  x,  par 
8-1 1  73b-74b  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii, 
ch  27-30  650a-651d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  5, 
a  4,  rep  1  25d-26c;  q  12,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3 
53b-54c;  q  14,  a  i,  ans  75d-76c;  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  1  76d-77d;  a  6,  rep  i  80a-81c;  a  ii,  ans 
and  rep  1-2  84c-85c;  a  12,  ans  85d-86d;  q  16, 
a  2  95c-96b;  q  17,  a  2  102a-d;  a  3,  ans  102d- 
103c;  q  18,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  105c-106b;  a  3, 
ans  106b-107c;  q  54,  a  5  288a-d;  q  57,  a  i, 
rep  2  295a-d;  a  2,  ans  295d-297a;  q  59,  a  i, 
rep  1  306c-307b;  q  75,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2 
380c-381b;  a  5,  ans  382a-383b;  q  76,  a  2, 
rep  4  388c-391a;  q  77,  a  5,  rep  3  403d-404c;  q 
78,  a  1,  ans  407b-409a;  aa  3-4  410a-413d; 
q  79,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  1-2  416a-417a;  a  6, 
ans  and  rep  1-2  419b-420d;  q  84,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  2  440d-442a;  a  2,  ans  442b-443c; 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  444d-446b;  a  6  447c- 
449a;  Q  85,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1,3  451c-453c; 
a  2  453d-455b;  a  3,  ans  455b-457a;  a  6, 
ans  458d-459c;  q  86,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2,4 
461c-462a;  a  3  463b-d;  q  87,  a  3,  rep  3  467b- 
468a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  82,  aa  3-4  971a-974c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  iv  [28- 
48]  111a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  49a- d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  285c-286a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  332a-335c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  41  109c-d; 
aph  50  111b;  bk  11,  aph  40  170c-173d 


31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iv,  53b  /  Medi¬ 
tations ,  1  75a-77c  passim;  11,  80c-81d;  iii, 
83d  84a;  vi  9 6b -103d  passim  /  Objections  and 
Replies ,  119d-120c;  124d-125a;  postulate  i- 
iii  130d-131a;  axiom  v  131d-132a;  162d- 
165d;  211a-b;  211d-212a;  228c-230c;  23la-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  axiom  4-5  373d; 
prop  1 1— 13  377b-378c;  postulate  5  380b; 
prop  14-17  380c-381d;  prop  19  382b-c;  prop 
22-29  383b-385a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  bk  iii,  rule  iii  270b- 
271a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  8-10  139b-140b;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  9 
270d-271a;  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  sect  14  312b-d;  ch 

iii,  sect  14  316b-d;  sect  21  319c;  ch  xi 
354c-358c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect  i 
405a-b;  sect  18  416b-c;  sect  25-33  417d- 
419a  passim;  sect  135-142  440a-441c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  108a-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  227 
74b-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  450a-471a  esp  453a-459b, 
469a-b,  470b-471a;  502a-525a  passim,  esp 
503a-505b,  508a;  564a-b 

6b( 2)  Memory  as  knowledge 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [mb24-3i] 
156d-157a;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i25b4— 14]  174c  / 
Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980*28-981*1]  499a-b 
/  Memory  and  Reminiscence ,  ch  i  [449bi]-cH  2 
[452*13]  690a-693d 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  25-TR 

iv,  ch  9  154d-163a  passim;  tr  vi,  ch  3  190b- 
191c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  12-38 
74b-81a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  9 
640c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  5,  677b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  54 
a  5  288a-d;  q  78,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  5  411d- 
413d;  q  79,  aa  6-7  419b-421c;  q  89,  a  6,  rep  i 
478b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  3  14b-15a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  70,  a  2,  rep  4 
896a-897d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  v  [34-42] 
112c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  50b-c;  53a-54a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  32d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  iii,  4c-d;  vii,  lOb-c;  xi 
17b-18b;  xii  18b-25a  passim  /  Meditations ,  v, 
95d-96a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  125a-b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  18,  schol 
382a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  iii, 
sect  21  118b-119a;  bk  ii,  ch  x,  sect  2  141b-c; 
bk  iv,  ch  1,  sect  8-9  308b-309b;  ch  xi, 
sect  11  357b-c;  ch  xvi,  sect  1-2  366d- 
367a 

53  James:  Psychology,  145a;  421a-422a  passim; 
424b-427a;  450a-45lb 


904  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6b(3)  to  6c(  1) 


(6b.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according  to 
the  faculties  involved  in  knowing.  6b (2) 
Memory  as  knowledge.) 

54  Freud:  Unconscious ,  428d  /  General  Intro¬ 
duction ,  484c-486a 

6b( 3)  Rational  or  intellectual  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  125a-b  /  Phaedo ,  224a-232d 
esp  224a-225a,  228b-232d  /  Republic ,  bk  vi- 
vii,  383d-398c  esp  bk  vi,  387a-388a,  bk  vii, 
389b,  393a-c  /  Theaetetus ,  534d-536a  / 

bk  x,  765b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [247bi-248a 
9]  330b-d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [98ob25- 
982ai]  499b-500b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vi,  ch  i  [ii39a6-n] 
387c;  ch  3-7  388b-390d 

12  Lucretius:  'Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [469- 
521]  50b-51a 

14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius ,  53b-c  /  Marcel - 
lus,  252b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  i  159a-d; 
tr  vi,  ch  2  189d-190b  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  v, 
ch  1,  228c-229c;  tr  ix,  ch  7  249b-c  /  5AM 
Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  18,  291a-b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  10  73d- 
74a;  par  16-19  75b-76b;  par  30  79b-c;  par  36 
80c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  31-38 
651d-654c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  14, 
a  1,  ans  75d-76c;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  76d-77d; 
aii,  ans  and  rep  1-2  84c-85c;  a  12,  ans  85d- 
86d;  q  16,  a  2  95c-96b;  q  17,  a  3  102d-103c; 
q  18,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1  105c-106b;  a  3,  ans 
106b-107c;  q  54  284d-288d  passim;  q  57,  a  i, 
rep  2  295a-d;  a  2,  ans  295d-297a;  q  59,  a  i, 
rep  1  306c-307b;  Q  78,  a  i,  ans  407b-409a; 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  4-6  411d-413d;  q  79  413d- 
427a;  qq  84-89  440b-480c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  qq 
57-58  35a-45c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  58a-61a;  65c-d; 
71c;  part  ii,  163a;  part  iv,  267a-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  32d 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  11  77d-81d  passim; 

vi  96b-103d  passim  /  Objections  and  Replies , 
119d-120c;  124d-125a;  def  i-ii  130a-b; 

axiom  v  131d-132a;  162d-165d;  228c-230c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  37-40  386b- 
388b;  prop  44,  corol  2-prop  46  390a-c; 
part  v,  prop  29  459b-d 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  ii, 
sect  1-8  309b-311a;  ch  iii,  sect  2-4  313a-c; 
ch  ix,  sect  2  349a;  ch  xi,  sect  13-14  357d- 
358c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  1 
405a-b;  sect  89  430b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  227 
74b-d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  299a-314b  esp  302b-304b, 
313b-314a 


6b (4)  Knowledge  in  relation  to  the  faculties  of 
understanding,  judgment,  and  reason; 
and  to  the  work  of  intuition,  imagina¬ 
tion,  and  understanding 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  23a-110d  esp  25b-c,  27c, 
28d-29d,  32a-c,  34a-c,  37b-39c,  41c-45b, 
48c-d,  52c-55a,  57d-59b,  65d-66d,  94b-95a, 
99a-101b,  109d-110d;  130b-c;  166c-171a; 

193a-195a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
282 b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385a-c 
/  Judgement,  46 la-4 76c;  493c-495a,c;  518a-d; 
542b-543c;  570b-572b 

53  James:  Psychology,  232b-235a 

6c.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according 
to  the  methods  or  means  of  knowing 

6<r(l)  Vision,  contemplation,  or  intuitive 
knowledge  distinguished  from  discur¬ 
sive  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  125a-126c  /  Symposium , 
150c-151a;  167a-d  /  Phaedo ,  224a-225a  / 
Republic ,  bk  vi-vii,  386d-389c  /  Seventh 
Letter,  809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  vii,  ch  10  [1036s 
1-8]  559b-c;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72bi3-29]  602d- 
603a;  ch  9  [1075^-11]  605c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  ch  8  [ii78b20-32] 
433 b-c 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1083b- 
1084b 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  18 
151  b-c;  tr  iv,  ch  1  159a-d  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr 
iii,  ch  3  216c-217b;  tr  v,  ch  1-2  228b-229d 
passim;  ch  7  231d-232b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ix,  par  23-25 
68a-c;  bk  xii,  par  16  102d-103a  /  City  of  God , 
bk  ix,  ch  16,  294a-b;  ch  22  296d-297a; 
bk  xi,  ch  2  323a-c;  ch  7  326a-c;  CH21 
333a-d;  ch  29  339a-b;  bk  xvi,  ch  6  426c- 
427a;  bk  xxii,  ch  29,  614b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12 
50b-62b  esp  a  10  59a-d;  Q  14,  a  i,  rep  2  75d- 
76c;  a  7  81d-82b;  a  9,  ans  83b-d;  a  12,  rep 
1-2  85d-86d;  a  13,  ans  and  rep  3  86d-88c; 
a  14  88d-89b;  a  15,  rep  2-3  89b-90b;  q  16,  a 
5,  rep  1  97c-98b;  q  19,  a  5,  ans  112d-113c;  q 
34,  a  1,  rep  2  185b-187b;  q  46,  a  2,  rep  3 
253a-255a;  q  57,  a  i,  rep  2  295a-d;  a  3,  ans 
and  rep  2  297b-298a;  q  58  300b-306b  esp 
a  4  302d-303c;  q  59,  a  i,  rep  i  306c-307b; 
q  60,  a  2,  ans  311a-d;  q  78,  a  4,  rep  6  411d- 
413d;  q  79,  a  4,  ans  417a-418c;  a  8  421c- 
422b;  q  85,  a  5  457d-458d;  q  86,  a  2,  ans 
462a-463a;  a  4,  ans  463d-464d;  part  i-ii, 
q  14,  a  1,  rep  2  677b-678a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  8 
416d-423b;  q  9,  a  1,  rep  i  423c-424b;  q  180, 
aa  3-6  609c-614d;  part  iii,  q  ii,  aa  3-4 
773d-775a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  92,  a  3  1034b- 
1037c 


905 


6c( 2)  to  6c(3)  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  ii  [37-45] 
108a;  xxx  [1-123]  I51d  153a;  xxxm  [46- 
145]  I56c-I57d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  15  I49a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [469-505]  185b- 
186a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  1-5  171a-173a;  277-288 
222b-224b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  ix, 
sect  2-3  349a-c 

42  Kant:  Pttre  Reason ,  33a-d;  52c-53b  /  Prac¬ 
tical  Reasony  320c-321b;  337a-c;  350c-351b  / 
Judgement ,  572d-574b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  349b- 
350a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  276a-b 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  874a-875a 

6c( 2)  The  distinction  between  immediate  and 
mediated  judgments:  induction  and  rea¬ 
soning,  principles  and  conclusions 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-3 
97a-100a;  ch  15  109a-b;  ch  22  [83b32-84b2] 
114c-115b;  ch  23  [84bi9-85ai]  115c-116a;  ch 
31  [8Sa5— 17]  120b-c;  ch  33  [88b30— 89*1]  121b-c; 
[89tti7-22]  121d;  bk  ii,  ch  9  128a-b;  ch  13 
[97b3I— 39]  133c;  ch  19  136a-137a,c  /  Topics , 
bk  i,  ch  12  148d  /  Physics ,  bk  viii,  ch  i  [252® 
I9~b5l  335d-336b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[994bi6-27]  513a-b;  bk  hi,  ch  2  [997^5-32] 

,  515d-516a;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [ioo5b5]-cH  4  [ioo6a 

12]  524c-525b;  ch  6  [1011^-14]  530d;  bk 
vii,  ch  17  [i04ib9-n]  565d;  bk  ix,  ch  10 
[i05ibi8-i052a4]  577d-578a,c;  bk  xi,  ch  i 
[1059^9-34]  587b;  ch  6  [io63b7~i2]  591d; 
ch  7  [io64a4— 9]  592b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [1098^ 5— b4] 
343d;  bk  vi,  ch  3  [1 139^5-34]  388c;  ch  6-7 
389d-390d;  ch  8  [1142^3-31]  391b-c;  ch  ii 
[n43a32-b5]  392d-393a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i, 
aa  7-8  7a-8d;  q  2,  aa  1-2  10d-12c;  q  12,  a  8, 
ans  57b-58b;  q  14,  a  i,  rep  2  75d-76c;  a  7, 
ans  and  rep  2-3  81d-82b;  q  17,  a '3,  rep  2 
102d-103c;  q  19,  a  5,  ans  112d-113c;  q  58, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  301d-302d;  a  4,  ans  302d- 
303c;  q  60,  a  2,  ans  311a-d;  q  79,  a  8,  ans 
421c-422b;  a  12,  ans  425c-426b;  q  85,  a  6, 
ans  458d-459c;  q  87,  a  i,  rep  i  465a-466c; 
part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  2  612a-613a;  a  5,  ans 
613a-614a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  2  36a-37b;  q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d-223a;  part 
ii— ii,  q  8,  a  1,  rep  2  417a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  58d-59a;  65c-d; 
71c 

30  Bacon:  /advancement  of  Learning ,  59c;  61  d; 
96d-97a  /  Novum  Organum ,  pref  105a-106d; 
bk  1  107a-136a,c  esp  aph  11-26  107d-108d, 
aph  69  116a-b,  aph  103-106  127d-128c;  bk 
ii,  aph  5,  139a;  aph  10  140c-d 


31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11,  2d  3a;  in,  4a  d;  vii, 
10c  12a;  ix,  14d;  xi  17b-18b;  xii-xiv,  20d- 
28b  /  Discourse ,  part  vi,  62a* b  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  123a  b;  125a  b;  224b, d 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  2- 
prop  42  388a-c;  prop  47,  schol  390c-391a; 
part  v,  prop  28  459b 
33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  1-5  I71a-173a 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  cii  ii, 
sect  i  103d'104a;  sect  4  104d'105a;  ch  iii, 
sect  23  119b-120a;  bk  iv,  ch  i,  sect  9-cH 
iii,  sect  4,  309b-313c;  ch  vii,  sect  i-ii  337a- 
342d  passim;  ch  ix,  sect  2-3  349a-c;  ch  xv, 
sect  1  365a-c;  sect  3  365d;  ch  xvii,  sect 
2-3  371d-372b;  sect  14-17  378c-379c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  39a-c;  66d-72c  esp  67d- 
68a;  99a-b;  109d-lllc;  211c-218d  /  Judge¬ 
ment ,  542d-543a 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a;  number 
83,  244b-c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  461c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  la-c 
53  James:  Psychology ,  144a-b;  167b;  453a-457a 
esp  453b-454a,  456a 

6c( 3)  The  doctrine  of  knowledge  as  reminis¬ 
cence:  the  distinction  between  innate 
and  acquired  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus ,  124a-126c  /  Menoy  179d- 
183a;  188d-189a  /  Phaedo ,  228a-230d  / 
Theaetetus ,  515d-517b 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[7ia26-b9]  97c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  19  [99^0-33] 
136a-b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  9  [992b24- 
993an]  511a-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Facidties ,  bk  i,  ch  12,  173a-b 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  ii  150a-151b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  4,  8b-c  / 
Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  25  154d-155c; 
tr  iv,  ch  5  160d-161b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  10  73d- 
74a;  par  16-19  75b-76b;  par  26-38  78a-81a  / 
City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  6,  269b-c  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  9  627a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  54, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  i  287b-288a;  q  55,  a  2  289d- 
290d;  q  57,  a  i,  rep  3  295a-d;  q  58,  a  1  300c- 
301a;  q  60,  a  i,  rep  3  310b-311a;  a  2,  ans 
311a-d;  q  84,  a  3  443d-444d;  a  4,  ans  444d- 
446b;  a  6,  ans  447c-449a;  q  89,  a  i,  rep  3 
473b-475a;  q  117,  a  i,  ans  595d-597c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  264d-265b 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  333d-334d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  lb-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  iv,  5c-d;  6d;  vi,  8d-9a; 
viii,  13c-d  /  Discourse,  part  v,  54c;  part 
vi,  62a  /  Meditations,  11  77d-81d  esp  81a-d; 
iii,  83b;  88c-d;  vi,  96d-97a  /  Objections  and 
Replies ,  120c-d;  140b-c;  215b-c;  224b,d-225a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  prop  23,  schol 
458c-d 


906  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6c( 4)  to  6<r(5) 


(6c*.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according  to 
the  methods  or  means  of  knowing.  6c( 3) 
The  doctrine  of  knowledge  as  reminiscence : 
the  distinction  between  innate  and  acquired 
knowledge.') 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  90d-91b;  bk 
i  95b,d-121a,c  passim;  bk  ii,  ch  i,  sect  6 
122  b-c;  ch  ix,  sect  6  139a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ii,  div  17, 
457b, d  [fn  1] 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113b-115a  /  Practical 
Reason ,  352c-353a  /  Judgement ,  551a-552c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  633a-635a;  851a-862a  esp 
851a-852b,  856a-858a,  859a-860a;  867a-868a; 
877b-878a;  879b-880a;  889a-b;  897a-b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  512b-513b; 

526c-d;  532b;  599a-b 

6c(4)  The  distinction  between  priori  and 

posteriori  knowledge:  the  transcendental, 
or  speculative,  and  the  empirical 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  iv> 
sect  6-8  325a-c;  ch  ix,  sect  i  349a;  ch  xii> 
sect  6-13  360a-362d;  ch  xvii,  sect  2,  371d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv  458a- 
463d  passim,  esp  div  20-21  458a-c,  div  30, 
462a;  sect  v,  div  34-38,  464b-466c;  sect  x, 
div  89  490b-c;  sect  xii,  div  131-132  508d- 
509d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  5a-d;  14a-108a,c  esp 
14a-20c,  23a-24a,  25b-26b,  27b-28b,  29d-33d, 
35b-36a,  41c-42b,  46a-48d,  57d-59b,  64b- 
66d;  115d-120c;  121a-d;  170d-171a;  172c- 
173a;  177d;  199a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals ,  253c-254d  /  Practical  Reason ,  307d- 
308b;  309b-d  /  Science  of  Right ,  405b-d  / 
Judgement ,  600d-603d  esp  603a-b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445a-447b  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d- 
158a 

53  James:  Psychology,  232b-238b  passim,  esp 
235a;  851a-897b  esp  851a-853a,  859a-862a, 
865b-866a,  868b-869a,  879b-880a,  889a-b, 
897a-b 

6c(5)  The  distinction  between  natural  and 
supernatural  knowledge:  knowledge 
based  on  sense  or  reason  distinguished 
from  knowledge  by  faith  or  through 
grace  and  inspiration 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  4:5-6  /  I  Kings, 
3:3-15;  4:29-34— (D)  III  Kings,  3:3-15; 
4:29-34  /  II  Chronicles ,  1:7-12 —(D)  II  Parali- 
pomenon,  1:7-12  /  Job,  28:28  /  Psalms,  111:10; 
119:97-104— (D)  Psalms,  110:10;  118:97-104 
/  Proverbs,  1:7;  2:5-6;  9:10  /  Isaiah,  11:1-4— 
(D)  Isaias,  11:1-4  /  Jeremiah ,  8:8-9— (P)  Jere~ 
mias,  8:8-9  /  Daniel,  1-2  esp  2:17-23 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  6-9  passim, 
esp  7:7,  7:15-21,  8:21,  9:13-18— (D)  OT, 
Bool^  of  Wisdom,  6-9  passim,  esp  7:7,  7:15- 


21,  8:21,  9:13-18  /  Ecclesiasticus,  1;  6:32-37; 
17:6-7,11;  24:23-27— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 
1;  6:33-37;  i7:5~6»9;  24:32-37 

New  T estament:  Matthew ,  1 1  .*25-27  /  Lu\e,  8 :4~ 
18  esp  8:10;  10:21-22;  21  :i2-i5  / 1  :i-i8; 
8:31-32;  10:37-38;  12:28-30;  14:10-12;  16:12- 
14;  20:24-29  /  Romans,  10:17  /  /  Corinthians, 
1:4-5;  1:17-2:16;  3:18-21;  8:1-2;  12:8-11  / 
//  Corinthians ,  1:12;  4:3-6;  12:1-6  /  Ephesians, 
1:15-18;  3:1-12  /  Colossians,  2:8  /  /  Thessalo- 
nians,  2:13  /  //  Thessalonians,  2:10-14  /  He¬ 
brews,  4:2;  11:1-3  /  James,  1:5;  3:13-18  /  / 
1:19-21 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  191d-192b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1  la-b; 
bk  iv,  par  25  25c;  bk  vi,  par  6-8  36c-37c; 
bk  vii,  par  16  48c-49a;  bk  viii,  par  28-29 
60d-61a;  bk  ix,  par  23-25  68a-c;  bk  xiii, 
par  46  123a-c  /  C/Vy  o/*  God,  bk  x,  ch  2 
299d-300a;  bk  xi,  ch  2-4,  323a-324a;  bk 
xix,  ch  18  523a-b;  bk  xxi,  ch  5  563d-564d; 
bk  xxii,  ch  4-5  588b-590a;  ch  7  591c-d  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  40  655b-656a; 
ch  42  656c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i  3a- 
10c;  q  2,  a  2,  rep  1  lld-12c;  q  8,  a  3,  ans  and 
rep  4  36b-37c;  q  12  50b-62b  esp  aa  11-13 
59d-62b;  q  32,  a  1  175d-178a;  q  46,  a  2 
253a-255a;  q  56,  a  3  294a-d;  q  57,  a  5  299b- 
300b;  q  58,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  300c-301a; 
aa  5-7  303c-306b;  q  62,  a  7  322d-323b;  q  64, 
a  1,  ans  334a-335c;  q  84,  a  5  446c-447c;  q  86, 
a  2,  rep  1  462a-463a;  q  88,  a  1,  ans  469a- 
471c;  a  3,  rep  1  472c-473a;  q  89,  a  i,  rep  3 
473b-475a;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  475a-d;  a  3, 
rep  3  475d-476c;  a  4,  ans  476c-477a;  a  8 
479c-480c;  q  94  501c-506a;  q  113,  a  i,  rep  i 
576a-d;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  aa  3-8  624b-629c; 
q  4,  aa  2-3  630b-631d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  62, 
a  3  61c-62b;  q  67,  a  3  83b-84d;  q  ioo,  a  4, 
rep  1  253d-255a;  q  108,  a  2,  rep  i  332b- 
333d;  q  109,  a  1  338b-339c;  q  no,  a  3,  rep  i 
350a-d;  a  4,  ans  350d-351d;  q  112,  a  5  359c- 
360c;  part  11-11,  q  1,  aa  4-5  382c-384b;  q  2, 
aa  3-4  392d-394b;  a  10  399b-400b;  q  4  402a- 
409d;  qq  8-9  416d-426c;  q  19,  a  7  469d-470c; 
Q  45  598c-603c;  q  188,  a  5,  rep  2-3  679d- 
681a;  part  iii,  qq  9-12  763b-779d;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  92  1025b-1037c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  iii 
[16-45]  56a-b;  xvii  [13-45]  78c-79a;  paradise, 
ii  [37-45]  108a;  iv  [124-132]  112a;  v  [1-12] 
112a-b;  xix  [22-66]  135b-d;  xxiv  [52—147] 
143b-144a;  xxx  [1-123]  151d-153a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  52a-b;  66a-c; 
69b;  83b;  part  ii,  137b-c;  149c-d;  160b-c; 
163a-b;  part  iii,  165a-166a;  172d-173a; 
241c-242a;  part  iv,  267a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  98b-99a;  208d-209c; 
212a-215b;  238c-239c;  250a-b;  267c-268a; 
273a-b 


5 dto  6d(  1)  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE  907 


30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  2c-4c; 
17b-c;  19b-c;  39d-40a;  41b  d:  54c-55d;  95d- 
lOld  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  apii  65  114b-c; 
aph  89  124a-d 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  in,  4d-5a  /  Discourse , 
part  1,  43c  /  Meditations ,  69a-71a,c;  m,  88d 
89a  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  125c-126b;  168b- 
169a:  232b;  284d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [1-55]  135b- 
136b;  bk  vii  [109-130]  219b-220a;  bk  xii 
[552-587]  33la-332a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  27a;  147b;  163a- 

166b  passim  /  Pensees ,  184-229  205a-213b; 
233,  214a-b;  245  218b;  248  219a;  265-290 
221b-225a;  425-427  243b-244b;  561-567 

272b-273b;  585-588  277a-b  /  Geometrical 
Demonstration,  440a- b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  ix, 
sect  23  291b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  vii,  sect  ii,  340b-c; 
ch  xvi,  sect  14  371b-c;  ch  xvii,  sect  23- 
ch  xviii,  sect  11  380b-384b;  ch  xix,  sect  4 
385a-b;  sect  14  387d-388a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 
55,  474d-475a;  sect  x,  div  86  488d-489b; 
div  101  497a-b;  sect  xii,  div  132,  509c 

37  Fielding:  Pom  Jones,  182a-c;  379c -380a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  189b-190d  passim, 
esp  190c-d;  307d-309d 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  346b-347a;349b-351a 
/  Judgement,  579a;  588d-589c;  604d-606d 
esp  606a-d;  607d-609b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  455a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  394a-b;  395a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  349d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [386-481]  llb-14a; 
part  11  [11,441-458]  278b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  196b-197b; 
bk  vi,  248d-249a;  bk  xv,  630d-631c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  1, 
lla-b;  bk  vi,  168b-c;  bk  vii,  177b-180a;  bk 
xi,  338a-b;  bk  xii,  396d-397a 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  874a-d; 
877d-879d  passim,  esp  879c-d 

Gd .  The  classification  of  knowledge  according 
to  the  degrees  of  assent 

6d(  1)  The  distinction  between  certain  and 
probable  knowledge 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  9  28a-29d  / 
Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  13  [32^4-23]  48b-d; 
bk  ii,  ch  25  91a-b  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i, 
ch  2  97d-99a  esp  [72a25~b4]  98d-99a;  ch  33 
[89a4-io]  121c  /  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [100*25- 
b23]  143a-b;  bk  v,  ch  3  [i3ibi9— 30]  182b-c  / 
Meteorology,  bk  1,  ch  7  [344*5-7]  450b  / 
Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  3  [ioo5b8-34]  524c- 
525a;  bk  vi,  ch  1  [i025bi— i 6]  547b;  bk  xi,  ch 
7  [1064*4-9]  592b;  bk  xii,  ch  8  [1074*14-16] 
604c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  3  [1  i39bi4— 34] 
388b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [n46b23~3o]  396d-397a 


/  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1355*14-17]  594b;  ch  2 
[1357*2  $  A»24 ]  596d-597c;  bk  ii,  ch  25  [i402b 
13  1403*17]  652b  653a 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  505a-506a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  3 
266a  d 

19  Aquinas:  Surnma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i, 
a  8,  ans  and  rep  2  7c-8d;  q  14,  a  3,  ans  77d- 
78b;  a  13  86d-88c;  q  32,  a  i,  rep  2  175d-178a; 
q  47,  a  1,  rep  3  256a-257b;  q  57,  a  3,  ans 
297b-298a;  Q  58,  a  7,  rep  3  305c-306b;  q  79, 
a  9,  rep  3-4  422b-423d;  q  82,  a  2,  ans  432d- 
433c;  q  84,  a  1,  ans  440d-442a;  q  85,  a  6, 
ans  458d-459c;  q  86,  a  4,  ans  463d-464d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  3  14b-15a;  q  57,  a  2,  rep  3  36a-37b;  q  94, 
a  4,  ans  223d-224d;  part  ii-ii,  q  i,  aa  4-5 
382c-384b;  q  4,  a  8  409a-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60c-61a;  65b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  240c-241b;  271b-273b; 
292a-d;  499c-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  33 
16lb-d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  1-11  la-3b;  xii,  22a-b; 
23a-c  /  Discourse,  part  i,  43d;  part  ii,  47a- 
48a;  part  iii,  49d-51a;  part  iv,  51b-52a; 
53c-d;  part  vi,  63d  /  Meditations ,  1-11  75a- 
81d;  iii,  81d-82d;  v,  95b-96a  /  Objections  and 
Replies,  119d-120c;  123b;  124b-125b;  postu¬ 
late  1— iii  130d-131a;  postulate  vi-vii  131c; 
168b-d;  260d-261a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  ii,  scHOL358d- 
359b;  part  ii,  prop  24-45  383c-390b  esp 
prop  43,  schol  388d-389b;  prop  49,  schol 
391d-394d;  part  iii,  prop  17,  schol  401d- 
402a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  27a-44a  /  Pensees, 
233-241  213b-217b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  intro  93a-95d 
passim;  bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  14  316b-d;  sect 
24-29  320c-323a  esp  sect  29  322c-323a; 
ch  iv  323d-329a  passim,  esp  sect  6-8  325a-c, 
sect  18  328d-329a;  ch  vi  331b-336d;  ch  ix, 
sect  1  349a;  ch  xi,  sect  9-12  356d-357d; 
ch  xii,  sect  6-14  360a-363a  passim;  ch  xiv, 
sect  i-ch  xvi,  sect  3  364b-367c;  ch  xvii, 
sect  2  371d-372b;  sect  14-17  378c-379c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv,  div 
20-21  458a-c;  div  30,  462a;  sect  vi,  469d 
[fn  1] 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  165a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  348a, c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  335d-336a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c;  194b-c;  211c- 
218d;  228c-d;  230c-233d;  240b-243c  /  Prac¬ 
tical  Reason,  330d-331a  /  Judgement ,  601  d; 
603a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  274b-293b  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  140, 
50b-c;  additions,  i  115a-d;  91,  131b-c 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  463d 


908 

{6 d.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according  to 
the  degrees  of  assent.) 

6d(2)  The  types  of  certainty  and  the  degrees  of 
probability 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  25  91a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [io94bi2-28] 
339d-340a;  ch  7  [1098^5-35]  343d;  bk  ii, 
ch  2  [1104^-9]  349b-c;  bk  hi,  ch  3  [ni2a3o- 
bi2]  358b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  1  5c-6a;  q  54,  a  5  288a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q  4, 
a  8  409a-d;  q  8,  a  8  422c-423b;  q  9,  a  1  423c- 
424b;  a  2,  ans  424b-425a;  q  18,  a  4,  ans  464c- 
465a;  part  hi,  q  7,  a  3,  rep  3  747b-748a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  53c-54a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  240c-241b 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  126  134b 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  hi,  4a-5a  /  Discourse , 
part  11,  45a;  part  iii,  48b-51a  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  124d-125a;  126a-b;  206c-207a; 
226d;  243c-d 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  102a-108a  / 

Pensees,  907-924  349a-352a  passim 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  ii 
309b-313a  passim,  esp  sect  i  309b-d,  sect 
6-7  310c-311a,  sect  14  312b-d;  ch  xi,  sect  3 
355a-b;  ch  xv-xvi  365a-371c;  ch  xvii,  sect 
14-17  378c-379c;  ch  xix,  sect  i  384c-d 

35  Hume:  Human  Under standingy  sect  vi  469d- 
470d;  sect  ix,  div  82  487b-c;  sect  x,  div 
86-91  488d-491c  passim,  esp  div  87  489b-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  348a, c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  hi,  408a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  5a-b;  66d-72c  esp  67d- 
68a;  202b-203c;  240b-243c  /  Intro.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals ,  387a-d  /  Judgement ,  542  d- 
543a;  600d-603d 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  463d  /  Beyond 
the  Pleasure  Principle ,  661c-662b  /  Ndw  /fl/ro- 
ductory  Lectures,  818c-d 

6d( 3)  The  distinction  between  adequate  and 
inadequate,  or  perfect  and  imperfect 
knowledge 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  18 
523a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  12, 
aa  7-8  56a-58b;  a  12  60d-61c;  q  14,  a  3  77d- 
78b;  a  5,  ans  79a-80a;  a  6  80a-81c;  q  17,  a  4, 
ans  103c-104b;  q  56,  a  3,  rep  1-2  294a-d; 
q  57,  a  5,  rep  2  299b-300b;  q  84,  a  2,  ans 
442b-443c;  a  7,  ans  and  rep  i  449b-450b;  q 
85,  a  3  455b-457a;  a  7  459c-460b;  a  8,  rep  i 
460b-461b;  q  89,  a  i,  ans  473b-475a;  a  2 
475a-d;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2,4  475d-476c; 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  2  476c-477a;  q  117,  a  i, 
rep  4  595d-597c;  part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  2,  rep  2 
737d-738c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  67, 


6^/(2)  to  6e(\)  { 

a  3,  ans  83b-84d;  part  iii,  q  9,  a  3,  rep  2 
765b-766b;  q  10  767b-772a 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  333b 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  ii-nr  2a-5a  /  Objections 
and  Replies ,  127b-c;  postulate  vi-vii  131c; 
152d-153c 

31  SprNOZA:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  def  4  373b;  prop 
ii,  corol  377b-c;  prop  24-43  383c-389b; 
part  iv,  prop  64  444b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxi  239b-243c  passim,  esp  sect  6  240d-241d, 
sect  13  243a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  30-31 
276d-277c;  sect  37  279b;  sect  40  280a-b; 
sect  43-47  280c-282b  passim 

42  Kant:  Pure  Re  a  son  ,2b  125b[fm];193a-c; 

240b-243c  esp  240d-241a  /  Judgement ,  498b- 
499c;  603a-b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  318b-319a;  668a-671a  esp 
669a-b;  676a-677a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  560c-561b 

6e.  The  classification  of  knowledge  according 
to  the  end  or  aim  of  the  knowing 

6^(1)  The  distinction  between  theoretic  and 
practical  knowledge:  knowing  for  the 
sake  of  knowledge  and  for  the  sake  of 
action  or  production 

7  Plato:  Charmides ,  7d-8a  /  Republic ,  bk  vii, 
391d-394d  esp  393c,  394b-c  /  Statesman ,  581a 
/  Laws ,  bk  vii,  728b-729a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  6  [i45ai2— 18] 
198d  /  Heavens ,  bk  iii,  ch  7  [30(^14-18] 
397b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  499a-501c 
esp  ch  2  [982a3o-b27]  500c-501a;  bk  11,  ch  i 
[993b20-23]  512a;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [ioo8b2-32] 
527d-528b;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [io25bi8-28]  547d; 
bk  xi,  ch  7  [io64aio-i9]  592b-c;  bk  xii,  ch  9 
[io74b35-io75a2]  605c  /  Soul ,  bk  i,  ch  3 
[407a22~3o]  636d-637a;  bk  iii,  ch  7  663c- 
664b;  ch  9  [432b26-433a9]  665c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  339d-340b;  ch  7 
[1098^5-35]  343d;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [no3b26-no4a 
9]  349b-c;  ch  4  350d-351b  esp  [no5bi2-i8] 
351a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  3  [ni2a30-bi2]  358b-c; 
bk  vi,  ch  2  [ii39a2i-bi4]  387d-388b;  ch  5 
389a-c;  ch  7  390a-d;  ch  8  [ii42ai3-i9] 
391b;  ch  12  [1 1 43b  1 7—1 1 4 4a5 ]  393b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  26  131b-132b; 
bk  iii,  ch  6  181d-182b 

14  Plutarch:  Marcellus,  252a-255a 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest ,  bk  i,  5a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  4  266d- 
267c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  1,  a  4 
5a-b;  a  5,  ans  5c-6a;  q  14,  a  i,  rep  2  75d-76c; 
a  16  90b-91b;  q  15,  a  3  93b-94a;  q  34,  a  3 
188b-189a;  q  79,  a  9,  ans  422b-423d;  aa  ii- 
13  424d-427a;  q  84,  a  8,  ans  450b-451b; 
q  86,  a  1,  rep  2  461c-462a;  a  3,  contrary 
463b-d;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  6,  rep  2  614a-c;  q  3, 
a  5  626b-627a;  q  7,  a  2  652d-653c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


6e( 2)  to  la  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE  909 


20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  56, 
a  3,  ans  31a-32b;  q  57,  a  5,  rep  3  39a-40a; 
a  6,  ans  and  rep  2-3  40a-41a;  q  94,  a  4,  ans 
223d'224d;  part  ii-ii,  q  8,  a  3  418c-419a;  q  9, 
a  3  425b-d;  q  45,  a  3  600c-601a;  q  179,  a  2, 
ans  607a-c;  part  iii,  q  ii,  a  i,  rep  3  772b- 
773a;  q  13,  a  i,  rep  3  780a-781b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  x  [109- 
1 14]  121b-c;  xiii  [37—1 1 1  ]  125d-126c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  60a-61a;  part  iv, 
267a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  55d-62a  esp  56b-57b; 
63d-77d  passim,  esp  69d-72a;  327b-d;  520b- 
522a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  16d-17a; 
42a-c;  46c-47c;  55b-d;  65d-66a;  69c;  86b-c 
/  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  3  107b;  aph  66 
114d-115c;  bk  11,  aph  1-9  137a-140c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  1  la-2a  /  Discourse ,  part  i, 
44a-c;  part  iii,  48b-49b;  part  vi,  60d-61c; 
66d-67a  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  126a-b; 
162d;  206c-207a;  237b-c;  243c-d 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  102a-108a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  intro,  sect 
5-6  94b-95a;  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect  i  103d-104a; 
sect  3-4  104b-105a;  bk  iv,  ch  xi,  sect  8 
356b-d;  ch  xxi  394d-395a,c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect  2 
405b;  sect  1 19-122  436c-437c  passim;  sect 
131  439b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i  451a- 
455b  esp  div  1-5  451a-453b;  sect  viii,  div  65, 
479b-c;  sect  xi,  div  104  498b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-13d;  190c-191a;  234c- 
235a  /  Fund .  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
253a-d;  260d-261b;  266a-d{  271a-c;  283d- 
284d  /  Practical  Reason,  291a-297c;  300d  [fn  1]; 
307d-314d  esp  310a-b;  329a-330c  /  Intro. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  388a-d;  390b,d-391a  / 
judgement,  461a-475d  esp  463a-467a,  474b- 
475d;  515b-c;  523d-524a;  578a-b 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  341d-342d; 
346d-347a  /  Utilitarianism ,  445c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  227, 
74b-c;  additions,  i  115a-d  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  part  iv,  360d-361a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  361d-365c 

53  James:  Psychology,  656b 

6e( 2)  The  types  of  practical  knowledge:  the 
use  of  knowledge  in  production  and 
in  the  direction  of  conduct;  technical 
and  moral  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  5c-6d  /  Lysis,  16c-18b  / 
Euthydemus,  70b-c;  74b-c  /  Statesman,  580d- 
582a  /  Laws,  bk  i,  649c-d 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  6  [i45ai2-i8] 

198d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  339a-d;  bk  ii, 
ch  4  350d-351b;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [ii39a32-b5] 
388a;  ch  4-5  388d-389c 


19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  21, 
a  2,  ans  125c  d;  q  65,  a  2,  rep  3  340b  341b; 
part  mi,  q  34,  a  1,  rep  3  768c-769d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
aa  3-6  37b-41a;  q  58,  a  2,  rep  i  42a-43a;  a  5, 
rep  2  44d-45c;  q  65,  a  i,  rep  4  70b-72a;  q  93, 
a  1,  ans  215b,d-216c;  q  97,  a  2,  rep  i  236d- 
237b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  60d-61c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  149d-150a;  234c-235a  / 
Fund.  Prin .  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  253a-255d 
esp  253a-254b;  260d-261b;  264b-d;  266b-d; 
271a-d;  283d-287d  /  Practical  Reason,  305d- 
307d;  314d-321b  esp  318c-32lb;  329a-330c; 
354d-355d;  357c-360d  /  Pref  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics,  367c  /  Intro.  Met  a  physic  of 
Morals,  383a-d;  387b;  388a-d;  390b,d-391a 
/  judgement,  463a-467a;  515b-c;  523d-524a; 
596c-598b 

54  Freud:  Psycho- Analytic  Therapy,  127a,c 

7.  Comparison  of  human  with  other  kinds  of 
knowledge 

la.  Human  and  divine  knowledge 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3:1-7,22  /  I  Samuel , 
16:7— (D)  I  Kings,  16:7  /  Job,  11:1-12;  12:16- 
17;  28:12-25;  38-41  /  Psalms,  92:5-6;  94:11; 
139 —(D)  Psalms,  91 :6- 7;  93  :ii  ;  138  /  Proverbs, 
20:24  /  Ecclesiastes,  3:10-11;  8:16-17;  1 1  :i— 6 
/  Isaiah,  40:12-31  esp  40:28;  44:24-25;  55:8-9 
—(D)  Isaias,  40:12-31  esp  40:28;  44:24-25; 
55:8-9  /  Jeremiah,  10:7-8,12-15;  51:15-18— 
(D)  Jeremias,  10:7-8,12-15;  51:15-18 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  9:13-17 —(D) 
OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  9:13-17  /  Ecclesiasticus, 
1:1-10;  23:18-20;  24:24-29;  42:17-22— (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  1:1-10;  23:25-29;  24:35- 
39;  42:17-23 

New  Testament:  Romans,  11:33-36  /  /  Corin¬ 
thians,  1:17-2:1 6;  3:18-21 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [86-103]  2a-b 
/  Prometheus  Bound  [526-554]  45b-c 

5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [570- 
575]  416a  /  Bacchantes  [386-433]  343a^b 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  125a-126c  /  Apology,  203a 
/  Parmenides ,  489d-490d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982b28- 
983au]  501a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [io72bi4~29] 
602d-603a;  ch  9  605a-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  8  [1 178^0-23] 
433bc 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  3  108b-c; 
ch  12,  119d'120a;  ch  14  120d-121c;  bk  iv,  ch 
ii,  240d-241a 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  2-4  216b- 
217d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v,  par  5  28b-c; 
bk  xi,  par  6  90c-d;  par  41  99a-b;  bk  xiii,  par 
46  123a-c  /  City  of  God,  bk  ix,  ch  22  296d- 
297a;  bk  xi,  ch  10,  328c-d;  ch  21  333a-d; 
bk  xii,  ch  18  354b-d;  bk  xxii,  ch  29,  614b-d 


910 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  Comparison  of  human  with  other  kinds  of 
knowledge,  la.  Human  and  divine  knowl¬ 
edge.) 

/  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  8-io  626c-627b; 
ch  12-14  627c-628b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  1,  q  1,  a  2 
4a-c;  a  4  5a-b;  a  5,  ans  5c-6a;  a  6  6b-7a;  a  8, 
rep  2  7c-8d;  q  3,  a  1,  rep  1  14b-15b;  a  6, 
rep  1  18c-19a;  q  8,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2-4  36b- 
37c;  q  12,  a  1,  rep  1  50c-51c;  a  4  53b-54c; 
aa  7-8  56a-58b;  q  14  75c-91b;  q  16  94b-100d 
passim;  q  18,  aa  3-4  106b-108c;  qq  22-24 
127c-143c  passim;  q  27,  aa  1-2  153b-155b; 
q  28,  a  4,  rep  1-2  160c-161d;  q  34  185a-189a 
passim;  q  44,  a  3  240b-241a;  q  46,  a  2,  rep  3 
253a-255a;  q  55,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  289a-d; 
a  3,  ans  291a-d;  q  57,  a  i,  ans  295a-d;  a  2, 
ans  295d-297a;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i  297b- 
298a;  a  4,  ans  298a-299a;  q  62,  a  9,  ans  324a- 
325b;  q  79,  a  1,  ans  414a-d;  a  2,  ans  414d- 
416a;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1,5  417a-418c;  a  10, 
rep  2  423d-424d;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3 
442b-443c;  q  85,  a  4,  ans  457a-d;  a  5,  ans 
457d-458d;  q  86,  a  2,  rep  i  462a-463a;  a  4, 
ans  463d-464d;  q  87,  a  1,  ans  465a-466c; 
a  3,  ans  467b-468a;  q  89,  a  i,  ans  473b- 
475a;  a  4,  ans  476c-477a;  q  93,  a  4,  ans  494c- 
495b;  part  1— 11,  q  2,  a  3,  ans  617b-618a;  q  3, 
a  8,  rep  2  628d-629c;  q  14,  a  i,  rep  2  677b- 
678a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologicay  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  3,  rep  1  209d-210c;  q  no,  a  2,  rep  2  349a-d; 
a  4,  ans  350d-351d;  part  ii-ii,  q  45,  a  6, 
rep  1-2  602b-603c;  q  180,  a  8,  rep  3  616a-d; 
part  hi,  q  9,  a  1  763b-764c;  a  4,  ans  766b- 
767b;  q  10  767b-772a;  q  13,  a  i,  rep  2-3  780a- 
781b;  q  15,  a  3  789d-790c;  a  10,  ans  795b- 
796a;  part  hi  suppl,  q  92,  a  3  1034b-1037c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  iv  [124— 
132]  112a;  xix  [22-66]  135b-d;  xxi  [73-102] 
139a-b;  xxvi  [103-108]  146d-147a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
136-154  106a-108b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  162c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  213a-b;  238c-239c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  17b-c;  98d- 
99b  /  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  23  108c; 
bk  11,  aph  15  149a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  152d-153c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  17,  schol  362c- 
363c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  hi  [654-735]  149b- 
151b;  bk  vii  [109-130]  219b-220a;  bk  viii 
[66-197]  233b-236b;  [412-418]  241a  /  Samson 
Agonistes  [60-62]  340b-341a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  793,  326b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  i, 
sect  10,  123b;  ch  x,  sect  9  143a-c;  ch  xv, 
sect  12  165b-c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  34  213a-b; 
bk  hi,  ch  vi,  sect  3  268d;  sect  n-12  271b- 
272b;  bk  iv,  ch  x,  sect  5-6  350a-c 


la  to  7c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  33a- d;  5 2c- 53b  /  Prac¬ 
tical  Reason,  344a-c;  350c-351b  /  Judgement, 
572d-574b;  579a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1765-1784]  42b 

53  James:  Psychology ,-  669a-b 

lb.  Human  and  angelic  knowledge 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xii,  par  12, 102a; 
par  16  102d-103a;  par  20  103c-d;  par  23  104b-c 
J  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  25  283b-c;  bk  ix, 
ch  21-22  296b-297a;  bk  xi,  ch  29  339a-b; 
bk  xvi,  ch  6  426c-427a;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b, d- 
587b;  ch  29,  614b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  12, 
a  4  53b-54c;  a  10,  ans  and  rep  2  59a-d;  qq 
54-58  284d-306b  passim;  q  59,  a  i,  rep  i  306c- 
307b;  q  60,  a  2,  ans  311a-d;  q  64,  a  i,  rep  2 
334a-335c;  q  79,  a  8,  ans  and  rep  3  421c- 
422b;  a  10,  ans  423d-424d;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  3  442b-443c;  a  3,  rep  i  443d-444d; 
a  7,  ans  449b-450b;  q  85,  a  i,  ans  451c- 
453c;  a  5,  ans  457d-458d;  q  87,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  2-3  465a-466c;  a  3,  ans  467b-468a;  q  89, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  1,3  475d-476c;  a  4,  ans  476c- 
477a;  qq  106-107  545c-552b  passim;  q  108, 
a  1,  ans  552c-553c;  q  117,  a  2  597c-598c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  1,  ans  12b-13c;  PART  III,  q  9,  a  3,  ans  765b- 
766b  ;  a  4,  ans  766b-767b;  q  ii,  a  3,  rep  3 
773d-774c;  a  4  774c-775a;  a  6,  ans  and  rep  i 
775d-776b;  q  12,  a  4  779a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xix  [22- 
66]  135b-d;  xxix  [70-81]  151a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  15  149a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  hi  [654-735] 
149b-151b;  bk  v  [388-505]  183b-186a  esp 
[404-413]  184a,  [469-490]  185b-186a;  [544- 
576]  187a-b;  bk  vi  [316-353]  203a-204a;  bk 
viii  [66-75]  233b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  285  224a;  793,  326b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  x, 
sect  9  143a-c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  36  213c-d; 
bk  hi,  ch  vi,  sect  3  268d;  ch  xi,  sect  23 
305a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  hi,  sect  6,  315a-b;  sect  23 
320a-c;  ch  xvii,  sect  14  378c-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  81 
428c-d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  318b;  394a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
285a-287d  /  Practical  Reason,  354d-355d  / 
Judgement,  572d-574b 

lc .  Knowledge  in  this  life  compared  with 

knowledge  in  the  state  of  innocence  and 
knowledge  hereafter 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:19-20;  3:1-22  esp 

3:5>  3:22 

New  Testament:  I  Corinthians,  13:12 
7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-126d  /  Meno ,  179d- 
180b  /  Phaedo,  228a-230c 

17  Plotinus  :  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  1-5  159a- 
161b 


Id  to  Sa  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE  911 


18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ix,  par  23-25 
68a-c;  bk  x,  par  7  73a;  bk  xiii,  par  18,  115c  / 
City  of  God ,  bk  xxii,  ch  29  614b-616d  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  37-38  635b  d; 
bk  11,  ch  7  638d-639c 

19  Aquinas:  Snmma  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i, 
a  9,  rep  3  8d-9c;  q  12  50b-62b  esp  aa  ii- 
13  59d-62b;  q  62,  a  i,  ans  317d-318c;  q  84, 
a  5  446c-447c;  q  88,  a  i,  ans  469a-471c; 
q  89  473a-480c;  q  94  501c-506a;  q  ioi  522c- 
523d 

20  Aquinas:  Snmma  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  67, 
aa  2-3  82c-84d;  q  69,  a  2,  rep  3  97b-98c; 
part  ii-ii,  q  180,  a  5  611d-613a;  part  iii, 
q  11,  a  1,  rep  2  772b-773a;  a  2,  ans  and  rep 
1-2  773a-d;  part  iii  suppl,  q  72,  a  i,  rep  i 
917c-919a;  Q  82,  a  3,  rep  4  971a-972d;  q  92, 
a  1,  rep  3,5,13,15  1025c-1032b;  a  2,  ans 

[  103 2  b- 1034b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  x  [94-108] 
14c-d;  purgatory,  iii  [16-45]  56a-b;  para¬ 
dise,  xv  [37-69]  128d-129a;  xix  [22-66] 
135b-d;  xx  [130-148]  138a-b;  xxi  [73-102] 
139a-b;  xxvi  [91-108]  146d-147a;  xxx  [1-123] 
151d-153a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iii,  88d-89a 
33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  242,  218a;  425-427  243b- 
244b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  90 
130b-d 

I  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
168a-c 

Id,  The  knowledge  of  men  and  brutes 

5  Euripides:  Trojan  Women  [669-672]  275d 
7  Plato:  Laches ,  35b-36a  /  Republic ,  bk  ii, 
320b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [98015 
25-27]  499b  /  So«/,  bk  iii,  ch  3  [427^-14] 
659d-660a;  [428*20-24]  660c;  ch  10  [433*8- 
13]  665d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[488^4-27]  9d;  bk  vm,  ch  1  [588ai8-b4] 
114b,d  /  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  23 
[73ia3°-b5]  271c-d  /  Ethics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [1147b 
2-5]  397d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  12, 
173a-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  6,  llOc-lllc; 
ch  9, 114c-d;  ch  28, 134b;  bk  ii,  ch  8, 146a-c; 
bk  iv,  ch  7,  233a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  16  262d- 
263a, c;  bk  vi,  sect  23  276b;  bk  ix,  sect  9 
292b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  105c-106b;  q  78,  a  4,  ans 
and  rep  4-6  411d-413d;  q  79,  a  6,  rep  i  419b- 
420d;  a  8,  rep  3  421c-422b;  Q  84,  a  2,  rep  i 
442b-443c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  52b;  53a-b;  53d- 
54a;  63a;  79b-c;  part  ii,  lOOa-c;  part  iv,  267b 
25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  215a-223b 


30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  73  117d- 
118a;  bk  11,  aph  40,  173c  d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  59c-60b  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  156a-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  vii  [506-516]  228a; 
bk  vm  [369-451]  240a-242a;  bk  ix  [549-566] 
259b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  357a-358a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  12-15  140c-141a;  ch  xi,  sect  4-11  144d- 
146a;  ch  xxvii,  sect  8  221a-222a;  bk  iii, 
ch  vi,  sect  12,  272b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
ii  407b-408a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  ix  487b- 
488c;  sect  xii,  div  118,  504c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  ld-2a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  338a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  164a-165c  /  Practical 
Reason ,  316c-317a  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Ele¬ 
ments  of  Ethics ,  372a-b  /  judgement ,  479a-c; 
584d-585c;  602b, d  [fn  1] 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  244a-245b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  288d-289a;  290c- 
298c  passim,  esp  292a-293a,  294d-295a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  678b-686b;  704a-b 

8.  The  use  and  value  of  knowledge 

8a.  The  technical  use  of  knowledge  in  the 
sphere  of  production:  the  applications 
of  science  in  art 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  5:22  /  Exodus ,  31:1- 
11 ;  35:3°-36:8 

5  Aeschylus  :  Prometheus  Bound  [442-506]  44c- 
45a 

7  Plato:  Lysis ,  16c-18b  /  Protagoras ,  43b-45a  / 

Euihydemus ,  70a-c  /  Ion  142a-148a,c/  Gorgias , 
261a-262a  /  Republic ,  bk  vii,  392a-b;  394b-d 
/  Statesman ,  580d-581a  /  Philebus ,  633a-634b 
/  bk  iv,  684c-685a 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  19 

[iooa6-9]  136c  /  Physics ,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [194^1- 
bi3)  270c-271a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  499a- 
500b;  bk  vii,  ch  7  [i032a25~i033a4]  555b- 
556a;  ch  9  [1034^1-32]  557c;  bk  ix,  ch  2 
571c-572a;  ch  5  [i047b3i-i048aio]  573a-b; 
ch  7  [io49a5-i2]  574c-d;  bk  xi,  ch  7  [1064s 
10-14]  592b-c  /  Sensible ,  ch  i 

[436*1 6-b2]  673b  /  Youth,  Life ,  Breathing , 

ch  27  [48ob2i-3i]  726d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  i  339a-b;  ch  7 
[1098*28-32]  343d;  bk  11,  ch  4  [no5*i7-b4] 
350d-351a;  bk  vi,  ch  4  388d-389a 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine  la-9a,c  esp 
par  1-4  la-2c,  par  14  5a-c,  par  20-22  7b-8d 
/  Prognostics,  par  1  19a-b;  par  25  26a, c  / 
Epidemics,  bk  iii,  sect  iii,  par  16  59b-c  / 
Surgery,  par  1  70b  /  Articulations,  par  58, 
11 2d  /  The  Law,  par  4  144d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  ii,  ch  9,  195c- 
196a 


912 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  8 a  to  8£(1) 


(8.  The  use  and  value  of  knowledge.  8a.  The  tech¬ 
nical  use  of  knowledge  in  the  sphere  of 
production :  the  applications  of  science  in 
art.) 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  i,  812d-813a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [1241- 
1457]  77b-80a,c  passim 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  17,  158d- 
159b 

13  Virgil:  Georgies  37a-99a  passim,  esp  11  [475— 
515]  65a-66a 

14  Plutarch:  Marcellus ,  252a-255a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  14,  a 
8  82c-83b;  q  16,  a  i,  ans  94b-95c;  q  17,  a  i, 
ans  lOOd-lOld;  q  19,  a  4,  rep  4  lllc-112c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  1,3  37b-38a;  a  4  esp  ans 
and  rep  2  38a-39a;  a  5,  rep  3  39a-40a;  q  95, 
a  2,  ans  227c-228c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
153  21a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  60a-b;  73b;  part 
iv,  267a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  450d-451a;  523c-524b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  v,  IOOc-IOIc 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  first  day,  154c- 
155b;  160d-161a;  second  day,  191b-193b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Hearty  289d;  291  d- 
292a  /  Circulation  of  the  Bloody  305a-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  145c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learningy  5b-c;  48d- 
49b;  50c-51d;  74b-c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, 
aph  3  107b;  aph  11  107d;  aph  81  120b-c; 
aph  85  121d-122d;  aph  129  134d-135d;  bk  ii, 
aph  4  137d-138b;  aph  44-52  175d-195d  pas¬ 
sim  /  New  Atlantis  199a-214d  esp  210d-214d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61b-d;  66d- 
67a 

33  Pascal:  Equilibrium  ofLiquidSy  392b  393a 

34  Newton:  Principlesy  la-b;  corol  ii  15a- 
16b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  xii, 
sect  11-12  361c-362c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understandingy  sect  i,  div  5 
452d-453b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  hi,  97b;  106a-112a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  ofNationSy  bk  i,  5b-6a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  633c;  661c-663c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  60a-c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals,  266d-267a  /  Practical  Reason , 
300d  [fni]  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
388d  !  Judgement,  463a-464c;  523d-524a;  526a- 
527b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  369a 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  part  i, 
45c-a 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  170a;  184a;  213b 

45  Faraday  :  Researches  in  Electricity,  433a-440a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  1,  218d- 
219a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  19c-d 


50  Marx:  Capital,  167a-171c  passim,  esp  170a- 
171a;  176d-178d;  180d-189b  esp  188b-189b; 
239b-241a;  299b-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  ix,  361d-365c; 
bk  x,  424a-c;  425b-426a;  441b-c;  456a-457c; 
epilogue  11,  685a 

54  Freud:  Psycho- Analytic  Therapy,  123a-125a 
esp  123b,  125a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discon¬ 
tents,  777a-c;  778b-d 

8b.  The  moral  use  of  knowledge  and  the  moral 
value  of  knowledge 

8&(1)  The  knowledge  of  good  and  evil:  the  re¬ 
lation  of  knowledge  to  virtue  and  sin 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:9,16-17;  3:1-7,22  / 
Job,  28:28  /  Psalms,  37:30;  82:4-5— (D) 
Psalms,  36:30;  81:4-5  /  Proverbs ,  1:1-23;  2:i~ 
20;  7-8  esp  8:8,  8:20;  10:8,31;  11:12;  14:9,16- 
18,22,29;  15:21;  19:8;  24:1-14;  28:7;  29:8  / 
Ecclesiastes,  2:26 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:1-7;  6:12-20; 
8:5-7;  9:9-10:14;  14:22-2 7— (D)  OT,  Boo\ 
of  Wisdom,  1:1-7;  6:13-20;  8:5-7;  9:9-10:14; 
14:22-27  /  Ecclesiasticus,  17:7;  19:22-24; 

50:28-29 —(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  17:6;  19:19- 
21;  50:30-31 

New  Testament:  Lu\e ,  23:34  /  John,  3:17-21  / 
Romans,  2:17-23;  7  esp  7:15-25;  16:19  / 
Philippians,  1:9-11  /  Colossians,  1:9-11  /  Titus , 
1:16  /  Hebrews ,  5:14  /  James,  4:17  /  II  Peter, 
1  :i-ii 

5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  [373-387]  228b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
397b-c;  402d-403b 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  7b-c;  12a-13c  /  Laches, 
31a-b;  33a-37a  /  Protagoras,  40b-41a;  56b; 
57d-64d  /  Euthydemus ,  69a-71a;  74b-76b  / 
Meno  174a-190a,c  esp  177d-178b,  183b-190a,c 
/  Phaedo,  225d-226c;  230d-234c  /  Gorgias , 
256d-259c;  280c-281b  /  Republic,  bk  i,  301d- 
302c;  306c-308a;  bk  ii,  314d-315a;  bk  hi, 
333b-d;  337b-d;  bk  iv,  354d-355a;  bk  vi-vii, 
383d-401d;  bk  x,  439b-441a,c  /  Theaetetus , 
530b-531a  /  Laws,  bk  i,  643c-d;  645b-652d; 
bk  hi,  670b;  bk  v,  689d-690c;  696c-697a; 
bk  vii,  724c-728a;  bk  ix,  748a-b;  754a-b; 
bk  xii,  788d-789a;  792c-d;  795c-d  /  Seventh 
Letter,  801b;  806b-c;  809c-810d  esp  810c-d 

8  Aristotle  :  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  25  [69s* 
20-28]  91a  /  Topics,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [1  i4b9~ 13] 
160b;  bk  iii,  ch  6  [120^6-31]  168a;  bk  iv, 
ch  2  [i2ib24-i22a2]  169d-170a;  ch  3  [i24aio- 
14]  172d;  bk  v,  ch  7  [i37ai3— 17]  189b  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  in,  ch  2  [996a2i-bi3]  514d-5l5a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  1-3  339a-340b; 
ch  4  [io95a3o-bi2]  340c-d;  ch  6  [i096b32- 
io97ai4]  342b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [no3b26-no4a9] 
349b-c;  ch  4  350d-351b  esp  [no5bi-4]  351a, 
[no5bi3-i8]  351a-b;  ch  6  [no6b3 6-1107^] 
352c;  bk  iii,  ch  1  [mobi7-35]  356b-c;  bk  v, 
ch  8  [ii35b9-ii36a9]  383c-384a;  bk  vi,  ch  5 


913 


8J(1)  to  8b(2)  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


389a-c;  cn  8  [i 1 4 ib33~i  1 42^1 9]  391a  b;  cii 
9-10  391c~392c;  cii  12-13  393b  394d;  bk  vii, 
ch  2-3  395c-398a;  bk  x,  cii  9  [1  i79b4~i  i8oa 
13]  434b-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  10  [i368b7— 13] 
611d;  ch  13  [i373b27— 39]  618a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  cii  5  llOb-c;  ch 
11  116d-118d;  ch  26-28  131b-134d;  bk  ii,  ch 
11  150a-151b;  cii  22  167d-170a;  cii  26  174c-d; 
bk  hi,  ch  10  185d-187a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a-223d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
bk  hi,  sect  12  262b-c;  sect  16  262d-263a,c; 
bk  vii,  sect  22  281b;  sect  26  281c;  sect  62- 
63  283d-284a;  bk  viii,  sect  14  286c;  bk  ix, 
sect  42  295c-296a,c;  bk  xii,  sect  12  308b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  121a-122a  /  Timoleon, 
197c-198a  /  Agesilaus,  490d-491b  /  Alexander, 
543b-544a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  6-7  9a-10a; 
tr  hi,  ch  6-tr  iv,  ch  3  lld-14a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  54-57 
85a-86a;  bk  xiii,  par  46  123a-c  /  City  of  God , 
bk  viii,  ch  3  266a-d;  ch  10  271a-d;  bk  ix, 
ch  20  296a-b;  bk  xi,  ch  28  338a-d;  bk  xviii, 
ch  40  495a-b;  bk  xix,  ch  20,  524a  /  Christian 
Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  36-37  634d-635c;  ch  40 
636a, c;  bk  ii,  ch  9  640c-d;  ch  38  654b-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  6, 
rep  3  6b-7a;  q  14,  a  10  83d-84c;  q  15,  a  3,  rep 
1  93b-94a;  q  18,  a  4,  rep  4  107d-108c;  q  22,  a 
1  127d-128d;  a  3,  rep  3  130d-131c;  q  54,  a  5 

*  288a-d;  q  59,  a  3,  ans  308b-309a;  q  79,  aa 

1 1— 13  424d-427a;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  6,  rep  3 
614a-c;  q  2,  a  1,  rep  i  615d-616c;  Q  19,  aa 
3-6  704c-708a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  a  2-3  13c-15a;  q  58,  a  2  42a-43a;  q  76  140d- 
144d;  part  ii-ii,  q  18,  a  4,  ans  464c-465a:  Q 

145,  aa  3-5  600c-602b;  part  iii  suppl,  q  87 
997a-1000c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  iii  [1-18]  4a- b; 
xxvi  [49-142]  38c-39c;  purgatory,  iii  [16- 
45]  56a-b;  x  [112-139]  68c-d;  xxxii  [37-60] 
102d-103a;  paradise,  xix  [22-66]  135b-d; 
xxvi  [25-45]  146a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  95d-96b;  part  ii, 
112a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  208a;  213a-216c;  218c- 
219a;  232b-242d;  478c-480c;  502c-504c;  508a- 
512a 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  i,  sc 
ii  [n-24]  408b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure,  act  ii, 
sc  iv  [2-17]  184d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  17d-18a; 
26c-27a;  79c-80a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  i,  43c;  part  iii, 
49d-50b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  pref  422b,d-424a; 
def  1-2  424a;  prop  8  426b-c;  prop  14-17 
428a-d;  prop  24  430d;  prop  26-27  431a-c; 
prop  35-73  433b-447a;  part  v,  prop  1-20 
452d-458a;  prop  42  463b-d 


32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  vii  [519  549]  228b- 
229a;  bk  viii  [316-337]  239a-b;  bk  ix  [677- 
779]  262a-264a;  bk  xi  [84-98]  301a  /  Areopa- 
gitica ,  389a  396a  passim,  csp  390b-391a,  394b- 
395a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  67  180b;  381-385  238b-239a; 
425-427  243b  244b;  460  254b 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  iii,  543b-544a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  intro,  sect 
5-6  94b-95a;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  35  186b-d; 
sect  62  194c-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  ioo 
432b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  i 
451a-b;  div  3-5  451d-453b  passim 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  182a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  343b-345c  esp  345a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  164a-165c  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261d;  265b;  282b- 
283d  /  Practical  Reason,  318b-319b;  326b- 
327a  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 
365b  [fn  1];  368b-369a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  388d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445a-447b  passim;  448d- 
450a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  151  b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  139- 
140  48d-54a;  additions,  74  127d-128a;  90 
130b-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  168b-d; 
part  ii,  279c-d;  280b-281b;  part  iii,  304d- 
305b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  194b-195a; 
214c-215b;  bk  xii,  537c-538a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iv, 
83c-84a;  bk  v,  122b-125a;  127b-137c;  bk  xi, 
335c-336b;  342d-345c;  bk  xii,  396d-397a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  806a-807a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  560c-d;  625a-b 

8b( 2)  Knowledge  as  a  condition  of  voluntari¬ 
ness  in  conduct 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  v,  689d-690c;  bk  ix,  746a- 
748c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  cii  i  [inobi7-iina 
23]  356b-357a;  ch  2  [1 1 1  ib6— 9]  357b;  bk  v, 
ch  8  383a-384a  csp  [ii35a22-b2]  383b  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  10  [1368^-13]  611d;  ch  13 
[I3731>27"37]  618a 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  12, 
173b-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  i  256b, d; 
sect  10  257d-258a;  bk  vii,  sect  22  281b; 
sect  26  281c;  sect  62-63  283d-284a;  bk  viii, 
sect  14  286c;  bk  ix,  sect  42  295c-296a,c; 
bk  xii,  sect  12  308b-c 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  1-4 
342d-344d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18,  a 
3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  47,  a  i,  rep  i  256a-257b; 
q  82,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  1,3  431d-432c;  q  84, 
a  8,  contrary  450b-451b;  Q  105,  a  4,  rep 
2-3  541c-542a;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  6,  rep  3 


914 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Sb(3)  to  8£(4) 


(8  b.  The  moral  use  of  knowledge  and  the  moral 
value  of  knowledge.  8b( 2)  Knowledge  as  a 
condition  of  voluntariness  in  conduct .) 

614a-c;  q  6,  aa  1-2  644d-646c;  a  8  650d-651c; 
q  7,  a  2,  ans  652d-653c;  q  19,  a  6  707a-708a; 
q  20,  a  2,  rep  3  712d-713c 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  7 6, 
a  2,  ans  141d-142c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61a-b;  64b-c 
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  v,  sc  ii  [37-235] 
68b-70c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  228c 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  5,  179c;  sect  7-13  180a-181b  esp  sect 
13  181b;  sect  69  196d-197a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  337d-338a 
42  Kant:  Pare  Reasony  149d-150a;  164a-165c; 
169c-170a  /  Practical  Reason ,  333a-334b  / 
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  386b-d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  ii,  par  117 
42c-d;  par  139  48d-49b;  part  iii,  par  142-143 
55a;  additions,  90  130b-d 
53  James:  Psychology ,  767b-768a 

8&(3)  Knowledge  in  relation  to  prudence  and 
continence 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  59c-d 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [i094b29-i095a 
12]  340a-b;  ch  13  [1102^3-28]  348a-b;  bk 
vi,  ch  5-13  389a-394d;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [ii45b8]- 
ch  2  [ii46a8]  395b-396a;  ch  3  396c-398a 
14  Plutarch:  Timoleon,  197c-198a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  4,  512a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i,  a  6, 
ans  6b-7a;  q  22,  a  1  127d-128d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  56, 
a  3,  ans  31a-32b;  q  57,  aa  4-6  38a-41a;  Q  58, 
a  3  43b-44a;  a  5,  ans  44d-45c;  q  77,  aa  2-3 
145d-148b;  part  ii-ii,  q  181,  a  2  617d-618c; 
part  iii,  q  11,  a  1,  rep  3  772b-773a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  x  [109- 
1 14]  121b-c;  xiii  [37—1 1 1  ]  125d-126c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  60a-61a;  84c-d; 
part  iv,  267a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  60c-61c;  327b-d;  520c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  14-17 
428a-d 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  389b-391a 
42  Kant:  Judgement ,  586a-587a 

8b(4)  The  possession  or  pursuit  of  knowledge 
as  a  good  or  satisfaction:  its  relation  to 
pleasure  and  pain;  its  contribution  to 
happiness 

Old  Testament:  I  Kings,  10:1-8— (D)  III  Kings, 
10:1-8  /  II  Chronicles ,  9:1-7,22-23— (D)  II 
Paralipomenon ,  9:1-7,22-23  /  Job,  28:12-20 
/  Proverbs ,  1:24-33;  3:i3-20»  10:1 ;  14:24; 
16:16;  19:2,8;  20:15;  23:23-25;  24:13-14  / 
Ecclesiastes ,  1:13-18;  2:12-21;  6:8;  7:11-13; 
9:i3-*8 


Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  6:18-37;  21:21;  25:5, 
10;  37:24;  51:13-28— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus , 

6:18-37;  21:24;  257.13;  37:27;  51:18-36 

New  Testament:  /  Corinthians,  8:1;  13:2 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [160-183]  53d-54a 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [1348-1353]  142d 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  12a- 13c  /  Protagoras,  59a- 

64d  /  Euthydemus ,  69a-71a;  74b-76b  /  Phae~ 
drus,  125a-126c  /  Symposium,  167a-d  /  Meno, 
183d-184c  /  Republic ,  bk  i,  295d-296c;  bk  ii, 
310c-d;  323c-d;  bk  vi,  374a-375a;  bk  ix, 
421a-425b  /  Timaeus,  475d-476b  /  Philebus 
609a-639a,c  /  bk  ii,  655a-656a;  660a- 

662a;  bk  iii,  669b-670c;  bk  v,  688c;  bk  vii, 
728b-d  /  Seventh  Letter,  801b;  808c-809a 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [29^24-29] 
383b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  499a-501c; 
bk  xii,  ch  7  [1 072^4-29]  602d-603a  /  Soul, 
bk  1,  ch  1  [402ai-6]  631a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  5  [64415 

22- 645a26]  168c-169a  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  8 
[i098bi2-29]  344a-b  passim;  bk  iii,  ch  10 
[ui7b28-32]  364b;  bk  vi,  ch  12  [ii43bi7~ 
ii44a6]  393b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  12  [11 52^3-1  i53a2] 
404a;  [1153^1-24]  404c;  bk  x,  ch  3  [ii73bi5- 
18]  427d-428a;  ch  4-5  428b-430d  passim;  ch 
7-8  431d-434a  /  Politics,  bk  viii,  ch  3  [1338s 
4-13]  543b;  ch  5  [i339a27~32]  544d;  [1 339b 
17-20]  545a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [1371^0- 
34]  614d;  [i37ib4~io]  615a;  [i37ib26-28]  615b 
/  Poetics,  ch  4  [i448b5~2o]  682c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [62-145] 
ld-2d;  [921-950]  12b-c;  bk  ii  [1-61]  15a-d; 
bk  iii  [1053-1075]  43c-d;  bk  iv  [1-25]  44a-b; 
bk  v  [1-54]  61a-d;  [1113-1135]  75c-d;  bk  vi  [1- 
42]  80a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  i  138b, d- 
140c;  bk  iii,  ch  2  177c-178d;  ch  10  185d- 
187a;  ch  15  190a-191a;  ch  22  195a-201a; 
ch  23,  202c-203b;  bk  iv,  ch  4  225a-228a; 
ch  6  230b-232c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  6  261a-c; 
sect  9  261d;  bk  iv,  sect  16  264d;  bk  v, 
sect  9  270b-c;  bk  vi,  sect  12  274c;  bk  x, 
sect  12  298c-d 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  11  [490-493]  65b 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  121a-122a;  122d-123c  / 
Alexander,  543b-544a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  6  9a-c; 
tr  iv  12b-19b  esp  ch  3-4,  13d-14b,  ch  9, 
16d-17a,  ch  15  18c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  19-27  5d- 
7d;  bk  iii,  par  7-8  14c-15a;  bk  v,  par  7-9 
28c-29b;  bk  vi,  par  26  42d-43a;  bk  ix,  par 

23- 25  68a-c;  bk  x,  par  33-34  79d-80c;  par  54- 
57  85a-86a;  bk  xi,  par  2-5  89c-90c  /  City 
of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  8  270a-d  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  7  638d-639c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  i 
3b-4a;  a  4  5a-b;  a  5,  ans  and  rep  i  5c-6a;  q  5, 
a  4,  rep  1  25d-26c;  q  12,  a  i,  ans  50c-51c;  a  5, 
ans  and  rep  3  54c-55b;  a  6,  ans  55b-56a;  a  7, 


915 


8£(4)  to  8 c  Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


rep  i  56a-57b:  a  8,  rep  4  57b-58b;  q  26  150a- 
152a,c;  q  57,  a  5  299b-300b;  q  58,  a  1,  ans 
300c-301a;  q  62,  aa  1-2  317d-319c;  aa  7-9 
322d-325b:  q  79,  a  ii,  rep  2  424d-425b;  q  82, 
a  3,  rep  1  433c^34c;  q  84,  a  5  446c -447c:  q 
89,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  475a-d;  a  5,  rep  2 
477a-478b;  part  i— ii,  q  1,  a  6,  rep  2  6l4a-c; 
a  8  615a-c;  q  3,  aa  3-8  624b-629c;  q  4,  aa  1-3 
629d-631d;  q  27,  a  i,  rep  3  737b-d;  q  32,  a  i, 
rep  1  759b-d;  a  2,  ans  759d-760d:  a  3,  ans 
760d-761c;  a  8  764c-765b;  q  33,  a  3  767a-d; 
a  4,  rep  1  767d-768c;  q  34,  a  3,  ans  770c- 
771c;  q  35,  a  5  775d-777a;  q  37,  a  i,  ans  783d- 
784c;  q  38,  a  4  788d-789b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii— ii,  q  8, 
a  7  421d-422c;  q  9,  a  4  425d-426c;  qq  179-180 
606a-616d:  q  182  620b-624d;  part  iii,  q  9,  a  2 
764c-765a;  a  3,  rep  3  765b-766b;  q  10,  a  4, 
ans  and  rep  i  771b-772a:  q  ii,  a  3,  rep  3 
773d-774c:  q  15,  a  10  795b-796a:  part  iii 
suppl,  q  70,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  5  897d-900d: 
q  90,  a  3,  ans  1014d-1016a;  q  92,  a  i  1025c- 
1032b:  a  2,  rep  6  1032b-1034b;  a  3,  rep  5,7- 
8,12  1034b-1037c;  q  94,  a  i  1040d-1041b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  iii  [i-i8]4a-b: 
iv  5c-7a;  purgatory,  iii  [16-45]  56a-b; 
xx  [124LXX1  [75]  84c-85d:  xxx-xxxi  99b- 
102b;  paradise,  iv  [ii5]-v  [12]  llld-112b 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  63a:  78d;  79b-80a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
26d-27d;  29d-30c  esp  30b;  bk  ii,  lOlb-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  55d-62a;  63d-77d  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  69d-72a:  lllb-d:  208a;  213a-215b; 
218c-219a:  231d-246a;  448d-452b;  497b-504c; 
508a-512a:  516b-524a 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  ii 
[83-117]  58c-59a;  sc  vii  [34-51]  61c;  [76-81] 
61d-62a  /  Love's  Labour's  Lost ,  act  i,  sc  i 
[70-93]  255a-b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  331c-332a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  145d-146a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-7c; 
18a- b:  27c-28c;  29a-b;  71a-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  1  la-2a  /  Discourse  41a- 
67a, c  passim  /  Meditations,  iii,  88d-89a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  53  413a; 
prop  58  415c;  part  iv,  prop  26-28  431a-c; 
appendix,  iv  447b-c;  xxxii  450c-d;  part  v, 
prop  24-42  458d-463d 

32  Milton:  II  Penseroso  21a-25a  /  Areopagitica, 
383a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding .  87a-b;  intro, 
sect  5-6  94b-95a;  bk  ii,  ch  vii,  sect  6  132d; 
ch  xv,  sect  11,  165a;  ch  xxi,  sect  44  188d- 
189b;  sect  55-56  192c-193b;  bk  iv,  ch  xi, 
sect  8  356b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 2 
405b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i  451a- 
455b  passim,  esp  div  6,  453b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  236b-238a 


38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  338c  339b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  645c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  523c-527a  passim, 
esp  524a-b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
256c-257c  /  Judgement,  508c-509a;  551d- 
552a;  586d-587a;  591b-592a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  448d-450b  passim;  451c- 
452a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  112a;  118a;  130b;  256c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  257d- 
258a 

47  Goethe:  Faust  esp  part  i  [354-517]  lla-14b, 
[602-784]  16b-20b,  [1675-1784]  40b-42b,  part 
ii  [11,397-419]  277a-b,  [11,434-452]  278a-b, 
[11,559-586]  281b-282a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  78a-b;  255a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  33d:  bk  xi, 
481d-482a;  bk  xv,  631a-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  524b-525a;  729b-730a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  773d- 
774a;  777a-c;  778d-779a 

8c.  The  political  use  of  knowledge:  the  knowl¬ 
edge  requisite  for  the  statesman,  legisla¬ 
tor,  or  citizen 

6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,370a-c; 
bk  11,  402d-403b 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  44c -45a  /  Meno ,  188b- 
190a, c  /  Gorgias ,  256d-262a  /  Republic ,  bk 
iv,  346c-347a;  bk  v,  369b-d;  375b-376c:  bk 
vi,  381  b-d;  bk  vi-vii,  383b-401d  /  Statesman, 
598b-608d  /  Laws,  bk  i,  645b-652d  esp  652d; 
bk  iii,  669b-670c;  671a-672a;  bk  iv,  679c- 
680d;  bk  vi,  702d-703a;  bk  vii,  723d-730d; 
bk  viii,  740d-741a;  bk  ix,  754a-b;  bk  xii, 
789b-790a;  792c-d;  794c-799a,c  /  Seventh 
Letter ,  801b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  339b-d;  ch  3 
[i094b28-i095ai2]  340a-b;  ch  13  [no2a5-25] 
347b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  5  [1140^-12]  389b;  ch  8 
[ii4ib23-ii42au]390d-391a;  bk  x,  ch  9  [n8oa 
25—1 181^25]  435a-436a,c  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch 
ii  [i28ib40-i282a23]  479d-480a;  bk  iv,  ch  i 
487a-488b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  4  [i359a3o- 
i36obi]  599c-600d;  ch  8  608a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  22 
[i396a4-bi9]  644a-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  1,  sect  14  254b-c; 
bk  vi,  sect  30  276d-277a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  41a-b;  43b-d;  46b-c  / 
Numa  Pompilius  49a-61d  /  Solon  64b, d- 
77a,c  /  Pericles,  122d-125a  passim  /  Alex¬ 
ander,  542d-544b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  x  [109- 
144]  121b-122a;  xm  [37—1 1 1]  125d-126c 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince  la-37d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  intro,  47b-d;  part  i, 
53c-54a;  60d-61a;  67d-68a;  71c-d;  72a-d; 
78b-d;  part  ii,  128c-130a;  140c;  153a-156b; 
158c-d;  164a,c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
85c-87c 


916 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(8.  The  use  and  value  of  knowledge.  8c.  The  polit¬ 
ical  use  of  knowledge:  the  knowledge 
requisite  for  the  statesman,  legislator,  or 
citizen .) 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  450d-451a;  451d-452d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  40d; 
part  ii,  33 la-333 b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  ld-2b;  4c- 
7c;  20d-26a  esp  23a-26a;  94b-95a 

32  Milton:  Sr  Henry  Vane  69b  /  Areopagitica, 
383a; 385a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  x, 
sect  8-9  293c-294a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  28b-29b;  part  ii, 
77a-78b;  part  iii,  112a-115b;  part  iv,  157a- 
158a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii,  85b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  329a-331d  /  Political 
Economy ,  371b-c  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii, 
400c-402a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  v,  337d-338c; 
343c- d;  347c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  284a-c;  343a-c 

41  Gibbon  :  Decline  and  Fall,  40b;  75d-81c  passim 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  ii,  sect 

*"[413-417]  15a5  SECT  3  [440-444]  15b 

43  Federalist:  number  35 -36,  113a-116a;  num¬ 
ber  53,  168b-169b;  number  56  174d-176d; 
number  62,  190b-d;  number  84,  253d-254b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  317d-319b  /  Representative 
Government,  330d-331a;  337a;  357b-d;  359a- 
361b;  363b-366a;  374c-377a;  380c-389b; 

401a-406a;  410d-412a;  415a-417c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  21 1 
70a-c;  par  215  71c-d;  par  300 100b  /  Philosophy 
of  History,  part  ii,  272c-273a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  107a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  242b-243a; 
bk  ix,  385c-387a  passim;  bk  xii,  537c-538a 

9.  The  communication  of  knowledge 

9 a.  The  means  and  methods  of  communicating 
knowledge 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  47d-48a;  50c-52d  /  Craty- 
lus,  85d-88a  esp  87c-d  /  Phaedrus,  138c-140b 
/  Meno,  179b-183a  /  Apology ,  206b-d  /  Gor- 
gias,  259d-260a;  261d-262a  /  Republic,  bk  vii, 
388a-398c  esp  389d-390a,  397b-398c;  399c  / 
Theaetetus,  515d-517b;  549c-550a,c  /  Sophist , 
551d;  556c-558d  /  Statesman,  590d-591c  / 
Laws,  bk  ii,  656b-c;  bk  iv,  684c-685a  / 
Seventh  Letter,  809a -81  la 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  i 
97a-d/  Topics ,  bki,  ch  18  [io8ai7~37]  152b-d/ 
Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  2  [165*38— b3]  227d- 
228a;  ch  10  [i7ia27~b2]  235d-236a;  ch  ii 
[i72ai5~2i]  237a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
513c-d  /  Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  i  [436^8- 
437a!7]  673d-674a 


9  to  9  a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  3  [1 139^5— 34] 
388c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1358*3—26]  597d- 
598b;  ch  4  [i359bi— 18]  599d;  bk  iii,  ch  i 
[i404ai-i2]  654a 

11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk  i,  403b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [921-950] 
12b-c;  bk  iv  [1-25]  44a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  21,  167a-d; 
ch  24,  172d-173c;  bk  iii,  ch  21-23  193d-203b 
passim;  bk  iv,  ch  4,  225a-226a;  ch  ii,  241d- 
242d 

17  Plotinus  :  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  2-3  lOd-lla 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  13  4b-c; 
par  19-20  5d-6a;  par  23  6d-7a;  bk  iv,  par  13 
22c-d  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  25  336b-d  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  638a-d;  ch 
36-37  653d-654b;  bk  iv  675a-698a,c 

19  Aquinas :  Summa  Theologica,  prologue  la-b; 
part  1,  q  1,  a  2,  rep  2  4a-c;  a  5,  rep  2  5c-6a; 
aa  8-10  7c-10c;  q  27,  a  1,  ans  153b-154b;  q 
34,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  1,3  185b-187b;  q  57, 
a  4,  rep  1  298a-299a;  q  76,  a  2,  rep  5  388c- 
391a;  q  79,  a  10,  rep  3  423d-424d;  q  84,  a  3, 
rep  3  443d-444d;  a  7,  ans  449b-450b;  q  89, 
a  1,  ans  473b-475a;  qq  106-107  545c-552b; 
q  108,  a  2,  rep  2  553c-554c;  q  iii,  a  i,  ans 
568c-569b;  a  3,  rep  3  570b-571b;  q  117,  a  i 
595d-597c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q  i, 
a  7,  rep  2  385c-387a;  q  181,  a  3  618c-619b; 
part  iii,  q  9,  a  4,  rep  1  766b-767b;  q  12,  a  3 
778b-779a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  55a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
101b-106a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  63d-80b  passim,  esp  65a- 
66b,  73b-74a;  446d-450a 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  ii,  sc  i  [<y-i 6] 
327d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  268c  /  On 
Animal  Generation ,  336d-337a,c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  14c-15a; 
16c;  29c-32c;  62c-68b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  42b;  42d; 
part  v,  59c-60b 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  384a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  9-10  173b;  626  286b  /  Geo¬ 
metrical  Demonstration,  439b-446b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  x, 
sect  34  299d-3G0a;  bk  iv,  ch  vii,  sect  ii, 
340d-341a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  109b-112a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  99d-100a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  339d-340a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  337c-d; 
339d-340a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  88c-d;  597a; 
601b-c;  669a-670b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  80c-d;  231a;  527c- 
528a, c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  2d-4a,c  /  Practical  Reason, 
335b-c 


9b  to  10 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  283c  288c  passim  /  Representa¬ 
tive  Government ,  424b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  144c;  257c;  471d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  294d-295a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  47b-48d; 
epilogue  ii,  689c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  692a-b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  449a-451a  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures ,  820c-829d  esp 
820d,  822b,  829a-c 

9£.  The  value  of  the  dissemination  of  knowl¬ 
edge:  freedom  of  discussion 

6  Thucydides  '.Peloponnesian  War,  BKii,397b-c; 
bk  iii,  425a-d;  427a-c 

7  Plato:  Apology  200a-212a,c  /  bk  xii, 

789b-790a 

10  Hippocrates:  Articulations ,  par  47,  107c 

10  Galen :  Natural Pacidties,  bk  iii,  ch  10  207b-d 

14  Plutarch:  Alexander ,  543 b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iv,  72b-73a;  bk  xiv, 
153b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  25  336b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  96,  a  7  1061b-1062a;  a  ii,  ans  and  rep  5 
1063d-1064d;  a  12  1064d-1065b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  102d-103a; 
114d-115a;  149b-d;  150c-151a;  155d-156b; 
part  iv,  274c-d;  conclusion,  282d-283a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  55d-62a  esp  60a-c;  65a- 
66a;  270a-271a 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  vii 
[34-51]  61c;  [76-81]  61d-62a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  273d-274b  / 
On  Animal  Generation,  331b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  7a-c;  32a  / 
New  Atlantis,  214a-b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  60d-61a  / 
Objections  and  Replies,  2 83c- 2 84a 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica  381a-412b  esp  384b- 
389a,  398a-b 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  15b-c;  18c-21c  /  Human 
Understanding ,  bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  20  319b-c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  5, 
453a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xix,  146a,  c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  339d-340a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  340c-343d; 
347c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  148a-b;  670b-671a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  161c-162b;  300a-b; 
334d-335a,c;  523a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  220b-221b;  223a-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  274b-293b;  293d;  318a-319b; 
322a-323a,c  /  Representative  Government ,  330a- 
b;  336c -338c;  361b-362c;  418b-d;  424b-c; 
425b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  29a-b;  86a-b;  195d;  221d- 
222a;  307d;  5l2c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  215 
71c-d;  par  224  73d;  par  3 1 4—3 1 5  104b-c; 
additions,  135  138c;  141  139c  /  Philosophy  of 


917 

History ,  part  ii,  280a- b;  part  iv,  347b-d; 
350d-351a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [10,155-159]  247b 
50  Marx:  Capital,  239d-241a 
54  Freud:  Psycho-Analytic  Therapy,  125d-127a,c 
/  New  Introductory  Lectures,  87 9b -880b 

10.  The  growth  of  human  knowledge:  the  his¬ 
tory  of  man’s  progress  and  failures  in 
the  pursuit  of  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  444a-445d 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  34 
[i83bi6-i84b8]  253a-d  /  Physics,  bk  i,  cii  2-9 
259b-268d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  3-10  501c- 
511d;  bk  ii,  ch  1  [993a3o— bi9]  511b, d  512a; 
bk  xii,  ch  8  [i074bi-i4]  604d-605a;  bk  xiii, 
ch  1  [1076^-17]  607a  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  2-5 
633a-641d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  iii,  ch  3 
[5I3a7_I4]  36c-d  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[642a25~3o]  165b-c  /  Generation  of  Animals, 
bk  v,  cii  1  [778b5~io]  320d  /  Ethics ,  bk  i, 
ch  7  [1098^2-25]  343c-d 

10  Hippocrates:  A?icient  Medicine,  par  1-8  la- 
3b;  par  12  4b-c  /  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases , 
par  1  26a-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  it,  ch  8.  193b-c; 
ch  9,  199a, c;  bk  iii,  ch  10  207b-d 

11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk  i,  403b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [62-79] 
ld-2a;  bk  iii  [1-30]  30a-b;  bk  v  [i448]-bk  vi 
[41]  79d-80d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  6  181d-182b 

14  Plutarch:  Marcellus,  252b-255a 

16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  6b 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  846a-850a  /  Har¬ 
monies  of  the  World,  1009b-1010a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  i-ii 
264b,d-272c  esp  ch  5  267d-268d,  ch  io-ii 
271a-272c;  bk  xix,  ch  1-4  507a-513c  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  40  655b-656a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  75, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  1-2  378b-379c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  97, 
a  1,  ans  236a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  i,  a  7,  rep  2 
385c-387a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  114d-115a;  153d; 
164a, c;  part  iv,  267c-269b;  274c-d;  conclu¬ 
sion,  282b-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
81a-83b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  271b-c;  276b-278a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  pref,  2b-d 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  267b,d-269a; 
274a-b;  279d-280c;  285b-c;  293b-d  /  Cir¬ 
culation  of  the  Blood,  306a-c  /  On  Animal 
Generation ,  331a-332a;  336d-337a,c;  364a- 
365a;  377a-c;  433c;  458a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning  la-101  d 
esp  2b-c,  18b,  29b-c,  32a-c,  33b-d,  34b,  42c- 
43a,  51d-54b  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph 
30-31  109a;  aph  51  111c;  aph  56  112a;  aph 


Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE 


918 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(10.  The  growth  of  human  knowledge:  the  history 
of  man's  progress  and failures  in  the  pursuit 
of  knowledge?) 

70-115  116b-130d  passim  /  New  Atlantis , 
203d-207b 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  iv  5a-7d  /  Discourse , 
parti,  42b-44c;  part  vi  60d-67a,c 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica ,  404a- b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  355a-358b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  88d-89b 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
17  409d-410a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div  5, 
453a-b;  div  8-9,  454b-455a;  sect  vii,  div  48, 
471b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  118a-119a 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  224b-225a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  329b-330d;  338c-342c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  v,  331b, d- 
343d  passim 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  23d-24a,c;  148a-b; 
159a-c;  597a;  601b-c;  633c-634a,c;  669a- 
671b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  75b-80d  passim; 
225a-b;  274a-d;  298a-300b;  325d-328a,c; 
347a, c;  439d-440a,c;  451c-452b;  509d-510a,c; 
522b-528a,c  esp  527d-528a,c 


10 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  ld-2b  [fn  2] ;  5a-8b;  175b 
[fn  1];  248d-250a,c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic 
of  Morals ,  273d-274a  /  Practical  Reason , 
299d;  307a-d;  317b-318b;  327c-d;  339b-d  / 
Judgement ,  513d-514a;  551b-552a 

43  Federalist:  number  9,  47c-d;  number  37, 
119b-120b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  274b-293b  passim  /  Utilitarian¬ 
ism ,  445a-447b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  129a 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  175b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  391b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  136 
138c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  185a- 
186a;  part  i,  217c-219c;  229b-d;  253b-c; 
257d-258a;  part  ii,  279d-280b;  part  iv, 
323c-d;  347b-d;  361a-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  95b-105b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  196b;  bk  xi, 
469a-d;  epilogue  ii,  694d-696d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  xi, 
341  d 

53  James:  Psychology,  37b;  125b-127b 

54  Freud:  Psycho -Analytic  Therapy,  125d-126a  / 
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  137b-139a  esp  138d- 
139a  /  General  Introduction,  550d  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents,  777a  /  New  Introduc¬ 
tory  Lectures ,  880d-881c 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  differences  between  human  and  other  kinds  of  knowledge,  see  Angel  3d;  Animal  ia(i)- 
ia(2);  God  5 f;  Infinity  7d;  Mind  4e~4f;  Wisdom  id. 

Other  discussions  bearing  on  the  nature  of  human  knowledge,  its  relation  to  truth,  error,  and 
ignorance,  and  its  distinction  from  opinion,  belief,  and  fancy,  see  Memory  and  Imagina¬ 
tion  6a;  One  and  Many  4f;  Opinion  i,  3-4^  Principle  3c(2);  Same  and  Other  4a; 
Truth  2e,  3d;  Will  3b(i);  and  for  the  elements,  causes,  or  principles  of  knowledge,  see 
Definition  5;  Experience  3;  Form  3,  4;  Idea  ia-ic;  Induction  3;  Judgment  8-8d; 
Principle  2-2b(3);  Reasoning  53-5^5);  Will  3b(i). 

Other  considerations  of  the  limits  of  human  knowledge  and  of  the  knowability  of  cer¬ 
tain  objects,  see  Angel  2b;  Being  8a-8c,  8e;  Cause  5d;  Experience  4a;  Form  3b;  God 
6-6b;  Infinity  6b;  Man  2a;  Matter  4a;  One  and  Many  4e;  Opinion  3c;  Prin¬ 
ciple  5;  Science  4e;  Soul  id;  Theology  3c;  Time  6e— 6f;  Truth  7a;  Universal  and 
Particular  4e. 

Matters  relevant  to  the  classification  of  the  kinds  of  knowledge  by  reference  to  its  objects, 
see  Being  8a-8b;  Form  3~3a;  Idea  ia;  Mind  ia(i);  Nature  4a~4c;  Necessity  and 
Contingency  4a;  Relation  4d;  Religion  ia;  Sense  4a~4b;  Universal  and  Particular 
4a- 

Matters  relevant  to  the  classification  of  the  kinds  of  knowledge  by  reference  to  the  faculties 
involved,  see  Memory  and  Imagination  3,  6a;  Mind  ia(i);  Sense  4a~4b. 

Matters  relevant  to  the  classification  of  the  kinds  of  knowledge  by  reference  to  the  methods 
or  means  of  knowing,  see  Experience  2d;  God  6c-6c(4);  Induction  ia;  Judgment  8a; 
Memory  and  Imagination  3a;  Opinion  4a;  Reasoning  ib;  Religion  6g;  Theology 
2;  Wisdom  ic;  and  for  methodology  in  general  and  the  methods  of  the  particular  sciences, 
see  Astronomy  2a-2c;  History  3a;  Logic  4-4^  Mathematics  3~3d;  Mechanics  2-2c; 
Metaphysics  2c;  Philosophy  3— 3c;  Physics  4~4d;  Science  5~5e;  Theology  4c. 


Chapter  43:  KNOWLEDGE  919 

For:  Matters  relevant  to  the  classification  of  the  kinds  of  knowledge  by  reference  to  the  degrees 
of  assent,  see  Judgment  9;  Opinion  3— 3b ;  Truth  2e. 

Other  discussions  of  the  distinction  between  theoretic  and  practical  knowledge,  see  Judg¬ 
ment  2;  Philosophy  2a;  Prudence  2a;  Reasoning  5e~5e(i);  Theology  Truth  2c; 
Wisdom  ib. 

The  basic  divisions  of  theoretic  knowledge,  see  Astronomy  4;  Dialectic  4;  History  i; 
Mathematics  ia;  Metaphysics  3b~3c;  Nature  4b;  Philosophy  2b;  Physics  ia,  2; 
Science  ia(2),  ic,  2a;  Theology  3a,  4a;  Truth  4c;  and  for  the  problem  of  the  hier¬ 
archy  of  the  sciences  and  the  definition  of  the  highest  form  of  human  knowledge,  see 
Dialectic  4;  Metaphysics  i;  Theology  4a;  Wisdom  ia. 

The  basic  divisions  of  practical  knowledge,  see  Art  6c;  Philosophy  2c;  Prudence  6a-6b; 
Science  3a~3b;  Wealth  9. 

The  moral  or  political  value  of  knowledge,  see  Citizen  6;  Good  and  Evil  6a-6c;  Happiness 
2b(7);  Philosophy  4a~4c;  Pleasure  and  Pain  4c,  4c(2);  Prudence  2c;  Science  ib(2); 
State  8c-8d;  Virtue  and  Vice  ia;  Will  3a(i);  Wisdom  2b. 

The  technical  use  of  knowledge  and  the  applications  of  science  to  production,  see  Art  6c; 

Medicine  2a;  Physics  5;  Science  ib(i),  3b;  Wealth  3a. 

The  general  problem  of  the  dissemination  and  communication  of  knowledge,  see  Education 
5b;  Language  ib;  Liberty  2a;  Opinion  5b. 

The  development  of  human  knowledge,  the  advancement  of  learning,  or  progress  in  science 
and  philosophy,  see  Art  12;  Philosophy  7;  Progress  6a-6e;  Science  6a-6b;  Truth  6. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Books  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Augustine.  Answer  to  Skeptics 

- .  On  the  Profit  of  Believing 

- .  On  Faith  in  Things  Unseen 

Aquinas.  On  the  Trinity  of  Boethius ,  qq  5-6 

- .  Summa  Contra  Gentiles,  bk  i,  ch  48-71 

- .  Quaestiones  Disputatae ,  De  Veritate 

Spinoza.  Of  the  Improvement  of  the  Understanding 
Berkeley.  Three  Dialogues  Between  Hylas  and  Phi - 
lonous 

Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  i,  part  iv, 
sect  I-IV 

Kant.  Prolegomena  to  Any  Future  Metaphysic 

- .  Metaphysical  Foundations  of  Natural  Science 

— — .  Introduction  to  Logic,  v-vi,  ix-x 
Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind,  vm 
- .  Logic ,  ch  3-5 

Faraday.  Observations  on  the  Education  of  the  Judg¬ 
ment 

J.  S.  Mill.  An  Examination  of  Sir  William  Hamil¬ 
ton's  Philosophy,  ch  2-3 


W.  James.  The  Will  to  Believe 
- .  The  Meaning  of  Truth,  ch  1-2,  4 

II. 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism,  bk  i-ii 
Saadia  Gaon.  The  Book  °f  Beliefs  and  Opinions, 
introductory  treatise 
Anselm  of  Canterbury.  Dialogue  on  Truth 
Maimoxnides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed,  part  iii, 
ch  20-21 

Albertus  Magnus.  On  the  Intellect  and  the  Intel¬ 
ligible 

Matthew  of  Aquasparta.  Ten  Disputed  Ques¬ 
tions  on  Knowledge,  qq  i-ii 
Duns  Scotus.  Oxford  Commentary,  bk  i,  dist  3, 
Q  4 

Petrarch.  On  His  Own  Ignorance 
Albo.  The  Boo\of  Principles  (Sefer  ha-lkfarirn) ,  bk 
iv,  ch  1 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae ,  1  (6)  viii-ix, 
xiii  (6),  xx  (1),  xxii  (1),  xxiii  (7-8),  xxx  (11- 
12),  xxxv  (4) 


920 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


Marlowe.  The  Tragical  History  of  Doctor  Faustus 
John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philosophicus  Tho- 
misticus ,  Ars  Logica,  part  ii,  q  26 
Glanvill.  The  Vanity  of  Dogmatizing 
Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite 
Leibnitz.  Discourse  on  Metaphysics ,  xxiv-xxix 
- .  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Understanding , 

BK  IV 

- .  Monadology,  par  29-30 

Voltaire.  “Ignorance,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dic¬ 
tionary 

- .  The  Ignorant  Philosopher ,  ch  51-55 

J.  G.  Fichte.  The  Vocation  of  Man 

- .  The  Science  of  Knowledge 

Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea ,  vol  i, 

BK  I— III ;  VOL  II,  SUP,  CH  1-7,  18;  VOL  III,  SUP,  CH 

3° 

Kierkegaard.  Philosophical  Fragments 

- .  Concluding  Unscientific  Postscript 

J.  H.  Newman.  The  Idea  of  a  University 

- .  An  Essay  in  Aid  of  a  Grammar  of  Assent 

Lotze.  Microcosmos ,  bk  v,  ch  4 
- .  Logic ,  bk  iii 

T.  H.  Green.  Prolegomena  to  Ethics ,  bk  i 
Pearson.  The  Grammar  of  Science 
Bosanquet.  Knowledge  and  Reality 

- .  Logic ,  vol  1,  intro,  (2) ;  vol  ii,  ch  7 

- .  Science  and  Philosophy ,  3 

Hodder.  The  Adversaries  of  the  Sceptic 
Husserl.  Logische  Untersuchungen 
Lenin.  Materialism  and  Empiriocriticism 
Bradley.  Appearance  and  Reality ,  bk  i,  ch  11-12; 
bk  11,  ch  21,  27 

- .  Essays  on  Truth  and  Reality ,  ch  2,  6 

Bergson.  Matter  and  Memory 

- .  An  Introduction  to  Metaphysics 

- .  The  Creative  Mind ,  ch  6 

T.  Veblen.  The  Vested  Interests  and  the  State  of  the 
Industrial  Arts ,  ch  i 


J.  M.  Keynes.  A  Treatise  on  Probability ,  part  i-ii 
Wittgenstein.  Tractatus  Logico-Philosophicus 
Marechal.  Le  point  de  depart  de  la  metaphysique 
Santayana.  Scepticism  and  Animal  Faith 
Whitehead.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  the  Principles  of 
Natural  Knowledge 

- .  The  Concept  of  Nature 

- .  Process  and  Reality ,  part  iii 

Meyerson.  Du  cheminement  de  la  pensee 
Maritain.  An  Introduction  to  Philosophy ,  part  ii 

(4) 

- .  The  Degrees  of  Knowledge ,  ch  2 

Blondel.  La  pensee 

Gilby.  Poetic  Experience 

Simon.  Introduction  a  Vontologie  du  connaitre 

A.  E.  Taylor.  Philosophical  Studies,  ch  10 
Gill.  The  Necessity  of  Belief 

Dewey  et  al.  Studies  in  Logical  Theory,  i-iv 
Dewey.  “The  Experimental  Theory  of  Knowledge,” 
“The  Significance  of  the  Problems  of  Knowledge,” 
in  The  Influence  of  Darwin  on  Philosophy 

- .  The  Quest  for  Certainty 

- - .  Logic,  the  Theory  of  Inquiry,  ch  25 

Weiss.  Reality,  bk  i 

Blanshard.  The  Nature  of  Thought 

Gilson.  The  Unity  of  Philosophical  Experience 

- .  Reason  and  Revelation  in  the  Middle  Ages 

- .  Realisme  thomiste  et  critique  de  la  connaissance 

C.  I.  Lewis.  Mind  and  the  World  Order 
- .  An  Analysis  of  Knowledge  and  Valuation 

B.  Russell.  The  Problems  of  Philosophy,  ch  5,  7-8, 
n,  13 

- .  Mysticism  and  Logic,  ch  10 

- .  The  Analysis  of  Mind,  lect  12 

- .  Sceptical  Essays,  1 

- .  An  Inquiry  into  Meaning  and  Truth,  ch  7-12, 

18 

- .  Human  Knowledge,  Its  Scope  and  Limits 

Dewey  and  Bentley.  Knowing  and  the  Known 


Chap  ter  44:  LABOR 


INTRODUCTION 


"A  /TEN  have  dreamed  of  a  golden  age  in  the 
jLVJL  past  when  the  world  was  young  and 
everything  needed  for  the  support  of  life 
existed  in  profusion.  Earth,  Lucretius  writes, 
“first  spontaneously  of  herself  produced  for 
mortals  goodly  corn-crops  and  joyous  vine¬ 
yards;  of  herself  gave  sweet  fruits  and  glad 
pastures;  which  now-a-days  scarce  attain  any 
size  even  when  furthered  by  our  labor;  we  ex¬ 
haust  the  oxen  and  the  strength  of  the  husband¬ 
men;  we  wrear  out  our  iron,  scarcely  fed  after 
all  by  the  tilled  fields;  so  niggardly  are  they  of 
their  produce  and  after  so  much  labor  do  they 
let  it  grow.”  When  the  aged  plowman  “com- 
(  pares  present  times  with  times  past,”  Lucretius 
adds,  “he  praises  the  fortunes  of  his  sire”  living 
in  the  time  of  earth’s  plenty. 

This  ancient  myth  of  a  golden  age  has  some¬ 
times  taken  the  form,  as  with  Rousseau,  of  an 
idealization  of  primitive  society,  uncorrupted 
by  civilization,  in  which  an  easy,  almost  effort¬ 
less,  existence  corresponded  to  the  simplicity  of 
man’s  needs.  Rousseau  pictures  a  situation  in 
which  “the  produce  of  the  earth  furnished 
[man]  with  all  he  needed,  and  instinct  told  him 
how  to  use  it,”  so  that  “singing  and  dancing, 
the  true  offspring  of  love  and  leisure,  became 
the  amusement,  or  rather  the  occupation  of 
men  and  women  assembled  together  with 
nothing  else  to  do.” 

In  our  own  day,  industrial  utopias  have  been 
projected  into  a  future  made  free  from  toil  by 
the  adequacy  of  machines  or  the  efficiency  of 
atomic  energy.  Long  before  the  industrial  era, 
Aristotle  envisioned,  as  a  supposition  contrary  to 
fact,  a  society  built  upon  labor-saving  machines. 
“If  every  instrument  could  accomplish  its  own 
work,”  he  writes,  if  it  could  obey  or  anticipate 
commands,  if  “the  shuttle  would  weave  .  .  . 
without  a  hand  to  guide  it,  the  chief  workmen 
would  not  want  servants,  nor  masters  slaves.” 


In  all  these  conceptions  of  a  better  life,  labor 
is  eliminated  or  reduced.  The  implication  seems 
to  be  that  the  labor  required  for  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  all  historic  societies  is  an  affliction,  a 
drudgery,  a  crushing  burden  which  deforms  the 
lives  of  many,  if  not  all.  The  pains  of  toil  do 
not  belong  to  human  life  by  any  necessity  of 
human  nature,  but  rather  through  the  accident 
of  external  circumstances  which  might  be  other 
than  they  are.  “Work  became  indispensable,” 
according  to  Rousseau,  only  when  “property 
was  introduced,”  and  then  “vast  forests  became 
smiling  fields,  which  man  had  to  water  with  the 
sweat  of  his  brow.”  It  was  the  result  of  “some 
fatal  accident,  which,  for  the  public  good, 
should  never  have  happened.”  Man  might  have 
realized  his  nature  more  surely  and  richly  if, 
like  the  lilies  of  the  field,  he  neither  toiled  nor 
spun. 

The  contrary  view  would  maintain  that  work 
is  not  a  curse  but  a  blessing,  filling  man’s  hours 
usefully,  turning  to  service  energies  which 
would  otherwise  be  wasted  or  misspent  in  idle¬ 
ness  or  mischief.  The  sinfulness  of  sloth  implies 
the  virtue  of  work.  The  principle  of  activity, 
according  to  Hegel,  whereby  “the  workman 
has  to  perform  for  his  subsistence,”  gives  man 
a  dignity  which  “consists  in  his  depending  en¬ 
tirely  on  his  diligence,  conduct,  and  intelli¬ 
gence  for  the  supply  of  his  wants.  In  direct  con¬ 
travention  of  this  principle”  are  “pauperism, 
laziness,  inactivity.” 

It  is  even  suggested  that  useful  occupations 
save  men  from  a  boredom  they  fear  more  than 
the  pain  of  labor,  as  evidenced  by  the  variety 
of  amusements  and  diversions  they  invent  or 
frantically  pursue  to  occupy  themselves  when 
work  is  finished.  The  satisfactions  of  labor  are 
as  peculiarly  human  as  its  burdens.  Not  merely 
to  keep  alive,  but  to  keep  his  self-respect,  man 
is  obliged  to  work. 


921 


922 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


“In  the  morning  when  thou  risest  unwilling,” 
the  emperor  Marcus  Aurelius  tells  himself,  “let 
this  thought  be  present — I  am  rising  to  the 
work  of  a  human  being.  Why,  then,  am  I  dis¬ 
satisfied  if  I  am  going  to  do  the  things  for  which 
I  exist  and  for  which  I  was  brought  into  the 
world  ?  Or  have  I  been  made  for  this,  to  lie  in 
the  bed-clothes  and  keep  myself  warm?  But 
this  is  more  pleasant.  Dost  thou  exist,  then,  to 
take  thy  pleasure,  and  not  at  all  for  action  and 
exertion?” 

The  perspectives  of  theology  give  still  an¬ 
other  view  of  labor.  It  is  not  an  accidental  mis¬ 
fortune  which  men  may  some  day  be  able  to 
correct.  But  neither  is  it  a  blessing  nor  the 
thing  for  which  man  was  created.  When  the 
golden  age  of  Saturn  came  to  an  end,  and  Jupi¬ 
ter  replaced  him  on  the  throne  of  heaven,  then, 
as  Virgil  tells  the  story,  labor  was  first  intro¬ 
duced  into  the  world.  “Before  Jove 

Fields  knew  no  taming  hand  of  husbandmen; 

To  mark  the  plain  or  mete  with  boundary-line — 
Even  this  was  impious;  for  the  common  stock 
They  gathered,  and  the  earth  of  her  own  will 
All  things  more  freely,  no  man  bidding,  bore. 

He  to  black  serpents  gave  their  venom-bane, 

And  bade  the  wolf  go  prowl,  and  ocean  toss; 

Shook  from  the  leaves  their  honey,  put  fire  away, 
And  curved  the  random  rivers  running  wine, 

That  use  by  gradual  dint  of  thought  on  thought 
Might  forge  the  various  arts,  with  furrow’s  help 
The  corn-blade  win,  and  strike  out  hidden  fire 
From  the  flint’s  heart. 

Here,  while  labor  may  in  some  sense  be  a  pun¬ 
ishment,  or  at  least  a  fall  from  the  golden  age, 
it  still  does  result  in  benefits.  “The  divers  arts 
arose”  from  Jove’s  “whetting  the  minds  of  men 
with  care  on  care,  nor  suffering  realm  of  his  in 
drowsy  sloth  to  stagnate.”  But  although  “toil 
conquered  all,”  it  is  still  “remorseless  toil.” 

According  to  Christian  doctrine,  labor  is  an 
inevitable  consequence  of  man’s  fall  from  grace, 
a  punishment  for  Adam’s  disobedience  like  dis¬ 
ease  and  death.  In  the  earthly  paradise  of  Eden, 
the  children  of  Adam  would  have  lived  without 
labor  or  servitude  of  any  sort.  But  when  Adam 
sinned,  the  Lord  God  said  unto  him:  “Cursed 
is  the  ground  for  thy  sake;  in  toil  shalt  thou 
eat  of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life  ...  In  the  sweat 
of  thy  face,  shalt  thou  eat  bread,  till  thou  re¬ 
turn  into  the  ground.” 

That  work  should  be  painful  belongs  to  its 


very  essence.  Otherwise  it  would  not  serve  as 
a  penalty  or  a  penance.  But,  in  the  Christian 
as  in  the  Virgilian  view,  labor  also  contributes  to 
such  happiness  as  man  can  enjoy  on  earth.  The 
distinction  between  temporal  and  eternal  hap¬ 
piness  is  a  distinction  between  a  life  of  work  on 
earth  and  the  activity  of  contemplation  in 
Heaven.  This  does  not  mean  the  elimination  of 
leisure  and  enjoyment  from  earthly  life,  but  it 
does  make  labor  their  antecedent  and  indis¬ 
pensable  condition.  It  also  means  that  even  in 
his  highest  activities— in  the  development  of 
his  arts  and  sciences — man  must  be  perpetually 
at  work.  His  achievement  of  truth  or  beauty  is 
never  so  perfect  and  lasting  that  he  can  rest  in  it. 

In  these  diverse  conceptions  of  the  relation  of 
labor  to  human  life,  work  seems  to  have  several 
different  meanings.  It  always  involves  activity 
or  exertion.  Its  clearest  opposite  is  sleep.  But 
other  things  are  also  opposed  to  work — play 
or  amusement,  leisure,  idleness.  When  leisure 
is  not  identified  with  idleness,  it  involves  ac¬ 
tivity  no  less  than  work.  So,  too,  many  of  the 
forms  of  play  require  intense  exertion  of  body 
or  mind.  The  difference,  therefore,  must  lie  in 
the  nature  or  purpose  of  the  activity. 

Aristotle  suggests  what  the  difference  is  when 
he  puts  play,  work,  and  leisure  in  an  ordered  re¬ 
lationship  to  one  another.  Nature,  he  writes, 
“requires  that  we  should  be  able,  not  only  to 
work  well,  but  to  use  leisure  well.”  Leisure  is 
“the  first  principle  of  all  action”  and  so  “leisure 
is  better  than  work  and  is  its  end.”  As  play  and 
with  it  rest  (/.<?.,  sleep)  are  for  the  sake  of  work, 
so  work  in  turn  is  for  the  sake  of  leisure. 

The  characteristics  of  work  as  the  middle 
term  here  seem  to  be,  first,  that  work  is  activity 
directed  to  an  end  beyond  itself  and,  second, 
that  it  is  productive  of  the  necessities  which 
sustain  life  rather  than  of  the  goods  by  which 
life  is  perfected.  The  political  or  speculative  ac¬ 
tivity  which  Aristotle  considers  the  proper  oc¬ 
cupation  of  leisure  is  intrinsically  good  or  en¬ 
joyable.  For  participation  in  such  activities 
leisure — in  the  sense  of  time  free  from  labor — 
is  required;  but  since  the  good  life  cannot  be 
lived  unless  life  itself  is  sustained,  labor  also  is 
a  prerequisite. 

Work  is  thus  defined  by  wealth  as  its  imme¬ 
diate  end— the  production  of  the  external,  eco- 


Chapter  44:  LABOR 


923 


nomic,  or  consumable  goods  which  support  life. 
Though  play  has  the  immediately  enjoyable 
character  of  an  activity  performed  for  its  own 
sake,  Aristotle  subordinates  it  to  work,  assign¬ 
ing  to  it  the  same  utility  which  rest  has.  Both 
refresh  men  from  the  fatigues  of  labor  and  re¬ 
create  the  energies  needed  for  work.  “Amuse¬ 
ment,”  he  writes,  “is  needed  more  amid  serious 
occupations  than  at  other  times,  for  he  who  is 
hard  at  work  has  need  for  relaxation,  and  amuse¬ 
ment  gives  relaxation.” 

The  economic  sense  which  connects  work 
and  labor  with  wealth  seems  to  be  the  primary 
but  not  the  only  sense  in  which  these  terms  are 
used  in  the  great  books.  There  is  the  more 
general  sense  of  human  work  as  any  productive 
activity  in  which  men  exercise  some  art  or 
skill.  The  familiar  distinction  between  skilled 
and  unskilled  labor  may  be  only  a  distinction  in 
degree  if  there  is  truth  in  the  theory  that  some 
degree  of  skill — some  rudimentary  art  at  least 
—is  required  for  the  performance  of  the  sim¬ 
plest  tasks  of  hand  and  eye. 

Kinds  of  work,  according  to  this  theory,  can 
be  differentiated  by  reference  to  the  type  of  art 
involved.  The  ancient  distinction  between  the 
servile  and  the  liberal  arts  also  divides  workers 
into  those  who  manipulate  and  transform  phys¬ 
ical  materials  and  those  who  employ  the  sym¬ 
bols  of  poetry,  music,  or  science  to  produce 
things  for  the  mind.  This  distinction  between 
manual  and  mental  work,  based  on  the  charac¬ 
ter  of  the  work  itself,  is  not  to  be  identified  with 
the  distinction  between  slave  and  free  labor. 
The  latter  is  based  on  the  status  of  the  worker. 
Even  in  the  slave  economies  of  the  ancient 
world,  some  freemen  were  artisans,  farmers,  or 
sailors,  and  some  slaves  were  philosophers.  Nor 
is  mental  as  opposed  to  manual  work  necessarily 
directed  to  the  production  of  the  goods  of  the 
mind.  The  white-collar  workers  of  an  industrial 
economy,  employed  with  the  symbols  of  fi¬ 
nance,  accounting,  or  management,  do  mental 
work  which  has  its  ultimate  end  in  the  produc¬ 
tion  or  exchange  of  material  goods. 

There  are  still  other  traditional  distinctions 
among  kinds  of  work  and  types  of  workers,  all 
of  which  cannot  be  put  together  into  a  single 
scheme  of  classification  without  much  over¬ 
lapping.  Some  distinctions,  like  that  between 


hand-work  and  machine-labor  or  between 
healthful  and  unhealthful  occupations,  turn  on 
the  characteristics  of  the  work  itself.  Some  de¬ 
pend  on  the  social  conditions  under  which  the 
work  is  done  or  on  the  relationship  between  the 
individual  worker  and  other  men.  The  work  to 
be  done  may  be  accomplished  by  an  individual 
working  alone,  or  by  the  cooperative  labor  of 
many;  and,  in  the  latter  case,  the  social  organi¬ 
zation  of  the  laboring  group  may  involve  the 
ranking  of  men  according  to  the  functions  they 
perform. 

Here  we  get  the  division  into  the  master- 
craftsmen,  who  plan  and  superintend,  and  all 
grades  of  helpers  who  execute  their  directions. 
One  meaning  of  the  word  “menial”  as  applied 
to  work  signifies  the  inferior  tasks  in  the  hier¬ 
archy  of  functions;  but  it  is  also  used  to  express 
society’s  opinion  of  those  who  perform  certain 
tasks,  such  as  that  of  the  domestic  servant.  The 
distinction  between  what  is  menial  and  what  is 
dignified  work  varies,  of  course,  from  society 
to  society. 

The  characterization  of  labor  as  productive 
or  non-productive,  and  of  work  as  useful  or 
wasteful,  is  based  on  strictly  economic  criteria 
and  on  considerations  of  social  welfare.  The 
sense  in  which  work  cannot  be  divorced  from 
the  production  of  some  extrinsic  effect  is  not 
violated  by  the  conception  of  non-productive 
labor  as  work  which  in  no  way  increases  the 
wealth  of  nations. 

“There  is  one  sort  of  labor  which  adds  to  the 
subject  upon  which  it  is  bestowed;  there  is 
another  which  has  no  such  effect.  The  former,” 
writes  Adam  Smith,  “may  be  called  produc¬ 
tive;  the  latter,  unproductive  labor  .  . .  The 
labor  of  some  of  the  most  respectable  orders  in 
society  is . . .  unproductive  of  any  value  . . .  The 
sovereign,  for  example,  with  all  the  officers  both 
of  justice  and  war  who  serve  under  him,  the 
whole  army  and  navy,  are  unproductive  la¬ 
borers  .  .  .  Like  the  declamation  of  the  actor, 
the  harangue  of  the  orator,  or  the  tune  of  the 
musician,  the  work  of  all  of  them  perishes  in 
the  very  instant  of  its  production.” 

The  standard  by  which  Marx  judges  the  use¬ 
fulness  of  labor  also  implies  the  economic  no¬ 
tion  of  a  commodity.  “Nothing  can  have  value,” 
he  says,  “without  being  an  object  of  utility.  If 
the  thing  is  useless,  so  is  the  labor  contained  in 


924 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


it.”  But  Marx  also  adds  a  criterion  of  social 
utility.  “Whoever  directly  satisfies  his  own 
wants  with  the  produce  of  his  labor,  creates,  in¬ 
deed,  use-values,  but  not  commodities.  In  order 
to  produce  the  latter,  he  must  not  only  produce 
use-values,  but  use-values  for  others,  social  use- 
values.”  It  is  by  this  last  criterion  that  Marx 
criticizes  the  capitalist  economy  for  its  “most 
outrageous  squandering  of  labor  power”  in 
superfluous  or  socially  useless  production. 

The  principle  of  the  division  of  labor  does 
not  depend  upon  any  particular  classification 
of  work  or  workers  according  to  type.  Nor  does 
it  belong  to  one  system  of  economy  rather  than 
another.  But  the  ancients,  concerned  as  they 
were  with  its  bearing  on  the  origin  and  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  state,  saw  the  division  of  labor  as 
primarily  of  political  significance;  whereas  the 
moderns  are  more  concerned  with  its  economic 
causes  and  consequences. 

Thucydides  compares  the  poverty  and  crude 
life  of  the  early  Hellenic  tribes  with  the  wealth, 
the  power,  and  the  civilization  of  Athens, 
Sparta,  Corinth,  and  other  city-states  at  the 
opening  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.  The  differ¬ 
ence  is  not  to  be  accounted  for  in  terms  of  the 
invention  of  new  tools,  but  rather  in  terms  of 
the  greater  efficiency  in  production  which  is 
obtained  by  a  division  of  labor.  This  is  both  an 
effect  and  a  cause  of  the  enlargement  of  the 
community,  and  its  increasing  population.  The 
greater  the  number  of  men  associated  in  a 
common  life,  the  greater  the  number  of  special¬ 
ized  tasks  which  can  be  assigned  to  different 
members  of  the  community. 

This  observation  is  formulated  by  Plato  and 
Aristotle  in  their  accounts  of  the  origin  of  the 
state.  The  advantages  which  the  state  confers 
upon  its  members  are  in  part  won  by  the  di¬ 
vision  of  labor  in  which  they  participate. 

The  isolated  family,  Aristotle  remarks,  is 
barely  able  to  supply  the  “everyday  wants”  of 
its  members.  The  tribe  or  village,  which  is  an 
association  of  families,  can  achieve  a  little  more 
than  bare  subsistence;  but  not  until  several 
tribes  unite  to  form  a  city  does  a  truly  self-suf¬ 
ficing  community  come  into  existence,  and  one 
with  an  adequate  division  of  labor.  Some  men, 
if  not  all,  can  then  acquire  the  leisure  to  en¬ 
gage  in  the  arts  and  sciences  and  politics — the 


pursuits  of  civilization  which  have  their  mate¬ 
rial  basis  in  sufficient  wealth. 

The  effect  of  the  division  of  labor  on  the 
social  structure  of  the  state  seems  to  be  gen¬ 
erally  agreed  upon  by  all  observers,  ancient  and 
modern.  Men  are  divided  into  social  classes  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  kind  of  work  they  do — not  only 
by  reference  to  the  type  of  economically  pro¬ 
ductive  labor,  but  also  in  terms  of  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  labor  and  leisure,  or  between  eco¬ 
nomic  and  other  functions  in  society. 

All  do  not  agree,  however,  that  such  class 
distinctions  are  as  beneficial  to  society  as  the  in¬ 
crease  of  wealth  or  opulence  which  the  division 
of  labor  affords.  They  not  only  threaten  the 
unity  and  peace  of  the  society,  but  tend  to  de¬ 
grade  the  condition  of  labor  by  reducing  the 
individual  worker  to  a  cog  in  the  machine.  The 
division  of  labor  frequently  restricts  him  to  a 
slight  and  insignificant  task,  repetitively  per¬ 
formed,  and  so  makes  it  impossible  for  him  to 
develop  his  skill  or  to  enjoy  any  pride  of  work¬ 
manship.  From  a  purely  economic  point  of  view, 
Adam  Smith  advocates  the  greatest  intensifica¬ 
tion  of  the  division  of  labor.  Each  more  minute 
sub-division  of  tasks  augments  efficiency  in  pro¬ 
duction.  But  from  the  human  point  of  view,  he 
sees  that  this  method  of  maximizing  wealth  by 
dividing  men  into  functional  groups — one  man, 
one  task — leads  to  the  mental  impoverishment 
of  the  men,  who  require  a  multiplicity  of  func¬ 
tions  for  their  development. 

“In  the  progress  of  the  division  of  labor,” 
Smith  writes,  “the  employment  of  the  far 
greater  part  of  those  who  live  by  labor  . . . 
comes  to  be  confined  to  a  few  very  simple  oper¬ 
ations,  frequently  one  or  two  .  . .  The  man 
whose  whole  life  is  spent  in  performing  a  few 
simple  operations  . . .  has  no  occasion  to  exert 
his  understanding  or  to  exercise  his  invention 
...  He  naturally  loses,  therefore,  the  habit  of 
such  exertion,  and  generally  becomes  as  stupid 
and  ignorant  as  it  is  possible  for  a  human  crea¬ 
ture  to  become.”  The  situation  seems  even 
worse  to  Marx.  The  industrial  system,  revolu¬ 
tionizing  the  mode  of  work,  “converts  the  la¬ 
borer  into  a  crippled  monstrosity,  by  forcing 
his  detailed  dexterity  at  the  expense  of  a  world 
of  productive  capabilities  and  instincts.”  It 
makes  the  individual  worker  “the  automatic 
motor  of  a  fractional  operation.” 


925 


Chapter  44: 


LABOR 


The  great  issues  concerning  labor  seem  to  be 
moral  and  political  rather  than  economic.  The 
consideration  of  the  division  of  labor  from  the 
point  of  view  of  efficiency  in  production  remains 
purely  economic  only  when  it  is  abstracted 
from  any  concern  about  the  effect  upon  the 
laborer.  The  analysis  of  factors  affecting  the 
productivity  of  labor  ceases  to  be  merely  eco¬ 
nomic  when  the  hours,  conditions,  and  organiza¬ 
tion  of  work  are  viewed  in  terms  of  the  working 
men. 

The  determination  of  wages  by  the  buying 
and  selling  of  labor  (or,  as  Marx  insists,  of 
labor-power)  as  a  commodity  subject  to  market 
conditions  of  supply  and  demand;  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  real  and  nominal  wages  as  de¬ 
termined  by  the  level  of  wages  in  relation  to 
the  price  of  other  commodities;  the  so-called 
“iron  law  of  wages”  according  to  which  wages 
cannot  be  reduced  below  the  minimum  of  bare 
subsistence  for  the  laborer  and  his  family — 
these  are  matters  which  the  economist  may 
deal  with  in  a  descriptive  or  historical  manner, 
calculating  rates  and  ratios  without  regard  to 
l  questions  of  j  ustice.  But  in  terms  of  such  formu¬ 
lations  questions  of  justice  are  raised  and  be¬ 
come  the  great  issues  concerning  the  rights  of 
workmen  to  the  fruits  of  their  labor,  to  the 
security  of  full  employment  and  other  forms  of 
protection,  to  collective  bargaining,  to  a  voice 
in  the  management  of  industry  or  business. 

Stated  in  this  way,  the  issues  seem  to  be  pe¬ 
culiarly  modern.  These  are  the  problems  of  a 
capitalist  economy,  to  which  the  partisans  of 
capital  and  of  labor  propose  different  solutions. 
Yet  the  principles  of  justice  to  which  the  parties 
in  conflict  appeal  seem  to  be  no  less  applicable 
to  earlier  conflicts  in  other  economic  systems — 
between  master  and  slave  or  between  feudal 
lord  and  serf.  All  the  institutional  differences 
among  these  three  economies  should  not,  ac¬ 
cording  to  Karl  Marx,  conceal  from  us  the  pro¬ 
found  analogy  which  obtains  in  the  relation  be¬ 
tween  owners  and  workers,  whether  the  work¬ 
ers  are  chattel  slaves,  peons  bound  to  the  land, 
or  industrial  proletarians  selling  their  labor- 
power. 

“Wherever  a  part  of  society  possesses  a  mo¬ 
nopoly  of  the  means  of  production,”  he  writes, 
“the  laborer,  free  or  not  free,  must  add  to  the 
working  time  necessary  for  his  own  mainte¬ 


nance  an  extra  working  time  in  order  to  pro¬ 
duce  the  means  of  subsistence  for  the  owners  of 
the  means  of  production,  whether  this  proprie¬ 
tor  be  the  Athenian  gentleman,  Etruscan  thco- 
crat,  civis  Romanus,  Norman  baron,  American 
slave-owner,  Wallachian  Boyard,  modern  land¬ 
lord  or  capitalist.” 

Marx  undertakes  to  explain  how  the  surface 
difference  between  slave  labor  and  wage  labor 
conceals  the  analogy.  “In  slave  labor,  even  that 
part  of  the  working-day  in  which  the  slave  is 
only  replacing  the  value  of  his  own  means  of 
existence,  in  which,  therefore,  he  works  for 
himself  alone,  appears  as  labor  for  his  master. 
All  the  slave’s  labor  appears  as  unpaid  labor.  In 
wage-labor,  on  the  contrary,  even  surplus  la¬ 
bor,  or  unpaid  labor,  appears  as  paid.  There  the 
property-relation  conceals  the  labor  of  the  slave 
for  himself;  here  the  money-relation  conceals 
the  unrequited  labor  of  the  wrage  laborer.” 

Two  phrases  here — “unpaid  labor”  and  “un¬ 
requited  labor” — indicate  that  Marx  is  think¬ 
ing  in  terms  of  justice.  Elsewhere  he  calls  the 
industrial  proletariat  “wage-slaves”  to  empha¬ 
size  the  presence  in  an  apparently  free  economy 
of  the  same  unjust  exploitation  which  the  word 
“slave”  connotes  when  it  refers  to  the  use  of 
men  as  chattel.  The  essential  similarity  in  all 
forms  of  economic  exploitation — which  makes 
all  forms  of  economic  slavery  essentially  similar 
— is  seen  by  Marx  in  terms  of  the  production  of 
a  surplus  value  by  the  laborer;  that  is,  he  pro¬ 
duces  a  greater  value  in  commodities  than  he 
needs  to  support  his  own  subsistence.  This  sur¬ 
plus  value,  when  appropriated  by  the  owner  of 
the  materials  and  the  tools  on  and  with  which 
the  propertyless  laborer  works,  becomes  an  un¬ 
earned  increment,  or,  in  other  words,  an  unjust 
profit  from  the  work  of  another  man. 

The  controversy  over  the  theory  of  surplus 
value  in  Marx’s  Capital  can  be  separated  from 
the  controversy  over  the  revolutionary  program 
of  the  Communist  Manifesto .  But  neither  can  be 
separated  from  issues  of  justice.  It  is  question¬ 
able  whether  those  economists  join  issue  with 
Marx  who  criticize  his  analysis  in  terms  of  the 
facts  or  conclusions  of  economics  as  a  purely 
descriptive  science,  and  who  put  aside  all  con¬ 
siderations  of  the  fair  and  the  equitable.  Yet 
those  facts  or  conclusions,  especially  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  operation  of  the  capitalist  economy, 


926 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


become  relevant  in  the  dispute  as  to  whether 
capitalist  profits  are  intrinsically  unjust,  be¬ 
cause  they  are  incapable  of  accruing  except 
from  the  exploitation  of  labor. 

Those  who  dispute  this  matter  seldom  deny 
that  chattel  slavery  is  unjust.  On  that  there 
may  be  conflicting  opinions,  as  indicated  in  the 
chapter  on  Slavery,  but  they  are  not  germane 
to  the  present  issue.  Nor  do  the  opponents 
seem  to  argue  their  case  in  terms  of  a  different 
theory  of  what  is  just  and  unjust.  They  them¬ 
selves  appeal  to  the  common  principle  of  fair¬ 
ness  in  exchange  and  distribution  to  defend  the 
rights  of  the  owners  of  capital  to  a  profit  in  re¬ 
turn  for  their  own  prior  labor  in  accumulating 
capital  stock,  as  well  as  for  the  risks  they  take 
when  they  invest  their  reserves  in  productive 
enterprises.  The  problem,  therefore,  seems  to 
narrow  down  to  such  questions  as  whether  la¬ 
borers  are  exploited  when  they  receive  in  wages 
less  than  the  full  value  their  work  creates; 
whether  capitalist  profits  are  entirely  reaped 
from  the  surplus  value  which  is  the  differential 
between  what  labor  creates  and  what  labor  re¬ 
ceives;  or  whether,  if  profit  is  not  identical  with 
surplus  value,  it  always  contains  a  marginal  ele¬ 
ment  of  unearned  increment  derived  from  the 
exploitation  of  labor. 

The  notion  of  value — the  value  of  commodi¬ 
ties  and  the  value  of  labor  itself — is  obviously 
of  central  importance.  As  indicated  in  the  chap¬ 
ter  on  Justice,  the  formulae  of  equality,  which 
determine  fair  exchanges  or  distributions,  re¬ 
quire  some  measure  of  equivalents  in  value. 
What  determines  the  intrinsic  value  of  a  com¬ 
modity  according  to  which  it  can  be  compared 
with  another  commodity,  without  reference  to 
the  price  of  each  in  the  market  place?  Adam 
Smith’s  answer  to  this  question  is  labor .  It  is 
the  answer  given  before  him  by  Locke,  and 
after  him  by  Marx. 

“Equal  quantities  of  labor,  at  all  times  and 
places,”  Smith  declares,  “may  be  said  to  be  of 
equal  value  to  the  laborer.  In  his  ordinary  state 
of  health,  strength  and  spirits;  in  the  ordinary 
degree  of  his  skill  and  dexterity,  he  must  al¬ 
ways  lay  down  the  same  portion  of  his  ease,  his 
liberty,  and  his  happiness.  The  price  which  he 
pays  must  always  be  the  same,  whatever  may 
be  the  quantity  of  goods  which  he  receives  in 


return  for  it.  Of  these,  indeed,  it  may  some¬ 
times  purchase  a  greater  and  sometimes  a  smaller 
quantity;  but  it  is  their  value  which  varies,  not 
that  of  the  labor  which  purchases  them.”  From 
this  Adam  Smith  concludes  that  “labor  alone, 
therefore,  never  varying  in  its  own  value,  is 
alone  the  ultimate  and  real  standard  by  which 
the  value  of  all  commodities  can  at  all  times 
and  places  be  estimated  and  compared.  It  is 
their  real  price;  money  is  their  nominal  price 
only.” 

This  labor  theory  of  value  raises  the  further 
question  of  the  value  of  labor  itself.  What  deter¬ 
mines  its  natural  or  real  price,  as  opposed  to  its 
market  or  nominal  price?  On  this  Marx  and 
Smith  appear  to  part  company,  which  may  ac¬ 
count  for  their  further  divergence  when  Marx 
declares  that  “the  real  value  of  labor  is  the  cost 
of  its  production,  not  the  average  price  it  can 
command  in  the  market”;  and  then  goes  on  to 
explain  how  a  surplus  value  is  derived  by  the 
capitalist  who  pays  for  labor-power  on  a  basis  of 
the  cost  of  producing  and  sustaining  the  labor¬ 
er,  but  uses  his  labor-power  to  produce  a  real 
value  in  commodities  which  exceeds  the  real 
price  of  labor  itself. 

Smith,  on  the  other  hand,  holds  that  “the 
whole  produce  of  labor  belongs  to  the  laborer” 
only  “in  that  original  state  of  things,  which  pre¬ 
cedes  both  the  appropriation  of  land  and  the 
accumulation  of  stock.”  When  “land  becomes 
private  property,”  the  landlord  “makes  the  first 
deduction”  in  the  form  of  rent ;  and  the  capital¬ 
ist,  or  the  person  who  invests  some  part  of  his 
stock  accumulation,  “makes  a  second  deduc¬ 
tion”  in  the  form  of  profit.  After  rent  and  profit 
are  taken,  the  laborer’s  wage  represents  what  is 
left  of  “the  whole  produce  of  labor.” 

Yet  Smith  also  says  of  the  landlords  that  “as 
soon  as  the  land  of  any  country  has  all  become 
private  property,”  they,  “like  all  other  men, 
love  to  reap  where  they  never  sowed.”  The  im¬ 
plication  of  unearned  increment  in  this  remark 
suggests  that  Smith  is  neither  disinclined  to  mix 
moral  judgment  with  economic  description,  nor 
at  variance  with  Marx  on  the  principle  of  eco¬ 
nomic  justice.  That  Smith  regards  profit  as  the 
price  properly  paid  for  the  use  of  capital  and 
that  he  does  not  see  reaping  without  sowing  as 
an  essential  element  in  profit-making  may  per¬ 
haps  be  read  as  a  challenge  to  Marx’s  develop- 


Chapter  44:  LABOR 


927 


ment  of  the  labor  theory  of  value  into  a  theory 
of  surplus  value  and  unearned  increment. 

It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  the  difference  in 
the  conclusions  of  Smith  and  Marx  from  a  com¬ 
mon  premise  can  be  explained  by  the  different 
directions  their  analyses  take.  It  may  not  repre¬ 
sent  a  direct  opposition  on  a  point  of  fact.  The 
proposition  that  value  derives  from  labor  seems 
to  yield  a  number  of  theoretical  consequences. 

Locke,  for  example,  holding  that  it  is  labor 
which  “puts  the  difference  of  value  on  every¬ 
thing,”  makes  this  the  basis  for  the  right  to  pri¬ 
vate  property,  certainly  in  its  original  appro¬ 
priation  from  the  common  domain  which  is 
God’s  gift  to  mankind.  “Though  the  earth  and 
all  inferior  creatures  be  common  to  all  men,  yet 
every  man  has  a  property  in  his  own  person. 
The  labor  of  his  body  and  the  work  of  his  hands 
we  may  say  are  properly  his.  Whatsoever,  then, 
he  removes  out  of  the  state  that  nature  hath 
provided  and  left  it  in,  he  hath  mixed  his  labor 
with,  and  joined  to  it  something  that  is  his  own, 
and  thereby  makes  it  his  property.” 

(  This  view  seems  to  be  shared  by  Rousseau. 
“It  is  impossible  to  conceive,”  he  says,  “how 
property  can  come  from  anything  but  manual 
labor;  for  what  else  can  a  man  add  to  things 
which  he  does  not  originally  create,  so  as  to 
make  them  his  own  property?”  In  the  same 
vein,  Smith  declares  that  “the  property  which 
every  man  has  in  his  own  labor,  as  it  is  the  origi¬ 
nal  foundation  of  all  other  property,  so  it  is  the 
most  sacred  and  inviolable.” 

What  further  conclusions  follow  from  this 
justification  of  private  property  as  a  right 
founded  upon  labor?  How  is  the  original  right 
to  property  extended  into  a  right  of  inherit¬ 
ance  ?  How  does  this  conception  of  the  origin  of 
property  bear  on  the  Marxist  conception  of 
the  origin  of  the  proletariat — the  propertyless 
workers  who  have  nothing  but  their  labor- 
power  to  sell?  Denying  the  charge  that  com¬ 
munists  desire  to  abolish  “the  right  of  person¬ 
ally  acquiring  property  as  the  fruit  of  a  man’s 
own  labor,”  Marx  and  Engels  make  the  coun¬ 
tercharge  that  the  development  of  industrial 
capitalism  “has  to  a  great  extent  already  de¬ 
stroyed  it  and  is  still  destroying  it  daily.”  They 
propose  public  ownership  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  to  protect  the  property  rights  of  labor; 


they  seek  to  abolish  only  “the  bourgeois  form 
of  private  property”  which,  in  their  view,  is  a 
use  of  property  to  exploit  labor. 

The  rights  of  labor  seem  to  be  central  in  any 
formulation  of  the  problem  of  a  just  distribu¬ 
tion  of  wealth.  But  when  other  rights  are  taken 
into  consideration,  the  problem  of  economic 
justice  becomes  more  complex;  and  different 
solutions  result  from  differences  in  emphasis. 
Even  with  regard  to  one  group  of  solutions, 
J.  S.  Mill  observes  that  “some  communists  con¬ 
sider  it  unjust  that  the  produce  of  the  labor  of 
the  community  should  be  shared  on  any  other 
principle  than  that  of  exact  equality;  others 
think  it  just  that  those  should  receive  most 
whose  wants  are  greatest.”  To  weigh  the  merits 
of  competing  solutions,  as  well  as  to  reach  an 
adequate  statement  of  the  problem,  the  discus¬ 
sion  of  labor  must  be  connected  with  the  discus¬ 
sion  of  related  considerations  in  the  chapters  on 
Justice,  Revolution,  and  Wealth. 

There  are  issues  of  justice  concerning  labor 
other  than  the  strictly  economic  problem  of  dis¬ 
tribution.  In  the  ancient  world,  for  example, 
not  only  chattel  slaves  but  also  free  artisans 
were  frequently  regarded  as  incapable  of  par¬ 
ticipation  in  political  life.  Only  men  of  inde¬ 
pendent  wealth  had  enough  leisure  for  the  ac¬ 
tivities  of  citizenship  which,  in  the  Greek  city- 
states,  was  almost  a  full-time  occupation.  This, 
according  to  Aristotle,  is  one  reason  for  the  dis¬ 
franchisement  of  the  laboring  classes  who  must 
devote  a  great  part  of  their  energy  to  earning  a 
living  and  who  have  neither  the  time  nor  train¬ 
ing  for  liberal  pursuits.  “Since  leisure  is  neces¬ 
sary  both  for  the  development  of  virtue  and  the 
performance  of  political  duties,”  citizens,  he 
maintains,  cannot  “lead  the  life  of  mechanics  or 
tradesmen.” 

Against  this  oligarchical  view  (which  also  in¬ 
volves  the  notion  that  wealth  deserves  special 
political  privileges),  the  Greek  democrats  take 
the  position  that  all  free  men  should  be  citizens 
on  an  equal  footing,  regardless  of  the  amount  of 
their  property  or  their  conditions  of  labor  and 
leisure.  But  the  oligarchical  principle  still  tends 
to  prevail  among  republicans  in  the  18th  cen¬ 
tury.  Kant,  for  example,  holds  that  citizenship 
“presupposes  the  independence  or  self-suffi¬ 
ciency  of  the  individual  citizen  among  the  peo- 


928 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


pie.”  On  this  basis  he  excludes  from  the  suf¬ 
frage,  as  only  “passive”  citizens,  “the  appren¬ 
tice  of  a  merchant  or  tradesman,  a  servant  who 
is  not  in  the  employ  of  the  state,  a  minor  ( natu - 
raliter  vel  civiliter ),  all  women,  and,  generally, 
everyone  who  is  compelled  to  maintain  himself 
not  according  to  his  own  industry,  but  as  it  is 
arranged  by  others  (the  state  excepted).”  They 
are  “without  civil  personality,  and  their  exist¬ 
ence  is  only,  as  it  were,  incidentally  included  in 
the  state.” 

The  preference  shown  by  the  writers  of  The 
Federalist  for  a  republican  as  opposed  to  a  demo¬ 
cratic  form  of  government — or  representative 
government  as  opposed  to  direct  democracy — 
rests  partly  on  their  fear  of  the  political  incom¬ 
petence,  as  well  as  the  factional  interests,  of 
wage  earners  and  day -la  borers.  While  express¬ 
ing  “disapprobation”  of  poll  taxes,  they  still  de¬ 
fend  the  right  of  the  government  to  exact  them, 
in  the  belief  that  “there  may  exist  certain  criti¬ 
cal  and  tempestuous  conjunctures  of  the  State, 
in  which  a  poll-tax  may  become  an  inestimable 
resource.”  Yet  such  a  tax  would  seem  to  be 
primarily  a  device  for  disfranchising  working¬ 


men  of  no  property  and  small  income,  and  in 
the  opinion  of  a  later  day  it  is  so  regarded. 

The  democratic  revolution  does  not  begin 
until  the  middle  of  the  19th  century.  But  even 
then,  Mill,  who  advocates  universal  suffrage, 
argues  for  the  disqualification .  of  paupers  or 
those  on  the  dole,  without  raising  the  question 
whether  the  right  to  work — to  avoid  poverty 
and  involuntary  indigence — is  not  a  democratic 
right  inseparable  from  the  right  to  citizenship. 
It  is  “required  by  first  principles,”  Mill  writes, 
“that  the  receipt  of  parish  relief  should  be  a 
peremptory  disqualification  for  the  franchise. 
He  who  cannot  by  his  labor  suffice  for  his  own 
support  has  no  claim  to  the  privilege  of  helping 
himself  to  the  money  of  others.  By  becoming 
dependent  on  the  remaining  members  of  the 
community  for  actual  subsistence,  he  abdicates 
his  claim  to  equal  rights  with  them  in  other  re¬ 
spects.” 

The  historic  connection  of  democracy  with  a 
movement  toward  political  justice  for  the  la¬ 
boring  classes  seems  to  suggest  that  political 
democracy  must  be  accompanied  by  economic 
democracy  in  order  to  attain  its  full  realization. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  Labor  in  human  life  930 

1  a.  The  curse  of  labor:  myths  of  a  golden  age  and  the  decay  of  the  world 

ib.  Labor,  leisure,  and  happiness:  the  servile,  political,  and  contemplative  life 

1  c.  The  pain  of  labor  and  the  expiation  of  sin:  the  disciplinary  and  penal  use  of  labor  931 

id.  The  social  necessity  of  labor  and  the  moral  obligation  to  work 

le.  The  honor  of  work  and  the  virtue  of  productivity:  progress  through  the  inven¬ 
tion  of  arts  for  the  conquest  of  nature  932 

if  The  degradation  of  labor:  the  alienation  of  the  laborer's  work  in  chattel  slavery, 
serfdom,  and  industrial  wage  slavery 

2.  The  nature  of  work 

2 a.  The  ends  of  work:  the  good  of  the  product  and  the  good  of  the  workman 
2 b.  The  process  of  work:  the  relations  of  art,  hand,  machine,  and  matter  933 

3.  The  kinds  of  work  and  the  relationship  of  different  types  of  workers 

3 a.  The  differentiation  of  work  according  to  the  human  talent  or  ability  required: 
skilled  and  unskilled  labor;  manual  and  mental  work 

33.  The  differentiation  of  work  according  to  the  social  status  of  the  worker:  servile 
and  free,  menial  and  honorable  work 


Chapter  44:  LABOR 


929 


PACB 

y.  The  classification  of  occupations  by‘reference  to  bodily  and  mental  concomitants  of 

the  work:  healthy  and  unhealthy  occupations;  pleasant  and  unpleasant  tasks  933 

yl.  Types  of  work  distinguished  by  reference  to  the  manner  in  which  the  work  is 

done:  solitary  and  group  work;  the  relation  of  master-craftsmen  and  helpers  934 

y.  Types  of  work  distinguished  by  reference  to  their  effect  on  the  increase  of 
wealth:  productive  and  non-productive  labor 

3 f.  The  differentiation  of  work  in  terms  of  its  relation  to  the  common  welfare; 
socially  useful  and  wasteful  or  superfluous  work 


4.  The  division  of  labor 

4#.  The  economic  causes  and  effects  of  the  division  of  labor:  its  relation  to  the  ex¬ 
change,  production,  and  distribution  of  goods  and  services;  its  bearing  on 
opulence 

4 b.  The  social  consequences  of  the  division  of  labor:  the  development  of  classes 

4<r.  The  moral  aspects  of  the  division  of  labor:  the  acquisition  of  the  virtue  of  art;  the 
attenuation  of  art  by  insignificant  tasks 

5.  The  organization  of  production:  the  position  of  labor  in  different  economies 

y.  Domestic  or  chattel  slavery  in  a  slave  economy 
5 b.  Serfdom  or  agrarian  peonage  in  a  feudal  economy 
y.  The  wage  earner  or  industrial  proletariat  in  a  capitalist  economy 
5 d.  The  condition  of  the  worker  in  a  socialist  economy 

6.  The  wages  of  labor:  kinds  of  wage  payments 

6a.  Labor  as  a  commodity:  the  labor  market 

6b.  The  iron  law  of  wages:  the  subsistence  level  and  the  minimum  wage 

6c.  The  distinction  between  real  and  nominal  wages:  variable  factors  affecting  wage 
levels 

6d.  The  natural  wages  of  labor  and  the  labor  theory  of  value 

7.  Economic  and  political  justice  to  the  laborer 

7 a.  Fair  wages,  hours,  and  working  conditions:  labor  legislation 
7 b.  The  right  to  property:  the  ownership  of  the  means  of  production 
7 c.  The  consequences  of  economic  inequality  or  oppression:  the  class  war 

(1)  The  economic  determination  of  antagonistic  social  classes:  slaves  vs.  free¬ 

men;  laboring  vs.  leisure  classes;  property  less  vs.  propertied  classes 

(2)  The  organization  of  workmen  and  the  formation  of  trade  unions  to  protect 

labor’s  rights  and  interests 

(3)  The  proletariat  as  a  revolutionary  class:  its  revolutionary  aims 

7 d.  The  underprivileged  condition  of  workers:  the  exclusion  of  slaves  from  citizen¬ 
ship;  the  disfranchisement  of  the  laboring  classes 

ye.  The  problem  of  poverty  and  pauperism:  unemployment  and  the  right  to  work 

yf.  The  relation  of  economic  to  political  freedom:  economic  democracy 

8.  Historical  observations  on  the  condition  of  labor 


935 


936 


937 


938 


939 


930 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 


To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d, 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g .,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras,  7:4 6. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Labor  in  human  life 

la,  The  curse  of  labor:  myths  of  a  golden  age 
and  the  decay  of  the  world 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  3:17-19,23  /  Psalms, 
90:10—  (D)  Psalms ,  89:10  /  Ecclesiastes ,  1:3- 
2:11;  2:17-24;  3:9-13;  4:4-8;  5:15-16;  6:7— 
(D)  Ecclesiastes ,  1:3-2:11;  2:17-24;  3:9-13; 
4:4-8;  5:14-16;  6:7  /  Jeremiah,  20:18 — (. D ) 
Jeremiasy  20:18 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticusy  7:15;  31:3-4;  40:1  — 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticusy  7:16;  31 13—4 ;  40:1 

New  Testament:  II  Thessalonians ,  3:7-12 
7  Plato:  Statesman ,  588a-589c  /  Laws ,  bk  iii, 
664a-665c;  bk  iv,  681b-c 
9  Aristotle:  Politicsy  bk  i,  ch  4  [i253b33~4o] 
447b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Thingsy  bk  ii  [1105- 
1174]  29a-30a,c;  bk  v  [195-217]  63c-d 

13  Virgil:  Ecloguesy  iv  [16-47]  14b-15a  /  Geor¬ 
gies,  1  [118-159]  40a-41b  /  Aeneidy  bk  viii 
[306-336]  267a-268a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bkxiv,  ch  io385b-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xxii 
[130-154]  87d-88a;  xxvm  [91-96]  97a 

27  Shakespeare:  Tempest ,  act  ii,  sc  i  [143-168] 
532d-533a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  27b-28a 


32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  x  [1046-1104] 
297a-298b;  bk  xi  [84-98]  301a;  [162-180] 
302b-303a;  [251-262]  304b-305a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  348b,d-353b;  362b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  125 
137a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  316a-b;  355b-356a 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  199c-200a  esp  199d  [fn  4] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bkvii,  275a 

lb.  Labor,  leisure,  and  happiness:  the  servile, 
political,  and  contemplative  life 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs ,  6:6-11;  13:4;  15:19; 
18:9;  19:15,24;  20:4;  21:25-26;  24:30-34; 
26:13-16;  28:19 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  11:11-14;  38:24-34— 
(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  11:11-14;  38:25-39 

New  Testament:  Lu^e,  10:38-42 

5  Aristophanes:  Plutus  [415-618]  633d-636d 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  86b;  bk  v,  161a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  43 b  d  /  Republic ,  bk  vii, 
390b-391b  /  Critias ,  479d  /  Statesman ,  581  b-c 
/  Laws,  bk  vii,  710c;  722d-723c;  bk  viii, 
740d-741a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [981H3- 
24]  500a;  ch  2  [982bn-28]  500d-501a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  ch  6-7  430d-432c  / 
Politics,  bk  1,  ch  4  [i253b33~4o]  447b-c;  ch  5 


931 


Chapter  44:  LABOR 


1  c  to  I  d 

[i254bi5-i255a2]  448b  c;  ch  7  [i255b3i— 37] 
449c;  kk  11,  ch  6  [  1 265ft2S— 37 ]  460c  d;  cii  9 
[i269a33~bi2]  465c-d;  hk  iii,  cii  4  [1277*30- 
b6]  474b-c;  bk  vii,  cii  1-3  527a-530a  csp  ch  3 
[1325*16-33]  529b,  [  1 325bi 4— 30]  529d;  ch  5 
[i326b27-32]  530d  531a;  ch  9  533a  d  esp 
[i328b33~i 329*1]  533b;  ch  14  [1333^16]— cn 
15  [i334bS]  538a  539c;  bk  viii,  ch  3  542d- 
543d;  ch  4  [1339*6-10]  544c;  ch  7  [1 34ib32— 
1342*28]  547c-548a  esp  [1342*19-28]  547d- 
548a 

12  Epictetus;  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  10  116b  d; 
ch  29, 137c~d;  bk  iv,  ch  4  225a-228a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  12  262b-c; 
bk  v,  sect  1  268b, d;  bk  vi,  sect  12  274c; 
sect  33  277b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  44d-45b  /  Alexander , 
560b~d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii, 
q  187,  a  3  666a-669b 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b  /  Sec¬ 
ond  Nun's  Prologue  461a-463a  /  Parson's  Tale , 
par  57-59  528b-529a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iv,  267c-268b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  14c-15a;  107a-112d; 

486b-489b;  490c-d;  538d-540b 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  ii 
[1-22]  57d-58a  /  Henry  V,  act  iv,  sc  i  [247- 
301]  554a-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Tempest ,  act  ii,  sc  i  [143-168] 
532d-533a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  368c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  6c-d; 
18a-b;  69d-76a  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, 
aph  129  134d-135d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [610-633] 
165b-166a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xx, 
sect  2  389a-b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  332ac 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  89d;  597a-598a 
esp  598a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  524a-b;  586a-587a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  171a-b;  201b-c;  216c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  267d- 
268b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [5199-5262]  128b- 
130a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  214a-b;  355b-366b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  324b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  112b;  262a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vii,  275a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  772d; 
774b  [fn  1] 

1  c.  The  pain  of  labor  and  the  expiation  of  sin: 
the  disciplinary  and  penal  use  of  labor 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3:17-19,23 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  33:24-28;  40:1  — (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  33:25-30;  40:1 
5  Euripides:  Heracles  Mad  [1-25]  365a-b; 
[348-429]  368a-c;  [1255-1280]  376a-b 


6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  78b 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  1  [1 18-159]  40a-41b 

14  Plutarch:  Pompey,  512c  d  /  Alexander , 
560b  d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  cii  15  521a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92, 
a  1,  rep  2  488d-489d;  q  96,  a  4  51 2d  513c; 
part  1— 11,  q  32,  a  1,  rep  3  759b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
187,  a  3,  ans  666a-669b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  vii  [16-60] 
9d  l0a;  purgatory,  x  [ioo]-xi  [72]  68b-69c; 
xxviii  [91-96]  97a 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Prologue  [15, 469-489] 
461a  /  Parson's  Tale ,  par  57-59  528b -5 29a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  147a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  x  [1046-1104] 
297a-298b;  bk  xi  [84-98]  301a;  [162-180] 
302b-303a;  [251-262]  304b-305a;  bk  xi  [334]- 
bk  xii  [649]  306b-333a  /  Samson  Agonistes 
339a-378a  esp  [1-46]  339b-340b,  [356-380] 
347b-348a,  [667-709]  354a-355a,  [1156-1177] 
364b-365a,  [1391-1409]  370a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  597a 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  524a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  385a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  316a-b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  354b-c;  364a-366a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  47b-c;  bk  vi, 
266c-d;  bk  vii,  275a;  bk  xiv,  606a-607a 

Id.  The  social  necessity  of  labor  and  the  moral 
obligation  to  work 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:9-11  /  Deuterono¬ 
my,  5:13-14  /  Proverbs,  21:25  /  Ecclesiastes, 
9:9-10 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  7:15;  22:i-2--(D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  7:16;  22:1-2 

New  Testament:  Ephesians,  4:28  /  I  Thessa- 
lonians,  4:11-12 — (D)  I  Thessalonians,  4:11  / 
II  Thessalotiians ,  3:7-12 

5  Aristophanes:  Plutus  [415-618]  633d-636d 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  316c-317b;  bk  vii, 
390b-391b  /  Laws,  bk  vii,  710c;  722d-723c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i290b37~ 
1291*19]  490a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  10  116b-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  i  268b, d; 
bk  vi,  sect  33  277b;  bk  viii,  sect  12  286b-c 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  1  [118-159]  40a-41b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  44d-45b  /  Solon,  72d  / 
Aristides- Marcus  Cato,  291c-d  /  Alexander , 
560b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii, 
q  187,  a  3  666a-669b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi  [91-111] 
16a-b 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  ii,  157a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [610-633]  165b- 
166a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  415b-c; 
bk  iv,  428d 


932 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  Labor  in  human  life .  Id.  The  social  necessity 
of  labor  and  the  moral  obligation  to  work.) 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  597a-b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  339d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  189 
65d-66a;  par  194  66c-d;  par  196  67a  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History ,  part  iv,  333c;  353bc 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  316a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  324b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  17a;  88c-d;  253a-255a  passim 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  426d- 
427a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  197b'C;  bk 
vii,  275a;  bk  xiii,  572d-573b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  573c  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents,  772d;  781d-782c 

le .  The  honor  of  work  and  the  virtue  of  pro¬ 
ductivity:  progress  through  the  invention 
of  arts  for  the  conquest  of  nature 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs,  6:6-11;  14:23;  31:10- 
3i 

Apocrypha  :  Ecclesiasticus,  10:27;  38:25-34— (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  10:30;  38:26-39 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xviii  [541-589]  135d-136c 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [442-506]  44c- 
45a 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  6c  /  Laws,  bk  hi,  664a- 
665c;  bk  vii,  722d-723c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  i  268b, d; 
bk  vi,  sect  33  277b 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  1  [118-159]  40a-41b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  44d-45b  /  Solon , 
64d-65b;  72d  /  Marcellus,  252a-255a  esp 
253d 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  30 
651c-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi  [91-111] 
16a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  73b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  6c-d  /  No¬ 
vum  Organum  105a-195d  esp  pref  105a-106d, 
bk  1,  aph  11  107d,  aph  81  120b-c,  aph  124 
133c-d,  aph  129  134d-135d,  bk  ii,  aph  49-51 
188b-194c  /  New  Atlantis,  210d-214d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  61b-d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [610-633]  165b- 
166a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  78a-b;  part  hi, 
105a-il5b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xviii, 
126c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  339b-c;  352a-d;  363b 
/  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  428d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  intro,  la-d;  bk  i, 
6a-d;  8b-10b  passim 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  21c-23c  passim; 
633d-634a,c;  655d-656a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  243d- 
244c;  245a;  part  ii,  267a-b;  268a-b;  part 
iv,  333c;  353b-c 


le  to  2 a 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [11,559-586]  281b- 
282a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  87a-b;  292d 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  420d- 
421a;  421d 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  772d; 
777a-779a  passim 

1 /.  The  degradation  of  labor:  the  alienation  of 
the  laborer’s  work  in  chattel  slavery, 
serfdom,  and  industrial  wage  slavery 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  1:8-14 
14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato,  278d-279a  /  Cras- 
sus,  439a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  53a-56a;  part  iv, 
154b-155b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  355a-b;  365d-366a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  20 b- 21c; 
27b*28d;  43a-b;  52b-53b;  bk  hi,  165b-171c; 
bk  iv,  239c-240a;  253c-254a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  144b 
42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  421c-422d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  67 
29c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  82d-83a;  88d-89b;  104b- 
105c;  150a-c;  161b-163c;  174b-c;  176a-178d; 
194b-195c;  199b-200a;  206c-208a;  226a-236c 
passim;  238c-240b;  251c-253b;  261d-262a; 
263b-d;  266b-267c;  280c-286a;  288b-290c; 
319c-321b;  354a-355d;  369c-371c;  383d 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  420c- 
421a;  422c-423a;  424c-425a 
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
165b-167b 

2.  The  nature  of  work 

2a.  The  ends  of  work:  the  good  of  the  product 
and  the  good  of  the  workman 
7  Plato:  Charmides,  6c  /  Republic,  bk  i,  303a- 
306b/  Laws,  bk  viii,  733b-d;  bkxi,  774a-775a 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  8  [i328a22~35] 
532c 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  1  [118-159]  40a-41b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36c-d  /  Pericles,  121a- 
122b  /  Marcellus ,  252a-255a  /  Pompey ,  512c-d 
/  Alexander,  560b-d 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  30, 
651c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
187,  a  3  666a-669b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  viii  [115- 
148]  118b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Prologue  [15,469-489] 
461a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  6c-d 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  154b-155b 
39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  54d-55a;  bk 
v,  332a-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  524a-b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  196 
67a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  259a-b 


lb  to  3c 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  16a;  18d:  113c  114a;  251c-d; 
253a;  254c-255a;  292d;  307c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  426b 

2b.  The  process  of  work:  the  relations  of  art, 
hand,  machine,  and  matter 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  319a-c  /  Statesman, 
591d-593d;  596a-b;  596d  /  Philebus,  633a  c 

8  Aristotle:  Soul ,  bk  hi,  ch  8  [-|32ai]  664c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  i  348b,d-349b  / 
Politics,  bk  i,  ch  4  447b-c 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  30 
651c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  91, 
a  3,  rep  2  486b-487d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  85, 
a  6,  ans  182d-184a;  part  ii-ii,  q  187,  a  3, 
ans  and  rep  1  666a-669b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  73b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  407c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v,  sect  42-43 
34a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  352a-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  4d-5a;  54d- 
55a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  68 
29d'30a;  part  iii,  par  196  67a;  additions, 
126  137a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  278c-d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  16d-17a;  31a-b;  85a-88d; 

180d-188c  esp  184b,  188b-c;  197a-198a; 

251a-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  576b- 
577a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  778b-c 

3.  The  kinds  of  work  and  the  relationship  of 
different  types  of  workers 

3 a.  The  differentiation  of  work  according  to 
the  human  talent  or  ability  required: 
skilled  and  unskilled  labor;  manual  and 
mental  work 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  316c-320c  /  Timaeus, 
442b  /  Statesman,  581c-582a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [98ia3i-b7] 
499 d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  7  [i255b2o~37] 
449b-c;  ch  ii  [i25Sb35— 39]  453b;  bk  viii, 
ch  4  [i339a6-io]  544c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1350- 
1360]  78c-d 

14  Plutarch:  Marcellus,  252a-255a  esp  253d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  91, 
a  3,  rep  2-3  486b-487d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
187,  a  3  666a-669b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  viii  [115- 
148]  llSb-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  60a-c;  110c-112a;  156d- 
158a, c;  460a-461a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  6c-d 


933 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b  31a;  part  iv, 
158b; 164b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  42d  43c; 
54c-55a;  56b-57b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  597a-598a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  524a-b;  586a-587a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  366d-367a; 

385bd 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  68 
29d-30a;  part  iii,  par  200  67c-68a;  par  204 
68c-d;  additions,  44  123c;  126  137a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  324b 

50  Marx:  Capital,  17b-18a;  95c-96a  esp  95d-96b 
[fn  2];  165d-166b;  170c-171b;  I76d-178a;  186b- 
d;  212a-c;  251b-d 

3 b.  The  differentiation  of  work  according  to 
the  social  status  of  the  worker:  servile 
and  free,  menial  and  honorable  work 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  84d-85b 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vii,  722d-723c;  bk  viii, 
740d-741a;  bk  xi,  774a-775a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [98ia3i- 
b7]  499d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  7  [i255b2o-27] 
449b-c;  ch  ii  [i^58b35— 39]  453b;  ch  13 
[i26oa33~b2]  455a;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [i277a3o-b6] 
474b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i29ob37-i29iai9]  490a-b; 
bk  vi,  ch  4  [1319^0-27]  522d;  bk  vii,  ch  8-9 
532c-533d;  bk  viii,  ch  2  [i337b3~23]  542c-d 
/  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  9  [1367^8-32]  610a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  44d-45b  /  Solon, 
64d-65b  /  Pericles,  121a-122b  /  Demetrius, 
733b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  110c-112a:  459c-462a 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  ii 
57d-59d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  iv,  sect  23 
30a-b;  ch  vii,  sect  85  43c-d 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  134a-b;  256b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  428c-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  42b-d;  44c- 
45c;  56b-58b;  bk  iii,  164c-d;  169c-171c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  524a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  44 
123c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  420d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 

165b-167b 

3 c.  The  classification  of  occupations  by  refer¬ 
ence  to  bodily  and  mental  concomitants 
of  the  work:  healthy  and  unhealthy 
occupations;  pleasant  and  unpleasant 
tasks 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [1258^5-39] 
453b;  bk  viii,  ch  2  542b-d;  ch  4  [i339a6-io] 
544c 

14  Plutarch:  Pompey,  512c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  110c-112a;  459c-462a 
passim 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  365b-c 


Chapter  44:  LABOR 


934  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3d  to  4 b 


(3.  The  kinds  of  work  and  the  relationship  of  dif¬ 
ferent  types  of  workers .  3  c.  The  classifica¬ 
tion  of  occupations  by  reference  to  bodily  and 
mental  concomitants  of  the  work:  healthy 
and  unhealthy  occupations;  pleasant  and 
unpleasant  tasks.) 

39  Smith-:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  42b-d;  54d- 
55a;  bk  iii,  164a;  bk  v,  340c-343d 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  524a-b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  85c-d;  117c-130c  passim; 

166b-c;  176d-178a;  194b-195c;  200a-204c  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  204a-c;  206b-209a;  227d-231b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  79b 

3 d.  Types  of  work  distinguished  by  reference 
to  the  manner  in  which  the  work  is  done: 
solitary  and  group  work;  the  relation  of 
master-craftsmen  and  helpers 

7  Plato:  Statesman ,  581c-582a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [98ia3i- 
b7]  499 d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  4  [i277a3o-b6] 
474b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  1,  3d-5b;  35c- 
36a;  50a-c;  51b-53b;  109a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  385b-d 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  157a-164a  esp  158d-159d, 
160d-162a;  165d-166b;  170c-171b;  186b-188c; 
251b-c 

3e.  Types  of  work  distinguished  by  reference 
to  their  effect  on  the  increase  of  wealth: 
productive  and  non-productive  labor 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  365b-366b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  ii,  142d- 
151c  esp  142d-143c;  bk  iv,  288c-292a;  294b- 
296a 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  16b-17a;  17c;  86d-87d  esp 
87b  [fn  2];  96a-97a;  219a-d;  251a-252a;  290d- 
292a 

3/.  The  differentiation  of  work  in  terms  of  its 
relation  to  the  common  welfare:  socially 
useful  and  wasteful  or  superfluous  work 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  ii,  318b-d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i29ob37~ 
129^33]  490a-c;  bk  vii,  ch  8-9  532c-533d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  vii,  sect  5  280a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  36c-d  /  Marcellus , 
255d-256b  /  Demetrius ,  733b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii, 
q  187,  a  3,  rep  3  666a-669b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xi  [91-m] 
16a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  365b-366b  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  iv,  428c- d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  ii,  142d-151c 
esp  142d-143c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  324b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  16a-18d  esp  16a,  18d;  31a- 
32c  esp  32a-c;  34d-35c;  48b-d;  174a-b;  261d- 
262a 


4.  The  division  of  labor 

7  Plato:  Charmides ,  5d;  12a-b  /  Republic , 
bk  11,  316a-319c;  bk  iv,  349a-350a  /  Timaeus , 
442b-c;  445c- d  /  Critias ,  480a-481b  / 
bk  viii,  740d-741a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i290b20- 
I29ib29]  489d-491a;  bk  vii,  ch  8-9  532c-533d 

18  Augustine:  C/Vy  o/* Go^/,  bk  vii,  ch  4,  246d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii, 
q  187,  a  3,  rep  1  666a-669b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  viii  [iis- 
148]  118b-c 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis ,  210d-214d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  v,  sect  42-43 
34a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  352a-353c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  3a-10b;  bk 
ii,  117a-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
253c-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  420a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par 
198-208  67b-69c;  par  243  77b-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  278d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  164a-180d  esp  164a-165c, 
171d-176a,  178d-179c 

4a.  The  economic  causes  and  effects  of  the  di¬ 
vision  of  labor:  its  relation  to  the  ex¬ 
change,  production,  and  distribution  of 
goods  and  services;  its  bearing  on  opu¬ 
lence 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  316c-319a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v,  sect  42-43 
34a-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  154b-155b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiii, 
191a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  352a-353c;  365b-366b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  3a-10c;  bk  ii, 
117a-d;  bk  iii,  163a-c;  bkiv,  191a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  21c-23b;  655d- 
656a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  198- 
199  67b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 
250a-c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  16c-d;  17b-c;  31a-37c  esp 
32a-c,  34c-35a;  48b-50b;  80b-81a;  164a-165b; 
167a-170b;  171c-175c;  176a-d;  178a-180d  esp 
178c-179c;  218c-219b;  251a-255a  passim; 

377c-378a 

4b.  The  social  consequences  of  the  division  of 
labor:  the  development  of  classes 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  84d-85b;  bk  vi, 
196c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii-iv,  316c-356a  /  Laws, 
bk  vm,  740d-741a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  4  447b-c;  bk 
ii,  ch  5  [i264ai-b25]  459a-460a;  ch  8  [i268ai6- 
b4]  464a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  5  [i277b33-i278a25] 


Chapter  44:  LABOR 


935 


4  c  to  5  b 

475a-c;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i290b2i-i29ib29]  489d- 
491a;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [i 3 i 7*1 7— 29]  520b-c;  bk  vii, 
ch  8-10  532c-534d 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI ,  act  iv,  sc  ii 
57d-59d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  154b*155b;  158a  b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xv,  111c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  353a-355b;  365b-366a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  7d-8b;  55d- 
56a;  109d-110d;  bk  iii,  169c-170b;  bk  v, 
301a-309a,c  passim,  esp303d-304a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  89d;  498c- d; 
501b-c;  655d-656a 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  586a-587a 

43  Federalist:  number  35, 113b-114a;  number 
36,  114c-115a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  369b-370a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  127b-c;  140b-141a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  198- 
208  67b-69c;  par  243  77b-c;  additions,  128- 
129  137b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i, 
222a-d;  250a-c;  part  ii,  275b-276a;  part  iv, 
335a-336c 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  16c-d;  165c-166a;  170c-176a 
esp  170c-172c,  174c-175c;  179a-c;  186b-d; 
205c-206c;  218c-219d;  239d-240c;  261d-262a; 
317c-319a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  422b- 
424c  esp  422c-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
165b-167b 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  882c-d 

4c.  The  moral  aspects  of  the  division  of  labor: 
the  acquisition  of  the  virtue  of  art;  the 
attenuation  of  art  by  insignificant  tasks 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  1  [118-159]  40a-41b 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii— ii, 
q  187,  a  3,  rep  1  666a-669b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  352a;  353b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  7d-8a;  54c- 
55a;  109d-110d;  bk  iv,  291a-c;  bk  v,  340d- 
342a 

42  Kant:  Fund,  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
253c-d  /  Judgement ,  524a-b 
50  Marx:  Capital,  164b-c;  165a-166c;  170c-171a; 
173b;  176a-178d;  205c-208a;  226d-231b; 

249a-250c;  319d-320a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  422c-d 

5.  The  organization  of  production:  the  position 
of  labor  in  different  economies 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  365b-366a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  intro,  ld-2a,c; 
bk  1,  50a-c;  109a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  33b-36c  esp  36c-d  [fn2]; 
79c-81a  esp  79d-80b  [fn  4],  80b-c;  104b-105a; 
113c-115c  esp  113c-d;  149a-150c;  157a-164a 
esp  158d-160d,  162d-164a;  171d-176a;  266c; 
267c;  283c-d;  354c-355d;  377c-378d 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto  ,420a-d; 
425b-429c  esp  426b-c,  429b-c 


5 a.  Domestic  or  chattel  slavery  in  a  slave  econ¬ 
omy 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  1 :8— 14 ;  21  n-12,16,20- 
21,26-27,32  /  Leviticus ,  25:44-55  /  Deuter¬ 
onomy,  15:12-18;  23:15-16;  24:14-15 
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  33:24-31 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus ,  33:25-33 

New  Testament:  Colossians,  3:22-4:1  /  Titus , 
2:9-11  /  Philemon 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  xiv  [55-71]  260d;  bk  xv 
[35 1— 379]  269c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  Plutus  [507-526]  635a-b 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  709a-710a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i252a26-bi3] 
445c-d;  ch  3-7  446d-449c  passim;  ch  13 
454a-455a,c  passim;  bk  ii,  ch  9  [126^^7,^12] 
465c-d;  bk  vii,  ch  10  [i330a25-34]  534d  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5  [136^12-14]  601c 
14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato,  278d-279a;  287b-d 
/  Crassus,  439a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-4  318b-321a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  llOb-llla;  part 
iv,  261d-262a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiii,  96d- 
97b;  bk  xv,  109a-d;  llld-112c;  bk  xvi,  116a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iii,  167a-d;  bk 
iv,  239c-240a;  253c-254a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  16c-17d;  144b; 
498b-500b  passim,  esp  500a-b;  620a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81d-82b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  article  i,  sect 
9  [260-266]  13d;  article  iv,  sect  2  [529-535] 
16b;  amendments,  xiii  18c 
43  Federalist:  number  42,  137b-c;  number 
54,  170b-d 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  339d-340c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  363b-364c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  66 
29a-c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  95a-b  [fn  1] ;  113c-114a;  128d- 
129a;  266c;  267c;  283c-d;  354c-355d 
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
165b-167b 

5b,  Serfdom  or  agrarian  peonage  in  a  feudal 
economy 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiii,  96d- 
97b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iii,  165b-170c 
esp  167a-170c;  175d-179a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  144b-c;  628c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  404c-d;  452d- 
453a, c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  351d-352b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  66 
29a-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  335a- 
336c;  352a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  34b;  79d-80b  [fn 4 ] ;  114a- 
115c;  266c;  354c-355d;  355d-364a  passim 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  420a-d 


936  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5c  to  la 


(5.  The  organization  of  production:  the  position  of 
labor  indifferent  economies .  5b.  Serfdom  or 
agrarian  peonage  in  a  feudal  economy .) 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  v,  211a-213a; 
bk  vi,  235a;  bk  x,  410c-411a;  epilogue  i, 
654a-655c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
165d  166a 

5c.  The  wage  earner  or  industrial  proletariat 
in  a  capitalist  economy 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  365d-366a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  i,  20b-21c; 
27b-37b  passim;  42a-62a  passim 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d-437c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  309b  c  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  345c-346a;  366d-367b;  369b-370a  / 
Utilitarianism ,  473 b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  251- 
256  78d-80a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  79a-256a  esp  82d-84a,c,  88d- 
89b,  104b-105c,  112c,  115c-131a,  150a-c,  161b- 
162d,  176a-178d,  192d-250c,  254c-255a; 

261d-262a;  279a-383d  esp  280c-286a,  287b- 
290c,  303b-305a,  311c-353a,c,  354c-355d, 
364a-368b,  377a-378b 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  422c- 
423a:  424b-c;  426b-428a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
165b-c 

5 d.  The  condition  of  the  worker  in  a  socialist 
economy 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  309b-c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  34d-35c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  425b- 
429c  esp  426b,  429b-c 

6.  The  wages  of  labor:  kinds  of  wage  pay¬ 
ments 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  27b-37b; 
42a-62a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  309b-c  /  Representative  Gov¬ 
ernment,  366d-367a  /  Utilitarianism,  472  d- 
473a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  82d-83c;  264a-278a,c 

6a.  Labor  as  a  commodity:  the  labor  market 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  124c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  154b-155b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  365d-366a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  13a-16d; 
2Qb-21c;  27b-37b  esp  28a-d,  29b-33c;  42a- 
62a;  107b;  bk  iv,  243b,d-244a;  bk  v,  380b, d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  424b-425a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  319b-d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  79a-84a,c;  91a-95a  passim, 
esp  93b-94a;  112c-113c;  211a-219d  esp  211a-c, 
216a-d;  302d-317c  esp  303b-305a,  315c-317c; 
379a-383d  esp  381b,  382c-383d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  422c- 
423a 


6b.  The  iron  law  of  wages:  the  subsistence  level 
and  the  minimum  wage 
39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  28d-29a;  41b; 
bk  v,  383b-384c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  81a-82c;  256b 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  422c- d; 
424d-425a;  426b 

6c.  The  distinction  between  real  and  nominal 
wages:  variable  factors  affecting  wage 
levels 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  13a-20b  esp 
14b-d;  23c-27b  passim;  27b-37b  esp  28a-32b; 
39d-40b;  42a-62a;  82d-83a;  87b-c;  bk  ii, 
123b-124a;  bk  iv,  265a-d;  bk  v,  380b, d- 
382a, c;  383b-387b;  391b-392a 
50  Marx:  Capital,  171a-c;  223a  esp  223b  [fn  1] ; 
256b-260c  esp  258b-c;  267d-268c;  302d-307c; 
315c-316c 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  422c- d\ 
423c;  425a-b 

6d.  The  natural  wages  of  labor  and  the  labor 
theory  of  value 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v  30b-36a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  353a-b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  13a-14d; 
16a;  20b-21c;  27b-28a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  424b-425a 
50  Marx:  Capital,  13a-25d  esp  14c-16a,  24c- 
25d;  32c-33b;  35d-36a  [fn  1];  36a-b  [fn  1]; 
78c-d;  93b-96a;  lOOa-lOlc;  112c-113b;  264a- 
267d  esp  265a-266a 

7.  Economic  and  political  justice  to  the  laborer 

la.  Fair  wages,  hours,  and  working  conditions: 
labor  legislation 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  12:16;  20:9-10;  21:1- 
12,16,20,26-27,32;  31:14-17  /  Leviticus,  16:29; 
19:13;  23:3-8,21,25,27-36;  25:1-12,39-55  / 
Numbers,  28:16-18,25-26;  29:1,7,12,35  /  Deu¬ 
teronomy,  5:12-15;  15:12-18;  16:8;  23:15-16; 
24:14-15  /  Jeremiah,  17:22,24;  22:13— (D) 
Jeremias,  17  ^2,24;  22:13 
Apocrypha:  Tobit,  4:14 — ( D )  OT,  Tobias,  4:15 
/  Ecclesiasticus,  7:20-21;  33:24-31;  34:20-22 
—(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  7:22-23;  33:25-33; 
34*24-27 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  10:10;  20:8  /  Luhp, 
3:14;  10:7  /  Ephesians ,  6:5-9  /  /  Timothy, 
5:18  /  II  Timothy,  2:6 
7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  viii,  741b-d 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ix,  ch  i  416b,d-417c 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i— ii,  q 
105,  a  2,  rep  6  309d-316a 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  30c-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  154b-155b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xv, 
lllb-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  353b;  365b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  13a-14d;  20b- 


lb  to  7c(  1) 

23b  esp  20b  21c;  27b-37b  csp  28a  29b,  33c- 
35b;  42a-62a  passim,  csp  52b-c,  56b-57a,  58b- 
61d;  106c-107a;  bk  iv,  200c~201a;  287b  c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  424b-425a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  309b-c;  310c-d  /  Representative 
Government ,  345c-346a;  366d-367b  /  Utili¬ 
tarianism,  467b;  472d-473c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  iii,  par  236 
76a-c;  additions,  145  140b 
50  Marx:  Capital,  81a  84a, c;  102b-156d  esp 
104b-105c,  112c  113c,  127c-146c,  150a-c, 

156c-d;  192d-209a  passim,  esp  193a-194b; 
226a-248d  esp  236c-242a;  256b-275c  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  261c-262a,  263c-d,  266a-267c;  296b- 
307c  passim,  esp  296c-298a,  305c-307c;  366a- 
368a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  422c- 
423a;  423c-d 

lb.  The  right  to  property:  the  ownership  of 
the  means  of  production 
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii-iv,  341c-342d  /  Laws, 
bk  v,  692d-693a;  695a-696b 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  5  458a-460a 
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-37b  /  Tiberius 
Gracchus,  674c-681a,c  esp  675b-d 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v  30b-36a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  339c-d;  353a  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  i,  394a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iii,  165b  170c; 
bk  iv,  239c-240a;  243b,d-244a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  86d-87a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  404a;  409d-410d; 
414c-415c;  426b-428a;  431a-432a;  441d-443b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  366d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  52 
25a-c;  par  67-69  29c-31a;  additions,  32 
121d-122a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  295a-297a 
50  Marx:  Capital,  *88d-89b;  113c-d;  149a-151a,c 
passim,  esp  150b-c;  160d-162d;  173c-174a; 
280c-283d  passim,  esp  282b-c;  288b-290c; 
319c-d;  354a-364a  esp  354a-355d,  359c-361d; 
369c-370b;  377c-378d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  424c; 

425c-427b  esp  426a-b;  428d-429c 
54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  787d- 
788b  passim,  esp  787d-788b  [fn  3] 

7c.  The  consequences  of  economic  inequality 
or  oppression:  the  class  war 

7c(l)  The  economic  determination  of  antago¬ 
nistic  social  classes:  slaves  vs.  freemen; 
laboring  vs.  leisure  classes;  propertyless 
vs.  propertied  classes 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [228-245]  260b-c 

5  Aristophanes  :  Plutus  [507-526]  635a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi,  203a-b;  bk  vii, 
243  b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
423a-c;  427d-428a;  428c-d;  434c-438c;  bk 


:  LABOR  937 

iv,  458d  459c;  463a-465c;  bk  v,  482d-483a; 
502d-504b;  bk  vi,  520a-d;  524d-525d;  533a- 
c;  bk  viii  564a-593a,c  passim,  csp  568d-569a, 
575c-576c,  577b-d,  579c-583c,  584b-585a, 

585d-586b,  587a-590c 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  343c-d;  bk  viii, 
405c-416a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  cii  6  [i265b6-i2] 
461a;  ch  7  461d-463c;  ch  9  [i26f^-hi2] 
465c-d;  bk  iii,  cii  10  [i28iau-29]  478d-479a; 
ch  15  [i286b8— 22]  484d-485a;  bk  iv,  ch  4 
[i29ib2— 1 1]  490d;  ch  6  [1293*12-34]  492d- 
493a;  ch  n-12  495b-497b;  bk  v,  cii  3  [i303b 
5-8]  505a;  ch  4  [i304bi— 6]  506a;  ch  5  [i304b 
i8]-ch  6  [i305b22]  506b-507c;  cii  7  [i^o6b22- 
1307*2]  508c-d;  ch  9  [1310*19-25]  512c;  ch  10 
[13 iob9— 1 5]  512d-513a;  ch  12  [1316*39^22] 
519c-d;  bk  vi,  ch  3  521c-522a;  cii  7  524c- 
525b  /  Athenian  Constitution ,  ch  2-6  553a- 
555c  esp  ch  5  554d-555a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-37c  /  Solon,  68a- 

71c  /  Camillus ,  117c-121a,c  /  Coriolanus, 

176b-184c  /  Agis  648b,d-656d  /  Tiberius 
Gracchus,  674c-681a,c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  97b  /  Histories,  bk 
ii,  224d-225a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  ix,  14c-d 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  ii 
57d-59d 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-167] 
351a-353a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  154b-155b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  77b-83c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  355a-356a  /  Political 
Economy,  375b-d;  381c-382b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iv,  429c-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  28a-d;  55d- 
56a;  109d-110d;  bk  iii,  169c-170b;  bk  iv, 
239c-240c;  243b,d-244a;  bk  v,  309a-311c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  126d-127c;  144a-d; 
501b-502c 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  50b-51b;  number 
35,  113b-114a;  number  36,  114c-115a;  num¬ 
ber  60,  185b-186a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  345c-346a; 
366d-367b;  369b-370a  /  Utilitarianism,  473b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  244 
77c;  additions,  149  140d-141a  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  intro,  193 b-c;  part  i,  250a-c;  part 
ii,  263c-d;  275b-276a;  part  iii,  287d-288b; 
295d-297b;  part  iv,  335a-336c;  356c-357a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  6d-9c;  63b-c;  lllc-146c  esp 
113c,  130a-131a,  134c-d,  141b-c,  145a;  209c- 
215a  esp  209c,  214a-215a;  262a;  282d-286a; 
354a-364a;  378d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  415b- 
416d  esp  416c-d;  419b,d-425b  esp  419b, d- 
420a,  421a,  422c-425b;  428c-d;  429c-430d; 
432d-433a;  434a-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
165b-c 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  882b-884d 


Chapter  44 


938 

(7c.  The  consequences  of  economic  inequality  or 
oppression :  the  class  war.) 

7c(2)  The  organization  of  workmen  and  the 
formation  of  trade  unions  to  protect 
labor’s  rights  and  interests 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  28a-d;  51a- 
56b;  61c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  309b-c  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment ,  345d-346a;  366d-367b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  121c-122b;  137b-138c;  146a-c; 
317b  c;  367c-368b 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  415a- 
416c;  423b-d;  425b-c 

7c(3)  The  proletariat  as  a  revolutionary  class: 
its  revolutionary  aims 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  9c;  294b-295a  esp  295a; 
377c-378d  esp  378d-379b  [fn  2] 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  415b- 
417a, c  esp  416b-d;  422c;  424a-d;  425b-434d 
esp  425b-c,  428d-430a,  434c-d 

Id.  The  underprivileged  condition  of  workers: 
the  exclusion  of  slaves  from  citizenship; 
the  disfranchisement  of  the  laboring 
classes 

5  Aristophanes:  Frogs  [686-705]  572a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107d-108a 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii,  405c-407a  /  Laws , 
bk  viii,  740d-741a 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [1 267^ 4-1 9] 
463b-c;  ch  8  [1268*16-33]  464a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  i 
[1275*5-10]  471d;  ch  4  [i277*30-b6]  474b-c; 
ch  5  [i277b33-i278*34]  475a-c;  bk  iv,  ch  6 
[i292b22— 1293*10]  492b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  4  522a- 
523b;  ch  7  [1321*27-32]  525a;  bk  vii,  ch  8 
[i328*-35-38]  532c;  ch  9  533a-d;  ch  10 
[1330*25-34]  534d  /  Athenian  Constitution ,  ch 
2-5  553a-555a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xv,  114c- 
115b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  412b-c; 
bk  iv,  429c-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  27b-37b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  I7a-b;  144b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73b;  81d-82b;404c- 
d; 452d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  436d-437c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments, 
xiii,  sect  i-xrv,  sect  i  18c;  xv  19b 

43  Federalist:  number  54,  170b-171b  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  339d- 
340c;  345c-346a;  351d-352b;  383d-387d 

passim;  394a-395c  passim  /  Utilitarianism , 
473b-c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  137b-141b  passim,  esp  138b, 
140a-b;  283d-286a;  316d-317c;  364a-368b  esp 
367c-368b 

50  Marx-Engels  :  Communist  Manifesto ,  424c- 
425a;  428a 


7c( 2)  to  7f 

le.  The  problem  of  poverty  and  pauperism:  un¬ 

employment  and  the  right  to  work 
7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  v,  695a-c;  bk  xi,  783b 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vi,  ch  5  [1320*17^13] 
523d-524b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-37b  /  Lycurgus - 
Numa,  62b-c  /  Pericles,  127a-128a  /  Lucullus, 
409b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  157a 
36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  154b-155b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xx,  147a; 
bk  xxiii,  190a-b;  191b-c;  199b-200a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  365c-366a  /  Political 
Economy,  375b-d  /  Social  Contract,  bk  iii, 
415b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  27b-37b  esp 
28a-d,  30b-31b;  58c-62a;  bk  iv,  239c-240a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  501c-d;  658c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  322c-d  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  383d-384a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  428b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  230 
75c;  par  241-245  76d-77d;  par  254  79c;  ad¬ 
ditions,  148-149  140c-141a 
50  Marx:  Capital ,  209c-225d  passim,  esp  211a-c, 
215d-217c;  302d-366a  esp  303d-305a,  311c- 
325c,  354b-355b,  358a-d,  364a-c 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  424d- 
425a 

lf.  The  relation  of  economic  to  political  free¬ 

dom:  economic  democracy 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  9  477c-478d; 
bk  iv,  ch  4  [i29ib30-38]  491a-b;  ch  6  492b- 
493a;  ch  ii  [i295b2-i296b2]  495c-496c;  bk  v, 
ch  5  [1305*29-34]  507a;  bk  vi,  ch  4  [i3i8b6- 
1319^]  522a-523a;  bk  vii,  ch  9  533a-d 
14  Plutarch:  Solon,  68d-70d  /  Poplicola- Solon, 
87a  /  Tiberius  Gracchus  671b,d-681a,c  esp 
675b-d  /  Caius  Gracchus  681b,d-689a,c 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  19d-21d; 
bk  vii,  44d-45b;  bk  xiii,  99b-100c;  bk  xv, 
114c-ll5b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  353c-355b  passim; 
355d-356a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  405b-c  esp 
405b  [fn  1] ;  bk  iii,  422c-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  51a-62a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  52b-c,  61b;  109d-110d;  bk  iv,  287c- 
288c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  144b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73b;  452d-453a,c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d-437c 

43  Federalist:  number  10, 50b-51d; number 35, 
113b-114a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  309a-c  /  Representative  Govern¬ 
ment,  369b-370a;  382c-d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  243 
77b-c;  additions,  44  123c;  145  140b  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History,  part  iii,  287d-288b;  part  iv, 
352a; 364d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  426b-c; 
428d-429c  esp  429b-c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


8 


Chapter  44:  LABOR  939 


8.  Historical  observations  on  the  condition  of 
labor 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  n,  84d-85b;  bk  vi, 
196c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [1 269*33^7] 
465c 

13  Virgil:  Georgies ,  1  [1 18-159]  40a-41b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  36a-37c  /  Solon ,  72d  / 
Pericles ,  127a-129b/  Marcus  Cato ,  278d-279a; 
287 b-d  /  Crassus,  439a-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  xiv,  151d-152c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
105,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-4  318b-321a 
25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  411a-d 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learnings  30c-d 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  348b,d-353b  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  iv,  428d;  429d 


39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  27b  37b  esp 
27b  28a,  29d  33c;  42a~62a  passim,  esp  50a- 
53a,  56b  58b,  59a-62a;  88c  d;  bk  iii,  165b- 
173b;  175d  179a;  bk  iv,  200c-201a;  239c- 
240a;  287b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  16c-17d;  113c; 
144b-c;  498b  501c  passim 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall  AQ4c-d;  452d-453a,c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  149 

140d-141a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  295a-297a 
50  Marx:  Capital ,  63b-c;  113c-115c;  127c-146c; 

162d-163c;  333c-377a  esp  355d-368b 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  415a- 
425b  passim,  esp  415b-416c,  419b, d,  424d- 
425a;  429c-433d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
165b-c 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Other  discussions  of  the  golden  age,  see  Man  9a;  Progress  ic;  Time  8b. 

Other  considerations  of  penal  labor,  see  Punishment  4b(3). 

Matters  relevant  to  the  nature  of  productive  work  and  the  factors  influencing  productivity, 
see  Art  4,  9a~9b;  Education  6;  Science  ib(i)-ib(2);  Wealth  3a. 

Other  discussions  of  the  division  of  labor  and  its  consequences,  see  Family  3a~3b;  Progress 
3a;  State  5c;  Wealth  3d. 

Other  discussions  of  the  position  of  labor  in  different  economic  systems,  see  Slavery  4a~4c; 
Wealth  6a,  7b(i). 

The  general  theory  of  wages  and  the  relation  of  wages  to  profits,  see  Wealth  4C~4d, 
6d(i)-6d(2). 

The  problem  of  economic  justice  to  the  laborer,  see  Democracy  4a(2);  Justice  8b-8c(2); 
Progress  3b;  Wealth  6d(2);  and  for  the  relation  of  economic  to  political  liberty,  see 
Liberty  2d,  6b;  Revolution  4a. 

The  discussion  of  property  rights  and  the  problem  of  the  ownership  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  see  Wealth  ja-jc,  8a-8c. 

The  problem  of  the  political  status  of  the  laboring  classes  and  the  issue  concerning  the  ex¬ 
tension  of  the  suffrage  to  workmen,  see  Citizen  3;  Constitution  5a;  Democracy  4a(i); 
Liberty  if;  Oligarchy  4,  5a;  Slavery  5a~5b. 

Another  discussion  of  the  problems  of  poverty  and  unemployment,  see  Wealth  8c-8d. 

The  general  theory  of  the  class  war  as  it  occurs  in  different  economic  systems,  see  Opposition 
5b;  Revolution  5a~5c;  State  5d(2)-5e;  War  and  Peace  2c;  Wealth  9h. 


940 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boohs  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Augustine.  Of  the  Work  of  Monks 
Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind ,  iv  (a) 

Marx.  The  Poverty  of  Philosophy ,  ch  2  (2,5) 

J.  S.  Mill.  Principles  of  Political  Economy ,  bk  i,  ch 

1-3,  7-8,  10;  BK  II,  CII  H-14;  BK  III,  CH  6;  BK  IV, 
CH  7 

- .  “The  Claims  of  Labor/’  in  vol  11,  Dissertations 

and  Discussions 

Engels.  The  Condition  of  the  Working  Classes  in 
England 

- .  Herr  Eugen  Dittoing' s  Revolution  in  Science , 

PART  11 

Tolstoy.  “On  Labor  and  Luxury,”  in  What  Then 
Must  We  Do? 

II. 

Hesiod.  Wor\s  and  Days 
Langland.  Piers  Plowman 
T.  More.  Utopia 

Paracelsus.  The  Miners'  Sickness  and  Other  Miners' 
Diseases 

Dekker.  The  Shoemaker' s  Holiday 
Ramazzini.  De  Morhis  Artificum  (The  Diseases  of 
Workers) 

Franklin.  Poor  Richard's  Almanack 
Fourier.  Social  Destinies 
Southey.  Essays ,  Moral  and  Political,  iv 
Ricardo.  The  Principles  of  Political  Economy  and 
Taxation ,  esp  ch  i,  5,  16 
Malthus.  An  Essay  on  Population 

- .  Principles  of  Political  Economy ,  esp  bk  i,  ch 

1-2,  4;  bk  11,  ch  1,  sect  10 
Skidmore.  The  Rights  of  Man  to  Property l 
T.  Carlyle.  Sartor  Resartus 
Hess.  Sozialistische  Aufsdtze 
Proudhon.  The  Philosophy  of  Misery 
Kierkegaard.  Christian  Discourses ,  part  iv  (2) 
Thoreau.  Walden ,  ch  i 
Ruskin.  Time  and  Tide 

- .  Munera  Pulveris 

- .  Tors  Clavigera 

George.  Progress  and  Poverty 
Stevenson.  “An  Apology  for  Idlers,”  in  Virgini- 
bus  Puerisque 

Jevons.  The  State  in  Relation  to  Labour 
Zola.  Germinal 
Smiles.  Life  and  Labor 
Nietzsche.  The  Dawn  of  Day,  aph  173 
- .  The  Joyful  Wisdom ,  aph  42,  329,  348 


Nietzsche.  Beyond  Good  and  Evil ,  ch  iii  (58) 

- .  The  Genealogy  of  Morals,  111  (18) 

A.  Marshall.  Principles  of  Economics ,  esp  bk  iv, 
ch  6,  9;  bk  vi,  ch  3-5 

Leo  XIII.  Rerum  Novarum  (Encyclical  on  the  Con¬ 
dition  of  Labor) 

Durkheim.  The  Division  of  Labor  in  Society 
Bucher.  Arbeit  und  Rhythmus 

S.  and  B.  Webb.  Industrial  Democracy,  esp  part  ii- 
iii 

Groos.  The  Play  of  Men 

- .  The  Play  of  Animals 

Kropotkin.  The  Conquest  of  Bread 

- .  Fields,  Factories  and  Workshops 

Sinclair.  The  Jungle 

Peguy.  Basic  Verities  (The  Honor  of  Work) 

Nexo.  Pelle  the  Conqueror 
Sorel.  Reflexions  on  Violence,  ch  7 
Troeltsch.  The  Social  Teaching  of  the  Christian 
Churches 

Bradley.  Essays  on  Truth  and  Reality,  ch  3 

J.  A.  Hobson.  The  Evolution  of  Modern  Capitalism 

- .  Work  and  health 

T.  Veblen.  The  Theory  of  the  Leisure  Class 

- .  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship ,  and  the  State  of 

the  Industrial  Arts 
Hamsun.  Growth  of  the  Soil 
Michels.  Economia  e  felicita 
Tawney.  The  Acquisitive  Society 
Briefs.  The  Proletariat ,  a  Challenge  to  Western  Civili¬ 
zation 

De  Man.  Joy  in  Work 
Beveridge.  Unemployment 

Pius  XI.  Quadragesimo  Anno  (Encyclical  on  the 
Reconstruction  of  the  Social  Order) 

Berle  and  Means.  The  Modern  Corporation  and 
Private  Property 

E.  Chamberlin.  The  Theory  of  Monopolistic  Com¬ 
petition 

Dunkmann.  Soziologie  der  Arbeit 

B.  Russell.  Proposed  Roads  to  Freedom,  ch  4 
- .  Freedom  Versus  Organization 

A.  R.  Burns.  The  Decline  of  Competition 
Borne  and  Henry.  A  Philosophy  of  Work 
Gill.  Work  and  Leisure 

- .  Work  and  Property 

Simon.  Trois  leqons  sur  le  travail 
Steinbeck.  The  Grapes  of  Wrath 
Maritain.  Freedom  in  the  Modern  World ,  appendix  i 

- .  Scholasticism  and  Politics,  ch  vii 

J.  M.  Clark.  Alternative  to  Serfdom 


Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  liberal  arts  of  grammar,  rhetoric,  and 
logic  are  all  concerned  with  language.  Each 
of  these  disciplines  establishes  its  own  rules  for 
the  use  of  language,  each  by  reference  to  a  spe¬ 
cial  standard  of  excellence  or  correctness  which 
measures  language  as  an  instrument  of  thought 
or  communication.  Together  these  three  arts 
regulate  discourse  as  a  whole.  Their  relation  to 
one  another  represents  the  relation  of  the  vari¬ 
ous  aspects  of  discourse— the  emotional,  the 
social,  and  the  intellectual. 

The  tradition  of  the  great  books  is  the  tradi¬ 
tion  of  the  liberal  arts.  Their  greatness  consists 
not  only  in  the  magnitude  of  the  ideas  or  prob¬ 
lems  with  which  they  deal,  but  also  in  their  for¬ 
mal  excellence  as  products  of  liberal  art.  Some 
of  the  great  books  are  expositions  of  logic  or 
rhetoric.  None  is  a  treatise  on  grammar.  But 
they  all  plainly  exemplify,  even  where  they  do 
not  expound,  the  special  refinements  of  the  arts 
of  language;  and  many  of  them,  especially  the 
works  of  science,  philosophy,  and  theology,  and 
even  some  of  the  poetical  works,  deal  explicitly 
with  the  difficulties  of  discourse,  and  the  de¬ 
vices  that  have  been  used  to  overcome  them. 
Language  is  their  instrument,  and  they  are  con¬ 
sciously  critical  in  its  use. 

One  of  the  great  books — Augustine’s  treatise 
On  Christian  Doctrine — is  directly  and  explicitly 
concerned  with  grammar  in  the  broad  sense  of 
the  art  of  reading.  Addressed  to  “earnest  stu¬ 
dents  of  the  word,”  it  attempts  to  “lay  down 
rules  for  interpretation,”  and,  in  so  doing,  it  is 
compared  by  Augustine  to  “one  who  teaches 
reading,  that  is,  shows  others  how  to  read  for 
themselves.”  It  is  not  reading  in  general,  how¬ 
ever,  but  the  reading  of  one  book — the  Bible — 
with  which  Augustine  is  concerned.  We  shall  re¬ 
turn  later  to  this  special  problem  of  interpreting 
the  word  of  God,  or  language  which  is  thought 
to  be  inspired. 


In  our  day,  there  is  a  lively  interest  in  the 
problems  of  language.  This  is  partly  because  of 
the  development  of  historical  and  comparative 
studies  of  the  various  human  languages,  and  the 
scientific  formulation  of  what  is  common  to  all 
languages  in  origin,  structure,  and  change.  But 
it  also  results  in  part  from  the  claims  of  a  dis¬ 
cipline  popularly  called  “semantics”  to  have 
discovered  the  properties  of  language  as  a  me¬ 
dium  of  expression,  and  especially  to  have  dis¬ 
covered  its  limitations.  The  claims  of  semantics 
often  go  so  far  as  to  find  in  the  misuse  of  lan¬ 
guage  the  origin  of  many  human  ills.  The  novel¬ 
ty  of  semantics  is  supposed  to  lie  both  in  the 
diagnosis  and  in  the  remedies  proposed. 

Of  these  two  sources  of  current  interest  in 
language,  the  second  calls  attention  to  the  vi¬ 
tality  of  the  liberal  arts,  of  which  semantics  is  a 
contemporary  formulation.  It  might  almost  be 
said  that  there  is  nothing  new  about  semantics 
except  the  name.  Hobbes,  Bacon,  and  Locke, 
for  example,  deal  explicitly  with  the  abuses 
of  language  and  the  treachery  of  words.  Each 
makes  recommendations  for  the  correction  of 
these  faults.  Plato  and  Aristotle,  Augustine  and 
Aquinas,  Berkeley  and  Hume,  are  similarly 
concerned  with  ambiguity  in  speech,  with  the 
multiple  senses  in  which  discourse  of  every  sort 
can  be  interpreted,  and  with  the  methods  by 
which  men  can  approximate  precision  in  the 
use  of  language. 

The  other  interest  in  language  is  also  repre¬ 
sented  in  the  great  books.  Though  the  science 
of  linguistics  and  the  history  of  languages  are 
researches  of  recent  origin,  speculation  about 
the  origin  of  language  and,  in  that  context,  con¬ 
sideration  of  the  natural  and  conventional  as¬ 
pects  of  language  extend  throughout  the  tradi¬ 
tion.  At  all  times  the  discussion  of  the  nature  of 
man  and  society  considers  language  as  one  of 
the  principal  characteristics  of  the  specifically 


941 


942 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


human  world  or  compares  the  language  of  men 
with  the  speech  of  brutes. 

In  addition  there  is  the  broad  philosophical 
inquiry  into  the  nature  of  signs  and  symbols  in 
general.  This  is  not  limited  to  the  problem  of 
how  written  or  spoken  words  get  their  mean¬ 
ing.  The  general  question  calls  for  an  examina¬ 
tion  of  every  type  of  signifying  and  every  sort 
of  symbol,  verbal  and  non-verbal,  natural  and 
artificial,  human  and  divine.  Though  these  mat¬ 
ters  are  closely  related  to  the  problems  of  lan¬ 
guage  and  may  therefore  be  touched  upon  here, 
their  main  treatment  is  reserved  for  the  chapter 
on  Sign  and  Symbol. 

The  treatment  of  language  seems  to  have  a 
different  tenor  in  ancient  and  modern  times. 
The  philosophers  of  antiquity  appreciate  the 
need  to  safeguard  discourse  from  the  aberra¬ 
tions  of  speech.  Plato  and  Aristotle  usually  pref¬ 
ace  their  discussion  of  a  subject  with  an  exami¬ 
nation  of  the  relevant  words  in  current  use.  Dis¬ 
covering  the  variety  of  meanings  attached  to 
common  words,  they  take  pains  to  enumerate 
the  various  senses  of  a  word,  and  to  put  these 
meanings  in  some  order.  They  pursue  definitions 
or  construct  them  to  control  the  ambiguity  that 
is  latent  in  the  language  anyone  must  use  to  ex¬ 
press  or  communicate  ideas.  But  they  do  not 
expect  to  remove  ambiguity  entirely.  They  tend 
to  accept  the  fact  that  the  same  word  will  have 
to  be  used  in  a  number  of  senses;  and  they  dis¬ 
criminate  between  the  occasions  when  it  is  de¬ 
sirable  to  be  precise  about  a  word’s  meaning 
and  those  times  when  the  purpose  of  discourse 
is  better  served  by  permitting  a  word  to  carry 
a  whole  range  of  meanings.  They  see  no  special 
difficulty  in  abstract  as  opposed  to  concrete 
words,  or  in  general  names  as  distinguished  from 
the  proper  names  which  designate  individuals, 
or  in  words  which  refer  to  purely  intelligible 
objects  like  ideas  rather  than  to  the  objects  of 
sense-experience. 

The  mood  of  the  ancients,  which  also  prevails 
for  the  most  part  among  the  philosophers  and 
theologians  of  the  Middle  Ages,  seems  to  ex¬ 
press  a  certain  tolerance  of  the  imperfections  of 
language.  If  men  do  not  think  clearly,  if  they 
do  not  reason  cogently  or  argue  honestly,  the 
fault  is  primarily  the  result  of  the  misuse  of 
their  faculties,  not  of  the  betrayal  of  their  in¬ 


tentions  by  the  intractable  character  of  lan¬ 
guage  as  an  instrument.  Even  when  men  mis¬ 
understand  one  another,  the  inadequacy  of  lan-  c] 
guage  as  a  medium  of  communication  is  not  h 
solely  responsible  for  the  failure  of  minds  to  t 

meet  through  the  interchange  of  words.  With  j 

greater  effort,  with  a  more  assiduous  applica-  ,  $ 
tion  of  the  liberal  arts,  men  can  succeed  even  if 
language  works  against  them. 

Some  things  are  inexpressible  in  human 
speech  even  as  they  are  incapable  of  being  fully 
grasped  by  human  thought.  “My  vision,”  Dan¬ 
te  says  when  he  reaches  the  mystic  rose  of  Para¬ 
dise,  “was  greater  than  our  speech.”  Such 
knowledge  as  we  can  have  of  “the  highest  mat¬ 
ters  and  the  first  principles  of  things”  Plato 
thinks  “does  not  admit  of  exposition  like  other 
branches  of  knowledge.”  In  his  Seventh  Letter ,  he 
even  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  “no  man  of  intel¬ 
ligence  will  venture  to  express  his  philosophical 
views  in  language.” 

With  these  exceptions  the  ancients  seem  to 
adopt  a  mood  of  tolerance  towards  language. 

This  does  not  imply  an  underestimation  of  the 
difficulties  of  using  language  well.  It  simply  does 
not  make  of  language  an  insidious  enemy  of 
clarity  and  truth.  The  deficiencies  of  language 
are  like  the  weaknesses  of  the  flesh.  As  man  can 
in  large  part  overcome  them  through  the  disci¬ 
pline  of  the  moral  virtues,  so  through  the  dis¬ 
cipline  of  the  liberal  arts — by  skill  in  grammar, 
rhetoric,  and  logic — he  can  make  language  ex¬ 
press  almost  as  much  truth  as  he  can  acquire, 
and  communicate  it  almost  as  clearly  as  he  can 
think  it.  Men  need  not  succumb  to  the  tyranny 
of  words  if  they  will  make  the  requisite  effort  to 
master  language  to  serve  their  purpose. 

But  the  liberal  arts  do  not  guarantee  purity 
of  purpose.  Obscurantism,  obfuscation,  decep¬ 
tion,  and  falsification  are  sometimes  the  aim. 
Men  try  to  persuade  others  at  all  costs,  or  to 
win  the  argument  regardless  of  where  the  truth 
lies.  They  try  to  confuse  their  opponents  or 
mislead  their  audience.  The  use  of  language  for 
such  ends  requires  as  much  skill  as  its  employ¬ 
ment  in  the  service  of  truth.  If  such  use  is  a 
misuse,  then  language  is  equally  available  for 
use  or  misuse. 

It  is  an  ancient  saying  that  only  the  compe¬ 
tent  in  grammar  can  make  grammatical  errors 
intentionally.  So,  as  Plato  recognizes,  the  dif- 


Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 


943 


ference  between  the  sophist  and  the  philoso¬ 
pher  is  not  one  of  skill  but  of  purpose.  When  he 
criticizes  the  trickery  of  sophistical  argument, 
he  also  acknowledges  the  cleverness  with  which 
,  the  sophists  juggle  words  and  propound  absurd¬ 
ities  under  the  cover  of  superficially  significant 
speech.  The  sophistical  fallacies  which  Aristotle 
enumerates  are  seldom  accidental  errors.  Far 
from  being  the  result  of  the  impediments  which 
language  places  in  the  way  of  thought,  they  are 
I  in  large  measure  artfully  contrived  equivoca¬ 
tions.  They  are  ways  of  using  language  against 
logic.  According  to  Aristotle,  they  represent 
i  “foul  fighting  in  disputation”  and  are  resorted 
to  only  by  “those  who  are  resolved  to  win  at  all 
costs.” 

In  the  modern  treatment  of  language  there  is 
more  of  an  imputation  that  words  cause  men 
unwittingly  to  deceive  themselves  as  often  as 
they  enable  one  man  intentionally  to  deceive 
another.  Men  are  duped  or  tricked  by  the  tend¬ 
ency  of  words  to  counterfeit  a  reality  which 
does  not  exist.  This,  in  the  view  of  Hobbes  or 
•  Locke,  Berkeley  or  Hume,  is  particularly  true 
of  general  or  universal  names — or  words  that 
1  signify  nothing  which  can  be  perceived  or  im¬ 
agined. 

We  cannot  imagine  anything  infinite,  says 
Hobbes.  Hence  a  word  like  “infinite”  is  a  form 
of  absurd  speech  “taken  upon  credit  (without 
any  signification  at  all)  from  deceived  philoso¬ 
phers  and  deceived,  or  deceiving,  Schoolmen.” 
In  addition  to  the  deceptions  of  ordinary  am¬ 
biguity  and  of  metaphorical  speech,  Hobbes 
pays  particular  attention  to  the  absurd,  ihsig- 
nificant,  or  nonsensical  use  of  words  “whereby 
we  conceive  nothing  but  the  sound”;  he  gives 
as  examples,  not  merely  “round  quadrangle,” 
but  “infused  virtue,”  “free  will,”  and  “imma¬ 
terial  substance.” 

In  the  light  of  the  examples,  this  theory  of  in¬ 
significant  or  meaningless  speech  explains  what 
Hobbes  means  when  he  says  that  “words  are 
wise  men’s  counters,  they  do  but  reckon  by 
them;  but  they  are  the  money  of  fools.”  It  also 
indicates  how  Hobbes  uses  the  susceptibility  of 
men  to  self-deception  through  language  as  a  way 
of  explaining  the  errors — he  calls  them  “absurd¬ 
ities” — into  which  his  predecessors  have  fallen. 
What  is  novel  here  is  not  that  he  disagrees  with 


earlier  thinkers  on  points  of  psychology  and 
metaphysics  or  theology,  but  that  he  reduces 
what  might  be  supposed  to  be  an  issue  between 
true  and  false  opinions  to  a  difference  between 
significant  and  absurd  speech.  His  opponents 
might  reply  that  unless  his  own  views  about 
matter  and  mind  are  true,  his  semantic  criti¬ 
cism  of  them  does  not  hold.  They  have  been 
seduced  by  language  into  talking  nonsense  only 
if  Hobbes  is  right  in  his  metaphysics  and  psy¬ 
chology. 

The  criticism  of  arguments  which  seem  to 
rely  on  metaphors  is  not  peculiarly  modern.  In 
his  attack  on  the  Platonic  theory  of  ideas,  Aris¬ 
totle  dismisses  the  statement  that  the  Forms 
“are  patterns  and  other  things  share  in  them” 
as  a  use  of  “empty  words  and  poetical  meta 
phors.”  But  Hobbes  carries  this  method  of  crit 
icism  much  further.  He  frequently  rests  his 
case  against  other  philosophers  entirely  on  the 
ground  that  they  are  talking  nonsense.  Though 
he  himself  catches  the  imagination,  almost  as 
often  as  Plato  does,  by  his  skillfully  wrought 
metaphors,  he  would  insist  that  what  he  says 
can  always  be  rendered  literally,  whereas  the 
metaphors  of  others  conceal  the  insignificance 
of  their  speech. 

Bacon  provides  another  illustration  of  the 
modern  attitude  which  ascribes  a  diabolical 
character  to  language.  “There  arises  from  a  bad 
and  unapt  formation  of  words,”  he  writes,  “a 
wonderful  obstruction  to  the  mind.  Nor  can  the 
definitions  and  explanations  with  which  learned 
men  are  wont  to  guard  and  protect  themselves 
in  some  instances  afford  a  complete  remedy — 
words  still  manifestly  force  the  understanding, 
throw  everything  into  confusion,  and  lead  man¬ 
kind  into  vain  and  innumerable  controversies 
and  fallacies.”  He  goes  on  to  say  that  “the  idols 
imposed  upon  the  understanding  by  words  are 
of  two  kinds.  They  are  either  names  of  things 
which  have  no  existence  ...  or  they  are  names  of 
actual  objects,  but  confused,  badly  defined,  and 
hastily  or  irregularly  abstracted  from  things.” 

Here,  as  in  the  case  of  Hobbes,  a  theory  of 
reality  and  of  the  way  in  which  the  mind  draws 
its  ideas  from  experience  seems  to  underlie  the 
charge  that  language  tangles  the  mind  in  a  web 
of  words,  so  that  it  deals  with  words  rather  than 
with  things.  In  the  same  spirit,  though  not  from 
the  same  premises,  Locke  tells  his  reader  why 


944 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


he  found  it  necessary  to  include  in  his  Essay 
Concerning  Human  Understanding  the  long  third 
book  on  language,  which  examines  in  detail  the 
imperfections  as  well  as  the  abuses  of  words,  and 
the  remedies  therefor, 

“Vague  and  insignificant  forms  of  speech,  and 
abuse  of  language,”  he  says,  “have  so  long  passed 
for  mysteries  of  science;  and  hard  or  misapplied 
words  with  little  or  no  meaning  have,  by  pre¬ 
scription,  such  a  right  to  be  mistaken  for  deep 
learning  and  height  of  speculation,  that  it  will 
not  be  easy  to  persuade  either  those  who  speak, 
or  those  who  hear  them,  that  they  are  but  the 
covers  of  ignorance,  and  hinderance  of  true 
knowledge.  ...  So  few  are  apt  to  think  they  de¬ 
ceive,  or  are  deceived  in  the  use  of  words  or 
that  the  language  of  the  sect  they  are  of  has  any 
faults  in  it.” 

Without  judging  the  fundamental  issues  in¬ 
volved  concerning  the  nature  of  things  and  of 
man  and  his  mind,  one  point  seems  to  be  clear. 
According  as  men  hold  different  conceptions  of 
the  relation  of  language  to  thought  (and  in  con¬ 
sequence  assume  different  attitudes  toward  the 
imperfections  or  misuse  of  language),  they  in¬ 
evitably  take  opposite  sides  on  these  issues. 
Whether  the  discipline  of  language  is  called  se¬ 
mantics  or  the  liberal  arts,  the  standards  by 
which  one  man  criticizes  the  language  of  another 
seem  to  depend  upon  what  he  holds  to  be  true. 

The  present  work  on  the  great  ideas  aims,  in 
part,  to  record  the  agreements  and  disagree¬ 
ments  among  the  great  minds  of  the  western 
tradition.  It  also  records  how  those  minds  have 
used  the  same  word  in  different  senses  or  have 
used  quite  distinct  words  for  the  same  thing.  It 
could  not  do  either  unless  it  did  both.  This  in¬ 
dicates  the  basic  relationship  between  language 
and  thought  which  the  great  books  exemplify, 
even  when  they  do  not  explicitly  make  it  the 
basis  of  their  discussion  of  the  relation  between 
language  and  thought. 

The  ideal  of  a  perfect  and  universal  language 
seems  to  arise  in  modern  times  from  dissatisfac¬ 
tion  with  the  inadequacy  of  ordinary  language 
for  the  analytical  refinement  and  precision  of 
mathematics  or  science.  As  Descartes  holds  up 
the  method  of  mathematics  as  the  procedure  to 
be  followed  in  all  other  inquiries  and  subject 
matters,  so  his  conception  of  a  “universal  ma  the¬ 


sis”  calls  for  a  language  which  shall  be. the  per¬ 
fect  instrument  of  analysis  and  demonstration. 

It  is  sometimes  supposed  that  the  symbolism 
of  mathematics  is  itself  that  perfect  language. 
Lavoisier  quotes  Condillac  to  the  effect  that  al¬ 
gebra,  “in  the  most  simple,  most  exact,  and  best 
manner,  is  at  the  same  time  a  language  and  an 
analytical  method.”  Of  the  analytical  equations 
“which  Descartes  was  the  first  to  introduce  into 
the  study  of  curves  and  surfaces,”  Fourier  re¬ 
marks  that  “they  extend  to  all  general  phenom¬ 
ena.  There  cannot  be  a  language  more  universal 
and  more  simple,  more  free  from  errors  and  ob¬ 
scurities,  that  is  to  say,  more  worthy  to  express 
the  invariable  relations  of  natural  things.  .  .  . 
Its  chief  attribute  is  clearness;  it  has  no  marks 
to  express  confused  notions.  ...  It  follows  the 
same  course  in  the  study  of  all  phenomena;  it 
interprets  them  by  the  same  language.” 

This  praise  of  mathematical  symbolism  indi¬ 
cates  that  one  feature  of  the  ideal  is  an  exact 
correspondence  between  words  and  ideas.  “Like 
three  impressions  of  the  same  seal,”  Lavoisier 
says,  “the  word  ought  to  produce  the  idea,  and 
the  idea  to  be  a  picture  of  the  fact.”  If  there 
were  a  perfect  one-to-one  correspondence  be¬ 
tween  physical  symbols  and  mental  concepts, 
there  would  never  be  any  failures  of  communi¬ 
cation.  Men  would  be  able  to  understand  each 
other  as  well  as  if  they  could  see  directly  into 
each  other’s  minds.  Though  they  still  used 
external  signs  as  a  medium  of  communication, 
they  would  approximate  the  immediate  com¬ 
munication  which  the  theologians  attribute  to 
angels.  In  addition,  the  process  of  thinking  it¬ 
self,  quite  apart  from  communication,  could  be 
perfectly  regulated  by  the  rules  of  grammar — 
the  rules  for  manipulating  symbols. 

In  the  sense  in  which  Lavoisier  says  that  “the 
art  of  reasoning  is  nothing  more  than  a  language 
well  arranged,”  the  rules  of  thought  might  be 
reduced  to  the  rules  of  syntax  if  there  were  a 
perfect  language.  If  the  symbols  of  mathematics 
lack  the  universality  to  express  every  sort  of 
concept,  then  it  may  be  necessary,  as  Leibnitz 
proposes,  to  construct  a  “universal  characteris¬ 
tic”  which  would  make  possible  a  symbolic  cal¬ 
culus  for  the  performance  of  all  the  operations 
of  thought.  This  conception  seems  to  contain 
the  principle  and  the  motivation  for  the  vari¬ 
ous  logistical  schemes  which  accompany  the 


945 


Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 


modern  development  of  symbolic  or  mathe¬ 
matical  logic,  from  Boole  and  Venn  to  Peano, 
Couturat,  Russell,  and  Whitehead.  The  hopes 
to  be  realized  by  an  algebra  of  logic  find  ex¬ 
pression  in  Jevons’  plan  for  a  logical  abacus 
which,  like  an  adding  machine  or  comptometer, 
would  be  a  thinking  machine  able  to  solve  all 
problems  that  can  be  put  in  suitable  terms. 


Is  the  ideal  of  a  perfect  and  universal  lan¬ 
guage  a  genuine  hope  or  a  utopian  dream?  Not 
all  modern  scientists  seem  to  agree  with  Lavoi¬ 
sier’s  point  that  the  improvement  of  a  science 
and  the  improvement  of  its  language  are  insep¬ 
arable.  Faraday,  for  example,  apologizing  for 
the  invention  of  new  words  to  name  electrical 
phenomena,  says  that  he  is  “fully  aware  that 
names  are  one  thing  and  science  another.”  The 
utopian  character  of  the  ideal  seems  to  be  im¬ 
plied  in  Swift’s  satirization  of  a  universal  lan¬ 
guage.  On  his  voyage  to  the  cloud-land  of  the 
scientists  in  Laputa,  Gulliver  learns  of  a  project 
which  is  being  considered  by  the  professors  of 
language.  “Since  words  are  only  names  for 
things,  it  would  be  more  convenient  for  all  men 
to  carry  about  them  such  things  as  were  neces¬ 
sary  to  express  the  particular  business  they  are 
to  discourse  on.”  The  substitution  of  things  for 
words  would  thus  provide  a  “universal  language 
to  be  understood  in  all  civilized  nations.” 

In  the  ancient  world  the  imperfection  of  or¬ 
dinary  speech  gives  rise,  not  to  the  conception 
of  a  perfect  language  which  man  should  try  to 
construct,  but  to  the  consideration  of  the  dis¬ 
tinction  between  a  hypothetical  natural  lan¬ 
guage  and  the  existing  conventional  languages 
actually  in  use.  If  there  were  a  natural  language, 
it  would  not  only  be  the  same  for  all  men  every¬ 
where,  but  its  words  would  also  be  perfect  im¬ 
ages  or  imitations  of  things.  That  human  lan¬ 
guage  is  conventional  rather  than  natural  may 
be  seen  not  only  in  the  plurality  of  tongues,  but 
also  in  the  fact  that  existing  languages  embody 
contradictory  principles  of  symbolization. 

This  fact,  Plato  suggests  in  the  Cratylus ,  in¬ 
dicates  that  human  language  does  not  originate 
as  a  gift  from  the  gods,  for  if  the  gods  had  given 
men  the  names  they  use,  signs  would  be  per¬ 
fectly  and  consistently  adapted  to  things  signi¬ 
fied.  The  hypothesis  of  a  natural  or  god-given 
language  is  not  proposed  as  an  ideal  to  inspire 


men  to  try  to  invent  a  perfect  language  for 
themselves.  It  functions  rather  as  a  norm  for  the 
criticism  of  man-made  language  and  for  discov¬ 
ering  the  natural  elements  common  to  all  con¬ 
ventional  languages. 

Like  human  society,  human  language  seems 
to  be  partly  natural,  partly  conventional.  As 
there  are  certain  political  principles,  such  as  that 
of  natural  justice,  common  to  all  societies  de¬ 
spite  the  diversity  of  their  customs  and  institu¬ 
tions,  so  all  conventional  languages  have  certain 
common  characteristics  of  structure  which  in¬ 
dicate  their  natural  basis  in  the  physical  and 
mental  constitution  of  man.  In  the  tradition  of 
the  liberal  arts,  the  search  for  a  universal  gram¬ 
mar,  applicable  to  all  conventional  languages, 
represents  not  the  hope  to  create  a  universal  or 
perfect  language,  but  the  conviction  that  all 
languages  have  a  common,  natural  basis. 

The  hypothesis  of  a  natural  language  takes 
another  form  and  has  another  implication  in  the 
Judaeo-Christian  tradition,  where  it  is  discussed 
in  the  light  of  certain  portions  of  revelation.  Y  et 
it  retains  the  same  fundamental  relevance  to  the 
problem  of  the  origin  and  characteristics  of  the 
many  conventional  languages  which  now  exist. 

Genesis  relates  how,  after  God  formed  every 
beast  of  the  field  and  every  fowl  of  the  air,  He 
“brought  them  to  Adam  to  see  what  he  would 
call  them;  and  whatsoever  Adam  called  every 
living  creature,  that  was  the  name  thereof.” 
The  names  which  Adam  devised  constituted 
a  natural  language,  at  least  insofar  as,  accord¬ 
ing  to  Augustine’s  interpretation,  it  is  the  one 
“common  language  of  the  race”  both  before  the 
flood  and  for  some  time  after.  But  there  is  the 
further  question  whether  the  names  which 
Adam  gave  to  things  were  their  rightful  or 
proper  names — whether  they  were  natural  signs 
in  the  sense  of  true  representations  of  the  na¬ 
tures  of  the  things  signified. 

Hobbes  suggests  one  answer  when  he  says  that 
“the  first  author  of  speech  was  God  himself, 
who  instructed  Adam  how  to  name  such  crea¬ 
tures  as  he  presented  to  his  sight”;  Augustine 
suggests  another  answer  by  identifying  the  orig¬ 
inal  language  of  man  with  Hebrew,  and  by  af¬ 
firming  the  continuity  of  the  Hebrew  spoken 
after  Babel  with  the  language  all  men  spoke  be¬ 
fore  the  confusion  of  tongues. 


946 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


At  the  time  when  men  began  to  build  “a 
tower  whose  top  may  reach  unto  heaven,”  Gen¬ 
esis  tells  us  that  “the  whole  earth  was  of  one 
language  and  one  speech.  .  .  .  And  the  Lord 
said,  Behold,  the  people  is  one,  and  they  have 
all  one  language;  and  this  they  begin  to  do;  and 
now  nothing  will  be  restrained  from  them, 
which  they  have  imagined  to  do.  Go  to,  let  us 
go  down,  and  there  confound  their  language, 
that  they  may  not  understand  one  another’s 
speech.” 

This,  according  to  Hobbes,  means  that  the 
language  “gotten  and  augmented  by  Adam  and 
his  posterity,  was  again  lost  at  the  tower  of  Babel, 
when  by  the  hand  of  God  every  man  was  strick¬ 
en  for  his  rebellion,  with  an  oblivion  of  his  for¬ 
mer  language.”  If  the  further  implication  is  that 
the  lost  language  was  unlike  any  of  the  con¬ 
ventional  languages  in  the  historical  record, 
then  it  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  that 
natural  form  of  speech  in  which  each  thing  is 
named  according  to  its  nature.  The  modern 
ideal  of  a  perfect  and  universal  language  may 
even  be  looked  upon  as  an  impious  wish  to 
achieve  what  God  took  away  from  men  at 
Babel. 

The  problem  of  the  origin  of  human  language 
is  not  an  easy  one  for  the  theologian.  It  is  more 
difficult  still  for  those  who  speculate  about  it  in 
purely  naturalistic  terms.  Rousseau  tries  to  ex¬ 
pose  some  of  the  perplexities  in  such  specula¬ 
tions. 

If  speech  did  not  become  a  social  necessity 
until  men  passed  from  isolation  in  a  state  of  na¬ 
ture  to  living  together  in  society,  how,  he  asks, 
could  societies  have  been  formed  before  lan¬ 
guages  had  been  invented  ?  “If  men  need  speech 
to  learn  to  think,”  he  remarks,  “they  must  have 
stood  in  much  greater  need  of  the  art  of  think¬ 
ing,  to  be  able  to  invent  that  of  speaking.”  The 
development  of  languages  already  in  existence, 
or  the  way  in  which  the  child  learns  to  speak 
through  living  in  an  environment  where  speech 
exists,  “by  no  means  explains  how  languages 
were  originally  formed.” 

Rousseau  imagines  a  primitive  condition  in 
which  men  uttered  instinctive  cries  “to  implore 
assistance  in  case  of  danger,  or  relief  in  case  of 
suffering”;  he  supposes  that  to  such  cries,  men 
may  have  added  gestures  to  signify  visible  and 


movable  objects,  and  imitative  sounds  to  sig¬ 
nify  audible  ones.  Such  methods  of  expression 
being  insufficient  to  convey  ideas  about  absent 
or  future  things,  men  had  at  last  to  invent  “the 
articulate  sounds  of  the  voice”  and  to  institute 
these  as  conventional  signs.  But,  as  he  observes, 
“such  an  institution  could  only  be  made  by 
common  consent .  .  .  itself  still  more  difficult  to 
conceive,  since  such  a  common  agreement 
must  have  had  motives,  and  speech,  therefore, 
seems  to  have  been  highly  necessary  in  order  to 
establish  the  use  of  it.” 

The  problem  of  the  origin  of  human  language 
is  not  only  connected  with  the  problem  of  the 
origin  of  human  society,  but  also  with  the  prob¬ 
lem  of  the  origin  of  man  himself.  The  faculty  of 
articulate  speech  does  not,  according  to  Darwin, 
“offer  any  insuperable  objection  to  the  belief 
that  man  has  been  developed  from  some  lower 
form.”  Though  the  habitual  use  of  articulate 
language  is  peculiar  to  man,  “he  uses,  in  com¬ 
mon  with  the  lower  animals,  inarticulate  cries 
to  express  his  meaning,  aided  by  gestures  and 
the  movements  of  the  muscles  of  the  face.”  The 
songs  of  birds  and  the  speech  of  parrots  show 
that  animals  can  learn  to  make  and  repeat  cer¬ 
tain  definite  sounds,  and  even  to  connect  words 
with  things.  It  seems  to  Darwin  quite  credible 
that  man’s  articulate  language  “owes  its  origin 
to  the  imitation  and  modification  of  various  nat¬ 
ural  sounds,  the  voices  of  other  animals,  and 
man’s  own  instinctive  cries,  aided  by  signs  and 
gestures.” 

Such  an  account  of  the  origin  of  human  speech 
is  not  credible,  however,  to  those  who  disagree 
with  Darwin’s  statement  that  “the  lower  ani¬ 
mals  differ  from  man  solely  in  his  almost  infi¬ 
nitely  larger  power  of  associating  together  the 
most  diversified  sounds  and  ideas.”  Those  who 
hold  that  human  rationality  differs  in  kind, 
rather  than  degree,  from  animal  intelligence 
tend  to  find  a  corresponding  difference  in  kind 
between  human  language  and  the  sounds  of 
brutes.  Aristotle,  for  example,  says  that  man  is 
the  only  animal  whom  nature  “has  endowed 
with  the  gift  of  speech.  Mere  vocalization  is 
only  an  indication  of  pleasure  and  pain  and  is 
therefore  found  in  other  animals,”  but  men 
alone  have  the  power  to  discuss  the  expedient 
and  the  iust,  and  this  fact  distinguishes  human 


947 


Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 


association  from  the  companionship  of  gregar¬ 
ious  animals. 

Human  speech  is,  for  Descartes,  one  of  the 
two  criteria  by  which  we  can  “recognize  the 
difference  that  exists  between  men  and  brutes. 
For  it  is  a  very  remarkable  fact  that  there  are 
none  so  depraved  and  stupid,  without  even  ex¬ 
cepting  idiots,  that  they  cannot  arrange  differ¬ 
ent  words  together,  forming  of  them  a  state¬ 
ment  by  which  they  can  make  known  their 
thoughts;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no 
other  animal  .  .  .  which  can  do  the  same.  It  is 
not  the  want  of  organs  that  brings  this  to  pass, 
for  it  is  evident  that  magpies  and  parrots  can 
utter  words  just  like  ourselves,  and  yet  they 
cannot  speak  as  we  do,  that  is,  so  as  to  give  evi¬ 
dence  that  they  think  of  what  they  say.  .  .  . 
This  does  not  merely  show  that  the  brutes  have 
I  less  reason  than  men,  but  that  they  have  none 
at  all.” 

The  difference  between  men  and  other  ani¬ 
mals  is  more  fully  discussed  in  the  chapter  on 
Max.  Here  we  are  concerned  with  opposite  opin¬ 
ions  on  that  subject  only  in  relation  to  opposite 
»  views  of  human  language  and  its  origin.  When, 
as  in  Descartes’  view,  human  language  is  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  syntax  and  grammar  or,  as  in 
Locke’s,  by  man’s  special  power  to  use  sounds 
“as  signs  of  internal  conceptions,  and  to  make 
them  stand  as  marks  for  ideas  within  his  own 
mind,”  the  origin  of  human  speech  does  not 
seem  explicable  in  evolutionary  terms. 

The  relation  of  grammar  to  the  other  liberal 
arts  and  to  the  various  uses  of  language  is  con¬ 
sidered  in  the  chapters  on  Logic,  Poetry,  and 
Rhetoric.  Isolated  from  these  others,  gram¬ 
mar  is  primarily  concerned  with  the  distinction 
of  the  parts  of  speech,  such  as  noun  and  verb,  or 
particle  and  adjective. 

“By  a  noun,”  says  Aristotle,  “we  mean  a 
sound  significant  by  convention,  which  has  no 
reference  to  time,  and  of  which  no  part  is  sig¬ 
nificant  apart  from  the  rest.”  In  contrast  to 
the  noun,  the  verb  is  defined  by  Aristotle  as 
the  sort  of  word  which,  “in  addition  to  its 
proper  meaning,  carries  with  it  the  notion  of 
time.  .  .  .  Moreover,”  he  continues,  “a  verb  is 
always  a  sign  of  something  said  of  something 
else.”  The  grammatical  function  of  nouns  and 
verbs  is,  in  Locke’s  opinion,  more  generally 


recognized  and  better  defined  than  that  of 
particles,  prepositions,  and  conjunctions.  Such 
words,  Locke  writes,  “show  what  connexion, 
restriction,  distinction,  opposition,  emphasis, 
etc.  [a  man]  gives  to  each  respective  part  of 
his  discourse.  .  .  .  He  who  would  show  the 
right  use  of  particles,  and  what  significancy  and 
force  they  have,  must  take  a  little  more  pains, 
enter  into  his  own  thoughts,  and  observe  nice¬ 
ly  the  several  postures  of  his  mind  in  dis¬ 
coursing.” 

Grammar  is  also  concerned  with  the  dif¬ 
ference  between  words  (or  phrases)  and  sen¬ 
tences,  or,  in  Aristotle’s  terms,  between  simple 
and  composite  expressions;  and  with  the  rules 
of  syntax  which  govern  the  order  and  agree¬ 
ment  of  words  according  to  their  function  as 
parts  of  speech.  By  reference  to  these  rules 
the  grammarian  critizes  the  misuse  of  language 
and  classifies  a  great  variety  of  common  errors. 

One  test  of  whether  grammar  is  a  universal 
art  applicable  to  all  languages — not  just  a  set 
of  rules  for  using  a  particular  conventional 
language  correctly — is  the  naturalness  of  its 
theoretical  distinctions.  Does  Aristotle’s  dis¬ 
tinction  between  noun  and  verb,  for  example, 
respond  to  something  natural  in  all  discourse, 
or  is  it  peculiar  to  the  Greek  or  to  the  Indo- 
European  languages? 

There  is  a  meaning  of  language  which  includes 
more  than  the  speech  of  men  and  brutes.  From 
Hippocrates  on,  the  physician  regards  the  symp¬ 
toms  of  disease  as  if  they  were  a  connected  sys¬ 
tem  of  signs,  a  language  for  which  his  diagnostic 
art  provides  a  grammar  of  interpretation.  This 
is  particularly  true  in  the  psychological  realm 
where,  in  the  psychoanalysis  of  the  neuroses  and 
especially  in  Freud’s  interpretation  of  dreams, 
both  symptom  and  dream-symbol  are  treated 
as  an  elaborate  language.  That  language  serves 
to  express  the  unconscious  thoughts  and  desires 
which  cannot  be  expressed  in  the  ordinary  lan¬ 
guage  of  social  intercourse  over  which  conscious¬ 
ness  exercises  some  control. 

These  medical  examples  represent  a  concep¬ 
tion  of  language  according  to  which  the  whole 
of  nature  is  a  book  to  be  read  by  the  scientist. 
He  penetrates  the  mysteries  of  nature  by  learn¬ 
ing  the  grammar  of  natural  signs.  To  know  the 
relation  of  natural  things  as  cause  and  effect  or 


948 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


whole  and  part  is  to  discover  nature’s  syntax. 
According  to  another  conception,  expressed  by 
Galileo,  the  book  of  nature  “is  written  in  mathe¬ 
matical  language,  its  symbols  being  triangles, 
circles,  and  other  geometrical  figures,  without 
whose  help  it  is  impossible  to  comprehend  a 
single  word  of  it.” 

The  book  of  nature  may  also  be  read  as  the 
language  of  God.  Prophecy  or  divination  is  such 
a  reading  of  dreams  or  of  other  events  as  omens 
and  portents  which  bespeak  the  divine  purpose. 
When  he  reaches  the  highest  heaven  Dante  finds 
in  the  vision  of  the  Trinity,  “bound  up  with 
love  in  one  volume,  that  which  is  dispersed  in 
leaves  through  the  universe.”  Berkeley  goes 
further  than  this.  All  of  the  ideas  which  man 
gets  by  sense-perception  are  words  in  a  divine 
vocabulary.  The  uniform  appearances  of  nature 
“may  not  unfitly  be  styled  the  Language  of  its 
Author,  whereby  He  discovers  His  attributes  to 
our  view  and  directs  us  how  to  act  for  the  con¬ 
venience  and  felicity  of  life.” 

God  speaks  to  man  in  still  another  way.  With¬ 
in  the  Judaeo-Christian  tradition  at  least,  God 
is  believed  to  have  revealed  himself  to  man 
through  the  vehicle  of  human  language.  Writ¬ 
ten  by  men  under  divine  inspiration,  Sacred 
Scripture  is  the  word  of  God.  Because  it  is  at 
once  human  and  divine,  this  language  is  the 
most  difficult  for  man  to  interpret. 

The  art  of  interpreting  the  Bible  involves  the 
most  elaborate  theory  of  signs,  and  of  the  types 
and  levels  of  meaning.  It  involves  special  rules 
of  reading.  The  development  of  this  theory  and 
these  rules  by  Augustine  and  Aquinas,  Maimon- 
ides  and  Spinoza,  Hobbes  and  Pascal,  has  deep¬ 
ened  the  liberal  arts  and  enlarged  the  scope  of 
man’s  understanding  of  other  languages — his 
own  or  nature’s.  Since  the  heart  of  this  larger 
consideration  of  language  lies  in  the  analysis  of 
meaning  and  the  modes  of  signification,  the  dis¬ 
cussion  of  the  symbolism  of  nature  and  the  word 
of  God  belongs  to  the  chapter  on  Sign  and  Sym¬ 
bol;  and,  in  its  theological  aspects,  to  the  chap¬ 
ters  on  Prophecy  and  Religion. 

The  discussion  of  language,  as  we  have  seen, 
cannot  be  separated  from  the  consideration  of 
human  nature  and  human  society.  Because  He 
“designed  man  for  a  sociable  creature,”  God, 
according  to  Locke,  “made  him  not  only  with 


an  inclination,  and  under  a  necessity  to  have 
fellowship  with  those  of  his  own  kind,  but  fur¬ 
nished  him  also  with  language,  which  was  to 
be  the  great  instrument  and  common  tie  of 
society.” 

It  is  not  merely  that  the  fellowship  of  men 
depends  upon  speech.  According  to  Locke,  men 
cannot  enjoy  “the  comfort  and  advantage  of 
society  .  .  .  without  the  communication  of 
thoughts.”  The  fact  that  “man  had  by  nature 
his  organs  so  fashioned  as  to  be  fit  to  frame 
articulate  sounds  .  .  .  was  not  enough  to  pro¬ 
duce  language” — at  least  not  human  language, 
“for  parrots,  and  several  other  birds,  can  be 
taught  to  make  articulate  sounds  distinct 
enough,”  and  yet,  Locke  writes,  they  are  “by 
no  means  capable  of  language.  Besides  articu¬ 
late  sounds,  therefore,  it  was  further  neces¬ 
sary,”  he  insists,  that  the  sounds  men  formed 
should  be  the  instrument  whereby  “the  thoughts 
of  men’s  minds  [are]  conveyed  from  one  to 
another.” 

Rousseau,  on  the  other  hand,  seems  to  think 
that  under  the  primitive  circumstances  sur¬ 
rounding  the  origin  of  both  society  and  lan¬ 
guage,  the  association  of  men  “would  not  re¬ 
quire  a  language  much  more  refined  than  that 
of  rooks  or  monkeys,  who  associate  together 
for  much  the  same  purpose.  Inarticulate  cries, 
plenty  of  gestures  and  some  imitative  sounds, 
must  have  been  for  a  long  time  the  universal 
language,”  he  writes;  “and  by  the  addition, 
in  every  country,  of  some  conventional  articu¬ 
late  sounds  .  .  .  particular  languages  were  pro¬ 
duced;  but  these  were  rude  and  imperfect,  and 
nearly  such  as  are  now  to  be  found  among 
some  savage  nations.” 

The  plurality  of  conventional,  historic  lan¬ 
guages  seems  to  parallel  the  plurality  of  the 
nations  or  societies  into  which  mankind  is  di¬ 
vided.  But  underlying  the  diversity  of  tongues 
there  is  also  a  unity  which  implies  the  possi¬ 
bility  of  mankind’s  unification.  To  the  extent 
that  language  expresses  thought,  diverse  lan¬ 
guages  are  but  different  mediums  for  the  same 
thing.  “All  men  [may]  not  have  the  same  speech 
sounds,”  Aristotle  declares,  “but  the  mental 
experiences,  which  these  directly  symbolize, 
are  the  same  for  all.” 

The  human  community  conceived  in  terms 
of  the  communication  of  thought  extends  as  far 


Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 


949 


as  the  bounds  of  such  communication  among 
men.  It  is  not  limited  by  political  boundaries. 
It  overcomes  by  translation  the  barriers  set  up 
by  a  diversity  of  tongues.  It  includes  the  living 
and  the  dead  and  extends  to  those  as  yet  un¬ 
born.  In  this  sense,  human  civilization  can  be 
described  as  the  civilization  of  the  dialogue,  and 
the  tradition  of  the  great  books  can  be  conceived 
as  the  great  conversation  in  which  all  men  can 


participate.  The  extent  of  this  conversation 
measures  the  range  of  western  thought.  The  vo¬ 
cabulary  of  its  language  is  the  stock  of  ideas  with 
which  each  individual  can  begin  to  think  for 
himself  when  he  turns  from  dialogue  to  solilo¬ 
quy;  for,  as  Plato  observes,  “thought  and  speech 
arc  the  same,  with  this  exception,  that  what  is 
called  thought  is  the  unuttered  conversation  of 
the  soul  with  itself.” 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  nature  and  functions  of  language:  the  speech  of  men  and  brutes  950 

1  a.  The  role  of  language  in  thought  951 

\b.  The  service  of  language  to  society 

2.  Theories  of  the  origin  of  language  952 

2 a.  The  hypothesis  of  one  natural  language  for  all  men 
2 b.  The  genesis  of  conventional  languages:  the  origin  of  alphabets 

3.  The  growth  of  language 

3^7.  The  invention  of  words  and  the  proliferation  of  meanings 

3 b.  The  spoken  and  written  word  in  the  development  of  language  953 

3c.  Tradition  and  the  life  of  languages 


4.  The  art  of  grammar 

4^7.  Syntax:  the  parts  and  units  of  speech 

4 b.  Standards  of  correctness  in  the  use  of  language:  grammatical  errors 

5.  The  imperfections  of  language 

5 a.  The  abuse  of  words:  ambiguity,  imprecision,  obscurity 
5 b.  Insignificant  speech:  meaninglessness,  absurdity 

6.  The  improvement  of  speech:  the  ideal  of  a  perfect  language 

7.  Grammar  and  logic:  the  formulation  and  statement  of  knowledge 

8.  Grammar  and  rhetoric:  the  effective  use  of  language  in  teaching  and  persuasion 

9.  The  language  of  poetry 


954 

955 


956 


10.  The  language  of  things  and  events:  the  book  of  nature;  the  symbolism  of  dreams; 

prophetic  signs 

11.  Immediate  communication:  the  speech  of  angels  and  the  gift  of  tongues 

12.  The  language  of  God  or  the  gods:  the  deliverances  of  the  oracles;  the  inspiration, 

revelation,  and  interpretation  of  Sacred  Scripture 


959 


950 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  116a'l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45 — (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  nature  and  functions  of  language:  the 
speech  of  men  and  brutes 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  11:1-9 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  4:24— (D)  OT,  Ec- 
clesiasticus ,  4:29 

New  Testament:  I  Corinthians ,  14  /  Ephesians , 
4:29 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  61a-b 

7  Plato:  Cratylus  85a-114a,c  /  Theaetetus, 
547c-d  /  Sophist ,  575d-577b  /  Seventh  Letter , 
809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  6  [4b32~36]  9b  /  In - 
terpretation ,  ch  i  [i6a4~8]  25a  /  Soul ,  bk  ii, 
ch  8  [420b5~42ia6]  651d-652c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  1,  ch  i 
[488^3^3]  9b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  9  62a-63c  /  Parts 
of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  16  [659b28]-cH  17 
[66ob3]  186d-187c  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[1253*7-18]  446b-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  hi,  ch  2 
[i404bi— 3]  654c;  ch  10  [i4iob9-28]  662c-d 
/  Poetics ,  ch  6  [i450bio-i5]  685a;  ch  19 
[i456a33-b8]  691d-692a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [1028- 
1090]  74c-75b 

14  Plutarch:  Demosthenes ,  692a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  3,  8a  / 
Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  hi,  ch  18  151b-c 


18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  x,  par  19  76a-b  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  13  62 7d;  bk  ii, 
ch  3  637c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  13, 
a  1,  ans  62c-63c;  q  34,  a  i,  ans  185b-187b; 
q  107,  a  1,  rep  1-3  549b-550b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  hi,  q  60, 
a  6,  ans  851b-852b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xxvi 
[124-138]  147a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54c-55b;  part  ii, 
100b;  part  iv,  270a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  215b-216b;  218a-c;  300c; 
323c-324b 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  iii  [154- 
173] 325b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  62c-63a  / 
Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  14  107d-108a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  59c-60b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [369-451] 
240a-242a;  bk  ix  [549-612]  259b-260b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  45  178b;  912  349b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xi, 
sect  8-1 1  145b-146a;  ch  xviii,  sect  7  174d- 
175a;  ch  xxii,  sect  5  201d;  ch  xxvii,  sect 
8  221a-222a;  ch  xxviii,  sect  2  228c-229a; 
ch  xxxii,  sect  7-8  244c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  i 
251b,d-252d;  ch  ii  252d-254c  passim;  ch  iii, 


1 

1  a  to  1  b 

sect  1-5  254d  255c;  sect  20  260a;  ch  vi, 
sect  22  273d-274a;  ch  ix,  sect  1-4  285a-c; 
ch  x,  sect  13  294c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  v,  sect  10 
331a;  ch  viii,  sect  7  347b-c;  ch  xxi,  sect 
4  395a, c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
19-21  410c-411b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  111a  b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  339d~342c;  349d-350a 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  120a  b 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  la-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  182b-c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  297c-300c:  349d 

53  James:  Psychology,  18b;  35b-37b;  683b-685a; 
715b-716a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  512d-513a 

la.  The  role  of  language  in  thought 

7  Plato:  Cratylus  85a-114a,c  /  Phaedrus,  138c- 
139d  /  Timaeus ,  447c-d  /  Critias,  478c-d  / 
Theaetetus,  520b;  524c-d;  526b;  537d-538a; 
547c-d  /  Sophist ,  575d-577b  /  Statesman , 
590d-591a  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  1-5  25a-26c  / 
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  10  [76b22-27] 
105c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  525a-528b  / 
Soul,  bk  11,  ch  8  [420^8-33]  652b 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  iii,  ch  10  [i4iob9~28] 
662 c-d 

(  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par  5  90b-c; 

bk  xii,  par  32-36  107a-108c;  par  41-43  llOa-d; 
bk  xiii,  par  36  120c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine, 
bk  1,  ch  13  627d;  bk  ii,  ch  3  637c-d;  ch  36 
653d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  13,  a  i, 
ans  and  rep  3  62c-63c;  q  34,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 
1-3  185b-187b;  a  3,  ans  188b-189a;  Q  63,  a  8, 
rep  1  332c-333b;  q  107,  a  i,  rep  1-2  549b-550b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  6, 
a  6,  rep  3  744d-745b;  q  60,  a  6,  ans  851b- 
852b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54c-58c;  part  iv, 
270a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  75c-d;  253c-254a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  61b-c;  62c- 
63a  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  14  107d-108a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiii,  26b-c  /  Discourse, 
part  v,  59c-60b  /  Objections  and  Replies, 
137a;  290c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  i 
387b-388a;  prop  47,  schol  390c-391a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  22-23  175b;  392  239b-240a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i, 
sect  15  98d-99a;  bk  ii,  ch  xvi,  sect  5-7 
166b-167b;  ch  xxii,  sect  3-9  201b-203a;  ch 
xxxii,  sect  7-8  244c-d;  ch  xxxiii,  sect  19 
251c-d;  bk  iii  251b,d-306d  esp  ch  i,  sect  6 
252c-d,  ch  iii,  sect  1-5  254d-255c,  sect  10 
256c-257a,  sect  20  260a,  ch  v,  sect  4  264b, 
sect  10-11  266b-d,  ch  ix,  sect  1-2  285a-b, 
sect  21  290c-291a,  ch  x,  sect  13  294c-d;  bk 
iv,  ch  iii,  sect  19  318b-319a;  ch  iv,  sect  17 


951 

328d;  ch  v,  sect  3-4  329b  d;  ch  vi,  sect 
1-3  331b  d;  cii  xxi,  sect  4  395a, c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
19  410c;  sect  21-25  411b-412a,c;  sect  121- 
122  436d-437c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  169a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  418a-419b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  339d-342c  esp340d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  88d 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  la-c; 
4a-5c;  7c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  173a-b 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  362c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  78 
32d-33a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  182b- 
c;  part  1,  218a-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1995-2000]  47a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  299b-300a;  349d; 
592a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  36b-37a;  127b-128b;  153b- 
154a;  156b;  159a-b;  161a-176a;  333a-334a; 
447b-448a;  608b;  650b;  689a-b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  385b-c  /  Un¬ 
conscious,  442a-443a  /  Ego  and  Id,  700b-701d; 
714b-c 

lb.  The  service  of  language  to  society 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  11:1-9 
5  Aeschylus  :  Prometheus  Bound  [442-461]  44c- d 
5  Sophocles  :  Antigone  [332-375]  134a-b 
5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [201-210]  260a-b 
7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120a-b  /  Gorgias,  270d 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1253^-18] 
446b-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  23  201a- 
203b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xvi,  ch  ii  429d- 
431a;  bk  xix,  ch  7  515a-c  /  Christian  Doc¬ 
trine,  bk  11,  ch  4-5  637d-638a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  4  207d-208b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxxi  [34-81] 
46bd 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54c;  55a-b;  part 
ii,  132d-133a;  157c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  253c-254a;  323c-324b 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  iii  [159— 
173]  325b  /  1st  Henry  IV,  act  iii,  sc  i  [192- 
238]  452a-c  /  Henry  V,  act  v,  sc  ii  [98-306] 
564b-566a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  23a-26a  # 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xviii,  sect  7  174d-175a;  ch  xxii,  sect  5-7 
201d-202b;  ch  xxviii,  sect  2  228c-229a;  ch 
xxxii,  sect  7-8  244c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  i,  sect  i 
251b, d;  ch  ii,  sect  1-2  252d-253c;  sect  4 
253d;  ch  iii,  sect  3-5  255a-c;  sect  20  260a; 
ch  v,  sect  7  265a-c;  ch  vi,  sect  51  282d- 
283a;  ch  ix,  sect  1-4  285a-c;  ch  x,  sect  13 
294c-d;  sect  23-31  298a-299a;  ch  xi,  sect 
1  300a-b;  sect  5  300d;  bk  iv,  ch  v,  sect  10 
331a 


Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 


952 


}! 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  The  nature  and  functions  of  language :  the 
speech  of  men  and  brutes.  1  b.  The  service 
of  language  to  society.) 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
19-21  410c-411b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  25b-26a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  340a-342c;  349d-350a; 
350d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  15d-16c  passim 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  300a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  347b-d 
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  278a;  294d-295a 
54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  450a-c  /  Group 
Psychology ,  668c;  685a 

2.  Theories  of  the  origin  of  language 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  2:19-20;  11:1-9 
5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [442-461] 
44c-d 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-375]  134a-b 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [201-210]  260a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  49a-d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  44c  /  Cratylus  85a-114a,c 
esp  106b-c  /  Phaedrus,  138c-139b  /  Gorgias , 
271b-272b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [1028- 
1090]  74c-75b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xvi,  ch  4  425b- 
426a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  4-5  63 7 d- 
638a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxxi  [34-81] 
46b-d;  paradise,  xxvi  [70-142]  146c-147b 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54d-55a 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  218a-c 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2d-3a;  17d- 
18b 

32  Milton  :  Paradise  Lost,  bkviii  [267-277)2383; 

[338-356]  239b-240a;  bk  xii  [1-62]  319a-320b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  i, 
sect  5  252b-c;  ch  ii,  sect  i  252d-253a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  340a-342c;  350d 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  509b 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  211b-c  /  Descent  of 
Man,  298a-301c;  349d 

53  James:  Psychology,  685b  [fn  1] 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  512d-513b 

2a.  The  hypothesis  of  one  natural  language  for 
all  men 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:19-20;  11:1-9 

7  Plato:  Cratylus  85a-114a,c  esp  llOc-lllc 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  i  [i 6a4— 9]  25a 
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xvi,  ch  ii  429d- 

431a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  4-5  63 7 d- 
638a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxxi  [34-81] 
46b-d;  paradise,  xxvi  [70-142]  146c-147b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54d-55a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
164a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2d-3a;  18b 


2  to  3a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [267-277]  238a; 

[338-356]  239b-240a;  bk  xii  [1-62]  319a-320b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  ii, 
sect  i  252d-253a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iii,  div 
18  457c-d 

2b.  The  genesis  of  conventional  languages: 
the  origin  of  alphabets 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  10:5;  11:1-9 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  12a-b;  bk  ii, 
60a-d;  80a-c;  bk  v,  171a-b 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  107c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus,  138c- 
139b  /  Philebus ,  612d-613a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  103c-d 
18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  4 
637d-638a;  ch  24  648d-649a 
21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxxi  [34-81] 
46b-d;  paradise,  xxvi  [70-142]  146c-147b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  54c-55a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  62d-63a 
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [38-62]  320a-b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxii,  sect  2  201a-b;  sect  5-7  201d-202b;  ch 
xxviii,  sect  2  228c-229a;  bk  iii,  ch  ii,  sect 
1  252d-253a;  sect  8  254b-c;  ch  v,  sect  8 
265c-266a;  ch  vi,  sect  43-51  280c-283a  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  sect  51  282d-283a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  340a-342c;  349d-350a; 
350d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  lOd  esp  675d 
[n  83];  756a  [n  43] 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  225a-b;  338b; 
342b-c;  706c  [n  22] 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  509b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  221a 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  211b-c  /  Descent 
of  Man,  300c-301c;  329a-b 
53  James:  Psychology,  685b  [fn  1] 

3.  The  growth  of  language 

3 a.  The  invention  of  words  and  the  prolifera¬ 
tion  of  meanings 

5  Aristophanes:  Ecclesiazusae  [1167-1182] 
628c-d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv,  128d 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  89a-107b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [i04b34-i05ai] 
148c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [ioo6a29-b4] 
525c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  iii,  ch  2  [i405a3~b2i] 
655b-656a;  ch  3  [i4o6b5-i9]  657c-d;  ch  10 
[i4iob5-i5]  662c;  ch  ii  [i4i2ai8-2i]  664c  / 
Poetics,  ch  21  [i457bi-i458a7]  693a-d 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  10 
640d-641a;  ch  16,  644b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  5  659d- 
660a;  ch  24-25  666d-667c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  13,  a 
2,  rep  2  63c-64d;  a  8  70d-71b;  Q  37,  a  2,  ans 
199a-200c;  q  67,  a  1  349d-350b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 


3b  to  4 b 

30d-31a;  bk  ii,  77b-78b;  bk  iii,  178b  179c; 
182c-184c;  202d-204c;  bk  iv,  280d  281d 
25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  422c-423c 
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  pref,  2b-c 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  336d-337a,c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  42c-43a  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  apii  59  112b-c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  290c-d 
35  Locke:  Human  Understandings  bk  ii,  cii 

xviii,  sect  7  174d-175a;  cii  xxii,  sect  2 
201a~b;  sect  5-7  201d-202b;  cn  xxvm, 
sect  2  228c-229a;  bk  iii,  ch  i,  sect  5  252b  c; 
ch  iii,  sect  6-9  255c-256c;  ch  v  263d-268a; 
ch  vi,  sect  25  274d;  sect  43-51  280c-283a 
passim,  csp  sect  51  282d-283a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341a-342b;  349d-350a 
/  Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  419b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  775c-776a,c  [n  173- 

1741 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  106b-c;  773d  [n  23] 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113b-c  /  Practical  Reason , 
294 b-c;  337c-338a 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  467b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  59d-60d;  191a;  353c-354a; 
410a-b;  454a 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  4a- 
5d;  part  i,  24c-d;  25c-29d 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  361a- 
362d;  829d-830a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  300c-301b 
1  53  James:  Psychology ,  689a-b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  509d;  512c- 
513b;  516b-c;  517c-518b 

3 b.  The  spoken  and  written  word  in  the  de¬ 
velopment  of  language 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  v,  171a-b 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  85a-107c  esp  lOOd-lOla, 
102c-d  /  Phaedrus,  138c-139a 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation ,  ch  i  [i6a3-8]  25a 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [1 40^1 5- 
34]  654b-c 

18  Augustine:  C//y  0/*  Go*/,  bk  xviii,  ch  39 
494c-495a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  4 
637d-638a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xxvi  [70- 
142]  146c-147b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54c 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341a-b 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  88c- d 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  253a-b;  330d-331a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  182b-c; 
part  1,  218a-c;  247d-248c 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  329a-b 
54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  540b-541a 

3c.  Tradition  and  the  life  of  languages 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy ,  6:4-9 
8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  10  [i48bi6-23] 
202d-203a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v  533a-547a,c 
18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  ii 
641a-c 


953 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii— ii,  q  i, 
a  9  388d  389d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  ii,  stanza 
2-4  21b  22a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  conclusion,  282c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
81d-83b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  77c-79a; 422c-423c;  476b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  1  lb-1 2b; 
42c-43a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  290c-d 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  22c-d  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  ii,  ch  xxii,  sect  7  202a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  128a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  350d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  334c-335b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  15d-16c;  628a-b; 
629a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  106b-c;  152a; 
300a-b;  325c-328a,c  esp  325c-326a,  327a-b; 
338b;  522b-528a,c  esp  522c-523a,  526a-c, 
527d-528a,c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  113b-115c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  467b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  151c-d;  166d;  307c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  182b-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  211b-c  /  Descent  of 
Man,  300c-301a 

4.  The  art  of  grammar 

4a.  Syntax:  the  parts  and  units  of  speech 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  105d-106a;  109a-b  /  Sophist , 
575d-576b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  2  [^17-19]  5b;  ch 
4  [2a4~io]  6a;  ch  7  [6b6-8]  11a;  [6b3i— 36]  11c  / 
Interpretation,  ch  1-5  25a-26c  /  Metaphysics, 
bk  v,  ch  3  [1014^6-32]  534c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  iii,  ch  2  [i404b 
26-i405a2]  655a-b  /  Poetics,  ch  19-21  691d- 
694a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  13, 
a  1,  rep  3  62c-63c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  64c-65a;  part  iii, 
182b;  part  iv,  270a-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  70d-71a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  44a-b; 
62c-63c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  vii 
283a-284b  esp  sect  2  283b-c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  287b-288a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341b-342c  esp  341  b-c, 
342b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  23d-24b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  229b-c 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  516b-c 

4b.  Standards  of  correctness  in  the  use  of  lan¬ 
guage:  grammatical  errors 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [635-693]  496c-497a 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  14 
239a-d;  ch  32  250d-251c 


Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 


954 


5  to  5a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  art  of  grammar .  4b.  Standards  of  cor¬ 
rectness  in  the  use  of  language :  grammati¬ 
cal  errors.) 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  hi,  ch  2  654c-656b; 
ch  5  657d-658c  /  Poetics,  ch  22  694a-695a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  10  254a 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  13 
642b-643a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  70d-71a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxx,  sect  4  238d-239a;  ch  xxxi,  sect  4-5 
240b-d;  bk  hi,  ch  vi,  sect  51  282d-283a; 
ch  ix,  sect  8  286c-d;  ch  xi,  sect  ii  302b-c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  287b-288a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  361d-362a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  164a-b 

5.  The  imperfections  of  language 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iv,  131d-132a 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  /  Cratylus , 
108c-110b  /  Phaedrus ,  138c-140a  /  Republic , 
bk  v,  369b  /  Critias ,  478b-d  /  Theaetetus , 
526b;  534a  /  Sophist ,  561d-563b  /  Seventh 
Letter ,  809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  iv,  ch  4  525a- 
528b 

9  Aristotle:  Poetics ,  ch  25  [i46i*9-bi8]  697c- 
698b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [136-139] 
2d 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  6,  242c  / 
5/r/A  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  13  349b-d 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  6 
626a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  13, 
aa  1-2  62c-64d;  a  3,  ans  64d-65c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxviii  [1-6] 
41b;  xxxiv  [1-27]  51b-c;  purgatory,  xxxi 
[133-145]  102b;  paradise,  1  [38-81]  106c-107a; 
x  [28-48]  120c-d;  xxiii  [40-69]  141d-142a; 
xxx  [19-36]  152a;  xxxm  156b-157d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  57d-58a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
101d-102a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  253c-254a;  422c-423c; 
476b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  336d- 
337a, c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  60b-c;  65b-c 
/  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  43  109d-110a; 
aph  59-60  112b-113a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  11,  80d-81a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  47,  schol 
390c-391a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiii, 
sect  18  152a-c;  bk  iii,  ch  v,  sect  16  267d- 
268a;  ch  vi,  sect  43  280c-d;  ch  ix,  sect  i- 
ch  xi,  sect  7  285a-301c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
21-25  411b-412a,c;  sect  52  422d-423a;  sect 
74  427c;  sect  143-144  441c-d 


36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  307b-308b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  340d-341a;  342a-c  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  401c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  40c-d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  400 d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  70d-71b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  182b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3432-3468]  84a-b 
esP  [345I_ 345^1  84b;  part  ii  [8691-8692] 
211b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vii,  302c-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  127b-128b;  153b-154a; 
159a-b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  662a-b 

5a.  The  abuse  of  words:  ambiguity,  impreci¬ 
sion,  obscurity 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [1178-1200]  503a-b  / 
Frogs  [923-991]  575a-576a;  [1119-1197]  577d- 
578d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi,  192b-c 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  esp  68c-d  / 
Phaedrus,  138c-140a  /  Theaetetus,  520b;  526b; 
534d  /  Sophist,  552 b-c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c- 
810d 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  7  [6b36~7bi4]  11c- 
12b  /  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  15  149d-152a;  ch  18 
[io8ai8— 36]  152b-d;  bk  ii,  ch  3  154d-155d; 
bk  v,  ch  4  [i33bi5-i34a4]  184d-185b;  bk  vi, 
ch  1  [i39bi2]-CH  2  [140*22]  192b-193b;  ch 
14  [i5ib3-n]  206c;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [1 58b8— 1 59a2] 
215b-c;  ch  7  217c-d  /  Sophistical  Refutations , 
ch  1  [165*5-19]  227b-c;  ch  4  [i65b24-i66bi9] 
228b-229c;  ch  19-23  243d-247a;  ch  24  [i79b 
38-180*22]  247d-248b;  ch  33  [i82bi3-32] 
251d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  525a-528b; 
bk  vii,  ch  ii  [1037*5-9]  560c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[648*37]-ch  3  [649^2]  172d-174b  /  Ethics, 
bk  v,  ch  1  [1129*26-31]  376d  /  Politics,  bk 
ii,  ch  3  [i26ibi6-3i]  456c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  iii, 
ch  2-5  654c-658c  passim  /  Poetics,  ch  25  [1461* 
9— bi9]  697c-698b  passim 

17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  viii,  ch  6,  242c 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  10 
640d-641a;  ch  12  641c-642b;  bk  iii,  ch  1-4 
657b,d-659d 

22  Chaucer:  Trotlus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 
37  26b;  stanza  147-149  40b-41a;  bk  v, 
stanza  257  153b-154a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  55b;  57d-58a; 
78a-b;  part  ii,  135c;  157c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
66b-67d;  bk  ii,  77b-78b;  101b-106a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  75a-77d;  148a-149a; 
253c-254a;  284d-285c;  422c-423c;  448d-449a; 
517b-519a 

26  Shakespeare:  Taming  of  the  Shrew,  act  i, 
sc  ii  [1-44]  205b-c  /  Romeo  and  Juliet,  act  ii, 
sc  iv  [38-140]  297d-298d  /  Merchant  of  Ven¬ 
ice,  act  11,  sc  11  [34-120]  412b-413a  /  Julius 
Caesar,  act  i,  sc  i  [5-36]  568b, d 


5b  to  7 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  v,  sc  r  [29-68] 
64d-65b;  [123-154]  65d-66a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone ,  bk  iii,  73d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  llb-13c; 
60b-c;  61b-c  /  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i,  aph  43 
109d-110a;  aph  59-60  112b-113a 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  xm,  26b-c  /  Meditations , 
11,  80d-81a  /  Objections  a?id  Replies ,  208c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  i 
387b-388a;  prop  47,  schol  390c-391a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  la-14a  /  Vacuum , 
370b;  374b;  376b-377a  /  Geometrical  Demon¬ 
stration^  432a-434a 

35  Locke:  C/Vi7  Government ,  ch  ii,  sect  12  27d- 
28a  /  Human  Understanding ,  89a-c;  bk  ii, 
ch  xm,  sect  18  152a-c;  sect  28  155a-b;  ch 
xxix,  sect  6-12  234d-236c;  ch  xxx,  sect  4 
238d-239a;  bk  iii,  ch  v,  sect  16  267d-268a; 
ch  vi,  sect  30  276d-277b;  sect  48-51  282b- 
283a;  ch  ix,  sect  i-ch  xi,  sect  7  285a-301c 
esp  ch  x,  sect  5-13  292d-294d;  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  19,  318c-d;  sect  30  323a-c;  ch  iv,  sect 
13-17  326d-328d  esp  sect  17  328d;  ch  viii, 
sect  11  348b-c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
21-25  411b-412a,c;  sect  52  422d-423a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  vii,  div 
48  470d-471c;  sect  viii,  div  62-63  478b-d; 
div  74  484a-c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  234b-236b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  38c-39a;  264b-c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii,  89c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  342a-c  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract ,  bk  iii,  419b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  ii,  123b-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113b-c  /  Practical  Reason, 
315d-316a 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  120a-b;  number  41, 
135c-136a  passim 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  6d- 
7a, c 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  851a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  218a-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1995-2000]  47a-b; 
part  11  [8691-8692]  211b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  104d  [fn  4] 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  517c-518b;  540b- 
541b 

5b.  Insignificant  speech:  meaninglessness,  ab¬ 
surdity 

7  Plato:  Cratylus,  107c-108c 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  13 
238d-239a;  ch  31  250c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk 
iv,  ch  4  [ioo6ai2-bu]  525b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  49d;  54b-c;  56b- 
d;  57c;  59a-60a;  71a-b;  78a;  part  iv,  269b- 
272c;  274a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
77b-78b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  370b;  374b  /  Geometrical 
Demonstration ,  432b 


955 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  89a-c;  bk  iii, 
ch  11,  sect  7  254a-b;  ch  iv,  sect  8-10  260d- 
261d  passim;  ch  v,  sect  16  267d-268a;  ch  x, 
sect  2-4  291d-292c;  sect  26  298c;  sect  31 
299a;  ch  xi,  sect  8  301c  d 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
23-24  411c-412a;  sect  54  423b;  sect  79-81 
428b-d;  sect  88  430a-b 
47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [1948-1963]  46a-b 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xii,  534a-c; 

bk  xiv,  612d-613a;  bk  xv,  620b-c 
53  James:  Psychology ,  168b- 17 2a 

6.  The  improvement  of  speech:  the  ideal  of  a 

perfect  language 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  107c-114a,c 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  7  [6b26— 7bi4]  11b- 
12b  /  Topics ,  bk  1,  ch  18  [io8ai8-36]  152b-d 
/  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  19-23  243d-247a 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  iii,  ch  1-12  653b,d- 
667b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  i  167a-b 
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  7  515a-c 
/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch  1-4  657 b,d- 
659d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  56b-d;  60c 
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day, 
142d-143a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  12b-c; 
60b-c;  62c-64a  esp  63a-b 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  290c-d 
33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  430b- 

431b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  i, 
sect  6  252c-d;  ch  xi  300a-306d  esp  sect  8- 
27  301c-306d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  109b-lllb 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  340d-341a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  294b-c;  339b-d 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  120a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  70d-71b;  81b-82c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  la-c; 
4a-5d;  6d-7a,c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  173a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  218a-c 
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  301a-b 

7.  Grammar  and  logic:  the  formulation  and 

statement  of  knowledge 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  /  Cratylus  85a- 
114a,c  /  Phaedrus,  138c-139d  /  Symposium, 
172b-c  /  Theaetetus ,  534d;  541d-542a  /  Sophist, 
561d-563b;  569d-577b  /  Seventh  Letter ,  809a- 
811a  esp  809a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  1-4  5a-6a  /  Inter¬ 
pretation,  ch  4  [17*1—7]  26b  /  Prior  Analytics , 
bk  1,  ch  34-41  66b-68c  /  Posterior  Analytics, 
bk  11,  ch  13  [97^8-39]  133c  /  Topics,  bk  1, 
ch  15  149d-152a;  ch  18  [108^7-37]  152b-d; 
bk  ii,  ch  3  154d-155d;  ch  9  [ii4a26-bi4] 
160a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [i24aio-i4]  172d;  ch  4 
[i24b35-i25a4]  173d;  bk  v,  ch  2  [i30bn-i5] 


Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 


956 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(7.  Grammar  and  logic :  the  formulation  and 
statement  of  knowledge .) 

180d;  ch  4  [i33bi5-i34a4]  184d-185b;  ch  7 
[i36bi5~32]  188c-d;  bk  vi,  ch  i  [i39bi2]-cH  3 
[i4ia22]  192b-194c;  ch  10  202b-203a;  ch  14 
[i5ib3— 1 1]  206c;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [i58b8— 15]  215b; 
ch  7  217c-d  /  Sophistical  Refutations ,  ch  i 
[i65si-i8]  227b-c;  ch  4  [i6f>2^-i66h2i]  228b- 
229c;  ch  10  [i7obn-4i]  234d-235b;  ch  13-14 
238d-239d;  ch  19-23  243d-247a;  ch  31-32 
250c-251c;  ch  33  [i82bi3-3i]  251d  /  Physics , 
bk  1,  ch  8  [i9ia33-b9]  267b  /  Metaphysics ,  bk 
iv,  ch  4  525a-528b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [1 147^7-24] 
397b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii,  par  32-36 
107a-108c;  par  41-43  llOa-d;  bk  xiii,  par 
36  120c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  13 
627d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  55a-57c;  58a- 
60b;  65c-d;  part  hi,  172a;  part  iv,  269b-c; 
270a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 

18d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  253c-254a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  56b-66a 
esp  58c-59a 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  xiii,  26b-c  /  Discourse , 
part  1,  43b;  part  vi,  66d  /  Objections  and 
Replies ,  137a;  290c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  47,  schol 
390c-391a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  22-23  175b;  392  239b- 240a 
/  Geometrical  Demonstration ,  430b-434a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understandings  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxiii,  sect  19  251c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  iii,  sect 
10,  256d-257a;  ch  vii  283a-284b;  bk  iv, 
ch  iv,  sect  17  328d;  ch  v  329a-331b  passim; 
ch  vi,  sect  1-3  331b-d 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
19  410c;  sect  52  422d-423a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  339d-342c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  la-4a,c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  la-c; 
4a-5d;  6d-7a,c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  182b-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  40c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  672a-b 

53  James:  Psychology,  144a-b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  662a- b 

8.  Grammar  and  rhetoric:  the  effective  use  of 
language  in  teaching  and  persuasion 

New  Testament:  I  Corinthians ,  14 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [1373-1383]  486d- 
487a  /  Clouds  488a-506d  esp  [882-1105]  499b- 
502a 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  /  Phaedrus , 
131b-141a,c  /  Symposium,  172b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  i  [16*4—8]  25a; 
ch  4  [i7ai— 7]  26b 


8  to  9 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  iii,  ch  1-12  653b, d- 
667b  /  Poetics,  ch  21  [i457bi-i458a7]  693a-d; 
ch  22  694a-695a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [142-156]  107a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  42c-43b  /  Alcibiades , 
159a-b  /  Marcus  Cato,  279d-281b  /  Phocion, 
606c-d  /  Demosthenes,  692d-695d  passim  / 
Marcus  Brutus,  803 b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  7-8  14c- 
15a;  bk  v,  par  10-11  29b-30a;  par  23-24  33c- 
34b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  6  638a-d; 
bk  iv  675a-698a,c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  prologue 

la-b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 
2-4  21b-22a;  stanza  1 47-1 49  40b-41a  /  Pro¬ 
logue  [725-746]  171b-172a  /  Franklin's  Pro¬ 
logue  351a  /  Prologue  to  Melibeus  400b-401a 
/  Manciple's  Tale  [17,154-186]  491a-b  / 
Parson's  Prologue  [17,341-375]  494a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  127d;  128d; 
part  iv,  270a;  conclusion,  282c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
77b-78b;  101b-106a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  75a-77d;  309c-310c; 
422c-424c;  448d-449c;  482b-483b 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  pref,  2 b-c 

29  Cervantes  :  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  lb-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  lb-2b; 
12b-c;  16c;  31a-d;  39b-d;  58c-59a;  64b-c; 
65a-c;  66b-68b;  83d-84a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43b;  part  vi, 
66d 

32  Milton:  Vacation  Exercise  [1-58]  59a-60b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  14-16  174a-b;  22-23,25-27 
175b;  48-59  178b-179b;  797-798  327b-328a 
/  Geometrical  Demonstration,  439b-446b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  x, 
sect  34  299d-300a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
20  410d-411a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  287b-289b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341a-b;  342b-c  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  401c-402a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  343a-b;  529d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  327a-c;  526a-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  3c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  292b-293b  passim 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  59c-61d;  284b;  353c- 
354a;  381d-382a;  454a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  40c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  347b- 
348a 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  450b  /  Beyond 
the  Pleasure  Principle,  662a-b 

9.  The  language  of  poetry 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [331-340]  492a;  [1351— 
1378]  504d-505b  /  Peace  [734-764]  534c-535a 
/  Birds  [1373-1409]  559b-c  /  Frogs  [755-1533] 
573a-582a,c  /  Thesmophoriazusae  [99-172] 
601c-602b 


10 


Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 


7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  52d  57a  /  Ion ,  143a  c; 
144b  d  /  Republic ,  bk  iii,  328b-333a;  bk  x, 
430b  c 

8  Aristotle:  biterpretationy  ch  4  [17*5-7]  26b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iv,  ch  8  [1128*18-25] 
375b-c  /  Politics ,  bk  viii,  ch  7  [1342*32-^18] 
548a, c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  iii,  ch  1-12  653b, d- 
667b  /  Poetics,  ch  i  [i447*29-b23]  681b-c;  ch 

6  [1 450bi3— 1 5]  685a;  cii  19-22  691d-695a  esp 
CH22  694a-695a;  ch  24  [1 46ob2— 5],  C1125  [i46ob 
7-13]  696d;  [1 46ia9~ bi8]  697c-698b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  Gody  bk  xi,  cii  18  331d- 
332a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  638a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Sumnia  Theologicay  part  1,  q  1,  a  9, 
rep  1  8d-9c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxxii  [1-12] 
47c;  purgatory,  xxiv  [49-63]  90a-b;  para¬ 
dise,  x  [28-48]  120c-d;  xxiii  [40-69]  141d- 
142a;  xxx  [19-36]  152a;  xxxm  156b-l57d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressiday  bk  ii,  stanza 
1-4  21b-22a;  stanza  147-149  40b-41a;  bk  v, 
stanza  256-257  153b-154a  /  Prologue  [725- 
745]  171b-172a  /  Clerics  Prologue  [7888-7932] 
295a-296a  /  Franklin's  Prologue  351a  /  Pro¬ 
logue  to  Melibeus  400b-401a  /  Manciple's 
Tale  [17,154-186]  491a-b  /  Parson's  Prologue 
[17,341-375]  494a-b  /  V Envoi  550a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  67b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  62b-c;  76b-c;  104d- 
105c;  195d-197a;  309c-310c;  422c-423c 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  IV,  actiii,  sc  i  [121- 
135]  451b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  ii,sc  ii  [454-466] 
45a  /  Sonnets ,  xxi  589b-c;  lxxvi  597d-598a; 
lxxv'iii— lxxix  598b;  cxxx  606a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  xia-xvid; 
lb-c;  part  11,  251a-252b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  lib- 12c; 
39b-d;  63b-c;  99b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  i,  43b 

32  Milton:  Vacation  Exercise  [1-58]  59a-60b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  25-35  175b-177a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  327a-c;  573a 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  167d-168b;  180c;  307c; 
381d-382a;  455b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  153  b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
115a-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  687a-688a 

10.  The  language  of  things  and  events:  the 
book  of  nature;  the  symbolism  of  dreams; 
prophetic  signs 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  9:8-17;  37:1-11;  40- 
41  /  Exodus ,  4:1-9,28-31  /  Deuteronomy , 
4:32-36;  7:17-19  /  Judges,  6:36-40;  7:13-15  / 

7  Kings,  13:1-6— (D)  7/7  Kings,  13:1-6  / 
77  Kings,  20:8-11  —  (7))  7P  Kings,  20:8-11  / 
Esther ,  10— (D)  Esther,  10:1-3  /  Job,  12:7-9; 
35:11-12;  36:24-25;  37:7  /  Psalms,  19:1-6; 
65:8— (D)  Psalms,  18:1-7;  64:9  /  Isaiah, 
38:6-8;  45:5-6— (D)  Isaias,  38:6-8;  45:5-6 


957 

/  Jeremiah,  18:1-6— (D)  Jeremias ,  18:1  6  / 
Daniel,  2;  4-5;  7-8 

Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther,  10:4-11  :i2  — (D)  OT, 
Esther,  10:4-11:12  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon , 
I3:i~7~(^)  OT,  0/  Wisdom,  13:1  7 

/  Ecclesiasticus ,  43— (D)  OT,  Ecclcsiasticus , 
43  /  77  Maccabees,  7:28;  15:11-16— (D)  07’, 
77  Machabees,  7:28;  15:11-16 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:26-30;  24:3-34; 
26:26-29  /  13:4-30;  14:22-25  /  Luhe, 

2:8-15;  12:24-28;  21:7-13;  22:17-20  /  John , 
6:32-35,47-58  /  Acts,  2:16-22  /  Romans,  1:20 
/  7  Corinthians,  11:23-29 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ii  [301-368]  13a-d  passim; 
bk  xiii  [821-832]  96d-97a,c  /  Odyssey,  bk  xix 
[509-58!]  294c-295a,c 

5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [176-225]  17a-c  /  Pro- 
metheus  Bound  [442-506]  44c-45a  /  Agamem¬ 
non  [104—1 59]  53a-d  /  Choephoroe  [523-553] 
75b-c 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [976-983]  108b 
/  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [1447-1517]  127b-128a  / 
Antigone  [988-1094]  139c-140b  /  Trachiniae 
[663-722]  175d-176b 

5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [42-60] 
411c-d 

5  Aristophanes:  [708-722]  551d-552a 

6  Herodotus  '.History,  bk  i,  8a-b;  12b-d;  17a-b; 
18b;  25b-31a  esp  25b-d,  28c-29a;  38a-b;  39c- 
40a;  47a-c;  bk  ii,  79a-c;  bk  iii,  90d-91a;  95d; 
103b-104b;  106c-d;  116a-b;  bk  iv,  124d-125a; 
135b-c;  146d-147a;  bk  v,  170c-d;  183d-184a; 
bk  vi,  190c-d;  199d-200a;  200d-201a;  204b-c; 
205d-206a;  208b;  211a;  bk  vii,  216d-220b; 
223b-c;  227a;  238d-239a;  bk  viii,  267a; 
268d-269a;  270c-271a;  278c;  285c-286a;  bk 
ix,  289d-290a;  309d-310a;  313d-314a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  389a- 
b;  bk  iii,  438d-439a;  bk  vii,  552a-c;  560d- 
561a 

7  Plato:  O//0,  213b-d  /  Theaetetus,  520b  / 
Statesman,  591  b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  27  92a- 
93a, c  /  Dreams  702a-706d  /  Prophesying  707a- 
709a, c 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1357^23— b24 ] 
596d-597c  /  Poetics,  ch  16  [i454bi9~3o]  689d- 
690a 

10  Hippocrates:  Prognostics ,  par  25  26a, c  / 
Epidemics,  bk  i,  sect  iii,  par  1  49c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iii  [931- 
977]  42a-c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  17  122d- 
124a;  bk  iii,  ch  i,  177a-b 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [385-401]  113b-114a;  bk 
ii  [162-233]  128b-130b;  [671-704]  143a-144a; 
bk  iii  [132-191]  150b-152b;  [356-409]  157a- 
158b;  [530-550]  161b-162a;  bk  iv  [54-67] 
168b-169a;  [450-473]  179b-180a;  bk  vi  [185— 
21 1]  216a-b;  bk  vii  [59-80]  237b-238a;  bk 
viii  [31-89]  259b-261b;  [520-540]  273a-b; 
bk  xii  [244-265]  360b-361a 


958 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  10 


(10.  The  language  of  things  and  events :  the  book 
of  nature;  the  symbolism  of  dreams;  pro¬ 
phetic  signs.) 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus ,  8d-9a;  14d-15a,c  / 

Numa  Pompilius ,  52b-c;  56d-57b  /  Pericles , 
123c-124a  /  Alcibiades ,  174a-d  /  Timoleon , 
198c-d  /  Pelopidas ,  239d-240c  /  Marcellus, 
259c-260c  /  Pyrrhus ,  329c-d  /  371d- 

372c  /  Canon,  398d-399b  /  Lucullus,  411a-b 
/  Nicias,  429d-430b  /  Eumenes ,  473a-b  / 
Alexander ,  548d-549a  /  Dion ,  789b-790a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  i,  9a-b;  bk  ii,  26c-27a; 
27b;  bk  iv,  79b;  bk  vi,  95d-96a;  bk  xi,  101b; 
103a-b;  bk  xii,  112d-113a;  119b;  124b;  bk 
xiii,  141a-b;  bk  xiv,  147a-b;  149b-c;  bk  xv, 
159b-c;  168d-169a  /  Histories ,  bk  i,  189d-190a; 
195b-c;  206a;  bk  ii,  228a-b;  235a-c;  bk  hi, 
256d-257a;  bk  iv,  293a-294a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  853b-854a  /  //tfr- 
monies  of  the  World ,  1080b-1085b  passim 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  i,  par  13  4b-c; 
bk  hi,  par  19-20  18b-19a;  bk  xiii,  par  6-48 
112a-124a  passim  /  CzVjy  0/  Go*/,  bk  i,  pref 
129a-d;  ch  36  149c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  2-3  150c-151c; 
bk  iv,  ch  33-34  206c-207a,c;  bk  v,  ch  i 
207d-208c;  ch  11-26  216c-230a,c;  bk  x,  ch  5 
301b-302a;  ch  8  303a-d;  ch  12-20  306d- 
311c;  bk  xi,  ch  18  331d-332a;  ch  24-28 
335c-338d;  bk  xv,  ch  i  397b,d-398c;  ch  21- 
22  415b-416c;  bk  xvi,  ch  25  438a  b;  bk 
xvii,  ch  1-3  449a-451c;  bk  xviii,  ch  1-2 
472b,d-473d;  bk  xxii,  ch  30,  618c-d  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  2  624d-625a;  bk 
ii,  ch  1-3  636b,d-637d  esp  ch  i,  637a;  bk  iv, 
ch  21,  690d-691b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  57, 
a  4,  ans  298a-299a;  q  104,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i 
538a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii,  q  12, 
a  3,  rep  2  778b'779a;  qq  60-65  847a-884a,c 
esp  q  60,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  848a-d,  a  4,  rep 
1  849c-850b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xxiv  [  1  —2 1  ] 
34d;  xxxiii  [1-90]  49c-50c;  purgatory,  ix 
[j3— 69]  66a-c;  xix  [1-69]  81c-82a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  v,  stanza 
52-55  127a-b;  stanza  177-185  143b-144b; 
stanza  207-217  147a-148b;  stanza  245  152a 
/  Nun' s  Priest' s  Tale  [14,898-15,162]  451a-455b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  53c-d;  80b-c; 
81d-82b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
146a-147d;  148d-150d;  I54a-156c;  159d-163c; 
166a-169d;  175c-178a;  2l5c-218a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  69b-d;  212a-c;  215a- 
216b;  218a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  i,  sc  ii 
[17-40]  36c-d  /  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  v,  sc  vi  [44- 
79]  103c-104a  /  Richard  III,  act  i,  sc  iv  [i- 
83]  114d-ll5c  /  Romeo  and  Juliet ,  act  i,  sc 
iv  [49-103]  291a-c  /  Richard  II,  act  ii,  sc  iv 


[7-24]  334c- d  /  Midsummer -N ight' s  Dream, 
act  11,  sc  11  [145-156]  360b-c  /  1st  Henry  IV, 
act  iii,  sc  1  [1-63]  450a-d  /  2nd  Henry  IV, 
act  1,  sc  1  [60-103]  468d-469b  /  Julius  Caesar, 
act  1,  sc  iii  [1—7.8]  572C'573b;  act  ii,  sc  ii  11 
[71—90]  578d-579a;  act  v,  sc  i  [71-92]  592d- 
593a  /  As  You  Li^e  It,  act  ii,  sc  i  [3-20] 
603c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  i  [64-125] 
30b-31a  /  King  Lear,  act  i,  sc  ii  [112-164] 
249a-b  /  Macbeth,  act  v,  sc  i  306b-307a  / 
Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  iv  [30-151]  481C'482c; 
sc  v  [426-465]  488b-d 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day, 
200a-b 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  331b-332a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  381a-b 

30  Bacon  :  Advancement  of  Learning,  54c-55a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  44a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  prop  25,  corol  365b; 
part  11,  def  i  373a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [28-128]  176a- 
178a;  bk  v  [3o8]-bk  viii  [653]  182a-246b 
esp  bk  viii  [283-499]  238b-243a;  bk  xi 
[i93]-bk  xii  [649]  303b-333a  /  Areopagitica, 
389a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  173  203b-204a;  643-646 
290b-291b  esp  643  290b-291a;  652-657  292a- 
293a;  670  295a-b;  675  296b-297a;  693-736 
301b-317b;  803-856  328b-341b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  iii,  general  schol, 
369a-371a  /  Optics,  bk  iii,  528b-529a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  44 
420d-421a;  sect  65-66  425d-426a;  sect  108- 
109  434a-b;  sect  146-154  442a-444b  passim, 
esp  sect  148  442b-d 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  162b-163a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  294a-296b;  547a-b; 
571a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  398b -399b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  263d- 
265c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [430-481]  12b-14a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  la-3a;  115b-117a; 
120a-b;  135a-136a;  138b-145a;  204a-205a; 
231a;  331a-332a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  198b-203a; 
bk  vi,  248d-250a;  259c-d;  bk  vii,  298d-299b; 
300c-301b;  302c-d;  bk  viii,  340d-341a,c;  bk 
ix,  377d-379a;  bk  x,  428a-429a;  bk  xi,  481b- 
482a;  bk  xii,  546a-d;  561b-562a;  bk  xiv, 
608a-b;  epilogue  i,  673d-674a,c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  36b- 
c;  bk  vi,  147c-148a;  bk  vii,  189a-191a,c 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  1  lb-1 2d  passim  /  Hysteria ,  57a-59d 
/  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  137d-138d;  173a- 
174d;  178a-205c  esp  178b-179c,  194b-d,  197b- 
198d;  230b-231c;  252c-340a  esp  252c-253a, 
264c-272c,  282a-285b,  332a-333b  /  Uncon¬ 
scious,  440c-442b  /  General  Introduction, 
467a-b;  489c-494d  esp  492d-493c;  504d- 


11  to  12  Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE  959 


519d  esp  505b'506c,  513d-518d  /  New  Intro¬ 
ductory  Lectures ,  808d-810d;  812d  817a  esp 
813c-814a,  814d-816b 

11.  Immediate  communication:  the  speech  of 
angels  and  the  gift  of  tongues 

Old  Testament:  Numbers ,  11:16-17,24-30 

New  Testament:  Mar 16:17  /  Acts ,  2:1-21; 
10:44-47;  19:5-6  /  I  Corinthians ,  12-14  esP  r4 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  18  151b  c 

18  Augustine:  GVy  o/* bk  xvi,  ch  6  426c- 
427a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  qq 
106-107  545c-552b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  4,  ans  15a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  iv  [1—2 1  ] 
HOd;  vii  [1-24]  115a-c;  xi  [13-27]  122a-b; 
xv  [1-90]  128b-129b;  xxm  [70-139]  142a-c; 
xxvi  [82-108]  146c-147a;  xxix  [1— 1 2]  150b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  55a- b  / 
New  Atlantis ,  203c 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxm,  sect  36  213c-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  189b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  846a-847b  esp  846b-847b 
[fn  3] 

54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  820c-829d 
esp  820d-821a,  822b-823d,  829a-c 

*12.  The  language  of  God  or  the  gods:  the  de¬ 
liverances  of  the  oracles;  the  inspiration, 
revelation,  and  interpretation  of  Sacred 
Scripture 

Old  Testament:  Genesisy  1  /  Exodus ,  4:11-12; 
24:12;  31:18;  32:15-16;  34:1  /  Numbers ,  12:6- 
8;  22:20-38  /  Deuteronomy ,  4:2;  8:3;  9:10; 
18:18-22;  29:29;  30:11-14  /  /o£,  38-42  / 
Psalms ,  12:6;  33:6,9;  119:105,130— (D)  Psalms , 
11:7;  32:6,9;  118:105,130  /  Proverbs,  30:5-6  / 
Isaiah,  28:9-13;  34:16;  40:8;  51:15-16;  55 :8— 
11 ;  59:21  —  (D)  Isaias,  28:9-13;  34:16;  40:8; 
51:15-16;  55:8-11;  59:21  /  Jeremiah,  1:7-9; 
5:14;  13:1-11;  15:16;  18:1-6;  23:28-32;  24; 
36:1-4— (D)  Jeremias ,  1:7-9;  5:14;  13:1-11; 
15:16;  18:1-6;  23:28-32;  24;  36:1-4  /  Eze\iel, 
2:7-3:11  — (D)  Ezechiel,  2:7-3:11  /  Daniel, 
2:20-22,28-29,47;  5:5-28  /  Joel,  2:28-29 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  16:26 — (Z)) 
OT,  0/  Wisdom,  16:26  /  Ecclesiasticus, 
1:5;  39:16—17;  42:15,19;  43:26— (D)  OT,  Ec- 
clesiasticus ,  1:5;  39:16-17;  42:15,19;  43:28  / 
I  Maccabees,  12:9 —(D)  OT,  /  Machabees,  12:9 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  4:4;  10:19-20;  11:25; 
1:3 :i— 53 ;  15:10-20;  16:16-17;  19:3-9;  21:33- 
45;  22:29  /  Mar^,  2:23-28;  4:3-34;  10:2-9; 
12:24;  J4:49  /  Tube,  1:70;  2:25-26;  8:4-15; 
10:21;  11:28;  20:37-38;  21:33;  24:27,32,44- 
45  /  /oA/*,  5:38-39,46-47;  10:1-14,35;  12:47- 
50;  14:24;  16:25-29  /  ytof,  2:17-18;  17:11  / 
Romans,  1:20;  10:8;  15:4;  16:25-27  /  /  Co- 
rinthians,  2:7-16;  14:26-39  /  //  Corinthians , 


3:2-7;  12:1-7  /  Galatians,  1:11-12  /  Ephesians, 
3:2-5  /  II  Timothy,  3:14-17  /  Hebrews ,  1:1-3; 
4:12  /  /  Pc/<?r,  1:10-13,23-25;  2:5-8  /  //  Prtcr, 
1:19-21;  3:5,15-16  /  / /0Z/2,  2:20,27 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  i  [59-67]  3d;  bk  ii  [1-34) 
10a  b  /  Odyssey ,  bk  xiv  [321-336]  263b-c; 
bk  xix  [291-307]  292b 

5  Aeschylus:  Against  Thebes  [742-777] 

35b-c  /  Prometheus  Bound  [640-682]  46d- 
47b  /  Choephoroe  [269-305]  72d-73a;  [1021- 
1076]  80a-d  /  Eumenides  [1—33]  81a-b 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  / 
Oedipus  at  Colonus  [386-419]  117d-118a  / 
Trachiniae  [155— 177]  171c;  [821-830]  177b 

5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [1234- 
1283]  422b-c  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [872-883] 
433a 

5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [108-233]  471b-472d; 

[941-1099]  481d-483d  /  [1017-1126] 

537c-539a  /  B/VvE  [959-991]  554c-555a  / 
Lysistrata  [762-780]  593a-b  /  Plutus  [1-78] 
629a-630a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  4d;  lOa-c;  llb-d; 
14a-15c;  20a-b;  21b-22a;  38a-b;  39c-d;  bk 
ii,  60d-61b;  70d-71a;  77a-b;  80c;  81d-82b; 
83b-c;  bk  hi,  101d-102b;  103b-d;  bk  iv, 
126d-127a;  153b-d;  bk  v,  160a-b;  175b-c; 
178aT80a;  183d-184a;  bk  vi,  189a-b;  191d- 
192b;  194d-195b;  197d-198a;  199d-201a;201d- 
202c;  211b-d;  212d-213a,c;  bk  vii,  234d; 
239c-240d;  241c-242a;  246b-c;  248b-c;  250b; 
255c-d;  bk  viii,  263b-c;  268b-d;  269c-270a; 
273b-c;  276d-277a;  281a;  284d-285b;  bk  ix, 
295d-296c;  302b-c;  308a-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  355b- 
c;  378a-b;  380a-d;  bk  ii,  392a-b;  401a-b; 
415d-416c;  bk  iii,  442c-443a;  bk  v,  489a-b 

7  Plato:  Ion  142a-148a,c  esp  142d-145c  / 
Apology,  201d-203a  /  Timaeus,  467b-c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ii  [108-136]  127a-b;  bk 
iii  [84-191]  149b-152a;  bk  vi  [42-101]  212a- 
213b;  bk  vii  [81-106]  238a-239a 

14  Plutarch:  Aristides,  268a-d  /  Cimon,  392b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  37a-b  /  Histories,  bk 
ii,  235a-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  9  15a-b; 
bk  vi,  par  6-8  36c-37c;  bk  xi-xiii  89b-125a,c 
/  City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  3  323d;  bk  xv,  ch 
26-27,  419d-421d;  bk  xvi,  ch  2,  423c-d;  ch  6 
426c-427a;  bk  xvii,  ch  3  450c-451c;  bk  xviii, 
ch  23  483d-485a;  ch  42-44  496d-498c;  ch 
46-47  500a-501b;  bk  xx  530a-560a,c  esp  ch 
21,  549d,  ch  28-29  556c-557c  /  Christian 
Doctrine  621a-698a,c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i, 
aa  9-10  8d-10c;  q  3,  a  1,  rep  1-5  14b-15b; 
q  34  185a-189a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  qq 
101-103  265d-304a;  part  ii-ii,  q  i  380a- 
390d;  part  iii,  qq  60-65  847a-884a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  iv  [22-48] 
llOd-llla;  xix  [40-66]  135c-d;  xxiv  [52-114] 


960 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(12.  The  language  of  God  or  the  gods :  the  de¬ 
liverances  of  the  oracles;  the  inspiration, 
revelation,  and  interpretation  of  Sacred 
Scripture.) 

143b-d;  xxv  [67-102]  145a-b;  xxvi  [1-69] 
145d-146c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  70c-71a;  81d-82a; 
part  11,  160b-c;  part  hi,  165a-167b;  171a- 
172a;  176d-177b;  181a-186c;  215b-216b; 

241a-242a;  246c;  part  iv,  247a-258b 
25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  284d 
27  Shakespeare:  Cymbeline ,  act  v,  sc  iv  [91- 
122]  482a-b;  sc  v  [426-485]  488b-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c;  97c- 
100b  /  New  Atlantis ,  202d-203c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  123d- 
124a;  227a-228a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [544-576]  187a- b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  78b-80b;  163a- 


12 

164b  /  Pensees,  570-588  273b-277b  passim; 
642-736  290b-317b;  775  323b-324a;  803-856 
328b-341b 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  5a-b;  21c-22d  /  Human 
Understanding ,  bk  hi,  ch  ix,  sect  9  286d- 
287b;  sect  23  291b-c;  ch  x,  sect  12  294b-c 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledgey  sect  44 
420d-421a;  sect  65-66  425d-426a 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  401c-402a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  186d-188a  passim 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  230c-232c 
43  Federalist:  number  37,  120a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  290a-291d  passim  /  Utilitar¬ 
ianism,  455b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  308c- 
309d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1220-1237]  30a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  30a-36b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
127b-137c 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For :  The  other  major  discussion  of  language  in  terms  of  the  variety  of  signs  and  the  modes  of 
signification,  see  Sign  and  Symbol. 

Other  considerations  of  language  as  an  instrument  of  thought,  see  Idea  4a;  Judgment  5a; 

Logic  3a;  Mathematics  3d;  Rhetoric  ib,  2c-2d;  Sign  and  Symbol  id,  4b,  4e. 

The  distinction  of  the  natural  and  the  conventional  as  applied  to  language,  see  Custom  and 
Convention  i;  Sign  and  Symbol  ib,  id,  if. 

The  general  discussion  of  the  liberal  arts  of  grammar,  rhetoric,  and  logic,  see  Art  6b;  and  for 
the  relation  of  grammar  to  these  other  arts,  see  Logic  3a;  Rhetoric  ib,  3c. 

Another  analysis  of  the  imperfections  of  language,  and  for  the  remedies  proposed  by  seman¬ 
tics,  see  Sign  and  Symbol  3a,  4c. 

The  language  of  poetry,  see  Poetry  8b. 

The  language  of  symptoms  in  medicine,  of  dreams  in  psychoanalysis,  and  of  omens  and 
portents  in  prophecy  and  divination,  see  Medicine  3c;  Memory  and  Imagination  8d-8e; 
Prophecy  3b~3c;  Sign  and  Symbol  4e,  5b,  6a-6c. 

The  language  of  God  or  the  gods  in  Sacred  Scripture  or  oracular  utterances,  and  for  the 
problem  of  interpreting  the  divine  word,  see  God  6c(i);  Prophecy  3a~3d ;  Religion  ib(i); 
Sign  and  Symbol  5e;  Theology  4b. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 

Hobbes.  The  Elements  of  Law,  Natural  and  Politic , 
f-  part  1,  ch  13 

Dante.  De  Vulgari  Eloquentia  Milton.  Grammar 

- .  Convivio  ( The  Banquet),  first  treatise,  Spinoza.  Tractatus  Theologico-Politicus  {Theological- 

ch  5-7,  9-13  Political  Treatise ),  ch  7-13 


Chapter  45:  LANGUAGE 


Locke.  Conduct  of  the  Understanding 
Rousseau.  Essai  sttr  Vorigine  des  langues 
A.  Smith.  A  Dissertation  on  the  Origin  of  Languages 
J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic ,  bk  i;  bk  iv,  ch  3-6 

II. 

Epicurus,  letter  to  Herodotus 

Quintilian.  I nstitutio  Oratoria  (Institutes  of Oratory), 

BK  I— III 

John  of  Salisbury.  Metalogicon,  bk  i 
Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed ,  part  i; 

PART  II,  CH  30;  PART  III,  CH  l~J 

R.  Bacon.  Opus  Majus ,  part  iii 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Mctaphysicae,  xxx  (13), 

xu  (3) 

John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus Philo sophicus  Thomis - 
tic tis,  Ars  Logica ,  part  i,  qq  1-3 
Arnauld  and  Lancelot.  A  General  and  Rational 
Grammar  Containing  the  Principles  of  the  Art  of 
Speaking 

Arnauld.  Logic  or  the  Art  of  Thinking,  part  i, 
ch  15;  part  11,  ch  1-2 

Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  BK  III 

J.  Harris.  Hermes,  or  A  Philosophical  Inquiry  Con¬ 
cerning  Universal  Grammar 
Burke.  A  Philosophical  Enquiry  into  the  Origin  of 
Our  Ideas  of  the  Sublime  and  Beautiful ,  part  v 
Voltaire.  “Languages,”  in  A  Philosophical  Diction¬ 
ary 

Condillac.  La  langue  des  calculs 
- .  Logique ,  part  ii 

Blair.  Lectures  on  Rhetoric  and  Belles  Lettres,  xi-xiv 
Tooice.  The  Diversions  of  Purley 
D.  Stewart.  Elements  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human 
Mind,  part  11,  ch  1 
A.  Johnson.  A  Treatise  on  Language 
J.  Mill.  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Hitman 
Mind ,  ch  4 
Emerson.  Nature 

Grimm.  Liber  den  Ur  sprung  der  Sprache 
Trench.  On  the  Study  of  Words 
Comte.  System  of  Positive  Polity,  volii,  Social  Statics , 
ch  4 

Boole.  An  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought 
Lotze.  Microcosmos ,  bk  v,  ch  3 
Renan.  De  Vorigine  du  langage 
Muller.  The  Languages  of  the  Seat  of  War  in  the 
East.  With  a  Survey  of  the  Three  Families  of  Lan¬ 
guage,  Semitic ,  Arian ,  and  Turanian 

- .  Comparative  Mythology 

- .  The  Science  of  Language 


961 

Schleicher.  Darwinism  Tested  by  the  Science  of 
Language 

Farrar.  Chapters  on  Language 
Wedgwood.  On  the  Origin  of  Language 
E.  Hartmann.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious , 
(») vi  . 

Whitney.  Oriental  and  Linguistic  Studies 
Jevons.  On  the  Mechanical  Performance  of  Logical 
Inference 

- .  The  Principles  of  Science,  ch  6  (17-18) 

Sayce.  Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Language 
Venn.  Symbolic  Logic 

- .  Principles  of  Empirical  or  Inductive  Logic, 

CII  6,  22 

Bradley.  Appearance  and  Reality,  bk  i,  ch  2 
Breal.  Semantics 

A.  Sidcwick.  The  Use  of  Words  in  Reasoning 
Croce.  Aesthetic  as  Science  of  Expression 
Couturat  and  Leau.  Histoire  de  la  langue  universelle 
Dilthey.  Das  Erlebnis  und  die  Dichtung 
Whitehead  and  Russell.  Principia  Mathematica, 

INTRO 

Shaw.  Pygmalion 

Pareto.  The  Mind  and  Society,  vol  i,  ch  1-2 
Sapir.  Language 
Vendryes.  Language 

Ogden  and  Richards.  The  Meaning  of  Meaning, 
ch  1,  9-10 

H.  Delacroix.  Le  langage  et  la  pensee 
Jespersen.  Language 

- .  The  Philosophy  of  Grammar 

Cassirer.  Philosophic  der  symbolischen  Formen,  vol  i, 
Die  Sprache 

- .  Language  and  Myth 

Dewey.  Experience  and  Nature,  ch  5 
Head.  Aphasia  and  Kindred  Disorders  of  Speech 
Whitehead.  An  Introduction  to  Mathematics , 
ch  5 

- .  Process  and  Reality,  part  i,  ch  i  (5) 

Buhler.  Sprachtheorie 

R.  A.  Wilson.  The  Miraculous  Birth  of  Language 

Richards.  Interpretation  in  Teaching 

Joyce.  Finnegans  Wal^e 

Urban.  Language  and  Reality 

Ayer.  Thinking  and  Meaning 

Carnap.  The  Logical  Syntax  of  Language 

- .  Introduction  to  Semantics 

- .  Meaning  and  Necessity 

B.  Russell.  An  Inquiry  into  Meaning  and  Truth, 
ch  1-6,  13-15,  25 

- .  Human  Knowledge,  Its  Scope  and  Limits , 

PART  11 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


INTRODUCTION 


THE  notion  of  law  is  associated  with  a  di¬ 
versity  of  subject  matters,  and  its  mean¬ 
ing  undergoes  many  variations  as  the  discussion 
shifts  from  one  context  to  another.  The  most 
radical  difference  separates  the  way  in  which 
natural  scientists  use  the  term  law  from  the  way 
in  which  it  is  used  in  the  arts  and  in  morals  or 
politics. 

We  ordinarily  think  of  law  as  a  rule — a  com¬ 
mand  or  a  prohibition — which  should  be  obeyed 
and  can  be  disobeyed.  Both  alternatives  are 
usually  present.  Though  the  duty  or  obligation 
which  a  law  creates  is  one  of  obedience,  there 
would  be  no  moral  significance  to  discharging 
this  duty  if  the  law  could  not  be  violated.  But 
the  laws  of  nature  which  the  scientist  tries  to 
discover  do  not  have  this  characteristic.  They 
are  inviolable.  The  so-called  law  of  gravitation, 
for  example,  or  Newton’s  three  laws  of  motion, 
cannot  be  disobeyed.  Scientists  may  disagree 
about  the  truth  of  any  formulation  of  a  natural 
law,  but  if  the  formulation  is  valid,  then  the 
general  rule  of  behavior  is  supposed  to  obtain 
without  exception;  and  if  exceptions  are  found, 
they  are  not  interpreted  as  instances  of  disobe¬ 
dience,  but  rather  as  cases  to  which  the  law  does 
not  apply. 

The  rules  of  an  art  may  be  violated,  either 
unwittingly  or  intentionally.  For  example, 
grammatical  errors  can  be  made  by  those  igno¬ 
rant  of  the  rules  or  by  those  who  wish  to  disre¬ 
gard  them.  The  so-called  “law  of  contradiction” 
in  the  art  of  logic  seems  to  be  like  the  rules  of 
grammar  or  of  any  other  art.  Men  certainly 
contradict  themselves  in  spite  of  the  rule  which 
places  the  penalty  of  error  on  those  who  make 
contradictory  statements. 

But  according  to  another  conception  of  the 
law  of  contradiction,  which  belongs  to  the  sci¬ 
ence  of  metaphysics  rather  than  to  the  art  of 
logic,  nothing  can  both  be  and  not  be  at  the 


same  time  in  the  same  respect.  This  law  of  be¬ 
ing,  like  the  laws  of  motion,  is  regarded  as  in¬ 
violable  by  those  who  think  it  true.  In  this  it 
has  the  aspect  of  a  scientific  or  natural  law.  The 
law  of  contradiction,  conceived  as  a  rule  of 
logic,  may  also  be  natural  in  the  sense  of  not 
being  man-made.  In  the  opinion  of  certain  phi¬ 
losophers,  man  does  not  invent  either  the  meta¬ 
physical  rule  which  all  existences  must  observe 
or  the  logical  rule  which  the  human  mind 
should  always  obey.  He  discovers  both. 

There  still  remains  that  other  class  of  rules  to 
which  the  word  “law”  is  most  commonly  ap¬ 
plied.  These  are  rules  of  moral  action  or  social 
conduct  which,  like  rules  of  art,  are  essentially 
violable.  “Laws,  in  their  most  general  significa¬ 
tion,”  Montesquieu  writes,  “are  the  necessary 
relations  arising  from  the  nature  of  things.  In 
this  sense  all  beings  have  their  laws.”  But  he 
points  out  that  law  operates  differently  in  the 
realm  of  physical  nature  and  in  the  realm  of  in¬ 
telligent  beings  like  man.  The  latter,  he  says, 
“does  not  conform  to  [its  laws]  so  exactly  as  the 
physical  world.  This  is  because,  on  the  one  hand, 
particular  intelligent  beings  are  of  a  finite  na¬ 
ture,  and  consequently  liable  to  error;  and  on 
the  other,  their  nature  requires  them  to  be  free 
agents.”  Hence,  even  the  laws  “of  their  own  in¬ 
stituting,  they  frequently  infringe.” 

The  profound  division  between  laws  of  nature 
and  laws  of  human  conduct  thus  seems  to  in¬ 
volve  two  points:  (1)  the  former  may  apply  to 
all  things,  the  latter  are  addressed  to  man  alone; 
(2)  the  former,  being  inviolable,  state  the  ne¬ 
cessities  of  behavior,  the  latter,  precisely  be¬ 
cause  they  are  violable,  imply  freedom  in  those 
to  whom  they  are  addressed. 

These  two  kinds  of  law  have  this  much  in 
common.  Both  the  laws  of  nature  discovered  by 
the  scientist  and  the  rules  of  conduct  instituted 
by  the  legislator  are  general  rather  than  particu- 


962 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


963 


lar.  Their  generality  has  been  made,  in  the  tra¬ 
dition  of  jurisprudence,  the  basis  for  differen¬ 
tiating  rules  of  law  from  particular  decisions  or 
decrees.  On  theological  grounds,  however,  the 
two  kinds  of  law  can  be  said  to  have  a  more  sig¬ 
nificant  characteristic  in  common. 

Aquinas  conceives  the  laws  of  nature  which 
the  scientist  discovers  as  laws  implanted  in  the 
verv  nature  of  things  at  their  creation  by  God. 
The  laws  which  God  implants  in  human  nature 
do  not  differ  in  their  eternal  origin  in  the  divine 
intellect  and  will,  or  in  their  manifestation  of 
the  divine  government  of  the  world.  They  dif¬ 
fer  only  in  that  it  is  part  of  man’s  nature  to  be 
free  and  therefore  able  to  disobey  even  the  rules 

I  of  his  own  nature.  Thus  both  sorts  of  law  are 
directions  of  behavior.  Only  if  the  laws  which 
science  discovers  are  not  attributed  to  God, 

I  will  they  seem  to  be  merely  descriptive  rather 
than  prescriptive. 

In  this  chapter  we  shall  be  primarily  con¬ 
cerned  with  law  as  a  direction  of  human  con- 
duct  or,  as  Kant  would  say,  law  in  the  sphere  of 
freedom.  But  within  the  one  meaning  of  law 
*  which  concerns  us  here,  there  are  still  many  im¬ 
portant  distinctions  of  type.  The  division  of  law 
into  divine  and  human,  natural  and  positive, 
private  and  public,  moral  and  political — to 
name  only  some  of  the  traditional  distinctions 
— determines  the  outlines  of  the  diverse  philoso¬ 
phies  of  law  which  the  great  books  contain,  and 
underlies  the  great  issues  concerning  the  origin, 
the  properties,  and  the  authority  of  law. 

Different  writers  use  different  criteria  to  set 
up  their  classification  of  the  kinds  of  law.  It  is 
nevertheless  possible  to  perceive  certain  paral¬ 
lels  in  analysis  and  classification.  The  opposite 
of  natural  law  is  sometimes  called  “human  law,” 
“positive  law,”  or  “written  law,”  sometimes 
“civil  law”  or  “municipal  law.”  Sometimes,  as 
with  Kant,  for  whom  the  analysis  of  law  derives 
from  an  analysis  of  rights,  the  differentiation  be¬ 
tween  natural  and  positive  right  is  also  expressed 
in  terms  of  innate  and  acquired  right,  public 
and  private  right. 

Thus,  for  Kant,  “natural  right  rests  upon 
pure  rational  principles  a  priori',  positive  or  stat¬ 
utory  right  is  what  proceeds  from  the  will  of  a 
legislator.  .  .  .  Innate  right  is  that  right  which 
belongs  to  everyone  by  nature,  independent  of 


all  juridical  acts  of  experience.  Acquired  right 
is  that  right  which  is  founded  upon  such  juridi¬ 
cal  acts.”  From  natural  or  innate  right  develops 
“the  system  of  those  laws  which  require  no  ex¬ 
ternal  promulgation”  and  which  therefore  be¬ 
long  to  the  sphere  of  private  right.  Positive  or 
civil  rights  are  the  acquired  rights  of  men  living 
in  a  state  of  civil  society  under  “the  system  of 
those  laws  which  require  public  promulgation” 
and  which  therefore  belong  to  the  sphere  of 
public  right.  The  source  of  differentiation  here 
seems  threefold:  whether  the  right  is  inherent 
in  human  nature  or  acquired  from  the  state; 
whether  men  are  viewed  as  living  in  a  state  of 
nature  or  as  living  in  a  civil  society;  whether 
the  laws  do  or  do  not  need  to  be  publicly  pro¬ 
mulgated. 

The  distinction  between  the  state  of  nature 
and  the  state  of  civil  society  is  used  by  many 
other  writers  in  differentiating  between  natural 
and  positive  (or  civil)  law,  e.g .,  by  Hobbes,  Spi¬ 
noza,  Locke,  Montesquieu,  Rousseau.  They 
also  recognize  that  the  law  which  governs  men 
living  in  a  state  of  nature  is  natural  in  the  sense 
of  being  instinctive,  or  a  rule  of  conduct  which 
man’s  reason  is  innately  competent  to  prescribe; 
whereas  the  civil  law  originates  with  specific 
acts  of  legislation  by  a  political  power,  vested  in 
a  sovereign  person,  in  a  representative  assembly, 
or  in  the  whole  body  of  the  people. 

Dividing  all  laws  into  two  kinds — “laws  of 
nature  and  laws  of  the  land” — Hegel  holds 
that  “the  laws  of  nature  are  simply  what  they 
are  and  are  valid  as  they  are.”  In  contrast, 
positive  law  is  “valid  in  a  particular  state,  and 
this  legal  authority  is  the  guiding  principle  for 
the  knowledge  of  right  in  this  positive  form, 
i.e.y  for  the  science  of  positive  law.”  Our  man¬ 
ner  of  knowing  their  content  further  distin¬ 
guishes  between  these  two  kinds  of  law.  “To 
know  the  law  of  nature,”  Hegel  explains,  “we 
must  learn  to  know  nature,  since  its  laws  are 
rigid,  and  it  is  only  our  ideas  about  them  that 
can  be  false.  .  .  .  Knowledge  of  the  laws  of  the 
land  is  in  one  way  similar,  but  in  another  way 
not.  These  laws  too  we  learn  to  know  just  as 
they  exist  .  .  .  But  the  difference  in  the  case  of 
laws  of  the  land  is  that  they  arouse  the  spirit 
of  reflection,  and  their  diversity  at  once  draws 
attention  to  the  fact  that  they  are  not  abso¬ 
lute.” 


964 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


This  leads  us  to  the  heart  of  the  distinction. 
The  law  of  the  land,  or  civil  law,  is  “something 
posited,  something  originated  by  men.”  It  is 
positive  law  in  the  sense  that  it  must  be  posited 
(t.e.y  officially  instituted)  in  order  to  exist.  The 
civil  law  is  not  something  discovered  by  exam¬ 
ining  man’s  nature.  It  is  made,  and  must  be 
externally  promulgated  so  that  those  who  are 
subject  to  it  can  learn  its  provisions.  Anyone 
who  will  inquire  can  learn  the  natural  law  for 
himself;  or  he  can  be  helped  to  discover  it  by 
a  teacher  who  instructs  him  in  this  matter  as 
he  would  instruct  him  in  geometry,  not  as  a 
lawyer  informs  clients  concerning  the  prevail¬ 
ing  laws  of  the  state. 

Aquinas  both  subtracts  from  and  adds  to  this 
analysis  of  the  difference  between  natural  and 
positive  law.  On  the  one  hand,  he  does  not  ap¬ 
peal  to  the  condition  of  man  in  a  state  of  na¬ 
ture  as  contrasted  with  civil  society.  On  the 
other  hand,  he  finds  the  chief  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  natural  and  the  positive  law  in  their 
originating  sources.  The  one  is  made  by  God, 
the  other  by  man.  “The  natural  law,”  Aquinas 
writes,  “is  nothing  else  than  the  rational  crea¬ 
ture’s  participation  in  the  eternal  law.”  It  is 
God’s  eternal  law  with  respect  to  man  as  that  is 
received  and  exists  in  human  nature.  It  exists  in 
man  as  the  first  principle  of  his  practical  reason 
and  includes  all  the  precepts  which  can  be  dis¬ 
covered  by  reasoning  therefrom. 

Hence,  for  Aquinas  as  for  Locke,  the  law  of 
nature  is  not  only  the  law  of  reason  but  the  law 
of  nature’s  God.  But  Aquinas  distinguishes  be¬ 
tween  the  law  of  nature  generally,  or  the  eter¬ 
nal  law,  and  the  natural  law  in  man.  The  latter 
is  a  moral  law,  both  in  the  sense  that  it  is  a  law 
governing  free  acts,  and  also  in  the  sense  that  it 
directs  man  with  regard  to  good  and  evil  in  the 
sphere  of  his  private  life,  not  merely  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  political  common  good. 

Natural  and  positive  law  are  alike  in  the  very 
respects  in  which  they  differ.  Both  share  in  the 
nature  of  law  which,  according  to  Aquinas,  “is 
nothing  else  than  an  ordinance  of  reason  for  the 
common  good,  made  by  him  who  has  care  of 
the  community,  and  promulgated.”  Each  has  a 
maker,  God  or  man;  each  proceeds  in  a  certain 
way  from  the  reason  and  will  of  its  maker;  each 
must  be  promulgated,  though  not  in  the  same 


manner;  and  each  is  concerned  with  a  common 
good — human  happiness  or  the  welfare  of  the 
state. 

The  further  additions  which  Aquinas  makes 
consist  of  distinctions  with  respect  to  divine 
and  human  law.  With  respect  to  the  divine  law 
he  distinguishes  between  God’s  eternal  ordi¬ 
nances  and  His  positive  commandments.  The 
eternal  part  of  the  divine  law,  as  we  have  seen, 
is  that  which,  at  the  moment  of  creation,  “God 
imprints  on  the  whole  of  nature”  to  instill  in 
each  created  species  “the  principles  of  its  proper 
actions.”  “If  man  were  ordained  to  no  other 
end  than  that  which  is  proportionate  to  his  nat¬ 
ural  faculties,”  Aquinas  writes,  “there  would  be 
no  need  for  man  to  have  any  further  direction 
.  .  .  besides  the  natural  law  and  the  human  law 
which  is  derived  from  it.”  But  “man  is  ordained 
to  the  end  of  eternal  happiness”;  and  since  sal¬ 
vation  is  a  supernatural  end  which  exceeds 
man’s  power  to  achieve  without  God’s  help,  “it 
was  necessary  that  .  .  .  man  should  be  directed 
to  this  end  by  a  law  given  by  God.” 

God  gave  such  a  body  of  law  to  man,  not  at 
creation,  but  at  a  certain  moment  in  history.  He 
did  not  implant  it  in  his  nature  but  promulgated 
it,  in  the  manner  appropriate  to  positive  law, 
through  verbal  declaration — through  His  re¬ 
vealed  word  in  the  Old  and  the  New  Testa¬ 
ments,  e.g.,  the  Ten  Commandments  and  the 
two  precepts  of  charity. 

The  human  law  Aquinas  divides  “into  the 
law  of  nations  [or  the  ins  gentium]  and  civil  law.” 
The  civil  law  is  that  which  is  instituted  by  a 
community  for  its  own  members.  With  regard 
to  the  ins  gentium  Aquinas  follows  the  tradition 
of  the  Roman  jurists.  What  he  has  in  mind  in 
using  this  term  should,  therefore,  not  be  con¬ 
fused  with  what  later  writers,  such  as  Grotius, 
treat  as  the  ins  inter  gentes  or  international  law. 
Yet  applicable  to  both  the  law  of  nations  and 
international  law  is  the  question  whether  such 
law  belongs  more  properly  to  the  sphere  of  nat¬ 
ural  or  to  the  sphere  of  positive  law. 

International  law  concerns  the  relations  be¬ 
tween  autonomous  states  which,  as  Hegel  points 
out,  are  “in  a  state  of  nature  in  relation  to  one 
another,”  since  “the  sovereignty  of  a  state  is 
the  principle  of  its  relations  to  others.”  Laws 
cannot  be  applied  to  sovereign  states  with  the 
coercive  force  of  positive  law.  “It  follows,”  says 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


965 


Hegel,  “that  if  states  disagree  and  their  particu¬ 
lar  wills  cannot  be  harmonized,  the  matter  can 
only  be  settled  by  war.”  His  statement  that  in¬ 
ternational  law  “does  not  go  beyond  an  ought- 
to-be”  separates  it  from  positive  law.  On  similar 
grounds  Aquinas  separates  the  ins  gentium  from 
positive  law.  He  recognizes,  as  will  presently 
appear,  that  it  does  not  result  from  legislative 
enactment.  Furthermore,  he  points  out  that  it 
is  discovered  by  reason  and  derives  its  rules  by 
way  of  deduction  from  natural  law.  The  law 
of  nations  is,  therefore,  not  positively  instituted. 

That  the  law  of  nations  lacks  some  of  the 
properties  of  civil  law  does  not  make  it,  for 
Aquinas,  less  essentially  a  body  of  law;  but  for 
Hegel  it  falls  short  of  the  essence  of  law,  which 
consists  in  a  determinate  and  universal  rule  of 
right  posited  by  a  sovereign  will.  The  great  le¬ 
gal  positivists  of  the  19th  century,  such  as  Aus¬ 
tin,  go  further  and  deny  that  anything  is  truly 
law  except  the  positive  enactments  of  a  govern¬ 
ment  which  has  the  power  to  enforce  its  ordi¬ 
nances.  The  laws  of  nature  are  laws  only  in  a 
metaphorical  sense. 

The  Greeks  also  appear  to  regard  law  as  pri¬ 
marily  a  creation  of  the  state.  Aristotle  con¬ 
ceives  political  justice  as  “part  natural,  part  le¬ 
gal — natural,  that  which  everywhere  has  the 
same  force  and  does  not  exist  by  people’s  think¬ 
ing  this  or  that;  legal,  that  which  is  originally 
indifferent,  but  when  it  has  been  laid  down  is 
not  indifferent.”  This  tends  to  identify  the  le¬ 
gal  aspect  of  justice  with  the  conventional.  The 
threefold  division  of  law  into  civil  law,  law  of 
nations,  and  natural  law  is  not  Greek  but  Ro¬ 
man  in  origin. 

Yet  the  Greeks  do  not  hold  that  all  law  is  of 
human  institution  or  merely  a  matter  of  local 
convention.  The  fundamental  opposition  be¬ 
tween  the  divine  law  and  the  man-made  law  of 
the  state  occurs  frequently  in  the  Greek  trage¬ 
dies,  and  with  particular  force  in  the  Antigone 
of  Sophocles.  In  burying  her  brother,  Antigone 
violates  the  king’s  edict,  but,  in  her  view,  not  to 
have  done  so  would  have  been  to  violate  the 
“unwritten  statutes  of  heaven”  which,  she  de¬ 
clares,  are  “not  of  today  or  yesterday,  but  from 
all  time,  and  no  man  knows  when  they  were  first 
put  forth.  Not  through  dread  of  any  human 
pride,”  she  says,  “could  I  answer  to  the  gods  for 
breaking  these." 


Aristotle  cites  this  passage  from  Sophocles 
when,  in  his  Rhetoric ,  he  advises  the  forensic  ora¬ 
tor  (or  trial  lawyer)  “to  appeal  to  the  universal 
law,  and  insist  on  its  greater  equity  and  justice,” 
//’“the  written  law  tells  against  our  case.”  Un¬ 
der  such  circumstances,  he  thinks  it  is  wise  to 
“urge  that  the  principles  of  equity  are  perma¬ 
nent  and  changeless,  and  that  the  universal  law 
does  not  change  either,  for  it  is  the  law  of  na¬ 
ture,  whereas  written  laws  often  do  change.” 
Under  the  opposite  circumstances,  that  is,  when 
“the  written  law  supports  our  case,”  he  pre¬ 
scribes  an  opposite  course — to  cite  the  laws  of 
the  state  and  to  urge  that  they  be  upheld. 

Though  Aristotle  here  speaks  of  “the  law  of 
nature,”  he  seems  to  have  in  mind  the  notion  of 
“a  universal  law,”  or  a  body  of  law  that  is  com - 
mon  to  all  peoples.  For  the  most  part,  he  speaks 
of  natural  justice  rather  than  natural  law. 
Whether  or  not  the  two  notions  are  equivalent, 
his  principle  of  natural  justice  stands  in  the 
same  relation  to  political  enactments  as,  for  later 
writers,  the  natural  law  stands  to  the  positive 
law.  Plato’s  conception  of  law  as  “a  disposition 
of  reason”  which  orders  things  according  to 
their  natures,  even  more  explicitly  recognizes 
that  law  neither  depends  upon  nor  derives  its 
authority  from  the  power  of  the  state.  The 
phrase  “natural  law”  may  be  infrequent  in  the 
Greek  books,  but  its  meaning  is  not  unrepre¬ 
sented  in  Greek  thought. 

Other  distinctions  in  kinds  of  law — written 
and  unwritten,  statutory  and  customary,  con¬ 
stitutional  law  and  the  various  particular  bod¬ 
ies  of  law,  such  as  the  law  of  contracts,  of  crimes, 
or  of  torts — are  for  the  most  part  subdivisions 
of  positive  law.  The  one  exception,  perhaps,  is 
the  unwritten  law,  which,  when  not  identified 
with  customary  law,  stands  for  the  natural  law 
or  the  law  of  reason.  With  respect  to  these  parts 
of  law,  the  chief  problems  concern  constitutions 
and  customs.  The  difference  between  a  consti¬ 
tution  as  law  and  all  other  laws  obtaining  in  a 
state  is  considered  in  the  chapter  on  Constitu¬ 
tion;  and  the  legal  force  of  custom,  both  in  it¬ 
self  and  also  in  relation  to  legislative  enactments, 
is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Custom. 

Here  our  major  concern  is  with  positive  law 
as  a  whole,  with  its  properties  and  defects,  but 
above  all  with  its  relation  to  natural  law.  Some 


966 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


of  the  properties  of  positive  law  are  agreed  upon 
even  by  those  who  sharply  disagree  concerning 
its  relation  to  natural  law. 

It  is  generally  agreed,  for  example,  that  a  rule 
of  positive  law  cannot  be  made  by  any  man,  but 
only  by  him  who  exercises  the  legislative  au¬ 
thority  and  has  the  power  to  enforce  the  rule. 
Agreement  also  prevails  concerning  the  muta¬ 
bility  of  positive  law,  though  not  all  would  go 
as  far  as  Montaigne  in  holding  that  “there  is 
nothing  more  subject  to  perpetual  agitation 
than  the  laws.”  Yet  it  is  generally  recognized 
that  the  content  of  positive  law  continually  un¬ 
dergoes  change  with  the  nullification  or  amend¬ 
ment  of  old  rules  and  the  addition  of  new  ones, 
and  that  positive  regulations  on  any  particular 
matter  may  vary  from  state  to  state. 

No  less  common  is  the  understanding  of  the 
indispensability  of  courts  and  judges.  “Laws  are 
a  dead  letter  without  courts  to  expound  and  de¬ 
fine  their  true  meaning  and  operation,”  Hamil¬ 
ton  writes.  Though  rules  of  law,  in  distinction 
from  decrees,  are  formulated  to  cover  an  indefi¬ 
nite  number  of  like  cases,  the  cases  to  which 
they  must  be  applied  by  the  judicial  process  are 
far  from  uniform.  Courts  and  judges  have  the 
task  of  deciding  whether  the  facts  of  the  par¬ 
ticular  case  bring  that  case  under  the  specific 
provisions  of  the  law.  This  is  the  field  of  judicial 
discretion  and  the  battleground  of  litigants  and 
lawyers. 

The  propensities  of  men  of  law,  on  the  bench 
and  at  the  bar,  to  protract  and  complicate  the 
procedures  of  a  trial,  to  multiply  and  divide  the 
issues,  to  separate  themselves  from  laymen  by  a 
heavy  curtain  of  language,  have  been  satirically 
noted  in  the  great  diatribes  against  the  legal  pro¬ 
fession,  from  Aristophanes  to  Chaucer,  Rabe¬ 
lais,  Montaigne,  and  Swift. 

Rabelais,  for  example,  has  Pantagruel  under¬ 
take  to  arbitrate  in  the  litigation  between 
“Lord  Kissbreech,  plaintiff  of  one  side,  and  .  .  . 
Lord  Suckfist,  defendant  of  the  other,  whose 
controversy  was  so  high  and  difficult  in  law 
that  the  court  of  parliament  could  make  noth¬ 
ing  of  it.”  Pantagruel  conducts  the  proceed¬ 
ings  in  an  unusual  style.  When  the  counsellors 
and  attorneys  “delivered  into  his  hands  the 
bags  wherein  were  the  writs  and  pancarts  con¬ 
cerning  that  suit,  which  for  bulk  and  weight 
were  almost  enough  to  load  four  great  couillard 


or  stoned  asses,  Pantagruel  said  unto  them, 
Are  the  two  lords,  between  whom  this  debate 
and  process  is,  yet  living?”  Upon  being  told 
they  are  alive,  “to  what  a  devil,  then,  said  he, 
serve  so  many  paltry  heaps  and  bundles  of 
papers  and  copies  which  you  give  me?  Is  it 
not  better  to  hear  their  controversy  from  their 
own  mouths,  whilst  they  are  face  to  face  before 
us,  than  to  read  these  vile  fopperies,  which  are 
nothing  but  trumperies,  deceits,  diabolical  coz¬ 
enages  of  Cepola,  pernicious  slights  and  sub¬ 
versions  of  equity.” 

Furthermore,  Pantagruel  continues,  “seeing 
the  laws  are  excerpted  out  of  the  middle  of 
moral  and  natural  philosophy,  how  should 
these  fools  have  understood  it,  that  have,  by 
G — ,  studied  less  in  philosophy  than  my  mule  ? 
In  respect  of  human  learning,  and  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  antiquities  and  history,  they  are  truly 
laden  with  these  faculties  as  a  toad  is  with 
feathers.  And  yet  of  all  this  the  laws  are  so 
full,  that  without  it  they  cannot  be  under¬ 
stood.  .  .  .  Therefore,  if  you  will  that  I  make 
any  meddling  in  this  process,  first,  cause  all 
these  papers  to  be  burned;  secondly,  make  the 
two  gentlemen  come  personally  before  me, 
and,  afterwards,  when  I  shall  have  heard  them, 
I  will  tell  you  my  opinion  freely,  without  any 
feignedness  or  dissimulation  whatsoever.”  The 
trial  which  Pantagruel  then  conducts,  in  which 
the  two  lords  are  forced  to  plead  without  bene¬ 
fit  of  counsel,  is  a  choice  and  proper  piece  of 
litigation. 

The  problems  of  casuistry,  with  which  Pascal 
deals  at  length  in  his  Provincial  Letters,  are  some¬ 
times  thought  of  as  peculiar  to  the  canon  law, 
but  casuistry,  in  the  sense  of  distinguishing 
cases  and  examining  them  in  relation  to  general 
rules,  necessarily  occurs  in  the  judicial  applica¬ 
tion  of  any  body  of  law.  The  most  difficult  cases 
are  those  which  may  fall  under  the  letter  of  a 
law  but  seem  to  be  inconsistent  with  its  spirit. 
The  reverse  also  happens;  cases  fall  outside  the 
letter  of  the  law  but  the  purpose  of  the  law 
seems  to  cover  them.  All  such  cases  indicate  an 
unavoidable  defect  in  rules  of  law. 

The  defect  is  unavoidable,  Aristotle  says.  Law 
aims  at  universality  “but  about  some  things  it 
is  not  possible  to  make  a  universal  statement 
which  shall  be  correct.”  To  remedy  this  defect, 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


967 


the  intention  of  the  lawmaker  should  be  con¬ 
sulted.  The  particular  case  should  be  treated  as 
he  would  have  treated  it  if  he  had  had  it  in 
mind  when  he  framed  the  general  rule.  Such 
handling  of  the  difficult  case  is  what  Aristotle 
means  by  the  equitable — “a  correction  of  the 
law  where  it  is  defective  owing  to  its  universal¬ 
ity-” 

The  law  which  equity  is  called  upon  to  cor¬ 
rect  may  be  a  just  rule,  but  that  does  not  pre¬ 
vent  its  being  unjustly  applied.  Equity  prevents 
the  injustice  of  misapplication  by  dispensing 
justice  in  the  particular  case  according  to  the 
spirit,  not  the  letter,  of  the  law.  It  is  a  kind  of 
justice,  Aristotle  says;  “not  legal  justice  but  a 
correction  of  legal  justice  .  .  .  not  better  than 
absolute  justice  but  better  than  the  error  which 
arises  from  the  absoluteness  of  the  rule.” 

Those  who  share  Aristotle’s  theory  of  equity 
acknowledge  a  standard  of  justice  by  which  not 
only  the  law’s  application,  but  also  the  law  it¬ 
self,  is  to  be  measured.  In  his  terms,  natural  jus¬ 
tice  provides  this  standard.  The  justice  of  laws 
made  by  the  state  is  not  only  relative  to  the  con¬ 
stitution  of  the  state,  but  since  the  constitution 
itself  can  be  more  or  less  just,  there  is  a  stand¬ 
ard  of  justice  prior  to  and  independent  of  the 
state — in  this  sense,  natural. 

Essentially  the  same  point  is  made  by  those 
who,  like  Montesquieu  and  Locke,  appeal  to 
the  natural  law,  both  as  a  measure  of  constitu¬ 
tions  and  as  a  criterion  for  distinguishing  good 
from  bad  law.  “Before  laws  were  made,”  Mon¬ 
tesquieu  writes,  “there  were  relations  of  possible 
justice.  To  say  that  there  is  nothing  just  or  un¬ 
just  but  what  is  commanded  or  forbidden  by 
positive  laws,  is  the  same  as  saying  that  before 
the  describing  of  a  circle  all  the  radii  were  not 
equal.” 

The  law  of  nature,  according  to  Locke,  does 
not  apply  only  to  the  conduct  of  men  living  in 
a  state  of  nature.  The  law  of  nature  which  Locke 
describes  as  a  rule  “of  common  reason  and  equity 
which  is  that  measure  God  has  set  to  the  actions 
of  men  for  their  mutual  security,”  is  not  abol¬ 
ished  when  men  enter  into  civil  society.  “The 
obligations  of  the  law  of  nature  cease  not  in  so¬ 
ciety,  but  only  in  many  cases  are  drawn  closer, 
and  have  by  human  laws  known  penalties  an¬ 
nexed  to  them,  to  enforce  their  observation. 
Thus  the  law  of  nature  stands  as  an  eternal  rule 


to  all  men,  legislators  as  well  as  others.”  The 
rules  of  positive  law,  writes  Locke,  must  “be 
conformable  to  the  law  of  nature,  i.e.y  to  the 
will  of  God,  of  which  that  is  the  declaration.” 
The  municipal  laws  of  any  particular  state  “are 
only  so  far  right  as  they  are  founded  on  the  law 
of  nature,  by  which  they  are  to  be  regulated 
and  interpreted.” 

The  position  of  Locke  and  Aquinas  makes 
natural  law  the  source  as  well  as  the  standard  of 
positive  law.  As  a  source,  natural  law  gives  rise 
to  positive  law  in  a  way  which,  for  Aquinas  at 
least,  differentiates  it  from  the  law  of  nations  or 
the  ins  gentium. 

“Something  may  be  derived  from  the  natural 
law  in  two  ways,”  he  writes.  “First,  as  a  conclu¬ 
sion  from  premises;  secondly,  by  way  of  deter¬ 
mination  of  certain  generalities.  The  first  way,” 
he  explains,  “is  like  to  that  by  which,  in  sci¬ 
ences,  demonstrated  conclusions  are  drawn  from 
the  principles;  while  the  second  mode  is  likened 
to  that  whereby,  in  the  arts,  general  forms  are 
particularized  as  to  details:  thus  the  craftsman 
needs  to  determine  the  general  form  of  a  house 
to  some  particular  shape.”  Now  “to  the  law  of 
nations  belong  those  things  which  are  derived 
from  the  law  of  nature,  as  conclusions  from 
premises,  e.g.y  just  buyings  and  sellings,  and  the 
like,  without  which  men  cannot  live  together, 
which  is  a  point  of  the  law  of  nature,  since  man 
is  by  nature  a  social  animal. .  .  .  But  those  things 
which  are  derived  from  the  law  of  nature  by 
way  of  particular  determination,  belong  to  the 
civil  law,  according  as  each  state  decides  on 
what  is  best  for  itself.” 

Aquinas  exemplifies  the  determinations  of 
positive  law  by  pointing  out  that  “the  law  of 
nature  has  it  that  the  evildoer  should  be  pun¬ 
ished;  but  that  he  be  punished  in  this  way  or 
that,  is  a  determination  of  the  law  of  nature,” 
which  the  positive  law  must  institute.  He  might 
also  have  used  as  an  example  the  fact  that  the 
universal  prohibition  of  killing  is  a  conclusion 
from  the  principle  of  natural  law  that  “ one 
should  do  harm  to  no  man”  whereas  the 
various  kinds  and  degrees  of  murder  are  dif¬ 
ferently  defined  in  different  countries  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  determination  of  the  natural  law 
made  by  the  positive  law  of  homicide  in  each 
country. 


968 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


The  rules  of  positive  law  cannot  be  arrived  at 
deductively.  They  do  not  follow  necessarily 
from  principles.  They  are  only  determinations 
which  particularize  the  precepts  of  natural  law 
in  a  manner  which  fits  the  contingent  circum¬ 
stances  of  a  particular  society.  Whatever  is 
made  determinate  by  positive  law  is  something 
which  the  natural  law  leaves  indeterminate  be¬ 
cause  no  point  of  justice  or  right  is  involved. 
Other  determinations  could  have  been  made. 
An  element  of  choice  is  involved  in  the  making 
of  positive  laws.  In  addition  to  being  formu¬ 
lated  by  the  reason,  they  must  be  posited  by 
the  will  of  whoever  has  the  authority  to  make 
laws. 

Rules  of  positive  law  are  the  work  of  reason 
to  the  extent  that  reason  is  called  upon  to  pro¬ 
pose  various  possible  determinations  of  the 
natural  law,  e.g .,  one  or  another  definition  of 
murder  in  the  first  degree,  one  or  another 
definition  of  the  penalty  for  it.  Since  a  definite 
rule  of  positive  law  cannot  be  instituted  until  a 
choice  is  made  among  the  alternative  possibili¬ 
ties,  the  positive  law  cannot  be  solely  the  work 
of  reason.  Choice,  according  to  Aquinas,  is  al¬ 
ways  an  act  of  the  will. 

Though  he  recognizes  the  role  of  choice,  and 
hence  of  the  will,  in  the  enactment  of  positive 
law,  Aquinas  does  not  go  to  the  other  extreme 
of  making  the  will  the  sole  arbiter  of  what  is 
law.  The  legality  of  the  state’s  ordinances  does 
not  depend  entirely  on  their  being  posited  by 
the  will  of  a  sovereign  authority.  If  a  positive 
regulation  is  not  derived  from  the  natural  law, 
it  cannot  be  a  just  rule.  Quoting  Augustine’s 
remark  that  “a  law  which  is  not  just  is  a  law  in 
name  only,”  Aquinas  goes  on  to  say:  “Every 
human  law  has  just  so  much  of  the  nature  of 
law  as  it  is  derived  from  the  law  of  nature.  But 
if  in  any  point  it  departs  from  the  law  of  nature, 
it  is  no  longer  a  law  but  a  perversion  of  law.” 

An  ordinance  which  had  no  other  foundation 
than  the  will  of  a  sovereign  prince  or  govern¬ 
ment  might  have  the  coercive  force  of  law, 
but  it  would  lack  the  moral  authority  of  law. 
It  would  bind  men,  not  through  conscience, 
but  only  through  their  fear  of  punishment 
for  disobedience.  “That  force  and  tyranny 
may  be  an  element  in  law,”  writes  Hegel,  “is 
accidental  to  law,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with 
its  nature.” 


A  completely  opposite  view  is  taken  by  those  c0 
who  deny  natural  law  or  principles  of  innate  su 
right  and  natural  justice.  There  is,  in  addition,  ' 
a  theory  of  natural  law  which  leads  to  an  op-  il 
posite  view  of  the  legal  and  the  just,  though  the  v 
opposition  in  this  case  is  qualified  to  some  ex-  Cl 
tent. 

According  to  Hobbes,  “civil  and  natural  law  J 
are  not  different  kinds,  but  different  parts  of  1 
law.”  The  law  of  nature  and  the  civil  law,  he 
says,  “contain  each  other  and  are  of  equal  ex¬ 
tent.”  But  he  also  says  that  “the  laws  of  nature 
...  are  not  properly  laws,  but  qualities  that 
dispose  men  to  peace  and  to  obedience.” 

Before  the  formation  of  a  commonwealth,  by 
the  contract  or  covenant  whereby  men  transfer 
the  rights  and  liberties  which  they  possess  in  a 
state  of  nature,  the  natural  law  directs  men, 
first,  to  preserve  their  lives  in  the  war  “of  every 
man  against  every  man”;  and  second,  to  seek  « 
the  security  of  peace  by  leaving  the  natural 
state  of  war  to  join  with  their  fellow  men  in  the 
order  of  a  civil  society.  The  nineteen  precepts 
of  natural  law  which  Hobbes  enumerates  seem 
to  set  forth  reason’s  recognition  of  the  advan¬ 
tages  of  civil  society  over  the  state  of  nature 
and  also  reason’s  understanding  of  the  condi¬ 
tions  indispensable  to  a  firm  foundation  of  the 
commonwealth. 

These  rules  of  reason  “are  the  laws  of  nature, 
dictating  peace,  for  a  means  of  the  conservation 
of  men  in  multitudes,  and  which  only  concern 
the  doctrine  of  civil  society.”  But  until  the 
commonwealth  exists,  the  laws  of  nature  bind 
in  conscience  only,  and  they  are  therefore  not 
effective  in  achieving  their  end,  which  is  secu¬ 
rity.  “When  a  commonwealth  is  settled,  then 
they  are  actually  laws  and  not  before;  as  being 
then  the  commands  of  the  commonwealth,  and 
therefore  also  civil  laws.  For  it  is  the  sovereign 
power  which  obliges  men  to  obey  them.” 

The  distinction  between  natural  and  civil 
law  then  becomes  a  distinction  between  un¬ 
written  and  written  rules ;  but  the  test  of  whether 
any  rule  is  actually  a  law  is  the  same,  namely, 
whether  it  is  adopted  and  enforced  by  the 
sovereign.  “All  laws,  written  and  unwritten, 
have  their  authority  and  force  from  the  will  of 
the  commonwealth,”  Hobbes  writes. 

The  difference  between  the  Hobbesian  theory 
and  that  of  Locke  or  Aquinas  reveals  itself  in  its 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


969 


consequences.  Under  what  circumstances  can  a 
subject  or  citizen  refuse  obedience  to  the  laws 
of  the  state?  On  the  ground  that  they  are  un¬ 
just  or  tyrannical?  By  the  criterion  that  they 
violate  precepts  of  natural  law  or  the  positive 
commandments  of  God?  Is  the  individual 
bound  in  conscience  to  obey  every  command  of 
the  civil  law',  because  the  civil  law  includes  the 
natural  law,  interprets  it,  and  gives  it  the 
authority  and  force  of  law;  and  because  the 
natural  law  itself  commands  obedience  to  the 
civil  law  once  a  commonwealth  has  been  insti¬ 
tuted  ?  Or,  on  the  contrary,  is  an  individual  in 
conscience  free  to  disobey  those  positive  en¬ 
actments  which  lack  the  authority  of  law  be¬ 
cause  they  are  not  in  conformity  to  the  natural 
law  or  the  divine  law? 

To  questions  of  this  sort,  and  to  the  whole 
problem  of  the  right  of  rebellion,  different 
answers  seem  to  be  given  in  terms  of  different 
views  of  the  nature  of  law,  the  sources  of  its 
authority,  and  its  sanctions. 

At  one  extreme  there  is  the  doctrine  that 
Rebellion  is  never  justified,  that  the  security  of 
peace,  which  the  maintenance  of  law  and  order 
provides,  is  always  better  than  the  anarchy  and 
war  which  result  from  rebellion.  Hobbes,  for 
example,  holds  that  “nothing  the  sovereign 
representative  can  do  to  a  subject,  on  what 
pretence  soever,  can  properly  be  called  in¬ 
justice,  or  injury.”  The  rebel  would,  therefore, 
always  be  a  criminal,  a  man  who  takes  the  law 
into  his  own  hands,  and  uses  force  to  gain  his 
ends.  A  man  may  be  justified  in  using  force, 
according  to  Hobbes,  only  to  repel  force  used 
against  him,  and  then  only  in  defense  of  his  life. 
So  much  the  law  of  nature  permits  or  requires. 
.But  it  does  not  permit  or  require  him  to  decide 
which  laws  enacted  by  his  sovereign  he  shall 
obey  or  disobey. 

At  the  other  extreme  there  is  the  doctrine  of 
civil  disobedience  as  expounded  by  Thoreau 
and,  of  course,  Gandhi.  Unjust  laws,  or  laws 
which  violate  a  man’s  conscience,  may  have  the 
force  of  the  state  behind  them.  But  they  exert 
ino  authority  over  him.  The  just  man  is  called 
upon  to  break  them  and  to  submit  gladly  to  the 
consequences  of  breaking  them,  by  suffering 
whatever  penalties  may  be  attached  to  their 
breach.  It  is  not  enough  for  the  individual  citi¬ 


zen  to  satisfy  his  conscience  by  criticizing  the 
government  and  joining  with  like-minded  fel¬ 
low  citizens  in  an  effort  to  get  unjust  laws  abol¬ 
ished  or  reformed.  He  is  obliged  in  conscience 
not  to  await  help  from  others  or  to  be  patient  in 
the  use  of  gradual  means.  He  is  obliged  to  act 
alone  and  at  once — by  disobeying  the  unjust 
law. 

Kant  seems  to  go  this  far  when  he  interprets 
the  precept  “Do  wrong  to  no  one”  as  meaning 
“Do  no  wrong  to  anyone,  even  if  thou  shouldst 
be  under  the  necessity,  in  observing  this  duty, 
to  cease  from  all  connection  with  others  and  to 
avoid  all  society.”  But  he  qualifies  this  some¬ 
what  by  the  precept:  “Enter,  if  wrong  cannot 
be  avoided,  into  a  society  with  others  in  which 
everyone  may  have  secured  to  him  what  is  his 
own.” 

Another  sort  of  qualification  limits  disobedi¬ 
ence,  rebellion,  or  secession  from  society — even 
when  the  individual  conscience  recoils  from  the 
injustice  or  illegality  of  a  civil  ordinance.  The 
principle,  as  stated  by  Aquinas,  seems  to  be 
that  the  common  good  may,  under  certain 
circumstances,  be  better  served  by  acquies¬ 
cence  than  by  disobedience.  Unless  what  the 
law  commands  involves  a  transgression  of 
God’s  commandments,  an  unjust  law  may  be 
obeyed  “in  order  to  avoid  scandal  or  disturb¬ 
ance.” 

Even  with  regard  to  reforming  law  by  legal 
means  Aquinas  recommends  that  the  disad¬ 
vantages  resulting  from  the  change  of  law  be 
weighed  against  the  advantages.  The  effective¬ 
ness  of  law  depends  upon  the  habits  of  obedi¬ 
ence  it  forms  and  upon  the  customary  behavior 
it  establishes.  “Consequently,”  Aquinas  says, 
“when  a  law  is  changed,  the  binding  power  of 
law  is  diminished,  in  so  far  as  custom  is  abol¬ 
ished.”  This  harm  to  the  common  welfare  may, 
of  course,  be  compensated  either  by  “the  bene¬ 
fit  conferred  by  the  new  enactment”  or  by  the 
fact  that  “the  existing  law  is  clearly  unjust,  or 
its  observance  extremely  harmful.” 

Locke  states  the  principle  somewhat  differ¬ 
ently.  So  long  as  due  process  of  law  is  available 
to  remedy  unjust  ordinances  or  illegal  acts,  the 
individual  is  not  justified  in  disobedience,  for 
such  action  would  “unhinge  and  overturn  all 
polities,  and,  instead  of  government  and  order, 
leave  nothing  but  anarchy  and  confusion.”  Nor 


970 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


is  it  effective  for  the  individual  to  act  alone  in 
using  force  to  resist  tyranny  or  injustice.  But  if 
these  illegal  acts  have  extended  to  the  majority 
of  the  people  “and  they  are  persuaded  in  their 
consciences,  that  their  laws,  and  with  them 
their  estates,  liberties,  and  lives  are  in  danger, 
and  perhaps,  their  religion  too,  how  they  will  be 
hindered  from  resisting  illegal  force  used  against 
them,  I  cannot  tell.  This  is  an  inconvenience,  I 
confess,  that  attends  all  governments.”  There  is 
no  alternative  then  but  rebellion — “properly  a 
state  of  war  wherein  the  appeal  lies  only  to 
heaven.” 


As  the  foregoing  discussion  indicates,  the 
basic  issues  in  the  philosophy  of  law  are  in¬ 
separable  from  questions  about  justice  and 
liberty,  the  rights  of  the  individual  and  the 
authority  of  the  state,  the  powers  of  govern¬ 
ment,  and  the  fundamental  alternatives  of 
crime  and  punishment,  war  and  peace.  These 
matters  are  considered  in  the  chapters  appropri¬ 
ate  to  the  terms  mentioned  above.  More  par¬ 
ticular  consequences  of  the  theory  of  law, 
especially  natural  law,  are  found  in  such  chap¬ 
ters  as  Revolution,  Slavery,  and  Tyranny, 
Citizen,  Constitution,  and  Wealth. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

i.  The  definition  of  law 

i a.  The  end  of  law:  peace,  order,  and  the  common  good 

ib.  Law  in  relation  to  reason  or  will 

ic.  The  authority  and  power  needed  for  making  law 

id.  The  promulgation  of  law:  the  need  and  the  manner  of  its  declaration 


PAGE 

972 

973 


2.  The  major  kinds  of  law:  comparison  of  human,  natural,  and  divine  law;  comparison 

of  natural  and  positive,  innate  and  acquired,  private  and  public,  abstract  and  civil 
rights  974 

3.  The  divine  law 

30.  The  eternal  law  in  the  divine  government  of  the  universe:  the  law  in  the  nature 
of  all  creatures 

(1)  The  natural  moral  law  as  the  eternal  law  in  human  nature 

(2)  The  distinction  between  the  eternal  law  and  the  positive  commandments  of 

God  975 

3 b.  The  divine  positive  law:  the  difference  between  the  law  revealed  in  the  Old 
and  the  New  Testament 

(1)  Law  in  the  Old  Testament:  the  moral,  the  judicial,  and  the  ceremonial 

precepts  of  the  Old  Law 

(2)  Law  in  the  New  Testament:  the  law  of  love  and  grace;  ceremonial  precepts 

of  the  New  Law  976 

4.  The  natural  law 

4 a.  The  law  of  reason  or  the  moral  law:  the  order  and  habit  of  its  principles 
4 b.  The  law  of  men  living  in  a  state  of  nature 

4 c.  The  a  priori  principles  of  innate  or  abstract  right:  universal  law  in  the  order  of 
freedom;  the  objectification  of  the  will 

4 d.  The  natural  law  as  underlying  the  precepts  of  virtue:  its  relation  to  the  moral 

precepts  of  divine  law  977 

4 c.  The  relation  of  natural  law  to  natural  rights  and  natural  justice 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


971 


PAGB 

tj.  The  relation  of  natural  law  to  civil  or  municipal  law:  the  state  of  nature  and  the 

regulations  of  the  civil  state  977 

4 g.  The  relation  of  natural  law  to  the  law  of  nations  and  to  international  law:  sov¬ 
ereign  states  and  the  state  of  nature  978 

4 h.  The  precepts  of  the  natural  law  and  the  condition  of  the  state  of  nature  with 
respect  to  slavery  and  property 

5.  The  human  or  positive  law:  the  sanction  of  coercive  force 

50.  The  difference  between  laws  and  decrees 


5 b.  The  kinds  or  divisions  of  positive  law  979 

5 c.  The  justice  of  positive  law:  the  standards  of  natural  law  and  constitutionality 
5  d.  The  origins  of  positive  law  in  the  legislative  process:  the  function  of  the  legislator 
5^.  The  mutability  or  variability  of  positive  law:  the  maintenance  or  change  of  laws  980 
jf.  The  relation  of  positive  law  to  custom 

5 g.  The  application  of  positive  law  to  cases:  the  casuistry  of  the  judicial  process;  the 

conduct  of  a  trial;  the  administration  of  justice  981 

5 h.  The  defect  of  positive  law:  its  need  for  correction  or  dispensation  by  equity  982 


6.  Law  and  the  individual 

6a.  Obedience  to  the  authority  and  force  of  law:  the  sanctions  of  conscience  and 
fear;  the  objective  and  subjective  sanctions  of  law;  law,  duty,  and  right 

6b.  The  exemption  of  the  sovereign  person  from  the  coercive  force  of  law  983 

6c.  The  force  of  tyrannical,  unjust,  or  bad  laws:  the  right  of  rebellion  or  disobedience 

6d.  The  educative  function  of  law  in  relation  to  virtue  and  vice:  the  efficacy  of  law 
as  limited  by  virtue  in  the  individual  citizen 


6c.  The  breach  of  law:  crime  and  punishment 

984 

(1)  The  nature  and  causes  of  crime 

(2)  The  prevention  of  crime 

(3)  The  punishment  of  crime 

985 

7.  Law  and  the  state 

986 

7 a.  The  distinction  between  government  by  men  and  government  by  laws:  the 
nature  of  constitutional  or  political  law 

7 b.  The  supremacy  of  law  as  the  principle  of  political  freedom 

yc.  The  priority  of  natural  to  civil  law:  the  inviolability  or  inalienability  of  natural 
rights 

7 d.  Tyranny  and  treason  or  sedition  as  illegal  acts:  the  use  of  force  without  authority  987 

ye.  The  need  for  administrative  discretion  in  matters  undetermined  by  law:  the 

royal  prerogative 

yf.  The  juridical  conception  of  the  person:  the  legal  personality  of  the  state  and 

other  corporations 

8.  Historical  observations  on  the  development  of  law  and  on  the  diversity  of  legal 

systems  or  institutions 

9.  The  legal  profession  and  the  study  of  law:  praise  and  dispraise  of  lawyers  and  judges 


988 


972 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS' 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  116a-119b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions  :  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  ( D ),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


t.  The  definition  of  law 

7  Plato:  Statesman ,  599c-601b  /  Laws ,  bk  i, 
650a-b;  bk  iv,  681b-c;  bk  ix,  743a-b;  754a-b; 
757a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  i  [ii29bi4-i9] 
377a;  bk  x,  ch  9  [1180*14-24]  434d-435a  / 
Politics ,  bk  hi,  ch  16  [1287*28-32]  485d; 
[i287b3— 5]  486a;  bk  vii,  ch  4  [1326*29-32] 
530b-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  xi,  sect  i  302a-b 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90 
205a-208b  esp  a  4,  ans  207d-208b 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  130b-c;  131a-c; 
149c; 157b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vi,  sect  57  36d- 
37b;  ch  ix,  sect  124  53d-54a;  ch  xi  55b-58b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  la-2b;  3c 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  330b-d  /  Political 
Economy ,  370b-d  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii, 
399b-400c  esp  399c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  110c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Meta- 
physic  of  Morals ,  266c-d  /  Pref  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics ,  367b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic 
of  Morals  383a-394a,c  esp  392b  /  Science  of 
Right ,  397a-399c 

43  Federalist:  number  33,  108d-109a;  num¬ 
ber  62,  191b 


44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  203d-204a 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  pref,  4a-b; 
intro,  par  3  10a-12c;  additions,  i  115a-d 

la.  The  end  of  law:  peace,  order,  and  the  com¬ 
mon  good 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  i,  301b-304a;  bk  ii, 
311b-c;  bk  v,  363b-365d;  bk  ix,  425c-427b 
esp  426c-d  /  Theaetetus ,  531a-b  /  Statesman , 
599c-601b  /  Laws ,  bk  i-iii  640a-677a  esp  bk 
1,  643a-644a,  650a-b,  bk  hi,  669b-d,  676b-c; 
bk  iv,  677d;  681b-682c;  bk  vi,  706b-c;  bk  ix, 
747d;  754a-b;  757a;  bk  xii,  795c-796b  / 
Seventh  Letter ,  804b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  i  [ii29bi4-i9] 
377a;  ch  6  [1134*29-32]  382a  /  Politics ,  bk 
hi,  ch  16  [i287ai8-b35]  485c-486c;  bk  vii, 
ch  4  [1326*29-32]  530b-c 
14  Plutarch:  Solon ,  72b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  17  522b- 
523a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  2  206b-2Q7a;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  207a-c; 
q  91,  a  1,  rep  3  208b-d;  a  5,  ans  211c-212c; 
a  6,  rep  3  212c-213c;  q  92,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 
1,3-4  213c-214c;  q  93,  a  i,  rep  i  215b,d-216c; 
a  4,  contrary  218b-d;  q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d- 
223a;  a  3,  rep  i  223a-c;  q  95,  a  1  226c-227c; 


973 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


1  b  to  1  d 

a  3  228c-229b;  a  4,  ans  229b  230c;  q  96,  aa 

12-3  231c  233a;  a  4,  ans  233a-d;  a  6,  ans 
235a~d;  q  97,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3  236a  d;  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  2  236d  237b;  a  4  238b  239b;  q 
98,  a  1,  ans  239b  240c;  q  99,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  1-2  245c-246b;  a  2,  ans  246b  247a;  a  3, 

Ians  247a-248a;  q  ioo,  a  2,  ans  252b  253a; 
a  8,  ans  259d  261a;  a  9,  contrary  261b 
262b;  a  ii,  rep  3  263c-264d;  q  105,  a  2,  ans 
and  rep  1,4  309d-316a;  q  107,  a  i,  ans  325c- 
327b;  a  2,  ans  327b-329a 
21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvi  [85— 
102]  77d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  103a;  131b  c; 
157bc 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  8c;  lib;  15c;  16a-17b 
passim  /  Civil  Government ,  ch  i,  sect  3  25d; 
ch  vi,  sect  57  36d-37b;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch 
xi  55b  58b;  ch  xv,  sect  171  65a-b;  ch  xix, 
sect  219  75b-c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  262a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  2c-3d 
passim 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  353d-355b  esp  354d- 
355a;  359c-d  /  Political  Economy ,  370b~d; 
375b-c  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  399b-c 
,  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  617a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  114b-115a  /  Fund.  Prin. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  259c-261d  esp  259c-d; 
272a-b;  274a-277b  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Ele¬ 
ments  of  Ethics ,  373  d  /  Science  of  Right ,  398c- 
399c;  408c-409c;  412c-414a 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  204b-c;  219d-220a 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  299 
99c-100b;  additions,  135  138c  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  intro,  170c-171c;  part  ii,  271d-272a 
54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  780b-d 

1  b.  Law  in  relation  to  reason  or  will 

7  Plato:  Gorgias,  271c-272b  /  Republic ,  bk  i, 
301c-302c  /  Laws,  bk  i,  650a-b;  bk  iii,  669b- 
670c;  bk  iv,  679c-680d;  681b-682c;  685d;  bk 
ix,  754a-b;  bk  xii,  792c-d 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  9  [1  i8oai 4—24] 
434d-435a  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1253*31-37] 
446d;  bk  iii,  ch  16  485b-486c  esp  [1287*19- 
32]  485c-d;  bk  vi,  ch  3  521c-522a 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  21,  a 
2,  rep  1  125c-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  1  205b-206b;  a  3  207a-c;  q  95,  a  1  226c-227c 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  1,  86b-87a;  96b; 
part  11,  127b;  131d-132b;  133a;  160b  c;  part 
iv,  272c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  6-8  26b- 
27a;  ch  vi,  sect  57-63  36d-38c;  ch  xi  55b 
58b  passim;  ch  xiii,  sect  151  59d-60a;  ch 
xix,  sect  212  74a-b 


36  Sterne:  ' Tristram  Shandy,  266a  b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  la;  3c 
38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  368d  371a  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  11,  395b  d;  3 99b -400c;  bk 
iii,  419c  420a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
264b  d;  273d~274a  /  Practical  Reason,  309d  / 
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  390b;  393a  / 
Science  of  Right ,  435a;  448b  d;  450a  b  / 
Judgement,  596c~598b 

43  Federalist:  number  78,  230d-232a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  3  12d- 
13a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  170c- 171c; 
part  iv',  328a;  364d-365a 

50  Marx-F^ngels:  Communist  Manifesto,  427a  b 

1  c.  The  authority  and  power  needed  for  making 
law 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  ch  9  [1180*14-24] 
434d-435a  /  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  16  485b-486c; 
bk  vi,  ch  3  521c-522a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  34b-d, 
47a-c  /  Numa  Pompilius,  52b-c  /  Solon  64b, d- 
77a, c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  3  207a-c;  q  92,  a  2,  rep  3  214d-215a,c;  q  95, 
a  1  226c-227c 

23  Maciiiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xii,  18a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  lOOc-lOla; 
123a-b;  130b-132a;  137b-138b;  157b;  160c- 
161a;  part  iii,  I71a-172a;  201a-b;  231d-234d 
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  147a; 
part  ii,  362b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  vi,  61a 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  87-88 
44a-c;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch  xi  55b-58b;  ch  xiii, 
sect  149  59b-d;  ch  xix,  sect  212  74a-b  / 
Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect  5-6 
105a-c;  sect  12-13  107b-108c;  bk  ii,  ch 
xxviii,  sect  5-12  229c-231c  passim,  esp  sect 
6  229d 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  369a  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  ii,  399d-400a;  400c-402a;  bk  iii, 
420a-421c 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  393c  / 
Science  of  Right,  398b-c;  399c;  405d-406c; 
412c-414c;  435c-436c;  438b-c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [43-47]  2a 
43  Federalist:  number  33,  107b-108a;  108d- 

109a;  number  44,  145c-146d;  number  78, 
230d-232a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  94 
36b;  part  iii,  par  212  70d-71a  /  Philosophy 
of  History,  part  i,  207b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  680d- 
684a 

id.  The  promulgation  of  law:  the  need  and  the 
manner  of  its  declaration 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy ,  27:1-8  /  Joshua , 
8:30-35— (D)  Josue,  8:30-35 
New  Testament:  Romans ,  2:14-15 


974 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2  to  3a(  1) 


(1.  The  definition  of  law .  Id.  The  promulgation 
of  law:  the  need  and  the  manner  of  its 
declaration .) 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [450-460]  135a 

5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [1435- 
1499]  424a-d 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iv,  684c-686b;  bk  ix,  745c- 
746a;  bk  x,  760c-761b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  3  [1113*3-13] 
359a  /  Athenian  Constitution ,  ch  7,  par  1  555c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  38c  /  Numa  Pompilius, 
60d-61c  /  So/o/7,  73d-74a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  4  207d-208b;  q  91,  a  i,  rep  2  208b-d;  q  93, 
a  2  216c-217b;  a  5,  rep  i  219a-d;  q  106,  a  i 
321a-322a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  132b-133d;  137b- 
138b;  143b-c;  157c-d;  160b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  47c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  14b  /  C/wV  Government , 
ch  11,  sect  9  27a-b;  ch  vi,  sect  57-60  36d- 
38a;  ch  ix,  sect  124  53d-54a;  ch  xi,  sect 
J3^~l37  56c-57b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xxix, 
266b-268c 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  371a  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  ii,  401c-402a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  616d-617a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  73a;  73d-74b  pas¬ 
sim 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  435a-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  203d-204c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  210- 
21 1  69d-70c;  par  215  71c-d;  par  217  72b-c; 
par  224  73d;  additions,  i  115a-d;  141  139c 

2.  The  major  kinds  of  law:  comparison  of 
human,  natural,  and  divine  law;  com¬ 
parison  of  natural  and  positive,  innate 
and  acquired,  private  and  public,  ab¬ 
stract  and  civil  rights 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [441-525]  134d-135c; 
[891-943]  138d-139a  /  Ajax  [1047-1421]  152a- 
155a, c 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [513-565]  262d-263b  / 
Bacchantes  [878-911]  347b-c 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iv,  681b-683a 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations ,  ch  12 
[173*7-31]  238b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  7  382c-383a  / 
Politics,  bk  1,  ch  6  448c-449b  /  Rhetoric,  bk 
1,  ch  10  [i368b7-io]  611d;  ch  13  [i373bi— 17] 
617c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b; 
par  17  17d-18a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  17 
522b-523a 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  63, 
a  2,  ans  64b-65a;  q  91  208b-213c;  q  97,  a  3, 
rep  1  237b-238b;  q  ioo,  a  i  251b-252a;  a  2, 
ans  252b-253a;  q  107,  a  i,  ans  325c-327b 


21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xxx  [97- 
123]  152d-153a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  86c-d;  part  ii, 
131a-c;  136d-137b;  138c;  151a-c;  part  iii, 
245c-246a;  part  iv,  249a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  281a-283c;  516c-517a; 
519a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  lOOd 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii  25d-28c  pas¬ 
sim;  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d;  ch  vi,  sect  56-59 
36d-37d;  ch  ix  53c-54d  passim  /  Human 
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect  13  107d- 
108c;  bk  ii,  ch  xxviii,  sect  6-13  229d-231c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  la-3a; 
bk  xxiv,  202b  c;  bk  xxvi,  214b,d-215a; 
218a;  221c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  399 b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  72a 

42  Kant:  Intro .  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  392b  / 
Science  of  Right,  400b,d-403b;  429a-c;  434b- 
436b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  467c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  3, 10a- 
11b;  additions,  i  115a-d 

3.  The  divine  law 

3 a.  The  eternal  law  in  the  divine  government  of 
the  universe:  the  law  in  the  nature  of  all 
creatures 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  119  esp  119:91  —  ( D ) 
Psalms,  1 18  esp  118:91  /  Proverbs,  8:15-30 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  ii  216c-d; 
bk  xi,  ch  22  333d-334c;  bk  xix,  ch  11-14 
516d-520d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  21, 
a  1,  rep  2  124b-125b;  a  2  125c-d;  part  i-ii, 
q  19,  a  4  705b-c;  a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  707a- 
708a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  1  208b-d;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  208d-209d; 
q  93  215b,d-220d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  i  [94-142] 
107b-d;  xxx  [97-123]  152d-153a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  159d-160b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  7la-b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  55a-b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  30-32 
418c-419a  passim 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  la-2b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  243  b-d 

3<z(l)  The  natural  moral  law  as  the  eternal  law 
in  human  nature 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  37:30-31  —  ( D )  Psalms , 
36:30-31 

New  Testament:  Romans,  2:11-16 
5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [450-460]  135a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  9,  lOd;  bk 
iii,  par  13-15  16c-17b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  19, 
a  4  705b-c 


3a( 2)  to  3b{\) 

20  Aquinas:  Surnma  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  2  208d  209d;  Q  93,  a  2  216c  217b;  a  6  219d- 
220d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  96b;  part  ii, 
134c;  136d-137a;  160b-c;  part  iii,  171a-c; 
216c-217a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  lOOd 
35  Locke:  Hainan  Understanding ,  bk  i,  cii  ii, 
sect  5-6  105a-c  passim;  bk  ii,  ch  xxviii, 
sect  7-8  229d-230a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b  d 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  330d-331d  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  iv,  437a 

3^(2)  The  distinction  between  the  eternal  law 
and  the  positive  commandments  of  God 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  2:11-16 
20  Aquinas:  Surnma  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  1  210c-211c 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  136d-138b; 

160b-c;  part  iii,  171a-c;  199b;  216c-217a 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  learning,  71a-b;  lOOd 

3 h.  The  divine  positive  law:  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  law  revealed  in  the  Old  and 
the  New  Testament 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  9:8-17;  17:4-14;  26:2- 
5  /  Exodus ,  19:3-6;  20  /  Deuteronomy ,  5; 
17:18-19;  27:1-8;  31:26  /  Joshua ,  8:30-35  — 
(D)  Josue ,  8:30-35  /  Psalms ,  1;  40:8;  78;  119 
passim,  esp  119:1-16,  119:33-40,  119:129-136 
—  (D)  Psalms ,  1;  39:9;  77;  1 1 8  passim,  esp 
118:1-16,  118:33-40,  118:129-136  /  Proverbs , 
3:1-2;  6:20-23  /  Jeremiah ,  31:33— (D)  /<?/?- 
mias ,  31:33 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  2:16;  17:11;  19:17- 
20;  32:15;  33:2-3;  39:1-11  — (D)  OT,  Ecclesi¬ 
asticus ,  2:19;  17:9;  19:17-18;  32:19;  33:2-3; 
38:39-39:15 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  5:17-44  esp  5:17- 
20;  22:36-40  /  Lul^e,  16:16—17  /  John,  1:17; 
7:19-23  /  10:1-48;  13:38-39;  15:22-29; 

21:19-28  esp  21:20-25  /  Romans  passim  / 
I  Corinthians,  9:19-21;  10:23-33  /  Galatians 
passim,  esp  2:1-5:12  /  Ephesians ,  2:14-15  / 
Colossians,  2:13-23  /  I  Timothy,  1:5-11  / 
Hebrews  esp  7-10  /  James,  1:25;  2:8-12 
18  Augustine:  C/Vy  0/ Go^/,  bk  x,  cii  17  309c- 
310b;  ch  25  313c-314c;  bk  xviii,  ch  ii 
477c-d;  bk  xx,  ch  4  532bc 
20  Aquinas:  Surnma  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
aa  4-5  210c-212c;  qq  98-108  239b-337d; 
part  ii-ii,  q  16  454c-456d;  q  22  480d-482c; 
q  44  592d-598c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  137b-138b;  160b- 
c;  part  iii,  171a-172a;  177c-180a;  199b-207b; 
215b-219d;  240c-241a;  part  iv,  257c-258a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [101-314]  321b- 
326a;  [401—4 1 9]  328a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  79b  /  Pensees ,  520 
263b-264a;  522  264a;  620  285a-286a;  672  296a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  14b-c 


975 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  402a;  bk 
iv,  435c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  181b  c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  252c 

3^(1)  Law  in  the  Old  Testament:  the  moral,  the 
judicial,  and  the  ceremonial  precepts  of 
the  Old  Law 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  9:3-7;  17:9-14;  26:2-5 
/  Exodus,  12-13;  20-31 ;  34-35;  40  /  l^eviticus  / 
Numbers  passim,  esp  15,  17-19,  27-30,  35-36  / 
Deuteronomy  esp  4-27  /  Joshua,  1:7-8;  8:30- 
35;  22:1-6— (D)  Josue,  1:7-8;  8:30-35;  22:1-6 
/  /  Samuel,  13:9-14— (D)  /  Kings,  13:9-14  / 
II  Kings,  21:8 — (D)  IV  Kings,  21:8  /  /  Chroni¬ 
cles,  22:12-13  — (D)  I  Paralipomenon,  22:12-13 
/  II  Chronicles,  34-35  esp  35:1-19— (D)  II 
Paralipomenon ,  34-35  esp  35:1—19  /  Ezra,  9-10 
— (D)  I  Esdras,  9-10  /  Nehemiah,  1  ^-9;  9:16- 
38— (D)  II  Esdras,  1:5-9;  9:16-38  /  Psalms, 
78;  89:30-32;  94:12;  105:43-45;  119  passim— 
(D)  77;  88:31-33;  93:12;  104:43-45; 

1 18  passim  /  Proverbs,  3:1-2;  4:1-2;  6:20-23  / 
Isaiah,  1:10-17;  5:24-25;  42:21-25;  51:7-8  — 
(D)  taw/,  1:10-17;  5-24-25;  42:21-25;  51:7-8 
/  Jeremiah,  6:19;  9:i3~ 16;  16:10-13;  26:4-6; 
31:33;  44:10-14,23— (D)  Jeremias,  6:19;  9:13- 
16;  16:10-13;  26:4-6;  31:33;  44:10-14,23  / 
Ezekiel,  5:6-9;  11:18-20;  18;  22:26;  36:25-27; 
43-48— (D)  Ezechiel,  5:6-9;  11:18-20;  18; 
22:26;  36:25-27;  43-48  /  Daniel ,  9:1-15  / 
Hosea,  4:6;  8:1  — (D)  4:6;  8:1  /  Micah , 

6:6-8— (D)  Micheas,  6:6-8  /  Zephaniah,  3:1- 
7 — (D)  Sophonias,  3:1-7  /  Zechariah,  7:12-14 
—  (D)  Zacharias,  7:12-14  /  Malachi,  2:1-10; 
3:7— (D)  Malachias,  2:1-10;  3:7 
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  2:16;  10:19;  11:15; 
17:11;  19:17-20;  24:1-23  esp  24:23;  32:15; 
33:2-3;  39:1-11;  45:5 —(D)  OT,  Ecclesias¬ 
ticus,  2:19;  10:23;  11:15;  I7:9‘»  19:17-18;  24:1- 

33  esp  24:32-33;  32:19;  33:2-3;  38:39-39:15; 

45:5-6  /  /  Maccabees ,  1:38-63;  2:19-68— (D) 
OT,  /  Machabees,  1:40-66;  2:19-68  /  //  Mac¬ 
cabees,  6-7;  15:1-5— (D)  OT,  II  Machabees, 
6-7;  15:1-5 

18  Augustine:  G/jy  0/  Go*/,  bk  x,  ch  17  309c- 
310b;  ch  25  313c-314c;  bk  xx,  ch  4  532b-c 
20  Aquinas:  Surnma  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  5  211c-212c;  a  6,  ans  and  rep  i  212c-213c; 
qq  98-105  239b-321a;  q  106,  a  3,  ans  323a- 
324a;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1,3  324a-325c;  q  107 
325c-330d  passim;  q  108,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3 
331a-332b;  a  2  332b-333d;  a  3,  rep  1-3  334a- 
336b;  part  ii-ii,  q  16  454c-456d;  q  22  480d- 
482c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  137b-c;  154b- 
155c;  160b-c;  part  iii,  177c-188a;  199b-204a; 
212d-213a;  216c-218a;  223a-c;  226b-d;  231b; 
part  iv,  268b-c;  269a 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  18b-c 
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [223-371]  324a- 
327a  esp  [223-230]  324a,  [287-309]  325b-326a 


Chapter  46;  LAW 


976 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3b( 2)  to  4c 


(3b.  The  divine  positive  law :  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  law  revealed  in  the  Old  and  the 
New  Testament .  3b(\)  haw  in  the  Old 
Testament:  the  moral,  the  judicial,  and 
the  ceremonial  precepts  of  the  Old  Law.) 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  619-620  2 84b- 2 86a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  180b-182c  passim; 
208a-c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  467c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  246c- 
247a 

3b(2)  Law  in  the  New  Testament:  the  law  of 
love  and  grace;  ceremonial  precepts  of 
the  New  Law 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5-7  esp  5:17-20; 
16:18-19;  18:18;  22:34-40;  28:19  /  Mar\, 
12:28-34  /  Lul^e,  6:20-49;  10:25-37;  16:16- 
17;  22:15-20  /  John,  3:1-8;  6  esp  6:47-58; 
13:31-17:26;  20:21-23 —(D)  John,  3:1-8;  6 
esp  6:47-59;  13:31-17:26;  20:21-23  /  Acts , 
2:37-42;  8:14-17,26-40;  10:34-48;  13:2-4,38- 
39;  15:22-29;  19:1-7;  21:20-25  /  Romans 
esp  3-13  /  /  Corinthians,  11:23-34;  r3  /  Gala¬ 
tians  esp  3-6  /  Colossians  /  I  Timothy,  4:14  / 
Hebrews ,  7-10  /  James,  5:14-15  /  1  Peter,  4:8- 
11  /  I  John  /  II  John 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  25  313c- 
314c;  bk  xx,  ch  4  532b-c  /  Christian  Doctrine , 
bk  1,  ch  22-30  629b-633b;  ch  35  634c-d;  bk 
iii,  ch  10  661c-662a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  5  211c-212c;  q  98,  a  4,  ans  242b-243c;  q 
ioi,  a  2,  ans  267a-268a;  a  4,  rep  2  269a- 
270b;  Q  102,  a  1,  rep  1  270c-271b;  a  4,  rep 
2-4  276d-283c;  a  5,  rep  3  283c-292c;  q  103, 
a  3,  ans  300d-302a;  qq  106-108  321a-337d; 
PART  II— II,  Q  16,  A  I,  REP  2  454C-455C 

22  Chaucer:  Parsony s  Tale ,  par  31  517b-518b; 
par  68  533b-534a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  180c-d;  206c- 
207a;  218a-219d;  240d;  part  iv,  257c-258a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  81a;  lOOd 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [285-314]  325b- 
326a;  [576-605]  331b-332a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  672  296a 

42  Kant:  Fund .  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
259a  /  Practical  Reason ,  327c-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  286b-287a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  525c-526b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
121d-137c  esp  121d-122b,  126c-127b;  bk  vi, 
150a-c;  166c-170a 

4.  The  natural  law 

4a.  The  law  of  reason  or  the  moral  law:  the 
order  and  habit  of  its  principles 

12  Aurelius  :  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  i  i  262a-b; 
bk  iv,  sect  4  264a;  bk  vii,  sect  55  283b-c; 
bk  xi,  sect  i  302a-b 


18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  9,  lOd 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  79, 
a  12  425c-426b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  58, 
aa  4-5  44a-45c;  9  63,  a  1  63a-64a;  q  90,  a  1 
205b-206b;  q  91,  a  2  208d-209d;  a  5,  rep  3 
211c-212c;  a  6  212c-213c;  q  94  220d-226b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  86b-87a;  91a-96b 
esp  96b;  part  ii,  132c-d;  133b 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  23b-c;  184a-b;  520c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  96a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  18,  schol 
429a-d;  prop  31-35  432a-434a;  prop  37, 
schol  2  435b-436a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii  25d-28c  esp 
sect  6-1 1  26b-27d;  ch  vi,  sect  56-63  36d- 
38c;  ch  ix,  sect  124  53d-54a  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  90d;  bk  1,  ch  11,  sect  5-6  105a-c 
passim;  sect  13,  108b-c 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  399b 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  235a-b;  236d-237a  / 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253d-254d; 
259c-261d;  264b-265a;  268d  [fn  2];  271c-d; 
282b-287b  /  Practical  Reason,  306d-310b; 
314d-321b;  360d-361d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  386b-387a,c;  388b-c;  390b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  140, 
52a-53a;  part  iii,  par  213  71a;  additions,  i 
115a-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  170d- 
171a 

4b.  The  law  of  men  living  in  a  state  of  nature 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  311b-312d 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  84c-87b;  part  ii, 
99a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii-iii  25d-29d; 
ch  ix  53c-54d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b-d 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  330a-331b:  333b-d; 
342c-348a  esp  343b-345c  /  Social  Contract, 
bk  i,  389d-390a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  237c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  222b-c  /  Science  of  Right, 
402c;  433c-436c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  93 
36a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  171c- 
172b 

4c.  The  a  priori  principles  of  innate  or  abstract 
right:  universal  law  in  the  order  of  free¬ 
dom;  the  objectification  of  the  will 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  110c;  114b-115a  /  Intro. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  390b;  392b  /  Science  of 
Right,  400b,d-402a;  412c-414c;  416b-417b; 
429a-c:  435a-436b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  446a-d:  458d-459d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  4-30 
12d-19c  esp  par  4  12d-13a,  par  15  16a-b,  par  22 
17c-d,  par  27-30  18d-19c;  par  33  20b-d;  part 
1  21a-39d  esp  par  36  21b-c,  par  94  36b;  part 
ii,  par  106-114  4Qa-42b;  par  133  47a;  par  135 


■c 


4d  to  4/ 

47b  d;  part  iii,  par  142-157  55a-57d  esp  par 
149  56b;  par  209  69d;  additions,  i  115a  d; 
46  123d-124a;  84  129b;  86  129c;  94  132b;  131 
137d  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  170c- 
171c;  part  iv,  362b-d;  364c-d 

Ad.  The  natural  law  as  underlying  the  precepts 
of  virtue:  its  relation  to  the  moral  pre¬ 
cepts  of  divine  law 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:1-17  /  Deuteron¬ 
omy,  5:6-21  /  Jeremiah ,  31:3 3  — (D)  Jeremias, 
3i*33 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  1:18-32;  2:11-16;  3 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  9,  lOd; 
bk  iii,  par  13-15  16c-17b;  par  17  17d-18a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i— ii,  q  19, 
a  4  705b-c;  a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  707a-708a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  51, 
a  1,  ans  12b-13c;  q  91,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  i 
210c-211c;  q  94,  a  3  223a-c;  a  5  224d-225d; 
q  98,  aa  5-6  243c-245b;  q  99,  a  2  246b-247a; 
a  4,  rep  2  248a-d;  a  5,  ans  249a-250a;  q  ioo 
251a-265d;  part  iii,  q  61,  a  3,  rep  2  856c- 
857c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  91a-96b  esp  95d- 
96b;  part  ii,  131a-b;  136d-137a;  part  iii, 
216c-217a;  240d-241a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning.  96a-c;  iOOd 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  18,  schol 
429a-d 

•  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  4-6  25d- 

26c  /  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect 
5-6  105a-c  passim 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  lc-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  343b-345c;  366c-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  275b 
/  Practical  Reason,  317b-318c;  327c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  361c-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  33c- 
34b 

4e .  The  relation  of  natural  law  to  natural  rights 
and  natural  justice 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [441-525]  134d-135c 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  5  447d-448c  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  13  [i373bi— 1 7]  617c-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a; 
bk  vii,  sect  55  283b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a- 
525a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  96,  a 
1  510b-511b;  a  4  512d-513c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  2  208d-209d;  q  94,  a  2,  ans  221d-223a;  q 
95,  a  2  227c-228c;  a  4  229b-230c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  86c-d;  part  ii, 
131a-c;  138c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Crcssida ,  act  ii, 
sc  11  [163-188]  115b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a;  appendix,  viii  447d 


977 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonislcs  [888  -902]  359a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii-ix  25d-54d 
passim;  ch  xi,  sect  145  147  55d-57b;  ch  xv, 
sect  171-172  65a  c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  53b  d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  330a-331b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  61b;  bk  ii, 
140b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  86d  87a 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  392b  / 
Science  of  Right,  397a  b:  421c-422d;  429a  c; 
430a-432c;  434a;  435a-457b  esp  436c,  437c-d, 
447b-450b,  451c-d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [1-28] 
la-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  272d-273b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  171c- 
172b 

4J.  The  relation  of  natural  law  to  civil  or  munic¬ 
ipal  law:  the  state  of  nature  and  the  reg¬ 
ulations  of  the  civil  state 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [450-460]  135a 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  7  [1  i34bi 8— 
ii35a4]  382c-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  13  [i373bi- 
18]  617c-d;  ch  15  [i375a26-b8]  619d-620a; 
[i376a33-b3i]  621a-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b; 
par  17  17d-18a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  i,  ch  21 
142d-143a;  bk  xix,  ch  12  517b-519a;  ch  21 
524a-525a;  ch  24  528b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  3  209d-210c;  q  94,  aa  4-6  223d-226b  passim; 
q  95,  a  2  227c-228c;  a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  99, 
a  3,  rep  2  247a-248a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  84c-87b;  91a-96b 
passim;  part  ii,  99a-b;  103a;  115b-c;  124d- 
125a;  131a-c;  132c-d;  134b-135b;  138c;  142a-c; 
156b-c;  part  iv,  273c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
87a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  281a-282a;  516c-517a; 
519a-520b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [888-902]  359a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  7-13 

26c-28b;  ch  vii,  sect  89  44d:  ch  ix  53c-54d; 
ch  xi  55b-58b;  ch  xiii,  sect  149  59b-d;  ch 
xiv,  sect  159  62b-c;  sect  168  64b-c;  ch  xv, 
sect  171  65a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  lc-d;  bk 
viii,  52a;  bk  xvi,  119d;  bk  xxvi,  2l5b-218a; 
219d-221c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  333b-c;  353d-355b: 
361c-362a  /  Political  Economy,  369a-b:  370d 
/  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393b-394d;  bk  ii, 
397a;  399b-c;  405d-406a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  52b-c;  61b; 
bk  iv,  228a;  bk  v,  397a-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  82b;  86d-89b  esp 
86d-87d 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


978 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  natural  law .  4/.  The  relation  of  natural 
law  to  civil  or  municipal  law:  the  state  of 
nature  and  the  regulations  of  the  civil 
state,) 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  222b-c  /  Science  of  Right, 
397a-b;  402c;  405d-406c;  426b-429a;  430a- 
432c;  433c-434d;  435c-436b 

43  Federalist:  number  43,  143b-c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  470d-471b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  120b-c;  275d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  214 
7la-c;  par  217  72b-c;  additions,  i  115a-d  / 
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  186a-c;  part  i, 
207b-c;  208b-d;  part  iv,  361c-d 

4g,  The  relation  of  natural  law  to  the  law  of 
nations  and  to  international  law:  sover¬ 
eign  states  and  the  state  of  nature 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a 

14  Plutarch:  Camillas ,  108b-109a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  4  223d-224d;  q  95,  a  2,  ans  227c-228c;  a  4 
229b-230c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  86a;  part  ii, 
114b-c;  159c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
13ab 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  9  27a-b; 
sect  14  28b-c;  ch  iii,  sect  19  29b-c;  ch  xii, 
sect  145-146  58d-59a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  2d-3b; 
bk  x,  61b,d-63d;  bk  xxiv,  201b  c;  bk  xxvi, 
223c-224a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  355b-c  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  369a-b/  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  389d-390d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  604c  [n  107] 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-b;  452a-455c  esp 
452a-d;  456b-457a 

43  Federalist:  number  64,  197d-198a;  num¬ 
ber  75,  223b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  338 
llOa-b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  361c-d 

4h,  The  precepts  of  the  natural  law  and  the 
condition  of  the  state  of  nature  with 
respect  to  slavery  and  property 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  5-6  447d-449b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  13  120b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  15  521a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  92,  a 
1,  rep  2  488d-489d;  Q  96,  a  4  512d-513c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  5,  rep  3  224d-225d 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  65-67,  531a-532a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  85d;  86b;  91a-b; 
94b-c;  part  11,  103a;  124d-125c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  iv-v  29d-36a; 
ch  vii,  sect  85  43c-d;  sect  87  44a-b;  ch  ix 
53c-54d  passim;  ch  xi,  sect  138-140  57b-58a; 
ch  xv,  sect  171-173  65a-c;  ch  xvi,  sect  183 
67d-68b 


4 g  to  5  a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xv,  109b- 
110a;  llOd-lllb;  bk  xxvi,  216a-217b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  333b-d;  348b, d;  353a; 
353d-355b;  356c-357a;  357c-358b  /  Political 
Economy,  368a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  388a-c; 
389a-390d;  393c-394d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  52b-c;  bk  iv, 
228a;  bk  v,  309a-311c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  86d-87b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  401b-402a;  413d- 
414a;  421c-422d;  445c-446a;  454a-455a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-10]  la 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  49 

24c-25a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  427b 

5,  The  human  or  positive  law:  the  sanction  of 
coercive  force 

7  Plato:  Crito  213a-219a,c  esp  216d-219a,c  / 
Republic,  bk  iv,  344a-345d  /  Statesman,  599c- 
604b  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  684b-686c 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  9  [1179*35- 
n8ob28]  434a-435c  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  15 
[i286b28-4i]  485b  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch 
12,  par  4  557d-558a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  17, 
522d-523a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  1  205b'206b;  a  3,  rep  2  207a-c;  qq  95-97 
226b-239b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xii,  18a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  103a;  113c;  130b- 
138d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  362b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  3a;  3c-4a  /  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment,  ch  ix  53c-54d  passim;  ch  xix,  sect  219 
75b-c  /  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  5  105a-b;  bk  ii,  ch  xxviii,  sect  6  229d; 
sect  9-13  230b-231c  esp  sect  9  230b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  3c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345d  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  371a-c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  399b- 
400c;  bk  iv,  426b-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  71b,d-96d 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  392b  / 
Science  of  Right,  439a-b 

43  Federalist:  number  15,  65a-d;  number  16 
66c-68d  passim,  esp  67d-68a;  number  21, 
78b-d;  number  28,  96c;  number  33,  108d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  467d-468c  passim 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  21 1- 
228  70a-75b;  additions,  131  137d  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History ,  part  iii,  290a-b;  part  iv, 
364d-365a 

5 a.  The  difference  between  laws  and  decrees 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  ix,  745c-746a 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [1292*4-37] 
491b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  96, 
a  1,  rep  1  230c-231c 


)b  to  5 d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  cii  ix,  sect  131 
54d;  ch  xi,  sect  136-137  56c-57b 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  6b;  hk 
vi,  33a-34d;  bk  xxix,  268c 
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  395b  d; 
397b-c;  399c-400a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  73d  74b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  438a-b 

43  Federalist:  number  64,  197a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  299 
99c- 100b  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i, 
207bc 

5 b.  The  kinds  or  divisions  of  positive  law 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iii,  674b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  cii  2  [ii3ob3o- 
1 13 ia9]  378b-c  /  Politics ,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [i289ai3- 
25]  488a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  38c 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  4  229b-230c;  q  ioo,  a  2,  ans  252b-253a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  136bl37b; 
138b'C 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xxvr, 
221c-223b  passim 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  406a-d 
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  96a 
43  Federalist:  number  53,  167d-168b;  num¬ 
ber  81,  241c-d;  number  84,  252ab 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  40 
21d-22c;  part  iii,  par  211  70a-c 

5c.  The  justice  of  positive  law:  the  standards  of 
natural  law  and  constitutionality 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [450-460]  135a 

5  Euripides:  Bacchantes  [878-911]  347b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii, 
396c-d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  52b  /  Gorgias ,  271b- 
272b;  273d-274c  /  Statesman ,  598b-604b  / 
Laws ,  bk  iv,  680c-683b;  bk  ix,  747c;  bk  x, 
760c 

8  Aristotle:  Sophistical  Refutations ,  ch  12 
[ 238b  c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  i  [ii29bi2-24] 

377a;  ch  7  382c-383a;  ch  9  [1136^2-35]  385a; 
ch  ii  [ii38a4~i3]  386b-c /Politics,  bk  i,  ch  6 
tI255a3-b4]  448c-449a;  bk  iii,  ch  ii  [i282bi- 
14]  480b-c;  ch  16  [i287a28-b5]  485d-486a;  bk 
iv,  ch  1  [i289ai3-25]  488a-b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i, 
ch  10  [i368b7— 10]  611d;  ch  13  [1373^-17] 
617c-d;  ch  15  [i375a25~b25]  619d-620b; 

[>376833-b3']  621a-c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iv,  sect  4  264a 
18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  15  17a-b; 
par  17  17d-18a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  ii,  cii  21 
161b-162d;  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a-525a;  ch  24 
528b  c  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  iv,  ch  18 
686d-687d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  91, 
a  3  209d-210c;  q  93,  a  3  217b-218a;  q  95,  a  2 
227c-228c;  q  96,  a  4,  ans  233a-d 


979 

23  Hobbes:  Ixviathan,  part  i,  91a  b;  part  ii, 
131a-c;  132a  b;  134b  135b;  156b-c;  157b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  47c-48a;  281a-282a; 
384b-c;  519a-520b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [888-902]  359a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  291-338  225a-233a;  878-879 
345a  b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  12  27d- 
28a;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch  xi  55b  58b;  ch  xviii 
7la'73c  passim;  ch  xix,  sect  221-222  75d- 
76c;  sect  240-242  81b  d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  lc-d; 
3c*d;  bk  vi,  39b;  bk  viii,  54b;  bk  xii,  85c- 
86d;  bk  xix,  136a;  138a-c;  bk  xxvi,  214b, d- 
225a  passim,  esp  214b,d-215a;  bk  xxix, 
262a  b;  265d 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  369c-d;  370d  / 
Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  399b-400a;  405a-406a; 
bk  iv,  426b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  i,  61b;  bk  ii, 
140b;  bk  iv,  228a;  284d;  bk  v,  397a-b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  525d-526c; 

617b-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  76d-77b;  89d-94b 
passim;  403b-404d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 
429a-c;  434a;  435a-436a;  450d-451c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  preamble  11a, c; 
article  1,  sect  8-io  13a-14b;  article  vi 
[583-590]  16d;  amendments,  i-x  17a-d 

43  Federalist:  number  33,  108b-109b;  num¬ 
ber  44,  145c-147a;  number  78,  230d-232d 
passim;  number  81,  237d-238b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  302d-323a,c  passim  /  Utili¬ 
tarianism,  465d-466b;  467c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  203d-204a;  205b-c;  363c- 
364a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  212- 
213  70d-71a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 
364b 

5 d.  The  origins  of  positive  law  in  the  legisla¬ 
tive  process:  the  function  of  the  legis¬ 
lator 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  i,  301c-302b;  bk  iv, 
344a-346a  /  Theaetetus ,  531a-b  /  Statesman, 
599C'600d  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  666b-c;  bk  iv,  679c- 
680d;  684b-686c;  bk  vi,  705d-706c;  bk  ix, 
745c-746a;  754a-d;  bk  xi,  782a-b  /  Seventh 
Letter,  807a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  8  [ii4ib23-33] 
390d-391a;  bk  x,  ch  9  434a-436a,c  /  Politics, 
bk  iii,  ch  ii  [i282bi-i4]  480b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  14 
498b-499c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  1  [i354ai3- 
r355a3l  593b-594a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1143- 
1160]  76a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  /  Solon  64b, d- 
77a, c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  51a-52a 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


980 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  The  human  or  positive  law:  the  sanction  of 
coercive  force .  5 d.  The  origins  of  positive 
law  in  the  legislative  process:  the  function 
of  the  legislator .) 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  4  207d-208b;  q  95,  a  1  226c-227c;  a  4,  ans 
229b-230c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  103a;  123b-d; 
130d-131a;  131d-132a;  133d-134a;  151c-152a; 
part  iv,  273d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  363d-364a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95a 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  ii,  44d-45a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  lib;  16a-c  /  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment ,  ch  vii,  sect  88-89  44c-d;  ch  ix,  sect 
127-CH  x,  sect  132  54a-55b;  ch  xi,  sect  134 
55b-d;  ch  xi,  sect  141-cH  xii,  sect  143 
58a-d;  ch  xiii,  sect  150  59d;  ch  xix,  sect 
212-217  74a-75a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  73a-74b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  ii,  6b; 
bk  vi,  33a-35c;  bk  xi,  69d;  71a-72b  passim; 
bk  xxix  262a-269a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  324c-d  /  Political 
Economy ,  368c-369a  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii, 
399b-402a;  bk  hi,  419c-423a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  27d-28a;  154a-b; 
616d-617a;  624b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  71d-75b  esp  72a, 
73b-c;  79d-80b;  93b-c;  108a-c 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  393c  / 
Science  of  Right ,  397a-b;  436b-c;  438b-c; 
45!d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [29-47]  lb" 
2a;  [62-64]  [78—79]  2b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
1-9  lla-14a 

43  Federalist:  number  33, 107b-108c;  number 
38,  121b-124a;  number  40,  130c-132a;  num- 
eer  44,  145c-146d;  number  53,  168b-169b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  356b-362c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  255d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  298 
99c  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  271d- 
273a;  part  iii,  290a-b;  part  iv,  364d-365d 

5e.  The  mutability  or  variability  of  positive 
law:  the  maintenance  or  change  of  laws 

Old  Testament:  Esther ,  1:19  /  Daniel,  6  esp 
6:8,  6:15 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  6c;  bk  iii,  103c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
425a-c;  438ab 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  344b-345d;  bk  viii, 
403a-404a  /  Statesman,  598b-604b  /  Laws, 
bk  iv,  679c-680d;  bk  vi,  705d-706c;  707a-b; 
bk  vii,  717d-718c;  bk  viii,  740c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  7  [1  i34bi 8— 
II35a4l  382c-d  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i268b23~ 
1269^8]  464d-465b;  bk  v,  ch  9  [i3ioai2-i9] 
512b-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  15  [1375^5— b25] 
619d-620b 


5e  to  5 f 

14  Plutarch  :  Lycurgus,  38c;  47a-48a  /  Lycurgus - 
Numa,  63d-64a,c  /  Solon,  69c-d  /  Agesilaus , 
494a-c  /  Agesilaus-Pompey,  539a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  21b-c;  bk  iii,  51a- 
52a;  57d-58b;  bk  xi,  106d;  bk  xiv,  151d-152c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  97 
235d-239b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  78b-c;  part  ii, 
116a-b;  157c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  47a-51a;  131b-132a; 
281a-c;  318c-319b;  462c-465c;  504c-506a; 
516c-517a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Govermnent,  ch  xiii,  sect  157- 
158  61c-62b;  ch  xix,  sect  223  76c-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  77d; 
bk  xiv,  102b;  104c;  bk  xviii,  126d;  bk  xix, 
135d-136a;  bk  xxix,  268d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324d  /  Social  Contract , 
bk  ii,  405d-406b;  bk  iii,  419c-420a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iii,  166a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  78b-81c  passim,  esp 
80d-81b;  96b-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  441b-c;  450d-452a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [76-77] 
2b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  v  16c 

43  Federalist:  number  37, 118d-119b;  number 
39,  127d-128b;  number  40  128b-132a;  num¬ 
ber  43,  143a-b:  number  49-50  159b-162c; 
number  53,  167d-168b;  number  62,  190d- 
191c;  number  64,  197a-c;  number  73,  220a-b; 
number  81,  239a-b;  number  85,  257a-259a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  359a-d;  360c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  203d-205a;  205d;  276a-b; 
277b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  3, 
llc-d;  part  iii,  par  216  71d-72a;  additions, 
176  147c-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1972-1979]  46b-47a 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  427a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  238c-243d; 
bk  viii,  308d 

5/.  The  relation  of  positive  law  to  custom 

5  Euripides:  Bacchantes  [877-911]  347b-c  / 
Hecuba  [798-805]  359d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  97d-98a 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  154a-c  /  Republic,  bk  iv, 
344b-d;  bk  vii,  401c-d  /  Statesman,  600a-b  / 
Laws,  bk  iii,  666b-c;  bk  iv,  678d-679a;  bk 
vii,  713c-716b;  7l8b-c;  730d-731b;  bk  viii, 
736c-737a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  3  [995a4~ 6] 
513c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  7  382c-383a  / 
Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i268b23-i269a28]  464d- 
465b;  bk  hi,  ch  16  [i287b5— 7]  486a;  bk  v,  ch 
8  [i307b3o-38]  509d-510a;  ch  9  [1310*12-19] 
512b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  3 2a-48d  esp  38b-d  /  Ly - 
curgus-Numa ,  63d-64a  /  Themistocles,  99b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xii,  lllb-c;  bk  xiv, 
151d-152c 


f 


98  i 


5 g  Chapter  46:  LAW 


18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xv,  cii  i 6, 
411a-d;  bk  xix,  cii  17,  522d  523a 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  2,  rep  3  227c-228c;  q  96,  a  2,  ans  231c- 
232b;  Q  97,  aa  2-3  236d-238b 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78b-c;  part  ii, 
108c; 130d-131a;  131c;  136d 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  46b-48b;  131  b~  132a; 
281a-283c;  462d-463b 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure,  act  ii, 
sc  1  [1-4]  178d-179a  /  King  Lear ,  act  i,  sc  ii 
I1-22]  247d-248a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  294  225b-226b;  312  229a; 
325-326  230b-231a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xiii,  sect  157- 
158  61c-62b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  3c-d;  bk 
x,  65b;  bk  xiv,  106b;  bk  xix,  135a-146a,c; 
bk  xxi,  168d-169a;  bk  xxiii  197c-198a;  bk 
xxviii,  237a-d;  240b;  261a-262a,c 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  324d  /  Social  Contract , 
bk  11,  406c-d;  bk  hi,  419d-420a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  616d-617a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71d-73a  passim; 
75b-d;  77c-d;  79d-80d  passim;  96b-c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [15-22]  lb 
43  Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d;  number  49, 
159d-160a 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  269c-271b;  307b-d  /  Repre¬ 
sentative  Government ,  329d-330a;  330d-331a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  204c-205b;  276a-b;  277b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  211 

70a-c;  par  274  92a;  par  339  110b;  par  355 
112d-113a;  additions,  132  137d-138b  /  Phi¬ 
losophy  of  History ,  part  ii,  271d-272d;  part 
iii,  294c-d 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-297a 
50  Marx:  Capital,  235a-236c 

15 g.  The  application  of  positive  law  to  cases: 

the  casuistry  of  the  judicial  process;  the 
conduct  of  a  trial;  the  administration  of 
justice 

I  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  18:20-22;  23:1-3,6-9 
/  Numbers,  5:11-31  /  Deuteronomy ,  1:16-17; 
16:18-19;  17:2-13;  19:15-20  /  7  Kings,  3:16- 
28 —(D)  III  Kings,  3:16-28  /  Daniel,  13 
New  Testament:  Acts ,  21-26 
5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  81a-91d  esp  [397-822] 
85c-89c 

5  Euripides:  Hecuba  [1129-1251]  362c-363c 
5  Aristophanes:  Wasps  507a-525d 
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  32b-c;  bk  iii,  95d- 
96b;  bk  iv,  135c-d;  bk  v,  164c;  bk  vi,  211d- 
212a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  381d- 
382d;  bk  iii,  429c-434c;  bk  vi,  523b-c;  524d- 
525d 

7  Plato:  Apology  200a-212a,c  /  Republic,  bk 
iii,  337b-338a  /  Theaetetus ,  544a-c  /  States¬ 
man,  599c-603a  /  Laws,  bk  vi,  704c-705c;  bk 
viii,  740c-d;  bk  ix,  744b-c;  754a-d:  bk  xi, 
782a-b;  783c-784b;  bk  xif,  792a-793a 


9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  cii  4  379b  380b  esp 
[1 132*19  bi8]  379d-380b;  bk  vi,  cii  8  [1 14^23- 
33]  390d-391a  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i268b5- 
23]  464c;  bk  iii,  cii  11  [i282bi-6]  480b  c;  ch 
15  [1286*10-30]  484b-c;  ch  16  [1287*24  28] 
485d;  [i287bi5-25]  486a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  16  501c- 
502a, c  /  Athenian  Constitution,  cii  45  573d- 
574a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i  [1354“!  i355a3] 

593b  594a;  ch  15  619d-622d 

14  Plutarch:  Solon ,  70d-71b/  Alcibiadcs,  162 d- 
165b  /  Coriolanus,  179c-184c  /  Aristides, 
264b-c  /  Agesilaus,  494a-c  /  Pornpey ,  526a  d  / 
Agesilaus-Pompey ,  539a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  46d-49b;  61c-62a; 
bk  xiv,  151c  /  Histories ,  bk  ii,  2l6d-217a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  6  514b- 
515a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  i,  rep  2-3  226c-227c;  q  105,  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  7-8  309d-316a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  87,  a  i, 
ans  997b-998c 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus,  par  11  403b- 
404a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78b-c;  part  ii, 
123b-d;  134b-136b;  part  iii,  234d;  part  iv, 
275a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  ii, 
85c-92c;  bk  iii,  204c-215c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  47c-48a;  283a;  516c- 
520b  passim 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  iv, 
sc  1  425c-430b 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure  174a- 
204d  esp  act  ii,  sc  i-ii  178d-184a  /  King 
Lear,  act  iii,  sc  vi  266c-267d  /  Coriolanus, 
act  iii,  sc  iii  375b-377a  /  Henry  VIII,  act  ii, 
sc  1  [51-136]  558c-559c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  332d- 
333b;  340d-343a;  353b-356d;  361a-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  27a-62a;  90a-99a; 

102b-117b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  90-94 
44d-46c;  ch  ix,  sect  125  54a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  73b-75a:  part  iv, 
152b-154a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  260a-b;  266a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  8c-10c;  28c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  33a- 
37d;  42c-d;  bk  xxix,  262a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  433a- b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  311c-315a,c 

40  Gumbo's:  Decline  and  Fall,  244d-245b;  251b-d; 
343b-c;  618a-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  77b-78b;  93b-c; 
94c-95c;  403c-404b;  458c-d;  459b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  60a-c  /  Pref  Metaphysical 
Elements  of  Ethics,  372b-d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [52-55]  2a; 
[70-71]  2b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  iii  15c- 
16a;  amendments,  v-viii  17b-d;  xi  18a;  xiv, 
sect  1  18c 


982 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5 h  to  6a 


(5.  The  human  or  positive  law:  the  sanction 
of  coercive  force .  5 g.  The  application  of 
positive  law  to  cases:  the  casuistry  of  the 
judicial  process;  the  co7iduct  of  a  trial;  the 
administration  of  justice.) 

43  Federalist:  number  15,  65a-b;  number  17, 
69d-70a;  number  22,  83d-84a;  number  65 
198a-200c  passim;  number  73,  221b-c;  num¬ 
ber  78-83  229d-251a  passim 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  133b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  85 
35a-b;  part  hi,  par  214  71a-c;  par  219  72d- 
73a;  par  222-229  73b-75b;  additions,  141 
139c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  250d-251a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-295a 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  139b-140b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xii,  547a-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
168c-d;  bk  ix  235b,d-271d;  bk  xii  348b, d- 
401d 

5 h.  The  defect  of  positive  law:  its  need  for  cor¬ 
rection  or  dispensation  by  equity 

7  Plato:  haws ,  bk  vi,  699d-700b;  bk  ix, 
754b-d;  bk  xi,  777d-778b;  bk  xii,  785c-786a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  3  [i4iai5-i8] 
194b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  10  385c-386b  esp 
[ii37bio-28]  385d-386a  /  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch 

15  [i286aio~37]  484b-d;  ch  16  [1287^4-28] 
485d;  [1287^15—25]  486a-b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i, 
ch  13  [i374ai7~b24]  618c-619a 

14  Plutarch:  Fabius ,  150d-151a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  96, 
a  6  235a-d;  q  97,  a  4  238b-239b;  q  ioo,  a  8, 
ans  and  rep  1  259d-261a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  94d;  part  ii, 
132d;  133d-135d;  136b;  156b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  50b-51a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xiv,  sect  159- 
160  62b-d 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  152b-154a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  343c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73d-74b;  77d- 
78a;  91b-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  399c-400d 

43  Federalist:  number  78,  232c-d;  number  80, 
237a-b;  number  83,  248d-249a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  214 
71a-c;  par  223  73c-d 

6.  Law  and  the  individual 

6a.  Obedience  to  the  authority  and  force  of 
law:  the  sanctions  of  conscience  and 
fear;  the  objective  and  subjective  sanc¬ 
tions  of  law;  law,  duty,  and  right 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  5:28-29;  13:11; 
17:12-13;  19:18-20;  21:20-21;  28:58-59  /  Ec¬ 
clesiastes,  12:13 

New  Testament:  Romans ,  13:1-5  /  I  Peter,  2:13- 

16 


5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [490-565]  86b-87a; 
[681-710]  88b-c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [362-372] 
134b,  [640-680]  136d-137a  /  Ajax  [666-676] 
148d;  [1047-1421]  152a-155a,c 

5  Euripides:  Orestes  [491-525]  399a-b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370b- 
c;  bk  11,  396c-d;  400d-401a;  bk  iii,  425a-c 

7  Plato:  Apology,  206b-d  /  Crito  213a-219a,c  / 
Republic,  bk  ii,  31  lb-31 2b  /  Statesman ,  599c- 
604b  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  675c-676b  /  Seventh 
Letter,  807a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  12  [ii44ai2-2i] 
393d;  bk  x,  ch  9  [1 179^5-1  i8ob28]  434a- 
435c  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i269ai2-23] 
465a-b;  bk  hi,  ch  15  [i286b28~4i]  485b;  bk 
iv,  ch  8  [i294ai— 8]  493d;  ch  ii  [i295b2-2o] 
495c-d;  bk  v,  ch  8  [i307b30-38]  509d-510a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [1142- 
1160]  76a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  7,  234d- 
235a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  38c;  48a  /  Lycurgus- 
Numa,  63d-64a,c  /  Solon ,  66a  /  Agesilaus, 
480b,d-481a  /  Cleomenes,  659d-660a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  92, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  213c-214c;  a  2,  ans  and 
rep  4  214d-215a,c;  q  95,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  i 
226c-227c;  q  96,  aa  4-6  233a-235d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  90b-d;  part  ii, 
99a-b;  112b-d;  115a-b;  130b-131c;  132d- 
133d;  149b-c;  153b-c;  part  iii,  224d;  240a- 
241a;  244d-246a,c;  conclusion,  279a-c;  283c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  48b-50a;  319b;  383c-d; 
480b-c;  520b 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus ,  act  iii,  sc  1  [263- 
336]  372c-373b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  68b-73a; 
177a-b;  part  ii,  362b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  scfiol  2 
435b-436a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [1334-1379]  368b- 
369b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  114b  /  Pensees,  297- 
303  227a-b 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  3a;  16c-17c/  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment,  ch  vii,  sect  94  46a-c;  ch  viii,  sect  97 
47a-b;  sect  120-122  52d-53c;  ch  ix  53c-54d 
passim;  ch  xi,  sect  134  55b-d  /  Human 
Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect  5-6  105a-c 
passim;  sect  13  107d-108c;  bk  ii,  ch  xxviii, 
sect  6  229d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
76,  485a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  69a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  366d  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy,  371a-372b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  398d; 
401c-402a;  406c-d;  bk  iv,  426b-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  308a;  309a- 
311c  passim;  397a-c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
253d-254b;  259a-c;  273d-287d  esp  273d-274a, 
275b-d,  277d-279d,  281c-282d,  283b-d  / 


983 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


)b  to  6d 

Practical  Reason ,  325d-326b;  356a  c  /  Prtf 
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics ,  365b-366d; 
375b-d;  379b-d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
389a  b;  391a-c  /  Science  of  Right ,  399c; 
400bd 

43  Federalist:  number  15,  65a-b;  number  16 
66c-68d  passim;  number  17,  69d-70a;  num¬ 
ber  27  94d-96c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  295d-296b;  302d-303a  /  Rep¬ 
resentative  Government ,  329c-330a;  339c-340d 
/  Utilitarianism ,  457c-461c;  465d-466b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  181b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  2b-3a;  4d- 
5a;  part  hi,  par  144  55b;  par  261  83a  d;  par 
270  84d-89c  passim;  additions,  i  115a-d;  93 
132a;  140  139b  c  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
intro,  186b-c;  part  i,  207b-c;  211a-c;  part 
11,  271d-272d:  part  iii,  290a  b;  part  iv, 
333c-d;  353c-d;  365b-c 

49  Darwin  :  Descent  of  Man ,  304a-305c  esp  305a; 

310a-317d  esp  310d,  313d-314c,  317a 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  epilogue  i,  670c- 
671a 

6b.  The  exemption  of  the  sovereign  person 
from  the  coercive  force  of  law 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  95d-96b:  107c-d 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iv,  682b-c;  bk  ix,  754a-b  / 
Seventh  Letter ,  807a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Alexander ,  564d-566b 
l  20  Aquinas:  Snmma  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  96, 
a  5,  rep  3  233d-234d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  102b-c;  125b-c; 
130d;  149d-150a;  153b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  177a-b 

30  Bacon:  Afop  Atlantis ,  208b 

35  Locke:  GV/7  Government ,  ch  vii,  sect  90-94 
44d-46c;  ch  xvi,  sect  195  70a-b;  ch  xviii, 
sect  205-206  72a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  357b-c  /  Political  Econ¬ 
omy ,  370d-371a  /  Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  399d- 
400a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  27b-c;  51c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  74c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  438b-c;  439c;  446a-b 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  v  [74-81]  6a 
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 

6  [132-142]  12c;  article  ii,  sect  4  15c 

43  Federalist:  number  69,  207b-c;  number 
81,  240c-241a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  120a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  284 
96b 

6c.  The  force  of  tyrannical,  unjust,  or  bad  laws: 
the  right  of  rebellion  or  disobedience 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [1011-1082] 
38b-39a,c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [1-99] 
131a-132a,  [441-525]  134d-135c,  [640-680] 
136d-137a,  [891-943]  138d-139a 
5  Euripides:  Phoenician  Maidens  [1625-1682] 
392b-d 


7  Plato:  Apology  200a  212a, c  /  Crito  213a- 
219a,c  /  Laws ,  bk  vi,  706b  c  /  Seventh  letter, 
800c  d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  8  [1294*1-8] 
493d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  13  [137^1-17] 
617c  d;  ch  15  [i375a26-b25]  619d-620b; 

[1 37^*33“ b3 1 J  621a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Tiberius  Gracchus,  678b  d  / 
Marcus  Brutus,  805c'811a 

15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  iv,  269d-270b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  15-17  17a- 
18a  /  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  17  522b  523a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  1,  rep  3  205b-206b;  q  92,  a  i,  rep  4  213c- 
214c;  q  93,  a  3,  rep  2  217b-218a;  q  95,  a  4, 
ans  229b-230c;  q  96,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2-3 
233a-d;  q  97,  a  2  236d-237b;  part  ii-ii,  q  42, 
a  2,  rep  3  584b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  102b-c;  113d- 
114b;  115a-116a;  134c-135b;  153c;  157b;  part 
iii,  228b;  238b-c;  part  iv,  273a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  7c;  504c-506a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [888-902]  359a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  326  231a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  16c-17c  /  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment,  ch  xiii,  sect  155  60d-61a;  ch  xiv, 
sect  168  64b-c;  ch  xvi-xix  65d-81d  passim 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract ,  bk  i,  388d-389a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  397a-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  439a-441d;  450d-451b 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Federalist:  number  16,  68b-c;  number  28, 
97c-d;  number  33,  108b-109a;  number  78, 
230d-232d 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  465d-466b;  467c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  668a- 
669d 

6d .  The  educative  function  of  law  in  relation 
to  virtue  and  vice:  the  efficacy  of  law  as 
limited  by  virtue  in  the  individual  citizen 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [681-710]  88b-c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  35c-d;  bk  vii, 
232d-233a;  233c-d 

6  Thucydides  '.Peloponnesian  War,  BKi,370b-c; 
bk  11,  396c-d 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  45b-47c  /  Apology,  203d  / 
Republic,  bk  iv,  344a-345d;  bk  ix,  426c-d  / 
Statesman,  607b-608d  /  Laws,  bk  i,  640a- 
644b;  bk  iii,  669d-670a;  bk  iv,  684b-686c; 
bk  v,  690d-691b;  bk  vi,  706b-c;  bk  viii, 
735c-738c;  bk  xii,  792c-d;  794a-799a,c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [1102*8-25] 
347c;  bk  ii,  ch  i  348b,d-349b  passim,  esp 
[1  i03b3— 7]  349a;  bk  v,  ch  i  [n29bi2-24] 
377a;  ch  2  [ii30b20-29]  378b;  bk  x,  ch  9 
[1179*35-1 1 8ob28]  434a-435c  /  Politics,  bk 
vii,  ch  14  537b-538d  esp  [i332b33-i333b29] 
537c-538c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  /  Lycurgus- 
Numa ,  63d-64a  /  Solon  64b,d-77a,c  /  Ly- 
sander,  361b-d  /  Cleomenes ,  659d-660a 


984 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(6.  Law  and  the  individual.  6d.  The  educative 
function  of  law  in  relation  to  virtue  and 
vice:  the  efficacy  of  law  as  limited  by 
virtue  in  the  individual  citizen.) 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  hi,  57b-58d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  92 
213c-215a,c;  q  95,  a  1  226c-227c;  q  96,  aa  2-3 
231c-233a;  q  98,  a  6,  ans  244c-245b;  q  ioo 
251a-265d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvi  [85— 
105]  77d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  131a-b;  140b- 
141b;  149b-c;  153a-155c 
25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  131b-132a 
27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure ,  act  i, 
sc  hi  [19-39]  177c;  act  ii,  sc  i  [225-270] 
181a-c;  act  v,  sc  1  [318-324]  202b 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  78d-81c 
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bkxii  [285-306]  325b- 
326a  /  Areopagitica,  383a-395b 
35  Locke:  Toleration,  8c;  14a  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  11,  ch  xxviii,  sect  9-13  230b- 
231c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  267b-268b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  13b, d- 
17b;  bk  v,  18b,d-23a;  bk  vii,  44d-45c; 
47c-50c;  bk  xii,  86b;  87c-88a;  bk  xiv,  104a- 
108d  passim;  bk  xvi,  119d;  bk  xix,  138c- 
142a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345d;  359d  /  Political 
Economy ,  372a-377b  esp  372a-373a,  375d- 
377a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393b-c;  bk  ii, 
400d-401a;  bk  iv,  434b-435a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  lOOc-lOlb;  291d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  93d-94a 

42  Kant:  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
367b-c;  373b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
383a-b  /  Science  of  Right,  448d-449c 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments, 
xviii  19c;  xxi  20b-c 

43  Federalist:  number  12,  58b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  272d-273d;  302d-312a  passim, 
esp  306b-307a;  315d-316b  /  Representative 
Government ,  336c-337b  /  Utilitarianism,  467b- 
468a 

44  Boswell:  Jobison,  222d-223b;  301c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  150 
56c-57a;  par  153  57c  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
intro,  166b;  part  iv,  333c-d 
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  328c-d 
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  30d- 
32a 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  758c-d 
6e.  The  breach  of  law:  crime  and  punishment 

6e(l)  The  nature  and  causes  of  crime 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  400d- 
401a;  bk  hi,  436d-438b 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  ii,  654c-d;  bk  v,  690d- 
691b;  bk  ix,  743c;  746a-750a;  bk  x,  758b- 


6e  to  6e(2)\  fc(3) 

760c;  bk  xi  771b-784b  passim;  bk  xii,  784b-  25 
786b;  791c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch2  [ii3ob3o-ii3ia9] 
378b-c;  ch  ii  [1138^-13]  386b-c  /  Politics,  27 
bk  11,  ch  7  461d-463c  esp  [1267*2-16]  462c-d; 
bk  iv,  ch  11  [i295b3-i2]  495c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  31 
ch  10-14  611c-619d 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch  10, 
662a  3 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  139c-144d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  23b-c;  334b-335a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  ii,  sect  6-13 
26b-28b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  271c-273a,c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xii,  85c- 
86d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  364d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  309a-c;  397a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  35a;  175c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92c;  93c 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  391d=- 
392a  /  Science  of  Right,  446a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  95-  i 
102  36b-39b;  part  hi,  par  218  72c-d;  par 
319,  106a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  364a-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  33c- 
34b 

54  Freud:  Ego  and  Id,  714a-b 

6e( 2)  The  prevention  of  crime 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [490-5 65]  86b-87a 

5  Sophocles:  Electra  [1501-1507]  169a, c 

5  Euripides:  Orestes  [491-525]  399a-b 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [1303-1464]  504b-506c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  87a-b;  bk  v,  164c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  400d- 
401a;  bk  hi,  424d-429a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  45b-d  /  Gorgias,  267c- 
270c  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  321d-322d  /  Laws, 
bk  v,  688d-689a;  690d-691b;  bk  ix,  743a-c; 
757a;  bk  x,  769d-770c;  bk  xi,  782a-b;  bk  xii, 
786a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  5  [ni3b2i- 
ni4a2]  359d-360a;  bk  x,  ch  9  [ii79a33~ 
n8oa32]  434a-435a  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  7  ’ 
461d-463c  esp  [1267^-16]  462c-d  /  Rhetoric, 
bk  1,  ch  12  [1372^3-27]  615d-616a;  ch  14 
[i375ai~7]  619b-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  61c-d;  bk  xiv,  151  d- 
152c;  bk  xv,  162c-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  16  521  d- 
522a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  87, 
a  3,  rep  2  187b-188b;  q  105,  a  2,  rep  9  309d- 
316a 

22  Chaucer:  TaleofMelibeus,  par  40  418b-419a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  94a;  part  ii, 
140a;  141b;  143d;  145a;  145d;  147a-b;  157d- 
158a 


•)  \e(3>)  Chapter  46:  LAW  985 


25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  446a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Jidiet,  act  i,  sc  i 
i  [71-110]  286b-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure ,  act  i, 
sc  hi  177b  d;  act  v,  sc  i  [318-324]  202b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a;  prop  51,  schol  439d;  prop  63, 
schol  444a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  3a  /  Civil  Government ,  ch 
11,  sect  7-12  26c-28a  /  Human  Understand¬ 
ing ',  BK  I,  CH  II,  SECT  13  107d~108c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
76,  485a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  150b;  267b-268b 

38  Montesquieu:  5p/W/  of  Laws ,  bk  vi,  37d- 
38a;  38d-40b;  bk  xix,  139c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  351b-d  /  Political 
Economy ,  371a-c;  372c  /  Social  Contract , 
bk  11,  399a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  309a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  175c-d;  216a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  83c;  85a-c;  92b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  446a-449c  esp  446b- 
447c,  448b-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  271c-272d;  313a-316b  /  Tfc/?- 
resentative  Government ,  334d-335a  /  Utili¬ 
tarianism,  471b-472d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  7d-8a;  204b-c;  301c-d; 
335c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  99 
37b-d;  part  iii,  par  232  75c-d;  par  319,  106a; 
additions,  62  126a  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
part  1,  214d-216a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  314b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  BKii,30d- 
32a;  33c-34b;  bk  vi,  165c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  787c 

6e(3)  The  punishment  of  crime 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [490-562]  86b-87a; 
[681-710]  88b-c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [640-680]  136d-137a  / 
Electra  [1501-1507]  169a, c 

5  Euripides:  Orestes  [491-604]  399a-400a 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  32b-c;  bk  iii,  116b- 
117a;  bk  iv,  135c-136a;  bk  v,  164c;  bk  vii, 
251a-b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
427d'428a 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  45a-46d  /  Gorgias,  267c- 
270c  /  Statesman,  601c-602d  /  Laws,  bk  v, 
690d-691b;  bk  ix  743a-757d  esp  747d,  757a; 
bk  x,  769d-770c;  bk  xi  771b-784b  passim;  bk 
xii,  784b-786b;  792c-793a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  4  379b-380b; 
ch  5  [ii32b2i-3o]  380b-c;  ch  ii  [ii38a4-i3] 
386b-c;  bk  x,  ch  9  [1  i79a33~ 1 180*32]  434a- 
435a  /  Politics,  bk  vi,  ch  8  [132^40-1322*28] 
525d-526a;  bk  vii,  ch  13  [1332*10-16]  536d  / 
Athenian  Constitution,  ch  52  576b-d;  ch  57-59 
579b-580c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  12  [1372*3-^6] 
615c-616b;  ch  14  619a-d 


14  Plutarch:  Solon,  70d;  73a  /  Themistocles , 
97b  d/  Cicero,  711c-712d  /  Artaxerxes,  851a b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  57a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  6  514b 
515a;  bk  xxi,  ch  ii  570b-571a 

20  Aquinas:  Sutnma  Theologica,  part  i— ii,  q  92, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  3-4  214d  215a,c;  q  96,  a  5 
233d-234d;  q  105,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  9-12 
309d-316a 

22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Mclibeus,  par  40  418b 
419a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  145a-148b;  157d- 
158a;  conclusion,  281a-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  519a  c 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  iii 
[1— 1 5]  44c-d  /  Romeo  and  Juliet ,  act  i,  sc  i 
[71-110]  286b-d;  act  iii,  sc  i  [146-202]  302c- 
303a  /  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  iii  [118-153]  324d- 
325b  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  v,  sc  ii  [65-145] 
498d-499b  /  Henry  V,  act  ii,  sc  ii  539a- 
541a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  68b-73a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  51,  schol  439d 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  108b-109a 

35  Locke:  Toleration ,  3a  /  Civil  Government,  ch 
1,  sect  3  25d;  ch  11,  sect  6-13  26b-28b;  ch 
vii,  sect  87-88  44a-c;  ch  ix,  sect  128  54b-c; 
sect  130  54c;  ch  xv,  sect  171  65a-b  /  Human 
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxviii,  sect  6  229d; 
sect  9  230b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div 
76,  485a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  28a-b;  29b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  37d- 
43d;  bk  xii,  85c-92b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  351  b-d  /  Political 
Economy,  371a-c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii, 
398b-399a;  406c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  175d-176a;  388c-d; 
617b-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  83b-c;  91a-94c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  306b-c  /  Science  of 
Right,  446a-449c  esp  446b-447c,  448a-d;  450a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 
9  [271-272]  13d;  sect  10  [300-301]  14a; 
ARTICLE  II,  SECT  4  15c;  ARTICLE  III,  SECT  3 

[507—51: 1:]  16a;  amendments,  v  17b-c;  viii 
17d;  xiii  18c 

43  Federalist:  number  15,  65a-b;  number  21, 
78b-d;  number  65  198a-200c  passim 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  471d-472d;  474d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  204b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  90- 
103  35d-39b  esp  par  96-100  36c-38a;  part  ii, 
par  132  46b-47a;  part  iii,  par  218  72c-d;  par 
220  73a- b;  par  233  75d;  par  319,  106a;  addi¬ 
tions,  60  125d;  138  139a-b  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  iv,  320b-c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  364a-367a  passim 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  505a-511b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  30b- 
32a;  bk  vi,  168c-d;  bk  xii,  398b-d 


986 

7.  Law  and  the  state 

la.  The  distinction  between  government  by 
men  and  government  by  laws:  the  nature 
of  constitutional  or  political  law 

5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [681-710]  88b-c 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [907-931] 
122d-123a 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

5  Aristophanes:  Wasps  [463-507]  512d-513c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-d;  bk  vii, 
233a-d 

6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian  War,  BKi,368c-d; 
bk  11,  396b-c 

7  Plato:  Statesman ,  598b-604b  /  Laws ,  bk  iii, 
667c-d;  bk  iv,  681b-682c;  bk  ix,  754a-b  / 
Seventh  Letter ,  805 d;  807a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  ch  6  [1 134^5— b8] 
382a-b;  bk  x,  ch  9  [1180^4-24]  434d-435a  / 
Politics ,  bk  1,  ch  1  [i252a6-i6]  445a-b;  ch  5 
[i254a34~b9]  448a;  ch  7  [i255bi5-2o]  449b; 
ch  12  453d-454a;  bk  ii,  ch  10  [i272a35~bn] 
468d-469a;  bk  iii,  ch  10  [128^29-38]  479a; 
ch  11  [i282bi-i4]  480b-c;  ch  15  [i285b34]-cH 
17  [i288a5]  484b-486c;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [1292^-37] 
491b-d;  ch  6  492b-493a;  ch  8  [i293b22-27] 
493c;  ch  10  [1295^-23]  495a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Cato  the  Younger ,  635a-b;  638b- 
639a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  36b;  bk  iii,  51b-c; 
61c  62a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  90, 
a  3  207a-c;  q  95,  a  i,  rep  2  226c-227c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  149d-150a;  part 
iv,  273a-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Henry  VIII,  act  i,  sc  ii  [91- 
101]  553d 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government  25a-81d  esp  ch  iv, 
sect  21  29d,  ch  vi,  sect  57  36d-37b,  ch  vii, 
sect  87-94  44a-46c,  ch  xi,  sect  137  56d-57b, 
ch  xviii,  sect  199-202  71a-72a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a;  7c- 
9a, c;  bk  iii,  12a-13c;  bk  vi,  33a-35a;  bk  xix, 
137c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323d-324a;  358b; 

361c-362a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  400a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  96d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 
401c;  436c-d;  451  b-c  /  Judgement,  586c 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  pas¬ 
sim 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  vi  [583- 
599]  16d 

43  Federalist:  number  33  107b-109b  passim; 
number  44,  146d-147a;  number  53,  167d- 
168b 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  340a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  260- 
271  82a-89c;  par  349  llld-112a;  additions, 
1 71  146b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 
198b-199c;  part  i,  213b;  part  ii,  271d:  part 
iii,  303a-b;  part  iv,  329b-c;  342b-c 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  780b-d 


7  to  7 c  yn 

lh.  The  supremacy  of  law  as  the  principle  of  38 
political  freedom 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [429-441]  262a-b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  38 
396c-d;  bk  iii,  438a-b 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iii,  672d-674d  j  3< 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  17  [1288^1-14] 

486d;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [1292^-37]  491b-d;  bk  v,  4i 
ch  9  [1310^5-36]  512c  /  Athenian  Constitu¬ 
tion,  ch  45  573d-574a  4 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d;  4 

CH  VI,  SECT  57-60  36d-38a;  ch  ix,  sect 
124-131  53d-54d;  ch  xi,  sect  136-139  56c- 
58a;  ch  xviii,  sect  202  71d-72a;  sect  206 
72c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  34c-d; 
bk  xi,  69a-b;  bk  xii,  85a-c;  bk  xv,  109c; 
112c-d;  bk  xxvi,  223c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  353d-355b  esp  354d- 
355a  /  Political  Economy,  370b-d;  375b-c  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  314d-315a,c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  398c-399c;  436c-d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [1-47]  la- 
28  passim;  [72-79]  2b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  11a, c; 
amendments,  v-vii  17b-d;  xm,  sect  i-xiv, 
sect  1  18c 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  30a-c;  number  9, 

47 b-c;  number  53,  167d-168b;  number  57, 
177d-178a;  number  84,  251b-253d 
43  Mill:  Liberty  267a-323a,c  passim,  esp  267b, d- 
274a  /  Representative  Government,  339d-340c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  208 
69c;  par  265  84b;  par  286  96c-97a;  additions, 

129  137c;  135  138c  /  Philosophy  of  History, 
intro,  170c-171c;  180c-d;  part  i,  230a-c; 
part  ii,  271d-272d;  part  iv,  321a;  342b-d; 
345a-b;  364b-c 

7c.  The  priority  of  natural  to  civil  law:  the  in¬ 
violability  or  inalienability  of  natural 
rights 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [450-460]  135a 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  13  [i373bx— 

17]  617c-d;  ch  15  [i375a25~bi3]  619d-620a; 
[I376a33-b3Il  621a-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b- 
162d;  bk  xix,  ch  21  524a-525a 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
aa  4-6  223d-226b;  q  95,  a  2  227c-228c 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  86c-87d;  90a-b; 
94b-95a;  part  ii,  115b-116a;  131a  c;  134c; 
138c;  142b-c;  153c;  part  iv,  273c-d 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  519a-520b 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95b 
35  Locke:  Toleration ,  20d-21a  /  Civil  Govern¬ 
ment,  ch  11,  sect  10-12  27b-28a;  ch  iii,  sect 
16-19  28d-29c;  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d;  ch  vii, 
sect  87-94  44a-46c;  ch  ix  53c-54d;  ch  xi, 
sect  135-140  55d-58a;  ch  xiv,  sect  168 
64b-c;  ch  xvi-xix  65d-81d  passim 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


987 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


Id  to  8 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  i,  le  d; 
2b  d;  bk  xv,  109b-110a;  lllab;  bk  xxvi, 
215b-217c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357 c-358b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  i,  393d-394d;  bk  ii,  397a-b;  399b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  52bc;  61b; 
bk  ii,  140b;  bk  iv,  228a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  408d-409c:  426b-429b 
esp  426b-c;  434a;  436a-b;  456b-457a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  esp 
[1-28]  la-b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S. :  amendments,  ix 
17d-d 

43  Federalist:  number  28,  97c;  number  43, 
143b-c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  465d-466b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  363c-364a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  66 
29a  c;  part  ii,  par  127  45b-c;  part  iii,  par 
323-324  107a-d;  additions,  43  123c  /  Phi¬ 
losophy  of  History,  part  iv,  362d-363a;  364d- 
365a 

Id .  Tyranny  and  treason  or  sedition  as  illegal 
acts:  the  use  of  force  without  authority 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iii, 
432b-c 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  ix,  744c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  10  [1281*19-28] 
478d-479a;  bk  v,  ch  10  [i3i3a8— 18]  515c-d; 
bk  vii,  ch  2  [i324b23~4i]  528d-529a 

14  Plutarch:  Poplicola,  77a-80d;  81d  /  Timole- 
on,  196c-197b  /  Lysander- Sulla,  387b,d-388c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii,  36b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  92, 
a  1,  rep  4  213c-214c;  q  93,  a  3,  rep  2  217b' 
218a;  q  95,  a  4,  ans  229b-230c;  q  96,  a  4,  ans 
and  rep  2  233a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  42,  a  2  584b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  101a-102c;  114d- 
115a;  115d'116a;  121bl22b;  144a;  147c;  150c- 
151a;  152b-c;  153c;  part  iv,  273a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V ,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [102- 
144]  540b-c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  298  227a;  325-326  230b- 
231a;  332  232a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xi,  sect  136-140 
56c-58a;  ch  xiii,  sect  155  60d-61a;  ch  xvii- 
xix  70c-81d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  361c-362a  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  i,  388d-389a;  bk  iii,  419a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  251d;  525d-526c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92d-93c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  439a-441d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  esp 
[25-30]  lb 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  iv  [37-44]  5d; 
v  [74-81]  6a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  ii,  sect 
4  15c;  article  iii,  sect  3  15d-16a 

43  Federalist:  number  16,  68b-c;  number  43, 
140c-d;  number  65  198a-200c  passim;  num¬ 
ber  74,  222b-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  274b, d  [fh  1] 


46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  278 
92c  93a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  328b 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  8d  lOd;  bk  xi, 
505a-511b;  epilogue  i,  668a-669d 

7e,  The  need  for  administrative  discretion  in 
matters  undetermined  by  law:  the  royal 
prerogative 

7  Plato:  Statesman,  600a-b  /  Laws,  bk  vi, 
705d-706c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  10  385c-386b 
passim,  esp  [ii37b26-3i]  386a  /  Politics,  bk 
iii,  ch  16  [i287a24~28]  485 d;  [i287bi5-25] 
486a  b  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  9  556c-d  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  1  [i354b4— 7]  593c 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, 
a  1,  rep  3  226c-227c;  q  96,  a  6,  rep  3  235a-d; 
q  97,  a  4  238b-239b 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  103c 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  94d-95a 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xii,  sect  147 
59a-b;  ch  xiv  62b-64c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73d-75b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  448a- b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  214 
71a-c;  additions,  134  138b-c 

If.  The  juridical  conception  of  the  person:  the 
legal  personality  of  the  state  and  other 
corporations 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  96c-98a,c;  part 
ii,  100c-102c;  104a-b;  117b-119a;  119d-120c; 
122b-124b  esp  122b-c;  130b-d;  132a-b;  151c- 
152a 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  368d-369a  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  392a;  393a;  bk  ii,  396d- 
397a;  bk  iii,  408b-409a;  412c 
42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  429b;  438b;  454a-c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  46 
23d-24a;  part  iii,  par  279,  93c;  additions, 
1 91  150a-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii, 
285b-d;  302d-303c 

8.  Historical  observations  on  the  development 
of  law  and  on  the  diversity  of  legal 
systems  or  institutions 
New  Testament:  Romans,  3:1-5:21  /  Galatians , 
3:i-5:i4 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6c;  14a-c;  bk  ii, 
77d-78b;  87a-b;  bk  iii,  96a-b 

7  Plato:  Critias,  484c-485d  /  Laws,  bk  iii, 
664b-670a  esp  666b-c,  668a;  674d-676b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  7-12  461d-471d 
passim  /  Athenian  Constitution  553a-584a,c 
passim,  esp  ch  27,  par  3-5  565b-c,  ch  63-69 
581d-584a,c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [1136- 
1160]  76a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  26a-b  /  Lycurgus  32a- 
48d  passim  /  Numa  Pompilius  49a-61d  passim 
/  Lycurgus-Numa  61b,d-64a,c  /  Solon  64b, d- 
77a,c  /  Poplicola,  81b-82a  /  Poplicola-Solon, 
86d-87b 


988 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(8.  Historical  observations  on  the  development  of 
law  and  on  the  diversity  of  legal  systems 
or  institutions .) 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  ii,  44b-c;  bk  hi,  51b- 
52a;  57b-58d;  61c-62a;  bk  iv,  67d-68a;  bk 
xii,  llla-d;  bk  xiv,  151d-152c;  bk  xv,  162c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iii,  par  13-14  16c- 
17a  /  City  of  God ,  bk  x,  ch  25  313c-314c;  bk 
xviii,  ch  11  477c-d;  bk  xx,  ch  4  532b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  4,  ans  223d-224d;  qq  98-108  239b-337d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  vi  [1-30] 
113c-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  144c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  47c-48a;  281a-283c; 
519b-520b 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  ii  [33-95] 
534b-535a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  95b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  374b-376a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws  la-315d  passim 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324c-325a;  330a-d; 
353d-355c;  366a-b  /  Political  Economy,  369c-d 
/  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  401d-402a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  51d;  175b-176a; 
616d-618d;  624b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71b,d-96d;  108a-c; 
210b-c;  403b-404d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  451d-452a 

43  Federalist:  number  2,  32a-d;  number  9, 
47b-d;  number  38,  121b-122b;  number  53, 
167d;  number  84,  252b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  295d-296b  /  Representative  Gov¬ 
ernment,  329d-330a  /  Utilitarianism,  467c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  204c-205b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  3  10a- 
12c;  additions,  176  147c- d  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  i,  229d-230a;  part  ii,  271d- 
272a;  part  hi,  290a;  296b-297a;  312c-d; 
part  iv,  345a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  292a-297a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  114d-115c;  131a-145c;  194a-b; 

195b-196d;  236c-238a;  241a-244b;  357a- 

358b;  364a-368b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  238c-243d 

9.  The  legal  profession  and  the  study  of  law: 
praise  and  dispraise  of  lawyers  and 
judges 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  1:12-17;  17:8-13 
/  I  Samuel,  8:3 —(D)  I  Kings,  8:3  /  Isaiah, 
1:21-26 — (D)  Isaias,  1:21-26  /  Jeremiah,  5:26- 
29 —(D)  Jeremias,  5:26-29  /  Micah,  3:9-12 — 
(D)  Micheas,  3:9-12 


9 

New  Testament:  Lube,  11:45-46,52-54;  18:1-8 
/  I  Corinthians,  6:1-9 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [428-475]  493d-494b 
/  Birds  [27-48]  542c-d;  [1035-1057]  555c-d; 
[1410-1469]  559c-560b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  95d-96b 

7  Plato:  Apology,  200a-c  /  Republic,  bk  iii, 
337b-338a  /  Theaetetus ,  528c-529a;  544b-c  / 
Statesman,  604c-605c  /  Laws,  bk  xi,  784a-b; 
bk  xii,  792c-d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  x,  ch  9  [u8obi2- 
n8ib24]  435b-436a,c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  1 
[I354&I3-I355a3]  593b-594a;  ch  12  [1372*17- 
21]  615d;  [i37^a33-35]  616a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  101c-102a;  bk  xiv, 
151c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  6  514b- 
515a 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [309-330]  164b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78b-c;  part  ii, 
132a-b;  135b;  150b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
85c-92c;  bk  iii,  204c-215c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  47c-48a;  238a-b;  283a; 
516c-520b 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  ii 
[83— 91:]  58c  /  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  iv,  sc  i 
425c-430b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  5b-6a;  94d- 
95a 

32  Milton:  Sonnets,  xviii  67b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iii,  ch  x, 
sect  12  294b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  73b-75a;  part  iv, 
152a-154a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  260a-b;  266b; 
374b-376a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  54b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  330a-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  314b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  244d-245d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  72d-73a;  75d-80b 

43  Federalist:  number  78,  233a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  157c-d;  191c-d;  209d- 
210a;  216c;  251d-252b;  281c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  3  10a- 
12c;  part  iii,  par  212  70d-71a;  par  215  71c-d; 
par  228  74d-75b;  par  297  99b;  additions, 
135  138c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1968-1979]  46b-47a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  295b-297a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  243c;  bk  xii, 
547b-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ix, 
247b-d 


Chapter  46:  LAW 


989 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For :  Other  discussions  bearing  on  the  kinds  of  law,  see  Constitution  2b;  God  7c;  Justice  ie,  10a; 
Liberty  ib,  3c;  Love  5K1);  Nature  2b;  Necessity  and  Contingency  5c;  Principle  4, 
4b;  Punishment  4c;  State  3b(2)~3c;  Virtue  and  Vice  4d(3);  War  and  Peace  1;  Will 
53(4);  World  ic;  and  for  the  comparable  distinctions  in  the  sphere  of  rights,  see  Jus¬ 
tice  6-6b. 

The  relation  of  law  to  liberty,  justice,  and  peace,  see  Democracy  4a;  Justice  io-ioc; 
Liberty  id,  ig;  Monarchy  4e(i);  Tyranny  5a;  War  and  Peace  11a,  11c;  and  for  the 
distinction  between  government  by  law  and  government  by  men,  see  Constitution  i  ; 
Monarchy  ia(i);  Tyranny  5-3 b. 

The  relation  of  law  to  duty,  virtue,  and  sin,  see  Duty  3,  5;  Education  4c;  Sin  i;  Virtue 
and  Vice  4d(3);  Will  8d. 

The  conception  of  the  common  good  as  an  end  of  government  and  law,  see  Good  and  Evil 
3d;  Government  ic;  Happiness  5-5^  Liberty  ie;  State  2f. 

Other  discussions  of  the  making  of  law,  see  Government  30-30(2);  Prudence  6b. 

The  factors  of  authority  and  power  in  lawmaking,  see  Government  id;  Tyranny  ia;  and 
for  law  in  relation  to  sovereignty,  see  Government  ia;  Liberty  ib;  Tyranny  3c;  War 
and  Peace  nd. 

Other  discussions  of  the  application  of  laws  to  particular  cases,  see  Government  3d~3d(2); 
Opinion  6b;  Prudence  6b;  and  for  the  problem  of  equity  in  the  application  of  law,  see 
Justice  iod;  Universal  and  Particular  6c. 

The  relation  of  law  to  custom  and  habit,  see  Custom  and  Convention  6b;  Habit  7. 

The  consideration  of  punishment  for  the  breach  of  human  and  divine  law,  see  Gov  fi;  Justice 
10c;  Punishment  4~4d,  5a~5e(2);  Sin  6-6e. 

Other  discussions  of  the  use  of  lawless  force,  and  of  the  right  of  rebellion  or  civil  disobedience, 
see  Justice  10b;  Revolution  6a-6b. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 


the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings 

Augustine.  On  the  Spirit  and  the  Letter 
Aquinas.  Summa  Contra  Gentiles ,  bk  iii,  ch  iii- 
121,  128-130 

- .  Quaestiones  Disputatae,  De  Veritate ,  q  i  6 

- .  The  Two  Precepts  of  Charity  and  the  Ten  Com¬ 
mandments 

F.  Bacon.  The  Maxims  of  the  Law 
Hobbes.  Philosophical  Rudiments  Concerning  Govern¬ 
ment  and  Society,  ch  2-4 

- .  The  Elements  of  Law,  Natural  and  Politic 

- .  A  Dialogue  Between  a  Philosopher  and  a  Student 

of  the  Common  Laws  of  England 
Spinoza.  Tractatus  Theologico-Politicus (Theological- 
Political  Treatise),  ch  4,  12 


follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 

Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  bk  iii,  part  ii, 
sect  XI 

- .  Of  the  Original  Contract 

A.  Smith.  Lectures  on  Justice,  Police ,  Revenue  and  Arms 
Kant.  Lectures  on  Ethics,  pp  47-70 
Hegel.  The  Philosophy  of  Mind,  sect  ii,  sub  sect 
a,c  (cc,a,/3) 

Freud.  Totem  and  Taboo 
II. 

Cicero.  De  Republica  (The  Republic ),  iii 

- .  De  Legibus  (The  Laws) 

Quintilian.  Institutio  Oratoria  (Institutes  of  Oratory) , 
bk  v;  bk  vii,  ch  5-7,  10 
Gaius.  Commentaries 
Talmud 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


990 

Justinian.  The  Digest 

- .  The  Institutes 

Saadia  Gaon.  The  Bool {  of  Beliefs  and  Opinions , 

TREATISE  III 

Ranulph  de  Glanville.  The  Laws  and  Customs 
of  the  Kingdom  of  England 
Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed ,  part  iii, 
CH  25-53 

Bracton.  De  Legibus  et  Consuetudimbus  Angltae 
{On  the  Laws  and  Customs  of  England ) 

Njalssaga 

Legnano.  On  War ,  Reprisals ,  and  the  Duel 
Fortescue.  Governance  of  England 

- .  De  Laudibus  Legum  Angliae  {In  Praise  of 

English  Law) 

Saint-German.  Dialogues  Between  a  Doctor  of  Di¬ 
vinity  and  a  Student  in  the  Laws  of  England 
Vitoria.  De  Indis  et  De  Jure  Belli 
Soto.  Libri  Decern  de  Justitia  et  Jure 
Hooker.  Of  the  Laws  of  Ecclesiastical  Polity 
Suarez.  A  Treatise  on  Laws  and  God  the  Lawgiver 
Coke.  Institutes  of  the  Laws  of  England 
Grotius.  The  Rights  of  War  and  Peace 
Pufendorf.  De  Jure  Naturae  et  Gentium  {On  the  Law 
of  Nature  and  Nations) 

Vico.  II  diritto  universale 

Burlamaqui.  Principles  of  Natural  and  Politic  Law 
Blackstone.  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  England 
Vattel.  The  Law  of  Nations 
Voltaire.  “Crimes  or  Offenses,”  “Criminal,” 
“Law  (Natural),”  “Law  (Salic),”  “Law  (Civil 
and  Ecclesiastical),”  “Laws,”  “Laws  (Spirit  of),” 
in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 
J.  Wilson.  Wor\s,  part  i,  ch  i-v,  xii;  part  iii 
Jefferson.  The  Commonplace  Boo\ 

Bentham.  A  Comment  on  the  Commentaries,  sect 
1-12 

- .  A  Fragment  on  Government ,  ch  4-5 

- .  An  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and 

Legislation 

Austin.  Lectures  on  Jurisprudence 
- .  The  Province  of  Jurisprudence  Determined 


Whewell.  The  Elements  of  Morality ,  bk  vi,  ch  i 
Thoreau.  Civil  Disobedience 
Dickens.  Pickwic\  Papers 
- .  Blea\  House 

Trendelenburg.  Naturrecht  auf  dem  Grunde  der 
Ethi\ 

Maine.  Ancient  Law 

H.  Sidgwick.  The  Methods  of  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  6  ; 

Ibsen.  Pillars  of  Society 
Ihering.  The  Struggle  for  Law 

- .  Law  as  a  Means  to  an  End 

O.  W.  Holmes  Jr.  The  Common  Law 
Brentano.  The  Origin  of  the  Knowledge  of  Right 
and  Wrong ,  par  1-13,  37-49 
Pollock.  Essays  in  Jurisprudence  and  Ethics ,  ch  2 

- .  The  Expansion  of  the  Common  Law 

Dicey.  The  Relation  Between  Law  and  Public  Opin¬ 
ion  in  England  During  the  Nineteenth  Century 
Vecchio.  The  Formal  Bases  of  Law 
Kohler.  Philosophy  of  Law 
Duguit.  Law  in  the  Modern  State 

B.  Russell.  Proposed  Roads  to  Freedom ,  ch  5 

T.  Veblen.  The  Vested  Interests  and  the  State  of  the 
Industrial  Arts ,  ch  2 
Pound.  The  Spirit  of  the  Common  Law 
Cardozo.  The  Nature  of  the  Judicial  Process 

- .  The  Growth  of  the  Law 

Kafka.  The  Trial 

Vinogradoff.  Common  Sense  in  Law 
- .  Custom  and  Right 

Hocking.  Present  Status  of  the  Philosophy  of  Law 
and  of  Rights 

Malinowski.  Crime  and  Custom  in  Savage  Society 

C.  K.  Allen.  Law  in  the  Maying 

Dewey.  “Logical  Method  and  Law,”  “Nature  and 
Reason  in  Law,”  in  Philosophy  and  Civilization 
F.  Cohen.  Ethical  Systems  and  Legal  Ideals 
M.  R.  Cohen.  Reason  and  Nature ,  bk  iii,  ch  4 

- .  Law  and  the  Social  Order 

A.  J.  Carlyle.  Political  Liberty 

Maritain.  The  Rights  of  Man  and  Natural  Law 

Kelsen.  General  Theory  of  Law  and  State 


Chapter  47:  LIBERTY 


INTRODUCTION 


E1FRTY  and  law,  liberty  and  justice,  lib¬ 
erty  and  equality — the  familiar  connec¬ 
tion  of  these  terms  breeds  neglect  of  the  mean¬ 
ing  they  confer  upon  one  another  through 
association.  A  few  simple  questions  may  help 
to  restore  the  significance  of  these  relationships. 
Are  men  free  when  their  actions  are  regulated 
by  law  or  coercion  ?  Does  liberty  consist  in  do¬ 
ing  whatever  one  pleases  or  whatever  one  has 
the  power  to  do,  or  is  one  required  by  justice  to 
abstain  from  injury  to  others?  Do  considera¬ 
tions  of  justice  draw  the  line  between  liberty 
and  license?  Can  there  be  liberty  apart  from 
equality  and  perhaps  also  fraternity? 

Other  questions  immediately  suggest  them¬ 
selves.  Does  not  the  rule  of  law  secure  liberty  to 
the  governed?  Is  not  slavery  the  condition  of 
those  who  are  ruled  tyrannically  or  lawlessly? 
Does  it  make  a  difference  to  freedom  whether 
the  law  or  the  constitution  is  just?  Or  is  that 
indifferent  because  government  itself  is  the 
impediment  to  liberty?  Does  liberty  increase 
as  the  scope  of  government  dwindles  and  reach 
fullness  only  with  anarchy  or  when  men  live  in 
a  state  of  nature  ? 

Yet  are  not  some  forms  of  government  said 
to  be  fitting  and  some  uncongenial  to  free 
men?  Do  all  men  have  a  right  to  freedom,  or 
only  some?  Are  some  men  by  nature  free  and 
some  slave?  Does  such  a  differentiation  imply 
both  equality  and  inequality  in  human  nature 
with,  as  a  consequence,  equality  and  inequality 
in  status  or  treatment?  What  implications  for 
law,  justice,  and  equality  has  the  distinction 
between  free  societies  and  dependent  or  sub¬ 
ject  communities? 

As  Tolstoy  points  out,  the  variety  of  ques¬ 
tions  which  can  be  asked  about  liberty  indi¬ 
cates  the  variety  of  subject  matters  or  sciences 
in  which  the  problems  of  freedom  are  differ¬ 
ently  raised.  “What  is  sin,  the  conception  of 


which  arises  from  the  consciousness  of  man’s 
freedom?  That  is  a  question  for  theology  .  .  . 
What  is  man’s  responsibility  to  society,  the 
conception  of  which  results  from  the  concep¬ 
tion  of  freedom?  That  is  a  question  for  juris¬ 
prudence  .  .  .  What  is  conscience  and  the  per¬ 
ception  of  right  and  wrong  in  actions  that  fol¬ 
low  from  the  consciousness  of  freedom  ?  That  is 
a  question  for  ethics  .  .  .  How  should  the  past 
life  of  nations  and  of  humanity  be  regarded — 
as  the  result  of  the  free,  or  as  the  result  of  the 
constrained,  activity  of  man  ?  That  is  a  question 
for  history.” 

The  great  traditional  issues  of  liberty  seem 
to  be  stated  by  these  questions.  From  the  fact 
that  most,  perhaps  all,  of  these  questions  elicit 
opposite  answers  from  the  great  books,  it  might 
be  supposed  that  there  are  as  many  basic  issues 
as  there  are  questions  of  this  sort.  But  the 
answers  to  certain  questions  presuppose  an¬ 
swers  to  others.  Furthermore,  the  meaning  of 
liberty  or  freedom  or  independence  is  not  the 
same  throughout  the  questions  we  have  con¬ 
sidered.  Answers  which  appear  to  be  inconsist¬ 
ent  may  not  be  so  when  the  meanings  involved 
in  their  formulation  are  distinguished.  We  must, 
therefore,  find  the  roots  of  the  several  distinct 
doctrines  of  liberty  in  order  to  separate  real 
issues  from  verbal  conflicts. 

The  historians  report  the  age-old  struggle  on 
the  part  of  men  and  of  states  for  liberty  or  in¬ 
dependence.  History  as  a  development  of  the 
spirit  does  not  begin,  according  to  Hegel,  until 
this  struggle  first  appears.  “The  History  of  the 
world,”  he  writes,  “is  none  other  than  the 
progress  of  the  consciousness  of  Freedom,” 
which  does  not  reach  its  climax  until  freedom  is 
universally  achieved.  But  though  freedom  is 
its  product,  history,  in  Hegel’s  view,  is  not  a 
work  of  freedom,  but  “involves  an  absolute  ne- 


991 


992 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


cessity.”  Each  stage  of  its  development  occurs 
inevitably. 

Other  historians  see  man  as  free  to  work  out 
his  destiny,  and  look  upon  the  great  crises  of 
civilization  as  turning  points  at  which  free  men, 
that  is,  men  having  free  will,  exercise  a  free 
choice  for  better  or  for  worse.  “Whether  we 
speak  of  the  migration  of  the  peoples  and  the 
incursions  of  the  barbarians,  or  of  the  decrees  of 
Napoleon  III,  or  of  someone’s  action  an  hour 
ago  in  choosing  one  direction  out  of  several 
for  his  walk,  we  are  unconscious  of  any  con¬ 
tradiction,”  Tolstoy  declares,  between  freedom 
and  necessity.  “Our  conception  of  the  degree  of 
freedom,”  he  goes  on  to  say,  “often  varies 
according  to  differences  in  the  point  of  view 
from  which  we  regard  the  event,  but  every 
human  action  appears  to  us  as  a  certain  combi¬ 
nation  of  freedom  and  inevitability.  In  every 
action  we  examine  we  see  a  certain  measure 
of  freedom  and  a  certain  measure  of  inevi¬ 
tability.  And  always  the  more  freedom  we 
see  in  any  action  the  less  inevitability  do  we 
perceive,  and  the  more  inevitability  the  less 
freedom.” 

Accordingly,  neither  necessity  which  flows 
from  the  laws  of  matter  or  of  spirit,  nor  over¬ 
hanging  and  indomitable  fate  determines  the 
direction  of  events.  If  the  theologians  say  that 
nothing  happens  which  God  does  not  foresee, 
they  also  say  that  divine  providence  leaves  the 
world  full  of  contingencies  and  man  a  free  agent 
to  operate  among  them.  “Though  there  is  for 
God  a  certain  order  of  all  causes,”  it  does  not 
follow,  Augustine  says,  that  nothing  depends 
“on  the  free  exercise  of  our  own  wills,  for  our 
wills  themselves  are  included  in  that  order  of 
causes  which  is  certain  to  God,  and  is  embraced 
by  His  foreknowledge,  for  human  wills  are  also 
causes  of  human  actions.” 

These  matters  are  further  discussed  in  the 
chapters  on  Fate,  History,  and  Necessity 
and  Contingency.  The  mention  of  them  here 
suggests  another  meaning  of  liberty — that  of 
free  choice  or  free  will — and  with  it  issues  other 
than  those  involved  in  the  relation  of  the  in¬ 
dividual  to  the  state  or  to  his  fellow  men.  Yet 
the  metaphysical  questions  about  liberty  and 
necessity,  or  freedom  and  causality,  and  the 
theological  questions  about  man’s  freedom  un¬ 
der  God,  are  not  without  bearing  on  the  politi¬ 


cal  problems  of  man’s  freedom  in  society,  or  his  aC 
rights  and  powers.  The  fundamental  doctrines  ^ 
of  civil  liberty  certainly  seem  to  differ  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  conception  of  natural  freedom  on  \  ^ 
which  they  are  based.  Freedom  may  be  natural  >D 
in  the  sense  that  free  will  is  a  part  of  human  na-  aI 
ture;  or  in  the  sense  that  freedom  is  a  birth-  b 
right,  an  innate  and  inalienable  right.  It  may  be  $ 
natural  in  the  sense  in  which  freedom  in  a  state  |  ( 
of  nature  is  distinguished  from  political  liberty,  I 
or  liberty  under  civil  law  and  government.  i  1 

The  effort  to  clarify  meanings  requires  us  to 
look  at  the  three  words  which  we  have  used  as  j 
if  they  were  interchangeable — “liberty,”  “free-  I 
dom,”  and  “independence.”  For  the  most  part, 
“liberty”  and  “freedom”  are  synonyms.  Both 
words  are  used  in  English  versions  of  the  great 
books.  Though  authors  or  translators  some¬ 
times  prefer  one,  sometimes  the  other,  their 
preference  does  not  seem  to  reflect  a  variation 
in  meaning. 

In  English  the  word  “freedom”  has  a  little 
greater  range  in  that  it  permits  the  formation 
of  the  adjective  “free.”  It  is  also  adapted  to 
speaking  of  freedom  from  certain  restraints  or 
undesirable  conditions,  as  well  as  of  freedom  to 
act  in  accordance  with  desire  or  to  exercise  cer¬ 
tain  privileges.  In  consequence,  the  word  “free¬ 
dom”  is  more  frequently  employed  in  the  dis¬ 
cussion  of  free  will.  Though  the  traditional 
enumeration  of  civil  liberties  may  use  the 
phrasing  “liberty  of  conscience  or  worship”  as 
frequently  as  “freedom  of  conscience  or  wor¬ 
ship,”  “freedom  of  speech”  is  more  usual,  and 
“freedom  from  fear  or  want  or  economic  de¬ 
pendence”  does  not  seem  to  have  an  alternative 
phrasing. 

The  word  “independence”  has  special  con¬ 
notations  which  make  it  equivalent  to  only  part 
of  the  meaning  of  “freedom”  or  “liberty.” 
Negatively,  independence  is  a  freedom  from 
limitation  or  from  being  subject  to  determina¬ 
tion  by  another.  Positively,  independence  im¬ 
plies  self-sufficiency  and  adequate  power.  When 
we  speak  of  a  man  of  independent  means,  we 
refer  not  only  to  his  freedom  from  want  or 
economic  dependence  on  others,  but  also  to  his 
having  sufficient  wealth  to  suit  his  tastes  or 
purposes.  A  moment’s  reflection  will  show  that 
this  is  a  relative  matter.  It  is  doubtful  whether 


Chapter  47:  LIBERTY 


993 


absolute  economic  independence  is  possible  for 
men  or  even  for  nations. 

The  real  question  here  seems  to  be  a  meta¬ 
physical  one.  Can  any  finite  thing  be  absolutely 
independent?  The  traditional  answer  is  No.  As 
appears  in  the  chapter  on  Infinity,  only  a 
being  infinite  in  perfection  and  power— only  the 
Supreme  One  of  Plotinus,  the  uncreated  God 
of  Aquinas,  or  the  self-caused  God  of  Spinoza — 
has  complete  independence.  God  has  the  free¬ 
dom  of  autonomy  which  cannot  belong  to  finite 
things.  There  is,  however,  another  sense  of 
divine  freedom  which  Aquinas  affirms  and  both 
Plotinus  and  Spinoza  deny.  That  is  freedom  of 
choice. 

“God  does  not  act  from  freedom  of  will,” 
Spinoza  writes;  yet  God  alone  acts  as  a  free 
cause,  for  God  alone  “exists  from  the  necessity 
of  his  own  nature  and  is  determined  to  action 
by  himself  alone.”  The  divine  freedom  consists 
in  God’s  self-determination  which,  for  Spinoza, 
does  not  exclude  necessity.  The  opposite  view  is 
most  clearly  expressed  in  the  Christian  doctrine 
of  creation.  The  created  world  does  not  follow 
necessarily  from  the  divine  nature.  “Since  the 
goodness  of  God  is  perfect,”  Aquinas  writes, 
“and  can  exist  without  other  things,  inasmuch 
as  no  perfection  can  accrue  to  Him  from  them, 
it  follows  that  for  Him  to  will  things  other  than 
Himself  is  not  absolutely  necessary.”  This  issue 
of  freedom  or  necessity  with  regard  to  God’s 
will  and  action  is  more  fully  discussed  in  the 
chapters  on  Will  and  World. 

The  metaphysical  identification  of  independ¬ 
ence  with  infinity  does  not  carry  over  into  the 
sphere  of  political  freedom.  Yet  in  one  respect 
there  is  an  analogy.  The  autonomous  is  that 
which  is  a  law  unto  itself.  It  admits  no  superior 
authority.  When  in  the  tradition  of  political 
thought  states  are  called  “free  and  independ¬ 
ent,”  their  autonomy  or  sovereignty  means 
that  by  virtue  of  which,  in  the  words  of  the 
Declaration  of  Independence,  “they  have  full 
power  to  levy  war,  conclude  peace,  contract 
alliances,  establish  commerce,  and  to  do  all 
other  acts  and  things  which  independent  states 
may  of  right  do.” 

Free  and  independent  states  do  not  have 
infinite  power.  There  is  always  the  possibility 
of  their  being  subjugated  by  another  state  and 
reduced  to  the  condition  of  a  dependency.  But 


though  their  power  is  not  infinite,  they  ac¬ 
knowledge  no  superior.  To  be  a  sovereign  is  to 
accept  commands  from  no  one. 

Since  autonomy  or  sovereignty  is  incompati¬ 
ble  with  living  under  human  law  or  govern¬ 
ment,  the  independence  of  sovereign  princes 
or  states  must  be  an  anarchic  freedom — a  free¬ 
dom  from  law  and  government.  This  seems  to 
be  the  view  of  Hobbes,  Locke,  Kant,  and 
Hegel,  all  of  whom  refer  to  the  anarchy  of  in¬ 
dependent  states  or  sovereign  princes  to  explain 
what  they  mean  by  the  “state  of  nature.”  Sov¬ 
ereigns  are,  in  the  words  of  Kant,  “like  lawless 
savages.” 

Applying  this  conception  to  individual  men, 
Hobbes  and  Locke  define  natural  as  opposed  to 
civil  liberty  in  terms  of  man’s  independence  in 
a  state  of  nature.  In  a  state  of  nature  man  had  a 
limited  independence,  since  each  man  might  be 
coerced  by  a  superior  force;  but  it  was  an 
absolute  independence  in  the  sense  that  he  was 
subject  to  no  human  government  or  man-made 
law. 

The  natural  freedom  of  man,  according  to 
Hobbes,  is  not  free  will.  Since  “every  act  of 
man’s  will,  and  every  desire  and  inclination, 
proceed  from  some  cause,  and  that  from  another 
cause,  in  a  continual  chain  (whose  first  link  is  in 
the  hand  of  God,  the  first  of  all  causes),  they 
proceed  from  necessity .”  Liberty  is  not  of  the 
will,  but  of  the  man,  consisting  in  this:  “that 
he  finds  no  stop  in  doing  what  he  has  the  will, 
desire,  or  inclination  to  do.”  The  proper  ap¬ 
plication  of  the  word  “free”  is  to  bodies  in 
motion,  and  the  liberty  it  signifies  when  so  ap¬ 
plied  is  merely  “the  absence  of  external  im¬ 
pediments.” 

The  natural  right  of  every  man  is  “the  liber¬ 
ty  each  man  has  to  use  his  own  power  ...  for 
the  preservation  of  his  own  nature,  that  is  to 
say,  of  his  own  life  .  .  .  and  consequently  of 
doing  anything  which  in  his  own  judgment  and 
reason  he  shall  conceive  to  be  the  aptest  means 
thereunto.”  This  liberty  or  natural  right  be¬ 
longs  to  man  only  in  a  state  of  nature.  When 
men  leave  the  state  of  nature  and  enter  the 
commonwealth,  they  surrender  this  natural 
liberty  in  exchange  for  a  civil  liberty  which, 
according  to  Hobbes,  consists  in  nothing  more 
than  their  freedom  to  do  what  the  law  of  the 


994 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


state  does  not  prohibit,  or  to  omit  doing  what 
the  law  does  not  command. 

Locke  agrees  that  man’s  natural  liberty  is  not 
the  freedom  of  his  will  in  choosing,  but  the 
freedom  to  do  what  he  wills  without  constraint 
or  impediment.  He  differs  from  Hobbes,  how¬ 
ever,  in  his  conception  of  natural  liberty  be¬ 
cause  he  differs  in  his  conception  of  the  state  of 
nature. 

For  Hobbes  the  state  of  nature  is  a  state  of 
war;  the  notions  of  right  and  wrong,  justice  and 
injustice,  can  have  no  place  in  it.  “Where  there 
is  no  common  power,  there  is  no  law;  where  no 
law,  no  injustice.”  The  liberty  which  sovereign 
states  now  have  is  the  same  as  “that  which 
every  man  should  have  if  there  were  no  civil 
laws,  nor  commonwealth  at  all.  And  the  effects 
of  it  also  are  the  same.  For  as  amongst  master¬ 
less  men,  there  is  perpetual  war  of  every  man 
against  his  neighbor  ...  so  in  states  and  com¬ 
monwealths  not  dependent  on  one  another, 
every  commonwealth  has  an  absolute  liberty 
to  do  what  it  shall  judge  .  .  .  most  conducing  to 
its  benefit.” 

For  Locke  the  state  of  nature  is  not  a  state  of 
war,  but  a  natural  as  opposed  to  a  civil  society, 
that  is,  a  society  in  which  men  live  together 
under  natural  rather  than  under  civil  law.  Men 
who  live  in  this  condition  are  “in  a  state  of 
perfect  freedom  to  order  their  actions  and  dis¬ 
pose  of  their  possessions  as  they  think  fit,  with¬ 
in  the  bounds  of  the  law  of  nature.”  This  is  a 
limited,  not  an  absolute  freedom;  or,  as  Locke 
says,  “though  this  be  a  state  of  liberty,  yet  it  is 
not  a  state  of  license.”  The  line  between  liberty 
and  license  is  drawn  by  the  precepts  of  the 
natural  law.  The  difference,  then,  between 
natural  and  civil  liberty  lies  in  this.  Natural 
liberty  consists  in  being  “free  from  any  supe¬ 
rior  power  on  earth,”  or  not  being  “under  the 
will  or  legislative  authority  of  man.”  Only  the 
rules  of  natural  law  limit  freedom  of  action. 
Civil  liberty,  or  liberty  under  civil  law,  consists 
in  being  “under  no  other  legislative  power  but 
that  established  by  consent.”  It  is  a  freedom 
for  the  individual  to  follow  his  own  will  in  all 
matters  not  prescribed  by  the  law  of  the  state. 

In  the  arguments  for  and  against  free  will, 
one  view  regards  free  will  as  incompatible  with 
the  principle  of  causality,  natural  necessity,  or 


God’s  omnipotence;  the  other  conceives  free 
choice  as  falling  within  the  order  of  nature  or 
causality  and  under  God’s  providence.  We 
shall  not  consider  these  alternatives  in  this 
chapter,  since  this  issue  is  reserved  for  the  chap¬ 
ter  on  Will. 

Yet  one  thing  is  clear  for  the  present  con¬ 
sideration  of  political  liberty.  If  the  statement 
that  men  are  born  free  means  that  it  is  a  prop¬ 
erty  of  their  rational  natures  to  possess  a  free 
will,  then  they  do  not  lose  their  innate  freedom 
when  they  live  in  civil  society.  Government 
may  interfere  with  a  man’s  actions,  but  it  can¬ 
not  coerce  his  will.  Government  can  go  no 
further  than  to  regulate  the  expression  of  man’s 
freedom  in  external  actions. 

Nor  is  the  range  of  free  will  limited  by  law. 
As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Law,  any  law — 
moral  or  civil,  natural  or  positive — which  di¬ 
rects  human  conduct  can  be  violated.  It  leaves 
man  free  to  disobey  it  and  take  the  conse¬ 
quences.  But  if  the  rule  is  good  or  just,  then  the 
act  which  transgresses  it  must  have  the  opposite 
quality.  The  freedom  of  a  free  will  is  therefore 
morally  indifferent.  It  can  be  exercised  to  do 
either  good  or  evil.  We  use  our  freedom  prop¬ 
erly,  says  Augustine,  when  we  act  virtuously; 
we  misuse  it  when  we  choose  to  act  viciously. 
“The  will,”  he  writes,  “is  then  truly  free,  when 
it  is  not  the  slave  of  vices  and  sins.” 

Those  who  conceive  the  natural  moral  law  as 
stating  the  precepts  of  virtue  or  the  commands 
of  duty  and  who,  in  addition,  regard  every 
concrete  act  which  proceeds  from  a  free  choice 
of  the  will  as  either  good  or  bad — never  indif¬ 
ferent — find  that  the  distinction  between  lib¬ 
erty  and  license  applies  to  every  free  act.  The 
meaning  of  this  distinction  is  the  same  as  that 
between  freedom  properly  used  and  freedom 
misused.  Furthermore,  since  there  is  no  good 
act  which  is  not  prescribed  by  the  moral  law, 
the  whole  of  liberty,  as  opposed  to  license, 
consists  in  doing  what  that  moral  law  com¬ 
mands. 

These  considerations  affect  the  problem  of 
political  liberty,  especially  on  the  question 
whether  the  spheres  of  law  and  liberty  are 
separate,  or  even  opposed.  One  view,  as  we 
have  seen,  is  that  the  area  of  civil  liberty  lies 
outside  the  realm  of  acts  regulated  by  law.  To 
break  the  law  may  be  criminal  license,  but  to 


Chapter  47:  LIBERTY 


995 


obey  it  is  not  to  be  free.  The  sphere  of  liberty 
increases  as  the  scope  or  stringency  of  law 
diminishes. 

The  opposite  view  does  not  regard  freedom 
as  freedom  from  law.  “Freedom,”  Hegel  main¬ 
tains,  ‘‘is  nothing  but  the  recognition  and 
adoption  of  such  universal  substantial  objects 
as  Right  and  Law.”  All  that  matters  in  the 
relation  between  liberty  and  law  is  whether  the 
law  is  just  and  whether  a  man  is  virtuous.  If 
the  law  is  just,  then  it  does  not  compel  a  just 
man  to  do  what  he  would  not  freely  elect  to  do 
even  if  the  law  did  not  exist.  Only  the  criminal 
is  coerced  or  restrained  by  good  laws.  To  say 
that  such  impediment  to  action  destroys  free¬ 
dom  would  be  to  deny  the  distinction  between 
liberty  and  license. 

Nevertheless,  liberty  can  be  abridged  by 
law.  That  is  precisely  the  problem  of  the  good 
man  living  under  unjust  laws.  If,  as  Montes¬ 
quieu  says,  “liberty  can  consist  only  in  the 
power  of  doing  what  we  ought  to  will,  and  in 
not  being  constrained  to  do  what  we  ought  not 
to  will,”  then  governments  and  laws  interfere 
1  with  liberty  when  they  command  or  prohibit 
acts  contrary  to  the  free  choice  of  a  good  man. 

The  conception  of  freedom  as  the  condition 
of  those  who  are  rightly  governed — who  are 
commanded  to  do  only  what  they  would  do 
anyway — seems  to  be  analogically  present  in 
Spinoza’s  theory  of  human  bondage  and  human 
freedom.  It  is  there  accompanied  by  a  denial  of 
the  will’s  freedom  of  choice. 

According  to  Spinoza  human  action  is  caus¬ 
ally  determined  by  one  of  two  factors  in  man’s 
nature — the  passions  or  reason.  When  man  is 
governed  by  his  passions,  he  is  in  “bondage,  for 
a  man  under  their  control  is  not  his  own  master, 
but  is  mastered  by  fortune,  in  whose  power  he 
is,  so  that  he  is  often  forced  to  follow  the  worse, 
i  although  he  sees  the  better  before  him.”  When 
man  is  governed  by  reason  he  is  free,  for  he 
“does  the  will  of  no  one  but  himself,  and  does 
those  things  only  which  he  knows  are  of  great¬ 
est  importance  in  life,  and  which  he  therefore 
desires  above  all  things.”  The  man  who  acts 
under  the  influence  of  the  passions  acts  in  terms 
of  inadequate  ideas  and  in  the  shadow  of  error 
or  ignorance.  When  reason  rules,  man  acts  with 
adequate  knowledge  and  in  the  light  of  truth. 

So,  too,  in  the  theory  of  Augustine  and 


Aquinas,  the  virtuous  man  is  morally  or  spir¬ 
itually  free  because  human  reason  has  tri¬ 
umphed  in  its  conflict  with  the  passions  to  in¬ 
fluence  the  free  judgment  of  his  will.  The  rule 
of  reason  does  not  annul  the  will’s  freedom.  Nor 
is  the  will  less  free  when  it  is  moved  by  the 
promptings  of  the  passions.  “A  passion,”  writes 
Aquinas,  “cannot  draw  or  move  the  will  direct¬ 
ly.”  It  does  so  indirectly,  as,  for  example, 
“when  those  who  are  in  some  kind  of  passion 
do  not  easily  turn  their  imagination  away  from 
the  object  of  their  affections.”  But  though  the 
will  is  not  altered  in  its  freedom  by  whether 
reason  or  emotion  dominates,  the  situation  is 
not  the  same  with  the  human  person  as  a  whole. 
The  theologians  see  him  as  a  moral  agent  and  a 
spiritual  being  who  gains  or  loses  freedom  ac¬ 
cording  as  the  will  submits  to  the  guidance  of 
reason  or  follows  the  passions. 

On  the  supernatural  level,  the  theologians 
teach  that  God’s  grace  assists  reason  to  conform 
human  acts  to  the  divine  law,  but  also  that 
grace  does  not  abolish  free  choice  on  the  part  of 
the  will.  “The  first  freedom  of  the  will,”  Au¬ 
gustine  says,  “which  man  received  when  he  was 
created  upright,  consisted  in  an  ability  not  to 
sin,  but  also  in  an  ability  to  sin.”  So  long  as  man 
lives  on  earth,  he  remains  free  to  sin.  But  super¬ 
natural  grace,  added  to  nature,  raises  man  to  a 
higher  level  of  spiritual  freedom  than  he  can 
ever  achieve  by  the  discipline  of  the  acquired 
virtues. 

Still  higher  is  the  ultimate  freedom  of  beati¬ 
tude  itself.  Augustine  calls  this  “the  last  free¬ 
dom  of  will”  which,  by  the  gift  of  God,  leaves 
man  “not  able  to  sin.”  It  is  worth  noting  that 
this  ultimate  liberty  consists  in  freedom  from 
choice  or  the  need  to  choose,  not  in  freedom 
from  love  or  law.  Man  cannot  be  more  free  than 
when  he  succeeds,  with  God’s  help,  in  submit¬ 
ting  himself  through  love  to  the  rule  of  God. 

The  political  significance  of  these  moral  and 
theological  doctrines  of  freedom  would  seem  to 
be  that  man  can  be  as  free  in  civil  society  as  in  a 
state  of  nature.  Whether  in  fact  he  is  depends 
upon  the  justice  of  the  laws  which  govern  him, 
not  upon  their  number  or  the  matters  with 
which  they  deal.  He  is,  of  course,  not  free  to  do 
whatever  he  pleases  regardless  of  the  well-being 
of  other  men  or  the  welfare  of  the  community, 


996 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


but  that,  in  the  moral  conception  of  liberty,  is 
not  a  loss  of  freedom.  He  loses  freedom  in 
society  only  when  he  is  mistreated  or  mis¬ 
governed— when,  being  the  equal  of  other  men, 
he  is  not  treated  as  their  equal;  or  when,  being 
capable  of  ruling  himself,  he  is  denied  a  voice  in 
his  own  government. 

The  meaning  of  tyranny  and  slavery  seems  to 
confirm  this  conception  of  political  liberty.  To 
be  a  slave  is  not  merely  to  be  ruled  by  another; 
it  consists  in  being  subject  to  the  mastery  of 
another,  /.<?.,  to  be  ruled  as  a  means  to  that 
other’s  good  and  without  any  voice  in  one’s 
own  government.  This  implies,  in  contrast, 
that  to  be  ruled  as  a  free  man  is  to  be  ruled  for 
one’s  own  good  and  with  some  degree  of  par¬ 
ticipation  in  the  government  under  which  one 
lives. 

According  to  Aristotle’s  doctrine  of  the 
natural  slave — examined  in  the  chapter  on 
Slavery — some  men  do  not  have  the  nature  of 
free  men,  and  so  should  not  be  governed  as  free 
men.  Men  who  are  by  nature  slaves  are  not  un¬ 
justly  treated  when  they  are  enslaved.  “It  is 
better  for  them  as  for  all  inferiors,”  Aristotle 
maintains,  “that  they  should  be  under  the  rule 
of  a  master.”  Though  they  do  not  in  fact  have 
the  liberty  of  free  men,  they  are  not  deprived 
thereby  of  any  freedom  which  properly  be¬ 
longs  to  them,  any  more  than  a  man  who  is  just¬ 
ly  imprisoned  is  deprived  of  a  freedom  which  is 
no  longer  his  by  right. 

The  root  of  this  distinction  between  free  men 
and  slaves  by  nature  lies  in  the  supposition  of  a 
natural  inequality.  The  principle  of  equality  is 
also  relevant  to  the  injustice  of  tyranny  and  the 
difference  between  absolute  and  constitutional 
government.  In  the  Republic  Plato  compares 
the  tyrant  to  an  owner  of  slaves.  “The  only 
difference,”  he  writes,  “is  that  the  tyrant  has 
more  slaves”  and  enforces  “the  harshest  and 
bitterest  form  of  slavery.”  The  tyrannical  ruler 
enslaves  those  who  are  his  equals  by  nature  and 
who  should  be  ruled  as  free  men.  Throughout 
the  whole  tradition  of  political  thought  the 
name  of  tyranny  signifies  the  abolition  of  lib¬ 
erty.  But  absolute  or  despotic  government  is 
not  uniformly  regarded  as  the  enemy  of  liberty. 

The  issue  concerning  the  legitimacy  or  jus¬ 
tice  of  absolute  government  is  examined  in  the 
chapters  on  Monarchy  and  Tyranny.  But  we 


can  take  it  as  generally  agreed  that  the  subjects  SCI 
of  a  despot,  unlike  the  citizens  of  a  republic,  do  ^ 
not  enjoy  any  measure  of  self-government.  To 
the  extent  that  political  liberty  consists  in  some  :: 
degree  of  self-government,  the  subjects  of 
absolute  rule  lack  the  sort  of  freedom  possessed 
by  citizens  under  constitutional  government. 
For  this  reason  the  supremacy  of  law  is  fre¬ 
quently  said  to  be  the  basic  principle  of  political 
liberty. 

“Wherever  law  ends,  tyranny  begins,”  Locke 
writes.  In  going  beyond  the  law,  a  ruler  goes 
beyond  the  grant  of  authority  vested  in  him 
by  the  consent  of  the  people,  which  alone  makes 
man  “subject  to  the  laws  of  any  government.” 
Furthermore,  law  for  Locke  is  itself  a  principle 
of  freedom.  “In  its  true  notion,”  he  writes,  it 
“is  not  so  much  the  limitation  as  the  direction 
of  a  free  and  intelligent  agent  to  his  proper 
interest,  and  prescribes  no  farther  than  is  for  the 
general  good  of  those  under  that  law.  Could 
they  be  happier  without  it,  the  law,  as  a  useless 
thing,  would  of  itself  vanish,  and  that  ill  de¬ 
serves  the  name  of  confinement  which  hedges 
us  in  only  from  bogs  and  precipices.  So  that 
however  it  may  be  mistaken,  the  end  of  law  is 
not  to  abolish  or  restrain,  but  to  preserve  and 
enlarge  freedom.” 

A  constitution  gives  the  ruled  the  status  of 
citizenship  and  a  share  in  their  own  govern¬ 
ment.  It  may  also  give  them  legal  means  with 
which  to  defend  their  liberties  when  officers  of 
government  invade  their  rights  in  violation  of 
the  constitution.  According  to  Montesquieu, 
for  whom  political  liberty  exists  only  under 
government  by  law,  never  under  despotism  or 
the  rule  of  men,  the  freedom  of  government  it¬ 
self  demands  “from  the  very  nature  of  things 
that  power  should  be  a  check  to  power.”  This  ( 
is  accomplished  by  a  separation  of  powers.  A 
system  of  checks  and  balances  limits  the  power 
of  each  branch  of  the  government  and  permits 
the  law  of  the  constitution  to  be  applied  by  one 
department  against  another  when  its  officials 
usurp  powers  not  granted  by  the  constitution 
or  otherwise  act  unconstitutionally. 

Yet,  unlike  tyranny,  absolute  government 
has  been  defended.  The  ancients  raise  the  ques¬ 
tion  whether,  if  a  truly  superior  or  almost  god¬ 
like  man  existed,  it  would  not  be  proper  for 
him  to  govern  his  inferiors  in  an  absolute  man- 


Chapter  47:  LIBERTY 


997 


tj  ner.  “Mankind  will  not  say  that  such  a  one  is  to 
lo  be  expelled  and  exiled,”  Aristotle  writes;  “on 
o  the  other  hand,  he  ought  not  to  be  a  subject — 
e  that  would  be  as  if  mankind  should  claim  to 
if  rule  over  Zeus,  dividing  his  offices  among  them. 
i  The  only  alternative,”  he  concludes,  “is  that 
.  all  should  joyfully  obey  such  a  ruler,  according 
-  to  what  seems  to  be  the  order  of  nature,  and 
I  that  men  like  him  should  be  kings  in  their  state 
for  life.”  Those  subject  to  his  government 
:  would  be  free  only  in  the  sense  that  they  would 
;  be  ruled  for  their  own  good,  perhaps  better 
than  they  could  rule  themselves.  But  they 
would  lose  that  portion  of  political  freedom 
which  consists  in  self-government.  Faced  with 
this  alternative  to  constitutional  government 
— which  Aristotle  describes  as  the  government 
of  free  men  and  equals— what  should  be  the 
choice  of  men  who  are  by  nature  free  ? 

The  ancient  answer  is  not  decisively  in  one 
direction.  There  are  many  passages  in  both 
Plato  and  Aristotle  in  which  the  absolute  rule 
of  a  wise  king  (superior  to  his  subjects  as  a 
1  father  is  to  children,  or  a  god  to  men)  seems  to 
be  pictured  as  the  political  ideal.  The  fact  that 
free  men  would  be  no  freer  than  children  in  a 
well  administered  household  does  not  seem  to 
Plato  and  Aristotle  to  be  a  flaw  in  the  picture. 
They  do  not  seem  to  hold  that  the  fullness  of 
liberty  is  the  primary  measure  of  the  goodness 
of  government. 

On  the  contrary,  justice  is  more  important. 
As  Aristotle  suggests,  it  would  be  unjust  for  the 
superior  man  to  be  treated  as  an  equal  and  given 
the  status  of  one  self-governing  citizen  among 
others.  But  he  also  points  out  that  “democratic 

I  states  have  instituted  ostracism”  as  a  means  of 
dealing  with  such  superior  men.  “Equality  is 
above  all  things  their  aim,  and  therefore  they 
ostracized  and  banished  from  the  city  for  a  time 
those  who  seemed  to  predominate  too  much.” 
Because  it  saves  the  superior  man  from  injus¬ 
tice  and  leaves  the  rest  free  to  practice  self- 
government,  “the  argument  for  ostracism,” 
Aristotle  claims,  “is  based  upon  a  kind  of  politi¬ 
cal  justice,”  in  that  it  preserves  the  balance 
within  the  state,  and  perhaps  also  because  it 
leaves  men  free  to  practice  self-government 
among  themselves. 

Since  the  eighteenth  century,  a  strong  tend¬ 


ency  in  the  opposite  direction  appears  in  the 
political  thought  of  Locke,  Montesquieu,  Rous¬ 
seau,  Kant,  the  American  constitutionalists, 
and  J.  S.  Mill.  Self-government  is  regarded  as 
the  essence  of  good  government.  It  is  certainly 
the  mark  of  what  the  eighteenth  century  writers 
call  “free  government.”  Men  who  are  born  to 
be  free,  it  is  thought,  cannot  be  satisfied  with 
less  civil  liberty  than  this. 

“Freedom,”  says  Kant,  “is  independence  of 
the  compulsory  will  of  another;  and  in  so  far 
as  it  can  co-exist  with  the  freedom  of  all  accord¬ 
ing  to  a  universal  law,  it  is  the  one  sole,  original 
inborn  right  belonging  to  every  man  in  virtue 
of  his  humanity.  There  is,  indeed,  an  innate 
equality  belonging  to  every  man  which  con¬ 
sists  in  his  right  to  be  independent  of  being 
bound  by  others  to  anything  more  than  that 
to  which  he  may  also  reciprocally  bind  them.” 
The  fundamental  equality  of  men  thus  appears 
to  be  founded  in  their  equal  right  to  freedom; 
and  that,  for  Kant  at  least,  rests  on  the  freedom 
of  will  with  which  all  men  are  born.  The  crite¬ 
rion  of  the  good  society  is  the  realization  of  free¬ 
dom. 

Kant’s  conception  of  human  society  as  a 
realm  of  ends,  in  which  no  free  person  should 
be  degraded  to  the  ignominy  of  being  a  means, 
expresses  one  aspect  of  political  freedom.  The 
other  is  found  in  his  principle  of  the  harmoniza¬ 
tion  of  individual  wills  which  results  in  the  free¬ 
dom  of  each  being  consistent  with  the  freedom 
of  all.  In  institutional  terms,  republican  gov¬ 
ernment,  founded  on  popular  sovereignty  and 
with  a  system  of  representation,  is  the  political 
ideal  precisely  because  it  gives  its  citizens  the 
dignity  of  free  men  and  enables  them  to  realize 
their  freedom  in  self-government. 

Citizenship,  according  to  Kant,  has  three  in¬ 
separable  attributes:  “i.  constitutional  free¬ 
dom,  as  the  right  of  every  citizen  to  have  to 
obey  no  other  law  than  that  to  which  he  has 
given  his  consent  or  approval;  2.  civil  equality, 
as  the  right  of  the  citizen  to  recognize  no  one 
as  a  superior  among  the  people  in  relation  to 
himself,  except  in  so  far  as  such  a  one  is  as  sub¬ 
ject  to  his  moral  power  to  impose  obligations, 
as  that  other  has  power  to  impose  obligations 
upon  him;  and  3.  political  independence,  as 
the  right  to  owe  his  existence  and  continuance 
in  society  not  to  the  arbitrary  will  of  another, 


998 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


but  to  his  own  rights  and  powers  as  a  member  of 
the  commonwealth,  and,  consequently,  the  pos¬ 
session  of  a  civil  personality,  which  cannot  be 
represented  by  any  other  than  himself.” 

Kant  leans  heavily  on  Rousseau’s  conclu¬ 
sions  with  regard  to  political  liberty.  Rousseau, 
however,  approaches  the  problem  of  freedom 
somewhat  differently.  “Man  is  born  free,”  he 
begins,  “and  everywhere  he  is  in  chains.”  He 
next  considers  two  questions.  What  makes  gov¬ 
ernment  legitimate,  “since  no  man  has  a  natu¬ 
ral  authority  over  his  fellow,  and  force  creates 
no  right”  ?  Answering  this  first  question  in 
terms  of  a  convention  freely  entered  into, 
Rousseau  then  poses  the  second  problem — how 
to  form  an  association  “in  which  each,  while 
uniting  himself  with  all,  may  still  obey  himself 
alone,  and  remain  as  free  as  before.”  This,  he 
says,  is  “the  fundamental  problem  of  which  the 
Social  Contract  provides  the  solution.” 

The  solution  involves  more  than  republican 
government,  popular  sovereignty,  and  a  partici¬ 
pation  of  the  individual  through  voting  and 
representation.  It  introduces  the  conception  of 
the  general  will,  through  which  alone  the  free¬ 
dom  of  each  individual  is  to  be  ultimately  pre¬ 
served.  Like  Kant’s  universal  law  of  freedom, 
the  general  will  ordains  what  each  man  would 
freely  will  for  himself  if  he  adequately  con¬ 
ceived  the  conditions  of  his  freedom.  “In  fact,” 
says  Rousseau,  “each  individual,  as  a  man,  may 
have  a  particular  will  contrary  or  dissimilar  to 
the  general  will  which  he  has  as  a  citizen.  His 
particular  interest  may  speak  to  him  quite  dif¬ 
ferently  from  the  common  interest.”  Neverthe¬ 
less,  under  conditions  of  majority  rule,  the 
members  of  the  minority  remain  free  even 
though  they  appear  to  be  ruled  against  their 
particular  wills. 

When  a  measure  is  submitted  to  the  people, 
the  question  is  “whether  it  is  in  conformity  with 
the  general  will,  which  is  their  will.  Each  man, 
in  giving  his  vote,  states  his  opinion  on  that 
point;  and  the  general  will  is  found  by  count¬ 
ing  votes.  When,  therefore,  the  opinion  that  is 
contrary  to  my  own  prevails,  this  proves  nei¬ 
ther  more  nor  less  than  that  I  was  mistaken, 
and  that  what  I  thought  to  be  the  general  will 
was  not  so.  If  my  particular  opinion  had  car¬ 
ried  the  day,  I  should  have  achieved  the  oppo¬ 
site  of  what  was  my  will;  and  it  is  in  that  case 


that  I  should  not  have  been  free.  This  presup-  . 
poses,  indeed,  that  all  the  qualities  of  the  gen-  y 
eral  will  still  reside  in  the  majority;  when  they 
cease  to  do  so,  whatever  side  a  man  may  take, 
liberty  is  no  longer  possible.” 

ji 

J.  S.  Mill  sees  the  same  problem  from  the  op¬ 
posite  side.  Constitutional  government  and  rep¬ 
resentative  institutions  are  indispensable  con¬ 
ditions  of  political  liberty.  Where  Aristotle  re¬ 
gards  democracy  as  the  type  of  constitution 
most  favorable  to  freedom  because  it  gives  the 
equality  of  citizenship  to  all  free-born  men, 
Mill  argues  for  universal  suffrage  to  give  equal 
freedom  to  all  men,  for  all  are  born  equal.  But 
neither  representative  government  nor  demo¬ 
cratic  suffrage  is  sufficient  to  guarantee  the 
liberty  of  the  individual  and  his  freedom  of 
thought  or  action. 

Such  phrases  as  “self-government”  and  “the 
power  of  the  people  over  themselves”  are  de¬ 
ceptive.  “The  ‘people’  who  excercise  the 
power,”  Mill  writes,  “are  not  always  the  same 
people  with  those  over  whom  it  is  exercised; 
and  the  ‘self-government’  spoken  of  is  not  the 
government  of  each  by  himself,  but  of  each  by 
all  the  rest.  The  will  of  the  people,  moreover, 
practically  means  the  will  of  the  most  numer¬ 
ous  or  the  most  active  part  of  the  people;  the 
majority,  or  those  who  succeed  in  making 
themselves  accepted  as  the  majority.” 

To  safeguard  individual  liberty  from  the  tyr¬ 
anny  of  the  majority,  Mill  proposes  a  single 
criterion  for  social  control  over  the  individual, 
whether  by  the  physical  force  of  law  or  the 
moral  force  of  public  opinion.  “The  sole  end  for 
which  mankind  are  warranted,  individually  or 
collectively,  in  interfering  with  the  liberty  of 
action  of  any  of  their  number,  is  self-protection. 

. . .  The  only  part  of  the  conduct  of  anyone,  for 
which  he  is  amenable  to  society,  is  that  which 
concerns  others.  In  the  part  which  merely  con¬ 
cerns  himself,  his  independence  is,  of  right, 
absolute.  Over  himself,  over  his  own  body  and 
mind,  the  individual  is  sovereign.” 

Mill’s  conception  of  individual  liberty  at 
first  appears  to  be  negative — to  be  freedom 
from  externally  imposed  regulations  or  coer¬ 
cions.  Liberty  increases  as  the  sphere  of  govern¬ 
ment  diminishes;  and,  for  the  sake  of  liberty, 
that  government  governs  best  which  governs 


Chapter  47:  LIBERTY 


999 


east,  or  governs  no  more  than  is  necessary  for 
.he  public  safety.  “There  is  a  sphere  of  action,’’ 
Mill  writes,  “in  which  society,  as  distinguished 
from  the  individual,  has,  if  any,  only  an  indi¬ 
rect  interest;  comprehending  all  that  portion  of 
i  person’s  life  and  conduct  which  affects  only 
himself,  or  if  it  also  affects  others,  only  with 
their  free,  voluntary,  and  undeceived  consent 
and  participation.  When  I  say  only  himself,” 
Mill  continues,  “I  mean  directly  and  in  the  first 
instance;  for  whatever  affects  himself,  may  af¬ 
fect  others  through  himself.  .  .  .  This,  then,  is 
the  appropriate  region  of  human  liberty.” 

But  it  is  the  positive  aspect  of  freedom  from 
governmental  interference  or  social  pressures 
on  which  Mill  wishes  to  place  emphasis.  Free¬ 
dom  from  government  or  social  coercion  is  free¬ 
dom  for  the  maximum  development  of  indi¬ 
viduality — freedom  to  be  as  different  from  all 
others  as  one’s  personal  inclinations,  talents, 
and  tastes  dispose  one  and  enable  one  to  be. 

“It  is  desirable,”  Mill  writes,  “that  in  things 
which  do  not  primarily  concern  others,  indi¬ 
viduality  should  assert  itself.”  Liberty  is  under¬ 
valued  as  long  as  the  free  development  of  indi¬ 
viduality  is  not  regarded  as  one  of  the  principal 
ingredients  of  human  happiness  and  indispen¬ 
sable  to  the  welfare  of  society.  “The  only  free¬ 
dom  which  deserves  the  name,”  Mill  thinks, 
“is  that  of  pursuing  our  own  good  in  our  own 
way,  so  long  as  we  do  not  attempt  to  deprive 
others  of  theirs,  or  impede  their  efforts  to  ob¬ 
tain  it”;  for,  “in  proportion  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  his  individuality,  each  person  becomes 


more  valuable  to  himself,  and  is  therefore  ca¬ 
pable  of  being  more  valuable  to  others.  There 
is  a  greater  fullness  of  life  about  his  own  exist¬ 
ence,  and  when  there  is  more  life  in  the  units 
there  is  more  in  the  mass  which  is  composed  of 
them.” 

Mill’s  praise  of  liberty  as  an  ultimate  good, 
both  for  the  individual  and  for  the  state,  finds  a 
clearly  antiphonal  voice  in  the  tradition  of  the 
great  books.  Plato,  in  the  Republic,  advocates 
political  regulation  of  the  arts,  where  Mill,  even 
more  than  Milton  before  him,  argues  against 
censorship  or  any  control  of  the  avenues  of  hu¬ 
man  expression.  But  the  most  striking  opposi¬ 
tion  to  Mill  occurs  in  those  passages  in  which 
Socrates  deprecates  the  spirit  of  democracy  be¬ 
cause  of  its  insatiable  desire  for  freedom.  That 
spirit,  Socrates  says,  creates  a  city  “full  of  free¬ 
dom  and  frankness,  in  which  a  man  may  do  and 
say  what  he  likes  .  .  .  Where  such  freedom  ex¬ 
ists,  the  individual  is  clearly  able  to  order  for 
himself  his  own  life  as  he  pleases.” 

The  democratic  state  is  described  by  Socrates 
as  approaching  anarchy  through  relaxation  of 
the  laws  or  through  utter  lawlessness.  Under 
such  circumstances  there  will  be  the  greatest 
variety  of  individual  differences.  It  will  seem 
“the  fairest  of  states,  being  like  an  embroidered 
robe  which  is  spangled  with  every  sort  of 
flower.”  But  it  is  a  state  in  which  liberty  has 
been  allowed  to  grow  without  limit  at  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  justice  and  order.  It  is  “full  of  variety 
and  disorder,  and  dispensing  a  sort  of  equality 
to  equals  and  unequals  alike.” 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 


PAGE 

i.  Natural  freedom  and  political  liberty  iooi 

i a.  The  birthright  of  freedom 

ib.  The  independence  of  men  and  the  autonomy  of  sovereigns  in  a  state  of  nature 

or  anarchy 

i c.  The  relation  of  liberty  to  free  will:  the  conceptions  of  liberty  as  freedom  from 

interference  and  freedom  for  personal  development  1002 

id.  The  supremacy  of  law  as  a  condition  of  political  liberty 

le.  The  restriction  of  freedom  by  justice:  the  distinction  between  liberty  and  license 
if.  The  freedom  of  equals  under  government:  the  equality  of  citizenship 
1  g-  The  juridical  protection  of  liberties:  bills  of  rights;  the  separation  of  powers  1003 
1  h.  Civil  liberty  under  diverse  forms  of  government 


1000 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


2.  The  issues  of  civil  liberty 

2 a.  Freedom  of  thought  and  expression:  the  problem  of  censorship 

2 b.  Liberty  of  conscience  and  religious  freedom 

2 c.  Freedom  in  the  sphere  of  economic  enterprise:  free  trade;  freedom  from  govern¬ 
mental  restrictions 

2 d.  Economic  dependence  as  a  limitation  of  civil  liberty:  economic  slavery  or  sub¬ 
jection 

3.  Moral  or  spiritual  freedom 

$a.  Human  bondage,  or  the  dominance  of  the  passions 

3 A  Human  freedom  or  the  rule  of  reason:  freedom  through  knowledge  of  the  truth 

3c.  Virtue  as  the  discipline  of  free  choice:  freedom  as  the  determination  of  the  will 
by  the  moral  law  of  practical  reason 

$d.  Freedom  from  conflict  and  freedom  for  individuality  as  conditions  of  happiness 

4.  The  metaphysics  of  freedom 

4 a.  The  relation  of  human  liberty  to  chance  and  contingency 

4 b.  The  opposites  of  freedom:  causality  or  necessity,  nature,  and  law 

5.  The  theology  of  freedom 

5 a.  Man’s  freedom  in  relation  to  fate  or  to  the  will  of  God 

5 b.  Man’s  freedom  and  God’s  knowledge 

5 c.  Man’s  freedom  and  God’s  grace:  the  freedom  of  the  children  of  God 

5 d.  The  divine  freedom:  the  independence  or  autonomy  of  infinite  being;  divine 
choice 

6.  Liberty  in  history 

6a.  The  historical  significance  of  freedom:  stages  in  the  realization  of  freedom;  the 
beginning  and  end  of  the  historical  process 

6b.  The  struggle  for  civil  liberty  and  economic  freedom:  the  overthrow  of  tyrants, 
despots,  and  oppressors 

6c.  The  struggle  for  sovereign  independence  against  the  yoke  of  imperialism  or 
colonial  subjugation 


PAGE 

1003 

1004 

1005 

1006 

1007 

1008 

1009 

1010 

101 1 


Chapter  47:  LIBERTY 


1001 


;e 

) 

REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283)  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  116a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah ,  7:45— (D)  II  Esdras ,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

*  For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 

Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  Natural  freedom  and  political  liberty 

la.  The  birthright  of  freedom 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  15 
521a-c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  96,  a 
4  512d-513c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i— ii,  q  94, 
a  5,  rep  3  224d-225d 

26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  i,  sc  ii  [90- 
99]  570b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  xii  [63-110]  320b- 
321b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vi  36a-42a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  53b-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xv, 
109b-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357c-d  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  1,  387c-390d  passim 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  401b-402a;  420d- 
421a;  421c-d 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [1— 15] 
la-b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  363c-364a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par 
57  26b-27a;  par  66  29a-c;  additions,  36 
122b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  171c- 
172b 


lb.  The  independence  of  men  and  the  au¬ 
tonomy  of  sovereigns  in  a  state  of  nature 
or  anarchy 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  iv,  271a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  84c-87b;  part  ii, 
99b-c;  113d-115a;  159c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii-vi  25d-42a 
passim,  esp  ch  ii,  sect  14  28b-c;  ch  vii,  sect 
87  44a-b;  ch  ix,  sect  123  53c-d;  sect  128 
54b-c;  ch  xi,  sect  136-137  56c-57b;  ch  xii, 
sect  145  58d-59a;  ch  xix,  sect  21  i  73d-74a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b-d;  bk 
viii,  52a;  bk  xxvi,  221c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  342c-345c;  352a;  353c- 
355b  passim;  356c-357a  /  Political  Economy, 
369a-b;  374a-b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393b-c; 
bk  ii,  398a-b;  bk  hi,  419a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  237c-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  222  b-c  /  Science  of  Right, 
402c;  408c-d;  433c-434d;  435c-436a;  452a-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  194 
66c-d;  par  333-334  109b-c  /  Philosophy  of 
History ,  intro,  I71c-172b;  part  iv,  317d- 
318a 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  780d 


1002 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1  c  to  If  1{ 


(1.  Natural  freedom  and  political  liberty .) 

lc.  The  relation  of  liberty  to  free  will:  the 
conceptions  of  liberty  as  freedom  from 
interference  and  freedom  for  personal 
development 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  59b;  86c-d;  part 
ii,  112d-113d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [246-257]  116b 
/  Areopagitica ,  394b-395b;  408a-b 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d; 
ch  vi,  sect  57-63  36d-38c  /  Human  Under¬ 
standing,  bk  11,  ch  xxi,  sect  7-27  180a-184c 
passim;  sect  57  193b-c;  sect  73  198c-199c 
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii,  div 
73  483c-484a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi,  69a-b; 

bk  xii,  85a;  bk  xxvi,  223c 
38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  370b-d  /  Social 
Contract ,  bk  i,  393a-c;  bk  iv,  426c-d 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386d- 
387a, c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  272d-273b;  293b-323a,c  pas¬ 
sim,  esp  312b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  161a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  121 
43d;  par  260  82a-83a;  par  299  99c-100b; 
additions,  1 17  135d-136a;  155-156  142a-b; 
158  142d;  177  147d 
50  Marx:  Capital,  237a 

Id *  The  supremacy  of  law  as  a  condition  of 
political  liberty 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [429-441]  262a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii,  233c-d 

6  Thucydides  '.Peloponnesian  War,  BKii,396c-d; 
bk  hi,  436d-438b  esp  438a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [ii34a24-bi7] 
382a-c  passim  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  6  [i279a8- 
22]  476b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [1 292^-37]  491  b-d; 
bk  v,  ch  9  [1310^5-36]  512c 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 
31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  73,  demonst 
446c 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d; 
ch  vi,  sect  56-63  36d-38c;  ch  ix,  sect  124- 
131  53d-54d;  ch  xi,  sect  135-139  55d-58a; 
ch  xviii,  sect  202  71d-72a;  sect  206  72c 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  34d; 
bk  xi,  69a-b;  bk  xii,  85a-c;  bk  xv,  109a-b; 
bk  xxvi,  223c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323d-324a;  355a-b; 
356b-c  /  Political  Economy,  370b-371c;  375b-c 
/  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  308b-c;  314d- 
315a, c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  96c- d;  161c-162a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 
398c-399c;  401c-402a;  436c-d  /  Judgement , 
586c 


43  Declaration  of  independence:  [1-47]  la- 
2a  passim;  [72-79]  2b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  11a, c; 
amendments,  v-vii  17b-d;  xiv,  sect  i  18c 

43  Federalist:  number  1,  30a-c;  number  37, 
118d-119b;  number  53,  167d-168b;  number 
57, 177d-l  78a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267b,d-274a  /  Representative 
Government,  339d-340c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  93 
36a-b;  part  iii,  par  194  66c-d;par2o8  69c;  par 
265  84b;  par  286  96c-97a;  additions,  129 137c; 
135  138c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  170c- 
172b;  173a-175c;  180c-181a;  part  ii,  271d- 
272d;  part  iv,  321a;  342b-d;  345a-b;  364b-c 


le.  The  restriction  of  freedom  by  justice:  the 
distinction  between  liberty  and  license 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396c- 
d;  bk  iii,  436d-438b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  314d-315d;  bk  iv, 
349a-d  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  674c-676c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  v,  ch  9  [1310^5-36] 
512c;  bk  vi,  ch  4  [i3i8b38-i3i9a5]  522c; 
[i3i9b27-32]  523b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  12,  119a-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  44d-45b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  57b-58d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  Q96,  a  4 
512d-513c 


23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  86c-87b;  part  ii, 
113b-116b;  138c 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure,  act  i, 
sc  11  [120-134]  176b-c;  sc  iii  [7-54]  177b-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2, 
435b-d;  prop  73,  demonst  446c 

32  Milton:  Sonnets,  xii  65a-b  /  Areopagitica, 
384a-386a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  12c-13b;  17c-18c  /  Civil 
Government,  ch  ii,  sect  4-6  25d-26c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  10a;  bk 
viii,  51a-52c;  bk  xi,  68b,d-69c;  bk  xii,  92b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  1,  393b-c;  bk  ii,  396d-398b 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  ii,  140b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  622d-623c;  653a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  398c-399c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  271c-d;  297a-b;  302d-323a,c 
passim 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  422c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  29 
19a-b;  partiii,  par  319  105b-106c;  additions, 
127  137b;  145  140b  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
part  iv,  321a;  328b;  342b-d 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  780c- 
781a 

If.  The  freedom  of  equals  under  government: 
the  equality  of  citizenship 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-462]  261d-262b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iii,  107c-108d;  bk 
vii,  232d-233d;  238c 


< 


: 


1003 


Chapter  47:  LIBERTY 


lg  to  2 a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  I Yar,  bk  ii,  396c- 
d;  bk  vi,  519c-520d 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iii,  6 74c- 6 7 6c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  v,  cii  6  [i 1 34*24— bi7] 
382a-c  /  Politics ,  bk  iii,  cii  i  471b.d-472c;  ch 
6  [i278b3Q-i279a22]  476a-c;  cii  16-17  485b- 
487a  passim;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [ia9ib30— 38]  491a-b; 
ch  10  [1 295*17— 23]  495a-b;  bk  v,  ch  9  [1310* 
25-36]  512c;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [13 17*40— bi6]  520d 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 
15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  vi,  97b-c 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  81, 
a  3,  rep  2  430c-431d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  114c-115a;  150c- 
151a; 156b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2 
435b-436a:  prop  73,  demonst  446c 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  iv,  sect  21  29d; 
ch  vii,  sect  94  46a-c;  cii  xi,  sect  136-139 
56c-58a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  v,  19a-d; 
bk  vi,  34d;  bk  viii,  52a-b;  bk  xi,  68b,d-69c; 
71  d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  326b-327a;  359a-b  / 
Social  Contract ,  bk  ii,  396d-398b;  405a-c 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fally  90d-92a  esp  91b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  398c-399c;  400b, d- 
402a, c;  408c-409c;  436c-d;  438b;  450d-452a 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  iv  [17-36]  5b-c 
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  lla,c; 

ARTICLE  IV,  SECT  2  [519-521]  16aj  AMEND¬ 
MENTS,  xiii-xv  18c-19b;  xix  19d 
43  Federalist:  number  8o,  236a-b 
43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  354b-355b; 
365b-366a  /  Utilitarianism ,  460a-c;  467a; 

474d-476a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  213b; 
part  ii,  271d-272d;  276a-d;  part  iv,  362d- 
363a 

Ig.  The  juridical  protection  of  liberties:  bills 
of  rights;  the  separation  of  powers 

7  Plato:  Laws ,  bk  iii,  671b-672c 
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34d-35d 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xii,  sect  143 
58c-d;  ch  xviii,  sect  202  71d-72a 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws ,  bk  xi,  69a- 
75b;  bk  xii,  84b,d-86d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  24b;  27a-b;  522c- 
523a, c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  81c-d;  403b-404c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  451a-d 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  iv  [17-36]  5b-c; 
V  [74H1  [93]  6a-b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  preamble  11a, c; 
article  1,  sect  3  [81-95]  12a-b;  sect  6  [143- 
151]  12c-d;  sect  9  [267-275]  13d;  [283-295] 
13d-14a;  sect  10  [300-303]  14a;  article  ii, 
sect  1  [331-334]  14b;  article  iii,  sect  3  15d- 
16a;  article  iv,  sect  2  [519-521]  16a;  sect  4 
16b-c;  amendments,  i-x  17a-d;  xm,  sect  t- 
xiv,  sect  1  18c;  xv  19b;  xix  19d 


43  Federalist:  number  9,  47a  d;  number  21, 
78d  79b;  number  45,  140c-d;  number  44, 
144d  145a;  146c-d;  number  47-51  153c-165a 
passim;  number  53,  167d;  number  57,  177d- 
178a;  number  58,  180d;  number  63,  192c- 
193c;  number  78-79  229d-234d  passim;  num¬ 
ber  80,  236a-b;  NUMBER8i,241a-242a  passim; 
number  83, 245d-247a;  number  84, 251a-253d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267d-268b  /  Representative 
Government ,  361b;  365b-366a;  369b-370a; 
401d-402b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  164c;  195c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  345a-b 

1  h.  Civil  liberty  under  diverse  forms  of  govern¬ 
ment 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [429-441]  262a-b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  107c-108c 

6  Thucydides  '.Peloponnesian  War ,  BKii,396c-d; 
bk  vi,  519c-520d 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  viii,  409b-d;  412a-413a  / 
Laws ,  bk  iii,  672c-676c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  v,  ch  9  [i3ioa25~36] 
512c;  bk  vi,  ch  2  [i3i7a40-bi6]  520d:  ch  4 
522a-523b  passim 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  14  254b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus ,  44d-45b 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  i,  189a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  114b-115a;  150c- 
151a;  part  iv, 273a-b 

32  Milton:  Areopagiticay  382a;  384b-388a 

35  I  .ocke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  vii,  sect  90-94 
44d-46c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  33a-35a; 
bk  xi,  68b,d-75b;  bk  xii,  84b,d-85a;  bk  xv, 
109a-b;  bk  xix,  135a-b;  142a-146a,c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  324a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract ,  bk  iii,  415b-d:  417b-c;  422a-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  32c-34a,c;  617a-b; 
632d-633a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  161c-162a;  222d- 
224a;  288a, c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  445b-c;  451b-c 

43  Federalist:  number  8  44c-47a  passim;  num¬ 
ber  47-48  153c-159a;  number  51,  164a-165a; 
number  53,  167d-168b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  267d-268b  /  Representative 
Government ,  338d-341d;  351d-352b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  299, 
lOOa-b;  additions,  155-156  142a-b  /  Philos- 
ophy  of  History,  intro,  173a-175c 

2.  The  issues  of  civil  liberty 

2a.  Freedom  of  thought  and  expression:  the 
problem  of  censorship 

Old  Testament:  Jeremiah ,  38:4-28— (D)  Jere - 
mias,  38:4-28 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  23:29-38  /  Luf^e, 
11:47-51  /  Acts,  4:1-31;  5:17-42;  16:19-24; 
18:12-16;  19:19;  21:27-32  /  /  Thessalonians , 
2:14-16 


1004 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  issues  of  civil  liberty .  2a.  Freedom  of 
thought  and  expression:  the  problem  of  cen¬ 
sorship.) 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [499—51 1]  135b-c;  [683- 
700]  137a 

5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  [366-384]  459c-d; 
[497-508]  460d-461a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  v,  172d-173b;  bk  vi, 
189c;  bk  vii,  217a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  397b- 
c;  bk  iii,  427a-c;  bk  viii,  580d-c 

7  Plato:  Protagoras ,  43b-c  /  Apology  200a- 
212a, c  /  Gorgias,  259d  /  Republic ,  bk  ii-iii, 
320c-334b;  bk  iv,  344b-d;  bk  x,  427c-434c 
esp  432d-434c  /  Statesman ,  601c-602c  /  Laws , 
bk  11,  653a-658b  esp  654d-656b;  bk  hi,  675c- 
676b;  bk  vii,  719d-721a;  727c-728b;  bk  viii, 
732c;  bk  xi,  782d-783b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  i,  sect  6  253b; 
sect  14  254b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  76a  /  Timoleon ,  212b-c  / 
Cato  the  Younger ,  632d;  636b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  21b-22d;  bk  hi,  56d- 
57b;  bk  iv,  67c;  72b-73a;  bk  vi,  87c-88d; 
bk  xiv,  152d-153c;  bk  xvi,  180d-183a  /  His¬ 
tories,  bk  1,  189a-b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  ii,  ch  9  154a-c; 
ch  12  155c-d;  ch  14  156c-157c;  bk  viii,  ch  13 
273b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  102d-103a;  150c- 
151a;  part  iv,  273c-d;  274c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  260b;  270c-d;  408b-410c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  13b-16c; 
117d-119d;  185b-188c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  7b-c 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  60d-61a 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica  381a-412b  esp  384b- 
389a,  398a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  hi, 
sect  20  319b-c;  ch  xvi,  sect  4  367c-368b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi,  div 
102-104  497b-498c;  div  114  503a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  75b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  32c- 
33a, c;  bk  xii,  89b-90c;  bk  xix,  146a, c 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  425d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  148a;  355b-a;  668d- 
671b  passim,  esp  669b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  300a-b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  220b-221b;  223a-c  / 
Science  of  Right,  425c-426a 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  amendments,  i 
17a 

43  Federalist:  number  84,  253a-b 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  272d-293b;  297b-298b  /  Rep¬ 
resentative  Government,  341a-c;  361b-362c; 
418c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  29a-b;  86a-b;  161a-b; 
221d-224a;  300c-301a  esp  301a-d  [£n  1];  313d- 
316d;  512c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  270, 


2 a  to  2b 

88c-89b;  par  319  105b-106c;  additions,  184- 
185  149a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  2l0d; 
213d-214a;  part  ii,  272c-d;  279d-280b 

54  Freud:  Psycho -Analytic  Therapy ,  125d-127a,c 
/  War  and  Death,  757b-c  /  New  Introductory 
Lectures,  879b-880b;  883d 

2b.  Liberty  of  conscience  and  religious  freedom 

Old  Testament:  II  Kings,  10:18-28;  ix:i8;  23— 
( D )  IV  Kings,  10:18-28;  11  :i8;  23  /  Ezra,  1; 
6-7 —(D)  I  Esdras,  1;  6-7  /  Nehemiah,  2:1-9— 
(D)  II  Esdras,  2:1-9  /  Daniel,  3;  6—{D) 
Daniel,  3:1-23,91-97;  6 

Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther ,  16— (D)  OT,  Esther , 
16  /  I  Maccabees,  1-2— (D)  OT.  I  Machabees, 
1-2  /  II  Maccabees ,  6-8— (D)  OT,  II  Macha¬ 
bees,  6-8 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:11-12;  10:16-23; 
23:34“38;  24:9;  26:59-66  /  Mark,  13:9-13; 
14:42-65  /  Luke,  11 :47— 51 ;  21 112-18;  22:66-71 
l  John,  5:16-18;  7:1;  15:18-16:3  /  Acts,  4:1-22; 
5:17-18,25-42;  6:9-14;  7:54-8:3;  9:1-5,23-24; 
12:1-6,18-20;  13:27-29,50;  14:5;  16:19-40; 
17:5-14;  18:12-16;  28:17-29  /Romans,  8:35-36 
/  I  Corinthians ,  4:9-13;  15:9  /  II  Corinthians, 
1:5-8;  11:24-26;  12:9-10  /  Galatians,  1  £-9,13- 
24;  2:1-5;  4:29;  5:10-12;  6:12  /  Philippians, 
1:28-30  /  /  Thessalonians ,  2:14-16  /  II  Thessa- 
lonians,  1:3-5  /  II  Timothy,  2:8-10;  3:10-12  / 
Titus,  3:10-11  /  Hebrews ,  11:35-38 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv,  137a-c;  138a-c 

7  Plato:  Apology,  204d-205c  /  Laws,  bk  x, 
769d-771b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  21c-d;  bk  ii,  44b-c; 
bk  xv,  168a-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  17  522b- 
523a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  partii-ii,  q  10, 
aa  7-12  431b-437d;  q  ii,  aa  3-4  440b-442b; 
q  12,  a  2  443b-444b 

22  Chaucer:  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,826-16,021] 
467b-471b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  149b-c;  part  iv, 
273c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  116d-117c;  208b-c;  324c- 
326b 

30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis ,  209a-b 

32  Milton:  New  Forcers  of  Conscience  68a-b  / 
Lord  Gen .  Cromwell  69a- b  /  Samson  Agonistes 
lI334-I379]  368b-369b  /  Areopagitica  381a- 
412b  esp  386a-b,  388a-b,  397a-b,  402a-b, 
404b,  411a-b 

35  Locke:  Toleration  la-22d  esp  2d-3a,  18c-20c 
/  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xvi,  sect  4 
367c-368b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  257a-258a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xix,  144c- 
145a;  bk  xxv,  211d-213d;  bk  xxvi,  218d-219a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  438d-439c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  344a-b;  345  b- 
346c;  347d-348a 


j  2c  to  la  Chapter  47: 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  12a-14a;  206b, d 
232b  passim,  esp  211a-b;  290d  291c;  324b; 
349a  c;  464b  d;  601d  603b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  227b  d;  285d; 
333b-335a,c  esp  335a, c;  480d-481a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  433b-c;  444a-c 

43  Articles  of  Confederation:  hi  5b 

43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  vi  [591- 
599]  16d;  amendments,  i  17a 

43  Federalist:  number  i,  30a;  number  51, 
164b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  270c-271a;  272d-274a;  276d- 
287b;  290a-292a;  307d  309a;  311a-312a  / 
Representative  Government ,  341a-c;  437d-438b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  221d-224a;  421d;  436d- 
438b;  512c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  66 
29a-c;  part  hi,  par  270  84d-89c;  additions, 

67  126d  f  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  193a-b; 
part  iv,  350d  351a;  353c-d 
48  Melville:  Moby  Did {,  60b-65a 
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  428b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
127b-137c  passim 

2c.  Freedom  in  the  sphere  of  economic  enter¬ 
prise:  free  trade;  freedom  from  govern¬ 
mental  restrictions 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  v30b-36a  passim 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xx,  148d- 
I  149a; 149c-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  42a, c;  51a-62a 
passim;  bk  ii,  142d;  bk  iv  182a-300d  passim, 
esp  194a-c,  287c-288c,  291d-294a,  300a-c;  bk 
v,  397a-c 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  441d-443b 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  312c-315c  /  Representative  Gov¬ 
ernment,  348c-349a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  179 
62b-c;  par  235-236  76a-c;  additions,  145 140b 
/  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  277b-c;  part 
iv,  345a-b;  364d 

50  Marx:  Capital,  79c-81a;  83d-84a,c;  127c-146c 
passim,  esp  130c-131a,  135d-138c,  141a-c,144a- 
146c;  194a  b;  236c-248d  passim,  esp  241a- 
242a,  243d-244a;  277d-278a,c;  316d-317c; 
367c-368b 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  420d; 
421d-422a;  426c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  573a-b 

2d.  Economic  dependence  as  a  limitation  of 
civil  liberty:  economic  slavery  or  sub¬ 
jection 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  5  [i277b34- 
i278a39]  475a-c;  bk  vii,  ch  9  [i328b34~i329ai] 
533  b 

14  Plutarch:  Poplicola-Solon,  87a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  85 
43c-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  20d-21d; 
bk  xiii,  99b-100c 


LIBERTY  1005 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  381a  b  /  Social 
Contract,  bk  ii,  405a-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  144b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73b 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  436d-437c 

43  Federalist:  number  10,  50b-51d;  number 
79,  233c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  339d-340c; 
382c  d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  243 
77b-c;  additions,  145  140b  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  iv,  352a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  138b;  366c-368b  esp  367c- 
368b 

50  Marx-Engels:  Cotnmunist Manifesto, 420b-d; 

424c;  426b-d;  428c-429c;  434c-d 

3.  Moral  or  spiritual  freedom 

3 a.  Human  bondage,  or  the  dominance  of  the 
passions 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  4:1-16;  6:5,12;  8:20- 
22  /  Numbers,  n  :4~35— iP)  Numbers ,  11:4-34 
/  II  Samuel,  11;  13— (D)  II  Kings,  11;  13  / 
Proverbs ,  5:22-23 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  18:30-31;  23:5-6; 
31  :i— 7, 29-30— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  18:30- 
31;  23:6;  31:1-7,39-40 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  26:41  /  Mar\,  14:38 
/  John,  8 :3 1— 36  /  Acts,  8 :i8-23  /  Romans,  1  :i8- 
32;  5:12-6:23;  7:8-8:21  /  Galatians,  4:1-10; 
5:1,13-26  /  Philippians,  3:18-19  /  /  Timothy , 
6:9-10  /  Titus,  3:3  /  James,  1:12-16;  4:1-7  / 
I  Peter,  2:11  /  II  Peter,  2  esp  2:19-20  /  I  John , 
2:15-17 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  120b-c;  128a-129c  /  Phaedo , 
224d;  232a-234c  /  Gorgias,  275d-280d  /  Re¬ 
public,  bk  1,  296b-c;  bk  iv,  347d-348d;  bk 
viii-ix,  411d-427b  /  Laws,  bk  iii,  669b-d  / 
Seventh  Letter,  801  b-c;  814b 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  12  [1 1 1 9a35— bi8] 
366a, c  /  Politics,  bk  iii,  ch  16  [i287a28-32] 
485d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [59-93] 
30d-31b;  bk  v  [1113-1135]  75c-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  i  105a-106c; 
ch  4,  109c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  18  161a-162b;  bk  iii, 
ch  15,  190d;  ch  22  195a-201a;  bk  iv,  ch  i 
213a-223d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  10  257d- 
258a 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  10  82b  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  15,  304c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vi,  par  18-26 
40d-43a;  bk  vii,  par  27  51d-52c;  bk  viii,  par 
10-11  55c-56b  /  City  of  God,  bk  iv,  ch  3 
190a-c;  bk  xiv,  ch  ii,  385d-386b;  ch  15  388d- 
390a;  bk  xix,  ch  15  521a-c  /  Christian  Doc¬ 
trine,  bk  1,  ch  24  630c-631a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  89, 
a  2,  rep  1  475a-d;  part  i-ii,  q  9,  a  2  658d- 
659c;  q  10,  a  3  664d-665c 


1006 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  Moral  or  spiritual  freedom.  3  a.  Human  bond¬ 
age, ,  or  the  dominance  of  the  passions .) 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  parti-ii,  q  72, 
a  2,  rep  4  112b-113a;  q  73,  a  5  123a-d;  q  77 
144d-152a  esp  a  2  145d-147c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  v  [25-45]  ?b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Manciple's  Tale  [17,130-144]  490b 
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  165c-166a;  232b-c; 488b- 

489b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [61-79] 
49c-d  /  Othello ,  act  iv,  sc  i  229d-233a  / 
Antony  and  Cleopatra ,  act  hi,  sc  xiii  [hi- 
116]  335d-336a;  [195-201]  336d-337a  /  Ww- 
/cr’i  Tale ,  act  ii,  sc  iii  [1— 192]  498c-500d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learnings  66c- d; 
78a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  2,  schol, 
397c-d;  part  iv,  pref-prop  18  422b,d-429d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [561-594] 244b- 
245a;  bk  xii  [79-110]  321a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  12  180d-181a;  sect  54  192b-c;  sect  69 
196d-197a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  239b 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393c 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  233b-c; 
part  iv,  348d-349b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 

164b-d 

54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  760d-761a 

3 b.  Human  freedom  or  the  rule  of  reason:  free¬ 
dom  through  knowledge  of  the  truth 

New  Testament:  John,  8:31-59  /  II  Corinthians , 
3:17  /  James,  1  csp  1:25 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  16c-18b  /  Phaedrus,  120b-c; 
128a-129c  /  Phaedo ,  230d-234c  /  Republic, 
bk  iv,  347d-348d;  bk  ix,  425c-427b  /  Theaete - 
tus,  528c-531a  /  Laws,  bk  i,  650a-b;  bk  iii, 
669b-d;  bk  ix,  754a-b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  v,  ch  i  [129^0-16] 
179a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [ii02bi3-i  103s 
3]  348a-c;  bk  iii,  ch  12  [1 1 1 9a35~ bi8]  366a, c 
/  Politics,  bk  1,  ch  5  [i254a33-b26]  448a-b; 
ch  13  [i26oa4~i5]  454c;  bk  iii,  ch  16  [1287s 
28-32]  485d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [1— 61] 
15a-d;  bk  v  [1117-1120]  75d 
12  Epictetus :  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  12  118d-120b; 
bk  ii,  ch  1-2,  139c-141c;  ch  18  161a-162b;  bk 

iii,  ch  7  182b-184a;  ch  15,  190d;  ch  22  195a- 
201a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a-223d;  ch  7  232c-235a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  5  257b-c; 
sect  16-17  259a-d;  bk  iii,  sect  6  261a-c;  bk 

iv,  sect  24  265c-d;  bk  v,  sect  9  270b-c; 
sect  26  272c;  bk  vii,  sect  55  283b-c;  sect 
68-69  284c-d;  bk  xi,  sect  18,  305b 

14  Plutarch:  Cato  the  Younger,  646b-648a 
17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  10  82b  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  3  344a-b 


3b  to  3c 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  24 
630c-631a;  ch  34  634b-c;  bk  iii,  ch  5-9  659d- 
661c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  81, 
a  3  430c-431d;  q  83,  a  i,  rep  i  436d-438a; 
q  95,  a  2  507c-508a;  part  i-ii,  q  24,  a  i 
727b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3  8b-9a;  q  56,  a  4  32b-33c;  q  57,  a  3,  rep  3 
37b-38a;  q  59,  aa  2-3  46c-48c;  part  ii-ii,  q 
183,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1  627d-628d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xviii 
[19-75]  80a'c  . 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  58c-d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  70a-c;  184b-d:  204d- 
205b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [61-79] 
49c-d  /  Othello,  act  i,  sc  iii  [322-337]  212b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  71d-72b; 
78a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  67-73  444d- 
447a;  part  v  451a-463d  esp  prop  3-4  453a-d, 
prop  20,  schol  457b-458a,  prop  42  463b-d 

32  Milton:  Sonnets,  xn  65a-b  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk 
xii  [79-110]  321a-b  /  Areopagitica,  404a-b; 
409b-410a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vi,  sect  56-63 
36d-38c  passim  /  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, 
ch  xxi,  sect  46-54  189d-192c;  sect  69  196d- 
197a 

38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  300b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  282  b- 
283d  /  Practical  Reason,  296a-d  /  Pref  Meta¬ 
physical  Elements  of  Ethics,  378c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  92b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  160c- 
161c;  part  11,  279d-280b;  part  iv,  315a; 
348d-349b;  350a-b;  361  b-c 

54  Freud:  Psycho- Analytic  Therapy,  126a-127a,c 
/  General  Introduction ,  625a-d  /  Ego  and  Id, 
702c-d;  715c-716a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures, 
838c-839b 

3c.  Virtue  as  the  discipline  of  free  choice:  free¬ 
dom  as  the  determination  of  the  will  by 
the  moral  law  of  practical  reason 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [no6b36-no7a 
6]  352c;  bk  iii,  ch  1-2  355b,d-358a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  iv,  ch  3,  190c; 
bk  xiv,  ch  11,  386b;  bk  xix,  ch  20  523d- 
524a;  bk  xxii,  ch  30,  617c-618a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  83, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  438a-d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii, 
q  183,  a  4,  ans  627d-628d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xviii 
[19-75]  80a'c;  xxvii  94c-96a  esp  [139-142] 
96a;  paradise,  xxxi  [73-90]  154a 

32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  391a-392a;  394b-395b 


3  d  to  4 b 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  275b 
/  Practical  Reason ,  302a  d;  307d  314d;  331a  b; 
332a-334b;  342a-c  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Ele¬ 
ments  of  Ethics ,  367d  368a;  378a  b  /  Intro. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  386b  387a, c;  390b, d- 
391a  /  Science  of  Right ,  420d-421a  /  Judgement , 
571c-572a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  29 
19a  b;  part  ii,  par  105-1 14  40a-42b;  part  iii, 
par  149  56b;  additions,  95  132b  /  Philosophy 
of  History,  intro,  171a-c;  part  iv,  328a;  362d- 
363a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
164a-165b 

3</.  Freedom  from  conflict  and  freedom  for  in¬ 
dividuality  as  conditions  of  happiness 

6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian  War ,  BKii,398a-c 

7  Plato:  L)W,  16c -18a  /  Gorgias ,  275 d- 276b/ 
Republic ,  bk  i,  295d-296c 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  iii,  ch  9  [1280*32-34] 
477d-478a 

12  Lucretius  ’.Nature  of  Things,  bk  v[i-54]61a-d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  i  105a-106c; 
ch  4  108d-110a;  ch  12  118d-120b;  ch  18  124a- 
125a;  bk  ii,  ch  1-2  138b,d-141c;  bk  iii,  ch  22 
195a-201a;  ch  24  203c-210a;  bk  iv,  ch  1-2 
213a-224b;  ch  4  225a-228a;  ch  6-7  230b-235a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  x,  sect  12  298c-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  viii,  par  10-30 
55c-61c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  20  523d- 
524a;  bk  xxii,  ch  30,  617c-618a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
182,  a  1,  rep  2  620b-621d 

22  Chaucer: Manciple's 7#/^ [17,1 09-123]  490a-b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  109a;  318a-319b;  469a- 
470a; 486b-489b 

29  Cervantes  :  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  379d-380a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  52-53  191d-192b 

42  Kant:  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
378c-379a 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  269b-c;  272d-274a;  293b-302c 
/  Utilitarianism,  451d-452a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  118 
136a-b;i58l42d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part 
ii,  276a-d;  part  iv,  320c-321a;  364d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  221  b-d;  bk 
xiii,  577a-578b;  bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk  xv,  630c- 
631a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  199b-202a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  9a-b;  20a-d  /  General  Introduction , 
593c';  623d-625d;  633d-634d;  635c 

4.  The  metaphysics  of  freedom 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  3  llOb-lllc;  a  8  116a-d;  a  10  117d-118b;  q 
22,  a  2,  rep  4  128d-130d;  a  4  131c-132b;  q  59, 
a  3  308b-309a;  q  83  436c-440b;  part  i-ii,  q  6, 


1007 

a  i,  rep  3  644d  646a;  q  10  662d  666a,c;  q  13, 
a  6  676c  677b;  q  17  686b,d-693d  esp  a  6 
690b  d;  q  21,  a  4,  rep  2  719d-720a,c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  dep  7  355b;  prop  17 
362b  363c;  prop  32-33  367a-369a;  appendix 
369b-372d;  part  ii,  prop  48-49  391a-394d; 
part  iii,  395a  d;  def  1-3  395d-396a;  prop  1-3 
396a  398c;  part  iv,  pref  422b,d-424a;  def  8 
424b  c;  prop  23  430c-d;  prop  66-73  444c- 
447a;  part  v  451a-463d  esp  pref  451a-452c, 
prop  40-42  462c-463d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  133a;  140b,d  l43a;  164a- 
172c  esp  169c-170a,  170c-171a;  190c-d;  234c- 
235a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  264d- 
265a;  279b,d-287d  /  Practical  Reason ,  291a- 
293c  esp  292a*293b;  296a-d;  307d-314d  esp 
309d,  310b-311d;  331c-337a,c;  340a-342d; 
351b-352c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
390b,d-391a  /  Judgement,  463a-467a;  571c- 
572a;  587d-588a;  606d-607c;  609b-610a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  ii,  par  139 
48d-49b  /  Philosophy  of  History  153a-369a,c 
esp  intro,  156d-190b,  203a-206a,c,  part  iv, 
368d-369a,c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  688a- 
696d 

4a.  The  relation  of  human  liberty  to  chance  and 
contingency 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  x,  439b-441a,c  /  Laws, 
bk  iv,  679a-b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  hi,  ch  3  [ui2ai8-bi2] 
358a-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-293] 
18b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  49c;  bk  iv,  69a-b; 
bk  vi,  91b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  8-10  81d- 
82b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  9  213b- 
215c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  82, 
a  2  432d-433c;  q  83,  a  1  436d-438a;  q  116,  a  1 
592d-593d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xvii  [13- 
42]  132b-c 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xxv,  35a-b 

42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  392d-393c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  15 
16a-b;  part  iii,  par  206  68d-69b;  additions, 
12  118a-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv, 
368d-369a,c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  158b-159a 

4b.  The  opposites  of  freedom:  causality  or 
necessity,  nature,  and  law 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  ix,  ch  5  [1047^5- 
1048*24]  573b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  3  [ni2ai8-bi2] 
358a-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-260] 

18b 


Chapter  47:  LIBKRTY 


Ab  to  5 a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1008 

(4.  The  metaphysics  of  freedom.  Ah,  The  oppo¬ 
sites  of  freedom:  causality  or  necessity , 
nature y  and  law.) 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iv,  69a-b;  bk  vi,  91b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  4  79d-80a; 
ch  8-10  81d-82b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  v,  ch  9-10  213b- 
216c 

19  Aquinas:  Sutnma  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  19, 
aa  3-9  110b-117d  passim;  q  41,  a  2  218c-219d; 
q  47,  a  1,  rep  1  256a-257b;  q  59,  a  3  308b- 
309a;  q  62,  a  8,  rep  2  323c-324a;  q  83,  a  i 
436d-438a;  q  103,  a  i,  rep  1,3  528b-529a;  q 
1 15,  a  6,  ans  591d-592d;  part  i-ii,  q  10  662d- 
666a, c;  q  13,  a  6  676c-677b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  50, 
a  3  8b-9a;  q  71,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  108b- 
109a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [61-96] 
lOb-c;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-114]  77b-78a 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  iv,  stanza 
i38~i54  106b-108b  /  Nun's  Priest's  Tale 
[15,236-256]  456b-457a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  113b-c;  part  iii, 
165c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  2 16c- 2 19a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  7  355b;  prop  17, 
schol  362c-363c;  appendix  369b-372d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [80-134]  137a- 
138a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  7-27  180a-184c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  viii  478b- 
487a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  337d-338a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  133a;  140b,d-143a;  164a- 
171a;  234c-235a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals ,  264d-265a;  279b,d-287d  esp  283d- 
285a  /  Practical  Reasony  292a-293b;  296a-d; 
301d-302d;  307d-314d  esp  310b-311d;  331c- 
337a, c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  386b- 
387a, c;  390b  /  Judgement ,  463a-467a;  571c- 
572a;  587a-5S8a;  607c;  609b-610a 

44  Boswell:  Johnsony  392d-393a;  549c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  139 
48d-49b;  part  iii,  par  186-187  64d-65c;  ad¬ 
ditions,  90  130b-d  /  Philosophy  of  History , 
intro,  160c-161c;  171b;  186b-c;  part  i, 
236a-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  I58b-159a;  209b; 
237a 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  7b-c;  42a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  viii,  303d-304b; 
bk  ix,  342a-344b;  bk  x,  389a-391c;  bk  xi, 
469a-472b;  bk  xiii,  563a-564c;  bk  xiv,  588a- 
590c;  epilogue  i,  645a-650c;  epilogue  ii, 
688a-696d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  84a-94b  passim,  esp  87b- 
90b;  291a-295b  esp  291a-b;  823a-826a  esp 
825b-826b  [fn  2] 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  13c  /  General  Introduction,  454b-c; 
462d;  486d 


5.  The  theology  of  freedom 

5 a.  Man’s  freedom  in  relation  to  fate  or  to  the 
will  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  3;  4:5-7  /  Exodus, 
4:21;  7-14  esp  7:3,  10:1,  14:17  /  Deuteronomy,  > 
11:26-28;  30  esp  30:15,  30:19-20  /  Joshua,  ] 
11:19-20;  24:14-24 —(D)  Josue,  11:19-20; 
24:14-24  /  I  Kings,  8:57-58 —(D)  III  Kings,  | 
8:5~~58  /  Job,  3:23;  12:14-25;  34:29  /  Psalms, 
119:36;  139:15-16;  141:4— (D)  Psalms,  118:36;  1 
138:15-16;  140:4  /  Proverbs,  21:1  /  Ecclesiastes ,  ! 
3:14-15  /  Isaiah,  14:24-27;  63:17;  64:8— (D)  | 
Isaias,  14:24-27;  63:17;  64:8  /  Malachi,  4:6— 
(D)  Malachias,  4:6 

Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther,  13:8-18— (D)  OT, 
Esther,  13:8-18  /  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  7:16— 
(D)  OT,  &oo\of  Wisdom,  7:16  /  Ecclesiasticus , 
15:11-20— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  15:11-21 

New  Testament:  Mattheiv ,  20:1-16;  23:37; 
26:39  /  J°hn>  6:44,64-65,70-71;  10:26-29; 
12:37-40;  13:18-27— (D)  John,  6:44,65-66,71- 
72;  10:26-29;  12:37-40;  13:18-27  /  Acts,  4:27- 
28;  7:51-53;  13:48;  17:24-27  esp  17:26  /  Ro¬ 
mans,  8:28-9:24;  11:1-10  /  /  Corinthians, 

7 121-23;  9:16-23;  12  /  Ephesians ,  1:3-12; 
2:8-10;  4:7-14  /  Philippians,  2:13  /  II  Thessa- 
lonians ,  2:11-14— (D)  //  Thessalonians,  2  no- 
13  /  //  Timothy,  1:9  /  James,  4:13-15 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  vi  [342-358]  43c-d;  bk  xix 
[74-94]  137d-138a;  bk  xxiv  [507-551]  176c- 
177a/  Odyssey,  bk  xviii  [117-150]  285b-c 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  esp 
[1297-14 1 5]  11  lb-1 12b  /  Oedipus  at  Colontis 
114a-130a,c  esp  [258-291]  116c-d,  [960-999] 
123b-c  /  Philoctetes  [169-200]  183d-184a; 
[1316-1347]  193d-194a 

5  Euripides:  Helen  [711-721]  304d-305a  / 
Electra  [1168-1359]  337d-339a,c  /  Heracles 
Mad  [1255-1357]  376a-d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  7b-8c;  20a-22a; 
bk  11,  77a-b;  bk  iii,  98b-99a;  bk  vii,  218b- 
220b;  bk  ix,  291b-c 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  x,  439b-441a,c  /  Laws, 
bk  1,  650a-b;  bk  iv,  679a-b;  bk  x,  765d-769c 
esp  767c-768b 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  10  [1075s 
12-24]  605d-606a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  1,  ch  12  118d-120b; 
bk  11,  ch  8,  147b;  bk  iii,  ch  22,  197c-198b; 
ch  24,  2Q9c-210a;  bk  iv,  ch  i,  218d-219c;  ch 
3,  224d;  ch  7,  233d 

12  Aurelius :  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b; 
bk  vi,  sect  42-46  278a-d;  bk  x,  sect  5  296d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iii  [492-505]  160b-161a; 
bk  iv  [333-361]  176a-177a 

14  Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  188d-189c  /  Sulla, 
370c-371b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  69a;  bk  vi,  91b-d 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii-iii  82c-97b 
passim 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  14  12a-b  / 
City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch  9-10  213b-216c 


5 b  to  5 d  Chapter  47:  LIBERTY  1009 


19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  19,  a 
8  116a-d;  q  22,  a  2,  rep  4-5  128d  130d;  qq 
23-24  132b-143c;  q  83,  a  i,  rep  2-4  436d 
438a;  q  103,  a  5  esp  rep  3  531b  532b;  aa  7-8 
533b- 534b;  q  105,  aa  3-5  540c-543b;  q  116 
592d-595c;  part  i-ii,  q  6,  a  i,  rep  3  644d- 
646a;  a  4,  rep  i  647b-648a;  q  9,  a  6  662a  d; 
q  10,  a  4  665d-666a,c;  q  21,  a  4,  rep  2  719d- 
720a,c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  vii  [61-96] 
lOb-c;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-114]  77b  78a; 
xvm  [1-75]  79d-80c;  paradise,  i  [94-142] 
107b-d;  hi  [64-90]  llOa-b;  xvii  [13—45]  132b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 
138-154  106b-108b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xxv,  35a  b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  113b  c;  part  iv, 
272b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  515a;  520b  d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [220- 
223]  51b  /  King  Lear ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [128-164] 
249a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  408c 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  141b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  appendix  369b-372d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [80-134]  137a- 
138a;  bk  v  [224-245]  180a-b;  [506-543]  186a- 
187a;  bk  vi  [169-188]  200a;  bk  vii  [139-173] 
220a-221a;  bk  ix  [342-375]  254b-255b;  bk  x 
[615-640]  287b-288b  /  Samson  Agonistes  [667— 
709]  354a-355a  /  Areopagitica ,  394b-395b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  ii,  sect  6  26b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  230b 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  334a-335c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  549c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  161d- 
162a 

48  Melville:  159a;  396b;  409b- 

410b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xi,  481d;  bk  xii, 
553b;  epilogue  1,  650b-c;  epilogue  ii,  675a- 
677b;  680 b-c;  684b-d 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams ,  246c-247d  / 
General  Introduction ,  582a-b 

5£.  Man’s  freedom  and  God’s  knowledge 

Old  Testament:  Psalms,  139:15-16— (D)  Psalms , 
138:15-16 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  42:19 — (D)  OT,  Er- 
clesiasticus ,  42:19  /  Susanna ,  13:42-43— (D) 
OT,  Daniel,  13:42-43 

New  Testament:  2:23  /  Romans ,  8:28-30 

/  EphesianSy  1:4-12  /  I  Peter ,  1:2,19-20 

12  Aurelius:  Meditationsy  bk  vi,  sect  44  278b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  Gody  bk  v,  ch  9-10  213b- 
216c;  bk  xxii,  ch  1,  587a-b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14,  a 
13  86d-88c;  Q  22,  a  2,  rep  4  128d-130d;  qq 
23-24  132b-143c;  q  86,  a  4,  ans  463d-464d; 
part  i-ii,  q  40,  a  3,  rep  i  794c-795a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xvii  [13— 
42]  132b-c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  iv,  stanza 


138-154  106b  108b  /  Nh/iV  Priest's  Tale 

[15,236-256]  456b-457a 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan ,  part  iv,  271b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  342a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iii  [80-134]  137a- 
138a;  bk  v  [224-245]  180a  b;  bk  x  [1-62] 
274b-275b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  230b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  173c;  392d  393a 

5c.  Man’s  freedom  and  God’s  grace:  the  free¬ 
dom  of  the  children  of  God 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs ,  1:20-33 

New  Testament:  John,  1:1-18  esp  1:12-13; 
6:44,65-66;  8:31-36  /  Acts ,  13:14-52;  15:1-11 
/  Romans  passim,  esp  3:1-8:21,  11:1-10  / 
/  Corinthians ,  6:11-12;  7:21-23;  8:9-13;  9:1- 
5,19-21;  10:23-29  /  II  Corinthians ,  3:17;  6:1- 
2  /  Galatians ,  2:4;  4:1-5:41  5:13,18,22-24 
/  Ephesians,  1:3-12;  2:4-22  /  Philippians , 
2:12-13  /  Colossians,  1:12-13  /  Titus,  2:11-14; 
3:3-7  /  James,  1:25;  2:10-12  /  /  Pc/cr,  2:15-16 
/  Revelation,  3:20—  (D)  Apocalypse,  3:20 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ix,  par  1  61c-d 
/  Cz/j  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  32  319d-322a,c; 
bk  xxii,  ch  1,  587a-b;  ch  30,  617c-618a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  23,  a 
3,  rep  3  134b-135a;  aa  5-6  135d-138c;  a  8 
140a-14ia;  Q  62,  a  3,  rep  2  319c-320b;  a  4, 
ans  320b-321b;  q  83,  a  2,  contrary  438a-d; 
q  95,  a  1,  rep  3,5  506b-507c;  part  i-ii,  q  5,  a 
5,  rep  1  640b-641a;  q  9,  a  6,  rep  3  662a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  parti-ii,  q  108, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  331a-332b;  q  109,  a 2  339c- 
340b;  q  iii,  a  2  352d-353d;  q  113,  a  3  362c- 
363c;  a  5  364b-365a;  part  ii-ii,  q  183,  a  4, 
rep  1  627d-628d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  i  [1-84] 
53a-54a;  xxvii  94c-96a  esp  [1 39-1 42]  96a; 
paradise,  iii  [64-90]  llOa-b;  vii  [64—84]  115d- 
116a;  xxi  [52-75]  138d-139a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  iv,  91a-b 

31  Spinoza :  Ethics,  bk  iv,  prop  68,  schol,  445a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  ii  [1024-1033] 
133b;  bk  iii  [56-415]  136b-144b  esp  [130-134] 
138a,  [227-238]  140b;  bk  xi  [1-2 1]  299a-b; 
[251-262]  304b-305a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  154b-159a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  238b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  140, 
50a/  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  310d-311a 

5</.  The  divine  freedom:  the  independence  or 
autonomy  of  infinite  being;  divine  choice 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  33:19  /  Psalms,  135:6 
—  ( D )  Psalms,  134:6  /  Isaiah,  14:24-25;  46:9- 
13  — (D)  Isaias ,  14:24-25;  46:9-12  /  Jeretniah, 
4:28 — (D)  Jeremias,  4:28  /  Daniel,  4:4-37 — 
(D)  Daniel,  4 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  20:1-16  /  John,  5:21 
/  Romans,  8:28-9:2 6  esp  9:15-18  /  /  Corinthi¬ 
ans,  12:7-18  /  Ephesians,  1:9-11  /  Philippians , 
2:12-13  /  H  Timothy,  1:8-10  /  James ,  1:18 


1010 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


6  to  6b 


(5.  The  theology  of  freedom.  5  d.  The  divine  free¬ 
dom:  the  independence  or  autonomy  of 
infinite  being;  divine  choice .) 

4  Homer:  Odyssey ,  bk  xiv  [441-445]  264c 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [1017-1034]  63a 

8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  5  [ioi5b9~ 
16]  536a;  bk  xii,  ch  6-7  601b-603b;  ch  10 
[1075*12-16]  605d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  iii,  ch  13,  188c-d; 
bk  iv,  ch  6,  230c-d 

17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii  342d-353d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  6-7 
44d-45d;  bk  xii,  par  18,  103a-b;  bk  xiii, 
par  5  llld;  par  12  113b-d;  par  19  115c-d  / 
City  of  God ,  bk  v,  ch  10  215c-216c;  bk  xii, 
ch  17  353a-354a;  bk  xxi,  ch  7-8  565d- 
568d;  bk  xxii,  ch  2  587b-588a;  ch  30,  617d- 
618a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  7,  aa 
1-2  31a-32c;  q  9,  a  1  38c-39c;  q  19,  aa  3-5 
110b-113c;  a  10  117d-118b;  q  22,  a  3,  rep  3 
130d-131c;  q  23,  a  5,  rep  3  135d-137d;  a  6, 
rep  3  137d-138c;  q  25,  a  2  144c-145b;  aa  5-6 
147d-150a;  q  46,  a  i,  rep  9-10  250a-252d;  q 
47,  a  1,  rep  1  256a-257b;  q  61,  a  2,  rep  i 
315c-316a;  q  104,  a  3  537b-d;  q  105,  a  i,  rep 
2  538d-539c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  parti-ii,  q  93, 
a  4,  rep  1  218b-d;  part  iii,  q  21,  a  i,  ans  823d- 
824d;  part  iii  suppl,  q  91,  a  i,  rep  2  1016b- 
1017c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  113b-c 

30  Bacon  :  Advancement  of  Learning ,  38a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  228a-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  i,  def  6-7  355b;  prop 
17  362b-363c;  prop  32-35  367a-369a;  ap¬ 
pendix  369b-372d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  vii  [139-173]  220a- 
221a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [300-329]  346a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  654  292b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi, 
sect  50-51  191b-c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  57  423d- 
424a;  sect  106  433c-d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
265b-c  esp  265b, d  [fn  1]  /  Practical  Reason , 
321b-c;  324d-325a;  325d;  328b;  342c  /  Intro. 
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  393c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  160c- 
161a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  684c-d 
6.  Liberty  in  history 

6a.  The  historical  significance  of  freedom: 
stages  in  the  realization  of  freedom;  the 
beginning  and  end  of  the  historical 
process 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  23a-b;  38b-c;  bk 
v,  175b;  bk  vi,  207b-208c;  bk  vii,  233a-b; 
238b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  353c-d 


7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  iii  663d-677a 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iii,  51b-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
108,  a  1  331a-332b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  24c;  32c-34a,c  esp 
33c-d;  51c;  90d-91a;  475a;  521c-523a,c  esp 
522d-523a;  523d-524a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  161c-162a;  202a-d; 
300a-b;  452d-453a,c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268b;  271d-272a  /  Rep¬ 
resentative  Government,  339a-341d;  346a-c  / 
Utilitarianism,  475 d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  4, 12d; 
part  1,  par  57  26b-27a;  part  iii,  par  340-360 
110b-114a,c;  additions,  36  122b-c  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History  153a-369a,c  esp  intro,  156d- 
190b,  203a-206a,c,  part  i,  207a-209a,  219d- 
221a,  230a-c,  235d-236c,  245d-246c,  251c, 
257a-258a,  part  ii,  259a-260c,  263d-267a, 
268b-274a,  part  iii,  286c-287a,  303c-307b, 
310d-311d,  part  iv,  315a,  319b-321c,  331d- 
333d,  348a-c,  350a-c,  360c-365c,  368d-369a,c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  35b-c 

6b.  The  struggle  for  civil  liberty  and  economic 
freedom:  the  overthrow  of  tyrants,  des¬ 
pots,  and  oppressors 

Old  Testament:  l  Kings,  12:1-25 —(D)  III  Kings, 
12:1-25  /  II  Kings,  9:1-10:11;  11 ;  21:18- 
26— (D)  IV  Kings,  9:1-10:11;  11 ;  21:18-26 
/  II  Chronicles,  10 — ( D )  II  Paralipomenon ,  10 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  120b-c;  bk  iv, 
124a-d;  bk  v,  167a-b;  171c-175b;  177d-180a; 
bk  vi,  193b-c;  201a-b;  208d-209b;  bk  vii, 
243b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  353c; 
bk  vi.  523c-524d;  bk  viii  564a-593a,c  esp 
582a-583c,  585d-586b,  587a-589a,  590a-c 

7  Plato:  Seventh  Letter,  813d-814d 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  v,  ch  10  512d-515d  / 
Athenian  Constitution,  ch  5  554d-555a;  ch 
13-20  558b-562b;  ch  33-41  568b-572a  passim 

14  Plutarch:  Solon  64b, d- 77a, c  /  Poplicola 
77a-86a,c  /  Poplicola-Solon  86a-87d  /  Corio- 
lanus  174b,d-193a,c  /  Timoleon  195a-213d  esp 
206d  /  Pelopidas  232a-246a,c  /  Caesar,  600a- 
604d  /  Cato  the  Younger  620a-648a,c  esp  643a- 
644b  /  Agis  648b,d-656d  /  Tiberius  Gracchus 
671b,d-681a,c  esp  678b-d  /  Cains  Gracchus 
681b,d-689a,c  /  Demetrius,  728b-729d  / 
Antony,  752a-755c  /  Marcus  Brutus  802b, d- 
824a, c  /  Aratus  826a-846a,c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  104a-c;  bk  xii,  112a- 
113b;  115d-116b;  117a;  bk  xv,  169a-176b  / 
Histories,  bk  i,  195a-201c  esp  197a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  ii-x 
57d-64d  /  Richard  III,  act  v,  sc  iii  [237-270] 
146b-c  /  Julius  Caesar  568a-596a,c  esp  act  i, 
sc  iii  [72-130]  573b-d,  act  iii,  sc  1  580b- 
583c 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c 

32  Milton:  Lord  Gen.  Fairfax  68b-69a  /  Lord 
Gen.  Cromwell  69a- b 


6c 


Chapter  47:  LIBERTY 


38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iii,  9d  10a; 
bk  v,  29a;  bk  viii,  54b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324a  b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  ii,  402c-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iii,  170c-173b; 
bk  v,  345b-d;  347d  353a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  29c-d;  39c-40a; 
60b-61a;  71b-76a  esp  72c-73c;  144a-d;  449d- 
450a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92d:  166a-167d; 
192c-193c;  333d-335a,c;  562b-566c  esp  562b- 
d;  574b-582b;  586c~588a 

43  Federalist:  number  9,  47a-c;  number  26, 
92a*94b  passim;  number  45,  147d-148a;  num¬ 
ber  46,  151a-153b  passim:  number  84,  252b  c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268b  /  Representative 
Government ,  331a;  346a-c;  352a-b;  367b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  383  b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  275b- 
276a;  part  iii,  295d-296c;  part  iv,  342a- 
346c;  359a; 364a-c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  7b 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  415a- 
416c;  419b,d;  423b-425b:  429c-433d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  667b- 
669d 

6c.  The  struggle  for  sovereign  independence 
against  the  yoke  of  imperialism  or  colo¬ 
nial  subjugation 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  1— 1 5  /  Deuteronomy , 
26:5-8  /  Judges ,  3-7  esp  6:8-9;  !3 :i— 5;  14-16  / 
Jeremiah,  41  —  (D)  Jeremias,  41 

Apocrypha:  Judith — (D)  OT,  Judith  /  1  Macca¬ 
bees,  1-9  —(D)  OT,  I  Machabees,  1-9  /  II 
Maccabees,  1-10 — ( D )  OT,  II  Machabees,  1-10 
6  Herodotus:  History  la-314a,c  esp  bk  i,  2b- 


1011 

6c,  10a  12b,  16c  20b,  23a  b,  33a  b,  35a-40b, 
42c-43b,  45b  48a,  bk  iii,  118b~123d,  bk  iv, 
145a  149a,  bk  v,  162b  163d,  170c-180c,  181b- 
185a,  bk  vi,  186a  191d,  193b  194d,  202c-205a, 
207b-208c,  bk  vii-ix  214a-314a,c 
6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  IK/r  349a  593a, c 
esp  bk  1,  353b  d,  355a  b,  378c  380a,  bk  ii, 
389a  b,  bk  iii  417a-446a,c,  bk  iv,  461b  463a, 
468a-469b,  469d-470b,  478d  479b,  bk  v, 
482d-483a,  504c-508a,c,  bk  vi,  519c-520d, 
528d-534d 

14  Plutarch:  Timoleon  195a-213d  /  Aristides 
262b,d-276a,c  /  Flamininus,  303a-310d  / 
Demosthenes,  695d-703b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  16b-21b:  bk  ii,  44d- 
45a;  bk  iii,  54b-56b;  bk  iv,  76a-77c;  82d- 
83c;  bk  xii,  112a-114c;  117c-d;  bk  xiv,  148d- 
151b  /  Histories ,  bk  i,  191a-b;  bk  iv,  269b- 
277d;  283b-292b;  bk  v  294c-302a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  v  8a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI  la-32a,c  /  2nd 
Henry  VI  33a-68d  /  3rd  Henry  VI  69a-104d  / 
Henry  V  532a-567a,c 

27  Shakespeare:  Cymbeline,  act  iii,  sc  i  463c- 
464c 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [241-276]  344b- 
345b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government ,  ch  xvi,  sect  192 
69c-d;  sect  196  70b-c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  71b-d;  489d-491a; 
521a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  51a-67c  passim,  esp 
51a-54a;  217a-b;  443c-446b;  465a-466a 

43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b 

43  Federalist:  number  45,  147d-148a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  i,  241  d- 
242b;  part  ii,  274a-275a 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  problem  of  the  freedom  of  the  will,  see  Will  5~6c,  8a;  and  for  the  relation  of  political 
liberty  to  free  will,  see  Will  53(2),  7a. 

The  freedom  of  men  in  a  state  of  nature  or  anarchy,  and  for  the  independence  of  sovereign 
states,  see  Government  ia;  Nature  2b;  State  3c,  9d;  War  and  Peace  i. 

Matters  relevant  to  political  liberty  or  the  freedom  of  the  individual  as  a  member  of  society, 
see  Citizen  2b;  Constitution  i,  2b,  7b;  Democracy  4a,  4b,  5c;  Government  ih;  Justice 
6,  6c-6e;  Law  7b-yc;  Monarchy  ia(i),  4d— 5b ;  Slavery  6-6d;  Tyranny  5-5C;  and  for 
the  relation  of  economic  to  political  liberty,  see  Democracy  43(2);  Labor  7f;  Slavery 
5-5 b;  Wealth  9d. 

Other  discussions  of  freedom  of  thought  or  expression,  see  Art  10b;  Education  8c;  Knowl¬ 
edge  9b;  Opinion  5a~5b;  Poetry  9b;  Progress  6e;  Truth  8d;  and  for  other  discus¬ 
sions  of  liberty  of  conscience  and  freedom  of  worship,  see  Religion  6c( i)-6e ;  Theology  4c. 

The  moral  or  psychological  freedom  in  the  relation  of  reason  and  emotion,  see  Desire 
5-6c;  Emotion  4-4^2);  Mind  9d;  Slavery  7;  Tyranny  5d. 

The  metaphysical  consideration  of  liberty  and  matters  related  thereto,  see  Cause  3;  Fate  3; 
Nature  2f;  Necessity  and  Contingency  5a,  53(3),  5f;  Will  53(3),  5c,  8a. 

The  theological  consideration  of  liberty,  see  Fate  4;  God  4c,  5f~5g,  7b,  7d,  7f;  Sin  6a,  7; 
Will  4b,  7c~7e(2). 


1012  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 

For:  The  issue  of  freedom  and  necessity  in  the  philosophy  of  history,  see  Fate  6;  History  4a(i), 
4a(3);  Will  7b;  and  for  the  history  of  man’s  struggle  for  civil  liberty  and  economic  free¬ 
dom,  see  Citizen  9;  Labor  70-70(3 );  Revolution  ^a-^c,  6a,  7;  Tyranny  8. 

ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Dante.  On  World- Government  or  De  Monarchia, 
bk  1,  ch  12 

Machiavelli.  The  Discourses 
Milton.  The  Readie  and  Easie  Way  to  Establish  a 
Free  Commonwealth 

Spinoza.  Tractatus  Theologico-Politicns (Theological- 
Political  Treatise ),  ch  20 

Locke.  Four  Letters  on  Toleration  in  Religion ,  ii-iv 
Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind ,  iv(b) 
Dostoevsky.  The  House  of  the  Dead 

II. 

Luther.  A  Treatise  on  Christian  Liberty 
Calvin.  Institutes  of  the  Christian  Religion ,  bk  iv 
Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae ,  xi  (3),  xix, 
xxx  (16),  xxxv  (5) 

Defoe.  The  Shortest  Way  with  the  Dissenters 
Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing BK  II,  CH  21 

Franklin.  Dissertation  on  Liberty  and  Necessity , 
Pleasure  and  Pain 
Voltaire.  Essay  on  Toleration 

- .  “Liberty,”  “Liberty  of  Opinion,”  “Liberty 

of  the  Press,”  “Toleration,”  in  A  Philosophical 
Dictionary 

T.  Reid.  Essays  on  the  Active  Powers  of  the  Human 
Mind ,  iv 

Paine.  Rights  of  Man 

Burke.  Refections  on  the  Revolution  in  France 
Godwin.  An  Enquiry  Concerning  Political  Justice , 
bk  11,  ch  4-6 
Schiller.  William  Tell 
Schelling.  Of  Human  Freedom 
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea ,  vol  i, 
bk  iv 

Shelley.  Prometheus  Unbound 
Byron.  Sonnet  on  Chillon 

- .  The  Isles  of  Greece 

Bentham.  On  the  Liberty  of  the  Press 
Emerson.  “Self-Reliance,”  in  Essays,  1 
J.  H.  Newman.  “Private  Judgment,”  in  vol  ii, 
Essays  and  Sketches 
Thoreau.  Civil  Disobedience 
Whitman.  Leaves  of  Grass 


Lotze.  Microcosmos ,  bk  i,  ch  i  (4) 

Burckhardt.  Force  and  Freedom 
J.  F.  Stephen.  Liberty ,  Equality ,  Fraternity 
Acton.  Essays  on  Freedom  and  Power ,  ch  2-4,  9 
Bradley.  Ethical  Studies,  1 

Arnold.  “Democracy,”  “Equality,”  in  Mixed 
Essays 

T.  H.  Green.  The  Principles  of  Political  Obligation , 
(H>  0 

— — .  Prolegomena  to  Ethics,  bk  1,  ch  3 

Spencer.  The  Man  Versus  the  State 

R.  Browning.  Why  I  Am  a  Liberal 

Lecky.  Democracy  and  Liberty 

Bosanquet.  The  Philosophical  Theory  of  the  State 

Gide.  The  Immoralist 

Santayana.  Reason  in  Society,  ch  6 

Peguy.  Basic  Verities  (Freedom) 

Bury.  A  History  of  Freedom  of  Thought 
Burgess.  Reconciliation  of  Government  with  Liberty 
Garrigou-Lagrange.  God,  His  Existence  and  Na¬ 
ture,  part  11,  ch  4 
Duguit.  Souverainete  et  liberte 
B.  Russell.  Sceptical  Essays,  xii-xiv 
Laski.  Liberty  in  the  Modem  State 
Whitehead.  Adventures  of  Ideas,  ch  4-5 
Gorky.  Forty  Years — the  Life  of  Clim  Samghin 
Dewey.  “The  Idea  of  Freedom,”  in  Outlines  of  a 
Critical  Theory  of  Ethics 

- .  The  Study  of  Ethics,  ch  8 

- .  Characters  and  Events,  vol  ii,  bk  iii  (14) 

- .  Experience  and  Education,  ch  5-6 

- .  Freedom  and  Culture 

Croce.  History  as  the  Story  of  Liberty 

- .  “The  Roots  of  Liberty,”  in  Freedom ,  Its 

Meaning 

Koestler.  Darkness  at  Noon 
Maritain.  “A  Philosophy  of  Freedom,”  in  Freedom 
in  the  Modern  World 

- .  Scholasticism  and  Politics,  ch  v 

Becker.  New  Liberties  for  Old 
A.  J.  Carlyle.  Political  Liberty 
Barker.  Reflections  on  Government,  ch  1-2 
Malinowski.  Freedom  and  Civilization 
Berdyayev.  Freedom  a?id  the  Spirit 

- .  Slavery  and  Freedom 

Hocking.  Freedom  of  the  Press 
Simon.  Community  of  the  Free ,  ch  i 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND  DEATH 


INTRODUCTION 


MEN  have  divided  the  totality  of  things 
in  various  ways.  The  three  most  funda¬ 
mental  divisions  rest  on  the  distinction  between 
che  natural  and  the  supernatural,  between  the 
material  and  the  spiritual,  and  between  the 
lifeless  and  the  living. 

The  same  kind  of  basic  question  is  raised  by 
!each  of  these  divisions,  and  given  opposite 
answers  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books.  The 
question  is  not  always  formulated  in  the  same 
way.  It  may  be  a  question  about  the  existence 
of  the  supernatural  order  or  of  incorporeal 
beings.  It  may  be  a  problem  of  whether  the 
i, terms  of  the  division  represent  a  real  duality 
or  merely  different  aspects  of  one  and  the 
same  whole.  Are  God  and  nature  one  or  are 
they  radically  distinct?  Is  spirituality  merely 
one  expression  of  bodily  existence,  or  are 
there  two  worlds,  a  world  of  bodies  and  a  world 
of  spirits? 

These  issues  are  considered  in  the  chapters 
on  God,  Nature,  Angel,  and  Matter,  as  well 
as  in  the  chapter  on  Being.  The  issue  raised  by 
the  third  great  division  is  one  of  the  central 
topics  in  this  chapter.  That  issue  concerns 
the  difference  between  the  living  and  the 
non-living.  There  is  no  question  here  about 
whether,  in  the  order  of  nature,  living  things 
exist.  The  fact  of  life  is  not  denied,  at  least  not 
as  a  matter  of  observation.  On  the  surface 
there  certainly  appears  to  be  a  striking  dif¬ 
ference  between  the  living  tree  and  the  stone, 
or  between  the  animal  which  a  moment  ago 
was  alive  and  is  now  dead. 

But  how  this  difference  is  to  be  understood 
is  the  question.  Does  it  signify  an  absolute 
break,  a  discontinuity,  between  the  world  of 
living  bodies  and  the  domain  of  inanimate 
things  ?  Or  is  the  continuity  of  nature  preserved 
across  the  line  which  divides  inorganic  and  or¬ 
ganic  matter?  Is  the  difference  between  the 


non-living  and  the  living  (or  the  living  and  the 
dead)  one  of  kind  or  of  degree  ? 

Those  who  answer  that  it  is  a  difference  in 
kind  usually  formulate  a  definition  of  life  which 
draws  a  sharp  line,  on  one  side  of  which  are  the 
things  that  have  the  indispensable  properties  of 
life,  while  on  the  other  side  are  things  totally 
lacking  in  these  properties.  The  critical  point 
here  turns  on  whether  vitality  is  present  in 
some  degree  or  totally  absent.  The  definition  of 
life  may  not  always  be  the  same.  It  may  not  al¬ 
ways,  for  example,  postulate  the  soul  as  the 
principle  in  all  living  things,  or  involve  the 
same  conception  of  soul  in  relation  to  living 
organisms.  But  when  life  is  defined  as  an  essen¬ 
tial  characteristic  of  some  natures,  the  defini¬ 
tion  implies  the  existence  of  natures  which  are 
totally  lacking  in  the  properties  essential  to  life. 
It  also  implies  the  impossibility  of  intermediate 
links  between  the  lowest  form  of  life  and  the 
most  complex  of  the  inorganic  substances. 

The  opposite  answer  that  there  is  only  a  dif¬ 
ference  in  degree  between  the  inanimate  and 
the  animate,  affirms  the  continuity  of  nature 
across  the  gap  between  things  which  appear 
lifeless  and  those  which  seem  to  be  alive.  All 
bodies  have  the  same  fundamental  properties, 
though  not  in  the  same  magnitude.  But  here 
there  is  a  further  question.  It  can  be  asked 
whether  those  properties  are  the  powers  or 
functions  commonly  associated  with  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  being  alive,  such  as  growth,  repro¬ 
duction,  sensitivity,  desire,  locomotion;  or 
whether  they  are  the  mechanical  properties  of 
matter  in  motion — properties  which  vary  only 
with  the  degrees  of  complexity  in  the  organi¬ 
zation  of  matter. 

According  to  the  doctrine  which  is  sometimes 
called  “animism”  and  sometimes  “panpsych¬ 
ism,”  everything  is  alive,  every  body  is  be- 
souled,  though  at  the  lower  end  of  the  scale  the 


1013 


1014 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


signs  of  vitality  remain  hidden  from  ordinary 
observation.  Although  this  theory  is  usually 
attributed  to  a  primitive  view  of  nature,  it  ap¬ 
pears  in  a  subtle  form  in  certain  philosophical 
developments  which  make  soul  or  mind  a  prin¬ 
ciple  as  universal  as  matter.  “There  is  one  com¬ 
mon  substance,”  says  Marcus  Aurelius,  “though 
it  is  distributed  among  countless  bodies  which 
have  their  several  qualities.  There  is  one  soul, 
though  it  is  distributed  among  infinite  natures 
and  individual  circumscriptions.” 

The  doctrine  which  in  modern  times  is  called 
“mechanism”  conceives  the  continuity  of  na¬ 
ture  in  terms  of  the  universality  of  purely 
mechanical  principles.  It  reduces  all  phenomena 
to  the  interaction  of  moving  parts  or  particles. 
No  new  principle  is  needed  to  explain  the  phe¬ 
nomena  of  life.  The  laws  of  physics  and  chem¬ 
istry  suffice.  Biophysics  and  biochemistry  sim¬ 
ply  deal  with  the  mechanics  of  more  complex 
material  systems.  The  apparent  differences  in 
function  between  “living”  and  “non-living” 
things  represent  the  same  functions.  They  are 
altered  only  in  appearance  by  the  more  complex 
organization  of  the  matter  which  is  called 
“living.” 

The  controversy  over  mechanistic  principles 
in  the  analysis  of  life  arose  with  great  explicit¬ 
ness  in  the  latter  part  of  the  nineteenth  century 
and  continues  to  our  own  day.  The  chief  oppo¬ 
nents  of  the  mechanists  are  those  who  at  one 
time  called  themselves  “vitalists”  to  signify 
their  insistence  upon  an  essential  difference  be¬ 
tween  vital  and  mechanical  phenomena.  The 
work  of  Jacques  Loeb  can  be  taken  to  represent 
the  mechanistic  side  of  this  controversy;  the 
writings  of  Bergson,  Haldane,  Whitehead,  the 
vitalist  position. 

Those  who  regard  the  realm  of  living  things 
as  a  distinct  domain  in  nature  also  think  that 
the  study  of  living  things  has  special  concepts, 
principles,  and  methods  as  different  from  those 
of  physics  and  chemistry  as  the  objects  studied 
are  distinct. 

Biology  is  a  science  of  ancient  origin.  The 
Hippocratic  collection  of  writings  on  health 
and  disease,  the  extensive  biological  researches 
of  Aristotle,  the  work  of  Galen,  represent  more 
than  a  bare  beginning  of  the  science.  The  an¬ 
cient  classification  of  vital  functions  establishes 


the  terms  of  biological  analysis.  Ideas  which 
have  come  to  seem  obvious  because  of  tradi¬ 
tional  acceptance  were  once  great  discoveries; 
for  example,  that  all  living  bodies  nourish  them¬ 
selves,  grow,  and  reproduce;  that  these  are  the 
minimal,  not  the  maximal,  functions  of  organic 
matter;  that  there  is  a  regular  cycle  of  growth 
and  decay  in  the  normal  life  span  which  is  it¬ 
self  different  for  different  types  of  organisms; 
that  in  the  dynamic  equilibrium  between  the 
living  organism  and  its  physical  environment, 
the  organism  actively  maintains  itself  through 
a  certain  balance  of  exchanges  in  the  biological 
economy,  of  which  breathing  is  a  prime  ex¬ 
ample. 

The  great  books  of  biological  science  from 
Aristotle  to  Harvey  seem  to  be  of  one  mind  on 
the  point  that  living  matter  possesses  distinc¬ 
tive  powers  and  performs  functions  which  are 
not  present  in  any  degree  in  the  realm  of  the  in¬ 
ert  or  inorganic.  For  the  most  part  they  reflect 
the  theory  that  the  living  body  possesses  a  soul 
which  is  the  principle  of  its  vitality  and  the 
source  of  the  vital  powers  embodied  in  its 
various  organs. 

In  ancient  and  mediaeval  theory,  the  soul  is 
not  conceived  as  belonging  peculiarly  to  man; 
it  is  not  identified  with  mind  or  w7ith  the  intel¬ 
lectual  faculties.  The  word  “animal”  derives 
from  the  Latin  name  for  soul — the  principle  of 
animation.  It  is  true  that  Galen  distinguishes 
between  what  he  calls  the  “natural”  and  the 
“psychic”  faculties.  The  latter  for  him  are  the 
powers  of  sensitivity,  desire,  and  locomotion. 
Yet  his  analysis  of  the  vegetative  powers  of 
nutrition,  growth,  and  reproduction  which  are 
common  to  plants  and  animals  squares  with 
Aristotle’s  conception  of  the  vegetative  soul. 

“What  has  soul  in  it,”  Aristotle  writes,  “dif¬ 
fers  from  what  has  not,  in  that  the  former  dis¬ 
plays  life.  Now  this  word  has  more  than  one 
sense.  .  .  .  Living,  that  is,  may  mean  thinking 
or  perception  or  local  movement  and  rest,  or 
movement  in  the  sense  of  nutrition,  decay,  and 
growth.  Hence  we  think  of  plants  also  as  living, 
for  they  are  observed  to  possess  in  themselves 
an  originative  power  through  which  they  in¬ 
crease  and  decrease  in  all  spatial  directions. 
This  power  of  self-nutrition  ...  is  the  origina¬ 
tive  power,  the  possession  of  which  leads  us  to 
speak  of  things  as  living .” 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND  DEATH 


1015 


In  the  great  books  the  opposite  position  with 
respect  to  the  living  and  non-living  seems  to  ap¬ 
pear  for  the  first  time  with  Descartes.  It  might 
be  supposed  that  Lucretius,  since  he  denies  the 
soul  as  an  immaterial  principle,  would  also  tend 
to  reject  anything  except  a  difference  in  degree 
between  animate  and  inanimate  bodies.  But 
this  is  not  the  case.  According  to  Lucretius 
living  things  are  not  merely  more  complex 
combinations  of  atoms  and  void.  Their  consti¬ 
tution  includes  a  special  type  of  soul-atom, 
whose  round,  smooth  shape  and  speed  of  move¬ 
ment  through  all  parts  of  the  living  body  ac¬ 
counts  for  the  powers  and  activities  which  are 
peculiar  to  that  body.  Lucretius  is  recognized 
as  a  materialist  and  a  mechanist,  yet  he  sharply 
separates  living  from  non-living  bodies  and  ap¬ 
peals  to  a  special  principle — the  soul-atom — to 
explain  this  difference  in  kind. 

As  appears  in  the  chapters  on  Mind  and 
Soul,  Descartes  is  at  variance  not  only  with 
Lucretius  but  also  with  Aristotle,  Galen,  and 
Plotinus  in  his  conception  of  the  soul  and  of 
life.  The  soul  is  not  a  body  or  composed  of 
bodies.  Neither,  in  his  opinion,  is  it  an  immate¬ 
rial  principle  conjoined  with  organic  matter  to 
constitute  the  living  body.  It  is  itself  an  im¬ 
material  substance,  quite  separate  from  the  hu¬ 
man  body  to  which  it  is  allied. 

Descartes  tells  us  how  he  passed  from  “a  de¬ 
scription  of  inanimate  bodies  and  plants  ...  to 
that  of  animals,  and  particularly  to  that  of 
men.”  He  asks  us  to  consider  the  supposition 
that  “God  formed  the  body  of  man  altogether 
like  one  of  ours  .  .  .  without  making  use  of  any 
matter  other  than  that  which  I  have  described 
and  without  at  first  placing  in  it  a  rational  soul 
or  any  other  thing  which  might  serve  as  a  vege¬ 
tative  or  sensitive  soul.”  He  then  goes  on  to  say 
that  ‘‘examining  the  functions  which  might  in 
accordance  with  this  supposition  exist  in  this 
body,  I  found  precisely  all  those  which  might 
exist  in  us  without  our  having  the  power  of 
thought,  and  consequently  without  our  soul — 
that  is  to  say,  this  part  of  us,  distinct  from  the 
body,  of  which  it  has  been  said  that  its  nature 
is  to  think.” 

The  mechanistic  implications  of  his  supposi¬ 
tion  are  explicitly  developed  by  Descartes  in 
his  consideration  of  Harvey’s  discovery  of  the 
motions  of  the  heart  and  blood.  These  move¬ 


ments,  he  says,  follow  “as  necessarily  from  the 
very  disposition  of  the  organs  ...  as  does  that 
of  a  clock  from  the  power,  the  situation,  and 
the  form,  of  its  counterpoise  and  of  its  wheels.” 
In  these  motions,  as  well  as  in  the  actions  of  the 
nerves,  brain,  and  muscles,  it  is  not  necessary 
to  suppose  any  other  cause  than  those  operat¬ 
ing  according  “to  the  laws  of  Mechanics  which 
are  identical  with  those  of  nature.” 

This  will  not  seem  strange,  Descartes  adds,  to 
those  who  know  “how  many  different  automata 
or  moving  machines  can  be  made  by  the  indus¬ 
try  of  man,  without  employing  in  so  doing  more 
than  a  very  few  parts  in  comparison  with  the 
great  multitude  of  bones,  muscles,  nerves,  ar¬ 
teries,  veins  or  other  parts  that  are  found  in  the 
body  of  each  animal.  From  this  aspect,  the 
body  is  regarded  as  a  machine,  which,  having 
been  made  by  the  hands  of  God,  is  incompa¬ 
rably  better  arranged,  and  possesses  in  itself 
movements  which  are  much  more  admirable, 
than  any  of  those  which  can  be  invented  by 
man.”  Only  the  functions  of  reason,  only  the 
acts  of  thinking— not  those  of  living — operate 
under  other  than  the  mechanical  laws  of  cor¬ 
poreal  nature.  Whether  living  or  not,  all  bodies 
without  reason  or  a  rational  soul  are  automata 
or  machines.  Whatever  they  do  can  be  ex¬ 
plained  as  a  kind  of  clockwork — by  the  dispo¬ 
sition  and  interaction  of  their  parts. 

Another  source  and  another  version  of  the 
view  that  the  continuity  of  nature  is  uninter¬ 
rupted,  comes  from  the  theory  of  evolution. 
Darwin  himself,  in  his  brief  consideration  of 
the  origin  of  life,  deals  mainly  with  the  alter¬ 
native  hypotheses  of  the  divine  creation  of  a 
single  original  form  or  of  several  primitive  forms 
from  which  the  whole  of  the  plant  and  animal 
kingdoms  has  developed  by  the  natural  steps  of 
evolution.  He  rejects  the  division  of  the  ani¬ 
mate  world  into  more  than  the  two  great  king¬ 
doms  of  plant  and  animal  life,  and  holds  that 
man  differs  from  other  animals  only  in  degree, 
not  in  kind. 

As  indicated  in  the  chapters  on  Animal  and 
Evolution,  Darwin  questions  the  disconti¬ 
nuity  between  plants  and  animals.  He  refers  to 
the  intermediate  forms  which  seem  to  belong 
to  both  kingdoms.  He  suggests  the  possibility 
that  the  lowest  forms  of  animal  life  may  have 


1016 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


developed  by  natural  evolutionary  descent 
from  plant  organisms.  But  he  does  not  seriously 
consider  the  hypothesis  of  an  evolutionary  tran¬ 
sition  from  inorganic  matter  to  living  organ¬ 
isms.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  he  seems  to  recog¬ 
nize  a  difference  in  kind.  “The  most  humble 
organism,”  he  writes,  “is  something  much 
higher  than  the  inorganic  dust  under  our  feet; 
and  no  one  with  an  unbiased  mind  can  study 
any  living  creature,  however  humble,  without 
being  struck  with  enthusiasm  at  its  marvellous 
structure  and  properties.”  He  questions  the  no¬ 
tion  that  living  organisms  might  have  originated 
from  inorganic  matter  by  spontaneous  genera¬ 
tion.  “Science  has  not  as  yet  proved  the  truth 
of  this  belief,”  he  says,  “whatever  the  future 
may  reveal.” 

Nevertheless,  with  the  extension  of  Darwin’s 
theory  of  the  origin  of  species  into  a  doctrine  of 
cosmic  evolution,  what  fames  calls  “the  evolu¬ 
tionary  afflatus”  leads  writers  like  Tyndall  and 
Spencer  to  “talk  as  if  mind  grew  out  of  body  in 
a  continuous  way.  ...  So  strong  a  postulate  is 
continuity,”  James  writes,  that  the  evolution¬ 
ists  try  to  “leap  over  the  breach”  between  in¬ 
organic  matter  and  consciousness. 

“In  a  general  theory  of  evolution,”  he  ex¬ 
plains,  “the  inorganic  comes  first,  then  the  low¬ 
est  forms  of  animal  and  vegetable  life,  then  forms 
of  fife  that  possess  mentality,  and  finally  those 
like  ourselves  that  possess  it  in  a  high  degree. 

.  .  .  We  are  dealing  all  the  time  with  matter  and 
its  aggregations  and  separations;  and  although 
our  treatment  must  perforce  be  hypothetical, 
this  does  not  prevent  it  from  being  continuous . 
The  point  which  as  evolutionists  we  are  bound 
to  hold  fast  is  that  all  the  new  forms  of  being 
that  make  their  appearance  are  nothing  more 
than  results  of  the  redistribution  of  the  original 
and  unchanging  materials.  The  self-same  atoms 
which,  chaotically  dispersed,  made  the  nebula, 
now,  jammed  and  temporarily  caught  in  pecul¬ 
iar  position,  form  our  brains;  and  the  ‘evolu¬ 
tion’  of  the  brains,  if  understood,  would  be  sim¬ 
ply  the  account  of  how  the  atoms  came  to  be  so 
caught  and  jammed.  In  this  story  no  new  na¬ 
tures,  no  factors  not  present  at  the  beginning, 
are  introduced  at  any  later  stage.” 

fames  is  here  presenting  a  theory  which  he 
himself  rejects.  He  recognizes  the  strength  of 
the  “postulate  of  continuity”  in  the  theories  of 


Spencer,  Tyndall,  and  other  evolutionists,  but 
he  thinks  the  evident  “contrasts  between  living 
and  inanimate  performances”  favor  the  division 
of  nature  into  two  realms.  Yet  he  also  seems  to 
regard  some  degree  of  intelligence  or  mentality  ; 
as  an  accompaniment  of  life.  Hence  his  criterion 
of  the  difference  in  kind  “between  an  intelli¬ 
gent  and  a  mechanical  performance”— namely, 
purposiveness  or  “the  pursuance  of  future  ends 
and  the  choice  of  means” — also  serves  as  the 
mark  of  distinction  between  the  animate  and 
the  inanimate. 

It  is  worth  remarking  that  this  criterion  is 
one  of  the  tests  Descartes  proposes  for  differen¬ 
tiating  man  from  all  the  rest  of  nature,  man 
alone  having  reason  or  thought.  It  is  also  worth 
noting  that  in  associating  different  degrees  of 
mentality  or  consciousness  with  life  at  all  levels 
of  development,  fames  himself  affirms  a  con¬ 
tinuity  in  the  realm  of  all  living  things.  He 
therefore  does  not  go  as  far  in  the  direction  of 
discontinuity  as  do  those  in  the  tradition  of  the 
great  books  who  find  an  essential  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  inanimate  and  the  living,  between 
plant  and  animal,  and  between  brute  and  hu¬ 
man  life. 

The  issues  raised  by  these  last  two  distinc¬ 
tions  are  further  considered  in  the  chapters  on 
Animal,  Man,  and  Mind.  Here  we  are  con¬ 
cerned  only  with  the  fact  that  those  who  find 
genuine  differences  in  kind  in  the  world  of  ani¬ 
mate  things  also  tend  to  distinguish  between 
the  living  and  the  non-living  by  reference  to 
the  most  generic  properties  of  corporeal  life, 
that  is,  the  powers  or  functions  shared  by  plants, 
animals,  and  men.  The  question  of  origins  does 
not  seem  to  be  relevant  to  the  problem  of  dif¬ 
ferences.  Aquinas,  for  example,  does  not  seem 
to  regard  the  hypothesis  of  the  spontaneous 
generation  of  living  organisms  from  putrefying 
organic  matter  as  inconsistent  with  his  assertion 
that  the  vegetative  functions  of  plants  and  ani¬ 
mals  are  not  performed — in  any  degree — by  in¬ 
animate  bodies. 

When  Aristotle  says  of  natural  bodies  that 
“some  have  life  in  them,  others  not;  and  by  life 
we  mean  self-nutrition  and  growth,”  he  is  aware 
that  the  word  “growth”  occurs  in  the  descrip¬ 
tion  of  a  certain  type  of  change  in  inanimate 
bodies.  Other  than  living  things  increase  in 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  ANI)  DEATH 


1017 


size.  To  avoid  an  equivocal  use  of  the  word 
‘growth,”  he  assigns  three  distinguishing  char¬ 
acteristics  to  the  quantitative  change  or  increase 
in  living  things:  “(i)  Any  and  every  part  of  the 
growing  magnitude  is  made  bigger,  (2)  by  the 
accession  of  something,  and  (3)  in  such  a  way 
that  the  growing  thing  is  preserved  and  persists.” 

To  exemplify  this  difference,  Galen  compares 
the  growth  of  an  organism  with  the  expansion 
of  a  dried  bladder  when  children  blow  air  into 
it.  The  expanding  bladder  seems  to  grow,  but 
not  as  it  did  when  it  was  a  part  of  a  living  ani- 
,mal  and  when  the  growth  of  the  whole  involved 
the  growth  of  each  part.  “In  these  doings  of  the 
(children,”  Galen  writes,  “the  more  the  interior 
cavity  of  the  bladder  increases  in  size,  the  thin¬ 
ner,  necessarily,  does  its  substance  become.  But, 
if  the  children  were  able  to  bring  nourishment 
to  this  thin  part,  then  they  would  make  the 
bladder  big  in  the  same  wray  that  Nature  does. 

.  .  .  To  be  distended  in  all  directions  belongs 
only  to  bodies  wTose  growth  is  directed  by 
Nature;  for  those  which  are  distended  by  us 
undergo  this  distension  in  one  direction  but 
( grow  less  in  the  others;  it  is  impossible  to  find  a 
body  which  will  remain  entire  and  not  be  torn 
through  whilst  we  stretch  it  in  the  three  dimen¬ 
sions.  Thus  Nature  alone  has  the  power  to  ex¬ 
pand  a  body  in  all  directions  so  that  it  remains 
unruptured  and  preserves  completely  its  pre¬ 
vious  form.” 

Modern  biologists  sometimes  compare  the 
growth  of  crystals  in  solution  with  living  growth 
and  reproduction.  Or,  making  the  point  that 
“other  systems  in  dynamic  equilibrium  show  in 
essence  all  the  properties  of  living  things,”  they 
say  that  “it  is  almost  impossible  to  distinguish  a 
candle  flame  from  a  living  organism.”  Aristotle 
considers  the  latter  comparison  and  rejects  it. 
He  observes  that  “the  growth  of  fire  goes  on 
without  limit  so  long  as  there  is  a  supply  of 
fuel”;  but  no  amount  of  nutriment  can  increase 
the  size  of  living  things  without  limit.  “There 
is  a  limit  or  ratio  which  determines  their  size 
and  increase,  and  the  limit  and  ratio  are  marks 
of  the  soul,  but  not  of  fire.” 

The  flame  is  a  lively  thing,  but  to  say  that  it 
is  alive,  that  it  growls  or  dies,  is  in  Aristotle’s 
view7  a  poetic  metaphor,  not  a  scientific  state¬ 
ment.  “When  I  have  plucked  the  rose,”  Othello 
says,  “I  cannot  give  it  vital  growth  again,  it 


needs  must  wither.”  But  to  the  candle  burning 
beside  Desdemona’s  bed,  he  says:  “If  I  quench 
thee,  thou  flaming  minister,  l  can  again  thy 
former  light  restore.”  The  flame  is  lit  or  ex¬ 
tinguished  by  motions  from  without;  but  the 
birth  and  death,  the  nourishing  and  grow  th  of 
the  living  thing  is  self-movement. 

According  to  Aristotle  and  Aquinas  self¬ 
movement  is  the  essential  mark  of  being  alive. 
“All  things  are  said  to  be  alive, ’’Aquinas  writes, 
“which  determine  themselves  to  movement  or 
operation  of  any  kind;  whereas  those  things 
which  cannot  by  their  own  nature  do  so,  cannot 
be  called  living  except  by  a  similitude.”  He  fur¬ 
ther  defines  the  meaning  of  self-movement  by 
distinguishing  between  the  transitive  action  of 
one  inert  body  upon  another  and  the  immanent 
activity  of  a  living  thing,  whereby  the  agent 
itself  is  perfected.  Growing,  sensing,  and  under¬ 
standing  are  immanent  actions  because  they  are 
activities  w'hich  affect  the  growing,  sensing,  or 
understanding  thing.  The  result  of  such  actions 
remains  in  the  agent .  In  contrast,  heating  is  a 
transitive  action.  In  heating,  one  thing  acts  upon 
another,  and  the  hot  thing  loses  its  own  heat  in 
the  process. 

As  vital  operations  differ  thus  from  the  ac¬ 
tions  of  inanimate  bodies,  so  do  vital  powders 
differ  from  the  capacities  of  inert  matter, 
through  which  bodies  can  act  upon  or  react  to 
other  bodies.  The  power  of  self-movement  (or 
immanent  activity)  enables  living  things  alone 
to  change  from  a  less  perfect  to  a  more  perfect 
state  of  being,  as  measured  by  the  thing’s  na¬ 
ture,  rather  than  simply  to  change  from  con¬ 
trary  to  contrary,  as  a  body  changes  when  it 
moves  locally  from  this  place  to  that,  or  alters 
from  hot  to  cold,  or  cold  to  hot. 

For  the  theologian,  there  is  an  additional  as¬ 
pect  to  the  problem  of  defining  life.  If  the  realm 
of  corporeal  substances  is  divided  into  inert  and 
living  bodies,  what  is  to  be  said  about  incor¬ 
poreal  substances  (/.<?.,  the  angels)  and  about 
God?  It  is  easier  to  think  of  the  angels  as  not 
being  than  to  conceive  them  as  not  being  alive . 
More  than  “infinite”  or  “omnipotent”  or  “eter¬ 
nal,”  “the  ever-living  God”  is  the  phrase  which, 
in  the  language  of  religious  worship,  expresses 
positively  the  divine  nature.  But  the  funda¬ 
mental  activities  which  distinguish  living  from 


1018 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


non-living  bodies  (such  as  nutrition,  growth, 
reproduction)  are  essentially  corporeal  in  na¬ 
ture.  So,  too,  are  sensing  and  locomotion.  What 
common  meaning  of  life,  then,  can  apply  to  ma¬ 
terial  and  spiritual  beings  ? 

Aquinas  answers  by  saying  that  “since  a  thing 
is  said  to  live  in  so  far  as  it  operates  of  itself  and 
not  as  moved  by  another,  the  more  perfectly 
this  power  is  found  in  anything,  the  more  per¬ 
fect  is  the  life  of  that  thing.”  By  this  criterion, 
plants  are  less  perfectly  alive  than  animals,  in 
whom  self-movement  is  found  to  a  higher  de¬ 
gree  because  of  their  sensitive  faculties;  and 
among  animals,  there  are  grades  of  life  accord¬ 
ing  to  degrees  of  sensitivity,  and  according  to 
the  possession  of  mobility,  a  power  which  cer¬ 
tain  animals  seem  to  lack.  In  both  the  higher 
animals  and  in  man,  there  is  purposive  behavior, 
but  man  alone,  through  his  intellect  and  will, 
can  freely  de  termine  his  own  ends  and  choose  the 
means  to  them ;  hence  these  faculties  give  human 
life  an  even  greater  degree  of  self- movement. 

But  the  action  of  the  human  intellect  is  not 
perfectly  self-determined,  for  it  depends  in  part 
upon  external  causes.  Wherefore  Aquinas  con¬ 
cludes  that  life  in  the  highest  degree  belongs 
properly  to  God — “that  being  whose  act  of  un¬ 
derstanding  is  its  very  nature  and  which,  in 
what  it  naturally  possesses,  is  not  determined 
by  another.”  He  quotes  Aristotle’s  remark  that 
the  perfection  of  God’s  life  is  proportionate  to 
the  perfection  of  the  divine  intellect,  which  is 
purely  actual  and  eternally  in  act.  And  he  goes 
on  to  remark  that,  in  the  sense  in  which  under¬ 
standing  is  movement,  and  that  which  under¬ 
stands  itself  moves  itself,  “Plato  also  taught  that 
God  moves  Himself.” 

Nourishment,  growth,  and  reproduction  are 
indispensable  features  of  corporeal  life  precisely 
because  corporeal  things  are  perishable.  They 
need  “reproduction,  to  preserve  the  species,” 
Aquinas  writes,  “and  nourishment  to  preserve 
the  individual.  ’ ’  Hence  the  higher  powers  of  life, 
such  as  sensing  and  understanding,  are  never 
found  in  corporeal  things  apart  from  the  vegeta¬ 
tive  powers.  This  does  not  hold,  however,  for 
spiritual  beings  which  are  by  nature  imperish¬ 
able.  Spiritual  life  is  essentially  immortal  life. 

Subject  to  the  ravages  of  time,  corporeal  life 
at  every  moment  betrays  its  mortality — in  its 
need  for  sleep,  in  the  enfeeblement  of  its  pow¬ 


ers,  in  disease,  decay,  or  degeneration.  Death  is 
the  correlative  of  life  for  those  who  sharply  di¬ 
vide  the  living  from  the  non-living.  Rocks  may 
crumble  into  dust,  bodies  may  disintegrate,  and 
atoms  explode — but  they  do  not  die.  Death  is  a 
change  which  only  living  matter  undergoes. 

The  transition  from  life  to  death  accentuates 
the  mystery  of  life.  The  notion  of  spontaneous 
generation  aside,  life  always  seems  to  come  from 
life.  Whether  by  cell  division  or  by  germination, 
the  living  thing  that  is  generated  comes  from 
the  living  substance  of  another  thing.  But  when 
a  living  thing  dies,  it  crosses  the  gap  between 
the  living  and  the  non-living.  As  the  organic 
matter  of  the  corpse  decomposes,  nothing  is  left 
but  the  familiar  inorganic  elements  and  com¬ 
pounds.  This  seems  to  be  a  change  more  radical 
than  generation  or  birth.  All  the  metaphysical 
problems  of  form  and  substance,  of  matter  and 
the  soul,  of  continuity  and  discontinuity  in  na¬ 
ture,  which  appear  in  the  analysis  of  life,  become 
more  intense  in  the  understanding  of  death. 

As  appears  in  the  chapter  on  Immortality, 
the  living  are  preoccupied  with  death,  not  pre¬ 
dominantly  with  analyzing  it,  but  with  facing 
and  fearing  it,  struggling  against  or  embracing 
it.  Death,  as  the  great  poems  reveal,  is  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  soliloquy  in  moments  of  greatest  intro¬ 
spection  or  self-appraisal.  To  die  well,  Mon¬ 
taigne  points  out,  requires  greater  moral  stam¬ 
ina  than  to  live  well.  For  him  the  essence  of  the 
philosophical  temper,  as  for  others  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  heroism  or  martyrdom,  consists  in  fac¬ 
ing  death  with  an  equanimity  which  reflects 
the  highest  qualities  of  a  well-resolved  life. 

Montaigne  devotes  a  long  essay  to  the  sub¬ 
ject  that  “to  philosophise  is  to  learn  to  die,” 
and  begins  it  by  quoting  Cicero’s  statement  that 
“to  study  philosophy  is  nothing  but  to  prepare 
one’s  self  to  die.”  Socrates  then  is  the  prototype 
of  the  philosopher,  for  in  conversation  with  his 
friends  in  prison  while  awaiting  death,  he  tells 
them  that  “the  true  votary  of  philosophy  ...  is 
always  pursuing  death,  and  dying.”  He  tries  to 
prove  to  them,  by  his  actions  as  well  as  by  his 
words,  that  “the  real  philosopher  has  reason  to 
be  of  good  cheer  when  he  is  about  to  die.” 

Not  only  death  but  the  dead  exercise  a  pro¬ 
found  effect  upon  the  living.  The  historians  de¬ 
scribe  the  various  forms  which  the  ceremonials 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND  DEATH 


1019 


of  death  take  in  every  society.  Whether  t he 
rituals  are  secular  or  sacred,  they  are  among  the 
most  significant  customs  of  any  culture,  for  they 
reveal  the  value  placed  upon  life  and  the  con¬ 
ception  of  life’s  meaning  and  man’s  destiny.  No 
deeper  differences  exist  among  the  great  reli¬ 
gions  than  those  which  appear  in  the  practices 
or  sacraments  in  preparation  for  death  and  in 
the  services  for  the  dead. 

The  moral,  social,  and  religious  aspects  of 
death  appear  to  be  peculiarly  human.  Yet  on 
the  biological  level,  the  same  fundamental  in¬ 
stincts  and  emotions  seem  to  prevail  in  animals 
and  men.  The  struggle  to  remain  alive  may  be 
presumed  to  occur  in  plants.  But  it  is  not  there 
as  plainly  discernible  as  in  the  specific  patterns 
of  behavior  manifested  by  the  animal  instinct 
of  self-preservation.  Almost  in  proportion  to 
the  degree  of  vitality,  the  instinct  of  self-pres¬ 
ervation  operates  with  a  strength  and  pertinac- 
itv  as  vigorous  as  the  love  for  life  and  arouses  as 
an  emotional  corollary  an  equally  devouring 
fear  of  death. 

The  instinct  of  self-preservation  is  the  life 
instinct.  Directed  toward  the  related  ends  of 
maintaining  and  increasing  life  are  the  repro¬ 
ductive  impulses  and  the  erotic  instincts.  But, 
according  to  Freud,  there  is  in  all  living  matter 
a  more  primitive  instinct  than  these,  and  one 
which  aims  in  the  opposite  direction.  That  is  the 
death  instinct — the  impulse  of  the  living  to  re¬ 
turn  to  lifelessness. 

“It  would  be  contrary  to  the  conservative 
nature  of  instinct,”  Freud  writes,  “if  the  goal  of 
life  were  a  state  never  hitherto  reached.  It  must 
rather  be  an  ancient  starting  point,  which  the 
living  being  left  long  ago,  and  to  which  it  harks 
back  again.  ...  If  we  may  assume  as  an  experi¬ 
ence  admitting  of  no  exception  that  everything 
dies  from  causes  within  itself,  and  returns  to  the 
inorganic,  we  can  only  say  ‘The  goal  of  all  life 
is  death.’  ” 

The  death  instinct,  according  to  Freud,  orig¬ 
inates  with  life  itself.  “At  one  time  or  another, 
by  some  operation  of  force  which  completely 
baffles  conjecture,  the  properties  of  life  were 
awakened  in  lifeless  matter.  .  .  .  The  tension 
then  aroused  in  the  previously  inanimate  mat¬ 
ter  strove  to  attain  an  equilibrium;  the  first  in¬ 
stinct  was  present,  that  to  return  to  lifelessness.” 
The  death  instinct  acts  against  the  tendency  of 


the  erotic  instincts,  “which  are  always  trying  to 
collect  living  substances  together  into  ever  larg¬ 
er  unities.  .  .  .  The  cooperation  and  opposition 
of  these  two  forces  produce  the  phenomena  of 
life  to  which  death  puts  an  end.” 

Freud’s  hypothesis  of  the  death  instinct  has 
a  bearing  on  the  impulse  to  commit  suicide  and 
on  the  question  whether  it  is  natural  or  perverse 
for  men  to  choose  this  escape  from  the  tensions 
and  difficulties  of  life.  The  psychological  prob¬ 
lem  here,  especially  with  regard  to  the  uncon¬ 
scious  forms  of  the  suicidal  impulse,  is  not  the 
same  as  the  moral  problem.  The  question 
whether  animals  other  than  men  ever  commit 
suicide,  like  the  question  whether  the  killing  of 
one  animal  by  another  can  be  called  “murder,” 
indicates  the  difference  between  psychological 
description  and  moral  judgment. 

For  the  moralist  the  condemnation  of  suicide 
seems  to  rest  on  the  same  grounds  as  the  con¬ 
demnation  of  murder.  With  Kant,  for  example, 
it  represents  the  same  type  of  violation  of  the 
universal  moral  law.  The  categorical  imperative 
requires  us  to  act  always  as  if  the  maxim  of  our 
individual  action  could  be  universalized  as  a 
rule  for  all  men  to  follow.  But,  in  the  case  of  sui¬ 
cide  as  in  the  case  of  murder,  the  maxim  of  the 
action  cannot  be  universalized  without  accom¬ 
plishing  a  result  which  no  one  intends.  Further¬ 
more,  suicide  is  not  consistent  with  the  idea  of 
the  human  person  as  an  end  in  itself.  The  man, 
says  Kant,  who  destroys  himself  “in  order  to 
escape  from  painful  circumstances  uses  a  person 
merely  as  a  means  to  maintain  a  tolerable  con¬ 
dition  up  to  the  end  of  life.” 

Suicide  is  also  condemned  by  the  theologians 
as  a  contravention  of  the  divine  as  well  as  of  the 
natural  law.  Men  are  God’s  handiwork  and, 
therefore,  as  Locke  puts  it,  “they  are  His  prop¬ 
erty  .  .  .  made  to  last  during  His,  not  one  an¬ 
other’s,  pleasure.”  Under  the  natural  law,  a  man 
is  not  at  liberty  to  destroy  himself,  nor  conse¬ 
quently  is  he  at  liberty  to  sell  himself  into  slav¬ 
ery.  Everyone  “is  bound  to  preserve  himself 
and  not  quit  his  station  willfully.”  If,  further¬ 
more,  there  is  an  after-life  of  rewards  and  pun¬ 
ishments,  suicide  is  no  escape.  “Death  so 
snatched,”  Adam  tells  Eve  in  Paradise  Lost , 
“will  not  exempt  us  from  the  pain  we  are  by 
doom  to  pay.” 


1020 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


There  is  similar  reasoning  in  pagan  antiquity. 
Suicide  is  an  act  of  violence  and,  says  Plotinus, 
“if  there  be  a  period  allotted  to  all  by  fate,  to 
anticipate  the  hour  could  not  be  a  happy  act. 
...  If  everyone  is  to  hold  in  the  other  world  a 
standing  determined  by  the  state  in  which  he 
quitted  this,  there  must  be  no  withdrawal  as 
long  as  there  is  any  hope  of  progress.”  A  Chris¬ 
tian  would  add  that  to  relinquish  hope  as  long 
as  life  persists  is  the  sin  of  despair. 


But  the  pagan  tradition  also  speaks  with  an 
opposite  voice.  For  the  Stoics,  suicide  does  not 
seem  to  be  as  reprehensible  as  murder.  To  those 
who  complain  of  life’s  pains  and  the  fetters  of 
the  body,  Epictetus  says,  “The  door  is  open.” 
In  a  doctrine  in  which  all  things  that  affect 
only  the  body  are  indifferent  to  the  soul’s  well¬ 
being,  death  too  is  indifferent.  “Death  is  the 
harbor  for  all ;  this  is  the  place  of  refuge ;  as  soon 
as  you  choose,  you  may  be  out  of  the  house.” 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGE 

1.  The  nature  and  cause  of  life:  the  soul  as  the  principle  of  life  in  organic  bodies  1021 

2.  Continuity  or  discontinuity  between  living  and  non-living  things:  comparison  of 

vital  powers  and  activities  with  the  potentialities  and  motions  of  inert  bodies  1022 


3.  The  modes  or  grades  of  corporeal  life:  the  classification  and  order  of  the  various  vital 
powers  or  functions 

30.  Continuity  or  discontinuity  between  plants  and  animals:  comparison  of  plant 

and  animal  nutrition,  respiration,  growth,  and  reproduction  1023 

3 b.  The  grades  of  animal  life:  types  and  degrees  of  mobility  and  sensitivity;  analogies 

of  structure  and  function  1024 


4.  The  biological  economy:  the  environment  of  the  organism;  the  interdependence  of 
plants  and  animals 


5.  Normal  vitality  and  its  impairment  by  disease,  degeneration,  and  enfeeblement  with 

age 

50.  The  nature  and  causes  of  health 
5 b.  The  restorative  function  of  rest  or  sleep 
5 c.  The  nature  and  causes  of  disease 

6.  The  life  span  and  the  life  cycle 

6a.  The  life  span  of  plants  and  animals,  and  of  different  species  of  plants  and  animals 
6b.  The  human  life  span 

6c.  The  biological  characteristics  of  the  stages  of  life 

7.  The  causes  and  occurrence  of  death:  the  transition  from  life  to  death 

8.  The  concern  of  the  living  with  life  and  death 

Sa.  The  love  of  life:  the  instinct  of  self-preservation;  the  life  instinct 

8b.  The  desire  for  death:  the  death  instinct;  the  problem  of  suicide 

8 c.  The  contemplation  and  fear  of  death:  the  attitude  of  the  hero,  the  philosopher, 
the  martyr 

8d.  The  ceremonials  of  death:  the  rites  of  burial  in  war  and  peace 


1025 

1026 


1027 


1028 

1029 


1030 

1032 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND  DEATH 


1021 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James:  Psychology,  116a-119b.  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  1 16  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g .,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 — (D)  II  Esdras  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  nature  and  cause  of  life:  the  soul  as  the 
principle  of  life  in  organic  bodies 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1:20-27;  2:7  /  Job , 
12:9-10 

7  Plato:  Cratylus ,  93c  /  Phaedrus ,  124b-d  / 
PhaedOy  223c-d;  225b;  244b-246c  /  Gorgias , 
275d-277b  passim  /  Laws ,  bk  x,  763a-764a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  10  [148^3-37] 
202b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  4  [1014^2-26] 
535a;  ch  8  [ioi7bio-i7]  538b;  bk  vii,  ch  10 
[i035bi4-28]  559a-b;  bk  ix,  ch  6  [io48bi 8— 34] 
574a-c;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [i072bi4~29]  602d-603a; 
BK  XIII,  CH  2  [l077a20-23]  608c  /  Soul ,  bk  1 
631a-641d  passim;  bk  ii,  ch  1-4  642a-647b; 
bk  in,  ch  12-13  667a-668d  /  Youth ,  Life ,  and 
Breathing ,  ch  1-4  7l4a-716b;  ch  14  720d-721a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [640b 
30-64 1  a33]  163c-164b  /  Generation  of  Animals , 
bk  1,  ch  19  [726bi5~29]  266d-267a;  bk  ii,  ch  i 
(73ib29-33]  272a-b;  [734b2°"735a9]  275b-d; 
ch  3  [737*18-34]  278a-b;  ch  5  [741*6-31] 
282a-b;  bk  iii,  ch  ii  [762ai8-b22]  303b-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  i  167a-b; 
bk  11,  ch  3,  185a-b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [865— 
1022]  26a-28a;  bk  iii  [94-416]  31b-35c;  bk  v 
[783-825]  71b-d 


17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  i  la-6b  passim  / 
Second  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  12-13  46c-47b  / 
Third  Ennead ,  tr  vi,  ch  3,  108b;  tr  viii, 
ch  8,  133a-b  /  Fourth  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  8, 
146c-d;  ch  9, 147b-c;  ch  19  151d-152b;  ch  23, 
153d;  tr  iv,  ch  29  173b-174b;  tr  v,  ch  7, 
188b-c;  tr  vii,  ch  2-5  192a-194a;  ch  14 
200b-c  /  Fifth  Ennead ,  tr  i,  ch  2,  208c-209a 
/  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  i  297b-d;  ch 
4-6  299a-300b;  ch  16,  305a;  tr  v,  ch  12 
310b-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  xii,  ch  25  358b- 
359a;  bk  xiii,  ch  2  360b-361a;  bk  xxii,  ch 
24,  609c-610a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  8 
626c-627a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  3,  a  i, 
ans  14b-15b;  q  4,  a  2,  rep  3  21b-22b;  q  10, 
a  1,  rep  2  40d-41d;  q  18  104b-108c;  q  27,  a  2, 
ans  154c-155b;  q  51,  a  i,  rep  3  275b-276b; 
a  3  277a-278c;  q  69,  a  2  361c-362c;  q  70, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  2-5  365b-367a;  qq  71-72 
367a-369d;  qq  75-76  378a-399b  passim; 
q  97,  a  3,  ans  515a-d;  qq  118-119  600a-608d 
passim 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  56, 
a  1,  rep  1  30a-c;  part  ii-ii,  q  23,  a  2,  rep  2 
483d-484d;  part  iii,  q  2,  a  5  715a-716b;  q  5, 
a  3  737d-739a 


1022 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1.  The  nature  and  cause  of  life:  the  soul  as  the 
principle  of  life  in  organic  bodies .) 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xviii 
[49-54]  80b-c;  xxv  [19-108]  91c-92c;  para¬ 
dise,  11  [127-148]  109a-b;  vn  [121-148]  116b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  intro,  47a-b;  part  i, 
65a;  part  hi,  173d;  176d;  part  iv,  251a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 
138a-b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  285d-286a; 
296a-d  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  316a-318b; 
325d-326d  /  On  Animal  Generation ,  384d- 
390b  passim;  431b-434a  esp  433c-d;  488d- 
496d 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  156a-d; 
207a; 226b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxvii,  sect  3-5  219d-220c  passim;  bk  iii, 
ch  x,  sect  22,  297d 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  191b-192b 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  5 5 5a- 5 58b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  47 
24a-b;  additions,  28  121b;  161  143a-b 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [6819-7004]  167a- 
171b;  [7851-7864]  191b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  27b-28a;  344b-345a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  145b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xii,  561b-d;  bk 
xiv,  608a-b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  140a 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  652d; 
654c-656d  esp  655c-656a;  659d-660b  /  Ego 
and  Id ,  708d-709a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures , 
851c 

2.  Continuity  or  discontinuity  between  living 
and  non-living  things:  comparison  of 
vital  powers  and  activities  with  the  po¬ 
tentialities  and  motions  of  inert  bodies 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  iv,  ch  5  [213^-9] 
292c;  bk  v,  ch  3  [227^0-17]  307d-308a;  bk 
vii,  ch  2  [244bi-245ai2]  328b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  i 
[250bn-i4]  334a;  ch  4  338d-340d;  ch  6 
[259^0^3 1  ]  345a-d  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[284b30-285ai]  376c  /  Meteorology ,  bk  iv,  ch 
1-3  482b,d-486a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  v,  ch  4 
[ioi4bi7~26]  534d-535a;  bk  vii,  ch  16  [i040b5- 
16]  564c  /  Soul ,  bk  1,  ch  5  [4iia7~23]  641a-b; 
bk  11,  ch  1  642a-643a;  ch  4  645b-647b;  ch  12 
656a-d  /  Longevity ,  ch  2-3  710b-711b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  viii,  ch  i 
[588b4-io]  114d-115a  /  Parts  of  Animals , 
bk  iv,  ch  5  [68iai2-i5]  211d  /  Motion  of  Ani¬ 
mals ,  ch  1  [698s! 5-21]  233b;  ch  4  [700^-27] 
235b-c;  ch  6  235d-236b;  ch  7  [7oibi]-CH  8 
[702bi2]  236d-238a  /  Generation  of  Animals , 
bk  1,  ch  23  [73ia3o— b8]  271c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[740ai3-i8]  281a;  bk  hi,  ch  ii  [76ib25~ 763bi 5] 
302d-304d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  i,  ch  7  170c- 
171a;  bk  ii,  ch  3,  186c-d 


2  to  3 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [215-264] 
3d-4b;  bk  ii  [865-930]  26a-d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ix,  sect  9  292b-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
1,  ans  14b-15b;  Q.18,  a  i  104c-105c;  a  4  107d- 
108c;  q  27,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  154c-155b;  q 
51,  a  3  277a-278c;  q  69,  a  2,  rep  i  361c-362c; 
q  7°,  a  3  365b-367a;  q  78,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  3 
407b-409a;  a  3,  ans  410a-411d;  q  118,  a  i, 
ans  600a-601c;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a  9,  rep  2 
692d-693d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  intro,  47a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Othello ,  act  v,  sc  ii  [7-15] 
239a 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  hi,  67b-d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  384a-b;  457a 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  27, 157b- 
158a;  aph  40,  171a-d;  aph  48  179d-188b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  59a-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  75  185b-186a  /  Great  Experi¬ 
ment,  382b-383a  /  Weight  of  Air,  425a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xxvi, 
sect  2,  217c;  ch  xxvii,  sect  3-5  219d-220c 
passim;  bk  hi,  ch  vi,  sect  12  271d-272b;  bk 
iv,  ch  iii,  sect  25  321a-b;  ch  xvi,  sect  12, 
370c-371a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d-338a 

42  Kant:  Judgement ,  555a-558b;  578d-582c  esp 
579d-580a,  582b-c;  602b, d  [fn  1] 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  119c 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  836d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  341c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  449b-c 

53  James  :  Psychology,  4a-6b;  68a-71b  passim,  esp 
68a-b;  85a-b;  95b-96a 

54  Freud:  Unconscious,  429c-d  /  Beyond  the 
Pleasure  Principle ,  651d-652d;  661b-c  /  New 
Introductory  Lectures ,  849d;  851c 

3.  The  modes  or  grades  of  corporeal  life:  the 
classification  and  order  of  the  various 
vital  powers  or  functions 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:11-12,20-31  / 

Psalms,  8  esp  8:4-8— (D)  Psalms,  8  esp  8:5-9 
/  Ecclesiastes,  3:18-22 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124c-128d  passim  /  Symposi¬ 
um,  165c-166b  /  Republic ,  bk  iv,  350c-353d  / 
Timaeus ,  466a-c;  469d-470a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i99a2o-bi3] 
276c-d  /  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  12  383b-384c  / 
Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  5  417b- 
420b  /  Meteorology ,  bk  iv,  ch  2  [379bio-25] 
483d-484a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [980^2- 
b27]  499a-b;  bk  ix,  ch  2  571c-572a;  ch  5 
573a-c  /  Soul  631a-668d  esp  bk  i,  ch  5  [4iob 
16-41  ia2]  640d-641a,  bk  ii,  ch  2-3  643a- 
645b,  bk  iii,  ch  12-13  667a-668d  /  Sense 
and  the  Sensible  673a-689a,c  /  Memory  and 
Reminiscence  690a-695d  /  Sleep  696a- 70 Id  / 
Youth,  Life,  and  Breathing  714a-726d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  viii,  ch  i 
114b,d-115b  /  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  t,  ch  i 


1023 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND  DEATH 


3  to  3a 

[64 ib5— 1  o]  164b  c;  bk  ii,  ch  10  [6^b2H-6^Gn 
1 4 ]  181d-182b;  bk  iv,  ch  5  [68 i“i 2-1 5]  2 11  d ; 
ch  10  [686b23-68yai  ]  218b-c  /  Motion  of  Ani¬ 
mals r,  ch  6-1 1  235d  239d  esp  ch  10  238c-239a 
/  Gait  of  Animals ,  ch  4  244a-245a  /  Genera¬ 
tion  of  Animals ,  bk  i,  ch  23  [7 3 ia24— b8] 
271c  d;  bk  ii,  ch  3  [736*25-b29]  276d  277c; 
ch  4  [740b25)-CH  5  [741*31]  281d-282b:  bk  iii, 
CH  7  l757bl4“3°l  298c  d;  ch  ii  [76iRi2-b23] 
302b  d  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  7  [io97b33-i098*7] 
343b;  ch  13  [1102*33-1103*3]  347d-348c  / 
Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  13  [i332a39-b8]  537a-b 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties  167a-2l5d  esp  bk 
1,  ch  1  167a-b,  ch  5-8  169b-171a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [258-322] 
33b-34b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  6,  llla-c;  bk 
ii,  ch  8,  146a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  16  262d- 
263a, c;  bk  v,  sect  16  271c-d;  bk  viii,  sect  7 
286a;  bk  ix,  sect  9  292b  d 

16  Kepler:  Epitome ,  bk  iv,  854b-856a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Enneady  tr  i,  ch  1-7  la-4a 
passim;  ch  ii  5b-c;  tr  iv,  ch  3,  13d  /  Fourth 
Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  19  151d-152b;  ch  23  153d- 
154b;  tr  iv,  ch  28  172a-173b;  tr  vii,  ch  14 
200b-c;  tr  ix,  ch  3  206a-b  /  Fifth  Ennead , 
tr  ii,  ch  2  215a-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  vii,  ch  23, 
256b-c;  ch  29  261a-b;  bk  xix,  ch  13,  519a  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  8  626c-627a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
1,  rep  2  14b-15b;  q  18,  aa  1-3  104c-107c;  q 
27,  a  2,  ans  154c-155b;  q  45,  a  5,  rep  i  245c- 
247a;  q  51,  a  3  277a-278c;  q  69,  a  2  361c- 
362c;  q  70,  a  3  365b-367a;  qq  71-72  367a- 
369d;  q  75,  a  1,  ans  378b-379c;  a  6,  rep  i 
383c-384c;  q  76,  a  5,  rep  3-4  394c-396a;  qq 
77-83  399b-440b;  q  98  516d-519a;  qq  118-119 
600a-608d;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  aa  8-9  692a-693d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  qiio, 
a  4,  rep  3  350d-351d;  part  iii,  q  7,  a  9,  ans 
751d-752c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xxv 
[37-84]  91d-92b;  paradise,  vii  [121-148] 
116b-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
137b-c;  138a-139b;  192d 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation ,  369d-370b; 
384d-390b  passim;  397b-398c;  441a-443b; 
444c-445c;  447a-b;  456b-458a  esp  457a-d 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  30 
159c-d;  aph  48,  186d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  v,  56a-b;  59a- 
60c  /  Objections  and  Replies ,  156a-d;  207a; 
244b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iii,  prop  57,  schol  415b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [469-490]  185b- 
186a;  bk  vii  [307-338]  223b-224b;  [387-550] 
225b-229a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  75  185b-186a;  339-344 
233a-b 


35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  11  15  140b  141a;  ch  xxvii,  sect  4-6 
220a  d;  bk  iii,  cii  vi,  sect  12  271d  272b;  bk 
iv,  cii  xvi,  sect  12,  370c  371a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  337d-338a 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  199c-200c  /  Judgement, 
578d  580a;  583b-c;  602b, d  [fn  1] 

45  I'araday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  836d 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  3a-b;  47c-49c; 
60b  61d;  64a  d;  71a-d;  241  b-c  /  Descent  of 
Man,  331  b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  4a-7a;  68b-73b  esp  68b, 
71a;  95b:  699a 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  401a-d  /  Instincts,  415b 
/  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  64 7a -648a; 
648 b-c;  651d-654b;  654d-657d  esp  656a, 
657b-c;  659d-661c  /  Ego  and  Id,  708d-709b; 
711c-712a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  851a-c 

3 a.  Continuity  or  discontinuity  between  plants 
and  animals:  comparison  of  plant  and 
animal  nutrition,  respiration,  growth, 
and  reproduction 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  viii,  403b-d  /  Timaeus, 
469d-470a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  10  [148*23-38] 
202b-c  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i99a20-bi3] 
276c-d  /  Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [292bi-u]  384a 
/  Soul,  bk  1,  ch  5  [4 1  obi 6—411*2]  640d-641a; 
bk  11,  ch  2  [4i3*20-b4]  643b-c;  ch  4  [4i5b28- 
416*5]  646a-b  /  Sleep,  ch  i  696a-697c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animdls,  bk  iv,  ch  6 
[53 ib8— 9]  58b;  bk  v,  ch  i  [539ai5~26]  65b-d; 
ch  ii  [543b23~3i]  70c;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [588b4~ 
589*2]  114d-115b  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii, 
ch  3  [650*1-37]  174c-175a;  ch  10  [655^7- 
656*8]  181d-182a;  bk  iv,  ch  4  [677b36— 678*1 5] 
207d-208a;  ch  5  [68i*io-b9]  211c-212b;  ch  6 
[682^6-28]  213d;  ch  10  [686b23-687*i]  218b-c 
/  Gait  of  Animals ,  ch  4  [705*26-b9]  244a- b  / 
Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [7i5bi7— 
716*2]  255d-256a;  ch  23  271b-d;  bk  ii,  ch 
1  [732*12-24]  272c;  [735*13-26]  275d-276a; 
CH  3  [73^24— bi4]  276d-277b;  ch  4  [740*24]- 
ch  5  [741*32]  281b-282b;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [752* 
10-23]  293a-b;  ch  5  [755b6-i3]  296c-d;  ch  7 
[757bl4“3°l  298c-d;  ch  ii  302b-304d;  bk  v, 
ch  1  [778b3o-779*4]  321a-b  /  Ethics,  bk  i, 
ch  13  [uo2*34-b4]  347d  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[1252*26-31]  445c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  i  167a-b 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [700-710] 
23d-24a;  bk  v  [783-820]  71b-d 
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  8,  146a-b 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18,  a 

1,  ans  and  rep  2  104c-105c;  a  2,  rep  i  105c- 
106b;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  106b-107c;  q  69,  a 

2,  rep  1  361c-362c;  q  72,  a  i,  rep  1,5  368b- 
369d;  q  1 18,  a  1  esp  rep  2  600a-601c;  q  119 
604c-608d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
143a-144c 


1024 


3b  to  4 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(3.  The  modes  or  grades  of  corporeal  life:  the 
classification  and  order  of  the  various  vital 
powers  or  functions.  3  a.  Continuity  or  dis¬ 
continuity  between  plants  and  animals : 
comparison  of  plant  and  animal  nutritionf 
respiration,  growth,  and  reproduction .) 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  278b;  299b-c  / 
Circulation  of  the  Blood ,  327d'328a  /  On  Ani¬ 
mal  Generation ,  368a-b;  369d-370b;  372b; 
384c-d;  397c-398c;  428c-429a;  442b-c;  449a-b; 
457c-d;  461b-d;  468b-469b;  471b-c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  27, 
158a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  ix, 
sect  11-15  140b-141a  passim;  bk  hi,  ch  vi, 
sect  12  271d-272b 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  579d-580a;  582b-c 

43  Federalist:  number  37,  119c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  ii, 
57b-c 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  47c-49c  passim, 
esp  49a-c;  115b;  241b-c  /  Descent  of  Man , 
372b-c 

53  James:  Psychology,  8a 

3 b.  The  grades  of  animal  life:  types  and  degrees 
of  mobility  and  sensitivity;  analogies  of 
structure  and  function 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  1:20-25 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  14 
[98a2o-23]  134a  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [4i3b4-io] 
643c;  [4i4ai— 3]  644a;  bk  hi,  ch  ii  [433b3i— 
434a9]  666d;  ch  12-13  667a-668d  /  Sense  and 
the  Sensible ,  ch  i  [436bi2~437ai7]  673c-674a; 
ch  5  [443bi7~445a4]  681c-682d  /  Youth ,  Life , 
and  Breathing  7 14a- 72  6d  passim 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals  7a-158d  esp  bk 

1,  ch  1-6  7a-13a,  bk  ii,  ch  i  19b,d-23d,  bk  iv, 
ch  8  59d-62a,  bk  v,  ch  i  65a-66a,  bk  viii,  ch  i 
114b,d-115b  /  Parts  of  Animals  161a-229d 
passim,  esp  bk  i,  ch  4  167d-168c,  ch  5  [645bi- 
646^]  169b-d  /  Gait  of  Animals  243a-252a,c 
/  Generation  of  Animals  255a-331a,c  esp  bk  i, 
ch  1-19  255a-268a,  bk  ii,  ch  i  272a-276a,  bk 
hi  290a-304d,  bk  iv,  ch  4-6  311c-317d,  bk  v 
320a-331a,c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  hi,  ch  2  199d- 
200a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  16  262d- 
263a, c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  18,  a 

2,  rep  1  105c-106b;  a  3,  ans  106b-107c;  q  50, 
a  4,  rep  1  273b-274b;  qq  71-72  367a-369d; 
q  76,  a  5,  rep  3  394c-396a;  q  78,  a  1,  ans  and 
rep  4  407b-409a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  274b-d;  277b- 
278d;  280c-283a;  299b-302c  /  On  Animal 
Generation ,  336b-d;  338a-496d  esp  449a-454c, 
463d-464a,  470c-472c 

30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  27, 158a; 
aph  30  159c-d 


35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ix 
sect  11-15  140b-141a;  bk  iii,  ch  vi,  sect  12 
271d-272b 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ix,  div 
82  487b-c 

42  Kant:  Judgement,  578d-580a  esp  579b-c; 
602b, d  [fn  1] 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  273a-274a;  279a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  75b-78c;  82d-94c; 
112b-113c;  207a-229a,c  esp  228c-229a,c;  238b- 
239a  /  Descent  of  Man,  255a-265d;  271a-275c; 
278c-284b;  300a-b;  331a-341d  esp  332a-c, 
337a-341d;  348b-c;  402b-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  13a-14b;  19b-42b  passim, 
esp  40a,  41b;  51a-52a;  705b-706b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Prmciple,  651  d- 
654b  esp  653  b,  654a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents,  7 68 d- 7 69a 

4.  The  biological  economy:  the  environment  of 
the  organism;  the  interdependence  of 
plants  and  animals 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:11-13,20-31 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  63b-c;  64b-c;  bk 
iii,  112d-113b 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  vi,  377c-d  /  Timaeus, 
469d-470a 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [i94bi3]  271a 
/  Meteorology,  bk  iv,  ch  i  482b,d-483c  / 
Longevity  710a-713a,c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i 
[487aM-b5]  8a-b;  bk  v,  ch  ii  [543bi9-3i] 
70b-c;  ch  22  [553b2o-23]  80c;  ch  31  [557a4~ 
32]  83d-84a;  bk  vi,  ch  17  [57ob29-57ia2] 
96d;  bk  viii,  ch  2-29  115c-132d  esp  ch  2-13 
115c-125b,  ch  18-20  127b-129b,  ch  28-29 
131c-132d;  bk  ix,  ch  1  [6o8bi9]-cH  2  [6iob 
19]  134a-136b;  ch  31  [6i8b9— 13]  144a-b;  ch 
32  [6i9a27~3i]  144d-145a;  ch  37  [622^-15] 
147c  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  8  [684ai-i4] 
215b;  ch  12  [693aio-24]  225a  /  Gait  of 
Animals,  ch  15  [7i3a3]-CH  18  [71 4b8]  250d- 
252a  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  10 
[76oa27~b28]  301  b-d 

10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters ,  Places  9a-19a,c 
esp  par  1-2  9a-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  ii,  ch  8-9  191b- 
199a,c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [784-787] 
40b;  bk  v  [837-877]  72a-c;  [925-1010]  73b-74b 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  32,  175d- 
176a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  69,  a 
2  361c-362c;  qq  71-72  367a-369d;  q  118,  a  i, 
rep  3  600a-601c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day, 
160c-d;  second  day,  187d-188c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  453c 

33  Pascal:  Equilibrium  of  Liquids,  401a-403a  / 
Weight  of  Air,  415a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  224a-b;  295b- 
296b 


5  to  5  a 

38  Montesqui  eu  :  Spirit  of  La  tvs,  rk  xiv.  102b, d- 
104a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  334b, d  337d  passim 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations ,  bk  i,  33c  34a; 
63a -b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  428c-d 

42  Kant:  judgement,  553c-554b;  583b  c;  584d- 
585c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  part  ii, 
57b  c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat ,  209b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dick,  227b  228a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  9b  l0d;  32a-41c 
esp  38b-39a;  49d-55b  esp  52d-53a,  53d-55b; 
65a-d;  68b-69c;  81a-c;  181a-206a,c  passim, 
esp  184d-188c.  204d-206a,c;  242d-243d  / 
Descent  of  Man ,  268b-269a;  341b, d  [fn  32]; 
350b-356a:  424a-425d;  430d-432c;  442a-443b; 
525b-527c;  554d-555b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  701a 

5.  Normal  vitality  and  its  impairment  by  dis¬ 
ease,  degeneration,  and  enfeeblement 
with  age 

7  Plato:  Timaeus ,  471d-474d 

8  Aristotle:  Physics ,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246aio-bi9] 
329c-330a  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [288bi 5— 19] 
380ab  /  Soul ,  bk  i,  ch  4  [4o8bi8-29]  638c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  vi,  ch  25 
103c;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [58ib25~582a4]  107b  c  / 

0/  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  5  [65 ia37~bi8] 
176c;  ch  7  177c-179a  esp  [653bi~7]  178d-179a 
/  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  1,  ch  18  [725b 
18-25]  265d-266a;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [766^7-34] 
308b;  bk  v,  ch  i  [78oai4~bi2]  322bd;  ch  4 
[784-3  i-b37]  326b-d 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine ,  par  3-4  Id- 
2c;  par  9-22  3b-8d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  ii,  ch  8-9  191b- 
199a, c  esp  ch  8,  194c-d,  ch  9,  195c-196a 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  ii  [1105- 
1174]  29a-30a,c;  bk  iii  [445-458]  35d-36a 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  i  259b, d 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  70,  a  1,  rep  7  893d-895d 
22  Chaucer:  Reeve  s Prologue  [3862-3896]  224a-b 
/  Wifc  of  Bath's  Prologue  [6051-6062]  263b- 
264a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
181d-182b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  33b-c;  156d  l58a,c; 

394a-395b;  406c-408b 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI ,  act  ii,  sc  v  [i- 
16]  12d-13a  /  As  You  Like  It,  act  ii,  sc  vii 
[137-166]  608d-609a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  296a-d  /  On 
Animal  Generation,  433a-c;  493a-b 
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [527-543]  310b- 
311a 

34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  i,  384b-385b 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  127a-128a 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  352b-353a 


1025 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  368d-369a  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  419c  d 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  143d  145c  esp  145a 
/  Descent  of  Man,  256c;  323c-327b  passim; 
354a-355c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  449b  c;  bk  xi, 
499c-500c;  bk  xv,  617a-b;  epilogue  i,  665a  d 

53  James:  Psychology,  19b-41a  passim,  esp  21a- 
26b;  44a-47a;  431b  433a;  815a 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  655b- 
657d  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety, 
718a719d 

5 a.  The  nature  and  causes  of  health 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv,  157a 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  2d-3b  /  Symposium,  155d- 
157a  /  Gorgias,  282c-283a  /  Republic ,  bk  iii, 
334b-337a;  bk  iv,  355b-d  /  Timaeus,  474d- 
475d  /  Philebus,  616d-617a 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  8  [8b25~9a28]  13d- 
14b  passim  /  Topics,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [i  i6bi7— 21  ] 
163a- b  /  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246aio-bi9] 
329c-330a  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  ch  12  [292ai4-bi8] 
383d-384b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  20  [i022b 
10-13]  544a  /  Soul,  bk  1,  ch  4  [4o8ai-2]  637c; 
bk  11,  ch  2  [4i4a4— 14]  644a-b  /  Sense  and  the 
Sensible,  ch  5  [445ai7-3i]  683a-b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  19 
[520bi9~52iai5]  45c-46a;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [58^25- 
582^]  107b-c  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  5 
[65iS37-bi7]  176c;  ch  7  177c-179a;  bk  iv,  ch 
2  [^77a5~bll  206d-207b  /  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  2 
[ii04aio-i9]  349c;  bk  v,  ch  i  [1129^2-25] 
376b-c;  ch  ii  [1138^9-32]  386d;  bk  vi,  ch  12 
[1  i43b2i— 1 144^5]  393b-c  passim;  bk  vii,  ch  14 
[ii54bi7-2o]  406a, c  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  17 
[1336^-39]  541a-c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[1 36ib3— 7]  602a;  ch  7  [i363b34-i364a5]  605b 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  13-19 
4c-7b  /  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases,  par  9,  29d 
/  Surgery,  par  20  73d  /  Articulations,  par  58, 
113a  /  Sacred  Disease,  156b-c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  ii,  ch  8,  194c-d; 
ch  9,  195c-196a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [558-565] 
37b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect  8  269d- 
270b 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  13,  519a; 
bk  xxii,  ch  24,  610c-611a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, 
a  2  2b-4a;  a  3,  rep  3  4b-5a;  a  4,  ans  5a-6a; 
q  50,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2-3  6a-7b;  a  3,  rep  2 
8b-9a;  q  51,  a  i,  ans  12b-13c;  q  52,  a  i,  ans 
15d-18a;  a  2,  ans  18a-19a;  Q  54,  a  i,  ans  22d- 
23d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iii, 
134d-135a;  bk  iv,  234a-235a;  239d-240a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  233c-236a  passim;  368d; 
369d-370a;  528c-529b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  296d-297a  /  On 
Animal  Generation,  433a-c;  493a-b 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND  DEATH 


1 


1026 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  Normal  vitality  and  its  impairment  by  dis¬ 
ease,  degeneration,  and  enfeeble  merit  with 
age.  5a.  The  nature  and  causes  of  health .) 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  72b 
32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  407b 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  412a-417a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  335a-b;  336b-337a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  293d-294b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  87d-88a 

42  Kant:  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
368d-369a  /  Judgement ,  509c-d 
44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  171d-172a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  324d;  356d-357c 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  52d 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  635b-c 

5b.  The  restorative  function  of  rest  or  sleep 

5  Sophocles:  Philoctetes  [821-832]  189c 

8  Aristotle:  Sleep  696a-701d  esp  ch  2  [455bi3~ 
28]  698b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [653s 
11-20]  178b-c  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  13  [no2a 
3 4— b  13]  347d-348a 

10  Hippocrates:  Prognostics,  par  10  21c 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [907-961] 
56a-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Midsummer-Night's  Dream , 
act  hi,  sc  11  [431-436]  367c  /  2nd  Henry  IV, 
act  hi,  sc  1  [1-3 1  ]  482d-483a  /  Henry  V,  act 
iv,  sc  1  [270-301]  554b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear ,  act  iv,  sc  iv  [1-20] 
272b-c  /  Macbeth,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [35—43]  291c-d 
/  Henry  VIII,  act  v,  sc  i  [1-5]  578a  /  Son¬ 
nets,  xxvii  590c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  413b 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  ^Shandy,  348b-349b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  35a-b 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  352b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [4613-4727]  115a- 
117b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  91b 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  112b;  128a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  144d-146d; 
bk  xii,  554b-d;  bk  xiii,  584c 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  478c-d;  617b-c 

5c.  The  nature  and  causes  of  disease 

Old  Testament:  Leviticus,  26:16  /  Numbers, 
12:10-15;  16:46-50  /  Deuteronomy,  28:21- 
22,27-28,35,58-62  /  II  Kings ,  5:27 —(D) 
IV  Kings ,  5:27  /  I  Chronicles,  21:14-15— (D) 
I  Paralipomenon,  21:14-15  /  II  Chronicles, 
26:18-21  —  (D)  II  Paralipomenon,  26:18-21  / 
Job,  2:7  /  Psalms,  107:17-20— (D)  Psalms, 
106:17-20 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  37:29-31  —  (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  37:32-34  /  II  Maccabees,  3:27- 
29  —(D)  OT,  II  Machabees,  3:27-29 
New  Testament:  Matthew,  9:32-33;  17:14-18  / 
I  Corinthians,  11:25-30 


5b  to  5c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  32c-d;  38a-b;  bk 
ii,  64c-d;  bk  hi,  96c;  bk  iv,  135c-d;  157a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  399b- 
401b 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  155d-157a  esp  156d  / 
Republic ,  bk  iii,  334b-337a;  bk  iv,  345b-c; 
355b-c;  bk  x,  435a-c  /  Timaeus,  472a-474b 

8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246aio-bi9] 
329c-330a  /  Meteorology,  bk  iv,  ch  7  [384^5- 
34]  488c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  iii,  ch  ii 
[5i8b2-4]  43a;  ch  15  [519^5-20]  44c;  ch  19 
[52iaio-32]  46a-b;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [58ib22-582a 
4]  107b-c;  ch  12  114c;  bk  viii,  ch  18-27  127b- 
131b  passim;  ch  29  132c-d  /  Parts  of  Animals, 
bk  11,  ch  5  [65ia37~bi8]  176c;  ch  7  [653bi— 7] 
178d-179a;  bk  iii,  ch  7  [67ob5-n]  199a;  bk 
iv,  ch  2  [677^5— bi  ]  206d-207b  /  Generation  of 
Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  7  317d-318b;  bk  v,  ch  4 
[784a3i-b35]  326b-d  /  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [no4a 
10-19]  349c;  bk  v,  ch  1  [ii29ai2-25]  376b-c; 
ch  11  [1 138*29-32]  386d;  bk  vii,  ch  8  [ii5ob 
29-35]  401c-d 

10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  1  la-b; 
par  3  ld-2b;  par  6  2d-3a;  par  9-1 1  3b-4b;  par 
13-22  4c-8d  /  Airs,  Waters,  Places ,  par  1-10 
9a-14a;  par  22  17b-18a  /  Regimen  in  Acute 
Diseases,  par  9-10  29d-30d;  appendix,  par  1 
35c-d;  par  3  35d-36a;  par  5-6  36b-37a;  par  17 
40d-41a  /  Epidemics,  bk  i,  sect  i,  par  1  44a-b; 
sect  11,  par  7-8  47a-c;  bk  iii,  sect  iii,  par  1-2 
56d-57a;  par  15  59b  /  Surgery,  par  20  73d  / 
Fractures,  par  31,  87a  /  Articulations,  par  12 
96a-b;  par  58,  113a  /  Aphorisms ,  sect  ii,  par 
51  133d;  sect  iii,  par  1-19  134a-d;  sect  v, 
par  16-24  138b-c  /  Fistulae ,  par  1  150a  / 
Hemorrhoids,  par  1  152b  /  Sacred  Disease  154a- 
160d  esp  155d-156a,  160b-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  ii,  ch  8-9  191b- 
199a, c  passim;  bk  iii,  ch  12  208b-209b  esp 
208d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [459— 
614]  36a-38a;  bk  vi  [769-829]  90c-91b;  [1090- 
1286]  94d-97a,c 

17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  14  74b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  71, 
a  1,  rep  3  105d-106c;  q  72,  a  5,  ans  115a-116b; 
q  77,  a  3,  ans  147c-148b;  q  88,  a  1,  ans  193a- 
194b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  151b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  330b-c;  367b-368a; 

369d-370a;  371c-d;  528c-529b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  296a-d  /  Circu¬ 
lation  of  the  Blood,  305a-d;  316c-d;  321d-322a 
/  On  Animal  Generation,  386d-387a;  407a; 
423b;  433a-c;  455d-456a;  493a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  52b-d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  61c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [477-548]  309b- 
311a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  155b-157a;  161b- 
162a 


6  to  6c 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  412a~417a 

38  Montesquieu;  Spirit  of  La  tvs,  bk  xiv,  106b- 
107a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  336b -33 7a;  364b-c 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  34d-35b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  70a-71a,c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  306d-307a 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  9d-10a  /  Descent 
of  Man,  256a;  350d-354a  passim;  356d-357b; 
380  b-c 

50  Marx:  Capital y  115c;  118b-124a  passim;  178a; 
194b-195b;  204a-c;  236c-237d;  324a-330d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  52d;  bk  v, 
222b;  bk  ix,  372a-374d 

53  James:  Psychology,  69a-b;  799a-807a  esp  799a- 
800a,  806a-b;  815a;  895a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  4c-5a  /  Hysteria,  25a-59d  csp  25a- 
30d,  37d-38d,  56b-58c;  87a-97b;  llla-115a 
esp  114b-115a  /  Narcissism,  402d-404a  / 
General  Introduction,  593b-595b;  601b-607b 
esp  605b-606a  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and 
Anxiety ,  744b-747b  esp  746c 

6.  The  life  span  and  the  life  cycle 

6a.  The  life  span  of  plants  and  animals,  and  of 
different  species  of  plants  and  animals 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  475 d 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  9  [279a23~b4] 
370c-d  /  Longevity  710a-713a,c 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  v,  ch  14 
[545bl5-2°]  72b;  ch  15  [547^-1 1]  74b;  ch  18 
[550bi4-i6]  77c;  ch  22  [554b6-8]  81b;  ch  33 
[558ai6-2o]  84d-85a;  bk  vi,  ch  4  [563^-3] 
89b;  ch  9  [564^5-27]  90c;  ch  12  [^66b2^-2j] 
92d-93a;  ch  17  [57 ia8— 1 2]  96d-97a;  ch  18 
[573b][6-1 7]*  ch  19  [573b23-29]  99c;  ch  20 
[574b3°-575a4l  100 c ;  ch  21  [575a32~34]  l°la; 
ch  22  [576a26-b4]  102a;  ch  23  [577b3~5]  103a; 
ch  24  [577^8-578^]  103c;  ch  26  [578ai2— 13] 
103d;  ch  29  [578b22-27]  104b-c;  bk  viii,  ch  2 
[592*23-24]  118c;  ch  9  [596*9—13]  122a;  bk  ix, 
ch  7  [613*17— b5]  138d-139a;  ch  37  [622^5- 
32]  147d;  ch  41  [627b29-628a7]  153a-b;  ch  44 
[629b27~34]  155a;  ch  46  [630^3-26]  156a  / 
Parts  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  2  [677a20-bi] 
207a-b  /  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  10 
319c-320a,c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [878-898] 
72c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  34a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxvi,  sect  4  218a-b 

49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  99b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  652d; 
655b;  657c-d 

6b.  The  human  life  span 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  5  esp  5:5,  5:27;  6:3; 
9:28-29;  11:10-32;  23:1-2;  25:7-8;  35:28-29; 
47:9;  50:26  /  Numbers,  33:38-39  /  Deuteron- 


1027 

omy,  34:7  /  Joshua ,  24:29— (D)  Josue,  24:29  / 
Psalms,  90:10 — (D)  Psalms ,  89:10 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  18:9-10— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  18:8 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [1080-1113]  267d  268a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  7b-8a;  bk  iii,  93d- 
94b 

7  Plato:  Timaeus,  469a;  475d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  15 
[493^32—494*1  ]  16a  /  Generation  of  Animals, 
bk  iv,  ch  10  3l9c-320a,c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  5 
[i36ib3i— 34]  602c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  [693-705]  186a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  29c-30a;  156d-157b; 
535d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [523-548]  310b- 
311a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  413b-414a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  336a-b  /  Social  Con¬ 
tract,  bk  iii,  419c-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  1,  33c-34a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  360b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  324d;  325c-327a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  118b-d;  194b- 195b  passim; 
229a-b;  318a-b 

6c.  The  biological  characteristics  of  the  stages 
of  life 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  17:15-19;  18:9-15; 
21:1-8;  27:1  /  Deuteronomy,  34:7  /  I  Kings, 
1:1-4— (D)  III  Kings ,  1:1-4  /  Proverbs,  20:29 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  14:17-18— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  14:18-19 

New  Testament:  John,  21:18 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [71-82]  52d 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [1080-1113]  267d-268a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iii,  118b 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  i,  296a-c  /  Timaeus, 
471d-472a 

8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  4  [4o8bi8-29]  638c 
/  Youth,  Life,  and  Breathing,  ch  23-26  724d- 
726b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  i 
[5oob26-50ia7]  23a-b;  ch  2-5  23d-24b;  bk 
iii,  ch  ii  [5i8a5]-cH  12  [519*9]  42c-43d;  ch 
18  [520b7~io]  45b-c;  ch  19  [52ia3i]-CH  20 
[52ibio]  46b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  9  [536b5— 8]  63a-b; 
ch  10  [537bi5~2o]  64b;  bk  v,  ch  14  71b-73b; 
ch  19  [551*13— 552b5]  78a-79b;  ch  30  [556b 
5-10]  83b;  bk  vi,  ch  3  [56ia4~562a22]  87c- 
88c;  bk  vi,  ch  i8-bk  vii,  ch  12  97b-114a,c 
passim,  esp  bk  vii,  ch  i  106b,d-108a;  bk  viii, 
ch  30  [607^7-33]  133c;  bk  ix,  ch  5  [6 1 1  a3 1 — 
b6]  137a;  ch  32  [6 1 9ai 6—29]  144d;  ch  37  [622s 
15-31]  147d;  ch  44  [629b27~33]  155a  /  Parts 
of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [65ib2o-28]  176d; 
bk  iv,  ch  10  [686b5— 28]  218a-b  /  Gait  of 
Animals,  ch  ii  [7iobi2-i8]  248d  /  Generation 
of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  18  [725bi8-25]  265d- 
266a;  ch  19  [727a2-io]  267a-b;  ch  20  [728b 
23—34]  268d-269a;  bk  ii,  ch  6  282d-287a; 
bk  iv,  ch  2  [766b27~3i]  308b;  ch  6  316c- 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND  DEATH 


1028 

(6.  The  life  span  and  the  life  cycle .  6c.  The  biolog¬ 
ical  characteristics  of  the  stages  of  life.) 
317d;  ch  8  [776bi5— 23]  318d;  bk  v,  ch  i  [778b 
20-77^13]  321a-d;  [780^4^9]  322b-d;  ch  3 
[78ib3o-782ai9]  324a-b;  ch  3  [783b2]-CH  8 
[789b2i]  325c-331a,c  passim  /  Politics ,  bk  vii, 
ch  1 6  [i335a7~ 34]  540a-b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii, 
ch  12  [1389^-6]  636b;  ch  13  [i39oau-i6] 
637c;  ch  14  [i39ob9-n]  638a 
10  Hippocrates:  Injuries  of  the  Head ,  par  18 
69a-b  /  Articulations ,  par  12  96a-b;  par  29 
99c;  par  41  103c-104b;  par  52-53  109b-llla; 
par  55  llla-c;  par  60  113b-d  /  Aphorisms , 
sect  i,  par  13-14  131d;  sect  ii,  par  39  133c; 
par  53  133d;  sect  iii,  par  3  134a;  par  18 
134d;  par  24-31  135a-b;  sect  vi,  par  6  140c; 
par  30  141a;  par  57  141d;  sect  vii,  par  82 
144a  /  Sacred  Disease ,  15 7b- 158b 
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties ,  bk  ii,  ch  8,  193a-d 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iii  [445— 
458]  35d-36a;  bk  iv  [1037-1057]  57d 
12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  i  259b, d 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  iii  suppl, 
q  70,  a  1,  rep  7  893d-895d 
22  Chaucer:  Reeve's  Prologue  [3862-3896]  224a-b 
/  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [6051-6062]  263b- 
264a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  33b-c;  156d-158a,c; 

339a-d;  394a-395b;  406c-408b;  429d-430a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  v  [i- 
16]  12d-13a  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  i,  sc  ii  [201- 
208]  472a-b  /  Henry  V,  act  v,  sc  ii  [167-174] 
565a  /  As  You  Lihe  It,  act  ii,  sc  vii  [137-166] 
608d-609a 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [197-206] 
42c-d/  King  Lear,  act  i,  sc  i  [291-312]  247c- 
d;  act  11,  sc  iv  [148-158]  260a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart ,  281a-282c; 
300b-c  /  On  Animal  Generation ,  352c;  363d- 
383c;  391a-c;  449a-454c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [527-543]  310b- 
311a 

34  Newton:  Optics ,  bk  i,  384b-385b 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  127a-128a 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  352b-353b 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  336a-b 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  306d-307a;  360b 
47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [11,531-538]  280b 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species ,  lid- 12a;  219d- 
225b  passim,  esp  219d-220a,  221b-222a; 

257c-258a;  377c-381d  passim,  esp  377d- 
378c,  381c-d;  511a-525a;  562c-563a 
51  Tolstoy:  War andPeace,  bk  v,  209a-c;  bk  vm, 
305b-310d  passim;  bk  x,  391d-394d;  bk  xiii, 
584c;  586c;  epilogue  i,  659d-660b;  665a-d 

53  James:  Psychology,  431b-433a;  714a-715b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  15a-16c  /  Sexual  Enlightenment  of 
Children,  119d-120b  /  General  Introduction, 
572d-576a  passim,  esp  573a-b,  574a-c;  579b- 
580d  J  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety, 
746c- d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  770b 


6c  to  7 

7.  The  causes  and  occurrence  of  death:  the 
transition  from  life  to  death 

4  Homer:  Odyssey ,  bk  xi  [215-224]  245b;  bk 
xvii  [290-327]  280a-c 

7  Plato:  Phaedo,  223c-d;  225b;  246c  /  Gorgias , 
292 d  /  Republic ,  bk  x,  434c-436a  /  Timaeus, 
471d-472a 

8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  iii,  ch  13  [435b4— 1 9]  668c 
/  Youth,  Life,  and  Breathing ,  ch  4-27  715d- 
726d 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  4 
[489^0-22]  lOb-c;  bk  v,  ch  20  [553ai2- 
16]  79d-80a;  bk  vii,  ch  12  [588*7-9]  114c  / 
Parts  of  Animals ,  bk  ii,  ch  7  [653^-7]  178d- 
179a;  bk  iii,  ch  4  [66ya^2-hu{]  195c-d  /  Gen¬ 
eration  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  5  [741b  15-24] 
282d 

10  Hippocrates:  Prognostics,  par  2-3  19b-20b; 
par  9  21b-c  /  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases,  ap¬ 
pendix,  par  9  38b-c  /  Aphorisms,  sect  ii,  par 
44  133c;  sect  vi,  par  18  140d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [417— 
829]  35c-40c 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  5  264b; 
bic  vi,  sect  28  276c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  6,  24a;  tr 
ix  34b-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xiii,  ch  9-1  i 
363c-365c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  119, 
a  1,  rep  4  604c-607b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  72, 
a  5,  ans  115a-116b;  q  85,  a  6  182d-184a;  q  88, 
a  1,  ans  193a-194b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  156d-157b;  176c-180b; 
530a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  ii,  sc  iii  [1-28] 
541a-b 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  276d-278a; 
296a- d  /  On  Animal  Generation,  407a-b; 
433a-c;  493a-b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  52d-53a 

31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  127c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  4  425b-d; 

prop  39  436b-437a 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  368d-369a  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  iii,  419c-d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  306d-307a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  351a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  326b-327a:  383d- 
384c 

50  Marx:  Capital ,  122c-124a;  194b-195b;  228d- 
229b;  318a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  44b-45b;  bk 
iv,  180d-183c;  bk  x,  406c-410c;  bk  xi,  499c- 
500c;  bk  xii,  558a-562d;  bk  xv,  624d-625b; 
epilogue  1,  650d-651a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi, 
149c-150d;  bk  vi-vii,  170c-177b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle.  652b- 
653a;  654c-657d  /  Ego  and  Id,  708d-709a; 
7lld  712a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1029 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND  DEATH 


3  to  Sb 

8.  The  concern  of  the  living  with  life  and  death 

8a.  The  love  of  life:  the  instinct  of  self-preserva¬ 
tion;  the  life  instinct 

Old  Testament:  Genesis.  3:22-24  /  Job ,  2:4  / 
Psalms.  21:4;  34:12-14;  49:6-12;  91:16— (D) 
Psalms.  20:5;  33:13-15;  48:7-13;  90:16  /  Ec¬ 
clesiastes.  9:4-6 

New  Testament:  Matthew.  19:16-30  /  Marl [. 
10:17-31  /  Luke.  10:25-37  /  John.  12:25;  15:13 
/  I  Timothy.  6:17-19  /  /  Peter.  3:10-11 

15  Euripides:  Ilippolytus  [189-197]  226cd  / 
Alcestis  237a-247a,c  esp  [629-746]  242c  243c 
/  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [1211-1252]  436a-c 
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  iv,  140d-141a;  bk 
vi,  191a  b;  bk  vii,  224d-225a;  bk  ix,  296c- 
297a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War.  bk  vii, 
559b  d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ix,  ch  9  [1 1 7oai 3— b8] 
423d-424b;  bk  x,  ch  4  [ii75aio-22]  429c  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  11,  ch  13  [1389^*32—35]  637b 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  30a- 
44a, c  passim 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  ii  258a-b 
15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  v,  301  d 
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  11  21d- 
22a;  bk  viii,  par  18  57d-58a;  par  25  60a  / 
City  of  God.  bk  xix,  ch  4,  513a 
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica.  part  i,  q  75,  a 
6,  ans  383c-384c 

22  Chaucer:  Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [15,282-287] 
457b 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  86c;  90a;  part  ii, 
115d:  142bc;  155b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays.  31d-32c;  184a;  267b-c; 
339a-d:  511d-512a^ 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  IV.  act  v,  sc  iv 
[iii  132]  465c 

27  Shakespeare:  Othello,  act  i,  sc  iii  [306- 
369]  212b-d  /  King  Lear,  act  v,  sc  iii  [184- 
186]  281b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning.  51b-c;  72c- 
73a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  18,  schol- 
ppop  25  429a-431a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees.  156-157  201b-202a 
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  6-8  26b- 
27a;  ch  iii,  sect  16-18  28d-29b 
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iii,  124a-129a 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy.  238a-239b;  459a- 
460a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones.  250b-d 
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality.  330d-331b;  337c; 

342  d  343a;  343c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals.  258b 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par  127 
45b-c;  .additions,  81  128d-129a 
47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [602-807]  16b-21a; 
[1544-1626]  37b-39a;  part  ii  [8909-9126] 
216b-221b 


48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  144a;  344b  345a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man.  311a  b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iii,  159d  160a; 
bk  vi,  262d  263a;  bk  x,  439b  440a;  457a-c; 
461d-464a;  bk  xi,  527a-b;  bk  xii,  549c-551c; 
558a-562d;  epilogue  i,  665a-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v, 
118b  119a;  bk  vi,  149c  150d 

53  James:  Psychology.  92a  b;  198b;  208a-209b; 
700b;  709b 

54  Freud:  Narcissism.  399b  /  Instincts.  414d-415b 
/  General  Introduction.  591d-592c;  607d-608a; 
615b-616b;  623b-c  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Prin¬ 
ciple.  651d-662b  esp  653a-d,  657c-659a,  659d- 
661c;  663c  /  Ego  and  Id.  708d-712a  passim, 
esp  708d-709b,  711c;  717c  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents.  790a-b;  791  a- d  /  New  Introduc¬ 
tory  Lectures.  846b-c;  851cd 

8b.  The  desire  for  death:  the  death  instinct;  the 
problem  of  suicide 

Old  Testament:  I  Samuel.  31 :4~6— (JD)  1  Kings. 
31 14-6  /  II  Samuel.  17:23— (JD)  II  Kings.  17:23 
/  I  Chronicles.  10:1-6— (D)  /  Paralipomenon. 
10:1-6  /  Job.  3  esp  3:13-22;  6:8-13;  7:13-16,21; 
10:1,18-22;  14:13-14;  16:22-17:1;  17:13-16— 
(D)  Job.  3  esp  3:13-22;  6:8-13;  7:13-16,21; 
10:1,18-22;  14:13-14;  16:23-17:1;  17:13-16  / 
Proverbs.  8:36;  11  :i9;  21 :6  /  Ecclesiastes.  4:2-3; 
6:3-5;  7:1-4— (D)  Ecclesiastes.  4:2-3;  6:3-5; 
7:2-5  /  Isaiah.  28:14-18— (D)  Isaias.  28:14-18 
/  Jeremiah,  8:3;  20:14-18— (D)  Jeretnias.  8:3; 
20:14-18  /  Jonah.  4 —(D)  Jonas.  4 
Apocrypha:  Tobit.  4:2 —(D)  OT,  Tobias.  4:1  / 
Wisdom  of  Solomon.  1:12-16;  2:23-24 — (D) 
OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom.  1:12-16;  2:23-25  / 
Ecclesiasticus.  23:14;  30:17;  41:2-3— (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  23:18-19;  30:17;  41:3-5 
New  Testament:  John.  11:16  /  Acts,  20:24  / 
Philippians.  1:20-24  /  Revelation,  9:6— (D) 
Apocalypse,  9:6 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [1297— 1415] 
1  llb-1 12b  /  Oedipus  at  Colomis  [1211-1248] 
125b-c  /  Antigone  [1261-1353]  141d-142d  / 
Ajax  [394-865]  146c-150c  /  Electra  [804-822] 
162c-d  /  Trachmiae  [871-1278]  177d-181a,c  / 
Philoctetes  [779-809]  189a-b 

5  Euripides:  Rhesus  [756-761]  209d  /  Trojan 
Women  [622-683]  275b-d  /  Helen  [252-305] 
300c-d  /  Hecuba  [218-582]  354d-357d  / 
Heracles  Mad  [1088-1393]  374b-377b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  9d-10a;  47c-d; 
bk  11,  62d-63a;  bk  v,  160c-d;  bk  vi,  199c-d; 
bk  vii,  224d-225a;  245d;  bk  ix,  303c-304a 

7  Plato:  Phaedo,  222a-225c  /  Laws,  bk  ix, 
753b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  ii  [1138^-13] 
386b-c;  bk  ix,  ch  4  [1 1 66bi  1— 13]  419d 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [31—93] 
30b-31b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  9  114c-116b; 
ch  24  129a-d 


1030 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(8.  The  concern  of  the  living  with  life  and  death . 
8b.  The  desire  for  death:  the  death  instinct; 
the  problem  of  suicide.) 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  v,  sect  29  272d- 
273a;  bk  viii,  sect  47  289b-c;  bk  ix,  sect  3 
291d-292a;  bk  x,  sect  8  297d-298a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ii  [634-704]  142a-144a; 
bk  iv  [450-705]  179b'186b;  bk  xii  [593-613] 
370a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  47a-c  /  Themistocles , 
lOlc-d  /  Cato  the  Younger ,  646a-647c  / 
Cleomenes,  668b-d  /  Marcus  Brutus ,  814d- 
815c;  818d-819a;  823b-824a,c  /  Otho,  875b- 
876c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  vi,  92c-d  /  Histories , 
bk  11,  227a-228a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  ix  34b-d  /  Third 
Ennead ,  tr  ii,  ch  8,  87b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  viii,  par  18  57d- 
58a;  par  25  60a  /  CzVy  q/* Go^,  bk  i,  ch  17-27 
140a-146a;  bk  xiii,  ch  4  361d-362a;  bk  xix, 
ch  4  511a-513c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi  [40-45] 
15c;  xiii  17d-19c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  iv,  stanza 
72-74  98a  /  Pardoner's  Tale  [12,645-672]  378b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  69d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  99b-100a;  167al73d; 
294b-297b;  340d-342a;  358b-362a;  511d-512a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  v  [i- 
16]  12d-13a;  [1 07-1 14]  13d-14a  /  Richard  II, 
act  v,  sc  v  [1— 41]  349d-350a  /  Julius  Caesar, 
act  1,  sc  hi  [89-102]  573c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  11  [129-159] 
32d-33a;  act  ii,  sc  ii  [21 1-222]  42d;  act  iii, 
sc  1  [56-89]  47c-d;  act  v,  sc  i  [1-36]  64c-d; 
[241-273]  66d-67b  /  Othello ,  act  i,  sc  iii 
[306-369]  212b-d  /  King  Lear,  act  iv,  sc  vi 
[1-79]  273b-274b  /  Antony  and  Cleopatra, 
act  iv,  sc  xv  [63-91]  344c-345a;  act  v,  sc  ii 
[207-316]  348d-350a  /  Cymbeline,  act  iii, 
sc  iv  [73-101]  467c-d  /  Sonnets ,  lxvi  596b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  18,  schol 
429a-d;  prop  20,  schol  430a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  x  [966-1028]  295b- 
296b  /  Samson  Agonistes  [508-520]  350b-351a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  156-157  201b-2Q2a 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  6  26b-c; 
ch  xiv,  sect  168  64b-c 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  127a-128a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  85a-d;  173d-176d  esp 
175c-d,  176c-d;  182d-184a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiv,  107a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  342d-343a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  95c-96a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  258b; 
269a;  272b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  214b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  part  i,  par  70 
31a;  additions,  45  123c-d  /  Philosophy  of 
History,  part  i,  224d-225a;  228b 


8£  to  8c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [602-807]  16b-21a; 
[1544-1626]  37b-39a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  356b-357a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  iii,  159d-160a; 
bk  v,  200c-d;  bk  viii,  311a-313a;  337d-338a; 
bk  xii,  535b-c;  558a-562d 

53  James:  Psychology ,  204b 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle  639a- 
663d  esp  651d-653a,  663c-d  /  Ego  and  Id, 
708d-709c;  711c-712a;  714c-715a;  716b-717a,c 
/  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  790a-791d  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures,  849c-851d  esp 
851c-d 

8c.  The  contemplation  and  fear  of  death:  the 
attitude  of  the  hero,  the  philosopher, 
the  martyr 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3:19  /  Numbers,  23:10 
/  Deuteronomy,  30:15-20  /  II  Samuel,  14:14; 
22:5-7— (D)  II  Kings ,  14:14;  22:5-7  /  ^  Kings, 
2:1-2— (D)  III  Kings,  2:1-2  /  /  Chronicles, 
29:15 —(D)  I  Paralipomenon,  29:15  /  Job, 
6-7;  14;  17;  20:4-11;  21:23-26;  24:22-24; 
30:23-24;  34:15  /  Psalms,  6  esp  6:5;  13:3; 
18:4-6;  23  esp  23:4;  31:12;  39:4-5;  49;  55:4- 
8;  88;  89:47-48;  90:5-12;  103:14-16;  115:17; 
116  esp  116:3,  116:15;  144:3-4— (D)  Psalms, 
6  esp  6:6;  12:4;  17:5-7;  22  esp  22:4;  30:13; 
38:5-6;  48;  54:5-9;  87;  88:48-49;  89:5-12; 
102:14-16;  113:17;  114-115  esp  114:3,  115:15; 
143:3-4  /  Proverbs,  7:7-27  esp  7:27;  8:36; 
10:2;  11:4,19;  12:28;  13:14;  14:27,32;  18:21; 
30:15-16  /  Ecclesiastes,  2:16;  3:1-2,18-21; 
7:1;  8:8;  9:1-12;  11:7-12:7— (D)  Ecclesiastes , 
2:16;  3:1-2,18-21;  7:2;  8:8;  9:1-12;  11:7-12:7 
/  Song  of  Solomon,  8:6—  (D)  Canticle  of 
Canticles ,  8:6  /  Isaiah,  9:2;  25:8;  38:10-19; 
40:6-8— (D)  Isaias,  9:2;  25:8;  38:10-19; 
40:6-8  /  Jeremiah,  9:17-22;  21:8-10—  (D) 
Jeremias,  9:17-22;  21:8-10  /  Ezekiel,  18:32; 
33:11  —  ( D )  Ezechiel,  18:32;  33:11  /  Hosea, 
13:14—  (D)  Osee,  13:14  /  Habahjyii\,  2:5 —(D) 
Habacuc,  2:5 

Apocrypha:  Tobit,  4:10 — ( D )  OT,  Tobias ,  4:11 
/  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:12-2:5;  2:24-3:6; 
4:7-5:23;  16:14 — ( D )  OT,  Bool{  of  Wisdom, 
1:12-2:5;  2:24-3:6;  4:7-5:24;  16:14  /  Ecclesi- 
asticus,  8:7;  10:10-11;  14:11-19;  16:30-17:2; 
17:27^8;  18:9-12;  22:11-12;  28:18-21;  33:14; 
38:16-23;  41:1-4— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  8:8; 
10:12-13;  14:11-20;  16:31-17:3;  17:27;  18:8- 
11 ;  22:10-13;  28:22-25;  33:15;  38:16-24; 
41:1-7  /  Baruch ,  2:17 — (D)  OT,  Baruch, 
2:17  /  II  Maccabees,  6:18-7:42— (D)  OT, 
II  Machabees,  6 : 1 8-7 :42 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  4:16;  10:28  /  Lul^e, 
1:79  /  John,  5:24;  8:51-59;  11  esp  11:23-27; 
12:24-25;  15:13  /  Acts,  7:54-60— (D)  Acts, 
7:54-59  /  Romans,  5-8;  14:7-8  /  /  Corin¬ 
thians,  15  /  II  Corinthians,  1:9-10;  4:9-5^ 
/  Philippians,  1:21-24  /  /  Thessalonians , 
4:13-5:11— (D)  I  Thessalonians,  4:12-5:11  / 


Sc 


1031 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND  DEATH 


II  Timothyy  1:10;  4:6-8  /  Hebrews ,  2:9  18; 
9:27-28  /  James ,  4:13-16  /  /  John ,  3:14  / 
Revelation ,  2:10-11;  6:8;  9:6;  14:13;  20:6; 
21:4— (D)  Apocalypse ,  2:10-11;  6:8;  9:6; 
14:13;  20:6;  21:4 

4  Homer:  7//W,  bk  vi  [144-151]  41c;  [482-493] 
45a;  bk  xii  [290-328]  85b  c;  bk  xviii  [65- 
126]  130d  131c;  bk  xix  [198-237]  139a  b;  bk 
xxi  [462-467]  153a;  bk  xxii  155a  160d  esp 
[289-305]  158b,  [355-366]  159a  /  Odyssey , 
bk  xi  243a-249d  esp  [477-489]  247d 

5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [249-253] 
42d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [1579-1779] 
128c-130a,c  /  Antigone  [332-375]  134a-b 

5  Euripides:  Rhesus  [756-761]  209d  /  Alcestis 
237a-247a,c  /  lleracleidae  [593-596]  253b  / 
Suppliants  [1 108-1113]  268a  /  Hecuba  [342- 
582]  355d-357d  /  Heracles  Mad  [275-326] 
367c-d  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d  esp 
[1211-1252]  436a-c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  6c-10a;  20b-21a; 
bk  11,  64d-65a;  bk  v,  183b-c;  bk  vii,  224c- 
225a;  bk  viii,  281d-282a;  bk  ix,  303c-304a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  395c- 
399a  esp  397d-398d;  400d-401a 

7  Plato:  Laches ,  34d  /  Symposium ,  166b-c  / 
Apology' ,  205d-206d;  207c-d;  211b-212a,c  / 
Cr/Vo,  215d-216a;  218b-d  /  Phaedo  220a-251d 
esp  230d-235a  /  Gorgias ,  286b-287c;  292a-b 
/  Republic ,  bk  i,  297a-b;  bk  iii,  324c-325b; 
bk  vi,  374a-d  /  Seventh  Letter ,  805d-806a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  6-9  361a-364b 
esp  ch  6  [iii 5^24— b6]  361b-c,  ch  9  [m7b7-i5] 
364a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  5  [1 382ai9— 27]  628b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [102-158] 
2b-3a;  bk  ii  [569-580]  22b;  bk  hi  [31—93] 
30b-31b;  [830-1094]  40c-44a,c 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  4  108d- 
110a;  ch  9  114c-116b;  ch  24  129a-d;  ch  27 
132b-133b;  ch  29  134d-138a;  bk  ii,  ch  i 
138b,d-140c;  ch  16  156b-158d;  bk  iii,  ch  5 
180d-181d;  ch  22  195a-201a;  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a- 
223d;  ch  4  225a-228a;  ch  10  238d-240d 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  ii,  sect  n-12 
258a-c;  sect  14  258d;  sect  17  259b-d;  bk 
iii,  sect  1  259b, d;  sect  3  260b;  bk  iv,  sect 
5  264b;  sect  48  267d-268a;  sect  50  268c; 
bk  vi,  sect  24  276b;  sect  47  278d;  sect  49 
279a;  bk  vii,  sect  23  281b;  sect  32,35 
282a;  bk  viii,  sect  25  287b-c;  sect  31  287d; 
sect  58  290d;  bk  ix,  sect  3  291d-292a; 
sect  21  293b-c;  bk  xii,  sect  35-36  310c  d 

13  Virgil:  Georgies ,  11  [490-493]  65b  /  Aeneid , 
bk  vi  211a-235a 

14  Plutarch:  Pericles ,  139c  /  Pelopidas ,  232a-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  xi,  lOla-b;  bk  xv, 
172c-173d;  bk  xvi,  180c-d;  181d-182a;  183d- 
184a, c  /  Histories ,  bk  ii,  226d-228a;  bk  iii, 
256a-c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iv,  ch  16  18d- 
19b;  tr  vi,  ch  6,  24a-b;  tr  vii,  ch  3  26d-27a 


18  Augustine :  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  7-14  20d 
23a;  bk  vi,  par  18-19  40d  41b;  bk  viii,  par  18 
57d  58a;  par  25  60a;  bk  ix,  par  23  37  68a 
71b  /  City  of  God ,  bk  i,  cii  ii  136d  137a;  bk 
ix,  ch  11  291b;  bk  xiii,  ch  4  361d  362a; 
cii  7-8  362d  363c;  bk  xix,  ch  8  5l5c-516a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i  ii,  q  61, 
a  3,  ans  56b-57a;  part  iii  suppl,  q  96,  a  6 
1058al061b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [3017-3056]  209b- 
210a  /  Second  Nun's  Tale  [15,787-800]  467a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  79c-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  6d-10a;  26d  36b;  99b- 
100a;  115b-121c;  124c-125a;  167a-173d;  176c- 
180b;  211b-212a;  294b-297b;  327d-329d; 
339a-d;  365b-366b;  402c-403c;  404d-405a; 
470b-c;  473d-477b;  503b-504c;  508a-512a; 
529c-530c;  535c-536a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  v 
[1-32]  12d-13a  /  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  v,  sc  ii 
[5—28]  lOOa-b  /  Richard  III,  act  i,  sc  iv  114d- 
117c  /  Romeo  and  Juliet ,  act  iv,  sc  v  [1-95] 
312d-314a;  act  v,  sc  iii  [74-222]  316c-318b 
/  Richard  II,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [144—177]  337a-b  / 
1st  Henry  IV,  act  v,  sc  iv  [m-132]  465c  / 
Julius  Caesar,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [32-37]  578c; 
act  iii,  sc  1  [98-110]  581c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  ii  [68-106] 
32b-c;  act  iii,  sc  1  [56-90]  47c-d;  act  iv, 
sc  iii  [20-33]  58a-b;  act  v,  sc  i  [84-129] 
65b-d;  [202-322]  66c-67d  /  Measure  for 
Measure ,  act  iii,  sc  i  [1-43]  186d-187a;  [117- 
136]  188a-b  /  Othello ,  act  v,  sc  ii  [7-15] 
239a  /  Macbeth,  act  i,  sc  iv  [i-ii]  287b; 
act  v,  sc  iii  [19-28]  307d;  sc  v  [19-28]  308d- 
309a  /  Antony  and  Cleopatra ,  act  iv,  sc  xv 
fe-91]  344c-345a;  act  v,  sc  ii  [207-316] 
348d-350a  /  Pericles ,  act  i,  sc  i  [41-55]  422b 
/  Cymbeline,  act  iv,  sc  ii  [203-332]  475b- 
476d;  act  v,  sc  iv  [3-29]  481a-b;  [152-215] 
482d-483b  /  Tempest ,  act  iv,  sc  i  [146-158] 
543b  /  Sonnets ,  lxxxi  598c-d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  237b-c; 
267a-b;  280b-c;  366d-367a;  427a-429d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  26a-c;  73d- 
74a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  67  444d- 
445a;  part  v,  prop  38-39  461d-462c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  x  [782-844]  291b- 
292b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  63  180a;  166,168-169  203a; 
199  210b;  210  211b;  215-216  212a;  481  257b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  388a-399b;  459a- 
460a;  466b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  86c-88b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  94a-b;  186a;  217d- 
220d  esp  219c-220d;  327d-328a;  375b-376c; 
645c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  238c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin .  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  258b; 
269a 


1032 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(8.  The  concern  of  the  living  with  life  and  death . 
8c,  The  contemplation  and  fear  of  death : 
the  attitude  of  the  hero ,  the  philosopher , 
the  martyr .) 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  93d-94b;  102b;  167a; 
169d;  174b-c;  238b;  347a-c;  394a-c;  399d- 
400a;  573b-574a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  197c- 
d;  part  i,  245b-d;  255a-257a;  part  iv, 
339b-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [1544-1626]  37b-39a; 
part  11  [8909-9126]  216b-221b;  [11,384-401] 
277a-b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Did [,  27a-28a;  168a-169b; 
209b;  238a;  316a-b;  318b;  331a-332a;  351a-b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  311a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  34b-c;  37d- 

47b;  bk  11,  77c-81b;  97a-106d;  bk  iii,  146d- 
147c;  bk  iv,  179b-180d;  bk  v,  194c-d; 
200c-d;  216d-218b;  226d-227a;  bk  vii, 

288b-c;  bk  viii,  311a-313a;  bk  ix,  369a- 
372a;  bk  x,  416c-417b;  433d-434a;  439b- 
440a;  457a-c;  461d-464a;  bk  xi,  481a-482a; 
bk  xii,  549c-551c;  558a-562d;  bk  xiii,  569d- 
570a;  bk  xiv,  607c-608d;  bk  xv,  614a-618b; 
636c-637c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii,  26a; 
bk  v,  118b-119a;  bk  vi,  148d-150d  esp  149c- 
150d 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  243a-c  /  Ego 
and  Id,  716c-717a,c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms , 
and  Anxiety ,  735d-736b  /  War  and  Death , 
761c-766d 

8d .  The  ceremonials  of  death:  the  rites  of 
burial  in  war  and  peace 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  23;  49:1-50:13  / 
Leviticus,  19:28;  21:1-5  /  Deuteronomy,  14:1- 
2;  33  /  II  Samuel,  1:17-27;  3:31-36— (D) 
II  Kings,  1:17-27;  3:31-36  /  II  Chronicles, 
16:13-14 — (D)  II  Paralipomenon,  16:13-14  / 
Isaiah,  3:16-26;  15:1-4 — ( D )  Isaias,  3:16-26; 
15:1-4  /  Jeremiah,  1 6:6— (D)  Jeremias,  16:6 
/  Ezekiel,  7:18;  24:16-23 —(D)  Ezechiel,  7:18; 
24:16-23  /  Amos,  8:10 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  22:11-12;  38:16-23 
— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  22:10-13;  38:16-22 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  8:21-22;  27:57-60 
/  Mar\,  15:43-16:1  /  Luke,  23:50-24:1  / 
John,  19:38-42  /  James,  5:14-15 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xi  [446-455]  76d-77a;  bk 
xix  [198-237]  139a-b;  bk  xxii  [247-272] 
157d-158a;  bk  xxiii-xxiv  161a-179d  /  Odys¬ 
sey,  bk  xi  [51-80]  243c-d;  bk  xxiv  [1-190] 
317a-319a 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [1011-1084] 
38b-39a,c 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [1579-1779] 
128c-130a,c  /  Antigone  131a-142d  /  Ajax 
[1040-1421]  152a-155a,c  /  Electra  [404-471] 
159b-d  /  Trachiniae  [1191-1278]  180b-18la,c 


8  d 

5  Euripides  :  Suppliants  258a-269a,c  /  Trojan 
Women  [1123-1255]  279c-280c  /  Phoenician 
Maidens  [1625-1670]  392b-d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  38a-b;  bk  ii,  65c- 
66c;  bk  iii,  94b-c;  bk  iv,  128c-d;  136a-d; 
157c;  bk  v,  160d-161a;  bk  vi,  196b-c;  bk  vii, 
235b-c;  bk  ix,  293a;  305a-c;  306b-c 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395c- 
399a;  400c-d 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  367b  /  Laws,  bk  xii, 
793a-794a 

13  Virgil:  Georgies,  iv  [451-558]  95b-99a  / 
Aeneid,  bk  iii  [60-68]  148b-149a;  bk  iv  [474— 
705]  180a-186b;  bk  vi  [212-235]  216b-217b; 
[295-383]  219a-221a;  bk  ix  [207-223]  284b- 
285a;  bk  x  [898-908]  327a;  bk  xi  [182-212] 
333a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  46a-b  /  Numa  Pom - 
pilius,  55b-c  /  Poplicola,  80d;  86a, c  /  Corio- 
lanus,  192c-d  /  Pelopidas ,  245a- d  /  Pompey , 
537d-538a,c  /  Alexander,  574c-575a  /  Cato 
the  Younger,  623c-624a  /  Demetrius,  747c-d  / 
Marcus  Brutus ,  810b-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  3c-4a;  bk  iii,  45d- 
46a;  bk  xvi,  177b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  12-13  137a- 
138b;  bk  viii,  ch  26-27  283c-285d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  iii,  q  65, 
a  1,  ans  879c-881d;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  5  881d- 
882c;  a  3,  ans  882d-883d;  part  iii  suppl,  q 
71  900d-917b 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [859-1004]  174a-176b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  5a-10a;  32b-c;  36a-b; 
405a-c;  473d-477b;  483b-484a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  IV,  act  v,  sc  iv 
[77-101]  465a-b  /  Julius  Caesar,  act  v,  sc  v 
[76—81]  596c 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  v,  sc  i  [1-35] 
64c-d;  [241-266]  66d-67a/  Cymbeline,  act  iv, 
sc  11  [186-290]  475a-476b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  427d- 
429d 

32  Milton:  Epitaph  on  the  Marchioness  of  Win¬ 
chester  14a-15b  /  On  Shake  spear.  1630  16a  / 
On  the  University  Carrier  16b  /  Another  on  the 
Same  17a-b  /  Lycidas  27b-32a  /  Death  of  a 
Fair  Infant  57a-59a  esp  [1— 21]  57a-b  /  Sonnets, 
xiv-xv  66a-b;  xix  67b-68a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  34d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  263a;  381a-d; 
513b;  568d-569a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  193a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  197c-d; 
part  1,  211d-212c;  252a-c;  255a-257a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dick »  25b-28a;  350b-354b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  38b;  43b-44b; 
bk  xi,  512a-b;  bk  xii,  549d-551c;  bk  xv, 
624d-625b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vii, 
171a-c 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  510b-c  /  War 
and  Death,  762a-b 


Chapter  48:  LIFE  AND  DEATH 


1033 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  doctrine  of  soul  as  the  principle  of  life,  see  Animal  ia,  ie;  Soul  ib. 

The  general  issue  concerning  continuity  or  hierarchy  in  nature,  see  Animal  ib-ic,  2c; 

Evolution  4a,  4c,  7b;  Man  i-ic,  8b-8c;  Nature  3b;  World  6b. 

The  contrast  between  the  powers  and  activities  of  living  and  non-living  bodies,  see  Animal 
4a;  Change  6c,  8a-8b,  9a~9b,  ioa-rob;  and  for  other  discussions  of  the  distinctive  powers 
of  plant,  animal,  and  human  life,  .tee  Animal  ia(i)-ia(4),  ic-ic(2),  8d;  Man  i-ic,  43-40; 
Soul  2c-2c(3). 

The  anatomical  and  physiological  considerations  relevant  to  the  analysis  of  vital  powers  and 
operations,  see  Animal  3~3d,  4b~4c,  5a~5g,  6a^7,  8b-8c(4). 

Discussions  of  animal  sensitivity  and  intelligence,  see  Animal  ia(i),  ic(2);  Man  ic;  Memory 
and  Imagination  i;  Mind  3a~3b;  Sense  2b-2c. 

Other  considerations  of  health  and  disease,  see  Medicine  4,  5a~5d. 

A  discussion  of  the  human  life  cycle,  see  Man  6c. 

Other  discussions  of  man’s  attitude  toward  death,  see  Happiness  4b;  Immortality  i  ;  and  for 
matters  relevant  to  the  special  problem  of  the  life  and  death  instincts,  see  Animal  id; 
Desire  3a;  Habit  3a. 

Another  discussion  of  sleeping  and  waking,  see  Animal  ia(5). 

Another  discussion  of  the  relation  between  the  living  organism  and  its  environment,  see 
Animal  11b. 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

| 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Booths  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Dante.  Convivio  ( The  Banquet),  second  treatise, 

CH  8 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Death,”  “Of  Youth  and  Age,”  in 
Essays 

Goethe.  William  Meister 

Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind,  v,  a  (2) 

- .  Science  of  Logic,  vol  ii,  sect  iii,  ch  i 

Dostoevsky.  The  House  of  the  Dead 
Tolstoy.  Three  Deaths 

- .  Memoirs  of  a  Madman 

- .  The  Death  of  Ivan  Ilyitch 

II. 

Epicurus.  Letter  to  Menoeceus 
Cicero.  Tusculan  Disputations ,  1 

- .  De  Senectute  (Of  Old  Age) 

Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xxx  (14) 

Calderon.  Life  Is  a  Dream 

King.  The  Exequy 

Browne.  Hydriotaphia 

Gray.  Elegy  Written  in  a  Country  Church-Yard 


Voltaire.  “Life,”  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary 
E.  Darwin.  The  Loves  of  the  Plants 
Bichat.  General  Anatomy,  Applied  to  Physiology  and 
Medicine 

Bryant.  Thanatopsis 
Shelley.  Adonais 
Hazlitt.  Table  Tal\,  xxxm 
Lamb.  “New  Year’s  Eve,”  in  Essays  of  Elia 
Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy,  bkv 
Schwann.  Microscopical  Researches  into  the  Ac¬ 
cordance  in  the  Structure  and  Growth  of  Animals 
and  Plants 

Whewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences, 

VOL  1,  BK  IX 

R.  Browning.  The  Bishop  Orders  His  Tomb  at 
Saint  Praxed's 
Emerson.  Threnody 

Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea,  vol 
iii,  sup,  ch  42 

- .  On  the  Doctrine  of  the  Indestructibility  of  Our 

True  Nature  by  Death 

- .  “On  Suicide,”  in  Studies  in  Pessimism 

Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  i 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1034 

Virchow.  Cellular  Pathology 
Bernard.  Introduction  to  Experimental  Medicine 
Stevenson.  “Ais  Triplex,”  in  Virginibus  Puerisque 
T.  H.  Huxley.  Methods  and  Results,  iii 
Weismann.  “Life  and  Death,”  in  vol  i,  Essays 
upon  Heredity  and  Kindred  Biological  Problems 
Tennyson.  Crossing  the  Bar 

Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough ,  part  iii;  part  v,  ch 
13;  part  vi,  ch  7 
FIertwig.  The  Cell 
Pearson.  The  Chances  of  Death 
Andreyev.  Lazarus 

Driesch.  The  Science  and  Philosophy  of  the  Or¬ 
ganism 

Loeb.  The  Mechanistic  Conception  of  Life 
Joyce.  Dubliners ,  esp  “The  Dead” 

Osler.  A  Way  of  Life 
Unamuno.  Mist 

D.  W.  Thompson.  On  Growth  and  Form 
Bergson.  Creative  Evolution 


Bergson.  Mind-Energy ,  ch  i 

Uexkull.  Theoretical  Biology 

J.  S.  Haldane  and  J.  G.  Priestley.  Respiration 

Pearl.  The  Biology  of  Death 

Lillie.  Protoplasmic  Action  and  Nervous  Action 

Santayana.  Scepticism  and  Animal  Faith ,  ch  23 

Dewey.  Experience  and  Nature ,  ch  7 

Jung.  Spirit  and  Life 

G.  N.  Lewis.  The  Anatomy  of  Science ,  essay  viii 
Henderson.  Blood 

J.  S.  Haldane.  Mechanism ,  Life  and  Personality 

- .  The  Sciences  and  Philosophy ,  lect  i-vi 

Woodger.  Biological  Principles 
Cannon.  The  Wisdom  of  the  Body 
Goldstein.  The  Organism 
Whitehead.  Modes  of  Thought ,  lect  viii 
Sherrington.  The  Integrative  Action  of  the  Nervous 
System 

- .  Man  on  His  Nature 

Schrodinger.  What  Is  Life? 


Chapter  49:  LOGIC 


INTRODUCTION 


IN  this  set  of  great  books,  the  Organon  of  Aris¬ 
totle,  the  Novum  Organum  of  Bacon,  Des¬ 
cartes’  Discourse  on  Method  and  his  Rules for  the 
Direction  of  the  Mind ,  and  Kant’s  Critique  of 
Pure  Reason  indicate  or  discuss  the  nature,  scope 
and  divisions  of  the  discipline  which  has  come 
to  be  called  “logic.”  Though  of  all  the  works 
mentioned  the  Organon  is  perhaps  the  most  ex¬ 
tensive  treatment  of  the  subject,  Aristotle  does 
not  use  the  word  “logic”  to  name  the  science  or 
art  of  which  he  seems  to  be  the  inventor — cer¬ 
tainly  the  first  systematic  expounder — in  the 
tradition  of  western  thought. 

Here  as  elsewhere  Aristotle  is  indebted  to  his 
predecessors  for  providing  him  with  materials 
to  develop  or  criticize:  to  the  sophists  for  the 
construction  of  arguments,  for  the  formulation 
of  methods  of  disputation,  and  for  the  discov¬ 
ery  of  fallacies;  to  Plato  for  the  theory  of  classi¬ 
fication  and  definition,  for  the  root  notion  of 
the  syllogism  and  a  conception  of  proof  or 
demonstration,  for  the  general  outlines  of  an 
intellectual  method  to  which  Plato  gives  the 
name  “dialectic.” 

As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  Dialectic, 
Aristotle  uses  Plato’s  name  for  the  whole 
method  of  the  mind  in  the  pursuit  of  truth,  in 
order  to  designate  just  one  part  of  his  method, 
the  part  concerned  with  probability  rather  than 
truth.  Yet  in  the  Roman  and  mediaeval  tradi¬ 
tion,  the  words  “logic”  and  “dialectic”  come 
to  be  used  interchangeably.  This  is  exemplified 
by  the  Stoic  division  of  the  sciences  into  phys¬ 
ics,  ethics,  and  logic  or  dialectic,  and  by  the 
mediaeval  enumeration  of  the  liberal  arts  of  the 
trivium  as  grammar,  rhetoric,  and  logic  or  dia¬ 
lectic.  So  used,  these  names  designate  the  whole 
range  of  discussion  to  be  found  in  Aristotle’s 
Organon. 

In  their  opposition  to  Aristotelian  or  what 
they  sometimes  call  “scholastic”  logic,  modern 


inventors  of  new  methods,  like  Bacon  or  Des¬ 
cartes,  tend  to  restrict  the  meaning  of  logic. 
For  them  logic  is  little  more  than  the  doctrine 
of  the  syllogism.  And  this  they  judge  to  be  no 
part  of  genuinely  fruitful  method,  or  they  hold 
it  to  be  of  use  mainly  as  a  critical  instrument  in 
disputation  rather  than  discovery.  Their  iden¬ 
tification  of  logic  with  dialectic  (like  their  as¬ 
sociation  of  both  with  rhetoric)  seems  to  have 
an  intentionally  invidious  significance. 

But  with  Kant,  who  was  influenced  by  the 
scholasticism  of  Christian  Wolff,  “logic”  is  gen¬ 
erally  restored  as  the  name  for  the  whole  range 
of  materials  in  Aristotle’s  Organon,  of  which 
dialectic  again  becomes  a  part.  In  his  own  Intro' 
duction  to  Logic,  Kant  speaks  of  Aristotle  as 
“the  father  of  Logic.”  Though  “logic  has  not 
gained  much  in  extent  since  Aristotle’s  time,” 
he  says,  “there  are  two  amongst  more  recent 
philosophers  who  have  again  brought  general 
logic  into  vogue,  Leibnitz  and  Wolff.”  Since 
their  day,  and  certainly  since  Kant’s,  as  may  be 
seen  from  the  titles  listed  under  Additional 
Readings,  “logic”  prevails  as  the  name  for 
treatises  which  discuss,  in  whole  or  part,  the 
matters  treated  in  Aristotle’s  Organon. 

“Logic”  is  also  used  in  modern  times  as  the 
name  for  an  inquiry  or  study  which  bears  little 
resemblance  to  the  discipline  expounded  in 
Aristotle’s  Organon .  What  is  called  “modern 
logic”  to  distinguish  it  from  the  traditional 
Aristotelian  or  scholastic  logic,  is  purely  a  sci¬ 
ence,  and  in  no  sense  an  organon,  methodology, 
instrument,  or  art.  It  does  not  restrict  itself  to 
stating  the  laws  of  thought  or  formulating  the 
rules  of  inference.  In  the  words  of  Josiah  Roy  ce, 
it  is  “the  science  of  order”  and  it  is  applicable 
to  the  order  of  things  as  well  as  the  order  of 
thought.  So  conceived,  the  science  of  logic 
is  sometimes  regarded  as  having  the  kind  of 
generality  which  is  traditionally  assigned  to 


1035 


1036 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


metaphysics;  as,  for  example,  by  Bertrand 
Russell  in  his  essay,  “Logic  as  the  Essence  of 
Philosophy.’’ 

But  it  is  mathematics  rather  than  metaphys¬ 
ics  with  which  logic  is  identified  by  its  modern 
exponents.  “Logistic  or  mathematical  logic,” 
writes  Russell,  “is  mathematical  in  two  differ¬ 
ent  senses:  it  is  itself  a  branch  of  mathematics, 
and  it  is  the  logic  which  is  specially  applicable 
to  other  more  traditional  branches  of  mathe¬ 
matics.”  Since  Boole’s  Laws  of  Thought,  which, 
according  to  Russell,  initiates  the  modern  de¬ 
velopment  of  mathematical  logic,  “logic  has 
become  more  mathematical  and  mathematics 
has  become  more  logical.  The  consequence,” 
he  says,  “is  that  it  has  now  become  wholly  im¬ 
possible  to  draw  a  line  between  the  two;  in  fact, 
the  two  are  one.” 

Aristotle’s  Organon  stands  to  the  tradition  of 
logic  as  Euclid’s  Elements  stands  to  the  tradition 
of  geometry.  In  both  cases  the  work  of  later 
minds  may  alter  considerably  the  structure  and 
content  of  the  discipline.  In  both  cases  there  are 
modern  departures  from  the  earlier  tradition. 
As  in  the  one  case  we  have  Descartes’  analytical 
geometry  and  the  various  non-Euclidean  geom¬ 
etries,  so  in  the  other  we  have  Kant’s  transcen¬ 
dental  logic  and  the  various  non-Aristotelian 
logics. 

But  all  these  innovations,  even  when  they 
might  be  described  as  anti-Aristotelian  rather 
than  simply  as  non-Aristotelian,  bear  the  marks 
of  their  traditional  origin.  Kant,  for  example, 
takes  pains  everywhere  to  indicate  the  parallel¬ 
ism  between  the  formulations  of  his  transcen¬ 
dental  logic  and  those  of  Aristotle’s  logic.  Even 
the  various  systems  of  relational  and  mathe¬ 
matical  logic  usually  attempt  to  show  that  the 
Aristotelian  logic  of  subject  and  predicate,  of 
particular  and  universal  propositions,  and  of  syl¬ 
logisms  can  be  treated  as  a  special  case  under 
their  own  formulations.  The  proposals  of  Bacon 
or  Mill  with  respect  to  induction  and  the 
method  of  Descartes,  though  accompanied  in 
each  case  by  a  critique  of  the  syllogism,  are  less 
radical  departures,  for  they  do  not  apparently 
reject  Aristotle’s  basic  doctrines  of  predication 
and  proof. 

Many  of  these  issues  in  logical  theory  are  dealt 
with  in  other  chapters,  e.g .,  in  Dialectic,  In¬ 


duction,  and  Hypothesis,  in  Idea,  Judgment,  b 
and  Reasoning.  Here  we  are  principally  con-  $ 
cerned  with  the  conception  of  logic  itself,  not  wt 
with  the  detailed  content  of  the  science  as  much  1/ 
as  with  its  character  as  an  art  or  science,  its  re-  |  i 
lation  to  other  arts  and  sciences,  its  major  divi-  i  is 
sions,  and  its  leading  principles.  Though  such  i  it 
considerations  are  more  explicitly  treated  by  t  a 
Kant  than  by  Aristotle,  the  formative  influence  .  o 
of  the  Organon  warrants  examining  it  first. 

The  parts  of  logic,  as  Aristotle  conceives 
them,  seem  to  be  indicated  by  the  subject  mat¬ 
ter  of  the  various  books  which  comprise  the  col¬ 
lection  of  writings  assembled  under  the  title  of 
Organon.  That  title  has  a  bearing  on  the  ques¬ 
tion  whether  logic  is  a  science  or  an  art  and  on 
its  difference  from  other  sciences  and  arts.  The 
word  “organon”  has  the  meaning  of  instrument 
or  method.  That  in  turn  suggests  something  to 
be  used  as  rules  of  art  are  used — as  directions 
to  be  followed  to  produce  a  certain  result. 

Aristotle’s  own  differentiation  of  the  specu¬ 
lative  sciences,  the  practical  sciences,  and  the 
arts  throws  light  on  this  view  of  logic  as  an  art. 
“The  end  of  theoretical  knowledge,”  he  writes, 

“is  truth,  while  that  of  practical  knowledge  is 
action.”  In  other  words,  the  theoretical,  or  spec¬ 
ulative,  sciences  differ  from  the  practical  sci¬ 
ences  in  that  they  are  knowledge  for  its  own 
sake  as  opposed  to  knowledge  for  an  ulterior 
end.  According  as  the  ulterior  end  is  the  pro¬ 
duction  or  “making”  of  something,  as  distinct 
from  human  action  or  conduct,  art  is  distinct 
from  the  other  practical  sciences.  “Making  and 
acting  are  different,”  Aristotle  says;  “the  rea¬ 
soned  state  of  capacity  to  act  is  different  from 
the  reasoned  state  of  capacity  to  make.  Hence, 
too,  they  are  not  included  one  in  the  other;  for 
neither  is  acting  making  nor  is  making  acting.” 
Logic,  then,  if  it  is  an  art,  will  be  concerned 
with  the  “making”  of  something,  with  pro¬ 
ducing  a  work  or  an  effect. 

The  way  in  which  Aristotle  himself  refers  to 
the  Organon  seems  to  confirm  this  view.  He  re¬ 
gards  it  as  a  preparation  for  work  in  the  theo¬ 
retic  sciences.  “Due  to  a  want  of  training  in 
logic,”  he  writes,  some  men  attempt  to  discuss 
the  criteria  of  truth  in  mathematics  or  physics 
at  the  same  time  that  they  are  considering  the 
subject  matter  of  these  sciences.  “They  should 


Chapter  49:  LOGIC 


1037 


know  these  things  already  when  they  come  to  a 
special  study,  and  not  be  inquiring  into  them 
while  they  are  listening  to  lectures  on  it.” 
Logic,  in  Aristotle’s  view,  trains  the  mind  in 
the  ways  of  science.  Its  productive  goal  as  an  art 
is  the  making  of  science  itself.  For  this  reason, 
in  the  mediaeval  period,  logic  comes  to  be  called 
a  “speculative  art”  or,  with  grammar  and  rhet¬ 
oric,  a  liberal  art. 

“Even  in  speculative  matters,”  Aquinas  says, 
i  “there  is  something  by  way  of  work,  e.g .,  the 
making  of  a  syllogism,  or  of  a  fitting  speech,  or 
the  work  of  counting  or  measuring.  Hence  what¬ 
ever  habits  are  ordained  to  such  works  of  the 
speculative  reason  are,  by  a  kind  of  comparison, 
called  arts  indeed,  but  liberal  arts,  in  order  to 
distinguish  them  from  those  arts  that  are  or¬ 
dained  to  works  done  by  the  body.  .  .  .  On  the 
other  hand,  those  sciences  which  are  not  or¬ 
dained  to  any  such  work  are  called  sciences  ab¬ 
solutely  and  not  arts.” 

But  though  it  may  not  be  a  science,  abso¬ 
lutely  speaking, ,  because  it  is  an  instrument  of  in¬ 
tellectual  work,  logic,  in  addition  to  being  an 
,  art,  may  also  have  some  of  the  characteristics  of 
a  science.  If  it  is  a  science,  what  is  the  object  of 
its  knowledge? 

Aristotle’s  division  of  the  speculative  sci¬ 
ences,  which  he  seems  to  present  as  exhaustive, 
leaves  no  place  for  logic.  “There  are  three  kinds 
of  theoretical  sciences,”  he  writes,  “physics, 
mathematics,  theology”  or  metaphysics,  as  the 
last  came  to  be  called.  Each  of  these  sciences, 

,  furthermore,  seems  to  have  a  distinctive  sub¬ 
ject  matter  which  is  some  aspect  of  reality,  such 
as  change,  or  quantity,  or  being.  But  insofar  as 
logic  is  concerned  with  the  study  of  terms,  prop¬ 
ositions,  and  syllogisms,  it  deals  with  elements 
common  to  all  sciences. 

This  suggests  that  whereas  reality  is  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  the  other  sciences,  the  object  of  logic  as 
a  science  is  science  itself,  or  more  generally  the 
,  whole  of  discourse.  It  considers  the  elements  or 
patterns  of  discourse  in  a  formal  manner;  that 
is,  it  considers  them  apart  from  their  reference 
to  reality  or  their  real  significance  as  the  terms, 
propositions,  and  syllogisms  of  particular  sub¬ 
ject  matters  or  sciences.  Because  it  separates  the 
forms  which  discursive  thought  takes  from  the 
matter  or  content  it  may  have,  logic  is  tradi¬ 
tionally  called  a  “formal  science.” 


Where  Aristotle  makes  his  object  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  discourse  (or  thought  expressed  in  lan¬ 
guage),  later  logicians  treat  the  formal  aspect  of 
thought  itself.  They  deal  with  concepts,  judg¬ 
ments,  and  reasoning  instead  of  with  terms, 
propositions,  and  syllogisms.  This  difference  re¬ 
sults  in  a  definition  of  logic  as  the  science  of 
thought;  the  basic  formulations  of  logic  are  the 
laws  of  thought.  Thus,  for  example,  Kant  says 
that  logic  “treats  of  nothing  but  the  mere  forms 
of  thought.”  Its  limits  “are  definitely  fixed  by 
the  fact  that  it  is  a  science  which  has  nothing  to 
do  but  fully  to  exhibit  and  strictly  to  prove  all 
formal  rules  of  thought.” 

The  logical  principles  of  identity,  excluded 
middle,  and  contradiction,  as  well  as  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  inference,  are  said  to  be  “laws  of 
thought.”  James  proposes  as  the  most  “funda¬ 
mental  principle  of  inference”  what  he  calls 
the  “axiom  of  skipped  intermediaries,”  which 
states  that  “ skipping  intermediary  terms  leaves 
relations  the  same."  That  “equals  of  equals  are 
equal”  is  a  special  application  of  this  principle 
in  the  sphere  of  quantities.  Because  it  applies  to 
all  subject  matters  equally,  James  regards  the 
principle  as  “on  the  whole  the  broadest  and 
deepest  law  of  man’s  thought.” 

In  either  conception  of  logic  as  a  formal  sci¬ 
ence,  questions  arise  concerning  the  relation  of 
logic  to  other  sciences.  For  Aristotle  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  about  logic  and  metaphysics,  because 
both  seem  to  have  an  unrestricted  scope.  Meta¬ 
physics  considers  the  being  of  everything  which 
is;  logic,  the  formal  components  of  discourse 
about  anything.  Aristotle  says  of  philosophy  in 
relation  to  dialetic,  that  both  “embrace  all 
things”  but  that  “dialectic  is  merely  critical 
where  philosophy  claims  to  know.”  The  same 
comparison  could  apply  to  metaphysics  and 
logic.  Both  “embrace  all  things”  but  not  from 
the  same  point  of  view. 

Aristotle  also  asks  whether  it  belongs  to 
metaphysics  as  well  as  to  logic  to  inquire  “into 
the  truths  which  are  called  axioms” — especially 
those  which  are  the  first  principles  of  all  knowl¬ 
edge  or  demonstration,  not  merely  the  founda¬ 
tions  of  knowledge  about  some  limited  subject 
matter.  “Since  these  truths  clearly  hold  good 
for  all  things  qua  being,”  the  science  which 
studies  being  qua  being  ( i.e .,  metaphysics)  must 
be  concerned  with  them.  It  also  belongs  to 


1038 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


metaphysics  as  well  as  to  logic  “to  inquire  into 
the  principles  of  the  syllogism.” 

The  principles  of  identity,  excluded  middle, 
and  contradiction  belong  to  both  sciences — to 
the  one  as  the  most  universal  truths  about  ex¬ 
istence,  to  the  other  as  the  basic  rules  of  dis¬ 
course  or  the  laws  of  thought.  This  sharing  of  a 
common  ground  does  not  seem  to  Aristotle  to 
violate  their  separateness;  but  Bacon  charges 
him  with  having  “corrupted  natural  philosophy 
by  logic.”  Of  Aristotle’s  physics,  he  says  that  it 
is  built  of  “mere  logical  terms,”  and,  Bacon 
adds,  Aristotle  “remodelled  the  same  subject  in 
his  metaphysics  under  a  more  imposing  title.” 

Whereas  Aristotle  considers  the  relation  of 
logic  to  metaphysics,  Kant  considers  its  relation 
to  psychology.  Both  logic  and  psychology  are 
concerned  with  thinking  and  knowing.  Distin¬ 
guishing  between  pure  and  applied  logic,  Kant 
says  that  pure  logic  “has  nothing  to  do  with 
empirical  principles  and  borrows  nothing  from 
psychology.”  Applied  logic  depends  on  psy- 
chology.  In  fact,  says  Kant  in  his  Introduction  to 
Logic ,  it  is  “a  psychology  in  which  we  consider 
what  is  the  usual  process  in  our  thought,  not 
what  is  the  right  one.”  Applied  logic  ought  not 
to  be  called  logic  at  all,  for  “logic  is  the  science 
of  the  right  use  of  the  understanding  and  the 
reason  generally,  not  subjectively,  that  is,  not 
according  to  empirical  (psychological)  princi¬ 
ples,  as  to  how  the  understanding  actually 
thinks,  but  objectively,  that  is,  according  to  a 
priori  principles,  as  to  how  it  ought  to  think.” 

James  also  insists  upon  the  distinction  be¬ 
tween  psychology  and  logic.  He  even  uses  Kant's 
terms  in  calling  logic  an  a  priori  and  psychology 
an  empirical  science.  What  the  psychologist  calls 
“laws  of  thought,”  such  as  the  laws  of  the  asso¬ 
ciation  of  ideas,  describe  the  actual  flow  of 
thought  and  connections  which  depend  upon 
similarity  and  succession.  The  laws  of  logic,  in 
contrast,  state  reason’s perceptionof  the  rational 
structure  of  thought  itself  and  the  relations 
which  must  obtain  if  thought  is  to  be  rational. 

Returning  now  to  the  indication  of  the  parts 
of  logic  which  may  be  found  in  the  structure  of 
the  Organon ,  we  can  see  two  orders  in  the  books. 
The  first  three  books — the  Categories ,  On  Inter - 
pretation ,  and  the  Prior  Analytics — deal  with 
terms,  propositions,  and  syllogisms:  with  the 


classification  of  terms  and  their  relation  to  one 
another;  with  the  classification  of  propositions 
and  their  opposition  to  one  another;  with  the 
analysis  of  the  various  types  of  syllogisms  and 
the  formulation  of  the  rules  of  valid  inference. 
Terms  are  the  elements  of  propositions;  terms 
and  propositions  are  the  elements  of  the  syllo¬ 
gism.  This  seems  to  determine  the  order  of  the 
first  three  books. 

The  first  three  books  as  a  whole  stand  in  a 
certain  order  to  the  remaining  books.  Taking 
the  latter  as  a  group,  their  differentiation  from 
what  precedes  them  seems  to  lie  in  the  fact  that 
they  deal  with  terms,  propositions,  and  syllo¬ 
gisms,  not  abstracted  from  all  considerations  of 
knowledge  and  truth  about  reality,  but  rather 
with  primary  emphasis  upon  the  logic  of  actual 
knowledge,  or  on  the  processes  of  knowing  and 
arguing  about  what  is  true  or  probable.  In  the 
traditional  development  of  Aristotelian  logic, 
this  division  between  the  first  three  and  the  re¬ 
maining  books  of  the  Organon  is  sometimes 
characterized  as  a  distinction  between  formal 
and  material  logic. 

In  the  Posterior  Analytics  and  the  Topics  Aris¬ 
totle  considers  the  discovery  and  establishment 
of  either  the  true  or  the  probable.  He  distin¬ 
guishes  between  induction  and  syllogism  (or  rea¬ 
soning)  as  modes  of  learning  and  arguing.  The 
later  division  of  logic  into  deductive  and  induc¬ 
tive — sometimes  confused  with  the  distinction 
between  formal  and  material  logic — does  not 
seem  to  correspond  to  the  difference  between 
the  Prior  and  the  Posterior  Analytics .  In  the  Ad¬ 
vancement  of  Learning ,  for  example,  Bacon  di¬ 
vides  the  art  of  judgment,  “which  treats  of  the 
nature  of  proof  or  demonstration,”  into  that 
which  concludes  by  induction  and  that  which 
concludes  by  syllogism;  whereas  Aristotle  ap¬ 
pears  to  treat  induction  as  that  upon  which  syl¬ 
logistic  demonstration  depends  for  its  primary 
and  indemonstrable  premises. 

The  distinction  between  truth  and  probabil¬ 
ity,  or  between  knowledge  and  opinion,  does 
not  affect  the  formal  character  of  either  induc¬ 
tion  or  syllogism.  A  syllogism  may  be  scientific 
(/.^.,  demonstratively  certain)  or  dialectical  (/.<?., 
merely  probable)  according  to  the  character  of 
its  premises.  In  either  case  its  formal  structure 
remains  the  same.  Similarly,  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  scientific  and  dialectical  induction  ap- 


Chapter  49:  LOGIC 


pears  only  in  its  result,  /.<?.,  whether  it  is  knowl¬ 
edge  or  opinion.  The  Posterior  Analytics  and  the 
Topics  consider  the  employment  of  both  syllo¬ 
gism  and  induction.  The  Posterior  Analytics 
treats  them  in  relation  to  the  development  and 
structure  of  scientific  knowledge.  The  Topics 
discusses  them  in  relation  to  the  dialectical  pro¬ 
cedures  of  argument  and  discovery. 

The  last  book  of  the  Organon ,  which  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  exposing  the  fallacies  in  sophistical 
proofs  or  refutations,  serves  to  protect  both  sci¬ 
entific  and  dialectical  reasoning  from  such  soph¬ 
istry.  Unlike  the  philosopher  or  the  dialectician, 
the  sophist  does  not  aim  at  the  truth.  Sophistry 
misuses  the  weapons  of  logic — the  same  weap¬ 
ons  used  by  the  scientist  or  dialectician — to  pro¬ 
duce  a  counterfeit  of  wisdom  or,  as  Aristotle 
says,  “a  wisdom  which  exists  only  insemblance.” 
Though  the  dialectician  cannot  claim  to  know, 
he  does,  nevertheless,  deal  with  opinions  criti¬ 
cally  and  respects  the  canons  of  logic  as  much  as 
the  philosopher. 

The  art  of  logic  seems  to  have  three  main  em¬ 
ployments.  To  its  use  by  the  scientist  and  the 
dialectician,  Aristotle  adds  its  utilization  by  the 
orator  for  the  purposes  of  persuasion.  The  rhet¬ 
orician  and  the  dialectician  are  most  closely  al¬ 
lied  because  both  deal  with  probabilities  and 
disputable  matters  concerning  which  opposite 
conclusions  can  be  drawn.  “As  in  dialectic,  there 
is  induction  on  the  one  hand  and  syllogism.  .  . 
on  the  other,  so  it  is  in  rhetoric. ”  Aristotle  says 
that  “the  enthymeme  is  a  rhetorical  syllogism, 
and  the  example  a  rhetorical  induction.” 

The  foregoing  suggests  that  a  certain  order 
obtains  between  two  of  the  three  arts  tradition¬ 
ally  called  the  trivium .  The  elements  and  prin¬ 
ciples  of  logic  are,  in  a  sense,  prior  to  the  rules 
of  rhetoric.  The  art  of  rhetoric  depends  on  and 
uses  logic.  The  third  art,  that  of  grammar,  seems 
to  serve  both  logic  and  rhetoric.  It  serves  the 
logician  in  his  task  of  forming  terms  and  propo¬ 
sitions  out  of  words,  phrases,  and  sentences.  It 
serves  the  rhetorician  in  his  effort  to  make  a 
forceful  use  of  language.  This  conception  of  the 
uses  of  grammar  appears  in  Aristotle’s  Rhetoric 
in  his  consideration  of  style,  and  in  the  opening 
books  of  the  Organon  in  his  discussion  of  univ¬ 
ocal  and  equivocal  names,  the  parts  of  speech, 
simple  and  composite  expressions,  and  the  dif¬ 
ferent  types  of  sentences. 


1039 

Kant  seems  to  diverge  from  Aristotle  both 
with  regard  to  the  unity  of  logic  and  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  nature  and  relation  of  its  parts. 
Formal  or  elementary  logic,  Kant  thinks,  is  not 
the  same  as  an  organon  of  the  sciences.  He  ex¬ 
plains,  in  his  Introduction  to  Logicy  that  an  or¬ 
ganon  gives  instruction  as  to  “how  some  partic¬ 
ular  branch  of  knowledge  is  to  be  attained.  .  .  . 
An  organon  of  the  sciences  is  therefore  not  a 
mere  logic,  since  it  presupposes  the  accurate 
knowledge  of  the  objects  and  sources  of  the  sci¬ 
ences.  .  .  .  Logic,  on  the  contrary,  being  the  gen¬ 
eral  propaedeutic  of  every  use  of  the  understand¬ 
ing  and  of  the  reason,  cannot  meddle  with  the 
sciences  and  anticipate  their  matter.”  Conced¬ 
ing  that  it  may  be  called  an  organon  so  far  as  it 
serves, “not  for  the  enlargement ,  but  only  for  the 
criticism  and  correction  of  our  knowledge,”  Kant 
insists  that  “logic  is  not  a  general  art  of  discov¬ 
ery,  nor  an  organon  of  truth;  it  is  not  an  algebra 
by  the  help  of  which  hidden  truths  may  be  dis¬ 
covered.” 

Aristotle,  according  to  Kant,  treats  the  whole 
of  his  logic  as  an  organon,  dividing  it  into  an 
analytical  and  a  dialectical  part.  As  Kant  sees 
it,  the  dialectical  part  arises  from  a  misuse  of 
the  analytical  part.  This  occurs,  he  says  in  the 
Critique  of  Pure  Reason ,  when  general  or  ele¬ 
mentary  logic  (/.<?.,  the  analytic  part)  “which  is 
meant  to  be  a  mere  canon  of  criticism,  is  em¬ 
ployed  as  if  it  were  an  organon,  for  the  real  pro¬ 
duction  of  at  least  the  semblance  of  objective 
assertions.  . .  .  This  general  logic,”  says  Kant, 
“which  assumes  the  semblance  of  an  organon,  is 
called  dialectic.” 

Kant  here  seems  to  identify  dialectic  with 
what  Aristotle  calls  sophistry.  He  says  of  dialec¬ 
tic  that  “different  as  are  the  significations  in 
which  the  ancients  use  this  name  of  a  science  or 
art,  it  is  easy  to  gather  from  its  actual  employ¬ 
ment  that  with  them  it  was  nothing  but  a  logic 
of  semblance.  It  was  a  sophistic  art  of  giving  to 
one’s  ignorance,  nay,  to  one’s  intentional  casu¬ 
istry,  the  outward  appearance  of  truth,  by  imi¬ 
tating  the  accurate  method  which  logic  always 
requires.”  When  logic  is  treated  as  an  organon, 
it  “is  always  an  illusive  logic,  that  is,  dialectical. 
For  as  logic  teaches  nothing  with  regard  to  the 
contents  of  knowledge  .  .  .  any  attempt  at  using 
it  as  an  organon  in  order  to  extend  and  enlarge 
our  knowledge,  at  least  in  appearance,  can  end 


1040 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


in  nothing  but  mere  talk,  by  asserting  with  a 
certain  plausibility  anything  one  likes,  or,  if  one 
likes,  denying  it.” 

Yet  Kant  himself  retains  Analytic  and  Dialec¬ 
tic  as  the  major  divisions  of  his  own  transcen¬ 
dental  logic,  explaining  that  he  employs  the  title 
of  dialectic,  not  for  the  misuse  of  logic,  but  rather 
to  signify  that  portion  of  logic  which  is  the 
critique  of  “dialectical  semblance”  or  sophistry. 
General  or  ordinary  logic  takes  no  account  of 
the  content  of  knowledge  and  applies  to  all  ob¬ 
jects  universally  because  “it  treats  of  the  form 
of  thought  in  general.”  Transcendental  logic 
does  not  entirely  ignore  the  content  of  knowl¬ 
edge,  but  only  the  content  of  that  knowledge 
which  is  empirical  in  origin.  If  there  are  tran- 
scendentalor# /?non  concepts  which  donot  orig¬ 
inate  from  experience,  then  there  can  be  a  sci¬ 
ence  which  treats  “of  that  knowledge  which  be¬ 
longs  to  the  pure  understanding,  and  by  which 
we  may  think  objects  entirely  a  priori .” 

That  is  the  science  Kant  calls  “ transcendental 
Logic”  It  deals,  he  writes,  “with  the  laws  of  the 
understanding  and  reason  in  so  far  only  as  they 
refer  a  priori  to  objects.”  That  part  of  it  “which 
teaches  the  elements  of  the  pure  knowledge  of 
the  understanding,  and  the  principles  without 
which  no  object  can  be  thought,  is  the  tran¬ 
scendental  Analytic.”  The  second  part  of  it  is 
the  transcendental  Dialectic — “a  critique  of  the 
understanding  and  reason  with  regard  to  their 
hyperphysical  employment,  in  order  thus  to  lay 
bare  the  false,  semblance  of  its  groundless  pre¬ 
tensions  .  .  .  serving  as  a  protection  of  the  pure 
understanding  against  all  sophistical  illusions.” 

The  issue  between  Kant  and  Aristotle  cannot 
be  understood  if  it  is  read  simply  as  a  dispute 
about  the  nature  and  divisions  of  logic.  Their 
diverse  views  of  logic  must  be  seen  against  the 
larger  background  of  their  philosophical  differ¬ 
ences  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  mind,  the 
nature  of  reality,  the  origin  of  knowledge,  and 
the  character  of  its  objects.  Controversies  about 
logic  (and  even  within  logic,  about  this  or  that 
theory  of  judgment  or  reasoning)  usually  reflect 
fundamental  issues  in  psychology  and  meta¬ 
physics.  The  attack  made  by  some  modern  lo¬ 
gicians,  for  example,  against  the  subject-predi¬ 
cate  logic  of  Aristotle  cannot  be  separated  from 
their  rejection  of  his  doctrine  of  substance  and 


accident  in  physics  and  metaphysics;  even  as  ] 
their  own  relational  logic  represents  a  different  s 
view  of  the  structure  of  reality  or  the  constitu-  , 
ents  of  experience.  , 

On  the  other  hand,  the  criticism  of  Aristo¬ 
telian  logic  by  Bacon  and  Descartes  seems  to  be 
motivated  primarily  by  considerations  of  meth¬ 
od.  They  do  not  have  a  different  logic  to  pro¬ 
pose,  as  do  Kant  and  later  symbolic  or  mathe¬ 
matical  logicians.  Rather  for  them  logic  itself 
by  which  they  mean  Aristotle’s  logic  and  par¬ 
ticularly  his  doctrine  of  the  syllogism — appears 
useless  for  the  purposes  of  enlarging  knowledge, 
discovering  new  truths,  and  developing  the 
sciences.  Where  Kant  criticizes  Aristotle  for  re¬ 
garding  logic  as  an  organon  or  method  for  ac¬ 
quiring  knowledge,  Bacon  and  Descartes  com¬ 
plain  that  logic  does  not  serve  that  purpose  at 
all,  and  therefore  a  novum  organum — not  a  new 
logic,  but  a  new  method — is  needed. 

“The  present  system  of  logic  is  useless  for  the 
discovery  of  the  sciences,”  Bacon  writes.  It 
“rather  assists  in  confirming  and  rendering  in¬ 
veterate  the  errors  founded  on  vulgar  notions 
than  in  searching  after  truth,  and  is  therefore 
more  hurtful  than  useful.”  The  syllogism,  for 
example,  “is  unequal  to  the  subtlety  of  nature. 

.  .  .  Our  only  hope  is  in  genuine  induction.” 
Induction  is  the  key  to  an  art  of  discovery,  and 
the  rules  of  induction  the  heart  of  a  fruitful 
method  of  inquiry. 

The  relation  of  induction  to  demonstration 
in  Aristotle’s  logic,  and  the  difference  between 
Aristotle’s  and  Bacon’s  theories  of  induction, 
are  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  that  subject.  In 
Bacon’s  view,  the  Novum  Organum  departs  rad¬ 
ically  from  the  old  Organon .  The  new  can  be 
substituted  for  the  old  in  its  entirety.  It  may  be 
asked,  he  says,  “whether  we  talk  of  perfecting 
natural  philosophy  alone  according  to  our  meth¬ 
od,  or  the  other  sciences  also,  such  as  logic,  eth¬ 
ics,  politics.”  His  answer  is  that  “as  common 
logic,  which  regulates  matters  by  syllogisms,  is 
applied  not  only  to  natural,  but  also  to  every 
other  science,  so  our  inductive  method  like¬ 
wise  comprehends  them  all.” 

Demonstration  is  opposed  not  only  to  induc¬ 
tion,  but  to  discovery.  Accordingly,  logic  con¬ 
ceived  as  concerned  only  with  the  rules  of  dem¬ 
onstration  is  opposed  to  other  methods  which 
aim  at  directing  scientific  inquiry  and  research. 


1041 


Chapter  49:  LOGIC 


The  basic  contrast  is  between  criticism  and  con¬ 
struction,  or  between  examining  what  is  offered 
as  knowledge  for  its  validity  and  developing 
techniques  for  adding  new  knowledge  to  old.  In 
his  Two  New  Sciences  Galileo  says  that  logic 
“teaches  us  how  to  test  the  conclusiveness  of 
any  argument  or  demonstration  already  discov¬ 
ered  and  completed”  but  not  “to  discover  cor¬ 
rect  arguments  and  demonstrations.”  It  does 
not,  “as  regards  stimulation  to  discovery,  com¬ 
pare  with  the  power  of  sharp  distinction  which 
belongs  to  geometry.” 

In  the  same  vein  Descartes  says  of  logic  that 
“the  syllogisms  and  the  great  part  of  the  other 
teaching  serve  better  in  explaining  to  others 
those  things  that  one  knows  .  .  .  than  in  learn¬ 
ing  what  is  new.  .  .  .  This  made  me  feel  that 
some  other  method  must  be  found.”  The  four 
rules  of  the  method  he  then  states,  which  codify 
the  steps  he  himself  has  taken  to  make  discover¬ 
ies  in  geometry  and  physics,  seem  to  him  a  gen¬ 
eral  procedure  for  insuring  the  advancement  of 
all  fields  of  learning. 

As  his  Rules  for  the  Direction  of  the  Mitid  in- 
*  dicates,  Descartes’  method  does  not  omit  the 
I  intuition  of  principles  and  the  deduction  of  con¬ 
clusions  therefrom — the  apparent  equivalents  of 
induction  and  demonstration  in  Aristotle’s  Or- 
ganon.  But  he  explains  why  he  has  “omitted  all 
the  precepts  of  the  dialecticians”  even  though 
he  is  himself  concerned  with  improving  “our 
power  of  deducing  one  truth  from  another.” 
Their  style  of  argument,  he  says,  “contributes 
nothing  at  all  to  the  discovery  of  the  truth.  .  .  . 
Its  only  possible  use  is  to  serve  to  explain  at 
I  times  more  easily  to  others  the  truths  we  have 
already  ascertained;  hence  it  should  be  trans¬ 
ferred  from  Philosophy  to  Rhetoric.” 

Furthermore,  the  forms  of  the  traditional  syl¬ 
logism  do  not  seem  able  to  accommodate  the 
connections  in  mathematical  reasoning  or  the 
structure  of  mathematical  proof.  “Everyone 
will  perceive  in  mathematical  demonstrations,” 
Locke  writes,  “that  the  knowledge  gained  there¬ 
by,  comes  shortest  and  clearest  without  syllo¬ 
gisms.”  Locke  identifies  logic  with  the  doctrine 
of  the  syllogism  and,  even  more  explicitly  than 
Descartes,  rejects  it  as  an  aid  to  reasoning. 

The  question  whether  logic  is  itself  a  meth¬ 
odology,  or  includes  rules  for  the  discovery  as 


well  as  the  demonstration  of  truth,  is  answered 
in  terms  of  broader  and  narrower  conceptions 
of  the  science  or  art.  Those  who  regard  the  rules 
of  logic  as  primarily  a  canon  of  criticism,  which 
test  the  validity  of  intellectual  work,  look  else¬ 
where  for  a  method  whose  rules  are  productive 
rather  than  critical.  The  question  then  usually 
arises  whether  there  is  one  methodology  appli¬ 
cable  to  all  fields  of  inquiry,  or  as  many  distinct 
methods  as  there  are  different  disciplines  or  sub¬ 
ject  matters. 

The  difference  between  the  traditional  Aris¬ 
totelian  and  the  modern  mathematical  logic 
suggests  that  there  may  be  a  plurality  of  logics. 
The  attempts  made  by  the  exponents  of  each 
to  subsume  the  other  as  a  special  case  do  not 
seem  to  be  entirely  successful.  Though  Aristo¬ 
telian  logic  appears  to  give  a  satisfactory  ac¬ 
count  of  the  forms  of  judgment  and  reasoning 
in  certain  types  of  discourse,  it  cannot,  in  the 
opinion  of  symbolic  logicians,  be  applied  to 
mathematics.  “Mathematics  consists  of  deduc¬ 
tions,  and  yet,”  according  to  Bertrand  Russell, 
“the  orthodox  accounts  of  deduction  are  largely 
or  wholly  inapplicable  to  existing  mathemat¬ 
ics.”  Symbolic  logic,  on  the  other  hand,  may 
succeed  in  formulating  the  relational  structure 
of  modern  mathematics,  but  it  does  not,  in  the 
opinion  of  its  critics,  hold  for  metaphysics — at 
least  not  the  sort  of  metaphysics  which  treats 
relation  as  a  category  subordinate  to  substance. 

The  difference  between  the  kind  of  thinking 
that  men  do  in  science  and  in  law  suggests 
another  type  of  diversity  among  logics.  The 
practical  or  moral  judgment  seems  to  involve  a 
special  type  of  predicate.  What  Aristotle  calls 
the  “practical  syllogism”  and  what  Aquinas 
describes  as  the  process  of  “determination” — 
quite  distinct  from  deduction — by  which  posi¬ 
tive  laws  are  derived  from  natural  law,  seem  to 
call  for  a  logic  of  practical  thinking,  quite  dis¬ 
tinct  from  the  logic  of  all  the  theoretic  sciences. 

Using  the  word  “logic”  in  its  broadest  sense, 
we  must  ask  whether  there  is  one  logic  common 
to  all  the  sciences;  or  a  logic  which  fits  mathe¬ 
matics  but  not  physics  or  metaphysics,  a  logic 
appropriate  to  speculative  philosophy  but  not 
to  experimental  or  empirical  research,  a  logic 
peculiar  to  the  nature  of  the  practical  or  moral 
sciences,  such  as  ethics  and  politics,  or  to  the 
work  of  jurisprudence. 


1042 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


There  is  evidence  in  the  great  books  that  sci¬ 
ences  as  different  as  mathematics  and  physics, 
or  as  metaphysics  and  politics,  differ  in  their 
methods  of  discovery  and  demonstration.  This 
may  mean  that  they  differ  in  their  logics  as 
well.  Yet  it  also  appears  to  be  the  case  that  the 
principle  of  contradiction  applies  in  all,  that  fal¬ 
lacious  inference  is  detected  by  the  same  crite¬ 
ria  in  all,  and  to  this  extent  all  share  a  common 
logic.  Where  alternative  methods  have  been 
proposed  within  a  single  major  field — notably 
in  the  case  of  philosophy — this  may  reflect  dif¬ 
ferent  conceptions  of  philosophy  itself  rather 
than  alternative  routes  to  the  same  end. 


Because  of  their  relevance  to  the  basic  issues 
about  logic  (and  especially  those  concerning  its 
scope  and  unity),  the  rules  of  methodology  in 
general  and  the  various  methods  proposed  for 
particular  disciplines  are  included  in  this  chap¬ 
ter.  They  are  also  considered,  of  course,  in  chap¬ 
ters  devotecT  to  the  special  disciplines  or  subject 
matters,  e.g.>  Astronomy,  History,  Mathe¬ 
matics,  Metaphysics,  Physics, Theology;  and 
in  the  chapters  on  Science  and  Philosophy. 
What  is  distinctive  about  each  of  these  methods 
is  discussed  in  those  chapters  in  relation  to  the 
type  of  knowledge  or  inquiry  which  seems  to 
require  a  method  of  its  own. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGB 

1.  Logic  as  a  science:  its  scope  and  subject  matter  compared  with  psychology  and  meta¬ 

physics  1 043 

1  a.  The  axioms  of  logic:  the  laws  of  thought;  the  principles  of  reasoning 

1  b.  Divisions  of  logic:  deductive  and  inductive;  formal  and  material;  analytic  and 

dialectic;  general  and  transcendental  1044 

2.  Transcendental  logic:  the  propaedeutic  to  all  a  priori  cognition;  the  transcendental 

doctrine  of  method 

3.  Logic  as  an  art:  its  place  in  education 

3 a.  The  relation  of  logic  and  grammar 

3 b.  The  relation  of  logic  and  rhetoric  1045 

4.  Methodology:  rules  for  the  conduct  of  the  mind  in  the  processes  of  thinking,  learning, 

inquiring,  knowing 

4 a.  Mathematical  analysis  and  reasoning:  the  search  for  a  universal  method 

4 b.  The  heuristic  principles  of  research  in  experimental  and  empirical  science  1046 

4 c.  The  criteria  of  evidence  and  inference  in  historical  inquiry  1047 

4 d.  The  diverse  methods  of  speculative  philosophy:  the  role  of  intuition,  analysis, 
dialectic,  genetic  or  transcendental  criticism 

4<?.  The  logic  of  practical  thinking:  the  methods  of  ethics,  politics,  and  jurisprudence  1048 
4 f  Theological  argument:  the  roles  of  faith,  reason,  and  authority 

5.  Logic  as  an  object  of  satire  and  criticism:  sophistry  and  logic-chopping  1049 


Chapter  49:  LOGIC 


1043 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  1 1 6  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halvesoftheright-handsideof 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  inthelowerhalf 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author's  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g.,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 —  (D)  II  Esdrasy  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1,  Logic  as  a  science:  its  scope  and  subject 
matter  compared  with  psychology  and 
metaphysics 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  vii,  397a-398c  /  Sophist , 
571a-c  /  Philebus,  634b-635a 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  i  [24*10- 
1 1]  39a  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  hi,  ch  i  [995b6— 10] 
514a;  ch  2  [996^ 6-997*1 5]  515b-d;  bk  iv, 
ch  2  [ioo4bi5~26]  523d;  ch  3-8  524b-532d; 
bk  v,  ch  7  [1017*22-28]  537d-538a;  bk  xi, 
ch  1  [1059*23-26]  587a;  ch  4-6  589d-592b 

9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  cii  i  [1354*1-11] 
593a;  cii  2  [1358*2-35]  597d-598b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  7  112b-113d; 
ch  17  122d-124a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead ,  tr  iii,  ch  4  lla-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  Gody  bk  viii,  ch  4  266d- 
267c;  cii  7  269c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii, 
ch  31  651d-652b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  57, 
a  3,  rep  3  37b-38a;  a  6,  rep  3  40a-41a;  q  94, 
a  2,  ans  221d-223a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  58a-b;  72a-d 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  second  day, 
190b-c 

30  Bacon:  Adi;ancement  of  Learning ,  55b-61d 
esp  56c-58c,  59c-60c 


31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11,  2c-3b  /  Discourse ,  part 
ii,  46c-d 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration  430a- 
446b  esp  445a-446b 

35  Locke:  Hutnan  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xxi 
394d-395a,c 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
6  405d-406a 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  335d-336a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-6d;  34a-37d;  59c; 
210b-c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
253a-c;  254c-d  /  Judgement,  463a;  492c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  182d 

53  James:  Psychology,  524a;  867a;  872b-874a; 
878a;  880b;  889a- b 

la.  The  axioms  of  logic:  the  laws  of  thought; 
the  principles  of  reasoning 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus ,  72d-73b  /  Republic,  bk 
iv,  350d-351b 

8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  3  [ibio— 16]  5c-d; 
ch  10  [i3bi— 35]  19a-c  /  Prior  Analytics,  bk  1, 
ch  1-3  39a-40c  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i, 
ch  1-2  97a-99a;  ch  ii  105d-106b  /  Metaphys¬ 
ics,  bk  iii,  ch  1  [995b6-io]  514a;  ch  2  [gg6h26- 
997*15]  5l5b-d;  bk  iv,  ch  3-8  524b-532d; 
bk  xi,  ch  1  [1059*23-26]  587a;  ch  4-6  589d- 
592b 


1044 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1  b  to  3a 


(1.  Logic  as  a  science:  its  scope  and  subject  matter 
compared  with  psychology  atid  metaphysics . 
la.  The  axioms  of  logic:  the  laws  of  thought; 
the  principles  of  reasoning.} 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  7  112b-113d 
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94, 
a  2,  ans  221d-223a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54c-61a  passim 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  i 
95b,d-103d  passim,  esp  sect  4  96b,  sect  16 
99b-c,  sect  20  lOOc-d;  ch  ii,  sect  i  103d- 
104a;  ch  hi,  sect  3  113a-b:  bk  iv,  ch  i,  sect 
4  307b-c;  ch  11,  sect  8  311a;  ch  vii  337a- 
344d;  ch  viii,  sect  2-3  345a-346b 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  36b-37b;  39c-41c  esp 
40d-41c;  64d-65c;  109d-113b  esp  llOd-lllc; 
115d-119a  espll8a-c;  156d-157b:  174b-d;  194b 
/  Judgement ,  492c-d;  542d-543a;  600d-601d 
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  iv,  362b 
53  James:  Psychology.  299b  [fn  1  ] ;  319b-320a; 
360b-361a:  667b-'668a;  868b-873a;  878a-879b 

lb.  Divisions  of  logic:  deductive  and  inductive; 
formal  and  material;  analytic  and  dialec¬ 
tic;  general  and  transcendental 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  30  63d- 
64b;  bk  11,  ch  23  90a-c  /  Posterior  Analytics , 
bk  1,  ch  1  [7iai-u]  97a;  ch  3  [72^2 5—33]  99c; 
ch  18  lllb-c;  ch  31  120a-c;  bk  ii,  ch  7 
[92a34~bi]  126b;  ch  19  136a-137a,c  /  Topics , 
bk  1,  ch  1  143a-d;  ch  12  148d;  ch  18  [io8b7~ 
12]  152d;  bk  vm,  ch  1  [i35b29~i56a7]  211c- 
212a;  [1 56bio— 1 8]  212c-d;  ch  14  [1 64ai 2— 16] 
222d  /  Physics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a-b;  bk  viii,  ch 
1  [252a20-b7]  335d-336b  /  Heavens ,  bk  hi,  ch 
7  [3o6a6-i8]  397b-c  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  vi,  ch  i 
[i025bi-i6]  547b;  bk  xi,  ch  7  [1064^-9] 
592b;  bk  xiii,  ch  4  [io78bi8-3o]  610b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  vi,  ch  3  [1  i39b24— 34] 
388c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1 356a36— bi 7]  596a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  42a-c;  56a- 
59a  esp  57b-58b;  59c-60a;  61d  /  Novum 
Organum ,  pref  105a-106d;  bk  i  107a-136a,c 
esp  aph  11-26  107d-108d,  aph  69  116a-b, 
aph  103-106  127d-128c;  bk  ii,  aph  10  140c-d 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  5b-c;  34a-37d 

2.  Transcendental  logic:  the  propaedeutic  to 

all  a  priori  cognition;  the  transcendental 
doctrine  of  method 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  5b-c;  15c-16c;  23d;  34a- 
48d  esp  35b-36a,  39a-41c,  45b-47c;  59c-d; 
lOlb-d;  113b-120c;  210a-250a,c  esp  210a-c, 
211c-218d,  233d-234b,  243c-248d  /  Fund. 
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  253a-254d  esp 
253b,  254c-d 

3.  Logic  as  an  art:  its  place  in  education 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  vii,  397a-398c  /  Parmen¬ 
ides ,  491a-c  /  Statesman ,  595a -d  /  Philebus , 
633a-635a  esp  634b-635a 


8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  1-3  143a-144b; 
bk  viii,  ch  14  221d-223a,c  /  Sophistical  Refu¬ 
tations ,  ch  34  252c-253d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  ii, 
ch  3  [99-tb3i-995ai4]  513c;  bk  iv,  ch  3 
[ioo5b2~5]  524c 

9  Aristotle  '.Rhetoric,  bki,  chi  [i354ai-u]  593a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  7  112b-113d; 

ch  17  122d-124a;  bk  ii,  ch  25  174b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  30  26b  c 
/  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  4  266d-267c;  ch  7 
269c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  3 1—37 
651d-654b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  37, 
a  3,  rep  3  37b-38a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
18b-19a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  61b-c;  69d-77a  passim; 
448d-449a 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  second  day, 

190b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  31a-d  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  ii,  aph  52,  194c-195a 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  iv,  5c;  x  16d-17a  /  Dis¬ 
course ,  part  11,  46c-d 

39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  335d-336a 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  299b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  36d-37d;  223a-d 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  28 7 d- 2 88c 

3 a.  The  relation  of  logic  and  grammar 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  /  Cratylus  85a- 
114a,c  /  Philebus ,  612b-613a  /  Seventh  Letter , 
809a-811a 

8  Aristotle:  Categories ,  ch  1-4  5a-6a  /  Inter¬ 
pretation ,  ch  4  [i7ai— 7]  26b  /  Prior  Analytics , 
bk  1,  ch  34-41  66b-68c  /  Posterior  Analytics , 
bk  11,  ch  13  (97b38— 39]  133c  /  Topics,  bk  i, 
ch  15  149d-152a;  ch  18  [ioSai7~ 37]  152b-d; 
bk  11,  ch  3  154d-155d;  ch  9  [1 1 4a26— bi 4 ] 
160a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  3  [i24aio-i4]  172d;  ch  4 
[i24b35-i25a4]  173d;  bk  v,  ch  2  [i3obi  1— 1 5] 
180d;  ch  4  [i33bi5-i34a4]  184d-185b;  ch  7 
[i36bi5-32]  188c-d;  bk  vi,  ch  1  [i39bi2]-cn  3 
[i4ia22]  192b-194c;  ch  10  202b-203a;  ch  14 
[i5ib3— 1 1  ]  206c;  bk  viii,  ch  3  [1 58b8— 1 7]  215b; 
ch  7  217c-d  /  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  i 
[1 65ai— 18]  227b-c;  ch  4  [i65b24-i66b2i]  228b- 
229c;  ch  10  [i70bi  1— 41]  234d-235b;  ch  13-14 
238d-239d;  ch  19-23  243d-247a;  ch  31-32 
250c-251c;  ch  33  [i82bi3-i7]  251d  /  Meta¬ 
physics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  5 2 5a- 5 2 8b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  xii,  par  32-36 
107a-108c:  par  41-43  llOa-d;  bk  xiii,  par  36 
120c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  13  62 7d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  54c-60c;  65c-d; 
part  hi,  172a;  part  iv,  269b-c;  270a-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  i, 
18d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  253c-254a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  56b-66a  esp 
58c-59a 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiii,  26b-c  /  Discourse , 


3b  to  4 a 

part  i,  43b;  part  vi,  66 d  /  Objections  and 
Replies ,  290c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  ii,  prop  47,  schol 
390c-391a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  22-23  175b;  392  239b-240a 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch 
xxxiii,  sect  19  251c-d;  bk  iii,  cii  iii,  sect 
10,  256d-257a;  ch  vii  283a-284b  esp  sect  2 
283b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  17  328d;  ch  v, 
sect  1-3  329a-b;  ch  vi,  sect  1-3  331b-d 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
19  410c;  sect  52  422d-423a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  339d-342c 
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  la-4a,c 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  la-c; 
4a-5d;  7c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  182b-c 
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  40c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  i,  672a-b 
53  James:  Psychology,  144a-b 

3 b.  The  relation  of  logic  and  rhetoric 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d  esp  [882- 
11 12]  499b-502b 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  131b-141a,c  /  Gorgias  252a- 
294d  /  Philebus ,  633a-635a  esp  634b-635a 

8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  4  [1 7ai— 7]  26b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [i094bi9-27] 
339d-340a  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  593a-598b; 
ch  4  [i359bi— 1 8]  599d;  bk  ii,  cii  22-26  643c- 
653a, c 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  16,  180d- 
181a 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  36- 
37  653d-654b;  bk  iv,  ch  4  676d-677a 
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  55a-b;  60d;  67c; 
72a-d;  part  ii,  127d;  128d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  31a-d;  58c- 
59a;  64a-b;  66c-67c 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  11,  2c;  x,  16d-17a  esp  17a 
/  Discourse ,  part  ii,  46c- d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  22-23  175b 
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  x, 
sect  34  299d-300a 

4.  Methodology:  rules  for  the  conduct  of  the 
mind  in  the  processes  of  thinking,  learn¬ 
ing,  inquiring,  knowing 

7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  /  Parmenides, 
491a-c  /  Philebus,  610d-613a 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  30  63d- 
64b  /  Topics,  bk  1,  ch  14  149a-d;  bk  viii,  ch 
14  221d-223a,c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
513c  d;  bk  v,  ch  1  [ioi3ai— 3]  533a 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  161a- 
165d  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [io94bi2-27]  339d- 
340a;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [1  i04ai4— 1 5]  349c;  bk  vi, 
ch  3  [ii39b24-34]  388c;  ch  ii  392c-393b  esp 
[1 1 4  3a3i— b6]  392d-393a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  cii  12  151b- 
152c;  ch  25  174b-c 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  4  lla-c 


1045 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  55a  56d;  58d  61a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  63d  66b;  240c-242a; 
270a  271c;  446d-450a;  453c-454d 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  second  day, 
190b-c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  331a-337a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  llal 7c  esp 
14c-15a,  16b  c;  33d-34b;  43d-44c;  47d  49b; 
55b  61d  esp  57d-58b;  64a-66a;  96d-97a  / 
Novum  Organum,  pref  105a-106d;  bk  i  107a- 
136a, c  esp  aph  11-26  107d-108d,  aph  39-69 
109c-116b,  aph  103-106  127d  128c;  bk  ii, 
aph  27-32  157b-161b  esp  aph  32  161a  b 

31  Descartes:  Rules  la-40a,c  esp  iii-vi,  4a-9b, 
vii  10b-12a,  x,  16d-17a,  xii-xm,  24d-27d, 
xiv,  28b-29b  /  Discourse  41a-67a,c  esp  part 
1,  41d-42b,  part  11,  45b-c,  46c-48b,  part  iii, 
50b  51a,  part  iv,  52a  /  Objections  and  Replies, 
237b-c;  267a-277a,c 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  1-5  17 la- 173a  /  Geometrical 
Demonstration  430a-446b  passim 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  intro,  sect 
4-7  94a-95c;  bk  i,  ch  iii,  sect  24-26  120a- 
121a, c;  bk  11,  ch  1,  sect  10  123b-d;  ch  xi, 
sect  15  146d-147a;  bk  iii,  ch  x,  sect  34 
299d-300a;  bk  iv,  ch  iii,  sect  22  319c-320a; 
sect  30  323a-c;  ch  iv,  sect  17  328d;  ch 
vii,  sect  ii,  340c-341a;  ch  xii  358c-363b 
passim,  esp  sect  7  360b-c,  sect  14  362d- 
363a;  ch  xvii,  sect  19-22  379d-380b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 
21-25  411b-412a,c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ii,  div 
17  457a-b;  sect  vii,  div  49  471c-d;  sect  viii, 
div  75,  484c;  sect  xii,  div  116,  503d-504a; 
div  132  509a-d 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c  esp  lb-d,  3c- d; 
lOlb-d;  133c-134d;  179d-182b;  218d-227a: 
248d-250a,c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  253a-b  /  Practical  Reason,  293c- 
294b;  336d-337a,c  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Ele¬ 
ments  of  Ethics ,  376c-d  /  judgement,  551a- 
552c;  575b-c 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  276c-d;  283d-284d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  690a-b 

4a.  Mathematical  analysis  and  reasoning:  the 
search  for  a  universal  method 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,  386d-387d  /  Theaete- 
tus,  514b-515d 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  41 
[49b32-5oa3]  68c  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i, 
ch  7  103c-d;  ch  10  104d-105d  /  Topics,  bk 
vi,  cii  4  [i4ib3— 22]  194d-195a;  bk  vii,  ch  3 
[1 53a6— 1 1  ]  208a-b  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  9 
[200ai5~29]  277c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch  3 
513c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  2  [996a22-36]  514d-515a; 
bk  vi,  ch  1  [1026*7-32]  548a-c;  bk  vii,  ch  10 
[1036*2-13]  559b-c;  bk  ix,  ch  9  [1051*22-34] 
577b-c;  bk  xi,  ch  3  [io6i*29-b3]  589c;  ch  4 
589d-590a;  bk  xiii,  ch  2  [i077bi]-cn  3 
[1078*32]  608d-609d 


Chapter  49:  LOGIC 


1046 

(4.  Methodology:  rules  for  the  cotiduct  of  the  mind 
in  the  processes  of  thinking,  learning,  in¬ 
quiring,  knowing.  4a.  Mathematical  analy¬ 
sis  and  reasoning:  the  search  for  a  universal 
method .) 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  iii,  ch  3  [11 12^0-24] 
358d;  bk  vii,  ch  8  [1 15iai5— 19]  402a 

11  Archimedes:  Method  569a-592a  esp  569b- 
570a 

11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic ,  bk  ii,  831d-841c 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World ,  1012b- 
1014b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  85, 
a  8,  rep  2  460b-461b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  56b;  58a-c;  59b-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences ,  second  day, 
190b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  65b  / 
Novum  Organum ,  bk  1,  aph  59  112b-c 

31  Descartes:  Rules  la-40a,c  esp  11  2a-3b,  iv, 
5c-7d,  vi  8a-10a,  xn,  24d-25a,  xiv-xvi  28a- 
35c,  xviii-xxi  36b-40a,c  /  Discourse ,  part  1, 
43b-c;  part  11,  46c-48b;  part  hi,  50d  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  128a-129a;  130a-133a,c 
/  Geometry  295a-353b  esp  bk  i,  295a-298b, 
bk  11, 304a-306a,  316a-317a,  bk  iii,  331b,  353a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  1-5  171  a- 173a  /  Geometri¬ 
cal  Demonstration ,  430a-434a;  442a-446b  / 
Arithmetical  Triangle ,  451b-452a;  458b-459b; 
464a-466a 

34  Newton:  Principles ,  la-b;  bk  i,  lemma  i-ii 
and  schol  25a-32a  esp  lemma  ii,  schol,  31a- 
32a;  prop  31,  schol  79a-81a;  bk  ii,  lemma 
2  168a-169b;  bk  iii,  lemma  5  338b-339a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xvi, 
sect  4  166a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  i,  sect  9  308c-309b; 
ch  11,  sect  9-10  311b-c;  ch  iii,  sect  18-20 
317d-319c;  sect  30  323a-c;  ch  iv,  sect  6-9 
325a-326b;  ch  vii,  sect  ii,  340c-341a;  ch 
xii,  sect  1-8  358c-360c  passim;  sect  14-15 
362d-363b;  ch  xvii,  sect  ii  378b 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
12  408a-b;  sect  19  410c;  sect  15-16  415d- 
416a;  sect  118-132  436b-439c  passim 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  iv,  div 
20  458a-b;  sect  vii,  div  48  470d-471c;  sect 
xii,  div  131  508d-509a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iii,  109b-llla;  118b- 
119a 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  5a-13d;  15c-16c;  17d-19a; 
46a-b;  68a-69c;  211c-212a;  215d-217a;  217c- 
218d  /  Practical  Reason ,  302d-303b;  330d- 
331a  /  Science  of  Right ,  399a-b  /  Judgement , 
497a-498d  esp  498b-d;  551a-553c 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  283d-284a 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry ,  pref,  2b 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  172a-173b;  249a- 
251b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xi,  469a-d; 
epilogue  11,  694d-695c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  175a-176a;  870a;  874a- 
878a 


4  a  to  4  b 

4b.  The  heuristic  principles  of  research  in  ex¬ 
perimental  and  empirical  science 

8  Aristotle:  Heavens ,  bk  iii,  ch  7  [3o6ai-iS] 
397b-c  /  Generation  and  Corruption ,  bk  i, 
ch  2  [316*5-14]  411c-d  /  Meteorology ,  bk  i, 
ch  7  [344a5"9]  f 50b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  6 
[49ia5-26]  12c-13a  /  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i, 
ch  1  161a-165d  esp  [642*14-^4]  165b-d  /  Gen¬ 
eration  of  Animals ,  bk  iii,  ch  10  [76ob28~33 
301d-302a 

10  Hippocrates  :  Ancient  Medicine,  par  1-8  la- 
3b;  par  20  7b-d 

10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  n  173d- 
177a 

16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly 
Spheres,  505a-506a;  507a-508a 

16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  888b-890a;  907b- 
908b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  v,  par  3-6  27c- 
28c  esp  par  6  28c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  32,  a 
1,  rep  2  175d-178a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  377a-d 

28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  pref,  la-2a;  bk  i,  6a-7a 
esp  6d-7a;  bk  ii,  27b-c 

28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  131a- 
138b;  148c-149c;  157b-177a,c  passim;  third 
day,  200a-d;  202d-203a;  207d-208c;  236d- 
237a 

28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  285c-d  /  Cir¬ 
culation  of  the  Blood,  322d-323d;  324c-d  / 
On  Animal  Generation ,  33  la-33 7a  esp  331b- 
333d,  335c-336c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  13d-14b; 
15d;  34b;  42a-c;  56c-59c;  64d-65a  /  Novum 
Organum  105a-195d  esp  pref  105a-106d,  bk 
1,  aph  1-26  107a-108d,  aph  50  111b,  aph  70 
116b-117a,  aph  95  126b-c,  aph  104-106 
128a-c,  bk  11,  aph  1-9  137a-140c,  aph  52 
194c-195d  /  New  Atlantis,  210d-214d 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi  60d-67a,c  esp 
61d-62c,  66a-b  /  Meditations,  iv,  90a-b  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  215a-b 

33  Pascal:  Vacuum ,  355a-358b;  365b-371a  pas¬ 
sim  /  Great  Experiment  382a-389b 

34  Newton:  Principles,  la-2a;  bk  iii,  rules 
270a-271b;  general  schol,  371b-372a  / 
Optics,  bk  1,  379a;  bk  iii,  542a;  543a-b 

34  Huygens:  Light ,  pref,  551b-552a;  ch  i, 
553a-554a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  vi, 
sect  13  335c-d;  ch  xii,  sect  9-13  360d-362d 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iii,  div 
19,  458a;  sect  iv,  div  23-27  459a-460d; 
sect  ix,  div  82  487b-c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-13d  esp  5c-6c;  210b-c; 
215d-216d 

45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  1c- 
2b;  6d-7a,c;  part  i,  17a;  23c;  part  iii,  87b-c 

45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  169a.-174a;  175b; 
181b;  184a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1047 


i 


Chapter  49:  LOGIC 


4  c  to  4 d 

45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity ,  440b, d; 
467a-b;  659a:  774d-775a 

50  Marx:  Capital,  6c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 
690a-b;  694d-696d 

53  James:  Psychology,  3b-4a;  120a*  129b  passim; 
348a-359a  esp  "  351a-352a;  385a  b;  677b; 
862a-865b;  882a-886a  passim,  esp  883a-884a 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  400d-401a  /  Instincts , 
412a-b  /  General  Introduction,  463d;  483d- 
485a  csp  484d-485a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure 
Principle ,  661c-662b  /  New  Introductory  Lec¬ 
tures,  815a-b;  818c-819b;  874a-c;  879c;  881b-c 

4c.  The  criteria  of  evidence  and  inference  in 
historical  inquiry 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  17b-c;  bk  ii,  49a- 
56b  passim;  59a;  69b-d;  71a-73b;  76d;  bk 

iii,  89c-d;  99b-c;  bk  v,  168b-c;  bk  vii, 
254c-d;  bk  viii,  281d-282b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  i,  353d- 
354b;  bk  ii,  391c-d;  bk  vi,  523c-524d  passim; 
bk  viii,  586b-d 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus  15a-30a,c  passim,  csp 
15a-18d  /  Numa  Pompilius,  49a-b  /  Themis - 
tocles ,  102a, c  /  Aristides,  262b,d-263c  /  Nicias , 
423a-c 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iii,  49c-d;  bk  iv,  66b-d 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  96b, d;  232c;  296a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  153a- 
158a;  180c-183d;  part  iii,  285d-286a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xiii,  563a-b; 
epilogue  ii  675a-696d 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  450d-451a 

4d .  The  diverse  methods  of  speculative  philos¬ 
ophy:  the  role  of  intuition,  analysis, 
dialectic,  genetic  or  transcendental  criti¬ 
cism 

7  Plato:  Protagoras,  50d-52d;  57a-c  /  Euthy - 
demus  65a-84a,c  /  Phaedrus  115a-141a,c  esp 
131b-141a,c  /  Meno ,  179d-183a  /  Republic , 
bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Parmenides,  491a-c  / 
Theaetetus ,  514b-515d;  525d-526b  /  Sophist 
551a-579d  csp  552b-561d,  571a-c  /  Statesman 
580a-608d  csp  595a-d  /  Philebus  609a-639a,c 
csp  609a-617d  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810d 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics  97a-137a,c  / 
Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  i  [iooa25~b2i]  143a-b;  bk 
viii,  ch  i  [i55bi— 16]  211a-b;  ch  14  [i63b8-i6] 
222a  /  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  16  [175*1- 
12]  241a  /  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a  b;  ch  2 
[i84b25— 185*19]  259c-260a;  bk  ii,  ch  7-9 
275b-278a,c  /  Heavens ,  bk  ii,  cii  13  [294^6- 
14]  386a;  bk  iii,  ch  7  [306*1— 1 8]  397b-c  / 
Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  2  [316*5- 
14]  411c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  3  [983* 
24— b6]  501c-d;  ch  9  [992**  18-993*2]  511a-b; 
bk  11,  cii  i  [993a30-bi9]  511b,d-512a;  ch  3 
513c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  i  [995*23— b4)  513b, d;  bk 

iv,  ch  2  522b-524b  esp  [1004*25-31!  523b-c; 
ch  4  [1005^5-1006*28]  525a-c;  ch  7  [1012* 


17-24]  532a  b;  cii  8  [ioi2n29-b8]  532b-c; 
bk  vi,  ch  1  547b,d-548c;  bk  vii,  cii  3  [1029* 
3 4  — b  1 2 ]  552a;  ch  17  [  1 04 1*6— h  1 1  ]  565a-d;  bk 
viii,  ch  4  [io44*33-b2o]  569a-b;  bk  ix,  cii  6 
[1048*35^9]  573d-574a;  bk  x,  cii  i  [io52bi- 
15]  578d-579a;  bk  xi,  cii  3  589a  d;  cii  5 
590a-d;  cii  6  [106^*13-16]  591b;  cii  7 
[io63b36-io64®9]  592b;  bk  xiii,  cii  i  [1076* 
10-16]  607a;  cii  3  [io77bi7-io78*3i]  609a  d 
/  Soul,  bk  1,  cii  1  [402*1  ]-ch  2  [403b23]  631a- 
633a;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [413*11-19]  643a-b;  ch  3 
[4i4b2o]-cn  4  [415*22]  644d-645c 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  3  388b  c;  ch  6 
389d;  ch  8  [1142*13-19]  391b;  cii  11  392c- 
393b  esp  [ii43a3i-b6]  392d-393a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  iii,  cii  4-6  11a- 
12b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  4  270c-271a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God ,  bk  viii,  ch  2-8 
265b-270d  passim 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  i  4a-c;  q  2,  a  2  lld-12c; 
q  32,  a  i,  rep  2  175d-178a;  part  i-ii,  q  18 
693 b,d- 703a  passim 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56b-d;  60a-b; 
65c-d;  part  iv,  267a-c;  269b-c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
101b-106a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  16b-c; 
42a-c;  56c-59c;  61d 

31  Descartes:  Rules,  ii-xiv,  2d-33b  /  Discourse , 
part  ii,  46c-47b;  part  iv  51b-54b  /  Medita¬ 
tions,  69a-71a,c;  72b, d;  1  75a-77c;  iii,  82a-d 
/  Objections  and  Replies,  119c-120c;  126a-b; 
128a-129a;  postulate  i-vii  130d-131c;  167c; 
206c-207a;  237b-238b;  244a-b;  245d-246a; 
267a-277a,c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  10,  schol 
376d-377a 

33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  430a- 
434a;  442a-443b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  87d;  intro 
93a-95d;  bk  i,  ch  iii,  sect  24-25  120a-d 
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
21-25  411b-412a,c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  2 
451b-c;  div  7-9  453c-455a;  sect  ii,  div  17 
457a-b;  sect  xii,  div  116,  503d-504a;  div 
130  508c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  339d;  341b-342b; 
362a-d  passim 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-13d;  16a-c;  109d- 
112d;  115d-116a;  119a-b;  133c-134d;  184b-c; 
185b-c;  193a-200c  esp  193d-194b,  199a-c; 
215d-216d;  218d-227a;  248d-250a,c  /  Fund . 
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals ,  253a-c;  254b-c; 
263b-d;  264b-d  esp  264d;  271a-c;  283d-284d 
/  Practical  Reason,  293c-294b  esp  293d  [fn  3]; 
297a-c;  329d-330c;  335b-c;  336d-337a,c; 
358a  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 
365a-366a;  376c-d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of 
Morals,  387a-388d  /  Judgement,  570b-572d 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a 


1048 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4^  to  4/ 


(4.  Methodology :  rules  for  the  conduct  of  the  mind 
in  the  processes  of  thinking,  learning,  in¬ 
quiring,  knowing.  Ad.  The  diverse  methods 
of  speculative  philosophy:  the  role  of  intui¬ 
tion,  analysis,  dialectic,  genetic  or  tran¬ 
scendental  criticism .) 

43  Mill:  Liberty ,  287b-288c  /  Utilitarianism , 
445a-447b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  pref,  la-c; 
intro,  par  2,  9d-10a;  additions,  3  116a  / 
Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  156c-158a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  690a-b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  674a-675b  esp  675b;  687a 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle ,  661c- 
662b  /  New  Introductory  Lectures ,  874c-875b 
esp  875a 

4e.  The  logic  of  practical  thinking:  the  methods 
of  ethics,  politics,  and  jurisprudence 

5  Aristophanes:  Wasps  [799-1002]  517c-519d 
9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals ,  ch  7  [70^5- 
39]  236b-d  /  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  3  [1 094^2-27] 
339d-340a;  ch  4  [io95a3o-b8]  340c;  ch  7 
[i098a25~b8]  343d-344a;  bk  ii,  ch  2  349b- 
350a  esp  [uo3b27-no4a9]  349 b-c;  ch  7 
[iio7a27~32]  352d-353a;  bk  hi,  ch  3  358a- 
359a;  bk  v,  ch  10  [1 137bi2— 31  ]  385d-386a; 
bk  vi,  ch  1  [ii38bi6-34]  387a-b;  ch  5  389a-c 
passim;  ch  8-9  390d-392b;  ch  ii  392c-393b 
esp  [ii43a3i-b6]  392d-393a;  bk  vii,  ch  2-3 
395c-398a;  ch  8  [115^15-19]  402a  /  Politics , 
bk  1,  ch  1  [i252ai8-24]  445b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  5,  ans  112d-113c;  a  7,  ans  114d-115d;  q  81, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  430c-431d;  q  83,  a  i,  ans 
436d-438a;  q  86,  a  i,  rep  2  461c-462a;  part 
i-ii,  qq  13-15  672d-684a;  q  44,  a  2  808b-d 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  76, 
a  1,  ans  141a-c;  q  77,  a  2,  rep  4  145d-147c; 
q  95,  a  2  227c-228c;  a  4  229b-230c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  53a-54a;  58a-b; 
60b-61a;  66c-68a;  78a-d;  part  ii,  112d; 
129a-b; 158c-d 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice ,  act  ii, 
sc  vii  [1-75]  416a-417a;  sc  ix  [19-72]  417d- 
418b;  act  hi,  sc  11  [73-139]  420d-421b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  57d-58b; 
79c-80a;  81d-82a;  94d-95b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse ,  part  iii,  48b-50b  / 
Objections  and  Replies ,  126a-b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  27a-80b;  90a-127a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  i,  ch  ii, 
sect  1  103d-104a;  sect  4  104d-105a;  bk  iii, 
ch  xi,  sect  15-18  303b-304b;  bk  iv,  ch  iii, 
sect  18-20  317d-319c;  ch  iv,  sect  7-10 
325b-326b;  ch  xii,  sect  8  360c 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding ,  sect  i,  div 
1-5  451a-453b  passim;  div  9,  454d-455a; 
sect  xii,  div  131-132  508d-509d  passim,  esp 
div  132,  509c-d 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  75d-81c  passim, 
esp  76d-78b 


42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  60a-c;  149d-150a  / 
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a-254d; 
264b-d;  266b-c;  271a-c;  283d-284d  /  Practical 
Reason,  291a-297c;  306d-307a;  307d-309b; 
309d-310b;  319c-321b;  329a-331a  /  Pref 
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics  365a-379d  / 
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  388a-d;  390b; 
393a  /  Science  of  Right,  397a-b;  398a-399c; 
413d-414a;  416b-417a 

43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a;  num¬ 
ber  85,  258d 

43  Mill:  Liberty,  284b-d  /  Utilitarianism,  445a- 
447b;  456a-457b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  intro,  par  3 
10a-12c;  part  iii,  par  222-223  73b-d;  par  225 
73d-74a;  par  229  75b;  additions,  140  139b-c 

50  Marx:  Capital,  6a-d;  lOa-lld;  301d  [fn  3] 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto ,  430c- 
433d  passim,  esp  431a-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  680d- 
681a;  683d-684a;  690a-b 

53  James  :  Psychology,  887a-888a 

4f.  Theological  argument:  the  roles  of  faith, 
reason,  and  authority 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1  la-b;  bk 
xii,  par  32-36  107a-108c;  par  41-43  llOa-d; 
bk  xiii,  par  36  120c-d  /  City  of  God,  bk  viii, 
ch  4-12  266d-273a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, 
ch  37  635b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  31  651d-652b;  bk  iii, 
ch  28  668a 

19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  i  3a- 
10c;  q  2,  a  2  lld-12c;  q  12,  a  12  60d-61c;  q 
19,  a  5,  rep  2  112d-113c;  q  32,  a  1  175d-178a; 
a  4  180b-d;  q  46,  a  2  253a-255a;  q  68,  a  i, 
ans  354a-355c;  q  102,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  4 
523d-525a;  q  113,  a  7,  rep  i  580b-581a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  102, 
a  2  271b-272a;  part  ii-ii,  q  1,  a  5,  rep  2 
383b-384b;  q  2,  a  10  399b-400b;  part  iii 
suppl,  q  75,  a  3,  rep  2  938a-939d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  paradise,  xxiv 
142d-144b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  66a-c;  83b;  part 
ii,  137b-c;  149c-d;  160b-c;  163a-b;  part  iii, 
165a-c;  167a-b;  241c-242a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  98b-99a;  208b-209c; 
212a-213a;  292c-294b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  122b-c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  12c-13c; 
17b-c;  39d-40a;  41b-d;  95d-101b 

31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43c  /  Medita¬ 
tions,  69a-72d 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii  [552-587]  331a- 
332a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  163a-166a  / 

Pensees,  242-253  217b-220a;  265-290  221b- 
225a;  557-567  272b-273b;  862-866  342b- 
343b;  903  348a  /  Vacuum,  355b-356b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xvii, 
sect  24  380c-d;  ch  xviii  380d-384b  passim; 
ch  xix,  sect  14  387d-388a 

35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi  497b- 


5 


Chapter  49:  LOGIC 


503c  passim,  csp  niv  102  497b  d,  div  104 
498bc,  div  107  499c  500b;  sect  xii,  div 
132,  509c 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  206a -b;  307a- 
314a  csp  308c-309a,  310b  312a,  313d-314a; 
348c-d;  438b-442a;  670b-c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  134a-151c  csp  136d- 
140d,  143c-145d;  520b-521c 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  240b-243c  /  Practical 
Reason ,  348b-349b;  351b-352c  /  Judgement , 
588a  613a, c  esp  588a  592d,  593d-596c,  603d- 
607c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  158c- 
160b;  part  hi,  308c-309d;  part  iv,  360c-361a 

5.  Logic  as  an  object  of  satire  and  criticism: 
sophistry  and  logic-chopping 

5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  488a-506d 
7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  /  Republic ,  bk 
vii,  400d-401a  /  Theaetetus,  525d-526b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  21  166c- 
167d;  bk  hi,  ch  2  177c-178d;  ch  21  193d-195a 

18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  ii,  ch  31 
651d-652b;  ch  37  653d-654b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  165b;  part  iv, 
268d;  270d-272c 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  1, 
12d-13b;  18d;  22b-c;  23b-c;  bk  ii,  73b-c; 
79c:  101b-106a;  bk  iii,  150a;  182c;  187b-c; 
197b-200d;  bk  iv,  273c-274b 


1049 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  61b  c;  72b  77a  passim; 
255b  256a;  259d-263b;  448d  449a;  517b  519a 

26  Shakespeare:  Faming  of  the  Shrew ,  act  i, 
sc  11  [1-44]  2 05 b  e  /  Two  Gentlemen  of 
Verona ,  act  i,  sc  i  [70-158]  230a  d  /  Julius 
Caesar ,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-36]  568b,d 

27  Shakespeare:  All's  Well  That  Ends  Well , 
act  1,  sc  iii  [27-59]  145d  146a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  57d  58b; 
60a-61c;  66c-67c  /  Novum  Organum ,  bk  i, 
aph  63  113d  114a 

31  Descartes:  Rules ,  x,  16d-17a  /  Discourse , 
part  11,  46c-d 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  393  240a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  iii,  ch  x, 
sect  6-13  293a  294d;  bk  iv,  ch  vii,  sect  ii, 
341a-d;  ch  xvii,  sect  4,  373a-c;  sect  6, 
376d-377a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  i,  15b-23a  esp  19b-20a; 
part  ii,  56a-62a  esp  58a-b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy ,  227a-228a;  234b- 
236b;  318b-321a;  329b-336a;  421b-422b 

42  Kant:  Pure  Reason ,  36d-37d;  109b-c;  120c- 
121c;  133d;  157d;  221c-222b  /  Judgement , 
607d-608c 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [1908-1945]  45b-46a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  238a-c; 
242c-243b;  bk  ix,  361d-365c;  epilogue  i, 
672a-b;  epilogue  ii,  683d-684a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  238b  [fn  2] 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  Logic  as  a  science  in  relation  to  other  sciences,  see  Dialectic  4;  Metaphysics  3c;  Philoso¬ 
phy  3d. 

The  conception  of  the  liberal  arts  and  their  place  in  education,  see  Art  4,  6b;  Education  5b; 
Mathematics  ib. 

The  conception  of  logic  or  dialectic  as  an  art,  in  itself  and  in  relation  to  other  arts,  see  Dia¬ 
lectic  1,  2a(2)-2b;  Language  7;  Mathematics  ia;  Rhetoric  ib. 

Other  discussions  of  the  laws  of  thought  and  the  rules  of  inference,  see  Judgment  7a~7b; 
Opposition  id(i)-id(2);  Principle  ic,  33(3);  Reasoning  2-2C,  4a;  and  for  the  examina¬ 
tion  of  logical  fallacies,  see  Reasoning  3a~3c;  Truth  3d(2)~3d(3). 

Particular  problems  in  the  art  or  science  of  logic,  see  Definition  i,  2a-2e,  4-5;  Hypothesis 
5;  Idea  4b~4c;  Induction  i-ib,  4~4a,  5;  Judgment  6-6d,  8-8d;  Opposition  ia-ic(2); 
Reasoning  4d~4f,  5b~5e(3);  Same  and  Other  3a(i)~3b. 

Matters  bearing  on  the  distinction  between  inductive  and  deductive  logic,  see  Induction  ib; 
Reasoning  4b~4c,  5^3);  Science  5d;  and  for  discussions  relevant  to  the  principles  of 
transcendental  logic,  see  Dialectic  2c-2c(2),  3c;  Idea  id,  5c;  Judgment  4,  8d;  Memory 
and  Imagination  ia;  Metaphysics  2c,  4b;  Opposition  ie;  Principle  2b(3);  Quality 
1 ;  Quantity  i  ;  Relation  4c. 

The  special  problem  of  the  difference  between  a  logic  of  predication  and  a  relational  logic, 
see  Idea  5a;  Judgment  5b~5c;  Relation  4b. 

The  methodology  of  the  particular  sciences,  see  Astronomy  2a-2c;  History  3a;  Mathe¬ 
matics  3— 3d ;  Mechanics  2-2c;  Metaphysics  2c;  Philosophy  3-3C;  Science  5~5e; 
Theology  4c. 

Other  statements  of  the  attack  on  sophistry  or  logic-chopping,^DiALECTic6;  Metaphysics 
4a;  Science  7b;  Theology  5. 


1050 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boo\s  of  the  Western  World but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas . 


I. 

Aquinas.  De  Fallaciis 

Hobbes.  Concerning  Body ,  part  i,  ch  6 

Spinoza.  Of  the  Improvement  of  the  Understanding 

Locke.  Conduct  of  the  Understanding 

Kant.  Introduction  to  Logic ,  i-ii 

Hegel.  Science  of  Logic 

J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic 

- .  An  Examination  of  Sir  William  Hamilton's 

Philosophy ,  ch  20-23 

II. 

Sextus  Empiricus.  Against  the  Logicians 
Porphyry.  Introduction  to  Aristotle's  Predicaments 
Boethius.  In  Isagogem  Porphyri  Commenta 
Abailard.  Dialectica 
Maimonides.  Treatise  on  Logic 
John  of  Salisbury.  Metalogicon 
Gilbert  de  la  Porree.  Liber  de  Sex  Principiis 
Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  liv 
John  of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus  Philo sophicus 
Thomisticus ,  Ars  Logica ,  prologus;  part  ii,  q 
1-2 

Arnauld.  Logic  or  the  Art  of  Thinking,  part  iv 
Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite ,  bk  vi 
Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Under¬ 
standing ,  bk  iv,  ch  2 
Euler.  Letters  to  a  German  Princess 
Coleridge.  Treatise  on  Method 
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea ,  vol 
ii,  sup,  ch  9 

Whately.  Elements  of  Logic  / 

W.  Hamilton.  Lectures  on  Metaphysics  and  Logic , 
vol  11  (1-4) 

De  Morgan.  Formal  Logic 

Boole.  Mathematical  Analysis  of  Logic 

- .  An  Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought 

Sigwart.  Logic 


Lotze.  Logic ,  bk  i,  intro,  (10-13) 

Jevons.  Pure  Logic 

- .  The  Principles  of  Science 

■ - .  Studies  in  Deductive  Logic 

Bradley.  The  Principles  of  Logic 
Bosanquet.  Logic 

C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers ,  vol  ii,  par  1-218; 
vol  hi,  par  1 54-25 1,  359-403;  vol  iv,  par  80- 
152;  vol  vi,  par  102-163,  1 85— 237 
Venn.  Symbolic  Logic 

- .  Principles  of  Empirical  or  Inductive  Logic 

Brunetiere.  An  Apology  for  Rhetoric 

Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough ,  part  i,  ch  3 

Lewis  Carroll.  Alice's  Adventures  in  Wonderland 

- .  Through  the  Looking-Glass  and  What  Alice 

Found  There 

- .  Symbolic  Logic 

Couturat.  The  Algebra  of  Logic 
Poincare.  Science  and  Method ,  bk  ii,  ch  3-5 
Whitehead  and  Russell.  Principia  Mathematical 
(Introductions  to  first  and  second  editions) 

B.  Russell.  Principles  of  Mathematics,  ch  2 

- .  Our  Knowledge  of  the  External  World ,  11 

- .  Mysticism  and  Logic ,  ch  i 

- .  Introduction  to  Mathematical  Philosophy ,  ch  18 

W.  E.  Johnson.  Logic 

Wittgenstein.  Tractatus  Logico -Philo sophicus 
Maritain.  An  Introduction  to  Logic 
Bridgman.  The  Logic  of  Modern  Physics 
Gilson.  The  Unity  of  Philosophical  Experience ,  ch  I 
Santayana.  The  Realm  of  Truth,  ch  3 
Dewey.  Essays  in  Experimental  Logic 

- .  Reconstruction  in  Philosophy ,  ch  6 

- .  The  Quest  for  Certainty ,  ch  9 

- .  Logic ,  the  Theory  of  Inquiry,  part  i 

Weiss.  Reality,  bk  1,  ch  7 
Blanshard.  The  Nature  of  Thought 
M.  R.  Cohen.  A  Preface  to  Logic,  esp  1,  ix 
Dewey  and  Bentley.  Knowing  and  the  Known 


Chapter  50:  LOVE 


INTRODUCTION 


HERE,  as  in  the  chapters  on  God  and  Man, 
almost  all  the  great  books  are  represented 
except  those  in  mathematics  and  the  physical 
sciences.  Even  those  exceptions  do  not  limit  the 
sphere  of  love.  As  the  theologian  understands 
it,  love  is  not  limited  to  things  divine  and  hu¬ 
man,  nor  to  those  creatures  less  than  man  which 
have  conscious  desires.  Natural  love,  Aquinas 
writes,  is  not  only  “in  all  the  soul’s  powers,  but 
also  in  all  the  parts  of  the  body,  and  universally 
in  all  things:  because,  as  Dionysius  says,  ‘Beauty 
and  goodness  are  beloved  by  all  things.’  ” 

Love  is  everywhere  in  the  universe — in  all 
things  which  have  their  being  from  the  bounty 
and  generosity  of  God’s  creative  love  and  which 
in  return  obey  the  law  of  love  in  seeking  God  or 
in  whatever  they  do  to  magnify  God’s  glory. 
Love  sometimes  even  takes  the  place  of  other 
gods  in  the  government  of  nature.  Though  he 
thinks  the  motions  of  the  world  are  without 
direction  from  the  gods,  Lucretius  opens  his 
poem  On  the  Nature  of  Things  with  an  invoca¬ 
tion  to  Venus,  “the  life-giver” — without  whom 
nothing  “comes  forth  into  the  bright  coasts  of 
life,  nor  waxes  glad  nor  lovely.” 

Nor  is  it  only  the  poet  who  speaks  metaphor¬ 
ically  of  love  as  the  creative  force  which  engen¬ 
ders  things  and  renews  them,  or  as  the  power 
which  draws  all  things  together  into  a  unity  of 
peace,  preserving  nature  itself  against  the  dis¬ 
ruptive  forces  of  war  and  hate.  The  imagery  of 
love  appears  even  in  the  language  of  science. 
The  description  of  magnetic  attraction  and  re¬ 
pulsion  borrows  some  of  its  fundamental  terms 
from  the  vocabulary  of  the  passions;  Gilbert, 
for  example,  refers  to  “the  love  of  the  iron  for 
the  loadstone.” 

On  the  other  hand,  the  impulsions  of  love  are 
often  compared  with  the  pull  of  magnetism. 
But  such  metaphors  or  comparisons  are  seldom 
intended  to  conceal  the  ambiguity  of  the  word 


“love”  when  it  is  used  as  a  term  of  universal  ap¬ 
plication.  “Romeo  wants  Juliet  as  the  filings 
want  the  magnet,”  writes  William  James,  “and 
if  no  obstacles  intervene  he  moves  toward  her 
by  as  straight  a  line  as  they.  But  Romeo  and 
Juliet,  if  a  wall  be  built  between  them,  do  not 
remain  idiotically  pressing  their  faces  against 
its  opposite  sides” — like  iron  filings  separated 
from  the  magnet  by  a  card. 

The  love  between  man  and  woman  makes  all 
the  great  poems  contemporaneous  with  each 
other  and  with  ourselves.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  each  great  love  affair  is  unique — a  world 
in  itself,  incomparable,  unconditioned  by  space 
and  time.  That,  at  least,  is  the  way  it  feels  to 
the  romantic  lovers,  but  even  to  the  dispassion¬ 
ate  observer  there  seems  to  be  a  world  of  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  relationship  of  Paris  and  Helen 
in  the  ///Wand  that  of  Prince  Andrew  and  Na¬ 
tasha  in  War  and  Peace,  oiTioWus  and  Cressida, 
Tom  Jones  and  Sophia,  Don  Quixote  and  Dul- 
cinea,  Jason  and  Medea,  Aeneas  and  Dido,  Othel¬ 
lo  and  Desdemona,  Dante  and  Beatrice,  Hippol- 
ytus  and  Phaedra,  Faust  and  Margaret,  Henry  V 
and  Catherine,  Paola  and  Francesca,  Samson 
and  Delilah,  Antony  and  Cleopatra,  Admetus 
and  Alcestis,  Orlando  and  Rosalind,  Haemon 
and  Antigone,  Odysseus  and  Penelope,  and 
Adam  and  Eve. 

The  analyst  can  make  distinctions  here.  He 
can  classify  these  loves  as  the  conjugal  and  the 
illicit,  the  normal  and  the  perverse,  the  sexual 
and  the  idyllic,  the  infantile  and  the  adult,  the 
romantic  and  the  Christian.  He  can,  in  addi¬ 
tion,  group  all  these  loves  together  despite  their 
apparent  variety  and  set  them  apart  from  still 
other  categories  of  love :  the  friendships  between 
human  beings  without  regard  to  gender;  the 
familial  ties — parental,  filial,  fraternal;  the  love 
of  a  man  for  himself,  for  his  fellow  men,  for  his 


1051 


1052 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


country,  for  God.  All  these  other  loves  are,  no 
less  than  the  love  between  man  and  woman,  the 
materials  of  great  poetry  even  as  they  are  omni¬ 
present  in  every  human  life. 

The  friendship  of  Achilles  and  Patroclus  dom¬ 
inates  the  action  of  the  Iliad  even  more,  per¬ 
haps,  than  the  passion  of  Paris  for  Helen.  The 
love  of  Hamlet  for  his  father  and,  in  another 
mood,  for  his  mother  overshadows  his  evanes¬ 
cent  tenderness  for  Ophelia.  Prince  Hal  and 
FalstafF,  Don  Quixote  and  Sancho  Panza,  Pan- 
tagruel  and  Panurge  seem  to  be  bound  more 
closely  by  companionship  than  any  of  them  is 
ever  tied  by  Cupid’s  knot.  The  love  of  Cordelia 
for  Lear  surpasses,  though  it  does  not  defeat, 
the  lusts  of  Goneril  and  Regan.  The  vision  of 
Rome  effaces  the  image  of  Dido  from  the  heart 
of  Aeneas.  Brutus  lays  down  his  life  for  Rome 
as  readily  as  Antony  gives  up  his  life  for  Cleo¬ 
patra. 

Richard  III,  aware  that  he  “wants  love’s  maj¬ 
esty,’’  implies  that  he  cannot  love  anyone  be¬ 
cause  he  is  unable  to  love  himself.  Why  should 
“I  love  myself,”  he  asks,  “for  any  good  that  I 
myself  have  done  unto  myself”  ?  This  element 
of  self-love  which,  in  varying  degrees,  prompts 
the  actions  of  Achilles,  Odysseus,  Oedipus,  Mac¬ 
beth,  Faust,  and  Captain  Ahab,  finds  its  proto¬ 
type  in  the  almost  infinite  amour-propre  of  Lu¬ 
cifer  in  Paradise  Lost .  This  self-love,  which  in 
its  extreme  form  the  psychoanalyst  calls  “nar¬ 
cissism,”  competes  with  every  other  love  in  hu¬ 
man  life.  Some  times  i  t  qualifies  these  other  loves ; 
when,  for  example,  it  enters  into  Pierre  Bezu- 
khov’s  meditations  about  freeing  his  serfs  and 
turns  his  sentiment  of  brotherly  love  into  a 
piece  of  sentimentality  which  is  never  con¬ 
firmed  by  action. 

Yet  self-love,  like  sexual  love,  can  be  over¬ 
come  by  the  love  which  is  charity  toward  or 
compassion  for  others.  True  self-love,  according 
to  Locke,  necessarily  leads  to  love  of  neighbor; 
and,  in  Dante’s  view  of  the  hierarchy  of  love, 
men  ascend  from  loving  their  neighbors  as  them¬ 
selves  to  loving  God.  Through  the  love  he  bears 
Virgil  and  Beatrice  for  the  goodness  they  repre¬ 
sent,  Dante  mounts  to  the  highest  heaven  where 
he  is  given  the  Good  itself  to  love. 

The  panorama  of  human  love  is  not  confined 
to  the  great  works  of  poetry  or  fiction.  The 
same  drama,  with  the  same  types  of  plot  and 


character,  the  same  lines  of  action,  the  same 
complications  and  catastrophes,  appears  in  the 
great  works  of  history  and  biography.  The  sto¬ 
ries  of  love  told  by  Herodotus,  Thucydides,  Plu¬ 
tarch,  Tacitus,  and  Gibbon  run  the  same  gamut 
of  the  passions,  the  affections,  the  tender  feel¬ 
ing  and  the  sacrificial  devotion,  in  the  attach¬ 
ments  of  the  great  figures  of  history. 

Here  the  loves  of  a  few  men  move  the  lives 
of  many.  History  itself  seems  to  turn  in  one  di¬ 
rection  rather  than  another  with  the  turning  of 
an  emperor’s  heart.  Historic  institutions  seem 
to  draw  their  strength  from  the  ardor  of  a  single 
patriot’s  zeal;  and  the  invincible  sacrifices  of 
the  martyrs,  whether  to  the  cause  of  church  or 
state,  seem  to  perpetuate  with  love  what  neither 
might  of  arms  nor  skill  of  mind  could  long  sus¬ 
tain.  History’s  blackest  as  well  as  brightest  pages 
tell  of  the  lengths  to  which  men  have  gone  for 
their  love’s  sake,  and  as  often  as  not  the  story  of 
the  inner  turbulence  lies  half  untold  between 
the  lines  which  relate  the  consequences  in  acts 
of  violence  or  heroism. 

Still  other  of  the  great  books  deal  with  love’s 
exhibition  of  its  power.  A  few  of  the  early  dia¬ 
logues  of  Plato  discuss  love  and  friendship,  but 
more  of  them  dramatically  set  forth  the  love 
his  disciples  bear  Socrates,  and  Socrates’  love  of 
wisdom  and  the  truth.  Montaigne  can  be  skep¬ 
tical  and  detached  in  all  matters.  He  can  sus¬ 
pend  judgment  about  everything  and  moderate 
every  feeling  by  the  balance  of  its  opposite,  ex¬ 
cept  in  the  one  case  of  his  friendship  with  Etienne 
de  la  Boetie  where  love  asserts  its  claims  above 
dispute  and  doubt.  The  princely  examples  with 
which  Machiavelli  documents  his  manual  of 
worldly  success  are  lovers  of  riches,  fame,  and 
power — that  triad  of  seducers  which  alienates 
the  affections  of  men  for  truth,  beauty,  and 
goodness. 

The  whole  of  Pascal’s  meditations,  insofar  as 
they  are  addressed  to  himself,  seems  to  express 
one  thought,  itself  a  feeling.  “The  heart  has  its 
reasons,  which  the  reason  does  not  know.  We 
feel  it  in  a  thousand  things.  I  say  that  the  heart 
naturally  loves  the  Universal  Being,  and  also  it¬ 
self,  according  as  it  gives  itself  to  them;  and  it 
hardens  itself  against  one  or  the  other  at  its 
will.  You  have  rejected  the  one,  and  kept  the 
other.  Is  it  by  reason  that  you  love  yourself?” 


Chapter  50:  LOVE 


1053 


In  the  Confessions  of  Augustine,  a  man  who 
inally  resolved  the  conflict  of  his  loves  lets  his 
nemorv  dwell  on  the  torment  of  their  disorder, 
n  order  to  repent  each  particular  sin  against 
:he  love  of  God.  “What  was  it  that  I  delighted 
n,”  he  writes,  “but  to  love,  and  be  beloved? 
aut  I  kept  not  the  measure  of  love,  of  mind  to 
nind,  friendship’s  bright  boundary;  but  out  of 
the  muddy  concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  and  the 
aubblings  of  youth,  mists  fumed  up  which  be¬ 
clouded  and  overcast  my  heart,  that  I  could 
not  discern  the  clear  brightness  of  love,  from 
the  fog  of  lustfulness.” 

Augustine  shows  us  the  myriad  forms  of  con¬ 
cupiscence  and  avarice  in  the  lusting  of  the  flesh 
and  of  the  eyes,  and  in  the  self-love  which  is 
pride  of  person.  In  no  other  book  except  per¬ 
haps  the  Bible  are  so  many  loves  arrayed  against 
one  another.  Here,  in  the  life  of  one  man,  as 
tempestuous  in  passion  as  he  was  strong  of  will, 
their  war  and  peace  produce  his  bondage  and 
his  freedom,  his  anguish  and  his  serenity. 

In  the  Bible,  the  history  of  mankind  itself 
is  told  in  terms  of  love,  or  rather  the  multiplic- 
lity  of  loves.  Every  love  is  here — of  God  and 
Mammon,  perverse  and  pure,  the  idolatry  and 
vanity  of  love  misplaced,  every  unnatural  lust, 
every  ecstasy  of  the  spirit,  every  tie  of  friend¬ 
ship  and  fraternity,  and  all  the  hates  which  love 
engenders. 

These  books  of  poetry  and  history,  of  medi¬ 
tation,  confession,  and  revelation,  teach  us  the 
facts  of  love  even  when  they  do  not  go  beyond 
that  to  definition  and  doctrine.  Before  we  turn 
to  the  theory  of  love  as  it  is  expounded  by  the 
philosophers  and  theologians,  or  to  the  psycho¬ 
logical  analysis  of  love,  we  may  find  it  useful  to 
summarize  the  facts  of  which  any  theory  must 
take  account.  And  on  the  level  of  the  facts  we 
also  meet  the  inescapable  problems  which  un¬ 
derlie  the  theoretical  issues  formed  by  con¬ 
flicting  analyses. 

First  and  foremost  seems  to  be  the  fact  of  the 
plurality  of  loves.  There  are  many  different 
kinds  of  love— different  in  object,  different  in 
tendency  and  expression — and  as  they  occur 
in  the  individual  life,  they  raise  the  problem  of 
unity  and  order.  Does  one  love  swallow  up  or 
subordinate  all  the  others?  Can  more  than  one 
love  rule  the  heart?  Is  there  a  hierarchy  of 


loves  which  can  harmonize  all  their  diversity? 
These  are  the  questions  with  which  the  most 
comprehensive  theories  of  love  find  it  necessary 
to  begin. 

Plato’s  ladder  of  love  in  the  Symposium  has 
different  loves  for  its  rungs.  Diotima,  whom 
Socrates  describes  as  his  “instructress  in  the  art 
of  love,”  tells  him  that  if  a  youth  begins  by 
loving  a  visibly  beautiful  form,  “he  will  soon 
of  himself  perceive  that  the  beauty  of  one  form 
is  akin  to  the  beauty  of  another,”  and,  there¬ 
fore,  “how  foolish  would  he  be  not  to  recognize 
that  the  beauty  in  every  form  is  one  and  the 
same.”  He  will  then  “abate  his  violent  love  of 
the  one,”  and  will  pass  from  being  “a  lover  of 
beautiful  forms”  to  the  realization  that  “the 
beauty  of  the  mind  is  more  honorable  than  the 
beauty  of  the  outward  form.”  Thence  he  will 
be  led  to  love  “the  beauty  of  laws  and  institu¬ 
tions  .  .  .  and  after  laws  and  institutions,  he 
will  go  on  to  the  sciences,  that  he  may  see  their 
beauty.”  As  Diotima  summarizes  it,  the  true 
order  of  love  “begins  with  the  beauties  of  earth 
and  mounts  upwards  .  .  .  from  fair  forms  to  fair 
practices,  and  from  fair  practices  to  fair  notions, 
until  from  fair  notions  [we]  arrive  at  the  notion 
of  absolute  beauty.” 

Aristotle  classifies  different  kinds  of  love  in 
his  analysis  of  the  types  of  friendship.  Since  the 
lovable  consists  of  “the  good,  pleasant,  or  use¬ 
ful,”  he  writes,  “there  are  three  kinds  of  friend¬ 
ship,  equal  in  number  to  the  things  that  are 
lovable;  for  with  respect  to  each  there  is  a 
mutual  and  recognized  love,  and  those  who 
love  each  other  wish  well  to  each  other  in  that 
respect  in  which  they  love  one  another.”  Later 
in  the  Ethics  he  also  considers  the  relation  of 
self-love  to  all  love  of  others,  and  asks  “whether 
a  man  should  love  himself  most,  or  someone 
else.” 

Aquinas  distinguishes  between  love  in  the 
sphere  of  the  passions  and  love  as  an  act  of  will. 
The  former  he  assigns  to  what  he  calls  the 
“concupiscible  faculty”  of  the  sensitive  appe¬ 
tite;  the  latter,  to  the  “rational  or  intellectual 
appetite.”  The  other  basic  distinction  which 
Aquinas  makes  is  that  between  love  as  a  natural 
tendency  and  as  a  supernatural  habit.  Natural 
love  is  that  “whereby  things  seek  what  is  suit¬ 
able  to  them  according  to  their  nature.”  When 
love  exceeds  the  inclinations  of  nature,  it 


1054 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


does  so  by  “some  habitual  form  superadded 
to  the  natural  power,”  and  this  habit  of  love 
is  the  virtue  of  charity. 

Freud’s  theory  places  the  origin  of  love  in 
the  sexual  instincts,  and  so  for  him  the  many 
varieties  of  love  are  simply  the  forms  which 
love  takes  as  the  libido  fixes  upon  various  ob¬ 
jects.  “The  nucleus  of  what  we  mean  by  love,” 
he  writes,  “naturally  consists  ...  in  sexual  love 
with  sexual  union  as  its  aim.  We  do  not  separate 
from  this,”  he  goes  on  to  say,  “on  the  one  hand, 
self-love,  and  on  the  other,  love  for  parents  and 
children,  friendship  and  love  for  humanity  in 
general,  and  also  devotion  to  concrete  objects 
and  to  abstract  ideas  .  .  .  All  these  tendencies 
are  an  expression  of  the  same  instinctive  activi¬ 
ties.”  They  differ  from  sexual  love  only  be¬ 
cause  “they  are  diverted  from  its  aim  or  are 
prevented  from  reaching  it,  though  they  al¬ 
ways  preserve  enough  of  their  original  nature 
to  keep  their  identity  recognizable.”  Sexual 
love  undergoes  these  transformations  according 
as  it  is  repressed  or  sublimated,  infantile  or 
adult  in  its  pattern,  degraded  to  the  level  of 
brutal  sexuality  or  humanized  by  inhibitions 
and  mixed  with  tenderness. 

All  of  these  classifications  and  distinctions 
belong  to  the  theory  of  human  love.  But  the 
fact  of  love’s  diversity  extends  the  theory  of 
love  to  other  creatures  and  to  God.  In  the 
tradition  of  biology  from  Aristotle  to  Darwin, 
the  mating  of  animals  and  the  care  of  their 
young  is  thought  to  exhibit  an  emotion  of  love 
which  is  either  sharply  contrasted  with  or  re¬ 
garded  as  the  root  of  human  love.  Darwin,  for 
example,  maintains,  “it  is  certain  that  associ¬ 
ated  animals  have  a  feeling  of  love  for  each 
other,  which  is  not  felt  by  non-social  adult 
animals.” 

At  the  opposite  pole,  the  theologians  identify 
God  with  love  and  see  in  God’s  love  for  Himself 
and  for  His  creatures  the  principle  not  only  of 
creation,  and  of  providence  and  salvation,  but 
also  the  measure  of  all  other  loves  by  which 
created  things,  and  men  especially,  turn  toward 
or  away  from  God.  “Beloved,  let  us  love  one 
another,”  St.  John  writes,  “for  love  is  of  God; 
and  everyone  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and 
knoweth  God.  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth 
not  God;  for  God  is  love.  In  this  was  manifested 
the  love  of  God  toward  us,  because  that  God 


sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that 
we  might  live  through  him.  Herein  is  love,  not 
that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us  .  .  . 
And  we  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that 
God  hath  to  us.  God  is  love;  and  he  that  dwell- 
eth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him.” 

In  the  moral  universe  of  the  Divine  Comedy , 
heaven  is  the  realm  of  love,  “pure  light,” 
Beatrice  says,  “light  intellectual  full  of  love 
love  of  true  good  full  of  joy,  joy  which  tran¬ 
scends  every  sweetness.”  There  courtesy  pre¬ 
vails  among  the  blessed,  and  charity  alone  of 
the  theological  virtues  remains.  The  beatitude 
of  those  who  see  God  dispenses  with  faith  and 
hope,  but  the  vision  of  God  is  inseparable  from 
the  fruition  of  love.  “The  Good  which  is  the 
object  of  the  will,”  Dante  writes,  “is  all  col¬ 
lected  in  it;  and  outside  of  it,  that  is  defective 
which  is  perfect  there.”  Desire  and  will  are 
“revolved,  like  a  wheel  which  is  moved  evenly, 
by  the  Love  which  moves  the  sun  and  the 
other  stars.”  Hell  is  made  by  the  absence  of 
God’s  love — the  punishment  of  those  who  on 
earth  loved  other  things  more  than  God. 

There  is  a  second  fact  about  love  to  which 
poetry  and  history  bear  testimony.  Love  fre¬ 
quently  turns  into  its  opposite,  hate.  Some¬ 
times  there  is  love  and  hate  of  the  same  ob¬ 
ject;  sometimes  love  inspires  hate,  as  it  oc¬ 
casions  jealousy,  of  the  things  which  threaten 
it.  Anger  and  fear,  too,  follow  in  the  wake  of 
love.  Love  seems  to  be  the  primal  passion,  gen¬ 
erating  all  the  others  according  to  the  oppo¬ 
sitions  of  pleasure  and  pain  and  by  relations  of 
cause  and  effect.  Yet  not  all  the  analysts  of  love 
as  a  passion  seem  to  agree  upon  this  point,  or 
at  least  they  do  not  give  the  fact  the  same 
weight  in  their  theories. 

Hobbes,  for  example,  gives  primacy  to  fear, 
and  Spinoza  to  desire,  joy,  and  sorrow.  Spinoza 
defines  love  as  “joy  with  the  accompanying  idea 
of  an  external  cause,”  and  he  defines  hatred 
similarly  in  terms  of  sorrow.  Nevertheless, 
Spinoza,  like  Aquinas  and  Freud,  deals  more 
extensively  with  love  and  hate  than  with  any 
of  the  other  passions.  He,  like  them,  observes 
how  their  fundamental  opposition  runs  through 
the  whole  emotional  life  of  man.  But  he  does 
not,  like  Aquinas,  regard  love  as  the  root  of  all 
the  other  passions.  Treating  the  combination 


Chapter  50:  LOVE 


1055 


Df  love  and  hate  toward  the  same  object  as  a 
mere  “vacillation  of  the  mind,’,  he  does  not, 
like  Freud,  develop  an  elaborate  theory  of 
emotional  ambivalence  which  tries  to  explain 
why  the  deepest  affections  of  men  are  usually 
mixtures  of  love  and  hate. 

A  third  fact  which  appears  in  almost  every 
one  of  the  great  love  stories  points  to  another 
aspect  of  love’s  contrariness.  There  seems  to  be 
no  happiness  more  perfect  than  that  which  love 
confirms.  But  there  is  also  no  misery  more  pro¬ 
found,  no  depth  of  despair  greater,  than  that 
into  which  lovers  are  plunged  when  they  are 
bereft,  disappointed,  unrequited.  Can  the 
pleasures  of  love  be  had  without  its  pains?  Is 
it  better  to  have  loved  and  suffered  than  never 
to  have  loved  at  all  ?  Is  it  wiser  not  to  love  than 
to  love  not  wisely  but  too  well?  Is  the  world 
well  lost  for  love  ? 

These  questions  paraphrase  the  soliloquies  of 
'  lovers  in  the  great  tragedies  and  comedies  of 
love.  For  every  praise  of  love  there  is,  in  Shake¬ 
spearian  speech  or  sonnet,  an  answering  com¬ 
plaint.  “All  creatures  in  the  world  through  love 
exist,  and  lacking  love,  lack  all  that  may  per¬ 
sist.”  But  “thou  blind  fool,  love,  what  does 
thou  to  mine  eyes,  that  they  behold  and  see 
not  what  they  see  ?”  “The  greater  castle  of  the 
world  is  lost,”  says  Antony  to  Cleopatra;  “we 
have  kissed  away  kingdoms  and  provinces.” 
But  in  Juliet’s  words  to  Romeo,  “My  bounty  is 

I  as  boundless  as  the  sea,  my  love  as  deep;  the 
more  I  give  to  thee,  the  more  I  have,  for  both 
are  infinite.” 

Love  is  all  opposites — the  only  reality,  the 
great  illusion;  the  giver  of  life  and  its  consumer; 
the  benign  goddess  whose  benefactions  men 
beseech,  and — to  such  as  Hippolytus  or  Dido — 
the  dread  Cyprian  who  wreaks  havoc  and  dev¬ 
astation.  She  is  a  divinity  to  be  feared  when  not 
propitiated,  her  potions  are  poison,  her  darts 
are  shafts  of  destruction.  Love  is  itself  an  ob¬ 
ject  of  love  and  hate.  Men  fall  in  love  with  love 
and  fight  against  it.  Omnia  vincit  amor ,  Virgil 
writes — “love  conquers  all.” 

In  the  dispassionate  language  of  the  moralist, 
the  question  is  simply  whether  love  is  good  or 
bad,  a  component  of  happiness  or  an  obstacle 
thereto.  How  the  question  is  answered  depends 
upon  the  kind  of  love  in  question.  The  love 


which  consists  in  the  best  type  of  friendship 
seems  indispensable  to  the  happy  life  and,  more 
than  that,  to  the  fabric  of  any  society,  domestic 
or  political. 

Such  love,  Aristotle  writes,  “is  a  virtue  or 
implies  virtue,  and  is  besides  most  necessary 
with  a  view  to  living.  For  without  friends  no 
one  would  choose  to  live  though  he  had  all 
other  goods.  .  .  .  Friendship  seems  too  to  hold 
states  together,  and  lawgivers  care  more  for  it 
than  for  justice.”  When  it  is  founded  on  virtue, 
it  goes  further  than  justice,  for  it  binds  men 
together  through  benevolence  and  generosity. 
“When  men  are  friends,”  Aristotle  says,  “they 
have  no  need  of  justice.” 

But  Aristotle  does  not  forget  that  there  are 
other  types  of  friendship,  based  on  utility  or 
pleasure-seeking  rather  than  upon  the  mutual 
admiration  of  virtuous  men.  Here,  as  in  the 
case  of  other  passions,  the  love  may  be  good  or 
bad.  It  is  virtuous  only  when  it  is  moderated  by 
reason  and  restrained  from  violating  the  true 
order  of  goods,  in  conformity  to  which  man’s 
various  loves  should  themselves  be  ordered. 

When  the  love  in  question  is  the  passion  of 
the  sexual  instinct,  some  moralists  think  that 
temperance  is  an  inadequate  restraint.  Neither 
reason  nor  law  is  adequate  to  the  task  of  sub¬ 
duing — or,  as  Freud  would  say,  of  domesticat¬ 
ing — the  beast.  To  the  question  Socrates  asks, 
whether  life  is  harder  towards  the  end,  the  old 
man  Cephalus  replies  in  the  words  of  Sophocles, 
when  he  was  asked  how  love  suits  with  age,  “I 
feel  as  if  I  had  escaped  from  a  mad  and  furious 
master.” 

In  the  most  passionate  diatribe  against  love’s 
passion,  Lucretius  condemns  the  sensual  pleas¬ 
ures  which  are  so  embittered  with  pain.  Venus 
should  be  entirely  shunned,  for  once  her  darts 
have  wounded  men, “the  sore  gains  strength  and 
festers  by  feeding,  and  day  by  day  the  madness 
grows,  and  the  misery  becomes  heavier.  .  .  . 
This  is  the  one  thing,  whereof  the  more  and 
more  we  have,  the  more  does  our  heart  burn 
with  the  cursed  desire.  .  . .  When  the  gathering 
desire  is  sated,  the  old  frenzy  is  back  upon  them 
.  .  .  nor  can  they  discover  what  device  may  con¬ 
quer  their  disease;  in  such  deep  doubt  they 
waste  beneath  their  secret  wound  .  .  .  These 
ills  are  found  in  love  that  is  true  and  fully  pros¬ 
perous;  but  when  love  is  crossed  and  hopeless, 


1056  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


there  are  ills  which  you  might  detect  with 
closed  eyes,  ills  without  number;  so  that  it  is 
better  to  be  on  the  watch  beforehand,  even  as 
I  have  taught  you,  and  to  beware  that  you  are 
not  entrapped.  For  to  avoid  being  drawn  into 
the  meshes  of  love,  is  not  so  hard  a  task  as  when 
caught  amid  the  toils  to  issue  out  and  break 
through  the  strong  bonds  of  Venus.” 

In  the  doctrines  of  most  moralists,  however, 
the  sexual  passion  calls  for  no  special  treatment 
different  from  other  appetites  and  passions. 
Because  it  is  more  complex  in  its  manifesta- 
tions,  perhaps,  and  more  imperious  in  its  urges, 
more  effort  on  the  part  of  reason  may  be  re- 
quired  to  regulate  it,  to  direct  or  restrain  it. 
Yet  no  special  principles  of  virtue  or  duty  ap¬ 
ply  to  sexual  love.  Even  the  religious  vow  of 
chastity  is  matched  by  the  vow  of  poverty. 
The  love  of  money  is  as  serious  a  deflection 
from  loving  God  as  the  lust  of  the  flesh. 

What  is  common  to  all  these  matters  is  dis¬ 
cussed  in  the  chapters  on  Duty,  Emotion,  Vir¬ 
tue,  and  Sin.  But  here  one  more  fact  remains 
to  be  considered — the  last  fact  about  love 
which  the  poets  and  the  historians  seem  to  lay 
before  the  moralists  and  theologians. 

When  greed  violates  the  precepts  of  justice, 
or  gluttony  those  of  temperance,  the  vice  or  sin 
appears  to  have  no  redeeming  features.  These 
are  weaknesses  of  character  incompatible  with 
heroic  stature.  But  many  of  the  great  heroes  of 
literature  are  otherwise  noble  men  or  women 
who  have,  for  love’s  sake,  deserted  their  duty 
or  transgressed  the  rules  of  God  and  man,  ac¬ 
knowledging  their  claims  and  yet  choosing  to 
risk  the  condemnation  of  society  even  to  the 
point  of  banishment,  or  to  put  their  immortal 
souls  in  peril.  The  fact  seems  to  be  that  only 
love  retains  some  honor  when  it  defies  morality; 
not  that  moralists  excuse  the  illicit  act,  but 
that  in  the  opinion  of  mankind,  as  evidenced  by 
its  poetry  at  least,  love  has  some  privileged 
status.  Its  waywardness  and  even  its  madness 
are  extenuated. 

The  poets  suggest  the  reason  for  this.  Unlike 
the  other  passions  which  man  shares  with  the 
animals,  characteristically  human  love  is  a 
thing  of  the  spirit  as  well  as  the  body.  A  man 
is  piggish  when  he  is  a  glutton,  a  jackal  when 
he  is  craven,  but  when  his  emotional  excess  in 


the  sphere  of  love  lifts  him  to  acts  of  devotion 
and  sacrifice,  he  is  incomparably  human.  That 
is  why  the  great  lovers,  as  the  poets  depict 
them,  seem  admirable  in  spite  of  their  trans-  ' 
gressions.  They  almost  seem  to  be  justified— 
poetically,  at  least,  if  not  morally— in  acting  as 
if  love  exempted  them  from  ordinary  laws;  as 
if  their  love  could  be  a  law  unto  itself.  “Who 
shall  give  a  lover  any  law?”  Arcite  asks  in 
Chaucer’s  Knight’s  Tale.  “Love  is  a  greater 
law,”  he  says,  “than  man  has  ever  given  to 
earthly  man.” 

To  a  psychologist  like  Freud,  the  conflict  be¬ 
tween  the  erotic  impulses  and  morality  is  the 
central  conflict  in  the  psychic  life  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  and  between  the  individual  and  society. 
There  seems  to  be  no  happy  resolution  unless 
each  is  somehow  accommodated  to  the  other. 

At  one  extreme  of  repression,  “the  claims  of  our 
civilization,”  according  to  Freud,  “make  life 
too  hard  for  the  greater  part  of  humanity,  and 
so  further  the  aversion  to  reality  and  the  origin 
of  neuroses”;  the  individual  suffers  neurotic 
disorders  which  result  from  the  failure  of  the 
repressed  energies  to  find  outlets  acceptable  to 
the  moral  censor.  At  the  other  extreme  of  ex¬ 
pression,  the  erotic  instinct  “would  break  all 
bounds  and  the  laboriously  erected  structure 
of  civilization  would  be  swept  away.”  Integra¬ 
tion  would  seem  to  be  achieved  in  the  indi¬ 
vidual  personality  and  society  would  seem  to 
prosper  only  when  sexuality  is  transformed  in¬ 
to  those  types  of  love  which  reinforce  laws  and 
duties  with  emotional  loyalty  to  moral  ideals 
and  invest  ideal  objects  with  their  energies, 
creating  the  highest  goods  of  civilization. 

To  the  theologian,  the  conflict  between  love 
and  morality  remains  insoluble — not  in  prin¬ 
ciple,  but  in  practice — until  love  itself  sup¬ 
plants  all  other  rules  of  conduct.  The  “good 
man,”  according  to  Augustine,  is  not  he  “who 
knows  what  is  good,  but  who  loves  it.  Is  it  not 
then  obvious,”  he  goes  on  to  say,  “that  we  love 
in  ourselves  the  very  love  wherewith  we  love 
whatever  we  love?  For  there  is  also  a  love 
wherewith  we  love  that  which  we  ought  not  to 
love;  and  this  love  is  hated  by  him  who  loves 
that  wherewith  he  loves  what  ought  to  be  loved. 
For  it  is  quite  possible  for  both  to  exist  in  one 
man.  And  this  co-existence  is  good  for  a  man, 
to  the  end  that  this  love  which  conduces  to  our 


Chapter  50:  LOVE 


1057 


living  well  may  grow,  and  the  other,  which 
, leads  us  to  evil  may  decrease,  until  our  whole 
life  be  perfectly  healed  and  transmuted  into 
good.”  Only  a  better  love,  a  love  that  is  wholly 
virtuous  and  right,  has  the  power  requisite  to 
jovercome  love’s  errors.  With  this  perfect  love 
goes  only  one  rule,  Augustine  says:  Dilige,  et 
quod  vis fac — “love,  and  do  what  you  will.” 

This  perfect  love,  which  alone  deserves  to  be 
a  law  unto  itself,  is  more  than  fallen  human 
nature  can  come  by  without  God’s  grace.  It  is, 
according  to  Christian  theology,  the  super¬ 
natural  virtue  of  charity  whereby  men  par¬ 
ticipate  in  God’s  love  of  Himself  and  His  crea¬ 
tures— loving  God  with  their  whole  heart  and 
soul  and  mind,  and  their  neighbors  as  them¬ 
selves.  On  these  two  precepts  of  charity,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  teaching  of  Christ,  “depends  the 
whole  law  and  the  prophets.” 

The  questions  which  Aquinas  considers  in 
his  treatise  on  charity  indicate  that  the  theo¬ 
logical  resolution  of  the  conflict  between  love 
and  morality  is,  in  essence,  the  resolution  of 
a  conflict  between  diverse  loves,  a  resolution 
laccomplished  by  the  perfection  of  love  itself. 
Concerning  the  objects  and  order  of  charity, 
he  asks,  for  example,  “whether  we  should  love 
charity  out  of  charity,”  “whether  irrational 
creatures  also  ought  to  be  loved  out  of  charity,” 
''“whether  a  man  ought  to  love  his  body  out  of 
charity,”  “whether  we  ought  to  love  sinners 
out  of  charity,”  “whether  charity  requires  that 
we  should  love  our  enemies,”  “whether  God 
ought  to  be  loved  more  than  our  neighbors,” 
“whether,  out  of  charity,  man  is  bound  to  love 
God  more  than  himself,”  “whether,  out  of 
charity,  man  ought  to  love  himself  more  than 
his  neighbor,”  “whether  a  man  ought  to  love 
his  neighbor  more  than  his  own  body,” 
“whether  we  ought  to  love  one  neighbor  more 
than  another,”  “whether  we  ought  to  love 
those  who  are  better  more  than  those  who  are 
more  closely  united  to  us,”  “whether  a  man 
ought,  out  of  charity,  to  love  his  children  more 
than  his  father,”  “whether  a  man  ought  to  love 
his  wife  more  than  his  father  and  mother,” 
“whether  a  man  ought  to  love  his  benefactor 
more  than  one  he  has  benefited.” 

The  diversity  of  love  seems  to  be  both  the 
basic  fact  and  the  basic  problem  for  the  psy¬ 


chologist,  the  moralist,  the  theologian.  The 
ancient  languages  have  three  distinct  words  for 
the  main  types  of  love:  eros,  philia ,  agape  in 
Greek;  amor,  a/nicitia  (or  dilectio ),  and  caritas  in 
Latin.  Because  English  has  no  such  distinct 
words,  it  seems  necessary  to  use  such  phrases  as 
“sexual  love,”  “love  of  friendship,”  and  “love 
of  charity”  in  order  to  indicate  plainly  that 
love  is  common  to  all  three,  and  to  distinguish 
the  three  meanings.  Yet  we  must  observe  what 
Augustine  points  out,  namely,  that  the  Scrip¬ 
tures  “make  no  distinction  between  amor ,  dilec~ 
tio ,  and  caritas ,”  and  that  in  the  Bible  “ amor 
is  used  in  a  good  connection.” 

The  problem  of  the  kinds  of  love  seems  fur¬ 
ther  to  be  complicated  by  the  need  to  differ¬ 
entiate  and  relate  love  and  desire.  Some  writers 
use  the  words  “love”  and  “desire”  interchange¬ 
ably,  as  does  Lucretius  who,  in  speaking  of  the 
pleasures  of  Venus,  says  that  “Cupid  [/>.,  de¬ 
sire]  is  the  Latin  name  of  love.”  Some,  like 
Spinoza,  use  the  word  “desire”  as  the  more 
general  word  and  “love”  to  name  a  special 
mode  of  desire.  Still  others  use  “love”  as  the 
more  general  word  and  “desire”  to  signify  an 
aspect  of  love.  “Love,”  Aquinas  writes,  “is 
naturally  the  first  act  of  the  will  and  appetite; 
for  which  reason  all  the  other  appetitive  move¬ 
ments  presuppose  love,  as  their  root  and  origin. 
For  nobody  desires  anything  nor  rejoices  in 
anything,  except  as  a  good  that  is  loved.” 

One  thing  seems  to  be  clear,  namely,  that 
both  love  and  desire  belong  to  the  appetitive 
faculty — to  the  sphere  of  the  emotions  and  the 
will  rather  than  to  the  sphere  of  perception 
and  knowledge.  When  a  distinction  is  made 
between  desire  and  love  as  two  states  of  appe¬ 
tite,  it  seems  to  be  based  on  their  difference  in 
tendency.  As  indicated  in  the  chapter  of  De¬ 
sire,  the  tendency  of  desire  is  acquisitive.  The 
object  of  desire  is  a  good  to  be  possessed,  and 
the  drive  of  desire  continues  until,  with  posses¬ 
sion,  it  is  satisfied.  Love  equated  with  desire 
does  not  differ  from  any  other  hunger. 

But  there  seems  to  be  another  tendency 
which  impels  one  not  to  possess  the  object 
loved,  but  to  benefit  it.  The  lover  wishes  the 
well-being  of  the  beloved,  and  reflexively  wishes 
himself  well  through  being  united  with  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  his  love.  Where  desire  devoid  of  love  is 
selfish  in  the  sense  of  one’s  seeking  goods  or 


1058 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


pleasures  for  oneself  without  any  regard  for 
the  good  of  the  other,  be  it  thing  or  person, 
love  seeks  to  give  rather  than  to  get,  or  to  get 
only  as  the  result  of  giving.  Whereas  nothing 
short  of  physical  possession  satisfies  desire,  love 
can  be  satisfied  in  the  contemplation  of  its  ob¬ 
ject’s  beauty  or  goodness.  It  has  more  affinity 
with  knowledge  than  with  action,  though  it 
goes  beyond  knowledge  in  its  wish  to  act  for 
the  good  of  the  beloved,  as  well  as  in  its  wish 
to  be  loved  in  return. 

Those  who  distinguish  love  and  desire  in 
such  terms  usually  repeat  the  distinction  in 
differentiating  kinds  of  love.  The  difference 
between  sexual  love  and  the  love  which  is  pure 
friendship,  for  example,  is  said  to  rest  on  the 
predominance  of  selfish  desires  in  the  one  and 
the  predominance  of  altruistic  motives  in  the 
other.  Sexual  love  is  sometimes  called  the  “love 
of  desire”  to  signify  that  it  is  a  love  born  of  de¬ 
sire;  whereas  in  friendship  love  is  thought  to 
precede  desire  and  to  determine  its  wishes. 

In  contrast  to  the  love  of  desire,  the  love  of 
friendship  makes  few  demands.  “In  true  friend¬ 
ship,  wherein  I  am  perfect,”  Montaigne  de¬ 
clares,  “I  more  give  myself  to  my  friend,  than 
I  endeavor  to  attract  him  to  me.  I  am  not  only 
better  pleased  in  doing  him  service  than  if  he 
conferred  a  benefit  upon  me,  but,  moreover, 
had  rather  he  should  do  himself  good  than  me, 
and  he  most  obliges  me  when  he  does  so;  and  if 
absence  be  either  more  pleasant  or  convenient 
for  him,  ’tis  also  more  acceptable  to  me  than  his 
presence.” 

These  two  loves  appear  in  most  of  the  great 
analyses  of  love,  though  under  different  names: 
concupiscent  love  and  fraternal  love;  the 
friendship  base  on  pleasure  or  utility  and  the 
friendship  based  on  virtue;  animal  and  human 
love;  sexuality  and  tenderness.  Sometimes  they 


are  assigned  to  different  faculties:  the  love  of 
desire  to  the  sensitive  appetite  or  the  sphere  of 
instinct  and  emotion;  the  love  of  friendship  to 
the  will  or  faculty  of  intellectual  desire,  capa¬ 
ble  of  what  Spinoza  calls  the  amor  intellectuals 
Dei— “the  intellectual  love  of  God.”  Some¬ 
times  the  two  kinds  of  love  are  thought  able 
to  exist  in  complete  separation  from  one  an¬ 
other  as  well  as  in  varying  degrees  of  mixture, 
as  in  romantic  and  conjugal  love;  and  some¬ 
times  the  erotic  or  sexual  component  is  thought 
to  be  present  to  some  degree  in  all  love.  Though 
he  asserts  this,  Freud  does  not  hold  the  con¬ 
verse,  that  sexuality  is  always  accompanied  by 
the  tenderness  which  characterizes  human 
love.  The  opposite  positions  here  seem  to  be 
correlated  with  opposed  views  of  the  relation 
of  man  to  other  animals,  or  with  opposed  the¬ 
ories  of  human  nature,  especially  in  regard  to 
the  relation  of  instinct  and  reason,  the  senses 
and  the  intellect,  the  emotions  and  the  will. 

As  suggested  above,  romantic  love  is  usually 
conceived  as  involving  both  possessive  and 
altruistic  motives,  the  latter  magnified  by  what 
its  critics  regard  as  an  exaggerated  idealization 
of  the  beloved.  The  theological  virtue  of  chari¬ 
ty,  on  the  other  hand,  is  purely  a  love  of  friend¬ 
ship,  its  purity  made  perfect  by  its  supernat¬ 
ural  foundation.  One  of  the  great  issues  here 
is  whether  the  romantic  is  compatible  with  the 
Christian  conception  of  love,  whether  the 
adoration  accorded  a  beloved  human  being  does 
not  amount  to  deification — as  much  a  violation 
of  the  precepts  of  charity  as  the  pride  of  un¬ 
bounded  self-love.  Which  view  is  taken  affects 
the  conception  of  conjugal  love  and  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  love  in  courtship  to  love  in  marriage. 
These  matters  and,  in  general,  the  forms  of  love 
in  the  domestic  community  are  discussed  in  the 
chapter  on  Family. 


OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS 

PAGB 

i.  The  nature  of  love  1060 

1  a.  Conceptions  of  love  and  hate:  as  passions  and  as  acts  of  will 

lb.  Love  and  hate  in  relation  to  each  other  and  in  relation  to  pleasure  and  pain  1061 

ic.  The  distinction  between  love  and  desire:  the  generous  and  acquisitive  aims 

id.  The  objects  of  love:  the  good,  the  true,  the  beautiful;  God,  man,  things 


1062 


Chapter  50:  LOVE  [059 

PAGE 

ie.  The  intensity  and  power  of  love:  its  increase  or  decrease;  its  constructive  or 

destructive  force  1063 

if.  The  power  of  hate  1064 

2.  The  kinds  of  love 

2 a.  Lustful,  sexual,  or  selfish  love:  concupiscent  love 

(1)  The  sexual  instinct:  its  relation  to  other  instincts  1065 

(2)  Infantile  sexuality:  polymorphous  perversity  1066 

(3)  Object-fixations,  identifications,  and  transferences:  sublimation 

(4)  The  perversion,  degradation,  or  pathology  of  love:  infantile  and  adult  love 
2 b.  Friendly,  tender,  or  altruistic  love:  fraternal  love 

(1)  The  relation  between  love  and  friendship  1067 

(2)  Self-love  in  relation  to  the  love  of  others 

(3)  The  types  of  friendship:  friendships  based  on  utility,  pleasure,  or  virtue  1068 

(4)  Patterns  of  love  and  friendship  in  the  family  1069 

2 c.  Romantic,  chivalric,  and  courtly  love:  the  idealization  and  supremacy  of  the 

beloved  1 070 

2 d.  Conjugal  love:  its  sexual,  fraternal,  and  romantic  components  1071 

3.  The  morality  of  love  1072 

3 a.  Friendship  and  love  in  relation  to  virtue  and  happiness 

3  b.  The  demands  of  love  and  the  restraints  of  virtue:  moderation  in  love;  the  order  of 

loves  1 073 

y.  The  conflict  of  love  and  duty:  the  difference  between  the  loyalties  of  love  and 
the  obligations  of  justice 

3 d.  The  heroism  of  friendship  and  the  sacrifices  of  love  1074 

4.  The  social  or  political  force  of  love,  sympathy,  or  friendship 

4 a.  Love  between  equals  and  unequals,  like  and  unlike:  the  fraternity  of  citizenship  1075 

of.  The  dependence  of  the  state  on  friendship  and  patriotism:  comparison  of  love 

and  justice  in  relation  to  the  common  good  1076 

4c.  The  brotherhood  of  man  and  the  world  community 

5.  Divine  love  1077 

$a.  God  as  the  primary  object  of  love 

(1)  Man’s  love  of  God  in  this  life:  respect  for  the  moral  law 

(2)  Beatitude  as  the  fruition  of  love  1078 

5 b.  Charity,  or  supernatural  love,  compared  with  natural  love 

(1)  The  precepts  of  charity:  the  law  of  love 

(2)  The  theological  virtue  of  charity:  its  relation  to  the  other  virtues  1079 

y.  God’s  love  of  Himself  and  of  creatures 


1060 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


REFERENCES 

To  find  the  passages  cited,  use  the  numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume  and  page 
numbers  of  the  passages  referred  to.  For  example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d,  the 
number  4  is  the  number  of  the  volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d  indicates  that  the  pas¬ 
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12. 

Page  Sections:  When  the  text  is  printed  in  one  column,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the 
upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  page.  For  example,  in  53  James  :  Psychology ,  1 16a-l  19b,  the  passage 
begins  in  the  upper  half  of  page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half  of  page  119.  When  the  text  is 
printed  in  two  columns,  the  letters  a  and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves  of  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  page.  For  example,  in  7  Plato:  Symposium ,  163b-164c,  the  passage  begins  in  the  lower  half 
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page  163  and  ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the  right-hand  side  of  page  164. 

Author’s  Divisions:  One  or  more  of  the  main  divisions  of  a  work  (such  as  part,  bk,  ch, 
sect)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets,  are  given  in  cer¬ 
tain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad ,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. 

Bible  References:  The  references  are  to  book,  chapter,  and  verse.  When  the  King  James 
and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of  books  or  in  the  numbering  of  chapters  or  verses,  the  King 
James  version  is  cited  first  and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (£>),  follows;  e.g .,  Old  Testa¬ 
ment:  Nehemiah,  7:45 —(D)  II  Esdras,  7:46. 

Symbols:  The  abbreviation  “esp”  calls  the  reader’s  attention  to  one  or  more  especially 
relevant  parts  of  a  whole  reference;  “passim”  signifies  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermit¬ 
tently  rather  than  continuously  in  the  work  or  passage  cited. 

For  additional  information  concerning  the  style  of  the  references,  see  the  Explanation  of 
Reference  Style;  for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas ,  consult  the  Preface. 


1.  The  nature  of  love 

la.  Conceptions  of  love  and  hate:  as  passions 
and  as  acts  of  will 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  6:17-18  —  (D) 
OT,  Bool{of  Wisdom ,  6:18-19 

New  Testament:  I  John,  4:7-8,16,18 
7  Plato:  Lysis  14a-25a,c  /  Cratylus ,  103 b-d  / 
Phaedrus,  115a-129d  /  Symposium  149a-173a,c 
/  Laws,  bk  viii,  736b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  5  [1 105^0-23] 
351b;  bk  iv,  ch  6  [ii26b20-25]  373d;  bk  viii, 
ch  1  406b,d-407a  esp  [n55a32-bi5]  406d- 
407a;  ch  3  [1 1 56^31— b5]  408a;  ch  5  [1 157^8- 
33]  409c;  ch  6  [1158*10-17]  409d-410a;  bk  ix, 
ch  5  [n66b33-i  167*3]  420b;  ch  7  [1168*19- 
21]  421d;  ch  10  [1171*11-12]  424d  /  Politics, 
bk  vii,  ch  7  [i327b4o-i328*i7]  532a-b  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  4  626c-628b 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  1-3  10a- 
11a;  tr  vi,  ch  5  23b-24a  /  Third  Ennead,  tr 
v  100c-106b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  10, 
309a-b;  tr  vii,  ch  33  337d-338b;  tr  ix,  ch  9, 
359b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  7  380c- 
381c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch  10,  662a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  20, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  i  120a-121b;  q  27,  a  3,  ans 


and  rep  3  155c-156a;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2 
156b-d;  q  37,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  2  197c-199a;  1 

q  60,  aa  1-2  310b-311d;  q  82,  a  5,  rep  i  435c- 
436c;  part  1— 11,  q  23,  a  4  726a-727a;  q  25,  a 
2  731b-732a;  q  26  733d-737a;  q  28,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  1-2  740b-741a;  q  29  744d-749a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  62, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  61c-62b;  part  ii-ii,  q  23, 
a  2,  ans  483d-484d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvii 
[82]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c;  paradise,  xxvi  [1— 81] 
145d-146c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  hi, 
stanza  1-7  54b-55b;  stanza  250-253  87a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61c;  63a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  424d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  axiom  3  373d; 
part  hi,  prop  13,  schol  400d;  prop  38-49 
408a-411b;  the  affects,  def  6-7  417b-d; 
part  iv,  appendix,  xix-xx  449a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  4-5  176d-177a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  453a-456a;  502a-b; 
523b-526b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  9b-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  343d-345d 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  259a 
/  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385c-386d 


lb  to  1  c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  64a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  ioi 

133b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  312b.d  [fa  27] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  525c-526b; 
bk  xii,  560a-561c 

53  James:  Psychology,  4a-5a;  391b-392a 

54  Freud:  Instincts,  418c  d;  420a-421a  /  General 
Introduction,  581b  /  Group  Psychology,  673b- 
674a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  783c 

lb.  Love  and  hate  in  relation  to  each  other  and 
in  relation  to  pleasure  and  pain 

5  Euripides:  Medea  212a-224a,c  esp  [465-662] 
216a-217c 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  18d-19d;  21a-c  /  Phaedrus,  121c- 
122a  /  Symposium ,  160c  /  Republic,  bk  iii, 
333b-334b 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  i,  ch  15  [io6b2-4]  150b 

9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  5  [644b 
31—645^1]  168d/  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  cii  2-6  407a- 
410c  passim;  bk  ix,  ch  5  [i  167^3— 6]  420b;  ch  9 
[ii7oHi3-bi9]  423d-424b;  ch  ii  425a-d  esp 
[ii7ia34-bi3]  425b-c;  bk  x,  ch  4  [ii75aio-22] 
429c  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  7  [i327b40-i328u 
17]  532a-b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  1,  ch  11  [i370bi5- 
28]  614a;  [1371*17-24]  614c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[1 38ob34~  1 382^1 9]  626d-628b 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1037- 
1140]  57d-59a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d-170a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  [279-705]  174b-186b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  16-17  12c- 
13a;  bk  iii,  par  1  13b-c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xix, 
ch  8  515c-516a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  23, 
a  4  726a-727a;  q  25,  a  2  731b-732a;  a  3,  ans 
732a-733a;  q  26,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  734d- 
735c;  q  27,  a  4  739c-740a;  q  28,  a  1  740b- 
741a;  a  5  743c-744b;  Q  29,  a  3,  ans  and  rep 
1,3  746b-747a;  q  30,  a  2  749d-750d;  q  31, 
a  6,  rep  3  756d-757c;  q  32,  a  3,  rep  3  760d- 
761c;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  761c-762a;  aa  5-6 
762a-763c;  a  8,  ans  764c-765b;  q  38,  a  3 
788b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii— ii,  q  28 
527b-530a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  v  7a-8b; 
purgatory,  xvii  [82]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  i,  stanza 
1  la;  bk  11,  stanza  ni-112  36a;  bk  iii, 
stanza  174-175  77a-b;  stanza  218-219  83a; 
bk  v,  stanza  60  128a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61c-62c;  77b-c 

27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida  103a- 

141a, c  esp  act  iii,  sc  ii  [8-30]  120b-c,  act  iv, 
sc  iv  [1-50]  128b-c,  act  v,  sc  11  134c-137a  / 
Cymbeline,  act  iii,  sc  v  [70-150]  459d-470c  / 
Sonnets,  cxxix  606a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  13,  schol 
400d;  prop  19-26  402c-404b;  prop  33-49 
406c-411b;  part  iv,  appendix,  xix-xx  449a 


1061 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  cii  xx, 
sect  4-5  176d  177a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  30a  32a;  127b-c;  349b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  344b  [fn  1  ];  345d  346b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  308a  309a;  312b, d 

[fn  27] 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  x, 
282b-283c;  bk  xi,  324a  b;  bk  xii,  366a  368c 

53  James:  Psychology,  391b-392a;  717a-718a; 
809b  810b  [fn  1] 

54  Freud:  Instincts,  418c-421a,c  /  Beyond  the 
Pleasure  Principle,  659 b  d  /  Group  Psychology, 
677c-678a;  679a-b  /  Ego  and  Id,  708d  711a 
esp  709c-710c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and 
Anxiety,  724a-725a  esp  724b-c;  733d-734b; 
752c-754a,c  /  War  and  Death,  766a- b  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  789c-790c  / 
New  Introductory  Lectures,  857c-859b  esp: 
857c,  858c-859a 

Ic.  The  distinction  between  love  and  desire 
the  generous  and  acquisitive  aims 

5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [543-589]  429d- 
430a 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  20c-d;  23d-24d  /  Cratylus, 
103b-d  /  Phaedrus,  115a-129d  esp  120b-c, 
123b-124a  /  Symposium,  153b-155c;  164c- 
165b  /  Laws,  bk  viii,  735c-736c 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  cii  22 
[68a25-b7]  89d-90a  /  Topics,  bk  vi,  ch  7 
[1 46a9— 12]  199d;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [i52b6— 9]  207c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iii,  ch  ii  [iii 8b8— 1 8] 
365a-b;  bk  viii,  ch  1-8  406b,d-411d  passim; 
ch  13-14  414d-416d;  bk  ix,  ch  i  416b, d- 
417c  passim;  ch  5  420a-c  passim;  cii  8  421  d- 
423a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1037- 
1062]  57d-58a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iii,  ch  24  203c- 
210a 

17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  7-TR  vi, 
ch  9  20a-26a  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  v  100c- 
106b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  i-bk  iii, 
par  1  9a-13c  /  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  7  380c- 
381c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch  10,  661d- 
662a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19, 
a  1,  rep  2  108d-109c;  a  2,  ans  109c-110b; 
q  20,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2  120a-121b;  a  2,  rep  3 
121b-122a;  q  60,  a  3,  ans  311d-312b;  part 
1— ii,  q  2,  a  1,  rep  3  615d-616c;  q  23,  a  2  724c- 
725c;  a  4  726a-727a;  q  25,  a  2  731b-732a; 
a  3,  ans  732a-733a;  q  26  733d-737a  esp  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  3  734d-735c,  a  4  736b-737a;  q 
27,  aa  3-4  738c-740a;  q  28,  a  1,  ans  and  rep 
1-2  740b-741a;  a  2,  ans  741a-742a;  a  3,  ans 
and  rep  2-3  742a-d;  a  4  742d-743c;  q  30, 
a  2  749d-750d;  q  32,  a  3,  rep  3  760d-761c; 
a  8,  ans  764c- 765b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  62, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  61c-62b 


Chapter  50:  LOVE 


1062 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(1.  The  nature  of  love.  1  c.  The  distinction  be¬ 
tween  love  and  desire:  the  generous  and 
acquisitive  aims .) 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  xvn  [82]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  61c;  63a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  83d-84a;  398c-399d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  i-ii 
447a-b 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  viii  [500-617] 
243a-245b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  4-6  176d-177b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  346c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  345c-346b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  525c-526b 

53  James:  Psychology ,  204b-209b  passim 

54  Freud:  Narcissism ,  404d-406b;  409b-411a,c 
/  Instincts ,  420a-421a  /  General  Introduction , 
581b;  617c-618a  /  Group  Psychology ,  673b- 
674a;  679a-b;  681c-682b;  693a-694c/  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents ,  783b-c  /  Afo*/  Introduc¬ 
tory  Lectures ,  847d-848a 

1</.  The  objects  of  love:  the  good,  the  true,  the 
beautiful;  God,  man,  things 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  29:17-18  /  So/zg  0/* 
Solomon — (D)  Canticle  of  Canticles  /  Zechari- 
ah,  8:19 — (Z>)  Zacharias ,  8:19 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon ,  8:1-3  —  (^) 
OT,  £00^  0/  Wisdom ,  8:1-3  /  Ecclesiasticus , 
4:11-19;  9:8;  36:22— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus , 
4:12-22;  9:8-9;  36:24 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  10:37  /  Lufye,  14:26 
/  Romans ,  12:9  /  Colossians ,  3:1-2  /  /  Timothy , 
6:10-11  /  /  John ,  2:15-16;  4:20-21 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  iii  [121-160]  20b-c;  bk  xiv 
[  1 93-221]  lOOa-b 

5  Euripides:  Andromache  [205-208]  317a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  v,  168d-169a;  bk  vi, 
196d-197b 

7  Plato:  Lysis ,  18d-24d  /  Phaedrus,  120a-c; 

126b-129d  /  Symposium ,  161d-167d  /  Euthy - 
phro ,  194b  /  Phaedo ,  225c  /  Republic ,  bk  i, 
296d-297a;  bk  v-vi,  368c-375b;  bk  vi,  376d 
/  bk  v,  687b;  bk  viii,  735b-738c 

8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics ,  bk  i,  ch  2 
[72a2S-2o]  98d  /  Metaphysics ,  bk  xii,  ch  7 
[io72a23~b4]  602b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  2-4  407a-409b; 
bk  ix,  ch  3  418c-419a  passim,  esp  [1 1 65bi3— 17] 
418d;  ch  5  [1167^-6]  420b;  ch  7  421a-d  esp 
[n67b34-n68ai8]  421b-c;  ch  8  421d-423a 
passim;  ch  9  [1 170^3-^9]  423d-424b;  ch  12 
425d-426a,c;  bk  x,  ch  4  [ii75aio-22]  429c  / 
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [i37ibi2-25]  615a-b;  bk 
11,  ch  4  626c-628b;  ch  12  [i389ai2-i5]  636b; 
ch  13  [i389b32— 34]  637b;  [i39oai4~i7]  637c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iii  [59-78] 
30d-31a 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d-170a 


1^ 

17  Plotinus:  F/rrf  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-3  10a- 
11a;  tr  vi  21a-26a  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  v  100c-  1 
106b  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  12,  234a-c  / 

Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  10,  309a-b;  tr  vii, 
ch  33  337d-338b;  tr  ix,  ch  9,  359b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  1  13b-c; 
bk  iv,  par  7-20  20d-24c;  bk  viii,  par  10-30 
55c-61c  passim;  bk  x,  par  38-70  81a-89b  / 
C//y  o/*  60^,  bk  xii,  ch  8-9  346d-348b;  bk 
xiv,  ch  7  380c-381c;  bk  xv,  ch  22  416a-c; 
bk  xix,  ch  10-17  516c-523a  /  Christian  Doc¬ 
trine,  bk  1,  ch  3-5  625b-626a;  ch  9-10  627a-b; 
ch  22-29  629b-632c;  ch  35  634c-d;  ch  38 
635c-d;  ch  40  636a, c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  20, 
a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  120a-121b;  q  60,  aa  3-5 
311d-314c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  8  615a-c;  q  2,  a 
1,  rep  3  615d-616c;  q  23,  a  4  726a-727a;  q  27 
737a-740a;  q  29,  a  1  745a-c;  aa  4-5  747a- 
748b;  q  32,  a  5,  ans  762a-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  62, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  61c-62b;  q  66,  a  6,  rep  i 
80c-81b;  q  67,  a  6  87a-c;  q  no,  a  i,  ans  and 
rep  1  347d-349a;  part  ii-ii,  q  23,  a  4,  ans 
485d-486b;  a  6,  rep  i  487a-d;  q  24,  a  i,  ans 
and  rep  1  489d-490b;  qq  25-27  501a-527b 
passim 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  xvi  [85-102]  77d;  xvn  [82]- 
xviii  [75]  79b-80c;  paradise,  i  [97-142] 
107b-d;  iv  [ii5]-v  [12]  llld-112b;  vi  [112- 
126]  114d-115a;  xxvi  [1— 81]  145d-146c 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  61c-62a;  76c-77b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  84b-85a;  191c-192d 

26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Juliet ,  act  i,  sc  i 
[214-244]  287d-288a;  sc  v  [43-55]  292b;  act 
ii,  sc  11  [1-32]  294b-c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  381c-382a 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  80b-81a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  56,  demonst 
414a-c;  part  v,  prop  15-16  456c;  prop  18 
456d;  prop  33  460c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [500-560] 
243a-244a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [1003-1007] 
361b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  81  186b;  100  191a-192b;  323 
230a-b 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  4-5  176d-177a;  bk  iv,  ch  xix,  sect  i 
384c-d 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  15b-c;  17b-c;  50d-51a; 
130b-c;  198d-199a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345d-346a;  347b-c 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  326a-327a  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  476a-483d;  585d-586a 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  ii  [8516-8523]  207b; 
[9192-9944]  223b-241b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  5d-6b;  bk  iii, 
113a-115a;  bk  vi,  249d-250a;  bk  xi,  525c- 
526b;  bk  xii,  555b-c;  560a-561c;  bk  xiv, 
608a-b;  epilogue  i,  659a;  660b-c 


l<?  Chapter  50:  LOVE  1063 


52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  26d~ 
27d;  bk  iii,  53d-54b;  bk  iv,  83c'84a;  bk  v, 
121d  l22d  passim;  bk  vi,  167bl68c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  204b-211a 

54  Freud:  Instincts ,  418d-420b  esp  420a  b  / 
Group  Psychology ,  673bc  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents ,  775b  c;  783a  b 

le.  The  intensity  and  power  of  love:  its  in¬ 
crease  or  decrease;  its  constructive  or 
destructive  force 

Old  Testament:  II Samuel,  11-12 —(D)  II  Kings , 
11-12  /  Proverbs,  5:3-14;  6:23-29;  23:26-28 
/  Ecclesiastes,  7:26— (D)  Ecclesiastes,  7:27 
/  So/2£  of  Solomon,  8:6-7— (D)  Canticle  of 
Canticles,  8:6-7 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xviii  [1-126]  130a-131c; 
bk  xix  [276-368]  139d-140c;  bk  xxii  [21-98] 
155b-156a;  [405-515]  159c-160d 

5  Aeschylus:  Choephoroe  [585-651]  75d-76b 
5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [781-805]  138a  /  Tra - 

chiniae  170a-181a,c  esp  [427-530]  173d-174d 
5  Euripides:  Medea  [627-642]  217c  /  Hippolytus 
225a-236d  esp  [1-57]  225a-c,  [1268-1282] 
235b-c  /  Suppliants  [990-1 071]  267a-c  /  Tro¬ 
jan  Women  [895-1059]  277c-279a  /  Androm¬ 
ache  [274-308]  31 7d  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis 
[543-589]  429d-430a 

5  Aristophanes:  Birds  [685-707]  551b-d  / 
Lysistrata  583a-599a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ix,  311b-312d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi,  523c- 
524c 

7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124a-129d  /  Symposium 
149a-173a,c  esp  152b-167d  /  Republic ,  bk  v, 
361b-c;  bk  ix,  417a-418a  /  Laws,  bk  viii, 
736b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  7  [i327b4o- 
I328ai 7]  532a-b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  12 
lI3^9b3“5]  636d;  ch  13  [i389b22-24]  637a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [1— 41  ] 
la-c;  bk  iv  [1037-1208]  57d-60a 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues,  11  [56-73]  esp  [68]  7b-8a;  x 
32a-34a  esp  [69]  34a  /  Georgies,  iv  [452-527] 
95b-98a  /  Aeneid,  bk  1  [657-756]  121a-123b; 
bk  iv  167a-186b 

17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  40 
180b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  1  13b-c; 
bk  iv,  par  7-14  20d-23a;  bk  vi,  par  18-26 
40d-43a;  bk  viii,  par  10-30  55c-61c  passim; 
bk  x,  par  38-70  81a-89b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  20, 
a  1,  rep  3  120a-121b;  q  98,  a  2,  ans  and  rep 
3  517d-519a;  part  i-ii,  q  25,  a  2  731b-732a; 
q  26,  a  2,  rep  1-2  734d-735c;  q  28  740a-744d 
esp  a  6  744b  d;  q  29,  aa  2-3  745c-747a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  qq 
31-33  536d-558d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  v  7a-8b;  xii 
[31-48]  16d;  purgatory,  viii  [67-84]  65a; 
xv  [40-81]  75d-76a;  xvn  [82]-xviii  [75]  79b- 


80c;  xxiv  [49-63]  90a  b;  paradise,  i  [97- 
142]  107b  d;  xxx-xxxiii  151d-157d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  i,  stanza 
1-8  la  2a;  stanza  31-37  5a  6a;  stanza  58-67 
8b  9b;  stanza  143-144  19b-20a;  bk  iii, 
stanza  1-7  54b  55b;  stanza  142-254  73a- 
87b  /  Knight's  Tale  [1152-1186]  179a  b  / 
Reeve's  Prologue  [3853-3896]  224a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  6a  b;  39a  40a;  410a-c; 
414d-416c;  431c-432d 

26  Shakespeare:  Comedy  of  Errors,  act  v,  sc  i 
[68-86]  165d  l66a/  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona, 
act  11,  sc  iv  [126-142]  237c-d;  sc  vi  239a  c  / 
Love's  Labour's  Lost,  act  iii,  sc  i  [175-207] 
264a-b;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [290-365]  271c-272a  / 
Romeo  and  Juliet ,  act  ii  293c-300d  /  Mid¬ 
summer-Night's  Dream  352a-375d  esp  act  i, 
sc  1  [226-251]  354d-355a  /  Merchant  of  Venice, 
act  11,  sc  vi  [1— 19]  415b-c  /  Much  Ado  About 
Nothing,  act  11,  sc  1  [379-405]  511a;  sc  iii 
511d-514b;  act  iii,  sc  1  [104-116]  515c  /  As 
You  Lil^e  It,  act  iii,  sc  11  [420-425]  613c 

27  Shakespeare:  Twelfth  Night  la-28despACTii, 
sc  iv  [82-127]  llb-d,  act  iii,  sc  1  [161-176]  15d 
/  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  iii,  sc  i  [106-146] 
119c-120a;  sc  11  [8-30]  120b-c;  [87-90]  121a; 
act  iv,  sc  iv  [1 1—50]  128b-c;  act  v,  sc  ii 
[154-181]  136c-d  /  Othello  205a-243a,c  /  King 
Lear,  act  v,  sc  iii  [257-273]  282b  /  Antony 
and  Cleopatra  311a-350d  /  Cymbeline,  act  iii, 
sc  iv  466d-468d  /  Sonnets,  xvii-cliv  588d- 
609d  passim 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  79d-80a; 
120b-137d;  part  ii,  381c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  44  437c-438a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ix  [990-1189] 
269a-273a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [999-1060] 
361b-362b 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  453a-456a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  14c-d;  30a-32a;  68d; 
167c-169c;  237b-c;  334b-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345c-346b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  169d-170b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  323b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [3025-3072]  73b-74b; 
[4460-4612]  lllb-114b;  part  ii  [8339-8487] 
203a-206b;  [9192-9944]  223b-241b 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  370b-371a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  70d;  bk  iii, 
116c-117a;  141b-d;  159b  l61b;  bk  iv,  184c; 
185b;  bk  vi,  235a-238c;  262b-271c;  bk  viii, 
316b-c;  327c-d;  340c-341a,c;  bk  ix,  377b-c; 
bk  xi,  525c-527a;  bk  xii,  541d-542b;  557b-c; 
560a-561c;  bk  xiv,  608a-b;  bk  xv,  616a-618b 
esp  617a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii, 
26a-27d;  bk  vi,  167b  l68c;  bk  viii,  200c- 
201c 

54  Freud:  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  657c-d 
/  Group  Psychology,  678a-c  /  Ego  and  Id, 
708d-712a  passim,  esp  708d-709a,  711c  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  791a-d 


1064 

(1.  The  nature  of  love,) 

1/.  The  power  of  hate 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  4:1-9;  37  /  II  Samuel, 
l3:l5~39—(D)  II  Kings,  13:15-39  /  Esther, 
3:2-5;  5:9-14  /  Proverbs ,  10:12 

New  Testament:  /  John ,  2:9-11;  3:12-15;  4:20 

5  Euripides:  Medea  212a-224a,c  esp  [465-662] 
216a-217c 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  34a-b;  bk  iii, 
lOOb-lOlb;  bk  vii,  258d-259a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ii,  403c- 
404a 

7  Plato:  Apology ,  205c-d  /  Phaedo ,  237b 

9  Aristotle:  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  7  [i328ai-i6] 
532b  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [i382ai-i6]  628a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  29, 
a  3  746b-747a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  v,  8c;  ch  xix  26a- 
30a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  141a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  Henry  VI,  act  i,  sc  iii 

73d-74b;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [146-195]  87d-88a; 
act  v,  sc  vi  [61-93]  103d-104a  /  Richard  III 
105a-148a,c  esp  act  i,  sc  i  105b,d-107b, 
act  v,  sc  111  [119-206]  144d-145d  /  Merchant 
of  Venice ,  act  iv,  sc  i  [35—62]  425d-426a 

27  Shakespeare:  Othello  205a-243a,c  esp  act  ii, 
sc  1  [1-81]  213b-214b,  [295-321]  216c/  Corio - 
lanus,  act  iv,  sc  v  [70-152]  380b-381a/  Timon 
of  Athens  393a-420d  esp  act  iv,  sc  i  409c-d, 
sc  iii  410c-416d  /  Cymbeline,  act  iii,  sc  v 
[70-150]  469d-470c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  i  [81-105]  95a- b  / 
Samson  Agonistes  [819-842]  357b-358a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  30a-32a;  124d;  237b-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  119a-121a;  134b-136a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  312b,d  [fn  27] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  183d-186c; 
188a-190c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
137c-142c;  bk  xii,  393a-394a 

53  James:  Psychology,  717a-720b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  328a-b  / 
Group  Psychology,  677c-678a  /  War  and 
Death ,  764d-765d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis - 
contents,  787a-788d;  790a-791d  esp  791b-c 

2.  The  kinds  of  love 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  153b-155c;  165b-167d  / 
Laws,  bk  vm,  735c-736c 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  v  100c-106b  / 
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  9,  359b-c 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  7  380c- 
381c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch  10  661c- 
662a 

19  Aquinas:  Sutnma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  20, 
a  2,  rep  3  121b-122a;  q  60,  aa  1-3  310b- 
312b;  q  82,  a  5,  rep  i  435c-436c;  part  i-ii, 
q  26  733d-737a  esp  aa  3-4  735c-737a;  q  27, 
a  3,  ans  738c-739c;  q  28,  aa  1-2  740b- 
742a 


1 f  to  2  a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  parti-ii,  q  66, 
a  6,  rep  2  80c-81b;  part  ii-ii,  q  23,  a  i,  ans 
482d-483d:  a  4,  ans  485d-486b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvii 
[82-139]  79b-d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 
128  38a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  63a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  83a-85a;  399a-b;  424d- 
425c 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  381c-382a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  xix-xx 
449a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  viii  [500-617] 
243a-245b;  bk  ix  [990-1189]  269a-273a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  522a-525a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  14c-d;  167c-169c;  198d- 
199a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  345d-346b;  348d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  289c-290b;  303c; 
305c-309a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  50a;  bk  vi, 
269c-d;  bk  vii,  276c-277a;  bk  xi,  520a-521b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 
27c-d 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  673b-d;  681c-682a 
/  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  783  b-c 

2a .  Lustful,  sexual,  or  selfish  love:  concupiscent 
love 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  39:6-20  /  Exodus, 
20:14,17  /  Leviticus,  18  /  Numbers ,  25:1-9  / 

II  Samuel,  11;  13:1-14— (D)  II  Kings,  11; 
13:1-14  /  Proverbs,  5:1-20;  6:20-35;  7;  23:26- 
35  /  Ecclesiastes,  7:26— (D)  Ecclesiastes,  7:27 
/  Ezekiel,  23— (D)  Ezechiel,  23 

Apocrypha:  Judith ,  11:21-23;  12:11-20;  16:7-9— 
(D)  OT,  Judith,  11:19-21;  12:10-20;  16:8-11  / 
Ecclesiasticus,  9:3-9;  25:21;  47:19-20 — (D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  9:3-13;  25:28;  47:21-22  / 
Susanna—  (D)  OT,  Daniel,  13 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:27-32  /  Romans, 
6:12-13;  7:14-25;  13:13-14  /  I  Corinthians, 
6:9-7:11  /  Colossians,  3:5  /  I  Thessalonians,  ! 
4:4-5  /  Hebrews,  13:4  /  James,  1:13-16  /  / 
Peter,  2:11  /  I  John,  2:15-17 

4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  viii  [266-366]  224d- 
225d 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  la-14a,c  esp 

[776-835]  Had,  [980-1073]  13b-14a,c  /  I 

Agamemnon  [681-781]  59b-60b  /  Choephoroe  ! 
[585-651]  75d-76b;  [892-930]  78d-79b 

5  Euripides:  Electra  [988-1122]  336a-337b 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ix,  311b-312d 

7  Plato:  Charmides,  2 b-c  /  Phaedrus,  117a-122a 
/  Symposium,  153b-155c  /  Republic ,  bk  iii, 
326c-327b;  333b-334b;  bk  ix,  417b-418a  / 
Timaeus,  474b-d;  476b-d  /  Laws,  bk  viii,  j 
735b-738c 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics ,  bk  ii,  ch  22 
[68a25-b7]  89d-90a  /  Topics ,  bk  vi,  ch  7 
[1 46a3— 13]  199d;  bk  vii,  ch  i  [i52b6— 9]  207c 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


2 a  to  2a{\)  Chapter  50:  LOVE  1065 


9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk  vi,  ch  i8 
[57 lb5~ 1  °]  97b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1037- 
1120]  57d  58d;  [1192-1208]  59d-60a;  bk  v 
[962-965]  73c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [657-756]  121a-123b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals ,  bk  iv,  64b-c;  bk  xi,  103b-c; 
107b-108c;  bk  xiii,  137bc 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead ,  tr  \r,  ch  1-2  100c- 
102a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  25-26  7a-c; 
bk  11,  par  1-8  9a-10d;  bk  iii,  par  1-5  13b-14b; 
bk  iv,  par  2  19d;  bk  vi,  par  18-26  40d-43a  / 
City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  8  346d-347b;  bk  xiv, 
ch  16-18  390a*391c;  ch  26  395d-396c;  bk 
xv,  ch  22-23  416a-418c  /  Christian  Doctrine, 
bk  iii,  ch  10  661c-662a;  ch  18-21  664d-666b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  98, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  517d-519a;  part  i-ii,  qq 
26-28  733d-744d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  q  15, 
a  3  453c-454c;  q  46,  a  3  604d-605a,c;  part  iii, 
q  65,  a  1,  rep  5  879c-881d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  7a-8b;  xi 
[76-90]  16a;  purgatory,  viii  [67-84]  65a; 
xvn  [127-139]  79d;  xix  [1-69]  81c-82a;  xxv 
[i09]-xxvi  [148]  92c-94c;  paradise,  viii-ix 
116d-120a  esp  ix  [103-108]  119d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilusand  Crcssida ,  bk  iii,  stanza 
172-2 1 9  77a-83a  /  Miller's  Tale  212b-223b  / 
Reeve's  Tale  225a-232a  /  Squire's  Tale  [10,813- 
943]  347a-349a  /  Physician's  Tale  366a-371a  / 
Manciple's  Tale  [17,088-103]  490a  /  Parson's 
Tale,  par  19  507b-508b;  par  74-86  535b-544a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  63a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
106a-107c;  bk  iii,  164d-166a;  188d-193c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  6a-b;  36c-40a;  83d-85a; 
297d-299c;  398c-399c;  406a-434d 

26  Shakespeare:  Titus  Andronicus  170a-198d 
esp  act  ii  176a-181d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  v  [40-91] 
37b-d;  actiii,  sciv  [40-96]  55a-c/  Troilusand 
Cressida  103a-141a,c  esp  act  iv,  sc  i  [51-79] 
126b-c,  sc  v  [13-63]  130a-c,  act  v,  sc  ii  134c- 
137a/  Measure  for  Measure  174a-204d  esp  act 
ii,  sc  1  [234-257]  181a-b,  sc  ii  [162-187]  183d- 
184a  /  Othello,  act  i,  sc  iii  [306-388]  212b- 
213a  /  King  Lear,  act  iv,  sc  vi  [i 09-1 35] 
274c-d;  act  v,  sc  1  277d-278d  /  Pericles, 
act  1,  prologue-sc  i  421b-423c;  act  iv,  sc 
v-vi  441a-443b  /  Sonnets,  cxxix  606a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  35  406d- 
407b;  the  affects,  def  48  421b-d;  part  iv, 
appendix,  xix  449a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  v  [443-450]  185a; 
bk  viii  [500-643]  243a-246a;  bk  ix  [990- 
1133]  269a-272a  esp  [1004-1098]  269a-271a  / 
Samson  Agonistes  [373-419]  347b-348b;  [766— 
842]  356b-358a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  402-403  241a;  451-461  253b- 
255a 


36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  513a-516a;  521a  b; 
525a-526a;  554b  556a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  9b  c;  58b-59b;  130b-c; 
138b  d;  289b  290b;  321b  322a;  352d-353a 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiv,  103c- 
104a;  bk  xvi,  118a  b;  il9a-b;  119d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345d-346b;  348d 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Pall,  92c-d;  649d-650c 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  301c-d 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  162 
58b-d 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [2605-2677]  63b-65a 
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  371c-372c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  15b-16a;  bk 
ii,  76a  b;  86b-87b;  bk  iii,  llla-118d  esp 
113d-115a;  122b-c;  bk  v,  201a-c;  204a-206c 
passim;  bk  viii,  318a-341a,c;  bk  xi,  476c-480a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 
20a  b;  39a-40a;  bk  iii  46a-82a,c  esp  53c-54b 

54  Freud:  “Wild"  Psycho-Analysis,  128d-129a  / 
Narcissism  399a-411a,c  esp  404d-406c,  409b- 
410d  /  Instincts,  418c-421a,c  esp  420b-c  / 
General  Introduction,  569c-585a  esp  569d- 
570a,  574c-d,  580a-581b;  615b-618a  esp 
616d-618a  /  Group  Psychology,  673b-674a; 
681c-683d',  693a-695b  /  Civilization  and  Its 
Discontents,  782a-b,d  [fn  1] ;  783c;  784a-785a 
esp  785a-b  [fn  1]  /  New  Introductory  Lectures , 
854a-863d  esp  862b-863c 

2^(1)  The  sexual  instinct:  its  relation  to  other 
instincts 

7  Plato:  Symposium,  157b-159b;  165b-c  / 
Timaeus,  476c-d  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  685a-c;  bk 
vi,  712b 

9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals ,  bk  v,  ch  8 
[542ai7-b4]  68d-69a;  bk  vi,  ch  i8-bk  vii,  ch 
2  97b-108c  passim,  esp  bk  vi,  ch  18  97b-99c, 
bk  vii,  ch  1  106b,d-108a  /  Generation  of 
Animals,  bk  iv,  ch  i  [764b4~ 7]  305c  /  Rhetoric, 
bk  11,  ch  7  [1385*21-25]  631d 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1037- 
1057]  57d 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5697- 
5744]  258a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  414d-416c;  424d-425b 
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  346a-347d; 

349a-350a;  402a-d;  405c-406a;  476c-477a 
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  555a-556a 
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345d-346d 
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  287d 

53  James:  Psychology,  734b-735b 

54  Freud:  Narcissism,  401a-402c  /  Instincts , 
414d-418c  esp  414d-415d  /  General  Introduc¬ 
tion,  574a-576a  esp  574a;  580a-d;  587d-588b; 
590a-593b;  615b-616b;  618d-619a  /  Beyond 
the  Pleasure  Principle,  651d-662b  esp  653b-d, 
654c- d,  657c-659a,  662b, d  [fn  1]  /  Ego  and 
Id,  708d-709c;  710c-712a  /  Civilization  and 
Its  Discontents,  789c- 790c  /  New  Introductory 
Lectures,  846a-851d  esp  847b-d,  849c-850c, 
851b-c 


1066  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2a(2)  to  2b 


(2a.  Lustful sexual,  or  selfish  love:  concupiscent 
love.) 

2a( 2)  Infantile  sexuality:  polymorphous  per¬ 
versity 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  15a-18a  esp  15d-16c  /  Hysteria , 
113d-114b  /  Sexual  Enlightenment  of  Children , 
119d-120b  /  General  Introduction ,  530d-531d; 
572d-576d;  578b-585a  esp  578c-580d  /  Group 
Psychology,  693a- b  /  New  Introductory  Lec¬ 
tures,  847c-848d;  855d-861c 

2^(3)  Object-fixations,  identifications,  and 
transferences:  sublimation 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1058- 
1072]  57d'58a 

14  Plutarch:  Solon,  66b-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  lOb-llb;  191c-192d; 
398c-399d 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  iii,  sc  11 
[123-195]  87c-88a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  13-17  400c- 
402a;  part  iv,  prop  6  426a;  prop  44,  schol 
437d-438a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  345d-346a 

53  James:  Psychology,  734b-735b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  16b-20d  esp  17b-c,  19a-c,  20a-d  / 
Narcissism  399a-411a,c  esp  399d-400b,  404d- 
406c,  409d-410d  /  Instincts,  414b  /  General 
Introduction,  551a-589c  passim,  esp  574c-d, 
581b-c,  583c-d,  587d-588a,  589a-b;  594d- 
597b;  599d-600d;  616d-622c;  627b-630d; 
634b-d  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  644d- 
645d  /  Group  Psychology,  678d-681a;  681b, d 
[fn  4];  685c -686a;  691c-692a;  693a-694b  / 
Ego  and  Id,  703c-706c  esp  704d-705c;  711b-c; 
712b-c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  832  b- 
834b  esp  832d-833b;  847a-849b;  856a-863d 
esp  856b-d,  862d-863c 

2 a (4)  The  perversion,  degradation,  or  pathol¬ 
ogy  of  love:  infantile  and  adult  love 

Old  Testament:  Genesis,  19:4-13;  38:6-10  / 
Exodus,  22:19  /  Leviticus,  18;  20:13-16  / 
Deuteronomy,  27:21  /  Judges,  19:22-30 

New  Testament:  Romans,  1:24-27 
7  Plato:  Symposium,  170b-171c  /  Laws,  bk  i, 
645d-646a;  bk  viii,  735d-736a 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch  5  399a-d  pas¬ 
sim 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues,  vi  [45-60]  20a-b  /  Aeneid , 
bk  vi  [23-30]  211b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  1  13b-c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xv-xvi  21a- 
23d;  purgatory,  xxvi  [25-87]  93b-d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  36c-40a;  84b-85a;  225a; 
427b-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Pericles  421a-448a,c  esp  act  i, 
prologue-sc  1  421b-423c 

28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  349b-c 


31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  44,  schol 
437d-438a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [629-870]  125a- 
130a 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  163b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii,  87c- 
88a;  bk  xvi,  117d;  bk  xxvi,  219d-221c 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  93d-94c;  169a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  419b  [fn  1] 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [11,676-843]  284a- 
288a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  1,  24a-25a;  bk 
iv,  177c-d;  bk  vi,  271c-d;  bk  vii,  292b-296a; 
bk  vm,  305b-307d;  322c;  bk  ix,  355c-d; 
357a-b;  357d-358b;  bk  xi,  520a-d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i, 
4a-d;  bk  ii,  39a-40a;  bk  iii  46a-82a,c  esp 
53c-54b,  58d-59b,  69d-70c;  bk  iv,  95b-100c; 
bk  viii,  200c-201c;  bk  x,  282b-283c;  bk  xi, 
324a-b;  bk  xii,  366a-368c 

53  James:  Psychology,  735a-b;  802b;  804a- 
805b 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  14b-15a;  16d-17a;  18a-b  /  Hysteria , 
84a-86c;  90d-96a;  97d-106c  esp  97d-99d; 
llla-118a,c  esp  lllb-115a  /  Narcissism,  409c- 
410d  /  Instincts,  4l5d-418c  /  General  Introduc¬ 
tion,  547b-549d  esp  548d-549a;  569c-573a; 
577a-578c;  583d-591d;  593d-599b;  604c-606a; 
611a-d;  619b-622b  esp  620d-622a  /  Beyond 
the  Pleasure  Principle ,  659b-d  /  Group  Psy¬ 
chology,  680c-d  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and 
Anxiety,  718b-d;  724a-728b  esp  725d-726c, 
728a-b;  733c-735a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents,  789d-790c  /  New  Introductory  Lec¬ 
tures,  847c-850c;  859c-d;  861c-862a 

2b.  Friendly,  tender,  or  altruistic  love:  fraternal 
love 

Old  Testament:  Leviticus,  19:17-18,33-34  / 
Deuteronomy,  10:18-19  /  I  Samuel,  18:1-4; 
19:1-7;  20;  23:15-18— (D)  I  Kings ,  18:1-4; 
19:1-7;  20;  23:15-18  /  II  Samuel ,  1 —(D) 
II  Kings,  1  /  Psalms,  133 —(D)  Psalms,  132  / 
Proverbs,  17:17-18;  18:19,24;  27:6 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  6:1,13-17;  7:18-19; 
9:10;  25:1;  27:16-21;  29:10,15;  37:1-2,6; 
40:23-24— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  6:1,13-17; 
7:20-21;  9:14-15;  25:1-2;  27:17-24;  29:13,19; 
37:1-2,6;  40:23-24 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  5:21-26;  19:19; 
22:39  /  Mar\,  12:31  /  Luke,  10:27  /  John, 
15:13  /  Romans,  13:9  /  Galatians ,  5:14  / 
Colossians,  4:7-18  /  7  Thessalonians ,  4:9-10  / 
II  Timothy,  4:9-22  /  James,  2:8  /  I  Peter,  3:8  / 
II  Peter,  1:5-7  /  I  John ,  3:11-17 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  iv  [153-183]  25c-d;  bk  vi 
[212-236]  42b-c;  bk  xvi  112a-121d;  bk  xviii 
130a-136d;  bk  xix  [276-368]  139d-140c;  bk 
xxiii  [1-261]  161a-163d  /  Odyssey,  bk  viii 
[581-586]  228c 

5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [666-683]  148d-149a 


lb  to  2b(2)  Chapter  50 :  LOVE  1 067 


5  Euripides:  lphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [578— 
616]  4l6a-b;  [674-715]  416d-4l7b 
7  Plato:  Lysis  14a-25a,c  /  Protagoras y  52b  / 
Phaedrus,  124a-129d  esp  128d  129c  /  Sym¬ 
posium ,  153b-155c  /  Laws ,  bk  viii,  735c-738c 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  viii-ix  406b,d-426a,c 
/  Rhetoric ,  bk  ii,  ch  4  626c-628b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d  170a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ix  [168-449]  283b-291a 

14  Plutarch:  Alcibiades ,  156cl58b  /  Pelopidas , 
233b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  7-14  20d- 
23a;  bk  vi,  par  11-26  38b-43a  passim  /  City 
of  God ,  bk  xix,  ch  7-8  515a-516a 

20  Aquinas:  Snmma  Theologica ,  part  ii-ii,  qq 
23-33  482c-558d  passim 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  ii  2c-4a;  xv 
21a-22c;  purgatory,  xiii  [i]-xv  [81]  71d- 
76a;  xvii  [82-139]  79b-d;  xxi  [i]-xxii  [129] 
85a-87d;  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b 

22  Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  174a-211a  esp  [1092- 
1186]  178a-179b,  [1574-1627]  186ab 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  82b-88d;  396a-398c  pas¬ 
sim;  446d-448c;  472a-473b 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  v,  sc  vi 
[61-93]  103d-104a  /  Richard  II,  act  ii,  sc  hi 
[46—49]  333a-b  /  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  i, 
sc  1  [119-160]  407c-408a;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [223- 
330]  422b-423b  /  As  You  Like  It,  act  ii,  sc 
vii  [174-200]  609a-b;  act  iv,  sc  iii  [120-133] 
620c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  iii  [62-65] 
35a;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [57-95]  49c-d;  [206-225]  51b; 
[360-389]  52d-53a  /  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act 
ii,  sc  iii  [iio-iii]  116d  /  Othello,  act  iii,  sc  iii 
[142-144]  223c  /  Antony  and  Cleopatra ,  act  v, 
sc  1  [13-48]  345b-c  /  Coriolanus ,  act  iv,  sc  iv 
[12-22]  379b  /  Timon  of  Athens,  act  i,  sc  ii 
[91—107]  398a-b  /  Henry  VIII,  act  ii,  sc  i 
[126-131]  559b-c  /  Sonnets ,  i-cxvi  586a-604a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  ii,  428b-c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  18,  schol 
429a-d;  prop  29-40  431d-437a;  prop  73  446c- 
447a 

35  Locke:  Human  Understanding ,  bk  ii,  ch  xx, 
sect  5  176d-177a 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
259a;  262a-d  /  Practical  Reason,  326a-b  / 
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  375d- 
376b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  lOla-c;  199a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  ioi 
133b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  341a-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dick,  36b-39b;  381a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  15a-b;  28c- 
31a;  49a;  51d;  56b;  bk  ii,  69a-c;  95d-96c; 
bk  iii,  127d-128d;  135c-137c;  140c-142d;  bk 
iv,  167c-d;  183d-186c;  188a-190c;  bk  v, 
220b-c;  222d-223a;  bk  vi,  262b-c;  266c-267c; 
271a-b;  bk  viii,  303b-d;  305d-306a;  311a-b; 
327a-333a;  334d-341a,c  passim;  bk  x,  465a-c; 
bk  xi,  502b-503a;  bk  xii,  557b-c;  bk  xiv, 


597a  598a;  600d;  bk  xv,  617b  618a;  625c- 
626d;  63lc-633a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vii, 
180a  189a;  bk  x,  281b-297d;  epilogue,  408a- 
412d 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  673b  c;  681  d- 
682b;  693b'694b  /  Civilization  and  Its  Dis¬ 
contents,  783a- c 

2&(1)  The  relation  between  love  and  friendship 

5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [666-683]  148d-149a 

7  Plato:  Lysis  14a-25a,c  /  Phaedrus,  115a-118c 
/  Laws,  bk  viii,  736a-c 

8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  22  [68a 
25_b7l  89d-90a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iv,  ch  6  [ii26b2o-25] 
373d;  bk  viii,  ch  2-3  407a-408c;  ch  5  [ii57b 
28-37]  409c-d;  ch  8  411b-d;  bk  ix,  ch  4-5 
419a-420c  passim;  ch  10  [1  i7iai  1— 15]  424d- 
425a;  ch  12  425d-426a,c  /  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  7 
[i327b40-i328ai7]  532a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d- 
170a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  iv,  par  7-14  20d- 
23a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  20, 
a  2,  rep  3  121b-122a;  q  60,  a  3,  ans  311d- 
312b;  part  1— 11,  q  26,  a  4  736b-737a;  q  27, 
a  3  738c-739c;  q  28,  a  1  740b-741a;  a  2,  ans 
741a-742a;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2-3  742a-d;  a  4 
742d-743c;  q  29,  a  3,  rep  2  746b-747a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i— ii,  q  65, 
a  5,  ans  74c-75a;  q  66,  a  6,  rep  2  80c-81b; 
part  ii-ii,  q  19,  a  6  469a-d;  q  23,  a  1  482d- 
483  d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  82b-88d  esp  83d-85a; 
410a-413a;  472b-473b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  291d-292a 

42  Kant:  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
375d-376b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  257b;  392b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  viii,  339d- 
341a, c;  bk  ix,  373c-374a;  bk  xii,  555a-c;  bk 
xv,  617b  d 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  693d-694b  / 
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  783  b-c 

2£(2)  Self-love  in  relation  to  the  love  of  others 

Old  Testament:  Leviticus,  19:18,33-34 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  14:5-7 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  1 4 : 5-7 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:38-47;  19:19; 
22:39  /  Mark,  I2:3I  /  Eukp,  6:27-35;  10:27  / 
Romans,  13:9  /  Galatians,  5:14  /  James,  2:8 

5  Euripides:  Alcestis  [614-740]  242c-243c 

7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  v,  689b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  7  [ii58b29- 
H59ai2]410d-411a;  ch  12  [1  i6ibi6— 33]  414a-b; 
bk  ix,  ch  4  419a-420a;  ch  8-9  421d-424b  esp 
ch  9  [ii7oai4-bi9]  423d-424b;  ch  12  [ii7ib33- 
1 1 7 2a2 ]  425d  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  5  [i263a40-b4] 
458c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  ii  [i37ibi2— 25]  615a-b 


1068 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2b{2)  to  2 b(3) 


(2  b.  Friendly ,  tender,  or  altruistic  love :  fraternal 
love .  2b (2)  Self-love  in  relation  to  the  love 
of  others .) 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  19  125b- 
126c;  bk  11,  ch  17  158d-161a 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  7-14  20d- 
23a;  bk  x,  par  58-64  86a-87d  /  City  of  God , 
bk  xiv,  ch  28  397a-d  /  Christian  Doctrine , 
bk  1,  ch  22-27  629b-631d;  ch  35  634c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  20, 
a  1,  rep  3  120a-121b;  a  2,  rep  i  121b-122a; 
q  60,  aa  3-5  311d-314c;  q  63,  a  2  326c-327b; 
part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  3  738c-739c;  q  28,  a  1  740b- 
741a;  a  2,  ans  741a-742a;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  3 
742a-d;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-2  742d-743c;  q 
29,  a  3,  rep  2  746b-747a;  a  4  747a-c;  q  32, 
aa  5-6  762a-763c;  q  40,  a  7  797a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  62, 
a  4,  ans  and  rep  3  62b-63a;  q  66,  a  6,  rep  2-3 
80c-81b;  q  73,  a  1,  rep  3  119c-120c;  q  77,  a  4 
148b-149a;  q  84,  a  2  175b-176a;  part  ii-ii, 
q  23,  a  1  482d-483d;  q  25,  aa  4-5  503c-504c; 
a  7  506a-d;  a  12  509c-510b;  q  26,  aa  3-13 
511d-520d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xvii 
[82-139]  79b-d 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  83c;  part  ii,  104d 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  486b-489b 

26  Shakespeare:  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  v,  sc  vi 
[80-84]  104a  /  Richard  III,  act  v,  sc  hi  [177— 
206] 145c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Twelfth  Night ,  act  i,  sc  v 
[97"I04]  5b 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  46  438c-d; 
prop  48-49  439a-b 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  100  191a-192b;  455-457 
253b-254a;  471-477  256a-257a;  492  259b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  5  26a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  70b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  58d-59a;  167c-170a 
esp  169d-170a;  291d-292a;  305d;  330b-c; 
354c-d 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  330d-331b;  343d-345c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin .  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 
262a-d;  268d-270a  /  Practical  Reason,  297a- 
314d  esp  298a-300a,  304d-307d;  321b-327d 
esp  325a-327d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements 
of  Ethics ,  376b-c 

43  Federalist:  number  70,  212a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  367d-368a  / 
Utilitarianism,  451  b-c;  453a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  169d-170b;  310d-311a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  ioi 

133b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  172b-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  308d-309a;  310a-d; 
316d-317a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  31a-32a;  bk 
hi,  146d-147c;  159d-160a;  bk  vi,  254b-c; 
267d-268c;  bk  viii,  323b-324b;  bk  ix,  354a- 
355c;  bk  xii,  545b-547a;  bk  xv,  617b-d; 
epilogue  1,  651d-652a;  656d-657a 


53  James:  Psychology,  204b-211a 

54  Freud:  Narcissism  399a-411a,c  esp  404d- 
406c,  409b-411a,c  /  General  Introduction , 
528d;  616c-618a  esp  617c-618a  /  Group  Psy¬ 
chology,  677d-678c  /  War  and  Death,  758c-d 

2&(3)  The  types  of  friendship:  friendships 
based  on  utility,  pleasure,  or  virtue 

Old  Testament:  Proverbs ,  14:20;  17:17-18 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  6:1-17;  9:10;  12:8-9; 
37:1-9;  40:24— (U)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  6:1-17; 
9:14-15;  12:8-9;  37:1-11;  40:24 

5  Euripides:  Rhesus  [319-478]  206a-207b  / 
Heracles  Mad  [55-59]  365c-d;  [1214-1228] 
375c  /  Orestes  [356-806]  397b-402c  /  Iphi - 
genia  at  Aulis  [334-401]  427d-428b 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
397b-c 

7  Plato:  Lysis  14a-25a,c  /  Symposium,  153b- 
155c  /  Gorgias,  285d-286b  /  Republic,  bk  i, 
299b-c  /  Seventh  Letter,  805b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  2-8  407a-411d; 
ch  13-14  414d-416d;  bk  ix,  ch  i  416b,d-417c 
passim;  ch  5  [1167^0-20]  420b-c;  ch  9 
[n69b22-ii70ai2]  423b-d;  ch  10  424c-425a 
passim,  esp  [11 70^3-31]  424c;  ch  ii  425a-d 
esp  [ii7ia20-33]  425a-b;  ch  12  [1172^-8] 
425d-426a;  bk  x,  ch  3  [ii73b32-ii74ai] 
428a-b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  5  [1 36^35-40] 
602c;  bk  11,  ch  4  [i38ob34-i38ib38]  626d- 
62  7d;  ch  12  [1389^ 5~b3]  636d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d- 
170a;  bk  hi,  ch  16  191a-d;  bk  iv,  ch  2  223d- 
224b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  16-17  12c- 
13a;  bk  iv,  par  12-14  22a-23a;  par  21-23 
24c- 25a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  4, 
a  8,  ans  636a-c;  q  26,  a  4,  rep  3  736b-737a; 
q  27,  a  3  738c-739c;  q  31,  a  6,  rep  3  756d- 
757c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
23,  a  1,  rep  3  482d-483d;  a  3,  rep  i  485a-d; 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  3  486b-487a 

22  Chaucer:  TaleofMelibeus,  par  20-21,  409a-b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xvii,  24a-b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  77b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  82b-88d 

26  Shakespeare:  Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona, 
act  11,  sc  vi  239a-c;  act  iv,  sc  i  245b-246b 
/  Richard  II,  act  v,  sc  i  [55-70]  345d  /  Mid¬ 
summer-Night's  Dream,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [192-2 19] 
364d-365a  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  v,  sc  v  501b- 
502c  /  Julius  Caesar ,  act  iv,  sc  ii  [10-27] 
587d  /  As  You  Lil^e  It,  act  ii,  sc  vii  [1 74-190] 
609a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iii,  sc  ii  [57-99] 
49c-50a;  [206-225]  5lb5  [360—389]  52d-53a  / 
Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  iii  [iio-iii] 
116d  /  Timon  of  Athens  393a-420d  esp  act 
1,  sc  11  397a-400a,  act  iv,  sc  i  409c-d,  sc  iii 
[464-543]  415d-416d 


lb( 4)  Chapter  50: 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  84ab;  89a 

131  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  70-71  445c- 
446b;  appendix,  ix  448a;  xxvi  449c 
36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  165b  l66a 
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  167c  l70a  esp  169d- 
170a;  364d  365a 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  92a-c 
42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
262c-263a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  193a;  423c-d;  533b 
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  28c-29d;  bk 
hi,  137c-140c  passim;  bk  viii,  322c;  329c-332a 
passim;  bk  xv,  617b-d;  639a-b 

2b(4)  Patterns  of  love  and  friendship  in  the 
family 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  4:1-16;  9:18-29;  16; 
21:9-21;  22:1-19;  245  25:21-34  esP  25:28;  27; 
29:21-30;  32-34;  37;  42-48;  50:15-23  /  Exo¬ 
dus,  2:1-8  /  Judges ,  11:30-40  /  Ruth ,  1:3-18  / 

1  Samuel,  1:1-8;  18-31  — (Z))  7  Kings,  1:1-8; 
18-31  /  II  Samuel,  13:1-20;  14;  18:33 — (D) 

II  Kings,  13:1-20;  14;  18:33  /  Proverbs,  10:1; 
15:20  /  Micah,  7:5-6— (7))  Micheas,  7:5-6 
Apocrypha:  Tobit  passim,  esp  4:1-4 — (7))  OT, 
Tobias  passim,  esp  4:1-5  /  Ecclesiasticus ,  25:1; 
40:23— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  25:1-2;  40:23 
New  Testament:  Matthew,  10:21,35-37;  12:46- 
50;  19:29  /  3:31-35;  13:12  /  8:19- 

21;  12:51-53;  14:26;  15:11-32;  18:29-30 
4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xxii  [1-98]  155a-156a;  [405- 
515]  159c-160d;  bk  xxiv  [159-804]  172d-179d 
/  Odyssey,  bk  ii  188a-192d;  bk  xi  [458-540] 
247c-248b;  bk  xiv-xv  260a-271d;  bk  xvi 
[167-225]  273d-274b;  bk  xvii  [31-60]  277b-c; 
bk  xxiii  [1-245]  312a-314d;  bk  xxiv  [290- 
361]  320a-d 

5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [956-1078] 
37d-39a,c  /  Choephoroe  70a-80d  esp  [212-305] 
72b-73a,  [892-930]  78d-79b  /  Eumenides 
[653-666]  88a 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  114a-130a,c 
esp  [324-460]  117a-118b,  [1150-1446]  124d- 
127b  /  Antigone  131a-142d  /  Ajax  [1290- 
1315]  154a-b  f  Electra  156a-169a,c  /  Trachiniae 
170a-181a,c 

5  Euripides:  Medea  212a-224a,c  esp  [976-1270] 
220b-222d  /  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  esp  [614— 

740]  242c-243c  /  Suppliants  258a-269a,c  esp 
[990-1 1 1 3]  267a-268a  /  Trojan  Women  [740- 
798]  276c-d;  [1156-1255]  279d-280c  /  Androm¬ 
ache  [309-420]  318a-d  /  Electra  [988-1122] 
336a-337b  /  Hecuba  [383-443]  356a-d  / 
Heracles  Mad  [562-584]  369d-370a;  [632— 

636]  370c  /  Phoenician  Maidens  378a'393d  / 
Orestes  394a-410d  esp  [21 1-3 15]  396a-397a, 
[1012-1055]  404a-c  /  Iphigenia  Among  the 
Tauri  411a-424d  esp  [769-908]  417d-419a  / 
Iphigenia  at  Aulis  425a-439d 
6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  i,  7a-b;  8a-10a; 
32a-c;  bk  ii,  73b-74d;  76b-d;  bk  hi,  89d; 
95d-96c;  lOOb-lOlb;  114d-115a;  116a;  bk  iv, 


LOVE  1069 

143b-144b;  bk  vi,  194d-195b;  2l2c  213a;  bk 
ix,  311b  312d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 
398c  d 

7  Plato:  Republic ,  bk  i,  296d  297a;  bk  v, 
360d-365d 

9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals ,  bk  hi, 
cii  2  [753^7-15]  294a-b  /  Ethics ,  bk  vii,  ch  4 
[1 1 48ft26— b4]  398d;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1155*16-21] 
406b, d;  ch  7  [1 1 58^12—24]  410c  d;  ch  8 
[1159*26-32]  411b*c;  ch  9-12  411d-414d  pas¬ 
sim;  ch  14  [1 1  631>i 2—27]  416c-d;  bk  ix,  ch  2 
417c-413b;  ch  4  [1 166*1-9]  419a-b;  ch  7 
[1168*21-27]  421d  /  Politics ,  bk  i,  ch  12-13 
453d-455a,c;  bk  ii,  ch  3-4  456c-458a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  v  [ioii- 
1018]  74b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  23  128c  d 

13  Virgil:  Eclogues,  iv  [60-64]  15 h  /  Aeneid, 
bk  hi  [692-715]  166a-b;  bk  v  [42-103]  188a- 
190a;  bk  vi  [679-702]  229a-b;  bk  viii  [554- 
584]  273b-274b;  bk  ix  [280-302]  286b-287a; 
bk  x  [822-828]  324b-325a;  bk  xi  [29-71]  328b- 
330a;  [139-181]  331b-333a;  bk  xii  [409-440] 
365a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa ,  62d-63c  /  Solon , 
66b-d;  7ld-72a  /  Pericles,  139a-140a  /  Cori - 
olanus,  174b,d-176b;  189d-191d  /  Timoleon , 
196b-198b  /  Marcus  Cato ,  286b-287b  /  Alex¬ 
ander,  542a-545b  /  Cato  the  Younger,  623c- 
624a  /  Agis,  654c-655a  /  Demetrius,  727a  b; 
740d-741c  /  Marcus  Brutus,  807b-d;  8llc-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  lOc-d;  bk  xi,  107b- 
108c;  bk  xii,  115a-c;  118d-119b;  128a-131b; 
bk  xiv,  141b-143d;  bk  xvi,  183a-c  /  Histories, 
bk  iv,  282b-d 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  19-21 
18b-19b;  bk  v,  par  15  31a-c;  bk  ix,  par  17-37 
66a-71b  /  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  14  520a-d 

19  Aquinas:  Siimma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  60,  a 
4,  ans  312c-313b;  q  96,  a  3,  rep  2  512a-c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  26, 
aa  8-11  516a-519a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxxii  [i]- 
xxxiii  [90]  47c-50c;  paradise,  xv-xvii  128b- 
133c  passim 

22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue  [5893- 
5914]  261a-b  /  Clerks  Tale  296a-318a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xvii,  24b-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  ii,  155b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
8c-d;  bk  ii,  81a-83b;  bk  iii,  144b-c;  196b-d; 
bk  iv,  243b-244d;  248d-250a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  66c-67a;  83a-84b;  184a- 
192d  esp  184a-d;  358b-362a;  409d-434d  esp 
410a-422b;  472a-473a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  v-vii 
23d-26a  /  3rd  Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  v  [55-113] 
82b-d  /  Richard  11,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1— 41]  322d- 
323a  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  ii,  sc  iii  477d-478c; 
act  iv,  sc  iv-v  492d-496d  /  Julius  Caesar , 
act  11,  sc  1  [234-309]  577a-c 


1070 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2b.  Friendly,  tender,  or  altruistic  love:  fraternal 
love.  2  b  (4)  Patterns  of  love  and  friendship 
in  the  family .) 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet ,  act  i,  sc  iii  [5-51] 
34c-d;  [84-136]  35b-d;  act  iv,  sc  v  [115-216] 
60d-62a  /  King  Lear  244a-283a,c  /  Coriolanus , 
act  1,  sc  iii  355b-356b;  act  ii,  sc  i  [110-220] 
362a-363b;  act  v,  sc  iii  387a-389b 
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  84b-c 
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iv  [720-775]  168a- 
169a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [1476-1507]  371b- 
372b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  iv,  165b-166a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  17d-19a,c;  22d-25a; 
44b-d;  65b-c;  126c-127c;  235b-238d;  304a-c; 
405a, c 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xvi,  117c; 
bk  xix,  140a-c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  326c-d;  327c-d;  350b; 
364d-365b  /  Political  Economy ,  368b-c  / 
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  387d-388a 
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  92d-93a 
42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  419a-420b 
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  57a;  57d-58a;  90c;  305b; 
424d-425a;  510b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  158 
58a;  additions,  no  134d;  112  135a  /  Philoso¬ 
phy  of  History ,  intro,  172b-d;  part  1,  21  ld- 
212c;  part  iii,  288c-289b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3620-3775]  88b- 
92a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  387a-388b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  2c-3a;  7d-8d; 
13a-14b;  25a-31a;  37d-47b;  55c-59a;  bk  iii, 
119a-131c;  bk  iv,  165a-168d;  179b-180d; 
183d-184b;  192b-193d;  bk  v,  203a-d;  210b- 
211a;  bk  vi,  247a-248a;  251a-b;  252d-254c; 
270b-274a,c;  bk  vii,  276b-277a;  290b-291a; 
bk  viii,  305b-310d;  314c-316a;  326b-329c; 
bk  ix,  357a-b;  bk  x,  406c-410c;  412d- 
414b;  416c-417b;  bk  xi,  485a-486d;  bk  xii, 
553c-d;  bk  xv,  614a-618b;  epilogue  i,  650d- 
674a, c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  iv, 

90b-92b;  100c-109a,c;  bk  v,  117c-121d; 

137a-c;  bk  vi,  148d-150d;  bk  x,  285a-297d; 
epilogue,  408a-412d 

53  James:  Psychology,  189a;  190a;  717b;  735b- 
736b 

54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  240d-248a  / 
Narcissism ,  406b-c  /  General  Introduction, 
528d-530b;  581b-583d  /  Group  Psychology , 
685c  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  783  b- 
784a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  856b-861c; 
862d-863c 

2c.  Romantic,  chivalric,  and  courtly  love:  the 
idealization  and  supremacy  of  the  beloved 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  15c-d;  18b 
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv  [1141- 
1191]  59a-d 


2c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  ii  2c-4a;  v  7a- 
8b;  purgatory,  ii  [106-133]  55c-d;  xiv  [91- 
126]  74c-75a;  xxiv  [49—63]  90a-b;  xxx-xxxi 
99b-102b 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida  la-1 5 5a  / 
Knight's  Tale  174a-211a  esp  [1092-1186]  178a- 
179b,  [1574-1627]  186a-b  /  Tale  of  Wife  of 
Bath  270a-277a  esp  [6832-6846]  276b-277a  / 
Franklin's  Tale  [11,099-125]  352b;  [11,754- 
766b]  363a  /  Sir  Thopas  396a-400a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 
106a-b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  82b-88d  esp  84b-85d; 
307a;  416d-419b;  426c-431c 

26  Shakespeare:  Taming  of  the  Shrew  199a- 
228a, c  esp  act  i,  sc  i  [151-181]  204a-b,  act  ii, 
sc  1  [115-326]  209b-211c  /  Two  Gentlemen  of 
Verona  229a-253a,c  esp  act  ii,  sc  iv  [126-177] 
237c-238a,  act  iii,  sc  i  [169-187]  242b,  sc  11 
[66-98]  245a-b  /  Love's  Labour's  Lost  254a- 
284d  esp  act  iv,  sc  iii  268b-272c,  act  v,  sc  ii 
[762-888]  283a-284b  /  Romeo  and  Juliet  285a- 
319a, c  esp  act  ii,  sc  ii  294b-296b  /  Mid¬ 
summer-Night's  Dream  352a-375d  esp  act  i, 
sc  1  [128-179]  353d-354b  /  Much  Ado  About 
Nothing  503a-531a,c  esp  act  iii,  sc  i-ii  514b- 
5l6d  /  Henry  V,  act  v,  sc  ii  [98-306]  564b- 
566a  /  As  You  Like  It  597a-626a,c  esp  act  ii, 
sc  iv  [22-56]  605c-d,  act  iii,  sc  v  615c-617a, 
act  iv,  sc  1  [93-108]  617d-618a,  act  v,  sc  ii 
[32-45]  622b 

27  Shakespeare:  Twelfth  Night  la-28d  esp  act  i, 
sc  1  [1— 15]  la-b  /  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  iii  34b-35d 
esp  [5-51]  34c-d,  [84-136]  35b-d/  Troilus  and 
Cressida  103a-141a,c  esp  act  iii,  sc  ii  120b- 
122c,  act  iv,  sc  iv  128b-129d,  act  v,  sc  ii 
134c-137a  /  All's  Well  That  Ends  Well  142a- 
173d  esp  act  1,  sc  1  [88-244]  143b-144c  / 
Othello,  act  1,  sc  iii  [158-169]  210c-d  / 
Cymbeline,  act  i,  sc  iv  [36-185]  453a-454b  / 
Tempest,  act  iii,  sc  i  537b-538b  /  Sonnets , 
cxxx-cxxxi  606a-b 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote  esp  part  i,  3a-b, 
32c-34d,  43d-45a,  80b-89c,  94a-98a,  part  ii, 
317a-331a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  33-36  406c- 
407c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [172-340]  156a- 
159b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  14b-16b;  55d;  68d-69a; 
72a-73a,c;  76c-77b;  84a-c;  108c-lllc;  124d; 
199b-200a;  400a-402d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxviii, 
244a-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  107a;  291a;  409c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  323b-c 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3374-3413]  82b-83a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  23a-24a;  35b- 

36c;  49b-c;  50a;  bk  iii,  129d-130b;  160d- 
161b;  bk  iv,  165a-168d;  183d-193d  passim; 
bk  vi,  249d-250a;  251d-254c;  262b-271c;  bk 
vii,  276c-277a;  291a-292b;  296a-302d;  bk 


2d  Chapter  50:  LOVE  1071 


viii,  314b;  316bc;  318a-340c;  bk  ix,  367c- 
369a;  373c-374a;  377b-d;  379a  38ld;  bk  x, 
417c-421c;  439d;  443c-444a;  bk  xi,  520d- 
521b;  522c-527b;  bk  xii,  539c-545a;  555d- 
556a;  bk  xv,  635a-644a,c;  epilogue  i,  652b- 
654a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  190a 

54  Freud:  Narcissism ,  410c-d  /  Group  Psychology , 
682a-683a;  694c-695d  /  Civilization  and  Its 
Discontents ,  768a 

2 d.  Conjugal  love:  its  sexual,  fraternal,  and 
romantic  components 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  2:23-24;  24:67;  29:28- 
30  /  /  Samuel ,  1:1-8— (D)  I  Kings,  1:1-8  /  // 
Samuel ,  11;  13:1-20— (D)  //  n;  13:1-20 

/  Proverbs ,  5;  6:20-7:27  /  Ecclesiastes ,  9:9  / 
Sewg-  o/*  Solomon — (D)  Canticle  of  Canticles 

Apocrypha:  To  bit,  6:10-17 — (D)  OT,  Tobias , 
6:11-22  /  Ecclesiasticus,  7 : 19,26;  25:1;  40:23 
—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus ,  7:21,28;  25:1-2; 
40:23 

New  Testament:  Matthew ,  19:4-6  /  Mar\, 
10:6-9  /  I  Corinthians ,  7:1-15,32-34  /  Ephe¬ 
sians ,  5:22-33  /  Colossians,  3:18-19  /  /  Peter, 
3*i-7 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xiv  [153-360]  99d-101d  / 
Odyssey,  bk  xxiii  [152-365]  313d-316a;  bk 
xxiv  [191-202]  319a 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [681-781]  59b-60b 
/  Choephoroe  [585-651]  75d-76b;  [892-930] 
78d-79b 

5  Sophocles:  Trachiniae  170a-181a,c 

5  Euripides:  Medea  212a-224a,c  esp  [446-662] 
215d-217c  /  Hippolytus  225a-236d  esp  [373— 
481]  228b-229b  /  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  esp 
[152-198]  238c-239a,  [329-368]  240a-b  /  Sz//?- 
pliants  [990-1071]  267a-c  /  Trojan  Women 
[634-683]  275c-d  /  Helen  298a-314a,c  / 
Andromache  315a-326a,c  esp  [147-308]  316c- 
317d  /  Ekrtra  [988-1122]  336a-337b 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c  / 

Thesmophoriazusae  600a-614d  esp  [383-532] 
604d-606a 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  vi,  197a-c;  bk  ix, 
311b-312d 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  152d-153a  /  Republic, 
bk  v,  361b-363b 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  12  [u62ai5-28] 
414c-d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [1192- 
1287]  59d-61a,c 

13  Virgil:  Georgies ,  iv  [452-527]  95b-98a  / 
Aeneid ,  bk  ii  [730-794]  144b-146b;  bk  iv 
[1-361]  167a-177a 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  39d-40b  /  Lycurgus - 
Numa ,  62d-63c  /  Solon,  71d-72a  /  Demetrius, 
731a-b  /  Antony,  756c-779d  /  Marcus  Brutus, 
807b-d;  811c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  64b-c;  bk  xi,  107b- 
110a;  bk  xii,  121c 

17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  i  IOOc-IOIc 


18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  2-8  9b- 
lOd;  bk  iv,  par  2  19d;  bk  vi,  par  21-25  41c- 
42d;  bk  ix,  par  19-22  67a  d  /  Cz/y  0/  Coz/, 
bk  xiv,  ch  16-26  390a  396c;  bk  xv,  ch  16 
411b-c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iii,  ch  12 
663a-c;  cii  18-21  664d-666b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92 
a  2,  ans  489d-490c;  q  98,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3 
517d-519a;  part  i-ii,  q  28,  a  4,  ans  742d  743c 

20  Aquians:  Summa  Theologica ,  parti-ii,  q  105, 
a  4,  ans  318b-321a;  part  ii— ii,  q  26,  a  i  i  518b- 
519a;  part  iii,  q  6,  a  i,  rep  3  740b-741b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  viii 
[67-84]  65a;  xxv  [109-139]  92c-d 

22  Chaucer:  Miller's  Tale  212b-223b  /  Wife  of 
Bath' s  Prologue  [5583-6410]  256a-269b/  Tale 
of  Wife  of  Bath  270a-277a  /  Clerks  Tale  296a- 
318a  /  Merchant's  Tale  319a-338a  /  Franklin's 
Tale  [11,041-125]  351b-352b  /  Manciple's  Tale 

*[17,088-103]  490a  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  79-80 
541a-542a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  155b-c;  part  iv, 
272d 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
8c-d;  bk  ii,  73b-74b;  106a-108d;  109c-126d; 
bk  iii,  144d-146a;  148d-150d;  154a-156c; 
159d-163c;  166a-169d;  186d-188c;  196b-d; 
197b-198b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  37c-39c;  84a-b;  89d- 
90c;  306d-307a;  358b-362a;  406a-434d  esp 
410a-413a;  472a-473a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  v,  sc  iii 
[80-195]  28a-29b;  sc  v  [48-78]  31d-32a  / 
Comedy  of  Errors,  act  ii,  sc  i  152a-153b;  sc  11 
[112-148]  154c-d;  act  iii,  sc  ii  [1-70]  157c- 
158b;  act  v,  sc  1  [38-122]  165c-166b  /  Two 
Gentlemen  of  Verona,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1-34]  230d- 
231b  /  Richard  II,  act  v,  sc  i  [71-102]  345d- 
346b  /  Henry  V,  act  v,  sc  ii  [98-306]  564b- 
566a  /  Julius  Caesar,  act  ii,  sc  i  [261-309] 
577b-c  /  As  You  Li\e  It,  act  iv,  sc  i  [i  15—157] 
618a-c;  act  v,  sc  iv  [114-156]  625a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i,  sc  ii  [137— 159] 
33a;  sc  iii  [5-51]  34c-d;  sc  v  [34-91]  37b-d; 
act  iii,  sc  1  [120-157]  48b-c  /  Merry  Wives  of 
Windsor  73a-102d  /  Othello  205a-243a,c  esp 
act  iv,  sc  iii  235d-237a,  act  v,  sc  11  238d- 
243a, c  /  Cymbeline  449a-488d  esp  act  ii, 
sc  v  463a-c,  act  iii,  sc  iv  466d-468d,  act  v, 
sc  v  [25-68]  483c-484a,  [129-227]  484d-485d 
/  Tempest,  act  iv,  sc  i  [1-133]  542b-543a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  120b- 
137d;  part  ii,  261c-262a;  270c-271a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  xix-xx 
449a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iv  [440-504]  162a- 
163b;  [736-775]  168b-169a;  bk  v  [443-450] 
185a;  bk  viii  [39-65]  233a-b;  [491-520] 
243a-b;  bk  ix  [226-269]  252a-253a;  [952-959] 
268a;  bk  x  [888-908]  293b-294a 

36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  193b-194a;  522a- 
523a 


1072 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(2.  The  kinds  of  love .  2d,  Conjugal  love:  its  sexual, 
fraternal \  and  romantic  components .) 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  2b-c;  14b-16b;  17a-b; 
30a-32a;  118d;  124a-125b;  130b-c;  167c-168d; 
230a-231c;  283b-c;  289b-291a;  321b-322a; 
332a-333a;  349b-350b;  352d-353a;  360b-d: 
405a,  c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  364d-365b 

40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  92c-93a;  649c-652a 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  419a-420b 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  22a;  57a;  64a;  107a;  160b; 
194a;  291a;  294d-295a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  158 
58a;  par  161-168  58b-60c;  additions,  101-108 
133b-134c 

47  Goethe:  Faust ,  part  i  [4243-4250]  104a; 
part  11  [9356-9944]  227a-241b 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  3a-c;  bk  iii, 
122b-c;  bk  iv,  177a-179d;  bk  vi,  245d-249d; 
269c-d;  bk  vii,  287a-291a  passim;  301b-302d; 
bk  viii,  311a-313a;  epilogue  i,  660d-661b; 
669d-672a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  1,  4a- 
5b;  bk  11,  21b-24d;  39a 

53  James:  Psychology ,  735a-b 

54  Freud:  Narcissism ,  404d-406b  /  Group  Psy¬ 
chology,  694b-695a  /  New  Introductory  Lec¬ 
tures,  862d-863c 

3.  The  morality  of  love 

3 a.  Friendship  and  love  in  relation  to  virtue 
and  happiness 

5  Sophocles:  Ajax  [666-683]  148d-149a 

5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [955-1164]  266d-268c 
/  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [543-589]  429d-430a 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  19d-24b  /  Symposium ,  152d- 
155c;  164c-167d  /  Republic ,  bk  i,  299b-c; 
308b-309b;  bk  iii,  333b-334b;  bk  ix,  417b- 
418a  /  Critias ,  485c-d  /  Seventh  Letter,  804c; 
805b-c 

8  Aristotle:  Topics ,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [i i6a3 1— 39] 
162d;  [n6b36-ii7a4]  163c;  ch  2  [1  i8ai— 7] 
164d;  ch  3  [1  iSb5— 9]  165c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk i,  ch  ii  346c-347a;  bk 
iv,  ch6  373d-374b  passim;  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1155* 
1-32]  406b, d;  ch  2  [11^16-26]  407a-b;  ch  3 
[1  i56b6— 32]  408a-c;  ch  4-5  408c-409d;  ch  6 
[1158*22-28]  410a-b;  ch  7  [ii58b29-i  159*12] 
4l0d-411a;  ch  8  411b-d  esp  [ii59b2-io]  411c; 
ch  13  414d-415d  passim;  bk  ix,  ch  1  [1164*33- 
b6]  417b;  ch  3  418c-419a  passim;  ch  4  419a- 
420a;  ch  6  [n67b5-i5]  420d-421a;  ch  8-12 
421d-426a,c  /  Rhetoric ,  bk  i,  ch  5  [i36obi9- 
30]  601a-b;  [136^35-40]  602c;  bk  ii,  ch  4 
[1381*36^9]  627b-c 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [1058- 
1191]  57d-59d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d- 
170a;  bk  iii,  ch  16  191a-d;  bk  iv,  ch  2  223d- 
224b 


3  to  3a  1  #: 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  xi,  sect  9  303b 

14  Plutarch:  Alcibiades,  156c-158b  /  Pelopidas, 

233 b-d  /  Cato  the  Younger,  623a- b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  1  13b-c; 
bk  iv,  par  7-14  20d-23a;  bk  vi,  par  11-26  38b- 
43a  passim  /  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  3, 
510d;  ch  5-9  513d-516c;  ch  13-14  519a-520d 
/  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  27-30  631d- 
633  b 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  60,  1 3 
a  4,  rep  3  312c-313b;  part  i-ii,  q  4,  a  8 
636a-c;  q  27,  a  1  737b-d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  partii-ii,  Q23, 
aa  3-8  485a-489c;  q  31,  a  i,  rep  3  536d- 
537c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi  [13-90]  15b- 
16a;  purgatory,  xv  [40-81]  75d-76a;  xvn 
[82]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 
in-112  36a;  stanza  119-128  37a-38a;  bk  iii, 
stanza  241-247  86a-b;  stanza  254-258  87b- 
88a 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xvii,  24b 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 
65c-66b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  82b-88d;  396a-398c  pas¬ 
sim;  431c-432d;  478b-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  act  iv, 
sc  iii  268b-272c  /  Richard  II,  act  ii,  sc  iii 
[46-49]  333a-b  /  Midsummer-Night' s  Dream, 
act  1,  sc  1  [67-78]  353a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iii,  sc  11  [57-99] 
49c-50a  /  Othello,  act  iv,  sc  ii  [47-64]  233c-d 
/  King  Lear,  act  v,  sc  iii  [1-26]  279a-b  / 
Timon  of  Athens  393a-420d  esp  act  i,  sc  ii 
[91-107]  398a-b,  act  iii,  sc  11  [71-94]  404c-d, 
sc  iii  [27-42]  405b,  act  iv,  sc  1  409c-d,  sc  iii 
[249-305]  413c-414a  /  Sonnets,  xxv  590a; 
cxxxvii-clii  607a-609c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  46  438c-d; 
prop  70-73  445c-447a;  appendix,  ix  448a; 
xx  449a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  21 1  211b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  165b-166a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  17a-b 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  343d-345c  /  Political 
Economy,  373c-374a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  367d-368a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson,  83b-c;  107a;  423c-d; 
490a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  ioi 
133b 

47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [3125-3136]  76a-b; 
[3374—3413]  82b-83a;  part  ii  [9356-9573] 
227a-232a 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  36b-39b 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  312a-314b;  317c-d; 
592d-593a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  15b- 16a;  bk 
iii,  116c-117a;  122b-c;  127d-128d;  bk  iv, 
183d-186c;  bk  v,  201a-c;  bk  vi,  266c-267c; 
bk  viii,  311a-313a;  327a-329c;  340c-341a,c; 


'  3 b  to  3c 

bk  ix,  377bc;  bk  x,  465a-c;  bk  xi,  476c- 
480a;  525c-526b;  bk  xv,  641c643b 
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii, 
27c-d;  bk  iii,  58d-59b;  bk  vi,  158b  159a; 
165b-170b  passim 

54  Freud:  War  and  Deaths  758c-d  /  Civilization 
and  Its  Discontents ,  774d-775a;  782d-783b; 
792a-796c 

3£.  The  demands  of  love  and  the  restraints  of 
virtue:  moderation  in  love;  the  order  of 
loves 

5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  la-14a,c  / 
Agamemnon  [681-781]  59b-60b  /  Choephoroe 
[585-651]  75d-76b;  [892-930]  78d-79b 
5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  225a-236d  /  Electra 
[988-1122]  336a -33 7b  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis 
[543-589]  429d-430a 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  165b-167d;  170b-171c  / 
Republic ,  bk  iii,  333d-334b  /  Timaeus,  474b-c 
/  Laws ,  bk  v,  687b;  bk  viii,  735b-738c 
9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  6  [1096*11-16] 
341b  /  Politics ,  bk  vii,  ch  7  [i327b4o-i328ai7] 
532a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  ii  116d-118d; 
bk  11,  ch  10  148c-l50a;  ch  18  161a-162b;  bk 
iv,  ch  2  223d-224b 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  39d-40a  /  Solon ,  66b-d 
/  Alexander ,  550b-551a  /  Demetrius ,  740d- 
741c  /  Antony -Demetrius,  780c-d 

17  Plotinus:  F/rr/  Ennead,  tr  iii,  ch  1-3  10a- 
11a;  tr  vi,  ch  5  23b-24a  /  T/i/ty/  Ennead ,  tr 

v  100c -106b  /  S/tM  Ennead ,  tr  ix,  ch  9, 
359b-c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ii,  par  1-8  9a- 
lOd;  par  16-17  12c-13a;  bk  iii,  par  1  13b-c; 
bk  vi,  par  18-26  40d-43a;  bk  vii,  par  11  47a-c; 
bk  viii,  par  10-30  55c-61c  passim;  bk  xiii, 
par  8  112b-c  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xii,  ch  8  346d- 
347b;  bk  xiv,  ch  7  380c -381c;  bk  xv,  ch  22 
416a-c  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  27  631  d; 
bk  iii,  ch  10,  662a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  98, 
a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  517d-519a;  part  i-ii,  q  26, 
a  3,  rep  3  735c-736b;  q  28,  a  i,  rep  2  740b- 
741a;  a  5  743c-744b;  q  29,  a  4  747a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  55, 
a  1,  rep  4  26b-27a;  q  62,  a  2,  rep  3  60d-61b; 
q  66,  a  6,  rep  1  80c-81b;  q  73,  a  i,  rep  3  119c- 
120c;  q  77,  a  4  148b-149a;  q  84,  a  2  esp  rep  3 
175b-176a;  q  86  184a-185c;  part  ii-ii,  q  15, 
a  3  453c-454c;  q  23,  a  5,  rep  1-2  486b-487a; 
a  6,  rep  1  487a-d;  q  25,  a  4,  rep  3  503c-504a; 
a  5  504a-c;  qq  26-27  510b-527b;  Q  45,  a  6 
602b-603c;  q  46,  a  3  604d-605a,c;  q  184,  a  i 
629a-d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  v  7a-8b;  xi 
[13-90]  15b-16a;  purgatory,  xvi  [85-102] 
77d;  xvii  [82]— xvm  [75]  79b-80c;  xix  [1—69] 
81c-82a;  xxv  [i09]-xxvi  [148]  92c-94c;  xxx- 
xxxi  99b-102b;  paradise,  i  [97-142]  107b-d; 

vi  [112-126]  114d-115a 


1073 

22  Ciiaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  iv,  stanza 
240  119b  120a 

23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  63a 

24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel ,  bk  iii, 
188d  191c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  89d  90c;  184a-d;  350d- 
351b;  353c-354b;  398c  399 d;  406a-434d  esp 
431c-432d 

26  Shakespeare:  Romeo  and  Juliet ,  act  ii,  sc 
vi  300c-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  xix-xx 
449a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  v  [443-450]  185a; 
bk  viii  [500-617]  243a  245b  /  Areopagitica , 
390b-391a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  8c- 10c;  78c-d;  198d- 
199a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  345c-346d 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  67c-68a 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right ,  additions,  106 
134a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  iii,  122b-c; 
127d-128d;  bk  v,  201a-c;  bk  vi,  249d-250a; 
bk  viii,  318a-340c;  bk  xi,  476c-480a;  epi¬ 
logue  1,  660d-661b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii, 
20a-b 

54  Freud:  General  Introduction ,  624a-625b  / 
Group  Psychology ,  682 d 

3 c.  The  conflict  of  love  and  duty:  the  difference 
between  the  loyalties  of  love  and  the  ob¬ 
ligations  of  justice 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  22:1-19  /  Exodus , 
23:4_5  /  Leviticus ,  19:17-18  /  Deuteronomy , 
13:6-11;  21:18-21  /  Judges ,  11:28-40  /  // 
Samuel ,  11-13— (D)  //  Kings,  11-13  /  Proverbs , 
20:22;  24:29;  25:21 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:38-48  /  Romans, 
12:17-21  /  /  P^r,  3:8-18 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  vi  [369-502]  43d-45a 

5  Aeschylus:  Agamemnon  [184-247]  54a-c 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [1-99] 
131a-132a,  [162-210]  132c-d,  [441-470]  134d- 
135a  /  Philoctetes  182a-195a,c  esp  [895-1292] 
190a-193c 

5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  225a-236d  /  Orestes 
[356-806]  397b'402c  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis 
425a-439d 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c  esp 
[706-780]  592b-593b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iv,  139a-b;  bk  vi, 
197a-b;  bk  vii,  223c-d 

7  Plato:  Euthyphro  191a-199a,c  /  Seventh  Let¬ 
ter,  813d-814a 

8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  iii,  ch  i  [116*31-39] 
162d;  ch  2  [118*1-7]  164d 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  iv,  ch  6 373d-374b  pas¬ 
sim;  bk  viii,  ch  1  [1155*22-28]  406d;  ch  7 
[1  i58b29— 1 159*13]  410d-411a;  ch  9  [1159^5- 
n6oa8]  411d-412b;  ch  ii  413b-d;  bk  viii,  ch 
12  [1 1 62*29]— bk  IX»  CH  3  [1  i65b37]  414d-419a; 


Chapter  50:  LOVE 


1074 

(3.  The  morality  of  love.  3 c.  The  conflict  of 
love  and  duty :  the  difference  between  the 
loyalties  of  love  and  the  obligations  of 
justice.) 

bk  ix,  ch  5  [1167*10-20]  420b-c;  ch  6  [ii6yb5- 
15]  420d-421a 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things ,  bk  iv  [1121- 
1140]  58d-59a 

12  Aurelius  :  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b; 
bk  viii,  sect  39  288c 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  iv  [333-361]  176a-177a 

14  Plutarch:  Poplicola ,  77d-79c  /  Coriolanus, 
189d-191d  /  Timoleon ,  196b-198b  /  Marcus 
Cato ,  278d-279c  /  Agesilaus ,  482b-c;  486c; 
491c-492b  /  Agis,  654c-655a  /  Antony ,  756c- 
779c  esp  772b-c  /  Marcus  Brutus ,  816c-d 

15  Tacitus:  Histories ,  bk  hi,  248c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  23, 
a  5,  rep  3  135d-137d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  66, 
a  4,  rep  1  78c-79b;  q  114,  a  4  373a-d;  part 
ii-ii,  q  23,  a  3,  rep  1  485a-d;  qq  25-27 
501a-527b;  qq  31-33  536d-558d;  q  44  592d- 
598c 

21  Dante:  Divme  Comedy ,  purgatory,  x  [70- 
93]  68a-b;  xv  [85-114]  76b-c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  83a-87c 

26  Shakespeare:  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  act  iv, 
sc  iii  268b-272c  /  Julius  Caesar ,  act  iii,  sc  ii 
[11-44]  583d-584a 

27  Shakespeare:  Antony  and  Cleopatra  311a- 
350d  esp  act  iii,  sc  x-xi  332c-334a,  sc  xiii 
334c-337a 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote ,  part  i,  71b-c; 
108c-109b;  177a-b;  part  ii,  332d-333b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  24b;  75d- 
76a 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [843-870]  358a-b 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  27b-30a  esp  29d;  77c- 
78b;  79d-80b;  116d-117a 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy ,  373a-b 

41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall ,  233c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
259a  /  Pre/1  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
368c-d;  371b-372a;  375d-376b  /  Intro.  Meta¬ 
physic  of  Morals ,  389c-390a,c 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism ,  466c-467a;  468b-469b; 
474b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  2d-3a;  392b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  162 
58b-d;  additions,  23  120d 

51  Tolstoy:  lEzr  and  Peace ,  bk  iii,  123d-124a; 
bk  vi,  271d;  bk  vii,  291a-292b;  301b-302b; 
bk  viii,  338c-d;  bk  ix,  365d-366a;  bk  xi, 
474a-b;  520c-d;  bk  xii,  545b-547a;  548d- 
549c  esp  549b;  epilogue  i,  655b-c;  670d- 
671a 

54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho- 
Analysis,  20c-d  /  General  Introduction ,  452c-d; 
573c  /  War  and  Death ,  757c-759d  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents ,  783c-784d;  785c- 
786d;  799a-800a  esp  800a;  801a 


3<r  to  4 

3*/.  The  heroism  of  friendship  and  the  sacri¬ 
fices  of  love 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  29:20  /  Judges ,  11:28- 
40  /  /  /  Samuel ,  20;  23:15-18— (D) 

I  Kings,  20;  23:15-18 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus ,  6:14-16 — (D)  OT, 
Ecclesiasticus,  6 : 1 4-1 6 

New  Testament:  John,  15:13 

4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  xvi  112a-121d;  bk  xviii 
[1-126]  130a-131c 

5  Aeschylus:  Against  Thebes  [1011-1084] 

38b-39a,c  /  Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  at  Colonus  [324-460] 
117a-118b  /  Antigone  131a-142d  /  [1266- 

1315]  154a-b  /  Trachiniae  170a-181a,c  esp 
[1157-1258]  180a-181a,c 

5  Euripides:  Alcestis  237a-247a,c  /  Heracleidae 
[295-332]  251a-b;  [500-601]  252c-253b  / 
Suppliants  [990-1 071]  267a-c  /  Heracles  Mad 
[55-59]  365c-d;  [562-584]  369d-370a;  [1214— 
1228]  375c  /  Phoenician  Maidens  [929-1018] 
386b-387b  /  Orestes  [356-806]  397b-402c; 
[1069-1097]  404d-405a  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis 
425a-439d 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  73d 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  152b-153b  /  Republic, 
bk  v,  366d-367a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  ch  7  [  1 1 5 8b2 9— 
1159*12]  410d-411a;  bk  ix,  ch  2-3  417c-419a; 
ch  8  [u69*i8-b2]  422d-423a 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid ,  bk  ix  [168-449]  283b-291a 

14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  12a-b  /  Alcibiades,  156c- 
158b  /  Pelopidas,  233b-d;  238d-239d 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xvi,  183a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  partii-ii,  Q26, 
a  4,  rep  2  512c-513b;  a  5  esp  rep  3  513b-d; 
q  184,  a  2,  rep  3  629d-630d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxxii  [124]— 
xxxiii  [90]  49a-50c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  358b-362a 

26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI,  act  iv,  sc  v- 
vii  23d-26a  /  Merchant  of  Venice  406a-433d 
esp  act  1,  sc  1  [153-160]  407d-408a,  act  iii, 
sc  11  [295-299]  423a 

27  Shakespeare:  Antony  and  Cleopatra  311a- 
350d  /  Sonnets,  lxxxvii-xc  599c-600a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ix  [896-989]  267a- 
269a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [871-902]  358b-359a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  30a-31a;  bk 
iii,  127d-128d;  135c-137c;  140c-142d;  159d- 
160a;  bk  iv,  167c-d;  185b-186c;  bk  vii,  277d- 
278a;  291a-292b;  301b-302b;  bk  viii,  327a- 
330a;  bk  xii,  545b-547a;  bk  xv,  615a-616a 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iv, 
96b-99a;  bk  v,  121d-122d;  bk  xii,  367c-368c 

4.  The  social  or  political  force  of  love,  sym¬ 
pathy,  or  friendship 

5  Aristophanes:  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c 

6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  31d-32a;  bk  iii, 
106a-c;  bk  iv,  126a-b;  bk  vi,  189c;  bk  vii, 
225d-226b;  bk  viii,  281d-282a 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


4  to  4  a 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War ,  bk  ir, 
395d-399a;  bk  iii,  419a;  bk  vi,  523c-524c; 
534bc 

7  Plato:  Symposium ,  152b  d;  154a-b  /  Repub¬ 
lic ,  bk  v,  360d-365d  /  La/ttf,  bk  iv,  678c- 
679a;  bk  v,  692b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  ch  i  [ii55a22-28] 
406d;  ch  4  [i 1 57^5— 27]  409a;  ch  9-12  411d- 
414d;  bk  ix,  ch  6  420c-421a;  ch  8  421d-423a 
esp  [1 169*^6-32]  422c-423a  /  Politics ,  bk  ii, 
ch  3-4  456c-458a;  ch  5  [i263a23~b27]  458b  d; 
bk  iii,  ch  9  [i28ob33-i28ia4]  478c;  bk  iv,  ch 
ii  495b-496d;  bk  vii,  ch  7  [i^2yh^o-i^2S&iy] 
532a-b 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  iii,  sect  ii  262a-b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus ,  21a-24d  /  Lycurgus  32a- 
48d  /  Numa  Pompilius ,  59d-60b  /  Pelopidas , 
233b-d;  238d-239d  /  Agesilaus,  482b-c;  483d- 
484a  /  Pompey ,  521c-d  /  Demetrius ,  737b-d  / 
Aratus,  835b-c;  844b-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  24  528b-c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  xi  [13-90]  15b- 
16a;  xiii  [52-78]  18b-c;  xxxii-xxxm  47c- 
51b;  pu»rgatory,  xvii  [82-139]  79b-d 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  iii, 
stanza  4-5  55a;  stanza  230-253  87a-b 

23  Machiavelli:  Prince ,  ch  xvii,  24a-d;  ch 
xxi,  32a-c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  i,  63a 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  86d-87b;  396a-d;  467b- 
470a;  486b-489b  ' 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  46  410c; 
part  iv,  prop  18,  schol  429a-d;  prop  29-40 
431d-437a  passim;  prop  73  446c-447a;  ap¬ 
pendix,  ix-xii  448a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver ,  part  ii,  70b 

37  Fielding:  Tow  Jones,  169d-170a 

38  Montesquieu:  S/wt/  o/*  La/py,  bk  iv,  15d- 
16a;  bk  v,  18d-19c;  bk  xii,  93d-94a 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  330d-331b;  343d- 
345c;  362c- d  /  Political  Economy,  372b-377b 
/  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  437c-438c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals , 
269d  /  Pre/l  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
375d-376b 

43  Federalist:  number  2,  31c-d;  number  17 
69a-70d;  number  27,  95c-d;  number  46, 
150c-15la 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  424c-425d; 
428b-c  /  Utilitarianism ,  453a-454a;  459d-461c 
esp  460a;  469c-470c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  169d-170b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History ,  intro,  172b-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man ,  308a-310d  esp 
309a,  310b;  592d 

51  Tolstoy:  ITtfr  Peace,  bk  iii,  135c-137c; 
140c-142d;  146d-147c;  159b-161b;  bk  v,  214c- 
216d;  bk  ix,  379a-388a,c;  bk  xi,  513d-521c; 
527b-532a,c;  epilogue  i,  669b-c 

53  James:  Psychology ,  717b-718a 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology ,  672a-695d  esp 

674a,  678a-c,  680b,  686b-c  /  £^o  Id , 


1075 

707c  d  /  H7ar  and  Death,  758c  759d  /  Civiliza¬ 
tion  and  Its  Discontents ,  781  d  791  d  esp  782c, 
783b-c,  785c  d,  791c;  799a-d;  802c 

4a.  Love  between  equals  and  unequals,  like  and 
unlike:  the  fraternity  of  citizenship 

5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [1063-1084] 
109a  b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  ii,  87c-88a;  bk  vii, 
258d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d- 
399a  esp  396c-d 

7  Plato:  Lysis,  19d-21b  /  Protagoras ,  52b  / 
Republic ,  bk  v,  360d-365d  /  Laws,  bk  vi, 
707c-708a 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  i  [ii55a22-28] 
406d;  [ii55a33-bi2]  406d-407a;  cn  3  [1156V 
23]  408a-b;  ch  6  [1 1 58a27]— ch  7  [ii59ai2] 
410b-411a;  bk  viii,  ch  8  [ii59bi]-BK  ix,  ch  3 
[1 1 65b37]  411c-419a  /  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  ii 
495b-496d;  bk  vii,  ch  7 
532a-b 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  13  120b-c; 
bk  11,  ch  22  167d-170a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations ,  bk  xi,  sect  9  303b 

14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  20d-21a  /  Lycurgus , 
36a-b  /  Cato  the  Younger,  623a-b 

15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xii,  121d-122a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  15-16 
521a-522a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  60, 
X  4,  ans  312c-313b;  q  96,  a  3,  rep  2  512a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
26,  a  8  516a-517a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  vi  [58- 
151]  61b-62c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  89a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iii,  prop  27  404b-d; 
part  iv,  prop  29-40  431d-437a;  prop  73 
446c-447a;  appendix,  ix.-xii  448a-b 

35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  5  26a-b 

36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  165b- 166a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  113d-116d;  308a-314d 

38  Montesquieu  >  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  19a-d 

38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  372b-377b 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  326b-327a  /  Pref 
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  375d.-376b  / 
Science  of  Right ,  400b,d-401b 

43  Federalist:  number  14,  62a-b 

43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  459d-461c  esp  460a-b 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  224a; 
part  iv,  341a-c 

48  Melville:  Moby  Dicl{,  381a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  317c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  15a-b;  bk  v, 
214c-216d;  bk  vi,  242c-243c;  270b-c;  bk  vii, 
278c-279b;  280b-281a;  bk  viii,  311a-313a; 
314c-316a;  326b-c;  329d-330a;  330d-332a; 
bk  xi,  513d-521c;  527b-532a,c;  bk  xii,  543b- 
544a;  bk  xiii,  576a-b;  bk  xiv,  608d;  bk  xv, 
617b-d;  621b-626d;  631c-633a;  640a;  epi¬ 
logue  1,  652b-654a;  669d-672a 


Chapter  50:  LOVE 


1076 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(4.  The  social  or  political  force  of  love,  sympathy, 
or friendship.  4a.  Love  between  equals  and 
unequals,  like  and  unlike:  the  fraternity  of 
citizenship.) 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  vi, 
165b-170b 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  674b-675a;  676c-d; 
687d;  691d-692a 

4b.  The  dependence  of  the  state  on  friendship 
and  patriotism:  comparison  of  love  and 
justice  in  relation  to  the  common  good 

4  Homer:  Iliad ,  bk  xii  [230-250]  84c-d 

5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [162-210]  132c-d  / 
Philocteies  182a-195a,c 

5  Euripides:  Phoenician  Maidens  [929-1018] 
386b-387b 

6  Herodotus:  History ,  bk  iv,  142c;  bk  vii, 
225d-226b;  239a-c;  258b-d;  bk  viii,  273d 

6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  397d- 
398c;  402b-404a;  bk  iii,  419a 

7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  i,  308b-309b  /  Laws , 
bk  v,  692b-c;  694d  /  Seventh  Letter,  804b-c 

9  Aristotle:  Ethics ,  bk  viii,  ch  i  [1155*22-28] 
406d;  ch  9-12  411d-414d;  bk  ix,  ch  6  420c- 
421a;  ch  8  421d-423a  esp  [1169*6-32]  422c- 
423a  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  3-4  456c-458a  esp 
ch  4  [i262a40-b23]  457c-d;  bk  iii,  ch  9 
[i28ob33-i28ia4]  478c;  bk  iv,  ch  ii  495b- 
496d 

12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  v  [ioii- 
1027]  74b-c 

14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  /  Pelopidas, 
233b-d  /  Sertorius,  467d-469a  /  Dion ,  784d- 
785a;  798b-d 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  21-24 
524a-528c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  60, 
a  5,  ans  313b-314c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  99, 
a  1,  rep  2  245c-246b;  a  2,  ans  246b-247a; 
part  11— 11,  q  26,  a  3,  ans  511d-512c;  a  8, 
ans  and  rep  3  516a-517a;  qq  37-42  570c- 
584d;  q  45,  a  6  602b-603c 

25  Montaigne:  Essays ,  84b-85a;  382b-383d; 
471a-c 

26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  iii  [275- 
309]  326c-d;  act  ii,  sc  i  [40-68]  328a-b 

27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  v,  sc  iii  [94— 
171] 388a-d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  prop  18,  schol 
429a-d;  appendix,  ix-xvii  448a-d 

32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [843-870]  358a-b 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  xxiia-d;  bk 

iv,  15d-16a;  bk  v,  18d-19c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323b-d;  325a-b  / 
Political  Economy ,  372b-377b  esp  373c-374a 
/  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  437b-438c 

42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  269d 
/  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  375d- 
376b 


4  b  to  4  c 

43  Federalist:  number  2,  31c-d;  number  14, 
62a-b;  number  27,  95c-d;  number  45, 
148b-d;  number  62,  189b-c;  191b-c 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  343a;  424c- 
425d;  428b-c 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  253c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  iii,  par  267- 
269  84b-d  /  Philosophy  of  History ,  part  ii, 
283c-d;  part  iii,  298c-d 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  214c-216d; 
bk  xi,  474a-b;  475b-476c;  bk  xii,  537b-538a 

4c.  The  brotherhood  of  man  and  the  world 
community 

Old  Testament:  Genesis ,  4:1-15  /  Exodus, 
12:48-49;  22:21;  23:9  /  Leviticus,  19:17- 
1:8,33—34 ;  24:22  /  Deuteronomy,  10:18-19  / 

I  Kings,  8:41-43— (D)  III  Kings,  8:41-43  / 
Psalms,  22:27-31;  68:29-35;  103:19-22;  133:1; 
145:11-13 — ( D )  Psalms,  21:28-32;  67:30-36; 
102:19-22;  132:1;  144:11-13  /  Isaiah,  2:1-4— 
(D)  Isaias,  2:1-4  /  Jeremiah,  16:19-21 — (D) 
Jeremias,  16:19-21  /  Ezekiel,  37:26-28 — (D) 
Ezechiel,  37:26-28  /  Micah,  4:1-4 — (D)  Mi- 
cheas,  4:1-4  /  Malachi,  2:10 —(D)  Malachias, 
2:10 

Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  25:1— (D)  OT,  Ec- 
clesiasticus,  25:1-2 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  12:46-50;  19:19; 
22:39;  23:8-9;  25:34-40  /  Mar{,  12:31-33  /  ■ 
Lukp,  10:27  /  John,  1:12;  13:34-35;  15:9-17; 
17:26;  18:36  /  Acts,  17:22-34  esp  17:24-26  / 
Romans,  8:14-19;  12;  13:8-10;  14:10  /  Gala¬ 
tians,  5:13-14  /  Ephesians ,  2:13-22;  4:1-16  esp 
4:13-16;  4:32;  5:1-2  /  Philippians,  2:1-2  / 
Colossians,  3:9-17  esp  3:11  /  I  Thessalonians , 
4:9-10  /  Hebrews,  13:1-3  /  James,  2:8  / 

I  Peter,  1:22;  3:8  /  I  John,  2:9-11;  3:2,10-18; 
47-5:2  /  II  John,  5 

4  Homer:  Odyssey ,  bk  vi  [207]  216b;  bk  vii 
[181]  220a;  bk  xiv  [55-56]  260d 
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  20b-d;  31d-32a;  ! 

bk  iv,  137a-138c;  bk  vi,  189c 
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i252b6-8]  445d 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  9  114c-116b; 
ch  13  120b-c;  bk  11,  ch  10  148c-150a;  ch  20, 
164d-165c;  bk  iii,  ch  ii  187a-b;  ch  22, 
199c-d;  ch  24  203c-210a 

12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iii,  sect  4  260b- 
261a;  sect  ii  262a-b;  bk  iv,  sect  3-4  263b- 
264a;  bk  vi,  sect  44  278b-c;  bk  xi,  sect  9 
303b;  sect  13  303d 

13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i  [254-296]  llOa-llla; 
bk  vi  [845-853]  233b-234a 

18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xii,  ch  21-22 
357a-c;  cii  27,  359d;  bk  xix,  ch  7  515a-c; 
ch  17,  522d 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 
26,  aa  6-8  514a-517a;  q  184,  a  2,  rep  3  629d- 
630  d 

22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  31  517b-518b 

25  Montaigne:  Essays,  471a-c 


to  5a(l) 

27  Shakespeare:  Timon  of  Athens ,  act  iv,  sc  i 
409c-d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  31d-32a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  ix-xvii 
448a-d 

38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv,  206c 

38  Rousseau:  Inequality ,  355b-c  /  Political 
Economy ,  369ab;  373c  /  Social  Contract ,  bk 
iv,  437c-d 

42  Kant:  Science  of  Right ,  449c-458a,c  csp  455c- 
456a,  457a-458a,c  /  Judgement ,  586a-587a 

43  Mill:  Representative  Government ,  424c-428a 
passim,  esp  426a-b  /  Utilitarianism ,  451  b  e 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  392b-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  224a 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  317c-d;  318d 

50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  428a-b 

51  Tolstoy:  JDir  jh*/  bk  ii,  69ac;  bk  v, 

198b-203a  passim,  esp  199b-200d,  202d:  217a; 
bk  vi,  244d-245d:  bk  ix,  375d;  bk  x,  466b  c; 
bk  xii,  548d-549c  esp  549b:  555b-c;  bk  xiii, 
575d-577a;  bk  xv,  625c-626d;  632b-c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i, 
13c-d;  bk  v,  121d-122d;  bk  vi,  164b-170b 
esp  166c-167b 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  674c-d;  691d-692a 
/  War  and  Death,  755a-761c  esp  755b-757c, 
761  a-c  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents , 
783a-b;  785d-788d  esp  786a-c,  788b-c 

5.  Divine  love 

ya.  God  as  the  primary  object  of  love 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  6:4-9 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:33  /  Lul^e,  12:31 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  16,  158b-d; 
bk  hi,  ch  24  203c-210a;  bk  iv,  ch  12,  243c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  1  la-b; 
bk  iv,  par  7-20  20d-24c;  bk  vii,  par  22  50a; 
bk  viii,  par  10-30  55c-61c  passim;  bk  ix,  par 
23-25  68a-c;  bk  x,  par  8-1 1  73b-74b;  par  38 
81a;  bk  xii,  par  10  101c;  par  23  104b-c  /  City 
of  God,  bk  x,  ch  18  310b-d;  bk  xii,  ch  8-9 
346d-348b;  bk  xiv,  ch  7,  380c-d;  bk  xv,  ch 
22,  416c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  3-4 
625b-c;  ch  9-10  627a-b;  ch  22-23  629b-630c; 
bk  hi,  ch  10,  662a 

19  Aquinas:  Surnma  Theologica,  part  i,  q  12, 
a  1,  ans  50c-51c;  a  8,  rep  4  57b-58b;  q  60, 
a  5  313b-314c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  8  615a-c;  q  2, 
a  1,  rep  3  615d-616c;  a  8  621c-622b;  q  4, 
a  8,  ans  and  rep  3  636a-c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  109, 
a  3  340c-341b;  part  ii— ii,  q  24,  a  2,  rep  2 
490b-d;  q  25,  a  12  509c-510b;  q  26,  aa  2-3 
511a-512c;  Q  27,  a  3  522c-523b;  a  8  526c-527b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si)  75d-76a;  xvn  [82]-xviii  [75]  79b-80c; 
xxx-xxxi  99b-102b;  paradise,  i  [97-142] 
107b-d;  iv  [1 15]— v  [12]  llld-112b;  xxvi  [1— 81] 
145d-146c 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  80b-81a 


1077 

31  Descartes:  Meditations,  in,  88c-89a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  iv 
447b-c;  part  v,  prop  15-16  456c;  prop  18 
456d;  prop  32-33  460bc 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  325a-327d  /  Judge¬ 
ment,  504b  505a;  611a-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  373b  377b 
passim;  bk  xi,  525c-526b;  bk  xii,  560a  561c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
127b-137c  passim 

5a(l)  Man’s  love  of  God  in  this  life:  respect  for 
the  moral  law 

Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:5-6  /  Deuteronomy, 
5:9-10;  6;  7:9-11;  10:12;  11:1,13,22;  13:3; 
19:9;  30:6,15-20  /  Joshua ,  22:1-6;  23:11  —  (D) 
Jo  sue,  22:1-6;  23:11  /  Psalms  passim,  esp  18:1, 
31:23,  97:10,  1 1 6 : 1 ,  119:132,  122:6,  145:20— 
(D)  Psalms  passim,  esp  17:2,  30:24,  96:10, 
114:1,  118:132,  121:6,  144:20  /  Ecclesiastes , 
12:13  /  Isaiah,  29:8-9— (D)  Isaias,  29:8-9  / 
Jeremiah,  2:2 —(D)  Jeremias ,  2:2 

Apocrypha:  To  bit,  13:12-14— (D)  OT,  Tobias, 
13:16-18  /  Ecclesiasticus,  2;  7:30;  10:19;  13:14; 
25:11-12;  34:16;  47:8— (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus , 
2;  7:32;  10:23;  13:18;  25:14-16;  34:19;  47:9-10 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  22:36-38  /  Marl \, 
12:30-32  /  Lube,  10:25-28  /  John,  14:15,21,23- 
24  /  Acts,  20:22-24;  21:7-15  /  Romans,  5:5; 
8:28  /  7  Corinthians,  8:1-3  /  Ephesians,  3:14-21 
/  II  Thessalonians,  3:5  /  James ,  1:12;  2:5  / 

I  Peter,  1:7-8  /  I  John,  2:5,12-17;  4:19-5:3  / 

II  John,  6 

12  Epictetus:  Discourses ,  bk  i,  ch  16  121d- 
122d;  bk  ii,  ch  16,  158b-d;  bk  iii,  ch  24 
203c-210a;  bk  iv,  ch  12,  243c 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iii,  par  15-16 
17a-d;  bk  iv,  par  14-19  22d-24b;  bk  vii,  par 
23-24  50b-51a;  bk  viii,  par  10-30  55c-61c 
passim;  bk  ix,  par  1  61c-d;  bk  x,  par  8  73b-c; 
par  38-70  81a-89b  /  City  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  i 
298b,d-299d;  ch  3  300b-301a;  bk  xii,  ch  20 
355b-357a;  bk  xiv,  ch  28  397a  d;  bk  xv,  ch 
22  416a-c;  bk  xix,  ch  20  523d-524a;  bk  xxi, 
ch  15-16  572c-574a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, 
ch  15-16  628b-d;  ch  22-23  629b-630c;  ch 
26-27  631  b-d;  ch  29-30  632a-633b;  ch  33 
633d-634b;  ch  35-37  634c-635c;  bk  ii,  ch 
38,  654c 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  62, 
a  9,  rep  1  324a-325b;  q  82,  a  3,  ans  and  rep 
3  433c-434c;  part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  2,  rep  2  737d- 
738c;  q  28,  a  5  743c-744b;  q  35,  a  5,  rep  i 
775d-777a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  65, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  1,3  74c-75a;  q  67,  a  5  85d- 
86d;  q  73,  a  1,  rep  3  119c-120c;  q  no,  a  i 
347d-349a;  q  114,  a  8  376a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q 
23,  a  1,  rep  1  482d-483d;  q  24,  a  2,  rep  2 
490b- d;  aa  4-12  491d-500d;  q  27  520d-527b 
£sp  a  4  523C'524a;  q  34  558d-562d;  q  184,  aa 
1-3  629a-632c 


Chapter  50:  LOVE 


1078 


5a(2)  to  5b(\) 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5a.  God  as  the  primary  object  of  love.  5a(l) 
Man’s  love  of  God  in  this  life:  respect  for 
the  moral  law.) 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b;  paradise, 
hi  [91-108]  llOb-c;  xi  122a-123c;  xxvi  [1-81] 
145d-146c 

22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  v,  stanza 
264-267  154b-155a  /  Parson’s  Tale,  par  41 
517b-518b 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  240d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  80b-81a 

31  Descartes:  Meditations ,  in,  88d-89a 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  iv 
447b-c;  part  v,  prop  15-16  456c 

32  Milton  :  Sonnets ,  xiv  66a  /  Paradise  Lost ,  bk 
v  [153-208]  178b-l79b 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters ,  78b-80b  /  Pensees , 
430  245a-247b;  463-492  255a-259b;  544  266a; 
556  270b-272a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  321b-329a  esp  326b- 
327a  /  Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics , 
370a-b;  375a-b  /  Judgement ,  504b-505a; 
509a-c;  593a-d;  611a-c 

46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  iii,  307b- 
308a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  xi,  525c-526b; 
bk  xii,  560a-561c;  bk  xiv,  608a-b 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
127b-137c  passim 

5a(2)  Beatitude  as  the  fruition  of  love 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  ix,  par  23-25 
68a-c  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xxii,  ch  29-30  614b- 
618d  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  15  628b-c; 
ch  32-33  633c-634b;  ch  38  635c-d 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  62, 
aa  7-8  322d-324a;  a  9,  rep  i  324a-325b;  part 
1— 11,  q  2,  a  8  621c-622b;  q  4,  aa  1-3  629d- 
631  d;  a  8  esp  rep  3  636a-c;  q  5,  a  4  639a-640b 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  65, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  1,3  74c-75a;  q  67,  a  6  87a-c; 
q  114,  a  4  373a-d;  a  8  376a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q 
23,  a  1,  rep  1  482d-483d;  Q  24,  a  6,  rep  i 
493d-494b;  a  7,  rep  i  494b-495b;  a  8,  ans 
and  rep  1  495b-496a;  a  9,  ans  and  rep  3 
496a-d;  a  11,  ans  498b-499c;  q  25,  a  10 
508b-d;  q  26,  a  13  519d-520d;  q  28,  a  3 
528d-529c;  q  184,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1-2  629d- 
630d;  part  iii  suppl,  q  90,  a  3  1014d-1016a; 
q  93  1037c-1040c  esp  a  3  1039d-1040c;  qq 
95-96  1042c-1066a 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  paradise  106a-157d  esp  iii 
[34-90]  109d-110b,  iv  [1 15]— v  [12]  llld-112b, 
xxi  [19-102]  138c-139b,  xxii  [61-69]  140b, 
xxvi  [1-81]  145d-146c,  xxvm  148d-150b, 
xxx  [34-45]  152a-b,  xxxm  156b-157d 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  iv,  appendix,  iv 
447b-c;  part  v,  prop  21-42  458a-463d  esp 
prop  32-37  460b-461c,  prop  42  463b-d 


32  Milton:  Sonnets ,  xiv  66a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason ,  346b-347c 

5b.  Charity,  or  supernatural  love,  compared 
with  natural  love 

New  Testament:  I  Corinthians ,  13 

18  Augustine:  Confessions ,  bk  vii,  par  23-24 
50b-51a;  bk  viii,  par  10-30  55c-61c  passim; 
bk  x,  par  38-70  81a-89b;  bk  xiii,  par  8 
112b-c  /  City  of  God ,  bk  xv,  ch  22  416a-c  / 
Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  iii,  ch  10,  662a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i,  q  8, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  4  36b-37c;  q  60  310a-314c 
esp  a  1,  rep  3  310b-311a,  a  5,  ans  and  rep 
4-5  313b-314c;  q  62,  a  2,  rep  i  318d-319c; 
a  7  322d-323b:  q  63,  a  i,  rep  3  325c-326c; 
part  1— 11,  q  26,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3  734a-d; 
a  2,  ans  734d-735c;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  4  735c- 
736b;  q  29,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  4  745a-c;  aa  4-5 
747a-748b 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  62, 
a  3,  ans  and  rep  3  61c-62b;  q  65,  a  5,  rep  i 
74c-75a;  q  109,  a  3  340c-341b;  q  no,  a  1 
347d-349a;  part  ii-ii,  q  24,  aa  2-3  490b- 
491d;  a  10  496d-498a;  q  25,  aa  7-8  506a- 
507c;  q  26,  a  3,  ans  511d-512c;  a  5  513b-d; 
a  6,  ans  514a-d;  aa  8-n  516a-519a;  q  31,  a  3 
538b-539c;  q  32,  a  9  548c-549b 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b;  paradise, 
IV  [n5]-v  I12]  llld-112b;  viii-ix  116d-120a 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan ,  part  iii,  240d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning ,  2c-4c; 
80b-81a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  xii  [576-605] 
331b-332a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees ,  793  326b-327a 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  26a-27a 

44  Boswell:  Johnson ,  392b-c 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  i,  50a;  bk  iii, 
128c-d;  bk  v,  214c-218b;  bk  x,  465a-c;  bk 
xi,  525c-526b;  bk  xii,  560a-561c;  bk  xv,  617d 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  v, 
121d-122d  passim 

54  Freud:  Group  Psychology ,  691d-692a  / 

Civilization  and  Its  Discontents ,  786a- d 

5&(1)  The  precepts  of  charity:  the  law  of  love 

Old  Testament:  Leviticus ,  19:17-18,33-34  / 
Deuteronomy ,  6:5;  10:12,18-19;  11:1,13,22; 
13:3~ 4;  x9:9»  24:19-22;  30:6,16  /  Proverbs , 
10:12;  25:21-22 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  3:9;  6:17-18 — 
(ZD)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  3:9;  6:18-19  / 
Ecclesiasticus ,  4:1-10;  13:14;  28:1-8;  29 —(D) 
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  4:1-11;  13:18;  28:1-11;  29 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:20-26,38-48; 
19:19;  22:34-40  /  Mar\,  12:28-34  /  Luke, 
6:27-38;  10:25-37  /  John,  13:34-17:26  passim 
/  Romans,  8:35-39;  12:9-21;  13:8-10  /  Corin¬ 
thians,  8:1-3;  13;  16:14  /  H  Corinthians,  2:4- 
11 ;  6;  8:7-8  /  Galatians,  5  /  Ephesians,  1:4; 


5b(2)  to  5c  Chapter  50:  LOVE  1079 


3:17-19;  4:1-2,13-16,32;  5:1-2  /  Philippians , 
1  :i— 1 1 ;  2:1-2  /  Colossians ,  3:12-15  /  /  Thessa - 
lonians,  3:12;  4:9-10;  5:8  /  /  Timothy,  1:5; 
6:11  /  //  Timothy ,  1:7  /  Hebrews ,  10:24-25; 
13:1-3  /  Jamesi  2:8  /  J  Peter,  1:22;  2:17;  3:8; 
4:8-10  /  //  Peter,  1:7  /  /  John  esp  2:5,  2:15, 
3:10-23,  47-5:3  /  ll  John 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  3-4  72a  b 
/  G/y  o/" Go*/,  bk  x,  ch  3  300b-301a;  bk  xxi, 
ch  22  576a-c;  ch  27  583a-586a,c  /  Christian 
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  22-30  629b-633b;  ch  33 
633d-634b;  ch  35  634c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  7  638d- 
639c;  bk  hi,  ch  10  661c-662a 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  60, 
a  5,  contrary  313b-314c 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 
65,  a  3,  contrary  72d-73d;  q  91,  a  5  211c- 
212c;  q  99,  a  1,  rep  2-3  245c-246b;  a  2,  ans 
246b-247a;  qq  106-108  321a-337d;  part 
ii— ii,  q  23,  a  4,  rep  3  485d-486b;  qq  25- 
27  501a-527b;  Q  44  592d-598c;  Q  184,  a  3 
630d-632c 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xi  [1-30] 
68d-69a;  xm  [22-39]  72a-b;  paradise,  xi 
122a-123c 

22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [529-541]  168b  /  Tale  of 
Melibeus  401a-432a  esp  par  55-78  426a-432a 
/  Parson's  Tale,  par  31  517b-518b;  par  68-69 
533b-534b;  par  91-92  547a-b 

26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice,  act  iv, 
sc  1  [182-205]  427c-d 

27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure,  act  ii, 
sc  11  [71-79]  182d 

29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  338b 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  80b-81a 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  xii  [576-605]  331b- 
332a  /  Areopagitica,  409b-410a 

33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  91a-94a  /  Pensees, 
663-670  293b-295b  passim 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  la-2c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  26a-27a 

42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  327c-d 

49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  312b, d  [fn  27] 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  214c-215b; 
bk  vi,  271d;  bk  ix,  375d-376a;  377a-b;  bk 
x,  465c;  bk  xi,  525c-526b;  bk  xii,  557b  c 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 
26a-27d;  37c-38a;  bk  iv,  83c-84a;  bk  v,  125d- 
127b;  127b-137c  passim;  bk  vi  146b,d-170d 
passim;  bk  xii,  398a-b 

54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  786a-d 

5&(2)  The  theological  virtue  of  charity:  its  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  other  virtues 

New  Testament:  Romans,  5:5//  Corinthians,  13 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vi,  par  7-20  20d- 
24c;  bk  vii,  par  23-24  50b-51a;  bk  x,  par  40 
81c  /  City  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  3  300b-301a;  bk 
xiv,  ch  7,  380c-d;  bk  xxi,  ch  16  573b-574a  / 
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  37-40  635b- 
636a, c;  bk  ii,  ch  41  656a-c;  bk  iii,  ch  10 
661c-662a 


19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  59, 
a  4,  rep  3  309a-310a;  q  82,  a  3,  rep  3  433c- 
434c;  q  95,  a  4,  ans  509b  510a;  part  i  ii,  q 
4,  a  2,  rep  3  630b  631a;  a  8,  ans  and  rep  3 
636a  c;  q  26,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  4  735c-736b; 
q  28,  a  2,  contrary  and  ans  741a-742a 

20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  58, 
a  3,  rep  3  43b-44a;  q  62,  a  2,  rep  3  60d  61b; 
aa  3-4  61c  63a;  q  65,  aa  2-5  72a-75a;  q  66, 
a  6  80c-81b;  q  67,  a  6  87a*c;  q  73,  a  i,  rep  3 
119c-120c;  q  no,  a  3,  rep  i  350a-d;  a  4,  ans 
350d-351d;  q  114,  a  4  373a-d;  a  6  374c-375b; 
a  8  376a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  4,  aa  3-5  404c- 
407a;  q  19,  a  6  469a-d;  a  10  472b  d;  qq  23- 
46  482c-605a,c;  q  184,  aa  1-2  629a-630d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [40- 
Si]  75d-76a;  paradise,  iii  [34-90]  109d-110b; 
xxi  [34-102]  138c-139b;  xxvi  [1-81]  145d  146c 

23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iii,  240d 

30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c;  80b- 
81a 

32  Milton:  Sonnets ,  xiv  66a  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk 
xii  [576-605]  331b-332a  /  Areopagitica,  409b- 
410a 

33  Pascal:  Pensees,  793  326b-327a 

35  Locke:  Toleration,  la-2c 

37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  26a-27a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  214c-218b 

5c.  God’s  love  of  Himself  and  of  creatures 

Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  7:6-15;  10:15,18 
/  Psalms  passim  /  Proverbs ,  3:12  /  Song  of 
Solomon— (D)  Canticle  of  Canticles  /  Isaiah, 
43;  63:7-9— (D)  Isaias ,  43;  63:7-9  /  Jeremiah, 
13:11;  31  — (D)  Jeremias,  13:11;  31  /  Ezekiel, 
16— (D)  Ezechiel ,  16  /  Ho  sea— (D)  Osee  / 
Jonah ,  4— (D)  Jonas,  4 

Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  7:28;  11:22- 
26;  12:13-16;  16:20-29 —(D)  OT,  Boo\  of 
Wisdom,  7:28;  11:23-27;  12:13-16;  16:20-29 
/  Ecclesiasticus,  11:14-17;  16:11-17:32;  33  no- 
15—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  11:14-17;  16:12- 
17:31;  33:10-15 

New  Testament:  Matthew,  6:25-34;  7:7-11; 
10:29-31  /  Luke,  11:1-13;  12:6-7,22-28  / 
John ,  3:16-21;  13:31-17:26  /  Romans,  2:4; 
5:5;  8:29-39  /  II  Corinthians,  13:11  /  Ga¬ 
latians,  2:20  /  Ephesians,  3:14-20;  5:1-2  / 
I  Timothy,  1:14  /  Titus,  3:3-7  /  Hebrews,  12:6 
/  /  John,  3:1-2,16;  47-5:5  /  Revelation,  3:19- 
21 — (D)  Apocalypse,  3:19-21 
7  Plato:  Timaeus,  447c-448a 

16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1050a-b; 
1071b 

18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  16,  48d; 
bk  xm,  par  1-2  llOd-lllb  /  City  of  God,  bk 
vii,  ch  31  261d-262a;  bk  xii,  ch  9  347b-348b; 
bk  xix,  ch  13  519a-520a;  bk  xxi,  ch  15-16 
572c-574a;  ch  18  574c-575b;  ch  24  577b- 
579d;  bk  xxii,  ch  i  586b,d-587b;  ch  24 
609a-612a  /  Christian  Doctrine ,  bk  i,  ch  31- 
32  633b  d 


1080 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


(5.  Divine  love .  5  c.  God’s  love  of  Himself  and  of 
creatures .) 

19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 
i,  rep  1  14b-15b;  q  6,  a  4  30bd;  q  19,  a  2, 
ans  and  rep  2-4  109c-110b;  a  4,  ans  and 
rep  1  lllc-112c;  q  20  119d-124a;  q  27,  aa  3-4 
155c-156d;  q  37  197c-200c;  q  74,  a  3,  rep  3-4 
375a-377a,c;  q  82,  a  5,  rep  i  435c-436c;  q 
93,  a  4,  ans  494c-495b;  part  i-ii,  q  28,  a  3, 
contrary  742a-d;  a  4,  contrary  742d-743c 

20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica ,  part  i-ii,  q  65, 
a  5,  ans  and  rep  3  74c-75a;  qq  109-114  338a- 
378a, c  esp  q  no,  a  1  347d-349a,  a  4,  ans 
350d-351d;  part  ii-ii,  q  23,  aa  1-2  482d- 
484d;  q  24,  aa  2-3  490b-491d;  a  8,  ans  495b- 
496a;  a  12  499c-500d;  q  184,  a  2,  ans  629d- 
630 d 

21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy ,  hell,  i  [37-40]  lb-c; 
purgatory,  iii  [103— 145]  57a-c;  x  [22-45] 
67c-d;  xi  [1-30]  68d-69a;  xv  [40-81]  75d-76a; 
xxviii  [91-96]  97a;  paradise,  iii  [34-90] 
109d-110b;  vn  [1-120]  115a  116b;  x  [1-27] 


5* 

120b-c;  xiii  [52-87]  126a-b;  xix  [86-90]  135d- 
136a;  xxvi  [1—66]  145d-146c;  xxvii  [97-120] 
148b-c;  xxix  [13-48]  150b-d;  [127-145]  151c- 
d;  xxxii  [i39]-xxxm  [145]  156a-157d 
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida ,  bk  iii, 
stanza  1-7  54b-55b;  stanza  250-253  87a-b; 
BK  V,  stanza  263-267  154b-155a  /  Tale  of 
Melibeus ,  par  78  431b-432a 
31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies ,  229c 

31  Spinoza:  Ethics ,  part  v,  prop  17,  corol 
456d;  prop  19  457a;  prop  35-36  460d-461c 

32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost ,  bk  iii  [56-343]  136b- 
143a;  bk  iv  [41 1-439]  161b-162a 

35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge ,  intro,  sect 
3  405b-c;  sect  154  444a-b 
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones ,  186c-d 
42  Kant:  Judgement ,  592a-c 
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\y  381a 

51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace ,  bk  vi,  271d-272b; 
bk  ix,  373b-377b  passim 

52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov ,  bk  ii, 
24a-c;  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim;  bk  vi,  153a-d; 
bk  vii,  189a-191a,c  passim 


CROSS-REFERENCES 

For:  The  basic  psychological  terms  in  the  analysis  of  love,  see  Desire  3c;  Emotion  i,  2-2c; 
Pleasure  and  Pain  7a;  and  for  the  comparison  of  love  and  knowledge,  see  Knowledge 
4^- 

Other  discussions  of  the  objects  of  love,  see  Beauty  3;  Desire  i,  2b;  Good  and  Evil  ia, 
3c;  Truth  8e;  Will  7d. 

Other  considerations  of  the  sexual  instincts,  sexual  love,  and  their  normal  or  abnormal  de¬ 
velopment,  see  Desire  4b~4d;  Emotion  ic,  3c~3c(3);  Habit  3~3a;  Pleasure  and  Pain 
4b,  7b,  8b-8c;  Temperance  2,  6a-6b. 

Other  considerations  of  conjugal  love  and  its  components,  see  Family  7a. 

For  the  moral  problems  raised  by  love,  see  Duty  8;  Justice  3;  Opposition  4d;  Pleasure 
and  Pain  8b;  Sin  2b;  Temperance  6a-6b;  Virtue  and  Vice  6e. 

The  role  of  friendship  in  the  life  of  the  individual,  the  family,  and  the  state,  see  Family  7c; 
Happiness  2b(5) ;  State  3e;  Virtue  and  Vice  6e;  and  for  other  discussions  of  the  brother¬ 
hood  of  man  and  the  world  community,  see  Citizen  8;  Man  11b;  State  iof;  War  and 
Peace  nd. 

Man’s  love  of  God,  or  charity,  as  a  theological  virtue,  see  Desire  7b;  Virtue  and  Vice  8d(3), 
8f;  Will  7d;  and  for  the  fruition  of  this  love  in  eternal  beatitude,  see  Happiness  7c- 
7c(2);  Immortality  5b 

God’s  love  of  Himself  and  of  His  creatures,  see  God  5I1;  Good  and  Evil  2a. 


Chapter  50:  LOVE 


1081 


ADDITIONAL  READINGS 

Listed  below  are  works  not  included  in  Great  Boofy  of  the  Western  World ,  but  relevant  to  the 
idea  and  topics  with  which  this  chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups: 

I.  Works  by  authors  represented  in  this  collection. 

II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. 

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult 
the  Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings,  which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. 


I. 

Plutarch.  “Of  Envy  and  Hatred/’  “How  to 
Know  a  Flatterer  from  a  Friend,”  “Of  Brotherly 
Love,”  “Of  Love,”  “Five  Tragical  Histories  of 
Love,”  in  Moralia 
Augustine.  Of  Continence 

- .  Of  Marriage  and  Concupiscence 

Aquinas.  Quaestiones  Disputatae ,  De  Caritate 

- .  Sumrna  Theologica ,  part  h-ii,  qq  106-107, 

114-119, 151-154 

- .  The  Two  Precepts  of  Charity  and  the  Ten 

Commandments 

Dante.  La  Vita  Nuova  ( The  New  Life) 

- .  Conrivio  (The  Banquet) 

F.  Bacon.  “Of  Love,”  “Of  Friendship,”  “Of 
Followers  and  Friends,”  in  Essays 
Pascal.  Discours  sur  les  passions  de  V amour 
Hume.  A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature ,  bk  ii,  part  ii 
[A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments 
Rousseau.  Eloisa  (La  nouvelle  Heloise) 

Goethe.  Sorrows  of  Young  Wert  her 
1  - .  Elective  Affinities 

Tolstoy.  The  Law  of  Love  and  the  Law  of  Violence 

- .  Anna  Karenina 

- .  On  Life 

Freud.  Three  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Sex 

- .  “ Civilized ”  Sexual  Morality  and  Modern 

Nervousness 

- .  Contributions  to  the  Psychology  of  Love 

II. 

Catullus.  The  Poems 

Cicero.  Laelius  de  Amicitia  (Of  Friendship) 

Ovid.  Amores 

- .  The  Art  of  Love 

Amis  and  Amilon 
Song  of  Roland 

Petrus  Alphonsi.  Disciplina  Clericalis ,  fables 
1— ii  (Concerning  the  Complete  Friend) 

Bernard  of  Clairvaux.  On  the  Love  of  God , 
ch  7 

Abailard.  Letters 

William  of  Saint-Thierry.  De  Natura  et  Dignita - 
te  Amoris 

Aucassin  and  Nicolette 
Chretien  de  Troyes.  Arthurian  Romances 
Andre  le  Chapelain.  The  Art  of  Courtly  Love 
Tristan  and  Iseult 


The  Romance  of  the  Rose 

Francis  of  Assisi.  The  Little  Flowers  of  St.  Francis 
of  Assisi,  ch  21-22 
Petrarch.  Sonnets 

- .  The  Triumph  of  Love 

Boccaccio.  II  Filocolo 

- .  Decameron 

Sir  Gawain  and  the  Green  Knight 
Gower.  Confessio  Amantis 

Albo.  The  Boo\  of  Principles  (Sefer  ha-Ihfarim ), 
bk  11I,  ch  35 

Thomas  a  Kempis.  The  Imitation  of  Christ ,  bk  ii; 
bk  iii,  ch  5-10 

Villon.  The  Debate  of  the  Heart  and  Body  of  Villon 
Valentine  and  Orson 

G.  Pico  della  Mirandola.  A  Platonic ^  Discourse 
upon  Love 

Ebreo.  The  Philosophy  of  Love 

Ariosto.  Orlando  Furioso 

Castiglione.  The  Boo\  of  the  Courtier 

Michelangelo.  Sonnets 

R.  Edwards.  Damon  and  Pithias 

P.  Sidney.  Astrophel  and  Stella 

John  of  the  Cross.  The  Living  Flame  of  Love 

Donne.  Songs  and  Sonnets 

Spenser.  The  Faerie  Queene ,  bk  iv 

- .  Epithalamion 

- .  An  Hymne  of  Heavenly  Love 

Suarez.  Disputationes Metaphysicae,  xxx  (16),  xlvii 

(m) 

Burton.  The  Anatomy  of  Melancholy ,  part  iii, 
sect  i-iii 

Tirso  de  Molina.  The  Love  Rogue 
Corneille.  La  Place  Royale 
Carew.  A  Rapture 
Crashaw.  The  Flaming  Heart 
Marvell.  To  His  Coy  Mistress 
J.  Taylor.  “The  Marriage-Ring,”  in  Twenty-Five 
Sermons 

- .  A  Discourse  of  the  Nature ,  Offices  and  Meas¬ 
ures  of  Friendship 

Moliere.  Le  misanthrope  (The  Man-Hater) 
Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite ,  bk  iv, 
ch  5-13 

Racine.  Andromaque 
- .  Phedre 

La  Fayette.  The  Princess  of  Cleves 
Dryden.  All  for  Love 
Congreve.  The  Way  of  the  World 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS 


1082 

Richardson.  Pamela 
Hurd.  Letters  on  Chivalry  and  Romance 
Voltaire.  “Charity,”  “Friendship,”  “Love,” 
“Love  of  God,”  “Love  (Socratic  Love),”  in  A 
Philosophical  Dictionary 
F.  Schlegel.  Lucinde 
Schleiermacher.  Soliloquies 
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and  Idea ,  vol 
hi,  sup,  ch  44 
Byron.  Don  Juan 
Manzoni.  The  Betrothed 
Stendhal.  On  Love 

- .  The  Red  and  the  Blac\ 

- .  The  Charterhouse  of  Parma 

Emerson.  “Love,”  in  Essays ,  i 
Balzac.  At  the  Sign  of  the  Cat  and  Racket 

- .  Cousin  Bette 

C.  Bronte.  Jane  Eyre 

E.  J.  Bronte.  Wuthering  Heights 

Kierkegaard.  Either j  Or 

- .  Stages  on  Life's  Way 

- .  Worlds  of  Love 

E.  B.  Browning.  Sonnets  from  the  Portuguese 

Hawthorne.  The  Blithedale  Romance 

Flaubert.  Madame  Bovary 

Michelet.  L' amour 

Turgenev.  Liza 

Meredith.  Modern  Love 

E.  Hartmann.  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious ,  (c) 

XIII  (3) 


Patmore.  Mystical  Poems  of  Nuptial  Love 
H.  Sidgwick.  The  Methods  of  Ethics ,  bk  i,  ch  7; 

BK  III,  ch  4 

Rossetti.  The  House  of  Life 
L.  Stephen.  The  Science  of  Ethics 
Stevenson.  Virginibus  Puerisque 

C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers ,  vol  vi,  par  287-317 
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough,  part  i,  ch  11-12 
Chekhov.  The  Sea-Gull 

Rostand.  Cyrano  de  Bergerac 
Bradley.  Ethical  Studies,  vii 

- -.  Aphorisms 

- .  Collected  Essays,  vol  i  (3) 

Gourmont.  The  Natural  Philosophy  of  Love 
Shaw.  Man  and  Superman 

Santayana.  Interpretations  of  Poetry  and  Religion , 
ch  5 

- .  Reason  in  Society,  ch  1,  7 

Gide.  Strait  Is  the  Gate 

Synge.  Deirdre  of  the  Sorrows 

Ellis.  Studies  in  the  Psychology  of  Sex 

J.  R.  Harris.  Boanerges 

Scheler.  We  sen  und  Formen  der  Sympathie 

D.  H.  Lawrence.  Women  in  Love 
Nygren.  Agape  and  Eros 
Proust.  Remembrance  of  Things  Past 
C.  S.  Lewis.  The  Allegory  of  Love 
Rougemont.  Love  in  the  Western  World 
Xirau.  Amor  y  mundo 

D’Arcy.  The  Mind  and  Heart  of  Love 


printed  in  the  u.  s.a. 


7^£  v^v^Y^py^v^i^i *  """  *  Hi  frfhl 


* 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


■SS&3 

1»i 


►33>j3N3£33$- 


^i35*v35|^5!53^ 


>33^3*53H3?- 


>533v3^3H35> 


^3«3£?3*33> 


>53*S3H3*535> 


H3£^33£535- 


^3^3£5S£r3^ 


H3*33*S3*535- 


H3£33f>33H3f> 


*33f>t35>S3H3?- 


53^*  r--^ 


«3HS^3«3^ 


^$3^53^ 


£33H3£53£t=£- 


sN32?3^3H3f> 


£j3£53^3^35» 


£53H3i*?3>335- 


£53£S3^3f>535- 


£iS£53«3M3*- 


£^35^335*  ^Fr53F* 

sH3*53H35>335- 


£53^3«3^3f> 


£33W3^3£53> 


£53W3^3N33> 


S^3£f3^3H35> 


£j3^3*53>S3f> 


£33£33H3£33?' 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


■s?  ^ 

ii  £ 

53*  y 

33* 

~  ? 

$3  * 

>3* 

wi 

«) 


53  a 
• - - 


p^ 

•55  s! 


£■ 


551 


5L 

i 


r^'  r^  r-^  r*^  r-^  r-^  r*^-  r«^-  ^  ^  w  ^  ^  w  —  w  —  w  — - —  ; 

 .  —  .      . '"   •  —  .   .  — .  >  »  — .  •  «.  ■— .«.  -— ^«.  -^«,  -»  «.  ■«>«,  -^i, 


^P  ^^^£"^£^£HP^PY^^,^^Y>^Y^PP^PS^>’  <r^  *^d>  r^r' 


^PYHpT^PYp^  Hp  P^PY^^H^  r7^ 


J72*^J2*v2H2573Jv3*f2*s3^y2H2?v2S?3S7S*?2>»23v2^2^2^2fc 


v2*»2^;2*S2£^2«2H2>i2H2«2H2?a2HS>i2£T2H2iN25?2^2J?2^ 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


»2>v2H3£v3^ 


52*52^52^2^ 


52*52*52*52* 


2*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*53*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52s*52*52*52*52* 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


52*^* 


52*52*52*52* 


52*52*52*52* 


52*52*52*52* 


52*52*52* 52* 


52*52*52*52* 


52*52*52*52* 


52*52*52*52* 


52*52*52*52* 


»*S*52*»* 


52*52*52*52* 


52*52*52*52* 


52*52*52*52* 


*2*52*52*52*1 


52*52*52*52* 


*2*52*52*52* 


*2*52*52*52* 


*2*52*52*52* 


*2*52*52*52*{ 


*2*52*52*52* 


^5^5^5i^5^5^^5i^5^5^5i^^2*52*52*53*52*52*52*52*52*52*53*52*52*52*52*53*52*52*52*52*52*52*55*52* 


*^2*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52* 


*g*53*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*52*Si* 


