GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD  tgg 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 


13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 


4.  HOMER 


5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 


16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 


6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 


7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 


17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 


10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 


23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 


11.  EUCLID 


24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 


I 


^^1 


GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


p5?r5r 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 

29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 

31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 

32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 

34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 

35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 

36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 

37.  FIELDING 

38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 

39.  ADAM  SMITH 

40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 

43.  AMERICAN  STATE 

PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 

44.  BOSWELL 

45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 

46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 

50.  MARX 
ENGELS 

51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 

54.  FREUD 


^2^S2£- 


ir2£v2^; 


^2£f2£- 


^2£?2^ 


^►S2£ 


' 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011 


http://www.archive.org/details/greatbooksofwest21ency 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


21. 

DANTE 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine; 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants :  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


■ 


THE  DIVINE  COMEDY  OF 
DANTE  ALIGHIERI 


TRANSLATED  BY 
CHARLES  ELIOT  NORTON 


William  Benton,  Publisher 
ENCYCLOPAEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 

CHICAGO  •  LONDON  •  TORONTO  •  GENEVA  •  SYDNEY  •  TOKYO  •  MANILA 


By  arrangement  with  Houghton  Mifflin  'Company 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO 

The  Great  Books 

is  published  with  the  editorial  advice  of  the  faculties 
of  The  University  of  Chicago 

No  part  of  this  work  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from  the 
publisher. 


*952 

by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Twenty-eighth  Printing,  1986 

Copyright  under  International  Copyright  Union 

All  Rights  Reserved  under  Pan  American  and  Universal  Copyright 
Conventions  by  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  Inc. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  55~I0329 
International  Standard  Book  Number:  0-85229-163-9 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

Dante,  1265  - 1321 


Dante  Alighieri  was  born  in  Florence  about 
the  middle  of  May,  1265.  The  city,  then  under 
its  first  democratic  constitution,  was  sharply 
divided  between  the  Papal  party  of  the  Guelphs 
and  the  Imperial  party  of  the  Ghibellines. 
Dante’s  family  were  adherents  of  the  Guelph 
faction,  and  when  Dante  was  only  a  few 
months  old,  the  Guelphs  obtained  decisive  vic¬ 
tory  at  the  Battle  of  Benevento.  Although  of 
noble  ancestry,  the  Alighieri  family  was 
neither  wealthy  nor  particularly  prominent. 

It  seems  probable  that  Dante  received  his 
early  education  at  the  Franciscan  school  of 
Santa  Croce.  He  evidently  owed  much  to  the 
influence  of  Brunetto  Latini,  the  philosopher 
and  scholar  who  figured  largely  in  the  coun¬ 
cils  of  the  Florentine  commune.  Before  twenty, 
he  began  writing  poetry  and  became  associated 
with  the  Italian  poets  of  the  “sweet  new  style,” 
who  exalted  their  love  and  their  ladies  in  phil¬ 
osophical  verse.  Dante’s  “lady,”  whom  he  cel¬ 
ebrated  with  singular  devotion,  was  a  certain 
Beatrice.  According  to  Boccaccio’s  life  of 
Dante,  she  was  Beatrice  Portinari,  daughter  of 
a  Florentine  citizen,  who  married  a  wealthy 
banker,  and  died  when  she  was  but  twenty- 
four.  Dante  first  sang  of  Beatrice  in  the  Vita 
Nuova  (1292),  a  sequence  of  poems  with  prose 
comment  in  which  he  recounts  the  story  of  his 
love,  of  the  first  meeting  when  they  were  both 
nine  years  of  age,  the  exchange  of  greetings 
which  passed  between  them  on  May  Day, 
1283,  and  of  Beatrice’s  death  in  1290. 

Upon  turning  thirty,  Dante  became  actively 
involved  in  Florentine  politics.  The  constitu¬ 
tion  of  the  city  was  based  upon  the  guilds,  and 
Dante,  upon  his  enrolment  in  the  guild  of 
physicians  and  apothecaries,  which  also  in¬ 
cluded  book  dealers,  became  eligible  for  office. 
He  participated  in  the  deliberations  of  the 
councils,  served  on  a  special  embassy,  and  in 
1300  was  elected  one  of  the  six  priors  that  gov¬ 
erned  the  city.  The  former  struggle  between 
the  Guelphs  and  Ghibellines  had  appeared  in 
new  form  in  the  conflict  between  the  Whites 
and  the  Blacks.  As  one  of  the  priors,  Dante 


seems  to  have  been  influential  in  the  move  to 
lessen  factionalism  by  banishing  from  Florence 
the  rival  leaders,  including  among  the  Blacks 
his  wife’s  relative,  Corso  Donati,  and  among 
the  Whites  his  “first  friend,”  the  poet,  Guido 
Cavalcanti.  Despite  the  opposition  of  Dante 
and  the  White  leaders  to  Papal  interference  in 
Florentine  affairs,  Pope  Boniface  VIII  in  1301 
invited  Charles  of  Valois,  brother  of  King 
Philip  of  France,  to  enter  Florence  to  settle  the 
differences  between  the  two  factions.  Actually 
he  assisted  the  Blacks  to  seize  power,  and  more 
than  six  hundred  Whites  were  condemned  to 
exile.  In  1302  Dante,  with  four  others  of  the 
White  party,  was  charged  with  corruption  in 
office.  He  was  condemned  to  pay  a  fine  of  five 
thousand  florins  within  three  days  or  lose  his 
property,  exiled  for  two  years,  and  denied  the 
right  ever  again  to  hold  public  office.  Three 
months  later,  upon  his  refusal  to  pay  the  fine, 
Dante  was  condemned  to  be  burned  alive  if 
he  should  come  within  the  power  of  the  re¬ 
public. 

“After  it  was  the  pleasure  of  the  citizens  of 
the  most  beautiful  and  most  famous  daughter 
of  Rome,  Florence,  to  chase  me  forth  from  her 
sweet  bosom,”  Dante  writes  of  his  exile  in  the 
Convivio,  “I  have  gone  through  almost  every 
region  to  which  this  tongue  of  ours  extends, 
showing  against  my  will  the  wound  of  for¬ 
tune.”  It  is  recorded  that  Dante  attended  a 
meeting  at  San  Godenzo,  where  an  alliance  was 
formed  between  the  Whites  in  exile  and  the 
Ghibellines,  but  he  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
present  in  1304  when  the  combined  forces  were 
defeated  at  Lastra.  Perhaps  he  had  already 
separated  himself  from  the  “evil  and  foolish 
company”  of  his  fellow-exiles,  “formed  a  party 
by  himself,”  and  found  his  “first  refuge  and 
hostelry”  at  the  court  of  the  Della  Scalas  in 
Verona.  Probably  during  the  following  years 
he  spent  time  at  Bologna  and  later  at  Padua, 
where  Giotto  is  said  to  have  entertained  him. 
Toward  the  end  of  1306  he  was  the  guest  of 
the  Malaspinas  in  Lunigiana  and  acted  as  their 
ambassador  in  making  peace  with  the  Bishop 


v 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


vi 

of  Luni.  Sometime  after  this  date  he  may  have 
visited  Paris  and  attended  the  university  there. 

During  the  early  years  of  his  exile  Dante  ap¬ 
pears  to  have  studied  in  those  subjects  which 
gained  him  the  title  of  philosopher  and  theo¬ 
logian  as  well  as  poet.  In  the  Convivio,  prob¬ 
ably  written  between  1305  and  1308,  he  tells 
how,  after  the  death  of  Beatrice,  he  turned  to 
Cicero’s  De  Amicitia  and  the  Consolatio  Phil - 
osophiae  of  Boethius,  which  awoke  in  him  the 
love  of  philosophy.  To  sing  its  praises  he  be¬ 
gan  his  Convivio,  which  he  intended  to  be  a 
kind  of  treasury  of  universal  knowledge  in  the 
form  of  poems  connected  by  lengthy  prose 
commentaries.  At  the  same  time  he  worked 
upon  the  De  Vulgari  Eloquentia,  a  Latin  trea¬ 
tise  in  which  he  defended  the  use  of  Italian  as 
a  literary  language. 

The  election  of  Henry  of  Luxemburg  as  em¬ 
peror  in  1308  stirred  Dante’s  political  hopes. 
When  Henry  entered  Italy  in  1310  at  the  head 
of  an  army,  Dante  in  an  epistle  to  the  princes 
and  people  of  Italy  hailed  the  coming  of  a  de¬ 
liverer.  At  Milan  he  paid  personal  homage  to 
Henry  as  his  sovereign.  When  Florence,  in  al¬ 
liance  with  King  Robert  of  Naples,  prepared 
to  resist  the  emperor,  Dante  in  a  second  epistle 
denounced  them  for  their  obstinacy  and  proph¬ 
esied  their  doom.  In  a  third  epistle  he  up¬ 
braided  the  Emperor  himself  for  his  delay  and 
urged  him  on  against  Florence.  It  was  prob¬ 
ably  during  this  period  that  he  wrote  his  De 
Monarchia,  an  intellectual  defense  of  the  em¬ 
peror  as  the  sovereign  of  the  temporal  order. 
The  death  of  Henry  in  1313,  after  a  year  or  so 
of  ineffectual  fighting,  brought  an  end  to  the 
political  aspirations  of  Dante  and  his  party. 


The  city  of  Florence  in  1311  and  again  in  1315 
renewed  his  condemnation. 

After  Henry’s  death,  Dante  passed  the  rest 
of  his  life  under  the  protection  of  various  lords 
of  Lombardy,  Tuscany,  and  the  Romagna.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  one  tradition,  he  retired  for  a  time 
to  the  monastery  of  Santa  Croce  di  Fonte  Avel- 
lana  in  the  Appenines,  where  he  worked  on 
the  Divine  Comedy,  which  may  have  been 
planned  as  early  as  1292.  He  was  almost  cer¬ 
tainly  for  a  time  at  the  court  of  Can  Grande 
della  Scala,  to  whom  he  dedicated  the  Para - 
diso.  In  1315  Florence  issued  a  general  recall 
of  exiles.  Dante  refused  to  pay  the  required 
fine  and  to  “bear  the  brand  of  oblation,”  feel¬ 
ing  that  such  a  return  would  derogate  from  his 
fame  and  honor.  To  the  end  of  his  life  he  ap¬ 
pears  to  have  hoped  that  his  Comedy  would 
finally  open  the  gates  of  the  city  to  him. 

The  last  few  years  of  the  poet’s  life  were 
spent  at  Ravenna,  under  the  patronage  of 
Guido  da  Polenta,  a  nephew  of  Francesca  da 
Rimini.  Dante’s  daughter,  Beatrice,  was  a  nun 
in  that  city,  and  one  of  his  sons  held  a  benefice 
there;  his  wife  seems  to  have  resided  in  Flor¬ 
ence  throughout  his  exile.  Dante  was  greatly 
esteemed  at  Ravenna  and  enjoyed  a  congenial 
circle  of  friends.  Here  he  completed  the  Divine 
Comedy  and  wrote  two  eclogues  in  Latin 
which  indicate  that  a  certain  contentment  sur¬ 
rounded  his  closing  days.  Returning  from  a 
diplomatic  mission  to  Venice  on  behalf  of  his 
patron,  he  caught  a  fever  and  died  September 
14,  1321.  He  was  buried  at  Ravenna  before  the 
door  of  the  principal  church,  with  the  highest 
honors,  and  “in  the  habit  of  a  poet  and  a  great 
philosopher.” 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note  v 

HELL 

Canto  I:  Dante,  astray  in  a  wood,  reaches  the  foot 
of  a  hill  which  he  begins  to  ascend;  he  is  hin¬ 
dered  by  three  beasts;  he  turns  back  and  is  met 
by  Virgil,  who  proposes  to  guide  him  into  the 
eternal  world  i 

Canto  II:  Dante,  doubtful  of  his  own  powers,  is 
discouraged  at  the  outset.  Virgil  cheers  him  by 
telling  him  that  he  has  been  sent  to  his  aid  by  a 
blessed  Spirit  from  Heaven,  who  revealed  her¬ 
self  as  Beatrice.  Dante  casts  off  fear,  and  the 
poets  proceed  2 

Canto  III:  The  gate  of  Hell.  Virgil  leads  Dante 
in.  The  punishment  of  those  who  had  lived 
without  infamy  and  without  praise.  Acheron, 
and  the  sinners  on  its  bank.  Charon.  Earth¬ 
quake.  Dante  swoons  4 

Canto  IV:  The  further  side  of  Acheron.  Virgil 
leads  Dante  into  Limbo,  the  First  Circle  of 
Hell,  containing  the  spirits  of  those  who  lived 
virtuously  but  without  faith  in  Christ.  Greet¬ 
ing  of  Virgil  by  his  fellow  poets.  They  en¬ 
ter  a  castle,  where  are  the  shades  of  ancient 
worthies.  After  seeing  them  Virgil  and  Dante 
depart  5 

Canto  V:  The  Second  Circle,  that  of  Carnal 
Sinners.  Minos.  Shades  renowned  of  old. 
Francesca  da  Rimini  7 

Canto  VI:  The  Third  Circle,  that  of  the  Glut¬ 
tonous.  Cerberus.  Ciacco  8 

Canto  VII:  The  Fourth  Circle,  that  of  the 
Avaricious  and  the  Prodigal.  Pluto.  Fortune. 
The  Styx. 

The  Fifth  Circle,  that  of  the  Wrathful  9 

Canto  VIII:  The  Fifth  Circle.  Phlegyas  and  his 
boat.  Passage  of  the  Styx.  Filippo  Argenti. 
The  City  of  Dis.  The  demons  refuse  entrance 
to  the  poets  10 

Canto  IX:  The  City  of  Dis.  Erichtho.  The 
Three  Furies.  The  Heavenly  Messenger. 

The  Sixth  Circle:  that  of  the  Heretics  12 

Canto  X:  The  Sixth  Circle.  Farinata  degli 
Uberd.  Cavalcante  Cavalcanti.  Frederick  II  13 


Canto  XI:  The  Sixth  Circle.  Tomb  of  Pope 
Anastasius.  Discourse  of  Virgil  on  the  divi¬ 
sions  of  the  lower  Hell  15 

Canto  XII:  The  Seventh  Circle,  that  of  the 
Violent,  first  round:  those  who  do  violence 
to  others.  The  Minotaur.  The  Centaurs. 
Chiron.  Nessus.  The  River  of  boiling  blood, 
and  the  sinners  in  it  16 

Canto  XIII:  The  Seventh  Circle,  second  round: 
those  who  have  done  violence  to  themselves  and 
to  their  goods.  The  Wood  of  Self-murderers. 
The  Harpies.  Pier  delle  Vigne.  Lano  of 
Siena  and  others  17 

Canto  XIV:  The  Seventh  Circle,  third  round: 
those  who  have  done  violence  to  God.  The 
Burning  Sand.  Capaneus.  Figure  of  the  Old 
Man  in  Crete.  The  rivers  of  Hell  19 

Canto  XV:  The  Seventh  Circle,  third  round:  those 
who  have  done  violence  to  Nature.  Brunetto 
Latini.  Prophecies  of  misfortune  to  Dante  21 

Canto  XVI:  The  Seventh  Circle,  third  round: 
those  who  have  done  violence  to  Nature. 
Guido  Guerra,  Tegghiaio  Aldobrandi  and 
Jacopo  Rusticucci.  The  roar  of  Phlegethon  as 
it  pours  downward.  The  cord  thrown  into  the 
abyss  22 

Canto  XVII:  The  Seventh  Circle,  third  round: 
those  who  have  done  violence  to  Art.  Geryon. 
The  Usurers.  Descent  to  the  Eighth  Circle  23 

Canto  XVIII:  The  Eighth  Circle:  that  of  the 
fraudulent;  first  pouch:  pandars  and  seducers. 
Venedico  Caccianimico.  Jason.  Second 
pouch:  false  flatterers.  Alessio  Interminei. 
Thais  25 

Canto  XIX:  The  Eighth  Circle:  third  pouch: 
simonists.  Pope  Nicholas  III  26 

Canto  XX:  The  Eighth  Circle:  fourth  pouch: 
diviners,  soothsayers,  and  magicians.  Amphi- 
araus.  Tiresias.  Aruns.  Manto.  Eurypylus. 
Michael  Scott.  Asdente  28 

Canto  XXI:  The  Eighth  Circle:  fifth  pouch:  bar¬ 
rators.  A  magistrate  of  Lucca.  The  Male- 
branche.  Parley  with  them  30 

Canto  XXII:  The  Eighth  Circle:  fifth  pouch:  bar¬ 
rators.  Ciampolo  of  Navarre.  Fra  Gomita. 
Michel  Zanche.  Fray  of  the  Malebranche  31 


vii 


CONTENTS 


viii 

Canto  XXIII:  The  Eighth  Circle.  Escape  from 
the  fifth  pouch.  The  sixth  pouch:  hypocrites,  in 
cloaks  of  gilded  lead.  Jovial  Friars.  Caiaphas. 
Annas.  Frate  Catalano  33 

Canto  XXIV:  The  Eighth  Circle.  The  poets 
climb  from  the  sixth  pouch.  Seventh  pouch, 
filled  with  serpents,  by  which  thieves  are  tor¬ 
mented.  Vanni  Fucci.  Prophecy  of  calamity 
to  Dante  34 

Canto  XXV:  The  Eighth  Circle:  seventh  pouch: 
fraudulent  thieves.  Cacus.  Agnello  Brunel¬ 
leschi  and  others  36 

Canto  XXVI:  The  Eighth  Circle:  eighth  pouch: 
fraudulent  counsellors.  Ulysses  and  Diomed  38 

Canto  XXVII:  The  Eighth  Circle:  eighth  pouch: 
fraudulent  counsellors.  Guido  da  Monte- 
feltro  39 

Canto  XXVIII:  The  Eighth  Circle:  ninth  pouch: 
sowers  of  discord  and  schism.  Mahomet  and 
Ali.  Fra  Dolcino.  Pier  da  Medicina.  Curio. 
Mosca.  Bertran  de  Born  41 

Canto  XXIX:  The  Eighth  Circle:  ninth  pouch. 
Geri  del  Bello.  Tenth  pouch:  falsifiers  of  all 
sorts.  Alchemists.  Griffolino  of  Arezzo. 
Capocchio  43 

Canto  XXX:  The  Eighth  Circle:  tenth  pouch: 
false  personators,  false  moneyers,  and  the  false 
in  words.  Myrrha.  Gianni  Schicchi.  Master 
Adam.  Sinon  of  Troy  44 

Canto  XXXI:  The  Eighth  Circle.  Giants.  Nim¬ 
rod.  Ephialtes.  Antaeus  sets  the  Poets  down 
in  the  Ninth  Circle  46 

Canto  XXXII:  The  Ninth  Circle:  that  of  traitors; 
first  ring:  Caina.  Counts  of  Mangona.  Cami- 
cion  de’  Pazzi.  Second  ring:  Antenora.  Bocca 
degli  Abati.  Buoso  da  Duera.  Count  Ugo- 
lino  47 

Canto  XXXIII:  The  Ninth  Circle:  second  ring: 
Antenora.  Count  Ugolino.  Third  ring: 
Ptolomea.  Frate  Alberigo.  Branca  d’  Oria  49 

Canto  XXXIV:  The  Ninth  Circle:  fourth  ring: 
Judecca.  Lucifer.  Judas,  Brutus  and  Cassius. 
Centre  of  the  Universe.  Passage  from  Hell. 
Ascent  to  the  surface  of  the  Southern  Hemis¬ 
phere  *  51 

PURGATORY 

Canto  I:  The  new  theme.  Invocation  to  the 
Muses.  Dawn  of  Easter  on  the  shore  of  Purga¬ 
tory.  The  Four  Stars.  Cato.  The  cleansing 
of  Dante’s  face  from  the  stains  of  Hell  53 

Canto  II:  Sunrise.  The  Poets  on  the  shore. 
Coming  of  a  boat,  guided  by  an  angel,  bearing 
souls  to  Purgatory.  Their  landing.  Casella 


and  his  song.  Cato  hurries  the  souls  to  the 
mountain  54 

Canto  III:  Anfe-Purgatory.  Souls  of  those  who 
have  died  in  contumacy  of  the  Church. 
Manfred  55 

Canto  IV:  Ante-Purgatory.  Ascent  to  a  shelf  of 
the  mountain.  The  negligent,  who  postponed 
repentance  to  the  last  hour.  Belacqua  57 

Canto  V:  Ante-Purgatory.  Spirits  who  had  de¬ 
layed  repentance,  and  met  with  death  by  vio¬ 
lence,  but  died  repentant.  Jacopo  del  Cassero. 
Buonconte  da  Montefeltro.  Pia  de’ Tolomei  59 

Canto  VI:  Ante-Purgatory.  More  spirits  who 
had  deferred  repentance  till  they  were  over¬ 
taken  by  a  violent  death.  Efficacy  of  prayer. 
Sordello.  Apostrophe  to  Italy  60 

Canto  VII:  Virgil  makes  himself  known  to 
Sordello.  Sordello  leads  the  Poets  to  the  Val¬ 
ley  of  the  Princes  who  had  been  negligent  of 
salvation.  He  points  them  out  by  name  62 

Canto  VIII:  Valley  of  the  Princes.  Two  Guard¬ 
ian  Angels.  Nino  Visconti.  The  Serpent. 
Corrado  Malaspina  64 

Canto  IX:  Slumber  and  Dream  of  Dante.  The 
Eagle.  Lucia.  The  Gate  of  Purgatory.  The 
Angelic  Gatekeeper.  Seven  P’s  inscribed  on 
Dante’s  Forehead.  Entrance  to  the  First 
Ledge  65 

Canto  X:  Purgatory  proper.  First  Ledge:  the 
Proud.  Examples  of  Humility  sculptured  on 
the  rock  67 

Canto  XI:  First  Ledge:  the  Proud.  Prayer. 
Omberto  Aldobrandeschi.  Oderisi  d’  Agubbio. 
Provenzan  Salvani  68 

Canto  XII.  First  Ledge:  the  Proud.  Instances 
of  the  punishment  of  Pride  graven  on  the 
pavement.  Meeting  with  an  Angel  who  re¬ 
moves  one  of  the  P’s.  Ascent  to  the  Second 
Ledge  70 

Canto  XIII:  Second  Ledge:  the  Envious.  Ex¬ 
amples  of  Love.  The  Shades  in  haircloth,  and 
with  sealed  eyes.  Sapia  of  Siena  71 

Canto  XIV:  Second  Ledge:  the  Envious.  Guido 
del  Duca.  Rinieri  de’  Calboli.  Instances  of 
the  punishment  of  Envy  73 

Canto  XV:  Second  Ledge:  the  Envious.  An 
Angel  removes  the  second  P  from  Dante’s  fore¬ 
head.  Discourse  concerning  the  Sharing  of 
Good.  Ascent  to  the  Third  Ledge:  the  Wrath¬ 
ful.  Vision  of  Examples  of  Forbearance  73 

Canto  XVI:  Third  Ledge:  the  Wrathful.  Marco 
Lombardo.  His  discourse  on  Free  Will,  and 
the  corruption  of  the  World  j6 


CONTENTS 


Canto  XVII:  Third  Ledge:  the  Wrathful.  Issue 
from  the  Smoke.  Vision  of  Instances  of  the 
punishment  of  Anger.  Ascent  to  the  Fourth 
Ledge,  where  Sloth  is  purged.  Second  Night¬ 
fall  in  Purgatory.  Virgil  explains  how  Love 
is  the  root  alike  of  Virtue  and  of  Sin  78 

Canto  XVIII:  Fourth  Ledge:  the  Slothful.  Dis¬ 
course  of  Virgil  on  Love  and  Free  Will. 
Throng  of  Spirits  running  in  haste  to  redeem 
their  Sin.  Examples  of  Zeal.  The  Abbot  of 
San  Zeno.  Instances  of  the  punishment  of 
Sloth.  Dante  falls  asleep  79 

Canto  XIX:  Fourth  Ledge.  Dante  dreams  of  the 
Siren.  The  Angel  of  the  Pass.  Ascent  to  the 
Fifth  Ledge:  The  Avaricious.  Pope  Adrian 
V  81 

Canto  XX:  Fifth  Ledge:  the  Avaricious.  The 
Spirits  celebrate  examples  of  Poverty  and 
Bounty.  Hugh  Capet.  His  discourse  on  his 
descendants.  Instances  of  the  punishment  of 
Avarice.  Trembling  of  the  Mountain  83 

Canto  XXI:  Fifth  Ledge.  The  shade  of  Statius. 
Cause  of  the  trembling  of  the  Mountain. 
Statius  does  honor  to  Virgil  85 

Canto  XXII:  Ascent  to  the  Sixth  Ledge.  Dis¬ 
course  of  Statius  and  Virgil.  Entrance  to  the 
Ledge:  the  Gluttonous.  The  Mystic  Tree. 
Examples  of  Temperance  86 

Canto  XXIII:  Sixth  Ledge:  the  Gluttonous. 
Forese  Donati.  Nella.  Rebuke  of  the  women 
of  Florence  88 

Canto  XXIV:  Sixth  Ledge:  the  Gluttonous. 
Forese  Donati.  Piccarda  Donati.  Bonagiunta 
of  Lucca.  Pope  Martin  IV.  Ubaldin  dalla 
Pila.  Bonifazio.  Messer  Marchese.  Prophecy 
of  Bonagiunta  concerning  Gentucca,  and  of 
Forese  concerning  Corso  de’  Donati.  Second 
Mystic  Tree.  Instances  of  the  punishment  of 
gluttony.  The  Angel  of  the  Pass  89 

Canto  XXV:  Ascent  to  the  Seventh  Ledge.  Dis¬ 
course  of  Statius  on  generation,  the  infusion 
of  the  Soul  into  the  body,  and  the  corporeal 
semblance  of  Souls  after  death.  The  Seventh 
Ledge:  the  Lustful.  The  mode  of  their  Purifi¬ 
cation.  Examples  of  Chastity  91 

Canto  XXVI:  Seventh  Ledge:  the  Lustful.  Sin¬ 
ners  in  the  fire,  going  in  opposite  directions. 
Instances  of  the  punishment  of  Lust.  Guido 
Guinicelli.  Arnaut  Daniel  93 

Canto  XXVII:  Seventh  Ledge:  the  Lustful.  Pas¬ 
sage  through  the  Flames.  Stairway  in  the  rock. 
Night  upon  the  stairs.  Dream  of  Dante. 
Morning.  Ascent  to  the  Earthly  Paradise. 
Last  words  of  Virgil  94 

Canto  XXVIII:  The  Earthly  Paradise.  The  For¬ 
est.  A  Lady  gathering  flowers  on  the  bank  of 


ix 

a  little  stream.  Discourse  with  her  concerning 
the  nature  of  the  place  96 

Canto  XXIX:  The  Earthly  Paradise.  Mystic 
Procession  or  Triumph  of  the  Church  97 

Canto  XXX:  The  Earthly  Paradise.  Beatrice 
appears.  Departure  of  Virgil.  Reproof  of 
Dante  by  Beatrice  99 

Canto  XXXI:  The  Earthly  Paradise.  Reproach¬ 
ful  discourse  of  Beatrice,  and  confession  of 
Dante.  Passage  of  Lethe.  Appeal  of  the  Vir¬ 
tues  to  Beatrice.  Her  Unveiling  100 

Canto  XXXII:  The  Earthly  Paradise.  Return  of 
the  Triumphal  procession.  The  Chariot  bound 
to  the  Mystic  Tree.  Sleep  of  Dante.  His  wak¬ 
ing  to  find  the  Triumph  departed.  Transfor¬ 
mation  of  the  Chariot.  The  Harlot  and  the 
Giant  102 

Canto  XXXIII:  The  Earthly  Paradise.  Prophecy 
of  Beatrice  concerning  one  who  shall  restore  the 
Empire.  Her  discourse  with  Dante.  The 
river  Eunoe.  Dante  drinks  of  it,  and  is  fit  to 
ascend  to  Heaven  104 

PARADISE 

Canto  I:  Proem.  Invocation.  Beatrice,  and 
Dante  transhumanized,  ascend  through  the 
Sphere  of  Fire  toward  the  Moon.  Beatrice  ex¬ 
plains  the  cause  of  their  ascent  106 

Canto  II:  Proem.  Ascent  to  the  Moon.  The 
cause  of  Spots  on  the  Moon.  Influence  of  the 
Heavens  107 

Canto  III:  The  Heaven  of  the  Moon.  Spirits 
whose  vows  had  been  broken.  Piccarda  Donati. 
The  Empress  Constance  109 

Canto  IV:  Doubts  of  Dante,  respecting  the  justice 
of  Heaven  and  the  abode  of  the  blessed,  solved 
by  Beatrice.  Question  of  Dante  as  to  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  reparation  for  broken  vows  1 10 

Canto  V:  The  sanctity  of  vows,  and  the  serious¬ 
ness  with  which  they  are  to  be  made  or 
changed.  Ascent  to  the  Heaven  of  Mercury. 
The  shade  of  Justinian  112 

Canto  VI:  Justinian  tells  of  his  own  life.  The 

story  of  the  Roman  Eagle.  Spirits  in  the 
planet  Mercury.  Romeo  113 

Canto  VII:  Discourse  of  Beatrice.  The  Fall  of 
Man.  The  scheme  of  his  Redemption  115 

Canto  VIII:  Ascent  to  the  Heaven  of  Venus. 

Spirits  of  Lovers.  Charles  Martel.  His  dis¬ 
course  on  the  order  and  the  varieties  in  mortal 
things  1 16 

Canto  IX:  The  planet  Venus.  Conversation  of 
Dante  with  Cunizza  da  Romano.  With  Folco 
of  Marseilles.  Rahab.  Avarice  of  the  Papal 
Court  1 18 


CONTENTS 


x 

Canto  X:  Ascent  to  the  Sun.  Spirits  of  the  wise, 
and  the  learned  in  theology.  St.  Thomas 
Aquinas.  He  names  to  Dante  those  who  sur¬ 
round  him  120 

Canto  XI:  The  Vanity  of  worldly  desires.  St. 

Thomas  Aquinas  undertakes  to  solve  two  doubts 
perplexing  Dante.  He  narrates  the  life  of  St. 
Francis  of  Assisi  122 

Canto  XII:  Second  circle  of  the  spirits  of  wise 
religious  men,  doctors  of  the  Church  and 
teachers.  S';.  Bonaventura  narrates  the  life  of 
St.  Dominic,  and  tells  the  names  of  those  who 
form  the  circle  with  him  123 

Canto  XIII:  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  speaks  again, 
and  explains  the  relation  of  the  wisdom  of 
Solomon  to  that  of  Adam  and  of  Christ,  and 
declares  the  vanity  of  human  judgment  125 

Canto  XIV:  At  the  prayer  of  Beatrice,  Solomon 
tells  of  the  glorified  body  of  the  blessed  after 
the  Last  Judgment.  Ascent  to  the  Heaven  of 
Mars.  Spirits  of  the  Soldiery  of  Christ  in  the 
form  of  a  Cross  with  the  figure  of  Christ  there¬ 
on.  Hymn  of  the  Spirits  126 

Canto  XV:  Dante  is  welcomed  by  his  ancestor, 
Cacciaguida.  Cacciaguida  tells  of  his  family, 
and  of  the  simple  life  of  Florence  in  the  old 
days  128 

Canto  XVI:  The  boast  of  blood.  Cacciaguida 
continues  his  discourse  concerning  the  old  and 
the  new  Florence  130 

Canto  XVII:  Dante  questions  Cacciaguida  as  to 
his  fortunes.  Cacciaguida  replies,  foretelling 
the  exile  of  Dante,  and  the  renown  of  his 
Poem  132 

Canto  XVIII:  The  Spirits  in  the  Cross  of  Mars. 
Ascent  to  the  Heaven  of  Jupiter.  Words  shaped 
in  light  upon  the  planet  by  the  Spirits. 
Denunciation  of  the  avarice  of  the  Popes  133 

Canto  XIX:  The  voice  of  the  Eagle.  It  speaks  of 
the  mysteries  of  Divine  justice;  of  the  necessity 
of  Faith  for  salvation;  of  the  sins  of  certain 
kings  135 

Canto  XX:  The  song  of  the  Just.  Princes  who 
have  loved  righteousness,  in  the  eye  of  the 
Eagle.  Spirits,  once  Pagans,  in  bliss.  Faith 
and  Salvation.  Predestination  136 


Canto  XXI:  Ascent  to  the  Heaven  of  Saturn. 
Spirits  of  those  who  had  given  themselves  to 
devout  contemplation.  The  Golden  Stairway. 
St.  Peter  Damian.  Predestination.  The  luxury 
of  modern  Prelates.  Dante  alarmed  by  a  cry 
of  the  spirits  138 

Canto  XXII:  Beatrice  reassures  Dante.  St. 
Benedict  appears.  He  tells  of  the  founding  of 
his  Order,  and  of  the  falling  away  of  its 
brethren.  Beatrice  and  Dante  ascend  to  the 
Starry  Heaven.  The  constellation  of  the 
Twins.  Sight  of  the  Earth  139 

Canto  XXIII:  The  Triumph  of  Christ  141 

Canto  XXIV:  St.  Peter  examines  Dante  concern¬ 
ing  Faith,  and  approves  his  answer  142 

Canto  XXV:  St.  James  examines  Dante  concern¬ 
ing  Hope.  St.  John  appears,  with  a  brightness 
so  dazzling  as  to  deprive  Dante,  for  the  time, 
of  sight  144 

Canto  XXVI:  St.  John  examines  Dante  concern¬ 
ing  Love.  Dante’s  sight  restored.  Adam  ap¬ 
pears,  and  answers  questions  put  to  him  by 
Dante  145 

Canto  XXVII:  Denunciation  by  St.  Peter  of  his 
degenerate  successors.  Dante  gazes  upon  the 
Earth.  Ascent  of  Beatrice  and  Dante  to  the 
Crystalline  Heaven.  Its  nature.  Beatrice  re¬ 
bukes  the  covetousness  of  mortals  147 

Canto  XXVIII:  The  Heavenly  Hierarchy  148 

Canto  XXIX:  Discourse  of  Beatrice  concerning 
the  creation  and  nature  of  the  Angels.  She 
reproves  the  presumption  and  foolishness  of 
preachers  150 

Canto  XXX:  Ascent  to  the  Empyrean.  The 
River  of  Light.  The  celestial  Rose.  The  seat 
of  Henry  VII.  The  last  words  of  Beatrice  151 

Canto  XXXI :  The  Rose  of  Paradise.  St.  Bernard. 
Prayer  to  Beatrice.  The  glory  of  the  Blessed 
Virgin  153 

Canto  XXXII:  St.  Bernard  describes  the  order  of 
the  Rose,  and  points  out  many  of  the  Saints. 
The  children  in  Paradise.  The  angelic  festival. 
The  patricians  of  the  Court  of  Heaven  154 

Canto  XXXIII:  Prayer  to  the  Virgin.  The 
Beatific  Vision.  The  Ultimate  Salvation  156 


Diagrams  Illustrating  Dante’s  Hell, 
Purgatory  and  Universe  159,  161,  163 


:  hell  :• 


CANTO  I 

i.  Midway  upon  the  journey  of  our  life  I  found 
myself  in  a  dark  wood,  where  the  right  way 
was  lost.1  Ah!  how  hard  a  thing  it  is  to  tell  what 
this  wild  and  rough  and  difficult  wood  was, 
which  in  thought  renews  my  fear!  So  bitter  is 
it  that  death  is  little  more.  But  in  order  to  treat 
of  the  good  that  I  found  in  it,  I  will  tell  of  the 
other  things  that  I  saw  there. 

to.  I  cannot  well  report  how  I  entered  it,  so 
full  was  I  of  slumber  at  that  moment  when  I 
abandoned  the  true  way.  But  after  I  had  reached 
the  foot  of  a  hill,2  where  that  valley  ended  which 
had  pierced  my  heart  with  fear,  I  looked  up¬ 
ward,  and  saw  its  shoulders  clothed  already 
with  the  rays  of  the  planet3  which  leads  man 
aright  along  every  path.  Then  was  the  fear  a 
little  quieted  which  had  lasted  in  the  lake  of 
my  heart  through  the  night  that  I  had  passed  so 
piteously.  And  even  as  one  who  with  spent 
breath,  issued  forth  from  the  sea  upon  the  shore, 
turns  to  the  perilous  water  and  gazes,  so  did  my 
mind,  which  still  was  flying,  turn  back  to  look 
again  upon  the  pass  which  never  left  person 
alive. 

28.  After  I  had  rested  a  little  my  weary  body, 
I  again  took  my  way  along  the  desert  slope,4 
so  that  the  firm  foot  was  always  the  lower.  And 
lo!  almost  at  the  beginning  of  the  steep  a  she- 
leopard,5  light  and  very  nimble,  which  was 
covered  with  a  spotted  coat.  And  she  did  not 
withdraw  from  before  my  face,  nay,  hindered 
so  my  road  that  I  often  turned  to  go  back. 

37.  The  time  was  the  beginning  of  the  morn¬ 
ing,  and  the  Sun  was  mounting  up  with  those 

1  The  action  of  the  poem  begins  on  the  night  before 
Good  Friday  of  the  year  1300;  cf.  Canto  xxi.  112-114. 
Dante  was  thirty-five  years  old.  The  dark  wood  is  the 
forest  of  the  world  of  sense. 

2  The  hill  is  the  type  of  the  true  course  of  life. 

3  According  to  the  Ptolemaic  system,  the  sun  was  a 
planet. 

4  Cf.  Matthew,  7.  14. 

5  The  leopard  is  the  type  of  the  temptations  of  the 
flesh. 


stars  that  were  with  him  when  the  Love  Divine 
first  set  in  motion  those  beautiful  things;0  so 
that  the  hour  of  the  time  and  the  sweet  season 
were  occasion  to  me  of  good  hope  concerning 
that  wild  beast  with  the  dappled  skin;  but  not 
so  that  the  sight  which  appeared  to  me  of  a 
lion7  did  not  give  me  fear.  He  appeared  to  be 
coming  against  me,  with  his  head  high  and 
with  ravening  hunger,  so  that  it  appeared  that 
the  air  was  affrighted  at  him;  and  a  she-wolf,8 
which  in  her  leanness  seemed  laden  with  all 
cravings,  and  ere  now  had  made  many  folk  to 
live  forlorn, — she  brought  on  me  so  much 
heaviness,  with  the  fear  that  came  from  sight 
of  her,  that  I  lost  hope  of  the  height.  And 
such  as  is  he  who  gains  willingly,  and  the 
time  arrives  which  makes  him  lose,  so  that 
in  all  his  thoughts  he  laments  and  is  sad, 
such  did  the  beast  without  peace  make  me, 
which,  coming  on  against  me,  was  pushing 
me  back,  little  by  little,  thither  where  the  Sun 
is  silent. 

61.  While  I  was  falling  back  to  the  low  place, 
one  who  appeared  faint-voiced  through  long 
silence  presented  himself  before  my  eyes.  When 
I  saw  him  in  the  great  desert,  “Have  pity  on 
me!”  I  cried  to  him,  “whatso  thou  be,  whether 
shade  or  real  man.”  He  answered  me:  “Not 
man;  man  once  I  was,  and  my  parents  were 
Lombards,  and  both  Mantuans  by  country.  I 
was  born  sub  Julio,  though  late,  and  I  lived  at 
Rome  under  the  good  Augustus,  at  the  time  of 
the  false  and  lying  gods.  I  was  a  poet,  and  sang 

6  It  was  a  common  belief,  which  existed  from  early 
Christian  times,  that  the  spring  was  the  season  of  the 
Creation.  By  the  Julian  calendar,  March  25  was  the 
date  of  the  vernal  equinox,  and  to  it  was  assigned 
the  Annunciation  and  the  Crucifixion.  March  25  was 
thus  what  may  be  called  the  ideal  Good  Friday.  But  in 
the  year  1300  the  actual  Good  Friday  fell  on  April  8. 
This  is  the  date  which  Dante,  following  the  calendar  of 
the  Church,  adopted  for  that  of  his  journey. 

7  The  lion  is  the  type  of  pride. 

8  The  wolf  is  the  type  of  avarice.  Cf.  Jeremiah,  5.  6. 
These  three  beasts  correspond  with  the  triple  division 
of  sins  into  those  of  incontinence,  of  violence,  and  of 
fraud  (see  Canto  xi). 


I 


HELL 


of  that  just  son  of  Anchises1  who  came  from 
Troy,  after  proud  Ilion  had  been  burned.  But 
thou,  why  dost  thou  return  to  such  great  annoy? 
Why  dost  thou  not  ascend  the  delectable  moun¬ 
tain  which  is  the  source  and  cause  of  all  joy?” 

79.  “Art  thou  then  that  Virgil  and  that  fount 
which  pours  forth  so  broad  a  stream  of  speech?” 
replied  I  with  bashful  front  to  him:  “O  honor 
and  light  of  the  other  poets!  may  the  long  study 
avail  me  and  the  great  love,  which  have  made 
me  search  thy  volume!  Thou  art  my  master 
and  my  author;  thou  alone  art  he  from  whom 
I  took  the  fair  style  that  has  done  me  honor. 
Behold  the  beast  because  of  which  I  turned; 
help  me  against  her,  famous  sage,  for  she  makes 
my  veins  and  pulses  tremble.” 

91.  “It  behoves  thee  to  hold  another  course,” 
he  replied,  when  he  saw  me  weeping,  “if  thou 
wouldst  escape  from  this  savage  place;  for  this 
beast,  because  of  which  thou  criest  out,  lets  not 
any  one  pass  along  her  way,  but  so  hinders  him 
that  she  kills  him;  and  she  has  a  nature  so 
malign  and  evil  that  she  never  sates  her  greedy 
will,  and  after  food  has  more  hunger  than  be¬ 
fore.  Many  are  the  animals  with  which  she 
wives,  and  there  shall  be  more  yet,  until  the 
hound  shall  come  that  will  make  her  die  of 
grief.  He  shall  not  feed  on  land  or  pelf,  but 
wisdom  and  love  and  valor,  and  his  birthplace 
shall  be  between  Feltro  and  Feltro.  Of  that 
low  Italy  shall  he  be  the  salvation,  for  which 
the  virgin  Camilla  died,  and  Euryalus,  Turnus 
and  Nisus  of  their  wounds.2  He  shall  hunt  her 
through  every  town  till  he  shall  have  put  her 
back  again  in  Hell,  there  whence  envy  first 
sent  her  forth. 

1 12.  “Wherefore  I  think  and  deem  it  for  thy 
best  that  thou  follow  me,  and  I  will  be  thy 
guide,  and  will  lead  thee  hence  through  the 
eternal  place  where  thou  shalt  hear  the  despair¬ 
ing  shrieks,  shalt  see  the  ancient  spirits  woeful 
who  each  proclaim  the  second  death.3  And 
then  thou  shalt  see  those  who  are  contented  in 
the  fire,4  because  they  hope  to  come,  whenever 
it  may  be,  to  the  blessed  folk;  to  whom  if  thou 

1  Aeneas.  Cf.  Aeneid,  i.  544. 

2  Camilla  and  Turnus  died  for  Italy  fighting  against 
the  Trojans;  Euryalus  and  Nisus  died  on  the  Trojan 
side  (Aeneid). 

8  Cf.  Revelation,  20.  10.  14;  21.  8;  St.  Augustine, 
City  of  God,  xiii.  8. 

4  That  is,  contented  in  the  purifying  pains  of  Purga¬ 
tory,  by  which  they  are  made  fit  for  Paradise. 


wouldst  then  ascend,  there  shall  be  a  soul5 
more  worthy  than  I  for  that.  With  her  I  will 
leave  thee  at  my  departure;  for  that  Emperor 
who  reigns  thereabove  wills  not,  because  I  was 
rebellious6  to  His  law,  that  through  me  any 
one  should  come  into  His  city.  In  all  parts  He 
governs  and  there  He  reigns:  there  is  His  city 
and  His  lofty  seat.  O  happy  the  man  whom 
thereto  He  elects!”  And  I  to  him:  “Poet,  I  be¬ 
seech  thee  by  that  God  whom  thou  didst  not 
know,  in  order  that  I  may  escape  this  ill  and 
worse,  that  thou  lead  me  thither  where  thou 
now  hast  said,  so  that  I  may  see  the  gate  of  St. 
Peter,7  and  those  whom  thou  reportest  so  af¬ 
flicted.” 

136.  Then  he  moved  on,  and  I  held  behind 
him. 

CANTO  II 

1.  The  day  was  going,  and  the  dusky  air  was 
taking  ithe  living  things  that  are  on  earth  from 
their  fatigues,  and  I  alone  was  preparing  to 
sustain  the  war  alike  of  the  journey  and  of  the 
woe,  which  my  memory  that  errs  not  shall  re¬ 
trace. 

7.  O  Muses,  O  lofty  genius,  now  assist  me! 
O  memory  that  didst  inscribe  that  which  I  saw, 
here  shall  thy  nobility  appear! 

10. 1  began:  “Poet,  who  guidest  me,  consider 
my  power,  if  it  be  sufficient,  before  thou  trust 
me  to  the  deep  pass.  Thou  sayest8  that  the  par¬ 
ent  of  Silvius  while  still  corruptible  went  to 
the  immortal  world  and  was  there  in  the  body; 
and  truly  if  the  Adversary  of  every  ill  was 
courteous  to  him,  it  seems  not  unmeet  to  the 
man  of  understanding,  thinking  on  the  high 
effect  that  should  proceed  from  him,  and  on 
the  who  and  the  what;0  for  in  the  empyrean 
heaven  he  was  chosen  for  father  of  revered 
Rome  and  of  her  empire;  both  which  (would 
one  say  truth)  were  ordained  for  the  holy  place 
where  the  successor  of  the  greater  Peter  has  his 
seat.  Through  this  going,  whereof  thou  givest 
him  vaunt,  he  learned  things  which  were  the 
cause  of  his  victory  and  of  the  papal  mantle. 
Afterward  the  Chosen  Vessel10  went  thither  to 

5  Beatrice. 

c  See  Canto  iv.  36. 

7  See  Purgatory,  Canto  ix.  127. 

8  See  Aeneid.  vi. 

9  God  was  thus  gracious  to  him  as  the  Father  of  the 
Roman  people  (the  “who”),  and  founder  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  Empire  (the  “what”). 

10  St.  Paul.  Cf.  Acts,  9.  15,  and  II  Corinthians.  12,  1-4. 


CANTO  II 


bring  thence  comfort  to  that  faith  which  is  the 
beginning  of  the  way  of  salvation.  But  I,  why 
go  I  thither?  or  who  concedes  it?  I  am  not 
Aeneas,  I  am  not  Paul;  neither  I  nor  others 
believe  me  worthy  of  this;  wherefore  if  I  yield 
myself  to  go,  I  fear  lest  the  going  may  be  mad. 
Thou  art  wise,  thou  understandest  better  than 
I  speak.” 

37.  And  as  is  he  who  unwills  what  he  willed, 
and  by  reason  of  new  thoughts  changes  his 
purpose,  so  that  he  withdraws  wholly  from 
what  he  had  begun,  such  I  became  on  that  dark 
hillside:  because  in  my  thought  I  abandoned 
the  enterprise  which  had  been  so  hasty  in  its 
beginning. 

43.  “If  I  have  rightly  understood  thy  speech,” 
replied  that  shade  of  the  magnanimous  one, 
“thy  soul  is  hurt  by  cowardice,  which  often¬ 
times  encumbers  a  man  so  that  it  turns  him 
back  from  honorable  enterprise,  as  false  seeing 
does  a  beast  when  it  shies.  In  order  that  thou 
loose  thee  from  this  fear  I  will  tell  thee  why  I 
came,  and  what  I  heard  at  the  first  moment 
that  I  grieved  for  thee.  I  was  among  those  who 
are  suspended,  and  a  Lady  blessed  and  beauti¬ 
ful  called  me,  such  that  I  besought  her  to  com¬ 
mand.  Her  eyes  were  more  shining  than  the 
star,  and  she  began  to  say  to  me  sweet  and  clear, 
with  angelic  voice,  in  her  speech: 

58.  “  ‘O  courteous  Mantuan  soul!  of  whom 
the  fame  yet  lasts  in  the  world,  and  shall  last  so 
long  as  motion  continues,  my  friend,  and  not  of 
fortune,  is  so  hindered  on  his  road  upon  the  des¬ 
ert  hillside  that  he  has  turned  for  fear,  and  I  am 
afraid,  through  that  which  I  have  heard  of 
him  in  heaven,  lest  he  be  already  so  astray  that 
I  may  have  risen  late  to  his  succor.  Now  do 
thou  move,  and  with  thy  ornate  speech  and  with 
whatever  is  needful  for  his  deliverance,  assist 
him  so  that  I  may  be  consoled  thereby.  I  am 
Beatrice  who  make  thee  go.  I  come  from  a  place 
whither  I  desire  to  return.  Love  moved  me,  that 
makes  me  speak.  When  I  shall  be  before  my 
Lord,  I  will  often  praise  thee  to  Him.’ 

75.  “Then  she  was  silent,  and  thereon  I  be¬ 
gan:  ‘O  Lady  of  Virtue!  through  whom  alone 
the  human  race  excels  all  contained  within  that 
heaven  which  has  the  smallest  circle,1  thy  com¬ 
mand  so  pleases  me  that  to  obey  it,  were  it  al- 

1  The  heaven  of  the  moon,  the  innermost  of  the  nine 
revolving  heavens,  the  nearest  to  the  earth. 


ready  done,  were  slow  to  me.  There  is  no  need 
for  thee  further  to  open  to  me  thy  will;  but  tell 
me  the  reason  why  thou  dost  not  beware 
of  descending  down  here  into  this  centre, 
from  the  ample  place  whither  thou  burnest 
to  return.’ 

85.  “  ‘Since  thou  wishest  to  know  so  inward¬ 
ly,  I  will  tell  thee  briefly,’  she  replied  to  me, 
‘wherefore  I  fear  not  to  come  here  within.  One 
need  be  afraid  only  of  those  things  that  have 
power  to  do  one  harm,  of  others  not,  for  they 
are  not  fearful.  I  am  made  by  God,  thanks  be 
to  Him,  such  that  your  misery  touches  me  not, 
nor  does  the  flame  of  this  burning  assail  me.  A 
gentle  Lady2  is  in  heaven  who  feels  compassion 
for  this  hindrance  whereto  I  send  thee,  so  that 
she  breaks  stern  judgment  there  above.  She 
summoned  Lucia3  in  her  request,  and  said, 
“Thy  faithful  one  now  has  need  of  thee, 
and  I  commend  him  to  thee.”  Lucia,  the  foe 
of  every  cruel  one,  moved  and  came  to  the 
place  where  I  was,  seated  with  the  ancient 
Rachel.’4 

103.  “  ‘She  said,  “Beatrice,  true  praise  of  God, 
why  dost  thou  not  succor  him  who  so  loved 
thee  that  for  thee  he  came  forth  from  the  vulgar 
throng?  Dost  thou  not  hear  the  pity  of  his 
plaint?  Dost  thou  not  see  the  death  that  com¬ 
bats  him  on  the  stream  where  the  sea  has  no 
vaunt?”  Never  were  persons  in  the  world  swift 
to  do  their  good,  or  to  fly  their  harm,  as  I,  after 
these  words  were  uttered,  came  down  here 
from  my  blessed  seat,  putting  my  trust  in  thy 
upright  speech,  which  honors  thee  and  them 
who  have  heard  it.’ 

1 15.  “After  she  had  said  this  to  me,  weeping 
she  turned  her  lucent  eyes,  whereby  she  made 
me  more  quick  to  come.  And  I  came  to  thee 
thus  as  she  willed.  I  withdrew  thee  from  before 
that  wild  beast  which  took  from  thee  the  short 
way  on  the  beautiful  mountain.  What  is  it 
then?  Why,  why  dost  thou  hold  back?  why 
dost  thou  harbor  such  cowardice  in  thy  heart? 
why  hast  thou  not  daring  and  assurance,  since 

2  The  Virgin  Mary,  never  spoken  of  by  name  in  Hell. 

3  As  an  allegorical  figure  she  is  the  symbol,  as  her 
name  indicates,  of  illuminating  Grace. 

4  Rachel  was  adopted  by  the  Church  as  the  type  of 
the  contemplative  life,  in  which  the  soul  devotes  itself 
to  the  consideration  of  the  things  of  God  and  so  has 
a  foretaste  of  the  felicity  of  heaven.  Beatrice,  the  type 
of  instruction  in  the  divine  mysteries,  is  therefore  rightly 
at  Rachel’s  side. 


HELL 


three  such  blessed  Ladies  care  for  thee  in  the 
court  of  Heaven,  and  my  speech  pledges  thee 
such  good?” 

12 7.  As  the  flowerets,  bent  and  closed  by  the 
chill  of  night,  when  the  sun  brightens  them 
erect  themselves  all  open  on  their  stem,  so  I 
became  with  my  drooping  courage,  and  such 
good  daring  ran  to  my  heart  that  I  began  like 
a  person  enfreed:  “O  compassionate  she  who 
succored  me,  and  courteous  thou  who  didst 
speedily  obey  the  true  words  that  she  addressed 
to  thee!  Thou  by  thy  words  hast  so  disposed  my 
heart  with  desire  of  going,  that  I  have  returned 
to  my  first  intent.  Now  go,  for  one  sole  will  is 
in  us  both:  thou  leader,  thou  lord,  and  thou 
master.” 

1 41.  Thus  I  said  to  him;  and  when  he  moved 
on,  I  entered  along  the  deep  and  savage  road. 

CANTO  III 

1.  “Through  me  is  the  way  into  the  woeful 
city;  through  me  is  the  way  into  the  eternal 
woe;  through  me  is  the  way  among  the  lost  peo¬ 
ple.  Justice  moved  my  lofty  maker:  the  divine 
Power,  the  supreme  Wisdom  and  the  primal 
Love  made  me.  Before  me  were  no  things 
created,  save  eternal,  and  I  eternal  last.  Leave 
every  hope,  ye  who  enter!”1 

10.  These  words  of  obscure  color  I  saw  writ¬ 
ten  at  the  top  of  a  gate;  whereat  I:  “Master, 
their  meaning  is  dire  to  me.” 

13.  And  he  to  me,  like  a  person  well  advised: 
“Here  it  behoves  to  leave  every  fear;  it  behoves 
that  all  cowardice  should  here  be  dead.  We 
have  come  to  the  place  where  I  have  told  thee 
that  thou  shalt  see  the  woeful  people,  who  have 
lost  the  good  of  the  understanding.” 

19.  And  when  he  had  put  his  hand  on  mine 
with  a  cheerful  look,  wherefrom  I  took  cour¬ 
age,  he  brought  me  within  to  the  secret  things. 
Here  sighs,  laments,  and  deep  wailings  were 
resounding  through  the  starless  air;  wherefore 
at  first  I  wept  thereat.  Strange  tongues,  horri¬ 
ble  utterances,  words  of  woe,  accents  of  anger, 
voices  high  and  faint,  and  sounds  of  hands  with 
them,  were  making  a  tumult  which  whirls  al¬ 
ways  in  that  air  forever  dark,  like  the  sand 
when  the  whirlwind  breathes. 

3 1 .  And  I,  who  had  my  head  girt  with  horror, 

1  Cf.  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  45, 
A  6;  Part  I,  Q  39,  A  8. 


said:  “Master,  what  is  that  which  I  hear?  and 
what  folk  is  it  that  seems  so  overcome  with  its 
woe?” 

34.  And  he  to  me:  “The  wretched  souls  of 
those  who  lived  without  infamy  and  without 
praise  maintain  this  miserable  mode.  They  are 
mingled  with  that  caitiff  choir  of  the  angels, 
who  were  not  rebels,  nor  were  faithful  to  God, 
but  were  for  themselves.  The  heavens  chased 
them  out  in  order  to  be  not  less  beautiful,  nor 
does  thedeep  Hell  receive  them,  for  the  damned 
would  have  some  boast  of  them.” 

43.  And  I:  “Master,  what  is  so  grievous  to 
them,  that  makes  them  lament  so  bitterly?” 

45.  He  answered:  “I  will  tell  thee  very 
briefly.  These  have  not  hope  of  death;  and 
their  blind  life  is  so  debased,  that  they  are  en¬ 
vious  of  every  other  lot.  Fame  of  them  the 
world  permits  not  to  be;  mercy  and  justice  dis¬ 
dain  them.  Let  us  not  speak  of  them,  but  do 
thou  look  and  pass  on.” 

52.  And  I,  who  was  gazing,  saw  a  banner, 
which,  whirling,  ran  so  swiftly  that  it  seemed 
to  me  disdainful  of  any  pause,  and  behind  it 
came  so  long  a  train  of  folk,  that  I  should  never 
have  believed  death  had  undone  so  many.  After 
I  had  recognized  some  among  them,  I  saw  and 
knew  the  shade  of  him  who  made,  through 
cowardice,  the  great  refusal.2  At  once  I  under¬ 
stood  and  was  certain,  that  this  was  the  sect 
of  the  caitiffs  displeasing  to  God  and  to  his 
enemies.  These  wretches,  who  never  were  alive, 
were  naked,  and  much  stung  by  gad-flies 
and  by  wasps  that  were  there;  these  streaked 
their  faces  with  blood,  which,  mingled  with 
tears,  was  gathered  at  their  feet  by  loathsome 
worms. 

70.  And  when  I  gave  myself  to  looking  on¬ 
ward,  I  saw  people  on  the  bank  of  a  great 
river;  wherefore  I  said:  “Master,  now  grant  to 
me  that  I  may  know  who  these  are,  and  what 
rule  makes  them  appear  so  ready  to  pass  over, 
as  I  discern  through  the  faint  light.”  And  he  to 
me:  “The  things  will  be  clear  to  thee,  when 
we  shall  stay  our  steps  on  the  sad  shore  of 
Acheron.”  Then  with  eyes  ashamed  and  down¬ 
cast,  fearing  lest  my  speech  might  be  trouble¬ 
some  to  him,  far  as  to  the  river  I  refrained  from 
speaking. 

2  Probably  Pope  Celestine  V,  who,  after  having  held 
the  papacy  for  five  months  in  1294,  abdicated. 


5 


CANTO  IV 


CANTO  IV 
i.  A  heavy  thunder  broke  the  deep  sleep  in 


82.  And  behold!  coming  toward  us  in  a  boat, 
an  old  man,  white  with  ancient  hair,  crying: 
“Woe  to  you,  wicked  souls!  hope  not  ever  to 
see  the  Heavens!  I  come  to  carry  you  to  the 
other  bank,  into  the  eternal  darkness,  into  heat 
and  into  frost.  And  thou  who  art  there,  living 
soul,  depart  from  these  that  are  dead.”  But 
when  he  saw  that  I  did  not  depart,  he  said: 
“By  another  way,  by  other  ports  thou  shalt 
come  to  the  shore,  not  here,  for  passage;  a 
lighter  bark  must  carry  thee.”1 

94.  And  my  Leader  to  him:  “Charon,  vex 
not  thyself;  it  is  thus  willed  there  where  is 
power  for  that  which  is  willed;  and  ask  no 
more.”  Thereon  were  quiet  the  fleecy  jaws  of 
the  ferryman  of  the  livid  marsh,  who  round 
about  his  eyes  had  wheels  of  flame. 

100.  But  those  souls,  who  were  weary  and 
naked,  changed  color  and  gnashed  their  teeth, 
soon  as  they  heard  his  cruel  words.  They  blas¬ 
phemed  God  and  their  parents,  the  human  race, 
the  place,  the  time  and  the  seed  of  their  sowing 
and  of  their  birth.  Then,  all  of  them  bitterly 
weeping,  drew  together  to  the  evil  bank,  which 
awaits  every  man  who  fears  not  God.  Charon 
the  demon,  with  eyes  of  glowing  coal,  beckon¬ 
ing  to  them,  collects  them  all;  he  beats  with  his 
oar  whoever  lingers. 

1 12.  As  in  autumn  the  leaves  depart  one  after 
the  other,  until  the  bough  sees  all  its  spoils  up¬ 
on  the  earth,  in  like  wise  the  evil  seed  of  Adam 
throw  themselves  from  that  shore  one  by  one, 
at  signals,  as  the  bird  at  his  recall.  Thus  they  go 
over  the  dusky  wave,  and  before  they  have 
landed  on  the  farther  side,  already  on  this  a 
new  throng  is  assembled. 

121.  “My  son,”  said  the  courteous  Master, 
“those  who  die  in  the  wrath  of  God,  all  come 
together  here  from  every  land;  and  they  are 
eager  to  pass  over  the  stream,  for  the  divine 
justice  spurs  them  so  that  fear  is  turned  to  de¬ 
sire.  A  good  soul  never  passes  this  way;  and 
therefore  if  Charon  fret  at  thee,  well  mayest 
thou  now  know  what  his  speech  signifies.” 

130.  This  ended,  the  gloomy  plain  trembled 
so  mightily,  that  the  memory  of  the  terror  even 
now  bathes  me  with  sweat.  The  tearful  land 
gave  forth  a  wind  that  flashed  a  crimson  light 
which  vanquished  all  sensation  in  me,  and  I 
fell  as  a  man  whom  slumber  seizes. 

aCf.  Aeneid,  vi.  298#.,  326#. 


my  head,  so  that  I  started  up  like  a  person  who 
is  waked  by  force,  and,  risen  erect,  1  moved  my 
rested  eye  round  about,  and  looked  fixedly  to 
distinguish  the  place  where  I  was.  True  it  is, 
that  I  found  myself  on  the  brink  of  the  woeful 
valley  of  the  abyss  which  collects  a  thunder  of 
infinite  wailings.  It  was  so  dark,  deep,  and 
cloudy,  that,  though  I  fixed  my  sight  on  the 
depth,  I  did  not  discern  anything  there. 

13.  “Now  let  us  descend  here  below  into  the 
blind  world,”  began  the  Poet  all  deadly  pale, 
“I  will  be  first,  and  thou  shalt  be  second.” 

16.  And  I,  who  had  observed  his  color,  said: 
“How  shall  I  come,  if  thou  fearest,  who  art 
wont  to  be  the  comfort  to  my  doubting?”  And 
he  to  me:  “The  anguish  of  the  folk  who  are 
here  below  paints  on  my  face  that  pity  which 
thou  takest  for  fear.  Let  us  go  on,  for  the  long 
way  urges  us.” 

23.  Thus  he  placed  himself,  and  thus  he 
made  me  enter  into  the  first  circle2  that  girds 
the  abyss.  Here,  as  one  listened,  there  was  no 
lamentation  but  that  of  sighs  which  made  the 
eternal  air  to  tremble;  this  came  of  the  woe 
without  torments  felt  by  the  crowds,  which 
were  many  and  great,  of  infants  and  of  women 
and  of  men. 

31.  The  good  Master  to  me:  “Thou  dost  not 
ask  what  spirits  are  these  that  thou  seest.  Now 
I  would  have  thee  know,  before  thou  goest 
farther,  that  these  did  not  sin;  and  though  they 
have  merits  it  suffices  not,  because  they  did  not 
have  baptism,  which  is  part  of  the  faith  that 
thou  believest;  and  if  they  were  before  Chris¬ 
tianity,  they  did  not  duly  worship  God:  and  of 
such  as  these  am  I  myself.  For  such  defects, 
and  not  for  other  guilt,  are  we  lost,  and  only  so 
far  harmed  that  without  hope  we  live  in  desire.” 

43.  Great  woe  seized  me  at  my  heart  when  I 
heard  him,  because  I  knew  that  people  of  much 
worth  were  suspended  in  that  limbo. 

46.  “Tell  me,  my  Master,  tell  me,  Lord,”  I 
began,  with  wish  to  be  assured  of  that  faith 
which  vanquishes  every  error,  “did  ever  any¬ 
one  who  afterwards  was  blessed  go  forth  from 
here,  either  by  his  own  or  by  another’s  merit?” 

51.  And  he,  who  understood  my  covert 

2  Limbo  (Lat.  limbus,  edge,  hem,  border). 


HELL 


speech,  answered:  “I  was  new  in  this  state  when 
I  saw  a  Mighty  One  come  hither  crowned  with 
sign  of  victory.  He  drew  out  hence  the  shade 
of  the  first  parent,  of  Abel  his  son,  and  that  of 
Noah,  of  Moses  the  law-giver  and  obedient, 
Abraham  the  patriarch,  and  David  the  King, 
Israel  with  his  father  and  with  his  offspring, 
and  with  Rachel,  for  whom  he  did  so  much, 
and  many  others;  and  He  made  them  blessed: 
and  I  would  have  thee  know  that  before  these, 
human  spirits  were  not  saved.” 

64.  We  ceased  not  goingon  because  he  spoke, 
but  all  the  while  were  passing  through  the 
wood,  the  wood,  I  mean,  of  crowded  spirits; 
nor  yet  had  our  way  been  long  from  the  place 
of  my  slumber,  when  I  saw  a  fire,  which  over¬ 
came  a  hemisphere  of  darkness.1  We  were  still 
a  little  distant  from  it,  yet  not  so  far  but  that  I 
could  in  part  discern  that  honorable  folk  pos¬ 
sessed  that  place. 

73.  “O  thou  who  honorest  both  science  and 
art,  who  are  these,  who  have  such  honor  that  it 
separates  them  from  the  manner  of  the  others?” 
And  he  to  me:  “The  honorable  renown  of  them 
which  sounds  above  in  thy  life  wins  grace  in 
heaven  which  thus  advances  them.” 

79.  At  this  a  voice  was  heard  by  me:  “Honor 
the  loftiest  Poet!  his  shade  returns  which  had 
departed.”  When  the  voice  had  stopped  and 
was  quiet,  I  saw  four  great  shades  coming  to 
us;  they  had  a  semblance  neither  sad  nor  glad. 

85.  The  good  Master  began  to  say:  “Look  at 
him  with  that  sword  in  hand  who  comes  before 
the  three,  even  as  lord;  he  is  Homer,  the  sover¬ 
eign  poet;  the  next  who  comes  is  Horace,  the 
satirist;  Ovid  is  the  third,  and  the  last  is  Lucan. 
Since  each  shares  with  me  the  name  which  the 
single  voice  sounded,  they  do  me  honor,  and 
in  that  do  well.” 

94.  Thus  I  saw  assembled  the  fair  school  of 
that  Lord  of  the  loftiest  song  who  soars  above 
the  others  like  an  eagle.  After  they  had  dis¬ 
coursed  somewhat  together,  they  turned  to  me 
with  sign  of  salutation;  and  my  Master  smiled 
thereat.  And  far  more  of  honor  yet  they  did  me, 
for  they  made  me  of  their  band,  so  that  I  was 
the  sixth  amid  so  much  wisdom.  Thus  we  went 
on  as  far  as  the  light,  speaking  things  concern¬ 
ing  which  silence  is  becoming,  even  as  was 

1  The  fire  may  he  the  symbol  of  the  partial  light 
afforded  by  philosophy  to  the  virtuous  heathen. 


speech  there  where  I  was. 

106.  We  came  to  the  foot  of  a  noble  castle, 
seven  times  circled  by  high  walls,2  defended 
round  about  by  a  fair  streamlet.  This  we  passed 
as  if  hard  ground;  through  seven  gates3  I  en¬ 
tered  with  these  sages;  we  came  to  a  meadow  of 
fresh  verdure.  People  were  there  with  slow  and 
grave  eyes,  of  great  authority  in  their  looks; 
they  spoke  seldom,  and  with  soft  voices.  There¬ 
on  we  withdrew  ourselves  upon  one  side,  into 
an  open,  luminous,  and  high  place,  so  that  they 
all  could  be  seen.  There  before  me  upon  the 
green  enamel  were  shown  to  me  the  great 
spirits,  whom  for  having  seen  I  inwardly  exalt 
myself. 

1 2 1. 1  saw  Electra  with  many  companions, 
among  whom  I  recognized  Hector  and  Aeneas, 
Carsar  in  armor,  with  his  gerfalcon  eyes;  I  saw 
Camilla  and  Penthesilea,  on  the  other  side  I 
saw  the  King  Latinus,  who  was  sitting  with 
Lavinia  his  daughter.  I  saw  that  Brutus  who 
drove  out  Tarquin;  Lucretia,  Julia,  Marcia, 
and  Cornelia;  and  alone,  apart,  I  saw  the  Sala- 
din.  When  I  raised  my  brows  a  little  more,  I 
saw  the  Master  of  those  who  know,4  seated 
amid  the  philosophic  family:  all  regard  him, 
all  do  him  honor.  Here  I  saw  Socrates  and 
Plato,  who  in  front  of  the  others  stand  nearest 
to  him;  Democritus,  who  ascribes  the  world 
to  chance;  Diogenes,  Anaxagoras,  and  Thales, 
Empedocles,  Heraclitus,  and  Zeno;  and  I  saw 
the  good  collector  of  the  qualities,  Dioscorides, 
I  mean;5  and  I  saw  Orpheus,  Tully,  and  Linus, 
and  moral  Seneca,  Euclid  the  geometer,  and 
Ptolemy,  Hippocrates,  Avicenna,  and  Galen, 
and  Averrhoes,  who  made  the  great  comment.6 
I  cannot  report  of  all  in  full,  because  the  long 

2  The  castle  is  the  symbol  of  the  abode  of  Philosophy, 
or  human  wisdom  unenlightened  by  revelation;  its 
seven  high  walls  may  perhaps  signify  the  four  moral 
and  three  intellectual  virtues — prudence,  temperance, 
fortitude,  and  justice;  understanding,  knowledge,  and 
wisdom,  all  which  could  be  attained  by  the  virtuous 
heathen.  Cf.  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I -II, 
Q65,  A2. 

3  The  seven  gates  may  typify  the  seven  liberal  arts 
of  the  trivium  and  the  quadrivium,  by  which  names 
the  courses  of  instruction  in  them  were  known  in  the 
schools  of  the  Middle  Ages.  The  trivium  included 
grammar,  logic,  and  rhetoric;  the  quadrivium,  music, 
arithmetic,  geometry,  and  astronomy. 

4  Aristotle. 

5  Dioscorides,  a  physician  in  Cilicia,  of  the  first  cen¬ 
tury  a.  d.,  wrote,  in  his  treatise  De  materia  medica,  of 
the  qualities  of  plants. 

0  On  Aristotle. 


7 


CANTO  V 


theme  so  drives  me  that  many  times  the  speech 
comes  short  of  the  fact. 

148.  The  company  of  six  is  reduced  to  two. 
Bv  another  way  the  wise  guide  leads  me  out 
from  the  quiet  into  the  air  that  trembles,  and  I 
come  into  a  region  where  is  nothing  that  can 
give  light. 

CANTO  V 

1.  Thus  I  descended  from  the  first  circle  down 
into  the  second,  which  girdles  less  space,  and 
so  much  more  woe  that  it  goads  to  wailing. 
There  stands  Minos  horribly,  and  snarls:  he 
examines  the  transgressions  at  the  entrance;  he 
judges,  and  he  sends  according  as  he  entwines 
himself.  I  mean,  that  when  the  ill  born  soul 
comes  there  before  him,  it  confesses  itself 
wholly,  and  that  discerner  of  the  sins  sees  what 
place  of  Hell  is  for  it;  he  girds  himself  with  his 
tail  so  many  times  as  the  grades  he  wills  that 
it  be  sent  down.  Always  many  of  them  stand 
before  him;  they  go,  in  turn,  each  to  the  judg¬ 
ment;  they  speak  and  hear,  and  then  are  whirled 
below. 

16.  “O  thou  that  comest  to  the  woeful  inn,” 
said  Minos  to  me,  when  he  saw  me,  leaving 
the  act  of  so  great  an  office,  “beware  how  thou 
enterest,  and  to  whom  thou  trustest  thyself; 
let  not  the  amplitude  of  the  entrance  deceive 
thee.”  And  my  Leader  to  him:  “Wherefore 
dost  thou  too  cry  out?  Hinder  not  his  fated 
going;  thus  is  it  willed  there  where  is  power 
for  that  which  is  willed;  and  ask  no  more.” 

25.  Now  the  notes  of  woe  begin  to  make 
themselves  heard  by  me;  now  I  am  come  where 
much  wailing  smites  me.  I  had  come  into  a 
place  mute  of  all  light,  that  bellows  as  the  sea 
does  in  a  tempest,  if  it  be  combated  by  contrary 
winds.  The  infernal  hurricane  which  never 
rests  carries  along  the  spirits  with  its  rapine; 
whirling  and  smiting  it  molests  them.1  When 
they  arrive  before  its  rush,  here  are  the  shrieks, 
the  complaint,  and  the  lamentation;  here  they 
blaspheme  the  divine  power.  I  understood  that 
to  such  torment  are  condemned  the  carnal  sin¬ 
ners  who  subject  the  reason  to  theappetite.  And 
as  their  wings  bear  along  the  starlings  in  the 
cold  season  in  a  large  and  full  troop,  so  did  that 
blast  the  evil  spirits:  hither,  thither,  down,  up 
it  carries  them:  no  hope  ever  comforts  them, 

1  Cf.  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  11.  16. 


neither  of  repose,  nor  of  less  pain. 

46.  And  as  the  cranes  go  singing  their  lays, 
making  in  air  a  long  line  of  themselves,  so  I 
saw  come,  uttering  wails,  shades  borne  along 
by  the  aforesaid  strife.  Wherefore  I  said:  “Mas¬ 
ter,  who  are  these  folk  whom  the  black  air  so 
castigates?” 

52.  “The  first  of  those  of  whom  thou  wishest 
to  have  knowledge,”  said  he  to  me  then,  “was 
empress  of  many  tongues.  She  was  so  aban¬ 
doned  to  the  vice  of  luxury  that  lust  she  made 
licit  in  her  law.  to  take  away  the  blame  into 
which  she  had  been  brought.  She  is  Semiramis, 
of  whom  it  is  read  that  she  succeeded  Ninus 
and  had  been  his  wife;  she  held  the  land  which 
the  Sultan  rules.  That  other  is  she2  who,  for 
love,  slew  herself,  and  broke  faith  to  the  ashes 
of  Sichaeus;  next  is  Cleopatra,  the  luxurious. 
See  Helen,  for  whom  so  long  a  time  of  ill  re¬ 
volved;  and  see  the  great  Achilles,  who  fought 
to  the  end  with  love.  See  Paris,  Tristan — ”  and 
more  than  a  thousand  shades  whom  love  had 
parted  from  our  life  he  showed  me,  and,  point¬ 
ing  to  them,  named  to  me. 

70.  After  I  had  heard  my  Teacher  name  the 
dames  of  eld  and  the  cavaliers,  pity  overcame 
me,  and  I  was  well  nigh  bewildered.  I  began: 
“Poet,  willingly  would  I  speak  with  those  two 
that  go  together,  and  seem  to  be  so  light  upon 
the  wind.”3  And  he  to  me:  “Thou  shalt  see 
when  they  are  nearer  to  us,  and  do  thou  then 
pray  them  by  that  love  which  leads  them,  and 
they  will  come.”  Soon  as  the  wind  sways  them 
toward  us,  I  lifted  my  voice:  “O  wearied  souls, 
come  to  speak  with  us,  if  Another4  deny  it  not.” 

82.  As  doves,  called  by  desire,  with  wings 
open  and  steady,  come  through  the  air  borne 
by  their  will  to  their  sweet  nest,  these  issued 
from  the  troop  where  Dido  is,  coming  to  us 
through  the  malign  air,  so  strong  was  the  com¬ 
passionate  cry. 

88.  “O  living  creature,  gracious  and  benign, 
that  goest  through  the  black  air  visiting  us  who 
stained  the  world  blood-red,  if  the  King  of  the 
universe  were  a  friend  we  would  pray  Him  for 
thy  peace,  since  thou  hast  pity  on  our  perverse 

2  Dido. 

3  These  two  are  Francesca  da  Rimini,  daughter  of 
the  lord  of  Ravenna,  and  her  lover,  Paoio,  the  brother 
of  her  husband,  the  son  of  the  lord  of  Rimini. 

4  The  name  of  God  is  never  spoken  by  the  spirits  in 
Hell. 


HELL 


ill.  Of  what  it  pleases  thee  to  hear,  and  what 
to  speak,  we  will  hear  and  we  will  speak  to 
you,  while  the  wind,  as  now,  is  hushed  for  us. 
The  city  where  I  was  born  sits  upon  the  sea¬ 
shore,  where  the  Po,  with  his  followers,  de¬ 
scends  to  have  peace.  Love,  which  quickly  lays 
hold  on  gentle  heart,  seized  this  one  for  the  fair 
person  that  was  taken  from  me,  and  the  mode 
still  hurts  me.  Love,  which  absolves  no  loved 
one  from  loving,  seized  me  for  the  pleasing  of 
him  so  strongly  that,  as  thou  seest,  it  does  not 
even  now  abandon  me.  Love  brought  us  to  one 
death.  Cain  awaits  him  who  quenched  our 
life.”  These  words  were  borne  to  us  from  them. 

109.  Soon  as  I  had  heard  those  injured  souls  I 
bowed  my  face,  and  held  it  down  so  long  until 
the  Poet  said  tome:  “What art  thou  thinking?” 
When  I  replied,  I  began:  “Alas!  how  many 
sweet  thoughts,  how  great  desire,  led  these  un¬ 
to  the  woeful  pass.”  Then  I  turned  me  again  to 
them,  and  spoke,  and  began:  “Francesca,  thy 
torments  make  me  sad  and  piteous  to  weeping. 
But  tell  me,  at  the  time  of  the  sweet  sighs,  by 
what  and  how  did  love  concede  to  thee  to 
know  thy  dubious  desires?”  And  she  to  me: 
“There  is  no  greater  woe  than  the  remember¬ 
ing  in  misery  the  happy  time,  and  that  thy 
Teacher  knows.  But  if  thou  hast  so  great  desire 
to  know  the  first  root  of  our  love,  I  will  do  like 
one  who  weeps  and  tells. 

127.  “We  were  reading  one  day,  for  delight, 
of  Lancelot,  how  love  constrained  him.  We  were 
alone  and  without  any  suspicion.  Many  times 
that  reading  urged  our  eyes,  and  took  the  color 
from  our  faces,  but  only  one  point  was  it  that 
overcame  us.  When  we  read  of  the  longed-for 
smile  being  kissed  by  such  a  lover,  this  one, 
who  never  shall  be  divided  from  me,  kissed  my 
mouth  all  trembling.  Gallehaut  was  the  book, 
and  he  who  wrote  it.1  That  day  we  read  no  far¬ 
ther  in  it.” 

139.  While  the  one  spirit  said  this,  the  other 
was  so  weeping  that  through  pity  I  swooned  as 
if  I  had  been  dying,  and  fell  as  a  dead  body  falls. 

CANTO  VI 

1.  At  the  return  of  my  mind,  which  had 
closed  itself  before  the  pity  of  these  two  kins¬ 
folk,  that  wholly  confounded  me  with  sadness, 

1  In  the  Romance,  it  was  Gallehaut  that  prevailed  on 
Guenever  to  give  a  kiss  to  Lancelot. 


I  see  around  me  new  torments  and  new  tor¬ 
mented  souls  wherever  I  move,  and  wherever 
I  turn,  and  wherover  I  gaze. 

7. 1  am  in  the  third  circle,  that  of  the  eternal, 
accursed,  cold,  and  heavy  rain:  its  rule  and 
quality  are  never  new.  Coarse  hail,  and  dark 
water,  and  snow  pour  down  through  the  tene¬ 
brous  air:  the  earth  which  receives  them  stinks. 
Cerberus,  a  Cruel  and  strange  beast,  with  three 
throats  barks  dogwise  above  the  people  that  are 
here  submerged.  He  has  red  eyes,  a  greasy  and 
black  beard,  and  a  big  belly,  and  paws  armed 
with  nails:  he  claws  the  spirits,  bites,  and  rends 
them.  The  rain  makes  them  howl  like  dogs;  of 
one  of  their  sides  they  make  a  screen  for  the 
other;  the  wretched  profane  ones2  often  turn 
themselves. 

22.  When  Cerberus,  the  great  worm,  ob¬ 
served  us,  he  opened  his  mouths,  and  showed 
his  fangs  to  us;  not  a  limb  had  he  that  he  held 
still.  And  my  Leader  opened  wide  his  hands, 
took  some  earth,  and  with  full  fists  threw  it 
into  his  ravenous  gullets.  As  is  the  dog  that 
baying  craves,  and  becomes  quiet  when  he  bites 
his  food,  and  is  intent  and  struggles  only  to  de¬ 
vour  it,  such  became  those  filthy  faces  of  the 
demon  Cerberus,  who  so  thunders  at  the  souls 
that  they  would  fain  be  deaf. 

34.  We  were  passing  over  the  shades  whom 
the  heavy  rain  subdues,  and  were  setting  our 
feet  upon  their  vain  show  which  seems  a  body. 
They  all  of  them  were  lying  on  the  ground,  ex¬ 
cept  one  which  raised  itself  to  sit,  soon  as  it 
saw  us  passing  in  front.  “O  thou  who  art  led 
through  this  Hell,”  it  said  to  me,  “recognize  me, 
if  thou  canst;  thou  wast  made  before  I  was  un¬ 
made.”  And  I  to  it:  “The  anguish  which  thou 
hast,  perchance  withdraws  thee  from  my  mem¬ 
ory,  so  that  it  seems  not  that  I  ever  saw  thee. 
But  tell  me  who  thou  art,  that  art  set  in  a  place 
so  woeful,  and  with  such  a  punishment,  that  if 
any  other  be  greater,  none  is  so  displeasing.” 

49.  And  he  to  me:  “Thy  city  which  is  so  full 
of  envy  that  already  the  sack  runs  over,  held 
me  in  it,  in  the  bright  life.  You,  citizens,  called 
me  Ciacco;3  for  the  pernicious  fault  of  gluttony, 
as  thou  seest,  I  am  broken  by  the  rain:  and  I, 
wretched  soul,  am  not  alone,  for  all  these  en- 

2  Cf.  Philippians,  3.  19. 

3  Ciacco,  an  abbreviation  of  Jacopo,  seems,  in  popular 
speech,  to  have  been  the  term  for  hog . 


CANTO  VII 


dure  like  punishment  for  like  fault”:  and  he 
spoke  not  a  word  more.  I  answered  him: 
“Ciacco,  thy  distress  so  weighs  upon  me,  that  it 
invites  me  to  weeping;  but  tell  me,  if  thou 
knowest,  to  what  will  come  the  citizens  of 
the  divided  city;  if  any  one  in  it  is  just;  and  tell 
me  the  cause  why  such  great  discord  has  as¬ 
sailed  it.” 

64.  And  he  to  me:  “After  long  contention 
they  will  come  to  blood,  and  the  sylvan  party 
will  chaseout  theother  with  much  injury.  Then 
afterwards  within  three  suns  it  behoves  that 
this  shall  fall, and  theother  surmount  by  means 
of  the  force  of  a  certain  one  who  just  now  is 
tacking.  It  will  hold  high  its  front  long  time, 
keeping  the  other  under  heavy  weights,  how¬ 
ever  it  may  lament  and  be  shamed  thereat. 
There  are  two  just  men,  but  they  are  not 
heeded  there;  Pride,  Envy,  and  Avarice  are  the 
three  sparks  that  have  inflamed  their  hearts.”' 
Here  he  made  ending  of  the  grievous  sound. 

77.  And  I  to  him:  “I  would  that  thou  instruct 
me  further,  and  that  of  more  speech  thou  make 
a  gift  to  me.  Farinata  and  Tegghiaio  who 
were  so  worthy,  Jacopo  Rusticucci,  Arrigo,  and 
Mosca,  and  the  others  who  set  their  minds  on 
well-doing,  tell  me  where  they  are,  and  make 
me  to  know  of  them,  for  great  desire  urges  me 
to  learn  if  Heaven  sweeten  them,  or  Hell  en¬ 
venom  them.” 

85.  And  he:  “They  are  among  the  blacker 
souls:  different  sin  weighs  them  down  toward 
the  bottom;  if  thou  descend  so  far,  thou  mayst 
see  them.  But  when  thou  shalt  be  in  the  sweet 
world  I  pray  thee  that  thou  bring  me  to  the 
memory  of  others:  more  I  say  not  to  thee,  and 
more  I  answer  thee  not.”  Thereon  he  twisted 
his  straight  eyes  awry,  looked  at  me  a  little, 
and  then  bent  his  head,  and  fell  with  it  level 
with  the  other  blind. 

94.  And  the  Leader  said  tome:  “He  rousesup 
no  more  on  this  side  the  sound  of  the  angelic 
trump.  When  the  hostile  Power  shall  come, 
each  one  will  find  again  his  dismal  tomb,  will 
resume  his  flesh  and  his  shape,  will  hear  that 
which  through  eternity  reverberates.” 

1  This  prophecy  relates  to  the  dissensions  of  the 
Whites  and  the  Blacks  by  which  Florence  was  rent. 
The  “sylvan  party”  was  that  of  the  Whites,  who  were 
mainly  Ghibellines.  By  the  “one  who  just  now  is  tack¬ 
ing”  Dante  probably  refers  to  Pope  Boniface  VIII.  In 
the  overthrow  of  the  Whites  Dante’s  own  fortunes  were 
involved. 


9 

100.  Thus  we  passed  along  with  slow  steps 
through  the  foul  mixture  of  the  shades  and  of 
the  rain,  touching  a  little  on  the  future  life; 
wherefore  I  said:  “Master,  these  torments  will 
they  increase  after  the  great  Sentence,  or  be 
less,  or  will  they  be  just  as  burning?”  A.nd  he 
to  me:  “Return  to  thy  science,2  which  declares 
that  in  proportion  the  thing  is  more  perfect  the 
more  it  feels  the  good,  and  so  the  pain.  Though 
this  accursed  folk  never  can  attain  to  true  per¬ 
fection,  it  expects  thereafter  to  be  more  than 
now.” 

1 1 2.  We  took  a  circling  course  along  that 
road,  speaking  far  more  than  I  repeat;  and  came 
to  the  point  where  the  descent  is.  Here  we 
found  Pluto,  the  great  enemy. 

CANTO  VII 

1.  “Pape  Satan,  pape  Satan  aleppe,”  began 
Pluto  with  his  clucking  voice.  And  that  gentle 
Sage,  who  knew  everything,  said  to  comfort 
me:  “Let  not  thy  fear  hurt  thee;  for,  whatever 
power  he  have,  he  shall  not  take  from  thee  the 
descent  of  this  rock.”  Then  he  turned  to  that 
swollen  lip  and  said:  “Be  silent,  accursed  wolf  !J 
consume  thyself  inwardly  with  thine  own  rage: 
not  without  cause  is  this  going  to  the  depth;  it 
is  willed  on  high,  there  where  Michael  wrought 
the  vengeance  for  the  proud  rape.”  As  sails 
swollen  by  the  wind  fall  in  a  heap  when  the 
mast  snaps,  so  fell  to  earth  the  cruel  wild-beast. 

16.  Thus  we  descended  into  the  fourth  hol¬ 
low,  taking  more  of  the  woeful  bank  which  in¬ 
sacks  the  evil  of  the  whole  universe.  Ah.  justice 
of  God!  who  heaps  up  so  many  new  travails  and 
penalties  as  I  saw?  And  why  does  our  guilt  so 
ruin  us?  As  does  the  wave,  yonder  upon  Cha- 
rybdis,  which  is  broken  on  that  which  it  en¬ 
counters,  so  needs  must  here  the  people  coun¬ 
terdance. 

25.  Here  I  saw  many  more  people  than  else¬ 
where,  both  on  the  one  side  and  the  other,  with 
great  howls  rolling  weights  by  force  of  chest. 
They  struck  against  each  other,  and  then  there 
each  wheeled  round,  rolling  back,  crying- 
“Why  holdest  thou?”  and  “Why  flingest  thou 
away?”  Thus  they  turned  through  the  dark 
circle  on  either  hand  to  the  opposite  point,  still 
crying  out  at  each  other  their  opprobrious 

2  The  teaching  of  Aristotle;  see  Ethics,  x.  4. 

3Cf.  Hell,  i.  49,  and  Purgatory,  xx.  10. 


HELL 


io 

measure;  then  each  wheeled  round,  when  he 
had  come  through  his  half  circle  to  the  other 
joust. 

3 6.  And  I,  who  had  my  heart  as  it  were 
pierced  through,  said:  “My  Master,  now  de¬ 
clare  to  me  what  folk  this  is,  and  if  all  these 
tonsured  ones  on  our  left  were  clerks.” 

40.  And  he  to  me:  “Each  and  all  of  these 
were  so  asquint  in  mind  in  the  first  life  that 
they  made  no  spending  in  it  with  due  measure. 
Clearly  enough  their  voice  bays  it  forth,  when 
they  come  to  the  two  points  of  the  circle  where 
the  contrary  fault  divides  them.  These  were 
clerks  who  have  no  hairy  covering  on  their 
heads,  and  Popes  and  Cardinals,  in  whom  ava¬ 
rice  practices  its  excess.” 

49.  And  I:  “Master,  among  such  as  these  I 
ought  surely  to  recognize  some  who  were  pol¬ 
luted  with  these  evils.” 

52.  And  he  to  me:  “Thou  harborest  a  vain 
thought;  the  undiscerning  life  that  made  them 
foul  now  makes  them  dim  to  all  discernment. 
Forever  will  they  come  to  the  two  buttings; 
these  will  rise  from  the  sepulchre  with  closed 
fist,  and  these  with  shorn  hair.  Ill-giving  and 
ill-keeping  have  taken  from  them  the  beautiful 
world,  and  set  them  to  this  scuffle;  what  that  is, 
I  adorn  not  words  for  it.  Now,  son,  thou  canst 
see  the  brief  jest  of  the  goods  that  are  com¬ 
mitted  to  Fortune,  for  which  the  human  race 
struggle  with  each  other;  for  all  the  gold  that 
is  beneath  the  moon,  or  that  ever  was,  could 
not  of  these  weary  souls  make  a  single  one  re¬ 
pose.” 

67.  “Master,”  said  I  to  him,  “now  tell  me  fur¬ 
ther,  this  Fortune,  on  which  thou  touchest  to 
me,  what  is  it,  which  has  the  goods  of  the  world 
so  in  its  clutches?” 

70.  And  he  to  me:  “O  foolish  creatures,  how 
great  is  that  ignorance  which  harms  you!  I 
would  have  thee  now  receive  my  opinion  con¬ 
cerning  her.  He  whose  wisdom  transcends  all, 
made  the  heavens,  and  gave  them  their  guides, 
so  that  every  part  shines  on  every  part,  distrib¬ 
uting  equally  the  light.  In  like  wise  for  the 
splendors  of  the  world,  Lie  ordained  a  general 
ministress  and  guide,  who  should  from  time  to 
time  transfer  the  vain  goods  from  race  to  race, 
and  from  one  blood  to  another,  beyond  the  re¬ 
sistance  of  human  wit.  Wherefore  one  race 
rules,  and  another  languishes,  pursuant  to  her 


judgment,  which  is  hidden  like  the  snake  in 
the  grass.  Your  wisdom  has  no  withstanding  of 
her:  she  foresees,  judges,  and  pursues  her 
reign,  as  theirs  the  other  gods.  Her  permuta¬ 
tions  have  no  truce;  necessity  compels  her  to 
be  swift,  so  often  comes  he  who  obtains  a  turn. 
This  is  she  who  is  so  set  upon  the  cross,  even  by 
those  who  ought  to  give  her  praise,  giving  her 
blame  amiss  and  ill  report.  But  she  is  blessed 
and  hears  this  not:  with  the  other  Primal  Crea¬ 
tures  glad  she  turns  her  sphere,  and  blessed  she 
rejoices.  Now  let  us  descend  at  once  to  greater 
woe:  already  every  star  is  sinking  that  was  ris¬ 
ing  when  I  set  out,  and  too  long  stay  is  forbid¬ 
den.” 

100.  We  crossed  the  circle  to  the  other  bank, 
above  a  fount  that  bubbles  up  and  pours  out 
through  a  trench  which  proceeds  from  it.  The 
water  was  far  darker  than  perse;  and  we,  in 
company  with  the  dusky  waves,  entered  down 
through  a  strange  way.  This  dismal  little  stream, 
when  it  has  descended  to  the  foot  of  the  malign 
gray  slopes,  makes  a  marsh  that  is  named 
Styx.  And  I,  who  was  standing  intent  to  gaze, 
saw  muddy  people  in  that  swamp,  all  naked 
and  with  look  of  hurt.  They  were  smiting  each 
other,  not  with  hand  only,  but  with  the  head, 
with  the  chest,  and  with  the  feet,  mangling 
one  another  piecemeal  with  their  teeth. 

1 15.  The  good  Master  said:  “Son,  now  thou 
seest  the  souls  of  those  whom  anger  overcame; 
and  also  I  will  that  thou  believe  for  certain  that 
under  the  water  are  folk  who  sigh,  and  make 
this  water  bubble  at  the  surface,  as  thine  eye 
tells  thee  wherever  it  turns.  Fixed  in  the  slime, 
they  say:  ‘Sullen  were  we  in  the  sweet  air  that 
is  gladdened  by  the  Sun,  bearing  within  our¬ 
selves  the  sluggish  fume;  now  we  are  sullen  in 
the  black  mire.’  This  hymn  they  gurgle  in  their 
throats,  for  they  cannot  speak  with  entire 
words.” 

127.  Thus  we  circled  a  great  arc  of  the  foul 
fen,  between  the  dry  bank  and  the  slough,  with 
eyes  turned  on  those  who  guzzle  the  mire.  We 
came  at  length  to  the  foot  of  a  tower. 

CANTO  VIII 

1. 1  say,  continuing,  that,  long  before  we  were 
at  the  foot  of  the  high  tower,  our  eyes  went  up¬ 
ward  to  its  top  by  reason  of  two  flamelets  that 
we  saw  set  there,  while  another  was  giving  sig- 


II 


CANTO  VIII 


nal  back  from  so  far  of?  that  the  eye  could 
hardly  catch  it.  And  I  turned  me  to  the  Sea  of 
all  wisdom;  I  said:  “This  one,  what  says  it? 
and  what  answers  that  other  fire?  and  who  are 
they  that  made  it?”  And  he  to  me:  “Upon  the 
turbid  waves  already  thou  mayst  discern  that 
which  is  expected,  if  the  fume  of  the  marsh 
hide  it  not  from  thee.” 

13.  Bowstring  never  urged  arrow  from  itself 
that  ran  so  swift  a  course  through  the  air,  as  a 
little  vessel  which  at  that  instant  I  saw  coming 
through  the  water  toward  us,  under  the  guid¬ 
ance  of  a  single  boatman,  who  cried  out:  “Now 
art  thou  arrived,  fell  soul?” 

19.  “Phlegyas,1  Phlegyas,this  time  thou  criest 
out  in  vain,”  said  my  Lord,  “thou  shalt  not 
have  us  longer  than  only  while  crossing  the 
slough.”  As  one  who  listens  to  some  great  de¬ 
ception  that  has  been  practiced  on  him,  and 
then  repines  thereat,  such  became  Phlegyas  in 
his  gathered  anger. 

25.  My  Leader  descended  into  the  bark  and 
then  he  made  me  enter  after  him,  and  only 
when  I  was  in  did  it  seem  laden.  Soon  as  my 

I !  Leader  and  I  were  in  the  boat,  the  antique 
prow  goes  its  way,  cutting  more  of  the  water 
than  it  is  wont  with  others. 

31.  While  we  were  running  through  the 
dead  channel,  one  full  of  mud  set  himself  be¬ 
fore  me,  and  said:  “Who  art  thou  that  com- 
est  before  thine  hour?”  And  I  to  him:  “If  I 
come,  I  do  not  stay;  but  who  art  thou  that  art 
become  so  foul?”  He  answered:  “Thou  seest 
that  I  am  one  who  laments.”  And  I  to  him, 
“With  lamenting  and  with  sorrow,  accursed 
spirit,  do  thou  remain,  for  I  know  thee,  though 

I  thou  be  all  filthy.”  Then  he  stretched  to  the 
boat  both  his  hands,  whereat  the  wary  Master 
thrust  him  back,  saying:  “Away  there,  with 
the  other  dogs!” 

43.  Then  he  clasped  my  neck  with  his  arms, 
kissed  my  face,  and  said:  “Indignant  soul, 
blessed  be  she  who  bore  thee!  That  was  an  ar¬ 
rogant  person  in  the  world;  no  goodness  is 
there  that  adorns  his  memory;  so  is  his  shade 
furious  here.  How  many  now  up  there  are  held 
great  kings  who  shall  lie  here  like  swine  in 
mire,  leaving  of  themselves  horrible  dispraises!” 

1  Phlegyas,  a  king  of  the  Lapithae,  enraged  with 
Apollo  for  the  violation  of  his  daughter,  set  fire,  in  his 
impious  wrath,  to  the  temple,  at  Delphi,  of  the  god, 
who  slew  him  with  his  arrows. 


52.  And  I:  “Master,  I  should  much  like  to  see 
him  soused  in  this  broth  before  we  depart  from 
the  lake.”  And  he  to  me:  “Before  the  shore 
lets  itself  be  seen  by  thee  thou  shalt  be  satisfied; 
it  is  fitting  that  thou  enjoy  such  a  desire.”  A  lit¬ 
tle  after  this  I  saw  such  rending  of  him  by  the 
muddy  folk  that  I  still  praise  God  therefor,  and 
thank  Him  for  it.  All  cried:  “At  Filippo  Ar- 
genti!”  and  the  raging  Florentine  spirit  turned 
upon  himself  with  his  teeth.  Here  we  left  him; 
so  that  I  tell  no  more  of  him. 

65.  But  on  my  ears  a  wailing  smote,  whereat 
forward  intent  I  unbar  my  eye.  And  the  good 
Master  said:  “Now,  son,  the  city  draws  near 
that  is  named  Dis,2  with  its  heavy  citizens,  with 
its  great  throng.”  And  I:  “Master,  already  in 
the  valley  therewithin  I  clearly  discern  its 
mosques  vermilion,  as  if  they  were  issuing 
from  fire.”  And  he  said  to  me:  “The  eternal 
fire  that  blazes  there  within  displays  them  red 
as  thou  seest  in  this  nether  Hell.” 

76.  We  at  last  arrived  within  the  deep  ditches 
which  encompass  that  disconsolate  city.  The 
walls  seemed  to  me  to  be  of  iron.  Not  without 
first  making  a  great  circuit  did  we  come  to  a 
place  where  the  boatman  loudly  shouted  to  us: 
“Get  ye  out,  here  is  the  entrance.” 

82.  Upon  the  gates  I  saw  more  than  a  thou¬ 
sand  of  those  rained  down  from  heaven  who 
angrily  were  saying:  “Who  is  this,  that  with¬ 
out  death  goes  through  the  realm  of  the  dead 
folk?”  And  my  wise  Master  made  a  sign  of 
wishing  to  speak  secretly  with  them.  Then 
they  shut  in  a  little  their  great  scorn,  and  said: 
“Come  thou  alone,  and  let  him  be  gone  who  so 
boldly  entered  on  this  realm.  Alone  let  him  re¬ 
turn  on  the  mad  path:  let  him  try  if  he  can;  for 
thou,  who  hast  escorted  him  through  so  dark 
a  region,  shalt  remain  here.” 

94.  Think,  Reader,  if  I  was  discomforted  at 
the  sound  of  the  accursed  words,  for  I  did  not 
believe  ever  to  return  hither. 

97.  “O  my  dear  Leader,  who  more  than 
seven  times  hast  restored  to  me  security,  and 
drawn  me  from  deep  peril  that  stood  confront¬ 
ing  me,  leave  me  not,”  said  I,  “thus  undone; 
and,  if  the  passing  farther  onward  be  denied 
us,  let  us  together  quickly  retrace  our  steps.” 
And  that  Lord  who  had  led  me  thither  said  to 
me:  “Fear  not,  for  no  one  can  take  from  us  our 

2  Cf.  Aeneid,  vi.  127. 


12 


HELL 


passage,  by  Such  an  one  is  it  given  to  us.  But 
here  await  me,  and  comfort  thy  dejected  spirit 
and  feed  on  good  hope,  for  I  will  not  leave  thee 
in  the  nether  world.” 

109.  So  the  sweet  Father  goes  away,  and  here 
abandons  me,  and  I  remain  in  suspense;  and 
yes  and  no  contend  within  my  head.  I  could 
not  hear  what  he  proffered  to  them,  but  he  had 
not  staid  there  with  them  long,  when  vying 
with  each  other  they  ran  back  within.  These 
our  adversaries  closed  the  gates  on  the  breast  of 
my  Lord,  who  remained  without,  and  turned 
back  to  me  with  slow  steps.  He  had  his  eyes 
upon  the  ground,  and  his  brows  were  shorn  of 
all  hardihood,  and  he  was  saying  with  sighs: 
“Who  has  denied  to  me  the  houses  of  woe?” 

121.  And  he  said  to  me:  “Because  I  am 
wroth,  be  not  thou  dismayed,  for  I  shall  win 
the  contest,  whoever  circle  round  within  for 
the  defence.  This  their  insolence  is  not  new, 
for  of  old  they  used  it  at  a  less  secret  gate, 
which  still  is  found  without  a  bolt.1  Above  it 
thou  didst  see  the  dead  inscription;  and  al¬ 
ready,  on  this  side  of  it,  is  descending  the  steep, 
passing  without  escort  through  the  circles,  One 
such  that  by  him  the  city  shall  be  opened  to  us.” 

CANTO  IX 

1.  That  color  which  cowardice  painted  out¬ 
wardly  on  me  when  I  saw  my  Guide  turn  back, 
repressed  more  speedily  his  own  new  color. 
He  stopped  attentive,  like  a  man  that  listens, 
for  the  eye  could  not  lead  him  far  through  the 
black  air,  and  through  the  dense  fog. 

7.  “Yet  it  shall  be  tor  us  to  win  the  fight,” 
began  he,  “unless - Such  an  one  offered  her¬ 

self  to  us.2  Oh  how  long  it  is  to  me  till  Another 
arrive  here!” 

10. 1  saw  well  how  he  covered  up  the  begin¬ 
ning  with  the  rest  that  came  after,  which  were 
words  different  from  the  first;  but  nevertheless 
his  speech  gave  me  fear,  because  I  drew  his 
broken  phrase  perchance  to  a  worse  meaning 
than  it  held. 

16.  “Into  this  depth  of  the  dismal  shell  does 
any  one  ever  descend  from  the  first  grade  who 
has  for  penalty  only  hope  cut  off?”3 

19.  This  question  I  put,  and  he  answered 

1  A  like  resistance  had  been  offered  to  Christ  on  his 
descent  to  Hell. 

2  Beatrice. 

3  See  Hell,  iv.  41. 


me:  “Seldom  it  happens  that  any  one  of  us 
makes  the  journey  on  which  I  am  going.  It  is 
true  that  another’ time  I  was  down  here,  con¬ 
jured  by  that  cruel  Erichtho’  who  was  wont  to 
call  back  shades  into  their  bodies.  Short  while 
had  my  flesh  been  bare  of  me,  when  she  made 
me  enter  within  that  wall,  in  order  to  draw 
thence  a  spirit  of  the  circle  of  Judas.  That  is  the 
lowest  place,  and  the  darkest,  and  the  farthest 
from  the  Heaven  which  encircles  all.  I  know 
the  road  well;  therefore  assure  thyself.  This 
marsh  which  breathes  out  the  great  stench 
girds  round  the  woeful  city  wherein  now  we 
cannot  enter  without  anger.” 

34.  And  more  he  said,  but  I  have  it  not  in 
mind,  because  my  eye  had  wholly  attracted  me 
toward  the  high  tower  with  the  ruddy  summit, 
where  in  an  instant  were  uprisen  suddenly 
three  infernal  Furies,  stained  with  blood,  who 
had  the  limbs  of  women  and  their  action,  and 
were  girt  with  greenest  hydras.  They  had  for 
hair  little  serpents  and  cerastes,0  wherewith 
their  savage  brows  were  bound. 

43.  And  he,  who  well  recognized  the  hand¬ 
maids  of  the  queen6  of  the  eternal  lamentation, 
said  to  me:  “Behold  the  fell  Erinnyes;  this  is 
Megaera  on  the  left  side,  she  who  wails  on  the 
right  is  Alecto,  Tisiphone  is  in  the  middle”: 
and  therewith  he  was  silent. 

49.  With  her  nails  each  was  tearing  her 
breast;  they  were  beating  themselves  with  their 
hands,  and  crying  out  so  loud  that  I  pressed 
close  to  the  Poet  through  dread.  “Let  Medusa 
come,  so  we  will  make  him  of  stone,”  they  all 
said, looking  downward;  “ill  was  it  we  avenged 
not  on  Theseus  his  assault.”7 

55.  “Turn  thee  round  backwards,  and  keep 
thy  sight  closed,  for  if  the  Gorgon  show  her¬ 
self,  and  thou  shouldst  see  her,  no  return  up¬ 
ward  would  there  ever  be.”8  Thus  said  the 

4  Erichtho,  a  sorceress  of  Thessaly,  at  the  desire  of 
Sextus,  the  son  of  Pompey,  on  the  night  before  the 
battle  of  Pharsalia,  conjured  up  one  of  his  dead  soldiers 
to  foretell  its  issue. 

5  Horned  snakes.  See  Paradise  Lost,  x.  525. 

6  Proserpine. 

7  Theseus,  failing  to  rescue  Proserpine,  was  kept  in 
the  lower  world  till  delivered  by  Hercules,  in  defiance 
of  the  power  of  Hades. 

8  Medusa,  who  should  turn  Dante  to  stone,  that  is, 
should  harden  his  heart  to  the  influences  of  the  Divine 
grace,  may  be  the  type  of  the  sin  of  dcspcratio,  despair 
of  the  mercy  of  God.  See  Aquinas,  Summa  T heologica, 
Part  II-II,  Q  20,  A  3. 


CANTO  X 


Master,  and  he  himself  turned  me,  and  trusted 
not  to  my  hands  but  with  his' own  he  also 
blinded  me. 

61.  O  ye  who  have  sound  understandings,  re¬ 
gard  the  doctrine  that  is  hidden  under  the  veil 
of  the  strange  verses! 

64.  And  already  across  the  turbid  waves  was 
coming  a  crash  of  a  sound  full  of  terror,  at 
which  both  the  shores  trembled.  Not  otherwise 
it  was  than  of  a  wind,  impetuous  by  reason  of 
the  opposing  heats,  which  strikes  the  forest, 
and  without  any  stay  shatters  the  branches, 
beats  down  and  carries  them  away;  forward, 
laden  with  dust,  it  goes  superb,  and  makes  the 
wild  beasts  and  the  shepherds  fly. 

73.  My  eyes  he  loosed,  and  said,  “Now  direct 
the  nerve  of  sight  across  that  ancient  scum, 
there  yonder  where  that  fume  is  most  bitter.” 

76.  As  the  frogs  before  the  hostile  snake  all 
vanish  through  the  water,  till  each  huddles  on 
the  ground,  I  saw  more  than  a  thousand  de¬ 
stroyed  souls  flying  thus  before  One,  who  on 
foot  was  passing  over  the  Styx  with  soles  un¬ 
wet.  From  his  face  he  was  removing  that  thick 
air,  waving  his  left  hand  oft  before  him,  and 
only  with  that  trouble  he  seemed  weary.  Well 
I  perceived  that  he  was  a  messenger  from 
Heaven,  and  I  turned  me  to  the  Master,  and 
he  made  sign  that  I  should  stand  quiet  and 
bow  down  to  him.  Ah,  how  full  of  disdain  he 
seemed  to  me!  He  came  to  the  gate  and  with 
a  little  rod  he  opened  it,  for  it  had  no  resistance. 

91. “O  outcasts  from  Heaven!  folk  despised,” 
began  he  upon  the  horrible  threshold,  “whence 
is  this  overweening  harbored  in  your  Where¬ 
fore  do  ye  kick  against  that  Will  from  which 
its  end  can  never  be  cut  short,  and  which  many 
a  time  has  increased  your  woe?  What  avails  it 
to  butt  against  the  fates?  Your  Cerberus,  if  ye 
remember  well,  still  bears  his  chin  and  his 
throat  peeled  therefor.”1  Then  he  turned  back 
over  the  filthy  road,  and  said  no  word  to  us, 
but  wore  the  semblance  of  a  man  whom  other 
care  constrains  and  stings,  than  that  of  him 
who  is  before  him. 

104.  Then  we  moved  our  feet  toward  the 
city,  secure  after  his  holy  words.  We  entered 
there  within  without  any  strife:  and  I,  who 
had  desire  to  observe  the  condition  which  such 
a  stronghold  locks  in,  soon  as  I  was  within, 

1  See  Aeneid,  vi.  395-6. 


send  my  eye  round  about,  and  I  see  on  every 
hand  a  great  plain  full  of  woe  and  of  cruel  tor¬ 
ment. 

1 12.  As  at  Arles,  where  the  Rhone  stagnates, 
as  at  Pola,  near  the  Quarnaro  which  shuts  Italy 
in  and  bathes  her  borders,  the  sepulchres  make 
all  the  place  uneven;  so  did  they  here  on  every 
side,  save  that  the  manner  was  more  bitter 
here;  for  among  the  tombs  flames  were  scat¬ 
tered,  by  which  they  were  so  wholly  heated 
that  no  art  requires  iron  more  so.  All  their  lids 
were  lifted;  and  such  dire  laments  were  issuing 
forth  from  them  as  truly  seemed  of  wretches 
and  of  sufferers. 

124.  And  I:  “Master,  who  are  these  folk 
that,  buried  within  those  coffers,  make  them¬ 
selves  heard  with  their  woeful  sighs?”  And  he 
to  me:  “Here  are  the  heresiarchs  with  their  fol¬ 
lowers  of  every  sect,  and  the  tombs  are  much 
more  laden  than  thou  thinkest.  Like  with  like 
is  buried  here,  and  the  monuments  are  more 
and  less  hot.” 

132.  And  after  he  had  turned  to  the  right 
hand,  we  passed  between  the  torments  and  the 
high  battlements. 

CANTO  X 

1.  Now,  along  a  solitary  path  between  the  wall 
of  the  city  and  the  torments,  my  Master  goes 
on,  and  I  behind  his  shoulders. 

4.  “O  virtue  supreme,”  I  began,  “that  through 
the  impious  circles  dost  turn  me  according  to 
thy  pleasure,  speak  to  me  and  satisfy  my  de¬ 
sires.  The  folk  that  are  lying  in  the  sepulchres, 
might  they  be  seen?  all  the  lids  are  now  lifted, 
and  no  one  keeps  guard.” 

io.  And  he  to  me:  “All  will  be  locked  in 
when  they  shall  return  here  from  Jehoshaphat 
with  the  bodies  which  they  have  left  on  earth.2 
Upon  this  side  Epicurus  with  all  his  followers, 
who  make  the  soul  mortal  with  the  body,  have 
their  burial  place.  Therefore  as  to  the  request 
that  thou  makest  of  me,  thou  shalt  soon  be 
satisfied  here  within;  and  also  as  to  the  desire 
of  which  thou  art  silent  to  me.”  And  I:  “Good 
Leader,  I  hold  not  my  heart  hidden  from  thee 
except  in  order  to  speak  little;  and  not  only 
now  hast  thou  disposed  me  to  this.” 

22.  “O  Tuscan,  who  goest  thy  way  alive 
through  the  city  of  fire,  speaking  thus  mod- 

2Cf.  Joel,  3.  2,  12. 


HELL 


estly,  may  it  please  thee  to  stop  in  this  place. 
Thy  mode  of  speech  makes  manifest  that  thou 
art  native  of  that  noble  fatherland  to  which 
perchance  I  was  too  molestful/’  Suddenly  this 
sound  issued  from  one  of  the  coffers,  wherefore 
in  fear  I  drew  a  little  nearer  to  my  Leader.  And 
he  said  to  me:  “Turn  thee:  what  art  thou  do¬ 
ing?  See  there  Farinata  who  has  risen  erect; 
all  from  the  girdle  upwards  wilt  thou  see 
him.”1 

34. 1  had  already  fixed  my  face  on  his,  and  he 
was  straightening  himself  up  with  breast  and 
front  as  though  he  had  Hell  in  great  scorn. 
And  the  bold  and  ready  hands  of  my  Leader 
pushed  me  among  the  sepulchres  to  him,  say¬ 
ing:  “Let  thy  words  be  clear.” 

40.  When  I  was  at  the  foot  of  his  tomb,  he 
looked  at  me  a  little,  and  then,  as  though  dis¬ 
dainful,  asked  me,  “Who  were  thy  ancestors?” 
I,  who  was  desirous  to  obey,  concealed  it  not 
from  him,  but  disclosed  it  all  to  him;  whereon 
he  raised  up  his  brows  a  little,  then  said:  “They 
were  fiercely  adverse  to  me  and  to  my  fore¬ 
fathers  and  to  my  party,  so  that  at  two  times  I 
scattered  them.”  “If  they  were  driven  out,  they 
returned  from  every  side,”  replied  I  to  him, 
“both  the  one  and  the  other  time,  but  yours 
have  not  learned  well  that  art.” 

52.  Then  there  arose  to  sight  alongside  of 
this  one,  a  shade  uncovered  far  as  to  the  chin: 
I  think  that  it  had  risen  on  its  knees.  It  looked 
round  about  me,  as  if  it  had  desire  to  see  if  an¬ 
other  were  with  me,  but  when  its  expectancy 
was  quite  spent,  weeping  it  said:  “If  through 
this  blind  prison  thou  goest  by  reason  of  lofti¬ 
ness  of  genius,  where  is  my  son?  and  why  is  he 
not  with  thee?”  And  I  to  him:  “I  come  not  of 
myself;  he  who  waits  yonder  is  leading  me 
through  here,  whom  perchance  your  Guido 
had  in  disdain.”2 

64.  His  words  and  the  mode  of  the  punish¬ 
ment  had  already  read  to  me  the  name  of  this 
one;  wherefore  my  answer  was  so  full. 

67.  Suddenly  straightening  up,  he  cried: 
“How  didst  thou  say,  ‘he  had’?  lives  he  not 
still?  does  not  the  sweet  light  strike  his  eyes?” 
When  he  became  aware  of  some  delay  that  I 

1  Farinata  degli  Uberti  was  the  head  of  the  Ghibelline 
party  in  Tuscany  for  many  years,  about  the  middle  of 
the  thirteenth  century. 

2  Guido  Cavalcanti,  Dante’s  first  friend,  was  charged 
with  the  same  sin  of  unbelief  as  his  father. 


made  before  answering,  he  fell  again  supine, 
and  appeared  no  more  outside. 

73.  But  that  other  magnanimous  one,  at 
whose  instance  I  had  stayed,  changed  not  as¬ 
pect,  nor  moved  his  neck,  nor  bent  his  side. 
“And  if,”  he  said, continuing  his  first  discourse, 
“they  have  ill  learned  that  art,  it  torments  me 
more  than  this  bed.  But  the  face  of  the  Lady 
who  rules  here3  will  not  be  rekindled  fifty 
times  ere  thou  shalt  know  how  much  that  art 
weighs.  And,  so  mayest  thou  return  to  the 
sweet  world,  tell  me  wherefore  is  that  people 
so  pitiless  against  my  party  in  its  every  law?” 

85.  Thereon  I  to  him:  “The  rout  and  the 
great  carnage  which  colored  the  Arbia  red 
cause  such  prayer  to  be  made  in  our  temple.” 
After  he  had,  sighing,  shaken  his  head,  “In 
that  I  was  not  alone,”  he  said,  “nor  surely  with¬ 
out  cause  would  I  have  moved  with  the  others; 
but  I  was  alone  there,  where  it  was  agreed  by 
every  one  to  destroy  Florence,  he  who  defended 
her  with  open  face.” 

94.  “Ah!  so  may  your  seed  ever  have  repose,” 
I  prayed  to  him,  “loose  for  me  that  knot,  which 
has  here  entangled  my  judgment.  It  seems,  if 
I  hear  rightly,  that  ye  see  in  advance  that  which 
time  is  bringing  with  it,  and  as  to  the  present 
have  another  way.”  “We  see,”  he  said,  “like 
him  who  has  bad  light,  the  things  that  are  far 
from  us,  so  much  the  supreme  Ruler  still  shines 
on  us;  when  they  draw  near,  or  are,  our  intelli¬ 
gence  is  wholly  vain,  and,  if  another  report  not 
to  us,  we  know  nothing  of  your  human  state; 
wherefore  thou  canst  comprehend  that  our 
knowledge  will  be  utterly  dead  from  that  mo¬ 
ment  when  the  gate  of  the  future  shall  be 
closed.” 

109.  Then,  as  compunctious  for  my  fault,  I 
said:  “Now,  then,  you  will  tell  to  that  fallen 
one  that  his  son  is  still  conjoined  with  the  liv¬ 
ing,  and  if  just  now  I  was  dumb  to  answer, 
make  him  know  that  I  was  so  because  I  was 
already  thinking  in  the  error  which  you  have 
solved  for  me.”4 

1 15.  And  now  my  Master  was  recalling  me, 
wherefore  more  hastily  I  prayed  the  spirit  that 
he  would  tell  me  who  was  with  him.  He  said 

3  Proserpine,  identified  with  Hecate,  and  hence  with 
the  Moon. 

4  Guido  Cavalcanti  died  in  August,  1300;  his  death 
was  an  event  too  near  at  hand  at  the  time  of  Dante’s 
journey  to  be  known  to  his  father. 


CANTO  XI 


to  me:  “Here  I  lie  with  more  than  a  thousand; 
here  within  is  the  second  Frederick1  and  the 
Cardinal,2  and  of  the  others  I  am  silent.” 

121 .  Thereon  he  hid  himself;  and  I  turned 
my  steps  toward  the  ancient  Poet,  reflecting  on 
that  speech  which  seemed  hostile  to  me.  He 
moved  on,  and  then,  thus  going,  he  said  to  me: 
“Why  art  thou  so  disturbed?”  And  I  satisfied 
him  as  to  his  question.  “Let  thy  memory  pre¬ 
serve  that  which  thou  hast  heard  against  thy¬ 
self,”  that  Sage  bade  me,  “and  now  give  heed 
here — ”  and  he  raised  his  finger:  “When  thou 
shalt  be  in  presence  of  the  sweet  radiance  of 
her  whose  beautiful  eye  sees  everything,  from 
her  thou  shalt  learn  the  journey  of  thy  life.” 
Then  to  the  left  he  turned  his  step. 

134.  We  left  the  wall,  and  went  toward  the 
middle  by  a  path  that  strikes  into  a  valley 
which  even  up  there  was  making  its  stench  dis¬ 
pleasing. 

CANTO  XI 

1.  Upon  the  edge  of  a  high  bank  which  great 
rocks  broken  in  a  circle  made,  we  came  above 
a  more  cruel  pen.  And  here,  because  of  the  hor¬ 
rible  excess  of  the  stench  which  the  deep  abyss 
throws  out,  we  drew  aside  behind  the  lid  of  a 
great  tomb,  whereon  I  saw  an  inscription 
which  said:  “I  hold  Pope  Anastasius,  whom 
Photinus  drew  from  the  right  way.”3 

10.  “It  behoves  that  our  descent  be  slow,  so 
that  the  sense  may  first  accustom  itself  a  little 
to  the  dismal  blast,  and  then  it  will  be  of  no 
concern.”  Thus  the  Master,  and  I  said  to  him: 
“Some  compensation  do  thou  find  that  the 
time  pass  not  lost.”  And  he:  “Behold,  I  am 
thinking  of  that.  My  son,  within  these  rocks,” 
he  began  then  to  say,  “are  three  lesser  circles 
from  grade  to  grade,  like  those  which  thou  art 
leaving.  All  are  full  of  accursed  spirits;  but,  in 
order  that  hereafter  the  sight  alone  may  suffice 
thee,  hear  how  and  wherefore  they  are  in 
bonds. 

22.  “Of  every  wickedness  that  acquires  hate 
in  heaven  injury  is  the  end,  and  every  such  end 
afflicts  others  either  by  force  or  by  fraud.  But 

1  Frederick  II,  Emperor  from  1212  to  1250. 

2Ottaviano  degli  Ubaldini,  a  fierce  Ghibelline. 

3  A  confused  tradition  charged  Pope  Anastasius  II 
(496-498),  with  having  been  led  by  Photinus  of  Thes- 
salonica  into  heretical  opinions  concerning  the  divinity 
of  Christ. 


because  fraud  is  an  evil  peculiar  to  man,  it 
more  displeases  God;  and  therefore  the  fraud¬ 
ulent  are  the  lower,  and  woe  assails  them  more. 

28.  “The  first  circle4  is  wholly  of  the  violent: 
but  because  violence  is  done  to  three  persons, 
it  is  divided  and  constructed  in  three  rounds. 
To  God,  to  one’s  self,  to  one’s  neighbor  may 
violence  be  done;  I  say  to  them  and  to  their  be¬ 
longings,  as  thou  shalt  hear  with  plain  dis¬ 
course.  By  violence,  death  and  grievous  wounds 
are  inflicted  on  one’s  neighbor;  and  on  his  sub¬ 
stance  ruins,  burnings,  and  harmful  extortions. 
Wherefore  the  first  round  torments  homicides, 
and  every  one  who  smites  wrongfully,  all  de¬ 
spoilers  and  plunderers,  in  various  troops. 

40.  “Man  may  lay  violent  hands  upon  him¬ 
self  and  on  his  goods;  and,  therefore,  in  the 
second  round  it  behoves  that  he  repent  without 
avail  who  deprives  himself  of  your  world, 
gambles  away  and  dissipates  his  property,  and 
laments  there  where  he  ought  to  be  joyous. 

46.  “Violence  may  be  done  to  the  Deity,  by 
denying  and  blaspheming  Him  in  the  heart, 
and  by  contemning  nature  and  His  bounty: 
and  therefore  the  smallest  round  seals  with  its 
signet  both  Sodom  and  Cahors,5  and  him  who, 
contemning  God,  speaks  from  his  heart. 

52.  “The  fraud,  by  which  every  conscience 
is  stung,  man  may  practice  on  one  that  confides 
in  him,  or  on  one  that  has  no  stock  of  confi¬ 
dence.  This  latter  mode  seems  to  destroy  only 
the  bond  of  love  which  nature  makes;  where¬ 
fore  in  the  second  circle  nest  hypocrisy,  flat¬ 
teries,  and  he  who  bewitches,  falsity,  robbery, 
and  simony,  panders,  barrators,  and  such  like 
filth. 

61.  “By  the  other  mode  that  love  is  forgot¬ 
ten  which  nature  makes  and  that  which  is 
thereafter  added,  whereby  special  confidence 
is  created.  Hence,  in  the  smallest  circle,  where 
is  the  point  of  the  universe,  upon  which  Dis 
sits,  whoso  betrays  is  consumed  forever.” 

67.  And  I:  “Master,  full  clearly  thy  discourse 
proceeds,  and  full  well  divides  this  pit,  and 
the  people  that  possess  it;  but,  tell  me,  they  of 
the  fat  marsh,  and  they  whom  the  wind  drives, 
and  they  whom  the  rain  beats,  and  they  who 
encounter  with  such  rough  tongues,  why  are 

4  The  first  circle  below,  the  seventh  in  the  order  of 
Hell. 

5  Cahors,  a  town  in  southern  France,  noted  in  the 
Middle  Ages  for  the  usurious  practice  of  its  inhabitants. 


HELL 


16 

they  not  punished  within  the  ruddy  city1  if 
God  be  wroth  with  them?  and  if  he  be  not  so, 
why  are  they  in  such  plight?” 

76.  And  he  said  to  me:  “Why  does  thy  wit  so 
wander  beyond  its  wont?  or  thy  mind,  where 
else  is  it  gazing?  Dost  thou  not  remember  those 
words  with  which  thy  Ethics  treats  in  full  of 
the  three  dispositions  that  Heaven  abides  not; 
incontinence,  wickedness,  and*  mad  bestiality, 
and  how  incontinence  less  offends  God,  and 
incurs  less  blame?2  If  thou  consider  well  this 
doctrine,  and  bring  to  mind  who  are  those  that 
up  above  suffer  punishment  outside,  thou  wilt 
see  clearly  why  they  are  divided  from  these  fel¬ 
ons,  and  why  less  wroth  the  divine  vengeance 
hammers  them.” 

91.  “O  Sun  that  healest  every  troubled  vision, 
thou  dost  content  me  so,  when  thou  solvest, 
that  doubt,  not  less  than  knowledge,  pleases 
me;  yet  turn  thee  a  little  back,”  said  I,  “to 
where  thou  sayest  that  usury  offends  the  Di¬ 
vine  Goodness,  and  loose  the  knot.” 

97.  “Philosophy,”  he  said  to  me,  “points  out 
to  him  who  understands  it,  not  only  in  one 
part 'alone,  how  Nature  takes  her  course  from 
the  Divine  Intellect  and  from  Its  art.  And  if 
thou  note  thy  Physics3  well  thou  wilt  find, 
after  not  many  pages,  that  your  art  follows  her 
so  far  as  it  can,  as  the  disciple  does  the  master, 
so  that  your  art  is  as  it  were  grandchild  of 
God.  From  these  two,  if  thou  bring  to  mind 
Genesis  at  its  beginning,4  it  behoves  mankind 
to  gain  their  life  and  to  advance.  But  because 
the  usurer  holds  another  way,  he  contemns 
Nature  in  herself,  and  in  her  follower,  since 
upon  other  thing  he  sets  his  hope.  But  follow 
me  now,  for  to  go  on  pleases  me;  for  the  Fishes 
are  quivering  on  the  horizon,  and  the  Wain 
lies  quite  over  Caurus,"  and  far  onwards  is  the 
descent  of  the  steep.” 

CANTO  XII 

1.  The  place  where  we  came  to  descend  the 
bank  was  alpine,  and,  because  also  of  what  was 
there,  such  that  every  eye  would  be  shy  of  it. 

1  Of  Dis. 

2  Cf.  Aristotle,  Ethics,  vii.  1. 

3  Cf.  Aristotle,  Physics,  ii.  2. 

4Cf.  Genesis,  3.  19. 

6  The  sign  of  the  Fishes  precedes  that  of  the  Ram, 
and,  as  the  Sun  was  in  the  latter  sign,  the  time  indicated 
is  about  4,  or  from  4  to  5  a.  m.  Caurus,  the  northwest 
wind,  here  stands  for  that  quarter  of  the  heavens. 


4.  As  is  that  downfall  which,  on  this  side  of 
Trent,  struck  the  Adige  on  its  flank,  either  by 
earthquake  or  through  failure  of  support. — for 
from  the  top  of  the  mountain,  whence  it  start¬ 
ed,  to  the  plain,  the  cliff  has  so  tumbled  down 
that  it  might  afford  some  path  to  one  that  were 
above — such  was  the  descent  of  that  ravine: 
and  on  the  edge  of  the  broken  chasm  was  out¬ 
stretched  the  infamy  of  Crete,  that  was  con¬ 
ceived  in  the  false  cow.  And  when  he  saw  us 
he  bit  himself  even  as  one  whom  wrath  rends 
inwardly. My  Sage  cried  out  toward  him:  “Per¬ 
chance  thou  believest  that  here  is  the  Duke  of 
Athens,6  who  up  in  the  world  gave  thee  thy 
death?  Get  thee  gone,  beast,  for  this  one  does 
not  come  instructed  by  thy  sister,  but  he  goes 
to  behold  your  punishments.” 

22.  As  is  that  bull  which  breaks  his  halter  at 
the  instant  he  has  just  received  his  mortal 
stroke,  and  cannot  go,  but  plunges  this  way 
and  that,  I  saw  the  Minotaur  do  the  like. 

26.  And  he  watchful  cried:  “Run  to  the  pass; 
while  he  is  in  a  rage  it  is  well  that  thou  de¬ 
scend.”  So  we  took  our  way  down  over  the 
discharge  of  those  stones,  which  often  moved 
under  my  feet  because  of  the  novel  burden. 

31. 1  was  going  along  thinking,  and  he  said: 
“Thou  art  thinking  perhaps  on  this  ruin  which 
is  guarded  by  that  bestial  wrath  which  I  just 
now  quelled.  Now  I  would  have  thee  know 
that  the  other  time  when  I  descended  here  be¬ 
low  into  the  nether  hell,  this  cliff  had  not  yet 
fallen.  But  in  truth,  if  I  discern  aright,  a  little 
ere  He  came,  who  levied  the  great  spoil  on  Dis 
from  the  uppermost  circle,'  on  all  sides  the 
deep  foul  valley  trembled*  so  that  I  thought 
the  universe  felt  love  whereby,  as  some  believe, 
the  world  has  oft-times  been  converted  into 
chaos:9  and,  at  that  moment,  this  ancient  rock 
here  and  elsewhere  made  such  downfall.  But 
fix  thine  eyes  below,  for  the  river  of  blood  is 
near,  in  which  everyone  who  does  harm  by 
violence  to  others  is  boiling.” 

49.  Oh  blind  cupidity,10  both  guilty  and  mad, 
which  so  spurs  us  in  the  short  life,  and  then,  in 

6  Cf.  Canterbury  Tales,  “The  Knight’s  Tale,”  860-62. 

7  See  Canto  iv.  52-63,  supra . 

8  Cf.  Matthew,  27.  51. 

9  It  was  the  doctrine  of  Empedocles  that  Love  and 
Hate  were  powers  to  whose  conflicting  influences  the 
actual  condition  of  the  sensible  world  is  due. 

10  See  Paradise,  xv.  3 ;  xxvii.  1 2 1 ;  De  Monarchia,  i. 
11,  70. 


CANTO  XIII 


the  eternal,  steeps  us  so  ill! 

52.  I  saw  a  broad  ditch,  according  as  my 
Guide  had  said,  bent  in  an  arc,  as  that  which 
embraces  all  the  plain.  And  between  the  foot  of 
the  bank  and  it,  Centaurs  were  running  in  a 
file,  armed  with  arrows,  as  they  were  wont  in 
the  world  to  go  to  the  chase.  Seeing  us  descend¬ 
ing,  each  stopped,  and  from  the  troop  three 
detached  themselves,  with  bows  and  darts  first 
selected.  And  one  cried  from  afar:  “To  what 
torment  are  ye  coming,  ye  who  descend  the 
slope?  Tell  it  from  there;  if  not,  I  draw  the 
bow/’  My  Master  said:  “We  will  make  answer 
unto  Chiron  near  by  there:  to  thy  hurt  was  thy 
will  ever  thus  hasty.” 

67.  Then  he  touched  me,  and  said:  “That  is 
Nessus,  who  died  for  the  beautiful  Dejanira, 
and  himself  wrought  vengeance  for  himself; 
and  that  one  in  the  middle,  who  is  gazing  on 
his  own  breast,  is  the  great  Chiron  who  nur¬ 
tured  Achilles;  that  other  is  Pholus,  who  was 
so  full  of  wrath.  Round  about  the  ditch  they  go 
by  thousands,  shooting  with  their  arrows  what¬ 
ever  soul  lifts  itself  from  the  blood  more  than 
its  crime  has  allotted  to  it.” 

76.  We  drew  near  to  those  fleet  wild  beasts. 
Chiron  took  a  shaft,  and  with  the  notch  put 
his  beard  back  upon  his  jaws.  When  he  had 
thus  uncovered  his  great  mouth  he  said  to  his 
companions:  “Are  ye  aware  that  the  one  be¬ 
hind  moves  what  he  touches?  thus  are  not 
wont  to  do  the  feet  of  the  dead.”  And  my  good 
Leader,  who  was  now  at  his  breast,  where  the 
two  natures  are  conjoined,  replied:  “He  is  in¬ 
deed  alive,  and  thus  alone  it  behoves  me  to 
show  him  the  dark  valley:  necessity  leads  him 
and  not  delight.  One  who  withdrew  from  sing¬ 
ing  hallelujah  committed  unto  me  this  new 
duty;  he  is  no  robber,  nor  I  a  fraudulent  soul. 
But,  by  that  Power  through  which  I  move  my 
steps  along  so  savage  a  road,  give  to  us  one  of 
thine,  to  whom  we  may  keep  close,  who  may 
show  us  where  the  ford  is,  and  may  carry  this 
one  on  his  back,  who  is  not  a  spirit  that  can  go 
through  the  air.” 

97.  Chiron  turned  upon  his  right  breast,  and 
said  to  Nessus:  “Turn,  and  guide  them  thus, 
and  if  another  troop  encounter  you,  make  it 
give  way.” 

100.  We  moved  on  with  the  trusty  escort 
along  the  edge  of  the  crimson  boiling,  in  which 


the  boiled  were  uttering  loud  shrieks.  I  saw 
folk  under  it  up  to  the  brow,  and  the  great 
Centaur  said:  “These  are  tyrants  who  laid  hold 
on  blood  and  plunder.  Here  they  bewail  their 
merciless  misdeeds:  here  is  Alexander,  and 
cruel  Dionysius  who  made  Sicily  have  woeful 
years.  And  that  forehead  which  has  such  black 
hair  is  Azzolino,1  and  that  other  who  is  blond 
is  Opizzo  of  Este/  who  of  a  truth  was  slain  by 
his  stepson  up  there  in  the  world.” 

1 13.  Then  I  turned  me  to  the  Poet,  and  he 
said:  “Let  him  now  be  first  for  thee,  and  I  sec¬ 
ond.”  A  little  further  on  the  Centaur  stopped 
above  a  folk  who  far  as  the  throat  seemed  to 
come  out  from  that  boiling  stream.  He  showed 
to  us  at  one  side  a  solitary  shade,  and  said:  “He 
cleft,  in  the  bosom  of  God,  the  heart  that  still 
is  honored  on  the  Thames.”3  Then  I  saw  folk, 
who  were  holding  their  heads,  and  even  all 
their  chests,  out  of  the  stream;  and  of  these  I 
recognized  many.  Thus  more  and  more  that 
blood  sank  down,  until  it  cooked  only  the  feet: 
and  here  was  our  passage  of  the  foss. 

127.  “As  on  this  hand,  thou  seest  that  the 
boiling  stream  continually  diminishes,”  said 
the  Centaur,  “so  I  would  have  thee  believe  that 
on  this  other  it  lowers  its  bed  more  and  more, 
until  it  comes  round  again  to  where  it  behoves 
that  tyranny  should  groan.  The  divine  justice 
here  goads  that  Attila  who  was  a  scourge  on 
earth,  and  Pyrrhus  and  Sextus;  and  forever 
milks  the  tears  which  with  the  boiling  it  un¬ 
locks  from  Rinier  of  Corneto  and  from  Rinier 
Pazzo,4  who  made  such  warfare  upon  the  high¬ 
ways.” 

139.  Then  he  turned  back  and  repassed  the 
ford. 

CANTO  XIII 

1.  Nessus  had  not  yet  reached  the  yonder 
bank  when  we  set  forward  through  a  wood 
which  was  marked  by  no  path.  Not  green 

1  Azzolino  (or  Ezzelino)  III  da  Romano,  son-in-law 
of  the  Emperor  Frederick  II,  and  his  vicar  in  northern 
Italy. 

2  Opizzo  II  of  Este,  Marquis  of  Ferrara.  See  Canto 
xviii.  56,  supra ;  Purgatory,  v.  77. 

3  In  1271,  Prince  Henry,  son  of  Richard,  Earl  of 
Cornwall,  was  stabbed,  during  Mass,  in  the  church  of 
St.  Sylvester  at  Viterbo,  by  Guy  of  Montfort,  to  avenge 
the  death  of  his  father,  Simon,  Earl  of  Leicester.  Henry’s 
heart  was  placed  in  a  golden  cup,  on  a  column,  at  the 
head  of  London  Bridge. 

4  Two  noted  highway  robbers. 


HELL 


18 

leaves  were  there,  but  of  a  dusky  color,  not 
smooth  boughs  but  gnarled  and  tangled,  not 
fruits  but  thorns  with  poison.  Those  savage 
wild-beasts  that  hold  in  hate  the  tilled  places 
between  Cecina  and  Corneto 1  have  no  thickets 
so  rough  or  so  dense. 

io.  Here  the  foul  Harpies  make  their  nests, 
who  chased  the  Trojans  from  the  Strophades 
with  dismal  announcement  of  future  calamity.2 
They  have  broad  wings,  and  human  necks  and 
faces,  feet  with  claws,  and  the  great  belly  feath¬ 
ered.  They  make  lament  on  the  strange  trees. 

1 6.  And  the  good  Master  began  to  say  to  me: 
“Before  thou  enterest  farther,  know  that  thou 
art  in  the  Second  Round,3  and  wilt  be,  till  thou 
shalt  come  to  the  horrible  sand.  Therefore  look 
well  around,  and  so  shalt  thou  see  things  that 
would  take  credence  from  my  speech.” 

22. 1  heard  wailings  uttered  on  every  side,  and 
I  saw  no  one  who  made  them,  wherefore,  all  be¬ 
wildered,  I  stopped.  I  believe  that  he  believed 
that  I  believed  that  all  these  voices  issued  from 
amid  those  trunks  from  people  who  because  of 
us  had  hidden  themselves.  Therefore  said  the 
Master:  “If  thou  break  of!  any  twig  from  one 
of  these  plants,  the  thoughts  thou  hast  will  all 
be  cut  short.” 

31.  Then  I  stretched  my  hand  a  little  forward 
and  plucked  a  little  branch  from  a  great  thorn- 
bush,  and  its  trunk  cried  out:  “Why  dost  thou 
break  me?”  When  it  had  become  dark  with 
blood  it  began  again  to  cry:  “Why  dost  thou 
tear  me?  hast  thou  not  any  spirit  of  pity?  Men 
we  were,  and  now  we  are  become  stocks;  truly 
thy  hand  ought  to  be  more  pitiful  had  we  been 
souls  of  serpents.” 

40.  As  from  a  green  log  that  is  burning  at 
one  of  its  ends,  and  drips  from  the  other,  and 
hisses  with  the  air  that  is  escaping,  so  from  that 
broken  twig  came  out  words  and  blood  to¬ 
gether;  whereon  I  let  the  tip  fall,  and  stood  like 
a  man  who  is  afraid. 

46.  “If  he  had  been  able  to  believe  before,” 
replied  my  Sage,  “O  injured  soul,  what  he  has 
seen  only  in  my  verse,4  he  would  not  have 
stretched  out  his  hand  on  thee;  but  the  incredi¬ 
ble  thing  made  me  prompt  him  to  an  act  which 
weighs  on  me  myself.  But  tell  him  who  thou 

1  Respectively  a  river  and  a  town  in  Tuscany. 

2  See  Aeneid,  iii.  210-257. 

3  Of  the  Seventh  Circle. 

4  See  Aeneid,  iii.  19#. 


wast,  so  that,  by  way  of  some  amends,  he  may 
refresh  thy  fame  in  the  world  above,  whereto  it 
is  allowed  him  to  return.” 

55.  And  the  trunk:  0  “Thou  dost  so  allure  me 
with  sweet  speech,  that  I  cannot  be  silent,  and 
may  it  not  burden  you,  that  I  am  enticed  to  talk 
a  little.  I  am  he  who  held  both  the  keys  of  the 
heart  of  Frederick,  and  who  turned  them,  lock¬ 
ing  and  unlocking  so  softly,  that  from  his  se¬ 
crets  I  kept  almost  every  one.  Fidelity  so  great 
I  bore  to  the  glorious  office,  that  I  lost  my  sleep 
and  my  pulse  thereby.  The  harlot,  that  never 
from  the  abode  of  Caesar  turned  her  strumpet 
eyes, — the  common  death  and  vice  of  courts, — 
inflamed  all  minds  against  me,  and  they,  in¬ 
flamed,  did  so  inflame  Augustus  that  my  glad 
honors  turned  to  dismal  sorrows.  My  mind, 
through  scornful  disgust,  thinking  to  escape 
scorn  by  death,  made  me  unjust  toward  my  just 
self.  By  the  strange  roots  of  this  tree  I  swear  to 
you,  that  I  never  broke  faith  to  my  lord  who 
was  so  worthy  of  honor.  And  if  one  of  you  re¬ 
turns  to  the  world,  let  him  comfort  my  memory 
which  yet  lies  prostrate  from  the  blow  that  envy 
gave  it.” 

79.  He  paused  a  little,  and  then,  “Since  he  is 
silent,”  said  the  Poet  to  me,  “lose  not  the  hour, 
but,  if  more  please  thee,  speak  and  enquire  of 
him.”  Whereon  I  to  him:  “Do  thou  ask  him 
further  of  what  thou  thinkest  may  satisfy  me, 
for  I  cannot,  such  great  pity  fills  my  heart.” 

85.  Therefore  he  began  again:  “So  may  this 
man  do  for  thee  freely  that  which  thy  speech 
prays  for,  spirit  incarcerate,  may  it  please  thee 
yet  to  tell  us  how  the  soul  is  bound  within  these 
knots,  and  tell  us,  if  thou  canst,  if  from  such 
limbs  any  soul  is  ever  loosed.” 

91.  Then  the  trunk  puffied  strongly,  and  soon 
the  wind  was  changed  into  this  voice:  “Briefly 
shall  ye  be  answered.  When  the  ferocious  soul 
departs  from  the  body  wherefrom  itself  has 
torn  itself,  Minos  sends  it  to  the  seventh  gulf. 
It  falls  into  the  wood,  and  no  part  is  chosen 
for  it,  but  where  fortune  flings  it  there  it  sprouts 
like  a  grain  of  spelt;  it  rises  in  a  sapling  and  to 
a  wild  plant:  the  Harpies,  feeding  then  upon  its 
leaves,  give  pain,  and  to  the  pain  a  window. 
Like  the  others  we  shall  go  for  our  spoils,  but 

5  The  spirit  who  speaks  is  Pier  delle  Vigne,  the  pri¬ 
vate  secretary  and  confidential  minister  of  Frederick  II. 
Cf.  Canto  x.  no,  supra. 


CANTO  XIV 


not,  however,  that  any  one  may  revest  himself 
with  them,  for  it  is  not  just  for  one  to  have  that 
of  which  he  deprives  himself.  Hither  shall  we 
drag  them,  and  through  the  melancholy  wood 
shall  our  bodies  be  suspended,  each  on  the 
thorn-tree  of  its  molested  shade.” 

109.  We  were  still  attentive  to  the  trunk,  be¬ 
lieving  that  it  might  wish  to  say  more  to  us, 
when  we  were  surprised  by  an  uproar,  like  one 
who  perceives  the  wild  boar  and  the  chase  com¬ 
ing  toward  his  post,  and  hears  the  beasts  and 
the  crash  of  the  branches.  And  behold,  two  on 
the  left  hand,  naked  and  scratched,  flying  so 
hard  that  they  broke  through  every  barrier  of 
the  wood.  The  one  in  front  was  shouting: 
“Haste  now!  haste  thee,  Death!”  and  the  other, 
who  seemed  to  himself  too  slow:  “Lano,  thy 
legs  were  not  so  nimble  at  the  jousts  of  the 
Toppo”;1  and  since  perhaps  his  breath  was 
failing,  of  himself  and  of  a  bush  he  made  a 
group.  Behind  them  the  wood  was  full  of  black 
bitches,  ravenous  and  running  like  greyhounds 
that  had  been  slipped  from  the  leash.  On  him 
who  had  squatted  they  set  their  teeth  and  tore 
him  piecemeal,  then  carried  off  those  woeful 
limbs. 

130.  My  Guide  then  took  me  by  the  hand, 
and  led  me  to  the  bush,  which  was  weeping  in 
vain  through  its  bleeding  fractures.  “O  Jacomo 
of  Sant’  Andrea,”  it  was  saying,  “what  has  it 
vantaged  thee  to  make  of  me  a  screen?  What 
blame  have  I  for  thy  wicked  life?”  When  the 
Master  had  stopped  above  it,  he  said:  “Who 
wast  thou,  who  through  so  many  wounds  blow- 
est  forth  with  blood  a  woeful  speech?” 

139.  And  he  to  us:  “O  souls  that  are  arrived 
to  see  the  shameful  ravage  that  has  thus  dis¬ 
joined  my  twigs  from  me,  collect  them  at  the 
foot  of  the  wretched  bush.  I  was  of  the  city 
which  for  the  Baptist  changed  her  first  patron:' 
wherefore  he  will  always  make  her  sorrowful 
with  his  art.  And  were  it  not  that  at  the  passage 
of  the  Arno  some  semblance  of  him  still  re¬ 
mains,  those  citizens  who  afterwards  rebuilt  it 
upon  the  ashes  that  were  left  by  Attila3  would 

1  Lano  was  slain  in  flight  at  the  defeat  of  the  Sienese 
by  the  Aretines,  near  the  Pieve  del  Toppo.  He  and 
Jacomo  were  notorious  spendthrifts. 

2  The  first  patron  of  Florence  was  Mars;  a  fragment 
of  a  statue  of  whom  stood  till  1333  at  the  head  of  the 
Pome  Vecchio.  See  Paradise,  xvi.  1 45-1 47. 

3Totila,  not  Attila,  besieged  Florence,  and,  accord¬ 
ing  to' false  popular  tradition,  burned  it. 


have  done  the  work  in  vain.4  I  made  a  gibbet 
for  myself  of  my  own  house.” 

CANTO  XIV 

1.  Because  the  love  of  my  native  place  con¬ 
strained  me,  I  gathered  up  the  scattered  twigs 
and  gave  them  back  to  him  who  was  already 
faint-voiced. 

4.  Thence  we  came  to  the  confine,  where  the 
second  round  is  divided  from  the  third,  and 
where  a  horrible  mode  of  justice  is  seen. 

7.  To  make  the  new  things  clearly  manifest, 
I  say  that  we  had  reached  a  plain  which  rejects 
every  plant  from  its  bed.  The  woeful  wood  is 
a  garland  round  about  it,  even  as  the  dismal 
foss  to  that.  Here,  on  the  very  edge,  we  stayed 
our  steps.  The  floor  was  an  arid  and  dense 
sand,  not  made  in  other  fashion  than  that 
which  of  old  was  trodden  by  the  feet  of  Cato." 

16.  O  vengeance  of  God,  how  much  shouldst 
thou  be  feared  by  every  one  who  reads  that 
which  was  manifest  to  my  eyes! 

19.  I  saw  many  flocks  of  naked  souls,  that 
were  all  weeping  very  miserably,  and  divers 
law  seemed  imposed  upon  them.  Some  folk 
were  lying  supine  on  the  ground,  some  were 
seated  all  crouched  up,  and  others  were  going 
about  continually.6  Those  who  were  going  a- 
round  were  the  more  numerous,  and  those  the 
less  so  who  were  lying  down  under  the  torment, 
but  they  had  their  tongues  more  loosed  by  the 
pain. 

28.  Over  all  the  sand,  with  a  slow  falling, 
were  raining  down  dilated  flakes  of  fire,  as  of 
snow  on  alps  without  a  wind.  As  the  flames 
which  Alexander  in  those  hot  parts  of  India  saw 
falling  upon  his  host,  unbroken  to  the  ground, 
wherefore  he  took  care  to  trample  the  soil  by 
his  troops,  because  the  vapor  was  better  extin¬ 
guished  while  it  was  single;  so  was  descending 
the  eternal  heat  whereby  the  sand  was  kindled, 
like  tinder  beneath  the  steel,  for  doubling  of 
the  dole.  The  dance  of  the  wretched  hands  was 
ever  without  repose,  now  there,  now  here,shak- 

4  Under  these  words  lies  a  satirical  reference  to  the 
devotion  of  the  Florentines  to  money-making.  Dante 
means,  says  Benvenuto  da  Imola,  “that  after  Florence 
gave  up  Mars,  that  is,  fortitude  and  valor  in  arms,  and 
began  to  worship  the  Baptist  alone,  that  is,  the  florin, 
on  which  is  the  figure  of  the  Baptist,  they  met  with 
misfortune  in  their  wars.” 

0  On  his  march  across  the  Libyan  desert. 

0  Cf.  Canto  xi.  49-51,  supra . 


20 


HELL 


ing  off  from  them  the  fresh  burning. 

43.  I  began:  “Master,  thou  that  overcomest 
everything,  except  the  obdurate  demons,  who 
at  the  entrance  of  the  gate  came  out  against  us, 
who  is  that  great  one  that  seems  not  to  heed 
the  fire,  and  lies  despiteful  and  twisted,  so  that 
the  rain  seems  not  to  ripen  him?” 

49.  And  that  same  one'  who  was  aware  that 
I  was  asking  my  Leader  about  him,  cried  out: 
“Such  as  I  was  alive,  such  am  I  dead.  Though 
Jove  weary  out  his  smith,  from  whom  in  wrath 
he  took  the  sharp  thunderbolt  wherewith  on 
my  last  day  I  was  smitten,  or  though  he  weary 
out  the  others,  turn  by  turn,  in  Mongibello2  at 
the  black  forge,  crying,  ‘Good  Vulcan,  help, 
help!’  even  as  he  did  at  the  fight  of  Phlegra/ 
and  hurl  on  me  with  all  his  might,  he  should 
not  have  thereby  glad  vengeance.” 

61.  Then  my  Leader  spoke  with  force  so 
great,  that  I  had  never  heard  him  so  vehement: 
“O  Capaneus,  in  that  thy  pride  is  not  extinct, 
art  thou  the  more  punished;  no  torment  save 
thine  own  rage  would  be  a  pain  adequate  to 
thy  fury.” 

67.  Then  he  turned  round  to  me  with  better 
look,  saying:  “That  was  one  of  the  Seven  Kings 
who  besieged  Thebes,  and  he  held,  and  it  seems 
that  he  holds  God  in  disdain,  and  it  seems  that 
he  little  prizes  Him;  but  as  I  said  to  him,  his 
own  despites  are  very  due  adornments  for  his 
breast.  Now  come  behind  me,  and  take  heed 
still  not  to  set  thy  feet  upon  the  scorched  sand, 
but  keep  them  always  close  to  the  wood.” 

76.  In  silence  we  came  to  where  a  little  brook, 
the  redness  of  which  still  makes  me  shudder, 
gushes  forth  from  the  wood.  As  from  the  Buli- 
came4  a  rivulet  issues,  which  then  the  sinful 
women  share  among  them,  so  that  went  down 
across  the  sand.  Its  bed  and  both  its  sloping 
banks  were  made  of  stone,  and  the  margins  on 
the  side,  wherefore  I  perceived  that  the  cross¬ 
ing  was  there. 

85.  “Among  all  else  that  I  have  shown  to 
thee,  since  we  entered  through  the  gate  whose 

1  Capaneus,  one  of  the  seven  kings  who  besieged 
Thebes.  He,  having  mounted  the  walls,  defied  Jupiter, 
who  slew  him  with  a  thunderbolt. 

2  Mt.  Etna. 

3  The  battle  between  the  gods  and  the  giants,  in  the 
vale  of  Phlegra,  in  Thessaly. 

4  A  hot  spring  near  Viterbo,  frequented  as  a  bath, 
the  use  of  a  portion  of  which  was  assigned  to  “sinful 
women.” 


threshold  is  denied  to  no  one,  nothing  has  been 
discerned  by  thine  eyes  so  notable  as  is  the  pres¬ 
ent  stream  which  deadens  all  the  flamelets 
above  it.”"  These  words  were  of  my  Leader, 
wherefore  I  prayed  him,  that  he  would  bestow 
on  me  the  food  of  which  he  had  bestowed  on 
me  the  desire. 

94.  “In  mid  sea  lies  a  wasted  land,”  said  he 
then,  “which  is  named  Crete,  under  whose 
king  the  world  of  old  was  chaste.  A  mountain 
is  there  which  of  old  was  glad  with  water  and 
with  leaves,  which  is  called  Ida;  now  it  is  des¬ 
ert,  like  a  thing  outworn.  Rhea  chose  it  of  old 
for  the  trusty  cradle  of  her  little  son,  and,  the 
better  to  conceal  him  when  he  wailed,  caused 
cries  to  be  made  there.6  Within  the  mountain  a 
great  old  man  stands  upright,  who  holds  his 
shoulders  turned  towards  Damietta,  and  gazes 
at  Rome  as  if  his  mirror.  His  head  is  formed  of 
fine  gold,  and  his  arms  and  breast  are  pure  sil¬ 
ver;  then  far  as  to  the  fork  he  is  of  brass;  from 
there  downward  he  is  all  of  chosen  iron,  save 
that  his  right  foot  is  of  baked  earth,  and  he 
stands  erect  on  that  more  than  on  the  other.' 
Every  part  except  the  gold  is  cleft  with  a  fissure 
that  drips  tears,  which,  collected,  perforate  that 
cavern.  Their  course  is  from  rock  to  rock  into 
this  valley;  they  form  Acheron,  Styx,  and  Phle- 
gethon;  then  their  way  is  down  through  this 
narrow  channel  till,  where  there  is  no  more  de¬ 
scending,  they  form  Cocytus,  and  what  that 
pool  is,  thou  shalt  see;  therefore  here  it  is  not 
told.” 

121.  And  I  to  him:  “If  the  present  stream 
flows  down  thus  from  our  world,  why  does  it 
appear  to  us  only  at  this  border?” 

5  See  Canto  xv.  3,  infra. 

cTo  prevent  Saturn  from  hearing  the  cries  of  the 
infant  Jupiter,  whom,  had  he  known  him  to  be  alive, 
he  would  have  sought  to  devour,  in  order  to  avert  the 
fulfillment  of  the  prophecy  that  he  would  be  dethroned 
by  one  of  his  children. 

‘  This  image  is  taken  directly  from  the  dream  of 
Nebuchadnezzar  (Daniel,  2.  31-33).  It  is  the  type  of 
the  historic  life  of  man,  with  its  back  to  the  past,  its 
face  toward  Rome — the  centre  of  the  actual  world.  Its 
upper  parts  of  metal  represent  the  Golden.  Silver, 
Bronze,  and  Iron  ages,  according  to  the  fancy  of  the 
poets.  The  two  legs  are  generally  interpreted  as  the 
symbols  of  the  Empire  and  the  Church;  the  right  leg, 
on  which  the  image  rests  the  most,  being  the  type  of 
the  Church.  Its  foot  of  baked  earth;  possibly  may  refer 
to  the  element  of  weakness  in  the  papacy  from  the 
earthly  character  of  the  Popes.  The  tears  of  the  sinful 
and  suffering  generations  of  man  form  the  rivers  of 
Hell. 


21 


CANTO  XV 


124.  And  he  to  me:  “Thou  knowest  that  the 
place  is  circular,  and  though  thou  art  come  far, 
always  to  the  left  in  descending  toward  the 
bottom,  thou  hast  not  yet  turned  through  the 
whole  circle;  wherefore  if  a  new  thing  appears 
to  us,  it  ought  not  to  bring  wonder  to  thy  face.” 

130.  And  I  again:  “Master,  where  are  Phle- 
gethon  and  Lethe  found,  for  of  the  one  thou 
art  silent,  and  the  other  thou  sayest  is  formed 
by  this  rain?” 

133.  “In  all  thy  questions  truly  thou  pleasest 
me,”  he  answered,  “but  the  boiling  of  the  red 
water  should  well  solve  one  that  thou  askest.1 
Lethe  thou  shalt  see,  but  outside  of  this  ditch, 
there  where  the  souls  go  to  lave  themselves, 
when  the  fault  repented  of  has  been  removed.” 
Then  he  said,  “Now  it  is  time  to  quit  the  wood; 
take  heed  that  thou  come  behind  me;  the  mar¬ 
gins  which  are  not  burning  afford  way,  and 
above  them  every  vapor  is  extinguished.” 

CANTO  XV 

1.  Now  one  of  the  hard  margins  bears  us  on, 
and  the  fume  of  the  brook  overshadows  so  that 
it  saves  the  water  and  the  banks  from  the  fire. 
As  the  Flemings,  between  Wissant  and  Bruges, 
fearing  the  flood  that  rushes  toward  them,  make 
the  bulwark  whereby  the  sea  may  be  routed; 
and  as  the  Paduans  along  the  Brenta,  in  order 
to  defend  their  towns  and  their  castles,  ere  Chi- 
arentana2  feel  the  heat-in  such  like  were 
these  made,  though  neither  so  high  nor  so  thick 
had  the  master,  whoever  he  was,  made  them. 

13.  We  were  now  so  remote  from  the  wood 
that  I  could  not  have  seen  where  it  was  though 
I  had  turned  backward,  when  we  encountered 
a  troop  of  souls  which  was  coming  alongside 
the  bank,  and  each  of  them  was  looking  at  us, 
as  a  man  is  wont  to  look  at  another  at  evening 
under  the  new  moon;  and  they  so  sharpened 
their  brows  toward  us  as  the  old  tailor  does  on 
the  needle’s  eye. 

22.  Thus  eyed  by  that  company,  I  was  recog¬ 
nized  by  one  who  took  me  by  the  hem,  and 
cried  out:  “What  a  marvel!”  And  when  he 
stretched  out  his  arm  to  me,  I  fixed  my  eyes  on 
his  baked  aspect  so  that  his  scorched  visage  did 
not  prevent  the  recognition  of  him  by  my  in¬ 
telligence;  and  bending  down  my  own  to  his 

1Cf.  Aeneid,  vi.  556. 

*  The  mountain  regions  north  of  the  Brenta. 


face,  I  answered:  “Are  you  here,  Ser  Bru- 
netto?”3  And  he:  “O  my  son,  let  it  not  displease 
thee  if  Brunetto  Latini  turns  back  a  little  with 
thee,  and  lets  the  train  go  on.”  I  said  to  him: 
“With  all  my  power  I  pray  this  of  you,  and  if 
you  will  that  I  sit  down  with  you  I  will  do  so, 
if  it  please  him  there,  for  I  go  with  him.”  “O 
son,”  said  he,  “whoever  of  this  herd  stops  for 
an  instant,  lies  afterwards  a  hundred  years 
without  fanning  himself  when  the  fire  smites 
him;  therefore  go  onward:  I  will  come  at  thy 
skirts,  and  then  I  will  rejoin  my  band  which 
goes  lamenting  its  eternal  penalties.” 

43.  I  dared  not  descend  from  the  road  to  go 
level  with  him,  but  I  held  my  head  bowed  like 
one  who  goes  reverently.  He  began:  “What 
fortune  or  destiny  leads  thee  down  here  before 
thy  last  day?  and  who  is  this  that  shows  the 
road  ?  ” 

49.  “There  above,  in  the  bright  life,”  I  an¬ 
swered  him,  “I  went  astray  in  a  valley,  before 
my  time  was  full.  Only  yesterday  morning  I 
turned  my  back  on  it:  this  one  appeared  to  me 
as  I  was  returning  to  it,  and  he  is  leading  me 
homeward  again  along  this  path.” 

55.  And  he  to  me:  “If  thou  follow  thy  star, 
thou  canst  not  miss  the  glorious  port,  if,  in  the 
fair  life,  I  discerned  aright:  and  if  I  had  not  so 
untimely  died,  seeing  heaven  so  benignant  to 
thee,  I  would  have  given  thee  cheer  in  thy  work. 
But  that  ungrateful  malignant  people  which 
descended  from  Fiesole  of  old,  and  still  smacks 
of  the  mountain  and  the  rock,  will  make  itself 
hostile  to  thee  because  of  thy  good  deeds;  and 
it  is  right,  for  among  the  bitter  sorb-trees  it 
befits  not  the  sweet  fig  to  bear  fruit.  Old  report 
in  the  world  calls  them  blind;  it  is  an  avaricious, 
envious,  and  proud  folk;  from  their  customs 
take  heed  that  thou  cleanse  thyself.  Thy  for¬ 
tune  reserves  such  honor  for  thee  that  the  one 
party  and  the  other  shall  have  hunger  for  thee: 
but  far  from  the  goat  shall  be  the  grass.  Let  the 
Fiesolan  beasts  make  litter  of  themselves,  and 
let  them  not  touch  the  plant,  if  any  spring  yet 
upon  their  dungheap,  in  which  the  holy  seed 
may  revive  of  those  Romans  who  remained 
there  when  it  became  the  nest  of  so  much  wick¬ 
edness.” 

79.  “If  my  entreaty  were  all  fulfilled,”  replied 

3  Brunetto  Latini,  one  of  the  most  learned  and  able 
Florentines  of  the  thirteenth  century. 


HELL 


I  to  him,  “you  would  not  yet  be  placed  in  ban¬ 
ishment  from  human  nature;  for  in  my  mind 
is  fixed,  and  now  fills  my  heart,  the  dear,  good, 
paternal  image  of  you,  when  in  the  world  hour 
by  hour  you  taught  me  how  man  makes  him¬ 
self  eternal;  and  how  much  I  hold  it  in  grati¬ 
tude,  it  behoves  that  while  I  live  should  be  dis¬ 
cerned  in  my  speech.  That  which  you  tell  of 
my  course  I  write,  and  reserve  it  with  other 
text1  to  be  glossed  by  a  Lady,  who  will  know 
how,  if  I  attain  to  her.  Thus  much  would  I  have 
manifest  to  you,  that  I,  provided  my  conscience 
chide  me  not,  for  Fortune,  as  she  wills,  am 
ready.  Such  earnest  is  not  strange  unto  my  ears; 
therefore  let  Fortune  turn  her  wheel  as  pleases 
her,  and  the  churl  his  mattock.” 

97 .  My  Master  thereupon  turned  backward  to 
his  right,  and  looked  at  me;  then  said:  “He 
listens  well  who  notes  it.” 

ioo.  Not  the  less  for  this  do  I  go  on  speaking 
with  Ser  Brunetto,  and  I  ask,  who  are  his  most 
noted  and  most  eminent  companions.  And  he 
to  me:  “To  know  of  some  is  good,  of  the  others 
it  will  be  laudable  for  us  to  be  silent,  for  the 
time  would  be  short  for  so  much  speech.  In 
brief,  know  that  all  were  clerks,  and  great  men 
of  letters  and  of  great  fame,  defiled  in  the 
world  by  one  same  sin.  Priscian  goes  along 
with  that  disconsolate  crowd,  and  Francesco 
d’  Accorso;2  and  thou  couldst  also  have  seen 
there,  hadst  thou  had  hankering  for  such  scurf, 
him  who  was  translated  by  the  Servant  of  Serv¬ 
ants  from  the  Arno  to  the  Bacchiglione,  where 
he  left  his  ill-strained  nerves.3  Of  more  would 
I  tell,  but  my  going  on  and  my  speech  cannot 
be  longer,  for  I  see  yonder  a  new  smoke  rising 
from  the  sand.  Folk  come  with  whom  I  must 
not  be.  Let  my  Treasure,4  in  which  I  still  am 
living,  be  commended  to  thee,  and  more  I  ask 
not.” 

121.  Then  he  turned  back,  and  seemed  of 
those  who  run  across  the  plain  at  Verona  for 

1See  supra,  Canto  vi.  64#;  x.  80H. 

2  Priscian,  the  famous  grammarian  of  the  sixth  cen¬ 
tury;  Francesco,  a  jurist  of  much  repute  in  his  time, 
who  taught  at  Oxford  and  at  Bologna,  and  died  in 

12394' 

3  Andrea  de’  Mozzi,  bishop  of  Florence,  because  of 
his  scandalous  life  was  translated  by  Boniface  VIII  to 

the  less  conspicuous  bishopric  of  Vicenza,  through 
which  city  the  Bacchiglione  runs.  He  died  in  1296. 

That  is,  Li  Livres  dou  Tresor,  Brunetto’s  chief  liter¬ 

ary  work. 


the  green  cloth,  and  of  these  he  seemed  the  one 
that  wins,  and  not  he  that  loses. 

CANTO  XVI 

1.  I  was  now  in  a  place  where  the  resounding 
of  the  water  which  was  falling  into  the  next 
circle  was  heard,  like  that  hum  which  the  bee¬ 
hives  make,  when  three  shades  together  sepa¬ 
rated  themselves,  as  they  ran,  from  a  troop  that 
was  passing  under  the  rain  of  the  bitter  tor¬ 
ment.  They  came  toward  us,  and  each  cried 
out:  “Stop  thou,  who  by  thy  garb  seemest  to 
us  to  be  one  from  our  wicked  city!” 

10.  Ah  me!  what  wounds  I  saw  upon  their 
limbs,  recent  and  old,  burnt  in  by  the  flames; 
it  grieves  me  still  for  them  but  to  remember  it, 

13.  My  Teacher  gave  heed  to  their  cries;  he 
turned  his  face  toward  me,  and:  “Now  wait,” 
he  said;  “to  these  one  should  be  courteous,  and 
were  it  not  for  the  fire  which  the  nature  of  the 
place  shoots  forth,  I  should  say  that  haste  better 
befitted  thee  than  them.” 

19.  As  we  stopped,  they  began  again  the  old 
verse,5  and  when  they  had  reached  us  they  all 
three  made  a  wheel  of  themselves.  As  cham¬ 
pions,  naked  and  oiled,  are  wont  to  do,  watch¬ 
ing  for  their  grip  and  their  vantage,  before  they 
exchange  blows  and  thrusts,  thus,  wheeling, 
each  directed  his  face  on  me,  so  that  his  neck 
was  making  continuous  journey  in  contrary  di¬ 
rection  to  his  feet. 

28.  “And  if  the  wretchedness  of  this  soft 
place  bring  us  and  our  prayers  into  contempt,” 
began  one,  “and  our  darkened  and  scorched 
aspect,  let  our  fame  incline  thy  mind  to  tell  us 
who  thou  art,  that  so  securely  rubbest  thy  liv¬ 
ing  feet  through  Hell.  He  whose  tracks,  thou 
seest  me  trample,  although  he  go  naked  and 
stripped  of  skin,  was  of  greater  degree  than  thou 
thinkest.  He  was  grandson  of  the  good  Gual- 
drada;  his  name  was  Guido  Guerra,  and  in  his 
life  he  did  much  with  wisdom  and  with  the 
sword.  The  other  who  treads  the  sand  behind 
me  is  Tegghiaio  Aldobrandi,  whose  reputation 
should  be  cherished  in  the  world  above.  And 
I,  who  am  set  with  them  on  the  cross,  was 
Jacopo  Rusticucci,6  and  surely  my  savage  wife 

6  The  wonted  burden  of  their  lamentation.  See  xiv. 
20,  supra. 

6Cf.  supra,  Canto  vi.  79,  80.  Tegghiaio  and  Guido 
Guerra  were  illustrious  Florentines  of  the  thirteenth 
century.  The  good  Gualdrada  was  the  daughter  of 


CANTO  XVIi 


more  than  aught  else  injures  me.” 

4 6.  If  I  had  been  sheltered  from  the  fire  I 
should  havecast  myself  below  among  them, and 
I  believe  that  the  Teacher  would  have  permitted 
it;  bur  because  I  should  have  been  burnt  and 
baked,  fear  overcame  my  good  will  which 
made  me  greedy  to  embrace  them. 

52.  Then  I  began:  “Not  contempt,  but  grief, 
did  your  condition  fix  within  me,  such  that 
slowly  will  it  beall  divested,  soon  as  this  my  Lord 
said  to  me  words  by  which  I  bethought  me  that 
such  folk  as  ye  are  were  coming.  I  am  of  your 
city;  and  I  have  always  rehearsed  and  heard 
with  affection  your  deeds  and  honored  names. 
I  am  leaving  the  gall,  and  goingfor  sweet  fruits 
promised  to  me  by  my  veracious  Leader;  but 
far  as  to  the  centre  I  needs  must  first  descend.” 

64.  “So  may  thy  soul  long  direct  thy  limbs,” 
replied  he  then,  “and  so  may  thy  fame  shine 
after  thee,  say  if  courtesy  and  valor  abide  in 
our  city  as  of  wont,  or  if  they  have  quite  gone 
forth  from  it?  For  Guglielmo  Borsiere,  who 
is  in  torment  with  us  but  short  while,  and  is 
going  yonder  with  our  companions,  afflicts  us 
greatly  with  his  words.” 

73.  “The  new  people  and  the  sudden  gains 
have  engendered  pride  and  excess,  Florence,  in 
thee,  so  that  already  thou  weepest  therefor.” 
Thus  I  cried  with  uplifted  face,  and  the  three, 
who  understood  this  for  answer,  looked  one  at 
the  other,  as  one  looks  at  truth. 

79.  “If  other  times  it  costs  thee  so  little,”  re¬ 
plied  they  all,  “to  satisfy  others,  happy  thou  if 
thus  thou  speakest  at  thy  pleasure.  Wherefore, 
if  thou  escapest  from  these  dark  places,  and  re- 
turnest  to  see  again  the  beautiful  stars,  when 
it  shall  rejoice  thee  to  say,  ‘I  have  been,’  mind 
thou  tell  of  us  to  the  people.”  Then  they  broke 
the  wheel,  and  in  flying  their  swift  legs  seemed 
wings. 

88.  An  amen  could  not  have  been  said  so 
quickly  as  they  had  disappeared:  wherefore  it 
seemed  well  to  my  Master  to  depart.  I  followed 
him,  and  we  had  gone  little  way  before  the 
sound  of  the  water  was  so  near  to  us,  that  had 
we  spoken  we  had  scarce  been  heard.  As  that 
river  which  first  from  Monte  Viso  holds  its 
own  course  toward  the  east,  on  the  left  flank  of 
the  Apennine, — which  is  called  Acquacheta  up 

Messer  Bellincione  Berti,  referred  to  in  Cantos  xv.  and 
xvi.  of  Paradise 


above,  before  it  sinks  down  into  its  low  bed, 
and  at  Forli  has  lost  that  name — reverberates 
in  falling  from  the  alp  with  a  single  leap  there 
above  San  Benedetto,  where  ought  to  be  shelter 
for  a  thousand:  thus,  down  from  a  precipitous 
bank,  we  found  that  dark  water  resounding,  so 
that  in  short  while  it  would  have  hurt  the  ears. 

106.  I  had  a  cord  girt  around  me,  and  with 
it  I  had  once  thought  to  take  the  leopard  of  the 
painted  skin.1  After  I  had  loosed  it  wholly  from 
me,  as  my  Leader  had  commanded  me,  I 
reached  it  to  him  gathered  up  and  coiled. 
Whereon  he  turned  toward  the  right,  and  threw 
it,  somewhat  far  from  the  edge,  down  into 
that  deep  gulf.  “And  surely,”  said  I  to  myself, 
“it  must  be  that  some  novelty  respond  to  the 
novel  signal  which  the  Master  so  follows  with 
his  eye.” 

1 18.  Ah!  how  cautious  ought  men  to  be  near 
those  who  see  not  only  the  deed,  but  with  their 
wisdom  look  within  the  thoughts!  He  said  to 
me:  “That  which  I  await  will  soon  come  up, 
and  what  thy  thought  is  dreaming  must  soon 
discover  itself  to  thy  sight.” 

124.  A  man  ought  always  to  close  his  lips  so 
far  as  he  can  to  that  truth  which  has  the  aspect 
of  falsehood,  because  without  fault  it  causes 
shame;  but  here  I  cannot  be  silent,  and  Reader, 
I  swear  to  thee,  by  the  notes  of  this  comedy — 
so  may  they  not  be  void  of  lasting  grace — that 
I  saw  through  that  thick  and  dark  air  a  shape 
marvelous  to  every  steadfast  heart  come  swim¬ 
ming  upwards,  like  as  he  returns  who  goes 
down  sometimes  to  loose  an  anchor  that  grap¬ 
ples  either  a  rock  or  aught  else  which  is  hidden 
in  the  sea,  who  stretches  upward,  and  draws  in 
his  feet. 

CANTO  XVII 

1.  “Behold  the  wild  beast  with  the  pointed 
tail,  that  passes  mountains,  and  breaks  walls 
and  weapons;  behold  him  that  infects  all  the 
world.”2  Thus  began  my  Leader  to  speak  to 
me;  and  he  beckoned  to  him  that  he  should 
come  to  shore  near  the  end  of  the  marbles  we 
had  walked  on.  And  that  loathsome  image  of 

'The  leopard  of  Canto  i.  32.  The  cord  symbolises 
the  ascetic  vows  or  whatsoever  else  on  which  Dante  had 
formerly  relied  to  capture  and  subdue  the  beast. 

2  Dante  makes  Geryon  the  type  and  image  of  Fraud, 
thus  allegorizing  the  triple  form  ( Aeneid ,  vi.  289;  viii. 
292). 


HELL 


fraud  came  onward,  and  landed  his  head  and 
his  bust,  hut  did  not  draw  up  his  tail  on  the 
bank.  His  face  was  the  face  of  a  just  man  (so 
benignant  the  skin  it  had  outwardly),  and  all 
his  trunk  was  of  a  serpent;  he  had  two  paws, 
hairy  to  the  armpits;  his  back  and  his  breast 
and  both  his  sides  were  painted  with  nooses 
and  rings.  Tartars  or  Turks  never  made  cloth 
with  more  colors  of  groundwork  and  pattern, 
nor  were  such  webs  laid  on  the  loom  by 
Arachne. 

19.  As  sometimes  boats  lie  on  the  shore,  and 
are  partly  in  water  and  partly  on  the  ground, 
and  as  yonder, amongthe  gluttonous  Germans, 
the  beaver  settles  himself  to  make  his  war,1  so 
lay  that  worst  of  beasts  upon  the  edge  of  stone 
which  closes  in  the  sand.  In  the  void  all  his 
tail  was  quivering,  twistingupwards its  venom¬ 
ous  fork,  which  in  guise  of  a  scorpion  armed 
the  point. 

28.  The  Leader  said:  “Now  needs  must  our 
way  bend  a  little  toward  that  wicked  beast 
which  is  couching  yonder.”  Therefore  we  de¬ 
scended  on  the  right  hand  side  and  took  ten 
steps  upon  the  verge  in  order  completely  to 
avoid  the  sand  and  the  flamelets.  And  when 
we  had  come  to  him,  I  see,  a  little  farther  on, 
people  sitting  upon  the  sand  near  to  the  empty 
space.2 

37.  Here  the  Master  said  to  me:  “In  order 
that  thou  mayst  carry  away  quite  full  experi¬ 
ence  of  this  round,  now  go  and  see  their  condi¬ 
tion.  Let  thy  talk  there  be  brief;  until  thou  re- 
turnest  I  will  speak  with  this  beast,  that  it  may 
concede  to  us  its  strong  shoulders.” 

43.  Thus,  further  up  along  the  extreme  head 
of  that  seventh  circle,  all  alone  I  went  where  the 
sad  people  were  sitting.  Their  woe  was  burst¬ 
ing  forth  through  their  eyes;  now  here,  now 
there  they  made  help  with  their  hands,  some¬ 
times  against  the  vapors,  and  sometimes  against 
the  hot  soil.  Not  otherwise  do  the  dogs  in  sum¬ 
mer,  now  with  muzzle,  now  with  paws,  when 
they  are  bitten  either  by  fleas,  or  flies,  or  gad¬ 
flies.  When  I  set  my  eyes  on  the  face  of  certain 
of  those  on  whom  the  grievous  fire  falls,  I  did 
not  recognize  one  of  them;  but  I  perceived  that 
from  the  neck  of  each  was  hanging  a  pouch, 

1  With  his  tail  in  the  water  to  attract  his  prey,  as  was 
popularly  believed. 

2  See  Canto  xi.  94-m,  supra . 


which  had  a  certain  color  and  a  certain  device,3 
and  therewith  it  seems  their  eye  is  fed.  And  as 
I  come  gazing  among  them,  I  saw  upon  a  yel¬ 
low  purse  azure  which  had  the  face  and  bear¬ 
ing  of  a  lion.1  Then  as  the  current  of  my  look 
proceeded,  I  saw  another,  red  as  blood,  display 
a  goose  whiter  than  butter. 

64.  And  one,  who  had  his  little  white  sack 
marked  with  an  azure  and  gravid  sow,3  said  to 
me:  “What  art  thou  doing  in  this  ditch?  Now 
get  thee  gone:  and  since  thou  art  still  alive, 
know  that  my  neighbor,  Vitaliano,  will  sit  here 
at  my  left  side.  With  these  Florentines  am  I, 
a  Paduan;  often  they  stun  my  ears,  shouting: 
‘Let  the  sovereign  cavalier  come  who  will 
bring  the  pouch  with  the  three  beaks.’  ”6  Then 
he  twisted  his  mouth,  and  thrust  out  his  tongue, 
like  an  ox  that  licks  its  nose.  And  I,  fearing  lest 
longer  stay  might  vex  him  who  had  admon¬ 
ished  me  to  stay  but  little,  turned  back  from 
these  weary  souls. 

79.  I  found  my  Leader,  who  had  already 
mounted  upon  the  croup  of  the  fierce  animal, 
and  he  said  to  me:  “Now  be  thou  strong  and 
courageous;  henceforth  the  descent  is  by  such 
stairs;  mount  thou  in  front,  for  I  wish  to  be 
between,  so  that  the  tail  cannot  do  harm.” 

85.  As  is  he  who  has  the  shivering  fit  of  the 
quartan  so  near  that  his  nails  are  already  pale, 
and  he  is  all  of  a  tremble  only  looking  at  the 
shade,  such  I  became  at  these  uttered  words: 
but  his  exhortations  wrought  shame  in  me, 
which  in  presence  of  a  good  lord  makes  a  serv¬ 
ant  strong. 

91.  I  seated  myself  on  those  huge  shoulders. 
“So  do,”  I  wished  to  say,  but  the  voice  came 
not  as  I  thought,  “that  thou  embrace  me.” 
But  he  who  other  time  had  succored  me,  in 
other  chance,  soon  as  I  mounted,  clasped  me 
and  sustained  me  with  his  arms;  and  he  said: 
“Geryon,  move  on  now;  let  thy  circles  be  wide, 
and  thy  descending  slow;  consider  the  novel 
burden  that  thou  hast.” 

100.  As  the  little  vessel  goes  from  its  place, 
backward,  backward,  so  he  thence  withdrew; 

3  The  blazon  of  their  arms,  by  which  Dante  learns 
who  they  are,  ignobly  borne  upon  the  purse. 

4  The  armorial  bearings  of  the  Gianfigliazzi,  a  Guelf 
family  of  Florence;  the  next  were  those  of  the  Ubriachi, 
Ghibellines,  also  of  Florence. 

5  The  arms  of  the  Scrovigni  of  Padua. 

Giovanni  Buiamonte  of  Florence,  another  notori¬ 
ous  usurer. 


CANTO 


and  when  he  felt  himself  quite  at  play,  he 
turned  his  tail  to  where  his  breast  had  been, 
and  moved  it  stretched  out  like  an  eel, and  with 
his  paws  gathered  the  air  to  himself.  Greater 
fear  I  do  not  think  there  was  when  Phaethon 
abandoned  the  reins,  whereby  heaven,  as  is  still 
apparent,1  was  scorched;  nor  when  the  wretched 
Icarus  felt  his  loins  unfeathering  by  the  melted 
wax,  his  father  crying  to  him:  “Ill  way  thou 
holdest,”  than  mine  was,  when  I  saw  that  I 
was  in  the  air  on  every  side,  and  saw  every 
sight  vanished,  except  that  of  the  beast.  It  goes 
along  swimming  slowly,  slowly,  wheels  and 
descends,  but  I  perceive  it  not,  save  for  the 
wind  upon  my  face,  and  from  below. 

1 1 8. 1  heard  now  on  the  right  hand  the  gulf 
making  beneath  us  a  horrible  din;  wherefore  I 
stretch  out  my  head,  with  my  eyes  down¬ 
ward.  Then  I  became  more  terrified  at  the  preci¬ 
pice,  because  I  saw  fires  and  heard  laments; 
whereat  I,  trembling,  all  the  closer  cling.  And 
I  saw  then,  for  I  had  not  seen  them  before,  the 
descending  and  the  circling,  by  the  great  evils 
which  were  drawing  near  on  divers  sides. 

127.  As  the  falcon  which  has  been  long  on 
wing,  that,  without  sight  of  lure  or  bird,  makes 
the  falconer  say:  “Ah  me,  thou  stoopest!”  de¬ 
scends  weary,  whence  it  started  swiftly,  through 
a  hundred  circles,  and  alights  disdainful  and 
sullen  far  from  its  master;  so  Geryon  set  us  at 
the  bottom,  at  the  very  foot  of  the  rough  hewn 
rock,  and,  disburdened  of  our  persons,  van¬ 
ished  as  arrow  from  the  bowstring. 

CANTO  XVIII 

1.  There  is  a  place  in  Hell  called  Malebolge,2 * 
all  of  stone  and  of  the  color  of  iron,  as  is  the 
circular  wall  that  environs  it.  Right  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  this  malign  field  yawns  a  very  wide  and 
deep  pit,  the  structure  of  which  I  will  tell  of 
in  its  place.  That  belt,  therefore,  which  remains 
between  the  pit  and  the  foot  of  the  high  hard 
bank  is  circular,  and  it  has  its  bed  divided  into 

1  In  the  Milky  Way. 

2  In  the  Eighth  Circle  the  sinners  are  punished  who 
belong  to  the  first  of  the  two  classes  of  the  fraudulent 

(see  Canto  xi.  52-66),  that  is,  those  who  practised  de¬ 
ceit  upon  persons  who  had  no  ground  for  special  con¬ 
fidence  in  them.  Its  bed,  which  slopes  gradually  from 

the  wall  that  environs  it  to  the  central  pit  of  Hell,  is 

occupied  by  ten  deep  concentric  valleys,  called  bolge. 
Bolgia  signifies,  literally,  a  budget,  or  pouch;  and  Male¬ 

bolge,  evil  pouches. 


XVIII  25 

ten  valleys.  Such  a  figure  as  where,  for  guard 
of  the  walls,  very  many  moats  encircle  castles, 
the  place  where  they  are  presents,  such  image 
did  these  make  here.  And  as  in  such  strong¬ 
holds  from  their  thresholds  to  the  outer  bank 
are  little  bridges,  so  from  the  base  of  the  cliff 
ran  crags  which  traversed  the  embankments 
and  the  moats  far  as  the  pit  which  cuts  them  off 
and  collects  them. 

19.  In  this  place  we  found  ourselves,  shaken 
off  from  the  back  of  Geryon;  and  the  Poet  held 
to  the  left,  and  I  moved  on  behind.  On  the 
right  hand  I  saw  new  woe,  new  torments,  and 
new  scourgers,  with  which  the  first  pouch  was 
replete.  At  its  bottom  were  the  sinners  naked; 
on  this  side  the  middle  they  came  facing  us;'1 
on  the  further  side  along  with  us,  l?ut  with 
greater  steps.  As  the  Romans,  because  of  the 
great  host  in  the  year  of  the  Jubilee,4 *  have 
taken  means  for  the  passage  of  the  people  over 
the  Bridge,  so  that  on  one  side  all  have  their 
front  toward  the  Castle,  and  go  to  Saint  Peter’s, 
and  on  the  other  rim  toward  the  Mount.'' 

34.  Along  the  gloomy  rock,  on  this  side  and 
on  that,  I  saw  horned  demons  with  great  whips, 
who  were  beating  them  cruelly  from  behind. 
Ah,  how  they  made  them  lift  their  heels  at  the 
first  blows!  truly  not  one  waited  for  the  second, 
or  the  third. 

40.  While  I  was  going  on,  my  eyes  were  en¬ 
countered  by  one,  and  I  said  straightway  thus: 
“Ere  now  for  sight  of  him  I  have  not  fasted”; 
wherefore  to  shape  him  out  I  stayed  my  feet, 
and  the  sweet  Leader  stopped  with  me,  and 
assented  to  my  goingsomewhat  back.  And  that 
scourged  one  thought  to  conceal  himself  by 
lowering  his  face,  but  it  availed  him  little,  for 
I  said:  “Thou  that  castest  thine  eye  upon  the 
ground,  if  the  features  that  thou  bearest  are  not 
false,  art  Venedico  Caccianimico;  but  what 
brings  thee  to  such  stinging  Salse?”6 

52.  And  he  to  me:  “Unwillingly  I  tell  it,  but 
thy  plain  speech  compels  me,  which  makes  me 
remember  the  old  world.  I  was  he  who  brought 

3  In  their  long  circling  course  round  the  bolgia,  the 
panders,  going  in  opposite  direction  to  the  poets,  came 
facing  them;  on  the  further  side  the  seducers  were 
taking  the  contrary  course. 

4  The  first  >ear  of  Jubilee:  1300. 

5  The  Bridge  and  Castle  of  Sant’  Angelo;  the 
“Mount”  is  the  Capitoline  Hill. 

0  Salse ,  the  name  of  a  ravine  near  Bologna,  into 
which  the  bodies  of  criminals  were  thrown. 


26  HELL 


the  beautiful  Ghisola1  to  do  the  will  of  the 
Marquis,  however  the  shameful  tale  may  be  re¬ 
ported.  And  not  the  only  Bolognese  do  I  weep 
here;  nay,  this  place  is  so  full  of  them,  that  so 
many  tongues  are  not  now  taught  between 
Savena  and  the  Reno  to  say  sipa /  and  if  of  this 
thou  wishest  assurance  or  testimony,  bring  to 
mind  our  avaricious  breasts.”  As  he  spoke  thus 
a  demon  struck  him  with  his  thong  and  said: 
“Begone,  pander,  here  are  no  women  for  coin- 
ing.” 

67. 1  rejoined  my  Escort;  then  with  few  steps 
we  came  to  where  a  crag  jutted  from  the  bank. 
We  ascended  it  easily  enough,  and  turning  to 
the  right  upon  its  ridge,  from  those  eternal  en¬ 
circling  walls  we  departed. 

73.  When  we  were  there  where  it  opens  be¬ 
low  to  give  passage  to  the  scourged,  the  Leader 
said:  “Wait,  and  let  the  sight  strike  on  thee  of 
these  others  born  to  ill,  of  whom  thou  hast  not 
yet  seen  the  face,  because  they  have  gone  along 
together  with  us.” 

79.  From  the  old  bridge  we  looked  at  the 
train  that  was  coming  toward  us  on  the  other 
side,  and  which  the  scourge  in  like  manner 
drives  on.  The  good  Master,  without  my  ask¬ 
ing,  said  to  me:  “Look  at  that  great  one  who  is 
coming,  and  seems  not  to  shed  a  tear  for  pain. 
What  royal  aspect  he  still  retains!  He  is  Jason, 
who  by  courage  and  by  wit  despoiled  the  Col- 
chians  of  their  ram.  He  passed  by  the  isle  of 
Lemnos,  after  the  bold  pitiless  women  had 
given  all  their  males  to  death.  There  with  to¬ 
kens  and  with  ornate  words  he  deceived  Hyp- 
sipyle,  the  maiden,  who  first  had  deceived  all 
the  others.  There  he  left  her  big  with  child, 
and  lonely;  such  guilt  condemns  him  to  such 
torment;  and  also  for  Medea  is  vengeance 
wrought.  With  him  goes  whoever  in  such  wise 
deceives.  And  let  this  suffice  to  know  of  the  first 
valley,  and  of  those  that  it  holds  in  its  fangs.” 

100.  We  were  now  where  the  narrow  path 
intersects  with  the  second  embankment,  and 
makes  of  that  abutments  for  another  arch.  From 
there  we  heard  people  whining  in  the  next 
pouch,  and  puffing  with  their  muzzles,  and 
beating  themselves  with  their  palms.  The  banks 

1  His  own  sister;  the  Marquis  was  one  of  the  Esti  of 
Ferrara.  Venedico  was  a  man  of  note,  and  for  a  time 
podesta  of  Pistoia. 

2  Bologna  lies  between  the  Savena  and  the  Reno; 
sipa  is  the  Bolognese  provincialism  for  sia. 


were  encrusted  with  a  mould  by  the  breath 
from  below  which  sticks  on  them,  and  was 
making  quarrel  with  the  eyes  and  with  the 
nose.  The  bottom  is  so  hollowed  out  that  no  place 
suffices  us  for  seeing  it,  without  mounting  to 
the  crown  of  the  arch  where  the  crag  rises  high¬ 
est.  Hither  we  came,  and  thence  I  saw  down  in 
the  ditch  people  plunged  in  a  filth  that  seemed 
to  have  come  from  human  privies. 

1 15.  And  while  I  am  searching  down  there 
with  my  eye,  I  saw  one  with  his  head  so  foul 
with  ordure  that  it  was  not  apparent  whether 
he  were  layman  or  clerk.  He  shouted  to  me: 
“Why  art  thou  so  greedy  to  look  more  at  me 
than  at  the  other  filthy  ones?”  And  I  to  him: 
“Because,  if  I  remember  rightly,  ere  now  I 
have  seen  thee  with  dry  hair,  and  thou  art 
Alessio  Interminei  of  Lucca;  therefore  I  eye 
thee  more  than  all  the  rest.”  And  he  then,  beat¬ 
ing  his  pate:  “Down  here  the  flatteries  where¬ 
with  I  never  had  my  tongue  cloyed  have  sub¬ 
merged  me.” 

127.  Hereupon  my  Leadersaid  tome:  “Mind 
thou  push  thy  look  a  little  further  forwards  so 
that  thou  mayest  quite  reach  with  thine  eyes 
the  face  of  that  dirty  and  disheveled  wench, 
who  is  scratching  herself  there  with  her  nasty 
nails,  and  now  is  crouching  down  and  now 
standing  on  foot.  She  is  Thais  the  harlot,  who 
answered  her  paramour  when  he  said:  ‘Have  I 
great  thanks  from  thee?’ — ‘Nay,  marvelous.’ 
And  herewith  let  our  sight  be  satisfied.” 

CANTO  XIX 

1.  O  Simon  Magus/  O  wretched  followers,  be¬ 
cause  ye,  rapacious,  do  prostitute  for  gold  and 
silver  the  things  of  God  which  ought  to  be  the 
brides  of  righteousness,  now  it  behoves  for  you 
the  trumpet  sound,  since  ye  are  in  the  third 
pouch. 

7.  We  were  now  at  the  next  tomb,4  having 
mounted  on  that  part  of  the  crag  which  hangs 
plumb  just  over  the  middle  of  the  ditch.  O 
Supreme  Wisdom,  how  great  is  the  art  which 
Thou  dost  display  in  heaven,  on  earth,  and  in 
the  evil  world!  and  how  justly  does  Thy  Power 
apportion! 

13.  Upon  the  sides  and  upon  the  bottom,  I 
saw  the  livid  stone  full  of  holes  all  of  one  size, 

3  See  Acts,  8.  9-24. 

*  The  next  bolgia. 


CANTO  XIX 


and  each  was  circular.  They  seemed  to  me  not 
less  wide  nor  larger  than  those  that  in  my 
beautiful  Saint  John  are  made  for  place  of  the 
baptizers;1  one  of  wThich,  not  many  years  ago, 
I  broke  for  the  sake  of  one  who  was  stifling  in 
it:  and  let  this  be  the  seal  to  undeceive  all  men. 

22.  Forth  from  the  mouth  of  each  were  pro¬ 
truding  the  feet  of  a  sinner,  and  his  legs  up  to 
the  calf,  and  the  rest  was  within.  Both  the  soles 
of  all  of  them  were  on  fire,  because  of  which 
their  joints  were  twitching  so  hard  that  they 
would  have  snapped  ropes  and  withes.  As  the 
flaming  of  things  oiled  is  wont  to  move  only 
on  the  outer  surface,  so  was  it  there  from  the 
heels  to  the  toes. 

31.  “Who  is  he,  Master,  who  torments  him¬ 
self,  twitching  more  than  the  others  his  con¬ 
sorts, ”  said  I,  “and  whom  a  ruddier  flame  is 
sucking ?”  And  he  to  me:  “If  thou  wilt  that  I 
carry  thee  down  there  by  the  bank  which  is 
the  more  sloping,  from  him  thou  shalt  know 
of  himself  and  of  his  wrongs.”  And  I:  “What¬ 
ever  pleases  thee  is  to  my  liking:  thou  art  Lord, 
and  knowest  that  I  part  me  not  from  thy  will, 
and  thou  knowest  that  which  is  unspoken.” 

40.  Then  we  went  upon  the  fourth  embank¬ 
ment,  turned,  and  descended  on  the  left  hand, 
down  to  the  bottom  pierced  with  holes,  and 
narrow.  The  good  Master  set  me  not  yet  down 
from  his  haunch,  till  he  brought  me  to  the 
cleft  of  him  who  was  thus  lamenting  with  his 
shanks. 

46.  “O  wretched  soul,  whoso  thou  art,  that 
keepest  upside  down,  planted  like  a  stake,”  I 
began  to  say,  “say  a  word,  if  thou  canst.”  I  was 
standing  like  the  friar  who  confesses  the  per¬ 
fidious  assassin,  who,  after  he  is  fixed,  recalls 
him,  in  order  to  delay  his  death. 

52.  And  he2  cried  out:  “Art  thou  already 
standing  there?  Art  thou  already  standing 
there,  Boniface?  By  several  years  the  writing 
lied  to  me.  Art  thou  so  quickly  sated  with  that 
having,  for  which  thou  didst  not  fear  to  seize 
by  guile  the  beautiful  Lady,3  and  then  to  do 
her  outrage?” 

1  “My  beautiful  Saint  John”  is  the  Baptistery  of 
Florence. 

2  This  is  Nicholas  III,  Pope  from  1277  to  1280, 
“the  first  Pope,  or  one  of  the  first,”  says  Villani,  “in 
whose  court  simony  was  openly  practiced.”  He  takes 
Dante  to  be  Boniface  VIII,  but  Boniface  was  not  to  die 
till  1303. 

3  The  Church,  which  Boniface  had  seized  by  guile, 


58.  Such  I  became  as  those  who,  through  not 
comprehending  that  which  is  replied  to  them, 
stand  as  if  mocked,  and  know  not  what  to  an¬ 
swer. 

61.  Then  Virgil  said:  “Tell  him  quickly,  I 
am  not  he,  I  am  not  he  that  thou  thinkest.” 
And  I  answered  as  was  enjoined  on  me;  where¬ 
at  the  spirit  writhed  violently  both  his  feet; 
then,  sighing  and  with  tearful  voice,  he  said  to 
me:  “What  then  dost  thou  want  of  me?  If  to 
know  who  I  am  concern  thee  so  much  that 
thou  hast  therefore  come  down  the  bank,  know 
that  I  was  vested  with  the  Great  Mantled  and 
verily  I  was  a  son  of  the  She-Bear,°  so  eager  to 
advance  the  cubs,  that  up  there  I  put  wealth, 
and  here  myself,  into  the  purse.  Beneath  my 
head  are  the  others  that  preceded  me  in  sim¬ 
ony,  dragged  down  flattened  through  the  fis¬ 
sures  of  the  rock.  Down  there  shall  I  in  my 
turn  sink,  when  he  shall  come  whom  I  believed 
that  thou  wast,  then  when  I  put  my  sudden 
question;  but  already  the  time  is  longer  that  I 
have  cooked  my  feet,  and  that  I  have  been  thus 
upside  down,  than  he  will  stay  planted  with 
his  feet  red;  for  after  him  will  come  from  west¬ 
ward,  a  shepherd  without  law,6  of  uglier  deed, 
such  as  befits  to  cover  him  and  me.  A  new 
Jason  will  he  be,  of  whom  it  is  read  in  Macca¬ 
bees;'  and  as  to  that  one  his  king  was  compli¬ 
ant,  so  to  this  one  he  who  rules  France  shall 
be.” 

88. 1  know  not  if  here  I  was  too  foolhardy 
that  I  answered  him  only  in  this  strain:  “Pray 
now  tell  me,  how  much  treasure  did  our  Lord 
require  of  Saint  Peter  before  he  placed  the  keys 
in  his  keeping?  Surely  he  asked  nothing  save: 
‘Follow  thou  me.’8  Nor  did  Peter  or  the  others 
take  gold  or  silver  of  Matthias,  when  he  was 
chosen  by  lot  to  the  place  which  the  guilty  soul 
had  lost.9  Therefore  stay  thou,  for  thou  art 

through  the  deceit  that  he  was  charged  with  practising 
on  Celestine  V  in  order  to  obtain  the  papacy. 

4  The  papal  mantle.  Cf.  Canto  ii.  27,  supra. 

5  Nicholas  was  of  the  Orsini  family,  whose  cogni¬ 
zance  was  a  she-bear,  orsa. 

0  Bertrand  de  Goth,  a  Gascon,  was  elected  Pope  in 
1305  and  died  in  1314,  little  more  than  ten  years  after 
the  death  of  Boniface.  In  1309  Clement  transferred  the 
papal  see  to  Avignon;  this  was  a  deed  “without  law,” 
and  he  was  beside  noted  for  cupidity,  simony,  and 
licentiousness.  Cf.  Paradise,  xxx.  142-148. 

‘  See  II  Maccabees,  4.  Clement  was  “compliant”  to 
Philip  IV. 

8  See  Matthew,  16.  19,  and  John,  21.  19-22. 

9  See  Acts,  1.  15-26. 


28  HELL 


rightly  punished,  and  guard  well  the  ill-gotten 
money  that  made  thee  bold  against  Charles.1 
And  were  it  not  that  reverence  for  the  supreme 
keys  which  thou  heldest  in  the  glad  life  even 
now  forbids  it  to  me,  I  would  use  still  heavier 
words;  for  your  avarice  afflicts  the  world, 
trampling  down  the  good  and  exalting  the 
bad.  Ye  shepherds  the  Evangelist  had  in  mind, 
when  she  that  sitteth  upon  the  waters  was  seen 
by  him  to  fornicate  with  kings:  she  that  was 
born  with  the  seven  heads,  and  from  the  ten 
horns  had  argument,  so  long  as  virtue  pleased 
her  spouse.2  Ye  have  made  you  a  god  of  gold 
and  silver:3  and  what  else  is  there  between 
you  and  the  idolaters  save  that  they  worship 
one,  and  ye  a  hundred?  Ah  Constantine!  of 
how  much  ill  was  mother,  not  thy  conversion, 
but  that  dowry  which  the  first  rich  Father  took 
from  thee!”4 

1 1 8.  And,  while  I  was  singing  these  notes  to 
him,  whether  anger  or  conscience  stung  him, 
he  was  kicking  hard  with  both  his  feet.  I  be¬ 
lieve,  indeed,  that  it  pleased  my  Leader,  with 
so  contented  look  did  he  all  the  while  give 
heed  to  the  sound  of  the  true  words  uttered. 
Thereupon  with  both  his  arms  he  took  me, 
and  when  he  had  me  wholly  on  his  breast,  re¬ 
mounted  along  the  way  whereby  he  had  de¬ 
scended.  Nor  did  he  tire  of  holding  me  clasped 
to  him,  till  he  had  thus  borne  me  up  to  the 
top  of  the  arch  which  is  the  passage  from  the 
fourth  to  the  fifth  embankment.  Here  he  gent¬ 
ly  laid  down  his  burden,  gently  because  of  the 
rugged  and  steep  crag,  which  would  be  a  diffi¬ 
cult  pass  for  goats.  Thence  another  great  valley 
was  discovered  to  me. 

CANTO  XX 

i.  Of  a  new  punishment  it  behoves  me  to 
make  verses,  and  give  material  to  the  twenti¬ 

1  Charles  of  Anjou.  The  Pope  was  charged  with 
having  been  bribed  to  favor  the  conspiracy  to  expel  the 
French  from  Sicily,  which  came  to  a  head,  more  than 
a  year  after  his  death,  in  the  Sicilian  Vespers,  in 
March,  1282. 

2  Cf.  Revelation,  17.  The  woman  here  stands  for 
the  Church;  her  seven  heads  may  be  interpreted  as  the 
Seven  Sacraments,  and  her  ten  horns  as  the  Command¬ 
ments;  her  spouse  is  the  Pope. 

3  Cf.  Hosea,  8.  4. 

4  The  reference  is  to  the  so-called  Donation  of  Con¬ 

stantine,  the  authenticity  of  which  was  generally  be¬ 

lieved  in  till,  about  1450,  its  forgery  was  conclusively 

exposed. 


eth  canto  of  the  first  lay,  which  is  of  the  sub¬ 
merged. 

4. 1  was  now  wholly  in  position  to  look  into 
the  uncovered  depth  which  was  bathed  with 
tears  of  anguish,  and  I  saw  folk  come,  silent 
and  weeping,  along  the  great  circular  valley,  at 
the  pace  which  the  litanies  make  in  this  world. 
As  my  sight  descended  lower  on  them,  each 
appeared  marvelously  distorted  between  the 
chin  and  the  beginning  of  the  chest;  for  their 
face  was  turned  toward  their  reins,  and  they 
must  needs  go  backwards,  because  looking  for¬ 
ward  was  taken  from  them.  Perhaps  indeed 
by  force  of  palsy  some  one  has  been  thus  com¬ 
pletely  twisted,  but  I  never  saw  it,  nor  do  I 
believe  it  can  be. 

19.  So  may  God  let  thee,  Reader,  gather  fruit 
from  thy  reading,  now  think  for  thyself  how 
I  could  keep  my  face  dry,  when  close  at  hand  I 
saw  our  image  so  contorted  that  the  weeping 
of  the  eyes  bathed  the  buttocks  along  the  cleft. 
Truly  I  wept,  leaning  on  one  of  the  rocks  of 
the  hard  crag,  so  that  my  Guide  said  to  me: 
“Art  thou  even  yet  among  the  other  fools? 
Here  pity  lives  when  it  is  quite  dead.  Who  is 
more  criminal  than  he  who  brings  passion  to 
the  Divine  Judgment?5  Lift  up  thy  head,  lift 
up,  and  see  him6  for  whom  the  earth  opened 
before  the  eyes  of  the  Thebans,  whereat  they 
all  shouted:  ‘Whither  art  thou  rushing,  Am- 
phiaraus?  Why  dost  thou  leave  the  war?’  And 
he  stopped  not  from  falling  headlong  down  far 
as  Minos,  who  lays  hold  on  every  one.  Look, 
how  he  has  made  a  breast  of  his  shoulders! 
Because  he  wished  to  see  too  far  before  him, 
he  looks  behind  and  goes  a  backward  path. 

40.  “Behold  Tiresias,7  who  changed  sem¬ 
blance,  when  from  male  he  became  female, 
transforming  all  his  members;  and  afterwards 
he  was  obliged  to  strike  again  with  his  rod  the 

5  Cf.  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  III,  Suppl. 
Q  94,  A  3,  citing  Psalms,  58.  10.  Virgil  has  not  rebuked 
Dante  for  feeling  compassion  for  individual  sinners 
suffering  the  penalty  of  sin  (see  Cantos  v.  72,  93,  117; 
xv.  79;  xvi.  52),  but  he  rebukes  him  here  for  shedding 
tears  at  the  mere  sight  of  the  punishment,  which, 
being  the  evidence  of  the  justice  of  God,  ought  not  to 
awaken  pity. 

6  Amphiaraus,  one  of  the  seven  kings  who  besieged 
Thebes,  an  augur  and  prophet. 

7  The  story  as  told  by  Ovid  is  that  when  Teresias 
struck  the  two  serpents  with  his  staff  he  was  trans¬ 
formed  to  a  woman,  and  that  seven  years  later,  when 
he  saw  them  again,  he  struck  them  with  his  staff  and 
became  a  man  again. 


CANTO  XX 


two  entwined  serpents,  ere  he  could  regain  his 
masculine  plumage.  He  who  has  his  back  to 
this  one’s  belly  is  Aruns,1  who  on  the  moun¬ 
tains  of  Luni  (where  grubs  the  man  of  Carrara 
who  dwells  below)  had  a  cave  for  his  abode 
among  white  marbles,  whence  for  looking  at 
the  stars  and  the  sea  his  view  was  not  cut  off. 

52.  “And  she  who  with  her  loose  tresses 
covers  her  breasts,  which  thou  dost  not  see,  and 
has  on  that  side  all  her  hairy  skin,  was  Manto,' 
who  roamed  through  many  lands,  then  settled 
there  where  I  was  born;  whereof  it  pleases  me 
that  thou  listen  a  little  to  me.  After  her  father 

Ihad  departed  from  life,  and  the  city  of  Bac¬ 
chus3  had  become  enslaved,  she  wandered  long 
while  through  the  world.  Up  in  fair  Italy,  at 
foot  of  the  alp  which  shuts  in  Germany  above 
Tyrol,  lies  a  lake  which  is  called  Benaco.4  By 
a  thousand  founts,  I  think,  and  more,  between 
Garda  and  Val  Camonica,  Apennino5  is  bathed 
by  the  water  which  settles  in  that  lake.  A  place 
is  in  the  middle  there,  where  the  Trentine  Pas¬ 
tor  and  he  of  Brescia  and  the  Veronese  might 
each  give  his  blessing  if  he  took  that  road.6 
Peschiera,  a  fair  and  strong  fortress,  to  front 
the  Brescians  and  Bergamasques,  sits  where 
the  shore  round  about  is  lowest.  There  that 
which  in  the  bosom  of  Benaco  cannot  stay 
must  needs  all  pour  forth,  and  it  becomes  a 
river  down  through  green  pastures.  Soon  as 
the  water  gathers  head  to  run,  it  is  no  longer 
called  Benaco,  but  Mincio,  far  as  Governo, 
where  it  falls  into  the  Po.  It  has  no  long  course 
before  it  finds  a  flat,  on  which  it  spreads,  and 
makes  a  marsh,  and  is  apt  at  times  in  summer 
to  be  noisome. 

82.  “Passing  that  way,  the  savage  virgin  saw 
land  in  the  middle  of  the  fen,  without  culture 
and  bare  of  inhabitants.  There,  to  avoid  all  hu¬ 
man  fellowship,  she  stayed  with  her  servants 
to  practice  her  arts,  and  lived,  and  left  there 
her  body  empty.  Afterward  the  men  who  were 
scattered  round  about  gathered  to  that  place, 
which  was  strong  because  of  the  fen  which  it 
had  on  all  sides.  They  built  the  city  over  those 
1  An  Etruscan  soothsayer. 

2  The  daughter  of  Tiresias,  and  herself  a  prophetess. 
Cf.  Aeneid,  v.  199. 

8  Thebes. 

4  Now  the  Lago  di  Garda. 

6  Not  the  chain  of  the  Apennines,  but  said  to  be 
the  proper  name  of  a  special  mountain  in  this  locality. 
0  A  point  in  the  lake  where  the  three  dioceses  meet. 


dead  bones,  and  for  her.  who  first  had  chosen 
the  place,  they  called  it  Mantua,  without  other 
augury.  Formerly  its  people  were  more  thick 
within  it,  before  the  stupidity  of  Casalodi  had 
been  tricked  by  Pinamonte.'  Therefore  I  in¬ 
struct  thee  that  if  thou  ever  hearest  that  my 
city  had  other  origin,  no  falsehood  may  de¬ 
fraud  the  truth.” 

100.  And  I:  “Master,  thy  discourses  are  so 
certain  to  me,  and  so  lay  hold  on  my  faith,  that 
the  others  would  be  to  me  as  spent  coals.  But 
tell  me  of  the  people  who  are  going  onward,  if 
thou  seest  any  one  of  them  worthy  of  note;  for 
only  to  that  does  my  mind  revert.” 

106.  Then  he  said  to  me:  “That  one,  who 
stretches  his  beard  from  his  cheek  over  his 
dusky  shoulders,  was  an  augur  when  Greece 
was  so  emptied  of  males  that  they  scarcely  re¬ 
mained  for  the  cradles,  and  with  Calchas  he 
gave  the  moment  for  cutting  the  first  cable  at 
Aulis.  Eurypylus  was  his  name,  and  thus  my 
lofty  Tragedy  sings  him  in  some  place;8  well 
thou  knowest  this,  who  knowest  the  whole  of 
it.  That  other  who  is  so  spare  in  the  flanks  was 
Michael  Scot,9  who  verily  knew  the  game  of 
magical  deceptions.  Behold  Guido  Bonatti,10 
behold  Asdente,n  who  now  would  wish  he  had 
attended  to  his  leather  and  his  thread,  but  too 
late  repents.  Behold  the  wretched  women  who 
left  the  needle,  the  spool,  and  the  spindle,  and 
became  fortune-tellers;  they  wrought  spells 
with  herbs  and  with  image. 

124.  “But  come  on  now,  for  already  Cain 
with  his  thorns12  holds  the  confines  of  both  the 
hemispheres,  and  touches  the  wave  below  Se¬ 
ville;  and  already  yesternight  was  the  moon 
round;  well  shouldst  thou  remember  it,  for  it 
did  thee  no  harm  sometimes  in  the  deep 
wood.”  Thus  he  spoke  to  me,  and  we  went  on 
the  while. 

7  The  Count  of  Casalodi,  being  lord  of  Mantua 
about  1270,  gave  ear  to  the  treacherous  counsels  of 
Messer  Pinamonte  de’  Buonaccorsi,  and  after  expelling 
many  of  the  nobles  was  himself  driven  from  the  city, 
with  great  slaughter  and  dispersion  of  the  chief  fam¬ 
ilies  that  had  remained. 

8Cf.  Aeneid,  ii.  114-115. 

9  A  famous  Scotch  wizard;  died  about  1250. 

10  A  famous  astrologer  of  Forli,  in  the  thirteenth 
century. 

11  A  shoemaker  of  Parma,  noted  for  his  soothsaying. 

12  The  Man  in  the  Moon,  who,  according  to  the 
Italian  version  of  the  old  popular  legend,  was  Cain, 
condemned  to  carry  forever  a  bundle  of  thorns. 


3° 


HELL 


CANTO  XXI 

i.  Thus  from  bridge  to  bridge  we  went,  talk¬ 
ing  of  other  things,  which  my  Comedy  cares 
not  to  sing,  and  were  holding  the  summit,1 
when  we  stopped  to  see  the  next  cleft  of  Male- 
bolge  and  the  next  vain  lamentations;  and  I 
saw  it  wonderfully  dark. 

7.  As  in  the  Arsenal  of  the  Venetians,  in  win¬ 
ter,  the  sticky  pitch  for  paying  their  unsound 
vessels  is  boiling,  because  they  cannot  sail  the 
sea,  and,  instead  thereof,  one  builds  him  a  new 
bark,  and  one  caulks  the  ribs  of  that  which  has 
made  many  a  voyage;  one  hammers  at  the 
prow,  and  one  at  the  stern;  another  makes 
oars,  and  another  twists  cordage;  and  one 
patches  the  foresail  and  the  mainsail — so,  not 
by  fire,  but  by  divine  art,  a  thick  pitch  was  boil¬ 
ing  there  below,  which  belimed  the  bank  on 
every  side.  I  saw  it,  but  saw  not  in  it  aught  but 
the  bubbles  which  the  boiling  raised,  and  all  of 
it  swelling  up  and  again  settling  down  com¬ 
pressed. 

22.  While  I  was  gazing  down  there  fixedly, 
my  Leader,  saying:  “Beware!  beware!”  drew 
me  to  himself  from  the  place  where  I  was 
standing.  Then  I  turned  as  one  who  is  in  haste 
to  see  that  from  which  it  behoves  him  to  fly, 
and  whom  a  sudden  fear  dismays,  and  who  for 
seeing  delays  not  to  depart,  and  I  saw  behind 
us  a  black  devil  come  running  up  along  the 
crag.  Ah!  hov  fell  he  was  in  aspect,  and  how 
bitter  he  seemed  to  me  in  act,  with  his  wings 
open,  and  light  upon  his  feet!  His  shoulder, 
which  was  sharp  and  high,  was  laden  by  a  sin¬ 
ner  with  both  haunches,  the  sinews  of  whose 
feet  he  held  clutched. 

37.  “O  Malebranche2  of  our  bridge,”  he  said, 
“lo  here,  one  of  the  Ancients  of  Saint  Zita!3 
put  him  under,  for  I  am  returning  for  still  oth¬ 
ers  to  that  city,  which  I  have  furnished  well 
with  them;  every  man  there  is  a  barrator, 
except  Bonturo:4 *  there,  for  money,  out  of 
Nay  is  made  Ay.”  Down  he  hurled  him  and 
turned  back  along  the  hard  crag,  and  never 

1  The  crown  of  the  arch  of  the  craggy  bridge  across 
the  fifth  bolgia. 

2  Malebranche:  “Evil-claws.” 

3  One  of  the  Anziani,  the  chief  magistrates  of  Lucca, 
whose  special  protectress  was  Santa  Zita. 

4  Ironical;  Bonturo  was  the  chief  barrator  of  them 

all. 


mastiff  loosed  was  in  such  haste  to  follow  a 
thief. 

46.  That  one  sank  under,  and  rose  again 
doubled  up,  but  the  demons  that  had  cover  of 
the  bridge  cried  out:  “Here  the  Holy  Face'  has 
no  place;  here  one  swims  otherwise  than  in  the 
Serchio;6  therefore,  if  thou  dost  not  want  our 
grapples,  make  no  show  above  the  pitch.” 
Then  they  pricked  him  with  more  than  a  hun¬ 
dred  prongs,  and  said:  “Here  thou  must  dance 
under  cover,  so  that,  if  thou  canst,  thou  mayst 
swindle  secretly.”  Not  otherwise  do  the  cooks 
make  their  scullions  plunge  the  meat  with 
their  hooks  into  the  middle  of  the  cauldron,  so 
that  it  may  not  float. 

58.  The  good  Master  said  to  me:  “In  order 
that  it  be  not  apparent  that  thou  art  here, 
squat  down  behind  a  jag,  that  thou  mayst  have 
some  screen  for  thyself,  and  at  any  offence  that 
may  be  done  to  me  be  not  afraid,  for  I  have 
knowledge  of  these  things,  because  once  before 
I  was  in  such  a  wrangle.” 

64.  Then  he  passed  on  beyond  the  head  of 
the  bridge,  and  when  he  arrived  upon  the 
sixth  bank,  he  had  need  to  have  a  steadfast 
front.  With  that  fury  and  with  that  storm  with 
which  dogs  run  out  upon  the  poor  wretch 
who,  where  he  stops,  suddenly  asks  alms,  they 
came  forth  from  under  the  little  bridge,  and 
turned  against  him  all  their  grapples.  But  he 
cried  out:  “Let  no  one  of  you  be  savage;  before 
your  hook  take  hold  of  me,  let  one  of  you 
come  forward  that  he  may  hear  me,  and  then 
take  counsel  as  to  grappling  me.”  All  cried 
out:  “Let  Malacoda'  go”;  whereon,  while  the 
rest  stood  still,  one  moved  and  came  to  him, 
saying:  “What  does  this  profit  him?” 

79.  “Thinkest  thou,  Malacoda,  to  see  me 
come  here,”  said  my  Master,  “safe  hitherto 
from  all  your  hindrances,  except  by  Divine 
Will  and  propitious  fate?  Let  me  go  on,  for  in 
Heaven  it  is  willed  that  I  show  to  another  this 
wild  road.”  Then  was  his  arrogance  so  fallen 
that  he  let  the  hook  drop  at  his  feet,  and  said  to 
the  others:  “Now  he  may  not  be  struck.” 

88.  And  my  Leader  to  me:  “O  thou  that  sit- 
test  asquat  among  the  splinters  of  the  bridge, 

5  The  Santo  Volto,  an  image  of  Christ  upon  the 
cross,  still  venerated  at  Lucca. 

6  The  river  that  runs  not  far  from  Lucca. 

'  Malacoda:  “Evil-tail.” 


CANTO  XXII 


return  now  securely  to  me.”  Wherefore  I 
moved  and  came  swiftly  to  him;  and  the  devils 
all  pressed  forward,  so  that  I  feared  they  would 
not  keep  compact.  And  thus  I  once  saw  the 
foot-soldiers  afraid,  who  were  coming  out 
from  Caprona  under  pledge,1  seeing  them¬ 
selves  among  so  many  enemies.  I  drew  close 
with  my  whole  body  to  my  Leader’s  side,  and 
did  not  turn  my  eyes  from  their  look,  which 
was  not  good.  They  were  lowering  their  forks, 
and  one  was  saying  to  the  other:  “Wilt  thou 
that  I  touch  him  on  the  rump?”  and  they  were 
answering:  “Yes,  see  that  thou  nick  it  for 
him.”  But  that  demon  who  was  holding 
speech  with  my  Leader  turned  round  with  all 
haste  and  said:  “Quiet,  quiet,  Scarmiglione!” 

106.  Then  he  said  to  us:  “Further  advance 
along  this  crag  is  not  possible,  because  the  sixth 
arch  lies  all  shattered  at  the  bottom.  And  if  it 
be  still  your  pleasure  to  go  forward,  go  on 
along  this  ridge;  near  by  is  another  crag  that 
affords  a  way.  Yesterday,  five  hours  later  than 
this,  completed  one  thousand  two  hundred 
and  sixty-six  years  since  the  way  was  broken 
here.2  I  am  sending  thitherward  some  of  these 
of  mine,  to  see  if  any  one  is  airing  himself;  go 
ye  with  them,  for  they  will  not  be  wicked. 
Come  forward,  Alichino  and  Calcabrina.”  he 
began  to  say,  “and  thou,  Cagnazzo;  and  Bar- 
bariccia,  do  thou  guide  the  ten.  Let  Libicocco 
go  also,  and  Draghignazzo,  tusked  Ciriatto, 
and  Graffiacane,  and  Farfarello,  and  mad  Ru- 
bicante.3  Search  round  about  the  boiling  pitch; 
let  these  be  safe  far  as  the  next  crag,  which  all 
unbroken  goes  over  these  dens.” 

127.  “O  me!  Master,  what  is  this  that  I  see?,, 
said  I;  “pray,  if  thou  knowest  the  way,  let  us 
go  alone  without  escort,  for  as  for  myself  I 
crave  it  not.  If  thou  art  as  wary  as  thou  art 
wont,  does  thou  not  see  that  they  grin,  and 
with  their  brows  threaten  harm  to  us?”  And 

1  In  August,  1289,  the  town  of  Caprona,  on  the 
Arno,  surrendered  to  the  Florentine  troops,  with  whom 
Dante  was  serving. 

3  By  the  earthquake  at  the  death  of  the  Saviour,  who, 
it  was  believed,  was  thirty-four  years  old  at  his  cruci¬ 
fixion. 

3  Some  of  the  names  of  these  demons  have  as  plain 
a  significance  as  Malacoda;  for  example,  Cagnazzo  for 
Cagnaccio,  “wretched  dog”;  Barbariccia.  “crisp  beard”; 
Graffiacane.  “scratch  dog”:  while  others  suggest  a 
meaning  by  their  composition  or  their  sound,  as  Ali¬ 
chino,  “bent  wing”:  Rubicante.  “rubicund”:  Scar¬ 
miglione,  “dishevelled,”  and  so  on. 


he  to  me:  “I  would  not  have  thee  afraid;  let 
them  grin  on  at  their  will,  for  they  are  doing 
it  at  the  boiled  sufferers.” 

136.  Upon  the  left  bank  they  took  a  turn, 
but  first  each  had  pressed  his  tongue  with  his 
teeth  toward  their  leader  as  a  signal,  and  he 
had  made  a  trumpet  of  his  rump. 

CANTO  XXII 

1. 1  have  seen  ere  now  horsemen  moving 
camp,  and  beginning  an  assault,  and  making 
their  muster,  and  sometimes  retiring  for  their 
escape;  I  have  seen  foragers  over  your,  land,  O 
Aretines,  and  I  have  seen  the  starting  of  raids, 
the  onset  of  tournaments,  and  the  running  of 
jousts,  now  with  trumpets,  and  now  with  bells, 
with  drums,  and  with  signals  from  strong¬ 
holds,  and  with  native  things  and  foreign — 
but  never  to  so  strange  a  pipe  did  I  see  horse¬ 
men  or  footmen  set  forth,  or  ship  by  sign  of 
land  or  star. 

13.  We  were  going  along  with  the  ten  de¬ 
mons.  Ah,  the  fell  company!  but  in  the  church 
with  the  saints,  and  in  the  tavern  with  the  glut¬ 
tons.  My  attention  was  only  on  the  pitch  in  or¬ 
der  to  see  every  condition  of  the  pouch,  and  of 
the  people  that  were  burning  in  it. 

19.  Like  dolphins,  when  by  the  arching  of 
their  back,  they  give  a  sign  to  the  sailors  to 
take  heed  for  the  safety  of  their  vessel,  so,  now 
and  then,  to  alleviate  his  pain,  one  of  the  sin¬ 
ners  would  show  his  back  and  hide  it  in  less 
time  than  it  lightens.  And  as  at  the  edge  of  the 
water  of  a  ditch  the  frogs  lie  with  only  their 
muzzle  out,  so  that  they  conceal  their  feet  and 
the  rest  of  their  bulk,  so  on  every  side  were  the 
sinners;  but  as  Barbariccia  approached  so  did 
they  draw  back  beneath  the  boiling.  I  saw,  and 
still  my  heart  shudders  at  it,  one  waiting,  just 
as  it  happens  that  one  frog  stays  and  another 
jumps.  And  Graffiacane,  who  was  nearest  over 
against  him,  hooked  him  by  his  pitchy  locks, 
and  drew  him  up  so  that  he  seemed  to  me  an 
otter.  (I  knew  now  the  name  of  every  one  of 
them;  I  had  so  noted  them  when  they  were 
chosen,  and  afterwards,  when  they  called  each 
other,  had  listened  how.)  “O  Rubicante,  see 
thou  set  thy  claws  upon  his  back  so  thou  flay 
him,”  shouted  all  the  accursed  ones  together. 

43.  And  I:  “My  Master,  contrive,  if  thou 
canst,  to  find  out  who  is  the  luckless  one  come 


HELL 


into  the  hands  of  his  adversaries.”  My  Leader 
drew  up  to  his  side,  and  asked  him  whence  he 
was,  and  he  replied:  “I  was  born  in  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Navarre;  my  mother  placed  me  in  serv¬ 
ice  of  a  lord,  for  she  had  borne  me  to  a  ribald, 
destroyer  of  himself  and  of  his  substance.  Af¬ 
terward  I  was  of  the  household  of  the  good 
King  Thibault;1  there  I  set  myself  to  practice 
barratry,  for  which  I  pay  reckoning  in  this 
heat.” 

55.  And  Ciriatto,  from  whose  mouth  pro¬ 
truded  on  either  side  a  tusk,  as  of  a  boar,  made 
him  feel  how  one  of  them  rips.  Among  evil 
cats  had  the  mouse  come;  but  Barbariccia 
clasped  him  in  his  arms,  and  said:  “Stand  off, 
while  I  clutch  him,”  and  turned  his  face  to  my 
Master.  “Ask  further,”  said  he,  “if  thou  de- 
sirest  to  know  more  from  him,  before  another 
one  undo  him.” 

64.  The  Leader:  “Then,  tell  now  of  the  oth¬ 
er  sinners;  knowest  thou  any  one  under  the 
pitch  who  is  Italian?”  And  he:  “I  parted  a 
short  while  since  from  one  who  there  beyond 
was  a  neighbor;  would  that  with  him  I  still 
were  so  covered  that  I  should  not  fear  claw  or 
hook.”  And  Libicocco  said:  “We  have  borne 
too  much,”  and  seized  his  arm  with  his  grap¬ 
ple  so  that,  tearing,  he  carried  off  a  sinew  of  it. 
Draghignazzo,  he  too  wished  to  give  him  a 
grip  down  at  his  legs,  whereat  their  decurion 
turned  round  about  with  evil  look. 

76.  V/hen  they  were  a  little  quieted,  my 
Leader,  without  delay,  asked  him  who  was 
still  gazing  at  his  wound:  “Who  was  he  from 
whom  thou  sayst  thou  madest  ill  parting  to 
come  to  shore?”  And  he  replied:  “It  was  Friar 
Gomita,  he  of  Gallura,2  vessel  of  every  fraud, 
who  held  the  enemies  of  his  lord  in  hand,  and 
dealt  so  with  them  that  each  of  them  praises 
him  for  it.  Money  he  took,  and  let  them 
smoothly  off,  so  he  says;  and  in  his  other  of¬ 
fices  besides  he  was  no  little  barrator,  but  sov¬ 
ereign.  With  him  frequents  Don  Michael  Zan- 
che  of  Logodoro,3  and  their  tongues  never  feel 

1  Probably  Thibault  II,  King  of  Navarre  and  brother- 
in-law  of  Saint  Louis. 

2  Gallura,  one  of  the  four  divisions  of  Sardinia,  called 
judicatures,  made  by  the  Pisans,  after  their  conquest  of 
the  island.  Also  see  Purgatory,  viii.  53.  Friar  Gomita 
was  hanged  for  his  frauds. 

Logodoro,  another  of  the  judicatures  of  Sardinia. 
Zanche  was  murdered  about  1290,  by  his  son-in-law 
Branca  cT  Oria;  see  Canto  xxxiii.  1 34-1 47,  infra. 


tired  in  talking  of  Sardinia.  O  me!  see  ye  that 
other  who  is  grinning:  I  would  say  more,  but  I 
fear  lest  he  is  making  ready  to  scratch  my 
itch.”  And  the  Grand  Provost,  turning  to  Far- 
farello,  who  was  rolling  his  eyes  as  if  to  strike, 
said:  “Get  away  there,  wicked  bird!” 

97.  “If  ye  wish  to  see  or  to  hear  Tuscans  or 
Lombards,”  thereon  began  again  the  fright¬ 
ened  one,  “I  will  make  some  of  them  come; 
but  let  the  Malebranche  stand  a  little  with¬ 
drawn,  so  that  they  may  not  be  afraid  of  their 
vengeance,  and  I,  sitting  in  this  very  place,  for 
one  that  I  am,  will  make  seven  of  them  come, 
when  I  shall  whistle,  as  is  our  wont  to  do 
whenever  one  of  us  sets  himself  outside.”  Cag- 
nazzo  at  this  speech  raised  his  muzzle,  shak¬ 
ing  his  head,  and  said:  “Hear  the  cunning 
trick  he  has  devised  for  casting  himself  be¬ 
low!”  Whereon  he  who  had  snares  in  great 
plenty  answered:  “Too  cunning  am  I  when  I 
procure  for  my  own  companions  greater  sor¬ 
row.”  Alichino  held  not  in,  and,  in  opposition 
to  the  others,  said  to  him:  “If  thou  plunge,  I 
will  not  come  after  thee  at  a  gallop,  but  I  will 
beat  my  wings  above  the  pitch:  let  the  ridge 
be  left,  and  let  the  bank  be  a  screen,  to  see  if 
thou  alone  availest  more  than  we.” 

1 1 8.  O  thou  that  readest,  thou  shalt  hear  a 
new  sport!  Each  turned  his  eyes  to  the  other 
side,  he  first  who  had  been  most  averse  to  do¬ 
ing  this.  The  Navarrese  chose  his  time  well, 
planted  his  feet  firmly  on  the  ground,  and  in 
an  instant  leaped,  and  from  their  purpose  freed 
himself.  At  this,  each  of  them  was  stung  with 
his  fault,  but  he  most  who  was  the  cause  of  the 
loss;  wherefore  he  started  and  cried  out: 
“Thou  art  caught.”  But  it  availed  little,  for 
wings  could  not  outstrip  fear.  The  one  went 
under,  and  the  other,  flying,  turned  his  breast 
upward.  Not  otherwise  the  wild  duck  on  a 
sudden  dives  under  when  the  falcon  comes 
near,  and  he  returns  up  vexed  and  baffled.  Cal- 
cabrina,  angry  at  the  flout,  flying  kept  behind 
him,  charmed  that  the  sinner  should  escape, 
that  he  might  have  a  scuffle;  and  when  the 
barrator  had  disappeared  he  at  once  turned  his 
claws  upon  his  companion,  and  grappled  with 
him  above  the  ditch.  But  the  other  was  indeed 
a  full-grown  sparrowhawk  for  clawing  him 
well,  and  both  of  them  fell  into  the  middle  of 
the  boiling  pool.  The  heat  was  a  sudden  un- 


CANTO  XXIII 


grappler;  but  yet  there  was  no  rising  from  it, 
they  had  their  wings  so  beglued.  Barbariccia, 
in  distress  with  the  others  of  his  troop,  made 
four  of  them  fly  to  the  other  side  with  all  their 
forks,  and  very  swiftly,  on  this  side  and  that, 
they  descended  to  their  posts,  and  stretched 
their  hooks  toward  the  belimed  ones,  who 
were  already  cooked  within  the  crust:  and  we 
left  them  thus  embroiled. 

CANTO  XXIII 

i.  Silent,  alone,  and  without  company,  we 
were  going  on,  one  before,  the  other  behind,  as 
Minor  Friars  go  along  the  way.  My  thought 
was  turned  by  the  present  brawl  upon  the  fable 
of  Aesop,  in  which  he  told  of  the  frog  and  the 
mouse;  for  now  and  this  instant  are  not  more 
alike  than  the  one  is  to  the  other,  if  beginning 
and  end  be  rightly  coupled  by  the  attentive 
mind.1  And  as  one  thought  bursts  out  from 
another,  so  then  from  that  was  born  another 
which  made  my  first  fear  double.  I  was  think¬ 
ing  in  this  wise:  These  through  us  have  been 
put  to  scorn,  and  with  such  harm  and  trick  as 
I  believe  must  vex  them  greatly;  if  anger  be 
added  to  ill-will,  they  will  come  after  us  more 
merciless  than  the  dog  to  the  hare  which  he 
snaps  up. 

19.  Already  I  was  feeling  my  hair  all  bris¬ 
tling  with  fear,  and  was  backwards  intent, 
when  I  said:  “Master,  if  thou  dost  not  speedily 
conceal  thyself  and  me,  I  am  afraid  of  the 
Malebranche;  we  have  them  already  after  us; 
I  so  imagine  them  that  I  already  feel  them.” 
And  he:  “If  I  were  of  leaded  glass,  I  should 
not  draw  to  me  thine  outward  image  more 
quickly  than  I  receive  thine  inward.  Even  now 
came  thy  thoughts  among  mine,  with  like  ac¬ 
tion  and  like  look,  so  that  of  both  I  made  one 
sole  counsel.  If  it  be  that  the  right  bank  lies  so 
that  we  can  descend  into  the  next  pouch,  we 
shall  escape  from  the  imagined  chase.” 

34.  He  had  not  yet  finished  reporting  this 
counsel,  when  I  saw  them  coming  with  wings 
spread,  not  very  far  off,  with  will  to  take  us. 

1  This  fable,  not  among  those  now  ascribed  to 
Aesop,  but  included  in  a  collection  which  went  under 
his  name,  has  it  that  the  frog  deceitfully  induced  the 
mouse,  attached  by  a  string  to  his  leg,  to  trust  himself 
to  the  water.  The  mouse  was  drowned,  and  a  kite, 
seeing  the  body  floating  on  the  surface,  seized  it,  and 
with  it  the  frog  still  tied  to  it,  and  swallowed  both. 


My  Leader  on  a  sudden  took  me,  as  a  mother 
who  is  wakened  by  the  noise,  and  sees  the  kin¬ 
dled  flames  close  to  her,  who  takes  her  son  and 
flies,  and,  having  more  care  of  him  than  of  her¬ 
self,  stays  not  so  long  as  only  to  put  on  a  shift: 
and  down  from  the  ridge  of  the  hard  bank,  he 
gave  himself  supine  to  the  sloping  rock  that 
closes  one  of  the  sides  of  the  next  pouch.  Nev¬ 
er  ran  water  so  swiftly  through  a  duct,  to  turn 
the  wheel  of  a  land-mill,  when  it  approaches 
nearest  to  the  paddles,  as  my  Master  over  that 
border,  bearing  me  along  upon  his  breast  as 
his  son  and  not  as  a  companion.  Hardly  had 
his  feet  reached  the  bed  of  the  depth  below, 
when  they  were  on  the  ridge  right  over  us;  but 
here  there  was  no  fear,  for  the  high  Provi¬ 
dence  that  willed  to  set  them  as  ministers  of 
the  fifth  ditch  deprived  them  all  of  power  of 
departing  thence. 

58.  There  below  we  found  a  painted  people 
who  were  going  round  with  very  slow  steps, 
weeping,  and  in  their  semblance  weary  and 
subdued.  They  had  cloaks,  with  hoods  low¬ 
ered  before  their  eyes,  fashioned  of  the  cut 
which  is  made  for  the  monks  in  Cologne.  Out¬ 
wardly  they  are  gilded,  so  that  it  dazzles,  but 
within  all  lead,  and  so  heavy  that  those  Fred¬ 
erick  used  to  have  put  on  were  of  straw.2  O 
mantle  wearisome  for  eternity! 

68.  We  turned,  still  ever  to  the  left  hand, 
along  with  them,  intent  on  their  sad  plaint. 
But  because  of  the  weight,  that  tired  folk  were 
coming  so  slowly  that  we  had  fresh  company 
at  every  movement  of  the  haunch.  Wherefore 
I  to  my  Leader:  “Contrive  to  find  some  one 
who  may  be  known  by  deed  or  name,  and 
while  thus  going  move  thine  eyes  around.” 
And  one  who  heard  the  Tuscan  speech  cried 
out  behind  us:  “Stay  your  feet,  ye  who  run 
thus  through  the  dusky  air;  perchance  thou 
shalt  have  from  me  that  which  thou  askest.” 
Whereon  my  Leader  turned  and  said:  “Wait, 
and  then  proceed  according  to  his  pace.”  I 
stopped,  and  saw  two  show,  by  their  look, 
great  haste  of  mind  to  be  with  me,  but  their 
load  and  the  narrow  way  retarded  them. 

85.  When  they  had  come  up,  awhile,  with 
eye  askance,  they  gazed  at  me  without  speak¬ 
ing  a  word;  then  they  turned  to  one  another, 

7  Emperor  Frederick  II  caused  leaden  cloaks  to  be 
put  on  criminals,  who  were  then  burned  to  death. 


HELL 


and  said  one  to  the  other:  “This  one  seems 
alive  by  the  action  of  his  throat;  and  if  they  are 
dead,  by  what  privilege  do  they  go  uncovered 
by  the  heavy  stole?”  Then  they  said  to  me: 
“O  Tuscan,  who  to  the  college  of  the  wretch¬ 
ed  hypocrites  art  come,  hold  it  not  in  disdain 
to  tell  who  thou  art.”  And  I  to  them:  “I  was 
born  and  grew  up  on  the  fair  river  of  Arno,  at 
the  great  towm,  and  I  am  in  the  body  that  I 
have  always  had.  But  who  are  ye,  from  whom 
such  woe  distils,  as  I  see,  down  along  your 
cheeks?  and  what  penalty  is  it  that  so  glitters 
on  you?” 

ioo.  And  one  of  them  replied  to  me:  “The 
orange  hoods  are  of  lead  so  thick  that  the 
weights  thus  make  their  scales  to  creak.  Jovial 
Friars1  were  we,  and  Bolognese;  I  named  Cat¬ 
alano  and  he  Loderingo,  and  together  taken 
by  thy  city,  as  one  man  alone  is  usually  chosen, 
in  order  to  preserve  its  peace:  and  we  were 
such  as  still  is  apparent  round  about  the  Gar- 
dingo.” 

109. 1  began:  “O  Friars,  your  ills” — but 
more  I  said  not,  for  there  struck  my  eye  one 
crucified  upon  the  ground  with  three  stakes. 
When  he  saw  me  he  writhed  all  over,  blowing 
into  his  beard  with  sighs:  and  the  Friar  Cata¬ 
lano,  who  observed  it,  said  to  me:  “That  trans¬ 
fixed  one,  whom  thou  lookest  at,  counseled  the 
Pharisees  that  it  was  expedient  to  put  one  man 
to  torture  for  the  people.2  Traverse  and  naked 
is  he  on  the  path,  as  thou  seest,  and  he  first 
must  needs  feel  how  much  whoever  passes 
weighs.  And  in  like  fashion  his  father-in-law3 
is  stretched  in  this  ditch,  and  the  others  of  that 
Council  which  for  the  Jews  was  seed  of  ill.” 

1  Brothers  of  the  Military  and  Conventual  Order  of 
Santa  Maria,  established  in  1261,  with  knightly  vows 
and  high  intent.  From  the  laxity  of  their  rules  and 
their  free  life  the  nickname  of  “Jovial  Friars”  was 
given  to  them. 

After  the  battle  of  Montaperti,  the  Ghibellines  held 
the  upper  hand  in  Florence  for  more  than  five  years. 
The  defeat  and  death  of  Manfred  early  in  1266  shook 
their  power  and  revived  the  hopes  of  the  Guelfs.  As  a 
compromise,  the  Florentine  Commune  elected  a  po- 
desta  from  each  party;  the  Guelf  was  Catalono  de’ 
Malavolti,  the  Ghibelline,  Loderingo  degli  Andalo 
both  from  Bologna.  They  were  believed  to  have  joined 
hands  for  their  own  gain,  and  to  have  favored  the  re¬ 
viving  Guelfs.  The  houses  of  the  Uberti,  a  powerful 
Ghibelline  family,  were  burned;  these  lay  in  the  re¬ 
gion  of  the  city  called  the  Gardingo,  close  to  the 
Palazzo  Vecchio. 

2  Caiaphas.  See  John,  1 1 .  50. 

3  Annas;  John,  18.  13,  14,  24. 


124.  Then  I  saw  Virgil  marvel  over  him  that 
was  outstretched, in  a  cross  so  vilely  in  the  eter¬ 
nal  exile.  Afterwards  he  addressed  this  speech 
to  the  Friar:  “May  it  not  displease  you,  if  it  be 
allowed  you,  to  tell  us  if  any  opening  lies  on 
the  right  hand,  whereby  we  two  can  go  out 
hence  without  constraining  any  of  the  Black 
Angels  to  come  to  deliver  us  from  this  deep.” 
He  answered  then:  “Nearer  than  thou  hopest 
is  a  rock  that  starts  from  the  great  encircling 
wall  and  spans  all  the  savage  valleys,  save  that 
at  this  one  it  is  broken,  and  does  not  cover  it. 
Ye  will  be  able  to  mount  up  over  the  ruin  that 
lies  against  the  side,  and  heaps  up  at  the  bot¬ 
tom.”  My  Leader  stood  a  little  while  with 
bowed  head,  then  said:  “Ill  did  he  who  hooks 
the  sinners  yonder  report  the  matter.”  And  the 
Friar:  “Of  old  at  Bologna  I  used  to  hear  tell 
of  vices  enough  of  the  devil,  among  which  I 
heard  that  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  false¬ 
hood.” 

145.  Then  my  Leader  went  on,  with  great 
steps,  disturbed  a  little  with  anger  in  his  look; 
whereon  I  departed  from  the  burdened  ones, 
following  the  prints  of  the  beloved  feet. 

CANTO  XXIV 

1.  In  that  part  of  the  young  year  when  the  sun 
tempers  his  locks  beneath  Aquarius,  and  now 
the  nights  are  passing  to  the  south,  when  the 
hoar  frost  copies  on  the  ground  the  image  of 
her  white  sister,  but  the  temper  of  her  pen 
lasts  little  while,  the  rustic,  whose  provision 
fails,  gets  up  and  looks,  and  sees  the  plain  all 
white,  whereat  he  smites  his  thigh,  returns  in¬ 
doors,  and  grumbles  to  and  fro,  like  the  poor 
wretch  who  knows  not  what  to  do;  then  goes 
out  again  and  picks  up  hope,  seeing  the  world 
to  have  changed  face  in  short  while,  and  takes 
his  crook  and  drives  forth  his  sheep  to  pasture. 
Thus  my  Master  made  me  dismayed,  when  I 
saw  his  brow  so  disturbed,  and  thus  speedily 
arrived  the  plaster  for  the  hurt.  For  when  we 
came  to  the  ruined  bridge,  the  Leader  turned 
to  me  with  that  sweet  look  which  I  first  saw 
at  the  foot  of  the  mount.  After  taking  some 
counsel  with  himself,  looking  first  well  at  the 
ruin,  he  opened  his  arms,  and  laid  hold  of  me. 
And  as  one  who  acts  and  considers,  and  seems 
always  to  provide  in  advance,  so,  lifting  me  up 
toward  the  top  of  a  great  rock,  he  was  taking 


CANTO  XXIV 


note  of  another  splinter,  saying:  “Grapple  next 
on  that,  but  try  first  if  it  be  such  that  it  can 
support  thee.'5 

31.  It  was  no  way  for  one  clothed  in  a  cloak, 
for  we  with  difficulty,  he  light  and  I  pushed 
up,  could  mount  from  jag  to  jag.  And  had  it 
not  been  that  on  that  precinct  the  bank  was 
shorter  than  on  the  other  side,  I  do  not  know 
about  him,  but  I  should  have  been  completely 
vanquished.  But  because  all  Malebolge  slopes 
toward  the  opening  of  the  lowest  well,  the  site 
of  each  valley  imports  that  one  side  is  higher 
than  the  other.  We  came,  however,  at  length, 
to  the  point  where  the  last  stone  is  broken  off. 
The  breath  was  so  milked  from  my  lungs 
when  I  was  up  that  I  could  no  farther,  nay, 
sat  me  down  on  first  arrival. 

46.  “Henceforth  it  behoves  thee  thus  to  put 
off  sloth,”  said  the  Master,  “for,  sitting  upon 
down  or  under  quilts,  one  comes  not  to  fame, 
without  which  he  who  consumes  his  life  leaves 
such  vestige  of  himself  on  earth  as  smoke  in 
air,  or  the  foam  on  water:  and  therefore  rise 
up,  conquer  thy  panting  with  the  soul  that 
wins  every  battle,  if  it  be  not  weighed  down  by 
its  heavy  body.  A  longer  stairway  needs  must 
be  ascended:  it  is  not  enough  to  have  depart¬ 
ed  from  these;  if  thou  understandest  me,  now 
act  so  that  it  avail  thee.”  Then  I  rose  up,  show¬ 
ing  myself  better  furnished  with  breath  than 
I  felt,  and  said:  “Go  on,  for  I  am  strong  and 
resolute.” 

61.  Up  along  the  crag  we  took  the  way, 
which  was  rugged,  narrow,  and  difficult,  and 
far  steeper  than  the  one  before.  I  was  going 
along  speaking  in  order  not  to  seem  exhausted, 
when  a  voice,  ill  suited  for  forming  words, 
came  out  from  the  next  ditch.  I  know  not 
what  it  said,  though  I  was  already  upon  the 
back  of  the  arch  which  crosses  here;  but  he 
who  was  speaking  seemed  moved  to  anger.  I 
had  turned  downwards,  but  my  living  eyes 
could  not  go  to  the  bottom,  through  the  dark¬ 
ness:  wherefore  I  said:  “Master,  see  that  thou 
get  to  the  next  girth,  and  let  us  descend  the 
wall,  for  as  from  this  place  I  hear  and  do  not 
understand,  so  I  look  down  and  shape  out 
nothing.”  “Other  reply,”  he  said,  “I  give  thee 
not  than  the  doing,  for  the  becoming  request 
ought  to  be  followed  by  the  deed  in  silence.” 

79.  We  descended  the  bridge  at  its  head, 


where  it  is  joined  with  the  eighth  bank,  and 
then  the  pouch  was  apparent  to  me.  And  I  saw 
within  it  a  terrible  crowd  of  serpents,1  and  of 
such  strange  kind  that  the  memory  still  cur¬ 
dles  my  blood.  Let  Libya  with  her  sand  vaunt 
herself  no  more:  for  though  she  bring  forth 
chelydri,  jaculi,  and  phareae,  and  cenchri  with 
amphisboena,  she  never,  with  all  Ethiopia,  nor 
with  the  land  that  lies  on  the  Red  Sea,  showed 
either  so  many  or  so  malignant  plagues. 

91.  Amid  this  cruel  and  most  dismal  swarm 
were  running  people  naked  and  terrified, 
without  hope  of  hole  or  heliotrope.2  They  had 
their  hands  tied  behind  with  serpents,  which 
fixed  their  tail  and  their  head  through  the 
loins,  and  were  twisted  up  in  front. 

97.  And  lo!  at  one,  who  was  near  our  bank, 
darted  a  serpent  that  transfixed  him  there 
where  the  neck  is  knotted  to  the  shoulders. 
Nor  O  nor  7  was  ever  so  quickly  written  as  he 
took  fire  and  burnt,  and  needs  must  become  all 
ashes  as  he  fell;  and  when  he  was  thus  de¬ 
stroyed  on  the  ground,  the  dust  drew  together 
of  itself,  and  in  an  instant  into  that  same  one 
returned.  Thus  by  the  great  sages  it  is  affirmed 
that  the  Phoenix  dies,  and  then  is  born  again 
when  she  draws  nigh  to  her  five-hundredth 
year.  In  her  life  she  feeds  not  on  herb  or  grain, 
but  only  on  tears  of  incense  and  amomum; 
and  nard  and  myrrh  are  her  last  winding- 
sheet. 

1 12.  And  as  he  who  falls,  and  knows  not 
how,  by  force  of  a  demon  that  drages  him  to 
ground,  or  of  other  obstruction  that  binds  the 
man  when  he  rises  and  gazes  around  him, 
all  bewildered  by  the  great  anguish  that  he 
has  suffered,  and  as  he  looks,  sighs;  such  was 
that  sinner  after  he  had  risen.  Oh  power  of 
God!  how  severe  it  is,  that  showers  down  such 
blows  for  vengeance! 

1 21.  My  Leader  then  asked  him  who  he 
was;  whereon  he  answered:  “I  rained  down 
from  Tuscany  short  time  ago  into  this  fell 
gullet.  Bestial  life,  and  not  human,  pleased 
me,  like  a  mule  that  I  was.3 1  am  Vanni  Fucci, 
beast,  and  Pistoia  was  my  fitting  den.”  And  I 
to  my  Leader:  “Tell  him  not  to  slip  away,  and 

1  Cf.  Paradise  Lost,  x.  540. 

2  A  precious  stone,  of  green  color,  spotted  with  red, 
supposed  to  make  its  wearer  invisible. 

3  That  is,  a  bastard;  one  of  the  Lazzari,  a  noble 
family  of  Pistoia.  In  1293,  he  with  two  companions 


HELL 


36 

ask  what  sin  thrust  him  down  here,  for  I  have 
seen  him  a  man  of  blood  and  of  rages.”  And 
the  sinner  who  heard  did  not  dissemble,  but 
directed  toward  me  his  mind  and  his  face,  and 
painted  himself  with  dismal  shame. 

133.  Then  he  said:  “It  grieves  me  more,  that 
thou  hast  caught  me  in  the  misery  where  thou 
seest  me,  than  when  I  was  taken  from  the  oth¬ 
er  life.  I  cannot  refuse  that  which  thou  askest. 
I  am  put  so  far  down  because  I  was  the  thief 
in  the  sacristy  with  the  fair  adornments,  and 
it  was  once  falsely  ascribed  to  another.  But  in 
order  that  thou  enjoy  not  this  sight,  if  ever 
thou  shalt  be  forth  of  these  dark  places,  open 
thine  ears  to  my  announcement,  and  hear: 
Pistoia  first  strips  herself  of  Blacks,  then  Flor¬ 
ence  renovates  her  people  and  her  fashions. 
Mars  draws  a  vapor  from  Val  di  Magra  which 
is  wrapt  in  turbid  clouds,  and  with  impetuous 
and  bitter  storm  there  shall  be  fighting  on  the 
Pescian  plain,  whence  it  shall  suddenly  rend 
the  mist,  so  that  every  White  shall  be  smitten 
by  it.  And  this  I  have  said  in  order  that  it  may 
grieve  thee.”* 1 

CANTO  XXV 

1.  At  the  end  of  his  words  the  thief  raised  his 
hands  with  both  the  figs,2  crying,  “Take  that, 
God!  for  at  Thee  I  square  them.”  From  that 
time  forth  the  serpents  were  my  friends,  for 
then  one  coiled  about  his  neck,  as  if  it  said:  “I 
will  not  have  thee  say  more”;  and  another 
about  his  arms  and  bound  him  up  anew,3 

broke  into  the  sacristy  of  San  Zeno,  at  Pistoia.  They 
carried  off  what  silver  and  jewels  they  could  lay 
hands  on.  At  length,  when  an  innocent  man  was 
about  to  be  punished  for  the  crime,  Fucci  revealed 
the  name  of  the  receiver  of  the  plunder,  who  was 
hanged,  while  he  himself  escaped  punishment. 

1  These  verses  may  be  partially  explained  as  fol¬ 
lows:  In  May,  1301,  Pistoia  expelled  the  Blacks;  many 
of  them  were  received  in  Florence,  and,  in  November, 
the  Florentine  Blacks,  thus  reinforced,  drove  the 
Priors  of  the  White  party  from  office,  chose  new  Priors 
of  their  own  party,  and  in  the  following  January  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  driving  from  the  city  the  great  body  of  the 

Whites,  of  whom  Dante  was  one.  The  “vapor”  from 
Val  di  Magra  was  Moroello  Malaspina,  captain  of  the 
forces  of  the  Blacks;  for  years  there  were  “turbid 
clouds”  of  confusion,  and  much  desultory  fighting, 

the  Whites  suffering  defeat  after  defeat.  The  Pescian 

plain  probably  denotes  a  district  near  Pistoia. 

A  coarse  gesture  of  contemptuous  defiance,  made 

by  thrusting  out  the  fist  with  the  thumb  between  the 

fore  and  middle  finger. 

8  See  Canto  xxiv.  94,  supra . 


clinching  itself  so  in  front  that  he  could  not 
give  a  shake  with  them.  Ah  Pistoia!  Pistoia! 
why  dost  thou  not  decree  to  make  ashes  of 
thyself,  so  that  thou  last  no  longer,  since  in 
evil-doing  thou  dost  surpass  thine  own  seed?4 * 
Through  all  the  dark  circles  of  Hell  I  saw  no 
spirit  so  arrogant  toward  God,  not  even  that 
one  who  fell  down  from  the  walls  at  Thebes/ 
He  fled  away,  and  spoke  not  a  word  more. 

1 7.  And  I  saw  a  Centaur  full  of  rage  come 
crying  out:  “Where  is  he,  where  is  the  obdu¬ 
rate  one?”  I  do  not  believe  Maremma6  has  so 
many  snakes  as  he  had  upon  his  croup  up  to 
where  our  semblance  begins.  On  his  shoul¬ 
ders,  behind  the  nape,  a  dragon  with  open 
wings  was  lying  upon  him,  which  sets  on  fire 
whomsoever  it  encounters.  My  Master  said: 
“This  is  Cacus,  who  beneath  the  rock  of 
Mount  Aventine  often  made  a  lake  of  blood. 
He  goes  not  on  one  road  with  his  brothers, 
because  of  the  fraudulent  theft  he  committed 
of  the  great  herd  that  he  had  in  his  neighbor¬ 
hood;  for  which  his  crooked  deeds  ceased  un¬ 
der  the  club  of  Hercules,  who  perhaps  dealt 
him  a  hundred  blows  with  it,  and  he  felt  not 
ten  of  them.”7 8 

34.  While  he  was  thus  speaking,  and  that 
one  had  run  by,  lo!  three  spirits  came  below 
us,  of  whom  neither  I  nor  my  Leader  was 
aware  till  when  they  cried  out:  “Who  are  ye?” 
by  which  our  story  was  stopped,  and  we  then 
gave  heed  only  to  them.  I  did  not  know  them, 
but  it  happened,  as  it  usually  happens  by  some 
chance,  that  one  had  occasion  to  name  an¬ 
other,  saying:  “Where  can  Cianfa  have 
stayed?”  Wherefore  I,  in  order  that  my  Leader 
might  be  attentive,  put  my  finger  upward 
from  my  chin  to  my  nose. 

46.  If,  Reader,  thou  art  now  slow  to  credit 
that  which  I  shall  tell,  it  will  be  no  marvel,  for 
I  who  saw  it  hardly  admit  it  to  myself.  As  I 
was  holding  my  eyebrows  raised  upon  them, 
lo!  a  serpent  with  six  feet  darts  in  front  of  one, 
and  takes  hold  all  over  him.  With  its  middle 
feet  it  clasped  his  paunch,  and  with  its  fore 

4  According  to  tradition,  the  first  settlers  of  Pistoia 
were  the  remnants  of  Catiline’s  forces  after  his  defeat 
and  death,  62  b.c. 

6Capaneus;  see  Canto  xiv.  46-72,  supra. 

8  The  desolate  and  unwholesome  district  of  Tuscany 
bordering  the  sea. 

7Cf.  Aeneid,  viii.  1 93ff. 


CANTO  XXV 


feet  took  his  arms,  then  struck  its  teeth  in  one 
and  the  other  cheek;  its  hind  feet  it  spread 
out  upon  his  thighs,  and  put  its  tail  between 
them,  and  stretched  it  up  behind  along  the 
reins.  Ivy  was  never  so  bearded  to  a  tree,  as  the 
horrible  beast  entwined  its  own  through  the 
other’s  limbs.  Then  they  stuck  together  as  if 
they  had  been  of  hot  wax,  and  mingled  their 
color;  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  seemed 
now  that  which  it  had  been;  even  as  in  ad¬ 
vance  of  the  flame,  a  dark  color  proceeds  up 
along  the  paper  which  is  not  yet  black,  and  the 
white  dies  away.  The  other  two  were  looking 
on,  and  each  cried:  “O  me!  Agnel,  how  thou 
changest!  See,  now  thou  art  neither  two  nor 
one!” 

70.  Now  were  the  two  heads  become  one, 
when  there  appeared  to  us  two  countenances 
mixed  in  one  face  wherein  the  two  were  lost. 
The  two  arms  were  made  of  four  strips;  the 
thighs  with  the  legs,  the  belly  and  the  chest 
became  members  that  were  never  seen  before. 
Every  original  aspect  was  there  canceled;  two 
and  none  the  perverted  image  appeared,  and 
such  it  went  away  with  slow  step. 

79.  As  the  lizard  under  the  great  scourge  of 
the  dog-days,  changing  from  hedge  to  hedge, 
seems  a  lightning-flash,  if  it  cross  the  way,  so 
seemed,  coming  toward  the  bellies  of  the  two 
others,  a  little  fiery  serpent,  livid,  and  black  as 
a  pepper  corn.  And  it  transfixed  in  one  of  them 
that  part  whereat  our  nourishment  is  first  tak¬ 
en,  then  fell  down  stretched  out  before  him. 
The  transfixed  one  gazed  at  it,  but  said  noth¬ 
ing;  nay,  with  feet  fixed,  he  began  to  yawn, 
just  as  if  sleep  or  fever  had  assailed  him.  He 
looked  at  the  serpent,  and  that  at  him;  one 
through  the  wound,  the  other  through  its 
mouth,  were  smoking  fiercely,  and  the  smoke 
commingled. 

94.  Let  Lucan  henceforth  be  silent,  where 
he  tells  of  the  wretched  Sabellus  and  of  Nasi- 
dius,1  and  let  him  wait  to  hear  that  which  now 
is  related.  Let  Ovid  be  silent  concerning  Cad¬ 
mus  and  Arethusa,2  for  if,  poetizing,  he  con¬ 
verts  him  into  a  serpent  and  her  into  a  foun¬ 
tain,  I  grudge  it  not  to  him;  for  never  did  he 

1  Sabellus,  bitten  by  a  little  serpent  in  the  Libyan 
desert,  melts  away  “like  snow  under  a  hot  South 
wind,”  and  Nasidius,  stung  by  a  snake  of  another 
kind,  swells  until  he  bursts  his  armor. 

2  See  Metamorphoses,  iv.  575ff,  and  v.  507E. 


transmute  two  natures  front  to  front,  so  that 
both  the  forms  were  prompt  to  exchange  their 
matter.  They  responded  to  one  another  in  such 
wise,  that  the  serpent  cleft  his  tail  into  a  fork, 
and  the  wounded  one  drew  his  feet  together. 
The  legs  and  the  thighs  along  with  them  so 
stuck  together,  that  in  short  while  the  juncture 
made  no  mark  that  was  apparent.  The  cleft 
tail  was  taking  on  the  shape  that  the  other  was 
losing,  and  its  skin  was  becoming  soft,  and 
that  of  the  other  hard.  I  saw  the  arms  entering 
through  the  armpits,  and  the  two  feet  of  the 
beast,  which  were  short,  lengthening  out  in 
proportion  as  the  arms  were  shortening.  Then 
the  hinder  feet,  twisted  together,  became  the 
member  that  man  conceals,  and  the  wretch 
from  his  had  two  stretched  forth. 

1 18.  While  the  smoke  veils  the  one  and  the 
other  with  a  new  color,  and  generates  hair  on 
the  one  part,  and  strips  it  from  the  other,  the 
one  rose  up,  and  the  other  fell  down,  not  how¬ 
ever  turning  aside  their  pitiless  lights,  beneath 
which  each  was  changing  his  muzzle.  He  who 
was  erect  drew  his  in  toward  the  temples,  and, 
from  the  too  much  material  that  came  in  there, 
the  ears  issued  on  the  smooth  cheeks;  that 
which  did  not  run  back  and  was  retained,  of 
its  superfluity  made  a  nose  for  the  face,  and 
thickened  the  lips  so  much  as  was  needful.  He 
that  was  lying  down  drives  his  muzzle  for¬ 
ward,  and  draws  backward  his  ears  into  his 
head,  as  the  snail  does  its  horns.  And  his 
tongue,  which  before  was  united  and  fit  for 
speech,  cleaves  itself,  and  the  forked  one  of  the 
other  closes  up;  and  the  smoke  stops.  The  soul 
that  had  become  a  brute  fled  hissing  along  the 
valley,  and  the  other,  speaking,  sputters  behind 
it.  Then  he  turned  on  him  his  new  shoulders, 
and  said  to  the  third,  “I  want  that  Buoso 
should  run,  as  I  have  done,  on  his  belly  along 
this  path.” 

142.  Thus  I  saw  the  seventh  ballast3  change 
and  transmute,  and  here  let  the  novelty  be  my 
excuse,  if  my  pen  straggle  a  little.  And  al¬ 
though  my  eyes  were  somewhat  confused,  and 
my  mind  bewildered,  those  could  not  flee  away 
so  covertly  but  that  I  clearly  distinguished 
Puccio  Sciancato:  and  he  it  was  who  alone,  of 
the  three  companions  that  came  first,  was  not 

3  The  sinners  in  the  seventh  holgia. 


HELL 


38 

changed;  the  other1  was  he  whom  thou,  Ga- 
ville,  weepest. 

CANTO  XXVI 

1.  Rejoice,  Florence,  since  thou  art  so  great 
that  thou  beatest  thy  wings  over  sea  and  land, 
and  thy  name  is  spread  through  Hell!  Among 
the  thieves  I  found  five  such,  thy  citizens, 
whereat  shame  comes  to  me,  and  thou  dost  not 
mount  unto  great  honor  thereby.  But,  if  near 
the  morning  one  dreams  of  the  truth,  thou 
shalt  feel  within  short  time  what  Prato,2  as 
well  as  others,  craves  for  thee.  And  if  already 
it  were,  it  would  not  be  too  soon.  So  were  it! 
since  surely  it  must  be;  for  it  will  weigh  the 
more  on  me  as  the  more  I  age. 

13.  We  departed  thence,  and,  up  along  the 
stairs  which  the  bourns3  had  before  made  for 
our  descent,  my  Leader  remounted  and  drew 
me.  And  pursuing  the  solitary  way  among  the 
fragments  and  the  rocks  of  the  craggy  bridge, 
the  foot  sped  not  without  the  hand.  I  sorrowed 
then,  and  now  I  sorrow  again  when  I  direct 
my  mind  to  what  I  saw;  and  I  curb  my  genius 
more  than  I  am  wont,  that  it  may  not  run  un¬ 
less  virtue  guide  it;  so  that  if  a  good  star,  or 
better  thing,  have  given  me  the  good,  I  may 
not  grudge  it  to  myself. 

25.  As  many  as  the  fireflies  which,  in  the 
season  when  he  that  brightens  the  world  keeps 
his  face  least  hidden  from  us,  the  rustic,  who 
is  resting  on  the  hillside  what  time  the  fly 
yields  to  the  gnat,  sees  down  in  the  valley, 
perhaps  there  where  he  makes  his  vintage  and 
ploughs — with  so  many  flames  all  the  eighth 
pit  was  gleaming,  as  I  perceived  so  soon  as  I 
was  there  where  the  bottom  became  apparent. 
And  as  he4  who  was  avenged  by  the  bears  saw 
the  chariot  of  Elijah  at  its  departure,  when  the 
horses  rose  erect  to  heaven, — for  he  could  not 
so  follow  it  with  his  eyes  as  to  see  aught  save 
the  flame  alone,  like  a  little  cloud,  mounting 
upward, — thus  each  of  those  flames  was  mov¬ 
ing  through  the  gulley  of  the  ditch,  for  not 

1  Francesco  Guercio  de’  Cavalcanti,  slain  by  men 
of  the  village  of  Gaville,  in  Valdarno,  which  mourns 
for  the  cruel  vengeance  taken  for  his  death. 

The  three  who  had  come  first  were  the  three  Flor¬ 
entine  thieves,  Agnello,  Buoso,  and  Puccio. 

a  A  Tuscan  town  ten  miles  from  Florence. 

*  The  projections  of  the  rocky  wall. 

4  Elisha.  II  Kings,  2.  9-24. 


one  shows  its  theft,  and  every  flame  steals 
away  a  sinner. 

43.  I  was  standing  on  the  bridge,  risen  up 
to  look,  so  that,  if  I  had  not  taken  hold  of  a 
rock,  I  should  have  fallen  below  without  being 
pushed.  And  my  Leader,  who  saw  me  thus 
intent,  said:  “Within  these  fires  are  the  spir¬ 
its;  each  is  swathed  by  that  wherewith  he  is 
burnt.’'  “My  Master,”  I  replied,  “through  hear¬ 
ing  thee  am  I  more  certain,  but  already  I 
deemed  that  it  was  so,  and  already  I  wished  to 
say  to  thee:  Who  is  in  that  fire  which  comes 
so  divided  at  its  top  that  it  seems  to  rise  from 
the  pyre  on  which  Eteocles  was  put  with  his 
brother?5  He  answered  me:  “Therewithin 
Ulysses  and  Diomed  are  tormented,  and  thus 
they  go  together  in  their  punishment,  as  in 
their  wrath.  And  within  their  flame  they  groan 
for  the  ambush  of  the  horse  which  made  the 
gate  whence  the  noble  seed  of  the  Romans  is¬ 
sued  forth;  within  it  they  lament  the  artifice 
whereby  the  dead  Deidamia  still  mourns  for 
Achilles,  and  there  they  bear  the  penalty  for 
the  Palladium.”6 

64.  “If  they  have  power  to  speak  within 
those  sparks,”  said  I,  “Master,  much  I  pray 
thee,  and  repray,  that  my  prayer  avail  a  thou¬ 
sand,  that  thou  make  not  to  me  denial  of 
waiting  till  the  horned  flame  come  hither:  thou 
seest  that  with  desire  I  bend  me  toward  it.” 
And  he  to  me:  “Thy  prayer  is  worthy  of  much 
praise,  and  therefore  I  accept  it;  but  mind  that 
thy  tongue  restrain  itself.  Leave  speech  to  me, 
for  I  have  conceived  that  which  thou  wishest; 
for,  because  they  were  Greeks,  they  would 
perhaps  be  disdainful  of  thy  words.” 

76.  When  the  flame  had  come  there  where 
it  seemed  to  my  Leader  time  and  place,  I  heard 
him  speak  to  it  in  this  form:  “O  ye,  who  are 
two  within  one  fire,  if  I  deserved  of  you  while 

6Cf.  Aeschylus,  The  Seven  Against  Thebes,  and 
Euripides,  The  Phoenician  Maidens.  Such  was  the 
mutual  hate  of  Eteocles  and  Polynices  that,  when 
their  bodies  were  burned  on  the  same  funeral  pile, 
the  flames  divided  in  two. 

0  It  was  through  the  stratagem  of  the  wooden  horse 
that  Troy  was  destroyed,  and  Aeneas  was  compelled 
to  lead  forth  his  followers,  the  seed  of  the  Romans. 
Deidamia  was  the  mother  of  a  son  by  Achilles,  and 
when  by  the  craft  of  Ulysses,  accompanied  by  Diomed, 
Achilles  was  discovered  and  persuaded  to  go  to  Troy, 
she  slew  herself.  The  Palladium,  the  image  of  Athena, 
on  which  the  safety  of  Troy  depended,  was  stolen  by 
the  two  heroes.  Aeneid,  ii.  163-170. 


CANTO 

I  lived,  if  I  deserved  of  you  much  or  little, 
when  in  the  world  I  wrote  my  lofty  verses, 
move  not,  but  let  one  of  you  tell,  whither,  be¬ 
ing  lost,  he  went  away  to  die.”  The  greater 
horn  of  the  ancient  flame  began  to  wag.  mur¬ 
muring,  even  as  a  flame  that  the  wind  wearies. 
Then  waving  its  tip  to  and  fro,  as  if  it  were  the 
tongue  that  spoke,  it  cast  forth  a  voice,  and 
said: 

90.  “When  I  departed  from  Circe,  who  had 
detained  me  more  than  a  year  there  near  to 
Gaeta,  before  Aeneas  had  so  named  it,1  neither 
fondness  for  my  son,  nor  piety  for  my  old 
father,  nor  the  due  love  which  should  have 
made  Penelope  glad,  could  overcome  within 
me  the  ardor  which  I  had  to  become  experi¬ 
enced  of  the  world,  and  of  the  vices  of  men, 
and  of  their  virtue.  But  I  put  forth  on  the  deep, 
open  sea,  with  one  vessel  only,  and  with  that 
little  company  by  which  I  had  not  been  de¬ 
serted.  I  saw  one  shore  and  the  other  as  far  as 
Spain,  as  far  as  Morocco  and  the  island  of  Sar¬ 
dinia,  and  the  others  which  that  sea  bathes 
round  about.  I  and  my  companions  were  old 
and  slow  when  we  came  to  that  narrow  strait 
where  Hercules  set  up  his  bounds,  to  the  end 
that  man  should  not  put  out  beyond.  On  the 
right  hand  I  left  Seville,  on  the  other  I  had  al¬ 
ready  left  Ceuta. 

112.“ ‘O  brothers,’  I  said,  ‘who  through  a 
hundred  thousand  perils  have  reached  the 
West,  to  this  so  brief  vigil  of  your  senses  which 
remains  wish  not  to  deny  the  experience,  fol¬ 
lowing  the  sun,  of  the  world  that  has  no  peo¬ 
ple.  Consider  your  origin;  ye  were  not  made 
to  live  as  brutes,  but  to  pursue  virtue  and 
knowledge.’ 

121.  “With  this  little  speech  I  made  my  com¬ 
panions  so  keen  for  the  voyage  that  hardly 
afterwards  could  I  have  held  them  back.  And 
turning  our  stern  to  the  morning,  with  our 
oars  we  made  wings  for  the  mad  flight,  always 
gaining  on  the  left  hand  side.2  The  night  saw 
now  all  the  stars  of  the  other  pole,  and  ours  so 

1  See  Aeneid,  vii.  1-4. 

3  In  Dante’s  scheme  of  the  Earth  the  southern  hem¬ 
isphere  was  a  vast  expanse  of  water,  in  which  the 
only  land  was  the  Mountain  of  Purgatory  (Canto 
xxxiv.  122-126),  the  antipodes  of  Jerusalem  (Purga¬ 
tory,  iv.  68-71).  The  course  of  Ulysses  and  his  com¬ 
panions  after  passing  through  the  Pillars  of  Hercules 
was  to  the  southwest,  until  they  came  in  sight  of  the 
Mountain.  See  Purgatory,  i.  132. 


XXVII  39 

low  that  it  rose  not  forth  from  the  ocean  floor. 
The  light  beneath  the  moon  had  been  five 
times  rekindled  and  as  many  quenched,  since 
we  had  entered  on  the  passage  of  the  deep, 
when  there  appeared  to  us  a  mountain  dark  in 
the  distance,  and  it  seemed  to  me  so  high  as  I 
had  never  seen  one.3  We  rejoiced,  and  soon  it 
turned  to  lamentation,  for  from  the  new  land 
a  whirlwind  rose  and  struck  the  fore  part  of 
the  vessel.  Three  times  it  made  her  whirl  with 
all  the  waters,  the  fourth  it  made  her  stern  lift 
up  and  the  prow  go  down,  as  pleased  Another, 
till  the  sea  had  closed  over  us.” 

CANTO  XXVII 

1.  The  flame  was  already  erect  and  quiet,  by 
reason  of  not  speaking  more,  and  already  was 
going  from  us,  with  the  permission  of  the 
sweet  poet,  when  another,  which  was  coming 
behind  it,  made  us  turn  our  eyes  to  its  tip,  by 
a  confused  sound  that  was  issuing  forth  from 
it.  As  the  Sicilian  bull,4  which  bellowed  first 
with  the  plaint  of  him  (and  that  was  right) 
who  had  shaped  it  with  his  tools,  was  wont  to 
bellow  with  the  voice  of  the  sufferer,  so  that, 
although  it  was  of  brass,  yet  it  appeared  trans¬ 
fixed  with  the  pain,  so,  through  not  at  first 
having  way  or  outlet  from  the  fire,  the  discon¬ 
solate  words  were  converted  into  its  language. 
But  when  they  had  taken  their  course  up 
through  the  point,  giving  to  it  in  their  passage 
that  vibration  which  the  tongue  had  given,  we 
heard  say:  “O  thou,  to  whom  I  direct  my 
voice,  and  who  just  now  wast  speaking  Lom¬ 
bard,0  saying:  ‘Now  go  thy  way,  no  more  I 
urge  thee:’  although  I  may  have  arrived  per¬ 
haps  somewhat  late,  let  it  not  irk  thee  to  stop 
to  speak  with  me;  behold,  it  irks  not  me,  and 
I  am  burning.  If  thou  art  but  now  fallen  into 
this  blind  world  from  that  sweet  Italian  land 
whence  I  bring  all  my  sin,  tell  me  if  the  Ro- 
magnoles6  have  peace  or  war;  for  I  was  of  the 
mountains  there,  between  Urbino  and  the 
chain  from  which  Tiber  is  unlocked.”' 

3  Cf .  Paradise,  xxvi.  139;  Purgatory,  iii.  15. 

4  The  brazen  bull  of  Phalaris,  tyrant  of  Agrigentum, 
made  to  hold  criminals  to  be  burned  within  it.  Perillus, 
its  inventor,  was  the  first  to  suffer. 

5  See  Canto  i.  68,  supra. 

6  The  people  of  the  Romagna.  See  Purgatory,  xiv.  92. 

7  The  spirit  who  speaks  is  that  of  the  Ghibellinc 
count,  Guido  da  Montefeltro,  the  ablest  and  most 
famous  warrior  of  his  time  in  Italy. 


HELL 


31. 1  was  still  downward  attent  and  leaning 
over,  when  my  Leader  touched  me  on  the  side, 
saying,  “Speak  thou,  this  is  an  Italian.”  And  I, 
who  already  had  my  answer  ready,  without 
delay  began  to  speak:  “O  soul,  that  art  hidden 
down  there,  thy  Romagna  is  not,  and  never 
was,  without  war  in  the  hearts  of  her  tyrants, 
but  no  open  war  have  I  left  there  now.  Raven¬ 
na  is  as  it  has  been  for  many  years;  the  eagle 
of  Polenta1  is  brooding  there,  so  that  he  covers 
Cervia  with  his  wings.  The  city  that  made 
some  while  ago  the  long  struggle,  and  of  the 
French  a  bloody  heap,  finds  itself  again  be¬ 
neath  the  green  paws.2  And  the  old  mastiff 
and  the  new  of  Verrucchio,3  who  made  the  ill 
disposal  of  Montagna,  make  an  auger  of  their 
teeth  there  where  they  are  wont.  The  young 
lion  of  the  white  lair,4  who  changes  side  from 
summer  to  winter,  rules  the  cities  of  Lamone 
and  of  Santerno.  And  she5  whose  flank  the 
Savio  bathes  lives  between  tyranny  and  a  free 
state,  even  as  she  sits  between  the  plain  and 
the  mountain.  Now  I  pray  thee  that  thou  tell 
us  who  thou  art;  be  not  harder  than  another 
has  been,  so  may  thy  name  hold  front  in  the 
world.” 

58.  After  the  fire  had  roared  for  a  while  ac¬ 
cording  to  its  fashion,  the  sharp  point  moved 
to  and  fro,  and  then  gave  forth  this  breath:  “If 
I  believed  that  my  reply  were  to  a  person  who 
should  ever  return  to  the  world,  this  flame 
would  stand  without  more  quiverings;  but  in¬ 
asmuch  as,  if  I  hear  truth,  never  did  any  one 

1  Guido  da  Polenta  had  been  lord  of  Ravenna  since 
1275.  His  shield  bore  an  eagle.  Cervia  is  a  small 
coastal  town  near  Ravenna. 

2Forli,  where  in  1282  Guido  da  Montefeltro  had 
defeated,  with  great  slaughter,  a  troop,  largely  of 
French  soldiers,  sent  against  him  by  Pope  Martin 
IV.  It  was  now  ruled  by  the  Ordelaffi,  whose  shield 
bore  on  its  upper  half  a  green  demi-lion  on  a  gold 
field. 

3  Verrucchio  was  a  castle  near  Rimini,  which  had 
long  been  in  possession  of  the  Malatesta  family.  “The 
old  mastiff  and  the  new”  were  Malatesta  de’  Malatesti 
and  his  son  Malatestino,  lords  of  Rimini.  In  1295  they 
had  treacherously  overpowered  and  murdered  Mon¬ 
tagna  de’  Parcitati,  the  head  of  the  Ghibellines  in 
Rimini. 

4  This  is  Maghinardo  de’  Pagani  da  Susinana,  who 
bore  on  his  shield  a  blue  lion  on  a  white  field.  He 
was  a  Ghibelline  in  Romagna,  and  a  Guelf  with  the 
Florentines,  says  Villani.  “Lamone”  is  Faenza,  near 
the  river  of  Lamone,  and  “Santerno”  is  Imola,  by 
which  the  Santerno  runs. 

5  The  city  of  Cesena. 


return  alive  from  this  depth,  I  answer  thee 
without  fear  of  infamy. 

67.  “I  was  a  man  of  arms,  and  then  I  was  a 
cordelier,6  trusting,  thus  girt,  to  make  amends; 
and  surely  my  trust  had  come  full  but  for  the 
Great  Priest,'  whom  ill  befall!  who  set  me 
back  into  my  first  sins;  and  how  and  where¬ 
fore,  I  will  that  thou  hear  from  me.  While  I 
was  that  shape  of  bone  and  flesh  which  my 
mother  gave  me,  my  works  were  not  leonine, 
but  of  the  fox.  All  wily  practices  and  covert 
ways  I  knew,  and  I  so  plied  their  art  that  the 
sound  went  forth  to  the  end  of  the  earth. 
When  I  saw  me  arrived  at  that  part  of  my  age 
where  every  one  ought  to  strike  the  sails  and 
coil  up  the  ropes,  what  before  was  pleasing  to 
me  then  was  irksome  to  me,  and  I  yielded  me 
repentant  and  confessed.  Ah  wretched,  alas! 
and  it  would  have  availed. 

85.  “The  Prince  of  the  new  Pharisees  hav¬ 
ing  war  near  the  Lateran,8 — and  not  with 
Saracens  nor  with  Jews,  for  every  enemy  of  his 
was  Christian,  and  not  one  of  them  had  been 
to  conquer  Acre,  or  a  trafficker  in  the  land  of 
the  Soldan, — regarded  in  himself  neither  his 
supreme  office,  nor  his  Holy  Orders,  nor  in  me 
that  cord  which  was  wont  to  make  those  girt 
with  it  more  lean;  but  as  Constantine  besought 
Sylvester  within  Soracte  to  cure  his  leprosy,0 
so  this  one  besought  me  as  master  to  cure  the 
fever  of  his  pride.  He  asked  counsel  of  me, 
and  I  kept  silence,  because  his  words  seemed 
drunken.  And  then  he  said  to  me:  ‘Let  not  thy 
heart  mistrust;  from  this  time  forward  I  ab¬ 
solve  thee,  and  do  thou  teach  me  to  act  so  that 
I  may  throw  Palestrina  to  the  ground.  I  can 
lock  and  unlock  Heaven,  as  thou  knowest; 
wherefor  the  keys  are  two,  which  my  prede¬ 
cessor  held  not  dear.’10  Then  his  weighty  argu- 

°In  1296  Guido,  past  seventy  years  old,  entered 
the  Franciscan  Order,  girding  himself  with  its  cord. 

7  Boniface  VIII. 

8  With  the  Colonna  family,  whose  stronghold  was 
Palestrina,  visible  from  the  Lateran  hill.  In  1297 
Boniface  proclaimed  a  crusade  against  them:  Palestrina 
was  surrendered  to  him  on  false  promises,  and  then 
demolished. 

9  It  was  for  this  service  that  Constantine  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  have  made  Pope  Sylvester  I  “the  first  rich 
Father”  (Canto  xix.  117)  by  the  famous  “Donation” 
conveying  to  the  Pope  the  sovereignty  over  Italy  and 
the  whole  Western  Empire.  Sylvester,  to  escape  from 
Constantine’s  previous  persecution  of  the  Christians, 
had  taken  refuge  on  Mount  Soracte. 

10  Cf.  Canto  iii.  59-60,  supra. 


CANTO 

ments  pushed  me  to  where  silence  seemed  to 
me  the  worst,  and  I  said:  ‘Father,  since  thou 
dost  wash  me  of  that  sin  wherein  I  now  must 
fall,  long  promise  with  short  keeping  will 
make  thee  triumph  on  the  High  Seat.’ 

1 12.  “Francis  came  for  me  afterwards,  when 
I  was  dead,  but  one  of  the  black  Cherubim 
said  to  him:  ‘Bear  him  not  away;  do  me  not 
wrong;  he  must  come  down  among  my  drud¬ 
ges  because  he  gave  the  fraudulent  counsel, 
since  which  till  now  I  have  been  at  his  hair; 
for  he  who  does  not  repent  cannot  be  absolved, 
nor  can  repentance  and  will  exist  together,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  contradiction  which  does  not  al¬ 
low  it.’  O  me  woeful!  how  I  shuddered  when 
he  took  me,  saying  to  me:  ‘Perhaps  thou  didst 
not  think  that  I  was  a  logician.’  He  bore  me  to 
Minos;  and  he  twisted  his  tail  eight  times 
round  his  hard  back,1  and,  after  he  had  bitten 
it  from  great  rage,  he  said:  ‘This  is  one  of  the 
sinners  of  the  thievish  fire’:  wherefore  here, 
where  thou  seest,  I  am  lost,  and  going  thus 
robed  I  am  afflicted.”  When  he  had  thus  com¬ 
pleted  his  speech  the  flame,  sorrowing,  de¬ 
parted,  twisting  and  flapping  its  sharp  horn. 

133.  We  passed  onward,  I  and  my  Leader, 
over  the  crag,  far  as  to  the  next  arch  that  cov¬ 
ers  the  ditch  in  which  the  fee  is  paid  by  those 
who  acquire  their  load  by  sundering.2 

CANTO  XXVIII 

i.  Who,  even  with  words  unfettered,  could 
ever  tell  in  full,  though  many  times  narrating, 
of  the  blood  and  of  the  wounds  that  I  now 
saw?  Every  tongue  assuredly  would  come 
short,  by  reason  of  our  speech  and  our  mem¬ 
ory  which  have  small  capacity  to  comprise  so 
much. 

7.  If  all  the  people  were  again  assembled, 
that  of  old  upon  the  storm-tossed  land  of 
Apulia  lamented  for  their  blood  shed  by  the 
Trojans,3  and  in  the  long  war  that  made  such 
vast  spoil  of  the  rings,4  as  Livy  writes,  who 
does  not  err;  together  with  those  who,  by  re¬ 
sisting  Robert  Guiscard,0  felt  the  pain  of  blows, 

1  See  Canto  v.  11-12. 

2  See  Canto  xi.  56. 

3  Cf.  Canto  xxvi.  60. 

4  The  spoils — three  bushels  and  a  half  of  rings — of 
the  battle  of  Cannae,  in  the  Second  Punic  War,  which 
lasted  more  than  fifteen  years. 

5  The  Norman  conqueror  and  Duke  of  Apulia.  He 
died  in  1085. 


XXVIII  41 

and  the  others  whose  bones  are  still  heaped  up 
at  Ceperano,6  where  every  Apulian  was  false, 
and  there  by  Tagliacozzo,7  where  the  old  Alar- 
do  conquered  without  arms — and  one  should 
show  his  limb  pierced  through,  and  one  his 
lopped  off,  it  would  be  nothing  to  equal  the 
hideous* mode  of  the  ninth  pouch. 

22.  Truly  a  cask  by  losing  mid-board  or 
stave  is  not  so  split  open,  as  one  I  saw  who 
was  cleft  from  the  chin  to  where  the  wind  is 
broken;  his  entrails  were  hanging  between  his 
legs,  his  pluck  was  visible,  and  the  dismal  sack 
which  makes  ordure  of  what  is  swallowed. 
While  I  fix  myself  all  on  seeing  him,  he 
looked  at  me,  and  with  his  hands  opened  his 
breast,  saying:  “Now  see  how  I  rend  myself; 
see  how  mangled  is  Mahomet.  In  front  of  me 
goes  Ali8  weeping,  cleft  in  the  face  from  chin 
to  forelock;  and  all  the  others  whom  thou  seest 
here  were,  when  living,  sowers  of  scandal  and 
of  schism,  and  therefore  are  they  so  cleft.  A 
devil  is  here  behind  that  fashions  us  so  cruelly, 
putting  again  to  the  edge  of  the  sword  each  of 
this  throng  when  we  have  circled  the  doleful 
road;  because  the  wounds  are  closed  up  before 
one  passes  again  before  him.  But  who  art  thou 
that  art  musing  on  the  crag,  perhaps  to  delay 
going  to  the  punishment  that  has  been  ad¬ 
judged  on  thine  own  accusations?” 

46.  “Death  has  not  reached  him  yet,”  re¬ 
plied  my  Master,  “nor  does  guilt  lead  him  to 
torment  him;  but,  in  order  to  give  him  full  ex¬ 
perience,  it  behoves  me,  who  am  dead,  to  lead 
him  down  here  through  Hell,  from  circle  to 
circle;  and  this  is  true,  as  that  I  speak  to  thee.” 

More  than  a  hundred  there  were  who,  when 
they  heard  him,  stopped  in  the  ditch  to  look  at 
me,  forgetting  the  torment  in  their  wonder. 

55.  “Now  say  then  to  Fra  Dolcino,9  thou 
who  perhaps  wilt  shortly  see  the  sun,  if  he  wish 

0  There  was  no  battle  at  Ceperano,  but  the  defence 
of  the  bridge  there  over  the  Garigliano  was  treacher¬ 
ously  abandoned,  leaving  the  way  open  for  Charles 
of  Anjou  to  advance  to  Benevento,  where  in  1266,  the 
great  battle  was  fought  which  ended  in  the  defeat  and 
death  of  Manfred,  king  of  Sicily.  At  this  battle  many 
of  the  Apulian  barons  proved  traitors. 

7  Here,  in  1268,  Conradin,  the  nephew  of  Manfred, 
was  defeated  and  taken  prisoner  by  Charles  of  Anjou. 
The  victory  was  won,  not  by  arms,  but  by  a  stratagem 
devised  by  Count  Erard  (Alardo)  de  Valery. 

8  Cousin  and  son-in-law  of  Mahomet,  and  himself 
the  head  of  a  schism. 

8  A  heretic  and  reformer,  who  for  two  years  main- 


HELL 


not  speedily  to  follow  me  hither,  so  to  arm 
himself  with  provisions  that  stress  of  snow 
may  not  bring  the  victory  to  the  Novarese, 
which  to  gain  otherwise  would  not  be  easy.” 
Mahomet  said  to  me  this  word,  after  he  had 
lifted  one  foot  to  go  on,  then  to  depart  he 
stretched  it  on  the  ground. 

64.  Another  who  had  his  throat  pierced  and 
his  nose  cut  off  close  under  his  brows,  and  had 
but  one  ear  only,  having  stopped  to  gaze,  for 
wonder,  with  the  others,  before  the  others 
opened  his  gullet,  which  outwardly  was  all 
crimson,  and  said:  “O  thou  whom  guilt  does 
not  condemn,  and  whom  I  saw  above  in  the 
land  of  Italy,  if  exceeding  resemblance  deceive 
me  not,  if  ever  thou  return  to  see  the  sweet 
plain  which  slopes  from  Vercelli  to  Marcabo,* 1 2 3 4 
remember  Pier  da  Medicina,2  and  make  known 
to  the  two  best  men  of  Fano,  to  Messer  Guido 
and  likewise  to  Angiolello,3  that,  if  our  fore¬ 
sight  here  is  not  vain,  they  will  be  thrown  out 
of  their  vessel  and  sunk  near  La  Cattolica/ 
through  the  treachery  of  a  fell  tyrant.  Between 
the  islands  of  Cyprus  and  Majorca  Neptune 
never  saw  so  great  a  crime,  not  of  the  pirates, 
nor  of  the  Argolic  people.5  That  traitor  who 
sees  only  with  one  eye,  and  holds  the  city6 
from  sight  of  which  one  who  is  here  with  me 
would  wish  he  had  fasted,  will  make  them 
come  to  parley  with  him;  then  will  deal  so  that 
against  the  wind  of  Focara7  they  will  not  need 
vow  or  prayer.” 

91.  And  I  to  him:  “Show  to  me  and  declare, 
if  thou  wishest  that  I  carry  up  news  of  thee, 
who  is  he  of  the  bitter  sight?”  Then  he  put  his 
hand  on  the  jaw  of  one  of  his  companions,  and 


tained  himself  in  Lombardy  against  the  forces  of  the 
Pope.  Finally,  being  reduced  by  famine  in  time  of 
snow,  in  1307,  he  was  taken  captive  and  burnt  at 
Vercelli. 

1  From  the  foot  of  the  Alps  to  the  Adriatic.  Marcabo 
was  a  stronghold  near  the  mouths  of  the  Po. 

2  Medicina  is  a  town  between  Bologna  and  Imola. 
Piero  was  a  fosterer  of  discord  among  the  lords  of 
the  cities  of  the  Romagna. 

3  Guido  del  Cassero  and  Angiolello  da  Cagnano, 
treacherously  drowned  by  order  of  the  one-eyed  Mala- 
testino  (Cf.  Canto  xxvii.  46). 

4  A  small  town  on  the  Adriatic  between  Rimini 
and  Pesaro. 

5  Cf.  Aencid,  ii.  78. 

0  Rimini. 

7  A  high  foreland  near  La  Cattolica,  dreaded  by 

mariners  because  of  the  dangerous  squalls  which  often 

swept  down  from  it. 


opened  the  mouth  of  him,  crying:  “This  is  he, 
and  he  does  not  speak;  this  one,  being  ban¬ 
ished  stifled  the  doubt  in  Caesar,  affirming  that 
the  man  prepared  always  suffered  harm  from 
delay.”  Oh,  how  aghast,  with  his  tongue  cut 
off  in  his  throat,  seemed  to  me  Curio,8 *  who 
had  been  so  bold  to  speak! 

103.  And  one  who  had  both  hands  lopped 
off,  lifting  the  stumps  through  the  murky  air 
so  that  the  blood  made  his  face  foul,  cried  out: 
“Thou  shalt  bear  in  mind  Mosca,’  too,  who 
said,  alas!  ‘Thing  done  has  a  head,’  which  was 
the  seed  of  ill  for  the  Tuscan  people.”  And  I 
added  for  him:  “And  death  to  thine  own 
race.”  Whereat  he,  accumulating  woe  on  woe, 
went  away  like  a  person  sorrowful  and  mad. 

1 12.  But  I  remained  to  look  at  the  crowd, 
and  saw  a  thing  which,  without  more  proof,  I 
should  be  afraid  only  to  tell,  were  it  not  that 
conscience  reassures  me,  the  good  companion 
which  emboldens  man  under  the  hauberk  of 
feeling  itself  pure.  I  saw  truly,  and  I  seem  to 
see  it  still,  a  trunk  without  a  head  going  along, 
even  as  the  others  of  the  dismal  herd  were 
going.  And  it  was  holding  its  cut-off  head  by 
the  hair,  dangling  it  in  hand  like  a  lantern, 
and  that  was  gazing  on  us,  and  saying:  “O 
me!” 

127.  Of  itself  it  was  making  a  lamp  for  it¬ 
self;  and  they  were  two  in  one,  and  one  in  two; 
how  it  can  be  He  knows  who  so  ordains. 
When  he  was  right  at  foot  of  the  bridge,  he 
lifted  his  arm  high  with  the  whole  head,  in 
order  to  bring  its  words  near  to  us,  which 
were:  “Now  see  the  dire  punishment,  thou 
that,  breathing,  goest  seeing  the  dead:  see  if 
any  other  be  great  as  this!  And  that  thou 
mayst  carry  news  of  me,  know  that  I  am  Ber- 
tran  de  Born,10  he  that  gave  to  the  young  king 

8  Curio  the  Tribune,  banished  from  Rome,  fled  to 
Caesar  delaying  at  the  Rubicon,  and  urged  him  to 
cross. 

9  In  1215  one  of  the  Buondelmonti,  plighted  to  a 
maiden  of  the  Amidei  family,  broke  faith,  and  en¬ 
gaged  himself  to  one  of  the  Donati.  The  relatives  of 
the  slighted  girl  took  counsel  how  to  avenge  the 
affront,  and  Mosca  de’  Lamberti  gave  the  ill  advice  to 
kill  the  young  Buondelmonte,  with  the  words:  “Thing 
done  has  a  head”:  it  cannot  be  undone — it  shows  its 
head.  The  murder  was  the  beginning  of  long  woe  to 
Florence,  and  of  the  division  of  her  people  into  Guelfs 
and  Ghibellines. 

10  The  famous  troubadour  who  incited  young  Prince 
Henry  to  rebel  against  his  father,  Henry  II  of  England. 


43 


CANTO  XXIX 


the  ill  encouragements.  I  made  father  and  son 
rebels  to  each  other.  Ahithophel  did  not  more 
with  Absalom  and  with  David  by  his  wicked 
goadings.  Because  I  divided  persons  thus  unit¬ 
ed,  I  carry  my  brain,  alas!  divided  from  its 
source  which  is  in  this  trunk.  Thus  the  retri¬ 
bution  is  observed  in  me.” 

CANTO  XXIX 

i.  The  many  people  and  the  divers  wounds 
had  so  inebriated  my  eyes  that  they  were  fain 
to  stay  for  weeping;  but  Virgil  said  to  me: 
“What  art  thou  still  watching?  why  does  thy 
gaze  still  rest  down  there  among  the  dismal 
mutilated  shades?  Thou  hast  not  done  so  at 
the  other  pits;  consider,  if  thou  thinkest  to 
count  them,  that  the  valley  circles  two  and 
twenty  miles;  and  already  the  moon  is  beneath 
our  feet;1  the  time  is  little  now  that  is  conceded 
to  us,  and  other  things  are  to  be  seen  than 
these  thou  seest.”  “If  thou  hadst,”  replied  I 
thereupon,  “given  heed  to  the  reason  why  I 
was  looking,  perhaps  thou  wouldst  have  per¬ 
mitted  me  yet  to  stay.” 

1 6.  Meanwhile  my  Leader  was  going  on, 

I  and  I  was  going  behind  him,  now  making  my 
reply,  and  adding:  “Within  that  hollow  where 
I  was  now  holding  my  eyes  so  fixedly,  I  believe 
that  a  spirit  of  my  own  blood  is  weeping  for 
the  guilt  which  costs  so  dear  down  there.” 
Then  said  the  Master:  “Let  not  thy  thought 
henceforth  be  broken  upon  him;  attend  to  oth¬ 
er  things,  and  let  him  stay  there;  for  I  saw  him 
at  the  foot  of  the  little  bridge,  pointing  thee 
out,  and  threatening  fiercely  with  his  finger, 
and  I  heard  him  called  Geri  del  Bello.2  Thou 
wert  then  so  wholly  occupied  with  him  who 
of  old  held  Hautefort3  that  thou  didst  not  look 
that  way;  so  he  went  off.” 

31.  “O  my  Leader,”  said  I,  “that  his  violent 
death  has  not  yet  been  avenged  for  him  by  any 
one  who  is  a  partner  in  the  shame  made  him 
indignant;  wherefore,  as  I  deem,  he  went  on 
without  speaking  to  me,  and  thereby  he  has 
made  me  the  more  pitiful  for  him.” 

*It  was  early  in  the  afternoon. 

2  A  first  cousin  of  Dante’s  father.  He  was  a  harmful 
and  quarrelsome  person,  who,  having  sown  discord 
among  the  Sacchetti,  was  slain  by  one  of  them.  After 
thirty  years  his  death  was  avenged  by  his  nephews, 
by  the  killing  of  one  of  the  Sacchetti. 

3  Bertran  de  Born  was  lord  of  Hautefort. 


37.  Thus  we  spoke  as  far  as  the  first  place  on 
the  crag  which  shows  the  next  valley,  if  more 
light  were  there,  quite  to  the  bottom.  When 
we  were  above  the  last  cloister  of  Malebolge, 
so  that  its  lay  brothers  could  appear  to  our 
sight,  divers  lamentations  pierced  me,  which 
had  their  arrows  barbed  with  woe:  wherefore 
I  covered  my  ears  with  my  hands. 

46.  Such  suffering  as  there  would  be  if,  be¬ 
tween  July  and  September,  the  sick  from  the 
hospitals  of  Valdichiana  and  of  Maremma  and 
of  Sardinia1  were  all  in  one  ditch  together, 
such  was  there  here;  and  such  stench  came 
forth  therefrom,  as  is  wont  to  come  from  gan¬ 
grened  limbs.  We  descended  upon  the  last 
bank  of  the  long  crag,  ever  to  the  left  hand, 
and  then  my  sight  became  livelier  down  to¬ 
ward  the  bottom,  where  the  ministress  of  the 
High  Lord — infallible  Justice — punishes  the 
falsifiers  whom  she  registers  here. 

58. 1  do  not  believe  it  was  a  greater  sorrow 
to  see  the  whole  people  in  Aegina  sick,  when 
the  air  was  so  full  of  harm  that  the  animals, 
even  to  the  little  worm,  all  fell  dead,  and  after¬ 
wards  the  ancient  people,  according  as  the 
poets  hold  for  sure,  were  restored  from  seed 
of  ants,  then  it  was  to  see  the  spirits  languish¬ 
ing  in  different  heaps  through  that  dark  valley. 
One  was  lying  on  the  belly,  and  one  on  the 
shoulders  of  another,  and  one,  on  all  fours, 
was  shifting  himself  along  the  dismal  path. 
Step  by  step  we  went  without  speech,  looking 
at  and  listening  to  the  sick,  who  could  not  lift 
their  persons. 

73. 1  saw  two  seated  leaning  on  each  other, 
as  pan  is  leaned  against  pan  to  warm,  spotted 
from  head  to  foot  with  scabs;  and  never  did  I 
see  currycomb  plied  by  stable-boy  for  whom 
his  lord  is  waiting,  or  by  one  who  stays  awake 
unwillingly,  as  each  was  incessantly  plying  the 
bite  of  his  nails  upon  himself,  because  of  the 
great  rage  of  his  itching  which  has  no  other 
relief.  And  the  nails  were  dragging  down  the 
scab,  as  a  knife  does  the  scales  of  bream,  or  of 
other  fish  that  has  them  larger  still. 

85.  “O  thou,  that  art  dismailing  thyself  with 
thy  fingers,”  began  my  Leader  unto  one  of 
them,  “and  who  sometimes  makest  pincers  of 
them,  tell  me  if  any  Italian  is  among  those  who 

4  All  haunts  of  malarial  fever. 


HELL 


are  here  within,  so  may  thy  nails  suffice  thee 
eternally  for  this  work.”  “Italians  are  we 
whom  here  thou  seest  so  spoiled,  both  of  us,” 
replied  one  weeping,  “but  who  are  thou  that 
askest  of  us?”  And  the  Leader  said:  “I  am  one 
that  descends  with  this  living  man  down  from 
ledge  to  ledge,  and  I  intend  to  show  Hell  to 
him.”  Then  their  mutual  support  was  broken; 
and  each  turned  trembling  to  me,  with  others 
who  heard  him  by  rebound.  The  good  Master 
drew  quite  close  to  me,  saying:  “Say  to  them 
what  thou  wilt”;  and  I  began,  since  he  wished 
it:  “So  may  memory  of  you  in  the  first  world 
not  steal  away  from  the  minds  of  men,  but 
may  it  live  under  many  suns,  tell  me  who  ye 
are,  and  of  what  folk;  let  not  your  unseemly 
and  loathsome  punishment  fright  you  from 
disclosing  yourselves  unto  me.” 

109.  “I  was  of  Arezzo,”  replied  one  of  them, 
“and  Albero  of  Siena  had  me  put  in  the  fire; 
but  that  for  which  I  died  does  not  bring  me 
here.  It  is  true  that  I  said  to  him,  speaking  in 
jest,  that  I  knew  how  to  raise  myself  through 
the  air  in  flight,  and  he,  who  had  lively  desire 
and  little  wit,  wished  that  I  should  show  him 
the  art,  and  only  because  I  did  not  make  him 
Daedalus,  caused  me  to  be  burned  by  one1  who 
had  him  for  son;  but  to  the  last  pouch  of  the 
ten,  Minos,  to  whom  it  is  not  allowed  to  err, 
condemned  me  by  reason  of  the  alchemy  that 
I  practiced  in  the  world.” 

121.  And  I  said  to  the  Poet:  “Now  was  ever 
people  so  vain  as  the  Sienese?  surely  not  so  the 
French  by  much.” 

124.  Whereon  the  other  leprous  one,  who 
heard  me,  replied  to  my  words:  “Excepting 
Stricca,  who  knew  how  to  make  moderate 
spendings;  and  Niccolo,  who  first  invented  the 
costly  use  of  the  clove,  in  the  garden  where 
such  seed  takes  root;  and  excepting  the  brigade 
in  which  Caccia  of  Asciano  squandered  his 
vineyard  and  his  great  wood,  and  Abbagliato 
showed  his  wit.  But  that  thou  mayst  know 
who  thus  seconds  thee  against  the  Sienese, 
sharpen  thine  eye  toward  me  so  that  my  face 
may  answer  well  to  thee,  so  wilt  thou  see  that 
I  am  the  shade  of  Capocchio,  who  falsified  the 
metals  by  alchemy;  and  thou  shouldst  recol- 

1  The  Bishop  of  Siena,  under  whose  ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction  Griffolino  of  Arezzo  fell  as  a  dealer  in 
the  black  art. 


lect,  if  I  descry  thee  aright,  how  I  was  a  good 
ape  of  nature.” 

CANTO  XXX 

1.  At  the  time  when  Juno  was  wroth  because 
of  Semele  against  the  Theban  blood,  as  she 
showed  more  than  once,  Athamas  became  so 
insane,2  that  seeing  his  wife  come  laden  on 
either  hand  with  her  two  sons,  he  cried  out: 
“Spread  we  the  nets,  so  that  I  may  take  the 
lioness  and  the  young  lions  at  the  pass,”  and 
then  he  stretched  out  his  pitiless  talons,  seiz¬ 
ing  the  one  who  was  named  Learchus,  and 
whirled  him  and  dashed  him  on  a  rock;  and 
she  drowned  herself  with  her  other  burden. 
And  when  Fortune  turned  downward  the 
loftiness  of  the  Trojans  which  dared  all,  so 
that  together  with  his  kingdom  the  king  was 
undone,  Hecuba,  sad,  wretched,  and  captive, 
after  she  saw  Polyxena  dead,  and  descried  her 
Polydorus  on  the  seastrand,  she  the  doleful, 
frantic,  barked  like  a  dog,  to  such  degree  had 
grief  distraught  her  mind.3 

21.  But  neither  furies  of  Thebes  nor  of  Troy 
were  ever  seen  in  any  one  so  cruel,  not  in  goad¬ 
ing  beasts  much  less  human  limbs,  as  those  I 
saw  in  two  pale  and  naked  shades  who  were 
running,  biting,  in  the  way  that  a  boar  does 
when  he  is  let  out  from  the  sty.  One  came  at 
Capocchio,  and  struck  his  tusks  in  the  nape  of 
his  neck,  so  that  dragging  him  it  made  his 
belly  scratch  along  the  solid  bottom.  And  the 
Aretine,4  who  remained  trembling,  said  to  me: 
“That  mad  sprite  is  Gianni  Schicchi,  and  he 
goes  rabid  dressing  others  thus.”  “Oh!”  said  I 
to  him,  “so  may  the  other  not  fix  its  teeth  on 
-thee,  let  it  not  be  weariness  to  thee  to  tell  who 
it  is  before  it  breaks  away  from  here.”  And  he 
to  me:  “That  is  the  ancient  soul  of  infamous 
Myrrha,  who  became  loving  of  her  father  be¬ 
yond  rightful  love.  She  came  thus  to  sinning 
with  him  by  falsifying  herself  in  another’s 
form,  even  as  the  other,  who  goes  off  there, 
ventured,  in  order  to  gain  the  lady  of  the  stud, 
to  simulate  in  his  own  person  Buoso  Donati, 

2  Athamas,  King  of  Orchomenos,  near  Thebes,  had 
two  children  by  the  sister  of  Semele,  Ino.  Both  he 
and  Ino  had  incurred  the  resentment  of  Juno. 

3  See  Euripides,  Hecuba. 

4  See  Canto  xxix.  i09ff.,  supra. 


CANTO  XXX 


making  a  will  and  giving  to  the  will  due 
form.”1 

4 6.  And  after  the  two  rabid  ones,  upon 
whom  I  had  kept  my  eye,  had  passed  on,  I 
turned  it  to  look  at  the  others  of  the  evil  born. 
I  saw  one  shaped  in  fashion  of  a  lute,  had  he 
only  had  his  groin  cut  short  at  the  part  where 
man  is  forked.  The  heavy  dropsy  which,  with 
its  ill-digested  humor,  so  unmates  the  members 
that  the  face  does  not  correspond  with  the 
belly,  was  making  him  hold  his  lips  open,  as 
the  hectic  does,  who  for  thirst  turns  one  toward 
his  chin,  and  the  other  upward. 

58.  “Oh  ye,  who  are  without  any  punish¬ 
ment,  and  I  know  not  why,  in  this  dismal 
world,”  said  he  to  us,  “behold  and  consider  the 
misery  of  Master  Adam.  Living,  I  had  enough 
of  what  I  wished,  and  now,  alas!  I  long  for  a 
drop  of  water.  The  little  brooks  that  from  the 
green  hills  of  the  Casentin  run  down  into  the 
Arno,  making  their  channels  cool  and  soft, 
stand  ever  before  me,  and  not  in  vain;  for  their 
image  dries  me  up  far  more  than  the  malady 
whereby  I  strip  my  face  of  flesh.  The  rigid 
justice  that  scourges  me  draws  occasion  from 
the  place  where  I  sinned  to  set  my  sighs  the 
more  in  flight.  There  is  Romena,  where  I  fal¬ 
sified  the  coin  stamped  with  the  Baptist,  for 
which  on  earth  I  left  my  body  burnt.2  But  if  I 
could  see  here  the  miserable  soul  of  Guido,  or 
of  Alessandro,  or  of  their  brother,3  I  would 
not  give  the  sight  for  Fonte  Branda.4  One  of 
them  is  here  within  already,  if  the  raging 
shades  who  go  around  speak  true;  but  what 
does  it  avail  me  who  have  my  limbs  bound?  If 
I  were  only  still  so  light  that  in  a  hundred 
years  I  could  go  one  inch,  I  should  already  have 
set  out  along  the  path,  seeking  for  him  among 
this  disfigured  folk,  although  it  circles  round 
eleven  miles,  and  has  not  here  less  than  a  half 
mile  across.  Because  of  them  I  am  among  such 

1  Buoso  Donati  had  died  without  making  a  will, 
whereupon  his  son  suborned  Gianni  Schicchi,  one  of 
the  Cavalcanti  family,  to  personate  the  dead  man  in 
bed,  and  to  dictate  a  will  in  his  favor.  This  Gianni 
did,  inserting,  however,  several  clauses  with  bequests 
to  himself,  among  which  was  that  of  a  favorite  mare 
or  she-mule  of  Buoso’s,  reputed  the  best  in  Tuscany. 

2  A  little  village  near  the  border  of  the  Casentino 
bears  the  name  of  La  Consuma,  perpetuating  the  fact 
that  here,  in  1281,  Master  Adam  was  burnt  alive  by 
the  Florentines,  jealous  for  the  purity  of  their  florin. 

3  Counts  of  Romena. 

4  A  spring  in  Romena. 


a  family;  they  induced  me  to  strike  the  florins 
which  had  three  carats  of  base-metal.” 

91.  And  I  to  him:  “Who  are  the  two  poor 
wretches  that  are  smoking  like  wet  hands  in 
winter,  lying  close  to  thy  confines  on  the 
right?”  “Here  I  found  them,”  he  answered, 
“when  I  rained  down  into  this  trough,  and 
they  have  not  since  given  a  turn,  and  I  do  not 
believe  they  will  give  one  to  all  eternity.  One 
is  the  false  woman  who  accused  Joseph,  the 
other  is  the  false  Sinon  the  Greek,  from  Troy:3 
because  of  their  sharp  fever  they  throw  out 
such  great  reek.” 

100.  And  one  of  them,  who  took  it  ill  per¬ 
haps  to  be  named  so  darkly,  with  his  fist  struck 
him  on  his  stiff  paunch;  it  sounded  as  if  it 
were  a  drum;  and  Master  Adam  struck  him 
on  the  face  with  his  arm  which  did  not  seem 
less  hard,  saying  to  him:  “Though  moving  be 
taken  from  me  because  of  my  limbs  which  are 
heavy,  I  have  an  arm  free  for  such  need.” 
Whereon  he  replied:  “When  thou  wast  going 
to  the  fire  thou  hadst  it  not  thus  ready;  but  so 
and  more  thou  hadst  it  when  thou  wast  coin¬ 
ing.”  And  he  of  the  dropsy:  “Thou  sayest  true 
of  this,  but  thou  wast  not  so  true  a  witness 
there  where  thou  wast  questioned  of  the  truth 
at  Troy.”  “If  I  said  false,  thou  didst  falsify  the 
coin,”  said  Sinon,  “and  I  am  here  for  a  single 
sin,  and  thou  for  more  than  any  other  demon.” 
“Remember,  perjurer,  the  horse,”  answered  he 
who  had  the  puffed  up  paunch,  “and  be  it  ill 
for  thee  that  all  the  world  knows  it.”  “And 
for  thee  be  ill  the  thirst  wherewith  thy  tongue 
cracks,”  said  the  Greek,  “and  the  putrid  water 
that  makes  thy  belly  thus  a  hedge  before  thine 
eyes.”  Then  the  coiner:  “Thy  mouth  gapes 
thus  for  its  own  harm  as  it  is  wont,  for  if  I 
have  thirst,  and  humor  stuffs  me,  thou  hast 
the  burning,  and  the  head  that  pains  thee,  and 
to  lick  the  mirror  of  Narcissus  thou  wouldst 
not  want  many  words  of  invitation.” 

130. 1  was  wholly  fixed  in  listening  to  them, 
when  the  Master  said  to  me:  “Now  only  look! 
for  it  wants  but  little  that  I  quarrel  with  thee.” 
When  I  heard  him  speak  to  me  with  anger,  I 
turned  me  toward  him  with  such  shame  that 
even  yet  it  circles  through  my  memory.  And  as 
is  he  who  dreams  of  his  harm,  and,  dreaming, 

E  See  Aeneid,  ii.  57H. 


HELL 


46 

desires  to  dream,  so  that  he  longs  for  that 
which  is,  as  if  it  were  not,  such  I  became,  not 
being  able  to  speak;  for  I  desired  to  excuse  my¬ 
self,  and  all  the  while  I  was  excusing  myself, 
and  never  thought  that  I  was  doing  it.  “Less 
shame  washes  away  a  greater  fault  than  thine 
has  been,”  said  the  Master;  “therefore  disbur¬ 
den  thyself  of  all  sadness,  and  make  reckoning 
that  I  am  always  at  thy  side,  if  again  it  happen 
that  fortune  find  thee  where  people  may  be  in 
a  similar  wrangle;  for  the  wish  to  hear  this  is 
a  base  wish.” 

CANTO  XXXI 

1.  One  and  the  same  tongue  first  stung  me,  so 
that  it  tinged  both  my  cheeks,  and  then  sup¬ 
plied  the  medicine  to  me.  Thus  do  I  hear  that 
the  lance  of  Achilles  and  of  his  father  was 
wont  to  be  cause  first  of  a  sad  and  then  of  a 
good  gift.1 

7.  We  turned  our  backs  to  the  wretched  val¬ 
ley,  up  over  the  bank  that  girds  it  round,  cross¬ 
ing  without  any  speech.  Here  it  was  less  than 
night  and  less  than  day,  so  that  my  sight  went 
little  forward;  but  I  heard  a  loud  horn  sound¬ 
ing,  so  that  it  would  have  made  every  thunder 
faint,  and  this  directed  my  eyes,  following  its 
course  counter  to  it,  wholly  to  one  place. 

16.  After  the  dolorous  rout  when  Charle¬ 
magne  lost  the  holy  gest,  Roland  sounded  not 
so  terribly.2  Short  while  I  carried  my  head 
turned  thitherward,  when  it  seemed  to  me 
that  I  saw  many  high  towers;  whereon  I: 
“Master,  say,  what  city  is  this?”  And  he  to  me: 
“Because  thou  dost  cross  through  the  darkness 
from  too  far  oft,  it  happens  that  then  thou  dost 
err  in  thy  imagining.  Thou  wilt  see  well,  if 
thou  drawest  nigh  there,  how  much  the  sense 
is  deceived  at  a  distance;  therefore  spur  thyself 
on  somewhat  more.”  Then  he  took  me  tender¬ 
ly  by  the  hand,  and  said:  “Before  we  go  further 
forward,  in  order  that  the  fact  may  seem  less 
strange  to  thee,  know  that  these  are  not  tow¬ 
ers,  but  giants,  and  they  are  in  the  pit  round 
about  the  bank,  from  the  navel  downward,  one 
and  all  of  them.” 

34.  As  when  the  mist  is  dissipating,  the  look 
little  by  little  shapes  out  what  the  vapor  that 

*Cf.  Shakespeare,  2  Henry  VI,  v.  1.  160.  So,  too, 
Chaucer,  in  The  Squire’s  Tale,  10552-4. 

2  At  Roncesvalles. 


thickens  the  air  conceals,  so,  as  I  pierced  the 
gross  and  dark  air,  as  we  drew  nearer  and 
nearer  to  the  brink,  error  fled  from  me  and 
fear  grew  upon  me.  For  as  above  its  circular 
enclosure  Montereggione3  crowns  itself  with 
towers,  so  with  half  their  bodies  the  horrible 
giants,  whom  Jove  still  threatens  from  heaven 
when  he  thunders,  betowered  the  bank  which 
surrounds  the  pit. 

46.  And  already  I  discerned  the  face  of  one 
of  them,  his  shoulders,  and  his  breast,  and 
great  part  of  his  belly,  and  down  along  his 
sides  both  his  arms.  Nature,  surely,  when  she 
left  the  art  of  such  like  living  beings,  did  ex¬ 
ceeding  well  to  take  such  executioners  from 
Mars:  and  though  she  repent  not  of  elephants 
and  of  whales,  he  who  looks  subtly  holds  her 
therein  more  just  and  more  discreet;  for  where 
the  faculty  of  the  mind  is  added  to  evil  will 
and  to  power,  the  human  race  can  make  no 
defense  against  it.  His  face  seemed  to  me  long 
and  huge  as  the  pinecone  of  St.  Peter’s  at 
Rome,  and  his  other  bones  were  in  proportion 
with  it;  so  that  the  bank,  which  was  an  apron 
from  his  middle  downward,  showed  of  him 
fully  so  much  above,  that  three  Frieslanders 
would  have  made  ill  vaunt  to  reach  to  his 
hair:  for  I  saw  of  him  thirty  great  spans  down 
from  the  place  where  one  buckles  his  cloak. 

67.  “Rafel  mai  amech  zabi  almi  ”  the  fierce 
mouth,  to  which  sweeter  psalms  were  not  be¬ 
fitting,  began  to  cry.  And  my  Leader  toward 
him:  “Foolish  soul!  Keep  to  thy  horn,  and 
with  that  vent  thyself,  when  anger  or  other 
passion  touches  thee;  seek  at  thy  neck,  and 
thou  wilt  find  the  cord  that  holds  it  tied,  O 
soul  confused!  and  see  it  lying  athwart  thy 
great  breast.”  Then  he  said  to  me:  “He  accuses 
himself;  this  is  Nimrod,  because  of  whose  evil 
thought  one  language  only  is  not  used  in  the 
world.  Let  us  leave  him  alone,  and  not  speak 
in  vain;  for  such  is  every  language  to  him,  as 
his  to  others  which  is  known  to  no  one.” 

82.  Then  turning  to  the  left,  we  made  a 
longer  journey,  and  at  a  crossbow-shot  we 
found  the  next,  far  more  fierce  and  larger. 
Who  had  been  the  master  to  bind  him  I  can¬ 
not  tell;  but  he  had  his  right  arm  shackled 
behind,  and  the  other  in  front,  by  a  chain 

3  The  castle  of  Montereggione  is  not  far  from  Siena. 


CANTO  XXXII 


which  held  him  girt  from  the  neck  downward, 
so  that  upon  his  uncovered  part  it  was  wound 
as  far  as  the  fifth  coil.  “This  proud  one  wished 
to  make  trial  of  his  power  against  the  supreme 
Jove,”  said  my  Leader,  “wherefore  he  has  such 
requital.  Ephialtes1  is  his  name,  and  he  made 
his  great  endeavors  when  the  giants  caused 
fear  to  the  Gods:  the  arms  which  he  plied  he 
moves  nevermore.” 

97.  And  I  to  him:  “If  it  may  be,  I  would 
that  my  eyes  might  have  experience  of  the 
measureless  Briareus.”  Whereon  he  answered: 
“Hard  by  here  thou  shalt  see  Antaeus,  who 
speaks,  and  is  unfettered,2  who  will  set  us  at 
the  bottom  of  all  sin.  He  whom  thou  wishest 
to  see  is  much  farther  on,  and  is  bound  and 
fashioned  like  this  one,  save  that  he  seems 
more  ferocious  in  his  look.” 

106.  Never  was  earthquake  so  mighty  that 
it  shook  a  tower  as  violently  as  Ephialtes  was 
quick  to  shake  himself.  Then  more  than  ever 
did  I  fear  death;  and  for  it  there  had  been  no 
need  of  more  than  the  fright,  if  I  had  not  seen 
his  bonds. 

1 12.  We  then  proceeded  further  forward, 
and  came  to  Antaeus,  who  stood  full  five  ells, 
besides  his  head,  above  the  rock.  “O  thou  that, 
in  the  fateful  valley  which  made  Scipio  the 
heir  of  glory,  when  Hannibal  with  his  follow¬ 
ers  turned  his  back,  didst  once  bring  a  thou¬ 
sand  lions  for  booty,  and  who  hadst  thou  been 
at  the  high  war  of  thy  brothers,  it  seems  that 
some  still  believe  that  the  sons  of  the  Earth 
would  have  conquered,  set  us  below  (and  dis¬ 
dain  not  to  do  so)  where  the  cold  locks  up 
Cocytus.  Make  us  not  go  to  Tityus,  nor  to 
Typhon;  this  man  can  give  of  that  which  is 
longed  for  here;  therefore  stoop,  and  twist  not 
thy  muzzle.  He  can  yet  restore  fame  to  thee  in 
the  world;  for  he  is  living,  and  still  expects 
long  life,  if  Grace  does  not  untimely  call  him 
to  itself.” 

130.  Thus  said  the  Master:  and  he  in  haste 
stretched  out  those  hands,  of  which  Hercules 
once  felt  the  mighty  grip,  and  took  my  Leader. 
Virgil,  when  he  felt  himself  taken  up,  said  to 
me:  “Come  hither,  so  that  I  may  take  thee”: 
then  he  did  so  that  he  and  I  were  one  bundle. 

1  See  Odyssey,  xi.  306-317. 

2  Because  he  took  no  part  in  the  war  of  his  brethren 

against  the  gods. 


As  the  Carisenda3  seems  to  the  view,  beneath 
its  leaning  side,  when  a  cloud  is  going  over  it 
so  that  the  tower  hangs  counter  to  it,  thus 
seemed  Antaeus  to  me  who  was  watching  to 
see  him  stoop;  and  it  was  a  moment  when  I 
could  have  wished  to  go  by  another  road.  But 
lightly  in  the  depth  that  swallows  Lucifer  with 
Judas  he  set  us  down;  nor,  thus  stooping,  did 
he  there  make  stay,  but  like  the  mast  of  a  ship 
he  raised  himself. 

CANTO  XXXII 

r.  If  I  had  rhymes  both  harsh  and  raucous, 
such  as  would  befit  the  dismal  hole  on  which 
all  the  other  rocks  thrust,  I  would  press  out 
more  fully  the  juice  of  my  conception;  but 
since  I  have  them  not,  not  without  fear  I  bring 
myself  to  speak;  for  to  describe  the  bottom  of 
the  whole  universe  is  no  enterprise  to  take  up 
in  jest,  nor  for  a  tongue  that  cries  mamma  and 
papa.  But  may  those  Dames4  aid  my  verse, 
who  aided  Amphion  to  enclose  Thebes,  so  that 
the  speech  may  not  be  diverse  from  the  fact. 

13.  O  ye,  beyond  all  others,  miscreated  rab¬ 
ble,  that  are  in  the  place  whereof  to  speak  is 
hard,  better  had  ye  here  been  sheep  or  goats! 

16.  When  we  were  down  in  the  dark  pit  be¬ 
neath  the  feet  of  the  giant,  far  lower,  and  I  was 
still  gazing  at  the  high  wall,  I  heard  say  to  me: 
“Take  heed  how  thou  steppest;  go  so  that  thou 
trample  not  with  thy  soles  the  heads  of  thy 
wretched  weary  brothers.”  Whereat  I  turned, 
and  saw  before  me,  and  under  my  feet,  a  lake 
which  by  reason  of  frost  had  semblance  of 
glass  and  not  of  water.5 

25.  The  Danube  in  Austria  never  made  in 
winter  so  thick  a  veil  for  its  current,  nor  the 
Don  yonder  under  the  cold  sky,  as  there  was 
here:  for  if  Tambernich6  had  fallen  on  it,  or 
Pietrapana,7  it  would  not  have  given  a  creak 

3  The  shorter  but  more  inclined  of  the  two  famous 
leaning  towers  at  Bologna. 

4  The  Muses,  who  so  endowed  the  lyre  of  Amphion 
that  its  sound  charmed  the  rocks  to  move  from  Mount 
Cithaeron  and  build  themselves  up  for  the  walls  of 
Thebes. 

5  The  lake  of  ice  has  four  concentric  rings:  the  first 
is  Caina,  where  traitors  to  their  kindred  suffer  pen¬ 
alty;  the  second  is  Antenora,  for  traitors  to  their 
country;  the  third  is  Ptolomea,  for  traitors  to  their 
guests;  the  fourth  is  Judecca,  for  the  worst  of  all  sin¬ 
ners,  traitors  to  their  benefactors. 

0  A  mountain,  the  identity  of  which  has  not  been 
settled. 

7  One  of  the  Tuscan  Apennines. 


48  HELL 


even  at  the  edge.  And  as  the  frog  lies  to  croak 
with  muzzle  out  of  the  water,  what  time  the 
peasant  woman  often  dreams  of  gleaning,  so, 
livid  up  to  where  shame  appears,  were  the 
woeful  shades  within  the  ice,  setting  their 
teeth  to  the  note  of  the  stork.  Every  one  held 
his  face  turned  downward:  from  the  mouth 
the  cold  and  from  the  eyes  the  sad  heart  pro¬ 
vides  testimony  of  itself  among  them. 

40.  When  I  had  looked  round  awhile,  I 
turned  to  my  feet,  and  saw  two  so  close  that 
they  had  the  hair  of  their  heads  mixed  togeth¬ 
er.  “Tell  me,  ye  who  thus  press  tight  your 
breasts,”  said  I,  “who  are  ye?”  And  they  bent 
their  necks,  and  after  they  had  raised  their 
faces  to  me,  their  eyes,  which  before  were 
moist  only  within,  gushed  up  through  the  lids, 
and  the  frost  bound  the  tears  between  them, 
and  locked  them  up  again;  clamp  never  girt 
board  to  board  so  strongly:  and  thereupon 
they,  like  two  he-goats,  butted  one  another, 
such  anger  overcame  them. 

52.  And  one  who  had  lost  both  his  ears  by 
the  cold,  with  his  face  still  downward,  said  to 
me:  “Why  dost  thou  so  mirror  thyself  on  us? 
If  thou  wouldst  know  who  are  these  two,  the 
valley  whence  the  Bisenzio  descends  belonged 
to  their  father  Albert,  and  to  them.1  They  is¬ 
sued  from  one  body;  and  thou  mayst  search 
all  Caina,  and  thou  wilt  not  find  shade  more 
worthy  to  be  fixed  in  ice;  not  he  whose  breast 
and  shadow  were  broken  by  one  self-same 
blow  by  the  hand  of  Arthur;2  not  Focaccia;3 
not  this  one  who  so  encumbers  me  with  his 
head  that  I  see  no  further,  and  who  was  named 
Sassol  Mascheroni;4  if  thou  art  a  Tuscan,  thou 
now  knowest  well  who  he  was.  And  that  thou 

1  Counts  Napoleone  and  Alessandro  degli  Alberti; 
one  was  a  Ghibelline,  the  other  a  Guelf.  They  quar¬ 
relled  over  their  inheritance,  and  each  seeking  treach¬ 
erously  to  kill  the  other,  they  were  both  slain.  The 
Bisenzio  is  a  little  stream  which  falls  into  the  Arno 
some  ten  miles  west  of  Florence. 

2  Sir  Mordred,  the  usurping  treacherous  son  of  King 
Arthur.  At  Dover  they  met  in  arms,  and  Arthur  smote 
Mordred  with  such  a  thrust  of  his  spear  that,  on  its 
withdrawal,  a  ray  of  light  passed  through  the  wound. 

3  Focaccia  de’  Cancellieri  of  Pistoia.  Enraged  by  a 
trifling  offense  committed  by  a  boy,  his  cousin,  he 
cut  off  the  boy’s  hand,  and  then  treacherously  killed 
the  boy’s  father.  From  this  crime  sprang  the  feud 
of  the  Blacks  and  the  Whites,  which,  after  raging 
in  Pistoia,  was  introduced  into  Florence. 

4  Sassol  Mascheroni  murdered  his  nephew  for  an 

inheritance. 


mayst  not  put  me  to  more  speech,  know  that  I 
was  Camicion  de’  Pazzi,5  and  I  await  Carlino 
to  exculpate  me.”’ 

70.  Then  I  saw  a  thousand  faces  made  cur¬ 
rish  by  the  cold:  whence  a  shudder  comes  to 
me,  and  will  always  come,  at  frozen  pools. 

73.  And  while  we  were  going  toward  the 
centre  to  which  all  gravity  collects,  and  I  was 
trembling  in  the  eternal  chill,  whether  it  was 
will,  or  destiny,  or  fortune  I  know  not,  but, 
walking  among  the  heads,  I  struck  my  foot 
hard  in  the  face  of  one.  Wailing  he  railed  at 
me:  “Why  dost  thou  kick  me?  If  thou  dost 
not  come  to  increase  the  vengeance  of  Mont’ 
Aperti,  why  dost  thou  molest  me?”  And  I: 
“My  Master,  now  wait  here  for  me,  so  that  by 
means  of  this  one  I  may  free  me  from  a  doubt,6 
then  thou  shalt  make  as  much  haste  for  me  as 
thou  wilt.” 

85.  The  Leader  stopped;  and  I  said  to  that 
shade  who  was  still  bitterly  blaspheming: 
“Who  art  thou  that  thus  chidest  another?” 
“Now  who  art  thou,  that  goes  through  the 
Antenora,”7  he  answered,  “smiting  the  cheeks 
of  others,  so  that  if  thou  wert  alive,  it  would 
be  too  much?”  “I  am  alive,  and  it  may  be  dear 
to  thee,”  was  my  reply,  “if  thou  demandest 
fame,  that  I  set  thy  name  among  my  other 
notes.”  And  he  to  me:  “For  the  contrary  have 
I  desire;  take  thyself  hence,  and  give  me  no 
more  trouble,  for  ill  thou  knowest  to  flatter  on 
this  swamp.”  Then  I  took  him  by  the  hair  of 
the  nape,  and  said:  “It  shall  needs  be  that  thou 
name  thyself,  or  that  not  a  hair  remain  upon 
thee  here.”  Whereon  he  to  me,  “Though  thou 
strip  me  of  hair,  I  will  not  tell  thee  who  I  am, 
nor  show  it  to  thee,  though  thou  fall  a  thou¬ 
sand  times  upon  my  head.” 

103. 1  had  already  twisted  his  hair  in  my 

'Camicion  de’  Pazzi  is  reported  to  have  betrayed 
and  killed  his  kinsman  Ubertino.  Carlino  was  also 
a  Pazzi.  In  1302  the  castle  of  Piantravigne  was  held 
by  a  body  of  the  recently  exiled  Whites  of  Florence, 
with  them  Carlino.  The  castle  was  besieged  by  the 
Blacks,  and  Carlino  for  a  bribe  opened  its  gates  to 
them. 

0  Dante  suspects  that  the  shade  is  that  of  Bocca 
degli  Abati,  the  Florentine  traitor,  who,  at  the  battle 
of  Montaperti,  in  1260,  cut  off  the  hand  of  the  stand¬ 
ard-bearer  so  that  the  standard  fell,  and  the  Guelfs 
of  Florence,  disheartened,  were  routed  with  frightful 
slaughter.  See  Canto  x.  85-93. 

7  The  second  division  of  the  ninth  circle  named 
after  the  Trojan  who  was  said  to  have  betrayed  Troy. 


49 


CANTO 

hand,  and  had  pulled  out  more  than  one  tuft, 
he  barking,  with  his  eyes  kept  close  down, 
when  another  cried  out:  “What  ails  thee,  Boc- 
ca?  Is  it  not  enough  for  thee  to  make  a  noise 
with  thy  jaws,  but  thou  must  bark  too?  What 
devil  is  at  thee?”  “Now,”  said  I,  “I  do  net 
want  thee  to  speak,  accursed  traitor,  for  to  thy 
shame  will  I  carry  true  news  of  thee.”  “Be¬ 
gone,”  he  answered,  “and  tell  what  thou  wilt; 
but  be  not  silent,  if  thou  go  forth  from  here 
within,  about  him  who  now  had  his  tongue  so 
ready.  He  is  lamenting  here  the  silver  of  the 
French:  I  saw,  thou  canst  say,  him  of  Duera,1 
there  where  the  sinners  stand  cold.  Shouldst 
thou  be  asked  who  else  was  there,  thou  hast 
at  thy  side  him  of  the  Beccheria2  whose  gorge 
Florence  cut.  Gianni  de’  Soldanier'  I  think  is 
farther  on  with  Ganelon,4  and  Tribaldello" 
who  opened  Faenza  when  it  was  sleeping.” 

124.  We  had  now  departed  from  him,  when 
I  saw  two  frozen  in  one  hole,  so  that  the  head 
of  one  was  a  hood  for  the  other.  And  as  bread 
is  devoured  for  hunger,  so  the  upper  one  set 
his  teeth  upon  the  other  where  the  brain  joins 
with  the  nape.  Not  otherwise  Tydeus  gnawed 
for  despite  the  temples  of  Menalippus,6  than 
this  one  was  doing  to  the  skull  and  the  other 
parts.  “O  thou  that  by  so  bestial  a  sign  show- 
est  hatred  against  him  whom  thou  are  eating, 
tell  me  the  wherefore,”  said  I,  “with  this  com¬ 
pact,  that  if  thou  with  reason  complainest  of 
him,  I,  knowing  who  ye  are,  and  his  sin,  may 
yet  make  thee  quits  with  him  in  the  world 
above,  if  that  with  which  I  speak  be  not  dried 
up.” 

1  Buoso  da  Duera,  commanding  part  of  the  Ghi- 
belline  forces  in  Lombardy  opposed  to  the  troops  of 
Charles  of  Anjou,  on  their  way  to  conquer  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Naples,  in  1265,  was  believed  to  have  been 
bribed  to  let  them  pass  unmolested. 

2  Tesauro  de’  Beccheria,  Abbot  of  Vallombrosa, 
beheaded  by  the  Florentines  in  1258,  because  of  his 
treacherous  dealings  with  the  exiled  Ghibellines. 

3  A  Ghibelline  of  Florence  who  plotted  against  his 
own  party. 

1  Ganelon  caused  the  destruction  of  Charlemagne’s 
rear  guard  at  Roncesvalles,  where  Roland  and  Oliver 
perished.  Cf.  Chaucer,  The  Nun’s  Priest’s  Tale , 
4417-8. 

5  To  avenge  a  grudge  against  some  of  the  Ghibel¬ 
lines  of  Bologna,  who,  being  expelled,  had  found  ref¬ 
uge  in  Faenza,  in  1280,  Tribaldello  treacherously 
opened  the  gates  to  their  enemies,  who,  entering,  mas¬ 
sacred  many  of  them. 

0  Cf.  Aeschylus,  The  Seven  Against  Thebes, 
382  a. 


XXXIII 

CANTO  XXXIII 

1.  From  his  savage  repast  that  sinner  raised 
his  mouth,  wiping  it  with  the  hair  of  the  head 
that  he  had  spoiled  behind:  then  he  began: 
“Thou  wishest  that  I  should  renew  a  desper¬ 
ate  grief  which  oppresses  my  heart  already 
only  in  thinking,  ere  I  speak  of  it.  But,  if  my 
words  are  to  be  seed  that  may  bear  fruit  of  in¬ 
famy  for  the  traitor  whom  I  gnaw,  thou  shalt 
see  me  speak  and  weep  together.  I  know  not 
who  thou  art,  nor  by  what  mode  thou  art  come 
down  here,  but  Florentine  thou  seemest  to  me 
truly  when  I  hear  thee.  Thou  hast  to  know 
that  I  was  Count  Ugolino  and  this  one  the 
Archbishop  Ruggieri.1  Now  I  will  tell  thee 
why  I  am  such  a  neighbor.  That,  by  the  effect 
of  his  evil  thoughts,  I,  trusting  to  him,  was 
taken  and  then  put  to  death,  there  is  no  need 
to  tell;  but  what  thou  canst  not  have  heard, 
that  is,  how  cruel  my  death  was,  thou  shalt 
hear,  and  shalt  know  if  he  has  wronged  me. 

22.  “A  narrow  slit  in  the  mew,  which  from 
me  has  the  title  of  Hunger,  and  in  which  oth¬ 
ers  must  yet  be  shut  up,  had  already  shown  me 
through  its  opening  many  moons,  when  I  had 
the  bad  dream  which  rent  for  me  the  veil  of 
the  future. 

“This  one  appeared  to  me  master  and  lord, 
chasing  the  wolf  and  his  whelps  upon  the 
mountain  because  of  which  the  Pisans  can¬ 
not  see  Lucca.  With  lean,  eager,  and  trained 
hounds,  he  had  put  before  him  at  the  front 
Gualandi  with  Sismondi  and  with  Lanfran- 
chi."  After  short  course,  the  father  and  his  sons 
seemed  to  me  weary,  and  it  seemed  to  me  I 
saw  their  flanks  ripped  by  the  sharp  fangs. 

37.  “When  I  awoke  before  the  morrow,  I 

7  Ugolino  della  Gherardesca,  Count  of  Donoratico, 
was  for  many  years  the  most  powerful  citizen  of  Pisa. 
In  1285,  he  permitted  his  ambitious  grandson,  Nino 
dei  Visconti,  the  “noble  Judge  Nino”  ( Purgatory ,  viii. 
53),  to  share  in  the  rule  of  the  city.  Discord  soon  broke 
out  between  them;  each  had  his  partisans,  and  the 
Guelf  party  was  rent  by  this  division.  The  Ghibellines 
saw  their  opportunity.  Their  chief,  Archbishop  Rug- 
gieri  degli  Ubaldini,  pretending  friendship  with  Ugo¬ 
lino,  joined  forces  with  him  to  expel  his  grandson. 
The  strength  of  the  Guelfs  being  thus  weakened,  the 
Archbishop  turned  against  the  Count.  After  a  great 
fight  in  the  streets,  the  Count  and  two  of  his  sons  and 
two  of  his  grandsons  were  taken  prisoners.  They  were 
shut  up  in  the  tower  of  the  Gualandi  alia  Sette  Vie, 
and  there  were  starved  to  death. 

8  Three  of  the  chief  Ghibelline  families  of  Pisa. 


HELL 


heard  my  sons,  who  were  with  me,  wailing  in 
their  sleep,  and  asking  for  bread.  Truly  thou 
art  cruel  if  already  thou  dost  not  grieve,  at 
thought  of  that  which  my  heart  was  forebod¬ 
ing:  and  if  thou  dost  not  weep,  at  what  art 
thou  wont  to  weep?  They  were  now  awake, 
and  the  hour  was  drawing  near  at  which  food 
used  to  be  brought  to  us,  because  of  his  dream 
each  one  was  apprehensive.  And  I  heard  the 
door  below  of  the  horrible  tower  being  nailed 
up;  whereat  I  looked  on  the  faces  of  my  sons 
without  saying  a  word.  I  did  not  weep,  I  was 
so  turned  to  stone  within.  They  were  weeping; 
and  my  poor  little  Anselm  said,  ‘Thou  lookest 
so,  father,  what  ails  thee?’ 

52.  “I  shed  no  tear  for  that;  nor  did  I  an¬ 
swer  all  that  day,  nor  the  night  after,  until  the 
next  sun  came  forth  upon  the  world.  When  a 
little  ray  made  its  way  into  the  woeful  prison, 
and  I  discerned  by  their  four  faces  my  own 
very  aspect,  I  bit  both  my  hands  for  woe;  and 
they,  thinking  I  did  it  through  desire  of  eat¬ 
ing,  of  a  sudden  raised  themselves  up,  and 
said:  ‘Father,  it  will  be  far  less  pain  to  us  if 
thou  eat  of  us;  thou  didst  clothe  us  with  this 
wretched  flesh,  and  do  thou  strip  it  off.’  I 
quieted  me  then,  not  to  make  them  more  sad: 
that  day  and  the  next  we  all  stayed  dumb.  Ah, 
thou  hard  earth!  why  didst  thou  not  open? 
After  we  had  come  to  the  fourth  day,  Gaddo 
threw  himself  stretched  out  at  my  feet,  saying: 
‘My  father,  why  dost  thou  not  help  me?’  Here 
he  died:  aad,  even  as  thou  seest  me,  I  saw  the 
three  fall  one  by  one  between  the  fifth  day  and 
the  sixth;  then  I  betook  me,  already  blind,  to 
groping  over  each,  and  for  two  days  I  called 
them  after  they  were  dead:  then  fasting  was 
more  powerful  than  woe.” 

76.  When  he  had  said  this,  with  his  eyes 
twisted,  he  seized  again  the  wretched  skull 
with  his  teeth,  that  were  strong  as  a  dog’s  up¬ 
on  the  bone. 

79.  Ah  Pisa!  reproach  of  the  people  of  the 
fair  country  where  the  si  doth  sound,1  since  thy 
neighbors  are  slow  to  punish  thee,  let  Caprara 
and  Gorgona2  move  and  make  a  hedge  for 
Arno  at  its  mouth,  so  that  it  may  drown  every 
person  in  thee;  for  even  if  Count  Ugolino  had 

1  Italy,  whose  language  Dante  calls  il  volgare  di  si, 
the  common  tongue  in  which  si  is  the  word  for  yes 
( Convito ,  i.  10). 

2  Two  little  islands  near  the  mouth  of  the  Arno, 
on  whose  banks  Pisa  lies. 


repute  of  having  betrayed  thee  in  thy  strong¬ 
holds,  thou  oughtest  not  to  have  set  his  sons 
on  such  a  cross.  Their  young  age,  thou  mod¬ 
ern  Thebes,  made  Uguccione  and  II  Brigata 
innocent,  and  the  other  two  that  my  song 
names  above. 

91.  We  passed  onward  to  where  the  ice 
roughly  enswathes  another  folk,  not  turned 
downward,  but  all  reversed.  The  very  weep¬ 
ing  allows  not  weeping  there,  and  the  grief, 
which  finds  a  barrier  on  the  eyes,  turns  inward 
to  increase  the  anguish;  for  the  first  tears  form 
a  block,  and  like  a  visor  of  crystal  fill  all  the 
cup  beneath  the  eyebrow. 

100.  And  although,  as  in  a  callus,  all  feeling, 
because  of  the  cold,  had  ceased  to  abide  in  my 
face,  it  now  seemed  to  me  I  felt  some  wind, 
wherefore  I:  “My  Master,  who  moves  this? 
Is  not  every  vapor  quenched  here  below?” 
Whereon  he  to  me,  “Speedily  shalt  thou  be 
where  thine  eye,  beholding  the  cause  that  rains 
down  the  blast,  shall  make  answer  to  thee  of 
this.” 

109.  Aad  one  of  the  wretches  of  the  cold 
crust  cried  out  to  us:  “O  souls  so  cruel  that  the 
last  station  has  been  given  to  you,  lift  from  my 
eyes  the  hard  veils,  so  that,  before  the  weeping 
recongeal,  I  may  vent  a  little  the  woe  which 
swells  my  heart.”  Wherefore  I  to  him:  “If 
thou  wishest  that  I  succor  thee,  tell  me  who 
thou  art,  and  if  I  relieve  thee  not,  may  I  have 
to  go  to  the  bottom  of  the  ice.”  He  replied 
then:  “I  am  Friar  Alberigo;3  I  am  he  of  the 
fruits  of  the  bad  garden,  who  here  get  back  a 
date  for  a  fig.”4  “Oh!”  said  I  to  him,  “art  thou 
then  dead  already?” 

122.  And  he  to  me,  “How  my  body  may 
fare  in  the  world  above  I  have  no  knowledge. 
Such  vantage  hath  this  Ptolomea5  that  often¬ 
times  the  soul  falls  down  here  before  Atropos 

8  Alberigo  de’  Manfredi  of  Faenza,  one  of  the  Jovial 
Friars  (Canto  xxiii.  103).  Having  received  a  blow 
from  his  younger  brother  Manfred,  he  pretended  to 
forgive  it,  and  invited  him  and  his  son  to  a  feast. 
Toward  the  end  of  the  meal  he  gave  a  preconcerted 
signal  by  calling  out:  “Bring  the  fruit,”  upon  which 
his  emissaries  rushed  in  and  killed  the  two  guests. 

4  Am  paid  with  overplus  for  my  sin;  a  fig  is  the 
cheapest  of  Tuscan  fruits;  the  imported  date  is  more 
costly. 

5  The  third  ring  of  ice,  named  for  that  Ptolemy, 
Captain  of  Jericho,  who,  having  invited  them  to  a 
banquet,  treacherously  slew  his  father-in-law,  the  high- 
priest  Simon  and  his  two  sons.  I  Maccabees,  16. 
11-16.) 


CANTO 

has  given  motion  to  it.1  And  that  thou  mayst 
the  more  willingly  scrape  the  glassy  tears  from 
my  face,  know  that  soon  as  the  soul  betrays, 
as  I  did,  its  body  is  taken  from  it  by  a  demon, 
who  thereafter  governs  it  until  its  time  be  all 
revolved.  It  falls  headlong  into  such  cistern  as 
this,  and  perhaps  the  body  of  the  shade  that  is 
wintering  here  behind  me  still  appears  above. 
Thou  shouldst  know  him  if  thou  comest  down 
but  now;  he  is  Ser  Branca  d’  Oria,2  and  many 
years  have  passed  since  he  was  thus  shut  up.” 
“I  believe,”  said  I  to  him,  “that  thou  art  de¬ 
ceiving  me;  for  Branca  d’  Oria  is  not  yet  dead, 
and  he  eats,  and  drinks,  and  sleeps,  and  puts 
on  clothes.”  “In  the  ditch  of  the  Malebranche 
above,”  he  said,  “there  where  the  sticky  pitch 
is  boiling,  Michel  Zanche3  had  not  yet  arrived, 
when  this  one  left  a  devil  in  his  stead  in  his 
own  body,  and  in  that  of  one  of  his  next  kin, 
who  committed  the  treachery  together  with 
him.  But  now  stretch  hither  thy  hand;  open 
my  eyes  for  me.”  And  I  did  not  open  them  for 
him,  and  to  be  churlish  to  him  was  courtesy.4 

15 1.  Ah  Genoese!  men  strange  to  all  moral¬ 
ity  and  full  of  all  corruption,  why  are  ye  not 
scattered  from  the  world?  For  with  the  worst 
spirit  of  Romagna5  I  found  one  of  you,  such 
that  for  his  deeds  he  is  already  in  soul  bathed 
in  Cocytus,  and  in  body  he  appears  still  alive 
on  earth. 

CANTO  XXXIV 

i.“Vexilla  regis  prodeunt  inferm 8  toward  us; 
therefore  look  forward,”  said  my  Master;  “see 
if  thou  discern  him.”  As  when  a  thick  fog 
breathes,  or  when  our  hemisphere  darkens  to 
night,  a  mill  which  the  wind  is  turning  seems 
from  afar,  such  a  structure  it  seemed  to  me 
that  I  then  saw. 

8.  Then,  because  of  the  wind,  I  drew  me  be¬ 
hind  my  Leader;  for  no  other  shelter  was 
there.  I  was  now  (and  with  fear  I  put  it  into 
verse),  there  where  the  shades  were  wholly 
covered,  and  showed  through  like  a  straw  in 
glass.  Some  are  lying  down;  some  are  upright, 

1Cf.  Psalms,  55.  15.  Also  see  Canto  xi.  52-63,  supra. 

2  A  member  of  the  famous  Genoese  house  of  Doria; 
murderer,  about  1290,  of  his  father-in-law,  Michel 
Zanche,  Governor  of  Logodoro,  in  Sardinia. 

3  See  Canto  xxii.  88. 

4  See  Aquinas.  Summa  Theologica,  Part  III,  Suppl., 
Q  94,  A2. 

6  Friar  Alberigo. 

G  “The  banners  of  the  King  of  Hell  advance”: 
Vexilla  regis  prodeunt  are  the  first  words  of  a  hymn. 


XXXIV  51 

this  one  with  his  head,  and  that  with  his  soles 
uppermost;  another,  like  a  bow,  bends  his  face 
to  his  feet. 

16.  When  we  had  gone  so  far  forward  that 
it  pleased  my  Master  to  show  me  the  creature 
which  had  the  fair  semblance,  he  took  himself 
from  before  me  and  made  me  stop,  saying: 
“Lo  Dis!  and  lo  the  place  where  it  is  needful 
that  thou  arm  thyself  with  fortitude!”  How 
frozen  and  faint  I  then  became,  ask  it  not, 
Reader,  for  I  do  not  write  it,  because  all  speech 
would  be  little.  I  did  not  die,  and  did  not  re¬ 
main  alive:  think  now  for  thyself,  if  thou  hast 
a  grain  of  wit,  what  I  became,  deprived  of  one 
and  the  other. 

28.  The  emperor  of  the  woeful  realm  issued 
forth  from  the  ice  from  the  middle  of  his 
breast;  and  I  compare  better  with  a  giant,  than 
the  giants  do  with  his  arms.  See  now  how 
great  must  be  that  whole  which  is  conformed 
to  such  a  part.  If  he  was  as  fair  as  he  now  is 
foul,  and  lifted  up  his  brows  against  his  Mak¬ 
er,  well  should  all  tribulation  proceed  from 
him.  Oh  how  great  a  marvel  it  seemed  to  me, 
when  I  saw  three  faces  on  his  head!  one  in 
front,  and  that  was  crimson;  the  others  were 
two,  which  were  adjoined  to  this  above  the 
very  middle  of  each  shoulder,  and  they  were 
joined  up  to  the  place  of  the  crest;  and  the 
right  seemed  between  white  and  yellow,  the 
left  was  such  in  appearance  as  those  who  come 
from  there  whence  the  Nile  descends.'  Beneath 
each  came  forth  two  great  wings,  of  size  be¬ 
fitting  so  great  a  bird;  sails  of  the  sea  I  never 
saw  such.  They  had  no  feathers,  but  their 
fashion  was  of  a  bat;  and  he  was  flapping  them 
so  that  three  winds  were  proceeding  from  him, 
whereby  Cocytus  was  all  congealed.  With  six 
eyes  he  was  weeping,  and  over  three  chins 
were  trickling  the  tears  and  bloody  drivel.  At 
each  mouth  he  was  crushing  a  sinner  with  his 
teeth,  in  manner  of  a  heckle,  so  that  he  thus 
was  making  three  of  them  woeful.  To  the  one 
in  front  the  biting  was  nothing  to  the  clawing, 
whereby  sometimes  his  back  remained  all 
stripped  of  the  skin. 

61.  “That  soul  up  there  which  has  the  great- 

TThe  three  faces  exhibit  the  devilish  counterpart 
of  the  attributes  of  the  three  persons  of  the  Godhead, 
Impotence,  Ignorance,  and  Hate  (Cf.  Canto  iii.  5,  6); 
Hate  scarlet  with  rage,  Ignorance  black  with  its  own 
darkness,  Impotence  pale  yellow  with  jealousy  and 
envy. 


HELL 


est  punishment,”  said  the  Master,  “is  Judas 
Iscariot,  who  has  his  head  within,  and  plies 
his  legs  outside.  Of  the  other  two  who  have 
their  heads  downwards,  he  who  hangs  from 
the  black  muzzle  is  Brutus;  see  how  he  writhes 
and  says  not  a  word;  and  the  other  is  Cassius, 
who  seems  so  large-limbed.  But  the  night  is 
rising  again;  and  now  we  must  depart,  for  we 
have  seen  the  whole.” 

70.  As  was  his  pleasure,  I  clasped  his  neck, 
and  he  took  advantage  of  time  and  place,  and 
when  the  wings  were  wide  opened  he  caught 
hold  on  the  shaggy  flanks;  down  from  shag  to 
shag  he  then  descended  between  the  matted 
hair  and  the  frozen  crusts.  When  we  were 
where  the  thigh  turns  just  on  the  thick  of  the 
haunch,  my  Leader,  with  effort  and  stress  of 
breath,  turned  his  head  to  where  he  had  had 
his  shanks,  and  grappled  to  the  hair  like  one 
who  mounts,  so  that  I  believed  we  were  re¬ 
turning  again  to  hell. 

82.  “Cling  fast  hold,”  said  the  Master,  pant¬ 
ing  like  one  weary,  “for  by  such  stairs  must  we 
depart  from  so  great  evil.”  Then  he  came 
forth  through  the  cleft  of  a  rock,  and  placed 
me  upon  its  edge  to  sit;  then  stretched  toward 
me  his  cautious  step. 

88. 1  raised  my  eyes,  and  thought  to  see  Lu¬ 
cifer  as  I  had  left  him,  and  I  saw  him  holding 
his  legs  upward;  and  if  I  then  became  per¬ 
plexed,  let  the  dull  folk  suppose  it,  who  see  not 
what  that  point  is  which  I  had  passed.3 

94.  “Rise  up  on  foot,”  said  the  Master;  “the 
way  is  long  and  the  road  is  difficult,  and  al¬ 
ready  the  sun  returns  to  mid-tierce.”* 2 

97.  It  was  no  hallway  of  a  palace  where  we 
were,  but  a  natural  dungeon  which  had  a  bad 
floor,  and  lack  of  light.  “Before  I  tear  myself 
from  the  Abyss,”  said  I  when  I  had  risen  up, 
“my  Master,  talk  a  little  with  me  to  draw  me 

1  The  centre  of  the  universe;  when  Virgil  had  turned 
upon  the  haunch  of  Lucifer,  the  passage  had  been 
made  from  one  hemisphere  of  the  earth — the  inhab¬ 
ited  and  known  hemisphere — to  the  other  where  no 
living  men  dwell,  and  where  the  only  land  is  the 
Mountain  of  Purgatory.  In  changing  one  hemisphere 
for  the  other  there  is  a  change  of  time  of  twelve  hours, 
from  about  sunset  to  about  sunrise.  A  second  Saturday 
morning  begins  for  the  poets,  and  they  pass  nearly 
as  long  a  time  as  they  have  been  in  Hell,  that  is, 
twenty-four  hours,  in  traversing  the  long  and  hard 
way  that  leads  to  the  surface  of  the  hemisphere  into 
which  they  have  just  entered. 

2  Tierce  is  the  name  given  to  the  first  three  hours 


out  of  error.  Where  is  the  ice?  and  this  one, 
how  is  he  fixed  thus  upside  down?  and  how 
in  such  short  while  has  the  sun  made  transit 
from  evening  to  morning?” 

106.  And  he  to  me:  “Thou  imaginest  that 
thou  still  art  on  the  other  side  of  the  centre, 
where  I  laid  hold  on  the  hair  of  the  wicked 
Worm  that  pierces  the  world.  On  that  side 
thou  wast  so  long  as  I  descended;  when  I 
turned,  thou  didst  pass  the  point  to  which 
from  every  part  all  weighty  things  are  drawn; 
and  thou  art  now  arrived  beneath  the  hemi¬ 
sphere  which  is  opposite  to  that  which  the 
great  dry  land  covers,  and  beneath  whose  ze¬ 
nith  the  Man  was  slain  who  was  born  and  lived 
without  sin:  thou  hast  thy  feet  upon  a  little 
circle  which  forms  the  other  face  of  the  Judec- 
ca.  Here  it  is  morning  when  it  is  evening  there; 
and  this  one  who  made  a  ladder  for  us  with 
his  hair  is  still  fixed  even  as  he  was  before.  On 
this  side  he  fell  down  from  heaven,  and  the 
earth,  which  before  was  spread  out  on  this  side, 
through  fear  of  him  made  of  the  sea  a  veil, 
and  came  to  our  hemisphere;  and  perhaps  to 
fly  from  him  that  land  which  appears  on  this 
side  left  here  this  vacant  space  and  ran  back 
upward.”3 

127.  A  place  is  there  below,  stretching  as  far 
from  Beelzebub  as  his  tomb  extends,  which  is 
not  known  by  sight,  but  by  the  sound  of  a 
rivulet  which  descends  here  along  the  hollow 
of  a  rock  that  it  has  gnawed  with  its  winding 
and  gently  sloping  course.4  My  Leader  and  I 
entered  by  that  hidden  road,  to  return  into  the 
bright  world;  and  without  care  to  have  any 
repose,  we  mounted  up,  he  first  and  I  second, 
so  far  that  through  a  round  opening  I  saw 
some  of  the  beautiful  things  which  Heaven 
bears,  and  thence  we  issued  forth  again  to  see 
the  stars. 

after  sunrise.  Mid-tierce  consequently  at  the  equinox 

is  about  half-past  seven  o’clock. 

3  Dante’s  conception  appears  to  be,  that  at  the  Cre¬ 
ation  the  southern  hemisphere  of  the  Earth  was  occu¬ 
pied  by  the  dry  land,  while  the  northern  was  a  hemi¬ 
sphere  of  waters,  and  that,  at  the  fall  of  Lucifer  on  the 
southern  hemisphere,  the  land  recoiled  in  horror  to  the 
northern,  forcing  the  waters  of  the  latter  to  fill  the 
place  which  it  left  void.  At  the  same  moment  the 
interior  of  the  globe  into  which  Lucifer  was  hurled 
fled  from  him,  and  rising,  amid  the  waters  of  the 
southern  hemisphere,  formed  the  solitary  Mount  of 
Purgatory. 

4  The  streamlet  of  sin  from  Purgatory  which  finds 
its  way  back  to  Satan. 


PURGATORY 


CANTO  I 

i.  To  run  over  better  waters  the  little  vessel  of 
my  genius  now  hoists  her  sails,  as  she  leaves 
behind  her  a  sea  so  cruel;  and  I  will  sing  of 
that  second  realm  where  the  human  spirit  is 
purified,  and  becomes  worthy  to  ascend  to 
heaven. 

7.  But  here  let  dead  poesy  rise  again,  O  holy 
Muses,  since  I  am  yours,  and  here  let  Calliope 
somewhat  mount  up,  accompanying  my  song 
with  that  sound  of  which  the  wretched  Picae 
felt  the  stroke  such  that  they  despaired  of  par¬ 
don.1 

A  sweet  color  of  oriental  sapphire,  which 
was  gathering  in  the  serene  aspect  of  the  mid 
sky,  pure  even  to  the  first  circle,2  renewed  de¬ 
light  to  my  eyes,  soon  as  I  issued  forth  from 
the  dead  air  which  had  afflicted  my  eyes  and 
my  breast.  The  fair  planet  which  incites  to 
love  was  making  all  the  Orient  to  smile,  veil¬ 
ing  the  Fishes  that  were  in  her  train.  I  turned 
me  to  the  right  hand,  and  gave  heed  to  the 
other  pole,  and  saw  four  stars,  never  seen  save 
by  the  first  people.3  The  heavens  appeared  to 
rejoice  in  their  flamelets.  O  widowed  northern 
region,  since  thou  art  deprived  of  beholding 
these! 

28.  When  I  had  withdrawn  from  regarding 
them,  turning  me  a  little  to  the  other  pole, 
there  whence  the  Wain  had  already  disap¬ 
peared,  I  saw  close  to  me  an  old  man  alone,  in 
aspect  worthy  of  so  much  reverence  that  no 
son  owes  more  to  his  father.4  He  wore  his 
beard  long  and  mingled  with  white  hair,  like 
his  locks,  of  which  a  double  list  fell  upon  his 

1  The  nine  daughters  of  Pieros  of  Emathia,  who, 
contending  in  song  with  the  Muses,  were  for  their 
presumption  changed  to  magpies. 

2  The  horizon. 

3  Purgatory  is  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  and 
“the  other”  is  the  South  pole.  The  four  stars  are  the 
symbols  of  the  cardinal  virtues — Prudence,  Temper¬ 
ance,  Fortitude  and  Justice. 

4  Cato.  Cf.  Aeneid,  viii.  670. 


breast.  The  rays  of  the  four  holy  stars  so 
adorned  his  face  with  light,  that  I  saw  him,  as 
though  the  sun  had  been  in  front. 

40.  “Who  are  ye  that,  counter  to  the  blind 
stream,  have  fled  from  the  eternal  prison?” 
said  he,  moving  those  venerable  plumes.  “Who 
has  guided  you?  Or  who  was  a  lamp  to  you, 
issuing  forth  from  the  deep  night  which  ever 
makes  the  infernal  valley  black?  Are  the  laws 
of  the  abyss  thus  broken?  or  is  a  new  design 
changed  in  heaven  that,  being  damned,  ye 
come  to  my  rocks?” 

49.  My  Leader  then  took  hold  of  me,  and 
with  words,  and  with  hands,  and  with  signs, 
controlled  to  reverence  my  knees  and  brow. 
Then  he  answered  him:  “Of  myself  I  came 
not;  a  Lady  descended  from  Heaven,  by  reason 
of  whose  prayers  I  succored  this  man  with  my 
company.  But  since  it  is  thy  will  that  more  of 
our  condition  be  unfolded  to  thee,  how  it  truly 
is,  mine  cannot  be  that  this  be  denied  to  thee. 
This  man  has  not  yet  seen  his  last  evening, 
but  through  his  folly  was  so  near  thereto  that 
there  was  very  little  time  to  turn.  Even  as  I 
have  said,  I  was  sent  to  him  to  rescue  him,  and 
there  was  no  other  way  than  this,  along  which 
I  have  set  myself.  I  have  shown  to  him  all  the 
guilty  people;  and  now  I  intend  to  show  him 
those  spirits  that  purge  themselves  under  thy 
ward.  How  I  have  brought  him,  it  would  be 
long  to  tell  thee;  from  on  high  descends  power 
which  aids  me  to  lead  him  to  see  thee  and  to 
hear  thee.  Now  may  it  please  thee  to  look 
graciously  upon  his  coming.  He  goes  seeking 
liberty,3  which  is  so  dear,  as  he  knows  who  for 
it  renounces  life. 

73.  “This  thou  knowest;  for  death  for  its 
sake  was  not  bitter  to  thee  in  Utica,  where 
thou  didst  leave  the  vesture  which  on  the  great 
day  shall  be  so  bright.  The  eternal  edicts  are 
not  violated  by  us,  for  this  one  is  alive,  and 

5  Cf.  Romans,  8.  21.  See  the  last  words  of  Virgil  to 
Dante,  at  the  end  of  Canto  xxvii. 


53 


PURGATORY 


Minos  does  not  bind  me;  but  I  am  of  the  circle 
where  are  the  chaste  eyes  of  thy  Marcia,  who 
in  her  look  still  prays  thee,  O  holy  breast,  that 
for  thine  own  thou  hold  her.  For  her  love, 
then,  incline  thyself  to  us;  allow  us  to  go  on 
through  thy  seven  realms:1  I  will  report  this 
grace  from  thee  to  her,  if  thou  deignest  to  be 
mentioned  there  below.” 

85.  “Marcia  so  pleased  my  eyes  while  I  was 
on  earth,”  said  he  then,  “that  whatsoever  grace 
she  wished  from  me,  I  did;  now  that  she 
dwells  on  the  other  side  of  the  evil  stream,2  she 
can  move  me  no  more,  by  that  law  which  was 
made  when  thence  I  issued  forth.  But  if  a  Lady 
of  Heaven  move  and  direct  thee,  as  thou  say- 
est,  there  is  no  need  of  flatteries;  it  may  well 
suffice  thee  that  thou  ask  me  for  her  sake.  Go 
then,  and  see  thou  gird  this  one  with  a  smooth 
rush,  and  that  thou  wash  his  face  so  that  thou 
cleanse  it  from  all  stain,  for  it  were  not  befit¬ 
ting  to  go  with  eye  dimmed  by  any  cloud  be¬ 
fore  the  first  minister  that  is  of  those  of  Para¬ 
dise.  This  little  island,  round  about  at  its  very 
base,  down  there  yonder  where  the  wave  beats 
it,  bears  rushes  upon  its  soft  ooze.  No  plant  of 
other  kind,  that  puts  forth  leaf  or  grows  hard, 
can  there  have  life,  because  it  yields  not  to  the 
shocks.  Thereafter  let  not  your  return  be  this 
way;  the  Sun,  which  now  is  rising,  will  show 
you  how  to  take  the  mountain  by  easier  as¬ 
cent.” 

109.  On  this  he  disappeared,  and  I  rose  up, 
without  speaking,  and  drew  me  quite  close  to 
my  Leader,  and  bent  my  eyes  on  him.  He  be¬ 
gan:  “Son,  follow  my  steps;  let  us  turn  back, 
for  from  here  this  plain  slopes  to  its  low 
bouads.” 

1 1 5.  The  dawn  was  vanquishing  the  matin 
hour,  which  was  flying  before  it,  so  that  from 
afar  I  discerned  the  trembling  of  the  sea.  We 
went  along  over  the  solitary  plain  like  a  man 
who  turns  to  the  road  which  he  has  lost,  and, 
till  he  find  it,  seems  to  himself  to  go  in  vain. 
When  we  were  where  the  dew  contends  with 
the  sun,  and,  through  being  in  a  place  where 
there  is  shade,  is  little  dispersed,  my  Master 
softly  placed  both  his  hands  outspread  upon 
the  grass;  whereon  I,  who  was  aware  of  his 
intent,  stretched  toward  him  my  tearful  cheeks: 

1  The  seven  circles  of  Purgatory. 

2  Acheron. 


then  he  wholly  uncovered  on  me  that  color 
which  hell  had  concealed. 

130.  We  came,  ’then,  to  the  desert  shore 
which  never  saw  man  navigate  its  waters  who 
afterwards  had  experience  of  return.  Here  he 
girt  me,  even  as  pleased  the  other.  O  marvel! 
that  such  as  he  culled  the  humble  plant,  such  it 
instantly  sprang  up  again  there  whence  he  had 
plucked  it. 

CANTO  II 

1.  The  sun  had  now  reached  the  horizon 
whose  meridian  circle  covers  Jerusalem  with 
its  highest  point;  and  the  night  wh;ch  circles 
opposite  to  him  was  issuing  forth  from  the 
Ganges  with  the  Scales  which  fall  from  her 
hand  when  she  exceeds;3  so  that  where  I  was 
the  white  and  red  cheeks  of  the  beautiful  Au¬ 
rora  were  becoming  orange  through  too  much 
age. 

10.  We  were  still  alongside  the  sea,  like  folk 
who  are  thinking  of  their  road,  who  go  in 
heart  and  in  body  linger;  and  lo!  as,  at  ap¬ 
proach  of  the  morning,  Mars  glows  ruddy 
through  the  dense  vapors,  down  in  the  west 
above  the  ocean  floor,  such  appeared  to  me, — 
so  may  I  again  behold  it! — a  light  along  the 
sea  coming  so  swiftly  that  no  flight  equals  its 
motion.  From  which  when  I  had  a  little  with¬ 
drawn  my  eye  to  ask  my  Leader,  again  I  saw 
it,  brighter  become  and  larger.  Then  on  each 
side  of  it  appeared  to  me  a  something,  I  knew 
not  what,  white,  and  beneath,  little  by  little, 
another  came  forth  from  it. 

25.  My  Master  still  said  not  a  word,  until  the 
first  white  things  appeared  as  wings;  then, 
when  he  clearly  recognized  the  pilot,  he  cried 
out:  “Mind,  mind  thou  bend  thy  knees:  Lo! 
the  Angel  of  God:  fold  thy  hands:  henceforth 
shalt  thou  see  such  officials.  See  how  he  scorns 
human  instruments,  so  that  he  wills  not  oar, 
or  other  sail  than  his  own  wings,  between  such 
distant  shores.  See,  how  he  holds  them  straight 
toward  heaven,  stirring  the  air  with  his  eternal 
feathers,  which  are  not  changed  like  mortal 
hair.” 

3  Purgatory  and  Jerusalem  are  antipodal,  and  the 
Ganges  or  India  was  arbitrarily  assumed  to  be  their 
common  horizon,  the  Western  horizon  to  the  one,  the 
Eastern  to  the  other.  The  night  is  here  taken  as  the 
point  of  the  heavens  opposite  the  sun,  and  the  sun 
being  in  Aries,  the  night  is  in  Libra. 


CANTO  III 


37 .  Then,  as  the  Bird  Divine  came  more  and 
more  toward  us,  the  brighter  he  appeared;  so 
that  my  eye  endured  him  not  near  by,  but  I 
bent  it  down :  and  he  came  on  to  the  shore  with 
a  little  vessel,  swift  and  light,  so  that  the  water 
swallowed  naught  of  it.  At  the  stern  stood  the 
Celestial  Pilot,  such  that  he  seemed  inscribed 
among  the  blest;  and  more  than  a  hundred 
spirits  sat  within.  “In  exitu  Israel  de  Egypto”1 
they  all  were  singing  together  with  one  voice, 
with  whatso  of  that  psalm  is  after  written.  Then 
he  made  them  the  sign  of  the  Holy  Cross; 
whereon  they  all  threw  themselves  upon  the 
strand;  and  he  went  away  swift  as  he  had 
come. 

52.  The  crowd  which  remained  there  seemed 
strange  to  the  place,  gazing  round  about, 
like  one  who  makes  essay  of  new  things.  The 
Sun,  who  with  his  bright  arrows  had  chased 
the  Capricorn  from  mid-heaven,  was  shooting 
forth  the  day  on  every  side,  when  the  new  peo¬ 
ple  raised  their  brows  toward  us,  saying  to  us: 
“If  ye  know,  show  us  the  way  to  go  to  the 
mountain.”  And  Virgil  answered:  “Ye  per¬ 
haps  believe  that  we  are  experienced  of  this 
place,  but  we  are  pilgrims,  even  as  ye  are.  We 
came  just  now,  a  little  while  before  you,  by  an¬ 
other  way,  which  was  so  rough  and  difficult 
that  the  ascent  henceforth  will  seem  play  to 
us.” 

67.  The  souls,  who  by  my  breathing  had  be¬ 
come  aware  that  I  was  still  alive,  marvelling, 
became  deadly  pale.  And  as  to  hear  news  the 
folk  press  to  a  messenger  who  bears  an  olive 
branch,  and  no  one  shows  himself  shy  of 
crowding,  so  all  of  those  fortunate  souls  fas¬ 
tened  themselves  on  my  countenance,  as  if  for¬ 
getting  to  go  to  make  themselves  fair. 

76. 1  saw  one  of  them  drawing  forward  to 
embrace  me  with  so  great  affection,  that  it 
moved  me  to  do  the  like.  O  shades,  empty  save 
in  aspect!  Three  times  I  clasped  my  hands  be¬ 
hind  it,  and  as  often  returned  with  them  unto 
my  breast.  With  wonder,  I  believe,  I  painted 
me;  whereat  the  shade  smiled  and  drew  back, 
and  I,  following  it,  pressed  forward.  Gently  it 
said,  that  I  should  pause;  then  I  knew  who  it 
was,  and  I  prayed  it  that  it  would  stay  to  speak 
with  me  a  little.  It  replied  to  me:  “Even  as  I 
loved  thee  in  the  mortal  body,  so  loosed  from 

1“When  Israel  went  out  of  Egypt.”  Psalms,  114. 


it  I  love  thee;  therefore  I  stay;  but  wherefore 
art  thou  going?” 

91.  “My  Casella,  in  order  to  return  another 
time  to  this  place  where  I  am,  do  I  make  this 
journey,”  said  I,  “but  from  thee  how  has  so 
much  time  been  taken?” 

94.  And  he  to  me:  “No  wrong  has  been  done 
me  if  he  who  takes  both  when  and  whom  it 
pleases  him  has  many  times  denied  to  me  this 
passage;  for  of  a  just  will  his  own  is  made.  For 
three  months,  indeed,  he  has  taken  with  all 
peace  whoso  has  wished  to  enter.  Wherefore  I, 
who  had  now  turned  to  the  seashore  where  the 
water  of  Tiber  becomes  salt,  was  benignantly 
received  by  him.  To  that  outlet  has  he  now  di¬ 
rected  his  wing,  because  always  those  assem¬ 
ble  there  who  towards  Acheron  do  not  de¬ 
scend.” 

106.  And  I:  “If  a  new  law  take  not  from 
thee  memory  or  practice  of  the  song  of  love 
which  was  wont  to  quiet  all  my  longings,  may 
it  please  thee  therewith  somewhat  to  comfort 
my  soul,  which  coming  hither  with  its  body  is 
so  wearied.” 

1 12.  “Love  which  in  my  mind  discourses 
with  me,”2  he  then  began  so  sweetly,  that  the 
sweetness  still  within  me  sounds.  My  Master, 
and  I,  and  that  folk  who  were  with  him,  ap¬ 
peared  so  content  as  if  naught  else  could  touch 
the  mind  of  any. 

1 18.  We  were  all  fast  and  attentive  to  his 
notes;  and  lo!  the  venerable  old  man  crying: 
“What  is  this,  ye  laggard  spirits?  What  negli¬ 
gence,  what  stay  is  this?  Run  to  the  mountain 
to  strip  off  the  slough  which  lets  not  God  be 
manifest  to  you.” 

124.  As,  when  picking  up  grain  or  tares,  the 
doves  assembled  at  their  feeding,  quiet,  with¬ 
out  display  of  their  wonted  pride,  if  aught  ap¬ 
pear  of  which  they  are  afraid,  suddenly  let  the 
food  alone,  because  they  are  assailed  by  a  great¬ 
er  care,  so  I  saw  that  fresh  troop  leave  the  song, 
and  go  towards  the  hillside,  like  one  that  goes, 
but  knows  not  where  he  may  come  out:  nor 
was  our  departure  less  speedy. 

CANTO  III 

i.  Although  the  sudden  flight  had  scattered 
them  over  the  plain,  turned  to  the  mount 
whereto  reason  spurs  us,  I  drew  up  close  to  my 

3  The  first  verse  of  a  canzone  by  Dante. 


56  PURGATORY 


trusty  companion.  And  how  should  I  have  run 
without  him?  Who  would  have  led  me  up 
over  the  mountain?  He  seemed  to  me  of  his 
own  self  remorseful.  O  conscience,  upright  and 
stainless,  how  bitter  a  sting  to  thee  is  little 
fault! 

io.  When  his  feet  left  the  haste  which  mars 
the  dignity  of  every  act,  my  mind,  which  at 
first  had  been  restrained,  let  loose  its  attention, 
as  though  eager,  and  I  set  my  face  against  the 
hill  which  rises  highest  towards  heaven  from 
the  sea.  The  sun,  which  behind  was  flaming 
ruddy,  was  broken  in  front  of  me  by  the  figure 
which  the  staying  of  its  rays  upon  me  formed. 
When  I  saw  the  ground  darkened  only  in 
front  of  me,  I  turned  me  to  one  side  with  fear 
of  having  been  abandoned:  and  my  Comfort, 
turning  wholly  round  to  me,  began  to  say: 

24.  “Why  dost  thou  still  distrust?  Dost  thou 
not  believe  me  with  thee,  and  that  I  guide 
thee?  It  is  already  evening  there  where  the 
body  is  buried  within  which  I  cast  a  shadow; 
Naples  holds  it,  and  from  Brundusium  it  was 
taken:  if  in  front  of  me  there  is  no  shadow 
now,  marvel  not  more  than  at  the  heavens,  of 
which  the  one  obstructs  not  the  other’s  radi¬ 
ance.1 2  The  Power,  which  wills  not  that  how  it 
acts  be  revealed  to  us,  disposes  bodies  like  this 
to  suffer  torments  both  of  heat  and  cold.  Mad 
is  he  who  hopes  that  our  reason  can  traverse 
the  infinite  way  which  One  Substance  in  Three 
Persons  holds.  Be  content,  O  human  race,  with 
the  quia?  for  if  ye  had  been  able  to  see  every¬ 
thing,  there  had  been  no  need  for  Mary  to  bear 
child:  and  ye  have  seen  desiring  fruitlessly 
men  such  that  their  desire  would  have  been 
quieted,  which  is  given  them  eternally  for  a 
grief.  I  speak  of  Aristotle  and  of  Plato,  and  of 
many  others.”  And  here  he  bowed  his  front, 
and  said  no  more,  and  remained  disturbed. 

46.  We  had  come,  meanwhile,  to  the  foot  of 
the  mountain;  here  we  found  the  cliff  so  steep 
that  the  legs  would  there  be  nimble  in  vain. 
Between  Lerici  and  Turbia3  the  most  deserted, 
the  most  secluded  path  is  a  stairway  easy  and 
open,  compared  with  that.  “Now  who  knows 
on  which  hand  the  hillside  slopes,”  said  my 

1  The  nine  concentric  heavens  are  transparent. 

2  That  is,  be  content  to  know  that  the  thing  is. 

3  Lerici  and  Turbia  are  at  the  two  ends  of  the 

Riviera. 


Master,  staying  his  step,  “so  that  one  who  goes 
without  wings  may  ascend?” 

55.  And  while  he  was  holding  his  face  bent 
down,  and  was  questioning  his  mind  about  the 
road,  and  I  was  looking  up  round  about  the 
rock,  a  company  of  souls  appeared  to  me  on 
the  left  hand,  who  were  moving  their  feet  to¬ 
wards  us,  and  seemed  not  doing  so,  so  slowly 
were  they  coming.  “Lift,”  said  I,  “Master, 
thine  eyes;  behold  on  this  side  those  who  will 
give  us  counsel,  if  of  thyself  thou  canst  not 
have  it.”  He  looked  at  them,  and  with  a  re¬ 
lieved  air  replied:  “Let  us  go  thither,  for  they 
come  slowly,  and  do  thou  confirm  thy  hope, 
sweet  son.” 

67.  That  people  was  still  as  far — I  mean 
after  a  thousand  steps  of  ours — as  a  good 
thrower  would  cast  with  his  hand,  when  they 
all  pressed  up  to  the  hard  masses  of  the  high 
bank,  and  stood  still  and  close,  as  one  who 
goes  in  doubt  stops  to  look.4  “O  ye  who  have 
made  good  ends,  O  spirits  already  elect,”  Vir¬ 
gil  began,  “by  that  peace  which,  I  believe,  is 
awaited  by  you  all,  tell  us,  where  the  mountain 
lies  so  that  the  going  up  is  possible;  for  to  lose 
time  is  most  displeasing  to  him  who  knows 
most.” 

79.  As  the  sheep  come  forth  from  the  fold  by 
ones,  and  twos,  and  threes,  and  the  others 
stand  timid,  holding  eye  and  muzzle  to  the 
ground;  and  what  the  first  does  the  others  also 
do,  huddling  themselves  to  it  if  it  stop,  silly 
and  quiet,  and  wherefore  know  not;  so  I  then 
saw  the  head  of  that  fortunate  flock  moving  to 
approach,  modest  in  countenance  and  digni¬ 
fied  in  gait. 

88.  When  those  in  front  saw  the  light  bro¬ 
ken  on  the  ground  at  my  right  side,  so  that  the 
shadow  was  cast  by  me  on  the  rock,  they 
stopped,  and  drew  somewhat  back;  and  all  the 
rest  who  were  coming  behind  did  the  like,  not 
knowing  why.  “Without  your  asking,  I  con¬ 
fess  to  you  that  this  is  a  human  body  which  ye 
see,  whereby  the  light  of  the  sun  on  the  ground 
is  cleft.  Marvel  not,  but  believe  that  not  with¬ 
out  power  which  comes  from  heaven  does  he 
seek  to  surmount  this  wall.”  Thus  the  Master: 

4  They  stopped,  surprised,  at  seeing  Virgil  and 
Dante  advancing  to  the  left,  against  the  rule  in  Purga¬ 
tory,  where  the  course  is  always  to  the  right,  symbol¬ 
izing  progress  in  good. 


CANTO  IV 


and  that  worthy  people  said:  “Turn,  proceed 
before  us,  then”;  with  the  backs  of  their  hands 
making  sign.  And  one  of  them  began:  “Who¬ 
ever  thou  art,  turn  thy  face  as  thou  thus  goest 
on;  consider  whether  in  the  world  thou  didst 
ever  see  me?”  I  turned  me  toward  him,  and 
looked  at  him  fixedly:  blond  was  he,  and  beau¬ 
tiful,  and  of  gentle  aspect,  but  a  blow  had  di¬ 
vided  one  of  his  eyebrows. 

109.  When  I  had  humbly  disclaimed  having 
ever  seen  him,  he  said:  “Now  look!”  and 
showed  me  a  wround  high  upon  his  breast. 
Then  he  said,  smiling;  “I  am  Manfred,1  grand¬ 
son  of  the  Empress  Constance:  wherefore  I 
pray  thee,  that  when  thou  returnest,  thou  go 
to  my  beautiful  daughter,2  mother  of  the  hon¬ 
or  of  Sicily  and  of  Aragon,  and  tell  to  her  the 
truth  if  aught  else  be  told.  After  I  had  my  body 
broken  by  two  mortal  stabs,  I  rendered  myself, 
weeping,  to  Him  who  pardons  willingly.  My 
sins  were  horrible,  but  the  Infinite  Goodness 
has  such  wide  arms  that  it  takes  whatever 
turns  to  it.  If  the  Pastor  of  Cosenza,3  who  was 
set  on  the  hunt  of  me  by  Clement,  had  then 
rightly  read  this  page  in  God,  the  bones  of  my 
body  would  still  be  at  the  head  of  the  bridge 
near  Benevento,  under  the  protection  of  the 
heavy  cairn.  Now  the  rain  bathes  them,  and 
the  wind  moves  them  forth  from  the  kingdom, 
hard  by  the  Verde,  whither  he  transported 
them  with  extinguished  light. 

133.  By  their  malediction  one  is  not  so  lost 
that  the  Eternal  Love  cannot  return,  while 
hope  has  speck  of  green.  True  is  it,  that  whoso 
dies  in  contumacy  of  Holy  Church,  though  he 
repent  him  at  the  end,  needs  must  stay  outside, 
upon  this  bank,  thirtyfold  the  whole  time  that 
he  has  been  in  his  presumption,  if  such  decree 
become  not  shortened  through  good  prayers. 

1  The  natural  son  of  the  Emperor  Frederick  II,  and 
king  of  Sicily.  Urban  IV  and  Clement  IV  offered  the 
throne  of  Sicily  to  Charles  of  Anjou,  the  brother  of 
St.  Louis.  Charles,  crowned  king  of  Sicily  at  Rome, 
routed  Manfred  at  Benevento.  Manfred  himself  was 
slain  in  the  battle. 

2  Constance,  who  married  Peter  III  of  Aragon.  She 
had  three  sons,  Alphonso,  James,  and  Frederick.  Al- 
phonso  succeeded  his  father  in  Aragon,  and  James  in 
Sicily,  but  after  the  death  of  Alphonso,  in  1291,  James 
became  king  of  Aragon,  and  Frederick  king  of  Sicily. 

3  The  archbishop  of  Cosenza,  at  command  of  Clem¬ 
ent  IV,  took  Manfred’s  body  from  its  grave  near  Bene¬ 
vento,  and  threw  it  unburied  on  the  bank  of  the 
Verde  (now  the  Garigliano),  separating  the  states  of 
the  Church  from  the  kingdom  of  Naples. 


See  if  hereafter  thou  canst  make  me  glad,  re¬ 
vealing  to  my  good  Constance  how  thou  hast 
seen  me,  and  also  this  prohibition;  for  here  by 
means  of  those  on  earth  much  may  be  gained.”4 

CANTO  IV 

1.  When  by  reason  of  delights,  or  of  pains 
which  any  capacity  of  ours  may  experience, 
the  soul  is  wholly  engaged  by  it,  to  any  other 
faculty  it  seems  no  further  to  give  heed:  and 
this  is  counter  to  the  error  which  believes  that 
one  soul  above  another  is  kindled  within  us.5 
And  therefore,  when  a  thing  is  heard  or  seen 
which  may  hold  the  soul  intently  turned  to  it, 
the  time  goes  by,  and  the  man  perceives  it  not: 
for  one  faculty  is  that  which  listens,  and  anoth¬ 
er  is  that  which  keeps  the  soul  entire;  the  lat¬ 
ter  is  as  it  were  bound,  and  the  former  is  loose. 

13.  Of  this  I  had  true  experience,  hearing 
that  spirit  and  wondering:  for  full  fifty  de¬ 
grees  had  the  sun  ascended,6  and  I  was  not 
aware  of  it,  when  we  came  where  those  souls 
with  one  accord  cried  out  to  us:  “Here  is  what 
you  ask.” 

19.  The  man  of  the  farm,  when  the  grape  is 
growing  dark,  often  hedges  up  a  larger  open¬ 
ing  with  a  forkful  of  his  thorns,  than  was  the 
passage  from  which  my  Leader  and  I  behind 
him  ascended  alone,  when  the  troop  departed 
from  us.  One  goes  to  Sanleo,  and  descends  to 
Noli,  one  mounts  up  Bismantova*  to  its  sum¬ 
mit,  with  only  feet;  but  here  it  behoves  that 
one  fly,  I  mean  with  the  swift  wings  and  with 
the  feathers  of  great  desire,  behind  that  guide 
who  gave  me  hope  and  made  a  light  for  me. 
We  ascended  through  the  cleft  rock,  and  on 
each  side  the  wall  pressed  close  on  us,  and 
the  ground  beneath  required  both  feet  and 
hands. 

34.  When  we  were  upon  the  upper  edge  of 
the  high  bank,  on  the  open  hillside:  “My  Mas¬ 
ter,”  said  I,  “what  way  shall  we  take?”  And 
he  to  me:  “Let  no  step  of  thine  fall  back,  al¬ 
ways  win  up  behind  me  on  the  mountain,  till 
some  sage  guide  appear  for  us.” 

40.  The  summit  was  so  high  that  it  sur¬ 
passed  the  sight;  and  the  mountain-side  far 

4Cf.  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  III,  Suppl., 
Q  63,  A  2. 

6  Cf.  Ibid.,  Part  I,  Q  76,  A  3. 

c  It  was  now  about  nine  a.m. 

7  All  these  are  places  difficult  of  access. 


58  PURGATORY 


steeper  than  a  line  from  the  mid  quadrant  to 
the  centre.  I  was  weary,  when  I  began:  “O 
sweet  Father,  turn  and  regard  how  I  remain 
alone  if  thou  stay  not.”  “My  son,”  said  he,  “far 
as  here  drag  thyself  on,”  pointing  out  to  me  a 
ledge  a  little  above,  which  on  that  side  circles 
all  the  hill.  His  words  so  spurred  me,  that  I 
forced  myself  on,  scrambling  after  him,  until 
the  belt  was  beneath  my  feet.  There  we  both 
sat  down,  turning  toward  the  east,  whence  we 
had  ascended,  for  to  look  back  is  wont  to  en¬ 
courage  a  man.  I  first  turned  my  eyes  to  the 
low  shores,  then  I  raised  them  to  the  sun,  and 
wondered  that  we  were  struck  by  it  on  the  left. 
The  Poet  well  perceived  that  I  was  all  bewil¬ 
dered  at  the  chariot  of  the  light,  where  it  was 
entering1  between  us  and  Aquilo. 

61.  Wherefore  he  to  me:  “If  Castor  and  Pol¬ 
lux  were  in  company  with  that  mirror  which 
sheds  its  light  up  and  down,  thou  wouldst  see 
the  zodiac  revolving  ruddy  still  closer  to  the 
Bears,  if  it  went  not  out  of  its  old  road/  How 
this  can  be,  if  thou  wishest  to  be  able  to  con¬ 
ceive,  with  collected  thought  imagine  Zion 
and  this  mountain  to  stand  upon  the  earth  so 
that  both  have  one  sole  horizon  and  different 
hemispheres;  then  thou  wilt  see,  if  thy  intelli¬ 
gence  right  clearly  heed,  how  the  road  which 
Phaethon,  to  his  harm,  knew  not  how  to  drive, 
must  needs  pass  this  mountain  on  the  one  side, 
and  that  on  the  other.” 

76.  “Surely,  my  Master,”  said  I,  “I  never  saw 
so  clearly  as  I  now  discern,  there  where  my 
wit  seemed  deficient,  that  the  mid-circle  of  the 
supernal  motion,  which  in  a  certain  art  is 
called  Equator,  and  which  always  remains  be¬ 
tween  the  sun  and  the  winter,  is  distant,  for  the 
reason  that  thou  tellest,  as  far  from  here  to¬ 
ward  the  north,  as  the  Hebrews  saw  it  toward 
the  warm  region.  But,  if  it  please  thee,  will¬ 
ingly  would  I  know  how  far  we  have  to  go,  for 
the  hill  rises  higher  than  my  eyes  are  able.” 
And  he  to  me:  “This  mountain  is  such,  that 
ever  at  the  beginning  below  it  is  hard,  and  the 
more  one  goes  up,  behold!  the  less  it  troubles 

1  Dante,  his  face  toward  the  east,  was  bewildered 
at  seeing  the  sun  on  his  left  hand.  Aquilo,  the  north 
wind,  is  put  for  the  north. 

2  If  the  sun  were  in  the  sign  of  the  Gemini — Castor 
and  Pollux  (which  is  nearer  the  constellations  of  the 
Bears  than  Aries,  in  which  the  sun  now  is) — it  would 
make  the  zodiac  ruddy  still  farther  to  the  north. 


him;  therefore  when  it  shall  seem  to  thee  so 
pleasant,  that  the  going  up  will  be  easy  to  thee 
as  going  down  the’current  in  a  vessel,  then  wilt 
thou  be  at  the  end  of  this  path;  there  mayst 
thou  expect  repose  from  toil:  more  I  answer 
not,  and  this  I  know  for  true.” 

9 7.  And  as  he  ended  his  words,  a  voice  near 
by  sounded:  “Perchance  before  then  thou  wilt 
be  constrained  to  sit.”  At  the  sound  of  it  each 
of  us  turned,  and  we  saw  at  the  left  a  great 
stone,  of  which  neither  he  nor  I  had  taken  note 
before.  Thither  we  drew;  and  there  were  per¬ 
sons  who  were  reposing  in  the  shadow  behind 
the  rock,  as  one  through  indolence  sets  himself 
to  repose.  And  one  of  them,  who  seemed  to  me 
weary,  was  seated,  and  was  clasping  his 
knees,  holding  his  face  down  low  between 
them.  “O  sweet  my  Lord,”  said  I,  “look  at 
him,  who  shows  himself  more  indolent  than  if 
sloth  were  his  sister.”  Then  that  one  turned  to 
us  and  gave  heed,  moving  his  look  only  up 
along  his  thigh,  and  said:  “Now  go  thou  up, 
for  thou  art  valiant.”  I  recognized  then  who  he 
was,  and  that  effort  which  was  still  quickening 
my  breath  a  little,  did  not  hinder  my  going  to 
him,  and  after  I  had  reached  him,  he  scarcely 
raised  his  head,  saying:  “Hast  thou  clearly  seen 
how  the  sun  drives  his  chariot  over  thy  left 
shoulder?” 

i2i.His  lazy  acts  and  his  short  words 
moved  my  lips  a  little  to  a  smile;  then  I  began: 
“Belacqua,3  henceforth  I  grieve  not  for  thee, 
but  tell  me  why  thou  art  seated  here?  dost 
thou  await  a  guide,  or  has  only  thy  wonted 
mood  recaptured  thee?”  And  he:  “Brother, 
what  avails  the  going  up?  For  the  bird  of  God 
that  sits  at  the  gate  would  not  let  me  go  to  the 
torments.  It  behoves  that  heaven  first  circle 
around  me  outside  the  gate,  as  long  as  it  did  in 
life,  because  I  delayed  my  good  sighs  until  the 
end;  unless,  before  then,  the  prayer  assist  me 
which  rises  from  a  heart  that  lives  in  grace: 
what  avails  the  other,  which  is  not  heard  in 
heaven?” 

136.  And  already  the  Poet  was  mounting  up 
before  me,  and  was  saying:  “Come  on  now: 
thou  seest  that  the  meridian  is  touched  by  the 
sun,  and  on  the  shore  the  night  now  covers 
Morocco  with  her  foot.” 

3  Belacqua  was  a  Florentine,  a  maker  of  citherns 
and  other  musical  instruments. 


CANTO  V 


CANTO  V 

1. 1  had  now  parted  from  those  shades,  and 
was  following  the  footsteps  of  my  Leader, 
when  behind  me  one,  pointing  his  finger,  cried 
out:  “Look  how  the  ray  seems  not  to  shine  on 
the  left  hand  of  that  lower  one,  and  he  seems 
to  bear  himself  as  if  alive.”  I  turned  my  eyes 
at  the  sound  of  these  words,  and  I  saw  them 
watching,  for  marvel,  only  me,  only  me,  and 
the  light  which  was  broken. 

io.  “Why  is  thy  mind  so  caught,”  said  the 
Master,  “that  thou  slackenest  thy  going?  What 
matters  to  thee  that  which  is  whispered  here? 
Come  on  after  me,  and  let  the  people  talk. 
Stand  like  a  firm  tower  that  never  wags  its  top 
for  blowing  of  the  winds:  for  always  the  man 
in  whom  thought  on  thought  wells  up  removes 
from  himself  his  mark,  because  one  weakens 
the  force  of  the  other.”  What  could  I  answer, 
save:  “I  come”?  I  said  it,  overspread  somewhat 
with  the  color,  which,  at  times,  makes  a  man 
worthy  of  pardon. 

22.  And  therewhile,  across  upon  the  moun¬ 
tain-side,  a  little  in  front  of  us,  were  coming 
people,  singing  " Miserere  ”  verse  by  verse. 
When  they  observed  that  I  gave  no  place  for 
passage  of  the  rays  through  my  body,  they 
changed  their  song  into  a  long  and  hoarse 
“Oh!”  and  two  of  them,  in  form  of  messen¬ 
gers,  ran  to  meet  us,  and  asked  of  us:  “Make 
us  acquainted  with  your  condition.”  And  my 
Master:  “Ye  can  go  back,  and  report  to  those 
who  sent  you,  that  the  body  of  this  one  is  true 
flesh.  If,  as  I  suppose,  they  stopped  because  of 
seeing  his  shadow,  enough  is  answered  them: 
let  them  do  him  honor  and  it  may  profit 
them.” 

37.  Never  did  I  see  enkindled  vapors  at  early 
night  so  swiftly  cleave  the  clear  sky,  or  the 
clouds  of  August  at  set  of  sun,1  that  these  did 
not  return  up  in  less  time;  and,  arrived  there, 
they  with  the  others  wheeled  round  toward  us, 
like  a  troop  that  runs  without  curb. 

43.  “These  folk  that  press  to  us  are  many, 
and  they  come  to  pray  thee,”  said  the  Poet; 
“yet  do  thou  still  go  on,  and  in  going  listen.” 
“O  soul,”  they  came  crying,  “that  with  those 
limbs  with  which  thou  wast  born  art  on  thy 

1  The  shooting  stars  in  a  clear  sky,  or  the  light¬ 
ning  in  the  clouds  of  August. 


way  to  be  glad,  a  little  stay  thy  step.  Look  if 
thou  hast  ever  seen  any  one  of  us,  so  that  thou 
mayst  carry  news  of  him  to  earth.  Pray,  why 
dost  thou  go  on?  Pray,  why  dost  thou  not  stop? 
We  all  of  old  were  slain  by  violence,  and  sin¬ 
ners  up  to  the  last  hour;  then  light  from  Heav¬ 
en  made  us  mindful,  so  that  both  penitent  and 
pardoning  we  issued  forth  from  life  at  peace 
with  God,  who  fills  our  hearts  with  the  desire 
of  seeing  Him.”  And  I:  “Although  I  gaze  up¬ 
on  your  faces,  I  recognize  no  one;  but  if  aught 
that  I  can  do  be  pleasing  to  you,  spirits  well¬ 
born,  speak  ye,  and  I  will  do  it  by  that  peace 
which  makes  me,  following  the  feet  of  such  a 
guide,  seek  it  from  world  to  world.” 

64.  And  one  began:  “Each  of  us  trusts  in  thy 
good  service,  without  thy  swearing  it,  provid¬ 
ed  that  want  of  power  cut  not  off  the  will; 
wherefore  I,  who  speak  alone  before  the  others, 
pray  thee,  if  ever  thou  see  that  land  which  lies 
between  Romagna  and  the  land  of  Charles.2 
that  thou  be  courteous  to  me  with  thy  prayers 
in  Fano,  so  that  supplication  may  be  well  made 
in  my  behalf,  that  I  may  be  able  to  purge  away 
my  grave  offenses.  Of  that  place  was  I;  but  the 
deep  wounds,  wherefrom  issued  the  blood  in 
which  I  had  my  seat,3  were  dealt  me  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Antenori,4  there  where  I  thought 
to  be  most  secure;  he  of  Este  had  it  done,  who 
held  me  in  wrath  far  beyond  what  justice 
willed.  But  if,  when  I  was  overtaken  at  Oriaco, 
had  fled  toward  La  Mira,5 1  should  still  be  yon¬ 
der  where  men  breathe.  I  ran  to  the  marsh,  and 
the  reeds  and  the  mire  hampered  me  so  that  I 
fell,  and  there  I  saw  a  lake  made  by  my  veins 
upon  the  ground.” 

85.  Then  said  another:  “Ah!  so  may  that  de¬ 
sire  be  fulfilled  which  draws  thee  to  the  high 
mountain,  with  good  piety  do  thou  help  mine. 
I  was  of  Montefeltro,  and  am  Buonconte.6 

2  The  March  of  Ancona,  between  the  Romagna  and 
the  kingdom  of  Naples,  then  held  by  Charles  II,  King 
of  Naples  and  Count  of  Anjou.  The  speaker  is  Jacopo 
del  Cassero,  of  the  leading  Guelf  family  in  Fano.  On 
his  way  to  become  Podesta  of  Milan,  in  1298,  he  was 
assassinated  by  the  minions  of  Azzo  VIII  of  Este, 
whose  enmity  he  had  incurred. 

3  Cf.  Leviticus,  17.  14. 

4  That  is,  in  the  territory  of  the  Paduans,  whose 
city  was  reputed  to  have  been  founded  by  Antenor. 

5  La  Mira  is  a  village  on  the  bank  of  one  of  the 
canals  of  the  Brenta  between  Padua  and  Venice. 
Oriaco  is  not  far  from  it. 

u  Son  of  Count  Guido  da  Montefeltro;  cf.  Hell, 


PURGATORY 


60 

Joan,  or  any  other,  has  no  care  for  me,  where¬ 
fore  I  go  among  these  with  downcast  front.” 
And  I  to  him:  “What  violence,  or  what  chance 
caused  thee  to  stray  so  far  from  Campaldino, 
that  thy  burial  place  was  never  known?” 
“Oh!”  replied  he,  “at  foot  of  the  Casentino* 1 2 
crosses  a  stream,  named  the  Archiano,  which 
rises  in  the  Apennine  above  the  Hermitage.' 
Where  its  name  becomes  vain  I  arrived, 
pierced  in  the  throat,  flying  on  foot,  and 
bloodying  the  plain.  Here  I  lost  my  sight,  and  I 
ended  my  speech  with  the  name  of  Mary,  and 
here  I  fell,  and  my  flesh  remained  alone.  I  will 
tell  the  truth,  and  do  thou  repeat  it  among  the 
living.  The  Angel  of  God  took  me,  and  he  of 
Hell  cried  out,  ‘O  thou  from  Heaven,  why  dost 
thou  rob  me?3  Thou  bearest  away  for  thyself 
the  eternal  part  of  him  for  one  little  tear  which 
takes  him  from  me;  but  of  the  rest  I  will  make 
other  disposal/ 

109.  “Thou  knowest  well  how  in  the  air  that 
moist  vapor  is  collected  which  turns  to  water 
soon  as  it  rises  where  the  cold  condenses  it.  He 
joined  that  evil  will,  which  seeks  only  evil, 
with  intelligence,  and  moved  the  mist  and  the 
wind  by  the  power  that  his  nature  gave.4 
Then,  when  the  day  was  spent,  he  covered  the 
valley  with  cloud,  from  Pratomagno  to  the 
great  chain,5  and  made  the  sky  above  so  dense 
that  the  pregnant  air  was  turned  to  water.  The 
rain  fell,  and  what  of  it  the  earth  did  not  en¬ 
dure  came  to  the  gullies,  and  as  it  gathered  in 
great  streams  it  rushed  so  swiftly  towards  the 
royal  river  that  nothing  held  it  back.  The  ro¬ 
bust  Archiano  found  my  frozen  body  near  its 
mouth,  and  pushed  it  into  the  Arno,  and 
loosed  on  my  breast  the  cross  which  I  made  of 
myself  when  the  pain  overcame  me.  It  rolled 


xxvii.  Joan  was  his  wife.  He  was  the  captain  of  the 
Aretines  at  the  battle  of  Campaldino  (1289),  where 
he  was  slain. 

1  The  Casentino  is  a  “district  in  Tuscany  comprising 
the  upper  valley  of  the  Arno,  and  the  slopes  of  the 
Etruscan  Apennines.” 

2  The  monastery  of  Camaldoli,  founded  by  St. 
Romualdo  of  Ravenna,  in  1012,  the  earliest  house  of 
the  Order  of  Reformed  Benedictines  which  derives  its 
name  from  this  locality. 

3  Cf.  Hell,  xxvii.  1 12-120. 

4  Cf.  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  no, 

A  53* 

J  Pratomagno  is  the  mountain  ridge  which  forms 

the  western  boundary  of  the  Casentino;  “the  great 

chain”  is  the  main  ridge  of  the  Apennines. 


me  along  its  banks,  and  along  its  bottom,  then 
with  its  spoil  it  covered  and  girt  me.” 

130.  “Pray,  when  thou  shalt  have  returned 
unto  the  world,  and  rested  from  the  long  jour¬ 
ney,”  the  third  spirit  followed  on  the  second, 
“remember  me,  who  am  Pia.6  Siena  made  me, 
Maremma  unmade  me;  he  knows  if,  who,  be¬ 
fore  wedding,  had  enringed  me  with  his  gem.” 

CANTO  VI 

1.  When  the  game  of  hazard  is  broken  up,  he 
who  loses  remains  sorrowful,  repeating  the 
throws,  and,  saddened,  learns;  with  the  other 
all  the  folk  go  along;  one  goes  before,  and  one 
plucks  him  from  behind,  and  one  at  his  side 
brings  himself  to  mind:  he  does  not  stop,  and 
listens  to  one  and  the  other;  the  man  to  whom 
he  reaches  forth  his  hand  presses  on  him  no 
longer,  and  thus  from  the  throng  he  defends 
himself.  Such  was  I  in  that  dense  crowd,  turn¬ 
ing  my  face  to  them  this  way  and  that;  and, 
promising,  I  loosed  myself  from  it. 

13.  Here  was  the  Aretine,  who  from  the 
fierce  arms  of  Ghin  di  Tacco  had  his  death;7 
and  the  other  who  was  drowned  when 
running  in  pursuit.8  Here  Federigo  No- 
vello9  was  praying  with  hands  outstretched, 
and  he  of  Pisa,  who  made  the  good  Mar- 
zucco  show  himself  strong.10  I  saw  Count 

6  Pia  is  reported  to  have  been  put  to  death  in  her 
husband’s  stronghold  in  the  Tuscan  Maremma. 

7  The  Aretine  was  Messer  Benincasa  da  Laterina,  a 
learned  judge,  who  had  condemned  to  death  for  their 
crimes  two  relatives  of  Ghin  di  Tacco,  the  most  fa¬ 
mous  highwayman  of  the  day,  whose  headquarters 
lay  between  Siena  and  Rome.  Some  time  after,  Messer 
Benincasa  sitting  as  papal  auditor  in  Rome,  Ghino 
made  his  way  to  the  tribunal,  slew  Benincasa,  and 
escaped  unharmed. 

8  Another  Aretine,  of  the  Tarlati  family.  While  pur¬ 
suing  or  pursued  by  his  enemies,  his  horse  carried 
him  into  the  Arno,  where  he  was  drowned. 

9  Federigo,  son  of  the  Count  Guido  Novello,  of 
whom  nothing  is  known  but  that  he  was  slain  in  1291, 
near  Bibbiena. 

10  Benvenuto  says:  “I  have  heard  from  the  good 
Boccaccio,  whom  I  trust  more  than  the  others,  that 
Marzucco  was  a  good  man  of  the  city  of  Pisa,  who 
had  become  a  Franciscan  friar,  whose  son  was  be¬ 
headed  by  order  of  Count  Ugolino,  the  tyrant,  who 
commanded  that  his  body  should  remain  unburied. 
At  a  late  hour  his  father  humbly  approached  the 
Count,  and  like  a  stranger  unconcerned  in  the  matter, 
and  without  tears  or  other  sign  of  grief,  he  said, 
‘Surely,  my  lord,  it  would  be  proper  and  to  your  honor 
that  that  poor  slain  man  should  be  buried,  and  not  left 
cruelly  as  food  for  dogs.’  Then  the  Count,  recognizing 
him,  said,  astonished,  ‘Go,  for  thy  patience  overcomes 


CANTO  VI  61 


Orso;1  and  the  soul  divided  from  its  body  by 
spite  and  by  envy,  as  it  said,  and  not  for  fault 
committed,  Pierre  de  la  Brosse,2  I  mean;  and 
here  let  the  Lady  of  Brabant  have  foresight, 
while  she  is  on  earth,  so  that  for  this  she  be 
not  of  the  worse  flock. 

25.  When  I  was  free  from  each  and  all  those 
shades  who  prayed  only  that  someone  else 
should  pray,  so  that  their  becoming  holy  may 
be  speeded,  I  began:  “It  seems  to  me,  O  Light 
of  mine,  that  thou  deniest  expressly,  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  text,  that  orison  can  bend  decree  of  Heav¬ 
en,  and  these  folk  pray  only  for  this, — shall 
then  their  hope  be  vain?  or  is  thy  saying  not 
righdy  clear  to  me?”3 

34.  And  he  to  me:  “My  writing  is  plain,  and 
the  hope  of  these  is  not  fallacious,  if  it  be  well 
regarded  with  sound  mind;  for  top  of  judg¬ 
ment  vails  not  itself  because  a  fire  of  love  may, 
in  one  instant,  fulfil  that  which  he  who  is  here 
installed  must  satisfy.  And  there  where  I  af¬ 
firmed  this  proposition,  defect  was  not 
amended  by  a  prayer,  because  the  prayer  was 
disjoined  from  God.  However,  in  regard  to 
matter  of  doubt  so  deep  decide  thou  not,  unless 
she  tell  it  thee,  who  shall  be  a  light  between  the 
truth  and  the  understanding.  I  know  not  if 
thou  understandest;  I  speak  of  Beatrice;  thou 
shalt  see  her  above,  smiling  and  happy,  upon 
the  summit  of  this  mountain.” 

49.  And  I:  “My  Lord,  let  us  go  on  with 
greater  speed,  for  now  I  am  not  weary  as  a 
while  ago;  and  see  how  the  hill  now  casts  its 
shadow.”  “We  will  go  forward  with  this  day,” 
he  answered,  “as  much  farther  as  is  now  pos¬ 
sible  for  us;  but  the  fact  is  otherwise  than  thou 
supposest.  Before  thou  canst  be  there-above 
thou  wilt  see  him  return,  who  is  now  hid¬ 
den  by  the  hill-side  so  that  thou  dost  not 
make  his  rays  to  break.  But  see  there  a  soul 
which,  stationed  all  alone,  is  looking  toward 

my  obduracy,’  and  immediately  Marzucco  went  and 
buried  his  son.” 

1  Count  Orso,  the  son  of  Count  Napoleone  degli 
Alberti,  was  murdered  by  his  cousin,  the  son  of  Count 
Alessandro.  Cf.  Hell,  xxxii.  55-60. 

2  Pierre  de  la  Brosse  was  chamberlain  and  confidant 
of  Philip  the  Bold  of  France.  He  lost  the  king’s  favor 
and  was  hanged.  It  was  believed  that  he  had  incurred 
the  hatred  of  Mary  of  Brabant,  Philip’s  second  wife. 
As  she  lived  till  1321,  Dante’s  warning  may  have 
reached  her  ears. 

3  Cf.  Aeneid,  vi.  376. 


us;  it  will  point  out  to  us  the  speediest  way.” 

61.  We  came  to  it.  O  Lombard  soul,  how 
lofty  and  disdainful  didst  thou  hold  thyself; 
and  in  the  movement  of  thine  eyes  grave  and 
slow!  It  said  not  anything  to  us,  but  let  us  go 
on,  only  eyeing  us  in  manner  of  a  lion  when  he 
is  couching.  Still  Virgil  drew  near  to  it,  pray¬ 
ing  that  it  would  show  to  us  the  best  ascent; 
and  it  made  no  answer  to  his  request,  but  of 
our  country  and  life  enquired  of  us. 

71.  And  the  sweet  Leader  began:  “Mantua” 
— and  the  shade,  all  in  itself  recluse,  rose  to¬ 
ward  him  from  the  place  where  first  it  was, 
saying:  “O  Mantuan,  I  am  Sordello  of  thy 
city.”4  And  they  embraced  each  other. 

76.  Ah,  servile  Italy!  hostel  of  grief!  ship 
without  pilot  in  great  tempest;  not  lady  of 
provinces,  but  a  brothel!  that  noble  soul  was 
so  ready,  only  at  the  sweet  name  of  his  native 
town,  to  give  glad  welcome  here  unto  his  fel¬ 
low-citizen;  and  now  in  thee  thy  living  men 
exist  not  without  war,  and  of  those  whom  one 
wall  and  one  moat  shut  in  one  gnaws  the  oth¬ 
er.  Search,  wretched  one,  around  its  shores,  thy 
seaboard,  and  then  look  within  thy  bosom,  if 
any  part  in  thee  enjoys  peace!  What  avails  it 
that  for  thee  Justinian  readjusted  thy  bridle,  if 
the  saddle  be  empty?  Without  this,  the  shame 
would  be  less.  Ah  folk,  that  oughtest  to  be  de¬ 
vout  and  let  Caesar  sit  in  the  saddle,  if  thou 
rightly  understandest  what  God  notes  for  thee! 
Look  how  fell  this  wild  beast  has  become, 
through  not  being  corrected  by  the  spurs,  since 
thou  didst  put  thy  hand  upon  the  rein. 

97.  O  German  Albert,  who  abandonest  her 
that  has  become  untamed  and  savage,  and 
oughtest  to  bestride  her  saddle-bows,  may  a 
just  judgment  from  the  stars  fall  upon  thy 
blood,  and  may  it  be  so  strange  and  manifest 
that  thy  successor  may  have  fear  thereat!3  For 
thou  and  thy  father,  held  back  up  there  by 
greed,  have  suffered  the  garden  of  the  empire 

4  Sordello,  who  lived  in  the  thirteenth  century,  left 
his  native  land  and  gave  up  his  native  tongue  to  live 
and  write  as  a  troubadour  in  Provence. 

5  Albert  of  Hapsburg,  son  of  the  Emperor  Rudolph, 
was  elected  King  of  the  Romans  in  1298,  but,  like  his 
father,  never  went  to  Italy  to  be  crowned.  He  was 
murdered  by  his  nephew,  John  the  Parricide,  in  1308, 
at  Konigsfelden.  The  successor  of  Albert  was  Henry 
VII  of  Luxemburg,  who  came  to  Italy  in  13 11  and 
was  crowned  at  Rome  in  1312.  His  death  in  1313 
ended  Dante’s  hopes. 


62  PURGATORY 


to  become  desert.  Come  thou  to  see  the  Mon- 
tecchi  and  Cappelletti,  the  Monaldi  and  Filip- 
peschi,1  thou  man  without  care,  those  already 
wretched,  and  these  in  dread.  Come,  cruel  one, 
come,  and  see  the  distress  of  thy  nobility,  and 
cure  their  hurts;  and  thou  shalt  see  Santafiora" 
how  safe  it  is. 

1 12.  Come  to  see  thy  Rome,  that  weeps,  wid¬ 
owed  and  alone,  and  cries  day  and  night:  “My 
Caesar,  wherefore  dost  thou  not  keep  me  com¬ 
pany?”  Come  to  see  how  the  people  love  one 
another;  and,  if  no  pity  for  us  move  thee,  come 
to  be  shamed  for  thine  own  renown!  And  if  it 
be  lawful  for  me,  O  Supreme  Jove,  who  wast 
on  earth  crucified  for  us,  are  Thy  just  eyes 
turned  aside  elsewhere?  Or  is  it  preparation, 
which  in  the  abyss  of  Thy  counsel  Thou  art 
making,  for  some  good  utterly  cut  off  from  our 
perception?  For  the  cities  of  Italy  are  all  full  of 
tyrants,  and  every  churl  that  comes  playing  the 
partisan  becomes  a  Marcellus.3 

127.  My  Florence!  surely  thou  mayst  be  con¬ 
tent  with  this  digression,  which  does  not  touch 
thee,  thanks  to  thy  people  that  takes  such  heed. 
Many  have  justice  at  heart,  but  shoot  slowly, 
through  not  coming  to  the  bow  without  delib¬ 
eration;  but  thy  people  has  it  on  the  edge  of  its 
lips.  Many  reject  the  common  burden,  but  thy 
people  eagerly  responds  without  being  called, 
and  cries,  “I  load  myself.”  Now  make  thee 
glad,  for  thou  hast  truly  wherefore:  thou  rich, 
thou  at  peace,  thou  wise!  If  I  speak  the  truth, 
the  fact  does  not  hide  it.  Athens  and  Lacedae¬ 
mon,  that  made  the  ancient  laws  and  were  so 
civilized,  made  in  regard  to  living  well  but 
little  sign,  compared  with  thee  that  makest 
such  fine-spun  provisions,  that  what  thou  spin- 
nest  in  October  reaches  not  to  mid-November. 
How  often  in  the  time  that  thou  rememberest 
hast  thou  changed  law,  money,  office,  and  cus¬ 
tom,  and  renewed  thy  members;  And  if  thou 
mind  thee  well  and  see  the  light,  thou  wilt  see 
thyself  resembling  that  sick  woman,  who  can- 

1  The  Montecchi  were  Ghibellines  of  Verona,  the 
Cappelletti  were  Guelphs  of  Cremona,  the  Monaldi 
were  Guelphs  of  Perugia,  and  the  Filippeschi  were 
Ghibellines  of  Orvieto. 

2  The  Counts  of  Santafiora  were  once  the  most 
powerful  Ghibelline  nobles  in  the  Sienese  territory. 
Now  their  territories  were  full  of  lawlessness  and 
misery. 

3  The  Consul  M.  Claudius  Marcellus  was  a  bitter 
opponent  of  Caesar. 


not  find  repose  upon  the  feathers,  but  with  her 
tossing  seeks  to  ease  her  pain. 

CANTO  VII 

1.  After  the  becoming  and  glad  salutations 
had  been  repeated  three  and  four  times,  Sor- 
dello  drew  back  and  said:  “Who  are  you?” 
“Before  the  souls  worthy  to  ascend  to  God 
were  turned  to  this  mountain,4  my  bones  had 
been  buried  by  Octavian;  I  am  Virgil,  and  for 
no  other  sin  did  I  lose  heaven,  but  for  not  hav¬ 
ing  faith”;  thus  then  replied  my  Leader. 

10.  As  is  he  who  suddenly  sees  a  thing  before 
him  whereat  he  marvels,  and  does  and  does 
not  believe,  saying:  “It  is,  it  is  not,” — such 
seemed  that  shade,  and  then  he  bent  down  his 
brow,  and  humbly  returned  toward  him,  and 
embraced  him  where  the  inferior  lays  hold.5 

16.  “O  glory  of  the  Latins,”  said  he,  “through 
whom  our  language  showed  what  it  could  do, 
O  eternal  honor  of  the  place  wherefrom  I  was, 
what  merit  or  what  grace  shows  thee  to  me? 
If  I  am  worthy  to  hear  thy  words,  tell  me  if 
thou  comest  from  Hell,  and  from  what  clois¬ 
ter.”  “Through  all  the  circles  of  the  realm  of 
woe,”  replied  he  to  him,  “am  I  come  hither; 
the  power  of  Heaven  moved  me,  and  with  it  I 
come.  Not  by  doing,  but  by  not  doing  have  I 
lost  the  sight  of  the  high  Sun  which  thou  desir- 
est,  and  which  by  me  was  known  too  late. 
There  is  a  place  below  not  sad  with  torments 
but  with  darkness  only,  where  the  lamenta¬ 
tions  sound  not  as  wailings,  but  are  sighs;  there 
I  abide  with  the  little  innocents  bitten  by  the 
teeth  of  death  before  they  were  exempt  from 
human  sin;  there  I  abide  with  those  whom  the 
three  holy  virtues  did  not  invest,  but  who  with¬ 
out  vice  knew  the  others,  and  followed  all  of 
them.6  But  if  thou  knowest  and  canst,  give  us 
some  direction  whereby  we  may  come  more 
speedily  to  where  Purgatory  has  its  right  be¬ 
ginning.” 

40.  He  replied:  “A  fixed  place  is  not  assigned 
for  us;  it  is  permitted  me  to  go  upward  and 
around;  so  far  as  I  can  go,  I  join  myself  to  thee 
as  guide.  But  see  how  already  the  day  declines, 
and  to  go  up  by  night  is  not  possible;  therefore 
it  is  well  to  think  of  some  fair  sojourn.  There 

4Cf.  Hell,  iv.  63. 

5  Cf .  Purgatory,  xxi.  130. 

0  Cf.  Hell,  iv;  description  of  Limbo. 


CANTO  VII 


are  souls  yonder  to  the  right,  apart;  if  thou  con- 
sentest  to  me  I  will  lead  thee  to  them,  and  not 
without  delight  will  they  be  known  to  thee.” 
“How  is  this?”  was  the  answer,  “would  he 
who  might  wish  to  ascend  by  night  be  pre¬ 
vented  by  another,  or  could  he  not  ascend  be¬ 
cause  he  had  not  the  power  ? 

52.  And  the  good  Sordellq  drew  his  finger 
on  the  ground,  saying:  “See,  only  this  line  thou 
couldst  not  pass  after  the  sun  is  gone;  not,  how¬ 
ever,  that  aught  else  than  the  nocturnal  dark¬ 
ness  would  give  hindrance  to  going  up;  that 
hampers  the  will  with  impotence.  One  might, 
indeed,  in  the  darkness  turn  downward,  and 
walk  the  hillside  wandering  around,  while  the 
horizon  holds  the  day  shut  up.”  Thereon  my 
Lord,  as  if  wondering,  said:  “Lead  us,  then, 
there  where  thou  sayest  one  may  have  delight 
while  waiting.” 

64.  A  short  distance  had  we  gone  from  that 
place,  when  I  perceived  that  the  mountain  was 
hollowed  out  in  like  fashion  as  the  valleys  hol¬ 
low  them  here  on  earth.  “Yonder,  said  that 
shade,  “will  we  go,  where  the  hillside  makes  a 
lap  of  itself,  and  there  will  we  await  the  new 
day.”  Now  steep,  now  level,  was  a  winding 
path  that  led  us  to  a  side  of  the  dale,  where  its 
border  more  than  half  dies  away.  Gold  and 
fine  silver,  and  cochineal  and  pure  white,  In¬ 
dian  wood  bright  and  clear  blue,  fresh  emer¬ 
ald  at  the  instant  it  is  split,  would  each  be  van¬ 
quished  in  color  by  the  herbage  and  by  the 
flowers  set  within  that  valley,  as  by  its  greater 
the  less  is  vanquished.  Nature  had  not  only 
painted  there,  but  of  sweetness  of  a  thousand 
odors  she  made  there  one  unknown  and  blend¬ 
ed  fragrance. 

82.  Here  I  saw  souls  who,  because  of  the 
valley,  were  not  visible  from  without,  seated 
upon  the  green  and  upon  the  flowers,  singing 
Salve  Regina.1 

1  The  beginning  of  an  antiphon  recited,  during  cer¬ 
tain  seasons  of  the  year,  at  compline,  the  last  service  of 
the  day,  after  sunset.  The  whole  antiphon  is  as  follows, 
and  its  appropriateness  to  the  condition  of  these  sin¬ 
ners  is  manifest:  “Hail,  Queen,  mother  of  mercy!  our 
life,  our  joy,  our  hope,  hail!  To  thee  we,  exiled  sons 
of  Eve,  do  cry;  to  thee  we  sigh,  groaning  and  weeping 
in  this  valley  of  tears.  Come  then,  our  Advocate,  turn 
thy  pitying  eyes  upon  us,  and  show  to  us,  after  our 
exile,  Jesus,  the  blessed  fruit  of  thy  womb.  O  clement, 
O  pitiful,  O  sweet  Virgin  Mary!  Pray  for  us,  holy 
Mother  of  God,  that  we  may  be  made  worthy  of  the 
promises  of  Christ.” 


63 

85.  “Before  the  now  diminished  sun  sink  to 
his  nest,”  began  the  Mantuan  who  had  turned 
us  thither,  “do  not  desire  that  I  guide  you 
among  these.  From  this  bank  ye  will  better  dis¬ 
cern  the  acts  and  countenances  of  each  and  all, 
than  when  received  among  them  on  the  level 
below.  He  who  sits  highest  and  has  the  sem¬ 
blance  of  having  neglected  that  which  he 
should  have  done,  and  who  moves  not  his 
mouth  to  the  others’  songs,  was  Rudolph  the 
Emperor/  who  might  have  healed  the  wounds 
that  have  slain  Italy,  so  that  too  late  is  she 
called  back  to  life  by  another.  The  next,  who  to 
appearance  is  comforting  him,  ruled  the  land 
where  the  water  rises  which  the  Moldau  bears 
to  the  Elbe,  and  the  Elbe  to  the  sea.  His  name 
was  Ottocar,3  and  in  his  swaddling-clothes  he 
was  better  far  than  bearded  Wenceslaus,  his 
son,  whom  luxury  and  idleness  feed/ 

103.  And  that  small-nosed  one,5  who  seems 
close  in  counsel  with  him  who  has  so  benign 
an  aspect,6  died  in  flight  and  disflowering  the 
lily;  look  there,  how  he  beats  his  breast:  see  the 
next  one  who,  sighing,  has  made  with  his  hand 
a  bed  for  his  cheek.  Father  and  father-in-law 
are  they  of  the  Pest  of  France;'  they  know  his 
vicious  and  foul  life,  and  thence  comes  the 
grief  which  so  pierces  them.  He  who  looks  so 
large-limbed,8  and  who  accords  in  singing 
with  him  of  the  masculine  nose,9  wore  girt  the 
cord  of  every  worth,  and  if  the  youth  that  is  sit¬ 
ting  behind  him10  had  remained  after  him  as 
king,  truly  the  worth  had  gone  from  vessel  to 

2  Rudolph  of  Hapsburg,  first  Emperor  of  the  House 
of  Austria,  born  in  1218,  crowned  Emperor  at  Aachen 
in  1273,  died  in  1291. 

3  Ottocar,  King  of  Bohemia  and  Duke  of  Austria, 
was  slain  in  battle  against  Rudolph  in  1278. 

4  Cf .  Paradise,  v.  125. 

5  This  is  Philip  III,  the  Bold,  of  France.  Having  in¬ 
vaded  Catalonia,  in  a  war  with  Peter  III  of  Aragon, 
he  was  driven  back,  and  died,  on  his  disastrous  re¬ 
treat  in  1285. 

6  Henry  of  Navarre,  whose  daughter  Joan  married 
Philip  IV  of  France. 

7  Philip  IV  of  France.  Cf.  Hell,  xix.  87;  Purgatory, 
xx.  91;  xxxii.  152;  xxxiii.  45;  Paradise,  xix.  118. 

8  Peter  III  of  Aragon,  the  husband  of  Constance, 
daughter  of  Manfred  (see  Canto  iii.  115,  143)- 
1282,  when  the  French  were  driven  out  of  Sicily, 
Pedro  was  made  king  of  Sicily. 

9  Charles  of  Anjou,  king,  by  conquest,  of  Naples 
and  Sicily.  See  Canto  xx.  67-69. 

10  This  youth  is  Alfonso,  son  of  Peter  III,  who  suc¬ 
ceeded  his  father  as  king  of  Aragon,  but  died,  twenty 
years  old,  in  1291. 


64  PURGATORY 


vessel,  which  cannot  be  said  of  the  other  heirs: 
James  and  Frederick  hold  the  realms;1  the  bet¬ 
ter  heritage  no  one  possesses. 

i2i.  Rarely  does  human  goodness  rise 
through  the  branches,  and  this  He  wills  who 
gives  it,  in  order  that  it  may  be  claimed  from 
Him.2  To  the  large-nosed  one  also  my  words 
apply  not  less  than  to  the  other,  Peter,  who  is 
singing  with  him;  wherefore  Apulia  and  Pro¬ 
vence  are  now  grieving.3  The  plant  is  as  inferior 
to  its  seed,  as,  more  than  Beatrice  and  Marga¬ 
ret,  Constance  still  boasts  of  her  husband.4 5  See 
the  King  of  the  simple  life  sitting  there  alone, 
Henry  of  England;  he  in  his  branches  has  a 
better  issue."  That  one  who  lowest  among 
them  is  seated  on  the  ground,  looking  upward, 
is  William  the  Marquis,6 7  for  whom  Alessan¬ 
dria  and  her  war  make  Montferrat  and  Cana- 
vese  mourn.” 

CANTO  VIII 

i.  It  was  now  the  hour  that  turns  back  desire 
in  those  that  sail  the  sea,  and  softens  their 
hearts,  the  day  when  they  have  said  to  their 
sweet  friends  farewell,  and  which  pierces  the 
new  pilgrim  with  love,  if  he  hear  from  afar  a 
bell  that  seems  to  deplore  the  dying  day— 
when  I  began  to  render  hearing  vain,  and  to 
look  at  one  of  the  souls,  who,  uprisen,  besought 
attention  with  its  hand.  It  joined  and  raised 
both  its  palms,  fixing  its  eyes  toward  the  east, 
as  if  it  said  to  God,  “For  aught  else  I  care  not.” 
Te  lucis  ante  so  devoudy  issued  from  his 

1The  kingdoms  of  Aragon  and  Sicily;  both  James 
and  Frederick,  the  two  surviving  sons  of  Peter  III, 
were  living  when  Dante  thus  wrote  of  them.  (See 
Canto  iii.  116.)  The  “better  heritage”  was  their 
father’s  virtue. 

2  Cf.  Chaucer,  Wife  of  Bath's  Tale,  6707-12. 

3  Apulia  and  Provence  were  grieving  under  the 
rule  of  Charles  II,  the  degenerate  son  of  Charles  of 
Anjou. 

4  That  is,  possibly,  Charles  himself,  the  husband 
first  of  Beatrice  of  Provence  and  then  of  Margaret  of 
Nevers,  was  inferior  to  Peter,  the  husband  of  Con¬ 
stance. 

5  Henry  III  of  England  (died  1272),  father  of  Ed¬ 
ward  I. 

0  William,  Marquis  of  Montferrat  and  Canavese. 
In  a  war  with  the  Guelfs,  who  had  risen  in  revolt  in 
1290,  he  was  taken  captive  at  Alessandria,  and  for 
two  years,  till  his  death,  was  kept  in  an  iron  cage. 

7  The  opening  words  of  a  hymn  sung  at  compline, 
the  last  service  of  the  day: — “Before  the  close  of  light, 
we  pray  thee,  O  Creator,  that  through  thy  clemency, 

thou  be  our  watch  and  guard.” 


mouth  and  with  such  sweet  notes  that  it  made 
me  issue  forth  from  my  own  mind.  And  then 
the  others  sweetly’and  devoutly  accompanied  it 
through  all  the  hymn  to  the  end,  having  their 
eyes  on  the  supernal  wheels.  Here,  reader, 
sharpen  well  thine  eyes  to  the  truth,  for  surely 
the  veil  is  now  indeed  so  thin  that  passing 
through  within  is  easy. 

22. 1  saw  that  army  of  the  gentle-born  silent¬ 
ly  thereafter  gazing  upward,  as  if  in  expecta¬ 
tion,  pallid  and  humble;  and  I  saw  two  angels, 
issuing  from  on  high  and  descending,  with 
two  flaming  swords  truncated  and  deprived  of 
their  points.  Green  as  leaflets  just  now  born 
was  their  raiment,  which,  beaten  and  blown  by 
their  green  pinions,  they  trailed  behind.  One 
came  to  his  station  a  little  above  us,  and  the 
other  descended  on  the  opposite  bank,  so  that 
the  people  were  contained  between  them.  I 
clearly  discerned  in  them  their  blond  heads, 
but  on  their  faces  the  eye  was  dazzled,  as  a  fac¬ 
ulty  which  is  confounded  by  excess.  “Both 
come  from  the  bosom  of  Mary,”  said  Sordello, 
“for  guard  of  the  valley,  because  of  the  serpent 
which  will  straightway  come.”  Whereat  I,  who 
knew  not  by  what  path,  turned  me  round,  and, 
all  chilled,  drew  close  to  the  trusty  shoulders. 

43.  And  Sordello  again:  “Now  let  us  go 
down  among  the  great  shades,  and  we  will 
speak  to  them;  well-pleasing  will  it  be  to  them 
to  see  you.”  Only  three  steps  I  think  that  I  de¬ 
scended  and  I  was  below;  and  I  saw  one  who 
was  gazing  only  at  me  as  if  he  wished  to  recog¬ 
nize  me.  It  was  already  the  time  when  the  air 
was  darkening,  but  not  so  that  between  his 
eyes  and  mine  it  did  not  reveal  that  which  it 
locked  up  before.  Towards  me  he  made,  and 
I  made  towards  him.  Noble  Judge  Nino,8  how 
much  it  pleased  me  when  I  saw  that  thou  wast 
not  among  the  damned !  No  fair  salutation  was 
silent  between  us;  then  he  asked:  “How  long  is 
it  since  thou  earnest  to  the  foot  of  the  mountain 
across  the  far  waters?” 

58.  “Oh,”  said  I  to  him,  “from  within  the 
dismal  places  I  came  this  morning,  and  I  am  in 
the  first  life,  although  in  going  thus  I  may  gain 
the  other.”  And  when  my  answer  was  heard, 
Sordello  and  he  drew  themselves  back,  like 

8  Nino  (Ugolino)  de’  Visconti  of  Pisa  was  the 
grandson  of  Count  Ugolino.  He  had  held  the  judica¬ 
ture  of  Gallura,  in  Sardinia  (see  Hell,  xxii.  81). 


CANTO  IX 


folk  suddenly  bewildered.  The  one  turned  to 
Virgil,  and  the  other  to  one  who  was  seated 
there,  crying:  “Up,  Corrado,1  come  to  see  what 
God  through  grace  has  willed.”  Then,  turning 
to  me:  “By  that  singular  gratitude  thou  owest 
unto  Him  who  so  hides  His  own  first  where¬ 
fore  that  there  is  no  ford  to  it,  when  thou  shalt 
be  beyond  the  wide  waves,  say  to  my  Joan  that 
she  cry  for  me  there  where  answer  is  made  to 
the  innocent.  I  do  not  think  her  mother"  loves 
me  longer,  since  she  changed  her  white  wim¬ 
ples,  which  she,  wretched,  needs  must  even 
now  long  for.  Through  her  one  may  under¬ 
stand  easily  enough  how  long  in  woman  the 
fire  of  love  endures,  if  the  eye  or  the  touch  does 
not  often  rekindle  it.  The  viper3  which  leads 
afield  the  Milanese  will  not  make  for  her  so 
fair  a  sepulture  as  the  cock  of  Gallura  would 
have  done.”  Thus  he  said,  marked  in  his  aspect 
with  the  stamp  of  that  righteous  zeal  which 
glows  with  due  measure  in  the  heart. 

85.  My  greedy  eyes  were  going  only  to  the 
sky,  only  there  where  the  stars  are  slowest,  even 
as  a  wheel  nearest  the  axle.  And  my  Leader: 
“Son,  at  what  art  thou  gazing  up  there?”  And 
I  to  him:  “At  those  three  torches  with  which 
the  pole  on  this  side  is  all  aflame.”  And  he  to 
me:  “The  four  bright  stars  which  thou  sawest 
this  morning4  are  low  on  the  other  side,  and 
these  are  risen  where  those  were.” 

94.  As  he  was  speaking,  lo!  Sordello  drew 
him  to  himself,  saying:  “See  there  our  adver¬ 
sary!”  and  pointed  his  finger  that  he  should 
look  thither.  At  that  part  where  the  little  valley 
has  no  barrier  was  a  snake,  perhaps  such  as 
gave  to  Eve  the  bitter  food.  Through  the  grass 
and  the  flowers  came  the  evil  streak,  turning 
now  and  again  its  head  to  its  back,  licking  like 
a  beast  that  sleeks  itself.  I  did  not  see,  and 
therefore  cannot  tell,  how  the  celestial  falcons 
moved,  but  I  saw  well  both  one  and  the  other 
in  motion.  Hearing  the  air  cleft  by  their  green 
wings  the  serpent  fled,  and  the  angels  wheeled 
upward  to  their  posts  with  equal  flight. 

1  Corrado,  of  the  Guelf  family  of  the  Malaspina, 
lords  of  the  Lunigiana,  a  district  between  Genoa  and 
Pisa. 

2  Beatrice  d’  Este,  who,  in  1300,  married,  secondly, 
Galeazzo  de’  Visconti  of  Milan. 

3  The  viper  was  the  cognizance  of  the  Visconti,  the 
lords  of  Milan;  the  cock  that  of  the  Judicature  of 
Gallura. 

4  Cf.  Canto  i.  23. 


65 

109.  The  shade  which  had  drawn  close  to 
the  Judge  when  he  exclaimed,  through  all  that 
assault  had  not  for  a  moment  loosed  its  gaze 
from  me.  “So  may  the  lantern  which  is  leading 
thee  on  high  find  in  thine  own  free  will  so 
much  wax  as  is  needed  as  far  as  to  the  enam¬ 
elled  summit,”  it  began,  “if  thou  knowest  true 
news  of  Valdimacra0  or  of  the  neighboring  re¬ 
gion,  tell  it  to  me,  for  there  I  once  was  great.  I 
was  called  Corrado  Malaspina;  I  am  not  the 
elder,6  but  from  him  I  am  descended;  to  mine 
own  I  bore  the  love  which  is  here  refined.” 
“Oh,”  said  I  to  him,  “through  your  lands  I 
have  never  been,  but  where  does  man  dwell  in 
all  Europe  that  they  are  not  renowned?  The 
fame  that  honors  your  house  proclaims  its 
lords,  proclaims  its  district,  so  that  he  knows  of 
them  who  never  yet  was  there.  And  I  swear  to 
you,  so  may  I  go  on  high,  that  your  honored 
race  does  not  despoil  itself  of  the  praise  of  the 
purse  and  of  the  sword.  Custom  and  nature  so 
privilege  it  that  though  the  guilty  head 7  turn 
the  world  awry,  alone  it  goes  straight  and 
scorns  the  evil  way.” 

133.  And  he:  “Now  go,  for  the  sun  shall  not 
return  to  rest  seven  times  in  the  bed  which  the 
Ram  covers  and  bestrides  with  all  four  feet,  be¬ 
fore  this  courteous  opinion  will  be  nailed  in  the 
middle  of  thy  head  with  greater  nails  than  the 
speech  of  another,  if  course  of  judgment  be  not 
arrested.” 

CANTO  IX 

1.  The  concubine  of  old  Tithonus  was  now 
gleaming  white  on  the  balcony  of  the  east, 
forth  from  the  arms  of  her  sweet  friend;  her 
forehead  was  bright  with  gems  set  in  the  shape 
of  the  cold  animal  that  strikes  people  with  its 
tail.8  And  in  the  place  where  we  were  the  night 
had  taken  two  of  the  steps  with  which  she  as¬ 
cends,  and  the  third  was  already  bending  its 
wings  downward,  when  I,  who  had  somewhat 
of  Adam  with  me,  overcome  by  sleep,  reclined 

5  The  valley  of  the  Magra,  in  the  Lunigiana. 

flThe  elder  Corrado  Malaspina  was  the  husband  of 
Constance,  King  Manfred’s  sister.  The  second  Corrado 
was  his  grandson. 

7  Probably  Rome  as  the  seat  of  a  corrupt  papacy. 

8  By  “the  concubine  of  old  Tithonus,”  Dante  seems 
to  intend  the  lunar  Aurora,  in  distinction  to  the 
proper  wife  of  Tithonus,  Aurora,  who  precedes  the 
rising  Sun. 


66  PURGATORY 


upon  the  grass,  there  where  all  five  of  us  were 
already  seated. 

13.  At  the  hour  near  the  morning  when  the 
little  swallow  begins  her  sad  lays,1  perhaps  in 
memory  of  her  former  woes,  and  when  our 
mind,  more  a  wanderer  from  the  flesh  and  less 
captive  to  the  thought,  is  in  its  visions  almost 
divine,2  in  dream  I  seemed  to  see  an  eagle  with 
feathers  of  gold  poised  in  the  sky,  with  wings 
spread,  and  intent  to  stoop.  And  I  seemed  to  be 
there3  where  his  own  people  were  abandoned 
by  Ganymede,  when  he  was  rapt  to  the  su¬ 
preme  consistory.  In  myself  I  thought  perhaps 
this  bird  strikes  only  here  through  wont,  and 
perhaps  from  other  place  disdains  to  carry  any¬ 
one  upward  in  its  feet.  Then  it  seemed  to  me 
that,  having  wheeled  a  little,  it  descended  ter¬ 
rible  as  a  thunderbolt,  and  snatched  me  up¬ 
wards  far  as  the  fire.4  There  it  seemed  that  it 
and  I  burned,  and  the  imagined  fire  so 
scorched  that  of  necessity  my  sleep  was  broken. 

34.  Not  otherwise  Achilles  shook  himself — 
turning  around  his  awakened  eyes,  and  not 
knowing  where  he  was,  when  his  mother  stole 
him  away,  sleeping  in  her  arms,  from  Chiron 
to  Scyros,  thither  whence  afterwards  the 
Greeks  withdrew  him5 — than  I  started,  as  from 
my  face  sleep  fled  away;  and  I  became  pale,  as 
does  a  man  who,  frightened,  turns  to  ice.  At 
my  side  was  my  Comforter  alone,  and  the  sun 
was  now  more  than  two  hours  high,  and  my 
face  was  turned  toward  the  sea. 

46.  “Have  no  fear,”  said  my  Lord;  “be  reas¬ 
sured,  for  we  are  at  a  good  point;  restrain  not, 
but  put  forth  all  thy  strength.  Thou  art  now 
arrived  at  Purgatory;  see  there  the  cliff  that 
closes  it  round;  see  the  entrance  there  where  it 
appears  divided.  Short  while  ago,  in  the  dawn 
that  precedes  the  day,  when  thy  soul  was  sleep¬ 
ing  within  thee  upon  the  flowers  wherewith 

1  The  allusion  is  to  the  story  of  Procne  and  Philo¬ 
mela,  transformed  the  one  into  a  swallow,  the  other 
into  a  nightingale. 

2  Cf.  Hell,  xxvi.  7. 

3  On  Mount  Ida. 

4  The  sphere  of  fire  by  which,  according  to  me¬ 
diaeval  cosmography,  the  sphere  of  the  air  was  sur¬ 
rounded. 

5  Statius  tells  how  Thetis,  to  prevent  Achilles  from 
going  to  the  siege  of  Troy,  bore  him,  sleeping,  away 
from  his  instructor,  the  centaur  Chiron,  and  carried 
him  to  the  Island  of  Scyros,  where,  though  concealed 
in  women’s  garments,  Ulysses  and  Diomed  discovered 
him. 


the  place  down  yonder  is  adorned,  came  a  lady, 
and  said:  ‘I  am  Lucia;6  let  me  take  this  one 
who  is  sleeping;  thus  will  I  assist  him  along  his 
way.’  Sordello  remained,  and  the  other  noble 
forms:  she  took  thee  up,  and  as  the  day  grew 
bright,  she  came  upward,  and  I  along  her  foot¬ 
prints.  Here  she  laid  thee  down:  and  first  her 
beautiful  eyes  showed  me  that  open  entrance; 
then  she  and  slumber  went  away  together.” 

64.  Like  a  man  who  in  perplexity  is  reas¬ 
sured,  and  who  changes  his  fear  into  confi¬ 
dence  after  the  truth  is  disclosed  to  him,  so  did 
I  change;  and  when  my  Leader  saw  me  free 
from  disquiet,  up  along  the  cliff  he  moved  on, 
and  I  behind,  toward  the  height. 

70.  Reader,  thou  seest  well  how  I  exalt  my 
theme,  and  therefore  marvel  not  if  I  support  it 
with  more  art.4 

73.  We  drew  near  to  it,  and  reached  a  place 
such  that  there,  where  at  first  there  seemed  to 
me  to  be  a  rift,  like  a  cleft  which  divides  a  wall, 
I  saw  a  gate,  and  three  steps  beneath  for  going 
to  it,  of  divers  colors,  and  a  gatekeeper  who  as 
yet  said  not  a  word.  And  as  I  opened  my  eye 
upon  him  more  and  more,  I  saw  him  sitting  on 
the  upper  step,  such  in  his  face  that  I  endured 
it  not.8  And  he  had  in  his  hand  a  naked  sword, 
which  so  reflected  the  rays  toward  us  that  I  of¬ 
ten  raised  my  sight  in  vain.  “Tell  it  from  there, 
what  would  ye?”  he  began  to  say:  “Where  is  the 
guide?  Beware  lest  the  coming  up  be  harmful 
to  you.”9  “A  lady  from  Heaven  versed  in  these 
things,”  replied  my  Master  to  him,  “only  just 
now  said  to  us:  ‘Go  thither,  here  is  the  gate.’  ” 
“And  may  she  speed  your  steps  in  good,”  be¬ 
gan  again  the  courteous  gatekeeper,  “come  for¬ 
ward  then  unto  our  stairs.” 

94.  Thither  we  came  to  the  first  great  stair; 
it  was  of  white  marble  so  polished  and  smooth 
that  I  mirrored  myself  in  it  as  I  appear.  The 
second,  of  deeper  hue  than  perse,  was  of  a 
rough  and  scorched  stone,  cracked  lengthwise 
and  athwart.  The  third,  which  uppermost  lies 
massy,  seemed  to  me  of  porphyry  as  flaming 
red  as  blood  that  spurts  forth  from  a  vein.  Up- 

6  Cf.  Hell,  ii. 

7  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I -II,  Q  113, 
A  6,  8. 

8  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  III.  Supply 
Q  8,  A  1. 

9  Cf .  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  III,  Q  89, 

A  2. 


CANTO  X 


on  this  the  Angel  of  God  held  both  his  feet,  sit¬ 
ting  upon  the  threshold,  which  seemed  to  me 
stone  of  adamant.1  Up  over  the  three  steps  my 
Leader  drew  me  with  good  will,  saying:  “Beg 
humbly  that  he  undo  the  lock.”  Devoutly  I 
threw  myself  at  the  holy  feet;  I  besought  for 
mercy’s  sake  that  he  would  open  for  me;  but 
first  upon  my  breast  I  struck  three  times.  Seven 
P’s  he  inscribed  upon  my  forehead  with  the 
point  of  his  sword,"  and:  “See  that  thou  wash 
these  wounds  when  thou  art  within,”  he  said. 

1 1 5.  Ashes  or  earth  dug  out  dry  would  be  of 
one  color  with  his  vestment,  and  from  beneath 
that  he  drew  two  keys.  One  was  of  gold  and 
the  other  was  of  silver:  first  with  the  white  and 
then  with  the  yellow  he  so  did  to  the  gate,  that 
I  was  content.  “Whenever  one  of  these  keys 
fails  so  that  it  turns  not  rightly  in  the  lock,” 
said  he  to  us,  “this  narrow  entrance  does  not 
open.  The  one  is  more  precious;  but  the  other 
requires  exceeding  much  of  art  and  wit  before 
it  unlocks,  because  it  is  that  which  disentangles 
the  knot.  From  Peter  I  hold  them;  and  he  told 
me  to  err  rather  in  opening  than  in  keeping 
shut,  if  but  the  people  prostrate  themselves  at 
my  feet.”  Then  he  pushed  the  valve  of  the 
sacred  gate,  saying:  “Enter,  but  I  give  you 
warning  that  whoso  looks  backward  returns 
outside.”3  And  when  the  pivots  of  that  sacred 
portal,  which  are  of  metal,  sonorous  and 
strong,  were  turned  within  their  hinges,  Tar- 
peia  roared  not  so  loud  nor  showed  herself  so 
harsh,  when  the  good  Metellus  was  taken  from 
her,  whereby  she  afterwards  remained  lean. 

139. 1  turned  away  attentive  to  the  first  tone, 
and  it  seemed  to  me  I  heard  “Te  Deum  lauda- 
mus”  in  a  voice  mingled  with  the  sweet  sound. 
That  which  I  heard  gave  me  just  such  an  im¬ 
pression  as  we  are  wont  to  receive  when  people 
stand  singing  with  an  organ,  and  the  words 
now  are,  now  are  not  heard. 

CANTO  X 

1.  When  we  were  within  the  threshold  of  the 
gate,  which  the  evil  love  of  souls  disuses,  be- 

AThe  first  stair  is  the  symbol  of  contrition;  the 
second  is  the  symbol  of  confession;  the  third  is  the 
symbol  of  the  satisfaction  rendered  by  deeds  of  love, 
the  works  of  penitence. 

2  The  P’s  stand  for  peccati,  the  Italian  word  for  sins. 

8  Cf.  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  III,  Q  84, 
A  10;  Luke,  9.  62. 


67 

cause  it  makes  the  crooked  way  seem  straight, 
I  heard  by  its  resounding  that  it  was  closed 
again.  And,  if  I  had  turned  my  eyes  to  it,  what 
excuse  would  have  been  befitting  for  the  fault? 

7.  We  were  ascending  through  a  cloven 
rock,  which  was  moving  to  one  side  and  to  the 
other,  even  as  the  wave  which  retreats  and  ap¬ 
proaches.  “Here  must  be  used  a  little  art,”  be¬ 
gan  my  Leader,  “in  keeping  close,  now  on  this 
hand,  now  on  that,  to  the  side  which  recedes.” 
And  this  made  our  steps  so  scant  that  the  wan¬ 
ing  disk  of  the  moon  had  regained  its  bed  to 
go  to  rest,  before  we  were  out  from  that  needle’s 
eye.  But  when  we  were  free  and  open  above, 
where  the  mountain  gathers  itself  back,  I 
weary,  and  both  uncertain  of  our  way,  we 
stopped  upon  a  level  more  solitary  than  roads 
through  deserts.  From  its  edge,  where  it  bor¬ 
ders  the  void,  to  the  foot  of  the  high  bank 
which  ever  rises,  a  human  body  three  times 
told  would  measure;  and  as  far  as  my  eye  could 
stretch  its  wings,  now  on  the  left  and  now  on 
the  right  side,  such  did  this  cornice  seem  to  me. 
Our  feet  had  not  yet  moved  upon  it,  when  I 
perceived  the  circling  bank,  which,  being  per¬ 
pendicular,  allowed  no  ascent,  to  be  of  white 
marble  and  adorned  with  such  carvings,  that 
not  only  Polycletus,  but  Nature  herself  would 
have  been  shamed  there. 

34.  The  Angel  who  came  to  earth  with  the 
announcement  of  the  peace,  many  years  wept 
for,  which  opened  Heaven  from  its  long  inter¬ 
dict,  appeared  before  us,  carved  here  so  truly  in 
a  sweet  attitude,  that  he  did  not  seem  an  image 
that  is  silent.  One  would  have  sworn  that  he 
was  saying  " Ave for  she  was  imaged  there 
who  turned  the  key  to  open  the  exalted  love. 
And  on  her  action  she  had  these  words  im¬ 
pressed,  Ecce  ancilla  Dei!4  as  exactly  as  a  shape 
is  sealed  in  wax. 

46.  “Keep  not  thy  mind  only  on  one  place,” 
said  the  sweet  Master,  who  had  me  on  that  side 
where  people  have  their  heart.  Whereupon  I 
moved  my  eyes  and  saw,  beyond  Mary,  upon 
that  side  where  he  was  who  was  moving  me, 
another  story  imposed  upon  the  rock;  where¬ 
fore  I  passed  Virgil,  and  drew  near  so  that  it 
might  be  set  before  my  eyes.  There  in  the  very 
marble  were  carved  the  cart  and  the  oxen  draw- 

4  “Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord!”  Luke,  1.  38. 


68  PURGATORY 


ing  the  holy  ark,  by  reason  of  which  men  fear 
an  office  not  given  in  charge.1 2  In  front  ap¬ 
peared  people;  and  all  of  them,  divided  in 
seven  choirs,  of  two  of  my  senses  made  the  one 
say:  “No,”  the  other:  “Yes,  they  are  singing.” 
In  like  manner,  by  the  smoke  of  the  incense 
that  was  imaged  there,  my  eyes  and  nose  were 
made  in  Yes  and  No  discordant.  There,  pre¬ 
ceding  the  blessed  vessel,  dancing,  girt  up,  was 
the  humble  Psalmist,  and  more  and  less  than 
king  was  he  on  that  occasion.  Opposite,  por¬ 
trayed  at  a  window  of  a  great  palace,  Michal 
was  looking  on,  even  as  a  lady  scornful  and 
troubled. 

70. 1  moved  my  feet  from  the  place  where  I 
was  standing,  in  order  to  look  from  near  at  an¬ 
other  story  which,  beyond  Michal,  was  gleam¬ 
ing  white  to  me.  Here  was  storied  the  high 
glory  of  the  Roman  prince,  whose  worth  in¬ 
cited  Gregory  to  his  great  victory:3  I  speak  of 
Trajan  the  emperor;  and  a  poor  widow  was  at 
his  bridle  in  attitude  of  weeping  and  of  grief. 
Round  about  him  it  seemed  trampled  and 
thronged  with  knights,  and  above  him  the 
eagles  in  the  gold  were  moving  in  appearance 
in  the  wind.  The  wretched  woman  among  all 
these  seemed  to  be  saying:  “Lord,  do  me  venge¬ 
ance  for  my  son  who  is  slain,  whereat  I  am 
broken-hearted.”  And  he  to  answer  her:  “Now 
wait  till  I  return”;  and  she:  “My  Lord” — like 
one  in  whom  grief  is  urgent — “if  thou  return 
not?”  And  he:  “He  who  shall  be  where  I  am 
will  do  it  for  thee.”  And  she:  “What  will  the 
good  deed  of  another  be  to  thee,  if  thou  art  un¬ 
mindful  of  thine  own?”  Whereon  he:  “Now 
comfort  thee;  for  it  behoves  that  I  discharge 
my  duty  ere  I  go;  justice  so  wills,  and  pity 
holds  me  back.”  He  who  never  beheld  a  new 
thing  produced  that  visible  speech,  novel  to  us, 
because  it  is  not  found  on  earth. 

97.  While  I  was  delighting  myself  with  look¬ 
ing  at  the  images  of  such  great  humilities,  and 
for  their  Maker’s  sake  dear  to  see:  “Behold,” 
murmured  the  Poet,  “on  this  side  many  peo¬ 
ple,  but  they  make  few  steps;  they  will  put  us 
on  the  way  to  the  lofty  stairs.”  My  eyes  which 

1  See  II  Samuel,  6.  4-7. 

2  See  II  Samuel,  6.  12-16. 

3  It  was  believed  that  Pope  Gregory  the  Great  in¬ 
terceded  for  Trajan,  praying  that  he  might  be  de¬ 
livered  from  Hell.  See  Paradise,  xx.  106-117. 


were  intent  on  gazing,  were  not  slow  in  turn¬ 
ing  toward  him  in  order  to  see  novelties, 
whereof  they  are  fain. 

106. 1  would  not,  indeed,  Reader,  that  thou 
be  diverted  from  thy  good  purpose,  through 
hearing  how  God  wills  that  the  debt  be  paid. 
Heed  not  the  form  of  the  suffering;  think  on 
what  follows;  think  that,  at  the  worst,  beyond 
the  Great  Judgment  it  cannot  go! 

1 12. 1  began:  “Master,  that  which  I  see  mov¬ 
ing  toward  us  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  per¬ 
sons,  but  what  I  know  not,  I  am  so  at  loss  in 
looking.”  And  he  to  me:  “The  heavy  condition 
of  their  torment  bows  them  to  earth,  so  that 
my  own  eyes  at  first  had  contention  with  it. 
But  look  fixedly  there,  and  disentangle  with 
thy  sight  that  which  is  coming  beneath  those 
stones;  already  thou  canst  discern  how  each  is 
stricken.” 

1 2 1 .  O  proud  Christians,  wretched  and  weary, 
who,  diseased  in  vision  of  the  mind,  have  con¬ 
fidence  in  backward  steps,  are  ye  not  aware 
that  we  are  worms  born  to  form  the  angelic 
butterfly,  which  flies  unto  judgment  without 
defence?  Wherefore  does  your  mind  float  up 
aloft,  since  ye  are  as  it  were  defective  insects, 
even  as  a  worm  in  which  formation  fails? 

130.  As  to  support  ceiling  or  roof,  by  way  of 
corbel,  a  figure  is  sometimes  seen  joining  its 
knees  to  its  breast,  which  out  of  the  unreal 
gives  birth  to  a  real  distress  in  him  who  sees  it, 
thus  fashioned  did  I  see  these,  when  I  gave 
good  heed.  True  it  is,  that  they  were  more  or 
less  bowed  down,  according  as  they  had  more 
or  less  upon  their  backs;  and  he  who  had  most 
patience  in  his  looks,  weeping,  appeared  to 
say:  “I  can  no  more.” 

CANTO  XI 

1.  “O  our  Father,  who  art  in  Heaven,  not  cir¬ 
cumscribed,  but  for  the  greater  love  which 
Thou  hast  to  the  first  works  on  high,  praised 
be  Thy  name  and  Thy  power  by  every  crea¬ 
ture,  as  it  is  meet  to  render  thanks  to  Thy 
sweet  effluence.  May  the  peace  of  Thy  King¬ 
dom  come  unto  us,  for  if  it  come  not,  we  can¬ 
not  unto  it  of  ourselves,  with  all  our  striving. 
As  Thine  angels,  singing  Hosanna,  make  sac¬ 
rifice  to  Thee  of  their  will,  so  may  men  make 
of  theirs,  Give  us  this  day  the  daily  manna, 
without  which,  in  this  rough  desert,  he  back- 


CANTO  XI 


ward  goes,  who  toils  most  to  go  on.  And  as  we 
forgive  to  each  the  wrong  that  we  have  suf¬ 
fered,  even  do  Thou,  benignant,  forgive,  and 
regard  not  our  desert,  Our  virtue,  which  is 
easily  overcome,  put  not  to  proof  with  the  old 
adversary,  but  deliver  from  him  who  so  assails 
it.  This  last  prayer,  dear  Lord,  is,  indeed,  not 
made  for  ourselves,  for  it  is  not  needful,  but 
for  those  who  have  remained  behind  us.' 1 

25.  Thus  praying  good  speed  for  themselves 
and  us,  those  shades  were  all  going  under  their 
load,  like  that  of  which  one  sometimes  dreams, 
unequally  distressed,  round  and  round  and 
weary,  along  the  first  cornice,  purging  away 
the  sullies  of  the  world.  If  good  is  always  asked 
for  us  there,  what  can  be  said  and  done  here 
for  them  by  those  who  have  a  good  root  to 
their  will?  Truly  we  ought  to  aid  them  to 
wash  away  the  marks  which  they  bore  hence, 
so  that  pure  and  light  they  may  issue  forth  un¬ 
to  the  starry  wheels. 

37.  “Ah!  so  may  justice  and  pity  disburden 
you  speedily,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  move  the 
wing  which  may  lift  you  according  to  your  de¬ 
sire,  show  on  which  hand  is  the  shortest  path 
toward  the  stairway;  and,  if  there  be  more 
than  one  passage,  point  out  to  us  that  which 
least  steeply  slopes;  for  this  one  who  comes 
with  me,  because  of  the  burden  of  the  flesh  of 
Adam  wherewith  he  is  clothed,  is  chary,  a- 
gainst  his  will,  of  mounting  up.” 

46.  It  was  not  manifest  from  whom  came 
the  words  which  they  returned  to  these  that  he 
whom  I  was  following  had  spoken,  but  it  was 
said:  “Come  with  us  to  the  right  hand  along 
the  bank,  and  ye  will  find  the  pass  possible  for 
a  living  person  to  ascend.  And  were  I  not 
hindered  by  the  stone  which  tames  my  proud 
neck,  so  that  I  needs  must  carry  my  face  low, 
I  would  look  at  that  one  who  is  still  alive  and 
has  not  been  named,  to  see  if  I  know  him,  and 
to  make  him  pitiful  of  this  burden.  I  was  an 
Italian,  and  the  son  of  a  great  Tuscan;  Gug- 
lielmo  Aldobrandesco  was  my  father:  I  know 
not  if  his  name  was  ever  with  you.2  The  an¬ 
cient  blood  and  the  gallant  deeds  of  my  ances¬ 
tors  made  me  so  arrogant  that,  not  thinking  on 
the  common  mother,  I  held  every  man  in  scorn 

1  Cf.  Canto  xxvi.  130-132. 

2  See  Canto  vi.  111.  The  speaker  was  murdered, 
in  his  own  stronghold  of  Campagnatico,  in  1259. 


to  such  extreme  that  I  died  therefor,  as  the 
Sienese  know,  and  every  child  in  Campagn¬ 
atico  knows  it.  I  am  Omberto:  and  not  only  to 
me  pride  does  harm,  for  all  my  kinsfolk  has  it 
dragged  with  it  into  calamity;  and  here  must 
I  bear  this  load  for  it  till  God  be  satisfied, — 
here,  among  the  dead,  since  I  did  it  not  among 
the  living.” 

73.  Listening,  I  bent  down  my  face;  and  one 
of  them,  not  he  who  was  speaking,  twisted 
himself  under  the  weight  that  hampers  him, 
and  saw  me,  and  recognized  me,  and  called 
out,  keeping  his  eyes  with  effort  fixed  on  me, 
who  was  going  along  all  stooping  with  them.3 
“Oh,”  said  I  to  him,  “art  thou  not  Oderisi,  the 
honor  of  Gubbio,  and  the  honor  of  that  art 
which  in  Paris  is  called  illuminating?”  “Broth¬ 
er,”  said  he,  “more  smiling  are  the  leaves  that 
Franco  of  Bologna  pencils;  the  honor  is  now  all 
his,  and  mine  in  part.  Truly  I  should  not  have 
been  so  courteous  while  I  lived,  because  of  the 
great  desire  of  excelling  whereon  my  heart  was 
intent.  Of  such  pride  the  fee  is  paid  here;  and 
I  should  not  yet  be  here,  were  it  not  that,  still 
having  power  to  sin,  I  turned  me  unto  God. 

91.  “O  vainglory  of  human  powers!  how 
short  while  lasts  the  green  upon  the  top,  if  it 
be  not  followed  by  dull  ages.  Cimabue  thought 
to  hold  the  field  in  painting,  and  now  Giotto 
has  the  cry,  so  that  the  fame  of  him  is  obscured. 
In  like  manner  the  one  Guido  has  taken  from 
the  other  the  glory  of  our  tongue;  and  he  per¬ 
haps  is  born  who  shall  drive  both  one  and  the 
other  from  the  nest.4  Worldly  renown  is  naught 
but  a  breath  of  wind,  which  now  comes  this 
way  and  now  comes  that,  and  changes  name 
because  it  changes  quarter.  What  more  repute 
shalt  thou  have,  if  thou  strippest  thy  flesh  from 
thee  when  it  is  old,  than  if  thou  hadst  died  be¬ 
fore  thou  hadst  left  thy  pap  and  thy  rattle,  ere 
a  thousand  years  have  passed? — which  is  a 
shorter  space  compared  to  the  eternal  than  a 
movement  of  the  eyelid  to  the  circle  which  is 
slowest  turned  in  Heaven. 

109.  “With  him  who  takes  so  little  of  the 
road  in  front  of  me,  all  Tuscany  resounded, 
and  now  is  scarce  a  whisper  of  him  in  Siena, 
whereof  he  was  lord  when  the  Florentine  rage 

3  See  Canto  xiii.  136-138. 

4  The  first  Guido  is  Guido  Guinicelli;  see  Canto 
xxvi.  97-99.  The  other,  Guido  Cavalcanti. 


PURGATORY 


was  destroyed,  which  at  that  time  was  proud, 
as  now  it  is  prostitute.  Your  reputation  is  as 
the  color  of  grass,  which  comes  and  goes,  and 
he  discolors  it  through  whom  it  came  up  fresh 
from  the  earth.”  And  I  to  him:  “Thy  true 
speech  fills  my  heart  with  good  humility,  and 
thou  abatest  a  great  swelling  in  me:  but  who 
is  he  of  whom  thou  now  wert  speaking?” 
“That,”  he  answered,  “is  Provenzan  Salvani;' 
and  he  is  here,  because  he  was  presumptuous 
in  bringing  all  Siena  to  his  hands.  He  has  gone 
thus — and  he  goes  without  repose — ever  since 
he  died:  such  coin  does  every  one  pay  in  satis¬ 
faction,  who  is  too  daring  on  earth.” 

127.  And  I:  “If  that  spirit  who  awaits  the 
verge  of  life  ere  he  repent  abides  there  below, 
and,  if  good  prayer  do  not  assist  him,  ascends 
not  hither,  until  as  long  a  time  pass  as  he  lived, 
how  has  this  coming  been  granted  unto  him?” 
“When  he  was  living  in  greatest  boast,”  said 
he,  “laying  aside  all  shame,  he  freely  stationed 
himself  in  the  Campo  of  Siena,3  and  there,  to 
deliver  his  friend  from  the  punishment  he  was 
enduring  in  the  prison  of  Charles,  brought 
himself  to  tremble  in  every  vein.  More  I  will 
not  say,  and  I  know  that  I  speak  darkly;  but 
little  time  will  pass,  before  thy  neighbors  will 
so  act  that  thou  shalt  be  able  to  gloss  it.  This 
deed  removed  those  limits  for  him.” 

CANTO  XII 

1.  With  even  pace,  like  oxen  that  go  yoked,  I 
went  on  with  that  burdened  soul  so  long  as  the 
sweet  Pedagogue  allowed  it;  but  when  he  said: 
“Leave  him,  and  pass  on,  for  here  it  is  well  for 
every  one  to  urge  his  bark,  both  with  the  sail 
and  with  the  oars,  as  much  as  he  can,”  I  strait¬ 
ened  up  my  body  again,  as  is  required  for 
walking,  although  my  thoughts  remained  both 
stooping  and  abased. 

10. 1  had  moved  on,  and  was  following  will¬ 
ingly  the  steps  of  my  Master,  and  both  were 
now  showing  how  light  we  were,  when  he  said 
to  me:  “Turn  thine  eyes  downward;  it  will  be 

1  In  1260,  at  Montaperti. 

2  A  chief  supporter  of  the  Ghibelline  cause  in  Tus¬ 
cany.  Defeated  and  taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of 
Colie,  in  1269,  he  was  beheaded. 

3  The  chief  public  square.  Provenzano’s  friend  is 
said  to  have  been  condemned  to  death,  and  his  ran¬ 
som  fixed  at  ten  thousand  florins.  Provenzano,  not 
being  able  to  pay  this  sum  from  his  own  means,  took 
his  station  in  the  Campo  and  begged  of  the  passers-by. 


well  for  thee,  in  order  to  cheer  the  way,  to  look 
upon  the  bed  of  thy  footsteps.”  As  above  the 
buried,  so  that  there  may  be  memory  of  them, 
their  tombs  on  the  ground  bear  engraved  what 
they  were  before — whence  often  is  weeping  for 
them  there,  through  the  pricking  of  remem¬ 
brance,  which  only  to  the  pious  gives  the  spur 
— so  I  saw  figured  there,  but  of  better  sem¬ 
blance  in  respect  of  the  workmanship,  all  that 
for  pathway  juts  out  from  the  mountain. 

25. 1  saw,  on  one  side,  him  who  was  created 
more  noble  than  any  other  creature,  falling 
down  as  lightning  from  heaven.4 

28.1  saw  Briareus,"  on  the  other  side,  trans¬ 
fixed  by  the  celestial  bolt,  lying  heavy  upon  the 
earth  in  mortal  chill. 

31.  I  saw  Thymbraeus,6  I  saw  Pallas  and 
Mars,  still  armed,  around  their  father,  gazing 
at  the  scattered  limbs  of  the  giants. 

34. 1  saw  Nimrod  at  the  foot  of  his  great  toil, 
as  if  bewildered,  and  looking  round  upon  the 
people  that  had  been  proud  with  him  in  Shi- 
nar. 

37.  O  Niobe!  with  what  grieving  eyes  did  I 
see  thee  portrayed  upon  the  road  between  thy 
seven  and  seven  children  slain! 

40.  O  Saul!  how  on  thine  own  sword  didst 
thou  here  appear  dead  on  Gilboa,  which  there¬ 
after  felt  not  rain  or  dew!' 

43.  O  foolish  Arachne,s  so  did  I  see  thee,  al¬ 
ready  half  spider,  wretched  on  the  shreds  of 
the  work  which  to  thy  harm  by  thee  was 
made! 

46.O  Rehoboam!  here  thine  image  seems 
not  now  to  threaten,  but  a  chariot  bears  it  away 
full  of  terror  before  anyone  pursues  it.5' 

49.  The  hard  pavement  showed  also  how 
costly  to  his  mother  Alcmseon  made  the  ill- 
fated  ornament  appear.10 

52.  It  showed  how  his  sons  threw  themselves 

4  Lucifer.  See  Luke,  10.  18. 

6  See  Hell,  xxxi.  98. 

0  Apollo,  so  called  from  his  temple  at  Thymbra, 
not  far  from  Troy.  See  Virgil,  Georgies,  iv.  323. 

7  See  I  Samuel,  31.  4;  II  Samuel,  1.  21. 

8  Changed  to  a  spider  by  Athena,  whom  she  had 
challenged  to  a  trial  of  skill  at  the  loom. 

9  See  I  Kings,  12.  18. 

10  Amphiaraiis,  the  soothsayer,  foreseeing  his  own 
death  if  he  went  to  the  Theban  war,  hid  himself.  His 
wife,  Eriphyle.  bribed  by  a  golden  necklace,  betrayed 
his  hiding-place  and  was  killed  by  her  son  Alcmseon, 
for  thus  bringing  about  his  father’s  death. 


CANTO  XIII 


upon  Sennacherib  within  the  temple,  and  how, 
he  dead,  they  left  him  there.1 

55.  It  showed  the  ruin  and  the  cruel  butch¬ 
ery  that  Tomyris  wrought,  when  she  said  to 
Cyrus,  “For  blood  thou  hast  thirsted,  and  with 
blood  I  fill  thee.”J 

58.  It  showed  how  the  Assyrians  fled  in  rout 
after  Holofernes  was  killed,  and  also  the  rem¬ 
nants  of  the  victim.3 

61. 1  saw  Troy  in  ashes,  and  in  caverns:  O 
Ilion,  how  cast  down  and  abject  did  the  image 
which  is  there  discerned  show  thee! 

64.  What  Master  has  there  been  of  pencil  or 
of  style  that  could  draw  the  shadows  and  the 
lines  which  there  would  make  every  subtile 
genius  wonder?  Dead  seemed  the  dead,  and 
the  living  alive.  He  who  saw  the  truth  saw  not 
better  than  I  all  that  I  trod  on,  while  I  went 
bent  down. — Now  be  ye  proud,  and  go  your 
way  with  haughty  look,  ye  sons  of  Eve,  and 
bend  not  down  your  face  so  that  ye  may  see 
your  evil  path! 

73.  More  of  the  mountain  had  now  been  cir¬ 
cled  by  us,  and  of  the  sun’s  course  far  more 
spent,  than  my  mind,  not  disengaged,4  was  a  - 
ware,  when  he,  who  always  went  attentive  in 
advance,  began:  “Lift  up  thy  head;  there  is  no 
longer  time  for  going  thus  abstracted.  See  yon¬ 
der  an  Angel,  who  is  making  ready  to  come 
toward  us:  see  how  the  sixth  hand-maiden  is 
returning  from  the  service  of  the  day.0  With 
reverence  adorn  thine  acts  and  thy  face  so  that 
it  may  please  him  to  direct  us  upward.  Think 
that  this  day  never  dawns  again.” 

85. 1  was  well  used  to  his  admonition  never 
to  lose  time,6  so  that  on  that  theme  he  could 
not  speak  to  me  obscurely. 

88.  The  beautiful  creature  came  toward  us, 
clothed  in  white,  and  in  his  face  such  as  seems 
the  tremulous  morning  star.  His  arms  he 
opened,  and  then  he  opened  his  wings;  he 
said:  “Come:  here  at  hand  are  the  steps,  and 
easily  henceforth  does  one  ascend.  Very  few 
come  to  these  tidings.  O  human  race,  born  to 
fly  upward,  wherefore  at  a  little  wind  dost 
.  thou  so  fall?” 

1  See  II  Kings,  19.  37. 

3  See  Herodotus,  i.  214. 

3  See  Judith,  14.  18;  15.  2. 

4  Cf.  Canto  iv.  7-12. 

5  The  sixth  hour  of  the  day  is  coming  to  its  end. 

8  See  Canto  iii.  78. 


97.  He  led  us  to  where  the  rock  was  cleft; 
here  he  struck  his  wings  across  my  forehead,' 
then  promised  me  secure  progress. 

100.  As  on  the  right  hand,  to  ascend  the 
mountain,"  where  the  church  sits  which  above 
Rubaconte9  dominates  the  well-guided  city, 
the  bold  flight  of  the  ascent  is  broken  by  the 
stairs,  which  were  made  in  an  age  when  the 
record  and  the  stave  were  secure,  so  the  bank 
which  falls  here  very  steeply  from  the  next 
round  is  made  easier;  but  on  this  side  and  that 
the  high  rock  grazes.  As  we  turned  our 
persons  thither,  voices  sang  Beati  pauperes 
spiritu  in  such  wise  that  speech  could  not  tell 
it.  Ah,  how  different  are  these  passes  from 
those  of  Hell!  for  here  one  enters  with  songs, 
and  there  below  with  fierce  lamentations. 

1 15.  Already  we  were  mounting  up  over  the 
holy  stairs,  and  it  seemed  to  me  I  was  far  more 
light  than  I  had  seemed  before  upon  the  plain. 
Whereon  I:  “Master,  say,  what  heavy  thing 
has  been  lifted  from  me,  so  that  almost  no 
fatigue  is  felt  by  me  as  I  go  on?”  He  answered: 
“When  the  P’s  which,  almost  extinct,10  still  re¬ 
main  on  thy  forehead  shall  be,  as  one  is,  quite 
erased,  thy  feet  will  be  so  conquered  by  good¬ 
will  that  not  only  will  they  not  feel  fatigue,  but 
it  will  be  delight  to  them  to  be  urged  upward.” 
Then  I  did  like  those  who  are  going  with 
something  on  their  head  unknown  to  them, 
unless  the  signs  of  others  make  them  suspect; 
wherefore  the  hand  assists  to  ascertain,  and 
seeks  and  finds,  and  performs  that  office  which 
cannot  be  accomplished  by  the  sight;  and  with 
the  fingers  of  my  right  hand  outspread,  I 
found  six  only  of  those  letters  which  he  of  the 
keys  had  incised  upon  my  temples:  looking  at 
which  my  Leader  smiled. 

CANTO  XIII 

1.  We  were  at  the  top  of  the  stairway,  where 
the  mountain,  ascent  of  which  frees  one  from 
ill,  is  for  the  second  time  cut  back.  There  a  cor¬ 
nice  binds  the  hill  round  about,  in  like  man- 

T  See  Canto  ix.  1 12-1 14. 

8  The  hill  of  San  Miniato,  above  the  city  of  Florence. 

9  The  upper  bridge  at  Florence  across  the  Arno, 
named  after  Rubaconte  da  Mandello,  who  laid  the 
first  stone  of  it  in  1237. 

10  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  11-11,  Q 
162,  A  7. 


f 


PURGATORY 


ner  as  the  first,  except  that  its  arc  curves  more 
quickly.  No  figure  is  there,  nor  mark  which  is 
apparent;  thus  the  bank  appears  bare  and  thus 
appears  the  path,  with  but  the  livid  color  of  the 
stone. 

io.  “If  to  enquire  one  waits  here  for  people,” 
said  the  Poet,  “I  fear  that  perhaps  our  choice 
will  have  too  much  delay.”  Then  he  set  his 
eyes  fixedly  on  the  sun,  made  of  his  right  side 
the  centre  for  his  movement,  and  turned  the 
left  part  of  himself.  “O  sweet  light,  with  con¬ 
fidence  in  which  I  enter  on  the  new  road,  do 
thou  lead  us  on  it,”  he  said,  “as  there  is  need 
for  leading  here  within.  Thou  warmest  the 
world,  thou  shinest  upon  it;  if  other  reason 
prompt  not  to  the  contrary,  thy  rays  ought  ever 
to  be  guides.” 

22.  As  far  as  here  on  earth  is  reckoned  for  a 
mile,  so  far  had  we  now  gone  on  from  there,  in 
short  time  because  of  ready  will.  And  toward 
us  were  heard  flying,  not  however  seen,  spirits 
uttering  courteous  invitations  to  the  table  of 
love.  The  first  voice  which  passed  flying,  said 
loudly:  Vinum  non  habent /  and  went  on 
behind  us  reiterating  it.  And  before  it  had  be¬ 
come  quite  inaudible  through  distance,  an¬ 
other  passed  by,  crying:  “I  am  Orestes,”2  and 
also  did  not  stay. 

34.  “O  Father,”  said  I,  “what  voices  are 
these?”  and  even  as  I  was  asking,  lo!  the  third, 
saying:  “Love  them  from  whom  ye  have  had 
evil.”  And  the  good  Master:  “This  circle 
scourges  the  sin  of  envy,  and  therefore  the 
lashes  of  the  scourge  are  drawn  from  love.  The 
curb  must  be  of  the  contrary  sound;  I  believe, 
according  to  my  judgment,  that  thou  wilt  hear 
it,  before  thou  arrivest  at  the  pass  of  pardon. 
But  fix  thine  eyes  intently  through  the  air,  and 
thou  wilt  see  in  front  of  us  people  sitting,  and 
each  is  seated  against  the  cliff.”  Then  more 
than  before  I  opened  my  eyes;  I  looked  in  front 
of  me,  and  saw  shades  with  cloaks  in  color  not 
different  from  the  stone.  And  when  we  were 
a  little  further  forward,  I  heard  cry:  “Mary, 
pray  for  us!”  and  a  cry  on  Michael,  and  Peter, 
and  all  the  Saints. 

52. 1  do  not  believe  there  goes  on  earth  to- 

1  “They  have  no  wine.”  See  John,  2.  3. 

2  The  words  of  Pylades,  before  Aegisthus,  when 
contending  with  Orestes  to  be  put  to  death  in  his 
stead. 


day  a  man  so  hard  that  he  would  not  be 
pierced  with  compassion  at  that  which  I  then 
saw.  For  when  I  had  approached  so  near  to 
them  that  their  actions  came  surely  to  me,  tears 
were  drawn  from  my  eyes  by  heavy  grief. 
They  seemed  to  me  covered  with  coarse  hair¬ 
cloth,  and  one  was  supporting  the  other  with 
his  shoulder,  and  all  were  supported  by  the 
bank.  Thus  the  blind,  who  lack  subsistence, 
wait  at  pardons3  to  beg  for  what  they  need,  and 
one  bows  his  head  upon  another,  so  that  pity 
may  quickly  be  moved  in  others,  not  only  by 
the  sound  of  their  words,  but  by  the  sight 
which  implores  no  less.  And  as  the  sun  profits 
not  the  blind,  so  to  the  shades,  in  that  place  of 
which  I  was  just  now  speaking,  the  light  of 
Heaven  wills  not  to  make  largess  of  itself;  for 
an  iron  wire  pierces  the  eyelids  of  all;  even  as  is 
done  to  a  wild  hawk,  because  it  stays  not  quiet. 

73.  It  seemed  to  me  I  was  doing  outrage  in 
going  on,  seeing  others,  not  being  seen  myself, 
wherefore  I  turned  me  to  my  sage  counsellor. 
Well  did  he  know  what  the  dumb  wished  to 
say,  and  therefore  waited  not  my  asking,  but 
said:  “Speak,  and  be  brief  and  to  the  point.” 

79.  Virgil  was  coming  with  me  on  that  side 
of  the  cornice  from  which  one  may  fall,  be¬ 
cause  it  is  encircled  by  no  rim.  On  the  other 
side  of  me  were  the  devout  shades,  who 
through  the  horrible  suture  were  so  pressing 
out  their  tears  that  they  bathed  their  cheeks.  I 
turned  me  to  them,  and  :  “O  folk,”  I  began, 
“assured  of  seeing  the  Light  on  high  which 
your  desire  has  alone  in  its  care,  may  grace 
speedily  dissolve  the  scum  from  off  your  con¬ 
science  so  that  the  stream  of  memory  may  flow 
down  through  it  clear,4  tell  me,  for  it  will  be 
gracious  and  dear  to  me,  if  there  be  a  soul  here 
among  you  that  is  Italian,  and  perhaps  it  will 
be  good  for  him  if  I  learn  it.”  “O  my  brother, 
each  of  us  is  a  citizen  of  one  true  city,  but  thou 
meanest  one  who  lived  in  Italy  while  a  pil- 

*  >>5 

grim. 

97.  It  seemed  to  me  I  heard  this  for  answer 
somewhat  farther  on  than  where  I  was  stand¬ 
ing;  wherefore  I  made  myself  heard  still  more 
that  way.  Among  the  others  I  saw  a  shade  that 

3  On  occasion  of  special  indulgences  the  beggars 
gather  at  the  door  of  churches. 

4  See  Ephesians,  2.  19. 

6  See  Hebrews,  13.  14. 


CANTO  XIV 


was  expectant  in  look;  and,  if  anyone  should 
wish  to  ask:  How? — it  was  lifting  up  its  chin 
in  the  manner  of  a  blind  man.  “Spirit/’  said  I, 
“that  art  subduing  thyself  in  order  to  ascend, 
if  thou  art  that  one  which  answered  me,  make 
thyself  known  to  me  either  by  place  or  by 
name.” 

106.  “I  was  of  Siena,”  it  answered,  “and 
with  these  others  I  cleanse  here  my  guilty  life, 
weeping  to  Him  that  He  vouchsafe  Himself  to 
us.  Sapient  I  was  not,  although  I  was  called 
Sapia/  and  I  was  far  more  glad  of  others’  harm 
than  of  my  own  good  fortune.  And  that  thou 
mayst  not  believe  that  I  deceive  thee,  hear 
whether  I  was  foolish  as  I  tell  thee.  When  the 
arch  of  my  years  was  already  descending,  my 
fellow-citizens  were  joined  in  battle  near  to 
Colle2  with  their  adversaries,  and  I  prayed  to 
God  for  that  which  He  willed.  They  were 
routed  there,  and  turned  into  the  bitter  passes 
of  flight;  and  I,  seeing  the  pursuit,  experienced 
a  joy  unmatched  by  any  other;  so  much  that  I 
turned  upward  my  audacious  face,  crying  out 
to  God:  ‘Henceforth  no  more  I  fear  thee’;  as 
the  blackbird  does  because  of  a  little  fair 
weather.  At  the  very  end  of  my  life  I  desired 
peace  with  God;  and  even  yet  my  debt  would 
not  have  been  lessened  by  penitence,  had  it  not 
been  that  Pier  Pettinagno/  who  out  of  charity 
was  sorry  for  me,  held  me  in  memory  in  his 
holy  prayers.  But  who  art  thou  that  goest  ask¬ 
ing  of  our  conditions,  and  earnest  thine  eyes 
loosed  as  I  think,  and  breathing  dost  speak?” 

133.  “My  eyes,”  said  I,  “will  yet  be  taken 
from  me  here;  but  for  a  short  time,  for  small  is 
the  offence  committed  through  their  being 
turned  with  envy.  Far  greater  is  the  fear,  with 
which  my  soul  is  in  suspense,  of  the  torment 
below,  and  the  load  down  there  already  weighs 
upon  me.”  And  she  to  me:  “Who  then  hath 
led  thee  up  here  among  us,  if  thou  thinkest  to 
return  below?”  And  I:  “This  one  who  is  with 
me,  and  who  says  not  a  word:  and  I  am  alive; 
and  therefore  ask  of  me,  spirit  elect,  if  thou 
wouldst  that  on  earth  I  should  yet  move  for 

1  A  lady  said  to  have  been  of  the  Bigozzi  family, 
who  held  a  stronghold  about  four  miles  from  Colle, 
in  the  territory  of  Siena. 

2  This  was  the  battle  in  1269,  in  which  the  Floren¬ 
tines  routed  the  Sienese  Ghibellines.  See  Canto  xi. 
121-123. 

3  A  poor  comb-dealer  of  Siena. 


thee  my  mortal  feet.”  “Oh,  this  is  so  strange  a 
thing  to  hear,”  she  replied,  “that  it  is  a  great 
sign  that  God  loves  thee;  therefore  assist  me 
sometimes  with  thy  prayer.  And  I  beseech 
thee,  by  that  which  thou  most  desirest,  that,  if 
ever  thou  tread  the  earth  of  Tuscany,  thou  re¬ 
store  me  to  good  fame  among  my  kindred. 
Thou  wilt  see  them  among  that  vain  people^ 
which  hopes  in  Talamone/  and  will  there  lose 
more  hope,  than  in  finding  the  Diana;6  but  the 
admirals  will  there  lose  even  more.” 

CANTO  XIV 

1.  “Who  is  this  that  circles  our  mountain  ere 
death  have  given  him  flight,  and  opens  and 
shuts  his  eyes  at  his  own  will?”'  “I  know  not 
who  he  is,  but  I  know  that  he  is  not  alone.  Do 
thou,  who  art  nearer  to  him,  ask  him;  and 
sweetly,  so  that  he  may  speak,  accost  him.” 
Thus  two  spirits,  leaning  one  to  the  other,  dis¬ 
coursed  of  me  there  on  the  right  hand,  then 
turned  their  faces  up  to  speak  to  me;  and  one 
of  them  said:  “O  soul,  that  still  fixed  in  thy 
body  art  going  on  toward  heaven,  for  charity 
console  us,  and  tell  us  whence  thou  comest, 
and  who  thou  art;  for  thou  makest  us  so  great¬ 
ly  marvel  at  this  thy  grace,  as  needs  must  a 
thing  that  never  was  before.”  And  I:  “Through 
mid-Tuscany  there  wanders  a  little  stream, 
that  has  its  source  on  Falterona/  and  a  hun¬ 
dred  miles  of  course  does  not  suffice  it.  From 
thereupon  I  bring  this  body.  To  tell  you  who  I 
am  would  be  to  speak  in  vain,  for  my  name  as 
yet  makes  no  great  sound.”  “If  I  rightly  pene¬ 
trate  thy  meaning  with  my  understanding,” 
then  replied  to  me  he  who  had  spoken  first, 
“thou  speakest  of  the  Arno.” 

25.  And  the  other  said  to  him:  “Why  did  he 
conceal  the  name  of  that  river,  even  as  a  man 
does  of  horrible  things?”  And  the  shade  of 
whom  this  was  asked,  delivered  itself  thus:  “I 

4  Cf.  Hell,  xxix.  122. 

5  A  little  Tuscan  port  on  which  the  Sienese  wasted 
toil  and  money  in  the  vain  hope  that,  by  strengthening 
and  enlarging  it,  they  could  rival  the  Pisans  and 
Genoese,  at  sea. 

0  A  subterranean  stream  supposed  to  flow  beneath 
the  city. 

7  These  words  are  spoken  by  Guido  del  Duca  and 
answered  by  Rinier  da  Calboli;  both  of  them  men 
of  note  in  the  Romagna  during  the  thirteenth  century. 
Guido  was  a  Ghibelline,  Rinier  a  Guelf. 

8  One  of  the  highest  of  the  Tuscan  Apennines. 


PURGATORY 


know  not,  but  truly  it  is  fit  that  the  name  of 
such  a  valley  perish,  for  from  its  source  (where 
the  rugged  mountain  chain,  from  which  Pelo- 
rus  is  cut  off,  is  so  teeming  that  in  few  places 
does  it  pass  beyond  that  mark),1  far  as  there 
where  it  renders  itself  to  restore  that  which 
heaven  sucks  up  from  the  sea,  whence  the  riv¬ 
ers  have  what  flows  in  them,  virtue  is  driven 
away  as  an  enemy  by  all  men,  even  as  a  ser¬ 
pent,  either  through  ill-fortune  of  the  place,  or 
through  evil  habit  that  incites  them.  Where¬ 
fore  the  inhabitants  of  the  wretched  valley 
have  so  changed  their  nature  that  it  seems  as 
though  Circe  had  them  in  her  feeding.  Among 
foul  hogs,2  more  fit  for  acorns  than  for  other 
food  made  for  human  use,  it  first  directs  its 
poor  path.  Then,  coming  down,  it  finds  curs/ 
more  snarling  than  their  power  warrants,  and 
from  them  disdainfully  it  twists  its  muzzle.  It 
goes  on  falling,  and  the  more  it  swells  so  much 
the  more  does  the  accursed  and  ill-fated  ditch 
find  the  dogs  becoming  wolves.4  Descending 
then  through  many  hollow  depths,  it  finds  the 
foxes'*  so  full  of  fraud,  that  they  fear  not  wit 
which  may  entrap  them.  Nor  will  I  cease  to 
speak  because  another  may  hear  me:  and  well 
it  will  be  for  this  man  if  hereafter  he  mind 
him  of  that  which  a  spirit  of  truth  discloses  to 
me. 

58.  “I  see  thy  grandson,6  who  becomes  a 
hunter  of  those  wolves  upon  the  bank  of  the 
fierce  stream,  and  terrifies  them  all.  He  sells 
their  flesh,  it  being  yet  alive;  then  he  slaughters 
them  like  aged  cattle;  many  of  life,  himself  of 
honor  he  deprives.  Bloody  he  comes  forth  from 
the  dismal  wood;  he  leaves  it  such,  that  from 
now  for  a  thousand  years  it  is  not  rewooded  in 
its  primal  state.” 

67.  As  at  the  announcement  of  grievous  ills, 
the  face  of  him  who  listens  is  disturbed,  from 
what  quarter  soever  the  peril  may  assail  him, 

1  The  chain  of  the  Apennines — from  which  Pelorus, 
the  northeastern  headland  of  Sicily,  seems  cut  off — 
nowhere  more  teems  with  waters  than  on  Monte 
Falterona,  where  the  Tiber,  as  well  as  the  Arno,  has 
its  source. 

2  The  people  of  the  Casentino,  the  upper  valley  of 
the  Arno. 

3  Of  Arezzo. 

4  Of  Florence. 

5  Of  Pisa. 

c  Fulcieri  da  Calboli,  grandson  of  Rinieri,  to  whom 
Guido  del  Duca  is  speaking,  was  made  podesta  of 
Florence  in  1302. 


so  I  saw  the  other  soul,  that  was  staying  turned 
to  hear,  become  disturbed  and  sad,  when  it  had 
gathered  to  itself  the  words. 

73.  The  speech  of  the  one  and  the  look  of  the 
other  made  me  wishful  to  know  their  names, 
and  I  made  request  for  it,  mixed  with  prayers. 
Wherefore  the  spirit  which  had  first  spoken  to 
me  began  again:  “Thou  wishest  that  I  conde¬ 
scend  to  do  for  thee  that  which  thou  wilt  not 
do  for  me;  but  since  God  wills  that  such  great 
grace  of  His  shine  through  in  thee,  I  will  not 
be  chary  to  thee;  therefore  know  that  I  am 
Guido  del  Duca.  My  blood  was  so  inflamed 
with  envy  that,  had  I  seen  a  man  becoming 
joyful,  thou  wouldst  have  seen  me  overspread 
with  hue  of  spite.  Of  my  own  sowing  such 
straw  I  reap.  O  human  race,  why  dost  thou  set 
thy  heart  there  where  exclusion  of  a  compan¬ 
ion  is  needful? 

88.  “This  one  is  Rinier;  this  is  the  glory  and 
the  honor  of  the  house  of  Calboli,  where  no 
one  since  has  made  himself  heir  of  his  worth. 
And  between  the  Po  and  the  mountain,  and 
the  sea  and  the  Reno,‘  not  his  race  only  has  be¬ 
come  stripped  of  the  good  requisite  for  truth 
and  for  delight;  for  within  these  boundaries 
the  land  is  full  of  poisonous  stocks,  so  that 
slowly  would  they  now  die  out  through  culti¬ 
vation.  Where  is  the  good  Lizio,  and  Arrigo 
Mainardi,  Pier  Traversaro,  and  Guido  di  Car- 
pigna?s  O  men  of  Romagna  turned  to  bas¬ 
tards!  When  in  Bologna  will  a  Fabbro  take 
root  again?  When  in  Faenza  a  Bernardin  di 
Fosco,  the  noble  scion  of  a  little  plant?  Marvel 
not,  Tuscan,  if  I  weep,  when  I  remember,  with 
Guido  da  Prata,  Ugolin  d’  Azzo  who  lived 
with  us,  Federico  Tignoso  and  his  company, 
the  house  of  Traversara,  and  the  Anastagi, 
(both  the  one  race  and  the  other  are  without 
heir),  the  ladies  and  the  cavaliers,  the  toils  and 
the  repose  for  which  love  and  courtesy  inspired 
us,  there  where  hearts  have  become  so  wicked. 
O  Brettinoro,  why  dost  thou  not  make  away 
with  thyself,0  since  thy  family  has  gone,  and 
many  people,  in  order  not  to  become  guilty? 

7  That  is,  in  all  Romagna. 

8  These  and  others  named  afterwards  were  well¬ 
born,  honorable,  and  courteous  men  in  Romagna  in 
the  thirteenth  century. 

9  Brettinoro  is  a  small  town  near  Forli.  It  was  the 
birthplace  of  Guido  del  Duca,  and  the  family  to  which 
he  refers  was,  perhaps,  his  own. 


CANTO  XV 


Bagnacaval  does  well  that  it  gets  no  more  sons; 
and  Castrocaro  does  ill,  and  Conio  worse  that 
it  still  troubles  itself  to  beget  such  counts/  The 
Pagani  will  do  well  after  their  demon  shall  be 
gone  from  them,”  yet  not  so  that  a  pure  testi¬ 
mony  can  ever  remain  to  them.  O  Ugolin  de’ 
Fantolin,  thy  name  is  secure,  since  no  longer  is 
one  to  be  expected  who  can  make  it  dark  by  his 
degeneracy.3  But  go  thy  way,  Tuscan,  now; 
for  now  it  pleases  me  far  more  to  weep  than  to 
speak,  so  much  has  our  discourse  wrung  my 
mind.” 

127.  We  knew  that  those  dear  souls  heard  us 
go  on;  therefore  by  their  silence  they  made  us 
confident  of  the  road.  After  we  had  become 
alone  as  we  proceeded,  a  voice,  that  seemed 
like  lightning  when  it  cleaves  the  air,  came 
counter  to  us,  saying:  “Everyone  that  findeth 
me  shall  slay  me,”4  and  fled  like  thunder 
which  rolls  away,  if  suddenly  the  cloud  is 
rent.  Soon  as  our  hearing  had  a  truce  from 
it,  lo!  now  another  with  so  great  a  crash 
that  it  resembled  a  thunder-clap  which  fol¬ 
lows  fast:  “I  am  Aglauros  who  became  a 

>>5 

stone. 

140.  And  then  to  press  close  to  the  Poet,  I 
took  a  step  backward  and  not  forward.  The  air 
was  now  quiet  on  every  side,  and  he  said  to  me: 
“That  was  the  hard  curb  which  ought  to  hold 
a  man  within  his  bound;  but  ye  take  the  bait, 
so  that  the  hook  of  the  old  adversary  draws  you 
to  him,  and  therefore  little  avails  bridle  or  lure. 
Heaven  calls  you,  and  revolves  around  you, 
displaying  to  you  its  eternal  beauties,  and  your 
eye  looks  only  on  the  ground;  wherefore  He 
who  discerns  all  things  scourges  you.” 

CANTO  XV 

1.  As  much  as,  between  the  beginning  of  the 
day  and  the  close  of  the  third  hour,  appears  of 
the  sphere  which  is  ever  sporting  in  manner  of 
a  child,  so  much  of  his  course  toward  the  eve¬ 
ning  appeared  to  be  now  remaining  for  the 

1  Bagnacavallo,  Castrocaro,  and  Conio  are  three 
little  towns  in  Romagna. 

2  The  Pagani  were  lords  of  Faenza  and  Imola;  the 
demon  was  Maghinardo.  Cf.  Hell,  xxvii.  49-51. 

3  Both  the  sons  of  Ugolino  de’  Fantolin  had  died 
without  offspring.  The  Fantolini  were  of  Faenza. 

4  The  words  of  Cain.  Genesis,  4.  14. 

3  The  daughter  of  Cecrops,  changed  to  stone  be¬ 
cause  of  envy  of  her  sister. 


75 

sun.  It  was  vespers  there,  and  here  midnight; 
and  the  rays  were  striking  us  full  in  the  face, 
because  the  mountain  had  been  so  circled  by  us 
that  we  were  now  going  straight  toward  the 
sunset,  when  I  felt  my  forehead  weighed  down 
by  the  splendor  far  more  than  at  first,  and  the 
things  not  known  were  a  wonder  to  me: 
wherefore  I  lifted  my  hands  toward  the  top  of 
my  brows,  and  made  for  myself  the  visor 
which  lessens  the  excess  of  what  is  seen. 

16.  As  when  from  water,  or  from  a  mirror, 
the  ray  leaps  to  the  opposite  quarter,  mounting 
up  in  like  manner  to  that  in  which  it  descends, 
and  at  equal  distance  departs  as  much  from  the 
fall  of  the  stone,  as  experiment  and  art  show; 
so  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  was  struck  by  light 
reflected  there  in  front  of  me,  wherefore  my 
sight  was  swift  to  fly.  “What  is  that,  sweet  Fa¬ 
ther,  from  which  I  cannot  screen  my  sight  so 
much  that  it  may  avail  me,”  said  I,  “and  which 
seems  to  be  moving  toward  us?”  “Marvel  not 
if  the  family  of  Heaven  still  dazzle  thee,”  he 
replied  to  me;  “it  is  a  messenger  that  comes  to 
invite  one  to  ascend.  Soon  will  it  be  that  to  see 
these  things  will  not  be  grievous  to  thee,  but 
will  be  to  thee  a  delight  as  great  as  nature  has 
fitted  thee  to  feel.” 

34.  When  we  had  reached  the  blessed  Angel, 
with  a  glad  voice  he  said:  “Enter  ye  from  here 
on  a  stairway  far  less  steep  than  the  others.” 

3 7.  We  were  mounting,  already  departed 
thence,  and  “Bead  misericordes ”6  was  sung 
behind  us,  and:  “Rejoice  thou  that  over- 
comest.” 

40.  My  Master  and  I,  we  two  alone,  were  go¬ 
ing  on  upward,  and  I  was  thinking,  as  we 
went,  to  win  profit  from  his  words:  and  I  ad¬ 
dressed  me  to  him,  enquiring  thus:  “What  did 
the  spirit  from  Romagna  mean,  in  speaking  of 
‘exclusion’  and  a  ‘companion’?”  Wherefore  he 
to  me:  “Of  his  own  greatest  fault  he  knows  the 
harm,  and  therefore  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
if  he  rebuke  it,  in  order  that  there  may  be  less 
lamenting  for  it.  Because  your  desires  are  di¬ 
rected  there,  where,  through  companionship,  a 
share  is  lessened,  envy  moves  the  bellows  for 
your  sighs.  But  if  the  love  of  the  highest  sphere 
turned  your  desire  upward,  that  fear  would 
not  be  in  your  breast;  for  the  more  there  are 
who  there  say  ‘Ours,’  so  much  the  more  of 

6  “Blessed  are  the  merciful.” 


76  PURGATORY 


good  doth  each  possess,  and  the  more  of  char¬ 
ity  burns  in  that  cloister.”1 

58.  “I  am  more  empty  of  satisfaction,”  said  I, 
“than  if  I  had  at  first  been  silent,  and  more  of 
doubt  I  gather  in  my  mind.  How  can  it  be  that 
a  good  distributed  can  make  more  possessors 
richer  with  itself,  than  if  it  be  possessed  by 
few?”  And  he  to  me:  “Because  thou  fastenest 
thy  mind  only  on  earthly  things,  thou  gather- 
est  darkness  from  the  very  light.  That  infinite 
and  ineffable  Good  which  is  on  high,  runs  to 
love  even  as  a  sunbeam  comes  to  a  lucid  body. 
So  much  it  gives  itself  as  it  finds  of  ardor;  so 
that  how  far  soever  charity  extends,  over  it 
does  the  Eternal  Valor  spread.  And  the  more 
the  people  who  set  their  hearts  on  high  the 
more  there  are  for  loving  well,  and  the  more 
love  there  is,  and  like  a  mirror  one  reflects  to 
the  other.  And  if  my  discourse  appease  not  thy 
hunger,  thou  shalt  see  Beatrice,  and  she  will 
fully  take  from  thee  this  and  every  other  long¬ 
ing.  Strive  only  that  soon  may  be  extinct,  as  are 
the  two  already,  the  five  wounds  which  are 
closed  up  by  being  painful.” 

82.  As  I  was  wishing  to  say:  “Thou  dost  sat¬ 
isfy  me,”  I  saw  that  I  had  arrived  on  the  next 
round,  so  that  my  eager  eyes  made  me  silent. 
There  it  seemed  to  me  I  was  of  a  sudden  rapt 
in  an  ecstatic  vision,  and  saw  many  persons  in 
a  temple,  and  a  lady  at  the  entrance,  with  the 
sweet  mien  of  a  mother,  saying:  “My  son,  why 
hast  thou  thus  dealt  with  us?  Behold,  thy  fa¬ 
ther  and  I  have  sought  thee,  sorrowing.”  And 
as  here  she  was  silent,  that  which  first  ap¬ 
peared,  disappeared. 

94.  Then  appeared  to  me  another,  with  those 
waters  down  along  her  cheeks  which  grief  dis¬ 
tils  when  it  is  born  of  great  despite  toward 
others,  and  she  was  saying:  “If  thou  art  lord  of 
the  city  about  whose  name  was  such  great 
strife  among  the  gods,  and  whence  every  sci¬ 
ence  sparkles  forth,  avenge  thyself  on  those 
audacious  arms,  which  have  embraced  our 
daughter,  O  Pisistratus.”  And  the  lord  ap¬ 
peared  to  me,  benign  and  mild,  to  answer  her, 
with  temperate  look:  “What  shall  we  do  to  him 
who  desires  ill  for  us,  if  he  who  loves  us  is  by 
us  condemned?” 

1  See  Aquinas,  Summa  TJteologica,  Part  I-II,  Q  26, 
A  3.  Cf.  Milton,  Paradise  Lost,  v.  73. 


106.  Then  I  saw  people  inflamed  with  fire  of 
wrath,  killing  a  youth  with  stones,  loudly  cry¬ 
ing  to  each  other  only:  “Slay,  slay.”  And  I  saw 
him  bowed  toward  the  ground  by  death, 
which  now  was  weighing  on  him,  but  in  such 
great  strife  he  ever  made  of  his  eyes  gates  for 
heaven,  praying  to  the  high  Lord,  with  that  as¬ 
pect  which  unlocks  pity,  that  He  would  par¬ 
don  his  persecutors.2 

1 15.  When  my  mind  returned  outwardly  to 
the  things  which  outside  of  it  are  true,  I  recog¬ 
nized  my  not  false  errors.  My  Leader,  who 
could  see  me  act  like  a  man  who  looses  himself 
from  slumber,  said  :  “What  ails  thee,  that  thou 
canst  not  support  thyself?  but  art  come  more 
than  half  a  league  veiling  thine  eyes,  and  with 
thy  legs  tangled  like  one  whom  wine  or  slum¬ 
ber  bends.”  “O  my  sweet  Father,  if  thou  hark- 
enest  to  me  I  will  tell  thee,”  said  I,  “what  ap¬ 
peared  to  me  when  my  legs  were  thus  taken 
from  me.”  And  he:  “If  thou  hadst  a  hundred 
masks  upon  thy  face,  thy  thoughts,  howsoever 
small,  would  not  be  hidden  from  me.  That 
which  thou  hast  seen  was  in  order  that  thou 
excuse  not  thyself  from  opening  thy  heart  to 
the  waters  of  peace  which  are  poured  forth 
from  the  eternal  fountain.  I  did  not  ask:  ‘What 
ails  thee?’  for  the  reason  that  he  does  who 
looks  only  with  the  eye  which  has  no  seeing 
when  the  body  lies  inanimate;  but  I  asked,  in 
order  to  give  vigor  to  thy  foot;  thus  it  behoves 
to  spur  the  sluggards,  slow  to  use  their  wake¬ 
fulness  when  it  returns.” 

r39-  We  were  going  on  through  the  vesper 
time,  forward  intent  so  far  as  the  eyes  could 
reach  against  the  late  and  shining  rays;  and,  lo! 
little  by  little,  a  smoke  came  toward  us,  dark  as 
night;  nor  was  there  place  to  shelter  ourselves 
from  it.  This  took  from  us  our  eyes  and  the 
pure  air. 

CANTO  XVI 

1.  Gloom  of  hell,  or  of  night  deprived  of  every 
planet,  under  a  poor  sky,  darkened  by  clouds 
as  much  as  it  can  be,  never  made  so  thick  a  veil 
to  my  sight,  or  of  so  rough  a  tissue  to  my  feel¬ 
ing,  as  that  smoke  which  covered  us  there;  for 
it  suffered  not  my  eye  to  stay  open:  wherefore 
my  sage  and  trusty  Escort  drew  to  my  side  and 

aSee  Acts,  7.  55-60. 


CANTO  XVI 


offered  me  his  shoulder.  Even  as  a  blind  man 
goes  behind  his  guide,  in  order  not  to  stray, 
and  not  to  butt  against  anything  that  may  hurt 
or  perhaps  kill  him,  I  went  along,  through  the 
bitter  and  foul  air,  listening  to  my  Leader,  who 
was  saying  only:  “Take  care  that  thou  be  not 
parted  from  me.” 

16. 1  heard  voices,  and  each  appeared  to  be 
praying  for  peace  and  for  mercy  to  the  Lamb 
of  God  that  taketh  sins  away.  Only  “Agnus 
Dei”1  were  their  exordiums:  one  word  there 
was  in  all,  and  one  measure;  so  that  there 
seemed  entire  concord  among  them.  “Are 
these  spirits,  Master,  that  I  hear?”  said  I.  And 
he  to  me:  “Thou  apprehendest  truly;  and  they 
go  loosening  the  knot  of  anger.” 

25.  “Now  who  art  thou  that  cleavest  our 
smoke,  and  speakest  of  us  even  as  if  thou  didst 
still  divide  the  time  by  calends?”  Thus  was  it 
spoken  by  a  single  voice:  whereon  my  Master 
said:  “Reply,  and  ask  if  by  this  way  one  goes 
up.”  And  I,  “O  creature,  that  art  cleansing  thy¬ 
self,  in  order  to  return  beautiful  unto  Him 
who  made  thee,  a  marvel  shalt  thou  hear  if 
thou  accompaniest  me.”  “I  will  follow  thee,  for 
so  far  as  is  permitted  me,”  it  replied,  “and  if 
the  smoke  allows  not  seeing,  in  its  stead  hear¬ 
ing  shall  keep  us  joined.”  Then  I  began: 
“With  that  swathing  band  which  death  un¬ 
binds  I  go  upward,  and  I  came  hither  through 
the  infernal  anguish;  and  since  God  has  so  en¬ 
closed  me  in  His  grace  that  He  wills  that  I 
should  see  His  court  by  a  mode  wholly  out  of 
modern  usage,  conceal  not  from  me  who  thou 
wast  before  thy  death,  but  tell  it  to  me,  and  tell 
me  if  I  am  going  rightly  to  the  pass;  and  let  thy 
words  be  our  escorts.”  “I  was  a  Lombard,  and 
was  called  Marco;  I  had  knowledge  of  the 
world,  and  I  loved  that  virtue,  toward  which 
everyone  has  now  unbent  his  bow:  for  mount¬ 
ing  upward  thou  art  going  rightly.”  Thus  he 
replied,  and  added:  “I  pray  thee  that  thou  pray 
for  me  when  thou  shalt  be  above.” 

52.  And  I  to  him:  “I  pledge  thee  my  faith  to 
do  that  which  thou  askest  of  me;  but  I  am 
bursting  inwardly  with  a  doubt,  if  I  free  not 
myself  of  it;  at  first  it  was  single;  and  now  it  is 
made  double  by  thy  opinion  which  makes  cer¬ 
tain  to  me,  here  and  elsewhere,  that  with 

1  “Lamb  of  God.” 


which  I  couple  it.  The  world  is  indeed  as  utter¬ 
ly  deserted  by  every  virtue  as  thou  declarest  to 
me,  and  is  big  and  covered  with  iniquity;  but 
I  pray  that  thou  point  out  to  me  the  cause,  so 
that  I  may  see  it,  and  that  I  may  show  it  to  oth¬ 
ers;  for  one  sets  it  in  the  heavens,  and  one  here 
below.” 

64.  A  deep  sigh  which  grief  wrung  into  “Ay 
me!”  he  first  sent  forth,  and  then  he  began: 
“Brother,  the  world  is  blind,  and  thou  truly 
comest  from  it.  Ye  who  are  living  refer  every 
cause  upward  to  the  heavens  only,  as  though 
they  moved  all  things  with  them  of  necessity. 
If  this  were  so,  free  will  would  be  destroyed  in 
you,  and  there  would  be  no  justice  in  having 
joy  for  good,  and  grief  for  evil.  The  heavens 
initiate  your  movements,  I  do  not  say  all  of 
them;  but,  supposing  that  I  said  it,  light  for 
good  and  for  evil  is  given  to  you,  and  free  will, 
which,  though  it  endure  fatigue  in  the  first 
battles  with  the  heavens,  afterwards,  if  it  be 
well  nurtured,  overcomes  everything.  To  a 
greater  force,  and  to  a  better  nature,  ye,  free, 
are  subject,  and  that  creates  the  mind  in  you, 
which  the  heavens  have  not  in  their  charge. 
Therefore  if  the  present  world  go  astray,  the 
cause  is  in  you,  in  you  it  is  to  be  sought;  and 
of  this  I  will  now  be  a  true  informant  for 
thee. 

85.  “Forth  from  the  hand  of  Him  who  de¬ 
lights  in  it  ere  it  exists,  like  to  a  little  maid 
who,  weeping  and  smiling,  wantons  childishly, 
issues  the  simple  little  soul,  which  knows  noth¬ 
ing,  save  that,  proceeding  from  a  glad  Maker, 
it  turns  willingly  to  that  which  allures  it.  At 
first  it  tastes  the  savor  of  trivial  good;  by  this  it 
is  deceived  and  runs  after  it,  if  guide  or  bridle 
bend  not  its  love.  Hence  it  was  needful  to  im¬ 
pose  law  as  a  bridle;  needful  to  have  a  king 
who  should  discern  at  least  the  tower  of  the 
true  city.  The  laws  exist,  but  who  set  hand  to 
them?  Not  one:  because  the  shepherd  who  is 
in  advance  can  chew  the  cud,  but  has  not  his 
hoofs  divided:2  wherefore  the  people,  who  see 
their  guide  aim  only  at  that  good  for  which 
they  are  greedy,  feed  upon  that,  and  seek  no 
further.  Well  canst  thou  see  that  the  evil  guid¬ 
ance  is  the  cause  which  has  made  the  world 
guilty,  and  not  that  nature  is  corrupt  in  you. 

2  See  Leviticus,  11.  3-8.  Also  Cf.  Aquinas,  Summa 
T heologica,  Part  I-II,  Q  102,  A  6. 


78  PURGATORY 


Rome,  which  made  the  world  good,  was  wont 
to  have  two  Suns,  which  made  visible  both  one 
road  and  the  other,  that  of  the  world  and  that 
of  God.  One  has  extinguished  the  other;  and 
the  sword  is  joined  to  the  crozier;  and  the  two 
together  must  perforce  go  ill,  because,  being 
joined,  one  fears  not  the  other.  If  thou  believ- 
est  me  not,  consider  the  fruit,  for  every  plant  is 
known  by  its  seed. 

1 1 5.  “In  the  land  which  the  Adige  and  the 
Po  water,  virtue  and  courtesy  were  wont  to  be 
found  before  Frederick  had  his  quarrel;1  now 
it  may  be  securely  traversed  by  anyone  who, 
out  of  shame,  would  avoid  speaking  with  the 
good,  or  drawing  near  them.  Three  old  men 
are  indeed  still  there,  in  whom  the  antique  age 
rebukes  the  new,  and  it  seems  late  to  them  ere 
God  remove  them  to  a  better  life;  Corrado  da 
Palazzo,2  and  the  good  Gherardo,’’  and  Guido 
da  Castel,  who  is  better  named,  in  fashion  of 
the  French,  the  simple  Lombard/ 

127.  “Say  thou  henceforth,  that  the  Church 
of  Rome,  through  confounding  in  itself  two 
modes  of  rule,  falls  in  the  mire,  and  defiles  it¬ 
self  and  its  burden.” 

130.  “O  my  Marco,”  said  I,  “thou  reasonest 
well;  and  now  I  discern  why  the  sons  of  Levi 
were  excluded  from  the  heritage;5  but  what 
Gherardo  is  that,  who,  thou  sayest,  remains  for 
sample  of  the  extinct  folk,  in  reproach  of  this 
barbarous  age?”  “Either  thy  speech  deceives 
me,  or  it  is  making  trial  of  me,”  he  replied  to 
me,  “in  that,  speaking  Tuscan  to  me,  it  seems 
that  thou  knowest  naught  of  the  good  Ghe¬ 
rardo.  By  other  added  name  I  do  not  know  him, 
unless  I  should  take  it  from  his  daughter  Gaia. 
May  God  be  with  you!  for  farther  I  come  not 
with  you.  Behold  the  brightness  which  rays  al¬ 
ready  whitening  through  the  smoke;  and  I 
must  needs  depart — the  Angel  is  there — before 

1  Before  Frederick  II  had  his  quarrel  with  Gregory 
ix ;  that  is,  before  Emperor  and  Pope  had  failed  in  their 
respective  duties  to  each  other. 

2  Of  Brescia,  and  in  his  day  of  high  repute  for  hon¬ 
orable  character 

3  Gherardo  da  Camino,  “noble  in  his  life,  and  whose 
memory  will  always  be  noble,”  says  Dante  in  the 
Convito,  iv.  14,  123.  Gherardo  was  a  noble  soldier  of 
Treviso  and  its  ruler  for  many  years. 

4  It  is  related  that  Guido  da  Castello,  who  lived  at 
Reggio,  generously  supplied  the  French  men-at-arms, 
returning  poor  from  Italy,  with  all  they  needed: 
horses,  arms,  or  money. 

6  See  Deuteronomy,  10.  8-9. 


I  became  apparent  to  him.”  So  he  turned,  and 
would  not  hear  me  more. 

CANTO  XVII 

1.  Recall  to  mind,  Reader,  if  ever  on  the  alps 
a  cloud  closed  round  thee,  through  which  thou 
couldst  not  see  otherwise  than  the  mole 
through  its  skin,  how,  when  the  humid  and 
dense  vapors  begin  to  dissipate,  the  orb  of  the 
sun  enters  feebly  through  them;  and  thy  im¬ 
agination  will  be  swift  in  coming  to  see,  how  at 
first  I  saw  again  the  sun,  which  was  already  at 
its  setting.  Thus  matching  mine  to  the  trusty 
steps  of  my  Master,  I  issued  forth  from  such  a 
cloud  to  the  rays  already  dead  on  the  low 
shores. 

13.  O  faculty  of  imagination,  that  dost  some¬ 
times  so  steal  us  from  outward  things  that  a 
man  heeds  it  not,  although  around  him  a  thou¬ 
sand  trumpets  are  sounding,  who  moves  thee  if 
the  sense  afford  thee  naught?  A  light,  which  is 
formed  in  the  heavens,  moves  thee  by  itself,  or 
by  a  will  which  guides  it  downward. 

19.  In  my  imagination  appeared  the  vestige 
of  the  pitilessness  of  her6  who  changed  her 
form  into  the  bird  that  most  delights  in  sing¬ 
ing.  And  here  was  my  mind  so  shut  up  with¬ 
in  itself  that  from  without  came  nothing  which 
then  might  be  received  by  it.  Then  there  rained 
down  within  my  raised  fantasy,  one  cruci¬ 
fied,7  despiteful  and  fierce  in  his  look,  and  thus 
was  he  dying.  Around  him  were  the  great 
Ahasuerus,  Esther,  his  wife,  and  the  just  Mor- 
decai,  who  was  so  blameless  in  word  and  deed. 
And  as  this  image  burst  of  itself,  in  manner  of 
a  bubble  for  which  the  water  fails,  under 
which  it  was  formed,  there  rose  in  my  vision  a 
maiden, s  weeping  bitterly,  and  she  was  saying: 
“O  queen,  wherefore  through  anger  hast  thou 
willed  to  be  naught?  Thou  hast  slain  thyself 
in  order  not  to  lose  Lavinia;  now  thou  hast  lost 
me:  I  am  she  that  grieves,  mother,  at  thy  de¬ 
struction,  before  that  of  another.” 

40.  As  sleep  is  broken,  when  of  a  sudden  the 
new  light  strikes  the  closed  eyes,  and,  broken, 
quivers  before  it  wholly  dies,  so  my  imagining 

0  Procne  or  Philomela,  according  to  one  or  the  other 
version  of  the  myth,  was  changed  into  the  nightingale 
after  her  anger  had  led  her  to  take  vengeance  on 
Tereus. 

*  See  Esther,  8. 

8  See  Aeneid,  xii.  595-607. 


CANTO  XVIII 


fell  down,  soon  as  a  light,  greater  by  far  than 
that  to  which  we  are  accustomed,  struck  my 
face.  I  was  turning  to  see  where  I  was,  when  a 
voice  said:  “Here  is  the  ascent”:  and  this  with¬ 
drew  me  from  every  other  object  of  attention, 
and  made  my  will  so  eager  to  behold  who  it 
was  that  was  speaking,  that  it  never  rests  till  it 
is  face  to  face.  But,  as  before  the  sun  which 
weighs  down  our  sight,  and  by  excess  veils  its 
own  shape,  so  here  my  power  failed.  “This  is  a 
divine  spirit  who  directs  us,  without  our  ask¬ 
ing,  on  the  way  to  go  up,  and  with  his  own 
light  conceals  himself.  He  so  deals  with  us  as  a 
man  does  with  himself;  for  he  who  waits  for 
asking  and  sees  the  need,  malignly  sets  himself 
already  to  denial.  Now  let  us  accord  our  feet  to 
such  an  invitation;  let  us  press  forward  to  as¬ 
cend  before  it  grow  dark,  for  after,  it  would 
not  be  possible  until  the  day  returns.” 

64.  Thus  said  my  Leader;  and  I  and  he 
turned  our  steps  to  a  stairway;  and,  soon  as  I 
was  on  the  first  step,  I  felt  near  me  a  motion  as 
if  of  a  wing,  and  a  fanning  on  my  face,  and  I 
heard  say:  “Beati  pacifici /  who  are  without 
evil  anger.” 

70.  Already  were  the  last  sunbeams,  on 
which  the  night  follows,  so  lifted  above  us,  that 
the  stars  were  appearing  on  many  sides.  “O 
my  strength,  why  dost  thou  so  melt  away?”  I 
said  to  myself,  for  I  felt  the  power  of  my  legs 
put  in  truce.  We  were  now  where  the  stair  no 
farther  ascended,  and  we  were  stayed  fast,  even 
as  a  ship  that  arrives  at  the  shore:  and  I  lis¬ 
tened  for  a  while,  if  I  might  hear  anything  in 
the  new  circle.  Then  I  turned  to  my  Master, 
and  said:  “My  sweet  Father,  say  what  offence 
is  purged  here  in  the  circle  where  we  are:  if 
our  feet  be  stopped,  let  not  thy  discourse  be 
stayed.”  And  he  to  me:  “The  love  of  good, 
defective  in  its  duty,  is  here  restored;  here  is 
plied  again  the  ill-slackened  oar.  But  that  thou 
mayst  still  more  clearly  understand,  turn  thy 
mind  to  me,  and  thou  shalt  gather  some  good 
fruit  from  our  delay. 

91.  “Neither  Creator  nor  creature,”  he  be¬ 
gan,  “my  son,  was  ever  without  love,  either 
natural,  or  of  the  mind,  and  this  thou  knowest. 
The  natural  is  always  without  error:  but  the 
other  may  err  either  through  an  evil  object,  or 
through  little,  or  through  too  much  vigor. 

1  “Blessed  are  the  peacemakers.” 


While  love  is  directed  on  the  primal  goods, 
and  with  due  measure  on  the  secondary,  it 
cannot  be  the  cause  of  ill-delight.  But  when  it 
is  bent  to  evil,  or  runs  to  good  with  more  zeal, 
or  with  less,  than  it  ought,  against  the  Creator 
his  own  creature  is  working.  Hence  thou  canst 
comprehend  that  love  is  of  necessity  the  seed 
in  you  of  every  virtue,  and  of  every  action 
that  deserves  punishment. 

106.  “Now  since  love  can  never  turn  its  sight 
from  the  welfare  of  its  subject,  all  things  are 
secure  from  hatred  of  themselves;  and  since  no 
being  can  be  conceived  of  as  divided  from  the 
First  and  standing  by  itself,  from  hating  Him 
every  affection  is  cut  off.  It  follows,  if,  thus 
distinguishing,  I  rightly  judge,  that  the  evil 
which  is  loved  is  that  of  one’s  neighbor;  and 
in  three  modes  this  love  has  its  birth  in  your 
clay.  There  is  he  who  hopes  to  excel  through 
the  abasement  of  his  neighbor,  and  only  on 
this  account  longs  that  from  his  greatness  he 
may  be  brought  low.  There  is  he  who  fears  loss 
of  power,  favor,  honor,  and  fame,  because  an¬ 
other  surmounts;  whereat  he  is  so  saddened 
that  he  loves  the  contrary.  And  there  is  he  who 
seems  so  resentful  for  injury  that  he  becomes 
greedy  of  vengeance,  and  such  a  one  must 
needs  coin  harm  for  others.  This  triform  love 
is  wept  for  down  below. 

125.  “Now  I  would  that  thou  hear  of  the 
other — that  which  runs  to  the  good  in  faulty 
measure.  Every  one  confusedly  conceives  of  a 
good  in  which  the  mind  may  be  at  rest,  and 
desires  it;  wherefore  everyone  strives  to  attain 
to  it.  If  the  love  be  slack  that  draws  you  to  look 
on  this,  or  to  acquire  it,  this  cornice,  after  just 
repentance,  torments  you  for  it.  Another  good 
there  is,  which  does  not  make  man  happy;  it  is 
not  happiness,  it  is  not  the  good  essence,  the 
fruit  and  root  of  every  good.  The  love  which 
abandons  itself  too  much  to  this  is  wept  for 
above  us  in  three  circles;  but  how  it  is  reck¬ 
oned  tripartite,  of  this  I  am  silent,  in  order 
that  thou  seek  it  out  for  thyself.” 

CANTO  XVIII 

1.  The  lofty  Teacher  had  put  an  end  to  his  dis¬ 
course,  and  was  looking  attentive  on  my  face 
to  see  if  I  appeared  content;  and  I,  whom  a 
fresh  thirst  was  already  goading,  was  silent 


PURGATORY 


80 

outwardly  and  was  saying  within:  “Perhaps 
the  too  much  questioning  I  make  annoys 
him.”  But  that  true  Father,  who  perceived  the 
timid  wish  which  did  not  disclose  itself,  by 
speaking  gave  me  boldness  to  speak.  Whereup¬ 
on  I:  “Master,  my  sight  is  so  vivified  in  thy 
light,  that  I  discern  clearly  all  that  thy  dis¬ 
course  imports  or  describes:  therefore  I  pray 
thee,  sweet  Father  dear,  that  thou  expound  to 
me  the  love  to  which  thou  referrest  every  good 
deed  and  its  contrary.”  “Direct,”  he  said,  “to¬ 
ward  me  the  keen  eyes  of  the  understanding, 
and  the  error  of  the  blind  who  make  them¬ 
selves  leaders  will  be  manifest  to  thee. 

19.  “The  mind,  which  is  created  apt  to  love, 
is  mobile  unto  everything  that  pleases,  so  soon 
as  by  pleasure  it  is  roused  to  action.  Your  fac¬ 
ulty  of  apprehension  draws  an  image  from  a 
real  existence,  and  displays  it  within  you,  so 
that  it  makes  the  mind  turn  to  it;  and  if,  thus 
turned,  the  mind  incline  toward  it,  that  incli¬ 
nation  is  love;  it  is  nature  which  is  bound  anew 
in  you  by  pleasure.1  Then,  as  the  fire  moves  up¬ 
ward  by  virtue  of  its  form,  which  is  born  to 
ascend  thither  where  it  most  abides  in  its  own 
matter/  so  the  captive  mind  enters  into  long¬ 
ing,  which  is  a  spiritual  motion,  and  never 
rests  until  the  thing  beloved  makes  it  rejoice. 
Now  it  may  be  apparent  to  thee  how  far  the 
truth  is  hidden  from  the  people  who  aver  that 
every  love  is  in  itself  a  laudable  thing,  because, 
perchance,  its  subject-matter  always  appears  to 
be  good;3  but  not  every  seal  is  good  although 
the  wax  be  good.” 

40.  “Thy  words,  and  my  wit  following 
them,”  replied  I  to  him,  “have  revealed  love  to 
me;  but  that  has  made  me  more  big  with 
doubt.  For  if  love  be  offered  to  us  from  with¬ 
out,  and  if  the  soul  go  not  with  other  foot,  it 
is  not  her  own  merit  if  she  go  strait  or  crook¬ 
ed.”  And  he  to  me:  “So  much  as  reason  sees 
here  can  I  tell  thee;  beyond  that  await  still  for 
Beatrice;  for  it  is  a  work  of  faith.  Every  sub¬ 
stantial  form  that  is  distinct  from  matter,  or 
that  is  united  with  it,4  has  a  specific  virtue  col¬ 
lected  in  itself  which  is  not  perceived  unless  in 

1  For  the  doctrine  in  this  canto,  see  Aquinas,  Summa 
Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  76,  A  1. 

2  Ibid.,  Part  III,  Q  13,  A  1. 

3  Ibid.,  Part  III,  Suppl.,  Q  98,  A  1;  Cf.  Part  I,  Q  19, 
A  9;  Q  82,  A  2;  Part  I-II,  Q  27,  A  1. 

4  Ibid.,  Part  I,  Q  3,  A  5;  Q  76,  A  4. 


operation,  nor  does  it  show  itself  save  by  its  ef¬ 
fect,  as  by  green  leaves  the  life  in  a  plant. 
Therefore,  mamdoes  not  know  whence  the  in¬ 
telligence  of  the  first  cognitions  comes,  nor 
whence  the  affection  for  the  first  objects  of  de¬ 
sire,  which  exist  in  you  even  as  zeal  in  the  bee 
for  making  honey;  and  this  first  will  admits 
not  desert  of  praise  or  blame.5  Now  in  order 
that  to  this  every  other  may  be  gathered,  the 
virtue  that  counsels  is  innate  in  you,  and  ought 
to  hold  the  threshold  of  assent.  This  is  the  prin¬ 
ciple  wherefrom  the  reckoning  of  desert  in  you 
is  derived,  according  as  it  gathers  in  and  win¬ 
nows  good  and  evil  loves.  Those  who  in  rea¬ 
soning  went  to  the  foundation,  took  note  of 
this  innate  liberty,  wherefore  they  bequeathed 
morals  to  the  world.  If  we  assume,  then,  that 
every  love  which  is  kindled  within  you  arises 
of  necessity,  in  you  exists  the  power  to  restrain 
it.  This  noble  faculty  Beatrice  understands  as 
free  will,  and  therefore  see  that  thou  have  it 
in  mind,  if  she  take  to  speaking  of  it  with 
thee.”6 

76.  The  moon,  almost  at  midnight  slow, 
shaped  like  a  bucket  that  is  all  ablaze,  was 
making  the  stars  appear  fewer  to  us,  and  was 
running  counter  to  the  heavens  along  those 
paths  which  the  sun  inflames,  when  a  man  at 
Rome  sees  it  at  its  setting  between  Sardinia  and 
Corsica;  and  that  noble  shade,  for  whom  Pie- 
tola7  is  more  famed  than  the  Mantuan  city, 
had  laid  down  the  burden  of  my  loading:  so 
that  I,  who  had  harvested  his  open  and  plain 
discourse  upon  my  questions,  remained  like  a 
man,  who,  drowsy,  wanders.  But  this  drowsi¬ 
ness  was  taken  from  me  suddenly  by  folk, 
who,  behind  our  backs,  had  now  come  round 
to  us.  And  such  a  fury  and  a  throng  as  Isme- 
nus  and  Asopus  saw  of  old  along  their  banks 
at  night  if  but  the  Thebans  were  in  need  of 
Bacchus,8  such  curves  its  way  along  that  circle, 
according  to  what  I  saw,  of  those  coming  on 
whom  good  will  and  right  love  are  riding. 
They  were  soon  upon  us;  because  all  that  great 
crowd  was  moving  at  a  run;  and  two  in  front, 
weeping,  were  crying  out:  “Mary  ran  with 

6  Cf.  Canto  xvii.  91-97. 

6  See  Paradise,  v.  19-24. 

7  The  modern  name  of  Andes,  the  birthplace  of 
Virgil. 

8  The  rivers  Ismenus  and  Asopus  ran  not  far  from 
Thebes,  the  birthplace  of  Bacchus. 


CANTO  XIX 


haste  unto  the  mountain” ;*  and:  “Caesar,  to 
subdue  Ilerda,  thrust  at  Marseilles,  and  then 
ran  on  to  Spain  ”  “Swift,  swift,  that  time  be 
not  lost  by  little  love,”  the  others  were  crying 
as  they  followed,  “so  that  zeal  in  well-doing 
may  make  grace  green  again.” 

106.  “O  people,  in  whom  keen  fervor  now 
perhaps  redeems  negligence  and  delay,  shown 
by  you  through  lukewarmness  in  well-doing, 
this  one  who  is  alive  (and  surely  I  do  not  lie 
to  you)  wishes  to  go  up,  if  but  the  sun  may 
shine  again  for  us;  therefore  tell  us  where  is 
the  opening  near  at  hand.”  These  words  were 
of  my  Leader;  and  one  of  those  spirits  said: 
“Come  thou  behind  us,  and  thou  wilt  find  the 
gap.  We  are  so  full  of  will  to  move  on  that  we 
cannot  stay;  therefore  pardon,  if  thou  hold  our 
duty  for  churlishness.  I  was  Abbot  of  San 
Zeno  at  Verona,  under  the  empire  of  the  good 
Barbarossa,  of  whom  Milan,  still  grieving, 
talks.  And  one  there  is  who  has  one  foot  al¬ 
ready  in  the  grave,1 2  who  soon  shall  lament  on 
account  of  that  monastery,  and  will  be  sorry 
for  having  had  power  over  it;  because  in  place 
of  its  true  shepherd  he  has  put  his  son,  ill  in 
his  whole  body  and  worse  in  mind,  and  who 
was  evil-born.”  I  know  not  if  he  said  more,  or 
if  he  were  silent,  so  far  beyond  us  had  he  al¬ 
ready  run  on;  but  this  I  heard,  and  to  retain  it 
pleased  me. 

130.  And  he  who  was  at  every  need  my  suc¬ 
cor,  said:  “Turn  thee  this  way;  see  two  of  them 
coming,  giving  a  bite  to  sloth.”  In  rear  of  all 
they  were  saying:  “The  people  for  whom  the 
sea  was  opened  were  dead  before  the  Jordan 
beheld  his  inheritors”;3  and:  “They  who  en¬ 
dured  not  the  toil  even  to  the  end  with  the 
son  of  Anchises,  offered  themselves  to  a  life 
without  glory.”4 

139.  Then  when  those  shades  were  so  far 
parted  from  us  that  they  could  no  more  be 
seen,  a  new  thought  set  itself  within  me,  from 
which  many  others  and  diverse  were  born;  and 
I  so  rambled  from  one  to  another  that,  with 
the  wandering,  I  closed  my  eyes,  and  trans¬ 
muted  my  meditation  into  dream. 

1  See  Luke,  1.  39. 

2  Alberto  della  Scala,  lord  of  Verona;  he  died  in 
1301.  See  Leviticus,  21.  16-23. 

3  See  Numbers,  14.  23-33;  Joshua,  5.  6. 

4  See  Aeneid,  v.  700-778. 


8l 

CANTO  XIX 

1.  At  the  hour  when  the  heat  of  day,  van¬ 
quished  by  the  Earth  or  sometimes  by  Saturn, 
can  no  longer  warm  the  coldness  of  the  moon, 
— when  the  geomancers  see  in  the  east,  before 
the  dawn,  their  Greater  Fortune"  rising  along 
a  path  which  short  while  stays  dark  for  it, — 
there  came  to  me  in  dream'’  a  woman  stammer¬ 
ing,  with  eyes  asquint,  and  crooked  on  her  feet, 
with  hands  lopped  off,  and  pallid  in  her  color. 

I  gazed  at  her;  and  as  the  sun  comforts  the 
cold  limbs  which  the  night  benumbs,  so  did 
my  look  make  her  tongue  nimble,  and  then  in 
short  while  set  her  wholly  straight,  and  so  col¬ 
ored  her  wan  face  as  love  requires.  Then,  when 
thus  she  had  her  speech  unloosed,  she  began 
to  sing,  so  that  with  difficulty  should  I  have 
turned  my  attention  from  her.  “I  am,”  she 
sang,  “I  am  the  sweet  Siren,  who  bewitch  the 
mariners  in  mid  sea,  so  full  am  I  of  pleasant¬ 
ness  to  hear.  I  turned  Ulysses  from  his  wan¬ 
dering  way  by  my  song;  and  whoso  customs 
himself  with  me  seldom  departs,  so  wholly  do 
I  satisfy  him.” 

25.  Not  yet  was  her  mouth  closed,  when  at 
my  side  a  Lady  appeared,  holy  and  ready  to 
put  her  to  confusion.  “O  Virgil,  O  Virgil,  who 
is  this?”  she  sternly  said;  and  he  came  with  his 
eyes  fixed  only  on  that  modest  one.  She  took 
hold  of  the  other,  and  in  front  she  opened  her, 
rending  her  garments,  and  showed  me  her 
belly;  this  waked  me  with  the  stench  that  is¬ 
sued  from  it.  I  turned  my  eyes  to  the  good 
Master:  “At  least  three  calls  have  I  given 
thee,”  he  said;  “arise  and  come  on;  let  us  find 
the  gate  through  which  thou  mayst  enter.” 

37. 1  rose  up,  and  all  the  circles  of  the  sacred 
mountain  were  already  full  of  the  high  day, 
and  we  went  on  with  the  new  sun  at  our  backs. 
Following  him,  I  was  bearing  my  forehead  like 
one  who  has  it  laden  with  thought,  and  who 
makes  of  himself  a  half  arch  of  a  bridge,  when 
I  heard:  “Come  ye!  here  is  the  passage,”  spok¬ 
en  in  a  mode  soft  and  benign,  such  as  is  not 

5  Geomancy  is  divination  by  an  arrangement  of 
points  on  the  ground,  or  of  pebbles,  in  certain  figures 
which  have  special  names.  One  of  them,  in  this  form, 
:  :  •  •  ,  was  called  the  Greater  Fortune.  The  stars 
forming  the  figure  of  the  Greater  Fortune  would 
be  in  the  east  about  two  hours  before  sunrise. 

fl  Cf.  Hell,  xxvi.  7. 


PURGATORY 


82 

heard  in  this  mortal  region.  With  open  wings, 
which  seemed  as  of  a  swan,  he  who  had  thus 
spoken  to  us  turned  us  upward,  between  two 
walls  of  the  hard  rock.  Then  he  moved  his 
pinions,  and  fanned  us,  affirming  qui  lugent 1 
to  be  blessed,  for  they  shall  have  their  souls 
mistresses  of  consolation. 

52.  “What  ails  thee  that  thou  gazest  only  on 
the  ground  ?”  my  Guide  began  to  say  to  me, 
both  of  us  having  mounted  up  a  little  from  the 
Angel.  And  I:  “With  such  mistrust  a  recent 
vision  makes  me  go,  which  bends  me  to  itself 
so  that  I  cannot  withdraw  me  from  the 
thought  of  it.”  “Hast  thou  seen,”  said  he,  “that 
ancient  sorceress,  who  above  us  henceforth  is 
alone  lamented?  Hast  thou  seen  how  from  her 
man  is  unbound?  Let  it  suffice  thee,  and  strike 
thy  heels  on  the  ground;  turn  upward  thine 
eyes  to  the  lure  which  the  eternal  King  whirls 
with  the  great  circles.”2 

64.  Even  as  the  falcon  that  first  looks  at  his 
feet,  then  turns  at  the  cry,  and  stretches  for¬ 
ward,  through  desire  of  the  food  that  draws 
him  thither;  such  I  became,  and  such,  so  far  as 
the  rock  is  cleft  to  afford  a  way  to  him  who 
goes  up,  did  I  go  on  to  where  the  circling  is 
begun.  When  I  had  come  forth  on  the  fifth 
round,  I  saw  people  upon  it  who  were  weep¬ 
ing,  lying  on  the  earth  all  turned  downwards. 
“ Adhae sit  pavimento  anima  meat’*  I  heard 
them  saying  with  such  deep  sighs  that  the 
words  were  hardly  understood.  “O  elect  of 
God,  whose  sufferings  both  justice  and  hope 
make  less  hard,  direct  us  toward  the  high  as¬ 
cents.”  “If  ye  come  secure  from  the  lying 
down,  and  wish  to  find  the  way  most  speedily, 
let  your  right  hands  be  always  outermost.” 
Thus  the  Poet  prayed,  and  thus  was  answer 
made  to  us  from  a  little  in  advance  of  us; 
wherefore  I,  in  his  speaking,  marked  the  one 
who  was  hidden;  and  then  I  turned  my  eyes 
to  my  Lord:  whereon  he  granted  me,  with 
cheerful  sign,  that  which  my  look  of  desire 
was  asking. 

88.  Then,  when  I  could  do  with  myself  ac¬ 
cording  to  my  pleasure,  I  drew  me  above  that 
creature,  whose  words  had  first  made  me  note 
him,  saying:  “Spirit,  in  whom  weeping  ma- 

1  They  that  mourn. 

2  Cf.  Canto  xiv.  148-150. 

3  “My  soul  cleaveth  unto  the  dust.”  Psalms,  119.  25. 


tures  that  without  which  one  can  not  turn  to 
God,  suspend  a  little  for  me  thy  greater  care. 
Tell  me  who  thou  wast;  and  why  ye  have  your 
backs  turned  upward;  and  if  thou  wouldst 
have  me  obtain  aught  for  thee  there  whence  I 
alive  set  forth.” 

97.  And  he  to  me:  “Why  heaven  turns  to 
itself  our  backs  thou  shalt  know;  but  first, 
scias  quod  ego  fui  successor  Petri,4  Between 
Sestri  and  Chiaveri3  descends  a  beautiful 
stream,6  and  of  its  name  the  title  of  my  race 
makes  its  boast.  One  month  and  little  more  I 
proved  how  the  great  mantle  weighs  on  him 
who  guards  it  from  the  mire,  so  that  all  the 
other  burdens  seem  a  feather.  My  conversion, 
alas!  was  tardy;  but  when  I  became  the  Roman 
Shepherd,  then  I  discovered  how  false  is  life. 
I  saw  that  there  the  heart  was  not  at  rest;  nor 
was  it  possible  to  rise  higher  in  that  life; 
wherefore  the  love  of  this  was  kindled  in  me. 
Up  to  that  time  I  had  been  a  wretched  soul  and 
parted  from  God,  wholly  avaricious;  now,  as 
thou  seest,  I  am  punished  for  it  here.  That 
which  avarice  does  is  displayed  here  in  the 
purgation  of  these  converted  souls,  and  the 
Mountain  has  no  more  bitter  penalty.  Even  as 
our  eye,  fixed  upon  earthly  things,  was  not  lift¬ 
ed  on  high,  so  justice  here  has  sunk  it  to  earth. 
As  avarice  quenched  our  love  for  every  good, 
whereby  our  working  was  lost,  so  justice  here 
holds  us  close,  bound  and  captive  in  feet  and 
hands;  and,  so  long  as  it  shall  be  the  pleasure 
of  the  just  Lord,  so  long  shall  we  stay  immov¬ 
able  and  outstretched.” 

127. 1  had  knelt  down  and  was  about  to 
speak;  but  as  I  began,  and  he  became  aware, 
only  by  listening,  of  my  reverence:  “What 
cause,”  said  he,  “has  bent  thee  thus  down¬ 
ward?”  And  I  to  him:  “Because  of  your  dig¬ 
nity  my  conscience  stung  me  for  standing.” 
“Straighten  thy  legs,  lift  thee  up,  brother,”  he 
replied;  “err  not,  I  am  fellow  servant  of  One 
Power  with  thee  and  with  the  rest.'  If  ever 
thou  hast  understood  that  holy  gospel  sound 
which  says  neque  nubent /  thou  mayst  well 

4  “Know  that  I  was  a  successor  of  Peter.”  The 
speaker  is  Adrian  V  (Ottobono  de’  Fieschi),  who 
died  in  1276,  having  been  Pope  for  thirty-eight  days. 

3  Little  towns  on  the  Genoese  coast. 

cThe  Lavagna;  the  Fieschi  were  Counts  of  La- 
vagna. 

4  See  Revelation,  19.  10. 

8  “They  neither  marry.”  Matthew,  22.  30. 


CANTO  XX 


see  why  I  speak  thus.  Now  go  thy  way;  I  wish 
not  that  thou  tarry  longer;  for  thy  stay  hinders 
my  weeping,  with  which  I  mature  that  which 
thou  hast  said.  A  niece  I  have  on  earth  who  is 
named  Alagia,1  good  in  herself,  if  only  our 
house  make  her  not  wicked  by  example;  and 
she  alone  remains  to  me  yonder.” 

CANTO  XX 

i.  Against  a  better  will  the  will  fights  ill: 
wherefore  against  my  own  pleasure,  in  order 
to  please  him,  I  drew  from  the  water  the 
sponge  not  full. 

4.I  moved  on;  and  my  Leader  moved  on 
through  the  spaces  vacant  only  alongside  of 
the  rock,  as  upon  a  wall  one  goes  close  to  the 
battlements;  for,  on  the  other  side,  the  folk, 
who  through  their  eyes  are  pouring  out  drop 
by  drop  the  evil  that  possesses  all  the  world, 
approach  too  near  the  edge. 

10.  Accursed  be  thou,  old  she- wolf,  that 
more  than  all  the  other  beasts  hast  prey,  be¬ 
cause  of  thy  hungry  hollow  without  end!  O 
Heaven!  by  whose  revolution  it  seems  that 
some  believe  conditions  here  below  are  trans¬ 
muted,  when  will  he  come  through  whom  she 
shall  depart?2 

16.  We  were  going  on  with  slow  and  scanty 
steps,  and  I  attentive  to  the  shades  whom  I 
heard  piteously  lamenting  and  bewailing;  and 
by  chance  I  heard:  “Sweet  Mary,”  cried  out  in 
front  of  us  in  the  lament,  just  as  a  woman  does 
who  is  in  travail;  and  in  continuance:  “So  poor 
wast  thou  as  may  be  seen  by  that  inn  where 
thou  didst  lay  down  thy  holy  burden.”  Fol¬ 
lowing  this  I  heard:  “O  good  Fabricius,3  thou 
didst  wish  rather  for  virtue  with  poverty,  than 
to  possess  great  riches  with  vice.”  These  words 
were  so  pleasing  to  me  that  I  drew  myself  far¬ 
ther  on,  to  have  acquaintance  with  that  spirit 
from  whom  they  seemed  to  come.  It  was 
speaking  now  of  the  largess  that  Nicholas4 

1  Alagia  was  the  wife  of  the  Marquis  Moroello 
Malaspina  (Canto  viii.  118-132). 

2  Cf.  Hell,  i.  49-54,  10 1 -11 1. 

3  Caius  Fabricius,  the  famous  poor  and  incorruptible 
Roman  consul,  who  rejected  the  bribes  of  the  Sam- 
nites,  282  b.  c. 

4  St.  Nicholas,  Bishop  of  Myra,  knowing  that,  be¬ 
cause  of  their  poverty,  three  maidens  were  exposed 
to  the  risk  of  leading  lives  of  dishonor,  threw  secretly, 
at  night,  into  the  window  of  their  house,  money 
enough  to  provide  each  with  a  dowry. 


83 

made  to  the  damsels  in  order  to  lead  their 
youth  to  honor.  “O  soul  that  speakest  so  much 
good,”  said  I,  “tell  jne  who  thou  wast,  and 
why  thou  alone  dost  renew  these  worthy  prais¬ 
es?  Thy  words  will  not  be  without  meed,  if  I 
return  to  complete  the  short  journey  of  that 
life  which  is  flying  to  its  end.” 

40.  And  he:  “I  will  tell  thee,  not  for  com¬ 
fort  that  I  may  expect  from  yonder,  but  be¬ 
cause  so  great  grace  shines  in  thee  ere  thou  art 
dead.  I  was  the  root  of  the  evil  plant  which 
overshadows  all  the  Christian  land,5  so  that 
good  fruit  is  seldom  plucked  from  it.  But  if 
Douai,  Lille,  Ghent,  and  Bruges  had  power, 
there  would  soon  be  vengeance  on  it;8  and  I 
implore  it  from  him  who  judges  all  things. 
Yonder  I  was  called  Hugh  Capet:  of  me  are 
born  the  Philips  and  the  Louises,  by  whom  of 
late  France  has  been  ruled.  I  was  the  son  of  a 
butcher  of  Paris.  When  the  ancient  kings  had 
all  died  out,  save  one,  betaken  to  gray  vest¬ 
ments,  I  found  the  bridle  of  the  government  of 
the  realm  fast  in  my  hands,  and  so  much  pow¬ 
er  of  new  acquest,  and  such  fullness  of  friends, 
that  to  the  widowed  crown  the  head  of  my  son 
was  promoted,  from  whom  the  consecrated 
bones  of  these  began. 

61.  “So  long  as  the  great  dowry  of  Provence7 
took  not  shame  away  from  my  race,  it  was  lit¬ 
tle  worth,  but  still  it  did  not  ill.  Then  it  be¬ 
gan  its  rapine  with  force  and  with  falsehood; 
and,  after,  for  amends,  it  took  Ponthieu  and 
Normandy  and  Gascony;  Charles  came  to 
Italy,  and,  for  amends,  made  a  victim  of  Con- 
radin,8  and  then  pushed  Thomas0  back  to 
heaven,  for  amends.  A  time  I  see,  not  long  aft¬ 
er  this  day,  which  draws  another  Charles10 

5  The  spirit  which  is  speaking  is  that  of  Hugh  Capet, 
whose  descendants  in  1300  were  ruling  France,  Spain, 
and  Naples. 

0  Philip  the  Fair  gained  possession  of  Flanders  by 
force  and  fraud,  in  1299;  but  in  1302  the  French 
were  driven  out  of  the  country,  after  the  signal 
defeat  at  Courtrai. 

'  See  Paradise,  vi.  133-135. 

8  The  grandson  of  Frederick  II,  who,  striving  to 
wrest  Naples  and  Sicily,  his  hereditary  possessions, 
from  the  hands  of  Charles  of  Anjou,  was  defeated 
and  taken  prisoner  by  him  in  1267,  and  put  to  death 
by  him  in  1268. 

9  Charles  was  believed  to  have  had  St.  Thomas 
Aquinas  poisoned,  on  his  journey  from  Naples  to 
the  Council  of  Lyons,  in  1274. 

10  Charles  of  Valois,  brother  of  Philip  the  Fair,  sent 
by  Boniface  VIII,  in  1301,  to  Florence  as  peace-maker. 


84  PURGATORY 


forth  from  France  to  make  both  himself  and 
his  the  better  known.  Unarmed  he  goes  but 
thence  alone,  but  with  the  lance  with  which 
Judas  jousted;  and  that  he  thrusts  so  that  he 
makes  the  paunch  of  Florence  burst.  Thereby 
he  will  gain  not  land,  but  sin  and  shame  so 
much  the  heavier  for  himself,  as  he  the  lighter 
reckons  such  harm.  The  other,1 2 3  who  once 
went  forth  a  prisoner  from  his  ship,  I  see  sell¬ 
ing  his  daughter,  and  bargaining  over  her,  as 
do  the  corsairs  with  other  female  slaves.  O 
Avarice,  what  more  canst  thou  do  with  us, 
since  thou  hast  so  drawn  my  race  unto  thyself 
that  it  cares  not  for  its  own  flesh?  In  order 
that  the  ill  to  come  and  that  already  done  may 
seem  the  less,  I  see  the  Fleur-de-lis  entering 
Alagna,  and  in  his  Vicar  Christ  made  captive.' 
I  see  him  mocked  a  second  time;  I  see  the 
vinegar  and  the  gall  renewed,  and,  between 
living  thieves/  Him  put  to  death.  I  see  the 
new  Pilate4 5  so  cruel  that  this  does  not  sate 
him,  but,  without  decretal,  he  bears  his  covet¬ 
ous  sails  into  the  Temple."  O  my  Lord,  when 
shall  I  be  glad  in  seeing  the  vengeance  which, 
hidden  in  Thy  secret,  makes  Thine  anger 
sweet? 

97 .  “That  which  I  was  saying  of  that  only 
bride  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  which  made  thee 
turn  toward  me  for  some  gloss,  is  the  response 
to  all  our  prayers  so  long  as  the  day  lasts,  but 
when  the  night  comes,  we  take  up  instead 
thereof  a  contrary  sound.  Then  we  rehearse 
Pygmalion,6 *  whom  his  gluttonous  longing  for 
gold  made  a  traitor  and  a  thief  and  a  parricide; 
and  the  misery  of  the  avaricious  Midas,  which 
followed  on  his  greedy  demand,  at  which  one 
needs  must  always  laugh.  Then  of  the  foolish 
Achan  each  bethinks  himself,  how  he  stole  the 
spoils,  so  that  the  anger  of  Joshua  seems  still 

1  Charles  II,  son  of  Charles  of  Anjou.  In  1284,  he 
was  captured,  off  Naples,  by  Ruggieri  di  Loria,  the 
Admiral  of  Peter  III  of  Aragon.  According  to  common 
report,  he  sold  his  young  daughter  in  marriage  to 
the  old  Azzo,  Marquis  of  Este. 

2  This  refers  to  the  seizure  of  Boniface  VIII  at 
Anagni,  in  1303,  by  Guillaume  de  Nogaret  and  Sci- 
arra  Colonna,  the  emissaries  of  Philip  the  Fair. 

3  Boniface  died  about  a  month  after  being  made 
captive.  The  “living  thieves”  were  Nogaret  and  Sci- 
arra  Colonna. 

4  Philip  the  Fair. 

5  The  suppression  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple  in 

I3H- 

See  Acneid,  i.  353-54. 


to  sting  him  here.'  Then  we  accuse  Sapphira 
with  her  husband  ;s  we  praise  the  kicks  that 
Heliodorus  received,9  and  in  infamy  Polym- 
nestor  who  slew  Polydorus10  circles  the  whole 
mountain.  Finally  our  cry  here  is:  ‘Crassus, 
tell  us,  for  thou  knowest,  what  is  the  taste  of 
gold?’11  Sometimes  one  speaks  loud,  and  an¬ 
other  low,  according  to  the  affection  which 
spurs  us  to  speak  now  at  a  greater,  and  now 
at  a  less  pace.  Therefore  in  the  good  which  by 
day  is  discoursed  of  here,  I  was  not  alone  just 
now,  but  here  near  by  no  other  person  was 
raising  his  voice.” 

124.  We  had  already  departed  from  him, 
and  were  striving  to  master  the  road  so  far  as 
was  permitted  to  our  power,  when  I  felt  the 
mountain  tremble,  like  a  thing  that  is  falling; 
whereupon  a  chill  seized  me,  such  as  is  wont 
to  seize  him  who  is  going  to  death.  Surely 
Delos  was  not  shaken  so  violently,  before  La- 
tona  made  her  nest  therein,  to  give  birth  to 
the  two  eyes  of  heaven.12  Then  from  all  sides 
such  a  cry  began  that  the  Master  drew  towards 
me,  saying:  “Distrust  not,  while  I  guide  thee.” 
Gloria  in  excelsis  Deo,™  all  were  saying,  by 
what  I  comprehended  from  near  at  hand 
where  the  cry  could  be  understood.  We  stood, 
motionless  and  in  suspense,  like  the  shepherds 
who  first  heard  that  song,  until  the  trembling 
ceased,  and  the  song  was  ended.  Then  we  re¬ 
sumed  our  holy  journey,  looking  at  the  shades 
that  were  lying  on  the  ground,  returned  al¬ 
ready  to  their  wonted  plaint.  No  ignorance 
ever  with  so  great  a  war  made  me  desirous  of 
knowing14 — if  my  memory  err  not  in  this — 
as  that  which  I  seemed  then  to  have  in  my 

‘  See  Joshua,  7. 

8  Acts,  5.  1 -11. 

9  See  II  Maccabees,  3.  25. 

10  Priam  had  entrusted  Polydorus,  his  youngest  son, 
to  Polymnestor,  King  of  Thrace,  who,  when  the 
fortunes  of  Troy  declined,  slew  Polydorus,  that  he 
might  take  possession  of  the  treasure  sent  with  him. 
Cf.  Hell,  xxx.  18. 

11  Marcus  Licinius  Crassus,  triumvir  (60  b.c.),  the 
richest  and  most  avaricious  of  men.  Having  been  de¬ 
feated  by  the  Parthians,  he  was  slain,  and  their  king 
is  said  to  have  poured  molten  gold  down  his  throat, 
with  the  words:  “Thou  hast  thirsted  for  gold,  now 
drink  it.” 

12  Delos  was  a  floating  island  until  Jupiter  fixed 
it  that  it  might  serve  for  the  birthplace  of  Apollo  and 
Diana. 

13  “Glory  to  God  in  the  highest.” 

14  Cf.  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  14.  22. 


CANTO  XXI 


thought:  nor,  for  our  haste,  did  I  dare  to  ask, 
nor  of  myself  could  I  discern  anything  there: 
so  I  went  on  timid  and  thoughtful. 

CANTO  XXI 

i.  The  natural  thirst,1  which  is  never  satisfied 
save  with  the  water2  whereof  the  poor  woman 
of  Samaria  besought  the  grace,  was  torment¬ 
ing  me,  and  haste  was  goading  me  along  the 
encumbered  way  behind  my  Leader,  and  I  was 
grieving  at  the  just  vengeance:  and  lo!  as  Luke 
writes  for  us  that  Christ,  now  risen  forth  from 
the  sepulchral  cave,  appeared  to  the  two  who 
were  on  the  way,  a  shade  appeared  to  us;  and 
it  was  coming  behind  us  who  were  looking  at 
the  crowd  that  lay  at  our  feet:  nor  were  we 
aware  of  it,  so  it  spoke  first,  saying,  “My 
brothers,  may  God  give  you  peace !”  We  turned 
suddenly,  and  Virgil  gave  back  to  it  the 
salutation  which  corresponds  thereto;  then  he 
began:  “In  the  assembly  of  the  blest,  may  the 
righteous  court,  which  relegates  me  into  eter¬ 
nal  exile,  place  thee  in  peace.”  “How,”  said  it, 
— and  meanwhile  we  went  on  steadily, — “if  ye 
are  shades  that  God  deigns  not  on  high,  who 
has  guided  you  so  far  along  his  stairs?”  And 
my  Teacher:  “If  thou  regard  the  marks  which 
this  one  bears,  and  which  the  Angel  traces, 
thou  wilt  clearly  see  that  he  is  to  reign  with  the 
good.  But,  because  she  who  spins  day  and 
night3  had  not  for  him  yet  drawn  the  distaff 
off,  which  Clotho  loads  for  each  one  and  com¬ 
pacts,  his  soul,  which  is  thy  sister  and  mine, 
coming  upwards,  could  not  come  alone,  be¬ 
cause  it  sees  not  after  our  fashion.  Wherefore 
I  was  drawn  from  out  the  ample  throat  of  Hell 
to  show  him,  and  I  shall  show  him  so  far  on 
as  my  teaching  can  lead  him. 

34.  “But  tell  us,  if  thou  knowest,  why  just 
now  the  mountain  gave  such  shocks,  and  why 
all  seemed  to  cry  with  one  voice,  even  down 
to  its  moist  feet.”  Thus  asking  he  shot  for  me 
through  the  needle’s  eye  of  my  desire,  so  that 
only  with  the  hope  my  thirst  became  less 
craving. 

40.  The  shade  began:  “The  sacred  rule  of  the 
mountain  can  feel  nothing  which  is  without 
due  order,  or  which  is  beyond  its  wont.  This 

1Cf.  Aristotle,  Metaphysics,  i.  1.  98o°22. 

2  Cf.  John,  4.  13-15. 

3  Lachesis. 


85 

place  is  free  from  every  alteration;  that  which 
from  itself  heaven  receives  into  itself,  and 
naught  else,  can  be  the  cause  of  this:  because 
neither  rain,  nor  hail,  nor  snow,  nor  dew,  nor 
frost,  falls  higher  up  than  the  little  stairway 
of  the  three  short  steps;  clouds,  thick  or  thin, 
appear  not;  nor  lightning,  nor  the  daughter  of 
Thaumas4  who  yonder  often  changes  her  quar¬ 
ter;  dry  vapor  does  not  rise  farther  up  than  to 
the  highest  of  the  three  steps  of  which  I  spoke, 
whereon  the  vicar  of  Peter  has  his  feet.  It  trem¬ 
bles  perhaps  lower  down,  little  or  much;  but 
up  here  it  never  trembled  because  of  wind 
that  is  hidden,  I  know  not  how,  in  the  earth.5 
It  trembles  here  when  some  soul  feels  itself 
pure,  so  that  it  rises,  or  moves  to  ascend;  and 
such  a  cry  seconds  it.  Of  the  purity  the  will 
alone  gives  proof,  which  surprises  the  soul 
wholly  free  to  change  its  company,  and  re¬ 
joices  it  with  willing.  It  wills  from  the  first 
indeed,  but  the  desire, — which,  contrary  to 
the  will,  Divine  Justice  sets  to  the  torment,  as 
it  had  been  to  the  sin, —  allows  it  not.8  And  I 
who  have  lain  in  his  woe  five  hundred  years 
and  more,  only  just  now  felt  a  free  volition 
for  a  better  seat.  Because  of  this  didst  thou  feel 
the  earthquake,  and  hear  the  pious  spirits 
upon  the  Mountain  render  praise  to  that  Lord, 
who,  may  He  speed  them  upward  soon!” 

73.  Thus  he  said  to  us,  and  since  one  enjoys 
drinking  in  proportion  as  the  thirst  is  great,  I 
could  not  say  how  much  he  did  me  good. 

76.  And  the  sage  Leader:  “Now  I  see  the  net 
which  snares  you  here,  and  how  it  is  un¬ 
meshed;  and  why  it  trembles  here;  and  for 
what  ye  rejoice  together.  Now  may  it  please 
thee  that  I  may  know  who  thou  wast,  and  may 
it  be  disclosed  to  me  in  thy  words  why  for  so 
many  centuries  thou  hast  lain  here?”  “At  the 
time  when  the  good  Titus,  with  the  aid  of  the 
Most  High  King,  avenged  the  wounds  where¬ 
from  issued  the  blood  sold  by  Judas,7  I  was 
famous  enough  on  earth  with  the  name  which 
lasts  longest,  and  honors  most,”  replied  that 
spirit,  “but  not  as  yet  with  faith.  So  sweet  was 

*  Iris,  the  rainbow. 

5  See  Aristotle,  Meteorology,  ii,  8. 

6  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  III,  Suppl., 
Q  72,  A  2. 

7  Titus  besieged  and  destroyed  Jerusalem  in  a.  d. 
70.  Statius  was  born  between  a.  d.  60  and  65,  and 
probably  died  about  the  end  of  the  first  century. 


PURGATORY 


86 

the  spirit  of  my  voice,  that  me  of  Toulouse1 
Rome  drew  to  itself,  where  I  earned  the  right 
to  adorn  my  temples  with  myrtle.  Statius  the 
people  still  name  me  yonder:  I  sang  of  Thebes, 
and  then  of  the  great  Achilles,  but  I  fell  on 
the  way  with  my  second  load.  Seed  of  my  ar¬ 
dor  were  the  sparks  that  warmed  me  of  the 
divine  flame  whereby  more  than  a  thousand 
have  been  kindled;  I  speak  of  the  Aeneid, 
which  was  mother  to  me,  and  was  nurse  to  me 
in  poesy:  without  it  I  balanced  not  the  weight 
of  a  drachm;  and  to  have  lived  yonder,  when 
Virgil  lived,  I  would  agree  to  one  sun  more 
than  I  owe  for  my  issue  from  ban.” 

103.  These  words  turned  Virgil  to  me  with 
a  look  which,  silent,  said:  “Be  silent”:  but  the 
power  that  wills  cannot  do  everything;  for 
smiles  and  tears  are  such  followers  on  the  pas¬ 
sion  from  which  each  springs,  that  in  the  most 
truthful  they  least  follow  the  will.  I  only 
smiled,  like  a  man  who  makes  a  sign;  whereat 
the  shade  became  silent,  and  looked  at  me  in 
the  eyes  where  the  expression  is  most  fixed. 
And  it  said:  “So  mayst  thou  bring  to  a  good 
end  so  great  a  labor,  why  did  thy  face  just  now 
display  to  me  a  flash  of  a  smile?” 

1 15.  Now  am  I  caught  on  one  side  and  the 
other;  one  bids  me  be  silent,  the  other  con¬ 
jures  me  to  speak:  wherefore  I  sigh,  and  am 
understood  by  my  Master,  and:  “Have  no  fear 
to  speak,”  he  said  to  me,  “but  speak,  and  tell 
him  what  he  asks  so  earnestly.”  Whereon  I: 
“Perhaps  thou  marvellest,  ancient  spirit,  at  the 
smile  I  gave;  but  I  would  have  more  wonder 
seize  thee.  This  one,  who  guides  my  eyes  on 
high,  is  that  Virgil  from  whom  thou  didst  de¬ 
rive  the  strength  to  sing  of  men  and  of  the 
gods.  If  thou  didst  believe  other  cause  for  my 
smile,  leave  it  as  not  being  true,  and  believe  it 
was  those  words  which  thou  saidst  of  him.” 
Already  he  was  stooping  to  embrace  the  feet 
of  my  Teacher,  but  he  said  to  him:  “Brother, 
do  it  not,  for  thou  art  a  shade,  and  thou  seest 
a  shade.”  And  he  rising:  “Now  canst  thou 
comprehend  the  sum  of  the  love  that  warms 
me  to  thee,  when  I  forget  our  emptiness,  treat¬ 
ing  the  shades  as  if  a  solid  thing.” 

1  Statius  was  actually  born  at  Naples.  In  Dante’s 
time,  there  was  a  confusion  between  him  and  a  rhet¬ 
orician  of  Toulouse  of  the  same  name. 


CANTO  XXII 

1.  Already  was ’the  Angel  left  behind  us — the 
Angel  who  had  turned  us  to  the  sixth  round, 
having  erased  a  stroke  from  my  face;  and  he 
had  said  to  us  that  those  who  have  their  de¬ 
sire  set  on  justice  are  Beati,  and  his  words 
completed  this  with  sitiunt,  without  the  rest.2 
And  I,  more  light  than  through  the  other  pass¬ 
es,  was  so  going  on,  that  without  any  fatigue 
I  was  following  upward  the  swift  spirits,  when 
Virgil  began:  “Love  kindled  by  virtue  always 
kindles  another,  provided  that  its  flame  appear 
outwardly;  wherefore  from  the  hour  when 
Juvenal  descended  among  us  in  the  limbo  of 
Hell,3  and  made  known  to  me  thy  affection, 
my  own  good  will  toward  thee  has  been  such 
that  more  never  bound  one  to  an  unseen  per¬ 
son;  so  that  these  stairs  will  now  seem  short 
to  me.  But  tell  me — and  as  a  friend  pardon  me, 
if  too  great  confidence  let  loose  my  rein,  and  as 
a  friend  henceforth  talk  with  me — how  could 
avarice  find  a  place  within  thy  breast,  amid 
wisdom  so  great  as  that  wherewith  through 
thy  diligence  thou  wast  filled?” 

25.  These  words  made  Statius  at  first  incline 
a  little  to  a  smile;  then  he  replied:  “Every 
word  of  thine  is  to  me  a  dear  token  of  love. 
Truly  often  things  are  apparent  which  give 
false  material  for  suspicion,  because  the  true 
reasons  are  hidden.  Thy  question  assures  me 
that  it  is  thy  belief,  perhaps  because  of  that 
circle  where  I  was,  that  I  was  avaricious  in  the 
other  life;  know  then  that  avarice  was  too  far 
removed  from  me,  and  this  want  of  measure 
thousands  of  courses  of  the  moon  have  pun¬ 
ished.  And  had  it  not  been  that  I  set  right  my 
care,  when  I  understood  the  passage  where 
thou  dost  exclaim,  as  if  indignant  with  human 
nature,  40  accursed  hunger  of  gold,  through 
what  dost  thou  not  impel  the  appetite  of  mor¬ 
tals?’4  I,  rolling,  should  feel  the  dismal  jousts.3 
Then  I  perceived  that  the  hands  could  spread 

2  That  is,  the  Angel  had  not  recited  all  the  words 
of  the  Beatitude,  which  are  as  follows  in  the  Vulgate: 
Beati  qai  esuriunt  et  sitiunt  justitiam:  quoniam  ipsi 
saturabuntur.  He  had  omitted  esuriunt,  and  said  only, 
“Blessed  are  they  which  do  thirst  after  righteous¬ 
ness.” 

3  In  a  famous  passage  of  his  Seventh  Satire,  81-87, 
Juvenal  speaks  of  Statius  with  high  praise. 

4  See  Aeneid,  iii.  56-57. 

5  See  Hell,  vii.  25-35. 


CANTO  XXII 


their  wings  too  much  in  spending;  and  I  re¬ 
pented  as  well  of  that  as  of  my  other  sins.  How 
many  shall  rise  with  cropped  hair1  through 
ignorance,  which  during  life  and  in  the  last 
hours  prevents  repentance  for  this  sin!  And 
know,  that  the  fault  which  rebuts  any  sin  with 
direct  opposition,  together  with  it  dries  up  its 
verdure  here.  Wherefore  if  for  my  purgation  I 
have  been  among  that  people  who  lament  their 
avarice,  by  reason  of  its  contrary  this  has  be¬ 
fallen  me.” 

55.  “Now  when  thou  wast  singing  the  cruel 
strife  of  the  twofold  affliction  of  Jocasta,”2  said 
the  Singer  of  the  Bucolic  songs,  “it  does  not 
appear  by  that  which  Clio  touches  with  thee 
there,  that  the  Faith,  without  which  good 
works  do  not  suffice,  had  as  yet  made  thee 
faithful.  If  this  be  so,  what  Sun,  or  what  can¬ 
dles,  did  so  disperse  thy  darkness  that  thou 

didst  thereafter  set  thy  sails  behind  the  Fisher¬ 
's  ” 

man: 

64.  And  he  to  him,  “Thou  first  didst  direct 
me  on  the  way  toward  Parnassus  to  drink  in 
its  grots,  and  then,  on  the  way  to  God,  thou 
didst  enlighten  me.  Thou  didst  like  him,  who 
goes  by  night,  and  carries  the  light  behind 
him,  and  profits  not  himself,  but  makes  the 
persons  following  him  wise,  when  thou  saidst, 
‘The  world  is  renewed;  Justice  returns,  and 
the  primeval  time  of  man,  and  a  new  progeny 
descends  from  heaven/3  Through  thee  I  be¬ 
came  a  poet,  through  thee  a  Christian.  But  in 
order  that  thou  mayst  better  see  that  which  I 
outline,  I  will  stretch  my  hand  to  color  it.  Al¬ 
ready  was  the  whole  world  teeming  with  the 
true  belief  ,  sown  by  the  messengers  of  the  eter¬ 
nal  realm;  and  thy  words  just  mentioned  were 
so  in  harmony  with  the  new  preachers,  that  I 
adopted  the  practice  of  visiting  them.  Then 
they  came  to  seem  to  me  so  holy,  that,  when 
Domitian  persecuted  them,  their  lamentations 
were  not  without  my  tears.  And  so  long  as  I 
remained  in  yonder  world,  I  succored  them; 
and  their  upright  customs  made  me  scorn  all 
other  sects.  And  before  I  had  led  the  Greeks 
to  the  rivers  of  Thebes  in  my  verse,  I  received 
baptism;  but  through  fear  I  was  a  secret  Chris¬ 
tian,  for  a  long  while  making  show  of  pagan- 

1  See  Hell,  vii.  57. 

2  See  Hell,  xxvi.  52-54. 

3  See  Virgil,  Eclogues,  iv.  5-7. 


ism:  and  this  lukewarmness  made  me  circle 
round  the  fourth  circle,  longer  than  to  the 
fourth  century. 

94.  “Thou,  therefore,  that  didst  lift  for  me 
the  covering  that  was  hiding  from  me  such 
great  good  as  I  say,  tell  me,  while  we  have  re¬ 
mainder  of  ascent,  where  is  our  ancient  Ter¬ 
ence,  Cascilius,  Plautus,  and  Varro,  if  thou 
knowest  it;  tell  me  if  they  are  damned,  and  in 
what  region?”  “They,  and  Persius,  and  I,  and 
many  others,  replied  my  Leader,  “are  with 
that  Greek  whom  the  Muses  suckled  more 
than  ever  any  other,  in  the  first  girdle  of  the 
blind  prison.  Often  we  discourse  of  the  moun¬ 
tain4  that  has  our  nurses"  always  with  itself. 
Euripides  is  there  with  us,  and  Antiphon, 
Simonides,  Agathon,  and  many  other  Greeks 
who  of  old  adorned  their  brows  with  laurel. 
There  of  thine  own  people  are  seen  Antigone, 
Dei'phile  and  Argia,  and  Ismene  sad  as  she 
lived.6  There  she  is  seen  who  showed  Lan- 
gia;  there  is  the  daughter  of  Tiresias  and 
Thetis,8  and  Deidamia  with  her  sisters.”9 

1 15.  Now  both  the  poets  became  silent,  in¬ 
tent  afresh  on  looking  around,  free  from  the 
ascent  and  from  the  walls;  and  four  of  the 
handmaids  of  the  day  were  now  remaining 
behind,  and  the  fifth  was  at  the  pole,  directing 
still  upward  its  blazing  horn,  when  my  Lead¬ 
er:  I  think  that  it  behoves  us  to  turn  our  right 
shoulders  to  the  outer  edge,  circling  the  Mount 
as  we  are  wont  to  do.”  Thus  usage  was  there 
our  guide,  and  we  took  the  way  with  less 
doubt  because  of  the  assent  of  that  worthy 
soul. 

127.  They  were  going  on  in  front,  and  I 
solitary  behind,  and  I  was  listening  to  their 
speech  which  was  giving  me  understanding 
for  poesy.  But  soon  the  pleasant  converse  was 
interrupted  by  a  tree  which  we  found  in  the 

4  Parnassus. 

5  The  Muses. 

0  The  sisters  Antigone  and  Ismene,  daughters  of 
Oedipus  and  Jocasta;  Dei'phile  and  Argia,  also  sisters, 
daughters  of  Adrastus,  King  of  Argos. 

‘  Hypsipyle,  who  showed  the  fountain  Langia  to 
Adrastus  and  the  other  kings,  when  their  soldiers 
were  perishing  with  thirst.  See  Hell,  xviii.  92-95,  and 
Purgatory,  xxvi.  94-96. 

8  But  for  Manto,  the  only  daughter  of  Tiresias, 
mentioned  by  Statius.  See  Hell,  xx.  55. 

9  Deidamia,  the  daughter  of  Lycomedes,  king  of 
Scyros,  and  beloved  by  Achilles  while  he  was  in  hid¬ 
ing  there.  See  Hell,  xxvi.  62.  . 


88  PURGATORY 


mid  road,  with  apples  sweet  and  good  to  smell. 
And  as  a  fir-tree  tapers  upward  from  branch 
to  branch,  so  downward  did  that,  I  think  in 
order  that  no  one  may  go  up.  On  the  side  upon 
which  our  way  was  closed,  a  limpid  water  was 
falling  from  the  high  rock  and  spreading  itself 
over  the  foliage  above.  The  two  poets  ap¬ 
proached  the  tree,  and  a  voice  from  within  the 
leaves  cried:  “Of  this  food  ye  shall  have 
dearth/’  Then  it  said:  “Mary  thought  more, 
how  the  wedding1  should  be  honorable  and 
complete,  than  of  her  own  mouth,  which  an¬ 
swers  now  for  you:  and  the  ancient  Roman 
women  were  content  with  water  for  their 
drink;2  and  Daniel  despised  food  and  gained 
wisdom.3  The  primal  age  was  beautiful  as 
gold;  with  hunger  it  made  acorns  savory,  and 
with  thirst  every  streamlet  nectar.  Honey  and 
locusts  were  the  viands  which  nourished  the 
Baptist  in  the  desert,  wherefore  he  is  in  glory, 
and  so  great  as  by  the  Gospel  is  revealed  to 
you. 

CANTO  XXIII 

i.  While  I  was  fixing  my  eyes  upon  the  green 
leafage,  just  as  he  who  wastes  his  life  following 
the  little  bird  is  wont  to  do,  my  more  than 
Father  said  to  me:  “Son,  come  on  now,  for 
the  time  that  is  assigned  to  us  must  be  more 
usefully  apportioned.”  I  turned  my  eyes,  and 
no  less  quickly  my  step  after  the  Sages,  who 
were  speaking  so  that  they  made  the  going  of 
no  cost  to  me;  and  lo!  a  lament  and  song  were 
heard:  “Labia  mea,  Domine in  such  fash¬ 
ion  that  it  gave  birth  to  delight  and  pain. 
“O  sweet  Father,  what  is  that  which  I  hear?” 
I  began,  and  he:  “Shades  which  go,  perhaps 
loosing  the  knot  of  their  debt.” 

1 6.  Even  as  do  pilgrims  rapt  in  thought, 
who,  overtaking  on  the  road  unknown  folk, 
turn  themselves  to  them,  and  stay  not;  so  be¬ 
hind  us,  moving  more  quickly,  coming  up  and 
passing  by,  a  crowd  of  souls,  silent  and  devout, 
was  gazing  at  us.  Each  was  dark  and  hollow 
in  the  eyes,  pallid  in  the  face,  and  so  wasted 
that  the  skin  took  its  shape  from  the  bones.  I 

1  See  Canto  xiii.  29. 

2  See  Aquinas,  Stimma  Theologica,  Part  II-II,  Q 
149.  A  4. 

3  See  Daniel,  1.  8-17. 

4  Sec  Matthew,  1 1 .  1 1 ;  Luke,  7.  28. 

5  “O  Lord,  open  thou  my  lips.”  Psalms,  51.  15. 


do  not  think  that  Erisichthon*  was  so  dried  up 
to  utter  rind  by  hunger,  when  he  had  most 
fear  of  it.  I  said  to  myself  in  thought:  “Behold 
the  people  who  lost  Jerusalem,  when  Mary 
struck  her  beak  into  her  son.”  The  sockets  of 
their  eyes  seemed  rings  without  gems.  Whoso 
in  the  face  of  men  reads  omo,  would  surely 
there  have  recognized  the  m.  Who  would  be¬ 
lieve  that  the  scent  of  an  apple,  and  that  of  a 
water,  begetting  a  longing,  could  so  control, 
if  he  knew  not  how  ? 

37. 1  was  still  wondering  what  so  famished 
them,  the  cause  of  their  meagreness  and  of 
their  wretched  scurf  not  yet  being  manifest, 
and  lo!  from  the  depth  of  its  head,  a  shade 
turned  his  eyes  on  me,  and  looked  fixedly,  then 
cried  out  loudly:  “What  grace  to  me  is  this!” 
Never  should  I  have  recognized  him  by  his 
face;  but  in  his  voice  was  manifest  to  me  that 
which  his  aspect  had  annulled  in  itself.  This 
spark  rekindled  in  me  all  my  knowledge  of  the 
altered  visage,  and  I  recognized  the  face  of 
Forese.' 

49.  “Ah,  strive  not  with  the  dry  scab  that 
discolors  my  skin,”  he  prayed,  “nor  with  my 
lack  of  flesh,  but  tell  me  the  truth  about  thy¬ 
self;  and  who  are  those  two  souls,  who  yonder 
make  an  escort  for  thee:  stay  not  thou  from 
speaking  to  me.”  “Thy  face,”  replied  I  to  him, 
“which  once  I  wept  for  dead,  now  gives  me 
no  less  a  grief  for  weeping  seeing  it  so  dis¬ 
figured;  therefore,  tell  me,  for  God’s  sake, 
what  so  despoils  you;  make  me  not  speak 
while  I  am  marvelling,  for  ill  can  he  speak 
who  is  full  of  other  wish.”  And  he  to  me:  “By 
the  eternal  counsel  a  virtue  falls  into  the  water 
and  upon  the  plant,  now  left  behind,  whereby 
I  grow  so  lean.  All  this  folk  who  sing  weep¬ 
ing,  because  of  following  their  appetite  beyond 
measure,  are  here  in  hunger  and  in  thirst  mak¬ 
ing  themselves  holy  again.  The  odor  which 
issues  from  the  fruit  and  from  the  spray  which 
is  spread  over  the  verdure,  kindles  in  us  de¬ 
sire  to  eat  and  drink.  And  not  once  only,  as 
we  circle  this  floor,  is  our  pain  renewed;  I  say 
pain,  and  ought  to  say  solace,  for  that  will 

Punished  for  sacrilege  by  Ceres  with  insatiable 
hunger,  so  that  at  last  he  turned  his  teeth  upon  him¬ 
self. 

‘  Brother  of  Corso  Donati,  and  related  to  Dante’s 
wife,  Gemma  de’  Donati. 


CANTO  XXIV  89 


leads  us  to  the  tree,  which  led  Christ  with  joy 
to  say:  ‘Eli,’1 2  when  with  his  blood  he  deliv¬ 
ered  us.” 

76.  And  I  to  him:  “Forese,  from  that  day  on 
which  thou  didst  change  world  to  a  better  life, 
up  to  this  time,  five  years  have  not  rolled 
round.  If  the  power  of  sinning  further  had 
ended  in  thee,  before  the  hour  supervened  of 
the  good  sorrow  which  re-weds  us  to  God, 
how  hast  thou  come  up  hither?  I  thought  to 
find  thee  still  down  there  below,  where  time 
is  made  good  by  time.”-  Whereon  he  to  me: 
“My  Nella  with  her  bursting  tears  has  brought 
me  thus  speedily  to  drink  of  the  sweet  worm¬ 
wood  of  these  torments.  With  her  devout  pray¬ 
ers  and  with  sighs  has  she  drawn  me  from  the 
hill-side  where  one  waits,  and  has  delivered 
me  from  the  other  circles.  So  much  the  more 
dear  and  more  precious  to  God  is  my  poor 
widow,  whom  I  loved  so  well,  as  she  is  the 
more  solitary  in  good  conduct;  for  the  Bar- 
bagia3  of  Sardinia  is  far  more  modest  in  its 
women  than  the  Barbagia  where  I  left  her.  O 
sweet  brother,  what  wouldst  thou  that  I  say? 
A  future  time  is  already  in  my  sight,  to  which 
this  hour  will  not  be  very  old,  when  from  the 
pulpit  it  shall  be  interdicted  to  the  brazen¬ 
faced  dames  of  Florence  to  go  about  display¬ 
ing  the  bosom  with  the  paps.  What  barbarian, 
what  Saracen  women  were  there  ever  for 
whom  either  spiritual  or  other  discipline  was 
needed  to  make  them  go  covered  ?  But  if  the 
shameless  ones  were  assured  of  that  which  the 
swift  heaven  is  preparing  for  them,  already 
would  they  have  their  mouths  open  for  howl¬ 
ing.  For  if  my  foresight  here  does  not  deceive 
me,  they  will  be  sad  before  he  who  is  now 
consoled  with  the  lullaby  shall  have  bearded 
cheeks. 

1 12.  “Ah  brother,  now  no  longer  conceal 
thyself  from  me;  thou  seest  that  not  only  I, 
but  all  these  people  are  gazing  there  where 
thou  dost  veil  the  sun.”  Whereon  I  to  him: 
“If  thou  bring  back  to  mind  what  thou  wast 
with  me,  and  what  I  was  with  thee,  the  pres¬ 
ent  remembrance  will  even  now  be  grievous. 
From  that  life  he  who  goes  in  front  of  me 

1  See  Matthew,  27.  46. 

2  See  Canto  iv.  130-132. 

3  A  mountainous  district  in  Sardinia,  inhabited  by 

people  of  barbarous  customs. 


turned  me  the  other  day,  when  the  sister  of 
him,”  and  I  pointed  to  the  sun,  “there  showed 
herself  round.  Through  the  deep  night,  from 
the  truly  dead,  he  has  led  me,  with  this  real 
flesh  which  follows  him.  Thence  his  encourage¬ 
ments  have  drawn  me  upward,  ascending  and 
circling  the  mountain  that  sets  you  straight 
whom  the  world  made  crooked.  He  says  that 
he  will  bear  me  company  so  long  till  I  shall  be 
there  where  Beatrice  will  be;  there  it  behoves 
that  I  remain  without  him.  Virgil  is  this  one 
who  says  thus  to  me,”  and  I  pointed  to  him, 
“and  this  other  is  that  shade  for  whom  just  now 
your  realm,  which  from  itself  releases  him, 
shook  every  slope.” 

CANTO  XXIV 

1.  Speech  made  not  the  going,  nor  did  the  go¬ 
ing  make  that  more  slow;  but,  talking,  we 
went  on  apace,  even  as  a  ship  urged  by  a  good 
wind.  And  the  shades,  that  seemed  things 
doubly  dead,  through  the  pits  of  their  eyes 
drew  in  wonder  at  me,  perceiving  that  I  was 
alive. 

7.  And  I,  continuing  my  talk,  said:  “He  goes 
up  for  the  sake  of  another  perchance  more 
slowly  than  he  would  do.  But,  tell  me,  if  thou 
knowest,  where  is  Piccarda;4  tell  me  if  I  see 
any  person  to  be  noted  among  this  folk  that  so 
gazes  at  me.”  “My  sister,  who,  between  fair 
and  good,  was  I  know  not  which  the  most, 
triumphs  already  rejoicing  in  her  crown  on 
high  Olympus.”  So  he  said  first,  and  then: 
“Here  it  is  not  forbidden  to  name  each  one, 
since  our  semblance  is  so  milked  away  by  the 
diet.  This,”  and  he  pointed  with  his  finger,  “is 
Bonagiunta,'’  Bonagiunta  of  Lucca;  and  that 
face  beyond  him,  more  pricked  through  than 
the  others,  had  the  Holy  Church  in  his  arms;" 
he  was  from  Tours;  and  by  fasting  he  purges 
the  eels  of  Bolsena,  and  the  Vernaccia  wine.” 
Many  others  he  named  to  me,  one  by  one,  and 
at  their  naming  all  appeared  content;  so  that 
for  this  I  saw  not  one  dark  mien.  I  saw,  using 
their  teeth  through  hunger  on  emptiness, 

4  Forese’s  sister.  See  Paradise,  iii. 

5  Bonagiunta  Urbiciani,  a  poet  of  Lucca  who  lived 
and  wrote  in  the  last  half  of  the  thirteenth  century. 

“Martin  IV,  native  of  Tours,  Pope  from  1281  to 
1285.  He  is  said  to  have  died  from  a  surfeit  at 
Orvieto. 


PURGATORY 


Ubaldin  dalla  Pila,  and  Boniface,  who  shep¬ 
herded  many  people  with  his  crook.  I  saw 
Messer  Marchese,  who  once  had  leisure  for 
drinking  at  Forli  with  less  thirst,  and  even  so 
was  such  that  he  felt  not  sated. 

34.  But  as  one  does  who  looks,  and  then 
makes  more  account  of  one  than  of  another, 
so  did  I  to  him  of  Lucca,  who  seemed  most 
to  wish  acquaintance  with  me.  He  was  mur¬ 
muring,  and  I  heard  something  like  “Gen- 
tucca”  from  there  where  he  felt  the  chastise¬ 
ment  of  the  justice  which  so  strips  them.  “O 
soul,”  said  I,  “who  seemest  so  desirous  to  speak 
with  me,  do  so  that  I  can  understand  thee, 
and  satisfy  both  thyself  and  me  by  thy  speech.” 
“A  woman  is  born,  and  wears  not  yet  the  veil,” 
he  began,  “who  will  make  my  city  pleasant  to 
thee,  however  men  may  blame  it.  Thou  shalt 
go  on  with  this  prevision:  if  from  my  mur¬ 
muring  thou  hast  conceived  error,  the  true 
things  will  hereafter  clear  it  up  for  thee.  But 
tell  me,  if  I  here  see  him,  who  drew  forth  the 
new  rhymes,  beginning:  ‘Ladies  who  have  in¬ 
telligence  of  Love ’?”2 

52.  And  I  to  him:  “I  am  one  who,  when 
Love  inspires  me,  notes,  and  in  that  mode 
which  he  dictates  within,  I  go  uttering.”  “O 
brother,  now  I  see,”  said  he,  “the  knot  which 
held  back  the  Notary,3  and  Guittone,4  and  me 
short  of  the  sweet  new  style  which  I  hear.  I 
see  clearly  how  your  pens  go  on  close  follow¬ 
ing  the  dictator,  which  surely  was  not  the  case 
with  ours.  And  he  who  most  sets  himself  to 
look  farther  sees  nothing  more  between  one 
style  and  the  other.”  And,  as  if  contented,  he 
was  silent. 

64.  As  the  birds  that  winter  along  the  Nile 
sometimes  make  a  troop  in  the  air,  then  fly  in 
greater  haste,  and  go  in  file,  so  all  the  folk  that 
were  there,  light  both  through  leanness  and 
through  will,  turning  away  their  faces,  quick¬ 
ened  again  their  pace. 

70.  And  as  the  man  who  is  weary  of  run¬ 
ning  lets  his  companions  go  on,  and  then 

1  Bonifazio  de’  Fieschi,  Archbishop  of  Ravenna  from 
1274  to  1294. 

2  The  first  verse  of  the  first  canzone  of  The  New 
Life . 

3  The  Sicilian  poet,  Jacopo  da  Lentino. 

4  Guittone  d’  Arezzo,  commonly  called  Fra  Guit- 
tonc,  as  one  of  the  order  of  the  Frati  Gaudenti,  men¬ 
tioned  in  Hell ,  xxiii.  103.  Also  see  Canto  xxvi.  124. 
He  died  probably  in  1293. 


walks,  until  the  panting  of  his  chest  be  abated, 
so  Forese  let  the  holy  flock  pass  on  and  came 
along  behind  wifh  me,  saying:  “When  shall  it 
be  that  I  see  thee  again?”  “I  know  not,”  I  re¬ 
plied  to  him,  “how  long  I  may  live;  but  truly 
my  return  will  not  be  so  speedy,  that  I  shall 
not  in  desire  be  sooner  at  the  shore;  because 
the  place  where  I  was  set  to  live,  strips  itself 
more  of  good  from  day  to  day,  and  seems  or¬ 
dained  to  dismal  ruin.”  “Now  go,”  said  he, 
“for  I  see  him  who  is  most  to  blame  for  this" 
dragged  at  the  tail  of  a  beast,  toward  the  valley6 
where  never  is  there  exculpation.  The  beast  at 
every  step  goes  faster,  with  ever  increasing 
speed,  till  it  strikes  him,  and  leaves  his  body 
vilely  undone.  Those  wheels  have  not  far  to 
turn,”  and  he  raised  his  eyes  to  heaven,  “ere 
that  will  be  clear  to  thee  which  my  speech  may 
not  further  declare.  Now  do  thou  stay  behind, 
for  time  is  so  precious  in  this  kingdom,  that  I 
lose  too  much  coming  thus  at  even  pace  with 
thee.” 

94.  As  a  cavalier  sometimes  sets  forth  at  a 
gallop  from  a  troop  which  is  riding,  and  goes 
to  win  the  honor  of  the  first  encounter,  so  with 
longer  strides  did  he  depart  from  us;  and  I  re¬ 
mained  on  the  way  with  only  those  two  who 
were  such  great  marshals  of  the  world. 

100.  And  when  he  had  passed  on  so  far  be¬ 
fore  us  that  my  eyes  became  such  followers  of 
him  as  my  mind  was  of  his  words,  there  ap¬ 
peared  to  me  the  laden  and  living  branches  of 
another  apple-tree,  and  not  far  distant,  be¬ 
cause  only  then  had  I  turned  thitherward.  I 
saw  people  beneath  it  raising  their  hands  and 
crying,  I  know  not  what,  toward  the  leaves, 
like  eager  and  fond  little  children  who  pray, 
and  he  to  whom  they  pray  does  not  answer, 
but,  to  make  their  longing  the  more  keen, 
holds  aloft  their  desire,  and  conceals  it  not. 
Then  they  departed  as  if  undeceived:  and 
upon  this  we  came  to  the  great  tree  which  re¬ 
jects  so  many  prayers  and  tears.  “Pass  ye  far¬ 
ther  onward,  without  drawing  near;  the  tree' 
which  was  eaten  of  by  Eve  is  higher  up,  and 

5  Corso  Donati,  the  leader  of  the  Black  Guelphs. 
On  October  6,  1308,  he  was  compelled  to  fly  from 
Florence.  Near  the  city  he  was  thrown  from  his  horse 
and  dragged  along,  till  he  was  overtaken  and  killed 
by  his  pursuers. 

6  “The  woful  valley  of  the  abyss.”  See  Hell,  iv.  8. 

7  See  Canto  xxxii.  38fT. 


CANTO  XXV 


this  plant  was  raised  from  it.”  Thus  said  I 
know  not  who  among  the  branches;  wherefore 
Virgil  and  Statius  and  I,  drawing  close  togeth¬ 
er,  proceeded  onward  along  the  side  that  rises. 
“Bethink  ye,”  the  voice  was  saying,  “of  the 
accursed  ones,1  formed  in  the  clouds,  who, 
when  glutted,  strove  against  Theseus  with 
their  double  breasts;  and  of  the  Hebrews,  who, 
at  the  drinking,  showed  themselves  weak/ 
wherefore  Gideon  had  them  not  for  compan¬ 
ions,  when  he  went  down  the  hills  toward 
Midian.” 

127.  Thus  keeping  close  to  that  one  of  the 
two  margins,  we  passed  by,  hearing  of  sins  of 
gluttony  followed,  indeed,  by  miserable  gains. 
Then  going  at  large  along  the  lonely  road,  full 
a  thousand  steps  and  more  had  carried  us  on¬ 
ward,  each  of  us  in  meditation  without  a 
word.  “Why  go  ye  thus  in  thought,  ye  three 
alone?”  said  a  sudden  voice;  whereat  I  started, 
as  do  terrified  and  timid  beasts.  I  lifted  up  my 
head  to  see  who  it  might  be,  aad  never  were 
glass  or  metals  in  a  furnace  seen  so  shining 
and  ruddy,  as  one  I  saw  who  said:  “If  it  please 
you  to  mount  upward,  here  there  is  need  to 
turn;  this  way  he  goes  who  would  go  for 
peace.”  His  aspect  had  taken  my  sight  from 
me,  wherefore  I  turned  to  go  behind  my  teach¬ 
ers,  like  one  who  goes  according  as  he  hears. 

145.  And  as  the  breeze  of  May,  a  herald  of 
the  dawn,  stirs  and  smells  sweet,  all  impreg¬ 
nate  with  the  herbage  and  with  the  flowers, 
such  a  wind  I  felt  strike  upon  the  middle  of 
my  forehead,  and  I  clearly  felt  the  motion  of 
the  plumage,  which  made  me  perceive  the 
odor  of  ambrosia.  And  I  heard  say:  “Blessed 
are  they  whom  so  much  grace  illumines,  that 
the  love  of  taste  kindles  not  too  great  desire 
in  their  breasts,  hungering  always  so  much 
as  is  right.”3 

CANTO  XXV 

1.  It  was  the  hour  in  which  the  ascent  allowed 
no  delay;  for  the  Sun  had  left  the  meridian 
circle  to  the  Bull,  and  the  Night  to  the  Scor¬ 
pion;4  wherefore  as  does  the  man  who,  what- 

1  The  centaurs,  said  to  have  been  born  of  Ixion 
and  a  phantom  cloud.  They  fought  with  Theseus  at 
the  marriage  feast  of  Peirithous. 

2  See  Judges,  7.  4-7. 

3  See  Matthew,  5.  6.  Also  Cf.  Canto  xxii.  5-6. 

4  The  hour  indicated  is  about  2  p.  m. 


ever  may  appear  to  him,  does  not  stop,  if  the 
goad  of  necessity  prick  him,  but  goes  on  his 
way,  so  did  we  enter  through  the  gap,  one  be¬ 
fore  the  other,  taking  the  stairway  which  by 
its  narrowness  unpairs  the  climbers. 

10.  And  as  the  little  stork  that  lifts  its  wing 
through  will  to  fly,  and  dares  not  abandon  the 
nest,  and  lets  it  drop,  so  was  I,  with  will  to 
ask  kindled  and  quenched,  coming  as  far  as 
to  the  motion  that  he  makes  who  proposes  to 
speak.  Nor,  though  our  going  was  swift,  did 
my  sweet  Father  forbear,  but  he  said:  “Dis¬ 
charge  the  bow  of  speech  which  up  to  the  iron 
thou  hast  draw'n.”  Then  I  opened  my  mouth 
confidently,  and  began:  “How  can  one  become 
lean,  where  the  need  of  nourishment  is  not 
felt?”  “If  thou  wouldst  call  to  mind,”  he  said, 
“how  Meleager  was  consumed  by  the  consum¬ 
ing  of  a  brand,  this  would  not  be  so  difficult  to 
thee;  and  if  thou  wouldst  think,  how  at  your 
quivering  your  image  quivers  within  the  mir¬ 
ror,  that  which  seems  hard  would  seem  easy  to 
thee.  But  in  order  that  thou  mayst  be  inwardly 
at  ease  in  respect  to  thy  wish,  lo,  here  is  Statius, 
and  I  call  on  him,  and  pray  that  he  be  now  the 
healer  of  thy  wounds.” 

31.  “If  I  explain  to  him  the  eternal  view,”  re¬ 
plied  Statius,  “where  thou  art  present,  let  it  ex¬ 
cuse  me  that  to  thee  I  cannot  make  denial.” 

34.  Then  he  began,  “If,  son,  thy  mind  re¬ 
gards  and  receives  my  words,  they  will  be  for 
thee  a  light  unto  the  ‘How/  which  thou  ask- 
est/  Perfect  blood,  which  is  never  drunk  up  by 
the  thirsty  veins,  but  remains  like  the  food 
which  thou  removest  from  the  table,  takes  in 
the  heart  a  virtue  informative  of  all  the  human 
members,  as  being  that  which  goes  through 
the  veins  to  become  them.  Digested  still  fur¬ 
ther,  it  descends  to  the  part  whereof  it  is  more 
becoming  to  be  silent  than  to  speak;  and  from 
there,  afterwards,  it  drops  upon  another’s 
blood  in  the  natural  vessel.  There  one  and  the 
other  meet  together;  the  one  ordained  to  be 
passive,  and  the  other  to  be  active  because  of 
the  perfect  place  wherefrom  it  is  pressed  out; 
and,  conjoined  with  the  former,  the  latter  be¬ 
gins  to  operate,  first  by  coagulating,  and  then 
it  quickens  that  to  which  it  gives  consistency 
for  its  own  material.  The  active  virtue  having 

5  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  QQ  118, 
1 19- 


PURGATORY 


become  a  soul,  like  that  of  a  plant  (in  so  far 
different  that  this  is  on  the  way,  and  that  al¬ 
ready  arrived),  then  so  works,  that  now  it 
moves  and  feels,  as  a  sea-fungus  does;  and  then 
it  proceeds  to  organize  the  powers  of  which  it 
is  the  germ.  Now,  son,  the  virtue  is  displayed, 
now  it  is  diffused,  which  issues  from  the  heart 
of  the  begetter,  where  nature  is  intent  on  all 
the  members. 

61.  “But  how  from  an  animal  it  becomes  a 
rational  being,  thou  as  yet  seest  not;  this  is 
such  a  point  that  once  it  made  one  wiser  than 
thou  to  err,  so  that  in  his  teaching  he  separated 
from  the  soul  the  potential  intellect,  because  he 
saw  no  organ  assumed  by  it.2  Open  thy  breast 
to  the  truth  which  is  coming,  and  know  that, 
so  soon  as  the  articulation  of  the  brain  is  per¬ 
fect  in  the  embryo,  the  Primal  Motor  turns  to 
it  with  joy  over  such  art  of  nature,  aad 
breathes  into  it  a  new  spirit  replete  with  virtue, 
which  draws  into  its  own  substance  that  which 
it  finds  active  there,  and  becomes  one  single 
soul  which  lives  and  feels  and  circles  on  itself. 
And  that  thou  mayst  the  less  wonder  at  my 
words,  consider  the  warmth  of  the  sun  which, 
combining  with  the  juice  that  flows  from  the 
vine,  becomes  wine.3 

79.  “And  when  Lachesis  has  no  more  thread, 
this  soul  is  loosed  from  the  flesh,  and  virtually 
bears  away  with  itself  both  the  human  and  the 
divine;  the  other  faculties  all  of  them  mute, 
but  memory,  understanding,  and  will  far  more 
acute  in  action  than  before.  Without  a  stop,  it 
falls  of  itself,  marvellously,  to  one  of  the 
banks.4  Here  it  first  knows  its  own  roads.  Soon 
as  the  place  there  circumscribes  it,  the  forma¬ 
tive  virtue  rays  out  around  it,  in  like  shape  and 
size,  as  in  the  living  members.  And  as  the  air 
when  it  is  full  of  rain  becomes  adorned  with 
divers  colors,  by  reason  of  the  rays  of  another 
which  are  reflected  in  it,  so  here  the  neighbor¬ 
ing  air  shapes  itself  in  that  form  which  the  soul 

1  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  118, 
A  1;  Aristotle,  Generation  of  Animals,  ii.  3. 

2  The  “one  wiser  than  thou”  is  generally  understood 
to  refer  to  Averroes,  whose  error  was  in  his  exposition 
of  Aristotle’s  doctrine  as  set  forth  in  On  the  Soul, 
iii.  4-5* 

3  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  76, 

A44' 

Of  Acheron  (see  Hell,  iii.  78),  or  of  Tiber  (see 
Purgatory,  ii.  100- 105),  according  as  the  soul  is 
damned  or  saved. 


that  has  stopped  virtually  imprints  upon  it. 
And  then  like  the  flamelet  which  follows  the 
fire  whithersoever  it  shifts,  so  does  its  new 
form  follow  the  spirit.  Since  thereafter  it  has  its 
aspect  from  this,  it  is  called  a  shade;  and  thence 
it  organizes  every  sense  even  to  the  sight; 
thence  we  speak,  and  thence  we  laugh,  thence 
we  make  the  tears  and  the  sighs,  which  thou 
mayst  have  heard  on  the  mountain.  According 
as  our  desires  and  our  other  affections  impress 
us,  the  shade  is  shaped;  and  this  is  the  cause  of 
that  at  which  thou  wonderest.” 

109.  And  now  we  had  come  to  the  last  cir¬ 
cuit,  and  had  turned  to  the  right  hand,  and 
were  intent  upon  another  care.  Here  the  bank 
shoots  forth  flame,  and  the  ledge  breathes  a 
blast  upward  which  drives  it  back,  and  se¬ 
questers  a  path  from  it.  Wherefore  it  was  need¬ 
ful  to  go  one  by  one  along  the  open  side;  and 
on  the  one  hand  I  was  afraid  of  the  fire,  and  on 
the  other  I  was  afraid  of  falling  off.  My  Leader 
said,  “Along  this  place,  one  must  keep  tight 
the  rein  upon  the  eyes,  because  for  little  one 
might  go  astray.” 

121  .“Summae  Deus  clementiae I  then 
heard  being  sung,  in  the  bosom  of  the  great 
burning,  which  made  me  care  not  less  to  turn. 
And  I  saw  spirits  going  through  the  flame; 
wherefore  I  looked  at  them  and  at  my  own 
steps,  apportioning  to  each  my  sight  from  mo¬ 
ment  to  moment.  After  the  end  that  is  made 
to  that  hymn,  they  loudly  cried:  “Virum  non 
cognosco”;  then  began  again  the  hymn  with 
low  voice;  this  finished,  they  cried  anew:  “To 
the  wood  Diana  kept  herself,  and  drove  there¬ 
from  Helice,7  who  had  tasted  the  poison  of 
Venus.”  Then  they  returned  to  their  singing; 
then  they  cried  aloud  wives  and  husbands  who 
were  chaste,  as  virtue  and  marriage  enjoin  up¬ 
on  us.  And  I  believe  this  mode  suffices  them  for 
all  the  time  that  the  fire  burns  them.  With 
such  cure  it  is  needful,  and  with  such  diet,  that 
the  last  wound  of  all  should  be  closed  up. 

5  “God  of  clemency  supreme,”  the  beginning  of  a 
hymn,  sung  at  Matins  on  Saturday,  containing  a 
prayer  for  purity. 

0  “I  know  not  a  man.”  See  Luke,  1.  34. 

7  Or  Callisto,  a  nymph  attendant  on  Diana.  She 
bore  a  son  to  Jupiter,  and,  having  been  changed 
into  a  bear  by  Juno,  she  was  by  Jove  transferred  with 
her  child  to  the  heavens,  where  they  are  seen  as 
the  Great  and  Little  Bear. 


CANTO  XXVI 


CANTO  XXVI 

i.  While  we  were  thus  going  on  along  the 
edge,  one  before  the  other,  the  good  Master 
was  often  saying:  “Take  heed!  let  it  avail  that 
I  warn  thee.”  The  sun,  which  now,  with  his 
radiance,  was  changing  all  the  west  from  azure 
to  a  white  aspect,  was  striking  me  on  the  right 
shoulder;  and  with  my  shadow  I  was  making 
the  flame  appear  more  ruddy,  and  only  to  that 
indication  I  saw  many  shades,  as  they  went  on, 
giving  heed.  This  was  the  occasion  which  gave 
them  a  beginning  to  speak  of  me,  and  they  be¬ 
gan  to  say:  “He  does  not  seem  a  fictitious 
body”;  then  certain  of  them  came  toward  me, 
so  far  as  they  could  do  so,  always  with  regard 
not  tc  come  out  where  they  would  not  be 
burned. 

1 6.  “O  thou,  who  goest  behind  the  others, 
not  from  being  slower,  but  perhaps  from  rever¬ 
ence,  reply  to  me,  who  am  burning  in  thirst 
and  fire:  nor  by  me  only  is  thy  reply  needed, 
for  all  these  have  a  greater  thirst  for  it  than 
Indian  or  Ethiop  for  cold  water.  Tell  us  how  it 
is  that  thou  makest  of  thyself  a  wall  to  the  sun, 
as  if  thou  hadst  not  yet  entered  within  the  net 
of  death.”  Thus  spoke  one  of  them  to  me;  and 
I  should  at  once  have  made  myself  known,  if 
I  had  not  given  attention  to  another  new  thing 
which  then  appeared;  for  along  the  middle  of 
the  burning  road  were  coming  people  with 
their  faces  opposite  to  these,  which  held  me  en¬ 
gaged  to  look  at  them.  There  I  see,  on  either 
side,  each  shade  making  haste  and  one  kissing 
the  other,  without  stopping,  content  with  a 
brief  greeting.  Thus  within  their  brown  troop 
one  ant  touches  muzzle  with  another,  per¬ 
chance  to  spy  out  their  way  and  their  fortune. 

37.  Soon  as  they  end  the  friendly  salutation, 
before  the  first  step  runs  onward  by,  each 
strives  to  outcry  the  other;  the  new-come  folk: 
“Sodom  and  Gomorrah,”  and  the  other:  “Into 
the  cow  enters  Pasiphae,  that  the  bull  may  run 
to  her  lust.”  Then  like  cranes,  which  should  fly 
part  to  the  Riphaean  mountains,1  and  part  to¬ 
ward  the  sands,2  these  shunning  the  frost  and 
those  the  sun,  the  one  folk  goes,  the  other 
comes  on,  and,  weeping,  they  return  to  their 

1  Mountains  vaguely  placed  by  the  early  geogra¬ 
phers  in  the  far  north. 

2  The  deserts  of  Libya. 


first  chants,3  and  to  the  cry  which  most  befits 
them.  And  those  same  who  had  prayed  me 
drew  near  to  me  as  before,  intent  in  their  looks 
to  listen. 

52. 1,  who  twice  had  seen  their  desire,  be¬ 
gan:  “O  souls,  secure  of  having,  whenever  it 
may  be,  a  state  of  peace,  my  limbs  have  not  re¬ 
mained  yonder,  either  unripe  nor  mature,  but 
are  here  with  me,  with  their  blood,  and  with 
their  joints.  I  go  hence  upward  in  order  to  be 
no  longer  blind.  A  Lady  is  on  high  who  wins 
grace  for  us/  whereby  I  bring  my  mortal  body 
through  your  world.  But  so  may  your  greatest 
wish  soon  become  satisfied,  in  such  wise  that 
that  heaven  may  harbor  you  which  is  full  of 
love,  and  most  amply  spreads,5  tell  me,  in  or¬ 
der  that  I  may  yet  rule  the  paper  for  it,  who 
are  ye,  and  who  are  that  crowd  which  go  their 
way  behind  your  backs.” 

67.  Not  otherwise  is  the  astonished  mountain¬ 
eer  confused,  and  gazing  round  is  dumb,  when 
rough  and  rustic  he  enters  the  town,  than  each 
shade  became  in  its  appearance;  but,  after  they 
were  unburdened  of  their  astonishment,  which 
in  high  hearts  is  quickly  abated:  “Blessed 
thou,”  began  again  the  one  who  first  had  ques¬ 
tioned  me,  “who,  in  order  the  better  to  die, 
dost  ship  experience  of  our  regions.  The  people 
who  do  not  come  with  us  offended  in  that  for 
which  once  Caesar  in  his  triumph  heard  ‘Queen’ 
shouted  out  against  him;  therefore  they  go  off 
crying  ‘Sodom,’  upbraiding  themselves,  as  thou 
hast  heard,  and  they  help  the  burning  by  their 
shame.  Our  sin  was  hermaphrodite;  but  be¬ 
cause,  following  our  appetite  like  beasts,  we 
did  not  observe  human  law,  when  we  part 
from  them  we  recite,  in  opprobrium  of  our¬ 
selves,  the  name  of  her  who  bestialized  herself 
in  the  beast-shaped  planks.  Now  thou  knowest 
our  deeds,  and  of  what  we  were  guilty;  if,  per¬ 
chance,  thou  wishest  to  know  by  name  who  we 
are,  there  is  not  time  to  tell,  and  I  should  not 
know.  I  will  indeed  make  thee  short  of  wish 
about  myself;  I  am  Guido  Guinicelli;*  and  I 
am  purging  myself  already,  because  I  truly  re¬ 
pented  before  my  last  hour.” 

3  See  Canto  xxv.  121. 

4  See  Hell,  ii.  94-96. 

J  The  Empyrean,  the  seat  of  Paradise. 

6  The  most  illustrious  of  the  Italian  poets  before 
Dante;  the  date  of  his  death  is  uncertain,  but  he 
was  living  in  1274.  See  Canto  xi.  97. 


PURGATORY 


94.  Such  as  in  the  frenzy  of  Lycurgus  her 
two  sons  became  at  seeing  again  their  mother,1 
such  I  became,  but  I  rise  not  so  far,  when  I 
hear  name  himself  the  father  of  me,  and  of  the 
others  my  betters  who  ever  used  sweet  and  gra¬ 
cious  rhymes  of  love;  and  without  hearing  or 
speaking,  full  of  thought,  I  went  on,  gazing  a 
long  time  upon  him;  nor,  for  the  fire,  did  I 
draw  nearer  to  him. 

103.  When  I  was  fed  with  looking,  I  offered 
myself  wholly  ready  for  his  service,  with  the 
affirmation  which  makes  another  believe.  And 
he  to  me:  “By  what  I  hear,  thou  leavest  such 
impression  on  me,  and  so  clear,  that  Lethe  can¬ 
not  take  it  away  nor  make  it  dim.  But,  if  thy 
words  just  now  swore  truth,  tell  me  what  is  the 
reason  why  thou  displayest  in  speech  and  look 
that  thou  dost  hold  me  dear?”  And  I  to  him, 
“The  sweet  ditties  of  yours,  which,  so  long  as 
the  modern  use  shall  endure,  will  still  make 
dear  their  ink.” 

1 1 5.  “O  brother,”  said  he,  “this  one  whom 
I  point  out  to  thee  with  my  finger,”  and  he 
pointed  to  a  spirit  in  advance,2  “was  a  better 
smith  of  his  mother  tongue.  In  verses  of  love 
and  proses  of  romances  he  surpassed  all;  and 
let  the  foolish  talk  who  think  that  he  of  Li¬ 
moges3  excels  him;  to  rumor  more  than  to  the 
truth  they  turn  their  faces,  and  thus  establish 
their  opinion,  before  art  or  reason  is  listened  to 
by  them.  Thus  did  many  of  old  concerning 
Guittone,4  from  cry  to  cry  giving  the  prize 
only  to  him,  until  the  truth  prevailed  with 
more  persons.  Now  if  thou  hast  such  ample 
privilege  that  it  is  permitted  thee  to  go  unto 
the  cloister  in  which  Christ  is  abbot  of  the  col¬ 
lege,  say  to  Him  for  me  one  paternoster,  so  far 
as  is  needful  for  us  in  this  world,  where  power 
to  sin  is  no  longer  ours.” 

133.  Then,  perhaps  to  give  place  to  one  who 
was  near  behind  him,  he  disappeared  through 
the  fire,  like  a  fish  going  through  the  water  to 

1  When  Hypsipyle  was  about  to  be  put  to  death 
by  Lycurgus,  king  of  Nemea,  enraged  with  her  for 
leaving  his  infant  child,  who  was  killed  by  a  serpent 
while  she  was  showing  the  river  Langia  to  the  Ar- 
gives  (see  Canto  xxii.  112),  she  was  found  and  rescued 
by  her  own  sons. 

2  Arnaut  Daniel,  a  famous  Proven9al  troubadour  of 
the  end  of  the  twelfth  century. 

3  Giraut  de  Borneil,  another  famous  poet,  contem¬ 
porary  with  Arnaut  Daniel. 

4  See  Canto  xxiv.  56. 


the  bottom.  I  moved  forward  a  little  to  him 
who  had  been  pointed  out  to  me,  and  said,  that 
for  his  name  my  desire  was  preparing  a  gra¬ 
cious  place.  He  readily  began  to  say:  “Your 
courteous  request  so  pleases  me  that  I  cannot, 
nor  do  I  wish  to  hide  me  from  you.  I  am  Ar¬ 
naut,  who  weep  and  go  singing;  contrite  I  see 
my  past  folly,  and  glad  I  see  before  me  the  joy 
I  hope  for.  Now  I  pray  you,  by  that  Power 
which  guides  you  to  the  summit  of  this  stair¬ 
way,  at  due  time  be  mindful  of  my  pain.”5 
Then  he  hid  himself  in  the  fire  which  refines 
them. 

CANTO  XXVII 

1.  As  when  he  darts  forth  his  first  rays  there 
where  his  Maker  shed  His  blood  (Ebro  falling 
under  the  lofty  Scales,  and  the  waves  in  the 
Ganges  scorched  by  noon)  so  the  sun  was 
now  standing;6  and  thus  the  day  was  depart¬ 
ing,  when  the  glad  Angel  of  God  appeared  to 
us.  Outside  the  flame  he  was  standing  on  the 
bank,  and  was  singing:  Beati  mundo  corde / 
in  a  voice  far  more  living  than  ours.  Then: 
“No  one  goes  farther,  ye  holy  souls,  if  first  the 
fire  sting  not:  enter  into  it,  and  to  the  song  be¬ 
yond  be  ye  not  deaf,”  he  said  to  us,  as  we  drew 
near  to  him:  whereat  I  became  such,  when  I 
heard  him,  as  is  he  who  is  put  in  the  pit.  I 
stretched  forward  above  my  clasped  hands, 
looking  at  the  fire,  and  vividly  imagining  hu¬ 
man  bodies  I  had  once  seen  burnt. 

19.  My  good  Escorts  turned  toward  me,  and 
Virgil  said  to  me:  “My  son,  here  may  be  tor¬ 
ment,  but  not  death.  Bethink  thee!  bethink 
thee!  ...  lo,  if  I  even  upon  Geryon  guided  thee 
safe,  what  shall  I  do  now  that  I  am  nearer 
God?  Believe  for  certain  that  if  within  the 
belly  of  this  flame  thou  shouldst  stand  full  a 
thousand  years  it  could  not  make  thee  bald  of 
a  single  hair.  And  if  perchance  thou  believest 
that  I  am  deceiving  thee,  draw  towards  it,  and 
make  trial  for  thyself  with  thine  own  hands 
upon  the  hem  of  thy  garments.  Put  aside  now, 
put  aside  every  fear,  turn  hitherward,  and 
come  on  secure.” 

5  The  words  of  Arnaut  are  in  the  Provencal  tongue. 

0  It  was  near  sunrise  at  Jerusalem,  and  consequently 
near  sunset  in  Purgatory,  midnight  in  Spain,  and  mid¬ 
day  at  the  Ganges. 

7  “Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart.” 


CANTO  XXVII 


33.  And  I  still  motionless  and  against  con¬ 
science! 

34.  When  he  saw  me  still  stand  motionless 
and  obdurate,  he  said,  disturbed  a  little:  “Now 
see,  son,  between  Beatrice  and  thee  is  this 
wall.” 

37.  As  at  the  name  of  Thisbe,  Pyramus,  at 
point  of  death,  opened  his  eyelids  and  looked 
at  her,  what  time  the  mulberry  became  dark 
red,  so,  my  obduracy  becoming  softened,  I 
turned  to  my  wise  Leader,  hearing  the  name 
that  in  my  memory  is  ever  welling  up.  Where¬ 
at  he  nodded  his  head,  and  said:  “How?  do  we 
want  to  stay  on  this  side?”  then  he  smiled  as 
one  does  at  a  child  who  is  conquered  by  an 
apple. 

46.  Then  within  the  fire  he  set  himself  in 
front  of  me,  praying  Statius,  that  he  would 
come  behind,  who  previously,  for  a  long  way, 
had  divided  us.  When  I  was  within,  I  would 
have  thrown  myself  into  boiling  glass  to  cool 
me,  so  without  measure  was  the  burning  there. 
My  sweet  Father,  to  encourage  me,  went  talk¬ 
ing  only  of  Beatrice,  saying:  “I  seem  already  to 
see  her  eyes.” 

55.  A  voice  which  was  singing  on  the  other 
side  was  guiding  us,  and  we,  attentive  ever  to 
it,  came  forth  where  the  ascent  began.  “Venite, 
benedicti  patris  mei,’n  sounded  within  a  light 
that  was  there  such  that  it  overcame  me,  and  I 
could  not  look  on  it.  “The  sun  is  going,”  it 
added,  “and  the  evening  comes;  tarry  not,  but 
hasten  your  steps  so  long  as  the  west  grows  not 
dark.” 

64.  The  way  mounted  straight,  through  the 
rock,  in  such  direction  that  in  front  of  me  I  cut 
off  the  rays  of  the  sun  which  was  already  low. 
And  of  few  stairs  had  we  made  essay  ere,  by 
the  vanishing  of  my  shadow,  both  I  and  my 
Sages  perceived  the  setting  of  the  sun  behind 
us.  And  before  the  horizon  in  all  its  immeasur¬ 
able  regions  had  become  of  one  aspect,  and 
night  had  all  her  dispensations,  each  of  us 
made  his  bed  of  a  stair;  for  the  nature  of  the 
mountain  took  from  us  the  power,  more  than 
the  delight,  of  ascending. 

76.  As  goats,  that  have  been  swift  and  wan¬ 
ton  on  the  peaks  ere  they  were  fed,  become 
tranquil  while  they  ruminate,  hushed  in  the 

1  “Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father."  Matthew,  25.  34. 


95 

shade  so  long  as  the  sun  is  hot,  watched  by  the 
shepherd,  who  on  his  staff  is  leaning  and,  lean¬ 
ing,  tends  them;  and  as  the  herdsman,  who 
lodges  out  of  doors,  passes  the  night  beside  his 
quiet  flock,  watching  that  the  wild  beast  may 
not  scatter  it:  such  were  we  all  three  then,  1 
like  a  goat,  and  they  like  shepherds,  hemmed 
in  on  this  side  and  on  that  by  the  high  rock. 

88.  Little  of  the  outside  could  there  be  seen, 
but  in  that  little  I  saw  the  stars  both  brighter 
and  larger  than  their  wont.  Thus  ruminating, 
and  thus  gazing  upon  them,  sleep  overcame 
me,  sleep  which  oft  before  the  deed  be  done 
knows  news  thereof. 

94.  At  the  hour,  I  think,  when  from  the  east 
Cytherea,  who  with  fire  of  love  seems  always 
burning,  first  beamed  upon  the  mountain,2  I 
seemed  in  dream  to  see  a  lady,  young  and 
beautiful,  going  through  a  meadow  gathering 
flowers,  and  singing  she  was  saying:  “Let  him 
know,  whoso  asks  my  name,  that  I  am  Leah, 
and  I  go  moving  my  fair  hands  around  to 
make  me  a  garland.  To  please  me  at  the  mirror 
I  here  adorn  me,  but  my  sister  Rachel  never 
departs  from  her  looking-glass,  and  sits  all  day. 
She  is  as  fain  to  look  at  her  fair  eyes  as  I  to 
adorn  me  with  my  hands.  Her,  seeing,  and  me, 
doing  satisfies.”3 

109.  And  now  before  the  splendors  which 
precede  the  sun,  and  rise  the  more  grateful  un¬ 
to  pilgrims  as  in  returning  they  lodge  less  far 
away,  the  shadows  were  fleeing  on  every  side, 
and  my  sleep  with  them;  whereupon  I  rose, 
seeing  the  great  Masters  already  risen.  “That 
sweet  fruit  which  the  care  of  mortals  goes  seek¬ 
ing  upon  so  many  branches,  today  shall  set  at 
peace  thy  hungerings.”  These  words  did  Vir¬ 
gil  use  toward  me,  and  never  were  there  gifts 
which  for  pleasure  were  equal  to  these.  Such 
great  wish  upon  wish  came  to  me  to  be  above, 
that  at  every  step  thereafter  I  felt  my  wings 
growing  for  the  flight. 

124.  When  beneath  us  all  the  stairway  had 
been  run  over,  and  we  were  on  the  topmost 
step,  Virgil  fixed  his  eyes  on  me,  and  said: 
“The  temporal  fire  and  the  eternal  thou  hast 
seen,  Son,  and  art  come  to  a  place  where  of  my- 

2  Venus,  the  morning  star,  was  rising.  Cf.  Canto  i. 
19,  20. 

3  Leah  and  Rachel  are  the  types  of  the  active  and 
the  contemplative  life. 


PURGATORY 


96 

self  I  discern  no  farther.  I  have  brought  thee 
here  with  understanding  and  with  art;  thine 
own  pleasure  take  thou  henceforward  for 
guide:  forth  art  thou  from  the  steep  ways, 
forth  art  thou  from  the  narrow.  See  there  the 
sun,  which  is  shining  on  thy  front;  see  the 
young  grass,  the  flowers,  and  the  shrubs,  which 
here  the  earth  of  itself  alone  produces.  Until 
the  beautiful  eyes  come  rejoicing,  which  weep¬ 
ing  made  me  come  to  thee,  thou  canst  sit  down 
and  thou  canst  go  among  them.  Expect  no 
more  or  word  or  sign  from  me.  Free,  upright, 
and  sound  is  thine  own  will,  and  it  would  be 
wrong  not  to  act  according  to  its  choice; 
wherefore  thee  over  thyself  I  crown  and  mi¬ 
tre.” 

CANTO  XXVIII 

1.  Fain  now  to  search  within  and  round  about 
the  divine  forest  dense  and  living,  which  was 
tempering  the  new  day  to  my  eyes,  without 
longer  waiting  I  left  the  bank,  taking  the  level 
ground  very  slowly,  over  the  soil  which  on 
every  side  breathed  fragrance.  A  sweet  breeze 
that  had  no  variation  in  itself  smote  me  on  the 
brow,  not  with  heavier  stroke  than  a  soft  wind; 
at  which  the  branches,  readily  trembling,  one 
and  all  were  bending  toward  the  quarter  where 
the  holy  mountain  casts  its  first  shadow;  yet 
not  so  swayed  from  their  uprightness,  that  the 
little  birds  among  the  tops  had  to  leave  the 
practice  of  their  every  art;  but,  singing  with 
full  joy,  they  received  the  early  breezes  among 
the  leaves,  which  were  keeping  a  burden  to 
their  rhymes,  such  as  gathers  from  bough  to 
bough  through  the  pine  forest  on  the  shore 
of  Chiassi,1  when  Aeolus  lets  forth  the 
Scirocco.2 

22.  Now  had  my  slow  steps  carried  me  with¬ 
in  the  ancient  wood  so  far  that  I  could  not  see 
back  to  where  I  had  entered  it:  and  lo,  a  stream 
took  from  me  further  progress,  which  with  its 
little  waves  was  bending  toward  the  left  the 
grass  that  sprang  up  on  its  bank.  All  the 
waters,  that  are  purest  here  on  the  earth,  would 
seem  to  have  some  mixture  in  them,  compared 
with  that  which  hides  nothing,  although  it 
moves  along  dusky  under  the  perpetual  shad- 

1  Classe,  the  old  port  of  Ravenna,  from  which  the 
sea  long  since  receded. 

2  The  southeast  wind. 


ow,  which  never  lets  the  sun  or  moon  shine 
there. 

34.  With  my  f’eet  I  stood  still,  and  with  my 
eyes  I  passed  to  the  other  side  of  the  streamlet, 
to  gaze  at  the  great  variety  of  the  fresh  blos¬ 
soms;  and  there,  even  as  a  thing  appears  sud¬ 
denly  which  turns  aside  through  wonder  every 
other  thought,  appeared  to  me  a  solitary  lady, 
who  was  going  along,  singing,  and  culling 
flower  from  flower,  wherewith  all  her  path  was 
painted.  “Ah,  fair  Lady,  who  warmest  thyself 
in  the  rays  of  love,  if  I  may  trust  to  looks  which 
are  wont  to  be  witnesses  of  the  heart,  may  the 
will  come  to  thee,”  said  I  to  her,  “to  draw  for¬ 
ward  toward  this  stream,  so  far  that  I  may  hear 
what  thou  art  singing.  Thou  makest  me  re¬ 
member  where  and  what  was  Proserpine,  at 
the  time  when  her  mother  lost  her,  and  she  the 
spring.” 

52.  As  a  lady  who  is  dancing  turns,  with  feet 
close  to  the  ground  and  to  each  other,  and 
hardly  sets  foot  before  foot,  she  turned  on  the 
red  and  the  yellow  flowerets  toward  me,  not 
otherwise  than  a  virgin  who  lowers  her  modest 
eyes,  and  made  my  prayers  content,  approach¬ 
ing  so  that  the  sweet  sound  came  to  me  with  its 
meaning.  So  soon  as  she  was  there  where  the 
grasses  are  just  bathed  by  the  waves  of  the  fair 
stream,  she  gave  me  the  boon  of  lifting  her 
eyes.  I  do  not  believe  that  so  great  a  light  shone 
beneath  the  eyelids  of  Venus,  when  transfixed 
by  her  son  quite  out  of  his  custom.  She  was 
smiling  upon  the  right  bank  opposite,  gather¬ 
ing  with  her  hands  the  many  colors  which  that 
high  land  brings  forth  without  seed.  The 
stream  made  us  three  paces  apart;  but  the  Hel¬ 
lespont  where  Xerxes  passed  it — still  a  curb  on 
all  human  pride — endured  not  more  hatred 
from  Leander  for  swelling  between  Sestos  and 
Abydos,  than  that  from  me  because  it  did  not 
then  open. 

76.  “Ye  are  new  come,”  she  began,  “and, 
perchance,  why  I  smile  in  this  place  chosen  for 
human  nature  as  its  nest,  some  doubt  holds  you 
marvelling;  but  the  psalm  Delectasti*  affords 
light  which  may  uncloud  your  understanding. 
And  thou  who  art  in  front,  and  didst  pray  to 

3  Psalms,  92.  4,  Delectasti  me,  Domine,  in  factnra 
tua,  et  in  operibus  manutim  tiiarum  exultabo.  “For 
thou,  Lord,  hast  made  me  glad  through  thy  work;  I 
will  triumph  in  the  works  of  thy  hands.” 


CANTO  XXIX 


me,  say,  if  aught  else  thou  wouldst  hear,  for  I 
came  ready  for  every  question  of  thine,  so  far 
as  may  suffice/’ 

85.  “The  water,”  said  I,  “and  the  sound  of 
the  forest  impugn  within  me  recent  faith  in 
something  which  I  heard  contrary  to  this/* 
Whereon  she:  “I  will  tell  how  that  which 
makes  thee  wonder  proceeds  from  its  own 
cause;  and  I  will  clear  away  the  mist  which 
falls  upon  thee. 

91.  “The  supreme  Good,  which  Itself  alone 
is  pleasing  to  Itself,  made  man  good,  and  for 
good,  and  gave  to  him  this  place  for  earnest  of 
eternal  peace.  Through  his  own  default  he 
dwelt  here  little  while;  through  his  own  de¬ 
fault  he  changed  honest  laughter  and  sweet 
sport  to  tears  and  to  toil.  In  order  that  the  dis¬ 
turbance,  which  the  exhalations  of  the  water 
and  of  the  earth  (that  follow  after  the  heat  so 
far  as  they  can)  produce  down  below,  should 
not  make  any  war  on  man,  this  mountain  rose 
so  high  toward  heaven,  and  is  free  from  them, 
from  there  where  it  is  locked  in.  Now  because 
the  whole  air  revolves  in  a  circuit  with  the 
primal  revolution,1 2  if  its  circling  be  not  broken 
by  some  obstacle,  upon  this  height,  which  is 
wholly  disengaged  in  the  living  air,  this  mo¬ 
tion  strikes,  and  makes  the  wood,  because  it  is 
thick-set,  resound;  and  the  plant  thus  struck 
has  such  power  that  with  its  virtue  it  impreg¬ 
nates  the  breeze,  and  this  in  its  whirling  then 
scatters  it  around;  and  the  rest  of  the  earth,  ac¬ 
cording  as  it  is  fit  in  itself,  or  through  its  sky, 
conceives  and  brings  forth  divers  trees  of  divers 
virtues.  It  should  not  then,  this  being  heard, 
appear  a  marvel  on  earth,  when  some  plant 
takes  root  there  without  apparent  seed.  And 
thou  must  know  that  the  holy  plain  where 
thou  art  is  full  of  every  seed,  and  has  within  it¬ 
self  fruit  which  is  never  gathered  yonder  upon 
earth. 

i2i.“The  water  which  thou  seest  does  not 
rise  from  a  vein  which  vapor  condensed  by  the 
frost  restores,  like  a  stream  that  gains  and  loses 
breath:  but  it  issues  from  a  constant  and  sure 
fountain,  which  by  the  will  of  God  regains  as 

1  Cf.  Canto  xxi.  43-53. 

2  With  the  movement  given  to  it  by  the  revolution 
of  the  crystalline  heaven,  the  so-called  Pritnum  Mo¬ 
bile,  from  which  the  other  heavenly  spheres  derive 
their  motion. 


much  as  it  pours  forth  open  on  two  sides.  On 
this  side  it  descends  with  virtue  that  takes  from 
one  the  memory  of  sin:  on  the  other  it  restores 
that  of  every  good  deed.  On  this  side  it  is  called 
Lethe/  so  on  the  other  Eunoe;  and  it  works 
not  if  first  it  be  not  tasted  on  this  side  then  on 
that.  To  all  other  savors  this  is  superior. 

134.  “And  though  thy  thirst  may  be  fully 
sated  even  if  I  reveal  no  more  to  thee,  I  will  yet 
give  thee  a  corollary  as  a  favor;  nor  do  I  think 
my  speech  will  be  less  dear  to  thee,  if  it  extend 
with  thee  beyond  my  promise.  Those  who  in 
old  time  sang  of  the  Golden  Age,  and  of 
its  happy  state,  perchance,  upon  Parnassus, 
dreamed  of  this  place:  here  was  the  root  of 
mankind  innocent;  here  is  always  spring,  and 
every  fruit;  this  is  the  nectar  of  which  each  one 
of  them  tells.” 

145. 1  turned  me  backward  then  wholly  to 
my  Poets,  and  saw  that  with  a  smile  they  had 
heard  the  last  words;  then  to  the  beautiful 
Lady  I  turned  again  my  eyes. 

CANTO  XXIX 

1.  Singing  like  a  lady  enamored,  she,  at  the 
ending  of  her  words,  continued:  Beati,  quo¬ 
rum  tecta  sunt  peccata *  And,  like  the  nymphs 
who  were  wont  to  go  solitary  through  the  syl¬ 
van  shades,  one  desiring  to  see  and  one  to 
avoid  the  sun,  she  then  moved  on  counter  to 
the  stream,  going  up  along  the  bank,  and  I  at 
even  pace  with  her,  following  her  little  step 
with  little.  Of  her  steps  and  mine  there  were 
not  a  hundred,  when  the  banks  both  alike 
gave  a  turn,  in  such  wise  that  I  faced  again  to¬ 
ward  the  east.  Nor  even  thus  had  our  way 
been  long,  when  the  lady  turned  wholly 
round  to  me,  saying:  “My  brother,  look  and 
listen.” 

16.  And  lo,  a  sudden  lustre  ran  through  the 
great  forest  on  every  side,  so  that  it  made  me 
question  if  it  were  lightning.  But  because  the 
lightning  stays  even  as  it  comes,  and  this,  last¬ 
ing,  became  more  and  more  resplendent,  in  my 
thought  I  said,  “What  thing  is  this?”  And  a 
sweet  melody  ran  through  the  luminous  air; 
whereupon  a  righteous  zeal  made  me  reproach 
the  hardihood  of  Eve,  who,  there,  where  the 

3  See  Hell,  xxxiv.  127-132. 

4  “Blessed  are  they  whose  transgressions  are  for¬ 
given.”  Psalms,  32.  1, 


PURGATORY 


98 

earth  and  the  heavens  were  obedient,  the  only 
woman,  and  but  just  now  formed,  did  not  en¬ 
dure  to  stay  under  any  veil;  under  which  if  she 
had  stayed  devout,  I  should  have  tasted  those 
ineffable  delights  before,  and  for  a  longer  time. 

31.  While  I  was  going  on  amid  so  many  first 
fruits  of  the  eternal  pleasure,  all  enrapt,  and 
still  desirous  of  more  joys,1  in  front  of  us  the 
air,  beneath  the  green  branches,  became  like  a 
blazing  fire,  and  the  sweet  sound  was  now 
heard  as  a  song. 

37.O  Virgins  sacrosanct!  if  for  you  I  have 
ever  endured  hunger,  cold,  or  vigils,  the  oc¬ 
casion  spurs  me  that  I  claim  reward  therefor. 
Now  it  behoves  that  Helicon  pour  forth  for 
me,  and  that  Urania  aid  me  with  her  choir  to 
put  into  verse  things  difficult  to  think. 

43.  A  little  farther  on,  the  long  tract  of  space 
which  was  still  between  us  and  them  shewed 
falsely  in  their  seeming  seven  trees  of  gold. 
But  when  I  had  come  so  near  to  them  that  the 
common  object,  which  deceives  the  sense,  lost 
not  through  distance  any  of  its  attributes,  the 
power  which  supplies  discourse  to  reason"  dis¬ 
tinguished  them  as  candlesticks,3  and  in  the 
voices  of  the  song,  Hosanna.  On  high  the 
fair  array  was  flaming,  brighter  by  far  than  the 
moon  in  the  clear  sky  at  midnight,  in  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  her  month.  I  turned  me  round  full  of 
wonder  to  the  good  Virgil,  and  he  replied  to 
me  with  a  look  charged  not  less  with  amaze¬ 
ment.  Then  I  turned  back  my  gaze  to  the  high 
things,  which  were  moving  toward  us  so  slow¬ 
ly  that  they  would  have  been  outstripped  by 
new-made  brides. 

61.  The  lady  chided  me:  “Why  art  thou  only 
thus  ardent  in  gazing  on  the  living  lights,  and 
dost  not  look  at  that  which  comes  behind 
them?”  Then  I  saw  folk  coming  behind,  as  if 
after  their  leaders,  clothed  in  white,  and  such 
whiteness  there  never  was  on  earth.4  The  water 
was  resplendent  on  the  left  flank,  and  reflected 
to  me  my  left  side,  if  I  looked  in  it,  even  as  a 
mirror.  When  I  had  such  position  on  my  bank 
that  only  the  stream  separated  me,  in  order  to 
see  better,  I  gave  halt  to  my  steps,  and  I  saw 
the  flamelets  go  forward  leaving  the  air  behind 

1  Cf.  Canto  vi.  46-48. 

2  See  Canto  xviii.  22. 

3  See  Revelation,  1.  12;  4,  5;  Isaiah,  11.  2. 

4  See  Mark,  9.  3. 


them  painted,  and  they  had  the  semblance  of 
streaming  pennons,  so  that  it  remained  divided 
overhead  by  seven  stripes,  all  in  those  colors 
whereof  the  sun  makes  his  bow,  and  Delia  her 
girdle."  These  banners  stretched  to  the  rear  be¬ 
yond  my  sight,  and  according  to  my  judgment 
the  outermost  were  ten  paces  apart.  Under  so 
fair  a  sky  as  I  describe,  twenty-four  elders,6  two 
by  two,  were  coming  crowned  with  flower-de- 
luce.  All  were  singing:  “Blessed  art  thou 
among  the  daughters  of  Adam,  and  blessed 
forever  be  thy  beauties.” 

88.  After  the  flowers  and  the  other  fresh 
herbage,  opposite  to  me  on  the  other  bank, 
were  free  from  those  folk  elect,  there  came  be¬ 
hind  them,  even  as  light  follows  light  in  heav¬ 
en,  four  living  creatures,  each  crowned  with 
green  leaves.  Each  was  feathered  with  six 
wings,  the  feathers  full  of  eyes;  and  the  eyes  of 
Argus,  if  they  were  living,  would  be  such.  To 
describe  their  forms,  Reader,  I  scatter  rhymes 
no  more,  for  other  spending  so  constrains  me 
that  in  this  I  cannot  be  liberal.  But  read  Ezek-  ,, 
iel,  who  depicts  them  as  he  saw  them  coming 
from  the  cold  quarter  with  wind,  with  cloud, 
and  with  fire;  and  such  as  thou  wilt  find  them 
in  his  pages  such  were  they  here,  save  that  as 
to  the  wings  John  is  with  me,  and  differs  from 
him.' 

106.  The  space  between  these  four  contained 
a  triumphal  chariot  upon  two  wheels,  which 
came  drawn  along  by  the  neck  of  a  Griffon.8 
And  he  stretched  up  the  one  and  the  other  of 
his  wings  between  the  midmost  stripe,  and  the 
three  and  three  others,  so  that  he  did  harm  to 
no  one  of  them  by  cleaving  it:  so  high  they  rose 
that  they  were  lost  to  sight.  His  members  were 
of  gold  so  far  as  he  was  bird,  and  the  rest  were 
white  mixed  with  crimson.  Not  Africanus,  or 
indeed  Augustus,  gladdened  Rome  with  so 
beautiful  a  chariot;  but  even  that  of  the  Sun 
would  be  poor  to  it — that  of  the  Sun,  which, 
going  astray,9  was  consumed  at  the  prayer  of 
the  devout  Earth,  when  Jove  in  his  secrecy  was 

5  Delia,  the  moon,  and  her  girdle  the  halo. 

6  See  Revelation,  4.  4. 

7  These  four  living  creatures  represent  the  four 
Evangelists.  See  Ezekiel,  1.  6;  Revelation,  4.  8. 

8  The  griffon,  half  eagle  and  half  lion,  represents 
Christ  in  his  double  nature,  divine  and  human.  See 
Song  of  Solomon,  5.  10,  11.  The  chariot  he  draws  is 
the  Church. 

8  When  driven  by  Phaethon. 


CANTO  XXX 


just.  Three  ladies,1  at  the  right  wheel,  came 
dancing  in  a  circle;  one  so  ruddy  that  hardly 
would  she  have  been  noted  within  the  fire;  the 
next  was  as  if  her  flesh  and  bones  had  been 
made  of  emerald;  the  third  seemed  as  snow 
fresh  fallen.  And  now  they  seemed  led  by  the 
white,  now  by  the  red,  and  the  others  took 
their  step  both  slow  and  swift  from  the  song  of 
her  who  led.  On  the  left,  four,2  robed  in  pur¬ 
ple,  made  festival,  following  the  measure  of 
one  of  them  who  had  three  eyes  in  her  head. 

133.  Behind  all  the  group  thus  described,  I 
saw  two  old  men,  unlike  in  dress,  but  like  in 
demeanor,  both  dignified  and  staid.  The  one 
showed  himself  one  of  the  familiars  of  that  su¬ 
preme  Hippocrates  whom  Nature  made  for 
the  creatures  that  she  holds  most  dear;3  the 
other  showed  the  contrary  care,4 5  with  a  shin¬ 
ing  and  sharp  swrord,  such  that  it  caused  me 
fear  on  the  hither  side  of  the  stream.  Then  I 
saw  four  of  humble  aspect,  and  behind  all  an 
old  man  alone,  coming  asleep  with  a  keen 
countenance/  And  these  seven  were  robed  like 
the  first  band;  but  they  made  not  a  crown  of 
lilies  round  their  heads,  rather  of  roses,  and  of 
other  red  flowers.  The  sight  at  little  distance 
would  have  sworn  that  all  were  aflame  above 
their  brows. 

15 1.  And  when  the  chariot  was  abreast  of 
me,  a  peal  of  thunder  was  heard,  and  those 
worthy  people  seemed  to  have  their  farther 
progress  interdicted,  stopping  there  with  the 
first  ensigns.6 7 * 

CANTO  XXX 

1.  When  the  Septentrion  of  the  first  heaven' 
(which  never  knew  setting  nor  rising,  nor  veil 
of  other  cloud  than  sin,  and  which  was  making 
every  one  there  acquainted  with  his  duty,  as 

1  The  theological  virtues,  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity. 

2  The  four  cardinal  virtues,  Prudence,  Justice,  Tem¬ 
perance,  and  Fortitude.  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theo- 
logica.  Part  III,  Q  85,  A  3. 

3  Acts,  represented  under  the  type  of  its  author, 
St.  Luke,  See  Colossians,  4.  14. 

4  The  Pauline  Epistles,  typified  by  their  writer, 
whose  sword  is  the  symbol  of  war  and  martyrdom. 

5  The  four  “humble  in  appearance”  are  the  repre¬ 
sentatives  in  their  writers  of  the  minor  Epistles,  and 
they  are  followed  by  St.  John,  as  the  writer  of  Revela¬ 
tion.’ 

0  Cf.  Canto  xxxii.  29. 

7  The  seven  candlesticks  of  the  first  heaven,  the 

Empyrean. 


the  lower"  makes  him  who  turns  the  helm  to 
come  to  port)  stopped  still,  the  truthful  people 
who  had  come  first  between  the  Griffon  and  it, 
turned  to  the  chariot  as  to  their  peace,  and  one 
of  them,  as  if  sent  from  heaven,  singing,  cried 
thrice:  Veni,  sponsa,  de  Libano /  and  all  the 
others  after. 

13.  As  the  blessed  at  the  last  trump  will  arise 
swiftly,  each  from  his  tomb,  singing  Hallelu¬ 
jah  with  reinvested  voice,10  so,  upon  the  divine 
wagon,  ad  vocem  tanti  senis ,u  rose  up  a  hun¬ 
dred  ministers  and  messengers  of  life  eternal. 
All  were  saying:  Benedictus,  qui  venis ,12  and, 
scattering  flowers  above  and  around,  Manibus 
o  date  l ilia  plenis ,13 

22. 1  have  seen  ere  now  at  the  beginning  of 
the  day  the  eastern  region  all  rosy,  and  the  rest 
of  heaven  beautiful  with  fair  clear  sky,  and  the 
face  of  the  sun  rising  shaded,  so  that  through 
the  tempering  of  vapors  the  eye  sustained  it  a 
long  while;  thus  within  a  cloud  of  flowers, 
which  was  ascending  from  the  angelic  hands 
and  falling  down  again  within  and  without,  a 
lady,  with  wreath  of  olive  over  a  white  veil,  ap¬ 
peared  to  me,  robed  with  the  color  of  living 
flame  under  a  green  mantle.  And  my  spirit 
which  now  for  so  long  a  time  had  not  been 
broken  down,  trembling  with  awe  at  her  pres¬ 
ence,  without  having  more  knowledge  by  the 
eyes,  through  occult  virtue  that  proceeded 
from  her,  felt  the  great  potency  of  ancient  love. 

40.  Soon  as  the  lofty  virtue  smote  my  sight, 
which  already  had  transfixed  me  ere  I  was  out 
of  boyhood,  I  turned  me  to  the  left,  with  the 
confidence  with  which  the  little  child  runs  to 
his  mother  when  he  is  frightened,  or  when  he 
is  troubled,  to  say  to  Virgil:  “Less  than  a 
drachm  of  blood  remains  in  me  that  does  not 
tremble;  I  recognize  the  signals  of  the  ancient 
flame.”14  But  Virgil  had  left  us  deprived  of 
himself;  Virgil,  sweetest  Father;  Virgil,  to 
whom  for  my  salvation  I  gave  me.  Nor  did  all 

8  The  lower  septentrion,  or  the  seven  stars  of  the 
Great  or  Little  Bear. 

9  “Come  with  me  from  Lebanon,  my  spouse.”  The 
Song  of  Solomon,  4.  8. 

10  See  Revelation,  19.  1. 

11  “At  the  voice  of  so  great  an  elder.” 

12  “Blessed  thou  that  comest,”  words  derived  from 
Psalms,  1 1 8.  26;  Cf.  Matthew.  21.  9. 

13  “Oh,  give  lilies  with  full  hands”;  words  from  the 
Aeneid,  vi,  883. 

14  See  Aeneid,  iv.  23. 


PURGATORY 


ioo 

which  the  ancient  mother  lost  avail  unto  my 
cheeks,  cleansed  with  dew,1  that  they  should 
not  turn  dark  again  with  tears. 

55.  ‘‘Dante,  though  Virgil  be  gone  away, 
weep  not  yet,  weep  not  yet,  for  by  another 
sword  thou  needst  must  weep.” 

58.  Like  an  admiral  who,  on  poop  or  on 
prow,  comes  to  see  the  people  that  are  serving 
on  the  other  ships,  and  encourages  them  to  do 
well,  upon  the  left-hand  border  of  the  chariot 
— when  I  turned  me  at  the  sound  of  my  own 
name,  which  of  necessity  is  registered  here, — 
I  saw  the  Lady,  who  had  first  appeared  to  me 
veiled  beneath  the  angelic  festival,  directing 
her  eyes  toward  me  across  the  stream.  Al¬ 
though  the  veil,  which  descended  from  her 
head,  circled  by  the  leaf  of  Minerva,  did  not  al¬ 
low  her  to  appear  distinctly,  royally,  still  severe 
in  her  mien,  she  went  on,  as  one  who  speaks, 
and  keeps  back  his  warmest  words.  “Look  at 
me  well:  I  am,  indeed,  I  am,  indeed,  Beatrice. 
How  hast  thou  deigned  to  approach  the  moun¬ 
tain?  Didst  thou  not  know  that  here  man  is 
happy?”  My  eyes  fell  down  to  the  clear  fount; 
but  seeing  myself  in  it  I  drew  them  to  the 
grass,  such  great  shame  weighed  on  my  brow. 
As  to  her  son  the  mother  seems  haughty,  so  she 
seemed  to  me;  for  somewhat  bitter  tastes  the 
savor  of  tart  pity. 

82.  She  was  silent,  and  the  angels  sang  of  a 
sudden:  In  te,  Domine,  speravi;  but  be¬ 
yond  pedes  meos  they  did  not  pass.  Even  as 
the  snow,  among  the  living  rafters  upon  the 
back  of  Italy,  is  congealed,  blown  and  packed 
by  Sclavonian  winds,  then  melting,  trickles 
through  itself,  if  only  the  land  which  loses 
shadow  breathe,  so  that  it  seems  as  fire  melting 
the  candle;  thus  was  I  without  tears  and  sighs 
before  the  song  of  them  who  always  sing  fol¬ 
lowing  the  notes  of  the  eternal  spheres;  but 
when  I  heard  in  their  sweet  melodies  their 
compassion  for  me,  more  than  if  they  had  said: 
“Lady,  why  dost  thou  so  confound  him?” 
the  ice  that  was  bound  tight  around  my  heart 
became  breath  and  water,  and  with  anguish 
issued  from  my  breast,  through  my  mouth  and 
through  my  eyes. 

100.  She,  still  standing  motionless  on  the 
aforesaid  side  of  the  chariot,  then  turned  her 

1  See  Canto  i.  121-129. 

aSee  Psalms,  31.  1-8. 


words  to  those  pious  beings  thus:  “Ye  watch  in 
the  eternal  day,  so  that  nor  night  nor  slumber 
robs  from  you  6ne  step  the  world  may  make 
along  its  ways;  wherefore  my  reply  is  with 
greater  care,  that  he  who  is  weeping  yonder 
may  understand  me,  in  order  that  fault  and 
grief  may  be  of  one  measure.  Not  only  through 
the  working  of  the  great  wheels,  which  direct 
every  seed  to  some  end  according  as  the  stars 
are  its  companions,  but  through  largess  of  di¬ 
vine  graces,  which  have  for  their  rain  vapors 
so  lofty  that  our  sight  goes  not  near  thereto — 
this  man  was  virtually  such  in  his  new  life, 
that  every  right  disposition  would  have  made 
admirable  proof  in  him.  But  so  much  the  more 
malign  and  wild  does  the  ground  become  with 
bad  seed  and  untilled,  as  it  has  the  more  of 
good  earthly  vigor. 

121.  “Some  time  did  I  sustain  him  with  my 
face;  showing  my  youthful  eyes  to  him,  I  led 
him  with  me  turned  in  right  direction.  So  soon 
as  I  was  on  the  threshold  of  my  second  age, 
and  had  changed  life,  he  took  himself  from 
me,  and  gave  himself  to  others.  When  I  had 
risen  from  flesh  to  spirit,  and  beauty  and  vir¬ 
tue  were  increased  in  me,  I  was  less  dear  and 
less  pleasing  to  him;  and  he  turned  his  steps 
along  a  way  not  true,  following  false  images  of 
good,  which  pay  no  promise  in  full.  Nor  did  it 
avail  me  to  obtain  inspirations  with  which, 
both  in  dream  and  otherwise,  I  called  him 
back;  so  little  did  he  heed  them.  So  low  he  fell 
that  all  means  for  his  salvation  were  already 
short,  save  showing  him  the  lost  people.  For 
this  I  visited  the  gate  of  the  dead,  and  to  him, 
who  has  conducted  him  up  hither,  my  prayers 
were  borne  with  weeping.  The  high  decree  of 
God  would  be  broken,  if  Lethe  should  be 
passed,  and  such  viand  should  be  tasted,  with¬ 
out  some  scot  of  repentance  which  may  pour 
forth  tears.” 

CANTO  XXXI 

1.  “O  thou,  who  art  on  the  farther  side  of  the 
sacred  river,”  turning  her  speech  to  me  with 
the  point,  which  only  with  the  edge  had 
seemed  to  me  keen,  she  began  anew,  going  on 
without  delay,  “Say,  say,  if  this  is  true;  to  so 
heavy  a  charge  thine  own  confession  must 
needs  be  conjoined.”  My  faculties  were  so  con¬ 
fused  that  the  voice  moved,  and  became  extinct 


CANTO  XXXI 


before  it  had  been  released  from  its  organs.  A 
little  while  she  waited,  then  said:  “What 
thinkest  thou?  Reply  to  me;  for  the  sad  mem¬ 
ories  in  thee  are  not  yet  injured  by  the  water.” 
Confusion  and  fear  mingled  together  forced 
such  a  “Yes”  from  out  my  mouth,  that  the 
eyes  were  needed  for  the  hearing  of  it. 

1 6.  As  a  cross-bow  breaks  its  cord  and  its 
bow  when  it  shoots  with  too  great  tension,  and 
the  shaft  hits  the  mark  with  less  force,  so  did  I 
burst  under  that  heavy  load,  pouring  forth 
tears  and  sighs,  and  the  voice  slackened  along 
its  passage.  Whereupon  she  to  me:  “Within 
those  desires  of  mine  that  were  leading  thee  to 
love  the  Good  beyond  which  there  is  nothing 
to  which  one  may  aspire,  what  trenches  run¬ 
ning  traverse,  or  what  chains  didst  thou  find, 
for  which  thou  shouldst  thus  have  despoiled 
thyself  of  the  hope  of  passing  onward?  And 
what  satisfactions,  or  what  advantages  were 
displayed  on  the  brow  of  the  others,  for  which 
thou  shouldst  have  lingered  before  them?” 

31.  After  the  drawing  of  a  bitter  sigh,  hardly 
had  I  the  voice  to  make  answer,  and  the  lips 
with  difficulty  gave  it  form.  Weeping,  I  said: 
“The  present  things  with  their  false  pleasure 
turned  my  steps,  soon  as  your  face  was  hid¬ 
den.”  And  she:  “Hadst  thou  been  silent,  or 
hadst  thou  denied  that  which  thou  dost  con¬ 
fess,  thy  fault  would  not  be  less  known,  by 
such  a  Judge  is  it  known.  But  when  the  accusa¬ 
tion  of  the  sin  bursts  from  one’s  own  mouth,  in 
our  court  the  wheel  turns  itself  back  against 
the  edge. 

43.  “Yet  still,  that  thou  mayst  now  bear 
shame  for  thy  error,  and  that  another  time, 
hearing  the  Sirens,  thou  mayst  be  stronger,  lay 
aside  the  sowing  of  tears,1  and  listen;  so  shalt 
thou  hear  how  my  buried  flesh  should  have 
moved  thee  in  opposite  direction.  Never  did 
nature  or  art  present  to  thee  pleasure  such  as 
the  fair  limbs  wherein  I  was  enclosed,  and 
which  are  scattered  in  earth.  And  if  the  su¬ 
preme  pleasure  thus  failed  thee  through  my 
death,  what  mortal  thing  should  afterward 
have  drawn  thee  into  its  desire?  Forsooth  thou 
oughtest,  at  the  first  arrow  of  things  fallacious, 
have  risen  upward  after  me,  who  was  no  long¬ 
er  such.  Nor  oughtest  thou  to  have  weighed 
thy  wings  downward  to  await  more  blows, 

*See  Psalms,  126.  5. 


either  of  some  young  girl  or  other  vanity 
of  so  brief  a  use.  The  young  bird  awaits 
two  or  three;  but  before  the  eyes  of  the  full- 
fledged,  the  net  is  spread  in  vain,  or  the  arrow 
shot.”2 

64.  As  children,  silent  in  shame,  with  their 
eyes  upon  the  ground,  stand  listening  and  con¬ 
science-stricken  and  repentant,  so  was  I  stand¬ 
ing.  And  she  said:  “Since  thou  art  grieved 
through  hearing,  lift  up  thy  beard,  and  thou 
shalt  take  greater  grief  from  seeing.”  With  less 
resistance  is  a  sturdy  oak  uprooted  by  a  native 
wind,  or  by  one  from  the  land  of  Iarbas,3  than 
I  raised  my  chin  at  her  command;  and  when 
by  the  beard  she  asked  for  my  eyes,  truly  I  rec¬ 
ognized  the  venom  of  the  argument. 

76.  And  when  my  face  was  lifted  up,  my 
sight  perceived  that  those  primal  creatures 
were  resting  from  their  strewing,  and  my  eyes, 
still  little  assured,  saw  Beatrice  turned  toward 
the  animal  that  is  one  person  only  in  two  na¬ 
tures.  Beneath  her  veil,  and  beyond  the  stream, 
she  seemed  to  me  more  to  surpass  her  ancient 
self,  than  she  seemed  to  surpass  all  others  here 
when  she  was  here.  So  pricked  me  there  the 
nettle  of  repentance  that  of  all  other  things  the 
one  which  most  had  turned  me  to  its  love  be¬ 
came  the  most  my  foe. 

88.  Such  self-conviction  stung  my  heart  that 
I  fell  overcome;  and  what  I  then  became  she 
knows  who  afforded  me  the  cause. 

9 1.  Then,  when  my  heart  restored  my  out¬ 
ward  faculties,  I  saw  above  me  the  lady  whom 
I  had  found  alone,  and  she  was  saying:  “Hold 
me,  hold  me.”  She  had  drawn  me  into  the 
stream  up  to  the  throat,  and  dragging  me  after 
her  was  moving  over  the  water,  light  as  a  shut¬ 
tle.  When  I  was  near  the  blessed  shore,  I  heard 
“Asperges  me ”4  so  sweetly  that  I  cannot  re¬ 
member  it,  far  less  can  write  it.  The  beautiful 
lady  opened  her  arms,  clasped  my  head,  and 
immersed  me  where  I  had  perforce  to  swallow 
of  the  water.  Then  she  took  me,  and  presented 
me,  thus  bathed,  within  the  dance  of  the  four 
beautiful  ones,  and  each  of  them  covered  me 
with  her  arm.  “Here  we  are  nymphs,  and  in 
heaven  we  are  stars:”  before  Beatrice  had  de- 

2  See  Proverbs,  1.  17. 

3  From  the  south:  the  land  of  Iarbas,  the  son  of 
Jupiter  Ammon,  was  Libya.  See  Acncid,  iv.  196. 

4  Cf.  Psalms,  51.  7. 

6  See  Canto,  i.  23. 


102 


PURGATORY 


scended  to  the  world  we  were  ordained  unto 
her  for  her  handmaids.  We  will  lead  thee  to 
her  eyes;  but  for  the  joyous  light  which  is  with¬ 
in  them,  the  three  yonder  who  look  more  deep¬ 
ly  shall  sharpen  thine  own.” 

1 12.  Thus  singing,  they  began;  and  then  to 
the  breast  of  the  Griffon  they  led  me  with 
them,  where  Beatrice  was  standing  turned  to¬ 
ward  us.  They  said:  “See  that  thou  spare  not 
thy  sight:  we  have  placed  thee  before  the  em¬ 
eralds,  whence  Love  of  old  drew  his  darts 
against  thee.”  A  thousand  desires  hotter  than 
flame  bound  fast  my  eyes  to  the  relucent  eyes 
which  ever  stayed  fixed  upon  the  Griffon.  Not 
otherwise  than  as  the  sun  in  a  mirror,  was  the 
twofold  animal  gleaming  therewithin,  now 
with  one,  now  with  the  other  mode  of  being. 

124.  Think,  Reader,  if  I  marvelled  when  I 
saw  the  thing  stay  quiet  in  itself,  and  in  its 
image  transmuting  itself. 

127.  While,  full  of  awe  and  glad,  my  soul 
was  tasting  that  food  which,  sating  in  itself, 
causes  longing  for  itself,  the  other  three,  show¬ 
ing  themselves  of  the  loftier  order  in  their  bear¬ 
ing,  came  forward  dancing  to  their  angelic  car¬ 
ol.  “Turn,  Beatrice,  turn  thy  holy  eyes,”  was 
their  song,  “upon  thy  faithful  one,  who  to  see 
thee  has  taken  so  many  steps.  Of  thy  grace  do 
us  the  grace  that  thou  unveil  to  him  thy  mouth, 
so  that  he  may  discern  the  second  beauty  which 
thou  dost  conceal.”1 

139.  O  splendor  of  living  light  eternal!  Who 
has  become  so  pallid  under  the  shadow  of  Par¬ 
nassus,  or  has  so  drunk  at  its  cistern,  that  he 
would  not  seem  to  have  his  mind  encumbered, 
trying  to  render  thee  as  thou  didst  appear  there 
where  with  its  harmony  the  heaven  hangs  over 
thee,  when  in  the  open  air  thou  didst  thyself 
disclose? 

CANTO  XXXII 

1.  So  fixed  and  intent  were  my  eyes  to  relieve 
their  ten  years’  thirst,  that  my  other  senses  were 
all  extinct:  and  they  themselves,  on  one  side 
and  the  other,  had  a  wall  of  indifference,  so  did 
the  holy  smile  draw  them  to  itself  with  the  an- 

1  “The  eyes  of  Wisdom  are  her  demonstrations  by 
which  one  sees  the  truth  most  surely;  and  her  smile 
is  her  persuasions  in  which  the  interior  light  of  Wis¬ 
dom  is  displayed  without  any  veil;  and  in  these  two  is 
felt  that  loftiest  pleasure  of  Beatitude,  which  is  the 
chief  good  in  Paradise.”  Dante,  Convito,  iii.  15. 


cient  net;  when  perforce  my  sight  was  turned 
toward  my  left  by  those  goddesses,  because  I 
heard  from  them  a  “Too  fixedly.”  And  the 
condition  which  exists  for  seeing,  in  eyes  but 
just  now  smitten  by  the  sun,  caused  me  to  be 
for  a  while  without  sight.  But  when  my  vision 
reshaped  itself  to  the  lesser  sensation  (I  say  to 
the  lesser,  in  respect  to  the  great  one  where¬ 
from  by  force  I  had  removed  myself),  I  saw 
that  the  glorious  army  had  wheeled  upon  its 
right  flank,  and  was  returning  with  the  sun 
and  with  the  seven  flames  in  its  face. 

19.  As  under  its  shields  to  protect  itself  a 
troop  turns  and  wheels  with  its  banner,  before 
it  all  can  change  about,  that  soldiery  of  the  ce¬ 
lestial  realm  which  was  in  advance  had  wholly 
gone  past  us,  before  its  front  beam  had  bent  the 
chariot  round.  Then  to  the  wheels  the  ladies  re¬ 
turned,  and  the  Griffon  moved  his  blessed  bur¬ 
den,  in  such  wise  however  that  no  feather  of 
him  shook.  The  beautiful  lady  who  had  drawn 
me  at  the  ford,  and  Statius  and  I  were  follow¬ 
ing  the  wheel  which  made  its  orbit  with  the 
smaller  arc.  Thus  passing  through  the  lofty 
wood,  empty  through  fault  of  her  who  trusted 
to  the  serpent,  an  angelic  song  set  the  time  to 
our  steps. 

34.  Perhaps  an  arrow  loosed  from  the  string 
had  traversed  in  three  flights  as  great  a  distance 
as  we  had  advanced,  when  Beatrice  descended. 
I  heard  “Adam!”  murmured  by  all:2  then  they 
encircled  a  plant  despoiled  of  flowers  and  of 
other  leafage  on  every  bough.  Its  tresses,  which 
the  wider  spread  the  higher  up  they  are,  would 
be  wondered  at  for  height  by  the  Indians  in 
their  woods. 

43.  “Blessed  art  thou,  Griffon,  that  thou  dost 
not  break  off  with  thy  beak  of  this  wood  sweet 
to  the  taste,  since  the  belly  is  ill  racked  there¬ 
by.”  Thus  around  the  sturdy  tree  the  others 
cried;  and  the  animal  of  two  natures:  “Thus  is 
preserved  the  seed  of  all  righteousness.”3  And 
turning  to  the  pole  which  he  had  drawn,  he 
dragged  it  to  the  foot  of  the  widowed  trunk, 
and  that  which  was  of  it*  he  left  bound  to  it. 

52.  As  when  the  great  light  falls  downward 
mingled  with  that  which  shines  behind  the  ce- 

2  See  2  Esdras,  VII.  48. 

3  See  Romans,  5.  19,  21. 

4  The  pole,  the  mystic  type  of  the  cross  of  Christ, 
which  was,  according  to  an  old  legend,  made  of  the 
wood  of  this  tree. 


CANTO  XXXII 


lestial  Carp,1  our  plants  become  swollen,  and 
then  renew  themselves,  each  in  its  own  color, 
before  the  sun  yokes  his  coursers  under  another 
star,  so,  disclosing  a  color  less  than  of  roses  and 
more  than  of  violets,  the  plant  renewed  itself, 
which  at  first  had  its  boughs  so  bare. 

61.I  did  not  understand,  nor  here  is  sung, 
the  hymn  which  that  folk  then  sang,  nor  did  I 
bear  the  melody  to  the  end. 

64.  If  I  could  portray  how  the  pitiless  eyes' 
sank  to  slumber,  while  hearing  of  Syrinx — the 
eyes  to  which  much  watching  cost  so  dear — 
like  a  painter  who  paints  from  a  model  I 
would  depict  how  I  fell  asleep;  but  whoso 
would,  let  him  be  one  who  can  represent  slum¬ 
ber  well.  Therefore  I  pass  on  to  when  I  awoke, 
and  I  say  that  a  splendor  rent  for  me  the  veil 
of  sleep,  and  a  call:  “Arise,  what  doest  thou?” 

73.  As,  to  see  some  of  the  flowerets  of  the  ap¬ 
ple  tree3  which  makes  the  Angels  greedy  for  its 
fruit,  and  makes  perpetual  marriage  feasts  in 
Heaven,4  Peter  and  John  and  James  were  led,5 
and  being  overcome,  came  to  themselves  at  the 
word  by  which  greater  slumbers  were  broken, 
and  saw  their  band  diminished  alike  by  Moses 
and  Elias,  and  the  raiment  of  their  Master 
changed,  so  I  came  to  myself,  and  saw  that 
compassionate  one  standing  above  me,  who 
had  before  been  conductress  of  my  steps  along 
the  stream;  and  all  in  doubt  I  said:  “Where  is 
Beatrice?”  And  she:  “Behold  her  under  the 
new  leafage,  sitting  upon  its  root.  Behold  the 
company  which  surrounds  her;  the  rest  are  go¬ 
ing  on  high  behind  the  Griffon,  with  sweeter 
song  and  more  profound.”6 

91.  And  if  her  speech  was  further  poured 
forth  I  know  not,  because  already  in  my  eyes 
was  she  who  from  attending  to  aught  else  had 
closed  me  in.  She  was  sitting  alone  upon  the 
bare  ground,  like  a  guard  left  there  of  the  char¬ 
iot  which  I  had  seen  bound  by  the  biform  ani- 

1  In  the  spring,  when  the  Sun  is  in  the  sign  of  the 
Ram,  which  follows  that  of  the  Fishes,  here  termed 
the  Carp. 

3  The  hundred  eyes  of  Argus,  who,  when  watch¬ 
ing  Io,  fell  asleep  while  listening  to  the  tale  of  the 
loves  of  Pan  and  Syrinx,  and  was  then  slain  by  Mer¬ 
cury. 

3  See  The  Song  of  Solomon,  2.  3. 

4  See  Revelation,  19.  9. 

5  See  Matthew,  17.  1-8. 

6  Christ  having  ascended,  Beatrice,  typifying  Revela¬ 
tion,  is  left  seated  by  the  chariot,  the  type  of  the 
Church  on  earth. 


IO3 

mal.  In  a  circle  the  seven  Nymphs  were  mak¬ 
ing  of  themselves  an  enclosure  for  her,  with 
those  lights  in  their  hands  which  are  secure 
from  Aquilo  and  from  Auster. 

100.  “Here  shalt  thou  be  short  time  a  forest¬ 
er:  and  thou  shalt  be  with  me  without  end  a 
citizen  of  that  Rome  whereof  Christ  is  a  Ro¬ 
man.  Therefore  for  profit  of  the  world  which 
lives  ill,  keep  now  thine  eyes  upon  the  chariot; 
and  what  thou  seest,  mind  that  thou  write 
when  thou  hast  returned  to  earth.”  Thus  Bea¬ 
trice;  and  I,  who  at  the  feet  of  her  commands 
was  all  devout,  gave  my  mind  and  my  eyes 
where  she  willed. 

109.  Never  with  so  swift  a  motion  did  fire 
descend  from  a  dense  cloud,  when  it  falls  from 
that  region  which  stretches  most  remote,  as  I 
saw  the  bird  of  Jove  swoop  down  through  the 
tree,  breaking  the  bark,  as  well  as  the  flowers 
and  new  leaves;  and  he  struck  the  chariot  with 
all  his  force,  whereat  it  reeled,  like  a  ship  in  a 
tempest  beaten  by  the  waves  now  to  starboard, 
now  to  larboard.  Then  I  saw  a  she  fox,‘  which 
seemed  fasting  from  all  good  food,  leap  into 
the  body  of  the  triumphal  vehicle;  but,  rebuk¬ 
ing  her  for  her  ugly  sins,  my  Lady  turned  her 
to  such  flight  as  her  fleshless  bones  allowed. 
Then,  from  there  whence  he  had  first  come,  I 
saw  the  eagle  descend  down  into  the  ark  of  the 
car  and  leave  it  feathered  from  himself.  And  a 
voice,  such  as  issues  from  a  heart  that  is  afflict¬ 
ed,  issued  from  Heaven,  and  thus  spoke:  “O 
little  bark  of  mine,  how  ill  art  thou  laden!” 

130.  Then  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  earth 
opened  between  the  two  wheels,  and  I  saw  a 
dragon  issue  from  it,  who  fixed  his  tail  upward 
through  the  chariot:  and,  like  a  wasp  that  re¬ 
tracts  its  sting,  drawing  to  himself  his  malig¬ 
nant  tail,  he  drew  out  part  of  the  floor,  and 
went  wandering  away.  That  which  remained 
covered  itself  again,  as  lively  soil  with  grass, 
with  the  plumage,  offered  perhaps  with  sane 
and  benign  intention;  and  both  one  and  the 
other  wheel  and  the  pole  were  again  covered 
with  it  in  such  time  that  a  sigh  holds  the 
mouth  open  longer.  Thus  transformed,  the 
holy  structure  put  forth  heads  upon  its  parts, 
three  upon  the  pole,  and  one  on  each  corner/ 
The  first  were  horned  like  oxen,  but  the  four 

7  The  early  heresies. 

8  See  Revelation,  12.  3. 


PURGATORY 


had  a  single  horn  upon  the  forehead.  A  like 
monster  was  never  seen  before.  Secure,  as  a 
fortress  on  a  high  mountain,  there  appeared  to 
me  a  dishevelled  harlot  sitting  upon  it,  with 
bold  brows  glancing  round.1  And,  as  if  in  or¬ 
der  that  she  should  not  be  taken  from  him,  I 
saw  a  giant  standing  at  her  side,  and  now  and 
then  they  kissed  each  other.  But  because  she 
turned  her  lustful  and  roving  eye  on  me  that 
fierce  paramour  scourged  her  from  head  to 
foot.  Then  full  of  jealousy,  and  cruel  with  an¬ 
ger,  he  loosed  the  monster,  and  dragged  it 
through  the  wood  so  far,  that  he  made  of  that 
alone  a  shield  from  me  for  the  harlot  and  for 
the  strange  beast.2 

CANTO  XXXIII 

i.Deus,  verier unt  gentes f  the  ladies  began, 
alternating,  now  three  now  four,  a  sweet 
psalmody,  and  weeping;  and  Beatrice,  sighing 
and  pitiful,  was  listening  to  them  with  such 
aspect  that  scarce  was  Mary  at  the  cross  more 
changed.  But  when  the  other  virgins  gave 
place  to  her  to  speak,  risen  upright  upon  her 
feet,  she  answered,  colored  like  fire:  Modi¬ 
cum,  et  non  videbitis  me,  et  iterum,  my  be¬ 
loved  Sisters,  modicum,  et  vos  videbitis  me * 
Then  she  set  all  the  seven  in  front  of  her;  and 
behind  her,  by  a  sign  only,  she  placed  me,  and 
the  Lady,  and  the  Sage  who  had  remained. 
Thus  she  moved  on;  and  I  do  not  think  her 
tenth  step  had  been  set  upon  the  ground,  when 
with  her  eyes  she  smote  mine,  and  with  tran¬ 
quil  aspect  said  to  me:  “Come  more  forward, 
so  that  if  I  speak  with  thee,  thou  mayst  be  well 
placed  for  listening  to  me.”  So  soon  as  I  was 
with  her  as  I  should  be,  she  said  to  me:  “Broth¬ 
er,  why  dost  thou  not  venture  to  question  me, 
now  thou  art  coming  with  me?” 

25.  As  befalls  those  who  with  exceeding  rev¬ 
erence  are  speaking  in  presence  of  their  supe¬ 
riors,  that  they  drag  not  their  voice  living  to 
the  teeth,  it  befell  me  that  without  perfect  ut- 

1  See  Revelation,  17.  3. 

2  The  harlot  and  the  giant  stand  respectively  for 
the  Pope  and  the  king  of  France.  The  dragging  of  the 
car,  transformed  into  a  monster,  through  the  wood, 
so  far  as  to  hide  it  from  the  poet,  may  be  taken  as 
typifying  the  removal  of  the  seat  of  the  Papacy 
from  Rome  to  Avignon,  in  1305. 

3  Cf.  Psalms,  79.  “O  God,  the  heathen  are  come  .  .  .” 

4  “A  little  while  and  ye  shall  not  see  me:  and  again, 
a  little  while  and  ye  shall  see  me.”  John,  15.  16. 


terance  I  began:  “My  Lady,  you  know  my 
need,  and  that  which  is  good  for  it.”  And  she 
to  me:  “From  fear  and  from  shame  I  wish  that 
thou  henceforth  disentangle  thyself,  so  that 
thou  mayst  speak  no  more  like  one  who 
dreams. 

34.  “Know  thou,  that  the  vessel  which  the 
serpent  broke  was,  and  is  not;5  but  let  him  who 
has  the  blame  thereof  think  that  the  vengeance 
of  God  fears  not  sops.6  The  eagle  that  left  its 
feathers  on  the  car,  whereby  it  became  a  mon¬ 
ster,  and  then  a  prey,  shall  not  be  for  all  time 
without  an  heir;  for  I  see  surely,  and  therefore 
I  tell  it,  stars  already  close  at  hand,  secure  from 
every  obstacle  and  from  every  hindrance,  to 
give  to  us  a  time  in  which  a  Five  hundred, 
Ten,  and  Five  sent  by  God  shall  slay  the  aban¬ 
doned  woman  together  with  that  giant  who  is 
sinning  with  her.'  And  perchance  my  narra¬ 
tion,  dark  like  that  of  Themis  and  the  Sphinx, 
less  persuades  thee,  because  after  their  fashion 
it  clouds  the  understanding.  But  soon  the  facts 
will  be  the  Naiades8  which  shall  solve  this  diffi¬ 
cult  enigma,  without  harm  of  flocks  or  of  har¬ 
vest.  Do  thou  note;  and  even  as  these  words 
are  uttered  by  me,  so  do  thou  teach  them  to 
those  alive  with  that  life  which  is  a  running 
unto  death;  and  bear  in  mind  when  thou  writ- 
est  them,  not  to  conceal  what  thou  hast  seen 
the  plant,  which  here  has  now  been  twice  de¬ 
spoiled.9  Whoever  robs  or  breaks  it,  with  blas¬ 
phemy  of  deed  offends  God,  who  for  His  own 
use  alone  created  it  holy.  For  biting  it,  the  first 
soul,  in  pain  and  in  desire,  for  five  thousand 
years  and  more,  longed  for  Him  who  punished 
on  Himself  the  bite. 

64.  “Thy  wit  sleeps,  if  it  deem  not  that  for  a 
special  reason  it  is  so  lofty  and  so  inverted  at 

5  See  Revelation,  17.  8. 

0  According  to  a  belief  that,  if  a  murderer  could 
contrive,  within  nine  days  of  the  murder,  to  eat  a 
sop  of  bread  dipped  in  wine,  above  the  grave  of  his 
victim,  he  would  escape  from  the  vengeance  of  the 
murdered  man’s  family. 

7  Beatrice  sees  near  at  hand  a  515,  in  Roman 
numerals  a  DXV,  which  letters  by  transposition  form 
DVX,  “a  leader,”  sent  by  God,  who  shall  reestablish 
the  Divine  order  upon  earth. 

8  According  to  a  blunder  in  the  manuscripts  of 
Ovid’s  Metamorphoses,  vii.  759,  the  Naiades  solved 
the  riddles  of  the  oracles,  at  which  Themis,  offended, 
sent  forth  a  wild  beast  to  ravage  the  flocks  and  fields. 
The  correct  reading  is  Laiades,  that  is,  Oedipus,  the 
son  of  Laius. 

9  See  Canto  xxxii.  51,  158. 


CANTO  XXXIII 


its  top.1 *  And  if  thy  vain  thoughts  had  not  been 
as  water  of  Elsa"  round  about  thy  mind,  and 
their  pleasantness  as  Pyramus  to  the  mul¬ 
berry,3  by  so  many  circumstances  alone  thou 
wouldst  have  recognized  morally  the  justice  of 
God  in  the  interdict  upon  the  tree.  But  though 
I  see  thee  in  thy  understanding  made  of  stone, 
and  thus  stony,  dark,  so  that  the  light  of  my 
speech  dazzles  thee,  I  yet  would  have  thee  bear 
it  hence  within  thee,  even  if  not  written,  at 
least  depicted,  for  the  reason  that  the  pilgrim’s 
staff  is  carried  wreathed  with  palm.” 

79.  And  I:  “Even  as  wax,  which  does  not 
change  the  figure  imprinted  by  a  seal,  is  my 
brain  now  stamped  by  you.  But  why  do  your 
desired  words  fly  so  far  above  my  sight,  that 
the  more  it  strives  the  more  it  loses  them?”  “In 
order  that  thou  mayst  know,”  she  said,  “that 
school  which  thou  hast  followed,  and  mayst 
see  how  its  doctrine  can  follow  my  word;  and 
mayst  see  that  your  way  is  distant  so  far  from 
the  divine,  as  the  heaven  which  highest  hastens 
on  is  remote  from  earth.”4  Whereon  I  replied 
to  her:  “I  do  not  remember  that  I  ever  es¬ 
tranged  myself  from  you,  nor  have  I  conscience 
of  it  that  reproaches  me.”  “And  if  thou  canst 
not  remember  it,”  she  replied  smiling,  “now 
call  to  mind  how  this  very  day  thou  hast  drunk 
of  Lethe;  and  if  from  the  smoke  fire  is  in¬ 
ferred,  this  thy  forgetfulness  clearly  proves 

I  fault  in  thy  will  intent  elsew’here.  Truly  my 
words  shall  henceforth  be  naked  so  far  as 
it  is  befitting  to  uncover  them  to  thy  rude 
sight.” 

103.  And  more  flashing,  and  with  slower 
steps,  the  sun  was  holding  the  circle  of  the 
meridian,  which  appears  here  or  there  accord- 

1  See  Canto  xxxii.  40-41. 

*  A  Tuscan  river,  whose  waters  have  a  petrifying 
quality. 

3  The  blood  of  Pyramus  dyed  the  mulberry. 

4  See  Isaiah,  55.  9. 


I05 

ing  to  the  point  of  view,  when,  as  he,  who  goes 
in  advance  of  people  as  a  guide,  halts  if  he  find 
some  strange  thing  on  his  track,  the  seven 
ladies  halted  at  the  edge  of  a  pale  shadow, 
such  as  beneath  green  leaves  and  black  boughs 
the  Alp  casts  over  its  cold  streams.  In  front  of 
them,  it  seemed  to  me  I  saw  Euphrates  and 
Tigris  issue  from  one  fountain,  and,  like 
friends,  depart  slowly  from  one  another. 

1 15.  “O  light,  O  glory  of  the  human  race, 
what  water  is  this  which  here  pours  forth  from 
one  source,  and  from  itself  divides  itself  a- 
away?”  To  this  prayer  answer  was  made  to  me: 
“Pray  Matilda  that  she  tell  it  to  thee.”  And 
hereupon  the  beautiful  Lady  answered,  as  one 
who  frees  himself  from  blame:  “This  and 
other  things  have  been  told  to  him  by  me;  and 
I  am  sure  that  the  water  of  Lethe  has  not  hid¬ 
den  them  from  him.”  And  Beatrice:  “Perhaps 
a  greater  care,  which  oftentimes  takes  the 
memory  away,  has  darkened  the  eyes  of  his 
mind.  But  behold  Eunoe,"  which  flows  forth 
yonder,  lead  him  to  it,  and,  as  thou  art  wont, 
revive  his  lifeless  power.”  As  a  gentle  soul 
which  makes  not  excuse,  but  makes  its  own 
will  of  another’s  will,  soon  as  by  a  sign  it  is  out¬ 
wardly  disclosed,  even  so,  when  I  had  been 
taken  by  her,  the  beautiful  Lady  moved  on, 
and  to  Statius  she  said,  with  manner  of  a  lady, 
“Come  with  him.” 

136.  If  I  had,  Reader,  longer  space  for  writ¬ 
ing,  I  would  in  part  at  least  sing  of  the  sweet 
draught  which  never  would  have  sated  me; 
but,  because  all  the  leaves  destined  for  this  sec¬ 
ond  canticle  are  full,  the  curb  of  my  art  lets  me 
go  no  farther. 

142. 1  returned  from  the  most  holy  wave,  re¬ 
animate,  even  as  new  plants  renewed  with  new 
foliage,  pure  and  disposed  to  mount  unto  the 
stars. 

J  Eunoe,  “the  memory  of  good,”  which  its  waters 
restore  to  the  purified  soul.  See  Canto  xxviii.  1 29-1 31. 


PARADISE 


CANTO  I 

The  glory  of  Him  who  moves  everything 
penetrates  through  the  universe,  and  is  re¬ 
splendent  in  one  part  more  and  in  another  less. 
In  the  heaven  which  receives  most  of  His  light 
I  have  been,1  and  have  seen  things  which  he 
who  descends  from  thereabove  neither  knows 
how  nor  has  power  to  recount;  because,  draw¬ 
ing  near  to  its  own  desire,2  our  intellect  enters 
so  deep,  that  the  memory  cannot  follow  after. 
Truly  whatever  of  the  Holy  Realm  I  could 
treasure  up  in  my  mind  shall  now  be  the  theme 
of  my  song. 

13.  O  good  Apollo,  for  this  last  labor  make 
me  such  a  vessel  of  thy  worth  as  thou  demand- 
est  for  the  gift  of  the  beloved  laurel.  Thus  far 
one  summit  of  Parnassus  has  been  enough  for 
me,  but  now  with  both3  I  need  to  enter  the 
remaining  arena.  Enter  into  my  breast,  and 
breathe  thou  in  such  wise  as  when  thou  drew- 
est  Marsyas  from  out  the  sheath  of  his  limbs. 
O  divine  Power,  if  thou  lend  thyself  to  me  so 
that  I  may  make  manifest  the  image  of  the 
Blessed  Realm  imprinted  within  my  head, 
thou  shalt  see  me  come  to  thy  chosen  tree,  and 
crown  myself  then  with  those  leaves  of  which 
the  theme  and  thou  will  make  me  worthy.  So 
rarely,  Father,  are  they  gathered  for  triumph 
or  of  Caesar  or  of  poet,  (fault  and  shame  of  hu¬ 
man  wills,)  that  the  Peneian  leaf4  should  bring 
forth  joy  unto  the  joyous  Delphic  deity,  when¬ 
ever  it  makes  any  one  to  long  for  it.  Great 
flame  follows  a  little  spark:  perhaps  after  me 
prayer  shall  be  made  with  better  voices,  where¬ 
to  Cyrrha5  may  respond. 

1  The  Empyrean. 

2  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I -II,  Q  3, 
A  8. 

s  Parnassus  was  supposed  to  have  two  peaks;  the 
Muses  dwelt  upon  one,  Apollo  upon  the  other. 

4  Daphne,  changed  into  the  laurel,  was  the  daugh¬ 
ter  of  Peneus. 

5  Cyrrha,  a  city  sacred  to  Apollo,  not  far  from  the 


38.  The  lamp  of  the  world  rises  to  mortals 
through  different  passages,  but  from  that 
which  joins  four  circles  with  three  crosses  it  is¬ 
sues  with  better  course  and  conjoined  with  a 
better  star,  and  it  tempers  and  seals  the  mun¬ 
dane  wax  more  after  its  own  fashion.6  Almost 
such  a  passage  had  made  morning  there  and 
evening  here;'  and  there  all  that  hemisphere 
was  white,  and  the  other  part  black,  when  I 
saw  Beatrice  turned  to  her  left  side,  and  gazing 
upon  the  sun:  never  did  eagle  so  fix  himself 
upon  it.  And  even  as  a  second  ray  is  wont  to 
issue  from  the  first,  and  mount  upward  again, 
like  a  pilgrim  who  wishes  to  return;  so  from 
her  action,  infused  through  the  eyes  into  my 
imagination,  mine  was  made,  and  I  fixed  my 
eyes  upon  the  sun  beyond  our  wont.  Much  is 
permitted  there  which  here  is  not  permitted  to 
our  faculties,  by  virtue  of  the  place  made  for 
the  human  race  as  its  proper  seat.  Not  long  did 
I  endure  it,  nor  so  little  that  I  did  not  see  it 
sparkle  round  about,  like  iron  that  issues  boil¬ 
ing  from  the  fire.  And  on  a  sudden,  day 
seemed  to  be  added  to  day,  as  if  He  who  has 
the  power  had  adorned  the  heaven  with  an¬ 
other  sun. 

64.  Beatrice  was  standing  with  her  eyes 
wholly  fixed  on  the  eternal  wheels,  and  on  her 
I  fixed  my  eyes  from  thereabove  removed. 
Looking  at  her  I  inwardly  became  such  as 
Glaucuss  became  on  tasting  of  the  grass  which 
made  him  consort  in  the  sea  of  the  other  gods. 


foot  of  Parnassus,  and  here  used  as  synonymous  with 
Delphi,  of  which  it  was  the  port. 

6  At  the  vernal  equinox  the  sun  rises  from  a  point 
on  the  horizon  where  the  four  great  circles,  namely, 
the  horizon,  the  zodiac,  the  equator,  and  the  equinoc¬ 
tial  colure,  meet,  and,  cutting  each  other,  form  three 
crosses.  The  sun  is  in  the  sign  of  Aries  “a  better  star,” 
because  the  influence  of  this  constellation  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  benignant. 

7  The  last  indication  of  time  given  in  the  Purgatory 
is  in  Canto  xxxiii.  104:  “the  sun  was  holding  the 
circle  of  the  meridian.” 

8  A  fisherman  changed  to  a  sea-god. 


CANTO  II 


Transhumanizing  cannot  be  signified  in  words; 
therefore  let  the  example  suffice  him  for  whom 
grace  reserves  the  experience.  If  I  was  only  that 
of  me  which  Thou  didst  the  last  create,1  O 
Love  that  governest  the  heavens,  Thou  know- 
est,  who  with  Thy  light  didst  lift  me.  When 
the  revolution  which  Thou,  being  desired, 
makest  eternal,2  made  me  attent  unto  itself 
with  the  harmony  which  Thou  dost  attune  and 
modulate,  so  much  of  the  heaven  then  seemed 
to  me  enkindled  by  the  flame  of  the  sun,  that 
rain  or  river  never  made  so  widespread  a 
lake. 

82.  The  novelty  of  the  sound  and  the  great 
light  kindled  in  me  a  desire  concerning  their 
cause,  never  before  felt  with  such  keenness. 
Whereon  she,  who  saw  me  as  I  see  myself,  to 
quiet  my  perturbed  mind  opened  her  mouth, 
ere  I  mine  to  ask,  and  began:  “Thou  thyself 
makest  thyself  dull  with  false  imagining,  so 
that  thou  seest  not  what  thou  wouldst  see,  if 
thou  hadst  shaken  it  off.  Thou  art  not  on  earth, 
as  thou  believest;  but  lightning,  flying  from  its 
proper  site,  never  ran  as  thou  who  art  return¬ 
ing  thereunto.” 

94.  If  I  was  divested  of  my  first  doubt  by 
these  brief  little  smiled-out  words,  within  a 
new  one  was  I  the  more  enmeshed.  And  I  said: 
“Already  I  rested  content  concerning  a  great 
wonder;  but  now  I  woader  how  I  can  tran¬ 
scend  these  light  bodies.”  Whereon  she,  after  a 
pitying  sigh,  directed  her  eyes  toward  me,  with 
that  look  which  a  mother  turns  on  her  deliri¬ 
ous  child,  and  she  began:  “All  things  whatso¬ 
ever  have  order  among  themselves;  and  this  is 
the  form  which  makes  the  universe  like  unto 
God."  Herein  the  exalted  creatures  see  the  im¬ 
print  of  the  Eternal  Power,  which  is  the  end 
for  which  the  aforesaid  rule  is  made.  In  the  or¬ 
der  of  which  I  speak,  all  natures  are  disposed, 
by  diverse  lots,  more  or  less  near  to  their 
source;4  wherefore  they  are  moved  to  different 
ports  over  the  great  sea  of  being,  and  each  with 

1  See  Purgatory,  xxv.  67-75;  Cf.  II  Corinthians, 

«.3. 

2  “The  Empyrean  ...  is  the  cause  of  the  most 
swift  motion  of  the  First  Moving  Heaven,  because  of 
the  most  ardent  desire  of  every  part  of  the  latter  to 
be  conjoined  with  every  part  of  that  most  divine  and 
quiet  heaven.”  Dante,  Convito,  ii.  4,  19-25. 

‘See  Aquinas,  Sttmma  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  45, 

A  3;  Q  5°j  A  1. 

*  Ibid.,  Part  I,  Q  45,  A  3;  Q  49,  A  1. 


the  instinct  given  to  it  which  bears  it  on.  This 
bears  the  fire  upward  toward  the  moon;  this  is 
the  motive  force  in  mortal  hearts;  this  binds 
together  and  unites  the  earth.  Nor  does  this 
bow  shoot  forth  only  the  created  things  which 
are  without  intelligence,  but  also  those  which 
have  understanding  and  love. 

121.  “The  Providence  that  ordains  all  this 
makes  always  quiet  with  its  own  light  the  heav¬ 
en  within  which  that  one  which  has  the  great¬ 
est  speed  revolves.  And  thither  now,  as  to  a  site 
decreed,  the  virtue  of  that  bowstring  is  bearing 
us  on,  which  directs  to  a  joyful  mark  whatever 
it  shoots.  It  is  true,  that  as  the  form  often  does 
not  accord  with  the  intention  of  the  art,  be¬ 
cause  the  material  is  deaf  to  respond,  so  the 
creature  sometimes  deviates  from  this  course; 
for  it  has  power,  though  thus  impelled,  to 
bend  in  another  direction  (even  as  the  fire  of  a 
cloud  may  be  seen  to  fall),  if  the  first  impetus, 
diverted  by  false  pleasure,  turn  it  earthwards. 
Thou  shouldst  not,  if  I  deem  aright,  wonder 
more  at  thy  ascent,  than  at  a  stream  if  it  de¬ 
scends  from  a  high  mountain  to  the  base.  It 
would  be  a  marvel  in  thee,  if,  deprived  of  hin¬ 
drance,  thou  hadst  sat  below,  even  as  quiet  in 
living  fire  on  earth  would  be.” 

142.  Thereon  she  turned  again  her  face  to¬ 
ward  heaven. 

CANTO  II 

O  ye  who  in  a  little  bark,  desirous  to  listen, 
have  followed  behind  my  craft  which  singing 
passes  on,  turn  to  see  again  your  shores;  put 
not  out  upon  the  deep;  for  haply,  losing  me, 
ye  would  remain  astray.  The  water  which  I 
take  was  never  crossed.  Minerva  breathes,  and 
Apollo  guides  me,  and  nine  Muses  point  out 
to  me  the  Bears. 

10.  Ye  other  few,  who  have  lifted  up  your 
necks  betimes  for  the  bread  of  the  Angels,  on 
which  one  here  subsists,  but  never  becomes 
sated  of  it,  ye  may  well  put  forth  your  vessel 
over  the  deep  brine,  keeping  my  wake  before 
you  on  the  water  which  turns  smooth  again. 
Those  glorious  ones  who  passed  over  to  Col- 
chos  wondered  not  when  they  saw  Jason  be¬ 
come  a  ploughman,  as  ye  shall  do." 

5  When,  to  obtain  the  golden  fleece,  Jason  yoked  the 
two  fire-breathing  oxen,  and  ploughed  with  them, 
sowing  the  dragon’s  teeth  in  the  furrows. 


PARADISE 


108 

19.  The  concreate  and  perpetual  thirst  for 
the  deiform  realm1  was  bearing  us  on  swift  al¬ 
most  as  ye  see  the  heavens.  Beatrice  was  gazing 
upward,  and  I  upon  her,  and  perhaps  in  such 
time  as  a  quarrel2  rests,  and  flies,  and  from  the 
notch  is  unlocked,  I  saw  myself  arrived  where 
a  wonderful  thing  drew  my  sight  to  itself;  and 
therefore  she,  from  whom  the  working  of  my 
mind  could  not  be  hid,  turning  toward  me, 
glad  as  beautiful,  said  to  me:  “Uplift  thy 
grateful  mind  to  God,  who  has  united  us  with 
the  first  star/’ 

31.  It  seemed  to  me  that  a  cloud  had  covered 
us,  lucid,  dense,  solid,  and  polished,  as  if  a  dia¬ 
mond  which  the  sun  had  struck.  Within  itself 
the  eternal  pearl  had  received  us,  even  as  water 
receives  a  ray  of  light,  remaining  undivided.  If 
I  was  body  (and  here3  it  is  not  conceivable  how 
one  dimension  brooked  another,  which  needs 
must  be  if  body  enter  body),  the  desire  ought 
the  more  to  kindle  us  to  see  that  Essence,  in 
which  is  seen  how  our  nature  and  God  were 
united.  There  will  be  seen  that  which  we  hold 
by  faith,  not  demonstrated,  but  it  will  be 
known  of  itself  like  the  first  truth  which  man 
believes. 

46. 1  replied:  “My  Lady,  devoutly,  to  the  ut¬ 
most  that  I  can,  do  I  thank  Him  who  has  re¬ 
moved  me  from  the  mortal  world.  But  tell  me, 
what  are  the  dusky  marks  of  this  body,  which 
there  below  on  earth  make  people  fable  about 
Cain?”4 

52.  She  smiled  a  little,  and  then  she  said  to 
me:  “If  the  opinion  of  mortals  errs  where 
the  key  of  sense  does  not  unlock,  surely  the 
shafts  of  wonder  ought  not  to  pierce  thee 
now,  since  thou  seest  that  the  reason  follow¬ 
ing  the  senses  has  short  wings.  But  tell  me 
what  thou  thyself  thinkest  of  it.”  And  I: 
“That  which  up  here  appears  to  us  diverse, 
I  believe  is  caused  by  bodies  rare  and 
dense.” 

61.  And  she:  “Surely  thou  shalt  see  that  thy 
belief  is  quite  submerged  in  error,  if  thou  lis¬ 
ten  well  to  the  argument  that  I  shall  make 

1  Cf.  Paradise,  i.  105. 

2  The  bolt  for  a  cross-bow. 

3  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  III,  Suppl., 
Q  85,  A  2. 

4  Fancying  the  dark  spaces  on  the  surface  of  the 

moon  to  represent  Cain  carrying  a  thorn -bush  for  the 

fire  of  his  sacrifice. 


against  it.  The  eighth  sphere5  displays  to  you 
many  lights,  which  may  be  noted  of  different 
aspects  in  quality  and  quantity.  If  rarity  and 
density  effected  all  this,  one  single  virtue,  more 
or  less  or  equally  distributed,  would  be  in  all. 
Different  virtues  must  needs  be  fruits  of  for¬ 
mal  principles;6  and  these,  all  but  one,  would,  in 
pursuance  of  thy  reasoning,  be  destroyed.  Fur¬ 
ther,  if  rarity  were  the  cause  of  that  duskiness 
about  which  you  ask,  this  planet  would  either 
be  thus  deficient  of  its  matter  in  part  quite 
through  and  through,  or  else,  as  a  body  divides 
the  fat  and  the  lean,  so  this  would  interchange 
the  leaves  in  its  volume.  If  the  first  were  the 
case,  it  would  be  manifest  in  the  eclipses  of 
the  sun,  by  the  shining  through  of  the  light, 
as  when  it  is  poured  upon  any  other  rare 
body. 

82.  “This  is  not  so;  therefore  we  must  look 
at  the  other  supposition,  and  if  it  happen  that  I 
quash  this,  thy  opinion  will  be  proved  false.  If 
it  be  that  this  rarity  does  not  pass  through, 
there  must  needs  be  a  limit,  beyond  which  its 
contrary  allows  it  not  to  pass  farther;  and 
thence  the  ray  from  another  body  is  thrown 
back,  just  as  color  returns  through  a  glass 
which  hides  lead  behind  itself.  Now  thou  wilt 
say  that  the  ray  shows  itself  dimmer  there  than 
in  the  other  parts,  because  it  is  reflected  there 
from  farther  back.  From  this  objection  experi¬ 
ment,  which  is  wont  to  be  the  fountain  to  the 
streams  of  your  arts,  may  deliver  thee,  if  ever 
thou  try  it.  Thou  shalt  take  three  mirrors,  and 
set  two  of  them  at  an  equal  distance  from  thee, 
and  let  the  other,  more  remote,  meet  thine  eyes 
between  the  first  two.  Turning  toward  them, 
cause  a  light  to  be  placed  behind  thy  back, 
which  may  shine  upon  the  three  mirrors,  and 
return  to  thee  reflected  from  all.  Although  the 
more  distant  image  may  not  reach  thee  so  great 
in  quantity,  thou  wilt  there  see  how  it  must 
needs  be  of  equal  brightness  with  the  others. 

106.  “Now,  as  beneath  the  blows  of  the 
warm  rays  that  which  lies  under  the  snow  re¬ 
mains  bare  both  of  the  former  color  and  the 
cold,  thee,  thus  remaining  in  thy  intellect,  will 
I  inform  with  light  so  living  that  it  shall  trem¬ 
ble  in  its  aspect  to  thee. 

3  The  heaven  of  the  fixed  stars. 

c  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I-II,  Q  9, 
A  1. 


CANTO  III 


1 12.  ‘‘Within  the  heaven  of  the  divine  peace 
revolves  a  body,  in  whose  virtue  lies  the  being 
of  all  that  it  contains.  The  following  heaven, 
which  has  so  many  sights,  distributes  that  be¬ 
ing  through  divers  essences  distinct  from  it, 
and  contained  by  it.  The  other  circles,  by  vari¬ 
ous  differences,  dispose  the  distinctions  which 
they  have  within  themselves  unto  their  ends 
and  their  sowings.  These  organs  of  the  world 
thus  proceed,  as  thou  now  seest,  from  grade  to 
grade;  for  they  receive  from  above,  and  oper¬ 
ate  below. 

124.  “Observe  me  well,  how  I  advance 
through  this  place  to  the  truth  which  thou  de- 
sirest,  so  that  hereafter  thou  mayst  know  to 
keep  the  ford  alone.  The  motion  and  the  vir¬ 
tue  of  the  holy  spheres  must  needs  be  inspired 
by  blessed  motors,1  as  the  work  of  the  hammer 
by  the  smith.  And  the  heaven,  which  so  many 
lights  make  beautiful,  takes  its  image  from  the 
deep  mind  which  revolves  it,  and  makes  there¬ 
of  a  seal.  And  as  the  soul  within  your  dust  is 
diffused  through  different  members,  and  con¬ 
formed  to  divers  potencies,  so  does  the  Intelli¬ 
gence2  display  its  goodness  multiplied  through 
the  stars,  itself  circling  upon  its  own  unity. 
Divers  virtue  makes  divers  alloy  with  the  pre¬ 
cious  body  that  it  quickens,  wherein  it  is  bound, 
even  as  life  in  you.  Because  of  the  glad  nature 
whence  it  flows,  the  mingled  virtue  shines 
through  the  body,  as  gladness  through  the  liv¬ 
ing  pupil.  From  this  comes  what  seems  differ¬ 
ent  between  light  and  light,  not  from  density 
and  rarity;  this  is  the  formal  principle  which 
produces,  conformably  with  its  own  goodness, 
the  dark  and  the  bright.” 

CANTO  III 

That  sun  which  first  had  heated  my  breast 
with  love  had  uncovered  to  me,  proving  and 
disproving,  the  sweet  aspect  of  fair  truth;  and 
I,  to  confess  myself  corrected  and  assured,  so 
far  as  was  needful  raised  my  head  more  erect 
to  speak.  But  a  sight  appeared  which  held  me 
so  fast  to  itself,  to  look  on  it,  that  I  did  not  be¬ 
think  me  of  my  confession. 

10.  As  through  transparent  and  polished 
glasses,  or  through  clear  and  tranquil  waters, 

1  Angels,  which  are  called  Intelligences. 

2  Cf.  xxviii.  78. 


IO9 

not  so  deep  that  their  bed  be  lost,  the  linea¬ 
ments  of  our  faces  return  so  faintly,  that  a 
pearl  on  a  white  brow  comes  not  less  readily 
to  our  eyes,  such  I  saw  many  faces  eager  to 
speak;  wherefore  I  ran  into  the  contrary  error 
to  that  which  kindled  love  between  the  man3 
and  the  fountain.  At  once,  as  soon  as  I  was 
aware  of  them,  supposing  them  mirrored  faces, 
I  turned  round  my  eyes  to  see  of  whom  they 
were,  and  saw  nothing;  and  I  turned  them  for¬ 
ward  again,  straight  into  the  light  of  my  sweet 
guide  who,  with  a  smile,  was  glowing  in  her 
holy  eyes.  “Do  not  wonder  that  I  smile,”  she 
said  to  me,  “at  thy  childish  thought,  since  thy 
foot  does  not  trust  itself  yet  upon  the  truth, 
but  turns  thee,  as  it  is  wont,  to  emptiness. 
These  which  thou  seest  are  real  substances,4 
relegated  here  for  failure  in  their  vows.  There¬ 
fore  speak  with  them,  and  hear,  and  believe; 
for  the  veracious  light  which  satisfies  them 
does  not  allow  them  to  turn  their  feet  from  it¬ 
self” 

34.  And  I  directed  myself  to  the  shade  that 
seemed  most  eager  to  speak,  and  I  began,  like 
a  man  whom  an  excessive  desire  confuses:  “O 
well-created  spirit,  who  in  the  rays  of  life 
eternal  art  tasting  the  sweetness,  which  if  not 
tasted  is  never  understood,  it  will  be  gracious 
to  me,  if  thou  content  me  with  thy  name,  and 
with  your  lot.”  Whereon  she  promptly,  and 
with  smiling  eyes:  “Our  charity  does  not  lock 
its  door  to  a  just  wish,  any  more  than  that 
which  wills  that  all  its  court  be  like  itself.  In 
the  world  I  was  a  virgin  Sister,  and  if  thy 
memory  look  back  well,  my  being  more  beau¬ 
tiful  will  not  conceal  me  from  thee;  but  thou 
wilt  recognize  that  I  am  Piccarda,0  who,  placed 
here  with  these  other  blessed  ones,  am  blessed 
in  the  slowest  sphere.  Our  affections,  which 
are  inflamed  only  in  the  pleasure  of  the  Holy 
Spiiit,  rejoice  in  being  formed  according 
to  His  order;  and  this  lot,  which  appears 
so  far  down,  is  given  to  us,  because  our 
vows  were  neglected  and  void  in  some  par¬ 
ticular.” 

58.  Whereon  I  to  her:  “In  your  marvellous 
aspects  there  shines  I  know  not  what  divine 

3  Narcissus. 

4  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  3,  A  5. 

5  The  sister  of  Corso  and  Forese  Donati;  see  Purga¬ 
tory,  xxiv.  10-15.  She  was  a  nun,  of  the  order  of 
St.  Clare. 


no 


PARADISE 


which  transmutes  you  from  our  former  con¬ 
ceptions;  therefore  I  was  not  swift  in  remem¬ 
bering;1  but  now  that  which  thou  sayest  to  me 
assists  me,  so  that  to  reshape  is  easier  to  me. 
But  tell  me,  ye  who  are  happy  here,  do  ye  de¬ 
sire  a  more  exalted  place,  in  order  to  see  more, 
or  to  make  for  yourselves  more  friends  ?” 

67.  With  those  other  shades  she  first  smiled 
a  little,  then  answered  me  so  glad,  that  she 
seemed  to  burn  in  the  first  fire  of  love:  “Broth¬ 
er,  virtue  of  charity  quiets  our  will,  and  makes 
us  wish  only  for  that  which  we  have,  and 
quickens  not  our  thirst  for  aught  else.  If  we 
desired  to  be  more  on  high,  our  desires  would 
be  discordant  with  the  will  of  Him  who  as¬ 
signs  us  here,  which  thou  wilt  see  is  not  pos¬ 
sible  in  these  circles,  if  to  exist  in  charity  is  here 
of  necessity,  and  if  thou  dost  well  consider  its 
nature.  Nay,  it  is  the  essence  of  this  blessed 
existence  to  hold  itself  within  the  divine  will, 
whereby  our  wills  themselves  are  made  one.  So 
that  as  we  are,  from  seat  to  seat  throughout 
this  realm,  to  all  the  realm  is  pleasing,  as  to 
the  King  who  inwills  us  with  His  will;  and 
His  will  is  our  peace;  it  is  that  sea  whereunto 
everything  is  moving  which  It  creates  and 
which  nature  makes.” 

88.  Then  was  it  clear  to  me,  how  everywhere 
in  Heaven  is  Paradise,  even  if  the  grace  of  the 
Supreme  Good  does  not  there  rain  down  in 
one  measure. 

91.  But  as  it  happens,  if  one  food  sates,  and 
for  another  the  appetite  still  remains,  that  this 
is  asked  for,  and  thanks  returned  for  that;  even 
thus  did  I,  with  act  and  with  word,  to  learn 
from  her,  what  was  the  web  wherein  she  had 
not  drawn  the  shuttle  to  the  end.  “Perfect  life 
and  high  desert  enheaven  a  lady2  higher  up,” 
she  said  to  me,  “according  to  whose  rule,  in 
your  world  below,  there  are  who  vest  and  veil 
themselves,  in  order  that,  even  till  death,  they 
may  wake  and  sleep  with  that  Spouse  Who  ac¬ 
cepts  every  vow  which  love  conforms  unto  His 
pleasure.  A  young  girl,  I  fled  from  the  world 
to  follow  her,  and  in  her  garb  I  enclosed  my¬ 
self,  and  pledged  me  to  the  pathway  of  her 
Order.  Afterward  men,  more  used  to  ill  than 

1  Cf.  Hell ,  vi.  43-45. 

2  Chiara  Sciffi  (St.  Clare),  the  friend  of  St.  Francis, 
who,  in  1212,  established  under  his  direction  a  re¬ 
ligious  order  for  virgins,  of  extreme  austerity.  The 
order  bore  her  name. 


good,  dragged  me  forth  from  the  sweet  clois¬ 
ter;  and  God  knows  what  then  my  life  became. 

109.  “And  this  other  splendor,  which  shows 
itself  to  thee  at  my  right  side,  and  which  is  en¬ 
kindled  with  all  the  light  of  our  sphere,  under¬ 
stands  of  herself  that  which  I  say  of  me.  She 
was  a  Sister;  and  from  her  head  in  like  manner 
the  shadow  of  the  sacred  veil  was  taken.  But 
after  she  too  was  returned  unto  the  world, 
against  her  liking  and  against  good  usage,  she 
was  never  loosed  from  the  veil  of  the  heart. 
This  is  the  light  of  the  great  Constance,3  who 
from  the  second  wind  of  Swabia  conceived  the 
third  and  the  last  power.” 

1 21.  Thus  she  spoke  to  me,  and  then  began 
singing  “ Ave  Maria  ”  and  singing  vanished,  as 
through  deep  water  some  heavy  thing.  My 
sight,  that  followed  her  so  far  as  was  possible, 
after  it  lost  her,  turned  to  the  mark  of  greater 
desire,  and  wholly  reverted  to  Beatrice;  but  she 
so  flashed  upon  my  gaze  that  at  first  my  sight 
endured  it  not:  and  this  made  me  more  slow  in 
questioning. 

CANTO  IV 

Between  two  viands,  distant  and  attractive 
in  equal  measure,  a  free  man  would  die  of 
hunger,  before  he  would  bring  one  of  them  to 
his  teeth.  Thus  a  lamb  would  stand  between 
two  ravenings  of  fierce  wolves,  fearing  both 
alike;  thus  would  stand  a  dog  between  two 
does.  Wherefore  if,  urged  in  equal  measure  by 
my  doubts,  I  was  silent,  I  do  not  blame  myself; 
nor,  since  it  was  necessary,  do  I  commend. 

10. 1  was  silent,  but  my  desire  was  depicted 
on  my  face,  and  my  questioning  with  that  far 
more  fervent  than  by  distinct  speech.  Beatrice 
did  what  Daniel  did,4  when  he  lifted  Nebu¬ 
chadnezzar  from  anger,  which  had  made  him 
unjustly  cruel,  and  she  said:  “I  see  well  how 
one  and  another  desire  draws  thee,  so  that  thy 
care  so  binds  itself  that  it  breathes  not  forth. 
Thou  reasonest:  ‘If  the  good  will  endure,  by 
what  reckoning  does  the  violence  of  others  les¬ 
sen  for  me  the  measure  of  desert?’  Further, 
that  the  souls  appear  to  return  to  the  stars,  in 
accordance  with  the  opinion  of  Plato,  gives 

3  Constance,  daughter  of  Roger  II  of  Sicily;  mar¬ 
ried,  in  1186,  to  the  Emperor,  Henry  VI,  the  second 
of  the  three  great  Swabian  emperors. 

4Cf.  Daniel,  11.  1-45. 


Ill 


CANTO  IV 


thee  occasion  for  doubt.1  These  are  the  ques¬ 
tions  that  thrust  equally  upon  thy  wish;  and 
therefore  I  will  treat  first  of  that  which  has  the 
most  venom. 

28.  “Of  the  Seraphim  he  who  is  most  in 
God,  Moses,  Samuel,  and  whichever  John  thou 
wilt  take,  I  say  even  Mary,  have  not  their  seats 
in  another  heaven  than  those  spirits  who  just 
now  appeared  to  thee,  nor  have  they  more 
or  fewer  years  for  their  existence;  but  all  make 
the  first  circle  beautiful,  yet  have  sweet  life  di¬ 
versely,  through  feeling  more  or  less  the  eter¬ 
nal  breath.  These  showed  themselves  here,  not 
because  this  sphere  is  allotted  to  them,  but  to 
afford  sign  of  the  celestial  grade  which  is  least 
exalted.  It  is  needful  to  speak  thus  to  your  wit, 
since  only  through  objects  of  sense  does  it  ap¬ 
prehend  that  which  it  afterward  makes  worthy 
of  the  intellect.  For  this  the  Scripture  conde¬ 
scends  to  your  capacity,  and  attributes  feet  and 
hands  to  God,  and  means  otherwise;  and  Holy 
Church  represents  to  you  Gabriel  and  Michael 
with  human  aspect,  and  the  other  who  made 
Tobias  whole  again/ 

49.  “That  which  Timaeus  argues  of  the 
souls  is  not  like  this  which  is  seen  here,  since 
it  seems  that  he  thinks  as  he  says.  He  says  that 
the  soul  returns  to  its  own  star,  believing  it  to 
have  been  severed  thence,  when  nature  gave  it 
for  form.3  But  perhaps  his  opinion  is  of  other 
guise  than  his  words  sound,  and  may  be  of  a 
meaning  not  to  be  derided.  If  he  means  that 
the  honor  of  their  influence  and  the  blame  re¬ 
turn  to  these  wheels,  perhaps  his  bow  hits  some 
truth.  This  principle,  ill  understood,  formerly 
turned  awry  almost  the  whole  world,  so  that 
it  ran  astray  in  naming  Jove,  Mercury,  and 
Mars. 

64.  “The  other  dubitation  which  disturbs 
thee  has  less  venom,  for  its  malice  could  not 
lead  thee  from  me  elsewhere.  That  our  justice 
seems  unjust  in  the  eyes  of  mortals  is  argu¬ 
ment  of  faith,4  and  not  of  heretical  iniquity. 
But  because  your  intelligence  can  well  pene¬ 
trate  to  this  truth,  I  will  make  thee  content,  as 
thou  desirest.  If  it  be  violence  when  he  who 
suffers  contributes  nothing  to  what  forces  him, 

1  Cf.  Plato,  Timaeus,  41,  42. 

3  See  Tobit,  3.  25;  6.  16. 

3  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  7 6, 
A  1. 

4  Ibid.,  Part  III,  Q  7,  A  3. 


these  souls  were  not  by  reason  of  that  excused; 
for  will,  unless  it  wills,  is  not  quenched,  but 
does  as  nature  does  in  fire,  though  violence  a 
thousand  times  may  wrest  it;  because  if  it  bend 
much  or  little,  it  follows  the  force;  and  thus 
did  these,  when  they  had  power  to  return  to 
the  holy  place.  If  their  will  had  been  entire, 
such  as  held  Lawrence'*  on  the  gridiron,  and 
made  Mucius6  severe  to  his  own  hand,  it  would 
have  urged  them  back,  so  soon  as  they  were 
loosed,  along  the  road  on  which  they  had  been 
dragged;  but  will  so  firm  is  too  rare.  And  by 
these  words,  if  thou  hast  gathered  them  up  as 
thou  shouldst,  is  the  argument  quashed  which 
would  have  given  thee  annoy  yet  many  times. 

91.  “But  now  another  pass  runs  traverse  be¬ 
fore  thine  eyes,  such  that  by  thyself  thou 
wouldst  not  issue  from  it  ere  thou  wert  weary. 
I  have  put  it  in  thy  mind  for  certain,  that  a 
soul  in  bliss  cannot  lie,  since  it  is  always  near 
to  the  Primal  Truth;  and  then  thou  mightst 
hear  from  Piccarda  that  Constance  retained  af¬ 
fection  for  the  veil;  so  that  she  seems  in  this  to 
contradict  me.  Many  a  time  ere  now,  brother, 
has  it  happened  that,  in  order  to  escape  peril, 
that  which  it  was  not  meet  to  do  has  been  done 
against  one’s  liking;  even  as  Alcmseon  (who, 
thereto  entreated  by  his  father,  slew  his  own 
mother),  not  to  lose  piety,  pitiless  became.*  On 
this  point,  I  wish  thee  to  think  that  the  force 
mingles  itself  with  the  will,  and  they  so  act 
that  the  offences  cannot  be  excused.  Will  ab¬ 
solute  does  not  consent  to  the  wrong;  but  it 
consents  in  so  far  thereto,  as  it  fears,  if  it  draw 
back,  to  fall  into  greater  trouble.  Therefore 
when  Piccarda  says  this,  she  means  it  of  the 
absolute  will;  and  I  of  the  other:  so  that  we 
both  speak  truth  together.” 

1 1 5.  Such  was  the  rippling  of  the  holy 
stream  which  issued  from  the  fount  whence 
every  truth  flows  forth;  and  such  it  set  at  rest 
one  and  the  other  desire. 

1 18.  “O  beloved  of  the  First  Lover,  O  divine 
one,”  said  I  then,  “whose  speech  overflows  me 
and  warms,  so  that  it  quickens  me  more  and 
more,  my  affection  is  not  so  deep  that  it  can 
suffice  to  render  to  you  grace  for  grace,  but 
may  He  Who  sees  and  can,  respond  for  this. 

5  St.  Lawrence,  martyred  thus  a.  d.  258. 

6  See  Dante,  Convito,  iv.  5,  107-118. 

7  See  Purgatory,  xii.  49-51. 


PARADISE 


I  clearly  see  that  our  intellect  is  never  satisfied 
unless  the  Truth  illume  it,  beyond  which  noth¬ 
ing  true  extends.  In  that  it  reposes,  as  a  wild 
beast  in  his  lair,  so  soon  as  it  has  reached  it: 
and  it  can  reach  it;  otherwise  every  desire 
would  be  in  vain.  Because  of  this,  doubt 
springs  up  like  a  shoot,  at  the  foot  of  the  truth; 
and  it  is  nature  which  urges  us  to  the  summit 
from  height  to  height.  This  invites  me,  this 
gives  me  assurance,  Lady,  with  reverence  to 
question  you  of  another  truth  which  is  obscure 
to  me.  I  wish  to  know  if  man  can  so  make  sat¬ 
isfaction  to  you  for  defective  vows  with  other 
goods,  that  in  your  scales  they  may  not  be 
light?” 

139.  Beatrice  looked  at  me  with  eyes  so  di¬ 
vine,  full  of  the  sparks  of  love,  that  my  power, 
vanquished,  turned  its  back,  and  I  almost  lost 
myself  with  eyes  cast  down. 

CANTO  V 

“If  I  flame  upon  thee  in  the  heat  of  love,  be¬ 
yond  the  measure  that  is  seen  on  earth,  so  that 
I  vanquish  the  valor  of  thine  eyes,  marvel  not, 
for  it  proceeds  from  perfect  vision,  which,  ac¬ 
cording  as  it  apprehends,  so  does  it  move  its 
foot  to  the  apprehended  good.  I  see  clearly  how 
already  in  thy  intellect  is  shining  the  eternal 
light,1  which,  only  seen,  always  enkindles  love; 
and  if  any  other  thing  seduce  your  love,  it  is 
naught  but  some  vestige  of  that  light,  ill-recog¬ 
nized,  which  therein  shines  through.  Thou 
wishest  to  know  if  for  an  unfulfilled  vow  so 
much  can  be  paid  with  other  service  as  may  se¬ 
cure  the  soul  from  suit.” 

16.  So  Beatrice  began  this  chant,  and  as  one 
who  breaks  not  oft  his  speech,  she  thus  con¬ 
tinued  her  holy  discourse:  “The  greatest  gift 
which  God  in  His  bounty  bestowed  in  creat¬ 
ing,  and  the  most  conformed  to  His  own  good¬ 
ness,  and  that  which  He  prizes  the  most,  was 
the  freedom  of  the  will,  with  which  the  crea¬ 
tures  that  have  intelligence,  they  all  and  they 
alone,  were  and  are  endowed.  Now,  if  thou 
argue  from  this,  the  high  worth  of  the  vow 
will  appear  to  thee,  if  it  be  such  that  God  con¬ 
sent  when  thou  consentest;  for,  in  closing  the 
compact  between  God  and  man,  victim  is 
made  of  this  treasure,  such  as  I  say,  and  made 
by  its  own  act.  What  then  can  be  rendered  in 

1  Sec  Canto  iv.  124-126. 


compensation?  If  thou  think  to  make  good  use 
of  that  which  thou  hast  offered,  thou  wishest 
to  do  good  work  with  ill-gotten  gain. 

34.  “Thou  art  now  assured  as  to  the  greater 
point;  but  since  Holy  Church  in  this  grants 
dispensation,  which  seems  contrary  to  the  truth 
that  I  have  disclosed  to  thee,  it  behoves  thee 
still  to  sit  a  little  at  table,  because  the  tough 
food  which  thou  hast  taken  requires  still  some 
aid  for  thy  digestion.  Open  thy  mind  to  that 
which  I  reveal  to  thee,  and  shut  it  therewithin; 
for  to  have  heard  without  retaining  does  not 
make  knowledge. 

43.  “Two  things  combine  in  the  essence  of 
this  sacrifice;  the  one  is  that  in  respect  to  which 
it  is  made,  the  other  is  the  covenant.  This  last 
is  never  cancelled  if  not  kept;  and  concerning 
this  was  my  preceding  speech  so  precise.  There¬ 
fore  it  was  only  imperative  on  the  Hebrews  to 
make  offering,  while  the  special  thing  offered 
might  be  changed,  as  thou  shouldst  know.2 
The  other,  which  is  known  to  thee  as  the  mat¬ 
ter,  may  indeed  be  such  that  there  is  no  fault 
if  it  be  exchanged  for  some  other  matter.  But 
let  not  any  one  shift  the  load  upon  his  shoulder 
at  his  own  will,  without  the  turning  both  of 
the  white  and  of  the  yellow  key.3  And  let  him 
deem  every  permutation  foolish,  if  the  thing 
laid  down  be  not  contained  in  that  which  is 
taken  up,  as  four  in  six.4  Therefore,  whatever 
thing  weighs  so  much,  through  its  own  worth, 
that  it  can  drag  down  every  balance,  cannot  be 
made  good  with  other  spending. 

64.  “Let  not  mortals  take  a  vow  as  a  trifle: 
be  faithful,  and  not  awry  in  so  doing,  as  Jeph- 
thah  was  in  his  first  offering;5  to  whom  it 
rather  behoved  to  say:  ‘I  have  done  ill,*  than, 
by  keeping  his  vow,  to  do  worse.6  And  thou 
mayst  find  the  great  leader  of  the  Greeks  in 
like  manner  foolish;1  wherefore  Iphigenia  wept 
for  her  fair  face,  and  made  weep  for  her  both 
the  simple  and  the  wise,  who  heard  tell  of  such 
like  observance.  Be  ye,  Christians,  more  grave 
in  moving;  be  not  like  a  feather  to  every  wind, 
and  think  not  that  every  water  may  wash  you. 

2  See  Leviticus,  27,  in  respect  to  commutation  al¬ 
lowed. 

3  See  Purgatory,  ix.  118-126. 

4  Cf.  Leviticus,  27. 

0  See  Judges,  11.  30-39. 

°Cf.  Shakespeare’s  King  John,  m.  1.270-73. 

7  See  Lucretius,  Nature  of  Things,  i.  85#;  Aeneid,  ii. 
1  i6fT. 


CANTO  VI 


Ye  have  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament,  and 
the  Shepherd  of  the  Church  who  guides  you; 
let  this  suffice  you  for  your  salvation.  If  evil 
covetousness  cry  aught  else  to  you,  be  ye  men, 
and  not  silly  sheep,  so  that  the  Jew  among  you 
may  not  laugh  at  you.  Do  not  ye  as  the  lamb, 
which  leaves  its  mother’s  milk,  and,  simple  and 
wanton,  at  its  own  pleasure  combats  with  it¬ 
self.” 

85.  Thus  Beatrice  to  me,  even  as  I  write; 
then  all  desireful  turned  again  to  that  region 
where  the  world  is  most  alive.  Her  silence  and 
her  changed  look  imposed  silence  on  my  eager 
mind,  which  already  had  new  questions  in  ad¬ 
vance.  And  as  an  arrow  that  hits  the  mark  be¬ 
fore  the  bowstring  is  quiet,  so  we  ran  into  the 
second  realm.1  Here  I  saw  my  lady  so  joyous  as 
she  entered  into  the  light  of  that  heaven,  that 
the  planet  itself  became  the  brighter  for  it.  And 
if  the  star  was  changed  and  smiled,  what  did 
I  become,  who  even  by  my  nature  am  trans- 
mutable  in  every  wise! 

100.  As  in  a  fishpond,  which  is  still  and  clear, 
the  fish  draw  to  that  which  comes  in  such  man¬ 
ner  from  without  that  they  deem  it  their  food, 
so  I  saw  full  more  than  a  thousand  splendors 
drawing  toward  us,  and  in  each  was  heard: 
“Lo,  one  who  shall  increase  our  loves!”  And 
as  each  one  came  to  us,  the  shade  was  seen  full 
of  joy  by  the  bright  effulgence  that  issued  from 
k- 

109.  Think,  Reader,  if  that  which  is  here  be¬ 
gun  should  not  proceed,  how  thou  wouldst 
have  a  grievous  craving  to  know  more;  and  by 
thyself  thou  wilt  see  what  my  desire  was  to 
hear  from  these  of  their  conditions,  soon  as 
they  became  manifest  to  mine  eyes. 

1 15.  “O  well-born,  to  whom  Grace  concedes 
to  see  the  thrones  of  the  eternal  triumph  ere 
the  warfare  is  abandoned,  with  the  light  which 
spreads  through  the  whole  heaven  we  are  en¬ 
kindled,  and  therefore  if  thou  desirest  to  en¬ 
lighten  thyself  by  means  of  us,  sate  thyself  at 
thy  pleasure.”  Thus  was  it  said  to  me  by  one 
of  those  pious  spirits;  and  by  Beatrice:  “Speak, 
speak  securely,  and  trust  even  as  to  gods.”2  “I 
see  clearly,  how  thou  dost  nest  thyself  in  thine 
own  light,  and  that  thou  drawest  it  through 

1  The  Heaven  of  Mercury. 

2  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  III,  Q  16, 

A  1. 


thine  eyes,  because  they  sparkle  as  thou  smil- 
est;  but  I  know  not  who  thou  art,  nor  why,  O 
worthy  soul,  thou  hast  the  grade  of  the  sphere 
which  is  veiled  to  mortals  by  another’s  rays.” 

130.  This  I  said,  addressed  to  the  light  which 
first  had  spoken  to  me;  whereon  it  became  far 
more  lucent  than  it  had  been.  Even  as  the  sun, 
which,  when  the  heat  has  consumed  the  tem¬ 
pering  of  the  dense  vapors,  conceals  itself  by  ex¬ 
cess  of  light,  so,  by  reason  of  more  joy,  did  the 
holy  shape  hide  itself  from  me  within  its  own 
radiance,  and  thus  close  enclosed,  it  answered 
me  in  the  fashion  which  the  following  canto 
sings. 

CANTO  VI 

“After  Constantine  turned  the  Eagle  coun¬ 
ter  to  the  course  of  the  heavens  which  it  had 
followed  behind  the  ancient3  who  took  to  wife 
Lavinia,  a  hundred  and  a  hundred  years  and 
more  the  bird  of  God  held  itself  on  the  verge 
of  Europe,  near  to  the  mountains  from  which 
it  first  came  forth,  and  there  it  governed  the 
world  beneath  the  shadow  of  its  sacred  wings, 
from  hand  to  hand,  and  thus  changing,  de¬ 
scended  unto  mine.  Cassar  I  was,  and  am  Jus¬ 
tinian,  who,  by  will  of  the  primal  Love  which 
I  feel,  drew  out  from  among  the  laws  the  su¬ 
perfluous  and  the  vain.  And  before  I  was  in¬ 
tent  on  this  work,  I  believed  one  nature  to  be 
in  Christ,  not  more,  and  with  such  faith  was  I 
content;  but  the  blessed  Agapetus,4  who  was 
the  supreme  pastor,  directed  me  to  the  pure 
faith  with  his  words.  I  believed  him;  and  that 
which  was  in  his  faith  I  now  see  clearly,  even 
as  thou  seest  that  every  contradiction  is  both 
false  and  true.  Soon  as  with  the  Church  I 
moved  my  feet,  it  pleased  God,  through  grace, 
to  inspire  me  with  this  high  task,  and  I  gave 
myself  wholly  to  it.  And  I  entrusted  my  arms 
to  my  Belisarius,  with  whom  the  right  hand  of 
Heaven  was  so  conjoined  that  it  was  a  sign 
that  I  should  rest  me. 

28.  “Now  here  to  the  first  question  my  an¬ 
swer  comes  to  the  stop;  but  its  condition  con¬ 
strains  me  to  add  a  sequel  to  it,  in  order  that 
thou  mayst  see  with  how  much  reason  he 
moves  against  the  sacrosanct  ensign,  who  ap¬ 
propriates  it  to  himself,  and  he  too  who  op- 

3  Aeneas. 

4  Agapetus  was  Pope,  535-536. 


PARADISE 


poses  himself  to  it.1  See  how  great  virtue  has 
made  it  worthy  of  reverence.”  And  he  began 
from  the  hour  when  Pallas2  died  to  give  it  a 
kingdom. 

37.  “Thou  knowest  that  it  made  its  abode  in 
Alba  for  three  hundred  years  and  more,  till  at 
the  end  when  the  three  against  the  three' 
fought  for  it  still.  And  thou  knowest  what  it 
did,  from  the  wrong  of  the  Sabine  women 
down  to  the  woe  of  Lucretia,  in  seven  kings, 
conquering  the  neighboring  peoples  round 
about.  Thou  knowest  what  it  did  when  borne 
by  the  illustrious  Romans  against  Brennus,  a- 
gainst  Pyrrhus,  and  against  the  other  princes 
and  confederates;  whereby  Torquatus,  and 
Quinctius  who  was  named  from  his  neglected 
locks,  the  Decii  and  the  Fabii  acquired  the 
fame  which  willingly  I  embalm.  It  struck  to 
earth  the  pride  of  the  Arabs,4  who,  following 
Hannibal,  passed  the  Alpine  rocks  from  which 
thou,  Po,  dost  glide.  Under  it,  in  their  youth, 
Scipio  and  Pompey  triumphed,  and  to  that  hill 
beneath  which  thou  wast  born,  it  seemed  bit¬ 
ter.5 

55.“ Afterward,  near  the  time  when  all  Heav¬ 
en  willed  to  bring  the  world  to  its  own  serene 
mood,  Cxsar,  by  the  will  of  Rome,  took  it;  and 
what  it  did  from  the  Var  even  to  the  Rhine,  the 
Isere  beheld,  and  the  Saone,  and  the  Seine  be¬ 
held,  and  every  valley  whence  the  Rhone  is 
filled.  That  which  it  did  after  it  came  forth 
from  Ravenna,  and  leaped  the  Rubicon,  was 
of  such  flight  that  neither  tongue  nor  pen 
could  follow  it.  Toward  Spain  it  wheeled  its 
troop;  then  toward  Durazzo,  and  smote  Phar- 
salia  so  that  to  the  warm  Nile  the  pain  was 
felt.  It  saw  again  Antandros  and  the  Simois, 
whence  it  had  set  forth,  and  there  where  Hec¬ 
tor  lies;6  and  ill  for  Ptolemy  then  it  shook  it¬ 
self.  Thence  it  swooped  flashing  down  on  Juba; 
then  wheeled  again  unto  your  west,  where  it 
heard  the  Pompeian  trumpet.  Of  what  it  did 
with  its  next  standard-bearer,'  Brutus  with 

1  The  Ghibelline  and  the  Guelf,  respectively. 

2  See  Aeneid,  xii.  940-50. 

3  The  Horatii  and  Curiatii. 

4  In  Dante’s  time  the  territory  of  Carthage  was 
held  by  the  Arabs. 

5  According  to  an  old  tradition,  Fiesole,  which  lies 
on  a  hill  overlooking  Florence,  had  been  the  head¬ 
quarters  of  Catiline’s  army,  and  was  destroyed  by  the 
Romans  after  his  defeat  and  death. 

0  See  Aeneid ,  iii.  5.  7  Augustus. 


Cassius  howls  in  Hell;  and  it  made  Modena 
and  Perugia  woful.  Because  of  it  the  sad  Cleo¬ 
patra  is  still  weeping,  who,  fleeing  before  it, 
took  from  the  asp  sudden  and  black  death. 
With  him  it  ran  far  as  the  Red  Sea  shore;  with 
him  it  set  the  world  in  such  peace  that  his 
temple  was  locked  up  on  Janus." 

82.  “But  what  the  ensign  which  makes  me 
speak  had  done  before,  and  after  was  to  do, 
through  the  mortal  realm  which  is  subject  to 
it,  becomes  in  appearance  little  and  obscure,  if 
it  be  looked  on  in  the  hand  of  the  third  Caesar3 
with  clear  eye  and  with  pure  affection;  for  the 
Living  Justice  which  inspires  me  granted  to  it, 
in  the  hand  of  him  of  whom  I  speak,  the  glory 
of  doing  vengeance  for  Its  own  wrath.  Now 
marvel  here  at  that  which  I  unfold  to  thee:  aft¬ 
erward  with  Titus  it  sped  to  do  vengeance  for 
the  vengeance  of  the  ancient  sin.10 

94.  “And  when  the  Lombard  tooth  bit  the 
Holy  Church,  under  its  wings  Charlemagne, 
conquering,  succored  her. 

97.  “Now  canst  thou  judge  of  such  as  those 
whom  I  accused  above,  and  of  their  misdeeds, 
which  are  the  cause  of  all  your  ills.  To  the  pub¬ 
lic  ensign  one  opposes  the  yellow  lilies,  and  the 
other  appropriates  it  to  a  party,  so  that  it  is 
hard  to  see  which  is  most  at  fault.  Let  the 
Ghibellines  practise,  let  them  practise  their  art 
under  another  ensign,  for  this  one  he  ever  fol¬ 
lows  ill  who  parts  justice  and  it.  And  let  not 
this  new  Charles11  strike  it  down  with  his 
Guelfs,  but  let  him  fear  the  talons,  which  have 
stripped  the  fell  from  a  loftier  lion.  Many  a 
time  ere  now  the  sons  have  wept  for  the  sin 
of  the  father;  and  let  him  not  believe  that  for 
his  lilies  God  will  change  His  arms. 

1 12.  “This  little  star  is  adorned  with  good 
spirits  who  have  been  active  in  order  that  hon¬ 
or  and  fame  may  follow  them.  And  when  the 
desires  thus  deviating  mount  thitherward,  the 
rays  of  the  true  love  must  needs  mount  upward 
less  living.  But  in  the  equal  measure  of  our 
wages  with  our  desert  is  part  of  our  joy,  be¬ 
cause  we  see  them  neither  less  nor  greater. 
Hereby  the  Living  Justice  makes  our  affection 

8  The  doors  of  the  temple  of  Janus  were  closed  only 
in  time  of  peace. 

9  Tiberius. 

10  Cf.  Purgatory,  xxi.  82-84. 

31  Charles  II,  King  of  Naples,  son  of  Charles  of 
Anjou. 


CANTO  VII 


so  sweet  within  us,  that  it  can  never  be  bent 
aside  to  any  iniquity.  Divers  voices  make  sweet 
melodies;  thus  in  our  life  divers  seats  render 
sweet  harmony  among  these  wheels. 

127.  “And  within  the  present  pearl  shines 
the  light  of  Romeo,  whose  beautiful  and  great 
work  was  ill  requited.1  But  the  Provencals 
who  wrought  against  him  have  not  the  laugh; 
and  forsooth  he  goes  an  ill  road  who  makes 
harm  for  himself  of  another’s  good  deed.  Four 
daughters,  and  each  a  queen,  had  Raymond 
Berenger,  and  Romeo,  a  humble  person  and  a 
pilgrim,  did  this  for  him.  And  then  crooked 
words  moved  him  to  demand  a  reckoning  of 
this  just  man,  who  had  rendered  to  him  seven 
and  five  for  ten.  Thereon  he  departed,  poor 
and  old,  and  if  the  world  but  knew  the  heart 
he  had,  while  begging  his  livelihood  bit  by  bit, 
much  as  it  lauds  him  it  would  laud  him  more.” 

CANTO  VII 

“Osanna  sanctus  Deus  Sabaoth,  superillus- 
trans  claritate  tua  j dices  ignes  horum  mala - 
chothV '2 — thus,  revolving  to  its  own  melody, 
that  substance,3  upon  which  a  double  light  is 
twinned,4  was  seen  by  me  to  sing;  and  it  and 
the  others  moved  in  their  dance,  and  like  swift¬ 
est  sparks  veiled  themselves  to  me  with  sudden 
distance.  I  was  in  doubt,  and  was  saying:  “Tell 
her,  tell  her,”  within  myself,  “tell  her,”  I 
was  saying,  “my  Lady,  who  slakes  my  thirst 
with  her  sweet  distillings”;  but  that  reverence 
which  is  wholly  mistress  of  me,  only  by  be 
and  by  ice,  bowed  me  again  like  one  who 
drowses. 

16.  Short  while  did  Beatrice  suffer  me  thus, 
and  she  began,  irradiating  me  with  a  smile 
such  as  would  make  a  man  in  the  fire  happy: 
“According  to  my  infallible  advisement,  how  a 
just  vengeance  could  be  justly  avenged  has  set 

1  Romeo,  a  pilgrim  to  Rome,  came  to  the  court  of 
Raymond  Berenger  IV,  Count  of  Provence  (who  died 
in  1245),  and  winning  the  count’s  favor,  served  him 
with  such  wisdom  and  fidelity  that  by  his  means  his 
master’s  revenues  were  greatly  increased,  and  his  four 
daughters  married  to  four  kings.  The  Provencal  nobles, 
jealous  of  Romeo,  procured  his  dismissal,  and  he  de¬ 
parted,  with  his  mule  and  his  pilgrim’s  staff  and 
scrip,  and  was  never  seen  again. 

2  “Hosanna!  Holy  God  of  Sabaoth,  illuminating 
from  above  with  thy  brightness  the  blessed  fires  of 
these  realms.” 

3  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  3,  A  5. 

4  See  Canto  v.  131-137. 


thee  thinking;  but  I  will  quickly  loose  thy 
mind:  and  do  thou  listen,  for  my  words  will 
make  thee  the  gift  of  a  great  doctrine. 

25.  “By  not  enduring  a  curb  for  his  own 
good  upon  the  power  which  wills,  that  man 
who  was  not  born,  damning  himself,  damned 
all  his  offspring;  wherefore  the  human  race  lay 
sick  down  there  for  many  centuries,  in  great 
error,  until  it  pleased  the  Word  of  God  to  de¬ 
scend  where  He,  by  the  sole  act  of  His  eternal 
love,  united  with  Himself  in  person  the  nature 
which  had  estranged  itself  from  its  Maker. 

34.  “Now  turn  thy  sight  to  that  which  now 
I  say:  This  nature,  thus  united  with  its  Maker, 
was  pure  and  good  such  as  it  was  created;  but 
by  itself  it  had  been  banished  from  Paradise, 
because  it  turned  aside  from  the  way  of  truth 
and  from  its  own  life.  The  penalty  therefore 
which  the  cross  afforded,  if  it  be  measured  by 
the  nature  assumed,  —  none  ever  so  justly 
stung;  and,  so,  none  was  ever  of  such  great 
wrong,  if  we  regard  the  Person  who  suffered, 
in  whom  this  nature  was  contracted.  There¬ 
fore  from  one  act  issued  things  diverse;  for  one 
death  was  pleasing  to  God  and  to  the  Jews:  at 
it  the  earth  trembled  and  the  heaven  was 
opened.  Henceforth  it  ought  no  longer  to  seem 
difficult  to  thee,  when  it  is  said  that  a  just 
vengeance  was  afterward  avenged  by  a  just 
court. 

52.  “But  I  see  now  thy  mind  bound  up,  from 
thought  to  thought,  within  a  knot,  the  loosing 
of  which  is  awaited  with  great  desire.  Thou 
sayest:  ‘I  discern  clearly  that  which  I  hear;  but 
why  God  willed  only  this  mode  for  our  re¬ 
demption  is  hidden  from  me.’  This  decree, 
brother,  lies  buried  to  the  eyes  of  every  one 
whose  wit  is  not  matured  in  the  flame  of  love. 
Yet,  inasmuch  as  on  this  mark  there  is  much 
gazing,  and  little  is  discerned,  I  will  tell  why 
such  mode  was  the  most  worthy. 

64.  “The  Divine  Goodness,  which  from  It¬ 
self  spurns  all  envy,  burning  in  Itself  so  spar¬ 
kles  that  It  displays  the  eternal  beauties.  That 
which  distils  immediately  from  It,  thereafter 
has  no  end,  for  when  It  seals  Its  imprint  can 
never  be  removed.  That  which  rains  down  im¬ 
mediately  from  It  is  wholly  free,  because  it  is 
not  subject  to  the  power  of  the  new  things.  It 
is  the  most  conformed  to  It,  and  therefore 
pleases  It  the  most;  for  the  Holy  Ardor  which 


PARADISE 


116 

irradiates  everything  is  most  living  in  what  is 
most  like  Itself. 

7 6.  “With  all  these  things1  the  human  crea¬ 
ture  is  advantaged,  and  if  one  fail,  he  needs 
must  fall  from  his  nobility.  Sin  alone  is  that 
which  disfranchises  him,  and  makes  him  un¬ 
like  the  Supreme  Good,  so  that  he  is  little  il¬ 
lumined  by  Its  light;  and  to  his  dignity  he 
never  returns,  unless,  where  fault  empties,  he 
fill  up  with  just  penalties  against  evil  delight. 
Your  nature,  when  it  sinned  totally  in  its  seed, 
was  removed  from  these  dignities,  even  as 
from  Paradise;  nor  could  it  recover  them,  if 
thou  considerest  full  subtly,  by  any  way,  with¬ 
out  passing  by  one  of  these  fords:  either  that 
God,  solely  by  His  courtesy,  should  have  re¬ 
mitted;  or  that  man  by  himself  should  have 
made  satisfaction  for  his  folly.2 

94.  “Fix  now  thine  eye  within  the  abyss  of 
the  eternal  counsel,  as  closely  fastened  on  my 
words  as  thou  art  able.  Man  within  his  own 
limits  could  never  make  satisfaction,  through 
not  being  able  to  descend  in  humility,  by  sub¬ 
sequent  obedience,  so  far  as  in  his  disobedience 
he  had  intended  to  ascend;  and  this  is  the  rea¬ 
son  why  man  was  shut  off  from  power  to  make 
satisfaction  by  himself.  Therefore  it  was  need¬ 
ful  for  God  with  His  own  ways3  to  restore  man 
to  his  perfect  life — I  mean  with  one  way,  or 
else  with  both.  But  because  the  deed  of  the 
doer  is  so  much  the  more  prized,  the  more  it 
displays  of  the  goodness  of  the  heart  whence  it 
issues,  the  Divine  Goodness  which  sets  its  im¬ 
press  on  the  world  was  content  to  proceed  by 
all  Its  ways  to  lift  you  up  again;  nor  between 
the  last  night  and  the  first  day  has  there  been 
or  will  there  be  so  exalted  and  so  magnificent 
a  procedure  either  by  the  one  way  or  by  the 
other.  For  God  was  more  bounteous  in  giving 
Himself  to  make  man  sufficient  to  uplift  him¬ 
self,  than  if  He  only  of  Himself  had  remitted; 
and  all  the  other  modes  were  scanty  in  respect 
to  justice,  if  the  Son  of  God  had  not  humbled 
Himself  to  become  incarnate. 

1 21.  “Now  to  fulfil  for  thee  every  desire,  I  re¬ 
turn  to  a  certain  place  to  make  it  clear,  in  order 
that  there  thou  mayst  see  as  I  do.  Thou  sayest: 

1  Cf.  Canto  v.  19-24. 

2  See  Ecclesiastes,  7.  25. 

3  See  Psalms,  25.  10.  Cf.  Aquinas,  Summa  Theo- 

logica,  Part  I,  Q  21,  A  2. 


‘I  see  the  water,  I  see  the  fire,  the  air,  and  the 
earth,  and  all  their  mixtures  come  to  corrup¬ 
tion,  and  endure  short  while,  and  yet  these 
things  were  created  things’;  so  that,  if  what  I 
have  said4  has  been  true,  they  ought  to  be  se¬ 
cure  against  corruption.  The  Angels,  brother, 
and  the  pure  country  in  which  thou  art,  may 
be  called  created,  just  as  they  are,  in  their  en¬ 
tire  being;  but  the  elements  which  thou  hast 
named,  and  those  things  which  are  made  of 
them,  are  informed  by  a  created  virtue.  The 
matter  of  which  they  consist  was  created;  the 
informing  virtue  in  these  stars  which  go  round 
about  them  was  created.  The  ray  and  the  mo¬ 
tion  of  the  holy  lights  draw  out  from  its  poten¬ 
tiate  elements  the  soul  of  every  brute  and  of 
the  plants;  but  the  Supreme  Benignity  inspires 
your  life  without  intermediary,  and  enamors  it 
of  Itself  so  that  ever  after  it  desires  It.  And 
hence  thou  further  canst  infer  your  resurrec¬ 
tion,  if  thou  reflect  how  the  human  flesh  was 
made  when  the  first  parents  were  both  made.” 

CANTO  VIII 

The  world  in  its  peril  was  wont  to  believe 
that  the  beautiful  Cyprian5  revolving  in  the 
third  epicycle  rayed  out  mad  love;  wherefore 
the  ancient  people  in  their  ancient  error  not 
only  unto  her  did  honor  with  sacrifice  and 
with  votive  cry,  but  they  honored  Dione  also 
and  Cupid,  the  one  as  her  mother,  the  other  as 
her  son,  and  they  said  that  he  had  sat  in  Dido’s 
lap;6  and  from  her,  from  whom  I  take  my  be¬ 
ginning,  they  took  the  name  of  the  star  which 
the  sun  woos,  now  behind  her  now  before.  I 
was  not  aware  of  the  ascent  to  it;  but  of  being 
in  it,  my  Lady  gave  me  full  assurance,  whom  I 
saw  become  more  beautiful. 

16.  And  as  a  spark  is  seen  within  a  flame, 
and  as  within  a  voice  a  voice  is  distinguished 
when  one  is  steady  and  the  other  goes  and  re¬ 
turns,  I  saw  within  that  light  other  lamps  mov¬ 
ing  in  a  circle,  speeding  more  or  less,  according 
to  the  measure,  I  believe,  of  their  eternal  vision. 
From  a  cold  cloud  winds,  whether  visible  or 
not,7  never  descended  so  swiftly,  that  they 
would  not  seem  impeded  and  slow  to  him  who 
had  seen  these  divine  lights  coming  to  us,  leav- 

4  See  line  67,  supra. 

6  Venus,  who  was  born  in  Cyprus. 

0  See  Aeneid,  i.  657!?.,  71 5ff. 

7  Cf .  Aristotle,  Meteorology,  iii.  1 . 


CANTO  VIII 


ing  the  circling  begun  first  in  the  exalted  Sera¬ 
phim.  And  within  those  who  appeared  most 
in  front  was  sounding  Hosanna,  in  such 
wise  that  never  since  have  I  been  without  de¬ 
sire  of  hearing  it  again, 

31.  Then  one  drew  nearer  to  us,  and  alone 
began:  “We  all  are  ready  at  thy  pleasure,  that 
thou  mayst  have  joy  of  us.  With  one  circle, 
with  one  circling,  and  with  one  thirst,  we  re¬ 
volve  with  the  celestial  Princes,  to  whom  thou 
in  the  world  once  didst  say:  Ye  whose  intelli¬ 
gence  moves  the  third  heaven ;  and  we  are  so 
full  of  love  that,  in  order  to  please  thee,  a  little 
quiet  will  not  be  less  sweet  to  us/’ 

40.  After  my  eyes  had  offered  themselves 
reverently  to  my  Lady,  and  she  had  made  them 
of  herself  contented  and  assured,  they  turned 
again  to  the  light  which  had  promised  so 
much;  and:  “Say  who  ye  are,”  was  my  utter¬ 
ance,  imprinted  with  great  affection.  Ah!  how 
much  greater  in  quantity  and  quality  did  I  see 
it  become,  through  the  new  gladness  which 
was  added  to  its  gladnesses  when  I  spoke! 

49.  Thus  become,  it  said  to  me:1 2  “The  world 
held  me  below  but  short  while;  and  had  it  been 
longer  much  evil  had  not  been  which  will  be¬ 
fall.3  My  joy,  which  rays  around  me,  holds  me 
concealed  from  thee,  and  hides  me  like  a  crea¬ 
ture  swathed  in  its  own  silk.  Much  didst  thou 
love  me,  and  hadst  good  reason  why;  for  had  I 
stayed  below  I  had  shown  thee  of  my  love 
more  than  the  leaves.  That  left  bank  which  is 
bathed  by  the  Rhone,  after  it  has  mingled  with 
the  Sorgue,  awaited  me  in  due  time  for  its 
lord;4  as  well  as  that  horn  of  Ausonia5  which 
has  for  suburbs  Bari,  and  Gaeta,  and  Catona,6 * * * 
from  where  the  Tronto  and  the  Verde  disgorge 

1  The  first  verse  of  the  first  canzone  of  Dante’s 
Convito. 

2  It  is  Charles  Martel,  eldest  son  of  Charles  II  of 
Naples,  who  speaks.  He  died  in  1295,  predeceasing  his 
father. 

3  On  the  death  of  Charles  II  in  1309,  the  kingdom  of 
Naples,  to  which  Martel  would  have  succeeded,  was 
secured  by  his  brother  Robert,  who  brought  many  ills 
upon  the  country.  See  lines  76-84,  infra. 

4  Charles  of  Anjou,  grandfather  of  Charles  Martel, 
had  received  a  part  of  Provence  as  dowry  of  his  wife 
Beatrice,  the  youngest  daughter  of  Raymond  Berenger. 
Cf.  Canto  vi.  133-136. 

5  Italy. 

0  Bari  on  the  Adriatic,  Gaeta  on  the  Mediterranean, 

and  Catona  at  the  toe  of  Italy,  together  with  the  two 

rivers  named,  give  roughly  the  boundaries  of  the  king¬ 

dom  of  Naples. 


into  the  sea.  Already  was  shining  on  my  brow 
the  crown  of  that  land  which  the  Danube  wa¬ 
ters  after  it  abandons  its  German  banks;'  and 
the  fair  Trinacria"  (which  between  Pachynus 
and  Pelorus,  on  the  gplf  which  receives  great¬ 
est  annoy  from  Eurus,  is  darkened,  not  by 
Typhceus  but  by  nascent  sulphur)  would  be 
still  awaiting  its  kings  sprung  through  me 
from  Charles  and  Rudolph,0  if  evil  rule, 
which  always  embitters  the  subject  people,  had 
not  moved  Palermo  to  shout:  ‘Die!  Die!’10 

76.  “And  if  my  brother  had  forenoted  this,1' 
he  would  ere  now  be  flying  from  the  greedy 
poverty  of  Catalonia,  in  order  that  it  might  not 
do  him  harm:  for  truly  it  is  needful  for  him 
or  for  some  other  to  provide,  so  that  on  his 
laden  bark  more  load  be  not  put.  His  own  na¬ 
ture,  which  descended  niggardly  from  a  liberal 
one,  would  have  need  of  such  a  soldiery  as 
should  not  care  for  putting  into  a  chest.” 

85.  “Because  I  believe  that  the  deep  joy 
which  thy  speech,  my  lord,  infuses  in  me,  is 
seen  by  thee  there  where  every  good  has  end 
and  has  beginning,  even  as  I  see  it,  it  is  the 
more  grateful  to  me;  and  this  also  I  hold  dear, 
that  thou  discernest  it,  gazing  upon  God.  Thou 
hast  made  me  glad;  and  so  now  do  thou  make 
clear  to  me  (since  in  speaking  thou  has  moved 
me  to  doubt)  how  from  sweet  seed  can  issue 
bitterness.” 

7  The  mother  of  Charles  Martel  was  sister  of  Ladis- 
laus  IV,  king  of  Hungary.  He  died  without  offspring, 
and  Charles  II  claimed  the  kingdom  by  right  of  his 
wife. 

8  Sicily;  the  gulf  darkened  by  sulphurous  fumes  is 
the  Bay  of  Calabria,  which,  lying  between  Cape 
Pachynus,  the  extreme  southeastern  point  of  the  island, 
and  Cape  Pelorus,  the  extreme  northeastern,  is  ex¬ 
posed  to  the  full  violence  of  Eurus,  or  the  east  wind. 
Clouds  of  smoke  from  Etna  sometimes  darken  it.  The 
eruptions  of  .Etna  were  ascribed  by  Ovid  to  the  strug¬ 
gles  of  Typhceus,  one  of  the  Giants  who  make  war 
upon  the  Gods,  and  who,  being  overthrown  by  Zeus, 
was  buried  under  Mount  Etna. 

9  From  his  father,  Charles  II,  or  his  grandfather, 
Charles  of  Anjou,  and  from  the  Emperor  Rudolph  of 
Hapsburg,  his  wife’s  father. 

10  By  the  insurrection  which  began  at  Palermo  in 
1282 — the  famous  Sicilian  Vespers — the  French  were 
driven  from  the  island,  and  the  rule  over  it  of  Charles 
of  Anjou  was  brought  to  an  end.  The  sovereignty  was 
conferred  by  the  people  on  Peter  III  of  Aragon,  the 
husband  of  the  daughter  of  Manfred,  the  illegitimate 
son  of  the  Emperor  Frederick  II. 

11  Robert,  the  third  son  of  Charles  II.  He  had  been 
kept  as  a  hostage  in  Catalonia  from  1288  to  1295,  and 
when  he  became  king  of  Naples  in  1309  he  introduced 
into  his  service  many  Catalonian  officials. 


n8  PARADISE 


94.  This  I  to  him;  and  he  to  me:  “If  I  can 
make  one  truth  plain  to  thee,  thou  wilt  hold 
thy  face  toward  that  which  thou  askest,  as 
thou  dost  now  hold  thy  back.  The  Good  which 
revolves  and  contents  all  the  realm  that  thou 
art  ascending,  makes  its  foresight  to  be  a  power 
in  these  great  bodies.  And  not  only  are  the  na¬ 
tures  foreseen  in  the  Mind  which  by  itself  is 
perfect,  but  they  together  with  their  well-being. 
Wherefore  whatsoever  this  bow  shoots  falls 
disposed  to  its  foreseen  end,  even  as  a  thing  di¬ 
rected  to  its  aim.  Were  this  not  so,  the  heaven 
through  which  thou  art  journeying  would  pro¬ 
duce  its  effects  in  such  wise  that  they  would 
not  be  works  of  art  but  ruins;  and  that  cannot 
be,  if  the  Intelligences  which  move  these  stars 
are  not  defective,  and  defective  the  Prime  In¬ 
telligence  in  that  it  did  not  make  them  perfect. 
Dost  thou  wish  that  this  truth  be  made  still 
clearer  to  thee?,, 

1 13.  And  I:  “No,  truly;  because  I  see  it  to  be 
impossible  that  Nature  should  weary  in  that 
which  is  needful.”  Whereupon  he  again: 
“Now,  say,  would  it  be  worse  for  man  on  earth 
if  he  were  not  a  citizen?”1  “Yes,”  answered  I, 
“and  here  I  ask  not  the  reason.”  “And  can  he 
be  so,  unless  he  live  there  below  diversely  for 
diverse  duties?  No;  if  your  master2  writes  well 
of  this.”  Thus  he  came  deducing  far  as  here; 
then  he  concluded:  “Therefore  the  roots  of 
your  works  must  needs  be  diverse;  on  which 
account  one  is  born  Solon,  and  another  Xerxes, 
another  Melchisedech,  and  another  he  who, 
flying  through  the  air,  lost  his  son.3  The  circu¬ 
lar  nature,  which  is  the  seal  of  the  mortal  wax, 
performs  its  art  well,  but  does  not  distinguish 
one  inn  from  another.  Hence  it  happens  that 
Esau  differs  in  seed  from  Jacob,  and  Quirinus 
comes  from  so  mean  a  father  that  he  is  as¬ 
cribed  to  Mars.  A  begotten  nature  would  al¬ 
ways  make  its  course  like  its  begetters,  if  the 
divine  foresight  did  not  overcome. 

136.  “Now  that  which  was  behind  thee  is  be¬ 
fore  thee,  but  that  thou  mayst  know  that  I 
have  joy  in  thee,  I  will  that  thou  cloak  thyself 
with  a  corollary.  Ever  does  a  nature,  if  it  find 
fortune  discordant  with  itself,  like  every  other 
seed  out  of  its  region,  come  to  ill  result.  And 

1Cf.  Aristotle,  Politics,  i.  i,  2;  iii.  9;  vii.  8. 

3  Aristotle. 

3  Daedalus  and  Icarus. 


if  the  world  there  below  would  fix  attention 
on  the  foundation  which  Nature  lays,  follow¬ 
ing  that,  it  would  have  its  people  good.  But  ye 
wrest  to  religion  one  who  shall  have  been  born 
to  gird  on  the  sword,  and  ye  make  a  king  of 
one  who  is  for  preaching;  so  that  your  track  is 
outside  of  the  road.” 

CANTO  IX 

After  thy  Charles,  O  beautiful  Clemence,4 
had  enlightened  me,  he  told  me  of  the  frauds 
which  his  seed  must  experience;3  but  he  said: 
“Keep  silence,  and  let  the  years  revolve”;  so 
that  I  can  say  nothing,  except  that  just  lamen¬ 
tation  shall  follow  on  your  wrongs. 

7.  And  now  the  life  of  that  holy  light  had 
turned  again  unto  the  Sun  which  fills  it,  as  that 
Good  which  suffices  for  every  thing.  Ah,  souls 
deceived,  and  creatures  impious,  who  from 
such  Good  turn  away  your  hearts,  directing 
your  foreheads  unto  vanity! 

13.  And  lo!  another  of  those  splendors  made 
towards  me,  and  by  brightening  outwardly 
was  signifying  its  will  to  please  me.  The  eyes 
of  Beatrice,  which  were  fixed  upon  me,  as  be¬ 
fore,6  made  me  assured  of  dear  assent  to  my  de¬ 
sire.  “Pray,  blessed  spirit,”  I  said,  “afford 
speedy  satisfaction  to  my  wish,  and  give  me 
proof  that  what  I  think  I  can  reflect  on  thee.” 
Whereon  the  light  which  was  still  new  to  me, 
from  out  its  depth,  wherein  before'  it  was  sing¬ 
ing,  proceeded,  as  one  whom  doing  good  de¬ 
lights: 

25.  “In  that  part8  of  the  wicked  Italian  land 
which  lies  between  Rialto  and  the  founts  of  the 
Brenta  and  the  Piave,  rises  a  hill,9  and  mounts 
not  very  high,  wherefrom  a  torch  descended 
which  made  a  great  assault  upon  that  district. 
From  one  root  both  I  and  it  were  born;  I  was 
called  Cunizza;  and  I  am  refulgent  here  be¬ 
cause  the  light  of  this  star  overcame  me.  But 
gladly  do  I  grant  myself  indulgence  for  the  oc- 

4  The  widow  of  Charles  Martel. 

6  Frauds  by  which  his  son  Caroberto  was  deprived 
of  his  rights  of  succession  to  the  throne  of  Naples. 

“See  Canto  viii.  42. 

7  See  Canto  viii.  28-30. 

8  The  March  of  Treviso,  lying  between  Venice 
(Rialto)  and  the  Alps. 

9  The  hill  on  which  stood  the  little  stronghold  of 
Romano,  the  birthplace  of  the  tyrant  Azzolino.  See 
Hell,  xii.  109.  Cunizza  was  his  sister. 


CANTO  IX 


casion  of  my  lot,  and  it  does  not  trouble  me; 
which  perhaps  would  seem  a  hard  saying  to 
your  vulgar.  Of  this  resplendent  and  precious 
jewel  of  our  kingdom,1  which  is  nearest  to  me, 
great  fame  has  remained,  and  ere  it  die  away 
this  hundredth  year  shall  yet  come  round  five 
times.  See  if  man  ought  to  make  himself  excel¬ 
lent.  so  that  the  first  life  may  leave  another! 
And  this  the  present  crowd,  which  the  Taglia- 
mento  and  the  Adige  shut  in,  considers  not; 
nor  yet,  though  it  be  scourged,  does  it  repent. 
But  it  will  soon  come  to  pass  that  because  her 
people  are  stubborn  against  duty/  Padua  at  the 
marsh  will  change  the  water  which  bathes 
Vicenza.  And  where  the  Sile  and  the  Cagnano 
unite,  one  lords  it,  and  goes  with  his  head 
high,  for  catching  whom  the  web  is  already 
made.3  Feltro  will  yet  weep  the  crime  of  its 
impious  shepherd,  which  will  be  so  shameful, 
that,  for  a  like,  none  ever  entered  Malta.4  Too 
large  would  be  the  vat  which  should  receive 
the  Ferrarese  blood,  and  weary  he  who  should 
weigh  it  ounce  by  ounce,  which  this  courteous 
priest  will  give  to  show  himself  of  his  party; 
and  such  gifts  will  be  conformed  to  the  living 
of  the  country.  Above  are  mirrors,  ye  call  them 
Thrones,  wherefrom  God  in  judgment  shines 
on  us,  so  that  these  words  seem  good  to  us.” 
Here  she  was  silent,  and  had  to  me  the  sem¬ 
blance  of  being  turned  elsewhither  by  the 
wheel  in  which  she  set  herself  as  she  was  be¬ 
fore." 

67.  The  other  joy,  which  was  already  known 
to  me  as  an  illustrious  thing,  became  to  my 
sight  like  a  fine  ruby  whereon  the  sun  should 
strike.  Through  joy  effulgence  is  gained  there 
on  high,  even  as  a  smile  here;  but  below  the 
shade  darkens  outwardly,  as  the  mind  is  sad. 

73.  “God  sees  everything,  and  thy  vision, 
blessed  spirit,  is  in  Him,”  said  I,  “so  that  no 
wish  can  steal  itself  away  from  thee.  Thy 

1  Folco,  or  Folquet,  of  Marseilles,  once  a  dissolute 
troubadour,  then  bishop  of  Toulouse. 

2  The  Paduan  Guelfs  were  defeated  more  than  once, 
near  Vicenza,  by  Can  Grande,  the  Imperial  Vicar, 
staining  with  their  blood  the  waters  of  the  marsh. 

“At  Treviso,  whose  lord,  Riccardo  da  Camino.  was 
assassinated  in  1312. 

4  An  act  of  treachery  in  1314  on  the  part  of  Ales¬ 
sandro  Novello,  Bishop  and  Lord  of  Feltre,  in  deliver¬ 
ing  up  certain  Ghibelline  refugees  from  Ferrara.  Some 
of  them  were  beheaded;  others  hanged.  Malta  was  a 
prison. 

“See  Canto  viii.  19-21;  34-35. 


1 19 

voice,  then,  which  forever  charms  the  heavens, 
together  with  the  song  of  those  devout  fires 
which  make  a  cowl  for  themselves  with  their 
six  wings,8  why  does  it  not  satisfy  my  desires? 
Surely  I  should  not  wait  for  thy  request  if  I  in- 
theed  myself,  as  thou  thyself  in-meest.” 

82.  “The  greatest  valley  in  which  the  water 
spreads,”1  began  then  his  words,  “except  of 
that  sea  which  garlands  the  earth,  extends  be¬ 
tween  its  discordant  shores  so  far  counter  to 
the  sun,  that  it  makes  a  meridian  where  first  it 
is  wont  to  make  the  horizon.  I  was  a  dweller 
on  the  shore  of  that  valley,  between  the  Ebro 
and  the  Macra,s  which,  with  short  course,  di¬ 
vides  the  Genoese  from  the  Tuscan.  With  al¬ 
most  the  same  sunset  and  the  same  sunrise  sit 
Buggea  and  the  city  whence  I  was,  which  once 
made  its  harbor  warm  with  its  own  blood/ 
That  people  to  whom  my  name  was  known 
called  me  Folco,  and  this  heaven  is  imprinted 
by  me,  as  I  was  by  it.  For  the  daughter  of 
Belus,10  wronging  both  Sichaeus  and  Creiisa, 
burned  not  more  than  I,  so  long  as  it  befitted 
my  locks;  nor  she  of  Rhodope  who  was  de¬ 
luded  by  Demophoon;11  nor  Alcides  when  he 
had  enclosed  Iole  in  his  heart.12  Yet  here  we  re¬ 
pent  not,  but  smile;  not  for  the  fault,  which 
does  not  return  to  the  memory,  but  for  the 
Power  which  ordained  and  foresaw.  Here  we 
gaze  on  the  art  which  adorns  so  great  a  work, 
and  we  discern  the  good  whereby  the  world 
below  turns  to  that  above. 

109.  “But  in  order  that  thou  mayst  bear  a- 
way  all  fulfilled  thy  wishes  which  have  been 
born  in  this  sphere,  I  must  needs  proceed  still 
further.  Thou  wouldst  know  who  is  in  this 
light,  which  beside  me  here  so  sparkles,  as  a 
sunbeam  on  clear  water.  Now  know  that  there- 

6  See  Isaiah,  6.  2. 

'  The  Mediterranean. 

8  Between  the  Ebro  in  Spain  and  the  Macra  in  Italy 
lies  Marseilles,  under  almost  the  same  meridian  as 
Buggea  (now  Bougie),  on  the  African  coast. 

9  When  the  fleet  of  Caesar  defeated  that  of  Pompey 
with  its  contingent  from  Marseilles,  49  b.  c. 

10  Dido.  See  Aeneid ,  iv.  2,  68,  10 1. 

11  Phyllis,  daughter  of  the  king  of  Thrace,  hanged 
herself,  believing  herself  deserted  by  Demophoon,  the 
son  of  Theseus.  Rhodope  was  a  chain  of  mountains 
between  Thrace  and  Macedonia. 

12  Iole  was  the  daughter  of  a  king  of  Thessaly,  and 
the  love  of  Hercules  (Alcides)  for  her  so  excited  the 
jealousy  of  his  wife  Dejaneira  that  she  brought  about 
his  death. 


PARADISE 


120 

within  Rahab1  is  at  rest,  and  being  joined  with 
our  order  it  is  sealed  by  her  in  the  supreme  de¬ 
gree.  By  this  heaven,  in  which  the  shadow  that 
your  world  makes  comes  to  a  point,  she  was 
taken  up  before  any  other  soul  of  the  triumph 
of  Christ.  It  was  well  befitting  to  leave  her  in 
some  heaven,  as  a  palm  of  the  high  victory 
which  was  acquired  with  one  palm  and  the 
other,  because  she  favored  the  first  glory  of 
Joshua  in  the  Holy  Land,2  which  little  touches 
the  memory  of  the  Pope.3 

127.  “Thy  city,  which  was  planted  by  him 
who  first  turned  his  back  on  his  Maker,  and 
whose  envy  has  been  so  bewept,4  produces  and 
scatters  the  accursed  flower''  which  has  caused 
the  sheep  and  the  lambs  to  stray,  because  it  has 
made  a  wolf  of  the  shepherd.  For  this  the  Gos¬ 
pel  and  the  great  Doctors  are  deserted,  and 
there  is  study  only  of  the  Decretals,  as  is  ap¬ 
parent  by  their  margins.  On  this  the  Pope  and 
the  Cardinals  are  intent;  their  thoughts  go  not 
to  Nazareth,  there  where  Gabriel  spread  his 
wings.  But  the  Vatican,  and  the  other  chosen 
parts  of  Rome,  which  have  been  the  burial 
place  for  the  soldiery  that  followed  Peter,  shall 
soon  be  free  from  this  adultery.”6 

CANTO  X 

Looking  upon  His  Son  with  the  Love  which 
the  one  and  the  other  eternally  breathe  forth, 
the  primal  and  ineffable  Power  made  every¬ 
thing  which  revolves  through  the  mind  or 
through  space  with  such  order  that  he  who 
contemplates  it  cannot  be  without  taste  of 
Him. 

7.  Lift  then  thy  sight,  Reader,  with  me  to 
the  lofty  wheels,  straight  to  that  region  where 
the  one  motion  strikes  on  the  other;'  and  there 
begin  to  gaze  with  delight  on  the  art  of  that 
Master  who  within  Himself  so  loves  it  that  His 
eye  never  departs  from  it.  See  how  from  that 

1  See  Hebrews,  11.  31.  Cf.  Joshua,  2.  1-21;  6.  17; 
James,  2.  25. 

2  See  Joshua,  2.  6. 

3  Boniface  VIII,  Cf.  Hell,  xxvii.  85-87. 

4  See  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  2.  24. 

6  The  lily  on  the  florin. 

8  By  the  removal  in  1305  of  the  papal  court  to 
Avignon. 

7  At  the  equinox,  the  sun  in  Aries  is  at  the  inter¬ 
section  of  the  ecliptic  and  the  equator  of  the  celestial 
sphere,  and  his  apparent  movement,  in  his  annual 
revolution  in  the  zodiac,  cuts  his  apparent  diurnal 
motion,  which  is  parallel  to  the  equator. 


point  the  oblique  circle  which  bears  the  planets 
branches  off,  to  satisfy  the  world  which  calls 
on  them;  and  if  their  road  were  not  bent,  much 
virtue  in  the  heavens  would  be  in  vain,  and 
well-nigh  every  potency  dead  here  below;  and 
if  its  departure  were  more  or  less  distant  from 
the  straight  line,  much  of  the  order  of  the 
world,  both  below  and  above,  would  be  defec¬ 
tive. 

22.  Now  remain,  Reader,  upon  thy  bench, 
pursuing  in  thought  that  which  is  foretasted  if 
thou  wouldst  be  glad  far  sooner  than  weary.  I 
have  set  before  thee;  henceforth  feed  thou  thy¬ 
self,  for  that  theme  whereof  I  have  been  made 
the  scribe  wrests  all  my  care  unto  itself. 

28.  The  greatest  minister  of  nature,  which 
imprints  the  world  with  the  worth  of  the  heav¬ 
ens,  and  with  his  light  measures  the  time  for 
us,  conjoined  with  that  region  which  is  men¬ 
tioned  above,  was  circling  through  the  spirals 
in  which  from  day  to  day  he  earlier  presents 
himself.  And  I  was  with  him;  but  of  the  ascent 
I  was  not  aware,  otherwise  than  is  a  man,  be¬ 
fore  his  first  thought,  aware  of  its  coming.  It  is 
Beatrice  who  thus  conducts  from  good  to  bet¬ 
ter,  so  instantaneously  that  her  act  does  not 
extend  through  time. 

40.  How  lucent  in  itself  must  that  have  been 
which  was  apparent  not  by  color  but  by  light 
within  the  sun  where  I  had  entered!  Though  I 
should  call  on  genius,  art,  and  use,  I  could  not 
tell  it  so  that  it  could  ever  be  imagined;  but 
one  may  believe  it,  and  let  him  long  to  see  it. 
And  if  our  fancies  are  low  for  such  loftiness,  it 
is  no  marvel,  for  beyond  the  sun  there  was 
never  eye  could  go.  Such  was  here  the  fourth 
family  of  the  exalted  Father,  who  always  sat¬ 
isfies  it,  showing  how  He  breathes  forth,  and 
how  He  begets.  And  Beatrice  began:  “Give 
thanks,  give  thanks  to  the  Sun  of  the  Angels, 
who  to  this  visible  one  has  raised  thee  by  His 
grace.” 

55.  Heart  of  mortal  was  never  so  disposed  to 
devotion,  and  so  ready,  with  its  whole  will,  to 
render  itself  up  to  God,  as  I  became  at  those 
words;  and  all  my  love  was  so  set  on  Him  that 
it  eclipsed  Beatrice  in  oblivion.  It  did  not  dis¬ 
please  her;  but  she  so  smiled  thereat  that  the 
splendor  of  her  smiling  eyes  divided  upon 
many  things  my  mind  intent  on  one. 

64. 1  saw  many  living  and  surpassing  efful- 


CANTO  X 


gences  make  of  us  a  centre,  and  make  of  them¬ 
selves  a  crown;  more  sweet  in  voice  than  shin¬ 
ing  in  aspect.  Thus  girt  we  sometimes  see  the 
daughter  of  Latona,  when  the  air  is  so  impreg¬ 
nate  that  it  holds  the  thread  which  makes  her 
zone.1  In  the  court  of  Heaven,  wherefrom  I  re¬ 
turn,  are  found  many  jewels  so  precious  and 
beautiful  that  they  cannot  be  brought  from  the 
kingdom,  and  of  these  was  the  song  of  those 
lights.  Let  him  who  does  not  wing  himself  so 
that  he  may  fly  up  thither,  await  tidings  thence 
from  the  dumb. 

7 6.  After  those  blazing  suns,  thus  singing, 
had  circled  three  times  round  about  us,  like 
stars  near  to  the  fixed  poles,  they  seemed  to  me 
as  ladies  not  released  from  a  dance,  but  who 
stop  silent,  listening  till  they  have  caught  the 
new  notes. 

82.  And  within  one  I  heard  begin:  “Since  the 
ray  of  grace,  by  which  true  love  is  kindled,  and 
which  then  in  loving  grows  multiplied,  so 
shines  on  thee  that  it  conducts  thee  upward  by 
that  stair  which,  without  reascending,  no  one 
descends/  he  who  should  deny  to  thee  the  wine 
of  his  flask  for  thy  thirst,  would  not  be  more  at 
liberty  than  water  which  descends  not  to  the 
sea.  Thou  wishest  to  know  with  what  plants 
this  garland  is  en flowered,  which,  round  about 
her,  gazes  with  delight  upon  the  beautiful 
Lady  who  strengthens  thee  for  heaven.  I  was  of 
the  lambs  of  the  holy  flock  which  Dominic 
leads  along  the  way  where  they  fatten  well  if 
they  do  not  stray.  This  one  who  is  nearest  to 
me  on  the  right  was  my  brother  and  master; 
and  he  was  Albert  of  Cologne,3  and  I  Thomas 
of  Aquino. 

100.  “If  thus  of  all  the  rest  thou  wouldst  be 
informed,  come,  following  my  speech,  with 
thy  sight  circling  around  upon  the  blessed 
wreath.  That  next  flaming  issues  from  the 
smile  of  Gratian,  who  so  aided  one  court  and 
the  other  that  it  pleases  in  Paradise.4  The  next, 
who  at  his  side  adorns  our  choir,  was  that  Peter 
who,  like  the  poor  woman,  offered  his  treasure 
to  Holy  Church."  The  fifth  light,  which  is  most 

1  When  the  air  is  so  full  of  vapor  that  it  forms  a  halo. 

2Cf.  Purgatory,  ii.  91,  92. 

8  Albertus  Magnus,  styled  Doctor  universalis. 

4  Gratian,  an  Italian  Benedictine  monk  of  the  twelfth 
century,  compiled  the  Decretum  Gratiani,  composed  of 
texts  designed  to  establish  the  agreement  of  the  civil 
and  canon  law. 

5  Peter  Lombard,  a  theologian  of  the  twelfth  century, 


beautiful  among  us,6  breathes  from  such  love 
that  all  the  world  there  below  is  greedy  to 
know  tidings  of  it:  within  it  is  the  lofty  mind 
wherein  wisdom  so  profound  was  put,  that,  if 
the  truth  be  true,  to  see  so  much  no  second  has 
arisen.'  At  its  side  behold  the  light  of  that 
candle  which,  below  in  the  flesh,  saw  most  in¬ 
wardly  the  angelic  nature,  and  its  ministry/  In 
the  next  little  light  smiles  that  advocate  of  the 
Christian  times,  with  whose  discourse  Augus¬ 
tine  provided  himself/ 

1 21.  “Now  if  thou  leadest  the  eye  of  the 
mind,  following  my  praises,  from  light  to 
light,  thou  stayest  already  thirsting  for  the 
eighth.  Therewithin,  through  seeing  every 
good,  the  holy  soul  rejoices  which  makes  the 
fallacious  world  manifest  to  him  who  hearkens 
to  it  well.3"  The  body  whence  it  was  chased  out 
lies  below  in  Cieldauro/1  and  from  martyrdom 
and  from  exile  it  came  to  this  peace.  Beyond, 
see  flaming  the  glowing  breath  of  Isidore,  of 
Bede,  and  of  Richard  who  in  contemplation 
was  more  than  man.32  This  one  from  whom 
thy  look  returns  to  me  is  the  light  of  a  spirit  to 
whom,  in  his  grave  thoughts,  it  seemed  that 
death  came  slow.  It  is  the  eternal  light  of 
Siger/3  who,  reading  in  the  Street  of  Straw, 
syllogized  invidious  truths/1 

139.  Then,  as  a  horologe  which  calls  us  at 
the  hour  when  the  Bride  of  God  rises  to  sing 

known  for  his  compilation  of  extracts  from  the  works 
of  the  Fathers  relating  to  the  chief  doctrines  of  the 
Church:  the  Sententiarum  libri  IV.  In  the  proem  he 
says  that  he  desired,  “like  the  poor  widow”  (Luke, 
21.  1-4),  “to  cast  something  from  his  penury  into 
the  treasury  of  the  Lord.” 

0  Solomon. 

7  See  I  Kings  3.  12. 

8  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  the  disciple  of  St.  Paul 
(Acts,  17.  34),  to  whom  was  ascribed  a  book  of  great 
repute,  written  probably  in  the  fifth  or  sixth  century, 
On  the  Celestial  Hierarchy. 

9  Paulus  Orosius,  who  lived  in  the  fourth  and  fifth 
centuiies,  and  wrote,  at  the  request  of  St.  Augustine, 
his  History  against  the  Pagans. 

10  Boethius,  statesman  and  philosopher;  his  work, 
De  Consolatione  philo so phiae ,  was  held  in  high  esteem 
by  Dante. 

11  Boethius,  put  to  death  in  Pavia,  in  525,  was  buried 
in  the  church  of  S.  Pietro  in  Cielo  d’  Oro — St.  Peter  s 
of  the  Golden  Ceiling. 

12  Isidore,  bishop  of  Seville,  died  636;  the  Vener¬ 
able  Bede,  died  735;  Richard,  prior  of  the  Monastery 
of  St.  Victor,  at  Paris,  a  mystic  of  the  twelfth  century; 
all  eminent  theologians. 

13  Siger  of  Brabant,  who  in  the  last  half  of  the  thir¬ 
teenth  century,  as  doctor  in  the  University  of  Paris, 
gave  instruction  in  the  Rue  du  Fouarre. 


122 


PARADISE 


matins  to  her  Bridegroom  that  he  may  love 
her,  in  which  the  one  part  draws  and  urges  the 
other,  sounding  ting!  ting!  with  such  sweet 
note  that  the  well-disposed  spirit  swells  with 
love,  so  did  I  see  the  glorious  wheel  move,  and 
render  voice  to  voice  in  concord  and  in  sweet¬ 
ness  which  cannot  be  known  save  there  where 
joy  is  everlasting. 

CANTO  XI 

O  insensate  care  of  mortals!  how  defective 
are  those  syllogisms  which  make  thee  down¬ 
ward  beat  thy  wings!  One  was  going  after  the 
laws,  and  one  after  the  aphorisms,3  and  one  fol¬ 
lowing  the  priesthood,  and  one  to  reign  by 
force  or  by  sophisms,  and  one  to  rob,  and  one 
to  civic  business,  one,  involved  in  pleasure  of 
the  flesh,  was  wearying  himself,  and  one  was 
giving  himself  to  idleness,  when  I,  loosed  from 
all  these  things,  with  Beatrice,  up  in  Heaven 
was  thus  gloriously  received. 

13.  After  each  had  returned  to  that  point  of 
the  circle  at  which  it  was  at  first,  it  stayed  still, 
as  a  candle  in  a  candlestick.  And  within  that 
light  which  first  had  spoken  to  me  I  heard,  as 
making  itself  more  clear,  it  smiling  began: 
“Even  as  I  am  resplendent  with  its  radiance, 
so,  looking  into  the  Eternal  Light,  I  apprehend 
whence  is  the  occasion  of  thy  thoughts.  Thou 
art  perplexed,  and  hast  the  wish  that  my  speech 
be  explained  in  language  so  open  and  so  full 
that  it  may  be  level  to  thy  sense,  where  I  said 
just  now:  ‘Where  they  fatten  well,’2  and  there 
where  I  said:  ‘No  second  has  been  born’;3  and 
here  is  need  that  one  distinguish  well. 

28.  “The  Providence  which  governs  the 
world  with  that  counsel,  in  which  every  cre¬ 
ated  vision  is  vanquished  ere  it  reach  its  depth, 
in  order  that  the  Bride  of  Him,  who  with  loud 
cries4  espoused  her  with  His  blessed  blood, 
might  go  toward  her  beloved,  secure  in  herself 
and  also  more  faithful  to  Him,  ordained  two 
princes  in  her  favor,  who  on  this  side  and  that 
should  be  to  her  for  guides.  The  one  was  all 
seraphic  in  ardor,0  the  other,  through  wisdom, 
was  on  earth  a  splendor  of  cherubic  light.6  I 

1  Of  Hippocrates. 

2  See  Canto  x.  96. 

3Cf.  Canto  x.  114. 

4  See  Matthew,  27.  46.  50. 

5  St.  Francis  of  Assisi. 

6  St.  Dominic. 


will  speak  of  one,  because  in  praising  one, 
whichever  be  taken,  both  are  spoken  of,  for  to 
one  end  were  their  works. 

43.  “Between  the  Tupino  and  the  water7 
which  descends  from  the  hill  chosen  by  the 
blessed  Ubald,  hangs  the  fertile  slope  of  a  high 
mountain,  wherefrom  Perugia  at  Porta  Sole8 
feels  cold  and  heat,  while  behind  it  Nocera  and 
Gualdo  weep  because  of  their  heavy  yoke.9 
From  this  slope,  where  it  most  breaks  its  steep¬ 
ness,  a  Sun  rose  upon  the  world,  as  this  one 
sometimes  does  from  the  Ganges.  Wherefore 
let  him  who  talks  of  this  place  not  say  Ascesi,30 
which  were  to  speak  short,  but  Orient,11  if  he 
would  speak  properly.  He  was  not  yet  very  far 
from  his  rising  when  he  began  to  make  the 
earth  feel  some  comfort  from  his  great  virtue; 
for,  while  still  a  youth,  he  ran  into  strife  with 
his  father  for  sake  of  a  lady12  such  as  to  whom, 
as  unto  death,  no  one  unlocks  the  gate  of  pleas¬ 
ure;  and  before  his  spiritual  court  et  coram 
patre 3  he  was  united  to  her;  and  thereafter 
from  day  to  day  he  loved  her  more  ardently. 
She,  deprived  of  her  first  husband,34  for  eleven 
hundred  years  and  more,  despised  and  obscure, 
even  till  him  had  remained  un wooed;  nor  had 
it  availed  to  hear,  that  he,  who  caused  fear  to 
all  the  world,  found  her  undisturbed  with 
Amyclas  at  the  sound  of  his  voice;15  nor  had  it 
availed  to  have  been  constant  and  undaunted, 
so  that,  where  Mary  remained  below,  she 
mounted  on  the  cross  with  Christ. 

73.  But  that  I  may  not  proceed  too  obscurely, 
henceforth  in  my  diffuse  speech  take  Francis 
and  Poverty  for  these  lovers.  Their  concord 
and  their  glad  semblances  made  love,  and  won¬ 
der,  and  sweet  regard  to  be  the  cause  of  holy 
thoughts;  so  that  the  venerable  Bernard  first 

7  The  Chiassi,  which  flows  from  the  hill  near  Gub- 
bio  chosen  for  his  hermitage  by  St.  Ubald. 

8  The  gate  of  Perugia,  which  fronts  Monte  Subasio, 
on  which  Assisi  lies. 

9  Little  towns,  southeast  of  Assisi,  held  in  subjection 
by  Perugia. 

10  So  the  name  of  Assisi  was  sometimes  spelled,  and 
here  with  a  play  on  ascesi  “I  rose.” 

11  As  the  place  where  this  new  Sun  of  righteousness 
arose. 

12  Poverty. 

13  “In  presence  of  his  father.” 

14  Christ. 

15  When  Caesar  knocked  at  the  door  of  Amyclas,  his 
voice  caused  no  alarm,  because  Poverty  made  the 
fisherman  secure. 


CANTO  XII 


bared  his  feet,1  and  ran  following  such  great 
peace,  and,  running,  it  seemed  to  him  that  he 
was  slow.  O  unknown  riches!  O  fertile  good! 
Egidius  bares  his  feet  and  Sylvester  bares  his 
feet,2  following  the  bridegroom;  so  pleasing  is 
the  bride.  Then  that  father  and  that  master 
goes  on  his  way  with  his  lady,  and  with  that 
family  which  the  humble  cord  was  now  gird¬ 
ing.  Nor  did  baseness  of  heart  weigh  down  his 
brow  for  being  the  son  of  Pietro  Bernardone, 
nor  for  appearing  marvellously  despised;  but 
royally  he  opened  his  hard  intention  to  Inno¬ 
cent,  and  from  him  received  the  first  seal  for 
his  Order.3 

94.  “After  the  poor  folk  had  increased  be¬ 
hind  him,  whose  marvellous  life  would  be  bet¬ 
ter  sung  in  the  glory  of  the  heavens,  the  holy 
purpose  of  this  archimandrite  was  adorned 
with  a  second  crown  by  the  Eternal  Spirit, 
through  Honorius.4 5  And  after  that,  through 
thirst  for  martyrdom,  he  had  preached  Christ 
and  the  others  who  followed  him,  in  the  proud 
presence  of  the  Sultan/  and  because  he  found 
the  people  too  unripe  for  conversion,  and  in  or¬ 
der  not  to  stay  in  vain,  had  returned  to  the 
fruit  of  the  Italian  herbage,  on  the  harsh  rock,6 7 
between  the  Tiber  and  the  Arno,  he  received 
from  Christ  the  last  seal,'  which  his  limbs  bore 
for  two  years.  When  it  pleased  Him,  Who  had 
allotted  him  to  such  great  good,  to  draw  him 
up  to  the  reward  which  he  had  gained  in  mak¬ 
ing  himself  lowly,8 *  he  commended  his  most 
dear  lady  to  his  brethren  as  to  rightful  heirs, 
and  commanded  them  to  love  her  faithfully; 
and  from  her  bosom  his  illustrious  soul  willed 
to  depart,  returning  to  its  realm,  and  for  his 
body  he  willed  no  other  bier. 

1 18.  “Think  now  what  he  was,  who  was  a 
worthy  colleague  to  keep  the  bark  of  Peter  on 
the  deep  sea  to  its  right  aim!  And  this  was  our 

1  Bernard,  a  wealthy  citizen  of  Assisi,  was  St.  Fran¬ 

cis’s  first  disciple.  After  the  death  of  Francis  he  was 
chosen  head  of  the  Order. 

3  Egidius,  the  blessed  Giles  of  Assisi,  and  Sylvester 
were  two  of  Francis’s  most  devoted  followers. 

3  Pope  Innocent  III  approved  the  Rule  of  St.  Francis. 

4  In  1223,  Honorius  III  confirmed  the  sanction  of 
the  Order. 

5  Francis,  with  some  of  his  followers,  in  1219,  ac¬ 
companied  the  Crusaders  of  the  Fifth  Crusade  to  Egypt. 

c  Mount  Alvernia,  in  the  Casentino. 

7  The  Stigmata. 

8  See  Matthew,  18.  6,  10,  14;  Mark,  9.  42;  Luke,  12. 

32;  17.  2. 


Patriarch:  wherefore  thou  canst  see  that  who¬ 
ever  follows  him  as  he  commands  loads  good 
merchandise.  But  his  flock  has  become  so 
greedy  of  strange  food  that  it  cannot  but  be 
scattered  over  diverse  meadows;  and  the  far¬ 
ther  his  sheep,  remote  and  vagabond,  go  from 
him,  the  more  empty  of  milk  do  they  return 
to  the  fold.  Some  of  them  indeed  there  are  who 
fear  the  harm,  and  keep  close  to  the  shepherd; 
but  they  are  so  few  that  little  cloth  furnishes 
their  cowls.  Now  if  my  words  are  not  faint,  if 
thy  hearing  has  been  attentive,  if  thou  recallest 
to  mind  that  which  I  have  said,  thy  wish  will 
be  content  in  part,  because  thou  wilt  see  the 
plant  wherefrom  they  are  hewn,  and  thou  wilt 
see  how  the  wearer  of  the  thong  reasons — 
‘Where  they  fatten  well  if  they  do  not  stray.’  ” 

CANTO  XII 

Soon  as  the  blessed  flame  took  to  speaking 
its  last  word  the  holy  mill-stone  began  to  re¬ 
volve,  and  had  not  wholly  turned  in  its  gyra¬ 
tion  before  another  enclosed  it  with  a  circle, 
and  matched  motion  with  motion,  song  with 
song;  song  which  in  those  sweet  pipes  as  much 
surpasses  our  Muses,  our  Sirens,  as  a  primal 
splendor  that  which  it  reflected.  As  two  bows 
parallel  and  like  in  colors  are  turned  across  a 
thin  cloud,  when  Juno  gives  the  order  to  her 
handmaid,10  the  one  without  born  of  the  one 
within  (in  manner  of  the  speech  of  that  wan¬ 
dering  one11  whom  love  consumed,  as  the  sun 
does  vapors),  and  make  the  people  here  to  be 
presageful,  by  reason  of  the  covenant  which 
God  established  with  Noah  concerning  the 
world,  that  it  shall  nevermore  be  flooded;  so 
the  two  garlands  of  those  sempiternal  roses 
were  turning  around  us,  and  so  did  the  outer 
correspond  to  the  inner. 

22.  After  the  dance  and  the  exalted  great  fes¬ 
tivity,  alike  of  the  singing  and  of  the  flaming, 
light  with  light  joyous  and  bland,  had  become 
quiet  together  at  one  instant  and  with  one  will, 
even  as  the  eyes  which  must  needs  close  and 
lift  themselves  together  at  the  pleasure  that 
moves  them,  from  the  heart  of  one  of  the  new 
lights  there  came  a  voice,  which  made  me 
seem  as  the  needle  to  the  star  in  turning  me  to 

9  St.  Dominic. 

10  Iris. 

11  The  nymph  Echo. 


PARADISE 


124 

its  whereabout;  and  it  began:1  “The  love 
which  makes  me  beautiful  draws  me  to  dis¬ 
course  of  the  other  leader,  by  whom  so  well  it 
has  been  spoken  here  of  mine.  It  is  fit  that 
where  one  is  the  other  be  led  in,  so  that  as  they 
waged  war  united,  so  together  may  their  glory 
shine. 

37.  “The  army  of  Christ,  which  it  cost  so  dear 
to  arm  afresh,  was  moving  behind  the  stand¬ 
ard,  slow,  mistrustful,  and  scanty,  when  the 
Emperor  who  forever  reigns  made  provision 
for  His  soldiery  that  were  in  peril,  of  His  grace 
only,  not  because  it  was  worthy,  and,  as  has 
been  said,  succored  His  Bride  with  two  cham¬ 
pions,  by  whose  deeds,  by  whose  words,  the 
people  gone  astray  were  brought  back. 

46.  “In  that  region  where  the  sweet  Zephyr 
rises  to  open  the  new  leaves  wherewith  Europe 
is  seen  to  reclothe  herself,  not  very  far  from  the 
beating  of  the  waves  behind  which,  over  their 
long  course,  the  sun  sometimes  hides  himself 
from  every  man,2 3  sits  the  fortunate  Callaroga, 
under  the  protection  of  the  great  shield  on 
which  the  Lion  is  subject  and  subjugates/ 
Therein  was  born  the  amorous  lover  of  the 
Christian  faith,  the  holy  athlete,  benignant  to 
his  own,  and  harsh  to  his  enemies;4 5  and  so  soon 
as  it  was  created,  his  mind  was  so  replete  with 
living  virtue,  that  in  his  mother  it  made  her  a 
prophetess/  After  the  espousals  between  him 
and  the  Faith  were  completed  at  the  sacred 
font,  where  they  dowered  each  other  with  mu¬ 
tual  salvation,  the  lady  who  gave  the  assent  for 
him  saw  in  a  dream  the  marvellous  fruit  which 
should  issue  from  him  and  from  his  heirs;  and 
in  order  that  he  might  be  construed  as  he  was, 
a  spirit  went  forth  from  here  to  name  him 
with  the  possessive  of  Him  whose  he  wholly 
was.  Dominic6 * 8 *  was  he  called;  and  I  speak  of 
him  as  of  the  husbandman  whom  Christ 

1  It  is  St.  Bonaventura,  the  biographer  of  St.  Francis, 
who  speaks. 

2  Cf.  Hell,  xxvi.  1 17. 

3  Callaroga,  now  Calahorra,  a  city  in  Old  Castile.  On 
the  shield  of  Castile  two  lions  and  two  castles  are 
quartered,  one  lion  below  and  one  above. 

4  St.  Dominic,  born  in  1170. 

5  His  mother  dreamed  that  she  gave  birth  to  a  dog, 

black  and  white  in  color,  with  a  lighted  torch  in  its 

mouth,  which  set  the  world  on  fire;  symbols  of  the 
black  and  white  robe  of  the  Order,  and  of  the  flaming 
zeal  of  its  brethren. 

8  Dominicus,  the  possessive  of  Dominns,  “Belonging 

to  the  Lord.” 


elected  to  His  garden  to  assist  Him.  Truly  he 
seemed  the  messenger  and  familiar  of  Christ; 
for  the  first  love  that  was  manifest  in  him  was 
for  the  first  counsel  which  Christ  gave.'  Often¬ 
times  was  he  found  by  his  nurse  upon  the 
ground  silent  and  awake,  as  though  he  would 
say:  ‘I  am  come  for  this/  O  father  of  him  truly 
Felix!  O  mother  of  him  truly  Joanna,  if  this, 
being  interpreted,  means  as  is  said/ 

82.  “Not  for  the  world,  for  which  men  now 
toil,  following  him  of  Ostia  and  Thaddeus/ 
but  for  love  of  the  true  manna,  he  became  in 
short  time  a  great  teacher,  such  that  he  set  him¬ 
self  to  go  about  the  vineyard,  which  quickly 
grows  white  if  the  vinedresser  be  at  fault;  and 
of  the  Seat,  which  was  formerly  more  benign 
unto  the  righteous  poor  (not  by  reason  of  itself 
but  by  reason  of  him  who  sits  there  and  is  de¬ 
generate),  he  asked  not  to  dispense  or  two  or 
three  for  six,  not  the  fortune  of  the  first  vacan¬ 
cy,  non  decimas,  quae  sunt  pauperum  Dei™ 
but  leave  to  fight  against  the  errant  world  for 
that  seed11  of  which  four  and  twenty  plants  sur¬ 
round  thee.  Then  with  doctrine  and  with 
will,  together  with  the  apostolic  office,  he  went 
forth  like  a  torrent  which  a  lofty  vein  presses 
out,  and  on  the  heretical  stocks  his  onset 
smote  with  most  vigor  there  where  the  resist¬ 
ance  was  the  greatest.  From  him  proceeded 
thereafter  divers  rills  whereby  the  catholic  gar¬ 
den  is  watered,  so  that  its  bushes  are  more  liv¬ 
ing. 

106.  “If  such  was  the  one  wheel  of  the  char¬ 
iot  on  which  the  Holy  Church  defended  her¬ 
self  and  vanquished  in  the  field  her  civil  strife, 
surely  the  excellence  of  the  other  should  be 
very  plain  to  thee,  concerning  whom  Thomas 
before  my  coming  was  so  courteous.  But  the 
track  which  the  highest  part  of  its  circumfer¬ 
ence  made  is  derelict;  so  that  there  is  mould 
where  the  crust  was.12  His  household,  which 
set  out  aright  with  their  feet  upon  his  foot¬ 
prints,  are  so  turned  round  that  they  set  the 

7  See  Matthew,  19.  21. 

8  Felix,  signifying  “happy,”  and  Joanna,  said  to 
mean,  “the  grace  of  the  Lord.” 

9  Henry  of  Susa,  cardinal  of  Ostia,  who  wrote  a 
much  studied  commentary  on  the  Decretals,  and  Tad¬ 
deo  d’  Alderotto  of  Bologna,  called  “the  greatest  physi¬ 
cian  in  Christendom.” 

10  “Not  the  tithes  which  belong  to  God’s  poor.” 

11  See  Luke,  8.  11. 

12  Good  wine  makes  a  crust;  bad  wine  makes  mould 
in  the  cask. 


CANTO  XIII 


forward  foot  on  that  behind;  and  soon  shall 
there  be  sight  of  the  harvest  of  the  ill  culture, 
when  the  tare  will  complain  that  the  bin  is 
taken  from  it.1 2  Nevertheless,  I  say,  he  who 
should  search  our  volume  leaf  by  leaf  might 
still  find  a  page  where  he  would  read:  ‘I  am 
that  which  I  am  wont/  But  it  will  not  be  from 
Casale  nor  from  Acquasparta/  whence  come 
such  to  the  writing  that  one  evades  it,  and  the 
other  contracts  it. 

127.  “I  am  the  life  of  Bonaventura  of  Bag- 
noregio,  who  in  great  offices  always  set  the  sin¬ 
ister3  care  behind.  Illuminato  and  Augustin 
are  here,  who  were  among  the  first  barefoot 
poor  that  in  the  cord  made  themselves  friends 
to  God.  Hugh  of  St.  Victor4 5  is  here  with  them, 
and  Peter  Mangiadore,  and  Peter  of  Spain/ 
who  down  below  shines  in  twelve  books;  Na¬ 
than  the  prophet,  and  the  Metropolitan  Chrys¬ 
ostom,6 7 8  and  Anselm,'  and  that  Donatuss  who 
deigned  to  set  his  hand  to  the  first  art;  Raban9 
is  here,  and  at  my  side  shines  the  Calabrian  ab¬ 
bot  Joachim,10 *  endowed  with  prophetic  spirit. 

142.  “The  flaming  courtesy  of  Brother  Thom¬ 
as,  and  his  well  advised  discourse,  moved  me 
to  envy  so  great  a  paladin;  and  with  me  moved 
this  company/’ 

CANTO  XIII 

Let  him  imagine,  who  desires  to  understand 
well  that  which  I  now  saw  (and  let  him  retain 
the  image  like  a  firm  rock,  while  I  am  speak¬ 

1  See  Matthew,  13.  30. 

2  Frate  Ubertino  of  Casale,  the  leader  of  a  party  of 
zealots  among  the  Franciscans,  enforced  the  written 
Rule  of  the  Order  with  excessive  strictness;  Matteo  of 
Acquasparta,  general  of  the  Franciscans  in  1287,  re¬ 
laxed  it. 

3  Care  for  temporal  things.  Cf.  Proverbs,  3.  16. 

4  A  noted  theologian  of  the  mystic  school,  of  the 
abbey  of  St.  Victor  at  Paris. 

5  Peter  Mangiador,  or  Comestor,  “the  Eater,”  so 
called  as  being  a  devourer  of  books.  He  was  chan¬ 
cellor  of  the  University  of  Paris,  and  died  toward  the 
end  of  the  twelfth  century.  Peter  of  Spain  wrote  a 
compendium  of  logic,  Summae  logicales,  in  twelve 
books.  He  was  chosen  Pope  in  1276,  taking  the  name 
of  John  XXI. 

A  Greek  Father  of  the  Church,  patriarch  of  Con¬ 
stantinople. 

7  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  died  in  1109. 

8  The  compiler  of  a  treatise  on  grammar  in  use 
throughout  the  Middle  Ages. 

9  Rabanus  Maurus,  Archbishop  of  Mainz  in  the 
ninth  century;  a  great  scholar  and  writer. 

10  Joachim,  Abbot  of  Flora,  in  Calabria.  He  died  in 

1202.  He  wrote  apocalyptic  and  prophetic  treatises. 


ing),  fifteen  stars  which  in  different  regions 
vivify  the  heaven  with  brightness  so  great  that 
it  overcomes  every  thickness  of  the  air;  let  him 
imagine  that  Wain”  for  which  the  bosom  of  our 
heaven  suffices  both  night  and  day,  so  that  with 
the  turning  of  its  pole  it  does  not  disappear;  let 
him  imagine  the  mouth  of  that  horn12  which 
begins  at  the  point  of  the  axle  on  which  the 
primal  wheel  goes  round — to  have  made  of 
themselves  two  signs  in  the  heavens,  like  that 
which  the  daughter  of  Minos  made,  when  she 
felt  the  frost  of  death,13  and  one  to  have  its  rays 
within  the  other,  and  both  to  revolve  in  such 
manner  that  one  should  go  first  and  the  other 
after;  and  he  will  have,  as  it  were,  the  shadow 
of  the  true  constellation,  and  of  the  double 
dance,  which  was  circling  round  the  point 
where  I  was;  since  it  is  as  much  beyond  our 
wont  as  the  motion  of  the  heaven  which  out- 
speeds  all  the  rest  is  swifter  than  the  movement 
of  the  Chiana/4  There  was  sung  not  Bacchus, 
not  Paean,  but  three  Persons  in  the  divine 
nature,  and  It  and  the  human  in  one  Person. 
The  singing  and  the  revolving  completed  each 
its  measure,  and  those  holy  lights  gave  heed 
to  us,  making  themselves  happy  from  care  to 
care. 

31.  Then  the  light13  within  which  the  marvel¬ 
lous  life  of  the  poor  man  of  God  had  been  nar¬ 
rated  to  me  broke  the  silence  among  those  con¬ 
cordant  divinities,  and  said:  “Since  one  straw 
is  threshed,  since  its  seed  is  now  garnered, 
sweet  love  invites  me  to  beat  out  the  other. 
Thou  believest  that  into  the  breast,  wherefrom 
the  rib  was  drawn  to  form  the  beautiful  cheek 
of  her  whose  palate  costs  dear  to  all  the  world, 
and  into  that  which,  pierced  by  the  lance,  both 
after  and  before  made  such  satisfaction  that  it 
overcomes  the  balance  of  all  sin,  whatever  of 
light  it  is  allowed  to  human  nature  to  have  was 
all  infused  by  that  Power  which  made  one  and 
the  other;  and  therefore  thou  wonderest  at  that 
which  I  said  above,  when  I  told  that  the  good 
which  is  inclosed  in  the  fifth  light  had  no 
second.  Now  open  thine  eyes  to  that  which  I 

11  The  Great  Bear. 

13  The  Lesser  Bear. 

13  Dionysus  bore  Ariadne,  deserted  by  Theseus,  to 
heaven,  and  changed  her  crown  into  a  constellation: 
Ariadne’s  Crown. 

14  The  Chiana  was  a  sluggish  Tuscan  stream. 

15  Of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas. 


126  PARADISE 


answer  to  thee,  and  thou  wilt  see  thy  belief  and 
my  speech  become  in  the  truth  as  the  centre  in 
a  circle. 

52.  “That  which  dies  not  and  that  which  can 
die  are  naught  but  the  splendor  of  that  idea 
which  in  His  love  our  Sire  brings  to  birth;1 
for  that  living  Light,  which  so  streams  from  its 
Lucent  Source  that  It  is  not  disunited  from  It, 
nor  from  the  Love  which  with  them  is  in- 
trined,  doth  of  Its  own  goodness  collect  Its 
rays,  as  it  were  mirrored,  in  nine  subsistences, 
Itself  eternally  remaining  one.  Thence  It  de¬ 
scends  to  the  ultimate  potentialities,  downward 
from  act  to  act,  becoming  such  that  finally  It 
makes  naught  save  brief  contingencies:  and 
these  contingencies  I  understand  to  be  the  gen¬ 
erated  things  which  the  moving  heavens  pro¬ 
duce  with  seed  and  without  it.  The  wax  of 
these,  and  that  which  moulds  it,  are  not  of  one 
mode,  and  therefore  under  the  signet  of  the 
idea  It  more  or  less  shines  through;  whence  it 
comes  to  pass  that  one  same  plant  in  respect  to 
species  bears  better  or  worse  fruit,  and  that  ye 
are  born  with  diverse  dispositions. 

73.  “If  the  wax  were  exactly  worked,  and  the 
heavens  were  supreme  in  their  power,  the 
whole  light  of  the  seal  would  be  apparent.  But 
nature  always  gives  it  defective,  working  like 
the  artist  who  has  the  practice  of  his  art  and  a 
hand  that  trembles.  Yet  if  the  fervent  Love  dis¬ 
poses  and  imprints  the  clear  Vision  of  the 
primal  Power,  complete  perfection  is  acquired 
there.  Thus  of  old  the  earth  was  made  worthy 
of  the  complete  perfection  of  the  living  being; 
thus  was  the  Virgin  made  impregnate;  so  that 
I  commend  thy  opinion  that  human  nature 
never  was,  nor  will  be,  what  it  was  in  those 
two  persons. 

88.  “Now,  if  I  should  not  proceed  farther, 
‘How  then  was  that  one  without  a  peer?’ 
would  thy  words  begin.  But,  in  order  that  that 
which  is  not  apparent  may  clearly  appear,  con¬ 
sider  who  he  was,  and  the  cause  which  moved 
him  to  make  request,  when  it  was  said  to  him: 
‘Ask.’2 1  have  not  so  spoken  that  thou  canst  not 
clearly  see  that  he  was  a  king,  who  asked  for 
wisdom,  in  order  that  he  might  be  a  worthy 
king;  not  to  know  the  number  of  the  motors 
here  on  high,  or  if  necesse  with  a  contingent 

1  The  nine  orders  of  the  Angelic  Hierarchy. 

2  See  I  Kings,  3.  5-9. 


ever  made  necesse;  non  si  est  dare  primum 
motum  esse  *  or  if  in  the  semicircle  a  triangle 
can  be  made  so  that  it  should  not  have  one 
right  angle.  Wherefore  if  thou  notest  what  I 
said  and  also  this,  a  kingly  prudence  is  that 
peerless  seeing,  on  which  the  arrow  of  my  inten¬ 
tion  strikes.  And  if  thou  directest  clear  eyes  to 
the  ‘has  arisen,’  thou  wilt  see  it  has  respect  only 
to  kings,  who  are  many,  and  the  good  are  rare. 
With  this  distinction  take  thou  my  saying,  and 
thus  it  can  stand  with  that  which  thou  believest 
of  the  first  father,  and  of  our  Beloved  one.” 

1 12.  “And  let  this  ever  be  as  lead  to  thy  feet, 
to  make  thee  move  slowly  as  a  weary  man, 
both  to  the  yea  and  to  the  nay  which  thou  seest 
not;  for  he  is  very  low  down  among  the  fools 
who  affirms  or  denies  without  distinction, 
alike  in  the  one  and  in  the  other  case;  because 
it  happens  that  oftentimes  the  hasty  opinion 
bends  in  false  direction,  and  then  self-love  binds 
the  intelligence.  Far  more  than  in  vain  does  he 
leave  the  bank,  since  he  returns  not  such  as  he 
sets  out,  who  fishes  for  the  truth,  and  has  not 
the  art;  and  of  this  Parmenides,  Melissus, 
Bryson,6  are  manifest  proofs  to  the  world,  and 
many  others  who  went  on  and  knew  not 
whither.  Thus  did  Sabellius,  and  Arius,‘  and 
those  fools  who  were  as  swords  unto  the  Scrip¬ 
tures  in  making  their  straight  faces  crooked. 

130.  “Let  not  the  folk  be  yet  too  confident  in 
judgment,  like  him  who  reckons  up  the  ears  in 
the  field  ere  they  are  ripe;  for  I  have  seen  the 
briar  first  show  itself  stiff  and  rugged  all  win¬ 
ter  long,  then  bear  the  rose  upon  its  top;  and 
once  I  saw  a  bark  run  straight  and  swift  over 
the  sea  through  all  her  course,  and  perish  at 
last  at  entrance  of  the  harbor.  Let  not  dame 
Bertha  or  master  Martin,  seeing  one  rob,  and 
another  make  offering,  believe  to  see  them 
within  the  Divine  counsel;  for  the  one  may 
rise  and  the  other  may  fall.” 

CANTO  XIV 

From  the  centre  to  the  rim,  and  so  from  the 
rim  to  the  centre,  the  water  in  a  round  vessel 

3  If  from  two  premises,  one  necessary  and  one  con¬ 
tingent,  a  necessary  conclusion  is  to  be  deduced. 

4  “If  a  prime  motion  is  to  be  granted,”  that  is,  a 
motion  not  the  effect  of  another. 

a  The  Lord  Jesus. 

0  Heathen  philosophers. 

7  Sabellius  denied  the  Trinity,  Arius  denied  the  con- 
substantiality  of  the  Father  and  the  Son. 


CANTO  XIV 


127 


moves,  according  as  it  is  struck  from  without 
or  within.  This  which  I  say  fell  suddenly  into 
my  mind  as  the  glorious  life  of  Thomas  be¬ 
came  silent,  because  of  the  similitude  which 
was  born  of  his  speech  and  that  of  Beatrice, 
whom  after  him  it  pleased  thus  to  begin:  “This 
man  has  need,  and  he  tells  it  not  to  you,  neither 
with  his  voice  nor  as  yet  in  thought,  of  going 
to  the  root  of  another  truth.  Tell  him  if  the 
light  wherewith  your  substance  blossoms  will 
remain  with  you  eternally  even  as  it  is  now; 
and  if  it  remain,  tell  how,  after  ye  shall  be 
again  made  visible,  it  can  be  that  it  will  not 
hurt  your  sight.5’ 

19.  As,  when  urged  and  drawn  on  by  in¬ 
crease  of  delight,  those  who  are  dancing  in  a 
ring  all  at  once  lift  their  voice  and  gladden 
their  motions,  so,  at  that  ready  and  devout  pe¬ 
tition,  the  holy  circles  showed  new  joy  in  their 
turning  and  in  their  marvellous  melody.  Who¬ 
so  laments  because  we  die  here  to  live  there  on 
high,  has  not  seen  here  the  refreshment  of  the 
eternal  rain. 

28.  That  One  and  Two  and  Three  which 
ever  lives,  and  ever  reigns  in  Three  and  Two 
and  One,  uncircumscribed,  and  circumscribing 
all  things,  was  thrice  sung  by  each  of  those 
spirits  with  such  a  melody  that  for  every  merit 
it  would  be  adequate  reward.  And  I  heard  in 
the  divinest  light  of  the  smaller  circle  a  modest 
voice,1  perhaps  such  as  was  that  of  the  Angel 
to  Mary,  make  answer:  “As  long  as  the  festival 
of  Paradise  shall  be,  so  long  will  our  love  radi¬ 
ate  around  us  such  a  garment.  Its  brightness 
will  follow  our  ardor,  the  ardor  our  vision, 
and  that  is  great  in  proportion  as  it  receives  of 
grace  above  its  own  worth.  When  the  flesh, 
glorious  and  sanctified,  shall  be  clothed  on  us 
again,  our  persons  will  be  more  acceptable 
through  being  all  complete;  wherefore  what¬ 
ever  of  gratuitous  light  the  Supreme  Good 
gives  us  will  be  increased — light  which  enables 
us  to  see  Him;  so  that  our  vision  must  needs  in¬ 
crease,  our  ardor  increase  which  by  that  is  kin¬ 
dled,  our  radiance  increase  which  comes  from 
this. 

52.  But  even  as  a  coal  which  gives  forth 
flame,  and  by  a  vivid  glow  surpasses  it,  so  that 

1  Probably  that  of  Solomon,  who  in  Canto  x.  109, 
is  said  to  be  “the  light  which  is  the  most  beautiful 
among  us.” 


its  own  aspect  is  defended,  thus  this  effulgence, 
which  already  encircles  us,  will  be  vanquished 
in  appearance  by  the  flesh  which  all  this  while 
the  earth  covers;  nor  will  so  great  a  light  have 
power  to  fatigue  us,  for  the  organs  of  the  body 
will  be  strong  for  everything  which  can  delight 
us.”  So  sudden  and  ready  both  one  and  the 
ether  choir  seemed  to  me  in  saying  “Amen,” 
that  truly  they  showed  desire  for  their  dead 
bodies,  perhaps  not  only  for  themselves,  but 
also  for  their  mothers,  for  their  fathers,  and  for 
the  others  who  were  dear  before  they  became 
sempiternal  flames. 

67.  And  lo!  round  about,  of  a  uniform 
brightness,  arose  a  lustre,  beyond  that  which 
was  there,  like  an  horizon,  which  is  growing 
bright.  And  as  at  rise  of  early  evening  new  ap¬ 
pearances  begin  in  the  heavens,  so  that  the 
sight  seems  and  seems  not  true,  it  seemed  to  me 
that  there  I  began  to  see  new  subsistences,  and 
a  circle  forming  outside  the  other  two  circum¬ 
ferences.  O  true  sparkling  of  the  Holy  Spirit! 
how  sudden  and  glowing  it  became  to  my  eyes, 
which,  vanquished,  endured  it  not!  But  Be¬ 
atrice  showed  herself  to  me  so  beautiful  and 
smiling  that  it  must  be  left  among  those  sights 
which  followed  not  my  memory. 

82.  Therefrom  my  eyes  regained  power  to 
raise  themselves  again,  and  I  saw  myself,  alone 
with  my  Lady,  translated  to  more  exalted  sal¬ 
vation.  That  I  was  more  uplifted  I  perceived 
clearly  by  the  fiery  smile  of  the  star,  which 
seemed  to  me  ruddier  than  its  wont.  With  all 
my  heart  and  with  that  speech  which  is  one 
in  all  men,  I  made  to  God  a  holocaust  such  as 
was  befitting  to  the  new  grace;  and  the  ardor 
of  the  sacrifice  was  not  yet  exhausted  in  my 
breast  before  I  knew  that  offering  had  been  ac¬ 
cepted  and  propitious:  for  with  such  a  glow 
and  such  a  ruddiness  splendors  appeared  to  me 
within  two  rays,  that  I  said:  “O  Helios,  who 
dost  so  adorn  them!” 

97.  Even  as,  distinct  with  less  and  greater 
lights,  the  Galaxy  so  whitens  between  the  poles 
of  the  world  that  it  makes  even  the  wise  to 
question,  thus,  constellated  in  the  depth  of 
Mars,  those  rays  made  the  venerable  sign 
which  joining  of  quadrants  in  a  circle  make. 
Here  my  memory  overcomes  my  genius,  for 
that  Cross  was  flashing  forth  Christ,  so  that  I 
know  not  to  find  worthy  example.  But  he  who 


PARADISE 


128 

takes  his  cross  and  follows  Christ  shall  yet  ex¬ 
cuse  me  for  that  which  I  omit,  when  he  be¬ 
holds  Christ  lightening  in  that  glow. 

109.  From  horn  to  horn,1  and  between  the 
top  and  the  base,  lights  were  moving,  brightly 
scintillating  as  they  met  together  and  in  their 
passing  by.  Thus  here  are  seen  the  atoms  of 
bodies,  straight  and  athwart,  swift  and  slow, 
changing  appearance,  long  and  short,  moving 
through  the  sunbeam,  wherewith  sometimes 
the  shade  is  striped  which  people  with  skill  and 
art  contrive  for  their  protection. 

1 18.  And  as  a  viol  or  harp,  strung  in  accord 
of  many  strings,  makes  a  sweet  tinkling  to  one 
by  whom  the  tune  is  not  caught,  thus  from  the 
lights  which  there  appeared  to  me  a  melody 
was  gathered  through  the  Cross,  which  rapt 
me  without  my  understanding  the  hymn.  I 
was  indeed  aware  that  it  was  of  lofty  praise, 
because  there  came  to  me:  “Arise  and  con¬ 
quer  !”  as  to  one  who  understands  not,  and  yet 
hears.  I  was  so  enamoured  therewith  that  un¬ 
til  then  there  had  not  been  anything  which  had 
fettered  me  with  such  sweet  bonds.  Perchance 
my  word  appears  too  daring,  in  setting  lower 
the  pleasure  from  the  beautiful  eyes,  gazing 
into  which  my  desire  has  repose.  But  he  who 
considers  that  the  living  seals  of  every  beauty 
have  more  effect  the  higher  they  are,  and  that 
I  had  not  there  turned  round  to  those  eyes,2 
may  excuse  me  for  that  whereof  I  accuse  my¬ 
self  in  order  to  excuse  myself,  and  may  see  that 
I  speak  truth;  for  the  holy  pleasure  is  not  ex¬ 
cluded  here,  because  it  becomes  the  purer  as 
it  mounts. 

CANTO  XV 

A  benign  will,  wherein  the  love  which  right¬ 
eously  inspires  always  manifests  itself,  as  cu¬ 
pidity3  does  in  the  evil  will,  imposed  silence  on 
that  sweet  lyre,  and  quieted  the  holy  strings 
which  the  right  hand  of  heaven  slackens  and 

1  From  arm  to  arm  of  the  cross. 

2  “The  eyes  of  this  Lady,”  says  Dante,  speaking  of 
philosophy  in  the  Convito,  “are  her  demonstrations, 
which,  directed  to  the  eyes  of  the  understanding, 
enamour  the  delivered  soul.  O  sweetest  and  ineffable 
looks,  the  sudden  captors  of  the  minds  of  men, 
which  appear  in  the  demonstrations  in  the  eyes  of 
Philosophy  when  she  discourses  with  her  lovers!  Truly 
in  you  is  the  salvation  by  which  he  is  made  blessed 
who  looks  on  you,  and  is  saved  from  the  death  of  ig¬ 
norance  and  sin.”  Convito,  ii.  16,  27-37. 

See  Purgatory,  xviii.  62-75. 


draws  tight.  How  shall  those  beings  be  deaf 
to  righteous  prayers,  who,  in  order  to  give  me 
the  will  to  pray  to  them,  were  concordant  in 
silence?  Well  is  it  that  he  should  grieve  with¬ 
out  end,  who,  for  the  love  of  thing  which 
does  not  last,  despoils  himself  forever  of  this 
love. 

13.  As,  through  the  tranquil  and  pure  eve¬ 
ning  skies,  a  sudden  fire  shoots  from  time  to 
time,  moving  the  eyes  which  were  steady,  and 
seems  to  be  a  star  which  changes  place,  save 
that  from  the  region  whence  it  was  kindled 
nothing  is  lost,  and  it  lasts  short  while;  so  from 
the  arm  which  extends  on  the  right,  ran  a  star 
of  the  constellation  which  is  resplendent  there, 
down  to  the  foot  of  that  Cross.  Nor  from  its 
ribbon  did  the  gem  depart,  but  through  the  ra¬ 
dial  strip  it  ran  along  and  seemed  like  fire  be¬ 
hind  alabaster.  With  like  affection  did  the 
shade  of  Anchises  stretch  forward  (if  our  great¬ 
est  Muse  merits  belief),  when  in  Elysium  he 
perceived  his  son.4 

28.  O  sanguis  meus !  a  superinjusa  gratia 
Dei !  sicut  tibi,  cui  bis  unquam  coeli  janua  re - 
clusa ?°  Thus  that  light;  whereat  I  gave  heed 
to  it;  then  I  turned  back  my  sight  to  my  Lady, 
and  on  the  one  side  and  the  other  I  was  awe¬ 
struck;  for  within  her  eyes  was  glowing  such  a 
smile,  that  with  my  own  I  thought  to  touch  the 
depth  of  my  grace  and  of  my  Paradise. 

37.  Then,  joyous  to  hearing  and  to  sight,  the 
spirit  added  to  his  beginning  things  which  I 
did  not  understand,  so  deep  was  his  speech. 
Nor  did  he  hide  himself  from  me  by  choice,  but 
by  necessity,  for  his  conception  was  set  above 
the  mark  of  mortals.  And  when  the  bow  of  his 
ardent  affection  was  so  relaxed  that  his  speech 
descended  towards  the  mark  of  our  under¬ 
standing,  the  first  thing  that  was  understood  by 
me  was:  “Blessed  be  Thou,  Trine  and  One, 
who  art  so  greatly  courteous  in  my  seed.” 

49.  And  he  went  on:  “A  pleasing  and  long- 
felt  hunger,  derived  from  reading  in  the  great 
volume  where  white  or  dark  is  never  changed, 
thou  hast  relieved,  my  son,  within  this  light 
in  which  I  speak  to  thee,  thanks  to  her  who 
clothed  thee  with  plumes  for  the  lofty  flight. 

4  See  Aeneid,  vi.  684-7. 

5  “O  blood  of  mine!  O  overflowing  grace  of  God! 
To  whom,  as  to  thee,  was  ever  the  gate  of  Heaven 
twice  opened?”  It  is  the  spirit  of  Cacciaguida,  the 
great-great-grandfather  of  Dante,  who  thus  speaks. 


CANTO  XV 


Thou  believest  that  thy  thought  flows  to  me 
from  Him  who  is  First,  even  as  from  the  unit, 
if  that  be  known,  ray  out  the  five  and  six;1  and 
therefore  who  I  am,  and  why  I  appear  to  thee 
more  joyful  than  any  other  in  this  blithe  throng, 
thou  askest  me  not.  Thou  believest  the  truth; 
for  the  lesser  and  the  great  of  this  life  gaze  up¬ 
on  the  mirror  in  which,  before  thou  thinkest, 
thou  dost  display  thy  thought.  But  in  order 
that  the  sacred  Love,  in  which  I  watch  with 
perpetual  vision,  and  which  makes  me  thirst 
with  sweet  desire,  may  be  fulfilled  the  better, 
let  thy  voice,  secure,  bold,  and  glad,  sound 
forth  the  will,  sound  forth  the  desire,  to  which 
my  answer  is  already  decreed.” 

70. 1  turned  me  to  Beatrice,  and  she  heard  be¬ 
fore  I  spoke,  and  granted  me  a  sign  which  made 
grow  the  wings  to  my  desire.  Then  I  began 
thus:  “When  the  Prime  Equality  appeared  to 
you,  the  affection  and  the  intelligence  became 
of  one  weight  for  each  of  you;  because  the  Sun 
which  illumined  and  warmed  you  with  its  heat 
and  with  its'  light  is  of  such  equality  that  all 
similitudes  are  defective.  But  will  and  dis¬ 
course  in  mortals,  for  the  reason  which  is  man¬ 
ifest  to  you,  are  diversely  feathered  in  their 
wings.  Wherefore  I,  who  am  mortal,  feel  my¬ 
self  in  this  inequality,  and  therefore  I  give  not 
thanks,  save  with  my  heart,  for  thy  paternal 
welcome.  Truly  I  beseech  thee,  living  topaz, 
that  dost  ingem  this  precious  jewel,  that  thou 
make  me  content  with  thy  name?” 

88.  “O  leaf  of  mine,  in  whom,  while  only 
awaiting,  I  took  pleasure,  I  was  thy  root.”  Such 
a  beginning  he,  answering,  made  to  me. 

91.  Then  he  said  to  me:  “He  from  whom 
thy  family  is  named,2  and  who  for  a  hundred 
years  and  more  has  circled  the  mountain  on  the 
first  ledge,  was  my  son  and  was  thy  great- 
grandsire;  truly  it  behoves  that  thou  shorten 
for  him  his  long  fatigue  with  thy  works. 
Florence,  within  the  ancient  circuit  of  her 
walls  wherefrom  she  still  takes  both  tierce  and 
nones,3  was  abiding  in  peace,  sober  and  modest. 

1  See  Canto  ix.  73-75. 

2  Alighiero,  from  whom,  it  would  appear  from  his 
station  in  Purgatory,  Dante  inherited  the  sin  of  pride, 
as  well  as  his  name. 

3  The  bell  of  the  church  called  the  Badia,  or 

Abbey,  measured  the  time  for  the  Florentines.  Tierce 

is  the  first  division  of  the  canonical  hours  of  the  day, 

from  six  to  nine;  nones,  the  third,  from  twelve  to 

three. 


She  had  not  necklace  nor  coronal,  nor  dames 
with  ornamented  shoes,  nor  girdle  which  was 
more  to  be  looked  at  than  the  person.  Not  yet 
did  the  daughter  at  her  birth  cause  fear  to  the 
father,  for  the  time  and  dowry  did  not  outrun 
due  measure  on  this  side  and  that.  She  has  not 
houses  empty  of  families;  nor  had  Sardanapa- 
lus1 *  yet  arrived  there  to  show  what  may  be  done 
in  a  chamber.  Not  yet  by  your  Uccellatoio  was 
Montemalo  surpassed,  which,  as  it  has  been 
surpassed  in  its  rise,  shall  be  so  in  its  fall/’  I 
saw  Bellincion  Berti6 *  go  girt  with  leather  and 
bone,  and  his  dame  come  from  her  mirror 
without  a  painted  face.  And  I  saw  him  of  the 
Nerli,  and  him  of  the  Vecchio,’  contented 
with  the  unlined  skin,  and  their  dames  with 
the  spindle  and  the  thread.  O  fortunate 
women!  Each  one  was  sure  of  her  burial  place; 
and  as  yet  no  one  was  deserted  in  her  bed  for 
France.  One  over  the  cradle  kept  her  careful 
watch,  and,  comforting,  she  used  the  idiom 
which  first  amuses  fathers  and  mothers.  An¬ 
other,  drawing  the  tresses  from  her  distaff,  told 
to  her  household  tales  of  the  Trojans,  of  Fie- 
sole,  and  of  Rome.  A  Cianghella,  a  Lapo  Sal- 
terello*  would  then  have  been  held  as  great  a 
marvel  as  Cincinnatus  or  Cornelia  would  be 
now. 

130.  “To  so  reposeful,  to  so  fair  a  life  of  cit¬ 
izens,  to  such  a  trusty  community,  to  such  a 
sweet  inn,  Mary,  called  on  with  loud  cries,0 
gave  me;  and  in  your  ancient  Baptistery  I  be¬ 
came  at  once  a  Christian  and  Cacciaguida.  Mo- 
ronto  was  my  brother,  and  Eliseo;  my  dame 
came  to  me  from  the  valley  of  the  Po,  and 
thence  was  thy  surname.  Afterward  I  followed 
the  emperor  Conrad,10  and  he  belted  me  of  his 
soldiery,  so  much  by  good  deeds  did  I  come 
into  his  favor.  Behind  him  I  went  against  the 

4  A  symbol  of  luxury  and  effeminacy. 

5  The  view  from  Montemalo  (Monte  Mario)  of 
Rome  in  its  splendor  was  not  yet  surpassed  by  that 
of  Florence  from  the  height  of  Uccellatoio. 

0  Bellincion  Berti  was  “an  honorable  citizen  of  Flor¬ 
ence”  and  “a  noble  soldier.” 

7  Two  ancient  and  honored  families. 

8  Cianghella  was  a  contemporary  of  Dante:  “a  most 
arrogant  and  intolerable  woman,  and  very  wanton  in 
her  life.”  Lapo  Salterello  was  a  lawyer  and  judge:  “a 
rash  and  bad  citizen,  a  litigious  and  tonguey  man.” 
Cf.  Canto  xvii.  61-63. 

9  The  Virgin,  called  on  in  the  pains  of  childbirth. 
Cf.  Purgatory,  xx.  19-21. 

10  Conrad  III  of  Swabia.  In  1147  he  joined  in  the 
disastrous  Second  Crusade. 


PARADISE 


iniquity  of  that  law1 2 3  whose  people  usurp  your 
jurisdiction/  through  fault  of  the  Pastors. 
There  by  that  foul  folk  was  I  released  from  the 
deceitful  world,  the  love  of  which  debases 
many  souls,  and  I  came  from  martyrdom  to 
this  peace.” 

CANTO  XVI 

O  our  petty  nobility  of  blood!  If  thou  mak- 
est  folk  glory  in  thee  down  here,  where  our 
affection  languishes,  it  will  nevermore  be  a 
marvel  to  me;  for  there,  where  appetite  is  not 
perverted,  I  mean  in  Heaven,  I  myself  gloried 
in  thee.  Truly  art  thou  a  cloak  which  quickly 
shortens,  so  that,  if  naught  be  added  from  day 
to  day,  Time  goes  round  about  thee  with  his 
shears. 

io.  With  the  You?  which  Rome  was  first  to 
tolerate,  in  which  her  family  least  perseveres, 
my  words  began  again.  Whereat  Beatrice,  who 
was  a  little  withdrawn,  smiling,  seemed  like 
her,  who  coughed  at  the  first  fault  that  is  writ¬ 
ten  of  Guenever.4 * 1  began:  “You  are  my  father, 
you  give  me  all  confidence  to  speak;  you  uplift 
me  so  that  I  am  more  than  I.  By  so  many 
streams  is  my  mind  filled  with  gladness  that 
it  makes  of  itself  a  joy,  in  that  it  can  bear  this 
and  not  burst.  Tell  me  then,  my  beloved  fore¬ 
father,  who  were  your  ancestors,  and  what 
were  the  years  that  were  reckoned  in  your  boy¬ 
hood.  Tell  me  of  the  sheepfold  of  St.  John,1' 
how  large  it  was  then,  and  who  were  the  peo¬ 
ple  within  it  worthy  of  the  highest  seats.” 

28.  As  a  coal  is  quickened  into  flame  at  the 
breathing  of  the  winds,  so  I  saw  that  light  glow 
at  my  blandishments;  and  as  it  became  more 
beautiful  to  my  eyes,  so  with  voice  more  sweet 
and  soft,  but  not  with  this  modern  speech,  it 
said  to  me:  “From  that  day  on  which  Ave  was 
said,  unto  the  child-birth  in  which  my  mother, 
who  now  is  sainted,  was  lightened  of  me  with 
whom  she  had  been  burdened,  this  fire  had 
come  to  its  Lion6  five  hundred,  fifty,  and  thirty 

1  The  law  of  Mahomet. 

2  In  the  Holy  Land. 

3  The  plural  pronoun,  used  as  a  mark  of  respect. 

4  Beatrice  is  observant,  like  the  Dame  de  Malehaut, 

who  coughed  at  seeing  the  first  kiss -received  by  Queen 

Guenever  from  Sir  Lancelot. 

"  Florence,  whose  patron  saint  was  St.  John  the 

Baptist. 

°  The  sign  Leo  in  the  zodiac,  appropriate  to  Mars. 


times  to  reinflame  itself  beneath  his  paw.7 *  My 
ancestors  and  I  were  born  in  the  place  where 
the  last  ward  is  first  reached  by  him  who  runs 
in  your  annual  game.s  Let  it  suffice  thee  to  hear 
this  of  my  elders;  as  to  who  they  were,  and 
whence  they  came  hither,  silence  is  more  be¬ 
coming  than  speech. 

46.  “All  those  able  to  bear  arms  who  at  that 
time  were  there,  between  Mars  and  the  Bap¬ 
tist,9  were  the  fifth  of  them  who  are  living.  But 
the  citizenship,  which  is  now  mixed  with 
Campi,  with  Certaldo,  and  with  Fighine,10  was 
to  be  seen  pure  in  the  lowest  artisan.  Oh,  how 
much  better  it  would  be  that  those  folk  of 
whom  I  speak  were  neighbors,  and  to  have 
your  boundary  at  Galluzzo  and  at  Trespiano, ” 
than  to  have  them  within,  and  to  endure  the 
stench  of  the  churl  of  Aguglione,12  and  of  him 
of  Signa,  who  already  has  his  eye  sharp  for  bar¬ 
ratry! 

58.  “If  the  folk  who  are  the  most  degenerate 
in  the  world  had  not  been  as  a  stepdame  unto 
Caesar,  but  like  a  mother  benignant  to  her  son, 
there  is  one  who  has  become  a  Florentine,  and 
is  a  money-changer  and  trader,  who  would 
have  been  turned  back  to  Simifonti,13  where 
his  grandsire  used  to  go  about  begging;  Mon- 
temurlo  would  still  belong  to  its  Counts,  the 
Cerchi  would  be  in  the  parish  of  Acone,  and 
perhaps  the  Buondelmonti  in  Valdigreve.14 
The  intermingling  of  persons  was  ever  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  harm  to  the  city,  as  the  food  which 
is  loaded  on  is  to  the  body.  And  a  blind  bull 
falls  more  headlong  than  the  blind  lamb;  and 

*  Five  hundred  and  eighty  revolutions  of  Mars  are 
accomplished  in  a  few  months  more  than  ten  hundred 
and  ninety  years. 

8  The  races  run  along  the  Corso  on  June  24.  the 
festival  of  St.  John  the  Baptist. 

9  Between  the  Ponte  Vecchio,  at  the  head  of  which 
stood  the  statue  of  Mars,  and  the  Baptistery — two 
points  marking  the  circuit  of  the  ancient  walls. 

10  Small  towns  in  the  territory  of  Florence. 

11  Galluzzo  and  Trespiano  are  villages  two  or  three 
miles  from  Florence. 

12  The  churl  of  Aguglione  was  a  lawyer  named 
Baldo,  who  became  one  of  the  priors  of  Florence  in 
1311.  He  of  Signa  is  supposed  to  have  been  one  Boni- 
fazio,  who  “sold  his  favors  and  offices.” 

13  A  stronghold  in  the  Val  d’Elsa. 

14  The  Conti  Guidi,  unable  to  defend  their  strong¬ 
hold  of  Montemurlo  from  the  Pistoians,  had  been 
compelled  to  sell  it  to  the  Florentines.  The  Cerchi 
and  the  Buondelmonti  had  been  forced  by  the  Flor¬ 
entine  Commune  to  surrender  their  fortresses  and 
to  take  up  their  abode  in  the  city. 


CANTO  XVI 


oftentimes  one  sword  cuts  more  and  better 
than  five. 

73.  If  thou  regard  Luni  and  Urbisaglia,  how 
they  have  gone,  and  how  Chiusi  and  Siniga- 
glia  are  going  their  way  after  them,  it  will  not 
appear  to  thee  a  strange  thing  or  a  hard,  to 
hear  how  families  are  undone,  since  even  cities 
have  their  term.  All  things  of  yours  have  their 
death  even  as  yourselves;  but  it  is  concealed  in 
some  that  last  long,  while  lives  are  short.  And 
as  the  revolution  of  the  heaven  of  the  Moon 
covers  and  uncovers  the  shores  without  a 
pause,  so  Fortune  does  with  Florence.  Where¬ 
fore  what  I  shall  tell  of  the  high  Florentines, 
whose  fame  is  hidden  by  time,  should  not  ap¬ 
pear  to  thee  a  marvellous  thing.  I  saw  the 
Ughi,  and  I  saw  the  Catellini,  Filippi,  Greci, 
Ormanni,  and  Alberichi,  even  in  their  decline, 
illustrious  citizens;  and  I  saw,  as  great  as  they 
were  old,  with  him  of  La  Sannella,  him  of 
L’  Area,  and  Soldanieri,  and  Ardinghi,  and 
Bostichi.  Over  the  gate  (which  at  present  is 
laden  with  new  felony1  of  such  great  weight 
that  soon  there  will  be  jettison  from  the  bark), 
were  the  Ravignani,  from  whom  the  Count 
Guido  is  descended,  and  whosoever  has  since 
taken  the  name  of  the  high  Bellincionje.2  He 
of  La  Pressa  knew  already  how  one  should 
rule,  and  Galigaio  already  had  in  his  house  the 
gilded  hilt  and  pummel.  Great  were  already 
the  column  of  the  Vair,3  the  Sacchetti,  Giuochi, 
Fifanti,  and  Barucci,  and  Galli,  and  they  who 
blush  for  the  bushel.4  The  stock  from  which 
the  Calfucci  sprang  was  already  great,3  and 
already  the  Sizii  and  Arrigucci  had  been 
drawn  to  the  curule  chairs. 

109.  “Oh,  how  great  did  I  see  those  who 
have  been  undone  by  their  pride!8  and  the 
balls  of  gold1  made  Florence  flourish  with  all 

1  Above  the  Gate  of  St.  Peter  rose  the  walls  of  the 
abode  of  the  Cerchi,  who,  making  themselves  the 
head  of  the  White  faction,  became  chief  promoters  of 
civil  strife  in  Florence. 

2  See  Canto  xv.  112,  and  Hell,  xvi.  37. 

3  The  family  of  the  Pigli,  whose  scutcheon  was  di¬ 
vided  longitudinally  by  a  stripe  of  the  heraldic  repre¬ 
sentation  of  the  fur  called  vair. 

4  One  of  the  Chiaramontesi,  being  the  officer  in 
charge  of  the  sale  of  salt  for  the  Commune,  had 
cheated  both  the  Commune  and  the  people  by  using 
a  false  measure.  See  Purgatory,  xii.  104,  105. 

0  The  house  of  the  Donati. 

®  The  Uberti  (see  Hell,  x). 

‘  The  Lamberti,  who  bore  golden  balls  on  their 
shields.  See  Hell,  xxviii.  103-m. 


their  great  deeds.  So  did  the  fathers  of  those 
who,  whenever  your  church  is  vacant,  become 
fat  by  staying  in  consistory.8  The  overweening 
race  which  is  as  a  dragon  behind  him  who 
flies,  and  to  him  who  shows  tooth  or  purse  is 
gentle  as  a  lamb,8  already  was  coming  up,  but 
from  small  folk,  so  that  it  did  not  please  Uber- 
tin  Donato  that  this  father-in-law  afterward 
made  him  their  kinsman.  Already  had  Ca- 
ponsacco  descended  into  the  market  place 
down  from  Fiesole,  and  already  was  Giuda  a 
good  citizen,  and  Infangato.10 1  will  tell  a  thing 
incredible  and  true;  into  the  little  circle  one 
entered  by  a  gate  which  was  named  for  those 
of  La  Pera.11  Everyone  who  bears  the  beautiful 
ensign  of  the  great  baron12  whose  name  and 
whose  worth  the  feast  of  Thomas  keeps  fresh, 
from  him  had  knighthood  and  privilege;  al¬ 
though  to-day  he  who  binds  it  with  a  border 
unites  himself  with  the  populace.13  Already 
there  were  Gualterotti  and  Importuni;  and  the 
Borgo14  would  even  now  be  more  quiet,  if  they 
had  gone  fasting  of  new  neighbors.  The  house 
of  which  was  born  your  weeping,15  by  reason 
of  its  just  indignation  which  has  slain  you,  and 
put  an  end  to  your  glad  living,  was  honored, 
both  itself  and  its  consorts.  Oh  Buondelmonte, 
how  ill  didst  thou  flee  its  nuptials  through  the 
persuasions  of  another!18  Many  would  be  glad 

8  The  Visdomini  and  the  Tosinghi,  guardians  of 
the  bishopric  of  Florence,  who  had  the  right,  during 
any  vacancy  of  the  see,  of  administering  its  revenues, 
and  thus  after  the  death  of  a  bishop,  by  securing  delay 
in  the  appointment  of  his  successor,  grew  fat  on  the 
episcopal  revenues. 

9  The  Adimari. 

10  These  three  names  mean  “Head  in  bag,”  “Judas,” 
and  “Bemired.” 

11  The  Peruzzi,  who  bore  the  pear  as  a  charge  upon 
their  scutcheon. 

12  Hugh,  imperial  vicar  of  Tuscany  in  the  time  of 
Otho  II  and  Otho  III.  He  died  on  St.  Thomas’s  Day, 
December  21,  1006. 

13  Giano  della  Bella,  the  great  leader  of  the  Flor¬ 
entine  commonalty  in  the  latter  years  of  the  thir¬ 
teenth  century.  He  bore  the  arms  of  Hugh  with  a 
border  of  gold. 

14  The  Borgo  Santi  Apostoli  would  have  been  more 
tranquil  if  the  Buondelmonti  had  not  come  to  take 
up  their  abode  in  it  after  the  destruction  of  their 
stronghold  of  Montebuono. 

laThe  Amidei  had  a  long  and  bitter  feud  with  the 
Buondelmonti  that  divided  the  whole  city. 

ll!  The  quarrel  between  the  Amidei  and  the  Buon¬ 
delmonti  arose  from  Buondelmonte  dei  Buondel- 
monti’s  slighting  a  daughter  of  the  former  house,  to 
whom  he  was  betrothed,  for  a  daughter  of  the  Do¬ 
nati.  induced  thereto  by  her  mother.  This  was  in 
1215. 


PARADISE 


who  now  are  sorrowful,  if  God  had  conceded 
thee  to  the  Ema’  the  first  time  that  thou 
earnest  to  the  city.  But  it  behoved  that  Florence 
in  her  last  hour  of  peace  should  offer  a  victim 
to  that  mutilated  stone  which  guards  the 
bridge/ 

148.  “With  these  families,  and  with  others 
with  them,  I  saw  Florence  in  such  repose  that 
she  had  no  occasion  why  she  should  weep. 
With  these  families  I  saw  her  people  so  glori¬ 
ous  and  so  just  that  the  lily  was  never  set  re¬ 
versed  upon  the  staff,  nor  made  vermilion  by 
divisions.” 

CANTO  XVII 

As  he  who  still  makes  fathers  chary  toward 
their  sons  came  to  Clymene,  to  ascertain  con¬ 
cerning  that  which  he  had  heard  against  him¬ 
self;3  such  was  I,  and  such  was  I  perceived  to  be 
both  by  Beatrice,  and  by  the  holy  lamp  which 
previously  for  my  sake  had  changed  its  station. 
Wherefore  my  Lady  said  to  me:  “Send  forth 
the  flame  of  thy  desire  in  such  wise  that  it  may 
issue  imprinted  well  by  the  internal  stamp;  not 
in  order  that  our  knowledge  may  increase 
through  thy  speech,  but  in  order  that  thou  ac¬ 
custom  thyself  to  tell  thy  thirst,  so  that  one 
may  give  thee  drink.” 

13.  “O  dear  root  of  me,  who  so  upliftest  thy¬ 
self  that,  even  as  earthly  minds  see  that  two 
obtuse  angles  can  not  be  contained  in  a  triangle, 
so  thou,  gazing  upon  the  Point  to  which  all 
times  are  present,  dost  see  contingent  things, 
ere  in  themselves  they  are;  while  I  was  con¬ 
joined  with  Virgil,  up  over  the  mountain 
which  cures  the  souls,  and  while  descending  in 
the  dead  world,  grave  words  were  said  to  me 
of  my  future  life;  although  I  feel  myself  truly 
four-square  against  the  blows  of  chance.  Where¬ 
fore  my  wish  would  be  contented  by  hearing 
what  fortune  is  drawing  near  for  me;  for  ar¬ 
row  foreseen  comes  more  slack.”  Thus  said  I 
unto  that  same  light  which  had  spoken  to  me 

1  A  little  stream  that  has  to  be  crossed  in  coming 
from  Montebuono  to  Florence. 

2  That  victim  was  Buondelmonte  himself,  slain  by 
the  outraged  Amidei,  at  the  foot  of  the  mutilated 
statue  of  Mars. 

3  Phaethon,  son  of  Clymene  by  Apollo,  having  been 

told  that  Apollo  was  not  his  father,  went  to  his 

mother  to  ascertain  the  truth — with  calamitous  re¬ 

sults.  See  Hell ,  xvii.  107;  Purgatory,  iv.  72. 


before,  and,  as  Beatrice  willed,  was  my  wish 
confessed. 

31.  Not  with  ambiguous  terms  in  which  the 
foolish  folk  of  old  were  entangled,  before  the 
Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  sins  had 
been  slain,  but  with  clear  words  and  with  plain 
speech  that  paternal  love,  enclosed  and  made 
manifest  by  its  own  smile,  made  answer: 

37.  “Contingency,  which  does  not  extend 
outside  the  volume  of  your  matter,  is  all  de¬ 
picted  in  the  Eternal  Vision.  Yet  thence  it  does 
not  take  necessity,  more  than  does  a  ship  which 
is  going  down  the  stream  from  the  eye  in 
which  it  is  mirrored.  Therefrom,  even  as  sweet 
harmony  comes  to  the  ear  from  an  organ, 
comes  to  my  sight  the  time  that  is  preparing 
for  thee.  As  Hippolytus  departed  from  Athens, 
by  reason  of  his  pitiless  and  perfidious  step¬ 
mother,  so  from  Florence  thou  must  needs  de¬ 
part.  This  is  willed,  this  is  already  sought  for, 
and  will  soon  be  brought  to  pass,  by  him4 *  who 
meditates  it  there  where  every  day  Christ  is 
bought  and  sold.  The  blame  will  follow  the 
injured  party,  in  outcry,  as  is  wont;  but  the 
vengeance  will  be  testimony  to  the  truth  which 
dispenses  it.  Thou  shalt  leave  everything  be¬ 
loved  most  dearly;  and  this  is  the  arrow  which 
the  bow  of  exile  shoots  first.  Thou  shalt  make 
proof  how  the  bread  of  others  savors  of  salt, 
and  how  hard  a  path  is  the  descending  and  the 
mounting  of  another's  stairs.  And  that  which 
will  weigh  heaviest  upon  thy  shoulders  will  be 
the  evil  and  senseless  compan 2y1*  with  which 
thou  wilt  fall  into  this  valley;  which  all  un¬ 
grateful,  all  mad  and  malevolent  will  turn 
against  thee;  but  short  while  after,  it,  not  thou, 
shall  have  the  forehead  red  therefor.  Of  its 
bestiality,  its  own  proceduce  will  afTord  the 
proof;  so  that  it  will  be  well-becoming  for  thee 
to  have  made  thee  a  party  by  thyself. 

70.  “Thy  first  refuge  and  first  inn  shall  be  the 
courtesy  of  the  great  Lombard6  who  bears  the 
holy  bird  upon  the  ladder,  who  will  have  for 
thee  such  benign  regard  that,  in  doing  and  in 
asking,  between  you  two,  that  will  be  first, 
which  between  others  is  the  slowest.  With  him 

4  Boniface  VIII. 

5  The  other  Florentine  exiles  of  the  party  of  the 
Whites. 

0  Bartolommeo  della  Scala,  lord  of  Verona,  whose 
armorial  bearings  were  the  imperial  eagle  upon  a 
ladder. 


CANTO  XVIII 


shalt  thou  see  one,1 2 *  who  was  so  impressed,  at 
his  birth,  by  this  strong  star,'  that  his  deeds 
will  be  notable.  Not  yet  are  the  people  aware 
of  him,  because  of  his  young  age;  for  these 
wheels  have  revolved  around  him  only  nine 
years.  But  ere  the  Gascon  cheat  the  lofty  Henry" 
some  sparkles  of  his  virtue  shall  appear,  in  his 
caring  not  for  money  nor  for  toils.  His  mag¬ 
nificences  shall  hereafter  be  so  known,  that  his 
enemies  will  not  be  able  to  keep  their  tongues 
mute  about  them.  Look  thou  to  him,  and  to  his 
benefits;  by  him  shall  many  people  be  trans¬ 
formed,  rich  and  mendicant  changing  condi¬ 
tion.  And  thou  shalt  bear  hence  written  of  him 
in  thy  mind,  but  thou  shalt  not  tell  it,” — and 
he  told  things  incredible  to  those  who  shall  be 
present.  Then  he  added:  “Son,  these  are  the 
glosses  on  which  was  said  to  thee:  behold  the 
snares  which  are  hidden  behind  few  revolu¬ 
tions.  Yet  I  would  not  that  thou  hate  thy  neigh¬ 
bors,  because  thy  life  has  a  future  far  beyond 
the  punishment  of  their  perfidies.” 

ioo.  When  by  its  silence  that  holy  soul  showed 
it  had  finished  putting  the  woof  into  that  web 
which  I  had  held  out  to  it,  warped,  I  began,  as 
he  who,  in  doubt,  longs  for  counsel  from  a  per¬ 
son  who  sees,  and  wills  uprightly,  and  loves: 
“I  see  well,  my  Father,  how  the  time  spurs  on 
toward  me  to  give  me  such  a  blow  as  is  heavi¬ 
est  to  him  who  most  deserts  himself;  where¬ 
fore  it  is  good  that  I  arm  me  with  foresight,  so 
that  if  the  place  most  dear  be  taken  from  me, 
I  may  not  lose  the  others  by  my  songs.  Down 
through  the  world  of  endless  bitterness,  and 
over  the  mountain  from  whose  fair  summit  the 
eyes  of  my  Lady  uplifted  me,  and  then  through 
heaven  from  light  to  light,  I  have  learned  that 
which,  if  I  tell  again,  will  have  for  many  a 
savor  of  great  bitterness;  and  if  I  am  a  timid 
friend  to  the  truth,  I  fear  to  lose  life  among 
those  who  will  call  this  time  ancient.” 

1 2 1.  The  light,  within  which  my  treasure 
that  I  had  found  there  was  smiling,  first  be¬ 
came  flashing  as  a  mirror  of  gold  in  the  sun¬ 

1  Can  Grande  della  Scala,  the  youngest  brother  of 
Bartolommeo,  and  his  successor  as  lord  of  Verona. 
He  was  made  Imperial  Vicar  in  1311,  and  on  him 
the  hopes  of  the  Ghibellines  rested. 

2  Mars. 

2  Before  the  Gascon  Pope  Clement  V,  under  whom 

the  papal  see  was  established  at  Avignon,  shall  deceive 
Henry  VII. 


beam;  then  it  replied:  “A  conscience  dark, 
either  with  its  own  or  with  another’s  shame, 
will  indeed  feel  thy  speech  to  be  harsh;  but 
nevertheless,  all  falsehood  laid  aside,  make  thy 
whole  vision  manifest,  and  let  then  the  scratch¬ 
ing  be  where  the  itch  is;  for  if  at  the  first  taste 
thy  voice  shall  be  molestful,  afterwards,  when 
it  shall  be  digested,  it  will  leave  vital  nourish¬ 
ment.  This  cry  of  thine  shall  do  as  the  wind, 
which  strikes  hardest  the  loftiest  summits;  and 
that  is  no  little  argument  of  honor.  Therefore 
only  the  souls  which  are  known  of  fame  have 
been  shown  to  thee  within  these  wheels,  upon 
the  mountain,  and  in  the  woeful  valley;  for  the 
mind  of  him  who  hears  rests  not,  nor  confirms 
its  faith,  by  an  example  which  has  its  root  un¬ 
known  and  hidden,  nor  by  other  argument 
which  is  not  apparent.” 

CANTO  XVIII 

Now  was  that  blessed  mirror  enjoying  only 
its  own  thoughts,4  and  I  was  tasting  mine,  tem¬ 
pering  the  bitter  with  the  sweet,  and  that  Lady 
who  was  leading  me  to  God  said:  “Change  thy 
thought;  think  that  I  am  near  to  Him  who 
lightens  the  burden  of  every  wrong.”  I  turned 
me  round  at  the  loving  sound  of  my  Comfort, 
and  what  love  I  then  saw  in  the  holy  eyes,  I 
here  leave  it;  not  only  because  I  distrust  my 
own  speech,  but  because  of  the  memory  which 
cannot  return  so  far  above  itself,  unless  another 
guide  it.  Thus  much  of  that  moment  can  I  re¬ 
count,  that,  again  beholding  her,  my  affection 
was  free  from  every  other  desire. 

16.  While  the  Eternal  Pleasure,  which  was 
raying  directly  upon  Beatrice,  was  contenting 
me  with  its  second  aspect  from  her  fair  face, 
vanquishing  me  with  the  light  of  a  smile,  she 
said  to  me:  “Turn  thee,  and  listen,  for  not  only 
in  my  eyes  is  Paradise.” 

22.  As  sometimes  here  the  affection  is  seen  in 
the  countenance,  if  it  be  so  great  that  the  whole 
soul  is  taken  up  by  it,  so  in  the  flaming  of  the 
holy  effulgence  to  which  I  turned  me,  I  recog¬ 
nized  the  will  in  it  still  to  discourse  somewhat 
with  me.  It  began:  “In  this  fifth  seat  of  the 
tree,  which  has  life  from  its  top,  and  always 
bears  fruit,  and  never  loses  leaf,  are  blessed 

4  See  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  34, 
A  1. 

3  The  Heaven  of  Mars,  the  fifth  resting-place  in 
the  ascent  of  Heaven. 


PARADISE 


spirits,  who  below,  before  they  came  to  heaven, 
were  of  great  renown,  so  that  every  Muse 
would  be  rich  with  them.  Therefore  gaze  up¬ 
on  the  arms  of  the  Cross;  he,  whom  I  shall 
name,  will  there  do  the  act  which  in  a  cloud  its 
own  swift  fire  does.”  At  the  naming  of  Joshua, 
even  as  it  was  done,  I  saw  a  light  drawn  along 
the  Cross;  nor  was  the  word  noted  by  me  be¬ 
fore  the  fact.  And  at  the  name  of  the  lofty 
Maccabeus1  I  saw  another  move  revolving,  and 
gladness  was  the  whip  of  the  top.  Thus  for 
Charlemagne  and  for  Roland  my  attentive  gaze 
followed  two  of  them,  as  the  eye  follows  its 
falcon  as  he  flies.  Afterward  William,  and  Re- 
nouard/  and  the  duke  Godfrey,  and  Robert 
Guiscard4  drew  my  sight  along  that  Cross. 
Then,  moving,  and  mingling  among  the  other 
lights,  the  soul  which  had  spoken  with  me 
showed  me  how  great  an  artist  it  was  among 
the  singers  of  the  heaven. 

52. 1  turned  me  round  to  my  right  side  to  see 
in  Beatrice  my  duty  signified  either  by  speech 
or  by  act,  and  I  saw  her  eyes  so  clear,  so  joyous, 
that  her  semblance  surpassed  her  other  and  her 
latest  wont.  And  even  as,  through  feeling  more 
delight  in  doing  well,  a  man  from  day  to  day 
becomes  aware  that  his  virtue  makes  advance, 
so  I,  seeing  that  miracle  more  adorned,  be¬ 
came  aware  that  my  circling  round  together 
with  the  heaven  had  increased  its  arc.  And 
such  as  is  the  change,  in  brief  passage  of  time, 
in  a  pale  lady,  when  her  countenance  discharges 
itself  of  the  load  of  bashfulness,  such  was  there 
to  my  eyes,  when  I  turned,  because  of  the 
whiteness  of  the  temperate  sixth  star  which 
had  received  me  within  itself.0  I  saw,  within 
that  torch  of  Jove,  the  sparkling  of  the  love 
which  was  there,  shaping  out  our  speech  to  my 
eyes. 

73.  And  as  birds,  risen  from  the  shore,  as  if 
rejoicing  together  at  their  pasture,  make  of 
themselves  a  troop  now  round,  now  of  other 
shape,  so  within  the  lights  holy  creatures  were 

1  See  I  Maccabees,  2-9. 

2  William,  Count  of  Orange,  and  Renouard  his 
companion  in  arms,  paladins  of  Charlemagne. 

3  Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  the  leader  of  the  First  Cru¬ 
sade. 

4  The  founder  of  the  Norman  kingdom  of  Naples. 

J  The  change  was  from  the  red  light  of  Mars  to 

the  white  light  of  Jupiter,  a  planet  called  by  astrol¬ 
ogers  “temperate,”  as  lying  between  the  heat  of 
Mars  and  the  coldness  of  Saturn. 


singing  as  they  flew,  and  in  their  figures  made 
of  themselves  now  D,  now  I,  now  L.b  At  first, 
as  they  sang,  they  moved  to  their  own  notes, 
then  as  they  became  one  of  these  characters, 
they  stopped  a  little,  and  were  silent. 

82.  O  divine  Pegasea,'  who  makest  the  wits 
of  men  glorious,  and  renderest  them  long- 
lived,  as  they,  through  thee,  the  cities  and  the 
kingdoms,  illumine  me  with  thyself  that  I  may 
set  forth  their  shapes,  as  I  have  conceived  them; 
let  thy  power  appear  in  these  brief  verses! 

88.  They  showed  themselves  then  in  five  times 
seven  vowels  and  consonants;  and  I  noted  the 
parts  as  they  seemed  as  if  spoken  to  me.  Dili- 
gite  justitiam  were  the  first  verb  and  noun  of 
all  the  picture;  qui  judicatis  terrain  were  the 
last.  Then  in  the  M  of  the  fifth  word  they  re¬ 
mained  arranged,  so  that  Jove  seemed  silver 
patterned  there  with  gold.  And  I  saw  other 
lights  descending  where  the  top  of  the  M  was, 
and  become  quiet  there,  singing,  I  believe,  the 
Good  which  moves  them  to  Itself.  Then,  as  on 
the  striking  of  burning  logs  rise  innumerable 
sparks,  wherefrom  the  foolish  are  wont  to 
draw  auguries,  so  thence  there  seemed  to  rise 
again  more  than  a  thousand  lights,  and  mount, 
some  much  and  some  little,  according  as  the 
Sun  which  kindles  them  allotted  to  them;  and, 
each  having  become  quiet  in  its  place,  I  saw  the 
head  and  the  neck  of  an  eagle  represented  by 
that  patterned  fire.  He  who  paints  there,  has 
none  who  may  guide  Him,  but  He  Himself 
guides,  and  from  Him  is  recognized  that  virtue 
which  is  form  for  the  nests.  The  rest  of  the 
blessed  spirits,  which  at  first  seemed  content  to 
lily  themselves  on  the  M,  with  a  slight  motion 
followed  out  the  imprint. 

1 15.  O  sweet  star,  what  and  how  many  gems 
made  plain  to  me  that  our  justice  is  the  effect 
of  that  heaven  which  thou  dost  ingem!  Where¬ 
fore  I  pray  the  Mind,  in  which  thy  motion  and 
thy  virtue  have  beginning,  that  It  look  down 
there  whence  issues  the  smoke  which  vitiates 
thy  radiance,  so  that  now,  a  second  time,  It 
may  be  wroth  at  the  buying  and  the  selling  in 
the  temple,  which  was  built  up  with  blood  and 

0  See  line  91,  infra. 

7  An  appellation  of  the  Muses  in  general,  whose 
fountain,  Hippocrene,  sprang  up  at  the  stamp  of 
Pegasus. 

8  “Love  righteousness,  ye  that  be  judges  of  the 
earth.”  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1.  1. 


CANTO  XIX 


martyrdoms.  O  soldiery  of  Heaven  whom  I 
contemplate,  pray  ye  for  those  on  earth  who 
are  all  gone  astray  after  the  bad  example!  Of 
old  it  was  the  wont  to  make  war  with  swords, 
but  now  it  is  made  by  taking  away,  now  here 
now  there,  the  bread  which  the  pitying  Father 
locks  up  from  none, 

130.  But  thou  that  writest  only  in  order  to 
cancel,  bethink  thee  that  Peter  and  Paul,  who 
died  for  the  vineyard  which  thou  art  laying 
waste,  are  still  alive.  Thou  canst  say  indeed: 
“I  have  my  desire  set  so  on  him1  who  willed  to 
live  alone,  and  for  a  dance  was  dragged  to  mar¬ 
tyrdom,  that  I  know  not  the  Fisherman  nor 
Paul.5’ 

CANTO  XIX 

With  outspread  wings  appeared  before  me 
the  beautiful  image  which  the  interwoven 
souls,  joyful  in  their  sweet  fruition,  were  mak¬ 
ing.  Each  of  them  appeared  as  a  little  ruby  on 
which  a  ray  of  the  sun  should  glow  so  enkin¬ 
dled  as  to  reflect  him  into  my  eyes.  And  that 
which  it  now  behoves  me  to  retrace,  never  did 
voice  report,  nor  ink  write,  nor  was  it  ever 
comprised  by  fancy;  for  I  saw,  and  also  heard 
the  beak  speaking,  and  uttering  with  its  voice 
both  I  and  My,  when  in  conception  it  was  We 
and  Our . 

13.  And  it  began:  “Through  being  just  and 
pious  am  I  here  exalted  to  that  glory  which  al¬ 
lows  not  itself  to  be  surpassed  by  desire;  and 
on  earth  I  left  my  memory  such  that  the  evil 
people  there  commend  it,  but  follow  not  its 
story.”  Thus  one  sole  heat  makes  itself  felt 
from  many  embers,  even  as  from  many  loves 
one  sole  sound  issued  from  that  image.  Where¬ 
on  I  at  once:  “O  perpetual  flowers  of  the  eter¬ 
nal  gladness,  ye  which  make  all  your  odors 
seem  to  me  only  one,  solve  for  me,  by  your 
breath,  the  great  fast  which  long  has  held  me 
hungering,  not  Ending  for  it  any  food  on  earth. 
Well  do  I  know  that  if  the  Divine  Justice 
makes  another  realm  in  heaven  its  mirror/ 
yours  does  not  apprehend  it  through  a  veil.  Ye 
know  how  intently  I  prepare  myself  to  listen; 
ye  know  what  is  that  doubt  which  is  so  old  a 
fast  to  me.” 

1  St.  John  the  Baptist,  whose  image  was  on  the 
florin.  Cf.  Matthew,  14.  1-12;  Mark,  6.  21-28. 

2  See  Canto  ix.  6 if. 


34.  As  a  falcon  which,  issuing  from  the  hood, 
moves  its  head,  and  claps  its  wings,  showing  its 
will,  and  making  itself  fine;  so  I  saw  this  em¬ 
blem,  which  was  woven  of  praise  of  the  Divine 
Grace,  become,  with  songs  such  as  he  knows 
who  thereabove  rejoices.  Then  it  began:  “He 
who  turned  the  compasses  at  the  verge  of  the 
world,  and  distributed  within  it  so  much  occult 
and  manifest,  could  not  so  imprint  His  Power 
on  all  the  universe  that  His  Word  should  not 
remain  in  infinite  excess.  And  this  makes  cer¬ 
tain  that  the  first  proud  one,  who  was  the  top 
of  every  creature,  through  not  awaiting  light, 
fell  immature.  And  hence  it  appears,  that  every 
lesser  nature  is  a  scant  receptacle  for  that  Good 
which  has  no  end,  and  measures  Itself  by  Itself. 
Therefore  our  vision,  which  must  needs  be  one 
of  the  rays  of  the  Mind  with  which  all  things 
are  replete,  cannot  in  its  own  nature  be  so  po¬ 
tent  as  not  to  discern  its  origin  far  beyond  that 
which  is  apparent  to  it. 

58.  “Therefore  the  sight  into  the  Eternal 
Justice  which  your  world  receives  penetrates 
within  as  the  eye  into  the  sea;  which,  though 
from  the  shore  it  can  see  the  bottom,  on  the 
main  it  sees  it  not,  and  nevertheless  it  is  there, 
but  the  depth  conceals  it.  There  is  no  light  but 
that  which  comes  from  the  serene  which  is 
never  clouded;  nay,  rather  there  is  darkness, 
either  shadow  of  the  flesh,  or  its  poison.  The 
hiding-place  is  now  open  enough  to  thee, 
which  concealed  from  thee  the  living  Justice 
concerning  which  thou  didst  make  such  fre¬ 
quent  question;  for  thou  saidst:  ‘A  man  is  born 
on  the  bank  of  the  Indus,  and  no  one  is  there 
who  may  tell  of  Christ,  nor  who  may  read,  nor 
who  may  write;  and  all  his  wishes  and  acts  are 
good,  so  far  as  human  reason  sees,  without  sin 
in  life  or  in  speech.  He  dies  unbaptized,  and 
without  faith;  where  is  this  Justice  which  con¬ 
demns  him?  where  is  his  sin  if  he  does  not  be¬ 
lieve?’  Now  who  art  thou,  that,  with  the  short 
vision  of  a  single  span,  wouldst  sit  upon  a 
bench  to  judge  a  thousand  miles  away?  As¬ 
suredly,  for  him  who  subtilizes  with  me,  if  the 
Scripture  were  not  above  you,  there  would  be 
marvellous  occasion  for  doubting.  Oh  earthly 
animals!  oh  gross  minds!3 

86.  “The  primal  Will,  which  of  Itself  is  good, 
has  never  moved  from  Itself,  which  is  the 

8Cf.  Hell,  xxxiv.  92. 


136  PARADISE 


Supreme  Good.  So  much  is  just  as  is  consonant 
with  It;  no  created  good  draws  It  to  itself,  but 
It,  raying  forth,  is  the  cause  of  that  good.” 

91.  As  the  stork  circles  above  her  nest,  after 
she  has  fed  her  brood,  and  as  the  one  that  has 
been  fed  looks  up  at  her,  such  became  the  bless¬ 
ed  image,  which  impelled  by  so  many  coun¬ 
sels  moved  its  wings,  and  I  so  raised  my  brows. 
Wheeling  it  sang,  and  said:  “As  are  my  notes 
to  thee  who  understandest  them  not,  such  is 
the  Eternal  Judgment  to  you  mortals.” 

100.  After  those  shining  flames  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  became  quiet,  still  in  the  sign  which 
made  the  Romans  reverend  to  the  world,  it  be¬ 
gan  again:  “To  this  kingdom  no  one  ever 
ascended,  who  had  not  believed  in  Christ  either 
before  or  after  he  was  nailed  to  the  tree.  But 
behold,  many  cry  Christ,  Christ,  who,  at  the 
Judgment,  shall  be  far  less  near  to  him,  than 
some  one  who  knows  not  Christ;  and  the  Ethi- 
op  will  condemn  such  Christians  when  the 
two  companies  shall  be  separated,  the  one  for¬ 
ever  rich,  and  the  other  poor.  What  may  the 
Persians  say  to  your  kings,  when  they  shall  see 
that  volume  open  in  which  was  written  all 
their  dispraises? 

1 15.  “There  shall  be  seen  among  the  deeds  of 
Albert  that  which  will  soon  set  the  pen  in  mo¬ 
tion,  by  which  the  kingdom  of  Prague  shall  be 
made  a  desert.1  There  shall  be  seen  the  woe 
which  he  who  shall  die  by  the  blow  of  a  wild 
boar  is  bringing  upon  the  Seine  by  falsifying 
the  coin.2  There  shall  be  seen  the  pride  that 
quickens  thirst,  which  makes  the  Scot  and  the 
Englishman  mad,  so  that  neither  can  keep 
within  his  own  bounds.  The  luxury  shall  be 
seen,  and  the  effeminate  living  of  him  of  Spain, 
and  of  him  of  Bohemia,  who  never  knew 
valor,  nor  wished  it.3  The  goodness  of  the  crip¬ 
ple  of  Jerusalem  shall  be  seen  marked  with  an 
I,  while  an  M  shall  mark  the  contrary.4 *  The 

1  The  devastation  of  Bohemia  in  1304,  by  Albert  of 
Austria  (Purgatory,  vi.  97ft.). 

2  After  his  defeat  at  Courtrai,  in  1302,  Philip  the 
Fair,  to  provide  himself  with  means,  debased  the  coin 
of  the  realm.  He  died  in  1314  from  the  effects  of  a 
fall  from  his  horse,  overthrown  by  a  wild  boar  in  the 
forest  of  Fontainebleau. 

3  Respectively,  Ferdinand  IV  of  Castile  and  Wen- 
ceslaus  IV  of  Bohemia.  Cf.  Purgatory,  vii.  102. 

4  The  virtues  and  vices  of  the  lame  Charles  II,  king 

of  Naples,  titular  king  of  Jerusalem,  shall  be  marked 

in  Roman  numerals.  See  Canto  viii.  82. 


avarice  and  the  cowardice  shall  be  seen  of  him 
who  guards  the  island  of  the  fire,  where  An- 
chises  ended  his  long  life;  and,  to  give  to  under¬ 
stand  how  paltry  he  is,  the  writing  for  him 
shall  be  in  abridged  letters  which  shall  note 
much  in  little  space.0  And  to  every  one  shall 
be  apparent  the  foul  deeds  of  his  uncle  and  of 
his  brother,6  who  have  dishonored  so  eminent 
a  race  and  two  crowns.  And  he  of  Portugal,7 
and  he  of  Norway8  shall  be  known  there;  and 
he  of  Rascia,9  who,  to  his  harm,  has  seen  the 
coin  of  Venice.  Oh  happy  Hungary,  if  she  al¬ 
low  herself  no  longer  to  be  maltreated!  and 
happy  Navarre,  if  she  arm  herself  with  the 
mountains  which  bind  her  round!  And  all 
should  believe  that,  for  earnest  of  this,  Nicosia 
and  Famagosta  are  now  lamenting  and  com¬ 
plaining  because  of  their  beast  which  departs 
not  from  the  side  of  the  others.”10 

CANTO  XX 

When  he  who  illumines  all  the  world  de¬ 
scends  from  our  hemisphere  so  that  the  day  on 
every  side  is  spent,  the  heaven,  which  before  is 
enkindled  by  him  alone,  suddenly  makes  itself 
again  conspicuous  with  many  lights,  wherein 
one  alone  is  shining.  And  this  act  of  heaven 
came  to  my  mind  when  the  ensign  of  the 
world  and  of  its  leaders  became  silent  in  its 
blessed  beak;  because  all  those  living  lights, 
shining  far  more,  began  songs  which  have 
lapsed  and  fallen  from  my  memory. 

13.  O  sweet  Love,  that  mantlest  thyself  with 
a  smile,  how  ardent  didst  thou  appear  in  those 
flutes  which  had  the  breath  alone  of  holy 
thoughts! 

16.  After  the  precious  and  shining  stones, 
wherewith  I  saw  the  sixth  luminary,  in- 
gemmed,  imposed  silence  on  their  angelic 
chime,  I  seemed  to  hear  the  murmur  of  a 

5  Frederick  of  Aragon,  king  of  Sicily.  See  Purgatory, 
vii.  119. 

0  James,  king  of  Majorca  and  Minorca,  and  James, 
king  of  Aragon.  See  Purgatory,  vii.  120. 

'  Dionysius,  king  of  Portugal,  to  whom  a  base  love 
of  money-getting  was  ascribed. 

8  Hakon  V,  who  cruelly  warred  with  Denmark. 

9  Rascia,  so  called  from  a  Slavonic  tribe,  which 
occupied  a  region  south  of  the  Danube,  embracing  a 
part  of  the  modern  Servia  and  Bosnia.  King  Stephen 
Ouros,  who  died  in  1307,  imitated  the  coin  of  Venice 
with  a  debased  coinage. 

10  Cities  in  Cyprus,  which  are  now  lamenting  under 
the  rule  of  Henry  II,  of  the  house  of  Lusignan. 


CANTO  XX 


stream  which  falls  down  clear  from  rock  to 
rock,  showing  the  abundance  of  its  mountain 
source.  And  as  the  sound  takes  its  form  at  the 
cithern’s  neck,  and  as  at  the  vent  of  the  bag¬ 
pipe  wind  which  enters  it,  thus,  without  pause 
of  waiting,  that  murmer  of  the  Eagle  rose  up 
through  its  neck,  as  if  it  were  hollow.  There  it 
became  voice,  and  thence  it  issued  through  its 
beak  in  form  of  words,  such  as  the  heart  where¬ 
on  I  wrote  them  was  waiting. 

31.  “The  part  in  me  which  in  mortal  eagles 
sees  and  endures  the  sun,”  it  began  to  me, 
“must  now  be  gazed  at  fixedly,  because  of  the 
fires  whereof  I  make  my  shape,  those  with 
which  the  eye  in  my  head  is  sparkling  are  the 
chief  of  all  their  grades.  He  who  shines  in  the 
middle,  as  the  pupil,  was  the  singer  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  bore  about  the  ark  from  town  to 
town;1  now  he  knows  the  merit  of  his  song,  so 
far  as  it  was  the  effect  of  his  own  counsel,  by 
the  remuneration  which  is  proportioned  to  it. 
Of  the  five  which  make  a  circle  for  my  brow, 
he  who  is  nearest  to  my  beak  consoled  the  poor 
widow  for  her  son;2  now  he  knows,  by  the  ex¬ 
perience  of  this  sweet  life  and  of  its  opposite, 
how  dear  it  costs  not  to  follow  Christ.  And  he 
who  on  the  rising  arc  conies  next  in  the  cir¬ 
cumference  of  which  I  speak,  by  true  peni¬ 
tence  delayed  death;3  now  he  knows  that  the 
eternal  judgment  is  not  transmuted,  when 
worthy  prayer  there  below  makes  to-morrow’s 
that  which  was  to-day’s.  The  next  who  follows, 
with  a  good  intention  which  bore  bad  fruit, 
made  himself  Greek,  together  with  the  laws 
and  me,  in  order  to  give  place  to  the  Pastor;4 
now  he  knows  how  the  ill  deduced  from  his 
good  action  is  not  hurtful  to  him,  although 
thereby  the  world  be  destroyed.  And  he  whom 
thou  seest  in  the  down-bent  arc  was  William,5 
whom  that  land  deplores  which  weeps  for 
Charles  and  Frederick  living;6  now  he  knows 
how  heaven  is  enamoured  of  a  just  king,  and 
by  the  aspect  of  his  effulgence  makes  it  still 
seen.  Who,  down  in  the  erring  world,  would 

1  David.  See  IlSamuel,  6;  Cf.  Purgatory,  x.  64-67. 

2 Trajan.  See  Purgatory,  x.  73-93. 

3  King  Hezekiah.  See  II  Kings,  20.  1-6;  Isaiah,  38, 
1-5- 

4  Constantine  the  Great  ceded  Rome  to  the  Pope 
and  transferred  the  seat  of  empire  to  Constantinople. 

’William  11  called  “the  Good,”  king  of  Sicily  and 
Apulia. 

*’  See  Canto  xix.  127-135. 


137 

believe  that  Rhipeus  the  Trojan'  was  the  fifth 
of  the  holy  lights  in  this  circle?  Now  he  knows 
much  of  that  which  the  world  cannot  see  of  the 
divine  grace,  although  his  sight  cannot  discern 
the  bottom.” 

73.  Like  a  little  lark  that  in  the  air  expati¬ 
ates,  first  singing,  and  then  is  silent,  content 
with  the  last  sweetness  which  satisfies  her,  such 
seemed  to  me  the  image  of  the  imprint  of  the 
Eternal  Pleasure,  according  to  whose  desire 
everything  becomes  that  which  it  is. 

79.  And  though  I  was  there,  in  respect  to  my 
doubt,8  like  glass  to  the  color  which  it  clothes, 
it  endured  not  to  bide  its  time  in  silence,  but 
with  the  force  of  its  own  weight  urged  from 
my  mouth;  “What  things  are  these?”  whereat 
I  saw  great  festival  of  flashing.  Then  at  once, 
with  its  eye  more  enkindled,  the  blessed  ensign 
answered  me,  in  order  not  to  keep  me  in  won¬ 
dering  suspense: 

88.  “I  see  that  thou  believest  these  things  be¬ 
cause  I  say  them,  but  thou  seest  not  how;  so 
that,  although  believed  in,  they  are  hidden. 
Thou  dost  as  one  who  fully  apprehends  a  thing 
by  name,  but  cannot  see  its  quiddity  unless  an¬ 
other  explain  it.  Regnum  coelorutn  suffers  vi¬ 
olence  from  fervent  love,  and  from  living 
hope  which  vanquishes  the  divine  will;  not  in 
such  wise  as  man  overcomes  man,  but  van¬ 
quishes  it,  because  it  wills  to  be  vanquished, 
and,  vanquished,  vanquishes  with  its  own  be¬ 
nignity.  The  first  life  of  the  eyebrow  and  the 
fifth  make  thee  marvel,  because  thou  seest 
the  region  of  the  Angels  painted  with  them. 
From  their  bodies  they  did  not  issue  Gentiles, 
as  thou  believest,  but  Christians,  with  firm 
faith,  one  in  the  Feet  that  were  to  suffer,  one  in  the 
Feet  that  had  suffered.  For  the  one  came  back 
unto  his  bones  from  Hell,  where  there  is  never 
return  to  righteous  will;  and  that  was  the  re¬ 
ward  of  living  hope;  of  living  hope,  which  put 
its  power  into  the  prayers  made  to  God  to  raise 
him  up,  so  that  it  might  be  possible  for  his  will 
to  be  moved. 

1 12.  “The  glorious  soul,  of  whom  I  speak, 
returning  to  the  flesh,  in  which  it  was  but  little 
while,  believed  in  Him  Who  had  power  to  aid 
it;  and  in  believing  was  kindled  to  such  fire  of 

7  See  Aeneid.  ii.  426-427. 

8  See  Canto  xix.  103-105. 

9  “The  kingdom  of  Heaven.”  Matthew,  11.  12. 


PARADISE 


!38 

true  love,  that  at  its  second  death  it  was  worthy 
to  come  unto  this  festivity.  The  other,  through 
grace  which  distils  from  a  fount  so  deep  that 
creature  never  pushed  the  eye  far  as  its  primal 
wave,  there  below  set  all  his  love  on  righteous¬ 
ness;  wherefore  from  grace  to  grace  God 
opened  his  eye  to  our  future  redemption,  so 
that  he  believed  in  it,  and  thenceforth  endured 
no  more  the  stench  of  paganism,  and  reproved 
therefor  the  perverse  folk.  Those  three  Ladies 
whom  thou  hast  seen  at  the  right  wheel1  were 
to  him  for  baptism,  more  than  a  thousand 
years  before  baptizing.  O  predestination,  how 
remote  is  thy  root  from  the  vision  of  those  who 
see  not  the  First  Cause  entire!  And  ye,  mortals, 
keep  yourselves  restrained  in  judging;  for  we 
who  see  God  know  not  yet  all  the  elect:  and  to 
us  such  defect  is  sweet,  for  our  good  is  per¬ 
fected  in  this  good — that  what  God  wills  we 
also  will.” 

139.  Thus,  to  make  my  short  sight  clear, 
sweet  medicine  was  given  to  me  by  that  divine 
image.  And  as  a  good  lutanist  makes  the  vibra¬ 
tion  of  the  string  accompany  a  good  singer, 
whereby  the  song  acquires  more  pleasantness, 
so  I  remember  that,  while  it  spake.  I  saw  the 
two  blessed  lights  moving  their  flamelets  to 
the  words,  just  as  the  winking  of  the  eyes  con¬ 
cords. 

CANTO  XXI 

Already  were  my  eyes  fixed  again  upon  the 
countenance  of  my  Lady,  and  my  mind  with 
them,  and  from  every  other  intent  it  was  with¬ 
drawn;  and  she  was  not  smiling,  but:  “If  I 
should  smile,”  she  began  to  me,  “thou  wouldst 
become  such  as  Semele  was  when  she  became 
ashes;  for  my  beauty,  which  along  the  stairs  of 
the  eternal  palace  is  kindled  the  more,  as  thou 
hast  seen,  the  higher  the  ascent,  is  so  resplen¬ 
dent  that,  were  it  not  tempered,  at  its  efful¬ 
gence  thy  mortal  power  would  be  as  a  bough 
shattered  by  thunder.  We  are  lifted  to  the  sev¬ 
enth  splendor,  which  beneath  the  breast  of  the 
burning  Lion  now  radiates  downward  min¬ 
gled  with  his  strength.2  Fix  thy  mind  behind 
thine  eyes,  and  make  of  them  mirrors  for  the 
figure  which  in  this  mirror  shall  be  apparent 
to  thee.” 

1  See  Purgatory,  xxix.  121. 

"  Saturn,  which  was  in  the  sign  of  the  Lion. 


19.  He  who  should  know  what  was  the  pas¬ 
ture  of  my  sight  in  her  blessed  aspect,  when  I 
transferred  me  to  another  care,  would  know,  by 
counterpoising  one  side  with  the  other,  how 
pleasing  it  was  to  me  to  obey  my  celestial  es¬ 
cort. 

25.  Within  the  crystal  which,  circling  round 
the  world,  bears  the  name  of  its  illustrious  lead¬ 
er,  under  whom  all  wickedness  lay  dead,3 1  saw, 
of  the  color  of  gold  on  which  a  sunbeam  is 
shining,  a  ladder  rising  up  so  high  that  my  eye 
followed  it  not.  I  saw,  moreover,  so  many  splen¬ 
dors  descending  along  the  steps,  that  I  thought 
every  light  which  appears  in  heaven  had  been 
poured  down  from  it. 

34.  And  as,  by  their  natural  custom,  the  daws, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  day,  move  about  togeth¬ 
er,  in  order  to  warm  their  cold  feathers;  then 
some  go  away  without  return,  others  wheel 
round  to  whence  they  started,  and  others,  cir¬ 
cling,  make  a  stay;  such  fashion  it  seemed  to 
me  was  here  in  that  sparkling  which  came  to¬ 
gether.  so  soon  as  it  struck  on  a  certain  step; 
and  that  one  which  stopped  nearest  to  us  be¬ 
came  so  bright  that  I  said  in  my  thought:  “I 
see  well  the  love  which  thou  dost  signify  to  me. 
But  she,  from  whom  I  await  the  how  and  the 
when  of  speech  and  of  silence, stays  still;  where¬ 
fore  I,  contrary  to  desire,  do  well  not  to  ask.” 
Whereupon  she,  who  saw  my  silence,  in  the 
sight  of  Him  who  sees  everything,  said  to  me: 
“Let  loose  thy  warm  desire.” 

52.  And  I  began:  “My  own  merit  does  not 
make  me  worthy  of  thy  answer;  but  for  her 
sake  who  concedes  to  me  the  asking,  O  blessed 
life,  that  art  hidden  within  thine  own  joy, 
make  known  to  me  the  cause  which  has  placed 
thee  so  near  me;  and  tell  why  in  this  wheel  the 
sweet  symphony  of  Paradise  is  silent,  which 
below  through  the  others  so  devoutly  sounds.” 

61.  “Thou  hast  thy  hearing  mortal,  as  thy 
sight,”  it  replied  to  me;  “therefore  no  song  is 
here  for  the  same  reason  that  Beatrice  has  no 
smile.  Down  over  the  steps  of  the  holy  stairway 
I  have  descended  so  far,  only  to  give  thee  glad 
welcome  with  my  speech  and  with  the  light 
that  mantles  me;  nor  has  more  love  made  me 
to  be  more  ready,  for  as  much  and  more  love 
is  burning  up  there,  even  as  the  flaming  man¬ 
ifests  to  thee;  but  the  high  charity,  which  makes 

3  Saturn,  in  the  golden  age. 


CANTO  XXII 


us  prompt  servants  to  the  Counsel  that  governs 
the  world,  allots  here,  even  as  thou  observest.” 

73.  “I  see  well,”  said  I,  “O  sacred  lamp,  how 
free  love  suffices  in  this  Court  for  following 
the  eternal  Providence;  but  this  is  what  seems 
to  me  hard  to  discern,  why  thou  alone  among 
thy  consorts  wert  predestined  to  this  office.”  I 
had  not  come  to  the  last  word  before  the  light 
made  a  centre  of  its  middle,  whirling  itself  like 
a  swift  millstone. 

82.  Then  the  love  that  was  within  it  an¬ 
swered:  “A  divine  light  is  directed  on  me,  pen¬ 
etrating  through  this  wherein  I  embosom  me; 
the  virtue  of  which,  conjoined  with  my  vision, 
lifts  me  above  myself  so  far  that  I  see  the  Su¬ 
preme  Essence  from  which  it  emanates.  Thence 
comes  the  joy  wherewith  I  flame,  because  to  my 
vision,  in  proportion  as  it  is  clear,  I  match  the 
clearness  of  my  flame.  But  that  soul  in  Heaven 
which  is  most  enlightened,  that  Seraph  who 
has  his  eye  most  fixed  on  God,  could  not  satisfy 
thy  demand;  because  that  which  thou  askest 
lies  so  deep  within  the  abyss  of  the  eternal  stat¬ 
ute,  that  from  every  created  sight  it  is  cut  off. 
And  when  thou  returnest  to  the  mortal  world, 
carry  this  back,  so  that  it  may  no  longer  pre¬ 
sume  to  move  its  feet  toward  such  a  goal.  The 
mind  which  shines  here,  on  earth  is  smoky; 
wherefore  consider  how  can  it  do  there  below 
that  which  it  cannot  do  though  Heaven  assume 
it.” 

103.  So  did  its  words  prescribe  to  me,  that  I 
left  the  question,  and  drew  me  back  to  ask  it 
humbly  who  it  was.  “Between  the  two  shores 
of  Italy,  and  not  very  distant  from  thy  native 
land,  rise  rocks  so  high  that  the  thunders  sound 
far  lower  down,  and  they  form  a  ridge  which 
is  called  Catria,  beneath  which  a  hermitage  is 
consecrated  which  was  wont  to  be  devoted  to 
worship  only.”2 

1 1 2.  Thus  it  began  again  to  me  with  its  third 
speech,  and  then,  continuing,  said:  “There  in 
the  service  of  God  I  became  so  steadfast,  that, 
only  with  food  of  olive  juice,  lightly  I  used  to 
pass  the  heats  and  frosts,  content  in  contem¬ 
plative  thoughts.  That  cloister  was  wont  to  ren¬ 
der  in  abundance  to  these  heavens;  and  now  it 
is  become  so  empty  as  needs  must  soon  be  re- 

1  Cf.  Canto  iii.  52-87. 

2  Catria  is  a  high  offshoot  to  the  east  from  the  Apen¬ 
nines,  between  Urbino  and  Gubbio.  On  its  side  was  the 
Camaldolite  monastery  of  Fonte  Avellana. 


vealed.  In  that  place  was  I  Peter  Damian,3  and 
Peter  the  sinner  had  I  been  in  the  house  of  Our 
Lady  on  the  Adriatic  shore.  Little  of  mortal  life 
was  remaining  for  me,  when  I  was  sought  for 
and  dragged  to  that  hat  which  ever  is  passed 
down  from  bad  to  worse.  Cephas4  came,  and 
the  great  vessel  of  the  Holy  Spirit"  came,  lean 
and  barefoot,  taking  the  food  of  whatsoever 
inn.  Now  the  modern  pastors  require  one  to 
prop  them  up  on  this  side  and  that,  and  one  to 
lead  them,  so  heavy  are  they,  and  one  to  hold 
up  their  trains  behind.  They  cover  their  pal¬ 
freys  with  their  mantles,  so  that  two  beasts  go 
under  one  hide.  O  Patience,  that  dost  endure 
so  much!” 

136.  At  these  words  I  saw  more  flamelets 
from  step  to  step  descending  and  whirling,  and 
every  whirl  made  them  more  beautiful.  Round 
about  this  one  they  came,  and  stopped,  and  ut¬ 
tered  a  cry  of  such  deep  sound  that  here  could 
be  none  like  it;  nor  did  I  understand  it,  the 
thunder  so  overcame  me. 

CANTO  XXII 

Oppressed  with  amazement,  I  turned  me  to 
my  Guide,  like  a  little  child  who  always  runs 
back  thither  where  he  most  confides;  and  she, 
like  a  mother  who  quickly  succors  her  pale  and 
breathless  son  with  her  voice,  which  is  wont  to 
reassure  him,  said  to  me:  “Knowst  thou  not 
that  thou  art  in  Heaven?  and  knowst  thou  not 
that  Heaven  is  all  holy,  and  whatever  is  done 
here  comes  from  righteous  zeal?  How  the  song 
would  have  transformed  thee,  and  I  by  smiling, 
thou  canst  now  conceive,  since  the  cry  has  so 
greatly  moved  thee;  in  which,  if  thou  hadst  un¬ 
derstood  its  prayers,  already  would  be  known 
to  thee  the  vengeance  which  thou  shalt  see  be¬ 
fore  thou  diest.  The  sword  of  here  on  high  cuts 
not  in  haste,  nor  tardily,  save  to  the  seeming 
of  him  who,  desiring  or  fearing,  awaits  it.  But 
turn  thee  round  now  toward  the  others;  for 
many  illustrious  spirits  thou  shalt  see,  if,  as  I 
bid,  thou  carry  back  thy  look.” 

22.  As  was  her  pleasure  I  directed  my  eyes, 
and  saw  a  hundred  little  spheres,  which  togeth¬ 
er  were  making  themselves  more  beautiful  with 

3  A  doctor  of  the  Church  in  the  eleventh  century. 
For  years  abbot  of  Fonte  Avellana,  in  1058  he,  much 
against  his  will,  was  made  cardinal  bishop  of  Ostia. 

4  St.  Peter.  See  John,  1.  42. 

5  St.  Paul.  See  Acts,  9.  15. 


PARADISE 


their  mutual  rays.  I  was  standing  as  one  who 
within  himself  represses  the  point  of  his  desire, 
and  attempts  not  to  ask,  he  so  fears  the  too- 
much.  And  the  largest  and  most  lustrous  of 
those  pearls1  came  forward  to  make  my  wish 
concerning  itself  content.  Then  within  it  I 
heard:  “If  thou  couldst  see,  as  I  do,  the  charity 
which  burns  among  us,  thy  thoughts  would  be 
expressed;  but  that  thou,  by  waiting,  mayst  not 
retard  thy  high  end,  I  will  make  answer  to 
thee,  even  to  the  thought  about  which  thou  so 
restrainest  thyself. 

37 .  “That  mountain  on  whose  slope  Cassino 
is,  was  of  old  frequented  on  its  summit  by  the 
deluded  and  ill-disposed  people,  and  I  am  he 
who  first  bore  up  there  the  name  of  Him  Who 
brought  to  earth  the  truth  which  so  high  exalts 
us:  and  such  grace  shone  upon  me  that  I  drew 
away  the  surrounding  villages  from  the  im¬ 
pious  worship  which  seduced  the  world.  All 
these  other  fires  were  contemplative  men,  kin¬ 
dled  by  that  heat  which  brings  to  birth  holy 
flowers  and  fruits.  Here  is  Macarius,  here  is 
Romualdus,2  here  are  my  brothers,  who  fixed 
their  feet  within  the  cloisters,  and  held  their 
heart  steadfast.” 

52.  And  I  to  him:  “The  affection  which  thou 
displayest  in  speaking  with  me,  and  the  good 
semblance  which  I  see  and  note  in  all  your  ar¬ 
dors,  have  expanded  my  confidence  as  the  sun 
does  the  rose,  when  she  becomes  open  as  wide 
as  she  has  power  to  be.  Therefore  I  pray  thee, 
and  do  thou,  Father,  assure  me  if  I  am  capable 
of  receiving  so  great  grace,  that  I  may  see  thee 
with  uncovered  shape.” 

61.  Whereon  he:  “Brother,  thy  high  desire 
shall  be  fulfilled  up  in  the  last  sphere,3  where 
are  fulfilled  all  others  and  my  own.  There  ev¬ 
ery  desire  is  perfect,  mature,  and  whole;  in  that 
alone  is  every  part  there  where  it  always  was: 
for  it  is  not  in  space,  and  it  has  not  poles;  and 
our  ladder  reaches  up  to  it,  so  that  thus  from 
thy  sight  it  steals  itself.  Far  up  as  there  the  pa¬ 
triarch  Jacob  saw  it  stretch  its  upper  part,  when 
it  appeared  to  him  so  laden  with  Angels. 

73.  “But  no  one  now  lifts  his  feet  from  earth 

1  St.  Benedict. 

2  St.  Macarius  of  Alexandria,  a  disciple  of  St.  An¬ 
tony,  who  did  much  to  promote  the  monastic  rule  in 
the  East.  St.  Romualdus  founded  the  Order  of  Ca- 
maldoli  in  1012. 

3  The  Empyrean. 


to  ascend  it;  and  my  Rule  remains  for  waste 
of  paper.  The  walls,  which  used  to  be  an  abbey, 
have  become  dens,  and  the  cowls  are  sacks  full 
of  bad  meal.  But  heavy  usury  is  not  levied  so 
counter  to  God’s  pleasure,  as  that  fruit  which 
makes  the  heart  of  the  monks  so  mad;  for 
whatsoever  the  Church  has  in  keeping  is  all  for 
the  folk  that  ask  it  in  God’s  name,  not  for  kin¬ 
dred,  or  for  others  more  vile.  The  flesh  of  mor¬ 
tals  is  so  soft  that  on  earth  a  good  beginning 
does  not  suffice  from  the  springing  of  the  oak 
to  the  forming  of  the  acorn.  Peter  began  with¬ 
out  gold  and  without  silver,  and  I  with  prayers 
and  with  fasting,  and  Francis  his  convent  with 
humility;  and  if  thou  lookestat  the  beginningof 
each,  and  then  lookest  again  to  where  it  has 
run  astray,  thou  wilt  see  the  white  changed  to 
dark.  Truly,  Jordan  turned  back,  and  the  sea 
fleeing  when  God  willed,  were  more  marvel¬ 
lous  to  behold  than  to  see  succor  here.” 

97.  Thus  he  said  to  me,  and  then  drew  back 
to  his  company,  and  the  company  closed  to¬ 
gether;  then  like  a  whirlwind  all  gathered  itself 
upward. 

100.  The  sweet  Lady  urged  me  behind  them, 
with  only  a  sign,  up  over  that  ladder;  so  did 
her  virtue  overcome  my  nature.  But  never  here 
below,  where  one  mounts  and  descends  natur¬ 
ally,  was  there  motion  so  rapid  that  it  could  be 
compared  unto  my  wing.  So  may  I  return, 
Reader,  to  that  devout  triumph,  for  the  sake  of 
which  I  often  bewail  my  sins  and  beat  my 
breast,  thou  hadst  not  drawn  out  and  put  thy 
finger  in  the  fire  so  quickly  as  I  saw  the  sign 
which  follows  the  Bull,4  and  was  within  it. 

1 1 2.  O  glorious  stars,  O  light  impregnate  with 
great  virtue,  from  which  I  acknowledge  all  my 
genius,  whatever  it  may  be;  with  you  was  born 
and  with  you  was  hiding  himself  he  who  is 
father  of  every  mortal  life,  when  I  first  felt  the 
Tuscan  air;  and  then, when  grace  was  bestowed 
on  me  to  enter  within  the  lofty  wheel  which 
turns  you,  your  region  was  allotted  to  me.  To 
you’  my  soul  now  devoutly  sighs  that  it  may 
acquire  virtue  for  the  hard  pass  which  draws 
her  to  itself. 

124.  “Thou  art  so  near  the  ultimate  salva¬ 
tion,”  began  Beatrice,  “that  thou  oughtest  to 

4  The  sign  of  the  Gemini,  or  Twins,  in  the  Heaven 
of  the  Fixed  Stars. 

6  The  Gemini. 


CANTO  XXIII 


have  thine  eyes  clear  and  keen.  And  therefore 
ere  thou  enter  farther  into  it,  look  back  down¬ 
ward,  and  see  how  great  a  world  I  have  already 
set  beneath  thy  feet,  in  order  that  thy  heart 
may  present  itself  joyous  to  its  utmost  unto  the 
triumphant  throng  which  comes  glad  through 
this  round  ether.” 

133.  With  my  sight  I  returned  through  all 
and  each  of  the  seven  spheres,  and  saw  this 
globe  such  that  I  smiled  at  its  mean  semblance; 
and  that  counsel  I  approve  as  best  which  holds 
it  of  least  account;  and  he  who  thinks  of  other 
things  may  be  called  truly  righteous.  I  saw  the 
daughter  of  Latona1  enkindled  without  that 
shadow  which  had  been  the  cause  why  I  once 
believed  her  rare  and  dense.  The  aspect  of  thy 
son,  Hyperion,2  here  I  endured,  and  I  saw  how 
Maia  and  Dione3  move  around  and  near  him. 
Then  appeared  to  me  the  temperateness  of  Jove, 
between  his  father  and  his  son,  and  then  was 
clear  to  me  the  varying  which  they  make  in 
their  position.  And  all  the  seven  were  displayed 
to  me — how  great  they  are  and  how  swift  they 
are,  and  how  far  apart  they  are  in  their  abodes. 
While  I  was  revolving  with  the  eternal  Twins, 
the  little  threshing-floor  which  makes  us  so 
fierce  all  appeared  to  me,  from  its  hills  to  its 
river-mouths. 

154.  Then  I  turned  back  my  eyes  to  the  beau¬ 
tiful  eyes. 

CANTO  XXIII 

As  the  bird,  among  the  beloved  leaves,  hav¬ 
ing  reposed  on  the  nest  of  her  sweet  brood 
through  the  night  which  hides  things  from  us, 
who,  in  order  to  see  this  longed-for  looks  and 
to  find  the  food  wherewith  she  may  feed  them, 
in  which  her  heavy  toils  are  pleasing  to  her,  an¬ 
ticipates  the  time,  upon  the  open  twig,  and 
with  ardent  affection  awaits  the  sun,  fixedly 
looking  till  the  dawn  may  break;  so  was  my 
Lady,  standing  erect  and  expectant,  turned  to¬ 
ward  the  region  beneath  which  the  sun  shows 
least  haste;  so  that  I,  seeing  her  rapt  and  eager, 
became  such  as  he  who  in  desire  would  fain 
havesomethingelse  and  in  hope  is  satisfied.  But 

1  The  Moon.  Cf.  Canto  ii.  49-148. 

2  The  Titan  Hyperion  was  the  father  of  Helios,  the 
Sun. 

3  Maia  and  Dione  were  respectively  the  mothers 
of  Mercury  and  Venus,  and  by  their  names  these 
planets  are  here  designated. 


short  while  was  there  between  one  and  the  other 
when;  of  my  awaiting,  I  mean,  and  of  my  see¬ 
ing  the  heavens  become  more  and  more  re¬ 
splendent. 

19.  And  Beatrice  said:  “Behold  the  hosts  of 
the  Triumph  of  Christ,  and  all  the  fruit  har¬ 
vested  by  the  revolution  of  these  spheres.”  It 
seemed  to  me  her  face  was  all  aflame,  and  her 
eyes  were  so  full  of  joy  that  I  must  needs  pass 
on  without  description. 

25.  As  in  the  clear  skies  at  the  full  moon 
Trivia4  smiles  among  the  eternal  nymphs  who 
paint  the  heaven  through  all  its  depths,  I  saw, 
above  thousands  of  lamps,  a  Sun  that  was  en¬ 
kindling  each  and  all  of  them,  as  ours  kindles 
the  supernal  shows;  and  through  its  living 
light  the  lucent  Substance"  gleamed  so  bright 
upon  my  face  that  I  sustained  it  not. 

34.  Oh  Beatrice,  sweet  guide  and  dear! 

35.  She  said  to  me:  “That  which  overcomes 
thee  is  a  virtue  against  which  naught  defends 
itself.  Here  is  the  Wisdom  and  the  Power  that 
opened  the  roads  between  heaven  and  earth, 
for  which  there  erst  had  been  such  long  de- 
sire.” 

40.  As  fire  is  unlocked  from  a  cloud,  by  dila¬ 
ting  so  that  it  has  not  room  there,  and  contrary 
to  its  own  nature  falls  down  to  earth,  so  my 
mind,  becoming  greater  amid  those  feasts,  is¬ 
sued  from  itself,  and  what  it  became  it  cannot 
remember. 

46.  “Open  thine  eyes  and  look  on  what  I  am; 
thou  hast  seen  things  such  as  thou  art  become 
able  to  sustain  my  smile.”  I  was  as  one  who 
comes  to  himself  from  a  forgotten  vision  and 
endeavors  in  vain  to  bring  it  back  to  mind, 
when  I  heard  this  invitation,  worthy  of  such 
gratitude  that  it  is  never  to  be  effaced  from  the 
book  which  records  the  past.  If  now  all  those 
tongues  which  Polyhymnia  and  her  sisters  made 
most  rich  with  their  sweetest  milk  should  sound 
to  aid  me,  it  would  not  come  to  a  thousandth 
of  the  truth  in  singing  the  holy  smile  and  how 
it  lighted  up  the  holy  face.  And  thus,  depict¬ 
ing  Paradise,  the  consecrated  poem  must  needs 
make  a  leap,  even  as  one  who  finds  his  way  cut 
off.  But  whoso  should  consider  the  ponderous 
theme  and  the  mortal  shoulder  which  is  laden 
therewith  would  not  blame  it  if  under  this  it 

4  An  appellation  of  Diana,  and  hence  of  the  moon. 

6  Christ  in  His  glorified  body. 


M2 


PARADISE 


tremble.  It  is  no  voyage  for  a  little  barque,  this 
which  my  venturous  prow  goes  cleaving,  nor 
for  a  pilot  who  would  spare  himself. 

70.  “Why  does  my  face  so  enamour  thee  that 
thou  turnest  not  to  the  fair  garden  which  blos¬ 
soms  beneath  the  rays  of  Christ?  Here  is  the 
Rose,  in  which  the  Divine  Word  became  flesh: 
here  are  the  lilies1  by  whose  odor  the  good  way 
was  taken.” 

76.  Thus  Beatrice:  and  I,  who  to  her  coun¬ 
sels  was  wholly  ready,  again  gave  myself  up  to 
the  battle  of  the  feeble  brows. 

79.  As  my  eyes,  covered  with  a  shadow,  have 
ere  now  seen  a  meadow  of  flowers  under  a  sun¬ 
beam  which  streams  bright  through  a  rifted 
cloud,  so  saw  I  many  throngs  of  splendors 
flashed  upon  from  above  by  burning  rays, 
though  I  saw  not  the  source  of  the  gleams.  O 
benignant  Power  which  dost  so  imprint  them, 
thou  didst  raise  thyself  on  high  to  bestow  scope 
there  for  my  eyes,  which  were  powerless. 

88.  The  name  of  the  fair  flower2  which  I  ev¬ 
er  invoke,  both  morning  and  evening,  wholly 
constrained  my  mind  to  gaze  upon  the  great¬ 
er  fire.  And  when  the  brightness  and  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  living  star,  which  up  there  con¬ 
quers  as  it  conquered  here  below,  were  de¬ 
picted  in  both  my  eyes,  from  within  the  mid 
heavens  a  torch,  formed  in  a  circle  in  fashion 
of  a  crown,  descended  and  engirt  her,  and  re¬ 
volved  around  her.  Whatever  melody  sounds 
sweetest  here  below,  and  to  itself  most  draws 
the  soul,  would  seem  a  cloud  which,  being 
rent,  thunders,  compared  with  the  sound  of 
that  lyre  wherewith  was  crowned  the  beaute¬ 
ous  sapphire  by  which  the  brightest  Heaven  is 
ensapphired. 

103.  “I  am  Angelic  Love,  and  I  circle  round 
the  lofty  joy  which  breathes  from  out  the  womb 
which  was  the  hostelry  of  our  Desire;  and  I 
shall  circle,  Lady  of  Heaven,  until  thou  shalt 
follow  thy  Son  and  make  the  supreme  sphere 
more  divine  because  thou  enterest  it.”  Thus 
the  circling  melody  sealed  itself,  and  all  the 
other  lights  made  the  name  of  Mary  resound. 

1 12.  The  royal  mantle3  of  all  the  revolutions 
of  the  world,  which  is  most  fervid  and  most 
quickened  in  the  breath  of  God  and  in  His 

1  See  II  Corinthians,  2.  14. 

2  The  Virgin. 

3  Probably  the  Empyrean. 


ways,  had  its  inner  shore  so  distant  above  us 
that  sight  of  it,  there  where  I  was,  did  not  yet 
appear  to  me.  Therefore  my  eyes  had  not  power 
to  follow  the  crowned  flame,  which  mounted 
upward  after  her  offspring.  And  as  an  infant 
which,  when  it  has  taken  the  milk,  stretches 
its  arms  toward  its  mother,  because  of  its  af¬ 
fection  which  flames  up  outwardly,  each  of 
these  splendors  stretched  upward  with  its  flame, 
so  that  the  exalted  love  which  they  had  for 
Mary  was  manifest  to  me.  Then  they  remained 
there  in  my  sight,  singing  Regina  coeli 4  so 
sweetly  that  never  has  the  delight  departed 
from  me.  Oh  how  great  is  the  abundance  which 
is  heaped  up  in  those  most  rich  coffers  which 
were  good  fields  for  sowing  here  below!  Here 
they  live  and  enjoy  the  treasure  which  was  ac¬ 
quired  while  they  wept  in  the  exile  of  Baby¬ 
lon,  where  the  gold  was  left  aside.  Here  under 
the  exalted  Son  of  God  and  of  Mary,  together 
with  the  ancient  and  with  the  new  council,  he 
triumphs  in  his  victory  who  holds  the  keys  of 
such  glory/ 


CANTO  XXIV 

“O  fellowship  elect  to  the  great  supper  of 
the  blessed  Lamb,  who  feeds  you  so  that  your 
desire  is  always  full,  since  by  grace  of  God  this 
man  foretastes  of  that  which  falls  from  your 
table,  before  death  prescribe  the  time  for  him, 
give  heed  to  his  immense  longing,  and  some¬ 
what  bedew  him;  ye  drink  ever  of  the  fount 
whence  comes  that  of  which  he  is  thinking.” 
Thus  Beatrice;  and  those  glad  souls  made  them¬ 
selves  spheres  upon  fixed  poles,  flaming  bright¬ 
ly  after  the  manner  of  comets.  And  as  wheels 
within  the  fittings  of  clocks  revolve,  so  that'  to 
him  who  gives  heed  the  first  seems  quiet,  and 
the  last  to  fly,  so  these  carols,  differently  danc¬ 
ing,  swift  and  slow,  made  me  rate  their  riches. 

19.  From  the  one  which  I  noted  of  greatest 
beauty,  I  saw  issue  a  fire  so  happy  that  it  left 
there  none  of  greater  brightness;  and  it  re¬ 
volved  three  times  round  Beatrice  with  a  song 
so  divine  that  my  fancy  repeats  it  not  to  me; 
wherefore  my  pen  makes  a  leap,  and  I  write 

4  “O  Queen  of  Heaven,”  the  first  words  of  an 
antiphon  sung  in  the  office  of  the  Virgin  at  compline 
on  certain  days  after  Easter.  “O  Queen  of  Heaven,  re¬ 
joice,  for  He  whom  thou  wert  worthy  to  bear  rose 
as  He  promised;  pray  to  God  for  us.  Hallelujah.” 

5  St.  Peter. 


CANTO 

it  not,  for  our  imagination,  much  more  our 
speech,  is  of  too  vivid  color  for  such  folds.  “O 
holy  sister  mine,  who  dost  so  devoutly  pray  to 
us,  by  thine  ardent  affection  thou  dost  unloose 
me  from  that  fair  sphere”:  after  it  had  stopped, 
the  blessed  fire  directed  to  my  Lady  its  breath, 
which  spoke  thus  as  I  have  said: 

34.  And  she:  “O  light  eternal  of  the  great 
man  to  whom  our  Lord  left  the  keys,  which 
he  bore  below,  of  this  marvellous  joy,  test  this 
man  on  points  light  and  grave,  as  pleases  thee, 
concerning  the  Faith,  through  which  thou 
didst  walk  upon  the  sea.  If  he  loves  rightly,  and 
hopes  rightly,  and  believes,  is  not  hidden  from 
thee,  for  thou  hast  thy  sight  there  where  every¬ 
thing  is  seen  depicted.  But  since  this  realm  has 
made  citizens  by  the  true  faith,  it  is  well  that 
to  glorify  it  speech  of  it  should  fall  to  him.” 

46.  Even  as  the  bachelor  arms  himself — and 
dost  not  speak,  until  the  master  propounds  the 
question — in  order  to  adduce  the  proof,  not  to 
decide  it,  so,  while  she  was  speaking,  I  was 
arming  me  with  every  reason,  in  order  to  be 
ready  for  such  a  questioner,  and  for  such  a  pro¬ 
fession. 

52.  “Speak,  good  Christian,  declare  thyself; 
Faith,  what  is  it?”  Whereon  I  raised  my 
brow  to  that  light  whence  this  was  breathed 
forth,  then  turned  me  to  Beatrice,  and  she  made 
prompt  signals  to  me  that  I  should  pour  the 
water  forth  from  my  internal  fount.  “May  the 
Grace,”  I  began,  “which  grants  to  me  that  I 
confess  myself  to  the  chief  centurion  cause  my 
conceptions  to  be  well  expressed.”  And  I  went 
on:  “As  the  veracious  pen,  Father,  of  thy  dear 
brother1  (who  with  thee  set  Rome  on  the  good 
track)  wrote  of  it,  Faith  is  the  substance  of 
things  hoped  for,  and  evidence  of  things  not 
seen;2  and  this  appears  to  me  its  essence.” 

67.  Then  I  heard:  “Rightly  dost  thou  think, 
if  thou  understandest  well  why  he  placed  it 
among  the  substances,  and  then  among  the  ev¬ 
idences.”  And  I  thereon:  “The  deep  things 
which  grant  unto  me  here  the  sight  of  them¬ 
selves,  are  so  hidden  to  eyes  below  that  there 
their  existence  is  in  belief  alone,  upon  which 
the  lofty  hope  is  founded,  and  therefore  it  takes 
the  designation  of  substance;  and  from  this 
belief  we  needs  must  syllogize,  without  having 

1  St.  Paul. 

J  See  Hebrews,  1 1.  1. 


XXIV  I43 

other  sight,  wherefore  it  receives  the  designa¬ 
tion  of  evidence.”3  Then  I  heard:  “If  all  that 
is  acquired  down  below  for  doctrine,  were  so 
understood,  the  wit  of  sophist  would  have  no 
place  there.” 

82.  These  words  were  breathed  forth  from 
that  enkindled  love;  then  it  added:  “Very  well 
have  the  alloy  and  the  weight  of  this  coin  been 
now  gone  over,  but  tell  me  if  thou  hast  it  in 
thy  purse?”  Whereupon  I:  “Yes,  I  have  it  so 
shining  and  so  round  that  in  its  stamp  nothing 
is  doubtful  to  me.”  Then  issued  from  the  deep 
light  which  was  shining  there:  “This  precious 
jewel,  whereon  every  virtue  is  founded,  whence 
came  it  to  thee?”  And  I:  “The  abundant  rain 
of  the  Heavenly  Spirit,  which  is  shed  over  the 
Old  and  over  the  New  parchments,  is  a  syllo¬ 
gism  which  has  proved  it  to  me  with  such  acute¬ 
ness,  that  in  comparison  with  this  every  dem¬ 
onstration  seems  to  me  obtuse.”  I  heard  then: 
“The  Old  proposition  and  the  New  which  are 
so  conclusive  to  thee — why  dost  thou  hold 
them  for  Divine  speech?”  And  I:  “The  proof 
which  discloses  the  truth  to  me  are  the  works 
that  followed,  for  which  nature  never  heated 
iron,  nor  beat  anvil.” 

103.  It  was  replied  to  me:  “Say,  what  assures 
thee  that  these  works  were?  The  very  thing  it¬ 
self  which  requires  to  be  proved,  naught  else, 
affirms  it  to  thee.”  “If  the  world  were  con¬ 
verted  to  Christianity,”  said  I,  “without  mir¬ 
acles,  this  alone  is  such  that  the  others  are  not 
the  hundredth  part;  for  thou  didst  enter  poor 
and  fasting  into  the  field  to  sow  the  good  plant, 
which  once  was  a  vine  and  now  has  become  a 
bramble.” 

1 12.  This  ended,  the  high  holy  Court  re¬ 
sounded  through  the  spheres  a  “We  praise 
thee,  O  God,”  in  the  melody  which  up  there  is 
sung. 

1 15.  And  that  Baron4  who  thus  from  branch 
to  branch,  examining,  had  now  drawn  me  on, 
so  that  we  were  approaching  the  last  leaves,  be¬ 
gan  again:  “The  Grace  that  holds  courteous 
converse  with  thy  mind  has  opened  thy  mouth 
thus  far  as  it  should  be  opened,  so  that  I  ap¬ 
prove  that  which  has  issued  forth,  but  now  it  is 

3  See,  for  this  signification  of  substance,  Aquinas, 
Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  29,  A  2. 

4  During  the  Middle  Ages  a  term  not  infrequently 
applied  to  the  most  eminent  among  the  saints,  and 
even  to  Christ  Himself. 


PARADISE 


befitting  to  express  what  thou  believest,  and 
whence  it  was  offered  to  thy  belief/’ 

124.  “O  holy  father,  spirit  who  seest  that 
which  thou  didst  so  believe  that  thou,  toward 
the  sepulchre,  didst  outdo  younger  feet,1  began 
I,  “thou  wishest  that  I  should  here  declare  the 
form  of  my  ready  belief,  and  also  thou  hast 
asked  the  cause  of  it.  And  I  answer:  I  believe 
in  one  God,  sole  and  eternal,  who,  unmoved, 
moves  all  the  Heavens  with  love  and  with  de¬ 
sire;  and  for  such  belief  I  have  not  only  proofs 
physical  and  metaphysical,  but  that  truth  also 
gives  it  to  me  which  hence  rains  down  through 
Moses,  through  Prophets,  and  through  Psalms, 
through  the  Gospel,  and  through  you  who  wrote 
after  the  fiery  Spirit  made  you  reverend.  And 
I  believe  in  three  Eternal  Persons,  and  these  I 
believe  to  be  one  essence,  so  one  and  so  three¬ 
fold  that  it  will  admit  to  be  conjoined  with  are 
and  is.  Of  the  profound  divine  condition  on 
which  I  touch,  the  evangelic  doctrine  many  times 
sets  the  seal  upon  my  mind.  This  is  the  begin¬ 
ning,  this  is  the  spark  which  afterwards  di¬ 
lates  into  a  vivid  flame,  and  like  a  star  in  heav¬ 
en  scintillates  within  me.” 

148.  Even  as  a  lord  who  hears  what  pleases 
him,  thereon,  rejoicing  in  the  news,  embraces 
his  servant,  soon  as  he  is  silent,  thus,  blessing 
me  as  he  sang,  the  apostolic  light,  at  whose 
command  I  had  spoken,  thrice  encircled  me 
when  I  was  silent;  so  had  I  pleased  him  in  my 
speech. 

CANTO  XXV 

If  it  ever  happen  that  the  sacred  poem  to 
which  both  heaven  and  earth  have  so  set  hand, 
that  it  has  made  me  lean  for  many  years,  should 
overcome  the  cruelty  which  bars  me  out  of  the 
fair  sheepfold,  where  a  lamb  I  slept,  foe  to  the 
wolves  that  give  it  war,  then  with  other  voice, 
with  other  fleece,  a  Poet  will  I  return,  and  on 
the  font  of  my  baptism  will  I  take  the  crown; 
because  there  I  entered  into  the  Faith  which 
makes  the  souls  known  to  God;  and  afterward 
Peter,  for  its  sake,  thus  encircled  my  brow. 

13.  Then  a  light  moved  toward  us  from  that 
sphere  whence  had  issued  the  first-fruit  which 
Christ  left  of  His  vicars;  and  my  Lady,  full  of 
gladness,  said  to  me:  “Look,  look!  behold  the 

1  Cf.  John,  20.  4-6. 


Baron  for  whose  sake  there  below  Galicia  is 
visited.”2 

19.  As  when  the  dove  alights  near  his  mate, 
and  each,  circling  and  cooing,  displays  its  af¬ 
fection  to  the  other,  so  by  the  one  great  Prince 
glorious  I  saw  the  other  greeted,  praising  the 
food  which  feeds  them  thereabove.  But  after 
their  gratulation  was  completed,  silent  coram 
mez  each  stopped,  so  blazing  that  it  overcame 
my  sight.  Then  Beatrice,  smiling,  said:  “Illus¬ 
trious  life,  by  whom  the  bounty  of  our  basilica 
was  written/  do  thou  make  Hope  resound  up¬ 
on  this  height;  thou  knowest  that  thou  dost 
represent  it  as  many  times  as  Jesus  displayed 
most  brightness  to  the  three.”5  “Lift  up  thy 
head,  and  mind  thou  reassure  thyself:  for  that 
which  comes  up  here  from  the  mortal  world 
needs  must  be  ripened  in  our  rays.”  This  com¬ 
fort  came  to  me  from  the  second  fire;  whereon 
I  lifted  up  my  eyes  unto  the  mountains  which 
had  bent  them  down  before  with  excess  of 
weight. 

40.  “Since,  through  grace,  our  Emperor  wills 
that  thou,  before  thy  death,  come  face  to  face 
with  his  Counts  in  His  most  secret  hall,  so 
that,  having  seen  the  truth  of  this  Court,  thou 
mayest  therewith  confirm  in  thyself  and  others 
the  Hope  which  there  below  rightly  enamours, 
say  what  it  is,  and  how  thy  mind  blossoms 
with  it,  and  say  whence  it  came  to  thee”;  thus 
further  did  the  second  light  proceed. 

49.  And  that  compassionate  one,  who  guided 
the  feathers  of  my  wings  to  such  lofty  flight, 
thus  in  the  reply  anticipated  me:  “The  Church 
militant  has  not  any  child  possessed  of  more 
hope,  as  is  written  in  the  Sun  which  irradiates 
all  our  band;  therefore  it  is  conceded  to  him 
that  from  Egypt  he  should  come  to  Jerusalem, 
to  behold,  before  his  term  of  warfare  is  com¬ 
pleted.  The  other  two  points  which  are  asked 
not  for  sake  of  knowing,  but  that  he  may  re¬ 
port  how  greatly  this  virtue  is  pleasing  to  thee, 
I  leave  to  him,  for  they  will  not  be  difficult  to 
him,  nor  of  vainglory,  and  let  him  answer  there- 

3  St.  James,  the  brother  of  St.  John,  is  believed  to 
be  buried  at  Compostella,  in  Galicia. 

3  “Before  me.” 

4  The  reference  is  to  the  Epistle  of  James,  which 
Dante  wrongly  attributes  to  St.  James  the  Greater. 
See  James,  1.  5,  17. 

5Cf.  Matthew,  17.  iii.;  25.  37;  Mark,  9.  1;  Luke,  8. 
51;  9.  28. 


CANTO  XXVI 


to,  and  may  the  grace  of  God  accord  this  to 
him.” 

64.  As  a  scholar  who  follows  his  teacher, 
prompt  and  glad  in  that  wherein  he  is  expert, 
so  that  his  worth  may  be  disclosed:  “Hope,” 
said  I,  “is  a  sure  expectation  of  future  glory, 
which  divine  grace  produces,  and  preceding 
merit.1  From  many  stars  this  light  comes  to  me, 
but  he  first  instilled  it  into  my  heart  who  was 
the  supreme  singer  of  the  Supreme  Leader.  ‘Let 
them  hope  in  Thee,  who  know  Thy  name,’  he 
says  in  his  theody;2  and  who  knows  it  not,  if 
he  has  my  faith?  Thou  afterwards  in  thy 
Epistle3  didst  instil  it  into  me  together  with  his 
instilling,  so  that  I  am  full,  and  upon  others 
shower  down  your  rain.” 

79.  While  I  was  speaking,  within  the  living 
bosom  of  that  fire  a  flash  was  trembling,  sud¬ 
den  and  frequent,  in  the  manner  of  lightning. 
Then  it  breathed:  “The  love  wherewith  I  still 
glow  toward  the  virtue  which  followed  me 
even  to  the  palm,  and  to  the  issue  of  the  field, 
wills  that  I  breathe  again  to  thee,  who  dost  de¬ 
light  in  it;  and  it  is  my  pleasure,  that  thou  tell 
that  which  Hope  promises  to  thee.”  And  I: 
“The  new  and  the  old  Scriptures  set  up  the 
mark,  and  that  points  it  out  to  me.  Of  the  souls 
whom  God  hath  made  his  friends,  Isaiah  says 
that  each  one  should  be  clothed  in  his  own  land 
with  a  double  garment,4 5 *  and  his  own  land  is 
this  sweet  life;  and  thy  brother,  far  more  ex¬ 
plicitly,  there  where  he  treats  of  the  white 
robes,  makes  manifest  to  us  this  revelation/ 

97.  At  first,  close  on  the  end  of  these  words, 
Sperent  in  te  was  heard  above  us,  to  which 
all  the  carols  made  answer;  then  among  them 
a  light  became  so  bright  that,  if  the  Crab  had 
one  such  crystal,  winter  would  have  a  month 
of  one  sole  day.  And  as  a  glad  maiden  rises  and 
goes  and  enters  in  the  dance,  only  to  do  honor 
to  the  new  bride,  and  not  for  any  failing,  so 
did  I  see  the  brightened  splendor  come  to  the 
two  who  were  turning  in  a  wheel,  such  as  was 
befitting  their  ardent  love.  It  set  itself  there 
into  the  song  and  into  the  measure,  and  my 

1  These  words  are  taken  directly  from  Peter  Lom¬ 
bard,  Liber  Sententiarum,  iii.  26. 

2  See  Psalms,  9.  10. 

3  See  James,  1.  12;  2.  5;  4.  8. 

4  See  Isaiah,  59.  7. 

5  See  Revelation,  7.  9-17. 

*  “They  will  put  their  trust  in  thee.”  Psalms,  9.  10. 


Lady  kept  her  gaze  upon  them,  even  as  a  bride 
silent  and  motionless.  “This  is  he  who  lay  up¬ 
on  the  breast  of  our  Pelican,'  and  who  was 
chosen  from  upon  the  cross  for  the  great  of¬ 
fice.”8 

1 15.  Thus  my  Lady;  but  no  more  after  than 
before  her  words  did  she  move  her  look  from 
its  fixed  attention.  As  is  he  who  gazes  and 
endeavors  to  see  the  sun  a  little  eclipsed,  and 
who  through  seeing  becomes  sightless,  so  did 
I  become  in  respect  to  that  last  fire,  till  it  was 
said:  “Why  dost  thou  dazzle  thyself  in  order 
to  see  a  thing  which  has  no  place  here?9  On 
earth  my  body  is  earth;  and  it  will  be  there 
with  the  others  until  our  number  corresponds 
with  the  eternal  purpose.  With  the  two  robes 
in  the  blessed  cloister  are  only  those  two  lights 
which  ascended;10  and  this  thou  shalt  carry 
back  unto  your  world.” 

130.  At  this  word  the  flaming  gyre  became 
quiet,  together  with  the  sweet  mingling  made 
of  the  sound  of  the  trinal  breath,  even  as,  for 
avoiding  of  fatigue  or  danger,  the  oars,  erst 
driven  through  the  water,  all  stop  at  the  sound 
of  a  whistle. 

136.  Ah !  how  greatly  was  I  disturbed  in  mind, 
when  I  turned  to  see  Beatrice,  at  not  being  able 
to  see  her,  although  I  was  near  her,  and  in 
the  happy  world. 

CANTO  XXVI 

While  I  was  apprehensive  because  of  my 
quenched  sight,  a  breath  which  made  me  atten¬ 
tive  issued  from  the  effulgent  flame  that  had 
quenched  it,  saying:  “While  thou  art  regain¬ 
ing  the  sense  of  sight  which  thou  hast  con¬ 
sumed  on  me,  it  is  well  that  thou  make  up  for 
it  by  discourse.  Begin  then,  and  tell  at  what  thy 
soul  is  aimed,  and  make  thy  recokoning  that 
thy  sight  is  confounded  in  thee  and  not  dead; 
because  the  Lady  who  conducts  thee  through 

7  Christ.  It  was  believed  that  the  pelican  killed  its 
brood,  and  then  revived  them  with  its  blood. 

8  See  John,  19.  27. 

9  Dante  seeks  to  see  whether  St.  John  is  present  in 
the  earthly  as  well  as  the  spiritual  body;  his  desire 
having  its  source  in  the  words  of  the  Gospel:  “Jesus 
saith  unto  him,  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what 
is  that  to  thee?  .  .  .  Then  went  this  saying  abroad 
among  the  brethren,  that  that  disciple  should  not 
die.”  See  John,  21.  22,  23.  From  these  words  arose  a 
legend  that,  immediately  on  his  apparent  death,  St. 
John,  still  in  the  body,  was  taken  up  to  heaven. 

10  Jesus  and  Mary.  See  Canto  xxiii.  86,  120. 


PARADISE 


146 

this  divine  region  has  in  her  look  the  virtue 
which  the  hand  of  Ananias  had.”1 

13. 1  said:  “At  her  pleasure,  or  soon  or  late, 
let  the  cure  come  to  the  eyes  which  were  the 
gates  when  she  entered  with  the  fire  wherewith 
I  ever  burn.  The  Good  which  makes  this  court 
content  is  Alpha  and  Omega  of  every  scripture 
that  Love  reads  to  me,  either  low  or  loud.”2 

19.  That  same  voice  which  had  taken  from 
me  fear  in  regard  to  the  sudden  dazzling,  laid 
on  me  the  charge  to  speak  further,  and  said: 
“Surely  with  a  finer  sieve  it  behoves  thee  to 
sift;  it  behoves  thee  to  tell  who  directed  thy 
bow  to  such  a  target.” 

25.  And  I:  “By  philosophic  arguments  and 
by  authority  that  descends  from  here,  such  love 
must  needs  be  impressed  on  me;  for  the  good, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  good,  so  soon  as  it  is  under¬ 
stood,  kindles  love;  and  so  much  the  greater 
as  the  more  of  goodness  it  comprises  in  itself. 
Therefore,  to  the  Essence  (wherein  is  such  su¬ 
premacy  that  every  good  which  is  found  out¬ 
side  of  It  is  naught  else  than  a  beam  of  Its  own 
radiance),  more  than  to  any  other,  the  mind 
of  everyone  who  discerns  the  truth  on  which 
this  argument  is  founded  must  needs  be  moved 
in  love.  This  truth  does  he  make  plain  to 
my  intelligence,  who  demonstrates  to  me  the 
first  love  of  all  the  sempiternal  substances.3  The 
voice  of  the  true  Author  makes  it  plain  who, 
speakingof  Himself, says  to  Moses:  ‘I  will  make 
thee  see  all  goodness.’4  Thou,  too,  makest  it 
plain  to  me,  beginning  the  lofty  announcement 
which  below  on  earth,  above  all  other  trump, 
proclaims  the  secret  of  this  place  on  high.”3 

46.  And  I  heard:  “By  human  understanding, 
and  by  authorities  concordant  with  it,  thy  sov¬ 
ran  love  looks  unto  God;  but  say,  further, 
if  thou  feelest  other  cords  draw  thee  towards 
Him,  so  that  thou  mayst  declare  with  how 
many  teeth  this  love  doth  bite  thee.” 

52.  The  holy  intention  of  the  Eagle  of  Christ 
was  not  latent  to  me;  nay,  rather  I  perceived 
whither  he  wished  to  lead  my  profession;  there¬ 
fore,  I  began  again:  “All  those  bitings  which 
can  make  the  heart  turn  to  God  have  been  con¬ 
current  unto  my  love;  for  the  existence  of  the 

1  See  Acts,  9.  18. 

2  See  Revelation,  1 .  8. 

3  Aristotle. 

4  See  Exodus,  33.  19. 

5  See  Revelation,  1 .  8. 


world,  and  my  own  existence,  the  death  which 
He  endured  that,  I  may  live,  and  that  which 
all  the  faithful  hope  even  as  I  do,  together  with 
the  aforesaid  living  consciousness,  have  drawn 
me  from  the  sea  of  perverted  love,  and  have 
set  me  on  the  shore  of  the  right.  The  leaves, 
wherewith  all  the  garden  of  the  Eternal  Gar¬ 
dener  is  enleaved,  I  love  in  measure  of  the  good 
borne  unto  them  from  Him.” 

67.  Soon  as  I  was  silent  a  most  sweet  song 
resounded  through  the  heavens,  and  my  Lady 
said  with  the  others:  “Holy,  Holy,  Holy.” 

70.  And  as  at  a  keen  light  sleep  is  broken  by 
the  spirit  of  sight,  which  runs  to  the  splendor 
that  goes  from  coat  to  coat,  and  he  who  awakes 
shrinks  from  what  he  sees,  so  ignorant  is  his 
sudden  wakening,  until  his  judgment  comes 
to  his  aid;  thus  Beatrice  chased  away  every 
mote  from  my  eyes  with  the  radiance  of  her 
own,  which  were  refulgent  more  than  a  thou¬ 
sand  miles;  so  that  I  then  saw  better  than  be¬ 
fore;  and,  as  one  amazed,  I  asked  concerning  a 
fourth  light  which  I  saw  with  us.  And  my 
Lady:  “Within  those  rays  the  first  soul  which 
the  First  Power  ever  created  gazes  with  joy 
upon  its  Maker.” 

85.  As  the  bough  which  bends  its  top  at  pass¬ 
ing  of  the  wind,  and  then  uplifts  itself  by  its 
own  virtue  which  raises  it,  so  did  I,  in  amaze¬ 
ment,  while  she  was  speaking;  and  then  a  de¬ 
sire  to  speak,  wherewith  I  was  burning,  gave 
me  again  assurance,  and  I  began:  “O  fruit, 
that  wast  alone  produced  mature,  O  ancient 
Father,  to  whom  every  bride  is  daughter  and 
daughter-in-law,  devoutly  as  I  can,  I  supplicate 
thee  that  thou  speak  to  me;  thou  seest  my 
wish,  and  that  I  may  hear  thee  speedily,  I  do 
not  tell  it.” 

97.  Sometimes  an  animal,  when  covered  up, 
so  stirs,  that  its  impulse  must  needs  be  appar¬ 
ent  because  of  the  corresponding  movement 
which  its  wrapping  makes;  and  in  like  man¬ 
ner  the  first  soul  made  evident  to  me,  through 
its  covering,  how  gladly  it  came  to  do  me 
pleasure. 

103.  Then  it  breathed  forth:  “Without  its  be¬ 
ing  uttered  to  me  by  thee,  I  better  discern  thy 
wish,  than  thou  whatever  thing  is  most  certain 
to  thee;  because  I  see  it  in  the  truthful  Mirror 
which  makes  of  Itself  a  reflection  of  other 
things,  while  nothing  makes  of  itself  a  reflec- 


CANTO 

tion  of  It.  Thou  wouldst  hear  how  long  it  is 
since  God  placed  me  in  the  lofty  garden  where 
this  Lady  made  thee  ready  for  so  long  a  stair¬ 
way;  and  hew  long  it  was  a  delight  to  my  eyes; 
and  the  proper  cause  of  the  great  wrath;  and 
of  the  idiom  which  I  used  and  which  I  made. 

1 1 5.  “Now,  my  son,  the  tasting  of  the  tree 
was  not  by  itself  the  cause  of  so  great  an  exile, 
but  only  the  overpassing  of  the  bound.  In  that 
place  whence  thy  Lady  moved  Virgil,  I  longed 
for  this  assembly  during  four  thousand  three 
hundred  and- two  revolutions  of  the  sun:  and 
while  I  was  on  earth  I  saw  him  return  to  all 
the  lights  of  his  path  nine  hundred  and  thirty 
times.  The  tongue  which  I  spoke  was  all  ex¬ 
tinct  long  before  the  people  of  Nimrod  at¬ 
tempted  their  unaccomplishable  work;  for  nev¬ 
er  was  any  product  of  the  reason  durable  for 
ever,  because  of  human  liking,  which  alters, 
following  the  heavens.  That  man  speaks  is 
work  of  nature;  but,  thus  or  thus,  nature  then 
leaves  to  you  to  do  according  as  it  pleases  you. 
Before  I  descended  to  the  infernal  anguish,  the 
Supreme  Good,  whence  comes  the  gladness  that 
swathes  me^was  on  earth  called  I;  afterwards 
it  was  called  El;1  and  that  must  needs  me.  for 
the  custom  of  mortals  is  as  a  leaf  on  a  branch, 
which  goes  away  and  another  comes.  On  the 
mountain  which  rises  highest  from  the  wave  I 
was,  with  pure  life  and  sinful,  from  the  first 
hour  to  that  which  follows  the  sixth,  when  the 
sun  changes  quadrant.” 

CANTO  XXVII 

“To  the  Father,  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  be  glory,”  all  Paradise  began,  so  that  the 
sweet  song  was  inebriating  me.  That  which  I 
was  seeing  seemed  to  me  a  smile  of  the  uni¬ 
verse;  for  my  inebriation  was  entering  through 
the  hearing  and  through  the  sight.  O  joy!  O 
ineffable  gladness!  O  life  entire  of  love  and  of 
peace!  O  riches  secure,  without  longing! 

10.  Before  my  eyes  the  four  torches  were 
standing  enkindled,  and  that  which  had  come 
first  began  to  make  itself  more  vivid,  and  in  its 
semblence  became  such  as  Jupiter  would  be¬ 
come,  if  he  and  Mars  were  birds,  and  should 
exchange  plumage.  The  Providence  which  here 
assigns  turn  and  office,  had  imposed  silence 

1  /  is  here  to  be  pronounced  jah;  see  Psalms,  68.  4. 


XXVII  1 47 

on  the  blessed  choir  on  every  side,  when  I 
heard:  “If  I  change  color,  marvel  not;  for,  as 
I  speak,  thou  shalt  see  all  these  change  color. 
He  who  on  earth  usurps  my  place,  my  place, 
my  place,  which  is  vacant  in  the  presence  of 
the  Son  of  God/  has  made  of  my  cemetery  a 
sewer  of  blood  and  of  filth,  wherewith  the  Per¬ 
verse  One  who  fell  from  here  above,  below 
there  is  placated.” 

28.  With  that  color  which,  by  reason  of  the 
opposite  sun,  paints  the  cloud  at  evening  and 
at  morning,  I  then  saw  the  whole  Heaven 
overspread.  And  as  a  modest  lady  who  abides 
sure  of  herself,  and  at  the  fault  of  another,  on 
only  hearing  of  it,  becomes  timid,  thus  did 
Beatrice  change  semblance;  and  such  eclipse,  I 
believe,  there  was  in  heaven  when  the  Supreme 
Power  suffered. 

37.  Then  his  words  proceeded,  in  a  voice  so 
transmuted  from  itself  that  his  countenance 
was  not  more  changed:  “The  Bride  of  Christ 
was  not  nurtured  on  my  blood,  and  that  of  Li¬ 
nus  and  of  Cletus,  to  be  employed  for  acquist 
of  gold;  but  for  acquist  of  this  glad  life  Sixtus 
and  Pius  and  Calixtus  and  Urban3  shed  their 
blood  after  much  weeping.  It  was  not  our  in¬ 
tention  that  part  of  the  Christian  people  should 
sit  on  the  right  hand  of  our  successors,  and 
part  on  the  other;  nor  that  the  keys  which  were 
entrusted  to  me  should  become  a  device  upon 
a  banner  which  should  fight  against  the  bap¬ 
tized;4  nor  that  I  should  be  made  a  figure  on 
a  seal  to  venal  and  mendacious  privileges, 
whereat  I  often  redden  and  flash.  Rapacious 
wolves,  in  garb  of  shepherd,  are  seen  from  here 
on  high  over  all  the  pastures:  O  defence  of 
God,  why  dost  thou  yet  lie  still!  To  drink  our 
blood  Cahorsines  and  Gascons  are  making 
ready;5  O  good  beginning,  to  what  vile  end 
must  thou  fall!  But  the  high  Providence,  which 
with  Scipio  defended  for  Rome  the  glory  of 
the  world,  will  succor  speedily,  as  I  conceive. 
And  thou,  son,  who  because  of  thy  mortal 

2  Dante  held  that  Boniface  VIII  had  no  right  to  the 
papal  throne,  because  his  election  had  taken  place 
while  Celestine  V,  his  predecessor,  was  still  alive,  and 
had  been  secured  by  bribery  and  deception. 

3  Early  Popes. 

4  In  Boniface  VIII’s  war  against  the  Colonna  family. 
See  Hell,  xxvii.  85-111. 

5  John  XXII,  Pope  from  1316  to  1334,  was  a  native 
of  Cahors;  his  immediate  predecessor,  Clement  V, 
i3°5'i3i4,  was  a  Gascon. 


PARADISE 


148 

weight  wilt  again  return  below,  open  thy  mouth, 
and  conceal  not  that  which  I  conceal  not.” 

67.  Even  as  our  air  snows  down  flakes  of 
frozen  vapors,  when  the  horn  of  the  Goat  of 
heaven  is  touched  by  the  sun,  so  I  saw  the 
aether  become  adorned,  and  flaked  upward 
with  the  triumphant  vapors  which  had  made 
sojourn  there  with  us.  My  sight  was  following 
their  semblances,  and  followed,  till  the  inter¬ 
mediate  space  by  its  vastness  took  from  it  the 
power  of  passing  farther  onward.  Whereon  my 
Lady,  who  saw  me  freed  from  gazing  upward, 
said  to  me:  “Cast  down  thy  sight,  and  look 
how  thou  hast  revolved.” 

79. 1  saw  that,  since  the  hour  when  I  had  first 
looked,1  I  had  moved  through  the  whole  arc 
which  the  first  climate  makes  from  its  middle 
to  its  end;  so  that  beyond  Cadiz  I  saw  the  mad 
track  of  Ulysses,  and  on  the  other  side  almost 
the  shore2  on  which  Europa  became  a  sweet 
burden.  And  more  of  the  site  of  this  little 
threshing-floor  would  have  been  discovered  to 
me,  but  the  sun  was  proceeding  beneath  my 
feet,  a  sign  and  more  removed. 

88.  My  enamoured  mind,  that  ever  pays 
court  to  my  Lady,  was  more  than  ever  burning 
to  bring  back  my  eyes  to  her.  And  if  nature 
or  art  has  made  bait  in  human  flesh  or  in  paint¬ 
ings  of  it,  to  catch  the  eyes  in  order  to  possess 
the  mind,  all  united  would  seem  naught  com¬ 
pared  to  the  divine  pleasure  which  shone  upon 
me  when  I  turned  me  to  her  smiling  face. 
And  the  virtue  which  that  look  vouchsafed 
to  me,  tore  me  from  the  fair  nest  of  Leda,3  and 
impelled  me  to  the  swiftest  heaven. 

100.  Its  parts,  most  living  and  lofty,  are  so 
uniform  that  I  cannot  tell  which  of  them  Be¬ 
atrice  chose  for  a  place  for  me.  But  she,  who 
saw  my  desire,  began,  smiling  so  glad  that  God 
seemed  to  rejoice  in  her  countenance:  “The 
nature  of  the  universe  which  holds  the  centre 
quiet,  and  moves  all  the  rest  around  it,  begins 
here  as  from  its  starting-point.  And  this  heav¬ 
en  has  no  other  Where  than  the  Divine  Mind, 
wherein  is  kindled  the  love  that  revolves  it, 
and  the  virtue  which  it  rains  down.  Light  and 

1  See  Canto  xxii.  133-153. 

2  The  coast  of  Phoenicia,  whence  Europa  was  carried 
off  by  Jupiter. 

3  From  Gemini,  the  constellation  of  Castor  and 

Pollux,  the  twin  sons  of  Leda. 


love  enclose  it  with  one  circle,  even  as  it  does 
the  others,  and  of  that  cincture  He  who  girds 
it  is  the  sole  Intelligence.  The  motion  of  this 
heaven  is  not  marked  out  by  another,  but  the 
others  are  measured  by  this,  just  as  ten  by  its 
half  and  by  its  fifth.  And  how  time  can  have 
its  roots  in  such  a  flower-pot  and  in  the  others 
its  leaves,  may  now  be  manifest  to  thee. 

121.  “O  covetousness,  which  dost  so  whelm 
mortals  beneath  thee,  that  no  one  has  power 
to  withdraw  his  eyes  from  out  thy  waves!  Well 
does  the  will  blossom  in  men,  but  the  contin¬ 
ual  rain  converts  the  true  plums  into  blighted 
fruit.  Faith  and  innocence  are  found  only  in 
children; then  each  flies  away  before  the  cheeks  ; 
are  covered.  One,  so  long  as  he  lisps,  keeps 
the  fasts,  who  afterward,  when  his  tongue  is 
loosed,  devours  whatever  food  under  whatever 
moon;  and  one,  while  he  lisps,  loves  his  mother 
and  listens  to  her,  who  afterward,  when  his 
speech  is  perfect,  desires  to  see  her  buried.  So 
the  skin  of  the  fair  daughter  of  him  who  brings 
morning  and  leaves  evening,  white  in  its  first 
aspect,  becomes  black.4  Do  thou,  in  order  that 
thou  make  no  marvel  of  it,  reflect  that  on  earth 
there  is  no  one  who  governs;  wherefore  the 
human  family  goes  thus  astray.  But  ere  Janu¬ 
ary  be  all  un-wintered  by  that  hundredth  part 
which  is  down  there  neglected,5  these  supernal 
circles  shall  so  roar  that  the  storm  which  has 
been  so  long  awaited  shall  turn  round  the 
sterns  to  where  the  prows  are,  so  that  the  fleet 
shall  run  straight,  and  true  fruit  shall  come 
after  the  flower.”6 

CANTO  XXVIII 

After  she  who  imparadises  my  mind  had 
disclosed  the  truth  counter  to  the  present  life 
of  wretched  mortals;  as  one  who  sees  in  a  mir¬ 
ror  the  flame  of  a  torch  which  is  lighted  behind 
him,  ere  he  has  it  in  sight  or  in  thought,  and 
turns  round  to  see  if  the  glass  tell  him  the 
truth,  and  sees  that  it  accords  with  it  as  the 
note  with  its  measure;  so  my  memory  recollects 
that  I  did,  looking  into  the  beautiful  eyes, 
wherewith  Love  made  the  cord  to  capture  me. 

And  when  I  turned,  and  mine  were  touched 

4  See  Aristotle.  Physics,  ii.  2.  I94bi3. 

5  By  an  error  in  the  calendar,  by  which  the  year 
was  lengthened  by  about  a  day  in  each  century. 

6Cf.  lines  125,  126,  supra. 


CANTO 

by  what  is  apparent  in  that  sphere  whenever 
one  gazes  fixedly  on  its  circling,  I  saw  a  Point 
which  was  raying  out  light  so  keen  that  the 
sight  on  which  it  blazes  must  needs  close  be¬ 
cause  of  its  intense  keenness.  And  whatever 
star  seems  smallest  from  here  would  seem  a 
moon  if  placed  beside  it,  as  star  with  star  is 
placed. 

22.  Perhaps  as  near  as  a  halo  seems  to  girdle 
the  light  which  paints  it,  when  the  vapor  that 
bears  it  is  most  dense,  at  such  distance  around 
the  Point  a  circle  of  fire  was  whirling  so  rap¬ 
idly  that  it  would  have  surpassed  that  motion 
which  most  swiftly  girds  the  world:  and  this 
was  girt  around  by  another,  and  that  by  the 
third,  and  the  third  then  by  the  fourth,  by  the 
fifth  the  fourth,  and  then  by  the  sixth  the  fifth. 
Thereon  the  seventh  followed,  so  widespread 
now  in  compass  that  the  messenger  of  Juno 
entire  would  be  narrow  to  contain  it.  So  the 
eighth  and  the  ninth;  and  each  was  moving 
more  slowly,  according  as  it  was  in  number 
more  distant  from  the  unit.  And  that  one  had 
the  clearest  flame  from  which  the  Pure  Spark 
was  least  distant;  I  believe  because  it  partakes 
more  of  Its  truth. 

40.  My  Lady,  who  saw  me  deeply  suspense 
in  heed,  said:  “On  that  Point  Heaven  and  all 
nature  are  dependent.  Look  on  that  circle 
which  is  most  conjoined  to  It,  and  know  that 
its  motion  is  so  swift  because  of  the  burning 
love  whereby  it  is  spurred.”  And  I  to  her:  “If 
the  world  were  disposed  in  the  order  which  I 
see  in  those  wheels,  that  which  is  set  before 
me  would  have  satisfied  me;  but  in  the  world 
of  sense  the  revolutions  may  be  seen  so  much 
the  more  divine  as  they  are  more  remote  from 
the  centre.  Wherefore  if  my  desire  is  to  have 
end  in  this  marvellous  and  angelic  temple, 
which  has  for  confine  only  love  and  light,  I 
need  yet  to  hear  why  the  example  and  the  ex¬ 
emplar  go  not  in  one  fashion,  because  by  my¬ 
self  I  contemplate  this  in  vain.”  “If  thy  fingers 
are  insufficient  for  such  a  knot,  it  is  no  won¬ 
der,  so  hard  has  it  become  through  not  being 
tried.” 

61.  Thus  my  Lady;  then  she  said:  “Take 
that  which  I  shall  tell  thee,  if  thou  wouldest 
be  satisfied  and  sharpen  thy  wit  about  it.  The 
corporeal  circles  are  wide  or  narrow  according 
to  the  more  or  less  of  virtue  which  is  diffused 


XXVIII  149 

through  all  their  parts.  Greater  goodness  must 
work  greater  weal;  the  greater  body,  if  it  has 
its  parts  equally  complete,  contains  the  greater 
weal.  Hence  this  one,  which  sweeps  along  with 
itself  all  the  rest  of  the  universe,  corresponds 
to  the  circle  which  loves  most,  and  knows  most. 
Therefore,  if  thou  draw  thy  measure  round 
the  virtue,  not  round  the  appearance  of  the 
beings  which  seem  circular  to  thee,  thou  wilt 
see  in  each  heaven  a  marvellous  agreement 
with  its  Intelligence,  of  greater  to  more  and 
of  smaller  to  less.” 

79.  As  the  hemisphere  of  the  air  remains 
splendid  and  serene  when  Boreas  blows  from 
that  cheek  wherewith  he  is  mildest,  whereby 
the  mist  which  before  troubled  it  is  cleared  and 
dissolved,  so  that  the  heaven  smiles  to  us  with 
the  beauties  of  its  every  region,  so  I  became 
after  my  Lady  had  provided  me  with  her  clear 
answer,  and,  like  a  star  in  heaven,  the  truth 
was  seen. 

88.  And  after  her  words  had  stopped,  not 
otherwise  does  molten  iron  throw  out  sparks 
than  the  circles  sparkled.  Every  scintillation 
followed  its  blaze,  and  they  were  so  many  that 
their  number  was  of  more  thousands  than  the 
doubling  of  the  chess.1 1  heard  Hosannah  sung 
from  choir  to  choir  to  the  fixed  Point  that 
holds  them,  and  will  forever  hold  them,  at  the 
Ubf~  in  which  they  have  ever  been.  And  she, 
who  saw  the  questioning  thoughts  within  mv 
mind,3  said:  “The  first  circles  have  shown  to 
thee  the  Seraphim  and  the  Cherubim.  Thus 
swiftly  they  follow  their  own  bonds,  in  order 
to  liken  themselves  to  the  Point  as  most  they 
can,  and  they  can  in  proportion  as  they  are 
exalted  to  see.  Those  other  loves,  which  go 
around  them,  are  called  Thrones  of  the  divine 
aspect,  because  they  terminated  the  first  triad.4 

1  This  alludes  to  the  story  that  the  inventor  of  the 
game  asked,  as  his  reward  from  the  King  of  Persia, 
a  grain  of  wheat  for  the  first  square  of  the  board, 
two  for  the  second,  four  for  the  third,  and  so  on 
with  successive  duplication  to  the  last  or  sixty-fourth 
square,  the  number  reached  by  this  process  extending 
to  twenty  figures. 

2  The  where . 

3  His  questioning  thoughts  were  in  regard  to  the 
arrangement  of  the  Orders  of  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy, 
which  Beatrice  now  proceeds  to  declare  to  him,  fol¬ 
lowing  the  treatise  Concerning  the  Heavenly  Hier¬ 
archy,  generally  ascribed  during  the  Middle  Ages  to 
Dionysius  the  Areopagite  (see  Acts,  17.  34;  II  Corin¬ 
thians,  12.  2-4). 

4  See  Canto  ix.  61. 


PARADISE 


And  thou  shouldst  know  that  all  have  delight 
in  proportion  as  their  vision  penetrates  into 
the  Truth  in  which  every  understanding  is  at 
rest.  Hence  may  be  seen  how  beatitude  is 
founded  on  the  act  which  sees,  not  on  that 
which  loves,  which  follows  after.  And  the  mer¬ 
it,  to  which  grace  and  good-will  give  birth,  is 
the  measure  of  this  seeing;  thus  is  the  progress 
from  grade  to  grade. 

1 15.  “The  next  triad,  that  in  like  manner 
bourgeons  in  this  sempiternal  spring  which  the 
nightly  Aries  despoils  not,  perpetually  sing 
Hosannah  with  three  melodies,  which  sound  in 
the  three  orders  of  joy  wherewith  it  is  three¬ 
fold.  In  this  hierarchy  are  the  three  divinities, 
first  Dominations,  and  then  Virtues;  the  third 
order  is  of  Powers.  Then,  in  the  two  penulti¬ 
mate  dances,  the  Principalities  and  Archangels 
circle;  the  last  is  wholly  of  Angelic  sports. 
These  orders  all  gaze  upward,  and  downward 
so  prevail,  that  toward  God  all  are  drawn,  and 
all  draw.  And  Dionysius  with  such  great  de¬ 
sire  set  himself  to  contemplate  these  orders,  that 
he  named  and  divided  them,  as  I.  But  Greg¬ 
ory1  afterward  separated  from  him;  wherefore, 
so  soon  as  he  opened  his  eyes  in  this  Heaven, 
he  smiled  at  himself.  And  if  a  mortal  declared 
on  earth  so  much  of  secret  truth,  I  would  not 
have  thee  wonder,  for  he  who  saw  it  here  on 
high  disclosed  it  to  him,  with  much  else  of  the 
truth  of  these  circles.” 

CANTO  XXIX 

When  the  two  children  of  Latona,  covered 
by  the  Ram  and  by  the  Scales,  both  at  one  mo¬ 
ment  make  a  zone  of  the  horizon,  as  long  as 
from  the  instant  the  zenith  holds  them  in  bal¬ 
ance,  till  one  and  the  other,  changing  their 
hemisphere,  are  unbalanced  from  that  girdle, 
so  long,  with  her  countenance  painted  with  a 
smile,  was  Beatrice  silent,  looking  fixedly  upon 
the  Point  which  had  overcome  me. 

to.  Then  she  began:  “I  tell,  not  ask,  what 
thou  wishest  to  hear,  for  I  have  seen  it  where 
every  where  and  every  when  are  centred.  Not 
for  the  gain  of  good  unto  Himself,  which  can¬ 
not  be,  but  that  His  splendor  might,  in  re- 

1  Pope  St.  Gregory  differed  slightly  from  Dionysius 
in  his  arrangement  of  the  Orders  of  the  Heavenly 
Host. 


splendence  say,  I  am;  in  His  own  eternity,  out¬ 
side  of  time,  outside  of  every  other  limit,  as 
it  pleased  Him,  the  Eternal  Love  disclosed 
Himself  in  new  loves.  Nor  before,  as  if  inert, 
did  He  lie;  for  neither  before  nor  after2  did 
the  moving  of  God  upon  these  waters  pro¬ 
ceed. 

22.  “Form  and  matter,  conjoined  and  sim¬ 
ple,  came  into  being  which  had  no  defect,  as 
three  arrows  from  a  three-stringed  bow:  and 
as  in  glass,  in  amber,  or  in  crystal  a  ray  shines 
so  that  there  is  no  interval  between  its  coming 
and  its  being  complete,  so  did  the  triform  effect 
ray  forth  from  its  Lord  into  its  being  all  at 
once,  without  distinction  of  beginning.  Order 
was  concreate  and  established  for  the  sub¬ 
stances;  and  those  in  which  pure  act  was  pro¬ 
duced  were  top  of  the  world.3  Pure  potential¬ 
ity  held  the  lowest  part;  in  the  middle  such  a 
bond  tied  up  potentiality  with  act,  that  it  is 
never  unbound.  Jerome  wrote  for  you  of  the 
Angels,  as  being  created  a  long  tract  of  centur¬ 
ies  before  the  rest  of  the  world  was  made;  but 
this  truth4  is  written  on  many  pages  by  the 
wi  iters  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  thou  wilt  thy¬ 
self  discern  it  there,  if  thou  watchest  well  for 
it;  and  also  the  reason  sees  it  somewhat,  which 
would  not  admit  that  the  motors  could  be  so 
long  without  their  perfection.  Now  thou  know- 
est  where  and  when  these  Loves  were  created, 
and  how;  so  that  three  flames  of  thy  desire  are 
already  quenched. 

49.  “One  would  not  reach  to  twenty,  in 
counting,soquicklyas  a  part  of  the  Angels  dis¬ 
turbed  the  lowest  of  your  elements.5  The  rest 
remained  and  began  this  art  which  thou  be- 
holdest,  with  such  great  delight  that  they  nev¬ 
er 'cease  from  circling.  The  origin  of  the  fall 
was  the  accursed  pride  of  him  whom  thou  hast 
seen  opprest  by  all  the  weights  of  the  world. 
Those  whom  thou  seest  here  were  modest  to 
recognize  themselves  as  from  the  Goodness 
which  had  made  them  apt  for  intelligence  so 
great;  wherefore  their  vision  was  exalted  by 
illuminating  grace  and  by  their  merit,  so  that 
they  have  a  full  and  steadfast  will.  And  I 
would  not  that  thou  doubt,  but  be  certain,  that 

2  See  Genesis,  1.2. 

3  See  Aquinas,  Stimma  Theo^ogica,  Part  I,  Q  50, 
A  1.;  Part  II-II,  Q  113,  A  6. 

4  Ibid.,  Part  I,  9  61,  A  3. 

5  See  Hell,  xxxiv.  122-126. 


CANTO  XXX 


to  receive  grace  is  meritorious  in  proportion  as 
the  affection  is  open  to  it. 

67.  “Henceforth,  if  my  words  have  been  har¬ 
vested,  thou  canst  contemplate  much  in  regard 
to  this  consistory  without  other  assistance.  But 
since  on  earth  it  is  taught  in  your  schools  that 
the  angelic  nature  is  such  that  it  understands, 
and  remembers,  and  wills,  I  will  speak  further, 
in  order  that  thou  mayest  see  the  simple  truth, 
which  there  below  is  confused,  by  the  equivo¬ 
cation  in  such  like  teaching.  These  substances, 
since  first  they  were  gladdened  by  the  face  of 
God,  have  not  turned  their  sight  from  it,  from 
which  nothing  is  concealed;  therefore  they 
have  not  a  vision  interrupted  by  new  objects, 
and  therefore  do  not  need  to  remember  by  a 
divided  conception.  So  that  down  there  men 
dream  when  not  asleep,  believing  and  not  be¬ 
lieving  to  speak  truth;  but  in  the  one  is  more 
fault  and  more  shame. 

85.  “Ye  below  go  not  along  one  path  in  phi¬ 
losophizing;  so  much  do  the  love  of  display 
and  the  thought  of  it  transport  you:  and  yet 
this  is  endured  here  on  high  with  less  indig¬ 
nation  than  when  the  divine  Scripture  is  set 
aside,  or  when  it  is  perverted.  Men  think  not 
there  how  much  blood  it  costs  to  sow  it  in  the 
world,  or  how  much  he  pleases  who  humbly 
keeps  close  to  it.  Every  one  strives  for  display, 
and  makes  his  own  inventions,  and  those  are 
treated  of  by  the  preachers,  and  the  Gospel  is 
silent.  One  says  that  the  moon  turned  back  at 
the  passion  of  Christ  and  interposed  herself, 
so  that  the  light  of  the  sun  reached  not  down; 
and  others  that  the  light  hid  itself  of  its  own 
accord,  so  that  this  eclipse  answered  for  the 
Spaniards  and  for  the  Indians  as  well  as  for  the 
Jews.  Florence  has  not  so  many  Lapi  and  Bindi1 
as  fables  such  as  these  that  are  shouted  the  year 
long  from  the  pulpits,  on  every  side;  so  that 
the  poor  flocks,  who  know  naught,  return 
from  the  pasture  fed  with  wind;  and  not  see¬ 
ing  the  harm  does  not  excuse  them. 

109.  “Christ  did  not  say  to  his  first  company: 
‘Go,  and  preach  idle  stories  to  the  world,’  but 
he  gave  to  them  the  true  foundation;  and  that 
alone  sounded  in  their  mouths,  so  that  to  fight 
for  kindling  of  the  faith  they  made  shield  and 
lance  of  the  Gospel.  Now  men  go  forth  to 

1  Common  nicknames  in  Florence. 


preach  with  jests  and  with  buffooneries,  and 
so  there  be  only  a  good  laugh  the  cowl  puffs 
up,  and  nothing  more  is  asked;  but  such  a  bird 
is  nesting  in  the  tail  of  the  hood,  that  if  the 
crowd  should  see  it,  they  would  see  in  what 
pardoning  they  are  trusting;  wherefore  such 
great  folly  has  grown  on  earth,  that,  without 
proof  of  any  testimony,  men  would  flock  to 
every  promise.  On  this  the  pig  of  St.  Antony 
fattens,2  and  others  also,  who  are  far  more  pigs, 
paying  with  money  that  has  no  stamp  of  coin¬ 
age. 

127.  “But  because  we  have  digressed  enough, 
turn  back  thine  eyes  now  toward  the  straight 
path,  so  that  the  way  be  shortened  with  the 
time.  This  nature3  so  exceedingly  extends  in 
number,  that  never  was  there  speech  or  mor¬ 
tal  concept  that  can  go  so  far.  And  if  thou  con¬ 
sider  that  which  is  revealed  by  Daniel  thou 
wilt  see  that  in  his  thousands4  a  determinate 
number  is  concealed.  The  Primal  Light  that 
irradiates  it  all  is  received  in  it  by  as  many 
modes  as  are  the  splendors  with  which  It  pairs 
Itself.  Wherefore,  since  the  affection  follows 
upon  the  act  that  conceives,  in  this  nature  the 
sweetness  of  love  diversely  glows  and  warms. 
Behold  now  the  height  and  the  breadth  of  the 
Eternal  Goodness,  since  it  has  made  for  itself 
so  many  mirrors  on  which  it  is  broken.  One 
in  itself  remaining  as  before.” 

CANTO  XXX 

The  sixth  hour  is  glowing  perhaps  six  thou¬ 
sand  miles  distant  from  us,  and  this  world  now 
inclines  its  shadow  almost  to  a  level  bed,  when 
the  mid-heaven,  deep  above  us,  begins  to  be¬ 
come  such  that  some  one  star  loses  its  show  so 
far  as  to  this  depth;  and  as  the  brightest  hand¬ 
maid  of  the  sun  comes  farther  on,  so  the  heav¬ 
en  is  closed  from  light  to  light,  even  to  the 
most  beautiful.  Not  otherwise  the  Triumph, 
that  plays  forever  round  the  Point  which  van¬ 
quished  me,  seeming  enclosed  by  that  which 

2  St.  Antony  of  Egypt,  the  patriarch  of  monks,  is 
represented  with  a  hog  under  his  feet,  as  a  symbol 
of  his  mastery  of  sensual  temptations.  The  monks 
of  his  order  kept  swine,  fed  at  public  charge;  it  was 
a  profanation  to  steal  or  kill  them.  Dante  gives  the 
name  of  pigs  to  his  degenerate  followers,  many  of 
whom  grew  fat  on  the  sale  of  false  indulgences. 

“See  Aquinas.  Summa  Theologica,  Part  I,  Q  50, 
A  3. 

*  See  Daniel,  7.  10. 


PARADISE 


it  encloses,  was  extinguished  little  by  little  to 
my  sight;  wherefore  my  seeing  nothing  and 
my  love  constrained  me  to  turn  with  my  eyes 
to  Beatrice.  If  what  has  been  said  of  her  so  far 
as  here  were  all  included  in  a  single  praise,  it 
would  be  little  to  furnish  forth  this  turn.  The 
beauty  which  I  saw  transcends  measure  not 
only  beyond  our  reach,  but  surely  I  believe  that 
its  Maker  alone  can  enjoy  it  all. 

22.  By  this  pass  I  concede  myself  vanquished 
more  than  ever  comic  or  tragic  poet  was  over¬ 
come  by  crisis  of  his  theme.  For  as  the  sun 
does  to  the  sight  which  trembles  most,  even  so 
remembrance  of  the  sweet  smile  deprives  my 
memory  of  its  very  self.  From  the  first  day 
when  in  this  life  I  saw  her  face,  until  this  sight, 
the  following  with  my  song  has  not  been  cut 
off  for  me,  but  now  needs  must  my  pursuit  de¬ 
sist  from  further  following  her  beauty  in  my 
verse,  as  at  his  utmost  every  artist. 

34.  Such,  as  I  leave  her  for  a  greater  herald¬ 
ing  than  that  of  my  trumpet,  which  is  bringing 
its  arduous  theme  to  a  close,  with  act  and  voice 
of  a  leader  whose  talk  is  accomplished  she  be¬ 
gan  again:  “We  have  issued  forth  from  the 
greatest  body  to  the  Heaven  which  is  pure 
light:  light  intellectual  full  of  love,  love  of  true 
good  full  of  joy,  joy  which  transcends  every 
sweetness.  Here  thou  shalt  see  the  one  and  the 
other  soldiery  of  Paradise;  and  the  one  in  those 
aspects  which  thou  shalt  see  at  the  Last  Judg¬ 
ment.'’ 

46.  As  a  sudden  flash  which  scatters  the 
spirits  of  the  sight  so  that  it  deprives  the  eye 
of  the  action  of  the  strongest  objects;  so  did  a 
vivid  light  shine  round  about  me,  leaving  me 
swathed  with  such  a  veil  of  its  own  effulgence 
that  nothing  was  visible  to  me. 

52.  “The  Love  which  quieteth  this  Heaven 
always  welcomes  to  itself  with  such  a  saluta¬ 
tion,  in  order  to  make  the  candle  fit  for  its 
flame.”  No  sooner  had  these  brief  words  come 
within  me  than  I  comprehended  that  I  was 
surmounting  above  my  own  power;  and  I  re¬ 
kindled  me  with  a  new  vision,  such  that  no 
light  is  so  pure  that  my  eyes  could  not  have 
withstood  it.  And  I  saw  light  in  form  of  a  river 
glowing  with  effulgence,  between  two  banks 
painted  with  marvellous  spring.  From  this 
stream  were  issuing  living  sparks,  and  on  ev¬ 
ery  side  were  setting  themselves  in  the  flowers, 


like  rubies  which  gold  encompasses.  Then,  as 
if  inebriated  by  the  odors,  they  plunged  again 
into  the  wonderful  flood,  and  as  one  was  en¬ 
tering  another  was  issuing  forth. 

70.  “The  high  desire  which  now  inflames 
and  urges  thee  to  have  knowledge  concerning 
that  which  thou  seest,  pleases  me  the  more  the 
more  it  swells;  but  thou  must  needs  drink  of 
this  water  before  so  great  a  thirst  in  thee  be 
slaked.”  Thus  the  Sun  of  my  eyes  said  to  me; 
then  added:  “The  stream,  and  the  topazes 
which  enter  and  issue,  and  the  smiling  of  the 
herbage,  are  shadowy  prefaces  of  their  truth; 
not  that  these  things  are  difficult  in  themselves, 
but  there  is  defect  on  thy  part  that  thou  hast 
not  yet  vision  so  exalted.” 

82.  There  is  no  babe  who  so  hastily  springs 
with  face  toward  the  milk,  if  he  awake  much 
later  than  his  wont,  as  I  did,  to  make  yet  better 
mirrors  of  my  eyes,  stooping  to  the  wave  which 
flows  in  order  that  we  may  be  bettered  in  it. 
And  even  as  the  eaves  of  my  eyelids  drank  of 
it,  so  it  seemed  to  me  from  its  length  to  have 
become  round.  Then  as  folk  who  have  been 
under  masks,  who  seem  other  than  before,  if 
they  divest  themselves  of  the  semblance  not 
their  own  wherein  they  disappeared,  in  such 
wise  for  me  the  flowers  and  the  sparks  were 
changed  into  greater  festival,  so  that  I  saw  both 
the  Courts  of  Heaven  made  manifest. 

97.  O  splendor  of  God,  through  which  I  saw 
the  high  triumph  of  the  true  kingdom,  give  to 
me  power  to  tell  how  I  saw  it! 

100.  Light  is  thereabove  which  makes  the 
Creator  visible  to  that  creature  which  has  its 
peace  only  in  seeing  Him;  and  it  spreads  in 
circular  shape  so  far  that  its  circumference 
would  be  too  large  a  girdle  for  the  sun.  Its 
whole  appearance  is  made  of  a  ray  reflected 
from  the  summit  of  the  First  Moving  Heaven, 
which  from  it  takes  its  life  and  potency.  And 
as  a  hill  mirrors  itself  in  water  at  its  base,  as  if 
to  see  itself  adorned,  when  it  is  rich  with  ver¬ 
dure  and  with  flowers,  so,  above  the  light, 
round  and  round  about,  on  more  than  a  thou¬ 
sand  seats,  I  saw  mirrored,  as  they  rose,  all  that 
of  us  have  made  return  on  high.  And  if  the 
lowest  row  gather  within  itself  so  great  a  light, 
how  vast  is  the  spread  of  this  rose  in  its  outer¬ 
most  leaves!  My  sight  lost  not  itself  in  the 
breadth  and  in  the  height,  but  took  in  all  the 


CANTO  XXXI 


quantity  and  quality  of  that  joy.  There  near 
and  far  nor  add  nor  take  away;  for  where  God 
governs  without  intermediary  the  natural  law 
is  of  no  relevancy. 

124.  Into  the  yellow  of  the  sempiternal  rose, 
which  spreads  wide,  rises  in  tiers,  and  breathes 
forth  odor  of  praise  unto  the  Sun  that  makes 
perpetual  spring.  Beatrice,  like  one  who  is  si¬ 
lent  and  wishes  to  speak,  drew  me  and  said, 
“Behold,  how  vast  is  the  convent  of  the  white 
stoles;1  See  our  city,  how  wide  its  circuit!  See 
our  benches  so  full  that  few  people  are  now 
wanting  here.  On  that  great  seat,  on  which 
thou  holdest  thine  eye  because  of  the  crown 
which  already  is  set  above  it,  ere  thou  dost  sup 
at  this  wedding-feast,  shall  sit  the  soul  (which 
on  earth  will  be  imperial)  of  the  lofty  Henry 
who,  to  set  Italy  straight,  will  come  ere  she  is 
ready.2  The  blind  cupidity  which  bewitches 
you  has  made  you  like  the  little  child  who  dies 
of  hunger,  and  drives  away  his  nurse;  and 
such  a  one  will  then  be  prefect  in  the  divine 
forum  that  openly  or  covertly  he  will  not  go 
with  him  along  one  road;3  but  short  while 
thereafter  shall  he  be  endured  by  God  in  the 
holy  office;  for  he  shall  be  thrust  down  there 
where  Simon  Magus  is  for  his  deserts,  and 
shall  make  him  of  Anagna4  go  lower.” 

CANTO  XXXI 

In  form  then  of  a  pure  white  rose  the  holy 
host  was  shown  to  me,  which,  in  His  own 
blood,  Christ  made  His  bride.  But  the  other, 
which,  flying,  sees  and  sings  the  glory  of  Him 
who  enamours  it,  and  the  goodness  which 
made  it  so  great,  like  a  swarm  of  bees  which 
one  while  inflower  themselves  and  one  while 
return  to  where  their  work  acquires  savor, 
were  descending  into  the  great  flower  which  is 
adorned  with  so  many  leaves,  and  thence  ris¬ 
ing  up  again  to  where  their  love  always  abides. 
They  had  their  faces  all  of  living  flame,  and 
their  wings  of  gold,  and  the  rest  so  white  that 
no  snow  reaches  that  limit.  When  they  de¬ 
scended  into  the  flower,  from  bench  to  bench, 

1  See  Revelation,  3.  5. 

2  Henry  VII. 

3  Pope  Clement  V  for  a  time  ostensibly  supported 
Henry  VII  in  his  Italian  expedition,  but  gradually  in 
underhand  fashion  turned  against  him.  He  died  in 
1314,  eight  months  after  the  death  of  Henry. 

4  Anagni,  where  Boniface  VIII  was  born. 


they  imparted  of  the  peace  and  of  the  ardor 
which  they  acquired  as  they  fanned  their  sides. 
Nor  did  the  interposing  of  so  great  a  flying 
plenitude,  between  what  was  above  and  the 
flower,  impede  the  sight  or  the  splendor;  for 
the  divine  light  penetrates  through  the  uni¬ 
verse,  according  as  it  is  worthy,  so  that  naught 
can  be  an  obstacle  to  it.  This  secure  and  joyous 
realm,  thronged  with  ancient  and  with  mod¬ 
ern  folk,  had  its  look  and  love  all  on  one  mark. 

28.  O  Trinal  Light,  which  in  a  single  star, 
scintillating  on  their  sight,  dost  so  satisfy  them, 
look  down  here  upon  our  tempest! 

31.  If  the  Barbarians,  coming  from  a  region 
such  that  every  day  it  is  covered  by  Helice,5  re¬ 
volving  with  her  son  of  whom  she  is  fond, 
when  they  beheld  Rome  and  her  lofty  work — 
what  time  Lateran  rose  above  mortal  things — 
were  wonder-struck,  I,  who  to  the  divine  from 
the  human,  to  the  eternal  from  the  temporal, 
had  come,  and  from  Florence  to  a  people  just 
and  sane,  with  what  amazement  must  I  have 
been  full!  Truly  what  with  it  and  with  the  joy 
I  was  well  pleased  not  to  hear,  and  to  stand 
mute.  And  as  a  pilgrim  who  is  refreshed  with¬ 
in  the  temple  of  his  vow  as  he  looks  around, 
and  hopes  some  day  to  report  how  it  was,  so, 
journeying  through  the  living  light,  I  carried 
my  eyes  over  the  ranks,  now  up,  now  down, 
and  now  circling  about.  I  saw  faces  persuasive 
to  love,  beautified  by  the  light  of  Another  and 
by  their  own  smile,  and  actions  graced  with 
every  dignity. 

52.  My  look  had  now  comprehended  the 
general  form  of  Paradise  as  a  whole,  and  on  no 
part  had  my  sight  as  yet  been  fixed;  and  I 
turned  me  with  rekindled  wish  to  ask  my  Lady 
about  things  as  to  which  my  mind  was  in  sus¬ 
pense.  One  thing  I  purposed,  and  another  an¬ 
swered  me;  I  was  thinking  to  see  Beatrice,  and 
I  saw  an  old  man,  robed  like  the  people  in 
glory.  His  eyes  and  his  cheeks  were  overspread 
with  benignant  joy,  his  mien  kindly  such  as  be¬ 
fits  a  tender  father.  And:  “Where  is  she?”  on 
a  sudden  said  I. 

65.  Whereon  he:  “To  terminate  thy  desire, 
Beatrice  urged  me  from  my  place,  and  if  thou 
lookest  up  to  the  third  circle  from  the  highest 
rank,  thou  wilt  again  see  her  upon  the  throne 

5  See  Purgatory,  xxv.  130- 137. 


PARADISE 


which  her  merits  have  allotted  to  her.”  With¬ 
out  answering  I  lifted  up  my  eyes,  and  saw  her 
as  she  had  made  for  herself  a  crown  reflecting 
from  herself  the  eternal  rays.  From  that  region 
which  thunders  highest  up  no  mortal  eye  is  so 
far  distant,  in  whatsoever  sea  it  lets  itself  sink 
deepest,  as  there  from  Beatrice  was  my  sight. 
But  this  was  naught  to  me,  for  her  image  did 
not  descend  to  me  blurred  by  aught  between. 

79.  “O  Lady,  in  whom  my  hope  is  strong, 
and  who,  for  my  salvation,  didst  endure  to 
leave  thy  footprints  in  Hell,  of  all  those  things 
which  I  have  seen  through  thy  power  and 
through  thy  goodness,  I  recognize  the  grace 
and  the  virtue.  Thou  hast  drawn  me  from  ser¬ 
vitude  to  liberty  by  all  those  ways,  by  all  the 
modes  whereby  thou  hadst  the  power  to  do  it. 
Guard  thou  in  me  thine  own  magnificence  so 
that  my  soul,  which  thou  hast  made  whole, 
may,  pleasing  to  thee,  be  unloosed  from  the 
body.”  Thus  I  prayed;  and  she,  so  distant,  as 
it  seemed,  smiled  and  looked  at  me;  then 
turned  to  the  eternal  fountain. 

94.  And  the  holy  old  man  said:  “In  order 
that  thou  mayst  complete  perfectly  thy  journey, 
for  which  end  prayer  and  holy  love  sent  me, 
fly  with  thine  eyes  through  this  garden;  for 
seeing  it  will  prepare  thy  look  to  mount  fur¬ 
ther  through  the  divine  radiance.  And  the 
Queen  of  Heaven,  for  whom  I  burn  wholly 
with  love,  will  grant  us  every  grace,  because 
I  am  her  faithful  Bernard.”1 

103.  As  is  he  who  comes  perchance  from 
Croatia  to  see  our  Veronica,2  who  by  reason  of 
its  ancient  fame  is  never  sated,  but  says  in 
thought,  so  long  as  it  is  shown:  “My  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  true  God,  was  then  your  sem¬ 
blance  like  to  this?”  such  was  I,  gazing  on  the 
living  charity  of  him  who,  in  this  world,  in 
contemplation,  tasted  of  that  peace. 

1 12.  “Son  of  Grace,  this  glad  existence,”  be¬ 
gan  he,  “will  not  be  known  to  thee  holding 
thine  eyes  only  down  here  at  the  base,  but 
look  on  the  circles  even  to  the  most  remote,  un¬ 
til  thou  seest  upon  her  seat  the  Queen  to  whom 
this  realm  is  subject  and  devoted.” 

1  St.  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  to  whom  the  Blessed 
Virgin  had  appeared  during  his  life. 

2  The  likeness  of  the  Saviour  miraculously  impressed 
upon  the  kerchief  presented  to  Him  by  a  holy  woman, 
on  His  way  to  Calvary,  wherewith  to  wipe  the  sweat 
and  dust  from  His  face. 


1 1 8. 1  lifted  up  my  eyes;  and  as  at  morning 
the  eastern  parts  of  the  horizon  surpass  that 
where  the  sun  declines,  thus,  as  if  going  with 
my  eyes  from  valley  to  mountain,  I  saw  a  part 
on  the  extreme  verge  vanquishing  in  light  all 
the  rest  of  the  front.  And  even  as  there  where 
the  pole  which  Phaethon  guided  ill  is  awaited, 
the  glow  is  brightest,  and  on  this  side  and  that 
the  light  diminishes,  so  that  pacific  oriflamme3 
was  vivid  at  the  middle,  and  on  each  side  in 
equal  measure  the  flame  slackened.  And  at  that 
mid-part  I  saw  more  than  a  thousand  jubilant 
Angels  with  wings  outspread,  each  distinct 
both  in  effulgence  and  in  act.  I  saw  there,  smil¬ 
ing  at  their  sports  and  at  their  songs,  a  Beauty 
which  was  joy  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  other  saints. 
And  if  I  had  such  wealth  in  speech  as  in  imag¬ 
ining,  I  should  not  dare  attempt  the  least  of  its 
delightfulness. 

139.  Bernard,  when  he  saw  my  eyes  fixed 
and  intent  upon  the  object  of  his  own  burning 
glow,  turned  his  own  with  such  affection  to  it, 
that  he  made  mine  more  ardent  to  gaze  anew. 

CANTO  XXXII 

With  affection  set  on  his  Delight,  that  con- 
templator  freely  assumed  the  office  of  a  teach¬ 
er,  and  began  these  holy  words:  “The  wound 
which  Mary  closed  up  and  anointed,  that  one 
who  is  so  beautiful  at  her  feet  is  she  who 
opened  it  and  who  pierced  it.  Beneath  her,  in 
the  order  which  the  third  seats  make,  sits  Ra¬ 
chel  with  Beatrice,  as  thou  seest.  Sara,  Rebecca, 
Judith,  and  she4  who  was  great-grandmother  of 
the  singer  who,  through  sorrow  for  his  sin, 
said  Miserere  mei thou  mayst  see  thus  from 
rank  to  rank  in  gradation  downward,  as  with 
the  name  of  each  I  go  downward  through  the 
rose  from  leaf  to  leaf.  And  from  the  seventh 
row  downwards,  even  as  down  to  it,  Hebrew 
women  follow  in  succession,  dividing  all  the 
tresses  of  the  flower;  because  these  are  the  wall 
by  which  the  sacred  stairs  are  separated  ac- 

3  This  oriflamme  is  the  part  of  the  rose  of  Paradise 
where  the  Virgin  is  seated;  its  mid-point  is  the  Virgin 
herself.  It  is  called  “pacific”  in  contrast  with  the  war¬ 
like  oriflamme,  the  banner  given  by  the  archangel 
Gabriel  to  the  ancient  kings  of  France,  which  bore  a 
flame  on  a  field  of  gold  ( atirea  jlamma )> 

4  Ruth. 

°  “Have  mercy  upon  me.”  Psalms,  51.  1. 


CANTO  XXXII 


cording  to  the  look  which  faith  turned  on 
Christ.” 

22.  “On  this  side,  where  the  flower  is  mature 
with  all  its  leaves,  are  seated  those  who  believed 
in  Christ  about  to  come.  On  the  other  side, 
where  the  semicircles  are  broken  by  empty 
spaces,  are  those  who  turned  their  faces  on 
Christ  already  come.  And  as  on  this  side  the 
glorious  seat  of  the  Lady  of  Heaven,  and  the 
other  seats  below  it,  make  so  great  a  division, 
thus,  opposite,  does  the  seat  of  the  great  John, 
who,  ever  holy,  endured  the  desert  and  martyr¬ 
dom,  and  then  Hell  for  two  years:1  and  be¬ 
neath  him  Francis  and  Benedict  and  Augus¬ 
tine  and  others  are  allotted  thus  to  divide,  far 
down  as  here  from  circle  to  circle. 

37.  “Now  behold  the  high  divine  foresight; 
for  one  and  the  other  aspect  of  the  faith  will 
fill  this  garden  equally.  And  know  that  down¬ 
wards  from  the  row  which  midway  cleaves  the 
two  divisions,  they  are  seated  for  no  merit  of 
their  own,  but  for  that  of  others,  under  certain 
conditions;  for  all  these  are  spirits  absolved  ere 
they  had  true  power  of  choice.  Well  canst  thou 
perceive  it  by  their  faces,  and  also  by  their 
childish  voices,  if  thou  lookest  well  upon  them 
and  if  thou  listenest  to  them.  Now  thou  art 
perplexed,  and  in  perplexity  art  silent:  but  I 
will  loose  for  thee  the  strong  bond  in  which 
thy  subtle  thoughts  fetter  thee.  Within  the  am¬ 
plitude  of  this  realm  a  casual  point  can  have 
no  place,  any  more  than  sadness,  or  thirst,  or 
hunger;  for  whatever  thou  seest  is  established 
by  eternal  law,  so  that  here  the  ring  answers 
exactly  to  the  finger.  And  therefore  this  folk, 
hastened  to  true  life,  is  not  sine  causa  more  and 
less  excellent  here  among  themselves. 

61.  “The  King,  through  whom  this  realm 
reposes  in  such  great  love  and  in  such  great 
delight  that  no  will  dares  for  more,  creating 
all  the  minds  in  His  own  glad  aspect,  endows 
with  grace  diversely  according  to  His  pleasure; 
and  here  let  the  fact  suffice.  And  this  is  express¬ 
ly  and  clearly  noted  for  you  in  the  Holy  Scrip¬ 
ture  in  the  case  of  those  twins  who,  within 
their  mother,  had  their  anger  stirred.2  There¬ 
fore,  according  to  the  color  of  the  hair  of  such 

1  The  two  years  from  the  death  ot  John  to  the  death 
of  Christ;  these  he  passed  in  limbo. 

Jacob  and  Esau.  See  Genesis,  25.  22;  Romans,  9. 
11-12. 


155 

grace,”  the  highest  light  must  needs  befittingly 
crown  them.  Without,  then,  merit  from  their 
own  wavs,  they  are  placed  in  different  grades, 
differing  only  in  their  primary  keenness  of  vi¬ 
sion.  In  the  early  centuries,  indeed,  the  faith  of 
parents  alone  sufficed,  together  with  innocence, 
to  secure  salvation:  after  the  first  ages  were 
complete,  it  was  needful  for  males,  through  cir¬ 
cumcision,  to  acquire  power  for  their  innocent 
wings.  But  after  the  time  of  grace  had  come, 
without  perfect  baptism  in  Christ,  such  inno¬ 
cence  was  held  back  there  below. 

85.  “Look  now  upon  the  face  which  most 
resembles  Christ,  for  only  its  brightness  can 
prepare  thee  to  see  Christ.” 

88. 1  saw  raining  down  on  her  such  great 
joy,  borne  in  the  holy  minds  created  to  fly  a- 
cross  through  that  height,  that  whatsoever  I 
had  seen  before  held  me  not  suspended  in  such 
great  wonder,  nor  showed  to  me  such  likeness 
unto  God.  And  that  Love  which  had  before  de¬ 
scended  to  her,4  in  front  of  her  spread  wide 
his  wings,  singing,  Ave,  Maria ,  gratia  plena . 
The  blessed  Court  responded  to  the  divine 
song  from  all  sides,  so  that  every  countenance 
became  thereby  the  more  serene. 

100.  O  holy  Father,  who  for  me  endurest  to 
be  here  below,  leaving  the  sweet  place  in  which 
thou  sittest  by  eternal  allotment,  who  is  that 
Angel  who  with  such  joy  looks  into  the  eyes 
of  our  Queen,  so  enamoured  that  he  seems  of 
fire?”  Thus  did  I  again  recur  to  the  teaching 
of  him  who  was  deriving  beauty  from  Mary, 
as  the  morning  star  from  the  sun.  And  he  to 
me,  “Confidence  and  grace  as  much  as  there 
can  be  in  Angel  and  in  soul,  are  all  in  him,  and 
we  would  have  it  so,  for  he  it  is"  who  bore  the 
palm  down  to  Mary,  when  the  Son  of  God 
willed  to  load  Himself  with  our  burden. 

1 15.  “But  come  now  with  thine  eyes;  as  I 
shall  proceed  speaking,  and  note  the  great  pa¬ 
tricians  of  this  most  just  and  pious  empire. 
Those  two  who  sit  there  above,  most  happy 
through  being  nearest  to  the  Empress,  are,  as  it 
were,  two  roots  of  this  rose.  He  who  on  the  left 
is  next  her  is  the  Father  because  of  whose  auda¬ 
cious  tasting  the  human  race  tastes  so  much  bit¬ 
terness.  On  the  right  see  that  ancient  Father  of 

sSee  Genesis,  25.  25. 

4  See  Canto  xxiii.  94. 

0  The  angel  Gabriel;  see  Luke,  1.  26. 


PARADISE 


156 

Holy  Church,  to  whom  Christ  entrusted  the 
keys  of  this  lovely  flower.  And  he1  who  saw  be¬ 
fore  his  death  all  the  grievous  times  of  the  fair 
bride,  who  was  won  with  the  spear  and  with 
the  nails,  sits  at  his  side;  and  by  the  other  rests 
that  leader,  under  whom  the  ingrate,  fickle  and 
stubborn  people  lived  on  manna.  Opposite 
Peter  see  Anna  sitting,  so  content  to  gaze  upon 
her  daughter,  that  she  moves  not  her  eyes  as 
she  sings  Hosannah;  and  opposite  the  eldest 
father  of  a  family  sits  Lucia,2  who  moved  thy 
Lady,  when  thou  didst  bend  thy  brow  to  rush 
downward.3 

139.  “But  because  the  time  flies  which  holds 
thee  slumbering,4  here  will  we  make  a  stop, 
like  a  good  tailor  who  makes  the  gown  accord¬ 
ing  as  he  has  cloth,  and  we  will  direct  our  eyes 
to  the  First  Love,  so  that,  looking  towards 
Him,  thou  mayst  penetrate  so  far  as  is  possible 
through  His  effulgence.  But,  lest  perchance, 
moving  thy  wings,  thou  go  backward,  believ¬ 
ing  to  advance,  it  is  needful  that  grace  be  ob¬ 
tained  by  prayer;  grace  from  her  who  has  the 
power  to  aid  thee;  and  do  thou  follow  me  with 
thy  affection  so  that  thy  heart  depart  not  from 
my  speech.” 

15 1.  And  he  began  this  holy  prayer. 

CANTO  XXXIII 

“Virgin  Mother,  daughter  of  thine  own  Son, 
humble  and  exalted  more  than  any  creature, 
fixed  term  of  the  eternal  counsel,  thou  art  she 
who  didst  so  ennoble  human  nature  that  its 
own  Maker  disdained  not  to  become  its  crea¬ 
ture.  Within  thy  womb  was  rekindled  the  Love 
through  whose  warmth  this  flower  has  thus 
blossomed  in  the  eternal  peace.  Here  thou  art 
to  us  the  noonday  torch  of  charity,  and  below, 
among  mortals,  thou  art  the  living  fount  of 
hope.  Lady,  thou  art  so  great,  and  so  availest, 
that  whoso  would  have  grace,  and  has  not  re¬ 
course  to  thee,  would  have  his  desire  fly  with¬ 
out  wings.  Thy  benignity  not  only  succors  him 
who  asks,  but  oftentimes  freely  foreruns  the 
asking.  In  thee  mercy,  in  thee  pity,  in  thee 
magnificence,  in  thee  whatever  of  goodness  is 
in  any  creature,  are  united.  Now  doth  this 

1  St.  John  the  Evangelist. 

2  See  Hell,  ii.  97-108;  Purgatory,  ix.  55-63. 

3  See  Hell,  i.  61. 

4Cf.  Cantos  i.  73-75;  ii.  37-39. 


man,  who,  from  the  lowest  abyss  of  the  uni¬ 
verse,  far  even  as  here,  has  seen  one  after  one 
the  spiritual  lives,  supplicate  thee  of  grace,  for 
power  such  that  he  may  be  able  with  his  eyes  to 
uplift  himself  higher  toward  the  Ultimate  Sal¬ 
vation.  And  I,  who  never  for  my  own  vision 
burned  more  than  I  do  for  his,  proffer  to  thee 
all  my  prayers,  and  pray  that  they  be  not  scant, 
that  with  thy  prayers  thou  wouldst  dispel  for 
him  every  cloud  of  his  mortality,  so  that  the 
Supreme  Pleasure  may  be  displayed  to  him. 
Further  I  pray  thee,  Queen,  who  canst  whatso 
thou  wilt,  that,  after  so  great  a  vision,  thou 
wouldst  preserve  his  affections  sound.  May  thy 
guardianship  vanquish  human  impulses.  Be¬ 
hold  Beatrice  with  all  the  Blessed  for  my 
prayers  clasp  their  hands  to  thee.”5 

40.  The  eyes  beloved  and  venerated  by  God, 
fixed  on  the  speaker,  showed  to  us  how  pleas¬ 
ing  unto  her  are  devout  prayers.  Then  to  the 
Eternal  Light  were  they  directed,  to  which  it 
may  not  be  believed  that  eye  so  clear  of  any 
creature  enters  in. 

46.  And  I,  who  to  the  end  of  all  desires  was 
approaching,  even  as  I  ought,  ended  within 
myself  the  ardor  of  my  longing.  Bernard  made 
a  sign  to  me,  and  smiled,  that  I  should  look  up¬ 
ward;  but  I  was  already,  of  myself,  such  as  he 
wished;  for  my  sight,  becoming  pure,  was  en¬ 
tering  more  and  more  through  the  radiance  of 
the  lofty  Light  which  in  Itself  is  true. 

55.  Thenceforward  my  vision  was  greater 
than  our  speech,  which  yields  to  such  a  sight, 
and  the  memory  yields  to  such  excess. 

58.  As  is  he  who  dreaming  sees,  and  after  the 
dream  the  passion  remains  imprinted,  and  the 
rest  returns  not  to  the  mind,  such  am  I;  for  my 
vision  almost  wholly  departs,  which  the  sweet¬ 
ness  that  was  born  of  it  yet  distils  within  my 
heart.  Thus  the  snow  is  by  the  sun  unsealed; 
thus  by  the  wind,  on  the  light  leaves,  was  lost 
the  saying  of  the  Sibyl. 

67.  O  Supreme  Light,  chat  so  high  upliftest 
Thyself  from  mortal  conceptions,  re-lend  to 
my  mind  a  little  of  what  Thou  didst  appear, 
and  make  my  tongue  so  powerful  that  it  may 
be  able  to  leave  one  single  spark  of  Thy  glory 
for  the  folk  to  come;  for,  by  returning  some¬ 
what  to  my  memory  and  by  sounding  a  little  in 

5Cf.  Chaucer,  in  The  Second  Nun’s  Tale,  for  a 
paraphrase  of  the  larger  part  of  this  prayer. 


CANTO 


these  verses,  more  of  Thy  victory  shall  be  con¬ 
ceived. 

76. 1  think  that  by  the  keenness  of  the  living 
ray  which  I  endured,  I  should  have  been  dazed 
if  my  eyes  had  been  averted  from  it;  and  I  re¬ 
member  that  on  this  account  I  was  the  more 
hardy  to  sustain  it  till  I  conjoined  my  gaze 
with  the  Infinite  Goodness. 

82.  O  abundant  Grace,  whereby  I  presumed 
to  fix  my  look  through  the  Eternal  Light  till 
that  there  I  consummated  the  seeing! 

85. 1  saw  that  in  its  depth  is  enclosed,  bound 
up  with  love  in  one  volume,  that  which  is  dis¬ 
persed  in  leaves  through  the  universe:  sub¬ 
stance  and  accidents  and  their  modes,  fused 
together,  as  it  were,  in  such  wise,  that  that  of 
which  I  speak  is  one  simple  Light.  The  univer¬ 
sal  form  of  this  knot1  I  believe  that  I  saw,  be¬ 
cause,  in  saying  this,  I  feel  that  I  rejoice  more 
spaciously.  One  single  moment  only  is  greater 
oblivion  for  me  than  five  and  twenty  centuries 
to  the  emprise  which  made  Neptune  wonder 
at  the  shadow  of  Argo/ 

97.  Thus  my  mind,  wholly  rapt,  was  gazing 
fixed,  motionless,  and  intent,  and  ever  with 
gazing  grew  enkindled.  In  that  Light  one  be¬ 
comes  such  that  it  is  impossible  he  should  ever 
consent  to  turn  himself  from  it  for  other  sight; 
because  the  Good  which  is  the  object  of  the 
will  is  all  collected  in  it,  and  outside  of  it  that 
is  defective  which  is  perfect  there. 

106.  Now  will  my  speech  fall  more  short, 
even  in  respect  to  that  which  I  remember,  than 
that  of  an  infant  who  still  bathes  his  tongue  at 
the  breast.  Not  because  more  than  one  simple 
semblance  was  in  the  Living  Light  wherein  I 

1  See  Aquinas,  Sttmma  Theologica,  Part.  I,  Q  4,  A  2. 

2  Because  it  was  the  first  vessel  that  sailed  the  sea. 


XXXIII  I57 

was  gazing,  which  is  always  such  as  it  was  be¬ 
fore;  but  through  my  sight,  which  was  grow¬ 
ing  strong  in  me  as  I  looked,  one  sole  appear¬ 
ance,  as  I  myself  changed,  was  altering  itself  to 
me. 

1 15.  Within  the  profound  and  clear  subsist¬ 
ence  of  the  lofty  Light  appeared  to  me  three 
circles  of  three  colors  and  of  one  dimension: 
and  one  seemed  reflected  by  the  other,  as  Iris 
by  Iris,  and  the  third  seemed  fire  which  from 
the  one  and  from  the  other  is  equally  breathed 
forth. 

121.O  how  inadequate  is  speech,  and  how 
feeble  toward  my  conception!  and  this  toward 
what  I  saw  is  such  that  it  suffices  not  to  call  it 
little. 

124.O  Light  Eternal,  that  sole  abidest  in 
Thyself,  sole  understandest  Thyself,  and,  by 
Thyself  understood  and  understanding,  lovest 
and  smilest  on  Thyself!  That  circle,  which  ap¬ 
peared  in  Thee  generated  as  a  reflected  light, 
being  awhile  surveyed  by  my  eyes,  seemed  to 
me  depicted  with  our  effigy  within  itself,  of  its 
own  very  color;  wherefore  my  sight  was  wholly 
set  upon  it.  As  is  the  geometer  who  wholly  ap¬ 
plies  himself  to  measure  the  circle,  and  finds 
not  by  thinking  that  principle  of  which  he  is  in 
need,  such  was  I  at  that  new  sight.  I  wished 
to  see  how  the  image  was  conformed  to  the 
circle,  and  how  it  has  its  place  therein;  but  my 
own  wings  were  not  for  this,  had  it  not  been 
that  my  mind  was  smitten  by  a  flash  in  which 
its  wish  came. 

142.  To  the  high  fantasy  here  power  failed: 
but  now  my  desire  and  my  will  were  revolved, 
like  a  wheel  which  is  moved  evenly,  by  the 
Love  which  moves  the  sun  and  the  other 
stars. 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.S.A. 


. 


i59 


Four  Classes  of  Tardy  Penitents 


161 


SPHERE  OF  AIR  f  SPHERE  OF  FIRE 


y  y  yyyyiyiy, 

/  y  y  ,~yyyjyy-.  y  ~x  x 

f  S  S  ,-/_/ /-/'"'vVaven.  v-s  S_  \  M 

/  /  sr  yr'rs~y \\ 

/  s'  s'  'S_  \  \  \ 

rr  y  y  y  y  yyy^sisyys- v  s  ~x- 3  s  s.i 
/  /  y  y  rr\syyy°^yy'0y "y  \ \  \  \ 

;  /  r1  /'  Z/yy**M*‘ W \  Y 4 's \  s 

/  /  \  \  i  I  «-c  fi  \  ?7<?  \  Y  >  'v  1  \ 

)  \  s  /  y  s'  s  "3*  rY  "~i  L  L  I  N<  I 

(  (  ^  ^  ^  'a  purgatory  y  k  ^  I  ^  v|^  ^ 

\  \  \  S  \  s  \  j™*'1"  „,.,s  s  s  (  <  >  )  ) 

S  ni  -  k  "\  ~y  y  ^a^::-  ■■  y  y  s  /  (  ^  (  ii 

-i  '.  \  s  k  X  ''-v  ,-■  y  j  /  c  ( _ 

\  \  s  S. y  - - —'V-'  /'  //  c  j 

y:,A  x  s  - - -  x  y  r'  /  rl  „ 

>SBaSBSZ33SS< 


163 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes,  2  and  3 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


